Se xm


ate


“yas
SOC he ἰς


THE LIBRARY
THE INSTITUTE OF MEDIAEVAL STUDIES
TORONTO


PRESENTED BY


᾿ΤΠΗΕΒΟΡΗΒΑΒΤΙΙ


a Ε΄... INTO PLANTS


Π


THEOPHRASTUS
ENQUIRY INTO, PLANTS
AND MINOR WORKS:ON ODOURS AND

; WEATHER. SIGNS


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
SIR ARTHUR HORT, Barr, M.A.


FORMERLY FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE


IN TWO VOLUMES
If


LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN
NEW YORK : G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS
MCMXVI


LIBRARN


“JUN ~ 9 1938
[0846


CONTENTS


BOOK VI
OF UNDER-SHRUBS


Of the classification of under-shrubs: the wild kinds :
the chief distinction:that between spinous and
i A TSI Sa a a πὸ μῆς

Of spineless under-shrubs and their differences 4

Of certain specially important spineless under-shrubs—
silphium and magydaris—belonging to ferula-like
MIN Boars Go ve τρροοεον ρα pS ee a By τὸς

Of spinous under-shrubs and their differences. . . . .

Of cultivated under-shrubs (coronary plants), with
which are included those coronary plants which are
πὴ πστ΄ τς ς ων τς πρίλ eT

Of the seasons at which coronary plants flower, aa Ἐ
ἘΠ ὍΝ their life... ..:. dodo)’. ταλετος


BOOK VII


PAGE


OF HERBACEOUS PLANTS, OTHER THAN CORONARY PLANTS:


POT-HERBS AND SIMILAR WILD HERBS


Of the times of sowing and of germination of pot-herbs


Of the propagation of pot-herbs, and of differences in
Cre A) Site sclera Sac iw! 6 eT a


Of the flowers and fruits of pot-herbs ........,
Of the various forms of some pot-herbs. .......
Of the cultivation of pot-herbs ; manure and water . .
Of the pests which infest pot-herbs .........
Of the time for which seed of pot-herbs can be kept . .
Of uncultivated herbs : the wild forms of pot-herbs .


CONTENTS


Of other uncultivated herbs, which may be classed with
Ῥού: ΠΟΘ... .... Ὁ... Ὁ ΞΕ ΕΞ


Of the differences in stem and leaf found in all herba-
ceous plants. . .. . .-..0 5) en


Of other differences seen in herbaceous plants in general,
as compared with one another and with trees .


Of the seasons at which herbs grow and flower


Of the classes into which herbaceous plants may be
divided, as those having a spike and chicory-like
plants. . . ye pe) pp


Of herbs which have fleshy or bulbous roots .... .


Of certain properties and habits peculiar to certain
herbaceous plants ὁ... .°S*. eae


BOOK VIII


OF HERBACEOUS PLANTS: CEREALS, PULSES, AND ‘SUMMER


CROPS’


Of the three classes and the times of sowing and of
germination ... Ὁ .. » « » = 5 ssn


Of differences in the mode of germination and of subse-
quent development. . . τὰ -cisgeiljRieeene


Of differences in development due to soil or climate . .


Of differences between the parts of cereals, pulses, and
summer crops respectively . . |... a uauennE


Of the differences between cereals... 2 2 2 11%
Of the differences between pulses . . ... 2... .
Of sowing, manuring, and watering .........
Of the degeneration of cereals intodarnel ..... .
Of the peculiar character of chick-pea ........
Of special features of ‘summer crops’ ........
Of treatment of cereals peculiar to special localities . .


Of cereals which grow a second time from the same
stock ... . - . « wvheiel toe τ


Of the effects of climate, soil, and manuring .... .
Of different qualities of seed . «᾿ς. 16 tes ee ee


vi


143


149
155


159
165
175
177
183
183
185
185


187
189
191


CONTENTS


Of degeneration of cereals, and of the weeds which
τ ΠΕ ΙσΠ 5. CrOPS, . spies \es-.ret. pei» ἴω dees) places


Of the conditions in the seeds of pulses known as
‘cookable’ and ‘ uncookable,’ and their causes


Of the grains and pulses which most exhaust the soil, or
Ηρ τον δ Wo wk tm ae


Of the diseases of cereals and pulses, and of Recto!
SP a ne Pe


Of seeds which keep or do not keep well ap ae ak Cea ee
Of the age at which seeds should be sown :
Of artificial means of preserving seed ........
Of the effect of heat on seeds .........

Of certain peculiarities of the seed of lupin and Ai ha


BOOK IX


OF THE JUICES OF PLANTS, AND OF THE MEDICINAL
PROPERTIES OF HERBS


Of the various kinds of plant-juices and the methods of
Peete we... So) ene Of πεν fil


Of resinous trees and the methods of collecting resin
DOMMES se sw ws IQ Salon


Of the making of pitch in Macedonia and in Syria. .
Of frankincense and myrrh: various accounts

Of cinnamon and cassia: various accounts ......
ΠΝ το ΙΘοσ άπ TM) BUS BG :
Of other aromatic plants—all oriental, except the iris .


Of the medicinal juices of plants and the collection of
Gaem eeneral account’. Pies yo. wk.


Of the cutting of roots for medicinal purposes, and of
certain superstitions connected therewith
Of the medicinal uses of divers parts of plants


Of hellebores, the white and the black: their uses ie
I sw. oo teed male


Of the various kinds of all-heal ...........
Of the various plants called strykhnos ........
Of the various kinds of tithymallos. . . 1... 2...


PAGE


193
197
199


201
205
209
211
211
213


217


223
229
233
243
245
247


251


255
261


265
269
271
275


Vii


CONTENTS


PAGE

Of the two herbs called ébanotis. . . 2... of io ΠΡΌΣ ΑΙ pe

Of the two kinds of chamaeleon. ...... “ey

Of the various plants called ‘poppy’. ........ 279

Of roots possessing remarkable taste or smell. . .. . 281
Of the time for which roots can be kept without losing

their virtue . ... το 287

Of the localities which spteclly product medicinal herbs 289

Of the medicinal herbs peculiar to Crete -...... 295


Of wolf’s-bane and its habitat, and of meadow-saffron . 299
Of two famous druggists and of the virtues of hemlock . 303


How use diminishes the efficacy of drugs, and how
they have not the same effect on all constitutions . 305


Of plants that possess properties affecting lifeless


objects . . 6... 6 6. = 0 309
Of plants whose properties affect animals other than

MAM . 6 6 6 fe ew ee ρΨΠ Ξ Ε Ε 309
Of plants possessing properties which affect the mental

powers .... 1% 3 2 = ees ems |e |
Of plants said to have magical properties. ...... 313
A problem as to cause and effect . .....65 se 313
Of certain plants, not yet mentioned, which possess


special properties . .... = + = 5) een 315


MINOR WORKS


INTRODUCTION TO THE TREATISES CONCERNING ODOURS
AND CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS ........ 324


CONCERNING ODOURS
Introductory: Of odours in general and the classifi-


cation of them 42.25" . Ὁ (09) Ν 327
Of natural odours ; of those of animals and of the effect

of odours on animals. .' .\. stn phe eeeeeeeee 329
Of smell and-taste .. . . . « . = = τ τὺ
Of odours in plants.. .. .. .... 4 42 ei 333
Of artificial odours in general and their manufacture :

especially of the use of perfumes in wine... . . . 333


Vill


CONTENTS


Of the oils used as the vehicle of perfumes ......


Of the spices used in making perfumes and their treat-
IRS Sa a


Of the various parts of plants used for eee ane of
the composition of various notable perfumes


Of the properties of various spices . :

Of the medicinal properties of certain τον

Of rules for the mixture of spices, and of the storing of
RII ke ek

Of the properties of certain perfumes

Of other properties and peculiarities of ἐπε πος


Of the making of perfume- igs and oe Ee
oS ..


Of the characteristic smells ἜΣ ΕἸΡΕΤΤΙ ἀνα οἷ Sorina
curious facts as to the smell of animal and vegetable
ee 9 νὸν νον ως

Of odours as compared ik ee sense-impressions .


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS
Introductory : general principles
aemiensoiraim. ..... .
Thesignsof wind .....
The signs of fair weather .
Miscellaneous signs


INDEX OF PLANTS


KEY TO THE INDEX—
I.—List of plants mentioned in the nas under
botanical names .....
II.—List of plants mentioned in the ὁ Enquiry u ante:
popular names. .


PAGE


341
347
351
355
359


361
365
373


377


381
383


391
397
407
427
431


435


487


494


ΙΧ


ΑΙ» ΣΝ Shh:

ys ee ig εἰ!

᾿ : τῇ κέν 1.
; iste ΟΜΝ
ita ΣῊΝ Bi:


es ΜΕ nite +e
΄ é ! * ah} Se FL
Pee ee νάνι.


. +»


+4 4): §


= 4 o ;
ΟΣ
ip tse Pio:


Ter -


 ἨΣ eax


; —
ν ὑφ ᾿
γ »
4 ᾿
kevt
εἰν
3
« iy
2 ve


4 i qsiuiic VE ee wig


THEOPHRASTUS


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS
BOOK VI


VOL, II B


ΘΕΟΦΡΑΣΤΟΥ
ΠΕΡῚ ΦΥΤΩΝ ΙΣΤΟΡΙΑΣ


Z


I. Περὶ μὲν οὖν δένδρων καὶ θάμνων εἴρηται
“ / lal
πρότερον" ἑπόμενον δ᾽ εἰπεῖν περί TE τῶν φρυγανι-
κῶν καὶ ποιωδῶν καὶ εἴ τινες ἐν τούτοις ἕτεραι
ts V4 R Ὁ“ x
συμπεριλαμβάνονται φύσεις" οἷον ἣ γε σιτηρὰ
ποιώδης ἐστί.
la \ / \ fal An Ψ
Πρῶτον δὲ λέγωμεν περὶ τῆς φρυγανικῆς" αὕτη
yap ἐγγυτέρω τῶν προειρημένων διὰ τὸ ξυλώδης
n 5 3. Y
εἶναι. πανταχοῦ μὲν οὖν ἴσως αἰεὶ TO ἄγριον
an Ε / an > \ / / \
τοῦ ἡμέρου πλεῖον, εἰ δὲ μή, περί γε THY φρυ-
γανικὴν οὐσίαν: ὀλίγον γὰρ τὸ ἥμερον αὐτῆς,
ὅπερ σχεδὸν ἐν τοῖς στεφανωτικοῖς ἐστιν, οἷον
«ς / >] / / > / ¢ /
ῥοδωνία ἰωνία διόσανθος ἀμάρακος ἡμεροκαλλές,
lj Y ,
ἔτι δὲ ἕρπυλλος σισύμβριον ἑλένιον ἀβρότονον.
a / 3
ἅπαντα γὰρ ταῦτα ξυλώδη καὶ μικρόφυλλα, δι
ἃ ss , \ ΡῚ \ a n ἣν
20 καὶ φρυγανικά. καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν λαχανηρῶν


o7.10,. 6. 1,
* This hardly corresponds to the definition of φρύγανα


2


THEOPHRASTUS
ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS


BOOK VI


Or UNDER-SHRUBS.


Of the classification of under-shrubs: the wild kinds: the chief
distinction that between spinous and spineless.

I, We have spoken already of trees and shrubs,
and next we must speak of under-shrubs and
herbaceous plants and of any other natural classes
which are included with these; for instance, cereals
come under herbaceous plants.

But first let us tell of under-shrubs, for this class
comes near those mentioned above because of its
woody character. Now it may be said that with all
plants the wild kinds are more abundant than the
cultivated, and this is certainly true of the under-
shrubs. For the cultivated kinds of this class! are
not numerous, and consist almost entirely of coronary
plants, as rose gilliflower carnation sweet marjoram
martagon lily, to which may be added tufted thyme
bergamot-mint calamint southernwood. For all
these are woody and have small leaves; wherefore 2
they are classed as under-shrubs. This class covers


given in 1, 3. 1, nor do some of the plants here mentioned
come under the description. St. considers the text defective.


3


B 2


THEOPHRASTUS


ὁμοίως, οἷον ῥάφανος πήγανον καὶ ὅσα παρα-
πλήσια τούτοις ἐστίν. ὑπὲρ ὧν οὐχ ἧττον ἴσως
ἁρμόττει. κατὰ τὴν οἰκείαν προσηγορίαν εἰπεῖν,
ὅταν περὶ στεφανωμάτων καὶ λαχάνων ποιώμεθα
μνείαν. νῦν δὲ πρῶτον περὶ τῶν “ἀγρίων λέγωμεν.
ἔστιν αὐτῶν εἴδη καὶ μέρη πλείω, ἃ δεῖ διαιρεῖν
καὶ τοῖς καθ᾽ ἕκαστον γένος καὶ τοῖς ὅλοις εἴδεσι.

Μεγίστην δ᾽ ἄν τις λάβοι διαφορὰν τῶν ὅλων
γενῶν, ὅτι τὰ μὲν ἀνάκανθα τὰ δὲ ἀκανθώδη
ey ἐπῶν πάλιν δ᾽ ἐν ἑκατέρῳ τούτων πολλαὶ

διαφοραὶ γενῶν καὶ εἰδῶν, ὑπὲρ ὧν καθ᾽ ἑκάτερα
πειρατέον εἰπεῖν.

Τῶν ἀκανθικῶν δὴ τὰ μὲν ἁπλῶς εἰσιν ἄκανθαι,
ὥσπερ ἀσφάραγος καὶ σκορπίος" οὐ γὰρ ἔχουσι
φύλλον οὐδὲν παρὰ τὴν ἄκανθαν. τὰ δὲ φυλ-
λάκαν θα, καθάπερ ¢ ἄκανος  ἠρύγγιον κνῆκος" ταῦτα
γὰρ καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα ἐπὶ τῶν φύλλων ἔχει τὴν
ἄκανθαν, δι’ ὃ καὶ φυλλάκανθα καλεῖται. τὰ δὲ
καὶ παρὰ τὴν ἄκανθαν ἕ ἕτερον ἔχει, φύλλον, ὥσπερ
ἡ ὀνωνὶς καὶ ὁ τρίβολος καὶ ὁ φέως, ὃ ὃν δή τινες
καλοῦσι στοιβήν. ὁ δὲ “τρίβολος καὶ περικαρ-
πιάκανθός ἐστιν' ἔχει. γὰρ ἀκάνθας ἐν τῷ περι-
καρπίῳ, δι’ ὃ καὶ τοῦτο ἴδιον πρὸς ἅπαντα ὡς
εἰπεῖν" ἐπεὶ πτορθάκανθά γε πολλὰ καὶ τῶν
δένδρων καὶ τῶν θαμνωδῶν ἐ ἐστιν, οἷον ἀχρὰς poa
παλίουρος βάτος ῥοδωνία KAT TAPS. ἐν μὲν. οὖν
τοῖς ἀκανθικοῖς ταύτας ἄν τις ὡς εἰπεῖν τύπῳ
λάβοι τὰς διαφοράς.


1 for... εἴδεσι : text needlessly altered by Sch. and W.
Sch. himself shews that T. uses εἶδος and γένος almost in-
discriminately.. Here τῶν ὅλων γενῶν means the same as τοῖς


4


"--


f
ἱ


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. τ. 2-3


also pot-herbs, such as cabbage rue and others
like them. Of these it is perhaps more appropriate
to speak under their proper designation, that is,
when we come to make mention of coronary plants
and pot-herbs. Now let us first speak of the
wild kinds. Of these are several classes and sub-
divisions, which we must distinguish by the char-
acteristics of each sub-division as well as by those of
each class taken as a whole.!

The most important difference distinguishing class
from class which one could find is that between the
spineless and the spinous kinds. Again under each
of these two heads there are many differences
distinguishing kinds and forms, of which we must
endeavour to speak severally.

2Of spinous kinds some just consist of spines, as
asparagus and skorpios; for these have no leaves
except their spines. ‘Then there are the spinous-
 leaved plants, as thistle eryngo safflower ; these and
the like have their spines on the leaves, whence
their name. Others again have leaves as well as
their spines, as rest-harrow caltrop and pheos,? which
some call stozbe. Caltrop is also‘ spinous-fruited,
having spines on the fruit-vessel. Wherefore this
peculiarity marks it off from almost all other plants ;
though many trees and shrubs have spines on the
shoots, as wild pear pomegranate Christ’s thorn
bramble rose caper. Such? are the general dis-
tinctions which may be made among spinous plants.
ὅλοις εἴδεσι; and below γενῶν and εἰδῶν both refer to the
smaller divisions called μέρη above. Pin: St. OW.

3 6 péws ὃν conj. Sch.; 6 φλεὼς ὃ Ald.H.; καὶ ὃ δή τινες Kar.
or. Po. ef. 6.5. 1 and Index.


kal περικαρπάκανθος conj. Sch.; καὶ ἡ περικαρπία φυλλά-


κανθον UMVAId. ef. 6. 5. 3. 5 οὖν add. Sch.
5


THEOPHRASTUS


> \ A 3 "3 > » “
Ev δὲ τοῖς ἀνακάνθοις οὐκ ἔστιν οὕτως δια-
Ὁ “Ὁ 7] “
λαβεῖν τοῖς γένεσιν" ἡ γὰρ τῶν φύλλων ἀνωμαλία
/ /
μεγέθει καὶ μικρότητι Kal σχήμασιν ἄπειρος καὶ
ἀσαφής" ἀλλὰ δεῖ πειρᾶσθαι κατ᾽ ἄλλον τρόπον
διαιρεῖν. πλείω δέ ἐστι τὰ γένη τὰ τούτων καὶ
ὃ \ BA / : / /
ιαφορὰς ἔχοντα μεγάλας, οἷον κίσθος μήλωθρον
7 7 ΄
ἐρευθεδανὸν σπειραία κνέωρον opiyavos θύμβρα
7 >} / / / /
σφάκος ἐλελίσφακος πράσιον Kovula μελισσό-
φυλλον ἕτερα τοιαῦτα: πρὸς τούτοις ἔτι τὰ
ναρθηκώδη καὶ ἐννευρόκαυλα, καθάπερ μάραθον
Ld / / / i \ =
ἱππομάραθον ναρθηκία νάρθηξ καὶ τὸ καλού-
/ ty ty
μενον ὑπό τινων μυοφόνον καὶ ὅσα ὅμοια τούτοις.
ἅπαντα γὰρ ἄν τις καὶ ταῦτα καὶ ὅλως εἴ τι
la) tg > a an 2 /
ναρθηκῶδές ἐστι τῆς φρυγανικῆς θείη φύσεως.
II. Εὔἴδη δὲ καὶ διαφοραὶ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον τῶν
/ A ἴω
εἰρημένων εἰσὶ τῶν μὲν φανερώτεραι τῶν δὲ
\ 7 4 “
ἀφανέστεραι. καὶ γὰρ κίσθου δύο γένη διαιροῦσι,
\ ΝΥ ” Ν NN A na \ \ n \
TO μὲν ἄρρεν TO δὲ θῆλυ, τῷ TO μὲν μεῖζον Kal
σκληρότερον καὶ λυπαρώτερον εἶναι καὶ τὸ ἄνθος
> / ” NX ek a > I 4 (a κ
ἐπιπορφυρίξζον: ἄμφω δὲ ὅμοια τοῖς ἀγρίοις podots,
πλὴν ἐλάττω καὶ ἄοσμα.
a \
Δύο δὲ εἴδη καὶ τοῦ κνεώρου" ὁ μὲν γὰρ λευκὸς
id \ \ \ 4
ὁ δὲ μέλας. ἔχει δὲ ὁ μὲν λευκὸς TO φύλλον


ζ.6. there is a gradation.

2 κίσθος conj. Sch.; κισσὸς Ald. H.

σπειραία conj. Sch. from Plin. 21. 53; σμηρέα Ald.G.

4 θύμβρα σφάκος conj. Sch.; θύμβρας paxds UMVAId.

er. b, 2...D:

ναρθηιεοώδη = hollow-stemmed, évvevpdxavaa=plants with a
plain unjointed stem, solid with ‘immersed’ fibres. In the


6


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. 1. 4-1. 2


With spineless plants it is not possible to make
such ‘generic’ distinctions; for the variation of
the leaves in size and shape is endless, and the
differences are not clearly marked!; but we must try
to distinguish on another principle. There are many
classes of such plants and they differ widely, as
rock-rose * bryony madder privet? kneoron marjoram
savory sphakos* (sage) elelisphakos® (salvia) hore-
hound konyza balm, and others like these; and in
addition to these we have the plants with a ferula-
_ like stem δ or with a stem composed of fibre, as fennel
horse-fennel’ narthekia (ferula) narthex (ferula) and
the plant called by some wolf’s bane,® and others
like these. All these, as well as any other ferula-
like plants, may be placed in the class of under-
shrubs.


Of spineless under-shrubs and their differences.


II. The various forms and the differences between
the above mentioned plants are in some cases more,
in some less easy to distinguish. Of rock-rose ® they
distinguish two kinds, ‘male’ and ‘female,’ in that
the one is?° larger, tougher, more glossy,!! and has a
crimson flower; both however are like the wild
rose,!? save that the flower is smaller and scentless.

There are also two kinds of kneoron, one white,
the other black. The white has a leathery oblong
examples given here the two classes are taken together,
ναρθηκία being ναρθηκώδης, the others ἐννευρόκαυλα ; hence the
article is not repeated. a) a es Aig

8 Lit. ‘mouse-bane’: for other Greek names see Index.

® κίσθου conj. Sch., cf. 6 1.43 κισσοῦ Ald.H.; Plin. 24. 81;
Diose. 1. 97.

10 εἶναι conj. W.; ἔχειν UMV AIA. (τὸ φύλλον ἔχειν conj. Sch.).


1 7,e. has more glossy leaves.
12 of. Plin. 21. 55; Theocr. 5.131. See Index.


THEOPHRASTUS


δερματῶδες πρόμηκες ὁμοιόσχημον τρόπον τινὰ
TH ἐλάᾳ, ὁ δὲ μέλας οἷον ἡ μυρίκη σαρκῶδες"
ἐπίγειος δὲ μᾶλλον ὁ λευκός" ἔστι δὲ ὀσμώδης,
ὁ δὲ μέλας ἄοσμος. τὴν δὲ ῥίζαν τὴν εἰς βάθος
ἄμφω μεγάλην ἔχουσι καὶ τοὺς ἀκρεμόνας πολ-
λοὺς καὶ παχεῖς καὶ ξυλώδεις ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς τῆς γῆς
ἢ μικρὸν ἄνω σχιζομένους, ξυλωδεστάτην δέ.
γλίσχρον δὲ σφόδρα, δι’ ὃ καὶ χρῶνται πρὸς τὸ
καταδεῖν καὶ περιλαμβάνειν, ὥσπερ τῷ οἴσῳ.
βλαστάνει δὲ καὶ ἀνθεῖ μετ᾽ ἰσημερίαν μετο-
πωρινὴν καὶ ἀνθεῖ πολὺν χρόνον.

Καὶ τῆς ὀριγάνου δὲ ἡ μέλαινα ἄκαρπος ἡ δὲ
λευκὴ κάρπιμος. καὶ θύμον τὸ μὲν λευκὸν τὸ δὲ
μέλαν εὐανθὲς δὲ σφόδρα' περὶ τροπὰς γὰρ ἀνθεῖ
θερινάς. ad’ οὗ καὶ ἡ μέλιττα λαμβάνει τὸ μέλι,
καὶ τούτῳ φασὶν οἱ μελιττουργοὶ δῆλον εἶναι
πότερον εὐμελιτοῦσι ἢ οὔ καλῶς γὰρ ἀπαν-
θήσαντος εὐμελυτεῖν' βλάπτει δὲ καὶ ἀπόλλυσι
τὴν ἄνθησιν ἐὰν ὕδωρ ἐ ἐπιγένηται.

Σπέρμα δὲ κάρπιμον ἡ μὲν θύμβρα καὶ ἔτι
μᾶλλον ἡ ὀρίγανος ἔχει φανερόν, τοῦ θύμου δ᾽
οὐκ ἔστι λαβεῖν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῷ ἄνθει πως ἀναμέ-
μικται: σπείρουσι γὰρ τοῦτο καὶ ἀναβλαστάνει.
ζητοῦσι δὲ καὶ λαμβάνουσιν οἱ ἐξάγειν ᾿Αθήνῃσι
βουλόμενοι τὸ γένος. ἴδιον δὲ ἔχει καὶ πρὸς
ταῦτα καὶ σχεδὸν πρὸς τὰ ἄλλα τὸ κατὰ τοὺς
τόπους" οὐ γάρ φασι δύνασθαι φύεσθαι καὶ


Sef. 10; 4.

2 Apparently an afterthought, suggested by the mention
of the woodiness of the branches.

3 περιλαμβάνει conj. W. from Οἱ ; περιλαμβάνειν Ald.

4 Plin. 21. 55.


8


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. πι. 2-4


leaf, somewhat like that of the olive; the leaf of
the black is like that of the tamarisk! and fleshy ;
the white grows more on the ground and is scented,
while the black is scentless. In both the root, which
runs deep, is large (and the branches which divide at
the ground level are numerous thick and woody),
and the root is also very woody.? It is also very
tough, wherefore it is used for binding and to put ®
round things, like the withy. It grows and flowers
after the autumnal equinox, and remains in flower a
long time.

4 Of marjoram the black form is barren, the white
bears fruit. ὃ There is a black and a white thyme,
and it flowers very freely: it is in bloom about the
summer solstice. It is from this flower that the bee
gets the honey, and by it ὁ beekeepers say that it is
made known whether they have a good yield of
honey or not; for, if the thyme flowers abundantly,’
they have a good yield, but the bloom is injured or
even destroyed if it is rained upon.

Savory, and still more marjoram, has a conspicuous
fruitful seed, but in thyme it is not easy to find,
being somehow mixed up with the flower; for men
sow the flower and plants come up from it. ὃ This
plant is sought and obtained by those in Athens who
wish to export such herbs. But it has a peculiarity
as compared both with similar plants and with most
others, namely the kind of region which it affects 9 ;
they say that it can not be grown or become

6 Plin. 21. 56 and 154.

6 rovTw conj. Sch.; τοῦτο Ald,

7 καλῶς mBod.; ἄλλως UMVAId. H.

ΒΕ ΠΟ ΗΠ ΟἹ. 57.


9 τὸ κατὰ τοὺς τόπους conj. W.; καὶ κατὰ τοὺς τ. Ald.; καὶ
κατὰ τόπους P,


9


THEOPHRASTUS


λαμβάνειν ὅπου μὴ ἀναπνοὴ διϊκνεῖται ἡ ἀπὸ τῆς
θαλάττης: δι᾿ ὃ οὐδ᾽ ἐν ᾿Αρκαδίᾳ γίνεται: θύμβρα
δὲ καὶ ὀρίγανος καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα πολλὰ καὶ πολ-
λαχοῦ. παραπλήσιον οὖν τὸ συμβαῖνον τοῦτο
καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς ἐλάας" οὐδὲ γὰρ οὐδ᾽ ἐκείνη δοκεῖ
τριακοσίων σταδίων ἀπὸ θαλάττης ἐπάνω
φύεσθαι.

Σφάκος δὲ καὶ ἐλελίσφακος διαφέρουσιν ὡσὰν
τὸ μὲν ἥμερον τὸ δὲ ἄγριον" λειότερον γὰρ τὸ
φύλλον τοῦ σφάκου καὶ ἔλαττον καὶ αὐχμηρότε-
ρον, τὸ δὲ τοῦ ἐλελισφάκου τραχύτερον.

Δύο δὲ γένη καὶ τοῦ πρασίου" τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἔχει
ποῶδες τὸ φύλλον καὶ μᾶλλον ἐπικεχαραγμένον,

ἔτι δὲ τὰς ἐντομὲς ἐνδήλους σφόδρα καὶ βαθείας,

ᾧ καὶ οἱ φαρμακοπῶλαι χρῶνται πρὸς ἔνια" τὸ
δὲ ἕτερον στρογγυλότερον καὶ αὐχμῶδες σφόδρα,
καθάπερ τοῦ σφάκου, καὶ τὰς ἐντομὰς ἀμαυρο-
τέρας ἔχον καὶ ἐπικεχαραγμένον ἧττον.

Κονύζης δὲ τὸ μὲν ἄρρεν τὸ δὲ θῆλυ. δια-
φορὰς δὲ ἔχει καθάπερ τὰ ἄλλα τὰ οὕτω διαι-
povpeva τὸ μὲν γὰρ θῆλυ λεπτοφυλλότερον καὶ
ξυνεστηκὸς μᾶλλον καὶ τὸ ὅλον ἔλαττον, τὸ
δὲ ἄρρεν μεῖζόν τε καὶ παχυκαυλότερον καὶ
πολυκλωνότερον κῶν TO φύλλον μεῖζον καὶ
λιπαρώτερον ἔχον, ἔτι δὲ τὸ ἄνθος λαμπρό-
τερον. καρποφόρα δὲ ἄμφω: τὸ δὲ ὅλον. ὀψι-
βλαστεῖ καὶ ὀψιανθεῖ περὶ ᾿Αρκτοῦρον καὶ μετ᾽


1 χαμβάνειν P,Ald.: lit. ‘take hold,’ ef. 6. 2, 6; βλαστάνειν
conj. W.

2 σφάκος conj. Sch.: σφάκελος UMVP,Ald.; Plin. 22, 146
and 147,


Io


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. π. 4-6


established! where a breeze from the sea does not
reach. This is why it does not grow in Arcadia,
while savory marjoram and such plants are common
in many parts. (A similar peculiarity is found in
the olive; for it appears that it likewise will not
grow more than three hundred furlongs from the
sea.)

The difference between sphakos? (sage) and
elelisphakos (salvia) is like that between cultivated and
wild ; for the leaf of sphakos? is smoother smaller
and less succulent, while that of elelisphakos is
rougher.® .

There are also two kinds of horehound: one has a
narrow leaf with a more jagged edge, and the notches
are very conspicuous and deep, and this is the plant
used by druggists for certain purposes; the other has
a rounder ὅ leaf, which, like that of sphakos, is not at
all succulent; the notches are less conspicuous and
the edge less jagged.

Of konyza" there is a ‘male’ and a ‘female’
kind, the differences between them being such as
are usual between forms so distinguished; the
‘female’ has slenderer leaves, is more compact, and
a smaller plant; the ‘male’ is larger, has thicker
stalks, is more branched, has larger glossier leaves,
and moreover the flower is more conspicuous. Both
bear fruit; the plant as a whole is late in growing
and in blooming; it blooms about the rising of


3 gpaxov con}. Sch.; σφακέλου UMVP, Ald.
4 W. omits ἧττον before αὐχμηρότερον.
5 τραχύτερον conj. Scal. from G ; βραχύτερον Ald. H.
στρογγυλότερον : cf. 1. 10. 4 n.
peewndex. Plin. 26. 58. cf. Nice Ther. 875; Diosc.
3. 121.


11


THEOPHRASTUS


᾿Αρκτοῦρον λαμβάνει. βαρεῖα δὲ ἡ ὀσμὴ τοῦ
ἄρρενος, ἡ δὲ τῆς θηλείας δριμυτέρα, δι’ ὃ καὶ
πρὸς τὰ θηρία χρησίμη.

avTa μὲν οὖν καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα ὥσπερ δια-
φέροντα. πάλιν δὲ ἄχλα μονοειδῆ τυγχάνοντα
καὶ τῶν πρότερον εἰρημένων καὶ ἕτερα παρὰ ταῦτα:
πλείω γάρ ἐστι.

Τὸ δὲ ναρθηκῶδες, καὶ γὰρ καὶ τοῦτο τῶν
φρυγανικῶν, πολλὰς περιείληφεν ἰδέας" ἐν οἷς
πρῶτον ὑπὲρ τοῦ κοινοῦ πᾶσι λεκτέον, ὑπὲρ
νάρθηκός τε καὶ ναρθηκίας, εἴτε τὸ αὐτὸ γένος
ἐστὶν ἀμφοῖν διαφέρον δὲ κατὰ μέγεθος, εἴτε
καὶ ἕτερον ὥσπερ τινές φασιν. ἡ δ᾽ οὖν φανερὰ
φύσις ἀμφοῖν ὁμοία ,πλὴν κατὰ τὸ μέγεθος" 0
μὲν γὰρ νάρθηξ γίνεται μέγας σφόδρα ἡ δὲ
ναρθηκία μικρά. μονόκαυλα δ᾽ ἄμφω καὶ γονα-
τώδη, ἀφ᾽ ὧν τά τε φύλλα βλαστάνει καὶ καυλοί
τινες μικροί: βλαστάνει δὲ παραλλὰξ τὰ φύλλα'
λέγω δὲ παραλλὰξ ὅτι οὐκ ἐκ τοῦ αὐτοῦ μέρους
τῶν γονάτων ἀλλ᾽ ἐναλλάξ' περιειληφότα δὲ τὸν
καυλὸν ἐπὶ πολύ, καθάπερ τὰ τοῦ καλάμου, πλὴν
ἀποκεκλιμένα ταῦτα μᾶλλον διὰ τὴν μαλακό-
THTAa καὶ τὸ μέγεθος" μέγα γὰρ τὸ φύλλον καὶ
μαλακὸν καὶ πολυσχιδές, ὥστε εἶναι σχεδὸν
τριχῶδες" ἔχει δὲ μέγιστα τὰ κάτω πρὸς τὴν
γῆν καὶ ἀεὶ κατὰ λόγον. ἄνθος δὲ μηλινοειδὲς
ἀμαυρόν, καρπὸν δὲ παρόμοιον τῷ ἀνήθῳ πλὴν


1 λαμβάνει Ald.; ἁδρύνει conj. W. But ef. the somewhat
similar use 6. 2. 4.

2 contra bestiarum morsus Plin. /.¢.

8 Plin.-13. 1382: and 133:

4 The form of expression in the repeated ὑπὲρ seems loose,


12


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. u. 6-8


Arcturus and is full grown! after his setting.
The smell of the ‘male’ plant is strong, but that of
the ‘ female’ more pungent ; wherefore both of them
are of use against wild beasts.?

These plants then and others like them have, as
it were, different forms. Again there are some
which have but one form both among those already
mentioned and others as well; for there are numerous
plants of this class.

5 The class of ferula-like plants (for this too belongs
to the under-shrubs) comprises many kinds: here
we must first speak of the characteristic which is
common to all, including ferula itself* (narthex) and
narthekia, whether they both belong to the same
kind and differ only in size, or whether, as some say,
they are distinct. The obvious character of both is
alike, except as to size; for narthex grows very tall,
while narthekia is a small plant. Each of them has a
single stalk, which is jointed; from this spring the
leaves and some small stalks; the leaves come
alternately—by which I mean that they do not
spring from the same part of the joint, but in
alternating rows. For a considerable distance they
embrace the stalk, like the leaves of the reed, but
they turn back from it more owing to their softness
and their size; for the leaf is large soft and much
divided, so that it is almost hair- like ; the largest
leaves are the lowest ones next the ground, and so
on in proportion. The flower is quince-yellow® and
inconspicuous, the fruit ° like dill, but larger.’ The
and above ἐν ois is hardly satisfactory. Sch. suspects
cee peron:

5 μηλινοειδὲς : cf. 7. 3. 1.


/ ἀμαυρόν, καρπὸν δὲ conj. Sch.; ἀμαυρόκαρπον Ald.
7 μείζω conj. Sch.5 μεῖζον Ald.


13


THEOPHRASTUS


μείζω. ἐξ ἄκρου δὲ σχίζεται καὶ ἔχει τινὰς οὐ
μεγάλους καυλούς: ἐνταῦθα δὲ τό τε ἄνθος
καὶ ὁ καρπός. ἔχει δὲ καὶ ἄνθος καὶ καρπὸν
καὶ ἐν τοῖς παρακαυλίζουσι δι’ ὅλου, καθάπερ
τὸ ἄνηθον. ἐπετειόκαυλον δέ, καὶ ἡ βλάστη-
σις τοῦ ἦρος πρῶτον μὲν τῶν φύλλων ἔπειτα
τοῦ καυλοῦ, καθάπερ τῶν ἄλλων. ῥίξαν δὲ ἔχει
βαθεῖαν, ἔστι δὲ μονόρριζον. ὁ μὲν οὖν νάρθηξ
τοιοῦτος.

Τῶν δ᾽ ἄλλων τὰ μὲν ὁμοιότερα τούτῳ τὸν
καυλὸν ἐ ἔχει «κοῖλον;», καθάπερ ὁ 0 μανδραγόρας καὶ
τὸ κώνειον καὶ ὁ ἐλλέβορος καὶ ὁ ἀνθέρικος" τὰ
δ᾽ οἷον ἐννευρόκαυλα τυγχάνει, καθάπερ μάραθον
μυοφόνον τὰ ὅμοια τούτοις. ἴδιος δὲ ὁ καρπὸς τοῦ
μανδραγόρου τῷ μέλας τε καὶ ῥαγώδης καὶ οἰνώδης
εἶναι τῷ χυμῷ.

ἘΠῚ. ᾿“Μέγισται δὲ καὶ ἰδιώταται φύσεις ἥ τε
τοῦ σιλφίου καὶ ἡ τοῦ παπύρου ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ:
ναρθηκώδη γὰρ καὶ ταῦτά ἐστιν" ὑπὲρ ὧν τοῦ
μὲν παπύρου πρότερον εἴπομεν ἐν τοῖς ἐνύδροις,
ὑπὲρ θατέρου δὲ νῦν λεκτέον.

Τὸ δὲ σίλφιον ἔχει ῥίζαν μὲν πολλὴν καὶ
παχεῖαν, τὸν δὲ καυλὸν ἡλίκον νάρθηξ, σχεδὸν
δὲ καὶ τῷ πάχει παραπλήσιον, τὸ δὲ φύλλον, ὃ ὃ
καλοῦσι μάσπετον, ὅμοιον τῷ σελίνῳ: σπέρμα


1 κοῖλον add. W.

2 See Index: the stalk is specially in question here.

3 cf.6.1.4n. ἐκνευρόκαυλα PyAld., ef. ἔκλευικος, ‘ whitish’ ;
ἐννευρόκαυλα conj. Sch. as in 6. 1. 4; but οἷον indicates the
coinage of a fresh term. κώνειον seems to be placed in the
wrong list.

4 Plin. 25. 147-150 describes mandragoras, but his deserip-
tion is not taken from T. cf. Diose. 4. 75, where three kinds


14


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. π΄ 8-1. Ἢ


plant divides at the top and has some small branches,
on which grow the flower and the fruit. It also
bears flowers and fruit on the side-stalks all the way
up, like dill. The stalk only lasts a year, and the
growth takes place in spring, the leaves growing
first and then the stem, as with other plants. It
roots deep and has but a single root. Such is the
ferula.

Of the others some to a certain extent resemble
ferula, that is, in having a hollow stem!; for instance
deadly nightshade hemlock hellebore asphodel ?:
while some have a stem more or less, as it were,
consisting of fibre,’ as fennel aconite and others like
these. The fruit of deadly nightshade 5 is peculiar
in being black and like a grape and like wine in
taste.


Of certain specially important spineless under-shrubs—silphium
and magydaris—belonging to ferula-like plants.

1Π|. Most important and peculiar in their characters
are the silphium and papyrus of Egypt. These too
come under the class of ferula-like plants ; of these
we have spoken ὃ of the papyrus already under the
head of plants living in water; of the other we have
now to speak.

6The silphium has a great deal of thick root;
its stalk is like ferula in size, and is nearly as
thick; the leaf, which they call maspeton, is like
celery: it has a broad fruit, which is _leaf-like,
of μανδραγόρας are described: there being only two known


species of mandragora, the third may be atropa Belladonna ;
and to this plant may also refer an interpolated sentence in


Diosc. 4. 73 (ἄνθος... σταφυλήν).
δ 4.8. 3and4. Papyrus is loosely classed with ferula-like
plants, as it has not a hollow stem, 6 Plin. 19, 42-45.


5


THEOPHRASTUS


δ᾽ ἔχει πλατύ, οἷον φυλλώδες, τὸ λεγόμενον φύλ-
λον. ἐπετειόκαυλον δ᾽ ἐστίν, ὥσπερ ὁ νάρθηξ.
ἅμα μὲν οὖν τῷ ἦρι τὸ μάσπετον τοῦτο ἀφίησιν, ὃ ὃ
καθαίρει τὰ πρόβατα καὶ ᾿παχύνει σφόδρα καὶ τὰ
κρέα θαυμαστὰ ποιεῖ τῇ ἡδονῇ: μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
καυλόν, <ov> ἐσθίεσθαι πάντα τρόπον ἑφθὸν
ὀπτόν, καθαίρειν δὲ καὶ τοῦτόν φασι τὰ σώματα
τετταράκοντα ἡμέραις. ὀπὸν δὲ διττὸν ἔχει, τὸν
μὲν ἀπὸ τοῦ καυλοῦ τὸν δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς ῥίζης, Se
ὃ καλοῦσι τὸν μὲν καυλίαν τὸν δὲ ῥιξίαν. ἡ δὲ
ῥίζα τὸν φλοιὸν ἔχει μέλανα, καὶ τοῦτον περι-
αἱροῦσιν. ἔστι δὲ ὥσπερ μέταλλα τῶν ῥιξοτο-
μιῶν αὐτοῖς, ἐξ ὧν ὁπόσον ἂν δοκῇ συμφέρειν
ταμιευόμενοι πρὸς τὰς τομὰς καὶ τὸ προὐπάρχον
τέμνουσιν' οὐκ ἔξεστι γὰρ οὔτε παρατέμνειν
οὔτε πλεῖον τῶν τεταγμένων" καὶ γὰρ διαφθεί-
ρεται καὶ σήπεται τὸ ἀργὸν ἐὰν χρονίζῃ. κατερ-
γάξονται δὲ ἄγοντες εἰς τὸν Πειραιᾶ τόνδε τὸν
τρόπον' ὅταν βάλωσι εἰς ἀγγεῖα καὶ ἄλευρα
μίξωσι, σείουσι χρόνον συχνόν, ὅθεν καὶ τὸ
χρῶμα λαμβάνει καὶ ἐργασθὲν ἐ ἄσηπτον ἤδη δια-
μένει. τὰ μὲν οὖν κατὰ τὴν ἐργασίαν καὶ τομὴν
οὕτως ἔχει.

Τόπον δὲ πολὺν ἐπέχει τῆς Λιβύης: πλείω
γάρ φασιν ἢ τετρακισχίλια στάδια" πλεῖστα δὲ
γίνεσθαι περὶ τὴν σύρτιν ἀπὸ τῶν Εὐεσπερίδων.
ἴδιον δὲ τὸ φεύγειν τὴν ἐργαζομένην καὶ ἀεὶ


συνεργαζομένης καὶ συνημερουμένης ἐξαναχωρεῖν,


1 οἷον mudd. τὸ λεγ. conj. W.;. φυλλ. οἷον τὸ λεγ. Ald. H.
2. T have added ὃν.

3 μέταλλα U; μέτρα Ald.; ὃ ἐν μετάλλοις μέτρα.

4 οἵ, 9.1. 7; 1680. 3. 80.


τό


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. π|. 1-3


as it were,! and is called the pfyllon. The stalk
lasts only a year, like that of ferula. Now in
spring it sends up this maspeton, which purges sheep
and greatly fattens them, and makes their flesh
wonderfully delicious ; after that it sends up a stalk,
which 2 is eaten, it is said, in all ways, boiled and
roast, and this too, they say, purges the body in
forty days. It has two kinds of juice, one from the
stalk and one from the root; wherefore the one is
called ‘stalk-juice, the other ‘root-juice.’ The
root has a black bark, which is stripped off. They
have regulations, like those in use in mines,’ for
cutting the root, in accordance with which they fix
carefully the proper amount to be cut, having regard
to previous cuttings and the supply of the plant.
For it is not allowed to cut it wrong nor to cut more
than the appointed amount; for, if the juice is kept
and not used, it goes bad and decays. When they are
conveying it to Peiraeus, they deal with it thus *:—
having put it in vessels and mixed meal with it, they
shake it for a considerable time, and from this
process it gets its colour, and this treatment ὃ makes
it thenceforward keep without decaying. Such
are the facts in regard to the cutting and treatment.

The plant is found over a wide tract of Libya, for
a distance,® they say, of more than four thousand
furlongs, but it is most abundant’ near the Syrtis,
starting from the Euesperides islands. It is a
peculiarity of it that it avoids cultivated ground, and,
as the land is brought under cultivation and tamed,

5 ἐργασθὲν : ἐξοργασθὲν conj. Salm.; from Plin. /.c., argu-
mentum erat maturitatis color siccitasque sudore finito.

6 of. Strabo 2. 5. 20; 17. 3. 20: Scyl. Perzplus, Libya.


7 πλεῖστα conj. W.; πλείονα U; τὰ πλείονα MAId.; γίνεσθαι
conj. W.; γενέσθαι Ald.


17


VOL. II. &


THEOPHRASTUS


ὡς οὐ δεομένου δῆλον ὅτι θεραπείας ἀλλ᾽ ὄντος

» / \ , ς al n \ /

ἀγρίου. φασὶ δ᾽ οἱ Κυρηναῖοι φανῆναι τὸ σίλ-
/ 3

φιον ἔτεσι πρότερον ἢ αὐτοὶ THY πόλιν ὥκησαν

ἑπτά: οἰκοῦσι δὲ μάλιστα περὶ τριακόσια εἰς

τ' [ὃ ” > θ Be

Σιμωνίδην ἄρχοντα Αθηνῃσιν.

Οἱ μὲν οὖν οὕτω λέγουσιν. οἱ δὲ τοῦ σιλφίου
τὴν ῥίζαν φασὶ γίνεσθαι πηχυαίαν ἢ μικρῷ μείζω.
ταύτην δὲ ἔ ew ἐπὶ τοῦ μέσου κεφαλήν, ὃ καὶ
μετεωρότατόν ἐστι καὶ σχεδὸν ὑπὲρ γῆς, καλεῖ-
σθαι δὲ γάλα' ἐξ ἡ ἧς δὴ φύεσθαι μετὰ ταῦτα καὶ
τὸν καυλόν, ἐκ δὲ τούτου μαγύδαριν τὸ καὶ
καλούμενον φύλλον' τοῦτο δ᾽ εἰναι σπέρμα" καὶ
ὅταν νότος λαμπρὸς πνεύσῃ μετὰ ΚΚύνα διαρρίπ-

3 es / \ / fal > n \
τεσθαι, ἐξ οὗ φύεσθαι TO cidtpiov. τῷ αὐτῷ δὲ
» ie Sh ‘ / \ x ae 5 \
ἔτει τήν Te ῥίζαν γίνεσθαι καὶ τὸν καυλόν: οὐθὲν
δὲ τοῦτο ἴδιον, καὶ γὰρ ἐπ᾽ ἄλλων, εἰ μὴ τοῦτο
λέγουσιν ὅτι εὐθὺς φύεται μετὰ τὴν διάρριψιν.

Καὶ τοῦτο ἴδιον καὶ διάφορον τοῖς πρότερον, ὅτι
φασὶ δεῖν ὀρύττειν ἐπέτειον" ἐὰν δὲ ἐαθῇ, φέρειν
μὲν τὸ σπέρμα καὶ τὸν καυλόν, χείρω δὲ γίνεσθαι
καὶ ταῦτα καὶ τὴν ῥίζαν, ὀρυττομένας δὲ βελτίους
γίνεσθαι διὰ τὸ μεταβάλλεσθαι τὴν γῆν. ἐναν-

/
τίον δὲ τοῦτο τῷ φεύγειν τὴν ἐργάσιμον. ἐσθί-
εσθαι καὶ τὰς ῥίζας προσφάτους κατατεμνομένας
εἰς ὄξος. τὸ δὲ φύλλον τῇ χροιᾷ χρυσοειδὲς


1 of. Hdt. 4. 158. 4 BG: Ble,

3 ταύτην δὲ... τὸ σίλφιον : text as restored conjecturally
by W., chiefly by alteration in the order of the words in Ald.

4 καλεῖσθαι δὲ γάλα after φύεσθαι in Ald.

5 In 6. 3. 7 this name is applied to a distinet plant. pew
Td καὶ conj. Salm.; pay. καὶ τὸ P,Ald.H. 6 of. 6..3. 2

7 τοῦτο Con). Salm. ; ; τούτον UMVAId.; τοῦτον Py


18


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. πὶ. 3-5


it retires, plainly shewing that it needs no tendance
but is a wild thing. The people of Cyrene say that
the silphium appeared! seven years before they
founded their city; now they had lived there for
about three hundred years before the archonship at
Athens of Simonides.*

Such is their account. Others however say that
the root of the silphium grows to the length of a
cubit or a little longer, and in the middle of this is a
head,? which 15 the highest part and almost comes
above ground, and is called the ‘milk’,* from this
then presently grows the stalk, and from that the
magydaris,? which is also called the phyllon®; but it’
is really the seed, and, when a strong south wind
blows after the setting of the dog-star, it is scattered ὃ
abroad and the silphium grows from it. The root
and the stalk grow in the same year; nor is this a
singular feature—unless they mean that it grows
immediately after the dispersal® of the seed—since
the same thing occurs with other! plants also.

There is this singular statement, which is incon-
sistent with what was said above, that, it is said, it
is necessary to dig. the ground every year, and that,
if it be left alone, it bears! the seed and the stalk,
but these are inferior and so is the root; on the
other hand, that with digging they are improved
because the soil is changed. (This is inconsistent
with the statement that silphium avoids cultivated
land.) They add that the roots are cut up into
vinegar and eaten fresh, and that the leafis of a golden


8 διαρρίπτεσθαι conj. Sch.; διαρρίπτεται Ald.; διαρριπτεῖται U ;
διαρρίπτηται M. :

® διάρριψιν conj. Sch.; δίριψιν UM; ἔκριψιν Ald.

10 ἐπ’ ἄλλων conj. W.; τῶν ἄλλων Ald. H.

Ἢ μὲν conj. Sch.; πᾶν Ald.


THEOPHRASTUS


πὰ > 7 \ \ ἊΝ \ / \
6 εἶναι. ἐναντίον δὲ καὶ TO μὴ καθαίρεσθαι τὰ
7 “Ὁ
πρόβατα τὸ φύλλον ἐσθίοντα" φασὶ γὰρ καὶ τοῦ
ἦρος καὶ τοῦ χειμῶνος εἰς ὄρος ἀφιέναι, νέμεσθαι
δὲ τοῦτό τε καὶ ἕτερον ὅμοιον ἀβροτόνῳ" θερμαν-
τικὰ δ᾽ ἄμφω δοκεῖ εἶναι καὶ κάθαρσιν μὲν οὐ
ποιεῖν, ἀναξηραίνειν δὲ καὶ συμπέττειν" ἐὰν δέ τι
“ A a yy 5 / / e /
νοσοῦν ἢ κακῶς ἔχον εἰσέλθῃ πρόβατον, ὑγιάζε-
/ XN τ / ¢ ’ > \ \ \
σθαι ταχέως ἢ ἀποθνήσκειν, ὡς δ᾽ ἐπὶ τὸ πολὺ
σώζεσθαι μᾶλλον. ταῦτα μὲν ὁποτέρως ἔχει
σκεπτέον.
7 Ἡ δὲ καλουμένη μαγύδαρις ἕτερόν ἐστι τοῦ
/ / -
σιλφίου μανότερόν τε καὶ ἧττον δριμὺ καὶ τὸν
>’ x > » / te \ an v ral
ὀπὸν οὐκ ἔχει: διάδηλος δέ ἐστι Kal TH ὄψει τοῖς
be
ἐμπείροις. γίνεται δὲ περὶ Συρίαν καὶ οὐκ ἐν
/ Ν \ \ 5 [οἷ / ἐπ
Κυρήνῃ φασὶ δὲ καὶ ἐν τῷ Ἰ]αρνασίῳ ὄρει
5 n an
πολλήν" ἔνιοι δὲ σίλφιον τοῦτο καλοῦσιν. εἰ δὲ
“ x /
φεύγει τὴν ἐργάσιμον ὥσπερ TO σίλφιον σκεπ-
τέον, ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ εἴ τι ὅμοιον ἢ παραπλήσιον
/ nr
ἔχει φύλλου τε πέρι Kal καυλοῦ, καὶ εἰ ὅλως
» / / / \ \ Φ /
ἀφίησί τι δάκρυον. τὴν μὲν οὖν ναρθηκώδη
XY @& \ > , Ψ >) a /
[καὶ ὅλως τὴν ἀκανθώδη] φύσιν ἐν τοῖς τοιούτοις
θεωρητέον.
“ 3 na an ‘
IV. Τῆς δ᾽ ἀκανθικῆς, ἑπόμενον yap τοῦτο
2 a 5 \ / \ \ 3: :ὦ an [γέ \
εἰπεῖν, ἐπειδὴ διήρηται TO μὲν ἀκανθῶδες ὅλως TO
\ of ς x Ε 7 ΄ /
δὲ φυλλάκανθον, ὑπὲρ ἑκατέρου χώρις λεκτέον,


1 cf. Arr. Anab. 3. 28. 6 and 7.

2 Artemisia canyphorata : Index App. (24).

8 Plin. 19. 46; Diose. 3. 94; Hesych. s.v.; Photius, Gloss.
8.v.; of. 6. 3. 4n.


20


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. m1. 5-1v. 1


colour. We have also the inconsistent statement
that sheep are not purged by eating the leaves; for
they say that in spring and in winter they are driven
into the hill-country, where! they feed on this and
on another plant? which is like southernwood ; both
these plants appear to be heating and not to cause
purging, but, on the contrary, to have a drying effect
and promote digestion. It is also said that, if a sheep
which is sick or in bad condition comes to that
district, it is quickly cured or else dies, but usually it
recovers. Which of these accounts is true is matter
for enquiry.

3The plant called magydaris is distinct from sil-
phium, being of later growth and less pungent,
and it does not produce the characteristic juice ;
experts can also easily distinguish it by its appear-
ance. It grows in Syria and not in Cyrene, and they
say that it is also abundant on Mount Parnassus, and
some call it silphium. Whether however, like sil-
phium, it avoids cultivated ground is matter for
enquiry, as also whether it has any resemblance or
likeness in leaf and stalk, and, in general, whether
it produces a juice. In these examples we may
consider the class of ferula-like plants [and, in
general, that of spinous plants.*]


Of spinous under-shrubs and their differences.


IV. Taking next the class of spinous plants (for
we must next speak of them), we have already dis-
tinguished ° those which are altogether spinous and
those which have spinous leaves, and now we must


4 nal... ἀκανθώδη. These words occur only in U: they
cannot belong here. Note that τὸ μὲν ἀκανθῶδες ὅλως occurs
just below. 6.-E 8.


21


THEOPHRASTUS


\ , \ \ “ \ \ \ BA
καὶ τρίτου δὴ περὶ τοῦ καὶ Tapa τὴν ἄκανθαν
ἔχοντος φύλλον, ὥσπερ ὅ τε φέως καὶ ὁ τρίβολος.
καὶ ἡ κάππαρις ἴδιον ἔχει τὸ μὴ μόνον τὴν ἐκ
τῶν καυλῶν ἄκανθαν ἔχειν ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ φύλλον
5 / οἱ 5 / 2) ω a
ἐπακανθίζον. τῶν δὲ διηρημένων εἰδῶν πλεῖστον
4 > x / 3 / \ e 3 lal
μέν ἐστι TO φυλλάκανθον, ἐλάχιστον δὲ ὡς εἰπεῖν
\ b] n Ὁ \ / / > /
TO ἀκανθῶδες ὅλως. βραχὺ yap τι πάμπαν ἐστίν,
ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη, καὶ σχεδὸν οὐ ῥάδιον λαβεῖν παρά
i ta aa ale ΕΣ ρ
τε τὸν ἀσφάραγον καὶ τὸν σκορπίον.
> / \ lal ᾽ a \ >] /
Αμφότερα δὲ ταῦτα ἀνθεῖ μετὰ ἰσημερίαν
7 ς \ / > “ ,
φθινοπωρινήν. ὁ μὲν σκορπίος ἐν τῷ σαρκώδει
an > fa) lal ς 5 aA > /
τῷ ἐποιδοῦντι TH ὑπὸ TO ἄκρον τῆς ἀκάνθης
4 \ byA θ τ & > ἢ \ rx \ δὲ δ᾽
ἔχων τὸ ἄνθος ἐξ ἀρχῆς μὲν λευκὸν ὕστερον
> / ς Ν ’ 4 > / x
ἐπιπορφυρίζον. ὁ δὲ ἀσφάραγος ἐκφύων παρὰ
la /
Tas ἀκάνθας Kopuva@des μικρόν, ἐκ τούτου δέ ἐστι
a id Ἂ, 7 Me \
τὸ ἄνθος μικρόν. ὁ δὲ σκορπίος μονόρριζον Kal
7΄ ς δ eee iy ΄ ͵ Ξ᾿
βαθύρριζον, ὁ δὲ ἀσφάραγος βαθύρριζόν τε εὖ
μάλα καὶ πολύρριζον πυκναῖς ταῖς ῥίξαις, ὥστε
τὸ ἄνω συνεχὲς εἶναι αὐτῶν, ἀφ᾽ οὗ καὶ αἱ
βλαστήσεις αὐτῶν τῶν καυλῶν: ἀναβλαστάνει
fal - a Φ \
δὲ ὁ καυλὸς ἐκ τῆς ἀσφαραγιᾶς τοῦ ἦρος Kal
ἐδώδιμός ἐστιν: εἶθ᾽ οὕτως ἀποτραχύνεται καὶ
a aie ἐν A ”
ἐξακανθοῦται προϊούσης τῆς ὥρας" ἡ δὲ ἄνθησις
/ A /
οὐκ ἐκ τούτου μόνον ἀλλὰ Kal ἐκ τῶν πρότερον"
bf \ > 4 / > \ \ 9 Ψ“
οὐ γὰρ ἐπετειόκαυλόν ἐστι. τὰ μὲν οὖν ὅλως
ἀκανθώδη τοιαύτην τινὰ ἔχει φύσιν.
lal an /
Τῶν δὲ φυλλακάνθων τὸ πλεῖστον γένος ὡς


1 φέως conj. St.; φλεὼς Ald. cf. 6. 1. 3.
* of, G. 1,2. 8. Plin. 915 Od πῶ, 50:


22


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. ιν. 1-3


speak of each of these classes separately, and also, in
the third place, of those which have leaves as well
as their spines, such as pheos! and caltrop. More-
over caper has the peculiarity of possessing not only
spines on its stems but also a spinous leaf. Of the
classes thus distinguished that with spinous leaves
is the largest, while that which is altogether spinous
is about the smallest. It is indeed, as was said, a
very small class, and it would not be easy to find
examples of such plants besides asparagus and
skorpios.?

3 Both of these flower after the autumnal equinox.
Skorptos produces its flower in the fleshy swelling ἢ
below the top ὅ of the spinous twig ; at first it is white,
but afterwards it becomes purplish. Asparagus pro-
duces alongside of the spines a small knob, and from
this grows the flower, which is of small size. Skorpios
has a single root which runs deep; asparagus roots
very deep and its roots are numerous and matted,
the upper part of them being in one piece,® and
from this the actual shoots spring. The stalk comes
up from the plant in spring and is edible; after-
wards, as the season advances, it acquires its rough
and spinous character’; the bloom appears not only
on this stalk, but on those of previous years, for the
stalk is not annual. Such is the character of
plants which are altogether spinous.

8 Of those which have spinous leaves the largest
class, one may say, consists of those plants which

4 ἐποιδοῦντι conj. Scal.; ἐπωδοῦντι U; ἐσποδοῦντι MALIA.

3 = a ἄκρον conj. Scal.; τὸ ἄκρατον UMAId.; τῆς ἀκάνθης om.
cal.

©7.¢e.tuberous. cf.Col.11. 3.43; Pall. 3. 24. 8; 4. 9. 11.


1 ἐξακανθοῦται conj. Link. ap. Sch.; ἐξανθοῦται UM ; ἐξαν-
θεῖται Ald. 8 Plin. 21. 94. { :


23


THEOPHRASTUS


ς lal ᾽ an 5] n 4 / \ \
ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν ἀκανῶδες τυγχάνει" λέγω δὲ TO
> a “ \ / Ν᾿ ΟἿ : \ ἊΝ Ἃ +f
ἀκανῶδες, OTL TO κύημα καὶ ἐν @ TO ἄνθος ἢ καὶ ὁ
3 A /
καρπὸς ἄκανος ἢ ἀκανῶδες πάντων ἐστί. διαφο-
ρὰν δὲ ἔχει ἐν ἑαυτῷ καὶ μεγέθει καὶ σχήματι
καὶ χρώματι καὶ πλήθει καὶ ὀλιγότητι τῶν ἀκαν-
θῶν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων. ἔξω yap ὀλίγων πάνυ,
ἴω re! “
καθάπερ τοῦ στρουθίου τε καὶ τοῦ σόγκου καὶ εἴ
/ \ \ a »
τίνων ἑτέρων, τὰ λοιπὰ πάντα ὡς εἰπεῖν τοιαύτην
\ e /
ἔχει τὴν φύσιν: ἐπεὶ Kal ὁ σόγκος τήν γε φύσιν
\
ἀκανθώδη ἔχει, TO δὲ σπερματικὸν οὐχ ὅμοιον"
\ “ ͵
ἀλλὰ τά γε τοιαῦτα πάντα οἷον ἄκορνα λευκ-
ἄκανθα χάλκειος κνῆκος πολυάκανθος ἀτρακτυλὶς
ὀνόπυξος ἰξίνη χαμαιλέων" πλὴν οὗτος οὐ φυλλ-
ἄκανθος, σκόλυμος δέ, ὃς καὶ λειμωνία, φυλλ-
/ \ 5 / / > /
ἄκανθος: καὶ τἄλλα, πλείω yap ἐστι. διαφέρουσι
2. DS th \ lal > / n 3, \ Zz
ὃ ἀλλήλων πρὺς τοῖς εἰρημενοῖς Τῷ τα πον πολύ-
if e
καυλα εἶναι καὶ ἀποφύσεις ἐ ἔχειν, ὥσπερ ὁ ἄκανος,
τὰ δὲ μονόκαυλα καὶ μὴ ἔχειν, ὥσπερ ὁ κνῆκος,
ἔνια δ᾽ ἄνωθεν ἐ ἔχειν. ἐξ ἃ ἄκρου, καθάπερ τὸ ῥύτρος.
καὶ τὰ μὲν εὐθὺς τοῖς πρώτοις ὑετοῖς βλαστάνειν
τὰ δ᾽ ὕστερον, ἔνια δὲ καὶ τοῦ θέρους, @ ὥσπερ καὶ ἡ
τετράλεξ ὑπό τινων καλουμένη καὶ ἡ ἰξίνη: καὶ
ἐπὶ τῶν ἀνθῶν ὁμοίως" ὀψιανθὴς γὰρ ὁ σκόλυμος
καὶ ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον.


1 ἀκανῶδες mBas.; ἀκανθῶδες Ald. cf. 1. 18. 3, where
ἀκανῶδες is restored by W.’s certain conj.

2 ἀκανῶδες conj. Sch.; ἀκανθῶδες Ald.H.; acanaceum G.

S &kavos ἢ ἀκανῶδες Ald.; ἄκανθος ἢ ἀκανθῶδες mBas. v.
supra.

4 σόγκος conj. Sch.; κνῆκος Ald. The correction seems
necessary in view of 6. 4. 8.

5 ἄκορνα conj. Sch.; ἄκαρνα Ald. ef. Plin. J.c.

ὃ ds καὶ λειμωνία I conj.; ἣ καὶ λειμωνία conj. Scal. from


24


LC


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. tv. 3-4


are thistle-like,! by which? I mean that the swollen
part, that part which contains the flower, or, it may
be, the fruit, is in all cases a thistle-head,’? or has
that appearance. However there are differences in
the ‘head’ itself, in size shape colour number of
spines and in other respects. For, apart from quite
a few plants, such as soap-wort sow-thistle and
possibly some others, nearly all the rest have this
character (even sow-thistle* has a spinous character,
but its seed-process is different). ‘The list includes
all the following: akorna® milk-thistle khalketos
safflower polyakanthos distaff-thistle onopyxos ixine
chamaeleon (the last-named, however, has not spinous
leaves, though golden thistle, which is also called
‘meadow-thistle,’ ὁ has’), and so on, for there are
many more. These differ from one another not only
in the aforesaid ways, but in that some of them
have many stalks and side-growths, like the pine-
thistle, while some have a single stalk and no side-
growths, like the safflower, and some again have
out-growths above from the top of the plant, like
the globe-thistle.2 Again some grow directly the
first rains come, others at a later time, some again in
summer, as the plant which some call yellow star-
thistle, and zxe.? So too 10 the flowering-time differs :
golden thistle blooms late !! and is in bloom for a
long time.
Plin. 22. 86; ἡλυλειμωνία UM,; ἠλυλειμωνία M,Ald. καὶ
λειμωνία conj. W. But λειμωνία is not mentioned again in
the following description, which is against its being a
distinct plant from σκόλυμος.

7 φυλλάκανθος I conj.; φυλλάκανθα MSS.

8 ῥύτρος : rhutrum G ; but Plin. 1.6. has eryngen.

®Plin. 22, 23. 10 καὶ ἐπὶ conj. Sch.; καὶ 7 ἐπὶ Ald. H.


Ἢ ὀψιανθὴς conj. Bod, from Plin. /,c. floret sero et diu;
εὐανθὴς Ald,
25


5


THEOPHRASTUS


Διαφοραὶ δὲ τῶν μὲν ἀκάνων οὐκ εἰσί, τῆς
κνήκου. δ᾽ εἰσίν: ἡ μὲν γὰρ ἀγρία ἡ δ᾽ ἥμερος.
τῆς δ᾽ ἀγρίας δύο εἴδη, τὸ μὲν προσεμφερὲς opo-
dpa τῷ ἡμέρῳ πλὴν εὐθυκαυλότερον, δι᾿ ὃ καὶ
πηνίοις ἔνιαι τῶν ἀρχαίων ἐχρῶντο γυναικῶν.
καρπὸν δὲ ἔχει μέλανα καὶ μέγαν καὶ πικρόν. ἡ
δ᾽ ἑτέρα δασεῖα καὶ τοὺς καυλοὺς ἔχει σογκώδεις,
ὥστε τρόπον τινὰ ἐπιγειόκαυλος γίνεται" διὰ γὰρ
μαλακότητα τῶν καυλῶν κατακλίνεται πρὸς τὰς
ἀρούρας! καρπὸν δ᾽ ἔχει μικρὸν πώγωνος" σπερ-
ματώδεις πᾶσαι, πλὴν μειζόσι, καὶ πυκνοτέροις
αἱ ἄγριαι. ἴδιον δὲ ἔχει πρὸς Ta ἄλλα ἄγρια: τὰ
μὲν yap σκληρότερα καὶ ἀκανθωδέστερα τῶν
ἡμέρων, αὕτη δὲ μαλακωτέρα καὶ λειοτέρα.

ἫἩ δ᾽ ἄκορνα προσεμφερὴς ὡς ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν
κατὰ τὴν πρόσοψιν τῇ κνήκῳ τῇ ἡμέρῳ, χρῶμα
δ᾽ ἐπίξανθον ἔχει καὶ χυλὸν λιπαρόν. ἀτρακτυ-
λὶς δέ τις καλεῖται καὶ λευκοτέρα τούτων" ἴδιον
δὲ ἔχει τὸ περὶ τὸ φύλλον, ὅτι ἀφαιρούμενον καὶ
τῇ σαρκὶ “προσφερόμενον αἱματώδη ποιεῖ τὸν
χυλόν, δι᾿ ὃ καὶ φόνον ἐ ἔνιοι καλοῦσι τὴν ἄκανθαν
ταύτην" ἔχει δὲ καὶ τὴν ὀσμὴν δεινὴν καὶ φονώδη:
ὀψὲ δὲ καὶ τελειοῖ τὸν καρπὸν πρὸς τὸ μετό-


1 ἀκάνων Ald.; ἀκαρνῶν mBas.; ἀκάνου or ἀκόρνης conj. Sch.,


the plural being awkward.

2 πηνίοις conj. R. Const.; σπληνείοις U; σπληνίοις MAId ;
colu G and Plin. l.c.; ef. Diose. 3. 107.

3 σογκώδεις : Plin. 1.6. seems to have read ὀγκώδεις (torosiore
caule).

4 κμαυλῶν conj. Scal. from Plin. /.c.; φύλλων Ald.

5 μικρὸν conj. Spr. from Plin. l.c. (minutwm semen) ; πικρὸν


6 πώγωνος: σπερματώδεις Ald,; so U, but πωγωνος, and M, but
26


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. rv. 5-6


Pine-thistle! has but one kind, but there are
different kinds of safflower, the wild and the culti-
vated. Again of the wild kind there are two
forms, one very like the cultivated except that the
stalk is straighter ; wherefore in ancient times women
sometimes used it to make distaffs:.2 It has a fruit
which is black large and bitter. The other is leafy,
and its stalks are like those of the sow-thistle,® so
that to some extent it comes to have a prostrate
stem; for on account of the softness of the stalks 4
it bends down towards the ground; and it has a
small® fruit, which is bearded. All the forms pro-
duce abundant seed,® but it is larger’ and more
crowded in the wild forms. This kind has also a
peculiarity as compared with other wild plants ; these
are usually coarser and more spinous than the culti-
vated forms, but in this plant the wild form is softer
and smoother.

The akorna resembles in a general way in appear-
ance the cultivated satlower, but has a yellowish
colour and a sticky juice.* There is also ἃ plant
called distaff-thistle, which is whiter than these. A
peculiarity of the leaf of this is that, if it is stripped
off and applied to the flesh, the contact makes the
juice blood-coloured,” wherefore some call this kind
of spinous plant ‘ blood-wort’ ; also it has an abomin-
able smell, like that of blood ; it matures its fruit late,


πωγωνὸς : G. has fructum amarum (see last note) frequentem
barbaeque modo hirsutum gignit: sunt ambo seminosa. W.
conj. πωγωνοσπέρματα δ᾽ εἰσὶ πᾶσαι, which is not convincing.
Epa retained the corrupt text and translate in the hight
of G.

1 μείζοσι : sc. σπέρμασι, but σπερματώδεις cannot be right.

8 χυλὸν add. St.; om. Ald.; sweco pingui G ; pinguiore succo
Plin. U.¢: Wefsdele ke  (Plin. 21.95.


27


THEOPHRASTUS


πώρον. τὸ δ᾽ ὅλον ὡς ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν ἅπασα ἡ
ἀκανικὴ φύσις ὀψίκαρπος. ἅπαντα δὲ ταῦτα
φύεται καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ σπέρματος καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς
ῥίξης, ὥστε βραχύν τινα γίνεσθαι τὸν ἀνὰ μέσον
χρόνον τῆς ἐκφύσεως τε καὶ τῆς τοῦ σπέρματος
τελειώσεως.

Τοῦ σκολύμου δὲ οὐχ ὅτι τοῦτο μόνον ἴδιον, ὅ ὅτι
τὴν ῥίξαν ἐδώδιμον ἔχει καὶ ἑφθὴν καὶ ὠμήν,
ἀλλὰ καὶ ὅτι τότε ἀρίστην ὅταν ἀνθῇ καὶ ὅτι
σκληρυνομένη ἀφίησιν ὁ ὀπόν. ἴδιον δὲ καὶ τὸ τῆς
ἀνθήσεως:" ἐπεὶ περὶ τροπάς.

Σαρκώδης δὲ καὶ ἐδώδιμος ἡ τοῦ σόγκου" ἡ δὲ
κύησις οὐκ ἀκανώδης ἀλλὰ προμήκης αὐτοῦ" καὶ
τοῦτ᾽ ἴδιον μόνον ἔχει τῶν φυλλακάνθων ἀντ-
εστραμμένως ἢ ὁ χαμαιλέων" ὁ μὲν γὰρ ᾿ἀφυλλ-
άκανθος ὧν ἀκανίζει. γηράσκον δὲ τὸ ἄνθος
ἐκπαπποῦται, καθάπερ τὸ τῆς ἀπάπης καὶ τὸ τῆς
μυρίκης καὶ ὅσα παραπλήσια τούτοις. παρακο-
λουθεῖ δὲ μέχρι τοῦ θέρους τὸ μὲν κυοῦν τὸ δὲ
ἀνθοῦν τὸ δὲ σπέρμα τίκτον, μικρὰν ἰκμάδα καὶ
κέντρον ἔχον' ξηραινόμενον δὲ τὸ φύλλον διαχεῖ-
ται καὶ οὐκέτι κεντεῖ.

ἫἩ ἰξίνη δὲ φύεται μὲν οὐ πολλαχοῦ, ῥιζόφυλ.-
λον δέ ἐστιν. ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς ῥίζης μέσης ὁ σπερ-
ματικὸς ἄκανος ἐπιπέφυκεν, ὥσπερ μῆλον εὖ


ἀκανικὴ conj. Bod., cf. 6. 4. 4 nn.3 ἀκανθικὴ Ald.

cf. Hes. Op. 582.

σόγκου conj. C. Hoffmann ; ὄγκου Ald.

κύησις : 1.6. flower-head. cf. κύημα 6. 4. 3; Plin. 21. 94.
ἀκανώδης conj. Scal.; ἀκανθώδης Ald. ef. 6. 4. 3 nn.

cf. 6. 4. 3. T.’s information seems to be incorrect, as


an αὶ ὦ wo eH


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI, tv. 6-9


towards autumn. Indeed, generally speaking, all
plants like the thistle-tribe 1 are late fruiting. All
these plants grow both from seed and from the root,
so that there is but a short period between the
beginning of growth and the maturing of the seed.

Golden thistle has not only this peculiarity, that
it has a root which is edible, whether boiled or raw,
but the root is best when the plant is in flower, and,
as it becomes hard, it produces a juice. The flowering
time * is also peculiar, about the solstice.

The root of the sow-thistle® is also fleshy and
edible ; but the swollen part+ is elongated and not
thistle-like®; and, alone of the spinous-leaved plants,
it has this peculiarity, in which it is the reverse of
the chamaeleon,® (for that plant, though it has not
spinous leaves, has a thistle-like flower-head). The
flower of the sow-thistle, as it ages, turns into down,
as do that of the dandelion’ the tamarisk ὃ and other
plants like these. In its growth® there is a succes-
sion up to the summer, part forming flowers, part
flowering, and part producing seed!°; this 11 has little
moisture in it and has a sharp point. The leaf, as it
dries, becomes flaccid and no longer pricks.

Izine does not grow in many places, and it has
leaves on the root. From the middle of the root
grows the seed-bearing thistle-head, which is like


both of the plants which he calls χαμαιλέων (see Index) have
spinous leaves.

1 ἀπάπης conj. Sch., cf. 7. 8. 3; πάπνης U; δαπάνης P;
δάφνης Ald.

® μυρίκης conj. Sch.; μυρίνης M ; μυρρίνης Ald.

ef, Flin: tc.

0 σπέρμα τίκτον 1 conj.; σπέρματος μὲν Ald.H.; σπερ-
μοτόκουν conj. Sch,

11 Text perhaps defective.


ad


10


11


THEOPHRASTUS


μάλα “ἐπικεκρυ! “μένον ὑπὸ τῶν φύλλων' οὗτος
δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ ἄκρου φέρει τὸ δάκρυον εὔστομον,
καὶ τοῦτό ἐστιν ἡ ἀκανθικὴ μαστίχη. ταῦ-
Ta μὲν οὖν καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα πανταχοῦ σχεδόν
ἐστιν.

Ἢ δὲ κάκτος καλουμένη περὶ Σικελίαν μόνον,
ἐν τῇ λλάδι δὲ οὐκ ἔστιν. ἴδιον δὲ παρὰ
τἄλλα TO φυτόν' ἀφίησι γὰρ εὐθὺς ἀπὸ τῆς
ῥίζης καυλοὺς ἐπιγείους, τὸ δὲ φύλλον ἔχει
πλατὺ καὶ ἀκανθῶδες: καλοῦσι δὲ τοὺς καυλοὺς
τούτους κάκτους" ἐδώδιμοι δέ εἰσι περιλεπόμενοι
μικρὸν ἐπίπικροι, καὶ θησαυρίζουσιν αὐτοὺς ἐν
ἅλμῃ.

ἵχτερον δὲ καυλὸν ὀρθὸν ἀφίησιν, ὃν καλοῦσι
πτέρνικα" γίνεται δὲ καὶ οὗτος ἐδώδιμος πλὴν
ἀθησαύριστος. τὸ δὲ περικάρπιον, ἐν ᾧ τὸ
σπέρμα, τὴν μὲν μορφὴν ἀκανῶδες, ἀφαιρεθέν-
των δὲ τῶν παππωδῶν σπερμάτων ἐδώδιμον
καὶ τοῦτο καὶ ἐμφερὲς τῷ τοῦ φοίνικος éy-
κεφάλῳ: καλοῦσι δὲ αὐτὸ σκαλίαν. τὰ μὲν
οὖν φυλλάκανθα σκεπτέον ἐν τοιαύταις δια-
φοραῖς.

Paha, δὲ καὶ παρὰ τὴν ἄκανθαν ἔχοντα
φύλλον, οἷον τὰ τοιαῦτα φέως ὄνωνις παντά-
δουσα τρίβολος ἱππόφεως μυάκανθος. . .. TE
σφόδρα καὶ τὸ φύλλον ἔχει σαρκῶδες: πολυ-


1 ὑπὸ conj. Sch.; ἐπὶ Ald.; Plin. 1.6. malum contectum sua
fronde. ? of. 9:1 ds 8 of. Plin. 12, 72.

4 Plin. 21. 97; Athen, 2. 83.

5 πλατὺ add. Scal. from Athen. J.c., cf. Plin. d.¢.3; om.
Ald.H. The ‘ stems’ are the petioles of the leaves.

ὁ ἀκανῶδες con}. Sch.; ἀκανθῶδες Ald.


30


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. ιν. 9--ν. 1


an apple and well hidden by! the leaves ; this on its
head produces its gum,” which is pleasant to the
taste, and this is the ‘thorn-mastich.’ 8 These
plants and others like them are found almost
everywhere.

4 But the plant called sakios (cardoon) grows only
in Sicily, and not in Hellas. It is a plant quite
different from any other ; for it sends up straight from
the root stems which creep on the ground, and its
leaf is broad® and spinous: these stems are called
kaktoi; they are edible, if peeled, and are slightly
bitter, and men preserve them in brine.

There is another kind which sends up an erect
stem, called the pternix. This too is edible, but can-
not be preserved. The fruit-vessel, which contains
the seed, is in shape like a thistle-head®: and when
the downy seeds are taken off, this too is edible and
resembles the ‘ brain’ ’ of the palm ; and it is called
skalas.§ Such are the different characteristics in
the light of which we may observe the spinous-
leaved plants.

V. Examples of plants which have leaves as well
as spines are pheos® rest-harrow star-thistle caltrop
‘horse-pheos’ 1° (spurge) butcher’s broom?! .. . ,12
and it has a fleshy leaf: it is much divided and has

‘te. eabbage.” cf. 2. 6. 2.

8 ascaliam Plin. /.c.3 ἀσκάληρον Athen. /.c. Modern Greek
σκάληρα. English ‘bottom.’ See Index κάκτος (2).

9 pews conj. St,; φλέως Ald. cf. 6. 1. 3.

ὯΝ “i sate conj. Salm., cf. 6. 5.2; ἱππόφυον Ald. cf. Plin.
πη πο 2-425-"Plin: 19, 151.
12 Text defective: the end of one sentence is missing and
_ the beginning of the next, containing the name of a plant.


-G attaches the following description to @éws. The plants
presently described do not correspond to this list.


31


THEOPHRASTUS *


σχιδὲς δὲ καὶ πολύρριζον, ov μὴν κατὰ βάθους

\ c/ » / \ “ /
ye Tas pitas ἔχον. βλαστάνει δὲ ἅμα Πλειάδι
καὶ τοῖς πρώτοις ἀρότοις καὶ ἀφίησι τότε τὸ
φύλλον: οὐ γάρ ἐστιν ἐπέτειον ἀλλὰ γχρονιώ-
τερον.

Τὸ δὲ τῆς καππάριος ἴδιον, ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη,
παρὰ ταῦτα' καὶ γὰρ τὸ φύλλον ἐπακανθίζον
ἔχει καὶ τὸν καυλόν, οὐχ ὥσπερ ὁ φέως καὶ
ἱππόφεως ἀνάκανθα τοῖς φύλλοις: μονόρριζον
δὲ καὶ ἐπίγειον καὶ χαμαίκαυλον' βλαστάνει
δὲ καὶ ἀνθεῖ τοῦ θέρους καὶ διαμένει τὸ φύλλον
χλωρὸν ἄχρι Πλειάδος. χαίρει δὲ ὑφάμμοις
καὶ λεπτογείοις χωρίοις" λέγεται δὲ ὡς ἐν τοῖς
ἐργασίμοις οὐ θέλει φύεσθαι, καὶ ταῦτα περὶ τὰ
ἄστη καὶ ἐν εὐγείοις τόποις φυομένη καὶ οὐχ
ὥσπερ σίλφιον ἐν ὀρεινοῖς" τοῦτο μὲν «οὖν! οὐ
πάντως ἀληθές.

Ὁ δὲ τρίβολος ἴδιον ἔχει, διότι περικαρπι-
ἀκανθός ἐστι. δύο δ᾽ αὐτοῦ γένη" τὸ μὲν γὰρ
ἔχει φύλλον ἐρεβινθῶδες, ὃ ἕτερος δὲ φυλχλάκανθος'
ἐπίγειοι δὲ ἄμφω καὶ «τολλαχῆ σχιζόμενοι" ὀψι-
βλαστὴς δὲ μᾶλλον ὃ φυλλάκανθος καὶ φύεται
περὶ τὰς αὐλάς. τὸ δὲ σπέρμα τοῦ μὲν πρωΐου
σησαμῶδες, τοῦ δὲ ὀψίου στρογγύλον ἐπίμελαν
ἐν λοβῷ. καὶ τὰ μὲν οὖν παρὰ τὰ φύλλα καὶ
ἄκανθαν ἔχοντα σχεδὸν ἐν τούτοις.

Ἢ & ὄνωνίς ἐστι πτορθάκανθον" ἐπέτειον δὲ
τὸ φύλλον ἔχει πηγανῶδες παραπεφυκὸς Tap


1 ἀρότοις conj. Bod.; ἀρότροις Ald. ef. 8. 1. 2.

2 rére conj. St.; τοῦτο Ald. 3 of Pall. 10/0372

4 6 φέως conj. St.; ὄφεως Ald. Bas.Cam.H.; ὁ φλεὼς mBas,
Prim, 21701:


32


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. v. 1-3


many roots, but is not deep-rooting. It grows at the
rising of the Pleiad, the first seed-time,! and then 3
puts forth its leaf; for it is not annual, but lives
longer than one year.

8 Caper, as was said, is quite distinct from these ;
it has a spinous leaf and a spinous stem, whereas
pheos* and ‘horse-pheos’ have no spines on their
leaves®; it has a single ® root, is low-growing,’ and
has a creeping stem; it grows and flowers in summer,
and the leaf remains green till the rising of the
Pleiad. It rejoices in sandy light soils, and it is said
that it is unwilling to grow on cultivated land, and
that though it grows near towns and in good soil,
and not, like silphium, in mountain country. This
account however § is not altogether accurate.

°A peculiarity of caltrop is that it is spinous-
fruited.1° There are two kinds; one has a leaf like
that of chick-pea, the other has spinous leaves.
Both are low-growing and much divided, but the
spinous-leaved form grows later and is found near
enclosures. The seed of the early kind is like that
of sesame, that of the late kind is round and blackish
and enclosed in a pod. ‘These may serve as examples
of plants which have spines as well as leaves.1!

12 Rest-harrow has spines on the shoots; the leaf,
which is annual,}® is like that of rue, and grows right
along the stem, so that the general appearance is


ὁ Diose. 2. 173 gives a different account.

ἔπ. 1..8..1.Ψ

ὃ οὖν add. W. (in comm.) from G.

® Plin. 21. 98. Be foG) 10:3:

1 τὰ μὲν οὖν παρὰ τὰ φύλλα Conj. Sch. (οὖν add. W.); τὰ μὲν
οὖν ὥσπερ ἀνάφυλλα Ald.H. 12-Plin. 21. 98.

15. 1 have altered the punctuation ; πτορθάκανθον, ἐπέτειον δέ:


τὸ φ. κτλ. W. after UMP.
33


VOL, I. D


THEOPHRASTUS


« Ἂς , ω / / A
ὅλον τὸν καυλόν, ὥστε καθάπερ στεφάνου τὴν
ὅλην εἶναι μορφήν, διαλαμβανομένων ἐπαλλή-
λων: κολοβοανθὴς δὲ καὶ ἐλλοβόκαρπος ἀδια-
a / ΄
ppaxtws φύεται δ᾽ ἐν τῇ γλίσχρᾳ καὶ γανώδει
καὶ μάλιστα ἐν τῇ σπορίμῳ καὶ γεωργουμένῃ,
ὸ / - n
δ ὃ Kal πολέμιον τοῖς γεωργοῖς: καὶ ἔστι
\ a
δυσώλεθρος: ὅταν yap λάβῃ χώρας βάθος, ὠθεῖ-
᾿]
ται κάτω εὐθὺς καὶ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ἔτος ἀποφύσεις
’ , > \ / / ot 4 Sg
ἀφεμένη εἰς τὰ πλάγια πάλιν εἰς TO ἕτερον
a 7 4 “
ὠθεῖται κάτω: σπαστέα μὲν οὖν ὅλη" τοῦτο
/ 7 n na \ ,
δὲ βραχείσης γίνεται τῆς γῆς Kal ἀπόλλυται
CA ὟΝ \ \ \ » θῇ > ἂν /
ῥᾷον: ἐὰν δὲ καὶ μικρὸν ἀπολειφθῇ, ἀπὸ τούτου
/ 7 yA \ n /
πάλιν βλαστάνει: ἄρχεται δὲ τῆς βλαστήσεως
θέρους τελειοῦται δὲ μετοπώρου. τὰ μὲν οὖν
ἄγρια τῶν φρυγανικῶν ἐκ τούτων θεωρείσθω.
δὰ " /
VI. Ta δὲ ἥμερα βραχεῖάν τινα ἔχει θεωρίαν,
ἅπερ ἐν τοῖς στεφανωματικοῖς ἐστι.
/
Ta δὲ καθ᾽ ὅλου πειρατέον περὶ στεφανωμάτων
nA al x ,
εἰπεῖν, ὅπως ἅπαν περιληφθῇ TO γένος. ἡ γὰρ
\ / 5, \ 7 -
στεφανωματικὴ φύσις ἰδίαν τινὰ ἔχει τάξιν,
Υ \ \ Ἄ a \
ἐπιμιγνυμένη *O€ TA μὲν τοῖς φρυγανικοῖς τὰ δὲ
an / > ἃ a
τοῖς ποιώδεσι' δι ὃ κἀκεῖνα συμπεριληπτέον
/ > ee 4
ἐπιμιμνησκομένους ὡς ἂν ἢ ὁ καιρός, ἀρξαμένους
n ΑΙ, na na an
πρῶτον ἀπὸ τῶν φρυγανικῶν. διχῆ δὲ ἡ τούτων


1 Evidently some conventional way of making a wreath.

2: διαλαμβανομένων ἐπαλλήλων conj. W.; διαλαμβανομένην ὑπ᾽
ἀλλήλων Ald. cf. Plat. Prot. 840 ΕΒ, where the verb means
‘to punctuate.’

3 κολοβοανθὴς ; cf. 8. 3. 3.


34


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. v. 3—v1. 2


that of a garland,! the leaves being set at intervals
alternately along it ?; the flower is irregular,’ and the
fruit contained ina pod,‘ which is not divided into
compartments.° It grows in sticky rich soil and
especially in sown and cultivated land; wherefore it
is an enemy to husbandmen, and it is hard,to kill;
for, when it gets hold of a piece of ground, it im-
mediately pushes its roots down deep,® and every
year it sends up new growths at the sides and the
next year’ it roots these again. Wherefore it has to
be dragged up entire ὃ ; this is done when the ground
has been moistened, and then it is easier to destroy.
But, if but a small piece is left, it shoots again from
this. It begins to grow in summer and completes its
growth in autumn. Let these examples serve for
a survey of the wild forms of under-shrubs.


Of cultivated under-shrubs (coronary plants), with which are
included those coronary plants which are herbaceous,


VI. The cultivated kinds need but a brief survey ;
these ® come under the class of coronary plants.

Of coronary plants we must endeavour to give a
general account, so that the whole class may be
included. This group has a somewhat peculiar
position, since it overlaps partly the under-shrubs,
partly the herbaceous plants; wherefore the latter
must also be included and we must mention them
as occasion serves, taking first the under-shrubs.


ἐλλοβόκαρπος conj. Sch.; ἐλλοβοάνθης Ald.

ΕΞ 8. 5, 2.

ὠθεῖται κάτω Cconj. Sch.; ὠθεῖ τὰ κάτω Ald.

εἰς τὸ ἕτερον, SC. ἔτος ; τῷ ἑτέρῳ 60η]. Sch.

σπαστέα μὲν οὖν ὅλη Conj. W.; σταθεῖσα μὲν οὕτως ὕλη Ald.


ἅπερ conj. Sch.; εἴπερ UMAIA.G.


onmont nn »


95


THEOPHRASTUS


/ a \ / an \ \ \
διαίρεσις ἡ κατὰ τὴν χρείαν. τῶν μὲν yap TO
7 / / \ \ ,
ἄνθος μόνον χρήσιμον" καὶ τούτων TO μὲν EVOT MOD,
“ " 48 5. ΚΓ “ / ,
ὥσπερ lov, TO δ᾽ ἄνοσμον, ὥσπερ διόσανθος φλόξ.

na \ ς “ \ \ /
τῶν δὲ καὶ οἱ κλῶνες καὶ τὰ φύλλα Kal ὅλως
ς n / A 2 ς 7 ς /
ἢ πᾶσα φύσις εὔοσμος, οἷον ερπύλλου ελενίου
n
σισυμβρίου τῶν ἄλλων. ἄμφω δὲ φρυγανικά.
> / la) > n a ¢ 7
κἀκείνων TOV ἀνθικῶν πολλῶν ἡ φύσις φρυγα-
/ \ Ud 5
VOONS, ἡ μὲν ἐπέτειος οὖσα μόνον, ἡ δὲ πολυ-
/ A > / a | le
χρονιωτέρα, πλὴν ἰωνίας τῆς μελαίνης" αὕτη
¢ \ /
yap ἄκλων ὅλως ἀλλὰ προσριζόφυλλος Kal ἀεί-
/ Ἷ
φυλλος, ὡς δέ τινές φασι καὶ δυναμένη Sv ὅλου
7 Ν f pI / \ ,ὔ
φέρειν τὸ ἄνθος, ἐὰν τρόπῳ τινὶ θεραπεύηται.

n 3 ,
τοῦτο μὲν ἴδιον ἂν ἔχοι.

Τῶν δὲ ἄλλων μᾶλλον δὲ τῶν πάντων αἱ μὲν
vA \ ἊΝ la / > /
ὅλαι μορφαὶ σχεδὸν πᾶσι φανεραί: εἰ δέ τινας
ov 5... 7 ” i y 2 >
ἄλλας ἰδιότητας ἔχουσι, ταύτας λεκτέον, οἷον εἰ

\ \ e ra ὃ la a ὃ - \ δὲ 4
τὰ μὲν ἁπλᾶ δοκεῖ τοῖς εἴδεσιν εἶναι TA δὲ ἔχειν
διαφοράς.
n \ i x /
‘ATAa μὲν οὖν τὰ ξυλώδη, καθάπερ ἕρπυλλος

7 π Λ Ν > \ \ 7 Ν \
σισύμβριον ἕλένιον' πλὴν εἰ TA μὲν ἄγρια τὰ δὲ
Ψ \ \ \ » \ Wwe) / ‘digg |
ἥμερα καὶ «-τὰ μὲν: εὔοσμα TA δὲ ἀοσμότερά ἐστι"
τούτων δὲ καὶ αἱ θεραπεῖαι καὶ αἱ χῶραι διά-

\ e ‘4 7 \ “ a
φοροι καὶ ot aépes. ἔνια δὲ καὶ τῶν ἀνθῶν, οἷον
\ / " > Ny rs ἮΝ Ἢ
τὸ μέλαν ἴον: οὐ γὰρ ἔχειν δοκεῖ τοῦτο διαφορὰν


1 Plin. 21. 59.
2 So Plin. /.c.; but Nic. ap. Athen. 15. 31 calls this flower


fragrant.
3 πολλῶν con}. W.; πολλὰ UMAId.
4 οἷον εἰ conj. W.; ὅτι Ald. 5 οὖν conj. W.; οἷον Ald.


36


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. νι. 2-3


1These may be divided into two groups according
to their uses. Of some only the flower is service-
able; and of these some are sweet-scented, as
gilliflower, some scentless, as carnation? and wall-
flower. Of others again the branches leaves and in
fact the whole growth are sweet-scented, as with
tufted thyme calamint bergamot-mint and the rest.
Both groups however belong to the under-shrubs.
And of the first-mentioned, those valued for their
flowers, the growth is in most? cases that of under-
shrubs, (in some annual merely, in others of longer
duration) except in the violet; for this is altogether
without branches, its leaves grow close to the root,
and it is always in leaf; while, as some say, it is
able to bear flowers continuously, if it is tended in a
certain way. This may be considered ἃ peculiar
characteristic of this plant.

Of the others, or rather of all the group, the
general appearance is in each case plain to all;
any peculiarities that they may exhibit we must
mention, for instance, if* some appear to have but
a single form, while others have various forms.

Thus° those of woody character, as tufted thyme
bergamot-mint calamint, have but one form, un-
less one counts wild and cultivated, scented and
scentless plants, as belonging to distinct forms;
and again there are with these plants differences
of culture of position and of climate. Some also ὃ
of the group valued for their flowers’ have each
but one form, for instance, the black zon (violet) ;
for this does not appear to have different forms


§ ἔνια δὲ καὶ conj. W.; ἔνιοι δὲ UM Ald.
1 ἀνθῶν in the sense of ἀνθικῶν ὃ 2, which perhaps should
be read here.


37


THEOPHRASTUS


4 Ἂς , > \ \ ς δ a
ὥσπερ TO λευκόν: ἐμφανὴς γὰρ ἡ τούτων χροιὰ
7 \ a “
διαλλάττουσα, καὶ ἔτι δὴ μᾶλλον ἡ τῶν κρίνων,
yy / / , / \ re |
εἴπερ δή, καθάπερ φασίν, ἔνια καὶ πορφυρᾶ ἐστι.
a Ck
Τῶν δὲ ῥόδων πολλαὶ διαφοραὶ πλήθει τε
/ hye? f \ "6 \ /
φύλλων καὶ ολιγότητι καὶ τραχύτητι καὶ λειότητι
\ / nr
Kal εὐχροίᾳ καὶ εὐοσμίᾳ. τὰ μὲν yap πλεῖστα
\ \
πεντάφυλλα, τὰ δὲ δωδεκάφυλλα καὶ εἰκοσίφυλλα,
\ ae fal a €. / / »”
Ta δ᾽ ἔτι πολλῷ πλεῖον ὑπεραίροντα τούτων" ἔνια
\ 5 / ὰ an
yap εἶναί φασιν ἃ Kal καλοῦσιν ἑκατοντάφυλλα"
a Ἂ \ a Ψ 5 \ /
πλεῖστα δὲ τὰ τοιαῦτά ἐστι περὶ Φιλίππους:
Φ \ / 5 a / /
οὗτοι yap λαμβάνοντες ἐκ τοῦ Ilayyaiouv φυτεύ-
» “ Ν J. / Α \ ,
ουσιν' ἐκεῖ γὰρ γίνεται πολλά" σμικρὰ δὲ σφόδρα
\ 5 x / ς Ν », > lal “
τὰ ἐντὸς φύλλα' ἡ γὰρ ἐκῴφυσις αὐτῶν οὕτως
4 Ψ \ \ | \ \ eS / > by
ὥστε εἶναι τὰ μὲν ἐκτὸς τὰ δ᾽ ἐντός" οὐκ εὔοσμα
Ν Q\ / a / 5 Ν an /
δὲ οὐδὲ μεγάλα τοῖς μεγέθεσιν. ἐν δὲ τοῖς peya-
ὦ a al \ os / \ \
λοις εὐώδη μᾶλλον ὧν τραχὺ TO κάτω. TO δὲ
τ΄. 4 bas JA Ne Se » vse bf 7
ὅλον, ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη, καὶ ἡ εὐχροία καὶ 1 εὐοσμία
\ \ / 7 \ an
παρὰ τοὺς τόπους ἐστίν' ἐπεὶ καὶ τὰ EV γῇ TH
A a \ /
αὐτῇ γινόμενα ποιεῖ τινα παραλλαγὴν εὐοσμίας
\ ’ J > / \ \ > / >
Kal aoopias. εὐοσμότατα δὲ Ta ἐν Κυρήνῃ, δι
ὰ \ \ / WA 1 a \ \ a ΝΜ
ὃ καὶ τὸ μύρον ἥδιστον. ἁπλῶς δὲ καὶ τῶν ἴων
\ lal ” > n yy / > “-“
καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἀνθῶν ἄκρατοι μάλιστα ἐκεῖθι


! cf. 6. 8. 1 n.; Diose. 3. 102.

2 Plin. 21. 14-21; Athen. 15. 29.

3 2,6. of the bark. ef. Plin. 21. 17, scabritia corticis.

4 Se. in ‘double’ roses.

5 7.e. the hip; called ὄμφαλος Arist. Probl. 12. 8, where
the same statement is made ; called μῆλον below, ὃ 6.


38


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. νι. 3-5


like the white ion (gilliflower) in which the colour
evidently varies; as does still more that of the
lilies, if it be true, as some say, that there is a
crimson kind.!

2 Among roses there are many differences, in
the number of petals, in roughness,’ in beauty
of colour, and in sweetness of scent. Most have
five petals, but some have twelve or twenty, and
some a great many more than these; for there
are some, they say, which are even called ‘ hundred-
petalled.’ Most of such roses grow near Philippi ;
for the people of that place get them on Mount
Pangaeus, where they are abundant, and _ plant
them. However the inner petals‘ are very small,
(the way in which they are produced being such
that some are outside, some inside). Some kinds
are not fragrant nor of large size. Among those
which have large flowers those in which the part®
below the flower is rough are the more fragrant.
In general, as has been said, good colour and scent
depend upon locality; for even bushes which are
growing in the same ® soil shew some variation in
the presence or absence of a sweet scent. Sweetest-
scented of all are the roses of Cyrene, wherefore
the perfume made from these is the sweetest.
(Indeed it may be said generally that the scents?
of the gilliflowers® also and of the other flowers
of that place are the purest, and especially the


6 τῇ αὐτῇ conj. Sch.; τοιαύτῃ U; τοιαῦτα Μ.

1 ἄκρατοι μάλιστα ἐκεῖθι αἱ ὀσμαί conj. Sch. after Saracenus
on Diose. 1. 25; Athen. l.c. (ἄκρατοι μάλιστα καὶ θεῖαι αἱ
ὀσμαί) ; ἄκρατοι: μάλιστα δ᾽ ἐκείνου ai doual Ald.; ἐκεῖ αἱ ὀσμαὶ
(rest uncertain) U. cf. C.P. 6. 18. 3.

8 ? violets and gilliflowers: see Index.


39


THEOPHRASTUS


at ὀσμαί, διαφερόντως δὲ τοῦ κρόκου" πλεῖστον
γὰρ οὗτος δοκεῖ παραλλάττειν. φύεται μὲν οὖν
ἡ ῥοδωνία καὶ ἐκ τοῦ σπέρματος" ἔχει δὲ ὑ ὑπὸ τὸ
ἄνθος ἐν τῷ μήλῳ κνηκῶδες ἢ ἀκανῶδες, ἔχον δέ
τινα χνοῦν ὥστε ἐγγὺς εἶναι τῶν παππωδῶν
σπερμάτων" οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ διὰ τὸ βραδέως παρα-
γίνεσθαι κατακόπτοντες, ὡς ἐλέχθη, τὸν καυλὸν

υτεύουσιν. ἐπικαιομένη δὲ καὶ ἐπιτεμνομένη
βέλτιον φέρει τὸ ἄνθος: ἐωμένη γὰρ ἐξαύξεται
καὶ ἀπολοχμοῦται. δεῖ δὲ καὶ μεταφυτεύειν
πολλάκις' καὶ γὰρ οὕτω φασὶ κάλλιον γίνεσθαι
TO pooov. ai & ἄγριαι τραχύτεραι καὶ ταῖς
ῥάβδοις καὶ τοῖς φύλλοις, ἔτι δὲ ἄνθος ἀχρού-
στερον ἔχουσι καὶ ἔλαττον.

Τὸ δὲ ἴον τὸ μέλαν τοῦ λευκοῦ διαφέρει κατά
τε ἄλλα καὶ κατ᾽ αὐτὴν τὴν ἰωνίαν, ὅτι πλατύ-
φυλλός τε καὶ ἐγγειόφυλλος καὶ σαρκόὀφυλλός
ἐστι, πολλὴν ἔχουσα ῥίξαν.

Τὰ δὲ κρίνα τῇ μὲν χροιᾷ τὴν εἰρημένην ἔχει
διαφοράν. μονόκαυλα δέ ἐστιν ὡς ἐπὶ πᾶν,
δικαυλεῖ δὲ σπανίως" τάχα δὲ τοῦτο χώρας καὶ
ἀέρος διαφορᾶς. Kal’ ἕκαστον δὲ καυλὸν ὁτὲ μὲν
ἕν κρίνον ὁτὲ δὲ πλείω γίνεται" βλαστάνει γὰρ
τὸ ἄκρον' σπανιώτερα δὲ ταῦτα" ῥίζαν δὲ ἔχει
πολλὴν σαρκώδη καὶ στρογγύλην" ὁ δὲ καρπὸς


1 διαφερόντως δὲ τοῦ κρόκου conj. Saracenus from Athen.
l.c.; διαφερόντως δὴ τοῦ χρόνου Ald. cf Callim. Hymn to
Apollo 83, whence it appears that an autumnal crocus (crocus
sativus) is meant. See below § 10.

2 ἀκανῶδες conj. Sch. from G, acanaceum ; ἀνθῶδες UMAId.

3 παππωδῶν conj. Sch.; πρώτων Ald.


CoP lint. 21,27.
40


\


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. νι. 5-8


scent of the saffron-crocus,! a plant which seems to
vary in this respect more than any other). Roses can
be grown from seed, which is to be found below the
flower in the ‘apple,’ and is like that of safflower
or pine-thistle,? but it has a sort of fluff, so that it
is not unlike the seeds which have a pappus.? As
however the plant comes slowly from seed, they
make cuttings of the stem, as has been said, and
plant them. If the bush is burnt or cut over, it bears
better flowers ; for, if left to itself, it grows luxuriantly
and makes too much wood. Also it has to be often
transplanted; for then, they say, the roses are
improved. The wild kinds are rougher both in
stem and in leaf, and have also smaller flowers of a
duller colour.

*The black zon (violet) differs from the white
ton (gilliflower) not only in other respects but in
the plant itself, in that in the former the leaves
are broad, lie close to the ground, and are fleshy, and
there is much root.

5 Krina (lilies) shew the variation in colour which
has been already mentioned. The plant has in
general a single stem, but occasionally divides
- into two, which may be due to differences’ in position
and climate. On each stem grows sometimes one
flower, but sometimes more; (for it is the top of
the stem which produces the flower’) but this
sort is less common. There is an ample root, which
is fleshy and round. If the fruit is taken off, it


5 Plin. 21. 25. The account of herbaceous coronary plants
seems to begin here. cf. 6. 6. 10. . 3.

7 διαφορᾶς Ὁ; διαφορᾷ W. after Sch.

8 βλαστάνει. But this word in T. has usually a more
general sense. ? ‘for in that case the top of the stem
branches’ (lit. ‘makes fresh growth’).


41


10


THEOPHRASTUS


ἀφαιρούμενος ἐκβλαστάνει καὶ ἀποδίδωσι τὸ
/ \ yy lal / \ ,
κρίνον πλὴν ἔλαττον. ποιεῖ δέ τινα καὶ δακρυώδη
συρροήν, ἣν καὶ φυτεύουσιν, ὥσπερ εἴπομεν.
«ς δὲ is Xx οὗ / ¢e \ \ a
O δὲ νάρκισσος ἢ TO λείριον, οἱ μὲν γὰρ τοῦτο
ς 93 » a a Ν Ν 5 \ fal an 7
οἱ δ᾽ ἐκεῖνο καλοῦσι, τὸ μὲν ἐπὶ τῇ γῆ φύλλον
ἀσφοδελῶδες ἔχει, πλατύτερον δὲ πολύ, καθάπερ
᾿ς / \ \ \ "7 \ /
ἡ κρινωνία, τὸν δὲ καυλὸν ἄφυλλον μὲν ποώδη
δὲ Ν 5 a > ” \ ’ ¢ fs \
€ καὶ ἐξ ἄκρου τὸ ἄνθος, καὶ ἐν ὑμένι τινὶ
- > ’ / \ / - / \
καθάπερ ἐν ἀγγείῳ «καρπὸν: μέγαν εὖ μάλα καὶ
A an a ’
μέλανα TH χροιᾷ σχήματι δὲ προμήκη. οὗτος δ᾽
/ an
ἐκπίπτων ποιεῖ βλάστησιν αὐτόματον: οὐ μὴν
» \ \ / "A \ \ c/
ἀλλὰ καὶ συλλέγοντες πηγνύουσι Kal THY ῥίζαν
» /
φυτεύουσιν. ἔχει ῥίζαν σαρκώδη στρογγύλην
μεγάλην. ὄψιον δὲ σφόδρα. μετὰ yap ᾿Αρκτοῦρον
ἡ ἄνθησις καὶ περὶ ἰσημερίαν.
,
Ὁ δὲ κρόκος ποώδης μὲν τῇ φύσει, καθάπερ καὶ
le) \ / al \ \ “
ταῦτα, πλὴν φύλλῳ στενῷ, σχεδὸν γὰρ ὥσπερ
/ /
τριχὐὀφυλλόν ἐστιν: ὀψιανθὲς δὲ σφόδρα καὶ
Ε F ͵ ς
ὀψιβλαστὲς ἢ πρωϊανθές, ὁποτέρως τις λαμβάνοι
ο n ’
τὴν ὥραν' «μετὰ; Πλειάδα γὰρ ἀνθεῖ καὶ ὀλίγας
€ / 3 \ > Ψ lal / \ \ ”
ἡμέρας: εὐθὺς δ᾽ ἅμα τῷ φύλλῳ καὶ TO ἄνθος
ὠθεῖ: δοκεῖ δὲ καὶ πρότερον" ῥίζα δὲ πολλὴ καὶ
σαρκώδης, καὶ τὸ ὅλον εὔζωον: φιλεῖ: δὲ καὶ
an /
πατεῖσθαι καὶ γίνεται καλλίων κατατριβομένης


1 of. 2, 2.1.., 9.14; Ο.}. 1.4.46. Plin. 21. 26 describes
a method of artificially producing crimson lilies from the
bulbils of a white lily. cf. Geop. 11. 20.

2 cf. 6.8.1 and 3. See Index. Sef. 7. Wek

4 rowdy: cf. 4. 10. 3.


42


is


neon ΎΣ


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. vi. 8-10


germinates and produces a fresh plant, but of
smaller size; the plant also produces a sort of
tear-like exudation, which men also plant, as we
have said.

The narcissus? or leirion (for some call it by the
one name, some by the other) has its ground-leaves
like those of the asphodel,? but much broader,
like those of the krinon (lily); its stem is leafless
and grass-green‘* and bears the flower at the top;
the fruit® is in a kind of membrane-like vessel,
and is very large, black in colour, and oblong in
shape. This as it falls germinates of its own accord ;
however men collect and set® the seed, and also
plant the root, which is fleshy round and large. The
plant blooms very late,’ after the setting of Arcturus
about the equinox.

8 The saffron-crocus is herbaceous in character, like
the above-mentioned plants,® but has a narrow leaf ;
indeed the leaves are, as it were, hair-like; it
blooms very late, and grows either late or early,
according as one looks at the season!" ; for it blooms
after 1! the rising of the Pleiad and only for a few
days. It pushes up the flower at once with the
leaf, or even seems to do so earlier. The τοοῦ 12
is large and fleshy, and the whole plant vigorous ;
it loves even to be trodden on and grows fairer
when the root is crushed into the ground by the


καρπὸν omitted in MSS.; add. Dalec. from Diose. 4. 158.
πηγνύουσι: cf. 7. 4. 3 n.

‘ ef. C.P. 1. 10. 5; Plin. l.c. (a much confused passage).

8 Plin. 21. 31-34.

® Se. κρίνον and νάρκισσος ; cf. 6. 6. 8 n.

10 7.e. whether at the end of one season or the beginning of
the next. cf. C.P.1.10.5. λαμβᾶνοι U; λαμβάνει Ald.

1 μετὰ add. W. meer ΘΜ.


5
6


43


il


THEOPHRASTUS


/ fel C/ be 2 «ἃ \ \ \ ig \ 2
πάτῳ τῆς ῥίζης" δι’ ὃ καὶ Tapa Tas ὁδοὺς Kal ἐν
τοῖς κροτητοῖς κάλλιστος. ἡ δὲ φυτεία ἀπὸ
ε ἢ
ῥίζης.
r A \ 5 e/ a \ > BA
Tatra μὲν οὖν οὕτω γεννᾶται. τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλα
\ £ a
ἄνθη τὰ προειρημένα πάντα σπείρεται, οἷον
Ν
ἰωνία διόσανθος ἴφυον φλὸξ ἡμεροκαλλές: καὶ
\ > \ \ ς cz / £ \
yap αὐτὰ καὶ αἱ ῥίζαι ξυλώδεις" σπείρεται δὲ
καὶ ἡ οἰνάνθη: καὶ γὰρ καὶ τοῦτο ἀνθῶδες. τὰ
μὲν οὖν ἀνθικὰ σχεδὸν ἐν τούτοις καὶ τοῖς ὁμοίοις
ληπτέον.
ΜῈ}: Tarde ἕτερα πάντα μὲν ἀνθεῖ καὶ σπερ-
μοφορεῖ, δοκεῖ δὲ οὐ πάντα διὰ τὸ “μὴ φανερὸν
εἶναί τινων τὸν καρπόν' ἐπεὶ καὶ τὸ ἄνθος
ἐνίων ἀμαυρόν' ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι βραδέως καὶ χαλεπω-
/
τέρως παραγίνεται, τῇ φυτείᾳ χρῶνται μᾶλλον,
ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη καὶ κατ᾽ ἀρχάς. καίτοι διατεί-
νονταί τινες ὡς οὐκ ἐχόντων καρπόν" οἵ τε
πεπειρᾶσθαι φάσκοντες καὶ τούτων εἰσίν, αὐτοὶ
a / nr
yap Enpavat πολλάκις Kal ἀποτρίψαι Kal σπεῖραι,
καὶ οὐδεπώποτε βλαστεῖν οὔτε ἕρπυλλον οὔτε
ἑλένιον οὔτε σισύμβριον οὔτε μίνθαν: πεπειρᾶσθαι
γὰρ καὶ ταύτης. ἀλλ᾽ ὅμως ἐκεῖνο ἀληθέστερον,
ἥ τε τῶν ἀγρίων. φύσις ἐπιμαρτυρεῖ' καὶ γὰρ
ἕρπυλλός ἐστιν ἄγριος, ὃν κομίξοντες ἐκ τῶν
ὀρῶν φυτεύουσι καὶ ἐν Σικυῶνι καὶ ᾿Αθήνῃσιν ἐκ
ne “ ’ ba 1 ee ” /
τοῦ Ὕ μηττοῦ' παρ᾽ ἄλλοις δὲ ὅλως ὄρη πλήρη
\ / / > an / \ 4
καὶ λόφοι, καθάπερ ἐν TH Opaxn: καὶ σισύμβριον


1 πάτῳ conj. Turneb. and others; κάτω Ald,

2 κροτητοῖς : Plin. 1.6. iuxia semitas ac fontes. Did he read
κρουνοῖς ?

3 ἀνθικὰ conj. Scal.; ἀκανθικὰ Ald. ef. 6. 6. 2.

4 ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι conj. W. from G ; ἄλλα δὲ UMPAId.


44


— ττρυ νη"


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. νι. 1to—vu. 2


foot!: wherefore it is fairest along the roads and in
well-worn places.?_ It is propagated from the root.

These are the ways then in which the above plants
are grown. All the above-mentioned flowers are
grown from seed, as gilliflower carnation § spike-
lavender wall-flower martagon-lily; these plants
themselves, as well as their roots, are woody.
Drop-wort is also grown from seed; for that too
is a plant grown for its flower. These and other
plants like them may serve as examples of plants
grown for their flowers.?

VII. All the others flower and bear seed, though
they do not all appear to do so, since in some cases
the fruit is not obvious. Indeed in some the flower
too is inconspicuous, but, because * these grow slowly
and with some difficulty, men propagate them rather
by off-shoots, as was said at the beginning. How-
ever some contend that they have no fruit: and
there are men who have actually tried with the
following plants®; they have, they say, themselves
often dried and rubbed out and sown the apparent
fruit of thyme calamint bergamot-mint and green
mint (for even that they have tried) and there was
no germination from such sowing. However, the
account given above is the truer, and the character
of the wild forms testifies to this; for there is
also a wild thyme (Attic thyme ®), which they bring
from the mountains and plant at Sicyon, or from
Hymettus and plant at Athens; and in other
districts the mountains and hills’ are quite covered
with it, for instance in Thrace. There is also a

5 of re. . . εἰσίν transposed by Sch.; in MSS. after ἀληθέ-
στερον.


6 Plin. 19. 172; Athen. 15. 28.
1 λόφοι conj. W.; τόποι Ald.


45


THEOPHRASTUS


δὲ καὶ τἄλλα δριμυτέραν ἔχοντα τὴν ὀσμήν'
ἕρπυλλος δ᾽ ἐνίοτε καὶ παντελῶς θυμώδης": ἃ
δῆλον ὅτι ταύτην τὴν γένεσιν λαμβάνει.

᾿Αβρότονον δὲ μᾶλλον ἀπὸ σπέρματος βλα-
στάνει ἢ ἀπὸ ῥίζης καὶ παρασπάδος: χαλεπῶς δὲ
καὶ ἀπὸ σπέρματος: προμοσχευόμενον «δὲ: ἐν
ὀστράκοις, ὥσπερ οἱ ᾿Αδώνιδος κῆποι, τοῦ θέρους"
δύσριγον γὰρ σφόδρα καὶ ὅλως ἐπίκηρον καὶ ὅποι
ὁ ἥλιος σφόδρα λάμπει: ἐμβιῶσαν δὲ καὶ αὐξηθὲν
μέγα καὶ ἰσχυρὸν καὶ δενδρῶδες ὥσπερ τὸ πήγα-
νον, πλὴν ξυλωδέστερον πολὺ τοῦτο καὶ ξηρότερον
καὶ αὐχμωδέστερον.

Ὁ δὲ ἀμάρακος ἀμφοτέρως φύεται, καὶ ἀπὸ
παρασπάδος καὶ ἀπὸ “σπέρματος πολύσπερμον
δέ, καὶ τὸ σπέρμα εὔοσμον ὀσμῇ μαλακωτέρᾳ:
δύναται δὲ καὶ μεταφυτεύεσθαι. πολύσπερμον δὲ
καὶ τὸ aBporovov | Kal οὐκ ἄοσμον. τοῦτο δὲ ῥίζας
μὲν ἔχει ὀρθὰς καὶ κατὰ βάθους. ἔστι γὰρ ὥσπερ
μονόρριζον τῆ παχείᾳ τὰς δ᾽ ἄλλας «ἀφίησιν: ἀπ᾽
αὐτῆς" ὁ δ᾽ ἀμάρακος καὶ ὁ ἕρπυλλος καὶ τὸ
σισύμβριον καὶ τὸ ἑλένιον ἐπιπολαίους καὶ
πολυσχιδεῖς καὶ ταρρώδεις" ξυλώδεις δὲ πᾶσαι,
TOAD δὲ μᾶλλον ἡ τοῦ ἀβροτόνου καὶ διὰ τὸ


μέγεθος καὶ τῇ ξηρότητι.


1 ἐνίοτε conj. W.; ἐνίοις Ald.

2 Plin. 21. 57. Description of various forms of ἕρπυλλος
has perhaps dropped out after this word: ef. ὃ 5, καθάπερ
ἐλέχθη.

3 i.e. from seed. ταύτην conj. W.; πάντα UMAId.; ? τάντα
ταύτην.

4 Plin. 21. 34: cf. C.P. 1. 4.:ὃ.  aBpdrovov . . . Oépous, text
nearly as given by Ald. and by UM (?)—supported by Plin.


46


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. vu. 2--1


wild bergamot-mint, and wild forms of the other
plants mentioned, having a more pungent smell.
Thyme is sometimes! quite like cultivated thyme.’
Now it is plain that these wild forms possess this
means of reproducing themselves.®

Southernwood actually grows more readily from
seed than from a root‘ or a piece torn off (though
it grows even from seed with difficulty); however
it can be propagated by layering in pots in summer-
time, like the ‘gardens of Adonis’®; it is indeed
very sensitive ὃ to cold and generally delicate even
where the sun shines brightly; but, when it is
established and has grown, it becomes tall and
strong and tree-like, like rue, except that the latter
is much more woody drier and less succulent.

7 Sweet marjoram grows in either way, from pieces


_ torn off or from seed ; it produces a quantity of seed,


“eee 77"
J


which is fragrant with a delicate scent ; it can also
be transplanted. Southernwood also produces much
seed, which hassome scent. This plant has straight
roots which run deep; it has, as it were, its single
stout root, from which the others spring;° while
sweet marjoram thyme bergamot-mint and calamint
have surface 10 roots which are much divided and
matted; in all these plants the roots are woody,
but especially in southernwood, because of its size
and because it is so dry.
i.e. so far as that passage is intelligible—but δὲ before ἐν
ὀστράκοις add. W.; after ἐν ὁστρ. supply βλαστάνει.

δ cf. Plat. Phaedo 2768 and Thompson’s n. Sir W.
Thiselton-Dyer in Companion to Greek Studies, ὃ 99, p. 65.

6 of C.P. 4. 3. 2. 7 Plin. 21. 61.

8 μεταφυτεύεσθαι conj. Sch. from G; μεταφύεσθαι Ald.

9 ἀφίησιν add. W.


10 ἐπιπολαίους conj. Scal.; ἐπὶ πολλοὺς MAld. cf. C.P. 2.
16. 5.


47


5


THEOPHRASTUS


Tod δὲ ἑρπύλλου ἴδιος ἡ αὔξησις ἡ τῶν Bra-
στῶν' δύναται γὰρ ἐφ᾽ ὁσονοῦν προϊέναι κατὰ
μῆκος χάρακα λαβὼν ἢ πρὸς αἱμασιὰν φυτευ-
θεὶς ἢ κάτω καθιέμενος: εὐαυξέστατος δὲ εἰς

/ 16 \ “ Ν «ς / a >
φρέαρ. εἴδη δὲ τοῦ μὲν ἡμέρου λαβεῖν οὐκ
» / > / an \ > 7 \
ἔστι, καθάπερ ἐλέχθη. τοῦ δὲ ἀγρίου φασὶν
εἶναι. τοῦ γὰρ ἐν τοῖς ὄρεσιν τὸν μὲν θυμβρώδη

> >
τινὰ Kal δριμύτατον τὸν δ᾽ εὔοσμον εἶναι καὶ
μαλακώτερον.
a / /

“Opa δὲ τῆς φυτείας πλείστων μετόπωρον, ἐν
a 7 ε m ΄ 5) \ > ᾽
ᾧ σπεύδουσιν ὡς πρῶτα φυτεύειν: οὐ μὴν ἀλλ
Μ \ aA 8 7 [γι /
ἔνια καὶ τοῦ ἦρος φυτεύουσιν. ἅπαντα φιλόσκια
καὶ pirvopa καὶ φιλόκοπρα μάλιστα" αὐχμὸν δὲ

/ \ Ὁ. > - Vd 4 ¢
δέχεται Kal ὅλως OALYOUSpOTaTOS ὁ ἕρπυλλος.

, \ / ΄ \ ‘ an na /
κόπρῳ δὲ χαίρει, μάλιστα δὲ Kal TH TOV λοφού-
ρων; φασὶ δὲ καὶ μεταφυτεύειν δεῖν πολλάκις:

7 /
καλλίω yap. τὸ δὲ σισύμβριον, ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη, Kal
ἐξίσταται μὴ μεταφυτευόμενον.

VIII. Τῶν δ᾽ ἀνθῶν τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἐκφαίνεται

\ La Ψ \ e ἌΡΑ / > \
TO λευκόϊον, ὅπου μὲν ὁ ἀὴρ μαλακώτερος εὐθὺς

la) la /
τοῦ χειμῶνος, ὅπου δὲ σκληρότερος ὕστερον,

n an 5 an /
ἐνιαχοῦ τοῦ ἦρος. ἅμα δὲ τῷ iw ἢ μικρόν τι
ς Ν᾿ ὟΝ
ὕστερον καὶ τὸ φλόγινον καλούμενον τὸ ἄγριον"


1 cf. Plin, 20. 245 and 246 (not from T.); C.P. 2. 18.2;
Diose. 3. 38; Index ἕρπυλλος.

2 cf. Plin. 19. 172, which refers however to σισύμβριον ;
Nic. ap. Athen. 15. 31.

Pin, 21; 61:


48


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. vi. 5-vui. 1


1The growth of the shoots of thyme is peculiar.
If it has a stake, or is planted against a wall, it can
send them out to any length; so also if it is let grow
downwards; indeed it is most vigorous when grown
into ἃ pit.2 It is not possible to distinguish different
forms of the cultivated kind, as has been said, but
they say that of the wild kind (Attic thyme) there
is more than one form; for that of the kind which
grows on the mountains one form is like savory and
very pungent, while the other is fragrant and more
delicate.

8 The season for planting most of these is autumn,
and then men hasten to plant them as early as
possible; however some are planted also in spring.
All of them love shade,‘ water, and especially dung ;
however thyme is patient of drought and, in general,
needs moisture less than the others. These plants
especially delight in the dung of beasts of burden ;
and it is said that they should often be transplanted,
for that it improves them, while bergamot-mint, as
has been said, actually degenerates® if it is not
transplanted.


Of the seasons at which coronary plants flower, and of the
length of their life.

VIII. ©Of the flowers the?’ first to appear is the
gilliflower ; where the air is mild, it appears as soon
as winter comes, but, where it is more severe, later,
sometimes in spring. Along with the gilliflower, or
a little later, appears the flower called the wild wall-

4 φιλόσκια conj. Scal. fromG ; φιλοίκια UMAId. ef. Plin. lc.

5 ἐξίσταται conj. Scal. from G, degenerat ; ἐξήτασται MAId.

6 Plin. 21. 64-66; Athen. 15. 26 and 27. ἀνθῶν : ? in the


sense of ἀνθικῶν, as in 6. 6. 3.
7 τὸ conj. Scal.; τοῦ Ald,


49
VOL, II. E


3


THEOPHRASTUS


ταῦτα γὰρ ὧν οἱ στεφανήπλοκοι χρῶνται πολὺ
ἐκτρέχει τῶν ἄλλων. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὁ νάρ-
κισσος καὶ τὸ λείριον, «καὶ τῶν ἀγρίων ἀνεμώ-
νῆς γένος τὸ καλούμενον ὄρειον, καὶ τὸ τοῦ
βολβοῦ κώδυον' ἐμπλέκουσι γὰρ ἔνιοι καὶ τοῦτο
εἰς τοὺς στεφάνους. ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις ἡ οἰνάνθη
καὶ τὸ μέλαν ἴον καὶ τῶν ἀγρίων ὅ τε ἐλειό-
χρυσος καὶ τῆς ἀνεμώνης ἡ λειμωνία καλου-
μένη καὶ τὸ ξίφιον καὶ ὑάκινθος καὶ σχεδὸν
ὅσοις ἄλλοις χρῶνται τῶν ὀρείων. τὸ δὲ ῥόδον
ὑστερεῖ τούτων καὶ τελευταῖον μὲν φαίνεται,
πρῶτον δ᾽ ἀπολείπει τῶν ἐαρινῶν' ὀλιγοχρονία
γὰρ um ἄνθησις. ὀλιγοχρόνια δὲ καὶ τῶν ἀγ-
ρίων Ta λοιπὰ πλὴν τῆς ὑακίνθου καὶ τῆς ἀγρίας
καὶ τῆς σπαρτῆς" αὕτη δὲ διαμένει καὶ τὸ λευκὸν
ἴον καὶ ἔτι πλείω τὸ φλόγινον' τὸ δὲ δὴ μέλαν ἴ tov,
ὥσπερ εἴρηται, δι᾿ ἐνιαυτοῦ θεραπείας τυγχάνον.
ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ ἡ οἰνάνθη, καὶ γὰρ τοῦτο ἀνθι-
κὸν μὲν ποῶδες δὲ τὴν φύσιν, ἐάν τις ἀποκνίζῃ
καὶ ἀφαιρῇ τὸ ἄνθος καὶ μὴ ἐᾷ σπερματοῦσθαι
καὶ ἔτι τόπον EVELNOV ἔχῃ" τὸ δὲ ἄνθος βοτρυῶδες
καὶ λευκὸν καθάπερ τῶν ἀγρίων... ταῦτα μὲν
οὖν ὥσπερ ἐαρινὰ φαίνεται.

Τὰ δὲ θερινὰ μᾶλλον ἥ τε λυχνὶς καὶ τὸ
διόσανθος καὶ τὸ κρίνον καὶ τὸ ἴφυον καὶ ὁ


1 Evidently both distinct from the νάρκισσος ἢ λείριον of
6. 6.9; 6.8 3. See Index.

2 καὶ tav ... ὄρειον ins Sch. from Athen. 1.06.0. with
alteration of ὀρείων to ἀγρίων. cf. Plin. l.c.

5 7.e. the flower of muscari, mentioned in this way because
elsewhere (e.g. 7. 12. 1) the edible root is in question, which
was properly called βολβός.

4 of. 9. 19, 3. 5 See Index.


50


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. vin. 1-3


flower. These, of all the flowers that the garland-


makers use, far outrun the others. After these come
pheasant’s eye! and polyanthus! narcissus (and,among
wild plants, the kind of anemone which is called
the ‘mountain anemone ’)? and the ‘ head’ ? of purse-
tassels; for this too some interweave in their gar-
lands. After these come dropwort violet, and of
wild plants, gold-flower,t the meadow kind of
anemone corn-flag hyakinthos (squill), and pretty
well all the mountain flowers that are used. The
rose comes last of these, and is the first of the
spring flowers to come to an end, as it is the first to
appear, for its time of blooming is short. So too is
that of the rest of the wild plants mentioned, except
hyakinthos,® the wild kind (squill), and also the culti-
vated (larkspur); this lasts on, and so does the gilli-
flower, and for a still longer time the wallflower,
while the violet, as has been said,® blooms throughout
the year, if it receives tendance. So too dropwort 7
(for that too is one of the plants valued for their
flowers, though it is herbaceous’ in character) if
one pinches off and removes the flower instead of
letting it go to seed, and if, further,’ it has a sunny
position. The flower is clustering and white, like
that of the wild ... Ὁ ‘These then are, we may
say, the plants of spring.

11 The following belong rather to summer: rose-
eampion carnation srinon 135 (lily) spike-lavender and


fetes cf. .C.P. 1. 13. 12. 1 ofsbeGelk
8 ποῶδες : sense not obvious ; εὐῶδες conj. Dalec. cf. C.P.
Bt. U2: 9 ἔτι conj. W.; ὅτι UMAId.


10 Ut labruscae G, perhaps a guess: see οἰνάνθη in Index.
11 2 Lin. wa: 67 and 68.
2 κρίνον Sch, from Athen. /.c.; so also Plin, l.c.; κήρινθον


ala.
51


THEOPHRASTUS


ἀμάρακος ὁ Φρύγιος: ἔτι δὲ ὁ πόθος καλούμενος"
οὗτος δ᾽ ἐστὶ διττός, ὃ μὲν ἔχων τὸ ἄνθος ὅμοιον
τῇ ὑακίνθῳ, ὁ ὁ δὲ é ἕτερος ἄχρους λευκός, ᾧ χρῶν-
ται περὶ τοὺς “τάφους: καὶ χρονιώτερος οὗτος.
ἀνθεῖ δὲ καὶ ἡ ἶρις τοῦ θέρους καὶ τὸ στρούθιον
καλούμενον: τῇ μὲν ὄψει καλὸν τὸ ἄνθος ἄοσμον
δέ. μετοπώρου δὲ τὸ λείριον τὸ ἕτεβον καὶ ὁ
κρόκος, ὅ τε ὀρεινὸς ἄοσμος καὶ ὁ ἥμερος" εὐθὺς
γὰρ ἀνθοῦσι τοῖς πρώτοις ὕδασι. χρῶνται δὲ καὶ
τῶν ἀγρίων τῷ τῆς ὀξυακάνθου καρπῷ καὶ τῷ
ἄνθει τῷ τῆς μίλακος.

Καὶ ταῖς μὲν ὥραις οὕτως ἑκάστων ἡ γένεσις.
ὡς δὲ ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν οὐδεὶς διαλείπεται, χρόνος
οὐδ᾽ ἔστιν ἀνανθής, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὁ χειμὼν ἔχει καί-
περ ἄγονος δοκῶν εἶναι διὰ τὴν κατάψυξιν τῶν
μετοπωρινῶν μεταλαμβανόντων, ἐὰν δὲ δὴ καὶ
μαλακὸς ἢ, πολλῷ μᾶλλον. ἁπλῶς γὰρ πάντ᾽ ἢ
τὰ πολλὰ καὶ ἐπεκτείνεται τῆς οἰκείας ὥρας, καὶ
ἐὰν ὁ τόπος εὔειλος ἢ μᾶλλον" δι᾿ ὃ καὶ συνέχεια
γίνεται. χρόνοι μὲν οὖν οὗτοι καὶ ὧραι κατὰ
τὰς γενέσεις.

Bios δὲ iwvias μὲν τῆς λευκῆς ἔτη μάλιστα
τρία" γηράσκουσα δὲ ἐλαττοῦται καὶ ἴα λευκό-
τερα φέρει. ῥοδωνίας δὲ πέντε τὰ πρὸς τὴν
ἀκμὴν μὴ ἐπικαομένης" χείρω δὲ καὶ ταύτης τὰ
ῥόδα γηρασκούσης. πρὸς εὐοσμίαν δὲ καὶ ῥόδων
καὶ ἴων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἀνθῶν μέγιστον ὁ τόπος


eo RO Pen ΕΙΣ

2 cf. the Eng. plant-name ‘ love-in-absence’; see πόθος in
Index.

3 λευκὸς. ἔκλευκος, ‘whitish,’ Athen. dc.

4 Evidently the νάρκισσος ἢ λείριον of 6. 6. 9; cf. 6. 8. In.


52


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. vin. 3-5


the Phrygian sweet marjoram! ; also the plant called
‘regret, ? of which there are two kinds, one with a
flower like that of larkspur, the other not coloured
but white,? which is used at funerals; and this one
lasts longer. The iris also blooms in summer, and
the plant called soap-wort, which has a beautiful
flower but is scentless. In autumn bloom the other
kind of narcissus,* the crocus, both the scentless
mountain form and the cultivated one (saffron-
crocus); for these bloom directly the first rains
come. The fruit® of the cotoneaster and the flower
of the smilax, both of them wild plants, are also
used in garlands.

Such are the seasons at which each appears; and,
to speak generally, there is no interval of time nor
flowerless period, but even winter produces flowers,
for all that it seems to be unproductive by reason of
the cold, since the autumn flowers continue into
winter, and to a much greater extent if the season
be mild. For all things,® one may say, or at least
most of them, extend beyond their proper season,
and all the more if the place be sunny ; so that there
is a continuous succession. These then are the
periods and seasons at which the various flowers are
produced.

™The life of the gilliflower is at most three years ;
as it ages it degenerates and produces paler flowers.®
A rose-bush lives five years, after which its prime ®
is past, unless it is pruned by burning!°; with this
plant too the flowers become inferior as it ages.
Position and a suitable climate contribute most to


ὅ καρπῷ : Plin. J,c. apparently read ἄνθει.


8 πάντ᾽ ἢ conj. St.; πάντη Ald.H. 2 Pim. 21. 69;
8 Ya conj. St.; ἀεὶ Ald.
ἀκμὴν conj. Scal.; ἀκτὴν Ald. 10 ef 6. 6.6:


5.3


THEOPHRASTUS


/ \ 2 >\ \ “ 3 lal
συμβάλλεται καὶ ὁ ἀὴρ πρὸς ἕκαστον οἰκεῖος"
ἐν Αἰγύπ 1p τὰ μὲν ἄλλα πάντ᾽ ἄοσμα καὶ
% id ἬΝ ὙΡ ᾧ = 4 B \
>
ἄνθη καὶ ἀρώματα, at δὲ puppivat θαυμασταὶ
A b) / a / A > al \
τῇ εὐοσμίᾳ. προτερεῖν δέ φασι τῶν ἐνταῦθα καὶ
ΜΡ ον Ν εν ” 7 \ / \
ῥόδα καὶ ἴα καὶ τὰ ἄλλα ἄνθη καὶ διμήνῳ, καὶ
/ “ a /
διαμένειν πλείω τῶν Tap ἡμῖν ἢ οὐκ ἐλάττω
/ fa
χρόνον ταῦτα.
a \ \ \ > / / Ὁ“
Δοκεῖ δὲ πολὺ πρὸς εὐοσμίαν διαφέρειν, ὥσπερ
\ ς \ a a - /
ἐλέχθη, Kal ὁ ἐνιαυτὸς τοῖος ἢ τοῖος γενόμενος,
» / 5 / \ ᾽ “Ὁ > \ \ fal
οὐ μόνον ἐπομβρίαις καὶ αὐχμοῖς ἀλλὰ καὶ τῷ
Ν ¢
κατὰ καιρὸν γίνεσθαι καὶ ὕδατα καὶ πνεύματα
ὦ Ὁ a \ a 2S / x δ
καὶ ἁπλῶς τὰς τοῦ ἀέρος μεταβολάς. τὰ δὲ ἐν
~ a a ev \ \
τοῖς ὄρεσιν ὡς ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν καὶ ῥόδα Kal ἴα καὶ τὰ
na a an \ > a
ἄλλα «καλῶς μὲν ἀνθεῖνΨΥΞ΄ τῇ δὲ ὀσμῇ πολλὰ
\ \ a
χείρω γίνεσθαι. καὶ περὶ μὲν τῶν στεφανω-
La) “Ὁ ἴω n Ν
ματικῶν καὶ ἁπλῶς τῶν φρυγανικῶν σχεδὸν ἐν
nan «ς / \ e ’
τούτοις καὶ τοῖς ὁμοίοις ἐστὶν ἡ ἱστορία.


1 ?*violets and gilliflowers ; so also below.

EPlin, {τ ef. CL Ge 18.3.

3 ἄνθη conj. St. from G ; ἀνανθὴ Ald. cf. C.P. 6. 19. 4.
4 Plin: 15. 37.


54


mai —


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VI. vu. 5-6


the fragrance of roses gilliflowers! and other flowers.
Thus in Egypt,” while all other flowers? and sweet
herbs are scentless, the myrtles* are marvellously
fragrant. In that country it is said that the roses
gilliflowers and other flowers are as much as two
months ahead of those in our country, and also that
they® last a longer, or at least not a shorter, time
than those of our country.

And, as has been said, the particular season ac-
cording to its character, makes a great difference to
the fragrance, not only by reason of rains and
droughts, but also according as rain, wind, and in
general, the changes of climate occur or do not occur
at the fitting moment. Also it appears that in
general roses gilliflowers and the rest bloom well on
the mountains, but many of them have there an
inferior scent.° Concerning coronary plants and
under-shrubs in general these examples and others


like them suffice for our enquiry.


5 ταῦτα conj. W.; τούτου Ald.

8 ἄνθη τῇ ὀσμῇ πολλῷ Ald.; ἄνθη TH δὲ ὀσμῇ πολλὰ UM,
whence Sch. and W. conj. that some such words as καλῶς μέν
have dropped out and ἀνθεῖν has been altered to ἄνθη. ef.
er, 6.20. 1.


55


Sw Ne
; απο J HO jw


'
2


iT ᾿
> te aenetraty: vik
in i Se
sraonity
riiatth Jue ν ant
ce? tees
LEO ND


orth inition a


ἡ


τ ἐν, Tom τσὴ ah
ictal


τ rub aa i


i


ig κῶν


LOS wh


ἘΠ τὰς ie


Η


¢ ’ \ an a
I. Exropevov δὲ τοῖς εἰρημένοις περὶ τῶν ποιω-
δῶν εἰπεῖν: τοῦτο γάρ ἐστι λοιπὸν τῶν ἐξ ἀρχῆς
/ “ Ld ,
διαιρεθέντων γενῶν, ἐν ᾧ συμπεριλαμβάνονταί
\ i lal n
TOS TO λαχανηρὸν καὶ TO σιτῶδες. καὶ πρῶτον
περὶ τοῦ λαχανώδους λεκτέον ἀρξαμένους ἀπὸ
an / 7 a lal
τῶν ἡμέρων, ἐπεὶ γνώριμα μᾶλλον τυγχάνει τῶν
id
ἀγρίων.
pe aN \ n / a
Εἰσὶ δὴ τρεῖς ἄροτοι πάντων τῶν κηπευομένων,
ἐν οἷς ἕκαστα σπείρουσι διαιροῦντες ταῖς ὥραις.
- \ 5, ς yA \ ς 4
εἰς μὲν οὖν ὁ χειμερινός, ἄλλος δὲ ὁ θερινός,
/ \ e \ / ’ Me ἡ \
τρίτος δὲ ὁ μεταξὺ τούτων μεθ᾽ ἡλίου τροπὰς
na >’
χειμερινάς. καλοῦσι δ᾽ οὕτως οὐ πρὸς τὴν
\ / > \ \ \ / \
σπορὰν βλέποντες ἀλλὰ πρὸς τὴν γένεσιν καὶ
\ \
THY χρείαν ἑκάστου: ἐπεὶ ἥ γε σπορὰ σχεδὸν
a a a \
ἐν τοῖς ἐναντίοις γίνεται. τοῦ χειμερινοῦ μὲν
\ \ \ x a
yap ἀρχὴ μετὰ τροπὰς θερινὰς τοῦ Merayert-
val / /
νιῶνος μηνός, ἐν ᾧ σπείρουσι ῥάφανον padavida
/ / rn
γογγυλίδα καὶ τὰ καλούμενα ἐπίσπορα' ταῦτα
δ᾽ > \ 7 / » /
ἐστὶ τεύτλιον θριδακίνη εὔζωμον λάπαθον
an lal \
νῶπυ Koptavvov ἄνηθον κάρδαμον: καλοῦσι δὲ


1 cf. C.P. 3. 20. 7 and 8.
58


BOOK VII


Or HERBACEOUS PLANTS, OTHER THAN CORONARY PLANTS:
PoT-HERBS AND SIMILAR WILD HERBS.


Of the times of sowing and of germination of pot-herbs.


I. Next we have to tell of herbaceous plants: for
this class remains of those which we distinguished
at the outset, and it includes to some extent the
classes of pot-herbs and of cereals. And first we
must speak of the class of pot-herbs, beginning with
the cultivated kinds, since it happens that these are
better known than the wild kinds.

1 There are three seed-times for all things grown
in gardens, at which men sow the various herbs,
distinguishing by the season. One is the ‘ winter’
seed-time, another the ‘summer, and the third is
that which falls between these, coming after the
winter solstice. These terms however are given in
regard not to the sowing, but to the growth and use
of each kind; for the actual sowing takes place, one
might almost say, at the opposite seasons. Thus,
the ‘winter’ period begins after the summer 3
solstice in the month Metageitnion,? in which they
sow cabbage radish turnip, and what are called
‘secondary crops, that is to say, beet lettuce rocket
monk’s rhubarb mustard coriander dill cress; and

2 θερινὰς conj. Scal.; χειμερινὰς U(?)MP,Ald.G (ed. Bas. and


Par. but not ed. Tarv.).
3 July. δὲ before M. om. Sch.


59


THEOPHRASTUS


Kal πρῶτον τοῦτον τῶν ἀρότων. τοῦ δὲ δευ-
τέρου πάλιν μεθ᾽ ἡλίου τροπὰς τοῦ Γαμηλιῶνος
μηνός, ἐν ᾧ σπείρουσι καὶ πηγνύουσι πράσον
σέλινον γήθυον ἀδράφαξυν. τοῦ τρίτου δέ, ὃν
καλοῦσι θερινόν, τοῦ Μουνυχιῶνος: ἐν τούτῳ
δὲ σπείρεται σίκυος κολοκύντη βλίτον ὥκιμον
ἀνδράχνη θύμβρον. ποιοῦνται δὲ πλείους ἀρό-
τους τῶν ὁμοίων καθ᾽ ἑκάστην ὥραν, οἷον ῥαφα-
vidos ἀ ὠκίμου τῶν ἄλλων. πᾶσι δὲ σπείρεται τοῖς
ἀρότοις τὰ ἐπίσπορα.

Διαφύεται δ᾽ οὐκ ἐν ἴσοις πάντα χρόνοις, ἀλλὰ
τὰ μὲν θᾶττον τὰ δὲ βραδύτερον ὅσα δυσφυῆ.
τάχιστα μὲν οὖν ὥκιμον καὶ βλίτον καὶ εὔξω-
μον καὶ τῶν χειμερινῶν ῥαφανίς: τριταῖα γὰρ
ὡς εἰπεῖν. θριδακίναι δὲ τεταρταῖαν ἢ πεμπτ-
αἴαι. σίκυος δὲ καὶ κολοκύντη περὶ τὰς πέντε
ἢ ἕξ, οἱ δέ φασιν ἑπτά' “πρότερον δὲ καὶ θῶττον
Raia ἀνδράχνη δ᾽ ἐν πλείοσι τούτων. ἄνη-
θον δὲ τεταρταῖον. κάρδαμον. δὲ καὶ vary πεμπτ-
aia. τεύτλιον δὲ θέρους μὲν ἑκταῖον χειμῶνος
δὲ δεκαταῖον. ἀδράφαξυς δὲ ὀγδοαία. ῥάφανος
δὲ δεκαταία. πράσον δὲ καὶ γήθυον οὐκ ἐν
ἴσοις, ἀλλὰ τὸ μὲν ἐννεακαιδεκαταῖον ἐνιαχοῦ


δὲ εἰκοσταῖον, γήθυον δὲ δεκαταῖον ἢ δωδεκα-


ταῖον. κορίαννον δὲ δυσφυές' οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐθέλει
βλαστάνειν τὸ νέον ἐὰν μὴ βρεχθῇ. θύμβρα δὲ
καὶ ὀρίγανος ἐν πλείοσιν ἢ τριάκοντα. δυσ-
φυέστατον δὲ πάντων τὸ σέλινον' τεσσαρακο-
σταῖον γάρ φασιν οἱ τὰ συντομώτερα λέγοντες,


1 January. 2 April. $ Plin. 10.117.
4 τῶν χειμερινῶν : cf. 7. 1. 1.


60


ΨΥ


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. 1. 2-3


this is also called the ‘first’ period of cultivation.
The second period begins after the winter solstice
in the month Gamelion,! in which they scatter or


plant the seed of leeks celery long onion orach.


The third period, which is called the ‘summer’
period, begins in the month Munychion ?: in this are
sown cucumber gourd blite basil purslane savory.
Moreover they make several sowings of the same
herb at each season, as of radish basil and the
others. And at all the periods are sown the
‘secondary crops.’

8Not all herbs germinate within the same time,
but some are quicker, others slower, namely those
which germinate with difficulty. The speediest are
basil blite rocket, and of those sown for winter 4
use, radish ; for these germinate in about three days.
Lettuce takes four or five, cucumber and gourd about
five or six, or, as some say, seven ; however, cucumber
is earlier and quicker than the others. Purslane
takes a longer time, dill four days, cress and mustard
five. Beet in summer takes six days, in winter
ten, orach takes eight, and turnip ten. Leek?
and long onion do not take the same time, but the
former nineteen to twenty days, the latter ten to
twelve. Coriander germinates with difficulty; indeed
fresh seed will not come up at all unless it is
moistened.® Savory’ and marjoram take more than
thirty days; but celery germinates with the greatest
difficulty of all; for those who make the time com-
paratively short say forty days, and others fifty, and


5 πράσον conj. Bod.; πράσιον P,Ald.H.

§ βρεχθῇ conj. Bod. ef. C.P. 4.3.1; ἐλιχθῇ Ald.; ἑλιχθῇ
P,Bas.; so also G.

(ef. C.P. 4, 3. 1... Plin. 19. 7.


61


THEOPHRASTUS


\ a ‘ a \ /
of δὲ πεντηκοσταῖον, Kal τοῦτο κατὰ πάντας
\ / / \ n
TOUS ἀρότους" ἐπισπείρουσι γάρ τινες ἐπὶ πᾶσιν.
“ δὲ v4 \ / “ ,ὔ
Ὅλως δὲ ὅσα κατὰ πλείους ὥρας σπείρεται,
nan Ὁ » Ν a 7] / “ /
ταῦτ᾽ οὐδὲν θᾶττον τέλεια γίνεται τοῦ θέρους.
\ X 2 \ \ ς σ 7
καὶ θαυμαστὸν εἰ καὶ μηθὲν ἡ ὥρα συμβάλλεται
A δ b aS \ \ a Jp. \ \ \
καὶ ὁ ἀὴρ πρὸς TO θᾶττον, ἐὰν δὲ μοχθηρὰ καὶ
\ \ n / \ / \
ψυχρὰ Kal τῷ ἀέρι περισκεπὴς βραδύτερον" ἐπεὶ
> a VA “- /
καὶ χειμώνων ἢ EVOLOV ἐπιγινομένων τοῖς ἀρότοις
eS 3s / geet \ a ς /
ὁτὲ μὲν βραδύτερον ὁτὲ δὲ θᾶττον ἡ βλάστησις"
J n δ᾽ /
διαφέρει δὲ ταῦτα κατὰ τοὺς ἀρότους ἑκάστων"
ἌΡ ΒΕ A \ n , \ > an
TPWLALTATOV γὰρ ἐν τοῖς εὐείλοις καὶ εὐκρᾶσιν.
€ x ct an Ἵ an > / lal \ ,’ 7
ὥς γὰρ ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν ἐν πλείοσι δεῖ τὰς αἰτίας
rn an ΜΆ “Ὁ /
ὑπολαβεῖν τῶν τοιούτων, ἔν TE τοῖς σπέρμασιν
3 a eye fa) / \ A. Se \ va) 4
αὐτοῖς καὶ ἐν TH χώρᾳ καὶ τῷ ἀέρι Kal ταῖς ὥραις
wie y \ ΄ epee. ers
ais ἕκαστα σπείρουσι Kal χειμώνων καὶ εὐδιῶν.
\ a \ / >
ἀλλὰ τοῦτο μὲν σκεπτέον, ἐφ᾽ ὧν TE παρωλλάτ-
€ , ? Ka 7 Ν \ \
τουσιν οἱ χρόνοι Kal ἐφ᾽ ὧν οὔ' καὶ γὰρ τὴν
€ / 7 / \ / \
ῥαφανίδα φασί τινες τριταίαν καὶ θέρους καὶ
n \ \ 4 ,
χειμῶνος, TO δὲ TEVTALOV, ὥσπερ εἴρηται, παραλ-
Ν \ 7 f 2 5 χὰ a
λάττει KATA TAS ὥρας. χρόνοι δ᾽ οὖν οὗτοι τῆς
/ 2
βλαστήσεώς εἰσι καὶ λέγονται καθ᾽ ἕκαστον.
f \ \ a /
Διαφέρει δὲ πρὸς τὸ θᾶττον καὶ βραδύτερον
Ἄ a / / \ \ x
καὶ ἡ TOV σπερμάτων παλαιότης. τὰ μὲν yap
\ if / a /
ἀπὸ νέων παραγίνεται θᾶττον, οἷον mpacov γήθυον


1 ὥρας Vo.H.; χώρας UM ; so also G.

2 τέλεια conj. W. (comm.); ye πολλὰ MSS.; τὰ πολλὰ
Vo.Sch. W. (text); γίνεται conj. Sch. from G ; γίνεσθαι Ald.

ὅ καὶ τῇ ἀέρι... βραδύτερον : grammar doubtful and text
perhaps defective: so given in UM; καὶ ὁ ἀὴρ περισκεπὴς


62


EE — δια οὐ...


i Re. ie ey


preer ets Ψν we δ


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. 1. 3-6


that too, at whichever period it is sown, for some
sow it as a ‘secondary crop’ at all the periods.

Generally speaking, those herbs which are sown at
more than one season! do not mature? faster in the
summer. Howbeit it is strange if the season and
the state of the atmosphere do not contribute at all
to quicker growth, and if, when there is an un-
favourable cold season and the atmosphere is cloudy,
these conditions do not tend to make growth slower,?
seeing that, when stormy or fair weather follows the
sowing, germination is slower or quicker accordingly.
And there is another thing which makes a difference
as to the raising of the various herbs; germination
begins earlier in sunny places which have an even
temperature.

As a matter of fact, to speak roundly, the causes
of such differences must be found in several different
circumstances, in the seeds themselves, in the ground,
in the state of the atmosphere, and in the season at
which each is sown, according as it is stormy or fair,
However it is a point for consideration with which
herbs the time of sowing makes a difference and
with which it makes none; thus it is said that
radish germinates on the third day whether it be
sown in summer or in winter, while beet, as has been
said, behaves differently according to the season.
Anyway such are and are said to be the seasons
of germination in each case.

* Another thing which makes a difference as to the
rapidity with which the seeds germinate is their age ;
for some herbs come up quicker from fresh seed, as


πρὸς τὸ βραδύτερον conj. Sch. (with μοχθ. x. ψυχρὰ supply
ἡ ὥρα ἢ).
4 Plin. 19. 118. δὲ conj. Scal.; yap Δ14.ΗΠ.


63


THEOPHRASTUS


σίκυος κολοκύντη:" ἔνιοι δὲ καὶ προβρέχουσι, τὸν
σίκυον πρὸς τὸ θᾶττον ἢ ἐν γάλακτι ἢ ἐν ὕδατι.
τὰ δ᾽ ἀπὸ παλαιῶν, οἷον σέλινον τεύτλιον κάρ-
δαμον θύμβρα. κορίαννον ὀρίγανον" εἴπερ μὴ
«φυτεύεται:- αὐτὰ ἀπὸ τοῦ νέου, καθάπερ εἴπομεν.
ἴδιον δέ φασιν ἐπὶ τοῦ τευτλίου συμβαίνειν" οὐ
γὰρ διαφύεσθαι πᾶν εὐθὺς ἀλλ᾽ ὕστερον πολλῷ,
τὸ δὲ καὶ τῷ ἐχομένῳ ἔτει καὶ τῷ τρίτῳ, δι’ ὃ καὶ
ἐκ πολλοῦ σπέρματος ὀλίγον βλαστάνειν.

Ἕκαστον δὲ τῶν σπερμάτων, ἐὰν ἁδρυνθέντα
ἀποπέσῃ, διαμένει πρὸς τὴν ὥραν τὴν ἑαυτοῦ καὶ
οὐ “πρότερον ἐκβλαστάνει" καὶ κατὰ λόγον ἐστί:
καὶ γὰρ ἐπὶ τῶν ἀγρίων ὁρῶμεν συμβαῖνον, ἐὰν
μὴ φθαρῇ. αἱ δὲ τελειώσεις τῶν καρπῶν ἅπάν-
των γίνονται τοῦ θέρους, πρότερον δὲ καὶ θᾶττον
ὡς ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν τῶν πρότερον σπαρέντων. δια-
φέρει δὲ καὶ ἡ ὥρα' τὰ γὰρ ἐν ταῖς θερμημερίαις
σπαρέντα θᾶττον ἐκκαυλεῖ καὶ ἐκσπερματοῦται,
καθάπερ ῥαφανὶς γογγυλίς. ἔνια δὲ οὐκ ἐνιαύσια
φέρει τὸν καρπὸν. ἀλλὰ δίενα, καθάπερ σέλινον
πράσον γήθυον, ἃ καὶ διαμένει χρόνον πλείονα
καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν ἐπέτεια" τὰ γὰρ πολλὰ τούτων ἅμα
τῇ τελειώσει τῶν σπερμάτων αὐαίνεται.

Πάντα δὲ ὡς εἰπεῖν ὅσα ἐκκαυλεῖ καὶ τελειοῖ
τὸν καρπὸν ἀποτελειοῦται κατὰ τὸ σχῆμα τοῦ
παραβλαστήσεις ἐκ τῶν καυλῶν ἔχειν ἀκρε-
μονικάς, πλὴν ὅσα μονόκαυλα, καθάπερ πράσον
καὶ γήθυον καὶ κρόμυον καὶ σκόροδον.

Φίλυδρα δὲ καὶ φιλόκοπρα πάντα, μᾶλλον δὲ


1 φυτεύεται αὐτὰ conj. W.; οὐ τὸ UMAId.
2 Sc. soaking.


64


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. τ. 6-8


leek long onion cucumber gourd; (some even soak
the seed of cucumber first in milk or water, to make
it germinate quicker). Some come up quicker from
old seed, as celery beet cress savory coriander
marjoram (unless indeed they are raised + from fresh
seed in the manner? which we have mentioned).
There is, they say, a singular feature about beet ?;
the seed does not all germinate at once, but some of
it not for some time, some even in the next or in the
third year; wherefore it is said that little comes up
from much seed.

Any of the seeds, if they are ripe when they fall,
last till their own proper season and do not sprout
tillthen. And in this they are consistent; for we
note that the same thing happens with the seed of
wild plants, unless it is destroyed. However all
mature their fruits in the summer, though sooner
and quicker, generally speaking, when they are sown
earlier. The season also‘+ makes a difference ; things
sown in the hot season push up their shoots and go
to seed sooner, as radish and turnip. Some however
bear their fruit not in the same year but in the next,
as celery’ leek long onion, which plants also last
a longer time, and are not annual ; for most herbs
wither with the ripening of their seed.

Generally speaking, all those that push up shoots
and mature their fruit reach their perfection of form
in having side-shoots branching from the main stem
—except those which have but a single stem, as
leek long onion onion garlic.

All these herbs are lovers of water and of dung,


Were ΦΈΡ. 4.3; 2% Plinii.c.
4 δὲ conj. W.; yap Ald. H.
® Phin: /.c.
65
VOL. 11. F


THEOPHRASTUS


\ , / \ / ᾽ / /
Ta ἀσθενέστερα Kal πλείονος ἐπιμελείας δεόμενα,
τὰ δὲ καὶ τροφῆς.
II. Φύεται δὲ πάντα ἀπὸ τοῦ σπέρματος, ἔνια
\ \ > \ / \ \ \ ΕἸ
δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ παρασπάδος καὶ κλωνὸς καὶ ῥίζης.
ἀπὸ μὲν παρασπάδος ἡ ῥάφανος" δεῖ γάρ τι καὶ
“ n \ lal lal
ῥιζῶδες προσλαβεῖν. ἀπὸ dé τῶν βλαστῶν πή-
/
yavov opiyavos ὦκιμον' ἀποφυτεύουσι yap Kal
n val a /
τοῦτο ὅταν σπιθαμιαῖον ἢ μεῖζον γένηται τεμόντες
> NG, ας τὰ ΒΡ, \ 4 \ ΄
εἰς τὸ ἥμισυ. ἀπὸ ῥίζης δὲ σκόροδον καὶ κρόμυον
Ν Ν \ o/. ἣν, ΄ “ Ν a rn
καὶ βολβὸς καὶ apov καὶ ἁπλῶς τὰ τοιαῦτα TOV
/ / \ f
κεφαλορρίζων. φύεται δὲ καὶ εἴ τινων αἱ ῥίζαι
, \ / / /
διαμένουσιν ἐπὶ πλείονα χρόνον ἐπετειοκαύλων
” « VES \ / 7 /
ὄντων. ὅτι δὲ ἀπὸ σπέρματος πάντα βλαστάνει
, \ \ \ / v4 lJ /
φανερὸν" Kal yap TO πήγανον, ὅπερ οὔ φασί τινες,
\ / A 7
ἀλλὰ βραδέως, du’ ὃ καὶ ἀποφυτεύουσιν.
iv x 3 \ (Hd / / ig \ εν
Οσα δὲ ἀπὸ ῥίζης φύεται, τούτων ἡ μὲν ῥίζα
/ > \ Ny Ὁ / aA \
χρόνιος αὐτὰ δὲ ἐπετειόκαυλα, Ou ὃ Kal παραβλα-
7 ων J \ ,
στάνουσιν αἱ ῥίζαι τῶν τοιούτων καὶ γίνονται
7, 4 a \
πλείους οὐ μόνον ἐν τοῖς ἡμέροις Kal κηπευο-
/ \ \ a > / “
μένοις ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν τοῖς ἀγρίοις, ὥσπερ εἴπομεν,
n / / - “
οἷον βολβοῖς γηθύοις σκίλλαις καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις.
3. OP a \ /
παραβλαστάνει δ᾽ ἔνια καὶ τῶν μὴ κεφαλορρίζων
/ δέ ἢ / \ / > a
χρονιωτέρων O€, οἷον σέλινον καὶ TEVTALOV’ ἀφιᾶσι
\ id 3 ci / 7 A /
yap ῥίζας ἀφ᾽ ὧν φύονται φύλλα καὶ καυλοί.


eee. 10,121, 2 of. C.F, 4a

3 δεῖ yap τι UP,; ἀεὶ γάρ τι Ald.H.G; Sch. suggests δὲ for
yap, missing the sense.

4 βλαστῶν corresponds to κλωνὸς above,


66


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. 1. 8-it. 2


and especialiy the weaker ones, which require more


attention or in some cases more feeding.


Of the propagation of pot-herbs; and of differences in their
roots,

II. +All these herbs are propagated from seed, and
some also by a piece torn off, a shoot, or a piece of
root. Cabbage is propagated by a piece torn off,?
since it is essential® in this case to take a piece
which has root attached to it. From cuttings* are
grown rue marjoram basil; for slips of this too men
plant when it has grown to the height of a span
or more, cutting off half the plant.° By root® are
planted garlic onion purse-tassels cuckoo-pint and in
general such bulbous plants. Such propagation is
also possible in cases where the roots persist for
more than a year, though the shoots last but for a
year. And it is plain that all these herbs can be
grown from seed; for even rue can (which some
deny), though the process is slow, and so cuttings
are also taken.

Of those which are propagated by a piece of root
the root is long-lived, though the plant itself may be
annual; wherefore the roots of such plants make
offsets and so increase ; and this is true not only of
plants cultivated in the garden, but also of wild
plants, as we have said, for instance of purse-tassels
long onion” squill and so forth. Some plants even
which are not bulbous ὃ but longer-lived make offsets,
as celery and beet; for these send out roots from


which grow leaves and stems. Long onion and


meer Ὁ.» 1..4: 8. δ 36. offsets.
7 γηθύοις om. some editors, as not being wild.
8 2,6. and so annual,


THEOPHRASTUS


παραβλαστάνει δὲ καὶ γήθυον Kal πράσον καὶ
παραφύει κάτωθεν οἷον βολβώδη τινὰ κεφαλήν,
ἐξ ἧς ἡ βλάστησις γίνεται τῶν φύλλων, αὐαν-
θέντος δὲ τοῦ καυλοῦ καὶ τοῦ σπέρματος. ἀφαιρε-
θέντος" ἀλλὰ διὰ τὸ μὴ χρησίμας εἶναι τὰς
τούτων κεφαλὰς οὐ συλλέγουσιν εἰς ξηρασίαν, δι᾽
ὃ καὶ οὐ φυτεύουσι. τάχα δὲ ταῦτα καὶ vata
καὶ σύνεγγύς πως τῇ τοῦ κρομύου φύσει, δι᾽
καὶ οὐ θαυμαστόν. ἀλλ᾽ ὁμοίως [καὶ] ἐ ἐπὶ πάντων
καὶ ἡμέρων καὶ ἀγρίων, ὅσα χρονιώτερα μέν
ἐστιν ἐπετειόκαυλα δέ, τούτων καὶ αἱ ῥίξαι ἐπι-
βλαστάνουσιν, ὥσπερ καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν φρυγανικῶν
καὶ τῶν θαμνωδῶν' ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ τῶν κρομύων καὶ
σκορόδων καὶ βολβῶν καὶ ὥσπερ ἀριθμός TLS
γίνεται τούτων. ἡ δὴ γένεσις, ὥσπερ εἴρηται,
τριχῶς ἐστιν, ἀπὸ σπέρματος μὲν πάντων, ἀπὸ δὲ
καυλοῦ καὶ ῥίζης τῶν εἰρημένων.

Τῶν δὲ καυλῶν κολουσθέντων πάντα μὲν ὡς
εἰπεῖν βλαστάνει πλὴν τῶν ἀποκαύλων, ἐμφανέ-
στατα δ᾽ ὥσπερ καὶ εἰς χρείαν ὥκιμον θρῖδαξ
ῥάφανος. καὶ τῆς μὲν θρίδακος ἡδίους φασὶ τοὺς
παλιμβλαστεῖς εἶναι καυλούς" τὸν γὰρ πρῶτον
ὀπώδη καὶ πικρὸν εἶναι ὡς ἄπεπτον' οἱ δὲ τὸ
ἐναντίον ὀπωδεστέρους τούτους ἀλλ᾽ ἕως ἂν ὦσιν
ἁπαλοὶ φαίνεσθαι γλυκυτέρους. ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ τῆς


1 πράσον conj. St.; πράσιον Ald. H.

2 διὰ τὸ μὴ conj. W.; μὴ διὰ τὸ UM(?) Ald.

3 2,6. offset bulbs.

4 W. omits μὲν (Ald. UM(?)) after συλλέγουσι.

5 7.e. the plant is increased by seed only and not by offsets.
cf. 7. 4.10; Plinsdi108:

6 ὁμοίως conj. Sch.; ὅμως PAld.H.(UM ἢ.

7 ἐπετειόκαυλα conj. Sch.; ἐπιγειότερα PAld. H.


68


͵


abi


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. n. 2-4


leek! also make offsets, sending out a ‘head’ below,
like the bulb of purse-tassels, from which the leaves
spring; but this only takes place when the stem
has withered and the seed has been removed. But,
as 2 the ‘ heads’ ? of such plants are not useful, they
do not collect them‘ for storing dry; wherefore also
they do not plant these.6 It may be that somehow
these are akin and closely allied to onion, wherefore
what has been said is not surprising. However in
all those plants, both wild and cultivated alike,®
which have an annual stem,’ but yet live longer than
a year, there is an outgrowth of the roots, just as
there is in under-shrubs and shrubby plants: while
in onions garlic and purse-tassels even a number,®
as it were, of such roots is formed. In fact,? they
are reproduced in three ways, as has been said ; from
seed in all cases and from the stem?!° and root in
those specified.

11 Almost all shoot again if the stem is broken
(except those which are stemless), but most obviously
basil lettuce cabbage, which are, as it were, broken
for a practical reason. Indeed they say that the
stems of lettuce which thus grow again are sweeter,!2
for that the original stem has a taste like fig-juice
and is bitter, as being not properly ripened. Some
however say that the later stems have the taste of
fig-juice more than the original one, but that, so long
as they are tender, they appear sweeter. Be that as


8 ἀριθμὸς is clearly corrupt, and has displaced an unusual
word for which ὥσπερ apologises.

9 δὴ conj. Sch.; δὲ Ald.

10 καυλοῦ is here that part of the plant which is above
ground. Pins. 19,,.122.

12 ἡδίους Vo.mBas.H., so too G, Plin. /.c., Athen. 2. 69;
idtovs UAld. cf. C.P. 2. 15. 6.


69


THEOPHRASTUS


ῥαφάνου τοῦτο ὁμολογούμενον, ὡς εἰ πάλιν βλα-
στήσειεν ἡδίων ἀφαιρεθέντων γε τῶν φύλλων πρὸ
τοῦ διακαυλίσαι.

Διαμένουσι δὲ αἱ ῥίζαι πλειόνων, GAN αἱ μὲν
βλαστάνουσι πάλιν αἱ δὲ οὔ. ῥαφανὶς γοῦν καὶ
γογγυλὶς διαμένουσι γῆς ἐπιβληθείσης ἄχρι
θέρους καὶ αὔξησιν λαμβάνουσιν, ὅπερ ποιοῦσί
τινες ἐξεπίτηδες TOV κηπουρῶν' οὐ βλαστάνουσι
δὲ οὐδ᾽ ἀφιᾶσι φύλλον οὐδ᾽ εἴ τις ἀφέλοι τὴν
ἐπισεσαγμένην γῆν. ἰδεῖν δὲ τοῦτο καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν
ἄλλων ἐστί. πὰ δὲ πλεῖστα τῶν λαχάνων μονόρ-
ριζα τῇ παχείᾳ κατὰ βάθους ῥίζῃ" καὶ γὰρ ὅσα
παραφύει τὰς ἰσοπαχεῖς ταύτας, ὥσπερ σέλινον
καὶ τεύτλιον, ἀπὸ τῆς “μέσης πως ἡ παράφυσίς
ἐστι καὶ οὐκ εὐθὺς ἀπὸ τῆς ἀρχῆς ἡ σχίσις" ἐκ
δὲ ταύτης τῆς μιᾶς ἀπήρτηνται αἱ ἀποφυάδες αἱ
μικραὶ καὶ τῆς ῥαφανίδος καὶ τῆς “γογγυλίδος.
καὶ αὗται μὲν δὴ πᾶσι φανεραὶ διὰ τὴν χρείαν.

Ἢ δὲ τοῦ τευτλίου “μία μὲν μακρὰ καὶ παχεῖα
καὶ ὀρθή, καθάπερ ἡ ἡ τῶν ῥαφανίδων, ἀποφύσεις δὲ
ἔχει παχείας ὁ ὁτὲ μὲν δύο ὁ ὁτὲ δὲ καὶ τρεῖς ὁτὲ δὲ
καὶ μίαν, τὰς δὲ μικρὰς ἐκ τούτων. σαρκώδης
δὲ ἡ ῥίζα καὶ τῇ γεύσει γλυκεῖα καὶ ἡδεῖα, δι᾿ ὃ
καὶ ὠμὴν ἐσθίουσί τινες" ὁ δὲ φλοιὸς οὐ παχὺς
οὐδὲ ἀφαιρετός, ὥσπερ ὁ τῶν ῥαφανίδων, ἀλλὰ
μᾶλλον οἷος ὁ τῶν ἱπποσελίνων. ὡσαύτως δὲ
καὶ ἡ τῆς ἀδραφάξυος μία μὲν εἰς βάθος ἐκ
ταύτης δὲ ἄλλαι.


1 βλαστήσειεν conj. Sch.; βλαστήσει Ald.
2 οὐδ᾽ εἴ τις Ald. Η.; εἰ μή τις conj. Scal. supported by G.
ὁ ἐκ ,νν μικραὶ conj. W.; εἰς δὲ ταύτην τὴν μίαν 7 ἀπ᾿ αὐτῆς


70


“νυν τὰν


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. 1. 4-6


it may, it is admitted that in the case of cabbage the
stem is sweeter if it should have grown! again after
being broken, provided that the leaves are stripped
off before the plant runs to stalk.

In most cases the roots persist, but they do not in
all cases produce fresh growth. Thus radish and
turnip persist till summer, if earth is thrown on
them, and they increase in size ; and some gardeners
do this deliberately ; but they do not make fresh
growth nor send out leaves, even if one ? removes the
earth heaped over them. And this may also be
observed in other plants. However, most pot-herbs
have the single stout root which runs deep ; for even
in those which produce these side-roots of equal
stoutness, as celery and beet, the side-growth comes,
as it were, from the middle root and it is not
separate to start with; but to this single root are
attached the small out-growths,’ both in radish and
inturnip. These instances are familiar to all because
of the use* which is made of these plants.

The beet has a single long stout straight root like
that of the radish, and has stout out-growths, some-
times two, sometimes three, sometimes only one, and
the small ones are attached to these. The root is
fleshy and sweet and pleasant to the taste, wherefore
some even eat it raw. The ‘bark’ is not thick and
cannot be detached, like that of the radish, but
rather resembles that of alexanders. In like manner
the root of orach is single and runs deep, and other
roots are attached to it.


τε kal τῆς ἀποφυάδος καὶ μικρὰ Ald.H.; so also M, omitting τε.
W.’s restoration of a very corrupt text is at least consistent
with what follows in § 6.

+ 7.e. for food.


γι.


7


THEOPHRASTUS


Μονορριζότατον δὲ τούτων πάντων τὸ λά-
> \ ” / > 4 > \
παθον' ov yap ἔχει παχείας ἀποφύσεις ἀλλὰ

\ / / \ / 7 \
Tas λεπτάς: βαθυρριζότατον δὲ πάντων, ἔχει yap

/ an /
μείξω τριῶν ἡμυποδίων' τὸ δ᾽ ἄγριον βραχυτέραν,
πολύκαυλον δὲ καὶ πολύκλαδον καὶ ἡ ὅλη μορφὴ
τελειωθεῖσα παραπλησία τῇ τοῦ τευτλίου: πολυ-
χρονιώτερον δὲ καὶ τοῦ ἀγρίου καὶ ὅλως δὲ
πάντων τῶν λαχάνων ws εἰπεῖν" διαμένει γὰρ
ς a / Ξ
ὁποσονοῦν χρόνον ὥς φασιν. ἔχει δὲ σαρκώδη

\ εὖ, ἊΨ be «| \ > a a
τὴν ῥίζαν καὶ ἔνικμον, Ov ὃ καὶ ἐξαιρεθεῖσα ζῇ
πολὺν χρόνον.

Τὸ δ᾽ ὥκιμον μίαν μὲν τὴν παχεῖαν τὴν κατὰ
βάθους τὰς δ᾽ ἄλλας τὰς ἐκ πλαγίου λεπτὰς
ἐπιεικῶς εὐμήκεις.

"BE δ᾽ > 4 \ / x > θ / a s.

via δ᾽ οὐκ ἔχει τὴν μίαν THY ὀρθήν, οἷον τὸ
βλίτον, ἀλλ᾽ εὐθὺ πολλὰς ἐξ ἄκρου καὶ εὐπαχεῖς
καὶ μακροτέρας τῆς ἀδραφάξυος.

Τῶν δὲ ῥιζῶν ξυλωδέσταται πασῶν αἱ τοῦ
3 7 7 Δ ἀξ / ς \ a /
ὠκίμου, καθάπερ καὶ ὁ καυλός. ἡ yap TOD βλίτου
καὶ τῆς ἀδραφάξυος καὶ τῶν τοιούτων ἧττον
ξυλώδης. εἰσὶ γὰρ ὡς ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν πασῶν αἱ

ἣν , Oe YD) γὃ ἷ Ξ
μὲν σαρκώδεις αἱ δὲ ξυλώδεις. <capK@ders>, οἷον ἡ
τοῦ τευτλίου καὶ τοῦ σελίνου καὶ ἱπποσελίνου καὶ

/
λαπάθου καὶ ῥαφανίδος καὶ γογγυλίδος καὶ πάν-
/ an “ PN \ »
των μάλιστα τῶν κεφαλοβαρῶν'" οὐδὲ γὰρ ἀναξη-
/ / / ἡὃ δέ
ραινόμεναι σκληρύνονται τελείως. ξυλώδεις δε,
1 of. 1. 6. 6. . .
2 τὰς Ald., cf. τὰς δὲ μικρὰς ὃ 6 ; τινας conj, W. ef, Plin. 19.


98 (who mistranslates).
JAE ae 7.0.1. 0.5. Te >. 4 See*Index.


72


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. 1. 7-8


Monk’s rhubarb! however has a single root in a
truer sense than any of the others, for it has no
stout out-growths of root, but only the? slender
ones; its root also runs deeper than that of the
others, being more than a foot and a half long. The
wild sort® however has a shorter root, and has
several stems and branches, and its shape, as a
whole, when fully grown resembles that of beet.
Cultivated monk’s rhubarb moreover is longer lived
than the wild form,* and, in general, we may say,
than any other pot-herb, for, they say, it may live
any time. It has a fleshy root,° full of moisture,
wherefore, if pulled up, it will live some time.

Basil has the single stout root, the one which runs
deep, and the others at the sides are slender and
fairly long.

Some herbs, as blite, have not the single straight
root, but a number of roots which start directly from
the top and are of a good stoutness® and longer than
those of orach.

The roots of basil are woodier than those of any of
the other herbs, as also is its stem; for those of blite
orach and the like are less woody. In general we
may say that the roots of any’ of these herbs are
either woody or fleshy. Examples of fleshy ὃ roots are
beet celery alexanders monk’s rhubarb radish turnip,
and especially all ‘heavy-headed’® kinds, for the
roots of these do not wither up altogether even when
they are dried. Examples of those with woody roots

5 ῥίζαν conj. Sch.; σάρκα Ald.

6 Plin. /.c. seems to have read a different word from
εὐπαχεῖς, or to have misunderstood it.

7 πασῶν conj. W.; map’ ὧν UMP;; also Ald.H., omitting ai.


8 gaprwders add. Scal. from G.
9 γ δὲ bulbous ; cf. 1. 6. 8.


75


THEOPHRASTUS


id lal ,
ὥσπερ αἱ τοῦ ὠκίμου καὶ βλίτου Kal ἀδραφάξυος
\ > ’ ν ) / \ Δ "
καὶ εὐζώμου καὶ ἀνήθου [καὶ λαπάθου] καὶ
κοριάννου καὶ ἁπλῶς τῶν νευροκαύλων'" ἔχει γὰρ
/
δὴ καὶ TO ἄνηθον Kai TO κορίαννον ὄντα μονόρριξα
, \ ee? ~ > \ > \ \
ξυλώδη τε τὴν ῥίζαν καὶ οὐ μακρὰν οὐδὲ Tas
λεπτὰς ἀποφυάδας ἔχουσαν πολλάς" πολύκαυλα
\ A \ 4 , ἃ \ > \ /
δὲ ἄμφω καὶ πολύοζα, δι’ ὃ Kal οὐ κατὰ λόγον
οὐδενὶ τούτων τὸ ἄνω πρὸς τὸ κάτω.
Βραχύρριξα δὲ ταῦτά ἐστιν, οἷον θρίδαξ ἀν-
͵7ὕ a > an \ tal > \ / 4 \
δράχνη, τῇ ὀρθῇ Kal ταῖς εἰς τὰ πλάγια. ἡ δὲ
a 3, va
Opidak, ὥσπερ οὐκ ἔχει τὰς τοιαύτας ἀποφύσεις
> \ / Ν / \ , 4 /
ἀλλὰ μόνον Tas λεπτάς, καὶ μάλιστα δὴ μονόρ-
ς > a ς lal \ / \ \
ριζον ὡς εἰπεῖν. ἁπλῶς δὴ πάντα Ta θερινὰ
Ν e /
βραχύρριζα' καὶ yap ὁ σίκυος καὶ ἡ κολοκύντη
ΨΊ ἐ 4 \ \ \ “ Ὗ Ca Μ an
καὶ ἡ σικύα καὶ διὰ THY ὥραν Kal ἴσως ETL μᾶλλον
\ \ / Ψ 7 a oe ς \
διὰ τὴν φύσιν, ἥπερ συνηκολούθηκε TH ὥρᾳ. ἡ δὲ
Ne an / ” \
μεταφυτευομένη OptdaE βραχυτέραν ἔχει τὴν
ῥίζαν τῆς σπαρείσης: παραβλαστάνει γὰρ ἐκ τῶν
te “ / \ ἈΠΕ." / A
πλαγίων μᾶλλον: βραχυτέραν δὲ Kal ἡ ἀγρία τῆς
ἡμέρου, καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἄνωθεν πολυκαυλοτερα.
Til. ᾿Ανθεῖ δὲ τῶν μὲν ἄλλων ἕκαστον ἀθρόον,
\ \ / a
TO δὲ WKLLOVY KATA μέρος, TA κάτω πρῶτον εἶτ᾽
wd a > / \ 7 3. ἃ \
ὅταν ταῦτα ἀπανθήσῃ τὰ ἄνω, Ov ὃ καὶ πολυ-


1 After ἀνήθου Ald.H. have καὶ λαπάθου : bracketed by W.
after Sch.

2 ἀποφυάδας conj. Scal.; ἀποφυλλάδας Ald.

3 ταῦτα conj. Sch.; τὰ τοιαῦτα UM ; τοιαῦτα Ald.

4 Athen. 2. 79. Sch suggests that the name of a plant
has dropped out after ὥσπερ : ὃ ἡ avdpaxvn.


74


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. τι. 8-0. 1


are basil blite orach rocket dill! coriander, and in
general, those with fibrous stems; for in dill and
coriander, which have a single root, the root is
woody and not long, and the slender side-roots? from
it are not numerous; but both plants have several
stems and branches; wherefore in neither of these
plants does the part above ground correspond to the
part which is below.

The following? have short roots: lettuce and purs-
lane, in which both the straight main root and the
side ones are short. ‘4 Lettuce may be said to have
no such side-roots, but only the slender ones, and
may be called in the strictest sense a plant of a
single root. In general all summer herbs have short
roots: we may-include cucumber gourd and _ bottle-
gourd, both because of the season to which they
belong and perhaps still more because of their
character, which corresponds to the season. How-
ever the transplanted lettuce has a shorter root than
one that is raised from seed, since it is more apt to
send out side-growths; also the wild kind has a
shorter® root than the cultivated, and the part above
ground has more stems.°®


Of the flowers and fruits of pot-herbs.


ΠῚ. “All, except one, of these herbs produce all their
bloom at once, but basil has a succession of flowers,
the lower part of the plant flowering first, and then,
when that bloom is over, the upper part. Wherefore
its season of bloom is a long one, like that of the


> βραχυτέραν conj. Sch.; βραχυτέρα Ald.
6 ἄνωθεν πολυκαυλοτέρα conj. Sch. from G ; ἄνω: τὰ δὲ πολυκ.


Ald. ef. Diosc. 2. 136, 7 Plin. 19. 100,
75


THEOPHRASTUS


χρόνιον ἐν τῷ ἀνθεῖν, καθάπερ κύαμος καὶ τῆς
πόας τὸ ἡλιοτρόπιον καλούμενον καὶ ἄλλα δὲ τῶν
ἀγρίων. ἀνθεῖ δὲ καὶ ὁ σίκυος πολὺν χρόνον"
καὶ γὰρ ἐπιβλαστάνειν τούτῳ γε συμβαίνει. τὰ
δὲ ἄνθη τῶν μὲν ἔκλευκα τῶν δὲ μηλινοειδῆ τῶν
δὲ μικρὸν ἐπιπορφυρίξοντα, εὔχρουν δ᾽ οὐθέν.

Τὰ δὲ σπέρματα διαφέρει καὶ τοῖς σχήμασι:
τὰ μὲν γὰρ πλεῖστα στρογγύλα τὰ δὲ προμήκη
τὰ δ᾽ αὖ πλατέα καὶ φυλλώδη, καθάπερ τὰ τῆς
ἀδραφάξυος" ὅμοιον γὰρ τῷ τοῦ σιλφίου' τὰ δὲ
στενὰ καὶ γραμμώδη, καθάπερ τοῦ κυμίνου. καὶ
τοῖς χρώμασιν ὁμοίως, τὰ μὲν μέλανα τὰ δὲ
ξυλώδη τὰ δὲ λευκότερα. πάντα δὴ ἐλλοβο-
σπέρματα ἢ γυμνοσπέρματα ἢ ἐμφλοιοσπέρματα
ἢ παπποσπέρματα" ῥαφανὶς μὲν γὰρ καὶ νᾶπυ
καὶ γογγυλὶς ἐλλοβοσπέρματα, Koplavvov δὲ καὶ
μάραθον καὶ ἄνηθον καὶ κύμινον γυμνοσπέρματα,
βλίτον δὲ καὶ τεύτλιον καὶ ἀδράφαξυς καὶ
ὥκιμον ἐμφλοιοσπέρματα, θριδακίνη δὲ παππο-
σπέρματον.

Πάντα δὲ πολύκαρπα καὶ πολυβλαστῆ, πολυ-
καρπότατον δὲ τὸ κύμινον. ἴδιον δὲ καὶ ὃ λέγουσι
κατὰ τούτου" φασὶ γὰρ δεῖν καταρᾶσθαί τε καὶ
βλασφημεῖν σπείροντας, εἰ μέλλει καλὸν ἔσεσθαι
καὶ πολύ.

Δυσξήραντα δὲ πάντα μὲν ὡς εἰπεῖν πλὴν τοῦ
κυμίνου, οὐχ ὡς ὁ σῖτος" οὗτος γὰρ κἂν ἅπαξ


1 For the collective sense οὗ πόα (-- τὰ ποώδη) cf 1. 8. 1.
2 πολὺν χρόνον conj. W., which at least gives the required
sense ; καλούμενος Ald.
3 μηλινοειδὲς : cf. 6. 2
? ‘orange.’ ὃ ιν. 19: 119,


76


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. m. 1-3


bean, and among herbaceous plants! that of the
- plant called helotropion, and also other wild plants.
Cucumber also has a long period? of bloom, for this
plant has a second growth. The flowers are in some
cases whitish, in others quince-yellow,? in others
somewhat reddish*; but the flower is never of a
bright colour.

5'The seeds too differ in shape; most are round,
but some are oblong ; some again are broad and leaf-
like, as those of orach, for the seed of this is like
that of silphium; others again are narrow or
marked in lines,6 as those of cummin. They also
vary in colour, some being black, some the colour
of wood,’ some paler. The seeds of all are either
in pods or naked, or have an integument or have a
pappus. Radish mustard and turnip have their seeds
in pods; coriander fennel dill and cummin have
naked seeds; those of blite beet orach and basil are
enclosed in an integument; those of lettuce have a
pappus on them.

All have numerous fruits and numerous shoots,
but cummin has the most ὃ fruits of all. ®And there
is another peculiarity told of this plant: they say
that one must curse and abuse it, while sowing, if
the crop is to be fair and abundant.

Nearly all of these, except cummin, are hard to
dry for keeping,—unlike corn 1°; for this, when once


ὁ γραμμώδη: ef. 4.12. 2.; canaliculata Plin. l.c.

a τον οὐ. 1 9. 3.

Reha. 5. 5.» C0, P. 4, 15.2.

9 cf 9. 8. 8; Plin. /.c. applies this to ὥκιμον, Pall. 4. 9. 5
to πήγανον.

10 σῖτος" οὗτος yap I conj.; σῖτος γάρ UMH.; P omits
yap; σῖτος ὃς W. after Sch.; nec modo frumenti consistunt,
quod G,


71


THEOPHRASTUS


ἁδρυνθῇ ταχὺ ξηραίνεται καὶ ἀποπίπτει" δυσ-
ηραντότερα δὲ τὰ ἐμφλοιοσπέρματα καὶ τούτων
\
«μάλιστα τὸ ὥκιμον. ἅπαντα δὲ ξηρανθέντα
f / ¢
πολυκαρπότερα γίνεται, δ O> Kal mpoadat-
Ν /
ροῦντες αὐτὰ Enpaivovow. ἅπαντα δὲ πολύχοα
\ /
καὶ πολυσπέρματα, πολυκαρπότατον δὲ τὸ
ὥκιμον.
Ἔστι δὲ τὰ μὲν ἀκρόκαρπα, καθάπερ ὦκιμον
πράσον κρόμυον: ta δὲ πλαγιόκαρπα μᾶλλον,
\ a
οἷον ῥαφανὶς ,γογγυλὶς καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα' τὰ δ᾽
ἀμφοτέρως, οἷον βλίτον ἀδράφαξυς" ἀμφότερα
\
yap ταῦτα καὶ ἐκ τοῦ πλαγίου, Kal TO YE βλίτον
εὐθὺς παρ᾽ ἕκαστον ὄζον προσκαθήμενον ἔχει τὸ
/ la \
σπέρμα βοτρυῶδες. τὰ δ᾽ ἐκ παλαιοτέρων σπερ-
μάτων θᾶττον ἐκκαυλεῖ, τάχιστα δὲ τὰ ἐκ τῶν
, \ \
ἀκμαζόντων" ἔστι yap τις ἀκμὴ καὶ τούτων. ἀνὰ
\ \ δ / > na “ 9.
λόγον δὲ καὶ τὸ κάλλος ἀκολουθεῖ τῶν... ἐὰν
\ igor \ 25 2.4N By /
Ta ἄλλα THY αὐτὴν ἔχωσι θεραπείαν.
“ \ \ / /
Δοκεῖ δὲ καὶ eis TO αὐτὸ ἀθρόα θεμένων καλλίω
/ \ \ lal
γίνεσθαι καὶ βλαστάνειν: οὕτω γὰρ TO τοῦ
ἣν a /
πράσου καὶ TO TOU σελίνου τιθέασιν ἀποδήσαντες
/ /
εἰς ὀθόνιον καὶ γίνονται μεγάλα.
7~ 7 \ me / \ ”
Συμβάλλεται δέ τι Kal ὁ τόπος πρὸς αὔξησιν'
an ¢ ΓΑ Χ ,
κελεύουσι γοῦν, ὅταν τις μεταφυτεύῃ τὰ σέλινα,
7 , 3 n
TATTANOV κατακρούειν ἡλίκον ἂν βούληται ποιεῖν
Ν / / \ \ > > / Ps
τὸ σέλινον: τιθέναι δὲ Kal ἐν ὀθονίῳ πάτταλον
/ 4 ἃ, a
κατακρούσαντα Kal πλήσαντα κόπρου καὶ γῆς.


1 μάλιστα... .. δι᾽ ὃ missing in UMAId. Bas.; text as restored
by Sch. from Cam. , Gand Plin. /.c.
2 τό γε βλίτον conj. W.; τό ye πλεῖστον U; τό τε πλεῖστον
Ald.H.
3 éxxavael: cf. 7.1.7; 7. 4. 3, and esp. C.P. 4. 3. 5.


4 After ἀκολουθεῖ τῶν follow sa lacuna of one and a half lines


78


OE eT


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. ur. 3-5


it is ripened, quickly dries and is shed, and the herbs
whose seed have an integument are harder still to dry,
especially basil. ‘All however, when dried, produce
more fruit : wherefore 1 it is the custom to gather the
seed early and dry it. All of them are prolific and
produce many seeds, but basil produces most of all.

Examples of those which produce their fruit at
the top of the stem are basil leek onion: of
those which produce it rather at the sides, radish
turnip and the like; of those which produce it in
both ways, blite and orach; both of these produce it
at the side as well as at the top; in fact blite? has
its seed in clusters, closely attached to each branch.
Some push up their shoots® fairly soon from old
seed, but seed from plants in their prime is the most
rapid; for these plants too have a time when they
are at their best. The beauty of the plant also
corresponds * in proportion, provided that equal care
in ° other respects is shewn in cultivation.

6It likewise appears that, if a quantity of seed is
sown in the same place, the resulting crop comes up
and germinates better; thus they tie up seed of
leek and celery in a piece of cloth’ before sowing,
and then there is a large ® crop.

The position also contributes to growth ; at least,
when celery is transplanted, they suggest that one
should hammer?’ in a peg of whatever size one
wishes to make the celery ; and also that one should
sow the seed in a piece of cloth 10 after hammering


in a peg and filling the hole with dung and soil.


in UMAId.; text as given by Cam., which however omits
τῶν ; τῶν σπειρομένων H.; τῶν τοιούτων Vo. Vin.

ay at 1. °-Pim, 19. 120, A OFC TsO, 0. 9.

8 μεγάλα conj. St.; μεγάλαι Ald.H.

* Made clearer C.P. 5. 0.7. Moree ©, Foo. On oe


79


THEOPHRASTUS


"BR δὲ ἈΝ n / > nr \
via δὲ καὶ τοῖς σχήμασιν ἐξομοιοῦται καὶ
rn /
τοῖς τόποις" ἡ γὰρ σικύα ὁμοιοσχήμων γίνεται ἐν
en an > /
ᾧ ἂν τεθῇ ἀγγείῳ. ᾿
: A \ \
Kai διαφορὰν λαμβάνει κατὰ τοὺς χυμοὺς
7 n
ἔνια προθεραπευθέντα THY σπερμάτων, οἷον TO
τοῦ σικύου ἐὰν ἐν γάλακτι βρέξαντες σπεί-
Ἀ XN as an
ρωσιν. ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν τοιαῦτα ἴσως οἰκειότερα
τῆς θεραπείας.
, la) / er 3
IV. Γένη δὲ τῶν μέν ἐστι πλείω τῶν δ᾽ οὐκ
» a ’ / re / /
ἔστιν, οἷον ὠκίμου λαπάθου βλίτου καρδάμου
εὐξζώμου ἀδραφάξυος κοριάννου ἀνήθου πηγάνου"
» \ γῇ ἘΝ / if
τούτων yap οὔ φασιν εἶναι <ryévous diapopay.>
“Ὁ \ oe « “ € / / v4
τῶν δὲ ἔστι, pahavidos ῥαφάνου τευτλίου σικύου
κολοκύντης κυμίνου σκορόδου θριδακίνης. διαι-
rn \ A 7 Ν “Ὁ Ce 4 \ a
ροῦσι δὲ τοῖς Te φύλλοις Kal ταῖς ῥίζαις Kal τοῖς
χρώμασι καὶ τοῖς χυλοῖς καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις τοῖς
τοιούτοις.
- “ n / 7 7
Οἷον τῆς ῥαφανῖδος «γένη Κορινθίαν Krewvaiav
/ 3 / / > / \
AevoPactav> ἀμωρέαν Βοιωτίαν: εὐαυξεστάτην δὲ
\ / ἃ \ \ CZ yy /
τὴν Κορινθίαν, ἣ καὶ τὴν pilav ἔχει γυμνήν"
᾿] val XN > N » \ > ς ec + /
ὠθεῖται yap εἰς TO ἄνω Kal οὐχ ὡς αἱ ἄλλαι κάτω.
\ \ ᾽ὔ ἃ 7 a /
τὴν δὲ Λειοθασίαν, ἣν ἔνιοι καλοῦσι Opaxiar,


1 καὶ τοῖς τόποις Ald.; κατὰ τοὺς τόπους con] W. cf. C.P.
BD. 7.

2 ἀγγείῳ... λαμβάνει om. UMPAIA.; διαφορὰν δὲ καὶ Cam.;
τόπῳ" διαφέρειν δὲ καὶ H.; ἀγγείῳ conj. W. from C.P. 5, 0. 7;
καὶ διαφορὰν conj. Sch. ef. Geop. 12. 19. 6.

2 cf. 7. 1. 6; Geop. 12. 20. 3.

‘After εἶναι there is a lacuna in UMAId.; Cam. supplies
γένους διαφοράν: τῶν δὲ ἀνάπαλιν πλείω γένη ; H. has πλείω γένη


80


=—— = «| ἕω οὐδόν


— ee


Se νὰν νλθδὸΝ


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. πὶ. στιν.


Some things again come to resemble in their shape
even the position! in which they grow: thus the
bottle-gourd becomes like in shape to the vessel? in
which it has been placed.

Moreover differences in taste are acquired in some
cases when the seed has been treated specially
beforehand ; for instance, the seed of the cucumber
produces a fruit with different taste if it is soaked ?
in milk before sowing. But such matters belong
perhaps more properly to the subject of cultivation.


Of the various forms of some pot-herbs.


IV. Of some herbs there are several kinds, but of
others only one, as basil monk’s rhubarb blite cress
rocket orach coriander dill rue; of each of these
they say that there is* but one kind. But of others
there is more than one, as radish cabbage beet
cucumber gourd cummin garlic lettuce. Differences
are marked in the leaves, the root, the colour, the
taste, and so forth.

Thus of radish they recognise these various kinds ὅ
—the Corinthian, that of Cleonae, the Leiothasian,
amorea, the Boeotian. The Corinthian is said to
be the strongest in growth, and it has an exposed
root; for it pushes upwards, and not downwards like
the others. The Leiothasian ὅ is called by some the


οὐδὲ γένους διαφοράν: τῶν δὲ ἀνάπαλιν πλείω γένη ; Plin. 19. 123
rather supports H. ? read as in H.: τῶν δὲ ἐστι is perhaps
an attempt to fill the lacuna.

5 cf. Plin. 19. 75 and 76, who gives a kind called viride in
place of T.’s auwpéa: see below. After padavidos there is a
lacuna in UMAId. (but U has τὴν δὲ μόραν Βοιωτίαν). Text
restored from Athen. 2. 48 (cf. Plin. /.c.). Cam.H.Bas. (also
Vo. Vin.(?)) give substantially the same.

6 The name suggests Thasos, off the Thracian coast.


8I
VOL, 11. G


oD


THEOPHRASTUS


r \ \
ἰσχυροτάτην πρὸς Tous χειμῶνας. τὴν δὲ Bow
an /
ὠτίαν γλυκυτάτην Kal τῷ σχήματι στρογγύλην,
r / 7 +, 3 τ
οὐχ ὥσπερ τὴν Κλεωναίαν μακράν. ὅσων δ᾽ ἂν ἡ
a ἠδ.
λεῖα τὰ φύλλα, γλυκύτεραι καὶ ἡδίους, ὅσων δ᾽ ἂν
Υ͂ a
τραχέα, δριμύτεραι. γένος δέ TL παρὰ ταῦτα
.Ψ ἃ BY 4 a z > ’ Ψ 3
ἔστιν ὃ ἔχει TO φύλλον εὐζώμῳ ὅμοιον. ῥαφα-
νῖδος μὲν οὖν ταῦτα.
Γογγυλίδος δὲ οἱ μέν φασιν εἶναι οἱ δ᾽ οὔ
b] ἈΝ A BA \ A /- /
φασιν, ἀλλὰ τῷ ἄρρενι καὶ TH θηλείᾳ διαφέρειν,
» > “ > n >
γίνεσθαι δὲ ἐκ τοῦ αὐτοῦ σπέρματος ἄμφω.
x Ν Ν b) / / an I
πρὸς δὲ TO ἀποθηλύνεσθαι πηγνύναι δεῖν μανάς"
Ξ fs A \
ἐὰν yap πυκνάς, πάσας ἀπαρρενοῦσθαι, TOV αὐτὸν
δὲ τρόπον κἂν ἐν γῇ μοχθηρᾷ σπαρῶσι" Ov ὃ καὶ
7 /
πρὸς σπερματισμὸν μεταφέροντες φυτεύουσι τὰς
\
ἐκφύσεις καὶ πλατείας. ἔστι δὲ Kal TO σπέρμα
a 5.3) \ a \ / ΄ a \
τῇ ὄψει TO χεῖρον Kal βέλτιον φανερὸν" τῆς μὲν
3 a \ n a ΄
γὰρ χρηστῆς λεπτὸν τῆς δὲ μοχθηρᾶς ἁδρόν.
/
χειμαζομένη δὲ χαίρει καὶ αὕτη Kal ἡ padavis:
οἴονται γὰρ ἅμα γλυκαίνεσθαί τε καὶ τὴν αὔξησιν
> Ν La / x > > Ν /
εἰς τὴν ῥίζαν τρέπεσθαι καὶ οὐκ εἰς τὰ φύλλα.
a / lal -
τοῖς δὲ νοτίοις καὶ ταῖς εὐδίαις ἐκκαυλεῖ ταχύ.
n 95 / n a μα
τοῦτο μὲν οὖν λόγου δεῖται τῆς ὁμοιώσεως ἐν
> a S a ΄
ἀμφοῖν εἶναι τὰς διαφοράς.


1 Diose. 2. 112 mentions a kind called by the Romans
ἀρμοράκιον. Plin. 19. 82 has armoracia and says that this
was called armon in Pontus ; Sch. suggests that the latter
name may have given rise to both armoracia and auwpéa.

2 Plin, 18. 129, cf. 19.75; Athen. 9.°7,

3 rnyvivat. The verb is used of planting seeds singly ; ef.
6.6.9.5. Fads δι.


82


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. ιν. 2-3


Thracian radish, and it stands the winter best. The
Boeotian is said to be the sweetest and to be round
in shape, not of a long shape like that of Cleonae.
Those kinds whose leaves are smooth are sweeter
and pleasanter to the taste, those whose leaves are
rough have a somewhat sharp taste. Besides the
above-mentioned kinds! there is yet another, whose
leaves resemble those of rocket. These then are
the different kinds of radish.

Of the turnip? all do not agree that there are
several kinds, but some say that the only difference
is between the ‘male’ and the ‘female,’ and that
both forms come from the same seed. In order
to produce ‘female’ plants it is said that the seed
should be sown ® thinly, for that, if it is sown thick,
the result is all ‘male’ plants; and that the same
result follows if the seed is sown in poor soil.
Wherefore, when they are shifting plants for
seeding,! they plant the seedlings ® wide apart.®
Good and inferior seed can be easily distinguished
by their appearance ; the seed of a good plant is fine,
that of a poor one coarse. Both this plant and
radish like exposure to winter; for it is supposed
that this makes them sweeter and that they are
thus made to grow roots rather than leaves. With
a south wind and warm weather they run up quickly.
It needs explanation that both plants should thus
adapt? themselves in special ways.

4 πρὸς σπερματισμὸν con). A gs τ pte Ald H.
of. 7.5. 3. 5 ἐκφύσεις : cf. 3. 3

6 καὶ πλατείας corrupt. διεστηκυίας ( AW. ) gives the required


sense ; but there may be a loss of some words, πλατείας in-


dicating that the object is to produce broader plants. cf.
C.P. 5. 6. 9 and Sch.’s note.


7 τῆς ὅμοιώσεως probably corrupt: no correction suggests
itself.
83


α 2


THEOPHRASTUS


Τῆς δὲ ῥαφάνου τριχῆ διαιρουμένης, οὖλο-
φύλλου τε καὶ λειοφύλλου. καὶ τρίτης τῆς ἀγρίας,
«ἡ aypia> τὸ μὲν φύλλον ἔχει λεῖον μικρὸν δὲ καὶ
περιφερές, πολύκλαδος καὶ πολύφυλλος, ἔτι δὲ
χυλὸν ἔχουσα, δριμὺν καὶ ᾿φαρμακώδη, δι᾿ 6 καὶ
πρὸς τὰς κοιλίας αὐτῷ χρῶνται οἱ ἰατροί. ὁμοίως
δὲ καὶ ἐν ἐκείναις δοκοῦσι διαφοραὶ καθ᾽ ἑκατέραν"
ἐπεὶ ἄσπερμόν τι γένος αὐτῶν ἐστιν ἢ κακό-
σπερμον. τὸ δ᾽ ὅλον ἡ οὔλη τῆς λείας εὐχυλο-
τέρα καὶ μεγαλοφυλλοτέρα.

Εὐχυλότερον δὲ καὶ τῶν τευτλίων τὸ λευκὸν
τοῦ μέλανος καὶ ὀλιγοσπερμότερον, ὃ καλοῦσί
τινες Σικελικόν.

“Ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ τῆς θριδακίνης" ἡ γὰρ λευκὴ
γλυκυτέρα καὶ ἁπαλωτέρα. γένη δὲ αὐτῆς ἐστὶν
ἄλλα τρία, τό τε πλατύκαυλον καὶ στρογγυλό-
καυλον καὶ τρίτον τὸ Λακωνικόν". αὕτη δὲ τὸ μὲν
φύλλον ἔχει σκολυμῶδες, ὀρθὴ δὲ καὶ εὐαυξὴς καὶ
ἀπαράβλαστος ἐκ τοῦ καυλοῦ. τῶν δὲ πλατειῶν
οὕτω τινὲς πλατύκαυλοι γίνονται ὥστ᾽ ἐνίους
φασὶ καὶ θύραις χρῆσθαι κηπουρικαῖς. τὸ δὲ
OT OES σφόδρα καὶ ᾿μικρόφυλλον καὶ λευκο-
καυλότερον ἔοικεν ἀγρίᾳ.

Τῶν δὲ σέλίνων καὶ ἐν τοῖς φύλλοις καὶ ἐν τοῖς
καυλοῖς αἱ διαφοραί: τὸ μὲν γὰρ πυκνὸν καὶ
οὗλον καὶ δασὺ τὸ φύλλον ἔχει, τὸ δὲ μανότερον
καὶ πλατύτερον καυλὸν δὲ μείζω. τούτων δὲ
πάλιν τὰ μὲν λευκόκαυλα τὰ δὲ πορφυρόκαυλα ἢ
ποικιλόκαυλα' τὸ δ᾽ ὅλον ἅπαν τὸ τοιοῦτον
ἐμφερέστερον τῷ ἀγρίῳ.


1 Athen. 9.9; Plin. 19. 80. 2 Wild radish. See Index.
84


i li it


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. tv. 4-6


1Of cabbage three kinds are distinguished, the
curly-leaved, the smooth-leaved, and thirdly, the
wild form.2 The wild form? has a small round
leaf, it has many branches and many leaves, and
further a sharp medicinal taste ; wherefore physicians
use it for the stomach. Between the other two
kinds * there seem also to be differences, inasmuch
as one of them bears no seed or only inferior seed.
In general the curly-leaved kind has a better flavour
than the smooth and it has larger leaves.

— 5So too with beet; the white kind has a better
flavour than the black and produces fewer seeds ;
some call it ‘ Sicilian ’ beet.

So too with lettuce; the white kind is sweeter
and tenderer. Of this plant there are three other
kinds,® the flat-stalked, the round-stalked, and the
Laconian; the last-named has a leaf like the
golden thistle,’ but is erect and strong-growing and
has no side-shoots® from the main stem. Of the
‘flat’ kinds some have such flat stalks that some,
they say, use them to make a garden trellis.? The
third kind, which has much milky juice and small
leaves and a whiter stem, is like a wild plant.

10TIn celery the differences between the various
kinds lie in the leaves and stem; one kind is close
and curly and has rough leaves, the other is more
open in growth and flatter, but has a larger stalk.
Again there are kinds with stems white, red or parti-
coloured; and in general all such forms resemble
more the wild kind.

3 ἡ ἀγρία add. W.
4 ἐκείναις conj. Sch. from Plin. /.c.; ἐκείνῳ ΑΔ, H.
* Athen. 9. 11; Plin. 19. 132.


SsPlra, 191/125. 7 Athen. 2. 79. Ss efer7 24.
9 ostiola olitoria Plin. 19. 125. 10 Plin, 19. 124.


85


THEOPHRASTUS


/ \ \ if a \ + /
Σικύου δὲ Kal κολοκύντης TOD μὲν εἶναί φασι
/ » ᾽ 3 al A
γένη τῆς δ᾽ οὐκ εἶναι, καθάπερ τῆς ῥαφανῖδος Kal
fel / > ᾽ > A > an / \ \
τῆς yoyyvAtoos, GAN ἐν TO αὐτῷ γένει Tas μὲν
’, \ \ Ψ' a) 7]
βελτίους τὰς δὲ χείρους. τοῦ δὲ σικύου τρία,
aX
Λακωνικὸν σκυταλίαν Βοιώτιον" τούτων δὲ ὁ μὲν
x / /
Λακωνικὸς ὑδρευόμενος βελτίων, of δ᾽ ἕτεροι
ἀνύδρευτοι.
/ \ / \ \ / \ \
Διαφέρει δὲ γένει. καὶ τὰ κρόμνα Kal τὰ
/ 7, \ A 7 pee @
σκόροδα. πλείω δὲ τοῦ κρομύου τὰ γένη, οἷον
\ \ N / > 7 / /
τὰ κατὰ TAS χώρας ἐπικαλούμενα Σάρδια Kvidva
\
Σαμοθράκια, καὶ πάλιν τὰ σητάνια Kal σχιστὰ
/
καὶ ᾿Ασκαλώνια. τούτων δὲ Ta μὲν σητάνια
\ / \ Ss / uN \ \ \
μικρὰ γλυκέα δὲ εὖ μάλα, Ta δὲ σχιστὰ Kal
7 \ A 7, / \
ἀσκαλώνια καὶ ταῖς θεραπείαις διαφέροντα καὶ
fol a ΄ \ \ \ n \
δῆλον OTL TH φύσει: TO yap σχιστὸν τῷ μὲν
a x An / an / u \ lal
χειμῶνι μετὰ τῆς κόμης ἐῶσιν ἀργόν, ἅμα δὲ TO
9 \ / lea \ ” \ \ +
ἦρι Ta φύλλα περιαιροῦσι Ta ἔξω καὶ τὰ ἄλλα
/ / \ “ /
Gepatrevovot περιαιρεθέντων δὲ τῶν φύλλων
“ A \ “ 7 ἧς PLT
ἕτερα βλαστάνει καὶ ἅμα κάτω σχίζεται, δι᾿ ὃ
a / e \ ae \ /
καλοῦσι σχιστά. οἱ δὲ Kal ὅλως φασὶ πάντων
a [τ / > \ / \ \
δεῖν, ὅπως ἡ δύναμις εἰς TO κάτω καὶ μὴ σπερ-
A an Nie 8 ,} / 7
popun. τῶν δὲ ᾿Ασκαλωνίων ἰδία τις ἡ φύσις"
\ ash x 7 / ᾽ \ a
μόνα yap «οὐ; σχιστὰ καὶ ὥσπερ ἄγονα ἀπὸ τῆς
(47 » δὲ 3 > ἴω > “ \ > (ὃ
ῥίζης, ἔτι δὲ ἐν αὐτοῖς ἀναυξῆ καὶ ἀνεπίδοτα"


1 Athen. 3. 4; Plin. 19. 68.

2 Plin. 19. 101-104.

3 Σάρδια conj. Meurs.from Plin. l.c.; γάρδια Ald. H.

4 7.e. making offsets.

° ᾿Ασκαλώνια, whence Eng. shallot ; though this name 15
applied to κ. σχιστόν. ὃ rd add. W.


36


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. rv. 6--.}


As to cucumber and gourd, it is said that
there are various forms of the former, but of the
latter, just as in radish and turnip, the differences
are only between better and inferior individuals.
1Of the cucumber there are three forms, the
Laconian the cudgel-shaped and the Boeotian. Of
these the Laconian is better with moisture, the
others without it.

2 There are also various kinds of onion and of
garlic; those of the onion are the more numerous,
for instance, those called after their localities
Sardian,? Cnidian, Samothracian; and again the
‘annual’ the ‘divided’* (shallot) and that of
Ascalon.® Of these the annual kind is small but
very sweet, while the divided and the Ascalonian
differ plainly as to their character as well as in
respect of their cultivation. For the ‘divided’ ®
kind they leave untended in winter with its foliage,’
but in spring they strip off® the outside leaves and
tend the plant in other ways; when the leaves
are stripped off, others grow, and at the same
time division takes place under ground, which is
the reason of the name ‘divided.’% Some indeed
say that all kinds should be thus treated, in
order that the force of the plant may be directed
downwards and it may not go to seed. The
Ascalonian kind has a somewhat peculiar character ;
it is the only kind which does ποὺ 190 divide and
which does not, as it were, reproduce itself from
the root; moreover in the plant!! itself there is no
power of increasing and multiplying; wherefore

κόμης ἐῶσιν Cconj. Scal.; κοιμησέως UMP,Ald. ~

περιαιροῦσι conj Scal. from Plin. l.c. and G3; περιάγουσι


P,Ald.H. eg. ῬΑ 9: 24-3:
10 οὐ add. Scal. 1 7.e. the part above ground.


37


10


THEOPHRASTUS


a eA \ 5 / > \ / > \
δι ὃ καὶ ov πηγνύουσιν ἀλλὰ σπείρουσιν αὐτὰ
\ / 5 \ 28 \ » 534) “
καὶ σπείρουσιν ὀψὲ πρὸς τὸ ἔαρ, εἶθ᾽ ὅταν

/ “
βλαστήσῃ μεταφυτεύουσι' τελειοῦται δὲ οὕτω
7 [2 ᾿] vA lal » XA \ /
ταχέως ὥσθ᾽ ἅμα τοῖς ἄλλοις ἢ καὶ πρότερον
ΕῚ a / \ , b] / > -“
ἐξαιρεῖσθαι: πλέονα δὲ χρόνον ἐαθέντα ἐν τῇ
an / / \ \ 5 vA \
yh σήπεται' φυτευθέντα δὲ καυλὸν ἀφίησι καὶ
if / 3 fa) /
σπέρμα φύει μόνον, εἶτα κενοῦται Kal avaiveTat.
5 7 A
τούτων μὲν οὖν τοιαύτη τις ἡ φύσις.
7 > » \ A ͵, - a nt
Διαφέρει δ᾽ EVLA καὶ τοῖς χρώμασιν" ἐν loog
\ \ \ 5) Ὡ fal ” \
yap Ta μὲν ἄλλα Opmota τοῖς ἄλλοις, λευκὰ δὲ
ὃ an a’ / δέ “ val
σφοῦρα TH χροιᾷ' φέρειν ὃὲ φασιν ὅμοια τοῖς
a > / Nee 7 e La] Le
Σαρδιανοῖς. ἰδιωτάτη δὲ ἡ φύσις ἡ TOV Kpntixor,
/ \ \ a
παραπλησία δὲ τρόπον τινὰ τοῖς ᾿Ασκαλωνίοις, εἰ
\ 7 \ / / 4 / /
μὴ apa καὶ ἡ αὐτή. ἐν Kpnrn γάρ ἐστί τι γένος
ἃ 7 \ rn ,ὔ
ὃ σπειρόμενον μὲν ῥίζαν ποιεῖ φυτευόμενον δὲ
Ν \ / \ \ > 5 \
καυλὸν καὶ σπέρμα, κεφαλὴν δὲ οὐκ Lael, γλυκυ
an an n \ r
δὲ TO χυμῷ' τοῦτο yap οἷον ἀνάπαλιν ἔχει τοῖς
yA A a , \ Α͂
ἄλλοις. ἅπαντα γὰρ πηγνύμενα καὶ βελτίω
na / \
καὶ θᾶττον παραγίνεται. πάντα δὲ φυτεύεται
> la) 7 a / a “ v
pet Apxtovpov ἔτι θερμῆς οὔσης THs γῆς, ὅπως
\ “ὃ 7ὔ \ ef
τὰ ὕδατα πεφυτευμένα καταλαμβάνῃ. Kal ὅλα
/ / \
δὲ φυτεύεται καὶ διατεμνόμενα Tapa τὴν κεφα-
λήν. οὐχ ὅμοιαι δὲ αἱ ἐκβλαστήσεις, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ
a / / an
μὲν τοῦ κάτω γίνεται κρόμνυον, ἐκ δὲ TOD ἄνω


1 πηγνύουσι: ο΄. 7. 4. 3. The word evidently has ἃ dif-
ferent sense here; cf. ὃ 10, where πηγνύω and φυτεύω seem to
be synonymous.

2 οὕτω conj. Sch. from G; τοῖς ἄλλοις Ald.

2 7.e. instead of being raised from seed. cf. what is said
7. 2. 2 of the offsets of γήθυον.


$8


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. 1v. 8-10


many do not plant! these, but raise them from
seed ; and the sowing is made late, towards the
spring; and then, when the seed has germinated,
they transplant. And the plant arrives at maturity
so? fast that it is taken up with the others or even
earlier ; whereas, if it is left a longer time in the
ground, it rots. If planted on the other hand,?
it sends up a stem and merely produces seed, and
then shrivels up* and withers. Such then is the
character of these.

Some also shew differences in colour; thus at
Issus® are found plants which in other respects
resemble the others,® but which are extremely
white in colour; and they bear, it is said, onions
like those of Sardis. Most distinct however is
the character of the Cretan kind, which resembles
to some extent that of Ascalon, if indeed it be not
the same. For in Crete there is a kind which when
sown produces a root, but when planted produces
a stem and seed but has no ‘head’;’ and it is
sweet in flavour. This kind in fact has just the
contrary character to the others; for they all
grow better and faster when they are planted.
All are planted® after the rising of Arcturus while
the earth is still warm, so that the rains may come
upon them after planting. They are planted?
either entire or else in sections made by cutting
at the ‘head.’ The growth which results is not
uniform ; from the lower part comes an onion,

4 κενοῦται conj. St. from Οἱ eainaniuntur; nawodra Ald. .

δ “Igo conj. Sch. from G and Plin. l.c.; ἴσῳ UM; νήσῳ
Ald. H.

6 ἄλλοις conj. Sch.; λευκοῖς Ald. 7 Se. bulb.


8 φυτεύεται conj. Sch ; φύεται Ald. See next note.
® φυτεύεται M; φύεται Ald. cf. C.P, 1. 4. δ.


39


11


12


THEOPHRASTUS :
χλόη μόνον: ὀρθὸν δὲ διατμηθὲν ὅλως ἀβλαστές
ἐστι. τὸ δὲ γήτειον. καλούμενον ἀκέφαλόν τι καὶ
ὥσπερ αὐχένα μακρὸν ἔχον, ὅθεν καὶ ἡ βλάστησις
ἄκρα' καὶ ἐπικείρεται πολλάκις, ὥσπερ τὸ πρά-
σον, δὲ ὃ καὶ “σπείρουσιν αὐτὸ καὶ οὐ φυτεύουσι.
τὰ μὲν οὖν κρόμυα σχεδὸν ταύτας ἔχει τὰς ἰδέας.

Τὸ δὲ σκόροδον φυτεύεται μὲν μικρὸν πρὸ
τροπῶν ἢ μετὰ τροπὰς διαιρούμενον κατὰ γέλγεις.
διαφορὰ δέ ἐστιν αὐτῶν ἥ τε τῶν ὀψίων πρὸς
τὰ πρώϊα' γένος γάρ τι τυγχάνει. τοιοῦτον ὃ ἐν
ἑξήκοντα ἡμέραις τελειοῦται, καὶ μεγέθει καὶ
μικρότητι. καὶ τῷ μεγέθει γένος τι διάφορόν
ἐστι, μάλιστα δὲ τὸ Κύπριον καλούμενον τοιοῦτον,
ὅπερ οὐχ ἑψοῦσιν ἀλλὰ πρὸς τοὺς μυττωτοὺς
χρῶνται, καὶ ἐν τῇ τρίψει θαυμαστὸν ποιεῖ τὸν
ὄγκον ἐκπνευματούμενον. καὶ ἔτι τῷ μὴ ἔχειν
ἔνια Tas γέλγεις. ἡ δὲ γλυκύτης καὶ ἡ εὐωδία
καὶ ἡ ἁδρότης σχεδὸν παρὰ Tas χώρας γίνεται
καὶ τὰς θεραπείας, ὥσπερ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων. τελει-
οῦται δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ σπέρματος ἀλλὰ βραδέως: τῷ
πρώτῳ γὰρ ἔτει κεφαλὴν ἡλίκην πράσου λαμ-
βάνει, τῷ δ᾽ ὕστερον γελγιδοῦται, καὶ τῷ τρίτῳ
τέλειον γίνεται, καὶ οὐδὲν χεῖρον ἀλλ᾽ ἔνιοί γε
καὶ κάλλιόν φασι τοῦ πηκτοῦ. τῆς δὲ ῥίξης ἡ
γένεσις οὐχ ὁμοία τοῦ τε σκορόδου καὶ τοῦ
κρομύου' ἀλλὰ τοῦ μὲν σκορόδου ὅταν ἀνοιδήσῃ
ἡ yeryis κυρτοῦται πᾶσα καὶ ἐνταῦθα αὐξηθεῖσα
ιαιρεῖται πάλιν εἰς τὰς γέλγεις καὶ ἐξ ἑνὸς πολλὰ


γίνεται τῷ τελειοῦσθαι τὴν κεφαλήν, τὸ δὲ


1 i.e, bulb; ef. 9. 11. 8. 2 of. 7, 2.2.
3’Plin. 19. llland 119. *


go


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. tv. 10-12


from the upper only foliage; while, if the plant is
divided vertically, no growth at all takes place. The
kind called horn-onion has no ‘ head,’ ! but has as
it were a long neck, at the top of which comes the
new growth ; it is often cut, like the leek; where-
fore it is raised from seed and not planted.?,—- Such
then, one may say, are the forms of the onion.

8 Garlic is planted a little before or after the solstice,
when it divides into cloves.t_ There are different kinds
distinguished as late or early, for there is one kind
which matures in® sixty days. There are also
differences as to size. There is one kind which
excels in size, especially that variety which is called
Cyprian, which is not cooked but used for salads,
and, when it is pounded up, it increases wondrously in
bulk, making a foaming dressing. There is a further
difference, in that some kinds cannot be divided into
cloves. The sweetness of taste and smell and the
vigour depend on the position © and on cultivation, as
with other herbs. Garlic reaches maturity from seed,
but slowly, for in the first year it acquires a ‘head’
which is only as large as that of the leek, but in the
next year it divides into cloves, and in the third is
fully grown, and is not inferior, indeed some say it
is superior, to the garlic which has been planted.’
The growth of the root in garlic and onion is not
the same; in garlic, when the clove has swollen, the


~ whole of it becomes convex ®; then it increases and


divides again into’ the cloves, and becomes several
plants instead of one by the maturing of the ‘ head,’


4 γέλγει5 conj. Scal. from G (nucleatim divisum) ; γένη Ald.
ὅ ὃ ἐν conj. Sch.; ὅθεν UMAId.

5. χώρας conj. Dalec.; ὥρας UMP, Ald.

7 Sc. not raised from seed. 8 So W. renders.


QI


THEOPHRASTUS


κρόμυον εὐθὺς ἐκ τῆς ῥίζης ἄλλο καὶ ἄλλο παρα-
φίησι, καθάπερ καὶ βολβοὶ καὶ σκίχλα καὶ πάντα
τὰ τοιαῦτα. καὶ γὰρ τὰ κρόμυα καὶ τὰ σκόροδα
\ >] / > 3 ϑὰν \ /
μὴ ἀναιρούντων ἄλλ ἐώντων πολλα γίνεται.
φέρειν δέ φασι καὶ τὸ σκόροδον ἐπὶ τῆς φύσιγγος
U4 3
σκόροδα καὶ τὸ κρόμυον κρόμυα: περὶ μὲν οὖν
τῶν γενέσεων ἱκανῶς εἰρήσθω.
V. Φίλυδρα δὲ πάντα τὰ ἄλλα λάχανα καὶ
, \ / a Nee ,
φιλόκοπρα πλὴν πηγάνου, τοῦτο δὲ ἥκιστα φιλό-
κοπρον. Ta χειμερινὰ δὲ οὐχ ἧττον τῶν θερινῶν
καὶ τὰ ἐπίκηρα τῶν ἰσχυρῶν. κόπρον δὲ μάλιστα
ἐπαινοῦσι τὴν συρματῖτιν, τὴν δὲ τῶν ὑποζυγίων
\ \ \ / > / na
μοχθηρὰν διὰ TO μάλιστα ἐξικμάζεσθαι: ζητοῦσι
δὲ τὴν κόπρον ἅμα τῷ σπόρῳ μάλιστα συνανα-
n ς ΑΥ \ / > rs
μιχθεῖσαν: οἱ δὲ καὶ σπείροντες ἐπιβάλλουσι:
an an / a
χρῶνται δὲ Kal TH ἀνθρωπίνῃ ὠμῇ πρὸς τὴν
χύλωσιν. φιλυδρότερα δὲ τὰ χειμερινὰ τῶν
θερινῶν καὶ τὰ ἀσθενῆ τῶν ἰσχυρῶν, ἔτι δὲ τὰ
, ῇ a / \ \
πλείστης δεόμενα τροφῆς. φίλυδρα καὶ τὸ
, A /
κρόμυον καὶ TO γήθυον: καίτοι φασί τινες οὐ
ζητεῖν, ἐὰν τὸ πρῶτον ἐπιγένηται δὶς ἢ τρίς.
an π᾿ 4 / 7 x / \ \ /
τῶν δὲ ὑδάτων ἄριστα τὰ πότιμα Kal Ta ψυχρά,
/ δὲ \ € \ \ ὃ a ὃ δι \
χείριστα δὲ τὰ ἁλυκὰ Kal δυσμανῆ, δι’ ὃ καὶ
ἐκ τῶν ὀχετῶν οὐ χρηστά' συμπεριφέρει yap
σπέρματα πόας. ἀγαθὰ δὲ τὰ ἐκ διός" ταῦτα


ἢ. 2..2 and:3.

2 φύσιγγος conj. Casaub. on Athen. 2. 78; σφύριγγος UM
Ald. See LS φύσιγξὲ. .

3 καὶ τὸ κρόμνον Kpduva conj. Sch.; καὶ τὰ κρόμμυα UMAI.

4 Plin. 19. 156.


g2


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. τν. 12-v. 2


while the onion puts out another and another growth
straight from the root, as do purse-tassels? and squill
and all such plants. For both onions and garlic
multiply if they are not removed but left alone.
They say also that garlic produces garlic heads on
the stalk,? and that the onion in like manner pro-
duces onions. Let this suffice for an account of
their ways of growth.


Of the cultivation of pot-herbs ; manure and water.


V. 4 All the pot-herbs are lovers of water and of
dung, except rue, which does not at all like dung;
this is true of the winter no less than of the summer
herbs, and of the tender no less than of the strong
ones. The dung which is most commended is that
which is mixed with litter, while that of beasts of
burden is held to be bad, because it is most apt to
lose its moisture. Dung which is mixed with the
seed is most in request, but some cast the manure
on while they are sowing, and they also use fresh
human dung as a liquid manure. The winter crops
like moisture more than the summer ones, and the
weak more than the strong, as well as those which
specially need feeding. Onion and long onion also
love moisture, though some say that they do not
require it, if at the outset it has been applied
twice or thrice. © Fresh cold water is the best, and
the worst is that which is brackish and thick :7
wherefore the water from irrigation ditches is not
good, for it brings with it seeds of weeds. Rain

5 Lit. ‘for their liquid-manuring.’ cf. C.P. 3. 9. 2, where
χύλωσις must have the same sense.


6 Plin. 12. 182 and 183.
1 δυσμανῆ UMAId.; δυσμενῆ H.


93


THEOPHRASTUS


a /
yap δοκεῖ καὶ φθείρειν τὰ θηρία [γινόμενα] τὰ
γόνιμα κατεσθίοντα. φασὶ δέ τινες οὔτε τοῖς
σικύοις συμφέρειν οὔτε τοῖς κρομύοις. ἀρδεύουσι
δὲ τὰ μὲν ἄλλα πρωὶ ἢ πρὸς ἑσπέραν, ὅπως μὴ
/ \ \ ” \ / \
καθέψηται, TO δὲ ὥκιμον καὶ μεσημβρίας" καὶ
\ / an / n \ lal
yap διαβλαστάνειν θᾶττόν φασι θερμῷ τὸ πρῶτον
> / \ AN \ of VAN a
ἀρδενόμενον. TO δὲ πολὺ λίαν ὕδωρ δοκεῖ συμ-
/ 7 \ 3. ὁ \ 4 /
φέρειν ἄλλως τε καὶ ἐὰν [μὴ] ἔχῃ κόπρον"
΄ \ n \ / / \ a
πολλάκις Yap πεινῆν Ta λάχανά φασι, καὶ ταῦτα
/ an n
γνωρίζειν τοὺς ἐμπείρους TOV κηπουρῶν.
Μεταφυτευόμενα δὲ πάντα καλλίω καὶ μείζω
7 \ an
γίνεται" Kal yap Ta TOV πράσων μεγέθη Kal τὰ
a ς / 2 / / x
τῶν padavidav ἐκ μεταφυτείας. μάλιστα δὲ
/ \ \
μεταφυτεύουσι πρὸς τοὺς σπερματισμούς: Kal
\ \ yA ς / - / ΄
τὰ μὲν ἄλλα ὑπομένει, οἷον γήθυον πράσον
ῥάφανος σίκυος σέλινον γογγυλὶς θρίδαξ, «-τὰ
/
δὲξ γλίσχρως. ἅπαντα δ᾽ εὐαυξέστερα καὶ μείζω
» a 5
πηγνυμένων τῶν σπερμάτων ἢ σπειρομένων.
7 - x lal
Θηρία δὲ γίνεται ταῖς μὲν ῥαφανῖσι ψύλλαι,
τῇ δὲ ῥαφάνῳ κάμπαι καὶ σκώληκες, καὶ ἐν τῇ


θριδακίνῃ καὶ ἐν τοῖς πράσοις καὶ ἐν ἄλλοις δὲ


πλείοσιν αἱ πρασοκουρίδες. ταύτας μὲν οὖν ἡ
a /
κράστις ἀθροισθεῖσα ἀπόλλυσι καὶ ὅταν κόπρος


1 γινόμενα τὰ γόνιμα H.; γινόμενα γόνιμα UMAId.; ? τὰ τὰ
γόνιμα. Kither “γινόμενα or γόνιμα seems to be due to ditto-
graphy. For γόνιμα ef. C.P. 1. 15. 1: τὰς γονίμους ἀρχάς.

ἡ καθέψηται conj. Sch. after Plin, l.c.; καθάψηται P,Ald,

3 ἔχῃ κόπρον conj. Dalec.; μὴ ἔχῃ x. Ald.; μετέχῃ κόπρου
conj. W. cf. 7. 5. 1, χύχῶσιν» CLP. 3.9. 2,

4 Plin. 19. 183.


94


— a ,.-


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. v. 2-4


water is good, for it also appears to destroy the pests
which devour the young plants.! Some however say
that rain-water is not good for melons nor for
onions. Most herbs are watered in early morning
or at evening, so that they may not be dried up?;
but basil is watered even at noon, for it is said that
it grows more quickly if it is watered at first with
warm water. In general water seems to be extremely
beneficial, especially if it is mixed with dung®; for,
they say, pot-herbs often are hungry, and experienced
gardeners can recognise when this is so.

4 All herbs grow finer and larger if transplanted ;
for even the size of leeks and radishes depends on
transplantation. Transplanting is done especially in
view of collecting seed®: and, while most herbs
bear it well, as long onion leek cabbage cucumber
celery turnip lettuce, others bear it less well.6 All
however make better growth and are larger if the
seed is planted ’ rather than scattered.


Of the pests which infest pot-herbs.


SAs for pests,—radish is attacked by spiders,°
cabbage by caterpillars and grubs, while in lettuce,
leek, and many other herbs occur ‘leek-cutters.’ 10
These are destroyed by collecting green fodder,! or
when they have been caught somewhere in a mass


ὃ. σπερματισμοὺς conj. Scal.; σπερματικοὺς UMAId. cf. 7. 4. 3.

ὁ τὰ δὲ γλίσχρως conj. Sch., adding τὰ 5&; γλίσχρως Ὁ;
γλίσχροι M; γλίσχρος Ald.; γλήχων conj. Scal. Sch. also
conjectures τὰ λίσχρα : see LS. 8.0.

7 πηγνυμένων: cf. 6. 6. 9; 7. 4. 3. ΒΘ ΕΙΣ 19: 1.7.1.

9 ψύλλαι: cf. Arist. H.A. 9. 89. 1.

10 πρασοκουρίδες : ? leaf-maggots. cf. Arist. H.A. 5. 19. 20;
Geop. 12. 9.

1 κράστις conj. R. Const.; κρᾶσις Ald.


95


THEOPHRASTUS


/
ἀθρόα που καταλάβῃ" φιλόκοπρον δ᾽ ὃν τὸ θηρίον
/ a a “

ἀναδύεται καὶ ἐνδῦσα κοιμᾶται ἐν τῇ κόπρῳ, δι᾽
A ὃ) id LO θ 7 3 », δ᾽ b] yy an
ὃ δὴ ῥάδιον θηρεύειν: ἄλλως οὐκ ἐστι. ταῖς
Ν val
δὲ ῥαφανῖσι πρὸς τὰς ψύλλας πρόσφορον τὸ
ἐπισπείρειν ὀρόβους. πρὸς δὲ τὸ μὴ γίνεσθαι

7 ” 9 ¥, > / ¢ ‘
ψύλλας ov φασιν εἰναι φάρμακον οὐδέν. ὑπο
δὲ τὸ ἄστρον ὥκιμον μὲν λευκαίνεται κορίαννον δὲ
ς [2] ἣν \ 3 7 \ ‘A
ἁλμᾷ. τὰ μὲν οὖν συμβαίνοντα διὰ τούτων
θεωρητέον.

Τῶν δὲ σπερμάτων τὰ μέν ἐστιν ἰσχυρότερα

"

τὰ δὲ ἀσθενέστερα πρὸς διαμονήν: ἰσχυρότερα
μὲν οἷον κορίαννον τεύτλιον πράσον κάρδαμον
a 3 θ 7 ς “ Ν ὃ / /
νᾶπυ εὔζωμον θύμβρα, ἁπλῶς τὰ ὁριμεα TATA’
b) / \ / a δὰ BJ 1f/
ἀσθενέστερα δὲ γήθυον, τοῦτο yap οὐκ ἐθέλει
μένειν, ἀδράφαξυς ὥκιμον κολοκύντη σίκυος,
ἁπλῶς τὰ θερινὰ τῶν χειμερινῶν μᾶλλον. δια-
μένει δὲ οὐδὲν πλέον τεττάρων ἐτῶν ὥστε ἔτι
χρήσιμον εἶναι πρὸς τοὺς σπόρους: ἀλλὰ διένα

Ν Ψ \ δὲ / WY; / Ν δ᾽
μὲν βελτίω, τὰ δὲ τριένα οὐδὲν χείρω, τὸ
ὑπερτεῖνον ἤδη χεῖρον.

Πρὸς δὲ τὴν μαγειρικὴν χρείαν ἐπὶ πλείω δια-
ieee mcm ξ Θ ...


1 κόπρος ἀθρόα που καταλάβῃ Ald.; κόπρον ἀθρόαν πού τις
καταβάλῃ conj. W. after Sch.; κόπρον ἀθρόαν con). Seal.

2 φιλόκοπρον δ᾽ dv τὸ θήριον ἀναδύεται καὶ ἐνδῦσα conj. W.;
φιλόπονον τὸ θήριον ἀναδεύεται καὶ ἐν ais κοιμᾶται ὉΜΑΙΑ.;
φίλυπνον conj. R. Const., but W.’s conj. is confirmed by
Geop. l.c. The change of gender in ἐνδῦσα is strange.

3 πρὸς τὰς ψύλλας πρόσφορον τὸ mBas.; ψύλλας πρὸς τὸ Ald.
H.; mpds τὰς ψύλλας ἀρκεῖ τὸ conj. W.

4 ψύλλας Ald.; καμπὰς conj. Sch. followed by W.

5 of. Geop. 12.7; Pall. 1. 35. 8; Plin. Lc.


96


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. v. 4-6


of dung,! the pest being fond of dung emerges, and,
having entered the heap, remains dormant there ?;
wherefore it is then easy to catch, which otherwise
itis not. To protect? radishes against spiders ¢ it is
of use to sow vetch® among the crop; to prevent
_ the spiders from being engendered they say that
there is no specific. © Basil turns pale about the
rising of the dog-star, and coriander becomes
mildewed.’ . In these instances we may observe
the accidents which occur to pot-herbs.


Of the tume for which seed of pot-herbs can be kept.


ὃ Οὗ seeds some have more vitality than others as
to keeping; among the more vigorous ones are
coriander beet leek cress mustard rocket savory,
and in general® those of pungent taste ; among the
less vigorous are long onion—which will not keep
—orach basil gourd cucumber; and in general the
summer herbs keep less well than the winter ones.
No seed will keep more than four years so as still
to be of use for sowing ; though it is better in the
second year,!°in some cases it does not deteriorate in
three years," but after that time deterioration
begins.

However for cooking purposes seed will keep a


pees, 19.176.

7 ἄλμᾷ conj.W.; ἅλμαι MAId.; ἁλμαίνεται Vo. Vin.; ἁλμᾶται
mBas. cf. 8.10.1; C.P. 6.10.5. In all three places W.
introduces this word, comparing ψωριᾶν ἐρυσιβᾶν, etc.

pram. 19, 181.

® ἁπλῶς conj. St. from G; ἄλλως Ald.; ἄλως U.

10 διένα conj. Scal.; δι’ ἕνα UMAId.H.

Ἢ τὰ δὲ τριένα conj.W.; διὰ δὲ τρεῖς UMAId.H.

15 ὑπερτεῖνον conj. Scal.: cf. 8.11. ὅ; ὑπὲρ γαῖον UMAId.;
ὑπερβαῖνον H.


97
VOL. II. H


THEOPHRASTUS


μένει, πλὴν ἀσθενέστερα ταῦτα ἀναγκαῖον εἶναι
διὰ τὴν ἀναπνοὴν καὶ τὴν σκωλήκωσιν. φθορὰ
δὲ μάλιστα μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν θηρίων: γίγνεται γὰρ ἐν
ἅπασι καὶ τοῖς δριμέσιν, ἥκιστα δὲ ἐν τῷ TLKVOVE
οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐξικμαζόμενα πικρὰ γίνεται τῇ
γεύσει, δι᾿ ὃ καὶ πρὸς τὴν χρείαν χείρω. καὶ
περὶ μὲν τῶν σπερμάτων καὶ ἁπλῶς τῶν κηπευο-
μένων ἱκανῶς εἰρήσθω. |

VI. Περὶ δὲ τῶν ἀγρίων Kal τῶν καλουμένων
ἀρουραίων πειρατέον ὁμοίως εἰπεῖν. τυγχάνει δὲ
τὰ μὲν ὁμώνυμα τοῖς ἡμέροις" ἅπαντα γάρ ἐστι
τὰ γένη ταῦτα καὶ ἄγρια, καὶ σχεδὸν τά γε πολλὰ
παραπλησίαν ἔχοντα τὴν ὄψιν τοῖς ἡμέροις, πλὴν
τοῖς γε φύλλοις ἐλάττω ταῦτα καὶ τραχύτερα
καὶ τοῖς καυλοῖς καὶ μάλιστα τοῖς χυλοῖς δριμύ-
τερα καὶ ἰσχυρότερα, καθάπερ ἥ τε θύμβρα καὶ
ἡ ὀρίγανος ἥ τε ῥάφανος καὶ τὸ πήγανον: ἐπεὶ
καὶ τὸ λάπαθον ἄγριον, καίπερ εὐστομώτερον τοῦ
ἡμέρου ὄν, τὸν χυλὸν ὅμως ὀξύτερον ἔχει καὶ
τούτῳ μάλιστα διαφέρει. πάντα δὲ καὶ ξηρότερα
τῶν ἡμέρων, καὶ ἴσως αὐτῷ τούτῳ τά γε πολλὰ
καὶ δριμύτερα καὶ ἰσχυρότερα.

Ἰδίως δὲ ἡ ῥάφανος ἔχει παρὰ τὰ ἄλλα τοὺς
καυλοὺς περιφερεστέρους καὶ λειοτέρους τῆς ἡμέ-


1 7.e. drying-up ; cf. Plat. Tum. 85 a.

2 σκωλήκωσιν conj. Sch.; κώλυσιν Ald.; σκωλήκησιν conj.
R. Const.

3 σικυῶνι Ald.: perhaps here a general term for cucumbers,


ourds, etc.; σικνῶν M; σικύῳ conj. W.
* Flin, 19. 185.


98


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. v. 6--νι. 2


longer time, except that such seed must necessarily
become less vigorous by reason of ‘evaporation’!
and destruction by worms.?. The chief cause of loss
is vermin; for vermin occur in all the seeds, even
those which are pungent, though least in the gourd 3
tribe ; such seeds however, as they lose their moisture,
become bitter in taste and inferior for use. Let
this suffice for an account of the seeds and in general
of herbs cultivated in gardens.


Of uncultivated herbs: the wild forms of pot-herbs.


VI. *We must now endeavour to speak in the same
way of the wild kinds and of those which are called
uncultivated herbs. Some of these have the same
names as the cultivated ὅ kinds; for all these kinds
exist also in a wild form, and most of them resemble
the cultivated kinds in appearance, except that in
the wild forms the leaves and also the stalks are
smaller and rougher, and in particular these forms
are more pungent and stronger in taste, for instance,
savory © marjoram cabbage and rue; the wild monk’s
rhubarb (dock) indeed, though it has a pleasanter
taste than the cultivated, yet has‘ a sharper flavour ;
and this is the chief difference. Moreover all the
wild kinds are less juicy than the cultivated, and
perhaps this is the very reason why most ὃ of them
are more pungent and stronger.

A peculiarity of ‘wild cabbage’ as compared with
the others is that its stems are rounder and smoother


5 ἡμέροις conj. Sch.; εἰρημένοις Ald. The correction would
seem unnecessary but that Ald. gives εἰρημένοις in §4 where
ἡμέρους is required. 6 ef. Diose..3.,. 37.

7 ov, τὸν I conj. ; τὸν δὲ MSS. W.

8 ye conj. Sch.; re UMAId,


Hise ΤΩ γι > 99


THEOPHRASTUS


\ \ a / / > / \
pov, καὶ τὴν τοῦ φύλλου πρόσθεσιν ἐκείνη μὲν
ἔχει πλατεῖαν αὕτη δὲ περιφερεστέραν, καὶ αὐτὸ

Ν 5! / > / > \ / yy
δὲ TO φύλλον ἀγωνότερον: ἐπεὶ τά γε ἄλλα
τραχύτερα καὶ τοῖς καυλοῖς καὶ τοῖς φύλλοις.
ς ae ᾿ \ \ ce » \ \
Η δὲ γογγυλὶς καὶ τὴν ῥίζαν ἔχει μακρὰν καὶ
€ 4 \ \ \ /
ῥαφανιδώδη καὶ τὸν καυλὸν βραχύν.
/ an
Θριδακίνη δὲ τό τε φύλλον βραχύτερον τῆς
a
ἡμέρου, καὶ τελεουμένης ἀκανθοῦται, καὶ τὸν
\ ς / \ 2 Ν \ \ \
καυλὸν ὁμοίως, τὸν ὀπὸν δὲ δριμὺν Kal φαρμα-
/ Y Bioko a ’ ΄ ιν 3
κώδη. φύεται δ᾽ ἐν ταῖς ἀρούραις" ὀπίζουσι ὃ
/ /
αὐτὴν ὑπὸ πυραμητόν, καί φασι καθαίρειν ὕδρωπα
\ > \ 2 > 3 la) > / \ 7
Kal ἀχλὺν at’ ὀφθαλμῶν ἀπάγειν καὶ ἄργεμα

an 7
ἀφαιρεῖν ἐν γάλακτι γυναικείῳ.

> ς

Τὸ δ᾽ ἱπποσέλινον καὶ ἐλειοσέλινον καὶ ὀρεο-

, \ Ν ς \ \ ” \ \

σέλινον Kal πρὸς ἑαυτὰ διαφορὰν ἔχει Kal πρὸς
,

τὸ ἥμερον: τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἐλειοσέλινον τὸ παρὰ τοὺς

> \ \ 3 a We , / ,

ὀχετοὺς καὶ ἐν τοῖς ἕλεσι φυόμενον μανοφυλλον

\ a

TE καὶ OV δασὺ γίνεται, προσεμφερὲς δέ πως TO

᾽ \ an ? a \ A an \ n - /

σελίνῳ καὶ TH ὀσμῇ Kal TO χυλῷ Kal TO σχή-

\ EA 4 / 7 \ > \ an
ματι. τὸ δ᾽ ἱπποσέλινον φύλλον μὲν ἐμφερὲς TO
> / ὃ \ δὲ Ν 4 \ \
ἐλειοσελίνῳ, δασὺ ὃὲ καὶ peyadoKavAOY καὶ τὴν

lA \
pilav ὥσπερ papavis ἔχει TO πάχος μέλαιναν'

/ \ Ἄς / / x a > /
μέλας δὲ Kal ὁ καρπός, μέγεθος δὲ μεῖζον ὀρόβου.
> 7 Ν
χρήσιμα δ᾽ ἄμφω φασὶ πρὸς στραγγουρίαν εἶναι
> / “A lal \ “A n 4 \
ἐν οἴνῳ γλυκεῖ λευκῷ Kal τοῖς λιθιῶσι" φύεται δὲ


1 τραχύτερα conj. Sch.; τραχύτερον Ald., which contradicts
what has just been said.

2 Plin. 20. 20; Diosc. 2. 110.

3 τελεουμένης conj. W.; τελεούμενος U3; τελειούμενον P,Ald.


ΟΣ ΟΣ, 4, 3.5.
TOO


brpop4aoVv


i a i -


<


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. vi. 2-3


than in the cultivated kind, and, while in the latter
the attachment of the leaf is flat, in the wild kind
it is rounder, and the leaf itself has less angles; in
other cases the wild form. is the rougher! both in
stem and leaf.

2 The wild turnip has a long root, like that of the
radish, and a short stem.

The wild lettuce has a shorter leaf than the
cultivated kind, and, as the plant matures,® it
becomes spinous; the stem is also shorter, while the
juice is pungent and medicinal. It grows in fields ;
they extract its juice at the time of wheat-harvest,
and it is said that it purges away dropsy and takes
away dimness of sight and removes ulcers* on the
eye; for which purpose it is administered in human
milk.

ὃ. 9 Horse-celery ’ (alexanders) ‘marsh-celery’ and
‘mountain-celery’ (parsley) differ both from one
another and from the cultivated kind ; ‘ marsh-celery,’
which grows by irrigation-ditches and in marshes,
has scanty leaves,° and is not of close habit, “yet it
somewhat resembles the cultivated kind in smell
taste and appearance. ‘ Horse-celery’ has a leaf
like that of the marsh kind, but is of close habit
and has a big stalk, and its root is as thick as a
radish and black; *the fruit is also black, and in
size is larger than the seed of a vetch. They say
that both kinds are serviceable in cases of strangury
and for those suffering from stone, being adminis-
tered in sweet white wine. Both kinds grow equally °

49. 9.5; Plin. 20. 58; Diosc. 2. 136.

© Plin. 19. 124.

§ μανόφυλλον : Plin. l.c. seems to have read μονόφυλλον.


™ Diosc. 3. θά. 8 Diosc. 3. 67.
9 ὁμοίως conj. Sch.; ὅμως Ald.


Io!


THEOPHRASTUS


€ , ἴω / \ , / >’
ὁμοίως πανταχοῦ: γίνεται δὲ καί τι δάκρυον ἐξ
> a A ψ e / Ὁ 4
αὐτοῦ ὅμοιον τῇ μύρρᾳ' οἱ δέ φασιν ὅλως μύρραν.
Τὸ δὲ ὀρεοσέλινον μείζους ἔτι διαφορὰς ἔχει" τὸ
7 /
μὲν yap φύλλον ἔοικε κωνείῳ, pila δὲ λεπτή, TOV
Ν \ ΝΜ / ” \ 2 δ
δὲ καρπὸν ἔχει καθάπερ ἄνηθον πλὴν ἐλάττω"
διδόασι δὲ τοῦτον ἐν οἴνῳ αὐστηρῷ τῶν γυναι-
κείων χάριν.
\ 7 a
"Evia δὲ ὅλως ἀσύμβλητα τοῖς ἡμέροις ἐστὶ
\ \
κατά γε τοὺς χυλοὺς Kal Tas δυνάμεις, ὥσπερ
/ 4 5 \ Cue ? > > a
σίκυος 6 TE ἄγριος Kal ὁ ἥμερος, GAN ἐκ τῆς
/ \ ς
προσόψεως ἔχει τὴν ὁμοιότητα, καθάπερ καὶ ἐν
a , ς..3 / \ A / 54
τοῖς στεφανώμασιν ἡ ἰωνία" TO yap φύλλον ἔχει
/ Qn > / e
παρόμοιον. τούτων μὲν οὖν ἐν τοῖς εἰρημένοις αἱ
ὔ
διαφοραί.
lal / la
VIL. Τῶν δὲ ἀρουραίων λεγομένων μετὰ ταῦτα
ῥητέον, καὶ ὅλως εἴ τι ποιῶδές ἐστιν ὃ μὴ τυγ-
A la) \ \ \
χάνει βρωτόν. καλοῦμεν yap λάχανα τὰ πρὸς
τὴν ἡμετέραν χρείαν: ἐν δὲ τῷ καθ᾽ ὅλου κἀκεῖνα
δ / /
περιέχεται, Ot ὃ Kal περὶ ἐκείνων λεκτέον. λά-
\ \ \ a a ,
yava μὲν δὴ καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα καλεῖται, κιχόρη
> / / ς \ > / \ 2
ἀπάπη χόνδρυλλα ὑποχοιρὶς ἠρυγέρων, Kal ὅλως


1 τὶ δθπ). Sch.; τὸ Ald. cf. 9. 1. 4.

2 ὅλως P,Bas ; ὥλως Ald.; ὃ ἁπλῶς W.

3 κωνείῳ conj. Sch.; κονίῳ Ald. cf 1. 5. 8 π.

4 καρπὸν conj. Cornarius on Diosce. 3. 67. and Dalec.; καυλὸν
UMAId. cf. Diosc. 7:6.

5 ἡμέροις H.; εἰρημένοις UMAId. ef. 7. 6. 1 n.

δ See Index, σίκυος.

? 2,6. which gives them a common name.

8 εἴ τι ποιωδές ἐστιν H.3 ἐγγειποιῶδες U; ἐγγειποιῶδές ἐστι


ΜΑΙΑ,
102


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. vi. 2- σπι. 1


everywhere. There is also a sort! of gum which
exudes from the plant, like myrrh, and some say that
it zs ? myrrh.

‘Mountain-celery ’ (parsley) exhibits even greater
differences; its leaf is like that of hemlock,’ the
root is slender, and the fruit ὁ like that of dill, but
smaller; it is given in dry wine for diseases of
women.

In some cases however the wild kinds are not in
the least like the cultivated ° in taste and properties ;
thus the wild and the cultivated cucumber ὃ are quite
different, and their resemblance’ is due only to their
general look, as, among coronary plants, there is
resemblance between the wild and the cultivated
kinds of gilliflower; for the leaves are alike. We
have then described the differences which these
plants present.


Of other uncultivated herbs, which may be classed with pot-herbs.


VII. Next we must speak of the differences found
in the herbs called ‘uncultivated,’ and in general in
any herbaceous plants 8 which are not edible. For
we give the name of ‘ pot-herbs’ to those which are
cultivated for our own use, but in a wider sense the
term includes these also ; wherefore we must speak
of them too. ®Under the name ‘pot-herbs’ are
included also?! such plants as chicory dandelion 1}
khondrylla}* cat’s ear groundsel, and’ in general all


9 Plin. 21. 89. 10 καὶ add. Scal.

1 ἀπάπη (or ἀπάτη) conj. Sch.; ἀφάκη Ald. The latter isa
leguminous plant mentioned 8. 5. 3, etc.: for ἀπάπη cf. 6. 4. 8;
7. 8. 3; 7. 11. 3; for spelling see notes on the last two
passages.

12 χόνδρυλλα conj. Salm. from Plin. /.c., ¢f. 7. 11. 4 n.3 ἀν-
Spvada Ald.G. cf. Plin. 21. 105; Diosc. 2. 133.


103


THEOPHRASTUS


ὅσα κιχοριώδη καλεῖται διὰ τὴν ὁμοιότητα τῶν
φύλλων' πάντα γάρ πως ἐμφερῆ ἔχει τῷ κιχορίῳ"
πάλιν καυκαλὶς ἔνθρυσκον ἡδύοσμον. οἱ δὲ μυρία
ἄλλα καλοῦσιν, σκάνδιξ καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα τοιαῦτα
σκανδικώδη, πραγοπώγων, οἱ δὲ κόμην καλοῦσιν,
ὃ τὴν μὲν ῥίξαν ἔχει μακρὰν καὶ γλυκεῖαν τὰ δὲ

ύλλα τῷ κρόκῳ ὅμοια πλὴν μακρότερα, τὸν
καυλὸν δὲ βραχύν, ἐφ᾽ οὗ τὴν κάλυκα μεγάλην
καὶ ἐξ ἄκρου μέγαν τὸν πάππον πολιόν, ἀφ᾽ οὗ
καλεῖται τραγοπώγων.

Ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα τοιαύτας μὲν ἰδέας

ἔχει τοὺς δὲ χυλοὺς ἐδωδίμους ἢ ὠμοὺς ἢ ἑφθούς:
ἔνια γὰρ δεῖται πυρώσεως, ὥσπερ μαλάχη͵ καὶ
τευτλὶς καὶ τὸ λάπαθον καὶ ἡ ᾿ἀκαλύφη καὶ τὸ
παρθένιον: τὸν δὲ στρύχνον καὶ ὠμὸν ἐσθίουσιν,
‘ ‘
OV καὶ εὐκήπευτόν τινες πρότερον .. .. καὶ ἕτερα
δὲ πλείω τούτων, ἐν οἷς καὶ ὁ παροιμιαζόμενός
ἐστι διὰ πικρότητα κόρχορος ἔχων τὸ φύλλον
ὠκιμῶδες. πάντα δὲ τὰ μὲν ἐπέτεια τὰ δὲ ἐπε-
τειόκαυλα τυγχάνει: τὰ μὲν yap ἐξαυαίνονται
τῶν δὲ διαμένουσιν εἰς πλείω χρόνον αἱ ῥίζαι"
σχεδὸν δὲ οὐκ ἐλάττω τὰ τοιαῦτά ἐστι.

Φύεται δὲ τὰ μὲν καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν ῥιζῶν καὶ ἀπὸ
τῶν σπερμάτων, τὰ δὲ ἕτερα μόνον ἀπὸ σπέρ-


1 καλεῖται conj. Sch.; ταῦτα Ald.

2 ἔνθρυσκον : Sch. conjectured ἔνθρυσκος, form corrected by
L.Dindorf ; ἐνθουσικόν Ald.G. cf. Plin. 22. 81.

2. Plin. On. 142 ; Diosce. 2. 138.

4 nadvt: cf. 8. 2. 4; 8. 4. 3.

5 πάππον conj. W.; παγητὸν UMAId.; πώγωνα H. cf. Diosce.
l.c., where Saracenus corrects καρπὸς to πάπποκ.

6 τοιαύτας (sc. herbaceous) PmBas.; τοιαῦτα τὰς Ald.; τὰς
αὐτὰς conj. W.


104


_—_—
ae


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. vn. 1-3


those that are called ! ‘ chicory-like’ because of the
resemblance in the leaves; for to a certain extent
the leaves of all these are like those of chicory ; and
we may add kaukalis chervil? green mint. Some
include under the name countless others, as wild
chervil and all plants that resemble it, and goat’s
beard,? which some call kome (‘hair’), which has a
long sweet root and leaves like those of the crocus,
but longer, and a short stem, on which is set the
sheath +; this is large, and on the top is the large
mass of grey pappus,’ from which it gets its name of
‘ goat's beard.’

In like manner all those may be included which
have a similar ® appearance, but juices suitable for
food whether raw or cooked; for some need the
action of fire, as malakhe (cheese-flower) beet monk’s
rhubarb nettle and bachelor’s buttons; while garden
nightshade’ is also eaten raw, and some in former
times® considered it worth growing in gardens.
There are also many more, including the plant
which has become proverbial ® for its bitterness, blue
pimpernel, which has a leaf like basil. All these are
either annual or have annual stems; for some of
them wither away altogether in one season, while of
others the roots persist for a longer time, and to this
class belong the majority.

Some of these plants grow from roots and also
from seed—unless in some cases they come up


Τ 2,6. orpixvos ὃ ἐδώδιμος: cf. 7. 15. 4. The American
‘ wonder-berry.’

8 πρότερον Ald.; ἵπρότερον Bas.; ὠνύμασαν conj. W. Text
probably defective.

9 κόρχορος ἐν λαχάνοις is the proverb. cf. Ar. Vesp. 239,
Schol.; Plin. 21. 183. (=‘Is Saul also among the prophets ?’)


105


THEOPHRASTUS


2 / \ > / ς \ /
ματος, εἰ μή TL καὶ αὐτόματον. ἡ δὲ βλάστησις
/ lal A a
Kal τούτων Kal TOV ἄλλων τῶν μὲν ἅμα τοῖς
πρώτοις ὑετοῖς ἐστι μετ᾽ ἰσημερίαν, οἷον ἀπάπης
A ἃ ἴω »
καὶ τοῦ κύνωπος καὶ ἣν καλοῦσί τινες βού-
an \ \ / / \
πρηστιν, τῶν de μετὰ Πλειάδα, καθάπερ καὶ κιχο-
, “ 7 fal lal
ptov καὶ σχεδὸν τῶν ἄλλων τῶν κιχοριωδῶν. Kal
\ \ > \ Ὡ aA 7 NX « ih > /
Ta μὲν εὐθὺς ἅμα TH βλαστήσει TO ἄνθος ἀφίησι,
/ €. 3 / \ Ἐν Leh, > a] /
καθάπερ ἡ ἀφία, τὰ δὲ ὕστερον ov πολλῳ, καθά-
/ lal 3 ν “Ὁ
περ ἡ ἀνεμώνη, τὰ δὲ ἅμα τῷ ἦρι καὶ ἐκκαυλεῖ
aA \ /
καὶ ἀνθεῖ, καθάπερ TO κιχόριον Kal τὰ κιχοριώδη
καὶ τῶν ἀκανθικῶν ὅσα λαχανώδη.
WO Eas al lal nm
Διαφορὰ δὲ τῶν ἀνθῶν πολλή, περὶ ἧς ἐν τοῖς
VA \ \
πρότερον εἴρηται; σχεδὸν γάρ ἐστι κοινὸν ἅπάν-
BA \ \ Ψ 2 n / \ Ν
των" ἔνια δὲ καὶ ὅλως ἀνανθῆ, καθάπερ καὶ τὸ
/ / a “ fal a \
ἐπίπετρον. συμβαίνει δὲ τοῖς ἅμα τῷ KAVA TO
a a 3 \ /
ἄνθος ἀφιεῖσι ταχεῖαν εἶναι τὴν ἀπάνθησιν: πλὴν
lal id
ἡ μὲν ἀπάπη γηράσαντος τοῦ πρώτου πάλιν
BA \ 7 7 \ n an >
ἄλλο καὶ ἀλλο παραφύει, καὶ τοῦτο ποιεῖ Trap
ἴω Ν lal
ὅλον τὸν χειμῶνα Kal TO ἔαρ ἄχρι τοῦ θέρους.
\ \ / NL Rees 7 \ \ Ἂν» >
πολὺν δὲ χρόνον καὶ ὁ ἠριγέρων. τὰ δὲ ἄλλα οὐ
an na € / Ἐ
ποιεῖ τοῦτο, καθάπερ οὐδὲ ὁ κρόκος οὔτε ὁ εὔοσ-
5 42» e Ν 0° ς > θ ὃ : x
μος οὔθ᾽ ὁ λευκὸς οὐθ᾽ ὁ ἀκανθώδης" οὗτοι δὲ
ἄοσμοι.
\ \ a a
VIII. Κοινὴ δὲ διαφορὰ πάντων τῶν ποιωδῶν
ἡ τοιάδε: τὰ μὲν γάρ ἐστιν ὀρθόκαυλα καὶ νευρό-
1 δὲ after τούτων om. W.
2 ἀπάπης (or ἀπάτης) conj. Sch.; ἀφάκης U; ἀφάκεις MAId.
cf. 7.7. 1n. Plin. l.c., however, has aphace.
3 ἐπίπετρον conj. Scal. from Plin. /.c.; ἐπίμετρον UMAIA.G.
cf. Hesych. 4 καυλῷ conj. Sch.; καρπῷ UMAId.G.


106


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. vu. 3-vur. 1


spontaneously. The growth alike of these! and of
others takes place in some cases with the first rains
after the equinox, for instance, dandelion? rib-
grass and the plant which some call buprestis ;
in other cases after the rising of the Pleiad, for
instance, chicory and most of the plants of that
class. Some produce their flower immediately at the
time of making growth, as lesser celandine, some not
long after,.as anemone, while some as soon as spring
comes send up both their stems and flower, as chicory
and the plants which resemble it, and those spinous
plants which come under the head of pot-herbs.

There is much difference in the flowers, of which
we have spoken already ; for such difference is a thing
common to all; and some are altogether flowerless,
as stonecrop.2 Those which produce their flower
with the stem? quickly shed the flower ; except that
dandelion,® when the first flower is past its prime,
produces another and yet another, and continues to
do so right through the winter and spring up to the
summer. Groundsel ὃ also blooms for a long time ;
the others however do not do this; for instance the
crocus does not, neither the scented (saffron crocus)
nor the white nor the spinous kind,’—which last are
scentless.


Of the differences in stem and leaf found in all herbaceous
plants.
VIII. A distinction which is found in all herbaceous
plants alike is the following :—some have straight
5 ἀπάπη γηρήσαντος conj. W.; ἀπηγηράσαντος U; ἀπογηρά-
σαντος MAId.; ἀφάκη ἀπογηράσαντος H. cf. Plin. l.c.; 7. 7. 1n.
ΠΡ ΘΕ 1, 22.4; Plin. 25. 106.
* See Index. This plant can only have been called κρόκος
because it produced a yellow dye.


107


THEOPHRASTUS


/

Kava, Ta δὲ ἐπιγειόκαυλα, καθάπερ μαλάχη
/ / 7 \ \ ς / »
σκάνδιξ σίκυος ἄγριος" τὸ δὲ ἡλιοτρόπιον ἔτι
“ a a 7 lal
μᾶλλον ὡς εἰπεῖν τοιοῦτον, ὥσπερ Kal ἐν τοῖς
» tn 5S / aS < 7 \
ἀκανθώδεσιν οὖσιν τρίβολος Kal ἡ κάππαρις Kal

/ \ 7
ἄλλα πλείω: καὶ γὰρ ἐκείνων ἡ διαφορὰ πλείων.
" \ / Ν᾽, εϑΆ \ a
ἔνια δὲ περιαλλόκαυλα, μὴ ἔχοντα δὲ ποῦ προσ-
/ / /
πέσωσιν ἐπιγειόκαυλα, καθάπερ ἐπετίνη καὶ ἀπα-
/ A ie al e e \ \ \ \
ρίνη καὶ ἁπλῶς WY ὁ καυλὸς λεπτὸς καὶ μαλακὸς
\ / ἃ \ / a
καὶ μακρός, δι’ ὃ καὶ φύονται ταῦτα ws ἐπὶ TO
a > by \ δ \ Ὁ Ὁ ὃ \
πᾶν ἐν ἄλλοις" κοινὴ δὴ καὶ αὕτη ἡ διαφορὰ
/ ἴω a \ rn
πάντων οὐ μόνον τῶν ποιωδῶν Kal φρυγανικῶν
3 Ν \ a a \ \ cme δ. 537
ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν θαμνωδῶν" καὶ γὰρ ἡ ἕλιξ καὶ ἔτι
a na A
μᾶλλον ἡ σμῖλαξ περιαλλοκαυλον.
la “ εν Ν / \
"Ete δὲ καὶ τῶν ποιωδῶν τὰ μὲν πολύκαυλα τὰ
ῇ \ an / \ \
δὲ μονόκαυλα' καὶ TOV μονοκαύλων τὰ μὲν ἀπα-
\ a \ \ MN /
ράβλαστα κατὰ τὸν καυλὸν τὰ δὲ παραβλαστικά,
Ν a ΄ ς \ \
καθάπερ Kal ἐν τοῖς ἡμέροις TE padavis Kai
> Δ “ > a \
ἄλλ᾽ ἄττα. πολύκαυλα δὲ ὡς ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν τὰ
Ι͂ Ν 3 ΄ \
ἐπιγειόκαυλα, μονόκαυλα δὲ Kal ὀλιγόκαυλα τὰ
> / 7 Ν 2 7 \ /
ὀρθόκαυλα. τούτων δὲ ἀπαράβλαστα τὰ λειό-
/ , \
καυλα κρόμυον πράσον σκόροδον, ὥσπερ Kal ἐν
a ς / \ \ \ ᾿θύ \ δὲ /
τοῖς ἡμέροις καὶ TA μὲν εὐθύκαυλα τὰ ὃδὲ σκολιο-
J a ς / ς v3
καύλα Kal τούτων [τοῖς ἡμέροις] ὑπάρχει.
Διαφορὰ δέ τις καὶ τοιάδε τῶν ποιωδῶν ἐστι"
/ \ > /
τὰ μὲν yap ἐπιγειόφυλλα τὰ δ᾽ ἐπικαυλόφυλλα
/ \ ὃ > / > / \
τυγχάνει TA ἀμφοτέρως. ἐπιγειοόφυλλα μὲν


1 ἐπιγειόκαυλα conj. Cornarius ; ἐπετειόκαυλα Ald H.
2 cf. 7. 15. 1; Diose, 4, 190 and 191; Plin. 22. 57.


108


-


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. vim. 1-3


_and fibrous stems, some prostrate stems,! as malakhe
(cheese-flower) wild chervil ‘ wild cucumber’ (squirting
eucumber) ; while heizotropion? has this character? to
an even greater extent, and so, among spinous plants,
_ have caltrop caper and several others; for in these
too the above-mentioned distinction is even more
marked. Some again have clasping stems, but if
they have nothing on which to throw themselves,
their stems become prostrate, as epetine bedstraw and
in general those which have a slender soft long stem ;
wherefore these in general grow in the midst of#4
other plants. This point of difference too is common
not only to all herbaceous plants and under-shrubs,
but also to shrubby ones ; for helix (ivy) has a clasping
stem, and, still more, smilax.
Again of herbaceous plants too some have several
_ stems, some only one; and of the latter some have
no side-shoots along ‘the stem, while others have
side-shoots, for instance, among cultivated plants
radish and some others. Those with prostrate stems
have generally more than one, while those with
erect stems have but one ora few. Of these those
with smooth stems have no side-shoots, as onion leek
garlic—the wild, as well as the cultivated forms ;
and of these ὅ again some have straight, some crooked
stems.
There is also the following point of difference in
herbaceous plants :—some have their leaves on the
ground, some on the stem, some have both characters.
_ The following have ground leaves—crowsfoot © the


% σοιοῦτον conj. Sch. from G Ἔ τούτων Ald.

4 ey; G seems to have read é

© Trois ἡμέροις probably caneated by mistake from above.
peo. 2, 5. 4; Plin. 22. 48; Diosc. 2. 130.


109g


THEOPHRASTUS


/ / / /
κορωνόπους ἄνθεμον ἀφύλλανθες ἄγχουσα πόα
ἀνεμώνη ἀπαργία ἀρνόγλωσσον ἀπάπη" ἐπικαυ-

/ \ na \
λόφυλλα δὲ κρηπὶς ἄνθεμον TO φυλλῶδες λωτὸς
fw : / \ ,
λευκόϊον' ἀμφοτέρως δὲ τὸ κιχόριον" καὶ γὰρ ἐπὶ
“ a a / al -
τῶν καυλῶν ἅμα ταῖς ἐκφύσεσι ταῖς ἀκρεμονικαῖς
lal 7
ἐκφύει τι καὶ ἄνθος" καὶ τῶν φυλλακάνθων ἔνια,
\ ) / ᾿ a / e /
πλὴν ἀκανθώδεσι κομιδῆ, καθάπερ ὁ σόγκος.
” Ν Ν \ x A \ \ /
IX. Ἔστι δὲ καὶ τὰ μὲν ἄκαρπα τὰ δὲ Kap-
a lal \ \ Yd na
πίμα. Kal ὅλως τῶν ποιωδῶν τὰ μὲν ἄχρι τῶν
a Ἀ \ ͵
φύλλων ἀφικνεῖται, τὰ δὲ καυλὸν ἔχει καὶ ἄνθος

Ν \ BA \ \ \ N “

καρπὸν δὲ οὔ. τὰ δὲ καὶ καρπὸν ὥσπερ τελειο-
4 2 7 \ ͵ na oS
τάτην φύσιν, εἰ μή τι καὶ ἄνευ τοῦ ἄνθους καρπο-
/ 7 \ a 4
φόρον, ὥσπερ ἐπὶ τῶν δένδρων.
7 Ν \ \ / \ /
Διαφέρει δὲ καὶ Ta φύλλα σχεδὸν οὐκ EXATTO-
\ / a Ν a J
σιν ἀλλὰ πλείοσι διαφοραῖς ἢ τὰ τῶν δένδρων"

Ν \ an 7 /

καὶ πρὸς αὐτὰ δὲ ἐκεῖνα διαφορὰς ἔχει" μεγίστην
> na ‘4 \ \ \ / /

μὲν ὡς εἰπεῖν OTL TA μὲν ἀπὸ μίσχου προσπέφυκε,
\ \ > \ \ ς ς a \ \ a

τὰ δὲ αὐτὰ μὲν ὡς ἁπλῶς, τὰ δὲ καυλικῇ τινι

/ a A

προσφύσει. καὶ τῶν μὲν ἐν TH βλαστήσει προ-
a = / a \ / \ A \
τερεῖ <O καυλὸς!» τῶν δὲ πλείστων τὰ φύλλα, καὶ
\ n lal / / /
σχεδὸν ἐν τῇ ἀρχῇ μέγιστα γίνονται Kal μάλιστα
IS OF, \ \ b a / a“
ἐδώδιμα: τὰ δὲ ἐκ τῶν δένδρων προωθεῖ τινα

/

καυλον.


1 ἀφύλλανθες placed after ἄνθεμον by Sch.; in Ald. placed
after ἀνεμώνη. cf. 7. 14.2; Plin. 21. 56.

2 ἀπάπη U; ἀπάτη Ald. cf. 7. 7. 1n.

5 ef..1,/13..4.,,and. Index:

4 ἐκφύει τι καὶ MSS.; ? ἐκφύει φύλλον τε καὶ W.


Το


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. vir. 3-1x. 1


anthemon whose flowers have no petals! (wild camo-
mile) alkanet grass anemone hawk’s beard plantain
dandelion ?; the following have leaves on the stem—
ox-tongue the anthemon which has petalled flowers 8
trefoil gilliflower; while chicory has both kinds of
leaves ; for this plant produces,* as well as leaves, a
certain number of flowers on the stems at the points
where the side-shoots are attached. Similar too are
some of the plants with spinous leaves, but not those
that are altogether spinous, as sow-thistle.


Of other differences seen in herbaceous plants in general, as
compared with one another and with trees.

IX. Again some are barren, while others bear
fruit, and, speaking generally, of herbaceous plants
some get as far as producing leaves only, others have
a stem and flower, but no fruit; some again have
fruit as the completion of their development, while
some bear fruit even though they have no flower, as
is the case with some trees.

®’The leaves of herbaceous plants again differ in
hardly fewer, nay, even in more, ways than those
of trees, and further, they present differences as
compared with these, the chief being perhaps that
some are attached by a leaf-stalk, some are attached
directly, some attached with cauline appendages.°
And in some herbaceous plants the stalk’ is the first
part to grow, but in most the leaves, which almost
at the outset grow to their largest and are best for
eating ; whereas the leaves of trees always push out
first a sort of stalk.

® Plin. 21. 100.


6 7.e. petiolate, sessile, and decurrent respectively.
7 6 καυλὸς add. Sch. from G.


IED


2


4


THEOPHRASTUS


Διαφέρουσι δὲ καὶ τοῖς ἄνθεσι πολύ" ἐν μὲν
γὰρ τοῖς δένδρεσι τά γε πλεῖστα λευκά, τὰ δὲ
μικρὸν ἐπιπορφυρίζοντα, τὰ δὲ ποώδη καὶ χλοώδη,
κεχρωσμένον δὲ ἀνθινῷ < οὐδέν" ἐν δὲ τοῖς ποιώ-
δεσι τῶν ἀνθῶν > πολλαὶ καὶ παντοδαπαὶ χροιαὶ
καὶ ἄκρατοι καὶ μεμιγμέναι καὶ εὔοσμοι δὴ καὶ
ἄοσμοί εἰσιν. καὶ τὰ μὲν δένδρα τὴν ἄνθησιν
ἀθρόαν ποιεῖται, τούτων δ᾽ ἔνια κατὰ «μέρος, ὥσ-
περ ἐλέχθη καὶ περὶ τοῦ ὠκίμου, δι’ ὃ καὶ πολὺν
χρόνον ἀνθεῖ, καθάπερ ἄλλα τε πολλὰ καὶ τὸ
ἡλιοτρόπιον καὶ τὸ κεχόριον.

Πολλαὶ δὲ καὶ τῶν ῥιζῶν διαφοραὶ καὶ τρόπον
τινὰ αἱ τούτων φανερώτεραι: εἰσὶ γὰρ αἱ μὲν
ξυλώδεις αἱ δὲ σαρκώδεις καὶ ἰνώδεις, ὥσπερ καὶ
τῶν ἡμέρων, καθάπερ αἵ τε τοῦ σίτου καὶ τῆς
πόας τῆς πλείστης. αὐτῶν δὲ τούτων ἕκασται
πλείστας ἔχουσι διαφορὰς χρώμασιν ὀσμαῖς χυ-
μοῖς μεγέθεσιν" αἱ μὲν γὰρ λευκαὶ αἱ δὲ μέλαιναι
αἱ δ᾽ ἐρυθραί, καθάπερ ἥ ἥ τε τῆς ἀγχούσης καὶ τοῦ
ἐρευθεδάνου" αἱ δ᾽ ὥσπερ ξανθαὶ καὶ ξυλοειδεῖς"
καὶ γλυκεῖαι δὲ καὶ πικραὶ καὶ δριμεῖαι καὶ
εὐώδεις καὶ κακώδεις, καὶ ἔνιαι φαρμακώδεις, ὡς
ἐν ἄλλοις εἴρηται.

Διαφοραὶ δὲ καὶ τῶν σαρκωδῶν' αἱ μὲν γὰρ
στρογγύλαι αἱ δὲ προμήκεις καὶ βαλανώδεις,
ὥσπερ ἀσφοδέλου καὶ κρόκου" καὶ αἱ μὲν λεπυ-
ριώδεις, ἃ ὥσπερ ἡ τοῦ βολβοῦ καὶ τῆς σκίλλης καὶ
ὅσαι βολβώδεις καὶ κρομύου δὲ καὶ γηθύου καὶ


et ae Ge i 1.

2 οὐδὲν. . . ἀνθῶν add. Scal. from G (κεχρωσμένων δὲ ἀνθικῷ
πολλαὶ UMAId.) ; ἀνθινῷ for ἀνθικῷ conj. W., who also added
τῶν ἀνθῶν. See LS. ἀνθινός.


112


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. 1x. 2-4


There is also much difference as to the flowers
between herbaceous plants and trees; for in trees!
most of the flowers are white, while some are slightly
reddish, others are greenish or greenish-yellow, but
none of them? have distinct gay colours; while in
herbaceous plants the flowers shew many and various
colours, both simple and in combination, and further,
some of them are scented, others not. Again 8 trees
produce all their bloom at once, while some herba-
ceous plants have a succession of flowers, as we said 5
of basil; wherefore it is in flower for a long period,
as are many other herbs, such as heliotropion and
chicory.

There are also many differences in the roots, and,
in a way, the differences in these are more obvious ;
some are woody, some fleshy and fibrous, just as in
the cultivated kinds, as are those of corn and most
kinds of grass. Again the roots themselves exhibit
in each case very many differences in colour smell
taste and size ; some are white, some black, some red,
as those of alkanet and madder ; some are yellowish,5
or the colour of wood.® Again there are roots which
are sweet, bitter, pungent, fragrant, evil-smelling ;
and some are medicinal, as has been said elsewhere.

There are also differences between those with
fleshy roots; the roots of some are round, of some
oblong and acorn-shaped, as those of asphodel and
erocus;’ some consist of several layers, as those of
purse-tassels squill and others which belong to
that class, onion long onion and others like


3 ἄοσμοι εἰσιν. καὶ τὰ μὲν conj.W.; ἄοσμοι. καὶ ἐνίων τὰ μὲν
Ald.H. oi Se ae

5 ὥσπερ MSS.; πλεῖσται conj. W.

8 ξυλοειδεῖς : cf. 7. 3. 2. Cf RV 6e}s° 6265 10;


113


WO, ΤΙ. I


THEOPHRASTUS


e ς a \ \
ὅσα τούτοις ὅμοια. αἱ δὲ ὁμαλεῖς καὶ ψαθυραὶ
ε ¢ /
καὶ μαλακαὶ dv ὅλου Kal ὥσπερ ἄφλοιοι, καθάπερ
al a /
τοῦ ἄρου' ai δὲ φλοιὸν ἔχουσι πρὸς TH σαρκί,
an / na l4
καθάπερ ἡ TOU κυκλαμίνου καὶ τῆς γογγυλίδος.
ς 3 a 3 V4
οὐχ ἅπασαι δ᾽ αἱ εὐώδεις ἢ γλυκεῖαι ἢ εὔστομοι
3 ὦ
καὶ ἐδώδιμοι, οὐδ᾽ αἱ πικραὶ ἄβρωτοι' ἀλλ᾽ ὅσαι
b) a > fal , \ \ 4
ἀβλαβεῖς εἰσι τῷ σώματι μετὰ τὴν Tpochopar:
ἔνιαι γὰρ γλυκεῖαι μὲν θανάσιμοι δὲ καὶ νοσώδεις,
ξ \ \ \ Ἃ / ει 7 ad \
αἱ δὲ πικραὶ μὲν ἢ κακώδεις ὠφέλιμοι δέ. TOV
/
αὐτὸν δὲ τρόπον Kal φύλλα Kal καυλοί, καθάπερ
κι 5 7 \ “ 7 ὃ \ δὲ
τοῦ ἀψινθίου καὶ τοῦ κενταυρίου. διαφορὰ δὲ
\ /
Kal κατὰ τὴν βλάστησιν Kal κατὰ τὴν ἄνθησιν,
a a \
οἷον ἀρχομένου χειμῶνος Kal μεσοῦντος καὶ
ΓΝ 3 \ \ a
πάλιν Hpos ἢ θέρους ἢ μετοπώρου. Kal ἐπὶ TOV
“Ὁ ς / an 4
καρπῶν δὲ ὁμοίως τῷ βρωτοὺς εἶναι καὶ ἐγχύλους
ΡΑΜΑ \ 7 \ » amt ae x 3
ἐνίοις καὶ φύλλα καὶ σπέρματα καὶ ῥίζας" καὶ ἐν
an ve \ 2 /
αὐτοῖς τούτοις κατὰ τοὺς χυλούς, οἷον ὀξύτητι
καὶ δριμύτητι καὶ γλυκύτητι καὶ αὐστηρότητι
καὶ ταῖς ἄλλαις ταῖς τοιαύταις ἁπλῶς τε καὶ
\ \ a \ \ Ss \ >
κατὰ TO μᾶλλον. τὰς μὲν οὖν διαφορὰς ἐν
τούτοις ληπτέον.
/ \ \ “
X. Διῃρημένων δὲ κατὰ τὰς ὥρας ἑκάστων
/ \ \ /
πρός τε Tas βλαστήσεις Kal κατὰ Tas ἀνθήσεις
καὶ τελειώσεις τῶν καρπῶν, οὐδὲν ἀναβλαστάνει
an 7] al a
πρὸ τῆς οἰκείας ὥρας οὔτε τῶν ῥιζοφυῶν οὔτε
κι n / \
TOV σπερμοφυῶν, ἀλλ᾽ ἕκαστον ἀναμένει τὴν


1 καὶ conj. W.; ἣ Ald.
2 τῷ βρωτοὺς εἶναι καὶ ἐγχύλους ἐνίοις conj. W.; τὸ βρωτὰ
εἶναι καὶ καυλοὺς εἶναι Ald.H, Text probably defective.


114


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. 1x. 4-x. 1


these. Some are smooth loose and soft through-
out, and, as it were, without ‘bark, as those of
cuckoo-pint, while some have a ‘bark’ attached to
the fleshy part, as those of cyclamen and turnip.
And not all those that are fragrant or sweet or
pleasant to the taste are also! edible, any more than
_ all those that are bitter are uneatable ; any (whether
sweet or bitter) that are harmless to the body after
being eaten are edible; for some that are sweet are
deadly and dangerous to health, while some are
beneficial even if they are bitter or have an evil
smell. The same may be said of the leaves and
stalks, as in the case of wormwood and centaury.
There are also differences in the time of growth and
of flowering, the season being variously the beginning
or middle of winter, or again spring, summer, or
autumn. So too is there in like manner a differ-
ence in the fruits, which? in some of these plants
are edible and juicy, as well as® the leaves seeds
and roots. And in these cases there are further
differences in the taste (of those which are edible
and juicy), which may be sharp, pungent, sweet, dry,
or exhibit other similar differences, either altogether
or in degree. These are examples of the differ-
ences which we find.


Of the seasons at which herbs grow and flower.


X. Each plant having its proper season for growth,
flowering and maturing of the fruit, nothing grows 4
before its proper season either of those grown from
a root or of those grown from seed, but each awaits


3 καὶ ῥίζας seems irrelevant.


4 ἀναβλαστάνει conj. W.; ἀναβλαστεῖ καὶ Ald. H.


115


.


THEOPHRASTUS


οἰκείαν οὐδ᾽ ὑπὸ τῶν ὑδάτων οὐδὲν πάσχον" ἔνια
γὰρ θερινὰ κομιδῆ καὶ τῇ βλαστήσει καὶ τῇ
ἀνθήσει, “καθάπερ ὅ τε σκόλυμος καὶ ὁ σίκυος
ἄγριος, ὥσπερ καὶ περὶ τῶν φρυγανικῶν ἐλέχθη
περὶ κονύζης TE Kal καππάριδος καὶ τῶν ἄχλων'
οὐδὲν γὰρ οὐδὲ ἐκείνων ἀνθεῖ καὶ βλαστάνει πρὸ
τῆς οἰκείας ὥρας. δι’ ὃ κἂν ταύτῃ δόξαιεν ἂν
διαφέρειν τῶν δένδρων. τῶν μὲν γὰρ ἅμα πως
πάντων ἢ ἐγγὺς ἡ βλάστησις, εἰ δὲ μὴ κατὰ μίαν
γε ὥραν ὡς εἰπεῖν: τούτων δὲ ἐν πολλαῖς μᾶλλον
δὲ ἐν ἁπάσαις ἡ βλάστησις καὶ ἔτι μᾶλλον ἡ
ἄνθησις, ὥστε εἴ TUS ἐθέλει κατανοεῖν σχεδὸν
συνεχὴς γίνεται καθ᾽ ὅλον ἐνιαυτὸν καὶ ἡ βλάσ-
τησις καὶ ἡ ἄνθησις" αἰεὶ γὰρ ἕτερον ἐξ ἑτέρου
διαδεχόμενον πάσας καταλαμβάνει τὰς ὥρας"
οἷον μετὰ τὴν ἀπάπην κρόκος ἔσται καὶ ἀνεμώνη
καὶ ὁ ἠριγέρων. καὶ τὰ ἄλλα χειμερινά, μετὰ δὲ
ταῦτα τὰ ἠρινὰ «καὶ θερινὰξ- καὶ μετοπωρινά.
πολλὰ δέ, ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη, διὰ τὸ κατὰ μέρος ἀνθεῖν
ἐπιτείνεται, ταῖς ὥραις" ἔνια γὰρ οὕτως ἀνθεῖ,
καθάπερ ἥ τε ἀπάπη καὶ τὸ ὀνοχειλὲς καὶ τὸ
κιχόριον καὶ τὸ ἀρνόγλωσσον καὶ ἄλλα: διὰ δὲ
τὴν συνέχειαν καὶ τὴν περικατάληψιν τὴν ὑπ᾽
ἀλλήλων οὐ φαίνεται ῥᾷδιον. ἐν ἐνίοις οὐδ᾽ ὁρίσαι
ποῖα πρῶτα βλαστάνει καὶ ποῖα ὀψιβλαστῆ"
πλὴν εἴ τις ὑποθοῖτο τοῦ ἔτους τὴν ἀρχήν τινα


1 οὐδ᾽ conj. W.; οὔθ᾽ Ald. 2 Reference not discoverable.
3 ἀπάπην conj. W.; ἀφάκην UMAId. ef. 7. 7. 1 π.
4 κρόκος conj. Sch. (adding 6); ἦρος Ὁ (corrected) ; xpos M ;
om. Ald.; τὸ κρόκον mBas.
5 καὶ θερινὰ seems to have dropped out.
6 διὰ τὸ κατὰ μέρος ἀνθεῖν conj. W.; καὶ τῶν κατὰ μέρος ἀνθέων


Ald.
116


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. x. 1-3


its proper season and is not! affected even by rain.
For some are plants which belong properly to
summer as to their growth and their flowering,
as golden thistle and squirting cucumber, as was
said? of shrubby plants and of konyza caper and
the rest; for of these too none blooms or grows
before its proper season. Wherefore in this respect
too these plants would seem to differ from trees.
For trees make their growth all at once or nearly
so, or at all events we may say that they do so
all at one season; but the plants of which we
are now speaking have their times of growing and
still more of flowering at many or rather at all
seasons ; so that, if one will consider it, both the
growing and the flowering are almost continuous
throughout the year; for one continually succeeds
to another, so that all seasons are covered; thus
after the dandelion 5 will come the crocus * anemone
groundsel and the other plants of winter, and after
these those of spring summer® and autumn. Some
again, as was said, because they do not produce all
their bloom at once,® cover a longer season; for
there are some that thus bloom, for instance
dandelion‘ bugloss ὃ chicory plantain, and others ; but
because of this continuity and overlapping it does
not seem easy in some cases to define which first
make growth and which are late in growing,—
unless? one were to lay down that the ‘year’

? ἀπάπη conj. W.; ἀφάκη Ald. cf. 7. 7. 1 n.

8 ὀνοχειλὲς conj. Sch. from Plin. 21. 100; Diose. 4. 24; dvo-
κίχλης UMAId.

9. 2,6. unless one has a fixed starting-point. τινα ὥρας twos
ἀρχῇ conj. W.; twa πρὸς τῇ ἵνα (Π() U; text defective in
MAIld., but both give ἵνα (ῇ ; W. conjectures also τροπὰς τὰς


χειμερινάς. ? εἶναι Spas τινος ἀρχήν or εἶναι Spay τινα (omitting
εἰ (7 as a trace of a lost sentence).
117


THEOPHRASTUS


, \ n lal
4 wpas τινὸς ἀρχῇ. Kal αὐτῶν δὲ τούτων Tas
/ \ “a lal
γενέσεις Kal τὰς ὥρας ὅταν τελειωθέντων τῶν
la) / 4 > \ 3. Ὁ a
καρπὼν πάλιν ἄλλας apyas ἐνίστωνται τῆς
/ “ / an / >
γενέσεως: ὅπερ μάλιστα δοκεῖ συμβαίνειν μετ
7ὔ
ἰσημερίαν μετοπωρινήν' τότε γὰρ ἤδη τὰ σπέρ-
ματα πλεῖστα τετελείωται καὶ τῶν δενδρικῶν
a e 7 ἌΓ / ᾽ a
καρπῶν οἱ πολλοί, καὶ ἅμα μεταβολή τις αὐτοῦ
be a a
τούτου προσγίνεται καὶ τῆς ὥρας" ὅσα δὲ ἀτελῆ
7
καὶ ἄπεπτα περικαταλαμβάνεται, τούτοις κατὰ
/
λόγον ἐκ περιόδου Kal ἡ βλάστησις γίνεται Kal
/ aN } 8
ἡ ἄνθησις καὶ ἡ τελείωσις" δι’ ὃ συμβαίνει τὰ
Ν ε \ \ > a \ 5. "Ὁ \ z \ \ \
μὲν ὑπὸ τροπὰς ἀνθεῖν Ta δ᾽ ὑπὸ Κύνα τὰ δὲ καὶ
μετὰ ᾿Αρκτοῦρον καὶ ἰσημερίαν μετοπωρινήν.
, \ a \ 7 ; M4 ΄
AX ταῦτα μὲν ἐοικε κοινοτέραν ἔχειν σκέψιν
> 5 δὰ > A 4 x e \ 7
εἰς ἀφορισμὸν ἀρχῆς. ὅτι δὲ αἱ διαφοραὶ πλείους
Ἃ > 3 / > / / > \ x
ἢ οὐκ ἐλάττους ἐν τούτοις φανερόν. ἐπεὶ Kal
a τ lal ΄ > \ ΝΜ, / \
ἀείφυλλα τῶν τοιούτων ἐστὶν EVLA, καθάπερ TO
We / 3, ἈΦ 5 IN,
πόλιον καὶ ἡλιοτρόπιον καὶ τὸ ἀδίαντον.
/
XI. ᾿Αφωρισμένων οὖν τούτων περὶ τὰς δια-
\ > 4 2 / \ “Ὁ / ” \
φορὰς ἐν οἷς γίνονται καὶ πῶς λεκτέον ἤδη τὰς


ὯΝ τ e / “ \ \ \
καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ἱστορίας ... ὅσα μὴ κατα τὴν


1 2,6. to fix the date of the beginning and end of the cycle
of the plant’s life.

2 αὐτοῦ τούτου : ? the plant itself. αὐτοῦ τοῦ ἔτους conj. Sch.

3 7.e. according as the seed ripened last year or this year.
In this rather obscure section I follow W.’s explanations.

4 Plin. 21. 100.


118


ee


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. x. 3—-x1. 1


begins when a certain season begins. Further in
these plants it is not easy to define} in each case
the time of first growth and the season when, the
fruits being matured, it makes a fresh start in
reproduction. This seems chiefly to occur after
the autumnal equinox; for by that time most of
the seeds are matured, like most of the. fruits of
trees: moreover a change then takes place in the
seed 2 itself as well as in the season. But in the
case of any seeds which are still immature and
unripe and so are overtaken by winter, the period
of first growth, the flowering of the new plant, and
the period of maturity are proportionally later.
Wherefore it comes to pass that some bloom at
the solstice, some at the rising of the dog-star,
and some after the rising of Arcturus and the
autumnal equinox.®

But these matters seem to require a wider in-
vestigation in order to determine when the process
begins. However it is clear from what has been
said that these plants present at least as many
differences as trees. *For some again of this class
are evergreen, as hulwort helvotropion and maiden-
hair.


Of the classes into which herbaceous plants may be divided, as
those having a spike and chicory-like plants.


XI. Having then made these explanations we must
now give a separate account of each plant, dis-
cussing the differences (in those plants in which
they occur) and saying how they arise... .ὅ
except those peculiarities which belong to the


5 Lacuna in UMAId.Cam.Bas., leaving the connexion of
the next clause obscure.


119


THEOPHRASTUS


ἰδίαν ἑκάστου φύσιν. λέγω δὲ οἷον τὰ σταχυώδη
καὶ τὰ σκανδικώδη καὶ μονοφυῆ, κἂν εἴ τι ἕτερόν
ἐστι τοιοῦτον κοινὸν ἐπὶ πάντων λαβεῖν, ὁ τῇ
αἰσθήσει γνώριμον ἢ φύλλοις ἢ ἄνθεσιν ἢ ῥίξαις
ἢ καρποῖς" ἐκ γὰρ τῶν φανερῶν ὁ μερισμὸς
ὥσπερ καὶ ἐκ τῶν ῥιζῶν.

Σταχυώδη μὲν οὖν ἐστιν ὅ τε κύνωψ' ὑπό τινῶν
καλούμενος πλείους ἔχων ἰδέας ἐν ἑαυτῷ' καὶ ὁ
ἀλωπέκουρος καὶ ὁ στελέφουρος ὑπ᾽ ἐνίων δὲ
ἀρνόγλωσσον τῶν δὲ ὄρτυξ καλούμενος" παρό-
μοιον δὲ τούτῳ τρόπον τινὰ καὶ ἡ θρυαλλίς.
ἁπλᾶ δὲ καὶ μονοειδῆ τρόπον τινὰ ταῦτα καὶ
στάχυν οὐκ ὀξὺν οὐδ᾽ ἀθερώδη ἔχοντα' ὁ ὃ
ἀλχλωπέκουρος μαλακὸν καὶ χνοωδέστερον, ὅτι καὶ
ὅμοιον ταῖς τῶν ἀλωπέκων οὐραῖς, ὅθεν καὶ
τοὔνομα μετείληφεν. ὅμοιος δὲ τούτῳ καὶ ὁ
στελέφουρος, πλὴν οὐχ ὥσπερ ἐκεῖνος ἀνθεῖ κατὰ
μέρος ἀλλὰ δι’ ὅλου τοῦ στάχυος ὥσπερ ὁ πυρός.
uP δὲ ἄνθησις ἀμφοῖν χνοώδης, καθάπερ καὶ τοῦ
σίτου: παρόμοιον δὲ τῇ ὅλῃ μορφῇ τῷ πυρῷ
πλὴν πλατυφυλλότερον. ὡσαύτως δὲ τούτοις καὶ
τὰ ἄλλα τὰ σταχυώδη λεκτέον.

Τὰ δὲ κιχοριώδη πάντα μὲν ἐπετειόφυλλα
καὶ ῥιζόφυλλα, βλαστάνει δὲ μετὰ Πλειάδα πλὴν
τῆς ἀπάπης, τοῖς δὲ καυλοῖς καὶ ταῖς ῥίζαις


12,6. spicate.

2 σκανδικώδη : 1.6. umbellate. One would expect κιχοριώδη.
to correspond with ὃ 8 ; but the three classes mentioned seem
to be merely ‘samples’ of classification: of the three only
one (τὰ σταχυώδη) is described below, and other classes are
added.

3 wovopun I conj.: 7.e. those which have a scape: cf. 2. 6. 9;
O.P. 1. 1. 8. μυόφαα U; μυοφῶα MAId.; om. G.


120


“-


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. χι. 1-3


character of individual kinds. I mean for instance
the plants which have a spike,! those which may
be classed with wild chervil,?. and those which
have a single stem,? . . . . or any other such class
in which one can find some such general charac-
teristics obvious to the senses either in leaves flowers
roots or fruits; (for the classification is to be made
by the visible parts, as well as by the roots).+

5 An example of the plants which have a spike
is the plant which some call ‘dog’s eye δ᾽ (rib-grass),
which comprises several forms; we have also ‘fox-
brush,’ stelephuros (plantain), which some call ‘ lamb’s
tongue’ and some ‘quail-plant’; and somewhat
similar to this is thryallis. ‘These are simple plants
and uniform in character, having a spike which
is not pointed nor bearded; while in ‘fox-brush’
it is soft and somewhat downy, in that it actually
resembles the brush of a fox, whence also it has
obtained its name. Similar to this is stelephuros
(plantain), except that it does not, like that plant,
flower here and there, but all up the spike like
wheat. The bloom of both is downy like that of corn,
and the plants in their general appearance resemble
wheat, but have broader leaves. Of the other
plants which have a spike a similar account may be
given.

The chicory-like plants all have annual leaves
and have root-leaves, and they begin to grow after
the Pleiad, except dandelion®; but in their stems

4 Roots being the basis of classification in xii. below.

SePlin. 21. 101:

6 κύνωψ conj. Sch.; ἀχύνωψ UAld.; Plin. 1.6. has cynops
(cf. 7. 7. 3); oculus caninus G.


7 3,6. composites. Plin. J,c.
8 ἀπάπης U; ἀπάτης MAld. cf. 7.7. 1n.; 7. 8, 3n,


T2I


THEOPHRASTUS


μεγάλας ἔχουσι διαφοράς" οἱ μὲν γὰρ τῶν ἄλλων
ἁπλούστεροι καὶ ἐλάττους, ὁ δὲ τοῦ κιχορίου
μέγας καὶ ἀποφύσεις ἔχων. πολλάς, ἔτι δὲ γλί-
σχρος καὶ δυσδιαίρετος, δι᾽ ὃ καὶ δεσμῷ χρῶνται"
παραβλαστητικὸν δὲ καὶ τῇ pity καὶ ἄχλως
pax popprtov, δὲ 0 Kal δυσώλεθρον' ὅταν γὰρ
ἐκλαχανίσωνται, πάλιν τὸ ὑπόλοιπον ἀρχὴν
λαμβάνει γενέσεως. συμβαίνει δὲ καὶ παρανθεῖν
αὐτοῦ μέρος ἄλλο καὶ ἄλλο, καὶ τοῦτο ἄχρι τοῦ
μετοπώρου, σκληροῦ δοκοῦντος εἶναι τοῦ καυλοῦ.
φέρει δὲ καὶ λοβὸν ἐν ᾧ τὸ σπέρμα περὶ τὰ ἄκρα
τῶν καυλῶν.

Ἢ δὲ ὑποχοιρὶς λειοτέρα καὶ ἡμερωτέρα τῇ
προσόψει καὶ γλυκυτέρα καὶ οὐχ ὥσπερ ἡ χόν-
δρυλλα: τὸ γὰρ ὅλον οὐκ ἐδώδιμος αὕτη καὶ
ἄβρωτος καὶ ἐν τῇ ῥίζῃ δριμὺν ὀπὸν ἔχει καὶ
πολύν.

ΓἌβρωτος δὲ καὶ πικρὰ ἡ ᾿ἀπάπη' πρωϊανθὴς
δὲ καὶ ταχὺ γηράσκει καὶ ἀποπαπποῦται, εἶτ᾽
ἄλλο φύεται πάλιν καὶ ἄλλο καὶ τοῦτο παρ᾽ ὅλον
ποιεῖ τὸν χειμῶνα καὶ τὸ ἔαρ ἄχρι τοῦ θέρους" τὸ
δ᾽ ἄνθος μηλινοειδές.

«Ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ ἡ πικρίς" καὶ γὰρ, αὕτη τῷ
ἦρι ἀνθεῖ, καὶ παραπλησία ov ὅλου τοῦ χειμῶνος
καὶ τοῦ θέρους παρανθεῖ' τῇ γεύσει δὲ πικρά, Sv
ὃ καὶ τοὔνομα εἴληφε. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐν ταύ-


ἐλάττους conj. Scal.; θάττους UMAId.

Plin. 21. 88. 3 τὸ conj. Sch.; τὴν Ald.

Meaning not obvious ; σκληροῦ is perhaps corrupt.
ὑποχοιρὶς conj. Scal.; ὑποχώρησις UMAld. cf. 7. 7. 1 n.
οὐχ ὥσπερ : an adjective has perhaps dropped out between
these words; ? πικρὰ (amare Plin. l.c.).


σι» we fe


a


I22


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. x1. 3-4


and roots they exhibit great differences; for in
some these are simpler and fewer,' but the stem
of chicory is large and has many side-shoots ; also
it is tough and hard to break, wherefore it is used
for withes?; it makes side-growths from the root,
and also has long roots, wherefore it is hard to
kill; for, when the top is taken off to use as a
vegetable, what remains? starts growing again.
Moreover different parts of it flower at different
times, and the flowering goes on till autumn, since
the stem appears to be hard.* Also it bears a pod,
which contains the seed, at the top of the stem.

Cat’s ear® is smoother and has a more cultivated
appearance, and is also sweeter and not like ®
khondrylla® ; for the latter is altogether uneatable
and ὃ unfit for food, and its root contains a quantity ot
pungent juice.

Dandelion? is also unfit for food and bitter: it
flowers early and quickly waxes old and the flower
turns to pappus; but then another flower forms, and
yet another, and this goes on right through the winter
and spring up to the summer; and the flower is
yellow.

10 The like may be said of pikris : for this plant
too blooms in spring, and like dandelion it flowers
throughout the winter, and it flowers also to some
extent in summer; in taste it is bitter, whence its
name. These are the special points of difference


7 χόνδρυλλα conj. St.; χανδρυ adda U; χανδρὺ αλλα M;
πυρὰς ἀλλὰ Ald.H.; cadryalia G (Tarv.); candralia G (Bas.

ar. ).

8 τὸ γὰρ ὅλον οὐκ ἐδώδιμος αὕτη Kal conj. W.; τὸ ὅλον οὐκ ἐδ.
αὕτη γὰρ Ald.; αὕτη γὰρ ἄβρωτος conj. Sch. from Plin, 21. 105.

9. ἀπάπη conj. W.; ἀφάκη Ald. cf. 7. 7. 1 ἡ.

"Ὁ Plin, 22. 66.


123


THEOPHRASTUS


Tals ταῖς διαφοραῖς. πειρατέον dé, ws ἐλέχθη,

\ a yA / ς /
καὶ TOV ἄλλων λαμβάνειν ὁμοίως.

ΧΙ]. Πολὺ δέ τι γένος ἐστὶ καὶ τῶν σαρκορ-
ρίξζων ἢ κεφαλορρίζων, ἃ καὶ πρὸς τὰ ἄλλα καὶ
καθ᾽ αὑτὰ τὰς διαφορὰς ἔχει ῥίζαις τε καὶ φύλ-

Ν al \ a A a na
ols καὶ καυλοῖς καὶ ταῖς ἄλλαις μορφαῖς. τῶν

Ν n
yap ῥιζῶν, ὥσπερ εἴρηται πρότερον, αἱ μὲν λεπυ-
ριώδεις αἱ δὲ σαρκώδεις, καὶ αἱ μὲν ἔχουσαι

Ν ? ΄
φλοιὸν αἱ δ᾽ ἄφλοιοι, ἔτι δὲ αἱ μὲν στρογγύλαι

ς \ / A € \ > / e >.
αἱ δὲ προμήκεις καὶ αἱ μὲν ἐδώδιμοι αἱ δ᾽ ἄβρωτοι.
26 γὃ \ οὖ 3 / \ \ \ “
ἐδώδιμοι μὲν γὰρ οὐ μόνον βολβοὶ καὶ τὰ ὅμοια
τούτοις, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἡ τοῦ ἀσφοδέλου pila καὶ ἡ
τῆς σκίλλης, πλὴν οὐ πάσης ἀλλὰ τῆς Ἐπιμενι-

/ ἃ [4]
δείου καλουμένης, ἢ ἀπὸ τῆς χρήσεως ἔχει τὴν

7
προσηγορίαν: αὕτη δὲ στενοφυλλοτέρα τε καὶ
λειοτέρα τῶν λοιπῶν ἐστιν.

> ὃ γὃ δὲ \ ς ALLY \ SHEA \ \

Εδώδιμος δὲ καὶ ἡ τοῦ ἄρου καὶ αὐτὴ Kal τὰ

» / a
φύλλα προαφεψηθέντα ἐν ὄξει καί ἐστιν ἡδεῖά
τε καὶ πρὸς τὰ ῥήγματα ἀγαθή. πρὸς δὲ τὴν

> fal vA 5 / » \
αὔξησιν αὐτῆς, ὅταν ἀποφυλλίσωσιν, ἔχει δὲ
μέγα σφόδρα τὸ φύλλον, ἀνορύξαντες στρέφουσιν,
“ Εν \ / 3 \ A i \
ὅπως av μὴ διαβλαστάνῃ ἀλλὰ πᾶσαν ἕλκῃ τὴν
\ > ς , ἃ \ ae a “A
τροφὴν εἰς ἑαυτήν, ὃ Kal ἐπὶ τῶν βολβῶν τινες


Gad, VA. σα jin. 2 Plin. 19. 93 and 94.

3 uwoppais: cf. 8. 4. 2. 4 7.9, 4.

5 The legends about Epimenides suggest that the ‘use’
was possibly in magic: ef. what is said of σκίλλα 7. 13, 4.
cf. Plin. Jc.


124


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. x1. 4-x1. 2


about these plants; now we must endeavour, as was
said,1 to set forth the special points of the other
classes in like manner.


Of herbs which have fleshy or bulbous roots.


XII. ? There is a large class of these which have
fleshy or bulbous roots : these exhibit differences both
as compared with other plants and with one another
both in roots leaves stems and their other prominent
features.? Of the roots, as has been said‘ already,
some are in layers, some fleshy, some have a ‘bark,’
some not; and again some are round, some oblong,
some edible and some not fit for food. Among
edible roots are not only purse-tassels and others
which resemble them, but also the roots of asphodel
and squill, though not of all kinds of the latter, but
only of the kind called ‘Epimenides’ squill (French
sparrow-grass) which gets its name from its use ® ;
this kind has narrower leaves and is smoother than
the others.

® The root of cuckoo-pint is also edible, and so are
the leaves, if they are first boiled down in vinegar ;
they are sweet, and are good for fractures. To
increase the root, having first stripped’ off the leaves
(and the leaf is very large), they dig® it up and
invert ® it in order that it may not shoot,!? but may
draw all the nourishment into itself. This some


€ Plin. 19. 96 ; 24. 162.

ἀποφυλλίσωσιν conj. Sch.; ἀποφυλάσσωσιν U; ἀποφυλλάσ-
σωσιν MAId.

8 ἀνορύξαντες conj. St.; ὃ ἀνορύξαντες Ald.

Pe ΠΣ Plin:'T9. 2 and 97, who seems to have read
κατορύξαντες : soalsoG. 7“ Rey plunge it in a pit.’

10 διαβλαστάνῃ : cf. C.P. 4.


125


2


THEOPHRASTUS


ποιοῦσι συντιθέντες" ἡ δὲ τοῦ δρακοντίου, καλοῦσι
γάρ τι δρακόντιον ἄρον διὰ τὸ τὸν καυλὸν ἔχειν
τινὰ ποικιλίαν, ἄβρωτος καὶ φαρμακώδης.

᾿Αλλὰ ἡ τοῦ φασγάνου καλουμένου γλυκεῖά τε
ἑψηθεῖσα, καὶ τριφθεῖσα μιγνυμένη τῷ ἀλεύρῳ
ποιεῖ τὸν ἄρτον γλυκὺν καὶ ἀσινῆ" στρογγύλη δέ
ἐστι καὶ ἄφλοιος καὶ ἀποφύσεις ἔχουσα μικράς,
ὥσπερ τὸ γήθυον' πολλὰς δὲ εὑρίσκουσιν ἐν ταῖς
σκαλοπιαῖς" χαίρει γὰρ καὶ συλλέγει τὸ ζῶον.

Ἢ &€ Tov θησείου τῇ μὲν γεύσει πικρά, τρι-
βομένη δὲ κοιλίαν ὑποκαθαίρει. φαρμακώδεις δέ
τινές εἰσι καὶ ἕτεραι, πολλῶν δὲ οὔτε φαρμακώ-
dets οὔτε ἐδώδιμοι. καὶ αὗται μὲν ἐν ταῖς ῥίζαις
αἱ διαφοραί.

XI. Kara δὲ τὰ φύλλα τοῖς τε μεγέθεσιν
καὶ τοῖς σχήμασιν. ὁ μὲν ἀσφόδελος μακρὸν καὶ
στενότερον καὶ ὑπόγλισχρον ἔχει τὸ φύλλον, ἡ δὲ
σκίλλα πλατὺ καὶ εὐδιαίρετον, τὸ δὲ φάσγανον
ὑπό τινων δὲ καλούμενον ξίφος ξιφοειδές, ὅθεν
ἔσχε καὶ τοὔνομα, ἡ δὲ ipis καλαμωδέστερον" τὸ
δὲ τοῦ ἄρου πρὸς τῇ πλατύτητι καὶ ἔγκοιλον καὶ
σικυῶδές ἐστιν: ὁ δὲ νάρκισσος στενὸν καὶ πολὺ
καὶ λυπαρόν' βολβὸς δὲ καὶ τὰ βοχβώδη παντε-
λῶς στενὰ καὶ τοῦ κρόκου. δ᾽ ἔτι _OTEVOTEPOV.

Καυλὸν δὲ τὰ μὲν οὐκ ἔχει τὸ ὅλον οὐδ᾽ ἄνθος,
ὥσπερ τὸ ἄρον τὸ ἐδώδιμον" τὰ δὲ τὸν τοῦ
ἄνθους μόνον, ὥσπερ ὁ νάρκισσος καὶ ὁ κρόκος"
ἔνια δὲ ἐ ἔχει, καθάπερ ἡ ἡ σκίλλα καὶ ὁ βολβὸς καὶ
ἡ ἶρις καὶ τὸ ξίφιον" μέγιστον δὲ πάντων acdo-

1 συντιθέντες : sense doubtful. Sch. and W. mark the word


as corrupt.
2 cf. 9. 20. 3; Plin. 24. 142; Diose, 2, 166.


126


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. xi. 2--ΧΠ]. 2


do also with purse-tassels, when they lay them by.*
2 However the root of edder-wort (for a kind of
euckoo-pint is so called because of its variegated stem)
is not good for food, but is used for drugs.

But the root of the plant called corn-flag is sweet,
and, if cooked and pounded up and mixed with the
flour, makes the bread sweet and wholesome. It is
round and without ‘bark, and has small offsets like
the long onion. Many of them are found in moles’
runs 9: for this animal likes them and collects them.

4The root of theseion is bitter to the taste, but
when pounded purges the bowels. There are also
certain others of these roots which have medicinal
properties, but of many the roots are neither
medicinal nor edible. Such are the differences in
the roots.

XIII. ° In the leaves the differences are in size and
shape. Asphodel has a long leaf, which is somewhat
narrow and tough, while that of squill is broad and
tears easily; corn-flag, which is called by some
awphos (‘sword’), has a sword-like leaf, whence its
name, and iris one more like areed. That of cuckoo-
pint, in addition to being broad, is concave and like
that of cucumber; that of the narcissus is narrow
substantial and glossy, those of purse-tassels and
plants of that character are quite narrow, and that of
crocus narrower still.

6 Some have not a stem at all, nor a flower, as the
edible cuckoo-pint ; some have only the flower-stem,
as narcissus and crocus; some however have a stem,
as squill purse-tassels iris and corn-flag ; but asphodel


3 παρὰ ταῖς σκαλοπιαῖς conj. Sch.; ἐν ταῖς ox. conj. W.; ταῖς
σκολοπίαις UMAId. 4 Plin, 22. 66. > Plin. 21. 108.
6 Plin, 21. 108 and 109.


Ἐ27


THEOPHRASTUS


δελος" ὁ γὰρ ἀνθέρικος μέγιστος' ὁ δὲ τῆς ἴριδος
ἐλάττων μὲν σκληρότερος δὲ τὸ δὲ ὅλον ἀνθερι-
κώδης. ἔστι δὲ καὶ πολύκαρπος ὁ ἀσφόδελος, καὶ
ὁ καρπὸς αὐτοῦ ξυλώδης τῇ μὲν μορφῇ τρίγωνος
τῷ δὲ χρώματι μέλας" γίνεται δὲ ἐν τῷ στρογ-
γύλῳ τῷ ὑποκάτω τοῦ ἄνθους, ἐκπίπτει δὲ τοῦ
θέρους, ὅ ὅταν τοῦτο διαχάνῃ. τὴν ἄνθησιν ποιεῖται
κατὰ μέρος, ὥσπερ καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς “σκίλλης, ἄρχεται
δὲ πρῶτον ἀπὸ τῶν κάτωθεν. ἐν δὲ τῷ ἀνθερίκῳ
συνίσταται σκώληξ, ὃς εἰς ἄλλο μεταβάλλει COov
ἀνθρηνοειδές, εἶθ᾽ ὅταν ὁ ἀνθέρικος αὐανθῇ διεσ-
θίον ἐκπέταται. δοκεῖ δὲ ἴδιον ἔχειν πρὸς τὰ
ἄλλα τὰ λειόκαυλα, διότι στενὸς ὧν ἀποφύσεις
ἄνωθεν ἔχει. πολλὰ δὲ εἰς τροφὴν παρέχεται
χρήσιμα' καὶ γὰρ ὁ ἀνθέρικος ἐδώδιμος στα-
θευόμενος καὶ τὸ σπέρμα φρυγόμενον καὶ πάντων
δὲ μάλιστα ἡ ῥίξα κοπτομένη μετὰ σύκου καὶ
πλείστην ὄνησιν ἔχει καθ᾽ ᾿Ησίοδον.

Ἅπαντα μὲν οὖν φιλόξζωα τὰ κεφαλόρριξα
μάλιστα δ᾽ ἡ σκίλλα' καὶ γὰρ κρεμαννυμένη ζῇ
καὶ πλεῖστόν γε χρόνον διαμένει" δύναται δὲ καὶ
τὰ θησαυριζόμενα σώζειν, ὥσπερ τὴν ῥόαν ἐμπήγ-
νυμένου τοῦ μίσχου, καὶ τῶν φυτευομένων δ᾽ ἔνια
βλαστάνει θᾶττον ἐν αὐτῇ" λέγεται δὲ καὶ πρὸ
τῶν θυρῶν τῆς εἰσόδου φυτευθεῖσαν ἀλεξητήριον
εἶναι τῆς ἐπιφερομένης δηλήσεως. πάντα δὲ
ταῦτα ἀθρόα φύεται, καθάπερ καὶ τὰ κρόμυα
καὶ τὰ σκόροδα' παραβλαστάνουσι γὰρ ἀπὸ τῆς


1. ἐκπίπτει conj. W.; ἐκπίπτων Ald.
2 ἄνθησιν conj. Scal.; &vavow corr. to αὔανσιν U; ἄναυσιν M ;
avavow Ald.; floret per partes G.


128


»"


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. χπὶ. 2-4


has the tallest of all—for the antherikos (asphodel-
stalk) is very tall: that of iris is smaller, but tougher,
though in general it is like the asphodel-stalk.
Asphodel also produces much fruit, and its fruit is
woody : in shape it is triangular and in colour black ;
it is found in the round vessel which is below the
flower, and it falls out! in summer when this splits
open. It does not produce all its flowers ? at once ;
in which respect it resembles squill, but the flowering
begins at the bottom. Inthe stalk of asphodel forms
a grub which changes into another creature like a
hornet, and then, when the stem withers, eats its
way out and flies away. A peculiarity of the plant
as compared with others which have a smooth stem
appears to be that, though it is slender, it has
- outgrowths at the top. It provides many things
useful for food: the stalk is edible when fried, the
seed when roasted, and above all the root ® when
cut up with figs ; in fact, as Hesiod says,* the plant is
extremely profitable.

Now all bulbous plants are tenacious of life, but
especially squill; for this even lives when hung up
and continues to do so for a very long time ; it is even
able to keep other things that are stored, for instance
the. pomegranate, if the stalk of the fruit is set in it ;
and some cuttings ° strike more quickly if set in it;
and it is said that, if planted before the entrance
door of a house, it wards off mischief ® which threatens
it. All these bulbs grow in masses, as do onions and
garlic; for they make offsets from the root, and some


ited. 9.4: 9.9. 6.
4 Hes. Op. 41.
peepee os C.F. 5.6: 10.
ὁ Se. witchcraft. veneficiorum noxam Plin. 21, 108.
129
VOL. II, K


THEOPHRASTUS


ῥίζης" ἔνια δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ σπέρματος Pavepas,
οἷον ὅ τε ἀνθέρικος καὶ τὸ λείριον καὶ τὸ φάσγα-
νον καὶ ὁ βολβός.

“ANN ἴδιον τοῦτο τοῦ βολβοῦ “λέγεται, τὸ μὴ
ἀπὸ πάντων βλαστάνειν. ἅμα τῶν σπερμάτων,
ἀλλὰ τοῦ μὲν αὐτοετὲς τοῦ δ᾽ εἰς νέωτα, καθάπερ
τὸν αἰγίλωπά φασι καὶ τὸν λωτόν. τοῦτο μὲν
οὖν εἴπερ ἀληθὲς κοινὸν ἑτέρων. κοινὸν δὲ ἴσως
καὶ τὸ μέλλον λέγεσθαι, πλὴν οὐ πολλῶν, θαυ-
μαστὸν δὲ ἐπὶ πάντων, ὅπερ ἐπί τε κι» σκίλλης
καὶ τοῦ ναρκίσσου συμβαίνει" τῶν μὲν γὰρ ἄλλων
καὶ τῶν ἐξ ἀρχῆς φυτευομένων καὶ τῶν βλασ-
τανόντων καθ᾽ ὥραν ἔτους τὸ φύλλον ἀνατέλλει
πρῶτον, εἶθ᾽ ὕστερον ὁ καυλός: ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων ὁ
καυλὸς πρότερον.

Τοῦ ναρκίσσου δὲ ὁ τοῦ ἄνθους μόνον εὐθὺ
προωθῶν τὸ ἄνθος" τῆς δὲ σκίλλης καθ᾽ αὑτόν,
εἰς ὕστερον ἐπὶ τούτῳ τὸ ἄνθος ἀνίσχον προσ-
καθήμενον" ποιεῖται δὲ τὰς ἀνθήσεις τρεῖς, ὧν ἡ
μὲν πρώτη δοκεῖ "σημαίνειν τὸν πρῶτον ἄροτον, ἢ
δὲ δευτέρα | τὸν μέσον, ἡ δὲ τρίτη τὸν ἔσχατον" ὡς
γὰρ ἂν αὗται γένωνται καὶ οἱ ἄροτοι σχεδὸν
οὕτως ἐκβαίνουσιν' ὅταν δὲ οὗτος ἀπογηράσῃ,
τότε ἡ τῶν φύλλων βλάστησις πολλαῖς ἡμέραις
ὕστερον" ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ ναρκίσσου,
πλὴν οὔτε καυλὸν ἕτερον ἔχει παρὰ τὸν τοῦ av-
θους, ὥσπερ εἴπομεν, οὔτε καρπὸν φανερόν, ἀλλ᾽


1 αἰγίλωπα conj. Sch. from Plin. 21. 108 ; γίλωπα UMAId.

2 εὐθὺ προωθῶν conj. W.; εὐθυπρόωρον Ald.H. cf. Plin. 21.
66, where however the statement is transferred to the
crocus.


130


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. xr. 4-6


plainly are also increased by seed, as the asphodel
polyanthus narcissus corn-flag and purse-tassels.

However it is said to be a peculiarity of purse-
tassels that all the seeds do not germinate at once,
but some in the same year, some the next year; a
like account is given of aigilops! and trefoil. If then
this is true, it is not peculiar to this plant. Nor
perhaps is the following characteristic, which is not
found in many plants and is marvellous wherever it
does occur—and it is found in squill and narcissus :
namely that, whereas in most plants, whether those
originally planted or those which are produced from
them in season, the leaf comes up first and then
presently the stem, in these plants the stem comes
up first.

In the case of narcissus it is only the flower-stem
which comes up, and it immediately pushes up ? the
flower. But in squill it is the stem? proper which
thus appears, and presently the flower appears
emerging* from and sitting on it. And it makes
three flowerings,® of which the first appears to mark
the first seed-time, the second the middle one, and
the third the last one; for, according as_ these
flowerings have occurred,® so the crops usually turn
out. But, when the flower-stem’ has waxed old,
then the growth of the leaves follows many days
later. So also is it with narcissus, except that it
has no second stem besides the flower-stem, as we
said, nor any visible fruit; but the flower itself


3 4.e, the whole ‘ bud.’

1 ἀνίσχον Ald.; ἀνίσχων conj. Sch. followed by W.

© Plin. (cig ief5 18. 237.

6 7.e, the flowering is the sign when to sow. The same is
said of the fruiting of oxivos de signs δῦ.

7 οὗτος conj. Sch.; οὕτως Ald.


121
κ᾿


THEOPHRASTUS


> ἣν \ 7 7 n an 7 \
αὐτὸ τὸ ἄνθος ἅμα τῷ καυλῷ καταφθίνει καὶ
“ > a / \ / > /
ὅταν αὐανθῇ τότε TA φύλλα ἀνατελλει.
\ a

Πρὸς μὲν οὖν τὰ ἄλλα τὰ συνάμφω ταῦτα ἴδια"

πρὸς δὲ τὰ προανθοῦντα τῶν φύλλων καὶ τῶν
a ¢ a a /
καυλῶν, ὅπερ δοκεῖ ποιεῖν TO τίφυον καὶ ἕτερα
cov ἀνθικῶν, ἔτι τε τῶν δένδρων ἡ ἀμυγδαλῆ
μάλιστα ἢ μόνον, ὅτι ταῦτα μὲν ἅμα τῷ ἄνθει
7 \ / Ἃ ὑθὺ / ec \

προφαίνει τὸ φύλλον ἢ EVOUS KATOTLV, ὥστε καὶ
διαζητεῖσθαι περί τινων, ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων οἷον ἀφ᾽
ε a “4 n n
ἑτέρας ἀρχῆς φαίνεται καὶ διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῶν
ἡμερῶν καὶ διὰ τὸ μὴ πρότερον βλαστάνειν πρὶν
τοῦ μὲν τὸ ἄνθος τοῦ δὲ καὶ ὁ καυλὸς ὅλος ἀπο-
γηράσῃ. ἡ δὲ βλάστησις προτέρα μὲν τῆς σκίλ-
Ans, ὑστέρα δὲ τοῦ ναρκίσσου' πολὺ δὲ πλέον τὸ

J Ξε > 7ὔ | a © £F ’ \ os
φύλλον οὗτος ἀφίησι, καὶ ἐστιν ἢ ῥίζα αὐτὴ μικρα
καὶ οὐ μεγάλη, προσεμφερὴς δὲ κατὰ τὸ σχῆμα

an a Ν Α “
τῷ βολβῷ, πλὴν «οὐ; λεπυριώδης. ταῦτα μὲν
οὗν ἔχει σκέψιν.

a a /

Τῶν δὲ βολβῶν ὅτι πλείω γένη φανερόν, καὶ

\ nq J \ a I \ - /
yap τῷ μεγέθει καὶ TH χροῳ καὶ τοῖς σχήμασι
διαφέρουσι καὶ τοῖς χυλοῖς" ἐνιαχοῦ γὰρ οὕτω
γλυκεῖς ὥστε καὶ ὠμοὺς ἐσθίεσθαι, καθάπερ ἐν
Χερρονήσῳ τῇ Ταυρικῇ. μεγίστη δὲ καὶ ἰδιωτάτη

a / ἴω
διαφορὰ τῶν ἐριοφόρων'" ἔστι γάρ τι γένος τοιοῦ-
τον, ὃ φύεται μὲν ἐν αἰγιαλοῖς ἔχει δὲ τὸ ἔριον
n \

ὑπὸ τοὺς πρώτους χιτῶνας, ὥστε ava μέσον εἶναι


σιν Πρ


1 sipvov Ald., of. C.P. 1. 10. 5; τ᾽ ἴφυον conj. W.; tphyum
GBas.Par. cf. 6. 6. 11. 2 ἢ add. Sch.

8 ἐπὶ conj. H.; περὶ UMAId. 4 W. adds ἂν.

5 αὐτὴ : se. apart from offsets.

6 μικρὰ conj. Sch. ; οὐ μικρὰ Ald.


132


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. xu. 6-8


perishes with the stem, and when it has withered,
then the plant puts up its leaves.

These two plants then, as compared with the
other bulbous plants are peculiar; and, as compared
with those which bloom before the leaves and stems
appear (as the autumn squill! seems to do, and other
plants with conspicuous flowers, as well as, among
trees, the almond especially, if not alone), there is
the distinction that, while these two put forth their
leaves along with the flowers or? immediately after-
wards (so that about some the matter is uncertain)
in? the case of these two the flower appears, as it
were, from a different starting-point, there being a
considerable number of days in between, and the
growth of the leaves not beginning till, in the case
of one of them, the flower, and in the case of the
other, the whole stem has withered. Squill produces
its leaves before the flower, narcissus afterwards ;
but the latter produces much more abundant foliage,
and the individual ὅ root is small ® rather than large,
resembling purse-tassels in shape, except that it is
not formed of scales.’ About these matters then
there is doubt.

Of purse-tassels it is plain that there are several
kinds; for they differ in size colour shape and
taste. ®In some places they are so sweet as to be
eaten raw, as in the Tauric Chersonese. But the
greatest and most distinct difference is shown by the
‘ wool-bearing®’ purse-tassels; for there is such a
kind, and it grows on?! the sea-shore, and has the
wool beneath the outer tunic, so that it is between

7 ov λεπυριώδης conj. Sch. from G, non squamata; οὐδὲ
πυρώδη UMAId.; οὐ λεπυρώδης H.

8 Plin. 19. 95; Athen. 2. 64.

® Plin. 19. 32. See Index. 10 ἐν after μὲν add. W.


2,


ΤΗΕΟΡΗΒΑΞΤΌΒ.


la) ’ / > Ν \ a se e /
τοῦ TE ἐδωδίμου τοῦ ἐντὸς καὶ TOD ἔξω: ὑφαίνεται
δὲ ἐξ αὐτοῦ καὶ πόδεια καὶ ἄλλα ἱμάτια: δι’ ὃ
καὶ ἐριῶδες τοῦτο καὶ οὐχ ὥσπερ τὸ ἐν ᾿Ινδοῖς
τριχῶδες.
/ ἴω
Πλείω δὲ καὶ τὰ βολβώδη καὶ ἐλάττω. ταῦτα
dé... καθάπερ τὸ λευκόϊον καὶ βολβίνη καὶ
ὀπιτίων καὶ KViE καὶ τρόπον τινὰ τὸ σισυρίγχιον.
, \ a Ὁ / a ἘΠῚ
βολβώδη δὲ ταῦτα ὅτι στρογγύλα ταῖς ῥίζαις"
ἐπεὶ τοῖς γε χρώμασι λευκὰ καὶ οὐ λεπυριώδη.
v7 \ a , \ fel «͵ > /
ἴδιον δὲ τοῦ σισυριγχίου TO τῆς ῥίζης αὐξάνεσθαι
τὸ κάτω πρῶτον, ὃ καλοῦσι. .. χειμῶνα, τοῦ δ᾽
i / a a
pos ὑποφαίνοντος τοῦτο μὲν ταπεινοῦσθαι TO δ᾽
v \ 2 , > / \ \ \
ἄνω τὸ ἐδώδιμον αὐξάνεσθαι. καὶ τὰ μὲν
τοιαύτας ἔχει τὰς διαφοράς.
XIV. Ἴδια δὲ καὶ ταῦτα ἐν τοῖς ποιώδεσιν,
Ξ- , 5.ἐπν wars / a 2O\ \
οἷον τό [τε] ἐπὶ τοῦ ἀδιάντου συμβαῖνον" οὐδὲ yap
C / Ἂν ΄ / 50.» 2 / /
ὑγραίνεται TO φύλλον βρεχόμενον οὐδ᾽ ἐπίδροσόν
\ /
ἐστι διὰ TO μὴ τὴν νοτίαν ἐπιμένειν, ὅθεν Kal ἡ
προσηγορία. γένη δὲ αὐτοῦ δύο, τὸ μὲν λευκὸν
Ἂ Ν / / > > / x y”
TO δὲ μέλαν, χρήσιμα δ᾽ ἀμφότερα πρὸς ἔκρυσιν
an n > > if / / a»
κεφαλῆς τριχῶν ἐν ἐλαίῳ τριβόμενα. φύεται δὲ


1 δι᾽ ὃ καὶ ép. τοῦτο : text probably defective. ? δι ὃ καὶ
-- χρησιμὸν To> ἐριῶδες τοῦτο : ‘ wherefore this woolly kind is
serviceable, which the Indian hairy kind is not.’

2 Plin, 19. 95.

3 καὶ ἐλάττω: ταῦτα δὲ : text corrupt and defective.

4 ὀπιτίων H.; 6 πιτίων Ald.; pithyon Plin. l.c. ; ὀπιτίων and
κὐϊξ were possibly earth-nuts.

5 ye conj. Sch ; τε Ald


134


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. xm. 8—x1v. 1


the edible inside and the outside: of it are woven
felt shoes and other articles of apparel. Wherefore !
this kind is woolly and distinct from the Indian kind,
which is hairy.

2 There are also several kinds of plants of the same
class as purse-tassels . . . .2 such as snowdrop star-
flower opilion * kyix, and to a certain extent Barbary
nut. These belong to this class only in having round
roots ; for in colour ὅ they are white, and the bulbs
are not formed of scales. A peculiarity of Barbary
nut is that the lower end of the root grows first, and
this is called . . . .; it grows® during winter, but,
when spring appears, it decreases, while the upper
part, which is edible, grows. Such are the differ-
ences in these plants.


Of certain properties and habits peculiar to certain herbaceous
plants.


XIV. There are also the following peculiarities in
herbaceous plants, for instance that’ which we find
in ‘ wet-proof’ (maidenhair) ; the leaf does not even
get wet when it is watered, nor does it catch the
dew,°? because the dew does ποὺ] rest on it; whence its
name. !! There are two kinds, the white ‘ wet-proof’
(English maidenhair), and the black (maidenhair) ;
and both are useful to prevent the falling off of
the hair of the head, for which purpose they are
pounded up and mixed with olive-oil. They grow


§ ‘Grows’ supplied from G and Plin. /.c., who have no
trace of ὃ καλοῦσι.

7 T have bracketed τε. 8 Plin. 22. 62-65.

9 ἐπίδροσον conj. W.; ἐπίδηλον UP,MAId.; nec quicquam
adhaesisse humoris constat G.

10 μὴ before τὴν add. W.

ΕΠ 27.159 :, 20, 132,


£35


THEOPHRASTUS


\ \ “ὃ / e δὲ » /
μαλιστα πρὸς Ta VOPHAA. WS OE OLOVTAL τινες,
\ / \ \ “-“
καὶ πρὸς στραγγουρίαν τὸ τριχομανὲς ποιεῖ" ἔχει
\ ° a / A
δὲ τὸν καυλὸν ὅμοιον TO ἀδιάντῳ TO μέλανι,
/ \ \ / \ \ \ /
φύλλα δὲ μικρὰ σφόδρα καὶ πυκνὰ Kal πεφυκότα
\ / ἘΠ Ν
καταντικρὺ ἀλλήλων, ῥίζα δὲ οὐχ ὕπεστι": χωρία
δὲ φιλεῖ σκιερά.
“Ὁ \ \ / >’ / Μ Ν Ν Ν
Τῶν δὲ κατὰ μέρος ἀνθούντων ἴδιον τὸ περὶ τὸ
if a \ ἡ 3.
ἄνθεμον, OTL τῶν μὲν ἄλλων πάντων τὰ κάτω
a a / \ \ : >
πρῶτον ἀπανθεῖ τούτου δὲ Ta ἄνω" τυγχάνει ὃ
n \ \ 4 \ \ / \ rn
αὐτοῦ TO μὲν κύκλῳ TO λευκὸν ἄνθος TO δὲ ἐν TO
/ \ / ἃ /
μέσῳ TO χλωρόν' καὶ καρπὸς ὃς ἐκπίπτει, καθά-
A \ /
περ τοῖς ἀκανθώδεσι, καταλιπὼν THY πρόσφυσιν
>] an
κενήν" εἴδη δ᾽ αὐτοῦ πλείω.
” ὃ δὲ \ \ \ \ > / ἃ \ a
Idtov δὲ καὶ TO περὶ τὴν ἀπαρίνην, ἣ Kal TOV
\ \ va
ἱματίων ἀντέχεται OLA τὴν τραχύτητα καί ἐστι
7 / \ / n cal
δυσαφαίρετον: ἐν τούτῳ γὰρ ἐγγίνεται TO τραχεῖ
VA wX n .} nr
τὸ ἄνθος ov προϊὸν οὐδὲ ἐκφαῖνον ἀλλ᾽ ἐν ἑαυτῷ
/ na 7 /
πεττόμενον καὶ OTTEPMOYOVOUV: ὥστε παρόμοιον
\ al 4 “ ἴω \
εἶναι TO συμβαῖνον ὥσπερ ἐπὶ τῶν γαλεῶν Kal
ῥινῶν: ἐκεῖνά τε γὰρ ἐν ἑαυτοῖς ὠοτοκήσαντα
i cay \ AN ἊΝ ¢ A 7
ζωογονεῖ, καὶ αὕτη τὸ ἄνθος ἐν ἑαυτῇ κατέχουσα
Υ͂ an
καὶ πέττουσα καρποτοκεῖ.
7 \ / >
XV. Ὅσα δὲ τὰς ἀνθήσεις λαμβάνουσι ἀκο-
“ lal ͵ \ /
λουθοῦντα τοῖς ἄστροις, οἷον TO ἡλιοτρόπιον
\ ς / 7 \ an
καλούμενον καὶ ὁ σκόλυμος, ἅμα yap ταῖς τρο-
an - / \
mais καὶ οὗτος, ἔτι δὲ TO χελιδόνιον, Kal γὰρ
“Ὁ Ψ an / > a a \ /
τοῦτο ἅμα τῷ χελιδονίᾳ ἀνθεῖ, ταῦτα δὲ δόξειεν
A \ \ as Ψ' a \
ἂν τῇ μὲν φυσικὴν ἔχειν τὴν αἰτίαν τῇ δὲ
συμπτωματικήν.


1 2,6. the white kind. Sch. followed by G adds τὸ καὶ
τριχομανὲς καλούμενον after Td μὲν λευκὸν above.


136


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. xiv. 1-xv. 1


especially in damp places. Some think that
trtkhomanes } (English maidenhair) is also useful in
_cases of strangury. Its stem is like that of the black
kind, but it has small leaves, which are close set and
grow in opposite pairs ; there is no root below, and
the plant loves shady places.

Of those plants which do not flower all at once
anthemon has the peculiarity that, while in all others 3
the lower part flowers first, in this plant it is the
upper part which does so; the outer circle of the
flower is white,? and the centre green‘; and the
fruit falls off, as in spinous plants, leaving the attach-
ment bare. There are several forms of it.

5 Bedstraw has the peculiarity that it sticks to
clothes owing to its roughness, and it is hard to pull
away ; indeed it is in this rough part that the flower is
contained : it does not project nor show, but matures
within itself and produces seed ; so that its habit is
like that of weasels and sharks ; for, as these animals ©
likewise produce eggs in themselves and then bear
their young alive, so this plant keeps its flower
within itself, matures it and produces fruit.

XV. 7 As to these plants whose flowering time is
dependent on the heavenly bodies,’ as the plant
called heliotropion, golden thistle (for this also blooms
at the solstice), and also ‘swallow-plant’ (greater
celandine)—for this blooms when the ὃ Swallow-wind
blows—the reason in these cases would seem to be
partly in their nature and partly accidental.


2 ὕδιον after πάντων om. W. after Sch.


3 τὸ λευκὸν : ἢ λευκὸν τὸ, 4 20m. τὸ before χλωρόν.
§ Plin. 21. 104. we. arioe. ΠΤ Ὁ:
* Athen. 15. 32. 8 ἄστροις conj. St.3 ἀγρίοις Ald.


® +@ conj. Sch.; TH MAld. cf. Plin. 2, 122.
137


2


THEOPHRASTUS


Πολλὰ δὲ τοιαῦτά ἐστι καὶ ἐν ἑτέροις ἴδια:
οἷον καὶ ἡ τοῦ ἀειζώου φύσις τὸ διαμένειν ὑγρὸν
ἀεὶ καὶ χλωρόν, φύλλον σαρκῶδες ἔχον καὶ λεῖον
καὶ πρόμηκες. φύεται δὲ ἔν τε τοῖς ἁλιπέδοις
τοῖς τε ἐπὶ τῶν τειχῶν ἀνδήροις καὶ οὐχ ἥκιστα
ἐπὶ τῶν κεράμων, ὅταν ἐπιγένηται γῆς τις ἀμμώ-
δης συρροή.

Πολλὰ δ᾽ ἄν τις ἴσως λάβοι καὶ ἕτερα περιττά.
χρὴ δέ, ὥσπερ πολλάκις εἴρηται, τὰς ἰδιότητας
θεωρεῖν καὶ τὰς διαφορὰς πρὸς τὰ ἄλλα. τὰ μὲν
ἐν πλείοσιν ἰδέαις ἐστὶ καὶ σχεδὸν οἷον ὁμωνύμοις,
ὥσπερ ὁ λωτός: τούτου γὰρ εἴδη πολλὰ διαφέ-
ροντα καὶ φύλλοις καὶ καυλοῖς καὶ ἄνθεσι καὶ
καρποῖς, ἐν οἷς καὶ ὁ μελίλωτος καλούμενος" καὶ
δυνάμει δὲ τῇ κατὰ τὴν προσφοράν, ἐ ἔτι τε τῷ μὴ
τοὺς αὐτοὺς τόπους ζητεῖν. ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ ἕτερα
πλείω.

Τὰ δὲ ἐν ἐλάττοσιν, ὥσπερ ὁ στρύχνος ὁμωνυ-
μίᾳ τινὶ παντελῶς εἰλημμένος" ὁ μὲν γὰρ ἐδώδιμος
καὶ ὥσπερ ἥμερον, “καρπὸν ἔχων ῥαγώδη, ἕτεροι
δὲ δύο εἰσίν, ὧν ὁ μὲν ὕπνον ὁ δὲ μανίαν ἐμποιεῖν
δύναται, πλείων δ᾽ ἔτι δοθεὶς καὶ κτείνει. ὁμοίως
δὲ τοῦτο καὶ ἐφ᾽ ἑτέρων ἐστὶ λαβεῖν, ἃ πολλὴν
ἔχει διάστασιν. περὶ μὲν οὖν τῶν ἄλλων τῶν
ποιωδῶν ἱκανῶς εἴρηται. περὶ δὲ τοῦ σίτου
καὶ τῶν σιτωδῶν μετὰ ταῦτα λεκτέον: τοῦτο γὰρ
ETL κατάλοιπον ἦν.


1 οἷον conj. W.; διὸ Ald.
2 ἁλιπέδοις Conj. Sch,; ἀληπέδοις U; ἁληπέδοις M; ἀλοπέδοις
Ald. cf. Xen, Hell. 2. 4. 30.
3 re after τοῖς add. W. after Lobeck.
4 e.g. λωτός and μελίλωτος. See Index, λωτός.
> μελίλωτος conj. Bod.; μελίας σῖτος Ald,


138


i a


a “Ὁ ὉὉΨΌΝ


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VII. xv. 2-4


Such peculiarities are common in other plants also ;
thus! it is the nature of the house-leek to remain
always moist and green, its leaf being fleshy smooth
and oblong. It grows on flat shores,? on the® earthy
tops of walls, and especially on tiled roofs, when
there is on them a sandy accumulation of earth.

Possibly one might mention many other eccen-
tricities. But, as has been repeatedly said, we must
only observe the peculiarities and differences which
one plant has as compared with others. Some plants
are found in several forms which have almost‘ the
same name, for instance the Jlotos; for of this there
are many forms differing in leaves stems flowers and
fruit, including the plant called melilotos® ; there are
also forms differing in the virtues for which ® they
are used as food, and again in their fondness for
different localities. So too is it with many other
plants.

Others are found in fewer forms, as_ strykhnos,’
which is a general name covering plants that are
quite distinct ; one is edible and like a cultivated
plant, having a berry-like fruit, and there are two
others,> of which the one is said to induce sleep,
the other to cause madness, or, if it is administered
in a larger dose, death. The same thing may be
observed in other plants which are widely dif-
ferent. Now about the other herbaceous plants
enough has been said; but concerning corn and
corn-like plants we must speak next; for this
subject still lies before us.


ὁ δὲ τῇ πε Sch.; διτταὶ UM ; διτταῖς Ald.

να}. 7: 7. ; Plin 21. 177-179 ; Diose. 4. 70-73 ; Index.

8 In 9. 11. 5 these two plants are said to be συνώνυμοι, 7.e.
different δὼ of the same plant, whereas the ‘ edible’
otpvxvos is the same only in name (ὁμωνυμίᾳ). cf. 9. 12. δ.


139


" Oowiow Wish


DOTY ΩΤ


Be 5; oF le,
ae hal


- «


Θ


5 n 14 la nw
I. Περὶ μὲν οὖν τῶν ἄλλων ποιωδῶν ἱκανῶς
> / θ \ δὲ / \ n n /
εἰρήσθω: περὶ δὲ σίτου Kal τῶν σιτωδῶν λέγωμεν
“ Ὁ , a \ >
ὁμοίως τοῖς πρότερον: τοῦτο γὰρ κατάλοιπον ἣν
τῶν ποιωδῶν.
a /
Avo δὲ αὐτοῦ γένη τὰ μέγιστα τυγχάνει" τὰ
Ν \ γὃ 4 Ν θ | / \ \
μὲν yap σιτώδη, οἷον πυροὶ κριθαὶ τίφαι Feral τὰ
7 ee, / tess / n= \ /
ἄλλα τὰ ὁμοιόπυρα ἢ ὁμοιόκριθα" "τὰ δὲ χεδροπά,
fe ΄ DiS, \ \ 1 @
οἷον κύαμος ἐρέβινθος πισὸς Kal ὅλως τὰ ὄσπρια
/ 3 » \
προσαγορευόμενα' τρίτον δὲ Tap αὐτὰ κέγχρος
ἔλυμος σήσαμον καὶ ἁπλῶς τὰ ἐν τοῖς θερινοῖς
» / > / a 'd
ἀρότοις ἀνώνυμα κοινῇ προσηγορίᾳ.
" δὲ ς \ / > a / \ € a
ἔστι δὲ ἡ μὲν γένεσις αὐτῶν pia Kal ἁπλῆ:
/
φύεται yap ἀπὸ σπέρματος, ἐὰν μή τι σπάνιον
x a e a /
Kal ὀλίγον ἀπὸ τῆς ῥίζης. ὧραι δὲ τοῦ σπόρου
a , /
TOV πλείστων δύο: πρώτη μὲν Kal μάλιστα ἡ
/ ς 7
περὶ ἸΪλειάδος δύσιν, ἣ καὶ Hoiodos ἠκολούθηκε


τῶν before ποιωδῶν om. Sch,
Plin, 18. 48-80.

3 ἔλυμος : μελίνη appears to be the Attic name for this
plant. Sch. would restore it for ἔλυμος here and 4. 4. 10;
8.11...


[42


9. "ὦ


et δια. δον. el


BOOK VIII


Or Herpacztous PLANTS: CEREALS, PULSES, AND ‘SUMMER
CRops.’


Of the three classes and the times of sowing and of germination.


I. Let the above suffice for an account of the other
herbaceous! plants; let us now discuss corn and
corn-like plants in the same manner as those already
treated; for this class of herbaceous plants we
reserved.

2There are two principal classes; there are the
corn-like plants such as wheat barley one-seeded
wheat rice-wheat and the others which resemble
either of the first two; and again there are the
leguminous plants, as bean chick-pea pea, and in
general those to which the name of pulses is
given. Besides these there is a third class, which
includes millet® Italian millet, sesame and _ in
general the plants which belong to the summer
seed-time,* which lack any common designation.

There is only one single way of propagating these ;
they grow from seed, except that some may grow
rarely and scantily from a root. There are two
seasons for sowing most of them; the first and
most important is about the setting of the Pleiad°;
this rule we find even Hesiod® following with

A eeu 72.3.


5. Πλειάδος conj. Sch.; πλειάδας U; πλειάδων Ald.
6 Hes. Op. 383.


143


THEOPHRASTUS


καὶ σχεδὸν οἱ πλεῖστοι, δι ὃ καὶ καλοῦσί τινες
αὐτὴν ἄροτον" ἄλλη δ᾽ ἀρχομένου τοῦ ἦρος μετὰ
τὰς τροπὰς τοῦ χειμῶνος. οὐ τῶν αὐτῶν δὲ
ἑκατέρα. τὰ μὲν γὰρ αὐτῶν φιλεῖ πρωΐσπο-
ρεῖσθαι, τὰ δὲ ὀψὲ διὰ τὸ μὴ δύνασθαι, φέρειν
τοὺς χειμῶνας, τὰ δὲ “πρὸς ἀμφοτέρας τὰς ὥρας
\

οὐ κακῶς ἔχει, καὶ πρὸς χειμῶνα καὶ πρὸς ἔαρ.

Πρωΐσπορα μὲν οὖν ἐστι πυρὸς κριθή, καὶ τού-
των ἡ κριθὴ πρωϊσπορώτερον' ἔτι δὲ ξειὰ τίφη
ὀλύρα καὶ εἴ τι ἕτερον ὁμοιόπυρον" ἁπάντων γὰρ
σχεδὸν ὁ ὁ αὐτὸς χρόνος τῆς σπορᾶς" τῶν δὲ χεδρο-
πῶν μάλιστα ὡς εἰπεῖν κύαμος καὶ ὦχρος" ταῦτα
γὰρ διὰ τὴν ἀσθένειαν προλαβεῖν τῇ ῥιζώσει
βούλεται τοὺς χειμῶνας" πρωΐσπορον δὲ καὶ ὁ
θέρμος" ἀπὸ τῆς ἅλω γάρ φασι δεῖν καταβάλλειν
εὐθύς.

᾿Οψίσπορα δὲ τούτων γε αὐτῶν ὅσα διαφέρει
τοῖς γένεσιν, οἷον πυρῶν τέ τι γένος καὶ κριθῶν ὃ
καλοῦσι τρίμηνον διὰ τὸ ἐν τοσούτῳ τελειοῦσθαι"
καὶ τῶν χεδροπῶν τὰ τοιάδε, φακὸς ἀφάκη πισός.
ἐν ἀμφοτέραις δὲ ταῖς ὥραις τῶν χεδροπῶν, καθά-
περ ὄροβος ἐρέβινθος" οἱ δὲ καὶ τὸν κύαμον ὀψὲ
σπείρουσιν, ἐὰν ὑ ὑστερήσωσι τῶν πρώτων ἀρότων.
ἁπλῶς δὲ πρωϊσποροῦσι τὰ μὲν διὸ ἰσχὺν ὡς
δυνάμενα φέρειν τοὺς χειμῶνας, τὰ δὲ δι ἀσθέ-
VELAY, ὅπως προλάβωσι ταῖς εὐδίαις τὴν αὔξησιν.
δύο μὲν οὖν αὗται. τρίτη δὲ τῶν θερινῶν ἣν


- "Δ cultural variety of (ed. cf. 8. 9. 2.
τῶν δέ ye Ald.; ye om. Sch.
3 xpos conj. W.; κέγχρος Ald.; om. G. cf. 8. 3. 1 and 2,
1B


ll] Pea
144


ENQUIRY INTO. PLANTS, VIII. τ. 2-4


most authorities; wherefore some call it simply
‘the seed-time.’ Another time is at the beginning
of spring after the winter equinox. However
different crops are sown at the two seasons. For
some of them love to be sown early, some late
because they cannot bear the winters, while some
will do not amiss at either season, both towards
winter and towards spring.

Crops sown early are wheat and barley, and of
these the latter is sown the earlier; also rice-wheat
one-seeded wheat olyra,} and others which resemble
wheat. For all of these the time of sowing is about
the same. Of leguminous plants? bean and okhros,?
it may be said, are specially sown at this time; for
these on account of their weakness like to be well
rooted before the winter. Lupin is also sown early ;
in fact they say it should be sown straight from the
threshing-floor.*

Those which are sown late are certain special
varieties ° of these very kinds, as a certain kind of
wheat, and of barley the kind which is called ‘three
months barley ’ because it takes that time to mature ;
and among. leguminous: plants lentil tare pea.
However some of these plants are sown at both
seasons, as vetch and chick-pea; some also sow
beans late, if they have missed the first seed-time.
To speak generally, some crops are sown early
because of their robustness, since they can stand
the winters, some because of their weakness, so
that their growth may be secured® in the ‘fine
weather. These then are the two seasons; the
third is that of the summer crops of which we


ὅ Trois γένεσιν : τῇ γενέσει W. 1.6. ‘certain kinds which


differ as to their germination.’ δ hehe den En Le Ὁ


T45
VOL, II. i
ε


THEOPHRASTUS


εἴπομεν, ἐν ἡ κέγχρος σπείρεται καὶ péduvos Kal
σήσαμον, ἔτι δ᾽ ἐρύσιμον καὶ ὅρμινον. χρόνοι μὲν
οὖν ἑκάστων οὗτοι.

Βλαστάνει δὲ τὸ μὲν θᾶττον τὸ δὲ βραδύτερον"
καὶ κριθὴ μὲν καὶ πυρὸς ἑβδομαῖα μάλιστα" προ-
τερεῖ δὲ ἡ κριθὴ μᾶλλον: τὰ δ᾽ ὄσπρια τεταρταῖα
ἢ πεμπταῖα πλὴν κυάμων' κύαμος δὲ καὶ τῶν
σιτωδῶν ἔνια πλείοσιν" ἐνιαχοῦ yap. Kal πεντε-
καιδεκαταῖος, ὁ ὁτὲ δὲ καὶ εἰκοσταῖος" δυσφυέστα-
τον γὰρ τοῦτο πάντων, ἐὰν δὲ δὴ καὶ σπαρέντος
ἐπὶ πλέον ὕδωρ ἐπιγένηται, καὶ παντελῶς. εἰ δὲ
τῶν ἐν τοῖς ἠρινοῖς ἀρότοις θᾶττον ἡ ἔκφυσις διὰ

/
τὴν ὥραν σκεπτέον.

Χρὴ δὲ τὰς ἀναβλαστήσεις καὶ τὰς διαφύσεις
ταύτας ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ πᾶν διαλαβεῖν" ἐνίοτε γὰρ
ἐνιαχοῦ καὶ ἐν ἐλάττοσιν ἡμέραις, καθάπερ ἐν
Αὐγύπτῳ «κριθή!ξ τριταίαν γάρ φασι καὶ τεταρ-
ταίαν ἀνατέλλειν: παρ᾽ ἄλλοις δὲ ἐν πλείοσι τῶν
εἰρημένων, ὅπερ καὶ οὐκ ἄλογον, ὅταν καὶ χώρα
καὶ ἀὴρ διαφέρῃ καὶ πρωϊαίτερον ἢ ὀψιαίτερον
apoon Kal τὰ ἐπιγινόμενα ἀνόμοια τυγχάνῃ. ἡ
μὲν γὰρ μανὴ καὶ κούφη καὶ εὐκράτῳ ἀέρι ταχὺ
καὶ ῥᾳδίως ἀναδίδωσιν, ἡ ἡ δὲ γλίσχρα καὶ βαρεῖα
βραδέως, ἡ δὲ τοῖς τόποις αὐχμωδεστέρα βραδύ-
τερον.

"Ere δὲ ἂν χειμῶνες ἐπιγένωνται, καὶ αὐχμοὶ
καὶ εὐδίαι καὶ πάλιν ὕδατα: καὶ γὰρ ἐν τούτοις


€


πολὺ παραλλάττουσιν. ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ ἐὰν ἡ


1 ἔνια conj. W.; ἐν Ald.
2 The reason is given Οἱ. 4. 8, 2


3 of. 7


es


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. 1. 4-7


spoke, in which are sown millet Italian millet
sesame, and also erysimon and horminon. Such then
are the times for each.

Some are quicker in coming up, some slower.
Barley and wheat generally come up on the seventh
day, but barley is the earlier. Pulses take four
or five days, except beans; for they, like some
kinds! of corn, require a longer time; in some
places they take as much as fifteen days, or even
twenty. This crop indeed is the slowest to start
of all, and if after the sowing there is a long spell of
wet weather, it is extremely slow.2, Whether the
sprouting * of crops sown at the spring seed-time
is quicker because of the season is matter for
enquiry.

These times of sprouting or germination must be
taken generally; for at some times and_ places
germination takes fewer days, as with barley‘ in
Egypt, where it is said to come up on the third
or fourth day ; while elsewhere it takes longer than
the period mentioned, which is not surprising when
both soil and climate are different, when one makes
the sowing earlier or later, and when the crop is
subjected to different influences afterwards. For
open light soil with a favourable ὅ climate produces
quick and easy growth, while soil that is sticky and
heavy tends to slow growth, and that of a specially
dry district to slower growth still.

Moreover the time of growth is affected, according
as storms supervene, or droughts, or fine weather
or again rain; for these conditions make wide
differences. So too it makes a difference if the


4 κριθή add. W.
> εὐκράτῳ conj. Scal. from G (benigno caelo) ; εὐκάρπῳ Ald.


147


co


THEOPHRASTUS


na 7 \ / 7
γῆ προειργασμένη καὶ κόπρον ἔχουσα τυγχάνῃ,
\
Kal ἐὰν μηδὲν τούτων' ἐπεὶ καὶ περὶ τὸ Tpwi-
an \ 5 n n
σπορεῖν ἕκαστα Kal ὀψισπορεῖν αἱ χῶραι διαφέ-
4 δὲ \ \ \ ς / /
ρουσιν. ἔνιοι δὲ καὶ περὶ τὴν “Ελλάδα πάντα
oe n > a 4 Xx / an
πρωϊσπορεῖν εἰώθασι διὰ ψυχρότητα τῆς χώρας,
la ς “Ὁ 7 e Qn
ὥσπερ οἱ Φωκεῖς, ὅπως ἂν οἱ χειμῶνες μὴ νήπια
καταλαμβάνωσιν.
΄, \ \ na A
11. Βλαστάνει δὲ Ta μὲν ἐκ τοῦ αὐτοῦ τὴν
ἘΔ, > if, \ ΄ \
ῥίζαν ἀφιέντα καὶ τὸ φύλλον, τὰ δὲ ἑκάτερον ἐξ
UA “ f 5
ἑκατέρου τοῦ ἄκρου. πυρὸς μὲν οὖν καὶ κριθὴ
14 iy \ oo “ , , Ie ¢ 7
καὶ τίφη καὶ ὅλως ὅσα σιτώδη πάντα ἐξ. ἑκατέρου
lA A oo / \ fa
ὥσπερ EV τῷ στάχυϊ πέφυκεν, ἀπὸ μὲν τοῦ κάτω
a / \ c/s > Ν \ (ole 4 \
τοῦ παχέος τὴν ῥίζαν ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ ἄνω Tov Brac-
/ ἃ / \ / δι n a
Tov’ ἕν δέ TL καὶ συνεχὲς γίνεται TO ἀμφοῖν τῆς
es \ an ἴω / \ ; \ Nyy ἂν
Te ῥίζης Kal TOU καυλοῦ. κύαμος δὲ Kal τὰ ἄλλα
Ν 3 ς / > 2 09 fal > n A ἐν
χεδροπὰ οὐχ ὁμοίως, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ τοῦ αὐτοῦ τὴν ῥίζαν
Ν / 2 re / a
Kal Tov καυλόν, Kal’ ὃ Kal ἡ πρόσφυσις αὐτῶν
5 \ \ ᾽ν βό > @ LT Ἶ 2) /
ἐστι πρὸς TOV λοβόν, ἐν ᾧ καὶ ἔχουσιν οἷον ἀρχήν
/ DCE IS τ 2 \ \ > an Ψ
τινα φανεράν" ἐπ᾽ ἐνίων δὲ καὶ αἰδοιῷδες φαίνεται,
“ “Ὁ ᾿ /
καθάπερ ἐπὶ TOV κυάμων Kal TOV ἐρεβίνθων καὶ
7 a rh > / \ ς \ ef
μάλιστα TOV θέρμων' ἐκ τούτου yap ἡ μὲν ῥίζα
/ X \ / + ees AN yy an
κάτω TO δὲ φύλλον καὶ ὁ καυλὸς ἄνω χωρεῖ.
r 4 \ i ὃ / fal δὲ ς ΄
Tavtn μὲν οὖν πὴ διαφέρει. τῇ δὲ ομοίως
n \ \ ΄ n an
ἔχει τῷ πάντα κατὰ τὴν πρόσφυσιν TOD λοβοῦ
a / \ , \
Kal τοῦ στάχυος ἀφιέναι τὴν ῥίζαν Kal μὴ
1 ὡς προειργ. Ald.H.; ὡς om. Sch. from G. 2 of. 8. 8. 2.


3 ὥσπερ conj. Scal.; πάντα Ald. (? repeated by mistake). ef.
C.P. 4. 7. 4.


148


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. 1. 7-11. 2


ground has been well tilled! and given dung, or if
neither of these things has been done: for the soil
makes a difference even as to the early or late
germination of each crop. In Hellas some are used
to sow everything earlier because of the coldness of
the soil, for instance the Phocians ;? the object being
that the winter may not overtake the crop while it is
still tender.


Of differcnces in the mode of germination and of subsequent
development.

II. In germinating some of these plants produce
their root and their leaves from the same point, some
separately, from either end of the seed. Wheat
barley one-seeded wheat, and in general all the
cereals produce them from either end, in a manner
corresponding ἴο 5 the position of the seed in the ear,
the root growing from the stout lower part, the shoot
from the upper part; but the part corresponding to
the root and that corresponding to the stem form a
single continuous whole. . Beans and other leguminous
plants do not grow in the same manner, but they
produce the root and the stem from the same point,
namely the point at which the seed is attached to
the pod, which, it is plain, is a sort of starting point
- of fresh growth. In some cases there is also a forma-
tion resembling the penis, as in beans chick-peas
and especially in lupins; from this‘ the root grows
downwards, the leaf and the stem upwards.

There are then these different ways of germinat-
ing ; but a point ὃ in which all these plants agree is
that they all send out their roots at the place where


4 rovrov conj. Sch.; τούτων Ald. cf. CLP. 4. 7. 4.
Sa ἜΡΙΣ ἢ. 7.


149


THEOPHRASTUS


καθώπερ ἐν τοῖς δενδρικοῖς τισιν ἀνάπαλιν, οἷον
ἀμυγδαλῇ καρύῳ βαλάνῳ τοῖς τοιούτοις. ἐν
ἅπασι δὲ ἡ ῥίξα μικρῷ πρότερον ἐκφύεται τοῦ
καυλοῦ" συμβαίνει δὲ ἔν γέ τισι τῶν δένδρων
ὥστε τὸν μὲν βλαστὸν ἐν αὐτῷ τῷ σπέρματι
βλαστάνειν πρῶτον, αὐξανομένου δὲ διΐστασθαι
τὰ σπέρματα---πάντα γάρ πως καὶ ταῦτα διμερῆ,
τὰ δὲ δὴ χεδροπὰ φανερῶς πάντα δίθυρα καὶ
σύνθετα---τὴν δὲ ῥίξαν εὐθὺς ἔξω “προωθεῖσθαι:
ἐν δὲ τοῖς σιτηροῖς διὰ τὸ καθ᾽ ἕν αὐτὰ εἶναι
τοῦτο μὲν οὐ συμβαίνει, προτερεῖ δὲ ἡ pita
,

μικρόν.

᾿Αναφύεται δὲ ἡ μὲν κριθὴ καὶ ὁ πυρὸς μονό-
φυλλα, ὁ δὲ πισὸς καὶ ὁ κύαμος καὶ ὁ ἐρέβινθος
πολύφυλλα. ῥίξαν δὲ ἔ ἔχει τὰ μὲν χεδροπὰ πάντα
ξυλώδη καὶ μίαν ἀπὸ δὲ ταύτης καὶ ἀποφύσεις
λεπτάς. βαθυρριζότατον δὲ ὡς εἰπεῖν τούτων
ὁ ἐρέβινθος, ἐνίοτε δὲ καὶ παρακαθίησιν' ἀλλ᾽
ὁ πυρὸς καὶ ἡ κριθὴ καὶ τὰ ἄλλα τὰ συτώδη
πολύρριξα καὶ λεπτόρριξα, δι ὃ καὶ “ταρρώδη.
καὶ πολύκλαδα καὶ πολύκαυλα πάντα τὰ τοιαῦτα.
σχεδὸν δὲ καὶ ἐναντίωσίς τις ἑκατέρων ἐστί: τὰ
μὲν γὰρ χεδροπὰ μονόρριξα ὄντα πολλὰς ἄνωθεν


ἀπὸ τῶν καυλῶν ἀποφύσεις ἔχει πλὴν κυάμου"


τὰ δὲ σιτηρὰ πολύρριζα πολλοὺς μὲν ἀνίησι


1 βαλάνῳ : διοσβαλάνῳ Sch. from mBod.

2 τισι τῶν δένδρων con}. W.; σιτώδεσιν ΓΜ ΑἸΑ. ; τοῖς δενδρικοῖς
conj. Sch. This and W.’s other conjectures in this section
are rather desperate, but are accepted provisionally as at
least restoring a satisfactory sense. The passage looks as if
it had been deliberately tampered with by someone who
misunderstood it.


150


i Αναν μον. ἃ


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. u. 2-3


the seed is attached to the pod or ear, whereas the
contrary is the case with the seeds of certain trees,
as almond hazel acorn! and the like. And in all
these plants the root begins to grow a little before
the stem; whereas in certain trees? the bud first
begins to grow within the seed itself, and, as it
increases in size, the seeds split—for all such seeds
are in a manner in two halves, and those of
leguminous plants again all plainly have two valves
and are double—and then the root is immediately
thrust out; but in cereals,? since the seeds are in
one piece,‘ this does not ὅ occur, but the root grows a
little before the bud.

Barley and wheat come up with a single leaf, but
peas beans and chick-peas with several. © All the
leguminous plants have a single woody root, and
also slender’ side-roots springing from this. The
chick-pea is about the deepest rooting of these, and
sometimes it has side-roots; but wheat barley
and the other cereals have a number of fine roots,
wherefore they are matted together.’ Again all
such plants have many branches and many stems.
And there is a sort of contrast between these two
classes ; the leguminous plants, which have a single
root, have many side-growths above from the stem—
all except beans; while the cereals, which have
many roots, send up many shoots,® but these have


σιτηροῖς conj. W.; χεδροποῖς UMAId.

καθ᾽ ἕν αὐτὰ conj. W.; κατὰ τὸ αὐτὸ UMAId.
ov conj. Scal. from α ; οὖν UMAId.

Plin. 18. 51.

λεπτάς conj. St.; λεπταί Ald. H.

tappodn: cf. 6. 7. 4.

μὲν conj. Sch.; yap Ald, H.


ora nn Pe Ww


Ley


THEOPHRASTUS


βλαστούς, ἀπαράβλαστοι δὲ οὗτοι, πλὴν εἴ τι
γένος πυρῶν τοιοῦτον, Os καλοῦσι σιτανίας καὶ
κριθανίας.

Τὸν μὲν οὖν χειμῶνα, ἐν τῇ χλόῃ μένει τὰ
συτώδη, διαγελώσης δὲ τῆς ὥρας καυλὸν ἀφίησιν
ἐκ τοῦ μέσου καὶ γονατοῦται. συμβαίνει δ᾽
εὐθὺς ἐν τῷ τρίτῳ γόνατι, τοῖς δὲ ἐν τῷ τετάρτῳ,
καὶ τὸν στάχυν ἔχειν ἀλλ᾽ οὐ φανερὸν ἐν τῷ
ὄγκῳ"---γίνεται. δὲ ἐν τῷ ὅλῳ καλάμῳ πλείω
τούτων"-- ὥστε σχεδὸν ἅμα τῷ καλαμοῦσθαι
συνίστασθαι <i> μικρὸν ὕστερον: ἀλλ᾽ οὐ πρό-
τερον φανερὸς γίνεται πρὶν ἂν προαυξηθεὶς ἐν τῇ
κάλυκι γένηται, τότε δὲ ἡ κύησις φανερὰ διὰ τὸν
ὄγκον.

᾿Απολυθεὶς δ᾽ εὐθὺς ἀνθεῖ μεθ᾽ ἡμέρας τέτταρας
ἢ πέντε καὶ πυρὸς καὶ κριθὴ καὶ ἀνθεῖ σχεδὸν
τὰς ἴσας, οἱ δὲ τὰς πλείστας λέγοντες ἐν ταῖς
ἑπτά φασιν ἀπανθεῖν. ἀλλὰ τῶν χεδροπῶν
χρόνιος ἡ ἄνθησις: χρονιωτάτη δὲ τῶν μὲν ἄλλων
ὀρόβου καὶ ἐρεβίνθου, τούτων δ᾽ ἁπάντων τοῦ
κυάμου καὶ ἐν μεγίστῃ διαφορᾷ' τετταράκοντα
γὰρ ἡμερῶν ἀνθεῖν λέγουσι: πλὴν οἱ μὲν ἀεὶ
παρανθοῦντος ἑτέρου καὶ ἑτέρου λέγουσι, κατὰ
μέρος γὰρ ἀνθεῖν, οἱ δὲ ἁπλῶς. ἡ γὰρ ἄνθησις
τῶν μὲν σταχυηρῶν ἀθρόως τῶν δὲ ἐλλοβωδῶν
καὶ χεδροπῶν πάντων κατὰ μέρος" πρῶτα γὰρ
avOet τὰ κάτω, καὶ ὅταν ταῦτα ἀπανθήσῃ τὰ
ἐχόμενα, καὶ οὕτως αἰεὶ βαδίζει πρὸς τὰ ἄνω.


1 Plin, 18. 52, 2 Plin, 18. 56.


n
8. Of. ils A ee ae
152


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. 1. 3-5


no side-shoots—except such sorts of wheat as are
called sttanias and krithanias (¢ barley-wheat ’).

1 During winter cereals remain in the. blade, but,
as the season begins to smile, they send up a stem
from the midst and it becomes jointed. 7 And it
comes to pass that the ear also at once appears in the
third, or in some cases in the fourth joint, though
it is not distinctly seen in the mass of growth (the
whole stem contains more joints than three or four),
so that it must be formed at the same time that
the straw grows or but a little later ; though it does
not become conspicuous till it has first swollen and
formed in the sheath,? and by that time its size
makes its development visible.

Four or five days after being set free* wheat and
barley flower and remain in bloom for a like number
of days; those who put the period at the longest say
that the bloom is shed in seven days. °On the
other hand the flowering period of leguminous plants
lasts a long time; that of vetch and chick-pea is
longer than that of most, but that of the bean is far
longer than that of any of them ; they say that it is
in bloom for forty days; some however give this
period absolutely, others say that at different times
different parts are in flower,® since the whole plant
does not flower at once. For plants with an ear
bloom all at once, but plants with pods and all
leguminous plants bloom part at a time; the lower
part blooms first, and, when this bloom has fallen,
the part next above it, and so on up to the top.


1 Sc. from the sheath. ἀπολυθεὶς Ald.H.; ἀποχυθεὶς conj.
Sch. followed by W. ef. ἀπόχυσις 8. 3. 4.
5 Plin. 18. 59.


5 παρανθοῦντος conj. H.; παρανθοῦντες Ald,


153


THEOPHRASTUS


2” ἃ \ lal ’ /
δι ὃ πολλὰ τῶν ὀρόβων τίλλεται τὰ μὲν κάτω
/ \ 7
κατερρυηκότα τὰ δ᾽ ἄνω χλωρὰ πάμπαν.
\ ᾿ Ν /
Μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἀπάνθησιν ἁδρύνονται καὶ τελ-
a) \ \ a
εἰοῦνται πυρὸς μὲν Kal κριθὴ τετταρακοσταῖα
7 /
μάλιστα: παραπλησίως δὲ καὶ Tidn Kal τἄλλα
\ a lal \
Ta τοιαῦτα. τετταρακοσταῖον δέ φασι Kal τὸν
/ an “
κύαμον, ὥστε ἐν ἴσαις ἀνθεῖν καὶ τελειοῦσθαι"
\ >] / / 3 id
Ta δ᾽ ἄλλα ἐν ἐλάττοσιν: ἐλαχίσταις δὲ ὁ ἐρέ-
\ an rn
βινθος, εἴπερ ἀπὸ τῆς σπορᾶς ἐν τετταράκοντα
a na / / ΄
τελειοῦται ταῖς ἁπάσαις ὥσπερ τινές φασιν"
> \ , > “ {4 id / ΄ \
ἐπεὶ TO γ᾽ ὅλον ὅτι τάχιστα φανερόν. οἱ δὲ
f \ / ¢ / \ 4
κέγχροι καὶ τὰ σήσαμα καὶ οἱ μέλινοι καὶ ὅλως
\ \ \ ς a \ ᾽
Ta θερινὰ σχεδὸν ὁμολογεῖται Tas τετταράκονθ
© / / As / \ 53 ’ὔ
ἡμέρας λαμβάνειν: οἱ δέ φασι καὶ ἐλάττους.
/ \ \ x x 7 /
Διαφέρει δὲ καὶ πρὸς THY τελείωσιν χώρα τε
», \ /
χώρας Kal ἀὴρ ἀέρος: ἐν ἐλάττοσι yap ἔνιαι
a >? / [χὰ yA \ /
δοκοῦσιν ἐκφέρειν, ὥσπερ ἄλλαι τε καὶ μάλιστα
Ὡ ΄ ” b] “Ὁ ἃς \ \ >
ἐπιδήλως Αἴγυπτος" ἐκεῖ yap κριθαὶ μὲν ἐν
e / \ VTS ἌΣ UY / Ὗ
ἑξαμήνῳ πυροὶ δὲ ἐν τῷ ἑβδόμῳ θερίξονται" περὶ
\ ¢ \ \ a / \
δὲ τὴν “Ελλάδα κριθαὶ μὲν ἐν τῷ ἑβδόμῳ Tapa δὲ
al ye > 4
τοῖς πλείστοις ὀγδόῳ, πυροὶ δὲ ἔτει προσεπι-
a > \ > ot al / lal na
λαμβάνουσιν. ov μὴν οὐδὲ ἐκεῖ TO ye πᾶν πλῆθος
“ 3 » vA > > a , \
οὕτως, GAN ὅσον εἰς ἀπαρχὴν: κομίζεται yap
\ (a) A / if / fa)
πρὸς ἱερῶν τινῶν χρείαν ἄλφιτα νέα TO ἕκτῳ
a a , /
μηνὶ καὶ ταῦτα ἐκ τῶν ἄνω τόπων ὑπὲρ Μέμφιν.
/ fal , >
Λέγεται δὲ καὶ ἐν Σικελίᾳ τῆς Μεσσηνίας ἐν


1 μέλμενοι Ald,H,; ἔλυμοι Vo.Vin, ef. 8. 1. 1 n.
154


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. 1. 5-8


Wherefore, at the time when some of the vetches
are gathered, the lower seeds have already fallen,
while the upper ones are still quite green.

After the flowering is over wheat and _ barley
develop and mature in about forty days; one-seeded
wheat and other such plants take about the same
time. So too, they say, does the bean, which blooms
and matures in a like number of days: but the
others take fewer, and fewest of all the chick-pea,
since, as some say, it takes only forty days from the
time when it is sown to that when it is mature ; and
in any case it is clear that the plant as a whole
develops veryrapidly. Millet sesame Italian millet 1
and the summer crops in general, it is fairly well
agreed, take the same number of days, that is, forty ;
though some say that they take less.


Of differences in development due to soil or climate.


2 Again as to the development of the plant there
are differences according to soil and climate. Some
soils seem to produce the crop in fewer days; for
instance, Egypt may be given as a specially con-
spicuous example; in that country barley is reaped
in six months and wheat in seven: while in Hellas
the barley? harvest is in the seventh month, or in
most parts in the eighth, and wheat requires an
even longer time. However even in Egypt the
whole harvest is not gathered at such an early date,
but only what is required for the first-fruits ; for they
gather new grain for the meal required in certain
sacrifices in the sixth month, and that too in the
regions high up the Nile, above Memphis.

It is said also that in the Messenian district in


ΕΓ Ὁ Phin, 18. 49, 3 κριθαὶ conj, Sch.; πυροὶ UM Ald.
T55


THEOPHRASTUS


al 4 7 al 7
ταῖς καλουμέναις Μύλαις ταχεῖάν τινα γίνεσθαι
/ “ / an
τὴν τελείωσιν TOV ὀψίων' TOY τῶν ὀσπρίων μὲν
Ν a x an
yap σπορητὸν ἕξ μῆνας, tov δὲ τῷ ὑστάτῳ
σπείραντα θερίζειν ἅμα τοῖς πρώτοις" ἀγαθὴν δὲ
, 5 \ / 7
διαφερόντως εἶναι τὴν χώραν, ὥστε τριακοντάχοα
a \
ποιεῖν, ἔχειν δὲ καὶ vowas θαυμαστὰς Kal ὕλην.
ἐν Μήλῳ δέ τι θαυμασιώτερον λέγουσιν: ἐν ya
NG " ρ γο γὰρ
x / /
τριάκοντα ἢ τετταράκοντα ἡμέραις σπαρέντα
θερίζουσι, δι’ ὃ καὶ λέγειν αὐτοὺς ὅτε μέχρι
τούτου δεῖ σπείρειν ἕως ἂν ἴδη τις δρώγμα:
/ \ LA By a 7 \
γίνεσθαι δὲ οὔτε ὄσπρια τοιαῦτα οὔτε πολλὰ
παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς. δεινὴν δέ τινα διαδοῦναι τὴν χώραν
3 /
τροφήν' καὶ yap εἶναι σιτοφόρον μὲν Kal ἐλαιο-
/ > \ > / δὲ /
φόρον ἀγαθὴν ἀμπελοφόρον δὲ μετρίαν.
Ὑπερβάλλον δ᾽ ἔτι τούτου καὶ πάντων θαυμα-
, \ \ 7 \ a \ ¢ /
σιώτερον TO περὶ Χαλκίαν THY νῆσον τὴν Ῥοδίων
a 3 /
γινόμενον: ἐκεῖ γάρ φασιν εἶναί τινα τόπον
πρώϊον οὕτω καὶ εὔφορον ὡς σπαρεισῶν κριθῶν
a / / /
ἅμα ταῖς ἄλλαις θερίσαντες ταύτας σπείρουσιν
3 / > / [2 a) a
εἶτα πάλιν, εἶτα θερίζουσιν ἅμα τοῖς λοιποῖς"
/ \ ΟῚ YJ BJ An WA ὃ 7 \
μεγίστη μὲν οὖν, εἴπερ ἀληθής, αὕτη διαφορά. τὸ
/
yap eis ἑτέραν χώραν μετενεχθέντα διαφέρειν,
“ 3 / \ > ὃ / \
ὥσπερ ἐκ Κιλικίας φασὶν εἰς Καππαδοκίαν καὶ
«. \ b , a T / UA Ε
ὅλως τὴν ἐπέκεινα τοῦ Ταύρου, ἧττον ἄτοπον
an / ᾿
φανερὰ γὰρ ἡ τῶν τόπων διάστασις.


1 πριακοντάχοα conj. Sch.; τριάκοντα χοὰς Ald.
ΠΟ CL. ἀ ais


156


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. u. 8-9


Sicily at the place called Mylae the late sown crops
mature rapidly ; thus the sowing of pulses goes on
for six months, but he that made the last sowing
gathers his crop at the same time as the first: also
that the soil is exceedingly good, so that it yields
thirty-fold 1; and there are also wonderful pastures
and forest-land. They tell of an even more wonder-
ful thing in Melos”; there they reap thirty or forty
days after sowing; wherefore it is a saying of the
islanders that “one should continue sowing till one
sees a swathe.”’ However it is said that pulses? in
their country do not grow like this, nor are they
abundant. Yet they say that the soil is wonderfully
productive ; for it is good both for corn and olives,
and fairly good for vines.

However what occurs in Chalkia,*+ an island
belonging to the Rhodians, goes even beyond this
and is more extraordinary than all the instances
given ; there they say that there is a place which is
so early and so fertile that, when the barley is sown
after reaping the crop with the other crops, they
then sow again, and then reap the crop thus sown at
the same time as the remaining crops; this then, if
it be true, marks a difference greater than we find
anywhere else. For it is less surprising that there
should be a difference in crops transferred® to
another region, as they say occurs when they are
transferred from Cilicia to Cappadocia or in general
beyond the Taurus; for these regions are obviously
very dissimilar.

ἢ ὄσπρια τοιαῦτα I conj.; ὄψιμα ταῦτα UAId.; ἕψιμα ταῦτα
M.G; P omits ταῦτα.

4 ef. Thue. 8. 41 foll.


5 μετενεχθέντα διαφέρειν conj. Sch. and W. from G ; perey-
κόντας σπείρειν Ald.


151


10


11


THEOPHRASTUS


\ \ \ + ee 4," a » τ [4 ς
Τὸ δὲ τὴν αὐτὴν διφορεῖν, ἐν ᾧπερ γε ἅπαξ αἱ
Yi 4: S / /
ἄλλαι, σύνορον οὖσαν Kal μίαν θαυμασιώτατον"
αὕτη μὲν οὖν ἐν μεγίστῃ διαφορᾷ.
\ \ \ \ 5 , τ᾿ \ a
Ta δὲ κατὰ Tas ἄλλας χώρας οὐ πολλὴν ἢ
/ an rn
οὐδεμίαν ὡς εἰπεῖν τοῦ γε χρόνου λαμβάνει
n \ fal
διάστασιν: προτερεῖ yap ταῖς ὥραις ta ᾿Αθή-
ἴω «ς / /
νῃσι τῶν περὶ ᾿Ελλήσποντον ἡμέραις τριάκοντα
΄, d > nA , ἢ \ 5 \
μάλιστα ἢ ov πολλῷ TrELOGLY: εἰ μὲν οὖν καὶ
ὁ σπορητὸς πρότερον, μετάθεσις ἂν εἴη τῆς ὥρας"
> 3. et a “ / X\ e /
εἰ δ᾽ ἅμα, δῆλον OTL πλείων ἂν ὁ χρόνος.
a /
Οὐ μικρὰν δὲ ποιοῦσι διαφορὰν οὐδὲ οἱ τόποι,
καίπερ ἔνιοι συνεγγὺς ὄντες: τὰ γὰρ ἐν Σαλαμῖνι
a \ a "7 a > es n \
προτερεῖ πολὺ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν ἐν TH ATTLKH καὶ
Ψ \ > / \ > a \ > \
ὅλως Ta ἐπιθαλάττια Kal εἰς ταῦτα καὶ εἰς TOUS
yA / ς Ν Ν \ ᾽ \
ἄλλους καρπούς, ὡς τὰ περὶ τὴν ᾿Ακτὴν καλου-
, an / \ \ > 7
μένην τῆς Πελοποννήσου καὶ τὰ ἐν Φαλύκῳ
nan / \ b] La) / /
τῆς Μεγαρίδος: πλὴν ἐνταῦθά ye συμβάλλεται
5 x \
καὶ TO λεπτόγεων εἶναι Kal ψαφαρὰν τὴν
\ \
χώραν. καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ τὴν γένεσιν καὶ τὴν
τελείωσιν οὕτως ἔχει.
/
III. Διαφέρει δὲ καθ᾽ ὅλα τὰ γένη τὰ διῃρη-
a a a \ \ ,
μένα TOV γενῶν, οἷον σῖτος χεδροπὰ Ta θερινά,
" ς a \
καὶ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον γένος τὰ ὁμογενῆ. τὰ μὲν yap
σιτώδη τὸ φύλλον ἔχει καλάμου, τῶν δὲ χεδρο-


1 2,6. and so in part account for the difference. εἴη τῆς
ὥρας conj. Sch.; ἢ τῆς χώρας MP; εἴη τῆς χώρας Ald. H.

2 i.e. we cannot say how far the difference is due to climate
without knowing whether the seed-time at either place is


the same,


158


SE Se


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. π΄. ro-m. 1


But that one particular land should produce two
crops in the time that other lands to which it is close
take to produce one, is very remarkable ; wherefore
Chalkia exhibits the greatest difference.

The crops grown in other regions show not much,
if any, dissimilarity as to time; those grown at
Athens are only about thirty days or not much
more before those of the Hellespont region. Now,
if the sowing should turn out to be also earlier,
that would shift the season back; if it is at the
same time, it is plain that the difference of time
would be greater.”

Again the particular district makes a considerable
difference, even as between places which are not far
apart ; thus the crops of Salamis are far earlier than
those of the rest of Attica, and so in general are those
of places by the sea; and this applies to other fruits
as well as these: for instance, those of the place
called Akte in the Peloponnese and of Phalykos?
in the Megarid are early; but here something is
contributed by the fact that the soil is light and
crumbling. Such are the facts in regard to growth
and development.


Of differences between the parts of cereals, pulses, and summer
crops respectively.

III. There are also differences between* the
whole classes which we have mentioned, namely
cereals leguminous plants ® and summer crops, as
well as between the several members® of the same
class. Cereals have the leaf of a reed, while of

3 ἐν Φαλύκῳ I conj.: cf. 2. 8. 1; ἐν Φαλήκῳ conj. W.;
ἐφαλύκῳ U; ἐκ φαλήκῳ M; ἐκ φαλήκου Ald.

4 καθ᾽ conj. Sch.; καὶ Ald.H. 5 ef, 8: lawl.

§ ὁμογενῆ conj. Sch. ;- ὁμοιογενῆ Ald.


159


THEOPHRASTUS


A \ \ Φ
πῶν τὰ μὲν περιφερές, οἷον ὁ κύαμος καὶ σχεδὸν
τὰ πλεῖστα, τὰ δὲ προμηκέστερον, οἷον ὁ πισὸς

ς 5 n
καὶ ὁ λάθυρος Kal ὁ ὦχρος Kal τὰ τοιαῦτα. Kal
τὰ μὲν ἰνώδη τὰ δ᾽ ἄφλεβα καὶ ἄϊνα. τὸ δὲ
σήσαμον καὶ τὸ ἐρύσιμον ἰδιώτερα παρὰ ταῦτα.
ς X n a

Πάλιν ὁ καυλὸς TOV μὲν γονατώδης Kal κοῖλος,
δ ὃ καὶ καλεῖται κάλαμος: ὁ δὲ τοῦ κυάμου
κοῖλος, τῶν δ᾽ ἄλλων χεδροπῶν ξυλωδέστερος,
ξυλωδέστατος δὲ ὁ ἐρέβινθος: τῶν δὲ θερινῶν
κέγχρου μὲν καὶ μελίνου καλαμώδης, σησάμου δὲ
καὶ ἐρυσίμου ναρθηκώδης μᾶλλον. καὶ τὰ μέν
ἐστιν ὀρθόκαυλα, καθάπερ πυρὸς καὶ κριθὴ καὶ
«“ \ A \ / \ \ /
ὅλως τὰ σιτώδη καὶ θερινά, τὰ δὲ πλαγιόκαυλα
μᾶλλον, οἷον ἐρέβινθος ὄροβος φακύός, τὰ δ᾽ ἐπι-

, ἜΣ A) \ ΄, © Q\
γειόκαυλα, καθάπερ MX pos πισὸς λάθυρος" ὁ δὲ
δόλιχος, ἐὰν παρακαταπήξῃ τις ξύλα μακρά,
> / x , / ’ Ά 7] ἴων
ἀναβαίνει καὶ γίνεται κάρπιμος, εἰ δὲ μή, φαῦλος

ἰ me | 7. / , xX / Lal
Kal ἐρυσιβώδης" μόνος δ᾽ ἢ μάλιστα TOV χεδρο-
πῶν ὀρθόκαυλος ὁ κύαμος.

Ἔχει δὲ καὶ τὰ ἄνθη διαφορὰν καὶ τῇ φύσει

Ν an θέ Ne 60 2 a θ᾽ av
καὶ τῇ θέσει, περὶ ὧν σχεδὸν ἐν τοῖς καθ᾽ ὅλου
διείλομεν, ὅτε τὰ μὲν χνοώδη, καθάπερ σίτου καὶ
παντὸς τοῦ στωχυώδους: τὰ δὲ φυλλώδη, καθά-
περ τῶν χεδροπῶν, καὶ τῶν πλείστων κολοβά"


1 Plin. 18. 58. Ξε δὶ ‘summer crops’; ef. 8. 1. 1.

3 Sc. but not jointed. W. suggests that the original text
may have been τῶν δὲ διόλον κοῖλος οἷον ὁ τοῦ κυάμου.

4 μελίνον Ald.H.; ἐλύμὸν V; ἐλύμου Vin. οἵ. 8.1.1; 8.1. 6.

5 ἢ add. St.; om. Ald. H.G. ang de eS ὁ.

7 χνοώδη. No rendering seems quite satisfactory: the


160


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. in. 1-3


leguminous plants some have a round leaf, as beans
and most others, some a more oblong leaf, as pea
lathyros okhros and the like. 14Some again have
fibrous leaves, others leaves without veins and fibres.
Again sesame? and erysimon? have leaves quite
distinct from these.

Again the stem of cereals is jointed and hollow;
wherefore it is called the ‘reed, while that of the
bean is hollow,? and that of the other leguminous
plants is more woody, that of chick-pea woodiest
of all; of the summer crops that of millet and
Italian millet* is reed-like, that of sesame and
erysmon is more like the stem of ferula. Some
again have erect stems, as wheat barley and
in general the cereals and summer crops; some
have rather a crooked stem, as chick-pea vetch
lentil; some a creeping stem as okhros pea lathyros ;
while calavance, if long stakes are set by it, climbs
them and becomes fruitful, whereas otherwise the
plant is unhealthy and liable to rust; the bean,
most of all leguminous plants, if not® alone among
them, has an erect stem.

The flowers also shew differences in character |
and in position (of which matters we have to some
extent treated in our general account) ὃ; thus
some are ‘downy,’ as those of corn® and of any
plant that has an ‘ear’; others are ‘leafy, " as
those of leguminous plants, and in most cases they
are irregular!° flowers; for most of these have
meaning is that such flowers may be classed with those
distinguished by this term in 1. 13. 1, as not being petaloid.

8 σίτου kal παντὸς Tod σταχυώδους conj. Sch. from G, wt
omnium fere gerentium spicam; που καὶ παντὸς τοῦ χυλώδους
UMAId. 9. Sc. petaloid.

10 cf. 6. 5. 3. 1.6. they depart from radial symmetry.
τόι
VOL, II, M


THEOPHRASTUS


\ an lal Ν \

Ta yap πολλὰ κολοβανθῆ: χνοῶδες δὲ Kal TO
τοῦ κέγχρου Kal μελίνου: τοῦ δὲ σησάμου Kal

a b) / n \ 74 \ \ \
τοῦ ἐρυσίμου φυλλῶδες. καὶ ὅτι δὴ τὰ μὲν

\

ἔχει περὶ αὐτὸν TOV καρπόν, οἷον τὰ σιτώδη καὶ
κεγχρώδη περὶ τὸν στάχυν' τὰ δὲ χεδροπὰ ἐξ
αὐτοῦ πως τοῦ ἄνθους ἢ ἀπό γε τῆς αὐτῆς ἀρχῆς
γίνεται. καὶ τὴν ἄνθησιν, ὅτε τὰ μὲν ἀθρόαν τὰ δὲ
κατὰ μέρος ποιεῖται" Kal τᾶλλα δὲ τὰ παραπλήσια
τούτοις.

ς / \ \ \ \ \ / “ \

Opoiws δὲ καὶ τὰ κατὰ τοὺς καρπούς, ὅτι τὰ
\ Ψ ie \ δὲ ὃ \ / \ \
μὲν ἔχει στάχυν, τὰ δὲ χεδροπὰ λοβόν, τὰ δὲ

7 / ς \ / 5 /

κεγχρώδη φόβην: ἡ δὲ καλαμώδης ἀπόχυσις

/ \ ’ “ > / \ wy >
φόβη. τὸ δ᾽ ὅλον ἐναγγειόσπερμα, τὰ δὲ ἐνυ-

/

μενόσπερμα, τὰ δὲ γυμνόσπερμα' Kal ἔτι τὰ μὲν
> / Ν \ f \ oe No
ἀκρόκαρπα, Ta δὲ πλαγιόκαρπα, Kal ὅσα δὴ ἄλλα
ταύτης ἔχεται τῆς θεωρίας.

“Ὅλως δὲ πολυκαρπότερα καὶ πολυχούστερα
εὖ 7 / > » a \ aN
Ta χεδροπά, τούτων δ᾽ ἔτει μᾶλλον τὰ θερινὰ
κέγχρος καὶ σήσαμον, αὐτῶν δὲ τῶν χεδροπῶν

an \

μάλιστα pakos. ἁπλῶς δὲ TA μικροσπερμότερα
μᾶλλον ὡς εἰπεῖν, ὥσπερ καὶ τῶν λαχανωδῶν
κύμινον ἁπάντων ὄντων πολυσπέρμων. ἰσχυρό-
Tepa δὲ πρὸς μὲν τὸν χειμῶνα καὶ ὅλως τὰ

a \ \
τοῦ ἀέρος τὰ σιτηρά, πρὸς δὲ THY τροφὴν τὰ


1 μελίνου Ald.H.; ἐλύμου Vo.Vin. ef. 8. 8, 2 and reff.

2 of 8.3, 3 ΤᾺ 3 Plin. 18. 53. '

4 ἀπόχυσις conj. Sch. from G ; ἀπόφυσις P2Ald, of. 4. 4. 10,
ἀποχείται; 8. 10. 4; C.P. 3. 21. 5,


5 τὸ δ᾽ ὅλον : ὃ τὰ 8 οἷον.


162


ἡ νὸς


ts


="


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. 11. 3-5


such flowers. Those of millet and lialian millet 1
are also ‘downy, ” those of sesame and erysimon
‘leafy. Another difference is that in some cases
the flowers are round the fruit; thus those of corn
and millet are round the ear; while in leguminous
plants the fruit comes as it were from the flower
itself, or at least from the same _ starting-point.
Another difference is that some produce all their
flowers at once, others in succession. And there are
other differences akin to these.

In like manner there are differences in the fruits ;
some have an ‘ear, leguminous plants a pod, and
millet-like plants a ‘plume ’*—which is the name
given to an inflorescence + such as reeds have. Again,
generally speaking,® some have their seeds in a
vessel,®© some in pods,’ some naked; and further
some bear their fruit at the top, some at the
sides; and there are other differences which bear on
this enquiry.

In general the leguminous plants produce more
fruit and are more prolific, and the summer crops’
millet and sesame are even more so than these, while
among the leguminous plants themselves lentil is
the most prolific. ὃ Generally speaking, those that
have small seeds are more prolific, as cummin amon
pot-herbs, which are all prolific of seed. The we
of cereals are more robust as to standing winter and
conditions of climate generally, while those of
leguminous plants are stronger as to providing
food. ° However it may be that in this respect

8 μὲν ἐναγγειόσπερμα conj. Sch.; μὲν ἐγγειόσπερμα P,Ald. cf.
C.P. 4. 7. 5.

ep BR TE» 2. Sef. OPP. 4719. 2!

® 7.e. what has just been said perhaps applies only to human
food. Sense fixed by 8. 9. 3 ad jfin.: cf. Plin. 18. 50.

163
M 2


THEOPHRASTUS


χεδροπώά. τάχα δὲ τοῦτό γε ἡμῖν τοῖς ἄλλοις
ἀνάπαλιν.

IV. Τὰ μὲν οὖν ὅλα γένη τοιαύτας ἔχει δια-
φοράς: τὰ δὲ ὁμογενῆ δῆλον OTL κατὰ τὴν τῶν
μερῶν ἀνωμαλίαν, οἷον τῶν σιτωδῶν πυρὸς
κριθῆς στενοφυλλότερον καὶ λειοκαυλότερον καὶ
πυκνότερον καὶ γλισχρότερον ἔχει τὸν καυλὸν
καὶ δυσθλαστότερον' ἅμα δὲ καὶ ὁ μὲν ἐν
χιτῶσι πολλοῖς ἡ δὲ γυμνόν: μάλιστα γὰρ δὴ
γυμνοσπέρματον ἡ κριθή. πολύλοπον δὲ καὶ ἡ
'τίφη καὶ ἡ ὀλύρα καὶ πάντα τὰ τοιαῦτα καὶ
μάλιστα πάντων ὡς εἰπεῖν ὁ βρόμος. ἔστι δὲ
καὶ ὑψηλότερος ὁ κάλαμος τοῦ πυροῦ ἢ τῆς
κριθῆς, καὶ τὸν «στάχυν ἀπηρτημένον ἔχει τοῦ
φύλλου μᾶλλον 0 πυρός.

Ἴδιον δὲ καὶ τὸ ἄχυρον τοῦ κριθίνου τὸ πύρινον"
ἐγχυλότερον γὰρ καὶ μαλακώτερον. διαφέρει δὲ
ἡ κριθὴ καὶ τούτῳ τῶν πυρῶν" ἡ μὲν γὰρ στοι-
χειώδης, ὁ δὲ πυρὸς ἄστοιχος καὶ πανταχόθεν
ὁμαλής τις.

Τῷ μὲν οὖν ὅλῳ γένει πρὸς γένος τοιαῦταί
τινές εἰσι διαφοραί. καθ᾽ ἑκάτερον δὲ τούτων
πάλιν, οἷον πυρῶν καὶ κριθῶν, πολλὰ γένη καὶ
τοῖς καρποῖς αὐτοῖς διαφέροντα καὶ τοῖς στάχυσι
καὶ ταῖς ἄλλαις μορφαῖς καὶ ἔτι ταῖς δυνάμεσι


---


ΡΣ ΛΝ;

2. After διαφορὰς UM add τὰ ὁμοιογενῆ, Ald. τὰ μὴ ὁμοιογενῆ ;
om. Sch. and W. after G.

3 ὁμογενῆ conj. Sch.; ὁμοιογενῇ UMAId. ef. 8. 3. 1.

4 δυσθλαστότερον conj. Scal. from G, ruptu difficiliorem ;
δυσαλθατώτερον UMAId.

® Plin. 18. 61. πολύλοπον conj. Salm.; πολύλοβον Ald.


164


a νυν σσ θΆΩῆΗΙΝΑ


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. m1. 5-1v. 2


the other animals are affected in the opposite! way
to men.


Of the differences between cereals.


IV. There are then these differences ? between the
various classes; and as between plants of the same
class ὃ there are plainly differences due to the unlike-
ness in the various parts. Thus among cereals wheat
as compared with barley has a narrower leaf, and
a smoother stem of closer texture tougher and less
brittle.+ Again the seed of wheat has several
coats,° that of barley is naked, that plant having
its seeds specially naked. Also one-seeded wheat
rice-wheat and all such plants have their seed in
several coats, and above all, it may be said, is this
true of oats.© Also the ‘ reed ’’ of wheat is taller than ἴ
that of barley, and wheat has its ear less distant
from the “ leaf.’

Further the husk of wheat is distinct 8 from that of
barley, being less dry and softer. Barley also differs
from wheat in this respect; it has grains in a regular
row,” whereas those of wheat are not in a row, but
the ear is as it were quite simple in form.!°

Such then are the differences as between one
whole kind and another. But in each of these
kinds again, for instance in barley and wheat,
there are many sub-divisions differing both in the
actual fruits, in the ear, and in the other characteristic


6 βρόμος conj. Scal. from Plin. 1.6. and G; κρόμος PM ;
κρόκος Ald.; βρῶμος Vin. =

7 ἢ conj. "Sch. from Plin. /.c. and G; καὶ Ald.H.

8 ἤδιον Ald.; ἥδιον Vin.H. from G: so Sch. and W. cf.
Col. 6. 3. 3.

9 στοιχειώδης. ὃ otorxddns: v. LS.

10 ὁμαλὴς conj. Sch.; ὁμαλὴ UMAId.


165


THEOPHRASTUS


καὶ τοῖς πάθεσι. τῶν μὲν κριθῶν αἱ μέν εἰσι
, / e \
δίστοιχοι αἱ δὲ τρίστοιχοι αἱ δὲ τετράστοιχοι
καὶ πεντάστοιχοι' πλεῖστον δ᾽ ἑξάστοιχον, καὶ
Ν “ / / / / \
yap τοιοῦτο TL γένος ἐστί. πυκνότεραι δὲ ἀεὶ
\ / a ΄
κατὰ τὴν θέσιν ὡς ἐπὶ πᾶν αἱ πολυστοιχότεραι.
\ \ / \ \ \
διαφορὰ δὲ μεγάλη καὶ TO παραβλαστητικὴν
\ ’
εἶναι, καθάπερ εἴπομεν τὴν ᾿Ϊνδικήν. καὶ οἱ
\ la) \ / , a
στάχυες δὲ τῶν μὲν μεγάλοι Kal μανότεροι ταῖς
a “ \ /
κριθαῖς τῶν δὲ ἐλάττους Kal πυκνότεροι, Kal
> / \ a / “ \ \ la) \
ἀπέχοντες δὲ τοῦ φύλλου τῶν μὲν πολὺ τῶν δὲ
/ [4 A > 7, / \
μίκρον, ὥσπερ TOV Αχιλλείων καλουμένων. Kal
n \ “ “ /
αὐτῶν δὲ τῶν κριθῶν ai μὲν στρογγυλότεραι Kal
\ /
ἐλάττους al δὲ προμηκέστεραι καὶ μείζους Kal
/ Ν Ν / \
μανότεραι κατὰ TOV στάχυν. ETL δὲ αἱ μὲν λευ-
Ψ e δὲ oh: \ > LC “
καί, αἱ δὲ μέλαιναι καὶ ἐπιπορφυρίζουσαι, αἵπερ
a “ x
Kal πολυάλφιτοι δοκοῦσιν εἶναι Kai πρὸς τοὺς
an \ \
χειμῶνας δὲ Kal τὰ πνεύματα καὶ ὅλως τὸν ἀέρα
A a Υ͂
τῶν λευκῶν ἰσχυρότεραι.
\ \ a a
Πολλὰ δὲ γένη καὶ τῶν πυρῶν ἐστιν εὐθὺς
a ω \ /
ἀπὸ TOV χωρῶν ἔχοντα τὰς ἐπωνυμίας, οἷον
ἣν a > / bee
Λιβυκοὶ ἸΙοντικοὶ Θρᾷκες ᾿Ασσύριοι Αἰγύπτιοι
7 x \ \ a - al
Σικελοί, διαφορὰς δὲ καὶ ταῖς χροιαῖς καὶ τοῖς
an \ - > /
μεγέθεσι καὶ τοῖς εἴδεσι καὶ ταῖς ἰδιότησιν
a na ,
ἔχουσι καὶ ἐν ταῖς δυνάμεσι ταῖς τε ἄλλαις καὶ
- Ν x / \ \ b
μάλιστα ταῖς πρὸς τὴν σίτησιν. τινὲς Kal ἀπ
1 Explained below, 8. 4. 4: cf. 8. 4. 3.
2 wdbeot: cf. 1. 1. τι. 3 Plin. 18, 78.
4 πλεῖστον δ᾽ ἑξάστοιχον, καὶ yap τοιοῦτο conj. W.; πλεῖστον


ἑξάστοιχον τοιοῦτον UM; πλεῖσται καὶ ἑξάστιχοι' καὶ yap τοι-


ovrov Ald. Ἡ,
166


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. tv. 2-3


features; and again in capacities! and properties.”
8 Of barley different sorts have respectively two, three,
four, and five rows of seeds; the largest number +
known is six, for there is a kind which bears that
number. And those which have more rows have
generally the grains set closer together. Another
great difference is that of having side-shoots, as we
said of the Indian kind.® Again in barley® the
ears are in some kinds large and of looser make,
in some smaller and set closer; in some kinds
the ear is some way from the ‘leaf,’ in some it is
nearer to it, as in the kind called ‘ Achillean.’ ἴ
Again of the grains themselves some are rounder
and smaller, some more oblong and larger and set
at wider intervals on the ear. Moreover some are
white, some black or reddish, and the latter are
thought to produce much meal and to be more
robust than the white as to bearing winter wind or
conditions of climate generally.

There are ὃ also many kinds of wheat which take
their names simply from the places where they
grow,? as Libyan Pontic!® Thracian Assyrian
Egyptian Sicilian. They show differences!! in
colour size form and individual character, and
also!” as regards their capacities 18 in general and
especially their value as food. Some again get


5. Referred to 4. 4. 9, but without mention of this feature.
δ ταῖς κριθαῖς conj. W.; τῆς κριθῆς Ald.
eye U.1 . 36 2A. δ ‘3. 0.2

8 ἐστιν εὐθὺς conj. W.; εὐθύς ἐστιν Ald.

Sof. GO. Ps 321-2; Plin: 18. 2.

10 Tlovrixol conj. Sch.; πόντιοι Ald.

11 διαφορὰς con}. W.; διαφέροντες Ald. H.

12 καὶ conj. W.; δὲ Ald.

13 Explained below, 8. 4.4: pace of growth.


167


THEOPHRASTUS


7 x ,7ὔ τ 7
ἄλλων τὰς προσηγορίας, οἷον καγχρυδίας στλεγ-
\ 3 - nr
yus ᾿Αλεξάνδρειος: ὧν ἁπάντων ἐν τοῖς εἰρημένοις
\ , a
tas διαφορὰς ληπτέον. οὐχ ἥκιστα δ᾽ οἰκεῖαι
‘ \ / /
εἴ τις λαμβάνοι τὰς τοιαύτας" οἷόν εἰσιν οἱ μὲν
Sw ς \ », \ > lal \ 4 e
πρώϊοι οἱ δὲ ὄψιοι, καὶ εὐαυξεῖς καὶ πολύχοι οἱ
Ν \ aed / \ , ¢ \
δὲ «μικροὶ; καὶ OALYOKOL, καὶ μεγαλοστάχυες οἱ δὲ
UA ns ς \ 5 δ, \ /
μικροστάχυες. καὶ Ol μὲν EV κάλυκι πολὺν χρόνον
εἰν Pyr/ 4 Ψ ¢ , \ /
οἱ δ᾽ ὀλίγον ἔνοντες, ὥσπερ ὁ Λιβυκός. καὶ κάλα-
Ν \ ¢ \ \ “ ς
μον οἱ μὲν λεπτὸν οἱ δὲ παχύν' καὶ τοῦτο ὁ Λι-
\ / \ \ \ ς !
βυκὸς ἔχει, παχὺν δὲ καὶ ὁ καγχρυδίας. ἔτι δὲ
lal [ ἈΝ 5 ’ e \ / v4 ε
χιτῶνας οἱ μὲν ὀλίγους οἱ δὲ πολλούς, ὥσπερ ὁ
ς ς
Θράκιος. καὶ ὁ μὲν μονοκάλαμος ὁ δὲ πολυκά-
a Ν \
Napos, καὶ μᾶλλον δὲ Kal ἧττον.
Ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ εἴ τι παραπλήσιον τούτοις
cal / 2 f \
ἢ τοῖς πρότερον εἰρημένοις κατὰ Tas δυνάμεις.
an , >
ai yap τοιαῦται φυσικώταται δόξαιεν ἂν εἶναι
lal fa) \ \ a /
τῶν διαφορῶν. ἐν αἷς Kal TO TOV τριμήνων Kal
“ Ν /
τὸ TOV διμήνων Kai εἴ TL γένος ἐν ἐλάττοσιν
a / \ 4
ἡμέραις τελειοῦται, καθάπερ φασὶν εἶναι περὶ
2 ’ «“ὉΝῸ / 7 X nr
τὴν Αἰνείαν, ol τετταράκοντα ἡμέραις ἀπὸ τῆς
a 4 \ Nd LJ
σπορᾶς ἁδρύνονται καὶ τέλος ἰσχουσιν' εἶναι δ᾽
ἰσχυρὸν τοῦτον καὶ βαρὺν οὐχ ὥσπερ τὸν τρί-
μῆνον κοῦφον, δι ὃ καὶ τοῖς οἰκέταις παρ-
έχειν, καὶ γὰρ οὐδὲ πίτυρον ἔχειν πολύ. σπα-
5 > /
VLOTATOS μὲν οὖν καὶ τάχιστος εἰς τελείωσιν


1 στλεγγύς. Sir W. Thiselton-Dyer conjectures σίλιγνις :
cf. Plin. 18. 184, LS. σιλίγνιον.

* cf. Geop. 3, 3. 11. 3 7.e. colour, size, ete.
er add. W. to correspond to εὐαυξεῖς (conj. Sch.; εὐαξεῖς

d.).


168


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. τν. 3-4


their distinctive names for other reasons, as kankh-
rydias stiengys‘ ‘Alexandrian ’?; all of which must be
distinguished by the above-mentioned? characters.
Again, if one takes such differences as the following,
they are quite characteristic—thus some are early,
some late, some are vigorous and _ prolific, some
are small* and produce little, some have a large,
some a small ear. The ears of some remain® a
long time in the sheath,® of some it remains but
a short time, as that of the Libyan kind. ‘ Again
some have a slender, some a stout haulm; the
Libyan kind has this characteristic also, and that
of kankhrydias is also stout. Again the grain of
some has few coats,® of some many, for instance the
Thracian. Some kinds have a single ‘reed,’ some
more than one, and in the latter class the number
varies.

10 So too must we distinguish any differences like
these or those mentioned above which are found in
the several capacities; for these would seem to be
the most essential differences. In this connexion
we may distinguish kinds which mature in three or
in two months, and those, if there be such, which
take a less number of days; for instance, they say
that in the region of Aineia there is a kind which
ripens and attains perfection within forty days from
the time of sowing; they say too that this grain is
strong and heavy, not light like that which takes
three months; wherefore they give it even to the
servants, for it also does not contain much bran.
Now this kind is the rarest and the quickest to


® ἔνοντες conj. W.; ἔχοντες Ald.
8 of 8s 2. 4. 7 Plin. 18. 69. 8 de. glumes.
9 of. C.P, 4. 12. 5; Plin. Le. 10 Plin. 18. 70.


TO9


THEOPHRASTUS


τ op \ \ / / “ \ 3
οὗτος. εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ δίμηνοί τινες οἵπερ καὶ ἐκ
/ 3 7 ᾽ ᾽ / 3 / \
Σικελίας ἐκομίσθησαν εἰς Αχαίαν' ὀλυγοχόοι δὲ
\ A
καὶ ὀλυγογόνοι Kal κοῦφοι κατὰ τὴν προσφορὰν
καὶ ἡδεῖς. καὶ ἄλλοι δέ τινες οἱ περὶ Εὔβοιαν
5. ἃ \ / b a / 4 \
εἰσὶ καὶ μάλιστα ἐν τῇ Kapvotia. τρίμηνοι δὲ
πολλοὶ καὶ πανταχοῦ κοῦφοι οὗτοι καὶ ὀλυγοχόοι
\ / \ \ 54 \ 3. ῃ
καὶ μονοκάλαμοι κατὰ τὴν ἔκφυσιν καὶ τὸ ὅλον
a / a -“
ἀσθενεῖς. κουφότατος μὲν οὖν ὡς ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν
\ «ς i? / \ “ > 4
πυρὸς ὁ ἸΠοντικός: βαρύτερος δὲ τῶν εἰς τὴν
/ ς το /
Ἑλλάδα παραγινομένων ὁ Σικελός: τούτου δ᾽
” / ς / a \ / Ὁ
ἔτι βαρύτερος ὁ Βοιωτός" σημεῖον δὲ λέγουσιν ὅτι
a / ie]
οἱ μὲν ἀθληταὶ ἐν τῇ Βοιωτίᾳ τρί᾽ ἡμιχοίνικα
/ > \
μόλις ἀναλίσκουσιν, ᾿Αθήναξε δὲ ὅταν ἔλθωσι
/ > ¢e / ι / a \ \ e >
πένθ᾽ ἡμιχοίνικα ῥᾳδίως. κοῦφος δὲ Kal ὁ ἐν
A ἴω / \ i lal
τῇ Λακωνικῇ. τούτων μὲν οὖν ἔν τε ταῖς χώ-
\ al οἱ ‘
pats καὶ τῷ ἀέρι TO αἴτιον: ἐπεὶ Kal περὶ τὴν
> / / /
Aciav ov πόρρω Βάκτρων ἐν μέν τινι τόπῳ
Ν 3 Ψ \ a ‘d “-
οὕτως ἁδρὸν εἶναί φασι τὸν σῖτον ὥστε πυρῆνος
ἐλαίας μέγεθος λαμβάνειν, ἐν δὲ τοῖς Πισσάτοις
τ Ν > -
καλουμένοις οὕτως ἰσχυρὸν ὥστ᾽ εἴ τις πλεῖον
A / \ aA
προσενέγκοιτο διαρρήγνυσθαι, καὶ τῶν Μακε-
Υ͂ Ν \ fa) ἴω A \
δόνων καὶ πολλοὺς τοῦτο παθεῖν. ἄτοπον δὲ
x ‘ -
καὶ ἀνομολογούμενον πρὸς τὴν τῶν τριμήνων
: \ \ \ a
κουφότητα τὸ περὶ τοὺς Ἰ]οντικοὺς συμβαῖνον"
δὲ ὁ \ 4 \ \ » \ ¢ ἃ \
εἰσὶ γὰρ οἱ μὲν σκληροὶ ἠρινοὶ οἱ δὲ μαλακοὶ
x / a ῇ ς
χειμερινοί' πολὺ γὰρ διαφέρει τῇ κουφότητι ὁ
/ ¢ lA δὲ x δύ J / «ς ”
μαλακός. [ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ δύο ἀρότους ὡς ἔοικε


1 τρί᾽ ἡμιχοίνικα conj. Sch.; τριημισ χοίνικα M ; τριημιχοίνικα
P,Ald.H.


170


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. τν. 4-6


mature. But there is also a kind which takes two
months ; this was brought to Achaia from Sicily ;
it is not however prolific nor fertile, though as
food it is light and sweet. There is another such
kind which grows in Euboea and especially in the
region of Karystos. There are several kinds that
take three months, and these, wherever they are
found, are light and not prolific; their growth
consists of a single ‘reed,’ and in general they are
not robust. Lightest of all we may say is the
Pontic wheat; the Sicilian is heavier than most of
those imported into Hellas, but heavier still than
this is the Boeotian ; in proof of which it is said
that the athletes in Boeotia consume scarcely three
pints,! while, when they come to Athens, they easily
manage five.2 The Laconian kind is also light.
The reason for these differences is to be found in
the respective soils and in the climate ; ? for in Asia
not far from Bactra they say that in a certain place
the corn is so vigorous that the grains grow as
large as an olive-stone, while in the country called
that of the Pissatoi it is so strong that, if a man
eats too much of it, he bursts, which was actually the
fate of many of the Macedonians. There is one
curious thing about the corn of Pontus, which is
an exception’ to the rule as to the lightness of
crops raised in three months; for there the hard
crops are those of the spring, the soft ones those
of the winter; for soft kinds are exceedingly light.
Two sowings, as it appears, are made of all corn


2 rev? ἡμιχοίνικα conj. Sch.; πενθημισχοίνικα M ; πενθη-
μιχοίνικα P,Ald.H. 3. Phin: 58} 70;

4 2,6. in Alexander’s army.

δ᾽ ἀνομολογούμενον : cf. C.P. 4. 8.2; Plat. Gory. 495 a.


171


THEOPHRASTUS


παντὸς τοῦ σίτου ποιοῦνται, τὸν μὲν χειμερινὸν
τὸν δὲ ἠρινόν, ἐν ᾧ καὶ τὰ ὄσπρια καταβάλ-
λουσιν].

Εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ οἱ μὲν καθαροὶ αἰρῶν, ὥσπερ ὁ
Ποντικὸς καὶ ὁ Αἰγύπτιος" καθαρὸς δὲ ἐπιει-
κῶς καὶ ὁ Σικελὸς καὶ μάλιστα ὁ AxpayayTivos
οὐκ αἱρώδης.

Ὁ δὲ Σικελὸς ἴδιον ἔχει τὸ μελάμπυρον καλού-
μενον, ὅ ἐστ ιν ἀβλαβὲς καὶ οὐχ ὥσπερ ἡ aipa
Bapv Kat κεφαλαλγές. ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν τοιαῦτα,
καθάπερ ἐλέχθη, ταῖς χώραις ἀναθετέον καὶ ὅσον
ἐπιβάλλει τοῖς γένεσιν.

V. Ἐν δὲ τοῖς ὀσπρίοις οὐχ ὁμοίως ἐστὶ
λαβεῖν τὰς τοιαύτας διαφοράς, εἴτ᾽ οὖν διὰ τὸ

μὴ ἐξετάξειν ὁμοίως εἴτε καὶ διὰ τὸ μονοειδέ-
στερᾶ τυγχάνειν" ἔξω γὰρ ἐρεβίνθου καὶ φακοῦ
καὶ ἐπ᾽ ὀλίγου κυάμου καὶ ὀρόβου, καθ᾽ ὅσον
ἡ τῶν χρωμάτων καὶ τῶν pes διαφορά, τῶν
γ᾽ ἄλλων οὐ ποιοῦσιν ἰδέας. δὲ ἐρέβινθοι
καὶ τοῖς μεγέθεσι καὶ τοῖς υλοῖς καὶ τοῖς
χρώμασι καὶ ταῖς μορφαῖς ιαφέρουσιν, οἷον
κριοὶ ὀροβιαῖοι οἱ ἀνὰ μέσον. ἐπὶ πᾶσι δὲ τὰ
λευκὰ γλυκύτερα" καὶ γὰρ ὁ ὄροβος καὶ φακὸς
καὶ ἐρέβινθος καὶ κύαμος καὶ σήσαμον: ἔστι γὰρ
καὶ σήσαμον λευκόν.

᾿Αλλὰ μῶλλον ἐν τοῖς τοιοῖσδε ποιεῖν ἐστι τὰς
διαφορὰς οἷον, ἐπεὶ πάντα ταῦτ᾽ ἔλλοβα, τὰ μὲν


1 ὁμοίως... καταβάλλουσιν bracketed by Sch. as a gloss.
2 But ef. 8.. 8. 3. 3 cf. Diosc. 4. 116.

4 2,6. when it gets into the bread.

5 of. Plin. 18. 156; Diose. 2. 100.

ὁ ὅσον ἐπιβάλλει : οἵ. Arist. Pol. 1. 13. 8,


172


Bhi:


<


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. tv. 6-v. 2


alike, one in winter and one in spring, at which time
they also plant the seed of the pulses.!

Some kinds are free from darnel, as the Pontic
and the Egyptian ; the Sicilian is also fairly free from
it, and that of Akragas is especially immune from
darnel, -

2 Peculiar however to the Sicilian is the plant
called melampyron,? which is harmless‘* and not, like
the darnel, injurious and productive of headache.°
However such peculiarities, as was said, must be
ascribed to the soil, and to a certain extent® to the
different characters of different kinds.


Of the differences between pulses.


V. In pulses we cannot find such differences to
the same extent, whether for the want of equally
careful enquiry or because there is actually less
diversity in these plants. ‘For, apart from chick-
pea lentil and to a certain extent bean and vetch
(in so far as in these we find differences of colour
and taste), among the rest® no distinct forms are
recognised. Chick-peas however differ in size colour
taste and shape; thus there are the varieties called
‘rams, ‘ vetch-like’ chick-peas and the intermediate
forms. In all pulses the white are the sweeter,
and this applies to vetch lentil chick-pea bean and
sesame, of which also there is a white form.

10 Fiowever it is more possible to recognise the
differences in such points as these :—all these plants
have pods, but whereas the pods in some kinds have

* Plin. 18. 124. 8 + conj. Sch.; 7’ Ald. H.

® οἱ after ὀριβιαῖοι add. Dalec. For ἀνὰ μέσον cf. 3. 18. 2

10 Plin 18. 125.
1 ἔλλοβα conj. Seal. from G ; ἐλλέβορα Ald.H.; ἐλλόβορα Ὁ ;


ἐπεὶ πάντα ταῦτ᾽ conj. W.; ἐπὶ πάντα τὰ Ald.H


OTS


THEOPHRASTUS


αὐτῶν ἀδιάφρακτα Kal ὥσπερ συμψαύοντα TUY-
χάνει, καθάπερ ὄροβος πισὸς καὶ σχεδὸν τὰ πλεῖ-
στα, τὰ δὲ διαπεφραγμένα, καθάπερ θέρμος, ἔ ἔτι δὲ
μᾶλλον καὶ ἰδίως τὸ σήσαμον. καὶ τὰ μὲν
μακρόλοβα τὰ δὲ καὶ στρογγυλόλοβα, καθάπερ ὁ
ἐρέβινθος. ἀνὰ λόγον δ᾽ ἀκολουθεῖ καὶ τὰ πλήθη
τῶν σπερμάτων' ἐλάττω γὰρ ἐν τοῖς μικροῖς,
ὥσπερ ἔν τε τῷ τῶν ἐρεβίνθων καὶ ἐν τῷ τῶν
φακῶν.

Καὶ παραπλήσιαι δὲ lows αἱ Eas a? καὶ ἃς
ἐπὶ τῶν σιτηρῶν ἐλέγομεν περὶ τῶν σταχύων καὶ
αὐτῶν τῶν καρπῶν' ἐπεὶ καὶ οἱ καλούμενοι λοβοὶ
σχεδὸν ἀκόλουθοι τοῖς σπέρμασίν εἰσιν, οἱ μὲν
ἐπιπλατεῖς, ὥσπερ οἱ τοῦ φακοῦ καὶ τῆς ἀφάκης,
οἱ δὲ κυλινδρώδεις μᾶλλον, ὡς οἱ τοῦ ὀρόβου καὶ
τοῦ πισοῦ: τὰ γὰρ σπέρματα ἑκατέρων τοιαῦτα
τοῖς σχήμασι" ἀλλὰ τὰς μὲν τοιαύτας διαφορὰς
πολλὰς av τις εὕροι καθ᾽ ἕκαστον, ὧν αἱ μὲν
κοιναὶ πᾶσιν αἱ δὲ ἴδιαι κατὰ γένος.

Ὅτι δὲ πάντα προσπέφυκε τοῖς λοβοῖς καὶ
ἔχει καθάπερ ἀρχήν τινα, τὰ μὲν προέχουσαν,
ὥσπερ ὁ κύαμος καὶ ὁ ἐρέβινθος, τὰ δὲ καὶ
ἔγκοιλον, ὥσπερ θέρμος καὶ ἄλλ᾽ ἄττα, τὰ δὲ
οὕτω μὲν οὐ φανερὰν ἐλάττω δὲ καὶ ὥσπερ ἀπο-
σημαίνουσαν μόνον, δῆλον μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς ὄψεως: ἐξ
ἧς καὶ ὅταν σπαρῇ βλαστάνει καὶ ῥιζοῦται,
καθάπερ ἐλέχθη, κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς δὲ καὶ αὐτὰ TPE:
peta προσηρτημένα τῷ ROBO, μέχρι ov ἂν


1 ἀδιάφρακτα con]. ον from 6, non intersepta ; διάφρακτα
ΑἸα.Η. i ea Uae. |S
3 διαπεφραγμένα con), Sch. λεῖα πεφραγμένα Ald. H.
4 of. 3, 18. 13.


174


»“- ΧὩ


<


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. v. 2-4


no divisions,! but the seeds as it were touch one
another,’ as in vetch pea and most kinds, in some
there are divisions,? as in lupin and still more in
sesame, in which the divisions are of a peculiar
kind. Again some have long, some round pods, as
chick-pea. And the number of seeds follows in
proportion, since they are fewer in the small pods,
as in those of chick-pea and lentil.

Possibly these differences correspond to _ those
which we mentioned in the case of cereals as to the
ears and the actual fruits ; for what are called ‘ pods’
also® fairly correspond to the shape of the seeds,
some being flat, as those of lentil and tare, some
more or less cylindrical, as those of vetch and pea ° :
for in the case of either pair of plants the seeds
correspond in shape. However one might discover
and distinguish many such differences, of which
some are common to a whole kind,’ others special to
particular varieties.

In all cases the seeds are attached to the pods and
have a sort of starting-point, which in some cases
projects, as in bean and chick-pea, in some. is
hollow, as in lupin and some others, and in some
is not thus conspicuous but smaller and, as it were,
only indicated; this is plain from observation; it is
from this point that the seeds germinate and take
root when they are sown, as was 8814 8: but to start
with. they are themselves nourished by being so
attached to the pod until they are matured. This

δ 7.e. as does the form of the ear in cereals.

6 καὶ τοῦ πισοῦ" τὰ γὰρ conj. Scal. from Plin. /.c. and G; τοῦ
πισοῦ yap τὰ UMAId.

7 ¢.e. which either differentiate (6. .} pea from lentil, or one


variety of pea from another. ef. 8. 4. 2 n.
τας πο ἃ


15


THEOPHRASTUS


a \ ai > \ , a na \ ,
τελειωθῇ! φανερὸν δέ ἐστι Kal ἐκ TOV νῦν καὶ ἐκ
τῶν προειρημένων. περὶ μὲν οὖν τῶν κατὰ τὰς
διαφορὰς ἅλις.

Vi, Σπείρειν δὲ ξυμφέρει πάντα μάλιστα μὲν
ἐν τοῖς ὡραίοις ἀρότοις: οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν ξηρᾷ
τινες καταβάλλουσι καὶ οὐχ ἥκιστα πυροὺς καὶ

Ν na
κριθὰς ὡς μάλιστα αὐταρκεῖν δυνάμενα, ὅπου μὴ
ὄρνισιν ἢ ἄλλοις θηρίοις ἐπισινὴς ἡ χώρα. δοκεῖ
n ς nan /
yap ws ἐπὶ πᾶν ὁ πρῶτος ἄροτος ἀμείνων εἶναι,
a /
χείριστος δὲ σπόρος ἐν ταῖς ἡμιβρόχοις" ἀπόλ-

\ nr
λυται yap Kal ἐκγαλακτοῦται τὰ σπέρματα, Kal
¢ / / > /, / \
ἅμα ξυμβαίνει πόαν ἀναφύεσθαι πολλήν. μετὰ

\ \ ¢ an
δὲ τὴν σπορὰν ὕδωρ ἐπιγίνεσθαι πᾶσι ξυμφέρει,

A Ὡ n / n d Ὁ“
πλὴν OTA δυσβλαστῆ γίνεται μᾶλλον, ὥσπερ ὃ TE
κύαμος δοκεῖ καὶ τῶν θερινῶν σήσαμον καὶ κύ-
μινον καὶ ἐρύσιμον.

A an \ Ν

Πυκνοσπορεῖν δὲ καὶ μανοσπορεῖν καὶ πρὸς τὰς

a \ / \
χώρας βλέποντα χρή" πλεῖον yap ἡ πίειρα Kal
> \ y s ἀν , \ a
ἀγαθὴ δύναται φέρειν THs ὑφάμμου τε Kal λεπτῆς.

7] / 7] / ς ¢ \ \ / e \ δὲ
καίτοι λέγεταί τις λόγος WS OTE μὲν πλέον OTE OE

᾽ὔ
ἔλαττον ἡ αὐτὴ δέχεται χώρα' καὶ οἰωνίζονται

\ / id ᾽ > / an A > 7
τὸ πλέον ὡς οὐκ ἀγαθόν, πεινῆν γὰρ εὐθύς φασι

n / /
τὴν γῆν" οὗτος μὲν οὖν ἴσως εὐηθέστερος λόγος.
/ /
εἰ δέ τις πρὸς τὰ σπέρματα Dewpoin καὶ μάλιστά
γε πρὸς αὐτοὺς τοὺς τόπους ἅμα τῷ ἐδάφει
ἴω \ /
καὶ τὴν θέσιν ἀναθεωρῶν τήν γε πρὸς τὰ πνεύ-


1 αὐταρκεῖν Ald.; ἀνταρκεῖν U.
2 ἐπισινὴς conj. Dalec.; ἐπινὴς UMAId.; obnoxia G.
3 7.e. after the rains.


176


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. ν. 4-v1. 2


is clear both from what is said now and from what
was said before. Enough then about the points of
difference.


Of sowing, manuring, and watering.


VI. It is expedient to sow all these, if possible, at
the early seed-time ; however some plant the seed
even in dry ground, and especially wheat and barley,
on the theory that they are most likely to hold
their own! at a time when the ground is not in-
tested. with birds or other creatures. — For ‘it
appears that in general the first sowing is better,
and worst that which is made in _half-soaked
ground ;* for then the seeds perish and become
‘milky ’;* moreover many weeds come up at that
time. After the sowing however it is beneficial
for all that rain should fall on them, except in
the case of some which appear to germinate then
with more difficulty, as seems ° to be the case with
beans, and among summer crops with sesame cummin
and eryszmon.

6 As to sowing thickly or scantily one should have
regard to the soil as well as to other considerations ;
for a fat good soil can bear more than one which is
sandy and light. However there is a saying that the
same soil can take at one time more, at another less
seed; and in general the former condition is taken
as an unfavourable omen, for then they say at once
that the soil is hungry; however this is perhaps a
rather foolish saying. If a man should have regard
to the kind of the seed and especially to the actual
situation, considering the aspect in respect of winds


4 of. γαλάκτωσις, C.P. 4. 4. 7 and 8.
> δοκεῖ conj. W.; ἐδόκει Ald. S Pling18,. 196:


177
VoL. Il. N


THEOPHRASTUS


\ \ Ψ » / rv / \
ματα Kal τὸν ἥλιον, οἰκειότερον ἂν λαμβάνοι τὰς
διαφοράς.

3 \ / A. “OF: \ ς / “ /
Ava λόγον δὲ ἔχει Kal ἡ κόπρισις τοῖς σπόροις
πρὸς τὰς χώρας" νειὸς δ᾽ ἀμείνων ἡ χειμέριος τῆς
> ny > “ \ > rd la 5
ἐαρινῆς. ἐνιαχοῦ δὲ οὐ ξυμφέρειν βαθεῖαν ἀρο-
τριᾶν, ὥσπερ καὶ ἐν Συρίᾳ, δι’ ὃ μικροῖς ἀρότροις
fal ᾽ » \ \ 4. > /
χρῶνται. παρ᾽ ἄλλοις δὲ TO λίαν ἐξεργάζεσθαι
βλάπτει, καθάπερ ἐν Σικελίᾳ, δι’ ὃ καὶ τῶν ξένων
ὡς ἔοικε πολλοὶ διαμαρτάνουσι. πάντα μὲν οὖν
πρὸς τὰς χώρας.
Διαιροῦσι δὲ καὶ τὰ σπέρματα ποίᾳ ποῖον
\ a a a
mpoodopov: ἐν yap ταῖς χειμεριναῖς πυρὸν μᾶλλον
ἢ κριθήν, καὶ ὅλως σῖτον ἢ χεδροπὰ κελεύουσιν
ἐν ταῖς χέρσοις καὶ διὰ χρόνου κινουμέναις" καὶ
\ π \ 7 a xX / /
yap αὗται πυρὸν φέρουσι μᾶλλον ἢ κριθήν. δέ-
χεται δὲ καὶ ἐπομβρίαν μᾶλλον πυρὸς τῆς κριθῆς,
καὶ ἐν τοῖς ἀκόπροις φέρει μᾶλλον. ὡσαύτως δὲ
καὶ αὐτῶν τῶν πυρῶν ποῖος τῇ ποίᾳ πρόσφορος,
οἷον ἀγαθῇ καὶ πιείρᾳ καὶ ψαφαρᾷ καὶ λεπτῇ
ἀγαθῇ καὶ πιείρᾳ p¢ ἢ
“Ὁ >
«καὶ! Tals ἄλλαις ομοίως.
“ \ “ \ (3 \ /
Towp δὲ ὅταν μὲν χλοηφορήσῃ Kal κυήσῃ
“ Ὁ / 2 n x a \
πλεῖον ἅπασι ξυμφέρει: ἀνθοῦσι δὲ πυροῖς μὲν
καὶ κριθαῖς καὶ τοῖς σιτώδεσι βλαβερόν: ἀπόλ-


1 ἂν λαμβάνοι conj. Sch.; ἀναλαμβάνοι ΑἸα.Η.

2 κόπρισις conj. Sch.; κόπρησις Ald.

ὃ cf. OL PLS: κυ ΤῸ 4 of. Creare.

5 πάντα μὲν οὖν M3; ταῦτα μὲν Ald.H.; ταῦτα μὲν οὖν conj.
Sch, followed by W.

: © κελεύουσιν conj. W.; καὶ ὅλως Ald. H.

΄ κινουμέναις conj. Sch. (ef. C.P. 3. 21. 4, ἣ διὰ χρόνον ree:
γουμένη γῆ) ; κενουμέναις UAId ; καινουμέναις Vin.


178


‘


yey τὰ Agee


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. vi. 2-5


and sun, as well as the soil itself, he would more
properly gauge! the differences.

Similarly manuring ? for the sown crops should be
done with regard to the soil ; and it is better to turn
up fallow? land in winter than in spring. And
there are some‘ places in which deep ploughing
is not expedient, as in Syria; wherefore they use
small plough-shares. In other parts to work the
ground too much is injurious, as in Sicily: wherefore
many settlers in the country, it appears, make a
mistake. From every point of view® therefore the
soil must be considered.

The seeds are also classified according as each
suits a particular soil; in wintry lands wheat is
sown rather than barley, and in general they say Ὁ
that corn rather than leguminous plants should be
sown in barren soils which are only disturbed’ at
long intervals; and such soils bear wheat better
than barley. Moreover wheat welcomes abundant
rain? more than barley, and bears better on land
which is not manured.!® In like manner they dis-
tinguish among wheats themselves which suits
which kind of soil, namely which grows best in
good? fat soil and which in crumbling light soil,
and?2 so on with other kinds of soil.

18 More abundant rain is beneficial to all crops when
they have come into leaf and formed the flower ;
however it is harmful to wheats and barleys and
other cereals when they are actually in flower; for

8 τῆς κριθῆς conj. W.; καὶ κριθῆς UM; ἡ κριθὴ Ald.; ἢ κριθὴ H.

as Le eS

10 Explained C. P. l.c.
Ἡ ἀγαθῇ conj. Casaub : so Vin.; ἀγαθὴ Ald. (and so with the


other datives). 12 καὶ add. St.
18 Plin. 18. 151 and 152.


179
N 2


THEOPHRASTUS


λυσι yap" ὀσπρίοις δ᾽ ἀβλαβὲς πλὴν ἐρεβίνθων"
οὗτοι γὰρ ἀποκλυσθείσης τῆς ἅλμης ἀπόλλυνται
σφακελίζοντες καὶ ὑπὸ καμπῶν κατεσθιόμενοι"
ἰσχυρότερος δὲ ὁ μέλας ἐρέβινθος καὶ ὁ πυρρὸς
τοῦ λευκοῦ: συμφέρει δέ, φασίν, ἐν τοῖς ἐφύδροις
τόποις ὀψὲ σπείρειν αὐτόν. κύαμος δὲ ἀνθῶν
μάλιστα φιλεῖ βρέχεσθαι, δι ὃ καὶ οὐκ ἐθέ-
λουσιν ὀψισπορεῖν, ὥσπερ εἴπομεν, ὅτι πολὺν
ἀνθεῖ: μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἀπάνθησιν ὀλίγου πάμπαν
ὕδατος δεῖται" σύνεγγυς γὰρ ἡ τελείωσις. ἀλλ᾽
ὅταν ἁδρυνθῇ καὶ βλάπτειν δοκεῖ τὰ σιτώδη καὶ
κριθὴν δὲ πυροῦ μᾶλλον.

Ἔν Αἰγύπτῳ δὲ καὶ Βαβυλῶνι καὶ Βάκτροις,
ὅπου μὴ ὕεται ἡ χώρα <> σπανίως, αἱ δρόσοι τὸ
ὅλον ἐκτρέφουσιν. ἔτι καὶ οἱ περὶ Κυρήνην καὶ
Εὐεσπερίδας τόποι. καιριώτατα δὲ πᾶσιν ὡς
ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν τὰ ἠρινά: δι ὃ καὶ ἡ Σικελία
πολύσιτος" πολλὰ γὰρ τοῦ ἦρος καὶ μαλακὰ
γίνεται, τοῦ δὲ χειμῶνος ὀλίγα. ζητεῖ δὲ ἡ μὲν
λεπτόγεως πολλὰ κατὰ μικρόν' ἣ δὲ πίειρα καὶ
πλῆθος μὲν ἐνεγκεῖν δύναται καὶ ἀὐδρίαν -πρὸς


δὲ τὴν χώρας ἀὐδρίαν πόντια πνεύματα καὶ αὖραι


δοκοῦσι ξυμφέρειν, ἄλλα δὲ παρ᾽ ἄλλοις τοιαῦτα,
καθάπερ καὶ πρότερον εἴρηται, ---ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ πᾶν
δὲ μᾶλλον αὐχμὸς ἢ ἐπομβρία ξυμφέρει τῷ σίτῳ"
οἱ γὰρ ὄμβροι καὶ ἄλλως ἐναντίοι καὶ πολλάκις
αὐτὰ τὰ σπέρματα διαφθείρουσιν, εἰ δὲ μὴ πλῆ-


---τ-τΠΠΠ-Ἕ---.-.-.-----᾽-᾽᾽--Ἐ-ὀἘὀ...-..--ὀ» ἘὀὈἠ5ἧ ΟὈ-ο--.--᾽»ν--Ξ--.--Ἕς--


Σ σφακελίζοντες Σ cf. 4. 14. 4.
* ὁ πυρρὸς τοῦ λευκοῦ conj. Scal. from G and Plin. 18, 124;
ὁ λευκὸς τοῦ πυροῦ UAld ; ὃ λ. τ. πυρροῦ H.; ὃ A. τ. πυρὸς Μ.
gi en OMY saa Re’) §
4 δεῖται conj. Sch.; δεῖσθαι Ald. H.


180


i al a a τ Νὴ)


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. νι. ς- 7


it destroys the flower. But to pulses it is harmless,
except to chick-peas ; for these, if the salt is washed
off them, perish from rot! or from being eaten
by caterpillars. However the black and the red 3
chick-pea are stronger than the white, and it is
beneficial, they say, to sow this crop late in moist
soil. The bean® likes especially to receive rain
when it is in flower; wherefore men are unwilling,
as we said, to sow it late, because it flowers for a
long time ; but after it has shed its flowers, it needs *
very little water, since its time of maturity is now
near. But, when cereals have matured, it appears
that water actually injures them, and barley more
than wheat.

In Egypt Babylon and Bactra, where the country
receives no rain, οὐ ὅ but little, the dews are sufficient
nourishment ; and so is it also® in the regions about
Cyrene and the Euesperides. However to all,
generally speaking, it is the spring rains which are
the most seasonable; and that is why Sicily is
rich in corn; for there is abundance of soft rain
in spring and little of it in winter. A light soil
requires plenty of rain, but little at a time; while
that which is fat can indeed bear both an abundance
of rain and a drought; (for a droughty country sea-
winds’ and breezes seem to be helpful, and various
breezes of this kind prevail in various countries,
as has been said already). Yet in general drought
suits corn better than excessive rain; for heavy
showers, apart from the harm which they do in
other ways, often actually destroy the seed, or at


5 ἢ add. Scal. from G: so Vin.
§ ἔτι conj. St. from G (?); ἐπεὶ Ald.
7 πόντια conj. Sch.; πάντα Ald. cf. 8. 7. 6.


18I


THEOPHRASTUS


/ A
Gos ye ποιοῦσι βοτάνης, ὥστε καταπνίγεσθαι Kal
> A
aT poder.
lal \ S
VII. Τῶν μὲν οὖν ἄλλων σπερμάτων οὐδὲν εἰς
7 /
ἄλλο πέφυκε μεταβάλλειν φθειρόμενον, πυρὸν
\ \ \ > 5 eS
δὲ καὶ κριθὴν εἰς αἷράν φασι καὶ μᾶλλον τὸν
/ , \ Aas > lal ? ’ \
Tupov, γίνεσθαι δὲ τοῦτ᾽ ἐν ταῖς ἐπομβρίαις καὶ
/ ? a We \. 42 ΄ 7
μάλιστα ἐν τοῖς εὐύδροις καὶ ὀμβρώδεσι χωρίοις.
e ᾽ > ” > \ ς i / ς ν᾽
ὅτι δ᾽ οὐκ ἔστιν ἠρινὸν ἡ aipa καθάπερ ἡ ἄλλη
lA a / “ / a
πόα, πειρῶνται yap τινες τοῦτο λέγειν, ἐκεῖθεν
a ᾽ \ \ a a \ ,
δῆλον: εὐθὺς yap Tov χειμῶνος φανερὰ γίνεται
nr / a Ν
πεφυκυῖα" καὶ διαφέρει πολλοῖς: ἔχει γὰρ τὸ
Λ Ν \ \ \ / \ ΄
φύλλον στενὸν καὶ δασὺ καὶ λιπαρόν, καὶ τούτων
2 " \ , Ψ \ / \ a
ἰδιώτατον TO λιπαρόν: ἡ γὰρ δασύτης Kal τοῖς
aA ’ , ς / 5 >. 23 \ / > \
τοῦ αὐγίλωπος ὑπάρχει, ANN ἐκφανὴς γίνεται ἐπὶ
a a ee. re rn \
τοῖς τοῦ αἰγίλωπος τοῦ ἦρος. τοῦτο μὲν οὖν ἴδιον
/ ΔΝ a / \ \ 3 /
τούτων, καὶ ETL τοῦ λίνου" καὶ γὰρ ἐκ τούτου
\ / \ 3
φασὶ γίνεσθαι τὴν aipav.
“ ’ \ Ἂν Y \ δ
Τοῦ δὲ ἐρεβίνθου πρὸς τὰ ἄλλα χεδροπὰ τό τε
\ \ x f
περὶ τὴν avOnow λεχθὲν Kal TO τάχιστα τελειο-


a ’ / x ὶ δέ, \
καρπεῖν ἰσχυρότατον ov καὶ ξυλωδέστατον, καὶ


1 Plin 18. 149 and 150; cf. C.P. 4. 5. 2.

2 πόα: ? grasses; cf. 8. 6. 1.

3 πειρῶνται γάρ τινες H.; ἀπειρῶνται" αἰτιῶνται γάρ τινες U;
ἃ πειρῶνται: αἰτιῶνται γάρ τινες PM: so also Ald. Βαβ. Οδιη.
with mark of corruption.

+ εὐθὺς yap Tod conj. Sch.; εὐθὺς τὸ τοῦ Ald.


182


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. vi. 7—vit. 2


least cause a luxuriant growth of leafage, so that the
grain is choked and becomes abortive.


Of the degeneration of cereals into darnel.


VII. 1Now, while it is not the nature of any
other of these seeds to degenerate and change into
something else, they say that wheat and _ barley
change into darnel, and especially wheat; and
that this occurs with heavy rains and especially in
well-watered and rainy districts. But that darnel
is not a plant of the spring, like other weeds? (for
some endeavour? to make this out) is clear from the
following consideration: it springs up and becomes
noticeable directly 4 winter comes; and it is dis-
tinguished in many ways; the foliage ® is narrow
abundant and glossy, and this gloss is the most
marked of these differences; (the® leaves of azgi-
lops* are indeed also abundant, 8 but this character
does not shew itself in them till spring). This
then is peculiar to the seeds of wheat and barley,
and also to those of flax ; for that too, they say, turns
into darnel.


Of the peculiar character of chick-pea.


A peculiarity of chick-pea as compared with other
leguminous plants is that which has been mentioned
as to its flowering; and also the fact that it is
the quickest to mature its fruit, being very strong
and woody; and again there is the fact that in


Pet. Pot 4, 11. ὁ rots conj. Sch.; τῆς Ald.
7 Plin. 18. 155.
8 ἀλλ᾽. . . αἰγίλωπος : text a makeshift. Wanting in Ald.


and all MSS. except Ὁ ; ἀλλ᾽ ἐκφανεῖς γίνονται καὶ τοῖς τοῦ αἰγ.
Ὁ; ἐκφανὴς γίνεται conj. Sch.; ἐπὶ for καὶ conj. W.


183


THEOPHRASTUS


ye \ = \ . ἢ \
TO ὅλον μὴ ποιεῖν νειὸν «ὡς: καρπιζόμενον: τὴν
\ “ 3 / \ / \ \ /
δὲ πόαν ἐξαπόλλυσι Kal μάλιστα δὲ Kal τάχιστα
τὸν τρίβολον. ὅλως δὲ οὐδὲ ἡ τυχοῦσα δύναται
7ὕ Sel? 5) \ / , A \ ,
φέρειν αὐτόν, ἀλλὰ μελάγγειόν τινα δεῖ καὶ πίει-.
3 lal Ἂν, Sf. ς » / \ by Ν -
ραν εἶναι. τῶν δὲ ἄλλων ἡ ἀρίστη νειὸς ἀπὸ τῶν
7
κυάμων καίπερ πυκνοσπορουμένων καὶ πολὺν
\ /
καρπὸν φεροντων.
nr a / » / ᾿' a
Ta δὲ ἐν τοῖς θερινοῖς ἀρότοις ὀλίγου δεῖ πάντα,
\ \ \ \ nr 7] a
φασὶ δὲ Kal τὰ ναματιαῖα συμφέρειν μᾶλλον
lal a / , \ /
αὐτοῖς τῶν ἐκ διός, μέλινοι δὲ Kal κέγχροι
\ “-
ἐλάττους ὕδατος: ἐὰν γὰρ ἔχωσι πλεῖον φυλλο-
A / Arrt A
βολοῦσιν. ἰσχυρότερον δὲ ὁ κέγχρος" οἱ δὲ μέλινοι
Δ / /
γλυκύτεροι Kal ἀσθενέστεροι. σήσαμον δὲ οὐδὲν
na \ \ /
«ζῶον; ἐσθίει χλωρὸν οὐδὲ θέρμον. εἰ δὲ μηδ᾽
7 a
ἐρύσιμον μηδὲ ὅρμινον σκεπτέον: καὶ ταῦτα
Ν 7
πικρά. ἔστι δὲ τὸ μὲν ἐρύσιμον ὅμοιον σησάμῳ
\ a 5, Ν \ «Ἁ lal /
καὶ λῖπος ἔχει" TO δὲ ὅρμινον κυμινῶδες μέλαν."
Ψ ᾿ 7]
σπείρεται δὲ ἅμα καὶ τὸ σήσαμον. περὶ μὲν οὖν
τούτων σκεπτέον.
» \ a > a / \ \ \
Ep δὲ ταῖς ἀγαθαῖς χώραις πρὸς TO μὴ φυλλο-
rn - “-
μανεῖν ἐπινέμουσι καὶ ἐπικείρουσι τὸν σῖτον,


1 Lit. ‘does not make fallow land.’ - αἵ. C.P. 4. 8. 3.

2 ὡς καρπιζόμενον I conj. after W. (καρπιζόμενον τὴν γῆν) ;
καρπὸς U; καρπὸς M3; καρπὸν Ald. ef. C.P. l.c. and 4. 8.1 ;
4. 8. 3: μὴ καρπίζεσθαι τὴν γῆν ἀλλὰ νειὸν ποιεῖν (ἢ - νέοις >)
καρποῖς, ‘for fresh crops.’

3 δὲ conj. W.; γε Ald. ‘od ΟΡ. ΒΙΘ

> ἡ ἀρίστη νειὸς conj. W. (cf. 8. 9. 1; ΟΡ. 4. 8. 1); χειρίστη
ΑΝ Ὁ; χειρίστην νήπιος MP; μμξηξ τ μεροῖν νειὸς Ald. οἵ. also
O.P. 3. 20. re


184


q


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. vit. 2-4


general it does not reinvigorate the ground,! since
it exhausts? it ; but it destroys weeds,? and above all
and soonest caltrop. And in general 4 it is not every
kind of soil which suits it; the soil should be black
and fat. Of the other leguminous plants the bean
best ὅ reinvigorates the ground, even if it is sown
thick and produces much fruit.


Of special features of ‘ summer crops.’
ΥΩ


All those crops® sown at the summer seed-time
need little water,’ and they say also that spring water
is better for them than rain water; and Italian
millet § and millet need less water, for, if they have
too much, they shed their leaves. Millet is the
robuster plant, Italian millet is sweeter and less
robust. Sesame and lupin are not eaten green by
any animal’; whether the same is true of erystmon
and horminon is matter for enquiry; for these too
are bitter. Hrysimon is like sesame and is oily;
horminon is like cummin and black, and is sown
at the same time as sesame. These matters then
require investigation. .


Of treatment of cereals peculiar to special localities.


10 In good soils to prevent the crop running wildly
to leaf they graze and cut down the young corn,


§ Plin. 18. 96 and 101.

7 ὀλίγου, sc. ὕδατος, but the omission is strange ; perhaps
due to misunderstanding of ὀλίγου δεῖ by a scribe. Sch. joins
the words τὰ δὲ... πάντα to the last sentence, and supplies
καρπίζεται τὴν γῆν (ὀλίγου dei=almost).

8 μέλινοι Ald.H.; ἔλυμοι Vin. cf. 8. 1. 1. n.

9 ζῷον add. Sch. from G and Plin. 18, 96. οἵ. C.P. 6. 12. 12.

10 Plin. 18. 157-162,


185


THEOPHRASTUS


ὥσπερ καὶ ἐν Θετταλίᾳ. συμβαίνει δ᾽ ἂν μὲν
ἐπινέμωσιν ὁποσακισοῦν μηδὲν ἀλλοιοῦσθαι τὸν
καρπόν, ἂν δὲ ἐπικείρωσιν ἅπαξ μόνον ἐξίστασθαι
τὸν πυρὸν καὶ γίνεσθαι μακρὸν καὶ οὐχ ἁδρόν, ὃν
καλοῦσι καμακίαν, καὶ οὐκ ἀποκαθίστασθαι
πάλιν σπειρόμενον: τοῦτο μὲν οὖν ὡς παύροις
συμβαῖνον Θετταλοὶ λέγουσιν. ἐν Βαβυλῶνι δὲ
ἀεὶ καὶ ὥσπερ τεταγμένως ἐπεκείρουσι μὲν δίς, τὸ
δὲ τρίτον τὰ πρόβατα ἐπαφιᾶσιν" οὕτω γὰρ φύει
τὸν καυλόν, εἰ δὲ μὴ φυλλομανεῖ: γίνεται δὲ μὴ
καλῶς ἐργασαμένοις πεντηκονταχόα, τοῖς δὲ ἐπι-
μελῶς ἑκατονταχόα. ἡ δὲ ἐργασία τὸ ὡς πλεῖστον
χρόνον ἐμμένειν τὸ ὕδωρ, ὅπως ἰλὺν ποιήσῃ
πολλήν" πίειραν γὰρ οὖσαν καὶ πυκνὴν τὴν γῆν
δεῖ ποιῆσαι μανήν. ὕλην δὲ οὐ φέρει καὶ πόαν
ὥσπερ ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ. τὰ μὲν οὖν τοιαῦτα χώρας
ἀρετῆς.

Φύεται δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ ῥιζῶν πυρὸς καὶ κριθὴ
πολλαχοῦ τῷ ὑστέρῳ ἔτει" αὐτοετὴς δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ
τῶν εἰς κράστιν κειρομένων ἑτέρου καλάμου παρα-
βλαστάνοντος. ὡσαύτως δὲ κἂν ὑπὸ χειμῶνος
ἐκπαγῇ παραβλαστάνει γὰρ ὑδάτων ἐπιγινομέ-
νων" ὁ δὲ στάχυς ἀτελὴς καὶ μικρὸς ἀπὸ τῶν
τοιούτων. βλαστάνουσι δὲ τῷ ὑστέρῳ ἔτει καὶ
ἀπὸ τῶν καταπονουμένων καὶ συμπατουμένων,
ὥστε μηδὲν εἶναι δῆλον ὡς εἰπεῖν, οἷον ὅταν


1 ἰλὺν conj. Sch. from Plin. 18. 162; ὕλην Ald. Ἡ,
2 Text perhaps defective : cf. Plin, /.c.


186


<


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. vit. 4-5


for instance in Thessaly. And the result is that,
however often they graze it, the crop is not im-
paired ; while if they cut it down not more than
once, the wheat changes in character and becomes
tall and weak—what they call ‘long-shafted’’ corn,
and, if seed of this is sown, it does not recover
its character. This the Thessalians tell of as having
occurred in a few cases. At Babylon however
they cut it down twice always and as it were
systematically, and after that they let the sheep
on to it; for in that case it makes its straw, but
otherwise it runs wildly to leaf; and, if the ground


is ill cultivated, it produces fifty fold, if it is care-


fully cultivated, a hundred fold. And the “ culti-
vation’ consists in letting the water lie on it as
long as possible, so that it may make much silt!;
for the soil being fat and close must be made open.
And at Babylon? the ground does not produce weeds
and grasses, as it does in Egypt. Such are the
things which depend on the quality of the soil.


Of cereals which grow a second time from the same stock.


3 Wheat and barley also in many places grow from
the root in the next year, or in the same year from
crops cut down for fodder, since a second haulm
shoots up. The like happens also if the plant has
been nipped by winter ; for it shoots again when rain
comes; but such plants produce an ear which is
imperfect and under-sized. There is also new growth
the next year from plants which are roughly treated
or trodden down?‘ so that hardly anything remains
visible, as happens when an army has marched over


8 of. CP. 4. 8. 5. ef: ΘΟ. τέο:
187


THEOPHRASTUS


7, \ e ͵ \ Η
διέλθῃ στρατόπεδον, καὶ οἱ στάχυες μικροὶ καὶ
7 an 4 “ cal
τούτων, Os καλοῦσιν ἄρνας: τῶν δὲ χεδροπῶν

lal lal ς
οὐδὲν δύναται τοιοῦτον ποιεῖν ἢ οὐχ ὁμοίως. καὶ
/ a
ai βλαστήσεις τοσαυταχῶς.
\ “
Πρὸς αὔξησιν δὲ καὶ τροφὴν μέγιστα μὲν ἡ τοῦ
"} a / ἐπι, Ῥ ᾽Ν 8
ἀέρος κρᾶσις συμβάλλεται, καὶ ὅλως ἢ τοῦ ETOUS
’, Ν -
κατάστασις: εὐκαίρων γὰρ ὑδάτων καὶ εὐδιῶν
, , ;
καὶ χειμώνων γινομένων ἅπαντα εὔφορα καὶ
΄ὕ A 5 ς , \ / 3
πολύκαρπα, κἂν ἐν ἁλμώδεσι καὶ λεπτογείοις ἢ"
3 / / lal
δι’ ὃ καὶ παροιμιαζόμενοι λέγουσιν οὐ κακῶς OTL
ce ρα ΄ Seay “9 ”
ἔτος φέρει οὐχὶ Apoupa.
/ \ \ e “ / > / -
Μέγα δὲ καὶ αἱ χῶραι διαφέρουσιν οὐ μόνον τῷ
/ \ \ ” \ > ,
πίειραι Kal λεπταὶ καὶ ἔπομβροι Kal αὐχμώδεις
5 > \ \ a 2S a / \ “-“
«εἶναι; ἀλλὰ καὶ τῷ ἀέρι τῷ περιέχοντι καὶ τοῖς
Ay. fa
πνεύμασιν" ἔνιαι yap οὖσαι λεπταὶ Kal φαῦλαι
fal \ \ \ \ “Α \ /
τελεσφοροῦσι διὰ TO πρὸς τὰ πνεύματα τὰ TOVTLA
- A fe Ae fal
κεῖσθαι καλῶς. ἄλλα δὲ ἄλλαις τοιαῦτα, καθάπερ
/ " val \ \ a Ws ca
πολλάκις εἴρηται" ταῖς μὲν yap τὰ ζεφυρικὰ ταῖς
lal \ 3, /
δὲ τὰ βόρεια ταῖς δὲ τὰ νότια.
/ \ \ > \ e > / \
Συμβάλλεται δὲ καὶ ov μικρὰ ἡ ἐργασία καὶ
/ D. of, \ an , - \
μάλισθ᾽ ἡ <arpo> τοῦ σπόρου' κατεργασθεῖσα yap
ς OL 3 / \ ς / δὲ / θ -
ῥᾳδίως ἐκφέρει. καὶ ἡ κόπρος δὲ μεγάλα βοηθεῖ
nq / 7 (4 / \
TO διαθερμαίνειν Kat συμπέττειν: προτρέχει γὰρ
ῇ fa > Ε \ /
τὰ κοπριζόμενα TOV AKOT POV Kal εἴκοσιν ἡμέραις"


1 τούτων conj. Sch.; τούτους Ald. H.

2 ef. Lewis and Short s.v. agna.

3 U.P. l.c. gives the reason.

4 τοσανταχῶς conj. Scal.; τοσαυταχεῖς Ald. H.


188


ee ϑων ναι να. να


_——<—e ee ae


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. vn. 5-7


the field; the ears in such cases! too are under-
sized and are called ‘lambs.’2 But no kind of
leguminous plant? can do anything of the kind, or at
least not to the same extent. In these various
ways * may new growth occur.


Of the effects of climate, soil, and manuring.


For growth and nourishment the climate is the
most important factor, and in general the character
of the season as a whole; for when rain, fair weather
and storms occur opportunely, all crops bear well
and are fruitful, even if they be in soil which is
impregnated with salt or poor. Wherefore there is
an apt proverbial saying ® that “it is the year which
bears and not the field.”

But the soil also makes much difference, according
as it is® fat or light, well watered or parched, and it
also makes quite as much difference what sort of air
and of winds prevails in that region; for some soils,’
though light and poor, produce a good crop because
the land has a fair aspect in regard to sea breezes.
But, as has been repeatedly said already, the same
breeze has not this effect in all places ; some places
are suited by a west, some by a north, some by a
south wind.

Again the working of the soil and above all that
which is done before 8 the sowing has an important
effect; for when the soil is well worked it bears
easily. Also dung is helpful by warming and
ripening the soil, for manured land gets the start by
as much as twenty days of that which has not been


> Quoted also C.P. 3. 23. 4.
© εἶναι add. Sch. Ref OP Poy 235-5:
8 mpd add.W. cf. C.P. 3. 20. 6.


THEOPHRASTUS


/ \ > / \ / ᾽ a
ἅπασι de ov ξυμφέρει: καὶ χρήσιμος ov μόνον
a \ \ rn , \ \ val », Ἁ
τοις περὶ τὸν σῖτον ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις πλὴν

/
πτερίδος, ταύτην δὲ φθείρειν φασὶν ἐπιβαλλο-
/
μένην. ἀπόλλυται δὲ ἡ πτερὶς καὶ ἐπικοιμωμένων
an / e / 7, A, ue \
τῶν προβάτων, ws δέ τινες λέγουσι Kal ἡ Μηδικὴ
΄ 5
διὰ τὴν κόπρον καὶ τὸ οὗρον.
a \
VIII. Τῶν δὲ σπερμάτων ἕκαστα καὶ πρὸς τὴν
n 7 / / x
τῆς χώρας φύσιν ἁρμόττει, καὶ ὅλως γένη πρὸς
tal a ς /
γένος καὶ ἐν αὐτοῖς τοῖς ὁμογενέσιν, ἃ δὴ πει-
a a / \ \ \ a
ρῶνται διαιρεῖν. μεταβάλλει δὲ τὰ Eevixa τῶν
Ν \ \
σπερμάτων μάλιστα μὲν ἐν τρισὶν ἔτεσιν εἰς τὰ
n lal Ἂς
ἐπιχώρια. συμφέρει δὲ ἐκ τῶν ἀλεεινῶν εἰς τὰ
- n n \
μικρὸν ἧττον ἀλεεινὰ Kal ἐκ τῶν ψυχεινῶν ἀνὰ
“ \ \ > nr
λόγον ποιεῖσθαι τὴν μεταβολήν. τὰ δ᾽ ἐκ τῶν
n a oh > x a
δυσχειμερινῶν ἐν τοῖς πρωΐοις ὀψὲ ἀποχεῖται,
4 , ’ > 3 a ig. >\ be τ 4
ὥστ᾽ ἀπ᾽ αὐχμοῦ φθείρεται, ἐὰν μὴ ὄψιον ὕδωρ
a \ f
σώσῃ. διὰ τοῦτο καὶ εὐλαβητέον φασὶ TO μίσγειν
a \ \ ς ,
τὰ ξενικὰ τοῖς ἐπιχωρίοις ἐὰν μὴ ἐξ ὁμοίας, ὅτι
n / \
ἀσύμφωνα τῇ χώρᾳ κατὰ τὸν σπόρον καὶ κατὰ
/ / a /
τὴν γένεσιν, ὥστε Kal ἐργασίας ἑτέρας δεῖται" τάς
a a 4 an
τε τῆς γῆς διαφορὰς καὶ Tas τῶν σπερμάτων
/ \ Ψ
δυνάμεις καὶ ἔτι τὰς ἑκάστων ὥρας.
¢/ δὲ > / / \ ,ὔ
Οταν δὲ εὐετηρία γένηται, καὶ πολυνοστότερα
τὰ σπέρματα γίνεται. ᾿Αθήνῃσι γοῦν αἱ κριθαὶ


1 cf. Col. 2. 2. 13. The reference is perhaps to fern
grown for litter, or possibly for medicinal use. cf. 9. 20. 5.

2 χώρας conj. Sch.; ὥρας Ald. 3 ἃ conj. Dalec.; ἂν Ald.

4 ψυχεινῶν conj. W.; ψυχικῶν UM ; ψυχρῶν Ald.

5 ἀποχεῖται conj. Sch., cf. ἀπόχυσις 8. 8. 4; ἀποκεῖται Ald.
ef. 4. 4. 10.


Igo


-


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. vi. η--νπι. 2


manured. However manure is not good for all crops ;
and further it is beneficial not only to corn and the
like but to most other things, except fern, which
they say it destroys if it is put on. (Fern is also
destroyed if sheep lie on it, and, as some say, lucerne
is destroyed by their dung and urine.)


Of different qualities of seed.


VIII. There is a particular kind of soil ? which best
suits each kind of seed, whether we compare one
class with another or those of the same class; and
attempts are made to distinguish these.? Foreign
seeds change into the native sorts in about three
years. It is well that they should be imported from
a warm climate to one that is rather less warm, or
from a cold one* to one that is rather less cold.
Those imported from a wintry climate, if they be
those of early crops, are late in coming into ear,° so
that they get destroyed by drought unless rain late
in the season saves them. Wherefore they say that
one should take good heed not to mix foreign with
native seeds, unless they come from a similar place,
since ® they do not agree with the soil’ as to the
time of being sown and of germinating, and ac-
cordingly need different cultivation ; and so that one
should take good heed to the differences of soil,
the properties of the seed, and further the seasons
appropriate to each.

When however there is a good season, the grain
also is fuller. For instance at Athens the barley pro-


8 ὅτι conj. Sch.; ἔτι UMAId.

7 χώρᾳ conj. Sch.; ὥρᾳ UMAId.

8 πολυνοστότερα: cf. νόστιμος, C.P. 4. 13. 2, Geop. 2. 16. 1,
and other reff. in Sch.’s exhaustive note.


ΙΟΙ


THEOPHRASTUS


\ “ rn / \
Ta πλεῖστα ποιοῦσιν ἄχλφιτα' KpLOopopos yap
, lal , n /
ἀρίστη: τοῦτο δ᾽ οὐχ ὅταν πλεῖσται γένωνται
a te \ an an /
ἀλλ᾽ ὅταν λάβῃ τινὰ κρᾶσιν. ἐν δὲ τῇ Φωκίδι
ἮΝ > / id \ “ ς / \
περὶ ᾿Ελάτειαν οἱ πυροὶ ποιοῦσιν ἡμιόλια τὰ
/ a
ἄλευρα, καὶ ἐν Σόλοις τῆς Κιλικίας καὶ οἱ πυροὶ
καὶ αἱ κριθαί: καὶ παρ᾽ ἄλλοις ἄλλα πρὸς ἅπερ
> \ « / / \ 3 \ / 2s
εὐφυὴς ἑκάστη. βελτίω μὲν οὖν καὶ χείρω τὰ
7 \ \ \ \ ~
σπέρματα καὶ διὰ τὴν ἐργασίαν καὶ διὰ τὴν γῆν
/ \ rae \ a
γίνεται: Kal yap ἀπαγριοῦται Kal ἡμεροῦται,
/ τ \
καθάπερ Ta δένδρα": καὶ ὅλως μεταβάλλει «κατὰ!
7 a , \
τὴν χώραν, ὥσπερ TWA τῶν δένδρων εὐθὺς ἕστηκε
πρὸς τὸ χεῖρον.
>? © \
Γένος δ᾽ ὅλον ἐξαλλάττειν εἰς ἕτερον οὐδὲν
7
ἄλλο πέφυκε πλὴν τίφη καὶ ζειά, καθάπερ εἴπο-
μεν ἐν τοῖς πρώτοις λόγοις, καὶ ἡ aipa δ᾽ ἐκ τῶν
πυρῶν καὶ κριθῶν διαφθειρομένων" ἢ εἰ μὴ τοῦτο
\ A lal an ΄
ἀλλὰ φιλεῖ γε μάλιστα ἐν τοῖς πυροῖς γίνεσθαι,
7 \ ς / e \ \ \
καθάπερ Kal ὁ μελάμπυρος ὁ Ἰ]οντικὸς καὶ τὸ
τῶν βολβῶν σπέρμα, καὶ ἄλλα δὲ ἐν ἄλλοις τῶν
ς 7 ἊΝ Lal
σπερμάτων: ἐπεὶ Kal ὁ αἰγίλωψ' δοκεῖ μᾶλλον ἐν
lal “ a a 14 \
ταῖς κριθαῖς, ἐν δὲ τοῖς φακοῖς ἄρακος TO τραχὺ
ΗΝ “ 5 \ a > / « a
καὶ σκληρόν, ἐν δὲ ταῖς ἀφάκαις ὁ πελεκῖνος
ὅμοιον τῇ ὄψει τῷ πελέκει: σχεδὸν δὲ καθ᾽
/ \ /
ἕκαστόν ἐστι TO συνεκτρεφόμενον καὶ συνανα-


κατὰ add.W. οἵ. 2. 4. 1.
τινα conj. W.; te P; τῷ Ald.; τὸ H.Vin.Vo. ef. 2. 2. 6.
ζειά conj. Scal,; tea Ald. H. $ B42,


192


ow re


-


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. vir. 2-3


duces more meal than anywhere else, since it is an
excellent land for that crop; and this is so, not
merely when a very large crop is sown, but when the
weather has been favourable for it. And in Phocis
about Elateia the wheats produce half as much meal
again as elsewhere ; while at Soli in Cilicia this is true
of both wheat and barley ; and in other parts there
are other crops for which the soil is severally well
adapted. Wherefore grain turns out better or worse
because of the soil as well as because of cultivation ;
for in some places it changes into the cultivated from
the wild form, or the reverse, like trees; and in
general it changes according! to the soil in which it
is grown, just as some? trees, when transplanted,
forthwith deteriorate.


Of degeneration of cereals, and of the weeds which infest
particular crops,


But no kind can change altogether into another,
except one-seeded wheat and rice-wheat,’ as we said #
in our previous discussions, and darnel which comes
from degenerate wheat and barley: at least, if this
is not the true account, darnel loves chiefly to
appear among wheat, as does the Pontic ὅ melampyros
and the seed of purse-tassels,6 even as other
seeds appear in other crops; thus aigilops seems to
grow for choice among barley, and among ‘lentils
the rough hard kind of arakos, while among tares
occurs the axe-weed,’ which resembles an axe-head in
appearance. Indeed in the case of nearly every
crop there is a plant which grows up with it and


> ef. 8. 4. 6, where μελάμπυρον was said to be peculiar to
Sicily. 8 ef Cx P 24..6.1,
7 Plin, 18.155 ; 27. 121; Diosc. 3. 130; Hesych. s.v. βέλλεκυς,


193


VOL. Il. O


THEOPHRASTUS


7 / \ \ / Ὡ > ”
μιγνύμενον εἴτε διὰ τὰς χώρας, ὅπερ οὐκ ἄλογον,
εἴτε δι’ ἄλλην τινὰ αἰτίαν. ἔνια δὲ καὶ φανερῶς
ἐστι κοινὰ πλειόνων, ἀλλὰ διὰ τὸ μάλιστα ἔν

> a " 4 / ff e
τισιν εὐθενεῖν ἴδια τούτων φαίνεται, καθάπερ ἡ
> / nn / n lal
ὀροβάγχη TOV ὀρόβων Kal ἡ ἀπαρίνη τῶν φακῶν'"
5 A ic \ / > “Ὁ la) 2 / \
ἀλλὰ ἡ μὲν μάλιστα ἐπικρατεῖ τῶν ὀρόβων διὰ
\ > [A ¢e \ > / / 3 a
τὴν ἀσθένειαν: ἡ δὲ ἀπαρίνη μάλιστα ἐν τοῖς
φακοῖς εὐτροφεῖ: τρόπον δέ τινα καὶ παραπλή-
σιόν ἐστι τῇ ὀροβάγχη <T@> ἐπιβάλλειν καὶ
¢ /
κατέχειν ὅλον ὥσπερ πλεκτάναις" ἀποπνίγει γὰρ
Ὁ “ \ bd »
οὕτως, ὅθεν καὶ τοὔνομα εἴληφε.
Ν b] ς / > \ 3 Ἂ e/ n
To δ᾽ ὑποφυόμενον εὐθὺς ἐκ τῆς ῥίζης TO
lal ς /
κυμίνῳ- καὶ τῷ βουκέρῳ TO αἱμόδωρον καλούμενον
va) 2Q/ » \ \ e / /
μᾶλλον ἰδίᾳ. ἔστι δὲ TO αἱμόδωρον μονόκαυλον
οὐκ ἀπεμφερές [τῷ KavrO], πλὴν βραχύτερό
μφερές [τῷ καυλῷ], πλὴν βραχύτερόν τε
Ul / a
πολύ, καὶ ἄνωθέν τι κεφαλῶδες ἔχει ῥίζαν δὲ
S / > \ \ vg ᾽ /
ὑποστρόγγυλον: οὐθὲν δὲ ἕτερον ἀφαυαίνεται
4 ,ὔ n A
mapa τὸ βούκερας. γίνεται δὲ ταῦτα ἐν ταῖς
lal nn / 4 iol
λεπταῖς οὐκ ἐν ταῖς πιείραις, ὥσπερ Kal THs
> 2 3 lal ie i > 7ὔ \ \
Εὐβοίας ἐν τῷ Ληλάντῳ μὲν ov γίνεται περὶ δὲ
Ν , \ 7 δ) ἴω /
tov Κάνηθον καὶ εἴ τις ἄλλος τοιοῦτος τόπος.


1 ἄλλην τινα 60η]. Sch.; ἄλλης twa  ; ἄλλην Ald.

2 τῷ add. Sch.

8 πλεκτάναις conj. W.; πλεκτᾶνες U; πλεκτάνης M ; πλεκτάνην
Ald.; veluti brachiis G.

4 Plin. 19. 176, who however calls this afuddwpov. See
Index App. (26).


194


i ΞΞ


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. vir. 3-5


mingles with it, whether this is due to the soil,
which is a reasonable explanation, or to some other!
cause. Some plants of this character evidently attach
themselves to more than one kind of crop, but,
because they are specially vigorous in some one
particular crop, they are thought to be peculiar to
that one, as ‘vetch-strangler’ (dodder) to vetches
and bedstraw to lentils. But the former gains the
mastery over the vetches especially because of the
weakness of that plant; and bedstraw is specially
luxuriant among lentils ; to some extent it resembles
dodder, in that? it overspreads the whole plant and
holds it fast as it were in coils,? for it is thus that
dodder strangles the plant, and this is the origin of
its name (‘ vetch-strangler ’).

4The plant which springs up straight from the
roots of cummin and the plant called broom-rape
which similarly attaches itself to ‘ ox-horn’ > (fenu-
greek) are somewhat more peculiar in their habits.°®
Broom-rape has a single stem,’ and is not unlike... ,°
but is much shorter and has on the top a sort of head,
while its root is more or less round ; and there is no
other plant which it starves except fenugreek.
These plants grow in light and not in fat soils ; thus
in Euboea they do not occur at Lelanton,°® but only
about Kanethos!° and in districts of like character.


© Plin. 24, 184.

8 ἰδίᾳ MSS.; ? ἴδια.

? cf. C.P. δ. 15. 5, where the same is said of λειμόδωρον (cf.
Plin. 19. 176). But Ald. Bas.Cam. give αἱμόδωρον here; hemo-
dorum G. |

8 τῷ καυλῷ probably conceals the name of a plant.

9. cf. Strabo, 10.1.9. L. is the name of a Euboean river in
Plin. 4. θά.

0 ef. Strabo, 10. 1. 8, Ap. Rhod. 1. 77.


195


THEOPHRASTUS


an 5 / 5 /
ταῦτα μὲν οὖν κοινὰ πλειόνων ὄντα κατισχύει
n b] a 2 7 \ \ > /
μᾶλλον ἐν τοῖς εἰρημένοις διὰ τὴν ἀσθένειαν.
Ν \ / \ / / \

To δὲ τέραμον καὶ ἀτέραμον λέγεται μὲν ἐπὶ
lal > / , > 7 \ \ 2K lal]
τῶν ὀσπρίων μόνον, οὐκ ἄλογον δὲ Kal ἐπὶ τῶν
a / Xx \ > / /
σιτωδῶν παραπλήσιον ἢ καὶ ταὐτό TL συμβαίνειν,
> Ἂ ὃ as \ \ \ > \ > fi >
ἀλλὰ διὰ TO μὴ τὴν αὑτὴν εἶναι χρείαν οὐχ

e ἢ) > / ad \ 50» > \ 7 3 e /
ὁμοίως ἐμφανές: ἐπεὶ οὐδ᾽ ἐπὶ τούτων ἁπάντων
€ / b) \ / Ψ ae. an / ¥
ομοίως ἀλλὰ μάλιστα ἔπι τῶν κυάμων λέγεται
\ nA y > 5 \ ΄, ,
καὶ φακῶν, εἴτ οὖν καὶ μάλιστα πασχόντων
Μ Ἂς μὴ \ / / /
εἴτε Kal διὰ THY χρείαν φαινομένων. γίνεται
a an n \ Ud /
γοῦν πλεοναχῶς" πολλαχοῦ yap τόποι TLVES
5 a ge / / \ ” /
εἰσιν οἱ αἰεὶ φέρουσι τεράμονα καὶ ἄλλοι πάλιν
5 / \ he 9... 2 a Ε / na
aTEpapova TO δὲ ὡς ἐπὶ πᾶν οἱ λεπτόγεω μᾶλλον
\ ΒΓ» / a \
τεράμονα" καὶ ἀέρος κατάστασίς TLS ποιεῖ τὴν
7 / a ‘ v4 > \
τοιαύτην Tapadraynv: σημεῖον δὲ OTL ταὐτὰ
Ψ \ e / > θέ , \ \
χωρία Kal ομοίως ἐργασθέντα φέρει ποτὲ μὲν
Ν \ \ /
τεράμονα «ποτὲ δὲ ἀτεράμονα.; περὶ Φιλίππους
Ν ς / / aN ε \ / >
δὲ ὁ κύαμος λικμώμενος, ἐὰν ὑπὸ πνεύματος ἐγ-
, a / BN > ΄ ,
χωρίου ληφθῇ, τεράμων ὧν ἀτεράμων γίνεται.


n iy / f n ἴω a
ταῦτα μὲν οὖν μηνύει διότι πολλαχῶς TOV αὐτῶν


lof. 2. 4. 2; CP. 4. 12; Phim 8. 165, who; makes
ateramum, teramum plants.

2 πλεοναχῶς: πολλαχοῦ I conj. ; πλέον: πολλαχῶς MSS.

3 ποτὲ δὲ ἀτεράμονα add. H. from G.


4 of. CP. 4.12.8; Plut. Quaest. Conv. 7. 2. 3; Plin. /.c.
196


a,


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. vin. 5-7


The reason then why these plants, which attach
themselves to more than one kind, grow stronger
when attached to the plants specified, is that the
latter are not robust.


Of the conditions in the seeds of pulses known as ‘ cookable’
and ‘uncookable,’ and their causes.


1The terms ‘ cookable’ and ‘uncookable’ are only
applied to pulses, but it is not unreasonable to
suppose that conditions like those indicated, if not
identical with them, occur also in cereals, though
they are not so obvious, since these plants are not
put to the same use. Indeed it is said that these
terms are not applied even to all pulses alike, but
chiefly to beans and lentils, either because these
are specially subject to these conditions, or because
the use to which they are put makes them more
conspicuous. At all events the conditions occur
for a variety of reasons; for in many parts 7 there
are places which regularly produce seeds that are
“cookable, while others again produce seeds that
are ‘uncookable’; in general however it is light
soils which tend to produce the former. Now it is
a certain condition of the climate which causes this
variation ; a proof of which is the fact that the same
piece of land, tilled in the same manner, produces
sometimes seeds that are ‘cookable, sometimes
seeds that are ‘uncookable.’* In the district of
Philippi, if the beans, while being winnowed,‘ are
caught by the prevailing wind of the country, they
become ‘ uncookable, having previously been ‘ cook-
able. These facts prove that for various reasons,
of districts ὅ which are close together, have the same


5 αὐτῶν conj. W.; δὲ τῶν Ald. cf.a similar expression 8. 2. 10.


197


THEOPHRASTUS


/
χωρίων ἔνια σύνορα καὶ ὁμοίως καθήμενα καὶ
/ a
οὐδεμίαν ἔχοντα κατὰ τὴν γῆν διαφορὰν TO μὲν
τεράμονα τὸ δ᾽ ἀτεράμονα φέρει, καὶ ἐνίοτε μόνον
αὔλακος διοριζούσης.
/ \ A
IX. Καρπίξεται τὴν γῆν μάλιστα πυρὸς εἶτα
7 > A \ € \ >’ \ fal 7 ς \
κριθή, dv ὃ καὶ ὁ μὲν ἀγαθὴν Entet χώραν ἡ δὲ
\ "4 \ > a ys >
κριθὴ δύναται καὶ ἐν ταῖς ψαφαρωτέραις éx-
7 a Ν al / : Ὁ
φέρειν. τῶν δὲ χεδροπῶν μάλιστα ἐρέβινθος
an lal ς
καίπερ ἐλάχιστον χρόνον ἐν τῇ γῆ μένων, ὁ δὲ
/ 4 5 / \ ἈΚ > \ \
κύαμος, ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη, καὶ AXNAWS οὐ βαρὺ καὶ
ἔτι κοπρίζειν δοκεῖ τὴν γῆν διὰ μανότητα καὶ εὐ-
σηψίαν'" δι’ ὃ καὶ οἱ περὶ Μακεδονίαν καὶ Θεττα-
λίαν ὅταν ἀνθῶσιν ἀνατρέπουσι τὰς ἀρούρας.
lal ς ς “Ὁ
Τῶν δὲ ὁμοιοπύρων καὶ ὁμοιοκρίθων, οἷον ζειᾶς
, 3 / / > / > /
τίφης ὀλύρας βρόμου αἰγίλωπος, ἰσχυρότατον
καὶ μάλιστα καρπιζόμενον ἡ ζειά" καὶ yap
πολύρριζον καὶ βαθύρριζον καὶ πολυκάλαμον" ὁ
δὲ καρπὸς κουφότατος καὶ προσφιλὴς πᾶσι τοῖς
ζώοις. τῶν δὲ ἄλλων ὁ βρόμος" πολύρριζος γὰρ
\ πε Ν / ς wr rd 7
καὶ οὗτος καὶ πολυκάλαμος. ἡ δὲ ὀλύρα μαλα-
κώτερον καὶ ἀσθενέστερον τούτων. ἡ δὲ τίφη
πάντων κουφότατον: καὶ γὰρ καὶ μονοκάλαμον
«καὶ λεπτοκάλαμον,:Σ δι ὃ καὶ χώραν ζητεῖ


ΤΟ ΕΣ “of. Of, am

3 Plin. 18. 120; Varro I. 28. δι᾽ Cok 2; 20. 7.

* 8.3.2.

δ 7.e. dig in the bean-plants if the soil is poor, before the
pods are formed enough to make it worth while to gather
the beans. So Varro /.c. 6 Cited by Galen.


198


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. vir. 7-1x. 2


aspect and shew no difference of soil, some bear
‘cookable’ some ‘ uncookable’ seeds, and that some-
times when there is only! the breadth of a furrow
between them.


Of the grains and pulses which most exhaust the soil, or which
emprove tt.

IX. Wheat exhausts the land more than any other
crop, and next to it barley; wherefore the former
requires good soil, while barley will bear even on
somewhat crumbling soils ; * and of leguminous plants
chick-pea is the most exhausting, although this crop
is in the ground only a very short time. ὃ Beans,
as was said,* are in other ways not a burdensome
crop to the ground, they even seem to manure it,
because the plant is of loose growth and rots
easily; wherefore the people of Macedonia and
Thessaly turn over the ground when it is in
flower.°

6Of the plants which resemble wheat or barley
—such as zeta (rice-wheat) one-seeded wheat olyra™
(rice-wheat) oats aigilops—zeia is the strongest ὃ and
most exhausts the ground; for it has many roots
which run deep and many stems ; but its fruit is the
lightest and is welcome to all animals. Of the rest
oats® is the most exhausting; for this too has many
roots and many stems. Olyrais amore delicate plant
and not so robust as these. But one-seeded wheat
is the crop which is of all the least burdensome to
the soil; for it has but a single slender stem 1;
wherefore also it requires a light soil and not, like

7 See Index.
8 ἰσχυρότατον conj. W. from Galen ; ἰσχυρότερον Ald.
9 βρόμος" πολύρριζος γὰρ conj. Sch.; β. πολ." καὶ yap Ald.

10 καὶ Χεπτοκάλαμον add. Bod. from Galen.


=


THEOPHRASTUS


/ +) [4 ς Χ / \ > ff
λεπτήν, οὐχ ὥσπερ ἡ ζειὰ πίειραν Kal ἀγαθήν.
/ rn a a
ἔστι δὲ δύο ταῦτα Kal ὁμοιότατα τοῖς πυροῖς ἥ TE
\ / ς ’
«ζειὰ καὶ ἡ τίφη,: ὁ δ᾽ αἰγίλωψ' καὶ ὁ βρόμος
ὥσπερ ἄγρι᾽ ἄττα καὶ ἀνήμερα.
/
᾿Επικαρπίζεται δὲ σφόδρα καὶ ὁ αἰγίλωψ' τὴν
a ΩΝ ih \ / e \
γῆν, Kat ἐστι πολύρριζον Kal πολυκάλαμον' ἡ δὲ
αἷρα παντελῶς ἀπηγριωμένον. τῶν δὲ ἐν τοῖς
a / Ἂν al /
θερινοῖς ἀρότοις TO σήσαμον δοκεῖ χαλεπώτατον
εἶναι τῇ γῇ καὶ μάλιστα καρπίζεσθαι" καίτοι
/
πολυκαλαμώτερον καὶ παχυκαλαμώτερον Kal
, 7 ΄ \ ΄ \
πολυρριζότερον κέγχρος. διαφέρει δὲ τά TE πρὸς
“ “ \
THY γῆν κοῦφα Kal TA πρὸς τὴν ἡμετέραν τροφήν.
ἔνια γὰρ ἐναντίως, ὥσπερ τὰ χεδροπὰ καὶ οἱ
4 \ \ \ e a / Ψ > / \
KéyX pou Kal τὰ πρὸς ἡμᾶς δέ, ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη, Kal
oS a x \ \ 7 (v4
τἄλλα Coa. καὶ περὶ μὲν τούτων ἅλις.
X. Νοσήματα δὲ τῶν σπερμάτων τὰ μὲν κοινὰ
/ > / a ς 2 V/A \ > » /
πάντων ἐστίν, οἷον ἡ ἐρυσίβη, τὰ δ᾽ ἴδιά τινων,
- ς \ a > / \ \ ς \
οἷον ὁ σφακελισμὸς τοῦ épeBivOov, καὶ τὸ ὑπὸ
καμπῶν κατεσθίεσθαι καὶ ὑπὸ ψυλλῶν, τινὰ δὲ
καὶ ὑπ᾽ ἄλλων θηριδίων. ἔνια δὲ καὶ ψωριᾷ καὶ
. nan / \ \ ng \ > ΟῚ Ig
ἁλμᾷ, καθάπερ καὶ TO κύμινον. τὰ δ᾽ ἐπιγινό-
an \ ἴω > an
μενα ζῶα μὴ ἐξ αὐτῶν ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ τῶν ἔξωθεν οὐχ
¢ 7 f. 5 / \ ς \ θ \
ὁμοίως βλάπτει. ἐπιγίνεται yap ἡ μὲν κανθαρὶς


ἥ τε Cera καὶ ἣ τίφη add. W. from Galen.

ὃ δ᾽ conj. Scal.; ὅ τ᾽ Ald.H.; 47’ UMP.
καίτοι conj. W.; καὶ Ald. ef. O.P. 4. 15. 1.
τὰ add. St. 5 8. 3. 5 ad fin.

καὶ τὰ Ald.; καὶ of τὰ UMP; ? καὶ ad τὰ W.


a ὦ © wpe


200


————— οὐ μόν,


le i i ee


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. rx. 2-x. 1


geia, one that is fat and good. These last two,!
geia and one-seeded wheat, are also those which are
likest to wheat, while? agilops and oats are as it
were wild and uncultivated things.

Aigilops also greatly exhausts the land, having
many roots and many stems; while darnel is a
plant which has become altogether wild. Of the
crops sown at the summer seed-time sesame seems
to be most severe on the land and to exhaust it
most ; yet® millet has more numerous and stouter
stems and more roots. Moreover there is a difference
between crops which 6 are called ‘light’ in relation
to the soil and those called ‘light’ in regard to
human use. For some, such as leguminous plants
and millet, are light in one sense but not in the
other; and, as was said,> what® is light for men is
not necessarily so for the other animals. Now
enough of these matters.


Of the diseases of cereals and pulses, and of hurtful winds.


X. ‘As to diseases of seeds—some are common to
all, as rust, some are peculiar to certain kinds; thus
chick-pea is alone subject to rot® and to being
eaten by caterpillars and by spiders?; and some
seeds are eaten! by other small creatures. Some
again are liable to canker and mildew,!! as cummin.
But creatures which do not come from the plant
itself but from without do not do so much harm ;
thus the kantharis'* is a visitor among wheat, the


7 Plin. 18. 152 and 154. 8 of; 4, 142:

9 ψυλλῶν : described by Arist. H.A. 9. 39. 1.

10 δὲ add. Sch.; ? κατεσθίεσθαι: κατεσθίεται δὲ καὶ ὑπὸ ψ. W.
1} ψωριᾷ καὶ ἁλμᾷ conj. W.; ψώραις καὶ ἅλμαις Ald. cf.7.5.4n.
"πο Plin, 18. 156.


201


THEOPHRASTUS


> a n SN /
ἐν τοῖς πυροῖς, TO δὲ φαλάγγιον ἐν ὀρόβοις, ἄλλα
>]
δ᾽ ἐν ἄλλοις.
᾽ an ᾽ ἴω a -
Ἐρυσιβᾷ δ᾽ ὡς ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν τὰ σιτώδη μᾶλ-
A 7 na la)
λον τῶν ὀσπρίων: αὐτῶν δὲ τούτων κριθὴ μᾶλλον
ἢ πυρός: καὶ τῶν κριθῶν ἕτεραι ἑτέρων, μάλιστα
δ᾽ ὡς εἰπεῖν ἡ ᾿Αχιλληΐς. διαφέρει δὲ καὶ ἡ τῶν
χωρίων θέσις καὶ ἡ φύσις οὐ μικρόν: τὰ γὰρ
» n
προσήνεμα καὶ μετέωρα οὐκ ἐρυσιβᾷ ἢ ἧττον,
2) \ \ » N of / Δ it /
ἀλλὰ τὰ ἔγκοιλα καὶ ἄπνοα" γίνεται δὲ ἡ ἐρυσίβη
/ / , / 4 \ e \
πανσελήνοις μάλιστα. ἀπόλλυται δὲ Kal ὑπὸ
fal \ \ ¢
TOV πνευμάτων καὶ πυρὸς Kal κριθή, ὅταν ἢ
’ lal A «tA: 9) > / \ » fal
ἀνθοῦντα ληφθῇ ἢ ἄρτι ἀπηνθηκότα καὶ ἀσθενῆ"
μᾶλλον δὲ κριθή, πολλάκις δ᾽ ἤδη ἐν τῷ ἁδρύ-
\
νεσθαι οὗσα, ἐὰν μεγάλα καὶ πλείω χρόνον ἐπι-
/ \ la
γένηται: ξηραίνει yap καὶ ἀφαυαίνει, ὃ καλοῦσί
na /
τίνες ἐξανεμοῦσθαι. διαπόλλυσι δὲ Kal HALOS ὁ
\ A \ 3
ἐκνέφελος ἄμφω καὶ μᾶλλον πυρὸν ἢ κριθήν, ὥστε
> Ly, Ξ Ν ΄ a / 7
μηδ᾽ ἐπίδηλον εἶναι τὸν στάχυν TH ὄψει ὄντα
κενόν.
Τὸν δὲ πυρὸν ἀπολλύουσι καὶ οἱ σκώληκες οἱ
\ > \ / / \ «7ὔ ς \
μὲν εὐθὺς κατεσθίοντες φυόμενοι Tas ῥίξας, οἱ δὲ
ὅταν αὐχμῶντες ἀποχυθῆναι μὴ δύνωνται: τότε
, ¢ 7 , \
yap ἐγγινόμενος ὁ σκώληξ ἐσθίει τὸν ἀποπηνιζό-
μενον κάλαμον' ἐσθίει δὲ ἄχρι τοῦ στάχυος, εἶτ᾽


Plin. 18. 154.

ἐρυσιβᾷ conj. W.; ἐρυσίβαι Ald.; eis add. Sch.
τὰ add, Sch. 4 of.i QP. 3) 22; 2,
ἐρυσιβᾷ conj. Sch.; ἐρυσίβαι Ald.

of. C.P. 4. 13. 4; Plin. 18. 151.

μέγαλα conj. Sch.; μεγάλη UMAId.


Noa ὦ τὸ μι


202


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. x. 1-4


phalangion in vetches, and other pests in other
crops.

1Generally speaking, cereals are more liable to
rust? than pulses, and among these barley is
more liable to it than wheat; while of barleys some
kinds are more liable than others, and most of all,
it may be said, the kind called ‘ Achillean.’ More-
over the position and character of the land make no
small difference in this respect; for lands which?
are exposed to the wind‘ and elevated are not
liable to rust,> or less so, while those that lie low
and are not exposed to wind are more so. And
rust occurs chiefly at the full moon. 6 Again
wheat and barley are destroyed by winds, if
they are caught by them either when in flower,
or when the flower has just fallen and they are
weak ; and this applies specially to barley, indeed
it occurs when the grain is already ripening, if
the winds are violent’ and last a long time; for
they dry up and parch the grain, which some call
being ‘wind-bitten.’ Also a hot sun after cloudy
weather destroys both, and wheat more than barley,
so that the ear is not even conspicuous, since it is
empty.

Wheat is also destroyed by grubs; sometimes they
eat the roots, as soon as they appear,’ sometimes
they do their work when by reason of drought the
ear cannot be formed ® ; for at such times the grub
is engendered, and eats the haulm as it is becoming
unrolled 1°; it eats right up to the ear and then,

8 φυόμενοι conj. Sch.; φνόμενον Ald. of. C.P. 3. 22. 4.

9 ἀποχυθῆναι conj. Sch. after Vin.Vo.G; ἀπολυθῆναι UM
Ald. cf. C.P. 3. 22.4; 4, 14. 1.


10 ἀποπηνιζόμενον : lit. ‘unwinding itself.’ All edd. mark
the word as corrupt.


203


THEOPHRASTUS


ἐξαναλώσας ἀπόλλυται: Kal ἐὰν μὲν ὅλον exhayn
/ > en ς ῇ be" \ - ΤᾺΣ "¢ n
τελέως αὐτὸς ὁ πυρός, ἐὰν δὲ ἐπὶ θάτερον τοῦ
καλάμου καὶ ἐκβιάσηται τὴν ἀπόχυσιν, τοῦτο
μὲν αὖον τοῦ στάχυος θάτερον δὲ ὑγιές. γίνεται
“ \
δὲ οὐ πανταχοῦ TO περὶ τοὺς πυρούς, οἷον ἐν
Θετταλίᾳ, ἀλλὰ κατὰ χώρας τινάς, ὥσπερ ἐν τῇ
7 \ an > / > A ἃ
Λιβύῃ καὶ τῆς Ἑὐβοίας ἐν τῷ Ληλάντῳ.
΄, \ / a
Σκώληκες δὲ γίνονται Kal ἐν τοῖς ὥχροις Kal
lal / a val ἴω
τοῖς λαθύροις καὶ τοῖς πισοῖς, ὅταν ὑγρανθῶσι
/ al
καὶ θερμημερίαι γένωνται, καθάπερ καὶ ἐν τοῖς
ΕῚ / ξ / / \ 5 "¢
ἐρεβίνθοις ai κάμπαι. πάντα δὲ ἐξαναλώσαντα
Ν Ν > / Nie n - “2
Tas τροφὰς ἀπόλλυται καὶ ἐν τοῖς χλωροῖς καὶ ἐν
a a a vA ς -
τοῖς ξηροῖς καρποῖς, οἷον οἵ τε imes καὶ οἱ ἐν τοῖς
/ \ a f “
κυάμοις ἐγγινόμενοι καὶ ἐν τοῖς ἄλλοις, ὥσπερ καὶ
a 2 a St if we
ἐν τοῖς δένδρεσι καὶ ἐν τοῖς ξύλοις ἐλέχθη, πλὴν
a “ / \ /

TOV κεραστῶν καλουμένων. πρὸς ἅπαντα δὴ
a 7 id ἴω 7
ταῦτα μεγάλα διαφέρουσιν αἱ χῶραι οὐκ ἀλόγως"

\ ΄ a \ x \
ὁ yap ἀὴρ εὐθὺς διάφορος τῷ θερμὸς ἢ ψυχρὸς
3 5 Δ Ξ Deore / ’
εἶναι ἢ ὑγρὸς ἢ ξηρός: οὗτος δ᾽ Hv ὁ γονεύων" δὲ
é ® / \ /
ὃ καὶ ἐν ois εἰώθασι γίνεσθαι οὐκ ἀεὶ γίνονται.
a / \ Vi /
XI. Τῶν δὲ σπερμάτων οὐχ ἡ αὐτὴ δύναμίς
᾽ / \ / \ > /
ἐστιν εἴς Te τὴν βλάστησιν καὶ εἰς θησαυρισμόν.


αὐτὸς : sc. the grain. ἀναίνεται con}. W.; ? αὐαίνεται αὐτὸς.
θάτερον conj. Sch.; θατέρου Ald.

cf.C P. 3. 22. 3. ὥχροις conj. St.; dxpors Ald. H.

καθάπερ καὶ conj. Sch.; καὶ καθάπερ Ald.

πάντα conj. W.; τὰ Ald.


uF ὦ τὸ »


204


-


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. x. 4-x1 1


having consumed it, perishes. And, if it has en-
tirely eaten it, the wheat itself! perishes; if
however it has only eaten one? side of the haulm
and the plant has succeeded in forming the ear,
half the ear withers away, but the other half remains
sound. However it is not everywhere that the
wheat is so affected; for instance this does not occur
in Thessaly, but only in certain regions, as in Libya
and at Lelanton in Euboea.

“Grubs occur also in okhros? lathyros and peas,
whenever these crops get too much rain and then
hot weather supervenes; and caterpillars occur in
chick-peas under the same conditions. All° these
pests perish, when they have exhausted their food,
whether the fruit in which they occur be green or
dry, just as wood-worms do and the grubs found in
beans and other plants, as was said of the pests
found in growing trees and in felled timber. But
the creature called: ‘horned worm ’® is an exception.
Now in regard to all these pests the position makes
a great difference, as might be expected. For the
climate, it need hardly be said, makes a difference
according as it is hot or cold, moist or dry; and it
was the climate which gave rise to these pests’;
wherefore they are not always found even in places
in which they ordinarily occur.®


Of seeds which keep or do not keep well.


XI. The seeds have not all the same capacity for
germination and for keeping well. Some germinate

6 cf. 4.14.5; C.P. 5. 10. δ.

1 δ᾽ ἣν ὃ γονεύων I conj.; δ᾽ ἣν 6 νεύων UAld.; δ᾽ jvo-
νεύων M ; δ᾽ ἐστιν ὃ γονεύων conj. Sch.; δ᾽ ὁ γονεύων conj. W.

8 2,6. because the atmospheric conditions are not always
favourable to the pest.


205


THEOPHRASTUS


ἔνια μὲν yap βλαστάνει καὶ τελειοῦται τάχιστα
καὶ θησαυρίξεται κράτιστα, καθάπερ ἔλυμος καὶ
κέγχρος" ἔνια δὲ βλαστάνει μὲν εὖ ταχέως δὲ
σήπεται, καθάπερ ὁ 0 κύαμος καὶ μᾶλλον ὁ τερά-
μων" “ταχὺ δ᾽ ἡ ἀφάκη καὶ ὁ δόλεχος" κριθὴ δὲ
πυροῦ «θᾶττον. ‘> θᾶττον δὲ καὶ ὁ κονιορτώδης
σῖτος καὶ ὁ ἐν οἰκήμασι κονιατοῖς ἢ ἀκονιάτοις.

Γίνεται δὴ φθειρομένοις σπέρμασι ἴδια ζῶα,
καθάπερ ἐλέχθη, πλὴν ἐρεβίνθου: μόνος γὰρ οὗτος
οὐ ζωογονεῖ. καὶ σηπομένοις μὲν πᾶσι “σκώληξ
κοπτομένοις δὲ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ἴδιον. πάντων δὲ
μάλιστα διαμένουσιν ἐρέβινθος καὶ ὄροβος, τού-
των δ᾽ ἔτι μᾶλλον ὁ θέρμος" ἀλλ᾽ ἔοικέ γ᾽ οὗτος
ὥσπερ ἀγρίῳ.

Avagéper δὲ ὡς ἔοικε χώρα χώρας καὶ ἀὴρ
ἀέρος εἰς τὸ κόπτεσθαι καὶ μὴ τὰ σπέρματα: ἐν
᾿Απολλωνίᾳ γοῦν τῇ περὶ τὸν Ἰόνιον οὐκ ἐσθίε-
σθαί φασιν ὅλως κύαμον, δι᾿ ὃ καὶ εἰς θησαυρισ-
μὸν ἀποτίθεσθαι: διαμένει δὲ καὶ περὶ Κυζικὸν
ἐπὶ πλείω. μέγα δὲ πρὸς διαμονὴν καὶ τὸ ξηρὰ
θερίξειν' ἐλάττων yap ἡ ὑγρότης" Oepifover δ᾽
ἐγχυλότερα τὰ μὲν XE ροπὰ πρὸς τὸ μᾶλλον καὶ
ῥᾷον συλλέξαι, ταχὺ γὰρ καταρρεῖ καὶ αὐανθέντα


1 εὖ conj. W.; οὐ Ald. 2 σήπεται add. W.

3 .cf. 8..8..65 CoP. 5. 18. 2, 4 @arrov add. W.

5 καὶ ὃ xov.... ἀκονιάτοις conj. W., cf. C.P. 4.16.1; ὁ κονι-
ορτώδης καὶ ὃ Kovtoptos: καὶ 6 ἐν Tots κονιορτοῖς ἐν ἅπασιν, οἷον
κονιάτοις ἢ ἀκονιάτοις Ald.; so also UM, but omitting trois; U
gives koviarots ; ἢ ὃ ἀκονίορθος for καὶ ὃ κονίορτος mBas. cf.
Plin. 18. 301, Varro 1. 57. 1, where the use of a cement of
pounded marble is recommended.

6 δὴ φθειρομένοις conj. Sch.; διαφθειρομένοις UM Ad.


206


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. xt. 1-3


and mature very quickly, and keep excellently, as
Italian millet and millet. Some germinate well,}
but soon rot,? as beans, and especially those that are
~ €cookable ?’ ; so do tare and calavance ; also barley
perishes sooner * than wheat ; and dusty® grain and
that which is kept in plastered store-rooms perishes
sooner than that which is kept in unplastered rooms.

Again, as seeds decay,° they engender special
creatures, except chick-pea, which alone engenders
none. As they rot,’ all produce a grub; but, as
they get worm-eaten, each produces ἃ special
creature. Chick-pea and vetch keep best of all, and
better still than these lupin; but this, as it were, is
like a wild kind.§

910 appears that soil and climate make a difference
as to whether the seed gets worm-eaten or not;
at least they say that at Apollonia on the Ionian Sea
beans do not get eaten in this way at all, and there-
fore they are put away and stored; and about
Cyzicus they keep an even longer time. It also
makes a great difference to keeping that the seed
should be gathered dry, for then there is less
moisture in it.4? However the seeds of leguminous
plants are gathered with a certain amount of
moisture in them,!! because then they can be collected
in greater quantity and more easily; for otherwise
they are soon shed and get shrivelled up and split 13;


7 4.6. rot is produced in all cases by the same creature
(σκώληξ), but the condition called being ‘worm-eaten’ is due
in each plant to a different pest.

8 7.e. and so the seed is hard and not liable to these attacks.
of. 8. 11.°8;°C.P. 4.16. 2.


Sef. CP. 4) 16) 22 + 10 7.e. liability to rot.
11 ἐγχυλότερα conj. Sch.; εὐχυλότερα Ald.H.Cam.; εὐχηλότερα
855: ef. ΟἿΣ 4 13. 3. 2 Plin, 18. 125.


207


THEOPHRASTUS


/ a
θρύπτεται, τοὺς δὲ πυροὺς καὶ γένος TL κριθῶν
\ \ / > \ ” / \ ’
διὰ TO βελτίους εἰς τὰ ἄλφιτα γίνεσθαι μὴ ἀπε-

/
ξηραμμένας.

Av’ ὃ καὶ εἰς θώμους συντιθέασι καὶ πυροὺς καὶ
κριθάς, καὶ δοκοῦσιν ἁδρύνεσθαι ἐν θώμῳ μᾶλλον
Ἃ a > > / \ a ¢ ς \
ἢ λιποσαρκεῖν. οὐκ ἐσθίεται δὲ σῖτος, ὅταν ὑσθεὶς

a b] é \ Ἃ / e /
θερισθῇ: ἀθέριστος δὲ μάλιστα διαμένει ὁ πυρός,
la) c =
ἔτι δὲ μᾶλλον ὁ θέρμος: οὐδὲ yap θερίξουσι

a / a
τοῦτον πρότερον ἢ ὕδωρ γενέσθαι, διὰ TO ἐκπηδᾶν
θεριζόμενον καὶ ἀπόλλυσθαι τὸ σπέρμα.

Πρὸς ἔκφυσιν δὲ καὶ τὴν ὅλην σπορὰν ἄριστα
δοκεῖ τὰ ἑνάενα" τὰ δὲ δίενα χείρω καὶ τὰ τρίενα,

\ Ν \

Ta δ᾽ ὑπερτείνοντα σχεδὸν ἄγονα, πρὸς δὲ τὴν
a /
σίτησιν ἀρκοῦντα. Bios yap ἐστιν ἑκάστοις ὡρισ-
/
μένος εἰς γονήν. καίτοι Kal ταύταις παραλλάττει
a \
ταῖς δυνάμεσι διὰ τοὺς τόπους ἐν οἷς ἂν θησαυρί-
A a / 2 , x
ζωνται. τῆς γοῦν Καππαδοκίας ἐν χωρίῳ τινὶ
lal /
τῷ καλουμένῳ Llétpa καὶ τετταράκοντα ἔτη δια-
έ

/ \ / \ / \ / >
μένειν φασὶ γόνιμα καὶ χρήσιμα πρὸς σπόρον, εἰς

Ν \ / ς / A Ὁ / \ \
δὲ τὴν σίτησιν ἑξήκοντα ἢ ἑβδομήκοντα: TO γὰρ
Ψ > / \ Nee / οἵ \ »
ὅλον οὐ κόπτεσθαι: τὰ δὲ ἱμάτια καὶ τὴν ἄλλην

7 , x Χ / ow
γάζαν κόπτεσθαι. τὸ yap χώριον ἄλλως TE
¢ \ Ὁ \ LA \ ” eae \
ὑψηλὸν εἶναι καὶ εὔπνουν Kal évavpov αἰεὶ καὶ

a / \ 7
ἀπ᾽ ἀνατολῆς ἔχουσι καὶ δύσεως καὶ μεσημβρίας.


1 ἢ λιποσαρκεῖν conj. H.; ἡλίκα σωρῶν U; ἡλίκα σαρκῶν Μ.
W. brackets as due to ἃ gloss. αἵ. C.P. 4. 18. 6.

2 ὅταν ὑσθεὶς conj. Scal.: so Vo.; 6 τανυσθείς Bas.Cam.
θερισθῇ conj. W.; περιφυῇ MSS.


208


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. x1. 3-6


and wheat and one kind of barley are gathered
before they are dry, because then they are better for
meal.

Wherefore the grain of wheat and barley is put
into heaps, and it seems to ripen in a heap rather
than to lose substance.1 (However corn does not
get worm-eaten when it is reaped after exposure to
rain.)? Also corn lasts better than other things if it
is left standing, and so does lupin to an even greater
extent ; indeed this crop is not even gathered till
rain has fallen,? because, if it is gathered, the seed
springs out and is lost.


Of the age at which seeds should be sown.


*For propagation and sowing generally seeds one
year old seem to be the best; *those two or three
years old are inferior, while those kept a still longer
time are infertile, though they are still available as
food. For each kind has a definite period of life in
regard to reproduction. However these seeds too
differ in their capacity according to the place in
which they are stored. For instance, in Cap-
padocia at a place called Petra they say that
seed remains even for forty years fertile and fit
for sowing, while as food it is available for sixty
or seventy years; for that it does not get worm-
eaten at all like clothes and other stored-up articles:
for that the region is, apart from this, elevated and
always exposed to fair winds and breezes which
prevail alike from® the east, the west, and the


3 πρότερον ἢ conj. W.; τὸν τρόπον UAld. cf. C.P. 4. 13. 3;
Plin. 18. 133. 4 Plin. 18. 195.

5 cf. 7. 5. 5; Geop. 2. 16.

§ am conj. Sch.; ἐπὶ P,Ald.


209
VOL. 11.


THEOPHRASTUS


φασὶ δὲ καὶ ἐν Μηδείᾳ καὶ ταῖς ἄλλαις ταῖς
n ’

ὑψηλαῖς χώραις διαμένειν θησαυριζόμενα πολὺν
VA

χρόνον. ἐρέβινθον δὲ δὴ καὶ θέρμον καὶ dpoBov

\ / \ \ n A “ A
Kal κέγχρον Kal τὰ τοιαῦτα δῆλον ὅτι πολλῷ
πλείω τούτων, ὥσπερ καὶ ἐν τοῖς περὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα

/ b] \ a / Ὁ 7 Ὁ
τόποις. ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν, ὥσπερ εἴρηται, τῶν
τόπων ἴδια.

Δοκεῖ δὲ καὶ γῆ τις εἶναι παρά τισιν ἣ δια-
παττομένη συντηρεῖ τὸν πυρόν, ὥσπερ ἥ τε ἐν
᾿Ολύνθῳ καὶ ἐν Κηρίνθῳ τῆς Εὐβοίας: ποιεῖ δὲ
χείρω μὲν εἰς τὴν σίτησιν ἁδρότερον δὲ τῇ προσ-
/ / Ν / > \ 7
oer παραπάττουσι δὲ χοίνικα εἰς τὸν μέδιμνον.

Πυρωθέντα πάντα τὰ σπέρματα ἀπόλλυται
καὶ ἀβλαστῆ γίνεται" καίτοι περί γε Βαβυλῶνά

x \ \ \ \ > a “
φασι τὰς κριθὰς καὶ τοὺς πυροὺς ἐπὶ τῆς ἅλω
n \ an
πηδᾶν, ὥσπερ TA φρυγόμενα: ἀλλὰ δῆλον ὅτι
διαφορά τίς ἐστι τῆς θερμότητος, ἢ ἁπλῶς πως
θερμασίᾳ γίνεται [καὶ] ἡ πήδησις. καὶ τὰ μὲν

ρμασίᾳ γ ἡ πήδησις. μ

a \ e \ \ / Ἃ i
τοιαῦτα σχεδὸν ὡσπερεὶ κοινὰ δόξειεν ἂν εἶναι


/ x la) ,
πάντων ἢ τῶν πλείστων.


1 cf. C.P. 5. 18. 3; for millet-seed see J.H.S, vol. xxxv.
part i. p. 22.

2 διαπαττομένη conj. H.; διαπλαττομένη UMAId.; διακοπτο-
gevn Fo. cf. Plin. 18. σῦδε

3 παραπάττουσι conj. Sch., cf. Geop. 2. 21. 3; (ἐμπάσσειν) ;
παρατάττουσι UMAId. ef. Varro 1, 57. 1.


210


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, VIII. x1. 6-7


south. They say that in Media! also and other
elevated countries the seed when stored keeps for
a long time. And it is plain that chick-pea lupin
vetch millet and the like will keep a far longer time
than these seeds, as they do even in districts of
Hellas. However these peculiarities, as has been
said, are due to the particular region.


Of artificial means of preserviny seed.


There appears to be a kind of earth in some
places, which when sprinkled 2 over the seed helps
to make wheat keep, for instance, the earth found
at Olynthos and at Kerinthos in Euboea; this
makes the grain inferior for food, but fuller in ap-
pearance ; the earth is sprinkled? in the proportion
of one pint to twenty-four of grain.


Of the effect of heat on seeds.


All seeds if exposed to fire perish and become
infertile. Yet they say that at Babylon‘ the grains
of barley and wheat jump on the _ threshing-floor
like corn which is being parched. However it is
plain that it is some particular kind of warmth®
which produces this effect: or else the jumping
is simply another effect of heat.6 Such behaviour
would appear to be common to most,’ if not to all


kinds.


4 2,6, the grain is there exposed to great swn-heat. cf.
de igne 44.

5 7.e, the sun’s heat is different in kind, and therefore in
effect, to that of a fire.

ὁ θερμασίᾳ conj. Sch.; θερμασία Ald. H.

? ὡσπερεὶ κοινὰ conj. Sch. from G; ὥσπερ εἰκόνα UM ; ὥσπερ


εἰκόνες Ald. H.


211
pP 2


8


THEOPHRASTUS


" δ Δ» ses) / \ a /
Eva δὲ ἔχει τινὰ ἰδιότητα καὶ τῶν δοκούντων
ὥσπερ ἀγρίων εἶναι καὶ κατὰ τὴν γένεσιν καὶ τὴν
” [4 ς / Δ, ς > li ς \
ἔκφυσιν, ὥσπερ ὁ θέρμος Kal ὁ αἰγίλωψ' ὁ μὲν
\ / 3 \ \
yap θέρμος καίπερ ἰσχυρότατος ὧν ὅμως, ἐὰν μὴ
DAN 5 \ A Ὡ a \ “
εὐθὺς ἀπὸ τῆς ἅλω καταβληθῇ, κακοφυὴς γίνεται,
καθώπερ ἐλέχθη, καὶ τὸ ὅλον δὲ οὐκ ἐθέλει
κρύπτεσθαι τῇ γῇ, δι’ ὃ καὶ οὐχ ὑπαροῦντεές
7ὔ / \ ΕΝ 3 «“ Ἃ /
σπείρουσι' πολλάκις δὲ κἂν εἰς ὕλην ἢ βοτάνην
/ \ /
τινὰ πέσῃ, διωσάμενος ταύτην συνάπτει τὴν ῥίζαν
τῇ γῆ καὶ βλαστάνει. χώραν δὲ ὕφαμμον ζητεῖ
καὶ φαύλην μᾶλλον, τὸ δὲ ὅλον οὐκ ἐθέλει
TA
φύεσθαι ἐν διειργασμένῃ.
€ n
O δὲ αἰγίλωψ' ἀνάπαλιν: ἐν yap TH yewpyou-
7 / Ne 3 la) \ JS > \
μένῃ κάλλιον' καὶ ἐνιαχοῦ δὲ πρότερον ἀβλαστὴς
ὧν ἐὰν γεωργηθῇ βλαστάνει καὶ γίνεται πολύς,
καὶ ὅλως δὲ φιλεῖ χώραν ἀγαθήν. ἴδιον δὲ αὐτοῦ
/ \ \ BA \ / / \
λέγεται πρὸς τὰ ἄλλα TA σιτώδη σπέρματα καὶ
ἡ Tap ἐνιαυτὸν βλάστησις ἑκατέρου τῶν σπερ-
μάτων. os ὃ καὶ οἱ βουλόμενοι τέλέως φθεῖραι,
iA μὴ \ 7 / \ » /
δύσφθαρτον yap δὴ φύσει τυγχάνει, τὰς ἀρούρας
ἀνιᾶσιν ἀσπόρους ἐπὶ δύο ἔτη, καὶ ὅταν ἀνα-
/ n
βλαστήσῃ τὰ πρόβατα ἐπαφιᾶσι πολλάκις, ἕως
ἂν ἐκνεμηθῶσι, καὶ αὕτη γίνεται φθορὰ παντε-
n al \
Ans ἅμα δὲ τοῦτο μαρτυρεῖ Kal THY παρὰ μέρος
βλάστησιν.


1 καὶ conj. Sch.; ἢ Ald.H.
σα 8. 1.9. a ty GEN ater: Me he 2
4 ὑπαροῦντες conj. H.; ὑπαποροῦντες UMAIA. ef. C.P. 3. 20.8.


212


ENQUIRY. INTO PLANTS, VIII. x1. 8-9


Of certain peculiarities of the seed of lupin and aigilops.


Some even! of those kinds which seem to be
more or less wild have peculiarities as to their
germination and growth, for instance, lupin and
aigilops. For lupin, although it is very robust,
unless it is planted immediately after leaving the
threshing-floor,? turns out of poor growth, as was
said, and refuses altogether to be buried in the
_ ground; wherefore they sow it without first
ploughing‘ the land. And often if the seed has
fallen amid thick undergrowth or herbage,> it
thrusts this aside, fastens on to the earth with its
root and grows vigorously. It seeks sandy and
poor soil for choice, and will not grow at all in®
cultivated” soil.

Aigilops has the opposite character; it grows
better in tilled soil; and in some places where at
first it would not grow, if the ground is tilled, it
grows and yields a large crop, and in general it
likes good soil. A peculiarity 8 mentioned in regard
to it as compared with other cereal seeds is that one
seed in two does not germinate for a year. Where-
fore those who wish to destroy it entirely, (since
it is naturally hard to destroy), leave the fields
unsown for two years, and, when it springs up,
send in® the sheep several times till they have
grazed it down, and this is a way of completely
destroying it. At the same time this testifies to the
fact that the seed does not all germinate at once.


2 ᾿ of. Lag 6 5 Plin. 18. 134. 6 A conj. W.; τῇ Ald.H.
” of. Si ΕΠ Pee. C.F. 4. Ἂ:
9 ἐπαφιᾶσι conj. Sen., cf. 8: Ἂν ; ἀφιῆσι M; ἀφίησι P;
ἀφίασι Ald,


253


Ἐν - a= 4
" ΄ - ΝΥ = ὶ
9 - ᾿ Ν ὦ"
ὙΠ ΈΧλῳ ΟΡ
; | Toa
Ψ , ν 4 5 Y -
᾿ ᾿ ‘ a | 4 νὰ ‘
o % wy Fu
.: ἣ ἃ a,
δι if
7 bat
Ε.- 3
-
“Ε ἧ ᾿
᾿ a Ε
π᾿ ΩΣ
εἴ 4
11.


;» ἢ ' sith ea
“a αὐ Dee lic νὰ ἜΑΗΗ a
. i word. 20m hlea

| . τ Se! i cote bl

ΓΗ iv θῶρι

ὲ oe cnc weny AY

αἱ ΔΙ ΤΩΡ ἫΝ τὰ
Ὶ γί frente 9 ὙΠ on eg


- ἯΙ " ; ry ΓῊ
itt {2 ἐ ΟΝ Dit 2a ee am:


Φ


harry oleae

ij, arte one Ἴδην.

fla fore aac bage off

pe wry ae ΠΝ


Ἢ: DD 5 Ne?
bitty He Ve. ale tt i


tour: fy fast,


Ὺ


Lh


δ ‘A ὑγρότης οἰκεία τῶν φυτῶν, ἣ ἣν δὴ καλοῦσί
τινες ὀπὸν ὀνόματι κοινῷ προσαγορεύοντες" δύνα-
μιν δὲ ἔχει δῆλον ὅτι τὴν καθ᾽ αὑτὴν ἑκάστη. χυμὸς
δὲ ταῖς μὲν μᾶλλον ταῖς δ᾽ ἧττον ἀκολουθεῖ, ταῖς
δ᾽ ὅλως οὐκ ἂν δόξειεν, οὕτως ἀσθενὴς καὶ ὑδαρής
τίς ἐστι. πλείστη μὲν οὖν ὑπάρχει πᾶσι κατὰ
τὴν βλάστησιν, ἰσχυροτάτη δὲ καὶ μάλιστα
ἐκφαίνουσα τὴν ἑαυτῆς φύσιν ὅταν ἤδη παύσηται
καὶ βλαστάνοντα καὶ καρπογονοῦντα. συμβαίνει
δέ τισι τῶν φυτῶν καὶ χρόας ἰδίας ἔχειν" τοῖς
μὲν λευκὰς οἷον τοῖς ὀπώδεσι, τοῖς δ᾽ αἱματώδεις
οἷον τῷ κενταυρίῳ καὶ τῇ ἀτρακτυλίδι καλουμένῃ
ἀκάνθῃ, τοῖς δὲ χλωρόν, τοῖς δ᾽ ἐν ἄχλῃ χρόᾳ.
ἔνδηλα δὲ μᾶλλον ταῦτα ἐν τοῖς ἐπετείοις καὶ
τοῖς ἐπετειοκαύλοις ἢ τοῖς δένδροις.

He ὑγρότης τῶν μὲν πάχος ἔχει μόνον, ὥσπερ
τῶν ὀπωδῶν' τῶν δὲ καὶ δακρυώδης γίνεται, καθά-
περ ἐλάτης πεύκης τερεβίνθου πίτυος ἀμυγδαλῆς
κεράσου προύμνης ἀρκεύθου κέδρου τῆς ἀκάνθης
τῆς Αἰγυπτίας πτελέας, καὶ γὰρ αὕτη φέρει κόμμι


᾿ of. CF ..6;- ΠΣ 16.
2 | have omitted 4 and restored δὲ before ἔχει (om. Seal. ;
found 1 in UMAId.).
3 σῷ Kevtavpiy conj. Scal. ef. Plin, 25, 32; κενταυρίδι con].
St.; κευτηρίᾳ P,Ald.G, ef. 9. 8. 7.


216


BOOK IX


OF THE JUICES OF PLANTS, AND OF THE MEDICINAL
PROPERTIES OF HERBS.


Of the various kinds of ΠΟ προ and the methods of collecting
them.

I. 1 Moisture belongs to plants as such and some
call it the ‘sap, to give it a general name; and
it plainly has? special qualities in each plant.
This moisture is attended by a taste, in some cases
more, in some less, while in some it would seem to
have none, so weak and watery is it. Now all plants
have most moisture at the time of making growth,
but it is strongest and most shows its character when
the plant has ceased to grow and to bear fruit.
Again in some plants the juice has a special colour ;
in some it is white, as in those which have a milky
juice ; in some blood-red, as in centaury * and the
spinous plant which is called distaff-thistle ; in some
green: and in some of other colours. And these
qualities are more obvious in annual‘ plants and
those with annual stems than in trees.

Again in some plants the juice is merely thick, as
in those in which it is of milky character ; but in some
it is of gummy character, as in silver-fir fir terebinth
Aleppo pine almond kerasos (bird-cherry) bullace
Phoenician cedar prickly cedar acacia elm.> For

4 ἐν inserted here by W. instead of before τοῖς ἐπετείοις.


° πτελέας after κέδρου P,Ald.; transposed by Sch. after
Tobias Aldinus. cf. Plin. 13. 67.


217


THEOPHRASTUS


\ > A A lal
πλὴν οὐκ EK τοῦ φλοιοῦ ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῷ κωρύκῳ, ETL
δὲ ᾽ > a € / \ ΄ / / \
ἐ ad ὧν ὁ λίβανος καὶ ἡ σμύρνα, δάκρυα yap
\ ἐς ΡΘΕ 4 \ / \ ς /
καὶ ταῦτα, Kal TO βάλσαμον καὶ «ἡ!» χαλβάνη
\ a ¢
καὶ εἴ TL τοιοῦτον ἕτερον, οἷόν φασι THY ἄκανθαν
\ Ἶ ὃ / 949 @ ἐφ / « a [4
τὴν ᾿Ινδικήν, ἀφ᾽ ἧς γίνεταί τι ὅμοιον τῇ σμύρνῃ"
/ A a
συνίσταται δὲ Kal ἐπὶ τῆς σχίνου καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς
» / θ An o/s v, > χὰ δ ,
ἀκάνθης τῆς ἰξίνης καλουμένης, ἐξ ὧν ἡ μαστίχη.
“ \ la)
Απαντὰα δὲ ταῦτα εὔοσμα καὶ σχεδὸν ὅσα
/ a ο “ lal
πιότητά τινα ἔχει καὶ Nitros: ὅσα δ᾽ ἀλιπῆ ταῦτα
7 Ν an
δ᾽ ἄοσμα, καθάπερ TO κόμμι καὶ TO τῆς apvy-
ὃ “ » δὲ ὃ / \ " es ς > K /
αλῆς. ἔχει δὲ δάκρυον καὶ ἡ ἰξία ἡ ἐν Kpnrn
/
Kal ἡ τραγάκανθα καλουμένη" ταύτην δὲ πρό-
vy 7 7 lal
τερον wovto μόνον ἐν Κρήτῃ φύεσθαι, νῦν δὲ
Ν \ > 3 A an / \
φανερὰ καὶ ἐν ᾿Αχαΐδι τῆς Πελοποννήσου καὶ
κ ΄ \
ἄλλοθι καὶ τῆς ᾿Ασίας περὶ τὴν Μήδειαν. καὶ
τούτων μὲν πάντων ἔν τε τοῖς καυλοῖς καὶ τοῖς
a \ / 2
στελέχεσι καὶ τοῖς ἀκρεμόσι τὸ δάκρυον' ἐνίων ὃ
a a / a
ἐν ταῖς ῥίζαις, ὥσπερ TOU ἱπποσελίνου καὶ τῆς
» \ 47 lal lal
σκαμμωνίας Kal ἄλλων πολλῶν φαρμακωδῶν.
a n fal \ a / x
τῶν δὲ καὶ ἐν τῷ KAVA® Kal ἐν TH ῥίζη" Kai yap
Ν \ > / 9: J, \ \ c/ Ὁ
τὸν καυλὸν ὀπίζουσιν ἐνίων καὶ τὰς ῥίζας, ὥσπερ
καὶ τοῦ σιλφίου.
> ol / / a
To μὲν οὖν Tod ἱπποσελίνου παρόμοιον TH
/ a
σμύρνῃ: καί τινες ἀκούσαντες ws ἐντεῦθεν ἡ
a > na e /
σμύρνα ἡγοῦνται βλαστάνειν ἐξ αὐτῆς immoce-


1 κωρύκῳ conj. Sch.; ἀγγείῳ H.; ἀγείῳ P,Ald. probably a
gloss on κωρύκῳ, for which ef. 2. 8. 3 and reff. in note. Plin.
1.6. has preserved the right word through an absurd biunder
—in Coryco monte Ciliciae.


218


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, ΙΧ. τ. 2-4


this last also produces a gum, though it does not
exude from the bark, but is found in the ‘bag’!
of the leaves; there are also the juices from which
come frankincense and myrrh; for these too are
gums ; so too are balsam of Mecca khalbane? and any
others of the kind that there may be, such as, they
say, the Indian akantha, from which comes some-
thing? resembling myrrh; and a similar substance
forms on mastich and the spinous plant called zane
(pine-thistle), whence mastic-gum is made.

All these have a fragrant odour, as in general have
those which contain a viscous substance and are
fatty ; while those that are not fatty have no scent,
as gum and the juice which exudes from the almond.
The pine-thistle* of Crete has also a gum, and. so
has the plant called tragacanth ;° this was formerly
supposed to grow only in Crete, but now it is well
known to grow also in Achaia in the Peloponnese
and elsewhere in Heilas and in Asia in the Median
country. In all these plants the gum occurs in
the stems the trunks and the branches, but in
some plants it is found in the roots, as in alexanders
scammony and many other medicinal plants. In
some it is found in the stem and also in the root; ®
for of some’ plants they tap the stem and the roots
as well, as is done with silphium.

Now the juice of alexanders is like myrrh, and
some, having heard that myrrh comes from it, have
supposed that, if myrrh is sown, alexanders comes up


2 galbanum. cf. Plin. 12. 121; 24.21. Verg. G. 8. 415;
4, 264. See 9. 7.2; 9. 9. 2n.

3 τι I conj. ; τὸ MSS. 4 itia=itivn. See Index.

= Phy. 19. 115. S cf. CP. Θὲ 11.16.


? ἐνίων καὶ conj. Sch.; καὶ ἐνίων Ald.


219


{


THEOPHRASTUS


λινον" φυτεύεται γάρ, ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη, καὶ ἀπὸ
δακρύου τὸ ἱπποσέλινον, καθάπερ ἡ ἡ Kpwovia καὶ

ἄλλα. τὸ δὲ τοῦ σιλφίου δριμύ, καθάπερ αὐτὸ τὸ
σίλφιον: ὁ γὰρ ὀπὸς καλούμενος τοῦ σιλφίου
δάκρυόν ἐστιν. ἡ δὲ σκαμμωνία καὶ εἴ τι ἄλλο
τοιοῦτον, ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη, φαρμακώδεις ἔχουσι τὰς
δυνάμεις.

Πάντων δὲ τῶν εἰρημένων τὰ oe αὐτομάτως
συνίσταται, τὰ δ᾽ ἀπ᾽ ἐντομῆς, τὰ δ᾽ ἀμφοτέρωθεν'
τέμνουσι δὲ δῆλον ὅτι τὰ χρήσιμα καὶ τὰ μᾶλλον
ἐπιξητούμενα. τοῦ δ᾽ ἀπὸ τῆς ἀμυγδαλῆς οὐ-
δεμία χρεία δακρύου, δι’ ὃ κοὐκ ἀφελκοῦσι. πλὴν
ἐκεῖνό γε φανερὸν ὅτε ὧν αὐτόματος ἡ πῆξις
τούτων πλείων ἡ ἐπιρροὴ τῆς ὑγρότητος. οὐ τὴν
αὐτὴν δ᾽ ὥραν ἁπάντων αἱ ἐντομαὶ καὶ ἡ πῆξις,

ἀλλὰ τὸ μὲν THS ἀμπέλου. μάλιστα συνίστασθαί
φασιν ἐὰν μικρὸν πρὸ τῆς βλαστήσεως τμηθῇ,
τοῦ δὲ μετοπώρου καὶ ἀρχομένου τοῦ χειμῶνος

A

ἧττον" καίτοι πρός γε καρποτοκίαν αἱ ὡραιόταται
ταῖς γε πλείσταις αὗται. τῆς δὲ τερμίνθου καὶ
τῆς πεύκης καὶ εἰ ἔκ τινων ἄλλων ῥητίνη γίνεται
μετὰ τὴν βλάστησιν' τὸ δ᾽ ὅλον οὐκ ἐπέτειος ἡ
τούτων, ἀλλ᾽ εἰς πλείω χρόνον ἡ ἐντομή. τὸν δὲ
λιβανωτὸν καὶ τὴν σμύρναν ὑπὸ Κύνα φασὶ καὶ
ταῖς Gepporarais ἡμέραις ἐντέμνειν: ὡσαύτως
δὲ καὶ τὸ ἐν Συρίᾳ βάλσαμον.

᾿Ακριβεστέρα δὲ καὶ ἐλάττων ἡ καὶ τούτων


1 ἐξ αὐτῆς conj. Scal.: cf. Plin. 19, 162, where smyrniwm is
given as a Synonym; ἐν αὐτοῖς Ald.
* of 2. 2.1; 6. 6.8% ΡΤ 4.0:
Δ Dial. Bs 4 of. CPS. TIPS


220


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, ΙΧ. τ. 4-7


from it ;! for, as was said,? this plant can be grown
from an exudation, like the krinonia (lily) and other
plants. The juice of silphium is pungent like the
plant itself; for what is called the ‘ juice’ of silphium
is a gum. Scammony and similar plants, as was
said,® have medicinal properties.

In all the plants mentioned the juice either forms
naturally, or when incisions are made, or in both
ways,‘ but it is obvious that men only make incisions
‘in plants whose juice is of use and is specially sought
after. Now there is no use in the gum which
exudes from the almond, wherefore men do not tap
it. However it is plain that in plants whose gum
forms naturally the flow of juice is greater. The
incisions and the clotting of the juice do not take
place at the same season in all cases; ‘but the juice
of the vine clots best they say if the incision is made
a little before budding begins, less well in the
autumn or at the beginning of winter ; (although in
regard to production of fruit these * seasons are the
best in the case of most® vines). However with
terebinth fir or any other tree which produces resin
the best time is after the period of budding; yet
in general these trees are not cut every year, but
at longer intervals. The frankincense and myrrh
trees they say should be cut at the rising of the
Dogstar and on the hottest days, and so also the
‘Syrian balsam’ (balsam of Mecca).

The cutting of these is also a more delicate matter

5 μᾶλλον ἐπιζητούμενα: τοῦ δ᾽ ἀπὸ τῆς ἀ. Hee W. supported
by G; μᾶλλον" ἐπὶ γοῦν τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ἀ. UMAld

ὁ μοὺκ ἀφελκοῦσιν conj. Scal., cf. 9. 2.1; κὰν ἀφέλκουσιν Τ' ;
κἂν ἀφέλκωσι MAId. ef. Plin. 24, 105.


7 Plin. 24. 106. 8 aiconj. W.; καὶ UPAId.
9. ye conj.Sch.; δὲ Ald. ef. C.P. 3. 13. 2.


221


THEOPHRASTUS


ἐντομή" καὶ γὰρ ἡ συρροὴ τῆς ὑγρότητος ἐλάτ-
των" ὧν δὲ καὶ ὁ καυλὸς ἐντέμνεται καὶ ἡ ῥίζα,
τούτων ὁ καυλὸς πρότερον, ὥσπερ καὶ τοῦ σιλ-
φίου, καὶ καλοῦσι δὲ τῶν ὀπῶν τούτων τὸν μὲν
καυλίαν τὸν δὲ ῥιξίαν' καί ἐστι βελτίων ὁ ῥιζίας"
καθαρὸς yap καὶ διαφανὴς καὶ ξηρότερος. ὁ δὲ
καυλίας ὑγρότερος" καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ἄλευρον αὐτῷ
περιπάττουσι πρὸς τὴν πῆξιν. τὴν ὥραν τῆς
ἐντομῆς ἴσασιν οἱ Λίβυες" οὗτοι γὰρ οἱ σίλφιον
λέγοντες. ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ οἱ ῥιζοτόμοι καὶ οἱ
τοὺς φαρμακώδεις ὀποὺς συλλέγοντες" καὶ γὰρ
οὗτοι τοὺς καυλοὺς ὀπίζουσι πρότερον. ἁπλῶς
δὲ πάντες καὶ οἱ τὰς ῥίζας καὶ οἱ τοὺς ὀποὺς συλ-
λέγοντες τὴν οἰκείαν ὥραν ἑκάστων τηροῦσι. καὶ
τοῦτο μὲν δὴ κοινόν.

1. Ἢ δὲ ῥητίνη γίνεται τόνδε τὸν τρόπον' ἐν
μὲν τῇ πεύκῃ ὅταν ἀφελκωθείσης ἡ ἡ Oas ἐξαιρεθῇ,
συρρεῖ γὰρ εἰς τὸ ἕλκωμα τοῦτο πλείων ἡ ὑγρότης,
ἐν δὲ τῇ ἐλάτῃ καὶ τῇ πίτυϊ ὅταν γευσάμενοι τῶν
ξύλων ἀφελκώσωσιν" οὐ γὰρ πᾶς ἀφορισμὸς
ὁμοίως" ἀφελκοῦσι γὰρ καὶ τὰς τερμίνθους ἐν
ἀμφοῖν καὶ ἐν τῷ στελέχει καὶ ἐν τοῖς ἀκρεμόσιν'
αἰεὶ δὲ πλείων καὶ βελτίων ἡ εἰς τὸ στέλεχος
συρρέουσα τῆς εἰς τοὺς ἀκρεμόνας.

“Διαφέρουσι δὲ καὶ κατὰ τὰ δένδρα. βελτίστη
μὲν γὰρ ἡ τερμινθίνη" καὶ γὰρ συνεστηκυῖα καὶ
εὐωδεστάτη καὶ κουφοτάτη τῆ ὀσμῇ ἀλλ᾽ ὀλίγη.
δευτέρα δὲ ἡ ἐλατίνη καὶ πιτυΐνη, κουφότεραι
yap τῆς πευκίνης. πλείστη δὲ ἡ πευκίνη καὶ


of. 6. 3. 25 C.P. 6; 11. 06.
2 σίλφιον conj. St.; σιλφίου UM ; σιλφιολέγοντες PAId.


222


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. 1. 7-1. 2


and is done on a smaller scale ; for the flow of juice
is less. In those plants whose stem and root are
both cut the stem is cut first, as also with silphium ;
and the juices so obtained are called respectively
stalk-juice and root-juice, of which the latter is the
better, for it is clear transparent and less liquid.
The stalk-juice is more liquid, and for this reason
they sprinkle meal! over it to make it clot. The
Libyans know the season for cutting, for it is they
that gather the silphium.? So also do the root-
diggers and those that collect medicinal juices, for
these too tap the stems earlier. And in general
all those who collect whether roots or juices observe
the season which is appropriate in each case. And
this remark applies generally.


Of resinous trees and the methods of collecting resin and pitch.


II. 5 Resin is made in the following manner :—in
fir it is done by removing the resinous wood after the
tree has been tapped ; for then the juice flows into
the hole so made in greater abundance ; in silver-fir
and Aleppo pine it is done by tapping the wood, after
tasting it. For there is no fixed rule for all alike ;
thus with terebinth they tap both the stem and the
branches ; but the juice which runs into the stem is
always more abundant and better than that which
flows into the branches.

There are also differences in* the resin obtained
from different trees. The best is that of terebinth ;
for it sets firm, is the most fragrant, and has the most
delicate smell; but the yield is not abundant. Next
comes that of silver-fir and Aleppo pine, for these are
more delicate than that of the fir. But that of the fir


*-Plin; 16, 57. 4 κατὰ conj. W.; ταῦτα Ald.H.
223


THEOPHRASTUS


/ \ ὃ / ὃ Ν \ /
βαρυτάτη καὶ πιττωδεστάτη διὰ TO μάλιστα
ἔνδαδον εἶναι τὴν πεύκην. ἄγεται δὲ ἐν ἀσκοῖς
ὑγρά, κἄπειτα οὕτω συνίσταται. καίτοι φασὶ καὶ
τὴν τέρμινθον πιττοκαυτεῖσθαι περὶ Συρίαν" ἔστι
γὰρ ὄρος, καθάπερ ἐν τοῖς ἔμπτροσθεν εἴπομεν, μέγα
τερμίνθων μεστὸν ἅπαν μεγάλων.

/

Ἔνιοι δέ φασι καὶ τὴν πίτυν καὶ τὴν κέδρον δὲ

\ / > δ “ \ ¢ > 4
τὴν Φοινικικήν' ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ὡς ἐνδεχόμενα

, ΤΟΝ aoe , it hig Leia \
ληπτέον διὰ TO σπάνιον" ἐπεὶ ot ye περὶ Make-
δονίαν οὐδὲ τὴν πεύκην πιττοκαυτοῦσιν ἀλλ᾽ ἢ
τὴν ἄρρενα καλοῦσι γὰρ ἄρρενα τὴν μὴ καρ-

ῇ a \ 7 2 a ς a
ποφόρον. τῆς δὲ θηλείας ἐάν τινα τῶν ῥιζῶν
λάβωσιν: ἅπασα γὰρ ἔνδαδος πεύκη ταῖς ῥίζαις

Ἁ Ν Υ͂ Ὑ P 5 \ 4 / Ρ 2 =? ¢
καλλίστη δὲ πίττα γίνεται καὶ καθαρωτάτη ἡ ἐκ

n ‘ " \ / > \
τῶν σφόδρα προσείλων Kal προσβόρρων, ἐκ δὲ

a / 7 \ / >
TOV παλισκίων βλοσυρωτέρα καὶ βορβορώδης" ἐν

x nm / / >O\ 4 /
yap τοῖς σφόδρα παλισκίοις οὐδὲ φύεται πεύκη
τὸ παράπαν.

[Ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἀφορία τις καὶ εὐφορία καὶ πλή-
θους καὶ καλλονῆς: ὅταν μὲν γὰρ χειμὼν μέτριος
γίνηται, πολλὴ γίνεται καὶ καλὴ καὶ τῷ χρώματι

»
λευκοτέρα, ὅταν δὲ ἰσχυρός, ὀλίγη καὶ μοχθηρο-
τέρα. καὶ ταῦτά γέ ἐστι τὰ ὁρίζοντα πλῆθος καὶ
7 fal a
καλλονὴν πίττης, οὐχ ἡ πολυκαρπία τῶν πευκῶν.


1 πιττοκαυτεῖσθαι conj. Sch., cf. 9. 8. 4 ; πιττοκαυθίσαι Ὁ;
πιττωθεῖσαι Ald. a 3) 2010;

3 δὲ conj. W.; καὶ Ald.H. cf. 3. 12. 3.

4 μὴ conj. W.; ye Ald.H.; ye μὴ Cod.Casaub. Vin.; γε μὴν
Vo. (τὴν ἄκαρπον mBas.). ef. 3. 9. 2.

5 Plin, 16. 59.


224


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. 1. 2-.4


is the most abundant, the grossest and the most pitch-
like, because this tree has the greatest amount of
resinous wood. It is carried about in baskets in a
liquid state, and so acquires the more solid form which
we know. However they say that in Syria pitch is
extracted even from the terebinth by burning!; for
there is in that land a mountain which, as we said
before,” is all covered with great terebinths.

Some ? say the same of Aleppo pine and also of
Phoenician cedar; but this must be taken as only
indicating what can be done, the practice not
being common; for the people of Macedonia do not
extract pitch by burning even from fir, except from
the ‘male’ kind (they call the kind which bears no
fruit* the ‘male’); the ‘female’ kind they only
treat in this way when they have found roots con-
taining pitch; for all firs have resinous wood _ex-
tending to the roots. °The finest and purest pitch
is that obtained from trees growing in a sunny
position and facing north®; that obtained from trees
growing in shade is coarser’ and muddy; (in ex-
ceedingly shady places the fir does not even grow
at all).

Again the yield may be either good or bad as to
amount and as to quality; thus, when there is a
moderate winter, it is abundant and good and whiter
in colour, but, when there is a severe winter, it is
scanty and of inferior quality. And it is these
conditions, and not the tree’s capacity for bearing
fruit, which determine the amount and quality of
pitch.

5 Apparently because this is the dry quarter in the Balkan
Be sterips con}, Sch.; 8 ‘oa M; Broonporépa Ald

οσωρωτερα CON}. Sch.; βροσηροτέρα M 3 0 τέρα ;
Pores ΣΝ ἐν.
225

VOL. Il. Q


THEOPHRASTUS


Ὁ a \
Οἱ δὲ περὶ τὴν Ἴδην φασί, διαιροῦντες Tas
"4 Ν N \ lal ᾽ / \ \
πεύκας Kal τὴν μὲν καλοῦντες ᾿Ιδαίαν τὴν δὲ
» \ > an ? 4 / \
παραλίαν, τὴν ἐκ τῆς ᾿Ιδαίας πλείω καὶ μελαν-
/ , \ / \ \ “
τέραν γίνεσθαι καὶ γλυκυτέραν καὶ τὸ ὅλον
εὐωδεστέραν ὠμήν, ἑψηθεῖσαν δὲ ἐλάττω ἐκ-
/ 7 Ν Ψ \ ᾽ / > A \
βαίνειν: πλείω yap ἔχειν τὸν oppov, δι’ ὃ καὶ
λεπτοτέραν εἶναι. τὴν δὲ τῆς παραλίας ἕανθο-
/ \ / > ΄ “ Ν \ 7
Tépav καὶ παχυτέραν ὠμήν, ὥστε Kal τὴν ἄφεψιν
ἐλάττω γίνεσθαι, δᾳδωδεστέραν δὲ τὴν ᾿Ιδαίαν.
ὡς δὲ ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν ἐκ τῆς ἴσης δᾳδὸς πλείω καὶ
6 7, 2 a > / / a 3
ὑδαρεστέραν ἐν ταῖς ἐπομβρίαις γίνεσθαι ἢ ἐν
τοῖς αὐχμοῖς, καὶ ἐκ τῶν χειμερινῶν καὶ παλι-
7 la) fal
σκίων τόπων ἢ ἐκ τῶν εὐείλων καὶ εὐδιεινῶν.
ταῦτα μὲν οὖν οὕτως ἑκάτεροι λέγουσιν.
nA / \
᾿Αναπληροῦσθαι δὲ συμβαίνει τὰ κοιλώματα
Ν \ n A n n
πρὸς TO πάλιν ἐξαιρεῖν τῶν μὲν ἀγαθῶν πευκῶν
an nw / a
ἐνιαυτῷ, τῶν δὲ μετριωτέρων ἐν δυσὶν ἔτεσι, τῶν
δὲ nN b] 7 ε δὲ > / >
ἐ μοχθηρῶν ἐν τρισίν. ἡ δὲ ἀναπλήρωσις οὐ
la) / \ Δ / > x a /
τοῦ ξύλου Kal τῆς συμφύσεως ἀλλὰ τῆς πίττης
3 7 3 \ x 7 27. a ἐν ἃ
ἐστίν: ἐπεὶ τὸ ξύλον ἀδύνατον συμφῦναι καὶ ν
7 Ζ΄ 3 > ς 2 / \ 7
γενέσθαι πάλιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ ἐργασία διὰ τοσούτου
/ / an aA \ a
χρόνου γίνεται τῆς πίττης: ἀναγκαῖον δὲ δῆλον
[γι \ n / / / 'd »
ὅτι καὶ τῷ ξύλῳ γίνεσθαί τινα πρόσφυσιν, εἴπερ


1 Plin. 16. 60.

2 εὐωδεστέραν H.; εὐκρινωδεστέραν UMAId.; ? εὐκρινεστέραν
καὶ εὐωδεστέραν W. cf 3. 9. 2.

Poe en, 0.0;


226


a


ὁ


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. u. 5-6


The people of Mount Ida distinguish different
kinds of fir, calling one ‘that of Mount Ida’ (Corsican
pine), another the “ fir of the seashore,’ (Aleppo pine);
1and they say that the pitch obtained from the former
is more abundant blacker sweeter and generally
more fragrant? in the raw state, but that boiling
down reduces the amount; for that it contains a
larger proportion of watery matter, wherefore it
_ is less substantial; but that derived from the ‘fir
of the seashore’ is browner and thicker in the
raw state, so that the amount is less reduced by
boiling down; that the ‘fir of Mount Ida’ how-
ever contains more resinous wood. And, speaking
generally, they say that from an equal amount of
resinous wood more pitch is obtained and in a more
liquid state in wet weather than during a drought,
and from a wintry and shady position than from one
that is sunny and enjoys fair weather. Such is
the account given by the peoples of Mount Ida and
of Macedonia respectively.

3 The holes for the pitch fill up, so that the pitch
can be again removed,‘in good firs in a year, in those
of more moderate quality in two years, in poor trees
in three. The filling-up is composed of the pitch ;
it is not caused by closing up of the wood; for the
wood cannot close up and become one again, but the
effect which takes the time mentioned is due to the
formation of the pitch.? However it is clearly in-
evitable that there should be some new growth of
the wood too, seeing that the resinous wood is


4 ἐξαιρεῖν conj.Sch.; ἐξαίρειν Ald.H.

5 So W. explains ἀλλὰ... πιττῆς. Or perhaps (as Sch.),
‘however this is the interval which must elapse before the
pitch can be worked again.’


227


THEOPHRASTUS


» if n \ \ 7 “Ὁ 7
ἐξαιρουμένης τῆς δᾳδὸς καὶ καιομένης τῆς πίττης
“Ὁ SS ,
ἡ ἐκροή. τοῦτο μὲν οὖν οὕτω ληπτέον.
“
Οἱ δὲ περὶ τὴν Ἴδην φασίν, ὅταν λεπίσωσι
A / if \ \ \ « ‘A
TO στέλεχος, ---λεπίζουσι δὲ TO πρὸς ἥλιον μέρος
ἐπὶ δύο ἢ τρεῖς πήχεις ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς--- ἐνταῦθα
a a n r /
τῆς ἐπιρροῆς γινομένης ἐνδᾳδοῦσθαι ἐνιαυτῷ μά-
fa! ; /
Miata, τοῦτο δ᾽ ὅταν ἐκπελεκήσωσιν ἐν ἑτέρῳ
» > a \ Ν / ς ’ \
πάλιν ἐνδαδοῦσθαι καὶ TO τρίτον ὡσαύτως, μετὰ
a \ /
δὲ ταῦτα διὰ τὴν ὑποτομὴν ἐκπίπτειν TO δένδρον
\ la) / a
ὑπὸ τῶν πνευμάτων σαπέν' τότε δ᾽ ἐξαιρεῖν
» a \ / “ A lis a
αὐτοῦ τὴν καρδίαν, τοῦτο γὰρ μάλιστα δᾳδῶδες,
2 aA > “ ς n \ by
ἐξαιρεῖν δὲ ἐκ τῶν ῥιζῶν: Kal yap ταύτας, ὥσπερ
4 a
εἴπομεν, ἐνδάδους πασῶν.
n 4
Εἰκὸς δὲ δῆλον ὅτι τὰς μὲν ἀγαθάς, ὥσπερ
» na A a \ δὴ , \
ἐλέχθη, συνεχῶς τοῦτο δρᾶν τὰς δὲ χείρονας διὰ
f / /
πλείονος χρόνου: καὶ ταμιευομένων μὲν πλείω
χρόνον ἀντέχειν, ἐὰν δὲ πᾶσαν ἐξαιρῶσιν ἐλάττω"
a /
δύναται δ᾽ ὡς ἔοικε τρεῖς μάλιστα τοιαύτας
ἐξαιρέσεις ὑπομένειν. οὐχ ἅμα δὲ καρποφοροῦσιν
“Ὁ a a \
αἱ πεῦκαι καὶ δᾳδοφοροῦσι: καρποφοροῦσι μὲν
γὰρ εὐθὺς νέαι, δαδοφοροῦσι δὲ ὕστερον πολλῷ
/ /
πρεσβύτεραι γινόμεναι. |
\ és /
TIT. Τὴν δὲ πίτταν καίουσι τόνδε τὸν τρόπον'
ς a e¢
ὅταν κατασκευάσωσιν ὁμαλῆ τόπον ὥσπερ ἅλω


1 2,6. and so this kind of wood at least is replaced by fresh
growth. 2 Plin. 1667:

3 τῆς ἐπιρροῆς γινομένης ἐνδαδοῦσθαι conj. W.; τὴν ἐπιρροὴν
γινομένην ἔνδαδον Ald.; τῆς ἐπιρροῆς γινομένης ἔνδᾳδον γίνεσθαι
conj. Sch.


228


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. π. 6-11. 1


removed ! and burnt when the discharge of pitch takes
place. So much for this account.

2 The people of Mount Ida however say that, when
they bark the stem,—and they bark the side towards
the sun to a height of two or three cubits from the
ground,—the flow of pitch takes place in that part,?
and in about a year the wood becomes full of pitch ;
and that, when they have hewn this part out, pitch
forms again in the next year, and in the third year
in like manner ; after which ‘ that the tree, because
it has been cut away underneath, is rotted by the
winds and falls; and that then® they take out its
heart, for that is especially full of pitch, and that
they also extract pitch from ὃ the roots ; for that these
too, as we said,’ are full of pitch in all firs.

Now it is plainly to be expected that they should,
as was said, repeatedly thus treat a good tree, but an
inferior one at longer intervals, and that, if the tree
is husbanded, the supply should hold out longer,
while, if they remove all the pitch, it will not hold
out so long; it appears as a matter of fact that the
tree will stand about three such removals of its
substance. ὃ However firs do not produce both fruit
and pitch at once; they begin to bear fruit when
they are quite young, but they only produce pitch
much later, when they are older.


Of the making of pitch in Macedonia and in Syria.


III. This is the manner in which they make pitch
by fire :—having prepared a level piece of ground,


4 μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα conj. Sch.; τὰ δὲ ταῦτα UM; τὰ δὲ τοιαῦτα


Ald.
5 τότε conj. Sch. from G; τοὺς Ald,
6 ἐκ Ald.; καὶ conj. W.
ies ΡΟ Ὁ. 8: 16. 2.


229


THEOPHRASTUS


ποιήσαντες ἔχουσαν εἰς τὸ μέσον συρροὴν καὶ
ταύτην ἐδαφίσωσι, κατασχίσαντες τοὺς κορμοὺς
συντιθέασι παραπλησίαν σύνθεσιν τῆς τῶν ἀν-
θρακευόντων, πλὴν οὐκ ἔμβοθρον' ἀλλὰ τὰς
σχίξας ὀρθὰς πρὸς ἀλλήλας, ὥστε λαμβάνειν ὕψος
αἰεὶ κατὰ πλῆθος" γίνεσθαι δέ φασιν, ὅταν ἡ
σύνθεσις ἢ κύκλῳ μὲν ὀγδοήκοντα καὶ ἑκατὸν
πηχέων εἰς ὕψος δὲ ἑξήκοντα πλεῖστον ἢ πεντή-
κοντα ἢ ἑκατὸν ἀμφοτέροις, ἐάνπερ ἡ Oas τυγχάνῃ
πίειρα. συνθέντες οὖν αὐτὴν οὕτως καὶ kara
σκεπάσαντες ὕλῃ γῆν ἐπιβαλόντες κατακρύπτου-
σιν ὅπως μηδαμῶς διαλάμψῃ τὸ πῦρ, ἀπόλλυται
γὰρ ἡ πίττα τούτου συμβάντος. ὑφάπτουσι δὲ
κατὰ τὴν ὑπολευπομένην δίοδον" εἶτα δὲ καὶ
ταῦτα ἐπιφράξαντες τῇ ὕλῃ καὶ ἐπιχώσαντες
τηροῦσιν ἀναβαίνοντες κατὰ κλίμακος, ἧ ἂν ὁρῶσι
τὸν καπνὸν ὠθούμενον, καὶ ἐπιβάλλουσιν αἰεὶ
τῆς γῆς ὅπως μηδ᾽ ἀναλάμψῃῃ. κατεσκεύασται
δὲ ὀχετὸς τῇ πίττῃ διὰ τῆς συνθέσεως τῆς
ἀπορροῆς εἰς βόθυνον ὅσον ἀπέχοντα πεντε-
καίδεκα πήχεις" ἡ δ᾽ ᾿ἀπορρέουσα τῆς πίττης
ψυχρὰ γίνεται, κατὰ τὴν ἁφήν. καίεται δὲ μά-
λιστα δύο ἡμέρας καὶ νύκτας" τῇ γὰρ ὑστεραίᾳ
πρὸ ἡλίου δύναντος ᾿ἐκκεκαυμένη γίνεται καὶ
ἐνδέδωκεν ἡ πυρά' τοῦτο γὰρ συμβαίνει μηκέτι
ῥεούσης. τοῦτον δὲ τὸν χρόνον ἅπαντα τηροῦσιν


1 ἐδαφίσωσι : cf. 9. 4. 4.
2 cf. 5 9, where however the ‘pit’ is not described.

3 γίνεσθαι δὲ. Something seems to have dropped out at the
begiuning of this clause. ὃ ‘‘and they say that the pile at
largest is 180”. . .: so Sch. supplying μεγίστη after 7. The
omitted words might also throw light on the preceding
sentence.


230


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. i. 1-3


which they make like a threshing-floor with a slope
for the pitch to run towards the middle, and having
made it smooth,! they cleave the logs and place them
in an arrangement like that used by charcoal-burners,?
except that there is no pit; but the billets are set
upright against one another, so that the pile goes on
growing in height according to the number used.
And they say that the erection is complete,? when the
pile is 180 cubits in circumference, and fifty, or at
most sixty, in height; or again when it is a hundred
cubits in circumference and a hundred in height,‘ if
the wood happens to be rich in pitch. Having then
thus arranged the pile and having covered it in with
timber they throw on earth and completely cover it,
so that the fire may not by any means show through ;
for, if this happens, the pitch is ruined. Then they
kindle the pile where the passage is left, and then,
having ° filled that part ® up too with the timber and
piled on earth, they mount a ladder and watch
wherever they see the smoke pushing its way out,
and keep on piling on the earth, so that the fire may
not even shew itself. And a conduit is prepared for
the pitch right though the pile, so that it may flow
into a hole about fifteen cubits off, and the pitch as
it flows out is now cold to the touch. The pile burns
for nearly two days and nights; for on the second
day before sunset it has burnt itself out and the pile
has fallen in; for this occurs if the pitch is no longer
flowing. All this time’ they keep watch and do not

4 ἀμφοτέροις : ἀμφοτέρωσε conj. Sch.

5 ἐπιφράξαντες conj. Scal. from G, stipant ; ἐπάξαντες UM
Ald.; ἐπισάξαντες H.

ὃ ταῦτα Ald.; ταύτην W. after Sch.’s conj.


7 τοῦτον δέ τὸν χρόνον conj. Sch. from G, totwm tempus ; τόνδε
δὲ τὸν τρόπον UMAId.H.


231


THEOPHRASTUS


ἀγρυπνοῦντες, ὅπως μὴ διαλάμπῃ, καὶ θύουσι
δὲ καὶ ἑορτάζουσιν εὐχόμενοι πολλήν τε καὶ
καλὴν γίνεσθαι τὴν πίτταν' οἱ μὲν δὴ περὶ
Μακεδονίαν καίουσι τὸν τρόπον τοῦτον.

Ἔν δὲ τῇ ᾿Ασίᾳ φασὶ περὶ Συρίαν. οὐκ ἐκ-
πελεκῶντας τὴν δᾷδα ἀλλ᾽ ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ τῷ δένδρῳ
προσκαίειν φέροντας ὄργανόν τι περιπεποιημένον
καὶ τούτῳ περιάπτοντας, εἶθ᾽ ὅταν ἐκτήξωσι
ταύτην πάλιν ἐπ’ ἄλλο καὶ ἄλλο μεταφέρειν"
ὅρος δέ ἐστιν αὐτοῖς τις καὶ σημεῖα τοῦ παύεσθαι
καὶ μάλιστα δῆλον ὅτι τὸ μηκέτι ῥεῖν. πιττο-
καυτοῦσι δέ, ὥσπερ καὶ πρότερον ἐλέχθη,
τὰς τερμίνθους" πεύκην γὰρ οὐ φέρουσιν οἱ
τόποι. τὰ μὲν οὖν περὶ τὴν ῥητίνην καὶ τὴν
πίτταν οὕτως ἔχει.

ΤΥ. Περὶ δὲ λιβανωτοῦ καὶ σμύρνης καὶ βαλ-
σάμου καὶ εἴ τι τοιοῦτον ἕτερον ὅτι μὲν καὶ ἀπ᾽
ἐντομῆς γίνεται καὶ αὐτομάτως εἴρηται. ποία δε
τις ἡ τῶν δένδρων φύσις καὶ εἴ τι περὶ τὴν γένε-
σιν ἢ τὴν συλλογὴν ἢ τῶν ἄχλων ἴδιον αὐτοῖς
ὑπάρχει πειρατέον εἰπεῖν, ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ περὶ
τῶν λουπῶν εὐόσμων' σχεδὸν γὰρ τά γε πλεῖστα
ἀπὸ τῶν τόπων ἐστὶ τῶν τε πρὸς μεσημβρίαν καὶ
ἀνατολήν.

Τίνεται μὲν οὖν ὁ λίβανος καὶ ἡ σμύρνα καὶ ἡ
κασία καὶ ἔτι τὸ κινάμωμον ἐν τῇ τῶν ᾿Αράβων
Χερρονήσῳ περί τε Σαβὰ καὶ ᾿Αδραμύτα καὶ


1 ἐκπελεκῶντας conj. W.; ἐκπλέκοντες Ὁ ; ἐκπλέοντες M3 ἐκ
πλήττοντες Ald.

2 The sense given to περιπεποιημένον is unexampled, and the
word may be corrupt.


232


“ὑπ υνς.


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. m. 3-1v. 2


go to rest, in case the fire should come through ; and
they offer sacrifice and keep holiday, praying that
the pitch may be abundant and good. Such is the
manner in which the people of Macedonia make
pitch by fire.

They say that in Asia in the Syrian region they
do not extract the pitch by cutting! out of the tree
the wood containing it, but use fire to the tree itself,
applying an instrument fashioned on _ purpose,?
with which they set fire to it. And then, when
they have melted out the pitch at once place, they
shift the instrument to another. But they have a
limit and indications when to stop, chiefly of course
the fact that the pitch ceases to flow. They also, as
was said before,* use fire to get pitch out of the
terebinth ; for the places where this tree grows do
not produce the fir. Such are the facts about
resin and pitch.


Of frankincense and myrrh: various accounts.


IV. As to frankincense myrrh balsam of Mecca
and similar plants it has been said that the gum is
produced both by incision and naturally. Now we
must endeavour to say what® is the natural character
of these trees and to mention any peculiarities as to
the origin of the gum or its collection or anything ®
else. So too concerning the other fragrant plants ;
most of these come from places in the south and east.

Now frankincense myrrh cassia and also cin-
namon are found in the Arabian peninsula’ about


3 τούτῳ περιάπτοντας seems to have been G’s reading (Scal.) ;
τοῦτο περιαλείφοντας MSS. Oo 2.

5 ποία conj. W.; πολλὴ Ald. 6 τι before τῶν add. Sch.

1 Χερρονήσῳ conj. Salm.; χώρᾳ νήσῳ Ald. cf. Plin. 6. 28.


233


THEOPHRASTUS


Κιτίβαινα καὶ Mapan.. φύεται δὲ τὰ τοῦ λι-
βανωτοῦ καὶ τῆς σμύρνης δένδρα τὰ μὲν ἐν τῷ
ὄρει τὰ δ᾽ ἐν ταῖς ἰδίαις γεωργίαις ὑπὸ τὴν ὑπώ-
ρειαν, δι᾿ ὃ καὶ τὰ μὲν θεραπεύεται τὰ δ᾽ οὔ" τὸ δ᾽
ὄρος εἶναί φασιν ὑψηλὸν καὶ δασὺ καὶ νιφόμενον,
ῥεῖν δ᾽ ἐξ αὐτοῦ καὶ ποταμοὺς εἰς τὸ πέδιον.
εἶναι δὲ τὸ μὲν τοῦ λιβανωτοῦ δένδρον οὐ μέγα,
πεντάπηχυ δέ τι καὶ πολύκλαδον, φύλλον δ᾽
ἔχειν ἐμφερὲς τῇ ἀπίῳ, πλὴν ἔλαττον. πολὺ καὶ
τῷ χρώματι ποῶδες σφόδρα, By Gi ὡς: TO πήγανον"
λειόφλοιον δὲ πᾶν, ὥσπερ τὴν δάφνην.

Τὴν δὲ σμύρναν ἔλαττον ἔτι τῷ μεγέθει καὶ
θαμνωδέστερον δέ, τὸ δὲ στέλεχος ἔχειν σκληρὸν
καὶ συνεστραμμένον ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, παχύτερον δὲ ἢ
κνημοπαχές: φλοιὸν δὲ ἔχειν λεῖον ὅμοιον τῇ
ἀνδράχλῃ. ἕτεροι δὲ οἱ φάσκοντες τεθεωρηκέναι
περὶ μὲν τοῦ μεγέθους σχεδὸν συμφωνοῦσιν' οὐ-
δέτερον γὰρ εἶναι μέγα τῶν δένδρων, ἔλαττον δὲ τὸ
τῆς σμύρνης καὶ ταπεινότερον" φύλλον δὲ ἔχειν
τὸ τοῦ λιβανωτοῦ δαφνοειδὲς καὶ λειόφλοιον δ᾽
εἶναι" τὸ δὲ τῆς σμύρνης ἀκανθῶδες καὶ οὐ λεῖον,
φύλλον δὲ “προσεμφερὲς ἔχειν τῇ πτελέᾳ, πλὴν
οὖλον ἐξ ἄκρου δὲ ἐπακανθίζον, ὥσπερ τὸ τῆς
πρίνου.

ἔφασαν δὲ οὗτοι κατὰ τὸν παράπλουν ὃν ἐξ
Ἡρώων ἐ ἐποιοῦντο κόλπου ζητεῖν ἐκβάντες ὕδωρ
ἐν τῷ ὄρει καὶ οὕτω θεωρῆσαι τὰ δένδρα καὶ τὴν
συλλογήν. εἶναι δ᾽ ἀμφοτέρων ἐντετμημένα καὶ


1 Plin. 12. 55 and 56. 2 Plin. 12. 67.

3 ἔχειν conj. Sch.; ἔχει PpAld.

4 λιβανωτοῦ Sapvoedes καὶ λειόφλοιον δ᾽ εἶναι conj. Sch. ; λιβά-
vou τοῦ δαφνοειδὲς καὶ λειόφυλλον δ᾽ εἶναι UM ; λιβάνου δαφνοειδὲς


234


EE ΤΠ


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. iv. 2-4


Saba Hadramyta Kitibaina and Mamali. The trees of
frankincense and myrrh grow partly in the mountains,
partly on private estates at the foot of the mountains ;
wherefore some are under cultivation, others not;
the mountains, they say, are lofty, forest-covered
and subject to snow, and rivers from them flow down
to the plain. The frankincense-tree,! it is said, is not
tall, about five cubits high, and it is much branched ;
it has a leaf like that of the pear, but much smaller
and very grassy in colour, like rue; the bark is
altogether smooth like that of bay.

The myrrh-tree? is said to be still smaller in
stature and more bushy; it is said to have® a tough
stem, which is contorted near the ground, and is
stouter than a man’s leg; and to have a smooth
bark like that of andrachne. Others who say that
they have seen it agree pretty closely about the
size ; neither of these trees, they say, is large, but
that which bears myrrh is the smaller and of lower
growth ; however they say that, while the frankin-
cense-tree* has a leaf like that of bay and smooth
bark, that which bears myrrh is spinous and not
smooth, and has a leaf like that of the elm, except
that it is curly and spinous® at the tip like that of
kermes-oak.

6 These said that on the coasting voyage which
they made from the bay of the Heroes they landed
to look for water on the mountains and so saw these
trees and the manner of collecting their gums.
They reported that with both trees incisions had
καὶ λειόφλοιον δ᾽ εἶναι Ῥῳ; λιβάνου: ἀλλὰ TOD μὲν δαφνοειδὲς καὶ
λειόφυλλον εἶναι Ald.H. ef. Plin. 12. 57.

5-of-§, 10: 1; 3. 11. 3.


6 cf. Arr. Anab. 3.5.4; 7.20.1 and 2.
7 Plin. 12, 58-62.


235


THEOPHRASTUS


\ / Ν \ / > \ \ \ ey
τὰ στελέχη καὶ τοὺς κλάδους, ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν ὥσπερ
5» ς,7 a a \ \ / 7
ἀξίνῃ δοκεῖν τετμῆσθαι τοὺς δὲ λεπτοτέρας ἔχειν
\ Ν \ /
Tas ἐντομάς: TO δὲ δάκρυον TO μὲν καταπίπτειν
A 4 / a
TO δὲ Kal πρὸς τῷ δένδρῳ προσέχεσθαι. ἐνιαχοῦ
an "4
μὲν ὑποβεβλῆσθαι ψιάθους ἐκ φοινίκων πεπλεγ-
, 3 a \ Sl / > , \
μένας, ἐνιαχοῦ δὲ To ἔδαφος μόνον ἠδαφίσθαι καὶ
\ 3 \ \ \ + Ἂ, a /
καθαρὸν εἶναι' καὶ Tov μὲν ἐπὶ τῶν ψιάθων
\ 5 Ν \ an \
λιβανωτὸν εἶναι καὶ καθαρὸν καὶ διαφανῆ, τὸν δ᾽
\ nr rn e ’ \ an /
ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς ἧττον" τὸν © ἐπὶ τοῖς δένδροις Tpoc-
/ > vA / b dee 28 \ \ Sar
εχόμενον ἀποξύειν σιδήροις, Ov ὃ καὶ φλοιὸν ἐνίοις
a / a
προσεῖναι. τὸ δὲ ὄρος ἅπαν μεμερίσθαι τοῖς
\ “9 / / \
Σαβαίοις, τούτους yap εἷναι κυρίους, δικαίους δὲ
\ \ δ , ὃ ΔΙ ak \ OE aa 50
Ta πρὸς ἀλλήλους, OL ὃ καὶ OVOEVA THPELV* ὅθεν
n 3 Ν a / ff
καὶ αὐτοὶ δαψιλῶς εἰς τὰ πλοῖα λαβόντες ἐνθέ-
a a \ a / > /
σθαι τοῦ λιβανωτοῦ Kal Ths σμύρνης ἐρημίας
BA \ 2 la 5 > κω x y
οὔσης Kal ἀποπλεῖν. ἔλεγον δ᾽ οὗτοι Kai τόδε
/

Kal ἔφασαν ἀκούειν, OTL συνάγεται πανταχόθεν ἡ
/ \ ς \ > wee nN ss ee Gs /
σμύρνα Kal ὁ λιβανωτὸς εἰς TO ἱερὸν TO TOD ἡλίου"

a ’ 3 \ la) / ς Λ \
τοῦτο © εἶναι μὲν τῶν Σαβαίων ἁγιώτατον δὲ
\ an \ / ° VA Yj
πολὺ τῶν περὶ TOV τόπον, τηρεῖν δέ τινας “Apa-

/ 7 \ / 7 /
Bas ἐνόπλους" ὅταν δὲ κομίσωσιν, ἕκαστον σωρεύ-
fa) \ 4 ¢ /
σαντα TOY αὑτοῦ Kal THY σμύρναν ὁμοίως κατα-
a tal παν a a Ψ a "δὰ a
λιπεῖν τοῖς ἐπὶ τῆς φυλακῆς, τιθέναι δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ
a / δ 7 a / a
σωροῦ πινάκιον γραφὴν ἔχον TOD Te πλήθους τῶν
\ a a a a a N /
μέτρων Kal τῆς τιμῆς ἧς Set πραθῆναι TO μέτρον
/ \ Cc? ASP /
ἕκαστον" ὅταν δὲ οἱ ἔμποροι παραγένωνται, σκο-
a \ 7, ok a /
πεῖν τὰς γραφάς, ὅστις δ᾽ ἂν αὐτοῖς ἀρέσκῃ


1 πραθῆναι conj. Sch. from G ; πρασθῆναι ἴ ; προσθεῖναι Τὸ
Ald.


236


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, ΙΧ. τν. 4-6


been made both in the stems and in the branches,
but that, while the stems looked as if they had
been cut with an axe, in the branches the incisions
were slighter; also that in some cases the gum
was dropping, but that in others it remained sticking
to the tree ; and that in some places mats woven of
palm-leaves were put underneath, while in some the
ground underneath was merely made level and
clean; and that the frankincense on the mats was
clear and transparent, that collected on the ground
less so; and that that which remained sticking to
the trees they scraped off with iron tools, wherefore
sometimes pieces of bark remained in it. The
whole range, they said, belongs to the portion of
the Sabaeans ; for it is under their sway, and they
are honest in their dealings with one another.
Wherefore no one keeps watch ; so that these sailors
greedily took, they said, and put on board their
ships some of the frankincense and myrrh, since
there was no one about, and sailed away. They also
reported another thing which they said they had
been told, that the myrrh and frankincense are
collected from all parts into the temple of the
sun; and that this temple is the most sacred thing
which the Sabaeans of that region possess, and it is
guarded by certain Arabians in arms. And _ that
when they have brought it, each man piles up his
own contribution of frankincense and the myrrh
in like manner, and leaves it with those on guard ;
and on the pile he puts a tablet on which is stated
the number of measures which it contains, and the
price for which each measure should be sold 1; and
that, when the merchants come, they look at the
tablets, and whichsoever pile pleases them, they


237


THEOPHRASTUS


/ Υ “Ὁ
μετρησαμένους τιθέναι τὴν τιμὴν εἰς τοῦτο τὸ
/ 3
χωρίον ἔνθεν ἂν ἕλωνται, Kal τὸν ἱερέα Tapayevo-
\ / id n ny an a
μενον τὸ τρίτον μέρος λαβόντα THs τιμῆς TO θεῷ
Ν Ν “ a ἴω n
TO λοιπὸν αὐτοῦ καταλιπεῖν καὶ τοῦτο σῶν εἶναι

an / 7 3
τοῖς κυρίοις, ἕως ἂν ἕλωνται παραγενόμενοι.

” / an “

Αλλοι δέ τινες τὸ μὲν τοῦ λιβανωτοῦ δένδρον
oe 3 / 7 \ \ ἶ \ -
ὅμοιον εἶναί φασι σχίνῳ καὶ τὸν καρπὸν ταῖς

7 2 TDS 5 / 3 \
σχινίσι φύλλον δὲ ὑπέρυθρον: εἶναι δὲ τὸν μὲν ἐκ
n /
TOV νέων λιβανωτὸν λευκότερον καὶ ἀοδμότερον,
\ 3 “ /
τὸν δ᾽ ἐκ τῶν παρηκμακότων EavOoTepov καὶ
> / \ \ an J 7 an
εὐοσμότερον' TO δὲ τῆς σμύρνης ὅμοιον TH τερ-
θ » δὲ \ > / 7
μίνθῳ, τραχύτερον δὲ καὶ ἀκανθωδέστερον, φύλ-
nan A 4
ov δὲ μικρῷ στρογγυλότερον, TH δὲ γεύσει δια-
/ an a 7
μασωμένοις ὅμοιον τῷ τῆς τερμίνθου" εἶναι δὲ καὶ

,7ὔ Ν / /
τούτων TA TAPNKMAKOTA εὐοσμότερα.

/ Neen tA > a 5.45. ἮΝ , rH \ i

Γίνεσθαι δὲ ἀμφότερα ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ τόπῳ" τὴν δὲ

n ς / \ al
γῆν ὑπάργιλον Kal πλακώδη, καὶ ὕδατα πηγαῖα
σπάνια. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ὑπεναντία τῷ νίφεσθαι

/ \ /
καὶ ὕεσθαι καὶ ποταμοὺς ἐξιέναι" τὸ δὲ παρόμοιον

9 \ / a ᾽ὔ Ν A \
εἶναι TO δένδρον τῇ τερμίνθῳ Kal ἄλλοι τινὲς

Us e > Ww ὦ / -
λέγουσιν, οἱ δὲ καὶ ὅλως τέρμινθον εἶναι" κομι-

na \ / Ἂν > e ς A “ bd /
σθῆναι yap ξύλα πρὸς ᾿Αντίγονον ὑπὸ τῶν Apa-
n \

Bov τῶν τὸν λιβανωτὸν καταγόντων, ἃ οὐδὲν

Ψ [οἷ an / \ > / Ἄ
διέφερε τῶν τῆς τερμίνθου' πλὴν οὗτοί γε μεῖζον


1 Plin. 12. 66 and 67. 2 Plin. 12,53.
8 πλακώδη : lit. ‘with a crust’; so W., but the word does


not seem to occur elsewhere in this sense.
ἘΞ Cis. ἃ. Ὁ,


238


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. τν. 6-8


measure, and put down the price on the spot whence
they have taken the wares, and then the priest
comes and, having taken the third part of the price
for the god, leaves the rest of it where it was, and
this remains safe for the owners until they come and
claim it. )

Others report that the tree which produces the
frankincense is like mastich, and its fruit is like
the fruit of that tree, but the leaf is reddish: also
that the frankincense derived from young trees is
whiter and less fragrant, while that derived from
those which have passed their prime is yellower and
more fragrant; also that the tree which produces
myrrh is like the terebinth, but rougher and more
thorny; that the leaf is somewhat rounder, and
that, if one chews it, it resembles that of the
terebinth in taste; also that of myrrh-trees too
those that are past their prime give more fragrant
myrrh.

1 Both trees, it is said, grow in the same region;
the soil is clayey? and caked,? and spring waters
are scarce. Now these reports are contradictory to
4that which says that the country is subject to snow
and rain and sends forth rivers. However others
make the statement ® that the tree is like the tere-
binth ; in fact some say that it is the same tree ; for
that logs of it were brought to Antigonus by the
Arabs who brought the frankincense down to the
sea, and that these did not differ at all from logs of
terebinth.© However these informants were guilty


5 ze. the statement quoted of the myrrh-tree, 87. The
‘tree’ is here the λιβανωτός, but these authorities did not
distinguish it from the myrrh-tree.. See below.

6 τῶν conj. Sch.; τῷ UAId,


239


10


THEOPHRASTUS


ἕτερον ἀγνόημα προσηγνόουν' ῴοντο yap ἐκ TOU
αὐτοῦ δένδρου τόν τε λιβανωτὸν γίνεσθαι καὶ τὴν
σμύρναν' διόπερ ἐκεῖνος ὁ λόγος πιθανώτερος ὁ
παρὰ τῶν ἀναπλευσάντων ἐξ Ἡρώων πόλεως"
ἐπεὶ καὶ τὸ ὑπὲρ Σάρδεων πεφυκὸς τοῦ λιβανω-
τοῦ δένδρον ἐν ἱερῷ τινι δαφνοειδὲς ἔ ἔχει τὸ φύλ-
λον, εἴ τι δεῖ σταθμᾶσθαι τοῦτο" ὁ λιβανωτὸς δ᾽
ἔχει, καὶ ὁ ἐκ τοῦ ᾿στελέχους καὶ ὁ ἐκ τῶν ἀκρε-
μόνων, ὁμοίως καὶ τῇ ὄψει καὶ τῇ ὀσμῇ θυμιώ-
μενος τῷ ἄλλῳ λιβανωτῷ. πέφυκε δὲ τοῦτο μόνον
τὸ δένδρον οὐδεμιᾶς τυγχάνειν «θεραπείας:

Ἔνιοι δὲ λέγουσιν ὡς πλείων μὲν ὁ λιβανωτὸς
ἐν τῇ ᾿Αραβίᾳ γίνεται, καλλίων δὲ ἐν ταῖς ἐπέκει-
μέναις νήσοις ὧν ἐπάρχουσιν' ἐνταῦθα γὰρ καὶ
σχηματοποιεῖν, ἐπὶ τῶν δένδρων οἷον ἂν θέλωσι"
καὶ τάχα τοῦτό γε οὐκ ἀπίθανον' ἐνδέχεται <yap>
ὁποίαν ἂν βούλωνται ποιεῖν τὴν ἐντομήν. εἰσὶ
δέ τινες καὶ μεγάλοι σφόδρα τῶν χόνδρων, ὥστ᾽
εἶναι τῷ μὲν ὄγκῳ χειροπληθιαίους σταθμῷ δὲ
πλέον ἢ τρίτον μέρος μνᾶς. ἀργὸς δὲ κομίζεται
πᾶς ὁ λιβανωτός, ὃ ὅμοιος δὲ τῇ προσόψει φλοιῷ.
τῆς σμύρνης δὲ ἡ μὲν στακτὴ ἡ δὲ πλαστή.
δοκιμάζεται δ᾽ ἡ «μὲν ἀμείνων τῇ γεύσει, καὶ
ἀπὸ ταύτης τὴν ὁμόχρων λαμβάνουσι. περὶ
μὲν οὖν λιβανωτοῦ καὶ σμύρνης σχεδὸν τοσαῦτα
ἀκηκόαμεν ἄχρι γε τοῦ νῦν.


1 Plin, 15. 57; cf. 16. 135.

2 δ᾽ ἔχει conj. W.; διΐεται P,Ald.; om. H.

ὃ θεραπείας add. Sch. from G; οὐδεμιᾶς τυγχάνειν ὉΜΑ]Ιαά, ;
οὐ μιᾶς τυγχάνειν P,. But there is no sign of a lacuna in the
MSS., and οὐδεμίας is probably corrupt, as W. suggests. οὐδὲ
θερ. is inconsistent with 9. 4. 2.

4 πλείων conj. W.; ἡδίων P,Ald.


240


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. tv. 8-τὸ


of a further more important piece of ignorance ; for
they believed that the frankincense and the myrrh
were produced by the same tree. Wherefore the
account derived from those who sailed from the city
of Heroes is more to be believed; in fact the
frankincense-tree which grows above Sardes in a
certain sacred precinct has? a leaf like that of bay, if
we may judge at all by this; and the frankincense
derived both from its stem and its branches is like
in appearance and in smell, when it is burnt as
incense, to other frankincense. This is the only
tree which can never be cultivated.®

Some say that the frankincense-tree is more
abundant‘ in Arabia, but finer in the adjacent islands ὃ
over which the Arabians bear rule ;° for there it is
said that they mould the gum on the trees to any
shape that they please. And perhaps this is not
incredible, since it is possible to make any kind of
incision that they like. Some of the lumps’ of gum
are very large, so that one is large enough in bulk to
fill the hand and in weight is more than a third of a
pound. All frankincense is gathered in the rough
and is like bark in appearance. Myrrh 8 is either
‘fluid’ (myrrh-oil) or ‘ solid’ (agglutinated). That
of better quality is tested by its taste, and of this
they select that which is of uniform colour. = Now
of frankincense and myrrh these are about all the
facts that have come to our notice at present.


Plin. 12. 60.
ἐπάρχουσιν conj. Coraés; ἐνυπάρχουσι P,Ald.
τῶν χόνδρων conj. Sch.: τῷ χόνδρῳ P,Ald.
i.e. here the commodity so called.
® of. Odor. 29.
10 ὁμόχρων conj. Sch.; ὁμόχρω UM ; ὁμόχρουν Ald.; τὴν ἑτέραν
καταλαμβάνουσι P..


5
6
7
8


241
VOL. II. R


THEOPHRASTUS


V. Περὶ δὲ κιναμώμου καὶ κασίας τάδε λέ-
γουσι' θάμνους μὲν ἀμφότερα ταῦτ᾽ εἶναι οὐ
μεγάλους ἀλλ᾽ ἡλίκους ἄγνου, πολυκλάδους δὲ
καὶ ξυλώδεις. ὅταν δὲ ἐκκόψωσιν, ὅλον τὸ κινά-
μωμον διαιρεῖν εἰς πέντε μέρη" τούτων δὲ τὸ πρῶ-
τον πρὸς τοῖς βλαστοῖς βέλτιστον εἶναι, ὃ τεμ-
νεται σπιθαμιαῖον ἢ μικρῷ μεῖζον: ἑπόμενον δὲ
τὸ δεύτερον, ὃ καὶ τῇ τομῇ ἔλαττον" εἶτα τὸ τρίτον
καὶ τέταρτον" ἔσχατον δὲ τὸ χείριστον τὸ πρὸς
τῇ pion φλοιὸν γὰρ ἐλάχιστον ἔχειν' χρήσιμος
δὲ οὗτος, οὐ τὸ ξύλον' δί' ὃ καὶ τὸ ἀκροφυὲς κρά-


"9 \ y \ \ / e
TLOTOV, πλεῖστον γὰρ ἔχειν καὶ τὸν φλοιον. οι


μὲν οὕτω λέγουσιν.

ἼΛλλοι δὲ θαμνῶδες μὲν καὶ ἔτι μᾶλλον φρυ-
yavades εἶναί pace δύο δ᾽ αὐτοῦ γένη, τὸ μὲν
μέλαν τὸ δὲ λευκόν. λέγεται δέ τις καὶ μῦθος
ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ: φύεσθαι μὲν γάρ φασιν ἐν φάραγξιν,
ἐν ταύταις δ᾽ ὄφεις εἶναι πολλοὺς δῆγμα θανάσι-
μον ἔχοντας, πρὸς οὗς φραξάμενοι τὰς χεῖρας καὶ
τοὺς πόδας καταβαίνουσι καὶ συλλέγουσιν, εἶθ᾽
ὅταν ἐξενέγκωσι διελόντες τρία μέρη διακλη-
ροῦνται πρὸς τὸν ἥλιον, καὶ ἣν ἂν λάχῃ ὁ ἥλιος
καταλείπουσιν" ἀπιόντες δ᾽ εὐθὺς ὁ “ὁρᾶν φασι καιο-
μένην ταύτην' οὗτος μὲν οὖν τῷ ὄντι μῦθος.

Τὴν δὲ κασίαν φασὶ τὰς μὲν ῥάβδους mayv-
τέρας ἔχειν, ἰνώδεις δὲ σφόδρα καὶ οὐκ εἶναι
περιφλεῦσαι: χρήσιμον δὲ καὶ ταύτης τὸν φλοιόν.


1 Plin. 12. 85-94.

2 A similar tale is told of frankincense by Herodotus (3.
107), who has an equally surprising tale about cinnamon
(e111):


242


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. v. 1-3


Of cinnamon and cassia: various accounts.


V. τοῦ cinnamon and cassia the following account
is given : both are shrubs, it is said,and not of large
size, but of the same size as bushes of chaste-tree,
with many branches and woody. When they cut
down the whole cinnamon-tree, they divide it into
five parts; of these the first is that which grows
next the branches and this is the best: this is cut in
lengths a span long or a little longer; next comes
the second kind, which is cut in shorter lengths;
then come the third and the fourth, and last the
least valuable wood, which grows next the root; for
this has least bark, and it is the bark and not the
wood which is serviceable ; wherefore the part which
grows high up the tree is the best, since it has the
most bark. Such is the account given by some.

Others say that cinnamon is shrubby or rather like
an under-shrub; and that there are two kinds, one
black, the other white. 2 And there is also a tale told
about it; they say that it grows in deep glens, and
that in these there are numerous snakes which have
a deadly bite; against these they protect their
hands and feet before they go down into the glens,
and then, when they have brought up the cinnamon,
they divide it in three parts and draw lots for it with
the sun; and whatever portion falls to the lot of the
sun they leave behind; and they say that, as soon as
they leave the spot, they see this take fire. Now
this is sheer fable.

8 Cassia, they say, has stouter branches, which are
very fibrous and difficult to strip of the bark‘; and’
it is the bark of this tree also which is serviceable.


3 Plin. 12. 95-97.
4 περιφλοῖσαι H.; περιφλεῦσαι UMP.Ald. ef. de igne 72.


243
R 2


THEOPHRASTUS


ὅταν οὖν τέμνωσι τὰς ῥάβδους, κατακόπτειν ὡς
διδάκτυλα᾽ τὸ μῆκος ἢ μικρῷ μείζω, ταῦτα δ᾽ εἰς
΄ 3
νεόδορον βύρσαν καταρράπτειν' εἶτ᾽ ἐκ ταύτης
καὶ τῶν ξύλων σηπομένων σκωλήκια γίνεσθαι,
ἃ > \ ig / 4 n » 3
ἃ τὸ μὲν ξύλον κατεσθίει, τοῦ φλοιοῦ δ᾽ οὐχ
e \ a
ἅπτεται διὰ τὴν πικρότητα Kal δριμύτητα τῆς
ὀσμῆς. καὶ περὶ μὲν κασίας καὶ κιναμώμου
τοσαῦτα λέγεται.
VI. Τὸ δὲ βάλσαμον γίνεται μὲν ἐν τῷ αὐλῶνι
a \ , / > 5 7 /
τῷ περὶ Συρίαν. παραδείσους δ᾽ εἶναί φασι δύο
μόνους, τὸν μὲν ὅσον εἴκοσι πλέθρων τὸν δ᾽ ἕτερον
la) \
πολλῷ ἐλάττονα. TO δὲ δένδρον μέγεθος μὲν
ἡλίκον ῥόα μεγάλη πολύκλαδον δὲ σφόδρα"
4 Ν o7, “ , \ Μ,
φύλλον δὲ ἔχειν ὅμοιον πηγάνῳ, πλὴν ἔκλευκον,
34) 7. \ - \ x / an
ἀείφυλλον δὲ εἶναι" καρπὸν δὲ παρόμοιον TH
τερμίνθῳ καὶ μεγέθει καὶ σχήματι καὶ χρώματι:
b Wite) / A fa) \ la) “Ὁ 7
εὐῶδες σφόδρα Kal τοῦτο καὶ μᾶλλον τοῦ δακρύου.
Τὸ δὲ δάκρυον ἀπὸ ἐντομῆς συλλέγειν, ἐντέμ-
νειν δὲ ὄνυξι σιδηροῖς ὑ ὑπὸ τὸ ἄστρον, ὅταν μάλισ-
τα πνίγη ὦσι, καὶ τὰ στελέχη καὶ τὰ ἄνω. τὴν
δὲ συλλογὴν ὅλον τὸ θέρος ποιεῖσθαι" οὐκ εἶναι
δὲ πολὺ τὸ ῥέον, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν ἡμέρᾳ τὸν ἄνδρα συλλέ-
\ >
yey ὅσον KoyXnVv: THY δ᾽ ὀσμὴν διαφέρουσαν καὶ
7 “ » \ fa} \ > lal /
πολλήν, ὥστε ἀπὸ μικροῦ πολὺν ἐφικνεῖσθαι TO-
πον. ἀλλ᾽ οὐ φοιτᾶν ἐνταῦθα ἄκρατον ἀλλὰ τὸ
συνηγμένον κεκραμένον' πολλὴν γὰρ δέχεσθαι


1 νεόδορον conj. Sch.; νεόδερον P,Ald. 5. Plin. 12 111-123.
3 εὐῶδες... τοῦτο P,Ald.; εὐώδη... τοῦτον W. after Sch.’s
conj. But the clause begins without a conjunction, and some


244


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. v. 3-v1. 2


When then they cut off the branches, they chop
them up into lengths of about two fingers’ breadth
or rather more, and these they sew up in raw!
hide ; and then from the leather and the decaying
wood little worms are engendered, which devour the
wood but do not touch the bark, because it is bitter
and has a pungent odour. This is all the in-
formation forthcoming about cinnamon and cassia.


Of balsam of Mecca.


VI. 2 Balsam of Mecca grows in the valley of
Syria. They say that there are only two parks in
which it grows, one of about four acres, the other
much smaller. The tree is as tall as a good-sized
pomegranate and is much branched; it has a leaf
like that of rue, but it is pale; and it is evergreen ;
the fruit is like that of the terebinth in size shape
and colour, and this too is very fragrant,? indeed
more so than the gum.

4The gum, they say, is collected by making
incisions, which is done with bent pieces of iron at
the time of the Dog-star, when there is scorching
heat ; and the incisions are made both in the trunks
and in the upper parts of the tree. The collecting
goes on throughout the summer; but the quantity
which flows is not large ; in a day a single man can
collect a shell-full®; the fragrance is exceeding
great and rich, so that that which comes from a small
amount is perceived for a wide distance. However
it does not reach usina pure state ; what is collected
is mixed with other things; for it mixes freely with


words about the flower may have dropped out, to which this
clause refers ; cf. however Odor. 32.
* Diose. 1, 19. 5 Phin? 12, 117.


245


THEOPHRASTUS


“ \ nm. “Ὁ
Kpaow: καὶ τὸ ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι πολλάκις εἶναι
κεκραμένον" εὔοσμα δὲ σφόδρα καὶ τὰ ῥαβδία'

/ \ al
καθαίρειν yap καὶ τῶνδε ἕνεκα Kai του διαφόρου"
val a \ / \ \ > cy \
πωλεῖσθαι <yap> τίμια. Kal τὴν ἐργασίαν τὴν
\ \ » lal
περὶ τὰ δένδρα σχεδὸν ἐν ταὐτῇ αἰτίᾳ εἶναι καὶ

\ / / \ a
τὴν Bpoxnv: βρέχεσθαι yap συνεχῶς. συναιτίαν
δὲ δοκεῖν εἶ D μὴ ia γίνεσθαι τὰ δένδ

εἶναι τοῦ μὴ μεγάλα γίνεσθαι τὰ δένδρα

\ \ lal Ἢ / \ i \ 2
καὶ THY TOV ῥαβδίων τομήν. διὰ yap TO πολλά-

5 / ξὺν > / \ > > ἃ
Kis ἐπικείρεσθαι ῥάβδους ἀφιέναι καὶ οὐκ εἰς ἕν
\
ἐκτείνειν τὴν ὁρμήν.

"Ayptov δὲ οὐδὲν εἶναι βάλσαμον οὐδαμοῦ" γί-
νεσθαι δὲ ἐκ μὲν τοῦ μείζονος παραδείσου ἀγγεί-
δια δώδεκα ὅσον ἡμιχοαΐῖα, ἐκ δὲ τοῦ ἑτέρου δύο

, L lal θΘ δὲ \ \ ” él \
μόνον: πωλεῖσθαι δὲ τὸ μὲν ἄκρατον δὶς πρὸς
> Is \ 3. Ἦν \ / n / \
ἀργύριον TO δ᾽ ἄλλο κατὰ λόγον τῆς μίξεως" Kal

a i / \
τοῦτο μὲν διαφέρον TL φαίνεται κατὰ τὴν εὐοσ-

/
μίαν.

¢ € “
VII. Ὁ δὲ κάλαμος γίνεται καὶ ὁ σχοῖνος ὑπερ-
\ n
βάλλοντι τὸν Λίβανον μεταξὺ τοῦ te Λιβάνου
a a /
Kal ἄλλου τινὸς ὄρους μικροῦ ἐν TO αὐλωνίσκῳ

Υ Ν » v4 / an? / ς
τούτῳ, καὶ οὐχ ὡς τινές φασι τοῦ Ἀντιλιβάνου" ὁ
γὰρ ᾿Αντιλίβανος μακρὰν ἀπέχει τοῦ Λιβάνου

ἃ A a
καὶ μεταξὺ τούτων ἐστὶν ὃν αὐλῶνα καλοῦσι TE-

/ \ \ , “ νι e / A ς

δίον πολὺ καὶ καλόν. ὅπου δὲ ὁ κάλαμος καὶ ὁ
lal / \

σχοῖνος φύεται λίμνη μεγάλη τυγχάνει, πρὸς
΄ As Bi a Ψῳ, n° / ΄

ταύτην δὲ ἐν τῷ ἕλει τῷ ἀνεξηραμμένῳ πεφύκασι

1 rov I conj.; τοῦ MSS. G’s rendering shews that the


explanation of the ‘different reason’ (7.e. to strengthen the
tree) has dropped out of our texts. 2 yap add. Sch.


246


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. νι. 2-vu.1


other things; and what is known in Hellas is
generally mixed with something else. The boughs
are also very fragrant. In fact it is on account of
these boughs, they say, that the tree is pruned (as
well as for a different reason!), since? the boughs
eut off can be sold for a good price. In fact the
culture of the trees has the same motive? as the
irrigation (for they are constantly irrigated). And
the cutting of the boughs seems likewise to be
partly the reason why the trees do not grow tall;
for, since they are often cut about, they send out
branches instead of putting out all their energy in
one direction.

Balsam is said not to grow wild anywhere. From
the larger park are obtained twelve vessels con-
taining each about three pints, from the other only
two such vessels; the pure gum sells for twice its
weight in silver, the mixed sort at a price propor-
tionate to its purity. Balsam then appears to be of
exceptional fragrance.


Of other aromatic plants—all oriental, except the iris.


VII. 4 Sweet-flag and ginger-grass grow beyond
the Libanus between that range and another small
range, in the depression thus formed; and not, as
some say, between Libanus and Anti-Libanus. For
Anti-Libanus is a long way from Libanus, and
between them is a wide fair plain called ‘The
Valley. But, where the sweet-flag and ginger-
grass grow, there is a large lake,> and they grow
near it in the dried up marshes, covering an extent

3 The ‘motive’ is the production of boughs. ἐν ταὐτῇ
αἰτίᾳ 1 conj.; ταύτην αἰτίαν UMP,Ald.; ἐν ταύτῃ αἰτίᾳ conj. W.


4Plin. 12. 104 and 105, 5 of. O.P. 6, 18. 2.
247


THEOPHRASTUS


ToTOV δὲ ἔχουσι πλεῖον ἢ τριάκοντα σταδίων.
οὐκ ὄζουσι δὲ χλωροὶ ἀλλὰ EnpavOévtes, τῇ
, \ > \ »Ἥ la 7 >
προσόψει δὲ οὐδὲν διαφέρουσι τῶν ἄλλων" εἰσ-
βάλλοντι δ᾽ εἰς τὸν τόπον εὐθὺς ὀσμὴ προσ-
βάλλει" οὐ μὴν πορρωτέρω γε ἡ ἀποπνοὴ γίνεται,
καθάπερ τινές φασι, ταῖς προσφερομέναις ναυσὶ
πρὸς τὴν χώραν' καὶ γὰρ ὁ τόπος οὗτος ἀπὸ
θαλάττης ἀπέχει. πλείους ἢ ἑκατὸν πεντήκοντα
σταδίους" ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῇ ᾿Αραβίᾳ τὴν ἀποπνοὴν
εἶναί φασι τὴν ἀπὸ τῆς χώρας εὔοσμον.

Ἔν μὲν οὖν Συρίᾳ τὰ περιττὰ τῇ ὀσμῇ σχεδὸν
ταῦτ᾽ ἐστίν: ἡ γὰρ χαλβάνη βαρύτερον καὶ μᾶλ-
λον ,Φφαρμακῶδες: ἐπεὶ καὶ αὕτη γίνεται περὶ

υρίαν ἐκ τοῦ πανάκους καλουμένου. τὰ δὲ ἄλλα
πάντα τὰ εὔοσμα οἷς πρὸς τὰ ἀρώματα χρῶνται,

\ \ 3 ᾽ a / b) al ree δι /
τὰ μὲν ἐξ Ινδῶν κομίζεται κἀκεῖθεν ἐπὶ θάλατταν
καταπέμπεται, τὰ δ᾽ ἐξ ᾿Αραβίας, οἷον πρὸς τῷ

/
κιναμώμῳ καὶ τῇ κασίᾳ καὶ κώμακον' ἕτερον. δ᾽
εἶναι τὸ κώμακον καρπόν" τὸ δ᾽ ἕτερον παραμίο-
γουσιν εἰς τὰ σπουδαιότατα τῶν μύρων. τὸ δὲ
/ \ ” e \ > / « »
καρδάμωμον καὶ ἄμωμον οἱ μὲν ἐκ Μηδείας, οἱ ὃ
9 > a \ a \ \ / \ AS, 18
ἐξ ᾿Ινδῶν καὶ ταῦτα Kal τὴν νάρδον Kal τὰ ἄλλα
ἢ τὰ πλεῖστα.
\ a

Οἷς μὲν οὖν εἰς τὰ ἀρώματα χρῶνται σχεδὸν
τάδε ἐστί: κασία κινάμωμον καρδάμωμον νάρδος
ναῖρον βάλσαμον ἀσπάλαθος στύραξ ἶρις νάρτη


1 οὐϊς ὄζουσι conj. Guilandinus, ef. C.P. 6. 14. 8; οὐ δοκοῦσι
P,Ald.H.

2 of. C.P. 6.18.1. τῶν ἄλλων : sc. καλάμων καὶ σχοίνων.

3 προσφερομέναις ναυσὶ πρὸς conj. Scal.; προσφ. εἶναι πρὸς P,


of. 9. 9. 2n. ‘The plant,’ 1.6. one of the plants so called.
S Plin: 12.1363 oy, T3548.


248


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, ΙΧ, vu. 1-3


of more than thirty furlongs. They have no
fragrance! when they are green, but only when
they are dried, and in appearance they do not
differ 2 from ordinary reeds and rushes; but, as
you approach the spot, immediately a sweet smell
strikes you. However it is not true, as some say,
that the fragrance is wafted to ships approaching ®
the country ; for indeed this district is more than
150 furlongs from the sea. However it is said
that in Arabia the breezes wafted from the land
are fragrant.

Such then are the plants in Syria which have.
remarkable fragrance. For that of khalbane is more
oppressive and somewhat medicinal; ‘for this perfume
also is produced in Syria from the plant called all-
heal. As to all the other fragrant plants used for
aromatic odours, they come partly from India
whence they are sent over sea, and partly from
Arabia, for instance, komakon®—as well as cinnamon
and cassia. The fruit called komakon is said to be
distinct ® from this; the komakon of which we
are speaking is a perfume which they mix with the
choicest unguents. Cardamom and Nepaul cardamom
some say come from Media; others say that these
come from India, as well as spikenard and most, if
not all, of the other species.

Now this is a general list of the plants used for
perfumes :—cassia cinnamon cardamom spikenard
nairon balsam of Mecca aspalathos storax iris narte


§ εἶναι has no government, and W. considers the passage
corrupt. Comparison of Plin. /.c. suggests that the original
text may have been something like this: τὸ κώμακον καρπὸν
ὄν: τὸν δὲ χυλὸν K.T.A., 1.6. ‘komakon is of different character
from these, being a fruit, whose juice—.’ Plin. calls κ, a kind
of cinnamon.


249


THEOPHRASTUS


/ / / a
KOTTOS TAVAKES κρόκος σμύρνα κύπειρον σχοῖνος
ia Α
κάλαμος ἀμάρακον λωτὸς ἄννητος. τούτων δὲ τὰ
\ 7 \ a
μὲν ῥίζαι τὰ δὲ φλοιοὶ τὰ δὲ κλῶνες τὰ δὲ ξύλα
\ δὲ / \ δὲ ὃ » μὴ δὲ 7 θ \
Ta δὲ σπέρματα τὰ δὲ δάκρυα Ta δὲ ἄνθη. Kal
\ la) /
τὰ μὲν πολλαχοῦ γίνεται, τὰ δὲ περιττότατα Kal
εὐοδμότατα πάντα ἐκ τῆς ᾿Ασίας καὶ ἐκ τῶν
5] lal / ’ \ > an > /, b] /
ἀλεεινῶν τόπων. ἐκ yap αὐτῆς Εὐρώπης οὐδέν
ἐστιν ἔξω τῆς ἴριδος. ὶ
’ / ’ an a
Αὕτη δ᾽ ἀρίστη ἐν Ἰλλυριοῖς, οὐκ ἐν TH πρὸς
θάλατταν χώρᾳ, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῇ ἀνακεχωρηκυίᾳ κει-
μένῃ δὲ μᾶλλον πρὸς ἄρκτον. τόποι δὲ τόπων
f
διαφέρουσιν ἐν οἷς ἀμείνων: ἐργασία δὲ περὶ av-
\ n a
τὴν οὐδεμία πλὴν TOD περικαθήραντα ἀναξηρᾶναι.
\ A a / / “ἢ ΄ὔ
Τὰ γὰρ ἐν τῇ Θρᾷάκῃ φυόμενα ῥιζία, καθάπερ
/ n / fol \ > + yx \
TO TE TH νάρδῳ προσεμφερῆ τὴν ὀσμὴν ἔχον καὶ
>’ / fal /
ἕτερ᾽ ἄττα, μικράν τινα Kal ἀσθενῆ τὴν εὐωδίαν
Ν ἈΝ an / nr
ἔχει. καὶ περὶ μὲν τῶν εὐόσμων ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον
εἰρήσθω.
“ > an
VIII. Περὶ δὲ τῶν ὀπῶν ὅσα μὴ πρότερον εἴ-
/ ’ e 5 4 x \
ρήται, λέγω δ᾽ οἷον εἴ τινες φαρμακώδεις ἢ Kal
ς / -
ἄλλας ἔχουσι δυνάμεις, πειρατέον ὁμοίως εἰπεῖν"
Le \ μὴ a ’ a
ἅμα δὲ Kal περὶ ῥιζῶν, Kal yap τῶν ὀπῶν τινες EK
΄ x \ ᾽ ‘ 2 ς \ \ \
τούτων καὶ χωρὶς αὐταὶ καθ᾽ αὑτὰς πολλὰς Kal
7] 5) ©
παντοίας ἔχουσι δυνάμεις, ὅλως δὲ περὶ πάντων
an a a 4
φαρμακωδῶν, οἷον καρποῦ χυλισμοῦ φύλλων ῥι-
A a \ / a
ζῶν πόας" καλοῦσι yap Kal πόαν ἔνια τῶν φαρ-
μακωδῶν οἱ ῥιζοτόμοι.


1 of. C.P. 6. 14. 8; 6. 18,12; Plin, 21. 40.
? See Index App. (25).


250


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX, vu. 2-  ΠΠ.1


kostos all-heal saffron-crocus myrrh kypeiron ginger-
grass sweet-flag sweet marjoram Jolos dill. Of these
it is the roots, bark, branches, wood, seeds, gum or
flowers which in different cases yield the perfume.
Some of them grow in many places, but the most
excellent and most fragrant all come from Asia and
sunny regions. From Europe itself comes none of
them except the iris.

1This is best in Illyria, not in the part near the
sea, but in that which is further inland and lies
more to the north. In different districts it varies
in quality ; no special attention is needed, except to
scrape the roots clean and dry them.

As for the roots which grow in Thrace, such
as one? which has a smell like spikenard and
certain others, their fragrance is but slight and
feeble. Let this suffice for an account of sweet-
smelling plants.


Of the medicinal juices of plants and the collection of them:
general account.

VIII. Now we must endeavour to speak in like
manner of those juices which have not been
mentioned already, I mean, such as are medicinal
or have other properties; and at the same time
we must speak of roots; for some of the juices are
derived from roots, and apart from that roots have
in themselves divers properties of all kinds; and
in general we must discuss medicinal things of all
kinds, as fruit, extracted juice,’ leaves, roots, ‘ herbs’ ;
for the herb-diggers call some medicinal things by
this name.

3 χυλισμοῦ P,Ald.H ; καυλοῦ conj. W. The list is of the


aspects in which the herbalist would regard the plant, not of
the parts of the plant.


251


THEOPHRASTUS


Τῶν δὲ ῥιζῶν πλείους μέν εἰσιν αἱ δυνάμεις καὶ
‘ “
πρὸς πλείω" ζητοῦνται δὲ μάλιστα αἱ φαρμα-
/ ’ lal
κώδεις ὡς χρησιμώταται, διαφέρουσαι τῷ TE μὴ
\ 3) \ an \ > val 2 a Ψ \
πρὸς ταὐτὰ καὶ TH μὴ ἐν τοῖς αὐτοῖς ἔχειν τὴν
ς “ ’ “Ὁ «ς Ὁ Ν Ψ
δύναμιν. ὡς δ᾽ οὖν ἐπὶ πᾶν αἱ πλεῖσται μὲν ἐν
αὑταῖς ἔχουσι καὶ τοῖς καρποῖς καὶ τοῖς ὀποῖς,
ἔνιαι δὲ καὶ ἐν τοῖς φύλλοις" τὰς δὲ φυλλώδεις
/ \ \ \ / n «“
δυνάμεις TAS πολλᾶς σχεδὸν TOaS καλοῦσιν, Wa-
περ εἴρηται μικρῷ πρότερον, οἱ ῥιζοτόμοι.
Ὃ μὲν οὖν ὀπισμὸς γίνεται τῶν ὀπιζομένων ὡς
ἐπὶ τὸ πολὺ τοῦ θέρους, τῶν μὲν ἐνισταμένου τῶν
Ν / Ὁ \ [4 / / /
δὲ προεληλυθότος. ἡ δὲ ῥιζοτομία γίνεταί τινων
καὶ ὑπὸ πυροτομίαν καὶ μικρῷ πρότερον, οὐ μὴν
> = Pe C2 / an / ϑι 3 a
ἀλλ᾽ ἣ γε πλείων τοῦ μετοπώρου μετ Ἀρκτοῦρον,
Ὁ“ / Ὡ“ \ \ ς \
ὅταν φυλλορροήσωσιν, ὅσων δὲ Kal ὁ καρπὸς
a / «
χρήσιμος, ὅταν ἀμερθῶσι τὸν καρπόν. ἔστι δὲ ὁ
ὀπισμὸς ἢ ἀπὸ τῶν καυλῶν, ὥσπερ τοῦ τιθυμάλ-
a a /
Nov καὶ τῆς θριδακίνης Kal σχεδὸν τῶν πλείστων,
ἢ ἀπὸ τῶν ῥιζῶν, ἢ τρίτον ἀπὸ τῆς κεφαλῆς, ὥσπερ
n γι
τῆς μήκωνος" ταύτης γὰρ μόνης οὕτω καὶ τοῦτ
a A > \
ἴδιον αὐτῆς. τῶν μὲν οὖν καὶ αὐτόματος ὁ ὀπὸς
1 From this point to 9. 19. 4, γίνεσθαι, the text is repeated
in U, with considerable variations, as a tenth book. Ald.
also repeats the first few lines of this passage (down to end
of §1) as a fragment of a tenth book. The two Medicean
MSS also repeat 9. 8.1, τῶν δὲ ῥιζῶν, down to 9. 10. 3,
βέλτιστοι δὲ καὶ οἷς, as part of a tenth book. The ‘tenth
book’ readings in each case are distinguished by a *.
> ῥιζῶν : ῥίζα signifies a medicinal plant in general (ef.
ῥιζότομοι) as well as ‘root’; the double sense makes transla-


tion of this section awkward : I print it ‘ root’ where it has
the wider sense,


252


“ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. vni. 1-2


1 The properties of ‘ roots’ 3 are numerous and they
have numerous uses; but those which have medicinal
virtues are especially sought after, as being the most
useful ; and they differ in not all being applied to
the same? purposes and in not all having their virtue
in the same parts of them.* To speak generally,
most ‘roots’ have it in themselves®; or else it is
found in the fruits or the juices of the plant; and in
some cases in the leaves as well, and it is to the
virtues of the leaves in most cases that the herb-
diggers refer, when they speak, as has just been
said,® of “ herbs.’

The collection of the juice from plants from which
it is collected is mostly done in summer, in some
cases at the beginning of that season, in others when
it is well advanced. The digging of roots is done in
some cases at the time of wheat-harvest or a little
earlier, but the greater part of it in autumn after the
rising of Arcturus when the plants have shed their
leaves, and, in the case of those whose fruit is
serviceable, when they have lost their fruit. The
collection of juice is made either from the stalks,’ as
with tathymallos (spurge) wild lettuce and the majority
of plants, or from the roots, or thirdly from the head,
as in the case of the poppy ; for this is the only plant
which is so treated § and this is its peculiarity. In
some plants the juice collects of its own accord in


3 ταὐτὰ conj. Seal. from G3; ταῦτα Ald.
4 After δύναμιν U*Ald.* add ὥσπερ εἴρηται μικρῷ πρότερον ;


omitted here by Sch.: see below. ° Sc. in the roots.
5 ὥσπερ. .. πρότερον inserted here by Sch.: see above;


ὥσπερ εἴρηται Ald,

7 καυλῶν Vin. Vo.Cod.Cas.: so 4150 G3; καρπῶν ΑἸ. Ἡ ΜΈ,

8 μόνης οὕτω καὶ conj. W.; μόνης καὶ Ald.H; μόνον οὕτω
καὶ ΜῈ,


253


THEOPHRASTUS


συνίσταται δακρυώδης τις, ὥσπερ καὶ τῆς τραγα-
/ θ rs \ ἡδὲ > / “ δὲ
κάνθης: ταύτην γὰρ οὐδὲ τέμνειν ἐστί: τῶν δὲ
πλείστων ἀπὸ τῆς ἐντομῆς. ὧν ἐνίους μὲν εὐθὺς
εἰς ἀγγεῖα συνάγουσιν, ὥσπερ καὶ τὸν τοῦ τιθυ-
΄ BN , a No fe , \
μάλλου ἢ μηκωνίου, καλοῦσι yap ἀμφοτέρως, καὶ
¢ lal Ὡ / / “ \ \ /
ἁπλῶς ὅσα πολύοπα τυγχάνει" τῶν δὲ μὴ πολυό-
5. / 4 \ a θ ὃ “
πων ἐρίῳ λαμβάνουσιν ὥσπερ καὶ τῆς θριδακίνης.
/
᾿Ενίων δ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ὀπισμὸς ἀλλ᾽ οἷον χυλισμός
bd 2 “ / x / \ “ὃ
ἐστιν, ὥσπερ ὅσα κόψαντες ἢ τρίψαντες καὶ ὕδωρ
“ \ /
ἐπιχέαντες ἀπηθοῦσι καὶ λαμβάνουσι τὴν ὑπό-
a ¢ ς Ἂς
στασιν" ξηρὸς δὲ δῆλον ὅτι καὶ ἐλάττων ὁ χυλὸς
a an \
τούτων. ἔστι δὲ TOY μὲν ἄλλων ῥιζῶν TO χύλισ-
a a n / \
μα ἀσθενέστερον τοῦ καρποῦ, τοῦ κωνείου δὲ
\ / “
ἰσχυρότερον, καὶ τὴν ἀπαλλαγὴν paw ποιεῖ καὶ
/ /
θάττω μικρὸν πάνυ καταπότιον δοθέν' ἐνεργό-
δὲ \ > \ ” / > \ δὲ
τερον δὲ καὶ εἰς τὰς ἄλλας χρείας. ἰσχυρὸν δὲ
καὶ τὸ τῆς θαψίας. τὰ δὲ ἄλλα πάντα ἀσθενέ-
στερα. οἱ μὲν οὗν ὀπισμοὶ σχεδὸν τοσαυταχῶς
γίνονται.
na N
Τῆς δὲ ῥιζοτομίας οὐκ ἔστι τοιαύτη διαφορὰ
A ,
πλὴν ἐν ταῖς ὥραις οἷον θέρους ἢ μετοπώρου, καὶ
τῷ τάσδε ἢ τάσδε τῶν ῥιζῶν: οἷον τοῦ ἐλλεβόρου
τὰς κάτω τὰς λεπτάς' τὴν γὰρ ἄνω τὴν παχεῖαν
τὴν κεφαλώδη φασὶν ἀχρεῖον εἶναι καὶ διδόναι


------.


1 cf. Diosc. 2. 136 ; Plin. 20. 58.
2 of. Didseidy Ἢ }
3 fdw conj. Sch.; ῥαιο U; ῥᾳδίως M*AId, ἢ ἰὸς


254


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. vin. 2-4


the form of a sort of gum, as with tragacanth ; for
incision of this plant cannot be made ; but in most it
is obtained by incision. In some cases the juice is
collected straight into vessels, for instance that of
tuthymallos (spurge) or mekonion (for the plant has both
names) and in general the juice of specially juicy
plants is so collected. But that of those which do
not yield abundant juice is taken with a piece of wool,
as also that of wild lettuce.!

2In some cases there can be no collection of juice,
but there is a sort of extraction of it, for instance in
the case of plants which are cut down or bruised;
they then pour water over them and strain off the
fluid, keeping the sediment ; but it is plain that in
these cases the juice obtained is dry and less copious.
In most ‘roots’ the juice thus extracted is less
powerful than that of the fruit, but in hemlock it is
stronger and it causes an easier ὃ and speedier + death
even when administered in a quite small pill; and it
is also more effective for other uses. °That of thapsia
is also powerful, while all the rest are less so. | Such
then is a general account of the various ways of
obtaining the juices of plants.


Of the cutting of roots for medicinal purposes, and of certain
superstitions connected therewith.


As to cutting of the roots there is no such
diversity of practice, except as to the season, which
may be summer or autumn, and as to the particular
roots selected. © Thus in hellebore the slender lower
roots are taken, for they say that the thick upper
part’ which forms a sort of head is useless, and that


4 θάττω con}. Sch.; ἐλάττω UM ; θᾶττον {ἘΜ Ald.
5 ο΄. Phin, 19. 125, 6 Plin. 25. 53. 7 2,6. rhizome,


255


THEOPHRASTUS


ταῖς κυσὶν ὅταν βούλωνται καθαίρειν. καὶ ἐφ
ς / / 4 / 4
ἑτέρων δέ τινων τοιαύτας λέγουσι διαφοράς.
ἜΣ δὲ Ψ ς lal \ c /
TL δὲ ὅσα οἱ φαρμακοπῶλαι Kal οἱ ῥιζοτόμοι
\ a
τὰ μὲν ἴσως οἰκείως τὰ δὲ Kal ἐπιτραγωδοῦντες
\
λέγουσι. κελεύουσι γὰρ τὰς μὲν KAT ἄνεμον
ς 7
ἱσταμένους τέμνειν, ὥσπερ ἑτέρας τέ τινας καὶ
\ ee A \ al
τὴν θαψίαν, ἀλειψάμενον λίπα' TO yap σῶμα
bd ὃ Ἄ aN > > / > go δὲ \ a
ἀνοιδεῖν ἐὰν ἐξ ἐναντίας. κατ᾽ ἄνεμον δὲ καὶ τοῦ
if, \ \ “ > \ \ 4
κυνοσβάτου τὸν καρπὸν συλλέγειν, εἰ δὲ μὴ κίν-
δυνον εἶναι τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν. τὰς δὲ νύκτωρ τὰς
\ / /
δὲ μεθ᾽ ἡμέραν, ἐνίας δὲ πρὶν τὸν ἥλιον ἐπιβάλ-
κω \ \ ΄ ΄
λειν, οἷον καὶ τὸ καλούμενον κλύμενον.
Καὶ ταῦτα μὲν καὶ τὰ παραπλήσια τούτοις
9 "Ἢ ᾽ 53 / / / > “Ὁ
τάχ᾽ ἂν οὐκ ἀλλοτρίως δόξειεν λέγειν" ἐπισινεῖς
«“
γάρ τινων αἱ δυνάμεις" ἐξάπτειν γάρ φασιν ὥσ-
an \ / > \ \ ς 3 /
περ πῦρ Kal κατακαίειν: ἐπεὶ καὶ ὁ ἐλλέβορος
a al \
ταχὺ καρηβαρεῖν ποιεῖ, καὶ ov δύνανται πολὺν
ἃ , /
χρόνον ὀρύττειν, δι’ ὃ καὶ προεσθίουσι σκόροδα
καὶ ἄκρατον ἐπιπίνουσιν. ἀλλὰ τὰ τοιαῦτα
/ \ /
ὥσπερ ἐπίθετα Kal πόρρωθεν, οἷον THY παιωνίαν,
ς Ν Ψ a i a ΄ὔ
οἱ δὲ γλυκυσίδην καλοῦσι, νύκτωρ κελεύουσιν
> 7] 3.8 Ν ς / A: 2 fal « x
ὀρύττειν: ἐὰν yap ἡμέρας Kal ὀφθῇ τις ὑπὸ Spvo-
κολάπτου τὸν μὲν καρπὸν ἀπολέγων κινδυνεύειν
a ’ - \ Nea er / > ,
τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς, τὴν δὲ pilav τέμνων ἐκπίπτειν
τὴν ἕδραν.
1 ἔτι δὲ boa Cconj. Sch. from G3; ἔτι δ᾽ ὡς U*; ἔτι δὲ ὡς Ald.
Η : ἐστι δὲ ὡς ΜΈ,


256


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. vin. 4-6


it is only given to dogs when it is desired to purge
them. And in certain other plants also such
differences are mentioned.

Further we may ! add statements made by druggists
and herb-diggers, which in some cases may be to
the point, but in others contain exaggeration. Thus
they enjoin that in cutting some roots one should
stand to windward,—for instance, in cutting thapsia
among others, and that one should first anoint
oneself with oil,? for that one’s body will swell up
if one stands the other way. Also that the fruit
of the wild rose must be gathered standing to wind-
ward, since otherwise there is danger to the eyes.
Also that some roots should be gathered at night,
others by day, and some before the sun strikes
on them, for instance those of the plant called
honeysuckle.®

These and similar remarks may well seem to be
not off the point, for the properties of these plants
are hurtful; they take hold, it is said, like fire and
burn ; +for hellebore too soon makes the head heavy,
and men cannot go on digging it up for long; where-
fore they first eat garlic and take a draught of neat
wine therewith. On the other hand the following
ideas may be considered far-fetched and irrelevant ;
®for instance they say that the peony, which some
call glykyside, should be dug up at night, for, if a man
does it in the day-time and is observed by a wood-
pecker while he is gathering the fruit, he risks the
loss of his eyesight ; and, if he is cutting the root at
the time, he gets prolapsus ani.


2 Plin. 13. 124; Diosc. 4. 153.
® cf..9. 18. 6. 4 Plins’ 25; 50;
Pek π 9.7..85.». Zo; 29.


25%
VOL. II. 5


THEOPHRASTUS


Φυλάττεσθαι δὲ Kal THY κενταυρίδα τέμνοντα
/ ¢ J Yd
τριόρχην, ὅπως ἂν ἄτρωτος ἀπέλθῃ. Kal ἄλλας
7 ὅν νι Ν 3... ὦ , / > \
δέ τινας αἰτίας. τὸ δ᾽ ἐπευχόμενον τέμνειν οὐθὲν
3 »
ἴσως ἄτοπον: ἀλλ᾽ εἴ TL καὶ ἄλλο προστιθέασιν,
κ vA SS τὰ οὗν. / 4
οἷον ὅταν TO πάνακες TO Ασκληπίειον καλούμενον"
n an \
ἀντεμβάλλειν γὰρ τῇ γῇ παγκαρπίαν <Kai>
n e/ x \ , /
μελιττοῦταν' ὅταν δὲ THY ξίριν, τριμήνου μελιτ-
/ /
TouTas ἀντεμβάλλειν μισθόν" τέμνειν δὲ ἀμφήκει
/ ΄ 9 / A eer, vn “A
Eider περιγράψαντα εἰς τρίς" καὶ OTL ἂν πρῶτον
a Ψ 4 52) Ὁ A ge /
τμηθῇ μετέωρον ἔχειν εἶθ᾽ οὕτω TO ἕτερον τέμνειν.
an / \
Kal ἄλλα δὲ τοιαῦτα πλείω. Teprypadew δὲ
\ \ / > \ 4 / δὲ
καὶ τὸν μανδραγόραν εἰς τρὶς ξίφει, τέμνειν δὲ
Ν e / tA \ 3 “ ,ὔ
πρὸς ἑσπέραν βλέποντα. τὸν δ᾽ ἕτερον κύκλῳ
a \ / ¢ a \ >
περιορχεῖσθαι Kal λέγειν ὡς πλεῖστα περὶ ἀφ-
ροδισίων. τοῦτο δ᾽ ὅμοιον ἔοικε τῷ περὶ τοῦ
, \ / ¢
κυμίνου λεγομένῳ κατὰ τὴν βλασφημίαν ὅταν
/
σπείρωσι. περιγράφειν δὲ καὶ τὸν ἐλλέβορον
ς \ \
Tov μέλανα Kal τέμνειν ἱστάμενον πρὸς ἕω Kal
/ > \ \ / Ν >
κατευχόμενον' ἀετὸν δὲ φυλάττεσθαι Kal ἐκ
a yr 2 > a rf \ 53 a
δεξιᾶς καὶ ἐξ ἀριστερᾶς" κίνδυνον yap εἶναι τοῖς
/ \ / ¢ /
τέμνουσιν, ἐάνπερ ἐγγὺς ἐπιγένηται ὁ ἀετός, ἀπο-


1 Plin. 25. 69 adds that this plant was therefore also called
tpiopxis. cf. Diose. 4. 162.
* wal... αἰτίας U*M*; ? καὶ ἄλλα δὲ τοιαῦτα W.


3 Plin. 25. 30 and 81].
258


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. vir. 7-8


It is also said that, while cutting feverwort! one
must beware of the buzzard-hawk, if one wishes to
come off unhurt; and other reasons for caution 2
are also given. That one should be bidden to pray
while cutting is not perhaps unreasonable, but the
additions made to this injunction are absurd ; for
instance as to cutting the kind of all-heal which is
called that of Asklepios ; * for then it is said that one
should put in the ground in its place an offering
made of all kinds of fruits anda cake ; and that, when
one is cutting gladwyn,‘ one should put in its place
to pay for it cakes of meal from spring-sown wheat,°
and that one should cut it with a two-edged sword,
first making a circle round it three times,® and that
the piece first cut must be held up in the air while
the rest is being cut.

And many similar notions are mentioned. Thus
it is said that one should draw three circles
round mandrake with a sword, and cut it with
one’s face towards the west; and at the cutting
of the second piece one should dance round the
plant and say as many things as possible about the
mysteries of love. (This seems to be like the
direction given about cummin,’ that one should utter
curses at the time of sowing.) One should also, it is
said, draw a circle round the black hellebore and
cut it standing towards the east and saying prayers,
and one should look out for an eagle both on the
right and on the left; for that there is danger to
those that cut, if your eagle should come near, that

4 cf. Plin. 21.42, who read ἶριν. οἵ. Diosc. 4. 22, where ξυρίς
is called a kind of ἶρις ; so also Plin. 21. 142.

5 τριμήνου conj. Salm.; τριμήνους M* Ald. H.


6 τρὶς conj. Sch.; τρεῖς UFM*P,Ald. So alsoin next section.
Δ οὐ; 1. 5. ὃ.


259


THEOPHRASTUS


θνήσκειν ἐνιαυτῷ. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐπιθέτοις
ἔοικεν, ὥσπερ εἴρηται. τρόποι δ᾽ οὐκ εἰσὶ τῶν
ῥιξζοτομιῶν πλὴν ods εἴπομεν.

IX. “Ἔστι δέ, ὥσπερ “ἐλέχθη, τῶν μὲν πάντα
χρήσιμα καὶ ἡ ῥίζα καὶ ὁ καρπὸς καὶ ὁ ὀπός,
ὥσπερ ἄλλων τε καὶ τοῦ πανάκους" τῶν δὲ ἡ
ῥίζα καὶ ὁ Ooms, οἷον τῆς σκαμμωνίας καὶ τοῦ
κυκλαμίνου καὶ τῆς θαψίας καὶ ἑτέρων, καθάπερ
καὶ τοῦ μανδραγόρου" τοῦ γὰρ μανδραγόρου τὸ
φύλλον χρήσ ἐμον εἶναί φασι πρὸς τὰ ἕλκη μετ᾽
ἀλφίτου, τὴν δὲ ῥίζαν πρὸς ἐρυσίπελας ξυσθεῖσάν
τε καὶ ὄξει δευθεῖσαν καὶ πρὸς τὰ ποδαγρικὰ καὶ
πρὸς ὕπνον καὶ πρὸς φίλτρα' διδόασι δ᾽ ἐν οἴνῳ
ἢ ὄξει: τέμνουσι δὲ τροχίσκους ὥσπερ ῥαφανῖδος
καὶ ἐνείραντες ὑπὲρ γλεύκους ἐκρέμασαν ἐπὶ
καπνῷ.

Ὁ δὲ ἐλλέβορος. ἐπὶ ταὐτὰ τῇ τε ῥίζῃ καὶ τῷ
καρπῷ χρήσιμος, εἴπερ οἱ ἐν ᾿Αντικύρᾳ, καθάπερ
φασί, τῷ καρπῷ καθαίρουσιν' ἔχει δὲ «τὸν!»
σησαμώδη τοῦτον.

Πλείω δὲ καὶ τοῦ πανάκους τὰ χρήσιμα καὶ οὐ
πάντα πρὸς τὰ aura: ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν καρπὸς πρὸς τὰς
ἐξαμβλώσεις καὶ τὰς δυσουρίας, ὁ δὲ ὀπὸς ἡ
χαλβάνη καλουμένη πρός τε Tas ἐξαμβλώσεις
καὶ πρὸς τὰ σπάσματα καὶ τοὺς τοιούτους
πόνους, ἔτι δὲ πρὸς τὰ ὦτα καὶ τὰς φωνασκίας"


1 ἐάνπερ ἐγγὺς ἐπιγένηται conj. W.; ἐὰν δὲ ὁ ἐγγὺς μὴ ἀποτέμνῃ
6 αἐτὸς ἀποθνήσκει ἐνιαυτῷ UMAId. Similar confusion with
variations in U*M*PP,: restoration a makeshift. ef. Plin.
25. 50. 2 9.:8..1.

3 Diosc. 4. 75; Plin. 26. 104 and 121.

*07-9.12,4.


260


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. νιπ. 8-Ιχ. 2


they may die ! within the year. These notions then
seem to be irrelevant, as has been said. There are
however no methods of root-cutting besides those
which we have mentioned.


Of the medicinal uses of divers parts of plants.


IX. As was said,? of some plants the root, fruit and
juice are all serviceable, as of all-heal among others ;
of some the root and the juice, as of scammony ὃ
cyclamen thapsia and others, such as mandrake ; for
the leaf of this, they say, used with meal, is useful
for wounds, and the root for erysipelas, when scraped
and steeped in vinegar, and also for gout, for sleep-
lessness, and for love potions. It is administered in
wine or vinegar; they cut little balls of it, as of*
radishes, and making a string of them hang them up.
in the smoke over must.

5 Of hellebore both root and fruit are useful for
the same purposes,°—if it is true, as is said, that
‘the people of Anticyra use the fruit as a purge;
this fruit contains the well-known’ drug called
- sesamodes.

Various parts of all-heal are also useful, and not all
for the same purposes ; the fruit is used in cases of
miscarriage and for disorders of the bladder, while
the juice,® which is called khalbane, is used in cases
of miscarriage and also for sprains and such-like
troubles; also for the ears, and to strengthen the

5 Diose. 4. 108, 109 and 162.

§ ταὐτὰ conj. Sch. from G ; ταῦτα ΜΈ Ald.

7 1 have inserted τὸν. cf.9. 14.4; Plin. 22. 188 ; 25. 52 and
64; Diose./.c. The drug was actually called σησαμοειδές or
σησαμοειδής. For the sense of τοῦτον cf. 3. 7. ὃ ; 3. 8. 3.and reff.


8 This seems to be a mistake. cf. 9. 7. 2; Diose. 3. 83;
Plin. 12. 126.


261


THEOPHRASTUS


ἡ δὲ pita πρός TE τοὺς τόκους καὶ τὰ γυναικεῖα
καὶ “πρὸς ὑποξυγίων φύσας" χρησίμη δὲ καὶ πρὸς
τὸ ἔρινον μύρον διὰ τὴν εὐωδίαν' ἰσχυρότερον δὲ
τὸ σπέρμα τῆς ῥίξης. γίνεται δὲ περὶ Συρίαν
καὶ τέμνεται περὶ πυραμητόν.

Τοῦ δὲ κυκλαμίνου ἡ μὲν pita πρός τε τὰς
ἐκπυήσεις τῶν φλεγμονῶν καὶ πρόσθετον γυναιξὶ
καὶ πρὸς τὰ ἕλκη ἐν μέλιτι: ὁ δὲ ὀπὸς πρὸς τὰς
ἀπὸ κεφαλῆς καθάρσεις ἐ ἐν μέλιτι ἐγχεόμενος, καὶ
πρὸς τὸ μεθύσκειν, ἐὰν ἐν οἴνῳ διαβρέχων διδῷ
τις πίνειν. ἀγαθὴν δὲ τὴν pitav καὶ @KUTOKLOL
περίαπτον. καὶ εἰς φίλτρα: ὅταν δὲ ὀρύξωσι, κατα-
καίουσιν εἶτ᾽ οἴνῳ δεύσαντες τροχίσκους ποιοῦσιν,
ὥσπερ τῆς τρυγὸς ἣ ῥυπτόμεθα.

Καὶ τοῦ σικύου δὲ τοῦ ἀγρίου τὴν μὲν ῥίξαν
«πρὸς;» ἀλφοὺς καὶ ψώρας βοσκημάτων. τὸ δὲ
σπέρμα χυλισθὲν ποιεῖ τὸ ἐλατήριον. συλλέ-
γεται δὲ τοῦ φθινοπώρου" τότε γὰρ βέλτιστον.

Ths δὲ χαμαίδρυος τὰ μὲν φύλλα πιρὸς τὰ
ῥήγματα καὶ πρὸς τὰ τραύματα ἐν ἐλαίῳ τριβό-
μενα καὶ πρὸς τὰ νεμόμενα ἕλκη" τὸν δὲ καρπὸν
καθαίρειν χολήν' ἀγαθὸν δὲ καὶ ὀφθαλμοῖς" πρὸς
δὲ τὰ ἄργεμα προσάγειν τὸ φύλλον τρίψαντα ἐν
ἐλαίῳ. ἔχει. δὲ φύλλα μὲν οἱάπερ δρῦς, τὸ δὲ
ἀνάστημα τῆς ὅλης ὅσον σπιθαμιαῖον" εὔοσμον
δὲ καὶ ἡδύ.

Τὸ μὲν οὖν μὴ πρὸς ταὐτὸ πάντα τὰ μέρη
χρήσιμα τυγχάνειν οὐκ ἴσως ἄτοπον" τὸ δὲ τῆς


1 ἐκπυήσεις conj. Coraés from Plin. 20. 120, eruptiones ;
ἐκπνεύσεις M* Ald,

2 Diose. 2. 164; Plin. 25. 133.5 26, 149.

$ cf. Plin, 23. 63.


262


a


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. 1x. 2-5


voice. The root is used in childbirth, for diseases
of women, and for flatulence in beasts of burden.
It is also useful in making the iris-perfume because
of its fragrance; but the seed is stronger than the
root. It grows in Syria and is cut at the time of
wheat-harvest.

Of cyclamen the root is used for suppurating !
boils ; also as a pessary for women and, mixed with
honey, for dressing wounds; the juice for purgings
of the head,? for which purpose it is mixed with
honey and poured in; it also conduces to drunken-
ness, if one is given a draught of wine in which it
has been steeped. They say also that the root is a
good charm for inducing rapid delivery and as a love
potion ; ?when they have dug it up, they burn it,
and then, having steeped the ashes in wine, make
little balls like those made of wine-lees which we
use as soap.

4 Of < wild cucumber ’ (squirting cucumber) the root
is used for® white leprosy and for mange in sheep,
while the extracted juice makes the drug called
‘the driver.’® It is collected in autumn, for then it
is best.

Of germander the leaves pounded up in olive-oil
are used for fractures and wounds and for spreading
sores ; the fruit purges bile, and is good also for the
eyes ; for ulcers’ in the eye they pound up the leaf
in olive-oil before applying it. It has leaves like
the oak, but its entire growth is only about a palm
high ; and it is sweet both to smell and taste.

Now that all parts are not serviceable for the
same purpose is perhaps not strange; it is more


* Diose, 4150+ Plin. 20: 3: 5 πρὸς add. St.
8 cf. 9. 14. 1 and 2, 7 ef. 7.6.2; Diosc.3. 98.


263


THEOPHRASTUS


> n Ἐν \ \ ” \ \ 4 /
αὐτῆς ῥίζης τὸ μὲν ἄνω TO δὲ κάτω καθαίρειν
θαυμασιώτερον, οἷον καὶ τῆς θαψίας καὶ τῆς
> / 6 ogee: A n \ n /
ἰσχάδος, οἱ δ᾽ ἄπιον καλοῦσι, καὶ τῆς λιβανωτί-
δος" ὅτι γὰρ αὖ καὶ κάτω καὶ ἄνω ταὐτὰ δύναται

/ ΄ \ id >9\ 2

[καθαίρειν], καθάπερ τὸ ἔλατήριον, οὐθὲν ἄτοπον.

Ἔχει δὲ ἡ θαψία φύλλον μὲν ὅμοιον τῷ
μαράθῳ πλὴν πλατύτερον καυλὸν δὲ ναρθηκώδη
C7 \ /
ῥίζαν δὲ λευκήν.

Ἢ δ᾽ ἐἰσχὰς ἢ ἄπιος φύλλον μὲν ἔχει πη-
γανῶδες βραχὺ καυλοὺς δ᾽ ἐπιγείους τρεῖς ἢ
/ c/ \ “ ς > ΄ \
τέτταρας ῥίζαν δὲ οἵανπερ ὁ ἀσφόδελος πλὴν
λεπυριώδη: φιλεῖ δὲ ὀρεινὰ χωρία καὶ κοχλα-
κώδη. συλλέγεται δὲ τοῦ ἦρος. τοῦτο μὲν

οὖν ἴδιον τῶν εἰρημένων.
X. Ὁ δὲ ἐλλέβορος ὅ τε μέλας καὶ ὁ λευκὸς
Ψ ¢€ f 7, \ \ an ”
ὥσπερ ὁμώνυμοι φαίνονται: περὶ δὲ τῆς ὄψεως
διαφωνοῦσιν: οἱ μὲν γὰρ ὁμοίους εἶναι, πλὴν τῷ
χρώματι μόνον διαφέρειν τὴν ῥίζαν τοῦ μὲν
λευκὴν τοῦ δὲ μέλαιναν" οἱ δὲ τοῦ μὲν μέλανος
τὸ φύλλον δαφνῶδες τοῦ δὲ λευκοῦ πρασῶδες,
\ \ e/ e / \ Lal ΄ - ’
τὰς δὲ ῥίζας ὁμοίας πλὴν TOV χρωμάτων. οἱ ὃ
οὖν ὁμοίους λέγοντες τοιάνδε φασὶν εἶναι τὴν
μορφήν' καυλὸν μὲν ἀνθερικώδη βραχὺν σφόδρα"
/ \ 7 / / an
φύλλον δὲ πλατύσχιστον, παρόμοιον σφόδρα TO
a 7 a ὙΠΌΝ 3 \ 3: δ a ae
τοῦ νάρθηκος, μῆκος δ᾽ ἔχον" εὐθὺ δ᾽ ἐκ τῆς ῥίζης


1 ὅτι yap conj].W.; ὅσα γὰρ UU*M*; τὰ yap M3; τὸ γὰρ Ald.
2 Diose, 4, 153:; Plin. 13. 124. 3 Diose. 4. 175.


264


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. 1x. 5—x.1


surprising that part of the same ‘root’ should purge
upwards and another part downwards, as is the case
with thapsia and iskhas —which some call apios (spurge)
—and with libanotis ; for! it is not strange that on the
other hand the same parts should purge both upwards
and downwards, as is the case with ‘ the driver.’

2 Thapsia has a leaf like fennel, but broader, a
stalk like that of ferula, and a white root.

3 Iskhas (or apios) has a leaf like rue and short,
three or four prostrate stems, and a root like that of
asphodel, except that it is composed of scales; 4 it
loves mountain districts with a gravelly soil. It is
collected in spring. Now this account applies
only to the above-mentioned plants.


Of hellebores, the white and the black: their uses and
distribution.


X. > The white and the black hellebore appear to
have nothing in common except the name. But
accounts differ as to the appearance of the plants;
some say that the two are alike and differ only in
colour, the root of the one being white, of the other
black; some however say that the leaf of the ‘black’ is
like that of bay, that of the white like that of the leek,
but that the roots are alike except for their respective
colours. Now those who say that the two plants are
alike describe the appearance ὃ as follows :—the stem
is like that of asphodel and very short ; the leaf has
broad divisions, and is extremely like that of ferula,
but is long; it is closely attached to the root and


4 cf. Diosc. 3. 134.

° Plin. 25. 47-61. See Index. ef. 9. 11.

® 7.e. of the two plants regarded as one; mae the text of
the following description seems to be hopelessly confused.


265


THEOPHRASTUS


/ \ Ne
ἠρτημένον καὶ erruyetopvAXov: πολύρριζον δ᾽ εὖ
μάλα ταῖς λεπταῖς καὶ χρησίμοις.
st a δὲ \ \ , ΜΝ AA \
vatpety δὲ TOV μὲν μέλανα Kal ἵππους Kal
a ve γ aA \ \
βοῦς καὶ bs, Ov ὃ Kal οὐδὲν νέμεσθαι τούτων: TOV
δὲ Ν / θ \ / \ 3 /
é λευκὸν νέμεσθαι τὰ πρόβατα Kal ἐκ τούτου
a a \ ve
πρῶτον συνοφθῆναι τὴν δύναμιν καθαιρομένων
val \ an »
ἐκείνων" ὡραῖος δὲ μετοπώρου, τοῦ δ᾽ ἦρος ἄωρος"
\ \ an
ἀλλὰ πρὸς τὴν πυλαίαν οἱ ἐκ τῆς Οἴτης συλλέ-
a \ a
γουσι' πλεῖστος yap ἐνταῦθα φύεται καὶ ἄριστος"
a \ / a y \ \ /
μοναχοῦ δὲ φύεται τῆς Οἴτης περὶ τὴν Πυράν.
\ \ \ / ¢ N
Μίσγεται δὲ πρὸς THY πόσιν, ὅπως εὐεμὲς ἢ, TO
a > “ / na 3. Ὁ \ /
τῆς ἐλλεβορίνης σπέρμα: τοῦτο δ᾽ ἐστὶ ποάριον.
e 7 “
Φύεται δὲ ὁ μὲν μέλας πανταχοῦ" καὶ γὰρ ἐν
fal ἢ
τῇ Βοιωτίᾳ καὶ ἐν EvBota καὶ παρ᾽ ἄλλοις πολ-
- ¢ ac la
λοῖς: ἄριστος δὲ ὁ ἐκ τοῦ ᾿Ελικῶνος, καὶ ὅλως TO
ὄρος εὐφάρμακον. ὁ δὲ λευκὸς ὀλιγαχοῦ" βέλ-
a /
τιστοι δὲ Kal οἷς χρῶνται μάλιστα τέτταρες ὁ
A al /
Oitaios ὁ Ἰ]Τοντικὸς ὁ ’EXeatns ὁ Μαλιώτης. φασὶ
Ν \ > BF, | / > n ᾽ fal / \
δὲ τὸν ᾿Ελεάτην ἐν τοῖς ἀμπελῶσι φύεσθαι Kat
a - e \
ποιεῖν TOV οἶνον οὕτω διουρητικὸν ὥστε λαγαροὺς
/
εἶναι πάνυ TOUS πίνοντας.
ΤᾺΝ δὲ / \ a \ nm Μ
ρίστος O€ πάντων καὶ τούτων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων
an ig ς
ὁ Oitaios. ὁ δὲ Παρνάσιος καὶ ὁ Αἰὐτωλικός,
4 \ \ 2) a \ \ } er a
γίνεται yap καὶ ἐνταῦθα καὶ πολλοὶ Kal ὠνοῦνται
\ an b] O07 > vA Ἅ, \
Kal πωλοῦσιν οὐκ εἰδότες, [οὐχ ὅτε] σκληροὶ καὶ


1 Which were held apparently at Thermopylae regularly
in autumn and sometimes in spring: the meeting would give
opportunities for sale. ἀλλὰ implies a spring meeting.


266


hl δ Δι... «δυν >


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, ΙΧ. x. 1-4


creeps on the ground; the plant has numerous roots,
to wit, the slender roots which are serviceable.

Also they say that the black is fatal to horses oxen
and pigs, wherefore none of these animals eat it ;
while the white is eaten by sheep, and from this
circumstance the virtue of the plant was_ first
observed, since it purges them; it is at its prime
in autumn, and past its prime when spring comes.
However the people of Mount Oeta gather it for the
meetings! of the Amphictyons; for it grows there
in greatest abundance and best, though at only one
place in the district of Oeta, namely about Pyra.

(The seed of rupture-wort is mixed with the
potion given to promote easy vomiting ; this plant
is a small herb).

The black kind of hellebore grows everywhere ;
it is found in Boeotia, in Euboea and in many other
places ; but best is that from Mount Helicon, which
mountain is in general rich in medicinal herbs. The
white occurs in few places ; the best and that which
is most used comes from one of four places, Oeta,?
Pontus, Elea, and Malea.*? They say that that of
Elea grows in the vineyards and makes the wine so
diuretic that those who drink it become quite
emaciated.

But best of all these and better than that found
anywhere else is that of Mount Oeta, while that of
Parnassus and that of Aetolia (for the plant is
common in these parts too and men buy and sell it,
not knowing‘ the difference) are tough and ex-

2 6 before Oiraios add. Sch.

3 Μαλιώτης con]. Hahnemann, cf. Strabo 9. 3. 3; Μασσαλι-
orns Ald. Plin. l.c. gives Parnassus as the fourth locality:
cf. § 4.

I the words οὐχ ὅτε may have arisen from οὐκ εἰδότες.


267


THEOPHRASTUS


ἄγαν περισκελεῖς. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ὅμοια ταῖς
μορφαῖς ὄντα ταῖς δυνάμεσι διαφέροντα.

Καλοῦσι δὲ τὸν μέλανά τινες ἔκτομον Μελαμ-
πόδιον, ὡς ἐκείνου πρῶτον τεμόντος καὶ ἀνευ-
ρόντος. καθαίρουσι δὲ καὶ οἰκίας αὐτῷ καὶ
πρόβατα συνεπᾷδοντές τινα ἐπῳδὴν καὶ εἰς ἄλλα
δὲ πλείω χρῶνται.

XI. Πολλὰ δέ ἐ ἐστι καὶ τὰ ᾿πανάκη καὶ οἱ τιθύ-
μαλλοι καὶ ἕτερ᾽ ἄττα. πάνακες γὰρ καλοῦσι
πρῶτον μὲν τὸ ἐν Συρίᾳ, περὶ οὗ μικρῷ πρότερον
εἴρηται. ἄλλα δὲ τὰ τρία, τὸ μὲν Χειρώνειον
καλούμενον τὸ δ᾽ ᾿Ασκληπίειον τὸ δ᾽ Ἡράκλειον.
ἔχει δὲ τὸ μὲν Χειρώνειον φύλλον μὲν ὅμοιον
λαπάθῳ μεῖζον δὲ καὶ δασύτερον, ἄνθος δὲ χρυ-

/ Cc of: \ / na \ "6 \
σοειδές, ῥίξαν δὲ μικράν" φιλεῖ δὲ μάλιστα τὰ
χὼρ ία τὰ πίονα" χρῶνται, δὲ πρός τε τοὺς ἔχεις
καὶ τὰ φαλάγγια καὶ τοὺς σῆπας καὶ τὰ ἄλλα
ἑρπετὰ διδόντες ἐν οἴνῳ καὶ ἀλείφοντες μετ᾽
ἐλαίου" τοῦ δ᾽ ἔχεως τὸ δῆγμα καὶ καταπλάττον-
τες καὶ ἐν ὀξίνῃ πιεῖν διδόντες" ἀγαθὴν δέ φασι
καὶ ἑλκῶν ἐν οἴνῳ καὶ ἐλαίῳ καὶ φυμάτων ἐν
μέλιτι.

To Ὁ, ᾿Ασκληπίειον τὴν ῥίξαν μῆκος μὲν ὡς
σπιθαμὴν λευκὴν δὲ καὶ παχεῖαν σφόδρα, καὶ
φλοιὸν παχὺν καὶ ἁλυκώδη: καυλὸν δὲ ἔ exeb youa-
TOON πανταχόθεν, φύλλον δὲ οἷόνπερ ἡ θαψία
πλὴν παχύτερον: ἀγαθὸν δὲ εἶναί φασι ἑρπετῶν


1 From this phrase ἔκτομον came to be used as a synonym
for ‘black hellebore.’ ef. Plin. 25.47; Diosc. 4. 149; Hesych.
and Galen, Lex. Hipp. s.v.

wg he Sh 3’ Plin. ‘25. 32 7 26. dae

4 μικρὰν conj. H. from Plin. 25. 32. radix varva ; μακρὰν U*
Ald.


268


«


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. x. 4-x1. 2


ceeding harsh. These plants then, while resembling
the best form in appearance, differ in their virtues.

Some call the black the ‘ hellebore of Melampus, !
saying that he first cut and discovered it. Men also
purify horses and sheep with it, at the same time
chanting an incantation; and they put it to several
other uses.


Of the various kinds of all-heal.


XI. There are also several kinds of all-heal
tuthymallos (spurge) and other herbs. To begin with,
one plant called all-heal is the one found in Syria, ot
which we have recently spoken.?, * Then come the
three other kinds, known as that of Chaeronea, that
of Asclepios, and that of Heracles. That of Chae-
ronea has a leaf like monk’s rhubarb, but larger and
rougher, a golden flower, and a small ὁ root; and it
specially loves rich ground; they use it for the bites
of snakes, spiders, vipers® and other reptiles, ad-
ministering it in wine or anointing the place with it
mixed with olive-oil. In treating a snake-bite they
use a plaster of it, and also give a draught of it
mixed with vinegar °; and they also say that it is good
for sores’ when mixed with wine and olive-oil, and
for tumours when mixed with honey.

8 The kind called after Asklepios has a white and
very stout root about a span long and a thick bark
which is crusted with salt®; its stem is jointed all
the way up, its leaf like that of thapsca, but
thicker ; it is said that it is good to scrape and drink


5 σῆπας conj. Scal., cf. Arist. Mir. Ausc. 164; σῆτας Ald.
καὶ ἐν ὀξίνῃ conj. Sch., cf. 9.13.35; ἐν ὀξίνῃ καὶ PAId.
For the genitive cf. 88 2, 8; Xen. Mem. 3. 8. ὃ.

Plin. 25. 30; Diosc. 3. 49.

ἁλυκώδη: ? ‘has a briny taste.’


a1 oS


“ὡῳ @


3


d


5


THEOPHRASTUS


΄ /, \ ῳ :
τε ξύοντα πίνειν, καὶ σπληνὸς ὅταν αἷμα περὶ
> an > / \ ν᾽ 7 >
αὐτὸν ἐν μελικράτῳ, καὶ Kehadaias τρίβοντα ἐν
/ / \ f \ an
ἐλαίῳ ἀλείφειν Kal ἄλλο TL ἐὰν πονῇ τις ἀφανές,
Ν \ > /, 3 »Μ / / \
καὶ γαστρὸς ὀδύνης ἐν οἴνῳ Evovta. δύνασθαι dé
\ \ / / an
καὶ τὰς μακρὰς ἀρρωστίας ἐκκλίνειν. ἔπειτα τῶν
an lal na \ Ψ
ἑλκῶν τῶν μὲν ὑγρῶν ξηρὸν ἐπιπάττοντα προ-
/ > "ὕ an a \ lal >
κατακλύζοντα ἐν οἴνῳ θερμῷ, τῶν δὲ ξηρῶν ἐν
“ , :
οἴνῳ δεῦσαι Kal καταπλάττειν.
\ ¢ / \ M4 /
To δ᾽ Ἡράκλειον φύλλον μὲν ἔχει μέγα καὶ
\ \ / A «7ὔλ \ ς
πλατὺ καὶ τρισπίθαμον πανταχῆ, ῥίζαν δὲ ὡς
/ \ / 7, x / fal vd
δακτύλου TO πάχος δίκραν ἢ τρίκραν, TH γεύσει
- 6 / an >] 2 a / nr
μὲν ὑπόπικρον τῇ δ᾽ ὀσμῇ καθάπερ λιβανωτοῦ
“3, \ \ nA « n / /
καθαροῦ: ἀγαθὴν δὲ τῆς ἱερᾶς νόσου μιγνυμένην
, 7 ¢ / / 2 ,ὔ
φώκης πιτύᾳ ὅσον τεταρτημόριον πίνειν, καὶ ὀδύ-
νης κατὰ γαστέρα ἐν οἴνῳ γλυκεῖ, καὶ EXKOV τῶν
\ ς a x la δὲ la) > / δ᾿
μὲν ὑγρῶν ξηρὰν τῶν δὲ ξηρῶν ἐν μέλιτι. αὗται
\ i 7
μὲν οὖν ταύτας ἔχουσι διαφοράς τε καὶ δυνάμεις.
/
ἜἌλλα δὲ πανάκη TO μὲν λεπτόφυλλον TO δὲ
7 ς \ , 5 lal e > / / /
οὔ: at δὲ δυνάμεις ἀμφοῖν at αὐταί, πρόσθετόν τε
\ Ν / > > lA x \
γυναιξὶ καὶ κατάπλασμα μετ᾽ ἀλφίτου Kal πρὸς
Nig: ΝῸ rd \ \ Ἂ id
Ta ἕλκη τὰ ἄλλα καὶ πρὸς TA νεμόμενα.
/, \ \ ¢ “4 \ ς 4
Συνώνυμοι δὲ καὶ οἱ στρύχνοι Kal οἱ τιθύμαλ-


1 κεφαλαίας conj. Sch.; κεφαλῆς Ald.

2 τῶν ἑλκῶν Conj. Sch.; τῶν δὲ ἑλκώδῶν (sic) U*; τῶν ἑλκωδῶν
Ald.H. cf. § 3.

3 Plin. 25. 32; Diosce. 3. 48.

4 δίκραν ἢ τρίκραν conj. Sch.; δίκραν ἢ τρίκαν UM ; δικρανῆ
πικρὰν U*; δικρανῆ ἢ τρικρανὴ Ald,


270


ey,


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. xr. 2-5


it against bites of reptiles, to take it in a posset of
honey for disorders of the spleen, when the blood
collects about it, and against headache! to pound it
up in olive-oil and anoint the head ; that it is of use
also in other obscure troubles, and against stomach-
ache, if scraped and taken in wine. It is said also
to be able to prevent long periods of sickness. Again
for running sores? one may sprinkle it on in hot
wine, first washing the place, while for dry sores one
may soak it in wine and apply a plaster.

3The kind named after Herakles has a large
broad leaf, three spans each way, a root as thick as a
man’s finger, forking in two or three *; in taste it is
somewhat bitter, in smell like pure frankincense ® ;
Sit is good to drink it against epilepsy, mixed with
the rennet of a seal in the proportion of one to four,
or in sweet wine against pain’ in the stomach ; it
may be used dry ὃ for running sores, and mixed with
honey for dry ones. Such are the special features
about these piants and their respective virtues.

®°There are also other kinds of all-heal, of which
one has a fine leaf, the other not; the properties of
both kinds are the same; namely they are used as a
pessary for women, and a plaster may be made of
them mixed with meal for spreading sores as well as
for ordinary sores.


Of the various plants called strykhnos.


As to strykhnos again and tithymallos (spurge) there
is in either case more than one form of the plant


5 χιβανωτοῦ καθαροῦ conj. Sch.; λιβανωτὸν καθαρὸν UM ; λι-
βανωτοῦ U*; λιβανωτοῦ καθαρῶν Ald.H καθαροῦ perhaps due
to καθάπερ. eo. ur. Libs Diose, 275.

7 ὀδύνης conj. W.; ὀδύναι UMU*Ald.

8 ξηρὰν conj. Sch.; ξηρὰ U*Ald.; Enpad M. 9 Phin’ 35. 33.


271


THEOPHRASTUS


a \ ie e \ e / 4 Ἀ
λοι. τῶν γὰρ στρύχνων ὁ μὲν ὑπνώδης ὁ δὲ
μανικός. καὶ ὁ μὲν ὑπνώδης ἐρυθρὰν ἔχων τὴν

/ 7 ®
pilav ὥσπερ αἷμα ξηραινομένην, ὀρυττομένην δὲ
/ \ \ > / / /
λευκήν, καὶ καρπὸν ἐρυθρότερον κρόκου, φύλλον
δὲ τιθυμάλλῳ ὅμοιον ἢ μηλέᾳ τῇ γλυκεί ὶ
μάλλῳ ὅμοιον ἢ μηλέᾳ τῇ γλυκείᾳ καὶ
\ \ \ / 4 an
αὐτὸ δασὺ Kal πυγμὴν μέγα. τούτου τῆς ῥίζης
» x / / \ / > /
τὸν φλοιὸν κόπτοντες λίαν Kal βρέχοντες ἐν οἴνῳ
> / “4 al \ lal / Me
ἀκράτῳ διδόασι πιεῖν Kal ποιεῖ καθεύδειν. φύε-
ται δὲ ἐν χαράδραις καὶ τοῖς μνήμασιν.
€ ἊΝ / e \ 4 a a A e
Ο δὲ μανικός, οἱ δὲ θρύορον καλοῦσιν αὐτὸν οἱ
δὲ περιττόν, λευκὴν ἔχει τὴν ῥίζαν καὶ μακρὰν
ς / \ , , ’ > n 2% \
ὡς πήχεως Kal κοΐλην. δίδοται δ᾽ αὐτῆς, ἐὰν μὲν
Ψ Ψ \ a ς [οὶ ΄ 3
ὥστε παίξειν Kal δοκεῖν ἑαυτῷ κάλλιστον εἶναι,
ὃ \ θ cea Be δὲ ca) / θ \
ραχμὴ σταθμῷ' ἐὰν δὲ μᾶλλον μαίνεσθαι καὶ

7 \ / / / >\ ’
φαντασίας twas φαίνεσθαι, δύο δραχμαί: ἐὰν ὃ
7 \ / a
ὥστε μὴ παύεσθαι μαινόμενον τρεῖς, Kal συμ-

7ὔ Ν,
παραμιγνύναι φασὶν ὀπὸν κενταυρίου' ἐὰν δὲ
v4 b] lal / ” uN \ \ /
ὥστε ATOKTELVAL, τέτταρες. EXEL δὲ TO μὲν φύλλον
Ψ > / \ na x \ \ “
ὅμοιον εὐζώμῳ πλὴν μεῖζον, τὸν δὲ καυλὸν ὥσπερ
2 / \ An off / / \ \
opyvias, κεφαλὴν δὲ ὥσπερ γηθύου μείξω δὲ καὶ
δασυτέραν" ἔοικε δὲ καὶ πλατάνου καρπῷ.


1 of. 7.15. 4, where a third στρύχνος is mentioned, which is
ὁμώνυμος, not συνώνυμος, 2.6. which has nothing in common
with these two στρύχνοι except the name. cf. also 9. 15. 5.

2 κρόκου conj. Dalec. from Diose. 4. 72, καρπὸν... κροκί-
ζοντα; κόκκου MSS.

3 πυγμὴν μέγα U; πυθμὴν μέγας U*Ald.H.; W. adopts Bod.’s
conjecture σπιθαμὴν μέγα.

4 Plin. 21. 177-179; Diosc. 4. 73.

5 θρύορον Ald.H.; θρυόρον U*; βρυόρον U; βρύορον MmBas. ;


ine


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. x1. 5-6


denoted by the name. 1 Of the plants called strykhnos
one induces sleep, the other (thorn-apple) causes
madness. The first-mentioned has a root which be-
comes red like blood as it dries, but when first dug
up it is white; its fruit is a deeper orange than
saffron,’ its leaf like that of tethymallos or the sweet
apple; and it is itself rough, and about a foot high.?
The ‘ bark’ of the root of this they bruise severely,
and soaking it in neat wine give it as a draught, and
it induces sleep. It grows in water-courses and on
tombs.

4 The kind which produces madness (which some
call thryoron® and some peritton®) has ἃ white
hollow root about a cubit long. Of this three
twentieths of an ounce in weight is given, if the
patient is to become merely sportive and to think
himself a fine fellow ; twice this dose’ if he is to go
mad outright and have delusions ὃ; thrice the dose,
if he is to be permanently insane; (and then they
say that the juice of centaury is mixed with it) ;
four ® times the dose is given, if the man is to be
killed. The leaf is like that of rocket, but larger,
the stem about a fathom long; the ‘head’! is like
that of a long onion, but larger and rougher. And
it also resembles the fruit of the plane-tree.


briorem G. Plin. /.c. seems to have read ἐρυθρὸν ; Diosce, l.c.
βρύον.

6 περιττὸν Ald.H.,7.¢. ‘violent’; pissum G; Plin l.c. peris-
son; Diose. l.c. πέρσιον.

? δραχμαὶ conj. Sch.; δραχμὰς Ald.

8 kal... φαίνεσθαι om. UM: ungrammatical, and possibly
a gloss; but ef. Diose. and Plin. /.c.

9 τέτταρες conj. Sch.; τέτταρας Ald ; τέσσαρας U*.

10 7.4.10 it was said that γήθυον has no ‘head,’ 1.6. bulb;
here the ‘head’ seems to be theinflorescence. cf. Diosc. and
Plin. /.c.


273
VOL. II. Ἐ


7


THEOPHRASTUS


Τῶν δὲ τιθυμάλλων ὁ μὲν παράλιος καλού-
μενος κόκκινον φύλλον ἔχει περιφερές, καυλὸν δὲ
καὶ τὸ ὅλον “μέγεθος ὡς σπιθαμῆς τὸν δὲ καρπὸν
λευκόν. ἀμᾶται δὲ ὅταν ἄρτι περκάξῃ σταφυλή,
καὶ ξηρανθεὶς ὁ καρπὸς δίδοται πίνειν τριφθεὶς
ὅσον τρίτον μέρος ὀξυβάφου.

‘O & ἄρρην καλούμενος τὸ μὲν φύλλον ἐλαιῶ-
des ἔχει, τὸ δὲ ὅλον μέγεθος πηχυαῖον. τοῦτον
ὀπίζουσιν ἃ ἅμα τρυγητῷ καὶ θεραπεύσαντες οὕτως
ὡς δεῖ χρῶνται: καθαίρει δὲ κάτω μᾶλλον.

Ὁ δὲ μυρτίτης καλούμενος τιθύμαλλος λευκός"
τὸ μὲν φύλλον ἔχει καθάπερ ὁ μύρρινος, πλὴν
ἀκανθῶδες ἀπ᾽ ἄκρου" κλήματα δ᾽ ἀφίησιν ἐπὶ
τὴν γῆν ὡς σπιθαμιαῖα, ταῦτα δ᾽ οὐχ ἅμα φέρει
τὸν καρπὸν ἀλλὰ Tap ἔτος, τὰ μὲν νῦν τὰ δ᾽ εἰς
νέωτα, πεφυκότα ἀπὸ τῆς αὐτῆς ῥίξης. φιλεῖ δὲ
ὀρεινὰ χωρία. ὁ δὲ καρπὸς αὐτοῦ καλεῖται
κάρυον. ἀμῶσι δ᾽ ὅταν ἀδρύνωνται αἱ κριθαὶ καὶ
ξηραίνοντες καὶ ἀποκαθαίροντες" αὐτὸν τὸν καρ-
πὸν πλύναντες ἐν ὕδατι καὶ πάλιν ξηράναντες
διδόασι πιεῖν συμμιγνύντες δύο μέρη τῆς μελαίνης
μήκωνος, τὸ δὲ συναμφότερον ὅσον ὀξύβαφον'
καθαίρει δὲ φλέγμα. κάτω" ἐὰν δὲ τὸ κάρυον αὐτὸ
διδῶσι, τρίψαντες ἐν οἴνῳ γλυκεῖ διδόασιν ἢ ἐν
σησάμῳ πεφρυγμένῳ κατατραγεῖν. ταῦτα μὲν
οὗν τοῖς τε φύλλοις καὶ τοῖς ὀποῖς καὶ τοῖς καρ-


ποῖς χρήσιμα.


1 Plin. 26. 68.

2 κόκκινον conj. W.; κόκκος MSS. ef. Plin. 1.6. ramis ru-
bentibus. 3 TDiose. 4. 164; Plin. 26. 62-65.

4 οὕτως ὡς δεῖ xp. conj. Sch.; οὕτως ὡς δὴ xp. U*; οὕτως xp.


Ald.
274


ENQUIRY INTO. PLANTS, IX. x1. 7-9


Of the various kinds of tithymallos.


1 Of the various plants called tzthymallos (spurge)
that which is called sea-spurge has a round scarlet?
leaf ; the stem (and the size of the plant generally)
is about a span long, and the fruit is white. It is
gathered when the grape is just turning, and the
dried fruit is given in a draught, the dose being the
twenty-fourth part of a pint.

3 That which is called the ‘male’ has a leaf like
the olive, and the height of the whole plant is a
eubit. Of this they collect the juice at the time
of vintage, and, after preparing it, use it as oc-
casion demands‘ ; and it purges chiefly downwards.

®5The kind of tathymallos called ‘myrtle-like’ is
white; it has a leaf like the myrtle, but spinous
at the tip; it puts out earthward twigs about a
span long, and these bear the fruit® not all at
the same time but in alternate years, so that from
the same root grow fruits partly this and partly
next year. It loves hill-country. The fruit of it is
ealled a ‘nut.’ They gather it when the barley is
ripening and dry and clean it ; (itis the actual fruit?
which they clean) ; they wash it in water and, after
drying it again, give it in a draught, mixing with it
two parts of ‘black*® poppy’; and the ‘whole dose
amounts to about an eighth of a pint. It purges
phlegm downwards. If they administer the ‘nut’
itself, they first pound it up in sweet wine, or give it


in parched sesame to bite up. These plants then
have leaves juices or fruits which are serviceable.
5 Diosc. 4. 164; Plin. 26. 66. Rieke ΟΡ 46:9.


7 W. adds δὲ after αὐτὸν. The treatment of the leaves has
perhaps dropped out. ef. Plin. /.c. G’s version is even shorter.
8 μέλαινα must here mean ‘ dark,’ z.e. red. See Index.


275


T 2


10


11


THEOPHRASTUS


Τῶν δὲ λιβανωτίδων, δύο γάρ εἰσιν, ἡ μὲν
ἄκαρπος ἡ δὲ κάρπιμος, ἡ μὲν καὶ τῷ καρπῷ καὶ
τῷ φύλλῳ χρησίμη ἡ δὲ μόνον τῇ ῥίξῃ. καλεῖται
δὲ ὁ 0 καρπὸς κάχρυ. ἔχει δὲ αὕτη τὸ μὲν φύλλον
ἐοικὸς σελίνῳ ἑλείῳ μεῖζον δὲ πολύ, καυλὸν δὲ
μέγεθος πήχεως ἢ ἢ μείξω, ῥίζαν δὲ μεγάλην καὶ
παχεῖαν λευκὴν ὄζουσαν ὥσπερ λιβανωτοῦ, καρ-
πὸν δὲ λευκὸν τραχὺν προμήκη" “φύεται δὲ μά-
Mora ὅπου ἂν αὐχμηρὰ χωρία. ἢ καὶ πετρώδη:
χρησίμη δὲ ἡ μὲν ῥίζα πρός τε τὰ ἕλκη καὶ πρὸς
τὰ γυναικεῖα πινομένη ἐν οἴνῳ αὐστηρῷ μέλανι:
0 δὲ καρπὸς πρός τε τὰς oT paryyoupias: καὶ πρὸς
τὰ ὦτα καὶ ἄργεμα καὶ πρὸς ὀφθαλμίας καὶ ὥστε
γάλα γυναιξὶν ἐμποιεῖν.

Ἢ δὲ ἄκαρπος ἔχει τὸ φύλλον ὅμοιον θριδα-
κίνης τῆς πικρᾶς τραχύτερον δὲ καὶ λευκότερον,
ῥίζαν δὲ βραχεῖαν. φύεται δὲ ὅπουπερ ἐρείκη
πλείστη. δύναται δὲ ἡ ῥίξα καθαίρειν. καὶ ἄνω
καὶ κάτω" τὸ μὲν γὰρ πρὸς τὴν βλάστην ἄνω, τὸ
δὲ πρὸς τὴν γῆν κάτω: κωλύει δὲ καὶ εἰς ἱμάτια
τιθεμένη τοὺς σῆτας. συλλέγεται δὲ περὶ πυρο-
τομίας.

XII. Χαμαιλέων δὲ ὁ μὲν “λευκὸς ὁ δὲ μέλας:
αἱ δὲ δυνάμεις τῶν ῥιζῶν καὶ αὐταὶ δὲ αἱ ῥίξαι
τοῖς εἴδεσι διάφοροι. τοῦ μὲν γὰρ λευκὴ καὶ
παχεῖα καὶ γλυκεῖα καὶ ὀσμὴν ἔχουσα βαρεῖαν"
χρήσιμον δέ φασι πρός τε τοὺς ῥοῦς, ὅταν ἑψηθῇ


~


Diose. 3. 74; Plin 19. 187.

cf. Plin. 24. 99 and 101.

of. 7.6.2 25 9. 9. 5.

ὕπουπερ ἐρείκη con). Dalec. etc. from Diose, /.c.; ὅπουπερ
εἴρηται Ald.H.; ὁπότε ἐρείκη U*.


276


= Ὁ ιὉ


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. x1. 10o-xu. 1


Of the two herbs called libanotis.


1 ΟΥ̓ the plants called libanotis, (for there are two)
one is barren, the other fruitful, the latter having
both fruit and leaves that are serviceable, the former
only a serviceable root. The fruit is called kakhry.?
This plant has a leaf like marsh celery, but much
larger, a stem a cubit long or more, a large stout
white root, which smells like frankincense, and a
white rough elongated fruit. It grows chiefly wherever
there is parched and rocky soil; the root is serviceable
for sores, and for diseases of women when given in a
draught of dry black wine. The fruit is good for
strangury, for the ears, for ulcers? on the eye, for
ophthalmia and for producing milk in women.

The barren kind has a leaf like that of the bitter
lettuce, but rougher and paler; the root is short. It
grows where there is abundance of heather.*’ The
root can purge both upwards and downwards, the
upper part being used for the former, that nearer
the ground for the latter purpose. Also, if it is put
among clothes, it prevents moth. It is gathered at
the time of wheat-harvest.


Of the two kinds of chamaeleon.


XII. °Of chamaeleon there is the white kind and
the dark; the properties of the roots are different,
and the roots also differ° in appearance. In the one
case the root is white stout and sweet, and it has a
heavy smell; they say that when cooked it is
serviceable against flux; it is chopped up like


> Diose. 3. 8; Plin. 22. 45 and 46, who explains the name
(mutat cum terra colores). See Index.

ὁ διαφέρουσαι conj. W.; διαφέρει U; διαφέρουσι δὲ Μ΄; διάφορον
Ald,


277


THEOPHRASTUS


θ A θ / ς \ > / >
κατατμηθεῖσα καθάπερ ῥαφανὶς ἐνειρομένη ἐφ
e / \ \ Ω a
ὁλοσχοίνου, Kai πρὸς τὴν ἕλμινθα THY πλατεῖαν,
“ > / / / > / 4
ὅταν ἀσταφίδα Tpopayn πίνειν ἐπιξύοντα ταύτην
Ὁ > 7 > 7 b] A > a \ \
ὅσον ὀξύβαφον ἐν οἴνῳ αὐστηρῷ. ἀναιρεῖ δὲ καὶ
/ \ an » x ’ » 7 > “
κύνα καὶ σῦν" κύνα μὲν ἐν ἀλφίτοις ἀναφυραθεῖσα
x 2 / \ e “Ὁ \ \ ς /
μετὰ ἐλαίου καὶ ὕδατος, σῦν δὲ μετὰ ῥαφάνων
/ an > \ \ ;
μεμιγμένη τῶν ὀρείων. γυναικὶ δὲ δίδοται ἐν
ὶ γλυκεία ἢ ἐν οἴνῳ γλυκεῖ i ἐὰν βούλ
τρυγὶ γλυκείᾳ ἢ ἐν οἴνῳ γλυκεῖ. καὶ ἐὰν βούλη-
/ >’ lal > / lal ’
Tat τις ἀσθενοῦντος ἀνθρώπου διαπειρᾶσθαι εἰ
vi 7 an
βιώσιμος, λούειν κελεύουσι τρεῖς ἡμέρας, κἂν
περιενέγκῃ βιώσιμος. φύεται δὲ ὁμοίως παντα-
a Ac, ἣν \ / “ / a
χοῦ, Kal ἔχει TO φύλλον ὅμοιον σκολύμῳ μεῖζον
δέ' αὐτὸ δὲ πρὸς τῇ γῆ τινα κεφαλὴν ἔχει ἀκανο-
aA 7 e \ ει Ὗς. lal
Elon μεγάλην, οἱ δὲ καὶ ἄκανον καλοῦσιν.
¢ / an 2: / /
O δὲ μέλας τῷ μὲν φύλλῳ παρόμοιος, σκολυ-
a \ ” \ yy \ δ
μῶδες γὰρ ἔχει πλὴν ἔλαττον καὶ δλειότερον,
δ, ΕΝ, ϑ δ. οὐ 2 \ “ / ς Ν Cr
αὐτὸς δ᾽ ὅλος ἐστὶν ὥσπερ σκιάδιον, ἡ δὲ ῥίζα
la) \ / a ae ,
παχεῖα καὶ μέλαινα διαρραγεῖσα δὲ ὑπόξανθος.
U3 a \
χωρία δὲ φιλεῖ ψυχρὰ καὶ ἀργά: δύναται δὲ
VA
λέπραν τε ἐξελαύνειν ἐν ὄξει τριβόμενος Kal Evo-
\ > i x » \ ς ΄ » al
θεὶς ἐπαλειφόμενος Kal ἀλφὸν ὡσαύτως" ἀναιρεῖ
δὲ καὶ τοὺς κύνας. :
Ψ ld /
Μήκωνες δ᾽ εἰσὶν ἄγριαι πλείους" ἡ μὲν κερα-
A 7 / 7 \ 7 “
τῖτις καλουμένη μέλαινα' ταύτης τὸ φύλλον ὥσ-


of, Ὁ:.9. Ε;

2 cf. Pseudo-Diose. 4. 175 and Index.

3 ἀκανοειδῇ conj. Sch.; κονοειδὴ U*; κωνοειδῇ mP; ὁμοίαν
ἀκανῷ PAId.

4 δὲ after τὴν om. Sch.; ? τινα κεφαλὴν W.


278


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. xn. 1-3


radishes 1 and the pieces strung on a rush ; it is also
good against the broad maw-worm; the patient first
eats a bunch of raisins and then drinks about an
eighth of a pint of this scraped up in a draught of
dry wine. It is fatal to dogs and pigs; to kill a dog
it is well mixed up ina meal paste with oil and water,

to kill a pig it is mixed with ‘ mountain cabbage’

(spurge).2_ It is given to a woman in sweet wine-
lees or sweet wine. And if one wishes to discover
whether a man that is sick will recover, they say
that he should be washed with this for three days,
and, if he survives the experience, he will recover.
It grows everywhere alike and has a leaf like the
golden thistle, but larger; the plant itself has a
large thistle-like ὃ head 4 close to the ground ; some
actually® call it the thistle.

6 The dark kind resembles the other in leaf, which
is like that of the golden thistle but smaller and
smoother ; the plant itself is in general appearance
like a sunshade; the root is stout and black, and
when broken is yellowish. It likes cold uncultivated
soil: it has the property of expelling leprosy; for
this it is given pounded up in vinegar, or else
scrapings of it are made into a plaster ; and it is also
used for the white leprosy. This plant is also fatal
to dogs.

Of the various plants called ‘poppy.’

8 There are several kinds of wild poppy: the one
called the horned poppy is black: the leaf of this is

5 δὲ καὶ ἄκανον I conj. ; δ᾽ ἄκανθαν U*mPar., so also Diosc.
l.c.3 δ᾽ ἄκανον PAld.G.

$ Diosc. 3. 9; Plin. /.c.

7 κύνας : κυνορραΐστας, dog-ticks, conj. Reinesius from Plin.
ricinos canum.


8 Diosc. 4. 64; Plin. 20, 205 and 206,
279


THEOPHRASTUS


περ φλόμου τῆς μελαίνης ἧττον δὲ μέλαν, τοῦ δὲ
καυλοῦ τὸ ὕψος ὡς πηχυαῖον, ῥίξα δὲ παχεῖα καὶ
ἐπιπόλαιος, ὁ δὲ καρπὸς καμπύλος ὥσπερ κερά-
τιον: συλλέγεται δὲ περὶ πυροτομίας. δύναται
δὲ καθαίρειν κοιλίαν, τὸ δὲ φύλλον ἄργεμα προ-
βάτοις ἀφαιρεῖν. φύεται δὲ παρὰ θάλατταν, οὗ
ἂν ἢ πετρώδη χωρία.

Ἑτέρα δὲ μήκων ῥοιὰς καλουμένη παρομοία
κιχορίῳ τῷ ἀγρίῳ, δι ὃ καὶ ἐσθίεται" ἐν τοῖς
ἀρουραίοις δὲ φύεται, μάλιστα ἐν ταῖς κριθαῖς"
ἄνθος δ᾽ ἔχει ἐρυθρὸν κωδύαν δ᾽ ὅσην ὄνυχα τοῦ
δακτύλου. συλλέγεται δὲ πρὸ τοῦ θερισμοῦ τῶν
κριθῶν, ἐγχλωροτέρα δὲ μᾶλλον. καθαίρει δὲ
κάτω.

«Ετέρα δὲ μήκων Ἡρακλεία «καλεῖται τὸ μὲν
φύλλον ἔχουσα οἷον στρουθός, ᾧ τὰ ὀθόνια λευ-
καίνουσι, ῥίζαν δὲ λεπτὴν ἐπιπόλαιον, τὸν δὲ
καρπὸν λευκόν. ταύτης ἡ ῥίξα καθαίρει avo:
χρῶνται δέ τινες πρὸς τοὺς ἐπιλήπτους ἐν μελι-

/
κράτῳ. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ὥσπερ ὁμωνυμίᾳ τινὶ
συνείληπται.

ATL. Tov δὲ ῥιζῶν καὶ ἐν τοῖς χυμοῖς αἱ
διαφοραὶ καὶ ἐν ταῖς ὀσμαῖς" αἱ μὲν γάρ εἰσι
δριμεῖαι αἱ δὲ πικραὶ αἱ δὲ γλυκεῖαι, καὶ αἱ μὲν
εὔοδμοι αἱ δὲ βαρεῖαι. γλυκεῖα μὲν ἥ τε νυμφαία
καλουμένη" φύεται δ᾽ ἐν ταῖς λίμναις καὶ ἐν τοῖς
ἑλώδεσιν, οἷον ἔν τε τῇ ᾽᾿ΟὈρχομενίᾳ καὶ Μαραθῶνι


1 ὥσπερ κεράτιον conj. W.; ὥσπερ κέρας UM ; ὥσπερ τῶν κερα-
τίων ὉΈΑΙΑ,

5 Diose. /.c.; Plin. 19. 167-169.

5 Diosc. 4. 66; Plin. 20, 207, cf. 19, 21.


280


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. xu. 3-xu1. 1


like that of the black mullein, but it is not so black ;
the stem grows about a cubit high, the root is stout
and shallow, the fruit is twisted like a little horn!:
it is gathered at the time of wheat harvest. It has
the property of purging the belly, and the leaf is
used for removing ulcers on sheep’s eyes. It grows
by the sea, wherever there is rocky ground.

2 Another kind of poppy is that called rhozas,
which is like wild chicory, wherefore it is even
eaten: it grows in cultivated fields and especially
among barley. It has a red flower, and a head as
large as a man’s finger-nail. It is gathered before
the barley-harvest, when it is still somewhat green.
It purges downwards.

8 Another kind of poppy is called Herakleia : it has
a leaf like soap-wort, with which * they bleach linen:
the root is slender and does not run deep, and the
fruit is white. The root of this plant purges upwards :
and some use it in a posset of mead for epileptics.

> These kinds then are distinct plants, though they
come under one name.


Of roots possessing remarkable taste or smell.


XIII. The differences between roots are shown in
their tastes ὁ and in their smells: some are pungent,
some bitter, some sweet : some again have a pleasant,
others a disagreeable smell. The plant called
yellow water-lily’ is sweet: it grows in lakes and
marshy places, as in the district of Orchomenus, at


4 This appears to refer to στρουθός, not to ‘HpakAela, as
Plin. takes it. cf. 6. 4. 3 and Index, στρούθιον (2).

5 7.e. pois and Ἡρακλεία are popularly called ‘ poppies.’
ὁμωνυμίᾳ τινι conj. W.; ὁμώνυμα τινα Ald.; ὁμώνυμα τινι U*. of.
7. 15. 4.

§ χυμοῖς conj. Sch.; χυλοῖς Ald, * Pliny 25, 75,


281


THEOPHRASTUS


καὶ περὶ Κρήτην' καλοῦσι δ᾽ αὐτὴν ot Βοιωτοὶ
μαδωνάϊν καὶ τὸν καρπὸν ἐσθίουσιν. ἔχει δὲ τὸ
φύλλον μέγα ἐπὶ τοῦ ὕδατος" εἶναι δέ φασιν
ἴσχαιμον, ἐὰν τρίψας τίς ἐπὶ τὴν πληγὴν ἐπιθῇ:
χρησίμη δὲ καὶ πρὸς δυσεντερίαν πινομένη.

Γλυκεῖα δὲ καὶ ἡ Σκυθική' καὶ evo δὲ καλοῦ-
σιν εὐθὺς γλυκεῖαν αὐτήν" γίνεται δὲ περὶ τὴν
Μαιῶτιν' χρησίμη δὲ πρός τε τὰ ἄσθματα καὶ
πρὸς τὴν βῆχα ξηρὰν καὶ ὅλως τοὺς περὶ τὸν

ώρακα πόνους" ἔτι δὲ πρὸς τὰ ἕλκη ἐν μέλετι:

δύναται δὲ καὶ τὴν δίψαν παύειν, ἐάν τις ἐν τῷ
στόματι ἔχη" δι᾽ ὃ ταύτῃ τε καὶ τῇ ἱππακῇ
διάγειν φασὶ τοὺς Σκύθας ἡμέρας καὶ ἕνδεκα καὶ
δώδεκα.

[Ἢ δὲ ἀριστολοχία τῇ ὀσφρήσει μὲν εὔοδμος τῇ
δὲ γεύσει πικρὰ odo pa τῇ χροιᾷ δὲ μέλαινα.
φύεται δὲ ἐν τοῖς ὄρεσιν ἡ βελτίστη: φύλλον δὲ
ἔχει προσεμφερὲς τῇ ἀλσίνῃ πλὴν στρογγυλό-
τερον" χρησίμη δὲ πρὸς πολλά, καὶ ἀρίστη πρὸς
κεφαλῆς ἀγαθὴ δὲ καὶ πρὸς τὰ ἄλλα ἕλκη, καὶ
πρὸς τὰ ἑρπετὰ καὶ πρὸς ὕπνον καὶ πρὸς ὑστέραν.
τὰ μὲν οὖν προσάγειν κελεύουσιν ἐν ὕδατι ἀνα-
δεύσαντα καὶ καταπλάττοντα, τὰ δὲ ἄλλα εἰς
μέλι ἐνξύσαντα καὶ ἔλαιον: πρὸς δὲ τὰ τῶν
ἑρπετῶν ἐν οἴνῳ okivn πίνειν καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ δῆγμα
ἐπιπλάττειν'" εἰς ὕπνον δὲ ἐν οἴνῳ μέλανι αὐστηρῷ
κνίσαι: ἐὰν δὲ αἱ μῆτραι προπέσωσι, τῷ ὕδατι
ἀποκλύζειν.ἢ


1 Diosc. 3. 5; Plin. 25. 82.

> γλυκεῖαν : γλυκύρριζαν conj. Dalec., whence ‘liquorice.’ cf.
Plin. 11. 284.

® ef. Plin, /.c,, who took ἱππακή to be a plant,


282


—


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, ΙΧ. xi. 1-3


Marathon and in parts of Crete: the Boeotians, who
eat the fruit, call it madonais. It has a large leaf
which lies on the water: and it is said that it acts as
a styptic if it is pounded up and put on the wound:
it is also serviceable in the form of a draught for
dysentery.

1¢Scythian root’ (liquorice) is also sweet; some
indeed call it simply ‘sweet-root.’? It is found
about Lake Maeotis: it is useful against asthma or a
dry cough and in general for troubles in the chest :
also, administered in honey, for wounds: also it has
the property of quenching thirst, if one holds it in
the mouth: wherefore they say that the Scythians,
with the help of this and mares’ milk cheese? can go
eleven or twelve days without drinking.

4(Birthwort is fragrant to the smell but in taste is
very bitter: in colour it is black. The best grows
on the mountains: it has a leaf like alsine, but
rounder: it is useful for many purposes, and is best
for sores on the head ὅ and other sores, also for bites
of reptiles, for inducing sleep and for disorders of
the womb.® It is directed that it should be applied
as a plaster, steeped in water, and for the other
purposes should be given shredded into honey and


- olive-oil: for snake-bites it should be taken in sour


wine and also used as a plaster on the bite : to induce
sleep it should be scraped up’ and administered in
black dry wine ; in cases of prolapsus uteri a lotion of
it mixed with water should be applied. ]


4 Diosce. 3. 4; Plin. 25. 95. This section is repeated 9. 20. 4.
with considerable variations: that seems to be its proper
lace. .
PS κεφαλῆς conj. W.; κεφαλὴν Ald. cf. ὃ 20, κεφαλόθλαστα.
6 ὑστέραν conj. W., cf. below, ἐὰν δὲ αἱ μῆτραι κιτ.λ. and the
duplicate passage ὃ 20; ἕτερα MSS.
κνίσαι conj. W.; κνίσας U* Ald.


283


4


THEOPHRASTUS


- 5 na \ /
Αὗται μὲν οὖν γλυκεῖαι. ἄλλαι δὲ πικραΐί, αἱ
4 7 fal
δὲ βαρεῖαι τῇ γεύσει. γίνονται δέ τίνες τῶν
γλυκειῶν αἱ μὲν ἐκστατικαί, καθάπερ ἡ ἡ ὁμοία τῷ


¢


σκολύμῳ περὶ Τέγεαν, ἣν καὶ ILdvdevos ὁ ἀνδριαν-
τοποιὸς φαγὼν ἐργαζόμενος ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ ἐξέστη.
αἱ δὲ ᾿θανατηφόροι, καθάπερ ἡ περὶ τὰ μέταλλα
ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις, τοῖς ἐν Opden κούφη δὲ Kal ἡδεῖα
πάνυ τῇ γεύσει καὶ τὸν θάνατον ὑπνώδη τινὰ
ποιοῦσα καὶ ἐλαφρόν. ἔχουσι δὲ καὶ τοῖς χρώ-
μασι διαφορὰς οὐ τῷ λευκῷ καὶ μέλανι καὶ ξανθῷ
μόνον, ἀλλ᾽ ἔνιαι καὶ οἰνοχρῶτες, αἱ δ᾽ ἐρυθραΐί,
καθάπερ ἡ τοῦ ἐρευθεδανοῦ.

Ἢ δὲ τοῦ πενταφύλλου ἢ πενταπετοῦς, καλοῦσι
γὰρ ἀμφοτέρως, ὀρυττομένη ἐρυθρὰ ξηραινομένη
δὲ μέλαινα γίνεται καὶ τετράγωνος" ἔχει δὲ τὸ
φύλλον ὥσπερ οἴναρον μικρὸν δὲ καὶ τὴν χροιὰν
ὅμοιον: καὶ αὐξάνεται καὶ φθίνει ἅμα τῇ ἀμπέλῳ:
πάντα δὲ πέντε τὰ φύλλα, δι’ ὃ καὶ ἡ προσηγορία"
καυλοὺς δὲ ἐπὶ γῆν ἵησι λεπτοὺς καὶ κνήμας ἔχει.

Τὸ δὲ ἐρευθεδανὸν φύλλον ὅμοιον κιττῷ πλὴν
στρογγυλότερον' φύεται δ᾽ ἐπὶ γῆς ὥσπερ ἄγρω-
OTIS, φιλεῖ δὲ παλίσκια χωρία. οὐρητικὴ έ, δι᾽
ὃ καὶ χρῶνται πρὸς τὰ τῆς ὀσφύος ἀλγήματα καὶ
πρὸς τὰς ἰσχιάδας.

Ἔνιαι δὲ ἰδιόμορφοί τινες, ὥσπερ ἥ τε τοῦ
σκορπίου καλουμένου καὶ ἡ τοῦ ποχυποδίου. ἡ


1 These words shew that ὃ 3 is out of place.
a of. CP. 6. 4. 5.
3 ἢ conj. Sch.; af U*Ald.
ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις τοῖς W. from U*. ? a gloss on μέταλλα.
τὰ pet. τὰ ἐν @ Ald. H.
5 Plin, 25. 139.


284


~


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. χπὶ. 4-6


᾿
;


1These then are sweet: other roots are bitter, and
some unpleasant to the taste. Of those that are
sweet * there are some that cause mental derange-
ment, as the plant like the golden thistle which
grows near Tegea: of this Pandeios the sculptor ate,
and went mad while he was working in the temple.
Others have fatal effects, as that? which grows near
the mines in the fields of Thrace: this however is
___ inoffensive and quite sweet to the taste, and the death
᾿ς which it causes is easy and like falling asleep. There
are also differences in colour, not merely as to being
black or white or yellow, but some are quite wine-
coloured and some are red, as the root of madder.
° The root of pentaphyllon or pentapetes (cinquefoil) ὃ
(for the plant bears both names) is red when it is dug
up, but as it dries it becomes black and square: its
leaf is like a vine-leaf, and it is small and like it in
colour : it grows and fades along with the vine. It
only has five leaves in all, whence its name: it sends
out long slender stems on the ground, and it has
| joints.’
: 8 Madder has a leaf like ivy, but it is rounder: it
grows along the ground like dog’s-tooth grass and
loves shady spots. It has diuretic properties, where-
fore it is used for pains in the loins or hip-disease.
Some roots are of peculiar shape, as that of the
plant called ‘scorpion-plant’ (leopard’s bane) ὃ. and
that of polypody. For the former is like a scorpion


6 πενταπετοῦς conj. Sch.; πενταπέτου UAIld.; πεντεπέτου M
ἘΠΕ οἵ. Diosc: 4.42.

7 καὶ κνήμας ἔχει U*; καὶ xv. ἐ. πυκνάς Ald.; καὶ κνίκας ἔχει
πυκνάς UM. cf. πολύκνημος, Diosc. 8. 94. Text probably de-
fective, as nothing is said of the plant’s medicinal use.

® Diose. 3. 143’; Plin. 19. 47.

e cf..9. 18. 2.


Ἶ
Ἃ


285


THEOPHRASTUS


\ \ e 7 / \ β \ \
μὲν γὰρ ὁμοία σκορπίῳ καὶ χρησίμη δὲ πρὸς τὴν
\ > “ Ν \ 7 ᾽ " ς \ n
πληγὴν αὐτοῦ καὶ πρὸς GAN ἄττα. ἡ δὲ τοῦ
/ “ Xr / “
πολυποδίου δασεῖα καὶ ἔχουσα κοτυληδόνας, ὥσ-
ες “ 7] 7 , Α
περ αἱ τοῦ πολύποδος πλεκτάναι. καθαίρει δὲ
/ Ἃ / / ” > /
κάτω κἂν περιάψηταί Tis οὔ φασιν ἐμφύεσθαι
I ” \ 7 “ a / a
πολύπουν. ἔχει δὲ φύλλον ὅμοιον TH πτερίδι TH
\ a
μεγάλῃ καὶ φύεται ἐν ταῖς πέτραις.
XIV. ἸΙασῶν δὲ τῶν ῥιζῶν αἱ μὲν πλείω
/ e \ 3 / / ς Ν \
χρόνον αἱ δὲ ἐλάττω διαμένουσιν. ὁ μὲν yap
> / \ / x / ς Ν
ἐλλέβορος καὶ τριάκοντα ἔτη χρήσιμος, ἡ δὲ
> , fe A, eer / \ ς A
ἀριστολοχία πέντε ἢ ἕξ, χαμαιλέων δὲ ὁ μέλας
/ \ Ἃ
τετταράκοντα, Kevtaupls δὲ δέκα ἢ δώδεκα"
, wad Ν / / \ /
πίειρα δὲ ἡ ῥίζα καὶ πυκνή: πευκέδανον δὲ πέντε
rv Ὁ« J / \ > / > / \ > ee ΞΘ
ἢ ἕξ, ἀμπέλου δὲ ἀγρίας ἐνιαυτόν, ἐὰν ἐν σκιᾷ ἢ
ΕΝ ᾽ \ , \ \ ,
Kal ἄπληκτος, εἰ δὲ μή, σαπρὰ Kal σομφώδης:
+ \ ” 4 / / \
ἄλλαι δὲ ἄλλους ἔχουσαι χρόνους. πάντων δὲ
,» an a / U %
ὅλως TOV φαρμάκων πλεῖστον διαμένει χρόνον TO
\ / 7
ἐλατήριον, καὶ τὸ παλαιότατον ἄριστον. ἰατρὸς
Δ δι + 5) 2 \ IO\ 7 c ”
δ᾽ οὖν τις ἔλεγεν οὐκ ἀλαζὼν οὐδὲ ψεύστης ws εἴη
> lal / lal N \ an
Tap αὐτῷ καὶ διακοσίων ἐτῶν θαυμαστὸν δὲ TH
a n \ [οἷ [ον ee \ na
ἀρετῇ, δοῦναι δὲ αὐτῷ τινα δῶρον. αἰτία δὲ τῆς
΄ / \ i 4 \
χρονιότητος ἡ ὑγρότης" διὰ yap ταύτην Kal ὅταν
/ , > / ¢ / \ 50» ἃ
κόψωσι τιθέασι εἰς τέφραν ὑγρόν, καὶ οὐδ᾽ ὡς
/ / ᾽ 5... δὲ / > [οἱ “
γίνεται ξηρόν, ἀλλ᾽ ἄχρι πεντήκοντα ἐτῶν σβέν-
͵] \ ΄
νυσι προσαγομενον τοὺς λύχνους. φασὶ δὲ μόνον


1 cf. the mediaeval doctrine of ‘ signatures.’

2 Diose. 4. 186.

3 ris οὐ conj. Sch.; tis ὡς Ald.; tls UM; tis &s U*.
4 Plin. 27. 143. 5 of..9P S07. ἀ of 9, 20.3.
7 ἅπληκτος : ? by worms. cf. ἄκοπος.


286


POM arp aps 3


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. xi. 6-x1v, 2


and is also useful! against the sting of that creature
and for certain other purposes. ? The root of polypody
is rough and has suckers like the tentacles of the
polyp. It purges downwards: and, if one wears it
as an amulet, they say that one? does not get a
polypus. It has a leaf like the great fern, and it
grows on rocks.


Of the time for which roots can be kept without losing their
virtue.


XIV. 4Some roots keep a longer, some a shorter
time. Hellebore retains its usefulness for as much
as thirty years, birthwort five or six, the black
chamaeleon for forty, feverwort ὅ (whose root is thick
and compact) for ten or twelve. Sulphur-wort keeps
five or six years, the root of the ‘ wild vine’ ® (bryony)
for a year, if it be kept in the shade and not
damaged :’ otherwise it rots and becomes spongy.®
Others keep for various periods. But, to speak
generally, of all plants used as drugs the ‘driver’ 3
keeps longest, and, the older it is, the better it is.
At least a certain physician, who was no boaster nor
liar, said that he had some which was 200 years old
and of marvellous virtue, and that it was a present
to him from some one. The cause of its keeping so
long is its moisture: !°for to secure this, as soon as
they have cut it, they put it among ashes without
drying it, and not even so does it become dry, but
up to fifty years it will put the lamp?! out if it is
brought near it. And they say that alone of all

8 σομφώδης conj. Sch.; σογκώδης Ald. H.

® A manufactured drug. cf. 9. 9. 4.

10 Diose. 4. 150; Plin. 20. δ.


1 λύχνους conj. Sch.: so Vin.Cod.Cas.GPlin. J.¢.; αὐχμοὺς
U*Ald.; χρόνους UM.


287


THEOPHRASTUS


ἢ μάλιστα ὑπέρινον ἄνω ποιεῖν τῶν φαρμάκων"
αὕτη μὲν οὖν ἰδιότης τις δυνάμεως.

Τῶν δὲ ῥιζῶν ὅσαι μὲν γλυκύτητά τινα ἔχουσι

/ /
ξυμβαίνει θριπηδέστους γίνεσθαι χρονιζομένας,
ὅσαι δὲ δριμεῖαι, τοῦτο μὲν μὴ πάσχειν ἀμαυροῦ-
σθαι δ᾽ αὐτῶν τὰς δυνάμεις μανουμένων καὶ
κενουμένων. τῶν δ᾽ ἔξω θηρίων ἄλλο μὲν οὐδὲν
« yA / ς \ 7 n
ἅπτεται ῥίζης δριμείας, ἡ δὲ σφονδύλη πασῶν"
τοῦτο μὲν οὖν ἴδιον τῆς τοῦ ζώου φύσεως.
a / /

Πᾶσαν δὲ χείρω γίνεσθαι ῥίζαν, ἐὰν ἐάσῃ τις
τελειωθῆναι καὶ ἁδρυνθῆναι τὸν καρπόν" ὡσαύ-
τως δὲ καὶ τὸν καρπόν, ἐὰν ὀπίσῃης τὴν ῥίζαν: ὡς
᾿] \ \ \ \ Ss / > > /
ἐπὶ TO πολὺ δὲ αἱ φαρμακώδεις οὐκ ὀπίζονται,
ὧν δ᾽ ἂν τὰ σπέρματα φαρμακώδη, αὗται δὴ
ὀπίζονται" χρῆσθαι δέ τινές φασι μᾶλλον ταῖς
ῥίζαις, ὅτι ἰσχυρότερος ὁ καρπὸς ὥσθ᾽ ὑπενεγκεῖν

Ν “Ὁ / \ > 3 et na >
TO σῶμα. φαίνεται δὲ ov καθ᾽ ὅλου τοῦτο ἀλη-
θές: ἐπεὶ καὶ οἱ ἐν ᾿Αντικύρᾳ τοῦ σησαμώδους
«ς
[ἐλλεβόρου] διδόασιν, [ὅτι ὁ καρπὸς ὅμοιος ση-
Tape].
a = /

XV. Φαρμακώδεις δὲ δοκοῦσιν εἶναι τόποι

a ‘ a \ \

μάλιστα τῶν μὲν ἔξω τῆς “Ελλάδος οἱ περὶ THY
/

Τυρρηνίαν καὶ τὴν Λατίνην, ἐν ἣ καὶ τὴν Κίρκην

9 / Xi em”. n / ς “O ,

εἰναι λέγουσιν" καὶ ETL μᾶλλον γε, ὡς Opnpos


1 Plin. 27, 148.

2 7.e. not engendered in the root.

3 A beetle? cf. Arist. H.A. 5. 8.

4 This section is omitted in U*. Plin. 27. 144.


288


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. xiv. 2—xv. 1


drugs, or to a greater degree than any, it effects a
thorough purge upwards: this then is a virtue
peculiar to it.

Those roots which contain any sweetness become
worm-eaten in course of time, but those that are
pungent are not so affected, though their virtues
diminish as they become flabby and waste away.
1No creature coming from without? touches a
pungent root, but the sphondyle? attacks them all ;
this then is a peculiarity of this creature.

4Any root, they say, deteriorates if one lets the fruit
grow to maturity and ripen: and so in like manner
does the fruit, if you drain the root of its juice: and
in general roots with medicinal properties do not have
the juice of their roots taken, and only those whose
seeds are medicinal are thus treated. But some say
that they use the roots for choice, because the fruit
is too powerful for the human body to be able to bear
it. However this does not appear to be true as a
universal rule, seeing that the people of Anticyra
administer® doses of the drug® sesamodes made
from hellebore, which is so called because its fruit is
like sesame.


Of the localities which specially produce medicinal herbs.


XV. The places outside Hellas which specially
produce medicinal herbs seem to be the parts of
Tyrrhenia and Latium (where they say that Circe
dwelt), and still more parts of Egypt, as Homer says :

® 7.e. and it is in this case the fruit which is used. The
drug in question, as well] as the plant, was called σησαμοειδές
or σησαμοειδῆς. cf. 9. 9. 2 η.; Diosc. 4. 149.

8 Or (if ἐλλεβόρου is sound) ‘ of the sesame-like hellebore,’
i.e. he ‘black.’ ὅτι... σησάμῳ I have bracketed, as a
gloss on σησαμώδους : ἐλλεβόρου is probably also a gloss.


289
vol. II. U


THEOPHRASTUS


\ \ " » a \ \ € /
φησι, Ta περὶ Αἴγυπτον" ἐκεῖθεν yap τὴν KXévnv
\ PS ce ict να \ ΄ c 7 ,
φησὶ λαβεῖν “ἐσθλὰ τά οἱ [Πολύδαμνα πόρεν
Θῶνος παράκοιτις Αἰγυπτίη" τόθι πλεῖστα φύει
/ 7 / \ \ > \
ζείδωρος ἄρουρα φάρμακα, πολλὰ μὲν ἐσθλὰ

, \ \ 4 158 Ὁ \ \ ‘
τετυγμένα πολλὰ δὲ λυγρά." ὧν δὴ Kal TO

n / 3

νηπενθὲς ἐκεῖνό φησιν εἶναι καὶ ἄχολον, ὥστε
λήθην ποιεῖν καὶ ἀπάθειαν τῶν κακῶν. καὶ
σχεδὸν αὗται μὲν ἐοίκασιν ὥσπερ ὑπὸ τῶν ποιη-
τῶν ὑποδεδεῖχθαι. καὶ γὰρ Αἰσχύλος ἐν ταῖς
ἐλεγείαις ὡς πολυφάρμακον λέγει τὴν Τυρρηνίαν'
fy Τυρρηνὸν γενεάν, φαρμακοποιὸν ἔθνος.

Οἱ δὲ τόποι πάντες πως φαίνονται μετέχειν
τῶν φαρμάκων, ἀλλὰ; τῷ μᾶλλον καὶ ἧττον δια-
φέρειν' καὶ γὰρ οἱ πρὸς ἄρκτον καὶ μεσημβρίαν
καὶ οἱ πρὸς ἀνατολὰς ἔχουσι θαυμαστὰς δυνάμεις.
ἐν Αἰθιοπίᾳ γὰρ ἣ τοὺς ὀϊστοὺς χρίουσι ῥίζα τίς
ἐστι θανατηφόρος. ἐν δὲ Σκύθαις αὕτη τε καὶ
ἕτεραι πλείους, αἱ μὲν παραχρῆμα ἀπαλλάττουσαι
τοὺς προσενεγκαμένους, αἱ δ᾽ ἐν ρόνοις αἱ μὲν
ἐλάττοσιν αἱ δ᾽ ἐν πλείοσιν, ὥστ᾽ ἐνίους κατα-
φθίνειν. ἐν ᾿Ινδοῖς δὲ καὶ ἕτερα γένη πλείω,

/ / »“ > n / v4
περιττότατα δέ, εἴπερ ἀληθῆ λέγουσιν, ἥ τε duva-
μένη τὸ αἷμα διαχεῖν καὶ οἷον ὑποφεύγειν, καὶ
πάλιν ἡ συνάγουσα καὶ πρὸς ἑαυτὴν ἐπισπωμένη,

δή φασιν εὑρῆσθαι πρὸς τὰ τῶν ὀφιδίων τῶν
θανατηφόρων δήγματα.

Περὶ δὲ τὴν Θράκην εἶναι μὲν καὶ ἑτέρας οὐκ
Ce ἰσχυροτάτην δὲ ὡς εἰπεῖν τὴν ἴσχαιμον,

ν δὴ λέγουσιν οἱ μὲν κεντηθείσης τῆς φλεβὸς


1 Od. 4. 22) foll.
* ὧν δὴ conj. Sch.; wi δὴ U*; ἐν οἷς δὴ PAId.


290


“A ge et orTre


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. xv. 1-3


for thence he says! that Helen brought “things of


virtue which Polydamna, the Egyptian wife of Thon,
gave her; there the grain-bearing earth produces
most drugs, many that are good, and many baneful.”’
Among these? he says was nepenthes, the famous drug
which cures sorrow and passion, so that it causes for-
getfulness and indifference to ills. So these lands
seem to have been pointed out, as it were, by the
poets. For Aeschylus too in his elegies speaks of
Tyrrhenia as rich in drugs, for he tells of the “ Tyrr-
henian stock, a nation that makes drugs.”

It seems that almost all places take their share in
producing drugs, but that they differ in the extent
to which they do so; for the regions of the North,
South, and East have herbs of marvellous virtue.
Thus in Ethiopia there is a certain deadly root 8 with
which they smear their arrows. And in Scythia there
is this and there are also others, some of which kill
at once those who eat them, some after an interval,
shorter or longer, so that in the latter case men have
a lingering death, In India there are many other
kinds,* but the most extraordinary,® if they tell the
truth, are these: there is one which has the power
to make the blood disperse and as it were to put it
to flight,® and another which collects it and draws it
to itself; these they say were discovered as remedies
for the bites of deadly serpents.

In Thrace it is said there are fairly numerous
other kinds, but that about the most powerful is
‘blood-stancher,’ ? which stops and prevents the flow


3 Somali arrow-poison. Index App. (27).

4 γένη conj. Dalec.; μέρη Ald.

5 περιττότατα conj.W.; περιττοτάτη Ald.

8 ἡ add ποιεῖν after ὑποφεύγειν. 7 Plin. 25. 83.


201
u 2


THEOPHRASTUS


i δὲ καὶ σφοδροτέρως διατμηθείσης. ἴσχειν καὶ
waikbety τὴν χύσιν. [ταῦτα μὲν οὖν, ὥσπερ εἴπο-
μεν, ἔοικε δηλοῦν τὸ κοινόν. τῶν μὲν οὖν ἔξω
τόπων οἱ φαρμακωδέστατοι οὗτοι.

Τῶν δὲ περὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα τόπων φαρμακωδέ-
στατον τό τε Πήλιον τὸ ἐν Θετταλίᾳ καὶ τὸ
Τελέθριον τὸ ἐν Εὐβοίᾳ καὶ ὁ Παρνασός, ἔτι δὲ
καὶ ἡ ᾿Αρκαδία καὶ ἡ 'Λακωνική': καὶ γὰρ αὗται
φαρμακώδεις ἀμφότεραι" δι᾽ ὃ καὶ οἵ γε ᾿Αρκάδες
εἰώθασιν ἀντὶ τοῦ φαρμακοποτεῖν γαλακτοποτεῖν
περὶ τὸ ἔαρ, ὅταν οἱ ὀποὶ μάλιστα τῶν τοιούτων
φύλλων ἀκμάξωσι' τότε γὰρ φαρμακωδέστατον
τὸ γάλα' πίνουσι δὲ βόειον: δοκεῖ γὰρ πολυ-
νομώτατον καὶ παμφαγώτατον εἶναι πάντων ὁ
βοῦς.

Φύεται δὲ παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς ὅ τε ἐλλέβορος ἀμφό-
τερος καὶ ὁ λευκὸς καὶ ὁ μέλας" ἔτι δὲ δαῦκον
δαφνοειδὲς κροκόεν, καὶ ἣν ἐκεῖνοι μὲν ῥάφανον
ἀγρίαν καλοῦσι τῶν δ᾽ ἰατρῶν τινες κεράϊν, καὶ
ἣν οἱ μὲν ἀλθαίαν ἐ ἐκεῖνοι δὲ μαλάχην͵ ἀγρίαν, καὶ
ἡ ἀριστολοχία καὶ τὸ σέσελι καὶ τὸ ἱπποσέλινον
καὶ τὸ πευκέδανον καὶ ἡ Ἡράκλεια καὶ ὁ στρύχνος
ἀμφότερος ¢ ὅ τε φοινικοῦν ἔχων τὸν καρπὸν καὶ ὁ
μέλανα.

Φύεται δὲ καὶ ὁ σίκυος ὁ ἄγριος, ἐξ οὗ τὸ
ἐλατήριον συντίθεται" καὶ ὁ τιθύμαλλος, ἐξ. οὗ τὸ
ἱπποφάες' ἄριστον δὲ τοῦτο περὶ Τεγέαν. κἀκεῖνο
μάλιστα σπουδάζεται" φύεται δ᾽ ἐκεῖ ἐπὶ πλέον'


1 [omit ταῦτα... κοινόν as apparently out of place and ἃ
duplicate of the last sentence of § 8.
* Plin. 25. 94; cf. 4. 5. 2. 3 Plin. 25, 110.


292


a“ τ


dy


» Oy ee Bead
\


+


ENQUIRY INTO: PLANTS, IX. xv. 3-6


of blood, some say if the vein is merely pricked,
others even if it is deeply cut into. ! These then
of the places outside Hellas are those that are most
productive of drugs.

2 Of places in Hellas those most productive of drugs
are Pelion in Thessaly, Telethrion in Euboea, Parnas-
sus, and also Arcadia and Laconia, for both these
states produce medicinal herbs ; wherefore the Arca-
dians are accustomed, instead of drinking medicine,
to drink milk in spring when the juices of such plants
are at their best, for then the milk has most medi-
cinal virtue. It is cows’ milk that they drink, since
it appears that the cow eats more than any other
animal and is more impartial as to what she eats.

3 Both kinds of hellebore, the white and the black,
grow in their country, and also carrot, ἃ saffron-


coloured plant like bay, and a plant which the


Arcadians call ‘wild cabbage’® (spurge) but some
physicians kerais; also a plant called by some marsh
mallow,® also birthwort hartwort alexanders sulphur-
wort Herakleia, and both kinds of strykhnos,’ that
which has a scarlet and that which has a black fruit.

There also grow there the ‘wild cucumber’
(squirting cucumber), of which the drug ‘driver’ 8
is compounded, and the tethymallos (spurge) of which
hippophaés® is made; this is best about Tegea, and
that kind is much sought after; it grows there in

4 δαῦκον. This name recurs ὃ ὃ and 9: 20.2. Text must
be defective here: the epithets are unintelligible, and
perhaps belong to another plant whose name has dropped
out. See Index.

5 ef. 9. 12. 1. and Index.

ὁ ἀλθαίαν conj. Sch., cf. 9.18.1; ἀλθέαν Ald. cf. Plin. 20, 222.

Grom, 11. δ. cf. 9.9.4 .;.9. 14. 1.

* ἱπποφάες is elsewhere the name of a plant: cf. Diosc. 4. 159.
ἐξ οὗ may be corrupt, or the text defective.


299


THEOPHRASTUS


πλεῖστον δὲ καὶ κάλλιστον φύεται περὶ τὴν
Κλειτορίαν.
ς XN 7 / \ \ a At
Η δὲ πανάκεια γίνεται κατὰ TO πετραῖον περὶ
Ψωφίδα καὶ πλείστη καὶ ἀρίστη. τὸ δὲ μῶλυ
Ν \ \ > i) / \ ’ Ὁ
περὶ Φενεὸν καὶ ἐν τῇ Κυλλήνῃ. φασὶ δ᾽ εἶναι
¢ ? “ 7 v
καὶ ὅμοιον ᾧ ὁ Ὅμηρος εἴρηκε, τὴν μὲν pilav
f / n é
ἔχον στρογγύλην προσεμφερῆ κρομύῳ τὸ δὲ φύλ-
ῳ / an fal
Nov ὅμοιον aKidry χρῆσθαι δὲ αὐτῷ πρός τε τὰ
> / \ \ / ‘2
ἀλεξιφάρμακα καὶ τὰς μαγείας" οὐ μὴν ὀρύττειν
ἐν «ς ¢
γ᾽ εἶναι χαλεπόν, ws” Opnpos φησι.
Ἂ 3, an “-“
Τὸ δὲ κώνειον ἄριστον περὶ Σοῦσα καὶ ἐν τοῖς
a
ψυχροτάτοις τόποις. γίνεται δὲ καὶ ἐν τῇ Λακω-
a \ \ ΄ \ \ ef /
νικῇ τὰ πολλὰ τούτων" KAL γὰρ AUT πολυφὰάρ-
5 2 / \ Ψ / \
μακος. ἐν ᾿Αχαίᾳ δὲ ἥ τε τραγάκανθα πολλὴ
/ a an
καὶ οὐδὲν χείρων ὡς οἴονται τῆς Κρητικῆς ἀλλὰ
Ἃ an Ὁ , { \ ὃ A \ \ II
καὶ TH ὄψει καλλίων: Kal OaVKOV TEpL τὴν τιᾶ-
τραϊκὴν διαφέρον: τοῦτο δὲ θερμαντικὸν φύσει,
εν \ ” / / \ \ \
ῥίζαν δὲ ἔχει μέλαιναν. φύεται δὲ τὰ πολλᾶ
τούτων καὶ ἐν τῷ Παρνασῷ καὶ περὶ τὸ Τελέ-
a \ \
θριον. καὶ ταῦτα μὲν κοινὰ πλειόνων χώρων.
XVI. Τὸ δὲ δίκταμνον ἴδιον τῆς Κρήτης, θαυ-
lal Ἂς /
μαστὸν δὲ τῇ δυνάμει Kal πρὸς πλείω χρήσιμον
Ud n a
άλιστα δὲ πρὸς τοὺς τόκους τῶν γυναικῶν. ἔστι
δὲ Ν Ν / / lal a » δέ
ὲ τὸ μὲν φύλλον παρόμοιον Τῇ βληχοῖ, EXEL O€
\
τι καὶ κατὰ τὸν χυλὸν ἐμφερὲς τὰ δὲ κλωνία
a al / “-
λεπτότερα. χρῶνται δὲ τοῖς φύλλοις, οὐ τοῖς
lal na / \ Ἂς Χ
κλωσὶν οὐδὲ τῷ καρπῷ: χρήσιμον δὲ πρὸς πολλᾶ
/ “ \
μὲν καὶ ἄλλα, μάλιστα δέ, ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη, πρὸς
1 Plin. 25. 80--ὃ8, 2 κατὰ conj. St.; καὶ Ald. H.
3 Plin, 25. 151.
4 Σοῦσα: cf. 9. 16.8; Λοῦσα (a town in Arcadia) conj. Sch.
(usually Λοῆσοι), the other places mentioned being all in


294


ee ee eee


"ὐπὸ. τ .,


a.


-


PNQUIRY ΝΘ PLANTS,: IX. xv. 6--χνι. 1


considerable abundance, but in greatest abundance
and best about Kleitoria.

1 All-heal grows in great abundance and best in?
the rocky ground about Psophis, moly about Pheneos
and on Mount Kyllene. They say that this plant is
like the moly mentioned by Homer, that it has a
round root like an onion and a leaf like squill, and
that it is used against spells and magic arts, but that
it is not, as Homer says, difficult to dig up.

8 Hemlock is best about Susa* and in the coldest
spots. Most of these plants occur also in Laconia, for
‘this too is a land rich in medicinal herbs. In Achaia
tragacanth® is abundant and is as good as that of
Crete, it is believed, and even fairer in appearance.
Daukon® again is excellent in the country about
Patrai’; this is by nature healing, and it has a black
root. Most of these grow also on Mount Parnassus
and about Telethrion. | So these plants are com-
mon to several lands.


Of the medicinal herbs peculiar to Crete.


XVI. ®But dittany is peculiar to Crete. This plant
is marvellous in virtue and is useful for many purposes,
‘but especially for women in child-birth. Its leaf is
like pennyroyal, to which it also bears some resem-
blance in taste; but the twigs are slenderer. They
use the leaves, not the twigs nor the fruit: and the
leaf is useful for many other purposes, but above all,


Hellas. But Plin. 25. 154 has Susa: it can hardly be the
Persian town.

δὲ Plin:- 13. 115.

6 Repeated 9. 20. 2; cf. 9. 15. 5 and Index.

1 Πατραϊκὴν conj. Sch., cf. 9.20.2; πατρικὴν Ald.; omapria-
κὴν U*; σπαρτικὴν MP; Patrensi agro G.

8 Plin, 25: 92.


295


THEOPHRASTUS


Tas δυστοκίας τῶν γυναικῶν" ἢ γὰρ εὐτοκεῖν φασι
ποιεῖν ἢ παύειν γε τοὺς πόνους ὁμολογουμένως:
δίδοται δὲ πίνειν ἐν ὕδατι. σπάνιον δέ ἐστι" καὶ
γὰρ ὀλίγος ὁ τόπος ὁ φέρων, καὶ τοῦτον αἱ aires
EKVEMOVTAL διὰ τὸ φιληδεῖν. ἀληθὲς δέ φασιν
εἶναι καὶ τὸ περὶ τῶν βελῶν, ὃ ὅτι φαγούσαις ὃ ὅταν
τοξευθῶσι ἐκβάλλει. τὸ μὲν οὖν δίκταμνον
τοιοῦτόν τε καὶ τοιαύτας ἔχει τὰς δυνάμεις.

Τὸ δὲ ψευδοδίκταμνον τῷ μὲν φύλλῳ ὅμοιον
τοῖς κλωνίοις δ᾽ ἔλαττον τῇ δυνάμει δὲ πολὺ
λειπόμενον. βοηθεῖ μὲν yap Kal ταὐτά, χεῖρον δὲ
πολλῷ καὶ ἀσθενέστερον. ἔστι δὲ εὐθὺς ἐν τῷ
στόματι φανερὰ τοῦ δικτάμνου ἡ δύναμις" δια-
θερμαίνει γὰρ ἀπὸ μικροῦ σφόδρα. τιθέασι δὲ
τὰς δεσμίδας ἐν νάρθηκι ἢ καλάμῳ πρὸς τὸ μὴ
ἀποπνεῖν' ἀσθενέστερον γὰρ ἀποπνεῦσαν. λέ-
γουσι δέ τινες ὡς ἡ μὲν φύσις μία ἡ τοῦ δικ-
τάμνου καὶ ἡ τοῦ ψευδοδικτάμνου, διὰ δὲ τὸ
ἐν εὐγειοτέροις φύεσθαι τόποις χεῖρον γίνεσθαι,
καθάπερ καὶ ἄλλα πολλὰ πλείω τούτων κατὰ
τὰς δυνάμεις. τὸ γὰρ δίκταμνον φιλεῖ χώραν
τραχεῖαν.

Ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἕτερον δίκταμνον ὥσπερ ὁμώνυμον,
οὔτε τὴν ὄψιν οὔτε τὴν δύναμιν ἔ ἔχον τὴν αὐτήν"
φύλλον γὰρ ἔχει ὅμοιον σισυμβρίῳ τοὺς δὲ κλῶ-
vas μείξους" ἔτι δὲ τὴν χρείαν καὶ τὴν δύναμιν
οὐκ ἐν τοῖς αὐτοῖς. τοῦτο μὲν οὗν, ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη,
θαυμαστὸν ἅμα καὶ ἴδιον τῆς νήσου. φασὶ δέ


1 ἐκβάλλει conj.Sch.; ἐκβάλλειν Ald.
~<Plin. 25. 93.
3 νάρθηκι ἢ conj. Sch.; ναρθηκίδη ἢ U; ναρθηκίδι ἢ Μ᾿; νάρθηκι
καὶ Ald.


296


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. χνι. 1-3


as was said, against difficult labour in women; for it
is said that either it makes labour quite easy or at
least it confessedly makes the pains to cease: it is
given as a draught in water. It is a scarce plant:
for the region which bears it is not extensive, and
the goats graze it down because they are fond of it.
The story of the arrows is also said to be true,—that,
if goats eat it when they have been shot, it rids
them! of the arrow. Such then is dittany and
such its properties.

2¢ False dittany ’ is like it in leaf, but has smaller
twigs, and in virtue is far inferior. For it is of
service in the same ways, but is feebler and not
nearly so powerful. The virtue of dittany is perceived
directly it is taken into the mouth: for a small piece
of it has a very warming effect. The bunches of it are
put in the hollow stem of ferula 3 ora reed, so that it
may not exhale its virtue : for, if it does so, it is less
effective. Some say that dittany and “ false dittany ’
are essentially the same plant, but that the latter is
an inferior form produced by growing in places with
richer soil; just as many other things* become
inferior in their properties for the same cause. For
dittany loves rough ground.

*There is also another plant called “ dittany,’
though it has nothing in common with these except
the name. This has neither the same appearance
nor the same virtue; for its leaf is like bergamot-
mint and its twigs are larger, and further its use and
virtue are differently shewn. The true plant is, as
was said, marvellous, and is also peculiar to the
island of Crete. Indeed some say that the plants


4 πλείω τούτων Ald., probably a duplicate of ἄλλα πολλὰ ;
not represented in G ; ἀλλοιοῦται conj. W, 5 Plin.25. 94.


297


THEOPHRASTUS


/ A 7 a
τινες ὅλως TOV φύλλων καὶ τῶν ὀροδάμνων Kal
ἁπλῶς τῶν ὑπὲρ γῆς τὰ ἐν Κρήτῃ διαφέ i
ρ γῆς Ta ἐν Kpntn διαφέρειν, τῶν
δὲ 7 a / An. 59 A A
ἐ ἄλλων τῶν γε πλείστων Ta ἐν TO Ilapvace.
To δ᾽ > / ’ \ N La / mr 5
ὃ δ᾽ ἀκόνιτον γίνεται μὲν καὶ ἐν Kpntn καὶ ἐν
/ a \ ἐὰ
Ζακύνθῳ, πλεῖστον δὲ καὶ ἄριστον ἐν Ἡρακλείᾳ
an 5 / "7 \ 4 \ “
τῇ ἐν Πόντῳ. ἔχει δὲ φύλλον μὲν κιχοριῶδες,
ΚΕ xX ς / A a
ῥίζαν δὲ ὁμοίαν τῷ σχήματι καὶ TO χρώματι
(δι, τὴν δὲ δύ ὴν θ ρον ἐ ITN"
καρίδι, τὴν δὲ δύναμιν THY θανατηφόρον ἐν ταύτῃ
Ν Ν , \ \ \ by / a
τὸ δὲ φύλλον Kal τὸν καρπὸν οὐθέν φασι ποιεῖν"
\ γι: 8 , > ς / a \
καρπὸς δέ ἐστι πόας οὐχ ὑλήματος. βραχεῖα δὲ
/ \ /
ἡ πόα καὶ οὐδὲν ἔχουσα περιττόν, ἀλλὰ παρομοία
A / \ \ / > ῇ / \
τῷ σίτῳ TO δὲ σπέρμα οὐ σταχυηρόν. φύεται δὲ
lal 3 A, / /
πανταχοῦ Kai οὐκ ἐν ταῖς Axkovats μόνον, ἀφ᾽ ὧν
/ / lal
ἔχει τὴν προσηγορίαν: αὕτη δέ ἐστι κώμη τις TOV
n a \ \
Μαριανδυνῶν" φιλεῖ δὲ μάλιστα τοὺς πετρώδεις
, 3 / \ » / of. Ye:
τόπους" οὐ νέμεται δὲ οὔτε πρόβατον οὔτ᾽ ἄλλο
a . 7 / \
ζῶον οὐδέν. συντίθεσθαι δὲ τρόπον τινὰ πρὸς TO
\ 5 a
ἐργάζεσθαι καὶ ov παντὸς εἶναι" δι’ ὃ καὶ τοὺς
/ / a
ἰατροὺς οὐκ ἐπισταμένους συντιθέναι σηπτικῷ TE
n \ \ ΕΝ 7 / >
χρῆσθαι καὶ πρὸς ἄλλα ἄττα: πινόμενον ὃ
a ᾽ ,» »
οὐδεμίαν αἴσθησιν ποιεῖν οὔτ ἐν οἴνῳ οὔτ ἐν
/ \ “ \ /
μελικράτῳ: συντίθεσθαι δὲ ὥστε κατὰ χρόνους
a ᾿ / / te.
τακτοὺς ἀναιρεῖν, οἷον δίμηνον τρίμηνον ἑξάμηνον
> / \ \ \ / ΝΜ / δὲ >
ἐνιαυτόν, τοὺς δὲ Kal δύο ἔτη: χείριστα δὲ ἀπαλ-


ὀροδάμνων : this word seems to occur only here in T.
Diosc. 4. 76 and 77; Plin. 27. 9 and 10.
καρίδι conj. W.; καρίαι U; καρύα Ald. cf. Diose. l.c.


re) Bs δὲ
Plin. 6.4, vortus Acone veneno aconito durus. Butin 27.10.


he apparently did not recognise ᾿Ακόναις as a proper name,


- ὦ τῷ "


σι


298


*


ENQUIRY INTO. PLANTS, IX. xvi. 3=5


of Crete are superior in leaves boughs! and in
general all the parts above ground to those of other
places; while those of Parnassus are superior to most
of those found elsewhere.


Of wolf’s-bane and its habitat, and of meadow-saffron.


2 Wolf’s-bane grows in Crete and in Zakynthos,
but is most abundant and best at Herakleia in
Pontus. It has a leaf like chicory, a root like in
shape and colour to a prawn,? and in this root resides
its deadly property, whereas they say that the leaf
and the fruit produce no effects. The fruit is that of
ἃ herb,* not. that of a shrub or tree. [Ὁ is a low-
growing herb and shows no special feature, but is
like corn, except that the seed is not in an ear. It
grows everywhere and not only at Akonai,> from
whence it gets its name (this is a village of the
Mariandynoi)®: and it specially likes rocky ground.
Neither sheep nor any other animals eat it.’ In
order to be effective it is said that it must be com-
pounded in a certain manner, and that not everyone
ean do this: and so that physicians, not knowing
how to compound it, use it as a septic and for other
purposes: and® that, if drunk mixed in wine or a
honey-posset, it produces no sensation: but that it
can be so compounded as to prove fatal at a certain
moment which may be in two three or six months,
or in a year, or even in two years: and that the


and translates it am nudis cautibus, misled perhaps by τοὺς
πετρώδεις τόπους below.

ὁ Μαριανδυνῶν conj. Meurs.; περιανδύνων U* Ald. H.

7 U* adds here βοηθεῖαι δὲ τοῖς ἐνεγκαμένοις εἰσί and omits
δὲ 5,6... εἰδέναι, continuing πολλάκις yap φασὶ τὰ ἀνδράποδα.
8 ¢ add. Sch,


299


THEOPHRASTUS


\
λάττειν τοὺς ἐν πλείστῳ χρόνῳ καταφθίνοντος
lal / ca \ \ fal
τοῦ σώματος, ῥᾷστα δὲ τοὺς παραχρῆμα. λυτι-
\ \ , > ¢ lal / > /
κὸν δὲ φάρμακον οὐχ εὑρῆσθαι, καθάπερ ἀκούομεν
e / 4 > \ \ > ’ > /
ἑτέρων τι φύεσθαι. ἀλλὰ TOUS ἐγχωρίους avaca-
\ /
ἕειν τινὰς μέλιτε Kal οἴνῳ Kal τοιούτοις τισί,
/ nr
σπανίως δὲ Kal τούτους καὶ ἐργωδῶς.
> ps n A
Αλλὰ τοῦ ἐφημέρου τὸ φάρμακον εὑρῆσθαι"
ev / Cr. ἊΨ A > / > /
ἕτερον yap TL ῥίζιον εἶναι ὃ ἐφήμερον ἀπαλλάττει"
la) \ / “ 4 lal > 2 x fal
τοῦτο δὲ φύλλον ὅμοιον ἔχειν TO ἐλλεβόρῳ ἢ TO
7 \ a s 07 ἀν... \ \
λειρίῳ' καὶ τοῦτο πάντας εἰδέναι: δι’ ὃ Kal τὰ
ἀνδράποδά φασι πολλάκις παροργισθέντα χρῆ-
“ Ν a na
σθαι, κἄπειτα ἰατρεύειν αὐτὰ πρὸς τοῦτο ὁρμῶντα,
\ \ ἠδὲ al a θ \ 2 \
καὶ yap οὐδὲ ταχεῖαν TroleLaCaL THY aTTaAdXAaAYNHY
\ a /
οὐδὲ ἐλαφρὰν ἀλλὰ δυσχερῆ Kal χρόνιον" εἰ μὴ
x
ἄρα διὰ TO εὐθεράπευτον εἶναι καὶ ἀκατασκεύασ-
τον ὡς δεῖ. φασὶ γοῦν καὶ παραχρῆμα ἀπαλ-
/ \ Ψ / \ \ \ >
λάττεσθαι Kal ὕστερον χρόνῳ τοὺς δὲ Kal εἰς
> ‘\ ” \ \ 4 > / κὶ
ἐνιαυτὸν ἄγειν, καὶ τὰς δόσεις ἀβοηθήτους εἶναι.


1 7.e. no herb having that effect.

2 ἑτέρων conj. Sch.; ἕτερόν τι φύεσθαι UAId.H.; ἕτερόν τι
φυόμενον conj. W. G seems to have had a fuller text.

3 ἀλλὰ τοὺς ἐγχ. UM; ἀλλά tives τοῖς ἐνεγκαμένοις βοήθειαι
εὕρηνται" τοὺς γὰρ eyx. Ald.H., which the indicative εὕρηνται
shews to be a gloss.

4 rod ἐφημέρου U; τὰ ἐφ᾽ ἡμέρον M; καὶ τὸ ἐφήμερον Ald.
The passage about ἐφήμερον, which interrupts the account of
ἀκόνιτον, is confused, and the text probably defective ; trans-
lation a makeshift. The sense of εἰ μὴ... ὡς δεῖ being
perhaps irrecoverable, the connexion of what follows is
obscured. W. gives up the passage.


300


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. χνι. 5-6


longer the time the more painful the death, since
the body then wastes away, while, if it acts at once,
death is quite painless. And it is said that no anti-
dote ! which can counteract it has been discovered,
like the natural antidotes to other? poisonous herbs
of which we are told: though the country-folk ? can
sometimes save a man with honey and wine and
such like things, only however occasionally and with
difficulty.

(On the other hand they say that for meadow-
saffron * the antidote has been found : for that there is
another root which counteracts that herb:° and that
it® has a leaf like hellebore’ or the madonna lily : 8
and that this® is generally known. Wherefore they
say that slaves often take meadow-saffron when
greatly provoked, and then themselves have recourse 19
to the antidote and effect a cure,—seeing that the
poison does not cause a speedy and easy death, but 11}
one that is lingering and slow,—unless indeed,
merely because the cure is so easy,!? the antidote
has not been properly prepared.’? At least they
say that though death may ensue at once, sometimes
it only occurs after a considerable interval, which in
some cases extends to a year, and that in these latter
cases the dose given has incurable effects: and that

5 ὃ ἐφήμερον PH.; ὁ ἐφημεραῖον U; ὁ ἐφ᾽ ἡμεραῖον M; ὁ οὐκ
ἐφήμερον Ald.

ὁ τοῦτο δὲ Ald.; τόνδε δὲ καὶ U; τῶνδε δὲ καὶ Μ.

? 7.e. the ‘black’: see Index.

8 λειρίῳ conj. Guilandinus from Diosc. 4. 84 (xpiv@); αἰρίῳ
Ald.H. 9 τοῦτο Ald.; τοῦτο μὲν UM.

10 After ὁρμῶντα UM add καὶ τοὺς οἰκέτας ἐπὶ τοῦτο ὁρμᾶν and
omit καὶ yap... θανατηφόρων. MN ἀλλὰ Ald.; οὐδὲ U*.
12 εὐθεράπευτον Ald.; ἀθεράπευτον U*P.


13 In which case apparently the slave outwits himself as
well as his master by ‘ dying on him.’


301


THEOPHRASTUS


“ \ lal \ “
ταῦτα δὲ ἐξακριβωθῆναι μάλιστα παρὰ τοῖς Τυρ-
a - € / a ὯΝ
ρηνοῖς τοῖς ἐν Ἡρακλείᾳ. τοῦτο μὲν «οὖν; οὐδὲν
» > / / ᾽ / BA \
ἄτοπον, εἰ τρόπον μέν τινα ἀβοήθητον ἄλλως δὲ
“ \ n
βοηθήσιμον, ὥσπερ Kal ἕτερα τῶν θανατηφόρων.
/ 7 -
Τὸ δὲ ἀκόνιτον ἄχρηστον, ὥσπερ εἴρηται, τοῖς
\ 3 é Oe an θ δὲ > a > \
μὴ ἐπισταμένοις" οὐδὲ κεκτῆσθαι δὲ ἐξεῖναι, ἀλλὰ
/ \ / \ \ lal / \
θάνατον τὴν ζημίαν' τὴν δὲ τῶν χρόνων διαφορὰν
b a \ \ / > / \
ἀκολουθεῖν κατὰ Tas συλλογάς: ἰσοχρόνους yap
τοὺς θανάτους γίνεσθαι τοῖς ἀπὸ τῆς συλλογῆς
/
χρόνοις.
J ἢ \ na
Θρασύας δ᾽ ὁ Μαντινεὺς εὑρήκει τι τοιοῦτον,
vA ΝΜ Ψ ς 4 “ Ὁ oF \
ὥσπερ ἔλεγεν, ὥστε ῥᾳδίαν ποιεῖν Kal ἄπονον τὴν
ἀπόλυσιν τοῖς ὀποῖς χρώμενος κωνείου τε καὶ
, \ , “ἡ
μήκωνος καὶ ἑτέρων τοιούτων, ὥστε εὔογκον εἶναι
/ \ \ vA > an ς 4
σφόδρα καὶ μικρὸν ὅσον εἰς δραχμῆς ὁλκήν.
> / \ / \ / rf
ἀβοήθητον δὲ πάντη καὶ δυνάμενον διαμένειν
¢ n , Ν > x ᾽ / > /
ὁποσονοῦν χρόνον καὶ οὐδὲν ἀλλοιούμενον. ἐλάμ-
\ \ ’ > [χὰ 2 » > ee
Bave δὲ τὸ κώνειον οὐχ ὅθεν ἐτύγχανεν ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ
/ \ y LA s \ \
Σούσων Kai εἴ τις ἄλλος τόπος ψυχρὸς Kal Ta-
λίσκιος" ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ τἄλλα. συνετίθει δὲ
n \
καὶ ἕτερα φάρμακα πολλὰ καὶ ἐκ πολλῶν. δεινὸς
/ ς \ a
δὲ καὶ ᾿Αλεξίας ὁ μαθητὴς αὐτοῦ καὶ ody ἧττον
Ψ “ » > a
ἔντεχνος ἐκείνου": Kal yap THs ἄλλης ἰατρικῆς
ἔμπειρος.


1 οὖν add. W.
2 ἀκολουθεῖν κατὰ conj. W.; ἀκούειν εἶναι κατὰ Ald. Ἡ.; ἀκονεῖν
εἶναι καὶ M.


302


ἵ
c
‘
‘
@
ΐ
:


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. xvi. 6-8


these facts have been most carefully ascertained
among the Tyrrhenians of Herakleia. Now! it is not
surprising that in some circumstances the effects of
the poison should be incurable, and yet in others that
a cure should be possible, this being also the case
with other deadly poisons.)

To return—wolf’s bane, as has been said, is useless
to those who do not understand it; in fact it is
said that it is not lawful even to have it in one’s
possession, under pain of death; also that the
length of time which it takes to produce its effects
depends on? the time when it is gathered; for that
the time which it takes to kill is equal to that which
has elapsed since it was gathered.


Of two famous druggists and of the virtues of hemlock.


Thrasyas of Mantineia had discovered, as he said,
a poison which produces an easy and painless end ;
he used the juices of hemlock poppy and other such
herbs, so compounded as to make a dose of con-
veniently small size, weighing only somewhat less
than a quarter of an ounce. For the effects of this
compound there is absolutely no cure, and it will
keep any length of time without losing its virtue
at all. He used to gather his hemlock, not just
anywhere, but at Susa® or some other cold and
shady spot; and so too with the other ingredients ;
he also used to compound many other poisons, using
many ingredients. His pupil Alexias was also clever
and no less skilful than his master, being also versed
in the science of medicine generally.


3 Σούσων MSS.; Λούσων conj. Sch. cf.9.15.8n. The men-
tion of Mantineia makes it likely that a place in Arcadia is
intended.


308


9


THEOPHRASTUS


Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν εὑρῆσθαι δοκεῖ πολλῷ μᾶλλον
A δ ef \ / \ A /
νῦν ἢ πρότερον. ὅτι δὲ διαφέρει τὸ χρῆσθαί
€ / \ 3 a bd \ \ a
πως ἐκάστῳ φανερὸν ἐκ πολλῶν" ἐπεὶ καὶ Ketos
al 7 / > e/ ὑλλὰ 4
τῷ κωνείῳ πρότερον οὐχ οὕτω ἀλλὰ τρίβοντες
> a) / e 7 al ? DNS] xX -
ἐχρῶντο, καθώπερ οἱ ἄλλοι: νῦν δ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἂν εἷς
/ \ Ν
τρίψειεν, ἀλλὰ περιπτίσαντες καὶ ἀφελόντες τὸ
7 A f
κέλυφος, τοῦτο yap TO THY δυσχέρειαν παρέχον
/ a / = n
δυσκατέργαστον ὄν, μετὰ ταῦτα κόπτουσιν ἐν TO
[χὰ \ / \ 3 / D927
ὅλμῳ Kal διαττήσαντες λεπτὰ ἐπιπάττοντες ἐφ
“ ΄ “ tal \ (ὦ x 7
ὕδωρ πίνουσιν, ὥστε ταχεῖαν καὶ ἐλαφρὰν γίνε-
\ > /
σθαι τὴν ἀπαλλαγήν.
/
XVII. ᾿Απάντων δὲ τῶν φαρμάκων ai δυνάμεις
, a a
ἀσθενέστεραι τοῖς συνειθισμένοις τοῖς δὲ καὶ ἀν-
tal Ne » \ > / > /
ενεργεῖς TO ὅλον. ἔνιοι yap ἐλλέβορον ἐσθίοντες
Ἂ Ὁ > / / vA 3 \ /
πολὺν ὥστε ἀναλίσκειν δέσμας ὅλας οὐδὲν πάσ-
/ /
χουσιν' ὅπερ ἐποίει Kat Opacvas δεινότατος wv
«ς 20. 7 \ \ Als na \ af ς
ὡς ἐδόκει περὶ τὰς ῥίζας. ποιοῦσι δὲ τοῦθ᾽ ὡς
a / a \ κ᾿ \
ἔοικε Kal τῶν νομέων τινές" δι’ ὃ Kal πρὸς TOV
/ /
φαρμακοπώλην τὸν θαυμαζόμενον ὡς κατήσθιε
/ Pe / ς \ \
ῥίζαν μίαν ἢ δύο παραγενόμενος ὁ ποιμὴν καὶ
» ΄, cf \ S 2 7, 100
ἀναλώσας ὅλην τὴν δέσμην ἐποίησεν ἀδόκιμον'
¢ / a a
ἐλέγετο δ᾽ ὅτι καθ᾽ ἑκάστην ἡμέραν τοῦτο ποιεῖ
καὶ αὐτὸς καὶ ἕτεροι.
fal / a 3
Κινδυνεύει yap ἔνια τῶν φαρμάκων TH ἀσυνη-
θείᾳ φάρμακα γίνεσθαι, τάχα δὲ ἀληθέστερον
2 φάρμ ¥ » TAY p


1 δυσκατέργαστον: cf. C.P. 1 14. 4.
2 διαττήσαντες conj. Hoffmann from G ; διαπτήσαντες Ald. H. ;
διηθήσαντες UFmP.


304


ae ἃ


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. xvi. g—xvit. 2


Now these things seem to have been ascertained
far better in recent than in former times. And
many things go to shew that the method of using
the various drugs makes a difference; thus the
people of Ceos formerly did not use hemlock in
the way described, but just shredded it up for
use, as did other people; but now not one of them
would think of shredding it, but they first strip off
the outside and take off the husk, since this is what
causes the difficulty, as it is not easily assimilated 1 ;
then they bruise it in the mortar, and, after putting
it through a fine sieve,’ sprinkle it on water and
so drink it; and then death is made swift and
easy.


How use diminishes the efficacy of drugs, and how they have
not the same effect on all constitutions.


XVII. *The virtues of all drugs become weaker
to those who are accustomed to them, and in some
cases become entirely ineffective. Thus some eat
enough hellebore to consume whole bundles and
yet suffer no hurt; this is what Thrasyas did, who,
as it appeared, was very cunning in the use of herbs.
And it appears that shepherds sometimes do the
like; wherefore the shepherd who came before the
vendor of drugs (at whom men marvelled because
he ate one or two roots) and himself consumed the
whole bundle, destroyed the vendor’s reputation :
it was said that both this man and others did this
every day.

For it seems that some poisons become poisonous
because they are unfamiliar, or perhaps it is a more ac-
curate way of putting it to say that familiarity makes


o"Plm. 27, 144.
395


VOL. II. x


THEOPHRASTUS


εἰπεῖν ὡς τῇ συνηθείᾳ ov φάρμακα: προσδεξα-
/ \ a / . 5 \ τὴν / p > Vs
μένης yap τῆς φύσεως Kal κατακρατούσης οὐκέτι
φάρμακα, καθάπερ καὶ Θρασύας ἔλεγεν: ἐκεῖνος
\ » ἣν > \ Ὁ \ / 3 ἴω ᾽
yap ἔφη τὸ αὐτὸ τοῖς μὲν φάρμακον εἷναι τοῖς ὃ
A A ,
οὐ φάρμακον, διαιρῶν τὰς φύσεις ἑκάστων" WETO
Ν a iy \ a lal
yap δεῖν καὶ ἣν δεινὸς διαγνῶναι. ποιεῖ δέ τι
a “ Ν an 8. Ξ \ Ἂς SH ”
δῆλον ὅτι πρὸς TH φύσει Kal τὸ ἔθος. Εὔδημος
γοῦν ὁ φαρμακοπώλης εὐδοκιμῶν σφόδρα κατὰ
\ / / /
τὴν τέχνην συνθέμενος μηδὲν πείσεσθαι πρὸ
ἡλίου δύναντος κατέφαγε μέτριον πάνυ καὶ οὐ
i 5.0 > / ς Ν n »
κατέσχεν οὐδ᾽ ἐκράτησεν. ὁ δὲ Χῖος Εὔδημος
/ 5 / 3 > ’ if "
πίνων ἐλλέβορον οὐκ ἐκαθαίρετο. καί ποτε ἔφη
an na 4 N n
πιεῖν ἐν μιᾷ ἡμέρᾳ δύο Kal εἴκοσι πόσεις ἐν TH
ἀγορᾷ καθήμενος ἐπὶ τῶν σκευῶν καὶ οὐκ ἐξανα-
A \ a / / / > > \
στῆναι πρὸ Tov δείλην γενέσθαι" τότε δ᾽ ἐλθὼν
\ / \ la) « 5 Α | >
καὶ λούσασθαι Kal δειπνεῖν ὥσπερ εἰώθει Kal οὐκ
2 JA \ es Κ 7 ,
ἐξεμέσαι' πλὴν οὗτός ye βοήθειάν τινα Tapa-
/ \
TKEVATAMEVOS KATETYXE κίσσηριν γὰρ ἐπιπάττων
Ἄς εν \ a 7 \ \ ς / ΄
ἐπ᾽ ὄξος δριμὺ πιεῖν ἔφη μετὰ τὴν ἑβδόμην πόσιν,
Ἂ, /
καὶ πάλιν ὕστερον ἐν οἴνῳ TOV αὐτὸν τρόπον" τὴν
a / ts
δὲ τῆς κισσήριδος οὕτως ἰσχυρὰν εἶναι δύναμιν
» 5 / /
ὥστ᾽ ἐάν τις εἰς πίθον ζέοντα «οἴνου!» ἐμβάλῃ
ν᾿ \ 7 a \
παύειν τὴν ζέσιν οὐ παραχρῆμα μόνον ἀλλὰ Kal
ty / a
ὅλως καταξηραίνουσάν τε δῆλον ὅτι Kal ἀναδεχο-
pa \ a “ oA -
μένην τὸ πνεῦμα καὶ τοῦτο διϊεῖσαν. οὗτος μὲν
9S / “ al /
οὖν τό γε πλῆθος ταύτῃ TH βοηθείᾳ κατέσχεν.
“O δὲ \ Σὲ > \ \ > an
TL δὲ καὶ TO ἔθος ἰσχυρὸν φανερὸν ἐκ πολλῶν"


1 This story is quoted by Apollonius, Hist. Mirab. 50.
306


= τὐσφν.


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. xvi. 2-4


poisons non-poisonous; for, when the constitution


has accepted them and prevails over them, they cease
to be poisons, as Thrasyas also remarked; for he
said that the same thing was a poison to one and not
to another ; thus he distinguished between different
constitutions, as he thought was right; and he was
clever at observing the differences. Also, besides
the constitution, it is plain that use has something
to do with it. At least Eudemus, the vendor of drugs,
who had a high reputation in his business, . after
making a wager that he would experience no effect
before sunset, drank a quite moderate dose, and it
proved too strong for his power of resistance : ! while
the Chian Eudemus took a draught of hellebore and
was not purged. And on one occasion he said that
in a single day he took two and twenty draughts in
the market-place as he sat at his stall, and did not
leave the place till it was evening, and then he went
home and had a bath and dined, and was not sick.


‘However this man was able to hold out because he


had provided himself with an antidote; for he said
that after the seventh dose he took a draught of tart
vinegar with pumice-stone dust in it, and later on
took a draught of the same in wine in like manner ;
and that the virtue of the pumice-stone dust is
so great that, if one puts it into a boiling pot of
wine,” it causes it to cease to boil, not merely for
the moment, but altogether, clearly because it has a
drying effect and it catches the vapour and passes it
off. It was then by this antidote that Kudemus was
able to contain himself in spite of the large quantity
of hellebore which he took.

However many things go to show that use makes


“οἴνου add. Sch., cf. Plin. 36. 42; 14. 138.


307
5 ον


THEOPHRASTUS


3 \ \ A τῷ / \ \ b) a / 5»
ἐπεὶ καὶ τὸ ἀψίνθιον τὰ μὲν ἐνταῦθα πρόβατα οὔ
/ \ a
φασί tives νέμεσθαι, τὰ δ᾽ ἐν τῷ Πόντῳ νέμεται
,ὔ ’
καὶ γίνεται πιότερα Kal καλλίω καί, ὡς δή τινες
λέγουσιν, οὐκ ἔχοντα χολήν. ἀλλὰ γὰρ ταῦτα
μὲν ἑτέρας ἄν τινος εἴη θεωρίας.
XVIII. Αἱ δὲ pifar καὶ τὰ ὑλήματα, καθάπερ
»“ \ 4 / > \ \ μὴ
εἴρηται, πολλὰς ἔχουσι δυνάμεις οὐ πρὸς τὰ ἔμ-
΄ , 3 \ \ ep es
ψυχα σώματα μόνον ἀλλὰ Kal πρὸς τὰ ἄψυχα.
λέγουσι γὰρ ἄκανθάν τινα εἶναι ἣ πήγνυσι τὸ
Ὁ > / / \ \ \ “
ὕδωρ ἐμβαλλομένη: πηγνύναι δὲ καὶ τὴν τῆς
ἀλθαίας pilav, ἐάν τις τρίψας ἐμβάλῃ καὶ OF
\
ὑπαίθριον: ἔχει δὲ ἡ ἀλθαία φύλλον μὲν ὅμοιον
an re \ a \ 4 \ \
τῇ μαλάχῃ πλὴν μεῖζον καὶ δασύτερον, τοὺς δὲ
\ vA 7 \ 7 Ν ᾽
καυλοὺς μαλακούς, ἄνθος δὲ μήλινον, καρπὸν ὃ
A “Ὁ / C7 \ > /, \ an
ὅμοιον TH μαλάχῃ, ῥίζαν δὲ ἰνώδη λευκὴν TH
ς a ς Ἐν
γεύσει δὲ ὥσπερ τῆς μαλάχης ὁ καυλός" χρῶνται
n \ \ lal
δὲ αὐτῇ πρός TE τὰ ῥήγματα Kal τὰς βῆχας ἐν
yy “ a: en Xr es > > /
οἴνῳ γλυκεῖ καὶ ἐπὶ TA ἕλκη EV ἐλαίῳ.
τῇ ΓΤ, 4 7 / tal /
Etépav δέ τινα συνεψομένην τοῖς κρέασι συν-


\


> ἊΣ @ ΄ \
ἄπτειν εἰς ταὐτὸ καὶ οἷον πηγνύναι' τὰς δὲ καὶ


Y ν


ἕλκειν, ὥσπερ ἡ λίθος καὶ τὸ ἤλεκτρον. καὶ
ταῦτα μὲν ἐν τοῖς ἀψύχοις.

Τὸ δὲ θηλύφονον, οἱ δὲ σκορπίον καλοῦσι διὰ
τὸ τὴν ῥίζαν ὁμοίαν ἔχειν τῷ σκορπίῳ, ἐπιξυό-


Piers Elin: 27.40.

2 ὑλήματα: here a general term for shrubs and under-shrubs.
cf. 9. 20. 6.

3 Diose. 3. 146; Plin. 20. 84.


308


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. xvi. 4—xvit. 2


much difference; 1 thus some say that the sheep of
some places do not eat wormwood; yet those of
Pontus not only eat it but become fatter and fairer
and, as some say, have no bile. But these things
may be said to belong to a different enquiry.


Of plants that possess properties affecting lifeless objects.
XVIII. Herbs and shrubs,” as has been said, have


many virtues which are shown in their effects not
only on living bodies but on lifeless ones. Thus
they say that there is a kind of akantha (gum arabic)
which thickens water, when it is put in it; ?and that
so also does the root of marsh-mallow if one shreds
it and puts it in and stands the water in the open
air. Marsh-mallow has a leaf like mallow, but larger
and rougher ; the stems are soft, the flower yellow,
the fruit like that of mallow, the root fibrous and
white, with a taste like that of the stem of mallow.
They use it for fractures and for coughs in sweet wine,
and for sores in olive-oil.

4'They say that there is another kind which, if
cooked with meat, combines with it and as it were
sets it hard ; and there are others that attract things
to them, like the magnet or amber. So much for
effects produced on lifeless things.


Of plants whose properties affect animals other than man.


5 Wolf's bane, which some call ‘ scorpion-plant be-
cause it has a root like a scorpion, kills that animal


4 Referred to by Apollon. Hist. Mirab.41. ef. Diosc. 3. 147 ;
Plin. 27. 42 ; 25. 67.

5 Referred to by Ael. H.A. 9.27; Apollon. Hist. Mirab. 41.
ef. Plin. 25. 122 (cf. 27. 6); Diosc. 4. 76. This is evidently a
different plant to the σκορπίος mentioned 9. 13. 6. See Index.


a


THEOPHRASTUS


μενον ἀποκτείνει TOV σκορπίον: ἐὰν δέ τις ἐλ-
λέβορον λευκὸν καταπάσῃ, πάλιν ἀνίστασθαί
φασιν: ἀπόλλυσι δὲ καὶ βοῦς καὶ πρόβατα καὶ
ὑποζύγια καὶ ἁπλῶς πᾶν τετράπουν ἐὰν εἰς τὰ
αἰδοῖα τεθῇ ἡ ῥίζα ἢ τὰ φύλλα adOnpepor-
χρήσιμον δὲ πρὸς σκορπίου πληγὴν πινόμενον.
ἔχει δὲ τὸ μὲν φύλλον ὅμοιον κυκλαμίνῳ τὴν δὲ
ῥίζαν, ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη, σκορπίῳ. φύεται δὲ ὥσπερ
ἡ ἄγρωστις καὶ γόνατα ἔχει' φιλεῖ. δὲ χωρία
σκιώδη. εἰ δὲ ἀληθῆ τὰ περὶ τὸν σκορπίον ἤδη
καὶ τἄλλα, οὐκ ἀπίθανα τὰ τοιαῦτα. καὶ τὰ
μυθώδη δὲ οὐκ ἀλόγως συγκεῖται. ἐν δὲ τοῖς
ἡμετέροις σώμασι χωρὶς τῶν πρὸς ὑγείαν καὶ
νόσον καὶ θάνατον καὶ πρὸς ἄλλα δυνάμεις ἐ ἔχειν
φασὶν οὐ μόνον τῶν σωματικῶν ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν
τῆς Wuyns. ..

XIX. Πρὸς ty τὴν ψυχὴν τὸν μὲν στρύχνον
ὥστε παρακινεῖν καὶ ἐξιστάναι, καθάπερ ἐλέχθη
πρότερον, ἡ δὲ τοῦ ὀνοθήρα pita δοθεῖσα ἐν οἴνῳ
πρᾳότερον καὶ ἱλαρώτερον ποιεῖ τὸ ἦθος. ἔχει
δὲ ὁ μὲν ὀνοθήρας τὸ μὲν φύλλον ὅ ὅμοιον ἀμυγδαλῇ
μικρότερον δέ, τὸ δὲ ἄνθος ἐρυθρὸν ὥσπερ ῥόδον'
αὐτὸς δὲ μέγας θάμνος" pita δὲ ἐρυθρὰ καὶ
μεγάλη, ὄξει δὲ αὐανθείσης ὥσπερ οἴνου: φιλεῖ
δὲ ὀρεινὰ χωρία. φαίνεται δὲ οὐ τοῦτο ἄτοπον"
οἷον γὰρ προσφορά τις γίνεται δύναμιν ἔχοντος
οἰνώδη.


1 σκορπίῳ con}. W.; σκορπίου Ald.

2 18. 3, λέγω δὲ σωματικῶν... 18. 11 (the account of the
physical effects) is here omitted.

= 9,,.11.;6.


310


a ew «᾿


SS ee 4.


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. xvin. 2--ΧΙΧ. 1


if it is shredded over him ; while if one then sprinkles
him with white hellebore, they say that he comes to
life again. It is also fatal to oxen sheep beasts of
burden and in general to any fourfooted animal, and
kills them the same day if the root or leaf is put on
the genitals ; and it is also useful as a draught against
a scorpion's sting. It has a leaf like cyclamen, and
a root, as was said, like a scorpion.! It grows like
dog’s-tooth grass, and is jointed, and it loves shady
places. Now if what has been told already about
the scorpion be true, then other similar tales are not
incredible. (Indeed fabulous tales are not composed
without some reason).?, And in relation to our own
persons, apart from their effects in regard to health
disease and death, it is said that herbs have also
other properties affecting not only the bodily but
also the mental powers. ... .


Of plants possessing properties which affect the mental powers.


XIX. As to those which affect the mind, strykhnos,
as was said before,? is said to upset the mental
powers and make one mad; ‘*while the root of
onotheras (oleander) administered in wine makes the
temper gentler and more cheerful. This plant has
a leaf like the almond, but smaller,’ and the flower
is red like arose. The plant itself (which loves hilly
country) forms a large bush; the root is red and
large, and, if this is dried, it gives off a fragrance
like wine. And this does not seem surprising, since
there is a sort of ‘ bouquet’ given off by a thing which
has the peculiar quality of wine.


4 Diose. 4. 117; Plin. 26. 111.
5 μικρότερον conj. W.; πικρότερον UM ; πλατύτερον Ald. (so
also Diosc. /.c.). G seems to have read μακρότερον.


211


2


THEOPHRASTUS


᾿Αλλὰ τάδε εὐηθέστερα καὶ ἀπιθανώτερα Ta

τε τῶν περιάπτων καὶ ὅλως τῶν ἀλεξιφαρμάκων
/ a r /
λεγομένων τοῖς τε σώμασι καὶ Tals οἰκίαις. καὶ
ὡς δή φασι τὸ τριπόλιον καθ᾽ Ἡσίοδον καὶ
a A n “ /
Μουσαῖον εἰς πᾶν πρᾶγμα σπουδαῖον χρήσιμον
3 ἌΝ 2 Ν \
εἶναι, Ob ὃ Kal ὀρύττουσιν αὐτὸ νύκτωρ σκηνὴν
\ a /
πηξάμενοι. καὶ τὰ περὶ τῆς εὐκλείας δὲ Kal
» ν), ς / x \ “- yA ΤᾺ
εὐδοξίας ὁμοίως ἢ καὶ μᾶλλον: εὔκλειαν γάρ φασι
- \ / / te 5΄. ¢ /
ποιεῖν TO ἀντίρρινον καλούμενον" τοῦτο δ᾽ ὅμοιόν
3 Ὁ » / «7 \ > “ ς Ν
ἐστι τῇ ἀπαρίνῃ: ῥίζα δὲ οὐχ ὕπεστιν: ὁ δὲ
\ / / aA \
καρπὸς ὥσπερ μόσχου ῥῖνας ἔχει. τὸν δ᾽ ἀπὸ
/ an a \
τούτου ἀλειφόμενον εὐδοξεῖν. εὐδοξεῖν δὲ Kai
A 4 na Yd “

ἐάν τις τοῦ ἐλειοχρύσου τῷ ἄνθει στεφανῶται
΄ ,ὔ : Arf ot
μύρῳ ῥαίνων ἐκ χρυσίου ἀπύρου. ἔχει δὲ ὁ
» \ \ ”# / 4
ἐλειόχρυσος τὸ μὲν ἄνθος χρυσοειδές, φύλλον
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \
δὲ λευκὸν καὶ τὸν καυλὸν δὲ λεπτὸν Kal σκληρὸν


- 7 al Qn”
ῥίζαν δὲ ἐπιπόλαιον καὶ λεπτήν. χρῶνται δὲ αὐτῷ


πρὸς τὰ δακετὰ ἐν οἴνῳ καὶ πρὸς τὰ πυρίκαυστα
κατακαύσαντες καὶ μίξαντες μέλιτι. τὰ μὲν
οὖν τοιαῦτα, καθάπερ καὶ πρότερον ἐλέχθη,
συναύξειν βουλομένων ἐστὶ τὰς ἑαυτῶν τέχνας.
Αἱ δὲ τῶν ῥιζῶν καὶ τῶν καρπῶν καὶ τῶν ὀπῶν
φύσεις ἐπεὶ πολλὰς ἔχουσι καὶ παντοίας δυνά-
pels, ὅσαι ταὐτὸ δύνανται καὶ τῶν αὐτῶν αἰτίαι,


1 ἀπιθανώτερα conj. Scal. after G: so also Cod.Cas. Vin. Vo.;
πιθανώτερα U*; πιθανότερα Ald.

2 πριπόλιον UMU*Ald.; G from Plin. 21. 44 has poliwm. It
may be observed that τριπόλιον can hardly have occurred in a
hexameter, Hesych., however, gives τρισπόλιον as the name


312


a a ee


-Ξ


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, ΙΧ. xix. 2-4


Of plants said to have magical properties.


On the other hand what is said of amulets and
charms in general for the body or the house is some-
what foolish and incredible.!. Thus they say that
tripolion? according to Hesiod and Musaeus is useful
for every good purpose, wherefore they dig it up
by night, camping on the spot. So too what is said
of good or fair fame as affected by plants is quite as
foolish or more so: for they say that the plant called
snapdragon * produces fair fame. This plant is like
bedstraw but it has no root: and the fruit has what
resembles a calf’s nostrils. The man who anoints
himself with this they say wins fair fame. 4 And they
say that the same result follows, if he crowns himself
with the flower of gold-flower, sprinkling it with
unguent from a vessel of unfired gold. The flower of
gold-flower is like gold, the leaf is white. The stem
also is white ® and hard, the root is slender and does
not run deep. ° Men use it in wine against the bites
of serpents, and to make a plaster for burns after
burning it and mixing the ashes with honey. Such
tales then, as was said before, proceed from men who
desire to glorify their own crafts.


A problem as to cause and effect.


Now since the natural qualities of roots fruits and
juices have many virtues of all sorts, some having
the same virtue and causing the same result, while


of a plant. Plin. /.c. seems to combine Diosc.’s account of
πόλιον (3. 110) with his account of τριπόλιον (4. 132).

3 τὸ ἀντίρρινον conj. St. from Diosc. 4. 130; Plin. 25. 129 ;
τὸ ἀντίρριζυν Ald.H.; τὸν ἀντ. UM; τὸ ἀντίριζον U*.

* Diose. 4. 57; Plin. 21.66. Cited also by Athen. 15. 27.

® λευκὸν conj. Sch.; λεπτὸν UMU*AId,G.

δ Diose. l.c.; Plin. 21. 168 and 169.


303


THEOPHRASTUS


\ / .“ \ td / / Ψ
καὶ πάλιν ὅσαι τὰ ἐναντία, διαπορήσενεν ἄν τις
κοινὸν ἴσως ἀπόρημα καὶ ἐφ᾽ ἑτέρων ἀπόρων,
/ ς΄ rn nr
πότερον ὅσα τῶν αὐτῶν αἴτια κατὰ μίαν τινὰ
/ , 2 x \ > Dy Ae b] / ee, '
δύναμίν ἐστιν, ἢ Kal ἀφ᾽ ἑτέρων ἐνδέχεται ταὐτὸ
i a \ s / > / > /
γίνεσθαι. τοῦτο μὲν οὖν ταύτῃ ἠπορήσθω:" εἰ δέ
\ 7 \ / Xa \ /
τινων Kal ἄλλων τὰς φύσεις ἢ τὰς δυνάμεις
ἔχομεν εἰπεῖν, ταῦτα ῥητέον.
XX. Τὸ δὴ πέπερι καρπὸς μέν ἐστι διττὸν δὲ
a \
αὐτοῦ TO γένος: TO μὲν γὰρ στρογγύλον ὥσπερ
” / $Y 4 \ / , e
ὄροβος, κέλυφος ἔχον Kal σάρκα καθάπερ ai
/ e / \ \ , /
δαφνίδες, ὑπέρυθρον" τὸ δὲ πρόμηκες μέλαν
/
σπερμάτια μηκωνικὰ ἔχον: ἰσχυρότερον δὲ πολὺ
a 7] \ \ yy >. A \
τοῦτο θατέρου: θερμαντικὰ δὲ ἄμφω" Se ὃ καὶ
\ \ , a - ἢ aE ,
πρὸς TO κώνειον βοηθεῖ ταῦτά TE καὶ ὁ λιβανωτός.
ὋὉ δὲ Κνίδιος κόκκος στρογγύλον ἐρυθρὸν τῇ
A a a /
χροιᾷ μεῖζον δὲ τοῦ πεπέριος ἰσχυρότερον δὲ πολὺ
a ὃ ο 7
τῇ θερμότητι, dv ὃ καὶ ὅταν δίδωσι κατάποτον,
/ \ \ , / Ps A x
διδόασι yap πρὸς κοιλίας λύσιν, ἐν ἄρτῳ ἢ
/ / / \ yA \
στέατι TEPLTAATTOVYTES’ κάειν Yap ἄλλως τὸν
φάρυγγα.
\ a e7
Θερμαντικὸν δὲ καὶ ἡ τοῦ πευκεδάνου <pifa,>
x ἃ Sos / a > Gas ¢ \
du ὃ Kal ἄλειμμά τι ποιοῦσιν ἐξ αὐτῆς ἱδρωτικὸν
Ν a
ὥσπερ Kal ἐξ ἄλλων. δίδοται δὲ ἡ τοῦ πευκε-


1 ap’ conj. Sch.; ἐφ᾽ U*P; Ald. omits the preposition.
2 Cited by Athen, 2. 73; οἷ. Diose. 2. 159.
PIN. 7. 70).


314


Δι...


ee


SS.


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. χιχ. 4-xx. 2


others have opposite virtues, one might raise a
question which is perhaps equally perplexing in
regard to other matters, to wit, whether those that
produce the same effect do so in virtue of some
single virtue which is common to them all, or whether
the same result may not come about also from!
different causes.—Let us be content to put the
question thus : but now we must proceed to speak of
the natural qualities or virtues of any other plants
that we can mention.


Of certain plants, not yet mentioned, which possess special
properties,


XX. 2 Pepper is a fruit, and there are two kinds:
one is round like bitter vetch, having a case and flesh
like the berries of bay, and it is reddish: the other
is elongated and black and has seeds like those of
poppy: and this kind is much stronger than the
other. Both however are heating: wherefore these,
as well as frankincense, are used as antidotes for
poisoning by hemlock.

8The ‘Cnidian berry’ is round, red in colour,
larger than that of pepper, and far stronger in its
heating power ; wherefore, when it is given as a pill *
(for it is given to open the bowels) they knead it up
in a piece of bread or dough: otherwise it burns the
throat.

° The root ® of sulphur-wort is also heating, where-
fore they make of it an ointment to produce a sweat,
as with other things so used. This root ® is also


4 κατάποτον conj. Sch.; κατὰ πότον Ald. cf. καταπότιον 9. 8. 3.
* ef. 9. 14.14; Phin. 95. 117.
6 ῥίζα add. W.


315


THEOPHRASTUS


δάνου pita καὶ πρὸς τοὺς σπλῆνας" τὸ δὲ σπέρμα
οὐ χρήσιμον οὐδὲ ὁ ὀπὸς αὐτῆς" γίνεται δὲ ἐν
᾿Αρκαδίᾳ.

Δαῦκον δὲ περὶ Πατραϊκὴν τῆς ᾿Αχαΐας δια-
φέρον, θερμαντικὸν φύσει: ῥίξαν δὲ ἔ ἔχει μέλαιναν.

ρμαντικὸν δὲ καὶ δριμὺ καὶ τῆς ἀμπέλου τῆς
ἀγρίας ῥίζα: δι᾽ ὃ καὶ εἰς ψίλωθρον χρήσιμον καὶ
ἐφηλίδας ἀπάγειν: τῷ δὲ καρπῷ Ψιλοῦσι τὰ
δέρματα. τέμνεται δὲ πᾶσαν ὥραν ὀπώρας δὲ
μάλιστα.

Δρακοντίου δὲ ῥίζα βῆχας ἐν μέλιτι διδομένη
παύειν χρησίμη. καυλὸν δὲ ἔχει ποικίλον ὀφιώδη:
σπέρματι δ᾽ οὐ χρῶνται.

Ἢ δὲ τῆς θαψίας ἐ ἐμετική" ἐὰν δέ τις κατάσχῃ,
καθαίρει καὶ ἄνω καὶ κάτω" δύναται δὲ καὶ τὰ
πελιώματα ἐξαιρεῖν: ὑπώπια δὲ ποιεῖ ἄλλα ἔκ-
λευκα. ὁ δὲ ὀπὸς ἰσχυρότερος αὐτῆς καθαίρει
καὶ ἄνω καὶ κάτω" σπέρματι δ᾽ οὐ χρῶνται"
γίνεται δὲ καὶ ἄλλοθι μὲν ἀτὰρ καὶ ἐν τῇ ᾿Αττικῇ"
καὶ τὰ βοσκήματα ταύτης οὐχ ἅπτεται τὰ
ἐγχώρια, τὰ δὲ ξενικὰ βόσκεται καὶ διαρροίᾳ
διαφθείρεται.

Τὸ δὲ πολυπόδιον μετὰ τὰ ὕδατα ἀναβλαστεῖ
σπέρμα δὲ οὐ φύει.

Τὸ δὲ τῆς ἐβένου ξύλον κατὰ μὲν τὴν πρόσοψιν
ὅμοιον πύξῳ φλοϊσθὲν δὲ μέλαν γίνεται" χρή-
σιμον δὲ πρὸς ὀφθαλμίας ἀκόνῃ τριβόμενον.


ef eo. 1δ::5: 2 cf, 9. 15.50.

> of. 9.14.1; Diose. 4. 181-183; Plin. 23. 19 and 21.
4-of. 7.12.2; Diose: 2) 167. -*ay, Plin. 94. 89.

> Diosce. 4. 153 ; Plin. 13. 125 and 126.


ia


ε


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. xx. 2-4


given for the spleen: but neither its seed nor its
juice is of use: it grows in Arcadia.!

2 Daukon of excellent quality grows in the district
of Patrai in Achaia, and is heating by nature: it has
a black root.

°The root of the ‘wild vine’ (bryony) is also
heating and pungent: wherefore it is useful as a
depilatory and to remove freckles: and the fruit is
used for smoothing hides. It is cut at any season,
but especially in autumn.

4 The root of edderwort given in milk is useful for
stopping a cough. It has a variegated snake-like
stem : the seed is not used.

5 The root of thapsia has emetic properties: and,
if one retains it, it purges both upwards and down-
wards. It is also able to remove bruises: and it
restores other contusions to a pale colour.’ Its
juice is stronger and purges both upwards and
downwards: the seed is not used. It grows especially
in Attica, but also in other places: the cattle of the
country do not touch it, but imported cattle feed on
it and perish of diarrhoea.’

8 Polypody springs up 9 after rain, and produces no
seed.

10'The wood of ebony is in appearance like box, but
when barked it becomes black: it is useful against
ophthalmia, and is rubbed on a whetstone for that
use.

ὁ ὑπώπια. .. ἔκλευκα : text perhaps defective.

7 διαρροίᾳ conj. Sch.; διάρροια ἢ UM: διάρροια αὐτοῖς γίνεται ἢ
Ald.G.

8 of. 9.13.6; C.P. 2.17.4. The account of the virtues of
this plant is evidently missing.

9 ἀναβλαστεῖ conj. W.; αἰεὶ βάλλει Ald.

10 Diose. 1. 98; Plin. 24, 89,


317


σι


THEOPHRASTUS


Ἡ δὲ ; ὃ τις ᾿ \
ἑ ἀριστολοχία παχεῖα Kal ἐσθιομένη πικρὰ
τῷ χρώματι μέλαινα καὶ εὔοσμος, τὸ δὲ φύλλον
στρογγύλον, οὐ πολὺ δὲ τὸ ὑπὲρ τῆς γῆς. φύεται
δὲ καὶ μάλιστα ἐν τοῖς ὄρεσι" καὶ αὕτη βελτίστη.
τὴν δὲ χρείαν αὐτῆς εἰς πολλὰ καταριθμοῦσιν'
ἀρίστη μὲν πρὸς τὰ κεφαλόθλαστα, ἀγαθὴ δὲ καὶ
πρὸς τὰ ἄλλα ἕλκη καὶ πρὸς τὰ ἑρπετὰ καὶ πρὸς
ὕπνον καὶ πρὸς ὕστεραν ὡς πεσσός, τὰ μὲν σὺν
ὕδατι ἀναδευομένη καὶ καταπλαττομένη, τὰ δ᾽
ἄλλα εἰς μέλι ξυομένη καὶ ἔλαιον: τῶν δὲ ἑρπετῶν
ἐν οἴνῳ ὀξίνῃ πινομένη καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ δῆγμα ἐπι-
παττομένη:" εἰς ὕπνον δὲ ἐν οἴνῳ μέλανι αὐστηρῷ
κνισθεῖσα: ἐὰν δὲ αἱ μῆτραι προπέσωσι, τῷ ὕδατι
ἀποκλύζειν. αὕτη μὲν οὖν ἔοικε διαφέρειν τῇ
πολυχρηστίᾳ.
Ths δὲ σκαμμωνίας ὥσπερ ἐξ ἐναντίας ὁ ὀπὸς
μόνον χρήσιμος ἄλλο δ᾽ οὐδέν.

Η δὲ τῆς πτερίδος ῥίζα μόνον τῷ χυλῷ γλυκύ-
rennet ἕλμινθα δὲ πλατεῖαν ἐκβάλλει: σπέρμα
δὲ οὐκ ἔχει οὐδὲ ὁπόν' τέμνεσθαι δὲ ὡραίαν μετο-
πώρου φασίν.

H & EA pues σύμφυτον ἐνίοις ἔθνεσιν' ἔχουσι
πὰ ὡς ἐπὶ πᾶν Αἰγύπτιοι Ἄραβες. ᾿Αρμένιοι
Ματαδίδες Σύροι Κίλικες: Θρᾷκες δ᾽ οὐκ ἔχουσιν
οὐδὲ Φρύγες: τῶν δὲ ᾿Βλλήνων Θηβαῖοί τε οἱ
περὶ τὰ γυμνάσια καὶ ὅλως Βοιωτοί: ᾿Αθηναῖοι
δ᾽ οὔ

Πάντων δὲ τῶν φαρμάκων ὡς ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν
βελτίω τὰ ἐκ τῶν χειμερινῶν καὶ προσβόρρων


P ef, 9. 18:. ὃ. 2 καὶ μάλιστα conj. W.; μάλιστα καὶ Ald.
3 αὕτη conj. Scal.; αὐτὴ Ald.


318


a τ΄“ ὰχ πὰ. ,


ENQUIRY INTO: PLANTS, IX. xx. 4-5


1 Birthwort is a stout plant and is bitter to the taste :
it is black in colour and fragrant ; the leaf is round.
However there is not much of the plant above
ground. It grows especially? on mountains, and
then * it is best. Many uses of it for various purposes
are enumerated ; it is best for bruises on the head,
good also for other wounds, against snake-bites, to
produce sleep, for the womb as a pessary: for some
purposes it is soaked with water and applied as a
plaster, for others it is scraped into honey and olive-
oil: against snake-bites it is drunk in sour wine and
also sprinkled over the bite ; to induce sleep it is
given pounded up in black dry wine: ‘in cases of
prolapsus uteri it is used in water as a lotion. This
plant then seems to have a surpassing variety of
usefulness.

5 ΟἿ scammony, as though by contrast, only the
juice is useful and no other part.

Of male-fern no part but the root is useful and it
has a sweet astringent taste. It expels the flat
worm. It has no seed nor juice: and they say it
is ripe for cutting in autumn.

6(This worm naturally infests certain races:
speaking generally the following are liable to it—
the Egyptians, the Arabians, the Armenians, the
Matadides, the Syrians, the Cilicians : the Thracians
have it not, nor the Phrygians.. Among the Hellenes
those Thebans who frequent wrestling-schools and
the Boeotians generally are liable to it: but not the
Athenians. )

Of all drugs, to speak generally, those are better
which come from places that are wintry, face the


4 Cited by Apollon. Hist. Mirab. 29.
§ Diose. 4. 170; Plin. 27. 78-80. ® Phin. 27. 145.


319


THEOPHRASTUS


΄“- ἃ lal \ Lal
καὶ ξηρῶν' bv ὃ καὶ τῶν ἐν Εὐβοίᾳ τὰ ἐν ταῖς
3 “- x \ 9 od / / / /
Aiyais ἢ τὰ ἐν τῷ Τελεθρίῳ pact ξηρότερα yap
/
τὸ δὲ Τελέθριον σύσκιον.
3 fal an /
Περὶ μὲν οὖν τῶν ῥιζῶν ὅσαι φαρμακώδεις καὶ
“ f % an
ὁποιασοῦν ἔχουσι δυνάμεις εἴτε ἐν αὐταῖς εἴτε ἐν
- ᾽ a Ἂ \ » \ A , \ \
τοῖς ὀποῖς ἢ Kal ἄλλῳ τινὶ τῶν μορίων, καὶ TO
(4 » \ x la ΓΑ ἘΣ /
Srov εἴ τι φρυγανικὸν ἢ ποῶδες ἔχει τοιαύτας
n lal na /
δυνάμεις, Kal περὶ τῶν χυλῶν τῶν TE εὐόσμων
\ ἴω ys \ 7 » ὃ Ψ
καὶ τῶν ἀόσμων καὶ ὅσας ἔχουσι διαφοράς,


A 9 \ ® , , 7
αἵπερ οὐθὲν ἧττον φυσικαὶ εἰσιν, εἰρηται.


220


ee ——————


ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS, IX. xx. 5-6


north and are dry: wherefore of those which grow
in Euboea best, they say, are the drugs of Aigai or
Telethrion, these places being dry, while Telethrion
is also shady.

1Thus we have spoken of drugs, those that are
medicinal and those that have virtues of whatsoever
kind, whether in the root itself, or in the juice, or in
any other of their parts, and in general of all the
shrubby or herbaceous plants which have such
virtues, as well as their tastes, whether they be
fragrant or without fragrance, with the differences
between them, which are equally part of their
essential character.

1 This section begins a tenth book in UMAId.H.G; ef.


9.8. 1n. The concluding words can hardly represent the
original text.


221
VOL. I. Y


ai! Ιθ60


| siti redo ᾿
be ἠγάσυοἹ


Diet ever
ἘΝ ἜΣ fret ΒΒ τὰ
ΠΑΝ wet.


ὠ ιν


ὍΣ MINOR WORKS


» ps}. εἰ PEN 2
lel Dive Hq
oF τὰ bk ἀν ἢ ὁ,


Pay


> we by. . εὐ Ἵ


Th Shit Wisi 34: {010
if Baas foiicnt


Υ Brin Ss Hi: ἢ
othir f ᾿


λ πο Σ
ἔτι αὶ


i. peek


emovawvarnd υἱπὸ «frac!
ν᾿


SLA SETe +7


ν δ Ὁ 1 tye}, .3.1-
Εν τὰ ' rating this 7)
~~ asi MIU OT ows wt tes] yg er ἣν
a ΩΝ


» ΓΠ|


INTRODUCTION TO THE
TREATISES CONCERNING ODOURS AND
CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS


Tue text of the two opuscula given here is re-
printed from that of Wimmer in the Teubner series,
1862, and in the Didot edition, 1866; the latter is
very carelessly printed : a few slight alterations are
mentioned in the notes. Both works are included
in the Aldine edition (1497), and in that of Camotius
(see p. x). For the de odoribus two MSS., Cod.
Vaticanus (A) and Cod. Parisiensis (Q) were collated
by Brandis. The text of the de signis is considered
by Wimmer to be very corrupt and defective : he
has admitted some emendations made by Schneider


from an old Latin translation published at Bologna


in 1516. Schneider’s commentary makes frequent
reference to an edition of the opuscula of Theo-
phrastus by Turnebus and Daniel Furlanus, printed
at Hanau in Prussia in 1605, and reprinted there in
1615.

The de signis was one of Aratus’ authorities for
his Diosemeia: I have only however made reference
to that work where it appears to throw light on
the text of Theophrastus. These and most other
references for the two fragments I owe chiefly to
Schneider.


324


ee


“δ


SECTIONS.


1-3.


CONCERNING ODOURS


CONTENTS


Introductory : Of odours in general and the classi-
fication of them.


Of natural odours: Of those οἵ animals and of the
effect of odours on animals.


Of smell and taste.
Of odours in plants.


Of artificial odours in general and their manufac-
ture : especially of the use of perfumes in wine.


Of the oils used as the vehicle of perfumes.


Of the spices used in making perfumes and their
treatment.

Of the various parts of plants used for perfunies, and
of the composition of various notable perfumes.

Of the properties of various spices.

Of the medicinal properties of certain perfumes.


Of rules for the mixture of spices, and of the storing
of various perfumes.


Of the properties of certain perfumes.
Of other properties and peculiarities of perfumes,


Of the making of perfume-powders and compound
perfumes.


Of the characteristic smells of animals, and of certain
curious facts as to the smell of animal and vege-
table products.


Of odours as compared with other sense-impressions.


325


ΠΕΡῚ ΟΣΜΩΝ


T. Αἱ ὀσμαὶ τὸ μὲν ὅλον ἐκ μίξεως εἰσι
:
καθάπερ οἱ χυμοί: TO γὰρ ἄμικτον ἅπαν ἄοδμον
ef 7 \ lal
ὥσπερ ἄχυμον, διὸ Kal Ta ἁπλᾶ ἄοδμα, οἷον
“ὃ »Ν lal ς \ n / Lie. , 2 \
ὕδωρ ἀὴρ πῦρ' ἡ δὲ γῆ μάλιστ᾽ ἢ μόνη ὀδμὴν
ἔχει διὸ μάλιστα μικτή.
lal 5 a ts a al
Τῶν δ᾽ ὀδμῶν αἱ μὲν ὥσπερ ἀειδεῖς καὶ ὑδαρεῖς
a “a /
καθάπερ ἐπὶ τῶν χυμῶν, αἱ δ᾽ ἔχουσαί τινας
/ ᾿ >] “ al “
ἰδέας. αἱ δ᾽ ἰδέαι δοκοῦσι μὲν ἀκολουθεῖν ταῖς
al A \ “
τῶν χυμῶν, οὐ μὴν ἔχουσί γε πᾶσαι τὰς αὐτὰς
, 7 a /
προσηγορίας, ὥσπερ ἐν τοῖς πρότερον εἴὔπομεν,
οὐδ᾽ ὅλως οὕτω διωρισμέναι τοῖς εἴδεσιν ὥσπερ
ς Ν ’ ’ ¢ x a / “ \ \
ol χυμοὶ ANN ὡς ἂν τοῖς γένεσιν, OTL τὰ μὲν
x \ \ / lol » » / \
εὔοσμα Ta δὲ κάκοσμα. τῆς δ᾽ εὐωδίας Kal
)ὔ / / /
KAKWOLAS οὐκέτι TA εἴδη κατωνόμασται καίπερ
\ / ’ nr a
ἔχοντα διαφορὰς μεγάλας ἐπί γ᾽ αὐτῶν τῶν
/ \ “ > \ lal , \
γλυκέων καὶ πικρῶν, ἀλλὰ δριμεῖα λέγεται Kal
’ \ \ \ \ a \ a > /
ἰσχυρὰ καὶ μαλακὴ καὶ γλυκεῖα καὶ βαρεῖα ὀδμή"
κοιναὶ δ᾽ ἔνιαι τούτων καὶ τῶν κακωδῶν.


1 i.e. there is not one set of terms applied to the varieties
of ‘ good’ and another distinct set applied to the varieties of
‘evil’ odours, but we get a cross-division, some terms (such
as ‘strong’) being applied to varieties of both classes. cf.
64-66.


326


CONCERNING ODOURS


Introductory : Of odours in general and the classification of
them.

I. Opours in general, like tastes, are due to
mixture: for anything which is uncompounded has
no smell, just as it has no taste: wherefore simple
substances have no smell, such as water air and fire:
on the other hand earth is the only elementary
substance which has a smell, or at least it has one to
a greater extent than the others, because it is of a
more composite character than they.

Of odours some are, as it were, indistinct and
insipid, as is the case with tastes, while some have
a distinct character. And these characters appear
to correspond to those of tastes, yet they have not in
all cases the same names, as we said in a former
treatise ; nor in general are they marked off from
one another by such specific differences as are tastes :
rather the differences are, one may say, in generic
character, some things having a good, some an evil
odour.! But the various kinds of good or evil odour,
although they exhibit considerable differences, have
not received further distinguishing names, marking
off one particular kind of sweetness or of bitterness
from another: we speak of an odour as pungent,
powerful, faint, sweet, or heavy, though some of
these descriptions apply to evil-smelling things as
well as to those which have a good odour.


327


THEOPHRASTUS


Ἢ δὲ καθόλου καὶ ὥσπερ ἐπὶ πᾶσι τοῖς δια-
/ e/
φθειρομένοις σαπρότης. ἅπαν yap TO σηπόμενον
wn Ψ \ »
κακῶδες, εἰ μή τις τὴν ὀξύτητα λέγει τοῦ οἴνου
nw id f fal Coal

σαπρότητα TH ὁμοιότητι τῆς φθορᾶς. ἐν ἅπασι
δ᾽ ἐστὶν ἡ τοῦ σαπροῦ κακωδία καὶ ἐν φυτοῖς
Ν J J, \ ’ - » , 9 ee \
καὶ ev ζώοις Kal ἐν τοῖς ἀψύχοις" ἐν ἅπασι δὲ
f ? \ «ς , z > \ >
διαφθειρομένοις ὧν μὴ ἡ σύστασις εὐθὺς ἐκ

VA ¢/ 4 \ y \ \ A [τὰ
τοιαύτης ὕλης" ἔχει γὰρ ἔνια καὶ τὴν τῆς ὕλης
a? -
ὀσμήν, οὐ μὴν ἐπὶ πάντων γε τοῦτ᾽ ἀκολουθεῖ.
ἣ \ by , \ ᾽ A A e
πολλὰ γὰρ οὐ κακώδη TA EK TOV σαπρῶν, ὡς
x09 e J e ’ fol / / x >
οὐδ᾽ οἱ μύκητες οἱ ἐκ τῆς κόπρου φυόμενοι" τὰ ὃ

3 / / \ ΄ /
ἐκ σήψεως φυόμενα καὶ συνιστάμενα κακώδη.

5 A a \
εὔοσμα μὲν οὖν ὡς ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν τὰ πεπεμμένα
\ \ \ a γὃ is \ \ A ’ a
καὶ λεπτὰ καὶ ἥκιστα γεώδη" TO γὰρ τῆς ὀσμῆς
A /

ἐν ἀναπνοῇ" κακώδη δὲ δηλονότι τἀναντία. πολλὰ

Ἃ, pet a A > / \
δὲ ὥσπερ TOV γλυκέων ἐμφαίνει τινὰ πικρότητα,
καὶ τῶν εὐωδῶν βαρύτητα ταῖς ὀσμαῖς.

\ ,
II. "Exes δὲ ἕκαστον ὀσμὴν ἰδίαν καὶ ζώων
κ᾿ lal φ > i
καὶ φυτῶν Kal TOV ἀψύχων ὅσα ὀσμώδη: πολλὰ

1 And so here we have a term which possibly is applied
only to the one class of ‘ evil’ odours.

2 Which is not an ‘evil’ odour.

3 i.e. putridity is a quality which things acquire as they
decay, and does not necessarily imply that they are them-
selves formed out of decaying matter. In fact things so
produced are not always ‘ putrid.’


4 The sense is apparently that ‘lighter’ (or less solid)
things exhale a lighter and pleasanter odour because in their


328


CONCERNING ODOURS, 2-4


Putridity however is a general term, applied, one
may say, to anything which is subject to decay !: for
anything which is decomposing has an evil odour,—
unless indeed the name putridity be extended to
sourness” in wine because the change in the wine is
analogous to decomposition. The evil odour of
putridity is found in all things, alike in plants in
animals and in inanimate things: it attends the
decay of things which are not formed directly out of
a substance which is decaying: for some things have
also the odour of that substance, though it is not
found in every case.* Thus in many instances things
which are produced by decaying matter have no evil
odour: for instance, mushrooms which grow from
dung have none: but things which grow from decay
and are actually formed out of it have such an odour.
To speak generally then, things that have been
cooked, delicate things, and things which are least of
an earthy nature have a good odour,‘ (odour being a
matter of exhalation), and it is obvious that those of
an opposite character have an evil odour. But, even
as many things pleasant to the taste present a certain
bitterness, so many things that have a good odour
have a kind of heavy scent.


Of natural odours ; of those of animals and of the effect of
odours on animals.


II. Every plant animal or inanimate thing that
has an odour has one peculiar to itself: but in many


case exhalation is easier. The sense given to ἀναπνοή requires
illustration (the passages cited by LS. are not in point). Sch.,
construing apparently as W. does, ‘since smell depends on
breathing’ (? inhalation), admits that he does not see the
point of this clause,


329


THEOPHRASTUS


>] ΄ “- ᾽ , \ \ / ” \
δ᾽ ἡμῖν ov φαίνεται διὰ τὸ χειρίστην ἔχειν τὴν
e > na a
αἴσθησιν ταύτην ὡς εἰπεῖν. ἐπεὶ τοῖς ye ἄλλοις
\ ie Pare ΟἿ / / ,
καὶ τὰ παντελῶς ἄοδμα φαινόμενα δίδωσί τινα
9 ¢ al / a
ὀσμήν, ὥσπερ αἱ κριθαὶ τοῖς ὑποζυγίοις ai ἐκ τῆς
ἃ AS \
Κεδροπόλιος, as οὐκ ἐσθίουσιν διὰ τὴν κακωδίαν.
Ὁ A \ \ e la , / lal >
ἡμᾶς δὲ καὶ αἱ TOV ζώων λανθάνουσιν τῶν ὀσμω-
lal 7 3 \ oO > \ /
dav δοκούντων. εὐωδίᾳ μὲν οὖν οὐθὲν φαίνεται
’ ¥, = (ἃ / ¢ b a » x, aw \ \
καθ᾿ αὑτὸ χαίρειν ὡς εἰπεῖν, ἀλλ ὁσὰ πρὸς τὴν
\ \ \ > / "“ ΕῚ "
τροφὴν καὶ τὴν ἀπόλαυσιν. πονεῖν δ᾽ ἔνια
- a - /
φαίνεται ταῖς ὀσμαῖς Kal ταῖς εὐωδίαις, εἴπερ
ἀληθὲς τὸ ἐπὶ τῶν γυπῶν καὶ τῶν κανθάρων.
lal \ A e ᾽ 5 , a ’ ’ »"»
τοῦτο δὲ δῆλον ὡς δι᾽ ἐναντίωσιν τῆς ἐν αὐτοῖς
΄ ¢ \ o~ A a \
φύσεως. ὡς δὲ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ἅμα Set τὴν γε
“ \ \ \ fal ’ a
κρᾶσιν τὴν ἑκάστου καὶ τὴν τῆς ὀσμῆς λαμβάνειν
δύναμιν.
S al / -
Εἰσὶ μὲν οὖν ἔνιαι τῶν εὐόσμων καὶ ἐν ταῖς
τροφαῖς, οἷον αἱ τῶν ἀκροδρύων καὶ ἀπίων καὶ
Ω \ / Lal “Ὁ “Ὁ
μήλων: αὗται γὰρ ἄνευ τῆς προσφορᾶς ἡδεῖαι,
\ a e bd a > \ ᾽ > 7 ϑ ἃ ζω
καὶ μᾶλλον ὡς εἰπεῖν. οὐ μὴν ἄλλ ὡς γ ἁπλῶς
an e / > 7 id \ e \ |
διελεῖν αἱ μέν εἰσι καθ᾽ αὑτὰς ai δὲ κατὰ συμ-
a lal fel fel \
βεβηκός: ai μὲν τῶν χυλῶν Kal τῆς τροφῆς κατὰ
᾿ G ’ “ lal > lal ’ 3 /
συμβεβηκός, αἱ δ᾽ ὥσπερ τῶν ἀνθῶν καθ᾽ αὑτάς.
᾽ / Ν / U
ὡς δ᾽ ἐπίπαν τὰ εὔοσμα, καθάπερ Kal πρότερον
’ VA / \ \ \ 4
ἐλέχθη, δύσχυμα καὶ στρυφνὰ καὶ ὑπόπικρα.
1 Τὴ Thrace. cf. Arist. H.A. 9. 386. Turn. quotes an illus-


tration from Scriptor θαυμασίων ἀκουσμάτων 126.
2 εὐωδίαις. 2 εὐώδεσι.


3390


CONCERNING ODOURS, 4-5


cases it is not obvious to us because, one might
almost say, our sense of smell is inferior to that οἵ
all other animals. Thus things which appear to us
to have no odour give forth an odour of which other
animals are conscious : for instance beasts of burden
can smell the barley of Kedropolis,! and refuse to eat
it because of its evil odour. Also we are unaware of
the odour of animals which appear to possess one.
Now no animal appears to take pleasure in a good
odour for its own sake, so to speak, but only in the
odour of things which conduce to its nurture and
enjoyment. Indeed some animals seem to be annoyed
by odours, even good? ones, if what is said οἱ
vultures and beetles be true ; the explanation is that
their natural character is antipathetic to odours.
To appreciate this in particular cases one should
take into consideration the temperament of the
animal in question and also its power of smell.


Of smell and taste.


Now the odour of some things which have a good
odour resides in things which are used for food, for
instance that of stone-fruits® pears and apples, the
smell of which is sweet even if one does not eat
them ; indeed it may be said to be sweeter in that
case. However, to make a general distinction, some
odours exist independently, while others are inci-
dental ;* those of juices and things used for food
are incidental, those of flowers exist independently.
And, as was said above,® things which have a good
odour are generally of unpleasant, astringent or

3 ἀκροδρύων here apparently plums, peaches, ete.

4 7.e. the smell is a kind of ‘accident,’ or by-product of
the taste. i as


33!


THEOPHRASTUS


᾿ \ A ae ae \ , / \
ἔνια δὲ τῶν εὐχύμων καὶ κακώδη, καθάπερ Kal TO
͵ὔ fal
Αἰγύπτιον καλούμενον σῦκον, γλυκὺ ὄν, Kal εἰ
\ = ΕῚ ᾽ ᾽ A \ e ad
μὴ- πανταχοῦ ἀλλ᾽ ἐνιαχοῦ. καὶ ἡ ἄρκευθος
ἐμφαίνει τινὰ τῇ μασήσει κακωδίαν γλυκεῖα
οὖσα" τὸ δ᾽ οὖρον ποιεῖ εὐῶδες.
> \ \ A ’ a! e \ b] - \ A
Ezret δὲ τῶν ὀσμῶν αἱ μὲν ἐν φυτοῖς καὶ τοῖς
’ -“
τούτων μορίοις, οἷον κλωσὶ φύλλοις φλοιοῖς
a ΄ e ie 4 / b ,
καρποῖς δακρύοις, αἱ δὲ ὥσπερ διείλομεν ἐν ζώοις
\ a \ A ᾽ ΄ Φ Ν \
[καὶ φυτοῖς] καὶ τοῖς ἀψύχοις, αὗται μὲν φανερὸν
“ / v4 - >’ a 4 6
ὅτι πέψιν ἕκασται λαμβάνουσιν ἐν τοῖς οἰκείοις
ca \ Ν 39. ἡ \ A ) A \
[ais]: καὶ τὸ εὐῶδες καὶ κακῶδες ἀκολουθεῖ κατὰ
\ ’ / Up ς x / A ’ / A
Tas οἰκείας φύσεις, ἡ δὲ πέψις τῷ οἰκείῳ θερμῷ.
, A A > 7 al “a [4 A 7 \
ἐν δὲ τοῖς ἀψύχοις Tals τῶν ἁπλῶν δυνάμεσι Kal
/ , /
γίνονται καὶ μεθίστανται καθάπερ οἱ χυμοί.
\
11. Ὅσαι δὲ δὴ κατὰ τέχνην καὶ ἐπίνοιαν
/ a “
γίνονται περὶ τούτων πειρατέον εἰπεῖν ὥσπερ καὶ
\ an a > > a \ A e Fen
περὶ TOV χυλῶν. ἐν ἀμφοῖν δὲ δῆλον ὡς ἀεὶ
\ \ , 5 ΕἸΣ Cents , A \
πρὸς τὸ βέλτιον [ἣν] ἡμῖν ἡ ἀναφορά: πᾶσα yap
’ \ -
τέχνη στοχάζεται τούτου. εἰσὶ μὲν οὖν καὶ τοῖς
\ a a -
ἀμίκτοις ὀσμαί τινες πρὸς ἃς συνεργεῖν πειρῶνται
a a \ \ \ lal
Kal ταῖς Tapa<oKevais, ὡς καὶ; πρὸς τὰς τῶν
lal > , ’ \ b) bd c/ a uF fa)
χυμῶν εὐστομίας. οὐ μὴν αλλ ws γ ἁπλῶς
hot. Poi 1432;
2 2,6. the berry: Sch. would read ἀρκευθίς. οἵ. H.P. 3. 12. 4,
with which this statement is inconsistent. Sch. suggests
punctuating—yaAvuxi ὄν. καὶ εἰ μὴ πανταχοῦ ἀλλ᾽ ἐνιαχοῦ καὶ


n ἄρκευθος κ.τ.λ. 3 καὶ φυτοῖς om. Turn.
4 ais 1 omit; 4 καὶ τὸ εὐ. conj. Turn,


332


CONCERNING ODOURS, 5-7


somewhat bitter taste. Again some things which
have a good taste have also an evil odour, such as
the carob,! which is sweet (this is true of some
regions, if not of all). Again the Phoenician cedar,”
though it is sweet to the taste, when chewed pro-
duces a sort of evil odour, though it makes the water
fragrant.
Of odours in plants.

Some odours being found in plants or in their
_ parts—as twig, leaf, bark, fruit, gum—and others, as
we distinguished, in animals ὃ and in inanimate things,
it is plain that the former are matured each of them
in the part to which it belongs; and‘ a good or evil
odour follows according to the natural character of
that part, the maturing being due to the warmth
which is found in it. On the other hand in inanimate
things the odour, like the taste, is formed and
modified by the properties of the simple substances
of which the thing is made.


Of artificial odoursin general and their manufacture. especially
of the use of perfumes in wine.

III. Next we must endeavour to speak of those
odours, and also those tastes, which are artificially 5
and deliberately produced. In either case it is clear
that improvement is always what we have in view;
for that is the aim of every artificial process. Now
even uncompounded substances have certain odours,
which men endeavour to assist by artificial means,°
even as they try to assist nature in producing
palatable tastes. However, to speak generally, the

5. The same phrase occurs in similar connexion C. P. 6. 11. 2.

6 Text defective. Ald.Bas.Vo. have marks of omission.


W. after Turn. gives καὶ ταῖς παρα --σκευαῖς, ὡς καὶ» ταῖς τῶν
ρ ᾽
χυμῶν εὖστο -- μίαις Ξ-, Which I have slightly altered. -


333


THEOPHRASTUS


> “
εἰπεῖν ἐν μίξει τὸ πλέον, καὶ οὕτως αἱ «μίξεις;
ὃ OL \ id A / Xx, B o δ Ὁ \ ὌΝ
υοῖν μὲν ὡς τῷ γένει λαβεῖν, ὑγροῦ καὶ ξηροῦ
τριχῶς δὲ yi<vovTal>, ὅταν ἢ ὁμογενὲς ὁμογενεῖ,
x / A / rv Cc A (ἴδ \
ἢ παράλλαττον τῷ παραλλάττοντι, ἢ VYP@ vy pov
Ἃ lal vA ¢ lal ,
ἢ ξηρῷ ξηρόν, «ἢ ὑγρῷ ξηρόν».
Ἢ ὃ a \ / \ ς a la x
κ δυοῖν yap τούτων Kal ἡ τῶν χυλῶν Kal
A ’ A Sa
TOV ὀσμῶν γένεσις" WS μὲν OL TA ἀρώματα Kal τὰ
al \
διαπάσματα συντιθέντες ξηροῖς πρὸς ξηρά: ὡς
᾽ ς \ 9 / Ἃ [οἷ Μ » /
δ᾽ οἱ τὰ μύρα κεραννύντες ἢ τῷ οἴνῳ ἐπιχέοντες
¢ a \ ς ΄ \ \ , ἃ \ a ,
ὑγροῖς πρὸς ὑγρά. τὸ δὲ τρίτον, ὃ καὶ πλεῖστόν
€ : “Ὁ ’,
ἐστιν, ὡς οἱ μυρεψοὶ ξηροῖς πρὸς ὑγρά" παντὸς
\ / »“"»
γὰρ μύρου καὶ χρίσματος ἡ σύνθεσις αὕτη. δεῖ
δ᾽ εἰδέναι ποῖαι ποίοις εὔμικτοι καὶ ποῖαι ποίοις
fa) a / fal
συνεργοῦσιν εἰς TO ποιεῖν μίαν ὥσπερ ἐπὶ τῶν
χυμῶν. καὶ γὰρ ἐκεῖ ταὐτὸ τοῦτο ζητοῦσιν οἱ
μιγνύντες καὶ οἷον ἀρτύοντες. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν
> e \ ὃ Ὁ, τ Φ ς ΔΛ ‘al \ ,,
ἐν οἷς καὶ δι᾿ ὧν αἱ τέχναι ποιοῦνται τὰ τέλη.
bi a n na
Μίγνυνται δὲ τὰ μὲν αὐτῆς τῆς ὀσμῆς ἕνεκα
Ν \ / \ yy \ ᾽ “
καὶ πρὸς ταύτην τὴν αἴσθησιν, τὰ 8 ὥσπερ
ἡὃ ΄ 4 \ fa! if Ὁ ς \ /
ἡδύνειν βουλόμενα τὴν γεῦσιν, οἷον ὡς οἱ τὰ μύρα


lal 7 3 UA x \ BJ ΄ 4 /
τοῖς οἴνοις ETLYEOVTES ἢ TA ἀρώματα ἐμβάλλοντες.


1 T have supplied μίζεις to fill the lacuna marked by W.
after οὕτως af: the text to the end of the section is defective,
but a makeshift restoration and rendering seem possible :
the sense of οὕτως is obscure.


334


CONCERNING ODOURS, 7-9


result is usually obtained by a mixture, and accord-
ingly ! such mixtures are of two things (or classes
of things), a liquid and a solid: but there are
three ways in which the result may be reached (the
combination? being one either of like with like, or
of unlike substances), according as a liquid is com-
pounded with another liquid, a solid with another
solid, or a solid with a liquid.

For tastes and odours alike are derived from these
two things: the method of the makers of spices and
perfume-powders " is to mix solid with solid, that of
those who compound unguents or flavour wines is to
mix liguid with liquid: but the third method,
which is the .commonest, is that of the perfumer,
who mixes solid with liquid, that being the way in
which all perfumes ¢ and ointments are compounded.
Further one must know which odours will combine
well with which, and what combination makes a
good blend, just as in the case of tastes: for there
too those who make combinations and, as it were,
season their dishes, are aiming at this same object.
So much for the ingredients and the methods
whereby these arts attain their ends.

The object of the mixture is in the one case
simply the production of a particular odour and the
gratification of the corresponding sense, in the other
there is a desire to produce, as it were, a pleasanter
taste: this for instance is the object of flavouring
wine with perfumes or of putting spices into it.

* ἡ,6. given two components we have three possible com-
binations, A with A, B with B, or A with B.

3 διαπάσματα. cf. Plin. 13.19; 21.125.

4 The difference between μύρου and χρίσματος does not


appear ; μύρον seems to be loosely used, as just above it was
used of an entirely liquid mixture.


335


10


THEOPHRASTUS


\ A
ai yap αἰσθήσεις σύνεγγυς οὖσαι ποιοῦσί τινα
ἀπόλαυσιν ἀλλήλων, ὅθεν καὶ αὐτοῖς τοῖς γευ-
A a /
στοῖς ζητοῦσι τὰς evoopias.
/ Ss ἫὮΡ 7 st / /
Απορήσειε δ᾽ ἄν τις ἴσως διὰ Ti ποτε μύρον
\ 5 5 \ \ » ψΨ 4 “ \
Kal τἄλλα εὔοσμα τοὺς μὲν οἴνους NOUVEL τῶν δὲ
΄, 507 » \ ΄ / \
βρωμάτων οὐδέν, ἀλλὰ πάντα λυμαίνεται καὶ
/ \ ? :
ἀπύρωτα καὶ πεπυρωμένα. τὸ δ᾽ altiov ὑπο-
iY / “ \ an A
ληπτέον ὅτι συμβαίνει τῶν μὲν ξηρῶν ἀφαιρεῖ-
Vd Ἂς > a Ν ἡ \ > \ \
σθαί τε Tov οἰκεῖον χυλὸν διὰ τὴν ἰσχὺν Kai
ω , Ν ς a 7 \
ἅμα συνεπιφαίνειν τὸν αὑτοῦ ὄντα στρυφνὸν
\ Ν »“
καὶ ὑπόπικρον: ἅπαν γὰρ τὸ εὔοσμον τοιοῦτον,
a \
διαμασωμένοις δὲ Kal μᾶλλον ἐμφανὲς διά τε τὴν


1 θλίψιν καὶ τομὴν καὶ ἔτι τῷ χρονίζεσθαι. τὸν


2 3 5 a \ ἣν e \ > ,
δ᾽ οἶνον οὐδέτερον ποιεῖ" καὶ yap ὁ χυλὸς ἰσχυρό-
\ A
τατος Kal πλείων εἰς TO μὴ κρατεῖσθαι καὶ οὐδένα
“ / / > ὃ / > ’ ὩΨ > /
τῇ γεύσει χρόνον ἐπιδιατρίβων ἀλλ᾽ ὅσον ἐπί-
Q / v4 A x ὁ ὃ Ai ων ὃ ὃ / a ᾽ θ 7
γγάνων, ὥστε τὸ μὲν ἡδὺ ἐνδιδόναι τῇ αἰσθήσει
Ν \ \ \ / a / \ >
τὸ δὲ πικρὸν Kal δύσχυμον TH γεύσει μὴ ἐμφαι-
> \ 7 Ὁ BA / 4
νειν, ἀλλὰ συμβαίνειν τῷ ὄντι καθάπερ ἥδυσμα
A \ > a
γίνεσθαι τῷ πόματι τὴν ὀσμήν: TO μὲν yap
λυκεῖ καὶ μάλιστα δεομένῳ διὰ τὸ μηδὲν ἔχειν
¥ t ᾽
an δ᾽ 7 e/ a > > - ,
τοῖς ὃ ἄλλοις ὥσπερ μιᾶς ἐξ ἀμφοῖν γενομένης


1 cf. 67; Arist. de Sens. 5. 2 cf. Arist. l.c.

5 As opposed to wine. Sch., misunderstanding this, thinks
ξηρῶν corrupt.

4 [ have restored καὶ, which Sch. and W. omit, missing the
point of the antithesis μὲν... δέ.


336


CONCERNING ODOURS, o-11


1 For the two senses of taste and smell being akin to
one another, each provides in a way for the enjoy-
ment of the other: wherefore it is through things
which appeal to the taste, as well as those which
appeal to the sense of smell, that men try to discover
fragrant odours.

The question may perhaps be raised why perfume
and other fragrant things, while they give a pleasant
taste to wine,” yet have not this effect on any other
_ article of food, but in all cases spoil food, whether it
be cooked or not. The explanation we must take
to be that this is what happens—the perfume if
mixed with solid® things is in any case powerful
enough to deprive them of their proper taste, and at
the same time it makes obtrusive its own taste,
which is astringent and somewhat bitter,—-all per-
fumeries having that character,—while, if one bites
up the food, this effect is even* more apparent
because the food is crushed and broken up, and also
because it remains longer in the mouth. But on
wine neither effect is produced, since in this the
taste is very strong and too generally diffused to be
overpowered: also wine does ποῦ linger on the
palate for any length of time, but merely touches it,
so that, while it makes one conscious of its own
pleasant taste, it does not make the palate feel the
bitter unpalatable taste of the perfume: in fact the
odour of this acts as a sort of relish ® to the draught.
This effect indeed ® it has on wine which is sweet
and specially needs the addition of perfume, because
it has no ‘relish’ of its own; while with other wines
the reason is that, as the effect of the mixture, the


> Se. ‘ bouquet.’
6 1 have restored yap, omitted by Sch. and W.


387


VOL. Il. Z


13


THEOPHRASTUS


διὰ τὴν μῖξιν. ὁ yap oivos, ὥσπερ Kal πρότερον
\ 3 ΄,
ἐλέχθη, δεινὸς δέξασθαι τὰς ὀσμάς.
"“ > > , \ ὃ ὃ \ / \ \
ἔχει δ᾽ ἀπόρησιν καὶ τόδε, διὰ TL τὰ μὲν
ἄνθη καὶ τὰ στεφανώματα ἀσθενέστερα ὄντα ταῖς
3 nr ἈΝ / θ 7 Ὁ δ᾽ 3 \ \ 7 ὃ
ὀσμαῖς καὶ πόρρωθεν ὄζει, ἡ δ᾽ ἐρις καὶ τὸ νάρδον
9 an wn a
Kal τἄλλα τὰ εὔοσμα τῶν ξηρῶν ἰσχυρότερα
if £ , \
ἐγγύθεν: καὶ ἔνιά ye προσενεγκαμένοις, ἔνια δὲ
\ , a \ , \ \
καὶ τρίψεως προσδεῖται καὶ διαιρέσεως, τὰ δὲ
δ ς Ν
καὶ πυρώσεως, ὥσπερ ἡ σμύρνα καὶ ὁ λιβανωτὸς
“Ὁ \ / 2 ¢ a
καὶ πᾶν τὸ θυμιατόν. αἴτιον δ᾽ ὅτι τῶν μὲν
an a \ a \ > \ A
ἀνθῶν ἐπιπολῆς TO ποιοῦν τὴν ὀσμὴν ἅτε μανῶν
"“ \ > > Ud / n Ν ς ἴω \
ὄντων καὶ οὐκ ἐχόντων βάθος, τῶν δὲ ῥιζῶν Kat
/ a aA 3 / \ > 54
πάντων τῶν στερεῶν ἐν βάθει, τὰ δ᾽ ἔξωθεν
\ / x 5 a
ἀπεξηραμμένα Kal πεπυκνωμένα" διὸ Kal ἀφιᾶσι
/ \ > - \ > Ξε > / /
πόρρω Tas ἀποπνοίας, TA δ᾽ οἷον ἀνοίξεως δέονται
“ / i, /
τῶν πόρων, ὅθεν διαιρούμενα Kal κοπτόμενα
᾽ > / Ν γ ” /
πάντ᾽ εὐωδέστερα, TA δ᾽ ἄνθη κακωδέστερα τρι-
, x \ \ > ᾽ \ > a \ \
βόμενα' τὰ μὲν yap ἐκφαίνει τὸ οἰκεῖον τὰ δὲ
\ / φ
προσλαμβάνει τὸ ἀλλότριον. ὁ δὲ λιβανωτὸς
΄ \ ,
Kal ἡ σμύρνα πυκνοτέραν ETL τὴν φύσιν ἔχοντα
᾿ς n
προσδέονται πυρώσεως μαλακῆς, ἣ KATA μικρὸν
Ν /
ἐκθερμαίνουσα ποιήσει τὴν ἀναθυμίασιν. ἐὰν
/ 3 an /
yap κόπτῃ τις ἢ τρίβῃ ταῦτα, προσοίσονται μὲν
1 7.e. of the unadulterated wine and of the perfume.
2 C.P. 6.19.2. Sch.’s reasons for bracketing this sentence
seem inadequate.


3 2,6. fragrant leaves, etc. ef. H.P. 1. 12. 4,
4 Made from the rhizomes: ef. H.P. 1. 7. 2, and Index.


338


CONCERNING ODOURS, 11-13


two |! odours combine, as it were, to form one. Wine.
indeed, as was said before,” has a special property of
assimilating odours.

Another question also suggests itself,—why it is
that, while the smell of flowers and other 58 things
used for garlands, though it is not so strong, can be
perceived even at a great distance, the iris-pertume,*
spikenard and other fragrant solids smell stronger at
a short distance: and of some of these the smell is
only perceived when they are eaten, while some
need even to be bruised and broken up, and others
to be subjected to fire, as myrrh frankincense and
anything that is burnt as incense. The explanation is
that, whereas in flowers that which causes the smell
is on the surface, seeing that the texture of flowers
is open and they are not substantial, in all such solid
substances as roots the power of producing smell
is diffused through a substantial mass, while the
exterior parts are dried up and of close texture : and
this is why flowers emit the scent which exhales from
them to a long distance, while things like roots need
an opening of their passages. Hence, when these
are broken up or bruised, they are in all cases more
fragrant, while, if flowers are crushed, they have a
comparatively evil smell: for under such treatment
roots give forth the property which belongs to them,
but flowers acquire a property which is not their
own. Again frankincense and myrrh, since they are
by nature of even closer texture than roots, need a
gentle application of fire, which, by gradually
warming them, will cause the scent to be exhaled.
For, if these substances are bruised or crushed, they
will indeed present an odour, but it will not be so


© of. Arist. Probl. 12. 9; 13. 3 and 11.
339


THEOPHRASTUS


ὀσμὴν οὐχ ὁμοίως δὲ ἡδεῖαν οὐδ᾽ εὐταμίευτον.
τούτων μὲν οὖν τοιαῦταί τινες αἱ αἰτίαι.

14 ΙΡ. Τῶν δὲ μύρων ἡ σύνθεσις καὶ ἡ κατασκευὴ
τὸ ὅλον οἷον εἰς θησαυρισμόν ἐστι τῶν ὀσμῶν'
διόπερ εἰς τοὔλαιον τίθενται" τοῦτο γὰρ χρονιώ-
τατον καὶ ἅμα πρὸς τὴν χρείαν μάλισθ᾽ ἁρμόττον.
ἐπεὶ φύσει ἥκιστα δεκτικὸν ὀσμῆς διὰ τὴν πυκνό-
τητα καὶ τὸ λίπος, αὐτῶν δὲ τούτων τὸ λιπαρώ-
τατον, οἷον τὸ ἀμυγδάλινον: τὸ δὲ σησάμινον
καὶ τὸ ἐκ τῶν ἐλαιῶν μάλιστα.

15 Χρῶνται δὲ μάλιστα τῷ ἐκ τῆς βαλάνου τῆς
Αὐγυπτίας καὶ Συρίας, ἥκιστα γὰρ λιπαρόν' ἐπεὶ
καὶ τῷ ἐκ τῶν ἐλαιῶν μάλιστα χρῶνται τῷ
ὠμοτριβεῖ τῆς φαυλίας" δοκεῖ γὰρ ἀλιπέστατον
ἔχειν καὶ λεπτότατον" καὶ τούτῳ νέῳ καὶ μὴ
πωλαιῷ: τὸ γὰρ ὑπὲρ ἐνιαυτὸν ἀχρεῖον παχύ-
cca Kal λιπαρώτερον γενόμενον. ἔλαιον μὲν
οὗν τὸ τοιοῦτον οἰκειότατον, ἀλιπέστατον γάρ.
φασὶ δέ τινες καὶ «ἐν τῷ χρίσματι τὸ ἐκ τῶν
πικρῶν ἀμυγδάλων' πολλὰ δὲ γίνεται περὶ Κιλι-

16 κίαν καὶ ποιοῦσιν ἐξ αὐτῶν χρίσμα. φασὶ δὲ
καὶ εἰς τὰ σπουδαῖα τῶν μύρων ἁρμόττειν, ὥσπερ
καὶ τὸ ἐκ τῆς βαλάνου καὶ αὐτό" ποιεῖ δὲ «τὰ;
κελύφη αὐτῶν εὔοσμον εἰς τὸ ἔλαιον ἐμβαλλό-


SS SS oe


1 This passage was misunderstood by Plin. 13. 19, The
sense seems to be that the viscous character of oil, though
preservative of perfume, is not easily receptive of it.

2 of. H.P. 4.2.1; 4.2.6. βάλανος, balanites aegyptiaca.
See Index.


340°


‘


ee oe


CONCERNING ODOURS, 13-16


sweet nor so lasting as when they have been sub-
jected to fire. Such are the explanations of these
difficulties. —


Of the oils used as the vehicle of perfumes.


IV. Now the composition and preparation of
perfumes aim entirely, one may say, at making the
odours last. That is why men make oil the vehicle
of them, since it keeps a very long time and also is
most convenient for use. 1! By nature indeed oil is
not at all well suited to take in an odour, because of
its close and greasy character : and of particular oils
this is specially true of the most viscous, such as
almond-oil, while sesame-oil and olive-oil are the
least receptive of all.

The oil most used is that derived from the
Egyptian ? or Syrian balanos, since this is the least
viscous; the olive-oil which is most used is that
which is pressed from ‘coarse olives’*® in the raw
state, since this is thought to be the least greasy
and the least coarse: this is used while it is new,
not when it is old, for that which is kept above a
year is useless, having become thick and viscous.
This then is the kind of olive-oil which is most
suitable, since it is the least greasy. Some say that
for unguent the oil derived from bitter almonds is
best: these are abundant in Cilicia, where an
unguent is made from them. It is said that this is
suitable for choice perfumes, like the oil of the
Egyptian balanos : this is suitable in itself,! however
the shells of the fruit are thrown into the oil to give
it a good odour: indeed they are also thrown into


Peper. Wi2e123 ΘῈ τθι 8. '3.and 6,
$ αὐτὸ conj. Sch.; τοῦτο Vulg. W,


341


17


18


THEOPHRASTUS


᾽ \ \ lal -“ > lal
μενα" ἐπεὶ καὶ TO τῶν πικρῶν. ἤδη δὲ TAS οὐκ
5» / e / r /
ἐναντίον ἅμα μὲν TO ἀοσμότατον ζητεῖν, ὥσπερ
\ \ 3 \ > la aA [2 ΦΙ,
καὶ τὸ ὠμοτριβὲς ἐκ τῶν φαυλιῶν, ἅμα δ᾽ ἐν
77 “ lal
τούτοις ποιεῖν; δριμύτητα γὰρ ἔχει TO τῶν
᾽ / τ \ Of 2S: ΩΝ x oS e /
ἀμυγδάλων: εἰ μὴ ap ὅτι TO ἔλαιον ἑψόμενον
κακῶδες. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐπισκεπτέον.
A \ a al
Χρῶνται δὲ πρὸς πάντα τοῖς ἀρώμασι, τοῖς
\ Ἅ \ lal
μὲν ἐπιστύφοντες τὸ ἔλαιον τοῖς δὲ καὶ THY ὀσμὴν
4 nr \ »
ἐκ τούτων ἐμποιοῦντες. ὑποστύφουσι γὰρ πᾶν
» \ A n \ bd / ef \ »
els TO δέξασθαι μᾶλλον THY ὀσμήν, ὥσπερ τὰ ἔρια
> \ / ς 7 \ r > /
εἰς τὴν βαφήν. ὑποστύφεται δὲ τοῖς ἀσθενεστέ-
“ >’ / 3.2) ee b] /
pois τῶν ἀρωμάτων, εἶθ᾽ ὕστερον ἐμβάλλουσιν
3 » al xX J \ , A a ᾽
ἀφ οὗ ἂν βούλωνται τὴν ὀσμὴν λαβεῖν" ἐπι-
na \ \ /
κρατεῖ yap ἀεὶ TO ἔσχατον ἐμβαλλόμενον καὶ
3 3
ἂν ἔλαττον ἢ" οἷον ἐὰν εἰς κοτύλην σμύρνης
’ “ lal \ WA bl - ,
ἐμβληθῇ μνᾶ καὶ ὕστερον ἐμβληθῶσι κιναμώμου
δραχμαὶ δύο, κρατοῦσιν αἱ τοῦ κιναμώμου δύο
δραχμαί.
/ 3. to y Po x s
Θαυμάσειε δ᾽ ἄν Tis ἴσως τοῦτό τε καὶ διὰ
τί ποτε τὰ ἀρώματα προεμβαλλόμενα δεκτικώ-
al 7 > \ 7 al \
τερον ποιεῖ τοὔλαιον ὀσμὴν ἔχοντα' δεῖ yap
, A - ἂς / \ x /
ἀῶδες εἶναι TO δεξόμενον, TO δὲ κατειλημμένον
ς ’ « / > 2) EN “ ε a > A »
ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρου οὐκ a@des, ὥσθ᾽ ἧττον ἐχρῆν εἶναι
» \
δεκτικόν. αἴτιον δ᾽ ἀμφοτέρων ἢ πάντων τὸ
’ / \ Ν v \ / \ ς SN
αὐτό. ξηρὰ yap ὄντα τὸ λίπος ἕλκει πρὸς ἑαυτὰ


1 +b conj. Sch.; τὰ Vulg.W. Sch. also adds ἀμυγδάλων after


πικρῶν. ᾿
2 3,6. those derived from the Egyptian balanos and bitter


almonds.


342


τῳ.


CONCERNING ODOURS, 16-18


that! which is made from bitter almonds. Once
more, is it not inconsistent to seek the vehicle which
has the least odour of its own, such as the oil which
is pressed raw from ‘ coarse olives, and yet at the
same time to use the above-mentioned? oils as
vehicles? (for oil of almonds has a pungent smell).
Possibly the explanation is that it is only by
being cooked that oil acquires an evil smell.’ These
matters then are subject for enquiry.

They use spices in the making of all perfumes ;
some to thicken‘ the oil, some in order to impart
their odour. For in all cases they thicken the oil to
some extent to make it take the odour better, just as
they treat wool for dyeing. The less powerful spices
are used for the thickening, and then at a later
stage they put in the one whose odour they wish
to secure. ὅ ον that which is put in last always
dominates, even if it is in small quantity; thus, if a
pound of myrrh is put into a half-pint of oil, and
at a later stage a third of an ounce of cinnamon is
added, this small amount dominates.

At this one may well wonder ; and also why it is
that the previous addition of spices, which have an
odour of their own, renders the oil more receptive :
for the vehicle should be scentless, but a substance
over which another substance has thus prevailed,
cannot be scentless, so that it ought, one would
think, to have become Jess receptive. However both
facts, or rather all of them, may be accounted for in
the same way :—the spices, being solid, attract to

5. Sc. ‘and these oils are used in the raw state’ (2). Ido
not see how Furlanus’ explanation, quoted by Sch., is to be
found in the text. The following sentence shews that T.


does not claim to have settled the question.
4 ¢.e. to make it less volatile. > ef. Plin. 13. 19.


343


THEOPHRASTUS ᾿


\ ᾽ / \ \ \ / b] -
καὶ ἀναδέχεται, διὸ καὶ τὴν συνέχειαν ἐξαιρεῖ"
\ \ / \ - αὶ 9 θέ
μανὸν δὲ γενόμενον [καὶ] τοῦ λίπους ἀφαιρεθέντος

b] : \ e > / 4 : 3 7 /
ἐν ᾧ καὶ ἡ οἰκεία μάλιστα ὀσμή, δεκτικώτερον
b] / a > / \ Ν x ’
ἐγένετο Tov ἐπιβαλλομένου διὰ TO μὴ ἀντιστα-
τεῖν.
A \
19 “H δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ἀρωμάτων ὀδμὴ καὶ ἀσθενὴς
δ \ \ / /
ἅτε εἰς TO λιπαρὸν ἀνηλωμένη, Kal ἔτι κατέχεται
\ \ A , m2 \
τούτῳ διὰ TO πληρῶσαι τοὺς πόρους. ὥστε κατὰ
a a
λόγον Kav ἔλαττον ἢ τὸ ἐπιβαλλόμενον ἐπικρατεῖν
/ ’ /
τὴν τούτου ὀσμήν" εἰς ἀσθενέστατον yap ἐμπίπτει
\ , ᾽ \ , > ah : a ὁ
καὶ δεκτικώτερον. ἀνὰ λόγον ὃ ἔχει καὶ ἡ πολυ-
χρονιότης ἡ ἐν ἑκάστῳ καὶ ἡ πρὸς τὴν πύρωσιν
3 / \ 3 \ a \ \ ὃ
εὐσθένεια καὶ τἄλλα τὰ τοιαῦτα. τὸ γὰρ δεκτι-
A /
κώτατον, οἷον τῆς βαλάνου, Kal χρονιώτατον, καὶ
\ qd
διὰ τὴν αὐτὴν αἰτίαν: μάλιστα yap ὥσπερ ν
\
γίνεται καὶ συμφυὲς TO μάλιστα δεχόμενον ἀεὶ
A \
yap τὸ τοιοῦτον διαμονώτατον, διὸ καὶ πυρούμε-
νον μάλιστα ἀπαθές.
0 Ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τὸ σησάμινον,
La) \ , \ .
τοῦτο yap δεκτικώτατον' TO δὲ ἀμυγδάλινον παρ-
\ Vs
ακμάζει ταχὺ Kal ὀλιγοχρονιώτατον διὰ THY ἐναν-
/ Ν
τίαν αἰτίαν: τὸ γὰρ ἥκιστα δεξάμενον τάχιστα
ae δι. ¢ oF \ 7, ' \ \
μεθίησι. τοῦ podivov δὲ μάλιστα δεκτικὸν τὸ


1 [ have bracketed καὶ.
2-2 This passage is omitted, apparently by accident, in
both W,’s texts, though represented in his Latin version. I


344


CONCERNING ODOURS, 18-20


themselves the viscid part of the oil, and so it
attaches itself to them; thus the density of the oil
is destroyed : the oil, thus becoming thinner by the
removal! of its viscid part which chiefly contains
the characteristic odour, becomes more receptive of
the spice which is added to it, because it does not
now offer resistance.

Again that odour which is due to the spices be-
comes less powerful as it is spent on the viscid part
of the oil, while at the same time it is preserved by
this because it has entirely filled up its passages.
Wherefore it naturally follows that, even if the
added spice is in small quantity, its odour pre-
dominates, since it passes into a vehicle which is
in itself not at all powerful and which is more
receptive than itself. A corresponding account may
be given of the keeping quality of the several oils,
of their power of resisting fire, and other such
qualities. Thus that oil which is most receptive,
for instance, that of the Egyptian balanos, will also
keep longest, and for the same reason; namely that
that oil which is most receptive unites, more than
others, into one single substance, as it were, with the
spices. Such a substance will always last longer than
others; which also explains why, if exposed to fire, it
is less affected than others.

Of the other oils the same applies to that of
sesame, this being specially receptive; 2 but, for the
contrary reason, almond-oil soon loses its virtue and
keeps for a shorter time than any other, for that oil
which has been least receptive parts soonest with
the property received. Sesame-oil however receives
rose-perfume better than other oils? because of its


have printed it from Sch.’s text. The omission ig evidently
due to the double occurrence of τὸ σήσαμινον,
a ΨΩ; 345


ny


ΕΘ
i)


23


THEOPHRASTUS


rs \ \ U / \
σησάμινον διὰ THY λιπαρότητα' πυρούμενον δὲ
.." / / ) , . \
ἐξόζει σησάμου καθάπερ avadvopevov. αἱ μὲν
5 κ / / ἴω
οὖν τῶν ἐλαίων φύσεις καὶ δυνάμεις τοιαῦται.
’ »
V. Τὰ δ᾽ ἀρώματα πάντα σχεδὸν καὶ εὔοσμα
\ κα » A \ \ \ \ \
πλὴν τῶν ἀνθῶν ξηρὰ καὶ θερμὰ καὶ στυπτικὰ
/
Kal δηκτικά. τὰ δὲ καὶ ἔχοντά τινα TLKPOTHTA,
καθάπερ καὶ ἐν τοῖς πρότερον εἴπομεν, ὥσπερ
5 ΄ et 5 46 A ἢ > - \
ἶρις σμύρνα λιβανωτός, ὡς δ᾽ ἁπλῶς εἰπεῖν καὶ
td / a /
τὰ μύρα. κοινόταται δὲ τῶν δυνάμεων TO TE
᾿ ‘ \ , ἃ ἣν
στυπτικὸν καὶ τὸ θερμαντικόν, ἃ δὴ καὶ ἐργά-
ζονται.
ς 7 \ > , ΄ὕ \
Ὑποστύφονται μὲν οὖν πάντα πυρούμενα, TAS
, > Ν \ le » fA \ \
δ᾽ ὀσμὰς τὰς κυρίας ἔνια λαμβάνει ψυχρὰ καὶ
\ / a ‘al x \
ἀπύρωτα. καὶ ἔοικεν ὥσπερ TOV ἀνθῶν Ta μὲν
ol \ \ fol ,
ψυχροβαφῆ ta δὲ θερμοβαφῆ παραπλησίως
v \ AY a ’ a / \ eee 4
ἔχειν καὶ ἐπὶ TOV ὀσμῶν. πάντων δὲ ἡ ἕψησις
\ / \ / 5 \
εἴς τε τὴν ὑπόστυψιν καὶ τὰς κυρίας ὀσμὰς EVioT-
la / ¢ / ων
αμένων τῶν ἀγγείων ὕδατι γίνεται καὶ οὐκ αὐτῷ
a / a VA “4 \ 9
τῷ πυρὶ χρωμένων: τοῦτο δέ, ὅτε μαλακὴν εἶναι
A \ / Ἂ, > , \ / 7, A
δεῖ τὴν θερμότητα, καὶ ἀπουσία πολλὴ γένοιτ᾽ ἂν
“ \ / \ oe A Ἃ ν᾽
τῇ φλογὶ χρωμένων, καὶ ἔτι καῦσιν ἂν ὄζοι.
lal > » / \ 3 / .“ 4
Ποιεῖ δ᾽ ἐλάττω THY ἀπουσίαν ὅσα πυρούμενα
\ , ’ \ A hoe ἔ \
λαμβάνει Tas κυρίας ὀσμὰς μᾶλλον ἢ ὅσα ψυχρὰ
a \ / Ν
διὰ τὸ προφυρᾶσθαι τὰ πυρούμενα, τὰ μὲν οἴνῳ
4. ἡ Ν V\ovg e \ > / \ \
εὐώδει, τὰ δὲ ὕδατι: ἧττον yap ἀναπίνει" τὰ δὲ
\ νυν “Ὁ 7 2 Φ “-“
ψυχρὰ ξηρὰ ὄντα μᾶλλον, καθάπερ ipis κοπεῖσα.
346


ΑΝ ot 06 tend


_ =


CONCERNING ODOURS, 20-23


viscid quality ; and, when subjected to fire, it gives
out a smell of sesame, as though it were being
disintegrated. Such are the special characters and
properties of the various oils.


Of the spices used in making perfumes and their treatment.


V. Almost all spices and sweet scents except
flowers are dry hot astringent and mordant. Some
also possess a certain bitterness, as we said above,
as iris, myrrh, frankincense, and perfumes in general.
However the most universal qualities are astringency
and the production of heat; they actually produce
these effects.

All spices are given their astringent quality by
exposure to fire, but some of them assume their special
odours even when cold and not exposed to fire ; and
it also appears that, just as with vegetable dyes some
are applied hot and some cold, so is it with odours.
But in all cases the cooking, whether to produce the
astringent quality or to impart the proper odour, is
done in vessels standing in water and not in actual
contact with the fire; the reason being that the
heating must be gentle, and there would be con-
siderable waste if these were in actual contact with
the flames; and further the perfume would smell of
burning.

However there is less waste when the perfume
obtains its proper odour by exposure to fire than
when it does so in a cold state, since those perfumes
which are subjected to fire are first steeped either in
fragrant wine or in water: for then they absorb ! less:
while those which are treated in a cold state, being dry,
absorb ! more, for instance bruised iris-root. Thus, if


1 ἀναπίνει. So Sch. explains. of. ἐκπίνωσιν, 24.


347


24


25


26


THEOPHRASTUS


, \ A / ~ 3
λαμβάνοντος γὰρ τοῦ ἀμφορέως Enpas ἴριδος
/ / \ 7 ¢ / \
κεκομμένης μέδιμνον καὶ δύο ἡμίεκτα πολλὴν
A \
ποιεῖν φασὶν ἀπουσίαν, ἐὰν δὲ μετρίως φυράσῃ
λείπειν ὅσον δύο χόας, τοῖς δὲ πολλοῖς ἔλαττον.
Τίψεται δὲ τὸ βέλτιον ἴρινον ἐὰν ἢ ξηρὰ καὶ
/
ἀπύρωτος ἡ ipiss ἀκρατεστέρα yap ἡ δύναμις 7)
ὟΝ a \ / / \
ἐὰν φυραθεῖσα καὶ πυρουμένη. συμβαίνει δὲ
ὥσπερ καὶ ἐκθλίβεσθαι μᾶχλον ἐκ τῶν προ-
/ \ \ » > / \
πεφυραμένων διὰ TO ἧττον ἀναδέχεσθαι Kal
ΠΑΝ 5) ie 1 ΄ \ ᾽ \ ΄
ἕλκειν εἰς AUTO’ προστύφοντες δὲ οὐ πολὺν χρό-
bial \ ’ / ’ a 5 a “ \
νον ἐῶσι τὰ ἀρώματα ἀλλ᾽ ἐξαιροῦσιν, ὅππως μὴ
πολὺ ἐκπίνωσιν.
A \
Πρὸς ἕκαστον δὲ τῶν μύρων ἐμβάλλουσι τὰ
a : \ ,
πρόσφορα τῶν ἀρωμάτων, οἷον eis μὲν τὴν KU-
προν καρδάμωμον ἀσπάλαθον ἀναφυράσαντες τῷ
3 Lf 5 \ \ ff, ok a > /
εὐώδει. εἰς δὲ TO ῥόδινον σχοῖνον ἀσπάλαθον
/ e » 5] / ς / \ a
κάλαμον. ἡ δ᾽ ἀναφύρασις ὁμοίως. καὶ τοῖς
ἄλλοις ἀεὶ τὰ ἁρμόττοντα. τῷ ῥοδίνῳ δ᾽ ἐμβάλ-
\ ce \ \ SD 7 » ἢ
λονται καὶ ἅλες πολλοὶ καὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἴδιον παρὰ
Ss Ν \ , 9 / , ,
τἄλλα, διὸ καὶ πλείστη ἀπουσία γίνεται" μίγ-
vuTat γὰρ εἰς τὸν ἀμφορέα δύο μέδιμνοι.
lal / / “
Τῆς δὲ κύπρου ἡ μὲν ἐργασία παραπλησία TH
' Dry measure : the equivalents given are, of course, only
approximate.
τὸ βέλτιον ἴρινον W. after Sch.; τὸ βέλτιον τὸ ἴρινον vulg.


The article must be omitted in one place or the other.


κύπρος, called from a tree of that name: not mentioned
1 Ἐν cf. Phin. ἘΣ 1710;
* of. ALP. 9, 7. 2 and 3, 6 of. ΘΛ.


348


ee eo |, λμμν)


CONCERNING ODOURS, 23-26


into eight and a half gallons of oil we put thirteen
gallons! of dry and bruised iris-root, they say that much
loss is caused, while if one does not steep it too
much, only about eleven pints and a half are wasted :
and in the case of most perfumes the waste is less.

However the superior? iris-perfume is made by
using the root dry and not subjecting it to fire: for
then its virtue asserts itself more completely than
when it is steeped in a liquid or subjected to fire.
It also comes to pass that, if the perfumes have been
first steeped, their virtues are, as it were, squeezed
out of them to a greater extent, because they take
in and absorb less: and so, when they are making
them astringent, they do not leave the spices in the
oil for long, but take them out, so that they should
not absorb an excessive amount.

For making each perfume they put in the suit-
able spices. Thus to make sypros® they put in
cardamom* and aspalathos,> having first steeped
them in sweet wine. To make rose-perfume they
put in ginger-grass aspalathos and sweet-flag : and
these are steeped as in the case of kypros. So too
into each of the others are put the spices which
suit them. Into rose-perfume moreover is put a
quantity of salt’: this treatment is peculiar to that
perfume, and involves a great deal of waste, twenty-
three gallons § of salt being put to eight gallons and
a half of the perfume.

The manufacture of sypros resembles that of


ὃ τῷ εὐώδει here evidently means the same as τῷ γλυκεῖ, 44,
where τῷ οἴνῳ τῷ εὐώδει occurs just above: of. μελικράτῳ ἢ
pane, COP 26217; 2.

’ To prevent decay, as Diosc. 2. 53 explains.

® Turn. suggests that μέδιμνοι should be μναῖ, the initial M
having been misunderstood by a copyist.


349


27


28


THEOPHRASTUS


PPR , \ > > 97 \ , + /
τοῦ ῥοδίνου' πλὴν ἀλλ᾽ ἐάν τις μὴ ταχέως ἐξαίρῃ
\ > / - > / / \ /
καὶ ἀποθλίβῃ σῆψις ἐγγινομένη φθείρει τὰ μύρα
διὰ τὴν δυσωδίαν: ποιεῖ γὰρ σῆψιν ἀνυγραι-

a /
νομένη. παραπλησία δ᾽ ἐργασία καὶ τοῦ μηλίνου"
/ \ ες / \ Ν ip b] /
προστυφέντος yap ἐλαίου καὶ Ta μῆλα ἐμβάλ-
λουσιν εἰς ψυχρόν, εἶτ᾽ ἐξαιροῦσι πάλιν πρὸ τοῦ
/ \ A \ > 4 ξ
μελαίνεσθαι κατὰ πάσας τὰς ἐμβολάς" μελαινο-
n \ "9
μένων yap σῆψις διὰ τὸ ἀνυγραίνεσθαι, καθάπερ
an 7
καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς κύπρου.
\ \
VI. ἽΛπαντα δὲ συντίθενται Ta μύρα Ta μὲν
a \
ἀπ᾽ ἀνθῶν τὰ δὲ ἀπὸ φύλλων τὰ δὲ ἀπὸ κλωνὸς
ἘΦ 8a iS “ἃν, CRP A Wee. ἔν ἃ ΄ \ 8: Gees
τὰ δ᾽ ἀπὸ ῥίζης τὰ δ᾽ ἀπὸ ξύλων τὰ δ᾽ ἀπὸ Kap-
n \ δ᾽ > \ ὃ Ν δὲ ͵ὔ > €
ποῦ τὰ ἀπὸ δακρύων. μικτὰ δὲ πάνθ᾽ ὡς
3 a > ? > 4 \ \ Cw \ \
εἰπεῖν. am ἀνθῶν μὲν οἷον TO ῥόδινον καὶ TO
- Ἂν; a
λευκόϊνον. Kal TO σούσινον" Kal yap τοῦτο ἐκ
a 4 » δὲ Ν ΄ \ A @ 7
τῶν κρίνων" ἔτι δὲ τὸ σισύμβρινον καὶ τὸ ἑρπύλ-
\
NLVOY καὶ ἡ κύπρος καὶ πρὸς τούτοις TO KPOKLVOV"
, / n
βέλτιστος δ᾽ ἐν Αἰγίνῃ καὶ Κιλικίᾳ. ἀπὸ δὲ τῶν
,ὔ Ka / ,ὔ Ν \ > / 6
φύλλων οἷον TO τε μύρρινον Kal TO οἰνάνθινον'
τ δ᾽ 3 / 4 5 \ \ /
αὕτη δ᾽ ἐν Κύπρῳ φύεται ὀρεινὴ καὶ πολύοδμος"
lal are ,
ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς ἐν TH λλάδι οὐ γίνεται διὰ τὸ
ἄοδμον.
> διε n \ , ” \ \ / \
Amro ῥιζῶν δὲ TO τε ἔρινον καὶ TO νάρδινον Kal
τὸ ἀμαράκινον ἐκ τοῦ κόστου' τοῦτο γὰρ ὀνο-


1 ef. Diosc. 1. 58.

2 I have bracketed καὶ as suggested by Sch.

* This passage, with some variations, is quoted by Athen.
15. 39. 4 of. Plin., 13. 11,

δ᾽ of. H.P. 6. 6. 11. for the plant, and for the perfume
Athen. 15. 38.


35°


CONCERNING ODOURS, 26-28


rose-perfume, except that, unless one soon takes out
the flowers and squeezes them out, decay sets in and
ruins the perfume by giving it a disagreeable smell,
since they cause decay as they get soaked. Similar
also is the manufacture of quince-perfume!: the oil
is first made astringent, and is cold when the quinces *
are put into it: then they take them out before they
turn black, removing each batch before the next is
put in: for, as they turn black, decay ensues because
they get soaked through—just as in the case of
kypros.


Of the various parts of plants used for perfumes, and of the
composition of various notable perfumes.

VI. 3 Perfumes are compounded from various parts
of the plant, flowers leaves twigs root wood fruit
and gum: and in most cases the perfume is made
from a mixture of several parts. Rose and gilli-
flower perfumes are made from the flowers: so also
is the perfume called susznon,* this too being made
from flowers, namely, lilies : also the perfumes named
from bergamot-mint and tufted thyme, /ypros,
and also the saffron-perfume; the crocus which
produces this is best in Aegina and Cilicia. Instances
of those made from the leaves are the perfumes
called from myrtle and drop-wort®: this grows
in Cyprus on the hills and is very fragrant: that
which grows in Hellas yields no perfume, being
scentless.

6 From roots are made the perfumes named from
iris spikenard and sweet marjoram,’ an ingredient in
which is koston ; for it is the root to which this name


6 Instances of perfumes made from twigs seem to be
missing. ? cf. 30. Text perhaps defective,


351


THEOPHRASTUS


μάζουσι τὴν ῥίζαν. τὸ δὲ χρίσμα TO’ Epetpixov
ἐκ τοῦ κυπείρου. κομίζεται δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν Κυκλά-
dwv τὸ κύπειρον. ἀπὸ ξύλου δὲ ὁ φοῖνιξ καλού-
μενος" ἐμβάλλουσι γὰρ τὴν ὀνομαζομένην σπάθην
ξηράναντες. ἀπὸ καρπῶν δὲ τό τε μήλινον καὶ
τὸ μύρτινον καὶ τὸ δάφνινον' τὸ δ Αἰγύπτιον ἐκ
πλειόνων, ἐ ἔκ τε τοῦ κιναμώμου καὶ ἐκ σμύρνης καὶ
ἐξ ἄλλων.

29 "Ere δ᾽ ἐκ πλειόνων τούτου τὸ μεγαλεῖον" καὶ
γὰρ ἐκ κιναμώμου .... καὶ ἐκ τῆς σμύρνης κοπτο-
μένης ἔλαιον ῥεῖ: στακτὴ γὰρ καλεῖται διὰ τὸ
«κατὰ! μικρὸν στάζεϊν. ὃ δὴ μόνον τινές φασιν
ἁπλοῦν εἶναι καὶ ἀσύνθετον τῶν μύρων τὰ δ᾽
ἄλλα πάντα σύνθετα, πλὴν τὰ μὲν ἐκ πλειόνων
τὰ δ᾽ ἐξ ἐλαττόνων, ἐξ ἐλαχίστων δὲ τὸ iptvov. οἱ
μὲν οὖν οὕτω λέγουσιν, οἱ δὲ τὴν ἐργασίαν τῆς
στακτῆς εἶναι τοιάνδε' τὴν σμύρναν ὅταν κόψωσι
καὶ διατήξωσι ἐν ἐλαίῳ βαλανίνῳ πυρὶ μαλακῷ
ὕδωρ ἐ ἐπιχεῖν θερμόν' συνιζάνειν δ᾽ εἰς βυθὸν τὴν
σμύρναν καὶ τοὔλαιον καθάπερ ἰλύν: ὅταν δὲ
τοῦτο συμβῇ, τὸ μὲν ὕδωρ ἀπηθεῖν τὴν δ᾽ ὑπό-
στασιν ἀποθλίβειν ὀργώνοις.

30 Τὸ δὲ μεγαλεῖον ἐκ ῥητίνης κεκαυμένης συν-
τίθεσθαι καὶ ἐλαίου ᾿βαλανίνου" μίγνυσθαι δὲ
κασίαν κινάμωμον σμύρναν. πλείστην δὲ πραγ-
ματείαν περὶ τὸ μεγαλεῖον καὶ τὸ Αἰγύπτιον εἶναι,


) Of P 28.7 135 OP. 8.9:
hGhs dae. ἧς 8, 4, σπάθην Sppeart tp be a conj. of W. for
vulg. πλάτην : ἐλάτην Turn. Cf, LS.
Said to be called after the menus one Megallos: cf.
Plin. 13, 13.


557


CONCERNING ODOURS, 28-30


is applied. The Eretrian unguent is made from
the root of kypeiron,! which is obtained from the
Cyclades as well as from Euboea. From wood is
made what is called ‘ palm-perfume’: for they put
in what is called the ‘spathe,? having first dried
it. From fruits are made the quince-perfume, the
myrtle, and the bay. The ‘Egyptian’ is made
from several ingredients, including cinnamon and
myrrh.

Again from several parts of the plant is made the
perfume called megaleion,? which is made from
cinnamon and... «(ἢ and from the myrrh when
it is bruised flows an oil: it is in fact called
stakte® (in drops) because it comes in drops slowly.
Some indeed say that this is the only simple un-
compounded perfume, and that all the others are
compound, though made from a larger or smaller
number of ingredients, and that iris-perfume is
made from the smallest number of all. Some
assert this, but others declare that the manufacture
of stakte (myrrh-oil) is as follows: having bruised the
myrrh and dissolved it in oil of balanos over a gentle
fire, they pour hot water on it: and the myrrh and
oil sink to the bottom like a deposit; and, as soon
as this has occurred, they strain off the water and
squeeze the sediment in a press.

Megaleion, these authorities say, is compounded of
burnt resin © and oil of balanos, with which are mixed
cassia cinnamon and myrrh. They add that this
perfume and the Egyptian are the most troublesome


4 The end of the account of mega/leion and the beginning of
that of myrrh-perfume seem to be missing. ?Supply καὶ
κασίας Kal σμύρνης.


poe. Ἡ.Ρ. 9. 4. 10. ΘΙ 12: 1.


359
VOL. Il. AA


31


THEOPHRASTUS


πλείστων yap μίξιν καὶ πολυτελεστάτων. τῷ δὲ
μεγαλείῳ καὶ τὸ ἔλαιον ἕψεσθαι δέχ᾽ ἡμέρας καὶ
δέκα νύκτας, εἶτα οὕτως τὴν ῥητίνην ἐμβάλλεσθαι
καὶ τἄχλα' δεκτικώτερον γὰρ ἀφεψηθέν. τὸ δ᾽
ἀμαράκινον τὸ χρηστὸν ἐκ τῶν βελτίστων ἀρω-
/ \ > / / 3 >’
μάτων συντίθεσθαι χωρὶς ἁμαράκου" TOUT@ δ᾽ οὐ
a / a > UA \ \ »ΟΣ
χρῆσθαι μόνῳ τῶν ἀρωμάτων τοὺς μυρεψοὺς οὐδ
¢ /
εἰς ἐν μύρον, ἀλλὰ ψευδώνυμός τις ἡ ἐπίκλησις.
Ποιοῦσι δὲ καὶ τὰ μὲν ἀχρωμάτιστα τὰ δὲ
κεχρωματισμένα. χρωματίζουσε δὲ ἀμαράκινον
ῥόδινον μεγαλεῖον, ἀχρωμάτιστα δὲ τῶν μὲν
πολυτελῶν Αἰγύπτιον μήλινον κύπρος, τὰ δ᾽
> nan tL an \ > / ‘ \
εὐτελῆ πάντα: ταῦτα δὲ ἀχρωμάτιστα διότι τὸ
Ν ΛΑ, ΧΝ \ / Nee /
μὲν Αἰγύπτιον καὶ τὴν κὕπρον λευκᾶ εἰναι βού-
n “ lal
Aovtat, TH δὲ μηλίνῳ THY TOV μήλων χρόαν, τοῖς
᾽ ᾽ / > la \ lal /
δ᾽ εὐτελέσιν οὐ λυσιτελεῖ TO χρῶμα προστιθέναι.
7 Ν 3 \ > bY lal > / \ 2
χρωματίζουσι δὲ τὰ μεν ἐρυθρὰ τῇ ἀγχούσῃ, τὸ ὃ


i n /
ἀμαράκινον τῷ καλουμε


vo χρώματι" τοῦτο δ᾽
5» \ « / « yy 5 Qn /
ἐστὶ ῥιζίον ὅ ἄγουσιν ἐκ τῆς Συρίας.
VII. Συνεργεῖν δὲ δοκοῦσι πρὸς τὰς γεύσεις
>} € ’ \ / > \ \ c / \
οὐχ αἱ ὀδμαὶ μόνον ἀλλὰ καὶ αἱ δριμύτητες καὶ
2 / δ΄ ἢ \ \ lal » \ \
ai θερμότητες ἐνίων, διὸ καὶ τῶν οἴνων τισὶ τὰ
τοιαῦτα μιγνύντες ὥσπερ κέντρον ἐμποιοῦσιν.


ἔστι δὲ ἡ μὲν σμύρνη θερμὴ καὶ δηκτικὴ μετὰ


354


-«


CONCERNING ODOURS, 30-32


to make, since no others involve the mixture of so
many and such costly ingredients. ‘To make megaleion,
they say, the oil is boiled for ten days and nights,
and not till then do they put in the resin and the
other things, since the oil is more receptive when it
has been thoroughly boiled. The superior kind of
sweet marjoram-perfume,! they say, is made of all
the best spices except sweet marjoram : in fact this
is the only spice which perfumers do not use for any
perfume, and the name is a misnomer.

Some perfumes are made up colourless, some are
given a colour. They give a colour to sweet mar-
joram-perfume, rose-perfume, and megaleion, while
among expensive kinds the Egyptian, quince-perfume
and kypros are colourless, as well as all the cheaper
kinds. The reason why these are made without
colour is that it is desired that the Egyptian and
kypros should look white and that quince-perfume
should have the colour of quinces, while it is not
worth while to add colour to the cheaper sorts.
The dye used for colouring red perfumes is alkanet ;
the sweet marjoram-perfume is dyed with the sub-
stance called khroma (dye), which is a root imported
from Syria.

Of the properties of various spices.

VII. It is thought that not only the smells of
perfumes contribute to a pleasant taste, but also the
qualities of pungency and heat which are found in
some of them: accordingly some of these perfumes
are also mixed with certain wines to give, as it were,
‘point’ to them. Thus myrrh is hot and has a
biting quality as well as being astringent, and it also


1 Clearly distinct from that mentioned in 28.


AAC?


33


34


THEOPHRASTUS


στύψεως, ἔχει δὲ Kal πικρίαν. TO δὲ κινάμωμον
δριμύτητά τινα μετρίαν μετὰ θερμότητος. παρα-
πλησίως δὲ καὶ τὸ κόστον. ἡ δὲ κασία τούτων
ὑπερβάλλει θερμότητι καὶ δριμύτητι καὶ στύψει.
θερμὴ δὲ καὶ στυπτικὴ καὶ ἡ ἶρις, καθ᾽ ὑπερβολὴν
δὲ καὶ πικρὰ νέα οὖσα καὶ τὸν χρῶτα τῶν ἐργαζ-
ομένων ἀφελκοῖ. δηκτικὸν δὲ καὶ τὸ καρδάμω-
μον μετὰ θερμότητος. τοῦ δὲ βαλσάμου ὁ μὲν
ὀπὸς καὶ τὸ καρπίον ἀνδρικώτερα πρὸς ἀμφότερα
ταῦτα, τὸ δὲ ξύλον ἀσθενέστερον. παραπλησίαν
δ᾽ ἔχει τούτῳ δύναμιν καὶ τὸ ἄμωμον.

Ὁ δὲ σχοῖνος δηκτικώτερον μὲν τοῦ καλάμου
καὶ θερμότερον, στυπτικὰ δὲ ὁμοίως ἄμφω.
τούτων δὲ στυπτικώτερον τὸ κύπειρον. στύφει
δὲ καὶ ἡ ἀσπάλαθος ἡ εὐώδης. ἡ δὲ νάρδος
δηκτικὴ μετὰ θερμότητος. τὸ δὲ μάρον καὶ τὸ
χρῶμα τὸ εἰς τὸ ἀμαράκινον ἐμμιγνύμενον θερ-
μαντικά. ἰσυνεργεῖ δὲ καὶ τῆς “ἀγχούσης τὸ
ῥιζίον εἰς τὴν χρόαν τοῦ ῥοδίνου καὶ τῆς ἴριδος.

Νέα μὲν οὖν ὄντα τῶν ἀρωμάτων ἔνια δυνάμεις
μὲν εὐθὺς ἐ ἔχει βαρείας καὶ δριμείας, παλαιούμενα
δὲ μέχρι τῆς ἀκμῆς γλυκαίνεται, εἶτ᾽ ἀναλύεται
πάλιν. οἷον ἡ ἶρις εἰς μὲν τὴν ἐργασίαν ἀκμάζει
μετὰ τὴν συλλογὴν τρία ἔτη, καὶ διαμένει δὲ
πλεῖστον χρόνον ἐξ ἔτη. τὸ δὲ μάρον ἔτη δύο.
ἡ δὲ σμύρνα δέκα ἔτη διαμένει βελτίων γενομένη.
παραπλησίως δὲ τούτοις ἡ τῆς ἀκμῆς διαμονὴ
καὶ τοῦ κιναμώμου καὶ τοῦ κόστου καὶ τῆς
κασίας. σχοῖνος δὲ καὶ κάλαμος παρακμάξει


ταχύ. τῶν δ᾽ ἀνθῶν τὰ μὲν εὐθὺς χλωρὰ ὄντα


Ὁ] 1, 21. 42. 2. ef. Index, σχοῖνος (2).
3 cf. Index, κάλαμος ὁ εὐώδης.


356


CONCERNING ODOURS, 32-34


has a bitter quality. Cinnamon again has a fair
amount of pungency as well as heat. So too is it
with koston. Cassia exceeds both of these in heat
pungency and astringency. Iris-perfume is hot and
astringent, and excessively bitter when it is fresh,
lin which state it causes sores on the skin of those
that work on it. Cardamom has also a biting quality
as well as heat. The juice and the fruit of balsam
of Mecca are more active in producing both these
qualities, while the wood is less so. Nepaul cardamom
has also a property similar to this.

_ Ginger-grass? has a more biting quality than
sweet-flag,? and is hotter; but both are equally
astringent. Kypetron is however more astringent
than either. The sweet-scented aspalathos also has
this quality. Spikenard has a biting quality as well
as heat. Maron and the khroma which is mixed with
sweet marjoram-perfume are heating. ‘*The root of
alkanet also contributes to the colour of rose-perfume
and iris-perfume.

Now some spices when they are fresh have at first
heavy and pungent qualities, but in course of time
become sweet till they have reached their prime,
and then lose their properties again. Thus the iris
is at its prime for manufacturing the perfume for
three years after it was gathered, and 5 lasts for six
years at longest. Maron lasts two years; myrrh ten,
and improves with time. Cinnamon foston and
cassia keep at their best for about the same periods
as these. Ginger-grass and sweet-flag soon get past
their prime. Of flowers some, like the rose, possess
4 This sentence seems irrelevant here.

δ. xal—éryn. These words are omitted, apparently by


accident, in both W.’s editions, though represented in his
Latin translation.
357


86


THEOPHRASTUS


\ / yy / δι. 238 \ \
Tas δυνάμεις ἔχει, καθάπερ TO ῥόδον, τὰ δὲ Enpay-
, ἦ΄ ε , ee , \
θέντα, καθάπερ ὁ κρόκος καὶ ὁ μελίλωτος" χλωρὰ
Ἀ ’
γὰρ ὑγρότερα.
Ν / lal
Tas μὲν οὖν φύσεις καὶ δυνάμεις τῶν ἀρωμάτων
ἐκ τούτων θεωρητέον.
VIII. Δοκεῖ δὲ τὸ μεγαλεῖον ἀφλέγμαντον
/
εἶναι παντὸς τραύματος" TO δὲ ῥόδινον ἄριστον
ἈΝ A , / 7 nr
πρὸς τὰ ὦτα. ταῦτα δ᾽ οὐκ ἀλόγως. τοῦ μὲν
\ { ed
yap ἡ σύνθεσις ἐκ ῥητίνης κεκαυμένης, ὥσπερ
/ /
ἐλέχθη, καὶ κασίας καὶ κιναμώμου καὶ σμύρνης,
ἅπαντα δὲ ταῦτα στυπτικὰ καὶ ξηραντικά. τὸ
\ LF a 3 εὐ 3 \ “ > Ε \ e
δὲ ῥόδινον τοῖς ὠσὶν ἀγαθὸν ὅτι ἐν ἁλσὶν ἡ
/ ᾽ / \ \ 2 / \
ποίησις" ἀναξηραίνει yap καὶ ἐκθερμαίνει διὰ
Ν /
τοὺς ἅλας" διὸ Kal ἡ ἁλοσάχνη ἀγαθόν. ἀλλὰ
\ a an
TO τῆς στραγγουρίας λόγου δεῖται" Kal yap ταύτῃ
a ’
λέγουσι μάλιστα βοηθεῖν. αἴτιον δ᾽ ἂν εἴη διότι
lal ‘ ς / 7 b] “ a“ /
πᾶν τὸ ὑπεξάγειν μέλλον ἀναλῦσαι δεῖ πρότερον
Ν ς , an ~ e ω fal
To ὑπεξαχθησόμενον' τοῦτο δὲ οἱ ἅλες ποιοῦσιν,
ς δ 3 / \ e \ 5 7
ἡ δ᾽ εὐωδία τὴν ὁρμὴν ἀπέδωκε.
Διὰ τί δὲ τὸ ἔρινον εὔοσμον μὲν οὐ ποιεῖ δὲ τὴν
ὁρμήν; ἢ διότι στυπτικὸν καὶ συνάγει τοὺς
/ 24 / 7 wi /
πόρους, ὥστε συγκλείσει κωλύειν τὴν δίοδον;
ἀλλὰ καὶ κοιλίας λυτικὴ διά τε τὴν θερμότητα
\ \ \ ᾽ / \ pa \ /
καὶ διὰ TO ἀποστύφειν τοὺς ἐπὶ τὴν κύστιν
Ἷ \
πόρους: ἀποκλειομένων yap τούτων εἰς τὴν
κοιλίαν ἡ συρροή. τὸ δὲ ὅλον φαρμακῶδες καὶ
1 of. O.P. 6. 14. 8 and 11.


358


,
᾿
Ά


CONCERNING ODOURS, 34-36


their virtues from the first while they are still fresh,
some only after they are dried, as crocus and melilotos,}
these having a certain amount of moisture while they
are fresh.

These examples may suffice for study of the
characters and properties of spices.


Of the medicinal properties of certain perfumes.


VIII. Megaleion is believed to relieve the in-
flammation caused by any wound, and rose-perfume
to be excellent for the ears. And this is probable
enough. For the former is composed, as was said,
of burnt resin cassia cinnamon and myrrh, and all
these have astringent and drying properties:
while the reason why rose-perfume is good for the
ears is that salt is used in the manufacture of it: for
it is by reason of the salt that it dries and warms
(which is why ‘ sea-foam 2’ is also good for the ears).
Its use against strangury however needs explanation :
for it is said to be specially helpful against this.
The explanation may be that anything which is to
remove the difficulty must first dissolve that which
is to be removed ; and this is the effect of the salt,
while the fragrance supplies the necessary stimulus.

Why however, it may be asked, though iris-
perfume is fragrant, does it not give the stimulus?
Perhaps it is because it is astringent and closes the
passages, so that by shutting them it prevents free
course. On the other hand this perfume acts as a
laxative on the bowels because of its heating
quality and because it astringes the passages leading
to the bladder: for, when these are closed, the
liquid collects in the bowels. In general iris-


2 Said to be a zoophyte: cf. Arist. H.A. 9. 14. 2.
359


37


38


THEOPHRASTUS


Ἄν ΟΕ. A f ς ’ t..oF /
TO ἰρινον καὶ ἄλλα τῶν μύρων. ἡ δ᾽ αἰτία πάντων
« / >’ a 5 A 7 a >
ὡς καθόλου εἰπεῖν ἐν ταῖς δυνάμεσι ταῖς εἰρη-
μέναις, OTL στυπτικὰ καὶ θερμαντικά: τὰ ἀρώ-
\ \ a a
ματα yap Ta τοιαῦτα φαρμακώδη. ταῦτα μὲν
οὖν ἔξω τῆς τέχνης.
IX. Κρᾶσις δὲ καὶ μῖξις οὐκ ἔστιν ὡρισμένη
A 4 A A
TOV ἀρωμάτων, WOT ἐκ τῶν αὐτῶν ἀεὶ χρηστὰ
¢ a \ /
Kal ὅμοια γίνεσθαι, ἀλλοῖα δὲ συμβαίνει διὰ τὴν
A VA fal al
ἀνωμαλίαν τῶν δυνάμεων τῶν ἐν τοῖς ἀρώμασι.
A 3... ,ὔ Qa if / ’ / c/
τῆς δ᾽ ἀνωμαλίας αἰτίαι πλείους. μία μέν, ἥπερ
A Yi - a
καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις καρποῖς, ἡ τοῦ ἔτους κατάστασις"
e A / id \ ’ » /
αὕτη yap πολυχουστέρας ὁτὲ δ᾽ ἀσθενεστέρας
A / \ ipl a
Tas δυνάμεις <movet>. ἑτέρα δὲ ἐν TH συλλογῇ,
A a a ee A \ \
TO TPOTEPHTAL τῆς ἀκμῆς ἢ VaTEPHTaL καὶ yap
A > \ ὃ / , δ᾽ \ ‘\
τοῦτο οὐ μικρὸν διαφέρει. τρίτη δ᾽ ἡ μετὰ τὴν
΄ Ὁ , al \ \ > /
συλλογήν, ὅσα χρόνου δεῖται πρὸς THY ἀκμήν,
ef ~ / \ \ > a (a: \
ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη: καὶ yap ἐνταῦθά ἐστι TO προτε-
ρεῖν καὶ ὑστερεῖν.
la) a ᾿ a \
Τούτων δὲ τὸ μὲν τῶν ἐτῶν οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν, πλὴν
> \ > / \ “- "4 \ >
εἰς TO εἰδέναι τὰ ποῖα σφοδροτέρας καὶ ἀσθενε-
/ ” \ / \ \ \ \ > \
στέρας ἔχει Tas δυνάμεις" τὰ δὲ κατὰ τὰς ἀκμὰς
n a Χ \ \ >
τῆς τε συλλογῆς Kal μετὰ τὴν συλλογὴν ἐφ
ἔσαν 3 av. lal 2O/ A alt /
ἡμῖν ἐστί, TO εἰδότι μᾶλλον TO ἐπιτυγχάνειν.
« 5. 7, \ ΄ A ΄ ᾽
Η μὲν οὖν γένεσις καὶ σύνθεσις τῶν μύρων ἐκ
τούτων.


360


=


CONCERNING ODOURS, 36-38


perfume, as well as others, has medicinal properties.
And the explanation in all cases, to put it generally,
lies in the above-mentioned properties of astringency
and heating; for it is spices possessing these pro-
perties that are medicinal. However these matters
lie outside our subject of study.


Of rules for the mixture of spices, and of the storing of various
perfumes,

IX. There is no fixed rule for the combination
and mixture of spices in the sense that the same
components will always produce a satisfactory and a
uniform result: the result varies by reason of the
varying quality of the virtues found in the spices.
For this there are several reasons. One, which
applies also to fruits, is the character of the season ;
this causes the virtues to be sometimes much more
than ordinarily powerful, sometimes less so. Another
is to be found in the time of collection, according
as it is made before or after the spices are in their
prime. A third cause operates after the collection,
that is, in the case of those spices which need time
to come to their prime, as was said!: for here too
it is possible to be too soon or too late.

Of these causes that which depends on the seasons
is not within our control, except so far as we can
discover which spices in a particular season have
powerful, and which weak virtues.2 But we can
control those which depend on collecting them
when in their prime, or on keeping them after they
are collected, that is, if we know pretty well how to
hit the right moment.

So much for the origin and composition of
perfumes.

1 34, 2 2,6. and we can select accordingly.


301


99


40


41


THEOPHRASTUS


Πολυχρονιώτατον δ᾽ ἐστὶ τό τ᾽ Αἰγύπτιον καὶ
τὸ ἴρινον καὶ τὸ ἀμαράκινον καὶ τὸ νάρδινον,
πάντων δὲ μάλιστα ἡ στακτή, διαμένει γὰρ
ὁποσονοῦν χρόνον. μυροπώλης δέ τις ἔφη παρ᾽
αὐτῷ μεμενηκέναι Αἰγύπτιον μὲν ὀκτὼ ἔτη, ἴρινον
δὲ εἴκοσι, καὶ ἔτι διαμένειν βέλτιον ὃν τῶν ἀκμαζ-
όντων. ἡ μὲν οὖν χρονιότης ἐν τούτοις.

Τὰ δ᾽ ἄνθινα πάντα ἀσθενῆ. συμβαίνει δὲ
τοῖς ἀνθίνοις ἀκμάζειν μὲν ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ πᾶν μετὰ
δίμηνον, μεταβάλλειν δ᾽ ἐπὶ τὸ χεῖρον ἐνιαυτοῦ
προελθόντος καὶ περικαταλαβούσης τῆς ὥρας
ἐν ἣ τὴν ἀκμὴν λαμβάνει τὸ ἄνθος. ἀνὰ λόγον
δὲ τῇ ἀσθενείᾳ καὶ τὸ εὐπέπαντα εἶναι καὶ ὅλως
εὐδιάπνευστα: τὰ δ᾽ ἐκ τῶν ῥιζῶν καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν
χρονιώτερα" πλείων γὰρ ἡ ὀσμὴ καὶ ἰσχυροτέρα
καὶ σωματωδεστέρα.

Διαφθείρει δὲ τὰ μύρα καὶ ὥρα θερμὴ καὶ
τόπος καὶ ὁ ἥλιος, ἂν τεθῶσι: διὸ καὶ οἱ μυρο-
πῶλαι ἕξητοῦσι τὰς οἰκίας ὑπερῴους καὶ μὴ
προσηλίους GAN ὅτι μάλιστα παλισκίους: ἀφαι-
ρεῖται γὰρ τὰς ὀσμὰς ὁ ἥλιος καὶ τὸ θερμὸν καὶ
ὅλως ἐξίστησι τῆς φύσεως μᾶλλον τοῦ ψυχροῦ"
τὸ δὲ ψυχρὸν καὶ ὁ πάγος, εἰ καὶ ἀοσμότερον
ποιεῖ διὰ τὸ συστέλλειν, GAN οὐκ ἀφαιρεῖταί
γε τὴν δύναμιν τελέως. ἡ πονηρὰ γὰρ φθορά,
καθάπερ τῶν οἴνων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων χυλῶν, τῷ
τὸ οἰκεῖον ἀφαιρεῖσθαι θερμόν. διὸ καὶ εἰς ἀγγεῖα
μολυβδᾶ ἐγχέουσι καὶ τοὺς ἀλαβάστρους ζητοῦσι
τοιούτου λίθου' ψυχρὸν γὰρ καὶ πυκνὸν καὶ ὁ


262


CONCERNING ODOURS, 38-41


Those which last longest are the Egyptian, the
iris, the sweet marjoram and the spikenard perfumes :
but myrrh-oil has the longest life of any; for it will
keep any time. A certain perfumer said that he
had had Egyptian perfume in his shop for eight
years, and iris-perfume for twenty, and that it was
still in good case, in fact better than fresh perfume.
These are instances of perfumes which will keep a
long time.

On the other hand all those made from flowers
have little vigour. These are usually at their best
after two months, but they deteriorate when a year
has past and the season has come round again at
which the flowers are at their best. Also, as these
perfumes lack vigour, so also do they quickly mellow,
and, in most cases, quickly evaporate. Those made
from roots and the other parts of the plant last
longer, their odour being fuller stronger and more
substantial.

Perfumes are ruined by a hot season or place or
by being put in the sun. This is why perfumers
seek upper rooms which do not face the sun but are
shaded as much as possible. For the sun or a hot
place deprives the perfumes of their odour, and in
general makes them lose their character more than
cold treatment : while cold and frost, even if they
make them less odorous by congealing them, yet do
not altogether deprive them of their virtue. For
the most destructive thing that can happen to them,
as to wines and other savours, is that they should be
deprived of their proper heat. This is why men put
them into vessels of lead and try to secure phials of
alabaster—a stone which has the required effect:
for lead is cold and of close texture, and stone has


363


THEOPHRASTUS


/ \ € 7 e al
μόλυβδος καὶ ὁ λίθος ὁ τοιοῦτος: Kal ἄριστος
al 4 3 7] lal [2 Φ «ἢ
τοῖς μύροις ὁ μάλιστα τοιοῦτος. ὥστε δι’ ἄμφω
a \ al A \ a nA /
τηροῦσι, καὶ τῷ ψυχρῷ Kal τῷ πυκνῷ, μήτε
ὃ / yy \ ’ \ SN> ᾿ξ ᾿] ’
ἱἱέντες ἔξω τὴν ὀσμὴν μήθ᾽ ὅλως ἐπιδεχόμενοι
δέ \ x Ci \ , \ A ΑΝ
μηδέν. καὶ yap ἡ ἀναπνοὴ φθείρει καὶ τὸ ἔξωθεν
,
ἐπεισιὸν καὶ ἀλλότριον: ἐπεὶ καὶ τὰ πνεύματα
θ ve \ / / > / \
φθείρει Kai καταναλίσκει, καθάπερ ἐλέχθη, τὰς
3 ΄, y \ \ \ tgs
Oo Mas, ἄλλως TE καὶ TAS μὴ φυσικάς.

42 X. Κεφαλαλγῆ δὲ τῶν μὲν πολυτελῶν TO
ἀμαράκινον καὶ τὸ νάρδινον καὶ μεγαλεῖον, τῶν
’ 5 ἴω Ὁ \ \ a ΄ \ \
δ᾽ εὐτελῶν ὅλως μὲν TA πλεῖστα μάλιστα δὲ TO

, \ \ /
δάφνινον. ἐλαφρότατα δὲ TO ῥόδινον Kal ἡ
ἃ a /
κύπρος, ἃ καὶ τοῖς ἀνδράσι μάλιστα ἁρμόττειν
A \ / 3. V4 n \
δοκεῖ, καὶ πρὸς τούτοις TO κρίνον" ταῖς δὲ γυναιξὶν
e \ \ \ a \ \ > / \
ἡ στακτὴ καὶ TO μεγαλεῖον καὶ TO Αἰγύπτιον Kal
\
TO ἀμαράκινον καὶ TO νάρδινον' διὰ yap τὴν
᾽ \ \ / > > / 50 »
ἰσχὺν καὶ τὸ πάχος οὐκ εὐαπόπνοα οὐδ᾽ εὐαφ-
/ a Ν XN :

aipeta’ ζητοῦσι <yap> τὰ χρόνια.

3 \ \ a \ > an \ 5 > / \

43 “Ene δὲ Ta μὲν ἀσθενῆ τὰ δ᾽ ἰσχυρά, Kal
᾽ / \ > \ a e “ \ \ ” \
ἰσχυρότερα Ta ἀπὸ τῶν ῥιζῶν καὶ τὰ ἄλλα τὰ

/ X a \ \ , \
προειρημένα, διὰ τοῦτο τὰ μὲν ἄνθινα μὴ τρι-
/ \ \ fal A
Bopeva evoopotepa, τὰ δ᾽ ἀπὸ τῶν ῥιζῶν καὶ
X \ / \ nN \ a ,
Ta λοιπὰ TpLBopevar τὰ μὲν γὰρ διαπνεῖταί
Ν Ψ / \ \ a
τε καὶ ἅμα διαθερμαινόμενα διὰ τὴν τρῖψειν
γφῳ.7 Ν > nr \ \ \ \ ’ \
ἐξίσταται Kal ἀλλοιοῦται, TA δὲ διὰ τὴν ἰσχὺν q
4


1 e.g. alabaster, which here at least is spoken of as a kind
of stone, 2 yap ins. Sch.


364


CONCERNING ODOURS, 41-43


the same character, that being the best for keeping
perfumes which has it in the highest degree.1 So
that vessels made of these materials keep the
perfume well for both reasons, their coolness and
their closeness of texture: they neither let the
odour pass away through them, nor do they take
in anything else. For evaporation destroys the
perfume, and so also does any foreign substance
which finds its way in: for even draughts of air
destroy odours and cause them to waste, as was
said, especially those odours which do not belong
to a thing’s essential nature.


Of the properties of certain perfumes.


X. Headache is caused by sweet marjoram spike-
nard and megaleion among costly perfumes: most of
the cheap ones have also this effect, notably that
made from bay. The lightest are rose-perfume and
kypros, which seem to be the best suited to men,
as also is lily-perfume. The best for women are
myrrh-oil, megaleion, the Egyptian, sweet marjoram,
and spikenard: for these owing to their strength
and substantial character do not easily evaporate
and are not easily made to disperse, and? a lasting
perfume is what women require.

Inasmuch however as some perfumes are stronger
than others, the stronger being those made from
roots and the others already mentioned, for this
reason those derived from flowers are more fragrant
if they are not bruised, while bruising improves
those made from roots and the others. For the
former kind evaporate and pass off as they are
warmed by the bruising, thus losing their character,
while the latter owing to their strength have, as it


395


44


45


THEOPHRASTUS


ὥσπερ ἀνοιγομένων τινῶν πόρων ἐκ τῆς τρίψεως
ἐμφανεστέραν ποιεῖ τὴν ὀσμήν. ὃ καὶ ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν
τῶν ῥιζῶν καὶ ὅλως τῶν στερεῶν συμβαίνει,
καθάπερ ἐλέχθη. κατὰ δὲ τῶν ἀνθῶν ἐναντίως,
ὥστε ἠκολούθηκεν ἑκάτερα τῇ ἀρχῇ. τὰ δ᾽ ἐκ
τῆς σμύρνης εὐλογώτατα δι᾽ ἄμφω" καὶ γὰρ
μίγνυται μᾶλλον καὶ <)> θερμότης ἡ ἡ τῆς τρίψεως
οὐκ ἀλλοτρία, μαλακή τις οὖσα' καὶ γὰρ «ἡ!
σμύρνα ζητεῖ τινα πύρωσιν. ἁπλῶς δὲ πᾶν τὸ
πολύοδμον ἄντ᾽ εὐῶδες ἄντε κακῶδες ἄντε δριμὺ
ἄντ᾽ ὀξὺ ἄντ᾽ ὁποιονοῦν τυγχάνῃ, κινούμενον ἐμ-
φανέστερον" τότε γὰρ ὥσπερ ἐνεργείᾳ ἀναμίγνυται
μᾶλλον τῷ ἀέρι.

Τῶν δὲ μύρων τὸ Αἰγύπτιον καὶ ἡ στακτὴ καὶ
εἴ τι ἄλλο πολύοδμον [καὶ] μιγνύμενα τῷ οἴνῳ τῷ
εὐώδει ἡδίω" παραιρεῖται γὰρ ἡ βαρύτης αὐτῶν"
ἐπεὶ καὶ ἡ -σμύρνη αὐτὴ πρὸς τὴν ἀναθυμίασιν
βρεχθεῖσα ἐν τῷ γλυκεῖ, καθάπερ ἐν τοῖς πρότερον
ἐλέχθη.

[pos δὲ τὰς δυνάμεις σκοπουμένοις δόξειεν ἂν
ἄτοπον εἶναι τὸ συμβαῖνον ἐπὶ τοῦ ῥοδίνου' κου-
φότατον γὰρ ὃν καὶ ἀσθενέστατον ἀφανίζει τὰς
τῶν ἄλλων ὀσμὰς ὅταν προμυρισθῶσι' διὸ καὶ
οἱ μυροπῶλαι τοὺς ἐπιδιστάζοντας καὶ μὴ ὠνου-
μένους παρ᾽ αὐτῶν ἐπιμυρίζουσι τούτῳ πρὸς τὸ
μὴ αἰσθάνεσθαι τὰ παρὰ τῶν ἄλλων. αἴτιον
δ᾽ ὅτι λεπτότατον ὃν καὶ προσφιλὲς τῇ αἰσθήσει
διὰ τὴν κουφότητα μάλιστα διικνεῖται καὶ συμ-


1 ἢ ins. W. 2 ἢ ins. W.
ὃ The words ἄντε δριμὺ are omitted in both. W.’s editions,
but represented in his Latin version.


366


CONCERNING ODOURS, 43-45


were, certain passages opened by the bruising, and
so their fragrance is made more obvious. ‘This, as
was said, also takes place in the case of the roots
themselves and of the solid things in general; but
the result in the case of flowers is just the opposite,
so that both kinds behave according to their origin.
That this should apply to the perfumes made from
myrrh is quite natural for both reasons; they mingle
more than others with the air, and the heat! due to
the bruising is not prejudicial, since it is gentle, and
myrrh ? in fact requires a certain amount.of heating.
And in general any strong odour, whether it be
pleasing or the reverse, whether it be pungent? or
sharp, or whatever its character, becomes more
pronounced with movement; for then it becomes,
as it were, active and mingles more with the air.

The Egyptian perfume, myrrh-oil, and any others
that have a strong odour become‘ sweeter if they
are mixed with fragrant wine; for then their heavy
quality is removed. In fact myrrh itself is made to
exhale a more fragrant odour by being steeped in
sweet wine, as was said ὅ in a former treatise.

If one has regard to the virtues of the perfumes
in question, one may well be surprised at what
happens in the case of rose-perfume :—though it
is lighter and less powerful than any other, if one
has first been scented with it, it destroys the odour
of the others. And this is why perfumers, if a
purchaser hesitates and is not inclined to buy this
perfume, scent him with it so that he is not
able to smell the others. The explanation is that,
being very delicate and acceptable to the sense of
smell, by reason of its lightness it penetrates as no


4 I have bracketed καὶ. * OP? θ .
367


46


47


48


THEOPHRASTUS


n \ / “ » id ”
πληροῖ τοὺς πόρους, ὥσθ᾽ ἡ αἴσθησις κατειλημ-
7 Ὁ / a »
μένη καὶ πλήρης οὖσα κρίνειν ἀδυνατεῖ. δύο
γάρ εἰσι τρόποι, τάχα δὲ τρεῖς, οἱ κωλύοντες τὴν
7 « \ e a > / ” > & b] \
κρίσιν. εἷς μὲν ὁ νῦν εἰρημένος" ἄλλος δ᾽ ὁ ἀπὸ
n > n ng 77 \
TOV ἰσχυρῶν ὥσπερ μεθύσκων τὴν αἴσθησιν Kal
ἴω “ 4 > n
καρηβαρᾶν ποιῶν" τρίτος δ᾽ ὅταν προκαταληφθῇ
a / x \ a A. al >
τῷ βελτίονι" TO γὰρ ἐπεισάγειν TO χεῖρον οὐ
ς (ὃ ἢ > δέ \ ς Μ θ th 0°
ῥάδιον: ov δέχεται yap ἡ αἴσθησις, ὥσπερ οὐ
ϑβοας a a \ o¢ aA \ \ /
ETL TOV YUAWY Kal ὅλως τῶν KATA τὴν τροφὴν.
7 A / \ VA
Κατισχναίνειν δὲ δοκεῖ τὸ ῥόδον καὶ THY σύν-
bd i “ \ 2 7 ἊΨ Ὁ» ς /
θετον ὀσμήν" ὅταν yap ἀκμάξῃ τὸ ἄνθος, ῥοδίζουσι
\ / 7 J / Vs
Tas συνθέσεις, ἀνουγόμεναι δ᾽ ἐξόζουσι τούτου
/ \ \ \ \ /
μόνου Kal μάλιστα. παύεται δὲ ταχὺ καὶ λήγει
\ \ » / \ / 21k \ 39¢/
διὰ τὴν ἀσθένειαν Kal λεπτότητα, OL ἣν καὶ ἐξό-
“ ” \ \ > ¢ > \ \
ζει τῶν ἄλλων' λεπτὴ γὰρ οὖσα ἡ ἀναπνοὴ καὶ
/ a / a a
ἠθροισμένη TH κατακλείσει προτερεῖ τε τῶν λοι-
“ x / a \ ah \
πῶν Kal διαδίδοται πανταχοῦ. διὰ ταὐτὸ δὲ
τοῦτο καὶ ἀπολήγει ταχὺ καὶ κατακρατεῖται
, 2 a \ p \ \ ,
πάλιν: ἀσθενεῖ yap TO λεπτὸν καὶ μαλακόν.
“ 7 ἴω a “
Ποιοῦσι δέ τινες τοῦτο καὶ τῶν οἴνων, ὥστε
/ / a / /
προποθέντες ἀφανίζειν τὴν TOV ἄλλων ἡδονήν.
” 3 0 \ b] / € / \ »,
ἔνιοι δ᾽ ὥστε μὴ ἐπιδέχεσθαι ῥᾳδίως τοὺς ἄλλους,


1 of. 57, ὅδ. σύνθετος ὀσμή or σύνθεσις seems to mean a
kind of pot-pourri, which was from time to time renewed
with fresh rose-petals. Sch. understands σύνθεσις to mean
‘clothes in a wardrobe’ (cf. Lat. synthesis), but it must
surely have the same meaning here as σύνθετος ὀσμή : Sch.’s
citation from 57 does not seem to prove his point, and
μένουσι πολὺν χρόνον ai συνθέσεις in 58 is conclusive against
him. cf. also 69.


368


CONCERNING ODOURS, 4ς-.48


other can and fills up the passages of the sense, so
that being entirely taken up and filled with it, it is
unable to judge of others. For the power of judging
is inhibited in two, or possibly in three ways; one is
that which has just been mentioned ; another is that
the sense of smell is, as it were, intoxicated with its
powerful virtues and becomes stupefied: the third
is that the sense may be preoccupied with the
superior odour; for then it is not easy to introduce
after it what is inferior, since the sense of smell
refuses this—just as the sense of taste in like case
refuses flavours and foods in general.

It is also thought that the rose even weakens the
effect of compound perfume! ; for, when the flower is
at its best, they treat compound perfumes with it ;
and, when these come to be opened, they smell only
or chiefly of rose. However this effect is only
temporary and transient because of the weakness
and delicacy of the rose-scent, (the very quality
which also causes it to assert 2 itself over the scent of
the other ingredients). For, as it is so delicate and
is compressed by confinement, it is exhaled before
the others and disperses in all directions. It is also
for this reason that the rose-scent only asserts itself
for a short time and then is overpowered again ; for
anything that is delicate and subtle must be lacking
in vigour.

Certain wines have also a similar effect: if they
are first drunk, there is no satisfaction in others.
Some again make it even difficult to take others


25,6. When the pot-pourri is first opened: the ‘ delicacy’
of the rose-scent causes it to be given off quickly and so (1)
to be the first scent perceived, (2) to be volatile. ἐξόζω in
this passage is used with gen. in two distinct senses.


369
VOL. II. B B


49


60


THEOPHRASTUS


“ : ς΄ 3 n ς / By \ /

ὥσπερ ὁ ᾿Ερυθραῖας ἁλυκός τις ὧν Kal μαλακός.
/ la ε

τὴν αἰτίαν «δὲ; πειρατέον ἐκ τῶν ὁμοίων Aap-

/ ” \ rr δι «a \ «" “
βάνειν: ἔχει δὲ τοῦτ᾽ ἴδιον τὸ ῥόδινον, ὥσπερ
σχεδὸν καὶ μικρῷ πρότερον εἴρηται; τὰ μὲν γὰρ
ἄλλα πάντ᾽ ἢ τὰ πλεῖστα κεφαλαλγῆ, τοῦτο δέ,
LA > / \ \ I se /
ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη, AUTLKOV Kal βάρους Kal adyndovos
Kal τῆς ἀπὸ TOV μύρων.

ς > Wd \ \ [οὶ ΄ »

Η δ᾽ αἰτία φανερὰ διὰ τῶν προειρημένων, εἴπερ

“ 4 -“ \

ἐπικρατεῖ καὶ διαδύεται πανταχοῦ. τὰ μὲν γὰρ

ty A \
ἄλλ᾽ ὅσα κεφαλαλγῆ βαρέα διὰ τὸ ἐκ τοιούτων

lal an \ , lal fal
συγκεῖσθαι τὰ μὲν ῥιζῶν τὰ δ᾽ oTa@v: τοῦτο δὲ Kal

an A a /
τῇ ὀσμῇ ἐλαφρὸν καὶ TH θερμότητι σύμμετρον εἰς
τὸ συμπέψαι καὶ διανοῖξαι τοὺς πόρους. οἱ γὰρ
an n Ἃ /
δὴ πόνοι τῆς κεφαλῆς ἢ καθυγραινομένης ἢ πνευ-
nA \
ματουμένης τῷ ἐναπολαμβάνεσθαι, ὥστε TO μὲν
2 a lal \ \ / A oe n
ἐκκρῖναι δεῖ TO δὲ πέψαι ἢ ἀφελεῖν.
/

Πρὸς ἅπαντα δὲ ἡ θερμότης χρήσιμον, καὶ eis
> / AOS? ἴω 2 Ν / \
ἀφαίρεσιν καὶ ἔτι μᾶλλον εἰς TO πέττειν Kal διαν-

/ > A \ a
οἴγειν τοὺς πόρους, εἰς ἃ συμβάλλεται TO ἐν TO
ἁλὶ πεποιῆσθαι" καὶ γὰρ ἀναστομοῦσι καὶ δια-

/ rf \ €
θερμαίνουσιν οἱ ἅλες. ἡ δ᾽ evoopia Kal ὁρμήν
an \
τινα ποιεῖ πρὸς τὴν κίνησιν. ἀγαθὸν δὲ καὶ
δοκεῖ πρὸς τοὺς κόπους εἶναι τῇ θερμότητι σύμ-
μετρον ὃν καὶ τῇ κουφότητι καὶ τῇ διαδύσει πρὸς

/
τοὺς ἐντὸς πόρους" ὡς δέ τινές φασιν, οὐχ ἧττον
ἡ κύπρος ἔτι τούτου: μαλακὴ γὰρ ἡ ὀσμὴ καὶ


lef. 52. 2 δὲ ins. W.
3 7.e. the case is so far analogous to that of rose-perfume ;
but the comparison does not hold as to what follows.


37°


ss


CONCERNING ODOURS, 48-50


after them; this is the effect for instance of wine
of Erythrae,' which has a taste of brine and is
subtle. The? explanation one inust endeavour to
find by comparing analogous cases.* However there
is one peculiarity which as we have already more or
less indicated, is possessed by rose-perfume only; while
all or most of the others are heady, this, as was said,
gives actual relief from heaviness and discomfort,
even from that caused by other perfumes.

The reason for this is plain in view of what has
been already said, seeing that this perfume over-
powers others and penetrates everywhere. For the
others that are heady are heavy because they are
made of heavy substances, whether roots or juices ;
while this perfume is both light as to its scent and
also by its heat well adapted to bring the passages
to a suitable temperature and to open them. For
pains in the head are due to an excess of moisture in
it, or of air which gets confined in it, so that it is
necessary to get rid of the one, and to raise the
temperature of the other or to remove it.

And for all such purposes heat is useful, both for
removing the moisture or air, and, still more, for
raising the temperature of the passages and opening
them: and to these ends it is helpful that the
perfume should have been prepared with salt, since
the effect of salt is to open the passages and to
warm them thoroughly. Again the fragrance also
supplies a stimulus to movement. This perfume is
also considered to be good against lassitude, because
its heat and its lightness make it suitable, and also
because it penetrates to the inner passages. Some
however say that kypros is quite as efficacious: for
this too has a delicate scent which is grateful to the


371


51


52


53


THEOPHRASTUS


rn “ \ \ ς / \ A
προσφιλὴς τῷ χρωτὶ Kal ἡ ταύτης. Kal ταῦτα
\ \
μὲν καὶ τὰ ὅμοια τούτοις ὥσπερ ἴδια ἂν εἴη.
ἴω , \ e Υ a a
XI. Τοῦ ῥοδίνου δὲ ai μίξεις καὶ ἐν ταῖς ὀσμαῖς
\ a a a /
Kal ἐν τοῖς χυμοῖς, ἐὰν ἡρμοσμέναι τυγχάνωσιν,
7 , / € a
ἔχουσί τινα χρείαν, αἱ μὲν ἀφαιροῦσαι THY Bapv-
\ Ἧ ᾽ "4 id > > ζ΄ Ν ¢ \
τητα Kal τὴν ἰσχύν, αἱ δ᾽ εὐοδμίαν τινὰ ai δὲ
Υ a a
γλυκύτητα ἐμποιοῦσαι, καθάπερ καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν
/ \ \ ¢ / id an. /
οἴνων. καὶ yap ὁ ἐν Θάσῳ ὁ ἐν TO πρυτανείῳ
/ / \
διδόμενος, θαυμαστός τις ὡς ἔοικε THY ἡδονήν,
3 , > / 2 rh \ > Ν /
ἠρτυμένος ἐστίν: ἐμβάλλουσι yap εἰς TO κερά-
a 7 \
μιον σταῖς μέλιτι φυράσαντες, ὥστε τὴν μὲν
\ a \ \ - a
ὀσμὴν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, τὴν δὲ γλυκύτητα ἀπὸ τοῦ
\ 3
σταιτὸς λαμβάνειν τὸν οἶνον.
a \ 5 \ a
Συμβαίνειν δὲ τοῦτο Kal κατὰ τὰς τῶν οἴνων
/ / \
μίξεις" οἷον ἐάν τις κεράσῃ σκληρὸν καὶ εὔοσμον
an \ 3. ἢ A \ ¢€ /
μαλακῷ καὶ ἀόσμῳ, καθάπερ τὸν Ἡρακλεώτην
\ > a n \ \ / n
καὶ tov ᾿Ερυθραῖον, τοῦ μὲν τὴν μαλακότητα τοῦ
/ / / x
δὲ τὴν εὐοσμίαν παρεχομένου: συμπίπτει yap
\ / a 7
ἅμα τὰ κακὰ ἀλλήλων ἀφανίζειν τῇ μαλακότητι
/ a / / \ \
θατέρου «καὶ τῇ εὐοσμίᾳ θατέρουξ. πολλὰς δὲ
ΕΛ 5Ὁ 6 Ὅν /
καὶ ἄλλας οἱ ἔμπειροι λέγουσι Kal ἴσασι μίξεις.
ὃ aA a ’ XY 28
ὃ καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ὀσμῶν εὔλογον συμβαίνειν, καὶ ἐπὶ
lal / \ ,
TOV χρωμάτων ἄν τις λαμβάνῃ τὰς ἁρμοττούσας
a 5 a ¢ /
μίξεις. τοῦτο μὲν οὖν ἴδιον TOD ῥοδίνου.
ry \ x 5 ΄ > , / ὃ /
Yo δὲ κοινὸν ἐπὶ πάντων ἀπόρημα, τί δή ποτε
1 Quoted by Athen. 1. 58. 5. of. 43,


3 This sentence must be defective: as it stands, the effect
of only one wine is given, though the effect is said to be


372


CONCERNING ODOURS, 50-53


skin. These and similar properties may be con-
sidered peculiar to these particular perfumes.


Of other properties and peculiarities of perfumes.

XI. The admixture of rose-perfume, whether in
scents or in flavours, if it be well blended, is bene-
ficial, in the one case by removing the heaviness and
strength of the scent, in the other by imparting a
fragrant scent or a sweet taste to the flavour, as in
the case of wines. 1Thus the wine which is served
in the town-hall of Thasos, which appears to be
of wonderfully delightful quality, is thus flavoured.
For they put into the jar a lump of dough which has
been kneaded up with honey, so that the wine gets
its fragrance from itself, but its sweet taste from the
honeyed dough.

This result also follows, it is said, from the mixture
of different wines,—-for example, if a strong fragrant
wine be mixed with one that is mild and without
fragrance, (for instance, if wine of MHeraclea be
mixed with wine of Erythrae),? since the latter con-
tributes its mildness and the former its fragrance :
8 for the effect is that they simultaneously destroy
one another's inferior qualities through the mildness
of the one and the fragrance of the other. There
are many other such blends mentioned by and known
to experts. And it is quite to be expected that such
a result should follow from blending odours, as it does
from blending colours, if one discovers the suitable
combinations. This then is peculiar to rose-perfume.

However there is one question which applies to
all perfumes, namely, why it is that they appear to
mutual. I have added καὶ τῇ εὐοσμίᾳ θατέρου after Sch.; his


text however is συμπίπτει yap ἅμα, καὶ τὰ κακὰ ἀλλήλων
ἀφανίζει, τῇ μαλακότητι -« καὶ τῇ εὐοσμίᾳ:- θατέρου.


373


54


THEOPHRASTUS


> \ rd r nr \ ¢ / \
ἀπὸ τοῦ καρποῦ τῆς χειρὸς ἥδιστα φαίνεται, διὸ
la) a /
καὶ οἱ μυροπῶλαι τοῦτο μυρίζουσι TO μέρος. τὴν
’ Ψ ῬΑ ᾽ +3 / / “ \ \
δ᾽ αἰτίαν ἐκ τοῦ ἐναντίου ληπτέον, ὅτι TO θερμὸν
ἐξίστησι καὶ ἀλλοιοῖ" ταχεῖα δ᾽ ἤδη ἡ αἴσθησις
τοῖς μύροις ἀναμιγνυμένοις τῷ χρωτί.
val / \ >
᾿Απορεῖται δὲ δίοτι οἱ μὴ εἰωθότες μυρίζεσθαι
nr / A an τ
μᾶλλον ἐξόζουσι τῶν συνεχῶς μυριζομένων" εἴη
Ν \ x / A ee / \ »
μὲν γὰρ ἂν λέγειν καὶ ὅτι φαντασίαι καὶ οὐκ
, 3
ἀλήθειαι διὰ τὸ μὴ εἰωθός" εἰ δ᾽ οὖν καὶ ἀληθές,
BA \ \ - / 7 5
ἔοικε τὸ μὲν οἷον συναναμίγνυσθαι πλείοσιν ὁσ-
pais ἑτέραις ὑφ᾽ ὧν ἀμαυροῦται, συγκαταμιγνυ-
a / /
μένου καὶ τοῦ χρωτός, τὸ δὲ ὥσπερ ἀκέραιον
ff. \ \ \ 5 ’ fal > 7
δέχεσθαι τὸ μανὸν καὶ ἐκφαίνειν τῇ αἰσθήσει
, ” > oN ‘ita / a ς
χρονιζόμενον. εἴη δ᾽ ἂν καὶ ἐναντίως λαβεῖν ὡς
& / Ἂ, \ Wi / :
ἧττον δεχομένου διὰ TO ἀσύνηθες, βραδύτερον ὃ
5 / ’ > / A r
ἀναμιγνύμενα πλείω χρόνον ἐξόζειν. καὶ τοῦτο
Ν » Ν > A Is /
μὲν ἔλαττον καὶ OV φανερῶς ομολογούμενον.
“Απτεται δὲ μάλιστα τοῦ χρωτὸς καὶ κεφαλῆς


\ a » \ a / bd / \
Kat τῶν ἄλλων καὶ πλεῖστον χρονον ἐμμένει TA


1 Se. a part of the body which, not being fleshy, does not
spoil the scent by its warmth. So Plin. 13. 19. appears to
give the point—experimentum (unguentorum) inversa manu


capitur, ne carnosae partis calor vitiet, though it may be |


questioned whether inversa manu represents καρποῦ. Pliny’s


374


<


CONCERNING ODOURS, 53-55


be sweetest when the scent comes from the wrist !;
so that perfumers? apply the scent to this part.
The explanation must be sought by observing what
happens in the contrary case, inasmuch as heat
changes or destroys the character of a scent, and the
effect on the sense of smell is immediately perceived
when perfumes are brought into close contact with
the skin.

The question is also raised why those who do not
habitually use perfumes smell of them more strongly,
when they do so, than those who use them habitually.
The suggestion might be made that this is an illusion
due to the fact that the use is not habitual, and
does not represent what really happens. If however
it does, it would appear that in the one case the
perfume becomes, as it were, confused with a number
of other scents which weaken its force (the smell of
the skin also becoming mixed with it), while in the
other case the porous condition of the skin takes in
the scent as it were uncontaminated, and so makes
it perceptible by the sense of smell, because it
lingers for some time. One might also make a
suggestion of opposite character, that the skin takes
in perfumes less readily because it is not used to
them, and so, as the perfumes mingle with it more
slowly, they preserve 8 their scent for a longer time.
One may add that this is a small point and that all
do not agree as to the fact.

Those perfumes whose scent is strongest get the
best hold on the skin head and other parts of the
body, and last for the longest time: such are
phrase presumably means the back of the hand, and suggests
that ἀπὸ τοῦ καρποῦ may be corrupt.


2 Sc. in offering samples for choice.
3 Sc. it is not absorbed by the skin.


375


56


THEOPHRASTUS


al > wn -ε » 5 ᾽ὔ
ἰσχυρότατα ταῖς ὀσμαῖς, οἷον μεγαλεῖον, Αὐγύ-
\ > “ \ ΄
πτιον, ἀμαράκινον" τὰ δ᾽ ἀσθενῆ καὶ «οὐ; πολύ-
7 / Ν 3 / Lal al
οὃμα, κούφην ἔχοντα τὴν ἀναπνοήν, ταχεῖαν ποιεῖ
\ \ > / ¢/ / ἘΠ \ id
Kal τὴν ἀπόλειψιν, ὥσπερ TO TE ῥόδινον Kal ἡ
κύπρος.
Ἵ Ν \ 3 \ id ’ > lal v
Evia δὲ καὶ εἰς τὴν ὑστεραίαν ov χεῖρον ὄζει,
7 " Seay Τα \ \ \
διαπεπνευκυίας εἴ τις ἐνῆν βαρύτης. τὰ δὲ Kal
Ὁ yy a v4 ξ / \ \
ὅλως ἔμμονα μᾶλλον, ὥσπερ ἡ Vapdos Kal TO
\ \ > /
ἴρινον, πάντων δὲ μάλιστα <Ta> ἰσχυρότατα.
καὶ τὰ μὲν ἔν τε τοῖς λουτροῖς καὶ τῇ ἀνέσει
a \ 3 \ x > 4 \ \
διατηρεῖ πως τὴν ὀσμὴν ἢ οὐ συγκακύνει" τὰ δὲ
ἐκ lal / a A
κακυνόμενα πλείω ποιεῖ δυσωδίαν αὐτῶν τῶν
b) Ἅ / x a :
ἱδρώτων, ὡς av σήψεώς τινος ἢ διαφθορᾶς γινο-
,
μένης.
\ \ a fa) / ,
Καὶ τὰ μὲν περὶ THs τῶν μύρων ποιήσεώς TE
καὶ δυνάμεως ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον εἰρήσθω.
\ \ \ fa) a /
XII. Ta δὲ περὶ τὴν τῶν ξηρῶν μίξιν, ἐξ ὧν
\ / \ ¢ / > » “
«τὰ; διαπάσματα καὶ αἱ συνθέσεις, οὐκ ἔτι ζητεῖ
/ a , ς / 3 >», ἢ ”
μίξιν τῶνδέ τινων ὡρισμένων, ἀλλ᾽ ὅσῳ ἂν TIS
ἊΝ / \ y% , LE / 5 Nts smears \
πλείω καὶ TOLKLA@TEPA μίξῃ, τοσούτῳ καὶ ἡ ὀσμὴ
/ \ eos t/ Ν᾽ 5 > “-
λαμπροτέρα καὶ ἡδίων, ὥσπερ καὶ ἐξ αὐτῶν
a a [4 » \ \
TOV ἀρωμάτων TOV προχείρων' εἰς ταὐτὸ γὰρ
al a 2 /
μιγνύντες ἅπαντα χρῶνται. ζητοῦσι δ᾽ ἐν Tov-


Ν 7 “ \ δι > \ /
τοις καὶ σπεύδουσιν ὥστε μὴ ἑνὸς ἀλλὰ πάντων


1 στὰ ins. Sch,


376


ae


-


CONCERNING ODOURS, 55-57


megaleion, Egyptian perfume and sweet marjoram-
perfume. Those on the other hand which are weak
and have not a powerful scent, since they are volatile
and evaporate, also quickly come to an end: for
instance rose-perfume and kypros.

There are some however whose scent is even
better on the second day, when any heavy quality
that they possessed has evaporated. Some again are
altogether more permanent, as spikenard and _ iris-
perfume, and the stronger! a perfume is, the longer
it lasts. Again some perfumes for some reason keep
their scent in the bath when the body is relaxed,
or at least do not help to produce a disagreeable
effect ; while others become disagreeable and cause
an even more unpleasant odour than the sweat, as
though some sort of decomposition or decay took
place.

Let this suffice for an account of the manufacture
and properties of perfumes.


Of the making of perfume-powders and compound perfumes.


XII. As to the mixing of solid substances to make
powders! and compound perfumes, we do not find it
here necessary to mix certain specified ingredients :
the more numerous and the more various the per-
fumes that are mixed, the more distinguished and
the more grateful will be the scent—just as though
one were mixing whatever spices themselves? were
procurable. As a matter of fact the custom is to use
a mixture made of all kinds. Again in perfumes of
this class the aim and object is not to make the
mixture smell of some one particular thing, but to


* Sc. the natural products from which the manufactured
perfumes are made.


377


THEOPHRASTUS


\ ’ \ /
κοινήν τινα. τὴν ὀσμὴν εἶναι. διὸ καὶ ἀνοίγοντες
a \ “
διά τινων ἡμερῶν τὸ ἐξόζον ἐξαιροῦσιν ἀεὶ καὶ
Lan] “
τῶν ἰσχυρῶν ἐλάττω μιγνύουσιν, ὥσπερ. .. τὰ
ld / Ἵ \ ,
δ᾽ ὅλως ov μιγνύουσιν, ὥσπερ TO ἐρυσίσκηπτρον,
/
ὑπὲρ οὗ καὶ ἀρτίως ἐλέχθη.
, \ / “ ” a 9...
58 Βρέχουσι δὲ συντιθέντες τῷ οἴνῳ τῷ εὐώδει:
Ie 3 \ \ ‘
ἔοικε δ᾽ οὖν χρήσιμος εἶναι πρὸς τὰς εὐοσμίας, εἴ
ς la /
ye καὶ ot μυρεψοὶ χρῶνται. μένουσι δὲ πολὺν
/ / \ lol Vy
χρόνον ai συνθέσεις. ἡ δὲ χρῆσις τούτων μὲν εἰς
\ n ec / 5 / aA \
τὴν TOV ἱματίων ὀσμήν, TOV δὲ διαπασμάτων εἰς
\ / “4 \ \ lal /
τὴν στρωμνήν, ὅπως πρὸς TOV χρῶτα προσπίπτῃ;
\ / ca) \ / a
καὶ yap ἅπτεται μᾶλλον καὶ ἐμμονώτερον τοῦτο,
/ δ , A Ὁ
καὶ ὥσπερ ἀντ᾽ ἐκείνου τοῦτο ποιοῦσιν. οἱ δὲ
/ 2 / » / φι 2
πρότερον ἐνέβαλον οἴνῳ καταβρέχοντες εὐώδει
Ν \ “ \ 2 /
πρὸς TO παραιρεῖσθαι τὴν ὀσμήν, ἔνια δὲ Kal
/ / LD
μελικράτῳ καὶ οἴνῳ μιγνύντες ἀνέδευον, τὰ δὲ
\ > A an / Ἂν εἶ “ »
καὶ αὐτῷ τῷ μελικράτῳ. τὸ γὰρ ὅλον ἄμφω
al n > / oN
ταῦτα συνεργεῖ πρὸς εὐοσμίαν. διαμένουσι δὲ
7 \ /
ai συνθέσεις. φανερὸν δ᾽ ἐκ τούτων ὅπερ Kal
/ Σ / ὃ \ \ \ > /
πρότερον ἐλέχθη, διότι τὰ ξηρὰ καὶ εὐοσμότερα
/ - wn
πρὸς ἄλληλα «μιχθέντα: ταῖς ὀσμαῖς.
> / \ \ / , \ \ re
59 Εὐλόγως δὲ τὰ μύρα φαρμακώδη διὰ τὴν TOV
/ \ x rn
(1) ἀρωμάτων δύναμιν" Kal yap Ta ἀρώματα τοιαῦτα.
x : Ve
δηλοῖ δὲ τά TE καταπλάσματα καὶ ἃ δή τινες


1 The example is missing. Turn. supplies costwm et amomum
from Plin. 13. 16, which does not however certainly refer
to this passage ; see 69, where this passage seems to be
repeated.

2 The reference of ἐκείνου is obscure.

3 μιχθέντα add. Turn.


378


CONCERNING ODOURS, 57-59


produce a general scent derived from them all.
This is why every few days they open the vessel and
remove each time that perfume whose scent is over-
powering the others, adding at the same time smaller
quantities of the less powerful scents, suchas . . .,}
while some perfumes are never added, such as
galingale, of which we spoke just now.

When they make compound perfumes, they
moisten the spices with fragrant wine: and _ this
certainly seems to be useful for producing fragrance,
- seeing that perfumers also use it. These com-
pound perfumes last a long time. They are used
to impart a pleasant odour to clothes, while the
powders are used for bedding, so that they may
come in contact with the skin: for this kind of
preparation gets a better hold and is more lasting,
so that men use it thus instead of scenting their
bodies directly.2, Some, before putting the powder
in the bedding, soak it in fragrant wine, so that it
may acquire its scent: and some powders they
moisten by mixing them with mead and wine, or
again simply with mead. For in general both these
things help to give them fragrance. Compound
perfumes also last well. From which what was said
above becomes manifest, inasmuch as solid perfumes,
when mixed? with one another, acquire a greater
fragrance. |

*It is to be expected that perfumes should have
medicinal properties in view of the virtues of spices:
for these too have such virtues. The effects of


4 In W.’s text, which I have followed, there is some re-
arrangement (after Furlanus) of the order of sentences in
this chapter and the next: e.g. part of §61 is transferred to
§59. Both figures are retained for convenience of reference.


379


61
(59)


62


(60)


THEOPHRASTUS


/ a “ > / /
μαλάγματα καλοῦσιν οἵας ἀποδείκνυται δυνάμεις
/ \ /
Ta τε φύματα Kal Ta ἀποστήματα διαχέοντα Kal
/ / n Ν \ “ “
ἄλλα πλείω τῶν κατὰ τὸ σῶμα διαλλοιοῦντα,
a \ A
ἐπιπολῆς μὲν ἀλλὰ Kal τὰ ἐν βάθει, οἷον, av
7 SN bs “ \ \ a
τις καταπλάσῃ τὰ ὑποχόνδρια Kal TO στῆθος,
> \ ἣ, al » a) > / 5. Κ Ν
εὐθὺς σὺν τοῖς ἐρυγμοῖς ἀποδίδωσιν εὐώδεις τὰς
σιν, ὩΣ ον
a / >
XIII. Ac δὲ τῶν ζώων ὀσμαὶ κατὰ τὰς ἰδίας
/ ἐφ « / / > / ᾿ > , \
γίνονται φύσεις" ἑκάστῳ γάρ ἐστί τὶς οἰκεία KATA
\ aA κ᾿ δ᾽ “ὃ a \ \ θ \
τὴν κρᾶσιν. αὗται ἡδεῖαι μὲν καὶ καθαραὶ
\ \ Ν » Ν Αι Ss ς fal
[καὶ] κατὰ Tas ἀκμὰς Kal ὅταν εὖ ἔχωσιν ἑαυτῶν,
" Ν ς / ς Lal \ / ” . “Ὁ
ἔτι δὲ ἡδίους ἁπαλῶν καὶ νέων ὄντων. πλεῖσται
\ \ / \ \ 2 / A. Ψ
δὲ Kal κακωδέσταται περὶ τὰς ὀχείας καὶ ὅλως
/ \ f \ \
συντηκομένων καὶ καμνόντων σωμάτων" διὸ καὶ
€
οἱ τράγοι καὶ οἱ ἔλαφοι καὶ λαγοὶ Kal τἄλλα
/ / 7
τότε μάλιστα ὄζει.
\ \
Θαυμαστὸν δὲ καὶ ἴδιον TO συμπάσχειν τὰς
/ ¢ / / a € a f
τραγέας, ὅταν ἡ ὥρα καθήκῃ τῆς ὁρμῆς. αἴτιον
Ν / δ pie / / 5 A /
δὲ δηλονότι TO ὑπολείπεσθαί τινα ἐν τῷ δέρματι
Ψ,. Δ ς / ‘¢ ᾽ ,’ ia ec Ἑ \
δύναμιν ἢ ὑγρότητα τοιαύτην ad ἧς ἡ ὁρμὴ
/ / / \
γίνεται καὶ ζώντων: κινουμένης οὖν καὶ διαθερ-
/ \ a a ἃ , \
μαινομένης ταύτης ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀέρος εὔλογον Kal


τὰ δέρματα καθ᾽ ὅσον ἐπιβάλλει. διὸ καὶ ὡς


1§ 60 on some other medicinal effects of perfumes is
omitted, 2 καὶ bracketed§by W.


380


CONCERNING ODOURS, 59-62


plasters and of what some call ‘ poultices’ prove
what virtues they display, since they disperse
tumours and abscesses and produce a distinct effect
on various other parts of the body, on its surface,
but also on the interior parts: for instance, if one
lays a plaster on his abdomen and breast, the patient
forthwith produces fragrant odours along with his
eructations.!


Of the characteristic smells of animals, and of certain curious
Jacts as to the smell of animal and vegetable products.


XIII. The smells of animals correspond to their
several characters: each has a smell of its own
according to its particular composition. These
smells are pleasant and pure when? the animal
is in its prime and in good condition, and even
pleasanter when they? are young and _ tender.
But the smell is strongest and least pleasant at
the breeding season, and generally when the body
is wasting or out of condition: wherefore goats
stags hares and other animals have most smell at
such times.

It is a remarkable fact and peculiar to the goat
that goat-skins* are sympathetically affected when
the breeding season comes round. The reason plainly
is that there remains somehow in the hide the sort
of virtue or moisture from which arises the breeding
impulse when the animal is alive. It is natural
therefore that, when this is excited and warmed
By the. air, the skin also should be excited®
so far as it belongs to it to be so affected.
Wherefore the original cause as it were of the

3 ἑαυτῶν can hardly be sound: αὐτὰ (86. τὰ ζῶα).


4 2,6. the skin of a dead goat.
5 W. adds κινεῖσθαι after ἐπιβάλλει.


381


THEOPHRASTUS


“Ἁ Vv " / / ᾿ εἶ ¢ \
πρῶτον αἴτιον ἡ διάθεσις" τότε yap Kal οἱ μὴ
> / Μ \ © AS \ e > “
ὀχεύοντες ὄζουσι καὶ οἱ ἄγονοι καὶ αἱ αἶγες ὅλως.

φῶ]; ᾽ὔ / \
ἡ δ᾽ ὀχεία τότε μὲν μεγάλην μερίδα συμβάλλεται,

’ ΓΤ ᾽ <7 , ¢ /
καθ᾽ αὑτὴν δ᾽ αἰτία γίνεται ἡ διάθεσις.

/ ,

68. Συμβαίνει δὲ τρόπον τινὰ Kal ἐν ἄλλοις ἡ
τοιαύτη συμπάθεια: καὶ γὰρ ὁ οἶνος ἅμα τῇ
σταφυλῇ δοκεῖ συνανθεῖν καὶ τὰ σκόροδα καὶ τὰ

/ / » a
κρόμνα τότε δριμύτατον ὄζειν, ὅταν «τὰ; ἐν TH

an 4 \ / “ / \
γῇ βλαστάνῃ' πλὴν τούτοις ἅμα συμβαίνει Kal
αὐτοῖς βλαστάνειν. ὅλως δὲ “πάντα κινεῖται
τὰ φλοιόριζα καὶ σαρκόριζξα μὴ ἀπεξηραμμένα

\ \ \ Ψ ς x > ,
κατὰ Tas βλαστητικὰς ὥρας" ἡ yap ἐνυπάρχουσα
δύναμις ἐν αὐτοῖς κινεῖται. θαυμασιώτατον δὲ

an rn / a
τῶν τοιούτων TO ἐπὶ τοῦ στέατος τῆς ἄρκτου
lal 7 “ Lad / > /
συμβαῖνον, εἴπερ ἅμα ταῖς φωλίαις ἐπαίρεται
καὶ ἐκπληροῖ τὰ ἀγγεῖα.
΄ \ \

64 XIV. Τί δή ποτε Δημόκριτος τοὺς μὲν χυμοὺς

\ \ an > rf \ ae \ \ \
πρὸς THY γεῦσιν ἀποδίδωσι, τὰς δ᾽ ὀσμὰς καὶ τὰς
χρόας οὐχ ὁμοίως πρὸς τὰς ὑποκειμένας αἰσθή-

a
a xX A /
σεις; ἔδει yap ἐκ τῶν σχημάτων. ἢ TOUTO ye


x «ς Ν ,
πρὸς ἅπαντας κοινόν; ἅπαντες γὰρ οἱ μὲν μονης


1 7.e. to form a ‘ crust.’ 2 σὰ ins. Sch.

8 Cf dt Buc Lok tte

4 7.e. when the fat of the living bear becomes abnormally
developed. Plin. 8. 128. expresses his surprise at T.’s credulity


382


«


CONCERNING ODOURS, 62-64


phenomenon is the special condition of the animal
at such periods: for at these times even those
males which are not breeding have the smeil, and
the sterile goats and the females in general. In-
deed, though at that particular time the fact that
animals are actually breeding is a powerful factor in
producing the smell, yet their condition is in itself
a cause.

Similar sympathetic behaviour is found in a
manner in other things also. ‘Thus wine appears to
‘bloom’! at the same time as the growing grape, and
stored garlic and onions appear to have the most
pungent smell at the season when those? in the
ground are sprouting: however in this case sprouting
takes place in the stored vegetables also. And in
general any plant whose root is in layers? or fleshy
becomes active at the season of sprouting, unless it
has been completely dried : for it is the force latent
in such plants which is stirred into activity. But
the most remarkable phenomenon of the kind is
what occurs with bears’ grease: it makes active
growth at the time of the bear’s winter sleep‘ and
completely fills the vessels in which it is kept.


Of odours as compared with other sense-impressions.


XIV. What can be the reason why Democritus,
though he assigns various flavours to the sense of
taste, yet does not in like manner assign various
smells and colours to the senses to which they
belong? According to his system he should have
done so. Perhaps the same criticism should apply
to all who have dealt with the subject: for they all


in this matter: his version (coctas ursorwm carnes) adds to
the marvel.


383


65


66


THEOPHRASTUS


e \ /
οἱ δὲ μάλιστα ταύτης τὰ πάθη λέγουσι Kal τὰς
ὃ ΄ ς > / \ \ 7 \
tapopas, ὡς ἐν χρώμασι λευκὸν καὶ μέλαν, Kal
’ an \ \ 4 > “ > >
ἐν χυμοῖς γλυκὺ καὶ πικρόν, οὐχ οὕτω δ᾽ ἐν
2 Ἂν ἐν Oe \ \ , > » \ \
ὀσμαῖς: οὐδὲν yap πλὴν TO τ᾽ εὔοσμον καὶ TO
/ ᾽ an
κάκοσμον. οὐδ᾽ ἐν ἁπτοῖς: πλείω yap εὐθὺ τὰ
ς / xX \ \ “
ὑποκείμενα, σκληρὸν μαλακὸν τραχὺ λεῖον.
᾽ Ν ἴω “Ὁ
Αλλὰ μᾶλλον ἐν φωναῖς, ὀξὺ καὶ βαρύ. ἔτι
δὲ \ \ \ \ δ᾽ yA ” \ ς
ETA μὲν μικτὰ τὰ δ᾽ ἄμικτα. ἄμικτοι χυλοὶ οἱ
\ lal \ / “ 9.65 > a ᾿
μὲν τῷ μὴ καταμερίζεσθαι ὥστ᾽ ἐξ ἀμφοῖν, οἷον
σ΄ f / na
ὕδωρ ἔλαιον φλέγμα αἷμα, ὅλως πᾶν TO ἐπινέον
nN \ ὃ A 4 Nin Sh \ \ / \
ἢ TO διαιροῦν, ὥσπερ TO ὄξος Kal TO γάλα. TO
X A , \ 7] 7 7 5
yap TH πιέσει καὶ τρίψει μυιγνύμενον ἕτερον εἶδος.
ἴλλ δὲ J ς \ 7 \ \ /
ἄλλον δὲ τρόπον οἱ μὴ εὔμικτοι πρὸς τὴν χρείαν
Ἃ , 3 7 a
ἢ καὶ λυμαινόμενοι ἀλλήλους, οἷον ἡ θάλαττα
δ \ © \ \ “ὃ \ » \
Kal τὰ νιτρώδη καὶ πικρὰ ὕδατα τοὺς οἴνους Kal
Ν »\ \ ὑθὺ fe! /
τὰ πότιμα, ἐὰν μὴ εὐθὺς γρῆταί τις.
Ὀ \ δὲ e \ ee bya , \
σμαὶ δὲ αἱ μὲν οὕτως ἄμικτοι πλείους καὶ
/ lal « n
ὥστε καθόλου λαβεῖν ai κακώδεις ταῖς κακώδεσι.


ὡς δὲ βέλτιόν τι τὸ ἐξ ἀμφοῖν ἔργον εὑρεῖν εἰ


1 4.e. taste. |

2 There seems to be some confusion here, as in the first 7
sentence of the section T. complained that colours are not |
classified. The following passage is unusually elliptical, and
the text is probably defective. T.’s complaint seems to be
that sense-experiences in general have been inadequately
classified (cf. 2); and in 66 foll. he specially mentions smells.


384


CONCERNING ODOURS, 64-66


either give the various qualities and distinguish the
experiences of this sense! alone or at least com-
paratively neglect the others: thus with colours?
they distinguish white and black, and with flavours
sweet and bitter, yet they make no corresponding
classification of smells, but merely class them as
‘pleasant’ or ‘unpleasant.’ So too they fail to
distinguish different experiences of the sense of
touch, whereas several belong immediately to this
sense, as hardness, softness, roughness, smoothness.
In sounds still more are there differences, as
that between shrill and deep. Again some sense-
experiences are simple, some compound. Flavours
are simple first in the sense that they cannot be
resolved into two components 8 : instances are water
oil phlegm blood,* and in general anything which
floats, like milk,® or which causes separation, like
vinegar. (Where mixture can be produced by pres-
sure or crushing, it is quite a different matter).
Secondly there are flavours which do not readily
combine in another sense, namely for human use, or
which even spoil one another if they are mixed, as
sea-water, or water with soda in it or which has a
bitter taste : these spoil wines or other things that
are good to drink, unless they are taken at once.
Now the odours which in this sense do not com-
bine are numerous, and, speaking generally, it is the
pleasant odours which do not combine with the
unpleasant ones. It would indeed be difficult, if not
impossible, to find a case in which mixture is an


8 Sch. and W. after Turn. add <éy γίνεσθαι:- after ἀμφοῖν,
which seems unnecessary.

4 2,6. a liquid which, in one way or another, refuses to mix
with another liquid. 5 ? cream.


385


VOL. II. Cc €


THEOPHRASTUS


Sg 7 > \ ΄, \ 7, aed
μὴ ἀδύνατον, εἰς THY τοιαύτην δὲ δύναμιν «οὐχ-»
e/ ς > an \ a 5 » Ἧὺ Ὁ’
ἅπαν ὡς εἰπεῖν πρὸς πᾶν εὔοσμον. ἀλλ᾽ ἔνθα

\ 7 “ A ΟὟ θ δὲ / θ /
μὲν ἴσως χείρω ποιεῖ ἔνθα δὲ βελτίω, καθάπερ

a \ \ r f
ἐπὶ τῶν μύρων: τὰ μὲν yap ἀφαιρεῖται TO ἄκρα-
\ / \ ᾽ > ‘6 \ v4
Tov καὶ σκληρόν, τὰ δ᾽ ἀποθηλύνει καὶ ὥσπερ
5 a \ > / > »ἵ a “ [γέ
ἐξυδατοῖ τὰς ὀσμάς. ἐν δὲ τοῖς ξηροῖς ἅπασαι
/
πάσαις μικταί.
\ \ / e/ Ἂ > /
ὁ Ta yap διαπάσματα ὅσῳ ἂν ἢ πλειόνων
/ a ἴω
ἀμείνω. ποιεῖ δὲ καὶ ἡ τοῦ οἴνου κατάμιξις καὶ

7 / \ /
μύρα ἔνια καὶ θυμιάματα εὐοσμότερα, καθάπερ
ἡ , a \ \ \ / Β / \
τὴν σμύρναν. δοκεῖ δὲ Kal TO μύρον ἡδύνειν TOUS

\ ς n of.
οἴνους, διὸ καὶ οἱ μὲν ἐν TH οἰνοποιΐᾳ μιγνύουσιν
/
of δὲ οὕτως ἐπιχεόμενον πίνουσιν. οὐκ ἄλογον
\ (4 \ a
δὲ cuvéyyus τὰς αἰσθήσεις οὔσας Kal ἐν τοῖς
a \
αὐτοῖς ὑποκειμένοις ἔχειν τινὰ ἐπικοινωνίαν" ὡς

\ ayy '\ \ ca) ὃ \ " \ 7 7
yap ἐπὶ TO πᾶν οὐδεὶς OUTE χυλὸς AOTMOS οὔτε
> \ 7 a) δὲ Ψ "ὃ / > \
ὀσμὴ ἄχυλος" τοῦτο δὲ OTL οὐδεμία EK μὴ ἔχοντος

/
χύυλον.
/ \ 5 uN
6s Συμβαίνει δὲ καὶ μεταβάλλειν τὰς ὀσμὰς ἅμα
A a ς 7, “ 5
τοῖς χυλοῖς, ὥσπερ ἐπί τε τοῦ οἴνου καὶ ἐπὶ
“ ἴω Ν a /
καρπῶν τινῶν' ἐνίων δὲ καὶ ἐν τῷ ἄνθει πρότερον,
a / \ a / > \
ὥσπερ τῶν βοτρύων: ἡ δὲ τῶν μύρων εἰς ἀκμὴν

/ e / le} >] a
μόνον καὶ οἷον φθίσιν. μετακινοῦνται δ᾽ ἐν ταῖς
> / ¢/ " > ς > Lal / Ν \
ἐτείαις ὥραις πάνθ᾽ ws εἰπεῖν, μάλιστα δὲ τὰ


1 J have inserted οὐχ, suggested by Sch.
2 Like Sch. I fail to see the relevance of this remark.
The sense required is ‘while the fruit is still on the tree’:


386


CONCERNING ODOURS, 66-68


improvement to the odour: in fact one might say
that not! every combination of one fragrant thing
with another will produce such a quality, but though
sometimes the effect of such mixture is an improve-
ment, sometimes it may be the reverse, as in the case
of perfumes: for while the effect of some admixtures
is to remove excessive strength or harshness, in other
cases the odour is enfeebled and made, as it were,
insipid. With solids however all combinations are
possible.

In fact powders are the better, the more in-
gredients they have. Also the admixture of wine
makes some perfumes and things used for incense
more fragrant, for instance myrrh. It appears also
that perfume sweetens wines, wherefore some add it
in the manufacture, some put it in at the time of
drinking. Nor is it unnatural that between these
senses, since they are akin and are affected by the
same objects, there should be a sort of reciprocity :
for, to speak generally, no taste is unaccompanied by
smell and no smell is unaccompanied by taste, the
reason being that a thing which has no taste pro-
duces no smell.

It is also the case that smells actually change
along with tastes, for instance in wine and certain
fruits. And in some cases, as with grapes, the
change takes place earlier, during? the flowering
period : while in perfumes it occurs only when they
have reached their best and are about, as it were, to
go off. Almost all perfumes undergo alteration at
certain seasons of the year, and this applies specially
to the weakest kinds: in the case of those made


possibly ἀνθεῖ has got in from below and we should read
καρπῷ.


387


συ


69


THEOPHRASTUS


> / \ ἣν » x A wd > an \
ἀσθενέστατα, τὰ δ᾽ ἄνθινα καθ᾽ ἣν ὥραν ἀνθεῖ τὸ
ἄνθος.
m \ ΄ an > an by /
[Tas συνθέσεις ποιοῦσιν ἐκ τῶν ἀρωμάτων"
/ N \ Ψ 5 > \ /
θραύσαντες πολλὰ καὶ μίξαντες εἰς ταὐτὸ κλεί-
ουσιν εἰς κιβώτιον, εἶτ᾽ ἀνοίγοντες διά τινων
A δ 3 > a Ce)
ἡμερῶν OTL ἂν μάλιστα ὄζειν δοκῇ τοῦτ᾽ αἴρουσι,
΄ /
καὶ πάλιν δὲ Kal πάλιν διαλείποντες χρόνον,
“ N \ 5 / θ \ δ᾽ | \
ὅπως ἂν μηδενὸς ἐξόζη. θαυμαστὴν ὀσμὴν
/ Vues / > n /
λαμβάνει τὰ ἱμάτια εἰς ταῦτα τιθέμενα.
γχΓιλ sy n 7 nan ’ ip re ᾽ SN
To δὲ τῆς βαλάνου τῆς Αἰγυπτίας μύρον αὐτὸ
7 al \ a οὶ
μὲν οὐκ ἄγαν ἀναπνεῖ, μιγνύμενον δὲ ποιεῖ TANNA
/ / \ \ Ss
βελτίω μάλιστα δὲ τὴν ipwi)....
lah 88.


? ef. 57, of which this section seems to be a repetition.
ceo) ae his


388


-


CONCERNING ODOURS, 68-69


from flowers this period is that at which the plants
from which they are made are in bloom.!

[Compound? perfumes are made from spices:
they bruise and mix a variety of these and shut them
up together in a box. Then after a few days they
open the box and take out the spice which seems to
have the strongest smell: this treatment is repeated
at intervals, so that the smell of no one ingredient
may overpower the others. And clothes put away
with such perfumes acquire a marvellous fragrance.

The perfume* made of the Egyptian balanos,
though it has not much scent of its own, when
mixed with others, especially iris-perfume, improves
PHS | si \4,"5\<*

4 The remaining sentences (§§ 70, 71) seem to be discon-
nected scraps, which perhaps do not belong to this treatise


at all. ‘The text of them being defective, it seems not worth
while to attempt translation.


389


ΠΕΡῚ SHMEION TAATON KAT IINETMA-
TON KAI XEIMONON KAI ETAION


1. Σημεῖα ὑδάτων καὶ πνευμάτων καὶ χειμώνων
καὶ εὐδιῶν ὧδε ἐγράψαμεν καθ᾽ ὅσον ἣν ἐφικτόν,

ἃ μὲν αὐτοὶ προσκοπήσαντες ἃ δὲ παρ᾽ ἑτέρων
οὐκ ἀδοκίμων λαβόντες.

Τὰ μὲν οὖν ἐπὶ τοῖς ἄστροις δυομένοις καὶ
ἀνατέλλουσιν ἐκ τῶν ἀστρονομικῶν δεῖ λαμβά-
νειν. εἰσὶ δὲ δύσεις διτταί" οἵ τε γὰρ ἀφανισμοὶ
δύσεις εἰσί; τοῦτο δέ ἐ ἐστιν ὅταν ἅμα συνδύνῃ τῷ
ἡλίῳ τὸ ἄστρον, καὶ ὅταν ἀνατέλλοντος δύνῃ.
ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ ἀνατολαὶ διτταί, αἱ μὲν ἑῷοι ὅταν
προανατέλλῃ τοῦ ἡλίου τὸ ἄστρον, αἱ δ᾽ ἀκρό-
νυχοι ὅταν ἅμα δυομένῳ ἀνατέλλῃ.

Αἱ μὲν οὖν τοῦ ᾿Αρκτούρου λεγόμεναι, ἀνατολαὶ
ἀμφοτέρως συμβαίνουσιν" ἡ μὲν γὰρ τοῦ χειμῶνος
ἀκρόνυχός ἐστιν, ἡ δὲ μετωπορινὴ EWA. τῶν δ᾽
ἄλλων αἱ πλεῖσται τῶν ὀνομαζομένων ἑ E@at, οἷον
Πλειάδος καὶ ᾿Ωρίωνος καὶ Κυνός.

Τῶν δὲ λοιπῶν σημείων ἔνια “μὲν ἴδια κατὰ
πάσας χώρας ἐστὶν ἐν ὅσαις ὄρη ὑψηλὰ καὶ
αὐλῶνές εἰσι, μάλιστα δὲ ὅσα πρὸς θάλασσαν
καθήκει τῶν ὑψηλῶν" τῶν τὲ γὰρ πνευμάτων
ἀρχομένων τὰ νέφη προσπίπτει πρὸς τοὺς τοι-
ούτους τόπους, καὶ μεθισταμένων εἰς τοὐναντίον


290


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS


Introductory : general principles.


I. Tue signs of rain wind storm and fair weather
we have described so far as was attainable, partly
from our own observation, partly from the informa-
tion of persons of credit.

Now those signs which belong to the setting or
rising of the heavenly bodies must be learnt from
astronomy.! Their settings are twofold, since they
may be said to have set when they become invisible.
And this occurs when the star sets along with the
sun, and also when it sets at sunrise. In like
manner their risings are twofold: there is the
morning rising, when the star rises before the sun,
and there is the rising at nightfall, when it rises at
sunset.

Now what are called the risings of Arcturus occur
at both times, his winter rising being at nightfall
and his autumn rising at dawn. But the rising of
most of the familiar constellations is at dawn, for
instance, the Pleiad Orion and the Dog.

Of the remaining signs some belong specially to
all such lands as contain high mountains and valleys,
specially where such mountains extend down to the
sea: for, when the winds begin to blow, the clouds
are thrown against such places, and, when the winds


1 Or, perhaps, ‘from my astronomical works.’


592


THEOPHRASTUS


, / 4. ie. y / \ ¥
ἀντιμεθίστανται Kal ὑγρότερα γινόμενα διὰ βάρος
᾽ \ n / lal
εἰς τὰ κοῖλα συγκαθίζει. διὸ δεῖ προσέχειν ov
7 ς / Ὁ \ / a
ἄν τις ἱδρυμένος 4. ἔστι yap ἀεί τινα λαβεῖν
a \ a \
τοιοῦτον γνώμονα καὶ ἔστι σαφέστατα σημεῖα TA
Ν
ἀπὸ τούτων.
\ Ay 2249 \ Z \ / A
Διὸ καὶ ἀγαθοὶ γεγένηνται κατὰ τόπους τινὰς
» / ” - / > 7
ἀστρονόμοι ἐνιοι, οἷον Ματρικέτας ἐν Μηθύμνῃ
> Ν fa) J \ / > /
ἀπὸ τοῦ Λεπετύμνου, καὶ KrXeootpatos ἐν Τενέδῳ
> SA fal wv \ Ν 2 if » sf lal
ἀπὸ τῆς Ἴδης, καὶ Φαεινὸς ᾿Αθήνῃσιν ἀπὸ τοῦ
a x: \ \ lal
Λυκαβηττοῦ Ta περὶ Tas τροπὰς συνεῖδε, παρ᾽
- lal \
ov Μέτων ἀκούσας τὸν τοῦ ἑνὸς δέοντα εἴκοσιν
an Zz / 5
ἐνιαυτῶν «κύκλον; συνέταξεν. ἣν δὲ ὁ μὲν Φαει-
/ ς \ / > rn
vos μέτοικος ᾿Αθήνῃσιν ὁ δὲ Μέτων ᾿Αθηναῖος.
omer cA ss \ 1d fal > /
καὶ ἄλλοι δὲ τὸν τρόπον τοῦτον ἠἡστρολόγησαν.
“4 x 2 a ἃ / > /
λλα δέ ἐστι σημεῖα ἃ λαμβάνεται ἀπό τε
an / / lal / \
ζώων TOV KAT οἰκίαν καὶ ἑτέρων τινῶν τόπων καὶ
/ / \ / x > x
παθημάτων, μάλιστα δὲ κυριώτατα «τὰ ἀπὸ
fa) / a / \ , \
τοῦ ἡλίου καὶ τῆς σελήνης" ἡ γὰρ σελήνη νυκτὸς
᾽ / lal a
οἷον ἥλιός ἐστι" διὸ Kal αἱ σύνοδοι τῶν μηνῶν
/ \ “Ὁ an
χειμέριοί εἰσιν, OTL ἀπολείπει TO PAS τῆς σελήνης
Ἢ 8 / ς
ἀπὸ τετράδος φθίνοντος μέχρι τετράδος ἱστα-
/ 53 , ,
μένου. ὥσπερ οὖν ἡλίου ἀπόλειψις γίνεται κατὰ
/ \ n 7 »Μ
τὸν ὅμοιον τρόπον καὶ τῆς σελήνης ἔκλειψις.
“ἅμ > lal > Qn Qn
δεῖ οὖν προσέχειν μάλιστα ταῖς ἀνατολαῖς ταῖς
Σ ΄ ς , οἵ aA \
τούτων Kal ταῖς δύσεσιν ὁποίας ἂν ποιῶνται TOV
/ 7
βουλόμενον προγινωώσκειν.
1 ἀντιμεθίστανται. Ἱἀντιμεθίσταται.
2 Plin. 5. 140. Οἱ Matriketas nothing is known.


3 Said (Plin. 2. 31) to have first recognised the Ram and
the Archer. Athen. (7. 278 b) connects him with Tenedos.


392


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 3-6


change, the clouds also change! and take a contrary
direction, and, as they become laden with moisture,
they settle down in the hollows because of their
weight. Wherefore good heed must be taken to
the local conditions of the region in which one is
placed. It is indeed always possible to find such an
observer, and the signs learnt from such persons are
the most trustworthy.

Thus in some parts have been found good astro-
nomers: for instance, ? Matriketas at Methymna
observed the solstices from Mount Lepetymnos,
Cleostratus ? in Tenedos from Mount Ida, Phaeinos
at Athens from Mount Lycabettus: Meton, who
made the cycle ὁ of nineteen years, was the pupil
of the last-named. Phaeinos was a resident alien
at Athens, while Meton was an Athenian. Others
also have made astronomical observations in like
manner.

Again there are other signs which are taken from
domestic animals or from certain other quarters and
happenings. Most important of all are the® signs
taken from the sun and moon: for the moon is as
it were a nocturnal sun. Wherefore also the
meetings of the months are stormy, because the
moon’s light fails from the fourth day from the
end of one month to the fourth day from the begin-
ning of the next: there is therefore a failure of
the moon corresponding to the failure of the sun.
Wherefore anyone who desires to forecast the
weather must pay especial heed to the character of
the risings and settings of these luminaries.

4 Called ‘the great year’: cf. Aelian. V.H. 10. 7. τὸν
τοῦ ἑνὸς δέοντα εἴκοσιν ἐνιαυτῶν -- κύκλον :- conj. Sch. ἐνιαυτὸν


conj. W.
5 τὰ seems necessary. ? κύρια τὰ.


393


THEOPHRASTUS


ral 5 ie
Πρῶτον μὲν οὖν ληπτέον ὅτι ai διχοτομίαι
/ \ UA 7 ral al
διορίζουσι Tas ὥρας, ὥστε ἐπὶ τούτων δεῖ ἀθρεῖν
Ν a \ / a
Kal ἐνιαυτὸν Kal μῆνα Kal ἡμέραν. διχοτομεῖ
\ \ x 5 Ν we / \ >
δὲ Tov μὲν ἐνιαυτὸν Ἰ]λειάς τε δυομένη Kal ava-
, 5 Ν Ν / / > A \
τέλλουσα' ἀπὸ γὰρ δύσεως μέχρι ἀνατολῆς TO
a a / / e
ἥμισυ τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ ἐστίν. ὥστε δίχα τέμνεται ὁ
an f ς /
πᾶς χρόνος. ὁμοίως δὲ Kal αἱ τροπαὶ Kal ἰση-
7 la) δ 5
μερίαι ποιοῦσιν. οἵα τις ἂν οὖν ἢ κατάστασις
φπ lg 4 / / e/ a ς > \ \
τοῦ ἀέρος Πλειάδος δυομένης, οὕτω ἔχει ὡς ἐπὶ TO
\ / a 3 \
πολὺ μέχρι τροπῶν, κἂν μεταβάλλῃ, μετὰ TPO-
7 aX \ \ ? / “ 5 /
πάς" ἐὰν δὲ μὴ μεταβάλλῃ, διέχει ἕως ἰσημερίας,
τ “ e Ve / / \ > \ ¥
κἀκεῖθεν ὡσαύτως μέχρι Ἰ]λειάδος, καὶ ἀπὸ Tav-
7 “ a rn /
TNS μέχρι τροπῶν θερινῶν, καὶ ἐντεῦθεν μέχρι
Χ Ν > 7 4 /
ἰσημερίας, καὶ ἀπὸ ἰσημερίας μέχρι Ἰ]λειάδος
δύσεως.
ς > “ 4 \ \ x a σ΄
Ὡς δ᾽ αὕτως ἔχει καὶ περὶ τὸν μῆνα ἕκαστον"
a \ “ / ie) /
διχοτομοῦσι yap αἵ τε πανσέληνοι Kal al ὀγδόαι
7 \ / ?
Kal αἱ τετράδες, WOTE ATO νουμηνίας ὡς ἀπ
> A a a / \ e δι τα \
ἀρχῆς δεῖ σκοπεῖν. μεταβάλλει yap ws ἐπὶ TO
A a8 a / pds \ / 3 a >’ / γ Ν
πολὺ ἐν τῇ τετράδι, ἐὰν δὲ μή, ἐν τῇ ὀγδόῃ, εἰ δὲ
/ / > Ν \ 4 > ’ /
μή, πανσελήνῳ: ἀπὸ δὲ πανσελήνου εἰς ὀγδόην
΄ μὴ
φθίνοντος, καὶ ἀπὸ ταύτης εἰς τετράδα, ἀπὸ δὲ
\ /
τετράδος ELS τὴν νουμηνίαν.
ς > “ \ > \ an Φ / » ΩΝ
Ὡς δ᾽ αὕτως καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς ἡμέρας ἔχουσιν αἱ
\ \ \ \
μεταβολαὶ ws ἐπὶ TO πολύ. ἀνατολὴ yap Kal
A. \ / \ / \ / \ \
πρωὶ καὶ μεσημβρία καὶ δείλη καὶ δύσις, καὶ τὰ
a x \ a a
τῆς νυκτὸς μέρη TA ἀνάλογα ταὐτὸ ποιεῖ τοῖς
εἰρημένοις περὶ πνευμάτων καὶ χειμῶνος καὶ
\ \ / ,
εὐδίας. μάλιστα yap ἐὰν μέλλῃ μεταβάλλειν, ἐν


394


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 6-9


Now the first point to be seized is that the various
periods are all divided in half, so that one’s study of
the year the month or the day should take account
of these divisions. The year is divided in half by
the setting and rising of the Pleiad!: for from the
setting to the rising is a half year. So that to begin
with the whole period is divided into halves: and a
like division is effected by the solstices and equinoxes.
From which it follows that, whatever is the condition
of the atmosphere when the Pleiad sets, that it con-
tinues in general to be till the winter solstice, and,
if it does change, the change only takes place after
the solstice: while, if it does not change, it continues
the same till the spring equinox : the same principle
holds good from that time to the rising of the Pleiad,
from that again to the summer solstice, from that
again to the autumnal equinox, and from that to the
setting of the Pleiad. .

So too is it with each month; the full moon and
the eighth 2 and the fourth days make divisions into
halves, so that one should make the new moon the
starting-point of one’s survey. A change most often
takes place on the fourth day, or, failing that, on the
eighth, or, failing that, at the full moon ; after that the
periods are from the full moon to the eighth day
from the end of the month, from that to the fourth
day from the end, and from that to the new moon.

The divisions of the day follow in general the
same principle : there is the sunrise, the mid-morning,
noon, mid-afternoon, and sunset; and the corres-
ponding divisions of the night have like effects in
the matter of winds storms and fair weather; that
is to say, if there is to be a change, it will generally


1 Plin. 18. 280. 2 Of Aras. (oun.
395


10


11


12


THEOPHRASTUS


ταῖς διχοτομίαις μεταβάλλει. καθόλου μὲν οὖν
τὰς ὥρας οὕτω δεῖ παρατηρεῖν, καθ' ἕκαστα δὲ
τῶν σημείων κατὰ τὸν ὑπογεγραμμένον τρόπον.

Ὕδατος μὲν οὖν σημεῖα τὰ τοιαῦτα δοκεῖ εἶναι.
ἐναργέστατον μὲν οὖν τὸ ἑωθινόν, ὅταν πρὸ ἡλίου
ἀνατολῆς φαίνηται ἐπιφοινίσσον σημεῖον" ἢ γὰρ
αὐθημερινὸν ἐπισημαίνει ἢ τριῶν ἡμερῶν ὡς ἐπὶ
τὸ πολύ. δηλοῖ δὲ καὶ τὰ ἄλλα σημεῖα" ἐὰν
γὰρ μὴ πρότερον, τριταῖα μάλιστα σημαίνει
τὸ ἐπιφοινίσσον καὶ δύνοντος, ἧττον δὲ ἢ τὸ
ἑωθινοῦ.

Καὶ ἐὰν δύνῃ χειμῶνος ἢ ἔαρος εἰς νεφέλιον,
τριῶν ἡμερῶν ὡς τὰ πολλὰ ἐπισημαίνει. καὶ
ἐὰν ῥάβδοι νοτόθεν, ταὐτὰ δὲ ταῦτα βορρᾶθεν
γινόμενα ἀσθενέστερα. καὶ ἐὰν ἀνίσχων μέλαν
σημεῖον ἴσχῃ, καὶ ἐὰν ἐκ , νεφελῶν “«ἀνΞέχῃ,
ὑδατικόν, καὶ ἐὰν ἀκτῖνες ἀνίσχοντος ἀνατείνωσι
πρὶν ἀνατεῖλαι, κοινὸν ὕδατος σημεῖον καὶ ἀνέμου.
καὶ ἐὰν καταφερομένου τοῦ ἡλίου ὑφίστηται
νέφος, ὑφ᾽ οὗ ἐὰν σχίζωνται αἱ ἀκτῖνες, χειμερινὸν
τὸ σημεῖον. καὶ ὅταν καυματίας δύηται καὶ
ἀνατέλλῃ, ἐὰν μὴ ἄνεμος γένηται, ὕδατος τὸ
σημεῖον.

Τὰ αὐτὰ δὲ σημαίνει καὶ σελήνη πανσελήνῳ
ἀνίσχουσα, ἀσθενέστερα δὲ ὁ μείς. ἐὰν μὲν ἢ
πυρώδης, πνευματώδη σημαίνει τὸν μῆνα, ἐὰν δὲ
ζοφώδης, ὑδατώδη: σημαίνει δὲ ὅτι ἂν σημαίνῃ


n XN ς »,
TPLTALOS ὧν O μεις.


1 τὸν troy. τρόπον seems to mean the same as the Aristote-
lian τὸν ὑφηγημένον τρόπον, e.g. Hth. Nic. 2. 7. 9. The
rendering ‘the following method’ would however suit the
context.


396


—


eS


<


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 9-12


occur at one of these divisions. In general there-
fore one should observe the periods in the way
indicated, though as to particular signs we must
follow the accepted method.


The signs of rain.


Now the signs of rain appear to be as follows:
most unmistakable is that which occurs at dawn,
when the sky has a reddish appearance before sun-
rise; for this usually indicates rain within three
days, if not on that very day. Other signs point
the same way: thus a red sky at sunset indicates
rain within three days, if not before, though less
certainly than a red sky at dawn.

Again, if the sun sets in a cloud in winter or
spring, this generally indicates rain within three
days. So too, if there are streaks of light from the
south, while, if these are seen in the north, it is a
less certain sign. Again, if the sun when it rises
has a black mark, or if it rises? out of clouds, it is a
sign of rain; while, if at sunrise there are rays?
shooting out before the actual rising, it is a sign of
rain and also of wind. Again if, as the sun sinks, a
cloud forms below it and this breaks up its rays, it is
a sign of stormy weather. Again, if it sets or rises
with a burning heat, and there is no wind, it is a sign
of rain.

Moonrise gives similar indications, at the time of
full moon: they are less certain when the moon is
not full. Ifthe moon looks fiery, it indicates breezy
weather for that month, if dusky, wet weather ; and,
whatever indications the crescent moon gives, are
given when it is three days old.


2 avéxn conj. Sch. 3 Plin. 18. 344.
397


18


14


15


THEOPHRASTUS


᾿Αστέρες πολλοὶ διάττοντες ὕδατος ἢ πνεύ-
ματος, καὶ ὅθεν ἂν διῴττωσιν ἐντεῦθεν τὸ “πνεῦμα
ἢ τὸ ὕδωρ. καὶ ἐὰν ἀκτῖνες ἀθρόαι ἀνίσχωσιν
ἀνιόντος ἢ ἡ δύνοντος, σημεῖον. «ὕδατος:». καὶ ὅταν
ἀνίσχοντος τοῦ ἡλίου αἱ αὐγαὶ οἷον ἐκλείποντος
χρῶμα ἴσχωσιν, ὕδατος σημεῖον. καὶ ὅταν νεφέλαι
πόκοις ἐρίων ὅμοιαι ὦσιν, ὕδωρ σημαίνει. [ὑετοῦ
δὲ σημεῖα) πομφόλυγες ἀνιστάμεναι πλείους ἐπὶ
τῶν ποταμῶν ὕδωρ σημαίνουσι πολύ. ὡς δ᾽ ἐπὶ
τὸ πολὺ ἴρις περὶ λύχνον ἢ διὰ λύχνου διαφαινο-
μένη νότια σημαίνει ὕδατα.

Καὶ οἱ μύκητες ἐὰν νότια ἢ, ὕδωρ σημαίνουσι,
σημαίνουσι δὲ καὶ ἄνεμον κατὰ λόγον ὡς ἂν
ἔχωσι πλήθους καὶ μεγέθους, σμικροὶ δὲ καὶ
κεγχρώδεις καὶ λαμπροὶ ὕδωρ καὶ ἄνεμον. καὶ
ὅταν χειμῶνος τὴν φλόγα «ὁ λύχνος:- “ἀπωθῇ
διαλιπὼν οἷον “πομφόλυγας, ὕδατος σημεῖον, καὶ
ἐὰν πηδῶσιν αἱ ἀκτῖνες ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν, καὶ ἐὰν σπιν-
θῆρες ἐπιγένωνται.

Ὄρρνιθες λουόμενοι μὴ ἐν ὕδατι βιοῦντες ὕδωρ
ἢ “χειμῶνας σημαίνουσι. καὶ φρύνη λουομένη
καὶ βάτραχοι μᾶλλον ἄδοντες σημαίνουσιν ὕδωρ.
καὶ ἡ σαύρα φαινομένη, ἣ ἣν καλοῦσι σαλαμάνδραν,
ἔτει δὲ καὶ ,᾿χλωρὸς βάτραχος ἐπὶ δένδρου ἄδων
ὕδωρ σημαίνει. χελιδόνες τῇ γαστρὶ τύπτουσαι
τὰς λίμνας ὕδωρ σημαίνουσι. βοὺς τὴν προσ-
θίαν ὁπλὴν λείξας χειμῶνα ἢ ὕδωρ σημαίνει. ἐὰν


of: 37. 2 ὕδατος ins. Furl. 3 Plin. 18. 344.
Plin. 18. 356. 5 ὑετοῦ δὲ σημεῖα bracketed by Sch.
ef. Arist. Meteor. 3.4; Plut. Quaest. Nat. 1. 2

cf. 42.

z.e. breaks up into small ‘ grains’ (ἢ. ef. 25, 42, 54.


or ao » »Ἡ


398


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 13-15


Many shooting ! stars are a sign of rain or wind,
and the wind or rain will come from that quarter
from which they appear. Again, if at sunrise or
sunset the sun’s rays appear massed together, it is a
sign of rain.” Also it is a sign of rain when at sun-
rise the rays 2 are coloured as in an eclipse ; and also
when there are clouds?‘ like a fleece of wool. The
rising of bubbles ὃ in large numbers on the surface of
rivers is a sign of abundant rain. And in general,
when a rainbow ° is seen round or through a lamp, it
signifies rain from the south.

Again, if the wind is from the south, the snuff?
of the lamp-wick indicates rain; it also indicates
wind in proportion to its bulk and size: while if
the snuff is small, like millet-seed,® and of bright
colour, it indicates rain as well as wind. Again,
when in winter the lamp rejects? the flame but
catches, as it were, here and there in spurts, it is
a sign of rain: so also is it, if the rays of light leap
up on the lamp, or if there are sparks.

It is a sign of rain or storm when birds which are
not aquatic take a bath. It is a sign of rain when a
toad takes a bath, and still more so when frogs are
vocal. So too is the appearance of the lizard known
as ‘salamander, !° and still more the chirruping of
the green frog in a tree. It is a sign of rain when
swallows !! hit the water of the lakes with their
belly. It is a sign of storm or rain when the ox


9. 7.e. refuses to light properly. The appearance seems to
be that described Verg. Georg. 1. 391 (scinteéllare olewm). In
the same passage putres concrescere fungos perhaps illustrates
the comparison of the snuff to millet-seed above.

10 of. de igne 60, where it is explained why the salamander
puts fire out.

1 Plin. 18. 363 ; Verg. Georg. 1. 377.


399


16


17


18


THEOPHRASTUS


δὲ els TOV οὐρανὸν ἀνακύπτων ὀσφραίνηται, ὕδωρ
σημαΐνει.

Κορώνη ἐπὶ πέτρας κορυσσομένη ἣν κῦμα
κατακλύζει ὕδωρ σημαίνει" καὶ κολυμβῶσα πολ-
λάκις καὶ περιπετομένη ὕδωρ σημαίνει. κόραξ
πολλὰς μεταβάλλειν εἰωθὼς φωνάς, τούτων ἐὰν
ταχὺ δὶς φθέγξηται καὶ ἐπερροιζήσῃ καὶ τινάξῃ
τὰ πτέρα, ὕδωρ σημαίνει. καὶ ἐὰν ὑετῶν ὄντων
πολλὰς μεταβάλλῃ φωνὰς καὶ ἐὰν φθειρίξηται
ἐπ᾽ ἐλαίας. καὶ ἐάν τε εὐδίας ἐάν τε ὕδατος
ὄντος ,μεμῆται τῇ φωνῇ οἷον σταλαγμούς, ὕδωρ
σημαίνει. ἐάν τε κόρακες ἐάν τε κολοιοὶ ἄνω
πέτωνται καὶ ἱερακίξωσιν, ὕδωρ σημαίνουσι. καὶ
ἐὰν κόραξ εὐδίας μὴ τὴν εἰωθυῖαν φωνὴν ἵῃ καὶ
ἐπιρροιβδῇ, ὕδωρ σημαΐνει.

᾿Εὰν ἱέραξ ἐπὶ δένδρου καθεζόμενος καὶ εἴσω
SN, φθειρίζηται, ὕδωρ σημαίνει. καὶ
θέρους ὅταν πολλοὶ ἀθρόοι φανῶσιν ὄρνιθες οἱ
βιοτεύουσιν ἐν νήσῳ, ὕδωρ σημαίνουσιν ἐὰν δὲ
μέτριοι, ἀγαθὸν αἰξὶ καὶ βοτοῖς, ἐὰν δὲ πολλοὶ
ὑπερβολῇ, αὐχμὸν ἰσχυρόν. ὅλως δὲ ὄρνιθες καὶ
ἀλεκτρυόνες φθειριξόμενοι ὑδατικὸν σημεῖον, καὶ
ὅταν μιμῶνται ὕδωρ ὡς Dov.

Καὶ ἡ νῆττα ἥμερος <éav> ὑπιοῦσα ὑπὸ τὰ

ἡ νῆττα ἥμερος
γεῖσα ἀποπτερυγίξηται, ὕδωρ σημαίνει, ὁμοίως δὲ
καὶ κολοιοὶ καὶ ἀλεκτρυόνες, ἐάν τε ἐπὶ λίμνη ἢ
θαλάττῃ ἀποπτερυγίξζξωνται, ὡς νῆττα ὕδωρ ση-


1 Plin. 18. 364; Verg. Georg. 1. 375.

2 ἐπιρροιζήσῃ. Sc. with his wings probably ; not, as LS.
‘croaks.’ Plin. (18. 362) seems to have had a fuller text, or
to have drawn also on some other authority.

3 ῥετῶν ὄντων can hardly mean ‘ while it is raining.’


400


ee eee or ee


ΝΟΥ ΎΤΗΣ


-


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 15-18


‘licks his fore-hoof; if he puts! his head up towards


the sky and snuffs the air, it is a sign of rain.

It is a sign of rain when a crow puts back its head
on a rock which is washed by waves, or when it often
dives or hovers over the water. It is a sign of rain
if the raven, who is accustomed to make many
different sounds, repeats one of these twice quickly
and makes a whirring ὁ sound and shakes his wings.
So too if, during a rainy season,’ he utters many
different sounds, or if he searches for lice perched on
an olive-tree. And if, whether in fair or wet weather,
he imitates, as it were, with his voice falling drops,
it is a sign of rain. So too is it if ravens or jack-
daws fly high and scream? like hawks. And, if a
raven in fair weather does not utter his accustomed
note and makes a whirring with his wings,® it is a
sign of rain.

It is a sign of rain if a hawk perches on a tree, flies
right into it and proceeds to search for lice: also,
when in summer a number of birds living on an
island pack together: if a moderate number collect,
itis a good sign for goats and flocks, while if the
number is exceedingly large, it portends a severe
drought. And in general it is a sign of rain when
cocks and hens search for lice; as also when they
make a noise like that of falling rain.

Again it is a sign of rain when a tame © duck gets
under the eaves and flaps its wings. Also it is a sign
of rain when jackdaws and fowls flap their wings
whether on a lake or on the sea—like the duck. It


4 ἱερακίζωσιν. ? ‘hover like hawks.’ However, Arat. 231
understood it to refer to the voice: so LS.
> ἐπιρροιβδῇ. Exact sense uncertain. cf. Soph. Ant. 1004.
ὁ ἥμερος. ? ἡ ἥμερος.
401
VOL. Il. DED


THEOPHRASTUS


μαίνει. καὶ ἐρωδιὸς ὄρθριον φθεγγόμενος ὕδωρ
ἢ πνεῦμα σημαίνει" καὶ ἐὰν ἐπὶ θάλατταν πετό-
μενος βοᾷ, μᾶλλον ὕδατος σημεῖον ἢ πνεύματος,
καὶ ὅλως βοῶν ἀνεμῶδες.

19 Kato σπίνος ἐν οἰκίᾳ οἰκουμένῃ ἐὰν φθέγξηται
ἕωθεν, ὕδωρ σημαίνει ἢ χειμῶνα. καὶ χύτρα
σπινθηρίζουσα πᾶσα περίπλεως ὕδατος σημεῖον.
καὶ ἴουλοι πολλοὶ πρὸς τοῖχον ἕρποντες ὑδατικόν.
δελφὶς παρὰ γῆν κολυμβῶν καὶ ἀναδυόμενος
πυκνὰ ὕδωρ ἢ χειμῶνα σημαίνει.

20 ἽὝμηττος ἐλάττων, ἄνυδρος καλούμενος, ἐὰν τῷ
κοίλῳ vepeduov ἔχῃ, ὕδατος σημεῖον" καὶ ἐὰν ὁ
μέγας Ὕηττος τοῦ θέρους ἔχῃ νεφέλας ἄνωθεν
καὶ ἐκ πλαγίου, ὕδατος σημεῖον. καὶ ἐὰν ὁ ἄνυ-
δρος᾿ Ὕηττος λευκὰς ἔχῃ ἄνωθεν καὶ ἐκ πλαγίου.
καὶ ἐὰν περὶ ἰσημερίαν Al πνεύσῃ, ὕδωρ ση-
μαίνει.

21 Αἵ “δὲ βρονταὶ αἱ μὲν χειμεριναὶ καὶ ἑωθιναὶ
μᾶλλον «ἄνεμον ἢ: ὕδωρ σημαίνουσιν" αἱ δὲ :
θεριναὶ μεσημβρίας καὶ ἑσπεριναὶ βρονταὶ ὑδατι-
κὸν σημεῖον. ἀστραπαὶ δὲ ἐάν γε πανταχόθεν
γένωνται, ὕδατος ἂν ἢ ἀνέμου σημεῖον, καὶ
ἑσπεριναὶ ὡσαύτως. καὶ ἐὰν ἀκρωρίας νότου
πνέοντος νοτόθεν ἀστράψῃ, ὕδωρ σημαίνει ἢ ἄνε-
μον. καὶ Sepupos ἀστράπτων πρὸς βορείου ἢ
χειμῶνα. ἢ ὕδωρ σημαίνει. καὶ θέρους αἱ éo-
πέριαι ἀστραπαὶ ὕδωρ αὐτίκα σημαίνουσιν ἢ


a


1 Sch. cites Plin. 18. 364, vermes terrent erwmpentes, as
representing this, which seems doubtful.


* cf. Plin. 18. 361; Cic, Div. 2. 70.


3 ἐὰν τῷ. ὃ ἐὰν ἐν τῷ.


402


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 18-21


is a sign of wind or rain when a heron utters his note
at early morning: if, as he flies towards the sea, he
utters his cry, it is a sign of rain rather than of wind,
and in general, if he makes a loud cry, it portends
wind.

It is a sign of rain or storm if a chaffinch kept in
the house utters its note at dawn. It is also a sign
if any pot filled with water causes sparks to fly when
it is put on the fire. It is also a sign of rain when a
number of millepedes? are seen crawling up a wall.
A dolphin? diving near land and frequently re-
appearing indicates rain or storm.

If the lesser Mount Hymettus, which is called the
Dry Hill, has cloud in? its hollows, it is a sign of
rain: so also is it, if the greater Hymettus has
clouds in summer on the top and on the sides: or if
the Dry Hymettus has white clouds on the top and
on the sides; also if the south-west wind * blows at
the equinox.

Thunder in winter and at dawn indicates wind ®
rather than rain; thunder in summer at midday or
in the evening is a sign of rain. If lightning is seen
from all sides, it will be a sign of rain or wind, and
also if it occurs in the evening. Again, if when
the south wind ὅ is blowing at early dawn,’ there is
lightning from the same quarter, it indicates rain or
wind. When the west wind is accompanied by
lightning from the north, it indicates either storm
or rain. Lightning in the evening in summer time
indicates rain within three days, if not immediately.


4 cf. Arist. Probl, 26, 26.

5 ἄνεμον add. Furl. from Plin. 18. 354.

6 ef. Soph. Aj. 257; Arist. Probl. 26. 20.
1 axpwplas. cf. 42. So Arat. 216 renders.


403
Dep 2


THEOPHRASTUS


ἴω a ’ / n
τριῶν ἡμερῶν. καὶ ὀπώρας βορρᾶθεν ἀστραπαὶ
Ν an
ὑδατικὸν σημεῖον.
«ς Y fal \
2 ἋἫ KuBoa ὅταν διαζωσθῇ μέση, ὕδωρ διὰ
/ ang Tae," > \ \ VA / /
ταχέων. καὶ ἐὰν ἐπὶ τὸ Ἰ]ήλιον νεφέλη προσίζῃ,
ry 3 n 3 /
ὅθεν ἂν προσίζῃ, ἐντεῦθεν ὕδωρ ἢ ἄνεμον σημαίνει.
3 7
ὅταν ἶρις γένηται, ἐπισημαίνει: ἐάν τε πολλαὶ
" / / Ὁ pas, ΓΑ 4 \
ἔριδες γένωνται, σημαίνει ὕδωρ ἐπὶ πολύ. ἀλλὰ
\ e 3 nan 7 f
πολλάκις καὶ οἱ ὀξεῖς ἥλιοι, ὅταν ἐκ νεφέλης.
» 7 \ i /
μύρμηκες EV κοίλῳ χωρίῳ ἐὰν τὰ wa ἐκφέρωσιν
an na Ν Ν \ /
ἐκ τῆς μυρμηκιᾶς ἐπὶ TO ὑψηλὸν χωρίον, ὕδωρ
2X / 3
σημαίνουσιν, ἐὰν δὲ καταφέρωσιν, εὐδίαν. ἐὰν
/ ΄ J X. \ ΄ ς \
παρήλιοι δύο γένωνται Kal ὁ μὲν νοτόθεν ὁ δὲ
an N er Ὡ “ \ / ,
βορρᾶθεν, καὶ ἅλως ἅμα ὕδωρ διὰ ταχέων σημαΐί-
\ Fe? «ς / ἘΣ μὴ \ a
νουσι. Kal ἅλως ai μέλαινα: ὑδατικὰν καὶ μᾶλ-
/
λον αἱ δείλης.
fal Ve / / /
23 Ἔν τῷ Καρκίνῳ δύο ἀστέρες εἰσίν, οἱ καλού-
Ἂς \ \ / /
μενοι "Ovo, ὧν τὸ μεταξὺ TO νεφέλιον ἡ Φάτνη
Ὁ x lal / ,
καλουμένη. τοῦτο ἐὰν ζοφῶδες γένηται, ὑδατικόν.
ah \ Eee \ “ XN > Vite / ς 2 «ἣν
ἐὰν μὴ ἐπὶ Κυνὶ ton ἢ ἐπὶ Ἀρκτούρῳ, ὡς ἐπὶ
\ » ἋἋ 7 \ \
TO πολὺ πρὸς ἰσημερίαν ὕδωρ ἢ ἄνεμος. καὶ TO
\ \ / / /
δημόσιον TO περὶ τὰς μυίας λεγόμενον ἀληθές"
\ / A a
ὅταν yap δάκνωσι σφόδρα, ὕδατος σημεῖον.
7 7, ld \ 4
σπίνος φθεγγόμενος ἕωθεν μὲν ὕδωρ σημαίνει
ἢ ava, δείλης δὲ UO
ἢ χειμῶνα, δείλης OE ὕδωρ.
a \ Ν «“ \ “ 7 A
24 Τῆς δὲ νυκτὸς ὅταν Tov “Tunttov κάτωθεν τῶν
” / ὃ 4 \ \ ix “ὃ
ἄκρων νεφέλη ιαζώσῃ λευκὴ καὶ μακρά, ὕδωρ
\ \ / a
γίνεται ὡς TA πολλὰ μετρίων ἡμερῶν. καὶ ἐὰν


1 Evidently an Attic saying, of days when only the upper
part of the Euboean mountains was visible.


404


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 21-24


Lightning from the north in late summer is a sign of
rain.

~lWhen Euboea has a girdle about it up to the
waist, there will be rain in a short space. If cloud
elings about Mount Pelion, it is an indication of rain
or wind from the quarter to which it clings. When
a rainbow appears, it is an indication of rain; if
many rainbows appear, it is an indication of long-
continued rain. So too is it often when the sun
appears? suddenly out of cloud. It is a sign of
rain if ants® in a hollow place carry their eggs up
from the ant-hill to the high ground, a sign of fair
weather if they carry them down. If two mock-
suns* appear, one to the south, the other to the
north, and there is at the same time a halo, these
indicate that it will shortly rain. A dark halo round
the sun indicates rain, especially if it occurs in the
afternoon.

In the Crab are two stars called the Asses, and
the nebulous space between them is called the
Manger? ; if this appears dark, it is a sign of rain.
If there is no rain at the rising of the Dog or of
Arcturus, there will generally be rain or wind to-
wards the equinox. Also the popular saying about
flies is true; when they bite excessively, it is a sign
of rain. If a chaffinch © utters its note at dawn, it
is a sign of rain or storm, if in the afternoon, of
rain.

When at night a long stretch of white cloud en-
compasses Hymettus below the peaks, there will
generally be rain in a few days. If cloud settles on

2 of. H.P. 8. 10. 3.

3 Plin. 18. 364; Verg. Georg. 1. 379.

+ of. 29. 5 of. 43, 51.

6 ef. 19, of which this seems to be in part a repetition.


405


20


THEOPHRASTUS


>, g£ a a «ς
ἐν Αὐγίνῃ [καὶ] ἐπὶ τοῦ Διὸς τοῦ ᾿Ἑλλανίου
νεφέλη καθίζηται, ὡς τὰ πολλὰ ὕδωρ γίνεται.
Ἂ e/ \ / / \ 54 e
ἐὰν ὕδατα πολλὰ γίνηται χειμερινά, TO ἔαρ ὡς

\ \ / > / > Ma ᾽ > \
τὰ πολλὰ γίνεται αὐχμηρόν: ἐὰν δ᾽ αὐχμηρὸς
ς / A, Oo? ¢ a Ὁ / \
ὁ χειμών, TO ἔαρ ὑδατῶδες. ὅταν χιόνες πολλαὶ

, \
γίνωνται, ὡς τὰ πολλὰ εὐετηρία γίνεται.

\ / \ \

Φασὶ δέ τινες καὶ εἰ ἐν ἄνθραξι λαμπρὰ χάλαζα
> / / 1A ἂς \ /
ἐπιφαίνηται, χάλαζαν προσημαίνειν WS τὰ πολλά’
2X \ Ὁ“ / \ \ /
ἐὰν δὲ ὥσπερ κέγχροι μικροὶ λαμπροὶ πολλοί,
ἌΡ Ε \ Yi >Q/ \ τ, Ἀν ΠΕΡ A
ἀνέμου μὲν ὄντος εὐδίαν, μὴ ἀνέμου δὲ ὕδωρ ἢ

A / /
ἄνεμον. ἔστι δ᾽ ἄμεινον πρῶτον γίνεσθαι βόρειον
Ὁ“ , Ν a / \ a 4 a
ὕδωρ νοτίου καὶ τοῖς φυομένοις καὶ τοῖς ζῴοις" δεῖ

x Ly a
δὲ γλυκὺ εἶναι καὶ μὴ ἁλμυρὸν τοῖς γευομένοις.

ἌΝ ey Μ , 4 / ἈΦ
καὶ ὅλως ἔτος βέλτιον νοτίου βόρειον καὶ ὑγιει-

, NG fer ΄ > / ΄
νότερον. καὶ ὅταν «πάλιν: ὀχεύωνται πρόβατα
Ἃ 3 la) a val
ἢ αἶγες, χειμῶνος μακροῦ σημεῖον.

7 5 an “

II. Ὕδατος μὲν οὖν ταῦτα λέγεται σημεῖα"
Sa. \ \ / ΄, 3 , ς
ἀνέμου δὲ καὶ πνευμάτων τάδε. ἀνατέλλων O
e/ / Ἃ \ 5 ,ὔ > ay
HALOS καυματίας, κἂν μὴ ἀποστίλβη, ἀνεμῶδες

\ a \ 9\ a / ς ef
TO σημεῖον" καὶ ἐὰν κοῖλος φαίνηται ὁ ἥλιος,
> LZ Ἃ “ὃ Ν lal NS oN 8... ἊΝ \
ἀνέμου ἢ ὕδατος TO σημεῖον. καὶ ἐὰν ἐπὶ πολλᾶς

/ /
ἡμέρας καυματίας, αὐχμοὺς Kal ἀνέμους πολυ-

/ \ a 3 Ν

χρονίους σημαίνει. ἐὰν αἱ ἀκτῖνες αἱ μὲν πρὸς
Ὁ ς Ν / / /

βορρᾶν at δὲ πρὸς νότον σχίζωνται τούτου μέσου

1 So called also by Pind. Nem. 5.19. Paus. 2. 80. 3 calls


it the temple of Zeds Πανελλήνιος. καὶ bracketed by Sch.
* Oh, Mtn ity


406


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 24-26


the temple of Zeus Hellanios! in Aegina, usually
rain follows. If a great deal of rain falls in winter,
the spring is usually dry; if the winter has been
dry, the spring is usually wet. When there is
much? snow in winter, a good season generally
follows.

Some say that, if in the embers? there is an ap-
pearance as of shining hail-stones, it generally
prognosticates hail; while, if the appearance is like
a number of small shining millet-seeds,* it portends
fair weather, if there is wind at the time, but, if
there is no wind, rain or wind. It is better both for
plants and for animals that rain should come from
the north before it comes from the south; it must
however be fresh and not briny to the taste. And
in general a season ® in which a north wind prevails
is better and healthier than one in which southerly
winds prevail. It is a sign of a long winter when
sheep or goats have a second 5 breeding season.


The signs of wind.


II. Such then are said to be the signs of rain. The
following are signs of wind and breezes. ‘If the sun
rises with a burning heat but does not shine bril-
liantly, it is a sign of wind. If the sun has a hollow
appearance, it is a sign of wind or rain. If it blazes
with a burning heat for several days, it portends
long-continued drought or wind. If at dawn its
rays are parted, some pointing to the north and some


3 ἄνθραξι conj. Sch., supported by Plin. 18. 358; Arat. 309.
ἀστράσι MSS.

4 of. 14, 42, 54. ΘΟ eee ὃ.

86. πάλιν ins. Sch.; text probably defective.

7 Plin. 18. 342.


407


27


28


29


THEOPHRASTUS


ὄντος κατ᾽ ὄρθρον, κοινὸν ὕδατος Kal ἀνέμου
σημεῖόν ἐστιν.

Ἔστι δὲ σημεῖα ἐν ἡλίῳ καὶ σελήνῃ, τὰ μὲν

/ c/ \ ει δ᾿ \ / 7\ x
μέλανα ὕδατος τὰ δ᾽ ἐρυθρὰ πνεύματος. ἐὰν δὲ
καὶ ὁ μεὶς βορείου ὄντος ὀρθὸς εἱστήκῃ, ζέφυροι
εἰώθασιν ἐπιπνεῖν καὶ ὁ μὴν χειμερινὸς διατελεῖ.
ὅταν μὲν ἡ κεραία <1) ἄνω: τοῦ μηνὸς ἐπικύπτῃ,
βόρειος ὁ eis” ὅταν δ᾽ ἡ κάτωθεν, νότιος" ἐὰν δ᾽
ὀρθὸς καὶ μὴ καλῶς ἐγκεκλεμένος μέχρι τετράδος
καὶ εὔκυκλος, εἴωθε χειμάξειν μέχρι διχομηνίας.
σημαίνει ζοφώδης μὲν ὧν ὕδωρ πυρώδης δὲ
πνεῦμα.

Αἴθυιαι καὶ νῆτται [πτερυγίζουσαι) καὶ ἄγριαι
καὶ τιθασσαὶ ὕδωρ μὲν σημαίνουσι δυόμεναι,
πτερυγίζουσαιν δὲ ἄνεμον. οἱ κέπφοι εὐδίας |
οὔσης ὅποι ἂν πέτωνται ἄνεμον προσημαίνουσι.
στρουθοὶ χειμῶνος ad’ ἑσπέρας θορυβοῦντες ἢ
ἀνέμου μεταβολὴν σημαίνουσιν ἢ ὕδωρ ὑέτιον.
ἐρωδιὸς ἀπὸ θαλάσσης πετόμενος καὶ βοῶν
πνεύματος σημεῖόν ἐστι" καὶ ὅλως βοῶν μέγα
ἀνεμώδης.

Κύων κυλινδούμενος χαμαὶ μέγεθος ἀνέμου
σημαίνει. ἀράχνια πολλὰ φερόμενα πνεῦμα ἢ
χειμῶνα σημαΐνει. ἡ ἡ ἄμπωτις βόρειον πνεῦμα
σημαίνει, πλημμύρα δὲ νότιον. ἐὰν μὲν γὰρ ἐκ
βορείων πλημμύρα ἥκῃ, εἰς νότιον μεταβάλλει,
ἐὰν δ᾽ ἐκ νοτίων ἄμπωτις γίνηται, εἰς βόρειον


σα Δ. δ ἐν Δ


1 Plin. 18. 343 suggests that this is the meaning: text
perhaps defective. cf. Verg. Georg. 1. 445.

POF, 38;

3 Lit. ‘the crescent moon has a northerly character.’ 7%
ἄνω add. Furl,


408


CONCERNING WEATHER. SIGNS, 26-29


to the south, while the orb itself is! clearly seen
between, it is a sign of rain and wind.

Also black spots on the sun or moon indicate rain,
red spots wind. Again, if, while a north wind blows,
the horns? of the crescent moon stand out straight,
westerly winds will generally succeed, and the rest
of the month will be stormy. When the upper horn
of the crescent moon is bent, northerly winds? will
prevail for that part of the month: when the lower
horn is bent, southerly winds will prevail. ‘If
however the horns up to the fourth day point
straight and have not a graceful bend inwards but
round to a circle, it will generally be stormy till the
middle of the month. If the moon is dusky, it
indicates rain, if fiery, it indicates wind.

It is a sign of rain when gulls and ducks,
whether wild or tame, plunge under water, a sign of
wind when they flap their wings. Wherever the
bird called kepphos flies during a calm, it is a sign of
coming wind. If sparrows in winter begin to be
clamorous at evening, it is a sign of a coming change
or of a fall of rain. A heron fiying from the sea and
screaming is a sign that a breeze is coming: so is it
in general a sign of wind when he screams loudly.

A dog rolling on the ground is a sign of violent
wind. A number of cobwebs® in motion portends
wind or storm. The ebb-tide indicates a north
wind, the flowing tide a wind from the south. For,
if the flowing tide sets from the north, there is a
change to the south, and if an ebb-tide comes from
the south, there is a change to the north. It is


4 cf. 38; Plin. 18. 347; Verg. Georg. i. 428; the English
sign, ‘the young moon with the old moon in her arm,’
5 Plin, 11, 84; Arist, Probl, 26. 61.


409


90


81


THEOPHRASTUS


μεταβάλλει. θάλασσα οἰδοῦσα καὶ ἀκταὶ βοῶσαι
καὶ αἰγιαλὸς ἠχῶν ἀνεμώδης. καὶ ὁ μὲν βορέας
λήγων ἐλάττων ὁ δὲ νότος ἀρχόμενος. παρήλιος
ὁπόθεν ἃἂ ἂν ἢ ὕδωρ ἢ ἢ ἄνεμον σημαίνει.

‘H πέμπτη καὶ δεκάτη ἀπὸ τροπῶν τῶν
χειμερινῶν ὡς τὰ πολλὰ νότιος. βορείων δὲ
γινομένων ξηραίνει πάντα, νοτίων δὲ ὑγραίνει.
ἐὰν δὲ νοτίων ὄντων ψοφῇ «τι» τῶν κεκολλη-
μένων, εἰς τὰ νότια σημαίνει τὴν μεταβολήν: ἐὰν
δὲ πόδες οἰδῶσι, νοτία ἡ μεταβολή. τὸ δὲ αὐτὸ
σημεῖον καὶ ἐκνεφίου. καὶ ὀδαξῶν τὸν δεξιόν.
ἐχῖνος. ὁ χερσαῖος σημαντικόν" ποιεῖται δὲ δύο
ὀπὰς ὅπου ἂν οἰκῇ, τὴν μὲν πρὸς βορρᾶν τὴν δὲ
νοτόθεν: ὁποτέραν δ᾽ ἂν ἀποφράττῃ, ἐντεῦθεν
πνεῦμα σημαίνει, ἐὰν δ᾽ ἀμφοτέρας, ἀνέμου
μέγεθος.

‘Kay ὁ ὄρος..., πρὸς βορρᾷ a ἄνεμον προσημαΐνει.
ἐὰν ἐν θαλάττῃ ἐξαίφνης πνεύματος γαλήνη
γίνηται, μεταβολὴν πνεύματος ἢ ἐπίδοσιν. ἐὰν
ἄκραι μετέωροι φαίνωνται ἢ καὶ νῆσοι ἐκ μιᾶς
πλείους, νοτίαν μεταβολὴν σημαίνει" γῆ τε μέ-
λαινα ὑποφαινομένη «βόρειον;», λευκὴ δὲ νότιον.
αἱ ἅλωνες περὶ τὴν σελήνην πνευματώδεις μᾶλλον
ἢ περὶ ἥλιον: σημαίνουσι δὲ πνεῦμα ῥαγεῖσαι
περὶ ἄμφω, Kal ἣ ἂν ῥαγῇ ταύτῃ πνεῦμα. ἐπι-


1 οἵ. 40; Plin. 18. 359; Verg. Georg. 1. 356.
“ΠΟ: Ariat, Probl. 26. 12 ad jin.
5 ξηραίνει, ὑγραίνει seem to be used quasi-impersonally ; but
the text is perhaps defective.
4 νότια MSS.; βόρεια conj. Furl., surely with good reason,
of. Arist. Probl. 1. 24.
δ After δεξιὸν Sch. and W. mark a lacuna, which does not
seem necessary. 6 cf. Arist. H.A. 9. 6 ad jin.


410


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 29-31


a sign of wind when the sea?! has a swell or promon-
tories moan‘or there is loud noise on the beach.
Now the north wind has less force as it ceases to
blow, the south wind as it begins. A mock sun, in
whatever quarter it appears, indicates rain or wind.

The fifteenth? day after the winter solstice is
generally marked by southerly winds. If there is a
northerly wind, everything gets dried? up, if a
southerly, there is abundant moisture. If, while a
south wind is blowing, glued articles make a cracking
- sound, it indicates a change to a south* wind. If
‘the feet swell, there will be a change to a south
wind. This also sometimes indicates a hurricane. So
too does it, if a man has a shooting pain in the right
foot.2 The behaviour® of the hedgehog is also
significant: this animal makes two holes wherever
he lives, one towards the north, the other towards
the south: now whichever hole he blocks up, it
indicates wind from that quarter, and, if he closes
both, it indicates violent wind.

If a mountain .. . ,’ it indicates wind from the
north. If at sea during a wind there is a sudden
calm, it indicates a change or an increase of wind.
If promontories 8 seem to stand high out of the sea,
or a single island looks like several, it indicates a
change to south wind. If the land looks black from
the sea, it indicates a north wind,? if white, a south
wind. A halo?!° about the moon signifies wind more
certainly than a halo about the sun: but in either
case, if there is a break in the halo, it indicates
wind, which will come from the quarter in which the
break is. If the sky is overcast in whatever quarter

7 I have marked a lacuna after ὄρος. Furl. renders si mons
versus aquilonem extenditur, venti signum est, with what


meaning I cannot see. 8 cf. Arist. Meteor. 3. 4 ad init.
9 βόρειον add. Furl. 10 efi.


411


82


99


34


THEOPHRASTUS


νεφέλων ὅθεν ἂν ἀνατέλληται, ἐντεῦθεν ἄνεμος.
αἱ κηλάδες νεφέλαι θέρους ἄνεμον σημαίνουσι.

᾿Εὰν ἀστραπὴ πανταχόθεν γίνηται, ὕδωρ ση-
μαίνει, καὶ ὅθεν ἂν αἱ ἀστραπαὶ πυκναὶ γίνων-
ται, ἐντεῦθεν πνεύματα γίνεται. θέρους ὅθεν
ἂν ἀστραπαὶ καὶ βρονταὶ γίνωνται, ἐντεῦθεν
πνεύματα γίνεται ἰσχυρά' ἐὰν μὲν σφόδρα καὶ
ἰσχυρὸν ἀστράπτῃ, θᾶττον καὶ σφοδρότερον πνεύ-
σουσιν, ἐὰν δ᾽ ἠρέμα καὶ μανῶς, κατ᾽ ὀλίγον.
τοῦ δὲ χειμῶνος καὶ φθινοπώρου τοὐναντίον"
παύουσι γὰρ τὰ πνεύματα αἱ ἀστραπαί: καὶ ὅσῳ
ἂν ἰσχυρότεραι γίνωνται ἀστραπαὶ καὶ βρονταί,
τοσούτῳ μᾶλλον παύονται: τοῦ δ᾽ ἔαρος ἧττον
ἂν ταὐτὰ "σημεῖα λέγω, ὥσπερ καὶ χειμῶνος.

‘Kay νότου πνέοντος “βορρᾶθεν a ἀστράπτῃ, παύ-
εται" ἐὰν ἕωθεν ἀστράπτῃ εἴωθε παύεσθαι τρι-
ταῖος, οἱ δὲ ἄλλοι πεμπταῖοι ἑβδομαῖοι ἐνναταῖοι,
οἱ δὲ δειλινοὶ ταχὺ παύονται. οἱ βορέαι παύονται
ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ πολὺ ἐν περιτταῖς οἱ δὲ νότοι ἐν ἀρτίαις.
ἄνεμοι αἴρονται μ᾽ ἡλίῳ ἀνατέλλοντι καὶ σελήνῃ.
ἐὰν ἀνατέλλων ὁ ἥλιος καὶ σελήνη παύσωσιν,
ἐπιτείνει τὰ πνεύματα: χρονιώτερα. δὲ καὶ ἰσχυ-
ρότερα τὰ πνεύματα γίνεται τὰ ἡμέρας ἢ νύκτωρ
ἀρχόμενα.

‘Kay ἐτησίαι πολὺν χρόνον πνεύσωσι καὶ
μετόπωρον γένηται ἀνεμῶδες, ὁ χειμῶν νήνεμος
γίνεται, ἐὰν δ᾽ ἐναντίως, καὶ ὁ χειμὼν ἐναντίος.


1 κηλάδες, 1.6. a ‘mackerel sky’ (?) The word seems to
occur nowhere else except in Hesych., who renders ἄνυδρος:
derivation obscure. It should probably be read in ὃ δ] for
κοιλάδες. 2 Plin. 18. 354.

3 ἄν, Sc. εἶναι, which perhaps should be added.


412


3
.


-


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 31-34


the sun is first seen, there will be wind from that
quarter. Light! clouds in summer-time indicate wind.

If lightning comes from all sides, it indicates rain,
and from any quarter from which the flashes come
in quick succession there will be wind. In summer?
from whatever quarter lightning and thunder come,
there will be violent winds: if the flashes are brilliant
and startling, the wind will come sooner and be more
violent ; if they are of gentler character and come at
longer intervals, the wind will get up gradually. In
winter and autumn however the reverse happens, for
the lightning causes the wind to cease: and, the
more violent the lightning and thunder are, the
more will the wind be reduced. In spring I consider
that the indications would 8 not so invariably have
the same meaning,—and this is also true of winter.

if, while a south wind is blowing, there comes
lightning from the north, the wind ceases. [ἢ
there is lightning at dawn, the wind generally
ceases on the third day: other winds than a south
wind however do not cease till the fifth seventh or
ninth day, though a wind which got up in the after-
noon will cease sooner. A north* wind generally
ceases in an odd, a south wind in an even number of
days. Winds get up at sunrise or moonrise. If the
rising sun or moon have caused the wind to cease,
presently ° it gets up again with more force, and
winds which begin to blow in the day-time last longer
and are stronger than those which begin at night.

If periodic winds have been blowing for a long
time, and a windy autumn follows, the winter is wind-
less: if however the contrary happens, the character


eum, 2. 129,
> So Furl, renders: W. inserts μὴ after σελήνη.


413


35


THEOPHRASTUS


πρὸς κορυφῆς ὄρους ὁπόθεν ἂν νεφέλη μηκύνηται,
ταύτῃ ἄνεμος πνευσεῖται. αἱ νεφέλαι ἐκ τῶν
ὄπισθεν προσίζουσαι καὶ ὄπισθεν πνευσοῦνται.


"Ades μέσος διεξευγμένος νότιος, καὶ ὅλως τὰ


ὄρη διεξζωσμένα νότια ὡς τὰ πολλά. οἱ κομῆται
ἀστέρες ὡς τὰ πολλὰ πνεύματα σημαίνουσιν, ἐὰν
δὲ πολλοί, καὶ αὐχμόν. μετὰ χιόνα νότος, μετὰ
πάχνην βορέας εἴωθε πνεῖν. μύκητες ἐπὶ λύχνου
νότιον πνεῦμα ἢ ὕδωρ σημαίνουσιν.

Αἱ δὲ στάσεις τῶν πνευμάτων οὕτως ἔχουσιν
ὡς ἐν τῷ γράμματι διώρισται. τῶν δ᾽ ἀνέμων
ἔτι πνέουσι τοῖς ἄλλοις ἐπιπίπτουσι μάλιστα
ἀπαρκτίας θρακίας ἀργέστης. ὅταν δὲ μὴ ὑπ᾽
ἀλλήλων διαλύωνται τὰ πνεύματα, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὰ


καταμαρανθῶσι, μεταβάλλουσιν εἰς τοὺς ἐχομέ-


ἜΤ»: δι ΘΠ:

3 οἡἥ. de Ventis 50; Arist. Probl. 20. ὃ... “4 ef. 14, 25, 42, 54.

5 The ‘ figure’ (giving points of the compass) has not been
preserved. Arist. Meteor. 2. 6. describes such a figure (ὑπο-
γραφή), Which may be reconstructed thus :—


414


{Δ de ei a ais ek εν. ᾿


a ee ν ἃ.


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 34-35


of winter is also reversed. From whatever quarter
cloud streams out from a mountain peak, wind will
blow in the direction thus indicated. Clouds which
cling to the back of the mountain will also produce
wind from the back of it. If there is a girdle! of
cloud half way up Mount Athos, and if mountains
in general wear such a girdle, there will generally
follow a southerly wind. Comets? usually indicate
wind, and, if there are many of them, drought is
also indicated. After snow? a south wind, after
hoar-frost a north wind generally blows. Snuff in
a lamp indicates wind or rain from the south.

The points from which the winds come are as
they are given in the figure.° The winds which
most often come on the top of other winds while
these are still blowing are the north wind (aparktias),°
the north-north-east and the north-west. When
however the winds are not dispersed by one another
but die down of their own accord, they change’ to


the next winds on the figure, reckoning from left


Arist. does not seem to distinguish βορέας and ἀπαρκτίας : his
θρασκίας is T.’s Opaxias: his eight principal winds (underlined
in diagram) correspond to those represented on the famous
Tower of the Winds at Athens, built about two hundred
years later,

© cf. Arist. l.c. 4 Pin; 2.198:


415


36


37


THEOPHRASTUS


ΕΒ N ὃ ΄ “ ς “δες νὰ » / e
vous ἐπὶ δεξιά, ὥσπερ ἡ τοῦ ἡλίου ἔχει φορά. ὁ
/ 4 na
νότος ἀρχόμενος ξηρὸς τελευτῶν δὲ ὑγρός. Kal
ς > ς 5) . Ὑ5 ΄ ΨΥ ΤᾺ 5 rea,

ὁ εὖρος. ὁ δ᾽ ἀπηλιώτης ἀπὸ ἀνατολῆς ion-
an ¢ / Ἂν a NOE X oe
μερινῆς ὑδατώδης" διὰ λεπτῶν δὲ ἄγει τὰ ὕδατα.
Ὑγροὶ δὲ μάλιστα ὅ τε καικίας καὶ ri:

΄ b) 2 Υ \ Υ̓ \ bd
χαλαζώδης δ᾽ ἀπαρκτίας καὶ Opaxias καὶ ap-
/ / A ey iv xX / \
γέστης" νιφετώδης δὲ 6 τε μέσης [ἢ βορέας] καὶ
> 7 7 \ / Ξ \ /
ἀπαρκτίας: καυματώδης δὲ νότος καὶ ζέφυρος
καὶ εὗρος" οἱ μὲν οἷς ἂν ἐκ πελάγους προσπίπτω-
€ \ @ x \ a / ’ » \
σιν, οἱ δὲ οἷς ἂν διὰ γῆς. δασύνουσι δ᾽ οὐρανὸν
7 \ Vb 7 / 3
νέφεσι καὶ καλύπτουσι καικίας μάλιστα ELTA
ifr. καὶ οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι ἄνεμοι ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτῶν τὰ
», 3. a ue \ / > ες /
νέφη ὠθοῦσι, καικίας δὲ μόνος πνέων εἰς ἑαυτόν.
" Ἂς iY / \ > / \
αἴθριοι δὲ μάλιστα Opaxias καὶ ἀργέστης καὶ
“ lal ’ 7 3 4 \ / “
τῶν λοιπῶν ἀπαρκτίας" ἐκνεφίαι δὲ μάλιστα ὅ
τε ἀπαρκτίας καὶ ὁ θρακίας καὶ ὁ ἀργέστης.
Γίνονται δὲ éxvediat ὅταν εἰς ἀλλήλους ἐμ-
πίπτωσι πνέοντες μάλιστα μὲν μετοπώρου τῶν
δὲ λοιπῶν ἔαρος. ἀστραπαῖος δὲ θρακίας καὶ
\ an
ἀργέστης καὶ ἀπαρκτίας Kal μέσης. ἐὰν ἐν TH
θαλάττῃ πάπποι φέρωνται πολλοὶ οἱ γινόμενοι
n “ /
ἀπὸ τῶν ἀκανθῶν, ἄνεμον σημαίνουσιν ἔσεσθαι
7 v4 Ἃ » / ὃ / / BA
μέγαν. ὅθεν ἂν ἀστέρες διάττωσι πολλοί, ἄνεμον


1 1 have bracketed ἢ βορέας as probably a gloss on ἀπαρκτίας ;
is difficult to account for otherwise. See diagram.
2 Plin. 18. 360.


416


τυ αν


ἐν ες eae


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 35-37


to right according to the course of the sun. When
the south wind begins to blow, it is dry, but it
becomes wet before it ceases: so too does the south-
east wind. The east wind, coming from the quarter
where the sun rises at the equinox, is wet: but it
brings the rain in light showers.

The north-east and south-west are the wettest
winds; the north the north-north-east and the north-
east bring hail; snow comes with the north-north-
east! and north. The south, the west, and the
south-east winds bring heat. Some of these have
their effect on places which they strike as they
come from the sea, others on places which they visit
as they come over land. The winds which more
than any others make the sky thick with cloud and
completely cover it are the north-east and the south-
west, especially the former. While the other winds
repel the clouds from themselves, the north-east
alone attracts them as it blows. Those winds which
chiefly bring a clear sky are the north-north-west
and the north-west, and next after them the north.
Those which most have the character of a hurricane
are the north the north-north-west and the north-
west.

They acquire this character when they fall upon
one another as they blow, especially in autumn, but to
some extent in spring. Those which are accompanied
by lightning are the north-north-west the north-
west the north and the north-north-east. If at
sea? a quantity of down is seen blown along, which
has come from thistles, it indicates that there will
be a great wind. Wind® may be expected from
any quarter in which a number of shooting stars are


* cf. 13; Plin. 18. 352; Verg. Georg. 1. 365.


‘ 417
VOL, II. E E


THEOPHRASTUS


ἐντεῦθεν: ἐὰν δὲ πανταχόθεν ὁμοίως, πολλὰ πνεύ-
ματα σημαίνουσι.
Πνευμάτων μὲν οὗν σημεῖα ταῦτα.

38 III. Χειμῶνος δὲ τάδε. ἥλιος δυόμενος εἰς μὴ
καθαρόν. καὶ ὡς ἂν μερισθῇ δυόμενος, οὕτως αἱ
ἡμέραι ἐπιτελοῦνται. οἷον εἰ τὸ τρίτον μέρος
ν᾿ ee Ged” \ ΄ r\ > AX
ἀπολειφθείη ἢ TO ἥμισυ. τὸ σελήνιον ἐὰν ὀρθὸν
ἢ μέχρι τετράδος καὶ εἰ εὔκυκλον, χειμάσει μέχρι

, \ A
διχοτόμου: γέρανοι ἐὰν πρωΐ πέτωνται Kal ἀθρόοι,
Xe / on. δὲ > Ν x \ / 2 \
πρωὶ χειμάσει, ἐὰν δὲ ὀψὲ Kal πολὺν χρόνον, OYE
΄ \ nr
χειμάσει. Kal ἐὰν ὑποστραφῶσι πετόμενοι, YEL-
μῶνα σημαίνουσι.
39 Χῆνες βοῶντες μᾶλλον ἢ περὶ σῖτον μαχόμενοι
7 7 \ 7
χειμέριον. σπίνος στρουθὸς σπίζων ἕωθεν χει-
2 \
péptov. ὄρχιλος [ὡς] εἰσιὼν Kai εἰσδυόμενος εἰς
an if
ὀπὰς χειμῶνα σημαίνουσι καὶ ἐριθεὺς ὡσαύτως.
΄ \ la
κορώνη ἐὰν ταχὺ Sis κρώζῃ Kal τρίτον, χειμερία.
\ ΄ \ / ἕξ \ x \ 2 \ 1
καὶ κορώνη καὶ κόραξ Kal κολοιὸς ὀψὲ ἄδοντες
, θὸ Ἡρὶ \ A Se d ;
χειμέριοι. στρουθὸς ἐὰν λευκὸς ἢ χελιδὼν ἢ
An \ / lal fa)
ἄλλο TL TOV μὴ εἰωθότων λευκῶν, χειμῶνα μέγαν
7 f 7 ‘
σημαίνουσιν, ὥσπερ καί, μέλανες ἐὰν ToANOL
φανῶσιν, ὕδωρ. ;
Ae ON b] / ” / n
4 Kal ἐὰν ἐκ πελάγους ὄρνιθες φεύγωσι, χειμῶνα
/ /
σημαίνουσι. καὶ σπίνος ἐν οἰκίᾳ οἰκουμένῃ
7 “4 ᾽ὔ
φθεγγόμενος χειμέριον. ὅσα ὕδωρ σημαίνει, χει-
fal \ / “
μῶνα ἄγει, ἐὰν μὴ ὕδωρ, χιόνα καὶ χειμῶνα.


1 2, 6. and the succeeding day will be more or less stormy in
proportion. ἀπολειφθείη. ? ἀποληφθείη =‘ may be obscured.’

2 cf. 27. ὃ.6. it is possible, more or less, to see the whole
circle.


418


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 37-40


seen. If these appear in every quarter alike, it in-
dicates many winds.

Such then are the signs of winds.

III. The following are signs of storm. The sun
becoming obscured as it sinks indicates storm. And,
according as its orb is divided as it sets, so the
succeeding days turn out; for instance, a third or a
half of the orb may remain visible.t If the horns 2 of
the moon point straight up till the fourth day, and if
it rounds to a circle, it will be stormy till the middle
of the month. If cranes fly early and in flocks, it
will be an early winter*; if they fly late and for a
long time, it will be a late winter; and, if they
wheel as they fly, it indicates stormy weather.

4It is a sign of storm when geese make more
elamour than usual or fight for their food; so too is
it when a sparrow or chaffinch twitters at dawn. It
indicates a storm when the goldcrest® goes into
holes and hides itself; so also when the redbreast
does the same. It is a sign of storm when the crow
caws twice in quick succession and then a third time ;
also when the crow or raven or jackdaw makes its
call late. It is a sign of a great storm when a white
sparrow or swallow is seen, or a white specimen of
any other bird which is not usually white, even as
the appearance of a large number of such birds of a
dark colour signifies rain.

It is also an indication of storm when birds flee
from the sea. A chaffinch uttering its note in an
inhabited house is a sign of storm. All the signs
which indicate rain bring stormy weather, that is to
say, snow and storm, if not rain. If the raven utters


3 So Arat. 343 f. interprets. 4 Plin. 18.-363.
5 ὡς bracketed by Sch.


419


Ὁ
ica]
bo


THEOPHRASTUS


κόραξ φωνὰς πολλὰς μεταβάλλων χειμῶνος
χειμέριον. κολοιοὶ ἐκ τοῦ νότου πετόμενοι καὶ
τευθίδες χειμέριαι. φωνὴ ἐν λιμένι ἀποψοφοῦσα
καὶ πολύπλοκον ἠχοῦσα χειμέριον. καὶ οἱ πνεύ-
μονες οἱ θαλάττιοι ἐὰν πολλοὶ φαίνωνται ἐν τῷ
πελάγει, χειμερινοῦ ἔτους σημεῖον. πρόβατα ἐὰν
πρωὶ ὀχεύηται, πρώϊον χειμῶνα σημαίνουσι.

41 Μετοπώρῳ ἐὰν πρόβατα ἢ βόες ὀρύττωσι καὶ
κοιμῶνται ἀθρόοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἔχοντες τὰς
κεφαλάς, τὸν χειμῶνα χειμέριον σημαίνει. ἐν
δὲ τῷ Πόντῳ φασίν, ὅταν ᾿Αρκτοῦρος ἀνατείλῃ
θᾶττον, ἐναντίους τῷ βορρᾷ νέμεσθαι. βόες
μᾶλλον ἐσθίοντες τοῦ εἰωθότος καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ δεξιὸν
κατακλινόμενοι χειμέριον. καὶ ὦτα κρούων ὄνος
χειμέριον' καὶ μαχόμενα πρόβατα καὶ ὄρνιθες
περὶ σίτου παρὰ τὸ ἔθος" προπαρασκευάζονται
γάρ' καὶ μῦες τρίξοντες καὶ ὀρχούμενοι χειμέριον.

a Καὶ κύων τοῖς ποσὶν ὀρύττουσα καὶ ὀλολυγὼν ;
ἄδουσα μόνη ἀκρωρίας χειμέριον. γῆς ἔντερα :
πολλὰ φαινόμενα χειμῶνα σημαίνει. καὶ ἐὰν
πῦρ μὴ θέλῃ ἅπτεσθαι, χειμέριον' καὶ ἐὰν λύχνος
ἅπτεσθαι μὴ ἐθέλῃ, χειμῶνα σημαίνει: καὶ τέφρα
πηγνυμένη νιφετόν. λύχνος εὐδίας ἡσυχαῖος
καιόμενος χειμῶνα σημαίνει" καὶ ἐὰν χειμῶνος
ὄντος μύκαι μέλαιναι ἐπιγίνωνται, χειμῶνα ση-
μαίνει: καὶ ἐὰν ὥσπερ κέγχροις πολλοῖς κατά-


1 χευθίδες. The word is perhaps corrupt and conceals the
name of a bird.

2 cf. 21, 29. πολύπλοκον is Furlanus’ conj. for Vulg.
πολύποδον.

3 πνεύμονες. Plin. 18. 359. pulmones: ef. 9. 154.


420


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 40-.42


a great variety of sounds in winter, it is a sign of
storm. Jackdaws flying from the south are a sign
of storm, and so are cuttle-fish.t It is a sign of storm
when a loud? voice is heard in harbour, which is re-
echoed many times. It is a sign of a stormy season
when a number of jelly-fish? appear in the sea. It
indicates an early winter when the breeding season
of sheep begins early.

If in autumn sheep or oxen dig holes and lie
keeping their heads close to one another, it indicates
a severe winter. They say that in Pontus when
Arcturus rises, (the cattle 4) face northwards as they
graze. Itisasign of storm when cattle eat more
than usual and lie down on their right sides.> So is
it when the ass shakes® his ears, or when sheep or
birds fight for their food more than usual, since they
are then trying to secure a store against bad weather :
also when mice squeak and dance.

A bitch digging holes with her paws and a tree-
frog croaking alone at early dawn’ are signs of
storm: it indicates storm when a number of the
worms ὃ called ‘the earth’s entrails’ appear. It is a
sign of storm if the fire refuses to catch, or if a lamp
refuses to light: while, if much ash is formed, it is a
sign of snow. If a lamp burns steadily in fine
weather, it is a sign of storm: so is it if in winter-
time dark snuff? forms: if it is, as it were, full of
numerous millet-seeds, there will be stormy weather ;


4 θᾶττον is clearly corrupt, and words indicating what the
sign portends are missing. > of. 54.

5 ὦτα kpovwy doubtful. Sch. suggests οὖδας for ὦτα.

* axpwplas. cf. 2).

8 γῆς ἔντερα. So Arat. 225 explains. One might guess
‘worm. casts.’

9 of. 14, 25, 34, 54.


421


48


44


THEOPHRASTUS


πλεως ἢ, “χειμερίσει: καὶ ἐὰν κύκλῳ περὶ τὸ
λαμπρὸν ὦσιν εὐδίας οὔσης, χιονικόν.

‘H τοῦ ὄνου Φάτνη εἰ συνίσταται καὶ ζοφερὰ
γίνεται, χειμῶνα σημαίνει. καὶ ἐὰν ἀστραπὴ
λαμπρὰ μὴ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ μένῃ, χειμέριον. ἐπὶ
Πλειάδι δνομένῃ ἐὰν λάμψῃ κατὰ Πάρνηθα καὶ
Βρίληττον καὶ “Tyunttov, ἐὰν μὲν ἅπαντα κατα-
λάμψη, μέγαν χειμῶνα σημαίνει, ἐὰν δὲ τὰ δύο,
ἐλάττω, ἐὰν δὲ Πάρνηθα μόνον, εὐδιεινόν' καὶ ἐὰν
χειμῶνος ὄντος νεφέλη μακρὰ ἐπὶ τὸν ὝΜμηττον 7 1s
χειμῶνος ἐπίτασιν σημαίνει. Αθως καὶ Ὄλυμ-
πος καὶ ὅλως ὀρέων κορυφαὶ κατεχόμεναι ὑπὸ
νεφελῶν χειμέριον. ἐὰν εὐδίας γινομένης νε-
φέλιον φαίνηται ἐν τῷ ἀέρι παρατεταμένον καὶ
τιλλόμενον, οὔπω παύεται ὁ χειμών.

᾿Εὰν τὸ μετόπωρον εὐδιεινὸν παρὰ τὸ εἰκὸς
γένηται, τὸ ἔαρ γίνεται ψυχρὸν ὡς τὰ πολλά.
ἐὰν πρωὶ χειμάξειν ἄρξηται, πρωὶ παύεται καὶ
ἔαρ καλόν, ἐὰν δὲ τοὐναντίον, καὶ ἔαρ ὄψιον ἐ ἔσται.
ἐὰν χειμὼν ὑέτιος, τὸ ἔαρ αὐχμηρόν, ἐὰν δ᾽
αὐχμηρὸς ὁ χειμών, τὸ ἔαρ καλόν. ἐὰν ἡ ὄπωρα
γίνηται ἐπιεικής, τὰ πολλὰ γίνεται τοῖς προ-
βάτοις λιμός. ἐὰν τὸ ἔαρ καὶ τὸ θέρος ψυχρὰ
γίνηται, ἥ τε ὄπωρα γίνεται καὶ <TO> μετόπωρον
πνυγηρὸν καὶ οὐκ ἀνεμῶδες.

Οἱ πρῖνοι ἐὰν εὐκαρπῶσι, χειμῶνες πολλοὶ
σφόδρα γίνονται. ἐὰν ἐπὶ κορυφῆς ὄρους νέφος
ὀρθὸν στῇ, χειμῶνα σημαίνει, ὅθεν καὶ ᾿Αρχίλοχος
ἐποίησε “ λαῦχ᾽ ὅρα: βαθὺς γὰρ ἤδη κύμασιν


1 ὄνου φάτνη. cf. 23,51. See LS, s.v. ὄνος ; Theocr. 22.
21. Plin. 18. 353, ai im signo Cancri duae stellae parvae


422


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 42-45


and if these in fine weather appear in a circle round
the flame, it is a sign of snow.

If the ‘ Ass’s Manger!’ shrinks in size and becomes
dark, it is a sign of storm; also if there is vivid
lightning which does not remain in the same quarter.
If at the setting of the Pleiad there is lightning
over Parnes Brilessus and Hymettus—when it
appears over all three mountains, it indicates a great
storm; when over the two lesser heights, a less
violent storm ; when over Parnes alone, fine weather.
Again, if during a storm a long cloud stretches over
Hymettus, it signifies that the storm will increase in
force. It is a sign of storm when Athos Olympus
and mountain-peaks in general are covered with
clouds. If during fine weather a cloud appears in
the sky stretching a long way and torn to shreds,
stormy weather will continue.

If the autumn is unusually fine, the succeeding
spring is generally cold. If winter begins early, it
ends early and there is a fair spring; if the reverse,
spring will also be late. If the winter is wet, the
spring will be dry, if the winter is dry, the spring
will be fair. If the late summer is satisfactory, the
sheep will generally suffer from hunger. If the
spring and summer are cold, the late summer and
autumn ? will be stifling hot and windless.

If the kermes-oak® fruits well, there follows a
long succession of storms. If a cloud stands up-
right on a mountain-peak, it indicates storm ; whence
Archilochus’ lines “ Mark you,* Glaucus ; deep ocean
aselli appellatae, exiguum inter illas spatium obtinente nube-
cula, quam praesepia appellant. * rsadd.Sch. ? ef. 49.

4 A comparison of war to stormy weather. Quoted also


by Plut. de Superstitione, 72, and by Heraclides, Allegoriae
Homericae, 4. In both citations the Greek is corrupt.


423


40


47


48


THEOPHRASTUS


ταράσσεται Πόντος ἀμφὶ δ᾽ ἄκρα «Γυρῶν;» ὀρθὸν
ἵσταται νέφος Σῆμα ,χειμῶνος. ἐὰν δ᾽ ὁμόχρων
i] ὑμένι λευκῷ, χειμέριον. ὅταν ἑστώτων νεφῶν
ἕτερα ἐπιφέρηται. τὰ δ᾽ ἠρεμῇ, χειμέρια.

«Ὁ ἥλιος: ἐὰν χειμῶνος διαλάμψας πάλιν
ἀποκρυφθῇ καὶ τοῦτο ποιήσῃ δὶς ἢ τρίς, ἡμέρα
χειμέριος δίεισιν. ὁ τοῦ Ἑρμοῦ ἀστὴρ χειμῶνος
μὲν φαινόμενος ψύχη σημαίνει θέρους δὲ καῦμα.
ὅταν μέλιτται μὴ ἀποπέτωνται μακρὰν ἀλλ᾽
αὐτοῦ ἐν τῇ εὐδίᾳ πέτωνται, χειμῶνα ἐσόμενον
σημαίνει. λύκος ὠρυόμενος χειμῶνα σημαίνει
διὰ “τριῶν ἡμερῶν. λύκος ὅταν πρὸς τὰ ἔργα
ὁρμᾷ ἢ εἴσω χειμῶνος ὥρᾳ, χειμῶνα σημαΐίνει
εὐθύς.

Ἔστι δὲ σημεῖον χειμώνων μεγάλων καὶ ὄμ-
βρων καὶ ὅταν γένωνται ἐν τῷ μετοπώρῳ πολλοὶ
σφῆκες, καὶ ὅταν ὄρνιθες λευκοὶ πρὸς τὰ ἐργάσιμα
πλησιάξζωσι, καὶ ὅλως τὰ ἄγρια θηρία ἐὰν πρὸς
τὰ ἐργάσιμα, βόρειον καὶ χειμῶνος μέγεθος ση-
μαίνει. τῆς Ἰάρνηθος ἐὰν τὰ πρὸς ζέφυρον
ἄνεμον καὶ τὰ πρὸς Φύλης φράττηται νέφεσι
βορείων ¢ ὄντων, χειμέριον τὸ σημεῖον.

Ὅταν πνίγη γίνηται ἰσχυρά, ὡς τὰ πολλὰ
ἀνταποδίδωσι καὶ γίνεται χειμὼν ἰσχυρός. ἐὰν
ὕδατα ἐαρινὰ πολλὰ γένηται, καύματα ἰσχυρὰ
ἐν τοῖς πεδινοῖς καὶ κοίλοις γίνεται. δεῖ οὖν τὴν
ἀρχὴν ὁρῶν. ἐὰν τὸ μετόπωρον εὐδιεινὸν γίνηται


1 Τυρῶν. γυροῦν W. Heraclides gives yupedy, Plut. γυρεῦον; ἐ
but one MS. of Plut. gives γύρων with a marginal gloss ‘sc.
metp@v, Which suggests that the word is a proper name. Od.
4, 500 mentions the Γύραι (7.e. the ‘round-backed rocks’)


424


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 45-48


is now stirred up with waves, and about the heights
of the Gyrae! there rises a cloud erect, the sign of
storm.” If the clouds are of uniform colour, like?
a white membrane, it is a sign of storm. When, as
some clouds are motionless, others move towards
them while they remain at rest, it is a sign of storm.

If the sun in winter after gleaming out is again
obscured, and this is repeated two or three times, it
will be stormy all day. If the star Hermes appears
in winter, it indicates cold, if in summer, heat.
When in fine weather bees do not fly? long distances,
_but fly about where they are, it indicates that there
will be a storm. The howling of a wolf indicates a
storm within three days. When a wolf approaches
or enters cultivated ground in the season of winter,
it indicates that a storm will come immediately.

10 is also a sign of great storms and heavy rain
when many wasps appear in autumn, or when white
birds* approach cultivated lands; and in general
when wild creatures approach such lands, it indicates
a north wind and a severe storm. If the western
side of Parnes and the side towards Phyle are
blocked with clouds during a north wind, it is a sign
of storm.

When there is severe heat, generally there is
compensation and a severe winter follows. If there
is much rain in spring, it is followed by severe heat
in low-lying districts and valleys; so that one should
mark how the season begins. If the autumn is,
Nn ay Aias Oileus perished. The word is missing in the MSS.
oO


2 ὁμοῖον has perhaps dropped out after ὁμόχρων 7; the
adjective seems to agree with νέφος.

3 cf. Arist. H.A. 9. 40 ad jin.

+ Plin. 18. 363: presumably gulls, etc.


425


49


50


51


THEOPHRASTUS


/ \ \
σφόδρα, TO ἔαρ ὡς τὰ πολλὰ γίνεται ψυχρόν:
ΣΝ \ ΔΨ bY / \ “ ΕἾ 5Δ
ἐὰν δὲ τὸ ἔαρ ὄψιον γένηται καὶ ψυχρόν, ἡ ὄπωρα
» 7 / \ \ / ς a! \
οψία γίνεται καὶ <TO> μετόπωρον WS TA πολλὰ
πνυγηρόν.
Οἱ a “ > a ὃ e \ \
ἱ πρῖνοι ὅταν εὐκαρπῶσι σφόδρα, ὡς μὲν τὰ
na \
πολλὰ χειμῶνα ἰσχυρὸν σημαίνουσιν, ἐνίοτε δὲ
/
καὶ avypovs φασι γίνεσθαι. καὶ ἐάν τις σπά-
λακα λαβὼν ὑποπάσας ἄργιλον εἰς πιθάκνην
aA / an an - / : 7
θῇ, σημαίνει ταῖς φωναῖς αἷς ἀφίησιν ἄνεμον καὶ
εὐδίαν. καὶ τὸ πανταχοῦ δὲ λεγόμενον σημεῖον
J ¢ lal lal
δημόσιον χειμέριον, ὅταν μῦες περὶ φορυτοῦ
μάχωνται καὶ φέρωσιν.
IV. Εὐδίας δὲ σημεῖα τάδε. ἥλιος μὲν ἀνιὼν
MN ἣν 35 A
λαμπρὸς Kal μὴ καυματίας Kal μὴ ἔχων σημεῖον
n / /
μηδὲν ἐν ἑαυτῷ εὐδίαν σημαίνει. ὡς δ᾽ αὕτως
σελήνη πανσελήνῳ. καὶ δυόμενος ἥλιος χει-
1] ΡΟ. ee ] xX
n ᾽ Ν > Ἀ >\ \ a /
μῶνος εἰς καθαρὸν εὐδιεινός, ἐὰν μὴ ταῖς προτέραις
ς / ? \ θ Ν ὃ ὃ \ 3 2 7) an
ἡμέραις εἰς μὴ καθαρὸν δεδυκὼς ἢ ἐξ εὐδιῶν'
“ ΦΧ », \ 3% / δ 7
οὕτω δὲ ἄδηλον. Kal ἐὰν χειμάζοντος ἡ δύσις
/ / \ AS /
γένηται els καθαρόν, εὐδιεινόν' καὶ ἐὰν δύνων
“- / /
χειμῶνος ὠχρὸς 7, εὐδίαν σημαίνει.
\ «. \ fe a Ἃ \ 3 >
Καὶ ὁ pels ἐὰν τριταῖος ὧν λαμπρὸς ἢ, εὐδι-
εἰνόν. καὶ ἡ τοῦ ὄνου Φάτνη ὅτε ἂν καθαρὰ καὶ
“ / 7 \ \ δ n
λαμπρὰ φαίνηται, εὐδιεινόν. ἅλως δὲ ἐὰν ὁμαλῶς


1 τὸ add. Sch. * Of aos
3 σπάλακα Vulg.; σπάκα Bas. Ald.; σκολόπακα (woodcock ?)
conj. Furl.


4 7.e. (reading σκολόπακα) for the bird to find worms in
with its long beak (Sch.). It is hard to say, without illus-


426


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 48-51


exceedingly fine, generally the spring is cold: if the
spring is late and cold, the summer goes on late and
the 1 autumn is usually scorching hot.

When the kermes-oak ? fruits exceedingly well, it
generally indicates a severe winter, and sometimes
they say that this sign is followed by droughts. If
one takes a mole® and puts it in a tub, the bottom‘
of which has been covered with clay, it indicates
by the sounds which it utters wind or fine weather.
There is also the sign of storm which is popularly
recognized everywhere, namely when mice fight for
the possession of chaff and carry it about.


The siyns of fair weather.


IV. The following are signs of fair weather. ®If
the sun rises brilliant but without scorching heat
and without showing any special sign in his orb, it
indicates fair weather. The same may be said of
the moon when it is full. If in winter that part of
the sky into which the sun goes down is clear, it is a
sign of fair weather, unless on the preceding days
_ that part has not been clear, though it was clear
above the horizon: in that case the prospect is
uncertain. It is also a sign of fair weather, if during
stormy conditions that part of the sky into which
the sun sets is clear; and also if, in winter at the
time of setting, the sun has a pale colour.

Again, it indicates fair weather if the outline of
the moon on the third day is bright; also if the
‘ Ass’s® Manger’ is clear and bright. If the halo”
forms and disappears evenly, it is a sign of fair


tration, which is the more convincing of the creatures
suggested. § Plin. 18. 342. S of: 23, 48.
* of. 22, 31; Plin. 18. 345; Arist. Meteor. 3. 3.


42]


THEOPHRASTUS


παγῇ Kat μαρανθῇ, εὐδίαν σημαίνει. αἱ κηλάδες
νεφέλαι χειμῶνος εὐδιειναί. Ὄλυμπος δὲ καὶ
ἼΛθως καὶ ὅλως τὰ ὄρη τὰ σημαντικὰ ὅταν τὰς
κορυφὰς καθαρὰς ἔχωσιν, εὐδίαν σημαίνει. καὶ
ὅταν τὰ νέφη πρὸς τὴν θάλασσαν αὐτὴν παρα-
ζωννύῃ, εὐδιεινόν. καὶ ὅταν ὕσαντος πρὸς δυσμὰς
χαλκῶδες τὰ νέφη χρῶμα ἔχῃ" εὐδία γὰρ ὡς τὰ
πολλὰ τῇ ὑστεραίᾳ.

ὅδ Ὅταν δὲ ὁμίχλη γένηται, ὕδωρ οὐ γίνεται ἢ
ἔλαττον. ὅταν γέρανοι, πέτωνται καὶ μὴ ἀνα-
κάμπτωσιν, εὐδίαν σημαίνει" οὐ γὰρ πέτονται πρὶν
ἢ ἂν πετόμενοι καθαρὰ ἴδωσι. γλαῦξ ἡσυχαῖον
φθεγγομένη ἐν χειμῶνι εὐδίαν Tpoonpaiver: καὶ
νύκτωρ χειμῶνος ἡσυχαῖον ς ἄδουσα. θαλαττία δὲ
γλαῦξ ἄδουσα χειμῶνος μὲν εὐδίαν σημαίνει, €v-
δίας δὲ΄ χειμῶνα. καὶ κόραξ δὲ μόνος; μὲν ἡσυχαῖον
κράζων, καὶ ἐὰν τρὶς κράξῃ μετὰ τοῦτο πολλάκις
κράξῃ, εὐδιεινός. ia

63 Kai κορώνη ἕωθεν εὐθὺς ἐὰν κράξῃ τρίς, εὐδίαν
σημαίνει, καὶ ἑσπέρας χειμῶνος ἡσυχαῖον ¢ ἄδουσα.
καὶ ὄρχελος ἐξ ὀπῆς ἐκπετόμενος καὶ ἐξ ἑρκίων
καὶ ἐξ οἰκίας ἔξωθεν εὐδίαν σημαίνει. καὶ ἐὰν
χειμῶνος Ropevovtos βορρᾶθεν ὑπόλαμψις γένη-
ται λευκή, νοτόθεν δὲ ἐ ἐναντία τεταγμένη 2 νεφέλη
ὀγκώδης, ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ πολὺ εἰς εὐδίαν σημαίνει μετα-
βολήν. καὶ ὅταν βορέας νεφέλας πολλὰς κινῇ
ἐκπνέων μέγας, εὐδίαν σημαΐνει.


;
ΑΔ
3
ἱ


1 κηλάδες I conj. cf. 51, to which this statement answers.
κοιλάδες MSS.

a ἘΠῚῚ 1S aoe 8 Plin. 18. 357. ο΄. Verg. Georg. 1. 401.

erin, 13. ΟΣ:

5 ἐν χειμῶνι. Ὁ ‘in winter.’ The same ambiguity occurs in
many places : the sense seems fixed here by the next sentence.


428


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 51-53


weather. Light! clouds in winter are a sign of fine
weather. It is a sign of fine weather when Olympus
Athos and in general the mountains which give signs
have their tops? clear: so too is it, when clouds
encompass them at the sea-level. Also when after
rain the clouds have a bronze colour towards sun-
down: in that case there will generally be fine
weather the next day.

When there is mist, little or no rain follows.
When cranes?* take flight and do not come back, it
- is a sign of fair weather: for they do not do so till
they see a clear sky before them as they fly. Itisa
sign of fair weather when during a storm an owl
makes a low hoot, or at night during a storm it
utters a low sound. If the sea-owl utters its note
during a storm, it indicates fair weather, if during
fair weather, it indicates a storm. It is a sign οἱ
fair weather if a solitary raven makes a low croak,
and, after croaking three times, repeats the sound
again and again. . . .6

If the crow caws thrice directly the dawn appears,
- it indicates fair weather, as also if it makes a low
note in the evening during a storm. It is a sign of
fair weather if a goldcrest flies out abroad from a
hole or.from a hedge or from its nest. Again, if
during a storm from the north there is a white
gleam from that quarter, while in the south a solid
mass of cloud has formed, it generally signifies a
change to fair weather. Again when the north
wind (Boreas) as it begins to blow violently stirs up
a number of clouds, it indicates fair weather.


6 I have marked a lacuna: the answer to μὲν is missing,
presumably a statement about the significance of more than
one raven. cf. Verg. Georg. 1. 410.


429


54


55


56


THEOPHRASTUS


/ 5 δ᾽ “2 - \ “
Πρόβατα ὀψὲ ὀχευόμενα εὐδιεινὸν ἀποτελοῦσι
\ “ n 4
τὸ σημεῖον. καὶ βοῦς ἐπὶ τὸ ἀρίστερον ἰσχίον
/ / /
KATAKALVOMLEVOS εὐδίαν σημαίνει" Kal κύων ὡσαύ-
ἈΝ \ \ an / \
τως" ἐπὶ δεξιὸν δὲ χειμῶνα. τέττιγες πολλοὶ
/ n \ /
γινόμενοι νοσῶδες TO ἔτος σημαίνουσι. λύχνος
fal / na / ig
χειμῶνος καιόμενος ἡσυχαῖος εὐδίαν σημαίνει.
7 ie 7 »
καὶ ἐὰν ἐπ᾽ ἄκρῳ οἷον κέγχρους ἔχῃ λαμπράς"
\ ἊΝ > / \ Vf ἘΠῚ \
καὶ ἐὰν ἐν κύκλῳ τὴν μύξαν περιγράφῃ λαμπρὰ
/
γραμμή.
ς n / ΝΥ / \ > /
O τῆς σχίνου καρπὸς σημαίνει τοὺς ἀρότους"
\ / / ς n an 4
ἔχει δὲ τρία μέρη Kal ἔστιν ὁ πρῶτος τοῦ πρώτου
/ va) ς 7 “Ὁ / ς /
ἀρότου σημεῖον, ὁ δεύτερος τοῦ δευτέρου, ὁ τρίτος
“ / \ ξ Ἃ 7 b] / /
τοῦ τρίτου' Kal ὡς ἂν τούτων ἐκβαίνῃ κάλλιστα
, ε , ἮΡΕ, \
καὶ γένηται adpotatos, οὕτως ἕξει καὶ ὁ κατὰ
τοῦτον ἄροτος.
, \ ᾿ / “ e/ ἴω
Λέγεται δὲ καὶ τοιάδε σημεῖα ὅλων τε τῶν
Qn Α \ lal ’
ἐνιαυτῶν γίνεσθαι καὶ τῶν μορίων. ἐὰν ἀρχο-
J la a / a / /
μένου τοῦ χειμῶνος ζόφος ἢ Kal καύματα γίνηται
\ a ” e/ Citta an x
Kal ταῦτα ἄνευ ὕδατος UT ἀνέμων διαλυθῇ, πρὸς
/ \ \
TO ἔαρ σημαίνει χάλαζαν ἐσομένην. καὶ ἐὰν
\ \ \ > / / ,
μετὰ τὴν ἐαρινὴν ἰσημερίαν ὁμίχλαι πίπτωσι,
/ 2
πνεύματα καὶ ἀνέμους σημαίνουσιν εἰς ἕβδομον
a \ e
μῆνα ἀμφοτέρων ἀριθμουμένων. ὅσαι μὲν ἅμα
a a / / & \ 4
μηνοειδεῖ TH σελήνῃ πίπτουσιν, αὗται μὲν πνεύ-
/ - \ / Ὁ ?
ματα σημαίνουσιν εἰς ἐκεῖνον Tov χρόνον, ὅσαι ὃ
ἰμφικύ ὔ ἧς σελή vd ὶ ὅσῳ
ἀμφικύρτου οὔσης τῆς σελήνης ὕδατα. καὶ ὅσᾳ


1 of. 41. 2 cf. 14, 25, 42.
3 H.P.'7. 13. 6 the same is said of oxfAAa.


430


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 54-56


When sheep begin to breed late, it is a sign which
fulfils itself in fair weather. So is it when an ox
lies! on his left side, and also when a dog does the
same: if they lie on the right side, it indicates
storm. ‘The appearance of a number of cicadas in-
dicates that the season will be unhealthy. Ifa lamp
burns quietly during a storm, it indicates fair weather.
So also if it has on the surface an appearance like
shining millet-seeds :? also if a bright line surrounds
the lamp-nozzle.

The fruiting of the mastich 8 gives signs as to the
seasons of sowing:* it takes place at three several
periods, which indicate respectively the time for the
first the second and the third sowing: and according
as one or other of these fruiting-times turns out ®
best and produces the most abundant fruit, so too
will be{the success of the corresponding time of
sowing.

Miscellaneous signs.

The following signs are said to affect either the
whole year or whole periods® of it. If at the be-
ginning of winter there is dull weather followed by
heat, and these conditions are dispersed by wind
without rain, it indicates that towards the spring
there will be hail. Again, if after the spring equinox
mists come down, it is an indication of breezes and
winds by the seventh month, reckoning inclusively.
Those mists which come down when the moon is in
its first quarter indicate breezes for that period,
those which come down when the moon is in its
third quarter indicate rain. And the more mists


meee. 7. 1. 1 foll.
> ἐκβαίνῃ 1 conj.: cf. H.P. 7. 18. 6; κλίνῃ MSS.
ey: 6.


431


57


THEOPHRASTUS


ἂν μᾶλλον ἐφ᾽ ἑκατέρῳ τῷ σχήματι ὁμίχλαι
πίπτωσι, μᾶλλον τὰ εἰρημένα σημαίνει.

Σημαίνει δὲ καὶ τὰ πνεύματα ἅμα ταῖς ὁμί-
χλαις ἐπιπιπτούσαις γινόμενα: καὶ ἐὰν μὲν ἀπ᾽
ἠοῦς καὶ μεσημβρίας γίνηται τὰ πνεύματα, ὕδατα
σημαίνει: ἐὰν δ᾽ ἀφ᾽ ἑσπέρας καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς ἄρκτου
πνεύματα καὶ ψύχη. οὺς δὲ κομήτας Αἰγύπτιοι
λέγουσιν οὐ μόνον τὰ προειρημένα σημαίνουσιν
ὅταν φαίνωνται ἀλλὰ καὶ ψύχη: ἐπὶ δὲ τοῖς
ἄστροις εἴωθεν ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ πολὺ σημαίνειν καὶ ταῖς
ἰσημερίαις καὶ τροπαῖς, οὐκ ἐπ᾽ αὐταῖς ἀλλ᾽ ἢ πρὸ
αὐτῶν ἢ ὕστερον μικρῷ.


1 cf. 34; Arist. Meteor. 1. 6.
2 Text seems doubtful, as cold weather was included above.


432


CONCERNING WEATHER SIGNS, 56-57


come down when the moon is assuming either shape,
the more certainly is the result just mentioned
indicated.

Also the winds which accompany the falling of
the mists are significant: if the breezes come from
the east or south, rain is indicated ; if from the west
or north, breezes and cold weather. And the stars
which the Egyptians! call ‘comets’ indicate not
only the conditions just mentioned but also cold?
weather. *In the case of the rising of the stars the
indication, as in the case also of the equinoxes and
solstices, is given not at the actual time but a little
earlier or later.


3 The text of this sentence can hardly be sound. σημαίνειν
has no subject and ταῖς ἰσημερίαις καὶ τροπαῖς no construction.


433
VOL, Il. fa. B


NOTE TO THE INDEX OF PLANTS


SPRENGEL made the first comprehensive attempt to determine
in modern nomenclature the plants mentioned by Theophrastus :
Wimmer gives the result in the Introduction to his 1842 edition.
Sprengel adopted the most probable identifications of earlier
botanists, supplemented by his own conjectures and Sibthorp’s
exploration of the Greek flora. The ambitious but uncritical
Conspectus Florae Classicae of Fraas did not add much to our
knowledge, which throughout had been vitiated by failure to
recognise the fact that the Mediterranean flora differed from
that of Western and Central Europe. MHalacsy’s Conspectus
Florae Graecae now gives us a scientific enumeration of the
native plants of Greece ; a Greek plant-name can be wedded toa
plant which at any rate is Greek. Incidentally much has been
cleared up by special research at the hands of De Candolle,
Hanbury, Yule, Schweinfurth, Bretzl, and others.

The identifications in the following Index are drawn from
various sources; for their selection in view of the botanical
data available I am indebted to Sir William Thiselton-Dyer. <A
considerable number may be accepted as certain, many are
probable, some no more than possible.


436


J
᾿
-
ἦν


INDEX OF PLANTS


comp.=compared.
= denotes a synonym. Where a reference is added (see e.g.
ἀτρακτυλίς), it indicates that Theophrastus himself states that
the names are Synonymous.


ἀβρότονον, southernwood, Artemisia
arborescens
1. 9. 4. evergreen; 6.1.1. in list
of under-shrubs; 6. 3. 6. an un-
named plant comp.: see App.
(oj. os 7 3. propagation;
6. 7. 4. much seed: roots
described.
ἄγνος (=oigos), chaste-tree, Vitex
Agnus-castus
1. 3. 2. a shrub which becomes
tree-like; 1. 14. 2. bears fruit
at the top; 3. 12. 1. growth
of xpdvea comp.; 3. 12. 2.
roots of θηλυκράνεια comp.;
4.10. 2. ἐλαίαγνος comp. ; 9. 5. 1.
size of κινάμωνον and kacia
comp.
ἀγριέλαιος (? = κότινος), wild olive,
Olea Oleaster
2. 2. 5. comes from seed of ἐλάα.
aypworis, dog’s tooth grass, Cynodon
Dactylon
1. 6. 7. root. jointed; 1. 6. 10.
roots large and numerous;
. 2. 1. propagation; 4. 6. 6.
φῦκος (6) comp.; 4. 10. 5-6 root
described; 4.11.13.an unnamed
form of κάλαμος comp.: root of
κ. ὃ Ivdtxos comp.; 9. 13. 6. habit
of ἐρευθέδανον comp.
ἄγχουσα, alkanet, Anchusa tinctoria
7.8.3. leaves ‘on the ground’:
7. 9. 3. roots red.
adiavrov, Maiden-hair, Adiantum
Capillus-Veneris, etc.
7.10.5. evergreen; 7. 14. 1. leaf
cannot be wetted: two kinds


THEOPH. Ill.


(see below): medicinal use:
grows in damp places.
adtavtov τὸ λευκόν (= τριχομανές
7. 14. 1), English maiden-hair,
Asplenium Trichomanes
7. 14. 1. described by comparison
with a. τὸ μέλαν : medicinal use:
likes shady places.
ἀδίαντον τὸ μέλαν, Maiden-hair, Adi-
antum Capillus:V eneris
7. 14. 1. comp. with a. τὸ λευκόν.
ἀδράφαξυς, orach, Atriplex rosea
1. 14. 2. bears fruit both on top
and at sides; 3. 10. 5. seeds of
φίλυρα comp.; 7. 1. 2-3. time
of sowing and of germination;
7.2. 6. root described ; 7. 2. 7-8.
root of βλίτον comp.; 7. 2. 8.
root: 7.3.2. seeds; 7.3. 4. seed
borne both at top and at side;
7. 4. 1. only one kind; 7.5.5.
seed does not keep well.
aciGwov, house-leek, Sempervivum
tectorum
1. 10. 4. leaves fleshy; 7. 15. 2.
always moist and green: habitat.
ἀθραγένη, traveller’s joy, Clematis
Vitalba
5. 9. 6. wood makes good fire-
sticks: described; 5. 9. 7. the
stationary piece should be made
of this or κιττός.
αἴγειρος, black poplar, Populus nigra
1. 2. 7. bark; 1. 5.2. bark fleshy;
2 2.10. Cretan form bears fruit;
3.1.1. propagation ; 3.3.1. tree
of mountain and plain; 3.3.4 a
question if it bears fruit; etc.;


437


INDEX OF PLANTS


3. 4. 2. time of budding; 3.6.1.
quick growing; 3.14.2. described;
4.1.1. likes wet ground; 4. 7. 4.
size of unnamed Arabian tree,
see App. (12a), comp.; 4. 13. 2.
shorter-lived by water; 5. 9. 4.
wood makes an evilsmoke when
burnt for charcoal.
αἰγίλωψ (1) (ΞΞ- ἄσπρις), Turkey oak,
Quercus Cerris
3. 8. 2. one of the five Capen)
kinds of oak: fruit; 3 8.
habit and timber; 3. 8. é.
galls: φάσκος (q.v.).
αἰγίλωψ (2) (grass), Aegilops ovata
7.13.5. seed sometimes takes two
wear to germinate ; So. Gams
comp. with aipa; 8. 8. 3. grows
specially among ieptOt: ΒΟ Ὁ;
like ἃ wild plant; 8.9. 3. greatly
exhausts the soil : 8. 11. 8-9.
peculiarities about seed.
αἱμόδωρον, broom-rape, Orobanche
cruenta
8.8.5. parasitic on βουκέρας (only):
described.
aipa, darnel, Lolium temulentum
1.5.2. ‘bark ’ in one layer ; ἜΤΙ rie
10.


>


πυρός turns into a.; 4
ὄρυζον comp.; 8. 4. 6. does not
infest certain kinds of πυρός:
contrasted with μελάμπυρον :
8. 7. 1. κριθή and especially
πυρός said to change into a.
under certain conditions: de-
scribed : λίνον _also said to
change into a.: comp. with
αἰγίλωψ (2); 8. 8. 3. produced
possibly by degeneration of
κριθή and πυρός, Or Fa specially
affects such crops; 8. 9. 3. alto-
gether a wild plant.

ἀκαλύφη, nettle, Urtica urens

GAs 2. a λάχανον; needs cooking.

ἄκανθα (1) ἡ Αἰγυπτία, acacia, Aca-
cia arabica (and albida)

4,2.1. peculiar to Egypt; 4. 2. 8.
described: two kinds G λευκή
and ἡ μέλαινα) distinguished
(see below) ; Oye ΡΟ PSD
gummy.

ἄκανθα (ἡ Αἰγυπτία) ἡ λευκή, acacia,
Acacia albida

4, 2. 3. distinguished from «a. ἡ

μέλαινα.


438


ἄκανθα (ἡ Αἰγυπτία) ἡ ἡ μέλαινα, acacia,
Acacia arabica
4, 2. 8. distinguished from a. 7
λευκή.
ἄκανθα (2) ἡ ἀκανώδης (866 4.10.6. n. ),
corn-thistle, Cardwus arvensis
4. 10. 6. root etc. described.
ἄκανθα (3) ἡ διψάς, Acacia tortilis
4. 7. 1. the only tree which grows
on part of the ‘ Red Sea’ coast.
ἄκανθα (4) ἡ ᾿Ινδική (see App. (9)),
Balsamodendron Mukul
9. 1. 2. sap gummy: gum like
σμύρνα.
ἄκανθα (5) ἡ λευκὴ Ἡρακλέους (=
ἄκανθα, (6)), Luphorbia anti-


4. oe "19. "ἀροϑῃδαὶ uses of wood.
ἄκανθα (6) (peculiar to Gedrosia),
Ξκεἄκανθα (5), Euphorbia anti-
quorum
4. 4. 13. described : has a blinding
juice.
ἄκανθα (7) τις, Zum arabic, Acantha
arabica
9. 18. 1. said to have the property
of thickening water.
ἄκανθα (?) (8) (= ἄκανος = ἰξία (2)
= ἰξίνη = χαμαιλέων ὃ λευκός
9.12.1.), pine-thistle, Atractylis
gummifera.
ἄκανος (= dkav0a(8) = =ttia (2)=ttivn=
χαμαιλέων ὃ λευκός), pine-thistle,
Atractylis gummifera
1. 10. 6. spinous-leaved ; 1. 13. 3.
flower attached above each
seed; 6. 1. 3. has spines on the
leaves: a wild under-shrub;
6. 4. 4. many stalks and side-
growths; 6. 4. 5.one form only;
6. 4. 8. root of σόγκος contrasted:
χαμαιλέων comp.; 6. 4. 11. fruit-
case of κάκτος (1) comp.; 6. 6. 6.
seed of ῥόδον comp.; 9. TA: 1:
‘head’ of χαμαιλέων ὁ λευκός
comp.: another name for χαμαι-
λέων (?) 5 9. 12. 2. leaf of χαμαι-
λέων ὃ μέλας comp.
ἀκόνιτον (= θηλύφονον = μυόφονον =
σκορπιός (3)), wolf’s bane, Aconi-


um A a

9. 16. 4. localities: described:
habitat: eaten by no animal;
9. 16. 5. difficulty of compound-
ing drug: effects: has no anti-


INDEX OF PLANTS


dote; 9.16. 7. use requires ex-
pert knowledge: legal restric-
tions : proportion between times
of gathering and of administer-
ing.

akopva, Cnicus Acarna

1. 10. 6. spinous-leaved; 7. 4.3. a

‘thistle-like’ plant; 6. 4. 6. de-
scribed.

axtéos(?) (= ἀκτῆ), elder, Sambucus


nigra
3. 4. 2. time of budding.
ἀκτὴ (=axréos),elder, Sambucus nigra
1. 5. 4. wood without knots;
1. 6. 4. core fleshy : has no core,
according to some; 1. 8. 1. few
knots; 4. 13. 2. shorter-lived by
water; 5. 3. 3. character of
wood.
ἀλθαία (= μαλάχη ἡ ἀγρία 9.15. 5.),
moana Althaea officin-
alis
9.15. 5. a drug, called in Arcadia
μαλάχη ἡ ἀγρία; 9.18.1. root said
to thicken water: described:
medicinal use.
ἅλιμον, Atriplex Halimus
4. 16. 5. very dangerous to trees.
ἁλίφλοιος (δρῦς), see δρῦς (3).
ἀλσίνη, Parietaria cretica
9.13. 3. leaf of ἀριστολοχία comp.
ἀλωπέκουρος, Polypogon monspelien-


sis
7. 11. 2. flowers in a spike: de-
scribed. ν
ἀμάρακον (ἀμάρακος), Sweet marjor-
am, Origanum Majorana
1. 9. 4, evergreen; 6. 1. 1. in list
of under-shrubs; 6. 7. 4. propa-
gation: roots described; 6.8.3.
flowering time; 9. 7. 3. in list
of ἀρώματα.
ἄμπελος (1) (leaf oivapoy 9, 13. 5.),
vine, Vitis vinifera
1. 2. 1. has tendrils; 1. 2.7. bark;
1. 3.1. a typical ‘tree’; 1. 3. 5.
evergreen at Elephantine; 1.5.2.
bark cracked and fibrous: bark
in layers; 1.6.1. core fleshy;
1. 6. 3. roots thin; 1. 6. 5. roots
branching upwards; 1. 8. 5.
highest shoots ‘ roughest’ : ‘eye’
analogous to knot in other
trees; 1. 9. 1. effect of pruning ;
1. 10. 4. leaves broad; 1. 10. 5.


leaf divided ; 1. 10. 7. long leaf-
stalk: attachment of leaf-stalk;
1. 10. 8. leaves made of ‘ bark’
and flesh; 1. 11. 4. seeds all
together in a single case: 1.11.5.
each grape separately attached ;
1. 12. 1. taste of fruit; 1. 12. 2.
taste of sap; 1. 13. 1. flower
‘downy’; 1.13. 3. flower sur-
rounds fruit; 1. 13. 4. some
kinds sterile; 1. 14.1. bears on
new shoots; 1. 14. 4. many cul-
tivated forms; 2. 1. 3. propa-
gation ; 2. 2. 4. degenerates from
seed; 2. 3. 1. sometimes spon-
taneously changes character;
2. 3. 2. a. ὃ κάπνειος Varies in
colour of grapes on same bunch;
2. 3. 3. sometimes bears fruit
on the stem ; etc.; 2.5. 3. propa-
gation: cannot be grafted;
2. 5. 4. propagation; 2. 5. 7.
low ground: suitable: great
variety of kinds according to
soil; 2. 6. 12. cuttings set up-
side down; 2.7.1. water-loving ;
2. 7. 2. needs much pruning;
2. 7. 5. use of dust ; 2. 7. 6. root-
pruning; 3.5.4. autumn bud-
ding; 3. 17. 3. bark of κολοι-
tla (2)comp.; 3.18.5. flower and
fruit of ῥοῦς comp.; 3. 18. 12.
cluster of berries of σμῖλαξ (2)
comp.; 4. 4. 8. unnamed Indian
tree (cotton-plant) planted in
rows like a.; 4. 4. 11. in India
confined to hill-country ; 4. 5. 4.
grows on Mount Tmolus and
Mysian Olympus; 4.7.7. leaf
Οἱ δένδρον τὸ ἐριόφορον comp.;
4. 7. 8. occurs on island of
Tylos; 4. 13. 2. some kinds
short-lived; 4. 18. 4-6. said to
be longest-lived of trees: rea-
son: method of prolonging life
artificially; 4. 14. 2. young
plants liable to ‘ sun-scorch’ ;
4, 14. 6. other diseases; 4.14.7.
effects of injury to roots;
4,14. 8. effect of rain on fruit-
ing; 4. 14. 9. a special pest at
Miletus; 4. 14. 10. effect of hot
winds; 4.14.13. effects of frost;
4. 15. 1. outer bark can be
stripped; 4. 16. 1. survives


439


INDEX OF PLANTS


splitting of stem; 4. 16. 6. natu-
ral antipathy of 4. to padavos;
5. 3. 4. character of wood;
5. 4. 1. the less fruitful trees
produce more solid wood; 5.9.4.
wood, if damp, makes an evil
smell when burnt for charcoal;
5. 9. 6. ἀθραγένη comp.; 8. 2. 8.
a. in Melos; 9.1. 6. time of tap-
ping; 9.13. 5. leaf and time of
growth of πενταπετές comp.;
9.18.11. peculiar properties of
certain local kinds.

ἄμπελος (2) (Mt. Ida), currant grape,
Vitis vinifera, var. corinthiaca
. 17. 4. a local Idaean kind;
3. 17. 6. do. described.

ἄμπελος (3) ἡ ποντία, Fucus spiralis

4.6. 2. peculiar to certain waters;
4. 6. 9. described.

ἄμπελος (4), ἡ ἀγρία (= μήλωθρον),
bryony, Bryonia cretica .

3. 18. 12. fruit of σμῖλαξ (2) comp.
9. 14,1. how long drug prepared
from it will keep; 9. 20. 3. pro-
perties of root: medicinal use.

ἀμυγδαλῆ, almond, Prunus Amyg-


Us

1. 6. 3. large central root; 1. 9. 6.
leaves produced early, but not
shed early; 1.11. 1. seed imme-
diately within envelope; 1.11. 3.
seed in a woody shell; 1. 12. 1.
taste of fruit; 1. 18. 1. flower
‘leafy’: flower of some kinds
reddish; 1.14.1. bears on last
year’s wood; 2. 2. 5. degen-
erates from seed; etc.; 2. 2. 9.
effects of cultivation; 2. 2. 11.
do.: effect of tapping gum;
2. 5. 6. trees should be planted
far apart; 2. 7. 6. ‘ punishing ’
the tree; 2. 7. 7. tapping the
gum; 2. 8. 1. apt to shed im-
mature fruit; 3. 11. 4. fruit of
μελία comp.; 8. 12. 1. leaf of
κράνεια comp.; 4. 4. 7. fruit of
τέρμινθος ἡ ᾿Ινδική comp.; 4.7.5.
fruit of unnamed Persian tree
(see App. (13)), comp.; 4.14.12.
uninjured by special winds;
5.9.5. wood-ashes make pungent
smoke; 7. 13. 6. flower appears
before leaves and (new growth
of) stem ; 8. 2. 2. germination de-


440


scribed; 9. 1. 2. sap gummy;
9. 1. 3. gum scentless; 9. 1. 5.
gum useless; 9. 19. 1. leaf of
ὀνοθήρας comp.
ἄμωμον, Nepaul cardamom, Amo-
mum subulatum
9.7.2. an ἄρωμα, Median or In-
dian.
ἀνδράχλη, andrachne, Arbutus An-
achne
1. 5. 2. bark readily drops off ;
1. 9. 3. evergreen; 3. 3. 1. a
mountain tree; 3. 3. 3. ever-
green; 3. 4. 2. time of budding;
3. 4. 4. time of fruiting; 3. 4. 6.
do.; 3. 6. 1. slow growing (?);
3.16.5. described ; 3. 16. 6. leaf
of κοκκυγέα comp.; 4. 4. 2. leaf
Of μηλέα ἡ ἹΤερσική comp.; 4.7.5.
an unnamed Persian tree (see
App. (14)), comp.; 4. 15.1. does
not perish if bark is stripped;
4.15. 2, bark cracks; 5. 7. 6.
wood used for parts of loom;
9. 4. 3. bark of σμύρνα comp.
ἀνδράχνη, purslane, Portulaca ole-
racea
7. 1. 2-3. time of sowing and ger-
mination ; 7.2.9. root described.
ἀνεμώνη, anemone, Anemone spp.
7.8.3. leaves ‘ on the ground.’
ἀνεμώνη, anemone, Anemone coron-
aria
7. 7. 3. puts forth flower soon
after season of growth begins;
7.10.2. flowers in winter.
ἀνεμώνη ἡ λειμωνία, Anemone pavo-
nina
6. 8. 1. flowering-time.
ἀνεμώνη ἡ ὑρεία, Anemone blanda
6. 8. 1. flowering-time.
ἄνηθον (= ἄννητος), dill, Anethum
graveolens
1. 11. 2. seeds naked; 1.12. 2.
taste of sap; 6. 2. 8. fruit of
νάρθηξ and ναρθηκία comp.; also
setting of flowers and fruit:
7. 1. 2-3. time of sowing and
germination; 7. 2. 8. root de-
scribed ; 7. 3. 2. seeds described;
7. 4. 1. only one kind; 7. 6. 4.
fruit of ὀρειοσέλινον comp.
ἄνθεμον, Anthemis chia, etc. (see


below)
1. 13. 3. flower attached above


INDEX OF PLANTS


each seed; 7. 14. 2. flowering
begins at top: flower and fruit:
several kinds (see below).
ἄνθεμον τὸ ἀφύλλανθες, wild chamo-
mile, Matricaria Chamomilla
7.8. 3. leaves ‘on the ground.’
ἄνθεμον τὸ φυλλῶδες, Anthemis chia
7. 8. 3. leaves on the stem.
ἀνθέρικος, 866 ἀσφόδελος.
ἄννησον, anise, Pimpinella Anisum
1. 12.1. scent.
ἄννητος (= ἄνηθον.) dill,
graveolens
9. 7. 3. in list of ἀρώματα.
ἀντίρρινον, snapdragon, Antirrhinum
Orontium
9. 19. 2. alleged magic properties:
described.
ἀπάπη, dandelion, Taraxacum offici-


Anethum


nate
6. 4. 8. (?) flower of χαμαιλέων


ΘΟ... ἦς εἴ. Pin ὃ λάχανον:
classed as ‘chicory-like’ from
its leaves ; 7. 7. 3. season of
growing; 7%. A, prolonged


flowering-time ; 7. 8. 3. leaves
‘on the ground’; σι 2.(?)
flowers in winter, earliest of all’;
7. 10. 3. flowers borne in succes-
sion; 7. 11. 3. flowering-time;
7. 11. 4. inedible: growth de
scribed.

amapyia, hawk’s beard, Crepis Colum-
nae


. 8. 8. leaves ‘ on the ground.’
ἀπαρίνη, bedstraw, Galium Aparine

7. 8. 1. stem ‘ clasping,’ _but, for
want of support, ‘on the
ground’; 7. 14. 3. clings to
clothes: peculiar setting of
flower described ; 8. 8. 4. grows
specially among ‘baxoi: growth
described; 9. 19. 2. ἀντίρρινον
comp.

ams (1), pear, Pyrus communis,

var. sativa

1. 2. 7. bark; 1. 8. 8. a tree whose
stem is not single; 1. 8. 2.
has less knots than ἀχράς ; :
1.10. 5. leaves round; 1.11.
seeds all together in a st:
case; 1. 11. 5. seeds in a mem-
brane; 1. 12. 2. taste of sap;
1. 13. 1. flower pleaty: > )1.13. 3.
flower above fruit-case; 1, 14,1.


bears on last year’s wood;
1. 14. 4. a cultivated form of
axpés; many cultivated forms;
2.1. 2. propagation; 2.2. 4. de-
generates from seed; 2. 2. 5.
seed produces wild form ; 2. 2.12.
cannot be made out of axpas by
cultivation; 2. 5. 3. grafting ;
2.5.6. trees should be planted
rather far apart; 2. 7. 7. ‘ pun-
ishing ’ the tree; 2. 8. 1. apt to
shed immature fruit; 3.-2. 1.
produces less fruit than axpas,
but ripens more; 3. 3. 2. has
better fruit and timber in low-
lands; 3. 4. 2. time of budding;
3. 6. 2. formation of buds:
8.11.5. mountain and lowland
forms comp.; 3. 12. 8. fruit of
ὄη comp. as to keeping; 3.14.1.
leaf of πτελέα comp.; 3. 14. ὃ.
leaf of κλήθρα comp.; 3. 18. 7.
does not differ in kind from
axpas; 4. 2. 5. περσέα comnp.;
4. 3.1. size of λωτός (4) comp.;
4.4.2. thorns of μηλέα ἡ ἹΤερσική
comp.; 4.5. 3. abundant in Pon-
tus; 4. 13. 1. shorter-lived than
axoas; 4.14.2. aptto get worm-
eaten; 4.14.10. fruit gets worm-
eaten; 4. 14. 12. uninjured by
special winds; 5. 3. 2. leaf of an
unnamed tree comp. (see App.
(20)); 9. 4. 2. leaf of λιβανωτός
comp.
amos (2) (-- ἰσχάς 9. 9.5. =pada-
vos ἡ opeia), Spurge, Huphorbia
Apios
9.9. ve medicinal use; 9. 9. 6. de-
scribed.
ἄρακος, Vicia Sibthorpii
1.6.12. an unnamed plant (see
App. (1)) comp.; 8.8. 3. (‘the
rough hard kind’ ) grows speci-
ally among φακοί.
ἀράχιδνα, Lathyrus amphicarpus
1.1.7. fruit underground; 1.6.12.
root like a second fruit.
apia (= ἵψος = φελλόδρυς 3. 16. 3.);
holm-oak, Quercus Ilex var.
agrifolia
- 8. 8. doubt whether it has a
flower; 3. 4.2. time of budding;
3.4. 4. time of fruiting ; 3.16.3.
Dorian name for φελλόδρυς ;


441


INDEX OF PLANTS


3.17.1. acorn of φελλός comp.;
4. 7. 2. (2) leaf of δάφνη (6)
comp.; 5.1.1. time of cutting
timber; 5. 3. 3. character of
wood; 5.4.2. wood proof against
decay; 5. 5. 1. wood hard to
work; 5.9. 1. wood makes good
charcoal.
ἀριστολοχία, birthwort, Aristolochia
rotunda
9.13.2. described: medicinal use;
9. 14. 1. how long drug will
keep; 9.15.5. Pape in Arcadia;
9220.4. cf Ori
ἄρκευθος (=kédpas (Dy, Phoenician
cedar, Juniperus phoenicea
1.9.18, everpréen $s. 8... 1. 8
mountain tree; 3. 3. 3. ever-
green; 3. 3. 8. doubt whether it
has a flower; 3.4.1. takes a
year to ripen fruit; 3. 4. 5. time
of fruiting; etc.; 3. 4. 6. do. ;
3. 6. 1. slow-growing (2) : 3.6.5.
shallow-rooting according to
Arcadians ; 3.12.3—4. described:
distinguished from κέδρος (1):
4. 1.3. grows high on moun-
tains, but not tall; 5. 7. 4.
use of wood in house-building ;
5. 7. 6. other uses of wood:
does not decay; 9. 1. 2. sap
gummy.
ἀρνόγλωσσον (= στελέφουρος 7.11. 2.,
according to some, = ὄρτυξ
da “1. 2°, according to some),
plantain, Plantago maior
ΤΟ ΛΟ ἢ leaves ‘on the ground’;
7.10. 3. flowers borne in succes-
sion; 7.11.2. flowers in a spike:
described by comparison with
ἀλωπέκουρος.
ἄρον, cuckoo-pint, Arum italicum


1. 6. 7. root fleshy; 1. 6.8. has a ᾽


stout root and also fibrous
roots: roots not tapering;
1. 6. 10. cultivation ; 1. 16. 10.(?)
flower made of flesh; 7. 2. 1.
propagation; 7. 9. 4. root de-
scribed; 7.12. 2.root and leaves
edible: use in surgery: special
treatment to promote growth
of root: one kind inedible (see
δρακόντιον); 7.13.1. leaves de-
scribed; 7. 13, 2, no stem or
flower.


442


ἀρρενόγονον (= θηλύγονον), dog mer-
cury, Mercurialis perennis
9. 19. 5. properties: described.
ἀσπάλαθος, Calycotome villosa
9. 7. 3. in list of ἀρώματα.
ἄσπρις (ΞΞ αἰγίλωψ. (1)), Turkey oak,
Quercus Cerris
3.8. 2. one of the four Macedonian
kinds of oak: acorns and
timber.
ἀστέρισκος, Michaelmas daisy, Aster
Amellus
ἡ ahaa Pain 2
comp.
ἀσταφίς, ΠῚ Staphisagria
9. 12. 1. medicinal use.
ἀσφάραγος, asparagus, Asparagus
acutifolius
1. 10. 6. spines for leaves; 6. 1. 3.
do.; a:wild under-shrub ; 6. 4.1.
one of very few plants which
are altogether spinous; 6. 4. 2.
described.
ἀσφόδελος (Stem ἀνθέρικος), (-- πόθος
(2)), asphodel, Asphodelus ramo-
sus


seed οἵ pedayxpavis


1. 4. 3. belongs to ‘ferula-like’
plants; 1.10. 7. attachment of
leaves; 6. 6. 9. leaves of vap-


κισσος (1) comp.; 7. 9. 4. root
acorn-shaped; 7 12. 1. root
edible; 7.13.1. leaves described ;
7.13. 2-3. stem of ? ips comp.:
largest stem of herbaceous
plants: fruit inflorescence etc.
described; worm which infests
it: uses for food of stem and
roots; 7.13.4. grown from seed;
9. 9. 6. leaf of ἰσχας comp.;
9.10.1. sip of ἐλλέβορος comp.
by som


ἄσχιον, put. -ball, Lycoperdon gigan- —


teum
1. 6. 9. not a root, though under-
ground.
ἀτρακτυλίς (-- φόνος 6. 4. 6.), distaff-
thistle, Carthamus lanatus
6. 4. 3. a ‘thistle-like’ plant;
6. 4. 6. described: also called
φόνος : reason; 9. 1. 1. juice
blood-coloured.
ἀφάκη, tare, Vicia sativa var. angus-
tifolia
8.1. 4. (a pulse) sown late; 8.5.3.
shape of pod; 8. 8,


3, πελεκῖνος. |


i
-
|


INDEX OF PLANTS


grows specially among «.; 8.11.1.
seed does not keep.

ἀφάρκη (a natural hybrid between
ἀνδράχλη and κόμαρος), hybrid
Srbatus. Arbutus hybrida

1.9.3. evergreen; 3.3.1. a moun-

tain tree; 3. 3) 3. evergreen ;
3. 4. 2. time of budding; 3. 4. 4.
time of fruiting; 5. 7. 7. uses of
wood.

aia, lesser celandine, Ranwnculus


icaria
7.7.3. puts forth flowers at season
of growth.
axpas, wild pear, Pyrus amygdali-
formis
1.4.1. more fruitful than culti-
vated kind; 1. 8. 2. has more
knots than amos; 1. 9. 7. time
of shedding leaves; 1. 14. 4. a
wild form of dmos; 2. 2. 5. pro-
duced from seed of amos; 2.2.12.
cannot be made into amos by
cultivation; 3. 2 1. produces
more fruit than amos, but ripens
less; 3. 3.1. a tree of mountain
and plain; 3. 3. 2. has better
fruit and timber in lowlands;
8. 4. 2. time of budding; 3. 4. 4.
time of fruiting; 3. 6. 1. slow
growing (?); 3. 11. 5. moun-
tain and lowland forms comp.;
9. 12. 8. fruit of ὄη comp. as to
keeping; 3. 14. 2. bark of λεύκη
comp.; 3.18.7. does not differ
in kind from ἄπιος ; ἘΠ 1.
longer lived than ἄπιος : ὅ. 5.1.
cobblers’ strops made of the
wood.
ἀψίνθιον, wormwood, Artemisia Ab-
sinthium
1, 12-1. taste of fruit; 4. 5. 1.
seeks cold regions; 7.9.5. leaves
and stem bitter, yet wholesome ;
9.17. 4. said to become by use
non-poisonous to sheep.


βάλανος, Balanites aegyptiaca
4. 2.1. peculiar to Egypt; 4.2.6.
described.
βάλσαμον (ZUM ὀποβάλσαμον), balsam
of Mecca, Balsamodendron Opo-
balsamum
9.1.2. sap gummy; 9.1. 7. time
of tapping; 9. 4. 1. collection of


gum; 9.6. 1—4. described : habi-
tat : method of collection: no-
where found wild; 9. 7. 3. in
list of ἀρώματα.
βάτος, bramble, Rubus ulmifolius
1. ϑ 155 typical ‘shrub’; 1.5 3.
thorns on wood; 1. 9. 4. ever-
green; 1.10. 6. leaf with spinous
projections; 1. 10. 7. stem pres-
ently spinous; 3. 18. 3. grows
in wet and dry places alike;
3. 18. 4. kinds distinguished;
3. 18. 12. cluster of berries of
σμῖλαξ (2) comp; 4. 8. 1. to
some extent grows in marshes;
4,12. 4. to some extent aquatic;
6. 1. 3. has spines on the shoots.
BAnx®, pennyroyal, Mentha Puleg-


wm ᾿
9. 16. 1. leaf etc. οὗ δίκταμνον


comp.
βλίτον, blite, Amaranthus Blitum

1,14. 2. bears fruit both on top
and at sides; 7. 1. 2-3. time of
sowing and of germination ;
7. 2. 7-8. root described ; 7.3. 2.
seeds described; 7. 3. 4. seed
borne both on top and at side;
7. 4. 1. only one kind.

βολβίνη, star-flower, Ornithogalum
umbellatum

7.13. 9. belongs to τὰ βολβώδη.

βολβός, purse-tassels, Muscari como-
sum etc. (see below).

1. 6. 7. root in scales; 1. 6. 8. root
not tapering; 1. 6. 9. no side
roots: (part of) stem wunder-
ground; 1. 10. 7. no leaf-stalk :
attachment of leaves; 6. 8. 1.
flowering time: used as acoron-
ary plant; 7. 2.1. propagation ;
7. 2. 2. root makes offsets;
7. 2. 3. offsets specially numer-
ous; 7. 4.12. formation of roots
of κρόμυον comp.; 7. 9. 4., ef.
POM fae Δ Ψ. example of an
edible "root ; 7. 12. 2. special
treatment to promote growth
of root; 7. 13. 1. leaves de-
scribed; 7. 13. 2. flower-stem
not the only stem; 7. 13. 4-5.
grown from seed: seed some-
times takes two years to ger-
minate; 7. 13. 7. root of vap-
Ktooos (1) comp.; 7. 13. 8.


443


INDEX OF PLANTS


several kinds; 7. 13. 9. roots of
various plants comp.; 8. 8. 3.
grows specially among πυρός.
βολβὸς ὁ ἐριόφορος, Pancratium
maritimum
7. 13. 8. grows on beach: de-
scribed : uses for food and cloth-
ing.
βουκέρας, (--- τῆλις), fenugreek. Tri-
gonella Foenum-Graecum
4. 4. 10. an Indian plant (see
App. (8)), comp. 8.8.5. αἱμό-
δωρον parasitic on β.
βουμέλιος, ash, Fraxinus excelsior
3. 11. 4-5. described; 4. 8. 2
common in Egypt.
βούπρηστις, ?
7. 7. 3. season of growing.
Bovtoxos,.sedge, Carex riparia
1.5.3. stem very smooth; 1.10.5.
leaves end in a point: further
described; 4. 8. 1. in list of τὰ
λοχμώδη; 4. 10. 4. described ;
4. 10. 6. grows both on land
and in water: grows on the
floating islands of Lake Copais;
4.10. 7. part used for food;
4.11.12. foliage of some κάλαμοι
comp.
βρόμος, oats, Avena sativa
8. 4. 1. seed has more coats than
other cereals; 8. 9. 2. exhausts
the soil: reason: like a wild
plant.
βρύον, oyster-green, Ulva Lactuca
4.6.2. occurs generally in Greek
waters; 4. 6. 6. described.


γήθυον, long onion, Alliwm Cepa var.
1.6.9. part of stem underground ;
7.1. 2-3. time of sowing and of
germination; 7. 1. 6. germina-
tion; 7. 1. 7. bears fruit in
second year: has single stem;
7. 2. 2-3. root makes offsets;
7.5.1. likes water; 7.5.3. bears
transplanting ; 7.5.5 seed does
not keep well; 7. 9. 4. root in
scales; 7.12. 3. root of φάσγανον
comp.; 9. 11. ὃ. 656." ot
στρύχνος ὃ μανικός COMP.
γήτειον (Attic for γήθυον), horn-
onion, Alliwm Cepa var.
1 10. 8. leaves hollow; 7. 4. 10.


444


described: cultivation (classed
as a form of κρόμνυον).
γλεῖνος, Acer creticum
3. 3. 1.name for lowland form of
σφένδαμνος ; 3. 11. 2. timber.
γλυκεῖα Ss ῥίζα) (= ῥίζα Σκυθική ᾳ.υ.),
9, , liquorice, Glycyrrhiza
spa


γλυκυσίδη (= παιωνία ¢g.v.), 9. 8. 6.,
peony, Paeonia officinalis.

γογγυλίς, turnip, Brassica Rapa

1. 6. 6. root fleshy ; 1. 6. 7. root of

bark and flesh; 7.1. 2. time of
sowing; 7, 1. 7, germination ;
7. 2. 5. survives and increases
in size under a heap of soil:
root described; 7. 2. 8. do.;
7. 3. 2. seeds described; 7.3. 4.
seed borne at side; a 3.
doubtful if more than one kind:
seed, method of sowing, effect
of weather ; 7.5. 3. bears trans-
planting ; 7. 6. 2. wild form
distinguished ; 7.9. 4. root has
ἡ ΠΣ ἢ τ


δανκην (1), carrot, Daucus Carota 4
15.5. Arcadian drug: described
ἡ: note).
δαῦκον (2), Malabaila aurea
9. grows about Patrai:
properties: root black; 9.20.2.
cf. 9. 15. 8.
babes (1) (ἡ ἥμερος), (berry Sadvis,
11. 3.), sweet bay, Laurus
nobilis
2. bark thin; 1. 6. 2. roots
“poth stout and fine ; 1.6.4. roots”
crooked ; etc.; 1.8. 1. few knots;
i Θὲ evergreen (cultivated
and wild forms, see below);
1.11. 8.. fleshy seed in a sheli
(Sapvis); 1. 12. 1. taste of fruit; —
1.14.4. many cultivated forms;
2. 1. 3. propagation; 2. 2. 6.
one age oves from seed ;
6. trees should be planted
a together ; 3. 3. 3. ever-
green; 3.4. 2. time of are
3. 7. 3. (one kind) produces a
cluster; 3. 11. 3. leaves of μελία
comp.; 3.11.4. winter-buds of
μελία comp.; 3. 12. 7. leaf of ὄη
comp.to that of δ. ἡ λεπτόφυλλος:
3.13. 5. leaflet of ἀκτῆ comp. to


INDEX OF PLANTS


leaf of δ. ἡ πλατύφυλλος : 3.14. 3.
flower (?) of κλήθρα comp.;
3. 15. 4. leaf of τέρμινθος COMP’;
3.16. 4. leaf of κόμαρος COMD.;
3.17.3. leaf of κολοίτια (2) comp.
to ὃ. ἡ πλατύφυλλος : 4. 4. 12. leaf
of an unnamed Arian shrub
comp. (see App. (10)); 4. 4. 13.
leaf of an unnamed Gedrosian
tree comp. (see App. (11)); 4.5.3.
does not thrive in cold regions;
4. 5. 4. grows in Propontis;
4.7.1. a class of marine Atlantic
plants comp.; 4. 7. 4. leaf of
an unnamed Arabian tree (see
App. (120)) comp.; 4.13.3. after
decaying shoots again from
same stock; 4. 16. 6. spoils
flavour of grape; δ. ὃ. 3-4.
character of wood; ὅ. 7. 7. wood
used for walking-sticks ; 5. 8. 3.
grows in lowland parts of
Latium: abundant on Circeian
promontory; 5. 9. 7. fire-drilis
made of the wood, because it
does not wear away; 9. 4. 2
bark of λιβανωτός comp.; 9.4.3.
leaf Of λιβανωτός comp. (by
some); 9. 4. 9. do.; 9.10.1. leaf
of ἐλλέβορος ὁ μέλας comp. (by
some) ; 9.15.5. davKov (1) comp.;
9.20.1. one kind of πέπερι (fruit)
ΝΠ ΠΣ (— ἰνοθήῤαι), οἱ
δάφνη (2) ἡ ἀγρία (= ὀνοθήρας), ole-
᾽ ander, rel ee Oleander
295 “4 distinguished from 6. 7


ἥμερο
δάφνη (3) ἡ ᾿Αλεξανδρεία, Alexan-
drian laurel, Ruscus Hypophyl-


ium
i lf 10. 8. bears fruit on leaves;
8. 17. 4. do.
δάφνη (4) ἡ λεπτόφυλλος, sweet bay,
Laurus nobilis
3. 12. 7. (see under δάφνη).
δάφνη (5) ἡ πλατύφυλλος, Sweet bay,
Laurus eden


Peto tos Ὁ... o.)17. 3. (566
under ὃ ἀφν Ἢ).
δάφνη (6) (-Ξ ἐλάα (3) = App. (14)),
white mangrove, Avicennia
officinalis


4.7.1. grows in ‘ Red Sea’; 4.7.2.
described: produces a drug for
stanching blood.


δίκταμνον, dittany, Origanum Dic-


tamnus

9. 16. 1-2. described: medicinal
use: popular belief about its
use to goats: comp. with ψευδο-
δίκταμνον; 9. 16. 3. habitat.

δίκταμνον (ἕτερον), Ballota Pseudo-

dictamnus

9. 16. 8. Cretan: has nothing in
common with true 5. except the


name: described: properties
different,

διόσανθος, carnation, Dianthus in-
odorus


6. 1. 1. in list of under-shrubs;
6.6. 2. ἃ cultivated under-shrub :
a coronary plant: scentless;
6. 6. 11. grown from _ seed:
woody ; 6. 8. 3. flowering time.
διοσβάλανος (fruit κάρυον KacTavat-
κόν), 4.8.11., chestnut, Castanea
vEscea
1, 12. 1. taste of fruit; ὃ. 2. 3.
evidence that it is really wild;
3. 3. 1. a mountain tree; 3.3. 8,
doubt whether it has a flower;
3. 4. 2. time of budding; 3.4. 4.
time of fruiting; 3.5.5. winter-
buds; 4. 5. 1. in list of northern
trees; 4. 5. 4. abundant on
Mount Tmolus and Mysian
Olympus; 4. 8. 11. bark of root
Of λωτός (2) comp. to shell of
chestnut.
διόσπυρος, Diospyros Lotus
3. 13. 3. fruit of κέρασος comp.
δόλιχος, Calavance, Vigna sinensis
8. 3.2. stem; 8.11.1. seed does
not keep.
δόναξ (Ξξκάλαμος ὁ Λακωνικός = k. ὃ
αὐλητικός = κ. ὁ συριγγιάς = κ. ὃ
toé.kos),pole-reed,Arundo Donax
4.11.11. a kind of κάλαμος: : habit
and habitat.
δρακόντιον, edderwort, Dracunculus
vulgaris
(ill τ an inedible and poisonous
kind of ἄρον ; 9.20.3. medicinal
use: described.
δρυπίς, Drypis spinosa
1. 10. 6. spinous-leaved.
δρῦς (1), oak, Quercus Robur
Ἐν; is has galls (kykis); 1. 2. 7.
“park ; 1. 5. 2. bark thick: bark
fleshy ; 1.5.3. wood fleshy ; 1.5.5.


445


INDEX OF PLANTS


wood heavy because it contains
mineral matter ; 1.6.1. core hard
and close; 1. 6.2. core called
‘oak-black’: core large and con-
spicuous; 1. 6. 3. roots many
and long; 1.6. 4. roots fleshy:
deep-rooting; 1. 8. 5. diseased
formation (κραδή); 1. 9. 5. an
evergreen specimen; 1. 10. 6.
leaves notched: leaves with
spinous projections; 1. 10. 7.
attachment of leaves; 1. 11. 3.
seed in a leathery shell; 2. 2. 3.
propagation ; 2. 2. 6. deterior-
ates from seed; 3. 3. 1. tree of
mountain and plain; 3. 3. 3.
evergreen in some places; 3.3.8.
doubt whether it has a flower
(βρύον) ; 3.4.2. time of budding ;
3. 4. 4. time of fruiting; 3. 5. 1.
periods of budding; etc.; 3.5. 2.
galls; 3. 5. 5. winter-buds ;
3.6. 1. quick growing; 3. 6. 5.
instance of a deep-rooting tree;
3.7. 4-6. various galls; etc.;
3. 8.2. four or five kinds, viz.
ἡμερίς OL ἐτυμόδρυς, αἰγίλωψ,


extra keel for hauling : does not
glue well on to ἐλάτη ΟΥ πεύκη;
5. 7. 4. use of wood in house-
building; 5.8.3. grows in La-
tium on Circeian promontory :
5.9. 1. wood makes good char-
coal, but inferior to apia and
Kop.apos; 5. 9. 2. charcoal of
this wood less esteemed by
smiths than that of πεύκη;
8. 2. 2. germination from acorn
described; 9. 9. 5. leaf of χαμαί-
dpus comp.


δρῦς (2) ἡ ἀγρία (Ξε φηγός 3. 8. 2.),


Valonia oak, Quercus Aegilops


1.5.2. rough bark; 3. 8. 2. see


under δρῦς.


δρῦς (3) ἡ ἁλίφλοιος (= δ. ἡ εὐθύ-


φλοιος 8. 8. 2.), Sea-bark oak,
Quercus Pseudo-Robur


8.8. 2. one of the five kinds of


oak (Mt. Ida): =6. ἡ εὐθύφλοιος;
8. 8. 8-4. acorns; 3. 8. 5. habit
and timber; 3. 8. 6. φάσκος
(q.v.) grows on it; 3.8.7. timber;
5. 1. 2. time of cutting timber.


δρῦς (4) ἡ εὐθύφλοιος (= δ. ἡ ἁλίφλοιος
3. 8. 2.), sea-bark oak, Quercus
Ν Pseudo-Robur
3. 8. 2. one of the five kinds of
oak (Mt. Ida).
δρῦς (5) ἡ ἥμερος (= ἐτυμόδρυς g.v. =


a


πλατύφυλλος, φηγός, ἁλίφλοιος OF
εὐθύφλοιος (five recognised by
inhabitants of Mt. Ida); 3.16.1.
leaf growth and ~bark of
πρῖνος comp.; 3. 16. 3. φελλό-


dpus δρῦς and πρῖνος comp. };
4, 2. 8. common in Thebaid;
4. 5. 1. in list of northern trees;
4.5.3. grows in Pontus; 4.14.10.
infested by knips; 4. 15. 2.
survives stripping of bark for


ἡμερίς (2)), true oak, Quercus
Robur


8. 8. 2. one of the five kinds of


oak (Mt. Ida).


δρῦς (6) ἡ πλατύφυλλος, broad-leaved


oak (scrub oak), Quercus lanu-


δὰ.


some time; 4. 15. 3. effect of
stripping bark in winter; 5.1.2.
time of cutting timber : reasons ;
6. 1.4; do.;..5. 3.1. core. very
close and heavy; 5. 3. 3. char-
acter of wood; 5. 4. 1. wood
hard and heavy; 5. 4. 2. wood
proof against decay; 5. 4. 3.
wood does not decay if buried
or soaked in water: rots in sea-
water: 5. 4. 8. effect of salt
water on different parts; 5.5.1.
wood hard to work; 5.6.1. wood
contains mineral matter and so
gives under weight: apt to split;
5. 7. 2. used for keel of triremes
and for merchantmen to make


446


ginosa
3. 8. 2. one of the five kinds of
oak (Mt. Ida): fruit; 3. 8. 5.
habit and timber; 38.8.6. galls:
one of the four Macedonian
oaks: has bitter acorns. Ἶ
δρῦς (7) (φῦκος), Cystoseira ericoides
4.6. 2. peculiar to certain waters ;
4, 6. 7-8. described.
δρῦς (8) (ποντία), Sargassum vulgare
4.6. 9. distinguished from δρῦς (7);
has a useful βάλανος.


ἐβένη (ἔβενος) (1), ebony, Diospyro
Ebenum


1. δ. 4. wood heavy; 1, 5. 5. do.
because of close grain; 1. 6.1


INDEX OF PLANTS


core hard and close; 4. 4. 6. de-
scribed : two kinds distinguished
(see below); 5. 3. 1. wood very
close and heavy, especially the
core; 5. 3. 2. colour of wood of
τέρμινθος cComp.: wood of an
unnamed tree (see App. {0}
comp. ἴο a variegated ἐ. ; 5.4.2
wood proof against * decay ;
9. 20. 4. colour and medicina!
use of wood.

ἐβένη (2), Diospyros melanoxylon

4. 4. 6. ἃ kind with inferior wood.

εἰλετίας, 866 κάλαμος ὃ εἰλετίας

EKTOMOV τὸ μελαμπόδιον See ἐλλέβορος ὁ
μέλας

ἐλάα, olive, Olea Europea

1.3.1. a typical ‘tree’; 1. 5. 4.

wood easily broken, He split:
wood has many knots; 1. 5. 5.
wood easily broken, because
tough and not of straight grain;
1. 6. 2. core not conspicuous;
das GO: 5 roots both stout and
thin ; 6. 4. roots branching ;
etc.: ? ΠΕ rooting; roots
crooked ; etc.; 1. 8. 2. has less
knotsthan κότινος ; 1.8.6. liable
to excrescences; etc.; 1. 9. 3.
evergreen; 1. 10. 1. leaves in-
verted in summer ; 1.10.2. colour
of leaves; 1. 10. 4. leaves nar-
row; 1.10. 7. leaf-stalk short;
ete.; 1.11.1. seed enveloped in
flesh and stone; 1.11. 3. fieshy
seed in a stone; 1. 11. 4. effect
on fruit of rich feeding; 1. 12.1.
taste of fruit; 1. 13. 2. flower
consists of one ‘ leaf’ only partly
divided; 1. 13. 8. fiower sur-
rounds fruit; etc; 1.14.1. bears
on last year’s wood ; a ΟΣ;
bears fruit both on top and at
side; 1.14.4. a cultivated form
of κότινος ; 2.1.2. propagation ;
2.1.4. do.; 2.2.5. seed produces
wild form; 2. 2. 12. cannot be
made out of κότινος by cultiva-
tion; 2. 3.1. sometimes changes
to κότινος spontaneously ; etc.;
2. 5. 3. grafting; 2. 5. 4. propa-
gation; 2.5.6. do.: trees should
be planted far apart; VATS eae fe
low ground suitable; oat pe Ae
needs much pruning; 2. 7. 3.


requires pungent manure and
much water; 3. 2. 1. produces
less fruit than κότινος but ripens
more; 3. 12. 2. flower and fruit
of θηλυκράνεια comp.,; 3. 17. 5.
size of fruit of συκῆ ἡ Toate comp.;
4. 2. 8. common in Thebaid;
4, 2. 9. character. i Thebaid ;
4, 3. 1. grows and bears well in
Cyrenaica; 4. 4. 1. (2) distribu-
tion in Asia ; 4. 7. 2. leaf and
fruit of ἐλάα (3) comp.; 4. 7. 4.
size of fruit of unnamed Arabian
tree comp. (see App. (126));
4. 13. 1. shorter-lived than
κότινος ; 4. 13. 2. story of a very
old tree at Athens; 4. 13. 5. ex-
planation of longevity ; 4.14. 2.
diseases; 4. 14. 8. effect of rain
on fruiting; 4. 14. 9. specially
apt to shed fruit at Taras;
4,14. 10. other diseases: effect
of hot winds; 4. 4. 11. suffers
much from special winds; 4.16.1.
improved by lopping branches ;
5.3.3. character of wood; 5.3. 7.
images made from the root;
5.4.2. wood proof against de-
cay; 5. 4. 4. wood not eaten by
teredon; 5. 5b. 2. core not
obvious: wherefore wood not
apt to ‘draw’; 5. 5. 3. core not
obvious but exists; 5.6.1. wood
apt to split under pressure ;
5. 9. 6. wood good for kindling
furnaces; 5.9. 7. wood not suit-
able for fire-sticks : reason ;
5. 9. 8. articles made of the
wood have been known to pro-
duce shoots ; instances; 6. 2. 1.
leaf of κνέωρος ὁ ΝΣ comp.;
6. 2. 4. will not grow more than
a short distance from the sea;

. 2. 8. abundant in Melos;
9.18. 5. fruit of θηλύγονον comp.
to βρύον of ¢.: fruit of appevdyo-
voy comp. to undeveloped olive.


ἴδ α mee Olea cuspidata


alt; Indian (in hill-country


ly).
tren (3) (= δάφνη (6) = App. (14)),


white mangrove, Avicennia offi-
cinalis


4.7.1. grows in ‘ Red Sea’; 4.7.2.


described.


447


INDEX OF PLANTS


éAaiayvos (properly ἑλέαγνος), goat
willow, Salix Caprea
4. 10. 1-2. in list of plants of L.
Copais: described.
ἐλάτη (1), silver-fir, Abies cephalonica
1. 1. 8. branches opposite ; 1.3.6.
refuses cultivation; 1. 5. 1.
erect and tall; 1. 5. 2. bark in
layers; 1. 5. ὃ. wood fibrous;
1. 5. 4. wood easily split; 1.5.5.
do. because of straight grain;
1.6. 3. root single; 1. 6. 4. roots
fibrous; 1.6.5. roots not branch-
ing; 1.8.1. many knots; 1.8. 2.
‘male’ has more knots than
‘female’; 1.8. 3. branches at
right angles; 1. 9. 1. growth
chiefly upwards; 1.9.2. growth
affected by position; 1. 9. 3.
evergreen; 1.10. 5. leaves de-
scribed; 1. 12. 1. taste of fruit;
i, 12-2: taste of sap; 1.19.1
flower yellow; 2. 2. 2. pro-
pagated only by seed; 2. 7. 3.
requires pungent manure;
8.1.2. grows only from seed;
3.3.1. a mountain tree; 3.3.3.
evergreen; 3. 4. 5. time of
flowering and fruiting; 3.5.1.
period of budding; 3. 5. 3.
do.; 3.5. 5. winter-buds ; 3. 6.1.
quick growing: even young
tree fruits; 3. 6. 2. formation of
buds; 8. 6. 4. not deep-rooting ;
3.6.5. deep-rooting according
to Arcadians; etc.; 3. 7. 1-2.
dies if topped: formation of
callus ; 8. 9. 5. timber compared
with πεύκη : etc.; 3. 9. 6. differ-
ences between ‘male’ and
‘female’: described; 3. 9. 7.
further comparison with πεύκη :
produces λοῦσσον ; 3.9.8. do.:
core and callus; 4. 1. 1. likes
shade; 4. 1. 2. grows tall in
shade but has inferior timber;
4, 1. 8. grows high on moun-
tains, but not tall; 4. 4. 1. (2)
distribution in Asia; 4. 5. 1.
in list of Northern trees;
4. 5. 8. does not grow in
Pontus; 4. 15. 3. effects of
stripping bark at various sea-
sons; 4. 16. 1. topping fatal;
4.16. 1-2. not injured by cut-


448


ting for resin; 4. 16. 4. said to
perish if entirely deprived of its
heart-wood; 5.1.1. time when
timber is of best colour; 5. 1. 2.
time of cutting timber; 5. 1. 4.
do.; 5. 1. 5-6. timber comp.
with πίτυς ; 5.1. 7. uses of tim-
ber; 5.1.8. growth and char-
acter; 5. 1. 9-10. methods of
cleaving; 5. 3. 3. character of
wood; 5. 3.5. used for doors;
5. 4. 4. less eaten by teredon
than πεύκη; 5. 4. 6. wood, if
barked just- before time of bud-
ding, does not decay in water:
story in proof of this; 5. 5. 1.
knotty parts of wood hard
to work; 5. 5. 2. core most
obvious in é.; 5. 6. 1. wood
good for struts: behaviour
under pressure; 5. 6. 2. strong-
est of all woods; 5. 7. 1-2. use
of wood ἴῃ ship-building;
5.7. 4-5. uses of wood in house-
building and crafts: the most
generally useful of woods : more
so than πεύκη; 5. 9. 8. wood
has a peculiar exudation ; 9.1.2.
sap gummy; 9. 2.1. production
ofresin (ῥητίνη); 9. 2. 2. quality
of resin.
ἐλάτη (2), silver-fir, Abies pectinata
5. 8. 1. grows to great size in
Latium, but finer still in
Corsica; 5.8.3. grows in hill-
country of Latium. ;
"ἐλάτη᾽ (8), ‘sea-fir,’ Cystoseira
Abies-marina
4. 6. 2. peculiar to certain waters ;
4. 6. 7-8. described.
ἐλατήριον, 866 σίκυος ὁ ἄγριος
4. 5. 1. in list of northern plants.
ἑλειοσέλινον (= σέλινον τὸ ἕλειον),
marsh celery, Apium graveolens
7.6. 8. comp. with σέλινον : medi-
cinal use.
ἑλειόχρυσος, gold-flower, Helichry-
sum siculum
6. 8. 1. flowering time; 9.19. 3.
alleged magic properties: de-
scribed : medicinal use.
ἐλελίσφακος, salvia, Salvia triloba
6. 1. 4. a spineless wild under-
shrub; 6. 2. 5. like wild σφάκος:
leaf described.


INDEX OF PLANTS


ἑλένιον, calamint, Calamintha in-
cana
2.1. 3. propagation; 6. 1. 1. in
list of under -shrubs ; ONO5 2.3
cultivated under-shrub: a coron-
ary plant: the whole plant
scented ; 6.6.3. woody: only
one form; 6. 7. 2. said by some
to have no fruit; 6. 7. 4. roots
described.
ἑλίκη, crack willow, Salix fragilis
3.13.7. Arcadian name for willow.
ἕλιξ, i de Hedera Heliz
ὃ. 18. 7-8. described : does not
develop into KUTTOS 5 3. 18. 8.
kinds ; 7. 8. 1. stem ‘ clasping.’
ἕλιξ ἡ λευκή white-berried ivy,
Hedera Helix
3. 18. 8. several kinds.
ἕλιξ ἡ ποικίλη (= ἑ. ἡ Opaxia, 3.18.8.),
ivy, Hedera Helix
os 18. 8. several kinds.
rae ἡ xAoepa, ivy, Hedera Helix
8. 8. described.
ns aR rupture-wort, Herniaria
glabra
9. 10. 2. seed mixed with ἐλλέβορος
ὃ λευκός to make an emetic.
ἐλλέβορος, hellebore, Helleborus cyclo-
phyllus and Veratrum album
4. 5. 1. seeks cold regions; 6. 2. 9.
belongs to ‘ ferula-like’ plants:
has a hollow stem; 9.8. 4. what
part of root cut for medicinal
use: ‘ bulbous ‘ part a purge for
dogs; 9. 8. 6. poisonous effect
on those who dig it; precau-
tions; 9. 9. 2. medicinal use ;
9. 10. 1-4. kinds distinguished
(see below); 9. 14. 1. how long
drug will keep; 9. 17. 1-3. the
drug can be made ineffectual by
use: instances.
ἐλλέβορος ὃ λευκός, white hellebore,
Veratrum album
9.10. 1. has nothing in common
with ἐ. ὁ μέλας except the name:
divergent accounts given of the
resemblances between the two
plants: described; 9. 10. 2. not
poisonous to sheep ; 3; when in
season : distribution; 9.10. 3-4.
very local: local varieties,
Oiratos, ἸΠοντικός, ᾿Ελεάτης, Ma-
λιώτης, Παρνάσιος, Αἰτωλικός:


THEOPH. VOL. II.


Oiratos the best: properties of
᾽᾿Ἐλεάτης ; 9. 15. 5. grows in Ar-
cadia; 9.18.2. restores scorpion
to life when it has been killed
with σκορπίος (3).
ieetas ὁ μέλας (drug onoapoerdés
14. 4.), hellebore, Helleborus
ἐκ ΔΕ ἫΝ
9, 8. 8. superstition as to gather-
ing; 9. 10. 1. (see under é. Ὁ
Acevkds): described; 9. 10. 2.
poisonous to animals; 9. 10. 3.
grows everywhere: some local-
ities specified; 9. 10. 4. called
by some ἔκτομον τὸ μελαμπόδιον :
uses for purification and as
charm; 9. 14. 4. use of fruit in
medicine ; 9. 15. 5. grows in
Arcadia ; 9.16.6. leaf of ἐφήμερον
comp.
ἔλυμος, ΕἾΤ millet, Setaria italica
inflorescence of ὄρυζον
ἐς Ἐπ "ΟΝ 1.1. in list of ‘ summer
crops ’ distinct from cereals and
pulses; 8. 11. 1. seed keeps
well.
ἔνθρυσκον, Chervil, Scandiax australis
7. 7. 1. a λάχανον.
ἐπετίνη (3) (? πιτυίνη), Ajuga Ira
7.8.1. stem ‘clasping,’ _ but, for
want of support, ‘on the
ground.’
᾿Επιμενίδειος, 866 σκίλλα 7K.
ἐπίπετρον, stone-crop, Sedum ano-
petalum
7. 7. 4. flowerless.
ἐρέβινθος, chick-pea, Cicer arietinum
2.4.2. 5684 soaked before sowing ;
2.6.6. size of some dates comp.;
4.4.4. size of put of συκῆ ἡ ᾿Ινδική
comp.; 4. 4. 9. not found in
India; 6. 5. 3. leaf of a kind of
τρίβολος comp.; 8. 1. 1. in list of
pulses; 8. 1. 4. sown both early
and late ; 8. 2. 1. germination
described; 8. 2. 3. comes up
with several leaves: deep-root-
ing; 8. 2. 5. flowering time;
8. 2. 6. time of maturing seed :
S. io. 2. sbemi*. 85 Dee). several
kinds: three’ mentioned, κριοί,
ὀροβιαῖοι, οἱ ἀνὰ μέσον: white
forms sweetest ; Shas oe, POM
round: seeds comparatively
few; 8.5.4. attachment of seed ;


449


INDEX OF PLANTS


8.6.5. rain hurtful when é. is in
flower: three kinds mentioned,
μέλας, πυρρός, λευκός; 8. ya
comp. with other pulses: de-
stroys weeds: suitable soil:
grows well after κύαμος ; 8. 9. 1.
exhausts the soil most of pulses;
8. 10. 1. diseases and pests;
8.10.5. infested by caterpillars ;
8.11.2. only seed which does
not engender ‘worms’ etc.:
seed keeps well; 8. 11. 6. do.
especially in hill country.
ἐρείκη, heath, Hrica arborea
1. 14. 2. bears fruit on the top;
9. 11. 11. λιβανωτὶς ἡ ἄκαρπος
grows where ¢. is abundant.
ἐρευθεδανόν, madder, Rubia tine-
torum
6, 1. 4. a spineless wild under-
shrub; 7.9.3. roots red; 9.13.4.
do.; 9.13. 6. described: habit:
habitat : medicinal use.
ἐρινεός, wild fig, Ficus Carica
1. 8. 2. has more knots than συκῆ;
1. 14..4. wild form of συκῆ;
2. 2. 12. cannot be made into
συκῆ by cultivation; 2. 3. 1.
sometimes changes to συκῆ
spontaneously ; 3.3.1. a moun-
tain tree; 3. 4. 2. time of bud-
ing; 4. 2. 3. fruit of ov«q ἢ
ζυπρία comp.; 4. 18. 1. longer-
lived than συκῆ; 4. 14. 4. not
liable to diseases of συκῆ; 5.6. 2.
wood tough and easy to bend:
uses; 5.9.5. wood makes pun-
gent smoke.
(δένδρον τὸ) ἐριόφορον, cotton-plant,
Gossypium arboreum
4.4.8. (not named) clothes made
from it; 4. 7. 7-8. described.
ἕρπυλλος (1) (€. ὃ ἥμερος), tufted
thyme, Thymus Sibthorpii
1. 9. 4. evergreen; 2.1.3. propa-
gation; 6. 1. 1. in list of under-
shrubs; 6. 6. 2. a cultivated
under-shrub : a coronary plant:
the whole plant’ scented;
6. 6. 8. woody: only one form;
6. 7. 2. said by some to have no
fruit: 6.7.4. roots described ;
6.7. 5. growth peculiar: wild
forms (see ἕρπυλλος (2)); 6. 7. 6.
cultivation.


450


ἕρπυλλος (2) ὁ ἄγριος, Attic thyme,
Thymus atticus
6. 7. 2. produces seeds, unlike
ἑ. (1); brought from Hymettus;
sometimes quite like @vpos;
6. 7. 5. has various forms.
ἐρύσιμον, Sisymbrium polyceratium
8. 1. 4. sown later than cereals
and pulses. a ‘summer crop’;
8. 3. 1. leaf; 8. 3. 3. flower;
8. 6. 1. rain not beneficial after
sowing; 8. 7. 3. doubtful if
eaten green by animals: de-
scribed.
PU (cf. ἐρυσιβᾶν, ἐρυσιβώδης
. 2.), wheat-rust, Puccinia
oo ed
. 10. 1. a pest common to all
“crops (cereals, Paves etc.).
ἐτυμόδρυς (--ὴἡμερίς (2) 8. 8. 2. -- δρῦς
ἡ ἥμερος), true oak, Quercus
Robur
3.8. 2. one of the five kinds of
oak (Mt. Ida): = ἡμερίς : fruit;
3. 8. 7. one of the four Mace-
donian kinds: has sweet acorns.
EvBotkov, see καρύα ἡ Εὐβοϊκή.
i rocket, Hruca sativa
i. 6. 6. root woody ; 7. 1. 2-3.
time of sowing and germina-
tion; 7. 2. 8. root described ;
* 4.1. only one kind; 7. 4. 2
leaf of a kind of pahavis comp.;
7.5. 5. seed keeps well; 9.11.6.
leaf of στρυχνὸς ὁ μανικός comp.
εὐθύφλοιος (δρῦς). see δρῦς (4).
εὐώνυμος, spindle-tree, Huonymus
europaeus
[3. 18. 13. described].
ἐφήμερον (= σπάλαξ (?)), meadow
saffron, Colchicum parnassicum
9. 16. 6. a poison which has an
antidote: described: effects.


Gea, rice-wheat, T'riticwm dicoccum
. 4. 1. seed, ‘unless bruised, pro-
‘duces mupos; 4. 4. 10. bpucov
comp.; 8. 1. 1. in list of ἐν ων
8. 1. 2. sown early; 8. 8, 3. ¢.-
and τίφη only plants which can
change into something quite
different ΣΝ TS Ce
exhausts the soil: reason : likes
rich soil: ¢. and tidy the cereals
most like πυρός.


INDEX OF PLANTS


ζυγία, Maple, Acer campestre
3. 3. 1. a mountain tree: name
for mountain form of σφένδαμ-
vos; 3.4. 2. time of budding ;
3. 6. 1. slow growing ΟἿ
3. 11. 1. 2. described; ὅ. 1.
time of cutting timber ; Oe 1: re
G0.355;3,) 3. character of wood ;
5. 7. 6. uses of wood.
ζωστήρ, see φῦκος (1) τὸ πλατύφυλλον.


ἡδύοσμον, (= μίνθη), green mint,
Mentha viridis
7. 7. 1. a λάχανον.
ἡλιοτρόπον, Heliotropium villosum
7. 3. 1. length of flowering season
of ὥκιμον comp.; 7. 8. 1. stem
‘on the ground’; 7.9. 2. long
in flower; 7.10.5. evergreen;
7.15.1. flowering depends on
the heavenly bodies.
ἡμερίς (1), gall-oak, Quercus infec-
toria
8.8.2. one of the five ‘Idaean’
kinds of oak: fruit; 3. 8. 4.
habit and timber; 3.8. 6. galls.
ἡμερίς (Σ͵ (so-called by some) [ἘΞ
δρῦς ἡ ἥμερος = ἐτυμόδρυς 3.8.2.),
true oak, Quercus Robur
3. 8. 2. bears sweet fruit.
ἡμεροκαλλές, Martagon lily, Lilium
Martagon
6. 1. 1. in list of under-shrubs (see
note); 6. 6. 11. grown from
seed: a coronary plant.
ἡμιόνιον, milt-waste, Asplenium
Ceterach
9. 18. 7. properties of leaf: de-
scribed: habitat: mules fond
of it.
ἡρακλεία (Ξεμήκων ἡ Ἡρακλεία), Si-
lene venosa
9. 15. 5. an Arcadian drug.
ἡρακλεωτικὴ (καρύα), see καρύα ἡ
ἩἩρακλεωτική.
ἠριγέρων, groundsel, Senecio vulgaris
a ty, & Adxavor : classed as
‘ chicory-like from its leaves:
7. 4. prolonged flowering-
time; 7.10.2. flowers in winter.
ἠρύγγιον, eryngo, Eryngiwm cam-
pestre


6, 1. 3. has spines on the leaves:
a wild under-shrub.


Gaia, Thapsia garganica
9. 8. 3. most powerful juice from
root; 9. 8. 5. superstition as to
method of cutting; 9. 9. 1. root
e and juice used; 9. 9. 5. medi-
cinal use; 9. 9. 6. described;
9,11. 2. leaf of πάνακες τὸ ᾿Ασ-
Amr levoy comp.; 9. 20. 3. medi-
cinal use: grows specially in
Attica: properties; effect on
foreign and native cattle.
θέρμος, lupin, Lupinus aiba
1. 3. 6. refuses cultivation ; 1.7.3.


seed roots through wunder-
growth; 3. 2. 1. fruits better in
wild state; 4. 7. 5. fruit of


an unnamed Arabian tree (see
App. (18)) comp.; 4. 7. 6. fruit
of an unnamed Persian tree
(see App. (18)) comp.; 4. 7.
fruit of a tree of the island of
Tylos (see App. (18)) comp.,;
ΘῈΣ Θ᾽ sown- early; 82225 1:
germination described ; 8. 5. 2.
seeds in compartments ; BD. 4:
attachment of seed; Su 3
not eaten green by any animal ;
8. 11. 2. seed keeps well: like a
wild plant; 8. 11. 6. seed keeps
specially well in hill country;
8. 11. 8. peculiarities about
sowing seed.

θηλύγονον (= appevoyovoy), dog-mer-
cury, Mercurialis perennis


9,18. 5. properties : described.
θηλυκράνεια, cornel, Cornus san-
guinea


1. 8. 2. has less knots than κράνεια ;
8.3. 1. tree of mountain and
plain; 3. 4. 2. time of budding;
3. 4.3. time of fruiting; 3. 4. 6.
fruit inedible; 3. 12. ἽΞ 2. de-
scribed ; 5. 4, 1. less fruitful
than κράνεια.

θηλύπτερις, bracken, Pteris aquilina

9. 18. 8. properties : distinguished

from πτερίς.

θηλύφονον (= ἀκόνιτον = μνόφονον =
σκορπίος (3) 9. 18. 2.), wolf’s
bane, Aconitum Anthora

9.18. 2. properties: habit: fatal
to the scorpion.

θήσειον. Corydalis densiflora

7, 12. ὃ. root bitter : medicinal

use.


451
G GZ


INDEX OF PLANTS


θραύπαλος, joint-fir, Ephedra campy-
lopoda
3. 6. 4. very shallow-rooting:
many roots; 4.1.8. likes shade
θριδακίνη (properly, but not always,
distinguished from θρῖδαξ), wild
lettuce, Lactuca scariola
1. 10. 7. time of leaf-growth:
stem presently spinous; 1.12.2.
taste of sap; 7. 1. 2-3. time of
sowing and of germination;
7. 8. 2. seeds; 7.4. 1. several
kinds; 7. 4. 5. do. viz. λευκή,
πλατύκαυλος, στρογγυλόκαυλος,
Λακωνική: differences; 7. 5. 4.
pests; 7. 6. 2. wild form dis-
tinguished: medicinal use;
9. 8. 2. juice of stalk collected,
with a piece of wool; 9.11.10.
leaf of χιβανωτὶς ἡ ἄκαρπος COM).
to 0. ἡ πικρά.
Opisaé, lettuce, Lactuca sativa
- ἢ 9.4. grows again when stem is
cut: effect on flavour; 7. 2. 9.
root described; 7. 5. 3. bears
transplanting.
θρναλλίς, Plantago crassifolia
" "7.11. 12. flowers more or less ina
‘ spike.’
@pvov, (a grass), Imperata arundi-
macea
4. 11. 12. foliage of some κάλαμοι
comp.
θρύορον (?) (= στρυχνὸς ὁ μανικός
9. 11. 6.), thorn-apple, Datura
Stramonium.
θυία (θύεια), Odorous cedar, Jwni-
perus foetidissima
1. 9. 3. evergreen; 3. 4. 2. time of
budding; 3. 4. 6. time of fruit-
ing; 4. 1. 3. grows on hill-tops.
(θῦμα, ? ἃ madrepore
4. 7.1. grows in Atlantic: turns
to stone).
θύμβρα (θύμβρον), Savory, Satureia
Thymbra
1. 3. 1. (2) a typical under-shrub ;
1; 12.1. taste of fruit; 1.12.2.
taste of sap; 6. 1. 4. a spineless
wild under-shrub; 0. 2. 3. seed
conspicuous: not, like θύμος,
particular as to situation ; 6.7.5.
a wild form of ἕρπυλλος Comp.;
7.1. 2-3. time of sowing and of
germination; 7. 1. 6. germina-


452


tion; 7. 5. 5. seed keeps well;
7.6. 1. wild form distinguished.
θύμον (1) (θύμος), Cretan thyme,
Thymbra capitata
1. 12. 2. taste of sap; 3.1.3. re-
produces itself without seed;
6. 2. 3. two forms, black and
white: seed inconspicuous ;
6. 2. 4. requires sea-breezes.
(‘@vporv’ (2), ἢ a madrepore
4.7.2. a marine plant which turns
to stone: described).
@vov (θύα), thyine-wood, Callitris
quadrivalvis
5. 3. 7. described: character and
use of wood; 5.4.2. wood proof
against decay.


ἰασιώνη, bindweed, Convolvulus
sepium

1. 13. 2. flower consists of one
‘leaf.’


ἴκμη, ? duckweed, Lemna minor
4,10. 1-2. in list of plants of Lake
Copais; 4.10.4. requires further
investigation
ἰξία (1). oak-mistletoe, “Loranthus
europaeus
3.7. 6. grows on oak and other
trees; 3. 16. 1. grows on πρῖνος.
ἰξία (2) (= ἄκανθα (9) = ἄκανος =
ἰξίνη--- χαμαιλέων ὁ λευκός), pine-
thistle, Atractylis gummifera
9,1. 3. Cretan: produces a gum.
ἰξίνη (gum (ἀκανθικὴ) μαστίχη 6. 4. 9.,
9.1.2.) (= ἄκανθα (9) = ἄκανος
= ikta (2) = χαμαιλέων ὁ λευκός),
pine-thistle, Atractylis gummi-


fera

6, 4. 3. a ‘thistle-like’ plant;
6. 4. 4. time of growing; 6. 4.9.
described; 9. 1. 2. produces a
gum called μαστίχη.

ἴον (=iwvia = tov τὸ λευκόν), gilli-

flower, Matthiola incana

1. 9. 4. evergreen; 2. 1. 3. pro-
pagation; 4. 7. 4. colour and
scent of unnamed Arabian
tree (see App. (12a)) comp. ;
6. 1. 1. in list of under-shrubs; —
6. 6. 1. a cultivated under-
shrub: a coronary plant; sweet-
scented ; 6.6.5. sweetest-scented
at Cyrene; 6. 6. 11. grows from


-


INDEX OF PLANTS


seed; woody; 6.8. 5. position
and climate important for frag-
rance: fiowers very early in
Egypt; 6. 8. 6. on mountains
blooms well, but has inferior
scent; 7. 6. 4. wild form quite
distinct, alike only i in leaf.

ἴον τὸ λευκόν (Ξελευκόϊον (1) =iwvia ἡ
λευκή), gilliflower, Matthiola in-


Cana -

8. 18. 13. flower of εὐώνυμος
comp.; 4. 7. 8. flower of an
Arabian tree (see App. (15))
comp; 6. 6. 3. several colour
forms ; 6. 6. 7. distinguished
from i. τὸ μέλαν; 6. 8. 1-2.
flowering-time ; 6. 8. 5. plant
lives three years at most: de-
generates with age : RS. 3s
leaves * on the stem.’

ἴον τὸ μέλαν (Ξεἰωνία ἡ μέλαινα),
wold) Viola odorata

1, 13.2. has a ‘twofold’ fiower ;
6. 6. 3. only one form; 6. 6. 2.
distinguished from ¢. πὸ λευκόν;
6. 8. 1-2. a coronary plant:
flowering time.

ἵπνον, ὃ marestail, Hippuris vulgaris

4.10. 1-2. in list of plants of Lake

Copais; 4.10.4. requires further


investigation.
ἱππομάραθον (=payvdapis), Prangos
ferulacea


. 1. 4. a spineless wild under-
“shrub : belongs to ‘ ferula-like’
plants.

ἱπποσέλινον, Alexanders, Smyrnium
Olusatrum


1. 9. 4. evergreen; 2. 2.1. propa-,.


gation; 7.2.6. root of τεύτλιον
Campi. aoe τοοῦ; 7. 6. 8:
comp. with ἐλειοσέλινον : medi-
cinal use; 9. 1. 3. root produces
a gum: which is like σμύρνα;
9. 1. 4. propagated from a
δάκρυον : a popular error about
ἐ. and σμύρνα; 9.15.1. grows
in Arcadia.
ἱπποφαές, 866 τιθύμαλλος.
ἱππόφεως, spurge, Euphorbia acan-
thathamnos
6. 5. 1. in list of spinous plants
which have leaves as well as
spines; 6. 5. 2. has no spines op
the leaves.


ἶρις, iris, Iris pallida, etc.
1 7. 2. root fragrant; ἜΣ ΟΣ 2.
grows best in Illyria on shores of


Adriatic; 6. 8. 8. a coronary
plant: flowering time; 7.13.1.
leaves described; 7. 13. 2.


flower-stem not the only stem:
stem comp. with ἀσφόδελος :
9.7.3. in list of ἀρώματα ; 9. 7. 4.
only European ἄρωμα ; best in
Illyria: preparation; 9. 9. 2.
perfume.

ἴσχαιμος, Andropogon Ischaemum

9. 15. 3. Thracian : Aart

ἰσχάς (= amos (2) 9. 9. 5. = ῥάφανος
n dpeta), cides Euphorbia
Apios.

ἰτέα, willow, Salix spp.

1. 4. 2. lives near water; 1. 4. 3.
‘amphibious’; 1. 5. 1. crooked
and low; 1. 5. 4. wood light;
ov Lvdl.rpropagations, 5. 1:72:
seems to have no fruit, yet re-
produces itself: instance ; 3.1.3.
sheds its fruit unripened ; 3.3.1.
tree of mountain and plain;
3.3.4. a question if it bears fruit;
3. 4.2. time of budding; 3. 6. re
quick or slow grower ?; 3.13. 7.
described: kinds (see below):
called in Arcadia ἑλίκη ; 3.14. 4.
leaf of κολυτέα comp.; 4. 1. 1.
likes wet ground; 4. 5. 7. com-
mon in some Mediterranean
regions; 4. 8. 1. grows partially
in water; 4. 10. 1. in list of
plants of Lake Copais; 4. 10. 6.
grows both on land and in
water; 4. 18. 2. shorter-lived
by water; 4. 16. 2. grows again
after being cut or blown down;
4. 16. 3. instance of a tree which
survived the lopping of its
branches; 5. 3. 4. character of
wood; 5. 7. 7. uses of wood;
5. 9. 4. wood makes an evil
smoke when burnt for charcoal.

ἰτέα ἡ λευκή, White willow, Salix


al
3.13. 7. described.
ἰτέα ἡ μέλαινα, Salix amplexicaulis
3.138. 7. described.
ipvov, spike-lavender,
Spica
6. 6. 11. a coronary plant: grown


453


Lavandula


INDEX OF PLANTS


from seed; 6. 8. 3. flowering
time.
ἵψος, ? cork-oak, Quercus Suber (G.
from Plin. 16. 98. Hesych. has
ios = κισσός)
8. 4. 2. time of budding.
iwvia (-εἴον g.v. = iwvia ἡ λευκή =
ἰόν τὸ λευκόν = λευκόϊον (1)),
gilliflower, Matthiola incana.
iwvia ἡ λευκή (= ἰωνία = ἴον g.v.),
gilliflower, Matthiola incana.
ἰωνία ἡ μέλαινα (= ἴον τὸ mEeAav'g.v.),
violet, Viola odorata.


κάκτος (1), cardoon, Cynara Cardun-


culus
4, 10-11. a “ thistle-like ἢ
plant: described: peculiar to
Sicily.
κάκτος (2), artichoke, Cynara Scoly-
mus


6. 4.11. has erect ‘stalk’ called
πτέρνιξ : described ; edible ; base
of receptacle called σκαλίας.

κάλαμος, reed

1. 5. 2. bark fibrous: bark in one
layer; 1. 5. 3. stem jointed;
1.6.2. core membranous; 1.6.7.
root jointed; 1. 6. 10. roots large
and numerous; 1. 8. 3. joints
regular; 1.8.5. joints analogous
to ‘knots’; 1. 9. 4. evergreen ;
1. 10. 5. leaves end in a point;
further described ; 1.10.9. leaves
made of fibre: leaf-stalk made
of fibre; 2. 2. 1. (a kind of)
propagation; 4. 8. 1. in list of
τὰ λοχμώδη; 4. 8. 7. κύαμος ὃ
Αἰγύπτιος comp.; 4. 8. 8. thick-
ness of root of κύαμος 0 Αἰγύπ-
twos comp.; 4. 9.1. class of rivers
in which «. grows; 4. 9. 3. has
‘side-growths’; 4. 10. 1. in list
of plants of Lake Copais; 4.10.6.
στόν both on land and in
water; 4.10.7. effect of drought ;
4.11.1. distinguished from kx.
ὁ αὐλητικός (see below): a stout
and a slender form (6 χαρακίας
and 6 πλόκιμος) (see below) ;
4.11. 10-13. other forms; 6. 2. 8.
setting of leaves of νάρθηξ and
ναρθηκία comp.; 9.16.1. δίκταμνον
kept ἐν καλάμῳ.

κάλαμος ὁ αὐλητικός (=k. 6 Λακωνικός


454


=k. 0 συριγγίας = K. ὃ τοξικός
=k. ὃ χαρακίας = δόναξ, pole-
reed, Arundo Dona:

4.10. 1. in list of plants of Lake
Copais; 4. 10. 6. grows only in
water; 4. 11. 1. distinguished
from the ordinary form of κι:
4.11.2. not true that it takes
nine years to grow; 4. 11. 3.
conditions of growth; 4. 11. 4.
described by contrast with other
κάλαμοι; 4. 11. 4-7. manufac-
ture of the mouthpieces of
pipes; 4. 11. 8-9. distribution
in region of Lake Copais.

κάλαμος ὃ εἰλετίας, Ammmophila arun-
dinacea


4. 11.18. the: “male kind’ of «.


ἐπίγειος, 80 called by some.
κάλαμος (ἐπίγειος), bush-grass, Cala-
mogrostis Epigeios
4.11.13. described : growth comp.
to ἄγρωστις.
κάλαμος ὃ εὐώδης, sweet flag, Acorus
Calamus
4. 8. 3. grows in a Syrian lake ;
9.7.1. habitat (east of Lebanon):
described: fragrance; 9.7.3. in
list of ἀρώματα.
κάλαμος ὁ Ἰνδικός, bamboo, Bambusa
arundinacea
4. 11. 13. described.
κάλαμος ὁ Ἰνδικός (‘male’), Male
bamboc, Dendrocalamus strictus
4, 11. 13. distinguished as solid.
κάλαμος ὃ Λακωνικός (= κ. ὁ αὐλητικός
=k. ὁ συριγγίας = κ. ὁ τοξικός
=k. ὁ χαρακίας = δόναξ), pole-
. reed, Arundo Donax
4.11.12. colour.
κάλαμος ὃ πλόκιμος, Spear-grass,
Phragmites communis
4. 11. 1. pliant reed; compared
with κ. ὃ χαρακίας: grows on
floating islands of Lake Copais.
κάλαμος ὁ συριγγίας (=, ὁ αὐλητικός
=k. ὃ Λακωνικός = K. 0 τοξικός
=k. ὁ xapaxias = δόναξ), pole-
reed, Arundo Donax
4. 11. 10 described.
κάλαμος ὁ τοξικός (Κρητικός) (= kK. ὁ
αὐλητικός = kK. ὁ Λακωνικός = Kk. ὃ
συριγγίας -- κ. ὃ χαρακίας -- δό-
vat), pole-reed, Arundo Donax
4. 11. 11. described,


“«


INDEX OF PLANTS


κάλαμος ὃ Xapakias (= kK. ὁ Λακωνικός
etc.), pole-reed, Arundo Donax
4. 11. 1. stout form: described:
grows in reed-beds of Lake
Copais.
κάλαμος (Other kinds)
4. 11. 10. briefly described.
κάππαρις, Caper, Capparis spinosa
1. 3. 6. refuses cultivation; 3.2.1.
fruits better in wild state;
4.2.6. fruit of βάλανος comp.;
6.1.8. has spines on the shoots ;
6. 4.1. has spines on leaves as
well as on stem; 6. 5. 2. de-
scribed; 7. 8. 1. stem ‘on the
ground‘; 7. 10. 1. grows and
flowers entirely in summer.
κάρδαμον, cress, Lepidium sativum
1. 12. 1. taste of fruit; 7.1. 2-3.
time of sowing and germina-
tion; 7. 1. 6. germination;
7.4.1. only one kind; 7. 5. 5.
seed keeps well.
καρδάμωμον, cardamom, Elettaria
Cardamomum
9.7.2. an ἄρωμα, Median or In-
dian; 9 7.3. in list of ἀρώματα.
καρύα (fruit capvov), hazel, Corylus
avellana
1. 12. 1. taste of fruit; 3. 2. 3.
evidence that it is really wild;
3. 3. 1. a mountain tree; 3.4.2.
time of budding; 3. 4. 4. time
of fruiting; 4.5. 4. abundant
on Tmolus and Mysian Olym-
pus; 8. 2. 2. germination de-
scribed.
καρύα ἡ ὐβοϊκή, sweet chestnut, Cas-
tanea vesca var. (improved form)
1.11.3. seed in a leathery shell;
4.5.4. common in Huboea and
Magnesia; 5. 4. 2. wood proof
against decay; 5. 4. 4. wood
does not decay in water (?)
5. 6. 1. wood makes a noise
when about to split: instance;
5.7.7. uses of wood: does not
rapidly decay; 5. 9. 2. charcoal
of this wood used in iron-mines.
καρύα ἡ Ἡρακλεωτική (Ἡρακλεῶτις)
(fruit κάρνον), filbert, Corylus
avellana vars.
1. 3. 3. effect of not pruning;
1.10. 6. leaves notched ; 1.11.1.
seed immediately within enve-


lope; 1. 11. 3. seed in a woody
shell; 3.3.8. doubt whether it
has a flower (iovAos); 3. 5. 5-6.
catkins; 3. 6. 2. formation of
buds; 3.6.5. deep-rooting ac-
cording to Arcadians: etc.;
Or fs) oe CaUKING . 9. 0. ΞΖ.
described: kinds.
καρύα ἡ Περσίκη, walnut, Juglans
regia
3.6.2. formation of buds; 3.14.4.
leaf of σημύδα comp.
κασία, Cassia, Cinnamomum iners
4. 4.14. in list of oriental aroma-
tic plants; 9. 4. 2. Arabian;
Ores, land 59: ) described:
method of collection; 9. 7. 2.
Arabian ; 9. 7. 3. in list of ἀρώ-
ματα,
καυκαλίς, Tordylium apulum
7.7.1. a Adxavov.
κέγχρος, millet, Panicum miliaceum
1. 11. 2. seeds in a husk; 4. 4. 10.
inflorescence of ὅρυζον comp.;
4.8.10. fruit of λωτός (2) comp.;
4. 10. 38. size of seeds of σίδη
comp.; 8.1. 1. in list of ‘sum-
mer crops’ distinct from cereals
and pulses; 8.1.4. sown later
than cereals and pulses; 8. 2. 6.
time of maturing seed; 8. 3. 2.
Stell 8: Ὁ. oF ΠΟΘΙ (Or ae ἜΣ
seed abundant; 8. 7. 3. needs
little water: comp. with péac-
vos; 8. 9. 3. reasons why it
might have been expected to
exhaust the soil: contrasted
with pulses as to ‘lightness’ ;
8.11.1. seed keeps well; 8.11.6.
do. specially in hill-country;
9.18.6. fruit of κραταιγών comp.
Kedpis, juniper, Juniperus communis
1. 9. 4. evergreen: a dwarf kind
(cf. κέδρος 3. 13. 7.); 1. 10. 6.
leaf spinous at tip; 1. 12. 1.
taste of fruit.
κέδρος (1) (= δξύκεδρος 3. 12. 3.),
prickly cedar, Juniperus Oxy-
cedrus
1. 5. 3. wood not fleshy ; 1. 10. 6.
leaf spinous at tip; 3. 6. 5.
shallow-rooting according to
Areadians; 3.10.2. μίλος comp.;
3.12. 3-4. described : two kinds,
ἡ Λυκίη and ἡ Φοινικῆ (? Φοινι-


455


INDEX OF PLANTS


κική) (see κέδρος (3)); distin-
guished from apxevéos; 3. 13. 7
has a dwarf form (ἢ κεδρίς, cf.
1.9, 4.); 4. 8. 8. size of fruit of
maAtoupos ὁ ᾿Αιγύπτιος comp.;
4.5.2. grows on Thracian and
Phrygian mountains; 4. 16. 1.
some think topping fatal; Dade «
images made from the wood;
5. 4. 2. wood proof against de-
cay; 5.9. 8. wood exudes mois-
ture : hence ‘sweating’ statues ;
9.1.2. sap gummy.
κέδρος (2), Syrian cedar, Juniperus
excelsa
3.2. 6. characteristic of mountains
of Cilicia and Syria; 4. 5. 5.
grows in Syria and is used for
ships; 1-2. use of wood
in ship- -building ; 5. 7. 4. use of
wood in house- pbuilding; Dock.
remarkably fine in some regions
e.g. Syria
κέδρος (3), ἡ Φοινικική (= ἄρκευθος),
Phoenician cedar, Juniperus
phoenicea
8. 12.3. see κέδρος (1); 9. 2. 3. said
to be burnt for pitch in Syria.
κέδρος (4) ἡ Λυκίη
3. 12. 3. a kind so distinguished
by some from κέδρος (3).
κενταύριον, centaury, Centaurea sa-
lonitana
ΤΠ. tastesOlerilGe τέο. Ὁ,
only bears fruit in hill country;
4.5.1. seeks cold regions; 7.9.5.
leaves and stems bitter, yet
wholesome ; 9. 1. 1. juice blood-
red; 9. 11. 6. juice mixed with
στρύχνος ὃ μανικός to make a
potion.
κενταυρίς, feverwort, Erythraea Cen-
taurium
9, 8. 7. superstition as to gather-


ing; 9. 14. 1. how long drug
will keep.
KevTpomuppivy (=pvaKavGos),butcher’s


broom, Ruscus aculeatus
3.17. 4. bears fruit on its leaves.
Kepais (= ῥάφανος ἡ ἀγρία 9. 15. 5.),
charlock, Raphanus Raphanis-
trum.
κέρασος (= λακάρη), bird-cherry, Pru-
nus avium
8.13.1-3. described; 4.15.1. bark


456


can be stripped; 9. 1. 2. sap
gummy
κεραύνιον, ‘‘thunder-truffle,’ T'uber
aestivum
1. 6. 5. has no roots.
κερκίς (1), Judas-tree, Cercis Sili-
quastrum
1. 11. 2. seeds in a pod.
κερκίς (2), aspen, Populus tremula
3. 14. 3. described.
κερωνία (Ξ- συκῆ ἡ Αἰγυπτία 1.11. 2.),
carob, Ceratonia Siliqua
1.11.2. seeds in a.nod2te13. 2:
bears on siem and branches ;
4. 2. 4. described.
Ae (κήλαστρον), holly, Ilex

Aquifolium

1.3. 6. refuses cultivation; 1.9.3.
evergreen; 3.3.1. tree of moun-
tain and plain; 3. 3. 3. ever-
green; 3. 4. 5-6. time of fruit-
ing; said to lose fruit in winter ;
rR ay 5 grows in very cold
positions; 5.6.2. colour of wood
of φιλύκη comp.; 5. 7. 7. wood
used for walking-sticks.

κινάμωμον, Cinnamon, Cinnamomum

Cassia

4.4.14. in list of oriental aromatic
plants; 9.4.2. Arabian ; 9.5.1—2.
two kinds, white and black,
described : habitat: method of
collection: .a story; 9. 7. 2. in
list of ἀρώματα.

κίσθος, rock-rose, Cistus spp.

145-8 a spineless wild under-
‘shrub ; 6. 2. 2. described: two
forms (see below).

κίσθος ὃ ἄρρην, Cistus villosus
6. 2. 1. described

κίσϑος ὁ θῆλυς. Cistus salvifolius
6. 2. 1. described.

κιττός, ivy, Hedera Helix

1. 3. 2. a shrub which becomes
tree-like; 1. 9. 4. evergreen;

1. 10. 1. leaves change shape
with age of pent, 1. 10. 7. long
leaf-stalk; 1. 13. 1. flower
‘downy’; 1. 18. 4. attachment
of flower; 3.4.6. time of fruit-
ing; 38. 10. 5. fruit and leaf
of φίλυρα comp.; 3. 14. 2. leaf
of kepxts (2) comp.; 3. 18. 6.
kinds distinguished (see below) ;
3. 18. 7. distinguished from


INDEX OF PLANTS


ἑλιδ; 3. 18. 9-10. described:
habit etc.; 3. 18. 11. cluster of
berries of σμῖλαξ (2) comp.: de-
scribed; 4. 4. 1. distribution in
Asia; 4.16.5. overgrowth of x.
dangerous to trees; 5. 3. 4.
character of wood; 5.9.6. wood
said to make best fire-sticks;
5.9. 7. the stationary fire-stick
should be made of x. or ἀθρα-
γένη; 9. 13. 6. leaf of ἐρευθεδανόν
comp.

κιττὸς ὁ ἕλιξ, 866 ἕλιξ

κιττὸς ὃ λευκός, White-berried ivy,
Hedera Helix

3.18.6. described : several kinds:

one=«kopup Bias, one=k. ὁ ᾿Αχαρ-
vixos; 3.18. 9. roots ; 3, νος [Ὁ],
fruit ; 9.18. 5. properties of fruit.

κιττὸς ὃ μέλας, black-berried ivy,
Hedera Helix

3. 18. 6. several kinds; 3. 18. 9.

roots; 3. 18. 10. fruit,

κιχόριον (κυχόρη), chicory, Cichorium
Intybus

. attachment of leaves;

7. 7. 1. a Adxavov; a class of

piants called ‘ chicory-like’ from

their leaves; 7.7.38. season of

growing; 7. 8. 3. leaves ‘ on the

ground’ and ‘on the stem’ ; etc.;

7.9. 2. long in flower; 7. 10. 3.

flowers borne in succession;

7. 11. 3. root, inflorescence and

seed-vessel described ; Qe LAA.

μήκων ἡ ῥοιάς comp. to κ. τὸ

eer 9.16. 4. leaf of axdvitov


ἐκ ήμο, ᾿ΑΙαον, Alnus glutinosa
‘amphibious’ ; 3.3. 1. tree
of mountain and plain; Sie. 6.
does not always fruit; 3. 4. 2.
time of budding; 3.4. 4. time
of fruiting; 3.6.1. slow grow-
ing (?); 3. 6. 5. roots slender
and ‘plain,’ according to Arca-
dians; 3. 14. ὃ. described;
3.15.1. leaf of καρύα ἡ Ἡρακλεω-
τική Comp.; 4.8.1. grows par-
tially in water.
κλινότροχος (?), Acer Pseudo-platanus
9. 11. 1. a form of σφένδαμνος.
κλύμενον, honeysuckle, Lonicera
etrusca
9. 8. 5. superstition as to time of


cutting; 9. 18. 6-7. properties
of fruit.
κνέωρον (berry Κάἄνίδιος
Daphne Gridium
6. 1. 4. a spineless wild under-


κόκκος),


shrub; 9. 20. 2. berry de-
scribed ; medicinal use and pro-
perties.


κνέωρος ὃ λευκός, Daphne oleoides

6. 2. 2. distinguished from κ. ὁ

μέλας ; Use οὗ τοοῦ.
κνέωρος ὁ μέλας, Vhymelaea hirsuta

1. 10. 4. leaves fleshy; 6. 2. 2. sce

kK. ὃ λευκός.

κνῆκος (= Kk. ὃ ἥμερος = κρόκος ὃ ἀκαν-
θώδης), ΒαΙΠονγογ, Carthamus tinc-
torius etc. (see below)

1. 13. 3. flowers attached above
each seed; 6.1.3. a wild under-
cae has spines on the leaves;

3. a ‘thistle-like’ plant;

6 ie 4. no side-growths; 6. 4. 5.

hree forms distinguished and

described, one cultivated (see

below); 6. 6. 6. seed of ῥόδον
comp.

ἀν τν ἡ ἀγρία, Carthamus leucocaulos

ΤΣ ἘΡ distinguished from κ. ἡ
ages

κνῆκος ἢ ἀγρία (ἑτέρα), Cnicus bene-
dictus

6. 4.5. described.

κνῆκος ἡ ἥμερος, Carthamus tinctorius

0. 5. distinguished from wild

kinds.

Κνίδιος κόκκος, 866 κνέωρον

KolE (= κουκιόφορον), doum-palm,
Hyphaene thebaica

1. 10. 5. reedy leaves; 2. 6.10. a
shrubby palm : Ethiopian.

κοκκυγέα, Wig-tree, Rhus Cotinus

3. 16. 6. described.

κοκκυμηλέα (fruit κοκκύμηλον), plum-
tree, Prunus domestica

1. 10. 10. fruit made of fiesh and
fibre; 1. 11. 1. seed enveloped
in flesh and stone; 1.12.1. taste
of fruit; 1.13.1. flower ‘leafy’;
1.13.3. flower above fruit-case ;
3. 6. 4. very shallow-rooting:
few roots; 3. 6. 5. deep-rooting
according to IJdaeans; etc.;
4, 2. 3. size of fruit of συκῆ 7
Κυπρία comp.; 4.2.5. fruit-stone
of περσέα Comp,


457


INDEX OF PLANTS


κοκκυμηλέα (ἡὴ Αἰγυπτία) (sebesten),
Cordia Myxa
4, 2. 10. described.
κολοιτία (1) (κολουτέα 3. 17. 2.: cf.
3. 17. 3. n.), Cytisus aeolicus

1. 11. 2. tree of Lipari islands:
seeds in a pod; 3. 17. 2. de-
scribed.

κολοιτία (2), Salix cinerea

3.17.3. Idaean: described.

κολοκύντη, gourd, Cucurbita maxima

10 ib. 4. seeds in a row: 1.12. 2;
taste of sap; 1. 138. 3. flower
attached above fruit: 2. 7. 5.
use of dust; 7. 1. 2-3. time of
sowing and οἵ. germination;
7.1. 6. germination; 7.2.9. rcot
described ; 7. 4.1.several kinds;
7.5.5. seed does not keep well.

κολυτέα, bladder-senna, Colutea ar-
boreseens

a 3. 14. 4. described. ]

κόμαρος (fruit μεμαίκυλον 8. 16. 4.),
arbutus, Arbutus Unedo

1. 5. 2. bark readily drops off;
1. 9. 8. evergreen; 3. 16. 4. de-
scribed ; 3. 16. 6. leaf of κοκ-
κυγέα comp.; 5.9. 1. wood makes
good charcoal.

κόμη = τραγοπώγων 7.7.1. g.v.
κόνυζα, Inula spp.

6. 1. 4. a spineless wild under-
shrub; 6. 2. 5. two kinds de-
scribed and compared (‘ male’
and ‘female’) (see below);
7. 10. 1. grows and flowers
entirely in summer.

κόνυζα ἡ ἄρρην, Inula viscosa
63255


κόνυζα ἡ θήλεια, Inula graveolens
6. 2.5.


κορίαννον, coriander, Coriandrum
sativum
1.11.2. seeds naked; 7.1. 2-3.
time of sowing and germination ;
7. 1. 6. germination; 7. 2. 8.
root described; 7. 3. 2. seeds
described; 7. 4. 1. only one
kind; 7. 5. 4. effect of hot
weather ; 7. 5. 5.seed keeps well.
κορυμβίας, 866 κιττὸς ὃ λευκός,
κόρχορος, blue pimpernel, Anagallis
caerulea
7.7.2. ἃ λάχανον:
bitterness.


458


proverbial for


κορωνόπους, hartshorn,
Coronopus
7. 8.3. leaves ‘on the ground.’
κόστος, Saussurea Lappa
9. 7. 3. in list of ἀρώματα
κότινος (? = ἀγριέλαιος), Wild olive,
Olea Oleaster
1. 4. 1. more fruitful than ἐλάα ;
1. 8. 1. many knots ; eA Ge.
more knots than ἐλάα ; 1. 8. 3.
knots regular : knots opposite ;
1. 8. 6. liable to excrescences;
1.14.4. wild form of ἐλάα ; 2.2. 11,
cannot be made into ἐλάα by
cultivation : effect of transplant-
ing and removing top-growth;
DSiISE Ale occasionally changes to
ἐλάα spontaneously; 3. 2. 1.
produces more fruit than éAdo
but ripens less; 3. 6. 2. knots
opposite ; 3. 15. 6. size of fruit
of κράταιγος comp.; 4. 4. 11.
Indian olive between x. and
ἐλάα; 4. 13. 1. longer-lived than
andes 4, 13. 2. story of a very
old «. at Olympia; 4. 14. 12.
suffers less than ἐλάα from
special winds; 5. 2. 4. story of
a tree at Megara; 5d. 3. 3. char-
acter of wood; 5. 4. 2. wood
proof against decay; 5. 4. 4.
wood not eaten by teredon;
5. 7. 8. uses of wood for car-
penter’s tools.
κουκιόφορον (= κόϊξ), doum-palm,
H rere thebaica
2. 6. 9. (not named) described;
4, 2. 7. described.
kpavea (fruit κράνεον 4. 4. 5.),
cornelian cherry, Cornus
mas
1.6.1. core hard and close; 1.8.2.
has more knots than θηλυ-
κράνεια; 3. 2. 1. fruit sweeter
and better ripened in wild than
in cultivated form; 3. 3. 1. tree
of mountain and plain ; oe ids Ὡς
time of budding; a 4. 3. time
of fruiting; 3.6.1. slow-grow-
ing(?); 3. 12. 1-2. described ;
4. 4. 5. fruit of an unnamed
Indian tree (see App. (6)) comp.;
5. 4. 1. more fruitful than @nAv-
kpavea; 5. 6. 4, wood very
strong.


Plantago


-


INDEX OF PLANTS


Kpatatyovos, willow-weed, Polygo-
num Persicaria
9. 18. 6. properties: described.
κράταιγος (= κραταιγών 3. 15. 6.),
Crataegus Heldreichit
3. 15. 6. described: perhaps a
wild form of μεσπίλη.
κρηπίς, ox-tongue, Helminthia echi-
oeides
7. 8. 3. leaves on the stalk.
κριθή, barley, Hordeum sativum
1.6 5. roots numerous; 1. 6. 6.
do.; 1. 11. 5. each seed separ-
ately attached: 2. 2.9. said to
turn sometimes into wheat;
2. 4. 1. wild «. turns into culti-
vated with cultivation ; 4. 4. 9.
India has a corresponding cereal
and a wild form of «.; 8.1.1.
in list of cereals; 8. 1. 8. sown
early, before πυρός ; 8. 1. 5-6.
time of germination in Hellas
(and in Egypt 3); 8. 2. 1. ger-
mination described; 8. 2. 3.
single leaf first appears: roots
described; 8. 2. 6. time of ma-
turing seed; 8. 2. 7. time of
harvest in Hellas and in Egypt;
8. 2. 9. erop very early in island
of Chalkia ; 8.3.2. stem ; 8.4.1-2.
comp. in detail with other
cereals: kinds distinguished
(see below) ; 8.6.1. conditions for
sowing; 8. 6. 4. suitable soil;
8. 6. 5-6. rain hurtful when «x.
is in flower : and when it is ripe ;
8. 7. 1. said to change into atpa
under certain conditions ; 8.7.5.
in many places comes up again
next year; etc.; 8. 8. 2. favour-
able localities ; 8.8.3. αἰγίλωψ (2)
grows specially among «.; 8.9.1.
exhausts the soil, but less
than πυρός : reason; 8. 10. 2.
wheat-rust; 8. 10. 3. effects
of weather; 8. 11. 1. seed
keeps less well than πυρός ;
8.11.3. grain stored without
drying; 8. 11.7. at Babylon
grain jumps on the threshing-
floor: reason; 9. 11. 9. τιθύ-
μαλλος ὁ μυρτίτης gathered at
time οἵ barley-harvest; 9. 12.
ss μήκων ἡ poras grows in fields
of x.


κριθαὶ at aypiac (Indian), Sorghum
halepense
4, 4, 9. can be used for bread.
κριθαὶ at ᾿Αχιλλεῖαι, barley, Hordewm
sativum var.
8. 4. 2. ear close to leaf; 8. 10. 2.
specially liable to wheat-rust.
κριθαὶ αἱ Ἰνδικαί, barley, Hordeum
sativum var.
8 4. 2. branching.
κριθῶν yévus τρίμηνον, barley, Hor-
deum sativum var.
8. 1. 4. sown late.
κρίνον (= κρινωνία, cf. λείριον (1)),
lily, Lilium candidum ete.
1.13.2. has a ‘twofold’ flower ;
2.2.1. propagation from exuda-
tion; etc.; 4.8. 6. an unnamed
Egyptian plant (see App. (18))
comp.; 4.8.9. petals of flower of
λωτός (2) comp.; 6. 6. 3. several
colour forms; 6. 6. 8. do.; a
coronary plant: described : pro-
pagation; 6. 6. 9. leaves of
νάρκισσος (1) comp.; 6. 8. 3.
Besronae time; 9. 1. 4. ef.
δ ὦ, 1.


κρίνον τὸ πορφυροῦν, Turk’s cap lily,
Lilium chalcedonicum
6. 6. 3. (see κρίνον).
κριοί, 866 ἐρέβινθος.
κρόκος, crocus, Crocus spp. etc. (see
below)

1. 6. 6. root fleshy; 1. 6. 7. do.
1. 6. 11. large fleshy root;
7.7.1. leaf of τραγοπώγων comp.;
7. 7. 4. flowering time short:
three kinds mentioned, εὔυσμος,
λευκός, ἀκανθώδης (see below).
7.9.4. root acorn-shaped ; 7.10 2.
flowers in winter; 7.13.1. leaves
described; 7. 13. 2. no stem
except flower-stem.

κρόκος ὃ ἀκανθώδης (= κνῆκος = κ. ἡ
ἥμερος), Safflower, Carthamus
tinctorius

7. 7.4. (see κρόκος).

κρόκος ὃ εὔοσμος, Saffron crocus,
Crocus sativus

4.3.1. abundant in Cyrenaica;
6. 6. 5. sweetest-scented at
Cyrene; 6. 6. 10. a coronary
plant : described: propagation ;
6. 8. 3. flowering time: a wild
(scentless) and ἃ cultivated


459


INDEX OF PLANTS


kind; 7. 7. 4. see cpdxos; 9.7.3.
in list of ἀρώματα.

κρόκος ὃ λευκός, CTOCUS, Crocus can-
cellatus

7.7.4: 7.10. 2. (see κρόκος).

κρομνογήτειον, Onion, Allium Cepa
var.

4. 6. 2. root of φῦκος τὸ πλατύ
comp.

κρόμυον, Onion, Allium Cepa

1.5. 2.‘ bark’ in layers; 1. 6. 7.
root in scales; 1. 6. 9. no side
roots; 1. 10. 7. attachment of
leaves; 1.10.8. leaves hollow;
ts Ls ΒΘ ΘΙ osingle:s \7.e2td.
propagation; 7. 2. 3. growth of
γήθυον and πράσον comp.: off-
sets specially numerous; 7. 8. 4.
seed borne at top; 7. 4. 7-10.
kinds distinguished, Σάρδιον,
Κνίδιον, Σαμοθράκιον, σητάνιον,
σχιστόν, ᾿Ασκαλώνιον : cultiva-
tion and special points of σχισ-
τόν (see below), ᾿Δσκαλώνιον :
further local varieties; 7. 4. 12
formation of roots of σκόροδον
contrasted ; 7. 5.1. likes water;

5. 2. said to dislike rain-
water; 7. 8. 2. stem smooth,
not branched; 7. 9. 4. cf. 1.6.7;
7.13.4. grows in colonies be-
cause of offsets; 9. 15.7. root of
μῶλυ Comp.

κρόμνον τὸ σχιστόν, shallot, Allium
Cepa var.

7. 4. 7-10. distinguished from
other varieties of κρόμνυον : cul-
tivation.

κρότων, castor-oil plant, Ricinus
communis

1.10. 1. leaves change shape with
age of plant; 3.18. 7. do.

κύαμος, bean, Vicia Faba

3. 13. 3. size of fruit of κέρασος
comp.; 3.15.3. fruit of τέρμινθος
comp.; 3.17.6 size of berry of
ἄμπελος (2) comp.; 4. 3. 1. size
of fruit of λωτός (4) comp.;
7. 8. 1. length of flowering
of @kioyv comp.; 8 1. 1. in
list of pulses; 8. 1. 3-4, sown
early, but can be sown late;
8. 1. 5. time of germination:
very slow; 8. 2. 1. germination
described; 8. 2. 8. comes up


460


with several leaves: roots and
side-growths contrasted with
other pulses; 8. 2. 5. flowering
time; 8. 2. 6. time of maturing
seed ; 8.3.1. leaf; 8.3.2. stem;
8. 5. 1. more than one kind:
white form sweetest; 8. 5. 4.
attachment of seed; 8.6.1. rain
not beneficial after sowing;
8. 6. 5. likes water when in
flower, but not later; 8. 7. 2.
makes ground fertile for épé-
βινθος ; 8. 8. 6. causes etc. of
x. becoming ‘ cookable’ or ‘ un-
cockable’; 8.9.1 improves the
soil (cf. 8.7. 2.); 8. 10. 5. in-
fested by ives; 8. 11. 1. seed
does not keep; 8. 11. 3. seed
keeps well in some localities.
κύαμος (ὃ Αἰγύπτιος), Nelumbium spe-
ciosum
4. 8. 7-8 described; 4. 8. 9. stalk,
leaves and growth of fruit of
λωτός (2) comp.
κυδώνιος (fruit μῆλον κυδώνιον) (=
στρουθίον (1)), quince, Cydonia
vulgaris
2. 2. 5. produced from seed of
στρούθιον ; 4.8.11. size of root
Of λωτός (2) comp. to μῆλον
κυδώνιον.
κυὶϊξ, ?
7. 18. 9. (in defective sentence):
belongs to τὰ βολβώδη.
κυκλάμινος, cyclamen,
graecum
7.9. 4. root has ‘bark’; 9. 9. 1.
root and juice used; 9. 9. 3. use
in medicine and as charm;
9. 18. 2. leaf of σκορπίος (8)
comp.
κύμινον, Cummin, Cuminum Cymi-


num ο
1.11. 2. seeds naked; 7. 8. 2-3.
seeds described: popular belief
about sowing; 7. 4. 1. several
kinds; 8. 3.5. seed very abun-
dant and small; 8. 6. 1 rain
not beneficial after sowing;
8. 8. 5. a plant parasitic on
root (see App. (25)); 8.10.1.
diseases; 9. 8. 8. cf. 7. 3. 2-3.
κυνόρροδον, dog-rose, Rosa canina
4. 4. 8. an unnamed Indian tree
(cotton plant) comp.


Cyclamen


INDEX OF PLANTS


κυνόσβατος, wild rose, Rosa semper-
VITeNs

3. 18. 4. described; 9. 8. 5. super-

stition as to method of cutting.

κύνωψ, rib-grass, Plantago lanceo-


lata
7.7.3. time of growing: 7.11.2. (Ὁ)
flowers in a spike.
κυπάριττος, cypress, Cupressus
sempervirens
ipepeeteeerect and tall: 1. 5. 3.
wood not fleshy ; 1. 6. 4. shallow


rooting; 1. 6. roots not
branching; 1. 8. 2. ‘male’ has
more knots than ‘female’;


1.9. 1. growth chiefly upwards;
teases. everereen:- 1.10. 4
leaves fleshy; 2. 2, 2. propa-
gation ; 2. 2. 6. seed of ‘female ’
produces ‘ male’ trees; 2.7. 1.
dislikes manure and water;
3. 1. 6. comes up spontaneously
in Crete; 3. 2. ἃ, evidence that
it is really wild (at least ‘male’
form); 3. 2. 6. characteristic of
the Cretan Ida; 3.12 4. bark
of κέδρος (1) comp.; 4.1.3. grows
very high on Cretan mountains ;
4, 3. 1. grows in Cyrenaica;
4.5. 2. abounds in Crete, Lycia,
Rhodes; 4. 18. 12. beer (βρυτός)
made from x.in Egypt; 4,16. 1.
some think topping fatal; 5.3.7.
θύον comp.: images made from
the wood; 5. 4. 1. the ‘ male’
form the more fruitful; 5. 4. 2.
wood proof against decay: an
instance: takes a fine polish;
5. 7. 4. use of wood in house-
building.
κύπειρον, Cyperus rotundus
9. 7. 3. in list of a ἀρώματα.
meres eats, Cyperus longus
5.3..stem very smooth; 1.6.8.
Ξ stout root and also fibrous
roots; 1.8.1. no knots; 1.10. 5.
leaves end in a apn further
described; 4. 8.1. in list of τὰ
λοχμώδη ; 4, 8. 12. leaves of
μαλιναθάλλη comp.; 4.:10. 1. in
list of plants of Take Copais ;
4. 10. 5. described; 4. 10. 6.
grows both on land and in
water: grows on the float-
ing islands of Lake Copais;


4.11.12. foliage of some κάλαμοι
comp.
KUTLVOS, séé poa,
κύτισος (1), laburnum, Laburnum
vulgare
1.6.1. core hard and close; 4. 4. 6.
habit of ἐβένη comp.; 5. 3. 1.
wood of the core very close
and heavy.
κύτισος (2), tree-medick, Medicago
arborea
4, 16. 5. dangerous to trees.
κώμακον, Ailanthus malabarica
9, 7. 2. an Arabian ἄρωμα (i.e.
imported through Arabia:
mixed with other ἀρώματα :


[name also given to fruit of a
different plant].


κώνειον, hemlock, Coniwm

latum
1.5.3. stem fleshy ; 6. 2.9. belongs

to ‘ferula-like’ plants: has a
hollow stem; 7. 6. 4. leaf of
ὀρειοσέλινον comp.; 9.8.3. most
powerful juice from _ root;
9.15.8. localities; 9.16.8. medi-
cal experience ; 9, 16. 9. treat-
ment in Keos; 9. 20. 1. πέπερι
an antidote to x.

Kwvopopos, see [πεύκη ἡ] κωνόφορος


Mmacu-


λάθυρος, Lathyrus sativus
beh Ie eat ἐς ΘΙ υοΣ stem ;
8. 10. 5. infested by ‘ WOrms.’
λακάρη (λάκαρα) (= κέρασος ? Mace-
donian name), bird-cherry, Pru-
nus avium
3. 1. a tree of mountain and
‘plain: 3. 6. 1. slow- -growing (?).
λάπαθος (λάπαθον), monk’s rhubarb,
Rumex Patientia
1, 6. 6. root single; 7. 1. 2. time
of sowing; 7. 2. 7-8. root
described; 7. 4. 1. only one
kind; 7. 6.1. wild form distin-
guished (see below) ; Ὅν | eg)
leaf of πάνακες τὸ Χειρώνειον
comp.
λάπαθον τὸ ἄγριον, dock, Rumex con-
glomeratus
de 6. 1. distinguished from A. τὸ
ἥμερον ; 7.7.2. ἃ λάχανον ; needs
cooking.


461


INDEX OF PLANTS


λειμωνία, "(3 = σκόλυμος 6. 4. 3.),
golden thistle, Scolymus  his-
panicus

6. 4. 3. a thistle-like’ plant:


leaves spinous.
λείριον (1) (Ξε κρίνον g.v.) Madonna
lily, Lilium candidum
3. 13. 6. flower of ἀκτῆ has the
heavy scent of A.; ὃ. 18. 11.
scent of flower of σμῖλαξ (2)
comp.; 9.16.6.(?) leaf of ἐφήμερον
comp
λείριον Yo), narcissus,
spp. (see below)
1. 13. 2. flower consists of one
‘leaf’ only partly divided.
λείριον, polyanthus narcissus, Nar-
cissus Tazeita
6. 8.1. flowering time; 7. 18. 4.
grown from seed.
λείριον (τὸ ἕτερον 6.8.3.) (Ξε νάρκισσος
(1) 6.6.9.), narcissus, Narcissis
serotinus
. 6. 9. a coronary plant: de-
scribed ; flowering time.
λέμνα, water chickweed, Callitriche
verna
4. 10.1.in list of plants of Lake


Copais.
milk-thistle, Silybum


λευκάκανθα,
MAriAanUum
6. 4. 3. a ‘ thistle-like ’ plant.
λεύκη, abele, Populus alba
1. 10. 1. leaves change shape with
age of tree: leaves inverted
in summer; 3. 1. 1. propaga-
tion; 38. 3. 1. tree of moun-
tain and plain; 3. 4. 2. time
of budding; 3. 6, 1. quick-
growing; 3. 14. 2. described;
Sse Chee Ls NOME sided. L,
likes wet ground; 4. 2. 8
stem of συκῆ ἡ Κυπρία comp.;
4.8.1. grows partially in water;
4, 8. 2. scarce on Nile; 4. 10. 2
flower of ἐλαίαγνος comp. ;
4,13. 2. shorter-lived by water;
4. 16. 3. instance of ἃ tree
which grew again after falling
down; 5. 9. 4. wood makes an
evil smoke when burnt for char-


Narcissus


λευκύϊον (1) (= ἴον τὸ λευκόν = ἰωνία
ἡ λευκή), gilliflower, Matthiola
INCANA


462


λευκόϊον (2), Snowdrop, Galanthus
nivalis

7. 13. 9. (in defective sentence)
belongs to τὰ βολβώδη.

AtLavertis

9.9 5. medicinal use; 9.11.10-11.
two kinds (see below).

λιβανωτὶς ἡ ἄκαρπος, Lactuca graeca

9. 11. 10-11. described: medi-
cinal use: habitat.

λιβανωτὶς ἡ κάρπιμος, (fruit Kaypv
9.11. 10.), Lecokia cretica

9. 11. 10. described: medicinal
use: habitat : prevents moth in
clothes. ,

λιβανωτός, (guM λίβανος, frankin-
cense: also λιβανωτός 9. 4. 4--9.
etc.), frankincense-tree, Bos-
wellia Carteri

4, 4,14. in list of oriental ἀρώματα;
9. 1. 6. time of tapping; 9. 4. 1.
collection of gum; ae a
Arabian: described : habitat ;
9.4.3. another account; 9.4.4-10.
accounts of travellers; 9.11.3
scent of mavaxes τὸ Ἡράκλειον
comp.; 9.11. 10. scent of root
Of λιβανωτὶς ἡ κάρπιμος COMP.;
9. 20. 1. an antidote to κώνειον.

λίνον, flax, Linum usitatissimum

3. 18. 3, seeds oily; 8.7.1. said
to change into ape...

λίνον πύρινον

9..18. 6. growth x Kpatatyovos

comp.
λινόσπαρτον, Spanish broom, Spar-
tium junceum

1. 5. 2. bark in layers.

λυχνίς, rose-campion, Lychnis coron-
aria

6. 8. 3. a coronary plant: flower-
ing time.

(λωτός)

7. 15. 8. many plants called by
this name which have nothing
in common but the name.

λωτός (1), nettle-tree, Celtis aus-
tralis

1. 5. 3. wood not fleshy; 1. 6. 1.
core hard and close; 1. 8. 2.
few knots; 4. 2. 5. colour of
wood of περσέα comp.; 4. 2. 9.
wood of olive of Thebaid comp.;
4. 2. 12. wood of an unnamed
tree (ἢ κοκκυμηλέα ἡ Atyumria)


INDEX OF PLANTS


comp.; 5. 3. 1. wood very close
and heavy; 5. 3. 7. images
made from the wood; 5. 4. 2
wood proof against decay:
turns black when old; 5. 5. 4.
core not obvious but exists;
5. 5. 6. treatment of core for
making door-hinges; 5. 8. 1.
grows in some places exception-
ally fine.
λωτός (2) (aquatic) (root κόρσιον),
Nile water-lily, Nymphaea stel-
laia
4. 8. 9-11. described.
λωτός (3) (herb), trefoil, Trifoliwm
fragiferum
7. 8. 3. leaves ΟΠ the stem’;
7. 13. 5. seed sometimes takes
two years to germinate.
λωτός (4) (Libyan tree), Zizyphus
Lotus
43.1. common in Libya; 4.3.1—2
described; 4. 3. 4. further de-
scribed.
λωτός (5) (aromatic) (= μελίλωτος),
Trigonelia graeca
9. 7. 8. in list of ἀρώματα.


μαγύδαρις (= ἱππομάραθον), Prangos
ferulacea
1. 6.12. root most characteristic


part; 6. 3. 7. distinct from
διλέιον: described: distribu-
ion.


[6. 3. 4. name also given to seed
of σίλφιον].


μαδωνάϊς (Ξε νυμφαία 9.13.1.), yellow
water-lily. Nuphar lutewm
μαλάχη (1), mallow, Lavatera ar-


borea
1. 3. 2. a herb which becomes
tree-like under cultivation;


1.9. 2. do.; 4. 15. 1. outer bark
can be stripped; 9. 18. 1. leaf
fruit and taste of stem of ἀλθαία
comp.
μαλάχη (2), cheese-flower, Malva
silvestris
7. 7. 2. a λάχανον ; needs cooking;
7. 8. 1. stem ‘on the ground’
μαλάχη (3) ἡ ἀγρία (= ἀλθαία 9,15.5.),
ΒΕ μη θδιίου, Althaea  offici-
nalis


μαλιναθάλλη (= μνάσιον), Cyperus
esculentus
4, 8. 12. described.
μανδραγόρας (1), mandrake, Mandra-
gora officinarum
9, 8. 8. superstition as to gather-
ing; 9. 9. 1. root and juice
used: medicinal use of leaf and
root.
pavdpayopas (2), ? deadly night-
shade, Atropa Belladonna
6. 2. 9. belongs to ‘ferula-like’
plants: has hollow stem: fruit
described.
μάραθον, fennel, Foeniculum vulgare
1. 11. 2. seeds naked; 1. 12. 2.
taste of sap; 4.6.3. φῦκος τὸ
τριχόφυλλον comp.; 6.1. 4. aspine-
less wild under-shrub: belongs
to ‘ferula-like’ plants; 6. 2. 9.
do.: has a fibrous stem; 7. 3. 2.
seeds described; 9. 9. 6. leaf of
Gaia comp.
μάσπετον, 866 σίλφιον
μελαγκρανίς (= σχοῖνος ὁ κάρπιμος
4. 12. 1.), bog-rush, Schoenus
RIGIICANS
μελάμπυρον (μελάμπυρος),  Neslia
paniculata
8. 4. 6, infests πυρὸς ὁ Σικελός :
contrasted with aipa; 8. 8. 3.
(μελάμπυρος ὃ Tlovtixds), speci-
ally affects crops of πυρός.
μελία, Manna-ash, /raxinus Ornus
3. 3. 1. tree of mountain and
plain; 3. 4. 4. time of fruiting;
3.6. 1. slow growing (?); ὃ. 6. δ.
roots numerous matted and
run deep, according to Arca-
dians; 3. 11. 3-4. described:
two kinds, see βουμέλιος ; 3.17.1.
leaf of φελλός comp.; 4. 5. 3.
grows.-in. Pontus; .4.° 8. 2.
common on Nile; 5.1. 2. time
of cutting timber; 5. 6. 4. wood
‘moist’: used for elastic bed-
steads; 5.7.3. wood used for
bent-wood work: use in ship-
building; 5. 7.8. uses of wood
for carpenter’s tools.
μελίλωτος (= λωτός (5)), Trigonella
graeca
7. 15. 3. one of the many diverse
plants called λωτός.
μέλινος, (in other authors μελίνη:


463


INDEX OF PLANTS


see 8. 1. 1. n.), Italian millet,
Setaria italica
8. 1. 4. sown later than cereals
and pulses; 8. 2. 6. time of
maturing seed; 8. 3. 2. stem;
87-3. 13: flower; 8.7. 3. needs
little water: comp with κέγχρος.
μελισσόφυλλον, balm, Melissa offici-
nalis
6. 1. 4. a spineless wild under-
shrub.
μεμαίκυλον, 866 κόμαρος


μεσπίλη (fruit μέσπιλον) (= μ. ἡ
σατάνειος), medlar, Mespilus
germanica


3. 12. 5-6. described: three kinds
(Idaean account, see below);
3. 13. 1. leaf of κέρασος comp.;
8. 15. 6. leaf, bark and taste of
fruit of κράταιγος comp.; 3.17.5.
flower of συκῆ ἡ ᾿Ιδαία comp.
also taste of fruit; 4.2.10, fruit
of κοκκυμηλέα comp.; 4 ὃ. 12.
μαλιναθάλλη comp.; 4. 14. 10.
fruit gets worm-eaten.
μεσπίλη ἡ ἀνθηδονοείδης, hawthorn,
Crataegus Oxyacantha
8.12. 5. described.
μεσπίλη ἡ ἀνθήδων, oriental thorn,
Crataegus orientaliss
3.12. 5. described.
μεσπίλη ἡ σατάνειος, medlar, Mes-
pilus germanica
3. 12. 5. described.


Μηδικὴ (πόα), lucerne, Medicago
sativa
8.7.7. destroyed by sheep sleep-
ing on it.


μήκων, poppy etc., Papaver spp. etc.
(see below)

1. 9. 4. evergreen; 1. 11. 2. seeds
ina vessel; 4.8. 7. size of flower
of κύαμος ὁ Αἰγύπτιος COMPp.;
4. 8. 10. size of ‘ head’ of λωτός
(2) comp.; 4.10.3. σίδη comp. (3);
9, 8. 2. juice of ‘head’ collected ;
9, 12. 3-5. kinds (see below)
having nothing in common but
the name; 9. 16. 9. medical
experience; 9. 20. 1. seeds of
one kind of πέπερι comp.

μήκων ἡ Ἡρακλεία (= Ἡρακλεία),
Silene venosa

9, 12. 5. described:

use,


404


medicinal


μήκων ἡ κερατῖτις, horned poppy,
Glaucium flavum var. Serpierit
9.12.3. described : medicinal use ;
habitat.
μήκων ἡ μέλαινα, Papaver Rhoeas
9. 11. 9. mixed with τιθύμαλλος ὃ
, μυρτίτης to make a medicine.
μήκων (ἡ ὀπώδης), Opium poppy,
Papaver somniferum
1, 12. 2: juice.
μήκων ἡ ῥοιάς, Papaver hybridum
9. 12. 4. described: edible: habi-
tat: medicinal use.
μηκώνιον (= τιθύμαλλος 9. 8. 2.),
spurge, Euphorbia Peplus
9. 8. 2. collection of juice.
μηλέα (fruit μῆλον), apple, Pyrus
Malus
1. 3. 3. a tree whose stem is not
single; 1. 5. 2. bark smooth:
bark readily drops off; 1. 6. 1.
core fleshy; 1. 6. 3. few roots;
1. 6. 4. shallow rooting; 1. 8, 4.
knots peculiar; 1. 9. 1. trunk
divides low down; 1. 10. 4.
(?) leaves fleshy; 1. 10. 5.
leaves oblong; 1. 11. 4. seeds
all together in a single case;
1.11. 5. seeds in a membrane;
1. 12. 1. taste of fruit; 1. 12. 2.
taste of sap; 1. 13. 1. flower
‘leafy’; 1. 18. 3. flower above
fruit-case; 1. 14. 1. bears on
last year’s ;wood: some kinds
bear also on new wood; 1.14. 4.
many cultivated forms; 2. 1. 2.
propagation; 2. 2. 4. degene-
rates from seed; 2. 2. 5. seed
produces wild form; 2. 5. 3.
grafting ; 2.5.6. trees should be
planted fairly close together;
2. 6. 6. some dates round like
μῆλα; 2. 8. 1. apt to shed im-
mature fruit; 3. 3. 1. tree of
mountain and plain; 3.3.2. has
better fruit and timber in low- ©
lands; 3. 4. 2. time of budding ;
8. 4. 4. time of fruiting; 3.11.5.
mountain and lowland forms
compared; 4. 5. 3. abundant in
Pontus; 4.5.4. grows on Mount —
Tmolus and Mysian Olympus;
4. 1. 7. size of fruit of δένδρον τὸ
ἐριόφορον comp.; 4. 10. 2. leaf of
€Aaiayvos comp. (?); 4. 10. 3.


4


INDEX OF PLANTS


size of flower of σίδη comp.;
4. 13. 2. short-lived, especially
certain kinds; 4. 13. 3.- after
decaying shoots again from
same stock; 4. 14. 2. apt to get
wormh- eaten; 4. 14. 10 fruit
gets worm-eaten ; 4,14. 12. un-
injured by special winds; 4.16.1.
survives splitting of stem; 5.3.3.
character of wood; 5. 4. 1. the
less fruitful trees produce more
solid wood; 6. 4. 9 ‘head’ of
ἰξίνη Comp. ‘to μῆλον.
μηλέα ἡ γλυκεῖα, Pyrus Malus var.?
4, 13. 2. specially short- lived ;
4.14. 7. has specially weak con-
stitution; a form of μ. ἡ ἐαρινή; :
9. 11. δ. leaf of στρύχνος ὁ ὑπ-
νώδης comp.
μηλέα ἡ ἐαρινή, Pyrus Malus var.?
2. 1. 3. propagation ; 4. 7. 7. size
of cotton-bearing vessel comp.;
4 18. 2. specially short-lived ;
4, 14. 7. has weak constitution ;
(cf. μ. ἡ γλυκεῖα).
μηλέα ἡ ὀξεῖα, Pyrus Malus var.?
4,.13. 2. comparatively long- lived.
μηλέα ἡ Περσική (Μηδική) citron, Cit-
rus Medica
1. 11. 4. seeds in a row; 1.13.4
only pistillate flower. fruitful ;
4, 4. 2. peculiar to Media and
Persia: described.
μῆλον τὸ Κυδώνιον, see Κυδώνιος
μήλωθρον (= ἄμπελος (4)), bryony,
Bryonia cretica
3.18.11. fruit of σμῖλαξ (2) comp.;
6. 1. 4. a spineless wild under-
shrub.
ea) Limnanthemum nymphoi-


es
4, 10. 1-2. in list of plants of
Lake Copais; 4. 10. 4. requires
further investigation.
μῖλαξ (= σμῖλαξ (2)), smilax, Smilax


aspera
1.10. 5. leaf described; 1.10. 6.
leaf with spinous projections;
6. 8. 3. flower used in garlands.
μίλος, yew, Taxus baccata
1 3. @vergreen; 3. 3. 1. a
mountain tree; 3. 3. 3. ever-
green; 3. 4.2. time of budding;
3. 4. 5. time of flowering and
fruiting; 3. 4. 6. time of fruit-


THEOPH. VOL. II.


ing; 3. 6. 1. slow growing (?)
3. 10. 2. described; 4.1.3. likes
shade; 5. 7. 6. uses of wood.
piven (μίνθα) (= ἡδυόσμον), green
mint, Mentha viridis
2. 4. 1. σισύμβριον turns into μ
unless often transplanted ; 6.7.2.
said by some to have no fruit.
μνάσιον (= μαλιναθάλλη), Cyperus
esculentus
. 8. 2. used for food in Egypt;
4, 8. 6. described.
μυάκανθος (= κεντρομυρρίνη), but-
cher’s broom, Ruscus aculeatus
6. 5. 1. in list of spinous plants
which have leaves as well as
spines.
μύκης, mushroom etc., Fungus
1.1. 11. has not all the ‘ parts’ of
a plant; 1. 5. 3. stem very
smooth; 1. 6. 5. no roots;
3. 7. 6. grows on roots of trees.


[4. 7. 2. marine growths which
turn to stone] ;
[4.14. 3. name given to a disease
of ἐλάα].
μυόφονον (= ἀκόνιτον-- θηλύφονον =
σκορπίος (3)), wolf’s bane, Aconi-
tum Anthora
6. 1. 4. a spineless wild under-
shrub: belongs to ‘ferula-like’
plants; 6: τῶ, ὍΣ, 40. shaswa
fibrous stem.
μυρίκη (1), tamarisk, Tamarix te-
trandra
1. 4. 3. ‘amphibious’; 1. 9. 3.
evergreen; 1. 10. 4. leaves
fleshy; 3.3. 1. tree of mountain
and plain; 3. 3. 3. evergreen 3
8, 16. 4. bark of κόμαρος COMP.;
4,2. 6.(?) leaf of βάλανος comp.;
4. 6. ie leaf of δρῦς (7) comp ;
6. 2.1. leaf of κνέωρος ὁ μέλας
pe le 6. 4. 8. flower of χαμαι-
λέων comp.
μυρίκη (2), tamarisk, Tamarix artic-
ulata
5.4.8. Arabian : wood very strong.
μυρρίνη (μύρρινὸς, μύρτος) (fruit μύρ-
τον), myrtle, Myrtus communis
. 3. 3. effect of not pruning;
Ἐς 9. 8, evergreen; 1. 10. 2.
leaves close-set and Opposite ;
1. 10. 4. leaves narrow; 1.10.8.


465


H H


INDEX OF PLANTS


leaves regular; 1. 12. 1. taste
of fruit; 1. 13. 3. flower above
{ruit-case; 1. 14. 1. bears on
last year’s wood: flowers borne
on new wood not fertile ; 1.14.4.
many cultivated forms; 2. 1. 4.
propagation ; 2.2.6. sometimes
improves from seedy: Zid: 6:
propagation: trees should be
planted close together; 2. 7 2.
needs much pruning; 2. 7. 3.
requires pungent manure and
much water; 3.6 2. formation
of buds; 3. 12. 4. Jruit of κέδρος
(1) comp.; ἡ ΘΙ ΒΡ. peat or πύξος
comp:; 9. 10. 4. ‘ows of κό-
papos comp.; 4. 2. 6. (3) leaf of
βάλανος comp.; 4. 8. 1. arrange-
ment of fruit of λωτός (4) comp.;
4.5. 3. does not thrive in cold
regions; 4. 5. 4. grows in Pro-
pontis; 5. 8. 3. grows in low-
land parts of Latium: and on
Circeian promontory (a dwarf
kind); 6. 8. 5. very fragrant
in Egypt; 9. 11. 9. leaf of τιθύ-
μαάλλος ὃ μυρτίτης comp.

μῶλυ, Moly, Allium nigrune

9. 15. 7. localities in Arcadia:

said to be like the μ. of Homer :
described : use as charm.


vaipov ?
9. 7. 3. in list οἵ ἀρώματα.
varv, White mustard, Brassica alba
1. 12. 1. taste of fruit 5.7.4, 3 5
time of sowing and of germina-
tion; 7. 2. seeds described ;
7,5. 5. seed keeps well.
νάρδον, spikenard, Nardostachys Ja-
tamansi
9.7.2. an Indian ἄρωμα; 9. 7. 3.
in list of ἀρώματα; 9.7.4. an
unnamed Thracian plant (see
App. (25)) comp.
ναρθηκία (=vapeyé see 6.2.7.), ferula,
λογία communis
6.1.4. spineless: belongs to ‘ ferula-
like, plants; 6. 2. 7. perhaps
differs only i in size from νάρθηξ;
6.2.8. described.
vapOné (= ναρθηκία see 6, 2.7.), ferula,
Ferula communis
1. 2. 7. flesh turns to wood; 1.6.1.
core fleshy; 1. 6.2. core mem-


466


branous; 6.2.7. perhaps differs
only ‘in’ size from ναρθηκία:
6. 2. 8. described; 6..8.1. stalk
of σίλφιον comp.; 9. 9. 6. stem
of θαψία comp.; 9. 10. 1. leaf of
both ἐλλέβοροι comp. by some ;
9. 16. 2. δίκταμνον kept ἐν νάρ-
θηκι.
νάρκισσος (1) (= λείριον (2) 6. 6. 9.),
narcissus, Narcissus serotinus
6.6.9. a coronary plant: described;
7.13.1. leaves described ; 7.13. 2.
no stem except the flower- stem ;
7. 13. 5-7. stem appears before
leaves, viz. flower-stem: se-
quence described and comp.
with σκίλλα. ἢ
νάρκισσος (2), pheasant’s eye nar-
cissus, Narcissus poeticus
ae ae 1. flowering time.
νά
θ᾽ ee 3. in list pes ἀρώματα.
(νηπενθές) -- μήκων ἡ ὑπώδης, Opium
poppy, Papaver somniferum.
. 15. 1. mythical: supposed
effects.
νυμφαία (=padmvais 9.13.1.), yellow
water-lily, Nuphar luteum
9. 13. 1. fragrant: habitat and
localities : leaf described : medi-
cinal use: called μαδωνάϊς in
Boeotia.


E(pis, gladwyn, Iris foetidissima
8. τ ay ieee as to gathering.
ξίφιον (= ξίφος 7.18.1. = φάσγανον),
corn-flag, Gladiolus segetuwm
6. 8. 1. flowering time; 7. 13. 2.
flower-stem not τῶ only stem.
ξίφος (= ξίφιον 7. 13. 1.= φάσγανον),
corn-flag, Gladiolus segetum.


oyxvn, Wild pear, Pyrus communis
> Var. Pyraster
. 5. 6. trees should be planted —
μον ὅν, far apart. :
én Soin), sorb, Sorbus domestica a
2.2 10. becomessterile in a warm
‘place; 2. 7.7. ‘correcting’ the


-


INDEX OF PLANTS


comp.; 3. 12. 6-9. described ;
3.15. 4. leaf of τέρμινθος comp.
οἰνάνθη (1), drop-wort, Spiraea L’ili-
pendula
6. 6. 11. a coronary plant: grown
from seed; 6. 8. 1-2. flowering
time : flower described.
pivavOy (2) ἡ ἀγρία, wild vine, Vitis
silvestris
59. 6. ᾿ἀθραγένη comp.
ἶσος (=ayvos), withy, Vitex Agnus-


castus
δι. 18. 1-2. has two forms, ‘ white’
end: *black’; 6, 2 2. "used for


tying-up.

ADT XOLVOS, 866 σχοῖνος ὃ OA,

λύρα, (cultural variety of ζειά), rice-
wheat, Triticum dicoccum

8. 1. 3. sown early; 8.4. 1. comp.

in detail with other cereals;
8. 9 2. does not exhaust the
soil much: reason.

ὑνοθήρας (= dadvy ἡ ἀγρία), Oleander,
Nerium Oleander


9. 19. 1. effect on ‘mind’: de-


scribed.
ὑνόπυξος, Onopordon illyricum
4. 3. a ‘ thistle-like ’ plant.
ὑνοχειλές, bugloss, Echiwm diffusum
7.10. 3. flowers borne in succes-
sion.
νωνίς, rest-harrow, Ononis anti-
quorum
6. 1. 3. has leaves as well as
spines: a wild under-shrub;
6. 5. 1. in list of spinous plants
which have leaves as well as
spines; 6. 5. 3-4. described:
troublesome to farmers.
EvdxavOos, cotoneaster, Cotoneaster
Pyracantha
1. 9. 8. evergreen; 3. 3.1. tree of
mountain and plain; 3. 3. 3.
evergreen; 3. 4, 2. time of bud-
ding; 3.4. 4. time of fruiting ;
4.4.2. thorns of μηλέα ἡ ἹΤερσική
ee: . 6.8 8. fruit used in gar-


Eun (8a), beech, Fagus silvatica
doubt whether it has a
Paver: oe.  χροΐϑ few
slender and ‘plain’ according to
Arcadians: shallow - rooting ; 5
8. 10. 1. described; 3. 11. 5.
mountain and lowland forms


compared; 5.1. 2. time of cut-
ting timber; 5.1.4. do.; 5.4, 4.
wood dces not decay in water ;
5. 6. 4. wood ‘ moist ’: used for
elastic bedsteads; 5.7.2. wood
used for keel etc.of small vessels;
5. 7. 6. other uses of wood;
5. 8. 3. grows very fine in low-
land part of Latium,
ὀξύκεδρος (= κέδρος (1) 3. 12. 3.),
prickly cedar, Juniperus Oxy-
cedrus
3. 12. 3. some, who call ἄρκευθος a
κέδρος, distinguish κέδρος (1) as
ὀξύκεδρος,
ὑπιτίων,
7, te. 9. Gn defective sentence)
belongs to τὰ βολβώδη.
ὑποβάλσαμον, 866 βάλσαμον.
ὀρειοσέλινον, parsley, Petroselinum
sativum
7. 6. 8-4. distinguished from other
forms of σέλινον : medicinal use.
ὀρειπτελέα, Wych-elm, Ulmus mon-


tana
3. 14.1. distinguished from πτελέα.
ὀρίγανον (optyavos) (= ὁ. ἡ μέλαινα),
marjoram, Origanuwm viride etc.
1.9. 4. evergreen (partly); 1.12.1.
taste of fruit; 6. 1. 4. a spine-
less wild under-shrub; 6. 2. 3.
two forms, ‘ black’ and ‘ white’
(see below): seed conspicuous:
not, like θύμος, particular as to
situation ; 7. 1. 3. time of ger-
mination ; 7. 1. 6. germination ;
7.20 1, spropagation ; 1... 1.
wiid form distinguished.
opiyavos ἡ λευκή, Marjoram, Ori-
ganum heracleoticum
6. 2. 3. distinguished from ὁ. ἡ
μέλαινα.
ὀρίγανος ἡ μέλαινα (-- ὀρίγανον), Mar-
joram, Origanum viride
6. 2. 3. distinguished from ὁ. ἡ
λευκή
ὅρμινον, τῆν ὰ Horminum
8. 1. 4. sown later than cereals
and pulses; 8. 7. 8. doubtful if
eaten green by animals: de-
cee sown at same time as


one
ὀροβάγχη, ΕΤΕΕΝ Cuscuta europaea
8. 8. 4. grows specially among


reason: ἀπαρίνη comp.


407


.


ὅροβοι:


ἘΠ cbr


INDEX OF PLANTS


pear bitter vetch, Ervum Ervilia
2. 4, 2. more digestible if sown in
spring; 7.5. 4. used to prevent
ψύλλαι in padavis; 7.6.3. size of
fruit of ἱπποσέλινον comp.: 8.1.4.
sown both early and late; 8.2.5.
flowering time; 8. 3. 2. stem;
8. 5. 1. more than one kind:
white form sweetest; 8. 5. 2.
seeds not in compartments;
8. 5. 3. shape of pod; 8. 8. 4.
ὀροβάγχη grows specially among
O2482 102 ba pests 5: ΠΣ
seed keeps well; 8. 11. 6. do.
specially in hill- country ; + 6-202.
shape of one kind Of πέπερι
(fruit) comp.

ὄρτυξ (Ξε στελέφουρος according to
some, 7. 11. 2.), plantain, Plan-
tago Lagopus.

Πρ τ, rice, Oryza sativa
4.4. 10. described.

ὄρχις (1) (μέγας), orchis, Orchis pap-
alionacea

9.18.3. properties: leaf and stalk.


opxis (2) (μικρός), orchis, Ovrchis
longicruris

9. 18.3. properties: leaf and stalk.

el Ἐς (ootpvis) (ὑστρυίς = ὄστρυς

3.10.3.), hop-hornbeam, Ostrya
carpinifolia

1.8. ‘male’ has more knots


‘than ‘female’ >. 32 ΘΝ tree of
mountain and plain; 3. 6. 1.
slow-growing (2); 3. 10. 3. de-
scribed.
ὄστρυς (= ὀστρύα 3.10.3.), hop-horn-
beam, Ostrya carpinifolia
3.10 3. described.
oviyyor, Colocasia antiquorum
1.1.7. ‘fruit’ underground; 1.6.9.
grows underground; {58:11}
described.


πάδος (3 --- πηδός (?)), Prunus Mahaleb
4.1. 8. likes shade.
παιωνία (-- γλυκυσίδη 9. 8. 6.), peony,
Paeonia officinalis
9. 8. 6. superstition as to time of
digging.
παλίουρος (1), Christ’s thorn, Pali-
urus australis
1.3: 1. atypical “shrub ‘; 1.'8:'2.
becomes tree-like; 1.5.3. thorns
on wood; 1. 10. 6. leaf with


468


spinous projections; 1. 10. 7.
stem presently spinous; 3. ὃ. 1.
tree of mountain and plain;
3. 4. 2. time of budding; 3.4.4.
time of fruiting; 3.11. 2. fruit
of σφένδαμνος comp.; 3. 18. 3.
kinds: described; 4. 8. 1. to
some extent grows in marshes;
4.12.4. to some extent aquatic:
6.1.3. has spines on the shoots.

παλίουρος (2) (6 Αἰγύπτιος), Zizyphus
gic Christi

4. 3. 1-2. common in Libya;

4.3.3. described : distinguished
from 7. of Hellas.

πανάκεια (= πάνακες TO bape
Opopanax hispidus

9. 15. 7. localities.

πάνακες (τὸ Σύριον 7.9.7.2: 9. 10.128

(juice χαλβάνη (ὃ) 9.7.2: 9.9.2.,


see note), all-heal, Ferulago
gaibanifera
9. 1. 2. in list of plants whose


juice is a gum; 9. 7. 2. Syrian:
χαλβάνη made from 7.; 9. 7. 3.
in list of ἀρώματα; 9. ὁ, 1. root
fruit and juice used ; 9. 9.
uses for medicine and perfume;
9. 11. 1. kinds (see below);
9. 11. 4. two further kinds, one
fine-leaved, the other not:
medicinal use. -
mavakes τὸ ᾿Ασκληπίειον, Ferula no-
dosa
9. 8. 7. ne, ταν τ as to gather-
ing; 9.1 . described : medi-
cinal ah
πάνακες TO Ἡράκλειον (= πανάκεια),
Opopanax hispidus
9. 11. 1. in list of kinds of 7
9. 11. 3. described: ἘΣ τς
use.
πάνακες τὸ Χειρώνειον, elecampane,
Inula Helenium
9. 11. 1. described: habitat
medicinal use.
παντάδουσα, star-thistle, Centaur
Calcitrapa
6. 5. 1. in list of spinous plan
which have leaves as well
spines.
πάπυρος (stalk πάπυρος), papyr
Cyperus Papyrus
4, 8. 2. useful for food in Egyp
4. 8. 3-4. described: us


F


-


INDEX OF PLANTS


4. 8. 5. stem of σάρι comp;
6. 3. 1. belongs to ‘ ferula-like ’
plants.
παρθένιον, bachelor’s buttons, Pyre-
thrum Parthenium
7.7.2. a λάχανον : needs cooking
πέζις, bullfist, Lycoperdon Bovista
1. 6. 5. no roots.
πελεκῖνος, axe-weed, Securigera Coro-
nilla
S27 8i, 3: grows specially among
ἀφάκη : Rame explained.
πενταπετές (--πεντάφυλλον 9.13. 5.),
cinquefoil, Potentilla reptans
9. 13. 5. described.
πεντάφυλλον (Ξε πενταπετές 9. 18. 5.),
cinquefoil, Potentilla reptans.
(πέπερι), pepper, Piper nigrum
9. 20. 1. a fruit: two forms: de-
scribed: properties: antidote
to κώνειον: 9. 20. 2... .5]Ζ6 of
Kr ίδιος κόκκος COMP.
περδίκιον, ‘ partridge-piant,’ Polygo-
num maritimum
1S Seas ta large fleshy roots.
περιττός (? στρύχνος ὃ περιττός) (=
στρύχνος ὃ μανικός 9. 11. 6.),
thorn- apple, DaturaStramonium,
περσέα (= πέρσιον), Mimusops Schim-


pert

3. 3.5. not fruitful everywhere;

4. 2. 1. peculiar to Egypt;

4. 2.5. described; 4. 2. 8. com-
mon in Thebaid.

πέρσιον (= περσέαν), Mimusops Schim-


peri
2. 2. 10. effects of climate.
πευκέδανον, sulphur-wort, Peuceda-
num officinale

9. 14. 1. how long drug will keep;
9. 15. 1. grows in Arcadia;
9. 20. 2. properties of root: use
in medicine: grows in Arcadia.

πεύκη, fir, Pinus spp.

1. 3. 6. refuses cultivation; 1.5.1.
erect and tall; 1.5.4. wood has
many knots; 1.6.1. core woody ;
1.6.3. root single; 1. 6.5. roots
not branching; 1. 8. 1. many
knots; 1. 9. 3. evergreen (the
wild and one cultivated kind);
1. 10. 4. leaves like teeth of
comb (?); 1.10.6. leaf spinous at
tip; 1. 12. 1. taste of fruit;
1. 12. 2. taste of sap; 2. 2. 2.


propagated only by seed; 2.5.2.
instance of very long roots;
3. 1. 2. grows only from seed:
3. 2. 8. evidence that it is really
wild; 8. 3. 1, a mountain tree;
8. 3. 3. evergreen; 3.3.8. doubt
whether it has a flower; 3. 4. 5.
time of budding and fruiting ;
3. 4. 6. time of fruiting; 3. 5.1.
periods of budding; 3. 5. 3: ὅ0.:
3. 5. 5. winter-buds; 3. 5. 6.
cone; 3. 6. 1. quick growing:
even young tree fruits; 3. 6. 4.
not deep-rooting ; 3.7.1. dies if
topped; 3. 7. 3. produces a
‘tuft’ (κύτταρος); 3. 9. 1-8.
kinds according to various
authorities (seé below): distinc-
tion from πίτυς ; 3. 9. 4. timber,
foliage; 3. 9. 5. further dis-
tinction from πίτυς : the disease
‘pitch-glut’ ; 3.9.7. comparison
with ἐλάτη; 3. 9. 8. do.: core
and callus; 4. 1. 1. likes sun;
4. 1. 2. in shade has inferior
timber; 4.5.1. in list of North-
ern trees; 4.5.3. does not grow
in Pontus; 4. 15. 3. effects of
stripping bark at various sea-
sons; 4. 16. 1. topping fatal;
4,16. 1-2. not injured by cutting
for tar; 4.16. 4. said to perish
if entirely deprived of its heart-
wood; 5. 1. 2. time of cutting
timber; 5.1. 4.do.; 5.1. 9-10.
methods of cleaving; 5. 4. 2.
wood (when resinous) proof
against decay; 5. 4. 4. more
eaten by teredon than ἐλάτη:
5. 4. 8. effect of salt water on
different parts; 5.5.1. knotty
parts of wood hard to work;
ξ' 6. 1. wood good for struts:
behaviour under pressure; 5.6.2.
takes glue best of all woods;
5. 7. 1-2. uses of wood in ship-
building; 5. 7. 4-5. uses in
house-building and crafts ; 5.8.1.
grows to great size in Latium,
but finer still in Corsica; 5.8.3.
grows in hill-country of Latium:
5. 9. 3. charcoal of this wood
preferred by smiths to that of
δρῦς ; 9.1.2. sap gummy; 9.1.6.
time of tapping; 9. 2. 1. pro-


469


INDEX OF PLANTS


ductive of resin (ῥητίνη) ; 9. 2. 2)
quality of resin ; 9, 2. 95-4, Mace-
donians only burn the ‘male’
for pitch (πίττα), and the roots
of the ‘female’; aspect etc. re-
quired for production of good
pitch; 9. 2. 5. Idaean account
Nifferent (sce π. ἡ ᾿Ιδαία and
7. ἣ puerta 9. 2. 6. filling
up ine holes; 9. 2.7.do. Idaean
account; 9. ay '8. further rules
for collecting pitch: age of tree;
etc.; 9. 3. 1-3. method of pre-
paring pitch; 9. 1. 4. does not
grow in Syria.
πεύκη ἡ ἄκαρπος (= π. ἡ θήλεια = π. ἡ
᾿Ιδαία), Corsican pine, Pinus
Laricio
3. 9. 2. described: 3. 9. 4. one of
three wild kinds (Idaean ac-
count).
πεύκη ἡ ἄκαρπος (‘male’), Corsican
pine, Pinus Laricio
3. 9. 2. comp. with ‘ female.’
πεύκη ἡ ἄκαρπος (‘female’), Aleppo
pine, Pinus halepensis
3.9. 2. comp. with * male.’
poe Ἶ ἄρρην(-Ξ π. ἣ παραλία -- Ξε πίτυς


.9.5.), Aleppo pine, Pinus


ἘΣ ΔΩΝΣ
3. 9. 3. timber: produces συκῆ
(Mt. Ida); 3. 9. 4. one of three


wild kinds (Idaean account).
πεύκη ἡ ἥμερος (= [π. ἡ] κωνόφορος),
stone pine, Pinus Pinea
SA Os: distinguished from other


kinds; 3. 9. 4. Arcadians say it
is a πίτυς: timber, foliage,
resin.


πεύκη ἡ θήλεια (-- π. ἡ ἄκαρπος = π. ἡ
᾿δαία), Corsican pine, Pinus
Laricio

3. 9. 8. timber: contains aiyis;
3.9. 4. one of three wild kinds
(Idaean account).

πεύκη ἡ data (= π. ἡ ἄκαρπος -- = στ. ἢ
θήλεια), Corsican pine, Pinus
Laricio

3. 9. 1-2, described ; 9. 2.5. Tdaean
account of pitch πίττα).

[πεύκη ἡ] κωνόφορος (= π. ἡ ἥμερος),
stone pine, Pinus pinea

22.6. seeds true; 3.9.4. foliage :
pitch (mitra): Arcadians say it
iS ἃ πίτυς.


470


πεύκη ἡ παραλία (= π. ἡ ἄρρην = πίτυς
in 3.9.5), Aleppo pine, Pinus
halepensis
3. 9. 1. described; 9. 2. 5. Idaean
account of pitch (πίττα).
πήγανον (πηγάνιον), rue, Ruta graveo-
lens
1... 3.. 1. Δ byes under- shrub ;
1.3.4. becomes tree-like; 1.9.4,
evergreen; 1. 10. 4. leaves
fleshy; 2. 1. 3. propagation ;
6. 1. 1. may be classed as an
under-shrub; 6. 5. 3. leaf of
ὀνωνίς comp.; 6. 7. 3. strong
plants of aBpérovov comp.; 7.2.1.
propagation: seed slow to ger-
minate; 7. 4. 1. only one kind;
7.5. 1. dislikes manure; 7. 6. 1
wild form distingui shed’ : 9. 4. ὃ.
colour of leaf of λιβανωτός
comp.; 9. 5. 1 leaf of βάλσαμον
comp.; 9. 9. Mi leaf of ἰσχάς
(ἄπιος (2)) 60
πηδός (3) (ἢ = pipe 1.3.), Prunus
Mahaleb
5. 1. 6. uses of wood.
πικρίς, Urospermum picroeides
7. 11. 4. inedible: flowers in
spring, but also throughout
winter and summer.
πῖλος, Polyporus igniarius (2)
3. 7 4. produced by δρῦς; de-
serlbed.
mids, pea, Pisum sativum
8.1.1. in list of pulses; 8. 1.4.
sown late; 8. 2. 3. comes up
with several leaves; 8. 3. 1.
leaf: 8. 3-2) stem.s:.8: Som
seeds not in compartments; 3
S. 5,3. shape of pod; 8. 10. δ,
infested by * worms.’
πίτυς (= πίτυς ἡ ἀγρία = πεύκη ἡ
ἄρρην ἴῃ ᾿ 9.5. = πεύκη ἡ παρα-
λία in 9. 5.), Aleppo pine,
Pinus taiidlames F
6. 1. core woody; 1. 10. 41
‘leaves like teeth. ‘of comb;
1. 10. 6. leaf spinous at tip;
1.12.1. taste of fruit; 2 2.2
propagated only by seed ; 3.1.2
do.; 3. 3. 3. evergreen ; 3. 3. 8.
doubt whether it has a flowed
(κύτταρος) ; 8. 4 5. time of bud:
ding and fruiting ; 3.5.5. winter
buds; 3. 6.1. slow growing (ὃ


INDEX OF


even young tree fruits; 3.9 4-8.
πεύκη and πίτυς: 3 9. 6. dis-
tinction from πεύκη; 3. 11. 1.
barkof ofévdauvoscomp.; 3.17.1.
bark of φελλός comp.; 4. 5. 3.
does not grow in Pontus:
4, 14. 8. if topped, becomes
barren, but is not destroyed;
4.16.1. topping fatal; 5.1. 2.
time of cutting timber; 5.1. 4.
do.; 5. 1. 5-6. timber comp.
with ἐλάτη: 5 7. 1. used in
Cyprus for ship- building instead
of πεύκη; 5.7.3. wood used for
bent-wood work in triremes;
5. 7. 5. use of wood in ship-
building and house-building:
soon rots; 5.7.8. use of wood
for carpenter’s tools; 5. 9. 2.
charcoal of this wood used in
silver mines ; 9.1.2. sap gummy ;
9. 2. 1. production of resin
(ῥητίνη): 9. 2. 2. quality of
resin; 9. 2. 3.said to be burnt
for pitch (irra) i in Syria.
πίτυς ἡ ἀγρία (= πίτυς = “πεύκη ἡ
ἄρρηνΞεπεύκη ἡ παραλία ἷῃ 3.9.5.)
Pinus halepensis (mountain
form)
πο 5 evergreens ὃ. 8.1. a
mountain tree (Macedonian).
πίτυς ἣ φθειροποιός, Pinus brutia
2.2. 6. seeds come true.
πλάτανος, plane, Platanus orientalis
1. 4. 2. lives near: water; 1. 6.3
roots many and long; 1 7.1.
example of long roots; 1. 8. 5.
diseased formation (xpad) ;
1. 9. 5. evergreen specimens;
1.10. 4. leaves broad; 1.10. 7.
attachment of leaf-stalk; 3.1.1.
propagation; 3. 1 3. produces
seed and seedlings ; 3.3. 3. ever-
green in some places; 3 4. 2.
time of budding; 8. 6. 1. quick
growing; 3.11 1. leaf of σφέν-
δαμνος comp.; 3. 11. 4. has a
sort of winter-bud like that
of μελία; 5. 6. found at
only one place on Adriatic
coast: rare in Italy; 4. 5. 7.
common in some Mediterranean
regions; 4.7. 4. size of unnamed
Arabian tree (see App. 12a)
comp.; 4. 8. 1. grows partially


-


PLANTS


in water; not common on Nile;
4. 13. 2: trees said to have been
planted by Agamemnon; 4.15.2:
bark cracks; 4. 16. 2. grows
again after being cut or blown
down: instances; 5. 3. 4. char-
acter of wood; 5. 7. 3. wood
used for bent-wood work: soon
decays; 5. 9. 4. wood makes an
evil smoke when burnt for char-
coal; 9.11. 6.‘ head’ of στρύχ-
vos 0 μανικός comp. to fruit of 7.
πλατύφυλλος (δρῦς) see δρῦς (6).
πόα, grass
Ὡς 8. ὃ. leaves ‘ on the ground.’
πόα ἡ Μηδική, 866 Μηδική.
πόθος (1), larkspur, Delphiniwm
orientale
6. 8. 3. a coronary plant: flowers
in summer: flower like ὑάκινθος.
πόθος (2) (= ἀσφόδελος), asphodel,
Asphodelus ramosus
6. 8. 3. a coronary plant: flowers
in summer: flower white: used
in connexion with funerals.
πόλιον, hulwort, Zeucrium Polium
lO. leaves fleshy: prevents
moth in clothes; 2. 8. 3. used
for caprification ; 7 10. 5. ever-
green.
πολυάκανθος, Carduus acanthoides
6. 4. 3. a ‘ thistle-like’ plant.
πολυπόδιον, polypody, Polypcdium
vulgare x
9.13.6. peculiar shape: described:
named from cuttle-fish (πολύ-
πους), and used as charm to
prevent polyp (πολύπους) : other
medicinal use: habitat; 9.20.4.
comes up after rain: has no
seed.
πράσιον, Marrubium spp.
6. 1. 4. a spineless wild under-


shrub; 6. 2. 5. two kinds;
see below.

πράαιον (1), horehound, Marrubium
peregrinum

6. 2. 5. leaf described: used by

druggists.

πράσιον (2), horehound, Marrubium
vulgare


6. 2. 5. leaf described.
mpacov (1), leek, Alliwm Porrum
7.1. 2-3. time of sowing and of
germination; 7, 1. 6, germina-


413


INDEX OF PLANTS


tion; 7. 1. 7. bears fruit in
second year: stem _ single;
7. 2. 2 3. root makes offsets;
7.3. 4. seed borne at top: me-
thod of sowing ; 7. 4. 10. coat
often like γήτειον ; 7. 4. 11. size
of ‘head’ of one year old oxo-
podov comp.; 7.5. 8. _improved
by transplanting ; 7.5.4. pests;
7. 5. 5. seed keeps well; 7. 8. 2.
stem smooth, not branched ;
9. 10. 1. leaf of ἐλλέβορος ὃ
λευκός comp. by some.
πράσον (2) (= ζώστηρ 4. 6. 2. = φῦκος
(1));  grass-wrack, Posidonia
oceanica
4. 6. 2. = ζώστηρ,
πράσον (3) (= φῦκος (2), riband- weed,
Laminaria saccharina
4.6.4. carried by current from
Atlantic into Mediterranean :
described ; 4.7.1. refers to 4 6.4.
πρῖνος, kermes- oak, Quercus coccifera
. 6. 1. core hard and close ; 1.6.2.
core large and conspicuous;
1. 9. 3. evergreen; 1. 10.
leaves with spinous projections ;
ὃ. 3. 1. a mountain tree; 3.3.3.
evergreen; 3. 3. 6. does not al-
ways fruit: 3. 4. 1. takes a year
to ripen fruit; 3. 4. 4-6; time
of fruiting; 3. 6. 4. deep root-
Meso. vc 3. produces a scarlet
‘berry’; 3. 16: 1. described ;
3. 16. 2. opidaé (1) comp.;
3. 16. 3. φελλόδρυς δρῦς and π.
comp.; 3. 16. 4. leaf of κόμαρος
comp.; 4. 8. 1. leaf οὗ λωτός (4)
comp.; effect of stripping bark
in winter ; 5. 4. 8. wood of
μυρίκη ὯΝ comp. for strength;
5. 5. 4. core not obvious, put
exists; 5. 7. 6. uses of wood;
5.9.7. wood used for fire-sticks :
9. 4. 3. leaf of σμύρνα comp. by
some.
προύμνη (= σποδίας), bullace, Prunus
msititia
9.1. 2. sap gummy.
πτελέα, elm, Ulmus glabra
1.8.5. diseased formation (κραδήλ);
1. 10. 1. leaves inverted in sum-
mer; 1. 10. 6. leaves notched;
5) Eo propagation; 3. 1. 2.
seems to have no fruit yet re-


472


produces itself: instance; 3.1.3.
do.:. proof; "Sy 8 1.ctree -of
mountain and plain: 3.3.4. a
question if it bears fruit; 3.4.2.
time of budding; 8. 6. Ἢ quick
growing ; 3. 7. 3. produces a
βότρυς and Pies ne 5. ΤΠ δ;
mountain and lowland forms
comp.; 3. 14. 1. description:
kinds; 3. 15. 4. leaf-galls of
τέρμινθος comp.; 3. 17. 3. leaf of
Idaean κολοιτία comp.; 3. 17. 5.
leaf of συκῆ ἡ Idaia comp.; 3.18.5.
leaf of povs comp.; 4. 2. 3. leaf
of συκῆ ἡ Κυπρία comp.; 4. 5. 3.
grows in Pontus; 4. 5. 7. com-
mon in some Mediterranean
regions; 4. 9. 2. leaf of rpi-
Bodos (3) comp.; 4. 15. 2. sur-
vives stripping of bark; 5.1. 2.
time of cutting timber; 5. 3. 4.
character of wood; 5. 3. 5.
method of making door-hinges
of the wood; 5. 4. 3. wood does
not decay if exposed to air;
5. 6. 4. wood Strong : used for
door-hinges; 5. 7. 3. wood used
for bent-wood work: use in
shipbuilding; 5. 7. 6. other
uses Of wood; 5. 7. 8. uses of
wood for carpenter’s tools;
9.1.2. sap gummy: gum con-
tained in the ‘bag’; 9. 4. 3.
leaf of σμύρνα comp. (by some).
πτερίς, fern, Nephrodium Filix-mas
1. 10. 5. frond described ; 4. 2.11.
leaf of an unnamed Memphian
shrub (see App. (2)) comp.; 8.7.7.
destroyed by manure or by
sheep sleeping on it; 9. 13. 6:
leaf of πολυπόδιον comp. to π.
μεγάλη; 9. 18. 8. pistnanichant
from θηλύπτερις ; 9. 20. 5. root
only of use: medicinal use:
time of gathering.
ie box, Buxus sempervirens


. δ. 4. wood heavy; 1.5. 5. do. ἢ


“pecause of close grain; 1. 6. 2.
core not conspicuous; 1. 8. 2.
few knots; 1. 9. 3. evergreen ;
δ. 9.1: a mountain tree; 3.38.3.
evergreen ; 3.4 6. time of fruit-
ing: fruit inedible ; 3. 6.1. slow
growing (2) 5 3.15.5. described ;
4.4.1. ard to grow in Baby-


<a eee


<


INDEX OF PLANTS


lon; 4. 5. 1. in list of Northern
trees; 5.3.1. wood very close
and heavy; 5. 8. 7. images
made from the wood; 5. 4. 1.
wood hard and heavy; 5. 4. 2.
wood proof against decay;
5. 4.5. wood not attacked by
σκώληξ; 5. 5. 2. core not ob-
vious: wherefore wood not apt
to ‘draw’; 5. 5. 4. core not
Obvious but exists; 5. 7. 7. uses
of wood: that grown on Mount
Olympus useless; 5. 7. 8. uses
of wood for carpenter’s tools;
9. 20. 4. wood of ἔβενος comp.
mupos, wheat, Triticum vulgare
1.5.2. ‘bark’ fibrous; 1.6.5. roots
numerous; 1.6.6. do.; 1.11. 2.
seeds in a husk; 1 11. 5. each
seed separately attached ; 2.2.9.
said to turn sometimes into
κριθή; 2.4.1. turns into cipa: wild
mw. turns into cultivated with
cultivation ; 4.4.9. πυροί grow in
India; 4.10. 3. taste of seeds of
᾿σίδη comp.; 7.11.2. inflorescence
and general appearance of στελέ-
govpos comp.; 8. 1. 1. in list of
cereals; 8. 1. 3. sown early, but
after κριθή; 8. 1. 4. one kind
sown late; 8.1.5. time of ger-
mination; 8. 2. 1. germination
described; 8. 2. 3. single leaf
first appears: roots described ;
8. 2. 6. time of maturing seed;
8. 2. 7. time of harvest in Hellas
and in Egypt; 8. 3. 2. stem;
8. 4. 1-2. compared in detail
with other cereals; 8. 4. 3-5.
kinds distinguished, local and
other (see below); 8. 6. 1. con-
ditions for sowing; 8. 6. 4. suit-
able soil; 8. 6. 5-6. rain hurtful
when π΄. is in flower: and when
it is ripe, but less so than to
κριθή; 8. 7. 1. said to change
into aipa under certain condi-
tions; 8. 7. 4. effect of cutting
down or grazing young crop in
Thessaly andin Babylon; 8.7.5.
in many places comes up again
next year; etc.; 8.8.2.favourable
localities; 8. 8. 3. degenerates
into aipa,—or else aipa is
specially apt to grow among π.;


8.9.1. exhausts the soil most of
cereals; 8. 10. 1. a pest of 7-.;
8. 10. 2. wheat-rust; 8. 10. 3.
effects of weather ; 8.10.4. effects
of ‘ worms’ in various localities ;
8. 11. 1. seed keeps better than
κριθή; 8. 11. 3. grain stored
without drying; 8.11. 7. effect
of mixing earth with the grain
in some places: at Babylon
grain jumps on the threshing-
floor: reason.

πυρὸς ὁ Αἰγύπτιος, Triticum vulgare


var.
8. 4. 3. in list of varieties of 7.;
8. 4. 6. escapes αἴρα.
πυρὸς ὃ ᾿Αλεξάνδρειος, Triticum vul-
gare var.
8. 4. 3. in list of varieties.
πυρὸς ὃ ᾿Ασσύριος, Triticum vulgare


var.
8. 4. 3. in list of varieties.
πυρὸς 0 Βοιώτιος, Triticum vulgare
var.
8. 4. 5. heaviest grain.
πυρὸς © Θρᾷκιος, Triticum vulgare
var.
8. 4. 3. grain has many coats.
πυρὸς ὁ Kaxpudias
8. 4, 3. thick stem.
πυρὸς ὃ κριθανίας
8. 2. 3. branching.
πυρὸς ὃ Λακωνικός
8. 4. 5. grain light.
πυρὸς ὁ Λιβυκός
8. 4. 3. grain not long in husk
thick stem.
πυρὸς ὃ ἸΤοντικός
8. 4. 8.--4. lightest grain; 8. 4. 5.
variation in grain ; 8.4.6. escapes
αιρα.
πυρὸς ὁ σιτανίας
8. 2. 3. branching.
πυρὸς ὃ Σικελός
8. 4, 8., 8. 4. 5. heaviest grain of
kindsimported to Hellas; 8.4.6.
fairly free from aipa, especially
that of Akragas: infested with
μελάμπυρον.
πυρὸς 0 στλεγγύς
8. 4, 3. in list of varieties, see note


pauvos, buckthorn, Rhamnus spp.


1. 5. 3. stem fleshy; 1. 9. 4. ever-
green; 3. 18. 12. cluster of ber-


473


INDEX OF PLANTS


ries of σμῖλαξ (2) comp.; 5. 9. 7.
wood used for fire-sticks, es-
pecially for the stationary piece.


ῥάμνος ἡ λευκή, buckthorn, Rhamnus


graeca
3. 18. 2. distinguished from ῥ. ἡ
μέλαινα.


ῥάμνος ἡ μέλαινα, buckthorn, Rham-


nus oleoides
3. 18. 2. distinguished from p. ἡ


λευκή.


ῥαφανίς, radish, Raphanus sativus


1. 2. 7. flesh of root turns to
wood; 1. 6. 6. root fleshy;
1. 6. 7. root of ‘ bark’ and flesh;
7.1. 2-3. time of sowing and of
germination; 7.1.5. do.; 7.1.7.
germination; 7. 2. 5. survives
and increases in size under a
heap of soil; 7. 2. 5-6. root de-
Scribede 7, 2.8. “dow Satie:
seeds described; 7. 3. 4. seed
borne at side; 7. 4. 1-2. several
kinds (described) Koprv@ia,
Κλεωναία, λειοθασία, (Or Θρᾳκία),
ἀμωρέα (see below), Βοιωτία, and
one with leaf like εὔζωμον ; 7.4.3.
effects of weather; 7.5. 3. im-
proved by transplanting ; 7.5.4.
pests; 7. 6. 2. root of wild yoy-
γυλίς comp.; 7. 6. 3. root of
ἱπποσέλινον comp.; 7. 8. 2. stem
branched; 9. 9. 1. method of
cutting root of pavdpaydpas (1)
comp.; 9, 12. 1. method of cut-
ting up χαμαιλέων ὃ λευκός for
medicinal use comp.


ῥαφανὶς ἡ ἀμωρέα, horse-radish (?)


7. 4. 2. in list of varieties of ῥ.


papavos, cabbage, Brassica cretica


1. 3. 4. becomes tree-like; 1. 6. 6.
root single; 1. 9. 4. evergreen;
1. 10. 4. leaves fleshy; 1. 14. 2.
bears fruit on top and at side;
4.4.12. sizeof an unnamed Asian
shrub (see App. (10)) comp.;
4.16.6. spoils flavour of grape:
vine-shoot turns away from );
whence use of p. as cure for
effects of wine; 6. 1. 2. may be
classed as an  under-shrub;
7. 1. 2-8. time of sowing and of
germination; 7. 2. 1. propaga-
tion; 7. 2. 4. grows again when
stem is cut; effect on flavour ;


474


7. 4. 1. several kinds; 7. 4. 4.
three kinds distinguished, οὐλό-
φυλλος, λειόφυλλος, ἀγρία (see
below); 7. 5. ὃ. bears trans-
planting; 7.5.4. pests; 7.6.1-2.
wild form distinguished,


ῥαφανος ἡ ἀγρία (-- κεράϊς 9. 15. 5.),


charlock, Raphanus Raphanis-
trum


7.4. 4. see padavos; 7. 6. 1-2. see


ῥάφανος: 9.15.5. Arcadian: a
drug: also called κεράϊς.


papavos ἡ ὀρεία (= amos (2)---ἰσχάς),


spurge, Euphorbia Apios


9. 12. 1. used to kill a pig, mixed


with χαμαιλέων ὃ λευκός.


ῥοά (ῥοιά), (flower κύτινος), pome-.


granate, Punica Granatum


1. 3. 3. a tree which has not how-


ever a single stem; 1. 5. 1.
croecked and low; 1. 6.1. core
fleshy ; 1. 6.3. few roots ; 1.6. 4.
shallow rooting; 1. 6. 5. roots
branching upwards; 1. 9. 1.
much branched ; 1. 10. 4. leaves
narrow; 1. 10.10. fruit made of
fibre and skin; 1. 11. 4. seeds
all together in a single case;
1. 11. 5. each fruit separately
attached (?); 1. 11. 6. arrange-
ment of stones: 1. 12. 1. taste
of fruit; 1. 13. 1. flower red;
1.18.3. flower above fruit-case ;
1. 13. 4. some kinds sterile;
1.13.5. flower described ; 1.14.1.
bears on last year’s wood;
1.14. 4. many cultivated forms ;
2.1. 2-3. propagation; 2. 2. 4.
degenerates from seed ; 2. 2. 5.
do. details; 2. 2. 7. in some
places improves from seed;
2. 2. 9. effects of cultivation ;
2.2.10. refeto 2 2s Os 22.11.
effect of good cultivation ; 2.3.1.
sometimes changes character ;
2.3. 2.. ref. to. 2. 2. ΤῊΣ 2.3.3
sometimes bears fruit on the
stem; 2. 5. 5. propagation;
2. 5. 6. trees should be planted
close together; 2. 6. 8. size of
fruit of a kind of φοῖνιξ (1)
comp.; 2. 6. 12. cuttings set up-
side down; 2.7.1. water-loving ;
2.7.3. requires pungent manure
and much water; ὦ. 8. 1. apt to


a ie ae


<4


INDEX OF PLANTS


shed immature fruit; 3. 5. 4.
autumn budding; 3. 6. 2. for-
mation of buds; 3. 18. 4. fruit
and growth of κυνόσβατος comp.;
3.18.13. size and leaf of εὐώνυμος
comp.; 4.3.3.stones eaten with
fruit; 4. 5. 3. grows well in
Pontus with shelter; 4. 5. 4.
grows on Mt. Tmolus and
Mysian Olympus; 4. 10. 3.
flower of σίδη comp.: seeds of
σίδη contrasted; 4. 13. 2. short-
lived, especially the stoneless
form (see below); 4.13. 3. after
decaying shoots again from
same stock; 4. 14. 10. fruit gets
worm-eaten; 4. 14. 12. unin-
jured by special winds; 4.16.1.
survives splitting of stem ; 6.1.3.
has spines on the shoots; 7.13.4.
fruit kept by inserting stalk
in bulb of σκίλλα; 9. 5. 2. size
of βάλσαμον comp.

ῥοὰ ἡ ἀπύρηνος, Punica Granatum


var.
4. 13. 2. specially short-lived.
podwvia (flower ῥόδον, fruit μῆλον
a 6. 6.), rose, Rosa centifolia
etc.

1; 9. 4. evergreen; 1.13.1. colour
alluded to ; 1.13. 2. has a ‘two-
fold’ flower; 1. 13. 3. flower
above fruit-case; 1.13.5. flower
of poa comp.; 2.2.1. propaga-
tion ; 4. 8. 7. colour of flower of
κύαμος ὃ Αἰγύπτιος comp.; 4.10.3.
sepals of σίδη comp.; 6.1.1. in
list of under-shrubs; τὰ 1.8. has
spines on the shoots; 6. 6. 4-6.
a cultivated under-shrub: a
eoronary plant: many kinds:
localities : propagation and cul-
tivation ; 6.8.2. flowering time ;
6. 8. 5. bush lives five years
and then degenerates unless
pruned: position and climate
important for fragrance: flowers
very early in Egypt; 6. 8. 6.
blooms well on mountains,
but has inferior scent; 9. 19. 1.
colour of flower of ὀνοθήρας


comp.
ῥόδον τὸ ἄγριον, wild rose, Rosa
dumetorum
6, 2. 1. flower Of κέσθος comp.


pods (drug ῥοῦς 3.18.
Rhus Coriaria
3. 18. 1. has more than one form
(see below); 3. 18. 5. ‘male’
and ‘ female’? forms: described :
used for dyeing : produces a
drug called ῥοῦς.
ῥοῦς ἡ λευκή
ὃ. 18. 2. distinguished from p. ἡ
μέλαινα.
ῥοῦς ἡ μέλαινα
3. 18. 2. distinguished from p. 7
λευκή
ῥύτρος, globe-thistle, Echinops spin-
osus
6. 4. 4. a ‘thistle-like ’
branches from the top.


5.), sumach


plant ;


σάρι (Stalk σάρι), Cyperus auricomus
4. 8. 2. useful for food in Egypt;
4. 8. 5. described.


᾿ σέλινον, celery, Apium graveolens


1.2.2. takes two years to mature;
1. 6. 6. root single, but with
large side-growths; 1.9.4. ever-
green (partly); 1. 10. 7. time of
leaf-growth ; 1. 12. 2. taste of
sap; 2. 4. 3. effect of trampling
and rolling in seed; 6. 3. 1. leaf
of σίλφιον comp.; 7. 1. 2-3. time
of sowing and germination ;
ἢ. A. G6. germination As. ἢ
bears fruit in second year;
7. 2. 2. root makes offsets;
7.2. 59 root described 5, 7.2. 8.
do.; 7. 3. 4-5. methods of sow-
ing and transplanting; 7. 4. 6.
kinds distinguished; 7. 5. 3.
bears transplanting ; 7.6.3. wild
forms (ἱπποσέλινον, ἑλειοσέλινον,
ὀρειοσέλινον) distinguished.

σέλινον τὸ ἕλειον (= ἐλειοσέλινον),
marsh celery, Apium graveo-
lens

4. 8. 1. in list of marsh plants ;
9. 11.1. leaf of λιβανωτὶς ἡ Kap-
πιμος COMP.

σέσελι, hartwort, Tordyliwm offi-
cinale

9. 15. 5. an Arcadian drug.

σημύδα (?), Judas-tree, Cercis Sili-
quastrum

3. 14.4. described; 5. 7. 7. (?)
wood used for walking-sticks.


475


INDEX OF PLANTS


σήσαμον (seed σήσαμη), sesame,


Sesamum indicum


1.11.2. seed- vessel ; 3.13.6. seeds


of berry of ἀ ᾿ἀκτῆ comp.; 3.18.13.
fruit of εὐώνυμος comp.; 4.8.14.
size of fruit of an unnamed
Egyptian plant (see App. (20))
comp.; 6. 5. 3. seed of a kind of
τρίβολος comp.; 8.1.1. in list of
‘summer crops’ distinct from
cereals and pulses; 8.1.4.sown
later than cereals and pulses ;
8 2.6. time of maturing seed ;
8.3.1. leaf; 8.3.2. stem; 8.3.3.
flower; 8. 3. 4. seed abundant;
8. 5.1. a white kind, which is
the sweetest; 8. 5. 2. seeds in
compartments ; 8.56; Jnana
not beneficial after sowing;
Saas: not eaten green by any
animal: ἐρύσιμον comp.: sown
at same time as ὅρμινον ; 8. 9. 3.
exhausts the soil; 9. 9. 2. fruit
of ἐλλέβορος comp.; 9. 14. 4. do.


σίδη, waterlily, Nymphaea alba


4, 10. 1-2. in list of plants of
Lake Copais; 4. 10. 3-4. de-
scribed : size of fruit of βούτομος
comp. (to seed of o.); 4. 10. 6.
grows only in-water; 4. 10. 7.
part used for food.


σικύα, bottle-gourd, Lagenaria vul-


garis
1. 11. 4, seeds in a row; 1. 13. 3.
flower attached above fruit ;
7.2.9. root described; 7. 3. 5.
takes shape of vessel in which
it is grown.


σίκυος (σίκυον), cucumber, Cucumis


Sativus


1. 10. 10. fruit made of flesh and


fibre; 1. 12. 2. taste of sap;
1.13. 3. flower attached above
fruit; 1. 13. 4. some flowers
sterile; 2. 7. 5. use of dust;
7. 1. 2-8. time of sowing and
germination; 7. 1. 6, germina-
tion; 7. 2. 9. root described ;
7. 8. 1. long in flower; flower
described; 7. 3. 5. effect of
soaking seed in milk; 7. 4. 1.
several kinds ; 7.4. 6. do. viz.
Λακωνικός, σκυταλίας, Βοιώτιος ;
7. 5. 2, said to dislike rain-
water; 7. 5 3. bears trans-


476


planting ; 7. 5. 5. seed does not
keep well; ἡ. 5. 6. seed not
liable to pests; 7. 18. 1. leaf of
ἄρον comp.


olKvos ἕῳ ἄγριος, (drug ἐλατήριον


9, 4.), squirting cucumber,
Hieballisen Elaterium


4. 5. 1. in list of Northern plants ;


7. 6. 4. quite distinct from cul:
tivated o.; 7. 8. 1. stem ‘on the
ground’ ; Ὁ. 9. 4. medicinal use:

ἐλατήριον made from seed ;

9. 4. 1-2. how long drug will
keep: conditions; 9. 15. 6.
grows in Arcadia.


σίλφιον (leaf μάσπετον 6. 8. 1), (seed


φύλλον, μαγύδαρις 6, 3. 4), sil-
phium, Ferula tingitana


1... 19» root most characteristic


part; 3. 1. 6. comes up spon-
taneously ; 3. 2. 1. fruits better
in wild state ; 4. 3. 1. grows in
Cyrenaica ; 4. 3. 7. considera-
tion postponed ; 6. 3. 1-2. de-
scribed : belongs to ‘ferula-
like’ plants: rules as to cutting
and treatment; 6. 3. 3. distri-
bution; 6. 3. 4-6. another ac-
count, inconsistent in some
points ; 6.5.2. growsin mountain
country; 7. 3. 2. seeds of ἀδρά-
φαξυς comp.; 9.1. 3. stem and
root produce a gum; 9. 1. 4.
gum pungent; 9.1. 7. time of
tapping: details about juices
of stem and root.


σισύμβριον, bergamot-mint, Mentha


aquatica


1.3.1. (2) a’typical ‘ under-shrub’;
tI


2. 1. 8: propagation; 2. 4. 1.
turns into μίνθη, unless often
transplanted ; 6. 1. 1. in list of
under-shrubs; 6. 6. 2. a culti-
vated under-shrub ; a coronary
plant: the whole plant scented ;
6. 6. 8. woody: only one form ;
6. 7. 2. said by some to have no
fruit: but te wild form cer-
tainly seeds; 6. 7. 4. roots de-
scribed; 6. 7. 6. cultivation ;
9. 16. 3. leaf of δίκταμνον (ἕτερον)
comp.


σισυρίγχιον, Barbary nut, Iris


Sisyrinchium
. 10. 7. attachment of leaves;


-"


INDEX OF PLANTS


7.13.9 (in defective sentence)
belongs to τὰ βολβώδη : peculiar
growth of root: upper part
edible.
σκαλίας, 866 κάκτος (2).
σκαμμωνία, Scammony, Convolvulus
Scammonia
4, 5. 1. seeks cold regions; 9.1.3.
root produces a gum; 9. 1. 4.
gum has medicinal properties ;
9. 9. 1. root and juice used;
9. 20. 5. juice only used.
σκάνδιξ, wild chervil, Scandix Pec-
ten-V eneris
7.7.1. a λάχανον ; a class of plants
called σκανδικώδη: 7. 8. 1. stem
“on the ground.’
σκίλλα, squill, Urginea maritima
6. 7. τοοῦ in scales; 1. 6. 8.
root fleshy and bark-like: root
not tapering; 1. 6. 9. no side
roots; 1. 10. 7. no leaf-stalk :
attachment of leaves; 2. 5. 5.
cuttings of συκῆ etc. set in the
bulb. of c.; 7. 2.2. root makes
offsets; 7. 4. 12. Seas of
roots of κρόμυον comp.; 7. 9. 4.,
Cpt. 0}1:.7.19.1. root edible (of
the kind called ἡ ᾿Επιμενίδειος)
(see below); 7. 18. 1. leaves de-
scribed: 7. 13. 2. flower-stem
not the only Suen) 7..19: 9.
“successive flowering of ἀσφό-
ϑελὸς comp.; 7. 13. 4. very
tenacious of life: hence various
uses: use aS a charm; 7.13.5-7.
stem appears before leaves:
sequence described and comp.
with that of νάρκισσος (1);
9.18. 3. leaf of ὄρχις comp.
σκίλλα ἡ ᾿Επιμενίδειος, French spar-
row-grass, Ornithogalum pyren-
aicum
7. 12.1. see above.
σκόλυμος (= ὃ λειμωνία 6.4.3.), golden
thistle, Scolymus hispanicus
6. 4. 3. a ‘thistle-like’ plant:
leaves spinous; 6. 4. 4. time of
flowering; 6. 4. 7. described ;
7. 4. 5. leaf of θριδακίνη ἡ Λακω-
νική comp.; 7. 10.1. grows and
flowers entirely in summer;
7. 15. 1. flowering depends on
the heavenly bodies; 9. 12. 1.
leaf Of χαμαιλέων ὁ λευκός COMP.


9.13. 4. an unnamed plant of
Tegea comp.
σκολόπενδρον, hart’s tongue, Scolo-
pendrium vulgare
9. 18. 7. leaf of ἡμιόνιον comp.
σκόροδον (σκόρδον), garlic, Allium
sativum
1. 6. 9. no side-roots; 1. 10. 7.
attachment of leaves; 7. 1. 7.
stem single; 7. 2. 1. propaga-
tion; 7. 2. 3. offsets specially
numerous; 7. 4. 1. several
kinds 5 ἧς 4.:7.do:307.. 4. 1dsdors
6.0. τὸ Κύπριον : cultivation etc.;
7. 4. 12. formation of roots of
κρόμυον contrasted; 7. 8. 2.
stem smooth, not branched;
7.13. 4. grows in colonies be-
cause of offsets; 9. 8. 6. eaten
as precaution by diggers of
ἐλλέβορος.
σκορπίος (1), Genista acanthoclada
6. 1. 3. has spines for leaves;
6. 4. 1. one of very few plants
which are altogether spinous;
6. 4. 2. described.
σκορπίος (2), leopard’s bane, Doro-
nicum cordatum
9.13. 6. peculiar shape, resembles
scorpion, and is useful against
its sting.
σκορπίος (3) (ἢ σκορπίον) (= ἀκονίτον
Ξε θηλύφονον 9.18.2.=pvodovor),
wolt’s bane, Aconitum Anthora
9. 18. 2. properties: habitat :
fatal to scorpion.
σκυθική (= γλυκεῖα, 86. ῥίζα 9.13.2.),
liquorice, Glycyrrhiza glabra
OF LS. Ze fragrant: grows on Lake
Maiotis: medicinal use: use
against thirst.
σμῖλαξ (1), holm-oak, Quercus Ilex
typica
8. 16. 2, described.
σμῖλαξ (?) (2) (ΞΞ μῖλαξ), smilax, Smi-
lax aspera
3. 18: L1-12. described; +7285 1.
stem clasping.
σμύρνα (ZUM σμύρνα 9.1. 2.), myrrh,
Balsamodendron Myrrha
4.4.12. gumofan Arian ἄκανθα (see
App. (9))comp.; 4. 4. 14. in list
of Oriental ἀρώματα; 9.1.2. sap
gummy (called σμύρνα); 9. 1. 6
time of tapping; 9. 4. 1. collec-


477


INDEX OF PLANTS


tion of gum; 9. 4. 2. Arabian:
habitat; 9. 4. 3. described (two
accounts) ; 9. 4. 4-10. accounts
of travellers; 9. 7. 3. in list of
ἀρώματα.
σόγκος, SoW-thistle, Sonchus Nymani
4.6.10. growth of φοῖνιξ (2) comp.;
6. 4. 3. a ‘ thistle-like’ plant,
but has not the characteristic
‘head’ of such plants; 6. 4. 5.
stalk of a kind of ἄκανος comp.;
6. 4. 8. root.
σπάλαξ (?) (= ἐφήμερον), meadow
saffron, Colchicum parnassicum
1. 6. 11. large fleshy roots.
σπειραία, privet, Ligustrum vulgare
1.14. 2. bears fruit at top; 6.1.4.
a spineless wild under-shrub.
(σπογγία, Sponge
4.6. 5.found on North Coast of
Crete; 4. 6. 10. distinguished
from ‘ plants.’)
τ σποδιάς (= προύμνη), bullace, Prunus
insilitia
3. 6. 4. very shallow rooting: few
roots.
στελέφουρος (= ἀρνόγλωσσον 7.11. 2.
according to some) (= ὄρτυξ
7. 11. 2. according to some),
plantain, Plantago Lagopus
στοιβή (= φέως 6. 1. 3.), Poterium
spinosum
1. 10. 4. leaves fleshy; 6. 1. 3.
has leaves as well as spines: a
wild under-shrub; 6. 5. 1. in
list of such plants ; 6. 5. 2. has
no spines on the leaves.
στρουθίον (1) = (κυδώνιος), quince,
Cydonia vulgaris
2. 2. 5. seed produces κυδώνιος.
στρουθίον (2) (= στροῦθος), Soap-wort,
Saponaria officinalis
6. 4. 3. a ‘thistle-like’ plant, but
has not the characteristic ‘head’
of such plants; 6. 8. 3. a coro-
nary plant: flowering time:
scentless.
στροῦθος (= στρουθίον (2)),soap-wort,
Saponaria officinalis
9. 12. 5. leaf of μήκων ἡ Ἡρακλεία
comp.
OTPUXVOS
7,15. 4. several plants called by
this name, which have nothing
in common but the name: three


478


mentioned (see below) ; 9.11. 5-6.
kinds (see below); 9. 15. 5. two
kinds grow in Arcadia.
στρύχνος ὃ ἐδώδιμος, garden night-
shade, Solanum nigrum
3. 18.11. fruit of σμιῖλαξ (2) comp.;
7 2. a λάχανον: can be
eaten raw; 7. 15. 4. more or
less cultivated: has berries.
στρύχνος ὃ μανικός (= Opvopos 9.11 6.
= περιττός 9.11.6) thorn-apple.
Datura Stramonivm
7.15. 4. causes Madness, or, in a
large dose, death; 9. 11. 6. de-
scribed : medicinal use; 9.19.1.
effect on ‘ mind.’
oTpvxvos ὃ ὑπνώδης, Withania somni-
Jera
7. 15. 4. induces sleep; 9. 11. 5.
eee : medicinal use: habi-
at.
στύραξ, Storax, Storax officinalis
9. 7. 3. in list of ἀρώματα.
συκάμινος, Mulberry, Morus nigra
1.6.1. core hard and close: 1. 9.7:
time of leafing; 1. 10. 10.
fruit made of fibre and skin;
1. 12. 1. taste of fruits 1.18. 1.
flower ‘downy’; 1.13.4. attach-
ment of flower; 5. 3. 4. charac-
ter of wood; 5. 4. 2. do.: wood
little liable to decay: turns
black when old; 5. 6. 2. wood
tough and easy to bend:
uses; 5. 7. 3. wood used for
bent-wood work: use in ship-
building.
συκάμινος ἡ Αἰγυπτία, sycamore.
Iieus Sycamorus
1.1. 7. position of fruit; 1. 13. 2.
bears on stem; 4. 1. 5. barren
in uncongenial climate ; 4.2.1—2.
peculiar to Egypt: described ;
4. 2. 4. κερωνία distinguished.
συκῆ (1) (fruit σῦκον), fig, Ficus
Carica
1. 3. 1. a typical ‘tree’; 1. 3. 5.
evergreen at Elephantine; 1.5.1.
crooked and low; 1. 5. 2. bark
smooth: bark in one layer;
1. δ, 3. wood fleshy; 1. ἢ. 3.
wood not fibrous; 1. 6. 1. core
fleshy; 1. 6. 3. roots many and
long; 1. 6. 4. roots crooked ;
1.7 2. roots very long; 1.8. 1.


-


INDEX OF PLANTS


no knots; 1.8. 2. has less knots
than épuveds; 1. 8. 5. young
branches ‘roughest’ ; 1.9.7. time
of shedding leaves; 1. 10. 4.
leaves broad; 1. 10. 5. leaf
divided : etc.; 1. 10. 8. leaves
made of ‘bark’ and flesh; 1. 11.
4. seeds all together in a single
case; 1. 11. 6. arrangement of
seeds; 1. 12. 1. taste of fruit;
15. 9. tastexot saps al. 14. 1.
bears on new shoots: some-
times also on old wood (?);
1. 14. 4. cultivated form of
ἐρινεός : Many cultivated forms ;
2. 1. 2. propagation; 2. 2. 4.
degenerates from seed: etc.;
2. 2. 12. cannot be made
out of épuveds by cultivation ;
2. 8. 1. sometimes changes to
ἐρινεός Spontaneously; 2. 3. 3.
sometimes bears fruit from be-
hind the leaves: other anoma-
lies; 2. 5. 3. grafting; 2. 5. 4,
propagation; 2. 5. 5. cuttings
set in a bulb of oxiAdn; 2. 5. 6.
easily propagated : trees should
be planted far apart; 2. 5. 7.
low ground suitable; 2. 6. 6.
dates said to vary as much
as figs in colour etc.; 2. 6. 12.
cuttings set upside down;
2. 7. 1. effects of watering;
257.05. Use Of Gust; 2; 7. 6.
root-pruning etc.; 2.8 1. apt to
shed immature fruit: caprifica-
tion; 2.8.2-4. do. and pseudo-
caprification ; Bites θυ. ΘΠ ΘΒ
ἐρινά ; 3. 4. 2. time of budding ;
8. ὅ. 4, autumn budding; 3.6.2

formation of buds; Anis 3.
produces ἐρινά and ὄλυνθοι:;
[8. 17. 4. a local Idaean kind
(see below); 3.17. 5. do. de-
scribed ;] 4. 2. 3. taste of fruit of
σ. ἡ Κυπρία comp.; 4. 4. 4. fruit
of ἡ συκῆ ᾿Ινδική comp.; 4. 5. ὃ.
grows well in Pontus with shel-
ter; 4. 7. 7. size of marine trees
ofisland of Tylos comp.; 4.13.1.
shorter - lived than épiveds;
4.13. 2. short-lived ; 4.14. 2. apt
to get worm-eaten: young
plants liable to ‘sunscorch’;


4.14. 3. destroyed by : worms*~ .


s be . Σὰ
Δ iss Wis
᾿ ΠΌΤΕ ἢ


which breed in it: gets scab
in some regions; 4. 14. 4-5.
other diseases; 4. 14. 8. effects
on fruit of rain and drought;
4, 14. 10. infested by knips;
4, 14. 12. suffers most from
special winds; 4. 15. 2. survives
stripping of bark for some time ;
4. 15. 2. instance of bark grow-
ing again; 4. 16. 1. survives
splitting of stem; 5. 3. 3. char-
acter of wood; 5. 6. 1. wood
strong only against a vertical
strain; 5. 9. 5. wood makes
pungent smoke; 5. 9. 6. wood
good for kindling furnaces;
7.13. 2. root of ἀσφόδελος eaten
with figs.
συκῆ (2) ἡ Αἰγυπτία (= Kepwvia
ἘΠ ), carob, Ceratonia Siliqua
συκῆ ΤΣ ἡ Tate (fruit σῦκον), Ame-
lanchier vulgaris
3. 17. 4-5. described.
συκῆ (4) ἡ Ἰνδική, banyan, Ficus
bengalensis
1. 7.3. roots again from branches ;
4, 4, 4—5. described.
συκῆ (5) ἡ Kumpia, sycamore, Ficus
Sycamorus var.
4, 2. 3. described.
συκῆ (6) ἡ Λακωνική, Ficus Carica
var.
2. 7. 1. water-loving? τῶν... 1.
caprification not used.
συκῆ (7) (ἡ ᾿Αραβική), Ficus Carica
var. ?
4.7.8. an evergreen Arabian kind.
(συκὴ (8) (? an aleyonidian polyp)
4, 0. 2. peculiar to certain waters ;
4. 6. 9. described).
pres sage, Salvia calycina
1. 4. a spineless wild under-
re 6. 2. 5. like cultivated
ἐλελίσφακος : leaf of one kind of
πράσιον COMP.
σφένδαμνος, Maple, Acer monspes-
sulanum
3. 3. 1. a tree of mountain and
plain; 3. 3. 8 doubt whether it
has a flower; 3. 4. 4. time of
fruiting; 8. 6. 1. slow-grow-
ing (?); 3. 6. 5. roots shallow
and few according to Arcadians;
3. 14. 1-2. described; 5. 1. 2.
~“time.of cutting timber; 5. 1. 4.
Ὥ “7 =


~ 479


"gs


INDEX OF PLANTS


do.; 5. 8. 3. character of tim-
ber; 5. 7. 6. uses of wood.
σχῖνος (fruit σχινίς 9.4.7.), mastich,
Pistacia Lentiscus
9.1.2. produces a gum; 9. 4. 7.
λιβανωτός Comp. by some.
σχοῖνος (1), rush, Juncus spp. etc.
1. 5. 3. not jointed; 1. 8. 1. no
knots; 4. 8. 1. in list of τὰ
λοχμώδη ; 4. 12. 1-3. kinds dis-
tinguished.
σχοῖνος (2) (ὃ εὐώδης ?), ginger-grass,
Cymbopogon Schoenanthus
9.7.1. habitat (E. of Lebanon):
described : fragrance ; Oi. 9.
in list of ἀρώματα.
σχοῖνος ee ὃ κάρπιμος, (= μελαγκρα-
vis, 4.12.1.), bog-rush, Schoenus
nigricans
4.12. 1-3. described.
σχοῖνος (4) 6 ὁλόσχοινος, Scirpus
Holoschoenus
4, 12. 2. described; 9 12. 1. used
for stringing pieces of χαμαιλέων
ὃ λευκός.
σχοῖνος (5) ὁ ὀξύς, Iuncus acutus
4, 12. 1--2, described.
σχοῖνος (6)
4.7. 3. stone
Sea.’)


in ‘ Red


“ σχοῖνοι᾽


τέρμινθος (τερέβινθος), terebinth, Pis-
tacia Terebinthus
1, 9. 3. evergreen (wild form);
3. 2. 6. characteristic of Syria ;
3. 3. 1. a mountain tree; 8. 8. 8.
evergreen ; 3. 4, 2. time of bud-
ding; 3. 4. 4. time of fruiting;
3. 15. 3-4, described ; 4. 4. 7. τ.
ἡ ᾿Ινδική comp.; 4. 16, 1-2. not
injured by cutting for resin ;
5.3.2. character of wood: uses;
5. 7. 7. fruit and resin ‘useful,
wood not used in crafts; 9.1. 2.
sap gummy; 9. 1. 6. time of
tapping; 9. 2. 1. method of
tapping ; 9. 2. 2. produces best
resin (ῥητίνην); 9. 2. 2. said to
be burnt for pitch (πίττα) in
Sytia: ef. 3..2. 63:9. 3. 4.
method of preparing pitch in
Syria; 9. 4. 7. σμύρνα comp. by
some; 9. 4. 8.some say σμύρνα
=7.; 9.5.1. fruit of βάλσαμον
comp.


480


eta hee Euonymus latifolius
9. 4. 2. time of budding; 3. 4. 6;
time of fruiting.
τετράλιξ, yellow star-thistle, Cen-
taurea solstitialis
4. 4. a ‘thistle-like’ plant:
time of growing,
τεῦτλις (= τεῦτλον)
ἡ. 7. 2. ἃ λάχανον ; needs cooking.
τεῦτλον (τεύτλιον) ‘= τεῦτλις, beet,
Beta maritima
1. 3. 2. becomes large in cuitiva-
tion; 1.5.3. stem fleshy; 1.6.6.
root single, but with large side-
growths; 1. 6. 7. root fleshy;
1. 19. ρει mec ered. OLA:


leaves fleshy ; 7. 1. 2-3. time οὗ.


sowing and germination; 7.1.5.
do.; 7. 1. 6. germination ; 7.2.2
root makes offsets; 7. 2. 5-6.
root described; 7. 2. 7. root of
λάπαθον comp.; 7. 2. 8. root;
7. 3. 2. Βοος 42493 several
kinds; 7. 4. 4. two kinds, τὸ
λευκόν (Σικελικόν) and τὸ μέλαν;
7.5. 5. seed keeps well.
τῆλις (= Bovképas), fenugreek, TZ'rigo-
nelia Foenum-graecum
3. 17. 2. leaf of κολουτέα (κολοιτία


(1) comp.

τιθύμαλλος (produces ἱπποφαές ?
9. 15. 6. see note) (= μήκώνιον
9. 8. 2.), spurge, Euphorbia


Peplus etc.

9. 8. 2. juice of stalk, how col-
lected; 9. 11.1. several kinds;
9.11. 5. do.; leaf of στρύχνος ὃ
ὑπνώδης comp.; 9.11. 7-9. kinds
(see below); 9. 15. 6. Arcadian :
localities.

τιθύμαλλος ὁ ἄρρην, Euphorbia Sib-
thorpit
. 11. 8. described: medicinal
use.

τιθύμαλλος ὁ μυρτίτης (fruit κάρυον
9.11 9.), Euphorbia Myrsinites

9.11. 9. described: habitat : time
of gathering : medicinal use.

τιθύμαλλος ὃ παράλιος, Se€a-Spurge,
Euphorbia Paralias


9. 11. 7. described: medicinal
use.
tidy, one-seeded wheat, Triticum


monococcum
ἢ. 5. roots numerous; 2. 4. 1.


ST. MICHAEL’S


2


INDEX OF PLANTS


seed, unless bruised, produces
πυρός: 8. 1. 1. in list of cereals;
8. 1. 8. sown early; 8. 2. 1. ger-
mination described; 8. 2. 6.
time of ripening seed ; 8.4.1.
comp. in detail with other
cereals; 8. 8. ὃ. τ. and Gea only
plants which can change into
something quite different (cf.
2. ἘΠῚ: 8. 9 2. exhausts the
soil less than any other cereal:
reason : likes light soil: τ. and
Gea the cereals most like
πυρός.
τίφυον, autumn squill, Scilla autum-
nalis
7. 13. 7. flower appears before
leaves and stem.
τραγάκανθα (1), tragacanth, Astra-
galus creticus
9. 1. 3. produces a gum: now
known to grow not only in
Crete (see τ. (2)); 9. 8. 2. no
cutting needed to collect gum.
τραγάκανθα (2), tragacanth, Astra-
galus Parnassi
9.15. 8. abundant in Achaia and
not inferior to Pe τ. of Crete.
τραγοπώγων (= κόμη 7.7.1.) goat’s
beard, Tragopogon porrifolwus
7. 7. 1. described : a λάχανον.
τρίβολος (1), caltrop, Tribulus ter-
restris
3. 1. 6 comes up spontaneously
in damp places; 6. 1. 3. has
leaves as well as spines: has
spines on the  fruit-vessel:
6. 5. 3. distinguished from τρί-
Bodos (2); 7.8.1. stem ‘on the
ground’; 8. 7. 2. (as a weed)
destroyed by ἐρέβινθος.
ee (2), caltrop, Fagonia cretica
1. 3. has leaves as well as
ome ΧΆΡΙΝ Gabe Tin
list of such plants; 6. 5. 3. dis-
tinguished from τρίβολος (1);
grows near enclosures.
τρίβολος (3), water chestnut, Trapa
natans
4, 9. 1-8. described.
τριπόλιον (?), Aster Tripolium
9. 19. 2. use as charm.
τριχομανές (ἢ = ἀδίαντον τὸ λευκόν)
7. 14, 1., English maidenhair,
Asplenium Trichomanes


THEOPH. VOL. II.


τύφη, bulrush, Typha angustata
Oso. NOL jointed ; 1 8 αν πὸ
knots; 4. 10. 1. in list of plants
of Lake Copais; 4. 10. 5. de-
scribed; 4. 10. 6. grows both on
land and in water : some doubt
this; 4.10.7. part used for food.


ὑάκινθος ἡ ἀγρία, Scilla bifolia
(5. 8. 1- 2, flowering time.
ἄάκινθος ἡ σπαρτή, larkspur, Del-
phinium Ajacis
6. 8. 2. flowering time: flower of
πόθος (1) comp.
ὕδνον, truffle, Tuber cibarium
1. 1. 11. has not all the ‘ parts’ of
a plant; 1.6.5. no roots; 1. 6.9.


ὑ


underground.
ὑποχοιρίς, cat’s ear, Hypochoeris
radicata


7: 7. 1. ἃ λάχανον; classed as
‘chicory-like’ from its leaves;
7.11.4. growth contrasted with
χόνδρυλλα.

ὕφεαρ, mistletoe, Viscum album
8. 16. 1. grows On πρῖνος.


φακός, lentil, Hrvum Lens
2.4.2.seed sown in dung; 3.15.38.
fruit of τέρμινθος comp.; 3.17. 2.
size of fruit of κολοιτία (1) comp.;
3. 18. 5. arrangement of fruit of
ῥοῦς comp.; 4. 4. 9. not found in
India; 4. 4. 10. a so-called ¢. in
India; 8. 1. 4. sown late; 8.3.2.
Stem? 8¥.3.'4) seed; <8. δὲ 1.
several kinds; white form
sweetest; 8. 5. 2. seedS com-
paratively few; 8. 5. 3. shape
of pod; 8. 8. 3. ἄρακος grows
specially among b.3 8. 8. 4. so
also arapivyn; 8. 8. 6. causes etc.
of φ. becoming ‘cookable’ or
‘ uncookable.’
φάσγανον (= ξίφιον = ξίφος 7. 18. 1.),
corn-flag, Gladiolus segetum
7. 12. 3. use of root in food: root
described; 7. 13. 1. leaves de-
scribed; 7. 13. 4. grown from
seed.
φάσκος, tree-moss, Usnea barbata
3. 8. 6. borne only On αἰγίλωψ (1).
φελλόδρυς (= apia 3.16. 3.), holm-
oak, Quercus Ilex var. agrifolia,
ἘΜ ἢ ΕΝ evergreen; 3. 3. 8. do.;


481
ΕἸ


“


INDEX OF PLANTS


3. 16. 3. described: called apia
by Dorians.

φελλός, (2= ἴψος ef. Plin. 16. 98.),
cork-oak, Quercus Suber

1. 2.7. bark; 1.5.2. bark rough
and fleshy; 1. 5. 4. wood light;
3. 17. 1. grows in Tyrrhenia:
described; 4. 15. 1. is the
stronger for having its bark
stripped ; 5.8. 6. wood of φοῖνιξ
(1) comp.

φέως (= στοιβή 6. 1. 3.), Poterium
spinosum.

φηγός (= δρῦς ἡ aypia), Valonia oak,
Quercus Aegilops

3. 9. 1. ἃ mountain tree; 3. 4; 2.
time of budding; 3. 6. 1. slow-
growing (?); 3. 8. 2. one of the
five ‘Idaean’ kinds of oak: de-
scribed : fruit; 3.8. 3—4. acorns ;
3. 8. 4. timber; 3. 8. 7. one of
the four ‘Macedonian’ kinds of
oak; 4. 18. 2. ancient trees at
Ilium; 5. 1. 2. time of cutting
timber.

φιλύκη, alaternus,
ternus

1. 9. 3. evergreen; 3.3. 1.amoun-
tain tree; 3. 3. 3. evergreen;
3. 4. 2. time of budding; 3. 4. 4.
time of fruiting ; 5. 6. 2. easiest
wood for turning.

φίλυρα (= φίλυρα ἡ θήλεια), lime (or
silver lime), Tilia platyphylios,
(or tomentosa)

1.5. 2. bark thin: bark in layers;
1 bose wood! pliable.) 4, Ova.
leaves inverted in summer;
1. 12. 4. leaves, but not fruit,
eaten by animals; 3. 3. 1. a
mountain tree; 3. 4. 2. time of
budding; 3. 4. 6. time of fruit-
ing: fruit inedible; 3. 5. 5-6.
winter-buds; 38. 10. 4-5. de-
scribed: ‘male’ and ‘female’
forms distinguished (see below);
8. 11. 1. bark of σφένδαμνος
comp.; 3. 18. 1. bark of κέρασος
comp.; 3. 13. 3. grows where
κέρασος grows; 3, 17. 5. leaf of
συκῆ ἡ ᾿Ιδαία comp.; 4.4.1. hard
to grow in Babylon; 4. 5. 1. in
list of Northern trees; 4. 8. 1.
grows partiallyin water ; 4.15.1.
outer bark can be stripped;


482


Rhamnus Ala-


4. 15. 2. survives stripping of
bark for some time; 5. 1. 2.
time of cutting timber ; 5. 1. 4.
do.; 5. 8. 3. character of wood;
5. 5. 1. wood easy to work;
blunts tools; 5. 6. 2. wood soft
and easy to work; 5.7.5. various
uses of wood and bark; 5.9. 7.
wood used for fire-sticks.

φίλυρα ἡ ἄρρην (= φιλυρέα), mock-
privet, Phillyrea media

3. 10. 4-5. distinguished from φ. ἡ
θήλεια.

φίλυρα ἡ θήλεια (= φίλυρα), silver-
lime, Tilia tomentosa

3. 10. 4-5, distinguished from ¢. 7


pnv. :
Phillyrea


ap
φιλυρέα,
media
1. 9. 3. evergreen; 3. 4. 6. (?)
time of fruiting.
φλεώ (φλεώς), Hrianthus Ravennae
4.8.1. in list of τὰ λοχμώδη; 4.10.1.
in list of plants of Lake Copais;
4. 10. 4. described; 4. 19. 6.
grows both on land and in
water; grows on the floating
islands of Lake Copais; 4. 10. 7.
part used for food ; 47 11. 12.
foliage of some κάλαμοι comp.
φλόγινον (= φλόξ), wall-flower, Cheir-
anthus Chewrt
6. 8. 1-2, a coronary plant:
flowering time.
φλόμος ἡ μέλαινα, Mullein, Verbascum
sinuatum
9. 12. 3. leaf of μήκων ἡ κερατῖτις
comp.
φλόξ ( = φλόγινον),
Cheiranthus Cheiri
6. 6. 2. a cultivated under-shrub ;
a coronary plant: scentless :
6. 6. 11. grown from seed.
φοῖνιξ (1), date-palm, Phoenix dacty-
lifera
1. 2. 7. ‘flesh’ turns to wood;
1. 4. 3. (2) tolerant of sea-water :
1. 5. 1. Τοῦ branches; 1. 5. 2.
rough bark; 1. 5. 8. wood
fibrous; 1.6.2. core not dis-
tinguishable; 1. 9. 1. growth
chiefly upwards; 1. 9. 3. ever-
green; 1. 10. 5. reedy leaves;
1.11.1. seed immediately within
envelope: envelope not single;


mock-privet,


+ ὁ Bien) >


as


oe


wall-flower,


INDEX OF PLANTS


1. 11. 3. seed solid and ‘dry’
throughout; 1. 13. 5. ‘male’
only flowers; 1.14.2. bears fruit
at top; 2. 2. 2. propagation ;
2. 2. 6 seeds come true; 2.2.8.
effect of locality ; 2.2.10. effects
of climate; 2. 6. 1. propagation
from fruit: 2. 6. 2. propagation
from ‘head’; 2. 6. 3. cultiva-
tion ; 2. 6. 4. ‘do.; 2. 6. 5. culti-
vation in Syria; 2. 6. 8. various
kinds; [2. 6. 9. branching kind:
see κονκιόφορον]: aly pas. Oe 10,
shrubby kind: see xoté]; 2.6.12.
cuttings set upside down;
2. 8. 1. apt to shed immature
fruit; 2. 8. 4. artificial fertilisa-
tion; 3. 3. 5. not fruitful wher-
ever it SIOWS ; Slow 7. dwart
form Ὁ ἐν ὃ Χαμαιρριφής) 5 4.1.5.
ΟΣ Ὁ ΣῈ 10 πάν 2. 7. κουκιόφορον
comp.; 4, 3.1. grows in parts of
Libya; 4, 3. 5. grows well in
waterless Libya: salt in soil,
water supply; 4.3.7. kept alive
by dew in dry regions; 4. 4. 3.
sown in pots; 4.4.13. dangerous
to eat unripe dates (in Ged-
rosia); 4. 7. 8. occurs on the
island of Tylos; 4. 13. 2. story
of the very old o. on Delos;
4. 14. 8. if topped, becomes
barren, but is not destroyed ;
4, 15. 2. survives stripping of
bark; 5. 3. 6. character of
wood: used for images; 5. 6. 1.
wood strong: behaviour under
pressure: 5. 9. 4. wood makes a
very evil smoke when burnt for
charcoal ; 6. 4. 11. seed-vessel
Of κάκτος rik when stripped of
seeds, comp. to ‘brain’ of ¢.;
9. 4. 4. mats in Arabia made of
leaves of ¢.
on (2), Nannorhops ritchiana
4.8. Bactrian.
point (3), 6 ὃ χαμαιρριφής, dwarf palm,
Chamaerops humilis
Ὁ ΤΙ aescribed 5; 8. 18. 7. (2).
φοῖνιξ (4), Callophyllis laciniata
4,6. 2. peculiar to certain waters;
4. 6. 10. described.
φόνος (-- ἀτρακτυλίς 6. 4. 6.), distaff-
thistle, Carthamus lanatus
6. 4. 6. reason for name


| (1) τὸ πλατύφυλλον (ΞΞ ζώστηρ
6. 2. = πράσον (2)), grass-
ci Posidonia oceanica
4, 6. 2. occurs generally in Greek
waters : root described.
φῦκος (2) θαυμαστὸν τὸ μέγεθος, τὶ-
band-weed, (= πράσον (3)),
Laminaria saccharina
4.6. 4. described: grows in Atlan-
tic: washed into Mediterranean ;
4. 7. 1. refers to 4. 6. 4
φῦκος (3) τὸ πόντιον
4.6.4. collected by sponge-fishers.
φῦκος (4) τὸ τριχόφυλλον, Cystoseira
foeniculosa
4. 6. 3. described.
φῦκος (5), litmus, Roccella tinctoria
4, 6. 5. Cretan: dye described.
φῦκος (6), grass-wrack, Cymodocea
nodosa (and Zostera marina)
4. 6. 6. described: comp. to
ἄγρωστις.


χαλβάνη, 866 πάνακες (τὸ Σύριον).
χάλκειος, Carlina corymbosa
6. 4. 3. a ‘ thistle-like’ plant.
χαμαίβατος (Ξε βάτος), Rubus ulmi-
folius
3.18. 4. described.
χαμαιδάφνη, periwinkle, Vinca her-


bacea
38. 18. 13. leaf of εὐώνυμος comp.
χαμαίδρυς, germander, Teucrium


Chamaedrys
9. 9. 5. medicinal use: described.
χαμαιλέων, chamaeleon
6. 4. 3. a ‘thistle-like’ plant, but
leaves not spinous (see n. on
6. 4. 8.); 6.4.8. flower turns into
‘down’; 9. 12. 1-2, kinds (see
below).
χαμαιλέων ὃ λευκός (= ἄκανθα (9)
12.1. = axavos = ifia (2) =
ἰξίνη), ypine-thistle, Atractylis
gummifera
9.12.1. described : medicinal use:
fatal to dogs and pigs: how
administered: grows every-
where.
χαμαιλέων ὁ μέλας,
corymbosum
9, 12. 2. described: medicinal
use: habitat: fatal to dogs;
9. 14. 1. how long drug will
keep.


Cardopatium


483


_
μι
bo


INDEX OF PLANTS


χελιδόνιον, greater celandine, Cheli-
donium maius
7.15.1. flowering depends on the
heavenly bodies.
χόνδρυλλα, Chondrilla juncea
7. 7. 1. a λάχανον: classed as
‘chicory-like’ from its leaves;
7. 11. 4. growth of ὑποχοιρίς
contrasted.


ψευδοδίκταμνον, Ballota acetabulosa
9.16.2. comp with δίκταμνον as to
appearance and properties: said
by some to be only a degene-
rate form of δίκταμνον : method
of keeping.


ὥκιμον, basil, Ocymum basilicwm
1. 6. 6-7. root woody; 1. 10. 7.


time of leaf-growth; 7. 1. 2-3.
time of sowing and germina-
tion; 7.2.1. propagation; 7.2.4.
grows again when stem is cut;
7. 2. 7-8. root described; 7.3.1.
long in flower; 7. 3. 2-3 seeds
described; 7. 3. 4. seed very
abundant: seed borne at top;
7. 4. 1. only one kind; 7. 5. 2.
watered at mid-day; 7. 5. 4.
effect of hot weather; 7. 5, 5.
seed does not keep well; 7.7. 2.
leaf of κόρχορος comp.; 7. 9. 2.
flowers borne in succession, cf.
7.8.1.5 9.18. 5. leaf of ἀρρενό-
γονον and of θηλύγονον comp.
&xpo;, Lathyrus Ochrus ;

8. 1. 3. sown early; 8.3.1. leaf;
8. 3. 2. stem; 8. 10. 5. infested
by ‘ worms.’


APPENDIX OF UNNAMED PLANTS


The following plants (arranged in the order of mention) which are
described or indicated, but not named, ia the Enquiry, seem possible


to identify :—


1, (ὅμοιον τῷ apaxw), tine-tare, La-

thyrus tuberosus
1. 6. 12. root described.

2. (ὑλήμα ἴδιον τι περὶ Μέμφιν), Mi-

mosa asperata
4.2.11. described : ‘sensitive.’

3. (δένδρον . . . μεγαλόκαρπον), Jack-

fruit, Artocarpus integrifolia
4. 4. 5. used for food by Indian
sages.

4, (φύλλον. .. τοῖς τῶν στρουθῶν
πτεροῖς ὅμοιον), banana, Musa
sapientum

4, 4. 5. described.

5. (καρπὸς σκολιὸς ἐσθιόμενος δὲ

γλυκύς), mango, Mangifera in-


ica
4, 4. 5. fruit described: causes
dysentery.
6. (καρπὸς ὅμοιος τοῖς κρανέοις), ju-
jube, Zizyphus Jujuba
4, 4, 5.


484


7. (ὅμοιον τερμίνθῳ), pistachio-nut,

Pistacia vera
4, 4. 7. described.

8. (ὅμοιον τῇ ὄψει καὶ τὸ BovKepas),

Phaseolus Mungo
4. 4. 9-10. called by Hellenes
ακός, and similarly used.

9. (ἄκανθα ἐφ᾽ ἧς γίνεται δάκρυον) (=
ἄκανθα (4) ἡ ᾿ἸΙνδική), Balsamo-
dendron Mukul ‘

4, 4. 12. grows in Aria: de-
scribed.

10. (ὕλημα
foetida,

4, 4,


ἥλικον ῥάφανος), Asa
corodosma foetidum Ὶ
12. described: fatal to


horses.
11. (ὅμοιον τῇ δάφνῃ φύλλον ἔχον),
Nerium odorum
4, 4. 13. effect on animals.
12a. (δένδρα μέγαλα), Mangrove,
Bruguwiera gymnorhiza
4. 7. 4, described.


INDEX OF PLANTS


12b. (δένδρον φύλλον ἔχον ὅμοιον τῇ
δάφνη) mangrove, Rhizophora
mucronata

4,7. 4. described (as if identical
with 12a. ye

13. (καρπὸς ὅμοιος τοῖς θέρμοις), Aegi-
ceras MAUS

4.7. 5, 6, and 7. described.

14, (δένδρα ὅμοια τῇ ἀνδράχλῃ (=
δάφνη (6) = ἐλάα (3)), White
mangrove, Avicennia officinalis

LN τὰν described.

10. (δένδρα τὸ ἄνθος ἔχοντα ὅμοιον τῷ

λευκοΐῳ) ( = (16)), tamarind,
ὰ ΤΠ πριν indica


Tylos.
16. (δένδρον πολύφυλλον) ( = (15)),
ee Tamarindus indica
Sone OF sTows in the island of
pp opening and closing of
flower
ἘΣ eter ov φυλλοροοῦσα), Ficus
laccifera
. 7. 8. grows in the island of
Tylos.
18. (ὅμοιον τοῖς κρίνοις) Ottelia alis-
moides
4. 8. 6. Egyptian marsh-plant:
habitat and leaves: medicinal
use.


grows in the island of


19. (ἕν τι γένος ἐν ταῖς λίμναις),
Saccharum biflorum
4,8. 13. use for fodder.
20. (γένος παραφυόμενον ἐν τῷ σίτῳ),
Corchorus trilocularis
4. 8. 14. treatment as fodder:
fruit described.
21. (δένδρον), Sissoo-wood, Dalbergia
Sissoo
5. 8. 2. wood described: use for
making furniture.
22. (ξύλον), teak, Tectona grandis
5.4. 7. wood stands sea-water well.


28. (δένδρον), calamander wood,
Diospyros quaesita
5. 4. 7. wood described.
24, (ὅμοιον ἀβροτόνῳ), Artemisia
camphorata


6.3.6. properties : effect on sheep.
25. (τὸ τῇ νάρδῳ προσεμφερὴ τὴν
ὀσμὴν ἔχον), Valeriana Dios-
coridis
9. 7. 4. a Thracian ἄρωμα.

26. (ὑποφυόμενον εὐθὺς ἐκ τῆς ῥίζης
τῷ κυμίνῳ), broom-rape, Ovo-
banche versicolor

8. 8. 5. parasitic on κύμινον.

27. (ῥίζα θανατηφόρος), Somali arrow-

poison, Acokanthera Schimperi
9. 15. 2. Aethiopian: used for
poisoning arrows.


485


1

Π

4
alsa:
ὁ
;
.
3


peru


ES
{i
τ ἔν aa
Ἷ A
) Ae
renner
ΓΤ , “EGG β f a
) 4, ὼς ‘ ae
<5 a ἢ
» ’
οὐ ἢ wey
ἐνῷ στῶν" OS
ἢ ᾿ wt
« (eos SAE
ru ims 8.5


pS re Ab ory ἢ


Lona


‘ Ate ΗΣ citys: val whee le}
juin pexcoelisy Ἢ


KEY TO THE INDEX


I—LIST OF PLANTS MENTIONED IN THE
ENQUIRY UNDER BOTANICAL NAMES


Abies cephalonica
—— pectinata
Acacia albida-
—— arabica
—— tortilis

- Acantha arabica
Acer campestre
— creticum
—— monspessulanum
—— pseudo-Platanus
Acokanthera Schim-


peri
Aconitum Anthora


Acorus Calamus


Adiantum Capillus-
Veneris

Aegiceras majus

Aegilops ovata

Ailanthus malabarica

Ajuga Ira

Allium Cepa and vars.


— nigrum

— Porrum

— sativum
Alnus glutinosa
Althaea officinalis


Amaranthus Blitum
Amelanchier vulgaris
Amomum subulatum


ἐλάτη (1)
ἐλάτη (2)
axav0a(1),etc.
axav0a(1),etc.
ἄκανθα (3)
ἄκανθα (7)
φυγία

γλεῖνος
σφένδαμνος
κλινότροχος


App. (27)


ἀκόνιτον, θηλύ-
φονον, μυό-
φονον, σκορ-
πίος (8)
κάλαμος ὁ εὐώ-
δης
ἀδίαντον, ἀ. τὸ
μέλαν
App. (13)
αἰγίλωψ (2)
κώμακον
ἐπετίνη
γήθυον, γήτει-
ον, κρόμνον,
kK. τὸ σχισ-
τόν, κρομυο-
γήτειον
μῶλυ
πράσον (1)
σκόροδον
κλήθρα
ἀλθαία, ᾿'μαλά-
χη ἡ ἀγρία
βλίτον
συκῆ ἡ ᾿Ιδαία
ἄμωμον


Anagallis caerulea
Anchusa tinctoria
Andropogon Ischae-


mum
Anemone blanda


— coronaria

—— pavonina

—— spp.

Anethum graveolens


Anthemis chia


Antirrhinum Oron-
tium
Apium graveolens


Arbutus Andrachne

— hybrida

— Unedo

Aristolochia rotunda

Artemisia Absinthium

— arborescens

— camphorata

Artocarpus  integri-
folia

Arum italicum

Arundo Donax


Asparagus acutifolius
Asphodelus ramosus


Asplenium Ceterach
— Trichomanes


κόρχορος
ἄγχουσα
ἴσχαιμος


ἀνεμώνη ἡ
ὀρεία
ἀ, ἡ λειμωνία
ἀ. ἡ λειμωνία
ἀνεμώνη
ἄνηθον,
τος
ἄνθεμον, ἀ. τὸ
φυλλῶδες
ἀντίρρινον


ἄννη-


ἐἑλειοσέλινον,
σέλινον, σ.
τὸ ἕλειον
ἀνδράχλη
ἀφάρκη
κόμαρος
ἀριστολοχία
ἀψίνθιον
ἀβρότονον
App. (24)
App. (3)


apov

dovaé, κάλαμος
ὃ αὐλητικός
etc.

ἀσφάραγος

ἀσφόδελος, πό-
θος (2)

ἡμιόνιον

ἀδίαντον τὸ
λευκόν, τρι-
χομανές


487


KEY TO THE INDEX


Aster Amellus
Tripolium
Astragalus creticus
—— Parnassi
Atractylis gummifera


Atriplex Halimus
—— rosea
Atropa Belladonna


Avenasativa |
Avicennia officinalis


Balanites aegyptiaca
Ballota acetabulosa


—— pseudo-Dictam-
nus

Balsamodendron Mu-
kul

— Myrrha

— Opobalsamum

Bambusa arundinacea


Beta maritima
Brassica alba

—— cretica

—— Rapa

Bruguiera gymnorhiza
Bryonia cretica


Buxus sempervirens


Calamintha incana
Calamogrostis Epi-
geios
Callitriche verna
Callitris quadrivalvis
Callophyllis laciniata
Calycotome villosa
Capparis spinosa
Cardopatium corym-
bosum
Carduus arvensis
— acanthoides
Carex riparia
Carlina corymbosa
Carthamus lanatus


488


ἀστέρισκος
τριπόλιον
τραγάκανθα (1)
τραγάκανθα (2)
a Kav θα (8),
ἄκανος, ἰξία
(2), ἰξίνη,
χαμαιλεὼν ὃ
λευκός
ἅλιμον
ἀδράφαξυς
μανδραγόρας
(2)


βρόμος
δάφνη
ἐλάα


App. (14)


βάλανος
ψευδοδίκταμ-
νον
δίκταμνον (ἕτε-
ἄκανθα (4),
App. (9)
σμύρνα
βάλσαμον
κάλαμος ὁ Ἴν-
δικός
τεῦτλον
νᾶπυ
ῥάφανος
ογγυλίς
App. (12a),
ἄμπελος ἡ ἀγ-
ρία,μήλωθρον
πύξος


ἑλένιον
κάλαμος (ἐπί-
γειος) -
λέμνα
θύον
φοῖνιξ (4)
ἀσπάλαθος
κάππαρις
χαμαιλεὼν ὃ
μέλας
ἄκανθα (2)
πολυάκανθος
βούτομος
χάλκειος
ἀτρακτυλίς,
φόνος


Carthamus leucocaulos κνῆκος ἡ ἀγρία


— tinctorius


Castanea vesca
— ss ———- aa.
Celtis australis
Centaurea calcitrapa
— salonitana
— solstitialis
Ceratonia Siliqua
Cerris Siliquastrum


Chamaerops humilis
Cheiranthus Cheiri
Chelidonium majus
Chondrilla juncea
Cicer arietinum
Cichorium Intybus
Cinnamomum Cassia
—— iners

Cistus salvifolius
—— villosus


Citrus medica


Clematis vitalba
Cnicus Acarna
——benedictus


Colchicum parnassi-
cum

Colocasia antiquorum

Colutea arborescens

Conium maculatum


Convolvulus Scam-
monia

—— sepium

Corchorus trilocularis

Cordia Myxa

Coriandrum sativum

Cornus Mas

—— sanguinea

Corydalis densiflora

Cotoneaster Pyra-
cantha


Corylus avellana


var.


Crataegus Heldreichii
— orientalis


κνῆκος, K. ἡ
ἥμερος, κρό-
Kos 0 ἀκαν-
θώδης

διοςβάλανος

καρύα ἡ Ev-
βοϊκή

λωτός (1)

παντάδουσα

κενταύριον
τετράλιξ
κερωνία
en (1) ση-


goine (3) F
φλόγινον, φλόξ
χελιδόνιον
χόνδρυλλα
ἐρέβινθος
κιχόριον
κινάμωμον
κασία
κίσθος ὃ θήλυς
κίσθος, K. ὃ
ἄρρην
μηλέα ἡ ἡ Περσι-
κή (Μηδική)
ἀθραγένη
ἄκορνα
κνῆκος ἡ ἀγρία
(ἑτέρα)
ἐφήμερον, σπά-
a.
οὔϊγγον
κολυτέα
κώνειον
σκαμμωνία


ἰασιώνη
App. (20)
κοκκυμηλέα (ἡ
Αἰγυπτία),
κορίαννον
κράνεια
θηλυκράνεια
θήσειον
ὀξνάκανθος


“««-


καρύα
καρύα ἡ Ἥρα

κλεωτική
κράταιγος


KEY


Crataegus oxyacantha


Crepis Columnae
Crocus cancellatus
—— sativus
ΞΡ.
Cucumis sativus
Cucurbita maxima
Cuminum Cyminum
Cupressus semper-
virens
Cuscuta europaea
Cyclamen graecum
Cydonia vulgaris


Cymbopogon Schoen-
anthus

Cymodocea nodosa

Cynara Cardunculus

— Scolymus

Cynodon Dactylon

Cyperus auricomus

- —— esculentus


— longus

— Papyrus

— rotundus

Cystoseira Abies ma-
rina

— ericoides.

— foeniculosa

Cytisus aeolicus


Dalbergia Sissoo
Daphne Gnidium
— oleoides


Datura Stramonium


Daucus Carota .
Delphinium Ajacis


— orientale
—— Staphisagria
Dendrocalamus stric-


us
Diospyros Ebenum
— Melanoxylon
Dracunculus vulgaris
Drypis spinosa


Ecballium Elaterium
Echinops spinosus
Echium diffusum


᾽,ὔ « >
μεσπίλη ἡ ἂν-
θηδονοείδης
ἀπαργία
« fd
kK. ὁ λευκός
K. ὃ εὔοσμος
κρόκος
σίκνος
κολοκύντη
κύμινον
κυπάριττος


ὀροβάγχη
κυκλάμινος
κυδώνιον,
στρουθίον (1)
σχοῖνος (2)


φῦκος (6)
κάκτος (1)
κάκτος (2)
ἄγρωστις
σάρι
μαλιναθάλλη,
μνάσιον
κύπειρος
πάπυρος
κύπειρον
ἐλάτη (3)


δρῦς (7)
φῦκος (4)
κολοιτία (1)


App. (21)
κνέωρον
κνέωρος ὃ λευ-
κός
θρύορον, περιτ-
τός, στρύχ-
νος ὁ μανικός
δαῦκον (1)
ὑάκινθος ἡ
σπαρτή
πόθος (1)
ἀσταφίς
κάλαμος ὁ Ἰν-
δικός
ἐβένη (1)
ἐβένη (2)
δρακόντιον
δρυπίς


σίκυος ὃ ἄγριος
cs

UT POS
ονοχειλές


TO THE INDEX


Elettaria Cardamo-
mum
Ephedra
poda
Hrianthus Ravennae

Erica arborea

Eruca sativa

Ervum Lens

Eryngium campestre

Erythraea Centau-
rium

Euonymus europaeus

— latifolius

Euphorbia antiquo-
rum

— Apios


campylo-


— Mpyrsinites
— paralias
— Peplus
— Sibthorpii
—— spp.


Fagonia cretica
Fagus silvatica |
Ferula communis


— nodosa


—— tingitana
Ferulago galbanifera
Ficus bengalensis
— Carica

— — val.


— laccifera
—— Sycamorus


var.
Fraxinus excelsior
—— Ornus

Fucus spiralis
Fungi


Galanthus nivalis
Galium Aparine
Genista acanthoclada


καρδάμωμον
θραύπαλος


φλεώ
ἐρείκη
εὔζωμον
ακός
ἠρύγγιον
κενταυρίς


εὐώνυμος
τετραγωνία


ἄκανθα (5), (6)


ἄπιος (2), ἰσ-
χάς, ῥάφανος
ἡ ὀρεία
τιθύμαλλος ὃ
μυρτίτης
τιθύμαλλος ὃ
παράλιος
μηκώνιον, τιθύ-
μαλλος
τιθύμαλλος ὁ
ἄρρην
μηκώνιον, ἱπ-
ποφέως, τι-
. θύμαλλος


τρίβολος (2)

ὀξύη

ναρθηκία, νάρ-
θη

πάνακες τὸ
᾿Ασκληπίειον

σίλφιον

πάνακες

συκῆ ἡ Ἰνδική

συκῆ (1)

συκῆ ἡ ᾿᾽Δρα-
βική

App. (17) :

συκάμινος ἡ
Αἰγυπτία

συκῆ ἡ Κυπρία

βουμέλιος

μελία

ἄμπελος (3)

μύκης


λευκόϊον (2)
ἀπαρίνη
σκορπίος (1)


489


Gladiolus segetum


Glaucium flavum var
Serpierii
Glycyrrhiza glabra


Gossypium arboreum


Hedera Helix

Helichrysum siculum

Heliotropium  villo-
sum


Helleborus cyclo-
phyllus

Herniaria glabra

Hippuris vulgaris

Hordeum = sativum
and vars.

Hyphaene thebaica


Tlex Aquifolium

Imperata arundi-
nacea

Inula Helenium


— graveolens


— viscosa

—— spp.

Tris foetidissima
— pallida ete.
—— Sisyrinchium


Juglans regia


Juncus acutus

—— 8ΡΡ.
Juniperus communis
— excelsa

— foetidissima
—— phoenicea


—— Oxycedrus


Laburnum vulgare
Lactuca graeca
—— sativa

— scariola


490


ξίφιον, ξίφος,
φάσγανον
μήκων ἡ κερα-
τῖτις
γλυκεῖα (ῥίζα),
Σκυθική
(δένδρον


ἐριόφορον


τὸ)


ἕλιξ, κιττός
ἐλειόχρυσος
ἡλιοτρόπιον


ἐλλέβορος,
ἐ. ὃ μέλας

ἐλλεβορίνη
ἴπνον


κριθή


κόϊξ, κουκιόφο-
ρον


κήλαστρος
θρύον


πάνακες τὸ
Χειρώνειον

κόνυζα ἡ θή-
λεια

κόνυζα ἡ ἄρρην

κόνυζα

ξίρις

ips

σισυρίγχιον


καρύα ἡ Ilep-
σική
σχοῖνος ὁ ὀξύς
σχοῖνος
κεδρίς
κέδρος (2)
νία
ἄρκευθος,
ὃρος (8)
κέδρος (1), ὀξύ-
κεδρος


,
Κε-


κύτισος (1)
λιβανωτίς
Opidaé
θριδακίνη


KEY TO THE INDEX


Lagenaria vulgaris
Laminaria saccharina
Lapidium sativum
Lathyrus amphicar-


—— sativus

— tuberosus
Laurus nobilis
Lavandula spica
Lavatera arborea
Lecokia cretica


Lemna minor
Ligustrum vulgare
Lilium candidum etc.


— chalcedonicum


— Martagon
Limnanthemum nym-
phoides
Linum usitatissimum
Lolium temulentum
Lonicera etrusca
Loranthus europaeus
Lupinus alba
Lychnis coronaria
Lycoperdon Bovista
—— giganteum


Malabaila aurea

Malva silvestris

Mandragora  offici-
narum

Mangifera indica

Marrubium peregri-
num

Matthiola incana


Matricaria Chamo-
milla

Medicago arborea

—— sativa

Melissa officinalis


Mentha aquatica
—— Pulegium
—— viridis


Mercurialis perennis


σικύα

φῦκος (2)
κάρδαμον
ἀράχιδνα


ὦχρος
λαθύρος
App. (1)
δάφνη (1)
ipvov
μαλάχη (1)
λιβανωτός ἡ
κάρπιμιοος
ἴκμη
σπειραία
κρίνον, κρινω-
via, λείριον()
κρίνον τὸ πορ-
φυροῦν
ἡμεροκαλλές
μήνανθος


λίνον
αἴρα
κλύμενον
ἰξία (1)
θέρμος
λυχνίς
πέζις
ἄσχιον


δαῦκον (2)
μαλάχη (2)
se pt γον


App. (5)


πράσιον


ν Ν ,

tov τὸ λευκόν,
> ’ «ε
ἰωνία (ἡ λευ-
Kn), λευκόϊον


(1)


ἄνθεμον τὸ


ἀφύλλανθες ©
κύτισος (2)
(πόα) ἡ Μηδική
μελισσόφυλ-

λον
σισύμβριον


ἀρρενόγονον,
θηλύγονον


2
3
ὃ
y


Mespilus germanica
etc.


Mimosa asperata
Mimusops Schimperi


Musa sapientum
Muscari comosum etc.
Myrtus communis


Nannorhops ritchiana
Narcissus poeticus
—— serotinus


— Tazetta

—— spp.

Nardostachys Jata-
mansi

Nelumbium
sum

_Nephrodium  Filix-
mas

Nerium Oleander


specio-


—— odorum
Neslia paniculata
Nuphar luteum


Nymphaea alba
— stellata


Ocymum basilicum
Olea cuspidata
—— europaea

— Oleaster


Ononis antiquorum
Onopordon illyricum
Opoponax hispidus


Orchis longicruris
—— papilionacea
Origanum Dictamnus
— heracleoticum


---- Majorana
—— viride ete.


Ornithogalum pyre-
naicum
— umbellatum


μεσπίλη, μεσ-
πίλη ἡ σατά-
VELOS
App. (2)
περσέα,
σιον
App. (4)
βολβός
μυρρίνη


πέρ-


φοῖνιξ (2)
νάρκισσος (2)
λείριον (2),

νάρκισσος(1)
λείριον (2)
λείριον (2)
νάρδον


κύαμος ὁ Αἰ-
γύπτιος
πτερίς


δάφνη ἡ ἡ ἀγρία,
ὀνοθήρας

App. (11)

μελάμπυρον

μαδωνάϊς, νυμ-
φαία

σίδη

λωτός (2)


ὥκιμον

ἐλάα (2)

ἐλάα (1)

ἀγριέλαιος, κό-
τινος

ὀνωνίς

ὀνόπυξος

πανάκεια, πάν-
ακες τὸ “Hp-
άκλειον

ὄρχις

ὄρχις

δίκταμνον

ὀρίγανος ἡ
λευκή

ἀμάρακον

ὀρίγανος,
γανος ἡ
λαινα

σκίλλα ἡ Ἔπι-
μενίδειος

βολβίνη


ὀρί-
μέ-


KEY TO. THE INDEX


Orobanche cruenta
— versicolor
Oryza sativa
Ostrya carpinifolia
Ottelia alismoides


Paeonia officinalis


Paliurus australis

Pancratium mariti-
mum

Panicum miliaceum

Papaver hybridum

— Rhoeas


— somniferum
—— sp


pp.
Parietaria cretica
Petroselinum sativum


Peucedanum  offici-
nale
Phillyrea media


Phoenix dactylifera

Phragmites commu-
nis

Pinus brutia


—— halepensis


— Laricio


— pinea


pp.
Pimpinella Anisum
Piper nigrum
Pistacia Lentiscus
— Terebinthus
—— vera
Pisum sativum
Plantago Coronopus
crassifolia
—— Lagopus


—— lanceolata

—— major

Platanus orientalis

Polygonum  mariti-
mum


αἱμόδωρον
App. (26)
ὄρυζον

ὀστρύα, ὄστρυς


App. (18)
γλυκυσίδη,


παιωνία
παλίουρος
βολβὸς ὁ ἐριό-
φορος
κέγχρος
μήκων ἡ ῥοιάς
μήκων ἡ μέ-
λαινα
μήκων (ἡ ὀπώ-
Sys), νηπεν-
θές
μήκων
ἀλσίνη
ὀρειοσέλινον
πευκέδανον


φιλυρέα
φοῖνιξ (1)
κάλαμος ὁ χα-
ρακίας
πίτυς ἡ φθειρό-
ποῖος
πίτυς ; 866 also
under πίτυς
n ἀγρία.
πεύκη ἡ ἄκαρ-
πὸς, 7. ἢ
θήλεια, π. ἡ
᾿Ιδαία
πεύκη ἡ ἥμε-
ρος, π. ἡ κω-
νόφορος
πεύκη
ἄννησον
πέπερι
σχῖνος
τέρμινθος
App. (7)
πισός
κορωνόπους
θρυαλλίς
ὄρτυξ, στελέ-
φουρος
κύνωψ,
ἀρνόγλωσσον
πλάτανος
περδίκιον


491


KEY TO THE INDEX


Polygonum Persicaria

Polypodium vulgare

Polypogon mouspeli-
ensis

Polyporus igniarius

Populus nigra

— tremula

Portulaca oleracea

Potentilla reptans


Poterium spinosum
Prangos ferulacea


Prunus Amygdalus
—— avium


---- domestica
-— insititia


— Mahaleb

Pteris aquilina

Puccinia graminis

Punica Granatum
---- —-_—svar.

Pyrethrum Parthe-
nium

Pyrus
mis

— communis

—— — var. Pyraster

— Malus

—— — vars.


amygdalifor-


Quercus Aegilops
— Cerris


— coccifera
—— Ilex typica


var.
agrifolia

—— infectoria

— lanuginosa


—— Pseudo-Robur


— Robur


—— Suber


492


κραταίγονος
πολυπόδιον
ἀλωπέκουρος


πῖλος

αἴγειρος

κερκίς (2)

ἀνδράχνη

πενταπετές,
πεντάφυλλον

στοιβή, φεώς

ἱππομάραθον,
μαγύδαρις

ἀμυγδαλῆ

κέρασος,
κάρη

κοκκυμηλέα

προύμνη, σπο-

ιάς

πάδος (πηδός ?)

θηλύπτερις

ἐρυσίβη

pda.

poa ἡ ἀπύρηνος

παρθένιον


λα-


ἀχράς


ἄπιος (1)

ΟὙΥΧΡΉ

μηλέα

μηλέα ἡ γλυ-
κεῖα, - “ἢ
εαρινὴ; μ. Ἢ
ὀξεῖα


>


μι ἀγρία,
αἰγίλωψ (1),


ἄσπρις


δρῦς is


ἡμερίς (1)

pus ἡ πλατύ-
φυλλος

δρῦς ἡ ἁλί-
φλοιος, δ. ἡ
εὐθύφλοιος

δρῦς, ὃ. ἡ ἥμε-
ρος, ἐτυμό-
Spus, ἡμερίς
(2


φελλός, Los (?)


Ranunculus Ficaria

Raphanus Raphani-
stram

— sativus

Rhamnus alaternus

——— graeca

—- oleoides


—— 'SDP-
Rhizophora mucro-
nata
Rhus Coriaria
— Cotinus
Ricinus communis
Rosa canina ᾿
— centifolia var.
— dumetorum
—— sempervirens
Rubus ulmifolius


Roccella tinctoria

Rumex conglomera-
tus

—— Patientia

Ruscus aculeatus


— Hypophyllum
Ruta graveolens


Saccharum biflorum
Salix alba

—— amplexicaulis
—— cinerea

—— fragilis
——spp. |

Salvia calycina
Horminum
— triloba
Sambucus nigra
Saponaria officinalis


Sargassum vulgare
Satureia Thymbra
Saussurea Lappa
Scandix australis
—— Pecten-Veneris
Schoenus Holoschoe-
nus
—— nigricans


Scilla autumnalis
—— bifolia


ἀφία

κεράϊς, “ῥάφα-
νος ἡ ἀγρία

ῥαφανίς

φιλύκη

ῥάμνος ἡ λευκή

ῥάμνος ἡ μέ-
λαινα


ῥάμνος
App. (128)


ῥοῦς

κοκκυγέα

κρότων

κυνόρροδον

ῥοδωνία

ῥόδον τὸ ἄγριον

κυνόσβατος

βάτος, χαμαί-
βατος

φῦκος (5)

λάπαθον τὸ ay-
ριον

λάπαθος

κεντρομυρρίνη,
μυάκανθος

δάφνη ἡ ᾿Αλεξ-
ἀνδρεία

πήγανον


App. (19) ἷ
ἰτέα ἡ λευκή 4
ἰτέα ἡ μέλαινα f
κολοιτία (2) 4
ἑλίκη
ἰτέα {
σφάκος
ὅρμινον
ἐλελίσφακος.
ἀκτέος, ἀκτῆ |
στρουθίον (2), —
στροῦθος ᾿
δρῦς (8)
θύμβρα
κόστος
ἔνθρυσκον
σκάνδιξ
σχοῖνος ὃ ὁλό-
σχοινος
μελαγκρανΐίς,
σχοῖνος ὃ
κάρπιμος
τίφνυον
ὑάκινθος ἡ ἀγ-
ρία


KEY TO THE INDEX


Scolopendrium vul-
gare Σ
Scolymus hispanicus


Scorodosma foetidum
Securigera Coronilla
Sedum anopetalum
Sempervivum _ tec-
torum -
Senecio vulgaris
Sesamum indicum
Setaria italica


Silene venosa


Silybum marianum
Smilax aspera
Smyrnium Olusatrum
Solanum nigrum


- Sonchus Nymani
Sorbus domestica
Sorghum halepense


Spartium junceum
Spiraea filipendula
Storax officinalis


Tamarindus indica
Tamarix articulata
— tetrandra
Taraxacum officinale
Taxus baccata
Tectona grandis
Teucrium Poltium
hapsia garganica
Thymelaea hirsuta


Thymbra capitata
Thymus atticus
— Sibthorpii _
Tilia platyphyllos
— tomentosa


Tordylium apulum
—— officinale
Tragopogon porrifolius


σκολοπένδριον


λειμωνία σκό-
λυμος

App. (10)

πελεκῖνος

ἐπίπετρον

ἀείζωον


ἠριγέρων
σήσαμον
ἔλυμος,
νος
Ἡρακλεία, μή-
κων ἡ “Hpa-
κλεία
λευκάκανθα
σμῖλαξ (2)
ἱπποσέλινον
στρύχνος ὃ
ἐδώδιμος
σόγκος
Gy)


μέλι-


κριθαὶ αἱ ἀγρίαι

(Indian)
λινόσπαρτον
οἰνάνθη (1)
στύραξ


App. (15) (16)

μυρίκη (2)

μυρίκη (1)

ἀπάπη

μίλος

App. (22)

πόλιον

θαψία

κνέωρος O μέ-
λας

θύμον (1)

ἕρπυλλος (2)

ἕρπυλλος (1)


Trapa natans

Tribulus terrestris

Trifolium fragiferum

Trigonella Foenum-
graecum

—— graeca


Triticum dicoccum
— monococcum
—— vulgare
— — vars.
Tuber aestivum
—— cibarium
Typha angustata


Ulmus glabra
— montana
Ulva Lactuca
Urginea maritima
Urtica urens
Usnea barbata


Valeriana Dioscoridis
Veratrum album


Verbascum sinuatum


Vicia angustifolia
— Ervilia

— Faba

—— Sibthorpii
Vigna sinensis
Vinca herbacea
Viola odorata


Viscum album
Vitex Agnus-castus
Vitis vinifera
—— —— var,
thiaca


corin-


pidvpa — silvestris
φίλυρα, φ. ἡ θή- ; >

λεια Zizyphus Jujuba
καυκαλίς — Lotus
σέσελι - Spina-Christi
τραγοπώγων

nate Oe τὸ τος τ


τρίβολος (8)
τρίβολος (1)
λωτός (8)
βουκέρας,
λις
μελίλωτος,
λωτός (5)
ζειά, ὀλύρα
τίφή
πυρός
πυρός
κεραύνιον
ὕδνον


τύφη


™-


πτελέα
ὀρειπτελέα
βρύον
σκίλλα
ἀκαλύφη
φάσκος


App. (25)
ἐλλέβορος ὁ
λευκός
φλόμος ἡ μέ-
λαινα
ἀφάκη
ὄροβος
κύαμος
ἄρακος
δόλιχος
χαμαιδάφνη
ἴον τὸ μέλαν,
ἰωνία ἡ μέ-
λαινα
ὕφεαρ᾽
ἄγνος, οἷσος
ἄμπελος (1)
ἄμπελος (2)


οἰνάνθη ἡ ἀγρία
App. (6)
λωτός (4)


παλίουρος ὃ Αἰ-
γύπτιος


493


KEY TO THE INDEX


II.—LIST OF PLANTS MENTIONED IN THE
ENQUIRY UNDER POPULAR NAMES


Abele λεύκη
Acacias ἄκανθα (1), (3)
Alaternus φιλύκη
Alder κλήθρα
Alexanders ἱπποσέλινον
Alkanet ἄγχουσα
Allheal TAVAKES
Almond ἀμυγδαλῆ
Andrachne ἀνδράχλη
Anemones ἀνεμώνη
Apples μηλέα
Arbutus κόμαρος
—— hybrid ἀφάρκη
ἀπ τοὶ οἱδὸν (So- App. (27)
mali)
Artichoke κάκτος (2)
Asafoetida App. (10)
Ashes βουμελιος, με-
λία
Asparagus ἀσφάραγος
Aspen κερκίς (2)
ASHOGE ἀσφόδελος, πό-
θος (2)
Axe-weed πελεκῖνος
Bachelor’s buttons παρθένιον
Balm μελισσόφυλ-
λον
Balsam of Mecca βάλσαμον
Bamboos κάλαμος ὃ Ἶν-
δικός
Banyan συκῆ ἡ ᾿Ἰνδική
Barbary nut σισυρίγχιον
Barley κριθή
Basil ὥκιμον
Bay (sweet) δάφνη (1)
Bean κύαμος
Bedstraw ἀπαρίνη
Beet τεῦτλον,
Bergamot-mint σισύμβριον
Bindweed ἰασιώνη
Bird-cherry Képagos, λα-
κάρη
Birth-wort ἀριστολοχία
Bladder-senna κολυτέα
Blite βλίτον


494


Bog-rush


Bottle-gourd
Box
Bracken
Brambles


Broadleaved oak


Broom-rapes
Brooms


Bryony


Buckthorns
Bugloss
Bullfist
Bulrush
Bush-grass


Butcher’s broom


Cabbage


Calum ciidbetwood


Calamint
Calavance
Caltrop
Caper
Cardamom
—— Nepaul
Cardoon
Carnation
Carob


Cassia
Castor-oil plant
Cat’s ear
Cedar, odorous
—— prickly


—— Syrian


μελαγκρανίς,
σχοῖνος ὃ
κάρπιμος

σικύα

πύξος

θηλύπτερις

βάτος, χαμαΐί-
βατος

δρῦς ἡ πλατύ-
φυλλος

αἱμόδωρον.,
App. (26)

λινόσπαρτον,
σκορπίος (1)

ἄμπελος ἡ ἀγ-
ρία, μήλωθ-


ρον
ῥάμνος, φιλύκη
py Sie
πέζις

τύφη

κάλαμος (ἐπί-
γειος)
κεντρομυρρίνη,
μνάκανθος


ῥάφανος
App. (23)


ἑλένιον
δόλιχος
τρίβολος(1).(8)
κάππαρις
καρδάμωμον


. ἄμωμον


κάκτος (1)

διόσανθος

κερωνία, συκῆ
n Αἰγυπτία

κασία

κρότων

ὑποχοιρίς

θυία

κέδρος (1), ὀξύ-
κεδρος

κέδρος (2)


᾽
Ἂς
a
-
Ἶ
Ἵ
8


Celandine, greater χελιδόνιον


— lesser
Celery
Centaury
Chamaeleon


Chamomile, wild


Charlock


Chaste-tree
Cheese-fiower
Chervil

— wild
Chestnuts


Chick-pea
Chicory
Christ’s thorn
Cinnamon
Cinquefoil


Citron


Clematis
Cork-oak


Coriander
Cornel


Cornelian cherry


Corn-flag


Corn-thistle
Cotoneaster
Cotton-plant


Crack willow
Cress

Crocus
Cuckoo-pint
Cucumber
—— squirting
Cummin
Currant-vine
Cyclamen
Cypress


Dandelion

arnel
Date-palm
Dill


Distafi-thistle


ἀφία
σέλινον
κενταύριον
αμαιλέων
ἄνθεμον τὸ
ἀφύλλανθες
κεράϊς, ῥαφανὶς
ἡ ἀγρία
ἄγνος (οἷσος)
μαλάχη (2)
ἔνθρυσκον
σκάνδιξ
διοσβάλανος,
καρύα ἡ Ev-
βοϊκή
ἐρέβινθος
κιχόριον
παλίουρος
κινάμωμον
πενταπετές,
πεντάφυλλον
μηλέα ἡ Περ-
σική
ἀθραγένη
twos (2), φελ-
Ads


κορίαννον
θηλυκράνεια
κράνεια
eam ξίφος,
άσγανον
Sena (2)
ὀξυάκανθος
(δένδρον τὸ)
ἐριόφορον
ἑλίκη
κάρδαμον
κρόκος
ἄρον
σίκυος
σίκυος ὁ ἄγριος
κύμινον
ἄμπελος (2)
κυκλάμινος
κυπάριττος


ἀπάπη

αἴρα

πον (1),

ἄνηθον, ἄννη-
τος

ἀτρακτυλίς,
φόνος


KEY TO THE INDEX


Dittany
Dock


Dodder
Dog-mercury


Dog-rose


Dog’s tooth grass


Doum-palm
Dropwort


Duckweed
Dwarf palm


Ebony
Edder-wort
Elder
EKlecampane
Elms
Eryngo
Fenugreek


Ferns


Ferula
Feverwort


Fig, wild
Figs


Filbert


Frankincense-tree
French sparrow-


grass
Fungi


Galingale
Gall-oak


δίκταμνον
λάπαθον τὸ ἄγ-
ριον
ὀροβάγχη
ἀρρενόγονον,
θηλύγονον
κυνόρροδον
ἄγρωστις
KOLE, κουκιό-


pop

το (1)
ἴκμη

φοῖνιξ ὁ χα-
μαιρριφής


ἐβένη
δρακόντιον
ἀκτέος, ἀκτὴ
πάνακες τὸ Χει-
ρώνειον
πτελέα, ὀρει-
πτελέα
ἠρύγγιον


βουκέρας, τῆ-
λις

ἀδίαντον, ἡμιό-
νιον, θηλυ-
πτερίς, πολυ-
πόδιον, πτε-
ρίς, τριχομα-
νές, σκολο-


πένδριον
ναρθηκία, νάρ-
OnE
κενταυρίς
ἐρινεός
συκῆ" Oo. Ἰὴ
᾿Αραβική, σ.
ἡ ἨἸνδική,
App. (17)
καρύα ἡ Hpa-
κλεωτική


πεύκη, ἐλάτη

λίνον

λιβανωτός

σκίλλα ἡ ’ Em-
μενίδειος

ἄσχιον, μύκης,
πέζις


κύπειρος


ἡμερίς (1)


Garden nightshade στρύχνος ὃ


ἐδώδιμος


495


Garlics


Germander
Gilliflower
Ginger-grass


Gladwyn
Globe-thistle
Goat’s beard
Goat willow
Gold flower
Golden thistle


Gourd
Grasses


Groundsel
Gum arabic


Hartshorn
Hart’s tongue
Hartwort
Hawk’s beard
Hawthorn


Hazel
Heath
Hellebores


Holm-oaks


Honeysuckle
(Greek)
Hop-hornbeam
Horehounds
Horned poppy


Horseradish


House-leek
Hulwort


Irises


Ivies


Jack-fruit
Joint-fir
Jujube
Judas-tree


496


KEY TO THE INDEX


μῶλν, σκόρο-
δον
χαμαίδρυς


ἰὸν τὸ λευκόν.
σχοῖνος ὃ εὐώ-
ons (2)
ξίρις
ῥύτρος
τραγοπώγων
ἐλαίαγνος
ἐλειόχρυσος
λειμωνία (2),
σκόλυμος
κολοκύντη
αἰγίλωψ (2),
θρύον, πόα
ἠριγέρων
ἄκανθα (7)


κορωνόπους
σκολοπένδριον
σέσελι
ἀπαργία
μεσπίλη ἡ ἀν-
θηδονοείδης
καρύα
ἐρείκη
ἐλλέβορος
κώνειον
κήλαστρος
ἀρία,ϊψος, σμῖ-
λαξ (1), φελ-
λόδρυς
κλύμενον


ὀστρύα, ὄστρυς
πράσιον
μήκων ἡ κερα-

τῖτις
ῥαφανὶς ἡ ἀμ-

wpéa (Ὁ)
ἀείζωον
πόλιον


ἴρις, ξίρις, σι-
συρίγχιον
ἕλιξ, κιττός


App. (3)

θραύπαλος

App. (6)

κερκίς (1), ση-
μύδα


Junipers


Kermes-oak


Laburnum
Larkspurs


Leek

Lentil
Leopard’s bane
Lettuce


Lilies


Liquorice
Limes


Litmus
Lucerne
Lupin


Madder
Madonna lily


Maiden-hair
—— English


Mallow
Mandrake


Mango
Mangroves
—— white


Manna-ash
Maples


Marestail
Marjorams
—— sweet
Marsh celery
Marsh mallow


ἐρευθεδανόν


ἄρκευθος, θυΐα,
κεδρίς,Θ κέ-
Spos, ὀξύκε-
dpos


πρῖνος


κύτισος (1)
ἀσταφίς, πόθος
ee ὑάκινθος
ἡ σπαρτή
πράσον (1)
φακός
σκορπίος (2)
θρίδαξ, θριδα-
κίνη
ἡμεροκαλλές,
κρίνον, κ.
τὸ πορφυ-
ροῦν, λεί-
ριον. 4)
γλυκεῖα (ῥίζα)
Σκύθίκή 3
φ. ἡ


(πόα) ἡ Μηδική
θέρμος


κρίνον, λείριον
1 ᾿


ἀδίαντον, ἀ. τὸ
μέλαν
ἀδίαντον τὺ
λευκόν
«xn (1)
μανδραγόρας


μελία
γλεῖνος, ζυγία,
κλινότροχος;
σφένδαμνος.
ἴπνον
ὀρίγανον
ἀμάρακον
ἐλειοσέλινον
ἀλθαία, μαλά-
χη ἡ ἀγρία


Martagon lily
Mastich
Meadow saffron


Medlar


ἡμεροκαλλές

σχῖνος

ἐφήμερον, σπά-
λα

μεσπίλη, μ. ἡ


σατάνειος
Michaelmas daisy ἀστέρισκος,
(τριπόλιον)
Milk-thistle λευκάκανθα
Milt-waste ἡμιόνιον
Millet κέγχρος
— Italian ἔλυμος
Mints ἡδύοσμον, μίν-
θη, σισύμ-
ριον
Mistletoes tia (1), ὕφεαρ
Mock-privet φίλυρα ἡ ἄρρην
Oly μῶλυ
Monk’s rhubarb λάπαθος
Mulberry σύκάμινος
Mullein φλόμος ἡ μέ-
λαινα
Mushroom μύκης
Mustard, white νᾶπυ
Myrrh σμύρνα
Myrtle μυρρίνη
Narcissus λείριον (2);
νάρκισσος
Nepaul cardamom ἄμωμον
Nettle pags
—— tree λωτός (1)
Nightshade, deadly μα Ng ayopas
(2) 7
— garden στρύχνος ὁ ἐδώ-
διμος
Oaks αἰγίλωψ (1),
ἀρία, ἄσπρις,
δρῦς, ἐτυμό-
Spus, ἡμερίς,
ios, πρῖνος,
σμῖλαξ (1),
φηγός, φελ-
᾿ λόδρυς, φελ-
; λός
Oak-mistletoe ἰξία (1)
Oats βρόμος
Oleander δάφνη ἡ ἀγρία.
ὀνοθήρας
Olives ἐλάα (1), (2)
Olive, wild ἀγριέλαιος, κό-


THEOPH,


TLVOS


VOL, Il,


KEY TO THE INDEX


Onions


Opium poppy


Orach
Orchis
Oriental thorn


Oyster-green
Ox-tongue


Palms


Papyrus


Pennyroyal
Peony


Pepper
Periwinkle
Pimpernel, blue
Pines
Pine-thistle


Plane-tree
Plantains


Plums


Polypody
Pole-reed


Pomegranate
Poppies

Poplar, black
—— white (abele)
Privet

Puff-ball
Purslane
Purse-tassels


γήθυον, γή-
TELOV, Κρομ.-
μνον, κρο-
μνυογήτειον


μήκων (ἡ ὀπώ-
Ons), (νηπεν-
θές)


ἀδράφαξυς

ὄρχις

μεσπίλη ἡ ἀν-
θηδών

βρύον

κρηπίς


κόϊξ, κουκιό-
φόρον, φοῖνιξ

πάπυρος

ὀρειοσέλινον

πισός

ἄπιος ()

ἀχράς, ὄγχνη
ληχώ

γλυκυσίδη,
παιωνία

πέπερι

χαμαιδάφνη

κόρχορος

πεύκη, πίτυς

a κανθα (8),
ἄκανος, ἰξία
(2), ἰξίένη,
χαμαιλέων
ὃ λευκός

πλάτανος

ἀρνόγλωσσον,
θρναλλίς, κο-
ρωνόπους, κύ-
vow, ὄρτυξ,
στελέφουρος

κοκκυμηλέα,
πάδος, πρού-
μνη; σποδίας

πολυπόδιον

δόναξ, κάλαμος
ὃ Λακωνικός
etc.

poa

μήκων

αἴγειρος

λεύκη

σπείραια

ἄσχιον

ἀνδράχνη

βολβός


497
K K


Quince


Radish
Reeds


Restharrow
Rib-grass


Rock-roses
Rose-campion
Roses


Rue
Rupture-wort
Rushes


Safflower
Saffron crocus


Sage
Salvia
Savory
Scammony
Scrub oak


Sea-bark oak


Sea spurge


Sea-weeds


Sebesten


Sedge
Sesame
Shallot


Silphium
Silver-fir
Silver-lim >


Sissoo
Smilax
Snowdrop
Snapdragon


498


κυδώνιον,
στρούθιον (2)


ῥαφανίς

δόναξ, κάλα-
μος, πάπυρος

ὀνωνίς

κύνωψ

ὄρυζον

ζειά, ὄλυρα

εὔζωμον

κίσθος

λυχνίς

κυνόρροδον, κυ-
νόσβατος, ῥο-
δωνία

πήγανον

ἐλλεβορίνη

μελαγκρανΐίς,
σχοῖνος


κνῆκος, κρόκος
6 ἀκανθώδης
κρόκος, Kk. ὃ


σφάκος
ἐλελίσφακος
θύμβρα
σκαμμωνία
δρῦς ἡ πλατύ-
φυλλος
δρῦς ἡ ἁλί
φλοιος, δ. ἡ
εὐθύφλοιος
τιθύμαλλος ὃ
παράλιος
ἄμπελος (9),
βρύον, δρῦς
(7), (8), ἐλά-
τη (8), φοῖνιξ
(4), φῦκος
κοκκυμηλέα ἡ
Αἰγυπτία
βούτομος
σήσαμον
κρόμμυον τὸ
σχιστόν
σίλφιον
ἐλάτη
φίλυρα, φ.
θήλεια
App. (21)
σμῖλαξ (2)
λευκόϊον (2)
ἀντίρρινον


«πὸ»


KEY TO THE INDEX


Soapwort


Sorb
Southernwood


Spanish broom


Spear-grass


Sow-thistle


Spike-lavender


Spikenard
Spindle-tree


Spurges


Squills


Star-flower
Star-thistle


—— —— yellow


Stonecrop
Storax
Sulphur-wort
Sumachs
Sweet bay
Sweet flag


Sycamore


Tamarind
Tamarisks
Tare

Teak
Terebinth
Thistles


στρούθιον (2),

: στροῦθος

ὄη

ἀβρότονον

λινόσπαρτον

κάλαμος ὃ πλό-
κιμος, K. ὃ
χαρακίας

σόγκος

ἴφνον

νάρδον

εὐώνυμος (τε-
τραγωνία)

ἄκανθα (δ), (6),
amos (2), ἱπ-
ποφέως, ἰσ-
χάς, μηκώ-.
νιον, ῥαφανὶς
ἡ ὀρεία, τιθύ-
μαλλος

σκίλλ a, τί-
φυον, ὑάκιν-
θος ἡ ἀγρία

βολβίνη

παντάδουσα

τετράλιξ

ἐπίπετι ov

στύρ

πευκέδανον
ῥοῦς

δάφνη (1)

κάλαμος ὃ EUW
dns ,

συκάμινος ἢ
Αἰγυπτία, σ.
ἡ Κυπρία


App. (45),(16)
μυρίκη


τέρμινθος

ἄκανθα (2),
(8), ἄκανος,
ἄκορνα, ἰξία
(2), ἰξί ἐν ἢ;
κάκτος, λει-
μωνία (2),
λευκάκανθα,
πολνάκανθος,
ῥύτρος, σκό-
λυμος, σόγ-
κος, χάλ-
κειος, χαμαι-
λέων


Thorn, oriental
Thorn-apple
Thyine-wood
Thyme, Attic


— Cretan
— tufted


Tine-tare
Tragacanth
Traveller’s joy
Tree-medick
Tree-moss
Trefoil
Truffles
Turk’s cap lily
Turkey oak
Turnip
Valonia oak


Vetch, bitter
Vine


μεσπίλη ἡ ἀν-
ηδών
θρύορον, περιτ-
τός, στρυχ-
νος ὃ μανικός
θύον
eg ὁ ay-


Bias (1)
ἔρπυλλος (ὁ
ἤμερος)
App. (1)
τραγάκανθα
ἀθραγένη
κύτισος (2)
φάσκος
λωτός (8)
κεραύνιον, ὕδ-
νον
κρίνον τὸ πορ-
φυροῦν
αἰγίλωψ (1),
ἄσπρις
γογγυλίς


δρῦς ἡ ἀγρία,
φηγός

ὄροβος

ἄμπελος (1)


<


KEY TO THE INDEX


Vine, wild
Violet


Wall-flower
Walnut


Water chestnut
Water chickweed
Water-lily, Nile
—— white

— yellow


Wheats

-—— one-seeded
Wheat-rust
Wig-tree
Willows


Willow-weed
Withy
Wolf’s bane


Wormwood
Wych-elm


Yew


οἰνάνθη ἡ ἡ ἀγρία
ἴον τὸ μέλαν


φλόγινον, φλόξ

καρύα ἡ Περ-
σική

τρίβολος (3)

λέμνα

λωτός (2)

σίδη

μαδωνάϊς, νυμ-
φαία

πυρός

τίφη

ἐρυσίβη

κοκκυγέα

ἐλαίαγνος, ἐἑλέ-
Ky, ἰτέα, κο-
λοιτία (2)

κραταίγονος

οἶσος

ἀκόνιτον, θηλύ-
φονον, μυό-
φονον, σκορ-
πίος (8)

ἀψίνθιον

ὀρειπτελέα


μίλος


499


-


ὧν»
2


~
~
-
“-
ἢ;
~
oe
.-


{8} Poet a ob
“Ἀφ πεν potas


BRUNSWICK ‘STREET, iene :


AND BUNGAY, ey


“4 “
“». ες


x τῷ


πῶ —
<a =


THE INSTITUTE OF MEDIAEVAL STUD °3
59 QUEEN'S PARK CRESC NT
TORONTO ~— 5, CANADA


/o2nx4~84
