Theophilus to Autolycus - Book III (Theophilus of Antioch)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf02.iv.ii.iii.html).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

Theophilus to Autolycus.

  Book III.

 Chapter I.--Autolycus Not Yet Convinced.

 Theophilus to Autolycus, greeting: Seeing that writers are fond of
 composing a multitude of books for vainglory,--some concerning gods,
 and wars, and chronology, and some, too, concerning useless legends,
 and other such labour in vain, in which you also have been used to
 employ yourself until now, and do not grudge to endure that toil; but
 though you conversed with me, are still of opinion that the word of
 truth is an idle tale, and suppose that our writings are recent and
 modern;--on this account I also will not grudge the labour of
 compendiously setting forth to you, God helping me, the antiquity of
 our books, reminding you of it in few words, that you may not grudge
 the labour of reading it, but may recognise the folly of the other
 authors.

 Chapter II.--Profane Authors Had No Means of Knowing the Truth.

 For it was fit that they who wrote should themselves have been
 eye-witnesses of those things concerning which they made assertions, or
 should accurately have ascertained them from those who had seen them;
 for they who write of things unascertained beat the air. For what did
 it profit Homer to have composed the Trojan war, and to have deceived
 many; or Hesiod, the register of the theogony of those whom he calls
 gods; or Orpheus, the three hundred and sixty-five gods, whom in the
 end of his life he rejects, maintaining in his precepts that there is
 one God? What profit did the sphærography of the world's circle confer
 on Aratus, or those who held the same doctrine as he, except glory
 among men? And not even that did they reap as they deserved. And what
 truth did they utter? Or what good did their tragedies do to Euripides
 and Sophocles, or the other tragedians? Or their comedies to Menander
 and Aristophanes, and the other comedians? Or their histories to
 Herodotus and Thucydides? Or the shrines [638] and the pillars of
 Hercules to Pythagoras, or the Cynic philosophy to Diogenes? What good
 did it do Epicurus to maintain that there is no providence; or
 Empedocles to teach atheism; or Socrates to swear by the dog, and the
 goose, and the plane-tree, and Æsculapius struck by lightning, and the
 demons whom he invoked? And why did he willingly die? What reward, or
 of what kind, did he expect to receive after death? What did Plato's
 system of culture profit him? Or what benefit did the rest of the
 philosophers derive from their doctrines, not to enumerate the whole of
 them, since they are numerous? But these things we say, for the purpose
 of exhibiting their useless and godless opinions.

 [638] While in Egypt, Pythagoras was admitted to the penetralia of the
 temples and the arcana of religion.

 Chapter III.--Their Contradictions.

 For all these, having fallen in love with vain and empty reputation,
 neither themselves knew the truth, nor guided others to the truth: for
 the things which they said themselves convict them of speaking
 inconsistently; and most of them demolished their own doctrines. For
 not only did they refute one another, but some, too, even stultified
 their own teachings; so that their reputation has issued in shame and
 folly, for they are condemned by men of understanding. For either they
 made assertions concerning the gods, and afterwards taught that there
 was no god; or if they spoke even of the creation of the world, they
 finally said that all things were produced spontaneously. Yea, and even
 speaking of providence, they taught again that the world was not ruled
 by providence. But what? Did they not, when they essayed to write even
 of honourable conduct, teach the perpetration of lasciviousness, and
 fornication, and adultery; and did they not introduce hateful and
 unutterable wickedness? And they proclaim that their gods took the lead
 in committing unutterable acts of adultery, and in monstrous banquets.
 For who does not sing Saturn devouring his own children, and Jove his
 son gulping down Metis, and preparing for the gods a horrible feast, at
 which also they say that Vulcan, a lame blacksmith, did the waiting;
 and how Jove not only married Juno, his own sister, but also with foul
 mouth did abominable wickedness? And the rest of his deeds, as many as
 the poets sing, it is likely you are acquainted with. Why need I
 further recount the deeds of Neptune and Apollo, or Bacchus and
 Hercules, of the bosom-loving Minerva, and the shameless Venus, since
 in another place [639] we have given a more accurate account of these?

 [639] Viz., in the first book to Autolycus.

 Chapter IV.--How Autolycus Had Been Misled by False Accusations Against
 the Christians.

 Nor indeed was there any necessity for my refuting these, except that I
 see you still in dubiety about the word of the truth. For though
 yourself prudent, you endure fools gladly. Otherwise you would not have
 been moved by senseless men to yield yourself to empty words, and to
 give credit to the prevalent rumor wherewith godless lips falsely
 accuse us, who are worshippers of God, and are called Christians,
 alleging that the wives of us all are held in common and made
 promiscuous use of; and that we even commit incest with our own
 sisters, and, what is most impious and barbarous of all, that we eat
 human flesh. [640] But further, they say that our doctrine has but
 recently come to light, and that we have nothing to allege in proof of
 what we receive as truth, nor of our teaching, but that our doctrine is
 foolishness. I wonder, then, chiefly that you, who in other matters are
 studious, and a scrutinizer of all things, give but a careless hearing
 to us. For, if it were possible for you, you would not grudge to spend
 the night in the libraries.

 [640] [The body of Christ is human flesh. If, then, it had been the
 primitive doctrine, that the bread and wine cease to exist in the
 Eucharist, and are changed into natural flesh and blood, our author
 could not have resented this charge as "most barbarous and impious."]

 Chapter V.--Philosophers Inculcate Cannibalism.

 Since, then, you have read much, what is your opinion of the precepts
 of Zeno, and Diogenes, and Cleanthes, which their books contain,
 inculcating the eating of human flesh: that fathers be cooked and eaten
 by their own children; and that if any one refuse or reject a part of
 this infamous food, he himself be devoured who will not eat? An
 utterance even more godless than these is found,--that, namely, of
 Diogenes, who teaches children to bring their own parents in sacrifice,
 and devour them. And does not the historian Herodotus narrate that
 Cambyses, [641] when he had slaughtered the children of Harpagus,
 cooked them also, and set them as a meal before their father? And,
 still further, he narrates that among the Indians the parents are eaten
 by their own children. Oh! the godless teaching of those who recorded,
 yea, rather, inculcated such things! Oh! their wickedness and
 godlessness! Oh! the conception of those who thus accurately
 philosophized, and profess philosophy! For they who taught these
 doctrines have filled the world with iniquity.

 [641] It was not Cambyses, but Astyages, who did this; see Herod. i.
 119.

 Chapter VI.--Other Opinions of the Philosophers.

 And regarding lawless conduct, those who have blindly wandered into the
 choir of philosophy have, almost to a man, spoken with one voice.
 Certainly Plato, to mention him first who seems to have been the most
 respectable philosopher among them, expressly, as it were, legislates
 in his first book, [642] entitled The Republic, that the wives of all
 be common, using the precedent of the son [643] of Jupiter and the
 lawgiver of the Cretans, in order that under this pretext there might
 be an abundant offspring from the best persons, and that those who were
 worn with toil might be comforted by such intercourse. [644] And
 Epicurus himself, too, as well as teaching atheism, teaches along with
 it incest with mothers and sisters, and this in transgression of the
 laws which forbid it; for Solon distinctly legislated regarding this,
 in order that from a married parent children might lawfully spring,
 that they might not be born of adultery, so that no one should honour
 as his father him who was not his father, or dishonour him who was
 really his father, through ignorance that he was so. And these things
 the other laws of the Romans and Greeks also prohibit. Why, then, do
 Epicurus and the Stoics teach incest and sodomy, with which doctrines
 they have filled libraries, so that from boyhood [645] this lawless
 intercourse is learned? And why should I further spend time on them,
 since even of those they call gods they relate similar things?

 [642] Not in the first, but the fifth book of the Republic, p. 460.

 [643] Minos.

 [644] As this sentence cannot be intelligibly rendered without its
 original in Plato, we subjoin the latter: "As for those youths who
 excel either in war or other pursuits, they ought both to have other
 rewards and prizes given them; and specially this, of being allowed the
 freest intercourse with women, that, at the same time, under this
 pretext the greatest number of children may spring from such parents."

 [645] [This statement reflects light upon some passages of Hermas, and
 shows with what delicacy he has reproved the gross vices with which
 Christians could not escape familiarity.]

 Chapter VII.--Varying Doctrine Concerning the Gods.

 For after they had said that these are gods, they again made them of no
 account. For some said that they were composed of atoms; and others,
 again, that they eventuate in atoms; and they say that the gods have no
 more power than men. Plato, too, though he says these are gods, would
 have them composed of matter. And Pythagoras, after he had made such a
 toil and moil about the gods, and travelled up and down [for
 information], at last determines that all things are produced naturally
 and spontaneously, and that the gods care nothing for men. And how many
 atheistic opinions Clitomachus the academician introduced, [I need not
 recount.] And did not Critias and Protagoras of Abdera say, "For
 whether the gods exist, I am not able to affirm concerning them, nor to
 explain of what nature they are; for there are many things would
 prevent me"? And to speak of the opinions of the most atheistical,
 Euhemerus, is superfluous. For having made many daring assertions
 concerning the gods, he at last would absolutely deny their existence,
 and have all things to be governed by self-regulated action. [646] And
 Plato, who spoke so much of the unity of God and of the soul of man,
 asserting that the soul is immortal, is not he himself afterwards
 found, inconsistently with himself, to maintain that some souls pass
 into other men, and that others take their departure into irrational
 animals? How can his doctrine fail to seem dreadful and monstrous--to
 those at least who have any judgment--that he who was once a man shall
 afterwards be a wolf, or a dog, or an ass, or some other irrational
 brute? Pythagoras, too, is found venting similar nonsense, besides his
 demolishing providence. Which of them, then, shall we believe?
 Philemon, the comic poet, who says,--


 "Good hope have they who praise and serve the gods;"

 or those whom we have mentioned--Euhemerus, and Epicurus, and
 Pythagoras, and the others who deny that the gods are to be worshipped,
 and who abolish providence? Concerning God and providence, Ariston
 said:--


 "Be of good courage: God will still preserve

 And greatly help all those who so deserve.

 If no promotion waits on faithful men,

 Say what advantage goodness offers then.

 'Tis granted--yet I often see the just

 Faring but ill, from ev'ry honour thrust;

 While they whose own advancement is their aim,

 Oft in this present life have all they claim.

 But we must look beyond, and wait the end,

 That consummation to which all things tend.

 'Tis not, as vain and wicked men have said,

 By an unbridled destiny we're led:

 It is not blinded chance that rules the world,

 Nor uncontrolled are all things onward hurled.

 The wicked blinds himself with this belief;

 But be ye sure, of all rewards, the chief

 Is still reserved for those who holy live;

 And Providence to wicked men will give

 Only the just reward which is their meed,

 And fitting punishment for each bad deed."

 And one can see how inconsistent with each other are the things which
 others, and indeed almost the majority, have said about God and
 providence. For some have absolutely cancelled God and providence; and
 others, again, have affirmed God, and have avowed that all things are
 governed by providence. The intelligent hearer and reader must
 therefore give minute attention to their expressions; as also Simylus
 said: "It is the custom of the poets to name by a common designation
 the surpassingly wicked and the excellent; we therefore must
 discriminate." As also Philemon says: "A senseless man who sits and
 merely hears is a troublesome feature; for he does not blame himself,
 so foolish is he." We must then give attention, and consider what is
 said, critically inquiring into what has been uttered by the
 philosophers and the poets.

 [646] automatismo.

 Chapter VIII.--Wickedness Attributed to the Gods by Heathen Writers.

 For, denying that there are gods, they again acknowledge their
 existence, and they said they committed grossly wicked deeds. And,
 first, of Jove the poets euphoniously sing the wicked actions. And
 Chrysippus, who talked a deal of nonsense, is he not found publishing
 that Juno had the foulest intercourse with Jupiter? For why should I
 recount the impurities of the so-called mother of the gods, or of
 Jupiter Latiaris thirsting for human blood, or the castrated Attis; or
 of Jupiter, surnamed Tragedian, and how he defiled himself, as they
 say, and now is worshipped among the Romans as a god? I am silent about
 the temples of Antinous, and of the others whom you call gods. For when
 related to sensible persons, they excite laughter. They who elaborated
 such a philosophy regarding either the non-existence of God, or
 promiscuous intercourse and beastly concubinage, are themselves
 condemned by their own teachings. Moreover, we find from the writings
 they composed that the eating of human flesh was received among them;
 and they record that those whom they honour as gods were the first to
 do these things.

 Chapter IX.--Christian Doctrine of God and His Law.

 Now we also confess that God exists, but that He is one, the creator,
 and maker, and fashioner of this universe; and we know that all things
 are arranged by His providence, but by Him alone. And we have learned a
 holy law; but we have as lawgiver Him who is really God, who teaches us
 to act righteously, and to be pious, and to do good. And concerning
 piety [647] He says, "Thou shalt have no other gods before me. Thou
 shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of anything
 that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in
 the water under the earth: thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor
 serve them: for I am the Lord thy God." [648] And of doing good He
 said: "Honour thy father and thy mother; that it may be well with thee,
 and that thy days may be long in the land which I the Lord God give
 thee." Again, concerning righteousness: "Thou shalt not commit
 adultery. Thou shalt not kill. Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt not
 bear false witness against thy neighbour. Thou shalt not covet thy
 neighbour's wife, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, nor his
 land, nor his man-servant, nor his maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his
 beast of burden, nor any of his cattle, nor anything that is thy
 neighbour's. Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of the poor in his
 cause. [649] From every unjust matter keep thee far. The innocent and
 righteous thou shalt not slay; thou shalt not justify the wicked; and
 thou shalt not take a gift, for gifts blind the eyes of them that see
 and pervert righteous words." Of this divine law, then, Moses, who also
 was God's servant, was made the minister both to all the world, and
 chiefly to the Hebrews, who were also called Jews, whom an Egyptian
 king had in ancient days enslaved, and who were the righteous seed of
 godly and holy men--Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. God, being mindful
 of them, and doing marvellous and strange miracles by the hand of
 Moses, delivered them, and led them out of Egypt, leading them through
 what is called the desert; whom He also settled again in the land of
 Canaan, which afterwards was called judæa, and gave them a law, and
 taught them these things. Of this great and wonderful law, which tends
 to all righteousness, the ten heads are such as we have already
 rehearsed.

 [647] Or, right worship.

 [648] Ex. xx. 3.

 [649] Ex. xxiii. 6.

 Chapter X.--Of Humanity to Strangers.

 Since therefore they were strangers in the land of Egypt, being by
 birth Hebrews from the land of Chaldæa,--for at that time, there being
 a famine, they were obliged to migrate to Egypt for the sake of buying
 food there, where also for a time they sojourned; and these things
 befell them in accordance with a prediction of God,--having sojourned,
 then, in Egypt for 430 years, when Moses was about to lead them out
 into the desert, God taught them by the law, saying, "Ye shall not
 afflict a stranger; for ye know the heart of a stranger: for yourselves
 were strangers in the land of Egypt." [650]

 [650] Ex. xxii. 21.

 Chapter XI.--Of Repentance.

 And when the people transgressed the law which had been given to them
 by God, God being good and pitiful, unwilling to destroy them, in
 addition to His giving them the law, afterwards sent forth also
 prophets to them from among their brethren, to teach and remind them of
 the contents of the law, and to turn them to repentance, that they
 might sin no more. But if they persisted in their wicked deeds, He
 forewarned them that they should be delivered into subjection to all
 the kingdoms of the earth; and that this has already happened them is
 manifest. Concerning repentance, then, Isaiah the prophet, generally
 indeed to all, but expressly to the people, says: "Seek ye the Lord
 while He may be found, call ye upon Him while He is near: let the
 wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let
 him return unto the Lord his God, and he will find mercy, for He will
 abundantly pardon." [651] And another prophet, Ezekiel, says: "If the
 wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all
 My statutes, and do that which is right in My sight, he shall surely
 live, he shall not die. All his transgressions that he hath committed,
 they shall not be mentioned unto him; but in his righteousness that he
 hath done he shall live: for I desire not the death of the sinner,
 saith the Lord, but that he turn from his wicked way, and live." [652]
 Again Isaiah: "Ye who take deep and wicked counsel, turn ye, that ye
 may be saved." [653] And another prophet, Jeremiah: "Turn to the Lord
 your God, as a grape-gatherer to his basket, and ye shall find mercy."
 [654] Many therefore, yea rather, countless are the sayings in the Holy
 Scriptures regarding repentance, God being always desirous that the
 race of men turn from all their sins.

 [651] Isa. lv. 6.

 [652] Ezek. xviii. 21.

 [653] Isa. xxxi. 6.

 [654] Jer. vi. 9.

 Chapter XII.--Of Righteousness.

 Moreover, concerning the righteousness which the law enjoined,
 confirmatory utterances are found both with the prophets and in the
 Gospels, because they all spoke inspired by one Spirit of God. Isaiah
 accordingly spoke thus: "Put away the evil of your doings from your
 souls; learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge
 the fatherless, plead for the widow." [655] And again the same prophet
 said: "Loose every band of wickedness, dissolve every oppressive
 contract, let the oppressed go free, and tear up every unrighteous
 bond. Deal out thy bread to the hungry, and bring the houseless poor to
 thy home. When thou seest the naked, cover him, and hide not thyself
 from thine own flesh. Then shall thy light break forth as the morning,
 and thine health shall spring forth speedily, and thy righteousness
 shall go before thee." [656] In like manner also Jeremiah says: "Stand
 in the ways, and see, and ask which is the good way of the Lord your
 God, and walk in it and ye shall find rest for your souls. Judge just
 judgment, for in this is the will of the Lord your God." [657] So also
 says Hosea: "Keep judgment, and draw near to your God, who established
 the heavens and created the earth." [658] And another, Joel, spoke in
 agreement with these: "Gather the people, sanctify the congregation,
 assemble the elders, gather the children that are in arms; let the
 bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet,
 and pray to the Lord thy God urgently that he may have mercy upon you,
 and blot out your sins." [659] In like manner also another, Zachariah:
 "Thus saith the Lord Almighty, Execute true judgment, and show mercy
 and compassion every man to his brother; and oppress not the widow, nor
 the fatherless, nor the stranger; and let none of you imagine evil
 against his brother in your heart, saith the Lord Almighty." [660]

 [655] Isa. i. 16, 17.

 [656] Isa. lviii. 6.

 [657] Jer. vi. 16.

 [658] Hos. xii. 6.

 [659] Joel ii. 16.

 [660] Zech. vii. 9, 10.

 Chapter XIII.--Of Chastity.

 And concerning chastity, the holy word teaches us not only not to sin
 in act, but not even in thought, not even in the heart to think of any
 evil, nor look on another man's wife with our eyes to lust after her.
 Solomon, accordingly, who was a king and a prophet, said: "Let thine
 eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before thee:
 make straight paths for your feet." [661] And the voice of the Gospel
 teaches still more urgently concerning chastity, saying: "Whosoever
 looketh on a woman who is not his own wife, to lust after her, hath
 committed adultery with her already in his heart." [662] "And he that
 marrieth," says [the Gospel], "her that is divorced from her husband,
 committeth adultery; and whosoever putteth away his wife, saving for
 the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery." [663]
 Because Solomon says: "Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his
 clothes not be burned? Or can one walk upon hot coals, and his feet not
 be burned? So he that goeth in to a married woman shall not be
 innocent." [664]

 [661] Prov. iv. 25.

 [662] Matt. v. 28.

 [663] Matt. v. 32.

 [664] Prov. vi. 27-29.

 Chapter XIV.--Of Loving Our Enemies.

 And that we should be kindly disposed, not only towards those of our
 own stock, as some suppose, Isaiah the prophet said: "Say to those that
 hate you, and that cast you out, Ye are our brethren, that the name of
 the Lord may be glorified, and be apparent in their joy." [665] And the
 Gospel says: "Love your enemies, and pray for them that despitefully
 use you. For if ye love them who love you, what reward have ye? This do
 also the robbers and the publicans." [666] And those that do good it
 teaches not to boast, lest they become men-pleasers. For it says: "Let
 not your left hand know what your right hand doeth." [667] Moreover,
 concerning subjection to authorities and powers, and prayer for them,
 the divine word gives us instructions, in order that "we may lead a
 quiet and peaceable life." [668] And it teaches us to render all things
 to all, [669] "honour to whom honour, fear to whom fear, tribute to
 whom tribute; to owe no man anything, but to love all."

 [665] Isa. lxvi. 5.

 [666] Matt. v. 44, 46.

 [667] Matt. vi. 3.

 [668] 1 Tim. ii. 2.

 [669] Rom. xiii. 7, 8.

 Chapter XV.--The Innocence of the Christians Defended.

 Consider, therefore, whether those who teach such things can possibly
 live indifferently, and be commingled in unlawful intercourse, or, most
 impious of all, eat human flesh, especially when we are forbidden so
 much as to witness shows of gladiators, lest we become partakers and
 abettors of murders. But neither may we see the other spectacles, [670]
 lest our eyes and ears be defiled, participating in the utterances
 there sung. For if one should speak of cannibalism, in these spectacles
 the children of Thyestes and Tereus are eaten; and as for adultery,
 both in the case of men and of gods, whom they celebrate in elegant
 language for honours and prizes, this is made the subject of their
 dramas. But far be it from Christians to conceive any such deeds; for
 with them temperance dwells, self-restraint is practiced, monogamy is
 observed, chastity is guarded, iniquity exterminated, sin extirpated,
 righteousness exercised, law administered, worship performed, God
 acknowledged: truth governs, grace guards, peace screens them; the holy
 word guides, wisdom teaches, life directs, God reigns. Therefore,
 though we have much to say regarding our manner of life, and the
 ordinances of God, the maker of all creation, we yet consider that we
 have for the present reminded you of enough to induce you to study
 these things, especially since you can now read [our writings] for
 yourself, that as you have been fond of acquiring information, you may
 still be studious in this direction also.

 [670] At the theatres. [N.B.--Let the easy Christians of our age be
 reminded of this warning; frequenting, as they do, plays and operas
 equally defiling, impure in purport often, even when not gross in
 language.]

 Chapter XVI.--Uncertain Conjectures of the Philosophers.

 But I wish now to give you a more accurate demonstration, God helping
 me, of the historical periods, that you may see that our doctrine is
 not modern nor fabulous, but more ancient and true than all poets and
 authors who have written in uncertainty. For some, maintaining that the
 world was uncreated, went into infinity; [671] and others, asserting
 that it was created, said that already 153,075 years had passed. This
 is stated by Apollonius the Egyptian. And Plato, who is esteemed to
 have been the wisest of the Greeks, into what nonsense did he run? For
 in his book entitled The Republic, [672] we find him expressly saying:
 "For if things had in all time remained in their present arrangement,
 when ever could any new thing be discovered? For ten thousand times ten
 thousand years elapsed without record, and one thousand or twice as
 many years have gone by since some things were discovered by Dædalus,
 and some by Orpheus, and some by Palamedes." And when he says that
 these things happened, he implies that ten thousand times ten thousand
 years elapsed from the flood to Dædalus. And after he has said a great
 deal about the cities of the world, and the settlements, and the
 nations, he owns that he has said these things conjecturally. For he
 says, "If then, my friend, some god should promise us, that if we
 attempted to make a survey of legislation, the things now said," [673]
 etc., which shows that he was speaking by guess; and if by guess, then
 what he says is not true.

 [671] i.e., tracing back its history through an infinate duration.

 [672] The following quotation is not from the Republic, but from the
 third book of the Laws, p. 676.

 [673] Plato goes on to say, that if he had this pledge of divine
 assistance, he would go further in his speculation; and therefore
 Theophilus argues that what he said without this assistance he felt to
 be unsafe.

 Chapter XVII.--Accurate Information of the Christians.

 It behoved, therefore, that he should the rather become a scholar of
 God in this matter of legislation, as he himself confessed that in no
 other way could he gain accurate information than by God's teaching him
 through the law. And did not the poets Homer and Hesiod and Orpheus
 profess that they themselves had been instructed by Divine Providence?
 Moreover, it is said that among your writers there were prophets and
 prognosticators, and that those wrote accurately who were informed by
 them. How much more, then, shall we know the truth who are instructed
 by the holy prophets, who were possessed by [674] the Holy Spirit of
 God! On this account all the prophets spoke harmoniously and in
 agreement with one another, and foretold the things that would come to
 pass in all the world. For the very accomplishment of predicted and
 already consummated events should demonstrate to those who are fond of
 information, yea rather, who are lovers of truth, that those things are
 really true which they declared concerning the epochs and eras before
 the deluge: [675] to wit, how the years have run on since the world was
 created until now, so as to manifest the ridiculous mendacity of your
 authors, and show that their statements are not true.

 [674] Literally, "contained."

 [675] [See supra, book i. cap. 14, p. 93, the author's account of his
 own conversion.]

 Chapter XVIII.--Errors of the Greeks About the Deluge.

 For Plato, as we said above, when he had demonstrated that a deluge had
 happened, said that it extended not over the whole earth, but only over
 the plains, and that those who fled to the highest hills saved
 themselves. But others say that there existed Deucalion and Pyrrha, and
 that they were preserved in a chest; and that Deucalion, after he came
 out of the chest, flung stones behind him, and that men were produced
 from the stones; from which circumstance they say that men in the mass
 are named "people." [676] Others, again, say that Clymenus existed in a
 second flood. From what has already been said, it is evident that they
 who wrote such things and philosophized to so little purpose are
 miserable, and very profane and senseless persons. But Moses, our
 prophet and the servant of God, in giving an account of the genesis of
 the world, related in what manner the flood came upon the earth,
 telling us, besides, how the details of the flood came about, and
 relating no fable of Pyrrha nor of Deucalion or Clymenus; nor,
 forsooth, that only the plains were submerged, and that those only who
 escaped to the mountains were saved.

 [676] laos, from laas, stone.

 Chapter XIX.--Accurate Account of the Deluge.

 And neither does he make out that there was a second flood: on the
 contrary, he said that never again would there be a flood of water on
 the world; as neither indeed has there been, nor ever shall be. And he
 says that eight human beings were preserved in the ark, in that which
 had been prepared by God's direction, not by Deucalion, but by Noah;
 which Hebrew word means in English [677] "rest," as we have elsewhere
 shown that Noah, when he announced to the men then alive that there was
 a flood coming, prophesied to them, saying, Come thither, God calls you
 to repentance. On this account he was fitly called Deucalion. [678] And
 this Noah had three sons (as we mentioned in the second book), whose
 names were Shem, and Ham, and Japhet; and these had three wives, one
 wife each; each man and his wife. This man some have surnamed Eunuchus.
 All the eight persons, therefore, who were found in the ark were
 preserved. And Moses showed that the flood lasted forty days and forty
 nights, torrents pouring from heaven, and from the fountains of the
 deep breaking up, so that the water overtopped every high hill 15
 cubits. And thus the race of all the men that then were was destroyed,
 and those only who were protected in the ark were saved; and these, we
 have already said, were eight. And of the ark, the remains are to this
 day to be seen in the Arabian mountains. This, then, is in sum the
 history of the deluge.

 [677] Literally, in Greek, anapausis.

 [678] Deucalion, from Deute, come, and kaleo, I call.

 Chapter XX.--Antiquity of Moses.

 And Moses, becoming the leader of the Jews, as we have already stated,
 was expelled from the land of Egypt by the king, Pharaoh, whose name
 was Amasis, and who, they say, reigned after the expulsion of the
 people 25 years and 4 months, as Manetho assumes. And after him
 [reigned] Chebron, 13 years. And after him Amenophis, 20 years 7
 months. And after him his sister Amessa, 21 years 1 month. And after
 her Mephres, 12 years 9 months. And after him Methramuthosis, 20 years
 and 10 months. And after him Tythmoses, 9 years 8 months. And after him
 Damphenophis, 30 years 10 months. And after him Orus, 35 years 5
 months. And after him his daughter, 10 years 3 months. After her
 Mercheres, 12 years 3 months. And after him his son Armais, 30 years 1
 month. After him Messes, son of Miammus, 6 years, 2 months. After him
 Rameses, 1 year 4 months. After him Amenophis, 19 years 6 months. After
 him his sons Thoessus and Rameses, 10 years, who, it is said, had a
 large cavalry force and naval equipment. The Hebrews, indeed, after
 their own separate history, having at that time migrated into the land
 of Egypt, and been enslaved by the king Tethmosis, as already said,
 built for him strong cities, Peitho, and Rameses, and On, which is
 Heliopolis; so that the Hebrews, who also are our ancestors, and from
 whom we have those sacred books which are older than all authors, as
 already said, are proved to be more ancient than the cities which were
 at that time renowned among the Egyptians. And the country was called
 Egypt from the king Sethos. For the word Sethos, they say, is
 pronounced "Egypt." [679] And Sethos had a brother, by name Armais. He
 is called Danaus, the same who passed from Egypt to Argos, whom the
 other authors mention as being of very ancient date.

 [679] Or, reading o gar Sethos, "Sethos is also called Egyptus."

 Chapter XXI.--Of Manetho's Inaccuracy.

 And Manetho, who among the Egyptians gave out a great deal of nonsense,
 and even impiously charged Moses and the Hebrews who accompanied him
 with being banished from Egypt on account of leprosy, could give no
 accurate chronological statement. For when he said they were shepherds,
 and enemies of the Egyptians, he uttered truth indeed, because he was
 forced to do so. For our forefathers who sojourned in Egypt were truly
 shepherds, but not lepers. For when they came into the land called
 Jerusalem, where also they afterwards abode, it is well known how their
 priests, in pursuance of the appointment of God, continued in the
 temple, and there healed every disease, so that they cured lepers and
 every unsoundness. The temple was built by Solomon the king of Judæa.
 And from Manetho's own statement his chronological error is manifest.
 (As it is also in respect of the king who expelled them, Pharaoh by
 name. For he no longer ruled them. For having pursued the Hebrews, he
 and his army were engulphed in the Red Sea. And he is in error still
 further, in saying that the shepherds made war against the Egyptians.)
 For they went out of Egypt, and thenceforth dwelt in the country now
 called Judæa, 313 [680] years before Danaus came to Argos. And that
 most people consider him older than any other of the Greeks is
 manifest. So that Manetho has unwillingly declared to us, by his own
 writings, two particulars of the truth: first, avowing that they were
 shepherds; secondly, saying that they went out of the land of Egypt. So
 that even from these writings Moses and his followers are proved to be
 900 or even 1000 years prior to the Trojan war. [681]

 [680] The Benedictine editor shows that this should be 393 years.

 [681] The correct date would be about 400 years.

 Chapter XXII.--Antiquity of the Temple.

 Then concerning the building of the temple in Judæa, which Solomon the
 king built 566 years after the exodus of the Jews from Egypt, there is
 among the Tyrians a record how the temple was built; and in their
 archives writings have been preserved, in which the temple is proved to
 have existed 143 [682] years 8 months before the Tyrians founded
 Carthage (and this record was made by Hiram [683] [that is the name of
 the king of the Tyrians), the son of Abimalus, on account of the
 hereditary friendship which existed between Hiram and Solomon, and at
 the same time on account of the surpassing wisdom possessed by Solomon.
 For they continually engaged with each other in discussing difficult
 problems. And proof of this exists in their correspondence, which to
 this day is preserved among the Tyrians, and the writings that passed
 between them); as Menander the Ephesian, while narrating the history of
 the Tyrian kingdom, records, speaking thus: "For when Abimalus the king
 of the Tyrians died, his son Hiram succeeded to the kingdom. He lived
 53 years. And Bazorus succeeded him, who lived 43, and reigned 17
 years. And after him followed Methuastartus, who lived 54 years, and
 reigned 12. And after him succeeded his brother Atharymus, who lived 58
 years, and reigned 9. He was slain by his brother of the name of
 Helles, who lived 50 years, and reigned 8 months. He was killed by
 Juthobalus, priest of Astarte, who lived 40 years, and reigned 12. He
 was succeeded by his son Bazorus, who lived 45 years, and reigned 7.
 And to him his son Metten succeeded, who lived 32 years, and reigned
 29. Pygmalion, son of Pygmalius succeeded him, who lived 56 years, and
 reigned 7. [684] And in the 7th year of his reign, his sister, fleeing
 to Libya, built the city which to this day is called Carthage." The
 whole period, therefore, from the reign of Hiram to the founding of
 Carthage, amounts to 155 years and 8 months. And in the 12th year of
 the reign of Hiram the temple in Jerusalem was built. So that the
 entire time from the building of the temple to the founding of Carthage
 was 143 years and 8 months.

 [682] Others read 134 years.

 [683] Literally, Hieromus.

 [684] In this register it seems that the number of years during which
 each person lived does not include the years of his reign.

 Chapter XXIII.--Prophets More Ancient Than Greek Writers.

 So then let what has been said suffice for the testimony of the
 Phoenicians and Egyptians, and for the account of our chronology given
 by the writers Manetho the Egyptian, and Menander the Ephesian, and
 also Josephus, who wrote the Jewish war, which they waged with the
 Romans. For from these very old records it is proved that the writings
 of the rest are more recent than the writings given to us through
 Moses, yes, and than the subsequent prophets. For the last of the
 prophets, who was called Zechariah, was contemporary with the reign of
 Darius. But even the lawgivers themselves are all found to have
 legislated subsequently to that period. For if one were to mention
 Solon the Athenian, he lived in the days of the kings Cyrus and Darius,
 in the time of the prophet Zechariah first mentioned, who was by many
 years the last of the prophets. [685] Or if you mention the lawgivers
 Lycurgus, or Draco, or Minos, Josephus tells us in his writings that
 the sacred books take precedence of them in antiquity, since even
 before the reign of Jupiter over the Cretans, and before the Trojan
 war, the writings of the divine law which has been given to us through
 Moses were in existence. And that we may give a more accurate
 exhibition of eras and dates, we will, God helping us, now give an
 account not only of the dates after the deluge, but also of those
 before it, so as to reckon the whole number of all the years, as far as
 possible; tracing up to the very beginning of the creation of the
 world, which Moses the servant of God recorded through the Holy Spirit.
 For having first spoken of what concerned the creation and genesis of
 the world, and of the first man, and all that happened after in the
 order of events, he signified also the years that elapsed before the
 deluge. And I pray for favour from the only God, that I may accurately
 speak the whole truth according to His will, that you and every one who
 reads this work may be guided by His truth and favour. I will then
 begin first with the recorded genealogies, and I begin my narration
 with the first man. [686]

 [685] But the meaning here is obscure in the original. Malachi was much
 later than Zechariah.

 [686] [Usher, in his Annals, honours our author as the father of
 Christian chronology, p. 3. Paris, 1673.]

 Chapter XXIV.--Chronology from Adam.

 Adam lived till he begat a son, [687] 230 years. And his son Seth, 205.
 And his son Enos, 190. And his son Cainan, 170. And his son Mahaleel,
 165. And his son Jared, 162. And his son Enoch, 165. And his son
 Methuselah, 167. And his son Lamech, 188. And Lamech's son was Noah, of
 whom we have spoken above, who begat Shem when 500 years old. During
 Noah's life, in his 600th year, the flood came. The total number of
 years, therefore, till the flood, was 2242. And immediately after the
 flood, Shem, who was 100 years old, begat Arphaxad. And Arphaxad, when
 135 years old, begat Salah. And Salah begat a son when 130. And his son
 Eber, when 134. And from him the Hebrews name their race. And his son
 Phaleg begat a son when 130. And his son Reu, when 132. And his son
 Serug, when 130. And his son Nahor, when 75. And his son Terah, when
 70. And his son Abraham, our patriarch, begat Isaac when he was 100
 years old. Until Abraham, therefore, there are 3278 years. The
 fore-mentioned Isaac lived until he begat a son, 60 years, and begat
 Jacob. Jacob, till the migration into Egypt, of which we have spoken
 above, lived 130 years. And the sojourning of the Hebrews in Egypt
 lasted 430 years; and after their departure from the land of Egypt they
 spent 40 years in the wilderness, as it is called. All these years,
 therefore, amount to 3,938. And at that time, Moses having died, Jesus
 the sun of Nun succeeded to his rule, and governed them 27 years. And
 after Jesus, when the people had transgressed the commandments of God,
 they served the king of Mesopotamia, by name Chusarathon, 8 years.
 Then, on the repentance of the people, they had judges: Gothonoel, 40
 years; Eglon, 18 years; Aoth, 8 years. Then having sinned, they were
 subdued by strangers for 20 years. Then Deborah judged them 40 years.
 Then they served the Midianites 7 years. Then Gideon judged them 40
 years; Abimelech, 3 years; Thola, 22 years; Jair, 22 years. Then the
 Philistines and Ammonites ruled them 18 years. After that Jephthah
 judged them 6 years; Esbon, 7 years; Ailon, 10 years; Abdon, 8 years.
 Then strangers ruled them 40 years. Then Samson judged them 20 years.
 Then there was peace among them for 40 years. Then Samera judged them
 one year; Eli, 20 years; Samuel, 12 years.

 [687] i.e., till he begat Seth. [A fragment of the Chronicon of Julius
 Africanus, a.d. 232, is given in Routh's Reliquiæ, tom. ii. p. 238,
 with very rich annotations. pp. 357-509.]

 Chapter XXV.--From Saul to the Captivity.

 And after the judges they had kings, the first named Saul, who reigned
 20 years; then David, our forefather, who reigned 40 years.
 Accordingly, there are to the reign of David [from Isaac] 496 years.
 And after these kings Solomon reigned, who also, by the will of God,
 was the first to build the temple in Jerusalem; he reigned 40 years.
 And after him Rehoboam, 17 years; and after him Abias, 7 years; and
 after him Asa, 41 years; and after him Jehoshaphat, 25 years; and after
 him Joram, 8 years; and after him Ahaziah, 1 year; and after him
 Athaliah, 6 years; and after her Josiah, 40 years; and after him
 Amaziah, 39 years; and after him Uzziah, 52 years; and after him
 Jotham, 16 years; and after him Ahaz, 17 years; and after him Hezekiah,
 29 years; and after him Manasseh, 55 years; and after him Amon, 2
 years; and after him Josiah, 31 years; and after him Jehoahaz, 3
 months; and after him Jehoiakim, 11 years. Then another Jehoiakim, 3
 months 10 days; and after him Zedekiah, 11 years. And after these
 kings, the people, continuing in their sins, and not repenting, the
 king of Babylon, named Nebuchadnezzar, came up into Judæa, according to
 the prophecy of Jeremiah. He transferred the people of the Jews to
 Babylon, and destroyed the temple which Solomon had built. And in the
 Babylonian banishment the people passed 70 years. Until the sojourning
 in the land of Babylon, there are therefore, in all, 4954 years 6
 months and 10 days. And according as God had, by the prophet Jeremiah,
 foretold that the people should be led captive to Babylon, in like
 manner He signified beforehand that they should also return into their
 own land after 70 years. These 70 years then being accomplished, Cyrus
 becomes king of the Persians, who, according to the prophecy of
 Jeremiah, issued a decree in the second year of his reign, enjoining by
 his edict that all Jews who were in his kingdom should return to their
 own country, and rebuild their temple to God, which the fore-mentioned
 king of Babylon had demolished. Moreover, Cyrus, in compliance with the
 instructions of God, gave orders to his own bodyguards, Sabessar and
 Mithridates, that the vessels which had been taken out of the temple of
 Judæa by Nebuchadnezzar should be restored, and placed again in the
 temple. In the second year, therefore, of Darius are fulfilled the 70
 years which were foretold by Jeremiah.

 Chapter XXVI.--Contrast Between Hebrew and Greek Writings.

 Hence one can see how our sacred writings are shown to be more ancient
 and true than those of the Greeks and Egyptians, or any other
 historians. For Herodotus and Thucydides, as also Xenophon, and most
 other historians, began their relations from about the reign of Cyrus
 and Darius, not being able to speak with accuracy of prior and ancient
 times. For what great matters did they disclose if they spoke of Darius
 and Cyrus, barbarian kings, or of the Greeks Zopyrus and Hippias, or of
 the wars of the Athenians and Lacedæmonians, or the deeds of Xerxes or
 of Pausanias, who ran the risk of starving to death in the temple of
 Minerva, or the history of Themistocles and the Peloponnesian war, or
 of Alcibiades and Thrasybulus? For my purpose is not to furnish mere
 matter of much talk, but to throw light upon the number of years from
 the foundation of the world, and to condemn the empty labour and
 trifling of these authors, because there have neither been twenty
 thousand times ten thousand years from the flood to the present time,
 as Plato said, affirming that there had been so many years; nor yet 15
 times 10,375 years, as we have already mentioned Apollonius the
 Egyptian gave out; nor is the world uncreated, nor is there a
 spontaneous production of all things, as Pythagoras and the rest
 dreamed; but, being indeed created, it is also governed by the
 providence of God, who made all things; and the whole course of time
 and the years are made plain to those who wish to obey the truth. [688]
 Lest, then, I seem to have made things plain up to the time of Cyrus,
 and to neglect the subsequent periods, as if through inability to
 exhibit them, I will endeavour, by God's help, to give an account,
 according to my ability, of the course of the subsequent times.

 [688] [Usher notes this as affirmed in general terms only, and
 qualified afterwards, in cap. xxix, infra, note i, p. 121.]

 Chapter XXVII.--Roman Chronology to the Death of M. Aurelius.

 When Cyrus, then, had reigned twenty-nine years, and had been slain by
 Tomyris in the country of the Massagetæ, this being in the 62d
 Olympiad, then the Romans began to increase in power, God strengthening
 them, Rome having been founded by Romulus, the reputed child of Mars
 and Ilia, in the 7th Olympiad, on the 21st day of April, the year being
 then reckoned as consisting of ten months. Cyrus, then, having died, as
 we have already said, in the 62d Olympiad, this date falls 220 A.U.C.,
 in which year also Tarquinius, surnamed Superbus, reigned over the
 Romans, who was the first who banished Romans and corrupted the youth,
 and made eunuchs of the citizens, and, moreover, first defiled virgins,
 and then gave them in marriage. On this account he was fitly called
 Superbus in the Roman language, and that is translated "the Proud." For
 he first decreed that those who saluted him should have their salute
 acknowledged by some one else. He reigned twenty-five years. After him
 yearly consuls were introduced, tribunes also and ediles for 453 years,
 whose names we consider it long and superfluous to recount. For if any
 one is anxious to learn them, he will ascertain them from the tables
 which Chryserus the nomenclator compiled: he was a freedman of Aurelius
 Verus, who composed a very lucid record of all things, both names and
 dates, from the rounding of Rome to the death of his own patron, the
 Emperor Verus. The annual magistrates ruled the Romans, as we say, for
 453 years. Afterwards those who are called emperors began in this
 order: first, Caius Julius, who reigned 3 years 4 months 6 days; then
 Augustus, 56 years 4 months 1 day; Tiberius, 22 years; then another
 Caius, 3 years 8 months 7 days; Claudius, 23 years 8 months 24 days;
 Nero, 13 years 6 months 58 days; Galba, 2 years 7 months 6 days; Otho,
 3 months 5 days; Vitellius, 6 months 22 days; Vespasian, 9 years 11
 months 22 days; Titus, 2 years 22 days; Domitian, 15 years 5 months 6
 days; Nerva, 1 year 4 months 10 days; Trajan, 19 years 6 months 16
 days; Adrian, 20 years 10 months 28 days; Antoninus, 22 years 7 months
 6 days; Verus, 19 years 10 days. The time therefore of the Cæsars to
 the death of the Emperor Verus is 237 years 5 days. From the death of
 Cyrus, therefore, and the reign of Tarquinius Superbus, to the death of
 the Emperor Verus, the whole time amounts to 744 years.

 Chapter XXVIII.--Leading Chronological Epochs.

 And from the foundation of the world the whole time is thus traced, so
 far as its main epochs are concerned. From the creation of the world to
 the deluge were 2242 years. And from the deluge to the time when
 Abraham our forefather begat a son, 1036 years. And from Isaac,
 Abraham's son, to the time when the people dwelt with Moses in the
 desert, 660 years. And from the death of Moses and the rule of Joshua
 the son of Nun, to the death of the patriarch David, 498 years. And
 from the death of David and the reign of Solomon to the sojourning of
 the people in the land of Babylon, 518 years 6 months 10 days. And from
 the government of Cyrus to the death of the Emperor Aurelius Verus, 744
 years. All the years from the creation of the world amount to a total
 of 5698 years, and the odd months and days. [689]

 [689] [As Verus died a.d. 169, the computation of our author makes the
 creation, b.c. 5529. Hales, who says b.c. 5411, inspires us with great
 respect for Theophilus, by the degree of accuracy he attained, using
 (the LXX.) the same authority as his base. Slight variations in the
 copies used in his day might have led, one would think, to greater
 discrepancies.]

 Chapter XXIX.--Antiquity of Christianity.

 These periods, then, and all the above-mentioned facts, being viewed
 collectively, one can see the antiquity of the prophetical writings and
 the divinity of our doctrine, that the doctrine is not recent, nor our
 tenets mythical and false, as some think; but very ancient and true.
 For Thallus mentioned Belus, king of the Assyrians, and Saturn, son of
 Titan, alleging that Belus with the Titans made war against Jupiter and
 the so-called gods in his alliance; and on this occasion he says that
 Gyges, being defeated, fled to Tartessus. At that time Gyges ruled over
 that country, which then was called Acte, but now is named Attica. And
 whence the other countries and cities derived their names, we think it
 unnecessary to recount, especially to you who are acquainted with
 history. That Moses, and not he only, but also most of the prophets who
 followed him, is proved to be older than all writers, and than Saturn
 and Belus and the Trojan war, is manifest. For according to the history
 of Thallus, Belus is found to be 322 years prior to the Trojan war. But
 we have shown above that Moses lived somewhere about 900 or 1000 years
 before the sack of Troy. And as Saturn and Belus flourished at the same
 time, most people do not know which is Saturn and which is Belus. Some
 worship Saturn, and call him Bel or Bal, especially the inhabitants of
 the eastern countries, for they do not know who either Saturn or Belus
 is. And among the Romans he is called Saturn, for neither do they know
 which of the two is more ancient--Saturn or Bel. So far as regards the
 commencement of the Olympiads, they say that the observance dates from
 Iphitus, but according to others from Linus, who is also called Ilius.
 The order which the whole number of years and Olympiads holds, we have
 shown above. I think I have now, according to my ability, accurately
 discoursed both of the godlessness of your practices, [690] and of the
 whole number of the epochs of history. For if even a chronological
 error has been committed by us, of, e.g., 50 or 100, or even 200 years,
 yet not of thousands and tens of thousands, as Plato and Apollonius and
 other mendacious authors have hitherto written. And perhaps our
 knowledge of the whole number of the years is not quite accurate,
 because the odd months and days are not set down in the sacred books.
 [691] But so far as regards the periods we speak of, we are
 corroborated by Berosus, [692] the Chaldæan philosopher, who made the
 Greeks acquainted with the Chaldæan literature, and uttered some things
 concerning the deluge, and many other points of history, in agreement
 with Moses; and with the prophets Jeremiah and Daniel also, he spoke in
 a measure of agreement. For he mentioned what happened to the Jews
 under the king of the Babylonians, whom he calls Abobassor, and who is
 called by the Hebrews Nebuchadnezzar. And he also spoke of the temple
 of Jerusalem; how it was desolated by the king of the Chaldæans, and
 that the foundations of the temple having been laid the second year of
 the reign of Cyrus, the temple was completed in the second year of the
 reign of Darius.

 [690] Another reading gives, "both of the antiquity of our religion."

 [691] [Usher quotes this concession as to the akribeia or minute
 delicacy he could not attain. Ut supra, p. 119, [10]note 1.]

 [692] Berosus flourished in the reign of Alexander the Great.

 Chapter XXX.--Why the Greeks Did Not Mention Our Histories.

 But the Greeks make no mention of the histories which give the truth:
 first, because they themselves only recently became partakers of the
 knowledge of letters; and they themselves own it, alleging that letters
 were invented, some say among the Chaldæans, and others with the
 Egyptians, and others again say that they are derived from the
 Phoenicians. And secondly, because they sinned, and still sin, in not
 making mention of God, but of vain and useless matters. For thus they
 most heartily celebrate Homer and Hesiod, and the rest of the poets,
 but the glory of the incorruptible and only God they not only omit to
 mention, but blaspheme; yes, and they persecuted, and do daily
 persecute, those who worship Him. And not only so, but they even bestow
 prizes and honours on those who in harmonious language insult God; but
 of those who are zealous in the pursuit of virtue and practice a holy
 life, some they stoned, some they put to death, and up to the present
 time they subject them to savage tortures. Wherefore such men have
 necessarily lost the wisdom of God, and have not found the truth.

 If you please, then, study these things carefully, that you may have a
 compendium [693] and pledge of the truth.

 [693] Otto prefers sumboulon instead of sumbolon , on the authority of
 one ms. The sense then is, "that you may have a counsellor and pledge
 of the truth,"--the counsellor and pledge of the truth being the book
 written by Theophilus for Autolycus. [This has been supposed to mean,
 "that you may have a token and pledge (or earnest) of the truth," i.e.,
 in Christian baptism. Our author uses St. Paul's word (arrhabon), "the
 earnest of the spirit," as in 2 Cor. i. 22, and Eph. 1.14.]

 Writings of Athenagoras

  Introductory Note

 to the

Writings of Athenagoras

 [Translated by the Rev. B. P. Pratten.]

 [a.d. 177.] In placing Athenagoras here, somewhat out of the order
 usually accepted, I commit no appreciable violence against chronology,
 and I gain a great advantage for the reader. To some extent we must
 recognise, in collocation, the principles of affinity and historic
 growth. Closing up the bright succession of the earlier Apologists,
 this favourite author affords also a fitting introduction to the great
 founder of the Alexandrian School, who comes next into view. His work
 opens the way for Clement's elaboration of Justin's claim, that the
 whole of philosophy is embraced in Christianity. It is charming to find
 the primal fountains of Christian thought uniting here, to flow on for
 ever in the widening and deepening channel of Catholic orthodoxy, as it
 gathers into itself all human culture, and enriches the world with
 products of regenerated mind, harvested from its overflow into the
 fields of philosophy and poetry and art and science. More of this when
 we come to Clement, that man of genius who introduced Christianity to
 itself, as reflected in the burnished mirror of his intellect. Shackles
 are falling from the persecuted and imprisoned faculties of the
 faithful, and soon the Faith is to speak out, no more in tones of
 apology, but as mistress of the human mind, and its pilot to new worlds
 of discovery and broad domains of conquest. All hail the freedom with
 which, henceforth, Christians are to assume the overthrow of heathenism
 as a foregone conclusion. The distasteful exposure of heresies was the
 inevitable task after the first victory. It was the chase and
 following-up of the adversary in his limping and cowardly retreat, "the
 scattering of the rear of darkness." With Athenagoras, we touch upon
 tokens of things to come; we see philosophy yoked to the chariot of
 Messiah; we begin to realize that sibylline surrender of outworn
 Paganism, and its forecast of an era of light:--


 "Magnus ab integro sæclorum nascitur ordo,

 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . quo ferrea primum

 Desinet, ac toto surget gens aurea mundo."

 In Athenagoras, whose very name is a retrospect, we discover a remote
 result of St. Paul's speech on Mars Hill. The apostle had cast his
 bread upon the waters of Ilissus and Cephisus to find it after many
 days. "When they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked;"
 but here comes a philosopher, from the Athenian agora, a convert to St.
 Paul's argument in his Epistle to the Corinthians, confessing "the
 unknown God," demolishing the marble mob of deities that so "stirred
 the apostle's spirit within him," and teaching alike the Platonist and
 the Stoic to sit at the feet of Jesus. "Dionysius the Areopagite, and
 the woman named Damaris," are no longer to be despised as the scanty
 first-fruits of Attica. They too have found a voice in this splendid
 trophy of the Gospel; and, "being dead, they yet speak" through him.

 To the meagre facts of his biography, which appear below, there is
 nothing to be added; [694] and I shall restrain my disposition to be a
 commentator, within the limits of scanty notations. In the notes to
 Tatian and Theophilus, I have made the student acquainted with that
 useful addition to his treatise on Justin Martyr, in which the able and
 judicious Bishop Kaye harmonizes those authors with Justin. The same
 harmony enfolds the works of Athenagoras, [695] and thus affords a
 synopsis of Christian teaching under the Antonines; in which precision
 of theological language is yet unattained, but identity of faith is
 clearly exhibited. While the Germans are furnishing the scholar with
 critical editions of the ancients, invaluable for their patient
 accumulations of fact and illustration, they are so daring in theory
 and conjecture when they come to exposition, that one enjoys the
 earnest and wholesome tone of sober comment that distinguishes the
 English theologian. It has the great merit of being inspired by
 profound sympathy with primitive writers, and unadulterated faith in
 the Scriptures. Too often a German critic treats one of these venerable
 witnesses, who yet live and yet speak, as if they were dead subjects on
 the dissecting-table. They cut and carve with anatomical display, and
 use the microscope with scientific skill; but, oh! how frequently they
 surrender the saints of God as mere corpses, into the hands of those
 who count them victims of a blind faith in a dead Christ.

 It will not be necessary, after my quotations from Kaye in the
 foregoing sheets, to do more than indicate similar illustrations of
 Athenagoras to be found in his pages. The dry version often requires
 lubrications of devoutly fragrant exegesis; and providentially they are
 at hand in that elaborate but modest work, of which even this
 generation should not be allowed to lose sight.

 The annotations of Conrad Gesner and Henry Stephans would have greatly
 enriched this edition, had I been permitted to enlarge the work by
 adding a version of them. They are often curious, and are supplemented
 by the interesting letter of Stephans to Peter Nannius, "the eminent
 pillar of Louvain," on the earliest copies of Athenagoras, from which
 modern editions have proceeded. The Paris edition of Justin Martyr
 (1615) contains these notes, as well as the Greek of Tatian,
 Theophilus, and Athenagoras, with a Latin rendering. As Bishop Kaye
 constantly refers to this edition, I have considered myself fortunate
 in possessing it; using it largely in comparing his learned comments
 with the Edinburgh Version.

 A few words as to the noble treatise of our author, on the
 Resurrection. As a firm and loving voice to this keynote of Christian
 faith, it rings like an anthem through all the variations of his
 thought and argument. Comparing his own blessed hope with the delusions
 of a world lying in wickedness, and looking stedfastly to the life of
 the world to come, what a sublime contrast we find in this figure of
 Christ's witness to the sensual life of the heathen, and even to the
 groping wisdom of the Attic sages. I think this treatise a sort of
 growth from the mind of one who had studied in the Academe, pitying yet
 loving poor Socrates and his disciples. Yet more, it is the outcome of
 meditation on that sad history in the Acts, which expounds St. Paul's
 bitter reminiscences, when he says that his gospel was, "to the Greeks,
 foolishness." They never "heard him again on this matter." He left them
 under the confused impressions they had expressed in the agora, when
 they said, "he seemeth to be a setter-forth of new gods." St. Luke
 allows himself a smile only half suppressed when he adds, "because he
 preached unto them Jesus and Anastasis," which in their ears was only a
 barbarian echo to their own Phoebus and Artemis; and what did Athenians
 want of any more wares of that sort, especially under the introduction
 of a poor Jew from parts unknown? Did the apostle's prophetic soul
 foresee Athenagoras, as he "departed from among them"? However that may
 be, his blessed Master "knew what he would do." He could let none of
 Paul's words fall to the ground, without taking care that some seeds
 should bring forth fruit a thousand-fold. Here come the sheaves at
 last. Athenagoras proves, also, what our Saviour meant, when he said to
 the Galileans, "Ye are the light of the world."

 The following is the original Introductory Notice:--

 It is one of the most singular facts in early ecclesiastical history,
 that the name of Athenagoras is scarcely ever mentioned. Only two
 references to him and his writings have been discovered. One of these
 occurs in the work of Methodius, On the Resurrection of the Body, as
 preserved by Epiphanius (Hoer., lxiv.) and Photius (Biblioth.,
 ccxxxiv.). The other notice of him is found in the writings [696] of
 Philip of Side, in Pamphylia, who flourished in the early part of the
 fifth century. It is very remarkable that Eusebius should have been
 altogether silent regarding him; and that writings, so elegant and
 powerful as are those which still exist under his name, should have
 been allowed in early times to sink into almost entire oblivion.

 We know with certainty regarding Athenagoras, that he was an Athenian
 philosopher who had embraced Christianity, and that his Apology, or, as
 he styles it, "Embassy" (presbeia), was presented to the Emperors
 Aurelius and Commodus about a.d. 177. He is supposed to have written a
 considerable number of works, but the only other production of his
 extant is his treatise on the Resurrection. It is probable that this
 work was composed somewhat later than the Apology (see chap. xxxvi.),
 though its exact date cannot be determined. Philip of Side also states
 that he preceded Pantænus as head of the catechetical school at
 Alexandria; but this is probably incorrect, and is contradicted by
 Eusebius. A more interesting and perhaps well-rounded statement is made
 by the same writer respecting Athenagoras, to the effect that he was
 won over to Christianity while reading the Scriptures in order to
 controvert them. [697] Both his Apology and his treatise on the
 Resurrection display a practiced pen and a richly cultured mind. He is
 by far the most elegant, and certainly at the same time one of the
 ablest, of the early Christian Apologists.

 [694] But Lardner tells the whole story much better. Credibility, vol.
 ii. p. 193.

 [695] The dogmatic value of a patristic quotation depends on the
 support it finds in other Fathers, under the supremacy of Scripture:
 hence the utility of Kaye's collocations.

 [696] The fragment in which the notice occurs was extracted from the
 works of Philip by some unknown writer. It is published as an appendix
 to Dodwell's Dissertationes in Irenæum.

 [697] [Here a picture suggests itself. We go back to the times of
 Hadrian. A persecution is raging against the "Nazarenes." A boyish, but
 well-cultured Athenian saunters into the market-place to hear some new
 thing. They are talking of those enemies of the human race, the
 Christians. Curiosity leads him to their assemblies. He finds them
 keeping the feast of the resurrection. Quadratus is preaching. He
 mocks, but is persuaded to open one of St. Paul's Epistles. "What will
 this babbler say?" He reads the fifteenth chapter of First Corinthians,
 and resents it with all the objections still preserved in his pages.
 One can see him inquiring more about this Paul, and reading the
 seventeenth chapter of the Acts. What an animated description of his
 own Athens, and in what a new light it reflects the familiar scenes! He
 must refute this Paul. But, when he undertakes it, he falls in love
 when the intrepid assailant of the gods of Greece. Scales fall from his
 own eyes. How he sees it all at last, we find in the two works here
 presented, corresponding as they do, first and last, with the two parts
 of the apostle's speech to the men of Athens.]

A Plea [698] For the Christians

  By Athenagoras the Athenian: Philosopher and Christian

 To the Emperors Marcus Aurelius Anoninus and Lucius Aurelius Commodus,
 conquerors of Armenia and Sarmatia, and more than all, philosophers.

 Chapter I.--Injustice Shown Towards the Christians.

 In your empire, greatest of sovereigns, different nations have
 different customs and laws; and no one is hindered by law or fear of
 punishment from following his ancestral usages, however ridiculous
 these may be. A citizen of Ilium calls Hector a god, and pays divine
 honours to Helen, taking her for Adrasteia. The Lacedæmonian venerates
 Agamemnon as Zeus, and Phylonoë the daughter of Tyndarus; and the man
 of Tenedos worships Tennes. [699] The Athenian sacrifices to Erechtheus
 as Poseidon. The Athenians also perform religious rites and celebrate
 mysteries in honour of Agraulus and Pandrosus, women who were deemed
 guilty of impiety for opening the box. In short, among every nation and
 people, men offer whatever sacrifices and celebrate whatever mysteries
 they please. The Egyptians reckon among their gods even cats, and
 crocodiles, and serpents, and asps, and dogs. And to all these both you
 and the laws give permission so to act, deeming, on the one hand, that
 to believe in no god at all is impious and wicked, and on the other,
 that it is necessary for each man to worship the gods he prefers, in
 order that through fear of the deity, men may be kept from wrong-doing.
 But why--for do not, like the multitude, be led astray by hearsay--why
 is a mere name odious to you? [700] Names are not deserving of hatred:
 it is the unjust act that calls for penalty and punishment. And
 accordingly, with admiration of your mildness and gentleness, and your
 peaceful and benevolent disposition towards every man, individuals live
 in the possession of equal rights; and the cities, according to their
 rank, share in equal honour; and the whole empire, under your
 intelligent sway, enjoys profound peace. But for us who are called
 Christians [701] you have not in like manner cared; but although we
 commit no wrong--nay, as will appear in the sequel of this discourse,
 are of all men most piously and righteously disposed towards the Deity
 and towards your government--you allow us to be harassed, plundered,
 and persecuted, the multitude making war upon us for our name alone. We
 venture, therefore, to lay a statement of our case before you--and you
 will learn from this discourse that we suffer unjustly, and contrary to
 all law and reason--and we beseech you to bestow some consideration
 upon us also, that we may cease at length to be slaughtered at the
 instigation of false accusers. For the fine imposed by our persecutors
 does not aim merely at our property, nor their insults at our
 reputation, nor the damage they do us at any other of our greater
 interests. These we hold in contempt, though to the generality they
 appear matters of great importance; for we have learned, not only not
 to return blow for blow, nor to go to law with those who plunder and
 rob us, but to those who smite us on one side of the face to offer the
 other side also, and to those who take away our coat to give likewise
 our cloak. But, when we have surrendered our property, they plot
 against our very bodies and souls, [702] pouring upon us wholesale
 charges of crimes of which we are guiltless even in thought, but which
 belong to these idle praters themselves, and to the whole tribe of
 those who are like them.

 [699] There are here many varieties of reading: we have followed the
 text suggested by Gesner.

 [700] We here follow the text of Otto; others read hemin.

 [701] [Kaye, 153.]

 [702] [For three centuries the faithful were made witnesses for Jesus
 and the resurrection, even unto death; with "spoiling of their goods,"
 not only, but dying daily, and "counted as sheep for the slaughter."
 What can refuse such testimony? They conquered through suffering. The
 reader will be pleased with this citation from an author, the neglect
 of whose heavenly writings is a sad token of spiritual decline in the
 spirit of our religion:-- "The Lord is sure of His designed advantages
 out of the sufferings of His Church and of His saints for His name. He
 loses nothing, and they lose nothing; but their enemies, when they rage
 most and prevail most, are ever the greatest losers. His own glory
 grows, the graces of His people grow; yea, their very number grows, and
 that, sometimes, most by their greatest sufferings. This was evident in
 the first ages of the Christian Church. Where were the glory of so much
 invincible love and patience, if they had not been so put to it?"
 Leighton, Comm. on St. Peter, Works, vol. iv. p. 478. West's admirable
 edition, London, Longmans, 1870.]

 Chapter II.--Claim to Be Treated as Others are When Accused.

 If, indeed, any one can convict us of a crime, be it small or great, we
 do not ask to be excused from punishment, but are prepared to undergo
 the sharpest and most merciless inflictions. But if the accusation
 relates merely to our name--and it is undeniable, that up to the
 present time the stories told about us rest on nothing better than the
 common undiscriminating popular talk, nor has any Christian [703] been
 convicted of crime--it will devolve on you, illustrious and benevolent
 and most learned sovereigns, to remove by law this despiteful
 treatment, so that, as throughout the world both individuals and cities
 partake of your beneficence, we also may feel grateful to you, exulting
 that we are no longer the victims of false accusation. For it does not
 comport with your justice, that others when charged with crimes should
 not be punished till they are convicted, but that in our case the name
 we bear should have more force than the evidence adduced on the trial,
 when the judges, instead of inquiring whether the person arraigned have
 committed any crime, vent their insults on the name, as if that were
 itself a crime. [704] But no name in and by itself is reckoned either
 good or bad; names appear bad or good according as the actions
 underlying them are bad or good. You, however, have yourselves a clear
 knowledge of this, since you are well instructed in philosophy and all
 learning. For this reason, too, those who are brought before you for
 trial, though they may be arraigned on the gravest charges, have no
 fear, because they know that you will inquire respecting their previous
 life, and not be influenced by names if they mean nothing, nor by the
 charges contained in the indictments if they should be false: they
 accept with equal satisfaction, as regards its fairness, the sentence
 whether of condemnation or acquittal. What, therefore, is conceded as
 the common right of all, we claim for ourselves, that we shall not be
 hated and punished because we are called Christians (for what has the
 name [705] to do with our being bad men?), but be tried on any charges
 which may be brought against us, and either be released on our
 disproving them, or punished if convicted of crime--not for the name
 (for no Christian is a bad man unless he falsely profess our
 doctrines), but for the wrong which has been done. It is thus that we
 see the philosophers judged. None of them before trial is deemed by the
 judge either good or bad on account of his science or art, but if found
 guilty of wickedness he is punished, without thereby affixing any
 stigma on philosophy (for he is a bad man for not cultivating
 philosophy in a lawful manner, but science is blameless), while if he
 refutes the false charges he is acquitted. Let this equal justice,
 then, be done to us. Let the life of the accused persons be
 investigated, but let the name stand free from all imputation. I must
 at the outset of my defence entreat you, illustrious emperors, to
 listen to me impartially: not to be carried away by the common
 irrational talk and prejudge the case, but to apply your desire of
 knowledge and love of truth to the examination of our doctrine also.
 Thus, while you on your part will not err through ignorance, we also,
 by disproving the charges arising out of the undiscerning rumour of the
 multitude, shall cease to be assailed.

 [703] [Kaye, 154.]

 [704] [Tatian, cap. xxvii., supra, p. 76.]

 [705] [Tatian, cap. xxvii., supra, p. 76.]

 Chapter III.--Charges Brought Against the Christians.

 Three things are alleged against us: atheism, Thyestean feasts, [706]
 OEdipodean intercourse. But if these charges are true, spare no class:
 proceed at once against our crimes; destroy us root and branch, with
 our wives and children, if any Christian [707] is found to live like
 the brutes. And yet even the brutes do not touch the flesh of their own
 kind; and they pair by a law of nature, and only at the regular season,
 not from simple wantonness; they also recognise those from whom they
 receive benefits. If any one, therefore, is more savage than the
 brutes, what punishment that he can endure shall be deemed adequate to
 such offences? But, if these things are only idle tales and empty
 slanders, originating in the fact that virtue is opposed by its very
 nature to vice, and that contraries war against one another by a divine
 law (and you are yourselves witnesses that no such iniquities are
 committed by us, for you forbid informations to be laid against us), it
 remains for you to make inquiry concerning our life, our opinions, our
 loyalty and obedience to you and your house and government, and thus at
 length to grant to us the same rights (we ask nothing more) as to those
 who persecute us. For we shall then conquer them, unhesitatingly
 surrendering, as we now do, our very lives for the truth's sake.

 [706] [See cap. xxxi. Our Lord was "perfect man," yet our author
 resents the idea of eating the flesh of one's own kind as worse than
 brutal. As to the Eucharist the inference is plain.]

 [707] Thus Otto; others read, "if any one of men."

 Chapter IV.--The Christians are Not Atheists, But Acknowledge One Only
 God.

 As regards, first of all, the allegation that we are atheists--for I
 will meet the charges one by one, that we may not be ridiculed for
 having no answer to give to those who make them--with reason did the
 Athenians adjudge Diagoras guilty of atheism, in that he not only
 divulged the Orphic doctrine, and published the mysteries of Eleusis
 and of the Cabiri, and chopped up the wooden statue of Hercules to boil
 his turnips, but openly declared that there was no God at all. But to
 us, who distinguish God from matter, [708] and teach that matter is one
 thing and God another, and that they are separated by a wide interval
 (for that the Deity is uncreated and eternal, to be beheld by the
 understanding and reason alone, while matter is created and
 perishable), is it not absurd to apply the name of atheism? If our
 sentiments were like those of Diagoras, while we have such incentives
 to piety--in the established order, the universal harmony, the
 magnitude, the colour, the form, the arrangement of the world--with
 reason might our reputation for impiety, as well as the cause of our
 being thus harassed, be charged on ourselves. But, since our doctrine
 acknowledges one God, the Maker of this universe, who is Himself
 uncreated (for that which is does not come to be, but that which is
 not) but has made all things by the Logos which is from Him, we are
 treated unreasonably in both respects, in that we are both defamed and
 persecuted.

 [708] [Kaye, p. 7.]

 Chapter V.--Testimony of the Poets to the Unity of God. [709]

 Poets and philosophers have not been voted atheists for inquiring
 concerning God. Euripides, speaking of those who, according to popular
 preconception, are ignorantly called gods, says doubtingly:--


 "If Zeus indeed does reign in heaven above,

 He ought not on the righteous ills to send." [710]

 But speaking of Him who is apprehended by the understanding as matter
 of certain knowledge, he gives his opinion decidedly, and with
 intelligence, thus:--


 "Seest thou on high him who, with humid arms,

 Clasps both the boundless ether and the earth?

 Him reckon Zeus, and him regard as God." [711]

 For, as to these so-called gods, he neither saw any real existences, to
 which a name is usually assigned, underlying them ("Zeus," for
 instance: "who Zeus is I know not, but by report"), nor that any names
 were given to realities which actually do exist (for of what use are
 names to those who have no real existences underlying them?); but Him
 he did see by means of His works, considering with an eye to things
 unseen the things which are manifest in air, in ether, on earth. Him
 therefore, from whom proceed all created things, and by whose Spirit
 they are governed, he concluded to be God; and Sophocles agrees with
 him, when he says:--


 "There is one God, in truth there is but one,

 Who made the heavens, and the broad earth beneath." [712]

 [Euripides is speaking] of the nature of God, which fills His works
 with beauty, and teaching both where God must be, and that He must be
 One.

 [709] [De Maistre, who talks nothing but sophistry when he rides his
 hobby, and who shocked the pope himself by his fanatical effort to
 demonstrate the papal system, is, nevertheless, very suggestive and
 interesting when he condescends to talk simply as a Christian. See his
 citations showing the heathen consciousness of one Supreme Being.
 Soirées de St. Pétersbourg, vol. i. pp. 225, 280; vol. ii. pp. 379,
 380.]

 [710] From an unknown play.

 [711] From an unknown play; the original is ambiguous; comp. Cic. De
 Nat Deorum, ii. c. 25, where the words are translated--"Seest thou this
 boundless ether on high which embraces the earth in its moist arms?
 Reckon this Zeus." Athenagoras cannot so have understood Euripides.

 [712] Not found in his extant works.

 Chapter VI.--Opinions of the Philosophers as to the One God.

 Philolaus, too, when he says that all things are included in God as in
 a stronghold, teaches that He is one, and that He is superior to
 matter. Lysis and Opsimus [713] thus define God: the one says that He
 is an ineffable number, the other that He is the excess of the greatest
 number beyond that which comes nearest to it. So that since ten is the
 greatest number according to the Pythagoreans, being the Tetractys,
 [714] and containing all the arithmetic and harmonic principles, and
 the Nine stands next to it, God is a unit--that is, one. For the
 greatest number exceeds the next least by one. Then there are Plato and
 Aristotle--not that I am about to go through all that the philosophers
 have said about God, as if I wished to exhibit a complete summary of
 their opinions; for I know that, as you excel all men in intelligence
 and in the power of your rule, in the same proportion do you surpass
 them all in an accurate acquaintance with all learning, cultivating as
 you do each several branch with more success than even those who have
 devoted themselves exclusively to any one. But, inasmuch as it is
 impossible to demonstrate without the citation of names that we are not
 alone in confining the notion of God to unity, I have ventured on an
 enumeration of opinions. Plato, then, says, "To find out the Maker and
 Father of this universe is difficult; and, when found, it is impossible
 to declare Him to all," [715] conceiving of one uncreated and eternal
 God. And if he recognises others as well, such as the sun, moon, and
 stars, yet he recognises them as created: "gods, offspring of gods, of
 whom I am the Maker, and the Father of works which are indissoluble
 apart from my will; but whatever is compounded can be dissolved." [716]
 If, therefore, Plato is not an atheist for conceiving of one uncreated
 God, the Framer of the universe, neither are we atheists who
 acknowledge and firmly hold that He is God who has framed all things by
 the Logos, and holds them in being by His Spirit. Aristotle, again, and
 his followers, recognising the existence of one whom they regard as a
 sort of compound living creature (zoon), speak of God as consisting of
 soul and body, thinking His body to be the etherial space and the
 planetary stars and the sphere of the fixed stars, moving in circles;
 but His soul, the reason which presides over the motion of the body,
 itself not subject to motion, but becoming the cause of motion to the
 other. The Stoics also, although by the appellations they employ to
 suit the changes of matter, which they say is permeated by the Spirit
 of God, they multiply the Deity in name, yet in reality they consider
 God to be one. [717] For, if God is an artistic fire advancing
 methodically to the production of the several things in the world,
 embracing in Himself all the seminal principles by which each thing is
 produced in accordance with fate, and if His Spirit pervades the whole
 world, then God is one according to them, being named Zeus in respect
 of the fervid part (to zeon) of matter, and Hera in respect of the air
 (ho aer), and called by other names in respect of that particular part
 of matter which He pervades.

 [713] Common text has opsei; we follow the text of Otto. [Gesner notes
 this corruption, and conjectures that it should be the name of some
 philosopher.]

 [714] One, two, three, and four together forming ten.

 [715] Timæus, p. 28, C.

 [716] Timæus, p. 41, A.

 [717] [We must not wonder at the scant praise accorded by the
 Apologists to the truths embedded everywhere in Plato and other heathen
 writers. They felt intensely, that "the world, by wisdom, knew not God;
 and that it was their own mission to lead men to the only source of
 true philosophy.]

 Chapter VII.--Superiority of the Christian Doctrine Respecting God.

 Since, therefore, the unity of the Deity is confessed by almost all,
 even against their will, when they come to treat of the first
 principles of the universe, and we in our turn likewise assert that He
 who arranged this universe is God,--why is it that they can say and
 write with impunity what they please concerning the Deity, but that
 against us a law lies in force, though we are able to demonstrate what
 we apprehend and justly believe, namely that there is one God, with
 proofs and reason accordant with truth? For poets and philosophers, as
 to other subjects so also to this, have applied themselves in the way
 of conjecture, moved, by reason of their affinity with the afflatus
 from God, [718] each one by his own soul, to try whether he could find
 out and apprehend the truth; but they have not been found competent
 fully to apprehend it, because they thought fit to learn, not from God
 concerning God, but each one from himself; hence they came each to his
 own conclusion respecting God, and matter, and forms, and the world.
 But we have for witnesses of the things we apprehend and believe,
 prophets, men who have pronounced concerning God and the things of God,
 guided by the Spirit of God. And you too will admit, excelling all
 others as you do in intelligence and in piety towards the true God (to
 ontos theion), that it would be irrational for us to cease to believe
 in the Spirit from God, who moved the mouths of the prophets like
 musical instruments, and to give heed to mere human opinions.

 [718] [See cap. xxx., infra. Important, as showing the degree of value
 attributed by the Fathers to the Sibylline and Orphic sayings. Comp.
 Kaye, p. 177.]

 Chapter VIII.--Absurdities of Polytheism.

 As regards, then, the doctrine that there was from the beginning one
 God, the Maker of this universe, consider it in this wise, that you may
 be acquainted with the argumentative grounds also of our faith. If
 there were from the beginning two or more gods, they were either in one
 and the same place, or each of them separately in his own. In one and
 the same place they could not be. For, if they are gods, they are not
 alike; but because they are uncreated they are unlike: for created
 things are like their patterns; but the uncreated are unlike, being
 neither produced from any one, nor formed after the pattern of any one.
 Hand and eye and foot are parts of one body, making up together one
 man: is God in this sense one? [719] And indeed Socrates was compounded
 and divided into parts, just because he was created and perishable; but
 God is uncreated, and, impassible, and indivisible--does not,
 therefore, consist of parts. But if, on the contrary, each of them
 exists separately, since He that made the world is above the things
 created, and about the things He has made and set in order, where can
 the other or the rest be? For if the world, being made spherical, is
 confined within the circles of heaven, and the Creator of the world is
 above the things created, managing that [720] by His providential care
 of these, what place is there for the second god, or for the other
 gods? For he is not in the world, because it belongs to the other; nor
 about the world, for God the Maker of the world is above it. But if he
 is neither in the world nor about the world (for all that surrounds it
 is occupied by this one [721] ), where is he? Is he above the world and
 [the first] God? In another world, or about another? But if he is in
 another or about another, then he is not about us, for he does not
 govern the world; nor is his power great, for he exists in a
 circumscribed space. But if he is neither in another world (for all
 things are filled by the other), nor about another (for all things are
 occupied by the other), he clearly does not exist at all, for there is
 no place in which he can be. Or what does he do, seeing there is
 another to whom the world belongs, and he is above the Maker of the
 world, and yet is neither in the world nor about the world? Is there,
 then, some other place where he can stand? But God, and what belongs to
 God, are above him. And what, too, shall be the place, seeing that the
 other fills the regions which are above the world? Perhaps he exerts a
 providential care? [By no means.] And yet, unless he does so, he has
 done nothing. If, then, he neither does anything nor exercises
 providential care, and if there is not another place in which he is,
 then this Being of whom we speak is the one God from the beginning, and
 the sole Maker of the world.

 [719] i.e., Do several gods make up one God?--Otto. Others read
 affirmatively, "God is one."

 [720] i.e., the world.

 [721] i.e., the Creator, or first God.

 Chapter IX.--The Testimony of the Prophets.

 If we satisfied ourselves with advancing such considerations as these,
 our doctrines might by some be looked upon as human. But, since the
 voices of the prophets confirm our arguments--for I think that you
 also, with your great zeal for knowledge, and your great attainments in
 learning, cannot be ignorant of the writings either of Moses or of
 Isaiah and Jeremiah, and the other prophets, who, lifted in ecstasy
 above the natural operations of their minds by the impulses of the
 Divine Spirit, uttered the things with which they were inspired, the
 Spirit making use of them as a flute-player [722] breathes into a
 flute;--what, then, do these men say? "The Lord is our God; no other
 can be compared with Him." [723] And again: "I am God, the first and
 the last, and besides Me there is no God." [724] In like manner:
 "Before Me there was no other God, and after Me there shall be none; I
 am God, and there is none besides Me." [725] And as to His greatness:
 "Heaven is My throne, and the earth is the footstool of My feet: what
 house will ye build for Me, or what is the place of My rest?" [726] But
 I leave it to you, when you meet with the books themselves, to examine
 carefully the prophecies contained in them, that you may on fitting
 grounds defend us from the abuse cast upon us.

 [722] [Kaye, 179. An important comment; comp. cap. vii., supra.]

 [723] Isa. xli. 4; Ex. xx. 2, 3 (as to sense).

 [724] Isa. xliv. 6.

 [725] Isa. xliii. 10, 11.

 [726] Isa. lxvi. 1.

 Chapter X.--The Christians Worship the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

 That we are not atheists, therefore, seeing that we acknowledge one
 God, uncreated, eternal, invisible, impassible, incomprehensible,
 illimitable, who is apprehended by the understanding only and the
 reason, who is encompassed by light, and beauty, and spirit, and power
 ineffable, by whom the universe has been created through His Logos, and
 set in order, and is kept in being--I have sufficiently demonstrated.
 [I say "His Logos"], for we acknowledge also a Son of God. Nor let any
 one think it ridiculous that God should have a Son. For though the
 poets, in their fictions, represent the gods as no better than men, our
 mode of thinking is not the same as theirs, concerning either God the
 Father or the Son. But the Son of God is the Logos of the Father, in
 idea and in operation; for after the pattern of Him and by Him [727]
 were all things made, the Father and the Son being one. And, the Son
 being in the Father and the Father in the Son, in oneness and power of
 spirit, the understanding and reason (nous kai logos) of the Father is
 the Son of God. But if, in your surpassing intelligence, [728] it
 occurs to you to inquire what is meant by the Son, I will state briefly
 that He is the first product of the Father, not as having been brought
 into existence (for from the beginning, God, who is the eternal mind
 [nous], had the Logos in Himself, being from eternity instinct with
 Logos [logikos]); but inasmuch as He came forth to be the idea and
 energizing power of all material things, which lay like a nature
 without attributes, and an inactive earth, the grosser particles being
 mixed up with the lighter. The prophetic Spirit also agrees with our
 statements. "The Lord," it says, "made me, the beginning of His ways to
 His works." [729] The Holy Spirit Himself also, which operates in the
 prophets, we assert to be an effluence of God, flowing from Him, and
 returning back again like a beam of the sun. Who, then, would not be
 astonished to hear men who speak of God the Father, and of God the Son,
 and of the Holy Spirit, [730] and who declare both their power in union
 and their distinction in order, called atheists? Nor is our teaching in
 what relates to the divine nature confined to these points; but we
 recognise also a multitude of angels and ministers, [731] whom God the
 Maker and Framer of the world distributed and appointed to their
 several posts by His Logos, to occupy themselves about the elements,
 and the heavens, and the world, and the things in it, and the goodly
 ordering of them all.

 [727] "Or, by Him and through Him." [Kaye, pp. 155, 175.]

 [728] [Kaye, p. 166.]

 [729] Prov. viii. 22.

 [730] [Compare Theophilus, supra, p. 101, and Kaye's note, p. 156.]

 [731] [Heb. i. 14, the express doctrine of St. Paul. They are ministers
 to men, not objects of any sort of worship. "Let no man beguile you,"
 etc. Col. ii. 4, 18.]

 Chapter XI.--The Moral Teaching of the Christians Repels the Charge
 Brought Against Them.

 If I go minutely into the particulars of our doctrine, let it not
 surprise you. It is that you may not be carried away by the popular and
 irrational opinion, but may have the truth clearly before you. For
 presenting the opinions themselves to which we adhere, as being not
 human but uttered and taught by God, we shall be able to persuade you
 not to think of us as atheists. What, then, are those teachings in
 which we are brought up? "I say unto you, Love your enemies; bless them
 that curse you; pray for them that persecute you; that ye may be the
 sons of your Father who is in heaven, who causes His sun to rise on the
 evil and the good, and sends rain on the just and the unjust." [732]
 Allow me here to lift up my voice boldly in loud and audible outcry,
 pleading as I do before philosophic princes. For who of those that
 reduce syllogisms, and clear up ambiguities, and explain etymologies,
 [733] or of those who teach homonyms and synonyms, and predicaments and
 axioms, and what is the subject and what the predicate, and who promise
 their disciples by these and such like instructions to make them happy:
 who of them have so purged their souls as, instead of hating their
 enemies, to love them; and, instead of speaking ill of those who have
 reviled them (to abstain from which is of itself an evidence of no mean
 forbearance), to bless them; and to pray for those who plot against
 their lives? On the contrary, they never cease with evil intent to
 search out skilfully the secrets of their art, [734] and are ever bent
 on working some ill, making the art of words and not the exhibition of
 deeds their business and profession. But among us you will find
 uneducated persons, and artisans, and old women, who, if they are
 unable in words to prove the benefit of our doctrine, yet by their
 deeds exhibit the benefit arising from their persuasion of its truth:
 they do not rehearse speeches, but exhibit good works; when struck,
 they do not strike again; when robbed, they do not go to law; they give
 to those that ask of them, and love their neighbours as themselves.

 [732] Luke vi. 27, 28; Matt. v. 44, 45.

 [733] [Kaye, pp. 212-217.]

 [734] The meaning is here doubtful; but the probably reference is to
 the practices of the Sophists.

 Chapter XII.--Consequent Absurdity of the Charge of Atheism.

 Should we, then, unless we believed that a God presides over the human
 race, thus purge ourselves from evil? Most certainly not. But, because
 we are persuaded that we shall give an account of everything in the
 present life to God, who made us and the world, we adopt a temperate
 and benevolent and generally despised method of life, believing that we
 shall suffer no such great evil here, even should our lives be taken
 from us, compared with what we shall there receive for our meek and
 benevolent and moderate life from the great Judge. Plato indeed has
 said that Minos and Rhadamanthus will judge and punish the wicked; but
 we say that, even if a man be Minos or Rhadamanthus himself, or their
 father, even he will not escape the judgment of God. Are, then, those
 who consider life to be comprised in this, "Let us eat and drink, for
 to-morrow we die," and who regard death as a deep sleep and
 forgetfulness ("sleep and death, twin brothers" [735] ), to be
 accounted pious; while men who reckon the present life of very small
 worth indeed, and who are conducted to the future life by this one
 thing alone, that they know God and His Logos, what is the oneness of
 the Son with the Father, what the communion of the Father with the Son,
 what is the Spirit, what is the unity of these three, the Spirit, the
 Son, the Father, and their distinction in unity; and who know that the
 life for which we look is far better than can be described in words,
 provided we arrive at it pure from all wrong-doing; who, moreover,
 carry our benevolence to such an extent, that we not only love our
 friends ("for if ye love them," He says, "that love you, and lend to
 them that lend to you, what reward will ye have?" [736] ),--shall we, I
 say, when such is our character, and when we live such a life as this,
 that we may escape condemnation at last, not be accounted pious? These,
 however, are only small matters taken from great, and a few things from
 many, that we may not further trespass on your patience; for those who
 test honey and whey, judge by a small quantity whether the whole is
 good.

 [735] Hom., Il., xvi. 672.

 [736] Luke vi. 32, 34; Matt. v. 46.

 Chapter XIII.--Why the Christians Do Not Offer Sacrifices.

 But, as most of those who charge us with atheism, and that because they
 have not even the dreamiest conception of what God is, and are doltish
 and utterly unacquainted with natural and divine things, and such as
 measure piety by the rule of sacrifices, charges us with not
 acknowledging the same gods as the cities, be pleased to attend to the
 following considerations, O emperors, on both points. And first, as to
 our not sacrificing: the Framer and Father of this universe does not
 need blood, nor the odour of burnt-offerings, nor the fragrance of
 flowers and incense, [737] forasmuch as He is Himself perfect
 fragrance, needing nothing either within or without; but the noblest
 sacrifice [738] to Him is for us to know who stretched out and vaulted
 the heavens, and fixed the earth in its place like a centre, who
 gathered the water into seas and divided the light from the darkness,
 who adorned the sky with stars and made the earth to bring forth seed
 of every kind, who made animals and fashioned man. When, holding God to
 be this Framer of all things, who preserves them in being and
 superintends them all by knowledge and administrative skill, we "lift
 up holy hands" to Him, what need has He further of a hecatomb?


 "For they, when mortals have transgress'd or fail'd

 To do aright, by sacrifice and pray'r,

 Libations and burnt-offerings, may be soothed." [739]

 And what have I to do with holocausts, which God does not stand in need
 of?--though indeed it does behove us to offer a bloodless sacrifice and
 "the service of our reason." [740]

 [737] [Harmless as flowers and incense may be, the Fathers disown them
 in this way continually.]

 [738] [This brilliant condensation of the Benedicite (Song of the Three
 Children) affords Kaye occasion to observe that our author is silent as
 to the sacraments. p. 195.]

 [739] Hom., Il., ix. 499 sq., Lord Derby's translation, which version
 the translator has for the most part used.

 [740] Comp. Rom. xii. 1. [Mal. i.11. "A pure Mincha" (Lev. ii. 1) was
 the unbloody sacrifice of the Jews. This was to be the Christian
 oblation: hence to offering of Christ's natural blood, as the Latins
 now teach, was unknown to Athenagoras.]

 Chapter XIV.--Inconsistency of Those Who Accuse the Christians.

 Then, as to the other complaint, that we do not pray to and believe in
 the same gods as the cities, it is an exceedingly silly one. Why, the
 very men who charge us with atheism for not admitting the same gods as
 they acknowledge, are not agreed among themselves concerning the gods.
 The Athenians have set up as gods Celeus and Metanira: the
 Lacedæmonians Menelaus; and they offer sacrifices and hold festivals to
 him, while the men of Ilium cannot endure the very sound of his name,
 and pay their adoration to Hector. The Ceans worship Aristæus,
 considering him to be the same as Zeus and Apollo; the Thasians
 Theagenes, a man who committed murder at the Olympic games; the Samians
 Lysander, notwithstanding all the slaughters and all the crimes
 perpetrated by him; Alcman and Hesiod Medea, and the Cilicians Niobe;
 the Sicilians Philip the son of Butacides; the Amathusians Onesilus;
 the Carthaginians Hamilcar. Time would fail me to enumerate the whole.
 When, therefore, they differ among themselves concerning their gods,
 why do they bring the charge against us of not agreeing with them? Then
 look at the practices prevailing among the Egyptians: are they not
 perfectly ridiculous? For in the temples at their solemn festivals they
 beat their breasts as for the dead, and sacrifice to the same beings as
 gods; and no wonder, when they look upon the brutes as gods, and shave
 themselves when they die, and bury them in temples, and make public
 lamentation. If, then, we are guilty of impiety because we do not
 practice a piety corresponding with theirs, then all cities and all
 nations are guilty of impiety, for they do not all acknowledge the same
 gods.

 Chapter XV.--The Christians Distinguish God from Matter.

 But grant that they acknowledge the same. What then? Because the
 multitude, who cannot distinguish between matter and God, or see how
 great is the interval which lies between them, pray to idols made of
 matter, are we therefore, who do distinguish and separate the uncreated
 and the created, that which is and that which is not, that which is
 apprehended by the understanding and that which is perceived by the
 senses, and who give the fitting name to each of them,--are we to come
 and worship images? If, indeed, matter and God are the same, two names
 for one thing, then certainly, in not regarding stocks and stones, gold
 and silver, as gods, we are guilty of impiety. But if they are at the
 greatest possible remove from one another--as far asunder as the artist
 and the materials of his art--why are we called to account? For as is
 the potter and the clay (matter being the clay, and the artist the
 potter), so is God, the Framer of the world, and matter, which is
 subservient to Him for the purposes of His art. [741] But as the clay
 cannot become vessels of itself without art, so neither did matter,
 which is capable of taking all forms, receive, apart from God the
 Framer, distinction and shape and order. And as we do not hold the
 pottery of more worth than him who made it, nor the vessels of glass
 and gold than him who wrought them; but if there is anything about them
 elegant in art we praise the artificer, and it is he who reaps the
 glory of the vessels: even so with matter and God--the glory and honour
 of the orderly arrangement of the world belongs of right not to matter,
 but to God, the Framer of matter. So that, if we were to regard the
 various forms of matter as gods, we should seem to be without any sense
 of the true God, because we should be putting the things which are
 dissoluble and perishable on a level with that which is eternal.

 [741] [Kaye, p. 172.]

 Chapter XVI.--The Christians Do Not Worship the Universe.

 Beautiful without doubt is the world, excelling, [742] as well in its
 magnitude as in the arrangement of its parts, both those in the oblique
 circle and those about the north, and also in its spherical form. [743]
 Yet it is not this, but its Artificer, that we must worship. For when
 any of your subjects come to you, they do not neglect to pay their
 homage to you, their rulers and lords, from whom they will obtain
 whatever they need, and address themselves to the magnificence of your
 palace; but, if they chance to come upon the royal residence, they
 bestow a passing glance of admiration on its beautiful structure: but
 it is to you yourselves that they show honour, as being "all in all."
 You sovereigns, indeed, rear and adorn your palaces for yourselves; but
 the world was not created because God needed it; for God is Himself
 everything to Himself,--light unapproachable, a perfect world, spirit,
 power, reason. If, therefore, the world is an instrument in tune, and
 moving in well-measured time, I adore the Being who gave its harmony,
 and strikes its notes, and sings the accordant strain, and not the
 instrument. For at the musical contests the adjudicators do not pass by
 the lute-players and crown the lutes. Whether, then, as Plato says, the
 world be a product of divine art, I admire its beauty, and adore the
 Artificer; or whether it be His essence and body, as the Peripatetics
 affirm, we do not neglect to adore God, who is the cause of the motion
 of the body, and descend "to the poor and weak elements," adoring in
 the impassible [744] air (as they term it), passible matter; or, if any
 one apprehends the several parts of the world to be powers of God, we
 do not approach and do homage to the powers, but their Maker and Lord.
 I do not ask of matter what it has not to give, nor passing God by do I
 pay homage to the elements, which can do nothing more than what they
 were bidden; for, although they are beautiful to look upon, by reason
 of the art of their Framer, yet they still have the nature of matter.
 And to this view Plato also bears testimony; "for," says he, "that
 which is called heaven and earth has received many blessings from the
 Father, but yet partakes of body; hence it cannot possibly be free from
 change." [745] If, therefore, while I admire the heavens and the
 elements in respect of their art, I do not worship them as gods,
 knowing that the law of dissolution is upon them, how can I call those
 objects gods of which I know the makers to be men? Attend, I beg, to a
 few words on this subject.

 [742] Thus Otto; others render "comprising."

 [743] [The Ptolemaic universe is conceived of as a sort of hollow ball,
 or bubble, within which are the spheres moving about the earth. Milton
 adopts from Homer the idea of such a globe, or bubble, hanging by a
 chain from heaven (Paradise Lost, ii. 10, 51). The oblique circle is
 the zodiac. The Septentriones are referred to also. See Paradise Lost,
 viii. 65-168.]

 [744] Some refer this to the human spirit.

 [745] Polit., p. 269, D.

 Chapter XVII.--The Names of the Gods and Their Images are But of Recent
 Date.

 An apologist must adduce more precise arguments than I have yet given,
 both concering the names of the gods, to show that they are of recent
 origin, and concerning their images, to show that they are, so to say,
 but of yesterday. You yourselves, however, are thoroughly acquainted
 with these matters, since you are versed in all departments of
 knowledge, and are beyond all other men familiar with the ancients. I
 assert, then, that it was Orpheus, and Homer, and Hesiod who [746] gave
 both genealogies and names to those whom they call gods. Such, too, is
 the testimony of Herodotus. [747] "My opinion," he says, "is that
 Hesiod and Homer preceded me by four hundred years, and no more; and it
 was they who framed a theogony for the Greeks, and gave the gods their
 names, and assigned them their several honours and functions, and
 described their forms." Representations of the gods, again, were not in
 use at all, so long as statuary, and painting, and sculpture were
 unknown; nor did they become common until Saurias the Samian, and Crato
 the Sicyonian, and Cleanthes the Corinthian, and the Corinthian damsel
 [748] appeared, when drawing in outline was invented by Saurias, who
 sketched a horse in the sun, and painting by Crato, who painted in oil
 on a whitened tablet the outlines of a man and woman; and the art of
 making figures in relief (koroplathike) was invented by the damsel,
 [749] who, being in love with a person, traced his shadow on a wall as
 he lay asleep, and her father, being delighted with the exactness of
 the resemblance (he was a potter), carved out the sketch and filled it
 up with clay: this figure is still preserved at Corinth. After these,
 Dædalus and Theodorus the Milesian further invented sculpture and
 statuary. You perceive, then, that the time since representations of
 form and the making of images began is so short, that we can name the
 artist of each particular god. The image of Artemis at Ephesus, for
 example, and that of Athenâ (or rather of Athelâ, for so is she named
 by those who speak more in the style of the mysteries; for thus was the
 ancient image made of the olive-tree called), and the sitting figure of
 the same goddess, were made by Endoeus, a pupil of Dædalus; the Pythian
 god was the work of Theodorus and Telecles; and the Delian god and
 Artemis are due to the art of Tectæus and Angelio; Hera in Samos and in
 Argos came from the hands of Smilis, and the other statues [750] were
 by Phidias; Aphrodité the courtezan in Cnidus is the production of
 Praxiteles; Asclepius in Epidaurus is the work of Phidias. In a word,
 of not one of these statues can it be said that it was not made by man.
 If, then, these are gods, why did they not exist from the beginning?
 Why, in sooth, are they younger than those who made them? Why, in
 sooth, in order to their coming into existence, did they need the aid
 of men and art? They are nothing but earth, and stones, and matter, and
 curious art. [751]

 [746] We here follow the text of Otto; others place the clause in the
 following sentence.

 [747] ii. 53.

 [748] Or, Koré. It is doubtful whether or not this should be regarded
 as a proper name.

 [749] Or, Koré. It is doubtful whether or not this should be regarded
 as a proper name.

 [750] The reading is here doubtful.

 [751] [There were no images or pictures, therefore, in the earliest
 Christian places of prayer.]

 Chapter XVIII.--The Gods Themselves Have Been Created, as the Poets
 Confess.

 But, since it is affirmed by some that, although these are only images,
 yet there exist gods in honour of whom they are made; and that the
 supplications and sacrifices presented to the images are to be referred
 to the gods, and are in fact made to the gods; [752] and that there is
 not any other way of coming to them, for


 "'Tis hard for man

 To meet in presence visible a God;" [753]

 and whereas, in proof that such is the fact, they adduce the energies
 possessed by certain images, let us examine into the power attached to
 their names. And I would beseech you, greatest of emperors, before I
 enter on this discussion, to be indulgent to me while I bring forward
 true considerations; for it is not my design to show the fallacy of
 idols, but, by disproving the calumnies vented against us, to offer a
 reason for the course of life we follow. May you, by considering
 yourselves, be able to discover the heavenly kingdom also! For as all
 things are subservient to you, father and son, [754] who have received
 the kingdom from above (for "the king's soul is in the hand of God,"
 [755] saith the prophetic Spirit), so to the one God and the Logos
 proceeding from Him, the Son, apprehended by us as inseparable from
 Him, all things are in like manner subjected. This then especially I
 beg you carefully to consider. The gods, as they affirm, were not from
 the beginning, but every one of them has come into existence just like
 ourselves. And in this opinion they all agree. Homer speaks of


 "Old Oceanus,

 The sire of gods, and Tethys;" [756]

 and Orpheus (who, moreover, was the first to invent their names, and
 recounted their births, and narrated the exploits of each, and is
 believed by them to treat with greater truth than others of divine
 things, whom Homer himself follows in most matters, especially in
 reference to the gods)--he, too, has fixed their first origin to be
 from water:--


 "Oceanus, the origin of all."

 For, according to him, water was the beginning of all things, and from
 water mud was formed, and from both was produced an animal, a dragon
 with the head of a lion growing to it, and between the two heads there
 was the face of a god, named Heracles and Kronos. This Heracles
 generated an egg of enormous size, which, on becoming full, was, by the
 powerful friction of its generator, burst into two, the part at the top
 receiving the form of heaven (ouranos), and the lower part that of
 earth (ge). The goddess Gê moreover, came forth with a body; and
 Ouranos, by his union with Gê, begat females, Clotho, Lachesis, and
 Atropos; and males, the hundred-handed Cottys, Gyges, Briareus, and the
 Cyclopes Brontes, and Steropes, and Argos, whom also he bound and
 hurled down to Tartarus, having learnt that he was to be ejected from
 his government by his children; whereupon Gê, being enraged, brought
 forth the Titans. [757]


 "The godlike Gaia bore to Ouranos

 Sons who are by the name of Titans known,

 Because they vengeance [758] took on Ouranos,

 Majestic, glitt'ring with his starry crown." [759]

 [752] [This was a heathen justification of image-worship, and entirely
 foreign to the Christian mind. Leighton, Works, vol. v. p. 323.]

 [753] Hom., Il., xx. 131.

 [754] [See Kaye's very important note, refuting Gibbon's cavil, and
 illustrating the purpose of Bishop Bull, in his quotation. On the
 perichoresis, see Bull, Fid. Nicænæ, iv. cap. 4.]

 [755] Prov. xxi. 1.

 [756] Hom., Il., xiv. 201, 302.

 [757] Hom., Il., xiv. 246.

 [758] tisasthen.

 [759] Orpheus, Fragments.

 Chapter XIX.--The Philosophers Agree with the Poets Respecting the Gods.

 Such was the beginning of the existence both of their gods and of the
 universe. Now what are we to make of this? For each of those things to
 which divinity is ascribed is conceived of as having existed from the
 first. For, if they have come into being, having previously had no
 existence, as those say who treat of the gods, they do not exist. For,
 a thing is either uncreated and eternal, or created and perishable. Nor
 do I think one thing and the philosophers another. "What is that which
 always is, and has no origin; or what is that which has been
 originated, yet never is?" [760] Discoursing of the intelligible and
 the sensible, Plato teaches that that which always is, the
 intelligible, is unoriginated, but that which is not, the sensible, is
 originated, beginning to be and ceasing to exist. In like manner, the
 Stoics also say that all things will be burnt up and will again exist,
 the world receiving another beginning. But if, although there is,
 according to them, a twofold cause, one active and governing, namely
 providence, the other passive and changeable, namely matter, it is
 nevertheless impossible for the world, even though under the care of
 Providence, to remain in the same state, because it is created--how can
 the constitution of these gods remain, who are not self-existent, [761]
 but have been originated? And in what are the gods superior to matter,
 since they derive their constitution from water? But not even water,
 according to them, is the beginning of all things. From simple and
 homogeneous elements what could be constituted? Moreover, matter
 requires an artificer, and the artificer requires matter. For how could
 figures be made without matter or an artificer? Neither, again, is it
 reasonable that matter should be older than God; for the efficient
 cause must of necessity exist before the things that are made.

 [760] Plat., Tim., p. 27, D.

 [761] Literally, "by nature."

 Chapter XX.--Absurd Representations of the Gods.

 If the absurdity of their theology were confined to saying that the
 gods were created, and owed their constitution to water, since I have
 demonstrated that nothing is made which is not also liable to
 dissolution, I might proceed to the remaining charges. But, on the one
 hand, they have described their bodily forms: speaking of Hercules, for
 instance, as a god in the shape of a dragon coiled up; of others as
 hundred-handed; of the daughter of Zeus, whom he begat of his mother
 Rhea; or of Demeter, as having two eyes in the natural order, and two
 in her forehead, and the face of an animal on the back part of her
 neck, and as having also horns, so that Rhea, frightened at her monster
 of a child, fled from her, and did not give her the breast (thele),
 whence mystically she is called Athêlâ, but commonly Phersephoné and
 Koré, though she is not the same as Athênâ, [762] who is called Koré
 from the pupil of the eye;--and, on the other hand, they have described
 their admirable [763] achievements, as they deem them: how Kronos, for
 instance, mutilated his father, and hurled him down from his chariot,
 and how he murdered his children, and swallowed the males of them; and
 how Zeus bound his father, and cast him down to Tartarus, as did
 Ouranos also to his sons, and fought with the Titans for the
 government; and how he persecuted his mother Rhea when she refused to
 wed him, and, she becoming a she-dragon, and he himself being changed
 into a dragon, bound her with what is called the Herculean knot, and
 accomplished his purpose, of which fact the rod of Hermes is a symbol;
 and again, how he violated his daughter Phersephoné, in this case also
 assuming the form of a dragon, and became the father of Dionysus. In
 face of narrations like these, I must say at least this much, What that
 is becoming or useful is there in such a history, that we must believe
 Kronos, Zeus, Koré, and the rest, to be gods? Is it the descriptions of
 their bodies? Why, what man of judgment and reflection will believe
 that a viper was begotten by a god (thus Orpheus:--


 "But from the sacred womb Phanes begat

 Another offspring, horrible and fierce,

 In sight a frightful viper, on whose head

 Were hairs: its face was comely; but the rest,

 From the neck downwards, bore the aspect dire

 Of a dread dragon" [764] );

 or who will admit that Phanes himself, being a first-born god (for he
 it was that was produced from the egg), has the body or shape of a
 dragon, or was swallowed by Zeus, that Zeus might be too large to be
 contained? For if they differ in no respect from the lowest brutes
 (since it is evident that the Deity must differ from the things of
 earth and those that are derived from matter), they are not gods. How,
 then, I ask, can we approach them as suppliants, when their origin
 resembles that of cattle, and they themselves have the form of brutes,
 and are ugly to behold?

 [762] i.e., Minerva.

 [763] Or, "have accurately described."

 [764] Fragments.

 Chapter XXI.--Impure Loves Ascribed to the Gods.

 But should it be said that they only had fleshly forms, and possess
 blood and seed, and the affections of anger and sexual desire, even
 then we must regard such assertions as nonsensical and ridiculous; for
 there is neither anger, nor desire and appetite, nor procreative seed,
 in gods. Let them, then, have fleshly forms, but let them be superior
 to wrath and anger, that Athênâ may not be seen


 "Burning with rage and inly wroth with Jove;" [765]

 nor Hera appear thus:--


 "Juno's breast

 Could not contain her rage." [766]

 And let them be superior to grief:--


 "A woful sight mine eyes behold: a man

 I love in flight around the walls! My heart

 For Hector grieves." [767]

 For I call even men rude and stupid who give way to anger and grief.
 But when the "father of men and gods" mourns for his son,--


 "Woe, woe! that fate decrees my best belov'd

 Sarpedon, by Patroclus' hand to fall;" [768]

 and is not able while he mourns to rescue him from his peril:--


 "The son of Jove, yet Jove preserv'd him not;" [769]

 who would not blame the folly of those who, with tales like these, are
 lovers of the gods, or rather, live without any god? Let them have
 fleshly forms, but let not Aphrodité be wounded by Diomedes in her
 body:--


 "The haughty son of Tydeus, Diomed,

 Hath wounded me;" [770]

 or by Arês in her soul:--


 "Me, awkward me, she scorns; and yields her charms

 To that fair lecher, the strong god of arms." [771]

 "The weapon pierced the flesh." [772]

 He who was terrible in battle, the ally of Zeus against the Titans, is
 shown to be weaker than Diomedes:--


 "He raged, as Mars, when brandishing his spear." [773]

 Hush! Homer, a god never rages. But you describe the god to me as
 blood-stained, and the bane of mortals:--


 "Mars, Mars, the bane of mortals, stained with blood;" [774]

 and you tell of his adultery and his bonds:--


 "Then, nothing loth, th' enamour'd fair he led,

 And sunk transported on the conscious bed.

 Down rushed the toils." [775]

 Do they not pour forth impious stuff of this sort in abundance
 concerning the gods? Ouranos is mutilated; Kronos is bound, and thrust
 down to Tartarus; the Titans revolt; Styx dies in battle: yea, they
 even represent them as mortal; they are in love with one another; they
 are in love with human beings:--


 "Æneas, amid Ida's jutting peaks,

 Immortal Venus to Anchises bore." [776]

 Are they not in love? Do they not suffer? Nay, verily, they are gods,
 and desire cannot touch them! Even though a god assume flesh in
 pursuance of a divine purpose, [777] he is therefore the slave of
 desire.


 "For never yet did such a flood of love,

 For goddess or for mortal, fill my soul;

 Not for Ixion's beauteous wife, who bore

 Pirithöus, sage in council as the gods;

 Nor the neat-footed maiden Danäe,

 A crisius' daughter, her who Perséus bore,

 Th' observ'd of all; nor noble Phoenix' child;

 .  .  .  .  .  .  nor for Semele;

 Nor for Alcmena fair;  .  .  .

 No, nor for Ceres, golden-tressèd queen;

 Nor for Latona bright; nor for thyself." [778]

 He is created, he is perishable, with no trace of a god in him. Nay,
 they are even the hired servants of men:--


 "Admetus' halls, in which I have endured

 To praise the menial table, though a god." [779]

 And they tend cattle:--


 "And coming to this land, I cattle fed,

 For him that was my host, and kept this house." [780]

 Admetus, therefore, was superior to the god. Prophet and wise one, and
 who canst foresee for others the things that shall be, thou didst not
 divine the slaughter of thy beloved, but didst even kill him with thine
 own hand, dear as he was:--


 "And I believed Apollo's mouth divine

 Was full of truth, as well as prophet's art."

 (Æschylus is reproaching Apollo for being a false prophet:)--


 "The very one who sings while at the feast,

 The one who said these things, alas! is he

 Who slew my son." [781]

 [765] Hom., Il., iv. 23.

 [766] Ibid., iv. 24.

 [767] Ibid., xxii. 168 sq.

 [768] Ibid., xvi. 433 sq.

 [769] Ibid., xvi. 522.

 [770] Ibid., v. 376.

 [771] Hom., Od., viii. 308 sq., Pope's transl.

 [772] Hom., Il., v. 858.

 [773] Hom., Il., xv. 605.

 [774] Hom., Il., v. 31, 455.

 [775] Hom., Od., viii. 296-298, Pope's transl.

 [776] Hom., Il., ii. 820.

 [777] [oikonomian. Kaye, p. 174. And see Paris ed., 1615.]

 [778] Hom., Il., xiv. 315 sqq.

 [779] Eurip., Alcest., 1 sq.

 [780] Ibid., 8 sq.

 [781] From an unknown play of Æschylus.

 Chapter XXII.--Pretended Symbolical Explanations.

 But perhaps these things are poetic vagary, and there is some natural
 explanation of them, such as this by Empedocles:--


 "Let Jove be fire, and Juno source of life,

 With Pluto and Nêstis, who bathes with tears

 The human founts."

 If, then, Zeus is fire, and Hera the earth, and Aïdoneus the air, and
 Nêstis water, and these are elements--fire, water, air--none of them is
 a god, neither Zeus, nor Hera, nor Aïdoneus; for from matter separated
 into parts by God is their constitution and origin:--


 "Fire, water, earth, and the air's gentle height,

 And harmony with these."

 Here are things which without harmony cannot abide; which would be
 brought to ruin by strife: how then can any one say that they are gods?
 Friendship, according to Empedocles, has an aptitude to govern, things
 that are compounded are governed, and that which is apt to govern has
 the dominion; so that if we make the power of the governed and the
 governing one and the same, we shall be, unawares to ourselves, putting
 perishable and fluctuating and changeable matter on an equality with
 the uncreated, and eternal, and ever self-accordant God. Zeus is,
 according to the Stoics, the fervid part of nature; Hera is the air
 (aer)--the very name, if it be joined to itself, signifying this; [782]
 Poseidon is what is drunk (water, posis). But these things are by
 different persons explained of natural objects in different ways. Some
 call Zeus twofold masculine-feminine air; others the season which
 brings about mild weather, on which account it was that he alone
 escaped from Kronos. But to the Stoics it may be said, If you
 acknowledge one God, the supreme and uncreated and eternal One, and as
 many compound bodies as there are changes of matter, and say that the
 Spirit of God, which pervades matter, obtains according to its
 variations a diversity of names, the forms of matter will become the
 body of God; but when the elements are destroyed in the conflagration,
 the names will necessarily perish along with the forms, the Spirit of
 God alone remaining. Who, then, can believe that those bodies, of which
 the variation according to matter is allied to corruption, are gods?
 But to those who say that Kronos is time, and Rhea the earth, and that
 she becomes pregnant by Kronos, and brings forth, whence she is
 regarded as the mother of all; and that he begets and devours his
 offspring; and that the mutilation is the intercourse of the male with
 the female, which cuts off the seed and casts it into the womb, and
 generates a human being, who has in himself the sexual desire, which is
 Aphrodité; and that the madness of Kronos is the turn of season, which
 destroys animate and inanimate things; and that the bonds and Tartarus
 are time, which is changed by seasons and disappears;--to such persons
 we say, If Kronos is time, he changes; if a season, he turns about; if
 darkness, or frost, or the moist part of nature, none of these is
 abiding; but the Deity is immortal, and immoveable, and unalterable: so
 that neither is Kronos nor his image God. As regards Zeus again: If he
 is air, born of Kronos, of which the male part is called Zeus and the
 female Hera (whence both sister and wife), he is subject to change; if
 a season, he turns about: but the Deity neither changes nor shifts
 about. But why should I trespass on your patience by saying more, when
 you know so well what has been said by each of those who have resolved
 these things into nature, or what various writers have thought
 concerning nature, or what they say concerning Athênâ, whom they affirm
 to be the wisdom (phronesis) pervading all things; and concerning Isis,
 whom they call the birth of all time (phusis aionos), from whom all
 have sprung, and by whom all exist; or concerning Osiris, on whose
 murder by Typhon his brother Isis with her son Orus sought after his
 limbs, and finding them honoured them with a sepulchre, which sepulchre
 is to this day called the tomb of Osiris? For whilst they wander up and
 down about the forms of matter, they miss to find the God who can only
 be beheld by the reason, while they deify the elements and their
 several parts, applying different names to them at different times:
 calling the sowing of the corn, for instance, Osiris (hence they say,
 that in the mysteries, on the finding of the members of his body, or
 the fruits, Isis is thus addressed: We have found, we wish thee joy),
 the fruit of the vine Dionysus, the vine itself Semelé, the heat of the
 sun the thunderbolt. And yet, in fact, they who refer the fables to
 actual gods, do anything rather than add to their divine character; for
 they do not perceive, that by the very defence they make for the gods,
 they confirm the things which are alleged concerning them. What have
 Europa, and the bull, and the swan, and Leda, to do with the earth and
 air, that the abominable intercourse of Zeus with them should be taken
 for the intercourse of the earth and air? But missing to discover the
 greatness of God, and not being able to rise on high with their reason
 (for they have no affinity for the heavenly place), they pine away
 among the forms of matter, and rooted to the earth, deify the changes
 of the elements: just as if any one should put the ship he sailed in
 the place of the steersman. But as the ship, although equipped with
 everything, is of no use if it have not a steersman, so neither are the
 elements, though arranged in perfect order, of any service apart from
 the providence of God. For the ship will not sail of itself; and the
 elements without their Framer will not move.

 [782] Perhaps her (aer) a.

 Chapter XXIII.--Opinions of Thales and Plato.

 You may say, however, since you excel all men in understanding, How
 comes it to pass, then, that some of the idols manifest power, if those
 to whom we erect the statues are not gods? For it is not likely that
 images destitute of life and motion can of themselves do anything
 without a mover. That in various places, cities, and nations, certain
 effects are brought about in the name of idols, we are far from
 denying. None the more, however, if some have received benefit, and
 others, on the contrary, suffered harm, shall we deem those to be gods
 who have produced the effects in either case. But I have made careful
 inquiry, both why it is that you think the idols to have this power,
 and who they are that, usurping their names, produce the effects. It is
 necessary for me, however, in attempting to show who they are that
 produce the effects ascribed to the idols, and that they are not gods,
 to have recourse to some witnesses from among the philosophers. First
 Thales, as those who have accurately examined his opinions report,
 divides [superior beings] into God, demons, and heroes. God he
 recognises as the Intelligence (nous) of the world; by demons he
 understands beings possessed of soul (psuchikai); and by heroes the
 separated souls of men, the good being the good souls, and the bad the
 worthless. Plato again, while withholding his assent on other points,
 also divides [superior beings] into the uncreated God and those
 produced by the uncreated One for the adornment of heaven, the planets,
 and the fixed stars, and into demons; concerning which demons, while he
 does not think fit to speak himself, he thinks that those ought to be
 listened to who have spoken about them. "To speak concerning the other
 demons, and to know their origin, is beyond our powers; but we ought to
 believe those who have before spoken, the descendants of gods, as they
 say--and surely they must be well acquainted with their own ancestors:
 it is impossible, therefore, to disbelieve the sons of gods, even
 though they speak without probable or convincing proofs; but as they
 profess to tell of their own family affairs, we are bound, in pursuance
 of custom, to believe them. In this way, then, let us hold and speak as
 they do concerning the origin of the gods themselves. Of Gê and Ouranos
 were born Oceanus and Tethys; and of these Phorcus, Kronos, and Rhea,
 and the rest; and of Kronos and Rhea, Zeus, Hera, and all the others,
 who, we know, are all called their brothers; besides other descendants
 again of these." [783] Did, then, he who had contemplated the eternal
 Intelligence and God who is apprehended by reason, and declared His
 attributes--His real existence, the simplicity of His nature, the good
 that flows forth from Him that is truth, and discoursed of primal
 power, and how "all things are about the King of all, and all things
 exist for His sake, and He is the cause of all;" and about two and
 three, that He is "the second moving about the seconds, and the third
 about the thirds;" [784] --did this man think, that to learn the truth
 concerning those who are said to have been produced from sensible
 things, namely earth and heaven, was a task transcending his powers? It
 is not to be believed for a moment. But because he thought it
 impossible to believe that gods beget and are brought forth, since
 everything that begins to be is followed by an end, and (for this is
 much more difficult) to change the views of the multitude, who receive
 the fables without examination, on this account it was that he declared
 it to be beyond his powers to know and to speak concerning the origin
 of the other demons, since he was unable either to admit or teach that
 gods were begotten. And as regards that saying of his, "The great
 sovereign in heaven, Zeus, driving a winged car, advances first,
 ordering and managing all things, and there follow him a host of gods
 and demons," [785] this does not refer to the Zeus who is said to have
 sprung from Kronos; for here the name is given to the Maker of the
 universe. This is shown by Plato himself: not being able to designate
 Him by another title that should be suitable, he availed himself of the
 popular name, not as peculiar to God, but for distinctness, because it
 is not possible to discourse of God to all men as fully as one might;
 and he adds at the same time the epithet "Great," so as to distinguish
 the heavenly from the earthly, the uncreated from the created, who is
 younger than heaven and earth, and younger than the Cretans, who stole
 him away, that he might not be killed by his father.

 [783] Tim., p. 40, D.E.

 [784] Pseudo-Plat., Epist., ii. p. 312, D.E. The meaning is very
 obscure.

 [785] Plat., Phoedr., p. 246, E.

 Chapter XXIV.--Concerning the Angels and Giants.

 What need is there, in speaking to you who have searched into every
 department of knowledge, to mention the poets, or to examine opinions
 of another kind? Let it suffice to say thus much. If the poets and
 philosophers did not acknowledge that there is one God, and concerning
 these gods were not of opinion, some that they are demons, others that
 they are matter, and others that they once were men,--there might be
 some show of reason for our being harassed as we are, since we employ
 language which makes a distinction between God and matter, and the
 natures of the two. For, as we acknowledge a God, and a Son his Logos,
 and a Holy Spirit, united in essence,--the Father, the Son, the Spirit,
 because the Son is the Intelligence, Reason, Wisdom of the Father, and
 the Spirit an effluence, as light from fire; so also do we apprehend
 the existence of other powers, which exercise dominion about matter,
 and by means of it, and one in particular, which is hostile to God: not
 that anything is really opposed to God, like strife to friendship,
 according to Empedocles, and night to day, according to the appearing
 and disappearing of the stars (for even if anything had placed itself
 in opposition to God, it would have ceased to exist, its structure
 being destroyed by the power and might of God), but that to the good
 that is in God, which belongs of necessity to Him, and co-exists with
 Him, as colour with body, without which it has no existence (not as
 being part of it, but as an attendant property co-existing with it,
 united and blended, just as it is natural for fire to be yellow and the
 ether dark blue),--to the good that is in God, I say, the spirit which
 is about matter, [786] who was created by God, just as the other angels
 were created by Him, and entrusted with the control of matter and the
 forms of matter, is opposed. For this is the office of the angels,--to
 exercise providence for God over the things created and ordered by Him;
 so that God may have the universal and general providence of the whole,
 while the particular parts are provided for by the angels appointed
 over them. [787] Just as with men, who have freedom of choice as to
 both virtue and vice (for you would not either honour the good or
 punish the bad, unless vice and virtue were in their own power; and
 some are diligent in the matters entrusted to them by you, and others
 faithless), so is it among the angels. Some, free agents, you will
 observe, such as they were created by God, continued in those things
 for which God had made and over which He had ordained them; but some
 outraged both the constitution of their nature and the government
 entrusted to them: namely, this ruler of matter and its various forms,
 and others of those who were placed about this first firmament (you
 know that we say nothing without witnesses, but state the things which
 have been declared by the prophets); these fell into impure love of
 virgins, and were subjugated by the flesh, and he became negligent and
 wicked in the management of the things entrusted to him. Of these
 lovers of virgins, therefore, were begotten those who are called
 giants. [788] And if something has been said by the poets, too, about
 the giants, be not surprised at this: worldly wisdom and divine differ
 as much from each other as truth and plausibility: the one is of heaven
 and the other of earth; and indeed, according to the prince of
 matter,--


 "We know we oft speak lies that look like truths." [789]

 [786] [Comp. cap. xxvii., infra.]

 [787] [Kaye, 192. And see cap. x., supra, p. 133. Divine Providence
 does not exclude the ministry of angels by divine appointment.
 Resurrection, cap. xviii., infra.]

 [788] [The Paris editors caution us against yielding to this
 interpretation of Gen. vi. 1-4. It was the Rabbinical interpretation.
 See Josephus, book i. cap. 3.]

 [789] Hesiod, Theog., 27. [Traces of the Nephilim are found in all
 mythologies.]

 Chapter XXV.--The Poets and Philosophers Have Denied a Divine Providence.

 These angels, then, who have fallen from heaven, and haunt the air and
 the earth, and are no longer able to rise to heavenly things, and the
 souls of the giants, which are the demons who wander about the world,
 perform actions similar, the one (that is, the demons) to the natures
 they have received, the other (that is, the angels) to the appetites
 they have indulged. But the prince of matter, as may be seen merely
 from what transpires, exercises a control and management contrary to
 the good that is in God:--


 "Ofttimes this anxious thought has crossed my mind,

 Whether 'tis chance or deity that rules

 The small affairs of men; and, spite of hope

 As well as justice, drives to exile some

 Stripped of all means of life, while others still

 Continue to enjoy prosperity." [790]

 Prosperity and adversity, contrary to hope and justice, made it
 impossible for Euripides to say to whom belongs the administration of
 earthly affairs, which is of such a kind that one might say of it:--


 "How then, while seeing these things, can we say

 There is a race of gods, or yield to laws?" [791]

 The same thing led Aristotle to say that the things below the heaven
 are not under the care of Providence, although the eternal providence
 of God concerns itself equally with us below,--


 "The earth, let willingness move her or not,

 Must herbs produce, and thus sustain my flocks," [792] --

 and addresses itself to the deserving individually, according to truth
 and not according to opinion; and all other things, according to the
 general constitution of nature, are provided for by the law of reason.
 But because the demoniac movements and operations proceeding from the
 adverse spirit produce these disorderly sallies, and moreover move men,
 some in one way and some in another, as individuals and as nations,
 separately and in common, in accordance with the tendency of matter on
 the one hand, and of the affinity for divine things on the other, from
 within and from without,--some who are of no mean reputation have
 therefore thought that this universe is constituted without any
 definite order, and is driven hither and thither by an irrational
 chance. But they do not understand, that of those things which belong
 to the constitution of the whole world there is nothing out of order or
 neglected, but that each one of them has been produced by reason, and
 that, therefore, they do not transgress the order prescribed to them;
 and that man himself, too, so far as He that made him is concerned, is
 well ordered, both by his original nature, which has one common
 character for all, and by the constitution of his body, which does not
 transgress the law imposed upon it, and by the termination of his life,
 which remains equal and common to all alike; [793] but that, according
 to the character peculiar to himself and the operation of the ruling
 prince and of the demons his followers, he is impelled and moved in
 this direction or in that, notwithstanding that all possess in common
 the same original constitution of mind. [794]

 [790] Eurip.; from an unknown play.

 [791] Ibid.

 [792] Eurip., Cycl., 332 sq.

 [793] [Kaye, p. 190.]

 [794] Or, "powers of reasoning" (logismos).

 Chapter XXVI.--The Demons Allure Men to the Worship of Images.

 They who draw men to idols, then, are the aforesaid demons, who are
 eager for the blood of the sacrifices, and lick them; but the gods that
 please the multitude, and whose names are given to the images, were
 men, as may be learned from their history. And that it is the demons
 who act under their names, is proved by the nature of their operations.
 For some castrate, as Rhea; others wound and slaughter, as Artemis; the
 Tauric goddess puts all strangers to death. I pass over those who
 lacerate with knives and scourges of bones, and shall not attempt to
 describe all the kinds of demons; for it is not the part of a god to
 incite to things against nature.


 "But when the demon plots against a man,

 He first inflicts some hurt upon his mind." [795]

 But God, being perfectly good, is eternally doing good. That, moreover,
 those who exert the power are not the same as those to whom the statues
 are erected, very strong evidence is afforded by Troas and Parium. The
 one has statues of Neryllinus, a man of our own times; and Parium of
 Alexander and Proteus: both the sepulchre and the statue of Alexander
 are still in the forum. The other statues of Neryllinus, then, are a
 public ornament, if indeed a city can be adorned by such objects as
 these; but one of them is supposed to utter oracles and to heal the
 sick, and on this account the people of the Troad offer sacrifices to
 this statue, and overlay it with gold, and hang chaplets upon it. But
 of the statues of Alexander and Proteus (the latter, you are aware,
 threw himself into the fire near Olympia), that of Proteus is likewise
 said to utter oracles; and to that of Alexander--


 "Wretched Paris, though in form so fair,

 Thou slave of woman" [796] --

 sacrifices are offered and festivals are held at the public cost, as to
 a god who can hear. Is it, then, Neryllinus, and Proteus, and Alexander
 who exert these energies in connection with the statues, or is it the
 nature of the matter itself? But the matter is brass. And what can
 brass do of itself, which may be made again into a different form, as
 Amasis treated the footpan, [797] as told by Herodotus? And Neryllinus,
 and Proteus, and Alexander, what good are they to the sick? For what
 the image is said now to effect, it effected when Neryllinus was alive
 and sick.

 [795] From an unknown tragedian. [A passage which I cannot but apply to
 the lapse of Tatian.]

 [796] Hom., Il., iii. 39.

 [797] [see note to Theophilus, cap. x., supra, p. 92.]

 Chapter XXVII.--Artifices of the Demons.

 What then? In the first place, the irrational and fantastic movements
 of the soul about opinions produce a diversity of images (eidola) from
 time to time: some they derive from matter, and some they fashion and
 bring forth for themselves; and this happens to a soul especially when
 it partakes of the material spirit [798] and becomes mingled with it,
 looking not at heavenly things and their Maker, but downwards to
 earthly things, wholly at the earth, as being now mere flesh and blood,
 and no longer pure spirit. [799] These irrational and fantastic
 movements of the soul, then, give birth to empty visions in the mind,
 by which it becomes madly set on idols. When, too, a tender and
 susceptible soul, which has no knowledge or experience of sounder
 doctrines, and is unaccustomed to contemplate truth, and to consider
 thoughtfully the Father and Maker of all things, gets impressed with
 false opinions respecting itself, then the demons who hover about
 matter, greedy of sacrificial odours and the blood of victims, and ever
 ready to lead men into error, avail themselves of these delusive
 movements of the souls of the multitude; and, taking possession of
 their thoughts, cause to flow into the mind empty visions as if coming
 from the idols and the statues; and when, too, a soul of itself, as
 being immortal, [800] moves comformably to reason, either predicting
 the future or healing the present, the demons claim the glory for
 themselves.

 [798] [Kaye, p. 191; and comp. cap. xxiv., supra, p. 142.]

 [799] [Comp. On the Resurrection, cap. xiii., infra., p. 439 of ed.
 Edinburgh. Also Kaye, p. 199.]

 [800] [Kaye, p. 190.]

 Chapter XXVIII.--The Heathen Gods Were Simply Men.

 But it is perhaps necessary, in accordance with what has already been
 adduced, to say a little about their names. Herodotus, then, and
 Alexander the son of Philip, in his letter to his mother (and each of
 them is said to have conversed with the priests at Heliopolis, and
 Memphis, and Thebes), affirm that they learnt from them that the gods
 had been men. Herodotus speaks thus: "Of such a nature were, they said,
 the beings represented by these images, they were very far indeed from
 being gods. However, in the times anterior to them it was otherwise;
 then Egypt had gods for its rulers, who dwelt upon the earth with men,
 one being always supreme above the rest. The last of these was Horus
 the son of Osiris, called by the Greeks Apollo. He deposed Typhon, and
 ruled over Egypt as its last god-king. Osiris is named Dionysus
 (Bacchus) by the Greeks." [801] "Almost all the names of the gods came
 into Greece from Egypt." [802] Apollo was the son of Dionysus and Isis,
 as Herodotus likewise affirms: "According to the Egyptians, Apollo and
 Diana are the children of Bacchus and Isis; while Latona is their nurse
 and their preserver." [803] These beings of heavenly origin they had
 for their first kings: partly from ignorance of the true worship of the
 Deity, partly from gratitude for their government, they esteemed them
 as gods together with their wives. "The male kine, if clean, and the
 male calves, are used for sacrifice by the Egyptians universally; but
 the females, they are not allowed to sacrifice, since they are sacred
 to Isis. The statue of this goddess has the form of a woman but with
 horns like a cow, resembling those of the Greek representations of Io."
 [804] And who can be more deserving of credit in making these
 statements, than those who in family succession son from father,
 received not only the priesthood, but also the history? For it is not
 likely that the priests, who make it their business to commend the
 idols to men's reverence, would assert falsely that they were men. If
 Herodotus alone had said that the Egyptians spoke in their histories of
 the gods as of men, when he says, "What they told me concerning their
 religion it is not my intention to repeat, except only the names of
 their deities, things of very trifling importance," [805] it would
 behove us not to credit even Herodotus as being a fabulist. But as
 Alexander and Hermes surnamed Trismegistus, who shares with them in the
 attribute of eternity, and innumerable others, not to name them
 individually, [declare the same], no room is left even for doubt that
 they, being kings, were esteemed gods. That they were men, the most
 learned of the Egyptians also testify, who, while saying that ether,
 earth, sun, moon, are gods, regard the rest as mortal men, and the
 temples as their sepulchres. Apollodorus, too, asserts the same thing
 in his treatise concerning the gods. But Herodotus calls even their
 sufferings mysteries. "The ceremonies at the feast of Isis in the city
 of Busiris have been already spoken of. It is there that the whole
 multitude, both of men and women, many thousands in number, beat
 themselves at the close of the sacrifice in honour of a god whose name
 a religious scruple forbids me to mention." [806] If they are gods,
 they are also immortal; but if people are beaten for them, and their
 sufferings are mysteries, they are men, as Herodotus himself says:
 "Here, too, in this same precinct of Minerva at Saïs, is the
 burial-place of one whom I think it not right to mention in such a
 connection. It stands behind the temple against the back wall, which it
 entirely covers. There are also some large stone obelisks in the
 enclosure, and there is a lake near them, adorned with an edging of
 stone. In form it is circular, and in size, as it seemed to me, about
 equal to the lake at Delos called the Hoop. On this lake it is that the
 Egyptians represent by night his sufferings whose name I refrain from
 mentioning, and this representation they call their mysteries." [807]
 And not only is the sepulchre of Osiris shown, but also his embalming:
 "When a body is brought to them, they show the bearer various models of
 corpses made in wood, and painted so as to resemble nature. The most
 perfect is said to be after the manner of him whom I do not think it
 religious to name in connection with such a matter." [808]

 [801] ii. 144. Mr. Rawlinson's translation is used in the extracts from
 Herodotus.

 [802] ii. 50.

 [803] ii. 156.

 [804] ii. 41.

 [805] ii. 3. The text is here uncertain, and differs from that of
 Herodotus. [Herodotus, initiated in Egyptian mysteries, was doubtless
 sworn to maintain certain secrets of the priests of Osiris.]

 [806] ii. 61. [The name of Osiris.]

 [807] ii. 170.

 [808] ii. 86.

 Chapter XXIX.--Proof of the Same from the Poets.

 But among the Greeks, also, those who are eminent in poetry and history
 say the same thing. Thus of Heracles:--


 "That lawless wretch, that man of brutal strength,

 Deaf to Heaven's voice, the social rite transgressed." [809]

 Such being his nature, deservedly did he go mad, and deservedly did he
 light the funeral pile and burn himself to death. Of Asklepius, Hesiod
 says:--


 "The mighty father both of gods and men

 Was filled with wrath, and from Olympus' top

 With flaming thunderbolt cast down and slew

 Latona's well-lov'd son--such was his ire." [810]

 And Pindar:--


 "But even wisdom is ensnared by gain.

 The brilliant bribe of gold seen in the hand

 Ev'n him [811] perverted: therefore Kronos' son

 With both hands quickly stopp'd his vital breath,

 And by a bolt of fire ensured his doom." [812]

 Either, therefore, they were gods and did not hanker after gold--


 "O gold, the fairest prize to mortal men,

 Which neither mother equals in delight,

 Nor children dear" [813] --

 for the Deity is in want of nought, and is superior to carnal desire,
 nor did they die; or, having been born men, they were wicked by reason
 of ignorance, and overcome by love of money. What more need I say, or
 refer to Castor, or Pollux, or Amphiaraus, who, having been born, so to
 speak, only the other day, men of men, are looked upon as gods, when
 they imagine even Ino after her madness and its consequent sufferings
 to have become a goddess?


 "Sea-rovers will her name Leucothea." [814]

 And her son:--


 "August Palæmon, sailors will invoke."

 [809] Hom., Od., xxi. 28. sq.

 [810] Hesiod, Frag.

 [811] i.e., Æsculapius.

 [812] Pyth., iii. 96 sq.

 [813] Ascribed by Seneca to the Bellerophon of Eurip.

 [814] From the Ino, a lost play of Eurip.

 Chapter XXX.--Reasons Why Divinity Has Been Ascribed to Men.

 For if detestable and god-hated men had the reputation of being gods,
 and the daughter of Derceto, Semiramis, a lascivious and blood-stained
 woman, was esteemed a Syria goddess; and if, on account of Derceto, the
 Syrians worship doves and Semiramis (for, a thing impossible, a woman
 was changed into a dove: the story is in Ctesias), what wonder if some
 should be called gods by their people on the ground of their rule and
 sovereignty (the Sibyl, of whom Plato also makes mention, says:--


 "It was the generation then the tenth,

 Of men endow'd with speech, since forth the flood

 Had burst upon the men of former times,

 And Kronos, Japetus, and Titan reigned,

 Whom men, of Ouranos and Gaïa

 Proclaimed the noblest sons, and named them so, [815]

 Because of men endowed with gift of speech

 They were the first"); [816]

 and others for their strength, as Heracles and Perseus; and others for
 their art, as Asclepius? Those, therefore, to whom either the subjects
 gave honour or the rulers themselves [assumed it], obtained the name,
 some from fear, others from revenge. Thus Antinous, through the
 benevolence of your ancestors towards their subjects, came to be
 regarded as a god. But those who came after adopted the worship without
 examination.


 "The Cretans always lie; for they, O king,

 Have built a tomb to thee who art not dead." [817]

 Though you believe, O Callimachus, in the nativity of Zeus, you do not
 believe in his sepulchre; and whilst you think to obscure the truth,
 you in fact proclaim him dead, even to those who are ignorant; and if
 you see the cave, you call to mind the childbirth of Rhea; but when you
 see the coffin, you throw a shadow over his death, not considering that
 the unbegotten God alone is eternal. For either the tales told by the
 multitude and the poets about the gods are unworthy of credit, and the
 reverence shown them is superfluous (for those do not exist, the tales
 concerning whom are untrue); or if the births, the amours, the murders,
 the thefts, the castrations, the thunderbolts, are true, they no longer
 exist, having ceased to be since they were born, having previously had
 no being. And on what principle must we believe some things and
 disbelieve others, when the poets have written their stories in order
 to gain greater veneration for them? For surely those through whom they
 have got to be considered gods, and who have striven to represent their
 deeds as worthy of reverence, cannot have invented their sufferings.
 That, therefore, we are not atheists, acknowledging as we do God the
 Maker of this universe and His Logos, has been proved according to my
 ability, if not according to the importance of the subject.

 [815] i.e., after Gaïa and Ouranos, Earth and Heaven.

 [816] Oracc., Sibyll., iii. 108-113. [Kaye, p. 220, and compare cap.
 vii., supra. The inspiration of Balaam, and likewise that of the ass,
 must, in my opinion, illustrate that of the Sibyls.]

 [817] Callim., Hym. Jov., 8 sq. [Tit. i. 12. But St. Paul's quotation
 is from Epimenides.]

 Chapter XXXI.--Confutation of the Other Charges Brought Against the
 Christians.

 But they have further also made up stories against us of impious feasts
 [818] and forbidden intercourse between the sexes, both that they may
 appear to themselves to have rational grounds of hatred, and because
 they think either by fear to lead us away from our way of life, or to
 render the rulers harsh and inexorable by the magnitude of the charges
 they bring. But they lose their labour with those who know that from of
 old it has been the custom, and not in our time only, for vice to make
 war on virtue. Thus Pythagoras, with three hundred others, was burnt to
 death; Heraclitus and Democritus were banished, the one from the city
 of the Ephesians, the other from Abdera, because he was charged with
 being mad; and the Athenians condemned Socrates to death. But as they
 were none the worse in respect of virtue because of the opinion of the
 multitude, so neither does the undiscriminating calumny of some persons
 cast any shade upon us as regards rectitude of life, for with God we
 stand in good repute. Nevertheless, I will meet these charges also,
 although I am well assured that by what has been already said I have
 cleared myself to you. For as you excel all men in intelligence, you
 know that those whose life is directed towards God as its rule, so that
 each one among us may be blameless and irreproachable before Him, will
 not entertain even the thought of the slightest sin. For if we believed
 that we should live only the present life, then we might be suspected
 of sinning, through being enslaved to flesh and blood, or overmastered
 by gain or carnal desire; but since we know that God is witness to what
 we think and what we say both by night and by day, and that He, being
 Himself light, sees all things in our heart, we are persuaded that when
 we are removed from the present life we shall live another life, better
 than the present one, and heavenly, not earthly (since we shall abide
 near God, and with God, free from all change or suffering in the soul,
 not as flesh, even though we shall have flesh, [819] but as heavenly
 spirit), or, falling with the rest, a worse one and in fire; for God
 has not made us as sheep or beasts of burden, a mere by-work, and that
 we should perish and be annihilated. On these grounds it is not likely
 that we should wish to do evil, or deliver ourselves over to the great
 Judge to be punished.

 [818] ["Thyestian feasts" (p. 130, supra); a charge which the Christian
 Fathers perpetually repel. Of course the sacrament of the Lord's Supper
 lent colour to this charge; but it could not have been repelled, had
 they believed the material body and blood of the "man Christ Jesus,"
 present in this sacrament. See cap. iii., note.]

 [819] [1 Cor. xv. 44. A very clear representation of the apostle's
 doctrine. See Kaye, 199; and compare On the Resurrection, cap. xiii.]

 Chapter XXXII.--Elevated Morality of the Christians.

 It is, however, nothing wonderful that they should get up tales about
 us such as they tell of their own gods, of the incidents of whose lives
 they make mysteries. But it behoved them, if they meant to condemn
 shameless and promiscuous intercourse, to hate either Zeus, who begat
 children of his mother Rhea and his daughter Koré, and took his own
 sister to wife, or Orpheus, the inventor of these tales, which made
 Zeus more unholy and detestable than Thyestes himself; for the latter
 defiled his daughter in pursuance of an oracle, and when he wanted to
 obtain the kingdom and avenge himself. But we are so far from
 practising promiscuous intercourse, that it is not lawful among us to
 indulge even a lustful look. "For," saith He, "he that looketh on a
 woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery already in his heart."
 [820] Those, then, who are forbidden to look at anything more than that
 for which God formed the eyes, which were intended to be a light to us,
 and to whom a wanton look is adultery, the eyes being made for other
 purposes, and who are to be called to account for their very thoughts,
 how can any one doubt that such persons practice self-control? For our
 account lies not with human laws, which a bad man can evade (at the
 outset I proved to you, sovereign lords, that our doctrine is from the
 teaching of God), but we have a law which makes the measure of
 rectitude to consist in dealing with our neighbour as ourselves. [821]
 On this account, too, according to age, we recognise some as sons and
 daughters, others we regard as brothers and sisters, [822] and to the
 more advanced in life we give the honour due to fathers and mothers. On
 behalf of those, then, to whom we apply the names of brothers and
 sisters, and other designations of relationship, we exercise the
 greatest care that their bodies should remain undefiled and
 uncorrupted; for the Logos [823] again says to us, "If any one kiss a
 second time because it has given him pleasure, [he sins];" adding,
 "Therefore the kiss, or rather the salutation, should be given with the
 greatest care, since, if there be mixed with it the least defilement of
 thought, it excludes us from eternal life." [824]

 [820] Matt. v. 28.

 [821] Otto translates: "which has made us and our neighbours attain the
 highest degree of rectitude." The text is obscure, but the above seems
 the probably meaning; comp. Matt. xxii. 39, etc.

 [822] [Hermas, p. 47, [11]note, and p. 57, this volume; Elucidation,
 [12]ii.]

 [823] [The Logos never said, "it excludes us from eternal life:" that
 is sure; and the passage, though ambiguous, is not so interpreted in
 the Latin of Gesner. Jones remarks that Athenagoras never introduces a
 saying of our Lord in this way. Compare Clem. Alexandrin. (Pædagogue,
 b. iii. cap. v. p. 297, Edinburgh Series), where he quotes Matt. v. 28,
 with variation. Lardner (cap. xviii. sec. 20) gives a probable
 explanation. Jones on The Canon (vol. i. p. 436) is noteworthy. Kaye
 (p. 221) does not solve the puzzle.]

 [824] Probably from some apocryphal writing. [Come from what source it
 may, it suggests a caution of the utmost importance to Americans. In
 the newer parts of the country, the practice, here corrected, as
 cropped out among "brothers and sisters" of divers religious names, and
 consequent scandals have arisen. To all Christians comes, the apostolic
 appeal, "Let it not be once named among you."]

 Chapter XXXIII.--Chastity of the Christians with Respect to Marriage.

 Therefore, having the hope of eternal life, we despise the things of
 this life, even to the pleasures of the soul, each of us reckoning her
 his wife whom he has married according to the laws laid down by us, and
 that only for the purpose of having children. For as the husbandman
 throwing the seed into the ground awaits the harvest, not sowing more
 upon it, so to us the procreation of children is the measure of our
 indulgence in appetite. Nay, you would find many among us, both men and
 women, growing old unmarried, in hope of living in closer communion
 with God. [825] But if the remaining in virginity and in the state of
 an eunuch brings nearer to God, while the indulgence of carnal thought
 and desire leads away from Him, in those cases in which we shun the
 thoughts, much more do we reject the deeds. For we bestow our
 attention, not on the study of words, but on the exhibition and
 teaching of actions,--that a person should either remain as he was
 born, or be content with one marriage; for a second marriage is only a
 specious adultery. [826] "For whosoever puts away his wife," says He,
 "and marries another, commits adultery;" [827] not permitting a man to
 send her away whose virginity he has brought to an end, nor to marry
 again. For he who deprives himself of his first wife, even though she
 be dead, is a cloaked adulterer, [828] resisting the hand of God,
 because in the beginning God made one man and one woman, and dissolving
 the strictest union of flesh with flesh, formed for the intercourse of
 the race.

 [825] [This our Lord commends (Matt. xix. 12) as a voluntary act of
 private self-devotion.]

 [826] [There is perhaps a touch of the rising Phrygian influence in
 this passage; yet the language of St. Paul (1 Tim. v. 9) favoured this
 view, no doubt, in primitive opinion. See Speaker's Comm. on 1 Tim.
 iii. 2. Ed. Scribners, New York.]

 [827] Matt. xix. 9.

 [828] [But Callistus, heretical Bishop of Rome (a.d. 218.), authorized
 even third marriages in the clergy. Hippolytus, vol. vi. p. 343,
 Ante-Nicene Fathers, Edinburgh Series.]

 Chapter XXXIV.--The Vast Difference in Morals Between the Christians and
 Their Accusers.

 But though such is our character (Oh! why should I speak of things
 unfit to be uttered?), the things said of us are an example of the
 proverb, "The harlot reproves the chaste." For those who have set up a
 market for fornication and established infamous resorts for the young
 for every kind of vile pleasure,--who do not abstain even from males,
 males with males committing shocking abominations, outraging all the
 noblest and comeliest bodies in all sorts of ways, so dishonouring the
 fair workmanship of God (for beauty on earth is not self-made, but sent
 hither by the hand and will of God),--these men, I say, revile us for
 the very things which they are conscious of themselves, and ascribe to
 their own gods, boasting of them as noble deeds, and worthy of the
 gods. These adulterers and pæderasts defame the eunuchs and the
 once-married (while they themselves live like fishes; [829] for these
 gulp down whatever falls in their way, and the stronger chases the
 weaker: and, in fact, this is to feed upon human flesh, to do violence
 in contravention of the very laws which you and your ancestors, with
 due care for all that is fair and right, have enacted), so that not
 even the governors of the provinces sent by you suffice for the hearing
 of the complaints against those, to whom it even is not lawful, when
 they are struck, not to offer themselves for more blows, nor when
 defamed not to bless: for it is not enough to be just (and justice is
 to return like for like), but it is incumbent on us to be good and
 patient of evil.

 [829] [An allusion to the fable of the Sargus; and see Burton's Anat.
 Mel., p. 445.]

 Chapter XXXV.--The Christians Condemn and Detest All Cruelty.

 What man of sound mind, therefore, will affirm, while such is our
 character, that we are murderers? For we cannot eat human flesh till we
 have killed some one. The former charge, therefore, being false, if any
 one should ask them in regard to the second, whether they have seen
 what they assert, not one of them would be so barefaced as to say that
 he had. And yet we have slaves, some more and some fewer, by whom we
 could not help being seen; but even of these, not one has been found to
 invent even such things against us. For when they know that we cannot
 endure even to see a man put to death, though justly; who of them can
 accuse us of murder or cannibalism? Who does not reckon among the
 things of greatest interest the contests of gladiators and wild beasts,
 especially those which are given by you? But we, deeming that to see a
 man put to death is much the same as killing him, have abjured such
 spectacles. [830] How, then, when we do not even look on, lest we
 should contract guilt and pollution, can we put people to death? And
 when we say that those women who use drugs to bring on abortion commit
 murder, and will have to give an account to God [831] for the abortion,
 on what principle should we commit murder? For it does not belong to
 the same person to regard the very foetus in the womb as a created
 being, and therefore an object of God's care, and when it has passed
 into life, to kill it; and not to expose an infant, because those who
 expose them are chargeable with child-murder, and on the other hand,
 when it has been reared to destroy it. But we are in all things always
 alike and the same, submitting ourselves to reason, and not ruling over
 it.

 [830] [See Tatian, cap xxiii., supra, p. 75. But here the language of
 Gibbon is worthy to be quoted: though the icy-hearted infidel failed to
 understand that just such philosophers as he enjoyed these spectacles,
 till Christianity taught even such to profess a refined abhorrence of
 what the Gospel abolished, with no help from them. He says, "the first
 Christian emperor may claim the honour of the first edict which
 condemned the art and amusement of shedding human blood; but this
 benevolent law expressed the wishes of the prince, without reforming an
 inveterate abuse which degraded a civilized (?) nation below the
 condition of savage cannibals. Several hundred, perhaps several
 thousand, victims were annually slaughtered in the great cities of the
 empire." He tells the story of the heroic Telemachus, without eulogy;
 how his death, while struggling to separate the combatants abolished
 forever the inhuman sports and sacrifices of the amphitheatre. This
 happened under Honorius. Milman's Gibbon, iii. 210.]

 [831] [Let Americans read this, and ask whether a relapse into
 heathenism is not threatening our civilization, in this respect. May I
 venture to refer to Moral Reforms (ed. 1869, Lippincotts,
 Philadelphia), a little book of my own, rebuking this inquity, and
 tracing the earliest violation of this law of Christian morals, and of
 nature itself, to an unhappy Bishop of Rome, rebuked by Hippolytus. See
 vol. vi. p. 345, Edinburgh Series of Ante-Nicene Fathers.]

 Chapter XXXVI.--Bearing of the Doctrine of the Resurrection on the
 Practices of the Christians.

 Who, then, that believes in a resurrection, would make himself into a
 tomb for bodies that will rise again? For it is not the part of the
 same persons to believe that our bodies will rise again, and to eat
 them as if they would not; and to think that the earth will give back
 the bodies held by it, but that those which a man has entombed in
 himself will not be demanded back. On the contrary, it is reasonable to
 suppose, that those who think they shall have no account to give of the
 present life, ill or well spent, and that there is no resurrection, but
 calculate on the soul perishing with the body, and being as it were
 quenched in it, will refrain from no deed of daring; but as for those
 who are persuaded that nothing will escape the scrutiny of God, but
 that even the body which has ministered to the irrational impulses of
 the soul, and to its desires, will be punished along with it, it is not
 likely that they will commit even the smallest sin. But if to any one
 it appears sheer nonsense that the body which has mouldered away, and
 been dissolved, and reduced to nothing, should be reconstructed, we
 certainly cannot with any reason be accused of wickedness with
 reference to those that believe not, but only of folly; for with the
 opinions by which we deceive ourselves we injure no one else. But that
 it is not our belief alone that bodies will rise again, but that many
 philosophers also hold the same view, it is out of place to show just
 now, lest we should be thought to introduce topics irrelevant to the
 matter in hand, either by speaking of the intelligible and the
 sensible, and the nature of these respectively, or by contending that
 the incorporeal is older than the corporeal, and that the intelligible
 precedes the sensible, although we become acquainted with the latter
 earliest, since the corporeal is formed from the incorporeal, by the
 combination with it of the intelligible, and that the sensible is
 formed from the intelligible; for nothing hinders, according to
 Pythagoras and Plato, that when the dissolution of bodies takes place,
 they should, from the very same elements of which they were constructed
 at first, be constructed again. [832] But let us defer the discourse
 concerning the resurrection. [833]

 [832] [Comp. cap. xxxi., supra, p. 146. The science of their times lent
 itself to the notions of the Fathers necessarily; but neither Holy
 Scripture nor theology binds us to any theory of the how, in this great
 mystery; hence Plato and Pythagoras are only useful, as showing that
 even they saw nothing impossible in the resurrection of the dead. As to
 "the same elements," identity does not consist in the same particles of
 material, but in the continuity of material, by which every seed
 reproduces "its own body." 1 Cor. xv. 38.]

 [833] [It is a fair inference that The Discourse was written after the
 Embassy. "In it," says Kaye, "may be found nearly all the arguments
 which human reason has been able to advance in support of the
 resurrection." p. 200.]

 Chapter XXXVII.--Entreaty to Be Fairly Judged.

 And now do you, who are entirely in everything, by nature and by
 education, upright, and moderate, and benevolent, and worthy of your
 rule, now that I have disposed of the several accusations, and proved
 that we are pious, and gentle, and temperate in spirit, bend your royal
 head in approval. For who are more deserving to obtain the things they
 ask, than those who, like us, pray for your government, that you may,
 as is most equitable, receive the kingdom, son from father, and that
 your empire may receive increase and addition, all men becoming subject
 to your sway? And this is also for our advantage, that we may lead a
 peaceable and quiet life, and may ourselves readily perform all that is
 commanded us. [834]

 [834] [1 Tim. ii. 1, 2. Kaye, p. 154. They refused worship, however, to
 imperial images; and for this they suffered. "Bend your royal head" is
 an amusing reference to the nod of the Thunderer.]

 [698] Literally, "embassy." [By this name best known to scholars.]
