THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS
An English translation from a revised text, with introduction and notes, by R. C. Jebb
London and Cambridge: Macmillan and Co., 1870.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/theophrastoucha00jebbgoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

OEO®PACTOY XAPAKTHPEC

. THE

| CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS

Cambridge:
PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A.
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.

OEO®PACTOY XAPAKTHPEC

THE

CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS

AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION
FROM A REVISED TEXT

WITH INTRODUCTION AND NOTES

BY

R. C. JEBB, M.A.

FELLOW AND ASSISTANT-TUTOR OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE,
AND PUBLIC ORATOR OF THE UNIVERSITY.

Cc
Hondon and Cambridge :
MACMILLAN AND CO.
1870.

[4il Rights reserved.\ —

Gey, 195

0 :

H sane 9 Perv.

¢ _). a
\ eae
ag. a

Bao! sa

HARVARD
U NIVERSITY
LIBRARY

PREFACE.

AT a time when the desire to see ancient life more
vividly on every side from which it can illustrate our
own is perhaps the strongest with which the classics
are widely read, it seems possible that the Ch2racters
of Theophrastus may have some general interest. To
Englishmen who do not read Greek they are probably
best known through the French translation of La
Bruyére. In an edition of the Characters published
in 1852 the Rev. J. G. Sheppard mentions an English
translation by Mr F. Howell (1824), and another by
Mr H. Galley, of which he does not give the date.
But he does not speak of either with approbation;
and I have not been able to learn that there is any
other.

The first object of my book is to make these

| b

vi . PREFACE.

lively pictures of old Greek manners better known to
English readers. But some critical labour has been
given to it, and I venture to hope that in certain
points of view it may have interest for scholars,

A translator of the Characters is forced to be-
come also an editor. The text is corrupt, and has
long been a field for the ingenuity of critics. It is
thickly studded with passages on which hardly two
commentators agree; and there is no edition with
which I am acquainted in which the editor has not
adopted several of his own conjectures. A student of
the book who is capable of forming a judgment upon
its difficulties is thus driven to make a text for him-
self. Where doctors differ so often and so utterly, it
is absolutely neccssary that he should be ‘nullius
addictus iurare in verba.’ He must, in the disputed
passages, first inquire what the mss. have, and whether
sense can be made of it. If he concludes that it is”
nonsense, he has the conjectures of previous critics to
choose from. If no one of these appears satisfactory,

or if he has thought of something which seems to him

PREFACE. Vil

more probable than any of them, he is justified in
adopting his own emendation. A critic ordinarily
competent to weigh the opinions of other critics has
in every case a right to give so much of weight to his
own. In the case of the Characters this right is
especially clear. Each chapter consists of a string of
short sentences not necessarily connected in meaning.
When, therefore, in any one of these the genuine
reading has been lost, no sure clue for -its recovery can
be looked for fromthe context; for it is ‘possible that
the sentence, as written by the author, had ho con-
mexion with the sentences which precede and follow
it. Every such passage must be treated as a separate
riddle; and the limits within which the answer ‘may

lie are wide. Open competition in conjecture affords

the best hope of the true answer being found. A -
paper by Dr O. Ribbeck in the Rheinisches Museum. °
for January, 1870, entitled ‘Critical Remarks on the

Characters of Theophrastus,’ illustrates the freedom
with which German scholars are disposed to apply

this principle.

“iy. ES
“te

Will PREFACE.

In forming the text from which this translation
has been made I have used the editions of (1) F. Ast,
Leipzig, 1816: (2) J. G. Sheppard, London, 1852: (3)
H. E. Foss, Leipzig, 1858: (4) E. Petersen, Leipzig,
1859: (5) J. L. Ussing, Hanover, 1868. The editions
of Foss and Petersen give in full the readings of the
three principal mss..—viz. of Par. A. and B., from
Herr Fr. Diibner’s collation, and of the Vatican ms,
from Mr Badham’s; also the reading of several other
mss. where they are important. The essential appa-
ratus criticus is thus provided. The commentaries of
Ast, Foss and Ussing give the conjectures of various
other editors and commentators, and make the con-
stant use of the older editions (as of Needham’s) prac-
tically unnecessary for the purposes of textual criti-
cism. A Critical Appendix at the end of the book
contains the results of my work on the text as
regards all important points. In “a great number
of cases it will be found that I have adhered more
closely than previous: editors to the mss. as reported

by Foss and Petersen. In a few cases, where neither

PREFACE. 1X

the mss. nor the critics solved a difficulty to my sa-
tisfaction, I have adopted conjectures of my own.
The chief of these are:—

In Ch. VIII. cvvavAnoovtas for ovvavtovras.

In Ch. XIV. Xeupey for humpov. .

In Ch. XVI. ovdé xarrndov for ovd’ Gua trode.

In Ch. XXI. Kopw6taxds for xpwwoxdpaxa.

In Ch. XXVIII. éori@pevov for éoreppéver.

In Ch. XXIX. do-yvos, ob xépdous for iaxupod xépdous.

The grounds upon which these emendations rest
are stated in the Appendix.

If the moderate use of conjecture is a privilege
which few, perhaps, will challenge, the translator who
presumes to expurgate must expect protests. In
assuming the unpopular and much-suspected office
of expurgato:, I was sensible that I was imperilling
the pretensions of this little book to a severely high
tone of scholarship, ‘and risking the censure of that
large majority who prefer the integrity to the purity
of a text. There are, however, in the Characters

about a dozen passages or phrases which I was un-

x PREFACE.

willing to translate, and which I have omitted both in
the English and in the Greek. The curious can

discover them by comparing this edition with any

‘other in the chapters epi aypotxias, amrovoias, Bdedu-

pias, teptepyias, avatcbycias, Sveyepeias, andias, oyi-
pablas. At least three objections may evidently be
made to such omissions. First, that a translator so
fastidious would have done better to have left the
Characters alone altogether. To this it may be
replied that the coarseness in the delineations of
Theophrastus is but a small element, accidental, not
essential, and can in every case be separated from the
portrait without injuring it as a whole. Secondly, it
may be asked—‘Where is the line to be drawn?
Why is this struck out and that left in?’ Here I have
nothing to say but that I have used my best discre-
tion. Thirdly, an objector may contend that, granting
the advisability of omitting certain passages in the
English translation, there was no sufficient reason for
omitting them in the Greek text. It is enough to
answer that, in this book, the Greek text is printed

PREFACE. xi

only as an adjunct to the translation ; and that,
therefore, passages omitted in the translation could
not, with due regard to symmetry, be left in the text.
So to leave them, it may be added, would have been
nearly equivalent to printing them in capital letters..
The order in which the mss. arrange the Cha-
racters has been changed, in this Translation, for an
order less embarrassing to the reader. The reasons
for this change are stated in the Introduction, pp. 43 ff.
The illustrative notes have been made to consist,
as much as possible, of short translated extracts from
Greek or Roman writers. The choice of these ex-
tracts cost some time and trouble; but, while making
them, I often thought of a passage in that delightful
book, the Oxford Spectator—the account of the Ox-
ford Commemoration given by an historian writing in
4000 A.D.:—‘ On the last day of the Commemoration
festival it appears that there was a procession to
Nuneham, a pleasant spot some miles down the river:
‘the whole University goes to Nuneham, says the

writer of a private letter.’ Anyone who attempts to

Xi PREFACE.

write notes on the details of ancient life is pretty sure
to make some statements of this kind. He can only

take precautions to keep the number down as much

as possible.

TRINITY COLLEGE,
April 4, 1870.

INTRODUCTION.

I.
PROBABLE ORIGIN OF THE BOOK.

THE book of Characters which tradition
ascribes to Theophrastus, the pupil of Aris-
totle, contains thirty sketches from Athenian |
society in the age of Alexander the Great.
If they do not go far into human nature, they
touch things upon its surface with a good
deal of humour and acuteness, As illustra-
tions of manners, again, they have this merit,
that they treat of commonplace people and
of everyday life. But it is not as pictures of
men or of manners that they seem most in-
teresting.

Besides the language which a literature
can preserve, every civilised people has an-

L3 : I

2 INTRODUCTION.

other which necessarily dies with it, the lan-
guage of society. The general sense of a
word survives in books, and it is sometimes
possible by a comparison of passages to dis-
criminate shades of meaning ; but it is seldom
or never possible to be sure that we have
seized the precise notions which the word
conveyed long ago to the men in whose mouths
it was a part of living speech. A thousand
associations which we cannot guess at, reach-
ing back into the infancy of the people, be-
coming more complex with its growth, inter-
twining themselves with every part of its civil
and social being, were blent together in every
word through which this life found utter-
ance, and dyed each with tints which are
lost for ever when the glow from which
they were caught is extinct. The words
of a dead language are like panes of stained
glass seen on a bleak morning. The genius
of the design which they make up can
be felt; and, if the separate colours seem
hard in the grey light, it is possible to
imagine them deepened ; but no imagination
can see them as they looked when the even-
ing sunshine was streaming through the

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 3

window. When the life of a nation is
over, the forms of the language which it
once warmed remain, and sympathy can
still quicken them, perhaps, with a tinge of
the old spirit ; but the very soul which gave
its meaning to the shape can never be lit up
again. |

This loss is at once severest and least
remediable in the case of those terms which
every society invents or adapts to express
familiar ethical facts from points of view pe-
culiar to itself; but which either do not come
into books, or are not fully explained there.
Even in a living language such terms are sel-
dom so well understood by a foreigner that he
can be sure of using them in exactly the right
cases. For instance, the ironical application
of ‘ shocking’ occasionally met with in French
novels is not always what we should consider
happy; and few Englishmen would dare to
say that they knew precisely what is meant
by certain French and German terms of the
same kind. This is one of the obvious rea-
sons against interlarding one’s mother-speech
with words borrowed to express ideas pithily ;
the words so borrowed are usually just those

1-2

4 INTRODUCTION. |

which a foreigner is most likely to use wrongly.
They are saturated more deeply than any
others with the mind of the people to whom
they are peculiar. For the same reason, when
it is possible to arrive at a tolerably clear
notion of what they mean, no helps are so
valuable towards understanding the ways in
which a foreign people feels and thinks,

Now in the Characters of Theophrastus
we have thirty such words explained and fully
illustrated. The precise idea, for example,
which an Athenian attached to ‘Meanness’
is put beyond a doubt by a list of the things
which the Mean man will do. To make
clearness doubly clear, qualities nearly akin to
each other are in some cases described. Thus
the province of Meanness has its border still
better defined by juxtaposition to Avarice
and to Penuriousness. We have, in fact, in
this book, a fragment of the social language
of Athens interpreted by a very full and
explicit commentary. The value of such a
fragment to the study of Greek history and.
literature is surely not slight. A series of
men, vividly seen, with all the tricks of speech
and manner which marked them in Athenian

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 5

society, passes before us; and for once we
know that we are viewing them from an
absolutely Athenian standpoint, and can
name every one of them as an Athenian
would have named him. It would bea dull
imagination which were not helped by this to
understand better the drama played on a
larger stage, and to feel the language which
the actors spoke as if it were one of which
the shades could still be caught from the
tones and gestures of living men.

It is well known that the text of the Cha-
racters is corrupt, though there is scarcely a
place where the general meaning cannot be
seen; and that one manuscript, now in the
Vatican library, is the sole authority for two
of the chapters, as well as for certain addi-
tions to thirteen others. A short account of
the manuscripts and of the principal editions
will be found in another place’. Here it will
be enough to say that there have been three
epochs in the modern history of the book;
the appearance of Casaubon’s edition in 1598;
the discovery of the two long-missing chap-
ters in 1786; and the publication, in 1834-6,

1 Critical Appendix.

Author-
ship of the
Characters
—Burney’s
VIEW,

6 INTRODUCTION.

of three essays by Herr H. E. Foss, by which
the disputed authenticity of these chapters
and of the other additions in the Vatican MS.
may be said to have been established.

The origin of a book so singular in style
and with a history so peculiar has been the
subject of various theories. It is proposed
briefly to review the principal of these; to
consider the chief arguments for and against
them; and to separate, as far as possible,
what is certain or probable from what remains
mere matter of conjecture.

Two questions occur. Were the Charac-
ters written by Theophrastus? And, if so,
did they originally form an independent work,
or have they been extracted from some other
book or books ?

Burney’ believed that the Characters were
composed by a writer who lived under the
Roman Empire, and who derived them from
the pictures of old Greek life in the dramatists

1 The authority for Burney’s opinion is a note by Dobree
on Ar. Plut. 1021 (in his Porsoni notae in Aristophanem,
Cambridge, 1820):—‘ Docte et acute suspicabatur desidera-
tissimus Burneius, tempore imperatorum Romanorum ex co-
moediis esse consarcinatos (Characteras).’

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 7

of the Middle or New Comedy. The second
part of this theory scarcely requires to be dis-
proved. No incident, no trait of style in the
book warrants the supposition that a writer
whose aim was to describe manners turned
from living men to portraits of the dead.
It is only necessary to read the ‘Letters’ in
which Alciphro, a rhetorician of the Empire, ©
attempted to revive the Athens of Menander,
in order to feel the difference between a clever
cento and a sketch from life’. There remains
the more general proposition,—that the Cha-
racters, if not a patchwork, are yet the pro-
duction of an age later than that of Theo-
phrastus. This opinion no longer finds many
supporters; but it is due to some names

1 Alciphro probably lived in the latter part of the second
century A.D. His imaginary Letters, in three books, are in-
tended to illustrate the Athenian manners of an earlier time.
One of them purports to be written by Menander, who was
contemporary with Theophrastus, It is probable that the
ludicrous adventures of parasites and rustics which they de-
scribe were taken in part from pieces of the Middle and New
Comedy. If this be so, we have here sketches actually con-
structed as Burney supposed the Characters to have been—
‘ex comoediis consarcinatae.’ The artificial and elaborate
drollery of the Letters is in striking contrast with the simple
humour of the Characters.

8 INTRODUCTION.

whose authority it has had, to state the
grounds on which it appears improbable.
ae a the The earliest writer who ascribes the Cha-
-External Yacters to Theophrastus is Diogenes Laertius,
evidence. early in the third century. Supposing him
to have been deceived, further evidence to
their higher antiquity can be found only in
themselves. The internal evidence which they
supply is of two kinds, general and parti-
cular.
Internal The general evidence is, in the first place,
uae that of the language. As far as the state of
language. the text allows us to judge, the book contains
scarcely a word or a construction which would
not be admissible in what is usually called
‘classical’ Greek prose’. Changes in the lan-
guage and in literary style proceeded rapidly
from the beginning of the third century B.c.;
and even those later writers who, like Lucian,
especially studied Atticism, use words and
constructions which, as far as we can judge,
an old Attic writer would not have used. As
regards the ordinary style of the later prose-

1 If xalrep €xes occurs in the character of the Flatterer,
it should be remembered that the same construction is found
in Plato’s Symposium.

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 9

writers, there is no possibility of mistaking
it for the ‘classical’: not only is the language
different, but the old straightforward way of
writing has given place to a general taste for
antithesis and for what was thought melodious
arrangement. The plain, short sentences of
the Characters, the series of infinitives strung
together on the olos at the head of each chap-
ter, like papers of all sizes on a file, do not
resemble such work as the disciples of the
rhetorical schools loved to produce. The
only case which has been alleged of a post-
classical usage is desocdaspovia in the sense of
‘superstition. The word, it is said, did not
‘acquire’ a bad sense till after the time of
Theophrastus. As we have endeavoured to
show in a note on c, XXVIII. it is inaccurate to
speak of the word ‘acquiring’ a sense which
potentially it must always have had. And
that, as early as the time of Theophrastus,
it was actually used in this as well as in its
better sense, is sufficiently shown by the fact
that Menander wrote a comedy with the title
Aciodaipov.
Another kind of general evidence may £vidence

probably be derived from the nature of the sae

10 INTRODUCTION.

social manners which the Characters describe.
Here, indeed, we are on ground far less sure
than that of language. But it is certain that
we may recognise in these sketches that frank
homeliness which marked old Athenian life,
and which faded there, as elsewhere, when
men began to take their tone from the new
capital of the world. This homeliness is seen
in frequent allusions to the details of a small
household, to petty loans between neighbours,
to minute economies in dress and the like’.
The simple life thus opened, and the can-
dour which opens it, remind us rather of
Aristophanes than of any writer whose taste
in manners and in literature had been formed
under imperial Rome’.

Evidenceof | The particular evidence consists in pas-

particular

passages.

sages which allude to Alexander the Great
and to his immediate successors as to persons
with whom the speakers were contemporary.

1 See esp. cc. 14, 15, 23.

* The tone of social life in the small republics of ancient
Greece is described, with the inspiration of a true feeling for
Aristophanes, by Mr G. O. Trevelyan, in the paper ‘ A Holi-
day among some Old Friends,’ lately reprinted from the
Cornhill Magazine in the same volume with ‘ Ladies in Par-
liament.’

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 1!

In c. XXIII (VI. of this edition) the Boastful
man brags of having served with Alexander;
and afterwards states that Antipater has con-
ferred upon him the privilege of exporting
timber from Macedonia free of duty. This
appears to refer to the four years during which
Antipater, first as regent of the province of
Macedonia, afterwards as supreme regent of
the whole Macedonian empire, was master of
Athens, 322—318 B.c. In c VIII. (XX. in
this ed.) the Newsmonger,—or, as he is styled,
the Newsmaker,—pretends that he has just
had news of a battle between Cassander and
Polysperchon. ‘These leaders were at war in
the years 317—316 B.C.; and the particular,
time referred to is probably the early part of .
the year 316, after the war had been trans-
ferred from Greece to Macedonia, and when
tidings were anxiously expected at Athens,
which had declared in the previous autumn
for Cassander.

Now a writer who wished to illustrate cha-
racter by sketches of representative men might
of course, if he pleased, throw them back into
history. By so doing, however, he would not
only give himself much needless trouble, but

¥2 INTRODUCTION.

would lose nearly all the freshness and effect.
An English character-writer of the present
day, who wished to convey a distinct idea of
how a braggart speaks and acts, would
scarcely place him in the reign of Eliza-
beth, and make him boast of his adventures
with Raleigh, or affect to have received pri-
vate advices from the Low Countries. Or,
if he chose to proceed in this way, he would
at least take care that the allusions should
be such as ordinary readers could easily re-
cognise. On Burney’s hypothesis, however,
‘the author of the Characters neglected even
this precaution. The allusion which he has
placed in the mouth of his Newsmonger is
to an obscure episode in the complicated
quarrels of Alexander’s successors. To an
Athenian who lived just then the episode
happened to be important, and in his mind it
would fill a large space: but it is scarcely
one which a literary man, writing long after-
wards, would have brought into a popular
sketch. The probability that the composer
of the Characters was contemporary with
the events of which they speak may be illus-
trated from the case of a similar book in our

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 13

own literature. Let us suppose that, several
centuries after the English language was dead,
a critic with no external testimony before
him, and who could not trust himself to de-
cide surely between the literary styles and
social manners of different periods, wished to
ascertain from internal evidence when Hall’s
‘Characterismes of Vertues and Vices’ were
written. He would be struck, in the first
place, by a passage in the sketch of the
Busie-Bodie. ‘What euerie man ventures in
Guiana voyage and what they gained he
knows to a haire. Whether Holland will haue
peace hee knowes, and on what conditions ;
and with what successe is familiar to him
ere it bee concluded.’ Another passage to
which he might look for help is in the
sketch of the Vaine-glorious man. ‘ His talke
is...what exploits he did at Cales or Nieu-
port. If he then consulted histories, he
would find that voyages to Guiana were most
in fashion in England during the latter part
of Raleigh’s life, who made his first expedi-
tion thither in 1595, and his second in 1618.
A truce for twelve years between the States-
General and Spain was signed on the goth

14 , INTRODUCTION.

April, 1609. Calais was taken by the Span-
iards April 17th, 1596’, and remained in
their hands until Henry IV. regained it by a
treaty with Philip signed at Vervins, May
2nd, 1598. In the interval he more than once
asked Elizabeth to help him in a siege for
the recovery of the town*. The battle of
Nieuport, in which the army of the States-
General, led by Maurice of Nassau, with the
English allies under Sir Francis Vere, de-
feated the Spaniards under Albert of Austria,
was fought July 2nd, 1600°. Here, then, are
four distinct allusions to events comprised in
a period of about twelve years. It would be
a reasonable inference that these were events
of the writer's own time; and that the ‘ Cha-
racterismes’ were written either soon before or
soon after the end of the war between Spain
and Holland. If the inquirer could assume
that the sketch of the Busie-bodie, who dis-
cusses the prospects of peace, was written
while peace was really future, then he would
have ascertained that part of the book at
least was composed not later than the spring

1 Motley, Unzted Netherlands, 111. 346, 470.
2 Jb, Wl. 347, 432. 3 Jb. IV. 27—47.

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 15

of 1609. If he hesitated to assume this, he
would merely pronounce it probable that the
book was written in or about the years 1600—
1610. We know that, in fact, it was published
in 1608.

On evidence of the like kind, confirmed
by the general evidence first noticed, it is
probable that the Characters were written
in or about the years 322—-300 B.c. If the
inference which would have been safe in re-
spect to Hall’s ‘Busie-Bodie’ is safe in re-
spect to the Greek sketch of the ‘Newsmaker,’
then that chapter, at least, was written early
in the year 316 B.C.; but this is uncertain
and unimportant.

_ The life of Theophrastus, though its pre- Dave of
cise limits are doubtful, falls in the period 7 apres
373 — 284 B.c.. The Characters are ex-
pressly ascribed to him by Diogenes in the
third century, and were known as his to the
later grammarians, Eustathius, Suidas, and
Tzetzes. A story preserved by Athenaeus

1 According to Apollodorus af. Diog. v. 58 he died in Ol.
123 (288—-284 B.c.), According to Diogenes (V. 40), he died
at 85 years of age. This places his birth. in 373—369 B.c.,
and makes him 11—15 years younger than Aristotle.

16 INTRODUCTION.

further shows that the tradition of antiquity
represented him as having a genius for lively
description’. On the whole, then, there seems
to be no good reason for doubting that the
Characters are his genuine productions’.
ne 42 but did they originally form a separate
Characters, book? Or have they been extracted from
some other work or works of Theophrastus ?
This question, unlike the former, cannot be
answered with any confidence: we can only
balance the probabilities.
The opi- The principal champion in recent times
lo fad of the belief that the Characters represent
ee an independent work has been F. Ast, the
author of the Lexicon Platonicum. When his
edition was published at Leipzig in 1816,
the theory of extracts was already current
Ast’sargu-in Germany. In his Prolegomena he re-
tas asserts the older view by an appeal to the
evidence of style. There are, he says, three

: 1 Athen. I. p. 21 A.

2 Dobree thus refers to the opinion of Porson:—‘ Putabat
scilicet, nisi me vehementer fallit memoria, falso tribui Theo-
phrasto Characteras, antiquos tamen esse concedens’ (Pors.
Notae in Ar., Put. 1021). Had Porson left on record his
reasons for this opinion, they would have been of great in-
terest. As it is, we have only a dictum vaguely reported.

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 17

styles in which character: may be described.
First the philosophical, having for its aim to
teach. Secondly the rhetorical, having for
its aim to move. Thirdly, what he calls the
‘mimicum genus,’ the farcical; having for its
aim simply to amuse. The proper subjects
for this style are qualities neither virtuous nor
vicious’, but morally indifferent; its excel-
lences are truth, tact, brevity; its results
should be ‘witty pictures—idylls—of human
character, drawn from nature itself, with no
purpose but to please’*. These conditions
are, he thinks, fulfilled by the Characters
of Theophrastus. They are essentially in this
humorous style; they cannot, therefore, have
been culled from a philosophical or rhetorical
work. As we shall endeavour to show by and
by, there is an element of truth in this view.
But, in the precise form which Ast gives to
it, it appears slightly fantastic. Granting that

1 Proleg. p. 13 ‘res vel materia...neque praestans et ad
virtutem insignis neque turpis et foeda erit, sed eiusmodi
quae propter suam ipsa naturam iocum et risum admittat ;
igitur ex earum rerum mumero erit quas indifferentes dicimus.’

2 Proleg. p. 26 ‘mimos, h. e. Jepidas humanorum morum
imagines (quasi e/duA\ea) ex ipsa natura expressas, quibus
mera delectatio sit proposita.’

18 INTRODUCTION.

the laws which he lays down for the ‘ farcical’
style are just, it cannot be said that the Cha-
racters of Theophrastus strictly obey them.
Truth, tact, conciseness, are doubtless among
the merits of these sketches. But the qualities
described are not such as the author, at least,
thought ‘morally indifferent.’ Many of them
are identical with ‘vices’ treated by Aristotle
and Eudemus; all of them, as being extremes,
are vices in the meaning of the Peripatetic
school to which Theophrastus belonged. Ast’s
rule that such descriptions should szmply
amuse is a test not easy to apply; but he
saves us this trouble by avowing that three
chapters—the Oligarch, the Patron of Rascals,
and the Superstitious Man—do not satisfy it ;
and regards them, on this and other grounds,
as spurious. The same objection might surely
be urged with equal force against some others,
—notably against the chapters on Irony and
on Evilspeaking.

But, when we have rejected Ast’s theory
of the style in which the Characters are com-
posed, we have still to consider the value of
his general result. The theory that these
sketches formed part or the whole of a special

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. | 19

work starts with an advantage; the burden
of proof rests with those who deny it. Nor,
indeed, can it be disproved. But a number
of circumstances, which severally are not of
great weight, combine to render it improbable.
In the first place, not only do the manuscripts
vary much in the number of chapters which
they contain, but they represent three dis-
tinct revisions or editions; in one of which
the same chapters are longer, and in another
shorter, than in the third. If the Characters
once formed a definite whole, the volume has
had a‘ fate which could not easily be paral-
leled ; for, whereas its original unity ought to
have secured something like a uniform tra-
dition, it has been handed down, not merely
with various texts, but in a number of dif-
ferent shapes and sizes. Next, if we consider
that portion of the contents, and that arrange-
ment of them, upon which the manuscripts
agree, we shall discover a want of symmetry
and a confusion hardly reconcileable with the
supposition that the book was put forth in
this form by its author. Some qualities are
treated, for no evident reason, with much
greater fulness than the rest. Three chapters
2—2

20 INTRODUCTION.

are given to the Love of Money, considered
in finer gradations than are recognised in any
other case; Talkativeness, again, and the
qualities allied to Shamelessness, are espe-
cially favoured ; while such complex ideas as
Pride and Cowardice are dismissed in one
chapter each. The order of the chapters is
also capricious. Qualities so much alike that
juxtaposition is necessary for distinction, are
placed apart; nor is contrast, any more than
resemblance, a principle of the arrangement.
Yet upon this arrangement the manuscripts
agree. Unless such an order had ancient
authority, it could scarcely have maintained
itself against reason and convenience in all
the manuscripts; on the other hand it is
scarcely conceivable that it can represent the
author’s final design. An explanation of the
fact will be suggested presently; we are now
concerned only with the fact itself. Three
things, then, seem against the view that the
Characters, as now extant, originally formed
a single work; the multiform tradition; the
unsymmetrical plan; the confused arrange-
ment. If it is contended that the Characters,
though not the whole, may be a fragment of

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 21

such a work, the first and third of these diffi-
culties have still to be met; for the second is
substituted that of explaining how it hap-
pened that part of a volume presumably
small should have been preserved in a num-
ber of copies which testifies to its popularity,
while the other part has been so completely
lost that no trace remains of it.

The opinion that the Characters are ex- Theory
tracts from some other work or works is less seed
open to obvious objections, and is that to %”° av
which recent scholars have generally inclined. |
It has been held in different forms, which
have gradually become more and more pre-
cise. Schneider, in the preface to his edition Schneider's
published in 1799, was content to surmise”
that these extracts were made ‘at various
times and by various persons’ from ‘some
larger ethical work’ of Theophrastus. This
is certainly to put the theory in its least pro-
bable shape. The gradual formation of the
book would account, indeed, for the confused
order of its chapters; but how can it be sup-
posed that such a collection was made gradu-
ally ‘by various men and at various times’?

If, when the first of these had selected two or

Works

Srom which

the Cha-
racters
may have
been taken.

22 . INTRODUCTION.

three sketches, he held his hand, what sin-
gular good fortune transmitted to the next
labourer this small beginning of a book, and
so passed the slowly growing volume through
these mysterious inheritors of a purpose? It
is surely simpler to suppose that a task of
such very moderate compass was completed
by the person who conceived it. But upon
what book or books did this person draw?
Schneider says merely on ‘a larger ethical
work’: but some later writers have spoken
more definitely.

Theophrastus is known to have been the
author of two large works on moral philo-
sophy; one of these was called 7@«a", and

1 Plutarch in his Life of Pericles, c. 38, quotes an anec-
dote as given by Theophrastus éy rots 7@:xots. The other
work, sepl 70av, is mentioned by a scholiast on the Vicoma-
chean Ethics, iv. 2, p. 1121 A, in Cramer's Anecdota Pari-
sina, I. p. 194, who says that the avarice of Simonides of
Ceos, on which Aristotle touches, was noticed also by Theo-
phrastus év rots wept 70@v. Athenaeus says too (XV. p. 673
E), that Adrantus (or as it is now generally read, Adrastus)
wrote ‘five books on the questions of history and language
(ra xaé’ loroplay cal dék&v Fnrovueva) in the wept HOcv of
Theophrastus, and one book on those in the Vicomachean
Ethics of Aristotle.’ That the wept #0ay and the 70cxd were
distinct works, and that each consisted of several books, ap-
pears from the statement of the grammarian Eustratius (on

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 23

was perhaps a collection of special treatises ;
the other was entitled aept nOov, and was
probably analogous in plan to the Nicoma-
chean Ethics of Aristotle, but more com-
prehensive. It is now a favourite opinion
that the Characters were derived from the
latter of these works’, or perhaps from both’.

the Z£¢h. Nicom. Vv. 2, p. 1129 B) that a certain verse there
quoted was ascribed by Theophrastus, in the first book of the
wept 0a, to Theognis ; but, in the first book of the #@cxd, to
Phocylides. Zeller agrees with Petersen in supposing the rep
hOav to have been a work of the same kind as the Vicoma-
chean Ethics, but ‘more comprehensive.’ Usener, in his 4a-
lecta Theophrasiga, (1858,) an examination of the catalogue of
the works of Theophrastus in Diog. v. 42— 50, supposes that
the 7@c:xd was a collection of essays like those wepi evdacnovlas,
wept evruylas, wept xo\axelas mentioned by Diogenes,—put
together by the grammarian Andronicus, who is said by Por-
phyry (Vit. Plot. 24) to have rearranged the writings of Theo-
phrastus (Anal. Theophr. p. 22). Besides these special trea-
tises, and the Characters, Diogenes mentions only #6txav
oxoAGv a’, which, Zeller thinks, may have been identical with
part of the epi 40a or of the 76cxd.

1 Speaking of the epitomes from the writings of Theo-
phrastus mentioned by Diogenes, Usener says: ‘eodem per-
tinent etiam #@cxol xapaxrypes, in rhetorum usum, quae est
Hermanni Sauppii coniectura ueri simillima, ex Theophrasti
libris wepl 40d» excerpti’ (p. 18).

2 ¢ Aus einem dieser Werke, oder auch ays beiden, scheinen
...die Schilderungen von Fehlern entlehnt zu sein, welche
in unsern ‘‘ Charakteren” zusammengestellt sind’ (Zeller P2:-
los. der Gr. I. 2, p. 684 note).

Petersen’s
wtew—the
Characters
taken from
the rept

HO ov.

24 INTRODUCTION.

The claims of the zrepit nOav have lately been
urged in an elaborate and able essay by
Dr. E. Petersen. We will attempt to give
an outline of his argument, and to consider
its value.

After touching upon some notices of the
lost work repi nO@v, which suggest that it
went over nearly the same ground as the
Nicomachean Ethics, Petersen expresses the
belief that yet clearer traces of this work are
to be found in an extant author. Stobaeus
in his ‘Eclogues’ sketches the ethical system
‘of Aristotle and the other Peripatetics,’ and
in one place quotes Theophrastus by name in
support of a particular statement. Petersen
endeavours to show that the whole of this ex-
position was probably derived from the zrept
nOav of Theophrastus; that, therefore, the
wept nOav treated of (at least) all those quali-
ties which are cited in illustration by Stobaeus;
and that, since twelve of these correspond
with qualities described in the Characters,
it is so far possible that the Characters may
have been derived from the zrepi nOav. The
first position is defended at length. To make
it probable that Stobaeus was indebted to a

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 25

work which not only is not extant, but of
which the nature can only be conjectured, is
certainly no easy task; and, on the other hand,
we would not willingly undertake to show
that it was improbable. It will suffice to quote
a criticism upon this part of Petersen’s theory
by the historian of Greek philosophy, Dr E.
Zeller’. ‘Since the latest source used by
Stobaeus is at all events a much later one
(than Theophrastus),—as one sees from the
frequent introduction of Stoic terminology
and the elaborate apologetic references to
Stoic doctrines, and as is also probable from
Cic. de Fin. V. ;-—since, too, a partial agree-
ment with Theophrastus warrants no con-
clusion as to the remaining contents of the
extract ;—we cannot use it (with the excep-
tion of one passage in which Theophrastus is
named, p. 300) as evidence for the doctrine of
this teacher.’

It appears to us, however, that Petersen
might resign his special theory regarding the
‘passage in Stobaeus without damage to his
main position, viz. that the Characters were
derived from the mepi néov. Everyone would

1 Zeller Philos. der Gr. 11. 2, p. 684 note.

First objec-
tion to
Petersen's
view.—-
Nature of
some of the
subjects of
the Cha-
racters.

26 INTRODUCTION.

allow that if, as is likely on other grounds,
the wept 7Oav was a work similar to the Nico-
machean Ethics, it probably treated of many
qualities identical with those described in the
Characters. The real difficulties are of a
kind out of which Stobaeus could not help us.

The first may be stated thus. Admitting
that many, or that most, of the characters
may have been extracted from a formal trea-
tise on morals, are there not some for which
such a source is inconceivable? Consider,
for instance, the sketches of the Newsmaker,
of the Late-learner, of the Oligarch, of the
Patron of Rascals. Each of these must, on
Petersen’s assumption, have been treated in
the lost philosophical work ; and, if this work
was on the plan of Aristotle’s Ethics, each
must have been considered in relation to—
an opposite and to an intermediate quality.
Petersen labours hard to reconstruct these
ovtvyiat or trios; but it is not surprising that
personages such as those just named are
somewhat refractory under the process. The’
Newsmaker, with all that is distinctive in his
genius unrecognised, subsides into a place
under the notion of Loquacity, though doubts

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 27

are expressed whether he would not have
been an equally loyal dependent of Boastful-
ness. The names of the vicious character to
which he is opposite, and of the virtuous one
in regard to which he is extreme, are not
specified. The Late-learner is dealt with yet
more summarily. He is merely pronounced
to be a variety of the Idly-laborious ; and,
when it has been briefly suggested that In-
dustry is the virtue from which he has strayed,
he is left with his more special relations un-
explained. The Oligarch is declared—with
a partiality somewhat oligarchical—to be the
opposite of the Reckless man (azrovevonpévos) ;
the intermediate character being the Popular
(Snuotixcs). The Patron of Rascals is still
more strangely situated ; he is given for his
vis-a-vis the Arrogant Man, and the character
between them is styled qvAcdnuos, the Friend
of the People.

Whether such groups can have had place
in a work on moral science, is a question
which everyone must judge for himself. It
would not, perhaps, be easy, with the given
materials, to form an arrangement which
should not be liable to criticism in at least

| Second ob-
jection.—
Style of the
Charac-
ters gene-
rally.

28 INTRODUCTION.

the same degree as Petersen’s. The News-
maker, the Late-learner, and the rest, could
never be accurately fitted into any of those
round or square holes which are prepared for
abstractions. They are not ideal men, in each
of whom a quality is personified; they are
real, and therefore complex. Moreover they
have been regarded, not from the philoso-
pher’s, but from the artist’s point of view;
they have not been analysed, but drawn as
they strike the eye, in such wise that the laws
of anatomy are of less moment than the rules
of perspective. Now, as Petersen himself has
conclusively shown elsewhere, the genuine-
ness of all thirty Characters rests upon the
same evidence. No hypothesis of their origin
can be accepted which will not apply to every
one of them. If, then, the derivation from a
formal work on morals appears unlikely for
some chapters, it must be pronounced unlikely
for all. |

The second difficulty involved in the
view which we are discussing arises from the
style of the Characters generally. Would
descriptions of this kind have been admitted
into a philosophical work? Petersen has

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 29

met this objection fairly, though not, as it ap-
pears to us, victoriously. Theophrastus merely
wished, he says, to embody each fault, with the
utmost truth and clearness, in a person who
should be typical of a class. If the resulting
portraits ‘move laughter rather than indigna-
tion, this is due partly to the nature of the
subject, partly to that of the author. Most
of the qualities described are such as hurt
the possessor more than anyone else; and
Theophrastus seems to have had a very
keen sense of the ridiculous. To these
remarks we readily assent; but they do not
appear to meet the case. The difficulty is,
not that the descriptions are amusing, but
that they, are written as if their principal
aim was to amuse. No one would object
to philosophical truths receiving humorous
illustration. But when a delineation of cha-
racter has been so worked up that every sen-
tence is a point ora witticism, its fitness to
illustrate general truths is spoilt by the in-
terest of its details. A writer whose first ob-
ject was to show by examples how certain
principles work, would do ill if he set before
the imagination a mass of particulars so hu-

3° INTRODUCTION.

morous that the thought of principles must
at least be undermost. :

Petersen contends, however, that passages
similar in style to the Characters are actu-
ally found in Aristotle’s Ethics. We will
now turn to these, and inquire how far the
resemblance goes.

Analogy of ‘The first passage in which he discovers an
passages in .
the Nicom. approach to the manner of Theophrastus is
As the discussion upon Courage (Z£¢%4. WN. IV.
racters e- §—Q), We translate the remarks which he
cites:—(1) ‘The rash are headlong, and,
though ready enough before dangers, yet in
dangers fall away; but the courageous are in
action keen, and, before it, quiet: Ath. NV. Iv.
7. (2) ‘Regular troops turn cowards when
, the peril becomes pressing and they are infe-
rior in numbers or equipment. They are the
first to run away?’ Iv. 8. (3) ‘Such’ (ie.
occasions of sudden death) ‘are especially the
chances of war; not but that the courageous
man is fearless also at sea:’ Iv.6. And (4)
from the comparison of Intemperance with
Cowardice, Iv. 12: ®Such things distract the
mind with pain, so that men throw away their

arms and otherwise incur disgrace.’

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 31

Aristotle refers here to particular occa-
sions on which cowardice is displayed, and
even to particular acts which the coward does.
But these are referred to in general terms,
and in direct connexion with the general laws
which they exemplify. Turn now to the
chapter on Cowardice in the Characters of
Theophrastus. It consists of two little sto-
ries, each elaborated to the highest point,
and set off with a profusion of lively details.
The first runs thus:—‘The Coward is one
- who, on a voyage, will protest that the pro-
montories are privateers; and, if a high sea
gets up, will ask if there is anyone on board
who has not been initiated. He will put up
his head and ask the steersman ‘if he is half-
way yet’; remarking to the person sitting
next him that ‘a dream makes him feel un-
easy’; and he will take off his tunic and give
it to a slave; or he will beg them to set him
ashore.’ :

Is it easy to suppose this embodied in a
work similar to the Nicomachean Ethics ?

But more stress is laid by Petersen on two
other cases,—the delineations of the Magni-
ficent and of the Magnanimous Man. From

32 INTRODUCTION.

the former he makes this extract :—‘ There are
cases of expenditure which we call honour-
able; for instance, the presentation to the
gods of offerings, temple-furniture, sacrifices ;
all things, in like manner, which concern the
divine nature generally, or which are subjects
of honourable rivalry in regard to the common
weal; as when men deem in any case that
_ they are bound to put a chorus on the stage,
to equip a trireme, or perhaps to feast the
town, in splendid style ... In private life [the
occasions for magnificence] are those which
occur but once,—a marriage, for instance, or
anything of that kind,—and those which ex-
cite the interest of the whole community, or
of its most respected members ; preparations,
again, for the reception or for the departure
of guests ; and the making or the recompens-
ing of gifts. It also belongs to the Magnifi-
cent Man to furnish his house suitably to his
wealth.’ (£724. IV. 2.)

With the particulars of this statement
Petersen compares some special points in the
three chapters of Theophrastus on Penurious-
ness, Meanness, and Avarice. But a safer
mode of proceeding is surely to compare the

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 33

general style of the passage in Aristotle with
the general style of any one of these. Take,
for example, the first few sentences of the
chapter on Meanness:—‘The Mean Man is
one who, having gained the prize in a tragic
contest, will dedicate a wooden scroll to Dio-
nysus, having had it inscribed with his own
name. When subscriptions are being raised
in the ecclesia, he will rise.without saying a
word, and walk out of the assembly. When
he is celebrating his daughter's marriage, he
will sell the flesh of the animal sacrificed,
save what is due to the altar; and will hire
the attendants at the marriage festival on
condition that they find their own board.
When he is trierarch, he will spread the
steersman’s rugs under him upon the deck,
and put his own away. Here, as in the
former case, the difference between the two
kinds of writing is well seen. Aristotle, bent
on illustrating principles, touches on facts by
the way. Theophrastus, studying to produce
a picture, combines groups of facts within a
framework which is itself scarcely observed.
It remains to consider the passage upon
which Petersen chiefly relies,—the famous de-

3

34 INTRODUCTION.

scription of the Magnanimous Man, which he
pronounces ‘most like of all, both in matter
and in manner,’ to the Characters. Eth. N.
Iv. 3:—‘ Nowthe Magnanimous Man despises
others justly...It is of his nature to confer
benefits, but he is ashamed to receive them.
He seems, also, to remember whom he has
benefited, but not those from whom he has
received benefits. Again, it is characteristic
of him to ask no favours, or to ask them
reluctantly, but to do a service readily; to
show himself haughty to men of rank or for-
tune, but kindly to those of middle station....
He will not court objects of common ambi-
tion, or go where others are foremost....He
will be inactive and dilatory save where there
is question of great honour or of a great work;
he will engage in few things, but these shall
be great and famous. He must needs be
frank, too, in his hatreds and in his likings:
for disguise belongs to fear....He will speak
and act openly....He will be ironical to the
many...not prone to admire...not apt to bear
a grudge...no gossip...Nor, again, is he lavish
of praise ; and for the same reason he speaks
no evil; not even of his enemies, unless it be

ORIGIN OF THE BOOR. 35

to show his scorn....Again he is apt to pos-
sess beautiful and unfruitful things rather than
those which yield fruit and profit; for this
better becomes an independent man. Slow
movement, also, deep tones, deliberate speech,
seem to become the man of a great soul...
Such, then, is the Magnanimous Man.’

Is it true that ‘this description is removed
only by the smallest interval from those of
Theophrastus’; and that ‘the differences are
in things which must, if the nature of his
genius is considered, have given rise to his
style of description’ ?

In the first place it should be noticed that
the above extract, which we have given as
Petersen gives it, does not accurately represent
the general tenor of the passage. To every
special characteristic of the Magnanimous
Man Aristotle subjoins, as usual, a statement
of the principle on which it depends. Thus
to the remark that ‘it is his character to con-
fer benefits, but he is ashamed to receive
them,’ is added, ‘for the one becomes a supe-
rior, the other an inferior’; and so, through-
out, each action has its theory appended to
it. The complexion of the entire passage is

I—2

36 INTRODUCTION.

therefore very different from that of the epi-
tome. It is not simply a series of picturesque
instances. These instances are ranged upon
a groundwork of connected reasonings; and
it is never for a moment obscure that the
artistic purpose is secondary to the philoso-
phical. If in the next place we consider the
terms in which the particular actions of the
Magnanimous Man are described, the differ-
ence between Aristotle and Theophrastus will
again be clear. These terms are always ge-
neral. The Magnanimous Man ‘shows him-
self haughty to men of rank or fortune.’ When
Theophrastus is describing Arrogance, he is
not content with saying that the Arrogant
Man is haughty to all the world. ‘The Arro-
gant Man,’ he tells us, ‘is one who will say to
a person who is in a hurry that he will see
him after dinner when he is taking his walk,
Aristotle says that the Magnanimous Man
‘will not court objects of common ambition.’
Theophrastus would have told us that such
a person scorns to walk through the Market-
place in his spurs, or to speak of the privilege
which Antipater has conferred upon him of
exporting timber free of duty.

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 37

To conclude: The theory that the Charac-
ters are extracts from a philosophical work
appears to us improbable for two reasons.
First, because of the subjects of certain chap-
ters. Secondly, because of the style of all;
and the latter objection cannot be overcome
by a comparison of passages in the Nico-
machean Ethics. |

In the course of an attempt to examine
several views of this question, it has been im-
possible to do full justice to the learning and
ability with which Dr. Petersen has urged his
own. It is an opinion which has struck deep
root in Germany; which many of her foremost
scholars in recent times have asserted or allow-
ed; and which will probably remain the general
faith about the Characters of Theophrastus,
We have endeavoured to give fairly the sub-
stance of the chief arguments for it, and to
explain why they do not satisfy us. If, then,
the theory of an independent book and the
theory of extracts are both to be rejected,
what hypothesis remains? We will suggest in
as few words as possible that solution of the
question which appears to us least improbable. vere

Theophrastus wrote from time to time, for “Ayporhesis.

38 INTRODUCTION.

his own amusement and that of his friends,
short sketches of characters common in every-
day life, allowing free scope in these to his
gift for lively satire. These playful pieces
were handed about in his intimate circle, but
were never formed into a regular book ; either
because sketches so desultory did not readily
lend themselves to a plan and an arrange-
ment, and their author did not care to force
them ; or because he thought pieces so slight
unworthy of his reputation and of his position
as Aristotle’s successor. At his death these
several pieces, already famous among a few,
passed into a wider currency than had been
permitted to them during his life. Copies
were multiplied; but some contained more
pieces, some fewer ; in some a particular piece
was given at greater extent than in others.
For there was no authentic volume to which
appeal could be made ; the sketches had been
circulated privately, and not necessarily all
together; no public edition had furnished a
standard text, or stamped the collection as a
definite whole. Thus may be explained the
circumstance which has already been noticed
as adverse to Ast’s theory of an independent

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 39

book; and which Zeller notices as favourable
to the theory of extracts,—the looseness of
the manuscript tradition. Thus, too, the ab-
sence of symmetry in the contents ; for either
Theophrastus, writing as fancy prompted,
may have dwelt most largely upon certain
characters in which the materials for descrip-
tion were peculiarly full and rich; or part of
what he wrote about others may have been
left out in the copies from which ours have
come. Lastly the order in which the chapters
are arranged, which can hardly have been due
to the author’s design, but which yet has an-
cient authority, is intelligible if it represents
the order into which the sketches chanced to
have fallen in one or more of the collections
made soon after the death of Theophrastus,
and which, as being known to date nearly from
his time, was respected by the Alexandrian
grammarians. With these advantages the
view just suggested combines the chief recom-
mendation of that which supposes the Cha-
racters to represent an independent book
published by Theophrastus. It justifies the
grotesque subjects of some chapters, and
the pointedly humorous style of all, on the

40 INTRODUCTION.

plain ground that these sketches were written
for their own sake, and were never episodes
of a graver work’.

rhea of be But whatever view may be held regarding
Uer LANA. e244 -
The proem. the origin of the book, on one point there can

be no doubt; as we possess it, it bears the
marks of a later hand. This hand is seen in
the proem, in the clauses added at the end of
certain chapters, and probably in some of the
definitions. The common consent of critics
has long pronounced the proem spurious.
Theophrastus is made to say in it that he
is about to record the experience of ninety

1 It may be mentioned, merely as an illustration, not of
course as an argument from analogy, that the history here
supposed for the Characters of Theophrastus was in fact nearly
that of a similar book in modern times, Earle’s Microcosmo-
graphie. In the notice ‘To the Reader Gentile or Gentle’
Earle says: ‘I haue for once aduentur’d to playe the Mid-
wife’s part, helping to bring forth these Infants into the
World, which the Father would haue smoothered : who hauing
left them lapt vp in loose Sheets, as soon as his Fancy was
deliuered of them ; written especially for his Private Recrea-
tion, to passe away the time in the Country, and by the
forcible request of Friends drawne from him; Yet passing
seuerally from hand to hand in written Copies, grew at length
to be a prety number in a little Volume ; and among so many
sundry dispersed Transcripts, some very imperfect and sur-
reptitious had like to-haue past the Presse, if the Author had
not vsed speedy meanes of prevention.’

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 41

years and nine—a startling statement, made
apparently in the belief that his great age
would be most impressive if it were put just
short of the century. Diogenes says that
Theophrastus died at eighty-five. The asser-
tion in the proem has, indeed, thus much of
internal evidence in its favour—that some of
the sentiments found in that composition
are strongly suggestive of second childhood.
‘ Often before now,’ says the writer, ‘have I
applied my thoughts to the puzzling question

—one, probably, which will puzzle me for
- ever—why it is that, while all Greece lies
under the same sky, and all the Greeks are
educated alike, it has befallen us to have cha-
racters variously constituted.’ It is not of
great moment to inquire why the proem pro-
mises descriptions of good as well as of bad
men. There may have been a vague tradi-
tion that the book once included sketches of
virtues corresponding to those of the vices ;
or this may have been the private opinion of
the literary forger. Accordingly he wrote
such a preface as he conceived that the book
might, in its complete state, have had’.

1 Petersen has used the undoubted spuriousness of the

42 INTRODUCTION.

Clauses. Six chapters’ end with clauses which are.
not only feeble in themselves, but are foreign
to the style of the Characters. It is now
generally believed that they were added by
some one who could not perceive that the
quiet humour of the descriptions was spoilt
by hortatory comments. One only of the
number—the paragraph added to the sketch
of the Newsmaker—has a faint tinge of the
manner of Theophrastus ; but it betrays itself
by its general tone, and especially by the
opening and concluding sentences. Another
case—the brief addition to the chapter on qr-
Notrovnpia—might admit of doubt; but this
again will be condemned if the test of general
style is applied.

The Defi- The spurious element in the Definitions

nitions. cannot be so easily separated; for, even if the

proem as an argument against the original unity of the book.
The forger added it, he thinks, ‘ut speciem hae unitatis ha-
berent laciniae.’ I abstained above (pp. 17 ff.) from using this
argument, because it seemed to me two-edged. Suppose
that, in the forger’s time, it was known that the Characters
- had once formed a single book, and that this book had had a
proem, which was no longer extant. The desire of restoring
it would have been motive enough for the forgery.
1 In this ed., nos. v. (usually I.), XVI. (VI.), XVIII (I1I.),
XX. (VIII.), XXI. (XXVIII.), XXX. (XXIX)..

—h

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. | 43

text were always certain, the fitness of the
definition to the subject, which has generally
been made a principal test of authenticity, is
a question on which opinions differ endlessly.
We will not venture to do more than state
our impression that some of the definitions
stand just, some nearly, as Theophrastus wrote
them ; that some have been mutilated more
seriously; and that a few have been added by
a later hand to chapters which the author had
perhaps left without any definition.
If it is asked when and by whom the Date and
author of
proem and clauses were probably added, she inter
Petersen’s conjecture appears very probable,— #4"
that they are due to a rhetorician of the
second or third century of the Christian era.
He supposes that the same person extracted
the Characters from the Ilepi "H@av, and
therefore places him earlier than Diogenes
Laertius (circ. 210 A.D), to whom they were
known as forming a separate book. But, if the
Characters are not supposed to be extracts, it
is unimportant whether the interpolator lived
before or after that writer. The age of the
Ptolemies, and the second and third Christian
centuries, are known to have been periods in

Arrange-
ment of the
Characters.

44 INTRODUCTION.

which literary frauds were common. An Alex-
andrian forger of the earlier period, however,
would probably have done his work more
neatly and more cautiously than the author of
the proem; and it seems more likely that he
should be assigned to the later period. It is
quite possible that he may have been a rheto-
rician, since the study of the leading types of
character, 76, was so much used in the rhe-
torical schools; but this likelihood is hardly
much strengthened by the fact which Petersen
notices, that all the MSS. which contain the
Characters contain also rhetorical writings.
What is spurious in the definitions can hardly
be attributed to any one man, but must have
come in gradually.

It has already been said that the order of
the Characters, as they follow each other in
the manuscripts, shows no attempt at method;
and it has been suggested how this order may
have arisen. To the reader it is intolerably
inconvenient. Many of the Characters are
separated from each other by differences so

_ fine that they cannot easily be distinguished

unless they are placed side by side. But the
usual arrangement, instead of helping such

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 45

comparison, makes it as difficult as possible.
The chapters have been thoroughly shuffled.
Those on Flattery and on Complaisance are
respectively nos. 2 and 5: those on Garrulity
and Loquacity, 3 and 7; those on Penurious-
ness, Meanness, and Avarice, 10, 22, and 30;
and so throughout. Thus a person who reads
the Characters consecutively is troubled with
a sense that the same traits are perpetually
recurring ; but cannot, unless he often pauses
and turns back, keep their several combi-
nations clearly before him. In an edition
published in 1852, Mr Sheppard made an Skepara's
effort to remedy the evil. He combined the Qon,-
Characters into eight groups, having regard to
the general principle which he recognised as
common to each group. This was a great
improvement. His classification seems to us,
however, liable to one objection. It is “00
‘scientific. In the endeavour to connect a
group of characters by the principle which is
their common root, he has sometimes over-
looked strong resemblances which lie on the
surface, and which, in sketches like these,
form the practically important affinities. For
instance, he classes Arrogance with Boasting,

46 INTRODUCTION.

Petty Ambition, and Late-learning, because
deep down in all these may be found Egotism;
but Surliness with Grumbling, Distrustfulness,
and Evilspeaking, because at the root of these
is an ‘organic moroseness of temper.’ But—
to pass over the question whether these
ground principles are right—has not Surliness,
as described by Theophrastus, so much in
common with Arrogance that each will be
understood better if viewed by the light of
the other ?

The arrangement which we have ourselves
adopted is less ambitious. It does not seek
to carry generalisation higher than the small
groups into which the Characters obviously
fall, and aims merely at placing these in a
practically convenient order. Three objects
have been kept in view. (1) The juxtaposi-
tion of Characters closely akin, e.g. Penu-
riousness, Meanness, Avarice. (2) The juxta-
position of such as present a direct contrast,
e.g. the Oligarch and the Patron of Rascals ;
the Ironical Man and the Boaster. (3) Gene-
ral continuity, as far as anything of the kind
can be obtained. For example, Irony being
from one point of view allied to Arrogance,

ORIGIN OF THE BOOK. 47

the Ironical man serves to break the transi-
tion from the Arrogant man, who precedes,
to the Boaster who follows him. Inthe same
way the Late-learner bridges the chasm be-
tween Petty Ambition and Unseasonableness.
The Stupid Man forms a sort of link between
the Offensive Man (the dull neglecter of his
person) and the Boor. The Grumbler, with
his murmurs against all the world, conducts
us from the Evilspeaker to the Distrustful
Man, who ‘presumes that all men are unjust.’
In two places only are there absolute breaks,
viz. after Avarice and after Superstition ; for
Surliness has to Complaisance the affinity of
contrast. To prevent any inconvenience in
referring to other editions, the usual number-
ing is given side by side with our own in the
list of the Characters.

48 INTRODUCTION.

IT.

THEOPHRASTUS AND SOME OF HIS
IMITATORS.

THE sketches of Theophrastus form perhaps
the earliest extant example of a kind of writing
which has been popular ever since, and which,
in modern Europe especially, has an immense
literature of its own. Even an outline of the
history of character-writing in its chief de-
velopements would require more space and
much wider knowledge than are at our com-
mand. . But it may not be _ uninteresting
briefly to compare Theophrastus with one or .
two of the modern writers who have taken
him as their master, or who resemble him in
the form of their work. The chief, or among
the chief, of these are Hall, Earle, Overbury,
and La Bruyére.
Style of The method of Theophrastus is'to consider
Theophras- : j : ;
dye: a quality as embodied in a representative
man, and to describe it by a simple enume-
- ration of actions which this man will do.

THEOPHRASTUS AND SOME IMITATORS. 49

Classes or types of character can thus be
sketched in bold, clear outline. But fine por-
traiture is not possible under such conditions.
The subtler parts of character are scarcely
the same in any two men; and a portrait
which is to give only those traits which are
common to a class cannot be at the same
time the accurate and intimate likeness of an
individual. Again, these subtler characteris-
tics are seen not so much in particular actions
as in the relations of one action to another;
and, if minute inferences from these are to be
sure, the induction must be large. A novelist
is able to develope tolerably complete theories
of character because he takes a long series of
connected actions, But even then bare recital
is not sufficient; the less obvious relations
between different parts of conduct need to be
interpreted for ordinary readers. In a first-
rate novel the characters are left to speak as
much as possible for themselves; but when
there is risk of their meaning being missed or
only half-seen, help is given by comment;
and, as they are gradually worked out, there
is from time to time a pause in which whole
stages of developement are reviewed. In the

4

50 INTRODUCTION.

hands of a master this is perhaps the highest
form of character-drawing. If it is contrasted
with sketches such as those of Theophrastus
it will be seen more clearly how and why
these are rudimentary. Here we have a bare
enumeration of actions not necessarily can-
nected.

Yet this style, if incompatible with work
of the highest kind, has excellences proper
to it; and in attaining these Theophrastus
seems to have been successful. First of them,
perhaps, is definiteness. Illustrations from
social life are so apt to be vague that it is
important for the author to start with a very
clear conception of the character which he
means to draw, and to take care that the out-
lines do not become hazy. They will inevit-
ably become so, unless he chooses incidents
in which the quality to be exemplified is not
only present but predominant. In this re-
spect Theophrastus will, if closely studied, be
found usually accurate. Thus the Penurious,
Mean, and Avaricious men are described with-
out any confusion of the ideas distinctive of
each, and without the special significance of
their respective actions being lost in the strong

THEOPHRASTUS AND SOME IMITATORS. §1

general resemblance. The same clearness of
conception will be seen on comparing the
portraits of the Garrulous and Loquacious
men. The only instance of a certain vague-
ness seems to us to be the chapter on Un-
pleasantness; but this, very likely, is only
because we have not got the right point of
view.

The next essential in a sketch of this sort
seems to be that it should combine, as far
as may be, generality with individuality. It
must: be characteristic of a class, and must at
the same time be so lively as to set before us
a particular man whom we can see. Here,
again, Theophrastus seems very good. He
hits the mean between abstract statement
and details which. might suit this or that per-
son, but which would rob the picture of its
generic interest. He effects this, indeed, at
the cost of subtlety; but this is a necessity
of the style. In a style less cramping, an
English writer has reached this special excel-
lence in a far higher degree than Theophras-
tus did, or perhaps any one who ever lived.
One of the most striking things in the ‘ Book
of Snobs’ and in some of the ‘Sketches and

4—2

Modern
Character-
writers.

52 INTRODUCTION.

Travels in London’ is the length to which
individualisation had been carried without
spoiling the claims of the personages to be
typical. |

Lastly, a book like the Characters ought
to have humour. As no direct comment is
admitted, the facts must be presented in such
a light and (as far as possible) in such a
connection that they shall comment upon
themselves. Theophrastus does not fail here,
though, as a rule, his humour is somewhat
broad. The best examples of it are, in our
opinion, the Chapters on the Newsmaker and
on the Boastful Man.

The Latin translation of the Characters
by Casaubon, published in 1592, and his com-
mentary which appeared six years later, pro-
bably gave an impulse to the taste among
scholars for this kind of writing; though it
was not unknown before’. The seventeenth
century in England was especially rich in it.

1 Rimbault, in the Introduction to his edition of Over-
bury (p. rt), mentions ‘two small tracts descriptive of the
characters of rogues and knaves—‘“‘ The Fraternitye of Vaca-
bondes,” 1565; and ‘‘ A Caveat for Common Cursetors vul-
garely called Vagabones, set forth by Thomas Harman,” 1567.’

THEOPHRASTUS AND SOME IMITATORS. 53

There was, in one particular, a rough analogy
between the literature of that century in Eng-
land and the Greek literature of the age of
Theophrastus ; both were marked by the re-
action from creating to analysing’, and in
both ethical analysis was a favourite subject.
Fifty-six ‘characters’ or books of characters,
published between the years 1605 and 1700,
are enumerated by Dr Bliss?’ in his edition of
Earle ; and at a later time he had increased
this list fourfold. The book of Theophrastus
may fairly be considered as the parent of all
these ; for in the earliest of them which be-
came popular it is expressly cited as the
model. Hall’s ‘Characterismes of Vertues and eli.

1 The general intellectual characteristics of the period
early in which Theophrastus lived are thus described by
Heyne, in an essay de genio seculi Ptolemacorum, printed in
his Opuscula (I. 3). ‘Legere litus, radere humum pennis
dixeris, non facile alto se committere aut sublime ferzi...
Nullus itaque vehementior impetus, quo animus legentes iu-
cunde impellatur ac perturbetur, nulla inventorum fecunditas
aut sententiarum copia, aut numerosa oratio, quae omnia a
divino illo spiritu incalescentibus adesse solent. Limpidos et
amoenos rivulos per prata properare videas, non magnum ac
vastum flumen devolvi.’

* Quoted by Arber in the Introduction to his edition of
Earle’s Microcosmographie, in the English Reprints, p. 7.

54 INTRODUCTION.

Vices’ was published in 1608. In the ‘Pro-
ceme’ to the First Book he says:—‘I have
heere done it as I could, following that an-
cient Master of Moralitie, who thought this
the fittest taske for the ninetie-and-ninth
yeere of his age’. It will be seen presently
how often Hall was indebted in details to
Theophrastus ; but the broad differences are
far more striking. |
In the first place, Hall’s method differs
from that of his Greek exemplar in this im-
portant respect, in which he seems to have
set the fashion to the English school. He
does not merely describe certain actions pro-
per to a character, but comments upon it in
general terms; aiming at epigram, pointed
expressions, lively images. For example,
Theophrastus begins—‘ The Flatterer is a per-
son who will say as he walks with another,
“Do you observe how people are looking at
you ?”’etc.; and the chapter is throughout a
simple narrative of his sayings and doings.
Hall:—‘ The Flatterer is bleareyed to ill, and
cannot see vices; and his tongue walks euer
in one tracke of unjust praises, and can no
1 See p. 40.

THEOPHRASTUS AND SOME IMITATORS. 55

more tell how to discommend than to speake
true...His Art is nothing but delightfull co-
_ zenage, whose rules are smoothing and garded
with periurie...Like that subtle fish, he turnes
himselfe into the colour of every stone...He
is the moth of liberal mens coats, the eare-
wig of the mightie, the bane of Courts, a
friend and a slave to the trencher, and good
for nothing but to be a factor for the Diuell.’
The prevalent taste for strained conceits
found ample scope in delineations of charac-
ter such as these. Hall is, however, less af-
fected and wearisome in this way than some of
-his successors. The discursive element bears -
a large proportion to the descriptive, but does
not overpower it.

He is further distinguished from Theo-
phrastus by a gravity both of subject and of |
manner. The qualities described by the Greek
writer are for the most part rather ridiculous
than repulsive; the Evilspeaker is the most
seriously odious person whom he has por-
trayed. But among the vices described by
Hall are Hypocrisy, Profanity, Envy. Among
the representatives of ‘vertues’ are the Wise
man, the Faithful, the Truly-noble. The

56 INTRODUCTION.

blame and the praise awarded to these are
uttered with an earnestness, often with a fer-
vour, in which the voice of the preacher is
heard above that of the essayist. To judge
him on the evidence of this book alone, Hall
was a man of warm disposition, of much
tender and noble feeling ; ingenious, but not
very subtle; and with no especial qualifica-
tion for his task beyond a fancy fertile in
illustration. His language would at times
rise into something like the stately music of
Milton’s prose, did not the love of petty con-
ceits too soon dwarf it and drag it down.
This, for instance, in the portrait of the Wise
Man:

‘His free discourse runnes backe to the
ages past, and recouers euents out of memory,
and then preuenteth Tyme in flying forward
to future things; and comparing one with the
other can giue a verdict well-neere propheti-
call: wherein his conjectures are better than
another’s judgements.’

And this in the Faithful character:

‘The celestiall spirits do not scorne his
company, yea his service. Hee deales in
these wordly affaires as a stranger, and hath

THEOPHRASTUS AND SOME IMITATORS. 57

his heart euer at home: without a written
warrant hee dare doe nothing, and with it,
anything. His warre is perpetuall, without
truce, without intermission; and his victorie
certaine: hee meets with the infernall powers,
and tramples them vnder feet. The shield
that he euer beares before him can neither
be missed nor pierced: if his hand be wound-
ed, yet. his heart is safe: he is often tripped,
seldome foiled ; and if sometimes foiled, neuer
vanquished.’ |

This talent for rhetoric sometimes carries
Hall beyond the bounds of just description.
But the commonest blemish of his style is
a straining after antithesis. Thus the disre-
gard of the Faithful man for his irreligious
parents is called a ‘holy carelessness,’

Lastly, there is one example in Hall of an
innovation upon the plan of Theophrastus,
which later character-writers made more
largely. In ‘the Good Magistrate’ he de-
scribes the representative, not merely of cer-
tain moral qualities, but of the qualities pro-
per for a certain office. By far the greater
part of Overbury’s and Earle’s sketches are
of this kind, treating of the characteristics of

58 INTRODUCTION.

a certain station or calling: e.g. ‘An Ostler’:
‘A Pyrate’: ‘An Elder Brother’: ‘A Sexton.’
Overbury has in some instances pushed this
style to the extreme of grotesqueness,’as in
his character of A Drunken Dutchman Resi-
dent in England.

With these differences of plan, method,
and tone Hall is yet a real disciple of Theo-
phrastus. Every sketch contains passages in
which the concise narrative manner of the
Greek writer is closely copied. The chapters
on the Busiebodie and on the Slothfull Man
are perhaps the best instances. Besides this
general imitation, a great number of par-
ticular touches have been borrowed. One or
two examples will suffice to show how directly
they have been taken :—

THEOPHRASTUS. HALL.

The Flatterer. The Flatterer.

The Flatterer is a When hee walks with
person who will say as __his friend hee sweares to
he walks with another, him that no man els is
‘Do you observe how looked at.
people are looking at
you ?’

The Penurious Man. The Covetous.

When a servant has If his servant breake

THEOPHRASTUS AND SOME IMITATORS. 59

THEOPHRASTUS.

broken a pot or a plate
he will take the value
out of his rations.

The Offictous Man.

He will undertake to
show the path, and after
all be unable to find the
way.

The Distrustful Man.

The Distrustful Man
is one who, having sent
his slave to market, will
send another to ascer-
tain what price he gave.

HALL,

but an earthen dish for
want of light, hee abates

‘It out of his quarters

wages.
The Busie-bodie.
This man will also
thrust himself forward to
be the guide of the way
he knowes not.

The Distrustfull.
When hee hath com-
mitted a message to his
seruant, he sends a se-
cond after him to listen
how it is deliuered.

Sir Thomas Overbury’s ‘Characters or Overbury
Witty Descriptions of the Properties of Sun-
dry Persons’ was published in 1614. Out of

1 The ‘Characters’ were attached to his poem of 4 W2fe,
now a Widdowe. The date 1614 is given by Arber, Introd.
to Earle’s Microcosmographie, p. 8, and by Rimbault in his
Introd. to Overbury’s Works, p. 13. It must be by an over-
sight that, in Arber’s table of the chief events during Earle’s
life, the date is given as 1616. Rimbault says that with the
exception of two small tracts of 1565 and 1567, ‘Overbury
claims the distinction of being the earliest writer of Characters
which this country can boast’ (#5. p.11). He overlooks
Hall, who came between in 1608.

60 INTRODUCTION.

eighty sketches only ten can be reckoned as
descriptive of intrinsic character. The rest
are concerned with such peculiarities as are
brought out by certain occupations or posi-
tions in life. These are curious as illustrating
manners, of which Overbury was a quick ob-
server, and which he could represent with
lively skill. For the delineation of character
in the proper sense he had little talent. Tricks
of behaviour and speech caught his eye; but
his reflections are generally trivial, and he
had not a fine perception of moral differences.
Thus in his chapter on A Proud Man he has
confused the characteristics of Haughtiness
and Vanity, which could hardly exist in such
a union as he depicts. Hall, whose acuteness
was not his strongest point, shows oftener and
with less effort an insight into the springs of
action. The elaborate quaintness of Over-
bury’s language and his faculty for pointed
expression render this defect more conspi-
cuous. The novelty of the manner is fre-
quently out of proportion to the originality
of the idea. His thoughts seem overdressed ;
and this, together with the sometimes coarse
vehemence of the satire, often gives a vulgar

THEOPHRASTUS AND SOME IMITATORS. 61

air to his writing. Hallam pronounces the
‘Faire and happy Milk-mayd’ the best of his
characters. It is very pretty, but somewhat
too conventional; and to us there seems-to
be more true poetry in the similar picture of
the Franklin. It would seem as if country
life in its humbler phases had had a peculiar
attraction for Overbury; that his sympathy
was not extended to squires is shown by the
portrait of the Country Gentleman.

A touch in his description of A Covetous
Man suggests that he had made a minute
study of Hall. ‘He neuer spends candle but
at Christmas...in hope that his seruants will
breake glasses for want of light, which they
doubly pay for in their wages.’ Compare
Hall’s, ‘If his servant breake but an earthen
dish for want of light, he abates it out of his
quarters wages.’ Whether he had read Theo-
phrastus or not is less certain. In two places
there are curious but not conclusive resem-
blances :—

THEOPHRASTUS. OVERBURY.

The Penurious Man. A Covetous Man.
He is apt also to en- If he euer pray, it

Earle.

62 INTRODUCTION.

THEOPHRASTUS. OVERBURY.
force the night of dis- is that some one may
training. breake his day, that the
beloued forfeiture may
be obtained.
The Arrogant Man. A Proud Man.
He will not permit He never _ salutes

himself to give any man first.
the first greeting.

A more interesting comparison is sug-
gested by Earle’s ‘Microcosmographie, or a
Piece of the World Discovered.’ The book
contains seventy-eight characters, fifty-four of
which appeared in 1628, twenty-three in the
following year, and one in 1633. The name
of the author was never formally announced,
but it was known at the time that he was John
Farle, then a Fellow of Merton College, Oxford.
He was in his twenty-eighth year when the
first instalment of the Characters was pub-
lished in 1628. Of the whole number, about
thirty are properly ethical; the rest are of
the same class as those which compose seven-
eighths of Overbury’s work, and in which the
persons are viewed not as possessors of cer-
tain qualities but as players of certain parts

THEOPHRASTUS AND SOME IMITATORS. 63

in life. Earle is not so thoroughly at home
with men of all sorts and conditions as Over-
bury, who had probably seen far more of
the world; nor are his reflections mingled so
largely as those of Hall with bits of pic-
turesque narrative which point their own
moral, But as an analyst of human nature
he is immeasurably superior to either. Theo-
phrastus, whose severely simple plan allowed
little scope for subtlety, must also yield to ~
him in fine delineation. Earle was not merely
ingenious, but had a special gift for the study
of character; his humour is of a thoughtful
kind which goes beneath peculiarities of the
surface to their origin in a bent or warp of
the mind, for which it seeks to account; and
so, while Hall and Overbury describe traits
which are recognised as true and remark
smartly upon them, Earle helps us to see
why they are there, and gives us a sense of
comprehending the whole character better.
Thus, speaking of the way in which the flat-
terer ministers to his patron’s self-approbation,
Hall says :—

Conscience hath no greater adversarie; for
when she is about to play her iust part of accusa-

64 INTRODUCTION.

tion, he stops her mouth with good termes and
well-neere strangleth her with shifts.

This is a lively expression of the fact, but
does not get beyond it. Earle contrives at
once to state and to account for it :—

-He is one neuer chides you, but for your ver-
tues, as, You are too good, too honest, too reli-
gious; when his chiding may seeme but the earn-
ester commendation, and yet would faine chide
you out of them too: for your vice ts the thing he
has use of, and wherein you may best use him,
and hee is neuer more active than in the worst
diligences.

Of the relation of flattery to friendship,
Hall says :— |

Flatterie is nothing but false friendship, fawn-
ing hypocrisie, dishonest ciuilitie, base merchan-
dize of words, a plausible discord of the heart and
lips. , |

These ingenious phrases do nothing to-
wards defining wherein the contrast between
the flatterer and the friend consists. Earle
brings out clearly a particular point of the
contrast :-—

His looke, conuersation, companie, and all the
outwardnesse of friendshippe [are] more pleasing
by odds or a true friend dare take the liberty to

THEOPHRASTUS AND SOME IMITATORS. 65

bee sometimes offensiue ; whereas he is a great
deale more cowardly, and will not let the least
hold goe, for feare of losing you.

In his chapter on the Male-Content, Hall
makes this general remark upon the cha-
racter :—

Nothing dislikes him but the present: for what
hee condemned while it was, once past hee magni-
fies, and striues to recall it out of the iawes of
Time.

This, after all, tells us nothing that we
did not know before. Earle, describing a
Discontented man, makes an observation
which throws a real light on one of the causes
by which such a temper is commonly pro-
duced :—

He considered not the nature of the world till he
felt it, and all blowes fall on him heauier, because
they light not first on his expectation.

Overbury’s sketch of a Vaine-glorious
Coward in Command, and Earle’s of a Cow-
ard, both dwell chiefly on the bluster under
which Cowardice seeks to hide itself. The
bearing of the coward in society is thus
described by Overbury :—

No man can worse define betweene pride and
noble courtesie: he that salutes him not so farre

9

66 INTRODUCTION.

as a pistoll carries level, gives him the disgust or
affront, chuse you whether.

Earle places this same arrogance in a far
more amusing and instructive light:—

Wonderfull exceptious and cholerick where he
sees men are loth to giue him occasion, and you
cannot pacify him better than by quarrelling with
him. ..Men fall out with him of purpose to get

courtesies from him, and be brib’d againe to a
reconcilement.

A general comparison of Earle with the
other two English writers would show that as
a rule he has deeper feeling, more acuteness,
a finer humour. An instance of what we
mean by his deeper feeling occurs at the end
of the chapter on a Plaine Country Fellow.

For Death hee is neuer troubled, and tf hee get
in but his Haruest before, \et it come when it wil he
cares not.

This shows more sympathy with the man’s
inner life than would be found in Hall or
Overbury. Good examples of his humour
and sagacity are these remarks on the Inso-
lent Man:—

He is one that lookes on all men as if he
were very angry, but especially on those of his

THEOPHRASTUS AND SOME IMITATORS. 67

acquaintance, whom hee beates off with a surlier
distance, as men apt-to mistake him because they
haue known him. And for this cause he knowes
not you, till you haue told him your name, which
he thinkes he has heard, but forgot, and with much
adoe seems to recouer. . .No vice drawes with it a
more generall hostility, and makes men readier to
search into his faults, and of them, his beginning :
and no tale so vnlikely but is’ willingly heard of
him, and beleeu’d.

And these on the Suspitious or TIealous
Man :—

He is a fellow commonly guilty of some weak-
nesses, which he might conceale if hee were care-
lesse : Now his over-diligence to hide them, makes
men pry the more. Howsoever hee imagines you
have found him, and it shall goe hard but you must
abuse him whether you wil or no.

A close comparison of Earle with Theo-
phrastus would be unfair to both, since the
styles in which they respectively excelled
were distinct. But if it could be doubted that
Earle, a distinguished classical scholar, had
studied the Greek Characters then recently
made popular by Casaubon, two passages
would place it beyond a question:—

s—2

La
Bruyere.

68 INTRODUCTION.

THEOPHRASTUS.

The Avaricious Man.
It is just like him,
too, when he is paying a
debt of thirty minas, to
withhold four drachmas.

The Boor.

He shows surprise

and wonder at nothing:

else, but will stand still
and gaze when he sees
an OX Or an ass or a
goat in the streets.

EARLE.

A Sordid Rich Man.

Hee loues to pay
short a shilling or two
in a great sum, and is
glad to gaine that, when
he can no more.

A Flaine Country Fel-
low.

His mind is not much
distracted with obiects:
but if a goode fat Cowe
come in his way, he
stands dumbe and asto-
nisht, and though his
haste be neuer so great,
will fixe here halfe an
houre’s contemplation.

La Bruyére published in 1688" ‘ Les Carac-
teres, ou les Moeurs de ce Siécle,’ with a trans-
lation of the Characters of Theophrastus pre-

fixed to it.

He is generally reckoned as the

chief modern imitator of Theophrastus; but

1 The permission to print the book was obtained by
the printer Oct. 8, 1687 ; the book was published March 1o,
1688, according to M. Servois in his recent edition of La
Bruyére in the series Les Grands Ecrivains de la France,

vol. I. p. gf.

THEOPHRASTUS AND SOME IMITATORS. 69

though, like Hall, he acknowledges the
Greek writer as his master, he is not his dis-
ciple in the same sense. He borrows from
him the conception and the title, but not the
method of his work. The ‘Characters’ of
La Bruyére are a series of essays on the
manners of the day. Each of them treats
some large subject in a discursive style; one
is ‘de la société,” another ‘du mérite per-
sonnel,’ another ‘de la ville,’ and so forth.
These essays are here and there illustrated
with sketches of representative men, which
may, indeed, be compared with the characters
of Theophrastus, but are slighter and more
hastily drawn. Many of them are said to have
been portraits of the author’s contemporaries;
and the desire of making an unmistakeable
personal allusion seems to have been often
stronger than that of illustrating principles.
Among the best are Arséne, in the essay
‘Des Ouvrages de Il’Esprit,—the gloomy
genius who belongs to a mutual-admiration
society ;—Phédon, in the ‘Des Biens de For-
tune, —the ostentatiously humble, but sinister
man ;—and Cydias, in the ‘De la Société,’—
the suggestive talker by profession.

7° INTRODUCTION.

The freer plan of La Bruyére’s work, and
the more diversified society from which he
drew his materials, enabled him to give it an
interest far more varied than the Characters
of Theophrastus can claim. Hallam’s deci-
sion that ‘the Greek writer, with no contempt-
ible degree of merit, has been incomparably
surpassed by his imitator’,’ is in this sense
just; but it must be remembered that the two
works cannot be regarded as performances
competing in the same line of excellence.
Each has his merit, and that of La Bruyére is
in perhaps the higher walk; but for this uey
reason a direct rivalry is impossible.

The French version of Theophrastus is
spirited, but is for the most part little more
than a paraphrase; and shows that La Bru-
yere’s conception of a translator’s duties was
as loose as his knowledge of Greek appears to
have been imperfect®, The great success,

1 Introduction to the Literature of Europe, part Iv. ch. 4,
§ 52.

2 In the Character of édyzua6la (D’Une Tardive Instruc-
tion, no. vi. in our Translation) the words xal rapa rod
viob pavOdvew 7d éwt Sdpu Kal éml dowlda xal éx odpdy are
thus rendered :—‘ I] apprende de son propre fils les évolutions
qu'il faut faire dans les rangs & droit ou & gauche, /e manie-

THEOPHRASTUS AND SOME IMITATORS. 71

however, of his book, which in six years went
through eight editions, did more than any-
thing before or since to make the name of
Theophrastus popular. Imitations were nume-
rous. One of these, Le 7. héophvraste Moderne,
attracted some notice on account of a curious
mystification of which it was the subject. A
pamphlet entitled ‘Sentimens Critiques sur
les Caractéres de Théophraste de Monsieur
de la Bruyére,’ appeared in 1701; in which that
work was reviewed in company with the
‘Modern Theophrastus, but far more severely
than the latter. In the same year was pub-
lished ‘l’Apologie de Monsieur de la Bru-

ment des armes, ec quel est Pusage & la guerre dela lance et du
bouclier.” La Bruyére did not see that rd éxt ddpu, ‘ Right
Wheel,’ etc., was already translated by ‘évolutions—% droit,’
etc.; and added the italicised words to express what he
thought to be the meaning of the Greek, ‘that which con-
cerns the spear and shield’; thus translating it twice over,
and the second time wrongly. M. Servois, his latest editor,
observes (p. 86, note 1), that no version which La Bruyére
can have had before him can have suggested this blunder: it
must have been his own. Again in the chapter on amoria
(De la Défiance, c. xx1i1. in our translation,) after the words
pddsora pev un Sotva, where the vulgate has a lacuna since
supplied by the Vatican ms., he inserts in his text a trans-
lation of ¢hree distinct conjectures made by Casaubon for the
purpose of filling the gap. He did not see, or did not care,
that they were proposed as alternatives.

72 INTRODUCTION.

yére; the anonymous author of this defence
took no notice, however, of the criticisms upon
the ‘Modern Theophrastus.’ It was presently
known that the ‘Modern Theophrastus,’ the
Criticism, and the Reply, were by the same
person, Brillon, a lawyer. He had done him-
self the honour of attacking his own book in
the society of La Bruyére’s; but had taken
care that it should not sustain such damage
as to require the services of an apologist’.

1 The story is told by M. Servois in his introduction to
the Caractéres, p. 99.

OEO®PAZTOY XAPAKTHPEZ.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. |

75
THE CHARACTERS.

(On the Order adopted here, see Introduction, page 43.)

PAGE
THE FLATTERER...........ccececeees I. usually II. 81
THE COMPLAISANT MAN ......... Te 0 aes V. 85
THE SURLY MAN  ..........cc cee eee Te = atau XV. 87
THE ARROGANT MAN ........... | ee XXIV. 89
THE IRONICAL MAN ............04 Ven. = aes I. gi
THE BOASTFUL MAN ...........000 Nips chasing XXIII. 95 -
THE MAN OF PETTY AMBITION VII. __....... XXI. 99
THE LATE-LEARNER .........ccc00- VIII. i... XXVII. 103
THE UNSEASONABLE MAN ...... | ©, Cree XII. 107
__HE OFFICIOUS MAN............00 >, TC XIII. 109
THE UNPLEASANT MAN .......... >, 4 ACerS XX. III
THE OFFENSIVE MAN ...........- Mile. - caiaves XIX.  «1I3
THE STUPID MAN ...........ccc000 AIT: awents XIV, 115
THE BOOK. cscusiuitsaccckuiseceies XIV. —...... Iv” Vy
, THE SHAMELESS MAN ........00.. > ae? Ix.” lat
THE RECKLESS MAN ............... AVI: | asec vi" 123
THE GROSS MAN...........ceceseeees XVIT. a... XI. 127
THE GARRULOUS MAAN ............ XVIII. ...... mm! 129
THE LOQUACIOUS MAN ............ >, | >, CP VII. 13K
THE NEWSMAKER .........0..00000: KX ich VIIL 138
THE EVIL-SPEAKER  ..........0s00 MAL. ° «axes XXVIII. 139
THE GRUMBLER .........0ccceeeceeee XXII. a... XVII. 143
THE DISTRUSTFUL MAN ......... XXIII. ...... XVITI 145
THE PENURIOUS MAN ............ XXIV. ....... >. od 147
THE MEAN MAN .........c..cccececees DAVE cceeds XXII. 151
THE AVARICIOUS MAN ............ XXVI._ a... XXX, 155
THE COWARD ....cecccscssceeessceees XXVII...... XXV. 159
THE SUPERSTITIOUS MAN......... AXVIIT. ....... XVI. 163
THE OLIGARCH  ........cccccesececes XXIX. XXVI. 167

THE PATRON OF RASCALS ...... XXX. a... XXIX. 171

, 76 @EO®PASTOY XAPAKTHPES,

[wr pooimov

non méev Kal mporepoy ToANaKIS emioTncas THY Sia-
vouay eOavpaca, iaws dé ovdé Travcopat Oavpatev, ti
yap Syrote tis ‘EdXados vird Tov avtdoy aépa Keipévns
Kal tavrev tov “EAAnvev opoiws Tradevopéevwv cupBe-
Bnxev nui ov thy avriy takw tov tporev éyew. éya
yap, ® IloAvKAe, svvPewpycas éx Toddod ypovoy THY
ant pena giow cai BeBiwkas ern evevixovra évvéa
Ere Se Wpiknnas Todrdais Te Kal TavtodaTrais Gucecs Kal
mapateOcapévos é& axpiBelas ToAAHS TOUS TE ayalous
tav avOpwrwv Kai trois davrous virédaBov Seiy ouy-
ypayras &@ éxatepot aitav éemitndevovoew ev TO Blo.
éxOnow 5é cou Kata yévos boa TE TYUyyavEL yévn TPOTTOY
ToUToUs mMpooKelweva Kal Sy TpoTrov TH oiKovouig ypar-
Tat’ virodauBdavw yap, @ IlodvKdes, Tors vieis Hydy
Berrious écecOat xatarerpbévrav avtois vropynuatov
tovouTwy ols mapabelypact ypwpevot aipnoovtat Tots
evaynuoverTarots cuveivai Te Kak Optrely, Orr@s p27)
xatadeéatepos dow avrav. tpéyropas Se dn ent rev
Noyov’ cov Sé mapaxonovOijoai te Kai eidfjcat eb dpOas

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 77

[PROEM

Often before now have I applied my thoughts to the
puzzling question—one, probably, which will puzzle me
- for ever—why it is that, while all Greece lies under the
same sky and all the Greeks are educated alike, it has
befallen us to have characters variously constituted. For
a long time, Polycles, I have been a student of human
nature ; I have lived ninety years and nine; I have asso-
ciated, too, with many and diverse natures; and, having
observed side by side, with great closeness, both the good
and the worthless among men, I conceived that I ought
to write a book about the practices in life of either sort.

I will describe to you, class by class, the several kinds
of conduct which characterise them and the mode in which
_ they administer their affairs ; for I conceive, Polycles, that
our sons will be the better if such memorials are be-
queathed to them, using which as examples they shall
choose to live and ‘consort with men of the fairest lives,
in order that they may not fall short of them.

And now I will turn to my narrative: be it your part
to come along with it and to see if I speak rightly. In

78 @EO®PASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

eyo. mpwarov pev ovy Tromocopat TOY NOyoY amd TeV
Thy eipwvetay enrwKxorwv, apels Td mpoosalerOas Kal
TWOANA TrEepl TOU WpaypLatos Aéyew* Kal apfowat mpwrov

’ aA ’ / e = > 7. > 4 \
amd THs eipwvelas Kal dploipar auvrnv’ €lf” obTws Tov |
elpwva SiéEerut, totes tis €ote Kal eis Tiva tTpoTrov KaTe- *
vnvexrat’ Kal ta GAXa &) tav TaOnpatev, dorrep vireOE-
Lv, Tetpacopat Kata yévos pavepa Kafioravat. |

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 79

the first place, then, I will commence my account with
those who have studied Irony’, dispensing with preface
or many words about the matter. I will begin with Irony
and define it; next I will set forth, in like manner, the
nature of the Ironical man, and of the character into
which he has drifted ; and then I will try, as I proposed,
to make the other affections of the mind plain, each after
its kind. ]

1 The Chapter on Irony (V in this ed.) stands first in the traditional
order.

80 @EO®SPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

4
KOAQKELaS @.

Thy 5é€ KodaKelay virokaBou ay TIS Outdiay aloypay
elvat cupépovoay Sé 7@ KoNaKevoyTi, Tov 5é KOAaKA Tot
OUTOY TLVa WOTE Topevdmevovy aua eitrely’ évOupH os
amoBAérovet mpos oe of avOpwrot; TovTo ovdert Tay
éy TH Woder yivetas wWAnY 7H col NudoKipers YOes ev TH
OTOG* TAELOVeY yap 7} TpLaxovTa avOpoTrav KaOnyuéven
kal éurrecdvtos NOyou, Tis ein BéXtioTOS, am’ avTod apta-
pévous Tavras emt TO Svoua avTov KateveyOnvats Kat
GANG Tolav’Ta A€ywy amd Tod ipatiou adereiy KpoKioa,
Kal éav TL Tpos TO Tplywmpa THS KehadrHs vad wvevparos
mpocevexOn axupov, Kapphoroynoat, Kal émuyenacas Sé
eireiy’ Gpas; Ort Svoty cov nucpov ovK évtTervynKa,
Tomev éoynkas TOY Teywva peoTov, Kaliep, el Tis Kat
GANos, Exes pds TA ern pédawway THY Tpixa’ Kal he
yovtos 5é avTov TL Tovs GAAOUS CLwTraY KEAEVCAL, Kal
érrawéoat S¢ axovovtos, Kal émionunvacbas Sé, et mrave-
Tat, op0as' Kat oxorpavts yuypws émvyeXacas TO TE
imatiov @oat eis TO oToua ws Sn ov Suvapevos KaTa-

er

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRAST US. 83

amusement. He will request those whom he meets to
stand still until ‘his Honour’ has passed. He will buy
apples and pears, and bring them in and give to the
children in the father’s presence; adding, with kisses,
‘Chicks of a good father’. Also when he assists at the
purchase of slippers, he will declare that the foot is more
shapely than the shoe. If his patron is approaching a friend,
he will run forward and say, ‘ He is coming to you’; and
then, turning back, ‘I have announced you’. He is just the
person, too, who can run errands to the Women’s Market
without drawing breath. He is the first of the guests
to praise the wine; and to say, as he reclines next the
host, ‘How delicate is your fare!’ and (taking up some-
thing from the table) ‘Now this—how excellent it is!’ He
will ask his friend if he is cold, and if he would like to
put on something more; and, before the words are spoken,
will wrap him up. Moreover he will lean towards his ear
and whisper with him; or will glance at him as he talks
to thé rest of the company. He will take the cushions
from the slave in the theatre, and spread them on the seat
with his own hands. He will say that his patron’s house
is well built, that his land is well planted, and that his
portrait is like. |

[In short the Flatterer may be observed saying and doing
all things by which he conceives that he will gain favour. ]

84 @EO®PASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

dpeakeias 2B.

9 8& apécxea éote wev, ws dpm TrepiraBely, Evrevkis
ovn emt t@ Bedtictm ndovns TapacKevacTixy, Oo 4é
wt t® Bertiot@ ndovns Trap , oO
Gpeckos apéder Torovtds tis olos woppwlev mpooayoper-
cas Kal dvdpa xpariotoy eimov Kat Oavpacas ixavas

9 / \ \ 39 , \ \ 4
apdotepas Tals yepot un adtévat, Kat ixpoy TpoTréeppas
xal épwtnoas, Tote avToy dWerat, Ett émawav atadXatT-
, \ \ \ , \ ’ e
tea0at' kal tapaxdrnOels 5é mpos Siartay pn jpovor, @
mapeott, BovrecOar apéokew, adda Kal TS avTidixe, iva
wows elvat Sonn’ nal rors Eévous bé eitrety ws Sixa-
Orepa Aeyovat Tav TodTaVY’ Kal KEexAnpévos Se emi
Seizrvoy KeXevoaL Kadécat TA Tratdia TOV éoTLMVTA, Kal
elcLovTa gat ovKOV oOmoloTepa elvat TH Tratpl Kat
mpocayayouevos diAjcat Kat tap avrov Kxabictacbar
\ Ca) N / > A / 3 , I
Kat Tols fev ovuptrailvey autos AEeYwY agKos, TENEKUS,
\ 3 a a
ra O¢ emi Tis yaoTpos éav KabevSery dua OruBdpevos.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 85

II. THE COMPLAISANT MAN.

COMPLAISANCE may be defined as a mode of address
calculated to give pleasure, but not with the best tendency.

The Complaisant man is very much the kind of person
who will hail one afar off with ‘my dear fellow’ ; and, after
a large display of respect, seize and hold one by both
hands. He will attend you a little way, and ask when
he is to see you, and will take his leave with a compli-
ment upon his lips. Also when he is called in to an
arbitration he will seek to please, not only his principal,
but the adversary as well, in order that he may be deemed
impartial. He will say, too, that foreigners speak more
justly than his fellow-citizens. Then when he is asked to
dinner he will request the host to send for the children ;
and will say of them, when they come in, that they are as
like their father as figs ; and will draw them towards him,
and kiss them, and establish them at his side,—playing
with some of them, and himself saying ‘Wineskin’, ‘Hatchet’,
and permitting others to go to sleep upon him, to his
anguish.

86 @EOPPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

avOadcias yy’.

4
n 8€ avOddeia éori amjvera optrdias év DNoyots, o
S¢ avdabns tosodtés tis olos epwrnfels, 6 Seva sarod
> a ,
cot; elmeiv’ Tpayuata pol pn Tapeye’ Kal Tpodc-
9 “ A

ayopevOels pin avTurpoceuTrety’ Kal TOA@Y TL pH Aéyew

“ “A A 4
Tois wvoupevous, ToTov ay aTrodoiTo, GAN €pwTay, Ti
: f i a “ A
evpioKel’ Kal Tots TYLWoL Kal TréwtroveLY eis Tas EopTas

a A

eitreiy Gre ovK av yevouto Sidouévwv' Kal ovK éxew ovy-
yvouny ote TO YpwoavTt avTov axovolws ovTe TO
W 4 a U
@oavTt ovTe TH EuBavts’ Kal ito 5é Epavoy Kenev-
cavtt eioeveyxety eirav Ste ove av Soln vaTEepoy new

D ee 74 > 7 \ a a !
depwv Kai eye OTL aToAAVOL Kal TOTO TO apryUpLoY
Kal mpoomtaicas ev tH 0d@ Sewvds KaTrapacacba Te
NiOw’ Kal avapeivar ove av viromeivat TodvY ypovoV
IQr Q y ) 2 ) ea 9 a Ww 9 ’
ovdeva’ Kal ovTe Goat ove pnow etmety ovTe Opynoacbat
a ? a ‘5 \ \ \ a a \ 3 ¢
av erjoat* Sewvcs dé cat Tots Oeots un errevyer Oa.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 87

III. THE SURLY MAN.

SURLINESS is discourtesy in words.

The Surly man is one who, when asked where so-and-so
is, will say, ‘Don’t bother me’; or, when spoken to, will
not reply. If he has anything for sale, instead of informing
the buyers at what price he is prepared to sell it, he will
ask them what he is to get for it. Those who send
him presents with their compliments at feast-tide are
told that he ‘will not touch’ their offerings. He cannot
forgive a person who has besmirched him by accident, or
pushed him, or trodden upon his foot. Then if a friend
asks him for a subscription he will say that he cannot give
one; but will come with it by and by and remark that he
is losing this money also. When he stumbles in the. street
he is apt to swear at the stone. He will not endure to wait
long for anyone; nor will he consent to sing, or to recite,
or to dance. He is apt also not to pray to the gods.

88 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

UTepnpavias 6.

A i

gore S€ 9 vmepnpavia Katadpovncis Tis MANY av-

“ “ W e de e , , 5 Z “

Tov TwY adXdaV, O O€ UTTEepnpavos ToLOTOE TLS OlOS TH
, 3 \ PS) / b] , , ? a)

omevoovtt amo deimvou évtevEecOar hacke ev TO TrEpe-

aA N 9 4 A ‘ ‘ ao U

mately? Kab ev Troinoas peuvncba dacKew kat Badilwy

év tais Gd0is Tas Swairas Kpivew Tois érerpéace’ Kal
, Ig? ; \ 9 \ 9 ¢

xyelpoTovoupevos éfouvucbar tas apyas, ov dacKkwv

oyonatew' Kat mpocedOeiv mpotepos orvdevi OedHoat.

Kal Tovs TwAovvTas TL Kal picPoupéevous Sewos KEdEv-
ef A 9 A v7. 9 6e | ee ? A e A“

Cat HKELY Tpds avTov au nucpa® Kal év tails odois To-
\ a a ? , / \
pevomevos un Aadrelv Tols evTUyyavoucl, KaTM KeKUdas,

/ \ a

éray é avtad Soden, dvw Tadw: Kal éotiav tors plrous
9 a) a

avTos pn cuvderrvely adra Tov Up avtdov Twe cvvTatat
> A 2 a * \ / \ QA

avTav éipercicOar’ Kat mpoatroatéANey Sé eTay tro-
, 4 2 A a L ; \o* 2 9

pevntas Tov €povvta OTL TpocépyeTat’ Kal ovTE er’ aret-
4 eA ov c hf bd , 9a a

dopuevoy avrov ote Aovopevoy oite ecOiovra édcoa ay

a > \

eirenOeiv. apérder 5é Kai Royilouevos mpos Twa Te

mao. cvvrata tas Yndous Siwbeiv nal xepadatov sroun-

gavtt yparpat avT@ eis AGyou" Kal émioTEANWY 7) YyPa-

dew ott yapitovo av pot, aAN bre BovrAopae ryevéo Oar,

Kal amréoTadKxa mpos ce AnYouévous, Kat brrws adrAwWS
by) Eotal, Kal THY TayioTND.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 89

IV. THE ARROGANT MAN.

ARROGANCE is a certain scorn for all the world beside
oneself.

The Arrogant man is one who will say to a person who
is in a hurry that he will see him after dinner when he
is taking his walk. He will profess to recollect benefits
which he has conferred. As he saunters in the streets,
he will decide cases for those who have made him their
referee. When he is nominated to public offices he will
protest his inability to accept them, alleging that he is too
busy. He will not permit himself to give any man the
first greeting. He is apt to order persons who have any-
thing to sell, or who wish to hire anything from him, to
come to him at daybreak. When he walks in the streets
he will not speak to those whom he meets, keeping his
head bent down, or at other times, when so it pleases him,
erect. If he entertains his friends, he will not dine with
them himself, but will appoint a subordinate to preside.
As soon as he sets out on a journey, he will send some one
forward to say that he is coming. He is not likely to
admit a visitor when he is anointing himself, or bathing,
or at table. It is quite in his manner, too, when he
is reckoning with any one, to bid his slave push the
counters apart, set down the total, and charge it to the
other’s account. In writing a letter, he will not say ‘I
should be much obliged’, but ‘I wish it to be thus and
thus’; or ‘I have sent to you for’ this or that: or ‘ You
will attend to this strictly’: or ‘Without a moment’s delay’.

go @EO®SPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

9 , ,
ELDWVELAS E€.

 pev ovv eipwveia Sofeev dv elvat, ws TUT@ NaBelD,
Mpoomroinats emi yeipov mpakcwv Kal Noywr, 6 5é elpwv
TolovTos Tis olos mpoceAOwy Tots éyOpois EOéNELy Aareiv,
ov puceiv’ Kal érraiveiv Tapovtas ols ééOeto AaOpa, Kal
TOUTOLS TUANUTTELT Oat NTTWLEVOLS* KAL oUyyvapny OE Exe
Tois avrov KaKas Néyovct Kal émi Trois Kal’ EavTod Neyoue-
vows’ Kal mpos Tovs adiKoupévous Kal wyavaxTovvTas Irpaws
dtareyeo Oar Kai Tois evtuyyavey Kata otovdny Boukope-
vous mpoctakat érraveneiv’ nal pndey wy wparrer oodo-
via anna prom Bovrever Gat? Kal ia lade
dptt Bapeyeyouvas Kat owe yevéoOat avrov Kal panaK-
taOjvat’ Kal mpos Tovs Saveilouévous Kal épavifovtas [ws
apyuptoy ove exer Kal Toray Néyew] Os OU TwdAE, Kal
2) Tora djcat Twr«civ Kal axovoas TL [7) TpoctroLeEl-
cOa, Kat doy dicat pr) éwpaxévat, Kal cporoyjoas pn
henrvpobar Kal Ta pev onévrecOas pace, ta Se ove

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRAST US. gI

V. THE IRONICAL MAN.

Irony, roughly defined, would seem to be an affectation
of the worse in word or deed.

The Ironical Man is one who goes up to his enemies,
and volunteers to chat with them, instead of showing hatred.
He will praise to their faces those whom he attacked be-
hind their backs, and will sympathise with them in their
defeats. He will show forgiveness to his revilers, and ex-
cuse things said against him; and he will talk blandly to
persons who are smarting under a wrong. When people
wish to see him in a hurry, he will desire them to call
again. He will never confess to anything that he is doing,
but will always say that he is thinking about it. He will
pretend that he has ‘just arrived’, or that he ‘was too late’,
or that he ‘was unwell’. To applicants for a loan or a
subscription he will say that he has no money; when he
has anything for sale he will deny that he means to sell ;
or, when he does zo¢ mean to sell, he will pretend that he
does. Hearing, he will affect not to have heard, seeing,
not to have seen; if he has made an admission, he will say
that he does not remember it. Sometimes he has ‘been

g2 @EOPPASTOY XAPAKTHPES. :

eldévat, ta Sé¢ Oavyateww, ra 8 75n wore Kal autos ovT@
SiaroyicacOatr. Kal tT ddov Sewds TH TovovTm THCT|P

A , an 9 , 9 e Ld -
Tov Aoyou ypnoOar ov muoTevw avy vTo\apBavw
? ’ t ’ \ a 4
exTAnTTOMAL Tapadofoy jot TO Tpayua’ adr TLvt

, f e \ e fs b] , ‘ \ 9
eye Kal Dreyer éavTov Erépov axnKoévat, Kal ony ov

a ee ee ig . 2 , aA > 7
Tavta mpos éue SueEner’ Oras 6€ col amiatnow 7 éxeivou
KaTaYVO atropovpat’ GAN Opa pr) ov Oattov muorevers.

[Tovavtas dovds nat wroKds Kai TradtdAXoYyias evpEty
gore Tov elpwvos. ta dy Tav jOGV pn aTAG GAN’ Ert-
Bovra guratrecbas parrov Sei 7) Tovs Execs. |

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 93

considering the question’; sometimes he does ‘not know’ ;
sometimes he is ‘surprised’; sometimes it is ‘the very con-
clusion’ at which he ‘once arrived’ himself. And, in gene-
ral, he is very apt to use this kind of phrase: ‘I do not
believe it’: ‘I do not understand it’: ‘I am astonished’,
Or he will say’that he has heard it from some one else:
‘This, however, was not the story that he told me’. ‘The
thing surprises me’: ‘Don’t tell me’: ‘I do not know how
I am to disbelieve you, or to condemn him’: ‘ Take care
that you are not too credulous’.

[Such the speeches, such the doublings and retractions
to which the Ironical man will resort. Disingenuous and
designing characters are in truth to be shunned more care-
fully than vipers. |

94 @®EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

ara Covetas s",

acre. 5é 7 araloveia Soketev av elvat mpootoinots
9 Aa 9 ” e \ b) \ ~ ? 9 A
ayabav ovx dvtwy, o Sé aralev TowwdvTos Tis olos ev TO
/ e \ “ , e A v4
Setypare éaotnxas SunyeiaBar Eévors ws ToANa YpnpaTa
2. aA 3 3 a / 7 \ \ a ’ f
auT@ é€otw év TH OaratTn Kai wept THS épyacias
ts Savevotinns SueEvévat, nr&IKn, Kal avtos b0a ecidnde
, 2) ! , \ of “ / , \
Kai amro\wrexe’ Kal Gua taita mrcOpitwy tréutrew TO
r 9 \ ’ a 7 Oa , \
matdaptov emt thy Tparelay, Spayuns avT@ Keypévns. Kal
a @¢ A
cuvodoiTropou Sé atroAavoas év TH 00@ Seuvos Aéyew ws
a) ’ ’ t \ . a ¢ \
per ArdcEavdpou éotpatrevoato, Kai ws avT@ elye, Kal
Goa ALOoKOAANTA ToTNpLA ExOmice Kal TEpl TOY TEYULT@YV
a 9 a 9 , (v4 / x, A “A 9 A 9 ,
tav év tH Agia, bre Bedtious evot Tav ev TH Evparrn,
> A ; \ ) \ A 9 ~a 9 A ,
augdusBnticau’ Kai tadta bn pdnoat ovdapovd ex TIS To-
News arrodeOnunKxws’ Kai ypawpata O€ eiretvy WS Tapertt
map “Avtumatpouv tpitta 5n, A€yovTa Tapayiverbar av-
tov eis Maxedoviay, rai Sidopévns avt@ éEaywyns EvNwv
’ aA er 9 , er ~ Or € yo? © AN ~
GTEXOUS, OTL aTreipnTal, Cras wind vd évos cvxopavrnOy
“ A 4 ’
mepatépw diros wy wrelv 7 mpoonker Maxedocet’ Kai év
a , . ¢€ / a , , . A ,
TH ottodcia SE WS TAELW 7} TEVTE TANAVTA AUT@ ‘yévotTo
Q 3 , a “ 3 , “A nn 9
Ta avadwpata SidovTt Tots amopois TaV ToNT@Y’ ava-

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 95

VI. THE BOASTFUL MAN.

BOASTFULNESS would seem to be, in fact, pretension
to advantages which one does not possess.

The Boastful Man is one who will stand in the bazaar
talking to foreigners of the great sums which he has at sea ;
he will discourse of the vastness of his money-lending busi-
ness, and the extent of his personal gains and losses; and,
while thus drawing the long-bow, will send his boy to the
bank, where he keeps—tenpence. He loves, also, to im-
pose upon his companion by the road with a story of how
he served with Alexander, and on what terms he was with
him, and what a number of gemmed cups he brought
home ; contending, too, that the Asiatic artists are superior
to those of Europe; and all this when he has never been
anywhere out of Attica. Then he will say that a letter has
come from Antipater—‘ this is the third’—requiring his pre-
sence in Macedonia; and that, though he was offered the
privilege of exporting timber free of duty, he has declined
it, that no person whatever may be able to traduce him
further for being more friendly than is becoming with Mace-
donia. He will state, too, that in the famine his outlay came
to more than five talents in presents to the distressed citi-

96 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

vevewv yap ov divacbat. Kal ayvdtwv é trapaxabnpévwr

Keredoat Oelvar tas Yryndous &va a’tav, Kab wooav Kal

A Ld

éfaxooias Kat Kata pay Kat mpooriOels miBavas éxa-

OTOLS TOUVTWY CYopaTa Tronoat Kal Séxa TaravTa’ Kal
a a : , 2 > 7 ea \ N

ToUTo gdyoat eoevnveyOa eis epavovs ayT@, Kal Tas |

Tpinpapxias eizrety Ott ov TiOnow ovdé Tas AELvToUpytas

Ooas AeAEtTOUpynKe Kab mpoceNOav Se Tovs immous Tovs

ayabovs Tois mwAovct mpootouncacbas wvntiay' Kai émt

Tas KNivas Ody iwatiopoyv Enrnoas eis Svo TaXavra,

a t a

Kal T@ Travwdt payecOar OTL TO Ypvoioy ovK ExwY aVT@
9 a, \ ? a > 7 > A A ,

axoXovlet? Kat ev picOwtn oixia oixav pnoay TavTny

\ J \ \ \ 907 e/ lA
elyat THY TaTpway pos TOV py eiddTa, Kab OTL wéArEL
9 8 A
Torcv avtny dia TO édXaTTH elvar avT@ mMpds Tas Eevo-

Soyias.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 97

zens; (‘he never could say No’;) and actually, although
the persons sitting near him are strangers, he will request
one of them to set up the counters; when, reckoning by
sums of six hundred drachmas or of a mina, and plausibly
assigning names to each of these, he will make a total of as
many as ten talents. This, he will say, was what he con-
tributed in the way of charities; adding that he does not
count any of the trierarchies or public services which he
has performed. Also he will go up to the sellers of the
best horses, and pretend that he desires to buy; or, visiting —
the upholstery mart, he will ask to see draperies to the |
value of two talents, and quarrel with his slave for having
come out without gold. When he is living in a hired house
he will say (to any one who does not know better) that it
is the family mansion ; but that he means to sell it, as he
finds it too small for his entertainments.

98 @EO®PASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

pixpogirotimias C.

7 Sé puxpodirotipia Sdkecev av elvar Spekue ripijs
avenevOepos, 6 5é puxpodtrdripos Totodrés tis olos oTrou-
Sdoat éri Selrvov KrnOels trap avroy Tov KadécayTa Ka-
Taxeipevos Sevtrvijcat’ Kal Toy vidv atroKeipat ayayay eis
Acrdovs’ wal éripernOnvar Sé Gras alt@ 6 axddovbos
AiOiolp Extra’ kai amodibols pvav dpyupiov Katvov trot-
a : a : \ ’ ’
joat atrodobvar’ Kai mreioraxis Sé arroxelpacOa Kal

. 997 \ oy ‘ \ eZ \
Tovs ddavTas AeuvKOrsS Eye Kal Ta ipatia Sé ypnoTa
petaBarrccOa nal ypiopatse areipecBarr Kal Ths pev
a@yopas Tpus Tas TpaTrélas mpoapottay, Tov Oé yupvaciwy
éy rovtois StatpiBew ov av EdnBot yupvatwvtas, rod dé
Gearpov xabjoGas orav 4 Géa wAnciay TeY OTpaTnyoV"

\ 93 ‘, e A \ \ U \ 3 4 9
Kal ayopate avT@ péev pndev, Eévois Sé ériotaAparta eis
Bufayriov ad\padas cat Aaxwvinas Kivas eis Kit&ixov Kal

li e ‘ ? e f a“ a A 9 a
pers “Tynrrsov ets “Podov, nal tabra trovwy tots év Th
mone SinyetoOar, apéret 5é ab riOnxov Gpeypat Servos
‘Kad thrupov KrncacOat Kal YuKedKads Tepiorepas Kat Sop-
Kadelous aeTpeyeNas xat @ouptaxas TOV oTpoyyUAwy
AnkvOous kat Baxtnplas trav oxodiav ex Aaxedalpovos
Kal avraiav éxovoav Ilépaas évudacpévous nai avrldvov

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 99

VII. THE MAN OF PETTY AMBITION,

Petty Ambition would seem to be a mean craving for
distinction.

The man of Petty Ambition is one who, when asked to
dinner, will be anxious.to be placed next to the host at table.
He will take his son away to. Delphi to. have his hair cut.
He will be careful, too, that his attendant shall be an Aethi-
opian: and when he pays-a mina he will cause the slave to
pay it with anew coin. Also he will have his hair cut very
frequently, and will keep his teeth white; he will change his
clothes, too, while still good; and will anoint himself with
unguent. In the Marketplace he will frequent the bankers’
tables ; in the gymnasia he will haunt those places where
the young men take exercise; in the theatre, when there is
a representation, he will sit near the Generals. For himself
he will buy nothing, but will make purchases on commission
for foreign friends—pickled olives:'to go to Byzantium, La-
conian hounds for Cyzicus, Hymettian honey for Rhodes ;
and will talk thereof to people at Athens. Also he is
very much the person to keep a monkey; to get a satyr
ape, Sicilian doves, deerhorn dice, Thurian vases of the
approved rotundity, walking-sticks with the true Laconian
curve, and a curtain with Persians embroidered upon it.

ig 7—2

100 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

TadaoTptaioy Koviw Eyov Kal ohaiptoTHploy, Kat TovTO
o N A A , a a “_A
Wepiiov Yphoat Tois pirocoots, Tois codiorais, Tols 6tr-
Aopayors, Tois apuovixois émdeixvvcbar Kai autos év
tais émideiEeow votepov érevotévay emt te elrety Tov
@ A a LY Cg ‘ >] \ €
Erepov Tov Oewpévwv mrpds Tov Erepoy STL TovTaV eoTiv 7
janaiotpa’ kat Body Ovcas 76 rpopetwriduoy avavrixpv
THs elaodou MpocTAaTTaA@aal, oTé“pace peyados WeEpi-~
Syaas, Orws of eiatovres Swot Sts Bovv EOvoe’ nat trop-

‘, A A @e ‘ A ‘ 0: ‘ A a)
qevoas peta TOv inméwy TA pev ddAda TravtTa Sodvas TO
mat ameveyxeiv olxade, avaRBaropevos Sé Ooipatiov ev
Trois pone KATA THY ayopay TepiTareiVv. Kal KoNOL@
Sé vSov tpepopéve Sewvds KALpaxvov mpiacbar Kal aowi-
Siov yarxodv tovjoat 6 éywv emt Tod KAtwaKiou 6 Ko-
Aowds wndnoerar’ Kat Kuvapiov 6é Meditraiov TeXevTHCav-

9 A ”% \ ( lA 9 ll
TOS aUT@ pia Kat oTndoLov Tromnoas émvypayrar KAA-
AO MEAITAIO®: xai avabels Sanxtudov yadxoiv év
e® 9
t@ AckAnTtov todrov éxtpiBew ortkmvev Kal adevpov
e 4 ? 4 de \ ry , Q \ n”
conpépat. apéder S€ Kal ovvdioixnoacGar wapa tav
, 6 ? a 4 \ e \ \
mputavewy brrws amrayyeiAn TE Snuw Ta lepa, Kai Trapa-
oKEVATAapEVOS AApTIPOY yuaTLoY Kal éoTEpavwpévos Trap-
eXOwv eirreiy’ @ avdpes “AOnvaio, éOvomev ot mputavers
A \ a Cod \ e \ bad \ 4. e a
Th pmtpt tav Ocav ta iepa akia nat nara Kal vpeis
, \ 9 /, \ a 9 A ? ‘
déyeoOe Ta ayaba’ Kal Tav’tTa atrayyeiXas ariwv din-
qynoacGat oixade TH avTod yuvaixi ws Kal’ vrepBRorrv
UN LE PEL. |

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. Tor

He will have a little court provided with an arena for wrest-
ling and a ball-alley, and will go about lending it to philo-
sophers, sophists, drill-sergeants, musicians, for their dis-
plays ; at which he himself will appear upon the scene rather
late, in order that the spectators may say one to another,
‘This is the owner of the palaestra.’ When he has sacri-
ficed an ox, he will nail up the skin of the forehead, wreathed
with large garlands, opposite the entrance, in order that
those who come in may see that he has sacrificed an ox.
When he has been taking part in a procession of the knights,
he will give the rest of his accoutrements to his slave to
carry home; but, after putting on his cloak, will walk about
the market-place in his spurs. He is apt, also, to buy a
little ladder for his domestic jackdaw, and to make a little
brass shield, wherewith the jackdaw shall hop upon the
ladder. Or if his little Melitean dog has died, he will put
up a little memorial slab, with the inscription, A SCION OF
MELITA. If he has dedicated a brass ring in the temple of
Asclepius, he will wear it to a wire with daily burnishings
and oilings. It is just like him, too, to obtain from the
presidents of the Senate by private arrangement the privi-
lege of reporting the sacrifice to the people; when, having
provided himself with a smart white cloak and put on a
wreath, he will come forward and say : ‘ Athenians! we, the
presidents of the Senate, have been sacrificing to the Mother
of the Gods meetly and auspiciously ; receive ye her good
gifts!’ Having made this announcement he will go home
to his wife and declare that he is supremely fortunate.

102 . @EO®PASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

éVipabias n,

aA e A
» 88 dxpepabla dirorovia Sdfevev dy elvat virép thy
a ev
nruxiav, 6 Sé driuabns ToLodtés Tis olos pnoes pav-
N ‘
Oavew éEnxovta ern yeyovas kal TravTas AEywv Tapa TO-
tov emtdavOaverOar Kal Tapa Tov viod pavOavew 76 emt
: ec a
depu Kat él aomida Kat én’ odparv: Kal eis npda oupBar-
. “ ’ >] ‘N v
Neca Tois peipaxiows Naptrabda Tpéxew. apéret Sé Kav
jou KAnOn eis “Hpaxdetov pias to twatuv tov Bodv
aipely iva tpaynrion Kal mpocavatpiBec Oat eicrdv eis
\ /, \ 3 A 4 ‘ A ,

Tas tTahaiotpas’ Kat év tois Oarpact tpia 7 TéTTapa
/ e / \ ew b U . N -
mrANpoOpaTa Vropévery TA Aopata éxpavOavwv Kal TE
4 A , e) / , \
Aotpevos TO VaBalip oredoat brrws KaddoTEvon Tapa

na e ~. \ > > A 999 & AX , ,
T@ lepel* Kal els aypov ef immov adXoTpiov KaToyovpe-
pos aa pederav immaterOa, nal wecev thy Kebadry
Kateayéevar kat év Sexatrais ovvayew tovs pel avrov

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOFHRAS TUS. 103

VIII. THE LATE-LEARNER.

LATE-LEARNING would seem to mean the pursuit of exer-
cises for which one is too old.

The Late-Learner is one who will study passages for
recitation when he is sixty, and break down in repeating
them over his wine. He will take lessons from his son
in ‘Right Wheel,’ ‘Left Wheel,’ ‘Right-about-face.’ At
the festival of a hero he will match himself against the
boys for a torch-race; nay, it is just like him, if haply
he is invited to a temple of Heracles, to throw off his
cloak and seize the ox in order to bend its neck back.
He will go into the palaestras and try an encounter; at
a conjuror’s performance he will sit out three or four
audiences, trying to learn the songs by heart; and when
he is initiated into the rites of Sabazius he will be eager
to acquit himself best in the eyes of the priest. Riding
into the country on another’s horse, he will practise his
horsemanship by the way ; and, falling, will break his head.
On a tenth-day festival he will assemble persons to play the

104 ®EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

cuvavAnoovtas’ Kai paxpoy avdptavta tailey irpés Tov
éavtod axoXovOov Kat SiatokeverOar nai StaxovritecOas
T TOY Taidwv Tradaywy~e Kai dua pavOavey rap

e fe) f e a \ 2 , A bY A
auTov KerEVELW WS av Kali éxeivou pn éTioTapévou’ Kal
€ , > A
ws madaiwv 5 év TO Badaveip muava Epav otpéder
Omrws mremavevo0as Sonn Kai Grav wor TANCiov yuvatKes
“a 9 a“ > AN €¢ _ a /
pedeTay opxeicGat avtos avT@ tepeTivov.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 105

flute with him. He will play at ¢abdeaux vivants with his
footman ; and will have matches at archery and javelin-
throwing with his children’s attendant, whom he exhorts, at
the same time, to learn from /im,—as if the other knew
nothing about it either. At the bath he will wriggle fre-
quently, as if wrestling, in order that he may appear
educated ; and when women are near he will practise danc-
ing-steps, warbling his own accompaniment.

106 @EOPPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

dkatptas 0’.

 pev ovv axatpia éotly émitevéis AvTotca Tos
évtuyyavovtas, 6 5é dxatpas TotodTos Tis olos aoyodov-
pév@p Trpoced Oy avaxowotacbas Kai apds THY avToU épw-
pévny Kwpave trupértovaay’ Kai Sieny wpAnKorte eyyuns
mpoceNOwv Kedetcat avtov avadéEacOat’ Kat paptupnowy
Tapéivat Tov Mpayuatos Hon Kexpiévov' Kal KeKNnMEVOS
eis yapLous TOD yuvasKelou yévous KaTnyopely’ Kal éx pa-
Kpas oOod AKovtas apts Tapaxaneip eis Trepitatov. Sewvos
dé Kal mpocayew wvntny Treiw Sidovta 45n Tempaxote’
Kal axnkootas Kal pepwabnxotas avictacbat é& apyns bu
Sackwy' nai mpobupos Sé émipernOjvas & pn Bovrerat
Tis yeverOas aioyvvetat Oé atreimacOat’ Kai Bvovtas Kat
GvaNicKovTas HKELY TOKOV ATTALTTCwV' Kal LacT’yoUméevoU
oixérov trapeotos SinyeioGat ort nal avrod tote Tais
olTw wAnyas NaBav amnytato' Kal Tapov Siairy ovy-
xpovery adudotépwv Bovropéevwv Starvecba’ Kat opyn-
capevos aracOat étépou pndérw peOvovTos.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 107

IX. THE UNSEASONABLE MAN.

UNSEASONABLENESS Consists in a chance meeting dis-
agreeable to those who meet.

The Unseasonable man is one who will go up to a busy
person, and oper his heart to him. He will serenade his
mistress when she has a fever. He will address himself to
a man who has been cast in a surety-suit, and request him
to become his security. He will come to give evidence
when the trial is over. When he is asked to a wedding
he will inveigh against womankind. He will propose a
walk to those who have just come off a long journey. He
has a knack, also, of bringing a higher bidder to him who
has already found his market. He loves to rise and go
through a long story to those who have heard it and know
it by heart ; he is zealous, too, in charging himself with offices
which one would rather not have done, but is ashamed to
decline. When people are sacrificing and incurring expense
he will come to demand his interest. If he is present at the
flogging of a slave, he will relate how a slave of his own was
once beaten in the same way—and hanged himself; or, as-
sisting at an arbitration, he will persist in embroiling the
parties when they both wish to be reconciled. And when
he is minded to dance he will seize upon another person
who is not yet drunk.

108 @EOPPASTOY XAPAKTHPES

mwepiepyias Ut,

auérer reptepyia Sdfeev av elvas mpootoinais Tis
g : , 9 bs] Ul e \ 4 A
Noywr Kal mpakewy per evvolas, o Sé Tepiepryos TOLODTOS
Tus olos ewrayyédneoOas avacras & pr) Suvnoerar Kal 6p0-
, ” , 4 > 9 A Aa
Noyoupévou Tov mpayyartos Sixaiou elvas évotas edeyyxOi7-
vat’ cat wreiov Sé érravayKacat Tov Traida Kepdoas 7) Scov
Sivavras of trapivtes éxmiciy’ Kal Sieipyew Tovs payo-
Hévous, Kal ols od ywooKe’ Kal atpatrod nynoacBa,
elra un Svvacbar evpeiv ob tropevetau’ Kal Tov oTpaTayov ©
\ 3 a , A , ; e
MpocehOwy Epwrngat, Tote wéEddet TaparatTecOat, Kal TL
Heta THY aipwv Tapayyédre’ Kal atrayopevovTos TOU
taTpod Sirws pur) Swoet olvoy Te paraxifouevo, pyoas
, . , 4 e , . ‘ A
BovrccOatr dtarretpay AawBavey eb ToTicas Tov KaKaS
54 Py N \ , bJ U 9 \N ‘A
€xovta’® Kal yuvaixos 5é teMeuTnoaons emrvypayras emt To
puja tov Te avdpos avTns Kal Tod TaTpos Kab Tihs
Hntpos Kal avTns THS Yyuvatkds- Tovvoya Kal trodarn
€oTl, Kal mpocervypawat Ort ovToL wavTes ypnoTol
njoav’ Kal ouvuva péddov clirely Tpds ToVS Wapeotn-
\ Lf , bd ,
Kétas Ott Kal mpoTepoy TWoANaKis Oue@poxa.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 10g

X. THE OFFICIOUS MAN.

OFFICIOUSNESS would seem to be, in fact, a well-
meaning presumption in word or deed. ,

The Officious man is one who will rise and promise
things beyond his power ; and who, when an arrangement is
admitted to be just, will oppose it, and be refuted. He will
insist, too, on the slave mixing more wine than the company
can finish ; he will separate combatants, even those whom
he does not know; he will undertake to show the path, and
after all be unable to find his way. Also he will go up to
his commanding officer, and ask when he means to give
battle, and what is to be his order for the day after to-
morrow. When the doctor forbids him to give wine to the
invalid, he will say that he wishes to try an experiment, and
will drench the sick man. Also he will inscribe upon a
deceased woman’s tombstone the name of her husband,
of her father, and of her mother, as well as her own, with
' the place of her birth; recording further that ‘ All these
- were Estimable Persons.’ And when he is about to take
an oath he will say to the bystanders, ‘This is by no means
the first that I have taken.’

110 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

9 , 0
andias ta.

Eorw 7 andia, ws opm AaPeiv, EvrevEu AUIrns Tol-
ntixn avev BraBns, 6 5é andrs Tovodrés Tis olos éyetpery
a a bd
dpte cabevdorta ciaed Ody iva avt@ NaAT’ Kal avdyerOar
57) wédAovTas KwAvev, Kal mpoceA\Oov SeicBar éri-
aA 9 ry r \ , a
axe Ews av Tepitatnon Kal TO TaLdlovy ths tlrOns
’ , , f > A \ /
adedouevos pacwpevos ative avtcs Kal viroxopivec Oat
mommulwy Kal Tavoupytov Tov Tamqrov Kad@v’ Kal épw-
a a 9
Irngat 5€ Sewds évaytiov TeV oikefwv" ei7ré, Maun, OT
| BS \ oy t , e 7 ‘ tL [Aéyewv] 6
| @oives Kat ETiKTEés yee, rola Tis nuépa; Kal [Aeyew] OTe
\ a b \ 9 + A a e A
apuypov Vdwp éott wap avT@ Aakkaiov, Kal ws KTS
wv
Aaxava TONG Eyw Kal aTrada, Kal paryetpos ev TO OWoV
oxevatwv’ Kal bre 4 oikia avTov TravdoKeloy éort’ pert?
yap ae’ xal Tovs didovs avtod elvat Toy TeTrpnuévov
ml@ov' ev Troav yap avrovs ov duvacbar éumAnoar Kat
Eevitwv 5é SeiEas Tov wWapactTov avToU, Toles TUS EOTL, TO
acuvdetvodvts’ Kat tapaxarov 5é él tod tornpiov
elmely OTL TO Téprov TOS TrapoYTasS TrapeTKEVacTAL.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. I1I

XI. THE UNPLEASANT MAN.

UNPLEASANTNESS may be defined as a mode of address
which gives harmless annoyance.

The Unpleasant man is one who will come in and awake
a person who has just gone to sleep, in order to chat with
him.’ He will detain people who are on the very point of
sailing ; indeed he will go up to them and request them to
wait until he has taken a stroll. He will take his child from
the nurse, and feed it from his own mouth, and chirp
endearments to it, calling it ‘papa’s little rascal.’ He is
apt, also, to ask before his relations, ‘Tell me, mammy,
—when you were bringing me into the world, how went the
time?’ ; He will say that he has cool cistern-water at his
house, and a garden with many fine vegetables, and a cook
who understands dressed dishes. His house, he will say, is
a perfect inn—always crammed; and his friends are like the
pierced cask—he can never fill them with his benefits. Also,
when he entertains, he will show off the qualities of his para-
site to his guest ; and will say, too, in an encouraging tone
over the wine that the amusement of the company has
been provided for.

ira @EO®PASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

Suaxepeias tf’.

Eorw 1 Svaxyépera aBeparrevola owpatos AVIFNS Ta-
pacxevaorixy, 6 Sé Sueyepns TovotTos tis olos Aémpay
éywv Kal addov cal Tovs dvuyas peyadous TWepsTrateiv Kal
dijcat tadra elvas avt@ ouyyena appootiwara’ Eyer
yap aura Kal Tov Tange kal Tov TaTToy, Kal ovK elvat
pasiov avrou els TO év08 SroBadrcoBas....xad chat oa-
mp@ év Badaveiw ypomevos xplecBat’ Kat yiTwvicxov
mayvy Kai iwariov opodpa rewrov kal Kndidov peorov
ayaBaropevos eis ayopav éEedNOeiv.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. IT3

XII. THE OFFENSIVE MAN.

OFFENSIVENESS is distressing neglect of the person. .

~The Offensive man is one who will go about with a
scrofulous or leprous affection, or with his nails overgrown,
and say that these are hereditary complaints with him; his
father had them, and his grandfather, and it is not easy to
be smuggled into és family...He will use rancid oil to
anoint himself at the bath; and will go forth into the
Marketplace wearing a thick tunic, and a very light cloak,
covered with stains.

114 @EO®PASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

> 4 ,
avatc@noias ty.

i ef

éort S¢ 9 avaicOncia, ws bp elmeiv, Bpadutns

“ 9 , \ / ¢e \ 9 /
yruyis éy Aoyors Kal mpdkeow, 6 S€ avaicOntos ror-
obTos Ts olos AOyLoapmevos Tais ~rndots Kat Kehadacov
Toimnoas épwray Toy tTapaxaOnuevov, Ti yiveTat; Kat
Sienv hevyov Kal ravrnv eiorévat pédX.wv erriAabopevos
eis aypov tropeverOar Kal Oewpav ev TO Ocatpw povos
KatanreitecOar Kxabevdov' xal raBov tt Kal artrobeis
b a la) “A
avTos TobdTo Enreiv Kal pn SivacOa evpeiv’ nab amray-

b ” “ “a

YéANOVTOS AaUT@ OTL TEeTENEUTNKE TLS aUTOD TAY dirw»,
o “
wa Tapayévntat, oxvOpwracas Kal Saxpvoas eizeiv’
ayabn tiyn. Sewos O€ Kal atroAauBavwv apyiptov
? , / a. \ a bg
Gethopevoy paptupas TwapanraBeiv' Kat yeyudvos dvtos
paxerOat TH Tradt OTL aiKVOUS oUK AYdpace’ Kab Ta

( e Le / Ad / \ , 9
maoia éavTod Tadaley avayxafwy Kai tpoyatew cis
Kotrous ¢uBadrAcw' Kai év ayp@ avtos daxny Apav dis
Gdas eis THY xUTpav éuBadrtov GBpwtov moijoat Kai
er a \ ? a eg a 9 ” ef
vovros tov Ads eitreitv, ndv ye tTav dotpwv oe, Gre

a a t

57) of GAXOL Aéyovet THS yHS’ Kal AéyovTos TiVOS, TOTOUS
y \ \ e oN ’ 9 a - ‘
oles KaTa Tas lepas muras eEeveyOnvat vexpous; mMpos
ToUTOV El7rely’ CooL euol Kal ool yévolrTo.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 115

XIII. THE STUPID MAN.

STUPIDITY may be defined as mental slowness in speech
and action.

The Stupid man is one who, after doing a sum and
setting down the total, will ask the person sitting next him
‘What does it come to?’ When he is defendant in an action,
and it is about to come on, he will forget it and go into the
country ; when he is a spectator in the theatre he will be
left behind slumbering in solitude. If he has been given
anything, and has put it away himself, he will look for it
and be unable to find it. When the death of a friend is
announced to him in order that he may come to the house,
his face will grow dark—tears will come into his eyes—and
he will say ‘Heaven be praised!’ He is apt, too, when he
receives payment of a debt, to call witnesses; and in
winter-time to quarrel with his slave for not having bought
cucumbers ;: and to make his children wrestle and run races
until he has exhausted them. If he is cooking a leek him-
self in the country he will put salt into the pot twice, and
make it uneatable. When it is raining he will observe
‘Well, the smell from the sky is delicious’ (when others of
course say ‘from the earth’:) or if he is asked ‘ How many
corpses do you suppose have been carried out at the
Sacred Gate?’ he will reply, ‘I only wish that you or I had
as many,’ | |

: 8—.2

116 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES

dypotkias .

n 8é aypoxia Soke av elvat apadia acynpov,
6 Sé dypotxos TovovTds Tis olos Kuxeava Tladv eis exe
, 4 4 \ ‘ , IQA a“
KAnoiay tropevecOar' Kat TO pvpov gaoKewy ovdéy Tod
Ovpuov ndvov Skew cal peilw tod modes Ta UobnwaTa
” . a a a a
popely’ Kal peyadn TH porn Aarelv’ Kal Tois pév Hiross
ry ry 9
Kal oiKxeiols amtoteiv, mpds 5€ Tos avTOD oiKéTas ava-
kowovoba: wept tav peyictwr’ Kal Tois Tap avT@ ép-
yalopévors ptcOwrois ev ayp@ Tavta Ta amo THS EKKAN-
, A . A 9 , ” “ 4
clas dinyeicOar’ nat avaBeBrAnpEvos avw Tov yovaTos
xabtfavew* Kai ém’ dd\drAm pev pndevt pyre Oavyatew
pnre extrAntrecOat évy tais odois, bray Oé€ ibn Bobv 7
évoy 7 Tpayov éatnxws Ocwpeiv. Kal mpoaipav Oé TE
€x Tod Ttapuelov Sewvos dayeiv’ kat Cwporepov miety’ nat
A a a A ¢ a
Grécat peta THS ovroTowd Tois Evdovy Wace Kat avT@
A 3 , 9 : a \, of a e b J
Ta emitnoea* xal dpictav dé apa tots violuyiows épu-
“ A 9
Bande’ Kai xorpayros tiv Ovpay viraxodcat avtés, Kas

THE CHARACTERS OF 7HEOPHRASTUS. Il7

XIV. THE Boor.

_ BoorisHNess would seem to be ignorance offending
against propriety.

The Boor is one who, having drunk a posset, will go
~ into the Ecclesia. He vows that thyme smells sweeter than
any perfume ; he wears his shoes too large for his feet; he
talks in a loud voice. He distrusts his friends and relatives,
but talks confidentially to his own servants on the most
important matters; and recounts all the news from the
Ecclesia to the hired labourers working on his land. Wear-
ing a cloak which does not reach the knee, he will sit down.
He shows surprise and wonder at nothing else, but will
stand still and gaze when he sees an ox or an ass or a goat
in the streets. He is apt also to take things out of the
storeroom and eat them; and to drink his wine rather
strong. He will help the bakery-maid to grind the corn for
the use of the household and for his own; he will eat his
breakfast while he shakes down hay for his beasts of burden;
he will answer a knock at the door himself, and call the

118 @®EO®PASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

Tov KUVa TpocKadecapevos Kat émiaBopevos Tov pry-
yous elirely’ ovTOs huAaTTEL TO ywploy Kal THY otKiay
‘ ‘ ’ , A Ul U 9 ,
kal TO apyupwoy Sé Tapa tov AapBRavov atrodoxipatey,
Alav Aéywy Aevpoy elvat, kal Erepov dua adrraTrecOa’
Kal €ay TO Gporpoyv xpnon } Kodiwov 7 Spéravov 7 Ovra-
A a 9 a 4. : if
kov, Tata THS vuKTos [arraiteiv] Kata aypuTrviay avapi-
Vicon
prnoKopevos’ kal eis aotu xataBaivwy épwthnaat Tov
arayvravra wocov joav ai SipOépar nal to Taptyos,
Kal ef onepov 6 apywv voupnviay dye’ Kat evtreiy evOds
ef , \ 3 , 4 a 9 A e n“
or. Bovrerat KataBas atroxeipacOat Kat THs avTHS odov
mapidv Kopicacbat wap’ ’Apyiov tod taptxyous* Kat év
9 N >] \ e , \ oO r]
Baravelo 5é doar Kal eis Ta VTodnpata dé Nrous éy-
Kpovuc at.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 119

dog to him, and take hold of his nose, saying ‘ This
fellow looks after the place and the house.’ When he
is given a piece of money he will reject it, saying that
it is too smooth, and thereupon will take another instead ;
and if he has lent his plough, or a basket or sickle or
bag, and remembers it as he lies awake, he will ask it
back in the middle of the night. On his way down to
Athens he will ask the first man that he meets how hides
and salt-fish were selling, and whether the archon cele-
brates the New Moon to-day; adding immediately that
he means to have his hair cut when he gets to town, and
at the same visit to bring some salt-fish from Archias as
he goes by. He will also sing at the bath; and will drive
nails into his shoes. |

120 . @EO@®PASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

, a
avaioyxuvTias te.

n S€ avatcyuvtia éorl wey, ws Spp AaBelv, Kata-
UG , > ne , e . 9 4
dpovnaots SoEns aicypov Evexa népdovus, 0 5é avaioyuvras
TowodTos olos mpa@Tov pev, Ov aTrocTEpEl, TPS TOVTOV
a) aA b
amreNOav SaveifecOar’ eita Ovaas Tots Oeots avTos pev
Ca x e #/ \ de 4 ’ 4 e \ , }
Seurrveiy wap érép@, Ta 5é Kpéa arroriOévat adroit Tacas
xal mpockadXecapevos Tov axcdovOov Sodvat amo THs
tpatrétns aptoy Kat Kpéas apas, Kal eimely axovavTwv
“ “a e

TavTwy' evwyov, TyuwtTate Kal owvav dé vroptpvy-
” , x A , ‘
oKew Toy Kpewrodny el TL yYpnotuos avT@ yéyove, Kal
éotnxes Tpos TO oTAOL@ pdrtoTa pév Kpéas, ef Se pr,
ooroty eis Tov Gwuov éuBareiv? cai dav pev rAaGBy, ev

v 9 \ cy e , 9 A “ 4 s oe
yet, eb O€ uj, apTacas amo THS Tpamétns yoALtxvoy aya
yeXov atadXarrecOas* nai Eévors S¢ avtov Béay ayo-
, \ } \ N lA 6. A Vv be v ea
pacas pn Sovs Td pépos Oewpetv, ayew 8 Kal Tods vies

> \ € , ‘ \ fe \ bc. ? ,
ELS THY VOTEPAIAY Kal TOV TraLOarywyoV’ Kal boa ewynpévos
Vee? t a a \ ea, ar ae
agua tis héper, petadovvar Kerctoar nal avt@’ Kal eri
THY aAXoTpiav oixiav €AOdy SaveiterOat xpiOas, Tore 5é
ayupov, Kab Tav’ta ypnoavtas avayKxacas atropépeww mpos
avrov. Sewos dé Kal mpos Ta yadkela ta ev TO Bada-
velo mpoceOav Kal Barpas dpvtawav Boayros tod Ba-
Aavéws avtTos avtod KatayéacOa, cal eimely bre ré-

AovTal, KATA aTriwy, oVdEeLia ToL yYapits.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 21

XV. THE SHAMELESS MAN,

SHAMELESSNESS may be defined as neglect of reputation
_ for the sake of base gain.

The Shameless man is one who, in the first place, will
go and borrow from the creditor whose money he is with-
holding. ‘Then, when he has been sacrificing to the gods,
he will put away the salted remains, and will himself dine
out; and, calling up his attendant, will give him bread and
meat taken from the table, saying in the hearing of all,
‘Feast, most worshipful.’ In marketing, again, he will
remind the butcher of any service which he may have rend-
ered him; and, standing near the scales, will throw in some
meat, if he can, or else a bone for his soup: if he gets it, it
is well; if not, he will snatch up a piece of tripe from the
counter, and go off laughing. Again, when he has taken
places at the theatre for his foreign visitors, he will see the
performance without paying his own share; and will bring
his sons, too, and their attendant the next day. When
anyone secures a good bargain, he will ask to be given part
in it. He will go to another man’s house and borrow
barley, or sometimes bran; and moreover will insist upon
the lenders delivering it at his door. ‘He is apt, also, to go
up to the coppers in the baths,—to plunge the ladle in, amid
» the cries of the bath-man,—and to souse himself; saying
that he has had his bath, and then, as he departs,—‘ No
thanks to you!’

122 ®EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

3 , ’
aTOVOLaS ts.

9 .
» 8€ amovoia éoriv vropovn aicypav épywv te Kal
, “ 3
Aoywv, 5 Sé arrovevonsévos ToLvovTds Tus olos odpbcat
Tayv, KaKas daxovoat Kal AovdopnOjvar Suvapevos, Tp
” A i = Og
nOer ayopaics tis Kal avacecuppévos Kal TrayToTrolws
> 2 a g ,
Guéret Suvatos Kat dpyeic0ar vnpwv tov Kopdaxa kal
a a “a 4
Mpocwretoy wn éywv ev Kwpix@ yop@’ Kal év Bavpace
oe \ a bd , g 4 ‘ b
Tous yadKouvs exrheyey KAU EKxaoTOY TapLwy, Ka
paxyerOat Tots TO cvpuBorov hépovot Kal mpoika Oewpelv
Géiovot’ Sewwds S¢ nat wavédonetoat Kal TeXwvncar Kat
/ > , 3 \ 9 e 3 \ a
pndeuiay épyaciay aioypay arrodoxiuacal, adda KnpUT-
TEL, paryelpevety, KUBEvELY, THY NTépa pn Tpepelv, amra-
a \ a , , 9 “a a
yeoOau KNOTS, TO SeapwTnploy mrelw ypovoy oiKeElv 1
\ e a > f£ \ / 9 a 9 , a
Tv avTov oixiav. Kat tovtwv 8 av elvat Sofaue tay
ee , A ¥ Q a /
TEPUCTALEVOY TOUS OYNOUS KAL TPOTKANOVYTMV, MEANY
TH dwvy xal rrapeppwyula AoWopovpévwyv kal Stadéyo-
pevoy impos avtous: xa perakd of pev mpociacw, ot Sé
> + bd a 3 a 9 \ a \ \ 3
ariact mWplv axovcat avrTov, add Tois pev THY apyxn»,
rots 5€ avAdNaBnv, Tots 5é pépos Tod wpaypwatos Aéyel,
avK Gdrws Oewpeicbat aEvdv tiv amévotay avTov } Stay

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 123

XVI. THE RECKLESS MAN.

RECKLESSNESS is tolerance of shame in word and deed.

The Reckless man is one who will lightly take an oath,
being proof against abuse, and capable of giving it; in
character a coarse fellow, defiant of decency, ready to do
anything ; just the person to dance the cordax, sober and
without a mask, in a comic chorus. At a conjuror’s per-
formance, too, he will collect the pence, going along from
man to man, and wrangling with those who have the free-
pass and claim to see the show for nothing. He is apt,
also, to become an inn-keeper or a tax-farmer; he will
decline no sort of disreputable trade, a crier’s, a cook’s; he
will gamble, and neglect to maintain his mother ; he will be
arrested for theft, and spend more time in prison than in his
own house.

And he would seem, too, to be one of these persons who
collect and call crowds about them, ranting in a loud cracked
voice and haranguing them; meanwhile some will approach,
and others go away without hearing him out; but to some he
gives the first chapter of his story, to others an epitome, to
others a fragment; and the time which he chooses for

124 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

9 Taviyyupis. txavos Sé wat Sixas tds pev evyew, tas
dé Suwxew, tas Sé ePuvveba, tais 5é qwapewa, éxov
Exivov év TO TpoKoATip Kal oppafors ypapparidioy év
a , ’ ’ ’ \ ION ’ ;
tais yepoiv’ Kal ovx azmodoxipatey Sé ovdé KxaTndov
ayopalwy otparnyelv, Kat evOds rovtois Saveifesv, Kal
“ a“ , / e , a € ,
THs Spayyns ToKoy Tpla nprwoBorma THs nuépas pa
reaOat, Kai epodevery Ta paryerpela, Ta ixOvoTrwa, Ta
Tapixorenta, Kat Tovs TéKoUS amd TOD éwrodsparos eis
Thy yvabov éxréyev.
[epydders 5€ eto of TO oTopa evAVTOY ExorTes eis
Aodopiay nai POeyysuevoe peyadyn TH dwvyn, ws ocuvrnyey
. auTois THY ayopay Kal Ta épyaornpta. |

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 125

parading his recklessness is always when there is some pub-
lic gathering. Great is he, too, in lawsuits, now as defendant,
now as prosecutor; sometimes excusing himself on oath,
sometimes attending the court with a box of papers in the
breast of his cloak and satchels of note-books in his hands,
He will not disdain either to be a captain of Marketplace
hucksters, but will readily. lend them money, exacting, as
interest upon ten-pence, two-pence half-penny a day; and ©
will make the round of the cook-shops, the fish-mongers, the
fish-picklers, thrusting into his cheek the interest which he
levies on their gains.

[These are troublesome persons, for their tongues are
easily set wagging abusively; and they talk in so loud a
voice that the Marketplace and the workshops resound
with them. |

126 @®EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES,

Bserupias tC.

ov yarerrov 5é éote tTHV BdeAupiay Stopicacbas’ Eore
A e \ \
yap watdia émidavyns cal érroveiduatos, 6 5é Bdedupos
fe) , 9
Towvtos olos amavrncas yuvaitiv édrevOépats [aoynpo-
a7. . 3 t a of eo» , \
vetv|* Kai é€v Oeatpw xpoteiy Gray ot aNdoL TAaVMVTAL, Kab
/ a "OG A e /. \ @ s
cupittey ods ndéws Bewpovaw ot Aowroi’ Kat TWANBoVENS
“ 9 ”“ , “a \ a
TS ayopas wpocedOwy Tpos Ta Kapva 7 TA puUpTAa 7
Ta axpodpua éotnkas TpaynpuatiterOal, dua TO TwXOVYTE
mpoodahav’ Kal Kadéoar Sé Tov TaploYT@Y ovomacTi
e \ , b] U \ , A e a
TWA @ py cuynOns ori Kal omevdovtas Sé Trou opav
a a é \ e / \ , /
Tepyetvar KerAcDoaL’ Kal nTTnuévm 5é peyadrny Sixny
\ a a a
aTrLovTt ato TOU SuKaaTypiov TpocerOeiv nai auvncOnvas'
] a “ A
Kal orwvety EavT@ Kai avAntpibas picOodcOar, Kat Seu-
kyvewy b€ Tols aTravT@ot TA awvnpéva Kal TapaKanely
ért tavta* kal SunyetaOar mpoctas pos KoupElov 7 pu-
' er t t : ee ee t
powwarsoy OTe peOroxeoOar pédreu’ Kat ets opviMoaKoTrou
TIS pntpos eEeAOovens Bracdynpnoar nai evyouévov Kat
omevoovtwy exBarely TO ToTNpLoY Kal yeXacal, WoTrEp
aoTelov TL TeTroinxws' Kal avrovuevos dé Kpoteiv Tais
‘ f a 7 \ / \ 2 “
XEpolt povos Tav GANwY Kal ocuvTepeTivery Kal émUTYaY
TH avAnTpio. Ti OV TaYY Tavaatto’ Kal atroTrTVcat Oé

/ e \ ~ / 4 A“ > ,
BovNopevos virép THs TpaTEelns mpooTTVcaL TH OWoYow.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 127

XVII. THE GROSS MAN.

GROSSNESS is not difficult to define ; it is obtrusive and
objectionable pleasantry.

The Gross man is one who will insult freeborn women ;
who, in a theatre, will applaud when others cease, and
hiss the actors who please the rest of the spectators. When
the Marketplace is full, he will go up to the place where
nuts or myrtleberries or fruits are sold, and stand munch-
ing while he chatters to the seller. Then he will call
by name to a passer-by with whom he is not familiar;
or if he chance to see persons in a hurry, he will cry
‘stop’; or he will go up to a man who has lost a great
lawsuit and js leaving the court, and will congratulate
him.’ He will do his own marketing, and hire flute-
players; moreover he will show to everyone who meets
him the provisions that he has bought, with an invitation
to come and eat them; and will explain, as he stands
at the door of a barber's or perfumer’s shop, that he means
to get drunk. His mother having gone out to the sooth-
sayer’s, he will use words of evil omen; or when people
are praying and pouring libations, he will drop his cup,
and laugh as if he had done something clever. Also,
when the flute is being played to him, he alone of all
the company will beat time with his hands, and trill an
accompaniment; and will reprove the player, asking why
she did not stop sooner. And when he desires to spit, he
will spit across the table at the cupbearer.

128 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

addoAcoyxias in.

e A 9 , > A ‘ , a “
n 5€ adorecyia é€oTi pev Sinynois Adyov paxpav
Kal ampoBovrevtwy’ o 5é adoréoyns TovoiTds éatuv olos,
OV LI) ywwwoKEl, TOUT@ TapaKabelcpwevos TANTO TpwToV
fev THS AVTOV yuvaLKos eltrety éyx@ptov’ Elta, 0 THS VUKTOS
9 > nw , ‘ 7 » x A a
eldev évirrviov, tovTo binynoacbar’ et? wv elyev eri TO
, ‘ id “ tJ A ~
Seirvm ta Kal’ Exacta SicEeAOety elra bn TpoywpodvTos
Tov MpayLatos Aéyeww WS TOA TrovNpOTEpoO! ELoww ot VoV
avOpwio. Tay apyaiwy’ Kal ws aFvou yeyovacty of trupol
9 a 9 a, \ o¢ Y > ° b a , . \ \
€v TH ayopa’ Kat ws TroAXol émidnpovor Eévoe nal thy
Oarartrav é« Atovyciov mrctpoy elvas’ Kat et Trourcecev
/ a a
6 Zevs vdwp Ta ev TH yn BerTtiw EoeoOat’ Kal ott aypov
> , ’ P \ oe rg \ gn, \ ¢
eis VeWTA Yewpynoe’ Kal ws yadeTroV éoTL TO SRV" Kab ws
U / / a v Py ‘ ,
Aapmimmos pvotnpios peyiotny baba éotnoe’ Kal Tocot
ey ick §n » Oude), <r \ \. oo» 7 ‘of 9
etal Kioves TOV ‘OQideiou' Kai yOes yucca’ Kai Tis éote
/ A
npépa onpepov ; Kat ws Bondpopua@vos pév dots TA puotn-
pea, IIvaveyrimvos 5¢ ’Amarovpia, Tlocedeavos Sé ta
9 2? ‘ U p “a e f > \ \ 397
kat aypous Atovvota’ Kav vrropévy Tis avTov, 47) adiota-
cba. |
Pa; Ss. 32 ‘ , a > Anas
[wapaceicavta On det Tos ToLovTOUs TaY avOparrwy
9
kai Svapapevoy arraddatTec Oat, Gotis amvperos Bovderat
9 ” N : n a
elvat’ Epyov yap cuvapxeioGar tots ponte orrovdny pyre
oyonny SiayiwecKovor.]

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 129

XVIII. THE GARRULOUS MAN.

GaRRULITY is the discoursing of much and ill-con-
sidered talk.

The Garrulous Man is one who will sit down beside
a person whom he does not know, and first pronounce
@ panegyric on his own wife; then relate his dream of
last night; then go through in detail what he has had
for dinner. Then, warming to the work, he will remark
that the men of the present day are greatly inferior to
the ancients; and how cheap wheat has become in the
market ; and what a number of foreigners are in town;-
and that, if Zeus would send rain, the crops would be
better; and that he will work his land next year; and
how hard it is to live; and that Damippus set up a very
large torch at the Mysteries; and ‘How many columns
has the Odeum?’; and that yesterday he was unwell;
and ‘What is the day of the month?’; and that the
Mysteries are in Boedromion, the Apaturia in Pyanepsion,
the Dionysia in Poseideon. Nor, if he is tolerated, will
he ever desist.

[He who would not have a fever must shake off such
_ persons, and thrust them aside, and make his escape.
It is hard to bear with those who cannot discern between
the time to trifle and the time to work. ]

130 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

Aartas 10’.

* 8€ Nada, eb tis avtiy dpitecBat Bovdrotto, elvas
dv Sofevev axpacia Tod doyou, 6 Sé AGAOS TOLOUTOS TIS
olos T@ évtuyxavovts elmeiv, av Gtiobv pos avTov Pbéy-
Enrat, Sts ovdey Réyel, Kal STL avTos TravTa olde, Kai
dy axovn avtov, pabijcerat’ nat perakd &¢ amoxpuwvo-
wéve vmoBadndeay, elas ov; pon émidaby 6 wédrews Dé-
yew’ Kab ev ye, OTL pe Uiréuvnoas’ Kal TO Nadel ws
“pnoyscy qou’ Kat O tapédTov’ Kal Tayu ye ouri-
Kas TO Tpaypa* Kal Wakal oe Trapetnpouy et é€ml TO
avTo euwot KateveyOnoet Kai éTépay apyas ToLavTAS Tropi-
cac0a, wore nde avatrvedoat Tov évtvyydvovTa. Kal
oray ye Tovs Kal’ &va atroyuidon, Sewvos Kab émi tovs
GOpcous Kai cuvertnoras TropevOjvar Kal puyeiy Tromjoa
petakd ypnuatifovras’ Kai eis ta SWacKaneia Sé Kal
eis Tas TadaloTpas ElcLaY KwAVEWW TOS Traidas Tpo-
pav0avety, Tocaita mpocAaXrwv Tois tradotpiBats Kat
didackadois. Kal Tovs amiévar dacKovtas Sewvds mpo-
méupar kal amoxatacrnoat eis THY oikiay’ Kal mov-
Gopevos Ta tHS éxKAnolas atraryyéAXNcW, Kal mpoadinyn-
caclas b€ Kal tHv én’ "ApiotopayTos mote yevouéyny

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 131

XIX. THE LoQuacious MAN.

Loquacity, if one should wish to define it, would seem
to be an incontinence of talk.

The Loquacious Man is one who will say to those whom
he. meets, if they speak a word to him, that they are quite
wrong, and that #e knows all about it, and that, if they’
listen to him, they will learn: then while one is answering
him, he will put in, ‘Do you tell me so?—don’t forget what
you are going to say’: or ‘Thanks for reminding me’; or
‘How much one gets from a little talk, to be sure!’: or
‘By-the-bye’—: or ‘Yes! you have seen it in a moment’:
or ‘I have been watching you all along to see if you would
come to the same conclusion as I did’: and other such
cues will he make for himself, so that his victim has not
even breathing-time. Aye, and when he has prostrated a
few lonely stragglers, he is apt to march next upon large,
compact bodies, and to rout them in the midst of their
occupations. Indeed he will go into the schools and the
palaestras, and hinder the boys from getting on with their
lessons, by chattering at this rate to the trainers and masters.
When people say that they are going, he loves to escort
them, and to see them safe into their houses. On learning
the news from the Ecclesia, he hastens to report it; and to
relate, in addition, the old story of the battle in Aristophon

5—2

132 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

a er U \ A 4 > ?
[rod pntopos| waynv Kat thy Aaxedaipoviwyv él Avoar-
Spou, kal ovs wrote NOyous avTos elzras evooxiunoey ev TH
Sno, Kat Kata Tav wAnOay ye pa Sunyovpevos Karn-

/ a ef \ > / ” >
yopiay wapeuBanrelv, WoTEe TOVs akovovTas NTOL Eémrida-
GécOas 9 vuotakas ) petakd KataNirrovTas amaANaTTE-
aba’ cai cuvdiucafwv Sé Kwrdoae Kpivat, Kal cuvOewpav
Oeacacba, nai cuvderrrvav hayeiv, Neywv Ste yarerrov
T® AdAw €oTl TiwTray, Kal ws ev Uyp@ eoTW 4 YyAOTTA,

\ oa 9 a , ray) b n , ,

Kal OTL ovK ay aiwmncetey ovd eb THY yedtdovey SokeLev
r % , : \ ’ ¢ a e \
dy elvyat AadiotEepos’ Kab oxwmTTdpevos UTropetvas Kab UIrd
TOV avTOD TralOlwy, GTay avrov On KaGevdey BovrAopeva

c a a A
Kéedevn A€yovTa’ Tramma, Nae TL Nuiv, OTMS GY nas
vmvos AaB.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 133

[the orator]’s year, and of the Lacedaemonian victory in Ly-
sander’s time; also of the speech for which he himself once
got glory in the assembly; and he will throw in some abuse
of ‘the masses’, too, ia the course of his narrative; so that
the hearers will either’ forget what it was about, or fall into
a doze, or desert him in the middle and make their escape.
Then on a jury he will hinder his fellows from coming to
a verdict, at a theatre from seeing the play, at a dinner-
party, from eating; saying that ‘it is hard for a chatterer to
be silent’, and that this tongue w// run, and that he could
not hold it though he should be thought a greater chatterer
than a swallow. Nay, he will endure to be the butt of his
own children, when, drowsy at last, they make their request
to him in these terms—‘Papa, chatter to us, that we may
fall asleep!’

134 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

Noyorrotias K.

n 8& Royorroila dott avvOccws sevdav Adyewv Kal
apatewy av Bovrctas 6 Noyorraay, 6 S& Royorrowds
TolovuTos Tis olos atraytnoas Te hit evOds KataBadav
To 700s Kai pedidaas epwrncas’ obey ov, al Néyets Ti;
Ti Exeus Tept Todde eimreiy Katvoy; Kal émiBadov épwray,

A , e \ 9 ? 9 A!
fo) Aéyeral Te Kaworepov; Kab pny ayaba ye eat Ta -
Neyoueva’ Kal ovn cacas aroxpivacbat ciety’ TL NEES;

Qn eee A “A / 9 4 “ 4 ‘ A
ovdey axnkoas ; Soxd poi ce EVaynoeW Kalvav AGywV' Kat
éorw avT@ 7 otpatwrns 7} wais “Actelov Tov avAnToU
9 Avxwy 0 épyoraBos tapayeyoves €& avrns THs pwayns,
ov dyciv axnkoévar’ at pev ovy avadhopal tav Aoywv
rovairal eiow avtovd dy ovdels av Exou érihaBéc bas’
Sunyetras S€, rovrous dackwyv réyew, ws TlodAvorrépyov
xato Bacireds payn vevixnre, kal Kaccavépos élerypntas

a y ? A A “A UJ , b!
kal ay clrn TIC avT@, ov bé TaiTa mioTEvets; yoeEL, TO

A a A bd a Ld A ‘ 4 >
apaypa BoacBat yap év TH Todt, Kat TOY NOyor érrev-

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 135

XX. THE NEWSMAKER.

NEWSMAKING is the framing of fictitious sayings and
doings at the pleasure of him who makes news.

The Newsmaker is a person who, when he meets his
friend, will assume a demure air, and ask with a smile—
‘Where are you from, and what are your tidings? What
news have you to give about this affair? And then he will
reiterate the question—‘Is anything fresh rumoured? Well
certainly these are glorious tidings!’ Then, without allow-
ing the other to answer, he will go on—‘What say you?
You have heard nothing? I flatter myself that J can treat
you to some news’; and he has a soldier, or a slave of
Asteius the fluteplayer, or Lycon the contractor, just arrived
from the field of battle, from whom he says that he has
heard of it. In fact the authorities for his statements are
always such that no one can possibly lay hold upon them.
Quoting these, he relates how Polysperchon and the king
have won the battle, and Cassander has been taken
alive; and if anyone says to him, ‘But do you believe
this ?°—‘Why’, he will answer, ‘the town rings with it!

136 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

A \ a “A > A \ , N
TEWELY, KAL TWavTaS oupPovelv, TavTa yap Eyely TeEpt
Tis wayns’ Kal troddy Tov Cope yeyovévar’ elvat 5é avT@
Kai onpelov Ta TpdcwTa THY év Tols TpayyaciW’ bpay

\ I A D Ph neti of 2 e \
yap avTav TavtToy peraBeBAnKoTa’ Aéyet S ws Kat Tapa-
KNKOE Tapa TOVTOLS KpUTTTOMEVOY TiVa ev oiKia HON Tép-

é U “~
TTnv nuépay HKovra éx Maxedovias os wavta taita
olde’ Kat taita mavra SieEibv, was olecOe ; midavas
oxerAraver Néywv* Suotuyns Kaooavdpos* w taXaitwpos’
a) “A 2
évOupel TO THS TUYNS; GAN’ OdY LoyuUpOS YE YyEvOoLEVOS..."

\ a Qi 9 AN \ / In7/ . ta) \ a 3 “ U
kai det 5 avto oé povoy eidévat' Taat Sé Tois ev TH ToNet
mpocdedpaunne NEyov.

[rev trovovrwy avOpwrwv teOaipuaxa ti mote Bov-
hovtat AoyotrovobyTes' ov yap jovoy vpevdovtas GANA
Kai GAVOLTEAWS ATrAaANATTOVEL’ TroAAaKLS Yap avTaY ot
Lev év Tois Badaveios Teptotacels TroLovmEvoL TA (maria
9 , e o 9 a” ” , \ /
amoBeBrjKacw, of & év TH oT0d Tefopayia Kal vavpayia
a > 7 t ) t . 7.3 & A \ ’
ViKOVTES Epnuous Sixas OdAnKacwW* etal 8 ot Kal Tones
T@ Loyw KATA KpaTOS aipodyTes TapedecTTUNnOncav. Tavu
6) TaXalmwpov avtayv écrit TO éritndevpa’ troia yap é
TANALTWPOV AUTwY EoT iTnOeupa’ Troig yap év
a / \ » / f \ / a 9 a ]
oTod, Toi dé épyacrnpi¢, troim 5é pépes THS ayopas ov
Sunuepevovow arravddy trotobvtes Tovs dkovovTas ovTwsS
Kat Katatrovobyres Tais wevdoroyiass ;]

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 137

The report grows firmer and firmer—everyone is ‘agreed
—they all give the same account of the battle’: adding that
the hash has been dreadful; and that he can tell it, too,
from the faces of the Government—he observes that they
have all changed countenance. He speaks also of having
heard privately that the authorities have a man hid in a house
who came just five days ago from Macedonia, and who knows
it all, And in narrating all this—only think!—he will be
plausibly pathetic, saying ‘Unlucky Cassander! Poor fellow!
Do you see what fortune is? Well, well, he was a strong
man once...’: adding ‘No one but you must know this’ —
when he has run up to everybody in town with the news.

[It is a standing puzzle to me what object such men can
have in their inventions; for, besides telling falsehoods, they
incur positive loss. Often have cloaks been lost by those
- of them who draw groups round them at the baths; often has
judgment gone by default against those who were winning
battles or seafights in the Porch; and some there are who,
while mounting the imaginary breach, have missed their
dinner. What porch is there, what workshop, what part
of the Marketplace which they do not haunt all day long,
exhausting the patience of their hearers in this way, and
wearying them to death with their fictions?]

138 @EOPSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

kakoAoylas Ka.

Gore 5é 7 KaKoAoyla aywyn THS Yruyns eis TO yeElpov
év oyots, 6 5é Kaxorcyos Totoade tis olos épwrnbeis,
e “ y > A , e “ a
o Seva ris éorw; eimeiy xabatrep ot yeveadoyourTes
Mp@tov amd Tov yévous avtod apEowat. tovTou 6 pév
matnp && apyns Lwolas éxareiro, éyévero 8 év Tots oTpa-

‘ / > \ \ ? N , >
Tidtats Lwoiotpatos’ érretdy 5é eis tods Snuotas éve-

, / e / , > 4 “ A : .
ypadn, Swoidnuos. 7 wévTor untnp evyevns Oparra eorte
Kareiras your 1 ypuyn [KopwOtaxes]: tas 5& tovatras
ghaciv év tH mrarpid. evyevets elvas* avrds Sé obTos, ws ex
TOLOUTM@Y Yyeyovas, KaKOs Kal pactuyias. Kat ixavos be

, 9 Ce | U A A 9 € \
mpos Tia eimeiv’ eyo Snirov ta Tovaita ola, virép av

’ a \ ’ \ , r e
ov Tava mpos ue Kat Tovtous SieEwv' adTa al
yuvaires é THs 6500 Tovs TaptovTas auvaptrafovat’ Kai
oixia Tus a’Tn Ta oxédyn NpKvia* ov yap ovVv AnpEs éoTt

b | , > ef , e A 9 a
TO AEyOoMEevoY, GAN WoTrep KUVES al yuvaiKes év Tals
odeis ouvépyovtay’ Kal Td GAov avdporaror tives, Kal
avrai émi Oupay thy avdeov UTraxovovet. apérct Se Kab

7HE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 139

XXI. THE EVIL-SPEAKER.

THE habit of Evil-speaking is a bent of the mind to-
wards putting things in the worst light.

The Evil-speaker is one who, when asked who so-and-so
is, will reply, in the style of genealogists, ‘I will begin with
his parentage. This person’s father was originally called
Sosias; in the ranks he came to rank as Sosistratus; and,
when he was enrolled in his deme, as Sosidemus. His
mother, I may add, is a noble damsel of Thrace—at least
she is called ‘my life’ in the language of Corinth—and they
say that such ladies are esteemed noble in their own country.
Our friend himself, as might be expected from his parentage,
is—a rascally scoundrel’. He is very fond, also, of saying
to one: ‘Of course—/ understand that sort of thing; you
do not err in your way of describing it to our friends
and me. These women snatch the passers-by out of the
very street... That is a house which has not the best of charac-
ters...Really there zs something in that proverb about the
women...In short, they have a trick of gossiping with men,—
and they answer the hall-door themselves’.

It is just like him, too, when others are speaking evil, to

T40 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

a , es ’ 2 7 . 9 4
Kakws NeyovTwY éTépwv ovverriAapBavecbas Eltrav’ eye
dé rodtoy tdv dvOpwiov mov tTravTwv penionka’ Kat
\ > / > A A , Pd] e \ ,
yap eldeyOns tis atrd TOU Tpocwou eotiv, 7 Sé wovnpia
PS alas a AN ¢ a \
ovdevl opoia’ onpetov bé° TH yap avTov yuvatkl TadavTa
etoeveyxapévy mpotka a&, cE Hs madiov ait@ yéyore,
Tpeis YaAKots eis dor Sidwor, Kat TE Yuyp@ AoveoOat
avayKates TH Tov Llocedavos nuépa. Kal ovyxabnpevos
Seuvos trepl tov dvactavtos eitreiy, Kal apyny ye eiAndas
\ 9 4 ‘ > ] o b ] C.) A i \
pn atroayéc Bar unde Tovs oixeiovs avTov Aoidopjoat’ Kal
TrEiora Tept TOY hidwy Kal oixeiwy Kaka citrely Kad Trepl
r , a , 9 “ ae ,
TOV TETENEUTNKOTOV, KAKWS EYELY ATTOKANwY TrappHoLaY
, e \ “A 9 “a ,
kat Snuoxpatiay Kal édevOepiav xal tov ev te Bip
HOLOTA TOUTO TTOLWD.
[ovrws 6 THs SvoKonias épeOiopcs pavixors Kal é€e-
ornxoras avOpaérrous Tots H0ect Trotel. |

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 141

join in:—‘And J hate that man above all men. He looks a
scoundrel—it is written on his face: and his baseness—it
defies description. Here is a proof—he allows his wife,
who brought him six talents of dowry and has borne him a
child, three farthings for the luxuries of the table; and
makes her wash with cold water on Poseidon’s day’. When
he is sitting with others he loves to criticise one who has
just left the circle; nay, if he has found an occasion, he
will not abstain from abusing his own relations. Indeed he
will say all manner of injurious things of his friends and
relatives, and of the dead; misnaming slander ‘plain speak-
ing’, ‘republican candour’, ‘independence’, and making it
the chief pleasure of his life.

[Thus can the sting of ill temper produce in men the
character of insanity and frenzy. |

342 @EOPPASTOY XAPAKTHPES

peprpipotpias KB.

cori 9 peprpipotpia émitipnots Tapa TO TpoonKoV

trav Sedopévav, 6 58 peprpipoupos tovdade tis olos atro-
oteiNavrTos peploa Tod didou eitrely mpds Tov dépovTa’
9 4 , A a A ? , b ) 9 A
éfOovncas por Tov Fwuod nai rod olvapiov, ovx émt

a a \ 3 r b 4 9 ed
Seimrvoy xadéoas. kal To Aui ayavaxreiv, ov Si6re ove Vet,
dAnra Siére Votepov’ nal evpdy ev TH 65@ RadXavttoy
> A, md? oe NF : ,
eitreiy* GAX’ ov Onoaupov edpynKa ovdérrore’ Kal mrptapevos
9 LU ww ‘ ‘ “ “A
avdpatrodov aEvov Kat troAdra SenGeis tov mwdodvtos, Gav-

, > a ¥ € \ e ” 27 - y \
pato, elmreiv, et re vytés ovTM akiov édvnpat’ Kal apes
Tov eVaryyeAtbopevoy GT’ vidos GOL yéyovev, Eitrety OTL
a a \ A a apes \ «of ” A
dv mpocOjs Kal TAS ovoias TO HuuLoV aTreoTtWW, addy
épels* xal Sixny vixnoas nai N\aBav macas Tas Wnpous

“A A A
éyxadely TH yparpayTt Tov AOYoY Ws ToANa TapaneXol-
wort tay Sixaiwy' Kal épavov eicevexPevtos Tapa Tov
dirwv cal dynoavtos Tivos, ihapos tof, Kal was ; ettrety’
Gre Set tapyiptoy atrodobva, ExaoT@ Kal ywpis TovTwV
’ 4

yapuy operrery ws evnpyeTnpévon ;

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 143

XXII. THE GRUMBLER.

GRUMBLING is undue censure of one’s portion. °

The Grumbler is one who, when his friend has sent him
a present from his table, will say to the bearer, ‘You grudged
me my soup and my poor wine, or you would have asked
me todinner’. He will be annoyed with Zeus, not for not rain-
ing, but for raining too late; and, if he finds a purse on the
road, ‘Ah’, he will say, ‘but I have never found a treasure!’.
When he has bought a slave cheap after much coaxing of
the seller, ‘It is strange’, he will remark, ‘if I have got a
sound lot such a bargain’, To one who brings him the
good news, ‘A son is born to you’, he will reply, ‘If you add
that I have lost half my property, you will speak the truth’.
When he has won a lawsuit by a unanimous verdict, he will
find fault with the composer of his speech for having left
out several of the points in his case. If a subscription has
been raised for him by his friends, and someone says to him
‘Cheer up!’—‘Cheer up?’ he will answer; ‘when I have to
refund his money to every man, and to be grateful besides,
as if I had been done a service!’

144 @®EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

9 , 4
awTtoTIAS KY.
Gotw apédes amiotia vrodn is tis adiclas KaTa
/ e \ ew a ? 9 \
mavtwy, 6 S€ amiatos ToLoUTOs Tis olos aTrooTeiNas TOV
maida opwrnoovta Erepov traida téwrey tevodpevov
qmocov émpiaro’ Kat épety avTos TO apyvpiov Kai
\ / ' ’ a ’ 2s, \ \
kata otadioy Kabifwy aptOue tmocov éoti’ Kat Th
yuvaika THY avTOU épwrav KaTaKeipevos ei KEKAELKE THY
\ \ 9 ’ N U > e
KiBwrov Kat eb oEecnpavTat TO KUALKOUYLOY Kal Et O
Hoyos eis THY Oipay thy avrAciay euBEBAnTat, Kal av
exeivn 7, wndey Hrtov avuTds avactas yupvos ex Tav
, \ > / \ , oe a
oTpwpatwy Kal avuTrddntos Tov AvyYVoy aApas TaiTa
ed
TavTa Tepiopayov émioxeyracbar Kai obtw ports varvou
U
Tuyxavewy’ Kal Tos opEethovTas aVT@ apyvptoy peta pap-
, . A
TUpWY atrattely Tos TOKOUS OTras pH SvvwvTar éEapvot
yevéoBat' Kal 1d ipatiov Sé éxdodvar Sewos, ovy ds
Bérxriora epydoerat, GAN bray 7 akvos éyyuntns Tov
Kvapéws* kat otayv Kn TIS aiTnoopevos ExTrOpaTa, pa-
Mora perv wn Sotva, dv & dpa Tis oixetos 7 Kal avay-
Kaios, wovoy ov TUpwaas Kal oTnaas Kal ayeddoy éyyun-
Th AaBev xpnoar’ Kal tov aida 8é axorovbodrvta
Kerevey avtov Omiacbev un Babdifery adr Eutrpoober, iva
D 2 \ \ 2 A CQA 2 P33 a
guAarrntas avTov py év TH 0O@ atrodpacy’ Kal Tots €’n-
oct Tt Tap avtov Kai Néyovat, Tocov; KaTaOou’ ov yap
oyoralo mw réutre, cimety’ undéy mpaypatevou’ eyo
yap, av od Ln aYONATYS, TVVaKoADUONow.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 145

XXIII. THE DISTRUSTFUL MAN.

DISTRUSTFULNESS is a presumption that all men are
unjust.

The Distrustful man is one who, having sent his slave to
market, will send another to ascertain what price he gave.
He will carry his money himself, and sit down every two-
hundred yards to count it. He will ask his wife in bed if
she has locked the wardrobe, and if the cupboard has been
sealed, and the bolt put upon the hall-door; and if the reply
is ‘Yes,’ not the less will he forsake the blankets and run
about shoeless to inspect all these matters, and barely thus
- find sleep. He will demand his interest from his creditors
in the presence of witnesses, to prevent the possibility of
their repudiating the debt. He is apt also to send his cloak
to be cleaned, not to the best workman, but wherever he
finds sterling security for the fuller. When anyone comes
to ask the loan of cups he will, if possible, refuse; but if
perchance it is an intimate friend or a relation, he will almost
assay the cups in the fire, and weigh them, and do everything
but take security, before he lends them. Also he will order
his slave, when he attends him, to walk in front and not
behind, as a precaution against his running away in the
street. To persons who have bought something of him and
say, ‘How much is it? Enter it in your books, for I am
too busy to send the money yet,’—he will reply; ‘Do not
trouble yourself; if you are not at leisure, I will accompany

you.’
Io

146 @®EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

pixpoAoyias Ko.

7 5é puxporoyia éatl pedwr/a tod Siadopouv v1rép
Tov Katpov, 6 Sé puxporoyos ToLovTos Tis olos ev TH uni
nurwBortov atraitety éXOav eri Thy oikiay® Kal cvociTaY
aptOwety Tas KUNIKaS, TrOGaS ExacTos TréTrwxKe, Kab aTrap-
yeoOar éraytorov tH ’Aprémids trav ovvdetrvovvTav’
Kat Goa pixpov Tis TrpLapevos AoyifeTat TravTa pacKeL
elvat ayav* Kal oikétov yuTpay 4 AoTraba KatatayTos
elompakat amo Tav émurndeiwy’ Kab THs yuvatKos éK-
Barovons tpiyadxov olos petadépev Ta oKEVN Kal TAS
Krivas Kal Tas KiBwrovs Kai dipay Ta Kadvppata* Kai
éav TL TWAH, TOToUTOV aTroducGas waTE pn AVOLTEAELY
TO® Tplapévw’ Kal ovK dv édcat ote ovKoTpaynoaL éx
ToD avtod Knmov ovTe bua Tov avTod aypod tropevOjvat
olre édaav 7 doivixa Tav yapal Keysévav averécOar’
Kal Tovs dpous Sé émriaxotreio Oat oonpuépar et Stapévovor
ot avtoi. Sewvds 5 xal virepnucpiav mpakat Kad ToKov
TOKO aTaTHoaL Kal éoTiav Tos Snuctas mikpa Ta Kpea
Kowas Trapabeivas: Kal oravav undey mpiapevos eiaed-

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 147

XXIV. THE PENURIOUS MAN.

PENURIOUSNESS is too strict attention to profit and loss.

The Penurious man is one who, while the month is
current, will come to one’s house and ask for a half-obol.
When he is at table with others he will count how many
cups each of them has drunk; and will pour a smaller liba-
tion to Artemis than any of the company. Whenever a
person has made a good bargain for him and charges him
with it, he will say that it is too dear. When a servant has -
broken a jug or a plate he will take the value out of his
rations; or, if his wife has dropped a three-farthing piece, he
is capable of moving the furniture and the sofas and the
wardrobes, and of rummaging in the curtains. Ifhe has any-
thing to sell he will dispose of it at such a price that the
buyer shall have no profit. He is not likely to let one eat
a fig from his garden, or walk through his land, or pick up
one of the olives or dates that lie on the ground; and he
will inspect his boundaries day by day to see if they remain
the same. He is apt, also, to enforce the right of distrain-
ing, and to exact compound interest. When he feasts the
men of his parish, the cutlets set before them will be small:
when he markets, he will come in having bought nothing.

1O—2

148 @EO®SPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

Geiv* xai atrayopedoat TH yuvatkl pnte ddas ypjoaw
c > Ul , , t > # ° b ‘
HNTE EXAVYVIOV PTE KUpLVOY NTE OpYyaVvOoY puNnTeE oUdaS
- pyre oréppata unre OvdAnpata, GANA Aéyew OTL Ta puiKpa
TAUTA WOAAG €oTt TOV éviavTov. Kal TO OXOV OE TOY pL-
, Q N bd ; ” > a“ 9 4
KpoX\oyov Kat Tas apyupoOnKxas got ielv evpwriwoas
Kai Kreis iwpévas, Kal avtovs 6¢ hopodvtas éXatTTW TOY

“ Ve , ‘ 9 4 “A Ud
PnpeVv Ta iwaTtia, Kat ex AnKVOiwy puLKpaY Travy adeLho-
 pévous, Kad ev yp@ Ketpopévous, kal Td péoov Tis Hyuépas
Urrodvopévous, Kal pos Tors yvaders Siaresvoyévous Srrws
TO iparioy avrois E€er mrodAny ynv wa pn puTraivytas
TAY.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 149

And he will forbid his wife to lend salt, or a lamp-wick, or
cummin, or verjuice, or meal for sacrifice, or garlands, or
cakes; saying that these trifles come to much in the year.
Then in general it may be noticed that the moneyboxes of
the penurious are mouldy, and the keys rusty; that they
themselves wear their cloaks scarcely reaching to the thigh ;
that they anoint themselves from very small oil-flasks; that
they have their hair cut close; that they take off their shoes
in the middle of the day; and that they are urgent with the
fuller to let their cloak have plenty of earth, in order that it
may not soon be soiled.

150 ®EO®PASTOY XAPAKTHPE2.

tA
dveNevOepias Ke.

4 \

7 5é avedevbepia eat wepiovcia tis adtdoTipwias és

é , w e de 9 50 a ? to
aTavny €xovoa, 0 0€ avedevlEpos ToLovTOS Tis olos Vt-

, ta) , / 3 a A ,
Knoas Tpaypoois Tatviav Evriwny avabeivar to Atovicg,
érriyparypapevos avtov TO dvoua* Kat érriddcewy yivopevwv
éx Tod Onpwou GvacTas ciwimy ex ToD pécov amedOely: Kal
9 ‘\ e A , A \ e t A A e
Exdid0vs avTov Ouyarépa Tov pev iepeiov TANV TaV lepw-
civev Ta Kpéa atrodocbat, Tors 5é Saxovodvtas ev Tois
yapots oixocitous wiocOwcacbar> Kal Tpinpapyey Ta TOD
4 a a“ /
KuBEepyntou oTpwOpaTa aUT@ él TOD KaTATTPwLATOS VTrO-
/ \ e a ? , ‘ /

oropevvucba, ra Sé avtod amotiBévar. nal Ta Tatdia
Sé Sewvds pn méurpas eis SidacKadov, brav 4 Moveeia,
Gra djoas xaxas Eye, va py cuuRarwvrar’ Kai &&

? “a \ 9 , \ 4 > A / \ A ,
ayopas 5é owrnoas Ta Kpéa avTos dépew Kai TA KaYava
év T@ mpoKoAtTriw® Kal évdov pévew Stay éxd@ Ooipariov

& é

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. I5t

XXV. THE MEAN MAN.

MEANNESS is an excessive indifference to honour where
expense is concerned.

The Mean man is one who, when he has gained the prize
in a tragic contest, will dedicate a wooden scroll to Diony-
sus, having had it inscribed with his own name. When sub-
scriptions for the treasury are being made, he will rise in
silence from his place in the Ecclesia, and. go out from the
midst. When he is celebrating his daughter’s marriage he
will sell the flesh of the animal sacrificed, except the parts
due to the priest; and will hire the attendants at the marri-
age festival on condition that they find their own board.
When he is trierarch he will spread the steersman’s rugs
under him on the deck, and put his own away. He is apt,
also, not to send his children to school when there is a festi-
val of the Muses, but to say that they are unwell, in order
that they may not contribute. Again, when he has bought
provisions, he will himself carry the meat and the vegetables
from the marketplace in the bosom of his cloak. When he

152 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

exTAdvat’ Kal piroy Epavov cvdAdéyovros Kab Sretheypévou

3 A , oe / 3 A > A e a
aUT@ WpoctovTra mpoidopevos atroxamypas éx THs odod

\ UY ¥ 5 0 a e \ A 2 de ”
THY KUKN@ olKadE TropEevUnVaL’ Kal TH YuvatKl O€ TH
éavTov Tpoika eiceveyxapévy por) TpiacOat Oepdrrasvar,
adr\a picGotcba cis tas é&ddous ex Ths yuvatxelas
maidiov TO cvvaxodovOnoov’ Kal TA vIrodnpata Taduy-
ante. KexaTTupeva popeiy Kat Aéyev Ore Képaros ovdey
Siahépes’ xal avactas Thy oixiay éxKopnoat Kat tds
KMivas Kadddvat’ Kal Kabefouevos twapactpéyras Tov
tpiSwva oy avrTos opel.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 153

has sent his cloak to be scoured he will keep the house. If
a friend is raising a subscription, and has spoken to him
about it, he will turn out of the street when he descries him
approaching, and will go home by a roundabout way. Then
he will not buy a maid for his wife, though she brought him
a dower; but will hire from the Women’s Market the girl
who is to attend her on the occasions when she goes out.
He will wear his shoes patched with cobbler’s work, and say
that it is as strong as horn. He will sweep out his house’
when he gets up, and polish the sofas; and in sitting down
he will twist aside the coarse cloak which he wears himself.

154 @EO@SPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

> , S
alo xXpoKepoetas Ks.

eQr\ 9 / ,9 ’ , 9 a,
n 5€ aicyponépoeta eats trepiovola Képdovs aicypov

” A “A e 9 A e A ” e
are 5é ToLovTos 6 aiaypoxepdns olos éoti@y apTous iKa-
“a 9
vous 7 trapabeivar: Kal SavetcacOa mapa Févov trap
auT@® Katadvovtos’ Kal Svavépwv pepidas pyoas Sixavov
a , / \ AN ¢ on
elvat Sipotplay r@ Svavépwovre Sidocbar Kat evOds avT@

a : \ 2. a / \ 2 a

veiwat’ Kab olvoTrmA@v Kexpapévoy Tov olvoy TO Hiry
amobocbat’ xat émt Oday tnvixadra tropeverOar daywv

‘\ a a a a 9
Tovs vies Nvixa mpoika éepiac ot Oeatpavat’ Kat amro-

“A / \ \ b lal , 9 , 4

Snuav Snuocia To ev éx THS ToAEws Epod.oy olKoL Ka-
TaniTely, Tapa Sé tav cuumpecBevovtwy daveicacGar’
kal T@ axorovOm peifov doptiov éembeivar 4 Suvarat
, \ , 9 ¢ “A w ll é
dépew Kal edaxlota éeriTndea TOY AANwWY TrapEeyeLV
\ ' \ ’ A € a? , ’ ' \
kal Eeviwy Sé pépos TO avtod atraitnoas atodocBau Kal
arepopevos ev TO Baraveiw cirwv, campov ye TO EXaLOV
éTpiw, TO Tadapip, T@ adAoTpip areiperOar. Kal THY
eUpioKopéevav Yadav 1rd TAY oiKeTa@V év Tals Odots Setvos
aTraiThoat TO pépos, Kowvoy elvar pnoas Tov “Epuny* Kat
inatiov éxdodvat wAdvat Kal ypnoapevos Tapa yvwpipou
éperxvoat TrAciovs nwépas, Ews av arrauTnO7 Kat Ta Tol-
atta’ Dedswrio pétpe Tov Tuvdaxa eyKexpoupéev@ pETpeEly

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 155

XXVI. THE AVARICIOUS MAN.

AVARICE is excessive desire of base gain.

The Avaricious man is one who, when he entertains,
will not set enough bread upon the table. He will borrow
from a guest staying in his house. When he makes a dis-
tribution he will say that the distributor ‘is entitled to a
double share, and thereupon will help himself. When he
sells wine he will sell it watered to his own friend. He will
seize the opportunity of taking his boys to the play when
the lessees of the theatre grant free admission. Ifhe travels
on the public service, he will leave at home the money al-
lowed to him by the State, and will borrow of his colleagues
in the embassy; he will load his servant with more baggage
than he can carry, and give him shorter rations than any
other master does; he will demand, too, his strict share of
the presents,—and sell it. When he is anointing himself at
the bath he will say to the slave-boy, ‘ Why, this oil that you
have bought is rancid’'—and will use someone else’s. He
is apt to claim his part of the halfpence found by his servants
in the streets, and to cry ‘Shares in the luck!’ Having sent
his cloak to be scoured he will borrow another from an
acquaintance, and delay to restore it for several days, until
it is demanded back.

These, again, are traits of his. He will weigh out their
rations to his household with his own hands, using ‘the

156 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

avros Tois évdov, opodpa aroWav, ta éemirndea’ Kal
vronpiacOa, dirov Soxodvtos mpos tpdrrov money,
kal émiBarav arrodocBa* apuérer Sé Kal ypéos azrobs-
Sovs tptaxovra pvav édatrov térrapot Spaypais aro-
Sovvau’ Kal rev vidv Sé 7) Tropevopevwy eis td SiSacKa-
Aelov Tov pnva orov Sia THY appwotlay adaipely Tov
picbod Kata Noyov' Kal rov "AvOcatnpidva pnva pq
Wéutrey avtous eis Ta waOnpwara dia 76 Oéas eivat Todas,
iva pon Tov picOdv éextivy’ nab Tapa trades Koputfopevos
_ atroopav Tov yarKod THY émixaTadXNayny Tpocatrattely
Kat rNoyiopoyv Sé AauBavav Tapa Tov yetpiLovros * * *-
Kat dpatopas éoridy aitety Trois éavtTod tratoly éx Tov
xowov pov, ta Sé Katarevtropeva amd tHS TpaTrétns
padaviioy jwiccea atroypadecOat, iva ot Svaxovoivres
maices pn AaBwor’ nal ouvatrodnuav Sé peta yvuwpi-
pov ypyoacbat Trois éxeivwy tratcl, Tov 6é éavTod éw
picOdoa, Kat un avadépery eis TO Kowvov Tov pucOov.
apérer S¢ Kal cuvayovTwy trap avT@ arrobeivat Tay
Sidopéevov EvAwv nal daxdy Kal d€ovs Kai adov xat
éXaiov Tod eis Tov AVYVOV’ Kal yapmodyYTOsS TiWOS TOV
dirwv xai éxdidouévov Ovyatépa po y~povou Tivos atro-
Snunoar, iva pn wéerrn mpocdopay’ Kal qwapd tay
yvopipev toaita xiypacOar & pnt ay ataitycas pnt
dy atrobwovtav Taxéws dy TL Komioatto.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 157

measure of the frugal king,’ with the bottom dinted inward,
and carefully brushing the rim. He will buy a thing pn-
vately when a friend seems ready to sell it on reasonable
terms, and will dispose of it at a raised price. It is just
like him, too, when he is paying a debt of thirty minas, to
withhold four drachmas. Then if his sons, through ill-
health, do not attend the school throughout the month, he
will make a proportionate deduction from the payment; and
all through Anthesterion he will not send them to their
lessons because there are so many festivals, and he does not
wish to pay the fees. When he is receiving rent from a
slave he will demand in addition the discount charged on
the copper money; also in going through the accounts of his
manager [he will challenge small items]. Entertaining his
clansmen, he will beg a dish from the common table for his
own servants; and will register the half-radishes left over
from the repast, in order that the attendants may not get
them. Again, when he travels with acquaintances he will
make use of their servants, but will let his own slave out
for hire; nor will he place the proceeds to the common ac-
count. It is just like him, too, when a club-dinner is held
at his house, to secrete some of the frewood, lentils, vinegar,
salt, and lamp-oil placed at his disposal. If a friend, or a
friend’s daughter, is to be married, he will go abroad a little
while before, in order to avoid giving a wedding present.
And he will borrow from his acquaintances things of a kind
that no one would ask back,—or readily take back, if it
were proposed to restore them.

158 @EOSPAZTOY XAPAKTHPES.

SerAtas KC’.

apéret 5é 7 Sevdia Sokevev av elvar brrevEis Tis uyns
a f
EupoBos, 0 dé Setdds TovodTos Tis olos WAEwY Tas axpas
dacKewy nutorias elvar’ Kal KrAvdwvos yevouévou épwrayv
el Tis 7) pewUNTaL TOV TEOVTWY’ Kal ToD KUBEpYNTOU
tavaxvrrwy [per] t rvvOavecOat et wecorropel Kal Ti adTo
Soxet ta Tod Oeod’ Kal mpos Tov mrapaxaOnpevoy Néyew
Ore oPeitar amo évuTrviou Tivos’ Kal éxdus Sidovar TO
maw. Tov yitwvioKoy, Kal SetcOat mrpcs THY yHhv Wpoaa-
¢ ? \ ’ ‘ a V9 a t
yew avTov’ Kal otpatevouevos 5é Trebq Tors ExBonOodvTas
TE TpooKarEly KEACVWY POS aUTOY GTAaVYTAS TMpOToV Te-
pudeiv, Kat Aéyew ws Epyov Siayvavai dott wéTeEpoi eiow
? “A w“

of TWoNéutolt’ Kal akovwv Kpavyns Kal 6pev Timrovtas
> ] \ \ A , A A , A
elirav pos TOs TapeoTnKOTas OTe THY oTaOny AaBetv

eA a a 9 Ld A 9 \N \ 4
UmTo THS arovdns émenaeTo, Tpéye ETL THY oOKNYHV’

\ \ A 9 , N , A
kal Toy traida éxéurras Kal Kedevoas mpocKorTreic Oat,
A 9 / 9 e

qov eioW ob TrONEMLOL, ATOKpUYraL aUTNY VITO TO Tpoc-

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 159

XXVII. THE COWARD.

CowarDICE would seem to be, in fact, a shrinking of
the soul through fear.
The Coward is one who, on a voyage, will protest that
the promontories are privateers; and, if a high sea gets up,
_ will ask if there is any one on board who has not been
initiated. He will put up his head and ask the steersman
if he is half-way, and what he thinks of the face of the
heavens; remarking to the person sitting next him that
a certain dream makes him feel uneasy; and he will take
off his tunic and give it to his slave; or he will beg them to
put him ashore.

On land also, when he is campaigning, he will call to
him those who are going out to the rescue, and bid them
come and stand by him and look about them first; saying
that it is hard to make out which is the enemy. Hearing

“shouts and seeing men falling, he will remark to those who
stand by him that he has forgotten in his haste to bring his
sword, and will run to the tent; where, having sent his slave
out to reconnoitre the position of the enemy, he will hide

a

160 @®EO@SPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

xeharaov’ elta SiatpiBew wordy ypovov ws Syrav év
TH oOKNVH’ Kal Gpav Tpavpatiay Twa Tpoahepopevoy TAY
dhirwv rpocdSpapov.xat Oappely Kedevoas virodaBav dé-
pew xal rovTov Oeparrevery Kal trepiotoyyile nal ta-
paxaOnevos amo Tov EXxous Tas puias coPety, Kal tay
PadXrov 7 payerOar Tols TroNEmiows’ Kat TOD GadTLTTOU
Sé 7d qoNeutxoy onpnvavtTos KaOnpevos ev TH oKNVT
[efzretv]* daray’ és Kopaxas' ove éedoer tov avOpwrov
barvov NaBelv uKva onpalvov’ Kal aiparos Sé¢ avatrhews
amd Tod adXoTpiov Tpavpatos évTuyydvew Tos ex TIS
payns eravioder Kal SinyetcOar ws Kwduvevoas va oé-
coxa Tov dirwv' Kal eiadyew mpos Toy KaTaxelmevov
oxerouévous Tods Snuctas, Tovs pudétas, kal ToUTMY dua
éxaote SinyeisOat ws avros avrov tals avTov yepoly ert
oKNVIY EKopiceV.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. — 161

the sword under his pillow, and then spend a long time in
pretending to look for it. And seeing from the tent a
wounded comrade being carried in, he will run towards him
and cry ‘Cheer up!’; he will take him into his arms and
carry him; he will tend and sponge him; he will sit by him
and keep the flies off his wound—in short he will do any-
thing rather than fight with the enemy. Again, when the
‘trumpeter has sounded the signal for battle, he will cry, as
he sits in the tent, ‘Bother! you will not allow the man to
get a wink of sleep with your perpetual bugling! Then,
covered with blood from the other’s wound, he will meet
those who are returning from the fight, and announce to
them, ‘I have run some risk to save one of our fellows;’
and he will bring in the men of his parish and of his tribe
to see his patient, at the same time explaining to each of
them that he carried him with his own hands to the tent.

II

162 @EOPSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

Serardatmovias Kn’.

dpérer 7 Sevodaipovla Sdkeev dv elvat Sethia mpos
To Satpovior, 6 Se Sercidaipwv tovovTas tts olos él xpnvy
amrovinpapevos Tas yeipas Kab Treptppavdayevos amrd iepod
Sadvnv eis TO ordpa AaBav obrw THv juépay rTepitra-
Tel’ Kal thy dddoy éay virepSpayn yah, “ TMporepov
mopevOjnvat ws SieFéNOn tes, 4) AlOous Tpeis vIrép THS
od0d duaBarn’ Kal cay idn Sbw ev TH oiKia, édy pey
mapeiay, 2aBatiov Kareiv, day Se tepov, évradOa tiepovt
evbus iSpicacbar’ xai tdv Autrapav AiOwv tay ev Tals
Tpiddols Traptov éx THS AnKVOoU EXaLoy KaTayely Kai én
yovata Trecoy Kal TpooKuyncas amadXaTTecOas’ Kal éay
pds Ovraxov additov Siadaryn, wpos tov eEnyntyy eXOav
épwrav Ti yp) Troteiy’ Kal éay amroxpivytar avr@, éxdod-
val TO oKuTOoEWY emspparpas, un Tpocéyey ToUTOLS, GAN
atrotpamels éxOvcacGa. Kat truxva Sé THY oiKxiay Ka-
Oapat Seivos, “Exarns dadcxwv éraywyny yeyovévas’ xav
yravl Babifovros avtov Taparrntat, eltras, AOnva xpelr-
tev, o’tw mapedGeiv’ Kai obte emiSnvar pynpats ovre

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 163

XXVIII. THE SUPERSTITIOUS MAN.

SUPERSTITION would seem to be simply cowardice in
regard to the supernatural.

The Superstitious man is one who will wash his hands at
a fountain, sprinkle himself from a temple-font, put a bit of
laurel-leaf into his mouth, and so go about for the day. If
a weasel run across his path, he will not pursue his walk
until someone else has traversed the road, or until he has
thrown three stones across it. When he sees a serpent in
his house, if it be the red snake, he will invoke Sabazius,—
if the sacred snake, he will straightway place a shrine on the
spot. He will pour oil from his flask on the smooth stones
at the cross-roads as he goes by, and will fall on his knees
and worship them before he departs. If a mouse gnaws
through a meal-bag, he will go to the expounder of sacred
law and ask what is to be done; and if the answer is, ‘give
it to a cobbler to stitch up,’ he will disregard this counsel,
and go his way, and expiate the omen by sacrifice. He is
apt, also, to purify his house frequently, alleging that Hecate
has been brought into it by spells; and if an owl is startled
by him in his walk, he will exclaim ‘Glory be to Athene!’
before he proceeds. He will not tread upon a tombstone,

1I—?

¢C

164 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

él vexpov ovr emi Neva EAOciv EOeAjoaL, GAAG TO fn
pralver Oar cupdépov adT@ picat elvat’ nab rais rerpact
Se xal tals EBSopaot mpoordatas olvov pew tots evdov
éEeXOav ayopaca, pupclvas, MBavwTtov, piraxa, Kal
eiceA Oa elow orehavodyv rors ‘Eppadpodirous OAnv THV
nucpav’ kat Grav évitrviov idy, wopeverOas mpds Tovs
dveypoxpitas, pds Tos pavTes, pds TOs opyifoaKorrOUS
épwrncwv tive Be@ 7 Oca ev-yerOas Set xal redecOnao-
pevos mpos tors ‘Opdearedeotds Kata pjva tropever Oat
peta THS yuvateos, dav 8 yun oyoraky 4 yuvn, peta TIS
tlrOns Kal trav tadiwy’ Kal Tay tTreptppawouévwy ard
Gararrns émiperas Sdofeev av elvav xdv mote éridy
ckopodwy éotidpevoy tav él tais tpiddois, arrehOov
Kata Kehadns NovoacGat, kai iepelas Kadéoas oKirArAN 7
oxvAaKt KedeDoat avTdy mepixafapas’ pawopevoy te
iSav 7 émiAntrrov dpi€as eis KéXtrov ricaL.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 165

or come near a dead body or a woman defiled by child-
birth, saying that it is expedient for him not to be polluted.
Also on the fourth and seventh days of each month he will
order his servants to mull wine, and will go out and buy
myrtle-wreaths, frankincense, convolvuluses; and on coming
in will spend the day in crowning the Hermaphrodites.
When he has seen a vision he will go to the interpreters of
dreams, the seers, the augurs, to ask them to what god or
goddess he ought to pray. Every month he will repair to the
priests of the Orphic Mysteries, to partake in their rites, ac-
companied by his wife, or (if she is too busy) by his children
and their nurse. He would seem, too, to be of those who
are scrupulous in sprinkling themselves with sea-water; and
if ever he observes anyone feasting on the garlic at the
cross-roads, he will go away, pour water over his head, and,
summoning the priestesses, bid them carry a squill or a
puppy round him for purification. And if he sees a maniac _
or an epileptic man he will shudder and spit into his bosom.

166 @EO®PASTOY XAPAKTHPES.

CAtyapxias Kf.

Sdfete 8 av elvas n ddAvyapyla girapyla tis, ioxyvos,
ov Képdous yALyouevn, 6 Se orAdyapxos ToLodtos olos, Tov
Snuwou BovAevopévou rivas TS Apxovre wpocarpnoovtat
THs ToumHs Tods TUVETTLEANTOLEVOUS, TrapeNOay aTro-
dyvacOat ws Set avroxparopas Tovrous elvay* xnav AdXov
mpoBdd\Xwvrar Séxa, Aéyew* ‘ixavds els éotw* todTov
Sé Gre Sef avdpa eivas’ nal tov ‘Opnpov éerav tovto ev
povoy KaTéxe, OTL ovK ayabov TorvKoLpavin: els
Kotpavos éotw, tay Sé adrdwov pnodev érrictacOa.
apérer dé Sewvds Tois ToLovtois Tav AGywv ypnoacOal,
Gre Sef avrods nuds cuvenOovras epi tovtwy Boudev-
cacOat Kat éx Tod Gydov Kal THS ayopas aTradXNayhva,
kat TavoacGa apyais mAnovalovras Kal vird TovTwY
UBpilopévous 7 Tyuwpévous’ Kal StL 7 ToUTOUS Set 7 pas
“ouKely THY TrokW* Kata pecov Sé THS nNuepas éEvav Td
iwatiov avaBeBAnpuévos Kat péonv Kouvpay Kexappévos
kal axpiBas atrwvuytopévos coBely tTovs ToLovTous NO-
yous Tréywr dia Hv Tod ‘Oéelou't Sia trovs cuxopavras

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 167

XXIX. THE OLIGARCH.

THE Oligarchical temper would seem to consist in a
love of authority, covetous, not of gain, but of power.

The Oligarchical man is one who, when the people
are deliberating whom they shall associate with the archon
as joint directors of the procession, will come forward
and express his opinion that these directors ought to
have plenary powers; and, if others propose ten, he will
say that ‘one is sufficient,’ but that ‘he must be a maz.’
Of Homer's poetry he has mastered only this one line,—

No good comes of manifold rule; let the ruler be one:

of the rest he is absolutely ignorant. It is very much
in his manner to use phrases of this kind: ‘We must
meet and discuss these matters by ourselves, and get
clear of the rabble and the marketplace :’ ‘we must leave
off courting office, and being slighted or graced by these
fellows ;’ ‘either they or Wwe must govern the city.’ He
will go out about the middle of the day witb his cloak
gracefully adjusted, his hair daintily trimmed, his nails
delicately pared, and strut through the Odeum Street,
making such remarks as these: ‘There is no living

168 @EO®PASTOY XAPAKTHPES,

ove oixntéov éotiv éy TH mWodEL Kal ws ev Tots SixacTn-
plows Sewad macyopey Urrd tev Sucaloyrwv’ Kal ws Bav-
U a A \ f / , . \
palw Tay wpds Ta Kowa TpociovTwy, Ti BovrNovTaL* Kai
e 9 , a, 9 A ry 9 A a“ a
@S aYapLoTOY €oTt TO TAHOGOS Kal ael TOD vémovToS Kat
, i ¢ ’ t ’ a
dé:d0vt0s’ Kal os aloxUvETaL EV TH éxxdnoia orav Tapar
KdOnral Tis avT@ Aetrrds Kal avypav’ Kat elmety’ métE
mavoonela vid Tay NELTOUpyL@Y Kal TOY TpiInpapYLOY
9 , e QA .) A a *
GTOAAU EVOL; Kal ws puLonTdy TO TaV Snuaywyav yévos
kat Tov @ncéa wpatov dfjocat tav KaKa@v TH Tone
’ ¥ " a \ , t : ,
yeyovévas altiov" Todtov yap é« Sadexa modewy eis piav
KatayayovTa Adoa, tHhv Bacidreiav’ kai Sixava avrop
A n 4 9 A 9 4 e 9 9 nx
mabey? mpatov yap avroy atrodéecOat UT’ avTay: xal
rowaita érepa impos tors Eévous xal Tay mouTay To
GpoTpoTrous Kal TavTa mpoalpoupévous.

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 169

in Athens for the informers:’ ‘we are shamefully treated
in the courts by the juries:’ ‘I cannot conceive what
people want with meddling in public affairs:’ ‘how un-
grateful the people are—always the slaves of a largess
or a bribe;’ and ‘how ashamed I am when a meagre,
squalid fellow sits down by me in the Ecclesia!’ ‘When,’
he will ask, ‘will they have done ruining us with these
public services and trierarchies? How detestable that
set of demagogues is! Theseus’ (he will say) ‘was the
beginning of the mischief to the State. It was he who
reduced it from twelve cities to one, and undid the
monarchy. And he was rightly served; for he was the
people’s first victim himself.’

And so on to foreigners and to those citizens who
resemble him in their disposition and their politics.

170 @EO®PASTOY XAPAKTHPEZS.

giXorovnpias N.

are 5é 4 pidoTrovnpia émiOupula Kaxias’ 6 5é ido-
movnpos éott towade Tis olos évruyyavew Tois nTTN-
pévois Kab Snpocious aydvas OdAnKdot Kal vTrodapBa-
yew, €ay TOvTOLS yYpHTat, éutreiporepos yevrnoéaOas Kai
doBepwrepos* wal él trois ypnotois eteiv, ws yiverat’
Kat dnoas ws ovdeis dots ypnotos, Kal duolovs mravras
elvat’ kal émicxanrar Se, bs ypnords éott* Kal Toy to-
pnpov §é eimeiv édevOepov, Gay Bovrntal tis ed oxorreiv’
Kal Ta ev GANG oporoyely adnO7n virép avTov AéyeoOar
bro Teév avOparwv, évia Sé ayvociv doa elvar yap
avrov evpun cal diréraipoy Kal émibéEiov' Kal Svarei-
veoOat Sé virép avrod ws ovK evtetuynKey avOpwrr@ ixa-
yotépp’ xat evvous 5é elvat avt@ ev éxxdAnola déyovtt 7
emt Suxaotnpiov Kpiwwouévp*® nal mpds Tods xaOnpévous
5é eimrely Sewves ws ov Set rov avdpa addAa TO wpaypa

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 7%

XXX. THE PATRON OF RASCALS.

THE Patronising of Rascals is a form of the appetite for
vice. :
The Patron of Rascals is one who will throw himself
into the company of those who have lost lawsuits and have
been found guilty in criminal causes; conceiving that, if he
associates with such persons, he will become more a man of
the world, and will inspire the greater awe. Speaking of
honest men he will add ‘so-so,’ and will remark that no one
is honest,—all men are alike ; indeed, one of his sarcasms
is, ‘What an honest fellow!’ Again he will say that the
rascal is a frank man, if one will look fairly at the matter.’
‘Most of the things that people say of him,’ he admits, ‘are
true; but some things’ (he adds) ‘they do not know;
namely that he is a clever fellow, and fond of his friends,
and a man of tact ;? and he will contend in his behalf that
he has ‘never met with an abler man.’ He will show him
favour, also, when he speaks in the Ecclesia or is at the
bar of a court; he is fond, too, of remarking to the
bench, ‘The question is of the cause, not of the person.’

172 @EOSPASTOY XAPAKTHPES,.

xpivecOar’ xai djoat avrov Kiva elvas Tov Sypov, pudat-
TELV Yap avrov Tovs adixovvTas’ Kal eitrety ws ody EFopev
Tovs vimép Tay Kowav cuvaybecOncopévovs av Tos
Totovtous mpowueba. Sewwds Sé xal mpoctarncat pav-
Awv Kat cuvedpevtoa ev Stxaarnpiows eri wovnpots mpay-
pact, Kal Kpiow Kkplvov éxdéyecOat TA UTO TAY avTtbi-
Kav Aeyoueva eri TO YEtpov.

[nai To ddov 7 iroTrovnpia adedgn éort THS Wovnpias,
Kat arnbés éote TO THS TWapoipias, TO OpoLoy IMpos TO
duovov tropever Gat. |

THE CHARACTERS OF THEOPHRASTUS. 173

‘The defendant,’ he will say, ‘is the watch-dog of the
people,—he keeps an eye on evil-doers. We shall have no-
body to take the public wrongs to heart, if we allow our-
selves to lose such men.’ Then he is apt to become the
champion of worthless persons, and to form conspiracies
in the law-courts in bad causes; and, when he is hearing
a case, to take up the statements of the litigants in the
worst sense. | |

[In short, sympathy with rascality is sister to rascality
itself; and true is the proverb that ‘Like moves towards
like.’]

NOTES.

NOTES.

THE PROEM.

1 Often before now &c.] Since the criticism of C. G. Sonntag,
published in 1787, on this proem, there has been no doubt
among scholars of its spuriousness. The fatuous remark with
which it begins, the sensational statement as to the writer’s
age, and the general feebleness of the whole production betray
a clumsy forger. Petersen’s conjecture (p. 62) that he probably
was not a dweller in Greece seems likely enough. See /uztrod.
Pp. 40.

2 ninety years and nine] Diogenes (V. 40) says that Theo-
phrastus died at §5- This, as Zeller says (Phzlosoph. der Gr.
Part II. sect. 2. p. 641), is a good deal more probable than the
statement here. The only confirmation of the latter is Jerome’s
assertion (E%. 34 ad Nepotian. 1v.b.) that Theophrastus lived to
107: but even there another reading is ‘Themistoclem.’

class by class] «xara yévos. Schneider and Ussing un-
derstand these words rightly, but strangely say that the promise
is not fulfilled, since the Characters, as they have come to us,
are not arranged ‘in any certain order. But xara yévos means
only that several classes, yéyn, of characters are to be described,
one by one; not necessarily in any particular order. Ast, on
the other hand, is wrong, I think, in taking xara yévos to mean
‘generically, gexeratim, ‘ita ut non singulos vel certos quos-
dam homines exhibeam, sed hominum mores in universum ex-
primam.’ This would surely be yeas.

42

178 NOTES.

4 both the good and the worthless among men] The author
of the proem goes on to say that he will describe doth sorts.
There may have been, in his time, a tradition that the book had
once contained descriptions of virtues as well as vices, or this
may have been his own opinion; accordingly he writes such
a preface as he conceived that the book in its complete state
might have had. Petersen, believing the Characters to be ex-
tracts from the large work epi 7Oav, suggests that the extracter
may have begun with the intention of,selecting descriptions of
virtues also. See /xtrod. p. 41.

Il. THE FLATTERER.

1 Flattery] The Definition is defective. It describes the
manner in which Flattery affects the interests of the person
who practises it; but does not say what it is in respect to the
person who is its object; viz. a desire to please.

After describing the man who conducts himself in society
as he ought to do, and observing that for this mean there is no
name, Aristotle says (Eth. Vic. Iv. 6): ‘Of those who try to
give pleasure, he who with no further motive aims at being
pleasant is Complaisant (dpeoxos, see c. 11.); he who does so in
order that advantage may accrue to him zx respect of money or
anything that money procures is a Flatterer: while he who is
peevish about everything is (as has been said) Cross (8vcxoAos—
the avéadns of Theophrastus, c. 111.) and Quarrelsome.’

The notion conveyed by the term xodaxeia is not precisely
what we usually mean by ‘flattery,’ but something coarser.
It meant a sort of extravagant toadyism, practised, not as a fine
art, but simply as an industry—as a recognised method of ob-
taining a livelihood. This tone is unconsciously illustrated by
Athenaeus when, in his reminiscences of eminent Flatterers
(VI. pp. 248—260), he speaks of ‘ Cheirisophus, the flatterer of
Dionysius,’ ‘Callicrates, the flatterer of Ptolemy,’ ‘ Anaxarchus,
one of the flatterers of Alexander.’ These men had, as it were,
been preferred to permanent posts. The remark (Ath. vi. p. 248
§ 53) that the xoda& ‘is not far from the Parasite’ is true in
so far as material benefit—especially in the form of entertain-
ment—was the object of both. But the xoAaé claimed this in
right of a supposed personal devotion, the Parasite rather in
virtue of his power to amuse,

I. THE FLATTERER. 179

2 the Porch] ‘i. e. the oroa motxiAn, the Porch of Paintings:
a piazza, not attached to any building, standing at the N.E.
corner of the Market-place. It was furnished with stone benches,
and afforded the kind of shelter for conversation and exercise
needed in a warm climate. Of the paintings on its walls the
most famous were Micon’s fresco of Theseus and the Amazons,
and a fresco of Marathon by Polygnotus. In front stood a row
of bronze statues, among which Pausanias (about 180 A.D.) men-
tions those of Solon and Seleucus.—Two other piazzas of the
same kind stood in the Market-place; (1) the Royal Porch,
where the ‘king’ Archon held his court, on the S. W. side;
and (2) the Porch of Freedom, probably to the E, of it—so
called from a statue of Zeus Eleutherios,

3. a morsel of wool] Suidas gives xpoxidas ddaipeiv: ‘20 pick
off shreds, as a proverb for those ‘who will do anything for the
sake of flattery.’ Hesychius explains the word xpoxvAeypos—‘the
picking off of shreds in the manner of a flatterer”? According
to Plutarch, Valeria, Sulla’s last wife, first attracted his notice at
the theatre by the attention of removing a thread from his cloak
(Suéla, c. 35). Ovid attributes a like flattery to the skilful
lover (Amor. III. 2. 41):—

Ah, while I speak, one small speck here doth rest—
Away, base atom, from that snowy breast !

4 white hairs] So in the Kxighfs, where Kleon and his
rival are bidding against each other for the favour of Demus
(v. 966):—‘ KZ, And I will pluck out your grey hairs and make
you young again.’

5 laugh at a frigid joke] Compare Athenaeus VI. p. 249
§ 55 :—‘ The same authority (one Hegesander) relates that Chei-
risophus, the flatterer of Dionysius, seeing his patron laughing
with some acquaintances—(he was too far from them to hear the
conversation)—laughed too. When Dionysius asked him why
he was laughing when he could not hear what was said, he
answered, “ My confidence in you assures me that the remark
was amusing.”

6 his Honour] avros, ifse, ‘the master ;’ said especially of
the head of a household or of a school. See the Clouds (v. 218):
‘ Strepstades. Pray, now, who is this person suspended in a
basket? Daéscifle. It is himself. S. And who is “himself”?
D. Socrates.’

I2—a4

180 NOTES.

assisting at the purchase of slippers] The xpymis was pro-
bably a kind of half-shoe, covering the fore part of the foot, and |
strapped on at the heels. The ordinary Greek foot-covering,
the hypodema, was a sandal bound under the foot; the ‘san-
dalion,’ a sandal with a small upper leather across the toe, but
covering less of the fore part of the foot than the ‘crepis: the
‘embas’ was the shoe proper. See Bekker’s Exc. to sc. XI. of
the Charzcles.

8 the Women’s Market] Mentioned again in c. XXV. as the
place from which a female slave is hired. Nothing is certainly
known about it. Bekker (Char. Exc. to sc. IV.) shows that it pro-
bably does not mean ‘the market frequented by women,’ since
at Athens freewomen never, and female slaves rarely, marketed.
He suggests that it may have been (1) a market in which the
sellers were women: (2) a market in which articles chiefly for
female use were sold.—Ussing prefers to suppose that it was
(3) the place where slave-girls were sold or hired. The word
Suvarés in the text seems to imply that the mission was dis-
creditable.

9 to praise the wine] Thus Horace’s host Nasidienus had
invited Nomentanus to dinner in order that he might call atten-
tion ‘to anything which was escaping notice’ (Sa¢. 11. 8. 25).

10 the cushions} As the seats in the theatre were merely
semicircular tiers of rock-hewn ledges, those who desired to be
comfortable brought their own cushions. Kleon’s rival in the
Knights pities Demus for the discomforts of the Pnyx:—‘ He
(Kleon) does not care how uneasily you sit on the rocks. How
different from me, who have had this’—(producing a cushion)—
‘stitched up as a present for you:’ (v. 783). Aeschines (é# Cfes.
p. 64 § 76) alleges in proof of the servility of Demosthenes to
Macedon that, when Philip’s envoys were introduced to the
Ecclesia, he ushered them to the place of honour, ‘and arranged
cushions and spread purple draperies.’ Ovid says (Art. Am. I.
160) :—

Small things take triflers: men have owed a place
To smoothing cushions with a dexterous grace.

Ir his portrait] The word exwy here is probably to be un-
derstood, not of a painting, but of a portrait-statue or bust. In
Diog. Laert. v. 52 the execution of the ‘portrait’ of Nicoma-
chus for which Theophrastus left directions inhis will is assigned
to Praxiteles the sculptor.

181

Il THE COMPLAISANT MAN.

1 Complaisance] The word rendered ‘mode of address’—
évrevéts—occurs again in the same sense in the Defin. to c. XI.
It is not equivalent to oyiAéa, but narrower in meaning, de-
noting chiefly the manner of accosting: see Athen. VI. p. 256
§ 16, ‘Their (the flatterers’) mode of address (évrev&s) is so
artistic, so plausible towards all men.’

The Flatterer, according to Aristotle, flatters for money or
what money buys: the Complaisant man ‘aims at being pleasant
with no further object’ (yu d¢ dAAo rt). This is a fault (1) be-
cause to combat the wishes of others is sometimes a duty to
them or to oneself: thus Aristotle’s Perfectly-behaved man is one
who will occasionally ‘make difficulties’ (8voyepaiverv) for either
reason or both: £7¢h. Nic. lv. 6. (2) Because the primary ob-
ject of the Complaisant man is, not that others may be pleased,
but that he may be pleasant. He desires popularity, either from
mere vanity, or for the sake of influence. When, therefore, he
is said to aim at being pleasant ‘without any /u7ther object,’
this does not exclude a selfish object. To be thought pleasant
is itself the objéct which he most covets. He is unmercenary,
as | with the Flatterer: but he is not disinterested. —

In*the pair of portraits which Theophrastus has drawn two
salient points of difference may be noted. (1) The Flatterer
treatsehis patron as an admired superior, for whom he displays
devotion, but whom it would be impertinent to assure of his
Segal The Complaisant man treats his associate as an equal
or whom he has a warm friendship. (2) The Flatterer, who
desires material benefits, is constant to a once-found patron ;
partly because ripe intimacy is essential to complete success,
and partly because he is unwilling to relinquish a certainty.
The Complaisant man, on the other hand, desires to be on
creditably cordial terms with as large a number of persons as
possible.

2 toan arbitration] The system of Arbitration at Athens
served in some degree to mitigate the Athenian passion for
lawsuits—it being understood that ‘the arbitrator looks to
equity, as the judge to the law’ (Ar. Ahez. 1.13). Arbitrators
were of two kinds: (1) Public; four, probably, for each of the
ten tribes. One or more of these could try any civil cause, if

182 NOTES.

the complainant preferred that course to going before a jury.
Or a particular question of fact involved in a civil cause was
sometimes referred to them. (2) Private: chosen to settle a
dispute by mutual agreement between the parties. In this
case there were usually three arbitrators. Two of these were
considered as advocates respectively of the two disputants.
The third sat as umpire (Demosth. zz Meaer. p. 1360 § 45).
Here the Complaisant man is one of the advocates. Inc. Iv.
the Arrogant man is the umpire.

3 that foreigners speak more justly] This may be under-
stood merely of general conversation. There were, however,
two occasions on which this tendency might find special scope.
The mercantile contracts (ovpBorq) between the Greek republics
provided for the hearing, in the defendant’s city, of lawsuits
arising out of commerce. In such an action tried at Athens
the foreigner would therefore always be the complainant ; and
the Complaisant juror may be conceived as warmly sympathis-
ing with his grievance. Again, when foreign envoys made 4
representation or a demand before the Ecclesia, the Com-
plaisant citizen would ostentatiously support their claim.

In this instance the man whose sole aim is to please volun-
tarily offends the sentiment of the majority for the sake of
conciliating a small minority. This might at first sight appear
inconsistent with his character. But it is, in fact, perfectly
true to it. The Complaisant man believes that the regard of
any individual can be purchased outright by certain ignoble
civilities. Once bought, it is his property; and, on his prin-
ciple that friendships are to be counted, not weighed, his next
object 1s to secure the regard of some one else. His citizens
are always with him ; but if the ‘foreigners’ are to be enrolled
among his acquaintance, this must be done while they are at
Athens.

4 to send for the children] The doom of seclusion under
which the Women’s Apartment lay does not seem to have ex-
tended in its full rigour to the nursery. Children, or at least
young boys, were sometimes guests in the dining-room: see
Lucian’s Dream, c. 11: ‘Come you, too, Micyllus, and dine
with us: I will send my boy to dine in the Women’s Apart-
ments, that there may be room for you.’ ~But when young
people came to table they saz, to recline was the privilege of
their elders. See Xenophon’s Symzfos. 1. 12, ‘Autolycus’ (a boy

lll. THE SURLY MAN. 183

old enough to have won the pancratium, i.e. about 14) ‘sat be-
side his father; the other guests reclined as usual.’

and kiss them] The Flatterer, when /e wished to pay
his court to the children, felt it necessary to present them with
fruit. This illustrates the distinction referred to in the first
note to this chapter. As the Flatterer had voluntarily assumed
a quasi-menial position, he could not expect, like the Com-
plaisant man, that his mere good-humour with the children
should gratify their father.

6 ‘Wine-skin '—‘Hatchet"] Some child’s-game, of which no-
thing is known. It may have consisted, for instance, in one of
the players bringing down his hand edgewise (‘hatchet’) on the
other’s clenched fist, before he could snatch it away. That the
words are not names which the guest calls the children—as
they have usually been explained—is clear from the avros
in the text, which shows that the children said them too.
Casaubon’s theory that the ‘ wine-skin’ and ‘hatchet’ were little
toys (mepidépaca) hung round the children’s necks, which the
guest cakes up and names successively, supposes the children
to be infants.

Ill. THE SURLY MAN.

1 Surliness}] The Definition is imperfect; for the person de-
scribed here is discourteous not in words only but in deeds ; as
when he refuses to sing. Probably the composer of the Defini-
tion wished to convey the idea that the Surly man is rough on
the surface only, but often kindly beneath it: e.g, he gives
money to his friend in difficulties, though with a rude speech,

- The conception of avéadeca presented here illustrates a
general characteristic of these sketches, of which ¢. xl. fur-
nishes perhaps the best example. A word originally of large
meaning is considered in that special sense to which social
usage had narrowed it. Av6adns is properly ‘one who pleases
himself ;? the word might, and did, express every shade of self-
will, from the stubbornness of a Prometheus to the caprice of a
coquette. Byt Theophrastus~in accordance, probably, with
the usage of his day—limits it to one special case, His avéaéns
is the man of morose, unsociable manners; apt to make rude
speeches and to be generally yngracious; tenacious, above all
things, of his independence, to the extent of grudging homage

184 NOTES.

to the gods; but capable of doing kindnesses, though in a rude
way. We know from other sources that the word had come to
be used in this special sense—of a certain manner in society;
but the quality of this manner is variously described. Already
in Euripides (AZedea, 223) the av@adns is one who is ‘harsh to
his fellow-citizens, from want of culture’ (atxpos...dpabias vro).
The author of the Magna Moralia (prob. later than Aristotle,
Grant, Vol. I. Essay I. p. 14) describes the av@adns very much
as he is described here—‘ one who will not associate or con-
verse with any man’ (I. 28). Eudemus, contemporary with
Theophrastus, identifies the av6adns with the duaxoXos, or Cross
man, of Aristotle, the opposite of the xcoAa& and apeoxos (E7h.
Nic. Iv. 6.9), describing him as ‘regulating his life with no
respect to others (yndev mpos érepov (av), but contempiuous’ (Eth.
Eudem. U1. 7. 4). This element of ‘contempt’ becomes the
distinctive feature of av@éadera in the analysis given of it by
Philodemus of Gadara, a contemporary of Cicero :—‘The so-
called Surly man (6 avdadns Aeyopevos) seems to be compounded
of conceit (otyows), arrogance (vmrepnpavia), and contemptuous-
ness (umepoyia).” (De Vitizs X. col. xvi. 39 ed. Ussing.) That
is, he thinks too highly 6f himself (conceit), too meanly of
others (contempt), and acts upon his estimate (arrogance).

-Philodemus adds this example :—Sharing a bath with another

person, the Surly man will order hot (or cold) water without
previously consulting his associate.

Now this is what the Arrogant man of Theophrastus (c. Iv.)
would do; but not what his Surly man would do; and it may
be proper to point out the main differences between them as
conceived by him. 1. The Surly man acts chiefly from a desire
to be left alone; though, as proud men are also reserved, he
often seems to act from pride. .The Arrogant man acts from
a desire to enforce the recognition of a fancied superiority.
2. The Surly man repels advances, but does not take liberties.
The Arrogant man does both.

2 at feast-tide] The great festivals were occasions not only of
public sacrifice but of private sacrifices in every house. Portions
(uepides) of the flesh were often’ sent to those friends who were
not present at the dinner given after the sacrifice (c. XV. note 2).
Thus, when the Discontented man receives such a present
(c. XXII.) he complains that it is a poor substitute for an invita-
tion to the dinner. See Ar. Acharn, 1048; ‘Slave. Dicaeo-

Ill. THE SURLY MAN. 185

polis! JD. Whom have we here? SZ, A bridegroom has sent
you this flesh from the wedding feast.’ Plutarch mentions this
among the attentions by which Antigonus Gonatas sought to
conciliate the founder of the Achaean League: ‘Whenever he
held a sacrifice at Corinth he used to send portions of the flesh
to Aratus at Sicyon’ (Avaz. c. 15). The Pitcher-feast (the second
day of the Anthesteria) was especially an occasion for such
offerings: see c. XXVI. note 14.

3 with their compliments} Xen. Cyrof. VIII. 2. 4: ‘Also,
when he had occasion to commend any of his domestics, he
used to compliment them with presents from his table’ (éripa
aro ths tpare(ns).

4 forasubscription] See c. v. note 5.

5 will not consent to sing] i.e. to take his turn in the
okodtov, or ‘catch,’ which the company are singing over their
wine. Each guest, though not in regular order, usually sang a
short stanza or verse. In Athenaeus (XV. p. 695 § 50) the first
singer gives an alcaic stanza on the dangers of the sea; the
second takes him up with a quatrain in the style of a nursery
rhyme; the third, fourth, fifth and sixth then go through the
stanzas on Harmodius and Aristogeiton.—In the Clouds, Phei-
dippides incenses his father by acting as the avddns does here.
‘First I requested him to take the lyre, and sing a song of
Simonides, the Shearing of the Ram; but he quickly objected
that to play the lyre and sing at dessert was an old-fashioned
custom’ (vv. 1355 ff.).

6 to recite] pots meant especially a speech from a tragedy.
Demosthenes gives as instances of pyoes the prologue of the
ffecuba and the Messenger’s speech from an unknown play (de
Coron. p. 315 § 267, cf. Ar. Wasps, 580). The declamation of
such a passage seems to have been accepted at entertainments
as a substitute for a song. Thus when Pheidippides haughtily
refuses to sing, his father requests him ‘at least to take the
myrtle branch and say something from Aeschylus; and finally
‘he chanted a speech (joe pow) from Euripides (Clouds, 1371).
Aeschines speaks of his rival ‘telling the Senate a long story
about the young Alexander—how he played the lyre to us over
our wine, declaimed some speeches, and sang see-saw catches
(avrixpovoets) with another youth’ (2% Z7zmarch. p. 24 § 160).

7 todance] - See c. IX. note 7.

186 NOTES.

8 not to pray to the gods] This touch alone momentarily
lifts the avéadns of Theophrastus from his petty sullenness into
something of that more tragic obstinacy which the old poets
associated with av@adeva. In the Prometheus Vinctys avéadns is
the word used to describe, on the one hand, the stubborn pati-
ence of the sufferer.—on the other, the inflexible resolve of
Zeus (vv. 928, 985). It was avéadeca, stubborn self-reliance, says
Plutarch (Cvass. 19), which prevented Crassus from recalling an
ill-omened speech which had excited the superstitious fears of
his men: see c. XIII. note 10. In this, its sterner sense, avdadns
would exactly describe Virgil’s contemptor divom Mezentius.

IV. THE ARROGANT MAN.

1 Arrogance] The relation of Arrogance, as treated by
Theophrastus, to Surliness has been spoken of in note r to
c. Ill. In regard to Aristotle’s system, Arrogance is a species of
what he terms xavvérns, Vanity or Inflation—the opposite ex-
treme being Mean-spiritedness, and the middle state Lofty-
mindedness. A remark which Aristotle makes in speaking of
these qualities is worthy of attention—viz. that the Vain man
may possess the same things (e. g. ability, wealth, etc.) which go
to justify the Lofty-minded man’s claim to high consideration;
but the Vain man’s claim is invalid on moral grounds. ‘Those
who possess these advantages wzthout virtue are neither
entitled to deem themselves worthy of great things, nor are
they properly called WLofty-minded... They mimic the Lofty-
minded man, while they do not resemble him,—i. e. they do so
in such things as they can; the actions which are according to
virtue they, of course, cannot do; and at the same time they
look down upon others. Now the Lofty-minded man looks
down upon others justly (for he judges truly); but most people
do soat random’ (£7. Nic. IV. 3. 20).

Casaubon considers the Arrogance described here as related,
not only to Surliness, but to Boastfulness (c. VI.) But Boast-
fulness and Petty Ambition (c. VII.) are referable to a principle
distinct from that of Arrogance,—the desire, namely, of honour,
as distinguished from opinion concerning one’s own worthiness
for honour.

2 he will see him after dinner] The Ironical man acts, from
a different motive, in the same way: see c. V. note 3.

IV. THE ARROGANT MAN. 187

: when he is taking his walk] Plut. Z7hes. c. 35: ‘Some say
that he stumbled and fell accidentally, while taking his walk, as
usual, after dinner. The young Autolycus, in Xenophon’s
Symposium, leaves the party early ‘to take his walk’ (els
mepimaroy: 1X.1). Zeus, in Lucian’s Zeus Tragoedus, says to the
other gods,—‘ We were entertained in the Peiraeus—as many of
us, that is, as Mnestheus invited to the sacrifice. Then, after
the libation, you went your various ways, as it pleased you; but
I—for it was not very late—went back to the town to take my
evening stroll (rd SecAcvov) in the Cerameicus’ (c. 15).

4 to recollect benefits which he has conferred] i.e. he will
remind others in a patronizing manner that he has placed them
under obligations; which may or may not be true, for the ambi-
guous dacxew, ‘to allege,’ leaves it doubtful. This trait illus-
trates the difference between Arrogance and Lofty-mindedness.
It is characteristic of the Lofty-minded man, as Aristotle ob-
serves, to remember whom he has benefited (Z7¢h. Nic. IV. 3. 25).
The Arrogant man (who is a bad imitation of the Lofty-minded,
26.21) does not only remember,—he proclaims that he remembers.

5 who have made him their referee] See c. II. note 2.

6 when he is nominated to public offices} Some public offi-
cers (as the archons) were chosen by lot; others—as the ten
Generals‘and all ambassadors—by show of hands in the Eccle-
sia. The suffrages of ‘the people have nominated the Arrogant
man to an office of the latter kind; but, as the appointment is
invalid without his acceptance of office, the present tense is
used, and he is said to be ‘in process of being elected’ (ye-
potovowpevos). Instead of accepting, he makes an oath before
the Ecclesia that he cannot serve ; assigning, not a definite rea-
son, such as illness or want of means, but the vague one that
he is ‘too busy.’ See Demosth. de Fals. Legat. p. 379 § 124,
where the brother of Aeschines takes a physician with him
to the assembly, and makes oath of his brother’s inability to
serve on an embassy. From the version of this incident given
by Aeschines, we learn a detail—viz. that an oath of this kind
could not be made before the Senate, but only before the Ec-
clesia (Aeschin. de Falsa Legat. p. 40 § 95).

7 the first greeting] The first yaipe was expected, of course,
to come from the inferior. Micyllus, in Lucian’s Dream (c. 14)
thus describes his meeting with an acquaintance who had sud-
denly grown rich: ‘The other day I saw him approaching, and

188 NOTES.

said ‘Hail, O Simon.’ But he, indignant: ‘Servant, desire that
needy person not to clip (xaracpixpuvev) my name. My name
is not Simon, but Simonides.’’ |

8 when he walks in the streets] Athenian criticism on de-
meanour in the streets appears to have been severe. Athenaeus
quotes two verses of Alexis—

Nothing, in my opinion, is so low
As walking out of just time in the streets:

(dppvOuos: Ath. 1. p. 21 § 38). In the speech against Pantaene-
tus (Dem. adv. P. p. 982) it is anticipated that he may say of
the defendant: —‘ Nicobulus is an unpopulak man; he walks
fast, talks loud, and carries a walking-stick’ (the stick implying
an affectation of Spartanism; c. VII. note 16); and after con-
trasting his own moral worth with that of the-plaintiff, Nico-
bulus adds: ‘Such, Pantaenetus, am I who walk quick, and
such are you who walk composedly’ (drpéuas). Aeschines is
described ‘walking through the market-place with his cloak
down to his heels, stepping as high as Pythocles’—({another
orator of the Macedonian party}—Demosth. de Fals. Legat.
Pp. 442 § 314. Plato expressly mentions ‘ walking quietly (jovyj)
in the streets’ as a mark of cwdpoovw: Charmid. p. 159 B.

Q when he is anointing himself or bathing] The exclusion of
a visitor at such a time scarcely reaches the modern idea of
Arrogance. But this is a good illustration of that hostility to
domestic privacy which was bred in the citizens of a Greek re-
public ot once by the temper of their race, by the physical con-
ditions of their life, and (not least) by democratic sentiment.
The first symptom in Pausanias of a transition to Persian man-
ners was that ‘he began to make himself difficult of access’
(Thue, I. 130). Menelaus, in Euripides, reproaches Agamemnon
with having become, on his accession to power, ‘hard for his
friends to approach, keeping within bolted doors and seldom
seen’ (€cw kAyOpev omanos, [ph. Aul. 344). Agesilaus stole away
the influence of Lysander because the latter ‘atfected a haughty
reserve (€cepvuvero), being difficult of access, while the former
delighted to be accessible to all’ (Xen. Ages. 9. 2); and Plu-
tarch, contrasting the same persons, describes the one as ‘popu-
eee the other as ‘vulgar’ (hoprixos: Plut. Ages. 7. 2:

. 4).

Io push the counters apart] A difficulty has arisen concern-

V. THE IRONICAL MAN. 189

ing some item of the account. Instead of allowing the groups
of counters on the counting-board to remain stationary until
this difficulty has been settled, the Arrogant man desires his
slave to break up the groups (8eiv)—to form the counters in
a line at the foot of the board, representing the total as it zow
stands—and to make out a bill accordingly. Compare c. XIII.
note 2.

II in writing a letter] Philodemus describes the Surly man
(whom he considers as a variety of the Arrogant, see c. III.
note‘1) as ‘one who in writing a letter will not add ‘Hail’ at
the beginning, or ‘ Farewell’ (€ppwao) at the end’ (De Vetits x.
col, xvii. 25 ed. Ussing).

V. THE IRONICAL MAN.

I Irony] It is defined here as ‘an affectation of the worse,’
literally ‘on the side of worse’ (émi yeipoy), i. e. of self-deprecia>
tion. Aristotle (£74. Vic. 11. 7) defines Irony as mpooroinats éxt
TO €Aarrov, ‘pretence on the side of less,’ i.e. conscious under-
stating (or underacting) of the truth; and in the Eudemian
Ethics (111. 7) the Ironical man is described as émt ra yelipw xa?
avrov Wevdopevos, ‘misrepresenting himself for the worse.’ Both
passages have contributed to the definition in the text; the
latter supplying émi ro yxetpoy (instead of €Aarrov), the former
mpoo7oinots. From their fusion results a phrase which is faulty
and inexact, but of which the general meaning is clear.

This sketch forms a remarkable chapter in the history of
the word Irony; first, because of the restricted sense in which
it is already employed by a pupil of Aristotle; and secondly
because the conception, while thus narrowed, seems also to have
become indistinct.

It is necessary to recall the sense in which Irony is under-
stood by Aristotle (Z7h, ic. Iv. 7 §§ 2 ff.). ‘It seems to be the
tendency of the Boastful man to lay claim to creditable things,
either when they do not belong to him, or in a greater degree
than they belong to him. The Ironical man, on the contrary,
tends to disclaim or to depreciate things which do belong to
him. The intermediate character, being (so to say) ‘ matter-of-
fact’ (av@éxaoros) is truthful in his life and in his speech, con-
fessing the attributes which are his, and neither exaggerating
nor extenuating them....Ironical persons, leaning to understate-

190 NOTES.

ment, impress one as being more refined in character ; for they
seem to speak with a view, not to advantage, but to avoiding
pomposity. And moreover it is creditable things which such
persons especially disclaim ; as, for example, did Socrates.’ The
general characteristic of the Ironical man is, then, that he holds
im reserve, for whatever purpose, something of his available
power. This purpose may be an earnest dialectic one, like that
of Socrates. Or it may be to avoid ostentation or check imper-
tinence; as Aristotle’s Lofty-minded man is ‘ironical’ to the
common.crowd (Z£7¢h. JV. Iv. 3. 28). Or the purpose may be
merely playful ; as Anacharsis in Lucian says that the Atheni-
ans were reputed ‘ironical’ in conversation (Amach. c. 15). -

Theophrastus has in most of his portraits embodied those
traits which are generic to the character described. His Flat-
terer, his Avaricious man, his Boaster are fairly representative of
the classes who flatter, hoard, or boast. But his picture ofthe
Ironical man, judged by his master’s standard, is strikingly in-
adequate. ‘ He does not show us the man whose habit it is—
either in earnest or in jest, now for the discomfiture of pre-
tence, now for the friendly insinuation of reproof or praise—to
keep on the inside edge of the truth. He describes merely a
person who takes a cynical pleasure in misleading or inconve-
niencing others by the concealment of his real feelings and
intentions.

But not only is the conception of this portrait narrow ; it
is also unfaithful to the essence of the quality portrayed by
Plato and defined by Aristotle. True Irony 1s a masked bat-
tery, a screen assisting the more effective use of a real power
which it veils. But the person described by Theophrastus
appears to deceive for the sake of deceiving ; no touch in the
picture suggests that he has any meaning or purpose in reserve.
His irony resembles rather a curtain on the stage, with nothing
behind it but the mechanism which sustains the illusion.
Again, when he is described as expressing incredulity and
cautioning another person against too ready belief, this is a
misplaced characteristic. The ironical and the sceptical mind
have, perhaps, much in common; but the avowal, as distin-
guished from the insinuation, of unbelief is not a trait of Irony.

The characters of Theophrastus are essentially popular,
interpreting the notions currently attached in society to certain
epithets. In the present instance this fact, while lessening the-

V. THE IRONICAL MAN. IQ!

author’s responsibility for the defects of his portrait, heightens
the significance of these defects themselves. It shows that
a word most flexibly and delicately expressive, a word contrived
to include, without confounding, innumerable shades of grave
or playful tone, had scarcely passed into currency when it was
debased. Already in the time of Aristotle’s pupil ‘irony’ is
popularly understood in a sense almost wholly bad, and the
fine precision of the term has been lost. (In his note on £7A.
N. Iv. 7 § 3 Sir A. Grant has noticed this swift decay.) ae

The definition speaks of ‘words and deeds:’ but this sketch
supplies no true example of practical irony. As in verbal irony#
there is a contrast between the thought and the expression, so
in practical there must be a contrast between the apparent and
the real character of the action: as when Timon (to borrow
an illustration from Bp. Thirlwall’s famous essay) gave the
thieves gold to ruin them.

2 in their defeats] when they are defeated in lawsuits: for
this meaning of #rracOa see cc. XVII, XXX.

3 to call again] This resembles a trait ascribed to the
Arrogant man (c. Iv.). But the Arrogant man puts off his
visitor for the sake of asserting his own consequence; the
Ironical man, merely because it is of his character to be evasive.
The caller presses, perhaps, for a definite answer to some pro-
posal which he has already made. The Ironical man (who has
made up his mind, but enjoys mystification) replies—‘I am
afraid that I have not quite decided...Could you call to-morrow ?’

he will pretend that he has just arrived] I understand
this and the next two clauses as being the reasons which the
Tronical man alleges for his ignorance of what has been passing
in the world. He is in a company where some one asks him—
‘Have you heard what happened at A’s house?’ He replies
(knowing the facts, but wishing to elicit the speaker’s view
of them) ‘I have only just returned to town,’ or ‘I came too
late for it,’ or ‘I have been ill for the last few days.’ That
paraxicOjvac refers to zl/ness, seems certain from c. X, where
6 padaxcfopevos is ‘ the invalid.’

5 @ subscription] épavos—such as was made for a man in
difficulties by his friends. Compare cc. III, VI, XXV. It was
usually understood that such assistance was a loan: see c. XXII

192 NOTES.

There were also at Athens regularly organized societies which,
as well as the subscriptions paid to them, were called ¢pavou.
These seem to have been partly dining-clubs, partly associa-
tions for mutual relief in case of need. Demosthenes (z# Med.
Pp. 574 § 184) alludes to both sorts of ‘subscription ’—that which
was raised privately on occasion among friends, and that which
was paid toaclub. He is insisting on the practical value of a
good character :—‘I believe that all men in the course of their
lives pay in subscriptions for their own benefit—not those
merely (1) which individuals raise, or (2) for which collecting
. Officers (wrAnpewrai) ave appointed, but others also. For instance
—we have among us a man considerate, humane, merciful to
many: to such a man it is right that like measure should be
meted by all, if ever he come to want or into peril of the law.’
This custom of the épavos furnishes a favourite metaphor to the
orators : e.g. Dem. 2” Arvistog. I. p. 776 § 22: ‘Everything that
each man among us does by the injunction of the law is his
contribution (épayos) as a citizen of the commonwealth.’

VI. THE BOASTFUL MAN.

1 Boastfulness] dAafoveia is with Aristotle the fault, in
respect to truth, on the side of. excess, as ‘irony’ on the side of
defect; and the adafev is one ‘who lays claim to creditable
things which do not belong to him, or in a greater degree than
they belong to him’ (Z£7/. MN. Iv. 7). It is remarked in that
chapter that ‘those who boast for the sake of reputation lay
claim to things for which men are praised or congratulated ;
those who boast for the sake of gain, to things which are avail-
able to others, and of which the non-possession may escape
notice; to the character, for instance, of a clever seer or doctor.’
The adafav of Theophrastus belongs to the former class; and
accordingly pretends to wealth, generosity, etc. Aristotle fur-
ther remarks that ‘zvomy’ may be pushed into ddagoveia, ‘as in
the case of the Spartan style of dress; for both excess and
extreme defects are in the nature of boastfulness.’ The de-
lineation of Theophrastus does not touch this more subtle form
of the quality; and his ada¢dy will therefore be adequately ren-
dered by ‘ boastful, as Menander’s was by the Latin gloriosus
(Plaut. A772. Glor. 11. 1. 18).

‘ Boastful, however, does not seem to be a perfect. render-

VI. THE BOASTFUL MAN. 193

ing for dAaf{wy in its most general sense. ‘ Boastful’ implies
pretension of a more direct, explicit kind than is necessarily
intended by the Greek word; which included many more
artistic forms of self-assertion. Thus a fashionable soothsayer
might have been termed aAaf{wv; but would not be described in
English as ‘boastful.’ Perhaps ‘Swaggerer,’ in the extended
sense in which it is sometimes heard now, would convey the
general notion of the word more faithfully. The simpler and
more usual rendering, ‘boastful,’ has, however, been preferred
here, since it was adequate to the occasion; and also because
‘ Swaggerer,’ in its proper sense as applied to demeanour, an-
swers more nearly to the Greek wadaxoy (Ar. Rhe?, II. xvi.).

The Aristotelian contrast between Irony and Boastfulness is
not effectively maintained in the two sketches of Theophrastus ;
partly because the Irony of Theophrastus is not that of Aristotle
(see c. V. note 1); partly because the relation of the Boastful
man to truth is, for the purpose of this sketch, less important
than the motive of his actions, viz. a desijre of reputation. In
this he resembles the man of Petty Ambition (c. VII.), but with
a difference :—the latter places hgnour in trifles; the Boaster
pretends to things which a majority of men do, in fact, honour.

2 the great sums which he has at sea] Money lent on bot-
tomry (vaurixov) was lost to the lender in case of disaster to the
ship: ‘the contract (ovyypagev) providing, as is the invariable
rule, for the repayment of the money 7” case of the ship coming
safe inta harbour’ (Dem. adv. Zenath. p. 863 § 5). Hence the
rate of interest was high: Dem. adv. Polye. p. 1212 § 17 speaks
of vaurixoy émcydoov, i.e, money thus lent at 12% per cent. Cf.
Xen. Vect. 111. 9, ‘He gets, as on bottomry, ahout 20 per cent.’
(eritrepmrov avr@ yiyveras).

3 money-lending business} The bankers (rpame(irat) who
kept the tables in the market-place were generally money-
lenders (Savetorai) too ; but money-lending was also carried on,
both on a great and on a small scale, as a distinct business.
Alciphro’s Leé¢fers relate some of the bitter experiences of
countrymen in their dealings with ‘the town: usurers.’ A
fisherman who requires a new net has recourse to such help.
‘Then that shrivelled Chremes, with contracted brows, who eyes
all men like a wild bull, enamoured, perhaps, of my boat, relaxed
his severe, unsmiling face; lifted his eyes; smiled softly on me,
and professed himself ready to do me any service... But when,

13

194 NOTES.

the time having come, he demanded back principal and interest
without allowing one day’s grace, I recognised my old friend
whom I remembered sitting at the Diomeian gate,—the pos-
sessor of the crooked stick, the enemy of all men, Chremes of
Phyle.’ He sells his wife’s necklace to ‘Pasion the banker,—
pays the usurer—and vows ‘never again to go to one of the city
money-lenders, though he should be worn to a shadow with
hunger first’ (A/c. III. 3).

4 inthe bazaar] The bazaar, Seiypa, where merchants dis-
played samples of their wares, was on the shore of the Pei-
raeus, where there were other places of business, e.g. the Com
Market (adqironmoAts oroa, Ar. Eccl, 682). That it was close to
the quays appears from Xenophon’s account of the descent
made upon the Peiraeus by Teleutias in 389 B.c.: ‘Some of his
men, too, sprang ashore into the bazaar, and, seizing some
merchants and skippers, carried them on board’ (Aed/en. V. 1.
21). Compare Lysias frag. 45 § 7: ‘As he could not walk, they
carried him on the sofa to the bazaar, and showed him in that
state to many Athenians and foreigners.’—On the reading dic
Cevypars, see Crit. ADP. VI. 2.

5 with Alexander] On the reading Evav8pou, see Crit, App.
VI. 3.—Compare the strain in which the Miles Gloriosus of
Plautus (Menander’s ’AXafev) boasts of his exploits in Asia
(Act I. Sc. I. etc.)

6 gemmed cups} Compare Juvenal v. 37 ff.:—‘In Virro’s
own hands are beakers on which the tears of the Sun-maidens
have stiffened, and saucers embossed with beryl. Yow are not
trusted with gold—or, when it is given to you, a sentinel is
planted on the spot, to count the gems and watch your sharp
nails, Excuse him ; there is a fine and admired jasper there;
for Virro, like many, shifts from his fingers to his cups those
gems which the successful rival of jealous Iarbas used to put on
the outside of his scabbard.’ Golden cups inlaid with gems
(piddae AcBoxodAAnToL xpvoat) are mentioned among the presents
made to a favourite by the Persian king, Athen. II. p. 48 § 31.

7 when he has never been anywhere out of Attica] For 7
moAts, meaning, not Athens merely, but Athens with her territory,
Attica, compare Ar. Peace 250: ‘ Poseidon. Woe to thee,
Sicily! How wilt thou, too, perish !—7Z7vygaeus. How that
poor country (dds) will be carded to shreds!’ So ‘seagirt

VI. THE BOASTFUL MAN. 195

cities’ for ‘islands’ Aesch. Zum. 77.—So far from having seen
the wonders of the East, the boaster has not even crossed
Cithaeron or passed the Isthmus. The Athenian feeling against
unnecessary travel receives intense expression in Plato’s Laws
(XII. p. 950 A) :—‘It is the tendency of intercourse between
cities to mix manners of the most various kinds, strangers
inoculating each other with new-fangled notions (xaworopias
éproovvrev). Now this is likely to inflict upon a community
well-governed under proper laws an injury more serious than any
other ; but to the majority of cities, as living under laws in no
wise good, it is of no consequence that they are contaminated by
welcoming strangers among themselves, and by flaunting forth
(émtxwpatovras) in their own turn to other cities, whenever any
man, young or old, takes a fancy for going abroad in any way or
on any occasion.’ It is then proposed (p. 950 D): ‘In the first
place, let no one under forty years of age be permitted to go
abroad on any pretence whatever. Next, let absence from
Athens om private affairs be permitted to no man: on public
business, to heralds, embassies, and perhaps to some sacred
missions.’ Absence on military service is, of course, excepted.
In the Cvzto, Socrates imagines the laws complimenting him on
having never once left Attica on any Srzvate business (p. 52 B).

8 Antipater] The reference is probably to that period
(322—318 B.C.) during which Antipater was absolute master of
Athens. When Alexander went to Asia in 334 B.C. Antipater
was left regent of Macedonia; and on the king’s death in 323
he was reappointed to that post. A league of the Greek States,
headed by Athens, was formed against him ; and the Lamian .
war ensued. This was terminated by the Macedonian victory at
Crannon in the autumn of 322. Athens, now helpless, accepted
Antipater’s terms; 12,000 of the poorer citizens were deported,—
the richer remnant being little more than gooo; the leaders of
the patriotic party, including Demosthenes and Hyperides,
were banished ; and a Macedonian garrison was quartered in
the Peiraeus. In the following year (321) Antipater succeeded
Perdiccas as supreme regent, and thus became actual head of
the whole Macedonian empire. He died. in 318, bequeathing
the regency to Polysperchon. See c. XX., where there is a
probable reference to the year 316 B.c.

privilege of exporting timber] from Macedonia, the great

timber-market of Greece, to Athens. Xen. Hellen. VI. 1. 11.

‘Holding Macedonia, the country from which the Athenians
134-2

196 NOTES.

import their timber, we shall of course be in a position to build
many more ships than they can.’ Compare the pseudo-Demosth.
Speech ‘On the Treaty with Alexander,’ p. 219 § 28 (in reference
to Alexander having asked leave to have some boats built at the
Peiraeus) : ‘Of course it cannot be said that timber for ship-
building is plentiful at Athens and has failed in Macedonia,—
the country which supplies it on the cheapest terms to any
foreigners who require it. When Brasidas took Amphipolis in
- 424 B.C. one of the causes of the alarm at Athens was that that
city was useful ‘in sending them timber for shipbuilding’ (Thuc.
4. 108).

10 free of duty] i.e. free of the Macedonian duty upon
exports. It is improbable that Antipater would have interfered
to remit the Athenian tax (two-per-cent, mevrnxoorn, Boeckh
P.£E. Ul. 4) on imports: besides this would have been called
eloaywyn, rather than efaywyn, dreAns. Compare Andocides dé
Reditu p. 21 § 11: ‘I supplied your army at Samos—the Four
Hundred having already seized the government here—with spars
for oars, as Archelaus (king of Macedon 413—399 B.C.) was a
family friend of mine, and allowed me to cut down and export
as many as I pleased.’

11 in order that no person whatever may be able to traduce
him further] He alleges, as his motive for declining the offer,
his wish to avoid the denunciations of informers, who might
accuse him of having too close relations with the Macedonian

overnment. ‘ As Athens was at this time absolutely subject to
Anteater who had taken vigorous measures to clear it of all
but Macedonian partisans, these fears may appear strange. But
a fact noticed by Plutarch shows that, heavy as was the yoke,
enough of public spirit was stirring beneath it to cause at least
a genera] impatience. In 319 B.c.—three years after the intro-
duction of the Macedonian garrison—the Athenians were im-
portunjng (éevoyAovvrey) Phocion to intercede with Antipater for
its removal (Plut. Phoc. c. 30). In such a state of the public
mind the reception of special favours fromthe regent might well
be a dangerous distinction.

12 in presents to distressed citizens} On these charities,
épavot, see C. V. note 5.

13 to set up the counters} Seec. IV. note Io.
14 reckoning by sums of six hundred drachmas] 100

VI. THE BOASTFUL MAN. 197

drachmas=I mina: 60 minas=1I talent. The boastful man first
states that he has given ‘ more than five talents’ (about (£1200)
in charity. He then proceeds to verify his statement. Taking
the counting-board, he arranges the counters in small groups to
represent the items—‘6oo drachmas (=6 minas, about £24) to
A ; one mina, 44, to B; and so forth. When at last the items
are cast up, they make a total of more than £2400, instead of
£1200; and it becomes évident that his first estimate was
prompted by excessive modesty.

I5 trierarchies or public services] See c. XXIX. note 16,

16 the best horses} At Athens horses were in a special
sense what Aeschylus calls them—‘ornaments of wealth’ (P. V.
474). The keeping of horses, especially for the great contests,
seems to have been regarded as in a manner a duty which was
incumbent upon rich men—their proper contribution to the
public splendour. See Demosth. adv. Phaenipp. p. 1046 § 14:
‘In one thing only can Phaenippus the defendant be proved to
have shown public spirit towards you, judges: he is a good and
spirited owner of horses (immorpodos...duAdripos)—where the
irony does not disturb the fact that, in the popular view, this
was public spirit. Compare Xen. ipparch. 1. 12: ‘(you may
win over parents) by explaining this to them,—that their sons
will be forced to keep horses, if not by you, by their fortune;
’ but that, if they begin to ride under your auspices, you will deter
them from giving extravagant or mad (waxy) prices for horses.’
Miltiades was ‘of a house which kept four-horse chariots’ (for
the contests: Her. vi. 35). Some of the good breeds were
branded in the flank (év ioyious, Anacr, 28.2). The ‘samphoras’
and ‘koppatias’ (marked with the old letters san 7) and koppa 9)
are known from the Clouds 23, 122: and Strabo mentions a
‘wolf’ brand in Italy (v. I. 9). The ‘koppatias’ of Pheidippides
cost 12 minas, about £48 (Clouds 23): the same sum is the
value of a horse in Lysias de maled. p.133 § 10. In the speech
of Isaeus de Dicaeog. hered, the rival claimant is taunted thus:
‘You have never possessed a horse worth more than 3 minas’

(412: p. 55 § 43).

17 the upholstery-mart] In that part of the Market-place
where the frames (xAivat) of couches and beds were sold, the
coverlets, rugs, pillows—everything included in the term ipar-
opos, ‘bedding’—could probably be bought too, Luxurious

198 NOTES.

drapery for couches was a specially eastern luxury; thus, when
Artaxerxes sent Themistocles ‘a silver-footed bed and costly
coverings, he sent therewith ‘a person to strew them ; observing
that the Greeks did not understand bedmaking’ (ov« émrioracéa
vmoorpwovvverv, Athen. II. p. 48 § 31). In the Frogs (v. 544)
‘coverlets from Miletus’ are mentioned; the same which are
said in the Georgics to be ‘of great price’ (III. 306). It was
specially noted as a sign of the degeneracy of Spartan manners
when they began ‘to use coverings for their couches of the pre-
sent large size and costly workmanship, superbly embroidered;
so that some of the guests invited shrank from resting their
elbows onthe cushions’ (Athen. Iv. p. 142 § 20).

VII. THE MAN OF PETTY AMBITION.

1 Petty Ambition] Compare with this character what Aris-
totle says of the yavyo, or Vain (E¢h. NV. Iv. 3):—*They set
themselves off with dress and outward show (ox7yparc) and the
like, and wish their advantages to be manifest, and talk about
them, as if they expected to receive honour by means of these
things.’ But the pexpodircrios does not necessarily, like the
xaivos, overrate himself; he only overrates those things on which
he founds his claim to honour. In ostentation, again, he resem-
bles the ada{av. But %e places honour in the trifles which he
really possesses; the adAa¢wv,' in greater things which he does
not possess. If some editors had not maintained that part of
this chapter suits the dpeoxos (see Crit. App. VII. 1) it would
have seemed needless to point out the wide difference between
the characters. The complaisant man desires to be popular for
what he is; the pxpodiAcripos, to be admired for what he has.

2 placed next the host] Plutarch says (Quaest, Conv.1.3.1):—
‘Different places (at table) are honourable with different nations
...With the Greeks, the first. With the Romans, the last place
on the middle couch, which they call the consular.’ Here, as
the context shows, ‘the first’ place, said to be that of honour
among the Greeks, must mean the first on the first couch: and
if Plutarch and Theophrastus are to be reconciled, it must be
supposed that the host was second on the first couch. In Plato’s
Sympostum, however, Agathon, the host, 1s placed on the last or
lowest couch,—é€cyaros xaraxeivevos (p. 175 C); as the Roman
host was usually summus in imo (though in Hor. S. 2. 8, 20

VII. THE MAN OF PETTY AMBITION. 199

medius in into) Probably there was no invariable custom.—
Contests for precedence at table supply Lucian with some good
touches. See the Déalogues of the gods c. 13: ‘Zeus. Cease,
Asclepius and Heracles, quarrelling like men. These things
are unseemly and improper at the dinner-table of the gods.
Heracles. But Zeus, would you have this druggist recline at
table above me?... Zeus. Cease, ] repeat, and do not disturb our
party..,Heracles, you may well allow Asclepius to take prece-
dence of you. He died first.’

3 to Delphi to have his hair cut] On entering his 17th year
(Xen. Cyr.1. 2.8) an Athenian boy became technically ‘a youth,’
épnBos (though the éoxipacia on his forma/ enrolment among the
épnBor did not take place till the 18th year). His long hair was
then cut off, and a lock dedicated (usually) to some river-god,—
as Orestes, in Aeschylus, offers his to the Inachus (Cho. 6); the
first-fruits of the living body being thus symbolically offered to
water, ‘nourisher of youth’ (xovporpogos). Athen. XI. p. 495 §
88: ‘Youths about to cut off the lock offer to Heracles a large
cup filled with wine, which they call Oinisteria; and, having
poured a libation, give it to the company to drink.’ The old
custom was to offer the lock to Apollo at Delphi—a place
especially suitable to the rite in its inner meaning, since the
abundance of waver there was probably the chief reason for which
Delphi was chosen as the central seat of worship (Curtius Hzs¢.
Gr. bk. I1. c. 4). Compare Plut. 7hes. c. 5: ‘It being at that
time still the custom that those who were passing out of boy-
hood into youth should go to Delphi and offer to the god a lock
of their hair, Theseus went thither; and from him they say
that a spot is still called the Thesea.’

4 anAethiopian] The intercourse with the East then recently
opened by Alexander’s expedition had brought black slaves into
fashion. Compare Alciphro’s Le¢¢ers (which refer to this period)
ll. 2. 5: ‘From that moment he has not ceased sending me
every kind of luxury,—dresses, gold ornaments, maids, footmen,
Indians male and female.’ In the Rhetorica ad Herennium
prob. of Cicero’s age) the pretender to wealth directs his slave
to borrow an Aethiopian, and come for him to the baths (Iv.
50. 63).

5 his hair cut frequently] See c. XXIV. note 16.

6 anoint himself with unguent] Instead of using (at the

200 - y NOTES.

baths or the gymnasium) plain olive-oil, he uses a thick
. perfumed unguent, ypiopa. See Xen. Anaé. Iv. 4. 13 : ‘Abundant
material for uzguent (xpipa) was found in the place, which they
used instead of olive-oil (avr €daiov). It was obtained from
hog’s lard, sesame, bitter almonds, and terebinths. The latter
supplied also a liquid perfume (pUpov’.’,—In Xenophon’s Sym-
posium 11. 3 the host proposes after dinner to send for pupov.
Socrates objects, observing that ‘the olive-oil used in the gym-
nasia’ is the only one which it befits a man to use.

7 the bankers’ tables} A fashionable lounge. Plat. Afol.
p- 17 C: ‘Do not be surprised’ (Socrates says) ‘if you hear me
defending myself in the same terms which I am wont to use in
the market-place at the bankers’ tables, where most of you have
heard me.’ Plutarch de Garrul. § 21 gives examples of the
three kinds of reply which may be made to the question ‘Is
Socrates at home?’ (1) The necessary; as ‘Not at home.’
(2) The polite; as ‘ Not at hotne; he is at the bankers’ tables.’
3 The superfluous; as ‘ Not at home. He is at the bankers’
tables, awaiting some Ionian strangers, for whom’—etc. etc.

8 where the young men take exercise} Besides the palaestras
or wrestling-schools, Athens had at this time three large gym-
nasia, provided with wrestling-rooms, baths, grounds for running
and javelin-practice, etc.—the Lyceum, the Cynosarges, and the
Academy. These were open to persons of all ages ; but separate
parts were assigned to adults (i.e. persons above 20), ephebi (18
—20),and boys. The ephebeum was a large hall with seats
placed round it, opening off the colonnade which ran round the
great court of the gymnasium. Here the best performances
would generally be seen, and here, consequently, the man of
petty ambition would find himself where he always desired to be
—in the most popular resott.

g near the Generals] In the Strds (794) Aristophanes
mentions rd BovAeutexov, ‘the senatorial places’ in the theatre
near the orchestra ; and in the Wasfs (575) the Strategi of that
day are described as sticklers for their ‘places of honour.’ But
it would seem that the seats for high officials were not very
definitely marked off. See Demosth. 7m Med. p. 572 § 178,
where the mapedpos or coadjutor of the archon lays hands upon a
person who ‘was taking possession of a place’ (@éav xaraAap-
Bavovros) and attempts to expel him from the theatre. The
incident shows that the public had access to the immediate

VII. THE MAN.OF PETTY AMBITION. 201

neighbourhood of the official seats. In Plato’s time a place in
the ‘ orchestra-circle’ could be obtained for ‘a drachma at the
most’ (10d.: Adol. p. 26 E) Compare Hor. £f. I. 1. 67:

Grow rich, grow rich by fair means or by all,
And view sad Pupius from 4 nearer stall.

10 Laconian hounds} A  sthall breed of red dog (/ulvus
Laco, Hor. Efod. 6. 5), which the ansients supposed to have
been got by a cross with a fox (Arist. H. A. vit. 27). Pindar
(frag. 73) speaks of ‘the Laconian hounds, in chasing wild
beasts keenest of all things that move ;’? Sophocles (Az. 8) gives
them the epithet ‘true-scenting}’ Virgil praises ‘Sparta’s swift
small hounds’ (Georg. 111. 105). Compare the Midsummer
Night’s Dream 1v. 1, ‘My hounds are bred otit of the Spartan
kind...A cry more tunable Was never holla’d to nor cheered
with horn In Crete, in Spafta, nor in Thessaly.’

II Gyzicus] in Mysia on the Propontis ; once a dependency
of Athens. The treaty of Antalcidas (387 B.C.) gave it, with the
other towns of Asia, to the Persian king. At the death of
Alexander it fell under the gévernment of Leonnatus; and on
his death in 322 under that of Antigonus.

I2 a satyr ape] a kind of shott-tailed ape, to which the
Greeks gave the name of ¢ztyrus. The Zztyrz, mythical com-
panions of Dionysus, are sometimes identified with, sometimes
distinguished from the Satyrs. There was also a kind of ape
called oarupos (Ael. H. A. 16, 21: Plins A. WM. IV. vill. 54, etc.) :
whether it was the same as the ¢z¢yvms, does not appear.

13 Sicilian doves} Philemon, the comic poet (circ. 330
B.C.), praises Sicily, among other.thiiigs, for its doves (Athen.
XIV. p. 658 § 76). And Nicander (circ. 160 B.C.) is quoted in
Athen. 1X. p. 395 § 51 as saying, ‘keep wheat-fed pigeons in
thy house ; or doves of Sicily, whom neither hawk nor falcon
vexes.’

14 deer-horn dice] The dorpayado: mentioned here (¢a/2)
were numbered on four sides, the other two being round: the
xuBou (tesserae) on all six. Astragali, as the name implies, were
properly knuckle-bones ; here they are of the horn of the gazelle
(8opxas). In Athen. v. p. 194 § 22 it is said that the capricious
temper of Antiochus Epiphanes used to show itself in the
unequal value of his presents ;—‘ to some he would give deer-horn

202 NOTES. ©

dice,—to others, dates,—to ‘others, gold.’ In Lucian Amor. c.
16 a disconsolate lover amuses himself by throwing (to obtain
an omen) ‘ four dice of the horn of the African gazelle (AcBuxijs
dop fis).

1} Thurian vases} ‘Thurian’ vases are not mentioned else-
where. The peculiar shape meant by orpoyyvAos is explained
by the description of an olive-jar in Appuleius Flor. 1. 9. 35 as
‘onion-shaped’ (denticulari forma),‘round and squat’ (pressula
rotunditate = arpoyyvnos).

16 walking-sticks with the true Laconian curve] The cus-
tom of carrying a walking-stick seems to have been regarded
at Athens as especially Spartan. In the Ecclestazusae (74) the
women provide themselves with ‘Laconian walking-sticks and
men’s dresses.’ The fashion must have been common; for
the invalid in the speech of Lysias (de Juval. p. 169 § 12)
speaks of himself as ‘using two walking-sticks, while ofhker
people use one.’ The painter Parrhasius—a contemporary of
Lysias—who affected personal splendour, is described as ‘leaning
on a cane studded with gold rings’ (Athen. XII. p. 543 § 62).
In Demosth. adv. Pant. p. 982, however, ‘carrying a walking-
Stick’ is mentioned as an offensive trait; either as suggesting
an affectation of Spartanism, or as a mark of dandyism: see
c. IV. note 8.

17 a curtain] a piece of tapestry hung on the walls of his
dining-room. The tapestry which fell at the dinner-party of
Nasidienus, and showered dust upon the table, was probably
hung on the walls: Hor. S. 2. 8.54. Horace speaks of ‘the
dinners of oor men without tapestries or purple :’ Od 3. 29. 14.
—The subject of the embroidery is a-victory of Greeks over
Persians; as the Painted Porch at Athens (c. I. n. 2) was
‘frescoed with the trowsered Medes;’ and as, in the Roman
theatre (Virg. Geo. 111. 25), ‘Wrought on the gorgeous curtain,
Britons rise.’

18 a little court with an arena] Xen. de Rep. Athen. Ul. 10:
‘Rich men have in some cases Jrtvate gymnasia and baths with
dressing-rooms.’

19 ball-alley} Various games with the hand-ball were
popular in Greece ; and a public gymnasium probably always
included a ogdatpiornpiov. Horace tells us that he used to play
‘the three-cornered game’ (of catching the ball) before taking
the bath: S. 1. 6, 126.

VII. THE MAN OF PETTY AMBITION. 293

20° to philosophers} for a conversazione, such as in the
Protagoras takes place at the house of Callias ; where Socrates
finds Protagoras pacing the colonnades with his ‘sacred band’
(yopés) of disciples. Hippias and Prodicus are also there,—the
Jatter quartered, so full is the house, in a store-room (P7rozé. p.
315D). Plato’s Callias is, in this respect, very much what the
psxpodirdriwos aspires to be. The arcades surrounding the
court of a public gymnasium were fitted with seats (€£¢dpar) and
large semicircular benches (spexvedra) ‘where philosophers,
rhetoricians, and literary men in general could sit and converse’
(Vitr. V. II. 2). :

21 to sophists] i.e. to professors of rhetoric. As rhetoric
was the most important branch of the encyclopedic practical
education which the ‘sophists’ professed to give, the term
‘sophist’?’ came to be more and more nearly identified with
‘rhetorician;’ until, under the Empire, it appears as its recog-
nised synonym. ‘Thus the rhetorician Libanius (circ. 340 A.D.)
is expressly styled ‘the Sophist.—The miniature gymnasium
was lent to the philosopher for a conversazione ; it is lent to the
‘sophist’ for a formal declamation, or for one of those continuous
florid expositions in which these professors loved to indulge.
Compare Juv. VII. 39:

If to declaim is your aspiring bent,
Your patron’s dingiest premises are lent.

22 drill-sergeante] who gave lessons in the use of the arms
carried by the hoplite, i.e. the pike (Sopv), the short sword, and
the large oblong shield (émAov). Thus they were not mere
fencing-masters, but, like the Roman campidoctores, drill-
sergeants. The scene of Plato’s Laches is laid at the place
where onesof these men had just been displaying his dexterity
(€mcOeckvupevov, p. 171 E); and the professional teaching of drill
for money is-there, as in the Exuthydemus p.272 D, spoken of as
something new. Athenaeus quotes a statement that ‘ scientific
fence under arms’ (6mAopayias padnoers) was first taught by one
Dameas of Mantinea (Iv. p. 154 § 4). Compare Plut. an senz
ger. s. resp. Cc. 18 p. 793 D: ‘We do not leave our bodies ab-
solutely without exercise when we can no longer use spades or
jumping-weights (aArjpes, to give an impetus), or throw the
quoit, or fight under arms (Grdopaxeiv). To the Greek States,
which (except Sparta) had only a militia subject to little
constant discipline, the professional drill-sergeants would be
useful ; comp. c. X. note 3.

204 NOTES.

23 to musicians] Stratonicus, a contemporary of Theo-
phrastus, is said to have been the first who made the advance
from the playing of the cithara without any accompaniment
(YurAn xcOapiots) to symphony (moAvyopdia), and took pupils in
concerted music (appovexey), and constructed a score (8¢dypapya):
Athen. VIII. p. 352 § 46. We ought probably to understand
Gppovixoi here of this symphony-playing—then a novelty.

24 the skin of the forehead] For the meaning of the
Greek word, see Her. vil. 2: ‘They had upon their heads the
Sorehead-skins (rpopetwridia) of horses, flayed off with the ears
and mane.’ The skin of the victim’s forehead is hung up, with
garlands round it, over the doorway leading from the vestibule
(mpo6vpov) into the court of the house. Compare, for the form
of the ostentation, Ar. Acharnians 989: ‘He has thrown out
these feathers before his door as a sample of his fare’ (ue.
to inform passers-by that he has had game for dinner).

25 a procession of the Knights] The 1200 knights, com-
manded by the two Hipparchs and by the ten Phylarchs of the
tribes, paraded publicly on several occasions. These occasions
were chiefly of three classes: (1) the great festivals, especially
the Panathenaea, to which the Chorus of Knights in Aristophanes
allude, saying that their fathers were ‘worthy of the rode Kn.
566): and the Dionysia, Xen. Hipparch. 3 § 2. (2) Certain
periodical reviews, held, according to Xenophon, in four places,—
in the grounds of the Lyceum ; in the grounds of the Academy ; in
the hippodrome ; and at the port of Phalerum: Xen. (7zH9. 3.1.
(3) Special occasions of public rejoicing or mourning, when the
goddess on the acropolis was to be thanked or entreated.—The
Roman Knights had but one annual ceremony corresponding to
this ; the ¢ransvecitto, on the ides of July, to the temple of Castor
in the forum from the temple of Mars without the wall.

26 putting on his cloak] In the procession a mantle (yAapus),
instead of the ordinary cloak, was probably worn,—‘ purple
and embroidered’ acc. to the Schol. on Ar. Kaighis 566; as the
Roman Knights paraded in the ¢vadea or toga with purple
stripes. The pixpodidrorizos does not shock public taste by
walking about in this. He resumes his ordinary cloak (iuartoy’,
and leaves the clinking of his spurs to hint the circumstance of
which he is vain.

27 his Mttle Melitean dog] Plin. H. MW. 111. 26: ‘Next

VII THE MAN OF PETTY AMBITION. 205

comes Corcyra, called Melaena (the Black), between which and
Illyricum is Melita, from which Callimachus (circ. 280 B.C.)
states that the little ‘Melitean’ dogs take their name.’ The
Black Corcyra is now Curzola; and this Melita is the long,
narrow island S.E. of it, now called Meleda, in N. lat. 42, close
to the eastern shore of the Adriatic. On these islands see
Sir G. Wilkinson’s Dalmatia and Montenegro, 1. p. 257.
This old account preserved by Pliny is more to be trusted than
Strabo’s (VI. 2) remark that Malta was the home of the breed,—
a natural guess. ‘Melitean’ dogs had ail the privileges of the
modern lap-dog. In Lucian de merced. cond. § 34, a lady requests
a philosopher to carry ‘Myrrhine:’ ‘It was absurd to see the .
little dog peeping out of his cloak just under his chin, and
barking in her small voice (such is the Melitean breed), and
licking the philosopher’s beard.’ One of Alciphro’s Letters ex-
presses a slave’s terror at the accidental poisoning of ‘ Plangon,
the little Melitean dog which we keep as a tame pet for the
mistress’ (III. 22).

28 a scion of Melita] The master desires to proclaim that
his dog was of the choice Melitean breed ; and this he does in a
characteristically high-flown phrase. Compare with xAados the
poetical use of gpvos, Addos, dos, wropOos. On the conjecture
xados for xAddos, see Crit. APP. VII. 5.

29 @ brass ring] Probably one of those which were worn
as amulets, and which were supposed to have a protecting, or,
for the sick, a healing virtue. The invalid, having recovered,
dedicates to Asclepius the ring which, by the god’s blessing, has
helped tocure him. Compare Ar. Plutus 881: ‘Informer. Where
have you got this cloak? ust Man. 1 do not care for you;
for I wear this ring which I bought from Eudemus for ten-pence.
/nf. But there is no charm against an informer’s bite.’ Clemens
Alex. Strom. 1. p. 334 B: ‘Execestus the tyrant of the Phocians
‘ used to wear two charmed rings (yeyonreupévous), and could
discern from their clink against each other the right moments .

for action. He died, however, by the hand of an assassin;
’ though not before the clink had warned him, as saith Aristotle
in his Polity of the Phocians.’

30 in the temple of Asclepius] The Athenian Asclepieum
stood on the slope of the acropolis at the S.w. corner: Paus. 1.
21. 4. Plutarch, inquiring why the Roman temples of Aescu-
lapius are always outside the city walls, observes that ‘the

206 NOTES.

Greeks have their temples of Asclepius placed on open and
tolerably high ground’; and that his great Hellenic shrine—that
at Epidaurus—was at some distance from the town (Quaest.
Rom. § 94 p. 286D). This circumstance may have assisted
the efficacy which a brief sojourn at the god’s temple was
supposed to have for invalids; Paxs. I. 27. 63.

31 daily burnishings and oilings] See Crit. App. VII. 6.—
The pexpodsArcrios, having dedicated a ring which, like that in
Aristophanes (see n. 29), is worth perhaps tenpence, visits the
temple daily in order to see that it is kept in a state creditable
to the donor.

32 from the presidents of the Senate] Public sacrifices on
behalf of the state were frequently offered by the Senate of Five-
Hundred, the members of the presiding section (mpvraves)
conducting the ceremony. The place was probably either the
Prytaneum adjoining the Senate-House on the north side, or the
Metroum (temple of the Mother of the gods) on its south side.
That the occasions were frequent appears from Antipho dé
choreut. p. 146 § 45, where the duty of ‘conducting rites
(ieporouetv) and sacrificing on behalf of the democracy’ is spoken
of as one which the prytanis had repeatedly performed during
his five weeks of office.

33 the privilege of reporting the sacrifices] The more formal
and systematic state-religion of Rome restricted the privilege of
reporting the auspices (#untéatio) to the magistrate who pre-
sided when they were taken; or to the augur who acted as his
deputy. Here the pixpodiArdripos obtains it as a personal favour;
but, as appears from his address to the people, he was at least
one of the fifty presidents of the Senate.

34 to the Mother of the gods} In her temple on the east
side of the Market-place, immediately south of the Senate- House.
Here were kept the graven tablets of the laws (Lycurg. in Leocr.
p. 156 § 66) and the original drafts of the decrees of the Ecclesia
(Aesch, zz Ctes. p. 80 § 187). Athenio (afterwards leader of the
Servile war) is said to have stolen some of these avroypada from
the Metroum during a popular tumult (Ath. v. p. 214 § 53).

35 receive ye her good gifts| A regular formula. See no. 54
of the mpooiuia, or exordia for public speeches, ascribed (though
improbably) to Demosthenes :—‘ Our (senatorial) province has
been duly discharged for you. We have sacrificed to Zeus the
Saviour, to Athene, and to Victory; and these sacrifices have

VIII 7VHE LATE-LEARNER. 2 207

been fair and prosperous for you. We have sacrificed also to
Persuasion and to the Mother of the Gods and to Apollo; and
here also the sacrifices were favourable...Receive, therefore these
blessings at the hands of the gods.’

36 a smart white cloak and wreath] Aesch. 7” Cifes. p. 46
§ 77 (speaking of the joy shown by Demosthenes at the death of
Philip) :...‘ Though his daughter was but a week dead, before he
had mourned for her or discharged the fitting rites, he put on a

garland, clad himself in white, and proceeded to offer burnt
sacrifice,’

VIII THE LATE-LEARNER.

1 Late-learning] The man described here is one who, from
whatever cause, was prevented in his youth from acquiring those
accomplishments which were included in the Greek idea of a
liberal education, and which belonged to one or other of its two
higher branches,—‘ music’ and ‘gymnastics,’ He comes in later
life into the society of people with whom his early education
places him at a disadvantage; and a sense of this makes him
ambitious to repair the defect. Instead, however, of taking up
self-culture at the point and in the branches which mature
years prescribe, he falls into the error of M. Jourdain.. He
attempts to start afresh; to acquire, by sudden application,
things which must be learned early and gradually ; and which,
even if they could be learned to good purpose now, demand
more time than a man ought to spend in sacrificing to the graces.

Just as, in the man of Petty Ambition, the love of honour is
made mean by a low estimate of what is honourable, so in the
Late-Learner the desire ynpaoxeww modXa didacKxopevos is made
absurd by a wrong choice of studies. The best point in the
character is its respect for culture; the weakest, its pride in
accomplishments which seem precious because they have long
beet} admired trom a distance.

hese were the ideas ordinarily conveyed by the word oyipa-
6ys,—a term analogous, from one point of view, to ‘pedant.’
Timaeus called Aristotle oyepab; vodguorny, ‘a pedantic sophist,’
for presuming to criticise the Locrian polity (Polyb. 12. 9. 4).
Gellius notes the tendency to bring in new or obsolete words
in writing and speaking as ‘a vice of late-learning, which. the
Greeks call éypadia’ (X1. 7. 3). ‘You know how insolent,’ says
Cicero, ‘are late-learners’ (Fam, 9. 12. 2). In ridiculing the taste

208 NOTES.

for interlarding Latin with Greek, Horace himself sets an ex-
ample of abstinence, by paraphrasing into sert studiorum the
term for which his own language supplied no equivalent (S.
I, 10, 21).

2 passages for recitation] See c. xv. note 6.

3 ‘Right wheel,’ ‘left wheel’] To turn towards the right was
to turn ‘towards the spear-hand; to the left, ‘towards the shield-
hand’ (or, for cavalry, ¢mt jviay, ‘towards the bridle-hand’). Thus
Xen. Cyr. VIL. 5. 6, pereBqAovro én’ gowida, ‘they wheeled to the
left.’ Xenophon often uses the phrases in reference to slantwise
marching: e.g. et Sogu rryeto Oa, to lead one’s men ov their own
right (Azad, IV. 3. 26). Gee his Lacon. Resp. 11. 8: ‘The Lace-
daemonians do with the greatest ease even those things which
drill-sergeants consider most difficult. When they are marching
in column (éx} xép@s), gne section (€vwporia) of a company is, of
course, behind another. Now, if at such a moment, the enemy
appear in frgnt jn phalanx, the word is passed to the commander
of each section ¢o form in front, coming up upon the left (eis
péerwmov rap dowida xabiocrac6at).’

4 at the festival of a Hero| Because no festival common to
all the Heroes is mentioned by Greek writers, this allusion has
been treated as obscure. But each of the Heroes had his own
festival; and it is enough to understand a reference to any one
of these. Such were the Theseia at Athens, the Aiaceia at
Aegina, the Aianteia at Salamis, the Diocleia at Megara. The
terms in which Thucydides mentions the honour paid to Brasidas
at Amphipolis imply that an annual festival, éopr7, was always
celebrated in memory of a canonjsed Hero(v. 11). In Plutarch's
praccepta de ger. resp. ¢ 15 § 7 a man is spoken of as ‘giving
the banquet in some festival at a hero’s tomb’ (jpaa Seurvav
€mitapiou twos); and probably where tradition pointed to the
grave,—-as in the case of Eurystheus, buried at Pallene near
Athens, Eur. Her. 1031,—the festival would be heldthere. Com-
pare the honours paid by Alexander to the tomb of Achilles at
Sigeum, Arrian I, I.

5 for a torch-race] The most probable account of the torch-
race is that it was contested by two or more parallel chains of
runners; along each a torch was passed; and the runners of
that chain which carried its torch most quickly to the goal were
collectively the winners. The length of the course at the great
festivals was about half-a-mile. True to his principle of begin-

VIII THE LATE LEARNER. 209

ning at the beginning, the Late Learner does not compete with
the ¢pnBor, but enters for the boys’ race.

6 to.a temple of Heracles} Small chapels or shrines of
Heracles were probably numerous in Attica,—his worship being
associated with that of Theseus. See Plut. Zhes. 35 ‘Theseus,
on his release (from Hades, by Heracles), returned to Athens;
and all those sacred enclosures (reyzém) which were formerly his,
and which had been set apart for him by the city, he consecrated
to Heracles, and called, instead of Thesea, Heraclea.’ The same
legend is given by Euripides, H. F. 1327, where these sanctu-
aries are spoken of as existing ‘throughout the land’ (ravrayot
Nabi Heracles had also an altar in the outer Cerameicus:

aus. I. 30 § 1.

7 seize the ox] The oyiuabys has been invited by a friend
to assist at a sacrifice. Eagertodisplay his strength, he throws
off his cloak and seizes the head of the victim,—drawing it back
so as to expose the throat to the knife. So //. 1. 459, ‘they
drew back the head and cut the throat’ (avépucay kal €oagav).
The word rpaynAi{w was used of a wrestler seizing his adversary
by the throat, and bearing back his head: Plut. de curios. 12,
“See the athlete with his neck in the grip of a boy’ (rpayndi(o-
pevov.)—There is no special fitness in the sacrifice of the ox to
Heracles ; it was the ordinary victim at 4 sacrifice of the more
costly kind: see c. vil. A bull was. probably the peculiar
victim in the worship of Heracles and Theseus,—the two bull-
slayers of legend ; and it was also one of the three animals
(suovetaurilia) offered to the Heroes generally: see Diod. Iv. 39.

8 palaestras] He scorns the promiscuous company at the
gymnasia, and goes to the palaestras, the regular wrestling
schools : see c. XIX. note 4.

Q at a conjuror’s performance] See c. xvi. note 6. The
conjuror’s entertainment is here varied by songs. It has been
proposed, but needlessly, to read Geapaan, 1.e. ‘stage plays.’

Io Sabagzius} On this character of Dionysus see c. XXVIII.
note 10.

11 to acquit himself best] In the Speech de Corona Aes-
chines is described as assisting his mother in the mystic
ceremonial by which she professed to purge guilt ; instructing
the candidates when to rise from their knees, and prescribing
the formula which they were to recite: (p. 313 §.259.) The

14

210 NOTES.

candidate for initiation in the rites of Sabazius is anxious to be
perfect in a lesson of this kind.

12 on a tenth-day festival] On the tenth day after birth
a child received its name, the parents holding a sacrifice
(Sexarny Ovev) and entertaining their friends. Peisthetaerus in
the Bzrds replies to the begging poet who pretends that he has
Jong sung the praises of the new Cloud-city, ‘Have I not this
very moment held its tenth-day festival, and named it like a
child? One of the objects of entertaining a large company on
this occasion was similar to that which was served by the
wedding-feast—viz. to secure witnesses in case the legitimacy of
the child should afterwards be disputed : see Demosth. Adv.
Boeot. de nom. p. 1oo1 § 22, Isaeus de Pyrrhi her. p. 45 § 70.

13 to play the flute with him} The dypabys aims at dis-
tinction in the two especially liberal branches of Greek education ;
gymnastics and music. The Roman feeling (under the Repub-
lic at least) that there was something unmanly in being skilful
on a musical instrument was very different from the Greek.
Aristotle speaks of such skill as ‘worthy of a free man, and
honourable’ (éAevdéptov cai xadnv: Poltt. VIII. 3). In Plato’s
Laws it is recommended that a boy should have music lessons
from the age of thirteen to that of sixteen (p. 809 E).

14 play at tableaux vivants} Nothing whatever is known
as to the nature of the amusement called paxpdy dvdpiawra
maifew: nor is the text certain: see Crit. Afp. VITI. 5. Ast
proposed to read wraiew: ‘he will fence at a tall dummy’—the
avOpias serving the purpose of the wooden post at which Roman
swordmasters taught their pupils to cut and thrust : ‘Who has
not seen the wounds of the post?’ Juv. vi. 247. As this exercise
could scarcely be competitive, Ast wished to transfer réy avrov
dxoAovOoy to the next clause. Coray read pixpov dydpiavra
métew : ‘he will press a statuette between his hands (to harden
them).’ This curious interpretation was suggested by a pas-
sage in Diog. Laert. (VI. 23), which says of Diogenes the cynic
that, to harden his frame, he used ‘to roll on smooth sand in
summer, and in winter to embrace statues covered with snow.’

15 archery and javelin-throwing] Both these were among
the exercises of the gymnasium; but they were esteemed in
very different degrees. Archery was not a subject of contest at
the great festivals ; and the bowmen of Greek armies in his-
torical times were usually of an inferior social grade, at Athens,

IX. THE UNSEASONABLE MAN. 211

Scythian slaves, at Sparta, Helots (Xen, He/len. Iv. 5). Javelin-
throwing, on the other hand, was one of the five exercises of
the pentathlum at the great contests, and was therefore sys-
tematically practised from boyhood. One of Antiphon’s speeches
turns on a case of a boy having accidentally shot another
‘while as the javelin with his fellows at the gymnasium’
(Tetraé. 11. 3 § 3).
16 to take a lesson from him] Compare Plutarch de fort.
Alex. 11. c. 1: ‘Philip, also, was in these things (jealousy of
rofessional artists) smaller and more puerile than his true self,
cause his accomplishments had come late (vn dyipadias).
Thus they say that when he was once wrangling with a harper
about the execution of a passage, and fancied that he was
confuting him, the man smiled quietly and answered, ‘ Far from
ou, O king, be the degradation of understanding these things
tter than me.”’ '

17 at the bath] See c. XIV. note 12.

18 that he may appear educated] The popular Greek ideal
of a good education is expressed in Plato’s 7heages p. 122 E:
‘Did not your father have you educated in the same things in
which all other gentlemen’s sons (o/ rdv caddy xayabay vieis) are
educated—for instance, letters, harp-playing, wrestling, and other
exercises ? Arist. Polit, VIII. 3, ‘There are chiefly four branches
of education—letters, gymnastics, music, and (in some cases)
ainting...for painting, also, seems useful in enabling one to judge
tter of artist's work.’ It is interesting to compare the popular
with the higher Greek conception of ‘the educated man.’
Aristotle says (E7A. Iv. 1. 3) that to the consideration of every
subject may be brought two valuable things—first, special know-
ledge (€murryun), and secondly,‘ a sort of educatedness’ (olov matdeia
ris), The man of special knowledge is the arbiter of fact ; the
‘educated’ man is the critic of method. So in Plato’s Erastae
(P. 135 D) it is said that the philoso her is able, as becomes ‘a
reeborn and educated man,’ to follow the statements of the
special artist (8npoupyos) better than the general company can ;
and Socrates observes that this makes the man of culture, like
the pentathlete, ‘a sort of second-best all round’ (imaxpov twa
mepi mavra: p. 136 A).
IX. ZHE UNSEASONABLE MAN.
I Unseasonableness] This, in its general sense, includes

another character described by Theophrastus,—that of meprepyia,
| L4——2

212 NOTES.

Officiousness. But between Unseasonableness in its strict sense
and Officiousness there are two points of difference. The un-
seasonable man does the wrong thing at the wrong time; the
mistake of the officious man consists either in doing a thing (in
itself opportune) too well, or in undertaking it when it is beyond
his power. The officious man always acts with a kind purpose,
and has his attention habitually directed to the needs of others:
the unseasonable man blunders chiefly through thinking too
exclusively of himself.

2 serenade] The ‘comastes’ was not always the midnight
reveller armed with ‘flambeaux and levers and bows that
threaten the barred doors’ (Hor. Od. 3. 26. 6). Sometimes he is
merely the prototype of the modern serenader. Such is the
‘comastes’ in Theocritus (III. 1); such the player of the * quaver-
ing flute’ against whom Horace warns Asterie (Od. III. 7. 20.)
Compare Lucian Marin. Dial. 1. 4. ‘Galatea. Polyphemus
is quite musical too. Doris. Oh, Galatea! We heard his
singing when he went to serenade you the other day’ (émare
éxapace mpany emi oe).

3 cast in a surety-suit}] Sureties were required by Athenian
law in two cases chiefly : (1) in public causes, for the appearance
of the accused on the day of trial. If he failed to appear, his
. surety became liable to the penalty for contempt of court; and,
in consideration of the risk run, the surety was allowed to hold
the bailee in confinement till the day for his appearance (Xen.
Hellen. \. 7. 35, €3€Onoav vd trav éyyunoapévev). (2) In public
and certain private causes, surety was taken for the satisfaction
of the judicial award. Ifthe principal made default, his surety
was liable for the money, and was sued in a ‘surety-suit’ (é¢yyins
dixn). But this responsibility was limited to one year from the
time when the principal’s liability was incurred (Dem. adv.
A pat. p. 901).

4 he will inveigh against womankind] He does this in their
presence ; for the wedding-feast was the one entertainment
in which Greek manners permitted respectable women to take
part. Plato proposed that the statutable wedding-party should
consist of twenty persons, ten of either sex (Laws VI. p. 775 A)
At the wedding-feast described by Lucian, the women, with the
bride, are placed on one side of the table, the male guests on the
other (Symp. cc. 6 ff.).

X&.- THE OFFICIOUS MAN. 233

and incurring expense] Since, after a sacrifice, it was
usual to entertain friends : see c. XV. note 2.

6 assisting at an arbitration] As an advocate of one of the
two parties : see c. Il. note 3. |

7 Who is not yet drunk] The Roman ‘nemo saltat sobrius’
implied that dancing was altogether incompatible with the
dignity of a freeborn man. This was not the Greek feeling.
The remark in the text only means that dancing, the ultimate
Fa pores of joy, is absurd when a man dances in cold blood.
Cf. Athen. XIV. p. 629 :—‘ Well says Damon the Athenian that
songs. and dances must come when the soul is at all stirred.
Liberal and beautiful souls impart the same qualities to their
dances and songs; souls of the opposite kind, the opposite.
Wherefore also the saying of Cleisthenes the despot of Sicyon was
witty, and the sign of a cultivated understanding. Having seen,
as they say, one of his daughter’s suitors dance in a vulgar
manner—it was Hippocleides the Athenian—he said that “he
had danced off his marriage ;’ deeming, as it seems, that the
soul of the man resembled his dancing.’ (Cf. Her. VI. 129.)

X. THE OFFICIOUS MAN.

1 Officiousness| The desire to please, either by rendering
an extraordinary service or by performing an ordinary one
unusually well, is present in every act ascribed to this character.
‘ Officiousness’ therefore seems to render it better than the more
literal ‘Overbusiness,’ which is too harsh. The distinction be-
tween dpecxeia and mepiepyia scarcely needs to be pointed out ;
the good-will in the latter case is honest, not affected, and the
exaggeration is due simply to an error of judgment. Compare
c. IX, note I.

2 mixing more wine| The wine and the water were usually
mixed together in the bowl, and thence poured into the cups of
the guests. The olvoydos was the ladler-out of the wine; and
otvoyon was the ladle used for that purpose. Athenaeus however
quotes a poet who had written on the subject, and from whom
it appears that this was not always the case: ‘No man’ says
Xenophanes ‘would in mixing his glass first pour in the wine:
the water comes first, and the wine on top of it’ (Ath. XI. p. 782,
§ 18). |

214 3 NOTES.

3 his commanding officer] Here we have the undisciplined
zeal, as in c. XXVII. the uncontrollable terror, of a badly-trained
militiaman. Touches like these well illustrate the character of
the Athenian military force—one which it shared with that of
every Greek state except Sparta. Xenophon says with truth
that the Spartans alone were ‘true artists in war; the other
Greeks, hasty amateurs (atvrooyediaoral) in campaigning’ (Lac.
Polit. 13. 5).

4 when he means to give battle] Compare Plutarch
Demetr. c. 28: ‘It is said that when Demetrius was a boy he
asked his father (Antigonus) when they were to march. An-
tigonus replied in anger: “Are you miserable lest you should
be the only person who does not hear the trumpet ?”

5 what is to be his order] The present tense implies in
Greek a certain obsequiousness which makes the indiscreet zeal
more absurd.—rapayyéAXew ‘to pass the word,’ which the com-
mander gives to his lieutenants and they to their subalterns.
The mepiepyos must be supposed to be a brigadier commanding
(as ‘taxiarch’) the infantry or (as ‘phylarch’) the cavalry of his
tribe.

6 a deceased woman's tombstone] Casaubon doubted whether
yuvaikos meant the man’s own wife ; but, to say nothing of the
fact that her husband is mentioned among those who were
estimable, this would have been ris yuvatxos or THs avrov yuvatkos:
see XVIII., XXIII, XXIV., XXVIII. Some relative of the sepiepyos
is meant, whose funeral it devolved upon him to superinten

7 ‘the name of her husband] It may be inferred from this
passage that it was usual at the time to write upon a woman’s
tomb merely her own name,—with perhaps that of her husband,
if she had been married, or of her father, but not both. There
"1S a very evident emphasis upon yuvatxos: the strangeness of the
fuller inscription consists in the fact that the tomb is a woman’s.
The same feeling which placed a woman’s glory in the absolute
Silence of her life (Thuc. II. 45) may have suggested—what,
indeed, it made inevitable—that her tombstone should say
little. Plato was legislating for his own sex only, when he
permitted tombstones to record ‘the praises of the deceased in
not more than four heroic verses’ (Laws XV. p. 958 E). Pau-
Sanias notices it as feculiar at Sicyon that ‘they add no in-
scription, but after simply stating the name of the deceased,

XI. THE UNPLEASANT MAN. 215

without intimating his descent: (ov marpédev vmetrdvres), bid
Farewell to the dead’ (II. 7. 3).

XI. THE UNPLEASANT MAN.

I Unpleasantness] The epithet ‘harmless’ (dvev BAaB8ns)
with which the ‘annoyance’ given by the character is qualified,
seems merely an attempt by the composer of the Definition to
indicate that Avmn, ‘pain,’ is not to be understood in a material
sense. Thus the Shameless man, for instance, does not merely
offend the taste, but sometimes inflicts positive damage, BAaBn,
—as on the butcher from whom he steals tripe. The Unpleasant
man on the other hand—says the Definition—is annoying in an
aesthetic sense only.

The outlines of this Character are not firmly drawn ; the
traits which it includes do not seem distinctly referable to any
one dominant moral quality: it is altogether a slight sketch,
put together from observations and impressions which have not
been thoroughly sorted or analysed. It haselementsincommon -
with at least three characters which are elsewhere treated
separately and fully :—1. The Unpleasant man is uaseasonadle.
He disturbs a friend’s sleep that he may talk to him, and keeps
a ship waiting while he takes a walk. 2. He is doast/ul; as
when he speaks of his cistern and of his cook. 3. He 1s gross,
Le. - coarse jester ; as in the question which he addresses to his
mother.

No one of these tendencies is strongly marked; but they
are so blended as to form a whole which would, in English
phrase, be most nearly described by Ill-breeding ; meaning
thereby a want of tact which is not accidental, but is due
to a defect, natural or engendered, in sure good-feeling.

2 cistern-water] The remark is dndés as being boastful ;
and perhaps also as suggesting thin potations. The female
legislator in the Ecclestasusae (1§4) proposes ‘that no publican
be allowed to construct cisterns in the wine-shops.’ Athenaeus
tells a story—preserved by a brother dramatist—of Diphilus.
The comic poet is dining out, and compliments his host upon
the coolness of the wine :—

‘Your cistern must be admirably cool.’
‘Yes; we take pains to ice it—with your prologues.’
(Ath. XIIL. p. §80 § 43).

216 NOTES.

the pierced cask] In Lucian’s Dialogues of the Dead
(x1. 4) the shades of two philosophers converse mournfully on
the uselessness of instilling truths into minds which have no
power to retain them :—‘ It was just the case of these daughters
of Danaus, for ever refilling the sieve-like cask.’

will show off the qualities of his parasite] He draws
attention, at his own table, to the appetite of his parasite,—
incites him to buffoonery,—and in short, displays him as one of
his possessions. The abject condition of the professional
Athenian parasite is vividly set forth in Alciphro’s Leffers,—
who, in this as in other things, seems to have drawn upon the
poets of the Middle and New Comedy. The parasite is described
as ever hesitating between two evils—on the one hand, yaunt
hunger—on the other, not indignities merely, but blows, cuffs,
all manner of ill-usage from his patron and his patron’s guests
(111. 6, 7, 49). His position is unbearable : he thinks of taking
to the road with a band of brigands who lie in wait at the
Scironian rocks for travellers to Corinth ; he attempts small
parts at the theatre, and implores his brother parasites to come
and applaud ; he even tries country life; but 1t is in vain; he
always relapses into the old dilemma between starvation and
maltreatment (III. 70, 71). The parasite in Plautus and Terence
holds, if not a higher, at least a safer position.

The word ‘ parasite’ is said to occur in a dad sense first ina
fragment of Araros (Apapos) the son of Aristophanes, whose first
piece, acc. to Suidas, was acted in Ol. 101 (376—372 B.C:
Meineke frag. com. ed. Bothe p. 466). In older times ‘ parasite’
was a term of honour, meaning a person appointed to assist the
magistrates in celebrating sacrificial feasts, and otherwise called
avvGowos: Athen. p. 234 § 26.

XII. THE OFFENSIVE MAN.

I Offensiveness] The appropriation of the word dvcyépea
to the special sense which it bears here is remarkable. It is
perhaps the strongest example of a characteristic common in
some degree to all these sketches—that they treat general terms
simply in reference to the particular meaning, however arbitrary,
which the social usage of the day had fixed upon them: see c.
III, note 1. It may be accidental, but seems worthy of notice,
that twice in the Philoctetes of Sophocles 8voyxépera is used
precisely in the sense to which it is restricted here—when the

XII. ZTHE STUPID MAN. 217

sufferer speaks of the annoyance which his malady must cause
to those with whom he sails : vv. 473, 900.
2 rancid ofl] Compare Juvenal v. 88 :—
Your humbler sauceboats know the grosser oil
Which came in wherries from Jugurtha’s soil;

Which helps the Moor to bathe in peace at Rome,
And guards his countrymen from snakes at home.

3° a thick tunic] He wears the lightest summer mantle over
such a tunic as is worn only in winter. Aristophanes in the
Birds (714) speaks of the time when— :
| The swallow brings us news,
*Tis time to sell the winter cloak and buy the summer blouse:

and Horace of the man who wears—

In June a cape, a jersey when it snows.
(Zp. 1. xi. 18.)

XIII. THE STUPID MAN.

1 Stupidity] In £7h. N. 11.7 Aristotle observes that there
is no proper name for those who care too little about pleasure ;
but proposes to call them ¢zsensible (dvaioOnro). The word is
used here in a general meaning, of one whose ‘ perceptions’ are
slow. All the phases of this slowness described by Theophrastus
have a common characteristic,—inattention to the immediate

resent. It is because the avaic@nros is seldom thinking of what
he is doing at the moment that his actions leave no stamp upon
his*memory, and that he forgets an engagement just formed.
For the same reason, when social pressure hurries him into
speaking or acting on the instant, he is apt to say or do
mechanically something which does not suit the occasion.

2 after doing a sum] In,c. VI. it is said of the Boastful
man that, when sitting in a public place among strangers, he
will ask one of them to ‘set up the counters’ (Geivac ras yous)
in order to verify a boast which he has made. These two
passages seem to show that people sometimes carried about a
‘ready reckoner’ in the shape of a small ciphering-board
(aBaxiov), like that used by an arithmetic master (calculator) at
Rome: Mart. X. 62. 4.—See c. IV. note 10,

when he is defendant in an action] The preliminary in-
vestigation of the case before the archon is over; a day has

218 NOTES.

been appointed for it to come before a court ; but, before this
day (7 xupia rov vopov, Dem. Med. p. 544 § 93) arrives, the
Stupid man forgets the whole matter, and leaves Athens. The
consequence is that judgment goes against him by default.

4 in order that he may come to the house} The duty ofa
relative or friend was not merely to attend the tuneral (€x@opd) ;
he was also expected to visit the house at least once while the
corpse was laid out (spoGecrs). Not to take part in the ‘mourning’
(ro xndos) then made, was thought unfeeling neglect: Isocr.
Aegin. p. 390. See Demosth. adv. Macart. p. 1071 § 64, ‘These
female relations he invites both to be present at the laying out
of the dead, and to follow him to the grave.” Plut. de Consol.ad
Ux. c. 3, ‘This also is mentioned with surprise by those who
visited the house (of rapayevopevo, i.e. during the mpobects),
that you have not put on mourning...nor was there any show of
splendour or pomp about the burial.’ So in the Andria 1 1. 79
the mourner often (frequens) visits the house of death.

will call iiaarae? | as if he were making, instead of
receiving, a payment. Compare Dem. 2” Phorm. p. 915 § po
‘I suppose you all know that (these men) borrow with few
witnesses, but call many when they pay.’

6 cucumbers] In the Peace (1001) Trygaeus prays ‘that
the marketplace may be full of good things—large garlic, early
cucumbers, apples, pomegranates.’ But the Stupid man forgets
that it is not even spring yet.

7 make his children wrestle} Through mere dull inad-
vertence he incites his children to continue their violent
exercise long after signs of fatigue have begun to appear.
Athletics filled a large place in the life of a Greek; but his
instinct for moderation in this as in other things is often
marked. See Plato’s Evastfae p. 133 E (where Socrates wants
to show that polymathy is not philosophy), ‘Pray, now, do you
consider that in the gymnasia heavy work (diAomovia) 1s
athleticism (iAcyupvacia)?? Aristotle says that gymnastic
na is the knowledge of the moderate in toil: Eth. N. 1. -

4.

8 and run races} Eur. Medea 46 ‘Here come in my
children from their races’—éx rpoyov, where a variant is éx
tpoyav (rpoxos) ‘from their hoops.’ Mr Sheppard understands
rpoxafew here of trundling hoops: but elsewhere the word

XIIL THE STUPID MAN. 219

always means to run races. An anonymous critic suggested
rpoxifew: but this (though supported by the analogy of Aone
¢evv) does not occur in the sense of ‘driving a hoop.’ Probably
the word for that would have been xpixndareiv, or perhaps
TpoxnAaréy,—certainly not rpoyrafew, as Ast suggests.

when it is raining] See Crit. Af. xi. 4. The point
concealed under the corrupt text is probably of the kind which
the most intelligible of the restorations affords. The dvaio6nros
makes one of his verbal blunders. Ussing supposes the general
sense to have been: ‘ When it rains he praises the fine weather,
and does things which can be done only when it is fine.’ But
probably even the dvaiaOnros, if (for instance) he went out to dig,
would discover that the weather was unpropitious.

10 the Sacred Gate} Sulla, in 86 B.c., broke into Athens by
levelling ‘that part of the wall which is between the Peiraic and
the Sacred Gate; and the ensuing massacre in the neighbour-
hood of the agora ‘spread over the whole Cerameicus within the
Dipylum’ (Plut. Sué/a 14) The Dipylum, also called the
Thriasian Gate, was on the N.wW. side of Athens; the Peiraic
was on the S.w.; the Sacred Gate was probably between them,
and was so called because it led (as did also the Dipylum) to
the Sacred Road to Eleusis. Now the Outer Cerameicus, upon
which the Sacred Gate, as well as the Dipylum, would thus
open, was the cemetery for those who were honoured with public
burial. See the Bzrds, 395 -—‘The Cerameicus shall receive
us; for, in order that we may have a public funeral, we will
tell the Generals that we died in battle with the enemy in Bird-
land.’—F or a discussion of the reading ’Hpias muAas, see Critical
A pphendtx XIII, 5. :

Ir I only wish that you or I had as many] The Stupid
man, in absence of mind, answers as if he had been asked (for
instance) ‘How many minas do you suppose that Glaucon is
worth?’ Thus inadvertently he speaks words of fearful omen ;
for he associates death with himself and with his questioner by
a wish, Fora precisely similar instance of avato@ncia betrayed
into dvognpia, see Plutarch Crass. 19: ‘And from Crassus
himself, as he was addressing the soldiers, fell an utterance
which agitated and appalled them. He directed them to break
down the bridge over the river, 7% order that no one might
yveturn. And whereas he ought, when he perceived the strange-
ness (droriay—a euphemism) of the phrase, to have recalled and

220 NOTES.

explained it to those whom his words had terrified, he neglected
through obstinacy to do so’—For the form of the expression
doo euot yévowro, cf. Theocr. XVI. 19, adr@ pol re yevotro ‘give
me pelf for myself.’

XIV. THE BOOR.

I Boorishness] The sense of apafia in the Definition
is illustrated by Eur. Med. 223, ‘harsh to his fellow-citizens
from want of culture (apabias vro).

The selection of the Rustic as a definite type is remarkable.
Small as Attica was, the line of demarcation between town and
country life was sharply drawn. As Athens grew in wealth, the
richer part, indeed, of the country population were more and
more attracted to it; and Isocrates, speaking in 380 R.C., can
already contrast his own time with the days when ‘the houses
and establishments in the country were handsomer than those
within the walls, and when many of the citizens did not even
come to town for the festivals’ (Aveop. p. 150 § 52). But there
remained a frugal farmer-class, strongly conservative of the old
simplicity, totally strange to the life of the city, and rarely—in
some cases, never—visiting it. A vivid picture of this’ class—
probably derived in part from the Greek comic dramatists—is
given in the LeZfers of Alciphro, of which the imaginary writers
belong to the age of Theophrastus. The temptations which
beset the rustic on his visits to Athens are forcibly described.
A farmer sends in his son to sell wood and barley ; the young
man sees a philosopher at the Academy, and to his father’s
dismay comes back a Cynic (111. 40). Another, having been
sent in to buy earthenwére, is betrayed into a ruinous carouse;
a third, after disposing of his figs and nuts, goes to the theatre,
and is thrown into ecstasies of wonder and terror by a conjuror
(III. 17. 20). The rareness of such visits is also marked. In
one letter a young Attic farmer requests a neighbour to be his
guide in a first visit to Athens ; he longs to see ‘ what this thing
may be which they call town’ (III. 31). In another, a son
implores his mother to ‘come and see the splendours of the
town before her dying day;’ for, though distant but a few hours’
journey, she has never seen them (III. 39).

It was from the intellectual, quite as much as from the
aesthetic side, that an Athenian viewed Rusticity. Aristotle calls
the man incapable of a joke—the opposite extreme to the Buffoon

XIV. 7THE BOOR. 221

—<dypotxos, a Rustic ; and when he afterwards changes his word,
it isonly to substitute for it another (dypsos) which expresses in
a still stronger form the result of living too much in the country.
The sketch which Theophrastus gives us is so far defective that
it contrasts rusticity, not with town intelligence, but merely with
town elegance.

2 a posset] The xuxedy was a sort of thick posset, made
with wine, barley-meal, grated cheese, and honey, and some-
times flavoured with thyme. The rustic carries the fragrance
on his breath into the Ecclesia.

3 his shoes too large for his feet] In the Axights (317)
Cleon is accused of having sold bad shoe-leather ‘to the country
people ;’ so that ‘before they had worn the shoes a day, they
were too large by a couple of spans.’ Compare Hor. Sad. 1. 3.
30; ‘He may be laughed at because he is shaved in a some-
what rustic fashion—because his toga falls to his heels—because
the loose shoe will hardly cling to his foot ..—Cf. c. I. note 7.

4 talks confidentially to his own servants} Greek manners,
unlike Roman, permitted familiarity with slaves. After telling
a story to illustrate the fear in which a Roman slave stood of
his master, Plutarch adds,—‘ but the Attic slave will tell his
master as he digs the terms of the last Convention ; so perfect
is their familiarity’ @e Garrul.18). Xenophon says :—‘ We have

‘iven to our slaves the right to talk like equals (onyopia) with
Pecnien, just as to resident-aliens the right of so talking with
citizens ;’ and he explains the indulgence by the fact that in a
naval state, which requires the personal service of its citizens,
the industries must be in the hands of the slaves, who will grow
rich, and must then be kept in good humour (de repudbl. Ath. 1.
12).—The Rustic’s rusticity consists, then, not in conversing
with his slaves, but in conversing with them on important
rpg which, with a surly reserve, he withholds from his own
amily.

hired labourers] Slavery did not altogether swamp the
labour-market. Poor men, chiefly foreigners, found employment
as artisans, farm-labourers, or domestics: see Plat. Rep. 371.
Lysis, in Plato’s dialogue, says that his father’s chariot was
driven at the games by a Aired charioteer (Lys. p. 208 E), while
the groom mentioned in the same passage is a slave. The
shrine of. Eurysaces in the Market-place is mentioned by Pollux

222 NOTES.

as the place at which ‘those who ply for hire used to con-
gregate,’

6 when he sees an ox or an ass or a goat] Compare Earle’s
Character of a Plaine Country Fellow:—‘His mind is not
much distracted with objects ; but if a good fat Cowe come in
his way, he stands dumbe and astonisht, and though his haste
be never so great, will fixe here halfe an houres contemplation.’

7 will drink his wine rather strong] Temperate drinkers
always put more water than wine into the bowl. Five parts of
water to two of wine appears to have been a favourite mixture
(Athen. X. p. 426. § 28), In a fragment of one of the comedies of
Eupolis the Wine-God is thus greeted on his appearance—

Hail, Dionysus: are you ‘ Five-and-two ?’
Hesiod (Of. 594) recommends three parts of water to one of
wine,—the mixture which in Horace (Od. Il. 8. 13) the Graces
are said to approve. As to stronger compounds, a poet in
Athenaeus (II. p. 36 § 2) says—

Half-wine half-water is a maddening drink ;

Wine without water brings paralysis.
The Spartan Cleomenes was supposed to have gone mad
through having learned from the Scythians to drink wine neat
(Her. vi. 84).

8 the dog] The house-dog which kept watch in the hall.
In Ar. Zysést. 1213 the servant at the door warns importunate
visitors to ‘beware of the dog.’ The arrival of a welcome guest
is thus described in some verses quoted by Athenaeus (I.
Pp. 3 § 4) :—
First, the hall-porter is all smiles—the dog

Wags a pleased tail—and some one hastes to set
A chair, unbidden.

if he has lent his plough] It is impossible not to be
struck by the frequent allusions in these sketches to loans
between neighbours of things used in housekeeping or farming.
Thus the Penurious man (XXIV.) is one who ‘ forbids his wife to
lend salt, or a lamp-wick, or cummin, or verjuice, or meal for
sacrifice, or garlands, or cakes;’ cf. cc. XV., XXIII, XXVI. Such
touches remind us that the social life of Attica was, in the best
sense, homely ; and of the saying of Pericles, that Athenians
understood giAoxaAeiv per’ evredeias, Compare Xenophon Jem.

XIV. THE BOOR. 223

II. 2. 12. ‘Well,’ said Socrates, ‘and do you not wish to be on
good terms with your neighbour, that he may give you a light
for your fire when you want one?’

‘10 salt-fish} As fresh fish was the favourite delicacy at
Athens, so salt-fish was the cheapest and commonest food.
While Dicaeopolis, in the Acharnians, having made peace for
himself, is preparing to dine on pheasants and _ thrushes,
Lamachus ruefully provides himself with the fare of a campaigner
—onions and salt-fish (4ch. 1100). There were shops expressly
for its sale in the marketplace (c. XVI.), and it was also sold at
the city-gates (Ar. Kwigh¢s 1246). Cargoes of salted thunnies,
mackerel, etc., were imported from the Hellespont and the
Euxine : Athen, III. p. 116 § 85. |

“11 hides] &8¢pas were sometimes worn by country people.
A rustic in the Clouds (72) is described as ‘clad in leather,
driving in his goats from Phelleus.’

12 the New-Moon| The first of the (lunar) month was fair-
day at Athens. Ar. Wasfs 171: ‘1 want to sell my ass; for it
is new moon?’ Knights 43 ‘this man bought a slave at the last
new moon.’ A public sacrifice, at which the archon presided,
was held on the acropolis on this day. Demosth. 4réstog. I.
p. 800 (urging the jury to be true to their oaths) ‘ How (else),
when you go up to the acropolis at the new moon, can you pray
the gods to bless Athens and to bless each one of you?’

13 Will sing at the bath] At the public baths, no less than
in the streets or at the theatres, manners were on their trial.
The term ‘ Triballians,’ which Demosthenes uses in the general
sense of ‘roysterers,’ meant especially, according to one old
lexicon, those who behave with wll-breeding at the baths. The
Shameless man (XvV.), the Offensive man (XII.), and the Late-
learner (VIII.) all make the baths a place for the display of their
_characters. The Rustic sings in mere gaiety of spirit. Horace
complains of more deliberate offenders :—‘Some recite their
works in the forum; not a few at the bath’ (Saf 1. 4. 75):
and Martial says of an irrepressible reciter—‘I fly to the baths
—you still buzz at my ear’ (III. 44. 12.) Seneca too reckons
among the nuisances of those resorts ‘the man who likes to hear
his own voice:’ (Ep. 56). One of the temptations may have
been the vaulted roof.

224 NOTES.

XV. THE SHAMELESS MAN.

I Shamelessness] The clause in the Definition—‘for the
sake of base gain’—is significant. It is the key, as will pre-
sently be explained, to the special and limited sense in which
Theophrastus considers Shamelessness. Compare the pseudo-
Platonic Definitions p. 416: ‘Shamelessness is a state of mind
tolerant of ignominy for the sake of gain.’

Shamelessness in its general sense—‘ the not-shrinking from
doing disgraceful things’ (£74. WV. iv. 9)—comprehends three
characters described by Theophrastus: 1. Shamelessness (ava
oxuvria) in his specialsense: 2. Recklessness or the Abandoned
character (dmrovoia): 3. Grossness (BéeAvpia). We will attempt
to discriminate these ; having regard, not to the ideas which
the terms might or ought to convey, but merely to the positive
sense in which Theophrastus has used them. :

(1) His Shameless man, then,—whom it will be convenient
to distinguish as the man of Shrewd Effrontery—is one who is
restrained by no scruple from committing those small injustices
for which there is a practical impunity. He is not at war with
society ; he does not outrage it by any grave misdemeanour, or
even by any eccentricity so violent that a brazen jocularity
cannot carry it off. The strength of his genius lies in this,—
that, while he is habitually guilty of sharp practice in his dealings
with the world, and while he knows that the world knows it, he
is able to suppress every trace of consciousness that he is not
generally respected and beloved. The first trait given by Theo-
phrastus is the most expressive. He dines out at a time when
he was socially bound to be dispensing instead of receiving
hospitality. But, instead of betraying embarrassment, he gaily
assumes the licence of a privileged and especially popular
guest.

(2) The Reckless or Abandoned man (drovevonpeévos) is also
shameless. But, whereas the man of Shrewd Effrontery re-
presses, for the sake of gain, an instinct of shame probably feeble
from the first, the Reckless man has fiercely cast off a sense of
shame which may once have been fine. The breach between
him and his self-respect is complete and irreconcileable, trans-
forming his whole character, and driving him into grotesque
forms of self-insult. The man of Shrewd Effrontery is on good
terms with the world ; the Reckless man is a social outcast.

XV. THE SHAMELESS MAN. 225

(3) The Gross man differs from the other two chiefly in this,
—that he stands morally on a higher, zsthetically on a lower
level. He does ‘shameless’ things neither, like the man of
Shrewd Effrontery, with a view to advantage, nor, like the
Reckless man, in a sort of desperation ; but naturally, with the
relish of a coarse nature for monstrous jests, which seem to him
the more humorous if they extort signs of disgust. But, if he
is in more violently bad taste, he is less immoral than the other
two ; for his offences are less voluntary, and, on the whole, of a
lighter kind. He does not defraud his neighbour, like the man
of Shrewd Effrontery ; nor, like the Reckless man, leave his
mother to starve.

2 when he has been sacrificing] As in Homeric, so in later
times a sacrifice was usually followed by a feast. Thus, in one
of Antipho’s speeches, a man has a sacrifice to perform to Zeus
Ctesius in the Peiraeus : he makes it the occasion of giving a
farewell dinner to a friend who is about to sail (de Venef. § 16).
The sacrifice in honour of any domestic event, e.g. the naming
of a child, or an athletic victory (Sexarny, vixnrnpta Ovew)—always
implied the entertaining of friends. After public sacrifices, in
like manner, the people were feasted (Isaeus de Astyph. hered.
§ 21), a regular portion of bread and meat being given to each
person (Plut. Syw~. 11. 10. 7). To hold a sacrifice without
giving a dinner would have been thought inhospitable; to dine
out on the same day, shameless.

calling up his attendant] A Roman custom allowed the
guest to hand to his slave, stationed behind him, delicacies
which he wished to reserve for use at home: see Athen. Iv.
p- 128 § 2, where, at an elaborate wedding-banquet, the slaves in
attendance on their masters carry baskets, which are soon filled.
But on ordinary occasions it was thought ill-bred to use this
privilege: see Lucian’s Symp. c. 2, Hermot. c.2; Martial 11.
37. And there is no proof that the custom was tolerated at all
by earlier Greek manners: at Rome it may have been con-
nected in origin with the client’s dole. Here the Shameless
man is of course represented as taking an unusual liberty.
A similar trait is mentioned of the Avaricious man, who, at
a club dinner, asks for a dish for his slaves (c. XXVI.).

4 in marketing] See c. XVII. note 6.
5 when he has taken places at the theatre] Having his
house full of guests, perhaps at one of the festivals, he takes a

S

226 ° NOTES.

certain number of places for a series of performances at the
theatre. His visitors pay for the tickets ; but, on the first day,
he contrives to go himself in the place of one of them ; and, em-
boldened by success, brings on the second day his children and
their ‘pedagogue’ in the room of others. In Plato’s time a place
in the best part of the house—.e. in the tiers nearest the orchestra
—seems to have cost about a drachma (10d.: Plat. Afol. Soer.
p. 26 E). The ordinary price of admission was two obols,—
rather more than 3¢.,—which the state furnished to poor people
at the festivals. Foreigners probably had to take their places
through citizens; and foreign women at least seem to have been
restricted to a particular part of the house. In a fragment of
Alexis the women complain, ‘we have to sit at the theatre in the
back rows, as if we were foreigners’ (févas: Alex. frag. 25. !
Meineke).

6 and borrow barley} See c. XIV. note 8.

7 the coppers in the baths] for heating the water. A
shower-bath was sometimes taken by having water dashed over
the head ; and this office was performed by the bathman, See
Plat. Rep. 1. p. 344 D, ‘Thrasymachus now thought of going,
after having, like a bathman, dashed his discourse over our ears
in a full torrent.” The Shameless man does this for himself, and
thus finds a pretext for depriving the attendant of his fee.

XVI. THE RECKLESS MAN.

I Recklessness} On the difference between this character
and those which precede and follow it, see c. XV. note 1. The
term drovevonsévos contrasts a former with an actual state;
before a man can be desperate he must have hoped. The
Definition fails to mark this; but the Character marks it
throughout. It is the picture of a person who has gone from
bad to worse, until he retains just so much remembrance of a
more respectable self as serves to give him a frantic pleasure in
insulting his own dignity. He 1s ready to be evem a crier or a
cook ; a statement which shows how advantageous is the original
position supposed for the now Reckless man. The ideas con-
ventionally attached to the words dmovota, drovevonzévos will be
seen from Demosth. 7” Aristog. 1. p. 780 § 32 : ‘Do you not see
that in his policy there is no calculation, no restraining sense of
honour (aides), but that recklessness (dmovora) is its guide? Or

XVI. THE RECKLESS MAN. 227

rather, his policy zs utter recklessness,—that worst of evils to the
man upon whom it comes, a thing terrible and cruel to all,—to
the State, intolerable. For the reckless man (6 dmovevonpévos)
has given himself up,—has no care for the safety which calcula-
tion can ensure,—and prospers, if he does prosper, against ex-
pectation and against probability.’ Plutarch makes callousness
to ill repute the essence of dmovaa (A lcib. 13. 4).

2 being proof against abuse, and capable of giving it] The
aor. AowdopnOjva is here, as in Demosthenes, deponent, having
an active sense, ‘to revile’ see Crit. Afp. XVI.1. The Reckless
man cannot only listen unmoved to reproaches (xaxds dxovaat),
but can retort them.

to dance the cordax] The author of the Clouds, taking
credit to himself for the propriety of his muse, instances some
things which she has eschewed. Among these it is specified that
she has ‘never mocked bald men, nor danced the cordax’ (549:.

4 sober] Cf. Demosth. O/y7. I. p. 23 § 19: ‘The rest of
(Philip’s) court consist of brigands and flatterers and such-like
persons, capable of dancing, when intoxicated, dances which I
would rather not name to you.’ |

5 without a mask] Demosth. de Falsa Legat. p. 433
§ 287: ‘men at the very sight of whom you would cry out—the
blackguard Nicias and the execrable Curebion, who plays comic
parts in the procession without the mask’ (i.e. at the Dionysia).
Observe the article: he (indispensable) mask.

6 at a conjuror’s performance] Jugglers, puppet-showmen
and the like travelled about to the fairs and festivals at towns.
Plutarch compares persons who circulate absurd opinions to
men ‘dragging about a sort of conjuror’s apparatus and booth
(rvAaiav) on their backs’ (de fac. Lunae 8). In Plato’s Republic
(VII. p. 514 B) the wall over which the prisoners in the cave see
images flit is compared to the ‘screens which ccnjurors set
between themselves and the spectators, over which they show
their tricks.’ Sometimes they were allowed to perform in
theatres (Athen. I. p. 19 § 16: Alciphr. III. 20). The tricks
were of the established type—bringing fire out of the mouth
(Athen. Iv. p. 129 $ 3), swallowing knives (Plut. Zyc. 20), making
pebbles pass from one cup to another, or producing them from
the mouth or ears of a spectator (Alciphr. III. 20).

7 the free-pass] 1d cvpSodoy appears to mean a token or
12

228 NOTES.

ticket given by the conjuror to his friends, or paid for, before
the performance commenced. Compare Ar. Plt. 278, ‘why do
you not go?—Charon offers you your ticket’ (ro ctpBordor di8ect)
—with allusionto the tickets given to jurymen when they entered
court, and on presenting which they received their pay.

8 an innkeeper] The unpopularity of innkeepers arose
partly, no doubt, from the general feeling in ancient Greece
against taking money for hospitality; but they were also
infamous, as a Class, for extortion. See acurious passage in
Plato’s Laws XI. p.9g18 D: ‘On this account (eagerness for
gain) all the lines of life connected with retail trade, commerce,
inn-keeping, have fallen under suspicion and become utterly
disreputable...A man opens lodgings, for the sake of trade, ina
lonely place, a long way from anywhere. He receives bewildered
travellers in barely tolerable quarters, or affords warmth, quiet,
and rest in his close rooms to people driven in by angry storms.
And then, after receiving them as friends, he does not provide
them with hospitable entertainment in accordance with that re-
ception, but holds them to ransom,—like captive enemies whom
he has got into his clutches,—on the most exorbitant, unjust,
rascally terms. It is these offences, and others like them,
shamefully common in all such callings, which have brought
discredit upon such ministration to men’s need.’ But though it
was discreditable to keep, it was not so to frequent an inn.
The Athenian ambassadors to Philip stay at inns (Dem. a F.
Legat. p. 272); and Dionysus in the Fvogs (114) inquires which
are the best inns on the road to Hades.

a tax-farmer] Andocides de Myst. p. 17 § 133 :—‘Agyr-
rhius became chief-farmer of the two-per-cent. tax two years ago,
buying it for thirty talents; and had for his partners the whole
set who muster under the white-poplar’ (the spot at Athens
where the tax-contracts were sold); ‘you know what they are
like.’

10 acrier’s] The Homeric ‘herald’ was also ambassador,
‘messenger of Zeus and men’ (//. I. 334); his office was sacred
and his person inviolable. The house of the Heralds at Athens
were the priestly representatives of this bygone dignity. But
the modern ‘herald’—the crier who made proclamation in the
Ecclesia or in the market-place—seems to have been on a level
with the Roman fraeco. Speaking of the shifts to which poor

XVI. THE RECKLESS MAN. 229

poets are reduced, Juvenal says: ‘Others have not thought it
too low or base to become criers’ (VII. 5).

II a cook’s} The meals of an Athenian household were
usually prepared by the female slaves; only on special occasions
was a man-cvok hired from one of the shops in the Marketplace
in which the business of professed cook was combined with
that of butcher. When Aristippus was reproached with em-
ploying a professional orator in a lawsuit, ‘Well,’ he answered,
‘and when I give a dinner-party I hire a cook’ (Diog. I. 72).
The earliest mention of a man-cook as part of the establishment
is said by Athenaeus to have occurred in a writer who lived about
280 B.c.: Athen. XIv. p.658 § 22, Commenting upon the luxury
brought in at Rome by the Asiatic conquests, Livy says: ‘Then
it was that the cook, esteemed and treated by the ancients as the
vilest of slaves, began to be prized’ (XXXIX, 6).

12 he will gamble] Aeschines zz Zimarch. p.8§ 53: ‘He
spent his days in a gambling-house, where the fighting-stage
(rnAia, a board with a ring chalked upon it) is set out, and they
match fighting-cocks, and play at dice.’ Alciphr. 111. 54: ‘Per-
haps you will ask me why I am crying, or how I came to have
my head broken, or why this flowered cloak of mine is torn to
tatters? I won atdice. Woyld that I never had! What busi-
ness had J to match my weak self against sturdy young men?
No sooner had I swept all the stakes on the table towards me,
and broken their bank, than they made a general rush at me.
Some pounded me with their fists, others used stones, others
tore my clothes. I clung fast to my money, determined to die
rather than give up to them any part of my winnings. Well, for
a time I made a good fight of it, standing the showers of blows,
resisting the wrenching fingers, and sitting still like a Spartan
who is being flogged on Orthia’s altar. At last, however, I grew
faint, and allowed the ruffians to take their plunder.’

13 will neglect to maintain his mother] Loss of civil rights
was the legal penalty for proved neglect of parents. Aeschin.
in Timarch. p. 4 § 28: ‘And whom did our lawgiver condemn to
silence (in the Ecclesia)? Evil livers. And where does he make
this clear? ‘Let there be’ he says ‘a scrutiny of the public
speakers, in case there be any speaker in the Ecclesia who is a
striker of his father or mother, or who neglects to maintain
them or to give them a home.’ Solon, however, enacted that

230 NOTES.

‘no son should be compelled to maintain a father who failed
to have him taught some trade’ (Plut. So/. 22).

14 will be arrested for theft] The Greek term drayeoba
implies that the man is caught in the fact and taken at once
before the Commissioners of Police (‘the Eleven’). According
to the letter of Athenian law in the time of Demosthenes theft
was a Capital crime in three cases: 1. theft to the value of more
than 50 drachmas, or about £2: 2. theft to the value of more
than 10 drachmas (8s.) from the gymnasia, the baths, or the
es 3. theft of anything by night (Dem. z% Zzmocr. p. 736

113).

15 some public gathering] mavyyupts is a word of general
meaning. He chooses for his displays a time when Athens is
full; either a market-day or a festival. As the great festivals
were occasions of buying and selling, savyyupis seems, at least
in later Greek, to have meant especially the fazr coincident with
a festival: see Paus. X. 32. 9 (describing a festival in Phocis):
“On the last of the three days they hold a has (ravnyupifovat),
selling slaves, and, indeed, all beasts of burden.’

16 excusing himself on oath] He is concerned with law-
suits in one of three capacities,—as defendant, as plaintiff, or as
witness. In the last case he sometimes attends the courts,
bringing a mass of papers; but he sometimes makes oath that
he knows nothing of the matter. This was éefouyvoGa. Those
who, when cited, refused either to give evidence or to take this
oath, were liable to a fine of 1000 drachmas. Demosth. i
Neaer. p. 1354: ‘I call Hipparchus himself before you. I will
compel him to give evidence, or to excuse himself on oath
according to law.’

17 in the breast of his cloak] which was worn deep, and
served as a bag or purse. Theocritus says, speaking of the
niggardly spirit of the age, ‘Everyone keeps his hand in the
bosom of his robe’ (i.e. guards his pockets closely : XVI. 17).

18 to be a captain of market-place hucksters] i.e. to be
patron and subsidizer of the retail-traders (xamndot) who kept
taverns and eatinghouses in the market-place, and who were, as
a class, in bad repute. He lends them small sums with which
to carry on their business, and goes the round of their shops to
levy his interest. He has himself been described as dyopaios
ris.—See Crit. App. XVI. 6.

XVII THE GROSS MAN. 231

19 twopence halfpenny a day] The drachma=6 obols: this
is therefote 25 per cent.a day. Compare Plaut. Ffzd. 1.1. 5:
‘He actually borrowed this money from a usurer at Thebes on
daily interest,—a sesterce for every silver mina.’ Taking the
mina at rather more than £4, and the sesterce at 2@,, this would
be about 74 per cent. a year. Menippus, the Cynic, ‘was a
moneylender by the day, and was called the day-lender’ (jpe-
podavecorns : Diog. VI. 99).

20 the cookshops] Isocrates implies that in his time the
shops of this kind in the market-place had a better class of
customers than formerly: for he says that ¢hem ‘no decent
servant, even, would have thought of eating and drinking in
a tavern’ (Areop. p. 149 § 49). See, however, the story in
Plutarch Demosth. 60:—‘ Diogenes once saw in a tavern De-
mosthenes—who was ashamed and shrank back. ‘The more
you shrink back,’ he said, ‘the more you will be in the tavern.”’

21 thrusting into his cheek] Ar. Eccl. 818: ‘I had been
selling grapes, and came back with my cheek full of copper
coins.’

22 upon their gains] dd rot éumoAnparos, ‘out of their
receipts from what they sell:’ ¢umwoAay meaning not merely ‘to
buy,’ but ‘to gain by traffic.” Isaeus de Agn. hered. p. 88 § 43:
‘Besides these he left furniture, cattle, barley, wine, fruit, by
which they made (éverdAnoav) 4900 drachmas.’

23 the workshops] Seec. XVII. note 7.

XVII. THE GROSS MAN.

I Grossness] AdeXupos, in its graver sense, was nearly equi-
valent to Blackguard. But it was used also in a lighter sense,
to describe that kind of coarse buffoon whom Aristotle calls
Bopordyos (Eth, N. Il. 7. 13). See Plato’s Repudlic p. 338D,
where Thrasymachus says, in reference to his opponent having
used what he considers an extravagantly unfair illustration,
B8edupes ef, & Zéxpares,—‘ Socrates, you are a buffoon.’ In this
sketch the graver and lighter meanings are blended; but the
latter predominates. It is impossible to find an exact equi-
valent in English. ‘ Buffoon’ has acquired too polite associa-
tions. ‘ Blackguard?’ is, on the whole, too grave for the character
intended here. ‘Gross’ appears least inadequate. It does not,
indeed, interpret the humorous side of the character ; but then

232 NOTES.

neither does its Greek original,—the humorous sense attached
to B&eAupes being conventional.

2 hiss the actors] A demonstrative Athenian audience did
not always confine themselves to hissing. Demosthenes, taunt-
ing Aeschines with his ill-success on the stage, remarks that the
tragic contests in which he used to take part were ‘contests for
his life,’ from which he frequently came off ‘with wounds’ (de
Coron. p. 314); i.e. he was pelted. Again, de Fals. Legat.
p. 449 : ‘When he played the woes of Thyestes and the Trojan
war, you drove him off the boards with your hisses, and a// but
stoned him to death” Lucian describes an impersonation of
Ajax so vivid that ‘the whole house went mad at once along
with Ajax,—they danced, shouted, tore off their clothes’ (de
Salt, 83).

3 when the Market-place is full] ‘Full market’ was an ex-
pression for the hours from about 9 A.M. to noon. See Her. Iv.
181 (speaking of a spring in the oasis of Ammon): ‘ through the
hour of dawn it is warm; at full market colder; noon comes,
and it is intensely cold’ Again, 111. 104: ‘(the Indians) have
the sun hottest in the early morning,—not, like others, at noon,
but from sunrise to the breaking-up of market’ (i.e. midday,
when people went home to a siesta: see c, XXIV. note 17).

4 mayrtleberries] a favourite delicacy at dessert. Athenians,
according to a poet in Athenaeus (XIV. p. 652 D), ‘sing the praises
of myrtleberries, of honey, of the portals of the acropolis, and
fourthly of dried figs.’

will cry ‘stop’] Terence alludes to this as a well-worn
practical joke: Phormio v. vi.7: ‘Antipho. Hi, Geta! Geta
(who is running in the opposite direction). There you go
again. Is there anything new or wonderful in being called back
when one has set out running?’

6 he will do his own marketing] The ordinary practice,
except among the very poor, was to send a slave to market:
see (for a somewhat earlier period) Xen. Mem. 1. 5. 2: ‘Would
we take a present of such (a worthless slave) to be our attendant
or our marketer?’ It is observable that in these Characters the
persons, besides the BdeAvpos, who are named as marketing for
themselves are the Shameless man (c. Xv.) and the Penurious
man (c. XXIV.); others have their provisions bought by slaves
(cc. XIII, XXIII.). At the fishmarket, however, where the chief

XVII. THE GROSS MAN. 233

dainty was contended for, gourmands seem to have watched
their own interests: Aesch. zz Zim. p. 9 § 65, ‘who is there
among you who has not been to the fishmarket and seen what.
sums these people spend? Alexis vividly describes a citizen
haggling with a fishmonger for a pair of mullets (/vag. XIL 2
Meineke).

7 @ barber’s or perfumer’s shop] Lysias de inval. p. 170
§ 20: ‘Each man has his favourite lounge ; one frequents a
perfumer’s shop, another a barber’s, another a shoemaker’s, and
so forth ; the most popular establishments being those nearest
the Market-place. Demosth. zz Arist. I. p. 786 (describing an
unsociable person), ‘He never frequents any of the barbers’ or
perfumers’ shops in the town, or indeed any of the workshops.’

8 to the soothsayer’s] Some persons invoked assistance of
this kind in very small domestic difficulties. See c. XXvIII.: ‘If
a mouse gnaws through a meal-bag, he will go to the expounder
of sacred law.’ Nicias, according to Plutarch, kept a prophet
(udvris) at his house, whom he used to consult ‘ ostensibly about
public affairs; but chiefly, in fact, about his private concerns,
and especially about silver-mines’ (/Vic. c. 4).

will use words of evil omen] His mother is seeking a
revelation of the will of the gods ; to utter, at such a moment,
words which will offend them, is not only to thwart her prayer,
but to expose her to their anger. To ‘blaspheme,’ in the Greek
sense, was not merely to speak against the gods, but to speak,
when they were deemed present, as at a sacrifice, of any dismal
subject, distasteful to the bright and gracious visitants. Clyt-
aemnestra complains that the /amentations of Electra prevent
her from sacrificing to the gods ; Philoctetes is left on Lemnos
because his cries of pain make offerings and libations unavailing
(Soph. £7. 632, PAz/. 8) See the striking passage in Plato’s
Laws (Vil. p. 800 B): ‘Suppose, I say, that when a sacrifice
had been performed and the victims duly burnt, some individual,
the man’s son or perhaps brother, standing near the altar and
oblations, should break into all manner of ill-omened words
—should we not say that his utterances would cast a gloom—a
sense of whispered and foreshadowed evil—upon his father and
upon all his house?’

10 will drop his cup] A bad omen,—what the Romans
called caducum auspictum. When Crassus was on his fatal
march into Armenia,—a march discouraged by many omens,—a

234 NOTES.

- sacrifice was held soon after crossing the Euphrates ; when the
augur handed to Crassus the liver of the victim, he dropped it.
‘Then, seeing that all present were deeply troubled, he said,
smiling, ‘Such is old age ; but at all events no arms shall be
dropped’’ (Plut. Crass. 19).

XVIII. THE GARRULOUS MAN.

1 Garrulity] The epithet ‘ill-considered’ in the Definition
embodies the distinction drawn by Theophrastus between Gar-
rulity and Loquacity. It is a difference, not of quantity, but of
quality. The Loquacious man is possibly able; he is certainly
ambitious ; it is his tendency to treat a subject in a large manner,
with copious, if not always apt, illustration. The Garrulous
man is necessarily weak ; talking is, with him, not 4f ambition,
nor exactly a pleasure, but rather an acquired physical need;
and, being neither inventive nor logical, he can néither rise out
of the the tritest topics nor pursue any one of these. Loquacity
wearies, Garrulity irritates ; the one—as Theophrastus says—
induces sleep ; the other, fever.

The specimen of Garrulity given in this chapter seems not
inartistic. It ischaracteristic, as has been said, of the Garrulous
man that he is incapable of pursuing a subject,—his remarks
being either wholly unconnected, or connected by an inadequate
link, the chain in the latter case being seldom long. Now the
discourse in the text shows both the absolute and the feebly-dis-
guised solution of continuity. The topics are :—1. His wife;
suggesting his dream upon the bed of which she is the partner.
2. His dinner (absolute change of subject). 3. The Inferiority
of the moderns (do.). 4. The Cheapness of wheat in the market-
place (do.) ; suggesting (i) the Strangers seen there ; who suggest
(11) the Dionysia, for which they may have come ; and this (ili)
the Navigable Season ; leading to (iv) the Crops, and (v) his own
Farming-plans, which remind him of (vi) the Difficulty of living,
and (vil) the Good-fortune of Damippus, who could afford so
great a torch at the Mysteries; these suggest (viii) Temples
generally, especially the Odeum.—5. His indisposition yester-
day (absolute change of subject). ‘Yesterday’ suggests (i) To-
day, and what day of the Month it is; which suggests the
Calendar generally, and so (ii) the Festivals which are its
landmarks.

XVII THE GARRULOUS MAN. 235

2 after the Dionysia] i.e. the ‘great’ Dionysia. The four
festivals of Dionysus fell in four successive months: 1. The
‘Rural’ in December: 2. the ‘Lenaea’ in January: 3. the
‘Anthesteria’ in February: 4. the ‘great’ or ‘city’ Dionysia in
March. About this time sets in the northern etesian ; followed
each day, after the sunset lull, by the south-breeze nowscalled
the ‘embates.’ ‘ Never, except in the short winter season, is
there any uncertain irregularity in wind and weather ; the com-
mencement of the fair season—the safe months, as the ancients
called it—brings with it an immutable law followed by the winds
in the entire archipelago ; every morning the north-wind arises
from the coasts of Thrace, and passes over the whole island-sea’
(Curtius, Ast. Gr. trans. Ward I. p. 14). With it came the
merchants ‘ flying over the sea in spring-time like birds of passage
to all foreign cities’ (Plato Laws XII. p. 952 E). It was the spe-
cial pride.df Athens that, unlike some other cities, she excluded
no foreigner, not even enemies, from anything which she could
teach or show (Thuc. I. 39).

3 set up a very large torch at the Mysteries} The Lesser
Mysteries of Demeter were celebrated at Athens at the end of
February ; the Greater at Eleusis at the end of September.
These lasted nine days. On the fifth, a procession of the fully-
initiated (émrowra:) and of those initiated in the Lesser rites
(uvorat) walked from Athens to Eleusis, carrying torches, and
led by the torch-béarer (Sadotyos). They remained there two
days ; on the sixth night the mystae became epoptae; next day
they returned to Athens. It seems probable that, on the evening
of the fifth or ‘torch’ day, there was at Athens a sort of illumina-
tion, when those who did not go to Eleusis burned torches
before their doors. These torches symboliséd the search of
Demeter for Persephone ; precisely as the lamps burnt at the
night-festival (Avyvoxaia) at Sais symbolised the search of Isis
for Osiris, and were burnt throughout Egypt on that night before
on of those who could not attend the festival (Her.
II. 02).

4 the Odeum} An odeum or music-hall resembled a theatre
in its semicircular form, but differed from it in being usually
roofed for the sake of sound. Athens had three such buildings:
—1I. The Odeum of Pericles, which is probably the one meant
here; built about 440 B.c. at the S.E. corner of the acropolis.
It had a pointed roof, said to be in imitation of the tent of

236: NOTES.

Xerxes ; in the interior ‘many seats and columns’ (Plut. Per. 13).
2. The Odeum near the fountain Callirhoe by the Ilissus ; older,
according to Hesychius, than the theatre of Dionysus, i. e. than

00 B.C. On one occasion 3000 hoplites were called together in
it: Xen. Hellen. 1.4§9. 3. The Odeum built about 150 A. D
at the S. W. corner of the acropolis by Herodes Atticus, and
called after his wife the ‘Odeum of Regilla.’ It was the largest
in ee the interior diameter being about 240 ft. (Paus. VII.
20 § 3).

5. the Apaturia] Between the Mysteries in September and
the ‘Rural’ or local celebrations of the Dionysia in December fell
in October the Apaturia; a festival kept in nearly all Ionic
cities, and having for its objects (1) the recognition of a common
descent from Ion, and, through him, from his father Apollo,
whom Ionians worshipped as Apollo Patrous: (2) the mainte-
nance of the ties of clanship subordinate to this common tie;
children being then enrolled in their father’s ‘phratria..—Ephesus
and Colophon alone, whose inhabitants claimed to be the purest
Ionians, were forbidden by a religious scruple to celebrate it
(Her. I. 147).

XIX. THE LOQUACIOUS MAN.

1 Loquacity] It is well defined as ‘zwcontimence (axpacia)
of talk ; for, while Garrulity drops its unconnected remarks with
dull persistence, Loquacity is fluent and eager. Compare Ar.
Frogs 838: ‘a mouth unbridled—cntemperate (dxparés)—of
which the gates stand ever wide.’—See c. XVIII. note I.

2 Doyoutellme so? don’t forget, &c.| i.e. ‘You astonish me:
take care that you do not involve yourself in a self-contradiction.’
See Crit. App. XIX. I.

3 he will go into the schools] Aeschines (7# TZimarch.
p. 2 § 12) quotes an ancient law providing for the strict privacy
of schools. ‘Let it not be lawful for those above the age of boys
to enter (the schools) while the boys are there, except for the
son, brother, or son-in-law of the master; and if anyone enter
contrary to this rule, let him be punished with death.’ The very
terms, however, in which Aeschines refers to this ordinance as
embodying the o/d feeling on the subject imply that it had
become obsolete.

XIX. ZPE LOQUACIOUS MAN. 237

4 the palaestras] here in the strict sense—schools of wrest-
ling and boxing. ‘Gymnasium’ properly meant a place of more
general resort and of more various resources, including grounds
for running and archery, javelin-ranges, baths, &c.—Physical edu-
cation probably began very early. Plato recommends that the dis-
tinctive discipline for boys and for girls should begin at six years
of age—that of a boy with lessons in riding and in the use of the
bow, javelin, and sling: ‘letters’ are to come at the age of ten
(Laws Vil. p. 794 Cc.) Aristotle thought that the active training
of mind aud dody might begin at the seventh year (ef. VII. 17).

5 the news from the Ecclesia] On the text see Crit. ADD.
XIX. 4. The meaning probably is that, on the breaking up of
the Ecclesia, the XaAos obtains a summary of the debate from
some one who was there, and retails it to others. At the
time when these Characters were probably written, the num-
ber of Athenian citizens, i.e. of persons privileged to attend
the Ecclesia, was comparatively small. The following measure
had been taken by Antipater in 322:—‘Out of 21,000 qualified
citizens of Athens, all those who did not possess property to the
amount of 2000 drachmae were condemned to disfranchisement
and deportation. The number below this prescribed qualifica-
tion, who came under the penalty, was 12,000, or three-fifths of
the whole. They were set aside as turbulent, noisy democrats ;
the gooo richest citizens, the ‘party of order,’ were left in exclu-
sive possession, not only of the citizenship, but of the city’
(Grote c. XCV.). The great mass of the population could, at such
a time, learn the proceedings of the Ecclesia only by hearsay.

6 the battle in Aristophon’s year] The battle of Megalopolis
in Arcadia, where a Lacedaemonian army was defeated by Anti-
pater, regent of Macedonia during the absence of Alexander.
This event is placed by Mr Grote (c. XCV.) in 330 B. C., O/. CXII.
3, in which year Aristophon was archon (Clinton Fast. Hellen...
This is the usual explanation of the reference, and probably the
right one. Mr Clinton, indeed, places the battle of Megalopolis
in July 331 B.C.; and inclines to the view of Casaubon that ‘the
battle in Aristophon’s year’ means the contest between Demo-
sthenes and Aeschines in 330 B.C., when the latter spoke his
oration Against Clestphon, and the former replied in the speech
On the Crown. Were not Casaubon’s proposed change of row
pyropos to Tay pytépwy a violent one, this ingenious view would
have some probability. But it seems impossible that, without

238 NOTES.

the help of rav pyropwr, payn could bear such a sense. The
words rod pyropos are now usually bracketed as spurious. They
were added by one who confused the Aristophon who was archon
in 330 B.C., and who is otherwise unknown, either with (1) Ari-
stophon of Azenia, who was dead in 330 B.C.: Aesch. 2” Cites.
§ 139: or with (2) Aristophon of Collytus, also dead then: com-
pare Dem. de Cor. §8 162 and 75. Both were distinguished as
politicians and speakers.

7. the Lacedaemonian victory] This is usually understood of
Aegospotami, 405 B.C.: and there was no other battle ‘in the
time of Lysander’ of sufficient importance to have been alluded
to in this way. If the clause is genuine, the Loquacious man for
once seems to degenerate into Garrulity. The comparatively
recent battle of Megalopolis may have had some real connection

_ with the political questions just discussed in the Ecclesia; but
why he should go on to speak of an event so remote as the fight
at Aegospotami,—unless because this was a battle also, and one
in which the fortune went the other way,—does not appear.—
See Crit. App. XIX. 6.

8 a greater chatterer than a swallow] Dionysus in the
Frogs (93) describes the swarms of chattering poetasters as
‘colleges of swallows.’ Virgil, too, calls the swallows ‘ garrulous’
(Geo. Iv. 307). There were other proverbs for loquacity: see
Alexis in Athen. Iv. p. 133 § 10 :—

Not tailed cicada, jay, or nightingale,
Not turtle-dove or grasshopper can match
Thy chattering. —

XX. THE NEWSMAKER.

1 Newsmaking] The character described here is that of a

. maker, not merely a monger, of news. A deliberate impostor,
not merely a reckless gossip, is the subject of the portrait. He
‘assumes a den.ure air’ that he may seem the more assured of
his intelligence ; he is careful to quote ‘such authorities that no
one can possibly lay hold upon them;’ he makes ‘ plausible’
comments upon his own story. It is the studied artifice im-
plied in these touches which distinguishes him from the mere
retailer, or even embellisher, of idle rumours, such as the
‘scurra’ in Plautus, who knows ‘what Juno said to Jupiter’

XX. THE NEWSMAKER. 239

(Trinum. 1. 2.171). At Athens more than in other cities the
desire of news was a passion; other cities had their news-
mongers; at Athens an exceptional demand produced the
Newsmaker.

2 Asteius the fluteplayer] Asteius is supposed to be with the
army. If it were only for festal purposes, musicians would
always be found in a Greek camp. Fluteplayers, in particular,
may have been there for two special purposes—as part of the
military band, since Dorians, at least, like Asiatics (Her. I. 17)
usually marched to battle to the sound of the flute (Plut. Lyc.
21)—and also with a view to sacrifices, at which the flute was
sometimes played (Ar. Peace 952).

3 Lycon the contractor] The term épyoAdBos included all
who undertook work by contract ; e.g. it might be applied to
the sculptor who took an order for statues. Cassander was now
besieging Pydna, He had sent for ‘weapons and engines of
all kinds’ (Diod. XIX. 36); he had blockaded the city, and
‘carried a palisade from sea to sea’ (26..49). The ‘contractor’
may have been concerned with the works of the siege.

4 Polysperchon and the king] The time referred to is pro-
bably early in the year 316 B.c., Ol. CxvI. 1. The allusions will
be explained by the following table of events :—

323 B.C. Death of Alexander the Great. Philip Arrhidaeus,
the imbecile half-brother of Alexander, is declared king; a
share in the sovereignty being reserved for the unborn child of
Alexander by Roxana. A regent is appointed to govern for
Philip Arrhidaeus. The child of Roxana (Alexander IV.) is born
In the same year.

318. Death of the regent Antipater. He bequeaths his
office, with the guardianship of the joint kings, Philip Arrhi-
daeus and Alexander IV., to Polysperchon, one of their father’s
generals. Cassander, son of Antipater, disappointed of the
regency, goes to war with Polysperchon. Athens presently
declares tor Cassander. At the same time Eurydice, wife of
Philip Arrhidaeus, resolves to throw off the authority of the
regent. Roxana flies with her young son Alexander IV. to
Aeacides, king of Epeirus.

317. Polysperchon invades Macedonia with Aeacides, ac-
companied by Olympias, mother of Alexander the Great.

240 NOTES.

Furydice is defeated. She and her husband Philip Arrhidaeus
are put to death.

316. Cassander goes to Macedonia and besieges Pydna,
into which Olympias has thrown herself with Roxana and
Alexander IV. [lt is in the interval while Cassander is absent
on this expedition, and before tidings have been received from
him, that the Newsmaker is supposed to invent his story.]
Aeacides and Polysperchon are prevented from succouring
Pydna by the defection of their troops (Diod. xIX. 36). The
town falls ; Cassander puts Olympias to death, and imprisons
Alexander, with his mother Roxana, in Amphipolis.

‘The king’ in the text is therefore the young Alexander IV.
It cannot be Philip Arrhidaeus, as Casaubon, Ast, and others
have supposed, because: 1. Philip Arrhidaeus was ranged, in
this war, not wzth but agaimst Polysperchon. 2. Philip Arrhi-
daeus had perished before the war between Cassander and
Polysperchon had been transferred from Greece to Macedonia.
—Alexander IV. was put to death in 311 by Cassander, who
himself died in 296 B.c.—Cf. c. VI., where Antipater is spoken of
as still alive.

5 the hash has been dreadful] ov (wpoy, lit. ‘the broth, —
the carnage. The introduction of this phrase seems happily
characteristic. A spirited metaphor is convenient to the utterer
of a fiction.

6 the Porch} See c. I. note 2.
7 what workshop] See c. XVII. note 7.

XXI. THE ZLVIL-SPEAKER.

1 Evil-speaking] This character differs from all the others
drawn by Theophrastus in being seriously odious. Still, the
xaxodoyos described here is too eager and outspoken to be a de-
tractor of the most vicious kind. ‘ The sting of ill-temper’—as
the last sentence of the chapter phrases it—makes him petulant
and bitter; but this very petulance has a comic side. He re-
minds us more of Mrs Candour than of Iago—For the word
aywyn in the Definition see Crzt. App. XXI. I.

2 in the style of genealogists] whose study was a very
popular one in Greece. Hesiod’s Theogony and the Genealo-
gies of Hecataeus (in which the myths and family legends were

XXI. THE £VIL-SPEAKER. 241

_ treated historically) may be taken as representative instances
of the early Greek taste for tracing pedigree. In Plato’s
Cratylus there is a sarcasm on this taste,—so far, at least, as it
concerned the immortals. After observing that Zeus was the
son of Cronos, Cronos of Ouranos, Socrates regrets that he
does not remember ‘the pedigree given by Hesiod, and whom
he states to have been the remoter ancestors of these persons.’
(p. 396 Cc.) Compare Plut. de Curios. c. 2 (people neglect their
own concerns, while) ‘they trace the descent of others, showing
that their neighbour’s grandfather was a Syrian and his grand-
mother a Thracian.’

3 Sosias] a Thracian name, Xen. Vect. 4. 14. In the
Wasps, and in Terence’s Hecyra, it is the name of a slave: in
the Axdria, of afreedman. The man is said to have changed
his original name, which bewrayed a barbarian origin, first for
that of Sosistratus, suggestive of gallant ancestors, then for that
of Sosidemus, which speaks still more eloquently of a descent
from Athenian patriots. Compare Lucian’s 77mon c. 21, where
the sudden inheritor of wealth is transformed ‘from the some-
time Pyrrhias or Dromo or Tibias, into Megacles or Megabyzus
or Protarchus.’ And so in the Dream, c. 14, Simon, on becoming
rich, dilates into Simonides. |

4 in the ranks] This need not mean more than that he
had served among the mercenaries of Athens. Hired troops had
long formed by far the larger proportion of her military force ;
thus 10,000 mercenaries (vor) and only 4,000 citizens go to
Olynthus (Dem. de F. Legat. § 266). In the allied Greek army
which met Philip at Chaeronea there were altogether 17,000 mer-
cenaries (de Cor. §237). Thrace, the country of Sosias, furnished
Athens with cavalry and peltasts in the Peloponnesian war (Thuc.
II. 29). But the xaxodoyos probably means to hint that Sosias
had been a Thracian s/ave—enrolled among the city-guard of
public slaves (rofcra:), who, in time of war, were sometimes
called into the field: see Boeckh P. Z. bk. II. c. 11.

5 Sosistratus] A name illustrious in Sicilian history. The
best-known Sosistratus was tyrant of Syracuse for a short time
before the accéssion of Agathocles 1n 317 B.C.

6 when he was enrolled in his deme] A man was an
Athenian citizen either (1) as the son of parents both of whom
were Citizens,—e& aorod Kal €& doris yeyovws : or (2) by adoption,
—troijoet troAitns, Dem. adv. Left. p. 466 § 30. In the latter

16

242 NOTES.

case he was, upon adoption, enrolled in an assigned deme. A
_ person who, not being a citizen in either of these ways, had his
name on the list of a deme, was liable to a £evias ypagy. A case
of fraudulent registration is mentioned in Dem. adv. Leoch. p.
1091. To guard against frauds, every register was periodically
revised, and doubtful claims were voted upon (Scaydeots : ar-
Lum. Dem. adv. Eubul. :

7 a noble damsel of Thrace] See Plat. 7heaef. p. 175 D,
where it is said that mental clumsiness ‘does not excite the
ridicule of Thracian maidservants or of any other uneducatea
person, for they do not perceive it.’ Again 26. p. 174 A the
@parra is the type of an uncouth barbarian. ‘Thratta,’ like
Syra, occurs as a proper name, Dem. 2% Neaer. p. 1357.

8 in the language of Corinth] See Crit. ADP. XXI. 3.

. g they answer the door themselves} Describing the con-

sternation produced at Athens by the news of Chaeronea,
Lycurgus says—‘ Freeborn women might be seen aé the doors of
houses, scared, stricken with dismay,...@ seght unworthy of
themselves and of the city’ (in Leocr. P. 153 § 40).

10 for the pleasures of the table] «is GWov. He provides his
wife with secessary food, i.e. oires, bread ; everything beyond
this,—meat, fish, etc., oyov—she has to find out of her allow-
ance. Aristophanes mentions among the established customs
of Athenian wives that of ‘marketing surreptitiously on their
own account’ (avrais mapoyrwveiy: Eccl. 666).

11 to wash with cold water] The warm bath— denounced
in the Clouds (423 B.C.) as a novel luxury—was already in Xeno-
phon’s time regarded as an almost necessary comfort: see AZem.
11. 13. 3. The penurious husband grudges the cost of this
cheap luxury.

I2 on Poseidon’s day] Probably the great day of the Posei-
donia,—a festival ranked by Athenaeus with the Eleusinia as a
great gathering, maynyupts (XII. p. 590). As the Anthesteria and
the Lenaea were respectively held in the months of the same
name, it is probable that the Poseidonia fell in Poseideon,—the
month answering to the latter half of December and the first
half of January. Offerings to Poseidon on the 8th day of that
month are mentioned in the Corp. Luscripit. 1. 523. ‘On Po-
seidon’s day,’ then, means merely ‘in the depth of winter.’

13 the character of insanity and frenzy] Because a bitter-
ness so extreme against others, and such reckless impiety as

XXII. THE GRUMBLER. 243

that of blaspheming the dead, imply a mind which the gods
have afflicted. As moderation, cwdpoctw, was the first of virtues
to a Greek, so the sense which he gave to pawxos was large. It
included every violent sin against the principle of . human
humility (ro xar’ avOpwrov dpoveiv),—e.g. excessive railing at
one’s neighbours. See Plato Symp. p. 173 D, where it appears
that a bitterly censorious person had acquired the nickname of
peavuxos. Cambyses, in his daring impieties, exactly fulfilled the
Greek conception of pavia: see Her. III. 29, 33.

XXII. THE GRUMBLER.

I Grumbling] Discontent, in its general sense, includes the
quality which Theophrastus describes here, and which may
be rendered ‘Grumbling.’ Discontent is either active or pas-
sive; but usage has given a predominance to the active sense
of the word. When a man is said to be ‘discontented’ it is
usually implied that he feels a restless desire to improve his
position. The Grumbler, on the other hand, represents only
the passive form of discontent. Dissatisfied with all persons
and things, he yet makes no effort to remove the causes
of his dissatisfaction, which is in itself a source of gloomy
pleasure. As the Discontented man (in the special sense) is
generally one who is striving to rise, the Grumbler 1s often one
whose fortunes have declined. Theophrastus has lightly marked
this when he describes the friends of the Grumbler as raising a
subscription for him. ‘All men whose affairs go wrong,’ says
Hegio in the Adelphoe, ‘are somehow prone to suspicions,—
prone to take everything as a slight.’ The Grumbler entertains
that presumption that ‘all men are unjust’ which, in a more
earnest form, constitutes the Distrustful character (c. XXIII.).
But, unlike the Distrustful man, he does not entertain it so
seriously as to take secret counsel with it; it is with him rather
a trick of speech, bred by despondency; and, instead of prompt-
ing him to guard against wrongs, finds vent merely in protesta-
tions that he has been wronged.

2 sent him a present from his table] See c. III. note 2.
3 never found a treasure] See c. XXVI. note 9.

4 the good news, ‘A son has been born to you.’] In Lucian’s
Charon (c. 17) Hermes, acting as guide to the ferryman of
Hades in a holiday visit to earth, points out to him a man ‘who

16—2

244 NOTES.

is rejoicing because his wife has borne to him @ male child, and
is feasting his friends on the occasion.’

5 by a unanimous verdict] No slight triumph where
there were 500 jurors, or perhaps twice or three times that
number. Ifthe defendant in an action gained more than four-
fifths of the votes, the plaintiff was fined; the unanimity, on a
large Athenian jury, of even four-fifths being considered to
imply a case so triumphantly clear that the other side deserved
to be punished for presumably vexatious proceedings.

6 the composer of his speech] Antipho (born in 480 B.C.) is
said to have been the first professional Acyoypados,—i. e. writer,
for money, of speeches which his employers delivered in court.
Lysias, Isocrates and (in early life) Demosthenes were among
the great orators who exercised this profession—despised, like
that of the sophists, chiefly because it was paid. Contrasting
the career of Demosthenes with the undeniable respectability of
his father, Aeschines says:—‘The trierarch appeared changed
into a speech-writer—so ludicrously did he belie his father’s
antecedents’ (2% Ctes. p. 78 § 173). Demosthenes retorts the
accusation :—-‘ Well, he applies to others the contemptuous names
of speech-writer and sophist, and attempts to deride them; yet
he himself will be proved liable to these charges.../Vow are not
you a specch-writer, and a vile one?’ (de F. Legat. p. 418 § 246).
In the Phaedrus we find that a like taunt was addressed to
Lysias (p. 257 C).—Cf. c. XXX. note 4. |

XXIII. THE DISTRUSTFUL MAN.

1 Distrustfulness] Speaking of the general characteristics
of elderly men, Aristotle says:—‘They are ill-disposed (axon-
Gers); for an ill-disposition consists in putting the worst con-
struction upon everything. They are also prone to sinister
suspicions (xayvrorrot), through their distrustfulness (dmoriayv) ;
and distrustful through experience.’ In this passage of Aristotle
Distrustfulness has its most general sense, denoting merely reluct-
ance to take things on credit. Out of this, when carried too far,
springs a fault, xaxonOeca,— a tendency to construe unfavourably
all the actions and motives of others. Of xaxonOeca, again,
kaxvrowia is a special form; viz. excessive distrust of the actions
and motives of others as they affect one’s self. Now the amoria
described by Theophrastus is not the general dmortia of Aris-

XXIII. THE DISTRUSTFUL MAN. 245

totle. It is not even coextensive with xaxoyOeca. It is that form
which xayvrowia takes in a mind rather weak and mean than
malicious. Hence the Distrustful man of Theophrastus presents
an outward resemblance to his Penurious man; insomuch that
one of the traits of the latter has been transferred by many
editors to the former (see Crit. A (Pp. XXIII. 3). Many of their
actions are, indeed, formally identical; the difference lies in the °
motives and consequent moral significance.

2 having sent a slave to market} See c. XVII. note 6.

3 will carry his money himself] The Distrustful man can,
as we see below, afford a slave to attend him in his walks; but
he does not allow this slave,-as was usual, to carry the purse.
Compare c. VI., where the Boaster chides his attendant for
having come out without gold. So probably in c. VIL: ‘when
he pays a mina, he will cause (the slave) to pay it with a new
coin. |

4 if the cupboard has been sealed] This was done with wax
called puma, Ar. Lys. 1195. Doors, when sealed, were not
usually locked, the object being merely that the master might
know if they had been tampered with. Diogenes has a story of
' a person who used to seal up his storeroom and then throw the
signet-ring in through a slit in the door. His servants, dis-
covering this, used to break open the storeroom, seal it up again,
. and throw back the ring (Iv. 8§ 59). The wives in the 7hesmo-

phoriazusae complain that forged signet-rings no longer secure
their escape from their sealed apartments; their husbands now
carry worm-wood seals (@pimndeota opayidia),—mottled in imi-
tation of worm-eaten wood, so that the task of making exact
copies would be endless (v. 427).

in the presence of witnesses} Some understand ‘the
same persons who originally witnessed the loan.’ But this
seems a needless refinement. The Distrustful man brings wit-
nesses simply in order that, if his créditor repudiates the debt,
the fact of the repudiation may be established. His remedy is
then easy; for he has of course preserved evidence of the loan.

6 to send his cloak to be cleaned] Seec. XXV. note 12.

security for the fuller] He prefers the workman, whether
skilful or not, who can find a friend to go bail in a satisfactory
amount for the due return of the cloak.

246 NOTES.

8 to ask the loan of cups] Pieces of gold or silver plate
were often lent between neighbours forthe table or for a sacrifice
(compare c. XIV. note 8), Athenaeus tells a story of a pretentious
host whose table was covered with plate borrowed among his
friends, and who bragged of his readiness ‘to break all these things
and get new ones.’ A guest observed, ‘then you will destroy every
man’s own’ (XIII. p. 585). See the Rhetorica ad Herennium ww.
50 (a pretender to wealth has brought some guests home to
dinner): ‘He had charged his slave Sannio to borrow plate,
couch-coverings, servants ; and the fellow, who was not without
shrewdness, had mustered a very fair show. Our hero brings
home his guests—observing that he has lent his ‘largest’ house
to a friend for a wedding. The slave whispers that the plate is
wanted back—({in fact the lender had felt extremely uneasy).
‘Go to!’ quoth he; ‘I have lent him my house—given him my
servants—and now he wants my plate! Well, though I have
guests, he shall have a loan of it. We will enjoy ourselves off
Samian earthenware.”’

he will almost assay the cups in the fire] His unwilling-
ness to lend them is so extreme that he seems as if he wished
solemnly to prove the fineness of the metal and to register the
weight, and then to take formal securities, before parting with
his cups. See Crv7t. App. XXII. 5.

1o his slave, when he attends him] Citizens of the richer
class were usually attended by a slave when they went out : see
cc. IV., VI., VII. On the other hand it is a mark of arrogance in
Meidias that he is attended by ‘three or four slaves’ (Dem. 7#
Meid. § 158).

11 to persons who have bought something of him] On the
text, see Crz¢t. Afp. XXII. 7. The meaning appears to be as
follows :—The buyer has no money with him ; and says that he
cannot zwmediately send it by a servant from his house, as he
has business to transact before going home. He therefore
requests the seller to make a memorandum of the amount. The
distrustful seller’s suspicions are aroused. ‘Do not take the
trouble of sending a servant with the money’ he says; ‘if you
have business to do, 1 will accompany you to the places which
you must visit, and then go home with you and receive the
money myself?’

247
XXIV. THE PENURIOUS MAN.

1 Penuriousness] ‘There seem to be several modes of
liliberality (dveXevOepias). For whereas it consists in two things,
—defect in giving and excess in taking,—it is not present in its
entirety to all, but is sometimes divided; so that some men
exceed in taking, and others fall short in giving’ (Ar. £7A. WV. Iv.
1). The Love of Money is considered by Theophrastus in the
twofold aspect indicated by Aristotle. The sketches of the
Penurious and of the Mean man portray it chiefly as a defect
in giving ; that of the Avaricious man as an excess in taking.

(1) The Penurious man, or Reckoner-of-trifles, answers to
that class of the illiberal whom Aristotle describes as ‘stingy’
(perdwAoi) ‘close-fisted’ (yAtcypoi) ‘skin-flints’ (kipBrres). He
is minutely and consistently economical. He enforces his own
rights tothe uttermost ; the rights of others he barely satisfies,
but does not invade. He may even act from a certain sense of
fairness, and from fear of being compelled to do something
shameful (Z7k. WM. Iv. 1). His fault is not necessarily more
than that of misjudging the degree of economy which it is his
duty to practise. :

(2) The Mean man (dvedevdepos) of Theophrastus answers
nearly to -he Shabby man (pexpompemns) of Aristotle (E7h. XN. Iv.
2). The distinctive thing about him is the disproportion be-
tween his economies and his fortunes. He is a trierarch ; and
borrows the steersman’s rugs. -He gives a large wedding-feast ;
and grudges food to the servants. Yet, like the Penurious man,
though he treats others shabbily, he does not defraud them.

(3) The Avaricious man (aicypoxepdjs Ar. Eth. N. IV. 1)
‘takes whence he ought not, and more than he ought.’ He
cheats everyone : he sells watered wine to his friends, and gives
short measure to his slaves. As described by Theophrastus, he
includes the other two characters. Thus, like the pixpodcyos, he
sets too little bread on the table ; and, like the aveAevdepos, he
shirks giving a wedding-present. |

2 while the month is current] Interest on money was at
Athens often reckoned by the month. Thus Io per cent per
annum was usually called ‘five-obol interest’—1.e. the payment
of five obols for the use of 600 (one mina) monthly. The last
day of the month—for which the Penurious man refuses to wait
—was pay-day. Strepsiades in the Clouds, deploring his son’s
extravagance, says: ‘and / am in despair when I see the moon

248 NOTES.

drawing the month out of its teens; the interest grows apace’
(v. 16). Again (v. 1130):—‘and then that day which of all
I most dread and abhor and detest-—¢hen comes the last of the
month (ym re cai véa).. Everyone of my creditors vows that he
will commence an action and beggar me.’

3 a smaller libation to Artemis] This probably refers toa
banquet given during a festival of Artemis. See Plut. de Glor.
Athen. 7: ‘The Athenians have consecrated to Artemis the
16th day of Munychion (April— May) on which, while they were
conquering at Salamis, she shone on them full-orbed.’ Piutarch
also mentions (de Herod. malig. 26) that before the battle
of Marathon the Athenians had vowed to Artemis of th2 Chase
(Agrotera) as many kids as they should slay barbariars. The
number of the slain proved countless ; they compounded there-
fore with the goddess by decreeing to sacrifice 500 kics yearly.
The Marathon-day was Boedromion 6th (late in September).
The allusion in the text may be either to the spring or to the
autumn festival. The only divinities to whom it is known that
libations were ordinarily made at dinner were (1) the Good
Genius, dyaOds Saipwyv: (2) the Zeus and Hera Teleioi of
marriage : (3) the Heroes: (4) Zeus Soter.

4 and charges him with it] For Aoyiferar=zuzzutat, see
Ar. Plutus 381: ‘Oh well, J do believe (Heaven knows!) that
you would spend three minas in a friendly way, and charge me
with twelve’ (rpets pvas avadwoaas Aoyicacbat Swdexa). So Arist.
Oecon. Il. 34.

5 broken a jug] Dionysus, in the /7ogs, thus describes the
spirit of the age: ‘Vow every Athenian when he comes home
screams to his servants, ‘Where is that jug?’ ‘Who has eaten
off the sardine’s head?’ ‘The bowl that I bought last year is no
more!’’ (v. 980).

6 upon his rations] A quart (choenix) of meal a-day, with
figs and olives, and a little wine and vinegar, seem to have
formed the ordinary rations of a Greek slave. To replace, out
of these, even a jug, must have required prudence. In the
Phormio of Terence Davus complains of the iniquitous fashion
which compels his fellow-servant Geta to make a present to the
bride of his master’s son. ‘What he, poor fellow, has saved up
with difficulty, ounce by ounce, out of his rations, defrauding
his appetite, she will snatch at one swoop, little reckoning with
what pains it has been hoarded?’ (I. i. 9).

XXIV. THE PENURIOUS MAN. 249

7 to eat a fig from his garden] Compare Plato’s Laws VIII.
p. 844 E: ‘If a stranger, having come into Attica, desire to eat
the ripe fruit as he passes along the roads, let him pluck the
garden-fruit (rijs yevvaias dmépas, see Ast) without payment
and as a guest-gift,—one attendant being also privileged; but
of the ‘wild’ fruit, as it is called, let the law restrain our visitors
from partaking.’ -_

8 inspect his boundaries] The boundary-line between farms
was usually marked by large stones or slabs (dpor). The Roman
termini were sometimes stones, sometimes wooden posts. Ovid
exhorts the god of boundaries not to allow dishonest encroach-
ments (fasti II. 677) :—

To wheedling neighbours Jend not thou an ear,
Lest mortals above Jove thou seem to fear ;
But, whether plough or harrow graze the line,
Cry ‘ Zhere is your field—¢hzs, I think, is mine.’

9g to enforce the right of distraining] vmepnpepiay mpa£at.
When, in a civil action, the court ordered the payment of money
or the delivery of property, a day was named on or before which
the order should be obeyed. The defaulter became liable, as
Unepnuepos, to an execution in his house (éveyvpafecOar). The
same was the case when a loan, or interest upon a loan, had
become overdue (Ar. Clouds 34). But to exercise the right of
distraining, except in the last resort, seems to have been thought
harsh. Sce the speech of Demosthenes against Euergus. A .
trierarch had obtained an order of the Senate for the delivery of
certain ship-furniture which a citizen, bound to furnish it, had
withheld. The term fixed by the order has expired; the need
is urgent. Yet the claimant ‘allows some days to elapse,’ and
only when all remonstrances have failed ¢hreatens to distrain ,
(p. 1149). For another instance see Demosth. zz AZeid. p. 540.

To. 6to exact compound interest] The rates of interest in
Greece were high, ranging ordinarily from 10 to 30 or 40 per
cent. To exact compound interest was thought extortionate.
Ar. Clouds 115: ‘A plague on you obol-weighers, you and your
‘principal’ and your ‘interest upon interest.’’ In Lucian’s 4uc-
tion of Careers (mpaots Biwv)—where various lots in life are
described and praised by eminent representatives—the Stoic
Chrysippus defends the combination of philosophy with usury:
—‘Yes, the wise man, indeed, is the only man whom it can

250 NOTES.

become to lend...Aye, and he wll not take simple interest
merely, like the rest of the world, but fresh interest upon that’
(c. 23).

II when he feasts the men of his parish] Every Athenian
citizen was a member (1) by descent, of one of the ten tribes
formed by Cleisthenes, and (2) of one of the three phratriae
or clans into which each tribe was divided: (3) according to his
place of residence, of one of the demes or parishes—not neces-
sarily contiguous—which each tribe comprised. Fellow-trbes-
men (pvAéraz), fellow-clansmen (@paropes), and fellow-parishioners
(Snuorat) had common sacrifices and banquets. A festival of
tribesmen is mentioned in Demosth. zz Meid. § 156: a festival
of clansmen below inc. XxvI. The dinner of fellow-parishioners
mentioned here is probably one of those which followed a sacri-
fice, and which were given by certain members of the deme
in rotation. The Mean man performs this duty shabbily.—Com-
pare a fragment from the Xeipwy of Cratinus (the younger) in
Meineke p. 515: ‘After many a year I have come home from
the wars—found out with difficulty my kinsmen, clansmen,
demesmen—and been enrolled upon their mess-list’ (eis rd xvdte-
Ketov eveypadny—‘their side-board:’ the schol. explains it ovp-
qwootov).

12 When he markets] See c. XVII. note 6.
13, to lend salt] Seec. XIV. note 8.

14 meal—garlands—cakes| Barley-meal, mixed with salt,
was strewn before the sacrifice on the victim’s head. Garlands
were worn by the sacrificers, and sometimes placed on the
victim. Cakes were burnt on the altar. At the sacrifice in the
Peace (v. 1041) the thighs of the victim are first laid on the fire;
the entrails and the cakes (OvAnpara) are then placed upon them.

15 scarcely reaching to the thigh] Athenian fashion seems
to have been fastidious in regard to the length of the cloak. The
wearing of ‘short cloaks’ is mentioned in the Protagoras among
those things which mark an affectation of Spartan austerity
(Pp. 342 C); and in c. XIV. we have seen that it is a mark of
rusticity. On the other hand the arrogant Aeschines is de-
scribed ‘walking through the Market-place with his cloak droop-
ing to his ankles’ (Dem. de F. Legat. § 314).

16 their hair cut close] In order that it may be a long
time before it is necessary to have it cut again, The phi-

XXV. THE MEAN MAN. 251

losophers in the C/ouds are described as ‘clever, sensible men,
not one of whom—so economical are they—was ever known to
have his hair cut’ (v. 834). Close-clipped hair was, at Athens,
properly a mark of mourning. Thus Theramenes, when, after
Arginusae, he wished to excite a feeling against the generals,
hired men to appear at the Apaturia in black clothes ‘with their
hair cut close’ (év yp@ xexappevous) ‘that they might seem to be
relatives of the lost’ (Xen. Hellen. 1. 7. 8). At Sparta, however,
it was the ordinary fashion; and so, for a time, the Penurious
man’s hair would be in keeping with his Spartan-like cloak.

17 in the middle of the day] when people went home to
the noontide siesta—as Horace did, at the same hour, ‘to his
luncheon and his ‘rest in the house’ (domesticus otior Sat. 1. 6.
128). The Penurious man seizes the opportunity of sparing his
shoes by taking them off during this interval of seclusion. Com-
pare the Lysistrata v. 418. A shoe pinches, and this order is
given to the shoemaker :—‘ Come at noon, and ease it.’

18 the fuller] See c. XXV. note 12.

XXV. THE MEAN MAN.

I Meanness] See c. XXIV. note I.

2 having gained the prize in a tragic contest] Not as the
poet, but as the choregus who brought out the tragedy, and for
whom its success was considered a distinction hardly less than
for the author.

will dedicate a wooden scroll] The duties of the choregia
consisted in finding maintenance and instruction for the chorus
(in tragedy, usually of 15 persons) as long as they were in train-
ing; and in providing the dresses and equipments for the per-
formance. Lysias speaks of two such choregiae costing together
about £200 (de bon. Aristoph. § 42), and of another which cost
about £120 (dzroA. Swpod. § 161). The Mean man, like Aristotle’s
pexpompenns, ‘after a great expenditure mars the honour of it fora
trifle’ (Zzh, NV. Iv. 2). Instead of offering in the temple of
Dionysus, or displaying in some public place, the bronze tripod
which was awarded to a successful choregus, he dedicates merely
a narrow tablet of wood, carved to resemble a scroll, and thus
records his victory in the cheapest possible way.—Isaeus num-
bers among the private adorners of Athens ‘those who had

252 NOTES.

offered in the temple of Dionysus the tripods which they had
gained as victorious choregi’ (de Dicaeog. hered. p. 113): and
Plutarch says that Nicias had presented to the temple a shrine
(veds) on which these tripods were placed (V7z¢. zc. 3). Before
the time of Theophrastus a more costly fashion had come in—
that of placing the prize-tripod in a small shrine built specially
for it, either in the precincts of the Theatre or in the ‘ Street of
Tripods’ (Paus. I. 20) on the east side of the Acropolis. One
such monument remains,—that of Lysicrates, choregus in 335
B.C. The site of the chapel dedicated in 320 B.c. by the choregus
Thrasyllus (Paus. I. 21) is still marked by a cave above the
theatre on the south side of the acropolis. Contrasted with this
new practice, the Mean man’s conduct would seem still meaner
than it would have done at an earlier time.

4 subscriptions to the treasury] émiddcewv,—‘ benevolences’
contributed by the citizens in emergencies of the State ; usually
to defray the expense of military operations which had suddenly
become necessary. In such cases the presidents (mpuraves) of
the Ecclesia made the appeal at a sitting of the house. Citizens
who intended to subscribe then came forward severally and
gave in their names. Meidias is accused by Demosthenes of
having been backward on an occasion of this kind, and of having
at last subscribed only in hope of escaping personal military
service (22 Med. § 162). The double meaning of émididsopi—to
‘contribute’ in this way, and to ‘make progress’—furnishes the
point of a story in Athenaeus about Phocion’s dissolute son.
‘Once, when subscriptions to the treasury were being made, he,
too, came forward in the Ecclesia, and said ‘I also advance—’
‘in profiigacy /’ roared the House with one accord’ (IV. p. 168).

5 celebrating his daughter’s marriage] Aristotle numbers
among the fit occasions for nagnificence ‘those domestic events
which occur only once—as a marriage, or the like’ (E7¢A, J. Iv.
2). The two chief ceremonies of a Greek wedding are alluded
to in thetext: (1) Zhe sacrifice called mporeXera yapwr, celebrated
by the father of the bride and the male relatives and friends.
In Ach. Tatius IJ. 12 this sacrifice is held on the morning of the
wedding. (2) Zhe wedding-feast, given usually at the bride-
groom’s house, but dy the father of the bride, after she had been
conducted thither. See Eur. Jph. tn Aul. 718 : ‘ Clytaem. Have
you yet offered the nuptial sacrifice to the goddess (Hera Teleia)
for your daughter? Agam. I purpose it... Clyt. And will

XXV. THE MEAN MAN. 253

you then give the wedding-feast which should follow?’ Accord-
ing to. Demosth. z# Onet. I. p. 869 one reason for giving a jlarge
wedding-banquet was the importance of securing witnesses to
the fact of the marriage.

6 he will sell the flesh] instead of entertaining his friends
with it: see c. XV. note 2, Compare Alexis in Athen. XV. p.
671: ‘ The very Triballians have no such customs, where they
say that the sacrificer allows his guests to feast their eyes on the
repast, and next day sells to the starving wretches what he set
out for them only to look at.’

7 the parts due to the priest] Ameipsias in Athen. Ix.
p. 368 E: ‘The parts usually given to the priest are the ham, the
rib, the left side of the face’ (déSorae padioO’ iepaouva| KwAq, Td
mAeupov, jpikparp aptorepa).

8 on condition that they find their own board] olxovirovs.
When servants were hired to assist the slaves of the household
on a special occasion, it was probably usual to give them,
besides their wages, their meals. But the Mean man engages
the assistants on the express understanding that they are to find
their own food. In the comedy of the ‘ Breakfast-party’ Crates.
makes an economical person boast of having extended this
regulation to his guests, and ‘celebrated the wedding on a basis
of self-refreshment’ (olxogirouvs rods yapous memounxevac: Athen.
XV. p. 671). In the Caszva of Plautus a man places his servants
at the disposal of a friend ; who replies, ‘be sure that they all
bring their own food’ (III. 1. 7).

when he is trierarch| The duty of the trierarchy was
not at this time burdensome. It consisted in maintaining the
efficiency, for one year, of a trireme found, rigged and manned
by the State (Dem. 2% Meid. § 156). The average cost of this
was about £240 (z4.). A law passed probably in 340 B.c. had
distributed the burden of the trierarchy according to an assess-
ment of property, at the rate of one trireme for every ten talents
(about £2400) of taxable capital. The taxable capital was }th of
the aggregate capital, No man, therefore, was liable to main-
tain a trireme at his so/e charge unless he possessed at least
£12,000. If he had less, he paid his proportionate share to
a Company (ovvréAeca) who maintained a trireme among them.
This system had superseded that of working the trierarchy by
permanent boards (cuppopiat), which had been found in practice

254 NOTES.

unfair to the poor.; just as the still older plan of the simple or
dual trierarchy had been oppressive to the moderately rich.
(See Boeckh Publ. Econ, bk. IV. c. 11.) Comp. c. XXIX.
note 16.

10 on the deck] Vessels of the larger size were usually, at
this time, completely decked. ‘Thucydides says that the ships
which fought at Salamis ‘had not as yet decks throughout
(1.14). Ina trireme there would be little cabin room below,
and officers as well as men would live almost entirely on deck.
But some vessels had cabins, for we hear of an open boat:
(doréyaoroy) being exchanged for a decked one (éoreyacpevov) on
account of the wet weather (Antipho dec. Herod. ¢ 26) Cas-
aubon quotes a notice from Pollux of the deck-cabin which the
trierarch usually fitted up for himself, and supposes that the
Mean man has avoided this expense, providing himself merely
with rugs. Compare Alciphr. I. 12: ‘He lay down on some
foreign carpets and wrappers, pretending that he could not lie
like other people on the deck; these planks, he said, are harder
than stones.’

II a festival of the Muses] Aeschines says that some of
the old laws contained regulations ‘for the festivals of the
Muses at schools and of Hermes in the palaestras’ (2 Z7march.
§ 10). The celebration of the Hermaea in a palaestra was the
occasion on which Socrates was introduced to the young Lysis
(Lys. p. 606 D). On that occasion the young men and boys had
held a sacrifice (2d. E). At the ‘Musea’ in schools there would
be a similar sacrifice, and for this the pupils would be expected
to contribute.

12 when he has bought provisions] See c. XVII. note 6.

13 sent his cloak to be scoured] éxmAtvac—properly said of
washing linen, but here applied to the scouring of the woollen
cloak by the fuller (ywadevs). The process consisting in scouring
-—rubbing in a sort of white earth (‘Cimolian clay’) like the
Roman crefa—and carding to raise the nap. The Mean man,
through not having a second cloak, probably condemns himself
to an imprisonment of some length; for the fullers were not
famous for punctuality. ‘If they would only give people their
cloaks when they want them, just after the summer solstice,’
says a speaker in Aristophanes, ‘we should never have pleurisy’
(Ecc/, 415). In Athen. XIII. p. 582 a person is described
imploring a faithless fuller to restore his cloak.

XXV. THE MEAN MAN. 255

14 a subscription] See c. V. note 4.
15 the Woman’s Market] See c. I. note 8.

16 the girl who is to attend her] It seems to have been
thought at this time a mark of severe simplicity that a citizen’s
wife of the richer class should appear in public with only ove
attendant. Plutarch tells a story of a tragic actor, who was
playing a queen’s part, refusing to go on the stage unless the
choregus gave him several well-dressed handmaids. The house
was kept waiting, until the choregus, who was at the side-scenes,
pushed him on, exclaiming, loud enough for the audience to
hear,—‘ Don’t you see Phocion’s wife always going out with one
maid? Why must you demoralise the drawing-rooms (étaeipers
THY yuvatkevirev) with your swagger?’ (Plut. Phoc. 19).

17 when she goes out] ‘Hard it is,’ says Calonice in the
Lysistrata, ‘for women to go out’ (v. 16). Solon ‘regulated the
appearance of women in public, their mourning, and their festi-
vals by a law prohibitive of everything disorderly or immodest
(Plut. So/. 21); and special officers to enforce these rules were
appointed at Athens, as in other Greek cities. How early the
Athenian, yuvarxovopoe were instituted is uncertain: Boeckh
thinks, in the time of Demetrius Phalereus, i.c. about 318 B.c.
The institution, as Aristotle remarks, is essentially aristocratic :
‘for how are you to prevent poor men’s wives from going out?’
(Polit, Iv. 15).

18 as strong as horn| He wears mended shoes and declares
—in a vigorous metaphor—that they are as good as new.

19 when he gets up] On rising in the morning he ad-
dresses himself to tasks which a needlessly meagre establishment
imposes upon him.

20 twist aside} Had not much been written on zapa-
arpéwa, it would have seemed impertinent to remark that he
‘twists aside’ the already well-worn cloak simply in order to
save it from further attrition.

21 the coarse cloak which he wears himself] ‘ Himself’: is
added to emphasise the fact that his meanness is not shown
merely in the administration of an office or a household, but
affects the details of his personal habits. The rpi8v was a short
mantle of coarse stuff. See Demosth. zz Conon.§ 34: ‘men
who are of a gloomy countenance and affect the Spartan, and
wear coarse cloaks (rpi8wvas) and single-soled sandals.’ The

256 NOTES.

Acharnian rustics wear the ‘tribon’ (4ch. 184), and it seems
to have been the ordinary dress of poor men. Bdelucleon in
the Wasfs (v. 1131) associates it with the democratic dicast.
Socrates sometimes alludes to his ‘poor cloak’ (rpiBwyv ovrosi,
Protag. p. 335 D). Being the ordinary dress of philosophers it
afterwards came to be regarded, like the cowl, as a badge of
austere life.

XXXVI. THE AVARICIOUS MAN.

I Avarice] See c. XXIV. note I.

2 when he makes a distribution] pepidas Scavéuov. The
statement is gencral: no particular allusion need be sought.
The word pepis, however, seems to have meant especially
the portion of food assigned to an individual at a public distri-
bution or at a picnic: see Plut. Symp. 11. 10 ‘most of the
banquets in old times were distributions (Saires), a portion
(wepidos) being assigned to each man at the sacrifices ’ and
in Athen. VIII. p. 365 E, the money-contribution (cupS8o0A7) made
to a picnic by the guest is opposed to the portion, pepis, allotted
to him out of the common store.

3 will sell it watered] Compare Lucian’s Hermotimus,
c. 59: I do not exactly see how you make out the resemblance
between philosophy and wine—unless, indeed, it is in this par-
ticular, that philosophers sell their wares as tavern-keepers do,
—a little watered, as a rule, and adulterated, and of short
measure.’

4 the lessees of the theatre] The theatre of Dionysus was
rented from the Government by a lessee, or company of lessees,
who undertook to keep it in repair, and received the entrance-
money. As lessees they were called Oearpa@vat: as receivers of
the entrance-money, OearpomaAar. The manager of the theatre,
perhaps appointed by the lessees, was called ‘the architect’ (dpyt-
réxtwyv)—1i.e. the superintendent of repairs, etc., in connexion with
the theatre. Demosthenes speaks of asking the ‘architect’ to
keep places for distinguished visitors (de Cor. § 24). The free-
days referred to here were probably at some of the minor festivals.

5 the money allowed to him by the State] A small al-
lowance for travelling expenses was made by the state to its
ambassadors, The Athenian envoys to Persia in the Acharnians
receive each two drachmas—about Is. 8a.—a day: and this was
the pay of a Gewpos, or member of a sacred mission, at the same

XXVI. THE AVARICIOUS MAN. 257

period: Wasps 1189. The members of the second embassy to
Philip in 347 B.c. were absent three months, and received 1000
drachmas among them (Dem. de F. Legat. § 158). If, as
seems probable, they were ten in number, this would not be
much more than one drachma apiece daily.

6 load his servant] who attends him on the embassy.
Slaves groaning under heavy packs were among the stock
personages of comedy: thus in the opening of the Frogs
Dionysus is moved by the complaints of Xanthias, who is toiling
after him with the baggage, to give up the ass to him (1—29).
In Xen. Memorabilia 11. 13. 16 a person who complains of
fatigue after’ a journey on foot is asked what the slave who
trudged behind had to carry. ‘My bed-furniture (orpopara)
and the rest of my baggage’ is the answer. Demosthenes is
described as attended on one of his embassies to Macedonia by
‘two men carrying packs’ (orpwparodecpa: Aeschin. de F. Lega.
§ 99).

7 the presents] £evioyv—meaning especially the provisions
furnished to ambassadors by the Government of the city in which
they were staying. For this sense of the word see Herod. VI. 35,
where a man sitting at his door calls out to foreigners whom he
sees passing, and offers them ‘lodging and entertainment?’
(xaraywynv cai £eiva). Plutarch uses £éa to translate the Roman
fautia,—the present of provisions made in old times to foreign
ambassadors by the Quaestors (Plut. Quaestiones Rom. 47).

8 anointing himself at the bath] Compare c. XIV, note
12, and c. XII. note 2.

g to cry ‘Shares in the luck!’] lit. ‘to say that the Hermes
is for both of us,’ xowov elvat rov ‘Eppnv. Hermes was the gain-
giver, whether he gave it by commerce, in his quality of épzro-
Aatos (Ar. Plutus 1155); or smiled, as 8dAtos, on some fraud
which won it ; or, as nyepovos, guided men to where it glittered
in their path or struck their spade. Compare Lucian, ¢he Boat
c. 12: ‘Adeimantus (who says that he has been dreaming
golden dreams), You have come upon me at the very height
of my opulence and luxury. Luczmus. Shares in your luck!
(xosvos ‘Eppns)—that phrase which comes so readily. Out with
your treasures for all to see!’ When a Roman dug up a pot of
coins in his garden, it was Hercules, not Mercury whom he
thanked (Pers. 2. 10, Hor. S. 2. 6. 13). But there was a Latin
phrase answering to xowos ‘Epps: Sen. Eps. 119, 1. ‘When I

17

258 NOTES.

have made a lucky find, I do not wait for you to cry ‘ Shares?
(‘tn commune /), but myself say it for you.’

Io sent his cloak to be scoured] See c. XXV. note 12.

11 the measure of the frugal king] Se:dovio pérpo—allud-
ing to Pheidon, king of Argos about 750 B.C., by whom was
introduced the standard of weights sometimes known as the
‘ Pheidonian’ (Strabo VIII. 3. 33), more usually as the ‘ Aeginetan,’
which were generally used in Greece before the time of Solon.
The joke on the name ‘ Pheidon’ seems to have been popular.
The miserly stage-father was sometimes so called : see Athen.
VI. p. 223 (quoting from a poet of the Middle Comedy): ‘ When
some Pheidon or Chremes is hissed off the stage.’ Alciphr.
Il. 34: ‘Most of the newly-rich at Athens are shabbier than
Pheidon or Grifhon’ (‘Niggard’—probably another personage
of Comedy). Strepsiades in the Clouds wished to call his
son Pheidonides (v. 65).—The historical meaning of ‘ Phei-
donian measures’ has been explained by Boeckh. His results
are briefly these :—1. From early times there existed in Asia
two money-standards—the ‘ Babylonian,’ used chiefly for silver ;
and another used for gold. 2. Between 780 and 730 B.c. Pheidon
of Argos introduced into Greece a standard identical with the
Babylonian, which was generally adopted by the Dorian states.
The merchants of Aegina, in particular, spread the knowledge
of it widely : hence the ‘ Pheidonian’ standard was better known
as the ‘Aeginetan.’ 3. The other, or gold, standard of Asia came
through the Asiatic Greeks to Chalcis or Eretria, and was called
the Euboic. 4. Before Solon, Athens used the Euboic standard,
but after his time exchanged it for the ‘Solonian.’ The nu-
merical ratio of the Aeginetan talent to the Euboic was 6: 5;
that of the Euboic to the Solonian, about 4 : 3.

12 he will buy a thing privately] See Crit, App. XXVI. 7.

13 to withhold four drachmas] i.e. about 3s. out of £120.
Compare Earle’s character of A Sordid Rich Man: ‘ Hee loues
to pay short a shilling or two in a great sum, and is glad to
gaine that, when he can no more.’ (Jicrocosmographie p. 100
ed. Auber.)

14 throughsut the month] It seems to be implied here that
school-accounts were usually settled, as interest on loans was
paid, at the end of the month.—Compare Demosth. zz Aphob. 1.
p. 828: ‘To such a pitch of avarice (aicxpoxepSeias) did he go,

XXVI. THE AVARICIOUS MAN. 259

that he actually robbed my teachers of their fees. — The saving
thus effected must have been small, unless the Athenian school-
master were better paid than the Roman, to whom Juvenal says,
after enumerating his toils (VII. 949)—

This do; and take, upon the year’s account,

What jockeys get for one successful mount.

15 because there are so many festivals] Especially (1) the
Anthesteria onthe 11th, 12th, and 13th, i.e. in about the first week
of March. On the 12th, or ‘ Pitcher-day,’ ‘it was the Athenian
custom that presents, as well as their regular fees, should be
sent to the Sophists, who used themselves to invite their ac-
quaintances to an entertainment’ (Athen. X. p. 437). Hence
Eubulides in the Comastac: ‘You affect the Professor (coduortas),
wretch, and long for the Pitcher-feast, with its pay and presents’
(20.). (2) The Lesser Mysteries of Demeter, held on the banks of
the Ilissus: Plut. Demetr. 26. (3) The Déiasta,—‘the greatest
festival of Gracious Zeus (MetAiytos), held without the walls, at
which a great multitude offer public sacrifice, not of victims,
but of the fragrant fruits of the soil’ (Thuc. 1. 896).—Not only
would the scholars have all these holidays: they would also be
expected to make presents to their master.

16 rent from a slave] Aeschines mentions among the
items of a legacy ‘some nine or ten slaves, skilled workmen in
the shoe-making trade, each of whom paid their master a daily
rent (amodopay) of two obols; the foreman (syepwv) of the work-
shop paying three:’ (7% Zimarch. § 97). Nicias possessed ‘a
thousand slaves employed in the silver mines, whom he hired
out to Sosias a Thracian, on the condition of his paying one
obol daily, clear of taxes, for each of them’ (Xen. Vec¢. Iv. 14).
The Greek slave was regarded as capital; the Roman slave,
mainly as a luxury. ‘ Romans,’ says Athenaeus, ‘have great
multitudes of slaves, but do not make them sources of revenue...
Most Romans employ the greater part of their slaves in personal
attendance’ (cupmpoidyras : Athen. VI. p. 272).

17 the discount charged on the copper money] rov yadkov
riv émuxaradAaynv. The Avaricious man is paid by his slave in
copper obols. Silver obols being generally preferred, the copper
coin had to be exchanged at a small discount. The master
insists on the slave paying this difference.— Copper money seems
to have first come into general use about the time of Alexander.
Before that time the only copper coin was the yaAxody, rather

W—2

260 NOTES.

less than a farthing: even the obol (13¢.) was of silver. The
copper issue at Athens in 406 B.c. (Ar. Frogs 737) was excep-
tional: (see Boeckh P. £.).—Compare Athen. Iv. § 6 (describing
the extortions of an Athenian fishmonger) :—‘ Then when you
pay Aim his money, he always exacts Aeginetan coin’ (the
Aeginetan talent being to the Attic as 5: 3),—‘and if he has to
give you change, he moreover pays you in Attic (srpocamedoxev
ae ; and soon both sides he clears the agio’ (rnv xaraA\Aayqy
€xet).

18 the accounts of his manager] See Crit. App. XXVI. 10.

1g his clansmen] See c. XXIV. note 11. The banquet is
in this case given at the Avaricious man’s house, but at the
joint expense.

20 register the half-radishes] In the Frogs 987 the pen-
urious citizen asks, ‘ Where is the stick of garlic which was left
yesterday ?’? Juvenal’s miser is well known (XIV. 129) :—

Who, in September, spreads a new repast

With mince, kept under padlocks, from the last ;
Who hoards, to make the sultry morrow glad,
One bean, a shred of lobster, half a shad ;

And counts, ere he imprisons for a week,

Each fine-split fibre of the stringy leek.

21 will let his own slave out for hire] When slaves were
_ hired by one citizen from another, it was usually for the purposes
of some business requiring a large number of hands. A mine-
owner, for instance, would rather hire men than encumber
himself by purchase with a large and permanent staff, which
might lie on his hands if the works were suddenly suspended or
contracted. See Xen. Vectig. Iv. 16 ‘But why speak of old
instances (like that of Nicias, above, note 16)? To this day
there are numbers of men in the silver mines leased out (éxde-
Sopevor) in this way.’

22 a club-dinner] We have seen how the Penurious man
and the Avaricious man behave as semi-official hosts : the one
in entertaining his parishioners, the other his clansmen. The
same spirit is carried by the Avaricious man into strictly private
entertainments. <A few friends have arranged a joint dinner-
party which is to be given at his house, and have sent in the
necessaries : this store he plunders, When the contributions to
a club-dinner were in 7d, as here, it was properly Setrvoy ano

XXVIII. THE COWARD. 261

orvpid8es,—when in money, 8eirvov dro avpBodroy (which Lucian
calls cupqpopav, Lexiph. 6): Athen. VII. p. 292. Athenaeus there
uses the -hrase 8eirvoyv cuvayev, to get up such a party. Com-
pare Ter. £uz. 111. 4. 1. ‘Yesterday a party of us met in the
Peiraeus, to arrange a club-dinner for to-day (22 hunc diem ut de
symbolis essemus). We made Chaereas our steward ; rings were
given (as pledges),—place and time appointed.’

23 a wedding-present| On the first day after the wedding
—called éravAta or the House-warming, as being the bride’s
first day-in her new home—*the relatives bring gifts to the
bridegroom and the bride’ (Hesychius). But the chief occasion
for wedding-presents was the third day after marriage, when the
bride for the first time appeared unveiled. The gifts then made
were Called dvaxaAumrnpia. See Diod. v. 2: ‘Some of the poets
feign that at the marriage of Persephone and Pluto the island
(Sicily) was given by Zeus to the bride as a wedding-present’
(dvaxadvurrpa).

XXVII. THE COWARD.

I Cowardice] When ‘cowardice’ is said to be ‘a shrinking
of the soul through fear’ this is an explanation, but not a defini-
tion, of the term ; for, as Aristotle says, there are things fearful
‘above human endurance,’ which the courageous man will not
only fear but shrink from (Z£7¢A. NV. ul. 6). The Coward either
fears too much things which are really fearful, or takes things to
be fearful which are not so (zé.).—Compare the so-called Platonic
Definitions p. 416, ‘ Cowardice tends to check impulse (dyreAnr-
rixy cps), being the first cause of yielding.

The phase of cowardice described here is the fear of death
or bodily hurt, and is seen in two cases—on a voyage and in
war. Theophrastus perhaps shared the view of his master that
avdpeia is strictly ‘physical’ courage only, and ought not to be
extended, as it is in Plato’s Laches p. 191 D, to what we call
‘moral’ courage ; at least the view of SeAéa given here answers
to this limitation. On the subjects of the chapter generally,
compare Arist. £7h. N. 111.6: ‘Properly, then, he would be
called Courageous who is fearless about the noble death and
about such things as bring it on and are sudden; and such
especially are the chances of war. Not but that the Courageous
man is fearless also on asick-bed, or on the sea; but he will not

262 NOTES.

be so much so as sailors. For landsmen at once give up all
hope of safety, and are ill-content with such a death; while
sailors are sanguine lby reason of their experience. Moreover
the cases in which men show courage are those in which there
is scope for valour (év ofs éoriy aAxyj) and in which to die is
glorious ; but in death by drowning or disease neither condition
is present.’

2 = protest that the promontories are privateers] The Persians,
in their retreat after Salamis, actually mistook some sharp points
(dxpat Xerrat) of the rocky Attic coast for ships (Her. VIII. 107).
- AS nyusodcos means ‘containing one and a half,’ nysodia was
a ship with one and half bank of oars,—the lower complete, the
upper broken by a half-deck. ;jeoAiae are sometimes mentioned
in connexion with this period as used in enterprises where light,
handy craft were needed ; e.g. in the attempt of Aristonicus of
Methymna to seize the harbour of Chios by night (B.C. 332,
Arrian Ax, Ill. 2. 5), and in the nocturnal attempt of Agathocles
to surprise Messene (Diod. XIX. 65).

3 who has not been initiated] Diod. Iv. 43 (in the account
of the voyage of the Argonauts) :—‘A great storm came on, and
the chiefs were despairing of safety, when Orpheus, it is said,
who alone of the ship’s company was initiated in the rite’ (of the
Cabeiri), ‘made his prayer tothe Samothracian gods. Immedti-
ately the wind abated. And therefore storm-tossed voyagers
ever make their prayer to the gods of Samothrace.’ Ar. Peace
279: ‘ This is a crisis. Oh, if any of you happens to have been
initiated at Samothrace, now is the time to pray.’ The Coward
refers here to the Eleusinian Mysteries. For the belief that
irreligious companions are dangerous on a voyage, see Antipho
de caede Herod. § 82: ‘I think you know that many men
erenow, having blood on their hands, or being otherwise impure,
have, as companions of a voyage, drawn into their own destruc-
tion those whose relations with the gods were blameless...All
with whom I have sailed have had excellent voyages.’ Aesch.
Theb. §98 and Hor. Od. 111. 1. 16 are well known.

4 what he thinks of the face of the heavens] The Coward,
verbally pious in his alarm, asks the steersman what he thinks—
not of the face of the sky (ra rot ovpavov)—but of the face ‘ of
the god’ (ra rov @eov). It is impossible to render the fineness
of this touch ; but it is necessary to represent it. The Greeks
ordinarily said ‘It [he] rains,’ etc.; but when special reverence or

XXVIII. THE SUPERSTITIOUS MAN. 263

emphasis was meant, ‘fhe god rains,’ etc. Soc. XVill., ‘if Zeus

would (be gracious enough to) send more rain, the crops would

be better:’ Ar. Wasps 261, ‘It is absolutely necessary that che

god should give us rain.” Xen. Hellen. iv. 7. 4, ‘the god made

an earthquake.” ‘The god’ of course means Zeus, who,

yt ae ae zs the sky, djafis: see Curt. Etym. Griech.
269.

5 when he is campaigning] The main body of the army in
which the Coward is serving has already engaged the enemy.
Reserve troops have been left in camp, with whom the Coward
has managed to remain. These, or a portion of them, are now
going out to the support of the main body. The Coward calls
to the men hurrying past, and pretends to be uncertain which of
the dark masses in the distance is the enemy. By this means
he gains a brief delay ; and, when the others insist on advancing,
returns on pretence of seeking his sword.

6 in his haste] in his burning eagerness to hurl himself
into the thick of the fight.

his sword] omaénv. The &idos was a short, straight
sword, with a blade of not much more than two feet. Iphicrates
(about 395 B.C.) ‘made the swords nearly twice as long as they
had been before :’ Diod. Xv. 44. This longer sword was called
oradn ; a word which sometimes translated the Roman gladius.
Vegetius II. 15, ‘longer swords (gladios) which they called
Spathae.’ |

8 sounded the signal for battle] 70 woAepixov, the signal to
charge (Xen. Ax. IV. 3. 29), is opposed to ro dvaxAnrixov, the note
of recall (Plut. Afopth. Lac. 68).—This is the third and most
pressing emergency which the Coward has had to meet. When
the main body went into action, he remained with the reserves.
When the reserves went out, he returned to look for his sword,
Now the trumpeter goes through the camp, to summon forth any
laggards who may chance to have stayed behind. The Coward
affects to be busied with the wounded man.

g the men of his parish and of his tribe] See c. XXIV.
note II. .
XXVIII. THE SUPERSTITIOUS MAN.

I Superstition] Ast regarded the use of Secordatpovia in
a bad sense as a reason for questioning the authenticity of this

264 NOTES.

chapter. The bad sense, he contends, was of later date, and
occurs for the first time in Polybius (VI. 56 § 7: circ. 160 B.C.).
This criticism appears unsound. A word signifying ‘fear of
supernatural beings’ may evidently have various shades of
meaning according to the view of those beings entertained by
the person who uses it. To say that desosdacuovia never meant
‘superstition’ before the age of Polybius is in fact to say that
doubts respecting the popular religion were never felt before his
time. A term so general must always have had potentially
a bad as well as a good sense. But the proof does not rest
merely on a fviori grounds. It is known that Menander—said
to have been a pupil of Theophrastus (Diog. Vv. 36 § 7}—wrote a
comedy called AcowWaipwv, The Supersit{ious Man. And where
Aristotle says that an absolute ruler will be more powerful
‘if his subjects believe that he fears the gods’ (€av decodaipova
vopitwow eivat), he adds—‘but he must show himself such
without fatuity (@vev dBeArepias)—showing that the word
Secorduipoy did not, to Aristotle's mind, exclude fatuity, as
evoeBns would have done: Polit. v. 11.

See Plutarch. de. Superst.c. 1: ‘Ignorance or uneducated
opinion about the gods divides at its source into two channels.
On the one part it soon engenders in refractory characters (ay
Turots 7Oect), as in a hard soil, Atheism. On the other part it
engenders, as in a moist soil, Superstition.’

2 at a fountain] See Crit. Afp. XXVIII. 1.

3 from a temple-font}] Vessels of water for sprinkling
(reptppavrnpia) stood at the doors of temples. Among the
treasures of Delphi Herodotus mentions two such vessels or
fonts, one of silver, the other of gold, dedicated by Croesus
(I. 54). The ceremony of sprinkling was usually intended to
purge a special defilement. ‘hus the messenger sent to Delphi
for the sacred fire after the slaughter at Salamis ‘ purified his
body and sprinkled himself (Plut. Arist, 20) ; and the people of
Miletus showed the fountain at which their fathers had sprinkled
Achilles after he had slain the king of the Lelégag (Athen. II. p.
43). What is for others an extraordinary purification the Super-
stitious man performs daily.

4 a bit of laurel-leaf} By carrying a laurel-leaf in his
mouth, he places himself under the protection of Apollo the
Averter. The same idea finds an ironical application in the
proverb quoted by Erasmus (4d@ag. I. 1. 79)—‘1 carry a laurel

XXVIII. THE SUPERSTITIOUS MAN. 265

walking-stick’—i.e. a rod of virtue to chastise my enemies. In.
Lucian’s 7wzice Accused c. 1, Zeus complains that Apollo is
always flitting ‘whither the priestess summons him, when she
has drunk some holy water and chewed some laurel.’ ‘To have
bitten the laurel’ is Juvenal’s phrase for poetical inspiration

(VII. 19).

5 if a weasel run across the path] Xen. Afpol. Socr. 13:
‘ Others believe that it is by birds, by sounds, dy the objects that
meet us (ovpBorous’...that the future is foretold.’ Prometheus
taught men to read ‘the signs that met them on journeys’
(€vodiovs avpBorovs: Aesch. P. V. 495). It was a warning sign
when the path was crossed by an unclean animal: Horace men-
tions some of these (Od. 111. 27. I—7). Compare Ar. £ccl. 792:
‘If a weasel were to rush across the road, they would stop
levying war.’

6 until some one else has traversed the path} It was the old
belief that the evil portended by omens was not aimed at any
particular person; and that, therefore, it could be turned off
from oneself to another by precaution, or (so to say) by a
vigorous protest. See the story in Dio Chrysost. Or. XXXIV.: -
‘A Phrygian was riding on a mule. Seeing a raven, and
drawing a bad omen from it (otwmoapevos), he threw a stone, and
chanced to hit the bird. Delighted at this, and believing that
the mischief had been turned off upon the raven, he remounted,
and pursued his ride. The raven, however, after a little while
got up again; the mule, startled, threw her rider ; and he broke
his leg’ Ar. Peace 1063: ‘Priest. O mortals wretched and
silly— Zrygaeus. On your head the omen !

7 three stones] These are thrown after the weasel; to
symbolise, as in Dio’s story, detestation of the evil power.
Perhaps the same notion is to be traced in Columella’s advice
that three stones should be buried at the roots of orange-trees in
order to prevent the fruit bursting on the branch (de a7é. 23).

8 when he sees a serpent in his house] Ter. Phormio Iv.
4. 24: ‘ How many things happened afterwards to warnme! A
strange black dog came into the house. A snake dropped from
the roof into the impluvium. A hen crew.’ So it is one of the
omens which proclaim the divine origin of Hercules that ‘two
i snakes spring down the impluvium’ (Plaut. Amph.
V. I. 58).

266 - NOTES.

g the red snake] The mapeias was ‘of a reddish colour,
. with a large, bright eye, a broad mouth, not biting dangerously,
but gentle’ (Ael. Hzst. Am. VIII. 12). It was sacred to Asclepius
(l.c.), and was also found in the temples of Dionysus (schol. Ar.
Plut. 690). In Dem. de Cor. § 260 Aeschines is described
‘leading those fine troops of bacchants through the streets,—
squeezing the ved suakes, and holding them on high above his
head,—and crying exoe, saboe

Io Sabazius} Diod. Iv. 4: ‘Some feign that there was yet
another Dionysus long prior in time to this one. They say that
a Dionysus was born of Zeus and Persephone,—he who by some
is called Sadazius, whose birth and sacrifices and rites they
celebrate stealthily, by night and in secret. He, they say, was
of surpassing sagacity, and first essayed to yoke oxen, and by
their means to achieve the sowing of crops; whence it is that
they introduce him crowned with horns.’

Ir the sacred snake] described in Arist. Hzst. Am. VII. 28
as ‘a small kind of serpent, of which the larger kinds are afraid;
its own length is a foot and a half. It is covered with hair.
Wherever it bites, the flesh immediately mortifies all round,’

12 ashrine] The text is uncertain: see Crit. ADP. XXVIII.
4. The sense, however, is clear :—the spot on which the ‘sacred’
snake was seen is consecrated. Plato complains that like acts
of superstition have choked up Athens with votive chapels and
altars. It is the custom, he says, of timid persons in any sick-
ness or danger ‘to promise seats to the gods and divinities and
children of the gods ; or, when they wake in terror from dreams
and visions—often, too, when they recall things seen in waking
hours—to contrive altars and rites as remedies for these; and
thus to fill every house, every quarter of the city, with their
foundations (idpvopevous):’ Laws 1X. p. 909 E.

13 the smooth stones at the cross-roads} Cairns, piled at
points where three roads met, were regarded as rude altars of
the triform goddess, Hecate Trioditis, 77zvza, and on these, at
the new moon, offerings were laid. The Superstitious man
never passes such a cairn without pouring on it a few drops of
oil from the flask which he is taking to the baths. Compare
Lucian’s Alexander c. 30: ‘He was quite distempered in feeling
towards the gods, and had the wildest beliefs about them. If
he only saw an anointed or crowned stone anywhere, he straight-

XXVIIL ZHE SUPERSTITIOUS MAN. 267

way fell on his knees, worshipped it, and stood by it for some
time, praying, and begging blessings from it.’ Clemens Alex-
andrinus speaks of those ‘who, as the common saying is,
worship every stock and every smooth stone’ (Strom. VII. p. 302).

14 if a mouse gnaws through a meal-bag| Plin. AWzst. Wat.
VIII. 57: (mice) ‘are animals of no mean significance in public
prodigies. They gave warning of the Social War by gnawing
some shields at Lanuvium. They warned Carbo of destruction
at Clusium by gnawing the thongs which he used for his boots’
(alluding to the battle in which he was defeated by Sulla in
82 B.c.). Augustine tells a story of some one whose boots had
been gnawed by rats asking Cato how the portent was to be
expiated, and of Cato replying that it would have been more
portentous if the rats had been gnawed by the boots (de doctr.
Chr. I1.).

15 the expounder of sacred law] éfnynryv. The Athenian
family of the Eumolpidae—descendants of the first high-priests
of Demeter—had in their keeping that body of unwritten tra-
clition which made up the sacred law. Three members of this
family (acc. to Suidas) formed a board or council to which all
ceremonial questions were referred. They did not profess, like
the inspired seers, pdvrecs, to read the future; their province lay
wholly in the interpretation of precedent. To them, in concert
‘with the guardians of the civil law, the seers, and (so) with the
god himself,’ Plato would entrust, for instance, the expiation of
crime (Laws VIII. p.871 Cc’. They were often consulted in cases
where some special circumstances connected with a death made
desirable some modification of the funeral ritual: see, e.g.,
Demosth. za Euerg. p. 1160.

16 to purify his house frequently] Houses, as well as per-
sons, were purified after a polluting presence. Antipho de Chor.
§ 37 ‘On the day after the boy’s burial, before we had purified
the house.’ In Eur. Her. Fur. 922 sacrifice is held ‘to purge
the house’ (xa@dapow’ oikwv) from the stain of murder. Even the.
open air and the soil required purification from a moral taint:
see Eur. Helen. 866.

17 Hecate has been brought into it by spells] Plato speaks
of the wandering jugglers (ayvprat) and soothsayers who beset
a rich man’s doors, offering to injure his enemies ‘at a slight
outlay’ (uerd opixpov Samayev) by persuading the gods ‘with

268 NOTES.

certain alluring charms or binding spells’ to help (érayayais
riot kal xaradécpots, Rep. p. 364 C). In the Laws (XI. p. 933 D)
he proposes to punish anyone who ‘for the use of diading or
drawing spells, or of incantations, or any such witchcraft what-
soever, shall be adjudged virtually a doer of violence’ (opotos —
Branrovre’. Compare Plut. de Superst. c. 3, where the prophet
tells a client who has come to him in alarm, ‘ Hecate has been
paying you one of her riotous visits’ ‘Exarns xdpov ed€&a).

18 if an owl is startled by him] Antiphanes in Athen.
XIV. p. 655 :—

Men say that in the City of the Sun

Are phoenixes; Athene has her owls;

Doves are most honoured by the Cyprian Queen ;
Hera of Samos loves her golden brood,

The bright birds conscious of admiring eyes.

19 Glory be to Athene!] ’AOnva xpeirrwy. Having startled
her favourite bird, he seeks to propitiate the goddess by a com-
pliment addressed to herself. ‘Athene is the better goddess
after all !—preferable to and stronger than rival divinities. For
the comparative, see Ovid Aez. xIv. 657, where Vertumnus
greets Pomona with the words ‘tanto potentior ’—not unlike the
Irish salutation, ‘More power to you!"—He cannot mean
‘Athene is stronger (than the evil power which sent this omen);’
for, to an Athenian, the appearance of Athene’s bird was a good
omen. Ar. Wasps 1085: ‘ However, we repulsed (the Persians)
with the help of the gods towards evening ; for an owl flitted
through our host before the battle.’ Aelian says, indeed (4. 4.)
X. 37), ‘When the owl attends a man hastening on some urgent
errand, and then suddenly stops (émioraca), it is not a good
omen;’ le. it is a friendly warning from the goddess to turn
back.

20 tread upon a tombstone] pryparz. Monuments to the
dead were either upright slabs, or7Aae: columns, xioves : shrines,
np@a: or flat tombstones, rpame(at (Plut. vit. dec. oratt. IV. 25:
mensae, Cic. de Legg. Vi. 26). The inscription on a monument
often contained imprecations on those who should in any way
dishonour it : ‘If any one shall strip this shrine of its ornaments,
or open it, or in any other way disturb it, with his own hand or
by another’s, he shall be suffered neither to walk the earth nor
to sail the sea, but shall be rooted out with all his race :’ Boeckh

XXVIII. THE SUPERSTITIOUS MAN. 269

Corp. Insc. 916. Compare Aul. Gell. x. 15. 24 (the flamen
dialis) ‘never sets foot on ground where a corpse has been
burned’ (locum in quo bustum est).

. 21 come near a dead body} Eur. A/c. 98, ‘I see not before

the doors the spring water for ablution, as is the usage at the
doors of the dead.’ The lustral water, yépvuf, was usually set
there in an earthen vessel (Zarpaxov, Ar. Eccl, 1025), in order
that friends passing out from their visit to the house of death
might wash off the defilement.—The Superstitious man is not
content with this remedy for the pollution. He refuses to incur
it at all,—thus declining one of the duties of kinship and
friendship—the visit to a corpse while it was laid out (c. XIII.
note 3).

22 @ woman defiled by childbirth] Eur. /ph. in Taur,
381 :—
I blame the niceties of Artemis:
Who, if a man has put his hand to blood,
Or touched a corpse, or her whom childbed stains,
Bans him her altars, counts him as defiled,
Herself delighting in the blood of men.

23 the fourth and seventh days of each month] (1) The
4th of each month was sacred to Hermes. Ar. Pluf, 1128,
‘Hermes. Nothing of any sort does any one offer to us gods any
longer. Karion. No, nor will. Hermes. Woe is me for the
cake baked on the fourth of the month.’ (2) The 7th of the
month was sacred to Apollo: ‘for on it Leto bare Apollo of the
golden sword’ (Hes. Off. 768).

24 myrtle-wreaths and frankincense} Ar. Wass 861:
‘ Bring out fire, some one, with all speed, and m,rtle-wreaths
and frankincense, that we may first offer prayer to the gods.’

25 convolvuluses} Worn by bacchants. Eur. Bacch. 105:
‘Thebes, nurse of Semele, crown thyself with ivy ; bloom with
the fair blossoms of the delicate convolvulus, and make thyself
a bacchanal with branches of oak or pine.’

26 the Hermaphrodites} Hermaphroditus, son of Hermes

and Aphrodite, was probably one of the household deities
(Petersen de cultu Graec. domestico p. 65). See Alciphro III. 37:
‘I had woven a harvest-wreath and was on my way to the

270 NOTES.

temple of Hermaphroditus, to offer it to him of Alopeke’ (miean-
Ing r@ paxapiry, her late husband).

27 if he has seen a vision] The belief in some dreams as
foreshadowing good or evil was universal in the ancient world,
and by no means confined to the superstitious. It is the
anxiety to ascertain the precise import of ay trivial dream
which is here the mark of the Superstitious man.—Aesch.
Pers, 202 :—

Such were the phantoms that appalled my sleep;
But, when I rose, in clear streams from the spring
I washed my hands and with sweet-smelling flame
Came near the altar, fain to dedicate

Gifts meet for gods who turn mischance aside.

28 the interpreters of dreams, the seers, the augurs] He
has recourse to one of three classes of diviners: (1) The special
Interpreters of dreams. In spite of the general belief in dreams,
the professors of a special dream lore were laughed at as early
as the time of Aristophanes: see the Wasfs 53, ‘Shall I not
hire him for two obols, with all his cleverness in telling dreams?’
Alciphro 111. §9: ‘I mean to go to one of the people who sit with
boards (muwaxia) before them by the temple of Iacchus, under-
taking to tell dreams—pay my two drachmas—and relate the
vision which appeared to me in my sleep.’ A work in five
books on the Interpretation of Dreams (ovetpoxpirixa) by Artemi-
dorus (circ. 150 A.D.) is still extant. (2) Zhe Seers, pavreis. In
the large sense anyone was so called who spoke by the direct
inspiration of the gods; and the various tpomot pavtixns are
enumerated in Aesch. P. V. 492—507. But pavrixn meant espe-
cially divination dy sacrifice, either from the appearance of the
victim (fepopavreia) or from that of the flame (mupopavreia).
(3) Zhe Augurs. Augural science never became so elaborate or so
important in Greece as at Rome. The Greek instinct for
‘spiritual freedom and clearness’ rebelled against a system
of minute technicalities : see Curt. Aés¢. Gr. bk. Il. c. 4, trans.
Ward.

29 priests of the Orphic Mysteries] The mythical personage
Orpheus, regarded by the oldest legends as the servant of
Apollo, was regarded by a later legend as the priest of an
Infernal god, Dionysus Zagreus. As early-as the 7th century
B.C. were formed Orphic Brotherhoods, ‘ who, under the guidance
of the ancient mystical poet Orpheus, dedicated themselves to

XXVIII. THE SUPERSTITIOUS MAN. 271

the worship of. Dionysus’ (Miller zst. Gr. Lit. p. 231). This
cult bore a strong affinity to Indian asceticism : (a) in regarding
the body as a prison from which the enlightened man seeks
to achieve the deliverance of the soul. Plato Cratylus p. 400C:
‘I think, however, that this term (‘ body,’ aéua) was the especial
invention of the Orphic sect (of audit ’Opdea)—signifying that
the soul is in a state of punishment, for whatsoever cause ; and
is girt about, for its safe keeping, with the image of a prison.
This, then, is, as its very name imports, the soul’s safe lodging
(owerOa) until it has paid its debts. —,4) In prescribing a life
of ceremonial purity: e.g. as regards diet; Plat. Laws VI. p.
782 C: ‘Orphic lives, as they are called, were led by those of our
race who lived then, adhering to the use of all inanimate things,
but abstaining from everything wherein is life: and as regards
bodily purity,—the Orphics wearing linen only, like the Egyp-
tian priests to whom Herodotus compares them, II. 81.

Such, in its original character, was the Orphic worship ; as
such, no doubt, it long had pure and earnest votaries. But
already in Plato’s time the name of the ‘Orphic Mysteries’
was traded upon by begging priests. Rep. p. 364 D: ‘Pro-
phets and quacks (pavrets—dyuprat), besetting rich men’s doors,
exhibit books by Musaeus and Orpheus, those descendants
of Selene and the Muses; according to which they offer
sacrifice, persuading not only individuals but states that (for-
sooth) deliverance and purification from deeds of wrong are
obtained by sacrifices axzd childish mummeries (madsas ndovai.
These things they call their ‘rites,’ which deliver us from the ills
beyond the grave: but, if we do not offer them, dread things
awaitus.’ Plut. Afophth. Lacon. p. 224 E: ‘ Philippus, the Orphic
priest, was very poor, but said that those who were initiated in
his rites were happy when life was over. ‘Why, then, foolish
man,’ he was asked, ‘do you not die at once, and have rest from
bewailing your poverty and wretchedness ?”’

30 accompanied by his wife] It appears from this passage
that women and children were admitted to the Orphic Mysteries.
This was the case also at the Mysteries of the Cabeiri: Plut.
Alex.2: ‘lt is said that Philip fell in love with Olympias on the
occasion of his being initiated in her company at Samothrace,
he being then a boy, and she a girl.” Women were admitted
also to the Mysteries of the Eleusinian Demeter : Demosth. 72
WVeid. § 158.

272 NOTES.

31 if she is too busy] Observe the irony. Greek wives
were seldom busy.

32 sprinkled with sea-water] In Plut. de Suferst. c. 3 the
dream-teller advises the person who consults him to ‘ dip himself
in the sea.’ Circe, in the Avgonautics, washes herself with sea-
water after an alarming dream (Apoll. Rh. 1v.669). Purification
on the seashore was the ceremony of the second day of the Great
Eleusinia, when worshippers were summoned with the cry
adXade, pvora. In Theocr. XXlv. 44 salt is added to fresh
water to increase its purifying efficacy.

33 the garlic at the crossroads} A ‘supper’ for Hecate
was placed at each new moon on the piles of stones at the
crossroads (see note 13). Ar. /’lutus 595: ‘ Hecate can tell us
whether it is better to be poor or hungry. She says that well-
to-do or rich people send her a supper every month: whereas
poor people snatch it away when it has hardly been put down.’
Plutarch (de Superst. c. 10) quotes a mention of Hecate as
‘fastening at the cross-roads on the guilty wretch who has gone
after her foul supper’ (xaapparecow éemiomopevo). The Super-
stitious man holds that he has been defiled by the mere sight of
such wickedness.

34 carry a squill or a puppy round him] The object of
all those ceremonies in which the offerings were carried round
the person or place to be purified was to trace a charmed circle,
within which the powers of evil should not come. Polyb. Iv. 21:
the Mantineans ‘held a purification, and carried victims round
the city and the whole territory.’ In the Roman ambarvalia
the victim was carried thrice round the cornfields. Plaut. 4 mph.
II. 2.154: ‘Why do you not order a procession round her, asa
madwoman’ (gro cerrita circumferre).

35 a equill] Lucian Menippus c. 7: ‘ At midnight he took
me tothe Tigris, and purified me, rubbing me clean, and moving
solemnly round me with torches and squills and divers other
things.’

30 a puppy] Plut. Quaest. Rom. c. 68: ‘The Grecks used,
and to this day_use, the dog for purifications. They carry
forth puppies, with other expiatory offerings, to Hecate, and
touch all round (mepiparrovor) with a puppy those who need re-
storation to purity, calling that sort of purification mepioKvAa-
Kio jL0S.

XXIX. THE OLIGARCH. 273

37 spit into his bosom] A custom connected with the
belief already referred to (n. 6) in this chapter—that threatened °
evil could be averted by acts or words expressive of violent
repugnance to it. Plin. Ast. Mat. 28. 4.7: ‘We guard ourselves
against epilepsy by spitting,—that is, we hurl back the plague
(contagta regerimus). In like manner we repel the evil eye,
and the lame man who jostles us on the right-hand side. We
also ask pardon from the gods for any overbold hope by spitting
into the bosom.’ Lucian Zhe Boat c. 15: ‘Nay, Adeimantus,
you wax insolent, and forget to spit into your bosom.’ Poly-
phemus zz Theocr. V1. 39 takes:this precaution against a nemesis
on his beauty. In such cases—where a nemesis was deprecated—
the idea of self-abasement was perhaps present.

XXIX. THE OLIGARCH.

1 The Oligarchical temper] oAcyapyia, which properly de-
notes a form of government, stands here for dAcyapytxorns—that
habit of mind to which oligarchy is congenial. Compare, as
analogous, the use of duow¢éBeca in Soph. Azz. 922 to denote, not
the quality itself, but the character in men’s eyes of the person
who has that quality : rnv dvacéBetav evocBodo’ éexrncaunv: ‘by
being pious I have gained ¢he name of impious.’

This Character and the following—that of the d:Aomrovnpos or
Patron of Rascals—are essentially companion sketches. They
are a pair of political caricatures, resting upon the fundamental
antithesis of Athenian politics— government by the Few as con-
trasted with government by the Many. The partisan of either
side is described from the point of view of the other; the
oligarch, as loathing the mass of his fellow-citizens and ever
tending towards a despotism ; the democrat, as naturally at-
tracted to whatever is low and tricky. There are two places in
Greek literature where the bolder features of this contrast, and
the commonplaces of recrimination which it suggested, are set
forth with especial clearness,—the dialogue in the Wasps be-
tween the Admirer and the Loather of Cleon (471—724); and
the whole speech of Isocrates, Ox the Peace.

It is interesting to remember that at the period to which the
Characters of Theophrastus belong the changes of party-fortune
were unusually rapid, and party-feeling was perhaps more than
usually keen. After his victory at Crannon in 322 B.c. Antipater
abolished the democracy at Athens, and established an oligarchy.

18

274 NOTES.

His death in 318 was followed by the democratic reaction to
‘which Phocion fell a victim. In 317 the oligarchy was re-
constituted by Cassander. It lasted till the nominal restoration
of the democracy by Demetrius Poliorcetes in 307 B.C., with
which the contest of parties in the old sense may be said to have
finally closed. Thenceforth the question was mainly as to
the particular agent in whom the Macedonian government of
Athens should be vested.

2 covetous, not of gain, but of power] See Crit. App.
XXIX. 1.—The wealthy oligarch was usually accused of bribing
in order to get power; the needy democrat, of seeking power in
order to be bribed. Thus in the Wasfs the oligarch is greeted
as ‘hater of the people, enamoured of monarchy’ (v. 473). He
retorts—‘ father, you choose ¢#ese men to rule over us, and then
- they take fees from the cities at the rate of thirty talents a town’
(v. 672).

3 whom they shall associate with the archon] The First
Archon would of course take a prominent part in a great public
procession ; and, if he was also to arrange it, would require the
assistance of special colleagues or fellow-stewards. Hipparchus
was assassinated in the act of marshalling (8taxoopowvrc) the
Panathenaic procession: Thuc. I. 20, These assistants of the
archon on a particular occasion must not be confused with his
regular assessors, mapeSpot, Each of the three principal archons
might have two such assessors to aid him throughout his year
of office; since, having been elected by lot, he might chance to
be no man of business (apayparwr areipos, Dem. zn Neaer. § 72).
The six Thesmothetae had in like manner their ‘advisers,’
ovpBovrdc: Dem. 2% Theocr. § 37.

4 the procession] ‘ 7e procession’ at Athens was that of
the Greater Panathenaea. This festival was held in the August
of every fourth year, the third of each Olympiad. The proces-
sion started from the chapel of the daughters of Leos (Aewxopioy,
Thuc. I, 20) in the outer Cerameicus ; went by the Sacred Way
to Eleusis ; on returning to Athens, passed round the northern
wall (IleAacyixov retyos) of the acropolis ; then along the west
side of the Lenaeum and the east side of the Marketplace ; and
finally, ascending to the acropolis, offered to Athene Polias the
saffron robe embroidered with her victories. The frieze of the
Parthenon represented the procession of which that temple was

XXIX. THE OLIGARCH. 275

the goal. There were two other great moyzai, both annual,—at
the Great Dionysia in March, and at the Great Mysteries in
September,

ought to have plenary powers] avroxpdropas eciva. At
Athens this word meant especially ‘empowered to act without
reference to the Ecclesia.’ Thus in the panic upon the mutila-
tion of the Hermae in 415 B.C. the Senate of Five-Hundred was
made avroxparwp (Andoc. de Myst. § 15). In the revolution
of 411 B.C. Peisander convoked the Ecclesia, and then proposed
the appointment of ten Commissioners who should be indepen-
dent of it (avroxparopas: Thuc. VIII. 67). The opposite to
avroxpdrep is Umevduvos, responsible to the public assembly. An
ambassador, of course, might in another sense have ‘plenary
power’ (to negotiate) but would still be ‘ responsible.’

6 if others propose ten] The Oligarch’s first demand is
that the new stewards of the procession shall not be responsible
to the Ecclesia. He now makes a further demand—that this
irresponsible power shall not even be divided, but shall be
vested in one man. This is a hint how he would act if he had
the framing of a constitution. His oligarchy would soon pass
into a monarchy: cf. note 2.

7 ‘No good comes of manifold rule’] From //iad It. 204.
Odysseus is urging the Greeks to hear their chiefs in council.
To the powerful he is persuasive ; ‘but when, on the other hand,
he saw a man of the people and found him making a noise, him
he would strike with his staff and loudly upbraid: Friend, sit
quiet, and listen to the speech of others who are thy betters...
Assuredly we cannot all be kings here, we Greeks. Vo good
comes of manifold rule, let there be one ruler, to whom the son
of shrewd-minded Cronos hath given the sceptre and laws, that
he may be king over his people.’ The Oligarch’s appeal from
democracy to the poetry of divine right is the best touch in this
sketch.

8 of the rest he is absolutely ignorant] A knowledge of the
Homeric poems was one of the essentials of a good education.
Isocr. Panegyr. § 159: ‘I fancy that Homer’s poetry gained the
greater renown because he nobly praised those who warred
against barbarians; and that for this cause our ancestors did
honour to his artistic skill both by musical contests and in the
education of the young, that, by often hearing his verses, they

18—2

276 NOTES.

might thoroughly learn the hereditary hatred of barbarians (ry
€xOpay rv Umapyovcay mpos avrovs), and through admiration of
the valour of those who went against Troy, might become
emulous of deeds like theirs. Xen, Sym. II. 5: ‘ My father,
anxious that I should become a good man, made me learn all
Homer’s poetry ; and now I could say off (ané oroparos eimeiy)
the whole Iliad and Odyssey.’

Q we must give up courting office] Some officials—e.g. the
Generals, and ambassadors—were appointed by election (aiperoi)
in the Ecclesia. The Oligarch scorns to be at the mercy of the
popular assembly.

10 about the middle of the day] He will not deign to mix
with the crowd in the Marketplace during the working-hours of
the morning. Towards noon, when tired men are going home
to their siesta (c. XXIV. note 17), he will appear fresh and trim,
and take gentle exercise in a street unprofaned by the hurry of
‘business.

II with his cloak gracefully adjusted] 16 inarsov dvaBeBAr-
pevos. This perfect participle is sometimes used, without a
qualifying adverb, in what may be called its pregnant sense—
to express that the cloak is thoroughly or carefully adjusted.
See Demosth. de Fals. Legat. § 281; ‘He said that the sobriety
of the popular speakers of that day 1s illustrated by the statue
of Solon with his cloak drawn round him and his hand within
the folds’ (eiaw ryv yxeipa Exovra dvaBeBAnpevoy). In c.
viI., which has wrongly been compared, dvaBaddpevos has no
such pregnant sense.—The cloak, izariov, was a square piece of
cloth ;: it was thrown over the left shoulder, brought under the
right arm, and then thrown over the left shoulder again. This
was emt de€ta avaBaddeoOa, ‘to put on the cloak from left to
right... Ar. Birds 1597 (to a Triballian) : ‘Why do you dress in
this left-handed way? (ri én’ dpiorep’ ovrws dpmeyer;) Plut.
Theat. p. 175 E (a man may possess vulgar accomplishments,
and yet not know how) ‘to put on his cloak from left to right
like a freemaw’ (éXevbépos).

12 his hair daintily trimmed] The man of Petty Ambition
is ridiculed for having his hair cut too frequently (c. VII.): the
philosophers (Ar. Clouds 834), for never having it cut at all.
The péon xovpa, not mentioned elsewhere, is perhaps simply the
mean approved by Athenian fastidiousness. A like attention to

XXIX. THE OLIGARCH. 277

Ratpos was exacted in regard to the length of the cloak : see
c. XXIV. note I5.

13 the Odeum Street] See Crit. App. xx1X. 3. The older
and larger Odeum was on the S.E. side of Athens: see c. XVIII.
note 4. Ifa street near it is meant, the Oligarch is described as
taking his walk at a distance from the haunts of ‘the people’-—
the Agora, Pnyx, etc., in the N.W. part of the city.

14 the informers} Isocrates condemns the tendency to
associate the informers—those pests of Athenian life—with the _
democratic side in politics : ‘One of the ways in which we may
mend the affairs of the city...is by ceasing to regard the informers
as representative men of the people (8nporixovs), and to identify
the better class (rovs xadovs xayaOouvs) with oligarchy’ (de Pace
§ 133). Still, as money was the object of the professional
informer, the rich must have suffered most from him; and
a rich Oligarch would naturally look upon him as one of the
plagues of a democracy. The ‘sycophant’ was a character
peculiar to Athens (Ar. Ach. 904). The best picture of him is
drawn in the pseudo-Demosth. First Speech against Aristogeiton:
—‘ He moves through the market-place like a viper or a scorpion
with sting erect, darting this way or that, seeking whom he may
afflict with misfortune or calumny or any evil, and so, by putting
him in fear, extort money’ (é# Arist. I. §52). When Aristotle
was asked ‘what he thought of Athens,’ he is said to have
replied—‘ A glorious place ; but there—

bxvn én’ Bxvy ynpdoxe, oixoy 3 éxl ocixy:
Pear after pear grows old, and fig on fig?’
i.e. the material for the sycophant never fails.

15 in the courts] The jury-courts were in their constitution,
their tone and their practice thoroughly democratic. No insti-
tution was so hateful to the true Oligarch. Nothing, on the other
hand, was more delightful to the ordinary dicast than the
temporary abasement of rank and wealth at his bar. Philo-
cleon in the Wasps undertakes to show that the dicast’s posi-
tion is ‘inferior to no sovereign’s’ (v. 549). After describing the
abject defendant, his flatteries, his prayers, his pleading wife
and whining children, he triumphantly concludes—‘ Is not this a
great empire? Is not this a flouting of wealth?’ (v. $75).

16 public services and trierarchies] The representative of a
property amounting to 3 talents (rpirdAavros olxos, Isaeus de

278 NOTES.

Pyrrh, h. § 80),—i.e. about £720—or upwards, was liable to the
‘liturgies.’ —These may be classed as (1) the annual: Dem. adv.
Lept. § 21: ‘those who perform the yearly, recurring (éyxv«Xiovs)
liturgies,—viz. the choregi, the gymnasiarchs and the enter-
tainers’ (€ortaropes, who gave banquets to the several tribes).
(2) The periodic at longer intervals: e.g. the sacred mission
(Oewpia) to Delos, to Olympia and to the Pythian festival
in every fourth year ; and to the Isthmian and Nemean games
in every second. (3) The extraordinary: e.g. missions to the
oracle at Delphi. The trierarchy in so far belongs to this third
class that the number of vessels required by the state of course
varied at different times. As organised in (prob.) 340 B.C. the
trierarchy was perhaps specially unpopular with rich men, since
under the old system of permanent boards (cuppopéac) they had
often paid less than their share: see c. XXV. note 8.

17 Theseus} Thuc. II. 15: ‘In the time of Cecrops, and in
that of the early kings down to Theseus, the population of
Attica was divided among several towns, each having its town-
hall and its magistrates ; and, except in a season of alarm, they
did not assemble to take counsel with the king....But when
Theseus came to the throne.,..he dissolved the local town-
councils and magistracies, and made the present city, with one
council and one town-hall, the metropolis of the whole people...
From that time to the present day the Athenians celebrate to
the goddess the public festival of the Union’ (cuvotxia). This
festival was held early in the October (Boedr. 17) of each year.
It has been remarked that in the Ewmenides—which, according
to one view, was a conservative protest against the reform of the
Areopagus—Theseus, the hero of the commonwealth, is made
prominent, as if to conciliate the popular party (vv. 356, 380).
His centralising policy finds no favour with the Oligarch, who
would prefer that of which oligarchical Sparta was so fond—
the Scouccopos, Or breaking up of a town into several villages
(Polyb. Iv. 27. 6).

18 he was the people's first victim himself] Plutarch tells
the story thus. In the absence of Theseus and Peirithous on an
attempt to carry off Coré, daughter of Aidoneus king of the Mo-
lossians, a sedition was excited at Athens by one Menestheus,
‘first of mankind, as they say, to attempt demagogy.’ Theseus
on his return tried to restore his old power, but was ‘borne down
by demagogues and faction’ (karednpaywyeiro cat xaregra-

XXX. THE PATRON OF RASCALS. 279

ovafero). Having abdigated, and pronounced a curse upon
the Athenians at Cargo where is now the Araterium’), he
withdrew to Scyros. that island he was killed by a fall
from the cliffs. (Plut. Zhes. 32—34.)

XXX. THE PATRON OF RASCALS.

1 ‘The Patronising of Rascals] The last sketch described
the Oligarch as shrinking from contact with the people,—
marvelling why they should wish to meddle in affairs,—
striving to keep all power in the hands of a coterie. In
this chapter he is giving his revenge. At Athens the word
aovnpos had what may be considered its political sense. It
described a particular rank growth of character which sprang,
amidst much that was good, out of the soil of Athenian
democracy. In the representative democratic institutions—the
Ecclesia and the law-courts—there was one great vice, arising
from the very smoothness of the machinery and from the want
of checks upon its swift, sweeping action. This was the in-
security of the individual. No man’s character, property, even
life was safe for a day from accusations which could be cheaply
made, and which, when made in malice, were heard under the
influence of rhetoric. Hence the terrible importance of the pro-
fessional informer. Now the ideal roynpos is to the avxopavrys
as genus to species. He is the man who avails himself without
scruple of all those opportunities for extorting money, grasping
power, or gratifying spite which a masterly knowledge of the
available weapons can suggest. He is the skilled bully of the
public assembly and of the lawcourts,—the finished knave which
Strepsiades aspired to hecome under the lessons of the sophist,
and which the Aristophanic Cleon already is. He is such a man
as is described in the First Speech against Aristogeiton, where
the meaning of sompia (§ 39) is thus drawn out (§ 41) :—‘ He
storms in the Ecclesia, falling furiously on all of you ; and, for
every advantage which he gains over you collectively in the
assembly, for this, when he has left the platform, he prosecutes
you individually—calumniating, begging, extorting.’

2 those who have lost lawsuits] Persons who made a
practice of bringing vexatious lawsuits in the hope of occasionally
getting a verdict would soon be competent masters in effrontery.

280 NOTES.

‘Great is he, too, in lawsuits,’ is said of the Reckless man
(c. XVI.). Strepsiades, in his exhaustive list of the qualities
which make up the perfect wovnpds, hopes that he may one day
be ‘an old hand at lawsuits’ (repirpippa Sixav : Clouds 547).

3 and have been found guilty in criminal causes] The
habit of getting up lawsuits (Sixac) implies hardened impudence;
the man who has been repeatedly convicted in public causes
(ypapai) is presumably a hardened criminal. The qdeAcmovnpos
serie lessons in both the lighter and the graver branches of his
subject.

4 to the bench] He undertakes to advocate the cause of
the man who is on his trial, and addresses the judges in his
favour. Both in public and in private causes the defendant
was allowed to apportion as he pleased the fixed time given to
him for speaking. He might, if he liked, surrender part of it to
an advocate, though he was always expected to say at least
a few words himself. The advocate was usually either a private
friend or a person directly interested in the issue,—the taking of
fees being forbidden under penalty of an indictment for bribery
(Dem. adv. Steph. § 26). Thus Demosthenes spoke for Ctesi-
phon against Aeschines, and for Phanus against Aphobus.

the question is of the cause, etc.] He exhorts the jury
to show that they are no respecters of persons,—not to be
biassed against the defendant because he is poor,—to decide
solely on the merits of the case. Appeals of this kind are, in
fact, very common in the orators: see, for example, the speech
against Meidias. A speaker who knew how to use this topic
skilfully could, in an Athenian court, exercise a good deal of
terrorism under the form of deprecation.

6 the watch-dog of the people] Compare the pseudo-
Demosth. 2” Aristog. 1. § 40: ‘What, then, is the defendant?
Some, I suppose, will say—‘a watch-dog of the people.’ Of
what breed? Of such a breed that he will not bite those
whom he takes for wolves, but will himself devour the sheep
that he pretends to guard.’ The metaphor ‘watch-dog’ was
less homely to Greek ears than it is to ours. It finds place
in one of the stateliest passages of Greek tragedy, Aesch.
Agam. 591, where Clytaemnestra is speaking of herself as the
faithful oixovpos during the absence of her lord:

XXX. THE PATRON OF RASCALS. 281

and coming may he find,
Even as he left, the Watcher of the house,
To him leal-hearted, hostile to his foes.

It is somewhat curious that in the same language the dog should
have been a proverb at once for shamelessness (xuvammns, etc.)
and for noble fidelity. The dog Argos in the Odyssey bears
witness to a Greek feeling for his species very different from
that usual in the East.

7 to form conspiracies in the law-courts] ovvedpetoa ev
duxaornpiots. He has already been described as assisting his
friends in the character of advocate (note 4). He now intrigues
for them in the character of judge. When the panel of 500 or
more jurors has been appointed to try a cause, the favourer of
the worthless defendant forms a clique (cuvedpevec) in his interest.
He conspires with a few of his numerous colleagues to give the
man every chance. Conspiracies of another kind are often
mentioned in the orators,—where ‘a gang of confederates’ com-
bined to bring on or defeat an action (rd épyaornpioy ray ovr-
ectorwy, Dem. adv. Pantaen.§ 39: épyactypia 10x Onpav dvOparreav
ouveatnxorav, adv. Zenoth.§ 10). But here the word cuvedpevecy
seems to show that the conspirator is on the bench.

8 and, when he is hearing a cause, etc.] The last sentence
described him as arranging with his brother-jurors, before the
trial comes on, that the person in whom he is interested shall
receive favour. The present sentence describes his ordinary
conduct when a case is actually in progress before him, whether
his sympathies are particularly engaged or not.

Q in the worst sense] A certain shallow cynicism—as
shown in his remarks on honesty—is characteristic of the
giArordmpos. It reappears in this trait. Neither of the parties
to ¢#zs cause being so eminently knavish as to enjoy his exclusive
favour, he comforts himself with the conclusion that both are
knaves. The usage of the Athenian law-courts permitted strong
and abundant personalities. The believer in general depravity
takes these conventional asperities ét ro yetpov,—i.e. in the fullest
and worst sense which a literal acceptation can fix upon them.

10 Like moves towards like] Od. XVII. 218, ‘The god ever
draws like to like. Arist. Eth. N. Vill. 1. 6, ‘There are no
slight controversies about (friendship). Some make it a certain
likeness, and friends, those who resemble us; whence the

282 NOTES.

sayings ‘like to like,’ ‘ jackdaw to jackdaw,’ and so forth. Some
on the contrary say that all such persons are potters to each
other’’ (Hes. Off. 25, ‘ Potter spites potter, bard hath grudge to
bard’). An examination of the proverb ‘like to like’—ending in
nothing more definite than the conclusion that pure contrariety
is incompatible with friendship—will be found in Plato’s Lysis,
pp. 214 ff,

CRITICAL APPENDIX.

CRITICAL APPENDIX.

A list (1) of the mss. of the Characters, (2) of the principal Editions
and Commentaries, is given by Foss (Teubner, 1858). In his Preface
he has some remarks on the different classes and ages of the mss. and
on some of the editions, The relation of the mss. to each other is fully
discussed by Petersen in his Introduction.

From a comparison of these authorities, with occasional help from
other sources, the following account has been drawn up. It is given
here because it may be convenient to those who intend to make a
critical study of the Characters to have in a compact form the prin-
cipal facts about the mss. and some notice of the best editions.

The editions of Ast, Foss, Sheppard, Petersen and Ussing are the
only ones which the writer of these notes on the text has had before
him. The varietas scripturae appended to the edition of Foss, and the
apparatus criticus given at the foot of each page by Petersen, supply
the necessary materials for forming a judgment on disputed passages.
Ast, Foss and Ussing give in their commentaries the best conjectures of
previous editors.

I. MANUSCRIPTS.

The extant mss. of the Characters, 36 in all, exhibit three different
recensions or editions, viz.

1. The Vulgate, or that recension which appears in 34 of the 36
mss. Of these 26 contain the first 15 Characters (as they stand in the
traditional order, see p. 75), 4 the first 23, and 4 the first 28. The two
oldest and best are usually called ‘Paris A, B,’ being nos. 3264 and
2751 in the Imperial Library at Paris. These contain the first 15
Characters only. <A is probably of the gth century, B of the roth.
Diibner thinks that both belong to the early part of the roth.

2. A recension found in one ms., formerly in the Palatine Library,
now no. Cx. in the Vatican. This contains the last 15 Characters only,
and is the only ms. which has the 29th and 30th. Also in cc. 15—28
it gives additions which are found in no other ms. It is sometimes
called (as by Foss) ‘ Palatinus,’ sometimes (as by Ussing) ‘ Vaticanus.’
With Petersen I designate it as the Palatino-Vatican (PVat.). Foss
thinks that it was written in the 13th century.

286 CRITICAL APPENDIX.

3. A recension found in one ms., now in the Library at Munich.
This contains the first 21 Characters, and gives them in a shorter form
than any other ms. It is usually called the Munich Epitome. At the
beginning it has an index to all the thirty Characters. It belongs tothe
14th or 15th century.

Characters 29 and 30 (nos. 30 and 26 in our Translation, see p. 75)
were first published from the PVat. in 1786 at Parma by J. C.
duzzi. The additions made to cc. 15—28 by the PVat. were first pub-
lished in 1788 by J. A. Goez, in the Anecdota Graeca of Siebenkees,
which he edited after his friend’s death. For many years afterwards
the students of the Characters were divided into two schools ; those
who denied, and those who allowed, the authenticity of the extra matter
in the PVat.

The principal impugners of the PVat. were Coray, in his edition
published at Paris in 1799; Ast, in his edition, Leipzig, 1816; and
Hottinger, in his German Translation, Munich, 1821. Ast does not even
admit the PVat. additions into his text, but prints them in small type at
the foot of the page ; c. 29 [30] he regards as wholly spurious ; c. 30 [26]
as patched together from fragments of cc. g [15], ro [24], 22 [25.] Buthe
is not consistent ; for in a passage of c. 22 [25] (kal r7 yuvacnl dé... uh wplac-
Oat) and in another of c. 24 [4] (xa Badltwyr év rats ddols rds Slacras xplvew)
he admits part of the PVat. supplement and rejects the rest. The earliest
champions of that ms. were J. G. Schneider, —whose first edition ap-
pare at Jena in 1799, the second at Leipzig in 1818,—and S., N. J.

loch, in his edition published at Leipzig in 1814. But the turning
point in the opinion of scholars on the question was the appearance of
three dissertations published successively at Halle in 1834—6 by H. E.
Foss. In these he defended very forcibly and elaborately the genuine-
ness of the supplements in the PVat. and of its two extra chapters.
Among his earliest converts were E. Meier and F, Diibner; the latter
of whom published his edition at Paris in 1840. Since that time the
PVat. has been generally acknowledged to be the best as well as the
fullest authority for cc. 15—28, and the authenticity of cc. 29, 30 has
been considered as established.

The latest statement of the case for the PVat. ms. is by Dr E. Peter-
sen, in an essay which gained a University prize at Bonn in 1857, and
which he published, slightly altered, in 1859. He agrees with Foss in
the main, but differs from him in a few particulars. A full analysis of his
essay would be out of place here ; but an outline of his argument may be
useful to those who wish to read it. (1) In respect to the supplements in the
PVat. it is argued that there are (a) cases in which they can be proved tobe
genuine by their intimate and necessary coherence with the text of the
Vulgate: pp. 4—17 ; (4) cases, in which, though they cannot be proved
genuine, there are no sufficient grounds for condemning them: pp. -
17—19. (2) The opinion that the Munich Epitome represents the true

CRITICAL APPENDIX. 287

text, and that the other two recensions are paraphrases of it, is examined
and refuted. It is shown that of all possible hypotheses as to the re-
lations of the three recensions to each other the only probable one is
that the PVat. came from the same archetype from which were derived,
but less immediately, the Vulgate on the one hand and the Epitome
on the other:-pp. 19—24. (3) The several families of the mss. which
have the Vulgate text are then examined: pp. 24—55. (4) Lastly the
probable relation between the PVat. and the archetype of the Vulgate
and Epitome is more exactly defined. From the same book which was
the source of the PVat. was made another copy; in which the last
leaf, containing on its inner page a part of c. 30, [26 in our Trans.] had
by accident been shifted to a place next c. 11 [17.] The leaf originally
last but one, and which contained c. 29 [30], was thus left last; and,
being exposed to ill-usage, became illegible, and was left out by tran-
scribers. From this copy was taken (with sundry omissions) the arche-
type of the Vulgate. Hence in the Vulgate cc. 29, 30 do not appear,
but a part of c. 30 is found in c. 11 (see Crit. App. xvI.). And from
this copy came also the Munich Epitome.—The archetype of the PVat.,—
which would thus have been the common ancestor of all otir mss.,—
was fee not much older than the roth century (pp. 55, 6: compare
p- 23).

II. EpIrions AND COMMENTARIES.

1527. Pirckeymher publishes at Nuremberg an edition of the
first 15 Characters—apparently the first after the revival of letters.

1552. J. Baptista Camot, in an edition of Aristotle, publishes
23 of the Characters, along with other writings of Theophrastus.

1598. Isaac Casaubon edits 28 Characters; the 5 new ones from
4 mss. in the Palatine Library at Heidelberg. It was even then known
that the number of the Characters was not complete: for indices to 30
had been found in some mss. But nearly two centuries more elapsed
before the missing chapters were found.

1712, Peter Needham published at Cambridge an edition in which
the novelty was the weight given to the two Paris mss. A, B, in the,
first 1§ chapters ; but he did not follow them consistently.

1737. J.C.de Pauw publishes an edition with some good con-
jectures, for which he is often quoted.

1739. J.C. Schwartz follows Needham chiefly, but alters and
conjectures audaciously.

1767. J. F. Fischer bases his edition, like the other editors, on

the majority of inferior mss., forsaking the two Paris mss. of which
Needham had recognised the importance, .

288 CRITICAL APPENDIX.

? J.J. Reiske’s Animadversiones in Auctores Graecos (1. pp. 96
——105) contain some good critical notes on the Characters.

1786. J. C. Amaduzzi publishes at Parma the two long-missing
Characters, 29 and 30, from a ms. formerly in the Palatine, now no. cx.
in the Vatican library. It had already been reported by Petronius that
this same ms. contained cc. 15—28 in a fuller form: and in

1788. J. P. Siebenkees copies these out for insertion in his Anec-
dota Graeca, collected in Italian libraries. He dies before publishing
the book, and it is edited by J. A. Goez.

1789. Coray’s edition appears at Paris. He maintains strongly
that the supplements discovered in the Palatine ms. are spurious. His
notes and (in some cases) his conjectures are good.

1799. J. G. Schneider, in his first edition published at Jena, adopts
and defends the Palatine supplements. His edition is one of the most
important, and is constantly referred to by later editors. It was re-
issued at Leipzig in 1818—21.

1814. S. N. J. Bloch publishes an edition at Leipzig, in which he
follows Schneider in maintaining the authenticity of the Palatine sup-
plements.

1816. F. Ast publishes at Leipzig an edition in which he re-asserts
the view of Coray that the extra matter in the PVat., including c. 29,
is spurious: c. 30 he regards as a patchwork from other chapters.

1821. J. J. Hottinger publishes at Munich a German Transla-

tion, in which he takes nearly the same view.

Chr. Wurm publishes in the Munich Journal of Philology the first
21 Characters, in a shorter form than that of the Vulgate, as he had
found them in ams. at Munich (the Epitome). F. Thiersch maintains
the view that this epitome gives the proem, and at least the first five
chapters, in their genuine form, the Vulgate having been amplified by
interpolation.

1830—18s0. E. Meier brings out at intervals five critical essays on
the Characters. While writing these, he adopted the view of Foss
respecting the Palutine ms.

1834—6. H. E. Foss, in three dissertations published in three
successive years at Halle, maintains (1) that the Munich text is not

complete, but a mere epitome: (2) that all the Palatine supplements are
genuine.

1840. F. Diibner, in his edition published at Paris, takes the
same view.

1852. J. G. Sheppard publishes in London an edition in which
he recurs to the theory that the PVat. additions are spurious. He adopts,

CRITICAL APPENDIX. 289
but modifies, the text of Ast. This Commentary is interesting for its

' illustrations from modern literature.

1857. H. J. A. Hartung’s edition appears at Leipzig. He adopts
the Palatine supplements.

1858 H. E. Foss publishes in Teubner’s series an edition of the text
of the Characters, with the ‘Varietas Scripturae’ appended. In this he
used a collation of the PVat. ms. made in 1843 by C. Badham. ;

1859. E. Petersen’s essay on the mss. of the Characters and on the
history of the book appears at Leipzig. He gives also the text of the
Characters, with a collation of several mss. at the foot of each page;
and also prints the Munich epitome of the first 21 chapters. It is
altogether a most valuable book.

1868. J. L. Ussing publishes a volume containing the Characters
of Theophrastus, the roth book of Philodemus wep? xaxcwy, and (in an
appendix) two short extracts from Rutilius Lupus and from the Rheto-
rica ad Herennium. The chief value of the book consists in the ex-
cellent though somewhat scanty commentary. In dealing with the
text he is usually cautious, but now and then makes emendations which
show more ingenuity than instinct for the language.

@GEO@PASTOY XAPAKTHPES.] The mss. call the book
simply xapaxrypes. Diogenes V. 47 cites it as #O@cxol xapaxrijpes, and
from him some modern editors have adopted the adjective.

1. wpoolpiov.] Needham, Pauw and Coray give the heading as
wpoolsov: Goez, Schneider and others as Geddpacros Io\uxde?. Most
mss., acc. to Ast, have no heading at all.

2. wojoopa Tov Aédyov dro tov tiv elp. cEnrAwKxérov.] The
two Paris mss., and another of less authority, omit the words roy Aoyor
axdé. Hence Foss reads on his own conjecture roijoopa: pvelav.

3. Kabiordvar.] Vulg. caracrijcas xadiordvac, restored by Foss
from Paris A and B, is adopted by Petersen and Ussing.

I.

rT, Kal dwatvdoo: 5% dKxovovros.] Foss transposes this clause,
placing it after dpdvros avrof below. But it is in keeping with the
character of the Flatterer that, though he has desired the others to
be silent, he himself praises the speaker in loud whispers. Ussing
brackets the words as spurious.

a. eiwaverar.] Vulg. ef ratcera. But el with the fut. indic. is
out of place here: it would mean ‘if (as is the case) he is destined to
stop.’ Foss’s érayv wavonra, which Ussing adopts, is too far from the
mss. Ast reads ef waverat, and suggests 7» watoyrat, The former

19

290 CRITICAL APPENDIX.

seems best. When his patron—who perhaps is not a fluent speaker
—pauses and is at loss for a word, the Flatterer encourages him.
éway wavonrat, which supposes him to say ‘dép@ws’ once for all at the
end of the speech, is not only a rash conjecture, but appears to give a
less pointed meaning.

3. Kal ovvovoupevos 82 xpymidfas.] Vulg. cal ocuvwvotpevos éxi
kpnwiéas, z.¢e. ‘going with him to the slipper-market to buy:’ but to
supply the idea of motion from guvywyovpevos is very harsh. Petersen
alters éri to rt, and transposes it to a place between elvac and et-
pv0ubrepov—greatly to the enfeebling of the latter word. The correction
(an old one) of éwl to 5¢é appears the best at present.

4. wapaxelnevos.] So Ast and Foss with a good ms. The others
mostly have rapapévwr, evidently a corruption, perhaps from mapa(xe)
pevos. Ussing, with Gronovius, 7@ rapaxeipévy.

. 5 parakds toGles.] Ast, oF paraxds éoOles, ‘you are un-
comfortably placed at table.’ Casaubon conj. ws wadaxds éoregs. Foss
ws paraxds [Exwy] éoPles. But the context shows that the Flatterer is
praising the fare. His words imply that the host is accustomed to
delicate living. With Casaubon’s ingenious éorigs an adverb such
as Aaprpws would have been more appropriate than wadaxds.

6. wal tr. ratra Adywv weproreitAar atrév.] The words raira
Aéywv had got out of their place, a copyist having written them after
xal zh. Reiske, followed by Ast, Foss, and Ussing, has restored them
to their right place. Petersen leaves them in the wrong one, after xat
piv, and alters weptore?Aac to meptore(dat, understanding apparently:
‘he asks whether he shall wrap him up:’ in which sense el wepeoreidas is
not Greek.

. mdvra—ols.] Vulg. wdvyra—¢: corrected by Ast. There can
be little doubt that @ was a slip of the pen. If it were to be kept, I
should like to read ray rt for ravra. Ussing reads on his own con]. el.

II.

1. dphorépats rats xepot pr ddrévar.] Schneider thought that
AaBosy or éemtAaBouevos had dropped out after xepol, and Foss inserts
AaBduevos in brackets. This seems unnecessary: bh-ddrévac = Exwv dia-
TENE.

2. trv érawev.] So most mss. Foss and Petersen ére alvaw, with
Par. A, B, and others. Orelli’s conjecture ére émiwetwy has been
adopted by Diibner, Hartung, and Ussing: rashly, I think.

3. KablorarGar.] So Foss, Petersen, Ussing with Par. A, B,
etc. Vulg. xa@foat, and so Ast: which I should prefer, did not the word
xa0laracOat appear to be used with something of an ironical tone: ‘he
manages to establish them beside him.’ The middle voice helps the
irony.

CRITICAL APPENDIX. 291

IIT.

1. ovK vy yevouro SiSopévwv.] Vulg. ovx dv yévorro diddueva: and
so Foss and Ussing, —the latter thinking it corrupt. Meier attempted
to render the vulgate :—‘They are not likely to prove presents?’ 7.4, ‘I
shall be expected to pay for them by a return-present :’ a very strained
version, which would, besides, require dedouéva. Reiske, whom Schnei-
der follows, conjectured od« dv yevorro Sedouévwy: but I prefer Ast’s ov«
dv yevoro SiSopevwv, because d:déueva, things offered, 1s more appro-
priate here than dedouéva, things giver. Petersen conj. ovx dv déxor70
d:éoueva (not, as Ussing reports him, dedouéva).

2. ovre Te xpecavTs airdv...ovre tw doavTt otre TH EvBdvri.]
Mss. ovre 7G dwucavre alrov...oure TP Soars ovre TH EuBdvrt. Schnei-
der and Petersen correct dwéoavrt to woayrt, and put the second wearre
in brackets; believing that, when érwoayvre had been written by mistake,
cayrt was written in the margin as a correction, and thence found an
independent place in the text. Ussing adopts this view. To me it
seems more probable that dwdcayrt is a corruption of something else
than merely woayrt. A list of several petty annoyances which the Surly
man cannot pardon seems almost necessary to the spirit of the passage.
Petersen's purwdcarr: is a little too strong, and though pumdw (intr.) is
common, the transitive jurdw is a very rare word. Ast’s xpécarte
seems precisely what is wanted.

IV.

I. pepviocOa ddoxav’ cal Badllwv iv rats dSois rds Sialras
kplvev rots dmirpéhpacr.] Vulg. peurijicbac pdoxew év rais ddots Kai
Pidgew ras dtalras xplvew ev rots éwirpéyact. The PVat. places the
words xal Bidtew before év rats ddots. For Bidgfew Schweighaiiser (and
Sheppard independently) conj. Badigfw»: which, as the best available
correction, I have taken, omitting év before ots éwirpéyace with
Schneider, Foss and Ussing. Foss xal ppdfecy (for Biafew) év rats ddots,
ras divalras xpwetv (for xpivew), rots éwerpéyaot. Ussing on his own
conj. xal Umridferw ras dtairas xplvew rots éwirpéyact, ‘haughtily
declines (superbe abnuere) to decide cases’ &c : omitting the words é»
rais é8ocs as corrupt: Petersen suspects them also. Ast peuvnoPa
gpdtev (for @dcxew) cal rds Scalras xplvew ev rais ddols’ rejecting
év rots émirpépact altogether.

2. ptoBoupévovs.] So Foss and Ast with most mss.: pemoOwpeé-
yous, Hottinger, Sheppard, Ussing, Petersen. Ast’s objection to peps-
cOwpévous, that it could only mean mercede conductos, whom therefore
the hirer has a right to summon at an early hour, is not convincing,
since it is conceivable that peuloOwya, like yéypaypat, etc., may have
been used as a Perfect Middle, and that of pepioPwudvo: rt may have
meant gui aliquid conduxerunt. But the present prcGoupévous is better
as denoting that the bargain is still in progress.
| 19—2

292 CRITICAL APPENDIX.

3. pr) Aadetv rots dvrvyydvover, xdre kexuvpos, Srav 8% avre Sdky,
dye rdw. ] So Foss and Ussing. Vulg. bray 32 adr doty don
(and so Shepp.). PVat. Sray dé adrg ddfy, dvw wddww’ xal éoriay x.7.d.
There can be no doubt that the words dyw wddw in the PVat., if not
sound, at least represent something which stood between 8é6éy and xal
éoriwy, and contrasted the conduct of the drepidaves in not speaking to
those he met with some other feature of his conduct. I once con-
jectured for dyw rdw, dvaxadetv: ‘When he walks in the streets he
will not speak to those he meets, keeping his head bent down; or,
when so it pleases him, w#// call them back.’

4- Swoetv.] So the mss.: Ussing, Sheppard, Ast. Ast conj.
Safety. Foss reads d:a@eivar, which he speaks of as a ‘conjecture,’
but without naming Sheppard, to whom it is due.

5. Anopévovs.] So Foss, Ussing. Sheppard Anpdsueros with
the mss. Ast Anydpevor.

V.

Almost every editor has taken a different view of the order in which
the clauses between Aadeiy ob pucely and dxovcas Tt mh wpoowosicbat
should be arranged. Foss has been the boldest in transposing ; Ussing
has adhered most nearly to the mss. I have observed absolutely the
order of the sentences in the mss. In writings of this kind, where
every sentence has an independent point and is not necessarily in direct
connexion either with what precedes or with what follows, that order
of the clauses which is found in the manuscripts ought not, surely, to
be disturbed without strong reason. In the present case the arrange-
ment which has authority seems at least as good as any which has
been effected by conjectural changes.

1. Aadeiv, ov puoeiv.] Ast, with one ms., directv, ov pecety. But
AaXety is both more probable and more graphic. Ussing encloses ov
pucety in brackets. Hartung proposes ws ob pucwr.

2. mpos rovs dbixoupévouvs.] Ussing ingeniously (but unneces-
sarily) conjectures mpds rods Gdiux[a ipyjounévous, ‘to those who think
that the things said against him are unjust.’ Foss, who transposes the
clause to a place after cuv\Aumeiobat Frrwuévos, reads wpes aurovs dd-
Koupévous—z, ¢. ols érébero \dOpa.

3. Kal Adyew éaurdv érépov axnxofvar.] Petersen’s conjecture,
adopted by Ussing with the change of Aéyew into Aéyee ydp. It is the
best correction which has been made of a hopeless passage. The mss.
give Aéyet éavrov Erepov yeyovéva:, which Casaubon vainly tried to
explain, ‘He says that he has become another person:’ i.¢. has been
mistaken for another, whose words or actions have been imputed to
him. ‘Vous me prenez pour un autre.’ Clearly this will not do: but
Foss adopts it, with Aéyes for Aéyew. Ast cal Aédyew, adrdy Erepoy

CRITICAL APPENDIX. 293

yeyovévac: She will say ‘To think that he (the person from whom his
friend has heard the story) should have changed so completely!’,—#.¢
‘to think that the man who told you this story should have told me
a story so different.’ This is worse than the vulgate itself. I once
conjectured cal Aéyes adrd (for daurdv) Erepov yeyovevat,’ ‘You describe
the occurrence as having been of a different sort;’? which agrees well
with what immediately follows,—‘This, however, was not the story
that he told me.’ But, for this sense, we should have expected érépg
rather than érepov : and I now prefer Petersen’s emendation.

4. edpev tor. tov efpwvos.] The two best mss (Paris A, B)
have edpeiy Exrw ov xelpov bv. Vulg., od xetpow Eorw evpeiv oddév—
probably a conjecture adapted to the old barbarous interpretation which
made the accusatives wAoxds xal wadtAdoylas (really governed by evpeiy)
depend on morevers. Foss evpeiy torw, ob xetpov ovdév, This would
do, if it were possible that evpety frre could stand alone for evpety tori
év r@ elpwx. There is great probability in Ussing’s conjecture that
EZTINOTXEIPONON is an old corruption of EZTITOTEIPQNOZ.

VI.

1. aspoowrolnors.] So Foss and Ussing,—Foss assigning the emen-
dation to Auber (ed. 1582) and Reiske;- Ast, to Schneider. Ast him-
self keeps the vulg. rpogdoxia: but believes that the text originally had
wpoowolnors dyabuv ovx Svrwy mpds ddgav (‘with a view to reputation’),
and that wpocdoxia arose from these words having been omitted and
then written in the margin. I doubt if a Greek writer could have said
age tated in this sense: he would have said rather évexa 8d&ns or
emi 3bé7.

2. We Selypare] Vulg. & 76 dtagedypart: explained by Coray
as the isthmus joining the Peiraeus to the mainland; by Ussing, as a
mole dividing the two parts of its great basin (the Kantharus and the
Emporium). Casaubon conj. delynart, which Ast adopts. The topo-
graphy of the Peiraeus is well known from ancient writers; but nowhere
is Td didfevywa mentioned, whereas 7d de?yya exactly suits the context.
This, however, would not in itself be a sufficient reason for adopting
the emendation, were it not intrinsically probable.

3. ‘AdeEdvSpov.] The mss. have Evdydpou, corrected by Auber to
*AXetdvdpov. He has been followed by Casaubon and by all subse-
uent editors except Goez and Sheppard. The latter thinks, with
oray, that Evander may have been some general of Alexander of
whom we know nothing. But the fact that we know nothing of
him is in itself the best argument against the reading. The names of
Alexander’s generals, the names of all who were prominent during his
period, are known from the detailed narratives of Plutarch, Arrian
and Quintus Curtius. Nowhere is an Evander named to whom this allu-

294 CRITICAL APPENDIX.

sion could refer. It is difficult to suppose that there can have been a
military leader so universally known that a braggart, incapable of
selection and attracted only by the largest names, should boast to a
chance companion of acquaintance with him; and of whom not a word
is said in the full histories of the time which have come down to us.
That the age of Alexander is referred to is shown, of course, by the
allusion to Antipater.

4. Kal ws aire dye] Schneider thought that some such adverb
as didtxws was wanted, and Ussing that a’r@ ought to be wpds aurév.
But cf. Xen. Cyr. vil. 5. 58, évowy Sri...mapacKkeud{oro olxely &
wore TH pmeylory rev pavepay, alrn 5¢ od rws Exot avrg ws Torepw-
tdrn dv yévowro, ‘was so disposed to him that it was likely to become
most hostile.’

5. tpitra S1.] PVat.: Foss, Ussing.—In the collation of the
PVat. by Siebenkees tpcr7d 84 was wrongly reported as rplrov 45m,
whence Ast’s conjecture 7d rplrov 75n, adopted in his own text and
in Sheppard’s.

6. wepartépw cis hltos aly mrety | mpoorjxe MaxeSéor.] Vulg.
wepairépw girocogety wpoajxe Maxeddct, which it has been attempted
to explain ‘the Macedonians ought to have been more thoughtful’ (i.e.
‘than to offer mea privilege which would make me unpopular at
Athens’), Schneider was for changing Maxeddor to Maxedovwy», ‘ultra
quam Macedones sapere decebat.’ ‘The sense thus extracted (or rather
extorted) from giAocodely is, I think, impossible. Ussing’s correction
of dirocogety to Pidos dy awdelv appears to me not only very brilliant but
almost certain. The ws which is then wanted before ¢iAos might easily
have dropped out after the final w of weparrépw. The omission of 7
before wrpooyxes would have been a natural result of the corruption of
plros dv wrelv to prrocogelv. mpoojxe: for mpoojxe is Ussing’s.

7. €axoolas.] The vulg. éfaxoclous was the mistake of a copyist
who was puzzled by the ordinary omission of dpaxuds, and refered” the
numeral to rots drépots TWH rodiTwP.

8. ampocedNOay St rovs trrirous Trovs dyalovs rots rwdotor.] Vulg.
mpocehOwy 8 els rovs trmaus rods dya0ods mwAofor: the PVat. inserts rots
before mwdotor. I cannot persuade myself that mpooeNOav els rods
trmous is Greek; and have little doubt that the preposition was in-
serted by a scribe who did not see that mpoce\Owy was to be taken
with the dat. rots wwAoor which governs rovs trmovs rods d-yadols.
Soc. Iv. (vulg. XXIV.) mpoceNOety odderl, c. XVII. (vulg. XI.), hrrqpéry
mpogedOety, etc. This is Sheppard’s view, who, however, puts tots
before rovs trmous. It seems unnecessary to move it from its place in
the PVat. ms,

CRITICAL APPENDIX. 295

VII.
1. Kal wraordas 5% droxelpacGar.] The passage which follows

here, down to the words rovrou écriv 4) wadalorpa, stands in the mss,
at the end of c. II. (vulg. ci v.) wept dpecxeias. That it is foreign
to the character of the dpesxos has been allowed by almost all com-
mentators since Casaubon except Coray and Ussing. (Petersen, in
printing it with the chapter mepi dpecx., is merely performing his edi-
torial duty to the mss., and does not enter upon the further question.)
It must suffice here to point out the broad distinction between the
dpecxos and the pexpogtAorywos, on which depends the unsuitableness of
this passage to the former. Both are vain; but the dpeoxos desires to
be popular for his qualities; the pexpogiAdripos, to be admired for his
advantages. Among those who agree in rejecting the passage from
the chapter wepl dpeoxelas two views prevail. Casaubon, followed by
Schneider and others, supposes it to be a fragment of a chapter.
wept Bavauslas or dameipoxadlas, ‘Of Vulgarity.’ Ast, Foss and others
assign it to this chapter wept puxpogtAoriwlas,—Ast adding it at the end
after evnuepe?,— Foss introducing it after AlOlop fora, I agree with
Foss, except that I do not separate the clause xal diodidolbs pay
dpyuplov, x.7.d., from that in which the Aethiopian slave is mentioned,
and with which it is, I think, closely connected in sense.

2. flvors St rcordApara els Bufdvriov dApddas.] Vulg. tdvors de
els Bufdvriov émordduwara. “As Ast perceived, a word has fallen out
here, denoting that special thing which was‘sent to Byzantium, as the
dogs to Cyzicus and the honey to Rhodes. He himself guessed méu-
para, ‘sweetmeats.’ Another conjecture made by Foss appears so
good that I have adopted it in the absence of anything certain. dA-
pades, pickled olives, were among the regular Athenian exports, and
d\uddas might easily have fallen out if émiordApara had been written
by mistake after Bugdvriov. Foss himself discards émiordApara, reading
els Bugdivriov drooréAXerw aGruddas. But éxicradya is a perfectly
good word in the sense of éreoradpévov Tt, 2.¢. @ commission given by
the person abroad to his friend at Athens; and is supported by the
contrast’ with dyopdtey air@ wey undév. He buys, not for himself, but
on commission for others. éwioréAXeww would mean ‘sends as presents ;’
and the contrast would then be less clear. Ussing, on his own con-
jecture, gévoes 8é els Bugavriov émeoxdd\wara, (a word which does not
occur) ‘leathers for rowlocks.’

3. wadatorptatoy.] So Foss, Petersen, Ussing, with the best mss.
Others radaorpexov: Ast radacorpexipy.

4. tracévar Grrl rq eiweivy rov Erepov Tév Oeaptvov mpds tov
cis ig AL In the mss. there is a lacuna. Vulg. elwety érl ray Oewudvwr
apos Erepov: the two best mss. (Paris A, B) having Erecow for elwety,

296 CRITICAL APPENDIX,

and wpds rdy Erepov for pcs Erepov. Both Sreow (%.¢. éwecocéva:) and
elrety are prob. right. The first ro» Erepovy was omitted by a copyist
who saw that the words were coming after rwéyv Qewuévwy, and did not
see that they were wanted twice. Foss’s restoration seems almost
certain. Ussing gives Ucrepov trevow émi'r@ elweiy tiwa (for Tov Erepor)
Tur Oewpnevuy : ee érecow is against the uniform structure of all thes
Characters, which are strings of infinitives: and rivd mwpos roy Erepov 5
awkward.

5. K«AdS0g Medcratos.] So Sheppard and Foss, with the ms
Toup’s conjecture xadés Medcraios has been adopted by Ast (writing
6 xadds), Petersen and Ussing. If the pexpodedériuos had inscribed upon
his dog’s grave ‘The Beautiful Melitean,’ he would have been can-
caturing the well-known formula of disconsolate lovers: e¢. g. Luc.
Amor. 16 (where the beloved object is Aphrodite herself) ‘ Every wall
was scored, every tree with soft bark proclaimed ‘Aphrodite the
Beautiful.’’ This would have been a joke quite foreign to the spirit
of the pompous juxpogiAdrtyos. The two instances of xadds in epitaphs
quoted from Iamblichus (in Photius pp. 246,7) only show that this use
of it was rare.

6. tre’ Ackdynrot.] The mss..év rp@’Aox\nm@. Ast rQ’Aoxdy-
aig. Foss, Ussing, Sheppard, & 7g ’Aoxdxreely.

7. ordavev kal drelpov.] Vulg. crepavoivra drelperGar: PVat.
vrepavouvra adelpew. The corruption of the passage probably lies
beyond any remedy which can now be applied to it. Ast reads erega-
yoy kal adeigwy, referring rotroy to Asclepius: but clearly it refers to
daxrvdos, Foss’s ortArvev (‘burnishing’) for orepavdy is the best
attempt at emendation which has been made. ovritArvds ‘glistering’ is
common enough, and the verb has the authority of Epictetus in the
ist century. Ussing suggests rovrov éxrplBev oujyware (unguent) xal
arelpew.

8. evopnev of mrpurdvas ry pyrpl rév Ccov ra tepd dia Kal
kadd.] Vulg. 20. ol mpur. rd lepad ry uw. Tév 6. dita Kal Kadd. PVat.
€0. ol wmpur. ra lepd rH uw. TwWY Dewy Ta yap aia Kal rd lepd add. Us-
sing gives, I think, the true account of confusion in the PVat. First ra
ydp was written for rd lepd: then rd lepd was added in the margin,
and thence crept in wrongly before 77 wyrpl and again before xadd.
Foss, emending the PVat., reads €0. of rpur. TH mw. Tv Oewy Kal vpeis
céxecde Ta ayadd: ra yap opdya (for diva) xal rd lepd xadd,

VIil.

1. apga.] Meier conjectures ‘Epuata, which Foss adopts.

2. alpety.] Vulg. alpefoGa: which Ast renders ‘bovem cafessere,
bovi manum inicere;’ and in this sense the commentators generally

CRITICAL APPENDIX. 207

$eem to acquiesce. But though in the /éad (16. 140) we have &yxos
elero, ‘he took (his own) spear,’ &c., it is improbable that in Attic
prose alpeia@ac could mean ‘to seize.’ The word, and perhaps the pas-
sage, is corrupt. Inthe mean time, to make, at least, sense, I write
alpety. .

- dy Sexdras cuvdyeay rods ped” avrof cuvavArcovras.] The
PVat. which alone has this clause, gives cal vdexa Aerais cuvarye Tovs
per’ avrod cuvaviovras, which is nonsense. Ast conjectures xal év dexd-
Tas cuvdyew rods wer’ avrov doovras: Foss xal év dexdras ody avdnrais
ouvdyew rovs per’ avrot cuvdéovras. I have taken Ast’s éy dexadrats, and
for cuwvavtovras written cuvavAjoorvras. The v in cuvaviovras preserves
a trace of this. If A had been left out by accident, H would speedily
have been corrupted to &.

4. wailev.] Mss. wévew: Schneider walfev, and so most editors.
Ast proposes xal uaxpor dvipiavra walew (so Pauw), xal wpos rov éavrot
dxdrouBov diarogevecOa, «.7.d.: Coray méfew: see Notes.

5. «e\eveav.] The insertion of this word, which is not in the mss.,
but which (or something like it) the sense demands, was proposed by
Reiske. Schneider introduced it in his rst ed. only to eject it in his 2nd.
It is now adopted by Foss, Petersen and Ussing.

6. ov wAnotov.] «xAnoloy is wanting in the PVat., which has,
however, a lacuna after dot. Foss, followed by Ussing, inserts it on
conjecture. Ast proposed fwo« for dor, Schneider wapGo., Foss for-
merly fSwo, =

1. avrév.] So Vulg.: Foss, Petersen, Ussing airéy, But the
usual phrase was dvaddéyoual rem: Polyb. v. 16. 8 seems to be the only
example of dvadéxoual riva in this sense: and I have no doubt that auvroy
(referring to 6 Thy Slknv woAnKds) is right. Then, however, we must
write wP¢rnxéri, not dpAnxéra, for rporedOdy could not in prose be fol-
lowed by an acc. of the person: it has the dat. in cc. Iv. (vulg. XXIV.)
XVII, (XI.) and (prob.) v1. (xxi) The same correction was pro-
posed by Pauw in his ed. of 1737. Ast cuts the knot by omitting
auréy altogether.

2. réKov.] Vulg. réuov: but one of the best mss. has réxov, and,
since Ast, this has been universally adopted. To request ‘a slice’ at a
season of feasting might be dvaloxuvroyv, but would not be Axatpov.

3. érépov.] Vulg. éralpouv: Foss érépov, with several mss., includ-
ing Paris A, B, and so Petersen and Ussing.

X.

1. dvords.] Mss. & ru ards. Ast supposes this to be a corruption
of dvacrds, which he omits after eXéyxeoOat, and puts here. He thinks

298 CRITICAL APPENDIX.

that an annotator wrote in the margin, as a note upon avyaords,—tv tun
ords: ‘in one manuscript there is ords:’ but this is more ingenious
than probable. When anything beside the variant itself was added, it
was usually yp. (ypdderac:) no copyist could have written & rev in that
sense. Foss reads, on his own bold conjecture, ouvrdtxjoas. Reiske’s
évords is the best correction that has been suggested.

2. k«alovs.] Ast arbitrarily omits xal,

3. €3 worloa.] Mss. evrperloa, ‘to arrange:’ which Ast ex:
plains ‘in lecto iacentem attollit et sa componit (hoc est enim evrpert-
gat, ig. werewplCew ap. Hippocratem) ut commode bibere possit.’ But
this is to make the word mean too much. No one could see that a
breach of the doctor’s order against giving the patient wine was hidden
in evrpericat, Foss’s emendation, eé woricat, is very brilliant, and, I
think, almost certain. Ussing hesitates to take it, and suggests avap-
purloat, ‘febris ardorem in aegroto excitare;’ which few will prefer.

XI.

I. wavotpyov.] PVat (which alone has this clause) xa wravoup-
stv rod wdarmov xadetv. Various corrections of ravoupy:mv have been
tried: Foss’s mwavoupyloy (‘little rascal’) is the least unsatisfactory and
improbable. Schneider wavoupyérepov: Petersen clumsily wavoupyar
awhedrepov. Ast suggested wav Epyov rov mdmrmov, ‘das ganze Wesen
des Grosspapas.’ He and Ussing take wdaov to be the genitive of
mwamwwos. But surely it is the gen. of rdrmas.

2. qola ris ypépa;] Vulg. elré uduun, ws mole nudpa me erixres;
PVat. elré payun, or Gdwes xai Ercxrés pe, tls Nuépa; From a combi-
nation of these Foss reads rola ris nuépa; and so Petersen (but adding
qv unnecessarily.)—[Here there follows in the PVat. a hopelessly corrupt
clause, about which only one thing is clear, that the a@ndia consists in
the coarseness; and which I have not translated:—xal vrép aris de
Aéyev ws HOU éori, kal aupdrepa dé ov« Exovra ov pddiov AvOpwirov NaBeiv:
et pro matre respondere dulcem esse rem (Sc. TO watdoroaety) 5 neque vero
facile hominem invenire qui alterum (ro 746d) sine altero (1d dumper)
habeat: 2. e. 4 wadorootca nberat, TavTny dvayKkn xal rikrovaay wolveuy.
Ast, Foss, Petersen, Ussing have all exercised their ingenuity on the
sentence. But none of them has got out a more intelligible sense than
that which the reading of the ms. itself gives. ]

3. Kal Aéyev Sri Wuxpdv VSwp, «.r.A.] The passage from here to
the end is very corrupt. Ast transfers it to the end of c. vi. (XxIII.)
wepl ddafovelas. But there is no reason to doubt that it belongs to the
andys. The ddragwy boasts of great things; the dyd%4s, boasting of his
cool cistern and his kitchen-garden, does not rise to the magnificence of
the dAagwy. This is mentioned merely as one of the particular traits in
which is seen his general characteristic—Illbreeding.

CRITICAL APPENDIX. 299

4. Adxava wodAd EXwv kal drahd.] Here the PVat. (alone) adds
Gore elvac Yuxpdy: whence Foss conjectures wore [aei row olvov] elvac
yuxpdv. Ussing leaves a lacuna, but thinks that we should read xfzos
day. x. wm. xal a. xpelrrwy éorly  pdyepos, «.7r.A. To me there
seems no doubt that the words dere elvac puxpdv were a gloss upon Aak-
Katov,

5. peor ydp del] Mss. neorh ydp éore: Foss, Diibner and Har-
tung peorhy yap ael. The sense seems to require def: but there is no
reason for changing peorn to weor7y.

6. Kal Eevlleov 88 Setfar. ] Foss needlessly transposes the words
tevliwy dé to a place before dre 7 olxia avrov, and inserts as after
them.

7. kal wapakaddy 8 érl rod wornplov elrety Sri 73 tépifov Tovs
mapévras tjaperkevacrat, K. .. A.J] Vulg. cal wapaxarety de éml rob
wornplou drt Tépyov rovs wapovras: omitting all that follows, which is
only inthe PVat.ms. Ast understood this: ‘ He will exhort (the parasite)
with the words ‘Amuse the company.’’ But the Sre before the zmpera-
tive is questionable in classical Greek : and ro répyor, the reading of the
best ms., is no doubt right.

XII.

I. avrd. ] Vulg. &xew yap xal rav warépa kal Tov wdrrov: PVat.
Exeuw yap avrov xal rov warépa xal rov wamrmoy. Diibner altered avrov
to atrov: Meier, whom Foss follows, to ard. Petersen, keeping auTor,
makes the strange mistake of translating it as if it were avrds.

2. avrov.}] PVat. (which alone has this clause) avrdy 7d -yévos.
Foss, Petersen and Ussing follow Siebenkees in inserting els before 7d
yévos: Foss alters aurov to aur@, Ussing to daurdy (reading els re yévos) :
I prefer atrov.

3- xpdpevos xpleorbar.] For these two words the vulgate has
simply xpijoGar: the PVat. xpupevos opugerda (‘to throb.’) A great
many corrections of o@vsecbat have been proposed, but none is pro-
bable: Ast pdrvger@a: (‘to boil over’), Petersen b¢ec8a:, Coray omroyyl-
geo8ar, Schweighiuser (after Visconti) oplyyeoGat, (‘ vestimento se con-
Sstringere,’) Foss s¢a:plfev. One of the good mss. has xpleo@ae (which
was another conjecture of Coray’s). This makes good sense, and may
have been corrupted through its likeness to xpwyevos.

XIII.

1, tore 88 yf dvawOyola.] Vulg. for: 52 Kal 4 dvaccOnola, Ast
follows Needham in omitting xaf on the authority of several mss.

2. AaBdvr.] 71, which is wanting in the mss., was first supplied

300 CRITICAL APPENDIX.

by Gesner, whom Foss, Ussing and most other recent editors follow.
Petersen supplies dpyvptov.

kal rad waSla éavrov...éuBdAXev.] Foss transfers this clause
to the Character of the éy:paéns, c. VIII. (XXVII.) But it is appropriate
to the avala@nros, as a mark of stupid inadvertence: see Notes.

4. 480 ye rav dorpov Ser, Sre 1 of ddAAor Adyouo: tijs yijs.] The
corruption in this passage is utterly desperate. Vulg. q5u ye rw dorpuy
voulfer Ore Sh xal ol AAXoe Aéyouor rlooyns.. I have followed Ast in taking
Coray’s 8xee for voulfer, and Schneider's rs ys for rloons. Ast thinks
that the words 87¢ 5h xat of dANoe Aéyoust Tis ys were added by a com-
mentator who wished to explain the point of the dvasc@nola: he says
‘ How sweet is the smell from the stars’ [decause, of course, other
say, ‘from the earth.’| But it is more probable that 87¢ should be 6re.
Foss fills out the sentences thus :—7duU ye rev dorpwy [7rd pias’ harvopé-
vow 5é ru dorpwy,] 6 re 5h Kal of Edrot Adyouct, wloons [peddyrepow elvat
76 oxéros.] This is to rewrite Theophrastus: nor could 6 re 34 xal ol
Aéyovot mean ‘ whatever other people may say.’—Every interpretation
which has been proposed requires the omission of xai before of d\\o.

5. Kard rds lepds awidas.] All the modern editors, except Us-
sing, have adopted the emendation of Meurse, "Hplas for lepds, ‘the
Gate of Tombs’ (4pla). This is, I think, rash. For (1) the mss. agree
on lepds: and we know that there was a gate at Athens called the
Sacred: Plut. Sud/ac. 14. (2) "Hpla: (for which Sylburg, acc. to Ast,
suggested "Hpraiat) is a strange adjective. The Etym. Magn. has,
indeed,—’Hpia, ‘A gate at Athens, so called because the dead were
carried out at it to the tombs (jpia).’? But this looks like guesswork;
nor is there any mention elsewhere of an Erian Gate. Dr. Smith, in
his excellent article A¢henae in the Dict. of Geogr., places it con-
jecturally on the north of the city, ‘since the burial-place of Athens
was in the outer Cerameicus.’ But this was a cemetery for those
only who received pudlic burial (Ar. Aves 395), and besides would be
approached more conveniently from the N. W., where stood the Dipy-
lum, and probably the Sacred Gate. Bekker states (possibly on the
authority of Pollux 1x. 1§) that the space outside the walls between
the Peiraic Gate on the s.w. of Athens and the Itonian Gate to the
E. of it was a public burial-ground for the poor, for metoeci and for
foreigners ; and in this space places the Erian Gate,—where Dr Smith,
on better grounds, places the Melitean. But Bekker gives no proofs,
(Charicles exc. to sc. 1X.).

XIV.
1. Kal dpvrrav St dua rots trrofuylos euBadety: kal xdavros

tHv Oipav vraxovcoa. avtds.] The two Paris mss. and one other
omit the words kal xéyavros, and have no point after éuBadetv. The

other mss. have ¢uBarely riv Bupa’ Kai Kbpavros Thy Ovpay vmaKovca

CRITICAL, APPENDIX. 301

avgés. Ast follows Casaubon in altering the first thy @vpay» into rdv
xéprov. I agree with Foss, Petersen and Ussing in thinking that it can
be understood. The confusion in the mss. probably arose thus. First
the words xal xéyayros dropped out. Then, as euSadXrcw rv OUpay was
a common phrase, it was assumed that riv @Upay belonged to éuBareiv.
When xai xéwavros were replaced, they were accordingly inserted after,
instead of before, 7)» @vpay: and the latter words were repeated by a
transcriber who saw that xédyavyros required them, but did not see
that they had merely to be transposed from the preceding clause.

a. Alav Akyow Acvpdv clvar.] Vulg. Ala» wey Aumpoy elvas (three
mss. Auwnpéy). There is some doubt about the uéy, which, Diibner
says, looks in Paris A more like yevdy. Foss and Ussing adopt Ca-
saubon’s conjecture, and alter it to Aéyw». I doubt whether this is
right; but it is the best remedy that has been proposed. Of course
‘May wey Aurpdv elvac’ might be treated as a quotation between in-
inverted commas: but the omission of Aéywy would be harsh; and for
pév we should then expect ydp. Various emendations of Avrpéy—
which Ussing vainly defends as meaning ‘sorry,’ ‘poor,’—have been
attempted; ¢. g. Aerrdy, purapdy, and Petersen’s bolder da 7d py
Aaumpdv elyar. I suspect that the true word is Aevpov. The Rustic likes
new, bright money : he complains that the coin offered to him is too old
and worn. |

3. dtratretv.] In the mss. the verb after ris vuxrés, which the
sense demands, has been lost. Ast supplies alreiv, Foss éga:reiv, Ca-
saubon dracrety, and so Ussing.

4. €b aorjpepov o dpxwv voupnvlav dye} Vulg. ef ofepov 6
ayav vounnvlay dye. Ast tried to make e by omitting 6 dyd»,
so that the subject to dye should be wayvrwy. I have adopted
Ussing’s emendation, 6 dpxwv: see Notes.

5. kal tHs avrys 6500.) This clause stands in the mss. after
éyxpotca:r, Foss and Petersen follow Schneider in placing it, as seems
necessary, after dwroxelpacOat.

6. ov raplxovs.] Ast is right, I think, in reading with Sylburg
rou raplxous (partitive gen.) for rovs raplxouvs. The form 6 rdpixos
is used by Herodotus: but in Attic (eg. Ar. Zg. 1246, Ach. 967) rd
rdptxos, already used in this chapter, was far more common.

XV.

1. era Oicas.] Petersen shifts efra to a place before rpds rovrop
dwe\Owy in the preceding clause, and inserts xal before @vcas. But
axpwrov péy in the first clause appears to confirm efra in the second.

2. Tyerare] Vulg. rime: two mss. rymesrare. The conjecture
of Salmasius, Tifce (a common slave’s name), has been adopted by

A

302, CRITICAL APPENDIX.

Foss, Petersen and Ussing. But riuewrare, besides having authority, has
more point. By it, as Ast says, ‘impudentia hominis mirifice augetur.’

3. {eopdv.J All the mss., except four of the best, have {vyis:
but, as Ast says, this was probably an attempt to explain éuSad\eu.
The balance is rdaXavrov, the beam, fvydv, the scales, wAdoreyyes.
gvyov could not be used for rAdervyé.

4 «al elreiy Sr. NAovtrar, dra drwy, ob8eula ool xdpis.]
Vulg. xal eloetvy Ore AéAovTat driww Kane ovdeula co xdprs. Pauw
conjectured: xal elxrew, Gre AéNovrat, deiwy* xdret, ovdeula cor ydpis:
‘he will say, when he has bathed and is going away: Summon me—
. I owe you no thanks:’ z.¢. if you want to get your fee, you must
bring an action, for I do not consider that I owe you anything, having
acted as my own bath-servant.’ But the boast, dre AéAourat, appears
characteristic, and therefore I would not change 6re to dre: and the
advice to bring an action seems a rather cumbrous joke. Ast adopts
xadet, but retains 67, Foss alters elrety to elu, and for xdxet boldly
substitutes xpaye’y. My remedy is simple. By merely changing xdxeé
to «gra, and. placing it before dxwsv, perfectly good sense is obtained
from the ms, text. Ussing alters xaxe? to 5é kal,

XVI.

t. kax@s dxovoa kal Aovdopnbivat Suvdpevos.] «al, which is
wanting in the best mss., has been restored by most modern editors,
and is undoubtedly right. Foss reads kaxés dxotcat, AotdopnOijvat
Suvapévots. He calls duvaudévors ‘ certissima coniectura:’ what it means,
he does not explain, and I do not understand. But there can be
little doubt that he and Ussing are right in taking AotdopnOjvas as
a deponent aorist, having an active sense. Demosthenes so uses it
in two places: (1) 2 Med. p. 558 § 132 ola édnnoynpyce wap’ vyiv...,
karnyopwyv Kal ddoxwy brvedos éedOetvy rhv orpariay travrnvy ry wore’
kal thy Aodoplav jv édordop7On Kparivy wept rovrwy. (2) in Coron.
Pp. 1257 § 5 AodopnOévros 8 avrots éxelvov kal kaxioavros avrovs.

2. tTporwmeov py gxov.] uh has been restored from two mss.
by Meier, who however changes éxwv to éyew: and so Foss. Ussing
rightly keeps €ywv. Casaubon had conjecturally inserted ovdx, and
was followed by Ast.

3. Kal rovtwy 8’.] Vulg. xal rofiro 8’: Ast cal rovrwy 5’: whom
Ussing follows, but omits &,

Tay Tepiiorapévwy Tovs SxAovs.] mwepilcravrac usu. means
‘they place themselves (stand) around:’ but here, ‘they place around
themselves: hominum turbam circum se colligunt’ (Ussing). Compare
wapioragGa:, ‘to draw over to one’s own side,’

CRITICAL APPENDIX. 393

5. Kal ovK aroSoxundtev §6.] Vulg. ov drodoxiudtwy dé Meier
corrected the part. to the infin., and inserted xal before ovx: so Foss.
Ussing retains the vulgate : but the infin. appears absolutely necessary.
Observe that in negative clauses depending on olos, devds we have
in the Characters usually 47, but sometimes ov: ¢.g. c. III. (vulg. Xv.)
Totodros olos...ovx Exe ouyyvounyv: Cc. IV. (XXIV.) rotdade olos...rpoo-
eOetv mrporepos ovderl GeNfjoat. |

6. ot8& xamrijAwv dyopalwy orparnyetv.] Vulg. ovd’ dua woddav
dyopalwy orpariyetv. Nothing can be made of the dua. It is absurd
to say that he does not disdain to be captain even of many ayopatot
at once, as if a more modest person would have been orparmyés of
one at a time. One German editor proposed to eject it altogether.
Ast was for changing da roy to raurod\\wy. But the context itself
supplies, I think, the true remedy. The ayopato: of whom this man is
prince or patron are, it appears, the keepers of the small provision-
shops in the market-place, of which he makes the round for the purpose
of levying the interest on his loans. In OTAAMATIOAAON is concealed,
I am persuaded, nothing but OTAEKAITIHAQN, the corruption of the
first e into a having been followed by that of « into. The idea of a
host involved in orparmyety would lend countenance to the false roAAwv.

7. épyddas S€ clot, rd ordpa evAvTov Exovres.] Vulg. epywaets
bé ciow ol ordua edvrov Exovres. I follow Ast in reading 76 for ol.
With of the sentiment is general; with ré, the subject to elol is of
admwovevonuévot understood, and the sentence is what it was meant to
be—a commentary on the chapter.

XVIT.

1. ta pipta.] The reading of the two Paris mss., adopted by
Foss, Petersen and Ussing. The rest (except one which has rd pupa)
give ra pij\a, which Ast prefers on the ground that dxpddpva is a
generic term, including both shell-fruits and soft fruits; and that
kdpva—pfjia represent these two species. But the disjunctive 7 is
against this view.

2. qwepuseivat KeAedorat.] These words are preserved only in
some of the inferior mss., but there seems to be little doubt of their
genuineness,

3. yrrnpévp.] The mss. give #rrwyévp. Schneider’s conjecture
arrnpévy has been accepted by Ast, Foss, Petersen and Ussing.

4. kal dipwvety...picGotc@ar.} Foss has unnecessarily transferred
this clause to c. I. (II.), inserting it after the words dtaxovijcas Suvards
amvevorl, The mss. have éavrov: Casaubon’s éavr@ has been adopted
by most editors; Furlan’s avros by Ast.

§- peOvonerGar pédrAx.] A long passage, now assigned by uni-

304 CRITICAL APPENDIX.

versal consent to c. XXVI. (XXX.), xal olvorwikadv—zaides AdBwar, used
to follow here.

6. at els spviBooxdrov.] The passage from here to the end
stands in the mss. in c. XII. (x1x.), following the words els dyopdy
éfeXOetv. Ast, followed by Foss and most recent editors, has transferred |
it hither. Petersen (Introd. p. 46) thinks that it belongs to c. X1. (XX.).
My own impression is that part of it, viz. as far as the words worep
daretdy Te wewounxws, belongs, as Ast thinks, to this chapter: the
remainder, xal avdovpevos dé, x.7.X., to c. XI. (XX.). But there is
no warrant for dissecting it in this manner. I have therefore dealt
with the entire passage in the way approved by Ast and Foss.

y. Gowep dorelévy Te wemownxeds.] dowep acreioy re is Bernard's
excellent emendation (adopted by Petersen) of the mss. ws repdoribe
vt, which is usually explained ‘something portentous:’ the Bdedupés
laughing as if he had done ‘something of evil omen.’ But it is
more natural that he should laugh ‘as if he had done something clever.’
Ast’s remark ‘ws non est guasi, sed guia, guod,’ will not bear close
inspection. ws, in places such as this, expresses the view—correct or
false—taken by the doer of the action.

8. rl ov raxd twatoatro.] This, the reading of the PVat. ms.,
is now generally adopted; as by Foss, Petersen and Ussing. The
Bdedupos asks rl ov raxv éravow; which becomes in oratio obliqua
rl od raxv wavoaro, The sense is the same, butin a more lively
form, as that given by the other mss., wi raxv wavoaydvy. Coray
and Ast altered this to ry trax’ ravoauévy, supposing that the Bdedupés
reproves the player for ceasing to play before he has ceased to sing.

XVIII.

I. @MAdipov.] So Foss, Petersen and Ussing, after Diibner, who
found this form in all the mss. which he collated, including three
of the best: vulg. rAwinov.

‘a. eb roujocey & Zevds BSwp.] mdefov, added after Jdwp in the
vulgate, is omitted by the two Paris mss. and another of the best,
as well as by some others of less authority. Fischer suggested (I
think truly) that it was probably introduced to balance BeAriw. He
is followed by Ast in rejecting it.

3. Kav Vropévy...ury ddloracat.] In the mss. this clause stands
after ofuepov. Schneider was the first editor who transferred it to
the place which it now occupies in nearly all editions. Ussing leaves
it in its old position, and considers that the spurious addition begins
at cal ws Bondpopucvos, x.7.X.

Tovs To.ovTrous Tév dvOpwarwv.] Casaubon’s conjecture that
gevye ought to be inserted here has been adopted by Foss, It seems
unnecessary.

CRITICAL APPENDIX. 9°5
XIX.

I. troBddrav, eras ob; prj drdey.] This, the reading of
the vulgate, is retained by. Ussing and Petersen (the latter, however,
giving éwiBd\\ew); and seems decidedly preferable to that proposed
by Casaubon, which several modern editors have adopted, broBad\ew
elras’ ov pn értddby. I cannot agree with Foss that the vulgate
requires the insertion of xal before uh ériAdOy. The words elas od;
Bh éwiadOy 8 pwédAAes Ayer, are closely connected in sense, and do
not represent two distinct remarks. Two mss. have ém®dA\ew, one
émtBadeiy: the rest broBd\Xe. Needham restored vroBdA\ew, which
is now generally read.

2. droyuudoy.] The best mss. have droyupvdoy, which Petersen
endeavours to defend in the sense, ‘when he has desfoiled’ (as the
victor strips and despoils a slain foe)—a figure for ‘vanquished ;’ but
this will hardly do. Pauw conjectured droyuwoys’ see J. 6. 264,
wh poor olvoy dewpe perlppova...uh pm’ aroyuwoys, wéveos 5 adxys Te
Ad@wuat. I think that this is probably right, and that the use of an
epic word was meant to heighten the humour. The inferior mss. have
amoxvaley, which Foss reads: but it has the air of a gloss by some
one who despaired of droyupruay.

3. mwpopavOdvay, roraira mpocdahdv.] Vulg. mpouavOdvev roc-
adra, kal rpoc\adeiv. The alteration of rpocdadely to rpoodaddv has
been generally adopted: but the modes of dealing with the xal have
been various. The obvious expedient of putting it before rocaira
and keeping mwpocdadeiy weakens the passage intolerably. Before
mpoohahwy it could only mean ‘actually,’ and such emphasis is not |
wanted: while the omission of the article before d:dacxados makes it
unlikely that xal stood before rots wa:dorplBas. Petersen suggests
trooatra Oy (for xal): Foss, rocavra xai [rowaira]. I agree with
Needham that it is to be omitted altogether. When mpocd\adaw became
wpoo\aeiy, -xal was inserted by some one who thought that rogaira
helonged to mpopavOdvew.

4. wWvOdpevog ta THs exxAnolas.] Vulg. ruddpevos rds éxxAyolas.
It has been attempted to explain rds éxxAnolas as ‘the days appointed
for the meetings of the Ecclesia,’ or ‘the transactions in the Ecclesia ;’
but neither sense is tolerable. Ussing thinks that some words, con-
nected with ras éxxAnolas by els or wpds, have dropped out. I have
adopted Petersen’s conjecture of ra tys for rds. Foss writes, on his
own conj., rudouévors ras éxxdAnolas,

5. wiv én’ ’Apirrodovrds tore yevopévny rot pr{topos paxnv. ]
It is now the general opinion that rod pyropos was added by some one
who confused the archon of 330 B.c. with one or other of his two more
distinguished namesakes, Aristophon of Azenia and Aristophon of

20

306 CRITICAL APPENDIX.

Collytus: see Notes. Casaubon proposed rw» jyrdpwy (2.¢. Demosthenes
and Aeschines): but such a change would be very rash.

6. Kal thy AaxeSatpovlwy ért Avodvipov.| The best mss. have
iro, and so Ussing (in his notes: though by a misprint his text has ézi)
and Petersen. But, as Ussing himself SaysS, uwo is suspicious; ‘quo-
niam non significatur (proelium) a Lysandro factum, Avodvipy scri-
bendum videtur.’ I doubt whether a Greek would have said Ure Av-
odvipy when he meant ‘under (the leadership of) Lysander.’ He
would rather have said, orparzyovvros Avodvépov. The reading éxf
in some of the inferior mss. is probably the true one. Ast and Hot-
tinger questioned the genuineness of this clause; and, if I felt sure
that they were right in referring wdy7 to the oratorical duel between
Demosthenes and Aeschines in 330 B.C., I should be inclined to agree
with them. See Notes.

7. PovdAcpeva.] The variant Bovddpevor, adopted by Foss, seems
to spoil the sense.

8. A€yovra, wetrma, Adda te Hytv.] Vulg. Aéyorrarasra, Nadely re
gutv. Hartung’s emendation of raira to wamrma, adopted by Ussing,
seems nearly certain. Petersen prefers the Homeric drra. Foss dé
yyovra Bavxaday’ dadely re Hyv. Baveaday is a late word meaning ‘to
smg a lullaby.’ Ussing defends the imper. for infin. in prose by Plat.
Crat. 426 B: Rep. V. 473 A. But it is an essentially poetical con-
struction, and would be out of place in this short, plain sentence. I
have therefore adopted the easy correction Ade, which has often been
proposed before.

XX.

1. mo0evy ov, kal Adyas rl; rl Exes wepl rovse cltrety katvdv; Kal
cariBadov épwrav, pr Adyeral re katvorepov; kal priv dyad yé éo-re rd
Aeyopeva.] This is the reading of the vulgate, except that for ri &xe:s it
has xal éxev. Three good mss. have xal rds éxecs: but wos Execs elreip
katyéy is not Greek. Ussing therefore reads wis éyets wepl rodde ; and
puts the words elwetvy xa:vov in brackets. To me it seems more likely
that was was inserted to mark a question after the second rf had been
corrupted to cal. Before émiSadwv four mss. have ws, which is without
meaning: for émBadwy is simply ‘following up,’ ‘repeating’ his ques-
tion. Foss rewrites the whole passage conjecturally: among other
changes he gives ws vroBalwy.

2. KaraBaddy rd 00s.] Casaubon conjectured peraBadcv 7d
00s. Ast renders the vulgate ‘voltu demisso—blando et ita comparato
ut alterum captet.’ If the text is right, this is probably the general
sense; but 400s, though it sometimes denotes nearly what we mean by a
man’s ‘air’ or ‘mien,’ has nowhere the definite sense of ‘ countenance.’
I understand—‘ giving a demure, subdued air to his whole bearing.’

CRITICAL APPENDIX. 307

3. GAN’ ody loyupds ye yevopevos]. Ast follows Casaubon in insert-
ing ye, which seems almost necessary, and which might easily have
been lost before yevonevos. Foss fills up the lacuna after yevéuevos with
the words viv ws doGevjs dort. I should have preferred simply dwréAwdev
or some equivalent word: but I rather suspect that the lacuna was
intentionally left by the author. These broken utterances, dying away
in an unfinished sentence, constitute the very art of the Aoyoroids.

4. wola yap éy arog, rolp 8% ipyacrnply...od Sinpepetouoy ; |
Vulg. rolg yap ob crog...ov Sinuepedovow. Schneider, feeling the want
of éy, gave in his first edition ovx évdenuepedovow, and has been followed
by Diibner, Hartung and Ussing. It seems better, with Ast, to change
the first ov, which is awkward, into év. On the strength of moia rod,
totoy épyacripiov in some of the good mss., Foss reads:—mola yap
ov cT0d, wotov Se épyacriprov, wotov 52 wépos Tis dyopas od denuepevovarr.
But zis réos ovx Ear, ob Senuepedw; could not stand for ris rémos
Eorev od od Sinpepedvw; and wolw pépe is in all the mss.

XXI.

I. dyoyy ris Wuxijs.] So Ussing, with Casaubon. The mss,
have dywy rijs puxijis: but dydy els rd xetpav cannot be right.

2. ZoolSypos.] This name is wanting in the mss., and was first
supplied by Meier’s clever conjecture, which Foss and Ussing have
adopted. Ast, followed by Sheppard, spoils the passage by reading
€recra (for éwecdy) 52 els rods Snudras eveypddy.

3. Kadetrar yoov 4 tux Kopwwiaxds.] PVat. (which alone has
this clause) Kadefrac -yoow 4 Yuxh Kpwoxdpaxa. Various attempts have
been made to explain the corrupt word. The right clue is, I suspect,
to be found in the fact that Kopw6la x6py was a synonym for éralpa
(Plat. Rep. 111. p. 404 D): cf. KopwOcdteq@ac. The copyist first wrote
Kpwd— by iste. leaving out the o, then cop in the margin; which
came to be written in the text after Kpw0, 0 being then changed to o.
Kopw@— thus became xpwoxop—. What the rest of the word was I do
not pretend to say; but | believe that KopiwOsaxds (from the adj. used
by Xenophon etc.) represents the sense.

4. «al lxaveg 8é.] Foss’s correction, adopted by Ussing, of the
corrupt xal cacy dé.

. trip dv ov miAavg mpdg dnd xal rovrous Suefusv.] PVat. (which

alone has this clause) iwép dy od rravds mpds eué> xal rovrots dcetiuv.

I follow Ussing in writing rovrous for rovrots, and so connecting xal rov-

tous deguov with what precedes: Foss, in writing rAavg for wavgs.

The change of a single letter will now give good sense: for ov read ov.

ios es is always eager to agree with those who are depreciating
¢ absent.

29-2

308 CRITICAL APPENDIX.

6. «bves.] The word is wanting in the mss., but is printed conjec-
turally in most editions since that of Ast.

7. ovvépxovrat.] Meier’s conjecture, adopted by Foss, for ovvé-
Xovra.

8. él Gipav tiv adAcov vraxovovor.] Petersen and Ussing have
+Hv, instead of érl, before Ovpay. But vwraxovew Ovpay is not Greek:
and as the PWat., the sole authority here, has éw? @vpay, there is no
excuse for omitting the preposition.

g. dvSporkddor.] Foss conj. dvdpodd Bor.
10. Tdédavra coeveynapévy E, ef iis warSloy air@ yéyove] PVat.

Tadravra eloevéyxauney 4 mwpotxa é& Hs matdov avr@ yerva (sic: in marg.
yéyove.) Petersen emends thus: radavra eloeveyxapery wpotxa ef, 7 TE
wadioy avrg yervg. His restoration of & is certain; but he ought to
bave seen that the very fact of its having dropped out is the strongest
argument for the €£ #s of the ms. é dropped out decause it was fol-
lowed by éé.

11. rods olxelove avrotd Aoapyoas.] So Foss, with the PVat.
Other mss. have AotdopetoGar. If we read this (as Ussing and Petersen
do), rods olxelovs ought probably to be altered to rots olxelocs, since the
Middle Aodopetc@at almost invariably takes a dat. of the object.

12. Kakds Adyew drroxadav rappyolav.] I follow Foss in placing
the comma at reAeurnxdrwy, and not at A\éyev, for two reasons: (1) an
accus. in apposition with rappyolav, Snuoxparlay, édevOeplay is required :
this is supplied by (7d) xaxws Aéyev. (2) We usually find xaxds Aéyew
rwd, but xaxa Aéyew wepl Tivos.

13. mwovwv.}] So the PVat. and Foss. Petersen and Ussing, zocet.

«14. «6 THE BuoKodlas épeOiopds.] PVat. 6 rijs SidackaNlas épeOropss.
For ddacxadlas Ussing suggests dtaBodlas (a merely poetical form);
Coray xaxodoylas; but this is utterly improbable. Hottinger’s dvexo-
Aigs seems most likely. The copyist began &—, then, seeing his mis-
take, started afresh: but as he did not erase the former, d:dacxaNilas
arose out of [d¢]vexoNlas. If the whole comment is spurious, the want
of necessary connection between xaxodoyla and duoxoXla is no proof that
the latter word did not stand here. ’

XXII.

1. éwirlunois rapa To mpootjkov Tév SeSouévov.] The PVat. has
wep] Twv xpoonkws dSedouévory, from which Foss gets wepl ray mpoonvus
dedouévww, But wpoonxds is, as Ast points out, merely a corruption
of wpoonxovrws, and this of rpoojKoy rap.

2, ov Sedrt ovx Te.] ox before ve is wanting in the mss. It was

CRITICAL APPENDIX. 309

first inserted by Needham, who is followed by Ast, Sheppard and
Ussing. :

3. @& te tyés.] So Petersen and Ussing. The mss. have dri,
which Foss takes from déorts.

4. Garerriv.] Two mss. have dréorny, which Petersen prints, and
which Coray thought might have come from dwréorn.

5. Sre Set rapyvprov éelAev.] So (on Casaubon’s conjecture) Ast,
Sheppard, Ussing.—Foss keeps the mss. 671, which Meier defended ;
but admits that 67e is a good emendation.

XXII.

1. Kal dépav ards rd dpyiptov kal kard ordfbiov xaSlLov cpt.
Ouetv.] The mss. have ¢épwv, which Ussing keeps, omitting the gal
before xara orddtov. It seems better, with Coray, Foss and Petersen,
to read pépeuy.

2. «vdwKkotxvov.] Vulg. xocdkcovxiov: PVat. xudovxt0v, and so
Petersen and Ussing. Sylburg and Foss xvAtxotxcop.

. Srvov rvyxdvev.}] Ast inserts here, Foss after Eapvoe yevéoOat,
the clause xal rods dpous 5é...8capndvovow of abrol which usu. stands in
c. XXIV. (X.). As Meier shows, it need not be moved. See Note 1 to
c. XXIV.

4 siddgidbeeg | I do not see how the 8vvawro of the vulgate, which
the editors pass by in silence, can stand. In those cases where drws
with opt. has reference to present time, the peculiarity is explained by
attraction to a preceding optative: ¢. g. Aesch. Zum. 288, E\@o1.—drws
yévorro ravd’ éuol Nuripios: ‘may Athene come that she may prove my
deliverer from these things '—where yévyrac might have been expected,
but yévoro is allowed on account of &\6o: cf Soph. Az. 1222, Phif,
324. Here no such explanation is possible.

5. pOvov ov tupdcas.] This is the reading of the PVat. (which
alone gives the clause from dy 6 dpa olxetos to xpyoe); and I see no
good reason for disturbing it. mrupotg@a is used of gold standing the
test of fire, Arist. Ast. An. 11. 5. If it was said that the dmricros
actually submitted his cups to this test, there would be reason to sus-
pect the text. But it says wévov ov mwupwcas. It is no more meant
that he actually puts them through the fire than that he actually weighs
them, or takes security. He only looks as if he would like to do all
three things. It is merely a humorous hyperbole to express his extreme
reluctance to grant the loan.—Elaborate attempts have been made to
emend rupdécas. Orelli and Foss independently conjectured, for wdvor
ov mupwoas, bvou’ é&vrumwoas, ‘having graven his name on the cups.’
Foss and Petersen give in their texts advoy évrurdeas, understanding

310 CRITICAL APPENDIX.

Evoua, or something of the kind. Coray suggested sroowoas. If a con-
jecture was to be made, a better one would, I think, have been pdvop oi
épxwcas: but no conjecture is needed.

6. atrév.] So Ast, Sheppard, Foss, Ussing for mss. aéré: Peter-
sen air@.

7. wdcov; katddov.] Mss. récou xardfov. This probably corrupt
passage is perhaps the most difficult in the Characters. The words p1-
dev mpayparevou...cvvaxo\ov0yow, found in the best ms., cannot on any
sound principle of criticism be rejected as spurious; and it is clear that
they represent the answer of the &wioros to the buyer. xardOou, then, is
said by the buyer: but in what sense? I follow Schneider, Foss and
Petersen in rendering it refer in tabulas. Cf. pseudo-Demosth. p. 1401:
raira 6¢ wdvra yéyparrat Tov rpbrov by ris av els BiBNovy KaraGeiro.
Schneider’s view of the passage generally also seems to me, on the
whole, the best. Three others should be noticed:—(1) Ast, following
Casaubon ahd Coray, rejects undeév rpayparevov—ouvaxodrovOjcw alto-
gether. He reads rocot: xardou, o yap cxodatw réurew :—t. c. ‘Buyer.
Reckon tp the amount (and enter it in your books). Seller. Pay
down; I have not time to send (to your house) for the money.’ (2)
Foss and Petersen differ from Schneider in reading wécov [they mean
rogod] kal xardOovu, ‘ Reckon up the amount and put it down,’ instead of
awécov; karadov. (3) Ussing understands the passage, not of buying,
but of borrowing. For récouv xara@ov he would read something like
mwbacov xpovoy Ere xaréxw. A person who has borrowed something from

the dmriotos says ‘How much longer may I keep it? for I have not time
to send it just yet.’

8. elretv] inserted conjecturally by Foss, Petersen and Ussing.
Schneider inserted Aé yew,

av ob pu} cxoddo'ys.] The pu, first inserted by Schneider, is
adopted by Foss and Petersen. The sense seems to require it, as Ast
saw; but he rejected the whole sentence.

AXIV.

1, wdvra ddorey elyar dyar,|] So Ast, Fossand Ussing. The best
mss. have ¢doxwy, and omit dyay. From Ast’s note, however, and
from the fact that Foss prints it without comment, I infer that there is
other authority for it. Ussing prints it in smaller type, as a conjectural
supplement.

2. XUtpav qf AowdSa.] After x¥rpay the two Paris mss. have elvat,
out of which Petersen gets wadacdy, It seems more likely that it has
merely come in by mistake from the last clause.

3. é&«Badovons.] So, with the best mss., Foss, Petersen and Ussing.
Cf. c. XVII. (XI.) éxBadety rd worjpiov. There is in Greek no word

CRITICAL APPENDIX. - 3ir

which precisely renders our ‘to drop’ (accidentally). This must, in
strictness, be expressed by a periphrasis with wirrev. But é«Sdddrew
seems to have been conventionally used searly in that sense: see //.
XIV. 419 etc. Ast, with some inferior mss., reads droBadovons, which
would have a more general meaning; ‘ having lost:’ and is less graphic
than éxBadovens.

4. txpijcact.] Mss. xpwrviev, but one xpwrvew, and one purview. Ast
and Schneider read xpa@v: Casaubon conj. xpav rut: others xpay ovderl,
pnoevl, or évl, But xpdw, in the sense of lending, occurs only in the fut.
and aor.: for the present Dem. p. 1250 uses xixpnuc: and so xlypacOat
c. XXVI. (xXxX.). Foss, from a ‘glossarium dvéxdoroy,’ gives xpnvvvew,
and in c. VII. (XXI.) a kindred form xpyvvivat, Neither has much pro-
bability. In the absence of any likely emendation, I have given xpjjcat,
in order at least to represent what was probably the sense.

&, GvArjpara.] So Ast and Foss. The word is known from Ar. Pax
1040. Petersen and Ussing keep the mss, OunAzjuara, which does not
occur elsewhere: and @umA7 is a poetical form.

6. vrodvopévous.] So Ast and Foss, with several mss. As tarodv-
omévous in this context can be exactly illustrated from Aristophanes (see
Note) it is astonishing that Petersen and Ussing keep vwodvopévous,
which, it may be safely said, is nonsense. Ussing explains it ‘ medio
die, quo tempore ceteri in publico versantur, /atebras guaerunt domique
sé condunt, ne in vestimentorum elegantiam sumptus faciant.’ It means,
then, ‘slinking into concealment!’

XXV.

1. weprovola tis ddirtotinlas és Samdvny Exovea.] Mss. repiovela
Tis dwo gidoriyulas dardynv Exovca. I follow Casaubon, Ast and others
in correcting dwd gt\oryslas to ddtdoripias (a word used by Aristotle) ;
and Ussing in inserting és before dardyy»y, Schweighauser’s drovola
Tis gidoriulas has been adopted (silently) by Ussing. Foss reads
weptovola ris admrogtdoTiulas damrdyns Exovoa: but it is hard to believe
in Fischer’s dwogtAoriula, or that @xyovca could, in prose, stand with
a genit. for dréxouga. Casaubon’s dardvyv gpevyouca is tempting; but,
as Ast says, ‘a vulgatae scripturae ductibus nimis recedit.’

2. TpaywdSois.} Foss and Petersen give rpayypdovs: but the dative
of most mss _ is undoubtedly right. Compare the common phrase
Katvors Tpxywoots, ‘at the representation of the new tragedies:’ Cic. Epp.
X. 31 gladiatoribus = ludis gladiatorits.

3. drypapipevos.] I have little doubt that Schneider was right
in thinking that this was the true correction of the érvypdas péy in the
mss.: ‘havinz caused (midd.) his name to be inscribed upon it.’ I
do not think that wéy could stand as a sarcastic comment upon the

312 CRITICAL APPENDIX.

fact that, shabby as was the offering, he yet took care to secure credit
for it. Petersen tries to get this sense by writing uy. Ussing more
boldly 473’: but this seems plainly wrong. The avedevfepos is one who
wants to get as much glory as possible for his money. He would not
fail to record his victory, but he would record it cheaply.

4. &« rob Srpov.] The mss. agree on this, and I have left it,
as it can be taken with dvaords. But I strongly suspect that we ought
to read ev r@ djuy, referring to ywoudywy. Ussing wanted r@ dyuy,
referring to éwidécewr.

5. wArAyv tav lepwotvev.] The PVat. has rAhy rdp lepéwy: the
other mss. xAiv trav lepelwv. Meier’s conjecture lepwodvwy, ‘the parts
reserved for the priest,’ has been adopted by Dibner, Hartung and
Foss. See Ameipsias af. Athen. 1X. p. 368 E, Sldoras wddrod" lepwouva |
KwAR, Td wrevpov, tylkpacp’ dpiorepd: the ham, the ribs, and the left
side of the face. Bekker Anecd. p. 44: lepwovva: rd rots Peots éfacpov-
peva wépn. Casaubon’s lepay is adopted by Ussing: Petersen reads
on his own conj. znplwy.

6. Srav yj Movoeta.] After dray # the PVat. (which alone has
this clause) inserts rod dworiOévac cal ra maéla, which is now uni-
versally rejected as a confused repetition of what has preceded.

7. Tv kvKr@.) These words occur only in the PVat.: but Foss
and Ussing seem right in regarding them as genuine. Cf. Plat. Lysis
Pp. 203 A, mopeverOar ri» kw relxouvs. Petersen emends amoxdupa
(for -as) €x rijs 6500 kat (for riv) Kuxd@ olkade ropevOjvat.

8. && tis yuvatkelas.] So the PVat., the sole authority here.
Cobet, Variae lectt. p. 204, observes that dyopds is to be supplied.
Meier also defends it: and Petersen and Ussing receive it into their
texts. Foss boldly writes els ras étddous ras yuvacxelas.

g. madturnfe.] PVat. wadw mjte. Schneider was the first to
write madkiumrnter.

10, tiv olklav éxkopycoat kal tds KAlvas xadAdvar.] The mss.
have olxiay xahdvvat—xkAlvas éxxopijaac: and so Petersen and Ussing,
Pauw’s transposition of the verbs is adopted by Ast and Foss,

XXVI.

This chapter (usu. XXX.) is found complete only in the PVat.:
but the passage xal olvorwiwyv d€...mratdes \dBwoe stands, in those mss.
which contain only the first 15 Characters, in the chapter on Bdedupia
(usu. XI., in this ed. xvi1). The PVat. places that passage here,
inserting in it two additional clauses, viz. (1) cal ludriov éxdotvac—
mwrelous tudpas: (2) kal ray vldy d¢ wh wopevouérw»—mwapd Tod xeipl-
fovros.

CRITICAL APPENDIX: 313

1. weptovola kipSous aloxpov.] So the ms. Ast says that the
peculiarity consists in wepovola, standing for simia cupiditas. It con-
sists father, I think, in xépdos standing ir cupiditas lucri, Cf. Soph?
Ant. 222, dvipas ré xépdos wodddxis Sewrecer, ‘the desire of gain has
often ruined men.’ Foss reads on his conj. weperolnots, which means
‘affectation of,’ rather than ‘effort to get.’ Schneider inserted ém-
Ouulas after wepovela—clumsily. Hartung boldly, droveta gudorimulas
xépdous Evexa alcxpod. Probably alexpov is a spurious addition.

2. Sypoiplav.] So Petersen and Ussing: PVat. dipzopov. The word
Siporpla is common: dinotpoy, in this sense, is unknown.

3. wpotka ébidow.}] Vulg. d¢éidow: but I think with Petersen
and Ussing that épidow (sc. wrpotka GeGoGar) is right.

4. «wav, campév ye, «.7.d.] Ast, Foss and Ussing omit the xaf
of the vulg. before elwwy.

5. Padavly pérpy.] PVat. decdopévy: vulg. Pecdwvly, which is
probably right, and which Ast and Ussing retain. See Notes.

6. od8pa dwoev.] In the vulgate these words stand after ra
éwirndeca. The PVat. has odddpa 8¢ broordy before ra émirjdea.
With Ussing I follow the vulgate for the words, and the PVat. as
regards their place.

. «al varorplacbar pitov Soxotvros mapds rpdrev todetv, Kal
tmpadsy dtrodécGa.] A passage too corrupt to be restored with
much probability. The vulgate has simply drorpiacba dldrov érthaBwr
drodécGac: the PVat., vrorplacba pldov Soxobvros wpds rpdwrov rodel-
oGa. I follow Ast and Foss in their general view of the sense, and
in attempting to combine the vulgate and the PVat. Ast proposes
vwrorplacdal ri, pldov diddvros wpos rpérov, xal értBarov amroddcba:
‘he buys a thing privately, when a friend offers it on reasonable terms,
and, having added to the price, sells it.’ Foss, vrorplac@a pidov
deSwxdros mpds rporov wwrcioOa elra émiiaBwy droddcOat 7. ¢. ‘when
a friend allows it fo de sold reasonably.’ In two points I would keep
closer to the mss.: (1) in retaining doxofvros: (2) instead of inserting
efra, I should write rwhety xal for mwdeioOa. The awkward passive
is thus got rid of, and the loss of xal explained. Coray's émiBadwy
for €rtAkaBwv may be supported from Arist. Polit. 1. 11.9, where ém-
Baddew means to ‘bid higher,’ lit. ‘to add to the price.’ But the blot
is wpds tpérov. I much doubt whether xpds rpdwov wwiely could mean
‘to sell on reasonable terms:’ though mpés tpdémrov Aéyew (Plat. Rep. p.
470 C), means ‘to speak reasonably.’ The corruption probably lies
deep.

8. dpéda 8 Kal.] So the vulgate, which Ussing seems right
in following. ayéAe, in these Charaeters often adds spirit to the men-
tion of an especially striking trait—here to the notice of a very shabby

314 CRITICAL APPENDIX,

little artifice. ‘Jt ts just like him to....... Petersen without comment
gives xal xpén 5€: Foss xal xpéos 5é.

9. Tov piva Sdov.] Ast leaves out these words, and reads below
tov ’AvOeornpiava Tov G)ov.

10. wapad tot xapllovros.] Ast, Foss and Ussing leave the la-
cuna in the PVat. after rod xe:plfovros without attempting to explain
it. Ussing says: ‘desiderari aliquid apparet; nam necessario indican-
dum est quid administraverit ille quicum ratione putat.’

11. ovvayévrav wap’ arg dwobectvar.] The ms. has wap’ daurg
Urobciva:: Ast’s correction is adopted by Foss and Ussing. The latter
seems right in omitting wap éavrod before didouévwy: it was probably
the mere error of a copyist whose eye had wandered back to wap’ éaurg.
Foss seems right in altering éaur@to air@.

12. pry wépby.] So Ussing: the PVat. has rporduyy,—the mpo
probably from the line before, xpd xpédvou riwds. Foss’s rpoorduypy is
improbable.—y%, first added by Siebenkees, the earliest collator of the
PVat. ms., is obviously wanted by the sense, and is read in all edi-

tions.
XXVIL

I. Kal rov xuBepvytov tdvaxurray [pev]t muvidverOar al peco-
mopet.] dvaxirrwy pév is the reading of the best ms., the PVat., and is
printed by Foss, Petersen and Ussing. If it is right, it means, as
Ussing says, that the decAds had either covered his head or taken refuge
below decks: ‘et wév importunum, ut ait Schneider., necessario delen-
dum.’ The inferior mss. have avaxvmrovros alc@dvecOar. Ussing sug-
gests that rod xuBepyijrov avaxumrovros might mean, ‘ when the steers-
man raises his head’ (in order to see over something which obstructs his
view). The ruv@dvecOac of the PVat. must of course be retained. But
besides the oddness of dvaxUrrovros in this sense, there is a further
objection: ef secorope? must then mean ‘ whether he is steering the
middle course:’ ‘diligentiam videas gubernatoris i7 anxgusto freto ver-
santis’ (Ussing). Now jpecoropety naturally means ‘to be in middle
course ;’ in another sense—that of ‘having come half way.’ So Diod.
XVIII. 34, wecomopovryrwy & avray, ‘in the middle of their voyage:’ and
so Menander (4. 320) used it. Clearly the Coward asks ‘ whether they
are half-way yet.’—Casaubon read dvaxomrrovros (which Ast wrongly
states to be the ms. reading). He understands: ‘when the steersman
changes the ship’s course, the Coward asks whether he is keeping in mid-
channel.’ To this there are two objections: (1) that just stated—the
sense given to pecomrope?: (2) the sense of dvaxdmrovros. dvaxowrrey
vatv might, perhaps, have the meaning of dvaxpover@a:, ‘to back the
ship:’ compare the pass., said of a hesitating speaker, Luc. Vier. 35,
étémrcrrov re kal dvexorréduny, ‘I began to blunder and retract:’ and Arat.
Phaenom. 340, quoted by Ast, dvaxowret vja, ‘quod Germanicus vertit,

CRITICAL APPENDIX, 315

tnhzbet tam mavita vemos.’ But Ido not see how it could mean ‘to
change the ship’s course’ in any other way than by backing, nor how it
could be said of the steersman. It would properly be applied, as by
Aratus, to the rowers.

2. avrov.] So Ast and Ussing.—Foss and Petersen avrdv: the
former placing only a comma at xiTweloxov, to which he makes auvrdy
refer. But surely the decAds is more anxious for his life than for his
clothes.

3. Kal orparevopevos 8% refi Tovs éxBonPotwrds re mrpockareiv
keAebov mpds aitov ordvras mpwrov mepiidelv.) Vulg. kal orparevd-
peevos 52 wpookadety wdvras xpos avrov Kal oravras wowrov wepitdelv.
PVat., xal orparevduevos 5é wefod(n superscr.) éxBonBodvros re mporxadely.
KeNevwy pos aurév ordvras mpwrov we..wtsetv. Ussing adopts the correc-
tion wep for wevoo in the PVat., and for éxBonOodvros writes rods éxBon-
Ooivras: in this I follow him, but not in putting mpos abrov (ms. avrdv)
before xeXedwy: it can go with ordvras as well as with wpogxadelv. Foss
differs from Ussing only in omitting rovs (which, however, seems neces-
sary) and in leaving wpds adrév as I do, in its place. Petersen proposes
merely to write éxBonOotvros rod wefou for rego éxBonOovvrds re. One
objection to this is that part of 7d mweféy is already fighting; it is toa
small support-party that the Coward addresses himself. Ast takes the
vulgate, simply omitting ordvras, and, as usual, despising the PVat. ms.
But rdyras is plainly wrong.

4- Kal rov watSa éxmépipas.] The xal is inserted conjecturally by
Foss and Ussing.

5. elmety] is not in the mss., but is supplied by all the editors.

6. SunyetoOar ws xwSvvevcas tva cicaxa tév dldwv.] So the
PVat.; Foss, Petersen, Ussing. Vulg. diyyeiodar ws xwiuvevcas, ws
céawxe ruwv diiwy. Foss and Petersen take xwduvevoas with céowxa,
Ussing with dtpyetodac ws.

XXVIII.

1. tél xprjvgt.] The PVat. has ércxpwrqv: the other mss. con-
tain nothing corresponding to it, but read simply olos dronypduevos ras
xefpas. Siebenkees corrected éwrtxpwrhp to éml xphvnv, which Schneider
adopted,—saying, however, that he would prefer either amd xpiyns or
éxl xphyny [€\Oav xai] dromypduevos. In the absence of any probable
emendation, I give the dative: cf. Od. x11i. 408, éwi xpivy, ‘ata foun-
tain.’—Petersen ingeniously proposes &re xpw %3n: Foss boldly prints
éxl xowy mou [yeviuevos] dwrouwduevos Tas xetpas, xK.T.A.: ‘when he has
been anywhere at the offering of libations to the dead.’—I once thought
of ef 7: Expavev, ‘when anything has defiled him.’ |

2, og Sref—A\0y.] So Petersen, with all the mss. Most editors

316 CRITICAL APPENDIX.

insert &. But the omission of dy in such cases, though commonest if
poetry, is not confined to it. Thuc. I. 137, undéva éxBivas éx rijs vews
péxpt wrovs yérvnrac.

3. Kal édy ne uv dv ry olklq, édv piv rapelav, DaBdLrow xadciy,
édv 8% lepdv, «.7.A.] The PVat. alone has the words, éd» wapelu,
LaBdsov (sic) xadeiv, édy 5é lepdv,... With Ussing I insert ué before
wapelay. Foss compresses and alters the sentence thus :—xal dy wapelay
lin Spw ey 77 olkig, ZaBdsiow xadeiv, day & ex’ jplov (for lepo»—‘on a
grave’).

4-_dvraiba lepdv eibis (Spicacbar.] Vulg. lepiv évraida Bpica-
wGa, PVat. évraita lepdov [sic] evOds picacGa:. Ussing adopts lep@or
in the sense of aediculam: but surely it is a vox nihili. Petersen has
taken Dibner’s conjecture q#egov: but I do not see how that mends
matters. With Foss, I leave lepov. It is probably corrupt ; but, as
being a word of general sense, it might possibly mean a small shrine or
altar; and nothing better has been proposed.

5. kav yAat& BadfLovros avrov rapdrryrat, «ras, K .X.] The
PVat. (the sole authority for the sentence) has xfv ydau'x Badifovros
avrov raparrera: xal elwas, x.7.4. Badham corrects yAau’« to yAavé,
the indic. to subj., and omits «af: and, with Ussing, I have followed
him. Petersen does so too, except that he keeps «al, and inserts det-
dirrerat before it, since the Munich Epitome has déuolws yNavcas det-
dirrovrat: but this seems very improbable. Foss, nay yAavxes Badifor-
Tos avrou [avaxpdywot], TapdrrecOat, kal elwas. Ast conjectured that
rapdrrera: should be changed to wraplarrnrat, ‘fly past.’

6. ABavwrov, plAaxa.] The PVat. (which alone has this) \:Ba-
vwroaw wivaxa: so Coray and Schneider, but with AcSavwrov.— Meier,
ABavwrdy, orvpaxa (storax, for incense): Foss, AcBaywrdv, mowava
(cakes). Petersen's wlAaxa, which Ussing has adopted, seems best: se¢
Notes.

awd Badarrns.] Schneider’s dre for the él of the PVat. has
been received by Foss, Ussing and most editors. Cf. supra, mepippa-
vaevos amo lepot.

8. kdv Tore érl8y okopddwv éxriuipevov tov dl rais tprddots,
aweXCoy kata Kehadts Aovoacbar.} The PVat. has xdv wore éwidy
oKopodw [sic] dorenpévwy tur éml rats rpiddoes ewmeNOovT wy (corrected into
am. by the same hand) xara x. AovoacOa. Vulg. xal éri rats rpiddos
adwredOwv xara xepadjys AovcacOa. Ast corrected oxopddw to axopddw»,
and éreA@ovrwy to amed\Ouv. These corrections confirm each other;
for, when the »v of cxopddwy was lost, dareXOwv was changed to dwed@ov-
rwy for the sake of rw, and dm. to éw. for the sake of rpeddos. Ast
also changed éoreupévwy to ednuuévov, ‘one who has fastened upon,’
‘laid hands upon;’ and in this, too, is followed by Ussing. But éepyp-

CRIFICAL APPENDIX. 317

#évoy seems improbable. Here I have ventured to adopt an emenda-
tion of my own, because it is so near at once to the ms. and to the sense
sey Gea as to appear highly probable. To eat the garlic and other
refuse placed for ‘ Hecate’s supper’ at the cross-roads is often mentioned
as an impiety to which hunger drove the poor: see Ar. P/ut. 595, Plut.
de Superst. 10. For éorenpévwy read éoridpevoy, ‘feasting upon.’ With
oxopddwy éoriaabat, compare Ar. Vesp. 1306, xaxptwv...evwxnuevov, and
so Char, XX. (VIII), evwxelyv Adywv.—Foss gives cxopbdy éoreupévor, and
keeps éreNOdvrwy, altering tals rpiddors to ras tprddous. Petersen takes
a strange view of the passage. He reads:—xdv more emlig oxopodp
é€oreupévwy Tav él rats tpidos ‘Exary Oudvrwy [for éredOcvrwr]
Kara xepadys AovioacPa. ‘If [one of] those who are sacrificing to H.
at the cross-roads, crowned with garlic, cast an [evil] eye on him,’ &c.
The words rpiddos éxdry Ovdvrwy were first corrupted, he supposes, to
TprodotsecsameNOovrwy, and els then omitted (Pet. zxérod. p. 5).

XXIX.

1. loyvog, od KépSous yAtyopévn.] Vulg. loxupot xépSous yAcxoué-
vous: PVat. loxupws xépdous yNtxouévy. The favourite mode of emend-
ing the passage has been by adopting Pauw’s conjecture of «xpdrovs for
xépdous: thus Foss loxupod xpdrovs: Petersen and Ussing, loxupds xpd-
tous. This seems to me rash. Casaubon saw that x«épdous was genuine,
but that a of was required with it; the love of power for its own sake,
as felt by the oligarch, being opposed to that love of power for the sake
of money with which demagogues were so often—as in Ar. Vesp. 672—
reproached. He conjectured loxupa, xépdous ov yAcxouévn. But a sim-
pler remedy is, I think, at hand. The loxupod of the vulgate merely
conceals loxvos, ov. For loxus in the sense of dvvauis, cf. Thuc. II. 97,
BAO  Bacrrela éml péya loxvos.

2. Kal umd rovray Up es att 7 tTiopévovg Kal ore i TovTous
Set i pas olkety riv hiv Vulg. cat 8re bwd rivav UBpifduevos
elrety, det abrovs xdue THy wodw olkety: PVat. xal rd rovTwy vBprvoue-
vous 7) Teuvouevous [acc. to Shepp., # ryuwudvous: acc. to Siebenkees #re-
popevos| Srt  Tovtous det 7 upuds olxety rhvy wodw.—I have followed
Ussing. Foss and Petersen read with Schneider bBp:fopévous [kal] are-
puwpévous. There is no difficulty about the xal—for, if yreuwpévous had
been corrupted into 4 tiwuevous, if would naturally have been omitted ;
but the perfect tense is an objection. We should have expected UBprto-
pévous 7) drimoupévous, esp. as a series of insults is referred to. I think
with Ussing that 4 tiu~wpévous, which is nearer to the ms., gives better
grammar and better sense. The oligarch is indignant that it should
be in the power of the people to slight or to honour him at will,
and scorns their favours as much as their affronts. avrovs, which is
found only in the PVat., probably came in from avrovs juds just before:
with Ussing I omit it.

318 CRITICAL APPENDIX.

3. xard pérov &.] So Ussing for xal 7d péoov 5¢: he also omits cal
before ré iudriov.

4. gwoPelv rovs rovovrous Adyous tAdyov Sia ry rod OlSelovt-]
Vulg. coBeiv rovs rotovrous Adyous’ dia Tovs ouKod., x.7.A. PVat. copeir
Tovds Troovrous Noyous Thy Tov wl, with an abbreviation over the ¢ which
Badham could not decipher. Preller’s tiv rod Qldeiov is adopted by
Foss and Petersen: Ussing despairs of the words, and does not print
them. To govern doyous, Ussing inserts Aéywr, Foss dguels; Petersen
suggests rots Tot. Acyors. How rhv rod ‘Qéelcu is to be governed, no one
explains; for coSety certainly cannot govern it. I have inserted did,
which may have been lost through a confusion with the other dd imme-
diately following. But I have not much faith in rhv rod Qlédeov itself,
and suspect that the fault lies too deep to be got at now.

5. tov Stkalovray.] Vulg. dicatouérvwy: Schneider dicatovrwy, and so
Foss and Ussing.

6. Kal ds dxdproréy tort ro wAnQos Kal del rod vépovros xal
SS6vros.] The words 7d rA700s cal acl, wanting in the mss., were
supplied by Ast’s almost certain conjecture, which Foss and Ussing
adopt.

7. Xemwrds.] So Petersen and Ussing with the mss.; but it means
macer, ‘meagre,’ ‘starved-looking:’ not ‘¢ezuis (pauper), as Ussing
renders it. Foss, with Meier, Aewpos.

8. tovrov ydp ék SuSexa modewy els plav katrayayovra Avoas TH
Baotrelav.] The PVat., which alone has this, gives rovroy yap éx
Oudexa mo\ewy Katayaydvra AvOelo BaocudA: with a contraction after
the o, which is written above the line. Foss thinks that the ms. had
AvOeicay Bacirelav. Bold measures have been taken to supply the sup-
posed lacuna. Foss reads, after e/s play, xarayayovra [Ta wrHOn
adetvat Thy xaral\vetoay Bacirelavy. Meier’s remedy, which Foss
justly calls ‘portentous,’ is to copy after xarayayévra the greater
part of Thuc. 11. 15. Ussing reads xarayayovra [rd wA7On] wadoau
Tas Baowelas: but this, though it adds less to the text, uses the text
itself still worse. I greatly prefer Ast’s simple proposal to read Ntoat
THv Bacrelay. It does not seem unlikely that the o written over Avre
was meant simply to correct 6, and that the doubtful contraction
after it was merely the article, and not, as has been supposed, ay or
at. The object of xarayayérra is thy wodw, understood from 79 wéva
just before. avrdy refers to the population of the dwéexa wéAets.

XXX.
This chapter is found only in the PVat. ms,

1. Kal émuokaar 6%, as xpnords éore.}] The ms. has xal ém-
exjyas 6¢, ws xpyords dort. Meier's excclicnt emendation emixcyar,

CRITICAL APPENDIX. 319

has been adopted by Ussing. Coray, followed by Ast and Foss, reads
émioxfyas 5¢, 8s xpnorés éort, which, besides being awkward gram-
matically, gives a very tame sense.

2. Kal Tov trovnpov 2 elretv BAelepov, av BovAnral mis ed
oKotrety.] The ms. has édy BotAnral res els w... The lacuna has usually
been filled up with movnpoy or wovnpiav. Coray proposed édy zou
AodopHral ris els wovnplay, or édy diaBddAyral ris els wovnpiav. Foss
reads, on his own conj., [kal] édy BovAnral tes els w[Lovnpov droreivecbat]
Tad pev adda duodroyety, x.t.r. where els wr. dworelvesOa: means, I sup-
pose, to descant upon a bad man; a very odd phrase. Hartung has
probably, I think, come nearer to the truth. Out of els 7... he gets
ed oxoweiy, Now I feel sure that the words éav BovAnral ris, x.7.X.
are part of what the g:Aowdyypos says. The rascal, he contends, is
merely ‘a frank independent man, tf one will look fuirly at the matter.’

3- tna 88 dyvociv pica evar yip avrév.] The ms. has va
de dyvoeivy pica yap a’roy. Foss, rightly, I think, inserts elvat be-
tween ¢i7jcoac and ydp, and puts a point at ¢joa. Ussing adopts the
conjecture, but, by an oversight, ascribes it to Petersen.

4. émdéftov.] Before Badham collated the PVat. ms. it was
supposed, on the report of Amaduzzi, that it contained éwldofov, which
Ast prints. It is creditable to Schneider’s sagacity that he conjectured
éwidé{coy, which now proves to be actually the word in the ms.

5. evvovs St var arte év exxAnola Aéyowrt.] The ms., 76 év
exxdnolg A\éyorrt. Meier’s adrg seems nearly certain; it is adopted by
Foss and Ussing.

6. Kal mpds rovg Kabnpévovs St elareiv Sevdés.] The ms. xal
awpooxaypevos 5¢. Here again, Meier seems to have hit the truth with
apos Tos KkaOnuévous, and is followed by Ussing. For ol xa6imevoe said
of the judges in a law-court, ‘the bench,’ see Andoc. de Myst. § 139,
@ odd’ dv ducv rwv Kabynudvwy ovdels dv ouddv émirpépecer.

haviour at

21

INDEX TO THE NOTES. I.

A. bath, the warm ......... XXI. 11
advocates in law-courts XXX. 4 eeaningt rs : win 186- ave
Aeginetan standard of oes) at Athens ...... XXV. 3

MEASUTES ....0-0ee eee ee XXVI. 10 4745 ‘sacred to several
Aegospotami, battle of = XIX. 7 deities XXVIIL. 18
Aethiopian slaves ...... Vile v4 Qe eo wea
Alexander the Great ... VI. 3 poun ree ee peek eee ees sacty. 8
eee ee oe ee ;

TO: cciccccrssowesescesiccse -XRVEs: §

Anthesterion, festivals Cc

IN accivesiceyactinecsvenee XXVI. " :

Antipater ..........-.0+00+ VI. Cabeiri, mysteries of ... XXVII.

Apaturia, the ........ wes XVUL § cakes for ae fn e ee XXIV. 1 ;
arbitration ......-.++-++0: Il, 2 ‘cask, the pierced’ ...... XL 3
AKCHEry —...ceeseererserees XXVI. 4 (Cassander .....2.c.-e200- XX. 3
‘architect,’ name of the choregus, duties of _XXV.) 3

manager of the thea- cisterna’ ao cecaes nee XI. 2

CYC ices ces vceveecscvwesenies Iv. § citizenship, conditions of xxl. 6
archon, assessors of ... XXIX. 3 clansmen, dinners of ... - XXIV. II
Artemis, festivals of’... XXIV. 3 cloak, mode of wearing XXIX. 11
Asclepius, temples of... VII. 30° __ fashionable length of XXIV. 15
Athene, invocation of XXVIII. 19 _ the breast ofapocket XVL 17
athletics, Greek mode- é clothing, winterandsum-

TAation IN ....cesee enone xu. 6 SOE sees cucccaidieaeus XIL 3
augury in Greece ...... XXXVI. 28 club-dinners...........0+.. XXVI. 21

CONJULOTS ......eceseeeeeees XVI. 6

B. conspiracies in law-
COUMS ss cdscetwceeescus XXX. 7
baggage carried by a contractors (épye\aBor) XX. 3

slave on foot ........- XXVI. 6 convolvulus, worn by

ball, games at .......-. VIL. 19 bacchants....... ren XXVIII. 25
banks in Marketplace. Vil. 7 cooks, hired..../.......... XVI. If
barber’s shop, a lounge XVII. 7 copper money ............ XXVI. 16
baths, the public, be- couches, coverings for VI. 17
seveccoeees XIV. 12 counting-board .........IV. 10, XIII. 2

322
‘crepis,’a slipper ......
crier, public
cross-roads, stones at...
— offeri
cups inlaid with gems
cushions taken to the

D.

Danaids, allusion to ...
dancing .......... ora
dead y, ution
from taaching w
dead, laying out of the
decked vessels
Delphi .......... eveutuaaees
deme, enrolment in a...
demesmen, dinners of...
Diasia, the
dicasteries, tone of the
dice of deerhorn
dice-playing ...............
dinner-party, presents to
guests at
Dionysia, the
discount on copper mo-
ney
distraining, right of ...
dogs, Greek feeling to-
wards
— in the halls of Greek
houses
— Laconian
— of Melita
doves, Sicilian
dreams, belief in .........
— interpretation of......
drill-serjeants
dropping a cup, etc. a
bad omen...............

@oaeee eeeoe

ee Oe ey

I.

XVI.
XXVIII.

to Hecateat XXVIII.
Vi.

I.
VII.

XXVIII.

Vil.

7

INDEX TO THE NOTES. 7.

E.
Ecclesia, controlling
power of ............6. XXIX.
education, Greek ideal of — VIII.
elective offices ............ XXIX.
ephebeum in gymnasia VII.
Eumolpidae....... Modiceuen XXVIII,
expoundersofsacredlaw 1.
F.
festivals, presents sent
to friends at............ IIL.
fish-market, the ......... XVII.
fish, salted ............... XIV.
flute-playing........ ...... XX.
fourth day of month, sa-
cred to Hermes ...... XXVIII
frankincense............... XXVIII
fruit, wayfarers allowed
LOPCAL: + sceasevinn eeu XXIV.
fuller, the ............... XXV.
‘full market,’ time meant
DY ood scecsvetocamisgsdeate XVIL
G.
gambling-houses......... XVI
Gate, the Sacred, at
Athens si sweseespecaness XII.
genealogy, Greek love
Obiaesinccaslvinetacoed XXI.
Generals, the Ten ...... VII
guests, presents to ({éa) XXXVI.
QyYMNASIA ............ 00008. VII.
gynaeconom1 ............ XXV.
H.
hair, close-cut, a mark
of mourning............ XXIV.
— worn long by youths VIL.
Hecate’s agency invoked
by spells ..........0.... XXVIEL

5
19
9
8
15
1§

Pwo ar

So

CN co-17 6 wv

INDEX TO THE NOTES. J.

*Hecate’s supper’ ......
Heracles, temples of. .

herald’s office ........:.;

Hermes, festivals of, at

palaestras
— the giver of luck
heroes, festivals of the
hired labour
Homer, his place in

Greek education
hoops, children’s.........
horses, kept by rich men

for the credit of the

XXVIII.
VIII.
XVI.

Vi,
XXVIII,

ill-omened words...XIII. 10, XVII.
informers, public...V1. 11, XXIX.

’ initiation, Dionysiacrites

OF cs etesaaatbanediaeiees
innkeeping
interest on money by the

day
— —— by the month
— compound

@veeeecenveeree
@eeeoeser een eosevonese

Coeeeeneeson

javelin-throwing
jury-courts, democratic
tone of the

K.

knights, processions of
the Athenian

labourers, hired
laurel, a bit of, carried
in the mouth as a
Charm ...........ccc000.

VIIL

33

15

. 15

leathern garments
libations at dinner to

Ge1tleSaecsenssivessosees
‘like to like’ ............
‘liturgies,’ the Athenian
loans between neigh-

DOUIS: -eveassoepenssecees
lustration, circular ......
Lysicrates, monument of

mantic art, the...... again
marketing, usu. done by

slaves
marriage feast
mask, the comic actor’s
Megalopolis, battle of
Melita
mercenary troops
Metréum, the ............
mice, omens from
moneylenders
mourning in the house

of death
Muses, festival of, at

sChools ..........ceceeee8
musical skill, Greek feel-

ing for
musicians, professional
myrtle-berries, at des-

sert
myrtle-wreaths worn by

SACTIAICETS...........0 08

@eevennecece
Bert eoe cetera vneeeeeve®
o0eve®

Cone eoeeseeeeneeaveseee

QLOALED sssssiiesanceceines
the lesser

—— the orphic .........
—— of Samothrace ...

N,

“name, change of.........

navigable season, the...

ww

324

‘new-moon,’ the fair-
day at Athens

O.

oath of inability to ac-
cept public office......
QOdeum, the...............
officers, ee appoint-
ed by lot or by election
eil used at the baths ...
omens which cross the
PACH sssiceiverpenedsretats
— the evil threatened
by, transferable ......
Al ic societies, the ...
owl, omen given by ...
ox, the more costly vic-
tim for sacrifice

P.

SHU vssesactvecataehs twas
palaestra, private ......
Panathenaea, the Great
parasites
parents, neglect to main-

tain, punishable
perfumer’s shop, the, a

lounge
‘Pheidonian measures’
philosophers, their con-
versaziOni.............4.

oer ees eceesereneseven
oonnee

Polysperchon ............
porches of Athens ......
*Poseidon’s day’.........
possets ............ sow euuil
‘potter spites potter’...

IV.
XVIII.

IV.
XII.

XXVIII.

XXVIII.
XXVIII.
XXVIII.

VIII.

XIX.
Vii.
XX IX.
XI.

XVI,

XVII.
XXVI.

VI.

VIL.

XXITT.
XX.

I,
XXI.
XIV.
XXX.

nn & OH

OY YW NA CO

INDEX TO THE NOTES. I

presents made to guests

at dinner ..............2 XXVL 7
— sent to friends at the

festivals ............00. Ill. 2
privacy, little permitted

by Greek manners ... IV. 9
procession, the Panathe-

NAIC aicasnrnewsnnaeass o-- XXIX. 4
public services, the, at

Athens 0 ..0.0005s0cc00008 XXIX: 16
puppies used in a rite of

purification ............ XXVIIL 36
purse usu. carried by an

attendant ....... bvedlvad XXIII. 3
Pydna, siege of ......... XX. 4

R,
recitations ............... mn. 6
‘red’ snake, the......... XXVIII. 9
rings worn as amulets VII. 29
‘right wheel,’ etc. ...... VII 3
S.

Sabazis sei sscescoesinsus XXVIIL 10
‘sacred’ snake, the ... XXVIII. I!
sacrifice, dress worn at VIL. 36
— followed bya banquet XV. 2
— public, by the Senate VII. 32
— — form in reporting VIL. 35
sacrificial victim, its neck

bent back............... VI. 7
— parts of, reserved for

PFIESE «sew ticasdenes chase Xxv. 6
Samothrace, mysteries

Olcwesoiseasiinatamesones XXVII. 3
‘satyri,’ a species of ape VII. 13
schools, law for privacy

Of es otuctorscacasticeia XIX. 3
schoolmasters’ fees...... XXVI. 13

sea-water in purification XXVIII. 32
seals set on doors XXII. 4
seers (Mdvrets) .........0.. XXVIII. 28

INDEX TO THE NOTES. 1.

serpent seen in a house,

OMINOUS .........ceeee XXVIII.
SETENACES ........0ccccccees IX.
seventh day of month

sacred to Apollo...... XXVIII

‘shares in the luck!’... XXVI.

ships, large, completely

COCKE ssueiacissavevaees XXV,
SHOES. sgesaieeadeni ve scsueee 1,
siesta, at NOON.......0.... XXIV.
singing at dessert ...... III.
slaves, Greek and Ro-

man treatment of ... XXVI.
— Greekfamiliarity with XIV.
— skilled, rent paid by,

to their masters ...... 16.
— rations of ............ XXIV.
— attend their masters

in the streets ......... XXIII
— let out for hire ...... XXVI.
Solonian standard of

weights and mea-

SUITES... 0-0 00.s-seeeeeroes XXVI.
son, rejoicings for birth

Ob schon Sooeusiresnoners XXII
soothsayer, consulted in

the smallest matters XVII.
: sophist’ meaning 2 a

cially ‘rhetorician’. VII
Sosias, a Thracian name XXI.
Sosistratus ............... XXI.
speech-writers............ XXII
spells, malign ............ XXVIII.
sprinkling, ceremony of XXVIII.
stick, custom of carry-

MG Bocce ccesacsewiawedeses Vil.
stones, three, virtue of XXVIII.
streets, demeanour in

CHE: iccsedessses conswhee IV.
subscriptions for friends V.

— tothe publictreasury XxXv.
SUTETICS. .....0020se00-ceees IX.
swallow, a proverb of

loquacity ..........s000 XIX.
sword, long (oxd6n) eo» XXVII.

2

7D When DW TWH Wea Aanw nm

Au

tapestry hung on walls
taverns in the market-

eeoeereroseeerese

‘tenth-day’ festival
theatre, cost of places at
— tickets for
— seats of officials at...
— lessees of
— demonstrative audi-
ences in
theft, laws against
Theseus, the hero of
the commonwealth...
— his connection with
Heracles
Thracian peltasts, etc...
— slaves

COeeeart ear euveorce

eee ae eereeeeraneen

‘tityti,? followers of
Dionysus ...............
tombstones, various
forms of ...............
torch-race .............4.
torches at the Mysteries
ee foreign, Plato
Pe eattiinesauievacsans

are appointed for

ee archon
tribesmen, festivals of

‘tribon,’ a coarse cloak

trierarchy, the............

tripod, the prize of a

choregus

trumpet, signals by......
U.

unguent instead of olive-

oil, a luxury ....... 7

325

VII.

XVI.
XVI.
VIII.
XV.
XVI.
VII.
XXXVI.

XVII.
XVI.

XXIX.
VIIl.
XXI.
XXI.
XXV.
VII.
XXVIII.

VIIl.
XVIII.

Vil.

17:

20

9
1%

14
17
6

“I>

12

20

we =
fo af SX) WO = = wy wy CW tn

326

vases, Thurian
verdict, unanimous......
vessels of water at tem-
ple-doors .............+.
vestibule of a Greek
HOUSE: westivieen sia csisea's
votive chapels, etc., at
Athens...............006
voyage, danger of wick-
ed companions in a

W.

walk after dinner ......
‘watch-dog of the peo-

ple’
weasel, ill-omened ......
wedding ceremonies ...

Coeeweseeenenereeeone

IV.

Xxx.
XXVIII.
XXV

ami Q w&

INDEX T0 THE NOTES. 1.

wedding feast ............
— presents ....00- eracceee
wine, mixing of ......:..
— selling, frauds in ...
witnesses called to a

payment ...............
witness, oath of inabi-
lity to be a ............
witchcraft ...............

women, privacy enjoin-
ed upon .. ............
— restrictions upon free-
GOM Of cisusrcceressesace
abroad. .swsescdscvsceres
— admitted to the Or-
_ phic and other mys-
COQIES: hsv ceseshedasesy
‘women's market,’ the
workshops, the, resorts
for conversation

INDEX TO THE NOTES.

a.
dvaBeBrnuévos .........-+ XXIX, II
GvaKaANuMTHpia.........00. XXVI. 22
avaxémrrew (a var. lect.)
Crit. ADD. cscccceceres XXVIII
GWOPOPG ........0ceeeceees XXVI. 15
dré\eua, Jdsraiamnasausdoxes VI. 10
GQUTOKPATWP ......0ceeceees XIX. 5
avrés ‘his honour’...... I. 6
B.

Pracgnpla .......ceceee XVII. 9g
é.

Seixvor axe orupldos and

Grd CULBONWY ......6 XXVI. 21
Secordaruovla .....2.2005- XXVIII. I
FeOCKLO [LDS ....scceeceeeeeees XXIX. 17

éxrdtvey, said of the

fuller .....scccssecceses XXV. 13
éurodGy, meanings of... XVI. 22
CEbupva Oat dpxas......+6 Iv. 6
éfdusvc Ban, said of a wit-

NESS: woceascedaccsucuew tea XVI. 16
éwl Sekta dvaBddNecPae = XXIX. I
CMOOTELS 0.2.22 eee eeeeees XXV. 4

XXVI. 16

EWEKATANAGYT) ....00 00005

IT.

EPAvOS 20 ceecenscsdesew eee Vv. §
EDODLOV .......csceceeeeseees XXVI. 4
n-
hpsorlat vas XXVII. 2
qrracOat, of law- suits... . Vv. 2
0.

Gear pawat sine wanawseresws XXVI. 4
Oeds=obpavds ............ XXVIII. 4
Beds Vet, K.T.Ao... sce eceeee tb. 2b.
te
Lepovvn ......sseseeeeeees XXV. 7
K.

KOUPA METI ....cecsereeeee XXIX. 12
kpoxvbas agaipely ...... I 3
r.
Aoyl{opar=imputo ...... XXIV. 4
Aoyoypagot .........0.006- XXII. 6
Aordop7nO Ava, deponent XVI. 2
Me

pavxés, Greek notion
OL chiansesieaviemsacieaes XXI. 13

328 INDEX 70 THE NOTES. 11.

perlxeos, a name of

ZEUS sos sehcsornciaereies
Kepls, special sense of
o.
OLKOTUTOS 00.0... esee eee eee
CWO iceinsctineeetendesiwcleds
Tv.

waviyyupts, meaning of
WAPESPOL .......0. cee eceeee

weptxadalpew ..........5. XXVIII. 36
WEeptppavrTyptov........ wee. XXVIIL 3
WEPLOKVAGKLOUGS ......... XXVIIL 36
WONEMLKOV, TO ....... cc eee XXVII. 8
wovnpos, peculiar: ‘on

OF Sessa geaeieceSiere XXX. I
mwporé\ea yauuw......... XXV. 5

o.

GUUBONOL .....0......0006. XXVIIL 3
TUUBOUAOL .......0ceeeeeces XXIX. 3
TUVOEKLA oo... ccc eceess XXIX. 17

Pelt ta tase eho e rit oe en en es a ey cet AOE
