DA

195

T455

1847

v.l

c.l

ROBARTS

11

IB

^European  Hi6rara<

THE NORMAN CONQUEST.

EUROPEAN LIBRARY.

Volumes  already  Published,  3s.  6rf.  each :

ROSCOE'S  LIFE  OF  LORENZO  DE'  MEDICI,  CALLED  THE  MAGNI-
FICENT. Edited  by  WILLIAM  HAZLITT,  ESQ. One  Volume.
GUIZOT'S  HISTORY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  REVOLUTION  OF  1640,

FROM  THE  ACCESSION  TO  THE  DEATH  OF  CHARLES  I. One  Volume.
DUMAS'  MARGUERITE  DE  VALOIS:  an  Historical  Romance  of  the

time  of  the  Massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew. One  Volume.
ROSCOE'S LIFE AND PONTIFICATE OF LEO X. Edited  by

WILLIAM  HAZLITT,  ESQ. Two  Volumes.
LIFE  OF  LUTHER:  written  by  Himself. Collected and arranged  by

M.  MICHELET;  with  Copious  Selections  from  his  Table  Talk. One

Volume.
LITERARY  HISTORY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES, FROM  THE  CLOSE

OF  THE  REIGN  OF  AUGUSTUS  TO  ITS  REVIVAL  IN  THE FIFTEENTH

CENTURY. By  the  REV.  JOSEPH  BERINGTON. One  Volume.
HISTORY  OF  CIVILIZATION,  FROM  THE  FALL  OF  THE  ROMAN  EMPIRE

TO  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION. BY  F.  GUIZOT. Three  Volumes.
LIFE  OF  CARDINAL  WOLSEY,  by  JOHN  GALT  ;  with  copious  additions

from  CAVENDISH  and  other  sources,  and  a  complete  Collection,  of  the

Cardinal's  LETTERS  and  DESPATCHES. One  Volume.
MIGNET'S HISTORY OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION, from

1789  to  1814,  translated  from  the  last  Paris  Edition. One  Volume.
HISTORY  OF  THE  COUNTER-REVOLUTION IN ENGLAND, for

the  Re-establishment  of  Popery, under  Charles  II.  and  James  II.

By  ARMAND  CARREL. HISTORY  OF  THE  REIGN  OF  JAMES  II.

By  the  RIGHT  HON.  C.  J.  Fox. One  Volume.
LIVES OF THE ITALIAN PAINTERS.  — MICHEL ANGELO,  by

R.  DUPPA,  LL.B. RAFFAELLO, by QUATREMERE  DE  QUINCY.

One  Volume.
CINQ-MARS:  an  Historical  Romance. By  COUNT  ALFRED  DE  VIGNY.

One  VolumB.
HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMAN  REPUBLIC. By  J.  MICHELET. One

Volume.
HISTORY  OF  SPANISH  LITERATURE.  By  FREDERICK  BOCTERWEK.

One  Volume.

The  above  are  the  only  Editions  of  ROSCOE'S  HISTORICAL  WORKS  in
which  the  Latin,  Italian,  and  Old  French  Notes  arc  translated.

<

HISTORY

OF  THE

CONQUEST OF  ENGLAND

23ji  tfje  Normans;

ITS  CAUSES,  AND  ITS  CONSEQUENCES,
IN  ENGLAND,  SCOTLAND,  IRELAND,  &  ON  THE  CONTINENT.

BY

AUGUSTIN THIERRY,

MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE.
TRANSLATED FROM THE SEVENTH PARIS EDITION*

BY  WILLIAM  HAZLITT,  ESQ.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL.  I.  x  7  7

LONDON:
DAVID BOGUE, FLEET STREET.

MDCCCXLVII.

D-fi

2TJ)e  jFolc  of  Jtormanfci*,

among  us  toonrtf)  get,  antr  scljulltt^  t&cr  mo:  ....
t  j^ormannes  6ctT>  tiips  f)tp  nun,  tfyat  l»et^  of  ti)t?s  loirtr,
t^t  lotof  men  of  Saxons

ROBERT  OP  GLOUCESTER'S  CHRONICLE,  Tol.  I.,  p.  3  &  363.

ADVERTISEMENT.

THE  present  translation  of  the  noblest  of  M.  Augustin
Thierry's  noble  productions,  has  been  .rendered  from  the
seventh  edition,  published  at  Paris,  in  1846.  It  forms  part
of  that  complete  collection  of  M.  Thierry's  writings  pro-
duced under  his  own  immediate  direction,  and  enriched  with
his  latest  emendations,  which  exhibit  the  form  wherein  he
proposes  to  bequeath  them  to  posterity.  One  English  ver-
sion of  this  history  was  brought  out  some  years  ago,  but  it
contained  no  portion  of  the  important  appendix  of  Pieces
Justificatives  that  add  such  value  and  interest  to  the  work,
and  among  which  may  be  mentioned  the  Eoll  of  Battle
Abbey,  and  other  lists  of  the  conquerors  of  England,  large
extracts  from  Domesday  Book  illustrative  of  the  state  of
England  at  the  period,  the  relation,  by  a  contemporary,  of
the  surrender  of  London  to  the  Normans,  a  poetical  narrative
of  the  Battle  of  Hastings,  by  an  eye-witness,  &c.  All  these
accompany  the  present  translation,  and  in  addition,  besides
a  few  supplementary  notes  that  casually  occurred  to  me
in  the  progress  of  my  labour  [distinguished  from  those  of
M.  Thierry  by  brackets],  I  have  given  full  translations  of
all  the  charters  granted  by  Henry  I.  and  his  Norman  suc-
cessors. It  seems  strange  that  Magna  Charta,  for  example,
which  is  in  every  Englishman's  mouth,  should  be  in  scarcely
any  Englishman's  memory;  the  reason  is,  that  hitherto  this
and  the  other  charters  of  the  period  have  never  been  given
in  a  popular  form.

WILLIAM  HAZLITT.

Middle  Temple,  March,  1847.

b

BIOGKAPHICAL  NOTICE

OF

M. AUGUSTIN THIERRY.

L'histoire  aura  sou  Homere  comme  la  poesie.— Chateaubriand,  Preface  des  Etudes
Historiques.

Si  j'avais  k  recommencer  ma  route,  je  prendrais  celle  qui  m'a  conduit  ou  je  suis.
Aveugle  et  souffrant,  sans  espoir  el  presque  sans  relache,  je  puis  rendre  ce  temoign-
age,  qui  de  ma  part  ne  sera  pas  suspect :  il  y  a  au  monde  quelque  chose  qui  vaut
mieux  que  les  jouissances  materielles,  mieux  que  la  fortune,  mieux  que  la  santt
elle-m£me ;  c'est  le  devouement  a  la  science. — Augustin  Thierry,  Dix  uns  d' Etudes
Historiques,  Preface,  p.  25.

Or  all  the  superior  men  I  ever  met,  few  have  left  so  deep  an  impression
upon  my  mind  as  M.  Augustin  Thierry.

I  had  long  been  acquainted  with  the  mighty  labours  that  have  rendered
him  one  of  the  leading  representatives  of  the  modern  school  of  history ;  I
had  a  vivid  recollection  of  the  enthusiasm  that  pervaded  all  the  forms  of  our
colleges,  when,  in  utter  disgust  as  we  were  with  the  meagre,  monotonous,
and  mendacious  narratives  of  Velly,  or  Millot,  or  Anquetil,  we  all  at  once
saw  new,  grand,  and  comprehensive  views  unfolded  before  our  dazzled  and
delighted  eyes,  by  M.  Augustin  Thierry.  I  had  long  known  that  after  having
endowed  his  country  with  two  masterpieces  of  literature,  in  which  the  eru-
dition of  a  Benedictine  is  combined  with  the  glowing  style  of  a  poet,  M.  Au-
gustin Thierry  had  purchased  with  the  loss  of  sight,  worn  out  over  old
texts  and  manuscripts,  the  honour  of  having  been  one  of  the  first  to  raise
the  standard  of  historical  reform,  and  to  teach  France  the  true  sources  of
her  national  origin.  I  knew  also  that,  after  this,  as  if  to  put  the  inflexible
champion  of  learning  to  the  utmost  proof,  fate  had  been  pleased  to  accu-
mulate for  him  affliction  upon  affliction ;  that  having  deprived  him  of  sight,
it  next  deprived  him  of  movement;  that  having  extinguished  the  light  of
those  penetrating  eyes,  it  had  paralyzed  his  once  robust  limbs ;  that  having
for  ever  shut  out  from  him  the  view  of  those  monuments  of  the  past,  whose
examination  and  study  had  constituted  his  joy,  his  happiness,  his  very  life,
it  had  not  even  left  to  his  hand,  mutilated  with  severest  suffering,  the  power
to  hold  a  pen.  But  I  knew,  also,  that  M.  Augustin  Thierry  had  come  vic-
torious out  of  this  fearful  struggle;  that  never  had  his  great  mind  striven  with
more  vivid  brilliancy  than  after  he  had,  to  use  his  own  expression,  become
friends  with  darkness  ;  that  never  had  his  march  over  the  difficult  ground
of  history  been  made  with  firmer  and  more  assured  step  than  when  he  was

b2

Vlll  BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF

guided  on  his  way  by  the  brightness  of  the  inward  light  alone;  I  knew  that
the  author  of  the  Rccits  des  Temps  Meroviiu/icns  hud  never  been  more-
lucid,  more  graphic,  more  graceful,  and  at  the  same  time  more  vigorous  in
his  style,  than  when  it  had  become  necessary  for  him  to  commit  to  other
hands  the  transcription  on  paper  of  the  works  cast  and  elaborated  in  that
powerful  brain,  as  in  a  burning  furnace.

I  knew  all  this,  and  it  was  this  that  made  me  eager  to  witness  a  spectacle,
to  my  mind  the  finest  of  all,  the  spectacle  of  a  great  soul  struggling  with
physical  pain,  conquering  it,  prostrating  it,  reducing  it  to  impotence,  and
deriving  from  a  loftier  sentiment  than  the  world-pride  of  Epictetus  the
power  and  the  right  to  say  to  it :  "  Pain,  ihou  art  but  a  irord!"

The  happiness  I  so  desired  I  obtained ;  and  as  it  is  impossible  for  me,
within  the  limits  of  this  sketch,  to  analyze  as  I  could  wish,  works,  that
after  all  are  in  every  one's  hands,  I  will  at  least  endeavour,  ere  I  succinctly
relate  the  noble  life  of  M.  Augustiu  Thierry,  to  convey  to  the  reader  the
impressions  made  upon  my  mind  in  a  visit  recently  paid  to  the  historian,  in
the  company  of  a  lady  and  two  other  friends.

On  reaching  the  eminence  which  overlooks  the  charming  valley  of  Mont-
morency,  not  far  from  the  Hermitage  immortalized  by  Jean  Jacques,  you
perceive  to  the  left  a  narrow  winding  road  bordered  with  villas  in  the
Italian  style.  About  half  way  down  this  road,  on  ths  right,  our  carriage  drew
up  at  a  little  gate,  the  threshold  of  which  \ve  passed  full  of  the  respectful  emo-
tion, ever  created  by  the  thought  of  great  talent  dignified  by  a  great  ca-
lamity ;  for  here,  in  the  summer  months,  dwells  Augustin  Thierry  ;  hither  he
comes  with  the  return  of  spring,  to  seek  strength  from  the  fresh,  pure  air  of
the  valley,  enabling  him  to  continue  his  labours.  We  found  ourselves  in
an  elegant  garden :  before  us  was  a  lawn  varied  with  flower  beds,  and  beyond
it  a  sloping  shrubbery.  On  the  right  were  a  green-house  and  a  summer-
house  ;  in  front  of  the  latter,  lay  at  full  length  a  handsome  Newfoundland
dog,  which,  raising  its  head,  gave  us  a  look  of  welcome  with  its  mild,  well-
natured  eyes.  To  the  left,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  lawn,  rose  a  rect-
angular house,  white,  simple,  and  in  good  taste,  consisting  of  two  stories,
the  lower  windows  opening  into  the  garden.  The  facade  was  adorned
with  a  Canova  Venus,  a  Bacchus,  a  head  of  Paris,  and  another  of  Helen,
standing  in  niches  in  the  wall.  Before  the  door  I  observed  a  Bath  chair,
painted  green ;  this  was  the  carriage  in  which  the  illustrious  invalid  took
the  air.

Entering  a  small  apartment  on  the  ground  floor,  furnished  with  simple  ele-
gance, we  were  received  by  alady  attired  in  black ;  still  young,  of  small  stature,
graceful  manners,  and  an  intellectual  but  pensive  countenance.  It  was  Ma-
dame Augustin  Thierry,  wife  of  the  historian ;  she  who  has  so  appreciated
the  beauty  and  happiness  of  associating  her  name  with  a  great  name,  her
life  with  a  life  of  glory  and  of  suffering,  of  quitting  the  vain  pleasures  of  the
•world  to  devote  herself  wholly  to  the  noblest  part  in  the  drama  of  life
that  can  be  assigned  to  a  woman,  the  part  of  a  guardian  angel,  of  a  provi
dence  on  earth  for  a  great  soul  imprisoned  in  a  suffering  body.  Even  had
I  not  known  that  Madame  Augustin  Thierry  is  endowed  with  faculties  that
qualify  her  to  take  a  direct  and  active  part  in  all  the  labours  of  her  husband,
even  had  I  not  read  the  pieces,  so  remarkable  for  thought  and  for  expres-
sion, that,  proceeding  from  her  pen,  have  appeared  in  the  Revue  des  Deux
Mondes,  under  the  title  of  Philippe  de  Morvelle,  the  destiny  that  she  has

M. AUGUSTIN THIERRY.  IX

adopted  would  suffice  in  my  eyes  to  manifest  that  hers  is  a  noble  heart,  a
noble  spirit.1

Having  been  introduced  to  Madame  Augustin.  Thierry  by  the  lady  under
whose  auspices  we  had  come,  I  sat  down  in  a  corner  of  the  apartment,  and,
while  the  reflections  I  have  just  expressed  were  passing  through  my  mind,
looked  over  a  small  round  table,  nearly  covered  with  books,  which  stood  at
my  side ;  upon  the  books  lay  some  embroidery-work  just  commenced  ;  here
was  a  bronze  sphynx  paper-weight,  and  there,  in  the  middle  of  the  table,  a
vase  filled  with  flowers  in  their  early  bloom.

Ere  long,  we  were  joined  by  M.  Augtistin  Thierry's  brother,  M.  Amedee
Thierry,2  a  man  of  middle  height,  grave  in  speech  as  in  countenance,  wherein
we  may  read  the  profound  depression  of  his  fraternal  heart.  On  his  arrival
the  conversation  became  more  general;  but,  for  my  own  part,  I  scarcely
listened  to  it,  absorbed  as  I  was  in  expectation  of  him  whom  I  was
about  to  see,  and  in  endeavours  to  picture  to  myself,  beforehand,  the  extent
to  which  evil  is  able  to  attain  the  soul  through  the  medium  of  the  body.

At  length  I  heard  the  sound  of  approaching  steps;  a  door  on  my  right
opened,  and  a  domestic  appeared,  carrying  on  his  back  a  man,  blind,
paralyzed,  incapable  of  movement.  We  all  rose :  my  heart  was  penetrated
with  emotion,  at  the  sight  of  a  being  so  powerful  in  intellect,  so  powerless
in  body  ;  the  domestic  in  his  every  motion  exhibited  a  respectful  solicitude
that  sensibly  affected  me  ;  he  seemed  thoroughly  to  appreciate  the  value  of
him  he  bore.  He  bent  gently  back  towards  an  arm  chair,  in  which  he  de-
posited his  charge,  enveloping  the  lower  part  of  the  motionless  frame  with
a  wrapper.  This  done,  in  an  instant  the  scene  changed,  and  I  at  once  re-
called a  passage  in  the  Essai  sur  la  literature  Anylaisi',  where  M.  de
Chateaubriand  describes  the  visit  of  a  contemporary  to  Milton.  "  The  author
of  '  Paradise  Lost,'  attired  in  a  black  doublet,  reclined  in  an  arm-chair  ;  his
head  was  uncovered,  his  silver  hair  fell  upon  his  shoulders,  and  his  fine
dark  eyes  shone  bright  in  their  blindness  upon  his  pallid  face."  It  was  the
same  head,  with  the  exception  of  the  white  hair,  that  I  now  saw  before  me  ;
the  same  face,  more  youthful  and  vigorous,  the  noblest  blind  face  that  cau
be  conceived.  The  head  was  firmly  set  upon  broad  shoulders  ;  glossy  hair,
of  the  deepest  black,  carefully  parted  over  an  expansive  forehead,  fell  in  curls
beside  each  temple ;  beneath  their  arched  brows  opened  the  dark  eyes ;
but  for  the  vagueness  of  their  direction,  I  should  have  imagined  them
animated  with  sight ;  the  nose  was  of  the  purest  Greek  form ;  the  mouth,
with  lips  fine,  delicate,  and  expressive,  seemed  endowed  with  all  the  sen-
sibility of  which  the  eyes  had  been  deprived  ;  the  finely  turned  chin  had  a
slight  dimple  at  its  extremity  ;  there  was  in  the  contour  of  the  face,  and  in
the  general  expression  of  the  physiognomy,  a  remarkable  combination  of
energy,  subtleness,  and  sedate  tranquillity  ;  the  tones  of  his  voice  were

1  Madame  Augustin  Thierry,  whose  maiden  name  was  Julia  de  Queran-
gal,  belongs  to  a  distinguished  Breton  family.  Besides  the  fragments  men-
tioned above,  she  is  the  authoress  of  a  charming  production,  entitled  Ade-
laide, on  Memoires  d'une  filic.

*  M.  Amtdee  Thierry  is  himself,  1  need  hardly  say,  a  great  historian ;
every  one  has  read  his  Histoire  dcs  Gaulolx.  Science  may  well  lament  that
important  administrative  occupations  have  prevented  M.  Amedee  Thierry
from  wholly  devoting  himself  to  her  service.

X  BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF

clear,  well  poised,  and  distinct,  though,  from  his  feeble  health,  not  sonorous  ~r
his  bearing  was,  in  the  highest  degree,  elegant;  the  lower  portion  of  the
frame,  as  I  have  said,  was  paralyzed,  but  the  movement  of  the  bust  and  of
the  arms  was  free;  the  hands,  of  which  only  the  forefinger  and  thumb
appeared  capable  of  action,  were  gloved.

When  the  name  of  the  lady  who  had  introduced  us  was  announced  to
him,  the  handsome  blind  man  smiled,  and  like  the  smile  of  Chactas  in
Rene,  "  that  smile  of  the  mouth,  unaccompanied  by  the  smile  of  the  eyes,
partook  of  the  mysterious  and  of  the  celestial."  The  lady  approached  him,
and  Thierry  kissed,  with  a  chivalrous  air,  the  fair  hand  placed  in  his  own.

Conversation  once  fairly  begun,  that  fine  head  seemed  as  it  were  radiant
in  the  light  of  the  intellect  still  finer  within.  I  have  been  in  the  company
of  many  persons  who  have  the  reputation  of  good  talkers,  and  who  do  talk
admirably,  but  I  have  perhaps  never  heard  anything  comparable  with  the
colloquial  language  of  M.  Angustin  Thierry,  in  facility,  perspicuity,  elegance.
It  is,  doubtless,  the  habit  of  dictation,  that  has  given  so  much  of  style  to  his
conversation  ;  but  whatever  the  cause,  it  may  indeed  be  said  of  him,  that  with-
out any  effort,  without  any  affectation  whatever,  he  really  speaks  like  a  book.

One  of  our  party,  M.  Ampere,  was  preparing  to  depart  for  the  East ;  he  had
no  sooner  mentioned  the  circumstance,  than  M.  Augustin  Thierry  discoursed
to  us  of  the  East,  in  what,  for  thought  and  language,  was  an  absolute  poem  ;
this  blind  man  knows  everything,  recollects  everything ;  that  which  he  has
not  seen  with  the  eyes  of  the  body,  he  has  seen  with  the  eyes  of  the  spirit.
Like  Milton,  he  is  acquainted  with  nearly  all  the  European  languages.  One
of  his  friends  told  me,  that  he  has  sometimes  heard  him  in  the  evening,  seated
in  his  garden,  beneath  the  pale  rays  of  the  setting  sun,  singing,  with  his
feeble  voice,  a  love  song  in  modern  Greek ;  and  at  such  moments,  added  my
informant,  '  he  seemed  to  me  finer  than  Homer,  or  than  the  unknown  Klepht,
who  himself,  perhaps  also  blind,  had  composed  the  verses  he  was  reciting.'

Throughout  the  conversation,  to  which  I  was  a  silent  and  attentive
listener,  I  could  detect  in  M.  Augustin  Thierry  not  the  slightest  trace
of  selfishness,  not  the  least  self-reference ;  on  the  contrary,  he  who
had  been  so  cruelly  tried  by  fate,  spoke  of  the  sufferings  and  infirmities
of  others  with  the  most  unaffected  and  touching  commiseration.  And
thus,  from  day  to  day,  does  this  martyr  to  science  intrepidly  pursue
the  task  he  has  imposed  upon  himself ;  at  times  only,  when  his
pains  are  most  racking,  he  is  heard  to  murmur:  "Oh,  that  I  were  only
blind  !"  Except  in  such  moments  of  depression,  which  are  short  and  far
between,  and  discernible  only  by  his  most  intimate  associates,  M.  Augustin
Thierry  seems  more  a  stranger  to  his  own  condition  than  are  those  who
surround  and  listen  to  him ;  science,  history,  poetry,  anecdotes,  reminis-
cences of  his  youth — he  applies  to  these  and  all  other  subjects  the  same  full,
rich,  elegant,  nervous,  noble  diction ;  every  shade  of  thought  is  reflected  on
his  lips.  At  times,  when  an  idea  of  a  more  peculiarly  grave  and  lofty
character  arises  in  his  mind,  you  can  discern  a  movement  in  the  muscles  of
the  eye ;  those  blind  eyes,  the  dark  pupil  of  which  stands  out  in  bold  relief
from  the  cornea,  open  wide ;  the  thought  within  seems  essaying  to  make  its
•way  through  the  opacity  of  the  ball,  and,  after  vain  efforts  to  effect  this,  re-
turns within,  descends  to  the  lips,  which  receiving  it,  give  it  forth,  not  only  in
language,  but  with  the  expression  of  the  look ;  from  time  to  time,  the  blind
man  passes  his  poor  weak  hand  over  those,  in  every  sense,  so  speaking  lips,

M. AUGUSTIN THIERRY.  31

as  if  cherishing  the  precious  orgaii,  enriched  for  him  with  all  the  faculties
that  the  other  organs  have  lost.  The  two  hours  we  spent  with  him  seemed
not  a  moment.

M.  Augustin  Thierry  was  born  at  Blois,  on  the  20th  May,  1795,  of  poor
and  humble  parents.  He  passed  through  his  studies  with  distinguished  suc-
cess at  the  college  of  his  native  town,  and  judging  from  the  first  production
of  his  youth,1  impressed  with  a  singular  energy  and  even  enthusiasm,  he
must  have  been  endowed  by  nature  with  an  extreme  sensibility,  with  an
imagination  highly  vivid,  and  of  such  vigorous  organization  as  must  have
necessitated  enormous,  pitiless  toil  to  quell  it.  He  himself  relates,  in  the
preface  to  his  Recits  des  Temps  Merovingiens,  how.  the  author  of  Les
Martyrs,  whom  we  find,  as  it  were,  a  great  lighthouse  at  the  entrance  to
every  new  idea  of  our  age,  became,  in  a  great  degree,  the  primum  mobile  of
his  future  vocation ;  how,  one  day,  when  alone  in  one  of  the  school-rooms,
reading,  for  the  first  time,  Les  Martyrs,  and  having  come,  in  the  sixth  book,
to  the  so  dramatic  picture  of  the  battle  of  the  Franks  and  the  Romans  in  the
marshes  of  Batavia,  the  young  student  suddenly  felt  within  him,  as  it  were,  a
revelation  of  historical  truth  falsified  by  the  classic  historians  and  restored
by  the  powerful  instinct  of  a  great  poet ;  how,  seized  with  enthusiasm,  he
rose  from  his  seat,  and  made  the  apartment  resound,  as  he  marched  up  and
down  its  length,  shouting  the  war-song  of  the  terrible  Franks  of  M.  de  Cha-
teaubriand :  "  Pharamond,  Pharamond,  we  have  fought  with  the  sword  !  &c."
and,  lastly,  how  the  memory  of  this  electric  impression  remained  stamped
upon  his  mind  in  indelible  characters.

In  1811,  on  quitting  his  college,  M.  Augustin  Thierry  entered  the  nor-
mal school ;  after  passing  two  years  there,  he  was  appointed  professor  in  a
provincial  college;  the  invasion  of  1814  brought  him  to  Paris.  He  was  at
this  time  in  all  the  ardour  of  early  youth ;  versed  in  the  most  various  studies,
he  had  as  yet  no  particular  predilection  for  any  distinct  branch  of  science,
and  his  political  ideas,  though  fervent,  partook  of  the  vagueness  and  confu-
sion which  characterized  the  period.  He  has  himself  described  the  condi-
tion of  his  mind  at  this  time :  "  With  a  hatred  of  military  despotism,  part  of
the  reaction  of  the  general  mind  against  the  imperial  regime,  I  combined  a
profound  aversion  for  revolutionary  tyranny,  and,  without  any  decided  pre-
ference for  one  form  of  government  over  another,  a  certain  distaste  for  the
English  constitution,  or  rather  for  the  odious  and  absurd  aping  of  it  which
at  this  period  prevailed  in  France.  I  yearned  for  a  future,  I  knew  not  ex.
actly  what ;  for  a  liberty  whose  definition,  if  I  gave  it  any  at  all,  assumed
something  of  this  form  :  a  government  with  the  greatest  possible  amount  of
individual  guarantees,  and  the  least  possible  amount  of  administrative
action."

There  was  living  at  this  time  a  celebrated  political  economist,  then,  in-
deed, obscure,  but  whom  it  has  since  been  sought  to  elevate  into  a  god.
The  daring  scope  of  his  views  at  first  led  away  the  ardent  mind  of  the
youthful  Augustin,  who,  quitting  the  university,  devoted  himself  with  all
the  fervency  of  his  nature  to  the  study  of  the  loftiest  social  problems,  and
attached  himself  to  St.  Simon  in  the  capacity  of  secretary,  and  of  disciple.2

1  Most  of  these  have  been  since  reproduced  in  the  work  entitled,  Dix
ans  tf  Etudes  Historiqucs.

2  Various  pamphlets  resulted  from  this  association.

Xll  BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF

It  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  at  this  period  St.  Simon  had  propounded  no
idea  of  constructing  anything  at  all  resembling  a  new  religion.  This  was  a
notion  which  occurred  to  him  much  later,  if,  indeed,  it  be  not  altogether
a  posthumous  crotchet,  gratuitously  attributed  to  him  by  his  successors.
However  this  may  have  been,  though  limited  to  questions  of  an  entirely  so-
cial, industrial,  or  political  character,  this  co-operation  of  M.  Augustin
Thierry  in  the  labours  of  a  man,  whose  eminent  qualities  as  a  political  eco-
nomist and  thinker  are  incontestable,  was  of  short  duration ;  the  gloomy,
narrow,  and  despotic  tendencies  of  sectarianism  could  not  but  jar  upon  a
mind  essentially  endowed  with  explicitness,  precision,  and  independence  ;
the  disciple  often  rebelled  against  the  views  of  the  master,  and,  besides,  he
felt  more  and  more  attracted  towards  a  sphere  of  studies  more  positive  in
their  nature.  M.  Augustin  Thierry  left  St.  Simon  in  1817,  and  joined
the  Censeur  Europcen,  which,  under  the  editorship  of  MM.  Comte  and  Du-
noyer,  enjoyed  the  reputation  of  the  most  important  and  most  high-minded  of
the  liberal  journals  of  the  period.

The  new  school  of  history  had  not  nt  this  time  raised  its  head ;  Velly,
Garnier,  Millot,  Anquetil,  reigned  sovereign  supreme.  The  general  as-
pect of  our  own  history,  more  especially  that  of  the  first  eight  centuries,
was  utterly  disfigured ;  in  that  dull  and  arid  nomenclature  of  falls  et  gestes
royaux,  the  Sicambrian  Chlodowig  is  presented  to  us  in  flowing  wig  and
laced  ruffles,  the  leudes  of  Charlemagne  in  the  guise  of  the  courtiers  of
the  CEil  de  Baevf,  Fredegonde  in  fontanyes,  and  Hermangarde  in  hooped-
petticoat  and  red-heeled  shoes.  "  These  men,"  observes  M.  de  Chateau-
briand, "  carried  in  their  heads  the  fixed  form  of  a  solemn  monarchy,  ever
the  same,  from  first  to  last,  marching  sedately  onwards  with  three  orders
and  a  parliament  of  grave  persons  in  black  robes  and  powdered  hair."  No
historian  had  thought  of  moving  out  of  this  beaten  track,  when  M.  Thierry,
having  occasion  to  seek,  in  the  history  of  the  past,  materials  for  the  po-
lemics of  the  day,  first  descended  into  the  arena,  and  young,  ardent,  uncon-
scious of  his  vocation  and  of  his  destiny,  entered  upon  that  grand  struggle^
the  result  of  which  was  to  be  the  establishment  of  new  doctrines  and  new
principles.

In  his  youthful  fervour  and  the  excess  of  his  popular  enthusiasm,  M.
Augustin  began  with  rushing  beyond  the  bounds  of  truth  into  the  regions
of  paradox.  And  this  was  to  be  expected.  Aristocracy,  assailed  and  deci-
mated under  Louis  XI.,  gagged  and  beaten  down  by  Kichelieu  and  Louis
XIV.,  dishonoured  under  Louis  XV.,  beheaded  by  the  Convention,  led  in  a
string  by  Napoleon,  sought  once  more  to  raise  its  head  under  the  Restora-
tion; it  would,  perhaps,  to  a  certain  extent,  have  attained  its  object,  had  it
been  better  served,  and  more  especially  had  it  been  less  compromised  by  the
majority  of  those  who  constituted  themselves  its  organs.  Listening  to  its
political  champions,  you  would  have  supposed  that  it  desired  to  pass  a
sponge  over  four  centuries  of  progressive  decay:  it  did  not  content  itself
with  assailing  accomplished  facts,  it  denied  them ;  and  feeble,  weak,  ob-
scured, lost  as  it  was  in  the  grand  social  unity,  the  result  of  '89,  instead  of
quietly  settling  down  in  its  position,  and  seeking,  in  self-renovation,  an  ele-
ment of  strength  and  duration,  it  aimed  at  nothing  less  than  the  annihila-
tion of  the  past,  the  confiscation  of  history.  In  the  nineteenth  century,  an
eloquent  voice  ventured  to  say,  in  the  very  teeth  of  new  France — "Enfran-
chised race,  slaves  wrested  from  our  grasp,  tributary  people,  new  people,

M. AUGUSTIN THIERRY.  Xlii

leave  was  granted  you  to  be  free,  but  not  to  be  noble  ;  for  us,  all  is  of  right ;
for  you,  all  is  of  favour."1  Pretensions  of  this  sort,  wholly  based  upon  the
old  right  of  conquest,  naturally  brought  into  the  field  of  history  a  plebeian,
proud  of  his  plebeian  birth,  and  ready  to  oppose  pride  to  pride.  When,  a
century  before,  the  Comte  de  Boulainvilliers  sought  to  construct  an  histo-
rical system  of  his  own,  by  deducing  false  consequences  from  the  false  pro-
position already  generally  scouted,  of  the  distinction  of  conquerors  and
conquered  in  Gaul,  a  man  of  the  people,  the  abbe  Dubos,  stood  forward  to
combat  fallacy  with  fallacy ;  in  reply  to  a  book  which  a-bused  the  fact  of
conquest,  he  wrote  a  very  learned  work2  to  prove  that  there  had  been  no
conquest  at  all ;  that  there  had  been  an  alliance  between  the  two  races  and
nothing  more;  that,  five  centimes  later,  in  the  tenth  century,  in  conse-
quence of  the  dismemberment  of  the  sovereignty,  and  the  conversion  of
offices  into  seigueuries,  a  dominant  caste  had  intrusively  interposed  itself
between  kings  and  people ;  and  that  it  was  feudalism  and  not  the  Prankish
invasion  which  had  enslaved  Gaul.

In  reproducing  the  aristocratic  theories  of  M.  de  Boulainvilliers,  M.  de
Montlosier  encountered  at  the  very  outset  an  antagonist  much  less  accom-
modating than  the  Abbe  Dubos.  Far  from  denying  the  fact  of  conquest,
M.  Augustin  Thierry  proudly  accepted  it,  as  a  premises  on  which  to  found
his  claims  in  favour  of  the  conquered  ;  not  content  with  establishing  the  ori-
ginal iniquity  of  the  fact  and  its  fatal  consequences  at  the  period,  he  traced
its  progress  through  fourteen  ages,  subsisting  ever  and  everywhere,  and
denounced  it  as  the  source  not  merely  of  evils  past,  but  of  all  present
difficulties.  Gravely  adopting  the  assertions  of  M.  de  Montlosier,  and  his
imaginary  division  of  the  France  of  1815  into  Gauls  and  Franks,  com-
bating menace  with  menace,  and  paradox  with  paradox,  he  in  his  turn  ex-
claimed :  "  We  think  we  are  one  nation,  yet  we  are  two  nations  in  the
same  land ;  two  nations,  hostile  in  their  recollections  of  the  past,  irreconcil-
able in  their  projects  for  the  future.  The  genius  of  the  conquest  has  made
its  mock  of  nature  and  of  time,  it  still  hovers  over  this  unhappy  country.  It
is  under  its  influence  that  the  distinctions  of  castes  have  succeeded  to  those
of  blood,  those  of  orders  to  those  of  castes,  those  of  titles  to  those  of  or-
ders.''3 Hurried  on  in  this  manner,  by  the  necessities  of  polemics,  beyond
the  bounds  of  the  true,  it  continued  the  fight  in  the  void.  Once  engaged  in
supplying  France  with  the  reason  and  solution  of  all  things  in  this  perma-
nent fact  of  conquest,  he  undertook  to  follow  it  out  of  France,  and  to
combat  it  wherever,  as  he  conceived,  he  should  find  it.  He  commenced  by
giving  in  the  Censeur  a  sketch  of  the  revolutions  of  England  from  the  Nor-
man invasion  to  the  death  of  Charles  I.,  and  not  content  with  metamor-
phosing the  Cavaliers  and  Roundheads  into  Normans  and  Saxons,  he  car-
ried the  theory  of  the  conquest,  and  subjection  of  the  one  race  by  the  other,
even  beyond  the  reign  of  Charles  II.

He  has  himself  given  an  account4  of  these  exaggerations  and  gropings  in
the  dark  of  a  young  and  great  mind  feeling  its  way ;  he  has  told  us,  with

1  Montlosier,  DC  la  Monarchic  Fran^aisc,  ii.

2  Histoire  Critique  de  1'Etablissement  de  la  Monarchic  Francaise  dans
les  Gaules.

s  Ceuseur  Europeen,  2  ap. 1820.
*  Dix  Ans  d'Etudes  Historiques. — Preface.

XiV  BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF

the  frankness  which  belongs  to  a  superior  man,  that  he  soon  saw  he  was
carrying  too  far  this,  in  itself,  so  true  and  fecund  principle  of  the  distinction
of  races,  that  he  was  falsifying  history  hy  applying  to  epochs  entirely  dif-
ferentforms  entirely  identical.  But  he  has  also  described  howto  his  aberrations
as  a  journalist,  who  had  at  first  lost  his  way,  as  it  were,  in  the  past,  he  owed
the  sentiment  of  his  true  vocation ;  how  from  the  very  day  when  he  first
touched  upon  the  great  problem  of  the  Germanic  invasions  and  the  dismem-
berment of  the  Roman  empire,  he  was  drawn  to  it  by  an  irresistible  attrac-
tion ;  how,  upon  his  first  glance  at  history  he  said  to  himself;  I  will  be  an
historian  :  and  how  deeply  he  became  impressed  with  the  essentiality  of  re-
gulating and  maturing  by  study  the  passion  that  had  risen  within  him.

When  the  Ccnseur  Ettropeen  succumbed  beneath  the  blows  of  a  censor-
ship altogether  different  from  its  own,  M.  Augustin  Thierry,  already  more
especially  devoted  to  the  labours  of  pure  erudition,  contributed  to  the  Cour-
rier  Fran^ais  a  series  of  letters  in  which,  sketching  an  outline  of  one  of  his
future  works,  he  expounded  his  plan  of  a  reform  in  the  manner  of  studying
and  writing  history.  The  exigencies  of  daily  polemics  closing  this  arena
to  him,  M.  Thierry,  who  had  hitherto  divided  his  attention  between  the  his-
tory of  the  past  and  the  business  of  the  present,  sequestered  himself  from
the  world  and  its  politics,  and  engaged  in  a  pertinacious  study  of  facts,
reading,  analysing,  comparing,  and  extracting  the  marrow  out  of  every  book
and  every  manuscript  that  could  throw  a  light  upon  his  investigations.
Still  under  the  influence  of  the  grand  problem  of  the  Germanic  invasions
which  had  struck  his  imagination  at  the  outset,  he  digested  all  the  docu-
ments calculated  to  throw  light  upon  it,  to  fathom  it,  to  solve  it ;  and  from
step  to  step,  his  ideas  progressively  matured  and  developed,  by  five  years  of
solitary  labours,  resulted  at  length  in  two  works,  alike  admirable  in  their
matter  and  their  manner,  and  which  our  epoch,  so  encumbered  with  futile
and  absurd  productions,  may  well  regard  as  memorable  and  glorious  to  it,
destined  as  they  are  to  a  permanent  existence  among  the  proudest  annals  of
learning.  The  first  edition  of  the  Histoirc  de  la  Conquete  de  VAngletcrre
par  les  Normands  appeared  in  the  spring  of  1825  ;  the  first  edition  of  the
Lettres  sur  I'Histoire  de  France  about  the  close  of  1827  ;  a  second  edition,
entirely  revised  and  recast,  was  published  in  the  following  year.

The  reader  is  aware  of  the  immense  sensation  produced  by  the  former  of
these  works,  the  so  cherished  production  of  an  historian  of  twenty-six.  The
author  was  enjoying  all  the  triumph  of  success  when  he,  too  late,  perceived
that  his  eyes  had  failed  under  his  intense  labours,  and  that  his  strength  was
giving  way.  After  a  journey  into  Switzerland,  he  visited  Provence,  accom-
panied by  his  learned  friend  M.  Fauriel,  and  on  his  return  to  Paris,  in  1826,
found  his  health  somewhat  improved,  but  his  sight  still  declining.  Almost
blind,  he  resumed  his  labours ;  a  young  man,  obscure  at  this  period,  but
•whose  name  was  destined  to  take  a  brilliant  position  in  literature,  Armand
Carrel,  joined  him,  as  secretary,  and  by  his  friendly  earnestness  of  purpose
rendered  the  necessity  of  reading  with  the  eyes  of  others  less  painful  to
Thierry:  relieved  by  this  co-operation,  heat  onetime  formed,  with  M.  Mig-
Bet,  the  project  of  writing  in  concert  a  great  national  history,  but,  after
some  experiments  which  seemed  to  show  the  futility  of  the  attempt,  the
project  was  abandoned.

His  next  publication  was  the  Lettres  sur  THistoire  de  France,  shortly
after  the  appearance  of  which,  in  the  spring  of  1830,  the  Institute  elected

M. AUGUSTIN THIERRY.  XV

him  a  member  of  the  Academie  des  Inscriptiones  et  Belles  Lettres.  He  was
ere  long  assailed  by  the  most  acute  pains,  and  by  a  nervous  malady  of  the
gravest  character.  He  had  once  more  to  renounce  his  beloved  studies  and
to  quit  Paris.  He  lived,  from  1831  to  1836,  between  Vesoul,  with  his
brother  the  prefect  of  Haute- Saone,  and  the  baths  of  Luxeuil.  It  was  at
the  latter  place  that,  in  1831,  he  became  acquainted  with  arid  married  the
lady  who  was  to  alleviate  his  sufferings,  by  aiding  him  on  his  way  through,
the  evil  days  of  premature  old  age.  In  the  intervals  of  repose  granted  him
by  his  maladies,  he  resumed  with  fresh  ardour  his  task  of  historian.  He
first  occupied  himself  with  the  revision  of  his  Histoirc  de  la  Conqu6te  de
fjtnglelerre,  and  then  with  selecting  and  correcting  the  various  productions
of  his  youth,  which  he  collected  into  a  volume,  published  in  1834,  under  the
title  of  Dix  Ans  d  Eludes  Historiques.  Still  full  of  the  desire  to  complete
his  history  of  the  Germanic  invasions,  he  commenced  in  the  Revue  des  Deux
Mondes  a  series  of  letters,  giving  an  exact  and  perfect  picture  of  the  civil,
political,  and  religious  life  of  the  French  of  the  sixth  century.

These  elegant,  animated,  and  at  the  same  time  substantial  productions,
published  in  the  next  year  under  the  title  of  Recits  des  Temps  Merovingiens,
obtained  for  their  author  the  prize  of  400/.,  founded  by  Baron  Gobert,  and
awarded  by  the  Academie  Fran9aise.  Almost  at  the  same  moment — in  the
autumn  of  1835 — M.  Guizot  recalled  him  to  Paris,  for  the  purpose  of  en-
trusting to  him  the  superintendence  of  a  great  undertaking,  honourable  alike
to  the  historian  who  conceived  it  and  the  historian  who  directed  it.  It  was
nothing  less  than  to  extract  from  the  archives  of  every  town  and  parish  of
France  all  the  materials  directly  or  indirectly  bearing  upon  the  history  of  the
Third  estate,  so  as  to  form  a  collection  rivalling  the  great  Benedictine  com-
pilations devoted  to  the  nobility  and  the  clergy,  and  to  supply  future  genius
with  all  the  materials  for  a  gigantic  work,  hitherto  declared  impossible — a
general  and  complete  history,  namely,  of  the  French  nation.  Should  this
splendid  monument  be  ever  constructed,  on  its  base  must  be  prominently
inscribed  the  names  of  Francis  Guizot  and  Augustin  Thierry.

An  illustrious  philosopher,  whose  untimely  death  Germany  still  deplores,
Edward  Gans,  writes  thus  : —

"  It  is  Thierry  who  has  triumphantly  demonstrated  the  fallacy  of  those
historical  systems  which  see  all  France  in  a  number  of  Frankish  tribes ;
which,  passing  over  in  silence  the  element  imported  from  the  south,  forget
that  up  to  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century  the  limits  of  the  Frank-
ish empire  did  not  extend  beyond  the  Isere,  and  that  in  the  tongue  of  oc
and  no,  the  tongue  of  ouy  and  nenny,  was  likened  to  the  barking  of  a  dog;
in  a  word,  it  is  Thierry  who  has  taught  us  to  appreciate  the  true  significa-
tion of  what  is  called  the  fourteen  centuries  of  the  French  monarchy."1

I  will  add,  that  it  is  M.  Augustin  Thierry  who,  by  his  efforts  to  restore
to  proper  names,  under  the  two  first  races,  their  true  orthography,  has  suc-
ceeded in  fixing  the  moment  of  the  metamorphosis  of  Franks  into  French ;
and  it  is  M.  Thierry  who  has  demolished  to  its  foundations  the  historical
axiom  inscribed  at  the  head  of  the  charter  of  1814 — namely,  the  pretended
enfranchisement  of  the  communes  by  Louis  le  Gros.  He  has  created  in
our  annals  a  glorious  trace  that  will  never  be  effaced  ;  no  historian,  ancient
or  modern,  has  exhibited,  in  a  higher  degree  than  he,  that  human  sense

1  Das  Erbrecht  in  Weltgeschieh.tlicb.er  Entwickelung,  iv.  242.

XVI  BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE.

which  js  the  very  soul  of  history,  I  mean  that  comprehensive  sensibility,
synthetic  without  losing  aught  of  the  true,  which  leads  a  writer  to  attack
himself  to  the  destiny  of  a  whole  people  as  to  the  destiny  of  an  individual ;
following  this  people,  step  by  step,  through  ages,  with  an  interest  as  earnest,
emotions  as  vivid,  as  though  he  were  following  the  steps  of  a  friend  engaged
in  a  perilous  enterprise ;  no  one,  in  a  word,  has  better  realized  than
M.  Thierry  this  conception  of  the  ideal  in  history  enunciated  by  himself:
"  La  narration  complete  epiiisant  les  textes,  rassemblant  les  details  epars,
recueillant  jusqu'auxmoiudres  indices  des  fails,  et  des  caracteres,  et  de  tout
cela  formant  un  corps,  auquel  vient  le  souffle  de  vie,  par  1'union  de  la
science  et  de  1'art."1

1  Kecits  des  temps  Merovingiens,  ii.  357.

INTRODUCTION.

THE  principal  states  of  modern  Europe  have  at  present
attained  a  high  degree  of  territorial  unity,  and  the  habit  of
living  under  one  same  government  and  in  the  bosom  of  one
same  civilization,  seems  to  have  introduced  among  the  popu-
lation of  each  state  an  entire  community  of  manners,  language,
and  patriotism.  Yet  there  is  perhaps  not  one  of  them  which
does  not  still  present  to  the  inquirer  living  traces  of  the
diversity  of  the  races  of  men  which,  in  the  progress  of  time,
have  combined  to  form  that  population.  This  variety  of
races  is  displayed  under  different  aspects.  Here  a  complete
separation  of  idioms,  local  traditions,  political  sentiments,  and
a  sort  of  instinctive  hostility,  distinguish  from  the  great
national  mass  the  population  of  particular  districts,  of  limited
extent;  there  a  simple  difference  of  idiom,  or  even  of  accent,
marks,  though  more  faintly,  the  limit  of  the  settlements
formed  by  peoples  of  diverse  origin,  and  long  separated  by
deep-seated  animosities.  The  further  we  go  back  from  the
time  in  which  we  live,  the  more  distinct  do  these  varieties
become ;  we  clearly  perceive  the  existence  of  several  peoples
in  the  geographical  circumscription  which  bears  the  name  of
one  alone:  instead  of  varying  provincial  dialects,  we  find
complete  and  regular  languages;  and  that  which  in  the  light
of  the  present  seems  merely  defective  civilization  and  pro-
tracted resistance  to  progress,  assumes,  in  the  past,  the  aspect
of  original  manners  and  patriotic  adherence  to  ancient  insti-

XV111  INTRODUCTION.

tutions.  In  this  way,  facts  themselves  of  no  social  im-
portance, retain  great  historical  value.  It  is  a  falsification  of
history  to  introduce  into  it  a  philosophical  contempt  for  all
that  does  not  enter  into  the  uniformity  of  existing  civiliza-
tion, or  to  regard  as  alone  worthy  of  honourable  mention  the
peoples  with  whose  name  the  chances  of  events  have  con-
nected the  idea  and  the  destiny  of  that  civilization.

The  populations  of  the  European  continent  and  its  islands
have  come  at  various  periods  into  juxtaposition,  usurping
the  one  from  the  other,  territories  already  occupied,  and
arrested  only  in  their  progress,  at  the  point  where  natural
obstacles,  or  resistance  more  powerful  than  their  attack,  the
result  of  some  extraordinary  combination  of  the  conquered,
absolutely  compelled  them  to  stop.  Thus  the  conquered  of
various  epochs  have  become,  so  to  speak,  ranged  in  layers  of
populations,  in  the  different  directions  taken  by  the  great
migration  of  peoples.  In  this  movement  of  successive  in-
vasions, the  most  ancient  races,  reduced  to  a  few  families,  have
deserted  the  plains  and  flown  to  the  mountains,  where  they
have  maintained  a  poor  but  independent  existence;  while  the
invaders,  invaded  in  their  turn,  have  become  serfs  of  the
soil  in  the  plains  they  occupied,  from  want  of  a  vacant  asylum
in  the  impregnable  recesses  already  possessed  by  those  whom
themselves  had  driven  there.1

OL  The  conquest  of  England  by  William  duke  of  Normandy,
in  the  year  1066,  is  the  last  territorial  conquest  that  has  been
operated  in  the  western  portion  of  Europe.  The  conquests
effected  there  since  that  period  have  been  political  conquests,
quite  different  from  those  of  the  barbarians,  who  transferred
themselves  and  their  families  to  the  conquered  territory,  and
apportioned  it  out  among  themselves,  leaving  to  the  con-
quered merely  life,  and  this  on  condition  of  their  doing  all

1  The  principal  movements  of  population  in  the  western  continent,  pre-
vious to  our  era,  are  related  in  detail,  and,  as  I  think,  with  rare  sagacity  by
my  brother,  Amedee  Thierry,  in  his  Histoire  des  Gaulois.

INTRODUCTION.  XIX

the  work  and  keeping  quiet.  This  invasion  having  taken
place  at  a  period  nearer  to  our  own  than  those  of  the  popula-
tions which,  in  the  fifth  century,  dismembered  the  Roman
empire,  we  possess  numerous  documents  elucidating  well
nigh  every  fact  connected  with  its  history,  and  which  are
even  complete  enough  to  give  us  a  just  idea  of  what  a  con-
quest in  the  middle  ages  was,  how  it  was  executed,  and  how-
maintained,  what  description  of  spoliations  and  sufferings  it
inflicted  on  the  vanquished,  and  what  means  were  employed
by  the  latter  to  react  against  their  invaders.  Such  a  picture
carefully  traced  in  all  its  details,  and  set  off  in  fitting  colours,
has  an  historical  interest  more  general  than  might  at  first
seem  to  belong  to  the  limits  of  time  and  place  within  which
itself  is  circumscribed,  for  almost  every  people  in  Europe  has,
in  its  actual  existence,  something  derived  from  the  conquests
of  the  middle  ages.  It  is  to  these  conquests  that  the  majority
of  them  owe  their  geographical  limits,  the  name  they  bear,
and,  in  great  measure,  their  internal  constitution,  that  is  to
say,  their  distribution  into  orders  and  classes.

The  higher  and  lower  classes  who,  at  the  present  day,  keep
so  distrustful  an  eye  upon  one  another,  or  actually  struggle  for
systems  of  ideas  and  of  government,  are  in  many  countries  the
lineal  representatives  of  the  peoples  conquering  and  the
peoples  conquered  of  an  anterior  epoch.  Thus  the  sword  of  the
conquest,  in  renewing  the  face  of  Europe  and  the  distribution
of  its  inhabitants,  has  left  its  ancient  impress  upon  each  nation
created  by  the  admixture  of  various  races.  The  race  of  the
invaders,  when  it  ceased  to  be  a  separate  nation,  remained  a
privileged  class.  It  formed  a  military  nobility,  which,  to
avoid  gradual  extinction,  recruiting  its  numbers  from  time
to  time  from  the  more  ambitious,  adventurous,  and  turbulent
of  the  inferior  ranks,  domineered  over  the  laborious  and
peaceful  masses  below  them,  so  long  as  the  military  govern-
ment derived  from  the  conquest  endured.  The  invaded  race,
despoiled  of  property  in  the  soil,  of  command,  and  of

XX  INTRODUCTION.

liberty,  not  living  by  the  sword  but  by  the  compulsory
labour  of  their  hands,  dwelling  not  in  castles  but  in  towns,
formed  a  separate  society  beside  the  military  association  of
the  conquerors.  Whether  it  retained,  within  the  walls  of  its
towns,  the  remains  of  Roman  civilization,  or  whether,  aided  by
only  a  slight  vestige  of  that  civilization,  it  had  commenced  a  new
civilization  of  its  own,  this  class  raised  its  head  in  proportion
as  the  feudal  organization  of  the  nobles  by  descent  or  political
affiliation,  declined.

Hitherto  the  historians  of  the  modern  peoples,  in  relating
these  great  events,  have  transported  the  ideas,  the  manners,
and  the  political  position  of  their  own  time  to  past  ages.  The
chroniclers  of  the  feudal  period  placed  the  barons  and  peerage
of  Philip-Augustus  in  the  court  of  Charlemagne,  and  con-
founded the  savage  government  and  brute  force  of  the  con-
quest with  the  more  regular  rule  and  more  fi-xed  usages  of
the  feudal  establishment.  The  historians  of  the  monarchical
era,  who  have  constituted  themselves  exclusively  the  histo-
rians of  the  prince,  have  proceeded  on  even  narrower  and
more  singular  ideas;  they  modelled  the  Germanic  royalty
of  the  first  conquerors  of  the  Roman  empire,  and  the  feudal
royalty  of  the  12th  century,  upon  the  vast  and  powerful  roy-
alties of  the  17th.  In  the  history  of  France,  the  various  in-
vasions of  Gaul,  the  numerous  populations,  different  in  origin
and  manners,  settled  upon  its  territory,  the  division  of  the
soil  into  several  countries,  because  there  were  several  peoples,
and  lastly,  the  union,  which  it  required  six  hundred  years
to  effect,  of  all  these  countries  under  one  sceptre;  these  are
facts  wholly  neglected  by  the  writers  in  question.  The  his-
torians formed  by  the  18th  century  are,  in  like  manner,  ab-
sorbed in  the  philosophy  of  their  period.  Witnesses  of  the
progress  of  the  middle  classes,  and  organs  of  their  wants
as  against  the  legislation  and  the  opinions  of  the  middle  ages,
they  have  not  calmly  viewed  or  correctly  described  the  old
times  in  which  the  classes  they  championed  scarce  enjoyed

INTRODUCTION.  XXI

civil  existence.  Full  of  a  disdain  inspired  by  abstract  right
and  reason,  they  treated  facts  as  nought:  a  process  which  may
be  very  well  with  the  view  of  operating  a  revolution  in
men's  minds  and  in  the  state,  but  by  no  means  proper  in  the
composition  of  history.  Yet  we  must  not  be  surprised  at
all  this;  whatever  superiority  of  mind  a  man  may  possess,
he  cannot  overpass  the  horizon  of  his  century  ;  each  new-
epoch  gives  to  history  new  points  of  view  and  a  special
form.

In  the  present  day,  however,  it  is  no  longer  permissible  to
write  history  for  the  profit  of  one  single  idea;  our  age  will  not
sanction  it;  it  requires  to  be  told  everything,  to  have  por-
trayed and  explained  to  it  the  existence  of  nations  at  various
epochs;  and  that  each  past  century  shall  have  assigned  to  it
its  true  place,  its  colour,  and  its  signification.  This  is  what
I  have  endeavoured  to  do  with  the  great  event  of  which  I
have  undertaken  to  write  the  history.  I  have  consulted  none
but  original  texts  and  documents,  either  for  the  details  of  the
various  circumstances  narrated,  or  for  the  characters  of  the
persons  and  populations  that  figure  in  them.  I  have  drawn.
so  largely  upon  these  texts,  that,  I  flatter  myself,  little  is  left
in  them  for  other  writers.  The  national  traditions  of  the
less  known  populations  and  old  popular  ballads,  have  supplied
me  with  infinite  indications  of  the  mode  of  existence,  the  feel-
ings, and  the  ideas  of  men  at  the  period  and  in  the  places
whither  I  transport  the  reader.

As  to  the  narrative,  I  have  adhered  as  closely  as  possible
to  the  language  of  the  ancient  historians,  contemporaries  of
the  facts  related,  or  but  little  removed  from  them  in  point  of
time.  When  I  have  been  obliged  to  supply  their  inadequacy,
by  general  considerations,  I  have  sought  to  give  authority  to
these  by  citing  the  original  passages  on  which  I  had  relied  in
my  deductions.  Lastly,  I  have  throughout  preserved  the
narrative  form,  so  that  the  reader  might  not  abruptly  pass
from  an  old  tradition  to  a  modern  commentary,  or  my  work

VOL.  i.  c

XX11  INTRODUCTION.

present  the  incongruous  aspect  of  fragments  of  chronicles  in-
termingled with  dissertations.  I  thought,  besides,  that  if  I
applied  myself  rather  to  relate  than  to  lecture,  even  in  the
exposition  of  general  facts  and  results,  I  might  communicate
a  sort  of  historical  life  to  the  masses  of  men  as  well  as  to  the
individual  personages,  and  that  thus  the  political  career  of
nations  might  offer  somewhat  of  that  human  interest  which
is  aroused  by  an  unaffected  account  of  the  mutations  of  for  -
tune  and  adventures  of  an  individual.

I  propose,  then,  to  exhibit,  in  the  fullest  detail,  the  na-
tional struggle  which  followed  the  conquest  of  England  by
the  Normans  established  in  Gaul;  to  reproduce  every  parti-
cular afforded  by  history  of  the  hostile  relations  of  two  peoples
violently  placed  together  upon  the  same  soil;  to  follow  them
throughout  their  long  wars  and  their  obstinate  segregation,  up
to  the  period  when,  by  the  intermixture  of  their  races,  man-
ners, wants,  languages,  there  was  formed  one  sole  nation,  one
common  language,  one  uniform  legislation.  The  scene  of
this  great  drama  is  England,  Scotland,  Ireland,  and  also
France,  by  reason  of  the  numerous  relations  which  the  suc-
cessors of  the  Conqueror  had,  since  the  invasion,  with  that
portion  of  the  European  continent.  On  the  French  side  of
the  Channel,  as  well  as  on  the  other,  their  enterprises  have
modified  the  political  and  social  existence  of  many  populations
whose  history  is  almost  completely  unknown.  The  obscurity
in  which  these  populations  have  become  involved  does  not
arise  from  any  unworthiness  on  their  part  to  have  had  histo-
rians, equally  with  other  populations;  most  of  them,  on  the
contrary,  are  remarkable  for  an  originality  of  character  which
.distinguishes  them  in  the  most  marked  manner  from  the  great
nations  into  which  they  have  been  absorbed,  and  in  resistance
to  a  fusion  with  which  they  have  displayed  a  political  acti-
vity, the  moving  cause  of  many  great  events  that  have  hitherto
been  erroneously  attributed  to  the  ambition  of  particular  in-
dividuals, or  to  other  accidental  causes.  The  research  into

INTRODUCTION.  XX111

the  history  of  these  populations  may  contribute  to  solve  the
problem,  hitherto  undecided,  of  the  varieties  of  the  human
race  in  Europe,  and  of  the  great  primitive  races  whence  these
varieties  derive.

Under  this  philosophical  point  of  view,  and  independent  of
the  picturesque  interest  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  create,
I  hoped  to  aid  the  progress  of  science  by  constructing,  if  I
may  use  the  expression,  the  history  of  the  Welsh,  of  the
Irish  of  pure  race,  of  the  Scots,  both  those  of  the  primitive
and  those  of  the  mixed  race,  of  the  continental  Bretons  and
Normans,  and  more  especially  of  the  numerous  population
then,  as  now,  inhabiting  Southern  Gaul,  between  the  Loire,
the  Rhone,  and  the  two  seas.  Without  assigning  to  the
great  facts  of  history  less  importance  than  they  merit,  I  have
applied  myself  with  peculiar  interest  to  the  local  events
relating  to  these  hitherto  neglected  populations,  and  while
necessarily  relating  their  revolutions  in  a  summary  manner,  I
have  done  this  with  that  sort  of  sympathy,  with  that  senti-
ment of  pleasure,  which  one  experiences  in  repairing  an  in-
justice. The  establishment  of  the  great  modern  states  has
been  mainly  the  work  of  force;  the  new  societies  have  been
formed  out  of  the  wrecks  of  the  old  societies  violently
destroyed,  and  in  this  labour  of  recomposition,  large  masses  of
men  have  lost,  amid  heavy  sufferings,  their  liberty,  and  even
their  name  as  a  people,  replaced  by  a  foreign  name.  Such  a
movement  of  destruction  was,  I  am  aware,  inevitable.  How-
ever violent  and  illegitimate  it  may  have  been  in  its  origin,
its  result  has  been  the  civilization  of  Europe.  But  while  we
render  to  this  civilization  its  due  homage,  while  we  view  with
glowing  admiration  the  noble  destiny  it  is  preparing  for  the
human  race,  we  may  regard  with  a  certain  tender  regret  the
downfal  of  other  civilizations  that  might  one  day  have  also
grown  and  fructified  for  the  world,  had  fortune  favoured  them.

This  brief  explanation  was  necessary  to  prevent  that  feel-
ing of  surprise  which  the  reader  might  otherwise  have  felt
c2

XXIV  INTRODUCTION.

upon  finding  in  this  work,  the  history  not  merely  of  one,  but
of  several  conquests,  written  in  a  method  the  very  reverse  of
that  hitherto  employed  by  modern  historians.  All  of  these,
following  what  seemed  to  them  the  natural  path,  go  from  the
conquerors  to  the  conquered;  they  take  their  stand  in  the
camp  where  there  is  triumph,  rather  than  in  that  where  there
is  defeat,  and  exhibit  the  conquest  as  accomplished  the  moment
that  the  victor  has  proclaimed  himself  master,  taking  no  more
heed  than  he  to  the  ulterior  resistance  which  his  policy  has
afterwards  defeated.  Thus,  for  all  those  who,  until  recently,
have  written  the  history  of  England,  there  are  no  Saxons
after  the  battle  of  Hastings  and  the  coronation  of  William  the
Bastard;  a  romance  writer,  a  man  of  genius,  was  the  first  to
teach  the  modern  English  that  their  ancestors  of  the  eleventh
century  were  not  all  utterly  defeated  and  crushed  in  one
single  day.

A  great  people  is  not  so  promptly  subjugated  as  the  official
acts  of  those  who  govern  it  by  the  law  of  the  strongest  would
appear  to  indicate.  The  resuscitation  of  the  Greek  nation
proves  how  great  a  misconception  it  is  to  take  the  history  of
kings,  or  even  that  of  conquering  peoples,  for  that  of  the
whole  country  over  which  they  rule.  Patriotic  regret  lives
on  in  the  depth  of  a  nation's  heart,  long  after  the  desire  to  raise
its  fallen  condition  has  become  hopeless.  This  sentiment  of
patriotism,  when  it  is  no  longer  adequate  to  the  creation  of
armies,  still  creates  bands  of  guerillas,  of  political  highway-
men in  the  forest  or  on  the  mountain,  and  venerates  as
martyrs  those  who  die  in  the  field  or  on  the  gibbet,  in  its
cause.  Such  is  what  recent  investigations  have  taught  us  with
reference  to  the  Greek  nation,1  and  what  I  have  myself  disco-
vered with  respect  to  the  Anglo-Saxon  race,  in  tracing  out  its
history  where  no  one  previously  had  sought  it,  in  the  popular
legends,  traditions,  and  ballads.  The  resemblance  between

1  See  M.  Fauriel's  excellent  historical  dissertations,  in  his  collection  of
Chants  Populaires  de  la  Greet'  Moderne.

INTRODUCTION.  XXV

the  state  of  the  Greeks  under  the  Turks  and  that  of  the  English
of  Saxon  race  under  the  Normans,  not  only  in  the  material
features  of  the  subjugation,  but  in  the  peculiar  form  assumed
by  the  national  spirit  amidst  the  sufferings  of  its  oppression,
in  the  moral  instincts  and  superstitious  opinions  arising  out
of  it,  in  the  manner  of  hating  those  whom  it  would  fain,  but
could  not,  conquer,  and  of  loving  those  who  still  struggled  on
while  the  mass  of  their  countrymen  had  bent  the  neck — all
this  is  well  worthy  of  remark.  It  is  a  resemblance  in  the  in-
vestigation of  which  much  light  may  be  thrown  upon  the
moral  study  of  man.

To  keep  in  view  the  distinction  of  races  in  England  after
the  conquest,  does  not  merely  communicate  importance  to
facts  before  unperceived  or  neglected :  it  gives  an  entirely
new  aspect  and  signification  to  events  celebrated  in  them-
selves, but  hitherto  incorrectly  elucidated.  The  protracted
quarrel  between  Henry  II.  and  archbishop  Becket  is  one  of
these  events;  a  version  of  that  affair,  entirely  differing  from
the  account  previously  most  accredited,  will  be  found  in  the
present  work.  If,  in  relating  the  struggle  between  these
famous  personages,  the  philosophic  historians  have  taken  part
against  the  weaker  and  more  unfortunate  of  the  two,  it  is
from  not  having  viewed  the  struggle  under  its  true  aspect,
from  not  having  been  thoroughly  acquainted  with  all  the  ele-
ments of  which  the  mutual  hate  of  the  antagonists  was  com-
posed. They  have  wholly  laid  aside,  in  reference  to  a  man
assassinated  with  the  most  odious  circumstances,  all  those
principles  of  justice  and  philanthropy  which  they  so  energeti-
cally profess.  Six  hundred  years  after  his  murder,  they  have
assailed  his  memory  with  the  fiercest  malignity;  and  yet
there  is  nothing  in  common  between  the  cause  of  the  enemies
of  Thomas  Becket,  in  the  twelfth  century,  and  that  of  philo-
sophy in  the  eighteenth.  Henry  II.  was  no  citizen  king,  no
champion  of  religious  independence,  no  systematic  antagonist
of  papal  domination;  there  was  nothing  of  the  sort,  as  will

XXVI  INTRODUCTION.

be  seen,  in  his  inveterate  hostility  to  a  man  against  whom  he
was  the  first  to  solicit  the  assistance  of  the  pope.

If  the  grave  circumstances  which  marked  the  dispute  of  the
fifth  king  of  Norman  race  with  the  first  archbishop  of  English
race  since  the  conquest,  are  to  be  attributed,  more  than  to  any
other  cause,  to  the  still  living  animosity  between  conqueror
and  conquered,  another  fact,  equally  important,  the  great  civil
war  under  John  and  Henry  III.  was  also  a  quarrel  of  races
rather  than  of  government.  Its  real  motive  was  the  fear,
well  or  ill  founded,  which  the  barons  of  Norman  origin  enter-
tained, of  experiencing  a  conquest,  in  their  turn,  on  the  part
of  other  foreigners  called  into  England  by  the  kings,  and  of
being  despoiled  of  their  territories  and  of  the  ruling  power  by
Poitevins,  Aquitans,  and  Provengals,  as,  a  century  and  a  half
before,  they  themselves  had  dispossessed  the  Saxons.  It  was
this  material,  personal  interest,  and  no  lofty  desire  to  found
political  institutions,  that  made  the  barons  and  knights  of
England  rise  up  against  their  kings.  If  this  great  aristocratic
movement  was  sustained  by  popular  favour,  it  was  because
the  alarm  of  a  second  conquest,  and  the  indignation  against
those  who  sought  to  bring  it  about,  were  common  to  the  poor
and  to  the  rich,  to  the  Saxon  and  to  the  Norman.

A  close  examination  of  all  the  political  phenomena  that  ac-
companied the  conquests  of  the  middle  ages,  and  of  the  part
taken  in  them  by  religion,  have  led  me  to  a  new  manner  of
considering  the  progress  of  papal  power  and  of  catholic  unity.
Hitherto  historians  have  represented  this  power  as  extending
itself  solely  by  metaphysical  influence,  as  conquering  by  per-
suasion, whereas  it  is  certain  that  its  conquests,  like  all  other
conquests,  have  been  effected  by  the  ordinary  means,  by  ma-
terial means.  The  popes  may  not  have  headed  military  ex-
peditions in  person,  but  they  have  been  partners  in  almost  all
the  great  invasions  and  in  the  fortune  of  the  conquerors,  even
in  that  of  conquerors  still  pagans.  It  was  the  destruction
of  the  independent  churches  effected  throughout  Christian

INTRODUCTION.  XXV11

Europe  concurrently  with  that  of  the  free  nations,  which
gave  reality  to  the  title  of  universal,  assumed  by  the  Roman
church  long  before  there  was  anything  to  warrant  the  assump-
tion. From  the  fifth  century  up  to  the  thirteenth,  there  was
not  a  single  conquest  which  did  not  profit  the  court  of  Rome
quite  as  much  as  it  profited  those  who  effected  it  with  sword
and  lance.  A  consideration  of  the  history  of  the  middle  ages
under  this  hitherto  unnoticed  aspect  has  given  me,  for  the
various  national  churches  which  the  Roman  church  stigma-
tized as  heretical  or  schismatic,  the  same  sort  of  interest
and  sympathy  which  I  expressed  just  now  for  the  nations
themselves.  Like  the  nations,  the  national  churches  have
succumbed  to  powers  that  had  no  sort  of  right  over  them;
the  independence  they  claimed  for  their  doctrines  and  their
government  was  a  part  of  the  moral  liberty  consecrated  by
Christianity.

Ere  I  conclude,  I  would  say  a  few  words  as  to  the  plan  and
composition  of  this  work.  Pursuant  to  its  title,  it  will  be
found  to  contain  a  complete  narrative  of  all  the  details
relating  to  the  Norman  conquest,  placed  between  two  other
briefer  narratives — one,  of  the  facts  preceding  and  preparing
that  conquest;  the  other,  of  those  which  flowed  from  it  as
necessary  consequences.  Before  introducing  the  person-
ages who  figure  in  the  great  drama  of  the  conquest,  I  was
desirous  of  making  the  reader  acquainted  with  the  ground  on
which  its  various  scenes  were  to  take  place.  For  this  pur-
pose, I  have  carried  him  with  me  from  England  to  the  Con-
tinent, from  the  Continent  to  England.  I  have  explained
the  origin,  the  internal  and  external  situation,  the  first  rela-
tions of  the  population  of  England  with  that  of  Normandy?
and  by  what  chances  these  relations  became  so  complicated
as  necessarily  to  involve  hostility  and  invasion.  The  success
of  the  Norman  invasion  crowned  by  the  battle  of  Hastings,
produced  a  conquest,  the  progress,  settlement  and  direct  re-
sults of  which  form  several  distinctly  marked  epochs.

XXV111  INTRODUCTION.

The  first  epoch  is  that  of  territorial  usurpation:  it  com-
mences with  the  battle  of  Hastings,  on  the  14th  of  October,
1066,  and  embracing  the  successive  progress  of  the  conquerors
from  east  to  west  and  from  south  to  north,  terminates  in
1070,  when  every  centre  of  resistance  had  been  broken  up,
and  every  powerful  native  who  survived  had  submitted  or
abandoned  the  country.  The  second  epoch,  that  of  political
usurpation,  begins  where  the  first  ends;  it  comprehends  the
series  of  efforts  made  by  the  Conqueror  to  disorganize  and
denationalize  the  conquered  population.  It  terminates  in
1076  with  the  execution  of  the  last  chief  of  Saxon  race,  and
the  decree  degrading  the  last  bishop  of  that  race.  During
the  third  epoch,  the  Conqueror  ?s  engaged  in  subjecting  to
regular  order  the  violent  results  of  the  conquest,  and  in  con-
verting the  forcible  possession  of  lands  by  his  soldiers  into
legal  if  not  legitimate  property;  this  epoch  terminates  in
1086,  by  a  comprehensive  review  of  all  the  conquerors  in
possession  of  estates,  who,  renewing  to  the  king  in  a  body  the
oath  of  fealty,  figure  for  the  first  time  as  an  established
nation,  and  no  longer  as  merely  an  army  in  the  field.  The
fourth  epoch  is  occupied  with  the  intestine  quarrels  of
the  conquering  nation,  and  with  its  civil  wars,  whether  for
the  possession  of  the  conquered  territory  or  for  the  right  of
rule  there.  This  period,  more  extended  than  the  preced-
ing, terminates  in  1152,  with  the  extinction  of  all  the  pre-
tenders to  the  throne  of  England,  except  one,  Henry,  son  of
Geoffroy,  earl  of  Anjou,  and  of  the  empress  Matilda,  niece  of
the  Conqueror.  Lastly,  in  the  fifth  epoch,  the  Normans  of
England  and  of  the  continent,  having  no  intestine  dissensions
wherein  to  expend  their  activity  and  their  strength,  either
go  forth  from  their  two  centres  of  action  to  conquer  and  co-
lonize abroad,  or  extend  their  supremacy  without  themselves
moving.  Henry  II.  and  his  successor  Richard  I.  are  the
representatives  of  this  epoch,  filled  with  wars  upon  the  con-
tinent, and  with  new  territorial  or  political  conquests.  It

INTRODUCTION.  XXIX

terminates,  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  thirteenth  century,  by  a
reaction  against  the  Anglo-Norman  power,  a  reaction  so  vio-
lent that  Normandy  itself,  the  native  land  of  the  kings,  lords,
and  chivalry  of  England,  is  severed  for  ever  from  the  country
to  which  it  had  given  its  conquerors.

With  these  various  epochs  correspond  successive  changes
in  the  lot  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  nation;  it  first  loses  the  pro-
perty in  the  soil;  next,  its  ancient  political  and  religious  or-
ganization; then,  favoured  by  the  divisions  of  its  masters,
and  siding  with  the  kings  against  their  revolted  vassals,  it
obtains  concessions  which  give  it  a  momentary  hope  of  once
more  becoming  a  people,  and  it  even  essays  a  vain  attempt  to
enfranchise  itself  by  force.  Lastly,  overwhelmed  by  the  ex-
tinction of  parties  in  the  Norman  population,  it  ceases  to  play
any  political  part,  loses  its  national  character  in  public  acts
and  in  history,  and  falls  altogether  into  the  condition  of  an
inferior  class.  Its  subsequent  revolts,  extremely  rare  of  oc-
currence, are  simply  referred  to  by  the  contemporary  writers
as  quarrels  between  the  poor  and  the  rich;  and  it  is  the  ac-
count of  an  outbreak  of  this  nature,  which  took  place  at
London  in  1196,  under  the  conduct  of  a  person  evidently  of
Saxon  race,  that  concludes  the  circumstantial  narrative  of  the
facts  relating  to  the  conquest.

Having  brought  the  history  of  the  Norman  conquest  up  to
this  point,  I  have  carried  on,  in  a  more  summary  form,  that  of
the  populations  of  various  race  which  figure  in  the  main  body
of  the  work.  The  resistance  they  opposed  to  the  more  power-
ful nations,  their  defeat,  the  establishment  of  the  conquerors
among  them,  the  revolutions  they  essayed  and  accomplished,
the  events,  political  or  military,  over  which  they  exercised  an
influence,  the  fusion  of  people,  languages,  and  manners,  and
the  exact  period  of  this  fusion,  all  this  I  have  endeavoured
clearly  to  exhibit  and  to  demonstrate.  This  last  portion  of
the  work,  where  a  special  article  is  devoted  to  each  race  of
men,  begins  with  the  continental  populations  which  have  since

XXX  INTRODUCTION.

become  French.  Next  come  those,  now  called  English,  each
in  its  rank;  the  Welsh,  whose  spirit  of  nationality  is  so  tena-
cious that  it  has  survived  a  territorial  conquest;  the  Scots,
who  have  never  undergone  any  such  conquest,  and  who  have
struggled  with  such  vast  energy  against  a  political  conquest;
the  Irish,  who  had  better  have  become  serfs,  like  the  Anglo-
Saxons,  than  have  preserved  a  precarious  liberty  at  the
expense  of  peace,  of  individual  and  family  happiness,  and  of
the  civilization  of  their  country;  lastly,  the  population  of
England  herself,  of  Norman  or  Saxon  origin,  where  these
national  differences  become  a  distinction  of  classes,  less  and
less  marked,  as  time  progressed.

I  have  only  now  to  mention  one  other  historical  innovation,
of  no  less  importance  than  the  rest;  the  retaining  the  ortho-
graphy of  the  Saxon,  Norman,  and  other  names,  so  as  to  keep
constantly  marked  out  the  distinction  of  races,  and  to  secure
that  local  colouring,  which  is  one  of  the  conditions,  not  merely
of  historic  interest,  but  of  historic  truth.  I  have,  in  like
manner,  taken  care  not  to  apply  to  one  period  the  language,
forms,  or  titles  of  another.  In  a  word,  I  have  essayed  tho-
roughly to  reintegrate  political  facts,  details  of  manners,
official  forms,  languages,  and  names;  so  as,  by  restoring  to
each  period  comprised  in  my  narrative  its  external  aspect,
its  original  features,  its  reality,  to  communicate  to  this  por-
tion of  history  the  certitude  and  fixity  which  are  the  distin-
guishing characteristics  of  the  positive  sciences.

CONTENTS.

BOOK I.

PROM THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BRITONS TO  THE NINTH
CENTURY.

B.C.  55— A.  D.  787.

Ancient  populations  of  Britain  —  Picts  and  Scots — Social  state  of  the
Britons — Their  form  of  government — Attacks  from  without — Internal
discords — The  Saxons  called  in  as  auxiliaries  of  the  Britons ;  become
their  enemies  —  Conquests  of  the  Saxons  in  Britain — Emigration  of
the  Angles — Conquests  of  the  Angles — Anglo-Saxon  colonies — Settle-
ment of  Britons  in  Gaul — Political  state  of  Gaul — Influence  of  the
Gaulish  bishops ;  their  friendship  towards  the  Franks — Conversion  and
baptism  of  Chlodowig,  king  of  the  Franks — Successes  of  the  Franks;
their  conquests — State  of  the  Britons  in  Gaul ;  their  quarrels  with  the
Gaulish  clergy ;  their  wars  with  the  Franks — Heresy  of  Britain — Cha-
racter of  pope  Gregory  —  His  desire  to  convert  the  Anglo-Saxons —
Roman  missionaries  sent  into  Britain — Conversion  of  an  Anglo-Saxon
king — Plan  of  ecclesiastical  organization — Ambition  of  bishop  Augustin;
Religious  belief  of  the  Welsh — Conferences  of  Augustin  with  the  Welsh
clergy — His  vengeance  upon  them  —  Return  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  to
paganism — Fresh  successes  of  the  Romish  priests — Essays  at  conver-
sion in  Northumberland — Conversion  of  Northumberland — Anglo-  Saxon
church — Attempts  of  the  Romish  clergy  against  the  church  of  Ireland
— Religious  zeal  of  the  Irish — Catholic  devotion  of  the  Anglo-Saxons
— Rupture  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  from  the  Romish  church — Respective
limits  of  the  various  populations  of  Britain — Remnant  of  the  British  race
— Feelings  of  the  historian  with  regard  to  the  conquered  peoples  .  p,  1

BOOK  II.

FROM THE FIRST LANDING OF THE DANES IN ENGLAND TO THE
END OF THE DOMINATION.

787—1048.

First  landing  of  the  Danish  pirates — Their  character ;  their  conquests  in
England — Invasion  of  Ragnar  Lodbrog;  his  death-song — Descent  of
the  Danes  in  the  south — Destruction  of  the  monasteries— Termination

XXX11  CONTENTS.

of  the  kingdom  of  East  Anglia — Invasion  of  the  kingdom  of  Wessex —
Resistance  of  Alfred — Flight  of  king  Alfred — His  return;  he  attacks
the  Danes,  and  concludes  peace  with  them — Successive  combinations
of  the  English  territory  under  a  sole  royalty — Descent  of  Hastings  upon
England — Election  of  king  Edward — Conquests  of  king  Athelstan —
Victory  of  Brunanburg — Defeat  of  Erik  the  Dane — Political  results  of
the  defeats  of  the  Danes — Fresh  emigrations  from  Denmark — Massacre
of  the  Danes — Grand  armament  of  Swen — Patriotic  firmness  of  arch-
bishop Elfeg;  his  death — Ethelred  takes  refuge  in  Gaul — Foundation
of  the  empire  of  the  Franks — Dismemberment  of  that  empire — Invasion
of  Gaul  by  the  Danes  or  Normans — New  states  formed  in  Gaul — Limits
and  populations  of  the  kingdom  of  France — Exile  of  Roll,  son  of  Rogu-
vald — The  Norwegian  exiles  establish  themselves  at  Rouen^First  ne-
gotiation of  the  French  with  the  Normans/-Roll  elected  chief  of  the
Normans — Second  negociation — Cession  of  Neustria  and  Brittany —
Conference  at  Saint-Clair-sur-Epte — Conversion  and  baptism  of  Roll,
first  duke  of  Normandy — Division  of  Normandy — Language  and  man-
ners of  the  people  of  Bayeux — Social  state  of  Normandy — Insurrection
of  the  peasants  of  Normandy — Violent  measures  to  suppress  the  insurrec-
tion— Language  and  political  relations  of  the  Gallo-Norrnans — Ethelred
recalled — Godwin  saves  the  life  of  a  Danish  chief — Knut  the  Dane  be-
comes king  of  all  England — Proscriptions  in  England — Marriage  of
king  Knut ;  remarkable  change  in  his  character  and  conduct — He  insti-
tutes Peter's  pence — Temporal  power  of  the  popes — Pilgrimage  of  Knut
to  Rome — Letter  written  by  king  Knut^Rise  of  Godwin — Harold  and
Hardeknut,  kings  of  England — Preparations  for  war  between  the  Anglo-
Saxons  and  the  Anglo-Danes — Harold  sole  king  of  England — Alfred,  ;
son  of  Ethelred,  reappears  in  England-^His  violent  death — Hardeknut's*  I.
barbarity — His  exactions — The  Danes  driven  from  England — Election  < ,
of  Edward,  son  of  Ethelred — His  marriage  with  Editha — Re-establish-  Nk
;'/:.  ment  of  English  independence/  Hostility  of  the  people  to  the  Norman  /
favourites  of  king  Edward./. p.  55

BOOK  III.

FROM  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  THE  ENGLISH  PEOPLE  AGAINST  THE
NORMAN  FAVOURITES  OF  KING  EDWARD,  TO  THE  BATTLE  OF
HASTINGS.

1048—1000.

Eustache  of  Boulogne  lands  at  Dover;  his  quarrel  with  the  inhabitants —
Patriotic  resistance  of  Godwin — Grand  armament  of  king  Edward —
Proscription  of  Godwin  and  his  sons — Triumph  of  the  Norman  favourites
— William,  duke  of  Normandy — His  origin  and  character — His  visit  to
England — His  ambitious  projects — Landing  of  Godwin  and  his  sons —
Their  entry  into  London — Terror  and  flight  of  the  Norman  favourites
— Reconciliation  of  Godwin  with  king  Edward — Death  of  Godwin —
Death  of  Siward,  chief  of  Northumberland-yf-Talents  and  popularity  of
Harold,  son  of  Godwin — Insurrection  of  the  Northumbrians  against

CONTENTS.  XXX111

Tosti — Banishment  of  Tosti — Hostility  of  the  Romish  church  to  the
English  people — Friendship  between  the  Romish  church  and  the  duke
of  Normandy — Harold  visits  Normandy — He  is  imprisoned  by  the  count
de  Ponthieu — His  release — He  is  received  at  Rouen  by  duke  William
— Request  made  him  by  William — Harold's  oath  upon  relics — His  re-
turn to  England — Death  of  king  Edward — Election  of  Harold^Indig-
nation  of  the  duke  of  Normandy-*-Tosti  persuades  Harold  of  Norway
to  make  a  descent  upon  England — Message  from  William  to  Harold —
William's  negotiation  with  the  Romish  church — Temporal  sovereignty
of  the  church  at  this  period— The  dispute  between  William  and  Harold
referred  to  the  pope — Alexander  II.  decides  in  favour  of  William — Con-
vocation of  the  states  of  Normandy — William  baffles  this  opposition —
Grand  military  preparations — Enrolment  of  men  from  all  countries —
William  seeks  to  form  allies — National  animosity  between  the  Nor-
mans and  Britons — Conan,  earl  of  Brittany,  refuses  his  assistance — He
is  poisoned — Departure  of  the  Norman  fleet — Harold  of  Norway  lauds
in  England — Harold  of  England  attacks  the  Norwegians — Rout  of  the
Norwegians — Landing  of  the  Norman  army  at  Pevensey  —  Harold
marches  against  the  Normans — He  forms  an  entrenchment  seven  miles
from  their  camp — Message  from  William  to  Harold  —  Reply  of  the  /__
latter — State  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  army — Preparations  of  the  two  A
armies — Attack  upon  the  Anglo-Saxon  camp — Victory  of  the  Normans  '
• — The  body  of  Harold  recognised  by  his  mistress.  f  .  .  .  .  128

BOOK  IV.

FROM  THE  BATTLE  OF  HASTINGS  TO  THE  TAKING  OF  CHESTER,
THE  LAST  CITY  CONQUERED  BY  THE  NORMANS.

1000—1070.

Battle  of  Romney — Taking  of  Dover — Capitulation  of  Kent — Election  of
king  Edgar — Defection  of  Edwin  and  Morkar — Blockade  of  London —
Proceedings  of  the  citizens — Submission  of  London — William  pro-
claimed king — The  ceremony  of  the  coronation  disturbed  by  conflagra-
tion— Division  of  the  spoils  among  the  Normans — Extent  of  the  con-
quered territory — Sufferings  of  the  conquered — Courageous  resistance
of  three  Saxons — Fortresses  erected  in  London — Ancient  lists  of  the
conquerors  of  England — William  revisits  Normandy — Revolt  of  Kent —
Eustache,  count  of  Boulogne,  comes  to  the  assistance  of  the  English —
Limits  of  the  territory  invaded — Return  of  king  William — He  inarches
into  the  west — Siege  of  Exeter — Division  of  lands  in  the  western  pro-
vinces— Imprisonment  and  deposition  of  Brihtrik — Resistance  of  the
monks  of  Winchcomb — Their  punishment — The  English  chiefs  retire
to  the  north — Conspiracy  against  the  Normans — King  Edgar  flies  into
Scotland — State  of  the  Scottish  population — Friendship  of  the  kings  of
Scotland  for  the  men  of  Teutonic  race — William  marches  into  the  north
— Taking  of  Oxford,  &c. — Taking  of  York — Archbishop  Eldred's  male-
diction upon  king  William — His  despair  and  death — Weariness  of  the

XXXIV  CONTENTS.

Normans — Insurrection  of  the  western  provinces — Landing  of  the  sons
of  king  Harold — Suppression  of  the  western  revolt — State  of  the
northern  provinces — March  of  Robert  Comine  against  Durham — His
defeat  and  death — Alliance  between  the  northern  English  and  the
Danes — Arrival  of  Danish  succours  in  England — The  English  and
Danes  besiege  and  take  the  city  of  York — York  retaken  by  the  Normans
— Devastation  of  Northumberland — Taking  of  Durham — Ravages  and
cruelties  exercised  by  the  conquerors — St.  John  of  Beverley  intimidates
the  Norman  •> soldiers — Completion  of  the  conquest  in  the  north — Fa-
mine in  the  conquered  districts — Division  of  houses  and  lands — French
colony  in  Yorkshire — Distribution  of  English  domains  and  heiresses —
Tosti  killed  by  Osulf  in  a  spirit  of  national  vengeance — Second  submis-
sion of  the  English  chieftains  and  of  king  Edgar — Defeat  of  Edrik  the
Saxon — Invasion  of  Wales — Fresh  emigrants  from  Gaul — Society  of
gain  and  loss  among  the  soldiers  of  the  Conquest — Brothers-in-arms —
March  of  William  upon  Chester — Taking  of  Chester — Battle  near  the
Ruddlan  marshes — Utility  of  local  details 180

BOOK  V.

FROM THE FORMATION OF THE CAMP OF REFUGE  IN THE ISLE OF
ELY,  TO THE EXECUTION OF THE LAST SAXON CHIEF.

1070— 1076.

Deplorable  condition  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  after  their  defeat — Emigration  to
Greece  of  many  Englishmen,  who  enter  the  service  of  the  Byzantine
court— Many  other  English  withdraw  into  the  forests,  and  by  armed
brigandage  make  their  last  protest  against  their  conquerors — General
terror  of  England — Camp  of  refuge — Patriotic  contributions  of  the
English  church — King  William  orders  the  strict  visitation  of  all  the
monasteries  and  convents — Spoliation  of  the  churches — Arrival  of  three
pontifical  legates  —  Circulars  of  the  legates— Deposition  of  Stigand,
archbishop  of  Canterbury — Deprivation  of  the  bishops  and  abbots  of
English  race — Lanfranc,  archbishop  of  Canterbury — Miserable  condi-
tion of  the  English  churches — Establishment  of  the  primacy  of  Canter-
bury— Submission  of  the  archbishop  of  York  to  the  see  of  Canterbury —
Introduction  of  foreign  prelates  into  English  bishoprics — Character  of
the  new  bishops — The  complaints  of  the  English  conveyed  to  Rome —
The  pope  sides  with  the  Normans — Disinterested  conduct  of  Guimond,
monk  of  Saint  Leufroy,  in  Normandy — The  saints  of  English  race  are
assailed  by  the  Normans — Insurrection  led  by  three  English  prelates —
The  laws  of  Edward  are  confirmed  by  king  William— Futility  of  this
concession — Recommencement  of  persecution — Paul,  an  abbot  of  Nor-
man race — Accession  of  refugees  to  the  camp  of  refuge — Death  of  Ed-
win— Ivo  Taille-bois,  an  Angevin  chief — His  character  —  Angevin
monks  established  at  Spalding— Here  ward,  chief  of  the  Saxon  partisans
— Anglo-Saxon  chivalry — Torauld,  a  Norman  abbot,  transferred  to  the
abbey  of  Peterborough — Fresh  alliance  between  the  English  and.  the

CONTENTS.  XXXV

.Danes — Retreat  of  tlie  Danes — Attack  on  the  camp  at  Ely  by  the  Nor-
mans— Treachery  of  the  monks  of  Ely — Defeat  of  the  insurgents —
Hereward  preserves  his  independence — His  exploits — His  marriage —
Dishonourable  conduct  of  the  Normans  towards  him  —  His  death —
Atrocious  cruelties  exercised  by  the  Normans  upon  the  insurgents  of
Ely — The  monks  of  Ely  receive  the  punishment  of  their  treachery —
Peace  between  the  Normans  and  the  king  of  Scotland — Vaulcher,  bishop
of  Durham — Deprivation  of  Gospatrick ;  promotion  of  Waltheof — King
William  visits  Gaul — Revolt  of  the  people  of  Mans  against  the  Normans
—Establishment  of  the  corporation  of  Mans — Troubles  of  that  corpo-
ration—Devastation and  submission  of  Maine — Alliance  of  Edgar  with
the  king  of  France — Third  submission  of  king  Edgar — English  women
take  refuge  in  the  convents — Marriage  concluded  contrary  to  the  order
of  the  king — Marriage  festival  at  Norwich — Conspiracy  of  Normans  aud
English  against  the  king — Preparations  to  meet  it;  defeat  of  the  con-
spirators— Proscription  of  Raulf  de  Gael,  and  sentence  upon  Roger,  earl
of  Hereford — Ruin  of  the  family  of  William  Fitz-Osbern — Impeachment
of  Waltheof — His  execution — He  is  honoured  as  a  martyr — Pilgrimage
to  his  tomb — His  widow,  Judith  la  Normande — Wulfstan,  the  last  bishop
of  Anglo-Saxon  race — Superstitions  founded  upon  the  national  turn  of
mind  .  .  238

BOOK  VI.

JPROM  THE  QUARREL  BETWEEN  KING  WILLIAM  AND  HIS  ELDEST  SON
ROBERT,  TO  THE  LAST  VISIT  OF  WILLIAM  TO  THE  CONTINENT.

1077—1087.

Discords  among  the  victors — Quarrel  between  William  and  his  son  Robert
— Robert  demands  Normandy — He  joins  his  father's  enemies — William
curses  his  son — Conspiracy  against  and  murder  of  Vaulcher — Devasta-
tion of  Northumberland — Miserable  condition  of  the  northern  provinces
— Anglo-Saxon  outlaws — Popular  poems  in  their  honour — Ambition  of
Eudes — His  arrest — Results  of  the  Norman  conquest — Toustain,  abbot
of  Glastonbury — Saxon  monks  killed  or  wounded  by  his  order — Death
of  Matilda — Severance  of  interests  between  the  king  and  the  Normans
— Domesday  book — Levies  upon  the  Normans  and  English — Equaliza-
tion of  property  in  the  hands  of  the  Normans — Laws  of  William  against
hunting — Political  reasons  for  the  severity  of  these  laws — Expropria-
tion of  the  English  subsequent  to  the  conquest — Emigration  of  Normans
to  Scotland — Descent  of  the  Danes — Preparations  for  defence — Singular-
order  issued  to  the  English — Motives  for  the  armament  of  king  Knut —
Termination  of  alliance  between  the  English  and  the  Danes — General
assembly  and  review  of  the  Normans— Ordinances  of  king  William —
State  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  population — Anxiety  and  mental  torments  of
king  William — Establishment  of  episcopal  jurisdiction — Separation  of
the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  tribunals— Conduct  of  William  with  reference
to  the  pope — Aspect  of  the  conquered  country 289

XXXVI  CONTENTS.

BOOK  VII.

FROM  THE  DEATH  OF  WILLIAM  THE  CONQUEROR,  TO  THE  LAST  GENE-
RAL CONSPIRACY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  AGAINST  THE  NORMANS.

1087—1137.

Quarrel  between  king  William  and  Philip  I.,  king  of  France — King  William
burns  the  town  of  Mantes — Last  moments  of  king  William — His  death
— His  funeral  —  Election  of  William  Ruftts — The  goldsmith  Otho,
banker  of  the  invasion — Verses  in  praise  of  the  Conqueror — Civil  war
among  the  Normans — Termination  of  the  civil  war — Treaty  between
William  Rufus,  king  of  England,  and  his  brother  Robert,  duke  of  Nor-
mandy— Revolt  of  the  English  monks  of  the  convent  of  St.  Augustin —
Conspiracy  of  the  monks  of  this  convent  against  their  Norman  abbot —
Alliance  between  the  monks  and  the  citizens  of  Canterbury — Tyranny
of  the  Norman  bishops  and  counts — Fresh  vexations  inflicted  upon  the
monks  of  Croyland — New  quarrels  among  the  Normans — Moderation
of  Eudes  Fitz-Hubert— Heavy  burdens  imposed  upon  the  English —
Terror  of  the  English  on  the  approach  of  the  king — Severity  of  the
forest  laws — Last  chase  of  William  Rufus — His  death — Henry  elected
king  of  England — He  addresses  himself  to  the  English — Utter  insin-
cerity of  his  promises — He  wishes  to  marry  an  Englishwoman — Oppo-
sition of  the  Norman  nobles  to  the  contemplated  match — Marriage  of  the
king  to  Editha,  Edgar's  niece— More  civil  war — Revolt  of  earl  Robert
de  Belesme — His  banishment— State  of  the  English  population — Re-
newed quarrel  between  the  king  and  his  brother  Robert —  Levy  of  money
in  England — Duke  Robert  becomes  his  brother's  prisoner — The  son  of
duke  Robert  takes  refuge  in  France — Foreign  abbots  installed  into  Eng-
lish monasteries — Sufferings  and  complaints  of  the  English  monks — Po-
pular superstitions — Embarkation  of  the  children  of  king  Henry — Their
shipwreck — Indifference  of  the  English  to  the  calamity  thus  endured  by
the  king  and  the  Norman  families — Invectives  of  the  English  historians
on  this  occasion — Mabile,  (laughter  of  Robert  Fitz-Aymon — Norman
anecdote — English  anecdote — Trial  and  sentence  of  the  Saxon  Brihtstan
— Anglo-Norman  tribunals — Oath  tal<eu  to  Matilda,  surnamed  the  Em-
press—  Marriage  of  Matilda  with  the  earl  of  Anjou  —  Festivities  at
Rouen  on  the  occasion — Election  of  Stephen  of  Blois — His  popularity
with  the  Norman  barons — His  rupture  with  them — Conspiracy  of  the
English — Flight  of  the  conspirators — Subsequent  insurrections — Diffi-
culties experienced  by  the  historian 825

APPENDIX

HISTORY

OF

THE  CONQUEST  OF  ENGLAND

23ij  tf)e  Normans.

BOOK I.

FROM THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BRITONS
TO THE NINTH CENTURY.

B.C.  55 — A.D.  787.

Ancient  populations  of  Britain  —  Picts  and  Scots — Social  state  of  the
Britons — Their  form  of  government — Attacks  from  without — Internal
discords — The  Saxons  called  in  as  auxiliaries  of  the  Britons ;  become
their  enemies  —  Conquests  of  the  Saxons  in  Britain — Emigration  of
the  Angles — Conquests  of  the  Angles — Anglo-Saxon  colonies — Settle-
ment of  Britons  in  Gaul — Political  state  of  Gaul — Influence  of  the.
Gaulish  bishops;  their  friendship  towards  the  Franks — Conversion  and
baptism  of  Chlodowig,  king  of  the  Franks — Successes  of  the  Franks ;
their  conquests — State  of  the  Britons  in  Gaul ;  their  quarrels  with  the
Gaulish  clergy ;  their  wars  with  the  Franks — Heresy  of  Britain — Cha-r
racter  of  pope  Gregory  —  His  desire  to  convert  the  Anglo-Saxons —
Eoman  missionaries  sent  into  Britain — Conversion  of  an  Anglo-Saxon
king — Plan  of  ecclesiastical  organization — Ambition  of  bishop  Augustin ;
Religious  belief  of  the  Welsh — Conferences  of  Augustin  with  the  Welsh
clergy — His  vengeance  upon  them  —  Return  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  to
paganism — Fresh  successes  of  the  Romish  priests — Essays  at  convex
sion  in  Northumberland — Conversion  of  Northumberland — Anglo  Saxon
church — Attempts  of  the  Romish  clergy  against  the  church  of  Ireland
— Religious  zeal  of  the  Irish — Catholic  devotion  of  the  Anglo-Saxons
— Rupture  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  from  the  Romish  church — Respective
limits  of  the  various  populations  of  Britain — Remnant  of  the  British
race — Fenlings  of  the  historian  with  regard  to  the  conquered  peoples.

ANCIENT  tradition  informs  us  that  the  great  island  which  now
bears  the  name  of  the  united  kingdom  of  England  and  Scot-
land, was  primitively  called  the  Country  of  the  Green  Hills,
then  the  Island  of  Honey,  and  thirdly,  the  Island  of  Bryt  or

VOL.  I.  B

2  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [B.C. 55

Prydyn;1  the  Latinization  of  the  latter  term  produced  the
name  Britain.  From  the  most  remote  antiquity,  the  isle  of
Prydyn,  or  Britain,  was  regarded,  by  those  who  visited  it,  as
divided  from  east  to  Avest,  into  two  large  unequal  portions,
of  which  the  Firth  of  Forth,  and  the  Clyde,  constituted  the
common  limit.  The  northern  division  was  called  Alben  ( Albyn,
Alban,  Latine  Albania),  that  is  to  say,  the  region  of  moun-
tains; the  other  portion,  towards  the  west  was  named  Kymru,
towards  the  east  and  south  Loegwr.  These  two  denomina-
tions were  not,  like  the  first,  derived  from  the  nature  of  the
country,  but  from  the  appellation  of  two  distinct  nations,  who
conjointly  occupied  nearly  the  whole  extent  of  Southern
Britain,  the  Kymrys  and  the  Lloegrwys,  or,  according  to  the
Latin  orthography,  the  Cambrians  and  the  Logrians.

The  nation  of  the  Cambrians  boasted  the  higher  antiquity;
it  had  come  in  a  mass  from  the  eastern  extremities  of  Europe,
across  the  German  ocean.  A  portion  of  the  emigrants  had
landed  on  the  coast  of  Gaul;  the  remainder,  disembarking  on
the  opposite  shores  of  the  straits  (Fretum  Gallicum,  Fretum
Morinoj'um\  had  colonized  Britain,  which,  say  the  Cambrian
traditions,2  had  previously  no  other  inhabitants  than  bears
and  wild  cattle,  and  where,  consequently,  the  colonists  estab-
lished themselves  as  original  occupants  of  the  soil,  without
opposition,  without  war,  without  violence.3  The  claim  is
honourable,  but  scarcely  historical;  the  great  probability  is
that  the  Cambrian  emigrants  found  in  the  island  men  of
another  origin  and  of  a  different  language  from  their  own,
whom  they  dispossessed  of  the  territory.  This  probability  is
rendered  almost  matter  of  fact,  by  the  existence  of  many
names  of  places  altogether  foreign  to  the  Cambrian  language,
and  by  ruins  of  an  unascertained  period,  which  popular  tra-
dition assigns  to  an  extinct  race  of  hunters  who  employed  foxes
and  wild  cats,  instead  of  dogs  in  the  chase.4  This  aboriginal
population  of  Britain  was  driven  back  towards  the  west  and
north  by  the  gradual  invasion  of  the  foreigners  who  landed  on
the  eastern  shores.

1  Trioedd  yuys  Prydyn,  n.  i ;  Myvyrian,  Arcltaiology  of  Wales,  ii.  57.

2  Troedd  ynys  Pryd.  ut  sup.  3  Ib.  No.  5.

*  Horse  Britannicae,  ii.  31,  and  327.  These  ruins  are  popularly '  deno  -
urinated  Cyttiau  y  Gwyddelad,  houses  of  the  Gael.  /St'eJEdward.  Llhuyd,
ArcU&oIotjia  Britannica.

TO  A.D.  787.] ANCIENT POPULATIONS OF BRITAIN.  3

A  portion  of  the  fugitives  passed  the  sea  to  the  large  island
called  by  its  inhabitants  Erin  (Latine,  lierne,  Inverna,  lier-
nia,  Hibernia),  and  to  the  other  western  islands,  peopled,  ac-
cording to  all  appearance,  by  men  of  the  same  race  and  lan-
guage with  the  British  aborigines.  Those  who  retreated  into
North  Britain,  found  an  impregnable  asylum  in  the  lofty
mountains  which  extend  from  the  banks  of  the  Clyde  to  the
extremity  of  the  island,  and  maintained  their  position  here
under  the  name  of  Gael  or  Galls  (more  correctly,  Gadhels,
Gwyddils),  which  they  still  retain.  The  wreck  of  this  dis-
possessed race,  augmented,  at  different  periods,  by  bands  of
emigrants  from  Erin,  constituted  the  population  of  Alben,  or
the  highlands  of  Britain,  a  population  foreign  to  that  of  the
plains  of  the  south,  and  its  natural  enemy,  from  the  here-
ditary resentment  growing  out  of  the  recollection  of  con-
quest. The  epoch  at  which  these  movements  of  population
took  place  is  uncertain;  it  was  at  a  later  period,  but  equally
unascertained,  that,  according  to  the  British  annals,  the  men
called  Logrians  landed  on  the  south  of  the  island.1

These,  according  to  the  same  annals,  emigrated  from  the
south- western  coasts  of  Gaul,  and  derived  their  origin  from
the  primitive  race  of  the  Cambrians,  with  whom  they  could
readily  converse.2  To  make  way  for  these  new  comers,  the
previous  colonists  voluntarily,  says  the  old  tradition,  but  more
probably  on  compulsion,  retired  to  the  shores  of  the  western
ocean,  which  then  exclusively  assumed  the  name  of  Cambria,
while  the  Logrians  gave  their  own  appellation  to  the  southern
and  eastern  coasts  of  the  island,  over  which  they  diffused
themselves.  After  the  establishment  of  this  second  colony,
there  came  a  third  band  of  emigrants,  issuing  from  the  same
primitive  race,  and  speaking  the  same  language,  or,  at  all
events,  a  dialect  very  slightly  differing  from  it.  The  dis-
trict which  they  had  previously  occupied  was  the  portion
of  western  Gaul  comprehended  between  the  Seine  and  the
Loire;  these,  like  the  Logrians,  obtained  lands  in  Britain
with  very  little  difficulty.  It  is  to  them  that  the  ancient  an-
nals and  the  national  poems  especially  assign  the  name  of
Brython  or  Briton,  which,  among  foreigners,  served  to  desig-

1  .Horae  Britannic£e,  ii,  292,  300. Trioedd  ynys  Prydvn,  No.  5.
*  Ibid.

B2

4  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [B.C.  55

nate  generally  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  island.  The  precise
site  on  which  they  settled  is  not  known ;  but  the  most  proba-
ble opinion  places  them  to  the  north  of  the  Cambrians  and
Logrians,  on  the  frontier  of  the  Gaelic  population,  between
the  Firth  of  Forth  and  that  of  Solway.

These  nations  of  common  origin  were  visited  at  intervals,
either  pacifically,  or  in  a  hostile  manner,  by  various  foreign
tribes.  A  band  from  that  portion  of  the  Gaulish  territory
now  called  Flanders,  compelled  permanently  to  quit  their  na-
tive country,  in  consequence  of  a  great  inundation,  passed  the
sea  in  sail-less  vessels,  and  landed  on  the  Isle  of  Wight  and
the  adjacent  coast,  first  as  guests,  and  then  as  invaders.1  The
Coranians2  (Corraniaid,  latine,  Coritani),  men  of  Teutonic
descent,  emigrating  from  a  country  which  the  British  annals
designate  the  Land  of  Marshes,  sailed  up  the  gulf  formed  by
the  mouth  of  the  H umber,  and  established  themselves  on  the
banks  of  that  river  and  along  the  eastern  coast,  thus  sepa-
rating into  two  portions  the  territory  of  the  Logrians.  Lastly,
Roman  legions,  led  by  Julius  Csesar,  disembarked  on  the
eastern  point  of  the  district  now  called  Kent.  They  encoun-
tered a  determined  resistance  at  the  hands  of  the  Logrian-
Britons,  entrenched  behind  their  war-chariots;  but,  ere  long,
thanks  to  the  treachery  of  the  tribes  of  foreign  race,  and  more
especially  the  Coranians,  the  Romans,  penetrating  into  the
interior  of  the  island,  gradually  achieved  the  conquest  of  the
two  countries  of  Logria  and  Cambria.  The  British  annals
call  them  Caisariaid,  CiBsarians,3  and  enumerate  them  among
the  invading  peoples  who  made  but  a  temporary  stay  in
Britain  :  "  After  having  oppressed  the  land  during  four  hun-
dred years,"  say  these  annals,  "  and  having  exacted  from  it
the  yearly  tribute  of  three  thousand  pounds  of  silver,  they
departed  hence  for  Rome,  in  order  to  repel  the  invasion  of
the  black  horde.  They  left  behind  them  only  their  wives  and
young  children,  who  all  became  Cambrians."4

During  this  sojourn  of  four  centuries,  the  Romans  extended
their  conquests  and  their  domination  over  the  whole  southern
portion  of  the  island,  up  to  the  foot  of  the  northern  mountains
which  had  served  as  a  rampart  for  the  aboriginal  population

1  Trioedd  ynys  Prydyn,  No.  6. Bclgce,  Jul.  Caesar,  dc  Bell.  Galileo.

2  Ib,  No.  6,  7.  3  n.  No.  8.  *  Ib.

TO  A.D.  410.]  SCOTS AND PICTS.  5

against  the  Cambrians.  The  Roman  invasion  stopped  at  the
same  limit  with  the  British  invasion;  and  the  Gael  remained
a  free  people  throughout  the  period  that  their  former  con-
querors were  groaning  under  a  foreign  yoke.  They  more
than  once  drove  back  the  imperial  eagles;  and  their  ancient
aversion  for  the  inhabitants  of  Southern  Britain  grew  stronger
and  stronger  amidst  the  wars  which  they  had  to  maintain
against  the  Roman  governors.  The  pillage  of  the  colonire
and  municipia,  adorned  with  sumptuous  palaces  and  gorgeous
temples,  increased,  by  a  new  feature,  this  national  hostility.
Every  spring,  the  men  of  Alben,  or  Caledonia,1  passed  the
Clyde  in  boats  of  osier  covered  with  leather:  becoming  formi-
dable to  the  Romans,  they  obliged  the  latter  to  construct,  on
the  limits  of  their  conquest,  two  immense  walls,  furnished
with  towers,  and  extending  from  one  sea  to  the  other.2  These
irruptions,  which  grew  more  and  more  frequent,  acquired  a
terrible  celebrity  for  the  people  of  Alben,  under  the  designa-
tion of  Scots  and  Picts,  the  only  terms  employed  by  the  Latin
writers,  who  appear  to  have  been  unacquainted  with  the  ap-
pellation, Gael.3

The  former  of  these  two  names  appertained  to  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  island  of  Erin,  which  the  Romans  called  indiffer-
ently Hibernia  or  Scotia.  The  close  relationship  between  the
British  highlanders  and  the  men  of  Hibernia,  with  the  fre-
quent emigrations  from  the  one  country  to  the  other,  had
produced  this  community  of  name.  In  northern  Britain  itself,
the  term  Scots  was  applied  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  coasts
and  of  the  great  archipelago  of  the  north-west,  and  that  of
Picts  to  the  eastern  population  on  the  shores  of  the  German
ocean.  The  respective  territories  of  these  two  peoples,  or
distinct  branches  of  one  population,  were  separated  by  the
Grampian  hills,  at  the  foot  of  which,  Gallawg  (Galgacm\  the
leading  chieftain  of  the  Northern  Forests  (Calyddoii),  had
valiantly  combated  the  imperial  legions.  The  manner  of

1  In  British,  Calyddon,  the  country  of  forests.

2  The  Vallum  Anton  in  i  and  the  Vallum  Hudriani,  afterwards  called  the
Vallum  Sei-tirl.

3  Venit  et  extremis  legio  prsetenta  Britannia,
Quoe  Scoto  dat  frena  truci,  ferroque  notatns
Perlegit  exangues,  Picto  moriente,  fignras.

Claudianus,  dc  Bcllo  ytlico,  v.  41(3,  ct  st><y.

6  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [B.C. 1

life  of  the  Scots  wholly  differed  from  that  of  the  Picts;  the
former,  dwellers  on  the  mountains,  were  hunters  or  wander-
ing shepherds;  the  latter,  enjoying  a  more  level  surface,  and
more  fixedly  established,  occupied  themselves  in  agriculture,
and  constructed  solid  abodes,  the  ruins  of  which  still  bear
their  name.  When  these  two  peoples  were  not  actually
leagued  together  for  an  irruption  into  the  south,  even  a
friendly  understanding  ceased  at  times  to  exist  between  them;
but  on  every  occasion  that  presented  itself  of  assailing  the
common  enemy,  the  two  chiefs,  one  of  whom  resided  at  the
mouth  of  the  Tay,  the  other  among  the  lakes  of  Argyleshire,
became  brothers,  and  set  up  their  standards  side  by  side.  The
southern  Britons  and  the  Roman  colonists  in  their  fear  and
their  hate,  made  no  distinction  between  the  Scots  and  the
Picts.1

Upon  the  departure  of  the  legions,  recalled  to  defend  Rome
against  the  invading  Goths,  the  Britons  ceased  to  recognise
the  authority  of  the  foreign  governors  who  had  been  left  in
charge  of  their  provinces  and  towns.  The  form,  and  even
the  name  of  these  administrators  perished;  and  in  their  place
arose  once  more  the  'ancient  authority  of  the  chiefs  of  tribe,
which  had  been  abolished  by  the  Romans.2  Old  genealogies,
carefully  preserved  by  the  national  poets,3  ascertained  those
who  were  entitled  to  claim  the  dignity  of  chief  of  a  district  or
family;  for  these  words  were  synonymous  in  the  language  of
the  ancient  Britons4  among  whom  the  ties  of  family  relation-
ship constituted  the  basis  of  the  social  state.  With  them,
people  of  the  lowest  condition  committed  to  memory  the
whole  line  of  their  descent,  with  a  care  which,  among  other
nations,  was  peculiar,  in  such  matters,  to  the  wealthy  and
exalted.  Every  Briton,  poor  as  well  as  rich,  had  to  establish
his  genealogy,  ere  he  could  be  admitted  to  the  full  enjoyment
of  his  civil  rights,  or  of  any  property  in  the  district  of  which
he  was  a  native;  for  each  district  belonged  in  original  owner-
ship to  one  particular  primitive  family,  and  no  man  could
legally  possess  any  portion  of  its  soil  unless  he  were  by  de-

1  Gildas,  De  cxcidio  Britannia,  passim.

3  Zozimus,  apud  Script,  renim.  Gallicarum  et  Franciarum,  i.  586.

3  The  bards ;  in  British  language,  Beirdd.

4  Penteulu  is  literally  the  head  of  the  family. (Laws  of  Hywel  Dda;,
Camlro  Briton,  ii.  298.)

TO  A.D.  443.]  INTERNAL DISCORDS.  7

scent  a  member  of  that  primitive  family,  become,  by  gradual
extension,  a  tribe.

Above  this  singular  social  order,  of  which  the  result  was  a
federation  of  petty  sovereignties,  some  elective,  some  here-
ditary, the  Britons,  delivered  from  the  Roman  authority,
raised,  for  the  first  time,  a  high  national  sovereignty:  they
created  a  chief  of  chiefs,  (Penteyrn,)  a  king  of  the  country,
as  their  annals  express  it,  whom  they  made  elective.  This
new  institution,  which  seemed  destined  to  give  the  people
more  union  and  more  strength  against  external  aggressions,
became,  on  the  contrary,  a  cause  of  divisions,  of  weakness,
and,  ere  long,  of  subjection.  The  two  great  populations  who
shared  the  southern  portion  of  the  island,  respectively  asserted
the  exclusive  right  of  furnishing  candidates  for  the  monarchy.
The  seat  of  this  central  royalty  was  in  the  Logrian  territory,
in  the  ancient  municipal  town,  called  by  the  Britons  Lon-din,
the  town  of  ships,  (Llundain,  latine,  Londiniuni.)  The
Cambrians,  jealous  of  this  advantage,  maintained  that  the
royal  authority  belonged  of  right  to  their  race,  as  the  most
indent,  as  that  which  had  received  the  others  on  the  soil  of
Britain.  To  justify  this  claim,  they  carried  back  the  origin
of  the  power  they  sought,  far  beyond  the  time  of  the  Roman
conquests,  attributing  its  institution  to  a  certain  Prydyn,  son
of  Aodd,  a  Cambrian,  who,  according  to  their  account,  had
combined  the  whole  island  under  one  monarchical  govern-
ment, and  decreed  that  this  government  should  for  ever
remain  vested  in  his  nation.1  With  what  fable  this  fable
was  met  by  the  southern  and  eastern  peoples,  is  not  known;
but  this  is  certain,  that  the  dispute  grew  fiercer  and  fiercer,
until  at  last  this  rivalry  of  self-love  had  lighted  up  civil  war
throughout  south  Britain.  The  intervention  of  the  tribes  of
foreign  origin,  ever  hostile  to  the  two  great  branches  of  the
British  population,  encouraged  its  discords  and  nourished  the
intestine  war.  Under  a  succession  of  chiefs,  called  national,
but  regularly  disowned  as  such  by  a  portion  of  the  nation,  no
army  was  levied  to  replace  the  Roman  legions  which  bad
guarded  the  frontiers  against  the  invasions  of  the  Gaelish
tribes.

Accordingly,  amidst  the  disorders  which  thus  afflicted  South

i  Trioedd  ynys  Prydyn,  No.  2.

8  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D.  443

Britain,  the  Picts  and  Scots  broke  down  the  two  great  Roman
walls,  and  passed  into  south  Britain,  at  the  same  time  that
other  enemies,  not  less  formidable,  burst  upon  the  country
from  the  sea.  These  were  pirates  come  forth  from  the  coasts
and  .islands  along  the  German  ocean,  to  pillage  and  then
return  home  laden  with  booty.  When  the  great  ships  of
Eoman  construction  were  forced  by  tempests  back  to  port,
the  light  vessels  of  these  men  of  the  sea1  dashed  boldly  on  at
full  sail,  and  suddenly  attacking  the  tall  ships  amid  the  terror
and  confusion  of  the  storm,  seldom  failed  to  capture  them.
Several  British  tribes  made  singly  great  efforts  against  the
enemy,  and  in  a  number  of  engagements  defeated  their  ag-
gressors, both  of  German  and  of  Gallic  race.  The  inhabit-
ants of  the  southern  coasts,  who  had  frequent  communication
with  the  continent,  solicited  foreign  aid;  once  or  twice  Roman
troops,  coming  over  from  Gaul,  fought  for  the  Britons,  and
assisted  them  in  repairing  the  great  walls  of  Hadrian  and
Severus.2  But,  ere  long,  the  Romans  themselves  were  driven
from  Gaul,  by  three  invasions  of  barbarians  from  the  south,
the  east,  and  the  north,  and  by  the  national  insurrection  of
the  maritime  districts  of  the  west.3  The  legions  fell  back
upon  Italy,  and  from  that  time  forth  the  Britons  had  no
succour  to  expect  from  the  empire.4

At  this  period,  the  dignity  of  supreme  chief  of  all  Britain
was  in  the  hands  of  one  Guorteyrn,5  a  Logrian.  On  several
occasions  he  assembled  around  him  all  the  chiefs  of  the  British
tribes,  in  order  to  take,  in  concert  with  them,  measures  for
the  defence  of  the  country  against  the  northern  invasions.
But  little  union  prevailed  in  these  deliberations,  and,  justly
or  not,  Guorteyrn  had  many  enemies,  more  especially  among
the  western  people,  who  seldom  assented  to  anything  pro-

J  Quin  et  aremoricus  piratam  saxona  tractus
Sperabat,  cui  pelle  salum  sulcare  Britaunum
Ludus.  et  assuto  glaucum  mare  findere  lembo.
(Sidonii  Apollinaris,  Carmlna,  ap.  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Franc.,  i.  807.)

2  Gildse,  Hist.,  cap.  xii.  ap.  Eer.  Angli  Scrip,  i.  4,  (Gale.)

3  "  Totus  ille  tractus,  ejectis  magistratibus  romanis." Zozimus,  nt  sup.
p.  587.

4  Gildae,  Hist.,  cap.  xvii.

5  In  Cambrian  orthography,  Gwrthevyru ; in  the  Anglo-Saxon  writers,
Wyrtegern  or  Wortigern,  probably  a  -word  bearing  the  same  sound,  in  their
way  of  pronouncing  it.

TO  449.] THE SAXONS CALLED INTO BRITAIN.  9

posed  by  the  Logrian.  The  latter,  in  virtue  of  his  royal
preeminence,  and  by  the  counsel  of  several  tribes,  though
without  the  consent  of  the  Cambrians,1  suddenly  adopted  the
resolution  of  introducing  into  Britain  a  population  of  foreign
soldiers,  who,  in  consideration  of  pecuniary  subsidies  and
grants  of  land,  should,  in  the  service  of  the  Britons,  carry  on
the  war  against  the  Picts  and  Scots.  At  about  the  epoch
when  this  decision  was  formed,  a  decision  which  the  Cambrians
denounced  as  base  and  cowardly,  chance  directed  to  the
shores  of  Britain  three  German  piratical  ships,  commanded
by  two  brothers,  called  Henghist  and  Horsa,2  who  landed  in
Kent,  on  the  same  promontory  where  the  legions  of  Rome
had  formerly  disembarked.

It  would  appear  that  the  three  vessels  had  come  to  Britain
on  this  occasion  on  a  mission,  not  of  piracy,  but  of  trade.
They  were  of  the  nation  of  the  Jutes,  or,  more  correctly,
lutes,  a  nation  forming  part  of  a  great  league  of  peoples
spread  over  the  marshy  coasts  of  the  ocean,  north  of  the  Elbe,
and  all  designating  themselves  by  the  general  name  of  Saxons,
or  men  with  the  long  knives.3  Other  confederations  of  the
same  kind  had  been  already  formed  among  the  Teutonic  tribes,
either  for  the  better  defence  of  all  from  the  Romans,  or  in
order  the  more  advantageously  to  assume  the  oifensive  against
them.  Such  had  been  the  league  of  the  Alamans,  or  men  of
men,  and  that  of  the  Franks,  or  men  rude  injight.^  On  land-
ing, the  Saxon  chiefs,  Henghist  and  Horsa,  received  from
the  British  king,  Guorteyrn,  a  proposition  to  enrol  them  and
an  army  of  their  countrymen  in  his  service.  There  seemed
nothing  strange  in  this  to  men  with  whom  war  was  a  business.
They  at  once  promised  a  considerable  body  of  troops  in  ex-
change for  the  little  island  of  Thanet,5  formed  on  the  coast  of

1  Trioedd  ynys  Prydyn,  No.  9.

2  Chronicon  Saxonicurn,  ed.  Gibson,  p.  12. The  Saxon  orthography  is
Hcng'ist. Heugist  signifies  a  stallion,  and  hors  or  hros,  a  horse. In  ge-
neral, the  Saxon  q  is  hard. In  future  the  gh  will  be  substituted,  as  above,
for  the  g  in  all  proper  names  of  German  origin.

3  Sax,  xacx,  scax,  stcx,  sex,  salts,  knife  or sword. Handsax,  poniard
(Gloss,  of  Wachter.)

4  All,  call,  all,  wholly ; man, maun, maud,  man. Frak,  frek,  frech,
vrek,  vraug,  rude, sharp,  fierce. See  Lettres sur  1'llistoire  de France,
letter  vi.

5  British,  Danet.

10  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  443

Kent,  on  one  side  by  the  sea,  and  on  the  other  by  a  river
with  two  arms.  Seventeen  vessels  speedily  brought  over
from  the  north  the  new  military  colony,  which  divided  out
its  new  settlement,  and  organized  itself  there  according  to  its
national  customs,  under  the  command  of  the  two  brothers,  the
promoters  of  the  enterprise.  It  received  from  its  hosts,  the
Britons,  all  the  necessaries  of  life;  it  fought  well  and  truly  for
them  on  several  occasions,  advancing  against  the  Picts  and
Scots  its  standard  of  the  White  Horse,  emblem  of  the  name
of  its  two  leaders;  each  time,  the  mountain  bands,  strong  in
numbers,  but  ill  armed  with  long,  brittle  pikes,  fled  before
the  great  axes,  the  national  weapon  of  the  Saxon  confedera-
tion.1 These  exploits  created  throughout  Britain  infinite
rejoicing  and  warm  friendship  for  the  Saxons.

"  Having  overthrown  our  enemies,"  says  an  ancient  poet,
"they  celebrated  with  us  the  festival  of  victory:  we  vied  with
one  another  how  best  to  show  to  them  our  gratitude  and  our
loving  welcome!  but  woe  to  the  day  when  we  loved  them!
Woe  to  Guorteyrn  and  his  craven  councillors."2

In  effect,  the  good  understanding  was  of  no  long  duration
between  those  who  made  war  and  those  for  whom  it  was  made;
the  former  soon  demanded  more  land,  more  provisions,  and
more  money  than  had  been  stipulated,  and  menaced,  in  the
event  of  refusal,  to  pay  themselves  by  pillage  and  usurpation.3

To  render  these  threats  more  effective,  they  called  to  their
aid  fresh  bands  of  adventurers,  either  belonging  to  their  own
nation  or  to  other  peoples  of  the  Saxon  confederation.  The
emigration  continuing,  the  lands  assigned  by  the  Britons  no
longer  sufficed;  the  bounds  agreed  upon  were  violated,  and
ere  long  a  numerous  German  population  collected  upon  the
coast  of  Kent.  The  natives,  who  at  once  needed  its  aid  and
feared  it,  treated  with  it  on  the  footing  of  nation  with  nation.
On  either  side  there  were  frequent  embassies  and  fresh
treaties,  broken  almost  as  soon  as  concluded.4  At  length,  the

1  Cum illi  pilis et lanceis pugnarent, isti  vero seeuribus  gladiisque
longis. Heiir.  Huntindon.,  Hist.,  ii.  ap.  Rer.  Anglic.  Script.,  p.  309,  ed.
Savile.

2  National  song  of  the  Britons,  Arym.es  Prydyn  Vawr  ; Cambrian  Re-
gister for  1796,  p.  554,  et  seq. See  Appendix,  No.  I.

3  "  Et  nisi  profusior  eis  munificentia  cumularetur,  testantur  se  cuncta
insulae,  rupto  foadere,  depopxilaturos." Gildae,  Hist.,  cap.  xxiii.

4  Arymes  Prydyn  Vawr.

TO  455.] CONQUESTS  OF  THE  SAXONS.  11

last  ties  were  broken:  the  Saxons  formed  an  alliance  with
the  Picts;  they  sent  messengers  inviting  them  to  descend  in
arms  towards  the  south;  and  themselves,  favoured  by  this
diversion,  advanced  into  the  interior  of  Britain  from  east  to
west,  driving  the  British  population  before  them,  or  forcing
it  to  submit.  The  latter,  indeed,  did  not  give  way  to  them
unresistingly;  they  once  even  drove  them  back  to  the  sea-
coast,  and  compelled  them  to  re-embark;  but  they  soon  re-
turned with  increased  numbers,  and  with  a  fiercer  determi-
nation subdued  the  country  for  many  miles  on  the  right  bank
of  the  Thames,  and  did  not  again  quit  the  conquered  lands.
One  of  the  two  brothers  who  commanded  them  was  killed  in
battle;1  the  other,  from  a  mere  military  chief,  became  the
ruler  of  a  province;2  and  his  province,  or,  to  use  the  cus-
tomary language,  his  kingdom,  was  called  the  kingdom  of  the
men  of  Kent;  in  the  Saxon  language,  Kent-wara-rike.3

Twenty-two  years  after  the  first  landing  of  the  Germans,
another  Saxon  chief,  named  GElla,  came  with  three  vessels  to
the  south  coast  of  Kent,  and,  driving  the  Britons  back  to-
wards the  north-west,  established  a  second  colony,  which
received  the  name  of  the  kingdom  of  the  South  Saxons,
( Suth-seaxna-rice.}  Eighteen  years  afterwards,  a  certain
Kerdic,4  followed  by  the  most  powerful  army  that  had  yet
passed  the  ocean  to  seek  lands  in  Britain,  disembarked  on  the
southern  coast,  to  the  west  of  the  south  Saxons,  and  founded
a  third  kingdom,  under  the  name  of  West  Saxony,  (  West-
seaxna-rice,  more  briefly,  West-seax.J*  The  chiefs  who  suc-
ceeded Kerdic  gradually  extended  their  conquests  to  the
vicinity  of  the  Severn:  this  was  the  ancient  frontier  of  the
Cambrian  population;  the  invaders  did  not  find  this  popu-
lation disposed  to  give  place  to  them;  it  maintained  against

1  "Et  ibi  cecidit  Horsa cum  filio  Guortliigirn,  cujus  nomeii  erat  Ca-
tigirnus." Nennii,  Hist.  Briton.,  cap.  xlvi.

2  Guth-cyning,  wig-cyning, folces  cyning, theod-cyning, land-cyning.
See  Lye's  Saxon  Glossary.

3  In  the  orthography  of  the  Saxon  chronicle  Cant-wara-rice  ;  the  Saxon
c  is  hard. Henric.  Huntind.,  Hist.,  lib.  ii. Bedae,  Hist.  Eccles.,  lib.  ii.
cap.  xv.

*  In  order  to  retain  the  original  pronunciation,  we  shall  invariably  sub-
stitute k  for  c  in  all  the  German  proper  names.
5  Saxon  Chronicle,  ed.  Gibson,  p.  18 — 30.

12  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  542

them  an  obstinate  struggle,  during  which  other  emigrants,
landing  on  the  eastern  coast,  obtained  possession  of  the  left
bank  of  the  Thames,  and  the  great  city  of  Londin,  or  London*
They  called  the  territory  in  which  they  established  them-
selves East  Saxony,1  (East-seaxna-rice,  East-seax.}  All
these  acquisitions  were  made  at  the  expense  of  Logria  and  of
the  race  of  Logrian-Britons,  who  had  invited  the  Saxons  to
come  and  dwell  beside  them.

From  the  moment  that  the  city  of  London  was  taken,  and
the  coasts  of  Logria  became  Saxon,  the  kings  and  chiefs
selected  to  oppose  the  conquerors  were  all  of  the  Cambrian
race.  Such  was  the  famous  Arthur.  He  defeated  the  Saxons
in  numerous  battles;  but,  despite  the  services  he  rendered  to
his  people,  he  had  enemies  among  them,  as  had  been  the  case
with  Guorteyrn.  The  title  of  king  obliged  him  to  draw  his
sword  against  the  Britons  almost  as  often  as  against  the
foreigner,  and  he  was  mortally  wounded  in  a  battle  with  his
own  nephew.  He  was  removed  to  an  island  formed  by  several
streams,  near  Afallach,  (Insula  Avallonia, )  now  Grlastonbury,
south  of  the  bay  into  which  the  Severn  discharges  itself.  He
there  died  of  his  wounds,  but  as  it  was  at  the  time  that  the
western  Saxons  invaded  this  territory,  amid  the  tumult  of
invasion,  no  one  exactly  knew  the  circumstances  of  the  death
of  Arthur,  or  the  spot  where  he  was  buried.  This  ignorance
surrounded  his  name  with  a  mysterious  celebrity:  long  after
he  was  no  more,  his  followers  still  looked  for  him;  the  need
they  felt  of  the  great  war  chief,  who  had  conquered  the
Germans,  nourished  the  vain  hope  of  one  day  seeing  him
return.  This  hope  was  not  abandoned;  and  for  many  cen-
turies the  nation,  which  had  loved  Arthur,  did  not  despair  of
his  recovery  and  return.2

The  emigration  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  marshes  of  the
Elbe  and  the  neighbouring  islands,  gave  the  desire  for  a

'  l  Saxon  Chronicle,  ed.  Gibson,  p.  18 — 30.

2  Quern  adhnc  vere  bruti  Britoues  expectant  veuturnm  (Gul.  Nieubri-
gensis,  Hist,  proem,  p.  13).  Hie  est  Arthurus  de  quo  Britonum  nugae
hodieque  delirunt.  (Will.  Malmesburiensis  de  Gest.reg.Angl.  lib.  i.  cap.  i.)
Credunt  quid  am  de  genere  Britonum  eum  futurum  vivere,  et  de  servitute
.id  libertatem  eos  redncere.  (Johannes  de  Fordun,  Scoti-chronicon,  lib.
iii.  cap.  xxv.)  Nennii,  Hist.  Briton.,  cap.  Ixii.  et  Ixiii.  Koberts's  Sketch
of  the  Early  History  of  the  Cymry,  p.  141,  et  seq.

TO  565.] CONQUESTS  OF  THE  ANGLES.  13

similar  emigration  to  nations  situated  further  east,  near  the
shores  of  the  Baltic  sea,  and  who  were  then  called  Anghels,
or  Angles,  (Engla,  Anglen.}  After  having  experimented
with  petty  partial  incursions  upon  the  north-east  coast  of
Britain,  the  entire  population  of  the  Angles  put  itself  in
motion,  under  the  conduct  of  a  military  chief,  named  Ida,  and
his  twelve  sons.  Their  numerous  vessels  came  to  anchor
between  the  mouths  of  the  Forth  and  the  Tweed.  The  better
to  succeed  against  the  Britons  of  these  districts,  they  formed
an  alliance  with  the  Picts,  and  the  confederate  troops  advanced
from  east  to  west,  striking  such  terror  into  the  natives,  that
the  king  of  the  Angles  received  from  them  the  appellation  of
the  flame-man,  (Flamddwyn.)  Despite  his  ferocity  and  his
valour,  Ida  encountered,  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  in  which
the  Clyde  takes  its  rise,  a  population  that  resisted  him.
"  The  flame-man  has  come  against  us,"  says  a  contempo-
raneous British  poet;  "  he  asks  us  in  a  loud  voice:  '  Will  you
give  me  hostages?  are  you  ready?'  Owen,  brandishing  his
lance,  replied:  'No,  we  will  not  give  thee  hostages;  no,  we
are  not  ready.'  Urien,  chief  of  the  land,  then  cried:  ;  Children
of  one  race,  united  by  one  cause,  let  us,  having  raised  our
standard  on  the  mountains,  rush  into  the  plain;  let  us  throw
ourselves  upon  the  flame-man,  and  combine  in  the  same
slaughter,  him,  his  army,  and  his  auxiliaries.' "

This  same  Urien,  at  the  head  of  the  northern  Britons,
descendants  of  the  ancient  emigrants  from  Armorican  Gaul,
gained  several  victories  over  the  confederated  invaders.  The
chief  of  the  Germans  perished  on  the  banks  of  the  Clyde ;
but  in  a  decisive  battle,  in  which  the  combatants  on  one  side
were  the  Picts  and  Angles,  on  the  other  the  men  of  the
valley  of  the  Clyde,  the  men  of  the  banks  of  the  Forth  and
of  De'ifr  and  Brynich,  (or  Bryneich  and  Deywr,  or  Dewyr,}
that  is  to  say,  of  the  mountainous  country  north  of  the
Humber,  the  British  cause  was  lost.  Here  perished  a  great
number  of  chiefs  wearing  the  collar  of  gold,  a  token  of  elevated
command  among  the  Britons.2  Aneurin,  one  of  the  most
celebrated  bards,  fought  in  the  first  ranks,  and  survived  this
signal  defeat,  which  he  sang  in  a  poem  that  has  come  down
to  us.3

1  Taliesin  ;  Arcliaiology  of  Wales,  i.  57.
2  Arcliaiology  of  Wales,  i.  4.  »  Gododin;  ib.,  p.  4—]  3.

14  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  560

The  victors  spread  themselves  over  the  whole  of  the
eastern  country,  between  the  Forth  and  the  Humber.  Those
of  the  conquered  to  whom  the  foreign  yoke  was  insupport-
able, took  refuge  in  the  south,  in  the  country  of  the  Cam-
brians, which  then,  as  now,  was  called  Wales.  The  conquer-
ing Germans  gave  no  new  names  to  the  northern  country;
they  retained  the  ancient  geographical  denominations,  and
themselves  made  use  of  them  to  distinguish  their  different
colonies,  according  to  their  place  of  settlement.  They
called  themselves,  for  example,  men  of  the  north  of  the
Humber,  (Northan-hymbra-menn,  latine,  Nord-anhymbri,
Northumbri,)  men  of  De'ifr,  men  of  Brynich,  or,  accord-
ing to  the  Latin  orthography,  Northumbrians,  Deirians,  Ber-
nicians.  The  territorial  designation  of  the  Angles,  (East-
engla-land,  East  Englas,  laline,  Orientales  Angli,  East  Anglia,)
was  only  given  to  a  small  portion  of  the  eastern  coast,  where
men  of  that  nation,  before  the  general  emigration,  had  founded
a  colony,  few  in  number,  but  capable  of  maintaining  itself
against  the  hostility  of  the  natives,  by  the  aid  of  the  East-
Saxons,  north  of  whom  they  dwelt.

The  ancient  population  of  the  Coranians,  established  for
several  centuries  south  of  the  Humber,  and  whom  so  long  a
sojourn  among  the  Britons  had  not  reconciled  with  them,
readily  joined  the  Anglo-Saxon  invaders  as  they  had  formerly
joined  the  Romans.  In  their  alliance  with  the  conquerors,
their  national  appellation  disappeared  from  the  district  they
inhabited;  but  the  name  of  their  allies  did  not  take  its  place;
both  were  lost,  and  the  country  between  the  Humber  and  the
Thames  was  thenceforward  called  the  country  of  Merk1  (Myr-
can,  Myrcna-rice,}  or  Mercia,  perhaps  from  the  nature  of  the
soil,  chiefly  marshy,  perhaps  from  the  vicinity  of  the  free
Britons  of  whom  this  kingdom  formed  the  frontier  or  march,
as  the  Germans  called  it.2  It  was  Angles  from  the  terri-
tories of  Deira  and  Bernicia,  or  from  the  eastern  coast,  who,
under  this  name,  founded  the  eighth  and  last  Germanic
colony  in  Britain.3  The  limits  of  the  people  of  Mercia,

1  Saxon  Chronicle,  passim.

8  Mserc,  mere,  myrc,  mark,  frontier,  according  to  some  authorities,
marsh  land,  according  to  others.  See  the  Glossaries  of  Wachter,  Ihre,  and
Lye.

3  People  generally  reckon  ouly  seven; but  there  were  first  eight,  then

TO  565.]  WALES.  15

(Myrcna-menn,}  a  mixture  of  Coranians  and  Angles,  were
not  at  first  at  all  definite;  this  people  progressively  extended
its  territory  towards  the  west  at  the  expense  of  the  Cam-
brians, and  towards  the  south  at  the  expense  of  the  Saxons
themselves,  with  whom  they  did  not  feel  themselves  united
by  community  of  origin,  so  closely  as  the  Saxons  were  among
themselves.1

Of  these  eight  colonies,  principalities,  states,  or  kingdoms,
call  them  what  you  will,  founded  in  Britain  within  the  space
of  a  century,  by  the  conquests  of  the  Saxons  and  Angles,
none  possessed  any  territory  on  the  coast  of  the  western  sea,
except  the  western  Saxons,  who,  however,  did  not  extend
north  of  the  Bristol  Channel.  The  western  coasts,  almost
throughout  their  extent,  from  the  mouth  of  the  Clyde  to  the
Land's-End,  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  native  race,  and
more  peculiarly  of  the  Cambrian-Britons.  The  irregular
form  of  these  coasts,  isolated  from  the  great  mass  of  this  still
free  population,  the  tribes  who  dwelt  to  wards 'the  south,  be-
yond the  Bristol  Channel,  and  towards  the  north  beyond  the
Solway  Firth;  but  between  these  two  opposite  points  was  a
long  tract  of  compact  land,  though  more  or  less  contracted,
according  to  the  projection  of  the  coast  into  the  ocean.  This
mountainous  and  unfertile  territory  was  the  abode  of  the
Cambrians,2  (Gwylt  Wallia^)  who  there  offered  a  poor,  but
secure  asylum  to  emigrants  from  every  corner  of  Britain,  to
all  who,  as  the  ancient  historians  expressed  it,  preferred  suf-
fering with  independence,  to  a  beautiful  country  under  foreign
servitude.3  Others  crossed  the  ocean  to  seek  in  Gaul  a
country  which  their  ancestors  had  peopled  at  the  same  time
with  Britain,  and  where  still  dwelt  men  of  their  race,  and
speaking  their  language.4

Many  vessels  full  of  fugitive  Britons  landed'  in  succession
on  the  western  point  of  Armorica,  in  the  districts  which,

seven,  then  six,  and  then  again  eight,  the  various  result  of  various  revo-
lutions.

1  Horse  Britannicae,  ii.  222.
2  Taliesin ;  Archaiology  of  Wales,  i.  95.

3  Miseram  cum  libertate  potius  ibidem  eligunt  vitam  transigere,  quam
liostium  subjici  dominio  servitute. Johannes  de  Fordun,  Scoti-chron'tcvit,
lib.  ii.  cap.  xlii.

4  Gild®,  Hist.  cap.  xxv.

16  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  450

under  the  Romans,  and  even  before  them,  had  been  called
territories  of  the  Osismians,  of  the  Curiosolites,  and  of  the
Venetes.  By  the  consent  of  the  ancient  inhabitants,  who  re-
cognised in  them  brothers  by  descent,  the  new-comers  diffused
themselves  over  all  the  northern  coast,  as  far  as  the  Ranee,
and  towards  the  south-east,  as  far  as  the  lower  stream  of  the
Vilaine.  On  this  peninsula  they  founded  a  separate  state,
whose  limits  frequently  varied,  but  beyond  which  the  cities  of
Rennes  and  Nantes  remained  down  to  the  middle  of  the  ninth
century.  The  increasing  population  of  this  western  nook  of
land,  the  immense  number  of  people  of  Celtic  race  and  lan-
guage1 who  thus  found  themselves  agglomerated  together,  pre-
served it  from  the  irruption  of  the  Roman  tongue,  which,  under
forms  more  or  less  corrupt,  gradually  spread  throughout  Gaul.
The  name  of  Brittany  was  given  to  these  coasts,  and  super-
seded the  various  names  of  the  indigenous  populations,  while
the  island  which,  for  so  many  centuries,  had  borne  this  appel-
lation, lost  it,  and,  adopting  that  of  its  conquerors,  began  to
be  called  the  land  of  the  Saxons  and  Angles,  or,  in  one  word,
England,  (Engel-seaxna-land,  Engla-land.)

At  the  time  when  the  men  of  Britain,  flying  before  the
Anglo-Saxons,  settled  on  the  point  of  land  called  the  Horn
of  Gaul,2  other  expatriated  Saxons  fixed  their  abode  on  a
more  northern  point  of  the  coast  of  Gaul,  near  the  town
whose  ancient  name  was  changed  into  that  of  Bayeux.3  At
the  same  time,  also,  the  Germanic  league,  whose  members,
for  two  centuries,  had  borne  the  name  of  Franks,  that  is  to
say,  undaunted,  descended,  in  several  bands,  from  the  mouths
of  the  Rhine  and  the  Meuse,  upon  the  central  lands  of  Gaul.
Two  other  nations  of  Teutonic  race  had  already  thoroughly
invaded  and  fixed  their  abode  in  the  provinces  of  the  south,
between  the  Loire  and  the  two  seas.  The  western  Goths  or
Visigoths4  occupied  the  country  west  of  the  Rhone;  the  Bur-

1  Celtoe,  KtXroi,  Galatoe,  names  which  the  Bomuns  and  Picts  applied  to  the
Gaulish  populations. We  are  often  obliged,  from  deficiency  of  terms,  to
apply  the  name  indifferently  to  populations of  Cambrian  and  of  Gaelic
origin. See  Amedee  Thierry's  Histoire  des  Gaulois.

2  Cormi  Galliee ;  the  same  name  with  that  of  the  westernmost  county  of
England,  Cornwall.

3  See Ducange, Glossariimi ad Script,  medics  ct  infima! lafinitatis,
\erbo  Otlingua  Saxonica.

4  West-gotheu,  latine  Yisigothi.

TO  500.] CONQUESTS  OF  THE  FRANKS.  17

.gundiones1  that  to  the  east.  The  establishment  of  these  two
barbarous  nations  had  not  taken  place  without  violence  and
ravage;  they  had  usurped  a  portion  of  the  possessions  of  each
native  family;  but  the  love  of  repose,  and  a  certain  spirit  of
justice  which  distinguished  them  among  all  the  Germans,  had
speedily  softened  their  manners;  they  contracted  relation-
ships with  the  conquered,  whom  their  laws  treated  with  im-
partiality, and  gradually  came  to  be  regarded  by  them  as
simply  friends  and  neighbours.  The  Goths  for  the  most  part
adopted  the  Roman  manners,  which  they  found  generally  in
use  among  the  civilized  inhabitants  of  Gaul;  their  laws  were,
in  great  measure,  mere  extracts  from  the  imperial  code;  they
prided  themselves  in  a  taste  for  the  arts,  and  affected  the
polished  elegance  of  Rome.2

The  Franks,  on  the  contrary,  filled  the  north  of  Gaul  with
terror  and  devastation;  strangers  to  the  manners  and  arts  of
the  Roman  cities  and  colonies,  they  ravaged  them  with  indif-
ference and  even  with  a  sort  of  pleasure.3  Being  pagans,  no
religious  sympathy  tempered  their  savage  humour.  Sparing
neither  sex  nor  age,  say  the  ancient  historians,  destroying
churches  as  readily  as  private  houses,  they  gradually  advanced
towards  the  south,  invading  the  whole  extent  of  Gaul;  while
the  Goths  and  Burgundians,  impelled  by  a  similar  ambition,
but  with  less  barbarous  manners — sometimes  at  peace  with
each  other,  more  often  at  war — essayed  to  make  progress  in
the  opposite  direction.  In  the  then  weak  condition  of  the
central  provinces,  still  united,  but  only  in  name,  to  the  Roman
empire,  and  utterly  disgusted  with  that  empire,  which,  in  the
words  of  an  ancient  Gaulish  poet,  made  them  feel  the  weight
of  its  shadow,4  there  was  reason  to  suppose  that  the  inhabi-
tants of  these  provinces,  incapable  of  resisting  the  conquering
nations  who  pressed  upon  them  on  three  sides,  would  come  to
terms  with  the  least  ferocious  of  them;  in  a  word,  that  the

1  See  Lettres  sur  1'Histoire  de  France,  letter  vi.

2  Burgundiones,  bl anile,  mansuete,  innoceuterque  vivunt,  non  quasi  cum
subjectis  Gallis,  sed  vere  cum  fratribus  Christianis.  (Paulus  Orosins,  ap.
Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  i.  507.)

3  See  Lettres  sur  1'Histoire  de  France,  letter  vi.

4  Portavimus  umbram
Imperii.

(Sidon.  Apoll.,  Carmina,  ap.  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  i,  810.)
VOL.  I.  C

18  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  450

whole  of  Gaul  would  submit  either  to  the  Goths  or  to  the
Burgundians,  Christians  like  itself,  to  escape  the  grasp  of  the
Franks.  Such  would  have  been  its  true  policy;  but  those
who  disposed  of  its  fate  decided  otherwise.

These  were  the  bishops  of  the  Gaulish  cities,  to  whom  the
decrees  of  the  Roman  emperors  assigned  high  administrative
authority,1  and  who,  by  favour  of  the  disorders  caused  by  the
invasion  of  the  barbarians,  had  found  means  illegally  to  ag-
grandize this  already  exorbitant  power.  The  bishops,  who
at  that  time  all  bore  the  title  of  popes  or  fathers,  were  the
plenipotentiaries  of  the  Gaulish  cities,  either  with  the  empire,
becoming  more  and  more  distant,  or  with  the  Germans,  each
day  approaching  nearer.  Their  diplomatic  negotiations  were
conducted  altogether  at  their  own  will  and  discretion,2  and,
whether  from  habit  or  fear,  no  one  ever  thought  of  saying
them  nay;  for  their  power  was  backed  by  the  sanguinary
executive  laws  of  the  empire  in  its  decline.

Sons  of  Rome,  and  strictly  bound  by  the  imperial  ordi-
nances to  recognise  as  their  patron  and  common  head  the
bishop  of  the  eternal  city,3  to  do  nothing  without  his  consent,
to  receive  his  decrees  as  laws,  and  his  policy  for  their  rule  of
conduct,  to  model  their  own  faith  upon  his,  and  thus,  by  the
unity  of  religion,  to  contribute  to  the  unity  of  empire,  the
bishops  of  the  Gaulish  provinces,  when  the  imperial  power
ceased  to  have  any  compulsory  action  upon  them,  and  when
they  had  become  altogether  independent  of  it,  did  not  enter
upon  a  new  path.  From  instinct  or  from  calculation,  they
still  laboured,  as  we  are  told  by  one  of  their  own  body,  to  re-
tain under  the  authority  of  Rome,  by  the  tie  of  religious  faith,
the  countries  where  that  political  subjection  was  broken.4
Their  aversion  or  their  good-will  towards  the  emigrant

1  See  the  laws  of  Arcadius  and  of  Theodosius  the  Younger.

2  Per  vos (episcopos)  mala  fcederum  currunt,  per  vos  regni  utrius  que
pacta  conditionesque  portantur. (Sidon.  Apollinar.,  Epist.,  apud  Script.
rer.  Gall,  et  Franc.,  i.  798.)

3  Decemimus  ne  quid  tarn  episcopis  gallicanis,  quam  aliarum  provincia-
rnm...liceat  sine  viri  venerabilis  papse  urbis  (eternte  auctoritate  tentare,  sed
illis...pro  lege  sit  quidquid  sanxit  vel  sanxerit. (Lex  Theodosii  et  Valen-
tiniani,  apud  Scriptores,  ut  sup.  sub  anno  445.) See  Appendix,  No.  II.

4  Populos  Galliarum,  quos  limes  gothicae  sortes  iucluserit,  teneamus,  ex
fide,  elsi noil  teiiearnus  ex  foedere. (Sidon.  Apollinar.,  Epist.,  ut  sup.
sub  anno  474.)

TO  493.]  CHLODOWIG.  19

peoples  of  Germany  was  not  measured  by  the  degree  of  bar-
barism and  ferocity  of  those  nations,  but  by  their  supposed
aptitude  to  receive  the  Catholic  faith,  the  only  faith  that
Rome  had  ever  professed.  Now  this  aptitude  was  calculated
to  be  far  greater  in  a  people  still  pagan,  than  in  schismatic
Christians,  wittingly  and  willingly  separated  from  the  Roman
communion,  such  as  the  Goths  and  Burgundians,  who  pro-
fessed the  faith  of  Christ,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Arius.
But  the  Franks  were  strangers  to  any  Christian  belief,  and
this  consideration  sufficed  to  turn  the  hearts  of  the  Gaulish
bishops  towards  them,  and  to  make  them  all,  as  a  nearly  con-
temporary author  expresses  it,  desire  the  domination  of  the
Franks  with  a  desire  of  love.1

The  portion  of  the  Gaulish  territory  occupied  by  the  Frank
tribes  extended  at  this  period  from  the  Rhine  to  the  Somme,
and  the  tribe  most  advanced  into  the  west  and  south  was  that
of  the  Merowings  or  children  of  Merowig,2  so  called  from
the  name  of  one  of  their  ancient  chiefs,  renowned  for  his
bravery,  and  respected  by  the  whole  tribe  as  a  common
ancestor.3

At  the  head  of  the  children  of  Merowig  was  a  young  man,
named  Chlodowig,4  who  combined  with  the  warlike  ardour  of
his  predecessors  a  greater  degree  of  reflection  and  skill.  The
bishops  of  the  portion  of  Gaul  still  subject  to  the  empire,
partly  as  a  precaution  for  the  future,  partly  out  of  their  hatred
to  the  Arian  powers,  entered,  of  their  own  motion,  into  rela-
tions with  this  formidable  neighbour;  sending  to  him  frequent
messages,  replete  with  flattering  expressions.  Many  of  them
visited  him  in  his  camp,  which,  in  their  Roman  politeness,

1  Cum  omnes  eos  amore  desiderabili  cuperent  regnare. (Gregorii  Tiir
ronensis,  Hist.  Franc.,  lib.  ii.  cap.  xxiii.)

2  See  as  to  the  signification  of  this  name,  the  Lettres  sur  1'Histoire  de
France,  Appendix.

3  Merovicus...a  quo  Franci  et  prius Merovinci  vocati  sunt,  propter  uti-
litatem  videlicet  et  prudentiam  illius,  in  tantam  venerationem  apud  Francos
est  habitus,  ut  quasi  communis  pater  ab  omnibus  coleretur. (Boriconis
Gest  Franc,,  apud  Scriptores,  &c.,  iii.  4.) Primum  regem  traduntur  ha-
buisse  Meroveum,  ob  cujus  potentia  facta  et  mirificos  triumphos,  intermisso
Sicambrorum  vocabulo,  Merovinyl  dicti  sunt. (Hariulfi,  Chronicon  Centii-
lense,  ib.,  p.  349.) In  the  Fraukish  language,  Merowings,  the  termination
ing  indicates  descent.

4  See  the  Lettres  sur  1'Histoire  de  France,  Appendix.
c2

20  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  481

they  dignified  with  the  name  of  Aula  Regia,  or  royal  court.1
The  king  of  the  Franks  was  at  first  very  insensible  to  their
adulations,  which  in  no  degree  kept  him  from  pillaging  the
churches  and  treasures  of  the  clergy:  but  a  precious  vase,
taken  by  the  Franks  from  the  cathedral  of  Reims,  placed  the
barbarian  chief  in  relations  of  interest,  and  ere  long,  of  friend-
ship, with  a  prelate  more  able  or  more  successful  than  the
rest.  Under  the  auspices  of  Remigius  or  Remi,  bishop  of
Reims,  events  seemed  themselves  to  concur  in  promoting  the
grand  plan  of  the  high  Gaulish  clergy.  First,  by  a  chance,
too  fortunate  to  have  been  wholly  fortuitous,  the  king,  whom
they  desired  to  convert  to  the  Roman  faith,  married  the  only
orthodox  princess  then  existing  among  the  Teutonic  families;
and  the  love  of  the  faithful  wife,  as  the  historians  of  the  time
express  it,  gradually  softened  the  heart  of  the  infidel  hus-
band.'2 In  a  battle  with  some  Germans  who  sought  to  follow
the  Franks  into  Gaul  and  to  conquer  their  part  also,  Chlo-
dowig,  whose  soldiers  were  giving  way,  invoked  the  god  of
Chlothilda  (such  was  the  name  of  his  wife),  and  promised  to
believe  in  him,  if  he  conquered:  he  conquered,  and  kept  his
word.3

The  example  of  the  chief,  the  presents  of  Chlothilda  and
of  the  bishops,  and  perhaps  the  charm  of  novelty,  brought
about  the  conversion  of  a  number  of  Frank  warriors,  as  many,
indeed,  according  to  the  historians,  as  three  thousand.4  The
baptism  took  place  at  Reims;  and  all  the  splendour  that
could  still  be  furnished  by  the  arts  of  the  Romans,  which
were  soon  to  perish  in  Gaul  in  the  hands  of  the  barbarians,
was  displayed  in  profusion  to  adorn  this  triumph  of  the
Catholic  faith.  The  vestibule  of  the  cathedral  was  decorated
with  tapestry  and  garlands ;  veils  of  various  colours  softened
the  glare  of  day;  the  most  exquisite  perfumes  burnt  abun-
dantly in  vases  of  gold  and  silver.5  The  bishop  of  Reims

1  Vita  S.  Vedasti,  apnd  Scriptores,  £c.,  iii.  372.

2  Fidelis  infuleli  coujuncta viro. (Aimonii,  Chronicon,  lib.  xiv.,  apud
Scriptores,  &c.,  iii.  38.)

3  Greg.  Turonensis,  Hint.,  tit  sup. Vita  St.  Remigii,  *?>.,  iii.  375.

4  De  exercitu  vero  ejus  baptizati  sunt  amplius  tria  millia. (Greg.  Tn-
ronensif,  ut.  sup.  p.  178.)

5  Velis  depictis  adumbrantur  platece  ecclesiee,  cortinis  albentibus  ador-
nantur,  baptisterium  componitur,  balsama  diffimdunturj  micant  tiagrantes
odore  cerei. (Greg.  Turonensis,  ut  sup.  p.  177.)

TO  497.] THE  FRANKS  ATTACK  THE  BURGUNDIANS. 21

advanced  to  the  baptistry  in  pontifical  robes,  leading  by  the
hand  the  Frankish  king  who  was  about  to  become  his  spiritual
son:  "  Father,"  said  the  latter,  marvelling  at  so  much  pomp,
"  is  not  this  that  kingdom  of  heaven  which  you  promised
me?"  l

Messengers  speedily  conveyed  to  the  pope  of  Rome  intel-
ligence of  the  baptism  of  the  king  of  the  Franks;  whereupon
letters  of  congratulation  and  friendship  were  addressed  from
the  eternal  city  to  the  king  who  thus  bowed  his  head  beneath
her  yoke:  and  he,  in  return,  sent  rich  presents,  as  tributes  of
filial  submission,  to  the  blessed  apostle  Peter,  the  protector  of
the  new  Rome.  From  the  time  that  king  Chlodowig  was
declared  son  of  the  Roman  church,  his  conquests  spread  in
Gaul,  almost  without  effusion  of  blood.  All  the  cities  of  the
north-west,  to  the  Loire  and  to  the  territory  of  the  British
emigrants,  opened  their  gates  to  his  soldiers.  The  garrisons
of  these  cities  passed  over  to  the  service  of  the  German  king,
and  among  his  skin-clad  warriors  retained  the  arms  and
banners  of  Rome.2  Ere  long,  the  limits  of  the  territory  or
kingdom  of  the  Franks  were  extended  towards  the  south-
east; and,  at  the  instigation  of  those  who  had  converted  him,
the  neophyte  entered,  sword  in  hand,  the  lands  conquered  by
the  Burgundians.3

The  Burgundians  were  Arians,  that  is,  they  did  not  believe
that  the  second  person  of  the  Trinity  was  co-substantial  with
the  first;  but,  despite  this  difference  of  doctrine,  they  in  no
way  persecuted  the  priests  and  bishops  who,  in  their  cities,
professed  the  creed  adopted  by  the  church  of  Rome.  The
bishops,  little  grateful  for  this  toleration,  corresponded  with
the  Franks,  encouraging  them  to  invasion,  and  sought  to  avail
themselves  of  the  dread  of  this  invasion  to  persuade  the  king
of  the  Burgundians  to  embrace  the  Roman  faith,  which  they
described  to  be  the  only  true,  evangelical,  and  orthodox  faith.
The  king,  named  Gondebald,4  although  a  barbarian,  and  their

1  Patrone,  est  hoc  regnum  Dei  quod  miki  promittis? (Vita  S.  Remigii,
tit  sup.  p.  877.)

2  Pellitae  turmae. (Sidon.  Apollinar.,  nt  sup.) Procopius  de  Francis,  ib.
ii.  31.

3  Vita  S.  Remigii,  id  sup.  p.  378.

4  In  Latin,  Gnndobaldus ;  Gond,  gand,  gitth,  war,  warrior; bald,  bold,
bold,  daring.

22  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  500

master,  opposed  them  with  great  gentleness;  while  they  ad-
dressed him  in  a  tone  of  menace  and  arrogance,  calling  him
madman,  apostate,  and  rebel  to  the  law  of  God.1  "  Nay,  not
so,"  he  answered,  mildly;  "  I  obey  the  law  of  God;  but  lean-
not,  like  yon,  believe  in  three  gods.  Besides,  if  your  faith
be  the  better  one,  why  do  not  your  brother  bishops  prove  it  so,
by  preventing  the  king  of  the  Franks  from  marching  upon
us  to  destroy  us?"2

The  entrance  of  the  Franks  was  the  only  answer  to  this
embarrassing  question:  they  signalized  their  passage  by  mur-
der and  fire;  they  tore  up  the  vines  and  fruit-trees,  pillaged
the  convents,  carried  away  the  sacred  vessels,  and  broke  them
up  without  the  slightest  scruple.  The  king  of  the  Burgundians,
reduced  to  extremity,  submitted  to  the  conquerors,  who  im-
posed a  tribute  on  him  and  all  his  cities,  made  him  swear  to
be  for  the  future  their  ally  and  soldier,  and  returned  to  the
north  of  the  Loire,  with  an  immense  booty.  The  orthodox
clergy  declared  this  sanguinary  expedition  to  be  a  pious,  illus-
trious, and  holy  enterprise  for  the  true  faith.3  '^But,"  said
the  aged  king,  "  can  faith  co-exist  with  coveting  o*ther  men's
goods,  and  thirsting  for  their  blood?"4

The  victory  of  the  Franks  over  the  Burgundians  again  brought
all  the  cities  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhone  and  Saone  under  the
sway  of  the  Roman  church  and  of  the  palace  of  San  Giovanni
di  Latran,  where  thus,  bit  by  bit,  was  gathered  together  the
heritage  of  the  ancient  Capitol.  Six  years  afterwards,  under
similar  auspices,  began  the  war  against  the  Visigoths.  Chlo-
dowig  assembled  his  warriors  in  a  circle,  in  a  large  field,  and
said  to  them  : — "  I  like  not  that  these  Goths,  who  are  Arians,
should  occupy  the  best  part  of  Gaul;  let  us  go  against  them,
with  the  aid  of  God,  and  drive  them  away;  let  us  subject  their
territory  to  our  power  :  we  shall  do  well  in  this,  for  the  land
is  very  good."5  The  proposition  pleased  the  Franks,  who

1  Collatio  episcoporum  coram  Gundebaldo  rege,  apud  Script,  rer.  Gallic.
See  Appendix  III.

1  Si  vestra  fides  est  vera,  quare  episcopi  vestri  non  impediunt  regem
Francomim,  &c.  (Collatio  episcoporum,  &c.,  vt  sup.)

3  Pia atque  inclyta  et  Christian*  religionis  cultrix  Franconum  ditio.
(Vita  S.  Dalmatii,  apud  Scriptores,  &c.  iii.  420.)

4  Non  est  fides  ubi  est  appetentia  alieni  et  sitis  sanguinis  populorum.
(Collatio  episc.  ut  supra.)

5  Gesta  Reg.  Franc.,  apud  Script.,  &c.,  ii.  553.

TO  507.]  CONQUESTS OF THE FRANKS.  23

adopted  it  with  acclamations,  and  joyously  proceeded  on  their
march  towards  the  good  land  of  the  south.  The  terror  of
their  approach,  say  the  old  historians,  resounded  far  before
them;1  the  mind  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  south  of  Gaul  was
so  agitated,  that  in  many  places  men  imagined  terrible  signs
and  prognostics,  announcing  all  the  horrors  of  invasion.  At
Toulouse,  it  was  said,  a  fountain  of  blood  burst  forth  in  the
centre  of  the  town,  and  flowed  for  an  entire  day.2  But  amidst
the  public  consternation,  one  class  of  men  was  impatiently
calculating  the  days  of  the  march  of  the  barbarian  troops.
Quintianus,  the  orthodox  bishop  of  Rodez,  was  detected  in-
triguing for  the  enemy,  and  he  was  not  the  only  member  of
the  high  clergy  guilty  of  these  machinations.3

The  Franks  passed  the  Loire;  and  ten  miles  from  the  city
of  Poitiers,  a  bloody  battle  took  place,  in  which  the  ancient
inhabitants  of  southern  Gaul,  the  Gallo-Roman  population  of
Aquitaine  and  Arvernia  (Arvernia,  Alvernia,  Alvernh,  Au-
vergne),4  aided  the  Goths  in  defence  of  the  country.  But
their  cause  did  not  prevail  against  the  conquering  ardour  of
the  Franks,  powerfully  assisted  by  the  fanaticism  of  the  or-
thodox Gauls  ;  Alarik,  king  of  the  Goths,  was  killed  fight-
ing; and  the  Arvernians  in  this  defeat  lost  the  principal  per-
sonages of  their  nation,  whom  they  entitled  senators,  in  imi-
tation of  the  Romans.  Few  cities  were  taken  by  assault;  the
surrender  of  the  majority  was  the  result  of  treachery.  All
whose  consciences  had  been  troubled  by  the  Arian  domina-
tion, revenged  themselves  by  inflicting  every  possible  injury
upon  their  ancient  rulers.  The  Goths,  unable  to  retain  the
country,  abandoned  Aquitaine,  and  passed  into  Spain,  or  took
refuge  in  the  fortresses  on  the  Mediterranean;  the  victorious
bands,  in  whose  ranks  were  combined,  under  the  orders  of  the
converted  king,  pertinacious  pagans  and  orthodox  fanatics,
marched  to  the  foot  of  the  Pyrenees,  pillaging  the  cities,  de-
vastating the  rural  districts,  and  carrying  away  the  inhabi-

1  Greg.  Tnron.,  Hist.,  lib.  ii.  cap.  xxiii.  ib.  ii.  173.
*  Idatii  Chron.,  apud  Script.,  &c.,  nt  supra,  ii.  403.

3  Vita  S.  Quiiitiani,  ib.  iii.,  408. See  Grego.  Turon.  de  Aprimciilo,
Tlieodoro,  Proculo,  Dionysio,  Volusiano  et  Verb,  episcopis.

4  All,  eall,  all,  wholly;  ric,  rift,  rich,  reich,  strong,  brave;  and  by  exten-
sion, powerful,  rich.

24  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D.  508'

tants  into  slavery.1  Wherever  the  victorious  chief  encamped,
the  orthodox  prelates  besieged  his  tent.  Germerius,  bishop
of  Toulouse,  who  abode  twenty  days  with  him,  eating  at  his-
table,  received  a  present  of  five  hundred  coins  and  gold
crosses,  and  silver  chalices  and  patines,  three  gilt  crowns,  and
three  robes  of  fine  linen,  taken  from  the  Arian  churches.2
Another  bishop,  who  was  unable  to  come  himself,  wrote  thus
to  the  king  of  the  Franks:  "  Thou  shinest  in  power  and  ma-
jesty; and  when  thou  lightest,  to  us  is  the  victory."3

Such  was  the  domination  which,  extending  from  the  Rhine
to  the  Pyrenees,  at  length  completely  surrounded  on  all  sides
the  western  nook  of  land  in  which  the  Britons  had  taken  re-
fuge. Frankish  governors  established  themselves  in  the  cities
of  Nantes  and  Rennes.  These  cities  paid  tribute  to  the  king
of  the  Franks;  but  the  Britons  refused  to  pay  it,  and  alone
dared  the  attempt  to  save  their  narrow  country  from  the
destiny  of  Gaul.  This  enterprise  was  all  the  more  perilous
to  them,  that  their  Christianity,  the  fruit  of  the  preaching  of
missionaries  from  the  churches  of  the  East,  differed  in  some
points  from  the  doctrines  and  practices  of  the  Romish  church.
These,  Christians  for  several  centuries  past,  arid  perhaps  the
most  fervent  Christians  in  the  world,  had  come  into  Gaul,
accompanied  by  priests  and  monks  of  greater  knowledge  than
those  of  the  isolated  province  where  they  fixed  their  abode.4
They  purified  the  still  very  imperfect  faith  of  the  ancient  in-
habitants of  this  country;  they  even  extended  their  gratuitous
preaching  into  the  surrounding  territories:  and,  as  their  mis-
sionaries sought  no  gain,  not  accepting  money  or  even  main-
tenance from  any  one,5  they  were  everywhere  well  received.
The  citizens  of  Rennes  chose  an  emigrant  Briton  as  their
bishop,  and  the  Bretons  instituted  bishops  in  many  cities  of
their  new  country,  where  there  had  been  none  before.  They
founded  this  religious  constitution  as  they  had  founded  their

1  Vita  S.  Eptadii,  apiirl  Script.,  &c.,  lit  sup.  iii.  381.  More  cauum
Innos  et  biaos  insimul  copulates.  (Vita  S.  Eusicii,  ib.  p.  429.)

*  Vita  S.  Germerii,  episcopi  Tolosaui,  ib.  iii.  380.
3  Epistola  Aviti,  Viennensis  Episcopi,  ib.  iv.  50.

*  Dom  Lobineau,  Hist,  dc  Bretaync,  i.  7 — 13.

5  Cambrian  Biography,  p.  80,  at  the  word  Dewi.  Roberts,  Sketch  of
the  Early  History  of  t lie  Cymry,  p.  129.

TO  826.]  RELIGIOUS STATE OF BRITTANY.  25

civil  constitution,  without  asking  permission  or  advice  from
any  foreign  power.1

The  chiefs  of  the  Breton  church  held  no  intercourse  with
the  prelates  of  Frankish  Gaul,  and  did  not  attend  the  Gaulish
councils  convoked  by  the  rescripts  of  the  Frank  kings.  This
conduct  soon  drew  upon  them  the  animosity  of  the  other
clergy.  The  archbishop  of  Tours,  who  claimed  the  spiritual
superintendence  of  the  whole  extent  of  country  which  the
Roman  emperors  had  named  the  third  Lyonnese  (Lugdunensis
tertia\  summoned  the  clergy  of  Brittany,  as  inhabiting  his
ancient  diocese,  to  recognise  him  as  metropolitan,  and  receive
his  commands.  The  Bretons  did  not  consider  that  the  impe-
rial circumscription  of  the  Gaulish  territories  imposed  upon
them  the  slightest  obligation  to  subject  to  the  authority  of  a
foreigner  the  national  church,  which  they  had  transplanted
from  beyond  seas;  moreover,  it  was  not  their  custom  to  attach
the  archiepiscopal  supremacy  to  the  possession  of  a  particular
see,  but  to  decree  it  to  the  most  worthy  among  their  bishops.
Their  religious  hierarchy,  vague  and  fluctuating  at  the  popu-
lar will,  was  not  rooted  in  the  soil,  or  graduated  in  territorial
divisions,  like  those  which  the  emperors  instituted  when  they
converted  Christianity  into  a  means  of  government.  Accord-
ingly, the  ambitious  pretensions  of  the  prelate  of  Tours  seemed
wholly  futile  to  the  Bretons,  who  paid  no  heed  whatever  to  it;
the  Gaulish  bishops  excommunicated  them.  They  were  equally
unmoved  at  this,  feeling  no  regret  at  being  deprived  of  the
communion  with  strangers,  from  whom  they  had  themselves
separated.2

In  punishment  of  its  political  and  religious  independence,
this  small  nation  underwent  frequent  and  formidable  inva-
sions on  the  part  of  the  powerful  conquerors  of  Gaul.  The
Frank  kings,  having  assembled  around  them,  in  high  coun-
cil, the  governors  of  their  provinces,  whom  they  called  grafs,
(grav,  grcef,  geref,  gerefa,  overseer,  prefect)  and  the  Gauls
counts  (comites),  the  count  of  the  Breton  frontier  was  ques-
tioned as  to  the  religious  faith  of  the  Bretons:  "  They  do  not
believe  in  the  true  dogmas,"  answered  the  Frank  captain;

1  Dom  Lobineau,  tit  sup.

2  All  the  Breton  bishops  refused  to  attend  the  council  of  Tours,  in  50G.
Lobineau,  ttt  siy).

26  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  300

"  they  do  not  walk  in  the  straight  path."1  Thereupon  war  was
voted  against  them  by  acclamation;  an  army,  collected  in
Germany  and  in  the  north  of  Gaul,  descended  towards  the
mouth  of  the  Loire;  priests  and  monks  quitted  their  books
and  threw  aside  the  long  robe,  to  accompany,  sword  in  hand
and  baldric  on  shoulder,  the  soldiers,  whose  laughter  they
excited  by  their  awkwardness.2  After  the  first  victory,  the
conqueror  issued  from  his  camp,  on  the  river  Elle  or  Blavet,
manifestos  respecting  the  tonsure  of  the  priests  and  the  lives
of  the  monks  of  Brittany;3  enjoining  them,  under  pain  of  cor-
poral punishment,  to  adhere  in  future  to  the  rules  of  the  Ro-
mish church.4

All  the  differences  of  opinion  and  practice  between  the
orthodox  church  and  the  Bretons  of  Gaul,  were  common  to
them  with  the  men  of  the  same  race  who  continued  to  inha-
bit the  island  of  Britain.  The  most  important  point  of  this
schism  was  the  refusal  to  believe  in  the  original  degradation
of  our  nature,  and  in  the  damnation  of  children  dying  un-
baptized.  The  Britons  thought  that,  in  order  to  become  bet-
ter, man  has  no  need  of  a  supernatural  grace  gratuitously
to  enlighten  him,  but  that,  by  his  own  will  and  reason,  he
may  raise  himself  to  moral  well  being.  This  doctrine  had
been  professed,  from  time  immemorial,  in  the  poems  of  the
Celtic  bards;  a  Christian  priest,  born  in  Breton,  and  known
by  the  name  of  Pelagius,5  introduced  it  into  the  churches  of
the  East,  and  created  a  great  sensation  by  his  opposition  to
the  dogma  of  the  culpability  of  all  men,  through  the  fault  of
their  first  father.  Denounced  to  the  imperial  authority  as
the  enemy  of  the  Catholic  doctrines,  he  was  banished  the  Ro-
man world,6  and  sentences  of  proscription  were  hurled  against

1  Prsecipue  cum  vana  colas,  nee  dogmata  serves,

Avia  curva  petas,  tu  populusque  tuns.

(Ermoldi  Nigelli,  Carmen,  lib.  iii.  apud  Scriptores,  &c.,  vi.  40.)
2  Cede  amis,  frater...i&.  p.  53. a  Diploma  Hludovici  Pii  imp.  ib.  p.  514.
4  Ib. Lobineau,  ut  sup. Pieces  Justificatives,  ii.  20.

5  His  name  was  Morgan.

6  Maniclioeos,  omnesque  heereticos  vel  schismaticos,  sive  mathematicos,
omnemque  sectam  catholicis  inimicam  ab  ipso  aspectii  urbtum  diversarum
exterminari  debere  pnecipimus.  (Tlieodosii  et  Yalentiniaui  Rescript.,
nub  anno,  425,  apud  Scriptores,  &c.,  i.  708.)  Romano  procul  orbe  fugati.
<Cbronicon  Prosperi  Tyronis,  de  Harelicis  arianis,  ib.  p.  637.)

TO  595.]  RELIGIOUS STATE OP BRITAIN.  27

his  disciples.  The  inhabitants  of  the  island  of  Britain,  already
separated  from  the  empire,  escaped  these  persecutions,  and
might  indulge  in  peace  their  belief  that  no  man  is  born  guilty;
they  were  simply  visited  from  time  to  time  by  orthodox  mis-
sionaries, who  endeavoured  to  bring  them  over,  by  persuasion,
to  the  doctrines  of  the  Romish  church.

In  the  early  period  of  the  Saxon  invasion,  there  came  into
Britain  two  Gaulish  preachers,  Lupus,  bishop  of  Troyes,  and
Germanus,  bishop  of  Auxerre  :  these  men  combated  the
Pelagians,  not  with  logical  arguments,  but  with  citations  and
texts.  "  How  can  it  be  pretended,"  said  they,  "that  man  is
born  without  original  sin,  when  it  is  written:  "  We  are  born
in  sin?"

This  sort  of  proof  was  not  without  its  effect  upon  simple
minds,1  and  Germanus  of  Auxerre  succeeded  in  raising  up  in
Britain  that  which  the  orthodox  termed  the  honour  of  the
Divine  grace.'2  It  must  be  admitted  in  praise  of  this  person,
that  an  ardent  conviction  and  a  charitable  zeal  were  the  only
motives  of  his  preaching,  and  that  he  had  a  brother's  love
towards  those  whom  he  essayed  to  convert.  He  gave  proof
of  this  by  himself  marching  at  the  head  of  his  proselytes
against  the  conquering  Saxons,  whom  he  drove  back  with
the  cry  of  Hallelujah,  repeated  thrice  by  his  whole  troop:3
unhappily,  it  was  not  thus  that  the  missionaries,  deputed  by
the  Romish  church,  treated  the  British  population  established
in  Wales.

At  the  time  when  the  Anglo-Saxons  had  completed  the
conquest  of  the  finest  portion  of  the  island  of  Britain,  the
dignity  of  bishop  or  pope  of  Rome  was  held  by  a  personage
skilfully  zealous  for  the  propagation  of  the  catholic  faith  and
the  aggrandizement  of  the  new  Roman  empire,  which  was
establishing  itself  on  the  primacy  of  the  see  of  St.  Peter.
This  pope,  Gregory,  successfully  laboured  to  concentrate
more  and  more  strictly,  around  the  metropolis  of  the  west,
the  bonds  of  the  episcopal  hierarchy  created  by  the  policy  of
the  emperors.  The  Frank  kings,  orthodox  chiefs  of  armies

1  Bedse,  Hist.  Eccles.,  lib.  i.  cap.  xvii. Henrici  Huntindon.,  Hist.)  lib.  ii.

2  Bedee,  vt  sup.

3  Ib.  cap.  xx.,  Henrici  Hunt.,  ut  sup.

28  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  560

still  semi-pagan,1  were  the  faithful  allies  of  pope  Gregory;
and  their  power,  dreaded  from  afar,  gave  support  and  sanction
to  his  pontifical  decrees.  When  he  thought  fit  to  impose
upon  the  bishops  of  Gaul  some  new  law  of  subordination
towards  himself  or  his  chosen  vicars,  he  addressed  his  ordi-
nance to  the  glorious  personages,  Hildebert,  Theodorik,  or
Theodebert,2  charging  them  to  enforce  its  execution  by  their
royal  power,  and  to  punish  recusants.3  Preposterous  flattery,
the  epithets  of  most  illustrious,  most  pious,  most  Christian,
and  the  donation  of  certain  relics,  "  which,  worn  round  the
neck  in  battle,  will  protect  the  wearer  from  all  danger,"  were,
on  the  part  of  the  Roman  pontiff,  the  easy  payment  of  the
good  offices  of  the  barbarian  king.4

A  similar  alliance  with  the  conquerors  of  Britain,  for  the
benefit  of  the  orthodox  faith  and  of  the  pontifical  supremacy,
was  an  early  object  of  the  zeal  and  ambition  of  pope  Gregory;
he  formed  the  design  of  converting  the  Anglo-Saxons  to
the  doctrines  of  Catholicism,  and  of  applying  their  domina-
tion, as  that  of  the  Franks,  to  the  aggrandizement  of  his
spiritual  power,  which  was  unrecognised  by  the  British
Christians.  These,  defeated  and  dispossessed,  gave  no  un-
easiness to  the  Roman  pontiff  in  his  projects;  they  were
deficient  neither  in  faith  nor  in  zeal,  but,  between  them  and
their  pagan  enemies,  any  compact  was  impossible.  Resent-
ment of  foreign  usurpation,  and  anxiety  to  provide  for  the
national  defence,  absorbed  all  their  thoughts;  they  had  neither
leisure  nor  inclination  to  negotiate  with  their  conquerors
pacific  relations,  which  might  subsequently  create  a  title  of
legitimacy  for  the  Anglo-Saxon  conquest.5

Pope  Gregory  thus  found  the  field  open  to  him;  and,  to
pave  the  way  for  his  enterprise,  he  sought  in  the  slave
markets  of  various  places  youths  of  Anglo-Saxon  race,  of

1  Ita  christiani  sunt  isti  barbari,  ut  multos  priscse  snperstitionis  ritus
observent,  humanas  Lostias  aliaque impia sacrificia  divinationibus  adhi-
beutes. (Procopius,  sub  anno  539,  op.  Scriptores,  &c.,  ii.  38.) See  also
Lettres  sur  1'Histoire  de  France,  letter  vi.

2  As  to  tbe  meaning  of  these  names,  see  Lettres  sur  1'Histoire  de  France,
Appendix.

3  Epistolae  Gregorii  Papoe  ad  episcopos  Galliae  ei,  Childebertum  regem.
apud  Scriptores,  &c.,  iv.  14.

4  Ib.,  p.  17.  5  Xb.

TO  596.]  MISSIONARIES SENT TO BRITAIN.  29

seventeen  or  eighteen  years  of  age.1  These  his  agents
bought  and  placed  in  monasteries,  imposing  upon  them  the
task  of  making  themselves  acquainted  with  the  doctrines  of
the  catholic  faith,  so  as  to  be  able  to  teach  them  in  their
native  language.  It  would  seem  that  these  missionaries  on
compulsion  did  not  answer  the  purpose  of  their  masters,
for  pope  Gregory,  soon  laying  aside  his  fantastic  expedient,
resolved  to  intrust  the  conversion  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  to
Romans  of  tried  faith  and  solid  learning.  The  chief  of  this
mission  was  named  Augustin;  he  was,  ere  his  departure,  con-
secrated bishop  of  England.  His  companions  followed  him,
full  of  zeal,  as  far  as  the  city  of  Aix  in  Provence;  but  here
they  conceived  alarm  at  their  enterprise,  and  desired  to  re-
trace their  steps.  Augustin  returned  alone,  to  seek  from
Gregory,  in  the  name  of  the  mission,  permission  to  withdraw
from  this  perilous  journey,  the  result  of  which,  he  said,  was
extremely  precarious  among  a  people  of  an  unknown  tongue.2
But  the  pope  would  not  consent.  "  It  is  too  late  to  retreat,"
he  said;  "you  must  accomplish  your  enterprise  without
listening  to  the  ill-disposed;  were  it  possible,  I  myself  would
willingly  labour  with  you  in  this  good  work."3  The  mis-
sionaries belonged  to  a  convent  founded  by  pope  Gregory  on
his  own  estate,  in  the  very  house  where  he  was  born;  all  had
sworn  obedience  to  him  as  to  their  spiritual  father:  they
therefore  obeyed,  and  went  first  to  Chalons,  where  dwelt
Theodorik,  son  of  Hildebert,  king  of  half  the  eastern  portion
of  the  country  conquered  by  the  Franks.4  They  next  re-
paired to  Metz,  where,  over  the  other  half,  reigned  Theode-
bert,  also  son  of  Hildebert.5

The  Romans  presented  to  these  two  kings  letters  full
of  panegyrical  expressions,  calculated  to  excite  their  good
will,  by  flattering  their  vanity  to  the  highest  degree.  Pope
Gregory  knew  that  the  Franks  were  at  war  with  the  Saxons
of  Germany,  their  neighbours  on  the  north,  and,  availing
himself  of  this  circumstance,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  describe

1  Epist.  Gregorii  ad  Camlidum  presbyterum,  ib.
2  Bedae,  Hist.,  lib.  i.  cap.  xxiii.  3  Ib.

4  Oster-Frankono-Eike,  Oster-Rike,  Oster-Liudi,  Osterland.  In  Latin,
Austrifrancia,  Austria,  Australia,  Begnum  Orlcntalc.  See  Lettres  sur
1'Histoire  de  France,  letter  x.

5  Epist.  Greg.,  vt  sup.  passim.

30  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  560

the  Anglo-Saxons  beyond  seas,  whom  these  monks  were  on
their  way  to  convert,  as  subjects  of  the  Franks:  "I  have
felt,"  he  wrote  to  the  two  sons  of  Hildebert,  "  that  you  would
ardently  desire  the  happy  conversion  of  your  subjects  to  the
faith  which  you  yourselves  profess,  you,  their  lords  and
kings;  this  conviction  has  induced  me  to  send  Augustin,  the
bearer  of  these  presents,  with  other  servants  of  God,  to
labour  there  under  your  auspices."1

The  mission  had  also  letters  for  the  grandmother  of  the
two  young  kings,  the  widow  of  Sighebert,  father  of  Hildebert,
a  woman  of  lofty  ambition  and  rare  ability  in  intrigue,  who,
in  the  name  of  her  two  grandsons,  governed  one  half  of  Gaul.
She  was  of  the  nation  of  the  Goths,  then  driven  by  the  Frank
invasion  beyond  the  Pyrenees.  Before  her  marriage,  her
name  had  been  Brune,  which  in  the  Germanic  language
signified  brilliant;  but  the  Frank  king,  who  espoused  her,
desiring,  say  the  historians  of  the  time,  to  augment  and  adorn
her  name,  called  her  Brunehilde,  that  is  to  say,  brilliant  girl,2
(Brunehaut,  latine,  Brunechildis.)  From  an  Arian  she  be-
came a  catholic,  received  the  unction  of  the  sacred  oil,  and
thenceforward  displayed  great  zeal  for  her  new  belief;  the
bishops  vied  with  each  other  in  praising  the  purity  of  her
faith,  and,  in  consideration  of  her  pious  works,  omitted  to
cast  a  single  glance  at  her  personal  immoralities  or  her
political  crimes.  "  You,  whose  zeal  is  so  ardent,  whose  works
are  so  pious,  whose  excellent  soul  is  strong  in  the  fear  of  the
Almighty  God,"  wrote  pope  Gregory  to  this  queen,  "  we
pray  you  to  aid  us  in  a  great  work.  The  English  nation  has
manifested  to  us  a  desire  to  receive  the  faith  of  Christ,  and
we  would  satisfy  its  desire."3  The  Frank  kings  and  their
grandmother  were  in  no  degree  anxious  to  verify  the  truth  of
this  ardent  desire  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  people,  or  to  reconcile
it  with  the  evident  repugnance  and  terror  of  the  missionaries:
they  welcomed  the  mission,  and  defrayed  its  expenses  on  its
way  towards  the  sea.  The  chief  of  the  western  Franks,4
although  at  war  with  his  relations  of  the  east,  received  the
Romans  as  graciously  as  they,  and  assisted  them  with  men  of

1  Opera  Gregorii  Papae,  iv.  189.

2  Greg.  Turon.,  i(t  sup,  p.  405.

3  Opera  Gregorii,  ttt  snp. Epist.  Gregorii,  lit  supra.
4  See  Lettres  sur  1'Histoire  de  France,  letter  x.

TO  596.]  ARRIVAL OP THE MISSIONARIES.  31

the  Frank  nation  to  act  as  interpreters  between  them  and  the
Saxons,  who  spoke  almost  the  same  language.1

By  a  fortunate  chance,  it  happened  that  the  most  powerful
of  the  Anglo- Saxon  chiefs,  Ethelbert,2  king  of  Kent,  had  just
married  a  woman  of  Frank  origin,  who  professed  the  Catho-
lic religion.  This  news  raised  the  courage  of  the  companions
of  Augustin,  arid  they  landed  with  confidence  on  the  pro-
montory of  Thanet,  already  famous  for  the  disembarkation  of
the  ancient  Romans,  and  of  the  two  brothers  who  had  opened
to  the  Saxons  the  way  into  Britain.  The  Frank  interpreters
repaired  to  Ethelbert,  and  announced  to  him  men  who  had
come  from  afar  to  bring  him  joyful  tidings,  the  offer  of  an
endless  happiness  in  heaven,  an  eternal  kingdom  with  the
true  and  living  God,  if  he  would  believe  in  their  words.3  The
Saxon  king  at  first  gave  no  positive  answer,  and  ordered  that
the  strangers  should  remain  in  the  isle  of  Thanet,  until  he  had
deliberated  upon  what  course  to  adopt  with  regard  to  them.
We  may  well  suppose  that  the  Christian  wife  of  the  pagan  king
did  not  remain  inactive  at  this  important  juncture,  and  that
all  the  effusions  of  domestic  tenderness  were  employed  to  ren-
der Ethelbert  favourable  to  the  missionaries.  He  consented
to  hold  a  conference  with  them ;  but  not  having  wholly  over-
come his  distrust,  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  receive  them
in  his  palace,  or  even  in  his  royal  city,  but  visited  them  in
their  island,  where,  further,  he  required  that  the  interview
should  take  place  in  the  open  air,  to  prevent  the  effect  of  any
witchcraft  which  these  strangers  might  employ  against  him.4
The  Romans  proceeded  to  the  conference  with  studied  dis-
play, in  a  double  rank,  preceded  by  a  large  silver  cross,  and  a
picture  representing  Christ;  they  explained  the  object  of  their
journey,  and  made  their  propositions.5

"  These  are  fine  words  and  fine  promises,"  answered  the
pagan  king;  "  but  as  this  is  all  new  to  me,  I  cannot  at  once  put
faith  in  it,  and  abandon  for  it  the  belief  which  I,  with  my

1  Naturalis  ergo  lingua  Francorum  communicat  cum  Anglis, eo  quod  de
Germania gentes ambae germinaverint. (Willelm.  Malmesb.  de Gcstis
rcg.  Any.  lib.  i.) Bedae,  Hist.,  lib.  ii.  cap.  xxiii.  xxiv.  xxv.

2  JEthel-byrht,  ^Ethel-bricht.  Mtliel,  cthhel,  edel,  noble,  of  ancient  race ;
Ichrt,  bright,  bright,  brilliant.

3  Henrici  Hunt.,  HM.,  lib.  iii.
*  Ib.  5  Ib.

32  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D.  596

whole  nation,  profess.  However,  since  you  have  come  so  far
to  communicate  to  us  what  you  yourselves  seem  to  think
good  and  true,  I  will  not  ill  treat  you;  I  will  furnish  you  with
provisions  and  lodging,  and  will  leave  you  free  to  make  known
your  doctrine,  and  to  convert  to  it  whom  you  can."1

The  monks  repaired  to  the  capital  city,  which  was  called
the  city  of  the  men  of  Kent,  in  Saxon,  Kentwara-Byrig
(  Cantware-byrig,  Canterbury);  they  entered  it  in  procession,
bearing  their  cross  and  their  picture,  and  chanting  litanies.
They  had  soon  made  some  proselytes;  a  church  built  by  the
Britons  in  honour  of  St.  Martin,  and  deserted  since  the  Saxon
conquest,  served  them  for  the  celebration  of  mass.  They
struck  the  imaginations  of  men  by  great  austerities;  they  even
performed  miracles,  and  the  sight  of  their  prodigies  gained
the  heart  of  king  Ethelbert,  who  at  first  had  seemed  to  appre-
hend sorcery  on  their  part.  When  the  chief  of  Kent  had  re-
ceived baptism,  the  new  religion  became  the  road  to  royal
favour,  and  numbers  accordingly  rushed  into  that  path,  though
king  Ethelbert,  as  the  historians  tell  us,  constrained  no  man.2
As  a  pledge  of  his  faith,  he  gave  houses  and  lands  to  his  spi-
ritual fathers;  such  in  all  countries  was  the  first  payment
which  the  converters  of  the  barbarians  demanded.  "  I  sup-
plicate thy  grandeur  and  munificence,"  said  the  priest  to  the
royal  neophyte,  "  to  give  me  some  land  and  all  its  revenues,
not  for  myself,  but  for  Christ,  and  to  confer  these  upon  me
by  solemn  grant,  to  the  end  that  thou  in  return  mayst  receive
numerous  possessions  in  this  world,  and  a  still  greater  number
in  the  world  to  come."  The  king  answered:  "I  confirm  to
thee  in  full  property  without  reserve,  all  this  domain,  in
order  that  this  land  be  to  thee  a  country,  and  that  in  future
thou  cease  to  be  a  stranger  among  us."3

Augustin  assumed  the  title  of  bishop  of  Kent,  (Kent-ware,
Cant-wara,  latine,  Cantuarii.)  The  mission  extended  its
labours  beyond  this  territory,  and  by  the  influence  of  example,
obtained  some  success  among  the  eastern  Saxons,  whose  chief,
Sighebert,  was  a  relation  of  Ethelbert.  Pope  Gregory  learned

1  Bedoe,  Hist.,  lib.  i.  cap.  xxv. Heurici  Hunt.,  nt  supra.

-  Bedoe,  ib.  cap.  xxvi. Henrici  Hunt.,  ib.

3  Vita  S.  Marculfi  Abbatis,  apud  Seriptores,  &c.,  iii.  425.  Diploma  in
append,  ad  Greg.  Turon.,  col.  1328,  ed.  Ruinart.

TO  601.]  MISSIVE OF POPE GREGORY.  33

with  infinite  joy  the  result  of  the  preaching  which  had  ren-
dered a  portion  of  the  conquerors  of  Britain  Christians  and
Catholics;  the  latter  point,  indeed,  was  the  great  feature  with
him,  for  his  attachment  to  the  creed  of  Nicea  and  to  the  doc-
trines of  Saint  Augustin  rendered  him  the  mortal  enemy  of
all  that  savoured  of  schism  or  heresy;  in  his  purism  of  ortho-
doxy, he  went  so  far  as  to  refuse  the  host  to  heretics  dying
in  vindication  of  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ.  "  The  harvest  is
great,"  wrote  Augustin  to  him,  "  but  the  husbandmen  are
few."  Upon  this  intelligence,  a  second  deputation  of  mission-
aries departed  from  Rome  with  letters  addressed  to  the  bishop
of  Gaul,  and  a  sort  of  diplomatic  note  for  Augustin,  the  grand
plenipotentiary  of  the  Roman  church  in  Britain.  The  note
addressed  to  Melitus  and  to  Laurentius,  chiefs  of  the  new  mis-
sion, was  conceived  in  these  terms:

"  Gregory,  the  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  his  most
beloved  brother,  the  abbot  Melitus.

"  We  have  been  in  a  state  of  great  anxiety  since  the  depar-
ture of  our  congregation,  which  you  have  taken  with  you,
because  we  have  heard  nothing  of  the  successful  progress  of
your  journey.

"  When  the  Almighty  God  shall  bring  you  to  the  presence
of  that  most  reverend  man,  our  brother,  bishop  Augustin,
say  to  him  that  I  have  long  been  cogitating  upon  the  matter
of  the  English  people,  and  the  result  is  this;  the  fanes  of  the
idols  which  are  amongst  that  people  ought  by  no  means  to
be  demolished,  but  the  idols  that  are  in  them  ought  to  be
destroyed,  the  temples,  meanwhile,  sprinkled  with  holy
water,  altars  constructed,  and  relics  of  the  saints  deposited.
If  these  temples  are  well  constructed,  it  is  necessary  that  they
be  changed  from  the  worship  of  demons  to  the  service  of  the
true  God;  so  that  whilst  the  people  do  not  see  their  temples
destroyed,  they  may  lay  aside  the  error  of  their  hearts,  and,
recognising  the  true  God,  adore  Him  in  those  very  places  to
which  they  have  been  in  the  habit  of  resorting.

"  In  the  same  manner,  let  this  be  done:  as  these  people
have  been  in  the  habit  of  slaying  many  cattle  in  the  sacrifices
to  their  demons,  so  for  their  sakes  ought  there  to  be  some
solemnity,  the  object  of  it  only  being  changed.  Then  upon
a  dedication,  or  upon  the  nativity  of  some  of  the  holy  mar-

VOL.  i.  D

34  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.  D.  596

tyrs,  whose  relics  are  in  the  churches,  let  it  be  permitted  to
make  arbours  with  the  branches  of  trees,  around  what  once
were  but  heathen  temples.  Then  celebrate  such  solemnities
with  religious  feasts,  so  that  the  people  will  not  immolate
animals  to  the  devil,  but  slay  them  and  partake  of  them,  with
thanks  and  praises  to  G-od,  for  that  abundance  which  has
been  bestowed  upon  them  by  Him  who  is  the  giver  of  all
things;  and  thus  whilst  exterior  joys  are  permitted  to  them,
they  may  with  the  greater  facility  be  attached  to  those  joys
that  are  of  the  spirit.  For  be  it  remembered,  that  it  is  not
possible  at  once  to  deprive  those  whose  minds  are  hardened,
of  all  things.  He  who  tries  to  reach  the  highest  place,  does
so  gradually,  and  step  by  step,  and  is  never  elevated  by  leaps.
When  our  Lord  made  himself  known  to  the  people  of  Israel
in  Egypt,  He  still  reserved  for  his  own  use  the  sacrifices  which
it  had  been  accustomed  to  tender  to  the  demon,  and  he  even
commanded  them  to  immolate  animals  in  His  honour;  so  that
as  their  hearts  changed  they  would  lose  one  portion  of  the
sacrifice;  that  whilst  the  animals  were  immolated,  as  they  had
been  immolated,  yetb  eing  offered  to  God,  and  not  to  idols,  the
sacrifices  may  no  longer  be  the  same."1

Together  with  these  instructions,  Melitus  and  Laurentius
delivered  to  Augustin,  the  ornament  of  the  pallium,  which,
according  to  the  ceremonial  the  Romish  church  had  bor-
rowed from  the  Roman  empire,  was  the  living  and  official
emblem  of  the  power  to  command  given  to  bishops.  They  at
the  same  time  brought  a  plan  of  an  ecclesiastical  constitution,
prepared  beforehand  at  Rome  to  be  applied  to  the  provinces
of  England,  as  the  domain  of  the  spiritual  conquest  became  ex-
tended over  them.  According  to  this  project,  Augustin  was
to  appoint  twelve  bishops,  and  to  fix  in  London,  when  that
city  should  become  Christian,  the  metropolitan  see,  upon  which
the  twelve  other  bishoprics  should  be  dependent.  In  like
manner,  as  soon  as  the  great  northern  city,  called  in  Latin
Eboracum,  and  in  Saxon  Eoforwic,  Everwic,  (York),  should
have  received  Christianity,  Augustin  was  to  institute  there  a
bishop,  who,  in  his  turn  receiving  the  pallium,  should  become

1  Bedae;  Henrici  Hunt.,  Hist.  iii.  (The  text  here  given,  fuller  than
that  supplied  by  M.  Thierry,  is  adopted  from  Mr.  Maccabe's  Catholic  His-
tory of  England,  a  work  of  the  most  learned  research,  and  of  great  interest.)

TO  605.] ARRANGEMENT OF SEES IN BRITAIN.  35

the  metropolitan  of  twelve  others.  The  latter  metropolitan,
though  dependent  upon  Augustin  during  his  life,  was  under
the  successors  of  Augustin  to  be  subject  only  to  Rome.1

Regarding  these  arrangements  solely  under  their  material
aspect,  we  may  fancy  we  see  the  revival  under  other  forms
of  the  partition  of  provinces  conquered  or  to  be  conquered,
which  in  anterior  ages  so  often  occupied  the  Roman  senate.
The  see  of  the  first  archbishop  of  the  Saxons  was  not  estab-
lished at  London,  as  the  papal  instructions  had  ordered;  and
either  to  conciliate  the  new  Christian  king  of  Kent,  or  in
order  to  watch  him  more  closely,  and  to  be  nearer  at  hand  to
oppose  in  him  any  return  of  old  habits,  Augustin  fixed  his
abode  in  the  city  of  Canterbury,  in  the  very  palace  of  Ethel-
bert,  the  king  himself  retiring  to  Reculver.  Another  Roman
missionary  was  fixed  as  a  simple  bishop  in  London,  the
capital  of  the  eastern  Saxons;  and  Rofeskester,  now  Rochester,
became  the  seat  of  a  second  bishopric.  The  metropolitan
and  his  two  suffragans  had  the  reputation  of  performing
miracles,  and  the  fame  of  their  marvellous  works  soon  spread
even  into  Gaul.  Pope  Gregory  skilfully  made  use  of  this
intelligence  to  re-animate  in  the  hearts  of  the  Frank  kings
the  love  and  fear  of  Rome;2  but,  while  fully  availing  him-
self of  the  renown  of  Augustin,  it  was  not  without  um-
brage that  he  saw  this  renown  augment,  and  his  subaltern
agent  viewed  by  men  as  another  apostle.3  There  exists  an
ambiguous  letter,  wherein  the  pope,  not  venturing  to  express
his  whole  opinion  on  this  matter,  appears  to  caution  the
apostle  of  the  Saxons  not  to  forget  his  rank  and  his  duty,
and  to  recommend  him  quietly  to  modify  the  exercise  of  his
supernatural  powers.4

"  On  learning,"  says  Gregory,  "  the  great  marvels  that  our
God  has  been  pleased  to  operate  by  your  hands,  in  the  eyes  of  the
nation  he  has  elected,  I  rejoiced  thereat,  because  external  pro-
digies efficaciously  serve  to  give  souls  an  inclination  towards

1  Bedse,  Hist.,  lib.  i.  cap.  xxix. Hemici  Huntind.,  Hist.,  p.  332. Opera
Gregorii  Papae,  iv.  387. Horoe  Britanrdcae,  ii.  259.

2  Epist.  Gregorii  Papae  ad  Brunichildein,  ad  Chlotarium,  apud  Scriptores
£c.,  iv.  30—33.

3  Ut Apostolorum virtutes in signis quse exhibet imitari videatur.
(Epist.  Greg.  Papas.)

4  Opera  Gregorii  Papae,  iv.  379,

36  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  604

internal  grace:  but  you  yourself  must  take  good  heed,  that
amidst  these  prodigies  your  spirit  be  not  inflated  and  become
presumptuous;  beware  least  that  which  outwardly  raises  you
in  consideration  and  honour,  should  inwardly  become  unto
you  a  cause  of  fall,  by  the  allurements  of  vain  glory."1  These
counsels  were  not  without  their  meaning;  the  ambitious  cha-
racter of  Augustin  had  already  manifested  itself  in  a  suffi-
ciently evident  manner:  unsatisfied  with  his  dignity  of  me-
tropolitan of  the  English,  he  coveted  a  more  flattering  and
more  assured  supremacy  over  nations  long  since  Christian.
In  one  of  his  despatches  to  Rome,  there  was.  among  other
things,  this  brief  and  peremptory  question:  "  How  am  I  to
deal  with  the  bishops  of  Gaul  and  the  bishops  of  the  Britons?'"2
"  As  to  the  bishops  of  Gaul,"  answered  Gregory,  somewhat
alarmed  at  the  question,  "  I  have  not  given  thee,  and  I  do  not
give  thee  any  authority  over  them:  the  prelate  of  Aries  has
received  the  pallium  from  me;  I  cannot  take  his  power  from
him;  it  is  he  who  is  the  chief  and  judge  of  the  Gauls;  and  as
for  thee,  thou  art  forbidden  to  put  the  reaping-hook  of  judg-
ment in  the  corn-field  of  another.3  As  for  the  bishops  of  the
Briton-race,  I  confide  them  all  to  thee;  teach  the  ignorant,
strengthen  the  weak,  and  chastise  evil  doers."4

The  enormous  difference  which  the  Roman  pontiff  thought
proper  to  establish  between  the  Gauls,  whom  he  protected
against  the  pretensions  of  Augustin,  and  the  Cambrians,
whom  he  abandoned  to  him,  will  be  understood,  when  we  call
to  mind  that  the  Cambrians  were  schismatics.  This  unfor-
tunate remnant  of  a  great  nation,  restricted  to  a  mere  corner
of  their  ancient  country,  had  lost  all,  says  one  of  their  old
poets,  but  their  name,  their  language,  and  their  God.5  They
believed  in  one  God  in  three  persons,  a  rewarder  and  avenger,
but  not  punishing,  as  the  Romish  church  maintained,  the  sins
of  the  father  in  his  posterity;  granting  his  grace  to  whomso-
ever practised  justice,  and  not  damning  children  who  die
before  they  have  possibly  committed  a  single  sin.  To  these
disagreements  as  to  dogma,  the  result  of  the  Pelagian  or  semi-

1  Bedce,  Hist.,  lib.  i.  cap.  xxxi.
2  Opera  Gregorii  Papae,  iv.  406.  3  Il>.

*  Bedae,  Hist.,  lib.  i.  cap.  xxvii.
5  Taliesin,  Archaiology  of  Waks,  i.  95.

TO  607.]  SPIRITUAL SYSTEM OP THE WELSH.  37

Pelagian  opinions  retained  by  the  Britons,  were  added  other
differences  relating  to  points  of  discipline  and  arising  from
local  customs,  or  from  the  oriental  traditions  which  the  British
church,  a  daughter  of  the  churches  of  the  east,  followed  in
preference.  The  form  of  the  clerical  tonsure  and  that  of  the
monastic  habit  were  not  the  same  in  Britain  as  in  Italy  and
Gaul;  they  did  not  in  Britain  celebrate  the  festival  of  Easter
precisely  at  the  period  fixed  by  the  decrees  of  the  popes.
Although  very  rigid,  the  rules  of  the  British  monasteries  were
in  this  way  peculiar,  that  very  few  of  the  monks  took  orders,
either  of  priesthood  or  clerkship,  and  that  all  the  rest,  simple
laymen,  laboured  with  their  hands  the  whole  day,  exercising
some  art  or  trade  for  their  own  support  and  that  of  the  com-
munity.1 The  Cambrians  had  bishops;  but  these  bishops
were,  most  of  their  time,  without  any  fixed  see:  they  lived
sometimes  in  one  town,  sometimes  in  another,  true  overseers  ;
and  their  archbishop,  in  the  same  way,  lived  now  at  Kerleon
(Caer-Lleon)  on  the  Usk,  now  at  Menew,  (Mynyw,  latine
Menevia)  since  named  Saint  David's;  this  archbishop,  inde-
pendent of  all  foreign  authority,  did  not  receive  the  pallium,
or  solicit  it.  These  were  crimes  in  the  eyes  of  the  Roman
clergy,  who  desired  that  all  should  bow  beneath  the  supremacy
of  their  church,2  and  fully  sufficed  to  warrant  pope  Gregory,
according  to  his  view  of  the  matter,  in  not  recognising  any  of
the  bishops  of  Cambria  as  a  religious  authority,  and  in  handing
them  over  to  the  guardianship  and  correction  of  one  of  his
missionaries.

Augustin,  by  an  express  message,  conveyed  to  the  clergy
of  the  conquered  Britons  the  order  to  acknowledge  him  arch-
bishop of  the  whole  island,  under  pain  of  incurring  the  anger
of  the  Romish  church,  and  that  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  kings.
For  the  purpose  of  demonstrating  to  the  Cambrian  priests
and  monks  the  legitimacy  of  his  pretensions,  he  invited  them
to  a  conference  on  the  banks  of  the  Severn,  the  boundary  of
their  territory  and  that  of  the  conquerors.  The  assembly  was

1  Monasticon Anglican., i.  100. Lobineau, Hist, de Srctagne, ii.
Prevues,  p.  ^. Horse  Britannicae,  ii.  !2'2">.

2  Inter alia  ineuavrabiUum  scelerum  facta...(Betlae,  Hist.,  lib.  i. cap.
xxii.) Trioedd  ynys  Prydyn,  Cambro-Briton,  i.  170. Horse  Britannicae,

38  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  606

held  in  the  open  air,  under  a  large  oak.1  Here  Augustin
called  upon  the  Britons  to  reform  their  religious  practices
according  to  the  discipline  of  Rome,  to  join  the  Catholic  unity,
to  give  obedience  to  himself,  and  to  employ  themselves,  under
his  direction,  in  the  conversion  of  the  Anglo-Saxons.  In  aid
of  his  harangue,  he  produced  a  counterfeit  blind  man,  a  Saxon
by  birth,  and  pretended  to  restore  him  to  sight;2  but  neither
the  eloquence  of  the  Roman  nor  his  miracle  could  awe  the
Cambrians,  and  make  them  abjure  their  ancient  spirit  of  in-
dependence. Augustin  was  not  discouraged;  he  appointed  a
second  interview,  to  which  repaired,  with  a  complaisance
which  proved  their  good  faith,  seven  bishops  of  British  race
and  many  monks,  chiefly  from  a  large  monastery  called  Bangor,3
situated  in  North  Wales,  on  the  banks  of  the  Dee.

On  their  approach,  the  Roman  did  not  deign  to  rise  from
his  seat;  and  this  token  of  pride  at  once  wounded  them.
"  We  will  never  admit  the  pretended  rights  of  Roman  am-
bition," said  their  spokesman,  Dimothus,  "  any  more  than
those  of  Saxon  tyranny.  In  the  bond  of  love  and  charity,
we  are  all  subjects  and  servants  to  the  church  of  God,  yea,  to
the  pope  of  Rome,  and  every  good  Christian,  to  help  them
forward,  both  in  deed  and  in  word,  to  be  the  children  of  God ;
but  for  the  submission  of  obedience,  we  owe  that  only  to  God,
and,  after  God,  to  our  venerable  head,  the  bishop  of  Kerleon
on  Use.  Besides,  we  would  ask  why  those  who  glorify
themselves  upon  having  converted  the  Saxons,  have  never
reprimanded  them  for  their  acts  of  violence  towards  us  and
their  spoliation  of  us?3' 4

The  only  answer  made  by  Augustin  was  a  formal  summons
to  the  Welsh  priests  to  acknowledge  him  as  archbishop,  and
to  aid  him  in  converting  the  Germans  of  the  island  of  Britain.
The  Welshmen  unanimously  replied  that  they  would  not
unite  in  friendship  with  the  invaders  of  their  country,  until
these  had  restored  all  which  they  had  unjustly  wrested  from

1  Probably  near  Aust  or  Aust  Clive.  The  tree  was  for  a  long  period
called  the  Oak  of  Augustin;  in  Saxou,  Augustines-ac.  See  Bedae,  Hist..,
lib.  ii.  cap.  ii.

2  Ib.

3  Banchor,  the  great  heart,  the  great  church.
4  British  MSS.  quoted  in  vol.  ii.  of  the  Horse  Britannicae,  p.  267.

TO  616.] MASSACRE  OF  THE  MONKS  OF  BANGOR.  39

them:  "  And  as  for  the  man,"  added  they,  "  who  does  not  rise
and  pay  us  respect  when  he  is  only  our  equal,  how  much
greater  the  contempt  he  would  manifest  for  us,  if  we  admitted
him  superior."1  "  Well,  then,"  exclaimed  the  missionary,  in  a
threatening  tone,  "  since  you  will  not  have  peace  with  your
brethren,  you  shall  have  to  endure  war  with  your  foes;  since
you  refuse  to  join  me  in  teaching  the  way  of  life  to  the  Saxons,
ere  long,  by  a  just  judgment  of  God,  you  shall  have  to  suffer
from  the  Saxons  the  bitter  pains  of  death."2

And,  in  effect,  but  a  short  time  had  elapsed  when  the  king
of  an  Anglo-Saxon  tribe,  still  pagan,  marched  from  the  north
country  to  the  very  spot  where  the  conference  had  been  held.
The  monks  of  Bangor,  bearing  in  mind  the  menace  of  Au-
gustin,  quitted  their  convent  in  the  utmost  terror,  and  fled
to  the  army  which  the  chief  of  the  Welsh  province  of  Powis
assembled.  This  army  was  defeated,  and  in  the  rout  the  vic-
torious king  perceived  a  body  of  men  singularly  clad,  without
arms,  and  all  kneeling.  He  was  told  that  these  were  the
people  of  the  great  monastery,  and  that  they  were  praying  for
the  safety  of  their  countrymen.  "  If  they  cry  to  their  God
for  my  enemies,"  said  the  Saxon,  "  they  are  fighting  against
me,  though  without  arms;"3  and  he  had  them  all  massacred,  to
the  number  of  two  hundred.  The  monastery  of  Bangor,  whose
chief  had  been  the  spokesman  in  the  fatal  interview  with
Augustin,  was  razed  to  the  ground;  "and  it  was  thus,"  say
the  ecclesiastical  authors,  "that  the  prediction  of  the  holy
pontiff  was  accomplished,  and  those  perfidious  men  who  had
slighted  his  counsels  in  aid  of  their  eternal  salvation,  punished
with  death  in  this  world."4  It  was  a  national  tradition  among
the  Welsh,  that  the  chief  of  the  new  Anglo-Saxon  church
caused  this  invasion,  and  pointed  out  the  monastery  of  Bangor
to  the  pagans  of  Northumberland.  It  is  impossible  to  affirm
anything  positive  on  this  point;  but  the  coincidence  of  time
rendered  the  imputation  so  grave  as  to  make  the  friends  of
the  Romish  church  desirous  of  destroying  all  traces  of  that
coincidence.  In  almost  all  the  manuscripts  of  the  sole  histo-
rian of  these  events,  they  inserted  the  statement  that  Augustin
was  dead  when  the  defeat  of  the  Britons  and  the  massacre  of

1  Bedse,  Hist.,  lib.  ii.  cap.  ii.  2  Ib.  8  Ib.  *  Ib.

40  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  608

the  monks  of  Bangor  took  place.1  Augustin  was,  indeed,  old
at  this  period;  but  he  lived  at  least  a  year  after  the  military
execution  which  he  had  so  exactly  predicted.

On  his  death,  Laurentius,  a  Koman,  like  himself,  took  the
title  of  archbishop;  Melitus  and  Justus  were  still  bishops,
the  one  of  London,  the  other  of  Rochester.  The  first  had
converted  to  Christianity  Sighebert,  a  relation  of  Ethelbert,
who,  in  the  novelty  of  his  conversion,  manifested  infinite
zeal,  and  surrounded  his  growing  clergy  with  honours  and
authority.  But  this  state  of  things  was  not  of  long  dura-
tion: this  fervent  king  was  succeeded  by  princes  indifferent
or  even  opposed  to  the  new  worship;  and  when  the  two  sons
of  Sighebert  (familiarly  termed  Sibert,  or  Sib)  had  committed
their  father  to  the  tomb,  they  returned  to  paganism,  and  abo-
lished all  the  laws  directed  against  the  old  national  religion.
Being,  however,  of  gentle  disposition,  they  at  first  did  not
persecute  either  bishop  Melitus  or  the  small  number  of  true
believers  who  continued  to  listen  to  him;  they  even  attended
the  Christian  church,  to  pass  the  time,  or  perhaps  with  a  sort
of  inward  doubting.

One  day  that  the  Roman  was  administering  the  communion
of  the  Eucharist  to  his  faithful,  the  two  young  chiefs  said  to
him:  "  Why  dost  thou  not  offer  to  us,  as  well  as  to  the  others,
some  of  that  white  bread  which  thou  didst  use  to  give  our
father  Sib?"2  "  If,"  answered  the  bishop,  "  you  will  wash  in
the  fountain  of  salvation,  wherein  your  father  was  washed,
you  shall,  like  him,  share  this  wholesome  bread."  "  We  will
not  enter  the  fountain;  we  have  no  need  of  it;  but  still  we
desire  to  refresh  ourselves  with  that  bread."3  They  several
times  renewed  this  singular  request;  the  Roman  on  each  oc-
casion repeated  that  he  could  not  accede  to  it;  and  they,
imputing  his  refusal  simply  to  ill  will,  became  irritated,  and
said:  "  Since  thou  wilt  not  please  us  in  so  easy  a  matter,  thou
shalt  quit  our  country."4

And  they  drove  him  and  all  his  companions  from  London.
The  exiles  went  into  Kent,  to  Laurentius  and  Justus,  whom

1  Quamvis  ipso,  jam  multo  ante  tempore,  ad  cselestia  regna  sublato.  (ib.)
The  celebrated  theologians,  Goodwin  and  Hammond,  are  both  of  opinion
that these words were interpolated. See Horae Britannicae, ii. 271.
Augiistin's  death,  however,  is  referred  by  Smith  and  by  Thorn  to  605.

2  Bedse,  Hist.,  lib.  ii.  cap.  v.  3  n_  4  j^

TO  620.]  CONVERSION  OF  EDBALD.  41

they  found  also  discouraged  by  the  indifference  manifested
towards  them  by  the  successor  of  Ethelbert.  They  all  re-
solved to  pass  into  Gaul.  Melitus  and  Justus  departed  to-
gether; but  Laurentius,  on  the  point  of  following  them,  deter-
mined to  make  one  last  effort  to  turn  the  mind  of  the  king
of  Kent,  still  wavering  and  uncertain,  he  believed,  as  to  the
religion  of  his  ancestors.  The  last  night  that  he  was  to  pass
among  the  Saxons,  he  had  his  bed  set  up  in  the  church  of
Saint  Peter,  built  at  Canterbury  by  the  old  king;  and  in  the
morning  he  issued  from  it,  bruised,  wounded,  and  bleeding.
In  this  state  he  presented  himself  before  Edbald,1  son  of
Ethelbert.  "  See,"  he  cried,  "  what  the  apostle  Peter  hath
done  unto  me  in  punishment  of  my  having  for  a  moment
thought  of  quitting  his  flock."2  The  Saxon  king  was  struck
by  this  spectacle,  and  trembled  lest  he  himself  should  incur
the  hostility  of  the  holy  apostle,  who  so  severely  chastised  his
friends.  He  invited  Laurentius  to  remain,  recalled  Justus,
and  promised  to  employ  all  his  authority  in  reconverting  those
who,  following  his  example,  had  fallen  into  apostasy.  Thanks
to  the  aid  of  the  temporal  arm,  the  faith  of  Christ  arose  once
more,  never  again  to  be  extinguished,  on  both  banks  of  the
Thames.  Melitus  was  the  successor  of  Laurentius  in  the
archiepiscopal  see;  Justus  succeeded  Melitus;  and  the  king
of  Kent,  Edbald,  who  had  been  on  the  point  of  driving  them
all  away,  was  complimented  by  the  sovereign  pontiff  upon
the  purity  of  his  belief  and  the  perfection  of  his  Christian
works.3

A  few  years  after  these  events,  a  sister  of  Edbald,  Ethel-
berge,4  was  married  to  the  pagan  chief  of  the  country  north
of  the  Humber.  The  bride  left  Kent,  accompanied  by  a
priest  of  Roman  birth,  named  Paulinus,  who  was  beforehand
consecrated  archbishop  of  York,  according  to  the  plan  of  pope
Gregory,  and  in  the  hope  that  the  faithful  wife  would  convert
the  infidel  husband.  The  king  of  Northumberland,5  named

1  ^Ed-bald,  End-bald. Ed,  cad,  happy  ;  bald,  bold,  daring.

2  Chrouicou  Saxonic.,  ed.  Gibson,  p.  20.
3  Bedee,  Hist.,  lib.  ii.  cap.  vi. llenrici  Huntin.,  Hist.,  lib.  iii.

4  JEthcl-byrg. Ethel,  noble;  bury,  burgh,  bitrh,  byrk,  berg,  security,  pro-
tector, protectress.

5  Northwnbria,  Northanhymbra-land,  or  Nurt-hiimber-lund,  the  country
north  of  the  Plumber.

42  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A-D.  625

Edwin,1  allowed  his  wife  Ethelberge  to  practise  the  Christian
religion  under  the  auspices  of  the  man  she  had  brought  with
her,  whose  black  hair  and  brown  thin  face  astonished  the
light-haired  inhabitants  of  the  country.2  When  the  wife  of
Edwin  became  a  mother,  Paulinus  gravely  announced  to  the
Anglo-Saxon  king  that  he  had  obtained  for  her  the  blessing  of
child-bearing  without  pain,  on  condition  that  the  child  should
be  baptized  in  the  name  of  Christ.3  In  the  effusion  of  his
paternal  joy,  the  pagan  consented  to  all  his  wife  desired;  but,
on  his  part,  he  would  not  hear  of  any  proposition  of  baptism,
though  he  allowed  free  speech  to  those  who  desired  to  con-
vert him,  argued  with  them,  and  sometimes  embarrassed
them.4

In  order  to  attract  him,  if  possible,  towards  celestial  things
by  the  bait  of  worldly  goods,  there  came  from  Rome  a  letter
addressed  by  pope  Boniface  "  to  the  glorious  Edwin:"  "  I  send
you,"  wrote  the  pontiff,  "  the  benediction  of  your  protector,  the
blessed  Peter,  prince  of  the  apostles,  that  is  to  say,  a  linen  shirt
ornamented  with  gold  embroidery,  and  a  mantle  of  fine  wool  of
Ancona."5  Ethelberge,  in  the  same  way,  received  as  a  pledge  of
the  blessing  of  the  apostle  Peter,  a  gilt  ivory  comb  and  a  silver
mirror.  These  gifts  were  accepted,  but  they  did  not  decide
king  Edwin,  whose  reflective  mind  could  only  be  gained  over
by  a  strong  moral  impression.6

The  life  of  the  Saxon  had  been  marked  by  an  extraordinary
adventure,  of  which  he  thought  he  had  kept  the  secret  wholly
to  himself;  but  it  had  probably  escaped  him  amidst  the  en-
dearments of  wedded  life.  In  his  youth,  before  he  became
king,  he  had  incurred  a  great  peril;  surprised  by  enemies,
who  sought  his  life,  he  had  fallen  into  their  hands.  In  the
prison  where  he  languished,  without  hope  of  safety,  his  heated
imagination  had,  in  a  dream,  brought  before  him  an  unknown
personage,  who  approached  him  with  a  grave  air,  and  said:
"What  wouldst  thou  promise  to  him  who  would  and  could  save

1  Ead-win. Ed,  happy,  fortunate  ;  win,  cherished,  conquering.
2  Vir  largaj  staturae,  paululum  incurvus,  nigro  capillo,  facie  macilenta,
naso adunco pertenui,  venerabilis simul  et terribilis aspectu. (Bedse
JIM&,  lib.  ii.  cap.  xvi.)

8  Henrici  Huntind.,  lib.  iii.

Quid  ageret  discutiebat,  vir  natura  sagacissimus.  (il.)  »  7^

6  Bedae,  Hist.,  lib.  ii.  cap.  ix.

TO  628.]  CONVERSION OF EDWIN.  43

thee?"  "  Aught  that  it  shall  ever  be  in  my  power  to  perform,"
answered  the  Saxon.  "  Well,"  replied  the  unknown,  "  if  he
who  can  save  thee  only  required  of  thee  to  live  according  to
his  counsels,  wouldst  thou  follow  them?"  Edwin  swore  it,
and  the  apparition,  stretching  forth  his  hand,  and  putting  it
on  his  head,  said,  "  When  such  a  sign  shall  again  present  it-
self to  thee,  recal  this  moment  and  our  conversation."1  Edwin
escaped  his  danger  by  some  happy  chance,  but  the  memory
of  his  dream  remained  engraven  on  his  mind.

One  day  that  he  was  alone  in  his  apartment,  the  door  sud-
denly opened,  and  he  saw  enter  a  personage,  who  advanced
gravely  forward  like  the  man  in  his  dream,  and  who,  without
pronouncing  a  single  word,  placed  his  hand  upon  his  head.
It  was  Paulinus,  to  whom,  according  to  the  ecclesiastical  his-
torians,2 the  Holy  Spirit  had  revealed  the  infallible  means  of
overcoming  the  king's  obstinacy.  The  victory  was  complete;
the  Saxon,  struck  with  utter  amazement,  fell  with  his  face  to
the  ground,  whence  the  Roman,  now  his  master,  graciously
raised  him.3  Edwin  promised  to  be  a  Christian:  but  firm  in  his
good  sense,  he  promised  for  himself  alone,  saying  that  the
men  of  the  country  should  themselves  decide  what  to  do.4
Paulinus  asked  him  to  convoke  the  great  national  council,
called  in  the  Saxon  language,  wittena-ghemote,  the  assembly
of  the  sages,  summoned  around  the  German  kings  on  all  im-
portant occasions,  and  at  which  were  present  the  magistrates,
the  rich  landed  proprietors,  the  warriors  of  high  grade,  and
the  priests  of  the  gods.5  King  Edwin  explained  to  this
assembly  the  reasons  ef  his  change  of  faith ;  and  addressing
all  present,  one  after  another,  he  asked  them  what  they  thought
of  this  new  doctrine.

1  II).  cap.  xii.  Henric.  Hunt.,  lib.  iii.  2  Ib.

3  Ib.  cap.  xiii.

4  "  The  prelate  encouragingly  addressed  him :  '  Lo  !  the  hands  of  the
foe  that  you  feared,  you  have  by  the  goodness  of  God  escaped :  lo !  the
kingdom  that  you  desired,  by  His  bounty  you  have  received ;  and  now,  re-
member the  third  promise  you  made — do  not  delay  its  accomplishment —
receive  the  faith,  attend  to  the  commands  of  Him,  who  freeing  you  from  the
hands  of  your  temporal  foes,  has  given  to  you  much  of  temporal  glory.  Do
this,  obey  His  will,  attend  to  His  commandments  ;  and  then  be  sure,  that
released  from  the  eternal  torments  of  the  wicked,  you  shall  become  a  partaker
in  the  joys  of  His  heavenly  kingdom.' " — Maccabe,  Catlwlic  History  of
England.

5  Elder-menu,  Ealdor-men,  Seniores.

44  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  628

To  this  question,  the  chief  of  the-  pagan  high  priests,  Coin",
thus  replied: — "  Your  majesty  sees,  and  can  judge  of  that  re-
ligion, which  is  now  expounded  to  us;  whilst  I  can  truly  de-
clare to  you,  that  which  I  most  assuredly  know,  namely,  that
there  is  no  advantage  in  the  religion  to  which  we  hitherto  have
adhered.  There  is  no  one,  for  instance,  who  has  been  more
devout  in  the  worship  of  our  gods  than  myself,  and  yet,  there
are  many  who  receive  greater  benefits  from  you,  who  are  pos-
sessed of  more  dignified  offices,  and  who  are  far  more  prospe-
rous in  all  their  undertakings  than  myself.  If  our  gods  could
be  of  any  avail,  assuredly  they  would  have  assisted  him  who
paid  the  most  court  to  them.  It  follows  from  this,  that  if,
upon  a  due  examination,  you  shall  find  that  the  new  doc-
trines that  are  preached  to  you  are  better  and  superior  to  the
old,  then  you  are  bound,  in  common  with  us  all,  not  to  delay
the  adoption  of  them."1

A  chief  of  the  warriors  then  arose,  and  spoke  thus: — "The
life  of  man,"  said  he,  "  on  this  earth,  in  comparison  to  that
space  of  time  which  is  unknown  to  us,  is  like  to  that  which
may  happen  when  you  with  your  nobles  and  attendants  are
seated  at  supper,  in  the  winter  season,  and  when  a  fire  is
lighted  in  the  midst,  and  the  room  is  filled  with  the  genial
heat,  whilst  the  whirlwind  rages,  the  rain  beats,  and  the  snow
falls  outside,  and  a  sparrow  flutters  quickly  in  at  one  door,
and  flies  as  hastily  out  at  the  other.  During  the  brief  period
that  it  is  within  the  room,  the  chill  of  winter  does  not  touch
it;  but  in  an  instant  the  serenity  it  has  enjoyed  in  its  flight
has  disappeared — and  as  you  look  upon  it,  it  has  flashed  from
the  darkness  of  winter  at  one  door,  into  the  darkness  of  win-
ter in  which  it  disappears  at  the  other — such,  too,  is  the  brief
measure  of  human  existence.  We  know  not  what  went  be-
fore, and  we  are  utterly  ignorant  as  to  what  shall  follow.  If
the  new  doctrine  can  make  you  more  certain  as  to  this,  then
it  is  one,  in  my  opinion,  that  ought  to  be  adopted  by  us."2

After  the  other  chiefs  had  spoken,  and  the  Roman  had  ex-
plained his  dogmas,  the  assembly,  voting  as  in  sanction  of
national  laws,  solemnly  renounced  the  worship  of  the  ancient
gods.  But  when  the  missionary  proposed  to  destroy  the

Bedoe,  lib.  ii.  cap.  xiii. Henric.  Huntin.,  lib.  iii.
Ib. See  for  the  Anglo-Saxon  text,  Appendix  IV.

TO  610.] CONVERSION OF NORTIIUMBRA, ETC.  45

images  of  those  gods,  none  among  the  new  Christians  felt
himself  firmly  enough  convinced  to  brave  the  perils  of  such  a
profanation;  none  save  the  high  priest,  who  demanded  of  the
king  arms  and  a  full-horse,  that  he  might  thus  violate  the  rule
of  his  order,  which  prohibited  priests  to  assume  warlike  habits,
or  to  ride  on  anything  but  a  mare.1  Then,  girt  with  a  sword,
and  brandishing  a  pike,  he  galloped  to  the  temple,  and  in
sight  of  all  the  people,  who  thought  him  mad,  he  struck  the
walls  and  images  with  his  lance.  A  wooden  house  was  raised
wherein  king  Edwin  and  a  great  number  of  men  were  bap-
tized.2 Paulinus  having  thus  really  achieved  the  arch-
bishopric of  which  he  bore  the  title,  traversed  the  countries
of  Deire3  and  Bernicia,  and  baptized  in  the  waters  of  the  Swale,
and  the  Glen  those  who  hastened  to  obey  the  decree  of  the
assembly  of  sages.4

The  political  influence  of  the  great  kingdom  of  Northum-
berland drew  towards  Christianity  the  population  of  the
East- Angles,  or  eastern  English,  dwelling  south  of  the  Hum-
ber,  and  north  of  the  eastern  Saxons.  This  people  had  already
heard  some  discourses  of  the  Roman  bishops  of  the  south;  but
the  two  religions  were  still  so  equally  balanced,  that  the  chief
of  the  country,  Redwald,5  had  two  altars  in  the  same  temple,
one  to  Christ  and  the  other  to  the  Teutonic  gods,  whom  he-
invoked  alternately.6  Thirty  years  after  the  conversion  of
the  people  on  the  banks  of  the  Humber,  a  woman  of  that
country  converted  the  chief  of  the  kingdom  of  Mercia,  which
then  extended  from  the  Humber  to  the  Thames.  The  Anglo-
Saxons  who  latest  retained  their  ancient  worship,  were  those
of  the  southern  coasts;  they  did  not  renounce  it  until  the  end
of  the  seventh  century.7

Eight  Roman  monks  were  successively  archbishops  of
Canterbury,  before  that  dignity,  instituted  for  the  Saxons,
was  attained  by  a  man  of  Saxon  race,  Berhtwald,  or  Brith-

1  Henric.  Hunt.,  lib.  iii.

2  Act.  pontific.  Cautuar.  auctore  Gervasio  Dorobernensi :  ainid  Hist.
Anglic.,  Script.,  ii.  col.  1034.

3 A  corruption  of  the  Cambrian  Deywr  or  Deifr.

4  Henric.  Huntin.,  lib.  iii.

5  Raed-wald.  Reed,  red,  word,  counsel,  counseller;  icald,  weald,  tca?t>
powerful,  governing.

6  Heuric.  Htiutin.,  lib.  iii. Bedae,  Hist.,  lib.  ii.  cap.  xv.

7  Heuric.  Huntiu.,  lib.  iii. Act.  Pontif.,  ut  svp.  col.  1035.

46  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  608

wald.  The  successors  of  Augustin  did  not  renounce  the  hope
of  constraining  the  clergy  of  Cambria  to  yield  to  their
authority.  They  overwhelmed  the  Welsh  priests  with  sum-
monings  and  messages;  they  even  extended  their  ambitious
pretensions  over  the  priests  of  Erin,  as  independent  as  the
Britons  of  all  foreign  supremacy,  and  so  zealous  for  the
Christian  faith,  that  their  country  was  surnamed  the  Isle  of
Saints.  But  this  merit  of  holiness,  without  complete  sub-
jection to  the  power  of  the  Romish  church,  was  as  nothing  in
the  eyes  of  the  members  of  that  church  who  had  established
their  spiritual  dominion  over  the  portion  of  Britain  conquered
by  the  Anglo-Saxons.  They  sent  messages  full  of  pride  and
acerbity  to  the  inhabitants  of  Erin:  "  We,  the  deputies  of  the
apostolic  see  in  the  western  regions,  of  late  foolishly  credited
the  reputation  of  your  island  for  holiness ;  but  we  now  fully
regard  you  as  no  better  than  the  Britons.1  The  journey  of
Columban  into  Gaul,  and  that  of  a  certain  Dagaman  into
Britain,  have  fully  convinced  us  of  this,  for  among  other
things,  this  Dagaman  passed  by  the  places  we  inhabit,  and
not  only  refused  to  eat  at  our  table,  but  even  to  take  his
meals  in  the  same  house  with  us."2

This  journey  into  Gaul,  cited  in  proof  of  the  ill  doctrines
and  perversity  of  the  Christians  of  Hibernia,  had  in  it  cir-
cumstances which  deserve  mention.  Columban,  or  more
correctly  Colum,  an  Irishman  by  birth,  and  a  missionary  by
inspiration,  filled  with  a  desire  to  seek  adventures  and  perils
for  the  sake  of  the  Christian  faith,  had  put  to  sea  with  twelve
chosen  companions.  He  passed  into  Britain,  and  thence  into
Gaul;  then  proceeding  to  the  eastern  frontier  of  that  country,
by  which  German  paganism  was  rushing  in  or  threatening
to  do  so,  he  resolved  to  establish  a  place  of  prayer  and
preaching.3  After  having  traversed  the  vast  forests  of  the
Vosges,  he  selected  as  a  residence  the  ruins  of  a  Rqman
fortress,  called  Luxovium,  now  Luxeuil,  in  the  centre  of
which  was  a  spring  of  mineral  waters  and  magnificent  baths,
adorned  with  marble  basins  and  statues.  These  ruins  fur-
nished Columban  and  his  companions  with  materials  for

1  Bedse,  Hist.,  lib.  ii.  cap.  iv.  2  jj.

3  ...Progress!  ad  Gallias,  ubi  tune,  vel  ob  frequeutiam  hostium  externo-
run,vel  ob  negligeiitiain  praesulum,  religioiiis  virtus  pene  abolita  habebatur,
tendunt.  (Vita  S.  Coluinbani,  apud  Scriptores,  &c.,  iii.  476.)

TO  777.]  COLUMBAN.  47

building  a  house  and  an  oratory,  and  the  monastery  founded
by  them  was  established  according  to  the  rule  of  the  convents
of  Ireland.1  The  reputation  for  sanctity  of  these  cenobites
from  beyond  sea,  soon  attracted  numerous  disciples,  and  the
visits  of  powerful  personages.  Theodorik,  the  Frank  king,
in  whose  country  they  were,  came  to  recommend  himself  to
their  prayers.

Columban,  with  a  freedom  which  no  member  of  the  Gallo-
Frankish  clergy  had  permitted  himself,  severely  remonstrated
with  the  visitor  upon  the  wicked  life  he  led,  instead  of
espousing  a  lawful  wife,  with  concubines  and  mistresses.2
These  reproaches  displeased  the  king  less  than  they  did  the
king's  grandmother,  that  Brunechild  whose  piety  pope  Gre-
gory had  so  lauded,  and  who,  the  more  absolutely  to  govern
her  grandson,  dissuaded  him  from,  and  gave  him  a  distaste  for
marriage.3  At  the  instigation  of  this  Avoman,  as  cunning  as
she  was  ambitious,  the  Frank  lords  and  the  bishops  themselves
laboured,  by  malignant  observations,  to  indispose  Theodorik
towards  the  chief  of  the  foreign  monks.  He  was  accused  of
being  of  but  doubtful  orthodoxy,  of  creating  a  schism  in  the
Gaulish  church,  of  following  an  unwonted  rule,  by  which  no
lay  visitor  was  admitted  into  the  interior  of  the  monastery.4
After  a  scene  of  violence,  in  which  the  king,  coming  to
Luxeuil,  penetrated  into  the  refectory,  and  in  which  Colum-
ban asserted  his  rule  with  inflexible  courage,  the  Irishman
was  ordered  to  retrace  the  same  road  he  had  come.3  An
escort  of  soldiers,  under  the  order  of  count  Theudoald  and
bishop  Suifronius,  conducted  him  to  Besancon,  from  Besancon
to  Autun,  from  Autun  to  Nevers,  and  thence  by  the  Loire  to
Nantes,  where  he  embarked  for  Ireland.6  But  his  adventurous
destiny  and  his  ardent  zeal  took  him  back  to  Gaul,  whence
he  crossed  the  Helvetian  Alps  into  Italy,  where  he  died.
Such  was  the  man  from  whose  conduct  the  bishops  of  Saxon
Britain  judged  that  the  Christianity  of  the  inhabitants  of
Hibernia  was  of  a  suspicious  nature,  and  that  it  had  need  to
be  purified  and  reformed  by  them.7

The  same  church  which  expelled  the  censurer  of  the  Frank

1  Vita  S.  Columbani,  apud  Scriptores,  &c.,  iii.  470  2  Ib.  p.  478.

3  Ib. Epistola  Gregorii  Papse  ad  Brimichildem,  ib.  iv.  20 — 34.

4  Ib.  iii.  479.  s  Ibm  4y()_  e  Ib

7  Fredegarii  Chron.,  apud  Scriptores,  &c.,  ii.  425. Lobineau,  i.  22.

48  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  656

kings  from  Gaul,  gave  to  the  Anglo-Saxon  kings  consecrated
crosses  for  standards,  "when  they  went  to  exterminate  the
ancient  Christians  of  Britain.1  The  latter,  in  their  national
poems,  attribute  much  of  their  disasters  to  a  foreign  con-
spiracy, and  to  monks  whom  they  call  unjust.2  In  their
conviction  of  the  ill-will  of  the  Romish  church  towards  them,
they  daily  became  more  confirmed  in  their  determination  to
reject  her  dogmas  and  her  empire;  they  preferred  addressing
themselves,  as  they  repeatedly  did,  to  the  church  of  Constan-
tinople, for  counsel  in  theological  difficulties.  The  most
renowned  of  their  ancient  sages,  Cattawg,  at  once  bard  and
Christian  priest,  curses,  in  his  political  effusions,  the  negligent
shepherd  who  does  not  guard  the  flock  of  God  against  the
wolves  of  Rome.3

But  the  ministers  and  envoys  of  the  pontifical  court,  thanks
to  the  religious  dependence  in  which  they  held  the  powerful
Anglo-Saxon  kings,  gradually,  by  means  of  terror,  subdued
the  free  spirit  of  the  British  churches.  In  the  eighth  century,
a  bishop  of  North  Cambria  celebrated  the  festival  of  Easter
on  the  day  prescribed  by  the  catholic  councils;  the  other
bishops  arose  against  this  change;  and,  on  the  rumour  of  this
dispute,  the  Anglo-Saxons  made  an  irruption  into  the  southern
provinces  where  the  opposition  was  manifested.4  To  obviate
foreign  war  and  the  desolation  of  his  country,  a  Welsh  chief
attempted  to  sanction,  by  his  civil  authority,  the  alteration  of
the  ancient  religious  customs;  the  public  mind  was  so  irritated
at  this,  that  the  chieftain  was  killed  in  a  revolt.  However,
the  national  pride  soon  declined,  and  weariness  of  a  struggle
constantly  renewing,  brought  a  large  portion  of  the  Welsh
clergy  to  the  centre  of  Catholicism.  The  religious  subjection
of  the  country  was  thus  gradually  effected;  but  it  was  never
so  complete  as  that  of  England.

The  kings  of  the  Saxons  and  of  the  Angles  had  for  the  city
of  Rome  and  the  see  of  St.  Peter,  a  veneration  which  they
frequently  testified  by  rich  offerings,  and  even  by  annual  tri-
butes, under  the  name  of  Rome-money  or  Church-money.  The

1  Bedae,  Hist.,  lib.  iii.  cap.  i.  and  ii.
-  Horse  Britannicee,  ii.  200.  3  Ib.  p.  277.

4  Extract  from  Caradoc  of  LJancarvan,  a  Welsh  historian ;  Horge  Bri-
tannictt,  ii.  067.

5  Horae  Britannicoe,  ii.  317.

TO  684.]  FORM OF SPIRITUAL DONATIONS.  49

successors  of  the  ancient  leaders  of  adventurers  Henghist,  Horsa,
Kerdic,  JElla  and  Ida,  taught  by  the  Roman  clergy  to  assume
the  peaceful  symbols  of  the  royal  dignity,  and  to  bear,  instead
of  the  hatchets  of  their  ancestors,  staves  with  gilt  ornaments,
ceased  to  place  the  exercises  of  war  in  the  iirst  rank.1  Their
ambition  now  was  to  see  around  them,  not  like  their  fathers,
troops  of  warriors,  but  numerous  converts  under  the  rule  of
Saint  Benedict,  the  most  in  favour  with  the  pope.  They
themselves  in  many  cases  cut  off  their  long  hair  to  devote
themselves  to  seclusion,  and,  if  the  need  of  an  active  life  de-
tained them  amidst  public  affairs,  they  reckoned  the  consecra-
tion of  a  monastery  as  one  of  the  great  days  of  their  reign.
This  event  was  celebrated  with  all  the  pomp  of  national  so-
lemnities;2 the  chiefs,  bishops,  warriors,  sages  of  the  people,
were  assembled,  and  the  king  sat  in  the  midst  of  them  sur-
rounded by  his  family.  When  the  newly  built  walls  had
been  sprinkled  with  holy  water,  and  consecrated  in  the  names
of  the  blessed  apostles  Peter  or  Paul,  the  Saxon  king  arose
and  said  aloud: — 3

"  Thanks  be  given  unto  God  Most  High,  that  I  have  been
enabled  to  do  somewhat  in  honour  of  Christ  and  the  holy
apostles.  All  you  here  present  be  witnesses  and  guarantees
of  the  donation,  made  by  me  to  the  monks  of  this  place,  of
the  lands,  waters,  meres,  weirs,  and  fens  hereafter  set  forth.
I  will  that  they  have  and  hold  them,  in  full  and  royal  man-
ner,4 so  that  no  tax  be  levied  upon  them,  and  that  the
monastery  be  subject  to  no  power  on  earth,  save  the  holy  see
of  Rome;  for  it  is  here  that  those  among  us  who  cannot  go
to  Rome,  shall  visit  Saint  Peter.  Let  those  who  succeed  me,
whether  my  son,  my  brothers,  or  any  other  person,  inviolably
maintain  this  donation,  if  they  would  participate  in  eternal
life,  if  they  would  be  saved  from  eternal  lire:  whosoever
shall  abridge  any  part  of  it,  may  the  porter  of  heaven
abridge  his  share  of  heaven;  whosoever  shall  add  to  it.  may
the  porter  of  heaven  add  to  his  share  of  heaven."5  The
king  then  took  the  roll  of  parchment  on  which  was  set
forth  the  deed  of  donation,  and  drew  a  cross  upon  it;  after
him,  his  wife,  his  sons,  his  brothers,  his  sisters,  the  bishops,

1  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  iii  p.  101.

-  Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  55.  3  Ib.  *  Ib.  36.  5  Ib.  07.

VOL.  I.  E

50  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  684

the  public  officers,  and  all  persons  of  high  rank,  succes-
sively subscribed  the  same  sign,  repeating  the  form  :  "  I  con-
firm it  by  my  mouth  and  by  the  cross  of  Christ."1

This  good  understanding  between  the  Anglo-Saxons  and
the  court  of  Rome,  or  rather  the  absolute  submission  of  the
former  to  the  latter,  which  gradually  converted  its  religious
primacy  into  political  suzerainty,  was  not  of  very  long  dura-
tion. The  illusion  upon  the  imagination  wore  off,  the  de-
pendence was  more  and  more  felt.  While  some  kings  bowed
their  head  before  the  representative  of  the  apostle  who  opened
and  shut  the  doors  of  heaven,2  there  were  others  who  repu-
diated the  infliction  of  the  law  of  the  foreigner,  disguised
under  the  name  of  the  Catholic  faith.3  In  this  struggle,  the
members  of  the  Saxon  clergy,  the  spiritual  sons  of  the
Romish  church,  at  first  ranged  themselves  on  her  side  and
defended  her  power;4  but  afterwards,  themselves  drawn
into  the  current  of  national  opinion,  they  claimed  to  owe  to
papacy  only  the  duties  of  respect  which  the  British  Christians
had  offered  to  render  it  in  the  time  of  Augustin,  and  which
it  had  so  harshly  disdained.  The  English  people  then  be-
came to  the  court  of  Rome,  what  the  Cambrians  had  been
at  the  time  of  their  schism;  by  a  conduct  less  religious  than
politic,  it  accordingly  united  itself  with  their  national  enemies;
it  excited  foreign  ambition  against  them,  as  it  had  excited
their  own  ambition  against  the  indigenous  Britons.  It  pro-
mised, in  the  name  of  Saint  Peter,  their  country  and  their
goods,  with  absolution  from  all  sin,  to  whomsoever  would
march  against  them;  and  to  recover  the  tribute  at  first  paid
voluntarily,  and  then  refused  by  slackened  zeal  or  patriotic
economy,  it  engaged  in  an  enterprise,  the  aim  of  which  was
the  subjection  of  the  nation.

The  detail  of  these  later  events  and  their  consequences  will
occupy  the  greater  portion  of  this  history,  devoted,  as  its
title  indicates,  to  the  narrative  of  the  fall  of  the  Anglo-Saxon
people.  But  we  have  not  yet  regularly  attained  this  point;
the  reader's  attention  must  still  be  directed  to  the  victorious
Germanic  race  and  the  conquered  Celtic  race;  he  must  view
the  white  standard  of  the  Saxons  and  of  the  Angles  gradually

1  Clmm.  Saxon.,  35 — 38.  s  II.  38.

3  Eddii  Vita  S.  Wilfridi,  apud  Her.  Anglic.  Script.,  iii.  01.
4  Hone  Britaunicaj,  ii.  329—34?.

TO  800.]  INDEPENDENCE OF THE WELSH.  51

driving  the  red  standard  of  the  Kymri1  back  towards  the
west.  The  Anglo-Saxon  frontiers,  continually  enlarging  in
the  west,  after  being  extended  on  the  north  to  the  Forth  and
the  Clyde,  were  again  contracted  in  this  direction  at  the  close
of  the  seventh  century.  The  Picts  and  the  Scots,  attacked
by  Egfrith,2  king  of  Northumberland,  skilfully  drew  him
into  the  gorges  of  their  mountains,  defeated  him,  and  after
their  victory  advanced  south  of  the  Forth  as  far  as  the
Tweed,  the  banks  of  which  they  then  made  the  limits  of  their
territory.  This  limit,  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  south
never  afterwards  altered,  marked  from  that  day  the  new
point  of  separation  between  the  two  parts  of  Britain.3  The
tribes  of  Anglian  race  who  inhabited  the  plain  between  the
Forth  and  the  Tweed  became  by  this  change  embodied  with
the  population  of  Picts  and  Scots,  or  Scotch,  the  name
which  this  mixed  population  soon  took,  and  from  which  was
formed  the  modern  name  of  the  country.

At  the  other  extremity  of  the  island,  the  men  of  Cornwall,
isolated  as  they  were,  long  struggled  for  independence,  aided
occasionally  by  the  Britons  of  Armorica.4  In  the  end,  they
became  tributaries  of  the  western  Saxons;  but  this  was  never
the  case  with  the  people  of  Wales:  "  Never,"  exclaim  their
old  poets,  "no,  never  shall  the  Kymri  pay  tribute;  they  will
fight  till  death  for  the  possession  of  the  lands,  bathed  by  the
Wye."5  It  was,  in  fact,  the  banks  of  that  river  which  stayed
the  progress  of  Saxon  domination ;  the  last  chieftain  by  whom
it  was  extended  was  a  king  of  Mercia,  named  Offa.6  He
passed  the  Severn  by  the  chain  of  mountains  which,  as  it  were
the  Apennines  of  southern  Briton,  had  hitherto  protected  the
last  asylum  of  the  conquered.  Almost  fifty  miles  beyond
these  mountains,  on  the  west,  OiFa,  instead  of  these  natural
boundaries,  constructed  a  long  rampart  and  trench,  which
extended  from  south  to  north,  from  the  Wye  to  the  valleys

1  The  national  poems  of  the  Cambrians  fantastically  designated  the  two
hostile  standards,  the  Red  Dragon  and  the  White  Dragon.

2  Eg,  ccg,  sharp,  sharpened ; by  extension, subtle ; frith,  frid,  fred>
fried,  peace,  pacific.

3  Henric.  Huntin.,  lib.  iii.

4  Extract  from  Caradoc  of  Llancarvan;  Horse  Britaunicee,  ii.  101.

5  Arymes  Prydyn  Vawr ;  Cambrian  Register  for  1796,  p.  554,  et  seq.

8  Ofla,  offo,  obbo,  gentle,  clement.
E2

52  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  800

through  which  runs  the  Dee.1  Here  was  permanently  fixed
the  frontier  of  the  two  races  of  men  who,  with  unequal
shares,  conjointly  inhabited  the  south  of  the  island  of  Britain,
from  the  Tweed  to  Cape  Cornwall.

North  of  the  bay  into  which  the  Dee  discharges  itself,  the
country  inclosed  between  the  mountains  and  the  sea  had
already,  for  half  a  century,  been  subjugated  by  the  English,
and  depopulated  of  the  ancient  Britons.  The  fugitives  from
these  countries  had  reached  the  great  asylum  of  Wales,  or
rather,  the  corner  of  land,  bristling  with  mountains,  which  is
washed  by  the  sea  at  the  bay  of  Solway.  Here  they  for  a
long  period  preserved  a  sort  of  savage  liberty,  distinguished
from  the  English  race,  in  the  language  of  that  race,  by  the
name  of  Cambrians ;  a  name  that  remained  attached  to  the
country  which  was  their  asylum.2  Beyond  the  plains  of
Galloway,  in  the  deep  valleys  of  the  Clyde  (Ystrad-Clwyd),
small  British  tribes,  who,  favoured  by  the  locality,  had  main-
tained their  freedom  among  the  Angles,  maintained  it  like-
wise among  the  Scots  and  Picts,  when  these  had  conquered
all  the  lowlands  of  Scotland  to  Annandale  and  the  Tweed.
This  last  remnant  of  the  pure  race  of  Britons  had  for  their
capital  and  fortress  the  town,  built  upon  a  rock,  which  is  now
called  Dumbarton,  (Dun-briton,  the  town  of  the  Britons.)
So  far  down  as  the  tenth  century,  we  find  traces  of  their  inde-
pendent existence;  but  after  that  period,  they  ceased  to  be
designated  by  their  ancient  national  name,  either  because
they  were  all  at  once  annihilated  by  some  war,  or  because
they  had  insensibly  become  incorporated  with  the  mass  of  the
population  which  surrounded  them  on  all  sides.

Thus  disappeared  from  the  island  of  Britain,  with  the  ex-
ception of  the  remnant  left  in  the  small  and  sterile  province
of  Wales,  the  Celtic  race  of  Cambrians,  Logrians,  and  Britons
especially  so  called,  partly  direct  emigrants  from  the  eastern
extremity  of  Europe,  and  partly  colonists  who  had  come  into
Britain,  after  an  intermediate  stay  of  various  duration,  on  the
western  coast  of  Gaul.  This  poor  wreck  of  a  great  nation
had  the  glory  of  defending  the  possession  of  their  last  corner
of  territory  against  the  efforts  of  an  enemy  immensely  superior

1  In  Welsh,  Claud  offn  ;  in  English,  OffcCs  Dyke.
It  is  now  called  Cumberland;  in  old  Saxon,  Cumnalnnd.

TO  900.]  THE ANCIENT BRITONS.  53

in  numbers  and  wealth ;  often  defeated,  they  were  never  sub-
jugated,  and,  from  century  to  century,  they  bore  deep  within
their  hearts  the  immovable  conviction  of  a  mysterious  eter-
nity reserved  for  their  name  and  their  language.  From  the
very  outset  of  their  national  defeats,  this  eternity  was  an-
nounced to  them  by  the  Welsh  bards;1  and  each  time  that,
in  the  progress  of  years,  a  new  foreign  invader  traversed  the
mountains  of  Cambria,  let  his  victories  have  been  as  complete
as  they  might,  he  still  heard  this  cry  from  the  vanquished:
"  Do  thy  worst:  thou  canst  not  destroy  our  name  or  our
language."  Chance,  valour,  and  more  particularly  the  nature
of  the  country,  composed  of  rocks,  lakes,  and  sands,  vindicated
the  daringly  sanguine  prediction;  but  in  itself,  it  must  be
ever  regarded  as  a  remarkable  proof  of  energy  and  imagina-
tion in  the  petty  people  who  unhesitatingly  acted  upon  it  as  a
national  article  of  faith.2

The  ancient  Britons  lived  and  breathed  in  poetry:  the  ex-
pression may  seem  extravagant,  but  it  is  not  so  in  reality ;  for,
in  their  political  maxims,  preserved  to  our  own  times,  they
place  the  poet-musician  beside  the  agriculturist  and  the  artist,
as  one  of  the  three  pillars  of  social  existence.3  Their  poets
had  but  one  theme:  the  destiny  of  their  country,  its  misfor-
tunes and  its  hopes.  The  nation,  a  poet  in  its  turn,  caught
up  and  adopted  their  fictions  with  earnest  enthusiasm,  giving
the  wildest  construction  to  their  simplest  expressions:  that
which  in  the  bard  was  merely  a  patriotic  wish,  became  to  the
excited  imagination  of  the  hearers  a  national  promise;  his
expectations  were  for  them  prophecies;  his  very  silence  was
a  confirmation  of  their  dreamiest  speculations.  That  he
sang  not  the  death  of  Arthur,  was  a  proof  that  Arthur  still
lived;  and  when  the  harper,  without  any  particular  meaning,
sounded  a  melancholy  strain,  the  auditors  at  once  sponta-
neously applied  to  the  vague  melody  the  name  of  some  spot
become  mournful  to  the  nation,  as  the  scene  of  a  battle
lost,  of  some  triumph  of  the  foreign  aggressor.4  These
memories  of  the  past,  these  hopes  of  the  future,  embellished,

1  Taliesin,  Archaiology  of  Wales,  i.  95.

2  See  postca,  book  xi.

3  Trioedd  beirdd  ynys  Prydyn,  sec.  xxi.  No.  i.,  Arcliaiology  of  Wales,
iii.  283.

4  See  postea,  lib.  iv.  suit  an.  1070.

54  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D.  800.

in  the  eyes  of  the  later  Cambrians,  their  land  of  rocks  and
marshes.  Though  poor,1  they  were  gay  and  sociable;  they
bore  misery  lightly,  as  a  transient  suffering,  and  awaited,  with
untiring  patience,  the  grand  political  revolution  which  was  to
give  back  to  them  all  they  had  lost,  to  render  them,  as  one  of
their  bards2  expresses  it,  the  crown  of  Britain.

Centuries  after  centuries  passed  away;  yet,  notwithstand-
ing the  predictions  of  the  poets,  the  land  of  the  ancient  Bri-
tons did  not  come  back  again  to  the  hands  of  their  descendants.
If  the  foreign  oppressor  was  vanquished,  it  was  not  by  the
nation  justly  entitled  to  this  retributive  victory;  his  defeat
and  his  subjection  in  no  degree  benefited  the  refugees  of
"Wales.  The  narrative  of  the  reverses  of  the  Anglo-Saxons,
invaded  and  subjugated  in  their  turn  by  a  people  from  be-
yond seas,  will  occupy  the  following  pages.  And  here  this
race,  hitherto  victorious  over  all  those  that  had  preceded  it
in  Britain,  will  excite  a  species  of  interest  to  which  it  had  not
previously  given  rise;  for  its  cause  will  become  the  good
cause,  the  cause  of  the  suffering  and  oppressed.  If  distance
of  time  ever  weakens  the  impression  produced  in  former
ages  by  contemporary  calamities,  it  is  when  the  want  of
vivid  memorials  throws  the  veil  of  oblivion  more  or  less  com-
pletely over  the  sufferings  of  those  who  have  so  long  since
passed  away.  But  in  presence  of  the  old  documents  wherein
these  sufferings  are  described  with  a  minuteness  and  a  naivete
which  seem  actually  to  bring  before  us  the  men  of  remote  ages,
a  sentiment  of  gentle  pity  awakens  in  our  hearts,  and  blend-
ing with  the  impartiality  of  the  historian,  softens  him,  with-
out in  the  least  impairing  his  determination  to  be  honest  and
just.

1  Giraldi  Cambriensis,  Itinerarum  WalHa,  passim;  Camden,  Anqlica,
Hibcrnica,  &c.

f  Taliesiu;  Archaiology  of  Wales,  i.  95;  Arymes  Prydyn,  ib.  p.  150—
159 ;  Afallenan  Myrddyn,  ib.  p.  150.

BOOK II.

FROM THE FIRST LANDING OF THE DANES IN ENGLAND
TO THE END OF THEIR DOMINATION.

787—1048.

First  landing  of  the  Danish  pirates — Their  character ;  their  conquests  in
England — Invasion  of  Ragnar  Lodbrog;  his  death-song — Descent  of
the  Danes  in  the  south — Destruction  of  the  monasteries — Termination
of  the  kingdom  of  East  Anglia — Invasion  of  the  kingdom  of  Wessex —
Resistance  of  Alfred — Flight  of  king  Alfred — His  return ;  he  attacks
the  Danes,  and  concludes  peace  with  them — Successive  combinations
of  the  English  territory  under  a  sole  royalty — Descent  of  Hasting  upon
England — Election  of  king  Edward — Conquests  of  king  Athelstan —
Victory  of  Brunanburg — Defeat  of  Erik  the  Dane — Political  results
of  the  defeats  of  the  Danes — Fresh  emigrations  from  Denmark — Massacre
of  the  Danes — Grand  armament  of  Sweu — Patriotic  firmness  of  arch-
bishop Elfeg;  his  death — Ethelred  takes  refuge  in  Gaul — Foundation
of  the  empire  of  the  Franks — Dismemberment  of  that  empire — Invasion
of  Gaul  by  the  Danes  or  Normans — New  states  formed  in  Gaul — Limits
and  populations  of  the  kingdom  of  France — Exile  of  Roll,  son  of  Hogu-
vald — The  Norwegian  exiles  establish  themselves  at  Rouen — First  nego-
tiation of  the  French  with  the  Normans — Roll  elected  chief  of  the
Normans — Second  negotiation — Cession  of  Neustria  and  Brittany —
Conference  at  Saint-Clair-sur-Epte — Conversion  and  baptism  of  Roll,
first  duke  of  Normandy — Division  of  Normandy — Language  and  man-
ners of  the  people  of  Bayeux — Social  state  of  Normandy — Insurrec-
tion of  the  peasants  of  Normandy — Violent  measures  to  suppress  the
insurrection — Language  and  political  relations  of  the  Gallo-Normans —
Ethelred  recalled — Godwin  saves  the  life  of  a  Danish  chief — Knut  the
Dane  becomes  king  of  all  England — Proscriptions  in  England — Mar-
riage of  king  Kuut ;  remarkable  change  in  his  character  and  conduct —
He  institutes  Peter's  pence — Temporal  power  of  the  popes — Pil-
grimage of  Knut  to  Rome — Letter  written  by  king  Knut — Rise  of
Godwin — Harold  and  Hardeknut,  kings  of  England — Preparations  for
war  between  the  Anglo-Saxons  and  the  Anglo-Danes — Harold  sole
king  of  England — Alfred,  son  of  Ethelred,  reappears  in  England — His
violent  death — Hardeknut's  barbarity — His  exactions — The  Danes
driven  from  England — Election  of  Edward,  son  of  Ethelred — His  mar-
riage with  Editha — Re-establishment  of  English  independence — Hosti-
lity of  the  people  to  the  Norman  favourites  of  king  Edward.

FOR  more  than  a  century  and  a  half,  almost  the  entire  of
southern  Britain  had  borne  the  name  of  England,  and  in
the  language  of  its  German-descended  possessors,  that  of

56  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  787

Briton  or  Welsh,  had  meant  serf  or  tributary,1  when  a  body
of  men,  of  unknown  race,  entered,  in  three  vessels,  a  port  on
the  eastern  coast.  In  order  to  learn  whence  they  came  and
what  they  wanted,  the  Saxon  magistrate  of  the  place2  pro-
ceeded to  the  shore  where  they  had  landed;  the  strangers
suffered  him  to  approach;  then  surrounding  him  and  his
escort,  they  fell  upon  them,  killed  them,  and,  having  pil-
laged the  town,  returned  with  the  booty  to  their  ships  and
departed.3

Such  was  the  first  appearance  in  England  of  the  northern
pirates,  variously  called  Danes4  or  Normans,5  according  as
they  came  from  the  islands  of  the  Baltic  sea  or  the  coast  of
Norway.

They  descended  from  the  same  primitive  race  with  the
Anglo-Saxons  and  the  Franks;  their  language  had  roots
identical  with  the  idioms  of  these  two  nations  :  but  this  token
of  an  ancient  fraternity  did  not  preserve  from  their  hostile
incursions,  either  Saxon  Britain,  or  Prankish  Gaul,  nor  even
the  territory  beyond  the  Rhine,  then  exclusively  inhabited  by
Germanic  tribes.  The  conversion  of  the  southern  Teutons  to
the  Christian  faith  had  broken  all  bond  of  fraternity  between
them  and  the  Teutons  of  the  north.  In  the  ninth  century
the  man  of  the  north  still  gloried  in  the  title  of  son  of  Odin,
and  treated  as  bastards  and  apostates  the  Germans  who  had
become  children  of  the  church  :  he  made  no  distinction  be-
tween them  and  the  conquered  populations  whose  religion
they  had  adopted.  Franks  or  Gauls,  Lombards  or  Latins,  all
were  equally  odious  to  the  man  who  had  remained  faithful  to
the  ancient  divinities  of  Germany.  A  sort  of  religious  and
patriotic  fanaticism  was  thus  combined  in  the  Scandinavian
with  the  fiery  impulsiveness  of  their  character,  and  an  insa-
tiable thirst  for  gain.  They  shed  with  joy  the  blood  of  the
priests,  were  especially  delighted  at  pillaging  the  churches,

1 l'.'<;,!l,,  :i  slave,  ;i  domestic;  Jtors-icealh,  a  groom. (Glossar.  Somneri,
apiid  Hist.  Aug.  Scrip.,  ii.,  ed.  Selden.) Si  servus  waliscus  anglicum  lio-
minem  occidat . . .  (Leges  Ins>,  art.  78,  iipnd  Jolian  Bromt.  ib.  i.  col.  707.)
-  Gcn-fa,  graf,  gravo,  in  the  dialect  of  the  Franks.

3  Heiiric.  Huntin.,  Hist.,  lib.  iv.
*  Luiine  Dani ;  Djeneii,  Deena,  Dtenishe.

5  Lfitine,  Normunui,  North-menu,  North-mature,  Normans.  This  was.
the  ancient  appellation  of  the  Norwegians.

TO  835.]  THE SEA-KINGS.  57

and  stabled  their  horses  in  the  chapels  of  the  palaces.1  When
they  had  devastated  and  burned  some  district  of  the  Christian
territory  :  "  We  have  sung  them  the  mass  of  lances,"  said
they,  mockingly;  "  it  commenced  early  in  the  morning,  and
lasted  until  night."2

In  three  days,  with  an  east  wind,  the  fleets  of  Denmark  and
Norway,  two-sailed  vessels,  reached  the  south  of  Britain.3
The  soldiers  of  each  fleet  obeyed  in  general  one  chief,  whose
vessel  was  distinguished  from  the  rest  by  some  particular  or-
nament. The  same  chief  commanded  when  the  pirates,  hav-
ing landed,  marched  in  troops,  on  foot  or  on  horseback.  He
was  called  by  the  German  title,  rendered  in  the  southern  lan-
guages by  the  word  king  :4  but  he  was  king  only  on  the  sea
and  in  the  battle-field;  for,  in  the  hour  of  the  banquet  the
whole  troop  sat  in  a  circle,  and  the  horns,  filled  with  beer,
passed  from  hand  to  hand  without  any  distinction  of  first  man
or  last.  The  sea-king5  was  everywhere  faithfully  followed
and  zealously  obeyed,  because  he  was  always  renowned  as  the
bravest  of  the  brave,  as  one  who  had  never  slept  under  a
smoke-dried  roof,  who  had  never  emptied  a  cup  seated  in  the
chimney-corner.6

He  could  guide  his  vessel  as  the  good  horseman  his  steed,
and  to  the  ascendancy  of  courage  and  skill  were  added,  for
him,  the  influence  created  by  superstition;  he  was  initiated
in  the  science  of  the  runes ;  he  knew  the  mystic  characters
which,  engraved  upon  swords,  secured  the  victory,  and  those
which,  inscribed  on  the  poop  and  on  the  oars,  preserved  ves-
sels from  shipwreck.7  All  equal  under  such  a  chief,  bearing

1  Hist.  S.  Vincentii,  apiid  Script,  rer.  Normann,  p.  21.  Gesta  Norman-
norum  ante  Eollonem  ducem.  (ift.)  Clironicon  Hermann!  Contract!,  apiid
Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  viii.  p.  246.

''  Attnm  odda  messu . . .  (Olai  Wormii  Litteratura  rtmica,  p.  208.)
Scriptor.  rer.  Dame.,  i.  374.  ib,  iv.  20.

3  Annales  Esromeuses,  ib.  i.  23C.

4  Koiig,  konnng,  kiueg,  kouiiig,  king;  in  Latin,  rex,  rector,  dux,  ductor,
prcrfcctus,  consul,  ccnturio,  chief  in  general: the  first  among  the  leaders
sometimes bore  the  title of  kongakong,  chief  of  chiefs,  king  of kings.
(Ihre.  Gloss.  Suio-gothic.)

5  Sae-kong,  her-koug. See-knung,  ker  kuung. See-king,  here-king.

6  Inglinga  saga,  cap. xxxiv. ; Heimsknmgla  eclr  Noregs  Konungasogor
af  Snorra  Sturlusyui,  i.  43.

7  Sig-nmar,  the  nines  of  victory ; Brlm-runar,  the  runes  of  the  waves.
See  the  Edda  Saemundar  hinns  froda,  ii.  195.

58  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  787

lightly  their  voluntary  submission  and  the  weight  of  their
mailed  armour,  which  they  promised  themselves  soon  to  ex-
change for  an  equal  weight  of  gold,  the  Danish  pirates  pur-
sued the  road  of  the  swans,  as  their  ancient  national  poetry
expressed  it.1  Sometimes  they  coasted  along  the  shore,  and
laid  wait  for  the  enemy  in  the  straits,  the  bays,  and  smaller
anchorages,  which  procured  them  the  surname  of  Vikings  or
children  of  the  creeks ;  sometimes  they  dashed  in  pursuit  of
their  prey  across  the  ocean.  The  violent  storms  of  the  north
seas  dispersed  and  shattered  their  frail  vessels;  all  did  not
rejoin  their  chieftain's  ship  at  the  rallying  signal,  but  those
who  survived  their  shipwrecked  companions  were  none  the
less  confident,  none  the  more  depressed;  they  laughed  at  the
winds  and  waves  that  had  failed  to  harm  them:  "  The  strength
of  the  tempest,"  they  sang,  "aids  the  arm  of  the  rower;  the
storm  is  our  servant;  it  throws  us  where  we  desired  to  go."2
The  first  great  army  of  Danish  and  Norman  corsairs  that
visited  England,  landed  upon  the  coast  of  Cornwall,  the  na-
tives of  which  district,  reduced  by  the  English  to  the  condition
of  tributaries,  joined  the  enemies  of  their  conquerors,  either
in  the  hope  of  gaining  a  certain  degree  of  liberty,  or  simply  to
satisfy  their  passion  of  national  vengeance.  The  Northmen
were  repulsed,  and  the  Britons  of  Cornwall  remained  under
the  yoke  of  the  Saxons;  but  shortly  afterwards,  other  fleets,
steering  to  the  eastern  coast,  brought  Danes  in  such  vast
numbers,  that  no  force  could  prevent  their  penetrating  to  the
heart  of  England.  They  ascended  the  course  of  the  great
rivers,  until  they  had  found  a  commodious  station;  here  they
quitted  their  vessels,  moored  them  or  laid  them  up  dry,  spread
over  the  country,  everywhere  seized  beasts  of  burden,  and  from
mariners  became  men  and  horses,  as  the  chroniclers  of  the  time
express  it.3  They  at  first  contented  themselves  with  pillaging
and  then  retiring,  leaving  behind  them  on  the  coasts  a  few
military  posts  and  small  entrenched  camps,  to  protect  their
next  return;  but  soon  changing  their  tactics,  they  established
themselves  fixedly,  as  masters  of  the  soil  and  of  the  inhabi-

1  Ofer  Swan  rade.

2 . .  .Quibus  nee  ingenn  mugitus  coeli  nee  crebri  jactus  fulminum  unquam
nocuerant,  favente  gratia  eleinentorum. (Hist.  S.  Eadimmdi,  auctoie  Ab-
bone  floriac,  Abbate,  apud  Surium  in  Vit.  Sanct.  Novemb.  20,  vi.  441.)
3  Chron.  Saxon.,  Gibson,  p.  130,  et  passim.

TO  865. J  EXPEDITION OF RAGNAR-LODBROG.  59

tants,  and  drove  back  the  English  race  of  the  north-east  to-
wards the  south-west,  as  the  latter  had  driven  back  the  ancient
British  population  of  the  Gaulish  sea  towards  the  other  sea.1

The  sea  kings  who  connected  their  names  with  the  events
of  this  great  invasion  are,  Ragnar-Lodbrog  and  his  three
sons,  Hubbo,  lugvar,  and  Afden.  Son  of  a  Norwegian  and
of  the  daughter  of  a  king  of  one  of  the  Danish  isles,  Ragnar
had  obtained,  either  fairly  or  by  force,  the  crown  of  all  these
islands;  but  fortune  becoming  unfavourable  to  him,  he  lost
his  territorial  possessions,  and  then  equipping  several  vessels
and  assembling  a  troop  of  pirates,  turned  sea  king.  His
first  expeditions  were  in  the  Baltic  and  upon  the  coasts  of
Friesland  and  Saxony;  he  next  made  numerous  descents  in
Brittany  and  Graul,  ever  successful  in  his  enterprises,  which
procured  for  him  great  wealth  and  great  renown.  After
thirty  years  of  successes,  obtained  with  a  simple  fleet  of  barks,
Ragnar,  whose  views  had  enlarged,  resolved  to  essay  his  skill
in  a  more  scientific  navigation,  and  had  two  vessels  con-
structed, which  surpassed  in  dimensions  anything  that  had
been  hitherto  seen  in  the  north.  Vainly  did  his  wife  Aslauga,
with  that  cautious  good  sense  which,  among  the  Scandinavian
women,  passed  as  the  gift  of  prophecy,  urge  upon  him  the
perils  to  which  this  innovation  exposed  him;  he  would  not
listen  to  her,  and  embarked,  followed  by  several  hundred  men.
England  was  the  object  of  this  novel  expedition.  The  pirates
gaily  cut  the  cables  which  held  their  two  vessels,  and,  as  they
themselves  expressed  it  in  their  poetical  language,  gave  the
rein  to  their  great  sea-horses.2

All  went  well  with  the  sea  king  and  his  companions  so  long
as  they  were  on  the  open  sea;  it  was  when  they  approached
the  coast  that  their  difficulties  commenced.  Their  large
ships,  unskilfully  steered,  struck  upon  shoals,  whence  vessels
of  Danish  construction  would  easily  have  extricated  them-
selves, and  the  wrecked  crews  were  obliged  to  throw  them-
selves upon  the  land,  destitute  of  every  means  of  retreat.
The  coast  on  which  they  thus  disembarked  against  their  will
was  that  of  Northumberland;  they  advanced  in  good  order,
ravaging  and  pillaging  according  to  their  custom,  the  same

1  Chron.  Saxon.,  Gibson,  p.  72.  Chron.  Johan.  Wallingford,  apud  rer.
Anglic.  Script.  (Gale,  ii.  532.)

2  Sharon  Turner's  Hist,  of  the  Anglo-Saxons,  i.  470  (ed.  of  1828).

60  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  838

as  though  they  were  not  in  a  hopeless  position.  On  hearing
of  their  devastations,  (Ella,  the  king  of  the  country,  marched
and  attacked  them  with  superior  forces;  the  combat  was
furious,  though  very  unequal;  and  Ragnar,  enveloped  in  a
mantle  his  wife  had  given  him  on  his  departure,  penetrated
the  enemy's  ranks  four  times.  But,  nearly  all  his  companions
having  perished,  he  himself  was  taken  alive  by  the  Saxons.
King  (Ella  proved  cruel  to  his  prisoner;  not  content  with
putting  him  to  death,  he  inflicted  unwonted  tortures  upon
him.  Lodbrog  was  shut  up  in  a  dungeon,  filled,  say  the
chroniclers,  with  vipers  and  venomous  serpents.  The  death
song  of  this  famous  sea  king  became  celebrated  as  one  of  the
chefs-d'oeuvre  of  Scandinavian  poetry.  It  was  attributed,
upon  very  slight  foundation,  to  the  hero  himself;  but  whoever
the  author  may  have  been,  the  production  bears  the  vivid  im-
press of  the  warlike  and  religious  fanaticism  which  in  the
ninth  century  rendered  the  Danish  and  Norman  Wikings  so
formidable.1

"  "We  struck  with  our  swords,  in  the  time  when,  yet  young,
I  went  towards  the  east,  to  prepare  the  repast  of  blood  for  the
wolves,  and  in  that  great  combat  wherein  I  sent  the  people  of
Helsinghie2  in  crowds  to  the  palace  of  Odin.  Thence  our
vessels  bore  us  to  the  mouth  of  the  Vistula,  where  our  lances
pierced  the  cuirasses,  and  our  swords  broke  the  bucklers.

"  We  struck  with  our  swords,  on  the  day  when  I  saw  hun-
dreds of  men  prostrate  on  the  sand,  near  a  promontory  of
England;  a  dew  of  blood  dropped  from  our  swords;  the
arrows  whistled  as  they  went  seeking  the  helmets;  it  was  for
me  a  pleasure  equal  to  that  of  holding  a  beautiful  girl  in  my
arms.

"  We  struck  with  our  swords,  the  day  when  I  laid  low  that
young  man,  so  proud  of  his  long  hair,  who  in  the  morning
had  been  wooing  the  young  girls  and  the  widows.  What  is
the  lot  of  a  brave  man,  but  to  fall  among  the  first?  He  who
is  never  wounded,  leads  a  wearisome  life;  man  must  attack
man  or  resist  him,  in  the  great  game  of  battle.

"We  struck  with  our  swords;  and  now  I  feel  that  men  are
the  slaves  of  destiny,  and  obey  the  decrees  of  the  spirits  who

1  Mallet,  H.  du  Danncmarck,  ii.  293.  '
2  A  province  of  Sweden,  on  the  gulf  of  Bothnia.

TO  866.] DANISH  INVASION  TO  AVENGE  LODBROG.  61

preside  over  their  birth.  Never  did  I  think  that  death  would
come  to  me  through  this  QElla,  when  I  urged  my  vessels  so
far  across  the  waves,  and  gave  such  banquets  to  the  wild
beasts.  But  I  smile  with  pleasure  when  I  reflect  that  a  place
is  reserved  for  me  in  the  halls  of  Odin,  and  that  soon,  seated
there  at  the  great  banquet  table,  we  shall  drink  flowing
draughts  of  beer,  in  our  cups  of  horn.

"  We  struck  with  our  swords.  If  the  sons  of  Aslanga
knew  the  anguish  I  suffer,  if  they  knew  that  venomous  ser-
pents wind  themselves  around  me  and  cover  me  with  bites,
they  would  all  shudder,  and  would  rush  to  the  combat;  for
the  mother  whom  I  have  left  them  has  given  them  valiant
hearts.  A  viper  now  tears  open  my  breast,  and  penetrates
to  my  heart;  I  am  conquered;  but  soon,  I  hope,  the  lance  of
one  of  my  sons  will  pierce  the  side  of  CElla.

"  We  struck  with  our  swords  in  fifty  and  one  combats;  I
doubt  whether  among  men  there  is  a  king  more  famous  than
I.  From  my  youth  I  have  shed  blood,  and  desired  an  end
like  this.  The  goddesses  sent  by  Odin  to  meet  me,  call  to
me  and  invite  me;  I  go,  seated  among  the  foremost,  to  drink
beer  with  the  gods.  The  hours  of  my  life  are  passing  away;
I  shall  die  laughing."1

This  lofty  appeal  to  vengeance  and  to  the  warlike  passions,
first  sung  in  a  funeral  ceremony,  passed  from  mouth  to  mouth
wherever  Ragnar-Lodbrog  had  admirers;  not  only  his  sons,
his  relations,  his  friends,  but  a  crowd  of  adventurers  and
young  men  from  every  northern  kingdom  responded  to  it.
In  less  than  a  year,  and  without  any  hostile  intelligence
reaching  England,  eight  sea  kings  and  twenty  iarls  or  chiefs
of  secondary  rank,  confederating  together,  united  their  vessels
and  their  soldiers.  This  was  the  largest  fleet  that  had  ever
left  Denmark  on  a  distant  expedition.  Its  destination  was
Northumberland,  but  a  mistake  of  the  pilots  carried  it  more
to  the  south,  towards  the  coast  of  East  Anglia.2

Incapable  of  repelling  such  a  great  army,  the  people  of  the
country  gave  the  Danes  a  pacific  reception,  of  which  the

1  Olai  Wormii  Litteratura  runica,  p.  198. Sharon  Turner,  lit  sup.  i.  480.
The  poem  in  the  original  extends  to  twenty-nine  strophes  ; I  have  omitted
nearly  one  half  of  these,  and  abridged  the  remainder.

2  Est  Anfjliu,  the  Latin  translation  of  the  Saxon  term,  East-engla-land.
Sharon  Turner,  tit  sup.  p.  Oil.

62  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  867

latter  availed  themselves  to  collect  provisions  and  horses,
while  awaiting  reinforcements  beyond  seas;  on  the  arrival  of
these,  deeming  themselves  sure  of  success,  they  marched  upon
York,  the  capital  of  Northumberland,  devastating  and  burning
everything  on  their  way.  The  two  chiefs  of  this  kingdom,
Osbert  and  CElla,  concentrated  their  forces  under  the  walls
of  the  city  for  a  decisive  battle.  The  Saxons  at  first  had  the
advantage;  but  dashing  on  prematurely  in  pursuit  of  the
enemy,  the  latter,  perceiving  their  disorder,  turned  upon
them,  and  completely  defeated  them.  Osbert  was  killed  while
fighting,  and,  by  a  singular  destiny,  CElla,  falling  alive  into
the  hands  of  the  sons  of  Lodbrog,  expiated  by  unheard  of
tortures,  the  tortures  he  had  inflicted  on  their  father.1

Vengeance  thus  consummated,  another  passion,  that  of
power,  took  possession  of  the  confederate  chiefs.  Masters  of
a  portion  of  the  country  north  of  the  Humber,  and  assured
by  messengers  of  the  submission  of  the  rest,  the  sons  of
Ragnar-Lodbrog  resolved  to  retain  this  conquest.  They
garrisoned  York  and  the  principal  towns,  distributed  lands
among  their  companions,  and  opened  an  asylum  to  people  of
every  condition  who  chose  to  come  from  the  Scandinavian
provinces  to  augment  the  new  colony.  Thus  Northumber-
land ceased  to  be  a  Saxon  kingdom ;  it  became  the  rallying
point  of  the  Danes,  for  the  conquest  of  the  south  of  England.
After  three  years  preparation,  the  great  invasion  commenced.
The  army,  led  by  its  eight  kings,  descended  the  Humber  as
far  as  the  heights  of  Lindsay,  and  there  landing,  marched  in
a  direct  line  from  north  to  south,  pillaging  the  towns,  massacre-
ing  the  inhabitants,  and,  with  fanatic  rage,  taking  especial
delight  in  burning  the  churches  and  monasteries.2

The  Danish  vanguard  was  approaching  Croyland,  a  cele-
brated monastery,  the  name  of  which  will  often  figure  in  these
pages,  when  it  met  a  small  Saxon  army,  which,  by  dint  of
courage  and  good  order,  held  it  in  check  for  a  whole  day.  It
was  a  levy  en  masse  of  all  the  people  of  the  neighbourhood,
commanded  by  their  lords  and  by  a  monk  called  brother  Toli,
who,  before  taking  the  vows,  had  borne  arms.3  Three  Danish

1  Sharon  Turner,  p.  513.  2  lit.  pp.  515,  516.

3  Sunano  diluculo,  auditis  divinis  officiis,  et  sumpto  sacro  viatico,  omnes
ad  moriendum  pro  CLristi  fide  patrioeque  defensione  . . .  contra  barbaros
processerunt.  (Hist.  Ingulf.  Croyland,  apud  rer.  Anglic.  Script.)  Gale,  i.  20.

TO  870.] CROYLAND  ABBEY  ATTACKED  BY  THE  DANES. 63

kings  were  slain  in  the  battle;  but,  on  the  coming  up  of  the
others,  the  Saxons,  overwhelmed  by  numbers,  were  nearly
all  killed  in  defending  their  posts.  Some  of  the  fugitives
hastened  to  the  monastery  to  announce  that  all  was  lost,  and
that  the  pagans  were  approaching.  It  was  the  hour  of
matins,  and  all  the  monks  were  assembled  in  the  choir.  The
abbot,  a  man  of  advanced  age,  addressed  them  thus:  "  Let  all
those  among  you  who  are  young  and  robust  retire  to  a  place
of  safety,  carrying  with  them  the  relics  of  the  saints,  our
books,  our  charters,  and  everything  that  we  have  of  value.
I  will  remain  here  with  the  old  men  and  the  children,  and
perhaps  by  the  mercy  of  God  the  enemy  will  take  pity  on
our  weakness."1

All  the  able-bodied  men  of  the  community,  to  the  number
of  thirty,  departed,  and  having  loaded  a  boat  with  the  relics,
sacred  vases,  and  other  valuables,  took  refuge  in  the  neigh-
bouring marshes.  There  remained  in  the  choir  only  the
abbot,  a  few  infirm  old  men,  two  of  whom  were  upwards  of  an
hundred  years  old,  and  some  children,  whom  their  parents,
according  to  the  devotional  custom  of  the  period,  were  bring-
ing up  under  the  monastic  habit.  They  continued  to  chant
the  psalms  at  all  the  regular  hours;  when  that  of  the  mass
arrived,  the  abbot  placed  himself  at  the  altar  in  his  sacerdotal
robes.  All  present  received  the  communion,  and  almost  at
the  same  moment  the  Danes  entered  the  church.  The  chief
who  marched  at  their  head  killed  with  his  own  hand  the  abbot
at  the  foot  of  the  altar,  and  the  soldiers  seized  the  monks,
young  and  old,  whom  terror  had  dispersed.  They  tortured
them,  one  by  one,  to  make  them  reveal  where  their  treasure
was  concealed,  and  on  their  refusing  to  answer,  cut  off  their
heads.  As  the  prior  fell  dead,  one  of  the  children,  ten  years
of  age,  who  was  greatly  attached  to  him,  fell  on  his  body,
embracing  him,  weeping,  and  asking  to  die  with  him.  His
voice  and  face  struck  one  of  the  Danish  chiefs;  moved  with
pity,  he  drew  the  child  out  of  the  crowd,  and  taking  off  his
frock,  and  throwing  over  him  a  Danish  cassock,  said:  "  Come
with  me,  and  quit  not  my  side  for  a  moment."  He  thus  saved
him  from  the  massacre,  but  no  others  were  spared.  After
having  vainly  sought  the  treasure  of  the  abbey,  the  Danes

1  Fleury,  Histoire  Ecclesiastique,  xi.  283.  (Bruxelles,  1714.)

64  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. |_A.D.  867

broke  open  the  marble  tombs  in  the  church,  and,  furious  at
not  finding  any  riches  in  them,  scattered  the  bones,  and  set
fire  to  the  church.  They  then  proceeded  eastward;  to  the
monastery  of  Peterborough.1

This  monastery,  one  of  the  chefs-d'oeuvre  of  the  architecture
of  the  period,  had,  according  to  the  Saxon  style,  massive
Avails  pierced  with  small  semi-circular  windows,  which  ren-
dered it  the  more  easy  to  defend.  The  Danes  found  the
doors  closed,  and  were  received  with  arrows  and  stones  by
the  monks  and  the  country  people  who  had  shut  themselves
up  with  them:  in  the  first  assault,  one  of  the  sons  of  Lodbrog,
whose  name  the  chroniclers  do  not  mention,  was  mortally
wounded;  but,  after  two  attacks,  the  Danes  entered  by  storm,
and  Hubbo,  to  revenge  his  brother,  killed,  with  his  own  hand,
all  the  monks,  to  the  number  of  eighty-four.  The  apartments
were  pillaged,  the  sepulchres  burst  open,  and  the  library  used
to  feed  the  fire  applied  to  the  building:  the  conflagration
lasted  fifteen  whole  days.

During  a  night  march  of  the  army  towards  Huntingdon,
the  boy  whom  a  Danish  chief  had  saved  at  Croyland,  escaped,
and  regained  the  ruins  of  his  late  abode.  He  found  the  thirty
monks  returned,  and  employed  in  extinguishing  the  fire,  which
still  burned.  He  recounted  to  them  the  massacre  with  every
detail;  and  ah1,  full  of  grief,  proceeded  to  seek  the  bodies  of
their  brethren.  After  several  days  labour,  they  found  that
of  the  abbot,  headless  and  crushed  by  a  beam;  the  rest  were
afterwards  discovered,  and  buried  near  the  church  in  one
grave.2

These  disasters  occurred  partly  in  the  territory  of  Mercia,
and  partly  in  that  of  East  Anglia,  or  Eastern  English.  The
king  of  the  latter  country,  Edmund,  speedily  paid  the  penalty
of  the  indifference  with  which,  three  years  before,  he  had
witnessed  the  invasion  of  Northumbria;  surprised  by  the
Danes  in  his  royal  residence,  he  was  led  a  prisoner  before
the  sons  of  Lodbrog,  who  haughtily  commanded  him  to
.acknowledge  himself  their  vassal.  Edmund  pertinaciously
refused;  whereupon  the  Danes,  having  bound  him  to  a  tree,
essayed  upon  him  their  skill  in  archery.  They  aimed  at  the

1  Ingulf,  ut  sup.  p.  22. Fleury,  ut  sup.  p.  284.
2  Fleury,  ut  sup.  *  Id.  ib.

TO  878.]  CONQUESTS OF THE DANES.  65

arms  and  legs,  without  touching  the  body,  and  at  length
terminated  this  barbarous  sport  by  striking  off  the  head  of
the  Saxon  king  with  an  axe.  He  was  a  man  of  little  merit
or  reputation,  but  his  death  procured  for  him  the  greatest
renown  then  attainable,  that  of  holiness  and  martyrdom.
Common  opinion,  in  the  middle  ages,  sanctified  the  memory  of
any  one  who  had  perished  by  the  hand  of  the  pagans;  but
here  something  else  was  in  operation,  a  peculiar  feature  of  the
Anglo-Saxon  character,  the  tendency  to  surround  patriotic
sufferers  with  a  religious  halo,  and  to  regard  as  martyrs  those
who  had  died  defending  the  national  cause,  or  persecuted  by
its  enemies.

East-Anglia,  entirely  subjected,  became,  like  Northumber-
land, a  Danish  kingdom,  and  a  point  of  emigration  with  the
adventurers  of  the  north.  The  Saxon  king  was  replaced  by
a  sea  king,  called  Godrun,  and  the  indigenous  population,
reduced  to  a  state  of  demi-servitude,  lost  all  property  in
their  territory,  and  in  future  cultivated  it  for  the  foreigners.
This  conquest  involved  in  great  danger  the  kingdom  of
Mercia,  which,  already  encroached  upon  in  its  eastern  portion,
had  the  Danes  upon  two  of  its  frontiers.  The  ancient  king-
doms of  Eastsex,  Kent,  and  Suth-sex,  had  no  longer  an  inde-
pendent existence;  for  more  than  a  century  past  they  had  all
three  been  annexed  to  that  of  West-sex  ( Wessex),  or  of  the
western  Saxons.1  Thus  the  struggle  was  between  two  Danish
kingdoms  and  two  Saxon  kingdoms.  The  kings  of  Mercia
and  Wessex,  hitherto  rivals  and  enemies,  leagued  together
in  defence  of  that  portion  of  England  which  remained  free;
but  despite  their  utmost  efforts,  the  whole  of  the  territory
north  of  the  Thames  was  overrun ;  Mercia  became  a  Danish
province;  and  of  the  eight  kingdoms  originally  founded  by  the
Saxons  and  the  Angles,  but  one  alone  remained,  that  of  Wes-
sex, which  at  this  time  extended  from  the  mouth  of  the
Thames  to  the  Bristol  Channel.

In  the  year  871,  Ethelred,  son  of  Ethelwolf,  king  of  Wes-
sex, was  mortally  wounded  in  a  battle  with  the  Danes,  who
had  passed  the  Thames  and  invaded  his  territory.  He  left
several  children;  but  the  national  election  fell  upon  his  bro-

1  West-Seax-na-land,  West-Seax-na-rice.  Ingulf.  Hist.  Croyland,  apud
Rer.  Anglic.  Script.,  i.  24,  et  seq.

VOL.  I.  F

66*  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D.  871

ther  Alfred,  a  young  man  of  two  and  twenty,  whose  courage
and  military  skill  inspired  the  Saxons  with  the  most  vivid
hopes.1  Alfred  twice  succeeded,  by  arms  or  negotiation,
in  relieving  his  kingdom  from  the  presence  of  the  Danes;
he  repulsed  several  attempts  to  invade  his  southern  provinces
by  sea,  and  for  seven  years  maintained  the  boundary  line  of
the  Thames.  It  is  probable  that  no  other  Danish  army  would
ever  have  overpassed  that  boundary,  had  the  king  of  Wessex
and  his  people  been  thoroughly  united;  but  there  existed  be-
tween them  germs  of  discord  of  a  very  singular  nature.

King  Alfred  was  more  learned  than  any  of  his  subjects;  while
quite  a  youth  he  had  visited  the  southern  countries  of  Europe,
and  had  closely  observed  their  manners;  he  was  conversant
with  the  learned  languages,  and  with  most  of  the  writings
of  antiquity.  This  superior  knowledge  created  in  the  Saxon
king  a  certain  degree  of  contempt  for  the  nation  he  governed.
He  had  small  respect  for  the  information  or  intelligence  of
the  great  national  council,  the  Assembly  of  Wise  Men.  Full
of  the  ideas  of  absolute  power,  that  so  frequently  recur  in  the
Roman  writers,  he  had  an  ardent  desire  for  political  reforms,
and  framed  infinite  plans,  better  in  themselves,  we  may  per-
haps concede,  than  the  ancient  Anglo-Saxon  practices  they
were  destined  to  replace,  but  wanting  in  that  essential  requi-
site, the  sanction  of  a  people  who  neither  understood  nor  de-
sired these  changes.  Tradition  has  vaguely  preserved  some
severe  features  of  Alfred's  government;  and  long  after  his
death,  men  used  to  speak  of  the  excessive  rigour  he  applied
to  the  punishment  of  prevaricators  and  other  evil  judges.2
Although  this  severity  had  for  its  object  the  good  of  the
Anglo-Saxon  nation,  it  was  far  from  agreeable  to  a  people,
who  at  that  time  more  highly  valued  the  life  of  a  free  man
than  regularity  in  the  administration  of  public  affairs.

Besides,  this  rigour  of  king  Alfred  towards  the  great,  was
not  accompanied  by  affability  towards  the  small;  he  defended
these,  but  he  did  not  like  them ;  their  petitions  and  their  ap-
peals were  distasteful  to  him,  and  his  house  was  closed  against
them.

"  If  any  needed  his  aid,"  says  a  contemporary  writer,  "  whe-

1  Turner,  Hist,  of  the  Anglo-Saxons,  i.  536.
2  Home,  Mirror  of  Magistrates,  p.  296.

TO  878.]  ALFRED.  67

ther  in  a  case  of  personal  necessity,  or  against  the  oppression
of  the  powerful,  he  disdained  to  give  audience  to  their  plaint;
he  gave  no  support  to  the  weak,  regarding  them  as  of  no  con-
sideration whatever."1

Thus,  when,  seven  years  after  his  election,  this  learned  king,
unconsciously  odious,  having  to  repel  a  formidable  invasion  of
the  Danes,  summoned  his  people  to  defend  the  land,  he  was  fear-
fully astonished  to  find  them  indisposed  to  obey  him,  and  even
careless  about  the  common  peril.  It  was  in  vain  that  he  sent
to  each  town  and  hamlet  his  war  messenger,  bearing  an  arrow
and  a  naked  sword,  and  that  he  published  this  ancient  national
proclamation,  to  which  hitherto  no  Saxon,  capable  of  bearing
arms,  had  refused  obedience:  "Let  each  man  that  is  not  a  no-
thing, whether  in  the  town  or  country,  leave  his  house  and
come."2  Very  few  men  on  this  occasion  accepted  the  invi-
tation; and  Alfred  accordingly  found  himself  almost  alone,
surrounded  solely  by  the  small  circle  of  private  friends  who
admired  his  learning,  and  whom  he  sometimes  affected  to  tears
by  reciting  his  works  to  them.3

Favoured  by  this  indifference  of  the  nation  towards  the
chief  whom  itself  had  chosen,  the  enemy  made  rapid  progress.
Alfred,  abandoned  by  his  people,4  in  turn  abandoned  them,
and  quitting,  says  an  ancient  historian,  his  warriors,  his  cap-
tains, and  all  his  people,  fled  to  save  his  life.5  Concealing
himself  as  he  went,  in  the  woods  and  on  the  moors,  he
reached,  on  the  limits  of  the  Cornish  Britons,  the  confluence
of  the  rivers  Tone  and  Parret.  Here,  in  a  peninsula  sur-
rounded by  marshes,  the  Saxon  king  sought  refuge,  under  a
feigned  name,  in  the  hut  of  a  fisherman,  compelled  himself  to
bake  the  bread  which  his  indigent  host  permitted  him  to  share
with  his  family.  Very  few  of  the  people  knew  what  had  be-
come of  him,6  and  the  Danish  army  entered  his  kingdom  with-

1  Asserius  Menevensis,  de  2Elfredi  Gestis;  Camden,  Anglica, Hiber-
iiica,  &c.,  p.  10.

2  Saxon Chronicle, p. 195. Niihing, nequam, nihilum. Augli . . .
niliil  miserius  estimant  quam  hujusmodi  iledecore  vocabuli  notari. (Mat-
tlineus  Paris,  i.  14.)

3  Ethelwerdi,  Hist.,  lib.  iv.  apud  Rer.  Anglic.  Scrip.,  Savile,  p.  847.

*  Asser.  Menev.,  ut  sup.  p.  9.  Johan.  Wallingford,  Chron.  apud  rer.
Aug.  Scrip.,  Gale,  iii.  537.

5  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum,  Vespas.  D.  14.
6  Asser.  ut  sup.  p.  10.
F2 -

68  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  871

out  opposition.  Many  of  the  inhabitants  embarked  from  the
western  coasts  to  seek  an  asylum  in  Gaul,  or  in  Erin,  called
by  the  Saxons,  Ireland;1  the  remainder  submitted  to  pay  tri-
bute, and  to  cultivate  the  land  for  the  Danes.  It  was  not
long  ere  they  found  the  ills  of  conquest  a  thousand  times  worse
than  those  of  Alfred's  rule,  which  in  the  hour  of  suffering  had
appeared  to  them  insupportable,  and  they  regretted  their  for-
mer condition  and  the  despotism  of  a  king  chosen  from  among
themselves.2

On  his  part,  calamity  suggested  to  Alfred  new  thoughts,
and  he  earnestly  meditated  the  means  of  saving  his  people,
and  of  regaining  their  favour.  Fortified  in  his  island  against
hostile  surprise  by  entrenchments  of  wood  and  earth,  he  led
there  the  wild  and  rugged  life  reserved  in  all  conquered
countries  for  those  of  the  conquered  who  will  not  submit  to
slavery,  the  life  of  a  brigand  in  the  woods  and  marshes  and
mountain  gorges.  At  the  head  of  his  friends,  formed  into
bands,  he  pillaged  for  their  support  the  Danes,  enriched  with
Saxon  spoils,  or  failing  these,  the  Saxons  who  obeyed  them  and
acknowledged  them  as  masters.  All  whom  the  Danish  yoke  bur-
dened, all  who  had  become  guilty  of  high  treason  to  the  men  in
power,  by  defending  against  them  their  goods,  their  wives,  or
their  daughters,  came  to  range  themselves  under  the  orders  of
the  unknown  chief  who  refused  to  share  the  general  servitude.
After  a  systematic  warfare  of  stratagems,  surprises,  and  noc-
turnal combats,  the  partisan  leader  resolved  to  avow  himself,
to  make  an  appeal  to  the  whole  western  country,  and  openly
to  attack,  under  the  Anglo- Saxon  standard,  the  Danish  head-
quarters, at  Ethandun,  on  the  borders  of  Wiltshire  and  Somer-
setshire, close  to  a  forest  called  Selwood,  or  the  Great  Forest.4
Before  giving  the  decisive  signal,  Alfred  determined  to  make
a  personal  observation  of  the  Danish  position;  he  entered
their  camp  disguised  as  a  harper,  and  with  his  Saxon  songs
entertained  the  Danish  army,  whose  language  differed  very
little  from  his  own;5  he  visited  every  part  of  the  encamp-
ment, and  on  his  return  to  his  own  quarters  despatched  mes-

1  Ira-land,  Ir-land,  Irorum-terra.  *  Asser.,  ut  sup.

3  Asser.,  nt  sup. Camden,  tit  sup.  p.  9.

*  Near  Frome,  the  environs  of  which  are  still  called  Woodlands.
5  Hist.  Ingulf.  Croylaud,  apud  rer.  Angl.  Script.  (Gale)  i.  20. Chrouo-
logia  rerum  Septentr.,  apnd  Script,  rer.  Dauic,  v.  20.

TO  883.] ALFRED  DEFEATS  THE  DANES.  69

senders  throughout  the  surrounding  country,  appointing  as
the  rendezvous  for  all  Saxons  who  would  arm  and  fight  under
his  command,  a  place  called  Egberthes-stane  (Egbert's-stone),
on  the  eastern  edge  of  Selwood,  and  a  few  miles  from  the
enemy's  camp.

During  three  consecutive  days,  armed  men  from  all  quar-
ters arrived  at  the  spot  indicated,  singly  or  in  small  bands.
Each  new  comer  was  hailed  by  the  name  of  brother,  and  re-
ceived with  cordial  and  tumultuous  joy.  Some  rumours  of
the  movement  reached  the  camp  of  the  Danes;  they  discerned
around  them  symptoms  of  agitation;  but,  as  every  Saxon  was
true  to  his  cause,  their  information  on  the  subject  was  ex-
tremely vague,  and  not  knowing  precisely  where  the  insur-
rection would  commence,  they  took  no  further  steps  than
doubling  their  outposts.  It  was  not  long  ere  they  saw  the
White  Horse,  the  banner  of  Wessex,  bearing  down  upon
them.  Alfred  attacked  their  redoubts  at  Ethandun  in  the
weakest  point,  carried  them,  drove  out  all  the  Danes,  and,  as
the  Saxon  chronicles  expresses  it,  remained  master  of  the
carnage,  (Woel-stow.)

Once  dispersed,  the  Danes  did  not  again  rally,  and  God-
run,  their  king,  did  that  which  was  a  frequent  occurrence
with  people  of  his  nation  under  circumstances  of  peril:  he  pro-
mised that  if  the  conquerors  would  relinquish  their  pursuit  of
him,  he  and  his  people  would  be  baptised,  and  retire  to  their
territories  in  East  Anglia,  and  henceforth  live  there  in  peace.
The  Saxon  king,  who  was  not  in  a  position  to  carry  matters
to  extremity,  accepted  the  proposal;  Godrun,  with  his  cap-
tains, swore  on  a  bracelet  consecrated  to  their  gods1  that  they
would  in  all  good  faith  receive  baptism.  King  Alfred  offi-
ciated as  spiritual  father  to  the  Danish  chief,  who,  putting  the
neophytical  white  robe  over  his  armour,  departed  with  the
wreck  of  his  army  for  the  land  whence  he  had  come,  and
where  he  engaged  for  the  future  to  remain.  The  limits  of
the  two  populations  were  fixed  by  a  definitive  treaty,  sworn
to,  as  its  preamble  set  forth,  by  Alfred,  king;  Godrun,  king;
all  the  Anglo-Saxon  wise-men,  and  all  the  Danish  people.2

1  Saxon  Chronicle,  ed.  Gibson,  p.  83.

2  Wilkins,  Leges  Anglo-Saxon.,  p.  47.  In  several  Latin  instruments,
Alfred  translates  his  title  of  Koning  by  the  word  dux:  e.g  ,  Ego  Elfred
Dux.  apud  Chart,  sub  an.  888.  Lye,  Gloss.  Sax.

70  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  878

These  limits  were,  on  the  south,  the  course  of  the  Thames  as
far  as  the  Lea,  which  discharges  its  waters  into  the  greater
stream  not  far  from  London;  on  the  north  and  east,  the  Ouse
and  the  great  highroad  constructed  by  the  Britons  and  re-
newed by  the  Romans,  called  by  the  Saxons  Wetlenga-street,
the  way  of  the  sons  of  Wetla.1

The  Danes  settled  in  the  towns  of  Mercia,  and  in  the
country  north  of  the  Humber,  did  not  consider  themselves
bound  by  the  agreement  between  Alfred  and  Godrun,  and
the  war  accordingly  still  proceeded  on  the  northern  frontier
of  Wessex.  The  ancient  kingdoms  of  Sussex  (Suthsex,
Suth-Seaxna-land)  and  Kent,  delivered  by  him  from  foreign
servitude,  unanimously  proclaimed  Alfred  their  liberator
and  their  king.  Not  a  single  voice  was  raised  against  him,
either  in  his  own  country,  where  his  former  unpopularity  had
been  effaced  by  his  recent  services,  or  in  those  which  his  pre-
decessors had  by  conquest  subjected  to  their  sway.2  All
those  portions  of  England  which  were  not  occupied  by  the
Danes,  thenceforth  formed  one  single  state;  and  thus  for  ever
disappeared  the  ancient  division  of  the  English  people  into
various  peoples,  corresponding  in  number  to  the  bands  of  emi-
grants which  had  incessantly  come  from  the  islands  and  coasts
of  Germany.3  The  flood  of  Danish  invasion  had  permanently
thrown  down  the  line  of  fortresses  which  had  before  separated
kingdom  from  kingdom,  and  isolation,  frequently  hostile,  was
now  replaced  by  the  union  ever  produced  by  common  misfor-
tunes and  common  hopes.

When  the  general  division  of  Anglo-Saxon  England  into
kingdoms  was  abolished,  the  other  territorial  divisions  as-
sumed an  importance  which  they  had  not  previously  possessed.

It  is  from  this  period  that  historians  begin to  make  men-

1  Strata  qnam  filii  Welthle  regis,  ab  oriental!  mail  usque  ad  occiden-
tale,  per  Angliam  straveruut. (Kogerii  de  Hovedeno,  Annul.,  pars  prior,
apud  rer.  Aug.  Script. (Savile,  p.  432.) Appearance  was  in  favour  of
this  signification,  but  the  greater  probability  is  that  Wetlinghe  street  was
merely  a  Saxon  corruption  of  the  British  Givydelinsarn,  "  the  way  of  the
Gael,"  (Irish,)  an  appellation  very  suitable  to  a  road  leading  from  Dover  to
the  coast  of  Cheshire.

2  Ethelwerdi,  Hist.,  lib.  iii.  apud  rer.  Anglic.  Script.  (Savile)  p.  846.

3  Eald-seax,  vetus  Saxonia, Anglorum  antiqua  patria. (Chron.  Sax.,
ed.  Gibson,  passim.}

TO  885. J  TERRITORIAL  DIVISIONS  OF  ENGLAND.  71

tion  of  skires,  scires,  shires,  or  portions  of  kingdoms,1  and  of
hundreds  and  tithings,  local  circumscriptions,  indeed,  as  old
in  England  as  the  establishment  of  the  Saxons  and  Angles,
but  of  which  little  notice  was  taken,  while  there  prevailed
above  them  a  more  extended  political  circumscription.  The
custom  of  reckoning  families  as  simple  units,  and  then  aggre-
gating them  in  tens  or  hundreds,  to  form  districts  and  hun-
dreds, is  found  amongst  all  peoples  of  Teutonic  origin.  If
this  institution  plays  a  principal  part  in  the  laws  which  bear
the  name  of  Alfred,  it  is  not  that  he  invented  it,  but,  on  the
contrary,  because,  finding  it  deeply  rooted  in  the  soil  of  Eng-
land, and  well  nigh  uniformly  diffused  throughout  all  the
kingdoms  he  peacefully  annexed  to  that  of  Wessex,  it  was
essential  for  him  to  make  it  the  great  basis  of  his  regula-
tions for  the  establishment  of  public  order.  He  himself  in-
stituted neither  tythings  nor  hundreds,  nor  the  municipal
officers  called  tything-men  and  hundred-men,  nor  even  that
form  of  procedure  which,  modified  by  the  action  of  time,  re-
sulted in  trial  by  jury.  All  these  things  existed  among  the
Saxons  and  Angles  prior  to  their  emigration.

The  king  of  Wessex,  after  his  second  accession  to  the
throne,  acquired  such  celebrity  as  a  brave,  and  more  especially
as  a  wise  man,  that  we  scarce  meet  in  history  with  any  trace
of  that  unpopularity  under  which  he  at  first  laboured.  With-
out relaxing  in  his  earnest  care  to  maintain  the  independence
he  had  achieved  for  his  people,  Alfred  found  leisure  for  the
studies  he  still  loved,  but  now  without  preferring  them  to  the
men  for  whom  he  destined  their  fruit.  There  have  come  down
to  us  from  his  pen,  productions  in  verse  and  in  prose,  re-
markable for  their  wealth  of  imagination,  and  for  that  luxu-
rious imagery  which  constitutes  the  distinctive  character  of
the  old  German  literature.2

The  remainder  of  Alfred's  life  was  occupied  in  these  labours,
and  in  war.  The  oath  sworn  to  him  by  the  Danes  of  East
Anglia,  first  on  the  bracelet  of  Odin,  and  then  on  the  cross  of
Christ,  was  broken  by  them  at  the  first  appearance  of  a  fleet

1  Skeren,  schaeren,  scheren ;  in  modern  English, to  share,  shear, cut,
divide.

8  Sharon  Turner,  Hist,  of  the  Anglo-Saxons,  ii.  149  et  seq.

72  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  883

of  pirates  on  their  coasts.  They  saluted  the  new  comers  as
brothers,  and  the  combined  influence  of  the  recollections  thus
awakened,  and  of  national  sympathy,  induced  them  to  quit
the  fields  they  were  cultivating,  and  to  detach  from  the  smoke-
discoloured  beam,  where  it  had  been  peacefully  suspended,
the  weighty  battle-axe,  or  the  club  bristling  with  iron  spikes,
which  they  called  the  Morghen  stiirna  (star  of  the  morning).
Very  soon  afterwards,  in  their  case  violating  no  treaty,  the
Danes  of  the  Humber  marched  towards  the  south,  to  join,
with  the  men  of  East  Anglia,  the  army  of  the  famous  sea-
king,  Hasting,  who  adopting,  as  the  southern  poets  expressed
it,  the  ocean  for  his  home,1  passed  his  life  in  sailing  from  Den-
mark to  the  Orcades,  from  the  Orcades  to  Gaul,  from  Gaul  to
Ireland,  from  Ireland  to  England.

Hasting  found  the  English,  under  king  Alfred,  well  pre-
pared to  receive  him  as  an  enemy,  and  not  as  a  master.  He
was  defeated  in  several  engagements;  a  portion  of  his  routed
army  took  refuge  among  the  Northumbrian  Danes;  another
body  became  incorporated  with  the  Danes  of  East  Anglia;
such  of  them  as  had  realised  any  booty  by  their  sea  and  land
expeditions,  became  citizens  in  the  towns,  and  farmers  in  the
country  districts;  the  poorer  sort  repaired  to  their  ships,  and
followed  their  indefatigable  chief  to  new  enterprises.  They
crossed  the  English  channel  and  ascended  the  Seine.2  Hast-
ing, standing  at  the  prow  of  his  own  vessel,  was  wont  to  col-
lect the  other  vessels  of  his  corsair-fleet  by  the  sound  of  an
ivory  horn,  which  hung  from  his  neck,  and  which  the  inha-
bitants of  Gaul  called  the  thunder.3  On  the  instant  that  this
dreaded  blast  was  heard  in  the  distance,  the  Gaulish  serf
quitted  the  field  on  which  he  was  employing  his  compulsory
labours,  and  fled,  with  his  little  property,  to  the  depths  of  the
neighbouring  forests;  while  his  master,  the  noble  Frank,
filled  with  equal  terror,  raised  the  drawbridge  of  his  strong-
hold, hastened  to  the  donjon  to  examine  the  state  of  the

1  Ermoldi  Nigelli,  Carmen;  apud  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  \'i.  50.

2  Asser.  Menev.,  ut  sup.  iii.  172.

3  Quo  dux  agnito,  tubara  chirneam  tonitruum  nuncupalam  dedit  monacho,
hsec  illi  addens,ut  suis  in  praedam  exeuutibus  ea  beccinaret. (Chron.  Sanct.
Flor.  apud  Mem.  pour  servir  de  preuves  a  1'histoire  eccles.  et  civile  de  Bre-
tagne,  i.  ]19.

TO  934.]  ACCESSION OF ETHELSTAN.  73

armoury,  and  buried  the  money-tribute  he  had  been  levying
from  the  surrounding  district.1

On  the  death  of  the  good  king  Alfred,  his  son  Edward,2
who  had  distinguished  himself  in  the  war  against  Hasting,
was  elected  by  the  Anglo-Saxon  chieftains  and  wise  men  to
succeed  him.  Ethelwald,3  a  son  of  Ethelred,  Alfred's  elder  bro-
ther and  predecessor,  was  daring  enough  to  protest,  in  the
name  of  his  hereditary  rights,  against  the  national  choice.
This  pretension  was  not  only  rejected;  it  was  regarded  as  an
outrage  upon  the  laws  of  the  land,  and  the  great  council  pro-
nounced the  banishment  of  the  offender,  who,  instead  of  obey-
ing the  sentence  thus  legally  passed  upon  him,  threw  himself,
with  some  partisans,  into  the  town  of  Wimborne,  on  the  south-
western coast,  swearing  that  he  would  either  maintain  his
position  there  or  die.4  But  he  did  not  keep  his  oath  :  on
the  approach  of  the  English  army,  he  fled  without  a  blow,
and,  taking  refuge  with  the  Northumbrian  Danes,  turned
pagan  and  pirate.  The  Danes  having,  some  time  after,
made  him  leader  of  an  expedition  against  his  countrymen,
Ethelwald  invaded  the  Anglo-Saxon  territory,  but  was  de-
feated and  killed  in  the  first  encounter.  Hereupon  king  Ed-
ward assumed  the  offensive  against  the  Danes,  expelled  them
from  the  eastern  coast,  from  the  mouth  of  the  Thames  to
Boston  Wash,  and  shut  them  up  in  their  northern  provinces
by  aline  of  fortresses,  erected  along  the  banks  of  the  Humber.5
His  successor,  Ethelstan,6  passed  that  river,  took  York,  and
compelled  the  inhabitants  of  Scandinavian  race  to  swear,
in  the  customary  form,  that  they  would  do  all  that  he  should
command  them  to  do.7  One  of  the  Danish  chiefs  was  honour-
ably received  in  the  palace  of  the  Saxon  king,  and  admitted
to  his  table;  but,  four  days  of  this  peaceful  life  sufficed  to
disgust  him  :  he  fled  to  the  sea-coast,  and  embarked  in  a>

1  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  de  Gcst.  reg.  Anglic.,  ii«  apud  rer.  Anglic.  Script.
(Savile)  43.

-  Ead-weard. Ed,  happy,  fortunate ;  weard,  keeper,  guardian.

3  JEthel-weald. Ethel,  noble ;  weald,  wald,  wait,  powerful,  governing.

*  Chi'ou.  Sax.,  ed.  Gibson,  100. Henric.  Huntiud.,  lib.  v.  tit  sup.

5  Chron.  Sax.,  100-9.

•  ^Ethelstan,  the  Saxon  superlative  of  ethel.
7  Chron.  Sax.,  109.

74  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  935

pirate  ship,  as  incapable  as  a  fish,  says  an  ancient  historian,
of  living  out  of  water.1

The  English  array  advanced  to  the  Tweed,  and  Northum-
berland was  annexed  to  the  territories  of  Ethelstan,  who  was
thus  the  first  king  that  ever  reigned  over  all  England.  In
the  ardour  of  this  triumph,  the  Anglo-Saxons  overpassed
their  ancient  northern  limit,  and  perturbated  by  an  invasion
the  descendants  of  the  Picts  and  Scots,  and  the  tribe  of
ancient  Britons  who  inhabited  the  valley  of  the  Clyde.  An
offensive  league  was  immediately  formed  between  these
nations,  and  the  Danes  arriving  from  beyond  seas  to  deliver
their  countrymen  from  the  domination  of  the  men  of  the
south.  Olaf,  son  of  Sithrik,  last  Danish  king  of  Northumber-
land, was  named  generalissimo  of  this  confederation,  which
comprised  within  its  ranks  the  men  of  the  Baltic,  the  Danes
of  the  Orcades,  the  Galls  or  Gael  of  the  Hebrides,  armed
with  the  long  two-handed  sword  which  they  called  glay-more
or  the  great  sword,  the  Galls  of  the  Grampians,  and  the
Cambrians  of  Dumbarton  and  Galloway  (latine  Galwidia),
bearing  long,  slight  pikes.  The  two  armies  met  north  of  the
Humber,  at  a  place  called  in  Saxon  Brunanburgh,  or  the
town  of  fountains  (Bamborough).  Victory  declared  for  the
English,  who  compelled  the  wreck  of  the  confederates  to
make  a  painful  retreat  to  their  ships,  their  islands,  and  their
mountains.  The  conquerors  named  this  day  the  Day  of  the
Great  Fight,2  and  celebrated  it  in  national  songs,  fragments
of  which  have  come  down  to  us.

"  The  king  Ethelstan,  chief  of  chiefs,  he  who  bestows  the
collar  of  honour  on  the  brave,  and  his  brother,  the  noble  Ed-
mund, fought  at  Brunanburgh  with  the  edge  of  the  sword.
They  clove  the  wall  of  the  bucklers,  they  threw  down  the
warriors  of  renown,  the  race  of  the  Scots,  and  the  men  of  the
ships.

"  Olaf  fled  with  the  petty  remnant  of  his  people,  and  wept
upon  the  waters.  The  foreigner  speaks  not  of  this  battle,
seated  at  his  fire-side,  with  his  family;  for  their  relations  fell
in  it,  and  their  friends  returned  not  from  it.  The  kings  of
the  north,  in  their  council-halls,  will  lament  that  their  war-

1  Wiilelm.  Mahns.,  ut  sup.  lib.  ii. Hist.  Ingulf.  Croyland,  ut  sup,  i-  29.
8  Ethelwerdi,  Hist.,  lib.  iii.  ut  sup.  Wiilelm.  Malms.,  ut  svp.  lib.  ii. Hist.
Ingulf.  Croyland,  ut  sup.

TO  946.]  SUCCESSES OF ETI1ELSTAN.  75

riors  ventured  to  play  the  game  of  carnage  with,  the  sons  of
Edward.

"  King  Ethelstan  and  his  brother  Edmund  returned  to  the
land  of  Wessex.  They  left  behind  them  the  raven  feasting
on  corses,  the  black  raven  with  the  pointed  beak,  and  the
toad  with  hoarse  voice,  and  the  eagle  famishing  for  flesh,  and
the  voracious  kites,  and  the  yellow  wolf  of  the  woods.

"  .Never  was  there  greater  carnage  in  this  island,  never  did
more  men  perish  by  the  edge  of  the  sword,  since  the  day
when  the  Saxons  and  Angles  came  from  the  east  across  the
ocean,  and  entering  Britain,  noble  war-makers,  vanquished
the  Welsh,1  and  took  possession  of  the  country."2

Ethelstan  made  the  Cambrians  of  the  south  pay  dearly  for
the  succour  which  their  northern  brethren  had  afforded  to  the
enemy;  he  ravaged  the  territory  of  the  Welsh,  and  imposed
tribute  upon  them;  the  king  of  Aberfraw,  as  the  old  instru-
ments express  it,  paid  to  the  king  of  London  tribute  in  money,
in  oxen,  in  falcons,  and  in  dogs  of  chace.3  The  Cornish
Britons,  expelled  from  the  city  of  Exeter,  which  hitherto  they
had  inhabited  conjointly  with  the  English,4  were  driven  beyond
the  Tamar,  which  then  became,  as  it  still  continues,  the  boun-
dary of  Cornwall.  Ethelstan  subjected  to  his  power,  by
war  or  by  policy,  all  the  populations  of  various  origin  which
inhabited  the  Isle  of  Britain.5  He  appointed  as  governor  of
the  Northumbrian  Anglo-Danes,  a  Norwegian,  Erik,  son  of
Harold,  a  veteran  pirate,  who  turned  Christian  to  obtain  this
command.

On  the  day  of  his  baptism,  he  swore  to  maintain  and  defend
Northumberland  against  all  pirates  and  pagans,  Danes  or
otherwise;0  from  a  sea-king  he  became  a  provincial  king,  a
folk-king,  as  the  Scandinavians  expressed  it.7  But  this  too

1  Weal,  Weallise,  Welsch,  is  the  general  name  given  by  the  Teutons  to
the  men  of  Celtic  or  Boman  race.

2  Chron.  Sax.  (Gibson)  11'2— 14. See  Appendix,  No.  V.
3  Laws  of  Howell  Dda.,  lib.  iii.  cap.  11 ;  Leges  Wallicse  (Wotton)  p.  199.

4  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lit  sup.  lib.  ii.

5  Charta  Edgari  regis,  apud  Dugdale,  Monasticon  Anglicanum,  i.  140.
In  an  extant  charter  of  Ethelstan  he  is  called :  Totius  Albionis  imperator,
Augustus,  rex  et  basileus.  Totius  Britanniae  Cunctarumque  nationum  quae
infra  earn  includuntur  imperator  et  dominus.

6  Saga  Haconaz  goda,  cap.  iii ;  Snone's  Heimskringla,  i.  127.
7  Theod-kyning,  fylkes-kymng,  folkes-kyning.

76  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D.  955

pacific  dignity  soon  ceased  to  please,  and  he  returned  to  his
ships.  After  some  years'  absence,  he  revisited  the  Northum-
brians, who  received  him  joyfully,  and  again  adopted  him  as
their  chief,  without  the  sanction  of  king  Edred,1  Ethelstan's
successor.  This  king  accordingly  marched  against  them,  and
compelled  them  to  abandon  Erik,  who,  in  his  turn,  in  revenge
for  their  desertion,  attacked  them,  by  the  aid  of  five  pirate-
bands  from  Denmark,  the  Orcades  and  the  Hebrides.  He
fell  in  the  first  encounter,  and  with  him  the  five  sea-kings
his  allies.2  His  death,  glorious  in  the  eyes  of  a  Scandinavian,
was  celebrated  by  the  skalds  or  northern  poets,  who,  paying
no  heed  to  the  baptism  which  Erik  had  received  from  the
English,  placed  him  in  a  far  different  paradise  from  that  of
the  Christians.

"  I  have  dreamt  a  dream,"  chants  the  panegyrist  of  the
pirate;  "  Methought  I  was  at  daybreak  in  the  hall  of  Wal-
halla,3  preparing  all  things  for  the  reception  of  the  men
killed  in  battles.

"  I  awakened  the  heroes  from  their  sleep ;  I  asked  them  to
rise,  to  arrange  the  seats  and  the  drinking  cups,  as  for  the
coming  of  a  king.

"  *  What  means  all  this  noise?'  cried  Braghi;4  '  why  are  so
many  men  in  motion,  and  why  all  this  ordering  of  seats?'
'It  is  because  Erik  is  on  his  way  to  us,'  replied  Odin;  'I
await  him  with  joy.  Let  some  go  forth  to  meet  him.'

"  *  How  is  it  that  his  coming  pleases  thee  more  than  the
coming  of  any  other  king?' — '  Because  in  more  battle-fields
has  his  sword  been  red  with  blood;  because  in  more  places  has
his  ensanguined  spear  diffused  terror.'

"  'I  salute  thee,  Erik,  brave  warrior!  enter;  thrice  wel-
come art  thou  to  this  abode.  Say,  what  kings  accompany
thee;  how  many  come  with  thee  from  the  combat?'

"'Five  kings  accompany  me,'  replied  Erik;  'I  am  the
sixth.'  "5

The  territory  of  the  Northumbrians  had  now  lost  that  title
of  kingdom  which  it  had  hitherto  preserved,  and  was  divided

1  Ed-red,  fortunate  councillor.
2  Hist,  regum  Norveg.  conscripta  a  Suorro  Sturlae  filio,  i.  128.

3  The  palace  of  the  dead.

4  The  Scandinavian  god  of  poetry  and  eloquence.
5  Torfaej,  Hist.  rer.  Norvey.,  pars  ii.  lib.  iv.  cap.  x.  p.  197.

TO  975.]  TITLES OF MAGISTRATES.  77

out  into  provinces.  The  district  between  the  Hurnber  and
the  Tees  was  called  Yorkshire, — in  Saxon,  Everwicshire.
The  rest  of  the  country,  as  far  as  the  Tweed,  retained  the
general  name  of  Northumbria,  Northan-humbra-land,  though
with  several  local  circumscriptions,  such  as  the  land  of  the
Cambrians,  Cumbra-land,  next  to  the  Solw ay  Firth;  the  land
of  the  Western  Mountains,  Westmoringa-land ;  and  lastly,
Northumberland  proper,  along  the  coast  of  the  eastern  sea,
between  the  rivers  Tyne  and  Tweed.  The  Northumbrian
chiefs,  in  passing  under  the  supreme  authority  of  the  Anglo-
Saxon  kings,  retained  the  Danish  title  they  had  borne  since
the  invasion;  they  continued  to  be  called  iarls,  or  eorls  ac-
cording to  the  Saxon  orthography  of  the  word.  The  original
signification  of  the  term  is  no  longer  known,  but  the  Scandi-
navians applied  it  to  every  description  of  commander,  mili-
tary or  civil,  who  acted  as  lieutenant  of  the  supreme  chief,  the
kining  or  king.  By  degrees  the  Anglo-Saxons  introduced  their
new  title  into  their  southern  and  western  territories,  qualifying
by  it  the  magistrates  to  whom  was  delegated  the  government
of  the  larger  provinces,  formerly  called  kingdoms,  and  the
supremacy  over  all  the  local  magistrates,  over  the  administra-
tors of  shires,  scire-gerefas,  shire-reeves,  sheriff's,  over  the
administrators  of  towns,  port  gerefas,  port  reeves,  and  over
the  ealdermen,  aldermen.  The  latter  title,  before  the  in-
troduction of  that  of  eorl,  had  been  the  generic  appellation
of  the  higher  Anglo-Saxon  magistracies;  it  thenceforward
descended  a  step,  and  was  only  applied  to  inferior  jurisdictions
and  to  municipal  dignitaries.

Most  of  the  new  Danish  citizens  of  England  turned  Chris-
tians in  order  to  remove  from  themselves  one  marked  indica-
tion of  alienship.  Several,  in  consideration  of  grants  of  land,
assumed  the  title  and  the  employment  of  perpetual  defenders  of
the  church,  of  that  church  whose  edifices,  before,  they  had  with
such  peculiar  delight  destroyed  and  burned.  Some  of  them
even  entered  religious  orders,  and  professed  a  rigid  and
sombre  austerity,  a  reminiscence  under  another  form,  of  the
rugged,  though  free,  condition  of  their  former  life.1

In  the  revolution  which  combined  all  England,  from  the

1  Summus  pontifex  Odo,  vir  ....  grandaevitatis  maturitate  ....  fultus
et  omnium  iniquitatum  inflexibilis  adversarius.  (Osbernus,  Vita  Odoni
Archiep.  Cantuar.  ;  Anglia  Sacra,  ii.  84.)

78  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A-D'  9*5

Tweed  to  Cape  Cornwall,  in  one  sole  and  undivided  body  poli-
tic, the  power  of  the  kings,  now  monarchs,  acquired  force  with
extension,  and  became,  for  each  of  the  populations  thus  united
together,  more  oppressive  than  the  ancient  sway  of  its  own
peculiar  kings  had  been.  The  association  of  the  Anglo-
Danish  provinces  with  the  Anglo-Saxon  provinces  necessarily
involved  the  latter  to  a  certain  extent  in  the  strict  and  dis-
trustful system  which  weighed  upon  the  former,  as  peopled
with  foreigners  who  were  subjects  against  their  will.  The
same  kings,  exercising  concurrently  in  the  north  the  right  of
conquest,  in  the  south  that  of  legitimate  sovereignty,  soon
yielded  to  the  tendency  to  confound  these  two  characters  of
their  power,  and  to  make  but  a  very  slight  distinction  be-
tween the  Anglo-Dane  and  the  Anglo-Saxon,  the  foreigner
and  the  native,  the  subjugated  and  the  subject.  They  be-
gan to  entertain  an  exaggerated  idea  of  themselves  and  of  their
power;  they  surrounded  themselves  with  a  pomp  hitherto
unknown;  they  ceased  to  be  popular  like  their  predecessors,
who,  invoking  the  people  as  councillor  in  all  things,1  ever
found  the  people  ready  to  do  that  which  itself  had  counselled.
Their  conduct  created  new  sources  of  weakness  for  England.
Great  as  she  henceforth  seemed  to  be,  under  chiefs  whose
titles  of  honour  occupied  several  lines,2  she  was  in  reality  less
capable  of  resisting  an  external  enemy  than  at  the  period
when,  with  few  provinces,  but  these  governed  alike  without
display  and  without  despotism,  she  saw  inscribed  at  the  head
of  her  national  laws  these  simple  words: — "I,  Alfred,  king  of
the  West  Saxons."

The  Danish  inhabitants  of  England,  unwilling  subjects  of
kings  of  foreign  race,  had  their  eyes  constantly  directed  to-
wards the  sea,  in  the  hope  that  some  favourable  breeze
would  bring  them  liberators  and  leaders  from  their  old
country.  They  had  not  long  to  wait;  in  the  reign  of
Ethelred,  son  of  Edgard,  the  descents  of  the  Northmen  upon
Britain,  which  had  never  been  wholly  discontinued,  suddenly
assumed  a  very  menacing  character.  Seven  war-ships  ap-
peared off  the  coast  of  Kent,  and  their  crews  pillaged  the  isle

1  Raede,  rfledegifan,  gersednes. See  the  preambles  of  the  Anglo  Saxon
laws;  Hickes'  Thesaurus  linguarum  septentrionalium,  ii,  in  fate.
2  Dugdale,  Monast.  Anglic.,  i.  140.

TO 1002.]  RE-APPEARANCE OF THE DANES.  79

of  Thanet;  three  more  vessels,  sailing  from  the  south,  ravaged
the  vicinity  of  Southampton,  while  other  pirate  troops  landed
on  the  eastern  coast,  and  took  up  positions  on  several  points.
The  alarm  extended  itself  to  London:  Ethelred  immediately
convoked  the  great  national  council;  but,  under  this  supine
and  ostentatious  monarch,  the  assembly  was  composed  of
bishops  and  courtiers  more  disposed  to  flatter  the  prince  and
encourage  his  indolence,  than  to  give  him  sound  advice.1
Conforming  to  the  king's  aversion  for  anything  like  prompt
or  energetic  measures,  they  thought  they  could  get  rid  of  the
Danes  by  offering  them  a  sum  equivalent  to  the  gain  which
these  pirates  had  calculated  upon  realizing  by  their  invasion
of  England.

There  existed,  under  the  name  of  Dane-money,  Dane-
gheldy2  an  impost  of  twelvepence  upon  every  hide  of  land
throughout  the  country,  levied  from  time  to  time  for  the  pay-
ment of  the  troops  who  guarded  the  coasts  against  the  Scan-
dinavian corsairs.3  This  money  the  council  proposed  to  give
the  new  invaders,  in  the  shape  of  a  tribute:  the  offer  was
accepted,  and  the  first  payment,  amounting  to  £10,000,  re-
ceived, on  condition  of  their  forthwith  quitting  England.
They  departed  accordingly,  but  only  to  return  in  greater
numbers,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  larger  sum.  Their
fleet  sailed  up  the  Humber,  devastating  both  banks.  The
Saxon  inhabitants  of  the  adjacent  provinces  ran  in  arms  to
give  the  enemy  battle;  but  on  the  eve  of  combat,  three  of
their  leaders,  Danes  by  origin,  betrayed  them,  and  passed
over  to  the  foe.  Every  Northumbrian  Dane  abandoned  his
new  faith  and  his  new  fidelity,  and  made  close  friendship  and
alliance  with  the  pagan  pirates  from  the  Baltic.4

The  breezes  of  spring  wafted  up  the  Thame  a  fleet  of
eighty  war- ships,  commanded  by  two  kings,  Olaf  of  Norway,
and  Swen  of  Denmark,5  the  latter  of  whom,  after  having
received  baptism,  had  returned  to  the  worship  of  Odin.  The

1  Willt'lm.  Malms.,  lit  siq).  lib.  ii.  Rex  ....  imbellis  (jiiia  imbecillis,  mo-
nachum  potius  quam  militem  actione  preetendebat.  (Osbernus,  Vita  S.
Elphcgi ;  Anglia  Sacra,  ii.  131.)

2  Dane-geld,  dcenc-qeold  ;  in  Latin,  danegeldum.

3  Wilkins,  Leges  Edwardi,  p.  198.

4  Ingulf,  itt  sup.  i.  55;  Job.  Bromt .  Chron.,  tit  sup.  i.  col.  879  ;  Eadmeri,
Hist,  lib.  i.  p.  3  &  4.  ut  sup. ;  Willelm.  Malmes.,  ut  sup.  lib.  ii.

5  Sven,  sweinn,  sweyn,  swayn,  a  young  man. See  Ihre's  Glossary.

80  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1002

two  kings,  in  token  of  possession,  having  planted  one  lance
on  the  shore  of  the  Thames,  and  thrown  another  into
the  current  of  the  first  river  they  crossed  after  landing,
marched,  says  an  old  historian,  escorted  by  their  wonted
leaders,  fire  and  sword.1  Ethelred,  whose  consciousness  of
his  unpopularity  made  him  fear  to  assemble  an  army,2  once
more  proposed  to  give  money  to  the  enemy,  on  condition  of
their  retiring  in  peace;  they  demanded  eighty  thousand
pounds,  which  the  king  immediately  paid  them,  satisfied  with
their  promises  and  with  the  conversion  of  a  Danish  chief,
who  received  in  Winchester  cathedral,  amid  vast  ceremony,
that  baptism  which  one  of  the  Danes  present  on  the  occasion
contemptuously  declared  that  he  had  already  received  twenty
times,  without  the  slightest  effect.3

The  truce  granted  by  the  invaders  was  far  from  being  a
peaceful  truce;  in  the  vicinity  of  their  cantonments  they
outraged  the  women  and  slew  the  men.4  Their  insolence  and
their  excesses  raising  the  indignation  of  the  natives  to  the
highest  point,  brought  about,  ere  long,  one  of  those  acts  of
national  vengeance  which  it  is  alike  difficult  to  condemn  or  to
justify,  because  a  noble  instinct,  the  hatred  of  oppression,  is
mixed  up  in  them  with  the  indulgence  of  atrocious  passions.
In  pursuance  of  a  vast  conspiracy,  formed  under  the  eyes  and
with  the  connivance  of  the  royal  magistrates  and  officers,  all
the  Danes  of  the  late  invasion,  men,  women,  and  children,
were,  in  the  same  hour  of  the  same  day,  attacked  and  killed
in  their  quarters,  by  their  hosts  and  neighbours.  This  mas-
sacre, which  excited  general  attention,  and  the  odious  cir-
cumstances of  which  afterwards  served  as  a  pretext  for  the
enemies  of  the  English  nation,  took  place  on  St.  Brice's  day.
in  the  year  1003.  It  did  not  extend  to  the  northern  and
eastern  provinces,  where  the  Danes,  longer  established,  and
become  cultivators  or  citizens,  formed  the  majority  of  the  po-
pulation; but  all  the  recent  invaders,  with  very  few  excep-
tions, perished,  and  among  them  a  sister  of  the  king  of  Den-
mark. To  avenge  this  massacre,  and  to  punish  what  he

1  Johan.  Bromt.,  nt  sup.  i.  col.  883.

2  Willelm.  Malnaes.,  ut  sup.  lib.  ii.

3  Monachal  Sancti  Galli,  apud  Script,  rer  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  v.  134..—
Bromton,  ut  sup.  i.  col.  880.— Chron.  Sax.  (Gibson)  p.  127.

*  Mattb.  Westmonast. Florcs  Hist.  (Frauckfort,  1001)  p.  200.

TO 1004.]  INVASION OF THE DANES.  81

called  the  treason  of  the  English  people,  king  Swen  assembled
an  army  far  more  numerous  than  the  first,  and  in  which,  if
we  are  to  credit  the  ancient  historians,  there  was  not  a  single
slave,  or  even  freed  man,  nor  an  old  man,  every  soldier  in  it
being  noble,  or  a  free  man,  the  son  of  a  free  man,  and  in  the
full  vigour  of  life.1

This  army  embarked  in  tall  ships,  each  of  which  had  a  dis-
tinctive badge  designating  its  commander.  Some  had  at  the
prow  figures  of  lions,  bulls,  dolphins,  men,  in  gilt  copper;
others  bore  at  their  mast-head  birds  spreading  their  wings
and  turning  with  the  wind;  the  sides  of  the  ships  were
painted  in  various  colours,  and  the  bucklers  of  polished  steel
were  suspended  along  them  in  rows.2  The  king's  own  ship
had  the  elongated  form  of  a  serpent,  the  prow  forming  its
head,  the  twisted  stern  its  tail;  it  was  on  this  account  called
the  Great  Dragon.3  On  landing  in  England,  the  Danes,  fall-
ing into  battalions,  unfurled  a  mystic  standard,  termed  by
them  the  Raven.  It  was  a  flag  of  white  silk,  in  the  centre  of
which  appeared  the  black  figure  of  a  raven,  with  open  beak
and  outspread  wings;  three  of  king  S wen's  sisters  had  worked
it  in  one  night,  accompanying  their  labour  with  magic  songs
and  gestures.4  This  banner,  which,  according  to  the  super-
stitious ideas  of  the  Scandinavians,  was  a  certain  pledge  of
victory,  augmented  the  ardour  and  confidence  of  the  invaders.
In  every  place  they  visited  on  their  way,  writes  an  old  his-
torian, they  gaily  ate  the  repast  unwillingly  prepared  for
them,  and  on  departing,  slew  the  host  and  burned  his  house.3

They  seized  all  the  horses  they  could  find,  and,  according
to  the  tactics  of  their  predecessors,  converting  themselves
into  cavalry,  rapidly  traversed  the  country,  and,  presenting
themselves  in  directions  where  they  were  wholly  unexpected,
surprised  castles  and  towns,  one  after  another.  In  a  very
short  time  they  had  conquered  all  the  south-eastern  provinces,
from  the  mouth  of  the  Ouse  to  Spithead.  King  Ethelred,
who  was  never  prepared  to  fight,  could  devise  no  other  expe-
dient than  to  purchase  truces  of  a  few  days  each,  for  various

1  Emrnje  reginae  Encomion,  apitd  Script,  rer.  Normann.  p.  168.  Saxon
Chron.  p.  127.

2  Emmae  Encomion,  ut  sup.  p.  160.

3  Saga  af  Haraldi  Hardvada,  cap.  Ixi. Snorre's  Heimskringla,  iii.  118.
*  Emmae  Encom.,  p.  170.  5  Henrici  Huntiud.,  ut  sup.  lib.  vi.  800.

VOL.  I.  G

82  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1004

suras  of  money — a  temporizing  policy,  which  compelled  him
to  burden  the  people  with  constantly  increasing  taxes.1  Thus
the  English  who  had  the  good  fortune  to  escape  being  pil-
laged by  the  Danes,  could  not  avoid  the  oppressive  exactions
of  their  own  king:  so  that,  under  the  one  form  if  not  under
the  other,  they  were  sure  to  be  stripped  of  all  they  possessed.

While  the  administrators  of  England  thus  made  their  das-
tardly bargains  with  the  foreign  foe  at  the  expense  of  the
people,  there  was  one  man  found  who,  a  rich  and  powerful
magnate  of  the  land,  preferred  death  to  giving  a  sanction  to
such  conduct  by  his  own  example.  This  was  the  archbishop
of  Canterbury,  Elfeg.  A  prisoner  of  the  Danes,  on  the  cap-
ture of  his  metropolitan  city,  and  dragged  among  their  bag-
gage from  encampment  to  encampment,  he  remained  day
after  day  in  chains,  without  even  uttering  the  word  ransom.
The  Danes,  first  breaking  this  silence,  offered  to  restore
their  captive  to  liberty  on  condition  of  his  paying  them  three
thousand  gold  pieces,  and  counselling  king  Ethelred  to  give
them  four  times  that  amount  in  addition.  "  I  have  no  money
of  my  own,"  replied  the  archbishop;  "and  I  will  not  deprive
my  ecclesiastical  territory  of  one  penny  on  my  account;  neither
will  I  counsel  my  sovereign  aught  that  is  contrary  to  the
honour  of  my  country."2  The  Danes,  more  eager  for  money
than  for  the  archbishop's  blood,  pressed  their  demand.  "  You
urge  me  in  vain,"  replied  Elfeg;  "I  am  not  one  who  will  fur-
nish Christian  flesh  for  pagan  teeth  to  tear,  and  it  were  doing
so  to  give  up  to  you  that  which  my  poor  people  have  been
saving  for  their  sustenance."3

The  Danes  at  length  lost  all  patience,  and  one  day  that
they  had  been  drinking  copiously  of  wine  just  brought  them
from  the  south,  they  bethought  themselves  of  trying  the  arch-
bishop, by  way  of  pastime.  He  was  led  bound,  and  seated
upon  a  miserable  horse,  to  the  centre  of  the  encampment,
which  served  alike  for  the  council-chamber,  the  judgment-seat,
and  the  banqueting -hall;  here  the  chiefs  and  the  more  dis-
tinguished warriors  were  seated  in  a  circle,  on  great  stones;
close  by  was  a  heap  of  the  bones,  the  jaws  and  horns  of  the

1  Ingulf.,  ut  sup.  i.  5fi. Willelm.  Malmes.,  ut  sup.  lib.  ii.  69.

2  Osbernus,  Vita  8.  Elphegi.,  ut  sup.  p.  138.

3  LI.  ib.  Eadmeri.,  ut  sup.  lib.  i.  p.  4. — Ingulf.,  ut  sup.  p.  57. — Bromton,
ut  sup.  i.  col.  889.

TO 1012.]  MURDER OF ELFEG.  83

oxen  consumed  at  the  recent  repast.1  As  soon  as  the  Saxon
prelate  was  in  the  midst  of  the  circle,  a  great  cry  arose  from
all  around  :  "  Gold,  bishop,  gold,  or  we  will  cause  thee  play  a
game  shall  make  thee  noted  through  the  world."2  Elfeg  calmly
replied:  "I  offer  you  the  gold  of  wisdom,  that  you  renounce
your  superstitions  and  be  converts  to  the  true  God;  if  you
heed  not  this  counsel,  know  that  you  shall  perish  as  Sodom,
and  shall  take  no  root  in  this  land."  At  these  words,  which
they  regarded  as  a  menace  to  themselves  and  an  insult  to  their
religion,  the  mock  judges  rose  furiously  from  their  seats,  and
rushing  upon  the  archbishop,  beat  him  to  the  earth  with  the
backs  of  their  hatchets;  several  of  them  then  ran  to  the  heap
of  bones,  and  taking  up  some  of  the  largest,  rained  a  deluge  of
blows  upon  the  prostrate  Saxon.  The  archbishop,  having
fruitlessly  endeavoured  to  kneel,  in  order  to  offer  up  a  last
prayer,  fell  forward  in  a  senseless  condition;  his  sufferings
were  terminated  by  the  barbarous  compassion  of  a  soldier,
whom  he  had  converted  and  baptised  on  the  previous  day,  and
who  now  split  his  skull  with  his  axe.  The  murderers  at  first
intended  to  throw  the  corpse  into  a  neighbouring  marsh;  but
the  Anglo-Saxons,  who  honoured  Elfeg  as  a  martyr  for
Christ's  and  for  his  country's  sake,  purchased  the  bodv  at  a
heavy  cost,  and  buried  it  at  London.3

Meantime  king  Ethelred  practised  without  any  scruple  that
which  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  at  the  sacrifice  of  his
life,  had  refused  to  counsel  him  to  do.  One  day  his  collectors
of  taxes  levied  the  tribute  for  the  Danes;  next  day  the
Danes  themselves  came  and  exacted  the  tribute  over  again,
on  their  own  account.4  On  their  departure,  the  royal  agents
again  presented  themselves,  and  treated  the  wretched
people  more  harshly  than  before,  reproaching  them  as
traitors  and  as  purveyors  for  the  enemy.5  The  real  pur-
veyor for  the  Danes,  Ethelred,  at  length  exhausted  the  pa-
tience of  the  people  who  had  made  him  king  for  the  common
defence.  Hard  to  bear  as  foreign  domination  might  be,  it
was  deemed  better  to  undergo  it  at  once,  than  to  await,  amid
constant  suffering,  under  a  king  alike  without  valour  and

1  Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  142.  2  Osbernus,  m  sup.  p.  140.

3  Chron.  Sax.,  p.  142. — Job.  Bromton,  ut  sup.  i.  col.  890,  1.

4  Regii  exactores.  Ingulf.,  ut  sup.  p.  57.  5  Ib.

G2

84  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1012

without  virtue,  the  moment  when,  instead  of  subjection,  there
would  be  slavery.  Several  of  the  midland  provinces  submitted
spontaneously  to  the  Danes;  Oxford  and  Winchester  soon
afterwards  opened  their  gates,  and  Swen,  advancing  through
the  western  countries  as  far  as  the  Bristol  Channel,  assumed,
without  opposition,  the  title  of  king  of  all  England.1  Terror-
struck  at  finding  himself  thus  forsaken,  Ethelred  fled  to  the
Isle  of  Wight,  and  thence  passed  over  into  Gaul,  to  seek  an
asylum  with  his  wife's  brother,  the  chief  of  one  of  the  western
provinces,  adjoining  the  mouth  of  the  Seine.2

In  wedding  a  foreigner,  Ethelred  had  conceived  the  hope
of  obtaining  from  the  powerful  relations  of  his  wife  aid
against  the  Danes;  but  he  was  deceived  in  this  expectation.
The  union,  which  was  to  have  procured  defenders  for  Eng-
land,3 had  only  the  effect  of  bringing  over  from  Gaul  infinite
solicitors  for  employment,  greedy  seekers  of  money  and  dig-
nities. When  the  invasion  came,  it  was  found  that  all  the
towns  which  the  weak  monarch  had  entrusted  to  these
foreigners  were  the  first  surrendered  to  the  Danes.4  By  a
singular  chance,  the  Gaulish  prince  whose  alliance  the  king
of  England  had  sought  as  a  support  in  the  struggle  against
the  power  of  Scandinavia,  was  himself  of  Scandinavian  origin,
the  son  of  an  old  pirate  chief  who  had  conquered  the  Gaulish
province  he  afterwards  bequeathed  as  an  inheritance  to  his
posterity,  had  established  in  it  his  corsair  comrades,  and  had,
in  common  with  them,  formed  of  it  a  state  which,  after  their
own  national  appellation,  he  called  Normandy,  or  the  land  of
the  Northmen.5

Normandy  on  the  south  adjoined  Brittany,  a  state  founded,
as  we  have  seen,  by  refugees  from  Britain;  and  on  the  east,
the  extensive  country  from  which  it  had  been  severed,
northern  Gaul,  which,  since  the  settlement  in  it  of  the
Franks,  had  borne  the  new  name  of  France.  The  descend-

1  Rex  pleuarins  ;  fullt  cynlng. (Cliron.  Sax.  143.)

2  Il>.  144.— Willelm.  Malmes.,  ui sup.  p.  69. Henric.  Huntind.,  itt  sup.
lib.  vi.  ;M>2.

3  Ad  tuitionem  et  mnjorem  securitatem  regni  sui.  (Job.  Bromt.,  ut  sun
col.  883.)

1  ^Hen.  Hunt.,  itt  sup. Roger  de  Hoveden,  Annul,  pars  prior,  (Savile,)

5  Script,  rer  Norman.,  p.  7.

TO 1013.]  THE FRANKS.  85

ants  of  these  German  emigrants  were  still,  after  a  lapse  of
five  centuries,  separated  from  the  indigenous  Gauls,  less  by
manners  and  ideas  than  by  social  condition.  It  was  in  this
profoundly  marked  difference  between  their  social  condition,
and  in  the  terms  which  served  to  express  it,  that  the  distinc-
tion between  the  races  was  most  clearly  indicated.  In  the
tenth  century,  to  designate  civil  liberty,  there  was,  in  the
spoken  language  of  France,  but  one  word,  frankise  ov  fran-
chise,1 according  to  the  various  dialects,  and  Franc  signified
at  once  free,  powerful,  and  rich.

The  mere  invasion  of  the  children  of  Merowig  and  the
conversion  of  their  kings  to  Catholicism,  would  not,  perhaps,
have  sufficed  to  establish  at  this  point  the  predominance  of
the  conquering  population.  In  less  than  three  centuries  after
their  settlement  in  Gaul,  these  terrible  invaders  had  almost
become  Gauls;  the  regal  descendants  of  Chlodowig,  as  inof-
fensive as  their  ancestors  had  been  fierce  and  formidable,
limited  their  ambition  to  a  good  table,  and  to  riding  about  in
an  easy  waggon,  drawn  by  trained  oxen.2  But  at  this  period
there  existed  between  the  Rhine  and  the  Forest  of  Ardennes,
in  the  territory  called  by  the  Franks  Oster-rike,  or  Eastern-
kingdom,  a  population  in  whom  the  Teutonic  character  had
better  resisted  the  influence  of  southern  manners.  Coming
last  to  the  conquest  of  Gaul,  and  excluded  from  the  rich
provinces  and  great  cities  of  the  south,  it  was  filled  with  a
desire  to  obtain  a  portion  of  that  more  valuable  territory,  and
even  to  supplant  in  their  possessions  the  Franks  of  Neoster-
rike,  or  Western  Kingdom.3  This  daring  project,  long  pur-
sued with  various  success,  became  accomplished  in  the  eighth
century,  when,  under  the  outward  form  of  a  ministerial  revo-
lution, there  was  a  regular  invasion  of  the  Neustrian  Franks
by  the  Austrasian  Franks.  A  fresh  division  of  lands  took
place  throughout  well  nigh  all  Gaul;  a  second  race  of  kings
arose,  strangers  to  the  first,  and  the  conquest,  in  its  renewal,
assumed  a  more  durable  character.

And  this  was  not  all;  the  warlike  activity  of  the  Franks,
aroused  by  this  powerful  impulse,  carried  them  in  every  di-

1  In  ~L&ti&,frank{sia,franchisia.

2  Annales  Fuldenses,  apud  Script,  rer.  Gallic.,  ii.  670.

3  See  Lettres  sur  1'Histoire  de  France,  letter  x.

86  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  801

rection  beyond  their  ancient  limits;  they  effected  conquests
towards  the  Danube  and  the  Elbe,  beyond  the  Pyrenees  and
the  Alps.  Masters  of  Gaul  and  of  both  banks  of  the  Rhine,
of  the  ancient  territory  of  the  Saxon  confederation,  and  of  a
portion  of  the  Slavonian  provinces,  of  almost  all  Italy,  and  of
the  north  of  Spain,  the  second  prince  of  the  new  dynasty,
Karl,  surnamed  the  Great — Charlemagne— exchanged  his
title  of  king  for  that  of  emperor  or  Caesar,  which  had  disap-
peared from  the  west  for  more  than  three  centuries  past.  He
was  a  man  of  indefatigable  activity,  and  endowed  with  that
administrative  genius  which  embraces  in  its  grasp  the  pettiest
details  alike  with  the  great  whole,  and  which,  most  remark-
ably, reappears  from  time  to  time,  almost  identically  the  same,
at  epochs  the  most  differing  from  each  other.  But  with  all
its  resources,  this  genius,  wanting  the  action  of  ages,  could
not  fuse  into  a  single  body  so  many  nations  of  various  origin,
manners,  and  language;  under  the  outward  semblance  of
union  the  natural  isolation  still  subsisted,  and  to  keep  the
empire  from  dissolution  in  its  very  cradle,  the  great  emperor
had  to  be  in  constant  action  on  every  point.  So  long  as  he
himself  lived,  the  peoples  of  the  western  continent,  strangers
to  each  other,  remained  aggregated  under  his  vast  domination;
but  this  factitious  union  began  to  disappear  when  the  Frank
Caesar  had  gone  down,  in  imperial  robes,  to  his  tomb  in  the
cathedral  of  Aix-la-Chapelle.

Soon,  a  spontaneous  movement  of  revolt  agitated,  almost  at
the  same  moment,  the  whole  of  these  unconsentingly  associated
nations.  Gaul  aimed  at  separation  from  Germany,  Italy  at
separation  from  both.  Each  of  these  great  masses  of  men,  in
its  movement,  drew  with  it  the  portion  of  the  conquering
people  which  dwelt  in  its  bosom,  as  mistress  of  the  soil,  in-
vested with  titles  of  power  and  honour,  Latin  or  German.1
Frank  drew  the  sword  against  Frank,  brother  against  brother,
father  against  son.  Three  of  the  grandsons  of  Charlemagne
fought  against  each  other,  in  the  centre  of  Gaul;2  one  at  the
head  of  an  army  of  Gauls  and  Gallo-Franks,  another  followed
by  Italians,  the  third  commanding  an  army  of  Teutons  and

1  Duces,  comites,  judices,  missi,  praefecti,  praepositi ;  grafen,  mark-grafen,
land-grafen,  tun-grafen,  herizogen,  skepen,  sensskalken,  maer  skalhen,  &c.
•  At  Fontenai,  Fontanetum,  near  Auxerre.

TO  841.]  NORMAN INVASION OF FRANCE.  87

Slaves.  This  domestic  dissension  of  the  royal  descendants  of
the  Frankish  Caesar  was  but  a  reflection  of  the  quarrel  be-
tween these  nations,  and  it  was  this  circumstance  which
rendered  it  so  protracted  and  so  pertinacious.  The  kings
made  and  unmade  ten  divisions  of  that  empire  which  the
peoples  desired  altogether  to  dissolve;1  they  exchanged  oaths
in  the  German  and  in  the  Romane2  tongue,  which  they  almost
immediately  violated,  compelled  to  discord  by  the  turbulence
of  the  masses,  whom  no  treaty  could  satisfy.

It  was  amidst  this  disorder,  at  a  time  when  civil  war  raged
from  one  end  of  the  vast  empire  of  the  Franks  to  the  other,  that
the  Danish  or  Norman  Vikings  (Norman  was  the  national  de-
signation by  which  they  were  known  in  Gaul,)  afflicted  the
country  with  incessant  invasions.  Their  mode  of  conducting
war  was  entirely  novel  in  its  character,  and  such  as  to  discon-
cert even  the  best  framed  measures  of  defence.  Their  fleets  of
large  boats,  impelled  both  by  sail  and  by  oar,  entered  the  mouths
of  rivers,  and  ascending  them  sometimes  up  to  their  source,
landed  alternately  on  either  bank,  bands  of  intrepid  and  well-
disciplined  depredators.  Whenever  a  bridge  or  other  obstacle
impeded  the  navigation,  the  crews  drew  their  vessels  on
shore,  and,  placing  them  on  rollers,  conveyed  them  beyond
the  obstacle.  From  the  greater  they  passed  into  the  smaller
rivers,  and  from  one  of  these  into  another,  seizing  upon  all
the  more  considerable  islands,  which  they  fortified  as  winter
quarters,  depositing  there,  under  huts  constructed  in  rows,
their  booty  and  their  captives.

Making  their  attacks  thus  by  surprise,  and,  whenever  they
were  prepared  for,  retreating  with  the  utmost  rapidity,  they
devastated  whole  districts  to  such  an  extent  that,  to  use  the
expression  of  a  contemporary  writer,  "  where  they  had  passed,
no  dog  remained  to  bark."  Castles  and  fortified  places  were
the  sole  refuge  against  them;  but  at  this  first  epoch  of  their
irruptions,  very  few  of  these  existed,  and  even  the  walls  of
the  old  Roman  towns  were  falling  into  decay.  While  the
rich  seigneurs  flanked  their  manor-houses  with  turreted
towers,  and  surrounded  them  with  deep  ditches,  the  in-
habitants of  the  plains  emigrated  in  crowds  from  their  villages

1  Nit.hardi,  Hist.,  apud  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  vii.  20.
2  The  corrupt  Roman  or  Latin  idiom  of  Gaul  was  thus  denominated.

88  . THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  841

to  the  neighbouring  forest,  where  they  encamped  in  huts
defended  by  palisades  and  felled  trees.  Ill  protected  by  the
kings,  dukes,  and  counts  of  the  land,  who  often  entered  into
treaties  with  the  enemy  on  their  own  account,  at  the  expense
of  the  peasantry,  the  latter  sometimes  became  inspired  with
the  courage  of  despair,  and,  armed  merely  with  clubs,  Avould
encounter  the  axes  of  the  Normans.1  In  other  cases,  finding
all  resistance  vain,  depressed  and  demoralized,  they  renounced
their  baptismal  vow  to  propitiate  the  pagan  conqueror,  and
in  token  of  initiation  into  the  worship  of  the  northern  gods,
ate  of  the  flesh  of  a  horse  sacrificed  at  their  altars.  This
apostasy  was  very  general  in  the  quarters  most  exposed  to
the  disembarkation  of  the  pirates,  who  even  recruited  their
ranks  from  among  the  very  people  that  had  lost  all  by  their
ravages;  we  are,  indeed,  assured  by  ancient  historians,  that
the  famous  sea-king,  Hasting,  was  the  son  of  a  labourer  near
Troyes.

Nearly  a  century  elapsed  between  the  first  and  the  second
descent  of  the  Normans  upon  Gaul,  in  which  interval  was
accomplished,  amid  calamities  of  every  description,  the  dis-
memberment of  the  empire  founded  by  Karl  the  Great.  Not
only  had  there  been  detached  from  the  Gaulish  territory,
lands  whose  natural  limits  had  anciently  separated  them  from
it,  but,  in  the  very  heart  of  that  territory  itself,  there  had
taken  place  a  division,  based  upon  geographical  congruities,
upon  local  traditions,  upon  differences  of  language  or  dialects.
Brittany,  which,  independent  under  the  first  Prankish  dynasty,
had  been  subjected  by  the  second,  commenced  the  movement,
and,  in  the  first  half  of  the  ninth  century,  became  once  more
a  separate  state.  She  had  her  national  princes,  free  from  all
foreign  suzerainty,  and  even  her  conqueror-princes,  who  took
from  the  grandson  of  Charlemagne  the  towns  of  Rennes,
Vannes,  and  Nantes.  Fifty  years  later,  the  ancient  kingdom
of  the  Visigoths,  the  district  between  the  Loire,  the  Rhone,
and  the  Pyrenees,  after  having  long,  and  with  various  success,
struggled  against  the  Frank  domination,  became,  under  the
name  of  Aquitaine  or  Guienne,  a  distinct  sovereignty;  whilst,
on  the  other  side  of  the  Rhone,  a  new  sovereignty  was  formed

1  Chronicon  Namnetense ;  Lobineau,  Hist,  de  Bret.  Pieces  Justificatives,
ii.  4r>.

TO  895.] FORMATION  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  FRANCE.  89

of  Provence  and  the  southern  part  of  the  ancient  kingdom  of
the  Burgundians.  At  the  same  time,  the  provinces  along  the
Rhone,  whither  the  flood  of  Germanic  invasions  had  brought
the  Teutonic  idiom,  raised  a  political  barrier  between  them-
selves and  the  countries  where  the  Roman  dialect  prevailed.
In  the  intermediate  space  left  by  these  new  states,  that  be-
tween the  Loire,  the  Meuse,  the  Scheldt,  and  the  Breton
frontier,  was  compressed  the  kingdom  of  the  Gallo-Franks,
or  France.  Its  extent  exactly  corresponded  with  that  of  the
Neoster-rike,  or  a  Neustrithe  of  the  ancient  Franks ;  but  the
latter  name  was  now  only  applied  to  the  westernmost  sea-
coast,  in  the  same  way  that  its  correlative,  Oster-rike,  or
Austrasia,  formerly  extending  over  the  whole  of  Germany,
became  insensibly  limited  to  districts  towards  the  Danube.

This  new  kingdom  of  France,  the  genuine  cradle  of  modern
France,  contained  a  mixed  population,  German  under  one
aspect,  Gaulish  or  Roman  under  another;  and  foreigners  ap-
plied to  it  different  names  according  to  the  different  point  of
view  under  which  they  regarded  it.  The  Italians,  the
Spaniards,  the  English,  and  the  Scandinavian  nations  called
the  people  of  Gaul  Franks;  but  the  Germans,  who  asserted
this  noble  appellation  for  themselves,  denied  it  to  their  western
neighbours,  whom  they  termed  Wallons  or  Welches.1  In
the  country  itself  there  prevailed  another  distinction  :  the
landed  proprietor  in  dwelling  amidst  his  vassals  and  coloni,
solely  occupied  in  war  or  the  chace,  and  who  thus  lived  con-
formably with  the  manners  of  the  ancient  Franks,  assumed
the  title  of  frank-man,  or  that  of  baron,  both  taken  from  the
language  of  conquest.2  Those  who  had  no  manor-house,
and  who  inhabited  towns  (villte),  hamlets,  or  villages,  in
masses,  after  the  Roman  fashion,  derived  from  this  circum-
stance a  special  designation  :  they  were  called  villeins  or
manans  (manentes)?  There  were  villeins  reputed  free,  and
villeins  serfs  of  the  glebe;  but  the  freedom  of  the  former,

1  Willelm.  Malmes.,  ut  sup.  lib.  i.  25.

2  Vivere,  habitare,  succedere  more  Francorum  . . .  Fraiicus  homo,  (Du-
cange,  Glossar.) Barn,  beam,  bairn,  beorn,  a  man,  a  male  child. (Wach-
ter,  Glossar.) Hence  the  Romane  words,  bers,  bernes,  bemaae.

3  The  term  villa  which,  among  the  Romans,  only  designated  a  country
house,  a  villa,  was  long  applied,  in  the  Neo-Latin  languages,  to  every  de-
scription of  inhabited  place.

90  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  875

constantly  menaced  and  even  invaded  by  the  lord,  was  feeble
and  precarious.  Such  was  the  kingdom  of  France,  as  to  its
extent  and  as  to  the  different  classes  of  men  who  inhabited  it,
when  it  underwent  that  grand  invasion  of  the  northern  pirates
which  was  to  terminate  the  long  series  of  such  expeditions  by
a  territorial  dismemberment.  For  the  cause  of  this  famous
event,  we  must  turn  to  the  history  of  the  north.

About  the  close  of  the  ninth  century,  Harold  Harfagher
(Harold  with  the  beautiful  hair),  king  of  one  portion  of  Nor-
way, extended,  by  force  of  arms,  his  power  over  the  remainder,
and  made  of  the  whole  country  one  sole  kingdom.  This  de-
struction of  a  number  of  petty  states  previously  free,  did  not
take  place  without  resistance;  not  only  was  the  ground  dis-
puted inch  by  inch,  but,  after  the  conquest  was  completed,
many  of  the  inhabitants  preferred  expatriation  and  a  wander-
ing life  on  the  sea,  to  the  domination  of  a  foreign  ruler.
These  exiles  infested  the  northern  seas,  ravaged  the  coasts
and  islands,  and  constantly  laboured  to  excite  their  country-
men to  insurrection.  Political  interest  thus  rendered  the  con-
queror of  Norway  the  most  determined  enemy  of  the  pirates.
With  a  numerous  fleet  he  pursued  them  along  the  coasts  of
his  own  kingdom,  and  even  to  the  Orcades  and  Hebrides,
sinking  their  vessels,  and  destroying  the  stations  they  had
formed  in  many  of  the  islands  of  the  northern  seas.  He,
moreover,  by  the  severest  laws,  prohibited  the  practice  of
piracy  and  of  every  species  of  armed  exaction  throughout  his
states.1

It  was  an  immemorial  custom  of  the  Vikings  to  exercise
upon  every  coast,  without  distinction,  a  privilege  which  they
termed  strandhug,  or  impressment  of  provisions.  When  a
vessel  found  its  stores  drawing  to  an  end,  the  pirate-crew
landed  at  the  first  place  where  they  perceived  a  flock  inse-
curely guarded,  and  seizing  upon  the  animals,  killed  them,
cut  them  up,  and  carried  them  off  without  payment,  or,  at
best,  with  a  payment  quite  below  the  value  of  the  goods.
The  strandhug  was  thus  the  scourge  and  terror  of  the  country
districts  which  lay  along  the  sea-coast  or  the  banks  of  rivers,
and  all  the  more  so  that  it  was  at  times  exercised  by  men  not

1  Mallet,  H.  du  Danncmarck,  i.  223.

A.D.  895. J  BANISHMENT OF ROLL.  91

professional  pirates,  but  to  whom  power  and  wealth  gave
impunity.1

There  was  at  the  court  of  king  Harold,  among  the  iarls  or
chieftains  of  the  first  rank,  a  certain  Rognvald,  whom  the
king  greatly  loved,  and  who  had  served  him  zealously  in  all
his  expeditions.  Rognvald  had  several  sons,  all  of  them
noted  for  their  valour;  of  these,  the  most  renowned  was  Rolf,
or,  by  a  sort  of  euphony  common  to  many  of  the  Teutonic
names,  Roll.  He  was  so  tall  that,  unable  to  make  use  of  the
small  horses  of  his  country,  he  always  marched  on  foot,  a  cir-
cumstance which  procured  him  the  appellation  of  Gang-Roll,
Roll  the  Walker.  One  day  that  the  son  of  Rognvald,  with
his  companions,  was  on  his  return  from  a  cruise  in  the  Baltic,
before  landing  in  Norway,  he  shortened  sail  off  the  coast  of
Wighen,  and  there,  whether  from  actual  want  of  provisions,
or  simply  availing  himself  of  a  favourable  opportunity,  he
exercised  strandhug.  Chance  brought  king  Harold  into  the
vicinity  at  the  particular  juncture;  the  peasants  laid  their
complaints  before  him,  and  at  once,  without  heeding  the  po-
sition of  the  offender,  the  monarch  summoned  a  Thing,  or  great
council  of  justice,  to  try  Roll  according  to  law.  Ere  the
accused  appeared  before  the  assembly,  which  would  in  all
probability  sentence  him  to  banishment,  his  mother  hastened
to  the  king,  and  implored  for  pardon;  but  Harold  was  inex-
orable. Hereupon  this  woman,  inspired  by  anger,  the  result
of  maternal  tenderness,  proceeded  to  improvise,  as  frequently
occurred  with  the  Scandinavians  when  they  were  highly  ex-
cited. Addressing  herself  to  the  king,  she  said  to  him,  in
verse:  "  Thou  expellest  from  the  country  and  treatest  as  an
enemy  a  man  of  noble  race;  listen,  then,  to  what  I  tell  thee:
it  is  dangerous  to  attack  the  wolf;  when  once  he  is  angered,
let  the  herd  in  the  forest  beware."2

Despite  these  somewhat  vague  menaces,  the  sentence  was
pronounced;  and  Roll,  finding  himself  banished  for  life,  col-
lected some  vessels,  and  sailed  towards  the  Hebrides.  These
islands  had  been  adopted  as  an  asylum  by  a  portion  of  the
Norwegians  who  emigrated  after  the  conquests  of  Harold;

3  Depping,  Histoirc  des  Expeditions  Maritinies  dcs  Normands.,  ii.  57.
2  Haralds  saga  ens  Harfagra,  cap.  xxiv. ;  Snorre's  Heimskriiigla,  i.  100 ;
Mullet,  ut  sup.  i.  224.

92  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D.  896

and  all  these  men  were  of  high  birth  and  great  military  repu-
tation. The  new  comer  entered  into  association  with  them
for  the  purposes  of  piracy,  and  his  vessels  added  to  theirs
formed  a  numerous  fleet,  which  it  was  agreed  should  act  under
the  orders,  not  of  one  sole  chieftain,  but  of  the  confederates
generally,  Koll  having  no  other  pre-eminence  than  that  of  his
personal  merits  and  his  name.1

Sailing  from  the  Hebrides,  the  fleet  doubled  the  extreme
point  of  Scotland,  and  proceeding  towards  the  south-east,
entered  the  Scheldt;  but  as  Gaul  in  that  direction,  naturally
poor  and  already  devastated  on  several  occasions,  offered  very
little  to  take,  the  pirates  soon  put  to  sea  again.  Going  fur-
ther south,  they  sailed  up  the  Seine  as  far  as  Jumieges,  five
leagues  from  Rouen.  It  was  just  at  this  period  that  the  limits
of  the  kingdom  of  France  had  been  definitely  fixed  between
the  Loire  and  the  Meuse.  To  the  protracted  territorial  revo-
lutions which  had  lacerated  that  kingdom,  there  had  succeeded
a  political  revolution,  the  object  of  which,  realized  a  century
later,  was  the  expulsion  of  the  second  dynasty  of  the  Frank
kings.2  The  king  of  the  French,  a  descendant  of  Karl  the
Great,  and  bearing  his  name,  the  only  resemblance  between
them,  was  disputing  the  crown  with  a  competitor  whose  an-
cestors had  never  worn  that  crown.  By  turns  conquerors
and  conquered,  the  king  of  ancient  race  and  the  king  by
election  were  masters  alternately;  but  neither  the  one  nor  the
other  was  powerful  enough  to  protect  the  country  against
foreign  invasion ;  all  the  forces  of  the  kingdom  were  engaged,
on  either  side,  in  maintaining  the  civil  war;  no  army,  accord-
ingly, presented  itself  to  stay  the  pirates,  or  prevent  them
from  pillaging  and  devastating  both  banks  of  the  Seine.

The  report  of  their  ravages  soon  reached  Rouen,  and  filled
that  city  with  terror.  The  inhabitants  did  not  expect  any
succour,  and  despaired  of  being  able  to  defend  their  walls,
already  in  ruins  from  former  invasions.  Amidst  the  universal
dismay,  the  archbishop  of  Rouen,  a  man  of  prudence  and
firmness,  took  upon  himself  to  save  the  city,  by  capitulating
with  the  enemy  before  the  first  attack.3  Without  being  de-

J  Depping,  Hist,  des  Expeditions  Maritimes  des  Normands,  ii.  08.

2  See  Lettres  sur  1'Histoire  de  France,  letter  xii.

8  Frankes  un  archeveske,  ki  a  Boem  esteit.  (Wace,  Roman  dc  Eon,
i.  57.)

TO  900.] INVASION  OF  FRANCE  BY  ROLL.  93

terred  by  the  hatred  often  so  cruelly  testified  by  the  pagans
of  the  north  towards  the  Christian  clergy,  the  archbishop
repaired  to  the  camp,  near  Jumieges,  and  spoke  to  the  Nor-
man chief  through  the  medium  of  an  interpreter.  He  talked
and  did  so  well,  promised  so  much,  gave  so  much,  says  an  old
chronicler,  that  he  concluded  a  truce  with  Roll  and  his  com-
panions, guaranteeing  them  admission  to  the  city,  and  receiv-
ing from  them,  in  return,  an  assurance  that  no  violence  should
be  committed  by  them.  It  was  near  the  church  of  St.  Morin,
at  one  of  the  gates  of  the  Seine,  that  the  Norwegians  peace-
ably landed.  Having  moored  their  vessels,  all  the  chiefs
went  through  the  city  in  different  directions;  they  attentively
examined  the  ramparts,  the  quays,  the  fountains,  and  finding
everything  to  their  taste,  resolved  to  make  it  the  citadel  and
head  quarters  of  their  new  establishment.1

After  thus  entering  upon  possession,  the  Norman  chiefs,
with  their  principal  troops,  continued  to  ascend  the  Seine.
At  the  point  where  that  river  receives  the  waters  of  the
Eure,  they  established  a  fortified  camp,  in  order  to  await  the
arrival  of  a  French  army  which  was  then  on  its  march  against
them.  King  Carl,  or  Charles,  as  it  was  called  in  the  Romane
language,  finding  himself  for  the  moment  sole  master  of  the
kingdom,  had  resolved,  by  a  great  effort,  to  repel  the  new  in-
vasion: his  troops,  led  by  one  Raghenold,  or  Regnauld,  who
bore  the  title  of  duke  of  France,  took  up  a  position  on  the
right  bank  of  the  Eure,  at  some  distance  from  the  Norman
camp.  Among  the  counts  who  had  hoisted  their  banners
at  the  command  of  the  king,  to  oppose  the  pagans,  was  a
converted  pagan,  the  famous  sea-king,  Hasting.  Twenty
years  before,  weary  of  a  life  of  adventure,  he  had  made  his
peace  with  the  kingdom  of  France,  accepting  the  county  of
Chartres.  In  the  council  of  war,  held  by  the  French,  Hasting,
consulted  in  his  turn,  advised  a  parley  with  the  enemy  before
risking  a  battle;  although  this  advice  was  regarded  with  sus-
picion by  many  lords  of  the  army,  it  prevailed;  and  Hasting

1  E  Ron  esgarda  la  vile  e  lunge  et  lee,
Et  deliorz  et  dedenz  la  sovent  esgardee ;
Bone  li  semble  et  bele,  mult  li  plest  e  agree,
Et  li  compaignanz  Tout  a  Ron  mult  loee.
Frankes  un  archeveske,  ki  a  Roem  esteit. ( Wace,  Roman  dc  Ron,  i.  60.)

94  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D.  900

departed  with  two  persons  who  knew  the  Danish  language,  to
communicate  with  the  Normans.

The  three  envoys  followed  the  course  of  the  Eure,  until
they  came  opposite  the  spot  where  the  confederates  had  raised
their  intrenchments.  There,  stopping  and  raising  his  voice
so  as  to  be  heard  on  the  opposite  bank,  the  count  de  Chartres
cried:  "  What,  ho!  brave  warriors,  what  is  the  name  of  your
lord?"  "We  have  no  lord,"  replied  the  Normans,  "we  are
all  equal."1  "  For  what  purpose  come  you  into  this  country?
what  seek  you  here?"  "  To  drive  out  the  inhabitants,  or
subject  them  to  our  power,  and  make  for  ourselves  a  country.
But  who  art  thou  who  speakest  our  language  so  readily?"
The  count  replied:  "  Have  you  not  heard  of  Hasting,  the
famous  pirate,  who  scoured  the  seas  with  so  many  vessels,
and  did  so  much  injury  to  this  kingdom?"  "  Aye,"  replied
the  Normans,  "  we  have  heard  of  him.  Hasting  began  well,
but  he  has  made  a  bad  ending."  "  Will  you  submit  to  king
Charles,  who  offers  you  fief's  and  honours,  on  condition  of
faith  and  service?"  "By  no  means;  we  will  submit  to  no
one,  and  all  that  we  acquire  by  our  arms  we  will  assert  the
dominion  of;  go  and  tell  this,  if  thou  wilt,  to  the  king,  whose
messenger  thou  art."2

On  his  return  to  the  camp,  Hasting  delivered  this  answer,
and  in  the  consultation  which  followed,  advised  them  not  to
attempt  to  force  the  pagan  intrenchments.  "  'Tis  the  counsel
of  a  traitor,"  cried  a  lord,  named  Holland;  and  several  others
repeated  the  cry.  The  old  sea-king,  either  from  indignation,
or  because  he  felt  himself  not  entirely  without  reproach,  im-
mediately quitted  the  army,  and  even  abandoned  his  county
of  Chartres,  going  none  knew  whither.  But  his  predictions
were  verified:  on  attacking  the  intrenched  camp,  the  troops
were  totally  defeated,  and  the  duke  of  France  perished  by  the
hand  of  a  fisherman  of  Rouen,  who  served  in  the  Norwegian
army.

Free  to  navigate  the  Seine  at  will,  Roll  and  his  companions
ascended  it  to  Paris,  and  laid  siege  to  that  city,  but  without
being  able  to  make  themselves  masters  of  it.  One  of  the

1  Dudo  de  Sancto  Quintino,  apud  Script,  rer.  Normani,  p.  76.
-  "Willelm.  Gemeticensis,  Hist.  Normani,  apud  Script,  rer.  Normani,  p.
228. Dudo,  ib.  76.

TO  912.]  CONQUESTS OF ROLL IN FRANCE.  95

principal  chiefs  having  been  taken  prisoner  by  the  besieged,
in  order  to  redeem  him,  they  concluded  a  year's  truce  with
king  Charles,  during  which  time  they  ravaged  the  northern
provinces,  which  had  ceased  to  be  French.  On  the  expiration
of  the  truce,  they  returned  in  all  haste  to  Rouen,  from  which
city  they  proceeded  to  surprise  Bayeux,  which  they  took  by
assault,  killing  the  count  and  many  of  the  inhabitants.  This
count,  Beranger,  had  a  daughter  of  great  beauty,  named
Popa,  who,  in  the  division  of  the  booty,  fell  to  the  share  of
Roll,  and  whom  the  Scandinavian  wedded,  according  to  the
rites  of  his  religion  and  the  law  of  his  country.1

Evreux  and  several  other  neighbouring  towns  next  fell
into  the  hands  of  the  Normans,  who  thus  extended  their
dominion  over  the  greater  part  of  the  territory  to  which  the
old  name  of  Neustria  was  given.  Guided  by  a  certain  political
good  sense,  they  ceased  to  be  cruel  when  they  no  longer
encountered  resistance,  and  contented  themselves  with  a
tribute  regularly  levied  upon  the  towns  and  country  districts.
The  same  good  sense  induced  them  to  create  a  supreme  chief,
invested  with  permanent  authority;  the  choice  of  the  con-
federates fell  upon  Roll,  "  whom  they  made  their  king,"  says
an  old  chronicler;  but  this  title,  which  was  perhaps  merely
given  him  in  the  language  of  the  north,  was  ere  long  replaced
by  the  French  title  of  duke  or  count.  Pagan  as  he  was,  the
new  duke  made  himself  popular  with  the  native  inhabitants.
After  having  cursed  him  as  a  pirate,  they  loved  him  as  a
protector,  whose  power  secured  them  at  once  from  new  attacks
by  sea,  and  from  the  miseries  caused  in  the  rest  of  the  land  by
civil  war.2

Having  become  a  territorial  power,  the  Normans  carried  on
a  better  sustained,  and,  so  to  speak,  more  methodical  war  upon
the  French.  They  leagued  themselves  with  other  Scandi-
navians, probably  Danes  by  origin,  who  occupied  the  mouth
of  the  Loire,  and  agreed  simultaneously  to  pillage  the  whole
territory  between  that  river  and  the  Seine.  The  devastation

1  Willelra. Gemeticensis,  Hist.  Normani,  apud  Script,  rer.  Normani,
p.  229. Dudo,  ib.  76.

2  Continua...pace  diuturnaque  requie  leetabantur  homines,  sub  (Rol-
lonis) ditione  securi  morantes; locupletesque  erant  omnibus  bonis,  non
timentes  exercitum  ullius  kostilitatis. (Dudo,  ut  sup.  p.  80.)

96  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  900

extended  into  Burgundy  and  Auvergne.  Paris,  attacked  a
second  time,  resisted  successfully,  as  did  Chartres,  Dijon,  and
other  strong  places;  but  many  unfortified  towns  were  de-
stroyed or  sacked.  At  last,  in  the  year  912,  sixteen  years
after  the  occupation  of  Rouen,  the  French,  of  all  conditions,
harassed  by  these  continual  hostilities,  began  to  complain,
and  to  demand  that  the  war  should  be  put  an  end  to,  at  what-
ever price;  the  bishops,  the  counts,  and  the  barons,  remon-
strated with  the  king;  the  citizens  and  peasants  implored
mercy  as  he  passed.  An  old  author  has  preserved  the  ex-
pression of  the  popular  murmurs:  "  What  do  we  see  in  all
places?  Churches  burnt,  people  killed;  by  the  fault  of  the
king  and  his  weakness,  the  Normans  do  as  they  please  in  the
kingdom;  from  Blois  to  Senlis  there  is  not  an  acre  of  corn,
and  no  man  dares  labour  either  in  the  fields  or  in  the  vine-
yards. Unless  the  war  be  finished,  we  shall  have  dearth  and
dearness."1  King  Charles,  who  was  surnamed  the  Simple,  or
the  Fool,2  and  to  whom  history  has  continued  the  former
of  these  names,  had  sufficient  good  sense  on  this  occasion  to
listen  to  the  voice  of  the  people;  perhaps,  also,  in  yielding  to
it,  he  thought  to  achieve  a  stroke  of  policy,  and,  by  the
alliance  of  the  Normans,  to  secure  himself  against  the  power-
ful intrigues  which  tended  to  dethrone  him.3  He  convoked
his  barons  and  bishops  in  a  grand  council,  and,  according  to
the  formula  of  the  time,  demanded  of  them  aid  and  advice.
All  counselled  him  to  conclude  a  truce,  and  to  negotiate  for
peace.

The  man  best  adapted  successfully  to  conduct  this  negotia-
tion was  the  archbishop  of  Rouen,  who,  notwithstanding  the
difference  of  religion,  exercised  the  same  kind  of  influence
over  Roll  that  the  bishops  of  the  fifth  century  had  obtained
over  the  conquerors  of  the  Roman  empire.  His  relations
with  the  other  bishops  and  with  the  lords  of  France  had
not  been  interrupted;  perhaps  he  was  even  present  at  their

1  Na  ne  boef,  ne  charrue,  ue  vilain  en  aree,
Ne  vigne  provignie,  ne  couture  seme,
Mainte  iglise  i  a  ja  essilie  e  gastee,
Se  ceste  guerre  dure,  la  terre  iert  degastee.

(Roman  de  Rou,  i.  73.)

2  Carolus,  simplex,  sive  stultus.  ( Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  ix.  22.)
Follus.  (Ib.  p.  8.)

3  See  Lettres  sur  1'Histoire  de  France,  letter  xii.

TO  912.]  DONATION OF NORMANDY.  9?

consultations;  but  present  or  absent,  lie  willingly  undertook
to  convey  and  to  support  their  offers  of  peace.  The  arch-
bishop went  to  the  son  of  Rognvald,  and  said  to  him —
"King  Charles  offers  you  his  daughter  Gisla  in  marriage,
with  the  hereditary  seigneury  of  all  the  country  situated  be-
tween the  river  Epte  and  the  borders  of  Brittany,  if  you  con-
sent to  become  Christian,  and  to  live  in  peace  with  the
kingdom."1

The  Norman  this  time  did  not  answer  "  We  will  obey  no
one:"  other  ideas,  another  ambition  than  that  of  an  adventurer,
had  come  to  him,  since  he  had  governed  no  longer  a  mere
band  of  pirates  but  a  vast  territory.  Christianity,  without
which  he  could  not  rank  as  the  equal  of  the  great  lords  of
France,  had  ceased  to  be  repugnant  to  him;  and  the  habit  of
living  amidst  Christians  had  extinguished  the  fanaticism  of
most  of  his  companions.  With  regard  to  the  marriage,  he
thought  himself  free  to  contract  a  new  one,  and,  becoming  a
Christian,  to  dismiss  the  wife  whom  he  had  married  with
pagan  ceremonies.  "  The  words  of  the  king  are  good,"  said
he  to  the  archbishop;  "  but  the  land  he  offers  me  is  insuffi-
cient; it  is  uncultivated  and  impoverished;  my  people  would
not  derive  from  it  the  means  of  living  in  peace."  The  arch-
bishop returned  to  the  king,  who  charged  him  to  offer
Flanders  in  his  name,  although  he  had  in  reality  no  other
right  over  that  kingdom  than  that  of  a  disputed  claim;  but
Roll  did  not  accept  this  new  proposal,  replying  that  Flan-
ders was  a  poor  country,  muddy,  and  full  of  swamps.  Then,
not  knowing  what  else  to  give,  Charles  the  Simple  sent  word
to  the  Norman  chief  that,  if  he  would,  he  should  have  in  fief
Brittany,  conjointly  with  Neustria:  this  offer  was  of  the  same
kind  with  the  preceding,  for  Brittany  was  a  free  state,  the
suzerainty  of  the  kings  of  France  only  extending  there  to
the  county  of  Rennes,  taken  from  the  French  by  the  Breton
princes  half  a  century  before.  But  Roll  heeded  little  this;
he  did  not  perceive  that  they  only  gave  him  an  old  quarrel
to  fight  out,  and  the  arrangement  was  accepted.2

In  order  to  ratify  the  treaty  in  the  most  solemn  manner,
the  king  of  France  and  the  chief  of  the  Normans  repaired  to

1  Willelm.  Gemet.,  vt  sup.  p.  231.

8  D'Argentre,  Hist,  de  Jlrctagne,  in. 191. (Paris, 1588.) Dudo  de
Sancto  Quintino,  p.  83. Willelm.  Gemet.,  ut  sup.  231.
VOL.  I.  H

98  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  911

the  village  of  St.  Clair-sur-Epte.  Each  was  accompanied  by
a  numerous  train ;  the  French  pitched  their  tents  on  the  one
bank  of  the  river,  and  the  Normans  on  the  other.  At  the
hour  fixed  for  the  interview,  Roll  approached  the  king,  and,
remaining  standing,  placed  his  hands  between  those  of  the
monarch,  pronouncing  the  formula: —

"  Henceforth  I  am  your  vassal  and  your  man,  and  I  swear
faithfully  to  protect  your  life,  your  limbs,  and  royal  honour."
Then  the  king  and  the  barons  gave  to  the  Norman  chief  the
title  of  count,  and  swore  to  protect  his  life,  his  limbs,  his
honour,  and  all  the  territory  set  forth  in  the  treaty  of  peace.1

The  ceremony  seemed  at  an  end,  and  the  new  count  was
about  to  retire,  when  the  Frenchmen  said  to  him:  "  It  is
fitting  that  he  who  receives  such  a  gift  as  this,  should  kneel
before  the  king  and  kiss  his  foot."  But  the  Norman  an-
swered: "  Never  will  I  bend  the  knee  before  any  man,  or  kiss
the  foot  of  any  man."  The  lords  insisted  on  this  formality,  a
last  remnant  of  the  etiquette  formerly  observed  in  the  court
of  the  Frank  emperors;  whereupon  Roll,  with  an  affected
simplicity,  signed  to  one  of  his  men  to  come  and  kiss  the
king's  foot  for  him.  The  Norwegian  soldier,  stooping  with-
out bending  the  knee,  took  the  king's  foot,  and  lifted  it  so
high  to  put  it  to  his  mouth,  that  the  king  fell  upon  his  back.
Little  accustomed  to  the  niceties  of  ceremony,  the  pirates
burst  into  a  shout  of  laughter;  there  was  a  momentary
tumult,  but  this  absurd  incident  produced  no  serious  result.2

Two  clauses  of  the  treaty  remained  to  be  fulfilled,  the  con-
version of  the  new  count  or  duke  of  Normandy,  and  his  mar-
riage with  the  daughter  of  the  king;  it  was  arranged  that
this  double  ceremony  should  take  place  at  Rouen,  and  many
of  the  high  barons  of  France  repaired  thither  as  an  escort  to
the  bride.  After  a  brief  lesson,  the  son  of  Rognvald  received
baptism  at  the  hands  of  the  archbishop,  to  whose  counsels  he
listened  with  the  greatest  docility.  On  quitting  the  bap-
tismal font,  the  neophyte  inquired  the  names  of  the  most
celebrated  churches  and  of  the  most  revered  saints  in  his  new
country.  The  archbishop  repeated  to  him  the  names  of  six
churches  and  three  saints,  the  Virgin,  Saint  Michael  and
Saint  Peter.  "  And  who  is  the  most  powerful  protector?"

1  Willelm.  Gemet.,  p.  231.

TO  997.]  PARTITION OP NORMANDY.  99

asked  the  duke.  "  Saint  Denis,"  answered  the  archbishop.
"  Well,  before  dividing  my  land  among  my  companions,  I
will  give  a  part  of  it  to  God,  to  Saint  Mary,  and  to  the  other
saints  whom  you  have  named."1  And  during  the  seven  days
he  wore  the  white  habit  of  the  newly  baptised,  he  gave  each
day  an  estate  to  one  of  the  seven  churches  that  had  been  in-
dicated to  him.  Then,  having  resumed  his  ordinary  dress,
he  occupied  himself  with  political  affairs  and  with  the  grand
partition  of  Normandy  among  the  Norwegian  emigrants.2

The  country  was  divided  out  by  the  cord,  say  the  old
chroniclers:  such  was  the  mode  of  mensuration  used  in
Scandinavia.  All  the  lands,  whether  desert  or  cultivated,
except  those  of  the  churches,  were  shared  out  afresh,  without
any  attention  to  the  rights  of  the  natives.  The  companions
of  Roll,  chiefs  or  soldiers,  became,  according  to  their  rank,
seigneurs  of  the  towns  and  rural  districts,  sovereign  proprie-
tors, great  or  small,  of  domains.  The  former  proprietors  were
compelled  to  accommodate  themselves  to  the  will  of  the  new
comers,  to  give  place  to  them  if  they  so  required,  or  to  hold
of  them  their  own  domain  under  lease  or  in  vassalage.  Thus
the  serfs  of  the  country  changed  masters,  and  many  freemen
became  serfs  of  the  glebe.  New  geographical  denominations
even  resulted  from  this  repartition  of  territorial  property,  and
usage  thenceforth  attached  to  many  of  the  domains  the  names
of  the  Scandinavian  warriors  to  whose  portion  they  had
fallen.3  Although  the  condition  of  the  craftsmen  and  pea-
sants of  Normandy  differed  little  from  what  it  was  in  France,
the  hope  of  a  more  complete  security,  and  the  movement  of
social  life  which  generally  accompanies  a  rising  empire,  in-
duced many  artizans  and  labourers  to  emigrate  and  establish
themselves  under  the  government  of  duke  Roll.  His  name,
which  the  French  pronounced  Rou,  became  widely  popular;
he  was  deemed  the  greatest  enemy  of  robbers,  and  the  most
vigorous  justiciary  of  his  time.

1  Fleury,  Hist.  Ecclesiast.,  xi.  593.

2  Willelin.  Gemet.,  p.  231.

3  Thus  Angoville,  Borneville,  Grimonville,  Heronville,  were  the  territorial
possessions  of  Ansgod,  Biorn,  Grim,  Harald,  &c.  The  ancient  charters  ex-
hibited these  original  names  under  a  form  more  or  less  correct.  (Memoire
de  M.  de  Gerville  sur  les  noms  de  lieux  en  Normandie;  Mem.  de  la  Societe
Koyale  des  Antiquaires  de  France,  tome  vii.)
H2

100  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  912

Although  the  majority  of  the  Norwegians,  following  the
example  of  their  chief,  had  eagerly  accepted  baptism,  it  ap-
pears that  a  certain  number  of  them  refused  it,  and  resolved
to  preserve  the  customs  of  their  ancestors.  These  dissentients
united  together  to  form  a  kind  of  separate  colony,  and  settled
in  the  environs  of  Bayeux.  They  were,  perhaps,  attracted
thither  by  the  manners  and  language  of  the  inhabitants  of
Bayeux,  who,  Saxons  by  origin,  still  spoke  in  the  tenth  cen-
tury a  German  dialect.  In  this  district  of  Normandy,  the
Norwegian  idiom,  differing  but  little  from  the  popular  lan-
guage, became  fused  with  it,  and  purified  it,  in  a  measure,  so
as  to  render  it  intelligible  to  the  Danes  and  the  other  Scandi-
navians.1 When,  after  several  generations,  the  repugnance
of  the  Norman  barons  of  Bessin  and  the  Cotentin  for  Christ-
ianity had  yielded  to  the  force  of  example,  the  impress  of  the
Scandinavian  character  was  still  found  among  them  in  a
striking  degree.  They  were  remarkable  among  the  other
lords  and  knights  of  Normandy  for  their  extreme  turbulence,
and  for  an  almost  permanent  hostility  to  the  government  of
the  dukes;  some  of  them  even  long  bore  pagan  devices  on
their  shields,  and  opposed  the  old  war  cry  of  the  Scandina-
vians, Thor  aide !  to  that  of  Dieu  aide  f  the  cry  of  Nor-
mandy.2

Peace  was  not  of  long  duration  between  the  French  and
the  Normans,  and  the  latter  skilfully  profited  by  circumstances
to  extend  their  dominion  towards  the  east,  almost  to  the  point
where  the  river  Oise  joins  the  Seine;3  on  the  north,  their  ter-
ritory was  bounded  by  the  little  river  Bresle,  and  by  that  of
Coesnon  on  the  south-west.  The  inhabitants  of  this  district
were  all  called  Normans  by  the  French,  and  by  foreigners,
with  the  exception  of  the  Danes  and  the  Norwegians,  who
only  gave  this  name,  honourable  in  their  eyes,  to  that  portion
of  the  population  which  was  really  of  Norman  race  and  lan-

1  Rotomageusis  civitas  romaiia  potius  qunm  dacisca  utitur  eloquentia,  et
Bniocacensis  fruitur  frequentius  dacisca  lingua  quam  roroana. (Di:do  de
Saucto  Quintino,  lit  sup.  p.  112.)
2  Raol  Tesson  . . .

Poinst  li  cheval,  criaut :  Tur  aie  ! . . .
. . .  Willame  crie  :  Dex  aie  !
Cest  1'enseigne  de  Normandie.

(Roman  de  Ron,  ii.  32,  34.)
3  Willelm.  Gemet.,  tit  sup.  p.  316.

TO  997.]  COMMOTIONS IN NORMANDY.  101

guage.  This,  the  least  numerous  portion,  stood,  with  regard
to  the  mass,  whether  native  or  emigrant,  of  the  other  parts  of
Gaul,  on  the  same  footing  as  the  sons  of  the  Franks  with
regard  to  the  sons  of  the  Gauls.  In  Normandy,  the  mere
qualification  of  Norman  was  from  the  first  a  title  of  nobility:  it
was  the  sign  of  liberty  and  of  power,  of  the  right  to  levy  taxes
from  the  citizens  and  serfs  of  the  country.1

All  the  Normans,  by  name  and  by  race,  were  equal  in  civil
rights,  though  not  equal  in  military  grades  and  political  dig-
nities. No  man  among  them  was  taxed  without  his  own  con-
sent, or  subject  to  toll  for  his  goods  by  land  or  by  water;
all  enjoyed  the  right  of  hunting  and  fishing  to  the  exclu-
sion of  the  villeins  and  peasants,  terms  which,  in  point  of
fact,  comprehended  the  whole  mass  of  the  native  population.
Although  the  court  of  the  dukes  of  Normandy  was  organ-
ized almost  wholly  upon  the  model  of  that  of  the  kings  of
France,  the  higher  clergy  did  not  at  first  form  a  part  of  it,  on
account  of  their  French  origin;  at  a  later  period,  when  a
great  number  of  men  of  Norwegian  or  Danish  race  had  as-
sumed the  ecclesiastical  habit,  a  certain  distinction  in  rank
and  privileges  continued  to  subsist,  even  in  the  monasteries,
between  them  and  the  other  ecclesiastics.2

This  distinction,  still  more  oppressive  in  the  political  and
civil  order,  soon  raised  against  it  the  ancient  population  of
the  country.  In  less  than  a  century  after  the  establishment
of  the  new  state,  of  which  it  was  the  oppressed  portion,  this
population  conceived  the  idea  of  destroying  the  inequality  of
races,  so  that  the  country  of  Normandy  should  contain  only
one  nation,  as  it  bore  but  one  name.  It  was  under  the  reign
of  Rikhart  or  Richard  II.,  third  successor  of  Roll,  that  this
great  project  manifested  itself.  In  all  the  districts  of  Nor-
mandy, the  inhabitants  of  the  villages  and  hamlets  began,  in
the  evening,  after  the  hour  of  labour,  to  assemble  and  talk
together  of  the  miseries  of  their  condition;  these  groups  of
politicians  were  composed  of  twenty,  thirty,  or  an  hundred
persons,  and  often  the  assembly  formed  into  a  circle  to  listen

1  The  Danish  double  descent  by  father  and  mother  constituted  the  high-
est degree  of  nobility. Providentia  snramae  divinitatis,  ut  remur,  hanc  tibi
dacigenam  quam  modo  refoves  conexuit ;  ut  patre  matreque  dacigeua  hseres
hujus  terra;  nascatur. (Dudo  de  S.  Quint.,  vt  sup.  p.  10^.)
2  Depping,  ut  sup.  ii.  cap.  xii.

102  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  912

to  some  orator  who  animated  them  by  violent  speeches  against
the  lords  of  the  country,  counts,  viscounts,  barons,  and  knights.
Ancient  chronicles  in  verse  present  to  us,  in  a  manner  vivid
and  powerful,  if  not  authentic,  the  substance  of  these  ha-
rangues.1

"  The  lords  do  nothing  but  evil;  we  cannot  obtain  either
reason  or  justice  from  them;  they  have  all,  they  take  all,  eat
all,  and  make  us  live  in  poverty  and  suffering.  Every  day  is
with  us  a  day  of  pain ;  we  gain  nought  by  our  labours,  there
are  so  many  dues  and  services.  Why  do  we  allow  ourselves  to
be  thus  treated?  Let  us  place  ourselves  beyond  their  power;
we  are  men  like  they,  we  have  the  same  limbs,  the  same
height,  the  same  power  of  endurance,  and  we  are  an  hundred
to  one.  Let  us  swear  to  defend  each  other;  let  us  be  firmly
knit  together,  and  no  man  shall  be  lord  over  us;  and  we
shall  be  free  from  tolls  and  taxes,  free  to  fell  trees,  to  take
game  and  fish,  and  do  as  we  will  in  all  things,  in  the  wood,
in  the  meadow,  on  the  water."2

These  appeals  to  natural  right,  and  to  the  power  of  the
greater  number,  did  not  fail  to  produce  an  effect,  and  many
people  of  the  hamlets  mutually  swore  to  keep  together,  and  to
aid  each  other  against  all  comers.3  A  vast  association  for  com-
mon defence  spread  over  the  whole  country,  comprehending,  if
not  the  entire  mass,  at  all  events  the  agricultural  class  of  the  in-
digenous population.  The  associates  were  divided  into  various
circles,  which  the  original  historian  designates  by  the  term
conventicula ;  there  was  at  least  one  for  every  county,  and
each  chose  two  members  to  form  the  superior  circle  or  central
assembly.4  The  business  of  this  assembly  was  to  prepare  and
organize  throughout  the  country  the  means  of  resistance  or
insurrection;  it  sent  from  district  to  district,  and  from  village

1  Roman  de  Ron,  304,  et  seq. Chronique  des  dues  de  Normandie,  par
Benoit  de  St.  Maure,  edit,  de  M.  Francisque  Michel,  ii.  390,  et  seq.

2  Juxtti  suos  libitus  vivere  decernebant  quatenus  tarn  in  silvarum  com-
pendiis  quam  in  aquarum  commerciis,  nullo  obsistente  ante  statuti  juris
obice,  legibus  uterentur  suis. (Willelm.  Gemet.,  ut  sup.  p.  249.) I  have
compared  this  passage  with  Wace  and  Benoit  de  St.  Maure,  by  whose  aid  I
have  extended  it  in  the  text. Though  posterior  to  the  event  by  a  century
and  a  half,  their  testimony  has  at  least  the  value  to  me  of  a  traditional
narrative.

3  Benoit  de  St.  Maure,  vt  sup.  ii.  393. Rom.  de  Rou,  i.  307.
4  Willelm.  Gemet.,  vt  sup.  p.  249.

TO 1013.]  ITS SUPPRESSION.  103

to  village,  eloquent  and  persuasive  persons,  to  gain  over
new  associates,  to  register  their  names,  arid  to  receive  their
oaths.1

Affairs  had  arrived  at  this  point,  and  no  open  rebellion
had  yet  broken  out,  when  the  news  reached  the  court  of  Nor-
mandy that  throughout  the  country  the  villeins  were  holding
councils  and  forming  themselves  into  a  sworn  association.2
There  was  great  alarm  among  the  lords,  thus  threatened  with
losing  at  one  blow  their  rights  and  their  revenues.  Duke
Richard,  who  was  then  too  young  to  act  for  himself,  sent  for
his  uncle  Raoul,  count  of  Evreux,  in  whom  he  placed  full
confidence.  "  Sire,"  said  the  count,  "  rest  in  peace,  and  let
me  deal  with  these  peasants;  do  not  yourself  stir,  but  send
me  all  the  knights  and  men-at-arms  at  your  disposal."3

In  order  to  surprise  the  chiefs  of  the  association,  count
Raoul  sent  able  spies  in  every  direction,  whom  he  specially
charged  to  discover  the  place  and  hour  at  which  the  central
assembly  was  to  be  held;  upon  their  reports  he  marched
his  troops,  and  arrested  in  one  day  all  the  deputies  of
the  inferior  circles,  some  while  sitting,  others  while  they
were  receiving  in  the  villages  the  oaths  of  the  associates.4
Whether  from  passion  or  calculation,  the  count  treated  his
prisoners  with  extreme  cruelty.  Without  any  trial,  without
the  slightest  inquiry,  he  inflicted  upon  them  mutilations  or
atrocious  tortures;  of  some  he  put  out  the  eyes,  of  others  he
cut  off  the  hands  or  feet;  some  had  their  legs  burned,  others
were  impaled  alive,  or  had  melted  lead  poured  over  them.5
The  unfortunate  men  who  survived  these  tortures  were  sent
back  to  their  families,  and  on  the  way  paraded  through
the  villages,  to  spread  terror  around.  And  in  effect,  fear  pre-
vailed over  the  love  of  liberty  in  the  hearts  of  the  Norman
peasants ;  the  great  association  was  broken  up ;  no  more  secret
assemblies  were  held,  and  a  mournful  resignation  succeeded,
for  several  centuries,  to  the  momentary  enthusiasm.6

1  Roman  de  Rou,  i.  307.

2  See  as  to  this  description  of  association,  its  effects  and  its  origin,  my
Considerations  sur  I'Histoire  dc  France,  prefixed  to  the  Rccits  des  temps
Merovingiens,  2nd  ed.  i.  311,  et  seq,

3  Roman  de  Rou,  i.  309.  *  Ib.  311.

5  Ib.  Benoit  de  St.  Maure,  vt  sup.  ii.  395.
8  Willelm.  Gemet.,  ut  siq).  p.  249.

104  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  997

At  the  period  of  this  memorable  attempt,  the  difference  of
language  which  had  at  first  separated  the  nobles  and  com-
mons of  Normandy  scarcely  existed;  it  was  by  his  genealogy
that  the  man  of  Scandinavian  origin  was  distinguished  from
the  Gallo-Frank.  Even  at  Rouen,  and  in  the  palace  of  the
successors  of  Roll,  no  other  language  was  spoken  at  the  com-
mencement of  the  eleventh  century  than  Romane  or  French.
The  town  of  Bayeux  alone  was  still  an  exception,  and  its  dia-
lect, a  mixture  of  Saxon  and  Norwegian  was  easily  under-
stood by  the  Scandinavians.  Accordingly,  when  fresh  emi-
grants came  from  the  north  to  visit  their  Norman  relations,
and  seek  from  them  a  portion  of  land,  it  was  around  Bayeux
that  they  established  themselves  in  preference.  So  again,  it
was  there,  if  we  are  to  credit  ancient  chronicles,  that  the
Norman  dukes  sent  their  children  to  learn  to  speak  Danish.
The  Danes  and  the  Norwegians  maintained  relations  of  al-
liance and  affection  with  Normandy  so  long  as  they  found  in
the  resemblance  of  language  the  token  of  an  ancient  national
fraternity.  Several  times,  during  the  quarrels  which  the  first
dukes  had  to  sustain  against  the  French,  powerful  succours
were  sent  them  from  Norway  and  Denmark,  and,  Christians  as
they  were,  they  were  aided  by  kings  who  still  remained  pagans;
but  when  the  use  of  the  Romane  language  became  universal
in  Normandy,  the  Scandinavians  ceased  to  look  upon  the
Normans  as  natural  allies;  they  even  ceased  to  give  them  the
name  of  Normans,  and  called  them  Frenchmen,  Romans,  or
Welskes,  in  common  with  the  other  inhabitants  of  Gaul.1

These  ties  of  relationship  and  friendship  were  already
greatly  relaxed  in  the  first  years  of  the  eleventh  century,
when  the  king  of  England,  Ethelred,  married  the  sister  of
this  same  Richard,  fourth  duke  of  Normandy,  whom  we  have
just  mentioned.  It  is  probable,  indeed,  that  if  the  branch  of
Scandinavian  population  established  in  Gaul  had  not  been  at
this  time  entirely  detached  from  its  northern  trunk,  the  Saxon
king  would  not  have  conceived  the  hope  of  being  supported
by  the  grandson  of  Roll  against  the  power  of  the  northern
kings.  The  little  readiness  shown  by  the  Norman  Richard
to  assist  his  brother-in-law,  did  not  arise  from  any  scruple  or
moral  repugnance,  but  because  Richard  did  not  see  in  this

1  See  postea,  look  vi. ;  Francigenae,  Eomani,  Walli.

TO  1015.]  RECAL  OF  ETHELRED.  105

intervention  anything  favourable  to  his  own  interest,  which
he  was  skilful  in  discerning  and  ardent  in  pursuing,  consist-
ently with  the  character  which  already  distinguished  the  in-
habitants of  Normandy.

Whilst  Ethelred  in  exile  was  receiving  the  hospitality  of
his  brother-in-law,  the  English,  under  the  dominion  of  the
foreigner,  regretted,  as  in  the  time  of  the  flight  of  Alfred  and
the  first  Danish  conquest,  the  sway  of  him  whom  they  had
deserted  in  disgust;  Swen,  whom,  in  the  year  1014,  they  had
allowed  to  assume  the  title  of  king  of  England,  died  in  that
same  year,  so  suddenly  as  to  occasion  his  death  being  attri-
buted to  an  impulse  of  patriotic  indignation.  The  Danish
soldiers,  stationed  in  the  towns  or  in  their  vessels  at  the
mouths  of  the  rivers,  chose  as  successor  to  their  late  chief,
his  son  Knut,  who  was  then  on  a  mission  to  the  country  along
the  Humber  with  the  tributes  and  hostages  from  the  English
of  the  south.  The  latter,  encouraged  by  his  absence,  sent  a
messenger  to  the  exile  in  Normandy,  telling  him,  in  the  name
of  the  English  nation,  that  they  would  again  accept  him  as
king,  if  he  would  promise  to  govern  better.1

In  answer  to  this  message,  Ethelred  sent  his  son  Edward,
charging  him  to  salute,  in  his  name,  the  whole  English
people?2  and  to  take  a  public  oath  that  for  the  future  he  would
fulfil  his  duties  as  a  sovereign  with  fidelity,3  would  amend
whatever  was  not  liked,  and  forget  everything  that  had  been
done  or  said  against  his  person.  The  friendship  sworn  be-
tween the  nation  and  the  king  was  confirmed  on  both  sides
by  mutual  pledges,  and  the  Wittenagemote  pronounced  a
sentence  of  perpetual  outlawry  against  any  Dane  who  should
style  himself  king  of  England.4

Ethelred  again  assumed  his  emblems  of  honour;  it  is  not
exactly  known  over  what  extent  of  territory  he  reigned,  for
the  Danish  garrisons,  although  driven  from  some  towns,  still
retained  many  others,  and  even  the  city  of  London  remained
in  their  hands.  Perhaps  the  great  road  called  Wetlinga-

1  Cliron.  Saxon.,  145. Matth.  West.,  p.  202.
2  Gretan  ealne  liis  Leodscire. (Chron.  Sax.,  tit  sup,)

3  Hold  Llaford.  (16.)

4  Ut-lagede  of  Englahind,  ib. — Ley  signified  alike  country,  state,  and  sta-
tute, la\v,  from  the  verb  lagen,  to  lay,  to  establish.  Ut-lage  (outlaw)  means
a  banished  man,  and  a  man  placed  out  of  the  pale  of  the  law.

106  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1015

street,  served,  for  the  second  time,  as  a  line  of  demarcation
between  the  free  provinces  and  the  provinces  subject  to
foreign  domination.  King  Knut,  son  of  Swen,  dissatisfied
with  the  portion  which  the  Anglo-Saxons  obliged  him  to
accept,  returned  from  the  north;  and  landing  near  Sandwich,
in  a  fit  of  rage,  cut  off  on  the  sea-shore  the  hands  and  noses
of  all  the  hostages  his  father  had  received.  This  futile
cruelty  was  the  signal  for  a  fresh  war,  which  Ethelred,  for
the  future  faithful  to  his  promises,  courageously  maintained
with  various  success.  Upon  his  death,  the  English  chose  for
king,  not  one  of  his  legitimate  children,  who  remained  in
Normandy,  but  his  natural  son,  Edmund,  surnamed  Iron  Sides,
who  had  given  great  proofs  of  courage  and  skill.  By  his
energetic  conduct,  Edmund  raised  the  fortunes  of  the  English
nation ;  he  took  London  from  the  Danes,  and  fought  five  great
battles  with  them.1

After  one  of  these  battles,  fought  on  the  southern  boundary
of  Warwickshire,  and  lost  by  the  Danes,  one  of  their  captains,
named  Ulf,2  separated  from  his  men  in  the  rout,  and  flying  to
save  his  life,  entered  a  wood,  with  the  paths  of  which  he  was
unacquainted.  Having  wandered  about  it  all  night,  at  daybreak
he  met  a  young  peasant  driving  a  herd  of  oxen.  Ulf  saluted
him,  and  asked  his  name.  "  I  am  called  Godwin,3  son  of  Ulf-
noth,"4  answered  the  herdsman;  "and  you,  if  I  mistake  not,
are  one  of  the  Danish  army?"  The  Dane,  obliged  to  de-
clare himself,  begged  the  young  man  to  tell  him  at  what  dis-
tance he  was  from  the  vessels  stationed  in  the  Severn  or  the
adjacent  rivers,  and  by  what  road  it  would  be  possible  for  him
to  reach  them.  "  The  Dane  must  be  mad,"  answered  God-
win, "  who  looks  for  his  preservation  at  the  hands  of  a  Saxon."5
Ulf  intreated  the  herdsman  to  leave  his  herd,  and  to  guide
him  on  his  way,  joining  to  his  entreaties  the  promises  most
calculated  to  tempt  a  poor  and  simple  man.  "  The  way  is
long,"  said  the  young  herdsman,  "  and  it  will  be  dangerous  to
guide  you.  The  peasants,  emboldened  by  our  victory  of  yes-
terday, are  armed  throughout  the  country;  they  would  show

1  76-  148—150.  Henric.  Huntind.,  lib.  vi.  362.  Willelm.  Malmes.,  lib
ii.  72.  Muttb.  West.,  p.  203  and  204.  Ingulf.,  i.  p.  57,  58.

*  Ulf,  ivitlf,  hiilf,  succour,  succourable.
3  God,  good;  win,  cherished,  beloved.

*  Noth,  not,  nod,  nyd,  useful,  necessary.

5  Torfaei,  Hist.  rer.  Norveg.,  pars.  iii.  lib.  i.  cap,  xxi.  p.  36.

TO  1017.]  KNUT,  KING OF ALL ENGLAND.  107

no  mercy  either  to  your  guide  or  to  yourself."  The  chief
drew  a  gold  ring  from  his  finger  and  presented  it  to  the  young
Saxon,  who  took  it,  looked  at  it  with  curiosity,  and  after  a
moment's  reflection,  returned  it,  saying:  "  I  will  not  take  it,
but  I  will  give  you  my  aid."1  They  passed  the  day  in  the
cottage  of  Godwin's  father,  and  when  night  came,  as  they  de-
parted, the  old  peasant  said  to  the  Dane:  "  Know  that  it
is  my  only  son  who  trusts  to  your  good  faith;  there  will  be  no
safety  for  him  among  his  countrymen  from  the  moment  that  he
has  served  you  as  a  guide;  present  him,  therefore,  to  your  king,
that  he  may  take  him  into  his  service."2  Ulf  promised  to  do
far  more  than  this,  and  he  kept  his  word;  on  his  arrival  at  the
Danish  camp,  he  seated  the  peasant's  son  in  his  tent,  upon  a
seat  raised  as  high  as  his  own,  treating  him  as  his  own  son.3
He  obtained  for  him  from  king  Knut  military  rank,  and  ulti-
mately the  Saxon  herdsman  attained  the  dignity  of  governor
of  a  province  in  that  part  of  England  occupied  by  the  Danes.
This  man,  who  from  the  condition  of  a  cowherd  was  raised
by  the  protection  of  foreigners  to  the  highest  dignities  of
his  country,  was,  by  a  singular  destiny,  to  contribute  more
than  any  other  man  to  the  downfal  of  the  foreign  domi-
nation. His  name  will  soon  figure  among  the  great  names
of  this  history,  when,  perhaps,  there  will  be  some  interest
in  calling  to  mind  the  origin  and  singularity  of  his  for-
tune.

The  victories  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  over  the  Danes  led  to
an  armistice  and  a  truce  which  was  solemnly  sworn  to,  in  the
presence  of  the  two  armies,  by  the  kings,  Edmund  and  Knut;
they  mutually  exchanged  the  name  of  brother,4  and  by  com-
mon consent  fixed  the  limit  of  their  respective  kingdom  at
the  Thames.  On  the  death  of  Edmund,  the  Danish  king
passed  this  boundary,  which  was  to  have  been  inviolable;  he
had  secretly  gained  over  several  interested  or  ambitious  chief-
tains, and  the  terror  caused  by  his  invasion  gave  success  to
their  intrigues.  After  a  brief  resistance,  the  Anglo-Saxons  of
the  southern  and  western  provinces  submitted,  and  acknow-
ledged the  son  of  Swen  as  king  of  all  England.  Knut  swore
in  return  to  be  just  and  benevolent,  and  with  his  bare  hand

1  Torfsei,  Hist.,  par.  iii.  lib.  i.  cap.  xxi.  p.  36.

2  Torfei,  Hist.,  ut  sup.  3  Ib.

4  Simus  fratres  adoptivi,  (Henrici  Huntind.,  lib.  vi.  360.) Emrnoe  reginse
Encomion,  ut  sup.  p.  171. Willelm.  Malmes.,  lib.  ii.  72.

108  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1015

touched  the  hands  of  the  principal  chiefs,  in  token  of  sin-
cerity.1

Despite  these  promises  and  the  facility  with  which  he  had
gained  the  crown,  Knut  was  at  first  suspicious  and  cruel.  All
those  who  had  been  remarkable  for  their  attachment  to  the
ancient  liberty  of  the  country  and  the  Anglo-Saxon  royalty,
some  even  of  those  who  had  betrayed  this  cause  for  that  of
the  foreign  power,  were  banished  from  England  or  put  to
death.  "  Whoever  will  bring  me  the  head  of  an  enemy,"
said  the  Danish  king,  with  the  ferocity  of  a  pirate,  "  shall  be
dearer  to  me  than  a  brother."2  The  relations  of  the  two  last
kings,  Ethelred  and  Edmund,  were  proscribed  in  a  body;  the
sons  of  Ethelred  were  then  at  the  court  of  Normandy;  but
those  of  Edmund,  who  had  remained  in  England,  did  not
escape  persecution.  Not  venturing  to  put  them  to  death
before  the  eyes  of  the  English  people,  Knut  sent  them  to
Scandinavia,  and  carefully  insinuated  to  the  petty  king  to
whose  care  he  confided  them,  what  were  his  intentions  re-
specting them;  but  the  latter  feigned  not  to  understand  him,
and  allowed  his  prisoners  to  escape  into  Germany.  Thence,
for  greater  security,  they  went  to  the  court  of  the  king  of
Hungary,  who  now  began  to  figure  among  the  Christian
powers.  They  were  received  with  honour,  and  one  of  them
afterwards  married  a  cousin  of  the  emperor  of  the  Germans.3

Richard,  duke  of  Normandy,  seeing  the  impossibility  of
establishing  his  nephews  on  the  throne  of  England,  and  wish-
ing to  have  the  benefit  of  a  close  alliance  with  that  country,
adopted  an  entirely  personal  policy;  he  negotiated  with  the
Danish  king  to  the  prejudice  of  the  sons  of  Ethelred.  By  a
singular  but  skilfully  conceived  arrangement,  he  proposed
that  Knut  should  marry  the  mother  of  these  two  children,  who,
as  we  have  seen,  was  his  sister:  she  had  received  at  her
baptism  the  name  of  Emme  or  Emma,  but  on  her  arrival  in
England  the  Saxons  had  changed  this  foreign  name  into  that
of  Alfghive,  signifying  present  from  the  genii.  Flattered  at
the  idea  of  becoming  once  more  the  wife  of  a  king,  Emma
consented  to  this  second  union,  and  left  it  doubtful,  say  the  old

1  Roger  de  Hoveden,  ut  sup.  p.  430.

2  Florentii  Wigornensis,  Chron.  (Francfort,  1601)  p.  019.
3  Matt.  Westmonest.,  206. Henric.  Hunt.,  lib.  vi.  063.

TO 1030.]  CONDUCT OF KNUT.  109

historians,  which  had  acted  with  most  dishonour,  she  or  her
brother.1  She  soon  became  the  mother  of  a  new  son,  to
whom  the  power  of  his  father  promised  a  fortune  very  dif-
ferent from  that  of  the  children  of  Ethelred,  and,  in  the  in-
toxication of  her  ambition,  she  forgot  and  slighted  her  first-
born, who,  on  their  part,  kept  out  of  their  native  land,
gradually  forgot  its  manners  and  even  its  language;  they
contracted  in  exile  foreign  habits  and  friendships:  an  event  of
little  importance  in  itself,  but  which  had  fatal  consequences.

Secured  in  his  power  by  a  possession  of  several  years,  and
by  a  marriage  which  made  him,  in  a  measure,  less  foreign  to
the  English  nation,  king  Knut  gradually  became  gentler;  a
new  character  was  developed  in  him ;  his  ideas  of  government
were  as  elevated  as  his  epoch  arid  situation  were  capable  of;
he  had  even  the  desire  to  be  impartial  between  the  English
and  the  Danes.  Without  at  all  diminishing  the  enormous
taxes  which  the  conquest  had  imposed  on  England,  he  em-
ployed them  partly  in  purchasing  of  his  countrymen  their
return  to  Denmark,  and  thus  rendering  less  sensible  the
division  of  the  inhabitants  of  England  into  two  races,  races
hostile  and  of  unequal  condition.  Of  all  the  armed  Danes
who  had  accompanied  him,  he  only  retained  a  chosen  troop
of  a  few  thousand  men,  who  formed  his  guard,  and  who  were
called  T/iingamanna,  that  is  to  say,  men  of  the  palace.  The
son  of  an  apostate  to  Christianity,  he  proved  a  zealous  Chris-
tian, rebuilding  the  churches  that  his  father  and  himself  had
burned,  and  magnificently  endowing  the  abbeys  and  monas-
teries.2 From  a  desire  to  please  the  national  feelings  of  the
Anglo-Saxons,  he  raised  a  chapel  over  the  grave  of  Edmund,
king  of  East  Anglia,  who,  for  a  century  and  a  half  past,  had
been  venerated  as  a  martyr  of  the  faith  and  of  patriotism;
the  same  motive  led  him  to  erect  at  Canterbury  a  monument
to  the  archbishop  Elfeg,  a  victim,  like  king  Edmund,  to  the
cruelty  of  the  Danes:  he  wished,  further,  to  have  the  body
of  this  saint,  which  had  been  buried  at  London,  removed
hither,  and  the  inhabitants  of  that  city  having  refused  to
deliver  it  up,  the  Danish  king,  suddenly  resuming,  for  an  act
of  devotion,  the  habits  of  the  conqueror  and  pirate,  had  the

1  Willelm.  Malmea.,  tit  sup.  lib.  ii.  p.  73.
2  Diploma  Chnuti  regis;  Tngulf.,  ut  sup.  i.  58.

HO  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D.  1017

coffin  forcibly  carried  off  by  the  troops,  between  two  lines  of
whom,  with  drawn  swords,  it  was  conveyed  to  the  Thames,
and  there  placed  in  a  ship  of  war,  having  for  its  figure-head
the  upper  part  of  an  enormous  dragon,  richly  gilt.1

During  the  time  of  the  partition  of  England  into  indepen-
dent kingdoms,  several  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  kings,  especially
those  of  Wessex  and  Mercia,  had,  at  different  periods,  esta-
blished certain  payments  in  favour  of  the  Romish  church.
The  object  of  these  purely  gratuitous  gifts  was  to  procure  a
better  reception  and  aid,  in  case  of  need,  for  the  English
pilgrims  who  visited  Rome,  to  support  a  school  there  for
youths  of  that  nation,  and  to  go  towards  the  expense  of  the
lights  in  the  tombs  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul.2  The  payment
of  these  dues,  which  in  the  Saxon  language  were  called  Rom-
feok,  Rom-skeat,  Rome-money,  Rome -tax,  more  or  less
regular,  according  to  the  degree  of  zeal  of  the  kings  and
people,  was  entirely  suspended  in  the  ninth  century  by  the
Danish  invasions.  Wishing  to  expiate,  in  some  degree,  the
evil  which  his  country  had  done  to  the  church,  and  to  surpass
in  munificence  all  the  Anglo-Saxon  kings,  Knut  revived  this
institution,  giving  it  a  greater  extent,  and  subjected  England
to  a  perpetual  tribute,  called  Peter's  pence  (Rom-fetJi).  This
tax,  paid  at  the  rate  of  a  penny  of  the  money  of  the  time,
for  each  inhabited  house,  was,  in  the  terms  of  the  royal
ordinances,  to  be  levied  every  year,  to  the  praise  and  glory  of
God,,  on  the  day  of  the  feast  of  the  prince  of  the  apostles.3

The  pecuniary  homage  of  the  ancient  Saxon  kings  to  the
Romish  church  had  not  in  any  way  increased  the  religious
dependence  of  England.  This  dependence  and  the  power  of
the  church  were  then  of  an  essentially  spiritual  nature;  but
in  the  course  of  the  ninth  century,  in  consequence  of  the  revo-
lutions which  took  place  in  Italy,  the  supremacy  of  the  court
of  Rome  assumed  quite  a  new  character.  Several  towns,
which  had  escaped  from  the  authority  of  the  emperors  of  Con-
stantinople, or  been  taken  by  the  Franks  from  the  Lombard
kings,  had  placed  themselves  under  the  subjection  of  the  pope,
who  thus  combined  the  character  of  temporal  sovereign  with

1  Osberni,  Hist,  de  translatione  8.  Elphcqi.  Anglia  Sacra,  ii.  146.  Dug-
dale,  Man.  Anglic.,  i.  286.  .Toll.  Bromton,  \t  sup.  i.  col.  891,

2  Diplomata  reg.  Angliae.
3  Leges  Clmuti,  Art.  xii. Bromton,  ut  sup.  col.  920.

TO 1030.]  KNUT VISITS ROME.  Ill

that  of  head  of  the  church;  the  name  of  Patrimony  of  Saint
Peter  ceased  from  that  time  to  be  applied  to  private  domains,
separated  by  great  distances,  spread  through  Italy,  Sicily,  and
Gaul,  but  served  to  designate  a  vast  and  compact  territory,
possessed  or  ruled  sovereignly,  by  seigneural  title.1  Pursuant
to  the  fixed  and  universal  law  of  political  development,  this
new  state  was  not,  more  than  any  other,  to  be  without  ambi-
tion, and  its  necessary  tendency  was  to  abuse,  in  promotion
of  its  material  interests,  the  moral  influence  which  its  chief
exercised  over  the  kingdoms  of  the  west.  After  such  a  revo-
lution, the  transmission  of  an  annual  tribute  to  the  pontifical
court  could  not  fail  to  have,  at  all  events  in  the  idea  of  that
court,  a  meaning  wholly  different  from  before.  Notions
hitherto  unheard  of  began  to  germinate  there;  the  pope  and
those  about  him  spoke  of  the  universal  suzerainty  of  Saint
Peter  over  all  countries,  however  distant,  which  had  received
the  Christian  faith  from  Rome.  England  was  of  this  number;
the  re- establishment,  therefore,  of  a  tax,  though  meant  merely
as  a  proof  of  Christian  fervour,  was  perilous  for  the  political
independence  of  that  kingdom.  No  one  there,  it  is  true,
suspected  the  consequences  which  might  result  from  the  per-
petual obligation  of  Saint  Peter's  pence,  neither  the  king,
who  formed  the  engagement  from  religious  zeal,  or  from
vanity,  nor  the  people,  who  had  submitted  to  it  without  a
murmur,  as  an  act  of  devotion;  yet  half  a  century  sufficed
to  develop  these  consequences,  and  to  enable  the  court  of
Rome  to  treat  England  as  a  fief  of  the  apostolic  see.

About  the  year  1030,  king  Knut  resolved  to  go  in  person
to  Rome,  to  visit  the  tombs  of  the  apostles,  and  receive  the
thanks  due  to  his  liberalities;  he  set  out  with  a  numerous
retinue,  bearing  a  wallet  on  his  shoulder,  and  a  long  staff  in  his
hand.2  Having  accomplished  his  pilgrimage,  and  on  the  point
of  returning  to  the  north,  he  addressed  to  all  the  English
nation  a  letter,  throughout  which  there  prevails  a  tone  of
kindliness  that  contrasts  singularly  with  the  education  and
first  acts  of  royalty  of  the  son  of  Swen.

"  Knut,  king  of  England  and  Denmark,  to  all  the  bishops
and  primates,  and  all  the  English  people,  greeting.  I  hereby

1  Fleury,  Hist.  Ecdcx.,  viii.  29.

2  Torfaeus,  nt  sup.  pars.  iii.  lib.  iii.  cap.  xvi.  p.  233.  Encomion  Eromae,
p.  403,  in  notis.

112  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1018

announce  to  you  that  I  have  been  to  Rome  for  the  remission
of  my  sins,  and  the  welfare  of  my  kingdoms.  I  humbly
thank  the  Almighty  God  for  having  granted  me,  once  in  my
life,  the  grace  of  visiting  in  person  his  very  holy  apostles
Peter  and  Paul,  and  all  the  saints  who  have  their  habitation
either  within  the  walls,  or  without  the  Roman  city.  I  deter-
mined upon  this  journey,  because  I  had  learned  from  the
mouths  of  wise  men,  that  the  apostle  Peter  possesses  great
power  to  bind  or  to  loose,  and  that  he  keeps  the  keys  of  the
celestial  kingdom;  wherefore  I  thought  it  useful  to  solicit
specially  his  favour  and  patronage  with  God.

"  During  the  Easter  solemnity  was  held  here  a  great
assembly  of  illustrious  persons — namely,  pope  John,  the  em-
peror Kunrad,  and  all  the  chief  men  of  the  nations,  from
Mount  Gargano  to  the  sea  which  surrounds  us.  All  received
me  with  great  distinction,  and  honoured  me  with  rich  pre-
sents: I  have  received  vases  of  gold  and  silver,  and  stuffs  and
vestments  of  great  price.  I  have  conversed  with  the  emperor,
the  lord  pope,  and  the  other  princes,  upon  the  wants  of  all  the
people  of  my  kingdoms,  English  and  Danes.  I  have  endea-
voured to  obtain  for  my  people  justice  and  security  in  their
pilgrimages  to  Rome,  and  especially  that  they  may  not  for
the  future  be  delayed  on  their  road  by  the  closing  of  the
mountain  passes,  or  vexed  by  enormous  tolls.  I  also  com-
plained to  the  lord  pope  of  the  immensity  of  the  sums  exacted
to  this  day  from  my  archbishops,  when,  according  to  custom,
they  repair  to  the  apostolical  court  to  obtain  the  pallium.  It
has  been  decided  that  this  shall  not  occur  for  the  future.

"  I  would  also  have  you  know  that  I  have  made  a  vow  to
Almighty  God  to  regulate  my  life  by  the  dictates  of  virtue,
and  to  govern  my  people  with  justice.  If  during  the  im-
petuosity of  my  youth  I  have  done  anything  contrary  to
equity,  I  will  for  the  future,  with  the  help  of  God,  amend
this  to  the  best  of  my  power;  wherefore,  I  require  and  com-
mand all  my  councillors  and  those  to  whom  I  have  confided
the  affairs  of  my  kingdom,  to  lend  themselves  to  no  injustice,
either  in  fear  of  me,  or  to  favour  the  powerful.  I  recommend
them,  if  they  prize  my  friendship  and  their  own  lives,  to  do
no  harm  or  violence  to  any  man,  rich  or  poor;  let  every  one
in  his  place  enjoy  that  which  he  possesses,  and  not  be  dis-
turbed in  that  enjoyment,  either  in  the  king's  name  or  in  the

TO  1035.]  DEATH  OF  KNUT.  113

name  of  any  other  person,  nor  under  pretext  of  levying  money
for  my  treasury;  for  1  need  no  money  obtained  by  unjust
means.

"  I  propose  to  return  to  England  this  summer,  and  as  soon
as  the  preparations  for  my  embarkation  shall  be  completed.
I  intreat  and  order  you  all,  bishops  and  officers  of  my  king-
dom of  England,  by  the  faith  you  owe  to  G  od  and  to  me,  to
see  that  before  my  return  all  our  debts  to  God  be  paid —
namely,  the  plough  dues,  the  tithe  of  animals  born  within  the
year,  and  the  pence  due  to  Saint  Peter  from  every  house  in
town  and  country;  and  further,  at  mid  August,  the  tithe  of
the  harvest,  and  at  Martinmas  the  first  fruit  of  the  seed;  and
if,  on  my  landing,  these  dues  are  not  fully  paid,  the  royal
power  will  be  exercised  upon  defaulters,  according  to  the
rigour  of  the  law  and  without  any  mercy."1

It  was  in  the  reign  of  Knut,  and  favoured  by  the  protracted
wars  that  he  prosecuted  to  reunite  the  other  Scandinavian
kingdoms  to  Denmark,  that  Godwin,  the  Saxon  peasant,
whose  singular  adventure  we  have  before  related,  gradually
rose  to  the  highest  military  honours.  After  a  great  victory
gained  over  the  Norwegians,  he  obtained  the  dignity  of  earl,
or  political  chief  of  the  ancient  kingdom  of  Wessex,  now
reduced  to  the  state  of  a  province.  Many  other  English
zealously  served  the  Danish  king  in  his  conquests  in  Norway
and  on  the  shores  of  the  Baltic.  He  employed  the  Saxon
navy  to  destroy  that  of  the  petty  kings  of  the  north,  and
having  dispossessed  them,  one  after  the  other,  he  assumed  the
new  title  of  emperor  of  the  north,  by  the  grace  of  Christ,
king  of  kings.'2  Despite  this  intoxication  of  military  glory,
however,  the  national  antipathy  to  the  Danish  domination  did
not  cease;  and  on  the  death  of  their  great  king,  as  his  con-
temporaries called  him,  things  resumed  their  course.  Nothing
remained  of  the  apparent  fusion  of  two  races  under  the  same
flag;  and  this  empire,  raised  for  a  moment  above  all  the  king-
doms of  the  north,  was  dissolved  in  the  same  manner  as  the
vast  empire  of  Charlemagne.  The  Scandinavian  populations
expelled  their  Danish  conquerors,  and  chose  national  chiefs

1  Floreut.  Wigorn.  Chron.,  p.  021.

2  Ego  ....  imperator  Kmito  a  Cbristo  rege  regnm,  regimiiiis  .  .  .  polilus
(Diploma  Knuti  regis,  fipitd  Wilkins,  Concilia Mfignse  Britanmee,  i.  '-M)G.")
VOL.  I.  I

114  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1030

for  themselves.  More  anciently  subjected,  the  Anglo-Saxons
could  not  all  at  once  regain  their  liberty  in  so  complete  a
manner;  but  they  secretly  attacked  the  power  of  the  foreigners,
and  commenced  by  intrigues  a  revolution  that  was  to  be  ter-
minated by  force.1

The  Danish  king  died  in  the  year  1035,  and  left  three  sons,
of  whom  one  only,  named  Hardeknut,  (Harda-knut,  Horda-
knut,  Hartha-knut^)  that  is,  Knut  the  strong  or  the  brave,
was  born  of  the  Norman  Emma;  the  others  were  the  children
of  a  first  wife.  Knut  had  at  his  death  desired  that  the  son
of  Emma  should  be  his  successor;  such  a  nomination  was
rarely  without  influence  upon  those  to  whom  the  German
customs  gave  the  right  of  electing  their  kings.  But  Harde-
knut was  then  in  Denmark;  and  the  Danes  of  London,2  eager
to  have  a  chief,  that  they  might  be  united  and  powerful  against
the  discontented  Saxons,  elected  as  king  another  son  of  Knut,
named  Harold.3  This  election,  sanctioned  by  the  majority,
met  with  some  opponents,  whom  the  English  hastened  to  join,
in  order  to  nourish  and  envenom  the  domestic  quarrel  of  their
masters.  The  provinces  of  the  south-west,  which,  for  the
whole  duration  of  the  conquest,  were  always  the  first  to  rise
and  the  last  to  submit,  proclaimed  Hardeknut  king,  while  the
Danish  soldiers  and  sailors  installed  Harold  in  London.  This
political  schism  again  divided  England  into  two  zones,  sepa-
rated by  the  Thames.  The  north  was  for  Harold,  the  south
for  the  son  of  Emma;  but  the  struggle  carried  on  in  these
two  names  was  in  reality  the  struggle  between  the  two  great
interests  of  the  all-powerful  conquerors  to  the  north  of  the
Thames,  and  the  less  feeble  of  the  conquered  to  the  south.

Godwin,  son  of  Ulfnoth,  was  then  chief  of  the  vast  pro-
vince of  Wessex,  and  one  of  the  most  powerful  men  in  Eng-
land. Whether  he  had  already  conceived  the  project  of
using  the  power  he  derived  from  the  foreigners  for  the  deli-
verance of  his  nation,  or  felt  a  personal  affection  for  the
younger  son  of  Knut,  he  favoured  the  absent  claimant,  and
invited  the  widow  of  the  late  king  into  the  west.  She  came,

1  Prsesidia  militum  danorum  in  Anglin,  ne  Anglici  a  dominio  Danorum
labereutur. (Petri  Olai  Excerpt,  apitd  Script,  rer.  Dame,  ii.,  207.)  Saga  af
Mngnusi  Berfsetta,  cap.  xi.;  Snorre's  Heiraskringla,  iii.  211.
2  Ingulf.,  ut  Kiip.  i.  61. Cbron.  Saxon.,  p.  154.

3  Her,  eminent,  chief;  aid,  hold,  faithful. The  Saxous  wrote  it  Harold.

TO  1035.]  HAROLD CROWNED.  115

accompanied  bj  some  Danish  troops,1  and  bringing  wi'th  her
part  of  her  husband's  treasures.  Godwin  assumed  the  office  of
general  in  chief  and  protector  of  the  kingdom  in  the  name
and  in  the  absence  of  the  son  of  Emma.2  He  received,  for
Hardeknut,  the  oaths  of  fidelity  of  the  whole  southern  po-
pulation. This  ambiguous  insurrection,  which,  under  one
aspect,  appeared  the  struggle  of  two  pretenders,  under  an-
other, a  war  of  nation  against  nation,  did  not  extend  north
of  the  Thames.  There  the  mass  of  the  Saxon  inhabitants
swore,  in  common  with  the  Danes,  fidelity  to  king  Harold;
there  were  only  a  few  individual  exceptions,  as  the  refusal  of
Ethelnoth,3  an  Englishman  by  birth  and  archbishop  of  Can-
terbury, to  consecrate  the  king  elected  by  the  foreigners,  and
to  give  him  the  sceptre  and  crown  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  kings.4
Harold,  according  to  some  historians,  crowned  himself  with
his  own  hand,  without  any  religious  ceremony;  and  renewing
in  his  heart  the  ancient  spirit  of  his  ancestors,  he  conceived  a
hatred  for  Christianity.  It  was  the  hour  of  worship,  and
when  the  people  were  repairing  to  church,  that  he  selected
to  send  for  his  hunting  dogs,  or  have  his  table  served.5

A  fierce  war  between  the  south  and  north  of  England,
between  the  Saxon  population  and  the  Danish  population,
appeared  inevitable.  This  expectation  occasioned  a  sort  of
panic  among  the  Anglo-Saxon  inhabitants  of  the  left  bank  of
the  Thames,6  who,  despite  their  apparent  fidelity  to  the  king
recognised  by  the  Danes,  feared  lest  they  should  be  treated
as  rebels.  Many  families  quitted  their  houses,  and  sought
shelter  in  the  forests.  Whole  troops  of  men,  women,  and
children,  with  their  cattle  and  goods,  proceeded  to  the  marshes,
which  extended  for  more  than  a  hundred  miles  over  the
four  counties  of  Cambridge,  Huntingdon,  Northampton,  and
Lincoln.7  This  district,  which  appeared  a  vast  lake  inter-
spersed with  islands,  was  only  inhabited  by  monks,  who  owed
to  the  munificence  of  the  ancient  kings  vast  houses  built
amidst  the  waters,  upon  piles  and  earth  brought  from  a  dis-

1  Mid  ....  huscarlum  (Chron.  Saxon.,  154.)

8  Willelm.  Malmes.,  ut  sup.,  lib.  ii.  p.  76.  Henric.  Huntind.,  ut  sup.  lib.  yi.
p.  364.  Chron  Sax.  p.  155.

3  Ethel,  noble  ;  noth,  useful.  4  Emmse  reginse  Encom.,  p.  174.

5  Ibid.  6  Ingulf.,  ut  sup.  i  fil.  "  Id.  II.

I  2

116  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1037

tance.1  The  poor  fugitives  settled  in  the  willow  groves
which  covered  these  low  and  muddy  lands.  "Wanting  many
of  the  necessaries  of  life,  and  having  nothing  to  do  the  whole
day,  they  assailed  with  solicitations,  or  with  visits  of  simple
curiosity,  the  monks  of  Croyland,  Peterborough,  and  other
neighbouring  abbeys.  They  went  to  and  fro  unceasingly  to
demand  assistance,  counsel  or  prayers;2  they  followed  the
monks  or  servants  of  the  convent  at  every  turn,  importuning
them  to  pity  their  lot.  In  order  not  to  depart  from  the
observance  of  their  rules,  the  monks  shut  themselves  up  in
their  cells,  and  deserted  the  cloister  and  the  church,  because
the  crowd  flocked  there.  Wulf,  a  hermit,  who  lived  alone  in
the  marshes  of  Pegland,  was  so  alarmed  at  finding  himself
suddenly  surrounded  by  men  and  noise,  that  he  abandoned
his  cabin,  and  fled  to  seek  other  deserts.

The  war,  so  desired  on  one  side  of  the  Thames,  and  so
dreaded  on  the  other,  did  not  take  place,  because  the  absence
of  Hardeknut  being  protracted,  the  enthusiasm  of  his  Danish
partisans  subsided,3  and  the  English  of  the  south  did  not  think
the  moment  had  arrived  for  them  to  raise  their  national  stan-
dards, not  as  favourers  of  a  Danish  pretender,  but  as  enemies
to  all  the  Danes.  The  Norman  woman,  whose  presence
served  to  give  to  the  insurrection  a  colour  less  offensive  in
the  eyes  of  a  foreign  power,  made  peace  with  this  power,  and
surrendered  the  treasure  of  Knut  to  the  rival  of  her  own  son.
Godwin  and  the  other  Saxon  chiefs  of  the  west,  forced  by
her  desertion  to  acknowledge  Harold  as  king,  swore  obe-
dience to  him,  and  Hardeknut  was  forgotten.4  At  the  same
time  there  happened  a  tragical  event,  the  story  of  which  has
only  reached  us  enveloped  in  much  obscurity.  A  letter
from  Emma,  who  was  living  at  London  on  good  terms  with
king  Harold,  was  sent,  it  would  appear,  to  the  two  sons  of
Ethelred  in  Normandy;  their  mother  informed  them  in  it
that  the  Anglo-Saxon  people  appeared  disposed  to  make
one  of  them  king,  and  to  shake  off  the  Danish  yoke;  she

1  Will.  Malmesb.,  nt  sup.  lib.  iv.  p.  292.

2  Ingulf.,  ut  sup.  i.  til.
3  Roger  de  Hoved.,  ut  sup.  pars.  i.  438.
*  Rex  plenarius Full  cyng  ofer  all  Engla-land. (Cliron.  Sax.,  P.

"

TO  1037.] ALFRED,  SON  OF  ETHELRED.  117

invited  one  of  them  to  come  secretly  to  England,  to  advise
with  her  and  their  friends.1  Whether  the  letter  was  genuine
or  forged,  the  sons  of  Ethelred  received  it  with  joy,  and
the  younger  of  the  two,  Alfred,  embarked  by  the  consent  of
his  brother,  with  a  troop  of  Norman  or  Boulognese  sol-
diers,2  which  was  contrary  to  the  instructions  of  Emma,  if,
indeed,  the  invitation  proceeded  from  her.3

The  young  Alfred  landed  at  Dover,  and  advanced  south
of  the  Thames,  where  he  was  likely  to  encounter  less  danger
and  difficulty,  because  the  Danes  were  not  numerous  there.
Godwin  went  to  meet  him,  perhaps  to  ascertain  his  capacity,
and  to  concert  with  him  some  plan  for  the  national  deli-
verance. He  found  him  surrounded  by  foreigners,  who  had
come  in  his  train  to  share  the  high  fortune  he  hoped  to
find  in  England,  and  this  sight  suddenly  converted  the
favourable  disposition  of  the  Saxon  chief  towards  Alfred  into
hatred.  An  ancient  historian  on  this  occasion  puts  into  the
mouth  of  Godwin  a  speech  to  the  assembled  chiefs,  in  which
he  represents  to  them  that  Alfred  was  come  escorted  by  too
many  Normans;  that  he  had  promised  to  these  Normans  pos-
sessions in  England,  and  that  they  must  not  allow  this  race
of  foreigners,  known  throughout  the  world  for  their  craft
and  daring,  to  become  masters  in  the  country.4  Whatever
may  have  been  the  fact  as  to  this  harangue,  Alfred  was  aban-
doned, if  not  betrayed  by  Godwin  and  the  Saxons,5  who
in  truth  had  not  summoned  him  from  beyond  seas,  nor
drawn  him  into  the  peril  in  which  they  left  him.  Harold's
officers,  informed  of  his  landing,  surprised  him  with  his  com-
panions in  the  town  of  Guildford,  while  they  were  unarmed
and  dispersed  in  different  houses.  They  were  all  seized  and
bound,  without  any  attempt  being  made  to  defend  them.6

More  than  six  hundred  foreigners  had  followed  young
Alfred;  they  were  separated  from  him,  and  treated  with  the

1  Eogo.  umis  vestrum  ad  me  velociter  et  private  veniat.  (Emmae  regime
ericom.,  p.  174.)

2  Willelm.  Gemet.,  vt  sup.  p.  271.
3  Job.  Bromton,  ut  sup.  i.  col.  930. Emma?  Encom.,  p.  175  &  G.

4  Henric.  Huntind.,  ut  sup.  lib.  vi.  p.  365

5  Willelm.  Malmes.,  ut  sup.  lib.  ii.  p.  77.

6  Roger  de  Hoveden,  ut  sup.  p.  438.  Ailred.  Eieval.  Genealog.  reg.  Aug.
apud  Hist.  angl.  Script.  (Selden)  i.  col.  360.  Guill.  Pictaviensis,  apud
Script,  rer.  Normami.,  p.  178.

118  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1040

greatest  barbarity;  nine  of  each  ten  perished  in  horrible  tor-
tures; the  tenth  alone  obtained  his  life.  The  son  of  Ethelred,
transferred  to  the  island  of  Ely,  in  the  heart  of  the  Danish
territory,  was  brought  before  judges,  who  condemned  him  to
lose  his  eyes  as  a  violator  of  the  peace  of  the  country.  His
mother  took  no  steps  to  save  him  from  this  punishment.  She
deserted  the  orphan,  says  the  ancient  chronicler;1  and  other
historians  reproach  her  with  having  been  an  accomplice  in  his
death.2  The  latter  assertion  may  be  doubted,  though  it  is  a
singular  circumstance  that  Emma,  on  being  shortly  afterwards
banished  from  England  by  king  Harold,  did  not  repair  to
Normandy  with  her  own  relations  and  the  second  son  of
Ethelred,  but  sought  a  foreign  asylum  in  Flanders,3  whence
she  addressed  herself  to  the  son  of  Knut  in  Denmark,  intreat-
ing  him  to  revenge  his  maternal  brother,  the  son  of  Ethel-
red  the  Saxon,  who,  said  Emma,  had  been  assassinated  by
Harold,  and  betrayed  by  Godwin.4

The  treachery  of  Godwin  was  the  war-cry  of  the  Normans,
who  in  their  blind  resentment  accused  the  Saxons  rather  than
the  Danes  of  the  massacre  of  their  countrymen,  victims  of  a
too  hazardous  enterprise.  There  are,  besides,  many  versions
of  this  affair,5  of  which  not  one  is  supported  by  sufficient
proofs  to  be  regarded  as  the  true  one.  An  historian,  among
the  most  worthy  of  belief,  commences  his  narration  in  these
words  :  "  I  am  now  going  to  relate  what  the  story-tellers  re-
count of  the  death  of  Alfred:"6  and  at  the  end  of  his  narrative,
he  adds,  "  This  being  the  common  rumour,  I  have  not  omitted
it,  but  as  no  chronicle  mentions  it,  I  affirm  it  not."7  What
appears,  beyond  doubt,  is  the  execution  of  the  son  of  Ethel-
red,  and  of  several  hundred  men  who  had  accompanied  him.
from  Normandy  and  France,  to  excite  the  Saxons  to  insur-
rection; the  interview  of  Godwin  with  this  young  man,  and
more  especially,  the  premeditated  treachery  of  which  he  is

1  Willelm.  Malmes.,  ut  sup.  lib.  ii.  p.  76. — Eluredi  carmen  scire  volebat,
et  Edwardo  exuli  nicbel  penibus  boni  faciebat.  (Dugdale,  Monast.  Anylic.
i.  33.)

2  C.  Joh.  Bromt.,  ut  sup.  i.  col.  934.. Dugdale,  p.  35.

3  Henrici  Hunt.,  lib.  vi.  p.  304.
4  Roger  de  Hoveden,  pars  i.  ut  sup.  p.  408.

s  Joh.  Bromt.,  ut  sup.
6  Willelm.  Malmes.,  lib.  ii.  ut  sup.  p.  77.  7  Id.  ib.

TO  1040.]  ELECTION OF HARDEKNUT.  119

accused  by  many  writers,  appear  to  be  fabulous  circumstances,
superstructed  on  one  genuine  fact.  However  unworthy  of
belief  these  fables  may  be,  they  are  far  from  being  destitute
of  historical  importance,  in  consequence  of  the  credit  they
obtained  in  foreign  countries,  and  the  national  resentment
which  they  excited  against  the  English  people.

On  the  death  of  Harold,  the  Anglo-Saxons,  still  not  bold
enough  to  choose  a  king  of  their  own  race,  concurred  with  the
Danes  in  electing  the  son  of  Emma  and  Knut.1  The  first
act  of  royalty  done  by  Hardeknut  was  to  order  the  body  of
his  predecessor,  Harold,  to  be  disinterred,  and  after  the  head
had  been  cut  off,  to  be  thrown  into  the  Thames.  Some  Danish
fishermen  found  the  body,  and  again  buried  it  at  London,  in
the  cemetery  set  apart  for  their  nation,  who  even  in  the
grave  were  resolved  to  be  distinguished  from  the  English.*
Having  given  this  example  of  vengeance  and  barbarity
against  one  dead  brother,  the  new  king,  with  a  great  show  of
fraternal  affliction,  commenced  an  extensive  judicial  inquiry
into  the  murder  of  Alfred.  He  himself  being  a  Dane,  no
man  of  Danish  race  was  cited  by  him  to  appear  before  the
justice-seat,  and  Saxons  were  alone  charged  with  a  crime
which  could  only  have  been  useful  to  their  masters.  God-
win, whose  power  and  doubtful  designs  inspired  great  fears,
was  the  first  accused;  he  presented  himself,  according  to  the
English  law,  accompanied  by  a  great  number  of  relations,
friends  and  witnesses,  who,  with  him,  swore  that  he  had
taken  no  part,  directly  or  indirectly,  in  the  death  of  the  son
of  Ethelred.  This  legal  proof  was  not  sufficient  with  a  king
of  foreign  race;  and  in  order  to  give  it  value,  it  was  necessary
for  the  Saxon  chief  to  back  it  with  rich  presents,  the  de-
tails of  which  if  not  wholly  fabulous,  would  lead  one  to  be-
lieve that  many  of  the  English  assisted  their  countryman  to
buy  off  this  prosecution,  instituted  in  bad  faith.  Godwin  gave
king  Hardeknut  a  vessel  adorned  with  gilt  metal  and  manned
with  eighty  soldiers,  each  with  a  gilt  helmet,  a  gilt  axe  upon
his  left  shoulder,  a  javelin  in  his  right  hand,  and  on  each  arm
bracelets  of  gold,  weighing  six  ounces.3  A  Saxon  bishop,

1  Id.  ib.  Matth.  Westm.,  ut  sup.  p.  210.

2  Ingulf.,  ut  sup.  i.  02.
3  Willelm.  Malraesb.,  lib.  ii.  ut  sup.  p.  77.

120  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1040

named  Leofwin,1  accused  of  having  assisted  the  son  of  Ulf-
noth  in  his  alleged  treason,  like  Godwin,  cleared  himself  by
presents.

In  general,  in  his  relations  with  the  conquered,  Harde-
kuut  showed  less  cruelty  than  avarice;  his  love  of  money
equalled  and  perhaps  exceeded  that  of  the  pirates  his  an-
cestors. He  overwhelmed  England  with  taxes,  and  more  than
once  his  collectors  fell  victims  of  the  hatred  and  despair  they
excited.  The  citizens  of  Worcester  killed  two  in  the  exer-
cise of  their  functions.  As  soon  as  the  news  of  this  murder
reached  the  Danish  authorities,  two  chieftains  of  that  nation,
Leofrik  and  Siward,  the  one  governor  of  Mercia,  the  other  of
Northumbria,  united  their  forces  and  marched  against  the
rebel  city,  with  orders  to  waste  it  by  fire  and  steel.  The
inhabitants  abandoned  their  houses  in  a  body,  and  took  refuge
in  one  of  the  islands  formed  by  the  Severn;  they  here  raised
intrenchments,  and  resisted,  until  the  wearied  assailants  al-
lowed them  to  return  in  peace  to  their  dwellings.2

Thus  the  spirit  of  independence,  wrhich  the  conquerors  called
revolt,  gradually  revived  among  the  sons  of  the  Saxons  and
the  Angles.  Misery  and  insults  were  not  wanting  to  awaken
in  their  minds  regret  for  their  lost  liberty.3  The  Dane  wrho
bore  the  title  of  king  of  England  was  not  the  only  oppressor
of  the  natives;  under  him  was  a  whole  nation  of  foreigners,
each  of  whom  did  his  best  towards  the  evil  work.  This  su-
perior class,  of  whom  the  English  were  subjects  and  not  fel-
low citizens,  did  not  pay  taxes  like  the  English,  but,  on  the
contrary,  shared  the  imposts  levied  by  their  chief,  receiving,
at  fixed  periods,  large  distributions  of  money.4  When  the
king,  in  his  military  reviews  or  pleasure  excursions,  used  the
house  of  a  Dane  as  his  lodging,  the  Dane  was  paid,  sometimes
in  money,5  sometimes  with  the  fat  cattle  which  the  Saxon

1  Id.  ib.  Lcof-ir'ni. Lcof,  liaf,  licb,  dear,  beloved.

•  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  ii.  ut  sup.  p.  76.

3  Job.  Bromt.,  ut  sup.  i.  col.  9.V1.

4  Classiariis  suis  per  siuguins  naves  viginti  marcas. (Willelm.  Malinesb.,
lib.  ii.,  ut  *>//>.  p.  70.) Kavhim  sirigulis  remigibus,  viii.  marcas. (Chron.
Sax.  p.  1"»U.) — xxxii  navibus,  xi  millia  librarum. (ib.')

5  Iste  dedit Danis xxviii.  mill. lib.  argenti.  ad  sumptus  hospitii

regis  (Henrici  Knyghton,  da  Event.  Angl.\\\>.  i.  cap.  xxvi.  apud  Script,  hist.
Angl.  (Selden)  ii.  col.  2020.

TO  1041.] EXPULSION  OF  THE  DANES.  121

peasant  had  thus  fed  for  the  table  of  his  conquerors.1  But
the  house  of  the  Saxon  was  the  inn  of  the  Dane;  the
foreigner  there  gratuitously  enjoyed  fire,  food,  and  bed;  he
occupied  the  place  of  honour  as  master.2  The  head  of  the
family  might  not  drink  without  his  guest's  permission,  nor  be
seated  in  his  presence.  The  latter  could  at  pleasure  insult
the  wife,  the  daughter,  or  the  servant3  of  his  Saxon,  and  if  he
defended  or  avenged  them,  he  found  no  asylum;  he  was  pur-
sued and  tracked  like  a  wild  beast;  a  price  was  set  on  his
head  as  on  a  wolfs;  he  became  a  wolfs  head,  to  adopt  the
Anglo-Saxon  expression;4  and  nothing  remained  for  him  but
to  fly  to  the  forest  with  the  wolves,  to  become  a  brigand
there,  and  war  against  the  foreign  conquerors,  and  the  na-
tives, who  slumbered  like  cowards  beneath  the  yoke  of  these
foreigners.

These  long  accumulated  sufferings  at  length  produced  their
fruits ;  on  the  death  of  king  Hardeknut,  which  took  place  sud-
denly amidst  a  marriage  feast,  before  the  Danes  assembled
to  elect  a  new  king,  a  great  insurrectionary  army  was  formed
under  the  command  of  a  Saxon  named  Howne.5  Unfor-
tunately, the  patriotic  exploits  of  this  army  are  now  as  little
known,  as  the  name  of  its  chief  is  obscure.  Godwin  and  his
son,  Harald  (or  Harold,  according  to  the  Saxon  orthography),
now  raised  the  standard  of  independence  of  their  country,
against  every  Dane,  king  or  claimant,  chief  or  soldier.  Beaten
back  rapidly  to  the  north,  driven  from  town  after  town,  the
Danes  left  the  country,  and  landed,  greatly  diminished  in  num-
ber, on  the  shores  of  their  old  country.0  They  in  their  turn
related  a  story  of  treachery,  the  romantic  circumstances  of
which  are  found,  equally  fabulous,  in  the  history  of  several
nations;  they  said  that  Harold,  son  of  Godwin,  had  invited

1  Magna  summa  aiiirnalium  bene  crassorum. (ib.)
-  Umis  Danus  custos  et  magister  domus  super  omnes  aJios  hospitii.  (ib-)

3  Nam  si  Dacus  Anglico  super  poutem  occurrisset,  Anglicus  pedem  movere
ansus  non  fuisset,  donee  Dacus  poutem  pertrausisset,  et  ulterius  nisi  Angli
in  honorem  Dacorum  capita  inclinassent  graves  poeuas  et  verbira  sentireut.
(Bromt.,  i.  col.  004.)

4  Wnlf-heofod,  the  term  applied  by  the  Saxons  to  men  outlawed  for  any
great  crime. (Wilkins,  Legc  et  Concilia.)

5  Knyghton,  lib.  i.  cap.  vi.  lit  sup.  «  Id.

122  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1042

the  chiefs  among  them  to  a  grand  banquet,  to  which  the
Saxons  came  armed,  and  attacked  them  unexpectedly.1

It  was  not  a  surprise  of  this  kind,  but  open  war,  which  put
an  end  to  the  dominion  of  the  Scandinavians  in  England.
Godwin's  son  and  Godwin  himself,  played,  at  the  head  of  the
revolted  nation,  the  most  conspicuous  part  in  this  national
war.  At  the  moment  of  deliverance,  the  whole  care  of  public
affairs  was  confided  to  the  son  of  the  cowherd  Ulfnoth,  who,
in  saving  his  country  from  the  hands  of  the  foreigners,  had
accomplished  the  extraordinary  fortune  he  had  begun  by
saving  a  foreigner  from  the  hands  of  his  countrymen.2  God-
win, had  he  desired  it,  might  have  been  named  king  of  the
English;  few  suffrages  would  have  been  denied  him,  but  he
preferred  to  direct  the  attention  of  the  people  towards  a  man
unconnected  with  the  recent  events,  without  enviers,  with-
out enemies;  inoffensive  to  all  from  his  absence  from  public
affairs,  interesting  to  all  by  his  misfortunes — towards  Edward,
the  second  son  of  Ethelred,  the  same  whose  brother  he  was
accused  of  having  betrayed  and  put  to  death.  By  the  advice
of  the  chief  of  Wessex,3  a  great  council,  assembled  at  Gilling-
ham,  decided  that  a  national  message  should  be  sent  to  Edward
in  Normandy,  to  announce  to  him  that  the  whole  people  had
elected  him  king,  but  upon  condition  that  he  should  bring
but  few  Normans  with  him.4

Edward  obeyed,  says  an  ancient  chronicle,5  and  came  to
England  with  very  few  men.  He  was  proclaimed  king  on
his  arrival,  and  crowned  in  the  cathedral  of  Winchester.  On
giving  him  the  crown  and  sceptre,  the  bishop  made  him  a
long  speech  upon  the  duties  of  royalty,  and  the  mild  and
equitable  government  of  his  Anglo-Saxon  predecessors.  As
he  was  unmarried,  he  selected  for  his  queen  the  daughter  of
the  powerful  and  popular  man  to  whom  he  owed  his  kingdom.
Various  evil  rumours  circulated  on  the  subject  of  this  marriage;
it  was  said  that  Edward,  alarmed  at  the  immense  authority
of  Godwin,  had  taken  him  for  a  father-in-law,  to  avoid  having

1  Petri  Olai,  Excerpt.,  -ut  sup.  ii.  207.

2  Dugdale,  Monast.  Anglic.,  i.  24.

3  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  ii.  ut  sup.  p.  80.

«  Chron.  Sax.,  p.  150.  Henric.  Huntind.,  lib.  vi.  utsup,  305  ;  Knyghton,
ut  sup.  lib.  i.  cap.  viii.  col.  2329.

5  Henrici  Huutind.,  lib.  vi.  itt  sup.

TO  1048.] RESTORATION  OF  ANGLO-SAXON  CUSTOMS.  123

him  for  an  enemy.1  Others  say  that,  before  procuring  the
election  of  the  new  king,  Godwin  had  exacted  from  him  an
oath,  by  God  and  his  soul,  that  he  would,  if  elected,  marry
his  daughter.2  However  this  may  have  been,  Edward  re-
ceived in  marriage  a  young  person  of  great  beauty  and  learn-
ing, modest  and  of  a  sweet  disposition;  she  was  called  Edith,
a  familiar  diminutive  for  Edswith  or  Ethelswith.3  "  I  have
often  seen  her  in  my  childhood,"  says  a  contemporary,  "  when
I  went  to  visit  my  father,  who  was  employed  in  the  king's
palace.  If  she  met  me  on  my  return  from  school,  she  inter-
rogated me  upon  my  grammar,  poetry,  or  even  logic,  in
which  she  was  well  versed;  and  when  she  had  entangled  me
in  the  meshes  of  some  subtle  argument,  she  never  failed  to
bestow  upon  me  three  or  four  crowns  by  her  servant,  and  to
send  me  to  have  refreshment  in  the  pantry."4  Edith  was
mild  and  kind  to  all  who  approached  her;  those  who  disliked
the  somewhat  savage  pride  of  character  of  her  father  and
brother,  praised  her  for  not  resembling  them,  as  is  poetically
expressed  in  a  Latin  verse,  then  much  esteemed:  "  Sicut
spina  rosam,  genuit  Godwinus  Editham." — "  As  the  thorn
produces  the  rose,  so  Godwin  produced  Edith."5

The  withdrawal  of  the  Danes,  and  the  complete  destruction
of  the  rule  of  the  conquest,  in  awakening  patriotic  thoughts,
had  rendered  the  Anglo-Saxon  customs  dearer  to  the  people.
They  desired  to  restore  them  in  all  their  pristine  purity,
freed  from  all  that  the  mixture  of  races  had  added  to  them  of
foreign  matter.  This  wish  led  them  to  revert  to  the  times
which  preceded  the  great  Danish  invasion,  to  the  reign  of
Ethelred,  whose  institutions  and  laws  were  sought  out  with
a  view  to  their  re-establishment.6  This  restoration  took  place
to  the  utmost  extent  possible,  and  the  name  of  king  Edward
became  connected  with  it;  it  was  a  popular  saying  that  this
good  king  had  restored  the  good  laws  of  his  father  Ethelred.
But,  in  truth,  he  was  no  legislator;  he  promulgated  no  new
code;  the  only  thing  was,  that  the  ordinances  of  the  Danish

3  Willelm  Gemet.,  tit  sup.  p.  271.
2  Dugdale,  Monast.  Anglic.,  i.  24.

3  Ed,  happy,  fortunate  ;  ctkel,  noble  ;  schwend,  steinlh,  swith,  light,  ac-
tive.

4  Ingulf.,  ut  sup.  i.  62.  5  Id.  ib.

6  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  ii.  ut  sup.

124  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1042

kings  ceased  in  bis  reign  to  be  executed.1  Tbe  tax  of  the
conquest,  at  first  granted  temporarily  under  the  name  of
Danegheld,  as  we  have  seen  above,  then  levied  each  year,
during  thirty  years,  for  the  foreign  soldiers  and  sailors,2  was
in  this  manner  abolished,  not  through  the  spontaneous  bene-
volence of  the  new  king,  but  because  there  were  no  longer
any  Danes  in  England.

That  is  to  say,  there  were  no  longer  any  Danes  living  in
the  country  as  rulers;  such  had  all  been  expelled;  but  the
English,  restored  to  liberty,  did  not  drive  from  their  habita-
tions the  laborious  and  peaceable  Danes  who,  swearing  obe-
dience to  the  common  law,  were  content  with  existing  simply
as  cultivators  or  citizens.  The  Saxon  people  did  not,  by  way
of  reprisals,  levy  taxes  on  them,  or  render  their  condition
worse  than  their  own.  In  the  eastern,  and  especially  in  the
northern  provinces,  the  children  of  the  Scandinavians  con-
tinued to  exceed  in  number  those  of  the  Anglo-Saxons;  these
provinces  were  distinguished  from  the  midland  and  southern
by  a  remarkable  difference  of  idiom,  manners,  and  local
customs,3  but  not  the  slightest  resistance  was  raised  to  the
government  of  the  Saxon  king.  Social  equality  soon  drew
together  and  fused  the  two  nations,  formerly  hostile.  This
union  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  English  soil,  formidable  to
foreign  invaders,  stayed  their  ambitious  projects,  and  no
northern  king  dared  to  assert  in  arms  the  heritage  of  the
sons  of  Knut.  These  kings  even  sent  messages  of  peace  and
friendship  to  the  peaceable  Edward:  "  We  will,"  said  they,
"  allow  you  to  reign  unmolested  over  your  country,  and  we
will  content  ourselves  with  the  lands  which  God  has  given
us  to  rule."4

But  under  this  exterior  appearance  of  prosperity  and  in-
dependence, new  germs  of  trouble  and  ruin  were  silently  de-
veloping themselves.  King  Edward,  son  of  a  Norman  woman,

1  Sub  nomine  regis  Edwardi  juratur,  non  quod  ille  statuerit,  sed  quod
observavrit.  (Id.  ib.)

*  Dane-geld,  dana-gcold ;  al.  Heregeold,  tribute  of  the  army  (Cliron.
Sax.  passim.)

»  Myrcna-laga,  West-Seaxna-laga,  Doma-laga.  See  Hickes,  Thesaurus
linguar.  Septentrion.

4  Magnus  then  godes  Saga,  cap.  iii.;  Snorre's  Heimskringla,  ii.  52;  In-
gulf., ?//  sup.  p.  G5  ;  Job.  Bromt.  ut  sup.  i.  col.  938.

TO  1048.] EDWARD'S  PATRONAGE  OF  FOREIGNERS.  125

brought  up  from  infancy  in  Normandy,  had  returned  almost
a  foreigner  to  the  country  of  his  ancestors;1  a  foreign  language
had  been  that  of  his  youth;  he  had  grown  old  among  other
men  and  other  customs  than  the  customs  and  men  of  England ;
his  friends,  the  companions  of  his  pleasures  and  his  sorrows,
his  nearest  relatives,  the  husband  of  his  sister,  were  all  beyond
seas.  He  had  sworn  to  bring  with  him  but  few  Normans,
and  but  few,  in  fact,  accompanied  him,  but  many  followed
him:  those  who  had  loved  him  in  his  exile,  those  who  had
more  or  less  assisted  him  when  he  was  poor,  all  hastened  to
besiege  his  palace.2  He  could  not  help  receiving  them  at  his
lireside  and  at  his  table,  or  even  the  preferring  them  to  the,
to  him,  strangers  from  whom  he  derived  his  fireside,  his  table,
and  his  title.  The  irresistible  tendency  of  early  affections  so
misled  him,  that  he  gave  all  the  high  dignities  and  great
offices  of  the  country  to  men  born  in  another  land,  and  who
cared  not  for  England.  The  national  fortresses  were  placed
under  the  guard  of  Norman  warriors;  Norman  priests  ob-
tained bishoprics  in  England,  and  became  the  chaplains,
councillors,  and  intimate  confidants  of  the  king.

Many  who  called  themselves  cousins  to  Edward's  mothei
passed  the  Channel,  sure  of  a  good  reception.3  None  who
solicited  a  favour  in  the  Norman  tongue4  met  with  a  denial;
their  language  even  banished  from  the  palace  the  national
language,  which  became  an  object  of  ridicule  with  the  foreign
courtiers;  flattery  was  ever  addressed  to  the  king  in  the  favourite
idiom.  All  the  ambitious  English  nobility  spoke  or  stam-
mered in  their  houses  the  new  court  language,  as  alone  worthy
of  a  well  born  man.5  They  cast  aside  their  long  Saxon
cloaks,  for  the  short  wide-sleeved  Norman  mantle;  they  imi-
tated in  their  writing  the  lengthened  form  of  the  Norman
letters;  instead  of  signing  their  name  at  the  bottom  of  civil
acts,  they  affixed  seals  of  wax,  in  the  Norman  fashion.  In
short,  all  the  ancient  national  customs,  even  in  the  most
trifling  things,  were  abandoned  to  the  lower  class.6

1  Ingulf.,  itt  sup.  p.  02.
2  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  ii.  ut  sup.  p.  80.

3  Attrahens  de  Normaunia  plurimos  quos,  variis  dignitatibus  promotes,
in  immensum  exaltabat  (Ingulf.,  ut  sup.  p.  02.)  Dugdale,  Mon.  AnyL,  i.  34.

4  Ingulf.,  ut  sup.

*  T anquam  magmim  gentilitium.  (Ingulf.,  tit  sup.)
6  Propriara  consuetudinem  in  his  et  in  aliis  multis  erubescere.  (Id.  ib.)

126  THE  NOEMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1042

But  the  people  who  had  shed  their  blood  that  England
might  be  free,  and  who  were  not  so  delighted  with  the  grace
and  charm  of  the  new  customs,  deemed  that  they  saw  the  re-
vival, under  another  form,  of  a  foreign  government.  Godwin,
although  among  his  countrymen  the  highest  in  dignity  and
the  next  after  the  king,  fortunately  had  not  forgotten  his
plebeian  origin,  and  joined  the  popular  party  against  the
Norman  favourites.  The  son  of  Ulfnoth  and  his  four  sons,
all  brave  warriors  and  greatly  beloved  by  the  people,  resisted,
with  erect  front,  the  Norman  influence,  as  they  had  drawn
their  swords  against  the  Danish  conquerors.1  In  the  palace,
where  their  daughter  and  sister  was  lady  and  mistress,  they
returned  with  insolence  the  insolence  of  the  parasites  and
courtiers  from  Gaul;  they  ridiculed  their  exotic  customs,  and
contemptuously  denounced  or  jested  at  the  weakness  of  the
king,  who  abandoned  to  them  his  confidence  and  the  fortune
of  the  country.2

The  Normans  carefully  collected  their  observations  and
envenomed  them  at  leisure;  they  incessantly  repeated  to  Ed-
ward that  Godwin  and  his  sons  grossly  insulted  him,  that
their  arrogance  was  unbounded,  and  that  it  was  easy  to  dis-
cern in  them  the  ambition  of  reigning  in  his  stead,  and  the
intention  to  betray  him.3  But  while  these  accusations  were
current  in  the  king's  palace,  in  the  popular  meetings4  the
conduct  and  character  of  the  Saxon  chief  and  his  sons  were
judged  far  differently.  "  Is  it  astonishing,"  asked  the  people,
"  that  the  author  and  support  of  Edward's  reign  should  be
indignant  at  seeing  new  men  from  a  foreign  nation  raised
above  him?  and  yet  never  does  he  utter  one  harsh  word  to
the  man  whom  he  himself  created  king."  The  Norman
favourites  were  denounced  as  infamous  informers,  fabricators
of  discord  and  trouble,5  and  there  was  ever  a  prayer,  in  ac-

1  Godwinum  et  natos,  magnanimos  viros  et  industries,  auctores  et  tu-
tores  regni.  (Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  ii.  nt  sup.  p.  80.)

2  Ib.  p.  81.

3  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  ii.  id  sup.

4  There  existed  a  variety  of  provincial  and  municipal  institutions  among
the  Anglo-Saxons,  f'olc-gcmot,  scire-gemvt,  provincial  assembly.  Burh-
gemot,  Wic-gemot,  town,  assembly.  Hmtiny,  Louse  of  council.  Hans-hiis,
common  house.  Gild-half,  club;  ged-scipc,  association.  (See  Hickes,
Thesaunis,  as  to  the  social  institutions  of  the  Anglo-Saxons.)
5  Willelm,  Malmesb.,  vt  sup.

TO 1048.]  DISCONTENT  OF  THE  ENGLISH.  127

clamations,  for  long  life  to  the  great  chief,  to  the  chief  mag-
nanimous by  sea  or  land.1  They  cursed  the  fatal  marriage
of  Ethelred  with  a  Norman,  that  union  contracted  to  save  the
country  from  foreign  invasion,2  and  from  which  a  fresh  inva-
sion was  now  the  result,  a  new  conquest,  under  the  mask  of
peace  and  friendship.

The  traces  and  perhaps  the  original  expression  of  these
national  maledictions  are  found  in  a  passage  of  an  ancient
historian,  in  which  the  singular  turn  of  the  ideas  and  the
vivacity  of  the  language  seem  to  reveal  the  style  of  the  people:
"  The  all-powerful  God  must  have  proposed  to  himself  at  once
two  plans  of  destruction  for  the  English  race,  and  must  have
framed  a  sort  of  military  ambuscade  against  it;  for  on  one
hand  he  let  loose  the  Danish  invasion;  on  the  other  he
created  and  cemented  the  Norman  alliance,  so  that,  if  we
escaped  the  blows  aimed  at  our  faces  by  the  Danes,  the  cun-
ning of  the  Normans  might  be  at  hand  to  surprise  us."3

1  Eadmeri,  Hist.  nov.  (Selden)  lib.  i.  p.  4.
2  Henrici  Huntind.,  lib.  vi.  ut  sup.  p.  539.  3  Id.  ib.

BOOK  III.

FROM  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  THE  ENGLISH  PEOPLE  AGAINST
THE  NORMAN  FAVOURITES  OF  KING  EDWARD,  TO  THE
BATTLE  OF  HASTINGS.

1048—1066.

Eustache  of  Boulogne,  lauds  at  Dover;  his  quarrel  with  the  inhabitants —
Patriotic  resistance  of  Godwin — Grand  armament  of  king  Edward —
Proscription  of  Godwin  and  his  sons — Triumph  of  the  Norman  favourites
— William,  duke  of  Normandy — His  origin  and  character — His  visit  to
England — His  ambitious  projects — Landing  of  Godwin  and  his  sons —
Their  entry  into  London — Terror  and  flight  of  the  Norman  favourites
— Keconciliation  of  Godwin  with  king  Edward — Death  of  Godwin —
Death  of  Siward,  chief  of  Northumberland — Talents  und  popularity  of
Harold,  son  of  Godwin — Insurrection  of  the  Northumbrians  against
Tosti — Banishment  of  Tosti — Hostility  of  the  Romish  church  to  the
English  people — Friendship  between  the  Romish  church  and  the  duke
of  Normandy — Harold  visits  Normandy — He  is  imprisoned  by  the  count
de  Ponthieu — His  release — He  is  received  at  Rouen  by  duke  William
— Request  made  him  by  William — Harold's  oath  upon  relics — His  re-
turn to  England — Death  of  king  Edward — Election  of  Harold — Indig-
nation of  the  duke  of  Normandy — Tosti  persuades  Harold  of  Norway
to  make  a  descent  upon  England — Message  from  William  to  Harold —
William's  negotiation  with  the  Romish  church — Temporal  sovereignty
of  the  church  at  this  period — The  dispute  between  William  and  Harold
referred  to  the  pope — Alexander  II.  decides  in  favour  of  William — Con-
vocation of  the  states  of  Normandy — William  baffles  this  opposition —
Grand  military  preparations — Enrolment  of  men  from  all  countries —
William  seeks  to  form  allies — National  animosity  between  the  Nor-
mans and  Britons — Conan,  earl  of  Brittany,  refuses  his  assistance — He
is  poisoned — Departure  of  the  Norman  fleet — Harold  of  Norway  lands
in  England — Harold  of  England  attacks  the  Norwegians — Rout  of  the
Norwegians — Landing  of  the  Norman  army  at  Pevensey  —  Harold
marches  against  the  Normans — He  forms  an  entrenchment  seven  miles
from  their  camp— Message  from  William  to  Harold  —  Reply  of  the
latter — State  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  army — Preparations  of  the  two
armies — Attack  upon  the  Anglo-Saxon  camp— Victory  of  the  Normans
— The  body  of  Harold  recognised  by  his  mistress.

AMONG  those  who  came  from  Normandy  or  France,  to  visit
king  Edward,  was  a  certain  Eustache,  who  on  the  other  side
of  the  channel  bore  the  title  of  count  de  Boulogne.  He  held
the  hereditary  government,  under  the  suzerainty  of  the  kings

TO  1048.] EUSTACHE  DE  BOULOGNE.  129

of  France,  of  the  town  of  Boulogne  and  a  small  territory
along  the  coast,  and  in  token  of  his  dignity  of  lord  of  a  mari-
time country,  when  he  was  armed  for  war,  wore  in  his
helmet  two  long  plumes  of  whalebone.1  Eustache  had  just
married  Edward's  sister,  the  widow  of  another  Frenchman
named  Gualtier  de  Mantes.2  The  Saxon  king's  new  brother-
in-law  sojourned  with  him  for  some  time,  with  a  numerous
retinue.  He  found  the  palace  filled  with  men  born,  like  him.'
self,  in  Gaul,  and  speaking  its  idiom,  so  that  England  ap-
peared to  him  a  conquered  country,  in  which  the  Normans
and  French  had  the  right  to  do  anything  they  pleased.  After
having  rested,  on  his.  return  home,  in  the  city  of  Canterbury,
the  count  proceeded  towards  Dover;  at  about  a  mile  from  the
town,  he  made  his  escort  halt,  quitted  his  travelling  palfrey,
and  mounted  the  charger  which  one  of  his  men  led  in  his
right  hand;3  he  put  on  his  coat  of  mail,  and  all  his  com-
panions did  the  same.  In  this  menacing  attire  they  entered
Dover.4

They  insolently  paraded  the  town,  marking  the  best  houses
to  pass  the  night  in,  and  authoritatively  established  them-
selves in  them.  The  inhabitants  murmured;  one  of  them  had
the  courage  to  stop  on  the  threshold  one  of  the  Frenchmen  who
was  about  to  take  up  his  quarters  in  his  house.  The  foreigner
drew  his  sword  and  wounded  the  Englishman,  who  hastily
arming  with  his  household,  attacked  and  killed  the  aggressor.
On  hearing  this,  Eustache  de  Boulogne  and  his  troop  left
their  lodgings,  remounted  their  horses,  and  besieging  the
house  of  the  Englishman,  murdered  him,  says  the  Saxon
chronicle,  before  his  own  hearth.5  They  then  went  through
the  town,  sword  in  hand,  striking  men  and  women,  and
crushing  children  under  the  feet  of  the  horses.6  They  had
not  proceeded  far  before  they  met  a  body  of  armed  citizens ;
and  in  the  combat  which  took  place,  nineteen  of  the  Bou-
lognese  were  killed.  The  count  fled  with  the  remainder,

1  See  Willelm.  Britonis  Philippeid,  apitd  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Franeic.,
xvii-  202.

2  Walterus  Medantinus. (Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  ii.  ut  sup.  81.)

3  Dcxtmrhis,  destrier.
4  Cliron.  Saxou.,  p.  103. Willelm.  Malmesb.,  nt  sup.

5  Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  102.
6  Koger  de  Hoveden,  nt  sup.  p.  441.
VOL.  I.  K

J30  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D. 1048

and  not  venturing  to  seek  the  harbour  to  embark,  he  turned
back  and  hastened  to  Gloucester,  where  king  Edward  then
resided  with  his  Norman  favourites.1

The  king,  say  the  chronicles,  gave  his  peace  to  Eustache
and  his  companions.2  He  believed,  on  the  bare  word  of  his
brother-in-law,  that  all  the  blame  lay  with  the  citizens  of
Dover,  and,  violently  enraged  against  them,  he  sent  for  God-
win, in  whose  government  the  town  was  included.  "Go
without  delay,"  said  Edward,  "and  chastise,  by  a  military
execution,3  those  who  attack  my  relations  with  arms  in  their
hands,  and  disturb  the  peace  of  the  country."  Less  prompt
to  decide  in  favour  of  a  foreigner  against  his  countrymen,
Godwin  suggested  that  instead  of  exercising  a  blind  vengeance
upon  the  whole  town>  the  magistrates  should  be  cited,  in  legal
form,  to  appear  before  the  king  and  royal  judges,  to  account
for  their  conduct.  "  It  is  not  right,"  said  he  to  the  king,  "  to
condemn,  without  hearing  them,  men  whom  it  is  your  duty  to
protect,"4

Edward's  fury,  aggravated  by  the  clamours  of  his  courtiers
and  favourites,  now  turned  wholly  against  the  English  chief,
who  himself,  charged  with  disobedience  and  rebellion,  was
cited  to  appear  before  a  great  council  convoked  at  Gloucester.
Godwin  at  first  was  little  moved  by  this  accusation,  thinking
the  king  would  soon  be  calmer,  and  that  the  other  chiefs
would  do  him  justice.5  But  he  soon  learned  that  by  means  of
the  royal  influence  and  the  intrigues  of  the  foreigners,  the
assembly  had  been  corrupted,  and  that  a  sentence  of  banish-
ment would  be  pronounced  against  himself  and  his  sons.
Both  father  and  sons  hereupon  resolved  to  oppose  their  popu-
larity to  these  machinations,  and  to  make  an  appeal  to  the
English  against  the  foreign  courtiers,  although  it  was  far
from  their  intention,  says  the  ancient  chronicle,  to  offer  any
violence  to  their  national  king.6

Godwin  raised  a  troop  of  volunteers  in  the  country  south
of  the  Thames,  the  whole  extent  of  which  he  governed.
Harold,  his  eldest  son,  assembled  a  great  number  of  men  on

1  Chron.  Saxon.  Fragm.,  sub  anno  MLII.  apud  Lve,  Glossar.  ii.ad  fmem.

2  Ib.

3  Mid  unfritha. (Chron.  Saxon.,  163.)
4  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  ut  stij).  5  /j

•  Chron.  Saxon.,  104.

A.D. 1048.] PATRIOTIC RESISTANCE OF GODWIN.  131

the  eastern  coast,  between  the  Thames  and  Boston  Wash ;  his
second  son,  Swen  or  Sweyn,  engaged  the  inhabitants  of  the
Severn  and  the  Welsh  frontier  in  this  patriotic  confedera-
tion. The  three  armies  united  near  Gloucester,  and  de-
manded of  the  king,  by  messengers,  that  count  Eustache  and
his  companions,  with  some  other  Normans  and  Boulognese  at
the  court,  should  bs  given  up  to  the  j  udgment  of  the  nation.
Edward  made  no  answer  to  these  requests,  and  sent  an  order
to  the  two  great  chiefs  of  the  northern  and  central  provinces,
Siward  and  Leofrik,  both  Danes  by  birth,  to  march  south-
west, with  all  the  forces  they  could  assemble.  The  inhabi-
tants of  Northumbria  and  Mercia,  though  they  armed  at  the
call  of  the  two  chiefs  for  the  defence  of  the  royal  authority,
did  so  with  little  ardour.  Siward  and  Leofrik  heard  their
soldiers  murmur  that  it  was  an  entire  miscalculation  to  sup-
pose that  they  would  shed  the  blood  of  their  countrymen  for
any  foreign  interest,  or  for  Edward's  favourites.1

Both  chieftains  saw  the  force  of  this;  the  national  distinc-
tion between  the  Anglo-Saxons  and  the  Anglo-Danes  had
become  too  slight  for  the  old  hatred  of  the  two  races  to  be  again
worked  for  the  profit  of  the  enemies  of  the  country.  The
chiefs  and  warriors  of  the  northern  provinces  refused  posi-
tively to  cross  arms  with  the  insurgents  of  the  south;  they
proposed  an  armistice  between  the  king  and  Godwin,  and  that
their  dispute  should  be  investigated  before  an  assembly  held
at  London.  Edward  was  compelled  to  yield;  Godwin,  who
did  not  desire  war  for  the  sake  of  war,  willingly  consented;
and  on  one  side  and  the  other,  says  the  Saxon  chronicle,  they
swore  the  peace  of  God  and  perfect  friendship.2  This  was
the  formula  of  the  time,  but,  on  one  side  at  least,  these  pro-
.  mises  were  insincere.  The  king  availed  himself  of  the  interval
before  the  meeting  of  the  assembly,  fixed  for  the  autumnal
equinox,  to  augment  the  number  of  his  troops,  while  Godwin
retired  to  the  south-western  provinces,  and  his  band  of
volunteers,  having  neither  pay  nor  quarters,  returned  to  their
families.  Breaking  his  word,  although  indirectly,  Edward
proclaimed  his  ban  for  the  levy  of  an  army,  south  as  well
as  north  of  the  Thames.3

1  Chron.  Saxon.  Fragm.,  nt  sup. Roger  de  Hoveden,  ut  sup.  p.  441.
*  Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  164.
3  Id.  ib. Id.  Frag.,  ut  sup.
K2

132  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1048

This  army,  say  the  chroniclers,  was  the  greatest  that  had
been  seen  under  the  new  reign.1  The  king  gave  the  com-
mand of  it  to  his  foreign  favourites,  amongst  whom  in  the
first  rank,  figured  a  youthful  son  of  his  sister  Goda  and  the
Frenchman  Gualtier  de  Mantes.  Edward  quartered  his
forces  in  and  near  London,  so  that  the  national  council
opened  in  the  centre  of  a  camp  exposed  to  the  influence  of
terror  and  of  royal  seduction.  Godwin  and  his  two  sons  were
cited  by  this  council,  deliberating  under  compulsion,  to
absolve  from  their  oaths  and  their  attendance  the  few  men
who  remained  with  them,2  and  to  appear  without  escort  and
unarmed.  They  replied  that  they  were  ready  to  obey  the
first  of  these  two  orders,  but  that  before  appearing  in  the
assembly  alone  and  unprotected,  they  demanded  the  king's
peace  and  hostages  to  guarantee  their  personal  safety  both
coming  and  going.3  Twice  they  repeated  this  demand,
which  the  military  array  displayed  in  London  fully  justi-
fied on  their  part,4  and  twice  they  were  met  by  a  refusal,
and  the  summons  to  appear  without  delay,  with  twelve
compurgators  to  afnrm  their  innocence  on  oath.  They  did
not  appear,  and  the  great  council  declaring  them  contu-
macious, banished  them,  granting  them  only  five  days  of
peace  to  quit  England  with  all  their  family.5  Godwin,  his
wife  Ghitha  or  Edith,  and  three  of  his  sons,  Sweyn,  Tosti,
and  Gurth,  proceeded  to  the  eastern  coast,  whence  they  em-
barked for  Flanders.  Harold  and  his  brother  Leofwin  went
westward,  to  Brig-stow,  now  Bristol,  and  crossed  the  Irish
sea.  Before  the  expiration  of  the  five  days,  and  in  contempt
of  the  decree  of  the  assembly,  the  king  sent  a  troop  of  horse
in  pursuit  of  them,  but  the  commander  of  the  party,  who
was  a  Saxon,  either  could  not  or  would  not  overtake  them.6

The  property  of  Godwin  and  his  children  was  seized  and
confiscated.  His  daughter,  the  king's  wife,  was  deprived  of
all  her  possessions  in  land,  goods  or  money.  It  was  not
right,  the  foreign  courtiers  ironically  said,  that  while  the
family  of  this  woman  was  undergoing  the  evils  of  exile,  she

1  C liron.  Sax.,  p.  Id. Id.  Frag.,  lit  sup.
-  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  vt  sup.  lib.  ii.  81.

3  Cbron.  Saxon.,  p.  104.

4  Willelm.  Malraesh.,  itt  sup.  s  <jhron.  Saxon.,  p.  104.

6  Id.  Frag.,  nt  sup. Eoger  de  Hoveden,  vt  sup.  p.  441.

A.D. 1061.]  WILLIAM OF NORMANDY.  133

herself  should  sleep  upon  down.1  The  weak-minded  Edward
went  so  far  as  to  allow  her  to  be  confined  in  a  cloister;  the
favourites  maintained  that  she  was  his  wife  in  name  only,
although  she  shared  his  bed,  and  he  himself  did  not  contradict
this  proposition,  upon  which  his  reputation  for  sanctity  was
partly  founded.2  The  days  which  followed  were  days  of  re-
joicing and  high  fortune  for  the  foreigners,  and  Normandy
furnished  more  governors  than  ever  to  England.  The  Nor-
mans gradually  obtained  there  the  same  supremacy  which  the
Danes  had  formerly  achieved  by  the  sword.  A  monk  of
Jumieges,  named  Robert,  became  archbishop  of  Canterbury;
another  Norman  monk  was  made  bishop  of  London;  Saxon
prelates  and  abbots  were  deposed,  to  make  room  for  French-
men and  pretended  relations  of  king  Edward  on  the  mother's
side;3  the  governments  of  Godwin  and  his  sons  became  the
property  of  men  bearing  foreign  titles.  One  Eudes  was  made
chief  of  the  four  counties  of  Devon,  Somerset,  Dorset,  and
Cornwall,  and  the  son  of  Gualtier  de  Mantes,  named  Raulfe,
had  charge  of  Herefordshire  and  of  the  fortresses  erected
against  the  Welsh.4

A  new  guest  from  Normandy,  the  most  considerable  of  all,
now  came  with  a  numerous  train  to  visit  king  Edward  and
the  towns  and  castles  of  England;5  this  was  William,  duke  of
Normandy,  bastard  son  of  the  last  duke  Robert,  whose  violent
character  had  gained  for  him  the  surname  of  Robert  the
Devil.  He  was  born  to  Robert  by  a  young  girl  of  Falaise,
whom  the  duke  saw  one  day  on  his  return  from  hunting,  by
the  side  of  a  brook,  washing  linen  with  her  companions.  Her
beauty  made  a  great  impression  on  Robert,  who,  wishing  to
have  her  for  a  mistress,  sent,  says  the  poetical  chronicle,0  one
of  his  most  discreet  knights  to  make  propositions  to  the  family.
The  father  at  first  treated  the  offer  with  disdain;  but  on
reflection  he  went  to  consult  one  of  his  brothers,  a  hermit  in
the  neighbouring  forest,  a  man  of  great  religious  reputation,

1  Willelra.  Malmesb.,  ut:  sup.  p.  *2.

-  N  upturn  sibi  rex  liac  arte  tractabat,  ut  nee  thoro  amoverit,  nee  virili
more  cogiioscerit.  (ib.  p.  80.)

3  Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  105.

4  Roger  de  Hoveden,  ut  sup.  p.  443.  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  ut  sup.  p.  81.
Thorn.  Rudborne,  Hist,  major.  Wlnton.  Anglia  Sacra,  i.  240.

3  Ingulf.,  ut  sup.  i.  05
0  Benoit  de  St.  Maure,  Chronique  das  dues  dc  Normandie,  ?.i.  505.

134  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1024

who  replied  that  in  all  things  it  was  fitting  to  do  the  will  of
the  prince;  the  request  was  accordingly  granted,  says  the
poet,  and  the  night  and  hour  fixed.  The  name  of  the  young
Norman  was  Arlete,  a  corruption  of  the  ancient  Danish  name
Herleve;  the  duke  Robert  loved  her  tenderly,  and  the  child  he
had  by  her  was  brought  up  with  as  much  care  as  though  he
had  been  the  son  of  a  lawful  wife.1

William  was  only  seven  years  of  age  when  his  father  was
seized  with  a  desire  to  make  a  pilgrimage  on  foot  to  Jeru-
salem, to  obtain  forgiveness  for  his  sins.  The  Norman  barons
wished  to  prevent  this,  by  representing  to  him  that  it  would
be  unwell  for  them  to  remain  without  a  chief.  "  By  my
faith,"  answered  Kobert,  "I  will  not  leave  you  without  a
lord.  I  have  a  little  bastard,  who  will  grow  and  be  a  gallant
man,  if  it  please  God;  and  I  am  certain  that  he  is  my  son.
Receive  him,  then,  as  your  lord;  for  I  make  him  my  heir,  and
give  him  from  this  time  forth  the  whole  duchy  of  Normandy."2
The  Norman  barons  did  as  the  duke  desired,  "because,"
says  the  old  chronicle,3  "  it  suited  them  to  do  so."  They  swore
fidelity  to  the  child,  placing  their  hands  between  his.4  Duke
Robert  dying  on  his  pilgrimage,  several  chiefs,  and  especially
the  relations  of  the  ancient  dukes,  protested  against  this  elec-
tion, saying  that  a  bastard  could  not  command  the  sons  of
Normans.5  The  seigneurs  of  Bessin  and  the  Cotentin,  more
turbulent  than  the  rest,  and  still  more  proud  of  the  purity
of  their  descent,  placed  themselves  at  the  head  of  the  malcon-
tents, and  raised  a  numerous  army;  but  they  were  defeated
in  a  pitched  battle  at  the  Val  des  Dunes,  near  Caen,  with  the
assistance  of  the  king  of  France,  who  maintained  the  cause  of
the  young  duke  from  personal  interest,  and  in  order  to  exer-
cise some  influence  over  the  affairs  of  the  country.  William,
as  he  advanced  in  years,  became  more  and  more  dear  to  his
partisans;  the  day  on  which  he  for  the  first  time  assumed
armour,  and  mounted  his  first  war-horse  without  using  the
stirrup,  was  a  day  of  rejoicing  throughout  Normandy.  From
his  youth  he  occupied  himself  with  military  matters,  and  made

1  Willelm.  Malinesb.,  lib.  iii.  tit  sup.  p.  95.

2  Benoit  de  St.  Maure,  nt  sup.  ii.  071.  Chronique  de  St.  Deuis ;  Ee-
cueil  des  Historians  de  la  France  et  des  Gaules,  xi.  400.  3  Ib.

4  Dudo  de  Sancto  Quintino,  ut  sup.  p.  157.
5  Willelm.  Gemet.,  ut  sup.  p.  2<JS.

TO 1051.]  WILLIAM VISITS ENGLAND.  135

war  on  his  neighbours  of  Anjou  and  Brittany.  He  was  pas-
sionately fond  of  fine  horses,  and  had  them  brought,  say  his
contemporaries,  from  G-ascony,  Auvergne,  and  Spain,  selecting
always  those  which  had  proper  names  by  which  their  genea-
logy was  distinguished.1  The  young  son  of  Robert  and
Arlete  was  ambitious  and  vindictive  to  excess;  he  impo-
verished his  father's  family  as  much  as  he  could,  to  enrich
and  elevate  his  relations  on  the  mother's  side.  He  often
punished  in  the  most  cruel  manner  the  jests  in  which  the
stain  of  his  birth  involved  him,  whether  on  the  part  of
foreigners  or  of  his  countrymen.  One  day,  while  he  was  at-
tacking the  town  of  Alencon,  the  besieged  cried  from  the  walls:
"Hides!  hides!"  and  beat  skins  of  leather,  in  allusion  to  the
trade  of  William's  tanner  grandsire.  The  bastard  imme-
diately cut  off  the  hands  and  feet  of  all  the  prisoners  who
were  in  his  power,  and  made  his  slingers  throw  the  amputated
members  into  the  town.2

While  traversing  England,  the  duke  of  Normandy  might
well  have  thought  that  he  had  not  quitted  his  own  duchy;
Normans  officered  the  fleet  he  found  stationed  at  Dover;  at
Canterbury,  Norman  soldiers  formed  the  garrison  of  a  fortress
built  on  the  side  of  a  hill;3  other  Normans  came  in  every
place  to  salute  him,  attired  as  captains  or  prelates.  The  fa-
vourites of  Edward  respectfully  gathered  round  the  chief  of
their  native  land,  around  their  natural  seigneur,  to  adopt  the
language  of  the  period.  William  appeared  in  England  more
a  king  than  Edward  himself,  and  his  ambitious  mind  was  not
slow  in  conceiving  the  hope  of  becoming  such  in  reality  at
the  death  of  this  prince,  so  entirely  the  slave  of  Norman  in-
fluence. Such  thoughts  could  not  fail  to  arise  in  the  mind  of
the  son  of  Robert;  and  yet,  if  the  testimony  of  a  contemporary
is  to  be  believed,  he  allowed  nothing  of  it  to  appear,  and  never
mentioned  the  subject  to  king  Edward,  believing  that  circum-
stances would  adapt  themselves  to  his  ambitious  purposes.4
On  his  side,  Edward,  whether  or  not  he  guessed  these  projects,
and  contemplated  the  one  day  having  his  friend  for  successor,
said  nothing  to  him  about  it,  but  simply  received  him  with

1  Guill.  Pictav.  apud  Script,  rer.  Norman.,  p.  ]81.

2  Benoit  de  St.  Maura,  nt  sup.  iii.  90. Willelm.  Gemet,,  ut  sup.  p.  276.

3  Castellum  in  Dornberniae  Clivo. Eoger  de  Hoved.  ut  s«p.  p.  441.

4  Ingulf.,  ut  sup.  p.  G5.

136  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1051

the  greatest  tenderness;  gave  him  arms,  horses,  dogs,  and
falcons,1  in  a  word,  all  sorts  of  presents  and  assurances  of
affection.  Entirely  absorbed  in  the  remembrance  of  the
country  in  which  he  had  passed  his  youth,  the  king  of  Eng-
land thus  yielded  to  an  oblivion  of  his  own  nation;  but  this
nation  did  not  forget  itself,  and  those  who  still  loved  it  soon
found  occasion  to  draw  the  king's  attention  towards  them. '

In  the  summer  of  the  year  1052,  Godwin  set  out  from
Bruges  with  several  vessels,  and  landed  on  the  coast  of  Kent.2
He  sent  secret  messengers  to  the  Saxon  garrison  of  the  port
of  Hastings,  in  Suth-sex,  or,  by  euphony,  Sussex;  other  emis-
saries spread  themselves  north  and  south.  On  their  solicita-
tion, numbers  of  men  fit  to  bear  arms  bound  themselves  by
oath  to  the  cause  of  the  exiled  chief,  all  vowing,  says  an  old
historian,  to  live  and  die  with  him.3  The  news  of  this  move-
ment reached  the  royal  fleet,  which  was  cruizing  in  the  eastern
sea,  under  the  command  of  the  Normans,  Eudes  and  Raulfe;
they  went  in  pursuit  of  Godwin,  who,  finding  his  forces  in-
ferior, retreated  before  them,  and  took  shelter  in  Pevensey
Roads,  while  a  tempest  arrested  the  progress  of  the  hostile
ships.  He  then  coasted  along  the  south  as  far  as  the  Isle  of
Wight,  where  his  two  sons,  Harold  and  Leofwin,  joined  him
from  Ireland  with  a  small  army.4

The  father  and  sons  then  together  began  to  open  commu-
nications with  the  inhabitants  of  the  southern  counties.
Wherever  they  touched,  the  people  supplied  them  with  pro-
visions, and  bound  themselves  to  their  cause  by  oath,  giving
hostages  for  their  fidelity;5  all  the  royal  soldiers,  all  the  royal
ships  they  found  in  the  ports,  deserted  to  them.6  They  sailed
towards  Sandwich,  where  they  landed  without  any  obstacle,
notwithstanding  Edward's  proclamation,  which  ordered  every
inhabitant  to  stay  the  progress  of  the  rebel  chief.  The  king
was  then  at  London;  he  commanded  all  the  warriors  of  the

1  Roman  <le  Eou,  ii.  100.

2  Cliron.  Saxon.,  p.  165.  3  Roger  de  Hoveden,  ttt  sup.  p.  442.

4  Chron.  Sax.,  ut  sup. Roger  de  Hov.,  ut  sup,

5  Chron.  Sax.,  p.  167.

t;  Buthsecarlos  cranes  quos  invenerant,  secnm  legentes  (Roger  de  Hov.,
ut  snp').  JBtithse-carl,  seamau,  one  of  the  crew  of  a  vessel,  from  bucca,
faccta,  lucea,  bttscia  (from  the  Saxon  verb  bugan,  to  bend)  signifying  a
vessel  of  large  dimensions ;  and  carl,  ceorl,  strong  man.  (See  Somner,
Glossarium,  apud  Script.  Anglic.  Hist.,  ii.  adfinem.}

TO  1052.]  RETURN OF GODWIN.  137

west  and  north  to  that  city.  Few  obeyed  the  order,  and  those
who  did,  came  too  late.1  Godwin's  ships  freely  ascended  the
Thames,  to  the  suburb  of  London,  then  called  Southward
(Southwark).2  "When  the  tide  went  down,  they  cast  anchor,
and  secret  emissaries  dispersed  among  the  inhabitants  of
London,  who,  following  the  example  of  the  outports,  swore
to  will  whatever  the  enemies  of  foreign  influence  should  will.3
The  vessels  passed  under  London  bridge  without  impediment,
and  landed  a  body  of  troops,  who  drew  up  on  the  banks  of
the  river.

Before  bending  a  single  bow,  the  exiles4  sent  a  respectful
message  to  king  Edward,  entreating  a  revision  of  the  sentence
which  had  been  pronounced  against  them.  Edward  at  first
refused;  other  messengers  followed,  and  meantime  Godwin
could  scarcely  restrain  the  irritation  of  his  friends.  On  his
side,  the  king  found  the  men  who  remained  under  his  standard
little  inclined  to  draw  the  sword  against  their  own  country-
men.5 His  foreign  favourites,  who  foresaw  that  peace  among
the  Saxons  would  be  their  ruin,  urged  him  to  give  the  signal
for  battle;  but  necessity  making  him  wiser  than  usual,  he
did  not  heed  the  Normans,  and  consented  to  abide  by  the  de-
cision of  the  English  chiefs  of  the  two  parties.  These  met
under  the  presidency  of  Stigand,  bishop  of  East  Anglia,  and
unanimously  decided  that  the  king  should  accept  from  Godwin
and  his  sons  the  oath  of  peace,  and  hostages,'  giving  them,  on
his  part,  equivalent  guarantees.

On  the  first  intimation  of  this  reconciliation,  the  Norman
and  French  courtiers  hastily  mounted  their  horses,  and  fled
in  every  direction — some  to  a  western  fortress  guarded  by
the  Norman  Osbert,  surnamed  Pentecoste;  others  to  a  north-
ern castle,  also  commanded  by  a  Norman.  The  Normans,
Robert,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  William,  bishop  of
London,  left  the  city  by  the  eastern  gate,  followed  by  some
armed  men  of  their  nation,  who,  even  while  thus  retreating,
massacred  several  English  children.  They  reached  the  coast,
and  embarked  in  fishing-boats.  In  his  agitation  and  haste,
the  archbishop  left  in  England  his  most  precious  effects,  and

1  Roger,  de  Hoved.,  ut  sup.  p.  442.
2  The  Saxons  wrote  it  Suth-weorde.

3  Roger  de  Hoved.,  ut  sup.
4  Elagati. (Sixx.  Chron.  p.  107.;  5  Roger  de  Hoveden,  ut  sup.

138  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1051

among  other  things  the  pallium  which  he  had  received  from
the  Roman  church,  as  the  ensign  of  his  dignity.1

A  great  council  of  the  wise  men  was  held  out  of  London,  and
this  time  they  assembled  freely.  All  the  chiefs  and  best  men
of  the  country,  says  the  Saxon  chronicle,  were  there.  God-
win spoke  in  his  own  defence,  and  justified  himself  from
every  accusation  before  the  king  and  the  people;2  his  sons
exculpated  themselves  in  the  same  way.  Their  sentence  of
banishment  was  revoked,  and  another  sentence,  unanimously
decreed,  banished  all  the  Normans  from  England,  as  enemies
of  the  public  peace,  promoters  of  discord,  and  calumniators  of
the  English  to  their  king.3  The  youngest  son  of  Godwin,
called  Ulfnoth,  like  his  ancestor  the  cowherd  of  the  west,  was
placed,  with  a  son  of  Sweyn,  in  the  hands  of  Edward,  as  hos-
tages for  the  peace.  Still,  even  at  this  moment,  influenced
by  his  fatal  friendship  for  the  foreigners,  the  king  sent  them
both  to  the  care  of  William  duke  of  Normandy.  Godwin's
daughter  left  her  convent,  and  returned  to  inhabit  the  palace ;
all  the  members  of  this  popular  family  were  reinstated  in
their  honours,  with  one  exception,  Sweyn,  who  renounced
them  of  his  own  will.  He  had  formerly  carried  off  a  nun,
and  had  committed  a  murder  in  a  fit  of  passion;  to  satisfy  jus-
tice, and  appease  his  own  remorse,  he  condemned  himself  to
make  a  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem  barefooted.  He  rigorously
accomplished  this  painful  task;  but  a  speedy  death  was  the
result.4

Bishop  Stigand,  who  had  presided  over  the  assembly  held
for  the  great  reconciliation,  replaced  the  Norman  Robert  in
the  archbishopric  of  Canterbury  ;  and,  pending  the  nego-
tiation for  the  pallium  for  himself  from  the  Roman  church,  he
ofiiciated  in  that  which  Robert  had  left  on  his  departure.
The  Normans,  Hugh  and  Osbert  Pentecoste,  gave  up  the
keys  of  the  castles  they  held,  and  obtained  safe  conducts  to
leave  England,5  but  on  the  request  of  the  weak  Edward,  some
exceptions  were  made  to  the  decree  of  banishment  pronounced
against  the  whole  body  of  foreigners.  Raulfe,  the  son  of

1  Chron.  Sax.,  nt  sup.  2  Sax.  Chron.,  p.  108.

3  Willelm.  Mahnesb.  lib.  ii.  iti  sup.  p.  82.

Id.  ib. Roger de  Hoveden, i/f  sup.  p. 442. Eadmeri,  Hist. nova.
(Selden)  p.  4.

5  Roger  de  Hoveden,  vt  stq).

TO  1053.]  DEATH OF GODWIN.  139

Gualtier  de  Mantes,  and  of  the  king's  sister;  Robert,  sur-
named  the  Dragon,  and  his  son-in-law,  Richard  Fitz-Scrob;
Onfroy,  the  equerry  of  the  palace;  Onfroy,  surnamed  Pied-
de-Guai,  and  several  others  for  whom  the  king  entertained
a  personal  friendship,  or  who  had  taker  little  part  in  the  late
troubles,  obtained  the  privilege  of  inhabiting  England,  and  of
retaining  their  offices.1  William,  bishop  of  London,  was  also
recalled  some  time  after,  and  re-established  in  his  see.  A
Fleming,  named  Herman,  remained  bishop  of  Wilton.  God-
win opposed  with  all  his  might  this  tolerance,  so  contrary  to
the  public  feelings,2  but  his  voice  did  not  prevail,  because  too
many  people  wished  to  conciliate  the  king,  and  thus  succeed
to  the  credit  of  the  foreign  courtiers.  The  result  showed
which  of  these  were  the  best  politicians,  the  court  people  or
the  austere  Godwin.3

It  is  difficult  exactly  to  estimate  the  degree  of  the  sincerity
of  king  Edward  in  his  return  to  the  national  interest,  and
his  reconciliation  with  the  family  of  Godwin.  Surrounded
by  his  countrymen,  he  perhaps  thought  himself  enslaved,
and  regarded  his  obedience  to  the  wishes  of  the  nation  that
had  made  him  king  as  a  constraint.  His  ulterior  relations
with  the  duke  of  Normandy,  his  private  conferences  with
the  Normans  who  remained  about  his  person,  are  the  secrets
of  this  history.  All  that  the  chronicles  of  the  time  say  is,
that  an  apparent  friendship  existed  between  the  king  and  his
father-in-law,  and  that,  at  the  same  time,  Godwin  was  utterly
detested  in  Normandy.  The  foreigners  whom  his  return  had
deprived  of  their  places  and  honours,  those  to  whom  the
facile  and  brilliant  career  of  courtier  to  the  king  of  England
was  now  closed,  never  named  Godwin  without  calling  him
traitor,  enemy  of  his  king,  murderer  of  the  young  Alfred.

This  last  accusation  was  the  most  accredited,  and  it  followed
the  Saxon  chief  to  the  hour  of  his  death.  One  day,  at  the
table  of  Edward,  he  suddenly  fell  fainting,  and  upon  this
incident  was  founded  a  story  altogether  romantic  and  doubtful,
though  repeated  by  several  historians.  They  relate  that  one
of  his  servants,  while  pouring  him  out  a  cup  of  wine,  stumbled

1  Eoger  de  Hoveden,  ut  sup.

a  Ranulf  Higden,  Polychron,  aptid  Kerum  Anglic.  Script.,  iii.  281.
3  Eoger  de  Hov.,  itt  sup.  Gervasii,  Acta  Pontif.  Cantnar.  apud  Script.,  ut
siqj.  ii.  col.  1051. liauulf  Higdeii,  ut  sup.

140  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1053

with  one  foot,  but  stayed  his  fall  with  the  other.  "  Well,"
said  Godwin  to  the  king,  smiling,  "  the  brother  has  come  to
assist  the  brother."  "  Ay,"  answered  Edward,  casting  a  sig-
nificant look  on  the  Saxon  chief,  "  brother  needs  brother,  and
would  to  God  mine  still  lived !"  "  0  king,"  exclaimed  God-
win, "  why  is  it  that,  on  the  slightest  recollection  of  your  bro-
ther, you  always  look  so  angrily  on  me?  If  I  contributed
even  indirectly  to  his  death,  may  the  God  of  heaven  grant
that  this  piece  of  bread  may  choke  me!"1  Godwin  put  the
bread  in  his  mouth$  say  the  authors  who  relate  this  anecdote,
and  was  immediately  strangled.  The  truth  is,  that  his  death
was  not  so  sudden;  that  falling  from  his  seat,  and  carried  out
by  his  two  sons,  Tosti  and  Gurth,  he  expired  five  days  after.2
In  general,  the  account  of  these  events  varies,  according  as  the
writer  is  of  Norman  or  English  race.  "  I  ever  see  before
me  two  roads,  two  opposite  versions,"  says  an  historian  of  less
than  a  century  later;  "  I  warn  my  readers  of  the  peril  in
which  I  find  myself."3

Shortly  after  the  death  of  Godwin,  died  Sig-ward  or
Siward,  the  chief  of  Northumberland,  who  had  at  first  fol-
lowed the  royal  party  against  Godwin,  but  subsequently  voted
for  peace,  and  the  expulsion  of  the  foreign  favourites.  He
was  a  Dane  by  birth,  and  the  population  of  the  same  origin,
whom  he  ruled,  gave  him  the  title  of  Siward-Digr,  Siward
the  Strong;4  a  rock  of  granite  was  long  shown,  which  he  had,
it  was  said,  split  with  one  blow  of  an  axe/'  Attacked  by
dysentery,  and  feeling  his  end  approach  :  "  Raise  me,"  said
he  to  those  who  surrounded  him;  "  let  me  die  like  a  soldier,
and  not  huddled  together  like  a  cow;  put  me  on  my  coat  of
mail,  place  niy  helmet  on  my  head,  my  shield  on  my  left  arm
and  my  gilt  axe  in  my  right  hand,  that  I  may  expire  in  arms."6
Siward  left  one  son,  named  Waltheof,  too  young  as  yet  to
succeed  to  his  government,  which  was  given  to  Tosti,  God-
win's third  son,  Harold,  who  was  the  eldest,  succeeded  his

1  Henrici  Huntiud.,  lib.  vi.  ut  sup.  p.  366.  Wfllelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  ii.  ut
sup.  p.  81.

2  Roger  de  Hoveden,  ut  sup.  p.  443.

3  Willeim.  Malmesb.,  ut  sup.
4  Origo  et  Gesta  Sivardi  regis,  apud  Script,  rer.  Danic.,  iii.  288.

5  Id.  ib.  ^92.

0  Heuric.  Huntiud.,  ut  sttp.  Ranulf  Higden,  lib.  \i.  ut  sup.  p.  281.
Bromton,  ut  sup.  p.  940.

TO 1054.]  TYRANNY OF TOSTI.  141

father  in  the  government  of  all  the  country  south  of  the
Thames,  and  transferred  to  Alfgar,  son  of  Leofrik,  governor
of  Mercia,  the  administration  of  the  eastern  provinces,  which
he  had  previously  governed.1

Harold  was  now,  in  power  and  military  talents,  the  first
man  of  his  time;  he  drove  back  within  their  ancient  limits  the
Welsh,  who  at  this  time  made  several  incursions  into  Eng-
land, encouraged  by  the  incapacity  of  the  Frenchman  Raulfe,
Edward's  nephew,  who  commanded  the  foreign  garrison  at
Hereford.  Baulfe  showed  little  vigilance  in  guarding  a
country  which  was  not  his  own;  or  if,  in  virtue  of  his  power
as  chief,  he  called  the  Saxons  to  arms,  it  was  to  exercise
them,  against  their  will,  in  the  warfare  of  the  continent,  and
make  them  fight  on  horseback,  contrary  to  the  custom  of
their  nation.2  The  English,  embarrassed  by  their  horses,  and
abandoned  by  their  general,  who  fled  with  his  Normans  at  the
first  peril,  could  not  resist  the  Welsh ;  the  vicinity  of  Here-
ford was  occupied,  and  the  town  itself  pillaged.  It  was  then
that  Harold  came  from  the  south  of  England;  he  drove  the
Cambrians  beyond  their  frontiers,  and  compelled  them  to  swear
that  they  would  never  again  pass  them,  and  to  receive  a  law
that  every  man  of  their  nation  found  in  arms  east  of  the  en-
trenchment of  Offa,  should  have  the  right  hand  cut  on0.  It
would  appear  that  the  Saxons,  on  their  part,  constructed
a  similar  entrenchment,  and  that  the  space  between  the  two
became  a  kind  of  neutral  ground  for  the  traders  of  both
nations.  The  antiquarians  imagine  that  they  can  still  distin-
guish the  traces  of  this  double  line  of  defence,  and  upon  the
heights  several  remains  of  ancient  fortified  posts,  established
by  the  Britons  on  the  west,  and  by  the  English  on  the  east.3

Whilst  Harold  was  thus  increasing  his  fame  and  his  popu-
larity with  the  southern  Anglo-Saxons,  his  brother  Tosti  was
far  from  acquiring  the  love  of  the  Anglo-Danes  of  the  north.
Tosti,  although  a  Dane  by  the  mother's  side,  from  a  false  na-
tional pride  treated  those  whom  he  ruled  more  as  subjects
than  as  citizens  voluntarily  combined  together,  and  made  them
feel  the  yoke  of  a  conqueror  rather  than  the  authority  of  a

1  Roger  de  Hoveden,  id  sup. Ingulf.,  ut  sup.  p.  CO.

8  Roger  de  Hoveden,  tit  sup.  p.  443.
3  Wats-Dyke. See  Pennant's  Tour  in  Wales.

142  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1055

chief.  He  violated  their  hereditary  customs  at  will,  levied
immense  taxes,  and  put  to  death  those  who  had  offended  him,
without  any  trial.  After  several  years  of  oppression,  the
patience  of  the  Northumbrians  became  exhausted,  and  a  troop
of  insurgents,  led  by  two  men  of  distinction  in  the  country,
suddenly  appeared  at  the  gates  of  York,  the  residence  of
Tosti.  The  chief  fled,  but  his  officers  and  ministers,  Saxons
and  Danes,  were  put  to  death  in  great  numbers.1

The  insurgents  seized  the  arsenal  and  the  treasure  of  the
province;  then,  assembling  a  great  council,  they  declared  the
son  of  Godwin  deprived  of  his  charge,  and  outlawed.  Morkar,
one  of  the  sons  of  the  Alfgar  who,  on  the  death  of  Leofrik
his  father,  had  become  chief  of  all  Mercia,  was  elected  to  suc-
ceed Tosti.  The  son  of  Alfgar  proceeded  to  York,  took  the
command  of  the  Northumbrian  army,  and  drove  Tosti  towards
the  south.  The  army  advanced  on  the  territory  of  Mercia,  as
far  as  the  town  of  Northampton,  and  many  of  the  inhabitants
of  the  district  joined  it.  Edwin,  the  brother  of  Morkar,  who
held  a  command  on  the  Welsh  frontier,  levied,  in  aid  of  his
brother,  some  troops  in  his  province,  and  even  a  body  of  Cam-
brians, induced  by  the  promise  of  pay,  and  partly  perhaps  by
the  desire  to  satisfy  their  national  hatred  in  fighting  against
Saxons,  even  though  under  a  Saxon  banner.2

On  the  news  of  this  great  movement,  king  Edward  sent
Harold,  with  the  warriors  of  the  south  and  east,  to  meet  the
insurgents.  Family  pride  wounded  in  the  person  of  a  brother,
joined  to  the  natural  aversion  of  the  powerful  against  any
energetic  act  of  popular  independence,  seemed  calculated  to
render  Harold  a  pitiless  enemy  of  the  population  which  had
expelled  Tosti,  and  the  chief  whom  it  had  elected.  But  the  son
of  Godwin  showed  himself  superior  to  such  vulgar  influences,
and  before  drawing  the  sword  on  his  countrymen,  he  proposed
to  the  Northumbrians  a  conference  of  peace.  The  latter  set
forth  their  grievances,  and  the  grounds  of  their  insurrection.
Harold  endeavoured  to  exculpate  his  brother,  and  promised  in
the  name  of  Tosti  better  conduct  for  the  future,  if  the  people  of
Northumberland  would  pardon  and  again  receive  him;  but  the
Northumbrians  unanimously  protested  against  any  reconcilia-

1  Roger  de  Hoveden,  ut  sup.  p.  4-1(5.
2  Chron.  Sax.,  p.  171. Roger  de  Hoved.,  ut  siyi.

TO  1058.] RELATIONS  OF  ENGLAND  WITH  ROME.  143

tion  with  him  who  had  so  tyrannized  over  them.1  "  We  were
born  free,"  said  they,  "  and  brought  up  free;  a  haughty  chief
is  insupportable  to  us,  for  we  have  learned  from  our  ancestors
to  live  free  or  to  die."  They  charged  Harold  himself  to  bear
their  answer  to  the  king;  Harold,  preferring  justice  and  the
peace  of  the  country,  to  the  interest  of  his  own  brother,2  went
to  Edward;  and  it  was  he  also  who,  on  his  return,  swore  to
the  Northumbrians,  and  subscribed  with  his  hand,  the  peace
which  the  king  granted  them  in  sanctioning  the  expulsion  of
Tosti  and  the  election  of  the  son  of  Alfgar.3  Tosti,  enraged
with  the  king  and  with  his  countrymen  who  thus  abandoned
him,  and  more  especially  with  his  brother,  whom  he  deemed
bound  to  defend  him,  right  or  wrong,  quitted  England,  hatred
deep  in  his  heart,  and  took  up  his  residence  with  the  count  of
Flanders,  whose  daughter  he  had  married.

Since  the  kingdom  had  been  freed  from  the  dominion  of  the
Danes,  the  law  instituted  by  king  Knut  for  the  annual  tribute
called  Peter's  pence  had  undergone  the  same  fate  with  the
other  laws  decreed  by  a  foreign  power.  The  public  authority
obliged  no  one  to  observe  it,  and  Rome  only  received  the  vo-
luntary offerings  and  gifts  of  individual  devotion.  Accord-
ingly, the  ancient  friendship  of  the  Roman  church  for  the
English  nation  rapidly  declined.  Injurious  reflections,  couched
in  mystic  language,  were  made  upon  this  nation  and  its  king
in  the  halls  of  St.  Giovanni  Latran;4  the  Saxon  bishops  were
accused  of  simony,5  that  is,  of  buying  their  sees  for  money,
a  reproach  of  which  great  use  was  made  against  others  by
the  court  of  Rome,  and  which  the  court  of  Rome  itself  fre-
quently incurred,  accustomed  as  it  was,  in  the  language  of  a
contemporary  proverb,  to  sell  everything.6  The  archbishop  of
York,  Eldred,  underwent  the  first  attack.  He  went  to  the
eternal  city  to  solicit  the  pallium,  the  usual  token  of  the  high
catholic  prelacy,  as  the  purple  mantles  transmitted  by  the
Caesars  were  the  signs  of  royalty  with  the  vassal  kings  of
ancient  Rome.  The  Roman  priests  refused  the  archiepisco-

1  Koger  de  Hoveden,  ut  sup.  2Willelm.  Malmesb.,  ut  swp. p.  83.

3  Chrou.  Saxon.,  p.  171.

4  Membra  mail  capitis  (Alexandri  papoe,  cpist.  apud  Labbsei,  concilia,  ix.
1121.)

5  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  ut  sup.  p.  204.
6  Ranulf.  Higden,  ut  sup.  p.  280.

144  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1050

pal  mantle  to  Eldred;  but  a  Saxon  chief  who  accompanied
him  threatened,  in  reprisal,  to  prevent  any  money  being  sent
to  the  apostolic  see,1  and  the  Romans  yielded,  retaining  in
their  hearts  deep  anger  at  having  been  constrained  to  yield,
and  an  eager  desire  for  revenge.

The  Norman  Eobert  de  Jumieges,  expelled  by  the  English
patriots  from  the  see  of  Canterbury,  now  proceeded  to  Rome,
to  complain  that  the  sacred  character  had  been  violated  in  his
person;  he  denounced  as  an  usurper  and  an  intruder,  the
Saxon  Stigand,  whom  the  popular  voice  had  elevated  to  his
place.  The  pontiff  and  the  Roman  cardinals  listened  favour-
ably to  his  complaints;  they  declared  it  a  crime  in  the  Saxon
prelate  to  have  assumed  the  pallium  which  the  Norman  had
abandoned  in  his  flight  ;  and  the  complainant  returned  to
Normandy  with  papal  letters  which  declared  him  legitimate
archbishop  of  Canterbury.'2  Stigand,  the  elected  of  the  Eng-
lish, seeing  the  danger  of  not  being  acknowledged  at  Rome,
meanwhile  opened  negotiations,  and  addressed  to  the  reigning
pope  a  demand  for  the  pallium;  but  a  circumstance,  impos-
sible to  foresee,  occasioned  other  embarrassing  difficulties  to
arise  out  of  this  demand.  At  the  time  it  reached  the  ponti-
fical court,  the  papacy  was  in  the  hands  of  a  man  chosen  by  the
principal  Roman  families,  against  the  will  of  the  king  of  Ger-
many, who,  in  virtue  of  the  title  of  Ca3sar,  transmitted  to  him
by  the  Frank  emperors,  asserted  that  no  sovereign  pontiff
could  be  created  without  his  consent.

This  pope  was  Benedict,  the  tenth  of  that  name:  disposed
to  be  indulgent,  because  his  power  was  insecure  and  he  needed
friends,  he  granted  the  pallium  to  archbishop  Stigand.  But
an  army  advancing  from  beyond  the  mountains,  soon  enforced
the  election  of  a  new  pope,  who,  having  expelled  Benedict,
assumed,  without  any  scruple,  the  pontifical  ornaments  aban-
doned by  the  defeated  pontiif,  degraded  him,  excommunicated
him,  and  annulled  all  his  acts.  Stigand  thus  found  himself
once  more  without  a  pallium,  and  charged,  in  the  eye  of  the
papal  power,  with  the  crime  of  usurpation,  and  with  another,
and  still  greater  crime,  that  of  having  sought  the  good  graces  of

1  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  nt  sup.  p.  271.
2 Ranulf  Higdeia,  ut  sup. Willelm.  Malmesb.,  vt  sup.

TO  1065.]  LANFRANC.  145

an  excommunicated  anti-pope.1  The  journey  from  Canter-
bury to  Rome  was  at  this  time  one  of  great  difficulty;  Stigand
was  in  no  haste  to  justify  himself  before  the  successful  rival
of  Benedict  X.,  and  the  old  ferment  of  hatred  against  the
English  became  more  violent  than  ever.2

Another  incident  furnished  the  Romans  with  the  means  of
associating  in  their  hatred  the  desire  of  vengeance,  which  the
so-called  treason  of  Godwin  had  excited  in  many  of  the  Nor-
mans, and  the  ambitious  projects  of  duke  William. There
was  at  the  court  of  Normandy a  monk  named  Lanfranc,  a
Lombard  by  origin,  famous  in  the  Christian  world  for  his  know-
ledge of  jurisprudence,  and  for  works  devoted  to  the  defence
of  catholic  orthodoxy;  this  man,  whom  duke  William  cherished
as  one  of  his  most  useful  councillors,  fell  into  disgrace  for
having  blamed  the  Norman  duke's  marriage  with  Matilda,
daughter  of  Baldwin,  count  of  Flanders,  his  relation  in  one
of  the  degrees  prohibited  by  the  church. Nicholas  II.,  suc-
cessor to  the  anti-pope  Benedict, obstinately  refused  to  ac-
knowledge and  sanction  this  union;  and  it  was  with  him  that
the  Lombard  monk, banished  from  his lord's court, took
refuge. But  far  from  complaining  of  the  duke  of  Normandy,
Lanfranc  respectfully  pleaded  before  the sovereign  pontiff
in  favour  of  the  marriage,  of  which  he  himself  had  before
not  approved.3 By  dint  of  intreaties  and  great  address,  he
obtained  a  dispensation  in  form,  and  for  this  signal  service
was  received  by  the  duke  with  greater  friendship  than  before.
He  became  the  soul  of  his  councils  and  his  plenipotentiary  at
the  court  of  Rome. The  respective  pretensions  of  the  Romish
clergy  and  of  the  duke  of  Normandy  over  England,  the  possi-
bility of  giving  effect  to  them,  now  became,  it  would  appear,  the
object  of  serious  negotiations.  An  armed  invasion  was  not  per-
haps yet  thought  of,  but  the  relationship  of  William  to  Edward
seemed  a  great  means  of  success,  and,  at  the  same  time,  an
incontestable  claim  in  the  eyes  of  the  Romans,  who  favoured
throughout  Europe  the  maxims  of  hereditary  royalty  against
the  practice  of  election.4

1  Auglia  Sacra,  i.  701.  2  Ingulf.,  at  sup.  p.  lifi.

:  Vita  LanlYanci,  apud  Script,  rer  Gallic,  et  Fruncicarum,  xiv.  •'>!.

4  Mabillon,  Annales  Benedictini,  iv.  -O'js.
VOL.  T.  L

146  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D. 1050

For  two  years  internal  peace  had  reigned  in  England
without  interruption.  The  animosity  of  king  Edward  to  the
sons  of  Godwin  disappeared  from  want  of  aliment,  and  from
the  habit  of  constantly  being  with  them.  Harold,  the  new
chief  of  this  popular  family,  fully  rendered  to  the  king  that
respect  and  deferential  submission  of  which  he  was  so  tena-
cious. Some  ancient  histories  tell  us  that  Edward  loved  and
treated  him  as  his  own  son,1  but,  at  all  events,  he  did  not
feel  towards  him  that  aversion  mingled  with  fear  with  which
Godwin  had  ever  inspired  him;  and  he  had  now  no  longer
any  pretext  for  retaining,  as  guarantees  against  the  son,  the
two  hostages  whom  he  had  received  from  the  father.  It  will
be  remembered  that  these  hostages  had  been  confided  by  the
suspicious  Edward  to  the  care  of  the  duke  of  Normandy.
They  had,  for  more  than  ten  years,  been  far  from  their
country,  in  a  sort  of  captivity.  Towards  the  end  of  the  year
1065,  Harold,  their  brother  and  their  uncle,  deeming  the
moment  favourable  for  obtaining  their  deliverance,  asked
permission  of  the  king  to  go  and  demand  them  in  his  name,
and  bring  them  out  of  exile.  Without  showing  any  repug-
nance to  release  the  hostages,  Edward  appeared  greatly
alarmed  at  the  project  which  Harold  had  formed  of  going  in
person  to  Normandy.  "  I  will  not  compel  you  to  stay,"  said
he;  "but  if  you  go,  it  will  be  without  my  consent;  for  your
journey  will  certainly  bring  some  evil  upon  yourself  and  upon
your  country.  I  know  duke  William  and  his  crafty  mind;
he  hates  you,  and  will  grant  you  nothing  unless  he  gain
greatly  by  it;  the  only  way  safely  to  obtain  the  hostages  from
him  were  to  send  some  one  else."2

The  brave  and  confiding  Saxon  did  not  adopt  this  advice;
he  departed  on  his  journey,  as  on  a  party  of  pleasure,  sur-
rounded by  gay  companions,  with  his  falcon  on  his  wrist
and  his  hounds  running  before  him.3  He  sailed  from  one  of
the  ports  of  Sussex.  Contrary  winds  drove  his  two  vessels
from  their  track  towards  the  mouth  of  the  Sonmie,  upon  the
territory  of  Guy,  count  de  Ponthieu.  It  was  the  custom  of
this  maritime  district,  as  of  many  others  in  the  middle  ages,

1  Saga  af  Harold  Hardrada,  cap.  Ixxvii. Snorre's  Heimskringla,  iii.  143.

2  Chronique  de  Normandie ;  Rec.  des  Hist,  de  France,  xiii.  22:j. — Romau
de  Ron,  ii.  108. — Eadmer,  itt  sup.  i.  p.  4.

3  See  the  Bayeux  Tapestry.

TO  1065.] HAROLD'S  VISIT  TO  NORMANDY.  147

that  every  stranger  thrown  on  the  coast  by  tempest,  instead
of  being  humanely  succoured,  was  imprisoned  and  put  to
ransom.  Harold  and  his  companions  were  subjected  to  this
rigorous  law;  after  being  despoiled  of  all  their  more  valuable
property,  they  were  thrown  by  the  lord  of  the  territory  into
his  fortress  of  Belrain,  now  Beaurain,  near  Montreuil.1

To  escape  from  the  wearisomeness  of  a  protracted  cap-
tivity, the  Saxon  declared  himself  the  bearer  of  a  message
from  the  king  of  England  to  the  duke  of  Normandy,  and  sent
to  require  William  to  obtain  his  release,  that  he  might  come
to  him.  William  did  not  hesitate,  and  demanded  from  his
neighbour,  the  count  de  Ponthieu,  the  liberty  of  the  captive,
at  first  menacingly,  and  with  no  mention  of  ransom.  The
count  de  Ponthieu  was  deaf  to  the  threats,  and  only  yielded
to  the  offer  of  a  large  sum  of  money  and  a  fine  estate  upon
the  river  Eaume.2  Harold  proceeded  to  Rouen,  and  the
bastard  of  Normandy  had  the  satisfaction  of  having  in  his
power  the  son  of  the  greatest  enemy  of  the  Normans,  one  of
the  chiefs  of  the  national  league  which  had  banished  from
England  the  friends  and  relations  of  William,  the  upholders
of  his  pretensions  to  the  English  crown.3  Duke  William  re-
ceived the  Saxon  chief  with  great  honours  and  an  appearance
of  frank  cordiality:  he  told  him  that  the  two  hostages  were
free  on  his  request  alone,  that  he  could  immediately  return
with  them;  but  that  as  a  courteous  guest  he  ought  not  to
depart  so  abruptly,  but  at  least  remain  some  days  to  see  the
towns  and  festivals  of  the  country.  Harold  went  from  town
to  town,  from  castle  to  castle,  and  with  his  young  companions
took  part  in  all  the  military  sports.  The  duke  created  them
knights,  that  is  to  say,  members  of  the  high  Norman  militia,
a  kind  of  warlike  brotherhood,  into  which  every  rich  man
who  devoted  himself  to  arms,  was  introduced  under  the
auspices  of  an  associate,  who,  with  great  ceremony,  gave
him  a  sword,  a  baldric  plated  with  silver,  and  a  bannered
lance.  The  Saxon  warriors  received  from  their  godfather
in  chivalry  presents  of  fine  weapons  and  valuable  horses.4

1  Roman  de  Eon,  ii.  110. Eadmer,  nt  sup.  p.  5.

2  Chron.  de  Nor.,  nt  sup.

3  Matth.  Paris,  i.  1. Henric.  Huntind.,  lib.  vi,  lit  sup.  p.  306.

4  Roman  de  Rou,  ii.  113. Guiil.  Pictav.,  ut  sup.  p.  191. Bayeux  Tapestry.

L2

148  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1058

William  then  proposed  to  him,  by  way  of  trying  their  new
spurs,  to  follow  him  in  an  expedition  he  had  undertaken
against  his  neighbours  of  Brittany.  Since  the  treaty  of
St.  Clair-sur-Epte,  each  new  duke  of  Normandy  had  at-
tempted to  give  eifect  to  the  claim  of  suzerainty  which  Charles
the  Simple  had  ceded  to  Roll;  the  result  had  been  continual
wars  and  a  national  enmity  between  these  two  states,  separated
only  by  the  little  river  Coesnon.

Harold  and  his  friends,  foolishly  tenacious  of  acquiring  a
reputation  for  courage  among  the  Normans,  did  for  their
host,  at  the  expense  of  the  Bretons,  deeds  of  valour  which
were  one  day  to  cost  themselves  and  their  country  dear.
The  son  of  Godwin,  robust  and  active,  saved  at  the  passage
of  Coesnon  several  soldiers  who  were  perishing  in  the  quick-
sands. He  and  William,  so  long  as  the  war  lasted,  had
but  one  tent  and  one  table.1  On  their  return,  they  rode
side  by  side,  enlivening  the  way  with  friendly  conversation,2
which  one  day  the. duke  turned  upon  his  youthful  friendship
with  king  Edward:  "Edward  and  I,"  said  he  to  the  Saxon,
"lived  under  the  same  roof,  like  two  brothers;  he  promised
me  if  ever  he  became  king  of  England,  to  make  me  heir  to  his
kingdom;  Harold,  if  thou  wouldst  aid  me  in  realising  this
promise,  be  sure  that,  if  I  obtain  the  kingdom,  whatever
thou  askest  thou  shalt  have."3  Harold,  taken  by  surprise
at  the  excess  of  this  unexpected  confidence,  could  not  help
answering  it  by  some  vague  words  of  compliance,  whereupon
William  continued:  «*  Since  thou  consentest  to  serve  me,
thou  must  engage  to  fortify  Dover  castle,  to  dig  a  well  there
of  fresh  water,  and  deliver  it  up,  when  the  time  comes,  to  my
people;  thou  must  also  give  thy  sister  in  marriage  to  one  of
my  barons,  and  thyself  marry  my  daughter  Adeliza;  moreover,
on  thy  departure,  thou  must  leave  me,  as  guarantee  for  thy
promise,  one  of  the  two  hostages  thou  reclaimest,  and  I  will
restore  him  to  thee  in  England  when  I  come  there  as  king."
Harold  felt  at  these  words  all  the  peril  in  which  he  himself
stood,  and  in  which  he  had  unconsciously  involved  his  two
young  relations.  To  escape  from  the  more  pressing  einbar-

1  Guill.  Pictav.,  ut  sap.

"  Peter  Langtofi's  Chronicle,  improved  by  .Robert  de  Bruce,  p.  08.
"Kadmer,  ut  sup.  p.  0.  Chron.  de  Kormandie,  tit  sup.  Guill.  Pictav.,  ///  sup.

TO  1065.]  HAROLD'S  OATH.  149

rassment,  he  acquiesced  in  word  to  all  the  demands  of  the  Nor-
man;1 and  he  who  had  twice  taken  up  arms  to  drive  foreigners
from  his  country,  promised  to  deliver  to  a  foreigner  the  prin-
cipal fortress  of  that  country,  with  no  intention,  indeed,  of
fulfilling  this  unworthy  engagement,  thinking  to  purchase,
by  a  falsehood,  his  safety  and  his  repose.  William  did  not
pursue  the  conversation  further;  but  he  did  not  long  leave
the  Saxon  at  rest  on  the  point.

On  arriving  at  the  castle  of  Bayeux,  duke  "William  held
his  court,  and  thither  convoked  the  great  council  of  the  high
barons  of  Normandy.  According  to  the  old  histories,  on  the
eve  of  the  day  fixed  for  the  assembly,  William  collected  from
the  churches  of  the  town  and  neighbourhood  all  the  relics
they  possessed.  Bones  taken  from  their  shrines,  and  the
entire  bodies  of  saints  were  laid,  by  his  order,  in  a  large
tub  or  trough,  which  was  placed,  covered  with  rich  cloth  of
gold,  in  the  council-hall.2  When  the  duke  was  seated  on  his
throne  of  ceremony,  crowned  with  a  worked  circlet,  holding
in  his  hand  a  drawn  sword,  and  surrounded  by  a  crowd
of  Norman  lords,  amongst  whom  was  the  Saxon,  two  small
reliquaries  were  brought  and  placed  upon  the  golden  cloth
which  covered  and  concealed  the  larger  box  of  relics.  Wil-
liam then  said:  "  Harold,  I  require  thee,  before  this  noble  as-
sembly, to  confirm,  by  oath,  the'  promises  thou  hast  made  to
me;  namely,  to  aid  me  to  obtain  the  kingdom  of  England
after  the  death  of  king  Edward,  to  marry  my  daughter
Adeliza,  and  to  send  thy  sister,  that  I  may  wed  her  to  one
of  my  people."3  The  Englishman  thus  a  second  time  taken  by
surprise,  and  not  venturing  to  deny  his  own  words,  ap-
proached the  two  reliquaries,  extended  his  hand  over  them,
and  swore  to  execute,  as  far  as  lay  in  his  power,  his  agree-
ment with  the  duke,  if  he  lived  and  God  aided  him.  All  the
assembly  repeated,  God  aid  him  /4  Then  William  made  a
sign;  the  cloth  of  gold  wras  raised,  and  the  bones  and  sacred
bodies  revealed  which  filled  the  box  to  the  brim,  and  upon
which  the  son  of  Godwin  had  sworn,  without  suspecting  their

1  Eadmer,  ut  sup.

2  Chrou.  <ie  Normandie,  ut  sup. Roman  de  Ron,  ii.  114.
3  Roman  de  Ron,  ii.  114. Eadmer,  ut  sup.  p.  5. Guill.  Pictav.,  ut  sup.

4  Id.  ib, — Bayeux  Tapestry.

150  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1058

presence.  It  is  said,  that  at  tliis  sight  he  shuddered  and
changed  countenance,  terrified  at  having  made  so  formidable
an  oath.1  Shortly  afterwards  Harold  departed,  taking  his
nephew  with  him,  but,  much  against  his  inclination,  leaving
his  younger  brother  Ulfnoth  in  the  hands  of  the  duke  of
Normandy.  William  accompanied  him  to  the  seaside,  and
made  him  fresh  presents,  delighted  at  having  surprised  the
man  the  most  capable  of  impeding  his  projects,  into  a  solemn
promise,  backed  by  a  terrible  oath,  to  serve  and  aid  him.2

When  Harold,  on  his  return  home,  presented  himself  to
king  Edward,  and  recounted  all  that  had  passed  between
himself  and  duke  William,  the  king  became  pensive,  and
said:  "  Did  I  not  warn  thee  that  I  knew  this  William,  and
that  thy  journey  would  bring  great  evils  upon  thyself  and
upon  thy  nation?  Heaven  grant  that  these  evils  happen  not
in  my  time!"3  These  words  and  this  mournful  expression
would  seem  to  prove  that  Edward  had  really,  in  the  days  of
his  youth  and  heedlessness,  made  the  rash  promise  to  a
foreigner,  of  a  royalty  that  did  not  belong  to  him.  It  is  not
known  whether,  subsequent  to  his  accession,  he  had  by  any
expressions  nourished  William's  ambitious  hopes;  but,  in
default  of  specific  words,  his  constant  friendship  for  the  Nor-
man had,  with  the  latter,  supplied  the  place  of  positive  assu-
rances, and  given  grounds  fo*r  believing  him  still  favourable
to  his  views.

Whatever  might  before  have  been  the  secret  negotiations
of  the  duke  of  Normandy  with  the  Roman  church,  hence-
forward there  was  afforded  them  a  fixed  basis,  a  distinct  di-
rection. An  oath  sworn  upon  relics,  however  absurd  the
oath  might  have  been,  called,  if  it  were  violated,  for  the  ven-
geance of  the  church;  and  in  such  a  case,  in  the  opinion  of
the  period,  the  church  struck  legitimately.  Whether  from  a
secret  presentiment  of  the  perils  with  which  England  was
threatened  by  the  spirit  of  ecclesiastical  revenge,  combined
with  the  ambition  of  the  Normans,  or  from  a  vague  impres-
sion of  superstitious  terror,  a  fearful  depression  came  over  the
English  nation.  Gloomy  reports  were  spread  from  mouth  to

1  Id.  ib.  Chron.  de  Normandie,  ut  sup.

2  Guill.  Pictav.,  ut  sup.  ]y>>. Eadmer,  ut  sup.

3  Eadmer,  ut  sup. Roger  de  Hoveden,  ut  sup.  449.

TO  1065.]  DEATH  OF  EDWARD.  151

mouth;  fears  and  alarms  spread  abroad,  without  any  positive
cause  for  alarm;  predictions  were  dug  up  from  the  graves  of
the  saints  of  the  old  time.  One  of  these  prophesied  calamities
such  as  the  Saxons  had  never  experienced  since  their  depar-
ture from  the  banks  of  the  Elbe;1  another  announced  the  in-
vasion of  a  people  from  France,  who  would  subject  the  Eng-
lish people,  and  abase  their  glory  in  the  dust  for  ever.2  All
these  rumours,  hitherto  unheeded  or  unknown,  perhaps  in-
deed purposely  forged  at  the  time,  were  now  thoroughly
credited,  and  kept  every  mind  in  the  expectation  of  some
vast  and  inevitable  evil.

The  health  of  king  Edward,  a  man  of  naturally  weak  con-
stitution, and  who  had  become  more  alive,  as  it  would  appear,
to  the  destiny  of  his  country,  declined  rapidly  after  these
events.  He  could  not  conceal  from  himself  that  his  love  for
foreigners  was  the  sole  cause  of  the  peril  which  terrified
England;  his  mind  was  thus  still  more  overwhelmed  than
was  even  that  of  the  people.  In  order  to  drown  these
thoughts,  and  perhaps,  also,  the  remorse  which  beset  him,  he
occupied  himself  wholly  with  religious  exercises.  He  made
great  donations  to  the  churches  and  monasteries;  and  his
last  hours  came  upon  him  amidst  this  mournful  and  inactive
life.  Upon  his  death-bed  he  was  entirely  absorbed  in  his
melancholy  forebodings;  he  had  frightful  visions,  and,  in  his
melancholy  ecstacies,  the  menacing  passages  of  the  Bible  re-
curred involuntarily,  and  in  a  confused  manner,  to  his  mind.
"  The  Lord  has  bent  his  bow,"  he  would  exclaim,  "  the
Lord  has  prepared  his  sword;  he  brandishes  it  like  unto  a
warrior;  his  anger  is  manifested  in  steel  and  flame."3  These
words  froze  with  horror  those  who  surrounded  the  king's
bed;4  but  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Stigand,  could  not
refrain  from  a  smile  of  contempt  at  men  who  trembled  at
the  dreams  of  a  sick  old  man.5
„  7  However  weak  the  mind  of  the  aged  Edward,  he  had  the

1  Job.  de  Fordun,  Scoti-chronicon,  lib.  iv.  cap.  xxxvi.  p.  349. (Ilearne.)

2  Job.  Bromton.  Chron.  tit  sup.  col.  909. Osbernus,  Vita  S.  Dunstani ;
Anglia  Sacra,  ii.  118.

»:-  3  Ailred.  Rieval.  dc  vita  Edwardl  Confess,  apud  Hist.  Angl.  Script.,  i.
col.  400.

4  Robert  of  Gloucester's  Chronicle,  p.  350,  '2.
5  Ailred,  ut  sup. Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  ii.  vt  sup.  93.

152  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1050

courage,  before  he  expired,  to  declare  to  the  chiefs  who  con-
sulted him  as  to  the  choice  of  his  successor,  that  in  his  opinion
the  man  worthy  to  reign  was  Harold,  son  of  Godwin.1  In
pronouncing  the  name  of  Harold,  under  the  circumstances,
the  king  showed  himself  superior  to  his  habitual  prejudices.
and  even  to  the  ambition  of  advancing  his  own  family;  for
there  was  then  in  England  a  grandson  of  Edmund  Ironsides,
born  in  Hungary,  where  his  father  had  taken  refuge  at  the
time  of  the  Danish  proscriptions.  This  young  man,  whose
name  was  Edgar,  had  neither  talent  nor  acquired  glory,  and
having  passed  his  childhood  in  a  foreign  country,  could  hardly
speak  the  Saxon  tongue.2  Such  a  candidate  could  not  com-
pete in  popularity  with  the  brave  and  rich  Harold,  the  de-
stroyer of  foreign  power.3  Harold  was  the  man  most  capable
of  encountering  the  dangers  which  seemed  to  menace  the
country;  and  even  had  the  dying  king  not  designated  him  to
the  choice  of  the  other  chiefs,  his  name  would  have  been  pro-
nounced by  every  mouth.4  He  was  elected  the  day  after  the
funeral  of  Edward,  and  consecrated  by  archbishop  Stigand,
whom  the  Roman  church,  as  we  have  seen,  persisted  in  not
acknowledging.5  The  grandson  of  the  cowherd,  Ulfnoth,
showed  himself,  from  the  day  of  his  accession,  just,  wise,
affable,  active  for  the  good  of  his  country,  not  sparing  himself,
says  an  old  historian,  any  fatigue  by  land  or  by  sea.6

Much  anxious  care  was  needed  on  his  part  to  overcome
the  public  discouragement  which  displayed  itself  in  different
ways.  The  appearance  of  a  comet,  visible  in  England  for
nearly  a  month,  produced  upon  every  mind  an  extraordinary
impression  of  wonder  and  fear.  The  people  collected  in  the
streets  and  public  places  of  the  towns  and  villages,  to  con-
template this  phenomenon,  which  they  regarded  as  a  confir-
mation of  the  national  forebodings.  A  monk  of  Malmesbury.
who  studied  astronomy,  composed  upon  this  comet  a  sort  of

1  Chron.  Sax.,  p.  172.  Eadmer,  tit  sup. Eogerde  Hovedeu,  nt  sup.  p.  449.

-  Pontanns,  Re  rum  Dnnicarum  hist.,  lib.  v.  183.  (Amsterdam,  1(351.)

:1  Orderic.  Vitnlis,  Hist.  Ecdcsiast.  upud  Script,  rer.  Normaim.,  p.  49;!.

4  Comes  Haroldns  unanhm  omnium  consensu  in  regem  eligitur,  quia  noil
erat  eo  prudentior  in  terra,  armis  magis  strennus,  legura  terrre  sagacior,  in
omni  genere  probitutis  cultior.  (Vita  Haroldi ;  Chron.  Auglo-Normann.
ii.  24:3.)

3  Bnyenx  Tapestry.  Guill.  Pictav.,  ?//  sup.  p.  190.  Orderic.  Vital.,  vt  sup.
6  Roger  de  Hoveden,  itt  sup.  Willelm.  Midmesb.,  ut  sup.

TO  1066.] WILLIAM  LEARNS  HAROLD'S  ACCESSION.  153

poetical  declamation,  in  which  were  these  words:  "Thou
hast,  then,  returned  at  length,  thou  who  wilt  cause  so  many
mothers  to  weep!  Many  years  have  I  seen  thee  shine;  but
thou  seemest  to  me  more  terrible  now,  that  thou  announcest
the  ruin  of  my  country."1

The  commencement  of  the  new  reign  was  marked  by
a  complete  return  to  the  national  customs  abandoned  under
the  preceding  reign.  In  the  charters  of  king  Harold  the
ancient  Saxon  signature  replaced  the  seals  lately  appended
in  the  Norman  fashion.2  He  did  not,  however,  carry
reform  so  far  as  to  deprive  of  their  offices  or  expel  from
the  country  the  Normans,  whom,  despite  the  law,  a  com-
pliance with  the  affections  of  king  Edward  had  spared.
These  foreigners  continued  to  enjoy  all  civil  rights,  but,  little
grateful  for  this  generosity,  they  began  to  intrigue,  at  home
and  abroad,  for  the  duke  of  Normandy.  It  was  a  messenger
from  them  who  announced  to  William  the  death  of  Edward,
and  the  election  of  the  son  of  Godwin.

When  the  duke  received  this  great  news,  he  was  in  his
park,  near  Rouen,  trying  some  new  arrows.3  All  at  once  he
appeared  pensive,  gave  his  bow  to  one  of  his  people,  and
crossing  the  Seine,  repaired  to  his  palace  at  Rouen;  he
stopped  in  the  great  hall,  and  walked  to  and  fro,  now-
seating  himself,  now  rising  and  changing  his  seat  and  position,
unable  to  remain  in  any  one  place.  None  of  his  people  dared
to  approach  him;  all  remained  apart,  looking  at  each  other  in
silence.4  An  officer,  admitted  to  more  than  ordinary  fami-
liarity with  William,  happening  to  enter,  the  others  pressed
around  him  to  learn  from  him  the  cause  of  the  great  agitation
they  remarked  in  the  duke.  "I  know  nothing  certain,"
answered  the  officer,  "  but  we  shall  soon  learn."  Then  ad-
vancing alone  to  William:  "  My  lord,"  he  said,  "  why  not
communicate  your  intelligence  to  us?  It  is  reported  in  the
town  that  the  king  of  England  is  dead,  and  that  Harold  has
seized  upon  the  kingdom,  thus  breaking  his  faith  to  you." —
"They  report  truly,"  answered  the  duke;  "my  anger  is
touching  the  death  of  Edward,  and  the  injury  Harold  has  done
me."  "  Sir,"  returned  the  courtier,  "chafe  not  at  a  thing  that

1  Ranulf.  Higden,  Pol ychron  icon,  lib.  vi.  tit  sup.  981.

2  Ducarel,  Norman  Antiquities.
3  Chronique  de  Normandie,  ut  sup.  p.  -i'24.  4  Ib.

154  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1065

may  be  amended:  for  Edward's  death  there  is  no  remedy,  but
there  is  one  for  the  wrong  that  Harold  has  done;  yours  is  the
right:  you  have  good  knights;  strike  boldly;  well  begun  is
half  done."1

A  man  of  Saxon  race,  and  Harold's  own  brother,  that  Tosti
whom  the  Northumbrians  had  expelled,  and  whom  Harold,
become  king,  had  refused  again  to  impose  upon  them,  has-
tened from  Flanders  to  urge  William  not  to  allow  the  per-
jurer to  reign  in  peace.2  Tosti  boasted  to  the  foreigners  that
he  had  more  credit  and  power  in  England  than  the  king  his
brother,  and  promised  the  possession  of  the  country  to  whom-
soever should  unite  with  him  to  make  its  conquest.3  Too
prudent  to  engage  in  a  great  undertaking  upon  the  mere
word  of  an  adventurer,  "William,  to  test  his  power,  gave  him
some  vessels,  with  which,  instead  of  landing  in  England,  Tosti
sailed  to  the  Baltic,  to  seek  other  aid,  and  to  excite  the  am-
bition of  the  northern  kings  against  his  country.  He  had
an  interview  with  Swen,  king  of  Denmark,  his  relation  by
his  mother's  side,  and  called  upon  him  to  aid  him  against  his
brother  and  his  nation.  But  the  Dane  gave  a  harsh  refusal.
Tosti  withdrew  in  utter  discontent,  and  went  to  seek  else-
where a  king  less  tenacious  about  justice.4  He  found  in  Nor-
way Harald  or  Harold,  the  son  of  Sigurd,  the  most  valiant  of  the
Scandinavians,  the  last  among  them  who  led  the  adventurous
life  whose  charm  had  vanished  with  the  religion  of  Odin.  In
his  southern  expeditions,  Harold  had  carried  on  his  pursuits
alternately  by  land  and  by  sea;  he  had  by  turns  been  pirate
and  soldier  of  fortune,  viking  and  varing,  as  the  language
of  the  north  expressed  it.5  He  had  served  in  the  east  under
the  chiefs  of  his  nation,  who  for  nearly  two  centuries  had
possessed  a  portion  of  the  Slavonian  provinces.  Then,  im-
pelled by  curiosity,  he  had  been  to  Constantinople,  where
other  Scandinavian  emigrants,  mercenary  troops  under  this

1  Chron.  de  Normandie,  nt  sup.  p.  225.

-  Order.  Vital.,  ut  sup.  p.  492.
3  Saga  af  Harolda  Hardrada,  cap.  Ixxxi.  ;  Snorre's  Heimskringla,  iii.  14G.

4  Torfae,  ut  sup.  pars.  iii.  lib.  v.  cap.  xvii.  p.  347-9.

5  More  correctly  vargliing,  from  varg,  fugitive,  expatriated.  This  word
exists  in  all  the  ancient  Germanic  dialects.  See  Ducange,  in  the  words
tvargits,  wargengus,  tcarengangi,  warganeus,  garyangi,  &c.

TO 1066.J  HAROLD OF NORWAY.  155

same  name  of  varings,  in  which  the  conquerors  of  the  Russ
towns  prided  themselves,  acted  as  the  imperial  guard.1

Harold  was  brother  to  a  king,  but  he  deemed  it  no  deroga-
tion to  enrol  himself  in  this  troop.  He  kept  guard,  axe  on
shoulder,  at  the  gates  of  the  imperial  palace,  and  was  em-
ployed with  the  corps  to  which  he  belonged  in  Asia  and
Africa.  Enriched  by  the  booty  acquired  in  these  expeditions,
he  wished  to  depart,  and  offered  his  resignation;  finding  that
it  was  intended  to  detain  him  by  force,  he  escaped  by  sea,
taking  with  him  a  young  woman  of  high  birth.  After  this,
he  cruized  as  a  pirate  along  the  coasts  of  Sicily,  and  thus
augmented  the  treasure  he  carried  with  him  in  his  ship.2  He
was  a  poet,  like  most  of  the  northern  corsairs,  who  in  their
long  voyages,  and  when  their  progress  was  slackened  by  calms,
amused  themselves  with  celebrating,  in  verse,  their  successes
and  their  hopes.  On  his  return  from  the  long  voyaging
in  which,  as  he  expressed  it  in  his  songs,  he  had  led  his  vessel
afar,  the  terror  of  the  labourers,  his  dark  vessel,  filled  with
grim  warriors,  Harold  raised  an  army,  and  made  war  upon
the  king  of  Norway,  in  order  to  dispossess  him.  He  asserted
an  hereditary  claim  to  the  crown  of  that  kingdom;  but  soon,
perceiving  the  difficulty  of  conquering  it,  he  made  peace  with
his  competitor,  on  the  condition  of  a  division;  to  complete
the  arrangement,  it  was  agreed  that  the  treasure  of  the  son  of
Sigurd  should  be  shared  between  them,  as  well  as  the  ter-
ritory of  Norway.  In  order  to  gain  over  to  his  views  this
man,  so  famous  throughout  the  north  for  his  wealth  and  cou-
rage, Tosti  approached  him  with  honied  words.  "  The  world
knows  well,"  said  he,  "  that  there  exists  not  a  warrior  worthy
to  be  compared  with  thee;  thou  hast  only  to  will  it,  and  Eng-
land will  be  thine."  The  Norwegian  allowed  himself  to  be
persuaded,  and  promised  to  put  his  fleet  to  sea,  as  soon  as  the
annual  melting  of  the  ice  should  set  the  ocean  free.3

Pending  the  departure  of  his  Norwegian  ally,  Tosti  essayed
his  fortune  on  the  northern  coasts  of  England,  with  a  band  of
adventurers  collected  in  Friesland,  Holland,  and  Flanders.

1  The  Byzantine  historians  designate  this  corps  of  foreign  mercenaries
4>apyavoi  and  Bapayyoi.

2  Saga  af  Haralda,  cap.  iii. : Snorre,  ut  sup.  p.  50.

3  Id.  cap.  Ixxxii.  ;  Snorre,  ut  sup.  p.  149.

156  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1065

He  pillaged  and  devastated  several  villages;  but  the  two
great  chiefs  of  the  provinces  laying  along  the  Humber,  Mor-
kar  and  Edwin,  united  their  forces,  and  pursuing  his  vessels,
compelled  him  to  seek  a  retreat  on  the  coast  of  Scotland.1
Meantime  Harold,  son  of  Godwin,  tranquil  in  the  south  of
England,  witnessed  the  arrival  of  a  messenger  from  Nor-
mandy, who  addressed  him  in  these  terms  :  "  William,  duke
of  Normandy,  reminds  thee  of  the  oath  which  thou  didst
swear  to  him,  by  mouth  and  by  hand,  upon  good  and  holy
relics."2  "  It  is  true,"  answered  the  Saxon  king,  "  that  I  swore
such  an  oath  to  duke  William;  but  I  swore  it  under  compul-
sion. I  promised  that  which  did  not  belong  to  me,  and  which
I  could  not  perform;  for  my  royalty  is  not  mine,  and  I  can-
not divest  myself  of  it,  without  the  consent  of  the  coun-
try; nor,  without  the  consent  of  the  country,  can  I  marry  a
foreign  wife.  As  to  my  sister,  whom  the  duke  claims,  to
marry  her  to  one  of  his  chiefs,  she  died  this  year;  would  he
have  me  send  him  her  body?"3  The  Norman  ambassador  took
back  this  answer;  and  William  replied  by  a  second  message,
couched  in  terms  of  gentle  remonstrance,4  intreating  the  king,
if  he  would  not  consent  to  fulfil  all  the  sworn  conditions,  to
execute  at  least  one  of  them,  and  to  take  as  a  wife  the  young
girl  he  had  promised  to  marry.  Harold  again  replied  that
he  would  not,  and  to  settle  the  point,  married  a  Saxon  wife,
the  sister  of  Edwin  and  Morkar.  Then  the  last  words  of
rupture  were  pronounced;  William  swore  that  within  the
year  he  would  come  and  demand  the  whole  of  his  debt,  and
pursue  the  perjurer  to  the  very  places  where  he  thought  he
had  the  surest  and  firmest  footing/"'

As  far  as  publicity  could  go  in  the  eleventh  century,  the
duke  of  Normandy  published  what  he  called  the  Saxon's
gross  dishonesty.6  The  general  influence  of  superstitious
ideas  prevented  indifferent  spectators  of  this  dispute  from
understanding  the  patriotic  conduct  of  the  sort  of  Godwin,  and

1  Id.  ib. Eoger  de  Hoveden,  ut  sup.  p.  448.

2  Chron.  de  Normandie,  itt  sup.  p.  229. Robert  of  Gloucester,  p.  058.
Chron.  PLctav.,  ut  sup.  p.  192.

3  Eadmer,  ut  sup.  p.  C. Roger  de  Hoveden, ut  sup.  p.  440. Ranulf.
Higden,  ut  sup.  p.  285.

4  Iterum  ei  arnica  familiaritate  mandavit.  (Eadmer,  vt  sup.  5.)

a  Willelra.,  Malmesb.  vt  sup.  p.  99.  Ingulf.,  ut  sup.  p.  08.  Matt.  Paris,  i.  2.
0  Eadmer,  vt  sup.

TO  1066.]  HILDEBRAND.  157

his  scrupulous  deference  to  the  will  of  the  people  who  had
made  him  king.  The  opinion  of  the  majority  upon  the  con-
tinent was  with  William  against  Harold,  with  the  man  who
had  employed  holy  things  as  a  snare,  and  accused  of  treason
the  man  who  refused  to  commit  it.  The  negotiation  com-
menced with  the  Romish  church  by  Robert  de  Jumieges  and
the  monk  Lanfranc  was  actively  pursued,  from  the  moment  that
a  deacon  of  Lisieux  had  borne  beyond  the  mountains  the  news
of  the  alleged  crime  of  Harold  and  the  English  nation.  The
duke  of  Normandy  laid  an  accusation  of  sacrilege  against  his
enemy  before  the  pontifical  court;  he  demanded  that  Eng-
land should  be  placed  under  the  ban  of  the  church  and  de-
clared the  property  of  the  first  occupant,  sanctioned  by  the
pope.1  He  founded  his  demand  upon  three  principal  causes
of  complaint:  the  murder  of  young  Alfred  and  his  Norman
companions,  the  expulsion  of  the  archbishop  Robert  from  the
see  of  Canterbury,  and  the  perjury  of  king  Harold.2  He  also
pretended  to  have  incontestable  claims  to  the  royalty,  in
virtue  of  his  relationship  to  king  Edward,  and  the  intentions
which  this  king  had,  he  said,  manifested  on  his  death-bed.
He  affected  the  character  of  a  plaintiff  awaiting  justice,  and
desiring  that  his  adversary  shall  be  heard.  But  Harold  was
summoned  in  vain  to  defend  himself  before  the  court  of
Rome.  He  refused  to  acknowledge  the  j  urisdiction  of  that
court  in  the  matter,  and  deputed  no  ambassador  there,  too
proud  to  submit  the  independence  of  his  crown  to  foreigners,
and  too  sensible  to  believe  in  the  impartiality  of  the  judges
invoked  by  his  enemy.3

The  consistory  of  Saint  John  Latran  was  at  this  time  go-
verned by  a  man  whose  celebrity  surpasses  that  of  any  other
man  of  the  middle  ages;  Hildebrand,  monk  of  Cluny,  created
archdeacon  of  the  Romish  church  by  pope  Nicholas  II.  After
having  reigned  several  years  under  the  name  of  this  pope,
he  found  himself  sufficiently  powerful  to  elect  one  of  his  own
choice,  who  took  the  name  of  Alexander  II. ;  and  to  maintain
him  on  his  throne,  despite  the  ill  will  of  the  imperial  court.
All  the  views  of  this  personage,  who  was  gifted  with  indefa-
tigable activity,  tended  to  transform  the  religious  supremacy

3  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  nt  sup.  p.  100.
2  Ilanulf.  Higilen,  tit  .sup.  p.  '28n.  3  Ingulf.,  ut  sup.  p.  GO.

158  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1065

of  the  holy  see  into  an  universal  sovereignty  over  the  Chris-
tian states.  This  revolution,  commenced  in  the  ninth  century
by  the  reduction  of  several  towns  of  central  Italy  to  the  obe-
dience or  suzerainty  of  the  pope,  was  continued  during  the
two  following  centuries.  All  the  cities  of  Campania,  of  which
the  pontiff  of  Rome  was  the  immediate  metropolitan,  had
passed,  voluntarily  or  by  force,  under  his  temporal  power;
and,  strange  circumstance,  in  the  first  half  of  the  eleventh
century,  Norman  knights,  emigrants  from  their  country,  had
been  seen  leading  the  Roman  troops  to  this  conquest,  under
the  banner  of  Saint  Peter.1  At  the  same  epoch,  other  Nor-
mans, pilgrims  or  adventurers,  had  taken  service  under  the
petty  lords  of  southern  Italy;  then,  like  the  Saxons  with  the
Britons,  they  had  broken  their  engagement,  seized  the  for-
tresses, and  established  their  dominion  over  the  country.  This
new  power,  having  put  an  end,  if  not  to  the  pretensions,  at
all  events  to  the  power  of  the  Greek  empire  over  the  towns
of  Apulia  and  Calabria,  suited  the  religious  intolerance  of  the
court  of  Rome,  and  flattered  its  ambition,  in  the  hope  of  an
authority  readily  obtained  over  simple-minded  warriors,  filled
with  veneration  for  the  holy  see.  In  fact,  several  of  these  new
dukes  or  counts  successively  declared  themselves  vassals  of
the  prince  of  the  apostles,  and  consented  to  receive  a  banner
of  the  Roman  church,  as  a  feudal  investiture  of  the  lands
which  they  themselves  had  conquered.  Thus  the  church
profited  by  the  power  of  the  Norman  arms  gradually  to  ex-
tend her  sovereignty  in  Italy,  and  accustomed  herself  to  look
upon  the  Normans  as  destined  to  combat  in  her  service,  and
to  do  her  homage  for  their  conquests.

Such  were  the  singular  relations  which  the  chance  of  events
had  created,  when  the  complaints  and  demand  of  the  duke  of
Normandy  reached  the  court  of  Rome.  His  mind  full  of  his
favourite  idea,  the  archdeacon  Hildebrand  thought  the  moment
favourable  for  attempting  on  the  kingdom  of  England  that
which  had  succeeded  in  Italy;  he  applied  all  his  efforts  to
substitute  for  the  ecclesiastical  discussion  on  the  indifference  of
the  English,  the  simony  of  their  bishops,  and  the  perj  ury  of
their  king,  a  formal  negotiation  for  the  conquest  of  the
country,  at  the  common  cost  and  for  the  common  profit.  Not-

1  Orderic.  Vital.,  ut  sup,  p.  472. Floury,  Hist.  Ecdes,,  xii.  40.

TO  1066.] HAROLD  EXCOMMUNICATED.  159

withstanding  the  reality  of  these  purely  political  projects,  the
cause  of  William  against  Harold  was  examined  in  the  assembly
of  cardinals,  without  any  other  question  being  discussed  than
that  of  the  hereditary  right,  the  sanctity  of  the  oath,  and  the
veneration  due  to  the  relics.  These  did  not  appear  to  several
of  those  present  sufficient  grounds  to  warrant,  on  the  part  ot
the  church,  an  armed  aggression  against  a  Christian  people;
and  when  the  archdeacon  persisted,  a  murmur  arose,  and  the
dissentients  told  him  that  it  was  infamous  to  authorize  and
encourage  homicide;1  but  he  was  unmoved  at  this,  and  his
views  prevailed.

In  the  terms  of  the  sentence  which  was  pronounced  by  the
pope  himself,  William  duke  of  Normandy  was  permitted  to
enter  England,  to  bring  that  kingdom  back  to  the  obedience
of  the  holy  see,  and  to  re-establish  there  for  ever  the  tax  of
Saint  Peter's  pence.2  A  bull  of  excommunication,  directed
against  Harold  and  all  his  adherents,  was  given  to  William's
messenger,  and  to  it  was  added  a  banner  of  the  Roman  church
and  a  ring  containing  one  of  the  hairs  of  Saint  Peter,  set
under  a  diamond  of  great  price.3  This  was  the  double  emblem
of  military  and  ecclesiastical  investiture;  the  consecrated
banner  which  was  to  consecrate  the  invasion  of  England  by
the  duke  of  Normandy,  was  the  same  which,  a  few  years  be-
fore, the  Normans  Raoul  and  William  de  Montreuil  had
planted,  in  the  name  of  the  church,  on  the  castles  of  Cam-
pania.4

Before  the  bull,  the  banner,  and  the  ring  had  arrived,  duke
William  assembled,  in  a  cabinet  council,  his  most  intimate
friends,  to  demand  their  advice  and  assistance.  His  two
brothers  by  the  mother's  side,  Eudes  and  Robert,  one  of  them
bishop  of  Bayeux,  the  other  count  of  Mortain;  William  Fitz-
Osbern,  seneschal  of  Normandy,  or  ducal  lieutenant  for
civil  administration,  and  some  high  barons,  attended  the  con-
ference. All  were  of  the  opinion  that  it  was  proper  to  make
a  descent  upon  England,  and  promised  to  serve  him  with  body
and  goods,  even  to  selling  or  pledging  their  inheritances.
"But  this  is  not  all,"  said  they;  "you  must  seek  aid  and

1  Epist.  Greg.,  vii.  apud  Script,  rev.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  xiv.  048.

2  Chronique  de  Normandie.  ut  sup.  p.  '2'27.

3  Guill.  Pictav.,  ut  sup.  p.  197. Matt.  Paris,  i.  2.

4  Order.  Vital.,  ut  sup.  p.  473. Fleury,  ut  sup.  p.  400.

160  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1065

counsel  from  the  body  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  country;  for
it  is  right  that  those  who  pay  the  cost  should  be  asked  their
consent."1  William,  say  the  chroniclers,  then  convoked  a
great  assembly  of  men  of  every  class  in  Normandy — warriors,
churchmen,  and  merchants,  all  the  richest  and  most  consi-
derable personages  of  the  land.  The  duke  explained  his
projects  to  them,  and  solicited  their  assistance;  the  assembly
then  withdrew,  in  order  to  deliberate  more  free  from  in-
fluence.2

In  the  debate  which  followed,  opinions  seemed  greatly
divided;  some  wished  to  aid  the  duke  with  vessels,  munitions,
and  money;  others  protested  against  any  kind  of  aid,  saying
that  they  had  already  more  debts  than  they  could  pay.  This
discussion  was  not  carried  on  without  tumult,  and  the  mem-
bers of  the  assembly,  risen  from  their  seats  and  divided  into
groups,  spoke  and  gesticulated  with  great  noise.  In  the  midst
of  this  confusion,  the  seneschal  of  Normandy,  William  Fitz-
Osbern,  raised  his  voice,  and  said:  "  Why  dispute  ye  thus?
he  is  your  lord,  he  has  need  of  you;  it  were  better  your  duty
to  make  your  offers,  and  not  to  await  his  request.  If  you
fail  him  now,  and  he  gain  his  end,  by  God  he  will  remember
it;  prove,  then,  that  you  love  him,  and  act  accordingly."
"  Doubtless,"  cried  the  opponents,  "he  is  our  lord;  but  is  it
not  enough  for  us  to  pay  him  his  dues?  We  owe  him  no  aid
beyond  the  seas;  he  has  already  enough  oppressed  us  with  his
wars;  let  him  fail  in  his  new  enterprise,  and  our  country  is
undone."3  After  a  long  discussion,  resulting  in  various
opinions,  it  was  determined  that  Fitz-Osbern,  who  knew  the
position  of  each  man  present,  should  be  the  messenger  to  ex-
cuse the  limited  offers  of  the  assembly.4

The  Normans  returned  to  the  duke,  and  Fitz-Osbe  n
spoke  thus:  "  I  do  not  believe  that  there  are  in  the  whole
world  people  more  zealous  than  these;  you  know  the  aids  they
have  given  you,  the  onerous  services  they  have  rendered  you;
well,  sire,  they  will  do  more,  they  offer  to  serve  you  beyond
the  sea  as  they  have  done  here.  Forward,  then,  and  spare
them  in  nothing;  he  who  hitherto  has  only  supplied  you  with
two  good  mounted  soldiers,  will  now  supply  four."  "No!

1  Gbronique  de  Normandie,  lit  sup.  p.  225.
8  H>.  s  7^  4  7j.

TO 1066.]  PREPARATIONS FOR INVASION.  161

no!"  exclaimed  the  Normans;  "we  did  not  charge  you  with
such  an  answer;  we  did  not  say  that,  and  it  shall  not  be  so.
In  things  within  his  own  country  we  will  serve  him  as  is  due;
but  we  are  not  bound  to  assist  him  to  conquer  another  man's
country.  Besides,  if  once  we  rendered  him  double  service,
and  followed  him  across  the  sea,  he  would  make  it  a  right  and
a  custom  for  the  future;  he  would  burden  our  children  with
it;  it  shall  not  be,  it  shall  not  be!"  Groups  of  ten,  twenty,
thirty,  formed;  the  tumult  was  general,  and  the  assembly
separated.1

Duke  William,  surprised  and  enraged  beyond  measure,  dis*
simulated  his  anger,  and  had  recourse  to  an  artifice,  which  lias
scarcely  ever  failed  of  its  effect  when  powerful  personages
have  desired  to  overcome  popular  resistance.  He  sent  sepa-
rately for  the  same  men  whom  he  had  first  convoked  in  a
body ;  commencing  with  the  richest  and  most  influential,  he
intreated  them  to  aid  him  out  of  pure  favour  and  as  a  volun-
tary gift,  affirming  that  he  had  no  intention  of  making  it  an
ill  precedent  for  the  future,  or  of  abusing  their  own  liberality
against  them;  offering  even  to  confirm  his  verbal  assurance
by  letters  sealed  with  his  own  great  seal.2  None  had  the
courage  to  pronounce  a  refusal  to  the  face  of  the  chief  of  the
country,  in  an  interview  with  him  alone.  That  which  each
agreed  to  do  was  immediately  registered;  and  the  example  of
the  first  summoned,  decided  those  who  came  afterwards.  One
subscribed  for  ships,  another  for  armed  soldiers,  others  pro-
mised to  march  in  person;  priests  gave  money,  merchants
merchandize,  peasants  their  goods.

Presently  after  this,  the  consecrated  banner  and  the  bull
authorizing  the  invasion  of  England  arrived  from  Rome,  which
greatly  increased  the  popular  ardour;  every  one  brought  what
he  could;  mothers  sent  their  sons  to  enrol  their  names  for
the  salvation  of  their  souls.3  William  published  his  ban  in
the  neighbouring  countries;  he  offered  good  pay  and  the  pil-
lage of  England  to  every  able  man  who  would  serve  him  with
lance,  sword,  or  cross-bow.  A  multitude  accepted  the  invi-
tation, coming  by  every  road,  far  and  near,  from  north  and  south.

1  Chron.  de  Normandie,  p.  220. Robert!  de  Monte,  Appendix,  ad  Sige-
bertum,  apud  Script,  rer.  Gallic.,  xi.  108.  2  Id.  ib.

3  Jd.  ib,  227.
VOL.  I.  M

162  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1065

They  came  from  Maine  and  Anjou,  from  Poitou  and  Brittany,
from  France  and  Flanders,  Aquitaine  and  Burgundy,  from
the  Alps  and  the  banks  of  the  Rhine.1  All  the  professional  ad-
venturers, all  the  military  vagabonds  of  Western  Europe
hastened  to  Normandy,  by  long  inarches;  some  were  knights
and  chiefs  of  war,  the  others  simple  foot-soldiers  and  sergeants
of  arms,  as  they  were  then  called;  some  demanded  money-
pay,  others  only  their  passage  and  all  the  booty  they  might
make.  Some  asked  for  land  in  England,  a  domain,  a  castle,
a  town;  others  simply  required  some  rich  Saxon  in  marriage.2
Every  thought,  every  desire  of  human  avarice  presented  itself.
William  rejected  no  one,  says  the  Norman  chronicle,  and
satisfied  every  one  as  well  as  he  could.  He  gave,  before-
hand, a  bishopric  in  England  to  a  monk  of  Fescamp,  in  re-
turn for  a  vessel  and  twenty  armed  men.3  During  the  spring
and  summer,  in  all  the  ports  of  Normandy,  workmen  of  every
kind  were  employed  in  constructing  and  fitting  up  ships;
smiths  and  armourers  forged  lances,  swords,  and  coats  of
mail,  and  porters  went  to  and  fro  continually,  transporting  the
completed  arms  from  the  workshops  to  the  vessels.4  While
these  preparations  were  actively  going  on,  William  went  to
Philip,  king  of  the  French,  at  Saint  Germain,  and  saluting
him  with  the  form  of  deference  which  his  ancestors  had  often
omitted  towards  the  kings  of  the  Frank  country:  "  You  are
my  seigneur,"  said  he;  "  if  it  please  you  aid  me,  and  I,  by
God's  grace,  obtain  my  right  over  England,  I  promise  to  do
you  homage  for  it,  as  though  I  held  it  from  you."  Philip
assembled  his  council  of  barons,  without  which  he  could  not
decide  any  important  affair,  and  the  barons  were  of  opinion
that  they  ought  not  in  any  way  to  aid  William  in  his  con-
quest. "  You  know,"  said  they  to  the  king,  "  how  ill  the  Nor-
mans obey  you  now;  it  will  be  still  worse  when  they  possess
England.  Besides,  it  would  cost  us  a  great  deal  to  assist  the
duke,  and  if  he  fail  in  his  enterprise,  the  English  will  be  our

1  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  ut  sup.  p.  99.  Willelm.  Gemet.,  ut  siqy.-  p.  51.
Hist.  Franc.  Frag.,  upud  Script,  rer.  Francicarum  et  Gallic.,  p.  102.  Order.
Vital.,  ut  siq).  p.  494.

2  Chron.  de  Normandie,  itt  sup.  p.  227.

3  Sharon  Turner,  ii.  410.  Eadiner,  ut  sup.  i.  7.  Willelm.  Malmesb.,
ib.  iv.  id  sup.  p.  290.

*  Bayeux  Tapestry.

TO  1066.] HOSTILE  MESSAGE  FROM  CONAN.  163

enemies  for  ever."  Thus  defeated  in  his  object,  duke  William
withdrew,  greatly  discontented  with  king  Philip,  and  ad-
dressed the  same  request  to  the  count  of  Flanders,  his
brother-in-law,  who  also  declined  to  aid  him.1

Despite  the  national  enmity  of  the  Normans  and  Bretons,
there  existed  between  the  dukes  of  Normandy  and  the  counts  of
Brittany  alliances  of  relationship,  which  complicated  the  re-
lations of  the  two  states  without  rendering  them  less  hostile.
At  the  time  when  duke  Robert,  the  father  of  William,  de-
parted on  his  pilgrimage,  he  had  no  nearer  relation  than  the
Breton  count  Allan  or  Alain,  a  descendant  of  Roll  by  the
female  side,  and  it  was  to  him  that,  on  his  departure,  he  con-
fided the  charge  of  his  duchy  and  the  guardianship  of  his  son.
Count  Alain  had  not  long  delayed  to  declare  the  birth  of  his
pupil  doubtful,  and  to  favour  the  party  which  wished  to  de-
prive him  of  the  succession;  but  after  the  defeat  of  this  party
at  the  Val  des  Dunes,  he  died,  poisoned,  according  to  all  ap-
pearances, by  the  friends  of  the  young  bastard.  His  son
Conan  succeeded  him,  and  still  reigned  in  Brittany  at  the
time  of  William's  great  armament  for  the  conquest  of  Eng-
land. He  was  a  daring  man,  dreaded  by  his  neighbours,  and
whose  principal  ambition  was 'to  injure  the  duke  of  Normandy,
whom  he  regarded  as  an  usurper  and  as  the  murderer  of  his
father.  Finding  the  latter  engaged  in  a  difficult  enterprise,
Conan  thought  the  moment  favourable  for  declaring  war
against  him,  and  sent  him,  by  one  of  his  chamberlains,  the
following  message:

"  I  hear  that  thou  art  about  to  cross  the  sea,  to  conquer
the  kingdom  of  England.  Now  duke  Robert,  whose  son
thou  pretendest  to  be,  on  departing  for  Jerusalem,  remitted
all  his  heritage  to  count  Allan,  my  father,  who  was  his  cousin.
But  thou  and  thy  accomplices  poisoned  my  father:  thou  hast
appropriated  to  thyself  his  seigneury,  and  hast  detained  it  to
this  day,  contrary  to  all  justice,  seeing  that  thou  art  a  bastard.
Restore  me,  then,  the  duchy  of  Normandy,  which  belongs  to
me,  or  I  will  make  war  upon  thee  to  the  last  extremity,  with
all  the  forces  at  my  disposal."^

The  Norman  historians  admit  that  William  was  somewhat
alarmed  at  this  message,  for  the  slightest  diversion  might

1  Chron.  de  Normandie,  ut  sup. -  Willelm.  Gemet.,  ut  sup.  p.  280.

164  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1065

defeat  his  projects  of  conquest;  but  lie  found  means  to  get
rid,  without  much  difficulty,  of  the  enemy  who  declared
himself  with  such  rash  boldness.  The  chamberlain  of  the
count  of  Brittany,  gained  over  doubtless  by  bribes,  rubbed
with  poison  the  mouthpiece  of  the  horn  which  his  master  used
in  the  chase,  and,  to  make  assurance  doubly  sure,  poisoned
also  his  gloves  and  the  reins  of  his  horse.1  Conan  died  a
few  days  after  the  return  of  his  messenger.  Count  Eudes,
his  successor,  was  careful  not  to  imitate  him,  or  alarm  William
the  Bastard  as  to  the  validity  of  his  rights:  on  the  contrary,
uniting  with  him  in  a  friendship,  quite  new  between  the
Bretons  and  the  Normans,  he  sent  his  two  sons  to  aid  him
against  the  English.  These  two  young  men,  Brian  and  Allany
came  to  the  rendezvous  of  the  Norman  troops,2  accompanied
by  a  body  of  horse,  who  gave  them  the  title  of  Mactierns,3
whilst  the  Normans  called  them  counts.  Other  rich  Bretons,
not  of  purely  Celtic  race,  and  who  bore  names  of  French
form,  such  as  Robert  de  Vitry,  Bertrand  de  Dinand,  and
Raoul  de  Gael,  also  came  to  the  duke  of  Normandy  to  offer
him  their  services.4  The  rendezvous  of  the  vessels  and
troops  was  at  the  mouth  of  the  Dive,  a  river  which  empties
itself  into  the  ocean,  between  the  Seine  and  the  Orne.  For
a  month,  the  winds  were  contrary,  and  detained  the  Norman
fleet  in  port.  Then  a  southern  breeze  carried  them  as  far  as
the  roadstead  of  Saint  Valery,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Somme;5
there  the  bad  weather  recommenced,  and  it  was  necessary  to
wait  some  days.  The  fleet  anchored,  and  the  troops  encamped

1  Willelm.  Gemet.,  lit  sup.  p.  286.
2  Lobiueau,  Hist,  de  Bretagne,  i.  book  iii.  p.  08. See  Appendix,  No.  VI.

3  Son  of  the  chief. Tiem,  chief;  in  Gaelic,  Teyrn.
4  Lobineau,  -tit.  sup. Cftronique  de  Normaudie,  id  sup.
5  Some  respectable  s avails  have  considered  that  the  place  to  which  Wil-
liam's fleet  was  thus  driven, was  Valery-eu-Caux, and not Valery-sur-
Sonime,  situated  beyond  the  limits  of  Normandy; but  the  manuscript  re-
cently discovered  at  Brussels  sets  all  doubt  on  the  point  at  rest :
';  Tuque,  velis  noliss,  tandem  tua  litora  linquens,

Navigitim  vertis  litus  ad  alterius.
Portus  ab  antiquis  Vimaci  fertur  haberi,

Quae  vallat  portum,  Somana  nomen  aqua?...
Desuper  est  castrum  qtioddam  Saucti  Walarici,
Hie  tibi  loiiga,  fuit  difficilisque  niora."

(\Yidon,  Carmen  de  Hasting ce  Pradio  ;  Chroniqucs
Auglo-Normandes,  iii.  3.)

TO  1066.] DETENTION  OF  THE  NORMAN  FLEET. 165

upon  the  shore,  greatly  incommoded  by  the  rain,  which  did
not  cease  to  fall  in  torrents.1

During  this  delay,  some  of  the  vessels,  shattered  by  a  vio-
lent tempest,  sank  with  their  crews;  this  accident  created  a
great  sensation  among  the  troops,  fatigued  by  protracted
encamping.  In  the  long  leisure  of  their  days,  the  soldiers
passed  hours  conversing  under  their  tents,  exchanging  their
reflections  upon  the  perils  of  the  voyage  and  the  difficulties
of  the  enterprise.2  No  combat  had  yet  taken  place,  and,  said
they,  already  many  men  were  dead;  they  reckoned  and  ex-
aggerated the  number  of  bodies  that  the  sea  had  thrown  on
the  sand.  These  conversations  abated  the  ardour  of  the
adventurers,  at  first  so  full  of  zeal;  some  even  broke  their
engagement  and  withdrew.3  To  check  this  tendency  so  fatal
to  his  projects,  duke  William  had  the  dead  secretly  interred,
and  increased  the  rations  of  provisions  and  strong  liquors;4
but  the  want  of  active  employment  continually  brought  back
the  same  thoughts  of  sadness  and  discouragement.  "  The  man
is  mad,"  said  the  murmuring  soldiers,  "  who  seeks  to  seize  the
land  of  another;  God  is  offended  with  such  designs,  and
proves  it  by  refusing  us  a  favourable  wind."5

Despite  his  strength  of  soul  and  habitual  presence  of  mind,
William  was  a  prey  to  uneasiness  which  he  could  hardly  con-
ceal. He  was  frequently  seen  to  go  to  the  church  of  Saint
Valery,  the  patron  of  the  place,  to  remain  there  a  long  time
in  prayer,  and  each  time  that  he  quitted  it,  to  look  at  the  cock
which  surmounted  the  bell-tower,  and  showed  the  direction
of  the  wind.  If  it  seemed  turning  towards  the  south,  the
duke  appeared  joyful;  but  if  the  wind  blew  from  the  north
or  west,  his  face  and  manner  became  still  more  depressed.
Whether  it  was  an  act  of  sincere  faith,  or  merely  to  furnish
some  occupation  to  his  sad  and  discouraged  troops,  he  took
from  the  church  the  coffer  which  contained  the  relics  of  the
saint,  and  had  it  carried  in  procession  with  great  ceremony
through  the  camp.  The  whole  army  joined  in  prayer.  The
chiefs  made  rich  offerings;  every  soldier,  to  the  very  lowest,
gave  his  piece  of  money;  and  the  following  night,  as  if

1  Wido,  nt  sup.  p.  4.

2  Willelm.  Malmesb..  nt  sup.  p.  100.

3  Guill.  Pictav.,  ut  sup.  p.  198.  4  Id.  il>.

3  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  ut  sup.  °  Wido,  ut  sup.

166  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1065

heaven  had  granted  a  miracle,  the  wind  changed,  and  the
weather  became  calm  and  serene.  At  daybreak  of  the  27th
September,  the  sun,  hitherto  each  day  enveloped  in  clouds,
appeared  in  all  its  splendour.1  The  camp  was  immediately
raised,  all  the  preparations  for  embarkation  executed  with
great  ardour  and  no  less  promptitude,  and  some  hours  before
sunset  the  entire  fleet  was  ready.  Four  hundred  ships  with
large  sails,  and  more  than  a  thousand  transport  vessels,  made
for  the  open  sea,  amid  the  sound  of  trumpets  and  a  shout  of
joy,  sent  forth  from  sixty  thousand  mouths  as  from  one.2

The  vessel  in  which  William  sailed  was  in  the  van,  bearing
at  its  mast-head  the  banner  sent  by  the  pope,  and  a  cross  on
its  own  flag.  Its  sails  were  of  different  colours,  and  on  them
in  various  places  were  painted  the  three  lions,  the  arms  of
Normandy;  at  the  prow  was  the  carved  figure  of  a  child,
bearing  a  bow  bent,  with  the  arrow  ready  to  quit  the  string.3
Lastly,  large  lanterns  suspended  from  poles,  a  necessary  pre-
caution for  a  night-passage,  were  to  serve  as  a  beacon  to  the
whole  fleet,  and  to  indicate  the  rallying  point.  This  vessel,  a
better  sailer  than  the  rest,  outstripped  them  during  the  day,
and  at  night  left  them  far  behind.  In  the  morning,  the
duke  sent  a  sailor  to  the  mast-head  to  see  if  the  other  vessels
were  coming.  "  I  see  only  sky  and  sea,"  answered  the
sailor;  whereupon  they  dropped  anchor.  The  duke  affected
a  gay  countenance,  and,  lest  fear  and  anxiety  should  spread
among  the  crew,  he  had  a  copious  repast  and  wines  highly
spiced  given  to  them.  The  sailor  again  ascended,  and  now
said  that  he  saw  four  vessels;  a  third  time,  he  exclaimed:  "I
see  a  forest  of  masts  and  sails."4

Whilst  this  great  armament  was  preparing  in  Normandy,
Harold,  kirl£  of  Norway,  faithful  to  his  engagements  with  the
Saxon  Tosti,  had  assembled  several  hundred  ships  of  war  and
transports.  The  fleet  remained  some  time  at  anchor,  and
the  Norwegian  army,  pending  the  signal  for  departure,  en-
camped upon  the  coast  as  the  Normans  had  done  at  the

1  Wido.,  lit  sup.

2  Id.  ib. ; where,  however,  the  author  greatly  exaggerates  the  number  of
the  troops,  to  whom  his  description  applies.

3  S trim's  Norman  Antiquities,  pi.  xxxii. Roman  de  Eon,  ii.  146. Rud-
borne,  nt  sup.  lib.  v.  cap.  i. ;  Anglia  Sacra,  i.  245. Bayeux  Tapestry.

*  Gnill.  Pictav.,  ut  stq).  108,  199.

TO  1066.]  INVASION OF THE NORMAN FLEET.  167

mouth  of  the  Somme.  Vague  impressions  of  discouragement
and  anxiety  were  produced  by  the  same  causes,  but  under  a
still  more  gloomy  aspect,  conformable  with  the  pensive  ima-
gination of  the  inhabitants  of  the  north.  Several  soldiers
believed  they  had  had  prophetic  revelations  during  their  sleep.
One  of  them  dreamed  that  he  saw  his  companions  landed  on
the  coast  of  England,  and  in  presence  of  the  English  army;
that  in  front  of  this  army,  riding  upon  a  wolf,  was  a  woman  of
gigantic  stature;  the  wolf  held  in  his  jaws  a  human  body,
dripping  with  gore,  and  when  he  had  devoured  it,  the  woman
gave  him  another.1  A  second  soldier  dreamed  that  the  fleet
sailed,  and  that  a  flock  of  crows,  vultures,  and  other  birds  of
prey  were  perched  upon  the  masts  and  sails  of  the  vessels;
on  an  adjacent  rock  a  woman  was  seated,  holding  a  drawn
sword  in  her  hand,  and  looking  at  and  counting  the  ves-
sels: "Go,"  said  she  to  the  birds,  "go  without  fear,  you
shall  have  enough  to  eat,  and  you  shall  have  plenty  to
choose  from,  for  I  go  with  them."2  It  was  remarked,  not
without  terror,  that  at  the  moment  when  Harold  placed  his
foot  on  the  royal  boat,  the  weight  of  his  body  pressed  it  down
more  than  usual.3

Despite  these  threatening  presages,  the  expedition  sailed
towards  the  southwest  under  the  command  of  the  king  and
his  son  Olaf.  Before  landing  in  England,  they  touched  at
the  Orcades,  islands  inhabited  by  men  of  Scandinavian  race,
and  two  chiefs  and  a  bishop  joined  them.  They  then  coasted
along  the  eastern  shore  of  Scotland,  where  they  met  Tosti
and  his  vessels.  They  sailed  thence  together,  and,  on  their
way,  attacked  the  maritime  town  of  Scarborough.  Finding  the
inhabitants  prepared  to  make  an  obstinate  defence,  they  took
possession  of  a  high  rock  which  commanded  the  town,  and  raised
there  an  enormous  pile  of  trunks  of  trees,  branches  and  stub-
ble, which,  firing,  they  rolled  down  upon  the  houses,  and  then,
favoured  by  the  conflagration,  forced  the  gates  of  the  town
and  pillaged  it.4  Relieved  by  this  first  success  from  their
superstitious  terrors,  they  gaily  doubled  Holderness  at  the

1  Saga  af  Haralda  Hardrada,  cap.  Ixxxiv. ;  Snorre's  Heimskringht,  iii.  151.

2  Idem.  ib.  cap.  Ixxxiii. ;  Snorre,  ib.

3  Id.  cap.  Ixxxv.  Snorre,  ib.  p.  152.  Torfseus,  ut  sup.  p.  351.  Turner's
Anglo-Saxons,  ii.  390.

4  Torfseus,  ut  sup. Turner,  id  sup.

168  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1065

mouth  of  the  Humber;  and  ascended  that  river.  From  the
Humber  they  passed  into  the  Ouse,  which  runs  near  York.
Tosti,  who  had  the  direction  of  the  campaign,  wished  first  of
all  to  regain  this  capital  of  his  ancient  government,  in  order
again  to  instal  himself  there.  Morkar,  his  successor,  Edwin,
Morkar's  brother,  and  young  Waltheof,  son  of  Siward,  go-
vernor of  Huntingdonshire,  assembled  the  inhabitants  of  the
surrounding  country,  and  gave  battle  to  the  foreigners  south
of  York,  upon  the  banks  of  the  Humber;  conquerors  at  first,
but  then  obliged  to  retreat,  they  shut  themselves  up  in  the
city,  where  the  Norwegians  besieged  them.  Tosti  assumed
the  title  of  chief  of  Northumberland,  and  issued  a  proclamation
dated  from  the  foreigner's  camp:  a  few  weak-minded  men
acknowledged  him,  and  a  small  number  of  adventurers  an-
swered his  appeal.1

While  these  things  were  passing  in  the  north,  the  king  of
the  Anglo-Saxons  remained  with  all  his  forces  on  the  south-
ern coast,  to  watch  the  movements  of  William,  whose  inva-
sion, which  had  been  long  expected,  gave  rise  to  much  alarm.2
Harold  had  passed  the  whole  summer  and  autumn  upon  his
guard,  between  the  landing-places  nearest  to  Normandy;3  but
the  delay  of  the  expedition  occasioned  it  to  be  believed  that
it  would  now  not  be  made  before  the  winter.  Moreover,  the
danger  was  greater  from  the  enemy  in  the  north,  already  mas-
ters of  a  portion  of  the  English  territory,  than  from  an  enemy
who  had  not  yet  set  foot  in  England;  and  the  son  of  Godwin,
prompt  and  daring  in  his  projects,  hoped  in  a  few  days  to
expel  the  Norwegians,  and  return  to  his  post  to  receive  the
Normans.  He  made  rapid  marches  at  the  head  of  his  best
troops,  and  arrived  by  night  under  the  walls  of  York,  just  as
the  inhabitants  had  agreed  to  surrender  to  the  allies  of  Tosti.
The  Norwegians  had  not  yet  made  their  entry:  but,  on  the
word  of  the  inhabitants  and  the  conviction  of  the  impossibility
of  their  retracting  that  word,  they  had  broken  up  the  lines,  and
were  reposing.  On  their  part,  the  inhabitants  of  York  had
no  other  idea  than  that  of  receiving  on  the  next  day  Tosti  and
the  king  of  Norway,  who  were  to  hold  a  great  council  in  the
city,  to  regulate  the  government  of  all  the  province,  and  dis-

i  /&._Saga  af  Haralcla,  cap.  Ixxxvii. ; Snorre,  p.  156.

2  Guill.  Pictav.,  lit  sup.  p.  197.
3  Roger  de  Hoveden,  ut  sup.  p.  448.

TO  1066.] HAROLD  ATTACKS  THE  NORWEGIANS. 169

tribute,  among  the  foreigners  and  deserters,  the  lands  of  the
rebel  English.1

The  unexpected  arrival  of  the  Saxon  king,  who  had  marched
so  as  to  avoid  the  enemy's  outposts,  changed  the  whole  face  of
things.  The  citizens  of  York  resumed  their  arms,  and  the
gates  of  the  city  were  closed  and  guarded,  so  that  no  one
could  quit  it  for  the  camp  of  the  Norwegians.  The  following
day  was  one  of  those  autumnal  days  in  which  the  sun  is  still
in  all  its  vigour;  the  portion  of  the  Norwegian  army  which  left
the  camp  on  the  Humber  to  accompany  their  king  to  York,
not  expecting  to  have  enemies  to  combat,  were  without  their
coats  of  mail,  on  account  of  the  heat;  and  of  their  defensive
arms  had  only  retained  their  helmets  and  bucklers.  At  some
distance  from  the  town  the  Norwegians  suddenly  perceived  a
great  cloud  of  dust,  and  in  the  midst  of  this  cloud  something
glittering  like  steel  in  the  sunshine.  "  Who  are  these  men
advancing  towards  us?"  said  the  king  to  Tosti.  "  It  can  only
be,"  said  the  Saxon,  "Englishmen  coming  to  demand  pardon
and  implore  our  friendship.'"2  The  advancing  mass  growing
gradually  more  distinct,  soon  appeared  a  numerous  army,
ranged  in  battle  order.  "  The  enemy!  the  enemy! "exclaimed
the  Norwegians,  and  they  detached  three  horsemen  to  bring
up  in  all  haste  the  soldiers  who  remained  behind  in  the  camp
and  on  board  the  ships.  The  king  unfurled  his  standard,
which  he  called  the  ravager  of  the  world  /3  the  soldiers  drew
up  around  it,  in  a  long  narrow  line,  curved  at  the  extremities.
They  stood  pressed  against  each  other,  their  lances  planted  in
the  ground  with  the  points  turned  towards  the  enemy.  Harold,
son  of  Sigurd,  rode  through  the  ranks  on  his  black  charger,
singing  extempore  verses,  a  fragment  of  which  has  been
transmitted  to  us  by  the  northern  historians  :  "  Let  us  fight,"
said  he,  "  let  us  advance,  though  without  our  cuirasses,  to
the  edges  of  blue  steel;  our  helmets  glitter  in  the  sun;  that  is
enough  for  brave  men."4

Before  the  two  armies  met,  twenty  Saxon  cavaliers,  men

1  Saga  af  Haralda,  cap.  Ixxxix. Snorre,  p.  156. Boger  de  Hoveden,  p.
448. Henric.  Knighton,  at  sup.  ii.  col.  ^339.

2  Saga  af  Haralda,  cap.  xc. Suorre,  p.  158,  150.

3  In  Icelandic,  Land-eydo  ; in  Danish,  Land-ode. Saga  af  Hardrada,
xci. Snorre,  ut  sup.

4  Saga  af  Haralda,  cap.  xciv. ; Snorre,  p.  ICO. Gesta  Danomm,  ii.  165.

170  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1065

and  horses  clothed  in  steel,  approached  the  Norwegian  lines;
one  of  them,  in  a  loud  voice,  cried  :  "  "Where  is  Tosti,  son  of
Godwin?" — "  Here,"  answered  the  son  of  Godwin  himself.
"  If  thou  art  Tosti,"  returned  the  messenger,  "  thy  brother
greets  thee  by  me,  and  offers  thee  peace,  his  friendship,  and
thy  ancient  honours."  "  These  are  fine  words,  and  very  dif-
ferent to  the  insults  and  hostilities  they  made  me  submit  to
a  year  ago.  But  if  I  accept  these  offers,  what  shall  be  given
to  the  noble  king  Harold,  son  of  Sigurd,  my  faithful  ally?"
"He,"  answered  the  messenger,  "shall  have  seven  feet  of
English  land,  or  a  little  more,  for  his  height  passes  that  of
other  men."  "  Say,  then,  to  my  brother,"  answered  Tosti,
"  that  he  prepare  to  fight :  for  none  but  liars  shall  ever  say
that  the  son  of  Godwin  deserted  the  son  of  Sigurd."1

The  battle  immediately  began,  and  at  the  first  shock  of  the
two  armies  the  Norwegian  king  was  killed  by  an  arrow  which
pierced  his  throat.  Tosti  took  the  command;  and  then  his
brother  Harold  sent  a  second  time  to  offer  him  peace  and  life,
for  himself  and  the  Norwegians.2  But  all  exclaimed  that  they
would  rather  die  than  owe  aught  to  the  Saxons.  At  this
moment,  the  men  from  the  ships  arrived,  armed  with  cuirasses,
but  fatigued  with  their  march  under  a  burning  sun.  Although
numerous,  they  did  not  sustain  the  attack  of  the  English,  who
had  already  broken  the  first  line  of  the  battle  and  taken  the
royal  banner.  Tosti  was  killed,  with  most  of  the  Norwegian
chiefs,  and.  for  the  third  time,  Harold  offered  peace  to  the
conquered.  They  accepted  it;  Olaf,  the  son  of  the  dead  king,
the  bishop  and  surviving  chief  of  the  Orcades,  retired,  with
twenty-three  vessels,  having  sworn  friendship  to  England.3
The  country  of  the  English  was  thus  delivered  from  a  new
conquest  by  the  men  of  the  north.  But  while  these  enemies
withdrew,  to  return  no  more,  other  foes  approached,  and  the
same  breeze  in  which  the  banners  of  the  victorious  Saxons
waved,  also  swelled  the  Norman  sails,  and  urged  them  on
towards  the  coast  of  Sussex.

By  an  unfortunate  chance,  the  vessels  which  had  long  been
cruizing  upon  this  coast  had  just  returned  to  port  from  want
of  provisions.4  The  troops  of  William  thus  landed,  without

1  Id.  ib.  Turner,  ii.  395.

2  Id.  il.  cap.  xcvi. Suorre,  p.  1(54. Turner,  ii.  396.
3  Id.  ib.  xcvii.  *  Roman  de  Kou,  ii.  151,  15;}. Bayeux  Tapestry.

TO  1066.]  LANDING  *OF WILLIAM.  171

resistance,  at  Pevensey  near  Hastings,  the  28th  of  September
1066,  three  days  after  the  victory  of  Harold  over  the  Nor-
wegians. The  archers  landed  first;  they  wore  short  coats,
and  their  hair  was  shaved  off;  then  came  the  cavalry,  wear-
ing coats  of  mail  and  helmets  of  polished  steel,  of  a  nearly
conical  form,  armed  with  long  and  strong  lances,  and
straight  double-edged  swords.  These  were  followed  by  the
workmen  of  the  army,  pioneers,  carpenters,  and  smiths,  who
brought  on  shore,  piece  by  piece,  three  wooden  castles,  ready
prepared  beforehand.  The  duke  was  the  last  to  land;  at  the
moment  his  foot  touched  the  sand,  he  slipped  and  fell  on  his
face.  A  murmur  arose,  and  voices  exclaimed  :  "  God  pre-
serve us!  this  is  a  bad  sign."  But  William,  rising,  said  im-
mediately: "  Lords,  what  is't  you  say?  What,  are  you  amazed?
I  have  taken  seizin  of  this  land  with  my  hands,  and,  by  the
splendour  of  God,  all  that  it  contains  is  ours."  The  repartee
prevented  the  effect  of  the  evil  presage.  The  army  took  the
road  towards  Hastings,  and  near  that  place  marked  out  a
camp,  and  raised  two  of  the  wooden  castles  as  receptacles  for
provisions.  Bodies  of  troops  overran  the  neighbouring  coun-
try, pillaging  and  burning  houses.  The  English  fled  from  their
dwellings,  hiding  their  goods  and  cattle,  and  hastened  in  crowds
to  the  churches  and  churchyards,  which  they  deemed  the  surest
asylum  against  enemies,  who  were  Christians  like  themselves.
But,  in  their  thirst  for  booty,  the  Normans  paid  little  heed  to
the  sanctity  of  places,  and  respected  no  asylum.

Harold  was  at  York,  wounded,  and  resting  from  his  fatigues,
when  a  messenger  arrived  in  great  haste,  to  inform  him  that
William  of  Normandy  had  landed,  and  planted  his  banner  on
the  Anglo-Saxon  territory.1  He  immediately  marched  to-
wards the  south  with  his  victorious  army,  publishing,  on  his
way,  an  order  to  all  the  provincial  governors  to  arm  their
fighting-men,  and  bring  them  to  London.  The  militia  of  the
west  came  without  delay;  those  of  the  north  were  later,  on
account  of  the  distance;  but  there  was  still  reason  to  believe
that  the  king  of  the  English  would  soon  find  himself  sur-
rounded by  the  forces  of  the  whole  country.  One  of  those  Nor-
mans who  had  been  made  exceptions  to  the  law  of  exile  pro-

1  William  of  Gloucester's  Chronicle,  p.  359.  Suppletio  historic  regni
Anglia?.  (MSS.  Mas.  Britamrici.)

172  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1065

nounced  against  foreigners,  and  who  now  played  the  part  of
spies  and  secret  agents  of  the  invader,  sent  word  to  the  duke
to  be  upon  his  guard,  for  that  in  four  days  the  son  of  God-
win would  have  an  hundred  thousand  men  with  him.1  Harold,
too  impatient,  did  not  await  the  expiration  of  the  four  days;
he  could  not  overcome  his  desire  to  close  with  the  foreigners,
especially  when  he  learned  the  ravages  of  every  kind  which
they  were  committing  round  their  camp.  The  hope  of  sparing
his  countrymen  further  evil,  and  perhaps  the  desire  of  attempt-
ing against  the  Normans  a  sudden  and  unforeseen  attack,  like
that  which  had  succeeded  against  the  Norwegians,  determined
him  to  march  to  Hastings,  with  an  army  four  times  less  nu-
merous than  that  of  the  duke  of  Normandy.2

But  William's  camp  was  carefully  guarded  against  a  sur-
prise, and  his  outposts  extended  to  a  great  distance.  Some
detachments  of  cavalry  falling  back,  gave  notice  of  the
approach  of  the  Saxon  king,  who,  they  said,  was  advancing
furiously.3  Failing  in  his  design  of  attacking  the  enemy  by
surprise,  the  Saxon  was  obliged  to  moderate  his  impetuosity;
he  halted  at  a  distance  of  seven  miles  from  the  Norman  camp,
and  suddenly  changing  his  tactics,  intrenched  himself,  to
await  them  behind  ditches  and  palisades.  Some  spies,  who
spoke  French,  were  sent  to  the  foreign  army  to  observe  its
disposition  and  force.  On  their  return,  they  related  that
there  were  more  priests  in  William's  camp  than  there  were
fighting  men  on  the  English  side.  They  had  mistaken  for
priests  all  the  soldiers  of  the  Norman  army  who  wore  shaved
beards  and  short  hair.  Harold  smiled  at  this  report:  "  They
whom  you  saw  in  such  great  numbers,"  said  he,  "  are  not
priests,  but  brave  warriors,  who  will  soon  show  us  what  they
are  worth."4  Some  of  the  Saxon  chiefs  advised  the  king  to
avoid  a  battle,  and  to  retreat  towards  London,  ravaging  the
•country  on  his  way,  to  starve  out  the  foreigners.  "  I !"  ex-
claimed Harold,5  "  I  ravage  the  country  which  has  been  con-
fided to  my  care!  By  my  faith,  that  were  indeed  treason,

1  Chron.  de  Normandie,  p.  228. Guill.  Pict.,  ut  sup.  100.

2  Id.  ib.  201.

MSS. Abbatiae  Waltham., in  Museo  Britanuico. Florent.  Wigron.
Chrem.,  p.  C34. Roger  de  Hoveden,  ut  sup.  p.  448. Ingulf.,  ut  sup.  p.  GO.

4  Guill.  Pictav.,  ut  sup.  p.  201.
5  Roman  de  Ron,  ii.  174. Matth.  Paris,  i.  3.

TO  1066.]  WILLIAM OFFERS TERMS TO HAROLD.  173

and  I  prefer  taking  the  chances  of  battle  with  the  few  men  I
have,  my  courage,  and  my  good  cause."

The  Norman  duke,  whose  totally  opposite  character  led
him,  in  every  circumstance,  to  neglect  no  means  that  occurred,
and  to  place  interest  above  all  personal  pride,  profited  by  the
unfavourable  position  in  which  he  saw  his  adversary,  to  renew
his  demands.  A  monk,  called  Dom  Hugues  Maigrot,  came,
in  William's  name,  to  require  the  Saxon  king  to  do  one  of
three  things;  either  to  surrender  the  crown  to  the  duke  of
Normandy,  or  to  submit  the  matter  to  the  arbitration  of  the
pope,  or  to  refer  its  decision  to  the  chance  of  a  single  combat.
Harold  shortly  answered:  "  I  will  not  resign  the  crown,  I
will  not  refer  the  matter  to  the  pope,  I  will  not  fight  a  single
combat."  Not  discouraged  by  these  positive  refusals,  Wil-
liam again  sent  the  Norman  monk,  to  whom  he  dictated  his
instructions  in  the  following  terms:  "  Go  and  say  to  Harold,
that,  if  he  will  fulfil  his  compact  with  me,  I  will  leave  him
all  the  land  which  is  beyond  the  Humber,  and  will  give  his
brother  Gurth  all  the  land  that  Godwin  held;  if  he  persist  in
not  accepting  my  offer,  thou  shalt  say  to  him,  before  all  his
people,  that  he  is  a  perjurer  and  a  liar,  that  he  and  all  those
who  support  him  are  excommunicated  by  the  pope,  and  that
I  have  the  papal  bull  for  this."

Dom  Hugues  Maigrot  delivered  this  message  in  a  solemn
tone,  and  the  Norman  chronicle  says  that  at  the  word  excom-
munication the  English  chiefs  looked  at  each  other,  as  though
they  stood  in  the  presence  of  a  great  danger.  One  of  them
spoke:  "  We  ought,"  said  he,  "to  fight,  whatever  the  danger
may  be;  for  it  is  not  here  the  question  of  receiving  a  new
lord,  as  if  our  king  were  dead;  the  matter  in  hand  is  very
different.  The  duke  of  Normandy  has  given  our  lands  to  his
barons,  his  knights,  and  all  his  people,  most  of  whom  have
already  rendered  him  homage  for  them ;  they  will  all  have
their  donations  carried  into  effect  if  the  duke  becomes  our
king,  and  he  will  be  bound  to  give  them  our  goods,  our  wives,
and  our  daughters,  for  all  is  promised  them  beforehand.  They
come,  not  only  to  ruin  us,  but  to  ruin  our  descendants  also,
to  take  from  us  the  country  of  our  ancestors;  and  what  shall
we  do,  or  where  shall  we  go,  when  we  have  no  longer  any
country?"  And  hereupon  the  English  unanimously  took  an
oath  to  make  neither  peace,  truce,  nor  treaty,  with  the

174  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1065

invader,  and  to  drive  out  the  Normans  or  die  in  the  at-
tempt."1

A  whole  day  was  employed  in  these  futile  messages;  it
was  the  eighteenth  since  the  battle  fought  with  the  Nor-
wegians near  York.  Harold's  precipitate  march  had  not  as
yet  permitted  any  additional  troops  to  join  him.  Edwin  and
Morkar,  the  two  great  northern  chieftains,  were  at  London,
or  on  the  road  to  London;  none  but  volunteers  came,  one  by
one,  or  in  small  bands,  citizens  armed  in  haste,  monks  who
quitted  their  cloisters  to  obey  the  call  of  their  country.
Among  the  latter  was  Leofrik,  abbot  of  the  great  monastery
of  Peterborough,  near  Ely,  and  the  abbot  of  Hide,  near  Win-
chester, who  brought  with  him  twelve  of  his  monks,  and
twenty  warriors  raised  at  his  expense.2  The  hour  of  battle
appeared  at  hand;  Harold's  two  young  brothers,  Gurth  and
Leofwin,  had  taken  their  positions  near  him:  the  former
endeavoured  to  persuade  him  not  to  be  present  in  the  action,
but  to  go  to  London  to  seek  fresh  reinforcements,  whilst  his
friends  sustained  the  attack  of  the  Normans.  "  Harold,'*
said  the  young  man,  "  thou  canst  not  deny  that,  whether  on
compulsion  or  willingly,  thou  hast  sworn  to  duke  William,
an  oath  upon  the  relics  of  saints;  why  risk  a  combat  with  a
perjury  against  thee?  For  us,  who  have  taken  no  oath,  the
war  is  just,  for  we  defend  our  country.  Leave  us,  then,  to
fight  the  battle;  thou  shalt  aid  us  if  we  retreat,  and  if  we  die
thou  wilt  revenge  us."3  To  these  words,  so  touching  in  the
mouth  of  a  brother,  Harold  replied  that  his  duty  forbad  him
to  remain  apart  while  others  risked  their  lives;  too  confident
in  his  courage  and  his  good  cause,  he  drew  up  his  troops  for
the  combat.4

On  the  ground,  which  has  ever  since  borne  the  name  of
Battle,5  the  lines  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  occupied  a  long  chain
of  hills,  fortified  by  a  rampart  of  stakes  and  willow  hurdles.
In  the  night  of  the  13th  October,  William  announced  to  the
Normans  that  the  next  day  would  be  the  day  of  battle.

1  Chron.  de  Normaiidie,  p.  231.
2  Dugdale,  Monast.  Anglic.,  i.  210.
3  Willelra.  Malrnesb.,  id  sup.  p.  100.

4  MS.  Abbati*  Waltbam.

5  In  Latin,  locus  Belli.  Willelm.  Gemet.,  ut  sup.  p.  288.  Dugdale,  ut
sup.  311.

TO  1066.]  BATTLE  OF  HASTINGS.  175

Priests  and  monks  who  had  followed  the  invading  army
in  great  numbers,  attracted,  like  the  soldiers,  by  the  hope  of
booty,1  met  to  pray  and  chaunt  litanies,  while  the  warriors
prepared  their  arms.  The  time  which  remained  to  them,
after  this  first  care,  was  employed  by  them  in  confessing  their
sins  and  receiving  the  sacrament.  In  the  other  army,  the
night  was  passed  in  a  very  different  manner;  the  Saxons
diverted  themselves  with  noisily  singing  old  national  songs,
and  emptying,  around  their  fires,  horns  filled  with  beer  and
wine.2

When  morning  came,  in  the  Norman  camp,  the  bishop  of
Bayeux,  brother,  on  the  mother's  side,  of  duke  William,
celebrated  mass  and  blessed  the  troops,  armed  with  a  hauberk
under  his  rochet;  he  then  mounted  a  large  white  courser,
took  a  baton  of  command,  and  drew  up  the  cavalry.  The
army  was  divided  into  three  columns  of  attack;  in  the  first
were  the  men-at-arms  from  the  counties  of  Boulogne  and
Ponthieu,  with  most  of  the  adventurers  engaged  individually
for  pay;  in  the  second  were  the  Breton,  Manceaux,  and
Poitevin  auxiliaries;  William  in  person  commanded  the  third,
composed  of  the  Norman  chivalry.  In  front  and  on  the
flanks  of  each  of  these  bodies  were  infantry,  lightly  armed,
wearing  quilted  coats,  and  armed  with  long  bows  or  with
steel  crossbows.  The  duke  was  mounted  on  a  Spanish
charger,  which  a  rich  Norman  had  brought  him  on  his  return
from  a  pilgrimage  to  St.  lago  in  Galicia.  He  wore  around
his  neck  the  most  revered  of  the  relics  upon  which  Harold
had  sworn,  and  the  standard,  blessed  by  the  pope,  was  carried
at  his  side  by  a  young  man,  named  Toustain  le  Blanc.3  At
the  moment,  ere  the  troops  began  their  inarch,  the  duke,
raising  his  voice,  thus  addressed  them: —

"  Fight  your  best,  and  put  every  one  to  death;  for  if  we  con-
quer, we  shall  all  be  rich.  What  I  gain,  you  gain;  if  I  conquer,
you  conquer;  if  I  take  the  land,  you  will  share  it.  Know,  how-
ever, that  I  am  not  come  here  merely  to  take  that  which  is
my  due,  but  to  revenge  our  whole  nation  for  the  felon  acts,
perjuries,  and  treason  of  these  English.  They  put  to  death
the  Danes,  men,  and  women,  in  the  night  of  Saint  Brice.

1  Dugdole,  nt  sup.

-  Roman  de  Rou,  ii.  184 — 186. See  Appendix,  No.  VII.
3  Id.  ib.  Guill.  Pictuv.,  p.  201. Chron.  de  Normandie.  p.  232,  233.

176  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1065

They  decimated  the  companions  of  my  relation,  Alfred,  and
put  himself  to  death.  On,  then,  in  God's  name,  and  chas-
tise them  for  all  their  misdeeds."1

The  army  soon  came  in  sight  of  the  Saxon  camp,  north-
west of  Hastings.  The  priests  and  monks  who  accompanied
it,  retired  to  a  neighbouring  hill,  to  pray  and  watch  the  com-
bat.2 A  Norman,  named  Taillefer,  spurred  his  horse  in  front
of  the  array,  and  began  the  song,  famous  throughout  Gaul,  of
Charlemagne  and  Roland.  As  he  sang,  he  played  with  his
sword,  throwing  it  far  into  the  air,  and  catching  it,  as  it  fell,
in  his  right  hand;  the  Normans  repeated  the  burthen,  or
shouted.  Dieu  aide !  Dieu  aide  !  3

Coming  within  shot,  the  archers  began  to  discharge  their
arrows,  and  the  cross-bowmen  their  bolts;  but  most  of  the
shots  were  rendered  useless  by  the  high  parapets  of  the  Saxon
redoubts.  The  infantry  armed  with  lances,  and  the  cavalry,
advanced  to  the  gates  of  the  redoubts,  and  endeavoured  to
force  them.  The  Anglo-Saxons,  all  on  foot  around  their
standard,  planted  in  the  ground,  and  forming  behind  their
palisades  a  compact  and  solid  mass,  received  the  assailants
with  heavy  blows  of  their  axes,  cevissimce  secures,  as  the  his-
torian calls  them,4  one  blow  of  which  broke  the  lances  and
cut  through  the  coats  of  mail.5  The  Normans,  not  being  able
to  penetrate  the  redoubts,  or  to  tear  up  the  stakes,  fell  back,
fatigued  with  their  useless  attack,  upon  the  division  com-
manded by  William.  The  duke  then  made  all  his  archers  ad-
vance, and  ordered  them  not  to  shoot  straightforward,  but  into
the  air,  so  that  the  arrows  might  fall  into  the  enemy's  camp.
Many  of  the  English  were  wounded,  most  of  them  in  the  face,
by  this  manosuvre;  Harold  himself  had  his  eye  pierced  with
an  arrow;  but  nevertheless,  continued  to  issue  his  orders  and
to  fight.  The  attack  of  the  infantry  and  cavalry  again  com-
menced, amid  cries  of  Notre  Dame  !  Dieu  aide  !  Dieu  aide  /
But  the  Normans  were  driven  back  from  one  of  the  gates  of
the  camp,  to  a  deep  ravine,  covered  with  brushwood  and  grass,
the  growth  of  time,  into  which  they  and  their  horses  fell  one

1  Id.  ib.  a  Id.  ib.

3  Id.  ib.  Henric.  Huutiud.,  lib.  viii.,  ut  sup.  p.  308.

4  Guill.  Pictav.,  p.  201.
5  Chron.  de  Normandie,  p.  234. Matt,  Paris,  i.  2

A.D.  1066.] DEATH  OF  HAROLD.  177

upon  the  other,  and  thus  perished  in  great  numbers.1  There
was  a  moment  of  terror  in  the  foreign  army.  The  report
spread  that  the  duke  had  been  killed,  and  at  this  news  a  re-
treat commenced.  William  threw  himself  before  the  fugitives
and  barred  their  passage,  threatening  them,  and  striking  them
with  his  lance;  then  uncovering:  "  I  am  here,"  he  exclaimed;
"look  at  me,  I  still  live,  and,  with  the  help  of  God,  I  will
conquer."2

The  cavalry  returned  to  the  redoubts,  but  they  could  not  force
the  gates  or  make  a  breach;  the  duke  then  thought  of  a  strata-
gem to  induce  the  English  to  quit  their  position;  he  ordered
a  thousand  horse  to  advance  and  immediately  retreat.  The
sight  of  this  feigned  flight  made  the  Saxons  lose  their  cool-
ness; they  all  rushed  in  pursuit,  their  axes  hanging  from  their
necks.3  At  a  certain  distance,  a  body  previously  disposed,  joined
the  fugitives,  who  turned;  and  the  English,  surprised  in  their
disorder,  were  assailed  on  every  side  by  blows  of  lances  and
swords,  from  which  they  could  not  defend  themselves,  having
both  their  hands  occupied  in  wielding  their  great  battle-axes.
When  they  had  lost  their  ranks,  the  redoubts  were  forced;
horse  and  foot  made  their  way  into  them,  but  the-  combat  was
still  fierce,  hand  to  hand.  William  had  his  horse  killed  under
him;  Harold  and  his  two  brothers  fell  dead  at  the  foot  of  their
standard,  which  was  torn  up  and  replaced  by  the  banner  sent
from  Rome.  The  wreck  of  the  English  army,  without  chief
and  without  standard,  prolonged  the  struggle  till  the  end  of
the  day,  so  late  that  the  combatants  of  the  two  parties  only
recognised  each  other  by  their  language.4

Then,  and  not  till  then,  did  this  desperate  resistance  end.
Harold's  followers  dispersed,  many  dying  upon  the  roads  of
their  wounds  and  the  fatigue  of  the  combat.  The  Norman
horse  pursued  them,  granting  quarter  to  none.5  The  victors
passed  the  night  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  the  next  day  at
sunrise,  duke  William  drew  up  his  troops  and  called  over  the
names  of  all  those  who  had  crossed  the  sea  with  him,  from  the

1  Dngdale,  ut  sup. Willelm.  Gemet,,  p.  287.

2  Guill.  Pictav.,  p.  202.

3  Chron.  de  Normandie,  p.  285.

4  Id.  p.  200.  Dugdale,  i.  012.  Matt.  West.,  p.  220.  Eadmer,  lib.  i.
p.C.

3  Guill.  Pictav.,  p.  203.
VOL.  I.  N

178  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1065

list  which  had  been  drawn  up  before  their  departure,  at  St.
Valery.  Numbers  of  these  lay,  dead  or  dying,  beside  the
conquered.1  The  fortunate  survivors  had,  for  the  first  fruits
of  their  victory,  the  spoils  of  the  dead  enemy.  In  turning  over
the  bodies,  thirteen  were  found  with  a  monk's  habit  under
their  armour;  they  were  the  abbot  of  Hide  and  his  twelve
companions:  the  name  of  their  monastery  was  the  first  written
in  the  black  book  of  the  conquerors.2

The  mothers  and  wives  of  those  who  had  come  from  the
neighbourhood  to  fight  and  die  with  their  king,  united  to  seek
together  and  bury  the  bodies  of  their  relations.  That  of  king
Harold  lay  for  a  long  time  on  the  field  of  battle,  without
any  one  daring  to  claim  it.  At  length,  Godwin's  widow,
Ghitha,  subduing  for  the  moment  her  grief,  sent  a  message
to  duke  William,  asking  his  permission  to  render  the  last
honours  to  her  son.  She  offered,  say  the  Norman  historians,
to  give  the  weight  of  his  body  in  gold.  But  the  duke  sternly
refused,  saying  that  a  man  who  had  been  false  to  his  word
and  to  his  religion,  should  have  no  other  sepulchre  than  the
sand  of  the  shore.  He  relented,  however,  if  we  are  to  believe
an  old  tradition,  in  favour  of  the  monks  of  Waltham  abbey,
which  Harold  had  founded  and  enriched.  Two  Saxon  monks,
Osgod  and  Ailrik,  deputed  by  the  abbot  of  Waltham,  de-
manded and  obtained  permission  to  transport  the  remains  of
their  benefactor  to  their  church.  They  sought  among  the
mass  of  bodies,  despoiled  of  arms  and  clothes,  examining  them
carefully  one  after  the  other,  but  could  not  recognise  the  body
of  him  they  sought,  so  much  had  his  wounds  disfigured  him.
Despairing  ever  to  succeed  in  their  research  unaided,  they  ad-
dressed themselves  to  a  woman  whom  Harold,  before  he  be-
came king,  had  kept  as  a  mistress,  and  intreated  her  to  assist
them.  She  was  called  Edith,  and  surnamed  the  Beauty  with
the  swan's  neck.3  She  consented  to  accompany  the  two  monks,
and  was  more  successful  than  they  in  discovering  the  corpse  of
him  whom  she  had  loved.

All  these  events  are  related  by  the  chroniclers  of  Anglo-
Saxon  race,,  in  a  tone  of  despondency  which  it  is  diffi-
cult to  convey.  They  call  the  day  of  the  battle  a  bitter  day,

1  Cbron.  de  Normandie,  ut  sup,  z  Dugtlale,  i.  210.

3  Chron.  Aiiglo-Normandes,  ii.  De  inventione  sanetse  crucis  Walthainen-
ws,  p.  249.

TO  1066.] FOUNDATION  OF  BATTLE  ABBEY.  179

a  day  of  death,  a  day  stained  with  the  blood  of  the  brave.1
"  England,  what  shall  I  say  of  thee,"  exclaims  the  historian
of  the  church  of  Ely;  "what  shall  I  relate  to  our  descendants?
Woe  to  thee!  thou  hast  lost  thy  national  king,  and  thou  hast
fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  foreigner;  thy  sons  have  perished
miserably,  thy  councillors  and  thy  chiefs  are  conquered,
dead,  or  disinherited."2  Long  after  the  day  of  this  fatal
fight,  patriotic  superstition  still  saw  traces  of  fresh  blood
upon  the  ground  where  it  had  taken  place;  they  were  visible,
it  was  said,,  on  the  heights  north-west  of  Hastings,  when  a
slight  rain  had  moistened  the  soil.3  Immediately  after  his
victory,  William  made  a  vow  to  build  an  abbey  on  the  spot,
dedicated  to  the  Holy  Trinity  and  Saint  Martin,  the  patron
of  the  warriors  of  Gaul.4  The  vow  was  soon  accomplished,
and  the  high  altar  of  the  new  monastery  was  raised  on  the
very  spot  where  the  standard  of  king  Harold  had  been
planted  and  torn  down.  The  outer  walls  were  traced  around
the  hill  which  the  bravest  of  the  English  had  covered  with
their  bodies,  and  the  whole  extent  of  the  adjacent  land,  upon
which  the  famous  scenes  of  the  battle  had  taken  place,  be-
came the  property  of  this  abbey,  which  was  called,  in  the
Norman  language,  L'Abbaye  de  la  BatailleJ*  Monks  from
the  great  convent  of  Marmoutiers,  near  Tours,  came  to  settle
here  and  pray  for  the  souls  of  all  who  had  died  on  the  field.6
It  is  said,  that,  when  the  first  stones  of  the  edifice  were
laid,  the  architects  discovered  that  there  would  be  a  deficiency
of  water;  they  went,  quite  disconcerted,  to  acquaint  William,
with  this  untoward  circumstance:  "  Work,  work  away,"  re-
plied the  conqueror,  in  a  jovial  tone,  "  for  if  God  give  me
life,  there  shall  be  more  wine  among  the  monks  of  Battle
Abbey  than  there  is  water  in  the  best  convent  of  Christen-
dom!"7

1  Matlh.  West.,  p.  224.

2  Hist.  Eccles.  Eliensis,  lib.  ii.  p.  44,  apud  Rer.  Anglic.  Script. (Gale)
iii.  51(5.  s  Guill.  Neubrig.  Hist.  (Hearne)  p.  10.

4  Charts  Willelm.  Conquaestoris,  upud  Dugdale,  Monast.  Anglican.,  i.
317,318.

5  Cum  leuga  circumquaque  adjacente^.sicut  ilia  quae  mihi  coronam  tribuit.
(Chart*  Willelm.  Conqusestoris in notis  ad  Eadmeri  Hist.  p.  165. — lu
Latin,  Abbatia  de  Bella.

«  Dugdale,  i.  312.  »  Id.  ib. [As  to  tlie  Bayeux  Tapestry,  see

Appendix  VIII.]

N2

BOOK IY.

FROM  THE  BATTLE  OF  HASTINGS  TO  THE  TAKING  OF  CHESTER,
THE  LAST  CITY  CONQUERED  BY  THE  NORMANS.

1066—1070.

Battle  of  Romney — Taking  of  Dover — Capitulation  of  Kent — Election  of
king  Edgar — Defection  of  Edwin  and  Morkar — Blockade  of  London —
Proceedings  of  the  citizens — Submission  of  London — William  pro-
claimed king — The  ceremony  of  the  coronation  disturbed  by  conflagra-
tion— Division  of  the  spoils  among  the  Normans — Extent  of  the  con-
quered territory — Sufferings  of  the  conquered — Courageous  resistance
of  three  Saxons — Fortresses  erected  in  London — Ancient  lists  of  the
conquerors  of  England — William  revisits  Normandy — Revolt  of  Kent —
Eustache,  count  of  Boulogne,  comes  to  the  assistance  of  the  English —
Limits  of  the  territory  invaded — Return  of  king  William — He  inarches
into  the  west — Siege  of  Exeter — Division  of  lauds  in  the  western  pro-
vinces— Imprisonment  and  deposition  of  Brihtrik — Resistance  of  the
Inonks  of  Winchcomb — Their  punishment — The  English  chiefs  retire
to  the  north — Conspiracy  against  the  Normans — King  Edgar  flies  into
Scotland — State  of  the  Scottish  population — Friendship  of  the  kings  of
Scotland  for  the  men  of  Teutonic  nice — William  marches  into  the  north
—Taking  of  Oxford,  &c.— Taking  of  York— Archbishop  Eldred's  male-
diction upon  king  William — His  despair  and  death — Weariness  of  the
Normans — Insurrection  of  the  western  provinces — Landing  of  the  sons
of  king  Harold — Suppression  of  the  western  revolt — State  of  the
northern  provinces — March  of  Robert  Comine  against  Durham — His
defeat  and  death — Alliance  between  the  northern  English  and  the
Danes — Arrival  of  Danish  succours  in  England — The  English  and
Danes  besiege  and  take  the  city  of  York — York  retaken  by  the  Normans
— Devastation  of  Northumberland — Taking  of  Durham — Ravages  and
cruelties  exercised  by  the  conquerors — St.  John  of  Beverley  intimidates
the  Norman  soldiers — Completion  of  the  conquest  in  the  north — Fa-
mine in  the  conquered  districts — Division  of  houses  and  lands — French
colony  in  Yorkshire — Distribution  of  English  domains  and  heiresses —
Tosti  killed  by  Osulf  in  a  spirit  of  national  vengeance — Second  submis-
sion of  the  English  chieftains  and  of  king  Edgar — Defeat  of  Edrik  the
Saxon — Invasion  of  Wales — Fresh  emigrants  from  Gaul — Society  of
gain  and  loss  among  the  soldiers  of  the  Conquest — Brothers-iu-arms —
March  of  William  upon  Chester — Taking  of  Chester — Battle  near  the
Ruddlan  marshes — Utility  of  local  details.

WHILE  the  army  of  the  king  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  and  the
army  of  the  invader  were  in  presence  of  each  other,  some
fresh  vessels  from  Normandy  had  crossed  the  Channel  to

A.D.  1066.]  TAKING OF DOVER.  181

join  the  main  fleet  stationed  in  the  bay  of  Hastings.  Those
who  commanded  them,  landed,  by  mistake,  several  miles  fur-
ther to  the  north,  in  a  place  then  called  Rumeney,  now
Romney.  The  inhabitants  received  the  Normans  as  enemies,
and  a  combat  took  place,  in  which  the  latter  were  beaten.1
William  learned  their  defeat  a  few  days  after  his  own  vie-
tory,  and  to  save  from  a  similar  misfortune  the  succours  he
still  expected  from  the  opposite  shore,  he  resolved,  first  of
all,  to  secure  the  possession  of  the  south-eastern  coast.  In-
stead, therefore,  of  advancing  to  London,  he  fell  back  to
Hastings,  where  he  remained  some  time,  to  see  if  his  pre-
sence alone  would  not  suffice  to  determine  the  population  of
the  neighbouring  country  to  voluntary  submission.  But  no
one  coming  to  sue  for  peace,  the  conqueror  again  commenced
his  march  with  the  remains  of  his  army,  and  some  fresh
troops  which,  in  the  interval,  had  joined  him  from  Nor-
mandy.2

He  proceeded  along  the  sea  coast,  from  north  to  south,
devastating  every  thing  on  his  way.3  At  Romney,  he  aven~
ged,  by  burning  the  houses  and  massacring  the  inhabitants,
the  defeat  of  his  soldiers;  thence  he  marched  to  Dover,  the
strongest  fortress  on  the  whole  coast,  and  of  which  he  had
formerly  endeavoured  to  make  himself  master,  without  dan-
ger and  without  fighting,  by  the  oath  into  which  he  had  en-
trapped Harold.  Dover  castle,  recently  completed  by  the
son  of  Godwin  for  better  purposes,  was  constructed  on  a
rock  bathed  by  the  sea,  naturally  steep,  and  which,  with
great  difficulty  and  labour,  had  been  hewn  on  every  side,  so
as  to  make  it  present  the  apj^arance  of  a  vast  wall.  The
details  of  the  siege  made  by  the  Normans  are  not  known ;  all
the  historians  tell  us  is,  that  the  town  of  Dover  was  fired,
and  that,  either  from  terror  or  treason,  the  garrison  of  the
fortress  surrendered  it.4  William  passed  a  week  at  Dover,
erecting  additional  walls  and  defensive  works;  then  changing
the  direction  of  his  march,  he  left  the  coast,  and  proceeded
towards  the  capital  city.

The  Norman  army  advanced  by  the  great  Roman  road,

1  Guill.  Pictav.,  p.  204.

*  Chron.  Sax.  Frag.,  tit  sup.  sub.  an.  3  lit,

4  Guill.  Pictav.,  tit  sup.

182  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1066.

which  the  English  called  Wtling-street,  the  same  which
had  figured  so  often  as  a  common  boundary  in  the  divisions
of  territory  between  the  Saxons  and  Danes.  This  road  led
from  Dover  to  London,  through  the  middle  of  Kent;  the
conquerors  passed  through  a  portion  of  this  county  without-
any  one  appearing  to  dispute  their  passage;  but  in  a  spot
where  the  road,  approaching  the  Thames,  ran  near  a  forest,
adapted  for  concealing  an  ambuscade,  a  large  body  of  armed
Saxons  suddenly  presented  themselves.  They  were  com-
manded by  two  priests,  Eghelsig,  abbot  of  the  monastery  of
Saint  Augustin  at  Canterbury,  and  Stigand  the  archbishop
of  Canterbury,  the  same  who  had  crowned  king  Harold.1  It
is  not  precisely  known  what  passed  at  this  meeting;  whether
a  combat  took  place,  followed  by  a  treaty  between  the  two
armies,  or  whether  the  capitulation  was  concluded  before  they
crossed  weapons.  The  Kentish  army,  it  appears,  stipulated
for  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  province  that  they  would  offer
no  further  resistance,  on  condition  of  remaining,  after  the
conquest,  as  free  as  they  had  been  before.2

In  treating  thus  for  themselves  alone,  and  separating  their
own  from  the  national  destiny,  the  men  of  Kent  (if  it  be  true,
indeed,  that  they  concluded  this  compact)  did  more  harm  to
the  common  cause  than  good  to  themselves ;  for  no  act  of  the
time  shows  that  the  foreigner  kept  faith  with  them,  or  distin-
guished them  from  the  other  English,  in  his  laws  and  oppres-
sive measures.  Archbishop  Stigand,  whether  he  had  taken
part  in  this  capitulation,  or  had  fruitlessly  opposed  it,  a  con-
jecture more  conformable  with  his  haughty  and  daring  cha-
racter,3 quitted  the  province  which  thus  laid  down  its  arms,
and  went  towards  London,  where,  as  yet,  no  one  thought  of
surrendering.  The  inhabitants  of  that  great  city,  and  the
chiefs  assembled  there,  had  resolved  to  fight  a  second  battle,
which,  well  arranged  and  well  conducted,  would,  according  to
all  appearance,  be  more  fortunate  than  the  first.4

But  there  was  wanting  a  supreme  chief,  under  whose  com-
mand the  whole  strength  and  will  of  the  country  should  rally;

1  Willelm.  Thoru.,  Chron.  apud  Hist.  Angl.  Script.,  ii.  1780.

2  Ib. — See  Appendix  IX.

z  Gervas.  Cantaur.  Act.  pontlf.  Cantaur.  apud  Hist.  Angl.  Script.,  ut  sup.
ii.  col.  1651.

4  Chron.  Saxon.  Frag.,  ut  sup.  sub  anno.

A.D. 1066.]  ACCESSION OF EDGAR.  183

and  the  national  council,  which  had  to  name  this  chief,  was
slow  in  giving  a  decision,  agitated  and  divided  as  it  was  by
intrigues  and  contending  claims.  Neither  of  the  brothers  of
the  late  king,  men  capable  of  worthily  filling  his  place,  had
returned  from  the  battle  of  Hastings.  Harold  had  left  two
sons  still  very  young,  and  little  known  to  the  people;  it  does
not  appear*that  they  were  at  this  time  proposed  as  candidates
for  the  crown.  The  claimants  most  powerful  in  renown  and
fortune  were  Edwin  and  Morkar,  brothers-in-law  to  Harold,
and  chiefs  of  Northumbria  and  Mercia.  They  had  with  them
the  votes  of  all  the  men  of  the  north  of  England;  but  the  citi-
zens of  London,  the  people  of  the  south,  and  the  party  malcon-
tent with  the  late  reign,  opposed  to  them  young  Edgar,  king
Edward's  nephew,  surnamed  Etheling,  the  illustrious,  because
he  was  of  the  ancient  royal  race.1  This  young  man,  feeble  in
character,  and  of  no  acquired  reputation,  had  not,  a  year  be-
fore, been  able  to  outweigh  the  popularity  of  Harold;  he
counterbalanced  now  that  of  the  sons  of  Alfgar,  and  was  sup-
ported against  them  by  Stigand  himself,  and  by  Eldred,  arch-
bishop of  York.2  Of  the  other  bishops,  several  would  accept
for  a  king  neither  Edgar  nor  Edgar's  competitors,  and  re-
quired the  people  to  submit  to  the  man  who  came  with  a  bull
from  the  pope  and  a  standard  of  the  church.3  Some  acted
thus,  from  blind  obedience  to  the  spiritual  power,  others  from
political  cowardice;  others,  again,  of  foreign  origin  and  gained
over  by  the  foreign  pretender,  played  the  part  for  which
they  had  been  paid  in  money  or  promises.  They  did  not
prevail,  and  the  majority  of  the  great  national  council  fixed
their  choice  on  the  man  least  able  to  command  in  difficult
circumstances — the  youthful  nephew  of  Edward.  He  was
proclaimed  king,  after  considerable  hesitation,  during  which
much  precious  time  was  lost  in  futile  disputes.4  His  ac-
cession did  not  combine  the  divided  opinions;  Edwin  and
Morkar,  who  had  promised  to  head  the  troops  assembled  at
London,  withdrew  this  promise,  and  retired  to  their  govern-
ments in  the  north,  taking  with  them  the  soldiers  of  those  pro-

1  Guill.  Pictav-,  p.  205. Willelm.  Malmesb.,  p.  102.

2  Chroii.  Sax.  Frag.,  ut  sup.

3  Episcopos  non  liabebant  assertores. (Johau.  de  Forduu.,  8coti-Ch.ro-
tiicon,  lib.  v.  cap.  xi.  p.  404.) Willelm.  Malmesb.,  p.  102.
4  Chron.  Sax.  Frag.,  sub  auiw.

184  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1066.

vinces,  over  whom  they  were  all-influential.  They  madly
thought  they  could  defend  the  northern  provinces  apart  from
the  rest  of  England.  Their  withdrawal  weakened  and  dis-
couraged those  who  remained  at  London  with  the  new  king;
depression,  the  fruit  of  civil  discord,  took  the  place  of  the
first  impulse  of  patriotism  which  had  been  excited  by  the
foreign  invasion.1  Meantime,  the  Norman  troop^  were  ap-
proaching from  several  directions,  overrunning  Surrey,  Sus-
sex, and  Hampshire,  pillaging  and  burning  the  towns  and
villages,  and  massacring  the  inhabitants,  armed  or  unarmed.2
Five  hundred  horse  advanced  as  far  as  Southwark,  engaged  a
body  of  Saxons  who  met  them,  and  burned  in  their  retreat
all  the  houses  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Thames.3  Judging
from  this  that  the  citizens  were  prepared  to  stand  on  their
defence,  William,  instead  of  approaching  London  and  besieging
it,  turned  towards  the  west,  and  passed  the  Thames  at  Wal-
lingford,  in  Berkshire.  He  formed  a  fortified  camp  in  this
place,  and  left  troops  there  to  intercept  the  Saxon  succours
that  might  come  from  the  western  counties;  then  proceeding
north-east,  he  himself  encamped  at  Berkhamsted,  in  Hertford-
shire, for  the  purpose  of  intercepting  all  communication  between
London  and  the  northern  counties,  and  preventing  the  return
of  the  sons  of  Alfgar,  should  they  repent  their  inaction.4  By
these  tactics  the  great  Saxon  town  was  entirely  hemmed  in;
numerous  bodies  of  scouts  ravaged  the  environs,  and  cut
off  the  provisions,  without  engaging  in  any  decisive  battle;
more  than  once,  the  inhabitants  of  London  came  to  blows
with  the  Normans;  but  by  degrees,  becoming  worn  out,
they  were  conquered,  less  by  the  strength  of  the  enemy,  than
by  the  fear  of  famine,  and  by  the  discouraging  thought  that
they  were  isolated  from  all  succour.5

There  existed  in  the  city  two  powers,  accord  between  which
it  was  necessary  but  very  difficult  to  maintain — the  court
and  the  guild,  or  municipal  confraternity  of  the  citizens.6

1  Itii  Angli  qui,  in  imam  coeuntes  senteutiam,  potuissent  patriae  refor-
mare  ruinaui...(Willelm.  Malmesb.,  ///  sit}).)

2  Koger  de  Hovedeu,  p.  450.

3  Guill.  Pictiiv.,  p.  205. Order.  Vitalis,  lib.  iv.  p.  50:5.
4  Idem,  ib.  s  Willelm.  Gemet.,  p.  288.

6  See  as  to  these  institutions,  chap.  v.  of  Considerations  snr  1'Histoire
de  France,  prefixed  to  the  Hecits  des  Temps  Meroviiigiens.

A.D.  1066.]  SIEGE OP LONDON.  185

The  municipality,  entirely  free,  was  ruled  by  its  elective
magistrates;  the  court  had  for  its  chief  the  officer  designated
Staller,  or  Standard-bearer.1

This  post,  at  once  civil  and  military,  had  just  been  restored
to  the  person  who  filled  it  under  Edward;  an  old  soldier,
named  Ansgar,  whose  legs  were  paralyzed  with  fatigue  and
wounds,  and  who  was  carried  on  a  litter  wherever  his  duty
called  him.2  William  had  met  him  in  1051,  at  the  court  of
king  Edward.  He  thought  it  possible  to  gain  him  over  to
his  cause,  and  sent  him,  by  a  secret  emissary,  his  propositions
and  offers,  which  were  no  less  than,  in  case  of  success,  the
lieutenancy  of  the  kingdom.  We  cannot  say  whether  Ans-
gar was  moved  by  these  promises,  but  he  certainly  received
them  with  circumspection,  and,  preserving  absolute  secrecy
with  respect  to  them,  adopted  a  course  calculated  to  relieve
him  from  the  peril  of  having  personal  correspondence  with
the  enemy.  Of  his  own  authority,  or  in  conjunction  with  the
king's  council,  he  assembled  the  principal  citizens  of  London,
and  addressing  them  by  the  name  which  the  members  of  the
municipal  corporation  gave  each  other,  said:  "  Honourable
brothers,  our  resources  are  nearly  exhausted,  the  city  is-
threatened  with  assault,  and  no  army  comes  to  its  aid.  Such
is  our  situation;  but  when  strength  is  exhausted,  when
courage  can  do  no  more,  artifice  and  stratagem  still  remain.
I  advise  you  to  resort  to  them.  The  enemy  is  not  yet  aware
of  our  miserable  position;  let  us  profit  by  that  circumstance,
and  send  them  fair  words  by  a  man  capable  of  receiving
them,  who  will  feign  to  convey  your  submission,  and,  in  sign
of  peace,  will  lay  his  hand  in  theirs,  if  required."3

This  counsel,  the  aptness  and  merit  of  which  it  is  difficult
to  comprehend,  pleased  the  chiefs  of  the  citizens,  as  coming
from  an  able  politician  and  experienced  warrior.  They  flat-
tered themselves,  it  would  appear,  with  the  hope  of  obtaining
a  suspension  of  hostilities,  and  protracting  the  negotiations
until  the  arrival  of  succours,  but  the  result  was  quite  different.
The  messenger  sent  to  deceive  duke  William,  returned  him-
self deceived,  loaded  with  presents  and  devoted  to  his  cause.

1  See  Lye,  Diet.  Saxonico  et  Gothico-Latinum,  at  the  words  Stallt-re,
Hteullcrc.  Esegarus  regie  procurator  aule,  qui  est  Anglice  dictus  stollere,
i.e.  regui  vexillifer.  (Chroniques  Anglo-Normandes,  ii.  204.)

2  Wido,  lit  sup.  p.  31-  3  Ib.

186  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1066.

When  he  appeared  before  the  principal  citizens  to  give  an
account  of  his  mission,  an  anxious  crowd  followed  and  pressed
behind  him.  His  singularly  daring  speech  consisted  of  bound-
less eulogy  of  the  armed  pretender,  to  whom  he  attributed
every  royal  virtue,  and  a  promise,  in  his  name,  of  peace,  justice,
and  obedience  to  the  wishes  of  the  English  nation.  These
words,  so  different  from  the  reports  in  circulation  of  the  im-
placable severity  of  the  conqueror  of  Hastings,  far  from  raising
the  cry  of  treachery,  were  received  by  the  crowd,  if  not  by
the  magistrates  themselves,  with  joy  and  confidence.  There
was,  in  favour  of  the  peace  party — and  the  duke  of  Normandy,
one  of  those  popular  outbursts  which  nothing  can  resist,  and
which  are  soon  followed  by  futile  repentance.  People  and
magistrates  unanimously  resolved  by  acclamation  to  carry,
without  further  delay,  the  keys  of  the  city  to  duke  William.1
The  court  of  the  young  king  Edgar,  without  army  or  free
communication  beyond  the  walls,  was  incapable  of  counter-
acting the  will  of  the  citizens,  or  of  compelling  them  to  incur
the  chances  of  a  desperate  resistance.  This  government,
created  in  the  midst  of  disorder,  and  which,  notwithstanding
its  popularity,  was  in  want  of  the  most  ordinary  resources,
found  itself  necessitated  to  declare  that  it  no  longer  existed.
The  king  himself,  accompanied  by  archbishops  Stigand  and
Eldred,  and  by  Wulstan,  bishop  of  Worcester,  several  chiefs
of  high  rank,  and  the  leading  citizens,  came  to  the  camp  at
Berkhamsted,  and  made  their  submission,  most  unhappily  for
the  country.2  They  gave  hostages  to  the  duke  of  Normandy,
swore  to  him  the  oath  of  fidelity,  and,  in  return,  the  duke
promised  them,  on  his  faith,  to  be  gentle  and  clement  towards
them.  He  then  marched  to  London,  and,  despite  the  promise
just  issued  from  his  lips,  allowed  his  people  to  devastate
everything  on  the  way.3  Upon  the  road  from  Berkhamsted
to  London,  was  the  rich  monastery  of  Saint  Alban,  built
near  the  vast  ruins  of  an  ancient  Roman  rnunicipium.  On
approaching  this  abbey,  William  beheld  with  surprise  great
trunks  of  trees  disposed  so  as  to  intercept  the  passage,  or
render  it  difficult.  He  sent  for  the  abbot,  Frithrik.  "  Why,"
asked  the  conqueror,  "hast  thou  thus  cut  down  thy  woods?"

1  Wido,  ut  sup.  p.  33,  34. *  Chron.  Sax.  Frag.,  sub  ann.
3  Il>. — Roger  de  Hoveden,  p.  450.

A.D. 1066.] PROPOSAL TO CROWN WILLIAM.  187

"  I  have  done  my  duty,"  answered  the  Saxon  monk;  "and
if  all  of  my  order  had  done  the  sarne,  as  they  might  and  ought
to  have  done,  thou  wouldst  not,  perhaps,  have  advanced  thus
far  into  our  country."1  William  did  not  go  quite  to  London,
but  halting  at  a  distance  of  some  miles,  sent  forward  a  nume-
rous detachment  of  soldiers  to  construct  a  fortress  for  his
residence  in  the  heart  of  the  city.2

Whilst  the  works  were  proceeding  in  all  haste,  the  council
of  war  held  by  the  Normans,  in  their  camp,  discussed  the
means  of  promptly  completing  the  conquest,  so  favourably
commenced.  William's  more  intimate  friends  said  that  to
mitigate  the  resistance  of  the  provinces  still  free,  their  future
movements  should  be  preceded  by  his  assuming  the  title  of
king  of  the  English.  This  proposition  was,  no  doubt,  most
agreeable  to  the  duke  of  Normandy,  but  with  his  usual  cir-
cumspection, he  feigned  indifference  to  it.  Although  the
possession  of  the  crown  was  the  object  of  his  enterprise,  it
appears  that  weighty  reasons  induced  him  to  seem  less  am-
bitious than  he  really  was,  of  a  dignity  which,  raising  him
above  the  conquered,  would,  at  the  same  time,  separate  his
fortune  from  that  of  all  his  companions  in  arms.  William
modestly  excused  himself,  and  demanded  at  least  some  delay,
saying  that  he  had  not  come  to  England  for  his  own  interest
alone,  but  for  that  of  the  whole  Norman  nation;  that,  besides,
if  it  were  the  will  of  God  that  he  should  become  king,  the
time  to  assume  the  title  had  not  arrived,  too  many  counties
and  too  many  men  still  remaining  to  be  subjected.3

The  majority  of  the  Norman  chiefs  were  inclined  to  take
these  hypocritical  scruples  literally,  and  to  decide  that  in
reality  it  was  not  yet  time  to  create  a  king,  when  the  captain
of  one  of  the  auxiliary  bands,  Aimery  de  Thouars,  to  whom
the  royalty  of  William  would  naturally  give  less  umbrage  than
to  the  natives  of  Normandy,  energetically  rose,  and,  in  the  style
of  a  flatterer  and  mercenary  trooper,  exclaimed  :  "  It  is  too
modest  of  you  to  appeal  to  warriors,  whether  or  no  they  will
have  their  lord  a  king;  soldiers  have  nothing  to  do  with
questions  of  this  nature;  and  besides,  our  discussions  only
serve  to  retard  that  which,  as  a  matter  of  feeling,  we  all  so

1  Speed,  Hist,  of  Great  Britain  (1623),  p.  436.
2  Guill.  Pictav.,  p.  205.  See  Appendix  X.  »  u,  #.

188  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1066.

ardently  desire."1  Those  Normans  who,  after  William's
feigned  excuses,  might  have  ventured  to  concur  in  them,
thought  very  different  after  the  Poitevin  had  spoken,  fearing
to  appear  less  faithful  and  less  devoted  than  he  to  their  com-
mon chief.  They  therefore  unanimously  decided  that,  before
carrying  the  conquest  further,  duke  William  should  be  crowned
king  of  England,  by  the  few  Saxons  whom  he  had  succeeded
in  terrifying  or  corrupting.

The  ceremony  was  fixed  for  Christmas -day,  then  close  at
hand.  The  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Stigand,  who  had
sworn  the  oath  of  peace  to  the  conqueror,  in  his  camp  at
Berkhamsted,  was  invited  to  attend  and  crown  him,  accord-
ing to  ancient  custom,  in  the  church  of  the  monastery  of  the
west,  called  in  English,  Westmynster,  near  London.  Stigand
refused  to  bestow  his  blessing  on  one  covered  with  the  blood
of  men,  and  an  invader  of  the  rights  of  others.2  But  Eldred,
archbishop  of  York,  with  greater  worldly  discretion,3  seeing,
say  the  old  historians,  that  it  was  needful  to  fall  in  with  the
times,  and  not  to  oppose  the  will  of  God,  by  whom  the  powers
of  the  world  are  raised  up,  consented  to  fulfil  the  office.4  The
church  of  Westminster  abbey  was  prepared  and  decorated  as
in  the  old  days,  when,  by  the  free  vote  of  the  best  men  of
England,5  the  king  of  their  choice  presented  himself  to  re-
ceive investiture  of  the  power  which  they  had  conferred  upon
him.  But  this  previous  election,  without  which  the  title  of
king  could  only  be  a  vain  mockery,  the  bitter  insult  of  the
strongest,  did  not  take  place  for  the  duke  of  Normandy.  He
left  his  camp,  and  walked  between  two  ranks  of  soldiers  to
the  monastery,  where  awaited  him  several  timid  Saxons,
affecting,  however,  a  firm  countenance,  and  an  air  of  free-
dom, in  their  dastardly  and  servile  office.  Far  around,  all
the  approaches  to  the  church,  the  squares  and  streets  of  the
then  suburban  village  of  Westminster,  were  guarded  by  armed
cavalry,  who,  as  the  Norman  narratives  have  it,6  were  to

1  Guill.  Pictav.,  p.  205.

2  Guill.  Neubrig.,  de  licb.  Angl.  (Hearne)  p.  15. Job.  Bromton,  lit  sup.
i.  col.  962.

3  Id.  76.  Walter  Hemingford,  Citron,  aptid  Script,  rer.  Anglic.  (Gale)  ii.
457.  *  Id.  ib.

*  Tba  bestan  menu. (Cbron.  Sax.  passim.)
6  Guill.  Pictav.,  p.  20G.

A.D. 1066.]  CORONATION OF WILLIAM.  189

keep  the  rebels  in  check,  and  watch  over  the  safety  of  those
whose  office  called  them  to  the  interior  of  the  temple.1  The
counts,  the  barons,  and  other  war-chiefs,  in  number  two
hundred  and  sixty,  entered  the  church  with  their  duke.

When  the  ceremony  opened,  Geoffrey,  bishop  of  Coutances,
ascending  a  platform,  asked  the  Normans,  in  the  French  lan-
guage, whether  they  were  all  content  that  their  lord  should
take  the  title  of  king  of  the  English;  and  at  the  same  time,
the  archbishop  of  York  asked  the  English,  in  the  Saxon  lan-
guage, whether  they  accepted  the  duke  of  Normandy  for  their
king.  Hereupon  there  arose  in  the  church  acclamations  so
vehement  that  they  resounded  beyond  the  doors,  and  reached
the  ears  of  the  cavalry  who  occupied  the  neighbouring  streets.
They  took  the  sound  for  a  cry  of  alarm,  and,  according  to
their  secret  instructions,  hastily  set  fire  to  the  houses.  Seve-
ral rushed  to  the  church,  and  at  sight  of  their  drawn  swords
and  of  the  flames,  all  present  dispersed,  Normans  as  well  as
Saxons;  the  latter  rushed  to  extinguish  the  fire,  the  for-
mer to  seek  plunder  amid  the  tumult  and  confusion.  The
ceremony  was  interrupted  by  this  sudden  event,  and  there
only  remained  hastily  to  complete  it,  the  duke  himself,  the
archbishop  Eldred,  and  a  few  priests  of  the  two  nations.
Tremblingly  they  received  from  him  whom  they  called  king,
and  who,  according  to  an  ancient  narrative,  himself  trembled
in  common  with  them,  an  oath  to  treat  the  Anglo-Saxon
people  as  well  as  the  best  king  ever  elected  by  that  people.2

But  on  the  same  day  London  was  to  learn  the  value  of
such  an  oath  in  the  mouth  of  a  foreign  conqueror;  an  enormous
war  tribute  was  imposed  on  the  citizens,  and  their  hostages
were  imprisoned.3  William  himself,  who  could  not  really
believe  that  the  benediction  of  Eldred  and  the  acclamations
of  a  few  dastards  had  made  him  king  of  England,  in  the
legal  sense  of  this  word,  and,  consequently,  at  a  loss  how  to
frame  his  manifestoes,  sometimes  falsely  styled  himself  king
by  hereditary  succession,  and  sometimes,  in  all  frankness,
king  by  the  edge  of  the  sword.4  But  if  he  hesitated  as  to
words,  he  had  no  hesitation  as  to  deeds,  but  showed  his
real  position  by  the  attitude  of  hostility  and  distrust  which

1  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iii.  p.  .")03.  2  Order.  Vital.,  ut  sup.

3  Chron.  Saxon.  Frag.,  sub  ann.
4  Hickes,  Thesaurus  Linguarum  Septentrionalium,  ii.  71,  72.

190  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1066.

he  maintained  towards  the  people;  he  dared  not  yet  establish
himself  in  London,  nor  inhabit  the  embattled  castle  which
had  been  hastily  constructed  for  him.  He  retired  accordingly
to  Barking,  until  his  engineers  had  given  more  solidity  to
this  work,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  two  other  fortresses,
destined  to  keep  in  check,  says  a  Norman  author,  the  change-
able spirit  of  a  too  numerous  and  too  haughty  people.1

During  the  period  that  the  king  remained  at  Barking,  the
two  Saxon  chiefs,  whose  i'atal  withdrawal  had  caused  the
subjection  of  the  great  city,  intimidated  by  the  augmented
power  which  the  possession  of  London  and  the  title  of  king
gave  to  the  invader,  came  from  the  north  to  swear  to  him  the
oath  which  the  English  chiefs  were  accustomed  to  swear  to
their  ancient  kings.2  The  submission  of  Edwin  and  Morkar
did  not,  however,  involve  that  of  the  provinces  they  had
governed,  and  the  Norman  army  did  not  advance  to  occupy
these  provinces;  they  remained  concentrated  around  London,
and  upon  the  southern  and  eastern  coasts  nearest  Gaul.  The
partition  of  the  wealth  of  the  invaded  territory  now  almost
solely  occupied  them.  Commissioners  went  over  the  whole
extent  of  country  in  which  the  army  had  left  garrisons;  they
took  an  exact  inventory  of  property  of  every  kind,  public  and
private,  carefully  registering  every  particular;  for  the  Norman
nation,  even  in  those  remote  times,  was  already  extremely
fond  of  deeds,  and  documents,  and  law  forms.3

A  close  inquiry  was  made  into  the  names  of  all  the  English
partisans  of  Harold,  who  had  either  died  in  battle,  or  survived
the  defeat,  or  by  involuntary  delays  had  been  prevented
from  joining  the  royal  standard.  All  the  property  of  these
three  classes  of  men,  lands,  revenues,  furniture,  houses,  were
confiscated;  the  children  of  the  first  class  were. declared  for
ever  disinherited;  the  second  class  were,  in  like  manner,
wholly  dispossessed  of  their  estates  and  property  of  every
kind,  and,  says  one  of  the  Norman  writers,  were  only  too
grateful  for  being  allowed  to  retain  their  lives.4  Lastly,  those
who  had  not  taken  up  arms  were  also  despoiled  of  all  they
possessed,  for  having  had  the  intention  of  taking  up  arms;
but,  by  special  grace,  they  were  allowed  to  entertain  the  hope

1  Guill.  Pictav.,  p.  208.  2  Id.  ib.

8  Dialogus  de  Saccario,  in  notis  ad  Matth.  Paris,  i.  ad  inilium.  See  Ap-
pendix XI.  <  Ib.

A.D. 1066.]  DIVISION OF THE SPOIL.  191

that  after  many  long  years  of  obedience  and  devotion  to  the
foreign  power,  not  they,  indeed,  but  their  sons  might  perhaps
obtain  from  their  new  masters  some  portion  of  their  paternal
heritage.  Such  was  the  law  of  the  conquest,  according  to
the  unsuspected  testimony  of  a  man  nearly  contemporary  with
and  of  the  race  of  the  conquerors.1

The  immense  product  of  this  universal  spoliation  became
the  pay  of  those  adventurers  of  every  nation  who  had  enrolled
under  the  banner  of  the  duke  of  Normandy.  Their  chief,
the  new  king  of  England,  retained,  in  the  first  place,  for  his  own
share,  all  the  treasure  of  the  ancient  kings,  the  church  plate,
and  all  that  was  most  rare  and  precious  in  the  shops  of  the
merchants.2  William  sent  a  portion  of  these  riches  to  pope
Alexander  with  Harold's  standard,  in  exchange  for  that
which  had  triumphed  at  Hastings;3  and  all  the  foreign
churches  in  which  psalms  had  been  chanted,  and  tapers  burnt
for  the  success  of  the  invasion,  received  in  recompence  crosses,
sacred  vessels,  and  cloth  of  gold.4  After  the  king  and  clergy  had
taken  their  share,  that  of  the  soldiers  was  awarded  according
to  their  rank  and  the  conditions  of  their  engagement.  Those
who,  at  the  camp  of  the  Dive,  had  done  homage  for  lands,
then  to  be  conquered,  received  those  of  the  dispossessed
English  ;5  the  barons  and  knights  had  vast  domains,  castles,
villages,  and  even  whole  cities;  the  simple  vassals  had  smaller
portions.6  Some  received  their  pay  in  money,  others  had
stipulated  that  they  should  have  a  Saxon  wife,  and  William,
says  the  Norman  chronicle,  gave  them  in  marriage  noble
dames,  great  heiresses,  whose  husbands  had  fallen  in  the
battle.  One  only  among*  the  knights  who  had  accompanied
the  conqueror,  claimed  neither  lands,  gold,  nor  wife,  and
would  accept  none  of  the  spoils  of  the  conquered.  His  name
was  Guilbert  Fitz-Richard:  he  said  that  he  had  accompanied
his  lord  to  England  because  such  was  his  duty,  but  that  stolen

1  Eicardus  Nigellus,  Richard  Lenoir  or  Noirot,  bishop  of  Ely  in  the
twelfth  century.

8  GuilL  Pictav.,  20G.
3  ...pecuniam  in  auro  et  argento  ampliorem  quam  dictu  credible  sit.  (ib.)

4  ...Mille  ecclesiis  Francise.  (ib.)

5  Chron.  de  Normandie,  p.  239.

6  Roman  de  Eon,  ii.  387. The  term  vassal  was  then  synonymous  with
warrior. Hardl  et  noble  vassal... vassciument,  wavely. See  Appendix  XII.

192  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1066.

goods  had  no  attraction  for  him,  and  that  he  would  return
to  Normandy  and  enjoy  his  own  heritage,  a  moderate  but
legitimate  heritage,  and,  contented  with  his  own  lot,  would
rob  no  one.1

The  new  king  employed  the  last  months  of  the  winter  of
1066  in  making  a  sort  of  military  progress  through  the  pro-
vinces then  invaded.  It  is  difficult  to  determine  exactly  the
number  of  these  provinces,  and  the  extent  of  country  which
the  foreign  troops  freely  occupied  and  overran.  Yet  by  care-
fully examining  the  accounts  of  the  contemporary  writers,  we
find,  at  all  events,  negative  proofs  that  the  Normans  had  not
advanced  in  a  north-easterly  direction  beyond  the  rivers,  the
mouths  of  which  form  Boston  Wash ;  or  towards  the  south-west,
not  beyond  the  high  territory  which  bounds  Dorsetshire.  The
city  of  Oxford,  nearly  equi-distant  between  these  two  oppo-
site points,  upon  a  straight  line  drawn  from  one  to  the  other,
had  not  yet  surrendered;  but  perhaps  this  ideal  frontier  had
been  passed,  either  to  the  north  or  to  the  south  of  Oxford.  It
is  equally  difficult  to  deny  or  to  affirm  this,  or  to  fix,  at  any
particular  moment,  the  limits  of  a  gradual  invasion.  Tne
whole  extent  of  country  really  occupied  by  William's  garri-
sons and  held  by  him  in  a  more  than  nominal  manner,  in  virtue
of  his  title  of  king,  w"ere  in  a  short  time  bristling  with  cita-
dels and  fortresses;2  all  the  inhabitants  were  disarmed,  and
obliged  to  swear  obedience  and  fidelity  to  the  new  chief  im-
posed on  them  by  the  lance  and  sword.  They  swore,  but  in
their  hearts  they  did  not  hold  this  foreigner  legal  king  of
England;  in  their  eyes  the  true  king  was  young  Edgar,  fallen
and  a  captive  as  he  was.  The  moHks  of  Peterborough  abbey
gave  a  remarkable  proof  of  this.  Having  lost  their  abbot,
Leofrik,  on  his  return  from  the  battle  of  Hastings,  they  chose,
as  his  successor,  their  prior,  named  Brand;  and  as  it  was  their
custom  to  submit  the  election  of  the  dignitaries  of  their  mo-
nastery to  the  approval  of  the  supreme  chief  of  the  country,
they  sent  Brand  to  Edgar.  According  to  the  chronicle  of
the  monastery,  they  took  this  step,  because  all  the  inhabitants
of  the  country  thought  that  Edgar  would  again  be  king.  In-
formation of  the  fact  soon  reached  William's  ears,  and  his

1  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  vi.  p.  COO.

2  Cbron.  Saxon.,  frag.,  sub  ann.

TO  1067.] FATE  OF  THE  CONQUERED.  193

rage  was  unbounded.  "  From  that  day,"  continues  the  con-
temporary narrator,  "  every  evil  and  every  tribulation  has  fallen
upon  our  house.  May  God  have  mercy  on  it."1

The  prayer  of  this  monk  might  well  have  been  repeated  by
every  inhabitant  of  the  conquered  provinces,  for  each  had
his  full  share  of  grief  and  misery:  the  men  had  to  undergo
indigence  and  servitude;  the  women  insult  and  outrage  more
cruel  than  death  itself.  Those  who  were  not  taken  par
mariage  were  taken  par  amours,  as  it  was  termed  in  the
language  of  the  conquerors,  and  became  the  plaything  of  the
foreign  soldiers,  the  least  and  lowest  of  whom  was  lord  and
master  in  the  houses  of  the  conquered.  "  Ignoble  grooms,
base  scum  of  armies,"  say  the  old  annalists,  "  did  as  they
pleased  with  the  noblest  women,  and  left  them  nothing  but  to
weep  and  wish  for  death.2  These  licentious  knaves  were
amazed  at  themselves;  they  went  mad  with  pride  and  asto-
nishment at  beholding  themselves  so  powerful,  at  having  ser-
vants richer  than  their  own  fathers  had  ever  been.3  Whatever
they  willed,  they  deemed  it  fully  permissible  to  do;  they
shed  blood  at  random,  tore  the  bread  from  the  mouths  of
the  wretched  people,  and  took  everything,  money,  goods,
land.  .  .  ."4

Such  was  the  fate  which  extended  itself  over  the  men  of
English  race,  as  the  three-lion  banner  advanced  into  their
country,  and  waved  over  their  towns.  But  this  destiny,
everywhere  equally  severe,  assumed  different  appearances,  ac-
cording to  the  diversity  of  places.  The  towns  were  not  struck
so  hard  as  the  country;  this  town  or  district  was  afflicted  in  a
different  way  from  that;  around  a  common  centre  of  misery,  if
we  may  thus  express  ourselves,  there  were  the  varied  forms
and  the  multiplicity  of  circumstances  which  are  ever  exhibited
by  the  course  of  human  affairs.

The  city  of  Dover,  half  consumed  by  fire,  was  allotted  to
Eudes,  bishop  of  Bayeux,  who  could  not,  say  the  ancient  docu-
ments, calculate  its  exact  value,  because  it  was  so  devastated.5
He  distributed  the  houses  among  his  soldiers  and  people;
Kaoul  de  Courtespine  (Crookthorne),  received  three,  with  the

1  Sax.  Chron.,  p.  173.  2  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  523.

3  Id.  ib.  *  Willelm.  Malraesb.

5  Extracta  ex  Domesday  Book,  apud  Script.  Rer.  Anglic.  (Gale)  iii.  759.
VOL.  I.  O

194  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1066

field  of  a  poor  woman.1  William  Fitz-Geoffroy  had  three
houses,  one  of  which  was  the  ancient  Guildhall,2  near  Col-
chester in  Essex;  Geoffrey  de  Mandeville  alone  had  forty  ma-
nors, or  houses  surrounded  with  cultivated  land;  fourteen
Saxon  proprietors  were  dispossessed  by  Engelry,  and  thirty,
by  one  Guillaume.  A  rich  Englishman,  to  secure  his  safety,
placed  himself  under  the  power  of  the  Norman  Gualtier,  who
made  him  his  tributary;3  another  Englishman  became  a  serf
on  the  glebe  of  his  own  field.4  The  domain  of  Button,  in  Bed-
fordshire, that  of  Burton  and  the  town  of  Stafford,  fell  to  the
lot  of  Guy  de  Riencourt.  He  possessed  these  lands  during
his  life.  But  Richard,  his  son  and  heir,  lost  the  greater  part
of  them  to  king  Henry  I.  at  dice.

In  Suffolk,  a  Norman  chief  appropriated  the  lands  of  a
Saxon  lady,  named  Ediva  the  fair;5  the  entire  city  of  Nor-
wich was  set  aside  as  the  private  domain  of  the  conqueror;
it  had  paid  to  the  Saxon  kings  thirty  pounds  and  twenty
pence;  but  William  exacted  seventy  pounds  a  year,  a  horse
of  value,  an  hundred  pence  for  the  queen  his  wife,  and  twenty
pounds  for  the  salary  of  the  officer  who  commanded  there  in
his  name.  A  strong  citadel  was  built  in  the  centre  of  the
city,6  for  its  inhabitants  being  men  of  Danish  origin,  the  con-
querors feared  that  they  might  demand  and  receive  aid  from
the  Danes,  who  often  cruised  on  the  coast.7  In  Dorchester,
instead  of  an  hundred  and  seventy-two  houses  that  were  there
in  the  time  of  king  Edward,  eighty-eight  alone  remained;  the
rest  were  a  heap  of  ruins;  at  Warham,  of  an  hundred  and
thirteen  houses,  sixty-two  had  been  destroyed;8  at  Bridport,
twenty  houses  disappeared  in  the  same  manner,  and  the
poverty  of  the  inhabitants  was  such,  that  more  than  twenty
years  after  not  one  had  been  rebuilt.9  The  Isle  of  Wight  was
invaded  by  William  Fitz-Osbern,  seneschal  of  the  Norman
king,  and  became  a  portion  of  his  vast  domains  in  England;
he  transmitted  it  to  his  son,  then  to  his  grand-nephew,  Bald-

1  Domesday  Book,  i.  fol.  0,  verso.

2  Extracta  ex  Domesday  Book,  ut  sup.

3  Domesday  Book,  i.  fol.  36,  recto.  4  Ib.  ii.  p.  1,

5  Edeva  faira.  Ib.  ii.  p.  285.

«  Ib.  p.  117.  r  Guill.  Pictav.,  p.  208.

8  Extracta  ex  D.  B-,  ut  sup.  7G4.  »  Ib.

TO 1067.]  DIVISION OF THE SPOIL.  195

win,  called  in  Normandy,  Baudoin  des  Reviers,  and  in  Eng-
land, Baldwin  de  1'Isle.1

Near  Winchester,  in  Hampshire,  was  the  monastery  of  Hide,
the  abbot  of  which,  accompanied  by  twelve  monks  and  twenty
men-at-arms,  had  gone  to  the  battle  of  Hastings  and  fallen
there.  The  revenge  which  the  conqueror  exercised  on  this
monastery  was  mingled  with  a  sort  of  pleasantry;  he  divested
the  domains  of  the  monastery,  as  ransom  in  land  for  the
patriotic  crime  of  its  thirteen  members,  of  one  barony  for  the
abbot's  share  of  the  offence,  and  one  knight's  fee  for  each  of
the  twelve  monks.2  Another  circumstance  that  may  be  men-
tioned among  the  joyeusetes  of  the  conquest,  is  that  a  dancing
girl,  named  Adeline,  is  named  in  the  roll  of  partition  of  the
same  county,  as  having  received  a  fief  from  Roger,  one  of
the  Norman  counts.3

In  Hertfordshire,  an  Englishman  had  redeemed  his  laud
by  a  payment  of  nine  ounces  of  gold;  and  yet,  to  avoid  a
violent  ejectment,  he  was  obliged  to  become  the  tributary  of
a  soldier  named  Vigot  or  Bigot.4  Three  Saxon  warriors,
Thurnoth,  Waltheof  and  Thurman,  associated  in  a  brother-
hood of  arms,  possessed  near  Saint  Albans  a  manor  which
they  held  of  the  abbot  on  the  terms  of  defending  it  with  their
swords,  in  case  of  need.5  They  faithfully  fulfilled  this  office
against  the  Norman  invaders;  but,  overcome  by  numbers
and  obliged  to  fly,  they  abandoned  their  domain.  It  fell  to
the  share  of  a  noble  baron,  called  Roger  de  Toe'ny,  who  had
soon  to  defend  his  new  property  against  the  three  expelled
Saxons.  The  latter,  who  had  sought  refuge  in  the  neigh-
bouring forests,  assembled  there  a  small  troop  of  men,  driven
out  like  themselves,  and  unexpectedly  attacking  the  Normans
established  on  their  lands,  killed  several,  and  burned  their
houses.6

These  facts,  taken  at  random  from  among  a  thousand
others  which  it  would  be  wearisome  to  enumerate,  will  enable
the  reader  to  figure  to  himself  the  sad  but  varied  scenes
presented  by  English  counties  of  the  south  and  east,  while

1  Dugdale,  ii.  905.
2  Ib.  I  2JO.  a  Domesday  B.,  i.  fol.  38,  verso.

4  Ib.  fol.  137,  verso.

5  Matth.  Paris,  Fita  Abbatum  S.  Albani,  i.  46.  c  Id.  ib*

o2

196  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1066

the  Norman  king  was  installing  himself  in  the  Tower  of
London.  This  fortress,  constructed  in  one  of  the  angles  of
the  city  wall,  close  to  the  Thames,  received  the  name  of
the  Palatine  Tower,  a  name  formed  from  an  old  Roman  title
that  William  bore  in  Normandy,  conjointly  with  that  of  duke
or  count.  Two  other  fortresses,  built  westward,  and  con-
fided to  the  care  of  the  Normans  Baynard  and  Gilbert  de
Montfichet.  took  respectively  the  name  of  their  keepers.1
The  three-lion  banner  was  planted  on  William's  donjon,  and
over  the  two  others  floated  those  of  Baynard  and  Montfichet.
But  these  captains  had  first  both  sworn  to  lower  their  flags
and  to  raise  that  of  the  king,  their  lord,  on  his  first  command,
preferred  in  anger  or  without  anger,  supported  by  a  great
force  or  a  small,  for  offence  committed  or  without  offence,  com-
mitted, as  the  formal  acts  set  forth.  Before  making,  amid  the
sound  of  trumpets,  their  first  entry  into  their  towers,  before
they  garrisoned  them  with  their  men,  they  placed  their  hands
in  the  hands  of  the  Norman  king,  and  acknowledged  them-
selves his  liege-men.  In  a  word,  they  had  promised  to  un-
dergo as  a  just  and  legal  decree,  their  sentence  of  deposses-
sion,  if  ever  they  voluntarily  took  part  against  their  lord  and
separated  their  banner  from  his.

The  same  oath  was  sworn  to  the  chief  of  the  conquest  by
other  leaders,  who  again  received  from  inferior  dignitaries
a  similar  oath  of  fealty  and  homage.  Thus  the  troops  of
the  conqueror,  although  scattered  and  dispersed  over  the
land  of  the  conquered,  remained  united  by  a  vast  chain  of
duty,  and  observed  the  same  subordination  as  when  in  his
ships  or  behind  his  fortifications  at  Hastings.  The  subaltern
owed  fealty  and  service  to  his  military  superior,  or  to  him
from  whom  he  had  received  in  fief  either  lands  or  money.
Upon  this  condition,  those  who  had  realized  the  larger  share
of  the  spoil,  bestowed  a  portion  of  their  superfluity  upon  those
who  had  been  less  fortunate;  the  knights  received  from  the
barons,  men-at-arms  from  their  captains;  in  their  turn  these
gave  to  the  squires,  the  squires  to  the  sergeants,  the  sergeants
to  the  archers  and  grooms.  In  a  word,  the  rich  gave  to  the
poor;  but  the  poor  soon  became  enriched  by  the  gains  of  the

1  Bayuard's  Castle,  Castelluin  Bevnardi. (Maitland's  Hist,  of  London,
P-  «.)

TO 1067.]  LISTS OF THE CONQUERORS.  197

conquest;  and  thus,  among  these  classes  of  combatants,1
great  fluctuations  took  place,  because  the  chances  of  war
rapidly  advanced  men  from  the  lowest  ranks  to  the  highest,

Men  who  had  crossed  the  sea  in  the  quilted  frocks  and
with  the  dark  wooden  bow  of  foot  soldiers,  appeared  upon
war-horses  and  girded  with  the  knightly  baldric,  to  the  eyes
of  the  new  recruits  who  crossed  the  sea  after  them.  He  who
had  came  over  a  poor  knight,  soon  had  his  own  banner  and
his  company  of  men-at-arms,  whose  rallying  cry  was  his  name.
The  drovers  of  Normandy  and  weavers  of  Flanders,  with  a
little  courage  and  good  fortune,  soon  became  in  England
great  men,  illustrious  barons;  and  their  names,  base  or
obscure  on  one  side  of  the  Channel,  were  noble  and  glorious
on  the  other.

"  Would  you  know,"  says  an  ancient  roll  in  the  French
language,  "  what  are  the  names  of  the  great  men  who  crossed
the  sea  with  the  conqueror,  William  the  Vigorous  T2  Here  are
their  surnames  as  we  find  them  written,  but  without  their  bap-
tismal names,  which  are  often  wanting  or  are  changed;  they
are,  Mandeville  and  Dandeville;  Omfreville  and  Domfre-
ville;  Bouteville  and  Estouteville;  Mohun  and  Bohuu;  Biset
and  Basset;  Malin  and  Malvoisin.  .  .  /'  All  the  other  names
are  in  like  manner  arranged  so  as  to  assist  the  memory,  by
the  rhythm  and  alliteration.  Several  of  the  same  kind  have
been  preserved  to  our  days;  they  were  found  written  upon
great  pages  of  vellum,  in  the  archives  of  churches,  and  de-
corated with  the  title  of  Book  of  the  Conquerors.3  In  one  of
these  lists,  the  names  are  arranged  in  groups  of  three  :  Bas-
tard, Brassard,  Baynard;  Bigot,  Bagot,  Talbot;  Toret,  Trivet,

Bouet;  Lucy,  Lacy,  Percy Another  catalogue  of  the

conquerors  of  England,  long  preserved  in  the  treasury  of
Battle  abbey,  contained  names  singularly  low  and  fantastic,
as  Bonvilain  and  Boutevilain,  Trousselot  and  Troussebout,
L'Engayne  and  Longue  Epee,  CEil-de-boeuf  and  Front-de-

beeuf.4 Lastly,  several  authentic  documents  designate

as  Norman  knights  in  England,  a  Guillaume  le  charretier,  a

1  Conte,  baron,  et  chevalier;  Conte,  baron,  et  vavassor.  (Anrienues
poesies  Normandes.)

2  Job.  Brorat.,  i.  col.  903. See  Appendix  XII.
3  Leland,  Collectanea,  i.  202. See  Appendix  XII.
4  Script,  rer.  Ngrmann.,  p.

198  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1066

Hugues  le  tailleur,  a  Guillaume  le  tambour;1  and  among  the
surnames  of  the  chivalry  collected  from  every  corner  of  Gaul,
figure  a  great  many  mere  names  of  towns  and  districts — Saint-
Quentin,  Saint-Maur,  Saint-Denis,  Saint-Malo,  Tournai,
Verdun,  Fismes,  Chalons,  Chaunes,  Etampes,  Kochefort,  La
Rochelle,  Cahors,2  Champagne,  Gascogne.  .  .  .  Such  were
the  men  who  assumed  in  England  the  titles  of  nobleman  and
gentleman?  and  planted  it  there  by  force  of  arms,  for  them-
selves and  their  descendants.

The  mere  valet  of  the  Norman  man-at-arms,  his  groom,  his
lance-bearer,  became  gentleman  on  the  soil  of  England;  they
were  all  at  once  nobles  by  the  side  of  the  Saxon,  once  rich
and  noble  himself,  but  now  bending  beneath  the  sword  of  the
foreigner,  driven  from  the  home  of  his  ancestors,  having  no-
where to  lay  his  head.4  This  natural  and  general  nobility  of
all  the  conquerors  at  large,  increased  in  proportion  to  the  per-
sonal authority  or  importance  of  individuals.  After  the
nobility  of  the  Norman  king,  came  that  of  the  provincial  go-
vernor, who  assumed  the  title  of  count  or  earl;  after  the  nobi-
lity of  the  count  came  that  of  his  lieutenant,  called  vice-
count  or  viscount ;  and  then  that  of  the  warriors,  according
to  their  grade,  barons,  chevaliers,  ecuyers,  or  sergents,  not
equally  noble,  but  all  nobles  by  right  of  their  common  victory
and  their  foreign  birth.5

Before  marching  to  conquer  the  northern  and  western  pro-
vinces, William,  ever  provident,  desiring  to  deposit  in  a  secure
place  the  booty  he  had  realized  in  the  provinces  already  con-
quered, considered  that  his  new  wealth  would  be  nowhere  so
safe  as  in  his  own  country.  On  the  eve  of  his  return  to  Nor-
mandy, he  confided  the  lieutenancy  of  his  royal  power  to  his
brother  Eudes,  and  to  William  Fitz-Osbern.  With  these  two
viceroys  were  joined  other  lords  of  note,  as  coadjutors  and
councillors:  Hugh  de  Grantmesnil,  Hugh  de  Montfort,  Walter
Giffard,  and  William  de  Garenne  (Warrenne.)  The  new  king

1  Dugdale,  passim,

2  Become  by  corruption  Rochfurd,  Rokely,  Chaworth,  &c.  Other  names,
genuine  French,  have  been  disfigured  in  a  variety  of  ways :  as  de  la  Haye,
Hay  ;  de  la  Souche,  Zouche  ;  du  Saut-de-Chevreau,  Sachevcrell,  &c.

8  These  two  words,  now  become  English,  are  of  pure  Norman  extrac-
tion, and  have  no  equivalent  in  the  ancient  Anglo-Saxon  tongue.

4  Joh.  de  Fordun,  lib.  v.  p.  404.  »  Guill.  Pictav.,  209.

TO  1067.]  WILLIAM VISITS NORMANDY.  199

proceeded  to  Pevensey,  to  embark  from  the  same  spot  on
which,  six  months  before,  he  had  landed.  Several  vessels
awaited  him  there,  decorated  in  token  of  joy  and  triumph.1
A  great  number  of  English  had  repaired  thither,  by  his  order,
to  cross  the  Channel  with  him.  Among  them  were  king
Edgar,  archbishop  Stigand,  Frithrik,  abbot  of  Saint  Albans,
the  two  brothers  Edwin  and  Morkar,  and  Waltheof,  son  of
Siward,  who  had  not  arrived  in  time  to  fight  at  Hastings.
These  men,  and  several  others  whom  the  conqueror  also  took
with  him,  were  to  serve  as  hostages  and  guarantees  for  the
quiescence  of  the  English;  he  hoped  that,  deprived  by  their
absence  of  its  most  powerful  and  most  popular  chiefs,  the
nation  would  be  less  turbulent,  less  prompt  to  insurrec-
tion.2

In  this  port,  where  for  the  first  time  he  had  set  foot  in
England,  the  conqueror  distributed  presents  of  every  kind  to
those  of  his  soldiers  who  again  crossed  the  sea,  in  order,
says  a  Norman  author,  that  no  one  on  his  return  might  say
that  he  had  not  gained  by  the  conquest.3  William,  if  we
may  believe  the  same  author,  his  chaplain  and  biographer,
brought  more  gold  and  silver  to  Normandy  than  was  con-
tained in  all  Gaul.4  The  whole  population  of  the  town  and
country  districts,  from  the  sea  to  Rouen,  hastened  to  meet
him,  and  saluted  him  with  cries  of  enthusiasm.  The  monas-
teries and  secular  clergy  rivalled  each  other  in  their  zealous
efforts  to  entertain  the  conqueror  of  the  English,  and  neither
monks  nor  priests  remained  unrecompensed.5  William  gave
them  gold  in  money,  sacred  vessels,  and  bullion,  with  stuffs
richly  embroidered,  which  they  displayed  in  the  churches,
where  they  excited  the  admiration  of  travellers.6  It  would
appear  that  embroidery  in  gold  and  silver  was  an  art  in
which  the  English  women  excelled;  the  commerce  of  that
country,  already  very  extended,  brought  there  also  many
precious  things,  unknown  in  the  north  of  Gaul.7  A  relation
of  the  king  of  France,  named  Raoul,  came  with  a  numerous
suite  to  the  court  held  by  king  William  during  Easter.  The
French,  equally  with  the  Normans,  viewed  with  curiosity

1  Guill.  Pictav.,  209.  2  Ib.

3  Id.  ib.  *  Id.  ib.  5  Id.  210.

6  Id.  211.  "  Id.  ib.

200  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1066

and  amazement  the  chased  gold  and  silver  plate,  and  the
drinking  cups  of  the  Saxons,  made  of  large  horns,  adorned
with  metal  at  the  two  extremities.  They  were  astonished
at  the  beauty  and  long  hair  of  the  young  English  hostages  or
captives  of  the  Norman  king.  "  They  remarked,"  says  the
contemporary  narrator,  "  these  things  and  many  others
equally  new  to  them,  that  they  might  relate  them  in  their
country."1

Whilst  this  display  was  made  on  one  side  the  Channel,  on
the  other  the  insolence  of  the  conquerors  was  deeply  felt  by
the  conquered.  The  chiefs  who  governed  the  subjected  pro-
vinces outvied  each  other  in  oppressing  the  natives,  the
people  of  rank  equally  with  the  commons,  by  exactions,
tyranny,  and  outrage.  Bishop  Eudes  and  Fitz-Osbern,  in-
flated with  their  new  power,  scorned  the  complaints  of  the
oppressed  people,  and  refused  all  remedy;2  if  their  soldiers
pillaged  the  houses  or  violated  the  wives  of  the  English,
they  applauded  them,  and  punished  the  unfortunate  suf-
ferers who  dared  to  complain.3  Excess  of  suffering  drove
the  people  of  the  eastern  coast  to  attempt  the  emancipation
of  themselves  from  the  Normans  by  the  aid  of  a  foreign
power.  Eustache,  count  of  Boulogne,  the  same  who  in  the
reign  of  Edward  had  occasioned  such  tumult  in  England,4
was  now  at  enmity  with  king  William,  who  kept  his  son
prisoner.  Eustache  was  renowned  for  his  military  skill,  and,
besides,  his  connexion  with  king  Edward  caused  the  Anglo-
Saxons  to  regard  him  as  a  natural  ally.

The  people  of  Kent  therefore  sent  a  message  to  Eustache,
and  promised  to  assist  him  to  take  Dover,  if  he  would  make
a  descent  and  succour  them  against  the  Normans.  The
count  of  Boulogne  consented,  and  landed  near  Dover  under
favour  of  a  dark  night.  All  the  Saxons  of  the  district  took
up  arms:  Eudes  de  Bayeux  and  Hugh  de  Montfort,  the  two
governors  of  the  town,  had  gone  beyond  the  Thames  with
part  of  their  troops.  Had  the  siege  lasted  two  days,  the  in-
habitants of  the  neighbouring  provinces  would  have  come  in
great  numbers  to  join  the  besiegers;5  but  Eustache  and  his
men,  prematurely  endeavouring  to  take  Dover  castle  by  sur-

1  Guill.  Pictav.,  p.  211.  2  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  007.

3  II).  508.  4  Guill.  Pictav.,  p.  212. 3  Order.  Vital.,  vt  sup.

TO  1067.] EDRIK  THE  FORESTER.  201

prise,  met  with  an  unexpected  resistance  on  the  part  of  the
Normans,  and  were  discouraged  after  this  one  effort.  A  false
report  of  the  approach  of  Eudes,  returning,  it  was  said,  with
the  main  body  of  his  troops,  struck  them  with  a  panic  terror.
Eustache  sounded  a  retreat;  his  soldiers  hastened  in  disorder
to  their  vessels,  and  the  Norman  garrison,  seeing  them  dis-
persed, left  the  town  to  pursue  them.  Several  fell  in  their
flight  from  the  steep  rocks  upon  which  Dover  castle  stands.
The  count  owed  his  life  solely  to  the  speed  of  his  horse,  and  the
Saxon  insurgents  returned  to  their  houses  through  bye -roads.
Such  was  the  result  of  the  first  attempt  made  in  England  to
overthrow  the  Norman  dominion.  Eustache  shortly  after
made  his  peace  with  the  duke  of  Normandy;  and,  forgetting
his  allies  of  a  day,  solicited  the  riches  and  honours  which
their  enemy  had  to  bestow.1

In  Herefordshire,  beyond  the  great  chain  of  mountains,
which  had  formerly  protected  the  independence  of  the  Britons,
and  which  might  still  serve  as  a  rampart  for  that  of  the
English,  there  dwelt,  before  the  invasion,  upon  lands  which  he
had  received  from  the  munificence  of  king  Edward,  a  Norman,
named  Richard  Fitz-Scrob.  He  was  one  of  those  whom
the  Saxons  exempted  from  the  sentence  of  exile  pronounced
in  the  year  1052  against  all  the  Normans  living  in  England.
In  return  for  this  favour,  Fitz-Scrob,  on  "William's  landing,
became  chief  intriguer  for  the  conquest,  established  a  corres-
pondence with  the  invaders,  and  placed  himself  at  the  head
of  some  bodies  of  soldiers,  emigrants  from  Gaul,  who,  since
the  time  of  Edward,  had  garrisoned  several  castles  near
Hereford.  He  visited  them  in  these  castles,  and,  making
frequent  sallies,  endeavoured  to  force  the  neighbouring  towns
and  villages  to  submit  to  the  conqueror.  But  the  population
of  the  west  made  an  energetic  resistance,  and,  commanded  by
the  young  Edrik,  son  of  Alfrik,  repulsed  the  attacks  of  Fitz-
Scrob  and  his  soldiers.2

The  young  Saxon  chief  had  the  art  to  interest  in  his  cause
several  chiefs  of  the  Welsh  tribes,  hitherto  mortal  enemies
of  the  English.3  Thus  the  terror  of  the  Normans  reconciled
for  the  first  time  the  Cambrians  and  the  Teutons  of  Britain,  and

1  Order.  Vital.,  id  sup.  2  Dngdale,  ii.  221.

3  Florent.  Wigom.,  p.  C35. Clmm.  Saxon.  Frag.,  sub  aim.

202  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1066

did  that  which,  in  former  times,  the  invasions  of  the  northern
pagans  could  not  accomplish.  Supported  by  the  inhabitants
of  Wales,  Edrik  successfully  assumed  the  offensive  against
Richard  Fitz-Scrob  and  his  soldiers,  who  are  called  in  the
chronicles  of  the  time,  castellans  of  Hereford.1  Three  months
after  the  departure  of  king  William  for  Normandy,  he  drove
them  from  the  territory  they  occupied,  pillaged  their  encamp-
ments, and  delivered  all  the  country  about  the  river  Lugg.2
South  of  this  district,  upon  the  coasts  of  the  Bristol  channel,
and  in  the  north,  upon  the  territories  adjoining  the  moun-
tains, there  were,  at  this  period,  neither  military  posts  esta-
blished by  the  Normans,  nor  strongholds  built  or  possessed
by  them.  The  conquest,  if  we  may  so  express  ourselves,  had
not  yet  reached  that  point;  its  laws  did  not  prevail  there,  its
king  was  not  acknowledged  there,  any  more  than  in  the  north
of  England  from  Boston  Wash  to  the  Tweed.

In  the  midland  districts  the  enemy's  scouts  freely  possessed
the  open  country;  but  many  fortified  towns  had  not  yet  sur-
rendered, and  even  in  the  parts  where  the  invasion  seemed
accomplished,  the  conquerors  were  not  without  alarm;  for
messengers,  sent  from  the  provinces  where  independence  still
reigned,  went  secretly  from  town  to  town  to  rally  the  friends
of  the  country,  and  revive  the  courage  which  had  been  de-
pressed by  the  rapidity  of  the  defeat.  Every  day,  one  or
more  of  the  men  most  in  credit  with  the  people,  disappeared
from  under  the  eyes  of  the  foreign  authorities;  those  who,
following  the  first  impulse  of  terror,  had  repaired  to  William's
camp,  and  sworn  to  him  the  oath  of  peace  and  submission,
were  invited  by  patriotic  addresses  to  break  their  compact  with
the  stranger,  and  to  join  the  party  of  good  and  brave  men
who  aimed  at  restoring  the  liberty  transmitted  them  by  their
forefathers.3

The  news  of  this  agitation  and  these  operations,  reaching
William  in  Normandy,  obliged  him  to  hasten  his  return  to
England.  He  embarked  at  Dieppe,  on  a  cold  night  in  the
month  of  December,  and,  on  his  arrival,  placed  in  the  for-
tresses of  Sussex  new  governors,  selected  in  Normandy  from

1  Florent.  Wigorn.,  p.  635. Chron.  Sax.  Frag.  sub.  ann.

8  Id.  ib.  s  Id.  ib.

*  Guffl.  Pictav.,  212.

TO  1067.]  WILLIAM'S  DUPLICITY.  203

among  the  men  in  whom  he  most  confided.  He  found  in
London  a  fermentation  which  seemed  to  presage  some  ap-
proaching movement;  fearing  that  his  three  castles,  with
their  towers  garnished  with  war-machines,  would  not  suffice
to  protect  him  against  a  popular  insurrection,  he  resolved  to
avert  it,  or  at  least  defer  the  moment,  by  exercising  that  craft,
that  cunning  of  the  fox,  which  the  ancient  historians  at-
tribute to  him,1  in  lulling  the  patriotic  spirit  which  he
despaired  of  destroying.  He  celebrated  at  London,  with
great  pomp,  the  festival  of  Christmas,  and  assembling  around
him  several  Saxon  chiefs  and  bishops,  overwhelmed  them
with  false  caresses;  he  appeared  full  of  affability,  and  gave
the  kiss  of  welcome  to  every  new  comer;2  whatever  was
asked,  he  granted;  whatever  was  counselled,  he  assented  to;
and  all  were  the  dupes  of  his  artifices.3

After  having  thus  gained  over  a  portion  of  the  more  im-
portant class,  king  William  directed  his  attention  to  the
people;  a  proclamation,  written  in  the  Saxon  language  and
addressed  to  the  inhabitants  of  London,  was  published  in  his
name,  and  read  aloud  in  the  churches  and  streets.  It  ran
thus:  "  Learn  all  what  is  my  will.  I  fully  consent  that  all  of
you  enjoy  your  national  laws,  as  in  the  days  of  king  Edward;
every  son  shall  inherit  from  his  father,  after  his  father's  death ;
none  of  my  men  shall  do  you  any  wrong."4  Upon  this  pro-
mise, insincere  as  it  was,  the  effervescence  of  the  people  of
London  was  calmed;  its  solace  rendered  men's  minds  less  dis-
posed to  run  the  perilous  risks  of  opposing  power.  Exempt
for  a  moment  from  the  three  scourges  which  the  conquest
had  brought  into  England,  outrages,  foreign  laws,  and  expro-
priation, the  inhabitants  of  the  great  Saxon  city  abandoned
the  cause  of  those  who  were  suffering  elsewhere,  and,  upon
a  calculation  of  gain  and  loss.,  resolved  to  remain  quiet.  How
long  they  were  permitted  to  enjoy  the  conqueror's  concessions
is  not  known,  but  meantime  they  made  no  objection  to  his
marching  from  London  with  his  best  troops,  for  the  subju-
gation of  the  provinces  that  still  remained  free.

The  Norman  king  first  proceeded  to  the  south-west,  and
crossing  the  hills  which  separate  Dorsetshire  from  Devon-

1  Matth.  Paris,  Vita  Abbot.  S,  Alb.  i.  47.

2  Order.  Vital.,  nt  sttp.  3  Ib.

4  Maitland's  Hist,  of  London,  p.  28.

204  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1066

shire,  marched  against  Exeter.1  It  was  in  this  city  that,  after
the  battle  of  Hastings,  the  mother  of  Harold  had  taken  refuge,
and  here  she  had  collected  the  wreck  of  her  treasures,  which
she  devoted  to  the  cause  of  that  country  for  which  her  son
had  died.  The  citizens  of  Exeter  were  numerous  and  full  of
patriotic  zeal:  contemporary  history  renders  to  them  this  testi-
mony, that,  young  and  old,  they  hated  with  mortal  hate  the
foreign  invader.2  They  fortified  their  towers  and  their  walls,
sent  for  armed  men  from  all  the  adjacent  districts,  and  en-
gaged the  services  of  the  foreign  sailors  in  their  port.  They
also  sent  messages  to  the  people  of  the  towns  around,  inviting
their  co-operation  in  resisting  the  foreign  king,  with  whom,
say  the  chronicles,  they  had  before  nothing  to  do.3

The  approach  of  the  invading  army  was  heralded  to  the
inhabitants  of  Exeter  from  afar,  by  the  intelligence  of  its
ravages;  every  place  through  which  it  passed  was  utterly  de-
vastated. The  Normans  halted  at  a  place  four  miles  distant,
whence  William  sent  to  the  citizens  a  summons  to  submit
and  to  swear  to  him  the  oath  of  fidelity.  "  We  shall  not,"
they  replied,  "  swear  the  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  pretended
king,  or  admit  him  within  our  walls;  but  if  he  thinks  proper
to  receive,  by  way  of  tribute,  the  impost  we  pay  to  our  kings,
we  will  give  it  to  him."  "  I  require  subjects,"  answered
William,  "  and  I  am  not  accustomed  to  take  them  on  any
such  conditions."  The  Norman  troops  advanced,  headed  by
a  battalion  of  English,  who  had  joined  the  foreign  army,
either  on  compulsion,  or  from  utter  want  of  other  means  of
support,  or  in  the  idea  of  enriching  themselves  by  the  pillage
of  their  countrymen.  Ere  the  first  assault  began,  the  magis-
trates and  leading  citizens  of  Exeter,  in  pursuance  of  some
secret  negotiation,  came  to  the  king,  delivered  hostages,  and
demanded  peace  on  terms  of  surrender.  But  on  their  return,
the  body  of  citizens,  far  from  fulfilling  the  engagement  thus
made,  kept  the  gates  closed,  and  stood  to  their  arms.

William  invested  the  city,  and  bringing  within  sight  of  the
ramparts  one  of  the  hostages  he  had  received,  had  his  eyes
put  out.  The  siege  lasted  eighteen  days;  a  considerable  por-
tion of  the  Norman  army  perished;  their  place  was  supplied

1  Cliron.  Sax.  Frag.,  sub  ann.  1007.
3  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  510.  3  Ib.

TO 1068.]  TAKING OF EXETER.  205

by  fresh  troops,  and  the  miners  laboured  to  sap  the  walls;  but
the  determination  of  the  citizens  was  inflexible.  It  is  quite
probable  that  they  would  have  wearied  William  out,  had  not
the  chiefs  again  betrayed  them.  Some  historians  relate  that
the  inhabitants  of  Exeter  repaired  to  the  foreign  camp,  in  the
attitude  of  suppliants,  with  their  priests  bearing  missals  and
sacred  vessels  in  their  hands.1  The  Saxon  chronicle  has
merely  these  words,  mournful  from  their  very  brevity:  "  The
citizens  surrendered  the  town,  because  their  thanes  deceived
them."2

A  great  number  of  women,  escaping  the  outrages  which
followed  upon  the  surrender  of  Exeter,  took  refuge  with  Ha-
rold's mother,  first  in  one  of  the  islands  of  the  Severn,  and
then  in  the  city  of  Bath,  which  had  not  as  yet  been  taken  by
the  enemy;  hence  they  gained  the  western  coast,  and,  in  de-
fault of  a  more  direct  route,  embarked  for  Flanders.  Forty-
eight  houses  had  been  destroyed  in  the  siege;3  the  Normans
applied  their  materials  to  the  construction  of  a  fortress,  which
they  called  Rougemont,  from  its  site  being  a  hill  of  red  earth.
This  castle  was  then  confided  to  the  keeping  of  Baldwin,  son
of  Gilbert  Crespin,  also  called  Baldwin  de  Brionne,  who  re-
ceived for  his  share  as  conqueror,  and  for  his  salary  as  vis-
count of  Devonshire,  twenty  houses  in  Exeter,  and  an  hundred
and  fifty-nine  manors  in  the  county.4

During  this  campaign,  a  defensive  alliance  had  been
formed  between  the  Anglo-Saxons  and  the  ancient  Britons  of
Cornwall.  After  the  taking  of  Exeter,  the  two  populations
thus  united  were  involved  in  one  common  ruin,  and  the  ter-
ritory of  both  was  shared  out  among  the  conquerors.  One  of
the  first  names  inscribed  on  the  partition  roll  was  that  of  the
wife  of  the  conqueror,  Matilda,  daughter  of  Baldwin,  earl
of  Flanders,  whom  the  Normans  called  the  Queen,  a  title  un-
known to  the  English,  who  only  employed  in  their  language
the  terms,  dame  or  wife.5  Matilda  obtained  as  her  portion  of
the  conquest,  all  the  lands  of  a  rich  Saxon,  named  Brihtrik.'5

1  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  510.  2  Chron.  Sax.  Frag.,  sub  ami.

3  Domesday  B.,  vol.  i.  fol.  100,  recto.

4  Dugdale's  Baronage.

5  Se  Hlafdige,  se  Cwene.  From  hlafdige,  suppressing  the  aspirates,
came  lafdye,  lavdy,  lady.  Cwene,  cween,  queen,  properly  signifies  a
woman.  «  See  Appendix  XIII.

206  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1067

This  personage,  if  we  are  to  credit  the  chronicles,  was  not  un-
known to  Matilda;  on  the  contrary,  he  had  formerly,  when
ambassador  from  king  Edward  at  her  father's  court,  incurred
her  deep  resentment  by  refusing  to  marry  her.  It  was  Matilda
herself  who  requested  the  king  her  husband  to  adjudge  to  her,
with  all  his  lands,  the  Englishman  who  had  slighted  her;  and
she  satisfied  at  once  her  vengeance  and  her  avarice,  by  appro-
priating the  lands  and  by  imprisoning  their  owner  in  a  for-
tress.1

It  was  probably  in  continuation  of  this  first  invasion  of  the
west,  that  Somersetshire  and  Gloucestershire  were  conquered
and  apportioned  out.  Various  facts  prove  that  this  conquest
was  not  accomplished  without  resistance.  According  to  the
local  tradition,  the  monastery  of  Winchcombe  was  at  this  time
deprived  of  all  its  possessions,  because  the  monks,  ill  advised
and  short  sighted  men,  as  an  ancient  historian  calls  them,
took  upon  themselves  to  oppose  king  William.2  Their  abbot,
Godrik,  was  removed  by  the  Norman  soldiers  and  imprisoned
at  Gloucester;  and  the  monastery,  become  odious  to  the  con-
querors, was  transferred  to  Eghelwig,  abbot  of  Evesham,
whom  the  contemporary  annalists  surname  the  Circumspect,3
one  of  those  men  whose  national  treason  assumes,  to  feeble
minds,  the  shape  "  of  the  fear  of  God,  and  veneration  of  the
king  appointed  by  Him."4  On  the  first  intelligence  of  the
first  defeat  of  his  countrymen,  Eghelwig  had  hastened  to
swear  true  faith  to  the  foreigner,  "for  whom  God  had  de-
clared." When  the  conquest  had  extended  itself  into  the
western  provinces,  he  solicited  a  share  in  the  spoil,  and,  in
imitation  of  his  friends  the  conquerors,  expelled  several
English  from  their  domains;  to  others,  he  sold  his  protection
at  a  heavy  price,  and  then  leaving  them  to  be  killed  by  the
Normans,  entered  upon  their  lands.  His  character  and  con-
duct caused  him  to  be  distinguished  by  king  William,  who
greatly  delighted  in  him;5  he  governed  the  rebellious  monks
of  Winchcombe  entirely  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Conqueror,
until  the  arrival  from  beyond  seas  of  a  monk  named  Galand,
to  whom  he  remitted  the  abbey.

i  Dugdale,  Mono  fit.,  I  154. Appendix  XIV.  2  jj.  #.  199.

3  Chron.  Sax.  Frag.,  sub  anno.
Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  f>()9.  5  Dugdale,  i.  132.

TO  1068.]  PATRIOTIC MOVEMENT.  207

The  theatre  of  English  independence  thus  became  more
and  more  limited  in  the  west;  but  the  vast  regions  of  the
north  still  offered  an  asylum,  a  retreat,  and  battle-fields  to
the  patriots.  Hither  repaired  those  who  had  no  longer  home
or  family,  whose  brothers  were  dead,  whose  daughters  dis-
honoured; those  who,  in  the  language  of  the  old  annalists,
preferred  a  life  of  war  to  slavery.1  They  made  their  way
from  one  forest  or  deserted  place  to  another,  until  they  had
passed  the  furthest  line  of  fortresses  erected  by  the  advancing
Normans,  and  once  beyond  this  girdle  of  slavery,  found  them-
selves among  free  Englishmen.  Remorse  soon  brought  to
them  the  chiefs  who,  the  first  to  despair  of  the  common  cause,
had  the  first  given  an  example  of  voluntary  submission.  They
made  their  escape  from  the  palace  in  which  the  Conqueror
had  detained  them  captives,  under  a  false  show  of  affection,
calling  them  his  dear  friends,  his  special  friends,2  and  making
use  of  their  presence  at  his  court  as  a  ground  of  reproach
against  the  nation,  which  refused  to  recognise  a  king  thus
surrounded  by  its  national  chiefs.  When  Edwin  and  Morkar
departed  for  the  north,  the  prayers  of  the  poor,  say  the  his-
torians of  English  race,  accompanied  them  in  their  flight,  and
the  priests  and  monks  offered  up  fervent  orisons  for  their
safety  and  success.3

On  the  arrival  of  the  sons  of  Alfgar  in  their  former
governments  of  Mercia  and  Northumbria,  every  indication  of
a  patriotic  movement  manifested  itself  from  Oxford  to  the
Tweed.  No  Norman  had  as  yet  passed  the  Humber,  and  but
very  few  had  reached  the  central  parts  of  Mercia.  This
province  maintained  an  uninterrupted  communication,  by  its
north  western  frontier,  with  the  Welsh  population,  who,  for-
getting their  ancient  grievances,  made  common  cause  with
the  Saxons  against  the  new  invaders.  It  was  rumoured  that
the  English  and  Welsh  chieftains  had  held  several  councils
together  in  the  mountains,  that  they  had  unanimously  re-
solved to  deliver  their  island  from  Norman  domination,  and
were  despatching  emissaries  in  every  direction  to  arouse
popular  indignation  and  revolt.  The  great  camp  of  inde-
pendence was  to  be  formed  beyond  the  Humber;  the  city  of

1  Matth.  Westraon.,  p.  225.
2  Mattb.  Paris,  nt  sup.,  i.  47. a  Order.  Vital.,  p.  511. «  Id.  il>.

208  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1068.

York  was  to  be  its  first  bulwark,  and  its  last,  the  lakes  and
marshes  of  the  north.  Large  numbers  of  men  had  sworn
never  to  sleep  beneath  the  shelter  of  a  roof  until  they  had
effected  the  national  deliverance;  they  lay  under  the  open
sky  or  in  tents,  whence  the  Normans  contemptuously  de-
signated them  savages. l  Among  them  was  young  Edrik,  the
son  of  Alfrik,  who  had  so  energetically  maintained  the  Saxon
cause  in  Herefordshire.

It  is  impossible  to  say  how  many  projects  of  national  de-
liverance, well  or  ill  conceived,  were  formed  and  destroyed
at  this  period.  History  scarcely  deigns  to  mention  some
two  or  three  of  the  men  who  preferred  war  to  servitude  ;  the
same  power  which  defeated  their  efforts,  effaced  the  memory
of  them.  One  Norman  chronicler  denounces,  with  bitter  re-
proaches, a  conspiracy,  the  object  of  which,  he  tells  us,  was  to
make  a  sudden  attack  upon  the  soldiers  of  every  foreign  gar-
rison throughout  England,  on  the  first  day  of  Lent,  when,
according  to  the  devotion  of  the  period,  they  all  repaired  to
church,  bare-footed  and  unarmed.2  The  historian,  while
thanking  God  for  the  discovery  of  this  abominable  machi-
nation, regrets  that  the  chiefs  of  the  plot  had,  by  flight,
escaped  the  vengeance  of  the  Great  conqueror.  Their  flight,
it  appears,  was  directed  to  the  northern  provinces,  where
they  were  shortly  afterwards  joined  by  another  fugitive,  young
Edgar,  the  lawful  king,  according  to  the  political  maxims  of
the  period,  by  the  election  of  the  people  and  the  consecration
of  the  church.  He  proceeded  onwards,  accompanied  by  his
mother  Agatha,  his  two  sisters  Margaret  and  Christina,  a
chieftain  named  Merlsweyn,  and  many  other  good  men,  as
the  Saxon  chronicle  expresses  it;3  and  passed  the  frontier
which,  since  the  defeat  of  king  Egfrith  by  the  Picts  and
Scots,  had  separated  England  from  the  land  of  Albyn.

The  invasions  of  the  Danish  pirates,  though  extending
north  as  well  as  south  of  the  Tweed,  had  not  displaced  this
boundary.  The  only  political  result  of  the  domination  exer-
cised for  a  time  by  the  Danes  over  the  mixed  population  of
Picts,  Britons,  and  Saxons,  which  occupied  the  territory  be-
tween the  Forth  and  the  Tweed,  had  been  to  augment  this

i  Order.  Vital.,  p.  511.  8  Willelm.  Gemet.,  p.  289.

3  Chron.  Sax.  Frag.,  sub  anno  1007.

A.D.  1068.] THE  KINGDOM  OF  SCOTLAND.  209

mixture  of  races  by  a  new  accession  of  Germanic  population.
Hence  it  was,  that  south  of  the  Forth,  and  more  peculiarly
towards  the  east,  the  preponderating  idiom  was  a  Teutonic
dialect,  interspersed  with  Gallic  and  British  words,  and
more  nearly  approximating,  in  its  grammatical  forms,  to  the
Danish  than  to  the  Anglo-Saxon.  About  the  time  when  this
change  was  gradually  operating  in  the  southern  districts  of
Albyn,  in  the  northern  a  more  rapid  revolution  united  into
one  state  and  under  one  authority  the  Picts  of  the  eastern
coast  and  the  Scots  of  the  western  mountains,  who  had
hitherto  existed  as  separate  nations,  each  ruled  by  its  own
independent  chief.  Their  union  was  not  effected  without
some  violence;  for  the  two  peoples,  though  apparently  of  the
same  origin,  though  speaking  a  language  almost  identical,1  and
naturally  disposed  to  act  in  co-operation  against  a  common
adversary,  were  rivals  in  time  of  external  peace.

The  Scots,  hunters  of  the  mountains,  and  leading  a  more
rugged  and  more  active  life  than  their  neighbours  of  the
plain,  deemed  themselves  nobler  than  the  latter,  whom  they
contemptuously  designated  the  bread-eaters.2  But,  notwith-
standing this  assumed  scorn  of  bread,  the  chieftains  of  the
Scots  were  very  desirous  of  extending  over  the  corn-growing
plains,  the  power  which  they  exercised  in  their  mountain  land
of  rocks  and  lakes.  They  pursued  this  object  year  after  year,
by  art  and  by  arms;  but  the  Pict  nation  successfully  resisted
them,  until  it  became  enfeebled  by  the  incursions  and  victories
of  the  Danes.3  Kenneth  Mac- Alpin,  king  of  western  Albyn,
availing  himself  of  the  occasion,  descended  into  the  land  of
the  Picts;  the  bread-eaters  were  conquered,  and  the  great
proportion  of  them  submitted  to  the  authority  of  Kenneth;
the  remainder,  withdrawing  to  the  extreme  north,  sought  to
retain  a  king  of  their  own  nation  and  their  own  choice,4  but
they  failed  in  this  object;  and  Kenneth,  king  of  the  Scots,
became  king  of  all  Albyn,  which  thenceforward  bore  the
name  of  Scotland.  The  nation  of  the  Picts  lost  its  name  in
its  incorporation  with  the  Scots;  but  it  does  not  appear  that

1  Bede,  in  the  eighth  century,  makes  a  distinction  between  the  idiom  of
the  Picts  and  that  of  the  Scots.

8  Fir  na  Cruinneachd. See  Jameson's  Popular  Songs,  ii.  nntes.
3  Fordun,  Scoti-Chron.,  lib.  iv.  p.  280.  '«  Id.  ib.  203.

VOL.  I.  P

210  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1068.

the  fusion  was  effected  on  unequal  terms,  as  would,  doubtless,
have  been  the  case,  had  the  conquerors  and  the  conquered
been  of  different  race.  The  latter  had  not  to  undergo  any
slavery,  any  political  degradation;  serfage,  the  ordinary  result
of  foreign  conquest  in  the  middle  ages,  was  not  established  in
Scotland.  Ere  long  there  existed  north  of  the  Forth  but  one
people,  and  it  early  became  a  fruitless  attempt  to  seek  the
traces  of  the  idiom  which  the  Picts  had  spoken  in  the  time  of
their  independence.  The  kings  of  the  victors,  quitting  their
native  mountains,  came  to  dwell  with  the  vanquished  at  Dun-
fermline  and  at  Scone.  They  brought  with  them  the  conse-
crated stone  chair  in  which,  according  to  an  ancient  custom,
they  sat  at  their  inauguration,  to  take  the  accustomed  oath  to
the  people,  and  to  which  an  ancient  national  superstition
attached  the  fate  of  the  Scottish  race.

At  the  period  of  the  Norman  invasion  of  England,  there
remained  not  the  slightest  vestige  of  the  original  separation
of  the  Scottish  Gael  into  two  distinct  populations;  the  only
national  division  observable  in  the  kingdom  of  Scotland  was
that  between  the  men  who  spoke  the  Gaelic  language,  called
also  Erse,  i.e.  Irish,1  and  the  descendants  of  the  Teutonic  co-
lonists, whose  idiom  was  alike  intelligible  to  the  English,  the
Danes,  and  the  Germans.  This  population,  the  nearest  to  Eng-
land, though  called  Scottish  by  the  English,  had  much  closer
affinity  with  the  latter  people  (from  the  resemblance  of  lan-
guages and  the  community  of  origin)  than  with  the  Scots  of
Gaelic  race.  These,  who  combined  with  a  somewhat  savage
pride,  habits  of  independence  derived  from  their  organization
in  separate  clans  or  tribes,  had  frequent  disputes  with  the
Teutonic  population  of  the  southern  plains,  and  even  with
the  kings  of  Scotland.  The  latter  almost  invariably  found
the  southern  Scots  disposed  to  aid  them  in  their  projects
against  the  liberty  of  the  clans;  and  thus  the  instinctive  en-
mity of  these  two  races,  fruit  of  the  diversity  of  origin  and
language,  turned  to  the  profit  of  royal  despotism.  This  ex-
perience, more  than  once  highly  profitable  to  the  successors
of  Kenneth  Mac-Alpin,  gave  them  a  great  affection  for  the
lowlanders  of  Scotland,  and  generally  for  men  of  English
origin;  they  preferred  these  strangers  to  the  men  who  de-

1  Irse,  Irshe,  Irish,  the  Saxon  term  for  the  inhabitants  of  Ireland.

A.D.  1068.]  TAKING OF OXFORD.  211

scended  from  the  same  ancestry  with  themselves;  they  fa-
voured, to  their  utmost  ability,  the  Scots  by  name,  at  the  ex-
pense of  the  Scots  by  race,  and  received  with  earnest  cor-
diality every  immigrant  from  England.

It  was  this  political  tendency  which  induced  the  Scottish
king  Malcolm,  surnamed  Kenmore,  to  receive  as  welcome  and
honoured  guests  the  youthful  Edgar,  his  relatives,  and  his
friends.1  He  saluted  Edgar  as  the  true  and  lawful  king  of
the  English,  and  proifered  him  a  secure  asylum  and  succours
wherewith  to  raise  his  fallen  fortunes.  He  gave  to  all  the
expatriated  and  dispossessed  chiefs  who  accompanied  their
king,  offices  and  estates,  taken  despotically,  in  all  probability,
from  his  own  British  or  Gaelic  subjects,  and  he  himself  es-
poused Edgar's  youngest  sister  Margaret.  This  princess  was
not  acquainted  with  the  Gaelic  tongue,  so  that  she  had  fre-
quent occasion  for  an  interpreter  when  she  conversed  with
the  chieftains  of  the  northern  and  western  tribes,  and  with
the  bishops  of  those  districts;  her  interpreter  was  her  hus-
band Malcolm,  equally  versed  in  both  idioms,2  though  after
his  reign  the  kings  of  Scotland  disdained  to  speak  or  even  to
know  the  language  of  the  ancient  Scots,  of  the  people  from
whom  they  descended,  and  from  whose  name  was  derived
that  of  the  country.

The  news  of  the  alliance  formed  between  the  Saxons  and
the  king  of  Scotland,  and  the  hostile  assemblages  formed
in  the  north  of  England,  determined  William  not  to  await
an  attack,  but  energetically  to  assume  the  offensive.3  His
first  military  operation  in  this  new  expedition  was  the  siege
of  Oxford.  The  citizens  resisted  the  foreign  king,  and  in-
sulted him  from  their  ramparts;  but  a  portion  of  the  wall
having  been  sapped,  gave  way,  and  the  Normans  entering  by
the  breach,  avenged  themselves  upon  the  inhabitants  by
fire  and  massacre.4  Of  seven  hundred  and  twenty  houses,
nearly  four  hundred  were  destroyed.5  The  monks  of  St.
Frideswide's  abbey,  following  the  example  of  their  brethren

1  Fordun,  Scoti-cJiron.,  v.  410.
-  Ib.  Ellis's  Metrical  Romances,  introduc.,  p.  127.
3  Chron.  Sax.  Frag.,  sub  anno  1067.

*  Matth.  Paris,  i.  0.

5  Extracta  ex  Domesday  B.,  lit  sup.  p.  7(55.
p2

212  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1068.

of  Hide  and  Winchcomb,  took  up  arms  to  defend  their  mo-
nastery, and,  as  a  consequence,  were  all  expelled  from  it  after
the  victory  of  the  Normans.1  Warwick  was  next  taken,  then
Leicester,  which  was  utterly  ^lestroyed,  with  its  castle  and  its
church;2  then  Derby,  one-third  of  which  was  in  like  manner
demolished.3  After  the  siege  and  capture  of  Nottingham,  a
strong  citadel  was  erected  there,  and  confided  to  the  keeping
of  the  Norman,  William  Peverel.  This  William  had  for  his
share  of  the  conquest,  fifty-five  manors  in  Nottinghamshire,
and  in  the  town  itself  forty-eight  houses  belonging  to  Eng-
lish merchants,  twelve  the  property  of  soldiers,  and  eight
taken  from  agriculturists.  He  fixed  his  own  abode  in
Derbyshire,  on  a  peaked  rock,  where  his  castle  seemed  sus-
pended in  the  air,  as  it  were  the  nest  of  a  bird  of  prey.

From  Nottingham  the  Norman  troops  proceeded  eastward
to  Lincoln,  which  they  compelled  to  capitulate  and  to  give
hostages.  Here,  besides  seventy-four  other  houses  destroyed,
an  hundred  and  ninety-six  were  demolished  to  make  room
for  a  citadel  and  other  fortifications,  with  which  the  foreigners
here  surrounded  themselves  more  carefully  than  elsewhere;4
for  in  this  town,  the  population  of  which  was  of  Danish  ori-
gin, the  conquerors,  as  at  Norwich,  feared  an  attack  from  the
transmarine  Danes.5  Among  the  Lincoln  hostages  im-
prisoned in  the  Norman  fortresses  as  guarantees  of  the
peace  of  the  county,  was  a  young  man  named  Thurgot,  of
Danish  origin,  who  succeeded  in  opening  his  prison,  gaining
over  his  keepers  with  the  aid  of  money.6  He  went  secretly  to
the  port  of  Grimsby,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Humber,  to  some
Norwegian  merchants,  whose  vessel  was  about  to  sail.  It  hap-
pened that  this  vessel  had  been  detained,  awaiting  certain  am-
bassadors, whom  the  conqueror  had  resolved  to  send  into  the
north,  to  dissuade  the  kings  of  those  parts  from  interesting
themselves  in  the  Saxon  cause,  or  lending  it  any  assistance.
The  Norwegians  unhesitatingly  received  the  young  fugitive,
and  concealed  him  in  the  hold  of  their  vessel  so  effectually,
that  the  Norman  coast  inspectors,  who  visited  it  at  the  mo-

1  Dugdale,  Monast.  Angl.,  i.  984.  2  id.  ,-j^  ^  312.

3  Domesday  Book,  i.  fol.  280,  recto.

*  Domesday  B.,  i.  fol.  330,  verso.

5  Guill.  Pictav.,  p.  208.
6  Snccessio  primorum  eccles.  Dunelmensis ;  Anglia  Sacra,  i.  78C.

A.D.  1068.]  TAKING  OF  YORK.  213

rnent  of  departure,  suspected  nothing.1  The  ambassadors
embarked,  and  when  they  had  lost  sight  of  land,  the  hostage
suddenly  appeared,  to  their  great  astonishment.  They  desired
the  sailors  to  return,  that  they  might,  as  they  said,  restore  the
fugitive  to  king  William;2  but  the  Norwegians  answered,
mockingly  :  "  The  wind  is  too  favourable,  the  vessel  sails
well;  it  were  pity  to  baulk  her."  The  dispute  grew  so  warm,
that  the  two  parties  came  to  blows,  but  the  sailors  were  the
strongest;  and  as  the  vessel  advanced  into  the  open  sea,  the
Normans  became  more  tractable.3

On  leaving  Lincoln,  which,  by  a  kind  of  French  euphony,
they  called  Nicole ,4  the  invading  troops  marched  upon  York;
at  the  spot  where  the  rivers  unite  whose  junction  forms  the
Humber,  they  met  the  confederate  army  of  Anglo-Saxons  and
Welsh.  Here,  as  at  the  battle  of  Hastings,  by  the  supe-
riority of  their  numbers,  and  by  their  armour,  they  drove  the
enemy  from  his  position,  though  defended  inch  by  inch.5
Many  of  the  English  perished;  the  survivors  sought  refuge
within  the  walls  of  York;  but  the  conquerors,  following  close
upon  them,  made  a  breach  in  the  wall  and  entered  the  city,
killing  all,  say  the  chroniclers,  from  the  child  in  arms  to  the
old  men.  The  wreck  of  the  patriot  army  (or  as  the  Nor-
man historians  designated  it,  the  army  of  factious  robbers),
descended  the  Humber  in  boats,6  and  then  went  northward  to
Scotland,  or  the  English  territory  adjoining  Scotland.  Here
the  conquered  men  of  York  rallied:  "Hither  retired,"  says  an
old  chronicler,  "  Edwin  and  Morkar,  the  noble  chiefs,  and
other  men  of  distinction,  bishops,  priests,  men  of  every  rank,
sad  to  find  their  cause  the  weakest,  but  not  resigned  to
slavery.7

The  conquerors  built  a  citadel  in  the  centre  of  York,  which
thus  became  a  Norman  fortress,  and  the  bulwark  of  conquest
in  the  north.  Its  towers,  garrisoned  by  five  hundred  men,
completely  armed,  having  several  thousand  squires  and  soldiers,
menaced  Northumbria.  The  invasion,  however,  was  not  at
this  period  continued  over  this  country,  and  it  is  even  doubt-
ful whether  Yorkshire  was  ever  occupied  in  its  whole  breadth

1  Roger  de  Hoveden,  p.  456.  8  Id.  ib.

3  Ib.  *  Dugdale,  flfonast.,  ii.  645.

5  Willelm.  Gemet.,  p.  290.
«  Ib.  7  Matth.  Westmon.,' p.  225.

214  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1068.

from  the  ocean  to  the  mountains.  The  capital,  subdued  be-
fore its  territory,  was  the  advanced  post  of  the  conquerors,  and
a  perilous  post;  they  worked  there  night  and  day  to  complete
their  lines  of  defence;  they  forced  the  poor  Saxon,  who  had
escaped  the  massacre,  to  dig  ditches  and  to  repair  for  the
enemy  the  ruin  which  the  enemy  had  made.  Fearing  that  they
might,  in  their  turn,  be  besieged,  they  collected  provisions
from  every  quarter,  and  stored  them  in  the  donjon.  At  this
juncture  the  archbishop  of  York,  Eldred,  the  same  who  had
officiated  at  the  coronation  of  the  foreign  king,  came  to  his
metropolis  to  celebrate  a  religious  solemnity.1  On  his  arri-
val, he  sent  to  his  estates  near  York  for  provisions  for  his
use.  His  servants,  leading  horses  and  carts  laden  with  wheat
and  other  provisions,  were  met  by  chance  at  one  of  the  gates
by  the  viscount  or  Norman  governor  of  the  city,  followed  by  a
great  train.  "  Who  are  you?"  asked  the  Norman,  "  and  to  whom
are  you  taking  these  things?"  "  We  are,"  they  answered,
"  the  servants  of  the  archbishop,  and  these  things  are  for  the
use  of  his  house."  The  viscount,  very  indifferent  about  the
archbishop  or  his  house,  ordered  the  armed  men  who  escorted
him  to  take  both  horses  and  carts  to  the  citadel  of  York,  and
to  deposit  the  provisions  in  the  Norman  storehouses.

When  the  archbishop,  the  friend  of  the  conquerors,  found
himself  also  struck  by  the  conquest,  there  arose  in  him  a  sen-
timent of  indignation  which  his  calm  and  cautious  soul  had
not  before  experienced.  He  immediately  proceeded  to  the
king's  quarters,  and  presented  himself  before  him  in  his  pon-
tifical dress,  holding  his  pastoral  staff.  William  rose  to  offer
him,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  time,  the  kiss  of  peace,  but
the  Saxon  prelate  drew  back,  and  said  :  "  Listen  to  me,  king
William;  thou  wert  a  stranger,  and  yet,  God  wishing  to  punish
our  nation,  thou  didst  obtain,  at  the  cost  of  much  blood,  the
kingdom  of  England;  then  I  crowned  thee  king;  I  crowned
thee  and  blessed  thee  with  my  own  hand  :  but  now  I  curse
thee,  thee  and  thy  race,  because  thou  hast  merited  it,  in  be-
coming the  persecutor  of  the  church  of  God,  and  the  oppressor
of  her  ministers."

The  Norman  king  listened,  without  emotion,  to  the  impo-
tent malediction  of  the  old  priest,  and  tranquilly  silenced  the

1  Stubbs,  Act.  Pontif.  Eborac,  apud  Hist.  Angl.,  Script.  (Selden)  ii.  col.
1703.

A.D. 1068.]  WEARINESS OP THE NORMANS.  215

indignation  of  his  flatterers,  who,  trembling  with  rage  and
drawing  their  swords,  demanded  permission  to  punish  the  in-
solence of  the  Saxon.  He  allowed  Eldred  to  return  in  peace
and  safety  to  his  church  of  York;  but  this  affair  cast  deep
affliction  into  the  heart  of  the  archbishop,  and  perhaps  remorse
for  having  contributed  to  the  establishment  of  the  foreign'
domination.  The  destruction  at  one  blow  of  his  dreams  of
ambition,  and  the  sad  conviction  that  he  himself  was  not  ex-
empt from  the  insults  of  the  foreigner  or  from  the  general  ser-
vitude, threw  him  into  a  slow  illness,  which  gradually  under-
mined his  strength.  A  year  after,  when  the  Saxons,  who
had  again  rallied,  advanced  to  attack  the  city  of  York,  Eldred's
grief  and  languor  redoubled;  and  as  if  he  feared,  more  than
death,  the  presence  of  those  who  had  remained  faithful  to
their  country,  he  prayed  to  God,  say  the  chroniclers,  to  take
him  from  this  world,  that  he  might  not  behold  the  total  ruin
of  that  country,  and  the  destruction  of  her  church.1

War  was  still  proceeding  in  the  extremities  of  England, —
agitation  was  everywhere; — all  expected  that  the  fugitives
from  York  would  return,  by  land  or  by  sea,  and  make  some
new  effort.  The  irksomeness  of  this  struggle,  apparently  in-
terminable, began  to  produce  its  effect  upon  the  soldiers,
and  even  upon  the  leaders,  of  the  invading  army;  many,
thinking  themselves  rich  enough,  resolved  to  renounce
these  fatigues;  others  considered  that  the  lands  of  the  Eng-
lish were  not  worth  the  trouble  and  danger  of  obtaining  them;
others  wished  to  see  their  wives,  who  overwhelmed  them  with
messages  and  intreaties  to  return  to  them  and  their  children.2
King  William  was  greatly  alarmed  at  this  increasing  ten-
dency; to  reanimate  the  zeal  of  his  troops,  he  offered  more
than  he  had  yet  given,  and  promised,  when  the  conquest
should  be  completed,  lands,  money,  and  honours  in  abundance.
He  caused  imputations  of  cowardice  to  be  diffused  with  refer-
ence to  those  who  might  abandon  their  leader,  surrounded  by
danger  in  a  foreign  land.  Bitter  and  not  very  decent  jests
were  directed  against  the  oSorman  women  who  were  in  such
haste  to  recal  their  protectors  and  the  fathers  of  their  chil-
dren. But,  despite  all  these  manoeuvres,  Hugh  de  Grant-
mesnil,  earl  of  Norfolk,  his  brother-in-law  Onfroy  du

1  76.  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  iii.  271.
2  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  513.

216  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A-I>.  1069.

Tilleul,  keeper  of  the  castle  of  Hastings,  and  many  others
departed,  leaving  their  lands  and  honours,  to  become,  as  the
courtiers  of  William  expressed  it,  the  slaves  of  their  lascivious
ladies,  at  the  expense  of  their  honour  as  vassals  to  their  lord.
Their  departure  made  a  deep  impression  upon  the  new  king;
seeing  in  the  future  greater  difficulties  than  he  had  yet  encoun-
tered, he  sent  his  wife  Matilda  to  Normandy,  to  remove  her
from  danger,  and  to  give  himself  entirely  to  the  prosecution  of
the  war.1  New  events  soon  justified  his  apprehensions.

One  of  Harold's  two  sons,  Edmund,  came  from  Ireland,
where  he  and  his  brother  had  sought  refuge,  either  after  the
battle  of  Hastings  or  after  the  taking  of  Exeter,  and  brought,
to  aid  the  English,  sixty-six  vessels  and  a  small  army.2  He
entered  the  mouth  of  the  Avon,  and  laid  siege  to  Bristol;  but
failing  to  take  it,  returned  to  his  vessels,  sailed  along  the
south-western  coast,  and  landed  in  Somersetshire.  On  his
approach,  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  rose  against  the
Normans,  and  the  insurrection  extended  to  Devonshire  and
Dorsetshire.  The  alliance  of  the  Britons  of  Cornwall  with
their  Saxon  neighbours  was  renewed,  and  together  they  at-
tacked the  foreign  troops  who  were  stationed  in  this  district,
under  the  command  of  one  Dreux  de  Montaigu.3  There
were  sent  to  reinforce  these  Normans  the  English  auxiliaries,
who  had  found  it  easier  to  join  the  enemy  than  to  resist  them;
and,  as  at  the  siege  of  Exeter,  they  were  placed  in  the  front
to  receive  the  first  attack.  They  were  led  by  Ednoth,  for-
merly one  of  Harold's  great  officers,4  whom  William  wished
to  get  rid  of  by  sending  him  against  the  insurgents;  for  it
was  his  policy,  says  an  ancient  historian,  to  set  these  foreigners
against  each  other,  calculating  to  find  his  advantage  in  it,  on
whatever  side  victory  might  fall."'  Ednoth  perished  with
many  of  his  people;  the  insurrection  remained  on  foot,  and
the  son  of  Harold  returned  to  Ireland  for  his  brother  and
fresh  troops.

Edmund  and  Godwin,  sailing  together,  and  doubling  the
Land's  End,  entered  the  mouth  of  the  Tamar,  in  Devonshire.
They  imprudently  ventured  onwards  in  this  territory,  where

1  Id.  ib.  *  Willelm.  Gemet.,  p.  200.

3  Ib.  p.  514.

4  Chron.  Saxon.  Frag,,  sub  anno  1007.
5  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  iii.  p.  104.

A.D. 1069.] DEFEAT OF THE WESTERN PATRIOTS.  217

the  Normans,  quartered  in  the  southern  provinces,  had  assem-
bled all  their  forces  to  oppose  a  barrier  to  the  insurrection  of
the  west.  Two  chiefs,  one  of  whom  was  Brian,  son  of  Eudes,
the  earl  or  duke  of  Brittany,  attacked  them  unexpectedly,
and  destroyed  more  than  two  thousand  of  them,  English,
Welsh,  and  Irish.  The  sons  of  the  last  Saxon  king  again
regained  their  vessels,  and  set  sail,  deprived  of  all  hope.1  To
complete  the  destruction  of  the  insurgents  in  Dorsetshire  and
Somersetshire,  Geoffroi,  bishop  of  Coutances,  marched  thither
with  the  garrisons  of  London,  Winchester,  and  Salisbury.
He  seized  many  men,  armed,  or  suspected  of  having  taken  up
arms,  and  caused  them  to  be  cruelly  mutilated.2

This  defeat,  and  the  retreat  of  the  auxiliaries  from  Ireland,
did  not  wholly  depress  the  western  population.  The  move-
ment, commenced  in  the  south,  had  extended  over  all  the
frontier  of  the  Welsh  territory;  the  inhabitants  of  the  country
around  Chester,  a  country  still  free  from  invasion,  marched
to  Shrewsbury,  and  joining  the  soldiers  of  young  Edrik
Guilda  (Wild),  whom  the  Normans  called  Le  Sauvage  (the
Forester),  drove  back  the  foreigners  towards  the  east.3

The  two  chiefs,  Brian  and  William,  who  had  defeated  the
sons  of  Harold,  and  subdued  the  men  of  Devon  and  Cornwall,
then  marched  from  the  south;  and  the  king  himself,  leaving
Lincoln,  advanced  with  his  chosen  troops.  Near  Stafford,  at
the  foot  of  the  mountains,  he  encountered  the  main  body  of
the  insurgent  army,  and  destroyed  it  in  one  engagement.
The  other  Norman  captains  marched  upon  Shrewsbury,  and
this  town,  with  the  surrounding  country,  fell  again  under  the
dominion  of  the  foreigner;  the  inhabitants  gave  up  their
arms;  a  few  brave  men  only,  who  resolved  to  retain  them,
withdrew  to  the  seacoast  or  to  the  mountain  fastnesses.  They
continued  the  war  with  little  advantage,  against  small  parties
of  the  enemy,  lying  in  ambush  in  the  woods  and  narrow
valleys,  for  the  straggling  soldier  or  adventurous  scout,  or  the
messenger  bearing  the  orders  of  the  chief;  but  the  high  roads,
the  cities  and  the  villages,  were  open  to  the  enemy's  troops.
Terror  took  the  place  of  hope  in  the  hearts  of  the  conquered;
they  avoided  each  other,  instead  of  uniting,  and  the  entire
south-western  portion  of  the  country  was  once  more  silent.4

1  Chron.  Saxon.  Frag.,  sub  anno  1008.
2  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  514.  »  Id.  ib.  *  Id.  ib.

218  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1069.

In  the  north,  the  city  of  York  was  still  the  extreme  limit
of  the  conquest;  the  Norman  soldiers  who  occupied  this  city
did  not  seek  to  advance  beyond  it;  even  their  excursions
in  the  country  south  of  York  were  not  without  danger  for
them.  Hugh  Fitz-Baudry,  viscount  or  governor  of  the  city,
dared  not  venture  to  Selby  or  to  cross  the  Ouse  without  a
numerous  escort.  The  Norman  soldiers  were  no  longer  in
safety  the  moment  they  had  quitted  their  ranks  and  their
arms;  for  bands  of  insurgents,  who  reassembled  as  fast  as
they  were  dispersed,  continually  harassed  the  troops  on  their
marches,  and  even  the  garrison  of  York.1  William  Malet,
the  colleague  of  Fitz-Baudry  in  the  command  of  this  garrison,
went  so  far  as  to  declare  in  his  despatches  that  without  prompt
succours  he  would  not  answer  for  his  post.  This  news,  con-
veyed to  king  William,  caused  great  alarm.  The  king  him-
self hastily  departed,  and  on  his  arrival  before  York,  found
the  citizens,  leagued  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  surrounding
districts,  besieging  the  Norman  fortress.  He  attacked  them
with  superior  forces,  spared  no  one,  say  the  chroniclers,2  dis-
persed those  whom  he  did  not  kill,  and  laid  the  foundations  of
a  second  stronghold,  of  which  he  confided  the  works  and  keep-
ing to  his  most  intimate  confident,  William  Fitz-Osbern,  his
seneschal  and  marshal  for  Normandy  and  England.3

After  his  departure,  the  English  again  rallied,  and  be-
sieged the  two  castles;  but  they  were  driven  back  with  loss,
and  the  Normans  tranquilly  completed  their  new  works  of
defence.  Assured  of  the  possession  of  York,  the  conqueror
resumed  the  offensive,  and  endeavoured  to  extend  the  limits
of  the  conquest  to  Durham;  he  intrusted  this  perilous  expe-
dition to  one  Robert  Comine  or  De  Comines,  whom  he  in-
vested, by  anticipation,  with  the  title  of  earl  of  Northumber-
land.4 His  army  was  not  numerous,  but  his  confidence  in
himself  was  great,  and  increased  beyond  all  measure  when  he
found  himself  nearly  at  the  end  of  his  journey,  without  having
encountered  any  resistance.  He  was  already  in  sight  of  the
towers  of  Durham,  which  the  Normans  called  the  fortress  of
the  northern  rebels,5  when  Eghelwin,  the  Saxon  bishop  of  the
city,  met  him,  and  advised  him  to  be  prudent  and  to  beware

1  Hist.  Monast.  Selebiensis,  apnd  Labbe,  Nova  BibHoth.,  MS.  i.  002.

2  Order.  Vital.,  nt  wp.  *  Id.  ib.

4  Chron.  Sax.,  3  74.  a  Willelm.  Gemet.,  p.  290.

A.D.  1069.]  DEFEAT OF THE NORMANS.  219

of  a  surprise.1  "  Who  would  attack  me!"  answered  Comine.
"  None  of  you,  I  imagine,  would  dare  to  do  so."2  The  Nor-
mans entered  Durham,  and  massacred  a  few  unarmed  men,  as
if  to  insult  and  defy  the  English;  the  soldiers  encamped  in
the  squares,  and  their  chief  took  up  his  quarters  in  the  bishop's
palace.

When  night  came,  the  inhabitants  of  the  banks  of  the  Tyne
lighted  signal  fires  on  all  the  hills;  they  assembled  in  great
numbers,  and  hastened  to  Durham.  By  day-break  they  were
before  the  gates,  which  they  forced,  and  the  Normans  were
attacked  from  every  side,  in  streets  with  whose  turnings  they
were  unacquainted.  They  sought  to  rally  in  the  episcopal
palace;  they  erected  barricades  there,  and  defended  it  for
some  time,  shooting  their  arrows  on  the  Saxons  from  the
roof,  until  the  latter  terminated  the  contest  by  setting  fire  to
the  mansion,  which  was  burned,  with  all  those  who  were  in
it.3  Robert  Comine  was  of  the  number.  He  had  brought
with  him  twelve  hundred  horse,  completely  armed;  the  num-
ber of  the  foot  soldiers  and  military  attendants  who  accom-
panied him  is  not  known,  but  all  perished.4  This  terrible
defeat  made  such  an  impression  on  the  Normans,  that  a  nu-
merous body  of  troops,  sent  to  avenge  the  massacre,  and  who
had  advanced  as  far  as  Elfertun,  now  Northallerton,  half-way
between  York  and  Durham,  refused,  seized  with  a  panic
terror,  to  proceed  further.  It  was  reported  that  they  had
been  struck  motionless  by  a  supernatural  power,  by  the
power  of  Saint  Cuthbert,  whose  body  reposed  at  Durham,
and  who  thus  protected  his  last  home.5

The  Northumbrians  who  gained  this  great  victory  were
the  descendants  of  Danish  colonists,  and  there  had  never
ceased  to  exist  between  them  and  the  population  of  Denmark
relations  of  reciprocal  friendship,  the  fruit  of  their  common
origin.  When  they  found  themselves  threatened  by  the
Norman  invasion,  they  demanded  aid  from  the  Danes,  in  the
name  of  the  ancient  brotherhood  of  their  ancestors;  and  similar
solicitations  were  addressed  to  the  kings  of  Denmark  by  the

1  Aluredus  Beverlacensis,  Annal.  de  Gestis  reg.  Brit.  (Hearne)  lib.  ix.
p.  128.

2  Hemingford,  Chron.,  lib.  i.  p.  458.

3  Alured.  Beverlac,  ut  sup.  4  Chron.  Sax.,  p.  174.

5  Chron.  Sanctae-Crucis  Edinborg ;  Anglia  Sacra,  i.  159.

220  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1069.

Anglo-Danish  inhabitants  of  York,  Lincoln,  and  Norwich.1
A  crowd  of  Saxon  refugees  pleaded  the  cause  of  their  country
with  the  northern  nations,  earnestly  intreating  them  to  un-
dertake a  war  against  the  Normans,  who  were  oppressing  a
nation  of  the  great  Teutonic  family,  after  having  killed  its
king,  the  near  relative  of  several  kings  of  the  north.2  Wil-
liam, who  in  his  life  had  never  uttered  one  word  of  the
northern  language  which  his  ancestors  had  spoken,  foresaw
from  the  outset  this  natural  alliance  of  the  English  with  the
Danes,  and  it  was  this  had  made  him  build  so  many  fortresses
on  the  eastern  coasts  of  England.  He  also  several  times  sent
to  Swen,  king  of  Denmark,  accredited  ambassadors,  skilful
negotiators,  bishops  of  insinuating  tongue,  with  rich  presents,
to  persuade  him  to  remain  in  peace.  But  the  man  of  the
north  would  not  be  seduced,  or  consent,  say  the  Danish  chro-
nicles, to  leave  the  English  nation  in  servitude  to  a  people  of
foreign  race  and  language.  He  collected  his  fleet  and  his
soldiers.3  Two  hundred  and  forty  vessels  sailed  for  Britain,
led  by  Osbiorn,  brother  of  king  Swen,  and  his  two  sons,
Harold  and  Knut.  On  hearing  of  their  departure,  the  Eng-
lish waited  with  impatience  the  days  which  must  elapse  ere
the  arrival  of  these  sons  of  the  Baltic,  once  so  terrible  to
them,  and  pronounced  with  tenderness  names  which  their
fathers  had  cursed.  They  also  expected  mercenaries  from
the  coasts  of  ancient  Saxony  and  Friesland;4  the  Saxons  who
had  sought  refuge  in  Scotland  also  promised  aid.  Encouraged
by  their  victory,  the  inhabitants  of  Northumberland  made
frequent  excursions  south  of  their  country,  to  the  encamp-
ments of  the  foreigners.5  The  governor  of  one  of  the  castles
of  York  was  killed  in  a  skirmish  of  this  kind.6

It  was  in  the  interval  between  the  two  festivals  of  the
Virgin  Mary  in  autumn,  that  the  son  of  king  Swen,  Osbiorn
his  brother,  and  five  other  Danish  chiefs  of  high  rank,  landed
in  England.7  They  boldly  attempted  a  descent  on  the  part

1  Legatio  Helsini  in  Daniam,  apud  Script,  rer.  Dauic.,  iii.  p.  225 ;  in
nota  n  ad  calc.  pag.

2  Id.  ib.,  p.  253.

3  Avidientes  Daci  Augliam  esse  subjectam  Normannis  seu  Fraucigenis,
graviter  sunt  indignati . . .  arma  parant,  classem  aptant.  (Id.  ?'&.)

4  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  513.

3  Willelm.  Gemet.,  p.  290.  «  Order.  Vital.,  vt  sup.

7  Matth.  Westm.,  p.  226. Matth.  Paris,  i.  G.

A.D.  1069.] YORK  TAKEN  BY  THE  PATRIOTS. 221

of  the  coast  best  guarded,  the  south-east;  but  successively
repulsed  from  Dover,  Sandwich,  and  Norwich,  they  returned
northwards,  and  entered  the  mouth  of  the  Humber,  as  their
ancestors  had  formerly  done,  but  under  quite  different  auspices.1
As  soon  as  the  news  of  their  approach  spread  over  the  sur-
rounding districts,  the  chiefs  of  English  race  in  every  direc-
tion, all  the  English  in  a  body,  left  their  villages,  houses,  and
fields,  to  form  friendship  and  alliance  with  the  Danes,  and
join  their  ranks.2  The  young  king  Edgar,  Merlsweynn,  Gos-
patrick,  Siward  Beorn,  and  many  other  refugees,  hastened
from  Scotland.  There  came,  also,  Waltheof  son  of  Siward,
who  had  escaped,  like  Edwin  and  his  brother,  from  the  palace
of  king  William;  he  was  still  very  young,  and  was  remark-
able, as  his  father  had  been,  for  his  great  height  and  extraor-
dinary vigour  of  body.3

The  Saxons  forming  the  advanced  guard,  the  Danes  the
main  body,  the  patriot  army  marched  upon  York,  some  on
horseback,  others  on  foot,  says  the  Saxon  chronicle,  all  filled
with  hope  and  joy.4  Messengers  preceded  them  to  inform
the  citizens  that  their  deliverance  was  at  hand,  and  ere  long
the  city  was  invested  on  every  side.  On  the  eighth  day  of
the  siege,  the  Normans  who  had  charge  of  the  two  castles,
fearing  that  the  neighbouring  houses  might  furnish  the  assail-
ants with  materials  for  filling  up  the  moats,  set  fire  to  them.5
The  flames  made  rapid  progress,  and  it  was  by  their  light
that  the  insurgents  and  their  auxiliaries,  aided  by  the  inha-
bitants, penetrated  into  the  city,  and  forced  the  foreigners  to
shut  themselves  up  in  their  two  citadels,  which  on  the  same
day  were  carried  by  assault.6  In  this  decisive  combat  there
perished  several  thousand  men  of  France,  as  the  English
chronicles  express  it.7  Waltheof,  in  ambuscade  at  one  of  the
gates  of  the  castle,  killed  with  his  own  axe  a  score  of  Nor-
mans, who  sought  to  fly.8  He  pursued  an  hundred  knights

1  Order.  Vital.,  nt  sup.

2  Chron.  Saxon.  Frag.,  sub  anno  1068. Matth.  Paris,  ut  svp.
3  Nervosus  lacertis,  robustis  pectore  et  procerus  toto  corpore. (Matth.
Westm.,  p.  229.)

4  Chron.  Saxon.  Frag.,  ut  sup.
5  Alured.  Beverlac.,  Annal,  dc  Gest.  reg.  Britan.  (Hearne)  lib.  ix.  p.  128.'

6  Ib.  7  Chron.  Sax.,  ut  sup. Matth.  Paris,  ut  sup.

8  Unos  et  unos  per  portas  gradientes  decapitans.  (Origo  et  Gesta  Si-
vardi  Ducis,  ut  sup.  iii.  299.)

THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1069.

to  a  neighbouring  wood,  and  to  save  himself  the  trouble  of  a
further  chase,  set  fire  to  the  wood,  and  with  it  burned  the
whole  party  of  fugitives.  A  Dane,  at  once  warrior  and  poet,
composed  on  this  deed  of  arms  a  song,  in  which  he  praised
the  Saxon  chief  as  being  brave  as  Odin,  and  felicitated  him  on
having  supplied  the  English  wolves  with  an  ample  repast  of
Norman  corses.1

The  conquerors  gave  quarter  to  the  two  governors  of
York,  Gilbert  de  Gand  and  Guillaume  Malet,  the  wife  and
children  of  the  latter,  and  a  few  others,  who  were  conveyed
to  the  Danish  fleet.  They  destroyed,  perhaps  imprudently,
the  fortifications  raised  by  the  foreigners,  in  order  to  efface  all
vestige  of  their  passage.2  Young  Edgar,  once  more  king  in
York,  concluded,  according  to  the  ancient  Saxon  custom,  a
treaty  of  alliance  with  the  citizens;3  and  thus  for  a  while  was
revived  the  national  royalty  of  the  Anglo-Saxons.  The  ter-
ritory and  power  of  Edgar  extended  from  the  Tweed  to  the
Humber;  but  William,  and  with  him  slavery,  still  reigned
over  the  whole  of  the  south,  over  the  finest  counties,  the
richest  and  largest  towns.

Winter  approached;  the  Danish  fleet  took  up  quarters  in
the  mouths  of  the  Humber,  Ouse,  and  Trent.  Their  army
and  that  of  the  free  Saxons  awaited  the  return  of  spring  to
advance  towards  the  south,  to  drive  back  the  conquerors,  and
confound  king  William,  as  the  historians  of  the  period  ex-
press it.4

William  was  not  without  alarm;  the  news  of  the  taking  of
York  and  the  complete  defeat  of  his  people  had  transported
him  with  rage  and  vexation ;  he  had  vowed  not  to  lay  aside
his  lance  until  he  had  killed  all  the  Northumbrians;5  but  mo-
derating his  anger,  he  first  essayed  stratagem,  and  sent  able
messengers  to  Osbiorn,  brother  of  king  Swen,  the  commander-
in-chief  of  the  Danish  fleet.  He  promised  this  chief  to  give
him  secretly  a  large  sum  of  money,  and  to  allow  him  freely
to  take  provisions  for  his  army  from  the  whole  eastern  coast,

1  Torva  tuenti  appositus  fuit  cibus.  Aim  equo  (lupo)  ex  cadaveribus
Francorum.  (Saga  af  Haralda  Hardrada,  cap.  ci. ;  Snorre's  Heimskringla,
iii.  1(58.)

2  Chron.  Sax.,  174.  3  Cliron.  Sax.  Frag.,  ut  sup.

4  Matth.  Westmon.,  p.  226. Matth.  Paris,  ut  sup.

5  Koger  de  Hoveden,  ut  sup.  p.  451.

A.D.  1069.]  YORK  RETAKEN.  223

if,  at  the  end  of  winter,  he  would  depart  without  fighting.
Tempted  by  avarice,  the  Dane  was  faithless  to  his  mission
and  a  traitor  to  the  allies  of  his  country;  to  his  eternal  dis-
honour, exclaim  the  chroniclers,  he  promised  to  do  all  that
king  William  desired.1

William  was  not  content  with  this  one  precaution:  after
having  quietly  deprived  the  free  Saxons  of  their  principal
support,  he  directed  his  attention  to  the  Saxons  of  the  sub-
jected districts,  satisfied  some  of  their  complaints,  checked
the  elated  insolence  of  his  soldiers  and  agents,  conciliated  by
slight  concessions  the  weak  mind  of  the  masses,  gave  them  a
few  good  words,  and  in  return  received  from  them  fresh  oaths
and  additional  hostages.  He  then  marched  upon  York,  by
long  marches,  with  his  best  troops.  The  defenders  of  the
city  learned  at  the  same  time  the  approach  of  the  Norman
cavalry  and  the  departure  of  the  Danish  fleet.  Abandoned
as  they  were,  and  deprived  of  their  highest  hopes,  they  still
resisted,  and  were  killed  by  thousands  in  the  breaches  of
their  walls.2  The  fight  was  long,  and  the  victory  dearly  pur-
chased. King  Edgar  was  obliged  to  fly,  and  all  who  could
escape  followed  him  to  Scotland.  Malcolm,  king  of  this
country,  again  received  him  with  kindness,  and  offered  an
asylum  to  all  of  every  class,  who  emigrated  from  the  north  of
England.3

A  second  time  master  of  York,  the  Conqueror  did  not  stop
there  ;  he  continued  the  rapid  march  of  his  troops  north-
wards. They  precipitated  themselves  on  the  land  of  North-
umbria  in  the  very  frenzy  of  vengeance;4  they  burned  the
fields  under  cultivation,  as  well  as  the  hamlets  and  towns,
and  massacred  the  flocks  with  the  men.5  This  devastation
was  prosecuted  upon  a  studied  and  regular  plan,  in  order  that
the  brave  men  of  the  north,  finding  their  country  uninhabit-
able, might  be  compelled  to  abandon  it,  and  to  disperse  in
other  districts.  They  sought  refuge  in  the  mountains  of
Cumberland,  once  the  asylum  of  the  Cambrians,  at  the  extre-
mities of  the  eastern  coast,  in  the  marshes,  and  upon  the  sea,
where,  respectively,  they  became  robbers  and  pirates  against

1  Florent.  Wigorn.,  Chron.,  p.  036.

2  Matth.  Westmon.,  p.  226.  3  Mattli.  Paris,  i.  6.

4  Alured.  Beverlac.,  ut  svp.  . 5  Matth.  Paris,  ut  su}).

224  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1070.

the  foreigner,  and  were  gravely  charged  in  the  proclamations
of  the  Conqueror  with  violating  the  public  peace  and  with
leading  a  dishonourable  life.1  The  Normans  entered  Durham
for  the  second  time;  and  their  slumbers  were  not  disturbed,  as
those  of  Robert  Comine  had  been.

Previous  to  their  entering  this  city,  which  was  for  them,
the  key  to  the  whole  northern  country,  the  bishop  of  Dur-
ham, Eghelwin,  the  same  who  had  given  Robert  Comine  the
warnings  which  had  proved  so  futile,  had  resolved  with  the
principal  inhabitants  to  fly  to  some  place  where,  says  an  an-
cient English  poet,  neither  Norman,  nor  Burgundian,  nor
brigand,  nor  vagabond  could  reach  them.2  Carrying  with
them  the  bones  of  that  Saint  Cuthbert  whose  formidable
power  the  Normans  themselves  believed  they  had  experienced,
they  reached  a  place  in  the  mouth  of  the  Tweed,  called  Lin-
disfarn-ey,  and  more  commonly,  Holy  Island,3  a  peninsula,
peopled  more  with  relics  than  with  men,  which  twice  a  day,
at  high  tide,  was  surrounded  by  the  water,  and  twice  also,
at  ebb  tide,  again  joined  the  mainland.  The  great  church  of
Durham,  abandoned  and  left  without  guardians,  became  the
asylum  of  the  wounded,  poor,  and  sick  Saxons,  who  lay,  to  the
number  of  several  thousand,  upon  the  bare  stone,  worn  out
with  misery  and  hunger.4

The  conquering  army,  the  divisions  of  which  covered  a
space  of  an  hundred  miles,  traversed  in  every  direction  this
territory,  now  for  the  first  time  invaded  by  them,  and  the
traces  of  their  passage  were  profoundly  marked  there.  Old
historians  relate,  that  from  the  Humber  to  the  Tyne,  not  one
rood  of  land  remained  under  cultivation,  not  a  single  village
inhabited.5  The  monasteries  which  had  escaped  the  ravages
of  the  Danish  pagans,  that  of  Saint  Peter  on  the  Wear,  and
that  of  Whitby,  inhabited  by  nuns,  were  profaned  and
burned.6  South  of  the  Humber,  if  we  may  believe  the  same

1  Cum  adlmc  in  sua  aerumna  armis  atque  fnga  auderent . . . ,  in  mariti-
morum praesidiorum  remotiora  sese  receperunt,  inhonestas  opes piratico
latrocinio  silri  contrabentes. (Willelm.  Gemet.,  p.  290.)

2  Sithen  dred  tliei  nothing  of  thefe  ne  of  felon. That  were  with  the
kyng  Norman  no  Burgoloun. (Xangtoft's  Chron.,  i.  77.)

3  Alured.  Beverlac.,  ut  sup.  p.  129.  «  Id.  ib.

5  Id.  ib.
r>  Joh.  Bromt.,  ut  sup.  i.  col.  9CO. Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  iii.  p.  271.

A.D.  1070.] ST.  JOHN  OF  BEVERLY.  225

narrators,  the  ravages  were  not  less  terrible.  They  say  that,
between  York  and  the  Eastern  sea,  every  living  thing  was  put
to  death,  man  and  beast,1  all  except  those  who  sought  refuge
at  Beverly,  in  the  church  of  Saint  John  the  archbishop.  This
was  a  saint  of  Anglo-Saxon  race,  and  on  the  approach  of  the
conquerors,  a  great  crowd  of  men  and  women  hastened  with
all  their  valuables  to  the  church  dedicated  to  their  sainted
countryman,  that  he,  remembering  in  heaven  that  he  was  born
a  Saxcn,  might  protect  them  and  their  property  from  the
fury  of  the  foreigner.  The  camp  of  the  Normans  was  then
seven  miles  from  Beverly,  and  a  report  spread  there  that  this
church  was  the  refuge  of  the  rich  and  the  depository  of  the
wealth  of  the  country.  Several  adventurous  scouts  hastened,
under  the  command  of  one  Toustain,  to  be  the  first  at  the
pillage.  They  entered  Beverly  without  resistance,  marched
direct  to  the  cemetery  where  the  terrified  crowd  had  sought
shelter,  and  leaped  the  walls,  without  heeding  the  Anglo-
Saxon  saint  any  more  than  they  did  those  who  invoked  him.
Toustain,  the  chief  of  the  band,  running  his  eye  over  the
groups  of  English,  saw  an  old  man  rjchly  attired  and  wear-
ing gold  bracelets,  according  to  the  custom  of  his  nation.  He
galloped  towards  him,  sword  in  hand;  the  terrified  old  man
sought  refuge  in  the  church,  and  Toustain  followed  him  thi-
ther; but  he  had  scarcely  passed  the  doors,  when  his  horse
slipped  on  the  pavement,  and  fell,  crushing  him  in  its  fall.2
At  the  sight  of  their  captain  half  dead,  the  other  Normans
turned  their  horses' heads,  and,  their  imagination  deeply  struck,
hastened  in  terror  to  the  camp  to  relate  this  terrible  example
of  the  power  of  Saint  John  of  Beverly.  When  the  army  pro-
ceeded on  its  march,  no  soldier  dared  expose  himself  to  the
vengeance  of  the  saint,  and  the  territory  of  his  church,  if  we
are  to  believe  the  legend,  was  the  only  spot  which  remained
covered  with  dwellings  and  cultivation  amidst  the  general
destruction  of  the  country.

William,  pursuing  the  wreck  of  the  free  Saxon  forces,
advanced  to  the  foot  of  the  great  Roman  wall,  the  remains
of  which  still  extend  east  and  west  from  the  mouth  of  the
Tyne  to  the  Solway  Firth.  He  then  returned  to  York,

1  Alured.  Beverlac,  tit  sup.  "  Id.  ib.

3  Job.  Bromtou.,  vt  sup.
VOL.  I.  Q

226  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1070.

whither  lie  had  brought  from  Winchester  tlie  gold  crown,
the  gilt  sceptre,  the  mantle  lined  with  fur,  and  all  the  other
insignia  of  English  royalty;  these  he  displayed  with  great
pomp  during  the  feasts  of  the  Nativity,  as  if  to  challenge
those  who  some  months  before  had  fought  for  king  Edgar
and  their  country.1  There  no  longer  remained  any  one
capable  of  accepting  the  challenge;  a  last  assembly  of  patriots
on  the  banks  of  the  Tyne  had  been  dispersed;2  and  such,  in
the  northern  provinces,  was  the  end  of  resistance:  the  end  of
liberty,  according  to  the  English;  of  rebellion,  according  to
the  Normans.3

Upon  both  banks  of  the  Humber,  the  cavalry  of  the  foreign
king,  his  counts,  his  bailiffs,4  could  for  the  future  freely  travel
on  the  roads  and  through  the  towns.  Famine,  the  faithful
companion  of  conquest,  followed  their  steps;  in  the  year  1067
it  had  already  desolated  the  counties  which  had  been  invaded;
in  1070  it  extended  over  all  England,  manifesting  itself  in
its  utmost  horrors  in  the  newly  conquered  districts.  The  in-
habitants of  Yorkshire  and  of  the  territory  further  north,
after  feeding  on  the  .flesh  of  the  dead  horses  left  by  the
Norman  army  on  their  way,  ate  human  flesh.5  More  than
an  hundred  thousand  persons,  of  all  ages,  perished  of  famine
in  this  district.6  "  It  was  a  frightful  spectacle,"  says  an  old
annalist,  "  to  behold,  in  the  roads  and  streets,  at  the  doors  of
houses,  human  bodies  devoured  by  the  worms,  for  none  re-
mained to  scatter  a  little  earth  over  them,  all  being  destroyed
by  famine  or  the  sword.  This  distress  was  felt  only  by  the
natives;  the  foreign  soldier  lived  in  plenty;  for  him,  in  the
heart  of  his  fortresses,  there  were  vast  stores  of  provisions,
and  more  was  sent  him  from  abroad,  in  return  for  the  gold
wrung  from  the  English.  Moreover,  famine  aided  him
entirely  to  quell  the  conquered;  often,  for  the  remains  of  the
repast  of  a  groom  in  the  Norman  army,  the  Saxon,  once
illustrious  among  his  countrymen,  in  order  to  sustain  his

1  Order.  Vital.,  ut  sup.  p.  515.

2  Hostile  collegium in  aiigulo (juodam regionis  —  paludibus undique
jnunito.  (*&.)

3  Seditiouum  tempestate  parumper  conquiescente. (Will.  Gemet.,p.  200.)

4  Ballivi,  iu  the  French  of  the  period,  bails  or  baillifs,  a  term  applied  to
several  descriptions  of  public  officers.

5  Florent.  Wigorn.,  p.  030.  e  Order.  Vital,,  ut  sup.

A.D.  1070.] STATE  OF  ENGLAND.  227

miserable  life,  came  to  sell  himself  and  his  whole  family  to
perpetual  slavery.1  The  act  of  sale  was  registered  upon  the
blank  page  of  some  missal,  where  may  still  be  found,  half
effaced,  and  serving  as  a  theme  for  the  sagacity  of  the  anti-
quaries, these  monuments  of  the  wretchedness  of  a  bygone
period.

The  territory  on  both  sides  of  the  Humber,  devastated  as
it  lay,  was  partitioned  out  among  the  conquerors  with  the
same  order  which  had  regulated  the  division  of  the  southern
counties.  Several  allotments  were  drawn  out  of  the  houses,
or  rather  the  ruins  of  York;  for  in  the  two  sieges  which  this
city  had  suffered,  it  was  so  devastated  that,  several  centuries
afterwards,  the  foundations  of  the  ancient  suburbs  were  still
seen  in  the  open  country,  more  than  a  mile  distant.2  King
William  appropriated  the  greater  number  of  the  houses  which
remained  standing;3  the  Norman  chiefs  shared  the  rest,  with
the  churches,  shops,  and  even  the  butchers'  stalls,  which  they
then  let  out.4  William  de  Warenne  had  twenty-eight  villages
in  Yorkshire  alone,  and  William  de  Percy  more  than  eighty
manors.5  Most  of  these  domains,  in  the  list  drawn  up  fifteen
years  after,  had  for  their  description  these  simple  words:
waste-land.6  A  property  which,  in  the  time  of  king  Edward,
had  produced  sixty  pounds  rent,  produced  less  than  five  in
the  hands  of  its  foreign  possessor,  and  upon  a  domain  in
which  two  Englishmen  of  rank  had  lived  at  their  ease,  there
were  found  after  the  conquest  only  two  wretched  serfs,
scarce  able  to  render  their  Norman  lord  a  tenth  of  the
revenue  of  the  ancient  free  cultivators.7

Vast  districts  of  land,  north  of  York,  were  the  portion  of
the  Breton  Allan,  whom  the  Normans  called  Alain,  and
whom  his  countrymen  in  their  Celtic  tongue  surnamed  Fer-
gan,  that  is,  the  Red.  This  Alain  constructed  a  strong

1  Roger  de  Hovedeu,  nt  sup.  p.  451.

-  Leland,  Collectanea,  iv  30.
3  Extracta  ex  D.  B.,  tit  sup.  p.  774.

4  Comes  de  Moritonio  habet  ibi  xiv  mansiones  et  ii.  bancos  in  inaoeilo
et  ecclesiam  Sauctae-Crucis.  (Domesday  Book,  i.  fol.  208,  recto.)

5  Ancient  Tenures  of  Land,  p.  6.

e  Omnia  nunc  wasta.  (D.  B.,  i.  fol.  309,  recto.)  Modo  omnico  suut
\vasta.  (ib.)  Ex  maxima  parte  wasta.  (ib.)  See  Appendix  XV.

7  Duo  taini  tenuere...,  ibi  sunt  ii.  villani  cum  i.  carruca;  valuit  xl.  sol.
rnodo  iv.  sol.  (ib.  fol.  315,  recto.)

Q2

223  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1070.

castle  and  works  of  defence,  near  his  principal  manor,  called
Ghilling,  on  a  steep  hill  which  was  nearly  surrounded  on
every  side  by  the  rapid  river  Swale.  This  fortress,  says  an
old  narrative,  was  designed  to  protect  him  and  his  men  from
the  attacks  of  the  disinherited  English.1  Like  most  of  the
other  captains  of  the  conquering  army,  he  gave  a  French
name  to  the  castle  which  became  his  dwelling,  calling  it
Richemont,  from  its  raised  situation,  commanding  the  sur-
rounding country.2

The  entire  island,  formed  by  the  ocean  and  the  rivers  at
the  easternmost  point  of  Yorkshire,  was  the  share  of  Dreux
Bruere,  a  captain  of  Flemish  auxiliaries.  This  man  married
one  of  William's  relations,  and  killed  her  in  a  fit  of  passion;
but  ere  tidings  of  the  murder  vere  circulated,  he  hastened  to
the  king,  and  asked  him  to  give  him  money  in  exchange  for
his  lands,  for  that  he  wished  to  return  to  Flanders.  William
gave  the  Fleming  the  sum  he  required,  and  did  not  learn
until  afterwards  the  reason  of  his  abrupt  departure.3  The
island  of  Holderness  then  became  the  property  of  Eudes  de
Champagne,  who  afterwards  married  the  conqueror's  maternal
sister  When  the  wife  of  Eudes  had  given  birth  to  a  son,
he  told  the  king  that  his  island  was  not  fertile,  that  it  pro-
duced nothing  but  oats,  and  begged  him  to  grant  him  some
land  capable  of  producing  wheat,  wherewith  to  support  the
child.4  King  William,  say  the  ancient  acts,  gave  him  the
entire  town  of  Bytham,  in  Lincolnshire.

Not  far  from  this  island  of  Holderness,  on  the  banks  of
the  Humber,  Gamel  Fitz-Quetel,  who  had  come  from  Meaux
in  France,  with  a  troop  of  men  of  the  same  town,  took  a  cer-
tain portion  of  land,  where  he  fixed  his  abode  and  that  of  his
companions.  They,  wishing  to  attach  to  their  new  habitation
a  remembrance  of  their  native  town,  gave  it  the  name  of
Meaux,  and  this  name  remained  for  some  centuries  that  of
an  abbey  founded  in  the  same  place/'  Gamel,  chief  of  the
Meaux  adventurers,  and  possessor  of  the  principal  manor  of
their  little  colony,  negotiated  with  the  Norman  chiefs  who

1  Genealog.  Comit.  Ilicbmuiidise,  apud  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,
xii.  568.

2  Ib.  Dugdale,  Monasl.,  i.  877.

3  Dugdale,  Baronage  of  England,  i.  CO;  Monast.  Anal.,  i.  790.
4  Id.  ib.  5  Id.,  Monasticon  Anglic.,  i.  792.

A.D. 1070.] SUBJUGATION OF NORTHERN ENGLAND.  229

occupied  the  neighbouring  lands,  in  order  that  their  respective
possessions  might  be  immutably  determined.  Several  con-
ferences, or  parliaments,  as  they  were  then  called,  were  held
with  Basin,  Sivard,  Franco,  and  Richard  d'Estouteville.  All
by  common  accord  measured  their  portions  of  land  and  set  up
marks,  "so  that,"  says  the  old  narrative,  "their  posterity
should  have  nothing  to  dispute  about,  and  that  the  peace
which  existed  between  them  should  be  transmitted  to  their
heirs."1

The  great  domain  of  Pontefract,  the  spot  where  the  Nor-
man troops  had  forded  the  river  Aire,  was  the  share  of  Gil-
bert de  Lacy,  who,  following  the  example  of  nearly  all  the
other  Norman  captains,  built  a  strong  castle  there.2  It  ap-
pears that  this  Gilbert  was  the  first  who  with  his  troops
passed  the  mountains  west  of  York,  and  invaded  the  adjoining
county  of  Lancaster,  which  then  formed  part  of  Cheshire.  He
appropriated  to  himself,  in  this  county,  an  immense  territory,
the  chief  town  of  which  was  Blackburn,  and  which  extended
south  and  east  to  the  borders  of  Yorkshire.  To  form  this
great  domain,  he  expelled,  according  to  an  ancient  tradition,
all  the  English  proprietors  from  Blackburn,  Rochdale,  Tol-
lington,  and  the  vicinity.  Before  the  conquest,  says  the  tra-
dition, all  these  proprietors  were  free,  equal  in  rights,  and  in-
dependent of  each  other;  but  after  the  Norman  invasion,
there  was  in  the  whole  county  but  one  lord.3

King  "William,  with  his  chosen  troops,  had  not  advanced
beyond  Hexham;  it  was  his  captains,  who,  penetrating  fur-
ther, conquered  the  rest  of  Northumbria,  north  and  west.
The  mountainous  district  of  Cumberland  was  reduced  to  a
Norman  county;  one  Renouf  Meschin  took  possession  of  it,
and  the  land  of  marsh  and  moor,  called  Westmoreland,  was
also  brought  under  the  power  of  a  foreigner,4  who  divided
among  his  soldiers  the  rich  domains  and  beautiful  women  of
the  county.  He  gave  the  three  daughters  of  Simon  Thorn,
proprietor  of  the  two  manors  of  Elreton  and  Todewick,  one
to  Onfroy,  his  squire,  another  to  Raoul  Tortesmains,  and  the
third  to  one  Guillaume  de  Saint  Paul.5  In  Northumberland
proper,  Ivo  de  Vescy  took  the  town  of  Alnwick,  with  the

1  Id.  ib.  2  Id.  ib.,  p.  %'jQ.  3  Id.  ib.

4  Ib.  ib.  *  Id.,  ii.  09--2.

230  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  10?0.

granddaughter  and  all  the  inheritance  of  a  Saxon  who  had
fallen  at  Hastings.1  Robert  de  Brus  obtained  by  conquest,
say  the  ancient  acts,  several  hundred  manors  and  the  dues  of
the  port  of  Hartlepool  in  Durham;2  as  a  last  instance  of  these
territorial  usurpations,  Robert  d'Omfreville  had  the  forest  of
Riddesdale,  which  belonged  to  Mildred,  son  of  Akman;  in
token  of  investiture  of  this  domain,  he  received  from  king
William  the  sword  which  the  latter  had  worn  on  his  entry
into  Northumberland,  and  swore  upon  it  that  he  would  use
it  to  free  the  land  of  wolves  and  of  the  enemies  of  the  con-
quest.

When  the  Northumbrians,  after  having  expelled  Tosti,
brother  of  Harold,  in  a  national  insurrection,  had  chosen  for
their  chief  Morkar,  brother  of  Edwin,  Morkar  had  by  their
consent  placed  in  the  goverment  of  the  country  beyond  the
Tees,  young  Osulf,  son  of  Edulf.3  Osulf  kept  his  com-
mand up  to  the  time  when  the  Normans  passed  the  Tyne;  he
was  then  obliged  to  fly,  like  the  rest,  to  the  forest  and  moun-
tain. In  his  place  was  appointed  a  Saxon,  named  Kopsi,
whom  the  inhabitants  of  Northumbria  had  expelled  with
Tosti,  who  eagerly  desired  to  be  revenged  on  them,  and  whom
for  this  reason  the  new  king  imposed  on  them  as  their  chief.4
Kopsi  installed  himself  in  his  post  under  the  protection  of  the
foreigners;  but  after  having  exercised  his  office  for  some  time,
he  was  assailed  in  his  house  by  a  body  of  the  disinherited,  led
by  the  Osulf  whose  spoils  he  had  received.  He  was  quietly
taking  his  dinner,  expecting  no  attack,  when  the  Saxons  fell
upon  him,  killed  him,  and  immediately  dispersed.5

Similar  instances  of  daring  vengeance,  of  which  the  histo-
rians cite  but  a  few,  must  certainly  have  taken  place  in  many
districts;  but  however  numerous  they  may  have  been,  they
could  not  save  England.  An  immense  force,  regularly
governed,  and  regularly  distributed,  mocked  the  virtuous  but
impotent  efforts  of  the  friends  of  independence.  The  'patriots
themselves,  with  their  great  chiefs,  whose  names  alone  called
forth  many  men,  lost  all  courage,  and  again  capitulated.  Wal-
theof,  Gospatrik,  Morkar,  and  Edwin,  made  their  peace  with

1  Id.,  p.  148.  Apud  Hartlepool,  portum  mavis,  et  de  qualibet  navi  viii.
den. (Ancient  Tenures  of  Land,  p.  14G.)  2  /^  15.

3  Id.  ib.,  i.  41.  *  Id.  ib.

5  Simeon  Dnnelmensis,  apud  Hist.  Anglic.  Script.  (Selden)  i.  col.  204.

A.D. 1070.] SUBMISSION  OF  EDGAR  AND  OTHERS.  231

the  conqueror.  It  was  upon  the  banks  of  the  Tees  that  this
reconciliation,  so  fatal  to  the  Saxon  cause,  took  place.  King
William  held  his  camp  there,  and  there  he  received  the  oaths
of  Gospatrik  and  Waltheof.  The  former,  who  was  absent
and  who  made  his  submission  by  proxy,  obtained  the  govern-
ment of  Northumbria,  vacant  by  the  death  of  Kopsi,  with  the
title  of  earl.1  Waltheof  placed  his  bare  hand  in  that  of  the
Norman  king,  and  became  earl  of  the  two  counties  of  Hunt-
ingdon and  Northampton.2  He  married  Judith,  one  of  the
nieces  of  his  new  friend;  but  as  the  result  will  show,  the  bed
of  the  foreign  woman  was  harder  for  the  Saxon  chief  than
the  bare  ground  upon  which  he  had  feared  to  lay,  in  keeping
faith  with  his  country.3  Ere  long,  king  Edgar  himself  came
for  the  second  time  to  abjure  his  national  title  and  the  rights
which  he  held  from  the  people.4  He  was  a  man  of  little  vigour
of  soul,  who  was  ever  led,  in  good  or  evil,  by  circumstances
and  by  the  example  of  others.  He  was  not  more  faithful  to  the
Normans  than  to  England,  and  the  wind  of  resistance  once
more  rising,  Edgar  again  fled  to  Scotland,  amid  the  impreca-
tions of  the  foreigners.5  The  English,  indulgent  in  their
misery,  pardoned  his  fickleness,  and  although  deserted  by  him,
still  loved  him:  "  He  was  young  and  handsome,"  say  the  an-
cient chroniclers,  "and  descended  from  the  true  race,  the  best
race  of  the  country."6

After  the  conquest  of  the  north,  that  of  the  north-western
counties  adjoining  the  Welsh  territory  appears  to  have  been
speedily  accomplished.  Edrik,  surnamed  the  Forester,  no
longer  stayed  the  Norman  bands  who  overflowed  on  every
side,  and  ceased  to  trouble  by  his  incursions  their  settlements,
hitherto  so  precarious,  near  the  entrenchment  of  Offa.
Raoul  de  Mortemer  took  the  young  partisan  chief  prisoner,
and,  with  the  sanction  of  a  council  of  war,  deprived  him  of

1  Dugdale,  Monast.,  i.  41.

2  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  515. Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  iii.  p.  104. Chrou.
Sax.  Frag.,  sub  aim.  1071.

3  Ei  dedit  Juettam,  filiam  coraitis  Lamberti  de  Lens. (Vita  et  passio
Waldevi  Comitis;  Chroniques  Anglo-Normandes,  ii.  112.)

4  Et  misericordiam  postulans  impetravit,  et  ei  fidelitatem  fecit. (Mattb.
Paris,  ii.  (j.)

5  Ib.,  p.  7.

6  That  best  Kunde  in  Engelond  adde  to  be  kyng. — Kobert  of  Gloucester,
Chronicle,  p.  370.

232  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1070

all  his  estates,  for  having,  says  an  ancient  history,  refused  to
obey  the  conquest,  although  several  times  summoned  to  do
so.1  The  Norman  army,  which  reduced  the  population  of
the  Welsh  marches,  did  not  stop  at  Offa's  Dyke,  but
passing  that  ancient  frontier,  west  of  Shrewsbury,  pene-
trated; the  territory  of  the  Cambrians.  This  was  the  com-
mencement of  that  subjugation  of  Wales,  which,  from  that
time,  the  conquerors  of  England  prosecuted  without  inter-
mission.2 The  first  Norman  fortress  raised  upon  the  Welsh
territory  was  built  sixteen  miles  from  Shrewsbury,  by  a  chief
named  Baldwin.  The  people  of  the  place  called  it,  in  the
Cambrian  language,  Tre-Faldwin,  the  castle  of  Baldwin;
but  the  name  which  the  Normans  retained  for  it  was  Mont-
Gomery,  in  compliment  to  Eoger  de  Montgomery,  earl  of
Shropshire  and  of  all  the  conquered  portion  of  Wales.3

The  town  of  Shrewsbury,  fortified  with  a  citadel  built
upon  the  site  of  fifty-one  houses,  was  reserved  in  the  demesne
of  king  William.4  The  taxes  were  here  received  for  the
king's  exchequer5  (so  the  Normans  called  that  which  the
Romans  had  named  tfiscus}.  The  agents  of  the  conqueror
did  not  demand  more  tribute  than  the  town  had  paid  in  the
time  of  English  independence;  but  an  authentic  protest  of
the  inhabitants  shows  the  value  to  them  of  this  apparent
moderation.  "  The  English  inhabitants  of  Shrewsbury,"  runs
the  passage  in  Domesday  Book,  "  say  that  it  is  hard  for  them
to  pay  the  whole  of  the  tax  which  they  paid  in  the  time  of
king  Edward,  and  to  be  taxed  for  as  many  houses  as  then
existed;  for  fifty-one  houses  have  been  pulled  down  for  the
earl's  castle;  fifty  others  are  so  devastated  as  to  be  uninhabit-
able; forty-three  Frenchmen  occupy  houses  which  paid  taxes
in  the  time  of  Edward ;  and,  moreover,  the  earl  has  given  to  the
abbey  he  has  founded  thirty-nine  citizens  who  formerly  con-
tributed with  the  rest."6

These  monasteries,  founded  by  the  Normans  in  the  towns
or  country  districts  of  England,  were  peopled  with  monks

1  Dugdale,  Monast,,  ii.  221.
2  Gesta  Stephani  regis,  apud  Script,  rer.  Norman.,  p.  930.

3  Pennant's  Tour  in  Wales,  ii.  348.

4  Extracta  ex  D.  B  ,  ut  sup.  p.  "S

. 6  So  called  from  a  table  with  compartments  and  squares  marked  upon  it.
6  Ext.  ex  D.  B.,  ut  sup.

A.D. 1070.] INFLUX OF FOREIGNERS TO ENGLAND.  233

who  had  come  over  with  the  foreign  troops.  Each  new  band
of  soldiers  was  escorted  by  a  new  band  of  tonsured  priests,
who  repaired  to  the  country  of  the  English  pour  gaaingner,
as  the  phrase  ran.  In  the  year  1068,  the  abbot  of  St.  Riquier
in  Ponthieu,  proceeding  to  the  port  of  Wissant  to  embark  for
England,  found  there  more  than  an  hundred  monks  of  every
order,  with  a  crowd  of  soldiers  and  merchants,  all  like  him-
self about  to  pass  the  Channel.1  Benedictines  from  Seez  in
Normandy,  poor,  absolutely  destitute,  came  to  establish  them-
selves in  a  vast  habitation  given  them  by  Roger  de  Mont-
gomery, and  received  for  their  table  the  tithe  of  all  the
venison  killed  in  Shropshire.2  Other  monks  of  St.  Florent
at  Saumur  emigrated  to  occupy  a  church  which,  by  right  of
conquest,  had  fallen  to  the  Angevin  Guillaume  de  Brause.3
In  Staffordshire,  near  Stone-upon-Trent,  was  a  little  oratory,
where  two  nuns  and  a  Saxon  priest  passed  their  lives  pray-
ing in  honour  of  the  local  saint,  Wolfed:  all  three  were  killed
by  one  Enisant,  a  soldier  of  the  conquering  army,  and  "  this
Enisant,"  says  the  old  legend,  "  killed  the  priest  and  the  two
nuns,  that  his  sister,  who  accompanied  him,  might  have  their
church."4

When  the  conquest  grew  flourishing,  not  merely  young
soldiers  and  old  captains,  but  whole  families,  men,  women,
and  children,  emigrated  from  almost  every  corner  of  Gaul  to
seek  their  fortune  in  England;  this  country  had  become  for
foreigners,  as  it  were  a  land  newly  discovered,  which  had  to
be  colonised,  and  which  belonged  to  every  comer.  "  Noel
and  Celestria,  his  wife,"  says  an  ancient  deed,  "  came  in  the
army  of  William  the  Bastard,  and  received  in  gift  from  the
same  bastard  the  manor  of  Elinghall  with  all  its  dependencies."5
According  to  an  old  rhyme,  the  first  lord  of  Coningsby,
named  William,  came  from  Brittany,  with  his  wife  Tiffany,
his  servant  Maufas,  and  his  dog  Hardigras.6  Sworn  brother-

1  Chron.  S.  Richarii,  apud  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  xi.  133.

2  Pennant,  Tour  in  Wales,  ii.  402.

3  Dugdale,  Monust.  Anglic.,  i.  375.

4  Ib.,  ii.  12(3.  '•>  Ib.,  iii.  54.

c William  de  Conigsby
Came  out  of  Britany
With  his  wife  Tiffany
And  his  maide  Maufas
And  his  dogge  Hardiqras.
(Hearne,  />/•«/.,  ad  Joh.  de  Fordun,  Scoti-chronicon,  p.  170.)

234  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1070.

hoods-in-arms,  societies  of  gain  and  loss,  for  life  and  death,
were  formed  between  those  who  together  ran  the  risks  of  the
invasion.1  Robert  d'Ouilly  and  Roger  d'lvry  sailed  to  the
conquest  as  leagued  brothers,  confederated  by  faith  and  by
oath;2  they  wore  dresses  and  arms  alike,  and  divided,  share
and  share  alike,  the  English  lands  they  conquered;  Eudes  and
Picot,  Robert  Marmion  and  Gauthier  de  Somerville,  did  the
same.3  Jean  de  Courcy  and  Amaury  de  St.  Florent  swore
their  brotherhood-in-arms  in  the  church  of  Notre  Dame  at
Rouen;  they  made  a  vow  to  serve  together,  to  live  and  die  to-
gether, to  share  together  their  pay  and  all  that  they  should
gain  by  their  good  fortune  and  their  swords.4  Others,  at  the
moment  of  departure,  relinquished  all  the  property  they  pos-
sessed in  their  native  land,  as  of  little  value  compared  with
what  they  hoped  to  conquer.  Thus  Geoffrey  de  Chaumont,
son  of  Gedoin,  viscount  of  Blois,  bestowed  upon  his  niece
Denise  the  lands  he  had  at  Blois,  Chaumont,  and  Tours.  "  He
departed  for  the  conquest,"  says  a  contemporary  history,  "  and
afterwards  returned  to  Chaumont,  with  an  immense  treasure,
large  sums  of  money,  great  stores  of  rare  commodities,  and
the  titles  of  possession  of  more  than  one  rich  domain."5

There  now  only  remained  to  invade  the  country  around
Chester,  the  one  great  city  of  England  that  had  not  yet
heard  the  tramp  of  the  foreigners'  horses.  Having  passed  the
winter  in  the  north,  king  William  undertook  in  person  this
last  expedition;6  but  as  he  was  about  to  leave  York,  loud
murmurs  arose  in  his  army.  The  reduction  of  Northumber-
land had  fatigued  the  conquerors,  and  they  foresaw  in  the  in-
vasion of  the  shores  of  the  western  sea  and  of  the  river  Dee,
still  greater  fatigues.  Exaggerated  accounts  of  the  rugged-
ness  of  the  country  and  the  determined  ferocity  of  the  in-
habitants, circulated  among  the  soldiers.7  The  maladie  du
pays  was  felt  by  the  Angevin  and  Breton  auxiliaries,  as,  the
year  before,  it  had  attacked  the  Normans,  and  they  in  their
turn  loudly  complained  of  the  severity  of  the  service,  more

1  Fortunorum  suarum  participem. (Dugdale,  Mon.  Anglic.,  ii.  13G.)

2  Ducange,  Gloss,  \erbo  Fratrcs  Con  jurat  I.

3  Dugdale,  Mon.  Angl.,  i.  108.  «  II

5  Gesta  Ambasiensium  Dominorum,  apud  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,
xi.  258.

6  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  515.  "  Ib.

A.D 1070.]  CONQUESTS IN WALES.  235

intolerable,  they  said,  than  slavery,  and  in  great  numbers  de-
manded leave  to  return  home.  William,  unable  to  overcome
the  pertinacity  of  those  who  refused  to  follow  him,  feigned  to
despise  them.  He  promised  repose  after  the  victory  to  those
who  should  remain  faithful  to  him,  and  great  estates  as  a  re-
ward for  their  labour ;  he  then  traversed,  by  roads  until  then
deemed  impracticable  for  horses,  the  chain  of  mountains  which
extends,  north  and  south,  the  whole  length  of  England,  entered
as  a  conqueror  the  city  of  Chester,  and,  according  to  his  cus-
tom, erected  a  fortress  there.  He  did  the  same  at  Stafford;  at
Salisbury,  on  his  return  to  the  south,  he  distributed  abundant
rewards  among  his  soldiers.1  He  then  went  to  his  royal
castle  at  Winchester,  the  strongest  in  England,  and  which
was  his  spring  palace,  as  that  of  Gloucester  was  his  winter
palace,  and  his  summer  palace  the  Tower  of  London,  or  the
abbey  of  Westminster,  near  London.2

Troops  commanded  by  a  Fleming  named  Gherbaud  re-
mained behind  to  keep  and  defend  the  newly  conquered  pro-
vince; Gherbaud  was  the  first  captain  who  bore  the  title  of
earl  of  Chester;  to  support  this  title  and  his  post,  he  was  ex-
posed to  great  perils,  both  from  the  English  and  from  the
Welsh,  who  long  harassed  him.3  He  became  disgusted  with
these  fatigues,  and  returned  to  his  own  country.  Hereupon
king  William  gave  the  earldom  of  Chester  to  Hugh  d'Av-
ranches,  son  of  Richard  Gosse,  surnamed  Hugh-le-Loup,  and
who  bore  a  wolf's  head  painted  on  his  shield.  Hugh-le-Loup
and  his  lieutenants  passed  the  Dee,  which  formed,  at  the  ex-
tremity of  Offa's  Dyke,  the  northern  limit  of  the  Welsh  terri-
tory. They  conquered  Flintshire,  which  became  part  of  the
Norman  county  of  Chester,  and  built  a  fortress  at  Rhuddlan.4
One  of  these  lieutenants,  Robert  d'Avranches,  changed  his
name  to  that  of  Robert  de  Rhuddlan,  and  from  an  opposite
fancy,  Robert  de  Malpas  or  de  Maupas,  governor  of  another
castle  built  upon  a  steep  hill,  gave  his  own  name  to  this  place,
which  still  bears  it.  "They  both,"  says  an  ancient  histo-
rian, "  made  war  with  ferocity,  and  shed  at  pleasure  the  blood

1  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  516. .

2  Ter  gessit  suani  coronam  (cynehelm)  singulis  annis  . . . ;  ad  Pascha
earn  gessit  iu  Winceaster,  ad  Pentecosten  in  Westmiuster,  ad  Natales  iri
Gleaveceaster.  ^Chron.  Saxon.,  190.)

3  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  522.
4  Journey  to  Snowden,  p.  11. Pennant,  Tour  in  'Wales,  ii.  in  fin.

236  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1070.

of  the  Welsh."  They  fought  a  sanguinary  battle  at  the  marshes
of  Rhuddlan,  a  place  already  marked  as  calamitous  in  the  me-
mory of  the  Cambrians,  from  a  great  battle  they  had  lost  there
against  the  Saxons  towards  the  close  of  the  eighth  century.  A
singular  monument  of  these  two  national  disasters  still  existed
a  few  years  ago  in  Wales,  in  the  form  of  a  melancholy  air,  with-
out words  of  its  own,  but  which  was  applied  to  many  mourn-
ful subjects,  and  which  was  called  the  Air  of  the  Marshes  of
Rhuddlan.

Old  histories  relate  that  when  Hugh-le-Loup  was  installed,
with  his  title  of  earl,  in  the  county  of  Chester,  he  sent  to  Nor-
mandy for  one  of  his  old  friends,  called  Nigel  or  Lenoir,
which  Lenoir  brought  .with  him  five  brothers,  Houdard,  Ed-
ward, Volmar,  Horsuin  and  Volfar,  among  whom  Hugh  dis-
tributed lands  in  his  earldom  ;  he  gave  to  Lenoir  the  town  of
Halton,  near  the  Mersey,  and  made  him  his  constable  and
hereditary  marshal,  that  is  to  say,  that  whenever  the  earl  of
Chester  should  go  to  war,  Lenoir  and  his  heirs,  in  going,  were
to  march  at  the  head  of  the  army,  and,  in  returning,  at  the
extreme  rear.  They  had  for  their  share  in  the  division  of
the  spoils  taken  from  the  Welsh  all  four  legged  beasts  of  more
than  one  colour.  In  time  of  peace,  they  exercised  high  justice
in  the  district  of  Halton,  and  received  all  fines;  their  followers
had  the  privilege  of  pre-emption  in  Chester  market  before  all
other  persons,  except  the  servants  of  the  earl,  when  these
presented  themselves  first.  Besides  these  prerogatives,  the  con-
stable Lenoir  obtained  for  himself  and  his  heirs  the  highway
and  street  tolls  at  Chester  fairs,  the  market  dues  throughout
Halton,  all  animals  found  straying  in  that  district,  and  lastly,
the  right  of  stallage,  or  the  liberty  of  selling,  free  from  all  tax
or  toll,  every  kind  of  merchandise,  except  salt  and  horses.2

Houdard,  the  elder  of  the  five  brothers,  was  to  Lenoir  much
the  same  that  the  latter  was  to  earl  Hugh;  he  was  here-
ditary seneschal  of  the  constablery  of  Halton.  Lenoir,  his
lord,  gave  him  for  his  service  and  homage,  the  lands  of  Weston
and  Ashton.3  He  had,  as  war  profit,  all  the  bulls  taken  from
the  Welsh,4  and  the  best  ox,  as  recompence  for  the  man-at-

1  Order.  Vital.,  tit  sup.

2  Dugdale,  Monast.  Anfllic.,  ii.  187.  =<  Ib.,  p.  177.

4  Adventagia  guerrae.  (Ducange,  Gloss,  verbo  Advent ag turn.)

A.D. 1070.]  UTILITY OF DETAILS.  237

arms  who  bore  his  banner.1  Edward,  the  second  brother,
received  from  the  constable  as  much  land  in  Weston  as  an
ox  could  plough  in  two  days;2  two  others,  Volmar  and
Horsuin,  received  a  domain  in  the  village  of  Runcorn;  and
the  fifth,  Volfar,  who  was  a  priest,  obtained  the  church  of
Runcorn.3

These  singular  details  are  of  little  interest  in  themselves;
but  they  may  aid  the  reader  in  forming  an  idea  of  the  varied
scenes  of  the  conquest,  and  investing,  with  their  original
colours,  the  facts  of  greater  importance.  All  these  arrange-
ments, all  the  divisions  of  possessions  and  offices  which  took
place  in  Cheshire  between  the  Norman  governor,  the  first
lieutenant  of  this  governor,  and  the  five  companions  of  the
lieutenant,  give  a  true  and  vivid  idea  of  the  transactions  of
the  same  kind  which  were  taking  place,  at  the  same  time,
throughout  England.  When,  in  future,  the  reader  meets
with  the  titles  of  earl,  count,  constable,  seneschal,  when,  in  the
course  of  this  history,  he  hears  of  the  rights  of  jurisdiction,  of
market  dues,  of  tolls,  of  war  and  justice  profits,  let  him  call
to  mind  Hugh  d'Avranches,  his  friend  Lenoir,  and  the  five
brothers  who  accompanied  Lenoir;  and  then,  perhaps,  he  will
perceive  some  reality  in  these  titles  and  forms,  which,  con-
sidered abstractedly,  have  only  a  vague  and  uncertain  mean-
ing. Through  the  distance  of  ages,  we  must  make  our  way
to  the  then  living  men;  we  must,  as  well  as  we  can,  realize
them  living  and  acting  upon  the  land,  where  not  even  the
dust  of  their  bones  is  now  to  be  found;  and  it  is  with  this
design  that  many  local  facts,  that  many  now  unknown  names,
have  been  introduced  into  this  history.  The  reader  must  fix
his  imagination  upon  these;  he  must  repeople  ancient  England
with  her  conquerors  and  her  conquered  of  the  eleventh  cen-
tury; he  must  figure  to  himself  their  various  situations,
interests,  and  languages;  the  joy  and  insolence  of  the  one,  the
misery  and  terror  of  the  other;  the  whole  movement  which
accompanies  the  deadly  war  between  two  great  masses  of
men.  For  seven  hundred  years  these  men  have  ceased  to
exist;  but  what  matters  this  to  the  imagination?  With  the
imagination  there  is  no  past,  and  even  the  future  is  of  the
present.

1  Dugdale,  Monast.  Anglic.,  ii.  187.  2  Id.  ib.  3  Id.  ib.

BOOK  V.

FROM  THE  FORMATION  OF  THE  CAMP  OF  REFUGE  IN  THE
ISLE  OF  ELY,  TO  THE  EXECUTION  OF  THE  LAST  SAXON
CHIEF.

1070—1076.

Deplorable  condition  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  after  their  defeat — Emigration  to
Greece  of  many  Englishmen,  who  enter  the  service  of  the  Byzantine
court — Many  other  English  withdraw  into  the  forests,  and  by  armed
brigandage  make  their  last  protest  against  their  conquerors — General
terror  of  England — Camp  of  refuge — Patriotic  contributions  of  the
English  church — King  William  orders  the  strict  visitation  of  all  the
monasteries  and  convents — Spoliation  of  the  churches — Arrival  of  three
pontifical  legates — Circulars  of  the  legates — Deposition  of  Stigand,
archbishop  of  Canterbury — Deprivation  of  the  bishops  and  abbots  of
English  race — Lanfranc,  archbishop  of  Canterbury — Miserable  condi-
tion of  the  English  churches — Establishment  of  the  primacy  of  Canter-
bury— Submission  of  the  archbishop  of  York  to  the  see  of  Canterbury
— Introduction  of  foreign  prelates  into  English  bishoprics — Character
of  the  new  bishops — The  complaints  of  the  English  conveyed  to  Rome
—The  pope  sides  with  the  Normans — Disinterested  conduct  of  Guimond,
monk  of  Saint  Leufroy,  in  Normandy — The  saints  of  English  race  ore
assailed  by  the  Normans — Insurrection  led  by  three  English  prelates —
The  laws  of  Edward  are  confirmed  by  king  William — Futility  of  this
concession — Recommencement  of  persecution — Paul,  an  abbot  of  Nor-
man race — Accession  of  refugees  to  the  camp  of  refuge — Death  of  Ed-
win—  Ivo  Taillebois,  an  Angevin  chief — His  character  —  Angevin
monks  established  at  Spalding — Herewavd,  chief  of  the  Saxon  partisans
— Anglo-Saxon  chivalry — Torauld,  a  Norman  abbot,  transferred  to  the
abbey  of  Peterborough — Fresh  alliance  between  the  English  and  the
Danes — Retreat  of  the  Danes— Attack  on  the  camp  at  Ely  by  the  Nor-
mans— Treachery  of  the  monks  of  Ely — Defeat  of  the  insurgents —
Hereward  preserves  his  independence — His  exploits — His  marriage —
Dishonourable  conduct  of  the  Normans  towards  him — His  death —
Atrocious  cruelties  exercised  by  the  Normans  upon  the  insurgents  of
Ely — The  monks  of  Ely  receive  the  punishment  of  their  treachery —
Peace  between  the  Normans  and  the  king  of  Scotland — Vaulcher,  bishop
of  Durham — Deprivation  of  Gospatrick ;  promotion  of  Waltheof — King
William  visits  Gaul — Revolt  of  the  people  of  Mans  against  the  Normans
— Establishment  of  the  corporation  of  Mans — Troubles  of  that  corpora-
tion— Devastation  and  submission  of  Maine — Alliance  of  Edgar  with
the  king  of  France — Third  submission  of  king  Edgar — English  women
take  refuge  in  the  convents — Marriage  concluded  contrary  to  the  order

A,D. 1070.]  EMIGRATION TO GREECE.  239

of  the  king — Marriage  festival  at  Norwich — Conspiracy  of  Normans  and
English  against  the  king — Preparations  to  meet  it ;  defeat  of  the  con-
spirators— Proscription  of  Eaulf  de  Gael,  and  sentence  upon  Roger,  earl
of  Hereford — Ruin  of  the  family  of  William  Fitz-Osbern — Impeach-
ment of  Waltheof — His  execution — He  is  honoured  as  a  martyr — Pil-
grimage to  his  tomb — His  widow,  Judith  la  Normande — Wulfstan,  the
last  bishop  of  Anglo-Saxon  race — Superstitions  founded  upon  the  na-
tional turn  of  mind.

THE  whole  country  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  was  conquered,  from
the  Tweed  to  Cape  Cornwall,  from  the  English  Channel  to  the
Severn,  and  the  conquered  population  was  overrun  in  every
direction  by  the  army  of  the  conquerors.  There  were  no
longer  any  free  provinces,  no  longer  masses  of  men  in  mili-
tary organization;  there  were  only  a  few  scattered  remains  of
the  defeated  armies  and  garrisons,  soldiers  who  had  no  chiefs,
chiefs  without  followers.  War  was  now  continued  against  them
in  the  form  of  individual  persecution;  the  most  prominent
were  tried  and  condemned  with  some  show  of  form;  the  re-
mainder were  handed  over  to  the  discretion  of  the  foreign
soldiers,  who  made  them  serfs  on  their  domains,1  or  massacred
them,  with  circumstances  which  an  ancient  historian  declines
to  detail,  as  incredible  and  monstrous  to  relate.2  Those  who
retained  any  means  of  emigration  proceeded  to  the  ports  of
Wales  or  Scotland,  and  embarked  thence,  as  the  old  annals
express  it.  to  carry  their  grief  and  misery  through  foreign
lands.3  Denmark,  Norway,  and  the  countries  where  the
Teutonic  language  was  spoken,  were  generally  the  goal  of
these  emigrations;  but  English  fugitives  were  also  seen  jour-
neying to  the  south,  and  soliciting  an  asylum  among  nations
of  an  entirely  different  language.

The  rumour  of  the  high  favour  which  the  Scandinavian
guard  of  the  emperors  enjoyed  at  Constantinople,  induced  a
certain  number  of  young  men  to  seek  their  fortune  in  that
direction.  They  assembled  under  the  command  of  Siward,
the  late  chief  of  Gloucestershire,  sailed  along  the  coast  of
Spain,  and  landed  in  Sicily,  whence  they  addressed  a  propo-
sition to  the  imperial  court,4  and  were,  in  accordance  with  it,

1  Chron.  Sax.  Frag.,  ex  Autog.  Biblioth.  S.  Germani,  apud  Script,  rer.
Gallic,  et  Francic.,  xi.  210.

2  Historia  Eliensis,  apud  rer.  Angl.  Script.,  iii.  510.

3  Joh.  de  Fordun,  Scoti-chronicon,  lib.  v.  cap.  xi.  p.  404.

4  Torfseus,  Hist.  rer.  Norvcy,  iii.  380.

240  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1070.

incorporated  in  the  select  troop  which,  under  the  German
name  of  Varings,  guarded  the  chamber  of  the  emperors,  and
had  the  custody  of  the  keys  of  the  towns  in  which  they  were
quartered,  and  at  times  of  that  of  the  public  treasure.  The
Varings,  or  as  the  Greeks  pronounced  it,  Varangs,  were
in  general  Danes,  Swedes,  or  Germans;  they  allowed  their
hair  to  grow  in  the  northern  fashion,  and  their  principal  wea-
pon was  the  great  double-bladed  axe,  which  they  ordinarily
bore  on  the  right  shoulder.  This  body,  whose  aspect  was
truly  formidable,  had  for  centuries  been  renowned  for  their
strict  discipline  and  inflexible  fidelity.  The  example  of  the
first  Saxons  who  enrolled  themselves  in  it  was  followed  by
others,  and  ultimately  the  body  of  Varings  was  almost  en-
tirely formed  of  Englishmen,  or,  as  the  Greeks,  in  their  still
classic  idiom  called  them,  of  Barbarians  from  the  island  of
Britain.1  The  Anglo-Saxon  tongue,  or  a  dialect  compounded
of  Saxon  and  Danish,  became,  to  the  exclusion  of  Greek,  the
official  language  of  these  guards  of  the  imperial  palace;  it  was
in  this  language  that  they  received  the  orders  of  their  chiefs,
and  that  they  themselves  addressed  to  the  emperor,  on  high
festival  days,  their  felicitations  and  their  homage.'2

Of  the  Saxons  who  could  not  or  would  not  emigrate,  many
sought  refuge  in  the  forests  with  their  families,  and,  if  they
were  rich  and  powerful,  with  their  servants  and  vassals.3  The
roads  along  which  the  Norman  convoys  passed  were  infested
by  their  armed  bands;  they  resumed  from  the  conquerors  in
detail  that  which  the  conquerors  had  taken  from  them  in
mass,  and  thus  obtained  ransom  for  their  heritages,  or  re-
venged by  assassination  the  massacre  of  their  countrymen.4
These  refugees  are  called  brigands  by  the  historians  favourable
to  the  conquest,5  who  in  their  narratives  treat  them  as  men
wilfully  and  wickedly  armed  against  lawful  order.  "  Every
day,"  say  they,  "  were  committed  infinite  thefts  and  homicides,
instigated  by  the  innate  wickedness  of  the  natives,  and  the

1  Stritterus,  Memoriae  populorum  Scptent.  ex  Scriptis  Hist.  Byzant,
Digestae.,  iv.  431.

2  Ib.— Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  508.
3  Matth.  Paris,  Vitas  AMat.  S.  Albani,  i.  29.

4  Pro  amissis  patrum  suorurn  praaediis  et  occisis  pareiitibus  et  conopa-
triotis.  (Order.  Vital.,  ut  sup.  p.  512.)

5  Latrones,  latrunculi,  sicarii.

TO  1071.]  ENGLISH  OUTLAWS.  241

immense  riches  of  this  kingdom;"1  but  the  natives  thought
they  had  a  right  to  recover  as  best  they  might  these  riches  of
which  they  had  been  deprived;  and  if  they  became  robbers,
it  was  only,  in  their  opinion,  to  obtain  their  own  property.
The  order  against  which  they  rose,  the  law  which  they  vio-
lated, had  no  sanction  in  their  eyes;  and  thus  the  English
word  outlaw  -  thenceforth  lost  in  the  mouth  of  the  subj  ugated
people  its  once  unfavourable  meaning,  so  much  so,  that  the
old  tales,  the  popular  legends  and  romances  of  the  English,
have  spread  a  sort  of  poetic  colouring  over  the  person  of  the
proscribed  men,  and  the  wandering  and  free  life  they  led  in
the  greenwood.3  In  these  romances,  the  outlaw  is  ever  the
most  joyous,  the  bravest  of  men;4  he  is  king  in  the  forest,  and
fears  not  the  king  of  the  country.

It  was  more  especially  the  north  country,  which  had  most
energetically  resisted  the  invaders,  that  became  the  land  of
these  armed  wanderers,  of  this  last  protest  of  the  conquered.
The  vast  forests  of  Yorkshire  were  the  abode  of  a  numerous
band,  who  had  for  their  chief  a  man  named  Sweyn,  son  of
Sigg.5  In  the  midland  counties  and  near  London,  even  under
the  walls  of  the  Norman  castles,  there  were  formed  many  of
these  troops,  who,  rejecting  slavery  to  the  last,  say  the  his-
torians of  the  time,  took  up  their  dwelling  in  the  desert.6
Their  encounters  with  the  conquerors  were  always  sanguinary,
and  whenever  they  appeared  in  some  inhabited  place,  it  was
a  pretext  for  the  foreigner  to  redouble  his  tyranny;  he
punished  the  unarmed  for  the  trouble  occasioned  him  by  the
armed;  and  the  latter,  in  their  turn,  frequently  paid  formidable
visits  to  those  who  were  pointed  out  to  them  as  friends  of  the
Normans.  Thus  the  country  was  kept  in  a  state  of  perpetual
terror.  To  the  danger  of  perishing  by  the  sword  of  the

1  Leland,  Collect  (in  act,  p.  42.

8  Vt-la<jc,  in  Saxon  ortliogniphy ;  in  Latin,  Vt-ltxjHS.
3  ...Mery  and  free

Under  the  leves  green.

(Robin  Hood,  a  collection  of  all  the  ancient  poems,  songs,  and  ballads
relating  in  that  famous  outlaw. Lond.,  182-'].  i.  08,  &c.)
4  A  more  mery  man  than  I  am  one

Lyves  not  in  Christianti:. — (Ib.  ii.  221.)

*  Quidam  princeps  hitronum. (Hist.  Monast.  Sekbiensis,  apnd  I.abbe,
Nova  Biblioth.  MSS.  i.  00:5.)

6  Matth.  Paris,  tit  Kitp.
VOL. I.  R

242  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  10?0

foreigner,  who  thought  himself  a  demigod  among  brutes,  who
understood  neither  prayer  nor  explanation  nor  excuse  proffered
him  in  the  tongue  of  the  conquered,  was  added  that  of  being
regarded  as  a  traitor  or  lukewarm  patriot  by  the  free  Saxons,
frantic  with  despair  as  the  Normans  were  with  pride.1  Thus
no  man  dared  to  walk  alone,  even  on  his  own  grounds  around
his  own  house;  the  abode  of  every  Englishman  who  had
sworn  peace  and  given  hostages  to  the  conqueror  was  closed
and  fortified  like  a  town  in  a  state  of  siege.2  It  was  filled
with  weapons  of  every  description,  bows  and  arrows,  axes,
maces,  poniards,  and  iron  forks;  the  doors  were  furnished
with  bolts  and  bars.  When  the  hour  of  rest  arrived,  at  the
moment  of  closing  up  everything,  the  head  of  the  family  arose
and  repeated  aloud  the  prayers  which  were  said  at  sea  on  the
approach  of  a  storm;  he  concluded  thus:  "  The  Lord  bless
us  and  help  us;"  and  all  present  answered  Amen.  This
custom  subsisted  in  England  for  more  than  two  centuries
after  the  conquest.3

In  the  northern  part  of  Cambridgeshire,  there  is  a  vast
extent  of  low  and  marshy  land,  intersected  in  every  direction
by  rivers.  All  the  waters  from  the  centre  of  England,  which
do  not  flow  into  the  Thames  or  the  Trent,  empty  themselves
into  these  marshes,  which  in  the  latter  end  of  autumn  overflow,
cover  the  land,  and  are  charged  with  fogs  and  vapours.  A
portion  of  this  damp  and  swampy  country  was  then,  as  now,
called  the  Isle  of  Ely;  another  the  Isle  of  Thorney,  a  third  the
Isle  of  Croyland.  This  district,  almost  a  moving  bog,  imprac-
ticable for  cavalry  and  for  soldiers  heavily  armed,  had  more  than
once  served  as  a  refuge  for  the  Saxons  in  the  time  of  the
Danish  conquest;  towards  the  close  of  the  year  1069,  it  be-
came the  rendezvous  of  several  bands  of  patriots  from  various
quarters,  assembling  against  the  Normans.4  Former  chief-
tains, now  dispossessed  of  their  lands,  successively  repaired
hither  with  their  clients,  some  by  land,  others  by  water,  by
the  mouths  of  the  rivers.  They  here  constructed  entrench-
ments of  earth  and  wood,  and  established  an  extensive  armed

1  Vecordes  e  superbia  efficiebantur. (Order.  Vital.,  itt  sup.  p.  523.)

2  Mattk.  Paris,  nt  sup.  p.  40.  3  Id.  ib.

4  Tboin.  lludborne,  Hist.  Major  Winton  ;  Anglia  Sacra,  i.  250  ;  Ingulf.,
Hist.  Croyland,  i.  71.

TO  1071.]  THE CAMP OF REFUGE.  243

station,  which  took  the  name  of  the  camp  of  refuge.1  The
foreigners  at  first  hesitated  to  attack  them  amidst  their  rushes
and  willows,  and  thus  gave  them  time  to  transmit  messages
in  every  direction,  at  home  and  abroad,  to  the  friends  of  old
England.  Become  powerful,  they  undertook  a  partisan  war
by  land  and  by  sea,  or,  as  the  conquerors  called  it,  robbery
and  piracy.

Every  day,  to  the  camp  of  these  "  robbers,"  these  "pirates"
in  the  good  cause,  came  some  Saxon  of  rank,  layman  or
priest,  bringing  with  him  the  last  remnant  of  his  fortune  or
the  contribution  of  his  church;  among  them  were  Eghelrik,
bishop  of  Lindisfarn,  and  Sithrik,  abbot  of  a  monastery  in
Devonshire.  The  Normans  charged  them  with  outraging
religion  and  dishonouring  the  holy  church,  in  abandoning
themselves  to  this  infamous  career;2  but  these  interested  re-
proaches did  not  stay  them.  The  example  of  the  insurgent
prelates  encouraged  many  men,  and  the  ascendancy  which
they  exercised  over  all  minds,  for  good  as  for  evil,  became
favourable  to  the  patriotic  cause.  The  churchmen,  hitherto
lukewarm  in  that  cause,  rallied  there  with  zeal.  Many  of
them,  it  is  true,  had  already  nobly  devoted  themselves  to
their  country's  cause,  but  the  mass  had  applied  to  the  con-
querors the  apostolic  precept  of  submission  to  the  powers
that  be.3  The  conquest  had,  in  general,  treated  them  some-
what better  than  the  rest  of  the  nation;  all  their  lands  had
not  been  taken;  the  asylum  of  their  habitations  had  not  been
everywhere  violated.  In  the  vast  halls  of  the  monasteries,
whither  the  Norman  spies  had  not  yet  penetrated,  the  Saxon
laymen  could  assemble  in  great  numbers,  and,  under  the  pre-
text of  pursuing  their  religious  exercises,  could  freely  converse
and  conspire.  They  brought  with  them  the  money  that  had
escaped  the  grasping  perquisitions  of  the  conquerors,  and  de-
posited it  in  the  treasury  of  the  sanctuary,  for  the  support  of
the  national  cause,  or  the  subsistence  of  their  children,  should
they  themselves  perish  in  the  struggle.  Sometimes  the  abbot

1  Castra  refugii.  (Thom.  Rudborne,  Loco  citato.)  Mattb.  Westmou.,
p.  227.

2  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  ii.  p.  256.

3  Praecepto  apostoli  dicentis :  Deiim  timete,  regem  honorificate.  (Order.
Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  509.)

R2

244  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1070

of  the  monastery  removed  the  gold  plates  and  precious  stories
with  which  the  Saxon  kings  had  adorned  the  altars  and  reli-
quaries, thus  disposing  of  their  gifts  for  the  salvation  of  the
country  which  they  themselves  had  loved  in  their  lives.
Brave  and  faithful  messengers  conveyed  the  produce  of  these
common  contributions,  through  the  Norman  posts,  to  the
camp  of  refuge,1  but  these  patriotic  operations  did  not  long
remain  secret.  King  William,  by  the  counsel  of  William
Fitz-Osbern,  his  seneschal,  soon  ordered  perquisitions  in  all
the  convents  of  England,  and  removed  all  the  money  that  the
rich  English  had  deposited  there,  with  most  of  the  vases,  reli-
quaries, and  precious  ornaments.2  He  also  took  from  the
churches,  where  they  had  been  deposited,  the  charters  which
contained  the  false  promises  of  clemency  and  justice  made  by
the  foreign  king  when  his  victory  was  yet  uncertain.3  This
vast  spoliation  took  place  in  the  Lent,  which,  in  the  ancient
calendar,  terminated  the  year  1070;  and  in  the  octave  of
Easter  there  arrived  in  England,  pursuant  to  William's  ap-
plication to  that  effect,  three  legates  from  the  apostolic  see;
Ermenfroy,  bishop  of  Sion,  and  the  cardinals  John  and  Peter.
The  Conqueror  founded  great  designs  upon  the  presence  of
these  representatives  of  his  ally,  pope  Alexander,  and  he  kept
them  with  him  a  whole  year,  honouring  them,  says  an  old
historian,  as  though  they  were  angels  of  God.4  Amidst  the
famine  which  was  sweeping  off  the  English  by  thousands,
brilliant  festivals  were  celebrated  in  the  fortified  palace  of
Winchester.  There  the  Roman  cardinals,  again  placing  the
crown  upon  the  head  of  the  Norman  king,  effaced  the  futile
malediction  which  the  archbishop  of  York,  Eldred,  had  ful-
minated against  him.5

After  these  entertainments  there  was  held  at  Winchester
an  assembly  of  all  the  foreigners,  laymen  or  priests,  who  had
realized  a  great  fortune  by  the  spoliation  of  the  English.6

:  Thomas  Eliensis,  Hist.  Elitnsis  ;  Anglia  Sacra,  i.  009.

2  Hist.  Eliensis,  apud  rer.  Anglic.  Script.  (Gale)  iii.  51(5. Chron.  Sax.
Frag.,  apud  Lye,  sub  anno  1071.

3  Cum  chartis  in  quarum  libertatibus  nobiles  Angliae  confidebsnt,  et  quas
rex,  in  arcto  positus,  observaturum  se  juraverat. (Matth.  Westm.,  p.  220.)

4  Order.  Vital.,  tit  sup.  p.  510.

5  Vita  Lanfranci,  apud  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  xiv.  52.
6  Several  Norman  prelates  were  present  at  the  ceremony. (See  Wilkins,
Concilia  MagiME  Brltan.,  i.  322,  ct  seg.)

TO  1071.] EXPULSION OF ENGLISH PRELATES.  245

The  Saxon  bishops  were  summoned  to  attend,  in  the  name  of
the  authority  of  the  Roman  church,  by  circulars,  the  haughty
style  of  which  was  calculated  to  warn  them  what  the  result
of  this  great  council,  as  it  was  called,  would  be  with  regard
to  them.  "  The  church  of  Rome,"  said  the  envoys,  "  has
the  right  to  superintend  the  conduct  of  all  Christians;  and  it
more  especially  behoves  her  to  make  inquiry  into  your  de-
portment and  manner  of  life;  you  whom  she  has  instructed
in  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  to  remedy  the  decline  among  you
of  that  faith  which  you  hold  from  her.  It  is  to  exercise
over  you  this  salutary  inspection  that  we,  the  ministers  of
the  blessed  apostle  Peter,  and  authorized  representatives  of
our  lord  the  pope  Alexander,  have  resolved  to  hold  a  council
with  you,  to  seek  out  and  uproot  the  evil  things  that  pullu-
late in  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord,  and  to  plant  others  in  their
place,  profitable  to  the  body  and  the  soul."1

The  real  meaning  of  these  mystic  words  was,  that  the  new
king,  in  concert  with  the  pope,  had  resolved  to  get  rid  of  the
whole  body  of  the  high  clergy  of  English  race;  the  legates  gave
a  sort  of  religious  colour  to  this  political  operation.  Such
was  their  mission,  and  the  first  prelate  whom  they  struck  was
the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Stigand,  the  same  who  had
marched  in  arms  against  the  foreigner,  and  refused  to  crown
him  king.  But  these  his  actual  offences  were  not  mentioned;
the  decree  of  ecclesiastical  degradation  was  based  upon  other
causes,  upon  an  honester  pretext,  as  an  ancient  historian  ex-
presses it.2  The  ordination  of  Stigand  was  annulled,  first
because  he  had  assumed  the  archbishopric  of  Canterbury  in
the  life-time  of  archbishop  Robert,  exiled  by  the  English
people;  secondly,  because  he  had  celebrated  mass  in  the  pal-
lium of  the  said  Robert ;  and  finally,  because  he  had  received
his  own  pallium  from  Benedict,  declared  antipope  and  ex-
communicated by  the  church.3

When  the  friend  of  king  Harold  and  of  his  country  had
been,  in  the  ecclesiastical  language,  struck  by  the  axe  of  cor-
rection as  a  barren  tree,4  his  lands  were  divided  between

1  Wilkins,  vt  sup.  323.

2  Honestam  de  ipso  voluit  habere  ultiouem. (Walt.  Hemingford,  Chron.,
apud  Her.  Anglic.  Script.  (Gale)  ii.  468.)

3  Florent.  Wigorn.,  Chron.,  p.  630.
4  Hemingford,  lit  sup.  p.  458.

246  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1070

king  William,  the  bishop  of  Bayeux,  the  king's  brother,  and
Adeliza,  wife  of  Hugh  de  Grantmesnil,  who,  doubtless  conci-
liated by  this  handsome  present,  came  to  inhabit  England,
and  brought  her  husband  back  with  her.1  The  English
bishops,  to  whom  no  canonical  objection  could  be  found,  were
none  the  less  struck.  Alexander,  bishop  of  Lincoln,  Eghel-
mar,  bishop  of  East  Anglia,  Eghelrik,  bishop  of  Sussex,  and
other  prelates,  with  the  abbots  of  the  principal  monasteries,
were  deposed  nearly  at  the  same  time.  At  the  moment  of
pronouncing  sentence  upon  each,  each  was  compelled  to  swear
upon  the  gospel  that  he  regarded  himself  as  deprived  of  his
dignity  for  ever,  and  that,  whoever  his  successor  might  be,
he  would  do  nothing  to  disparage  him,  by  protesting  against
him.2  The  deprived  bishops  were  conducted  either  to  a  for-
tress, or  to  a  monastery,  which  was  to  serve  as  a  prison.
Those  who  had  formerly  been  monks,  were  forcibly  re-clois-
tered in  their  old  monasteries,  and  it  was  officially  announced
that,  disgusted  with  the  bustle  and  noise  of  the  world,  they
had  been  anxious  to  rejoin  the  companions  of  their  youth.3

Several  members  of  the  high  Saxon  clergy  found  means
to  escape  this  fate;  archbishop  Stigand  and  the  bishop  of
Lincoln  both  fled  to  Scotland;  Eghelsig,  abbot  of  Saint  Au-
gustin,  sailed  to  Denmark,  and  remained  there,  although  de-
manded by  the  Conqueror,  as  the  king's  fugitive*  Eghelwin,
bishop  of  Durham,  upon  the  point  of  leaving  also  for  exile,
solemnly  cursed  the  aggressors  of  his  country,  and  declared
them  separated  from  the  communion  of  Christians,  in  the
grave  and  sombre  formula  by  which  this  separation  was  pro-
nounced.5 But  his  words  fell  harmless  upon  the  Norman
king:  William  had  priests  to  gainsay  the  Saxon  priests,  as  he
had  swords  to  break  the  Saxon  swords.

r  1  Domesday  Book,  i.  fol.  142,  verso  ;  ii.  p.  142  aud  288.

2  Episcopatum  reddidit,  se amplius  non  habiturum,  nee successor!  ca-
lumneam aut  damnum illaturum, jurejurando  . . .  firmavit. (Lanfranci,
Opera,  p.  301.)

3  Deliinc  ad  monasterium,  in  quo  ab  infantia  nutritus  monacliiis  fuerat,
repedavit. (Ib.} Alderedus  . . .  abbas Abbendomae  ...  in captione po-
nitur. (Hist,  caenob.  Abbendon ;  Anglia  Sacra,  i.  168.) Usque  ad  finem
vitae  custodiae  mancipatos. (Hist.  Eliensis,  vt  sup.  p.  516) In  ergastulo
carceris  ferro  adstrictus. (/ft.  p.  512.)

4  Helsini,  Legatio  in  Daniam,  apud  Script,  rer.  Danic.,  iii.  285.

5  Zelum  Dei  habens,  exulavit  spontaneus  ab  Anglia,  volens  oppressores
vinculo  excomnmnicationis  innodare. (Matth.  West.,  p.  22(S.)

TO  1071.] LANFRANC,  ARCHBISHOP  OF  CANTERBURY.  24?

Lanfranc,  that  monk  of  Lombard  origin  whom  we  have
seen  playing  the  part  of  negotiator  at  the  court  of  Rome,  still
lived  in  Normandy,  greatly  renowned  for  his  learning  as  a
jurist,  and  still  equally  beloved  by  the  pope  and  the  new
king.1  Him  the  legate  of  Alexander  II.  proposed  as  suc-
cessor of  Stigand  in  the  archbishopric  of  Canterbury,  and
William  fully  approved  the  choice,  in  the  hope  that  the  ability
of  Lanfranc  would  greatly  contribute  to  consolidate  the  con-
quest. Queen  Matilda  and  the  Norman  lords  hastened  his
departure  for  England,  where  he  was  joyfully  received  by  the
Normans,  who  hypocritically  celebrated  his  arrival  as  that  of
"  an  institutor  sent  from  God  to  reform  the  evil  habits  of  the
English."2  Lanfranc  was  named  archbishop  by  the  election
of  the  king  and  his  barons,  contrary  to  the  ancient  custom  of
the  Anglo-Saxon  church,  where  the  prelates  were  elected  by
the  body  of  the  clergy,  and  the  abbots  by  the  monks.3  This
custom  was  one  of  those  which  the  conquest  could  not  permit
to  remain,  for  all  the  religious,  as  well  as  the  civil  power,  was
to  pass  from  the  natives  to  the  conquerors.

When  archbishop  Lanfranc  made  his  first  entry  into  the
metropolis  transferred  to  his  sway,  he  was  seized  with  a  pro-
found sentiment  of  sadness  on  seeing  the  state  to  which  the
Normans  had  reduced  it.  The  church  of  Christ  at  Canter-
bury was  devastated  by  pillage  and  conflagration,  and  the  high
altar,  despoiled  of  its  ornaments,  was  well  nigh  buried  under
a  heap  of  rubbish.4

At  the  feast  of  Pentecost,  a  second  council  was  held  at
Windsor,  and  Thomas,  one  of  the  king's  chaplains,  was
named  archbishop  of  York,  in  the  place  of  the  Saxon  Eldred,
who  had  died  of  grief.  Thomas,  like  Lanfranc,  found  his
metropolitan  church  destroyed  by  fire,  with  its  ornaments,
charters,  titles,  and  privileges;  he  found  the  territory  of  his
diocese  ravaged,  and  the  Normans,  who  inhabited  it,  so  sad-
dened by  the  spectacle  of  their  own  devastations,  that  they
even  hesitated  to  settle  on  the  lands  which  they  had  taken.5

1  Vita  Lanfranci,  ut  sup.  p.  31. Lanfranci,  Opera,  p.  299.

2  Order.  Vital.,  ut  sup.  p.  530.

3  Eegis  et  omnium  optimatum  ejus  benevola  electione.  (ib.  p.  519.)
Successio  priorum  dunelmensis  ecclesiae ;  Anglia  Sacra,  i.  785.

4  Eadmer,  Hist.,  p.  7.

5  Thomas  Stubbs,"yfc*a  pontif.  Eborac.,  apud  Hist.  Angl.  Script.  (Sel-
den),  ii.  col.  1708.

248  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [AD.  1071

Thomas  took  possession  of  all  the  domains  of  the  church  of
York,  but,  whether  from  disgust  or  terror,  no  man,  Norman
or  Saxon,  would  rent  them.1

The  pope  sent  his  own  pallium  to  Lanfranc,  in  token  of
investiture,  and  loaded  him  with  flatteries.  "  I  long  for  you,"
he  said,  "  and  am  only  consoled  for  your  absence  by  reflect-
ing on  the  happy  fruits  which  England  will  derive  from  your
care."2  It  was  thus  that,  viewed  from  a  distance,  the  hideous
operations  of  the  conquest  appeared  under  agreeable  colours.
The  mission  of  Lanfranc  to  England,  his  real  and  avowed  mis-
sion, was  to  make  religion  subservient  to  the  enslavement  of
the  English,  to  complete,  says  an  old  narrator,  the  ruin  of  the
conquered  nation,  by  the  mutual  embraces  of  royalty  and  the
priesthood.3  The  more  effectually  to  realize  this  object,  the
archbishop  of  Canterbury  proposed  to  the  Conqueror  a  new
plan  of  ecclesiastical  constitution,  a  plan  as  favourable  to
the  ambition  of  the  prelate  as  to  the  stability  of  the  conquest.
"  It  is  necessary,"  said  Lanfranc  to  king  William,  "  that  there
should  be  in  England  but  one  religious  chief,  in  order  that
the  royalty  you  have  conquered  may  be  maintained  in  all  its
integrity.  It  is  necessary  that  the  church  of  York,  the  church
of  the  land  of  rebellion,  though  ruled  by  a  Norman,  should
become  subject  to  that  of  Kent;  it  is  necessary,  above  all,
that  the  archbishop  of  York  shall  not  enjoy  the  prerogative
of  crowning  the  kings  of  England,  lest  some  day,  voluntarily,
or  on  compulsion,  he  lend  his  ministration  to  some  Saxon  or
Dane,  elected  by  the  revolted  English."4

The  church  of  Kent  or  Canterbury  was,  as  we  have  already
seen,  the  first  church  founded  by  the  missionaries  from  Rome
among  the  yet  pagan  Saxons;  upon  this  priority  in  point  of
time  had  been  established  the  vague  idea  of  a  kind  of  hierar-
chal  pre-eminence,  but  Avithout  any  effective  supremacy  hav-
ing resulted  from  it,  either  for  the  church  of  Kent  or  for
those  who  governed  it.  The  metropolitan  see  of  York  had
remained  its  equal,  both  conjointly  exercising  the  chief  super-

1  Thomas  Stubbs,  Acta  ponlif.  Eborac.  a-pitd  Hist.  Angl.  Script.  (Sel-
den)  ii.  col.  1708.

2  Lanfranci,  Opera;  Notte  et  Observ.,  p.  387.

3  (jervas.  Cantuar.,  Imag.  de  discordiis  inter  Monac, Dorobor  ct  Archie -
piscop.  Baldcinnum,  apud  Hist.  Augl.  Script.,  (Seldeii)  ii.  col.  lo'Jo.
*  Stubbs,  lit  sup-  c°l-  1700.

TO  1072.]  THE PRIMACY.  249

intendence  over  all  the  bishoprics  of  England.1  It  was  this
order  of  things  that  archbishop  Lanfranc  undertook  to  re-
duce to  absolute  unity;  a  new  thing,  say  the  historians  of  the
period,  a  thing  unheard  of  before  the  reign  of  the  Normans.2
He  ransacked  the  archives  for  every  possible  privilege,  how-
ever ambiguous,  of  every  pope  that  had  so  evinced  his  affec-
tion for  the  church  of  Canterbury,  the  eldest  daughter  of
papacy  in  Britain.  He  established  the  axiom  that  the  law
should  proceed  whence  the  faith  had  proceeded,  and  that  as
Kent  was  subject  to  Rome,  because  from  Rome  it  had  re-
ceived Christianity,  so  York  ought  to  be  hierarchally  subject
to  Kent.3

Thomas,  the  Norman  archbishop  of  York,  whose  personal
independence  this  policy  tended  to  destroy,  was  not  suffi-
ciently devoted  to  the  cause  of  the  conquest  to  agree,  without
opposition,  to  this  new  constitution.4  He  requested  his  col-
league Lanfranc  to  cite  some  authentic  titles  in  support  of
his  pretensions.  This  was  an  embarrassing  demand;  but  Lan-
franc eluded  it  by  assuring  him  that  good  and  valid  acts  and
titles  would  not  be  wanting  if,  unfortunately,  they  had  not
all  perished  four  years  before  in  the  burning  of  his  church.5
This  evasive  answer  terminated  the  dispute,  aided,  indeed,  by
certain  official  warnings,  which  the  indiscreet  adversary  of
king  William's  confident  received,  and  which  signified  to  him
that  if,  for  the  peace  and  unity  of  the  kingdom,  he  did  not
submit  to  receive  the  law  from  his  colleague,  and  to  acknow-
ledge that  the  see  of  York  had  never  been  the  equal  of  the
other  metropolitan  see,  he  and  all  his  relations  would  be
banished  not  only  from  England,  but  from  Normandy.6  Tho-
mas insisted  no  further,  but  did  his  duty  as  a  faithful  son  of
the  conquest;  he  resigned  into  the  hands  of  Lanfranc  all  the
power  which  his  predecessors  had  exercised  south  of  the
Humber,  and,  making  a  solemn  profession  of  obedience  and

1  Duo  metropolitan!,  nou  solum  potestate,  dignitate,  et  officio,  sed  suf-
fraganeorum  numero  pares.  (Stubbs,  id  sup.  col  1705.)

2  Eadmer,  ut  sup.  p.  '3.
3  Laufranci,  Opera,  p.  378.

4  Eboracensis  ecclesiae  antistes  adversum  me  palam  murmuravit,  clam
detraxit, . . .  calumiiiam  suscitnvit.  (Laufranci,  Epistulcr,  apud  Wilkins,
Concilia  Mag  nee  Brit.,  i.  320.)

5  Laufranci,  Opera,  p.  302.

6  Stubbs,  tit  sup.  col.  1700.

250  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1071

fidelity,  retained  only  the  name  of  archbishop;  for  Lanfranc,
with  the  title  of  primate,  concentrated  in  his  own  person  all
its  rights.1  In  the  language  of  the  conquerors,  he  became,  by
the  grace  of  Gk>d,  father  of  all  the  churches ;  in  the  language
of  the  conquered,  all  the  churches  fell  under  his  yoke  and
were  his  tributaries.2  He  expelled  whom  he  chose,  replacing
them  with  Normans,  Frenchmen,  men  of  Lorraine,  men  of
every  country  and  every  race,  provided  they  were  not  Eng-
lish;3 and  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  in  the  general  dispossess-
ing of  the  former  prelates  of  England,  those  of  foreign  birth
who  had  been  naturalized  in  the  country  were  spared;  for
example,  Hermann,  Guis,  and  Walter  or  Gualtier,  all  three
men  of  Lorraine,  who  retained  the  bishoprics  of  Wells,  Sher-
borne,  and  Hereford.

Most  of  the  bishoprics  and  abbeys  were  employed,  as  had
formerly  been  the  property  of  the  rich,  the  liberty  of  the  poor,
and  the  beauty  of  the  women,  in  paying  the  debts  of  the  con-
quest. One  Remi,  formerly  a  monk  at  Fecamp,  received  the
bishopric  of  Lincoln  for  a  vessel  and  twenty  armed  men  whom
he  had  brought,  in  1066,  to  the  rendezvous  of  the  Norman
troops.4  This  man  and  the  other  prelates  come  from  beyond
seas — a  spiritual  arriere-ban — everywhere  expelled  the  monks
who,  according  to  a  custom  peculiar  to  England,  lived  upon
the  domains  of  the  episcopal  churches;  and  king  William
thanked  them  for  this,  holding,  says  a  contemporary  writer,
that  monks  of  English  race  could  only  bear  him  ill  will.5  A
class  of  adventurers,  priests  in  name  only,  poured  down  upon
the  prelacies,  archdeaconries,  and  deaneries  of  England,6  car-
rying with  them  the  spirit  of  violence  and  rapine,  the  haughty
and  domineering  manners  of  the  foreign  ruler;  many  of  them
became  noted  for  their  splendid  ostentation  and  their  disor-
derly life — several  for  their  infamous  actions.7  Robert  de

1  Thomas  Rudborne,  lit  sup.  p.  253.  Ab  universis  Anglise  episcopis,
prius  ab  aliis  sacratis  professiones  petiit  et  accepit.  (Heuric.  Kuyghton,
ut  svp.  lib.  i.  col.  2345.)

2  Lanfranci,  Opera,  p.  306. Gervas.  Cantuar,  ut  sup.

3  Tantum  tune  Anglicos  abominati  sunt,  ut . . .  rnulto  minus  habiles  alie-
genee  de  quacumqtie  alia  natione,  quae  sub  cselo  est,  extitissent,  gratenter
assumerentur. (Ingulf.,  p.  70.)

4  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  de  Gestis.  Pontif.  lib.  iii.  p.  290. Eadmer,  p.  7.

5  Ingulf.,  p.  86.  c  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  523.

7  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  nt  sup.  p.  377.

TO  1072.] TYRANNY  OF  THE  NORMAN  CHURCHMEN. 251

Limoges,  bishop  of  Lichfield,  pillaged  the  monastery  of  Co-
ventry; he  took  the  houses  and  goods  of  the  monks  who  in-
habited it,  forced  open  their  caskets  and  their  coffers,  and  ulti-
mately pulled  down  their  houses,  to  build  with  the  materials  an
episcopal  palace,  the  cost  of  furnishing  which  was  defrayed  by
melting  down  the  gold  and  silver  ornaments  that  decorated
the  church.1  The  same  Robert  made  a  decree  forbidding  the
Saxon  priests  the  use  of  nourishing  food  and  instructive  books,
fearing,  say  the  historians,  lest  good  eating  and  learning  might
render  them  too  strong  and  too  bold  against  their  bishop.2

Nearly  all  the  Norman  bishops  disdained  to  inhabit  the
ancient  capitals  of  their  dioceses,  which  were,  for  the  most
part,  petty  towns,  and  transferred  their  residences  to  places
better  adapted  for  the  luxurious  enjoyment  of  life;  it  was
thus  that  Coventry,  Lincoln,  Chester,  Salisbury,  and  Thet-
ford,  became  episcopal  towns.3  In  general,  the  churchmen
introduced  by  the  invasion  were  a  new  affliction  for  England;
and  their  tyranny,  which  assailed  consciences,  was  even  more
odious  than  the  brute  force  of  the  men  of  the  sword.  In
some  cases,  indeed,  the  Norman  abbots  also  wielded  the
sword,  though  only  against  unarmed  monks;  more  than  one
English  convent  was  the  scene  of  military  executions.  In
that  governed  by  one  Turauld  or  Torauld,  of  Fecamp,  the
abbot  was  accustomed  to  cry,  " A  moi,  mes  hommes  d'armes,"
whenever  his  monks  resisted  him  in  any  point  of  ecclesias-
tical discipline.  His  warlike  exploits  in  this  way  became
so  noted,  that  the  Conqueror  thought  himself  called  upon  to
punish  him,  arid,  a  singular  mode  of  chastisement,  sent  him.
to  rule  the  abbey  of  Peterborough  in  Northamptonshire,  a  post
dangerous  from  its  vicinity  to  the  Saxon  camp  of  refuge,
"  but  very  fit,"  said  William,  "  for  an  abbot  who  is  so  good
a  soldier."4  Delivered  from  this  formidable  chief,  the  monks
were  none  the  better  off;  for  in  his  place  they  received  one
Guerin  de  Lire,  who,  in  the  words  of  an  ancient  narrative,
took  the  last  crown  from  their  purses,  to  gain  for  himself  the

1  Lanfranci,  Opera,  p.  315. Additam.  ad  Hist.  Veterem  Lichfeldensem  ;
Anglia  Sacra,  i.  445.

2  Knygbton,  ut  sup.  lib.  ii.  col.  2352.
3  Lanfranci,  Op.,  p.  338. Chron.  Sax.,  in  notls.

4  Quia  majis  se  agit  militem  quam  abbatem.  (Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  v.
p.  372.)

252  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1071

renown  of  wealth  among  those  who  had  once  seen  him  poor.1
This  Guerin  had  the  bodies  of  his  predecessors,  the  abbots  of
English  race,  dug  up,  and  threw  their  bones  out  of  doors.2

Whilst  these  things  were  going  on  in  England,  fame  was
publishing  abroad  by  the  pens  of  hired  priests,  or  priests  who
wished  to  be  hired,  that  William,  the  powerful,  the  victorious,
the  pious,  had  civilized  that  country,  until  then  barbarous,
and  revived  Christianity  there,  until  then  greatly  neglected.3
The  truth,  however,  was  not  wholly  stifled:  the  cries  of  the
oppressed  reached  even  to  Rome;  and  in  that  Roman  court,
accused  by  contemporary  historians  of  being  so  venal,4
there  were  some  conscientious  men  who  denounced  the  revo-
lution operating  in  England,  as  odious  and  contrary  to  the
ecclesiastical  laws.  The  degradation  in  a  body  of  the  Saxon
bishops  and  the  principal  abbots,  and  the  intrusion  of  Nor-
mans into  their  places,  was  warmly  censured.5  But  the
death  of  Alexander  II.,  and  the  accession,  under  the  name  of
Gregory  VIL,  of  that  archdeacon  Hildebrand  who,  as  we
have  seen,  had  displayed  so  much  zeal  in  favour  of  the  inva-
sion, reduced  well  nigh  to  silence  the  impeachers  of  the  new
church  founded  by  the  Norman  conquest.  Her  canonical
legitimacy  ceased  to  be  questioned,  and  two  individuals  only,
Thomas,  archbishop  of  York,  and  Remi,  bishop  of  Lincoln,
were  cited  before  the  pontifical  court,  the  one  because  he  was
the  son  of  a  priest,  the  other  because  he  had  bought  the  epis-
copal dignity  with  money.6

Lanfranc  accompanied  them  to  Rome,  laden  with  presents
for  the  pope  and  principal  citizens.  All  three  largely  distri-
buted the  gold  of  the  English  in  the  city  of  the  apostles,  and
thus  acquired  great  renown.7  This  conduct  smoothed  all
difficulties  for  them;  the  affair  of  the  two  Norman  prelates

1  Idoneus  monachorum  marsupia  evacuare,  undecunque  iiummos  rapere,
ut, apud cos, qui earn  olim  pauperem  vidissent,  compararet  jactantiam.
(Willelm.  Malmesb.,  ut,  sup.  lib.  v.  p.  372.)

2  Id.,  de  Vita  Aditclmi  episcopi  Scireburnensis  ;  Anglia  Sacra,  ii.  142.

3  Hist.  Fraiicicae  Frag.,  apud  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  xi.  162.

4  RadulpL.  de  Diceto,  Imag.  Histor.,  apud  Script,  rer.  Gallic.,  &c.,  xiii.
202.

5  Prisci  Abbates,  quos  canonicae  leges  noil  damiiabant,  secularis  commi-
natioue  potestatis  terrebantur,  et  sine  synodali  discussione  de  sedibus  suis
injuste  fugabautur. (Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  52:3.) Eadraer,  p.  0,  7.

6  Knyglitoii,  ut  sup.  col.  2348.

7  Order.  Vital.,  ut  sup.  p.  548.

TO  1072.]  GUIMOND.  253

was  privately  arranged,  and,  instead  of  an  investigation  into
their  conduct,  there  was  merely  an  arranged  scene,  in  which
both  returned  to  the  pope,  in  sign  of  obedience,  their  ring
and  pastoral  staff;  then  Lanfranc  pleaded  their  cause,
proving  that  they  were  useful,  nay,  very  necessary  to  the  new
king  and  to  the  arrangements  of  the  kingdom;1  and  the  pope
answered:  "Decide  the  affair  as  thou  thinkest  fit;  thou  art
the.  father  of  that  country;  I  place  the  two  pastoral  rods2  at
thy  disposition."  Lanfranc  took  them  and  returned  them  to
Eemi  and  Thomas;  then  having  himself  received  from  Gre-
gory VII.  the  confirmation  of  his  title  of  primate  of  all
England,  he  departed  with  his  companions.

Thus  the  churches  of  the  English  continued  to  be  handed
over  without  obstacle,  and  by  the  consent  of  the  Roman
church,  to  priests  of  every  nation.  The  prelate  of  foreign
race  delivered  his  homilies  to  a  Saxon  auditory  in  the
French  language,  and  because  they  listened  patiently,  from
fear  or  apathy,  grew  elated  with  the  power  of  his  discourse,
which,  he  said,  miraculously  insinuated  itself  into  the
ears  of  the  barbarians.3  A  sort  of  shame,  and  the  desire  to
exhibit  to  the  Christian  world  something  different  from  this
ridiculous  spectacle,  induced  William  to  seek  some  ecclesiastic
whom  the  opinion  of  the  period  extolled,  from  afar,  for  the
austerity  of  his  monastic  life.  Such  was  Guimond,  a  monk
of  the  abbey  of  La  Croix- Saint- Leufroi,  in  Normandy;  the
king  invited  him  to  cross  the  sea,  and  he  at  once  obeyed  the
order  of  his  temporal  lord.  On  his  arrival,  the  Conqueror
told  him  that  he  designed  to  retain  him  there,  and  to  raise
him  to  a  high  ecclesiastical  dignity:  this  is  the  monk's
answer,  if  we  may  believe  an  historian  only  a  few  years
posterior:4

"Many  motives  lead  me  to  avoid  ecclesiastical  dignities
and  power;  I  will  not  enumerate  them  all.  I  shall  only  say
that  I  do  not  conceive  how  it  were  possible  for  me  worthily
to  be  the  religious  chief  of  men  whose  manners  and  language  I

1  Eadiner,  p.  7.  ~  Id.  ib.

3  Qui,  licet  latirie  vel  gallice  loqueutem,  ilium  minimc  intelligerent,  ta-
men,  intendentes  ad  ilium,  virtute  verbi  Dei ...  ad  lacrymas  imiltoties  COHI-
puncti.  (Petrus  Blesensis,  Ingulf.  Continunt.,  apud  Her.  Anglic.  Script.,
(Gale)  i.  115.)

*  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  024.

254  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1071

do  not  understand,  and  whose  fathers,  brothers,  and  dear  friends
have  died  under  your  sword,  or  have  been  disinherited,
banished,  imprisoned,  or  cruelly  enslaved  by  you.  Search
the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  see  whether  any  law  there  permits
the  pastor  of  God's  flock  to  be  violently  imposed  on  it  by
the  will  of  an  enemy.  That  which  you  have  forcibly  ac-
quired by  war,  at  the  cost  of  the  blood  of  so  many  men,  can
you  without  sin  share  it  with  me,  with  those  who,  like  me,
have  sworn  to  despise  the  outer  world,  and  who,  for  the  love
of  Christ,  have  renounced  the  goods  of  this  world?  It  is  the
law  of  all  monks  to  abstain  from  rapine,  and  to  accept  of  no
share  of  any  spoil,  even  as  an  offering  to  the  altar;  for  as
the  Scriptures  say,  he  that  oifereth  in  sacrifice  the  goods
of  the  poor,  acteth  as  one  who  sacrificeth  the  son  in  the
presence  of  the  father.  When  I  recal  to  mind  these  divine
precepts,  I  feel  terrified;  your  England  seems  to  me  a  vast
prey;  and  I  fear  to  touch  either  her  or  her  treasures,  as  I
should  fear  to  touch  a  burning  brasier."1

The  monk  of  Saint  Leufroi  again  crossed  the  sea,  and  re-
turned to  his  cloister;  but  the  report  soon  spread  that  he  had
exalted  the  poverty  of  the  monks  above  the  wealth  of  the  pre-
lates; had,  in  the  very  teeth  of  the  king  and  his  barons,  de-
nounced the  acquisition  of  England  as  plunder;  and  had
treated  as  spoliators  and  intruders  all  the  bishops  and  abbots
installed  in  that  country  against  the  will  of  the  English.
His  words  displeased  many  who,  not  desiring  to  imitate  him.
calumniated  him,  and  succeeded,  by  their  intrigues,  in  driving
him  from  the  country.  Guimond  went  to  Rome,  and  thence
to  Apulia,  to  one  of  the  towns  conquered  and  possessed  by  the
Normans.2

The  hatred  which  the  clergy  of  the  conquest  bore  to  the
native  English  extended  even  to  the  saints  of  English  race,
and  in  more  than  one  place  their  tombs  were  opened  and
their  bones  scattered  abroad.3  Whatever  had  formerly  been
an  object  of  veneration  with  the  country,  was  regarded  by
the  new  comers  as  base  and  despicable.4  But  the  violent
aversion  with  which  the  English  saints  inspired  the  Normans

i  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  525.  a  /&.  p.  52G.

3  Typho  quodam  et  nausea  sanctorum  corporum.  (Willelm.  Malmesb.,
de  Gest.  &c.,  lib.  v.  p.  372.)

4  Eadmer,  p.  120.

TO  1072.]  DEGRADATION OF SAXON SAINTS.  255

was  based  upon  political  considerations,  apart  from  their
general  contempt  for  all  that  the  conquered  people  respected.
In  many  instances,  religious  veneration  had  been,  with  the
English,  but  a  reflection  of  patriotism,  and  among  the  saints
then  invoked  in  England,  several  had  become  such  for
dying  by  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  in  the  time  of  the  Danish
invasions ;  as  Elfeg,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  Edmund,
king  of  East  Anglia.  Such  saints  as  these  would  necessarily
give  umbrage  to  the  new  invaders;  for  their  worship  kept
alive  the  spirit  of  revolt,  and  hallowed  old  memories  of  courage
and  independence.  The  foreign  prelates,  accordingly,  with
archbishop  Lanfranc  at  their  head,  did  not  long  delay  to  pro-
claim that  the  Saxon  saints  were  not  true  saints,  nor  the
Saxon  martyrs  true  martyrs.1

Guerin  de  Lire  attacked  Saint  Adhelm;  Lanfranc  under-
took to  degrade  Saint  Elfeg,  by  lessening  the  merits  of  his  so
fine  and  so  patriotic  death.  "  That  which  constitutes  mar-
tyrdom," said  the  primate,  "is  the  cause  and  not  the  death;
I  see  in  this  saint  of  yours,  merely  a  man  who  was  killed  by
the  pagans  in  default  of  a  ransom  which  he  could  not  pay
himself,  and  with  which  he  would  not  burden  others."2
Perhaps  with  analogous  views,  and  to  give  a  new  direction
to  the  mind  of  the  English,  he  seized,  throughout  England,
the  copies  of  the  Bible,  and  corrected  them  with  his  own
hand,  on  the  pretext  that  Saxon  ignorance  had  theretofore
corrupted  the  text;  but  all  did  not  credit  this  broad  assertion,
and  Lanfranc,  notwithstanding  his  renown  for  virtue  and
learning,  incurred  in  his  own  time  the  reproach  of  having
falsified  the  Sacred  Books.3

Violence  done  to  popular  conviction,  reasonable  or  super-
stitious, often  arouses  the  courage  of  the  oppressed  more  than
the  loss  even  of  liberty  and  property.  The  insults  lavished
upon  objects  of  long-established  devotion,  the  sufferings  of
the  bishops,  a  sort  of  fanatic  hatred  to  the  religious  innova-
tions of  the  conquest,  strongly  agitated  men's  minds,  and  be-
came the  mobile  of  a  great  conspiracy,  which  extended  over

1  Angli,  interquos  vivimus,  quosdam  sibi  instituerunt  sanctos,  quorum
incerta  sunt  merita.  (Johan.  Sarisburiensis,  de  Vita  Auschni  Archiej).
Cantuar. ;  Anglia  Sacra,  ii.  102.)  2  Id.  ib.

3  QUJB  rudis  simplicitas  anglicana  corruperat  ab  Antique.  (Chron.,  sub
anno  1089;  Anglia  Sacra,  i.  55.  note  «.)

256  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1071

all  England.1  Many  priests  engaged  in  it,  and  three  prelates
were  its  chiefs:  Frithrik,  abbot  of  Saint  Albans;  Wulfstan,
bishop  of  Worcester,  the  only  man  of  English  race  who  retained
a  bishopric;  and  Walter,  bishop  of  Hereford,  a  Fleming,  the
only  foreigner  who,  a  bishop  prior  to  the  conquest,  had  re-
mained faithful  to  the  cause  of  his  adopted  country.2  The
name  of  the  young  king  Edgar  was  again  pronounced;  popular
songs  were  circulated  in  which  he  was  called  the  beautiful,
the  brave,  the  darling  of  England.3  The  two  brothers  Edwin
and  Morkar  quitted  the  court  of  the  Norman  for  the  second  time.
The  city  of  London,  hitherto  peaceable  and  resigned  to  the
foreign  yoke,  began  to  be  turbulent,  and,  as  the  old  historians
express  it,  in  a  language  unfortunately  somewhat  vague,  to
face  king  William.4

To  meet  this  new  peril,  William  resorted  to  the  means  he
had  more  than  once  found  successful,  promises  and  lies.
Frithrik  and  the  other  insurgent  chiefs,  invited  by  him  to
Berkhamsted,  to  treat  of  peace,  repaired  to  that  ill-omened
place,  where,  for  the  first  time,  Saxon  hands  had,  in  sign  of
subjection,  touched  the  armed  hand  of  the  conqueror.  They
found  the  king  there,  with  his  bosom-friend  and  councillor
the  primate  Lanfranc.  Both  affected  towards  them  an  air  of
gentleness  and  good  faith;5  and  there  was  a  long  discussion
upon  their  respective  and  mutual  interests,  which  terminated
in  an  accommodation.  All  the  relics  of  the  church  of  Saint
Alban  had  been  brought  to  the  place  of  conference;  an  open
missal  was  laid  upon  these  relics,  at  the  page  of  the  gospel
for  the  day;  and  king  William,  placing  himself  in  the  position
in  which  he  had  formerly  placed  Harold,  swore,  by  the  holy
relics  and  by  the  sacred  gospels,  inviolably  to  observe  the  good
and  ancient  laws  which  the  holy  and  pious  kings  of  England,
and  above  all,  king  Edward,  had  theretofore  established.0
The  abbot  Frithrik  and  the  other  English,  satisfied  with
this  concession,  repaid  William's  oath  with  the  oath  of  fidelity
sworn  to  their  ancient  kings,  and  then  separated,  dissolving

1  Matth.  Paris,  Vita;  Allot.  S.  Alban.,  i.  48.  2  II.  p.  47.

3  Speciosissiraum  et  fortissimum  . . .  mide  in  Angliam  tale  exiit  eulogi-.im  :
"^Edgar,  Etlielinge,

Engelondes  derelhig." — (Ib.  p.  48.)
4  Gives  Londoniae  in  faciem  restitenmt. —  ( Ib.  p.  47.)
5  Ib.  48.  «  Ib.

TO  1072.]  STATE OF THE LAWS.  257

the  great  association  they  had  formed  for  the  deliverance  of
the  country.1  Bishop  Wulfstan  was  sent  into  Cheshire  to
calm  the  excitement  of  the  people  there,  and  to  make  a  pastoral
visitation  which  no  Norman  prelate  dared  undertake.'2

These  good  and  ancient  laws,  these  laws  of  king  Edward,
the  mere  promise  of  which  sufficed  to  allay  insurrections,  were
not  a  particular  code  or  system  of  written  provisions;  by  these
words  was  understood  simply  the  mild  and  popular  adminis-
tration  which  had  existed  in  England  in  the  time  of  the  na-
tional kings.  During  the  Danish  domination,  the  English,  in
their  prayers  to  the  Conqueror,  demanded,  under  the  name  of
the  laws  of  Ethelred,  the  destruction  of  the  odious  rule  of  the
conquest;  to  demand  the  laws  of  Edward,  under  the  Norman
domination,  was  to  make  the  same  prayer,  a  futile  prayer,
which,  notwithstanding  his  promises,  the  new  conqueror  could
not  grant.  Even  had  he  honestly  maintained  all  the  legal
practices  of  the  olden  time,  and  enforced  their  observance  to
the  letter  by  his  foreign  judges,  they  would  not  have  borne
their  former  fruits.  There  was  an  entire  error  in  terms  in
the  demand  thus  made  by  the  English  nation;  for  it  was  not
the  absence  of  its  ancient  criminal  or  civil  laws  that  rendered
its  situation  so  disastrous,  but  the  destruction  of  its  indepen-
dence and  of  its  existence  as  a  nation.3  Neither  William  nor
his  successors  ever  manifested  any  particular  hatred  to  the
Saxon  legislation,  civil  or  criminal;  they  allowed  it  to  be  ob-
served in  various  points,  and  the  Saxons  were  none  the  better
for  this  concession.  They  left  the  rates  of  fines  for  theft  and
murder  committed  upon  the  English  to  vary  as  before  the
conquest,  according  to  the  division  of  the  great  provinces;4
they  allowed  the  Saxon,  accused  of  murder  or  robbery,  to
justify  himself,  as  by  the  old  custom,  by  the  ordeal  of  red  hot
iron  and  boiling  water;  while  the  Frenchman,  accused  by  a
Saxon,  appealed  to  single  combat,  or  if  the  accused  declined

1  Matth.  Paris,  Vitet  Abbut.  S.  Albani,  i.  48.

2  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  de  Vita  S.  Witlfstani,  lib.  i.  cap.  i. ;  Aiiglia  Sacra,
ii.  250.

3  11s  requireut  estre  tenus  et  gouvernez  comrue  le  roy  Edouart  les  avoit
gouveruez. (Cbrou.  de  Normandie,  xiii.  239.)

4  Si  home  occit  altre...xx.  lib.  eu  Mercbenelae  et  xxv.  lib.  eu  West'
saxenlae. (Leges  Willelmi  Regis  ;  Ingulf.,  p.  80.)

VOL.  I.  S

258  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1071

the  combat,  freed  himself  by  oath,  according  to  the  law  of
Normandy.1  This  difference  of  procedure,  operating  alto-
gether against  the  conquered  population,  did  not  disappear
until  a  century  and  a  half  later,  when  the  decrees  of  the
Eoman  church  had  everywhere  prohibited  the  ordeal  of  fire
and  water.2

Moreover,  among  the  ancient  Saxon  laws  there  were  some
which  were  especially  favourable  to  the  conquest;  such  as  that
which  rendered  the  inhabitants  of  each  hundred  responsible
for  every  offence  committed  in  the  hundred,  the  perpetrator
of  which  was  unknown3 — a  law  well  adapted,  in  the  hands  of
the  conquerors,  to  spread  terror  throughout  the  country.  As
to  these  laws,  it  was  the  interest  of  the  Conqueror  to  maintain
them,  and  as  to  those  which  related  to  their  private  transac-
tions, their  preservation  was  a  matter  of  indifference  to  him.
He  accordingly  fulfilled  the  promise  he  had  made  to  the
Saxon  conspirators,  without  troubling  himself  as  to  whether
they  put  a  different  construction  upon  that  promise.  He  sum-
moned before  him,  at  London,  twelve  men  from  each  county,
who  declared  upon  oath,  to  the  best  of  their  knowledge  and
belief,  the  ancient  laws  and  customs  of  the  country,  omitting
nothing,  and  adding  nothing.4  What  they  said  was  formed
into  a  sort  of  code,  in  the  French  idiom  of  the  time,  the  only
legal  language  acknowledged  by  the  government  of  the  con-
quest. The  Norman  heralds  then  went  throughout  the  country,
announcing,  to  the  sound  of  the  horn,  "  the  laws  which  king
William  granted  to  all  the  people  of  England,  the  same  that
king  Edward  his  cousin  observed  before  him."5

The  laws  of  Edward  were  published,  but  the  times  of  Ed-
ward did  not  return  for  England,  and  the  chiefs  of  the  pa-
triotic movement  were  the  first  to  experience  the  futility  of
this  concession.  From  the  moment  their  league  was  dissolved,
they  were  persecuted  to  extremity  by  the  power  they  had

i  Leges  Willelmi  Regis ;  Joh.  Bromton,  col.  289.

2  Selden,  Nottc  ad  Eddmeri  Hist.,  p.  204.

3  Borlis,  fritli-borks,  borlis-liolders.  (See  Cancianus,  Leges  Antiq.  Bar-
lar.,  iv.  pp.  273,  338,  340.)

4  Thomas  Rudborne,  Hist.  Maj.  Winton  ;  Anglia  Sacra,  i.  259.
5  Ces  sount  les  leis  et  les  custumes  que  li  reis  Will,  grentat  a  tut  le  pu-
ple  de  Engleterre . . .  iceles  mesmes  que  li  reis  Edward  sun  cosin  tint  devant
lui. (Leges  Will.  Regis  ;  Ingulf.,  p.  88.)

TO  1072.] TREATMENT  OF  ST.  ALBAN'S  ABBEY. 259

constrained  to  treat  with  them.1  Bishop  "Walter  fled  to  Wales;
the  Norman  soldiers  were  ordered  to  pursue  him  into  that
country,  over  which  the  dominion  of  William  did  not  ex-
tend; but  the  prelate  escaped  them,  favoured  by  the  forests
and  mountains.  King  Edgar,  perceiving  that  snares  were
laid  for  him,  again  fled  to  Scotland.  Bishop  Wulfstan,  a  man
of  feeble  mind  and  character,  gave  all  the  securities  required
from  him,  and  thus  found  favour  with  the  Conqueror;  he
offered  the  abbot  of  Saint  Alban's  to  obtain  pardon  for  him
at  the  same  price;  but  Frithrik  was  too  proud  to  accept  it  on
such  terms.  He  assembled  all  his  monks  in  the  great  hall,
and  taking  leave  of  them  with  emotion  :  "  My  brothers,  my
friends,"  he  said,  "  this  is  the  hour  in  which,  as  the  holy  Scrip-
tures tell  us,  we  must  flee  from  one  city  to  another  before  our
persecutors."  Taking  with  him  provisions  and  some  books,  he
proceeded  to  the  isle  of  Ely  and  the  camp  of  refuge,  where  he
died  shortly  afterwards.2

King  William,  irritated  at  this  flight  of  a  man  whom  he
thought  dangerous,  directed  all  his  fury  against  the  monastery
of  Saint  Alban.  He  seized  its  domains,  cut  down  its  woods,
and  resolved  to  destroy  it  utterly.3  But  the  primate  Lan-
franc  severely  reproached  him  for  this  purpose,  and,  by  dint
of  persuasion,  secured  the  preservation  of  the  abbey,  and  per-
mission to  place  in  it  an  abbot  of  his  own  choice.  Lanfranc
had  brought  with  him  to  England  a  young  man  named  Paul,
who  passed  for  his  son,  and  upon  him  he  bestowed  the  vacant
abbey.4  The  first  administrative  act  of  the  new  abbot  was
to  demolish  the  tombs  of  all  his  predecessors,  whom  he  de-
nounced as  brutes  and  idiots,  because  they  were  of  English
race.  Paul  sent  over  to  Normandy  for  his  relations,  among
whom  he  distributed  the  offices  and  part  of  the  property  of
his  church.  "They  were  all,"  says  an  ancient  historian,
"  men  without  the  slightest  literary  culture,  and  ignoble  in
their  manners  to  a  degree  which  it  is  impossible  to  describe."5

The  reader  must  now  turn  his  attention  to  the  isle  of  Ely,

1  Tyrannus  inexorabilis,  quos  non  poterat  confoederatos  et  congregates
superare,  singulos  disperses  ac  semotos . . .  studuit . . .  infestare  . . .  et  sub-
peditare.  (Matt.  Paris,  Vitas  Abbat.  S.  Albani,  i.  48.)

2  76.  p.  49.  3  Ib.

4  Ib.  Selden,  ut  sup.  p.  196.  *  Mattli.  Paris,  p.  52.

S2

THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1071

that  land  of  marsh  and  rushes,  as  the  chroniclers  term  it,  which
was  the  last  refuge  of  Anglo-Saxon  independence.1  Arch-
bishop Stigand  and  bishop  Eghelwin  quitted  Scotland  for
this  place.2  Edwin  and  Morkar,  after  having  wandered  for
some  time  in  the  forests  and  country  districts,  also  came
there  with  other  chiefs.3  The  king,  who  had  just  succeeded
by  his  craft  alone  in  dissolving  the  conspiracy  of  the
patriot  priests,  essayed  craft  once  more,  ere  he  employed
force  against  the  Saxons  of  the  camp  of  Ely.  Morkar  was
for  the  third  time  the  dupe  of  his  false  professions;  he  allowed
himself  to  be  persuaded  to  quit  the  camp  of  refuge  for  the
court,4  but  he  had  scarce  set  foot  beyond  the  entrenchments
raised  by  his  companions  than  he  was  seized  and  put  in  irons,
in  a  fortress  the  keeper  of  which  was  Roger,  the  founder  and
proprietor  of  the  castle  of  Beaumont  in  Normandy.5  Edwin
also  quitted  the  isle  of  Ely,  not  to  submit  like  his  brother,
but  to  attempt  his  deliverance.  For  six  months  he  sought
aid  and  collected  friends  in  England,  Scotland  and  Wales;
but  at  the  moment  when  he  found  himself  strong  enough  to
attempt  his  enterprise,  two  traitors  sold  him  to  the  Normans.
He  defended  himself  for  a  long  time  with  twenty  knights
against  greatly  superior  forces.  The  final  combat  took  place
near  the  coast  of  the  North  Sea,  towards  which  the  Saxon
chief  was  retreating,  in  the  hope  of  finding  some  means  of
embarking  there;  but  he  was  stopped  by  a  brook  which  the
rising  tide  had  swollen.  Overcome  by  numbers,  he  fell;  his
enemies  cut  off  his  head,  and  carried  it  to  the  Conqueror,6  who
was  touched,  and  wept,  say  some  historians,  over  the  fate  of  a
man  whom  he  loved,  and  whom  he  would  fain  have  attached
to  his  fortune.

Such  was  the  lot  of  Edwin  and  Morkar,  the  sons  of  Alfgar,
and  brothers-in-law  of  king  Harold,  both  victims  to  the
cause  which  they  had  several  times  abandoned.  Their  sister,
Lucy,  shared  the  fate  of  all  the  Englishwomen  who  were  left
without  a  protector.  She  was  given  in  marriage  to  Ivo
Taille-Bois,  the  chief  of  the  Angevin  auxiliaries,  who  received

1  Chron.  Saxon.,  (Gibson)  p.  170.
2  Thorn.  Elieusis,  Hist.  Elicnsis  ;  Anglia  Sacra,  i.  COO.

3  Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  181.
4  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  521.
5  lit. — Beaumont-le-Roger,  department  de  I'Eure.  °  Ib.

TO 1072.]  IVO TAILLE-BOIS.  261

with  her  all  the  ancient  domains  of  the  family  of  Alfgar.1
The  bulk  of  these  were  situated  about  Spalding,  towards  the
borders  of  Cambridgeshire  and  Lincolnshire,  in  the  marshy
country  called  Holland,  near  the  camp  of  refuge.  Ivo  Taille-
Bois  settled  in  this  place;  he  became  for  the  farmers  of
the  ancient  domain  what  in  the  Saxon  language  was  called
the  hlaford,  and,  by  contraction,  the  lord  of  the  land.'2  This
name  ordinarily  signified  loaf-giver,  distributor  of  bread,  and
in  old  England  designated  the  head  of  a  large  house,  him  whose
table  fed  many  men.  But  other  ideas,  ideas  of  dominion  and
servitude,  were  substituted  for  this  honourable  signification,
when  the  men  of  the  conquest  received  from  the  natives  the
title  of  lords.  The  foreign  lord  was  a  master;  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  domain  trembled  in  his  presence,  and  approached
with  terror  his  manor  or  hall,  as  the  Saxons  called  it;  an
abode  once  hospitable,  whose  door  was  ever  open,  whose  fire
ever  lit;  but  now  fortified,  walled,  embattled,  garrisoned  with
men-at-arms  and  soldiers,  at  once  a  citadel  for  the  master
and  a  prison  for  the  neighbourhood.

"  Thus,"  says  a  contemporary,  "  all  the  inhabitants  of  the
lowlands  were  careful  always  to  appear  with  great  humility
before  Ivo  Taille-Bois,  and  never  to  address  him  but  on  one
knee;  but  although  they  rendered  him  every  possible  honour,
and  paid  him  all  they  owed  him  and  more  in  rents  and  ser-
vices, on  his  part  he  had  for  them  neither  affability  nor  kind-
ness. On  the  contrary,  he  vexed  them,  tormented  them,  tor-
tured them,  imprisoned  them,  overwhelmed  them  with  compul-
sory labour,  and  by  his  daily  cruelties  obliged  most  of  them  to
sell  the  little  they  still  possessed,  and  to  seek  other  countries.3
By  a  diabolical  instinct,  he  delighted  to  do  evil  for  evil's  sake;
he  often  set  his  dogs  upon  the  cattle  of  the  poor  people,  drove
the  domestic  animals  into  the  marshes,  drowned  them  in  the
lakes,  or  mutilated  them  in  various  ways,  and  rendered
them  incapable  of  service,  by  breaking  their  limbs  or  their
backs."4

Some  of  the  English  monks  of  the  abbey  of  Croyland  lived

1  Dugdale,  Mona&t.  Anglic.,  i.  30G.  2  ingulf.,  p.  71.

3  Sed  torqnens  et  tribulans,  nngens  et  angariaus,  iucarcerans  et  excru-
eians,  ac  quotidie  novis  servitiis  ouerans,  plurimos  omiiia  sua  vendere,  ac
alias  patrias  petere,  crudeliter  compellebat.  (Ib.)
*  II.

262  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1071

near  Spalding,  in  a  chapel  of  ease  which  the  monastery  pos-
sessed just  at  the  gates  of  this  formidable  Angevin.  He  made
them,  even  more  than  the  rest  of  the  neighbourhood,  feel  the
effects  of  his  destructive  mania  against  all  that  was  Saxon,  or
that  belonged  to  Saxons.1  He  lamed  their  horses  and  cattle,
killed  their  sheep  and  poultry,  overwhelmed  their  farmers
with  exactions,  and  assailed  their  servants  on  the  roads  with
sticks  or  swords.  The  monks  tried  the  effect  of  supplications
and  offers;  they  made  presents  to  his  attendants;  "they  tried
all  and  suffered  all,"  says  the  contemporary  history;  "then,
seeing  that  their  efforts  were  thrown  away,  and  that  the  malice
of  the  tyrant  and  his  people  only  increased,  they  took  with
them  the  sacred  vessels,  their  beds  and  their  books,  leaving
their  house  in  the  hands  of  the  all-powerful  God,  and  shaking
the  dust  from  their  feet  against  the  sons  of  eternal  fire,  they
returned  to  Croyland."2  Ivo  Taille-Bois,  rejoicing  at  their
departure,  promptly  sent  a  messenger  to  Angers,  his  native
town,  requesting  to  have  monks  sent  him,  to  whom  he  offered
a  good  house,  large  enough  for  a  prior  and  five  monks,  amply
furnished,  and  well  provided  with  lands  and  farms.

The  French  monks  passed  the  Channel  and  took  pos-
session of  the  succursal  of  Croyland.  The  abbot,  who  hap-
pened to  be  an  Englishman,  was  bold  enough  to  address  a
complaint  to  the  king's  council  against  the  Angevin  chief;
but  Ivo  Taille-Bois  was  fully  acquitted,  and  even  congra-
tulated upon  all  he  had  done  in  the  way  of  pillage,  out-
rage, and  murders.  "  These  foreigners  mutually  supported
each  other,"  says  the  ancient  historian;  "they  formed  a  close
league,  one  backing  the  other,  as,  upon  the  dragon's  back,
scale  is  joined  to  scale."3

There  was  at  this  time  in  Flanders  a  Saxon  named  Here-
ward,  long  settled  in  that  country,  to  whom  some  English
emigrants,  flying  their  native  land,  after  having  lost  all  they
had  possessed  there,  announced  that  his  father  was  dead,  that
his  paternal  heritage  was  the  property  of  a  Norman,  and  that
his  aged  mother  had  suffered  and  was  still  suffering  infinite
indignities  and  vexations.  On  hearing  this,  Hereward  de-

1  In  ejus  januis  . . .  tota  die  ...  conversances,  tanta  tyrannide  debacchatur.
(Ib.)  2  Ingulf.,  p.  71.  *3  Ib.  72.

TO  1072.]  HEREWARD.  263

parted  for  England,  and  arrived  without  suspicion  at  the  place
formerly  inhabited  by  his  family;  he  made  himself  known  to
such  of  his  relations  and  friends  as  had  survived  the  invasion,
induced  them  to  assemble  in  arms,  and  at  their  head  attacked
the  Norman  who  had  insulted  his  mother  and  taken  posses-
sion of  his  inheritance.  Hereward  expelled  him  and  took
his  place;  but  compelled,  for  his  own  safety,  not  to  limit  him-
self to  this  one  exploit,  he  maintained  a  partisan  warfare  in
the  vicinity  of  his  dwelling,  and  encountered  the  governors  of
the  neighbouring  fortresses  and  towns  in  numerous  engage-
ments, wherein  he  signalized  himself  by  his  extraordinary
bravery,  skill,  and  personal  strength.  The  report  of  his  great
deeds  spread  over  England,  and  the  eyes  of  the  conquered
turned  towards  him  with  a  sentiment  of  hope;  upon  his  ad-
ventures and  in  his  praise,  popular  songs,  now  lost,  were  com-
posed and  sung  in  the  streets,  in  the  very  ears  of  the  conque-
rors, with  impunity,  thanks  to  their  ignorance  of  the  English
idiom.1

The  inheritance  regained  from  the  Normans  by  the  Saxon
Hereward  was  situated  at  Brunn,  now  Bourn,  in  the  south  of
Lincolnshire,  near  the  abbey  of  Croyland,  and  not  far  from
that  of  Peterborough  and  from  the  isles  of  Ely  and  Thorney:
the  insurgents  of  these  districts  did  not  delay  to  open  a  cor-
respondence with  the  bands  commanded  by  the  brave  parti-
san chief.  Struck  with  his  renown  and  his  talents,  they  in-
vited him  to  join  them  and  to  be  their  captain;  and  Here-
ward, yielding  to  their  intreaties,  passed  over  to  the  camp  of
refuge  with  all  his  companions.2  Before  assuming  the  com-
mand of  men,  several  of  whom  were  members  of  the  high
Saxon  militia,  a  sort  of  brotherhood  or  corporation  in  arms,
authorized  by  the  ancient  laws  of  the  country,  he  was  desi-
rous of  joining  that  body,  so  as  to  become,  to  use  the  expres-
sion of  the  contemporary  authors,  a  right  war-man.3

The  institution  of  a  superior  class  among  those  who  devoted
themselves  to  arms,  and  of  ceremonies  without  which  none
could  be  admitted  into  this  military  order,  had  been  propagated

*  Ingulf.,  p.  70. See  Appendix  XVI.  2  Ib.  71.

3  Necdnm  militan  more  balteo  legitime  se  accinctum . .  .legitimae  mi-
litise  . . .  legitimum  militem.  ( Ib.  70. )

264  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1071

throughout  the  rest  of  Europe  by  the  Germanic  tribes  who
dismembered  the  Roman  empire.  This  custom  existed  in
Gaul,  and  in  the  Romane  language  of  that  country  a  member
of  this  high  militia  was  called  cavalier  or  chevalier,  because
mounted  warriors  were  then,  throughout  Gaul,  and  generally
upon  the  continent,  the  principal  strength  of  armies.  It  was
not  so  in  England;  the  perfection  of  equestrian  skill  went  as
nothing  in  the  idea  there  entertained  of  a  perfect  war-man;
the  two  only  elements  of  this  idea  were  youth  and  strength,
and  in  the  Saxon  tongue,  they  called  knit,  that  is  to  say,  young
man,  him  whom  the  French,  the  Normans,  the  southern
Gauls,  and  even  the  Germans,  called  horseman.1

Notwithstanding  this  difference,  the  ceremonies  by  which
a  warrior  was  admitted  into  the  high  national  militia  in  Eng-
land and  upon  the  Continent,  were  exactly  the  same;  the
aspirant  had  to  confess  in  the  evening,  watch  in  a  church
during  the  whole  night,  and  in  the  morning,  at  the  hour  of
mass,  lay  his  sword  upon  the  altar,  receive  it  again  from  the
hands  of  the  officiating  priest,  and  communicate  after  receiv-
ing it.  Every  combatant  who  had  gone  through  these  for-
malities was  thenceforward  reputed  a  right  war-man,  and
capable  of  assuming  any  grade  of  command.2  It  was  in  this
manner  that  a  warrior  was  made  a  knight  in  France  and
throughout  Gaul,  except  in  Normandy,  where,  by  a  vestige
of  the  Danish  customs,  the  investiture  of  knighthood  took
place  under  forms  more  military  and  less  religious.  The
Normans,  indeed,  had  a  saying,  that  he  who  had  had  his  sword
girded  on  by  a  priest  was  not  a  true  knight,  but  a  degenerate
burgess.3  This  sneer  was  applied  to  the  Saxon  Hereward,
when  the  knights  with  whom  he  had  often  crossed  swords
learned  that  he  had  gone  to  the  monastery  of  Peterborough
to  receive  the  military  baldric  from  the  hands  of  a  Saxon
abbot.  There  was,  however,  in  this,  on  the  part  of  the
Normans,  something  more  than  their  habitual  aversion  for  the
rites  which  connected  the  priesthood  with  chivalry;  they
were  indignant  that  an  English  rebel  should  obtain,  in  any
way  whatever,  the  right  to  style  himself  a  knight  equally

1  Al.  Knight,  or  Cild,  al.  Child.  The  Germans  in  like  manner,  before  they
adopted  the  term  Belter  or  Hitter,  employed  the  word  Ilild  or  Held.

2  Ingulf.,  p.  70.
3  ...  socordem  equitem  et  quiritem  degenerem  . . . (-?"&•)

TO 1072.]  EXPEDITION AGAINST HEREWARD.  265

with  themselves.  Their  pride  of  conquerors  seems,  on  this
occasion,  to  have  been  more  deeply  wounded  than  their  point
of  honour,  as  warriors,  was  with  the  religious  ceremony;  for
they  themselves  afterwards  submitted  to  this  ceremony,  and
accorded  to  the  bishops  the  right  of  conferring  knighthood.1

The  monastery  of  Peterborough  was  at  this  time  governed
by  the  same  Brand  who,  after  his  election  by  the  monks  of
the  abbey,  had  sought  from  Edgar  the  confirmation  of  his
title  of  abbot.  A  man  of  a  lofty  and  indomitable  spirit,  he
had  not  attempted,  in  any  way,  to  conciliate  the  favour  of
king  William.  In  performing  for  a  rebel  chief  the  cere-
monial of  blessing  of  arms,  he  gave  a  second  example  of
patriotic  courage  and  of  contempt  for  the  foreign  power.  His
fate  was  inevitable,  but  death  removed  him  from  this  world
ere  the  Norman  soldiers  came  in  the  king's  name  to  seize  him;
it  was  upon  his  decease  there  was  sent,  as  his  successor,
the  Norman  Turauld,  the  fighting  monk,  who  has  been  already
spoken  of.  Turauld,  bringing  with  him  an  hundred  and
sixty  well  armed  soldiers,  stopped  at  Stamford,  some  leagues
from  Peterborough,  and  thence  sent  scouts  to  observe  the
position  of  the  English  refugees,  and  to  ascertain  the  exact
obstacles  that  he  should  have  to  encounter  in  taking  posses-
sion of  the  abbey.2  On  their  part,  the  refugees,  informed  of
the  approach  of  the  Norman,  made  a  descent  upon  the  monas-
tery, and  finding  the  monks  not  at  all  resolved  to  defend
themselves  against  the  abbot  and  his  soldiers,  carried  away
with  them  all  the  valuables  they  could  find,  crosses,  chalices,
stuffs,  and  transported  them  by  water  to  their  quarters,  that
they  might,  as  they  said,  have  hostages  for  the  fidelity  of  the
convent.3  The  convent  was  not  faithful,  and  admitted  the
foreigners  without  any  resistance.

'  Turauld  installed  himself  as  abbot,  and  appropriated  sixty-
two  hides  of  the  land  of  his  church  for  the  payment  or  fee
of  his  soldiers.4  The  Angevin  Ivo  Taille-Bois,  viscount
of  Spalding,  soon  proposed  to  his  neighbour,  the  abbot,  an
expedition  against  Hereward  and  the  camp  of  the  Saxons.
Turauld  appeared  to  receive  the  proposition  with  delight,
but  as  his  courage  Avas  less  decided  against  armed  men  than

1  Sharon  Turner,  i.  140.

2  Cbron.  Sax.,  p.  177.  3  jj.

4  Ex  lib.  Hugonis  monachi  Petriburgensis ;  Lelaud,  Collectanea,  i.  14.

THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1071

against  monks,  he  allowed  the  Angevin  viscount  to  advance
alone  to  reconnoitre  among  the  forests  of  willows  which
served  as  the  Saxon  intrenchment,  and  himself  remained  at
a  distance  behind,  with  some  Normans  of  high  rank.1  As
Ivo  entered  the  wood  on  one  side,  Hereward  quitted  it  on  the
other,  attacked  the  abbot  and  his  Normans  unexpectedly,
seized  them  and  kept  them  in  his  marshes  until  they  paid  a
ransom  of  thirty  thousand  marks  of  silver.2

Meantime,  the  Danish  fleet,  which,  after  having  passed  the
winter  of  1069  in  the  mouth  of  the  Humber,  had  returned  in
the  spring  without  fighting  a  single  battle,  and  thus  occasioned
the  second  capture  of  York,  had  arrived  in  Denmark.  Its
chiefs,  on  their  return,  were  ill  received  by  king  Swen,  whose
orders  they  had  disobeyed  in  allowing  themselves  to  be
gained  over  by  William.  The  indignant  king  banished  his
brother  Osbiorn,  and,  himself  assuming  the  command  of  the
fleet,  sailed  for  Britain;3  he  entered  the  Humber,  and  on  the
first  rumour  of  his  approach  the  inhabitants  of  the  surround-
ing country  again  rose,  came  to  meet  the  Danes,  and  formed
an  alliance  with  them.  But  in  this  country,  so  devastated,  so
intimidated  by  military  executions,  there  were  not  sufficient
means  to  undertake  an  efficacious  resistance.  The  Danish
king  returned  home,  while  his  captains  and  warriors,  con-
tinuing their  route  towards  the  south,  entered  Boston  Wash,
and,  by  the  mouth  of  the  Ouse  and  the  Glen,  reached  the  isle
of  Ely.  The  refugees  received  them  as  liberators  and  friends.4

As  soon  as  king  William  was  informed  of  the  appearance
of  the  Danish  fleet,  he  sent,  in  all  haste,  messages  and  presents
to  king  Swen  in  Denmark;  and  this  king,  who  but  just  before
had  punished  his  brother  for  having  betrayed  the  Saxons,
himself  gained  over,  it  is  not  known  how — for  many  things
are  obscure  in  the  history  of  these  times — betrayed  them  in
his  turn.5  The  Danes  at  Ely  received  orders  to  return  home;
they  were  not  content  with  simply  obeying  the  order,  but
carried  off*  with  them  part  of  the  treasure  of  the  insurgents,
and,  among  other  things,  the  sacred  vessels,  crosses,  and  other
ornaments  of  the  abbey  of  Peterborough.  Then,  as  in  1069,

1  Sed  venerabilis  abbas,  ac  inajores  proceres  angustias  sylvarum  ingredi
formidantes...(Petri  Blesensis,  Ingulfi  Contimiat.)  vt  sup.  p.  125.
2  II).  3  Florent,  Wigorn.  Chron.,  p.  036.

4  Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  176.  5  Ib.  .177.

TO  1072.] HEREWARD  BETRAYED.  267

the  Norman  king  assembled  all  his  forces  against  the  deserted
Saxons.  The  camp  of  refuge  was  invested  by  land  and  by
water,  and  the  assailants  constructed  on  every  side  dykes  and
causeways  over  the  marshes.  Hereward  and  the  other  chiefs,
among  whom  were  distinguished  Siward  Beorn,  the  com-
panion of  the  flight  of  king  Edgar,  resisted  bravely  for  some
time.  William  commenced  on  the  western  side,  across  the
waters  covered  with  willows  and  rushes,  a  road  which  was  to
be  three  thousand  paces  long;1  but  his  workmen  were  con-
stantly harassed  and  disturbed  in  their  labours.

Hereward  made  attacks  so  sudden,  he  employed  stratagems
so  wholly  unforeseen,  that  the  Normans,  struck  with  super-
stitious fear,  attributed  his  success  to  the  aid  of  the  evil  one.
Thinking  to  fight  him  with  his  own  weapons,  they  had  re-
course to  magic;  Ivo  Taille-Bois,  appointed  by  the  king  to
superintend  the  works,  sent  for  a  witch,  who  was  to  disconcert
by  her  enchantments  all  the  warlike  devices  of  the  Saxons.2
The  magician  was  placed  in  a  wooden  tower  at  the  head  of
the  works  in  progress;  but  at  the  moment  when  the  soldiers
and  pioneers  were  confidently  advancing,  Hereward  sallied
out  from  the  side,  and,  firing  the  forest  of  osiers  which
covered  the  marsh,  destroyed  in  the  flames  the  sorceress  and
most  of  the  soldiers  and  Norman  workmen3  who  were  with
her.

This  was  not  the  only  success  of  the  insurgents;  despite
the  superiority  in  numbers  of  the  enemy,  they  stayed  them
by  dint  of  address  and  activity.  For  several  months,  the
isle  of  Ely  was  entirely  blockaded,  like  a  town  in  a  state
of  siege,  and  received  no  provisions  from  without.  There
was  in  the  isle  a  monastery,  whose  inmates,  unable  to  endure
the  hunger  and  misery  of  the  siege,  sent  to  the  king's  camp
and  offered  to  show  him  a  passage,  if  he  would  promise  to
leave  them  in  possession  of  their  property.  The  offer  was
accepted,  and  two  Norman  lords,  Gilbert  de  Clare  and

1  Ubi  adductis  instruments  et  structuris  lignorum  et  lapidum  et  ex  omni
genere  struis,  aggregationem  in  pnlude,  viam  licet  nimis  sibi  perinutilem  et
angustam,  straverunt.  (De  Gestis  Herwardi  Saxonis ;  Chron.  Anglo-
Norm.,  ii.  57.)

2  Petri  Blesensis,  Ingulf.  Contln.,  ut  sup.  p.  124,  125.

3  Id.  ib.  Et  stridor  flammarum  crepidantibus  virgis  virgultorum  cum
arboribus  salicum  terribiliter  insonuit.  (De  Gestis  Herwardi,  ut  sup.  p.  76.)

268  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1071

Guillaume  de  Garenne,  plighted  their  faith  for  the  execution
of  this  treaty.1  Thanks  to  the  treachery  of  the  monks  of  Ely,
the  royal  troops  penetrated  suddenly  into  the  island,  killed  a
thousand  English,  and  closely  surrounding  the  camp  of  refuge,
forced  the  remainder  to  lay  down  their  arms.2  All  surrendered
with  the  exception  of  Hereward,  who,  with  a  few  followers,
daring  to  the  last,  retreated  by  paths  into  which  the  Normans
did  not  venture  to  follow  him.3

Passing  from  marsh  to  marsh,  he  gained  the  lowlands  of
Lincolnshire,  where  some  Saxon  fishermen,  who  carried  fish
every  day  to  the  adjacent  Norman  station,  received  him  and
his  companions  in  their  boats,  and  concealed  them  under  heaps
of  straw.  The  boats  approached  the  station  as  usual;  the
chief  and  his  soldiers,  knowing  the  fishermen  by  sight,  con-
ceived no  alarm  or  suspicion;  they  prepared  their  dinner,  and
began  tranquilly  to  eat  it  under  their  tents.  Hereward  and
his  friends  rushed,  axe  in  hand,  upon  the  foreigners,  who
were  taken  wholly  by  surprise,  and  killed  a  great  number  of
them.  The  rest  fled,  quitting  their  post,  and  leaving  their
horses  ready  saddled,  which  the  English  seized.4

This  daring  action  was  not  the  last  exploit  of  the  great
partisan  captain.  He  appeared  at  various  points  with  his
band  newly  recruited,  and  lay  in  ambush  for  the  Normans,
to  whom  he  never  gave  quarter,  resolved,  says  a  contempo-
rary author,  that  his  old  companions  should  not  die  unavenged.5
He  had  with  him  an  hundred  men,  well  armed  and  of  in-
flexible fidelity,  among  whom  were  distinguished  as  the
bravest  and  most  devoted,  Winter,  his  brother-in-arms;
Gheri,  his  cousin;  Alfrik,  Godwin,  Leofwin,  Torkill,  Siward,
and  another  Siward,  surnamed  the  Red.6  If  one  of  these,
says  an  old  poet,  met  three  Normans,  he  refused  not  the  com-
bat ;  and  as  for  the  chief,  he  often  fought  with  seven  Normans
at  a  time.7  It  appears  that  the  glory  of  Hereward,  so  dear  to

1  De  Gestis  Herwurdi,  nt  sup.,  p.  78.

2  Stow,  Annuls,  (Loud.,  1631)  p.  114.  a  Cliron.  Saxon.,  p.  181.

4  Cliron.  de  Geoffroy  Gaynaar;  Chrou.  Anglo -Normandes,  i.  19.

5  Matth.  Paris,  i.  7. Ingulf.,  p.  71.

0  De  Gestis  Hervvardi,  ut  sup.  p.  52.

7  En  plusurs  lius  ceo  avint,
Encontre  VII.  tres  bien  se  tint.

(Geoff.  Gaymar,  vt  sup.  p.  22.)

TO  1072.] DEATH  OF  HEREWARD.  269

every  Saxon  heart,  gained  for  him  the  love  of  a  lady  named
Alswithe,  who  had  retained  her  large  property,  probably  be-
cause her  family  had  early  declared  for  the  new  king.  She
offered  her  hand  to  the  insurgent  chief,  in  admiration  of  his
courage;  he  accepted  it,  and  then,  dreading  his  continued  ex-
posure to  dangerous  adventures,  she  employed  all  her  influ-
ence to  induce  him  to  live  tranquilly,  and  to  make  his  peace
with  the  Conqueror.1

Hereward,  who  loved  her,  yielded  to  her  intreaties,  and,
as  the  phrase  ran,  accepted  the  king's  peace.  But  this  peace
could  only  be  a  truce;  despite  William's  oath,  and  perhaps  by
his  orders,  the  Normans  soon  sought  to  rid  themselves  of  the
formidable  Saxon  chief.  His  house  was  several  times  at-
tacked; and  one  day  that  he  was  sleeping  in  the  open  air
after  dinner,  a  troop  of  armed  men,  among  whom  were  several
Bretons,  surprised  and  surrounded  him.  He  was  without  his
coat  of  mail,  and  his  only  weapons  were  a  sword  and  a  short
pike,  with  which  the  Saxons  were  always  armed.  Suddenly
awakened  by  the  noise,  he  arose,  and,  unintimidated  by  their
number,  exclaimed  :  "  Felon  traitors,  the  king  has  given  me
his  peace;  if  you  seek  my  goods  or  my  life,  by  God,  you
shall  pay  for  them  dearly  !"2

And  at  these  words,  Hereward  thrust  his  lance  with
such  force  against  a  knight  who  stood  facing  him,  that  it
pierced  his  heart  through  his  hauberk.  Notwithstanding
numerous  wounds,  he  continued  to  thrust  with  his  pike  while
it  lasted;  he  then  drew  his  sword;  and  this  weapon  breaking
on  the  helmet  of  one  of  his  enemies,  he  still  fought  with  the
pommel.  Fifteen  Normans,  says  the  tradition,  had  already
fallen  around  him,  when  he  received  at  once  four  lance-
thrusts.3  He  had  still  sufficient  strength  to  remain  on  his
knees,  and  in  this  position  seizing  a  buckler  which  lay  beside

1  Ceo  fut  Alsued  qe  90  manda
A  Ereward,  que  mult  ama
Au  roy  se  devoit  accorder. —  (Ib.  p.  22.)

8  Mult  fierement  dist  as  Francois :
Triwes  m'avoit  done  li  rois,
Fel  traitres,  vendrai  moi  cher. — (Ib.  p.  24.)

3  Mes  IIII.  viendrent  a  son  dos
Qui  Font  feru  par  mi  le  cors,
Od  IIII.  lances  Tout  feru.— (Ib.  2G.)

270  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1071

him,  he  struck  Raoul  de  Dol,  a  Breton  knight,  so  fiercely  in
the  face,  that  he  fell  back  dead;  but  at  the  same  moment
Here  ward  himself  expired.  The  chief  of  the  troop,  named
Asselin,  cut  off  his  head,  swearing  by  the  virtue  of  God  that
in  his  life  he  had  never  seen  so  valiant  a  man.  It  was  after-
wards a  popular  saying  among  the  Saxons,  and  even  among  the
Normans,  that  if  there  had  been  four  such  as  he  in  England,
the  French  would  never  have  entered  it,  and  that  had  he  not
died  in  this  manner,  one  day  or  another  he  would  have  driven
them  all  out.1

Thus  was  destroyed,  in  the  year  1072,  the  camp  of  Ely,
which  had  shed  a  moment's  gleaming  hope  of  liberty  over
five  counties.  Long  after  the  dispersion  of  the  brave  men
who  had  sought  refuge  in  it,  there  were  found  in  this  nook  of
marshy  land  traces  of  their  entrenchments  and  the  remains
of  a  wooden  fortress,  which  the  local  population  called
Hereward's  castle.2  Many  of  those  who  submitted  had  their
hands  cut  off  or  their  eyes  put  out,  and  in  this  condition,
with  cruel  mockery,  the  Conqueror  set  them  free  ;3  others  were
imprisoned  in  fortresses  in  every  part  of  England.  Arch-
bishop Stigand  was  condemned  to  perpetual  seclusion;  Eghel-
win,  bishop  of  Durham,  accused  by  the  Normans  of  having
stolen  the  treasures  of  his  church,  because  he  had  employed
them  in  maintaining  the  patriotic  cause,  was  imprisoned  at
Abingdon,  where,  a  few  months  after,  he  died  of  hunger.4
Another  bishop,  Eghelrik,  was  shut  up  in  Westminster  abbey,
for  having,  as  the  sentence  pronounced  against  him  by  the
foreign  judges  set  forth,  broken  the  public  peace  and  exer-

1  Et  sil  eust  eu  od  lui  trois,
Mai1  i  entrassent  li  Franyois  ;
Et  s'il  ne  fust  issi  occis,
Tous  les  cha9ast  for  del  pa'is. — (Ib.  27.)

The  violent  deatli  of  Hereward,  respecting  which  the  Latin  Chronicles
are  silent,  is  attested  by  an  ancient  roll  of  the  genealogy  of  the  Seigneurs
de  Brunne :  "  Qui  Hugo,  dum  semel  cum  prsefato  Herewardo  apud  Hun-
tyngdone  hospitatus  fuisset,  orta  inter  eos  gravi  contencione,  maligno  spi-
ritu  instigante,  ipsum  Herewardum  miserabiliter  peremit."  (Chron.  Anglo-
Normandes,  ii.  pref.  14.)

2  Matth.  Paris,  i.  7.
3  Florent.  Wigorn.  Chron.,  p.  637.

4  ...inaedia  spontanea  seu  coacto.  (Hist.  Episcop.  Dunelm.;  Anglia
Sacra,  i.  703.)

TO  1072.] PUNISHMENT OF THE MONKS OF ELY.  271

cised  piracy.  But  the  judgment  of  the  English,  the  popular
opinion  of  his  case,  were  far  different;  he  was  praised  so  long
as  he  lived,  and  after  his  death  was  honoured  as  a  saint.
Fathers  taught  their  children  to  implore  his  intercession;  and
a  century  afterwards,  pilgrims  still  visited  his  tomb.1

The  treachery  of  the  monks  of  Ely  soon  received  its  re-
compence;  forty  soldiers  occupied  their  convent  as  a  military
post,  and  lived  at  free  quarters.  Every  morning  the  butler
had  to  distribute  to  them  provisions  and  pay  in  the  great  hall
of  the  cloister.2  The  monks  complained  bitterly  of  the  viola-
tion of  the  treaty  they  had  concluded  with  the  king,  and  were
answered  that  it  was  necessary  to  guard  the  isle  of  Ely.3
They  then  offered  seven  hundred  marks  to  be  exempted  from
the  charge  of  maintaining  the  foreign  soldiers;  and  this  sum,
which  they  obtained  by  despoiling  their  church,  was  carried
to  the  Norman  Picot,  the  royal  viscount  at  Cambridge.  The
viscount  had  the  money  weighed,  and  finding  that  by  chance
the  weight  was  an  ounce  short,  he  formally  accused  the  monks
of  seeking  to  defraud  the  king,  and  condemned  them,  by  his
court,  to  pay  three  hundred  marks  more,  as  a  penalty  for
the  offence.4  After  the  payment  of  the  thousand  marks,
came  the  royal  commissioners,  who  carried  off  from  the  abbey
of  Ely  everything  of  value,  and  drew  up  a  survey  of  the
lands  of  the  abbey,  for  the  purpose  of  dividing  it  into  fiefs.5
The  monks  poured  forth  complaints  to  which  no  one  listened;
they  invoked  pity  for  their  church,  once  the  most  beautiful,
they  said,  among  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  and  now  suf-
fering and  oppressed.6  But  not  a  tear  flowed,  not  a  hand
was  armed  in  their  cause.

After  the  entire  defeat  and  dispersion  of  the  refugees
of  the  Isle  of  Ely,  the  Norman  army  and  fleet  proceeded  to-
wards the  northern  counties,  to  make  a  sort  of  battue  there,
and  prevent  the  formation  of  new  assemblies.  Passing  the
Tweed,  for  the  first  time,  they  entered  the  territory  of  Scot-
land, to  arrest  all  the  English  emigrants  there,  and  terrify

1  Willelm.  Malraesb.,  dc  Gcslls,  &c.  ut  sup.  lib.  iii.  p.  277.

2  Thorn.  Eliensis,  Hist.  Eliensis;  Anglia  Sacra,  i.  012.

3  Ob  custodiam.  (ib.)  4  Stow,  Annals,  p.  114.

5  Thorn.  Eliensis,  ut  sup.  p.  610.
e  Hist.  Eliensis,  apud  Eer.  Anglic.  Script.,  (Gale)  iii.  501.

272  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1071

king  Malcolm,  who  had  just  before  made  a  hostile  incursion
into  Northumberland.1  The  emigrants  escaped  their  search,
and  the  king  of  Scotland  would  not  deliver  them  up  to  the
Normans;  but,  intimidated  by  the  presence  of  troops  better
disciplined  and  better  armed  than  his  own,  he  came  to  meet
king  William  in  a  peaceful  attitude,  touched  his  hand  in
sign  of  friendship,  promised  that  William's  enemies  should
be  his  also,  and  freely  acknowledged  himself  his  vassal  and
liege-man?

William  returned,  content  with  having  thus  deprived  the
Saxon  cause  of  its  last  support;  on  his  way  back  he  was  re-
ceived at  Durham  by  bithop  Vaulcher,  a  man  of  Lorraine,
whom  the  Normans  had  instituted  in  the  place  of  Eghelwin,
degraded  by  them,  and  condemned,  as  we  have  seen,  to  per-
petual imprisonment.  It  appears  that  the  mournful  fate  of
the  Saxon  prelate  had  excited  throughout  the  country  a  vio-
lent animosity  to  the  successor  elected  by  the  foreigners.
Although  the  city  of  Durham,  standing  upon  an  eminence,
was  strong  by  its  position,  Vaulcher  did  not  consider  himself
safe  there  from  the  enmity  of  the  Northumbrians.  At  his
request,  say  the  chronicles,  the  king  built  a  citadel  upon  the
topmost  height  of  the  place,  where  the  bishop  could  dwell
with  his  people  secure  from  any  attack.3

This  bishop,  after  his  consecration  at  Winchester,  had
been  accompanied  to  York  by  a  numerous  escort  of  Norman
knights,  and,  in  this  city,  the  Saxon  Gospatrick,  who  had
purchased  for  a  large  sum  the  government  of  the  country  be-
yond the  Tyne,  came  to  meet  the  bishop  and  conduct  him  to
Durham.  This  service  rendered  to  the  cause  of  the  con-
quest did  not  efface  from  the  Conqueror's  mind  the  fact  that
Gospatrick  was  an  Englishman,  and  had  been  a  patriot:  no
obsequiousness  could  remove  that  original  stain.  In  the
same  year,  king  William  deprived  the  Saxon  of  the  dignity
he  had  purchased,  without  making  him  any  restitution,  and
the  reason  he  alleged  was,  that  Gospatrick  had  fought  at  the
siege  of  York,  and  taken  part  in  the  insurrection  in  which
Robert  de  Comine  had  fallen.4  Filled  with  the  same  grief
and  the  same  remorse  that  had  formerly  attacked  archbishop

1  Mattb.  Westmon.,  p.  227. Matth.  Paris,  i.  7.

2  Ib.  p.  6,  7.  3  Roger  de  Hoveden,  p.  454.

4  Id.  ib. — Dugdale,  Monast.,  i.  41.

TO 1073.]  THE MANCEAUX.  273

Eldred,  Gospatrick  quitted  England  for  ever,  and  settled  in
Scotland,  where  his  family  long  endured,  honoured  and  opu-
lent.1 The  government,  or  to  use  the  Norman  phrase  the
earldom,  of  Northumberland  was  then  given  to  Waltheof,
son  of  Siward,  who,  like  his  predecessor,  had  fought  in  the
Saxon  ranks  at  the  siege  of  York,  but  whose  fatal  hour  had
not  yet  arrived.

Afterthis  series  of  successful  expeditions,  king  William,  find-
ing in  England  prostrate  depression — happy  peace  the  con-
querors sty  led  it — ventured  upon  a  new  journey  to  Gaul,  whither
he  was  called  by  intestine  disorders  and  resistance  to  his  au-
thority. The  count  of  Maine,  shut  up,  so  to  speak,  between
two  much  more  powerful  states,  Normandy  and  Anjou,  seemed
destined  alternately  to  fall  under  the  suzerainty  of  the  one  or
the  other.  But  notwithstanding  the  disadvantage  of  position
and  inferiority  of  forces,  the  Manceaux  often  struggled  vigo-
rously for  the  re-establishment  of  their  national  independence;
so  that  it  was  said  of  them  in  the  eleventh  century,  that  they
were  of  a  rugged,  haughty,  and  disobedient  temperament.2
Some  years  before  his  invasion  of  England,  William  was  ac-
knowledged suzerain  of  Maine  by  Herbert,  count  of  that
country,  the  great  enemy  of  the  Angevin  power,  and  whose
nocturnal  incursions  against  the  towns  and  villages  of  Anjou
had  procured  for  him  the  singular  and  striking  surname  of
Eveille-Chiens  (Wake-dog).  As  vassals  of  the  duke  of  Nor-
mandy, the  Manceaux  readily  furnished  their  contingent
of  horse  and  archers;  but  when  they  found  him  occupied  with
the  cares  and  embarrassments  of  the  conquest,  they  conceived
the  idea  of  emancipating  themselves  from  the  Norman  do-
mination. Nobles,  war-men,  burgesses,  every  class  of  the
population,  concurred  in  the  patriotic  work;  the  castles
guarded  by  Norman  troops  were  attacked  and  taken  one  after
another;  Turgis  de  Tracy  and  Guillaume  de  la  Ferte,  who
commanded  the  citadel  of  Mans,  surrendered  it,  and  left
the  country,  with  all  such  of  their  countrymen  as  had  escaped
the  popular  vengeance.3

The  impulse  given  to  the  people  by  this  insurrection  did
not  cease  when  Maine  had  been  restored  to  its  national  lords;
a  revolution  of  a  new  kind  now  broke  out  in  the  capital  town.

1  Roper  de  Hoveden,  p.  424. Dr.gdale,  Barommc.
8  Order.  Vital.,  p.  y.'U.  s  II.  r>.°,?.

VOL.  I.  T

274  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1073.

After  having  fought  for  the  independence  of  the  country,  the
citizens  of  Mans,  on  their  return  home,  began  to  find  the
government  of  their  count  harassing  and  vexatious,  and  grew
angry  at  many  things  which  they  had  hitherto  tolerated.  At
the  first  heavy  tax  that  was  imposed  upon  them,  they  rose,
and  binding  themselves  together  by  the  oath  of  mutual  sup-
port, formed  what  in  the  language  of  the  time  was  called  a

commune.

The  bishop  of  Mans,  the  nobles  of  the  town,  and  Geofroi  de
Mayenne,  guardian  of  the  reigning  count,  were  compelled  to
take  the  oath  of  the  commune,  and  to  confirm  by  this  oath  the
new  laws  published  against  their  own  power;  but  several  of  the
nobles  around  refused  their  adhesion,  and  the  citizens,  to  com-
pel them  to  it,  proceeded  to  attack  their  castles  and  manor-
houses.  They  marched  upon  these  expeditions  in  parishes,
the  men  of  each  parish  being  preceded  by  its  own  cross  and
banner;  but  despite  this  religious  display,  they  fought  furi-
ously, passionately,  cruelly,  as  ever  happens  in  political
troubles.  They  were  reproached  with  carrying  on  war
during  Lent  and  in  Passion  week;  with  too  severely  and  too
summarily  executing  justice  on  their  enemies,  hanging  some
and  mutilating  others,  without  any  regard  to  the  rank  of
persons.2  Hated  by  nearly  all  the  seigneurs  of  the  country,
the  commune  of  Mans,  at  a  period  when  these  institutions
were  yet  rare,  obstinately  defended  its  liberty.  An  act  of
treachery,  which  placed  Count  Geofroi  de  Mayenne  in  pos-
session of  the  citadel,  compelled  the  citizens  to  fight  in  the
streets,  and  to  set  fire  to  their  own  houses,  to  advance  the
operations  of  the  siege.  They  did  this  with  that  valorous
self-devotion  which,  half  a  century  later,  was  displayed  so
strikingly  in  the  great  communes  of  France.3

It  was  during  this  struggle  between  feudal  power  and  civic
liberty,  that  the  king  of  England  prepared  to  invade  Maine,
and  impose  his  suzerainty  upon  both  of  the  rival  parties.
Skilful  in  profiting  by  occasion,  he  ordered  the  enrolment  of
all  the  English  who  chose  to  serve  him  for  pay;  he  calculated
that,  in  the  misery  to  which  most  of  them  were  reduced,  they

1  Gest.  pontif.  ceiioman,  apnd  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  xii.  540.

2  Id.  ib.
3  Id.  ib. See  Lettres  sur  1'Histoire  de  France,  letter  xiii.  et  seq.

A.D. 1073.] SUBJECTION OF THE MANCEAUX.  275

would  be  tempted  by  the  booty  which  the  war  seemed  to
promise.  Men  who  had  not  house  or  home,  the  remnant  of
the  partisan  bands,  and  even  chieftains  who  had  distinguished
themselves  in  the  camp  of  refuge,  assembled  under  the  Norman
banner,  without  ceasing  to  hate  the  Normans.  They  rejoiced
at  the  idea  of  going  to  combat  men  who,  though  the  enemies
of  king  William,  seemed  to  them,  by  the  similarity  of
language,  of  the  same  race  with  him.  Without  asking
whether  it  had  been  willingly  or  on  compulsion  that  the
Manceaux  had,  seven  years  before,  taken  part  in  the  conquest,
they  marched  against  them  in  the  train  of  the  Conqueror,  as
to  an  act  of  national  vengeance.  From  their  first  entry  into
the  country,  they  gave  themselves  up,  with  a  sort  of  frenzy,
to  every  species  of  devastation  and  rapine,  tearing  up  the
vines,  cutting  down  the  trees,  burning  the  villages;  in  a
word,  doing  to  Maine  all  the  evil  they  would  fain  have  done
to  Normandy.1

The  terror  caused  by  their  excesses  contributed  more  than
the  bravery  of  the  Norman  knights,  or  even  the  presence  of
king  William,  to  the  submission  of  the  country.  The  for-
tresses and  castles  surrendered,  for  the  most  part,  before  the
first  assault,  and  the  principal  citizens  of  Mans  brought  the
keys  of  their  town  to  the  king  in  his  camp  on  the  banks  of  the
Sarthe.  They  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  him  as  to  their
legitimate  lord,  and  in  return,  William  promised  them  the
preservation  of  their  ancient  franchises,  but  it  would  appear,
without  consenting  to  the  maintenance  of  the  commune.  The
army  then  returned  to  England,  where  the  Saxon  soldiers
landed,  laden  with  booty;  but  these  ill  acquired  riches  were
fatal  to  many  of  them  in  exciting  the  envy  and  cupidity  of
the  Normans.2

While  these  events  were  taking  place,  king  Edgar  went
from  Scotland  to  Flanders,  to  negotiate  with  the  earl  of  that
country,  the  political  rival,  although  the  relation  of  William,
some  aid  for  the  Saxon  cause,  now  more  hopeless  than  ever;
his  efforts  meeting  with  little  success,  he  returned  to  Scotland,
where  he  was  surprised  to  receive  a  friendly  message  from

1 ...Omnem  provinciam  debiliorem  simul  et  pauperiorem  rmilto  post  tern-
pore  reliquerunt. (Mattli.  Paris,  i.  8.)

2  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  tit  sup.  p.  533. Gesta  pontif.  Cen.,  ut  sup.  p.  539.
T2

276  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D. 1073.

the  king  of  France,  Philip,  the  first  of  that  name.1  Philip,
alarmed  at  the  successes  of  the  Norman  king  in  Maine,  had
resolved,  by  assisting  the  Saxons,  to  raise  up  obstacles  in  his
way,  which  should  render  him  less  active  on  the  other  side  of
the  Channel;  he  invited  Edgar  to  come  to  him,  and  aid  him
in  his  counsels;  he  promised  him  a  fortress  at  Montreuil,  at
once  near  England,  upon  which  he  might  thence  make  a  de-
scent, and  near  Normandy,  which  he  might  ravage.  Edgar
accepted  his  proposal,  and  arranged  everything  for  his  journey
to  France.  King  Malcolm,  his  brother-in-law,  become  the
liegeman  and  vassal  of  William,  could  not,  without  breaking
his  faith,  supply  the  Saxon  with  soldiers  for  this  enterprise;
he  contented  himself  with  secretly  giving  him  money,  and,  as
was  the  custom  of  the  period,  distributing  arms  and  clothes
among  his  companions.2

Edgar  set  sail,  but  had  hardly  got  out  of  sight  of  land
when  his  vessels  were  dispersed  and  driven  on  shore  by  a
violent  tempest.  Some  were  dashed  to  pieces  on  the  northern
coasts  of  England,  and  their  crews  became  prisoners  to  the
Normans;  the  others  sunk.  The  king  and  the  principal  per-
sonages who  were  with  him  escaped  these  two  dangers,  and
returned  to  Scotland,  having  lost  all,  some 'on  foot  and  the
rest  poorly  mounted,  says  the  contemporary  chronicle.  After
this  misfortune,  Malcolm  advised  his  brother  to  struggle  no
longer  against  fate,  and  for  a  third  time  to  seek  peace  of  the
Conqueror.  Edgar,  allowing  himself  to  be  persuaded,  sent  a
message  across  the  Channel  to  king  William,  who  invited  him
to  join  him  in  Normandy;  on  his  way  he  traversed  all  England,
escorted  by  the  chiefs  and  Norman  governors  of  the  counties,
and  entertained  in  their  castles.  At  the  court  of  Rouen,
where  he  remained  eleven  years,  he  lived  in  the  king's  palace,
wore  his  uniform,  and  occupied  himself  more  with  dogs  and
horses  than  with  political  interests;3  but,  at  the  end  of  these
eleven  years,  he  experienced  a  sentiment  of  regret,  and  re-
turned to  England  to  dwell  among  his  countrymen  ;4  he  after-
wards returned  once  more  to  Normandy,  and  passed  the  re-
mainder as  he  had  passed  the  former  part  of  his  life,  in  utter

1  Chvon.  Saxon.  Fr.ig.,  sub  ait  no  107").  -  Ib,

s  Ib.— Willelm.  Malmesb.,  dc  Gestis,  &c.,  p.  ]()3.

4  Annales  Waveileienses,  sub  anno  1080,  apiid  lier.  Anglic.  Pcript.,
(Gale)  ii.  1GC.

A.D. 1074.]  SAXON NUNS.  277

irresolution,  taking  no  determinate  course,  the  sport  of  events,
a  man  without  energy  and  without  pride.1

The  sad  destiny  of  the  English  seemed  to  be  irretrievably
fixed.  In  the  absence  of  all  opposition,  the  calm  of  entire
hopelessness  reigned  throughout  the  land.  The  foreign  mer-
chants fearlessly  displayed  in  the  towns  and  villages,  stuffs
and  weapons  fabricated  on  the  continent,  which  they  exchanged
for  the  booty  of  the  conquest.2  A  man  might  then  travel,
says  the  contemporary  history,  having  with  him  his  weight
in  gold,  and,  get  none  but  good  words  addressed  to  him.3
The  Norman  soldier,  more  at  ease  in  the  possession  of  his
share  of  land  or  money,  less  disturbed  by  midnight  alarms,
less  frequently  obliged  to  sleep  in  his  hauberk,  became  less
violent  and  less  malevolent.  The  conquered  themselves  had
some  moments  of  repose;4  the  English  women  no  longer  feared
for  their  chastity:  many  of  them,  who  had  sought  refuge  in
the  nunneries,  and  had  taken  the  veil  as  a  protection  against
the  brutality  of  the  conquerors,5  becoming  weary  of  this  en-
forced retirement,  wished  to  return  to  their  friends  and  fami-
lies. But  it  was  not  so  easy  for  the  Saxon  women  to  quit  the
cloister  as  it  had  been  to  enter  it.  The  Norman  prelates  held
the  keys  of  the  monasteries,  as  the  Norman  barons  held  those
of  the  towns;  and  it  was  deemed  necessary  for  these  sovereign
masters  of  the  souls  and  bodies  of  the  English  to  deliberate,
in  solemn  assembly,  upon  the  question  of  setting  free  the
Saxon  women  who  had  become  nuns  against  their  inclination,
and  solely  from  necessity.  Archbishop  Lanfranc  presided  at
this  council,  at  which  were  present  all  the  bishops  nominated
by  king  William,  several  abbots  from  Normandy,  and  other
personages  of  high  rank.  The  opinion  of  the  primate  was,
that  the  English  women  who,  to  preserve  their  chastity,  had
sought  the  convent  as  an  asylum,  ought  not  to  be  punished
for  having  obeyed  the  holy  precepts,  and  that  the  doors  of  the
cloisters  ought  to  be  thrown  open  for  all  who  so  desired.6
This  opinion  prevailed  in  the  Norman  council,  less,  perhaps,
because  it  was  the  most  humane,  than  because  it  proceeded
from  the  confident  and  intimate  friend  of  king  William;  the

1  Willelm.  Malraesb.,  itt  sup.

2  Order.  Vital.,  p.  520.  »  Matth.  Westmon.,  p.  229.

*  Order.  Vital.,  vt  sup.  *  Eadmer,  p.  57.  6  Id.  ib.

278  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1074.

women  who  had  still  a  family  or  a  protector  regained  their
liberty.

About  the  same  time,  William  Fitz-Osbern  died  a  violent
death  in  Flanders,  where  a  love  affair  had  involved  him  in
political  intrigues.1  The  eldest  of  his  sons,  who  bore  the  same
name  with  himself,  inherited  his  lands  in  Normandy,  and
Roger,  the  youngest,  had  the  domains  conquered  in  England,
with  the  earldom  of  Hereford.  He  took  upon  himself  the
charge  of  providing  for  and  portioning  his  young  sister,
named  Emma,  and  negotiated  a  marriage  for  her  with  Raulf
de  Gael,  a  Breton  seigneur,  who  had  become  earl  of  Norfolk.2
For  some  reason  or  other,  this  alliance  was  displeasing  to  the
king,  who  sent  from  Normandy  an  express  order  not  to  con-
clude it;  but  the  parties  paid  no  heed  to  this  prohibition,  and
on  the  day  fixed  for  the  ceremony  the  bride  was  conducted
to  Norwich,  where  was  celebrated,  says  the  Saxon  chronicler,
a  marriage  that  proved  fatal  to  all  who  were  present  at  it.3
Bishops  and  Norman  barons  were  there,  Saxons,  friends  of
the  Normans,  and  even  several  Welshmen,  invited  by  the
earl  of  Hereford;  Waltheof,  son  of  Si  ward,  husband  of  one  of
the  king's  nieces,  and  earl  of  Huntingdon,  Northampton,  and
Northumberland,  prominently  figured  throughout  the  affair.4

After  a  sumptuous  repast,  whereat  the  wine  flowed  in
abundance,  the  tongues  of  the  guests  became  loosened.  Roger
de  Hereford  loudly  censured  the  refusal  of  king  William  to
sanction  this  union  between  his  sister  and  the  earl  of
Norfolk;  he  complained  of  this  as  an  insult  to  the  memory
of  his  father,  the  man  to  whom  the  Bastard,  he  said,  un-
doubtedly owed  his  conquest  and  his  kingdom.5  The  Saxons,
who  had  received  from  William  other  and  far  more  cruel
outrages,  vehemently  applauded  the  invectives  of  the  Nor-
man earl;  and  all  present  becoming  gradually  excited,  there
arose  a  tumult  of  execration  against  the  conqueror  of
England.6

"  He  is  a  bastard,  a  man  of  low  birth,"  said  the  Normans;
"  he  may  call  himself  king,  but  'tis  clearly  seen  that  he  is
not  made  for  one,  and  that  he  is  not  agreeable  in  the  sight  of

i  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  p.  105.  2  ciiron.  Sax.,  p.  D82.

3  Ib.  *  Matth.  Paris,  i.  9.

5  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  de  Gest.,  &c.,  p.  104.  s  Matth.  Paris,  i.

A.D. 1074.] NORMAN REVOLT IN ENGLAND.  279

God."1  "  He  poisoned,"  cried  the  Bretons,  "  he  poisoned
Conan,  the  brave  earl  of  Brittany,  for  whom  our  country
still  mourns." — "  He  invaded  the  noble  land  of  England,"
exclaimed  the  Saxons  in  their  turn;  "  he  massacred  the
legitimate  heirs,  or  obliged  them  to  expatriate  themselves."
"  And  those  who  came  in  his  train  or  to  his  assistance,"
cried  the  foreigners;  "those  who  raised  him  higher  than
any  of  his  predecessors  have  not  been  honoured  by  him
as  they  ought  to  have  been;  he  is  ungrateful  to  the  brave
men  who  have  shed  their  blood  in  his  service.  What
has  he  given  to  us,  the  conquerors  who  are  covered  with
wounds?  Sterile  and  devastated  tracts  of  land;  and  when  he
sees  our  fiefs  improving,  he  deprives  us  of  them." — "  'Tis
true, 'tis  true!"  tumultuously  exclaimed  all  the  guests:  "he
is  odious  to  all,  and  his  death  would  gladden  the  hearts  of
all."

One  of  the  two  Norm.an  earls  then  arose,  and  addressing
Waltheof:  "  Brave  man,"  he  said,  "this  is  the  moment;  this  is
for  thee  the  hour  of  vengeance  and  fortune.  Join  us,  and
we  will  re-establish  the  kingdom  of  England,  in  every  respect
as  it  was  in  the  time  of  king  Edward.  One  of  us  three  shall
be  king,  the  other  two  shall  command  under  him,  and  all  the
lordships  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  held  of  us.  William  is
occupied  beyond  sea  with  interminable  affairs;  we  are  satis-
fied that  he  will  not  again  cross  the  Channel.  Now,  brave
warrior,  adopt  this  plan;  'tis  the  best  for  thee,  thy  family,
and  thy  crushed  and  fallen  nation."2  New  acclamations
arose  at  these  words;  earls  Eoger  and  Raulf,  several  bishops
and  abbots,  and  a  great  number  of  Norman  barons  and  Saxon
warriors,  bound  themselves  by  oath  against  king  William.3
Waltheof,  after  a  resistance  which  proved  his  distaste  for  this
strange  association,  allowed  himself  to  be  persuaded,  and
joined  the  conspiracy.  Roger  de  Hereford  hastened  to  his
province  to  collect  his  friends,  and  engaged  in  his  cause
many  of  the  Welsh  of  the  borders,  who  joined  him,  either  for
pay,  or  out  of  hatred  to  the  Conqueror,  who  menaced  their
independence.4  As  soon  as  earl  Roger  had  assembled  his
forces,  he  marched  towards  the  east,  where  the  other  con-
spirators awaited  him.

i  Order.  Vitalis,  p.  534.  *  Id.  ib.

3  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  ut  sup.  *  Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  182.

280  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1074.

But  when  about  to  pass  the  Severn  at  the  bridge  of  Wor-
cester, he  found  that  formidable  preparations  had  been  made
to  stop  him;  and  ere  he  could  find  another  passage,  the
Norman  Ours,  viscount  of  Worcester,  and  bishop  Wulf-
s tan,  still  faithful  to  king  William,  directed  troops  upon
various  points  of  the  east  bank  of  the  river.  Eghelwig,
the  courtier- abbot,  who  had  become  the  servant  of  the
foreigners  against  his  countrymen,  induced  the  popula-
tion of  Gloucestershire  to  obey  the  call  of  the  royal
chiefs,  rather  than  the  proclamations  and  promises  of  the
Norman  conspirators.1  They  accordingly  assembled  under
the  banner  of  count  Gualtier  de  Lacy  against  Roger  de  Here-
ford and  his  Welshmen,  whose  cause  did  not  seem  to  them  so
clearly  identical  with  the  national  cause.  Of  two  parties,
both  almost  equally  indifferent  to  them,  they  adopted  that
which  appeared  to  involve  the  least  danger,  and  served  king
William,  whom  they  hated  more  than  death.  In  his  absence,
the  primate  Lanfranc,  under  the  title  of  royal  lieutenant,  ad-
ministered affairs;2  he  hastily  despatched  troops  from  Lon-
don and  Westminster  to  the  county  in  which  Roger  was  held
in  check,  and  at  the  same  time  hurled  a  sentence  of  excom-
munication against  him,  couched  in  the  folio  wing  terms:

"  Since  thou  hast  departed  from  the  rules  of  conduct  ob-
served by  thy  father,  hast  renounced  the  faith  that  he  all  his
life  preserved  towards  his  lord,  and  which  gained  him  such
great  riches,  in  virtue  of  my  canonical  authority  I  curse  thee,
excommunicate  thee,  and  exclude  thee  from  the  threshold  of
the  church  and  the  society  of  the  faithful."3

Lanfranc  also  wrote  to  the  king  in  Normandy,  to  inform
him  of  the  revolt,  and  his  hope  of  soon  putting  an  end  to  it.
"  It  were  with  great  pleasure,"  said  he,  "  and  as  a  messenger
from  God  himself,  that  we  should  see  you  again  among  us.
Do  not,  however,  hasten  to  cross  the  sea;  for  it  were  shame
to  us  were  you  obliged  to  come  and  assist  us  in  destroying  a
handful  of  traitors  and  robbers."4  The  former  epithet  would
seem  to  have  been  directed  at  the  Normans  who  followed
earl  Roger,  and  the  second  at  the  numerous  Saxons  in  the

1  Script,  rer.  Danic.,  iii.  207.

2  Lanfraucus  erat  princeps  et  custos  Angliae.  (Vita  Laiifrauci ;  Lanfran-c.
Opera,  p.  15.

3  Lanfranc.  Opera,  p.  321.  *.  Ib.  317.,

A.D.  1074.] BATTLE  AT  FAGADON.  281

army  of  Raulf  de  Gael,  encamped  near  Cambridge,  or  who,
encouraged  by  the  presence  of  this  army,  began  to  rise  in  the
maritime  towns  of  the  east,  and  to  renew  their  old  negotia-
tions with  the  Danes.1

The  king  of  Denmark  once  more  promised  to  send  troops
against  king  William;  but,  before  the  arrival  of  these  suc-
cours, the  army  of  the  earl  of  Norfolk  was  attacked  by  Eudes,
bishop  of  Bayeux,  Geoffroy,  bishop  of  Coutances,  and  earl
William  de  Warenne,  with  superior  forces.  The  battle  was
fought  in  a  place  which  is  called  by  the  ancient  historians
Fagaclon.2  The  Norman  and  Saxon  conspirators  were  com-
pletely defeated,  and  it  is  related  that  the  conquerors  cut  off
the  right  foot  of  every  prisoner,  of  whatever  rank  or  nation.3
Raulf  de  Gael  escaped,  and  hastened  to  shut  himself  up  in
his  citadel  of  Norwich,  whence  he  soon  afterwards  sailed  to
seek  assistance  from  his  friends  in  Brittany,  leaving  his  castle
in  the  charge  of  his  bride  and  his  vassals.4  The  daughter  of
William  Fitz-Osbern  made  protracted  resistance  to  the  at-
tacks of  the  royal  officers,  and  only  capitulated  under  the
pressure  of  famine.5  The  men-at-arms  who  defended  the
fortress  submitted,  upon  condition  of  having  their  lives  granted
them,  if  they  quitted  England  within  forty  days.  "  Glory  to
God  in  the  highest,"  wrote  the  primate  Lanfranc  to  William;
"  your  kingdom  is  freed  from  the  filthy  Bretons."  Many  of
the  men  of  this  nation,  who  had  come  as  auxiliaries  or  ad-
venturers to  the  conquest,  now  involved  in  the  disgrace  of
Raulf  de  Gael,  lost  the  lands  they  had  taken  from  the  Eng-
lish.6 While  the  friends  of  Raulf  were  thus  conquered  and
dispersed,  those  of  Roger  de  Hereford  were  defeated  in  the
west,  and  their  chief  made  prisoner.

Before  returning  to  England  to  enjoy  this  new  triumph,
king  William  made  a  hostile  incursion  into  the  territory  of
his  neighbours  the  Bretons,  in  pursuit  of  earl  Raulf  de  Gael,
and  under  this  pretext  to  attempt  the  conquest  of  a  portion
of  the  country,  the  constant  aim  of  the  ambition  and  policy  of
his  ancestors.  But  after  vainly  besieging  the  town  of  Dol,
he  retreated  before  the  army  of  the  duke  of  Brittany,  who

i  Order.  Vital.,  p.  533. Mattli.  Paris,  i.  9.
2  Order.  Vital.,  p.  530.  3  I!>.

«  Matth.  Paris,  i.  9.  5  J6.  •  Lanfraac.  Opera,  p.  318.

282  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1074.

marched  against  him,  supported  by  the  king  of  France.1
Then  crossing  the  Channel,  he  came  to  London  at  Christmas,
to  preside  over  the  great  council  of  Norman  barons,  and  to
judge  the  authors  and  accomplices  of  the  late  conspiracy.
Raulf  de  Gael,  absent  and  contumacious,  was  deprived  of  all
his  estates;  Roger  de  Hereford  appeared,  and  was  condemned
to  lose  his  lands  and  to  pass  his  life  in  a  fortress.2  In  the
depths  of  his  prison,  his  proud  and  indomitable  spirit  often
made  him  brave  with  insults  the  king  whom  he  had  not  been
able  to  dethrone.  One  day,  during  Easter,  William,  accord-
ing to  the  custom  of  the  court  of  Normandy,  sent  to  him,  as
though  he  were  free,  a  complete  suit  of  precious  stuff,  a  coat
and  mantle  of  silk,  and  a  jacket  trimmed  with  foreign  furs.3
Roger  examined  these  rich  vestments  with  an  air  of  satisfac-
tion; he  then  had  a  great  fire  lighted,  and  cast  them  all  into
it.  The  king,  who  did  not  expect  to  have  his  gifts  received
in  this  manner,  was  fiercely  angered,  and  swore,  by  the
splendour  of  God  (his  favourite  oath),  that  the  man  who
thus  insulted  him  should  never  quit  his  prison.4

After  having  narrated  the  deplorable  story  of  this  son  of
the  most  powerful  man  next  to  the  king,  and  who  had  most
urgently  persuaded  William  to  undertake  the  conquest,  the
historian,  born  in  England  though  of  foreign  race,  touched  by
the  misery  of  his  native  land,  exclaims  with  a  kind  of  pa-
triotic enthusiasm:  "Where  is  now  this  William  Fitz-Os-
bern,  viceroy,  earl  of  Hereford,  seneschal  of  Normandy  and
England?  He  who  was  the  first  and  greatest  oppressor  of
the  English,  who,  through  ambition  and  avarice,  encouraged
the  fatal  enterprise  in  which  so  many  thousands  of  men
perished;  he  fell  in  his  turn,  and  received  his  j ust  reward.
He  who  killed  so  many  men  with  the  sword,  died  by  the
sword,  and  after  his  death,  the  spirit  of  discord  made  his  son
and  his  son-in-law  revolt  against  their  lord  and  kinsman.
The  race  of  William  Fitz-Osbern  has  been  uprooted  from
England,  so  that  now  there  is  not  a  corner  in  which  it  can
set  foot."5

The  royal  vengeance  extended  to  all  who  had  been  present
at  the  wedding  feast  at  Norwich;  and  the  city  itself  was

1  Order.  Vital.,  p.  544.  *  Alured.  Beverlac.,  vt  sup.  p.  134.

3  Order.  Vital.,  p.  535.  *  Jb.  536.  «  Id.  ib.

A.D. 1074.]  CONDEMNATION OF WALTHEOF.  283

assailed  with  indiscriminating  revenge.1  Infinite  oppres-
sions ruined  the  Saxon  inhabitants,  and  compelled  numbers  of
them  to  emigrate  into  Suffolk,  around  Beccles  and  Halesworth.
Here  three  Normans,  Roger  Bigot,  Richard  de  Saint  Clair
and  William  de  Noyers,  seized  them,  and  made  serfs  of  them,
although  they  were  too  poor  to  be  a  beneficial  acquisition.2
Other  Saxons,  and  the  Welsh,  taken  prisoners  with  arms  in
their  hands,  on  the  banks  of  the  Severn,  had  their  eyes  put
out  and  their  limbs  mutilated,  or  were  hung  upon  gibbets,  by
order  of  the  Norman  earls,  prelates,  barons  and  knights,
assembled  at  the  court  of  the  king.3

Meanwhile,  a  fleet  of  two  hundred  ships  left  Denmark,
commanded  by  one  of  the  sons  of  king  Swen,  who  had
again  become  the  friend  of  the  English,  and  approached  the
eastern  coast;  but  when  the  Danes  learned  what  had  passed,
they  dared  not  fight  the  Normans,  and  turned  their  helms
towards  Flanders.4  Waltheof  was  accused  of  having  invited
them  over;  he  denied  the  charge,  but  the  Norman  woman
whom  he  had  received  in  marriage  from  king  William  be-
came his  denouncer,  and  bore  witness  against  him.5  The
votes  of  the  assembly  or  of  the  court  (as  it  was  then  called)
were  divided  as  to  the  sentence  which  should  be  passed  upon
the  Saxon  chief.  Some  were  for  death,  as  for  a  revolted  Eng-
lishman, others  for  perpetual  imprisonment,  as  for  a  disloyal
officer  of  the  king.6  The  discussion  lasted  for  nearly  a  year,
during  which  time  Waltheof  was  confined  in  the  royal  for-
tress of  Winchester.  At  last  his  enemies  prevailed,  and  in
one  of  the  courts  which  was  held  three  times  a  year,  sentence
of  death  was  pronounced.7  Contemporary  English  writers
accuse  Judith,  the  niece  of  the  king,  married  to  Waltheof
against  her  will,  of  having  desired  andurgedthe  sentence  which

1  Clirou.  Saxon.,  p.  183.

2  De  Burgeusibus  qui  manserunt  in  burgo  de  Norwic,  abieruut  et  mauent
in  Beecles...xxii.  et  vi.  in  Humilgar...,  et  dimiserunt  burgum...In  terra
Rog.  Bigot  i.  et  sub  W.  de  Noies  i.,  et  Ricardus  de  St.  Cler  i. Isti  fugi-
enteset  alii  remanentes,  omnino  sunt  vastati,  partim propter  forisfacturas
Rodulfi  comitis,  partim  propter  arsnram,  partim  propter  geltum  regis,  partim
propter  Walerannum. (Domesd.  B.,  ii.  117.)

3  Matth.  Paris,  i.  9. Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  183.  4  Id.  ib.

5  Johan.  de  Fordun,  Scoti-chronicon,  lib.  vi.  p.  510. Order.  Vital.,  lib.
iv.  p.  536.

6  Secundum  leges  Normannorum.  (ib.  535.)  7  Ib.  536.

284  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1075

was  to  widow  her  and  to  set  her  at  liberty.1  Moreover,  many
Normans  aspired  to  the  three  earldoms  possessed  by  the
Saxon  chief;  and  Ivo  Taille-Bois,  whose  lands  joined  his,
and  who  desired  to  annex  them,  was  one  of  the  most  eager
for  his  destruction.2  Lastly,  the  king,  to  whom  Waltheof
was  no  longer  useful,  rejoiced  at  a  pretext  for  getting  rid  of
him;  if  we  may  believe  the  old  chroniclers,  he  had  long  en-
tertained this  desire.3

Early  in  the  morning,  while  the  people  of  Winchester  still
slept,  the  Normans  conducted  the  Saxon  chief  beyond  the
walls  of  the  city.  Waltheof  walked  to  execution,  attired  in
his  costume  as  earl,  the  outer  portions  of  which  he  distributed
among  the  priests  and  poor  people  who  followed  him,  and
whom  the  Normans  allowed  to  approach,  on  account  of  their
limited  number  and  wholly  peaceful  aspect.  Coming  to  an
eminence  at  a  short  distance  from  the  walls,  the  soldiers
stopped,  and  the  Saxon,  prostrating  himself,  with  his  face  to
the  ground,  prayed  in  under  tones  for  some  minutes;  the
Normans,  fearing  lest  delay  should  spread  the  news  of  the
execution  through  the  city,  and  a  rising  take  place  to  save
Waltheof,  said  to  him  impatiently:  "Rise,  that  we  may  fulfil
our  orders."  As  a  last  request,  he  asked  them  to  await
until  he  had  said  the  Lord's  Prayer,  for  himself  and  for
them.  They  consented,  and  Waltheof,  rising  from  his  pros-
trate attitude,  but  remaining  on  his  knees,  began  to  say,  in  a
loud  voice:  "  Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven,"  but  at  the
first  words  of  the  verse  :  "  and  lead  us  not  into  temptation,"
the  executioner,  whoperhaps  saw  the  early  rays  of  the  coming
day,  would  wait  no  longer,  and,  suddenly  drawing  his  large
sword,  decapitated  the  condemned  man  with  a  single  blow.4
His  body  was  thrown  into  a  hole  dug  between  two  roads,  and
hastily  covered  with  earth.5

Having  been  unable  to  save  the  life  of  Waltheof,  the
Saxons  went  into  mourning  for  his  death,  and  honoured
him  with  the  name  of  "martyr,"  which  they  had  just
awarded  on  the  same  grounds  to  bishop  Eghelwin,  who  had
died  of  hunger  in  a  Norman  dungeon.6  "  They  sought,"  says

1  Ingulf.,  p.  72.  -  Ib.  3  Job.  de  Fordun,  p.  509.

4  Order.  Vital.,  tit  sup.  5  Matthew  Paris,  i.  9.

6  Order.  Vital.,  p.  537;  Caedes  Waltbiofi  larli,  cap.  ci. ;  Snorre,  Heims-
hnngla,  iii.  1C9.

TO 1076.]  BEATIFICATION OP WALTHEOF.  285

a  contemporary,  "to  efface  his  memory  from  this  world,  but
they  did  not  succeed,  for  we  firmly  believe  that  he  is  in  heaven
with  the  blessed."1  It  was  reported  among  the  serfs  and
towns-people  of  England,  that  after  fifteen  days  interment,
the  body  of  the  last  chief  of  the  English  race,  when  removed
by  the  monks  of  Croyland,  had  appeared  intact  and  sprinkled
with  fresh  blood.2  Other  miracles,  propagated  in  like  man-
ner by  patriotic  superstition,  were  operated,  it.  was  said,  at
the  tomb  of  Waltheof,  erected,  with  the  king's  permission  in
the  chapel  of  the  abbey  of  which  he  had  been  patron.3  The
news  of  these  prodigies  affrighted  the  Norman  widow  of  the
decapitated  chief.  To  appease  the  soul  of  him  she  had  be-
trayed, and  whose  death  she  had  occasioned,  she  repaired  to
Croyland  to  the  tomb  of  Waltheof,  and  offered  a  silken  cloth,
which  she  placed  on  the  sepulchre.  The  chronicles  of  the  time
relate  that  an  invisible  arm  repelled  her  offering,  and  [that
men  saw  the  piece  of  stuff  raised  and  cast  to  a  distance,  as  if
by  a  violent  gust  of  wind.4

Wulfketel,  the  abbot  of  Croyland,  an  Englishman,  hastened
to  make  known  these  miraculous  events,  by  narrating
them  in  the  Saxon  language  from  the  pulpit  of  his  church.
But  the  Normans  did  not  long  permit  him  to  continue
his  preaching  in  peace,  and  he  was  accused  of  idolatry  be-
fore a  council  held  in  London.  The  assembled  bishops  and
earls  degraded  him  from  his  ecclesiastical  dignity,  and  sent
him,  as  a  simple  monk,  far  from  his  friends,  to  the  abbey  of
Glastonbury,  ruled  by  a  Norman  named  Toustain,  conspi-
cuous among  all  the  abbots  of  the  conquest  for  his  hard  and
ferocious  disposition.5  This  example,  however,  did  not  cast
down  the  popular  superstition:  founded  upon  national
regrets,  it  disappeared  only  with  those  regrets,  when  the
sons  of  the  Saxons  had  forgotten  the  old  cause  for  which
their  ancestors  had  suffered.  But  this  period  did  not  arrive
so  speedily  as  the  conquerors  desired;  and  forty  years  after
the  death  of  Waltheof,  when  the  government  of  the  monas-
tery of  Croyland  had  passed  through  a  succession  of  foreign

1  Florent.  Wigovn.  Chron.,  p.  (WO.  2  Order.  Vital.,  nt  sup.

3  Ib.  Quorum  auditis  rumorilms  Angli  lastati  stint.  (Vita  et  Pnssio  Wal-
<levi  cornitis  ;  Chron.  Auglo-Normuudes,  ii.  110.)

4  Ingulf.,  p.  7;!. Vita  et  Passio  Waldevi,  ut  siqi.  p.  118.
5  Ingulf.,  ut  Kitp.  p.  78.

286  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1075

abbots,  under  the  authority  of  one  Geoffrey,  a  native  of  Or-
leans, miracles  again  began  to  be  worked  at  the  tomb  of  the
last  Saxon  chief.  People  of  English  race  came  in  crowds
to  visit  his  sepulchre,  the  monks  of  Norman  origin,  who  oc-
cupied the  abbey,  ridiculing  their  fervour  and  abusing  them
and  the  object  of  their  worship,  calling  the  latter  a  felon
traitor,  justly  punished  with  death.1

The  widow  of  Waltheof  inherited  all  his  possessions,  and
even  the  lands  which  he  had  given  in  full  and  entire  posses-
sion to  the  abbey  of  Croyland  were  resumed  and  given  to
her.2  Judith  hoped  to  share  this  vast  inheritance  with  a
husband  of  her  own  choice;  but  she  was  mistaken;  the  same
power  that  had  disposed  of  her  hand  to  gain  over  a  Saxon,
now  proposed  to  employ  it  in  repaying  the  services  of  a
Frenchman.  Without  consulting  his  niece  any  more  than  on
the  former  occasion,  king  William  offered  the  possessions
of  Waltheof  to  one  Simon,  from  the  town  of  Senlis,  a  brave
knight,  but  lame  and  ill-formed.  Judith  expressed  an  utter
contempt  for  the  man  and  refused  the  match:  the  Conqueror,
little  accustomed  to  make  his  policy  yield  to  the  fancies  of  a
woman,  gave  to  Simon  de  Senlis  the  earldom  of  Northamp-
ton, and  the  whole  inheritance  of  Waltheof,  without  his
widow,  who  thus  lost  the  fruit  of  her  treachery.  Left  alone
with  two  children,  she  led  an  obscure  and  mournful  life  in  a
remote  corner  of  England.  The  Normans  despised  her  be-
cause she  had  become  poor;  the  Saxons  abhorred  her  as  an
infamous  traitor;  and  the  old  historians  of  English  race  ex-
hibit a  degree  of  joy  in  relating  her  years  of  desolation  and
sorrow.3

The  execution  of  Waltheof  completed  the  prostration  of  the
conquered  nation.  It  would  seem  that  the  people  had  not
lost  all  hope,  so  long  as  they  saw  one  of  their  countrymen
invested  with  great  power,  even  though  under  foreign  au-
thority. After  the  death  of  the  son  of  Si  ward,  there  was  not
in  England,  of  all  those  invested  with  honours  and  political
functions,  one  single  man  born  in  the  country  who  did  not
look  upon  the  natives  as  enemies  or  brute-beasts.  All

1  Order.  Vital,,  lib.  iv.  p.  543.

2  Domesday  Book,  i.  fol.  152,  verso,  202  recto,  22H  recto. Ingulf.,  ut  sup.

3  Justo  Dei  judicio  multum  despecta,  odio  omnibus  habita,  per  diversa
loca  et  latibula  diu  fovet. (Ingulf.,  p.  73.)

TO  1076.]  SUDDEN ENERGY OF WULFSTAN.  287

religious  authority  had  also  passed  into  the  hands  of  men  of
foreign  race,  and  of  the  old  Saxon  prelates  there  remained
only  Wulfstan,  bishop  of  Worcester.1  He  was  a  simple,
weak-minded  man,  incapable  of  even  a  daring  thought,  and
who,  as  we  have  seen  above,  after  a  momentary  impulse  of
patriotic  enthusiasm,  became  heartily  reconciled  with  the
conquerors.  He  had  since  rendered  them  important  services;
he  had  made  pastoral  visitations  and  proclaimed  the  amnisties
of  the  king  in  the  provinces  still  in  commotion;  he  had
marched  in  person  against  Eoger  de  Hereford,  on  the  banks
of  the  Severn:  but  he  was  of  English  race:  his  day  came,  as
that  of  others  had  come.

In  the  year  1076,  Wulfstan  was  cited  before  a  council  of
Norman  bishops  and  lords,  assembled  in  the  church  of  West-
minster, and  presided  over  by  king  William  and  archbishop
Lanfranc.  The  assembly  unanimously  declared  that  the  Saxon
prelate  was  incapable  of  exercising  the  episcopal  functions  in
England,  by  reason  of  his  not  being  able  to  speak  French.2
In  virtue  of  this  singular  judgment,  the  king  and  archbishop
ordered  the  condemned  prelate  to  resign  the  staff  and  ring,3
the  ensigns  of  his  dignity.  Astonishment  and  indignation  at
being  so  ill  rewarded  inspired  Wulfstan  with  an  energy  en-
tirely new  to  him;  he  rose,  and  holding  his  pastoral  staff  in
his  hand,  walked  straight  to  the  tomb  of  king  Edward,  who
was  buried  in  this  church;  there,  stopping  and  addressing  the
dead  man,  in  the  English  tongue,  he  said:  "  Thou,  Edward,
gavest  me  this  staff;  to  thee  I  return  it  and  confide  it."4  Then
turning  towards  the  Normans:  "  I  received  this  from  a  bet-
ter man  than  any  of  you;  I  return  it  to  him,  take  it  from  him
if  you  can."5  As  he  pronounced  these  last  words,  the  Saxon
energetically  struck  the  tombstone  with  the  end  of  the  pas-
toral staff.  His  air  and  this  unexpected  action  produced  on
the  assembly  an  impression  of  utter  astonishment,  mingled
with  superstitious  fear :  the  king  and  the  primate  did  not  re-

1  Job.  Bromton,  tit  sup.  col.  975.

2  Annales  Burtonienses,  apud  rer.  Anglic.  Script.,  (Gale)  i.  264. Matth.
Paris,  i.  20. H.  Knygbton,  nt  sup.  col.  2368.

3  Job.  Bromton,  lit  .tup.  col.  076.  4  lidem,  ib.

0  H.  Knygbton,  nt  siqi.

288  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1076.

peat  their  demand,  and  permitted  the  last  English  bishop  to
retain  his  staff  and  his  office.1

The  popular  imagination  converted  this  affair  into  a  prodigy,
and  the  report  spread  that  the  pastoral  staff  of  Wulfstan,  when
he  struck  the  stone  with  it,  had  penetrated  deep  into  it,  as  into
soft  earth,  and  that  no  one  had  been  able  to  withdraw  it  but
the  Saxon  himself,  when  the  foreigners  had  revoked  their
sentence.2  After  the  death  of  Wulfstan,  who  was  succeeded
in  his  see  by  a  canon  of  Bayeux,  named  Samson,  the  English
honoured  him,  as  they  had  done  Waltheof  and  Eghelwin,  with
the  title  of  saint.3  It  was  so  with  almost  all  those  who,
eminent  for  dignity  and  character,  suffered  death  or  persecu-
tion for  the  cause  of  Anglo-Saxon  nationality.

All  this  seems  somewhat  strange  to  us  of  the  present  day;
for  oppressed  nations  have  lost  the  custom  of  making  saints
of  their  defenders  and  friends;  they  have  strength  of  mind
enough  to  preserve  the  remembrance  of  those  whom  they  have
loved,  without  surrounding  their  names  with  a  superstitious
glory.  But  whatever  the  difference  between  our  patriotic
manners  and  those  of  the  men  who  have  preceded  us  on  the
earth,  let  this  difference  inspire  us  neither  with  anger  nor
with  contempt  towards  them.  The  grand  thought  of  human
independence  was  revealed  to  them  as  to  us;  they  environed
it  with  their  favourite  symbols;  they  assembled  around  it  all
that  they  deemed  noblest,  and  made  it  religious  as  we  make
it  poetical.  It  is  the  same  conviction  and  the  same  enthu-
siasm  expressed  in  a  different  manner;  the  same  inclination
to  immortalize  those  who  have  devoted  their  life  to  the  good
of  their  fellow-creatures.

1  Matth.  Paris,  Vita  Allatum  S.  Albani,  i.  40.

2  Knyghton,  ut  sup.
3  Annal.  Burton.,  ut  sup.  p.  047.

BOOK  VI.

FROM  THE  QUARREL  BETWEEN  KING  WILLIAM  AND  HIS  ELDEST
SON  ROBERT,  TO  THE  LAST  VISIT  OF  WILLIAM  TO  THE  CON-
TINENT.

1077—1087.

Discords  among  the  victors — Quarrel  between  William  arid  his  son  Robert
— Robert  demands  Normandy — He  joins  his  father's  enemies — William
curses  his  son — Conspiracy  against  and  murder  of  Vaulcher — Devastation
of  Northumberland — Miserable  condition  of  the  northern  provinces —
Anglo-Saxon  outlaws — Popular  poems  in  their  honour — Ambition  of
Eudes — His  arrest — Results  of  the  Norman  conquest — Toustain,  abbot
of  Glastonbury — Saxon  monks  killed  or  wounded  by  his  order — Death
of  Matilda — Severance  of  interests  between  the  king  and  the  Normans
— Domesday  book — Levies  upon  the  Normans  and  English — Equaliza-
tion of  property  iu  the  hands  of  the  Normans — Laws  of  William  against
hunting — Political  reasons  for  the  severity  of  these  laws — Expropria-
tion of  the  English  subsequent  to  the  conquest — Emigration  of  Normans
to  Scotland — Descent  of  the  Danes — Preparations  for  defence — Singular
order  issued  to  the  English — Motives  for  the  armament  of  king  Knut —
Termination  of  alliance  between  the  English  and  the  Danes — General
assembly  and  review  of  the  Normans — Ordinances  of  king  William —
State  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  population — Anxiety  and  mental  torments  of
king  William — Establishment  of  episcopal  jurisdiction — Separation  of
the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  tribunals — Conduct  of  William  with  refer-
ence to  the  pope — Aspect  of  the  conquered  country.

ONE  of  the  necessary  phases  of  all  conquests,  great  or  small,
is,  that  the  conquerors  quarrel  among  themselves  for  the  pos-
session and  partition  of  the  property  of  the  conquered.  The
Normans  did  not  escape  this  necessity.  When  there  were  no
more  rebels  to  subdue,  England  became  a  cause  of  intestine
war  to  her  masters;  and  it  was  in  the  bosom  of  her  new  royal
family,  between  the  father  and  his  eldest  son,  that  discord  first
broke  out.  His  son  Robert,  whom  the  Normans  surnamed
in  their  language,  Gamberon  or  Courte-ffei/se,  on  account  of
the  shortness  of  his  legs,1  had,  before  the  battle  of  Hastings,
been  named  by  duke  William  heir  to  his  lands  and  title.  This

»  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  540.
VOL.  I.  U

290  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1077

nomination  had  taken  place,  according  to  custom,  with  the  for-
mal consent  of  the  barons  of  Normandy,  who  had  all  taken  the
oath  to  young  Robert,  as  to  their  future  lord.  When  William
had  become  king,  the  young  man,  whose  ambition  was  aroused
by  his  father's  successes,  required  him  at  least  to  abdicate  in
his  favour  the  government  of  Normandy;  but  the  king  refused,
willing  to  keep  both  his  old  duchy  and  his  new  kingdom.  A
violent  quarrel  ensued,  in  which  the  two  younger  brothers,
William  Rufus  and  Henry,  took  part  against  Robert,  under
colour  of  filial  affection,  but  in  reality  to  supplant  him,  if  they
could,  in  the  succession  which  their  father  had  assigned  to
him.1

One  day  that  the  king  was  at  Laigle  with  his  sons,  William
and  Henry  came  to  Robert's  apartments,  in  the  house  of  one
Roger  Chaussiegue,  and  ascending  to  the  upper  rooms  began
to  play  at  dice,  after  the  manner  of  the  soldiers  of  that  time;
then  they  made  a  great  noise,  and  threw  water  upon  Robert
and  his  friends,  who  were  in  the  court-yard  below.  Irritated
by  this  insult,  Robert  hastened,  sword  in  hand,  to  chastise  his
brothers :  there  was  a  great  tumult,  which  the  king  had  some
difficulty  in  appeasing.  On  the  following  night,  the  young
man,  followed  by  all  his  companions,  left  the  town,  and  pro-
ceeded to  Rouen,  where  he  attempted  to  surprise  the  citadel,
but  failed  in  his  object.  Many  of  his  friends  were  arrested;
he  himself  escaped,  with  some  others,  and,  passing  the  frontier
of  Normandy,  took  refuge  in  La  Perche,  where  Hugh,
nephew  of  Aubert-le-Ribaud,  received  him  in  his  castles  of
Sorel  and  Reymalard.2

A  reconciliation  afterwards  took  place  between  the  father
and  son,  but  it  did  not  last  long;  for  the  young  men  who
surrounded  the  latter  began  again  to  stimulate  his  ambi-
tion by  every  device.  "  Noble  son  of  a  king,"  said  they,
"thy  father's  people  must  take  good  care  of  his  treasure,
since  thou  hast  not  a  penny  to  bestow  on  thy  followers.  Why
endurest  thou  to  remain  so  poor,  when  thy  father  is  so  rich?
Ask  him  for  a  portion  of  his  England,  or  at  least  for  the
duchy  of  Normandy,  which  he  promised  thee  before  all  his
barons."  Robert,  excited  by  this  and  similar  suggestions,
renewed  his  former  request,  but  the  king  again  refused,  and

»  Order.  Vital.)  lib.  iv.  p.  545. .  c  Id.  p.  540.

TO 1079.] INSUBORDINATION OF YOUNG ROBERT.  291

exhorted  him,  in  a  paternal  tone,  to  return  to  his  duty,  and
especially  to  make  choice  of  better  counsellors,  wise  and  grave
persons,  of  mature  age,  such  as  archbishop  Lanfranc.  "  Sir
king,"  sharply  replied  Robert,  "  I  came  here  to  claim  my
right,  and  not  to  listen  to  sermons;  I  heard  enough  of  them,
and  wearisome  enough  they  were,  when  I  was  at  my  gram-
mar. Answer  me  therefore  distinctly,  so  that  I  may  know
what  I  have  to  do;  for  I  am  firmly  resolved  not  to  live  on  the
bread  of  others,  and  not  to  receive  the  wages  of  any  man."

The  king  answered  angrily,  that  he  would  not  divest  him-
self of  Normandy,  where  he  was  born,  or  share  England,
which  he  had  acquired  by  so  much  labour.  "  Well,"  said
Robert,  "  I  will  go — I  will  go  and  serve  strangers,  and  per-
haps obtain  from  them  what  is  refused  me  in  my  own
country."  He  departed,  and  went  through  Flanders,  Lorraine,
Germany,  then  to  France  and  Aquitaine,  visiting,  says  an
old  historian,  dukes,  counts,  and  rich  lords  of  castles,  telling
them  his  grievances  and  demanding  their  aid;  but  all  he  re-
ceived for  the  support  of  his  cause  he  spent  upon  mounte-
banks, parasites,  debauched  women,  and  soon  found  himself
compelled  to  beg  afresh,  or  to  borrow  at  enormous  usury.
Matilda,  his  mother,  sometimes  sent  him  money  unknown  to
the  king.  William  heard  of  this,  and  forbad  her  to  send  any
more;  she  disobeyed,  and  the  irritated  king  reproached  her,
in  bitter  terms,  "  with  supporting  his  enemies  by  the  treasure
he  had  placed  in  her  keeping;"  he  ordered  Matilda's  mes-
senger, who  conveyed  the  money,  to  be  arrested  and  to  have
his  eyes  put  out;  but  the  latter,  a  Breton,  named  Samson,
escaped,  and  turned  monk,  to  save  at  once,  says  an  old  chro-
nicle, his  soul  and  his  body.1

After  much  journeying,  young  Robert  repaired,  under  the
auspices  of  Philip,  king  of  France,  to  the  castle  of  Gerberoy,
in  Beauvoisis,  on  the  confines  of  Normandy.  He  was  well
received  here  by  Elie,  viscount  of  the  castle,  and  by  his  col-
league; for,  says  the  old  narrator,  it  was  the  custom  at  Ger-
beroy  to  have  two  seigneurs  equal  in  power,  and  to  receive
fugitives  from  all  countries.2  There  the  son  of  the  Con-
queror assembled  a  body  of  »mercenaries ;  some  came  to  him
from  France  and  Normandy;  even  men-at-arms  of  king  Wil-

1  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  571.  2  Id.  572.

u2

292  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1079

Ham,  and  several  of  those  who  had  been  flattering  him  daily,
and  living  at  his  table,  quitted  their  posts,  and  repaired  to
Gerberoy;1  and  at  length  he  himself,  crossing  the  sea,  came
in  person  to  besiege  the  castle  where  his  son  had  shut  himself
up.

In  a  sally  made  by  Robert,  he  engaged,  hand  to  hand,  a
knight  enveloped  in  armour,  wounded  him  in  the  arm,  and
threw  him  from  his  horse;  the  voice  of  the  wounded  man
told  him  that  it  was  his  father  he  had  overthrown;  he  in-
stantly dismounted,  aided  him  to  rise  and  to  regain  his  saddle,
and  left  him  free  to  depart.'2  The  Norman  chiefs  and  bishops
endeavoured  once  more  to  reconcile  father  and  son;  but  Wil-
liam at  first  resisted  their  intreaties.  "  Why,"  said  he,  "  do
you  solicit  me  in  favour  of  a  traitor  who  has  seduced  from
me  my  soldiers,  those  whom  I  have  fed  with  my  bread,  and
whom  I  have  supplied  with  the  arms  they  bear?"  He,  how-
ever, ultimately  gave  in;  but  the  good  understanding  between
father  and  son  was  not  of  long  duration;  for  the  third  time,
Eobert  withdrew,  went  into  a  foreign  country,  and  returned
no  more  during  his  father's  life.3  The  king  cursed  him  on
his  departure,  and  the  historians  of  the  age  attribute  to
this  malediction  the  misfortunes  which  filled  the  life  of  the
eldest  son  of  William  the  Bastard — misfortunes  of  which,  as
we  have  seen,  the  conquest  of  England  was  the  first  cause.4

From  these  dissensions,  which  troubled  the  repose  of  the
chief  of  the  conquerors,  the  conquered  derived  no  advantage;
and  if,  in  the  absence  of  William,  the  royal  hand  itself  weighed
not  upon  that  people,  other  hands,  those  of  earls,  viscounts,
judges,  prelates,  and  abbots,  all  of  foreign  race,  made  it  feel
their  heaviness.  Among  the  most  pitiless  of  these  ministers
of  the  conquest,  figured  the  Lorrainese,  Vaulcher,  bishop  of
Durham,  who,  since  the  execution  of  Waltheof,  had  added  to
his  ecclesiastical  office  the  government  of  the  whole  country
between  the  Tweed  and  the  Tyne.5  The  friends  of  the  earl-
bishop  loudly  vaunted  his  administration,  and  praised  him
for  equal  skill  in  repressing  the  rebellions  of  the  English  by
the  edge  of  the  sword,  and  in  reforming  their  morals  by  the

1  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  p.  572.
2  Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  184.  3  Order.  Vital.,  p.  573.

4  Matth.  Paris,  i.  10.
5  Hist.  Episcop.  Duiielm. ;  Ariglia  Sacra,  i.  703.

TO  1080.]  DEATH OF BISHOP VAULCHER.  293

power  of  his  discourses.1  The  simple  fact  was,  that  Vaulcher
harassed  his  province  by  insupportable  exactions,  that  he
allowed  his  officers,  after  him,  to  levy  tributes  on  their  own
account,  and  that  he  permitted  his  soldiers  also  to  rob  and
murder  with  impunity.2  Among  those  whom  he  put  to  death
without  trial  was  one  Liulf,  a  man  beloved  by  the  whole
country,  who  had  retired  to  Durham  after  having  been  de-
spoiled by  the  Normans3  of  all  the  property  he  possessed  in
the  south  of  England.  This  murder,  executed  with  most
atrocious  circumstances,  put  the  crowning  point  to  the  hatred
of  the  people  to  the  Lorrainese  bishop  and  his  agents.  The
old  spirit  of  Northumberland  was  aroused,  and  the  inhabi-
tants of  that  district,  so  fatal  to  foreigners,  assembled  as  in
the  time  of  Robert  Comine.4

They  held  nocturnal  conferences,  and  unanimously  agreed
to  proceed  with  concealed  weapons  to  the  assembly  of  justice,
held  from  time  to  time  by  the  bishop,  at  the  county  court.5
This  court  was  held  on  the  banks  of  the  Tyne,  near  the  New
Castle,  built  by  the  conquerors  on  the  high  road  to  Scotland,
at  a  place  called  in  Saxon  Gotes-Heaved,  or  Goats-IIead.G
The  Northumbrians  repaired  hither  in  great  numbers,  as  if
to  address  humble  and  pacific  solicitations  to  their  lord.  They
demanded  reparation  for  the  wrongs  that  had  been  done  them.
"  I  will  not  redress  any  of  these,"  said  the  bishop,  "  unless
you  first  give  me  four  hundred  pounds,  good  money."  The
Saxon  who,  knowing  French,  spoke  in  the  name  of  the  rest,
asked  permission  to  confer  with  them,  and  all  went  apart  for
a  moment,  as  if  to  consult  together  about  paying  the  sum  de-
manded; but  suddenly  the  speaker,  who  was  the  chief  also  of
the  plot,  cried  out  in  the  English  tongue,  "  Short  reed,  good
reed,  slay  ye  the  bishop!"7  At  this  signal,  they  drew  their
weapons,  threw  themselves  upon  the  Lorrainese,  killed  him,
and  with  him  an  hundred  men  of  Norman  or  Flemish  race.8
Two  servants  only,  Englishmen  by  birth,  were  spared  by  the

1  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  de  Gesiis,  &c.,  p.  277.
2  Mattli.  Paris,  i.  10. Hist.  Episcop.  Dunelm.,  p.  703.

3  II).  p.  704.

4  Ib.  703. Willelm.  Malmesb.,  de  Gest ,  &c.,  p.  110.
5  Matth.  Paris,  i.  10. Cbron.  Saxon.,  p.  184.

6  Florent.  Wigorn.  Chron.,  p.  039.
'  Matth.  Paris,  i.  10.  »  Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  184.

294  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1080.

conspirators.1  The  popular  rising  extended  to  Durham;  the
fortress  built  there  by  the  Normans  was  attacked;  but  the
garrison,  numerous  and  well  provided,  resisted  the  Northum-
brians, who,  after  a  siege  of  four  days,  became  discouraged,
and  dispersed.2

At  this  new  indication  of  life  given  by  the  population  of
the  north,  Eudes,  bishop  of  Bayeux,  the  king's  brother,  and
one  of  his  lieutenants  in  his  absence,  promptly  marched  to
Durham,  with  a  numerous  army.  Without  taking  the  time  or
the  trouble  to  investigate  the  circumstances  of  the  insurrec-
tion, he  promiscuously  seized  the  natives,  who,  confiding  in
their  innocence,  remained  in  their  homes,  and  beheaded  or
mutilated  them.3  Others  only  purchased  their  life  by  sur-
rendering all  they  possessed.  Bishop  Eudes  pillaged  the
church  of  Durham,  and  carried  away  all  that  remained  of  the
sacred  ornaments  that  Eghelwin  had  saved  by  removing  them
to  Lindisfarn.4  He  renewed  throughout  Northumberland  the
ravages  made  there  by  his  brother  in  1070;  and  it  was  this
second  devastation  which,  added  to  the  first,  impressed  upon
the  northern  counties  of  England  that  aspect  of  desolation
and  gloom  which  they  presented  for  more  than  a  century
afterwards.5  "  Thus,"  says  an  historian,  who  lived  seventy
years  later,  "  thus  were  cut  the  nerves  of  this  county,  once
so  flourishing.  Those  towns,  formerly  so  renowned,  now
so  abased,  those  lofty  towers,  which  threatened  heaven,  now
in  ruins,  those  pasture  fields,  once  smiling  and  watered  by
sparkling  rills,  now  wholly  waste,  the  stranger  who  sees
them,  beholds  with  a  sigh,  the  old  inhabitant  no  longer  re-
cognises."6

In  this  county,  ruined  as  it  was,  the  population,  half  Saxon,
half  Danish,  long  preserved  its  ancient  spirit  of  independence,
and  of  somewhat  savage  pride.  The  Norman  successors  of
the  Bastard  dwelt  in  full  safety  in  the  southern  provinces;
but  it  was  scarcely  without  apprehension  that  they  journeyed
beyond  the  Humber;  and  an  historian  of  the  twelfth  century
tells  us  that  they  never  visited  that  part  of  their  kingdom

1  Florent.  Wigorn.  Chron.,  p.  G40.

2  Simeon  Dunelm.,  Hist.  Dunclm.  Ecclesice,  lib.  iii.  apud  Histor.  Angl.
Script.,  (Selclen)  i.  col.  48.  3  Ib.

4  n.  *  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  dc  Gestis  Pontif.  &c.,  p.  277.

6  Id.  dc  Gest.  reg.  Angl.  p.  103.

A.D. 1080.]  ENGLISH OUTLAWS.  295

without  the  escort  of  an  array  of  veteran  soldiers.1  It  was  in
the  north  that  the  tendency  to  rebel  against  the  social  order
established  by  the  conquest  longest  endured;  it  was  the  north
which,  for  more  than  two  centuries,  furnished  those  bands  of
outlaws  who  were  the  political  successors  of  the  refugees  of
the  camp  of  Ely,  and  of  the  companions  of  Hereward.  His-
tory has  not  understood  them;  it  has  passed  them  over  in
silence,  or  else,  adopting  the  legal  acts  of  the  time,  it  has
branded  them  with  names  which  divest  them  of  all  interest,
with  the  names  of  rebels,  robbers,  and  bandits.  But  let  us
not  be  misled  by  these  apparently  odious  titles;  in  all  coun-
tries subjugated  by  foreigners,  they  have  been  given  by  the
victors  to  the  brave  men  who  in  small  numbers  took  refuge
in  the  mountains  or  in  the  forests,  abandoning  the  towns  and
cities  to  those  who  chose  to  support  slavery.2  If  the  Anglo-
Saxon  nation  had  not  the  courage  to  follow  their  example,  it
at  least  loved  those  who  gave  it,  and  accompanied  them  with
its  blessing.  While  ordinances,  drawn  up  in  the  French  lan-
guage, required  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  cities  and  boroughs
of  England  to  hunt  the  outlaw,  the  man  of  the  forest,  as  a
wolf,3  to  pursue  him  from  hundred  to  hundred,  with  hue  and
cry,  the  English  sang  ballads  in  honour  of  this  enemy  to
foreign  rule,  who,  as  they  expressed  it,  had  the  earl's  purse  for
his  treasure,  and  the  king's  deer  for  his  herd.  The  popular
poets  celebrated  his  victories,  his  combats,  his  stratagems
against  the  agents  of  authority.  They  sang  how  he  had  out-
stripped the  men  and  horses  of  the  viscount,  how  he  had  taken
the  bishop,  had  put  him  to  a  thousand  marks  ransom,  and
made  him  dance  a  measure  in  his  pontifical  robes.4

The  Norman  bishop,  Eudes  de  Bayeux,  after  his  expedi-
tion into  Northumberland,  became  famous  among  his  people,
as  one  of  the  greatest  quellers  of  the  English;5  he  was  chief

1  Willehn.  Malmesb.,  de  Gestis  Pontiff,  &c.,  p.  458.
2  ....  fovptcovQ  fj.rj  7rpocncyvo?;/uv.

Ha/jitv  vd  \i/i£pia£w/i£v,  OTTOV  ^wXea^ovv  \vnol,
"Sraig  %wpaig  (7K\a€oi  KCITOIKOVV.
(Chants  populaires  de  la  Grece  Moderne,  publics  par  M.  Fauriel,

i.  Sterghios,  Song  No.  24.)

3  The  Normans  sometimes  used  the  term  ullages,  sometimes  that  of
forestiers.

*  See  the  ballads  of  Robin  Hood,  Adam  Bell,  &c.,  passim.
5  Willelm.  Gemet.,  p.  282.

296  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1080

of  the  judges,  or  grand  justiciary  of  all  England,  earl  of
Kent  and  of  Hereford,  since  the  imprisonment  of  Roger  Fitz-
Osbern.  The  reputation  he  enjoyed  inflated  him  with  pride,
and  the  power  he  exercised  in  England  and  in  Normandy
excited  in  him  the  ambition  of  the  greatest  power  then  ex-
tant, the  papal  power.  Some  Italian  soothsayers  had  pre-
dicted that  a  pope  named  Eudes  should  succeed  Gregory  VII.
The  bishop  of  Bayeux,  relying  upon  this  prediction,  com-
menced intrigues  at  Rome,  bought  a  palace  there,  sent  rich
presents  to  those  whom  the  people  beyond  the  Alps  still
called  senators,  and  loaded  the  pilgrims  of  Normandy  and
England  with  letters  and  despatches;1  he  engaged  Norman
barons  and  knights,  among  others  Hugh  le  Loup,  earl  of  Ches-
ter, to  follow  him  into  Italy,  in  order  to  constitute  a  brilliant
escort  for  him.  King  William,  while  still  in  Normandy,  heard
of  these  preparations,  which,  for  some  reason  or  other,  dis-
pleased him.  Not  desiring  that  his  brother  should  become
pope,  he  sailed,  and  surprised  him  at  sea,  off  the  Isle  of  Wight.
The  king  immediately  assembled  the  Norman  chiefs  in  that
island,  and  accused  before  them  the  bishop  of  having  abused
his  power  of  judge  and  earl;  of  having,  beyond  all  measure,
illtreated  the  Saxons,  to  the  great  danger  of  the  common
cause;  of  having  despoiled  the  churches;  and  lastly,  of  having
attempted  to  seduce  and  take  with  him,  beyond  the  Alps,  the
warriors  upon  whose  fidelity  rested  the  safety  of  the  country.
"  Consider  these  grievances,"  said  the  king  to  the  assem-
bly, "  and  tell  me  how  I  ought  to  act  towards  such  a  brother."
No  one  dared  reply.  "  Let  him  then  be  arrested,"  continued
the  king,  "  and  put  into  safe  custody."  None  present  dared
lay  his  hand  upon  the  bishop.  Hereupon  the  king  advanced
and  seized  him  by  his  robe.  "  I  am  a  priest,"  cried  Eudes;
"  I  am  the  minister  of  the  Lord  :  the  pope  alone  can  judge
me."  But  William,  without  quitting  his  hold,  answered:
"It  is  not  a  priest  nor  prelate  I  judge;  it  is  my  earl,  my
vassal  and  false  viceroy  whom  I  arrest."  The  brother  of  the
conqueror  of  England  was  taken  to  Normandy  and  impri-
soned in  a  fortress,2  perhaps  in  the  same  where  still  languished
Ulfnoth,  the  brother  of  king  Harold,  whose  fate  was  now  like
his  own,  after  fifteen  years  of  a  fortune  so  different.

1  Orderic.  Vital.,  lib.  iii.  p.  646.  2  Id.  ib.

TO  1082.] TREATMENT  OF  THE  SAXON  CLERGY. 297

The  reproaches  of  the  king  to  the  bishop  as  to  his  conduct
in  the  north  of  England,  if  they  are  not  an  invention  of  the
old  historian,  seem  to  betray  some  fears  of  a  fresh  rising  on
the  part  of  those  who  had  killed  Robert  Comine,  retaken
York,  massacred  bishop  Vaulcher,  and  who  joyfully  hastened
to  embrace  every  and  any  enemy  of  the  Normans  that  landed
on  their  coasts.  Such  an  apprehension  was  not  entirely
futile,  for  more  than  one  revolt  broke  out  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Durham,  under  the  administration  of  William,  suc-
cessor to  the  Lorrainese.1  In  the  rest  of  England  the  con-
quered showed  less  energy,  or  more  resignation  to  their  suf-
ferings. Few  positive  facts  as  to  the  nature  of  their  suffer-
ings have  come  down  to  us,  and  those  few  relate,  for  the
most  part,  to  the  miseries  of  the  clergy,  the  only  class  of  the
oppressed  men  of  old  England  that  has  found  historians.
However,  what  was  done  to  this  privileged  class  may  enable
us  to  conjecture  to  what  the  other  classes,  whom  religious
scruples  did  not  protect,  would  be  subjected;  and  an  incident
in  the  internal  rule  of  an  English  monastery,  under  a  Nor-
man abbot,  in  the  sixteenth  year  of  the  conquest,  will  aid  us
in  forming  an  idea  of  the  rule  of  the  conquerors  in  the  cities
and  provinces  under  the  authority  of  the  earls,  viscounts  and
bailiffs  of  the  foreign  king.2

The  convent  of  G-lastonbury,  Somersetshire,  after  the  depo-
sition of  Eghelnoth,  its  Saxon  abbot,  had  been  given  to  Tous-
tain,  a  monk  of  Caen.  Toustain,  according  to  the  custom  of
other  Normans,  who  had  become  abbots  in  England,  had
begun  with  lessening  the  rations  given  to  his  monks,  in  order
to  render  them  more  manageable;  but  hunger  only  irri-
tated them  against  the  power  of  him  whom  they  loudly
termed  intruder.3  The  abbot,  from  national  predilections,
or  out  of  pure  despotism,  ordered  his  Saxon  monks  to  learn
to  chant  the  service  after  the  method  of  a  famous  musi-

1  Annales  de  Margan,  opud  rer.  Anglic.  Hist.,  (Gale)  ii.  3.

2  Monasterium  Glastoniae... semper  post  adventum  Normannorum  pessi-
mis  est  infractum  laboribus...Abbates  enhn,  rerum  gloria  elati,  nou  religi-
osos sed tirannos agunt, foris tumidi...intus crudeles et incommodi.
(Adanuis  de  Dotneram,  ed.  Henrne,  p.  113.)

3  Monachos  in  victualibus  miserabiliter  tractare, liinc  lites  verborumi
animorum discordise qua,  ut ait  Lucanus, nescit  plebes  jejuna timere.
(Willelm.  Malraesb.,  de  Gestis  Pout.  &c.,  lib.  ii.  ut  sup.  254.)

298  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1080

cian  of  Fecamp,  and  the  Saxons,  as  much  through  hatred  of
the  Norman  music,  as  from  habit,  adhered  to  the  Gregorian
chant.1  They  received  repeated  injunctions  to  renounce  it,
as  well  as  many  other  ancient  usages;  but  they  resisted,  and
at  length  declared,  in  full  chapter,  their  firm  resolution  not
to  change  it.  The  Norman  arose  in  a  fury,  went  out,  and
immediately  returned  at  the  head  of  a  body  of  soldiers,  fully
armed.

At  this  sight  the  monks  fled  towards  the  church,  and  took
refuge  in  the  choir,  the  door  of  which  they  had  time  to  shut.2
The  soldiers  attempted  to  force  it,  and  meanwhile  some  of
them  climbed  the  pillars,  and,  placing  themselves  on  the
rafters  at  the  top  of  the  choir,  assailed  the  monks  below  with
discharges  of  arrows.  The  latter,  retreating  to  the  high  altar,
glided  behind  the  shrines  or  reliquaries,  which,  serving  them
as  ramparts,  received  the  arrows  discharged  against  them.
The  great  crucifix  of  the  altar  soon  bristled  with  these  mis-
siles.3 By  and  bye  the  door  of  the  choir  yielded  to  the  efforts
of  the  soldiers,  and  the  Saxons,  forced  in  their  retreat,  were
attacked  with  swords  and  lances;  they  defended  themselves
as  best  they  could  with  the  wooden  benches  and  the  metal
candlesticks;  they  even  wounded  some  of  the  soldiers,4  but  the
arms  were  too  unequal;  eighteen  monks  were  killed  or  mortally
wounded,  and  their  blood,  says  the  contemporary  chronicle,
poured  down  the  steps  of  the  altar.5  Another  historian  says,
that  he  could  recite  many  facts  similar  to  this,  but  that  he  pre-
fers to  pass  them  over  in  silence,  as  equally  painful  to  write
and  to  read.6

In  the  year  1083  died  Matilda,  wife  of  king  William.  An
old  narrative  says  that  the  counsels  of  this  lady  more  than
once  softened  the  soul  of  the  conqueror;  that  she  often  dis-
posed him  to  clemency  towards  the  English,  but  that  after
her  death  William  abandoned  himself  without  reserve  to  his

1  Id.  De  Antiquit.  Glaston.  Ecclcs.,  apud  rer.  Anglic,  Script.,  (Gale)
iii.  331.

8  Chron.  Sax.,  p.  184. Willelm.  Mahnesb.,  loco  citat.
3  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  De  Gestis  Regum,  &c.,  lib.  iii.  ut  sup.  p.  110.

4  H.^Knyghton,  lib.  ii.  id  sup.  col.  2352.

5  De  altari  in  gradus  et  de  gradibus  in  aream. (Sax.  Chron.,  p.  185.)
e  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  iv.  ut  sup,  p.  524.

TO  1083.] TAXATION  OF  THE  NORMANS.  299

tyrannical  humour.1  Facts  are  wanting  to  substantiate  this
aggravation  of  oppression  and  misery  for  the  conquered
people,  and  the  imagination  can  scarcely  supply  the  deficiency,
for  it  is  difficult  to  add  a  single  shade  to  the  dark  picture  of
the  unhappiness  of  the  preceding  years.  The  only  differ-
ence observable  between  the  epoch  of  the  conquest  which
followed  the  death  of  Matilda,  and  those  which  have  been
already  narrated  is,  that  William,  having  nothing  further  to
gain  in  power  over  the  natives,  began  to  create  for  himself  a
personal  domination  over  his  companions  in  victory.

Necessity  had  probably  as  large  a  share  in  this  enterprise
as  ambition;  nothing  remaining  to  take  from  the  English,
the  king  found  himself  obliged  to  levy  contributions  on  the
Normans  themselves  for  the  maintenance  of  the  common
property.  In  the  year  1083  he  exacted  sixpence  in  silver
for  every  hide  of  land  throughout  the  kingdom,  without  dis-
tinction of  possessor.2  The  Norman  warrior,  worn  out  by
twenty  years  of  combats,  found  himself  obliged  to  pay,  out  of
the  revenues  of  the  domain  he  had  conquered  in  the  days  of
his  youth  and  strength,  the  hire  of  a  new  army.

From  this  epoch  dates  a  spirit  of  mutual  distrust  and  secret
hostility  between  the  king  and  his  old  friends;  they  accused
each  other  of  avarice  and  selfishness.  William  reproached
the  Norman  chiefs  with  caring  more  for  their  private  in-
terest than  for  the  common  safety;  with  thinking  more  of
building  farms,  raising  flocks,  or  forming  studs,  than  of  hold-
ing themselves  in  readiness  against  the  native  or  foreign
enemy.3  In  their  turn,  the  chiefs  reproached  the  king  with
being  beyond  all  measure  greedy  of  gain,  and  with  desiring
to  appropriate  to  himself,  under  false  pretexts  of  general
utility,  the  wealth  acquired  by  the  labour  of  all.  In  order
to  rest  his  demand  of  contributions,  or  money  services,  on  a
fixed  basis,  William  ordered  a  general  territorial  inquest  to  be
made,  and  a  register  prepared  of  all  the  mutations  of  property
brought  about  in  England  by  the  conquest;  he  desired  to
know  into  what  hands  throughout  the  country  the  Saxon  do-

1  Thorn.  Rudborne,  Hist.  Major.  Winton  ;  Auglia  Sacra,  i.  257.

2  Mattb.  Paris,  i.  11.

3  Ricbardus  de  Rulos...multum  agricultures  deditus,  ac  in  jumentorum
et  pecorum  multitudine  plurimum  delectatus.  (Ingulf.,  i.  p.  77.)

300  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1080

mains  had  passed,  and  how  many  of  these  still  retained  their
possessions  in  virtue  of  special  agreements  with  himself  or  his
barons,1  how  many  acres  of  land  there  were  in  each  domain,  how
many  were  sufficient  for  the  maintenance  of  a  man-at-arms,
and  how  many  men-at-arms  there  were  in  each  province  or
county  of  England;  what  was  the  gross  amount  derived  in
various  ways  from  the  cities,  towns,  boroughs  and  hamlets,
what  was  the  exact  property  of  each  earl,  baron,  knight,  or
sergeant-at-arms;  what  land,  how  many  men  holding  fiefs
on  that  land,  how  many  Saxons,  how  much  cattle,  and  how
many  ploughs  each  possessed.2

This  undertaking,  in  which  modern  historians  have  thought
they  discerned  the  stamp  of  administrative  genius,  was
simply  the  result  of  the  peculiar  position  of  the  Norman  king,
as  chief  of  a  conquering  army,  and  of  the  necesity  of  establish-
ing some  kind  of  order  in  the  chaos  of  the  conquest.  This  is  so
entirely  the  case,  that  in  other  conquests,  the  details  of  which
have  been  transmitted  to  us,  for  example,  in  that  of  Greece
by  the  Latin  crusaders  in  the  thirteenth  century,  we  find  the
same  kind  of  inquest  instituted  by  the  chiefs  of  the  invasion,
on  a  wholly  similar  plan.3

In  virtue  of  the  orders  of  king  William,  Henry  de  Fer-
rieres,  Walter  Giffard,  Adam,  brother  of  Eudes  the  senes-
chal, and  Remi,  bishop  of  Lincoln,  with  other  personages
selected  from  among  the  officers  of  justice  and  of  the  Ex-
chequer, made  a  progress  through  the  counties  of  England,
establishing  a  court  of  inquiry  in  each  place  of  any  importance.4
They  summoned  before  them  the  Norman  viscount  of  each
province,  or  of  each  Saxon  shire,  a  personage  whom  the
Saxons,  in  their  language,  still  called  by  the  ancient  title  of
shire-reve  or  sheriff.  They  then  summoned,  or  caused  the
viscount  to  summon,  all  the  Norman  barons  of  the  neigh-
bourhood, and  called  upon  them  to  state  the  precise  limits  of
their  possessions  and  of  their  territorial  jurisdictions;  then
some  of  the  inspectors,  or  commissioners  delegated  by  them,

1  Quomodo  incoleretur  et  a  quibus  hominibus.  (Chron.  Sax.,  Gibson,  p.
186.)

2  Florent.  Wigorn.,  p.  229. Rndborue,  itt  sup.  p.  257.
3  Poeme  sur  la  conquete  de  la  Moree,  trad  par  M.  Buchon  d'un  MS.
de  la  Biblioth^que  Royale.

*  Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  180.

TO  1086.]  DOMESDAY BOOK.  301

proceeded  to  each  large  domain  and  to  each  district,  or  hun-
dred, as  the  Saxons  called  it.  There  they  made  the  French
men-at-arms  of  each  seigneur,  and  every  English  inhabitant
of  the  hundred,  declare  upon  oath  how  many  free-holders  or
lease-holders  there  were  on  the  domain,1  what  portion  each
occupied  in  full  and  modified  property,  the  names  of  the  actual
holders,  the  names  of  those  who  had  possessed  them  before
the  conquest,  and  the  various  mutations  of  property  that  had
taken  place  since.  So  that  they  required,  say  the  narratives
of  the  time,  three  declarations  concerning  each  estate  ;  what
it  had  been  in  the  time  of  king  Edward;  what  it  was  when
William  gave  it,  and  what  it  was  at  the  time  being.2  Under
each  particular  return  was  inscribed  this  form  :  "  This  is
what  has  been  sworn  by  all  the  Frenchmen  and  all  the
Englishmen  of  the  hundred."3

In  each  town  they  inquired  what  taxes  the  inhabitants  had
paid  to  the  ancient  kings,  and  what  the  town  produced  to  the
officers  of  the  Conqueror;  how  many  houses  the  war  of  the
conquest  or  the  construction  of  fortresses  had  done  away  with;
how  many  houses  the  conquerors  had  taken;  how  many
Saxon  families,  reduced  to  utter  poverty,  were  not  in  a  condi-
tion to  pay  anything.4  In  cities,  they  took  the  oath  from  the
high  Norman  authorities,  who  convoked  the  Saxon  citizens
in  their  old  Guildhall,  now  become  the  property  of  the  king
or  of  some  foreign  baron;  lastly,  in  places  of  less  importance,
they  took  the  oath  of  the  royal  provost,  of  the  priest,  and  of
six  Saxons  or  villeins,  as  the  Normans  called  them,  of  each
town.5  This  survey  occupied  six  years,  during  which  the
commissioners  of  king  William  went  over  all  England,  with
the  exception  of  the  mountainous  districts,  north  and  west  of
Yorkshire,  that  is  to  say,  the  five  modern  counties  of  Dur-
ham, Northumberland,  Cumberland,  Westmoreland,  and  Lan-
cashire.6 Perhaps  the  lands  in  this  district,  cruelly  devas-
tated on  two  separate  occasions,  were  not  deemed  valuable
enough  or  fixedly  appropriated  enough  to  make  their  survey

1  Ex  Anonym.  MSS.,  apud  Selden,  praef.  ad  Eadmeri  Hist,  nov.,  p.  15.
2  Ib.  s  /&.  10.

*  Domesday  Book,  passim.
5  Ex  Anonym.  MSS.,  vt  sup.  p.  15.

6  Auuo  millesimo  octogesimo  sexto  ab  incarnatione  Domini,  vigesinio
quinto  regni  Willelmi  facta  est  ista  deacriptio.  (Domesday  B.,  ii.  4DO.)

302  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1080

useful  or  even  practicable;  perhaps,  too,  the  Norman  commis-
sioners feared,  lest,  if  they  extended  their  inquiries  into  the
towns  of  Northumbria,  the  Saxon  words  which  had  been  the
signal  for  the  massacre  of  bishop  Vaulcher  and  his  hundred
men,  might  sound  in  their  ears  also.

However  this  may  be,  the  register,  or,  to  use  the  old  term,
the  terrier  of  the  Norman  conquest,  makes  no  mention  of  the
domains  conquered  beyond  the  province  of  York.  The  com-
pilation of  this  roll  for  each  county  mentioned  in  it,  was
formed  on  an  uniform  plan.  The  king's  name  was  placed  at
the  head,  with  the  list  of  his  lands  and  revenues  in  the
county;  then  followed  the  names  of  the  chiefs  and  lesser  pro-
prietors, in  the  order  of  their  military  rank  and  territorial
wealth.1  The  Saxons  who  had  been  spared  by  special  grace
in  the  great  spoliation,  figured  only  in  the  last  ranks;  for  the
few  men  of  that  race  who  remained  free  proprietors,  or
tenants,  en  chef  du  roi,  as  the  conquerors  expressed  it,  pos-
sessed only  very  small  estates.  They  were  inserted  at  the
end  of  each  chapter  under  the  name  of  thanes  of  the  king,2
or  with  various  qualifications  derived  from  offices  in  the
royal  household.3  The  other  names  of  Anglo-Saxon  aspect
which  occur  here  and  there  in  the  roll,  belonged  to  men  who
farmed  portions,  of  greater  or  less  extent,  of  the  domains  of
the  Norman  earls,  barons,  knights,  sergeants-at-arms  or  cross-
bow-men.4

Such  is  the  form  of  the  authentic  and  still  existing  book,
whence  have  been  derived  most  of  the  facts  as  to  expro-
priations given  in  the  present  work.  This  precious  volume,
in  which  the  conquest  was  registered  in  its  entirety,  so  that
its  memory  might  never  be  effaced,  was  called  by  the  Nor-
mans, le  grand  role,  le  role  royale,  or  le  role  de  Winchester,
because  it  was  preserved  in  the  treasury  of  the  cathedral  of
that  city.5  The  Saxons  called  it  by  a  more  solemn  name,
Dom-boc,  or  Doomsday  Book,  because  it  contained  their  sen-

1  Liber  uiger  de  Scaccario,  apud  Gloss.  Spelmani,  verbo  Domesday.
2  Thani  regis. (Domesday  B.,  passim.)
3  Venatores,  accipitrarii,  ostiarii,  pistores.

4  Nicolaus  balistarins.

5  Rotulus  reyis,  rotulus  Vintonice,  and  liber  Vintonia.  (Spelman,
Gloss,  verbo  Domesday.)  Magnus  liber... habitus  in  thesauro  ecelesiae
cathedralis  Wintoniae.  (K-udborne,  ut  sup.  i.  p.  257.)

TO  1086.]  DISPOSSESSION OP NORMANS.  303

tence  of  irrevocable  expropriation.1  But  if  this  book  was
a  sentence  of  dispossession  for  the  English  nation,  it  was  so
equally  for  some  of  the  foreign  usurpers.  Their  chief  skilfully
availed  himself  of  it  to  effect  numerous  changes  of  property
in  his  own  favour,  and  to  legitimate  his  personal  pretensions
to  many  lands  usurped  and  occupied  by  others.  He  asserted
himself  proprietor,  by  inheritance,  of  all  that  Edward,  the  last
king  but  one  of  the  Anglo-Saxons,  Harold,  the  last  king,  and
the  whole  family  of  Harold  had  possessed;  by  the  same  title,
he  claimed  all  public  property  and  the  lordship  of  all  cities,
except  where  he  had  expressly  divested  himself  of  it,  either
wholly  or  in  part,  by  a  formal  deed,  par  lettre  et  saisine,  as
the  old  jurisconsults  call  it.2

In  the  moment  of  victory,  no  one  had  thought  of  the  for-
malities of  lettre  or  saisine,  and  each  of  those  to  whom  "William,
before  the  battle  of  Hastings,  said:  "  What  I  take,  you  shall
take,"  had  carved  out  his  own  portion ;  but  after  the  conquest,
the  soldiers  felt  transferred  to  their  own  shoulders  some  of
the  wreight  of  that  power  which  they  had  brought  upon  the
shoulders  of  the  English.  It  was  thus  that  the  right  of  Wil-
liam de  Warenne  to  the  estates  of  two  free  Englishmen  in
Norfolk  was  contested,  because  these  lands  had  once  formed
part  of  one  of  Edward's  royal  manors.3  It  was  the  same  with
the  domain  of  one  Eustache,  in  Huntingdonshire,  and  with
fifteen  acres  of  land  held  by  one  Miles,  in  Berkshire.4  An
estate  that  Engelry  occupied  in  Essex  was,  in  the  language
of  the  great  roll,  seized  into  the  hands  of  the  king,  because
Engelry  sent  no  one  to  justify  his  titles.5  The  king,  in  like

1  Vocatus  Domysday...<iuia  nulli  parcit  sicut  nee  inagnus  dies  judicii.

(-T&0

["  Some  have  imagined  that  the  word  signified  literally  the  lord's  dver-
tisement  to  his  tenants,  from  dom  (dominus),  a  lord,  and  deia,  an  adver-
tisement. The  most  natural  conjecture,  however,  is  that  by  the  day  of
judging,  is  to  he  understood  the  work  of  judicially  determining.  The  Dom-
boc  of  the  Saxons  was  rendered  in  Latin  hy  liber  judicialis,  and  Domesday
Book  is  also  commonly  rendered  liber  judicialis  or  censualis,  and  sometimes
Magna  rolla  Winton."  Crabb,  Hist,  of  English  Law.']

2  Breve  sigillum,  liberatio,  saisitio. (Domesday  B.,  passim.')

3  Quod  pertiuebant  tempore  Edwardi  regis  ad  faganaham  mansi  regis.
(D.  B.,  ii.  .172.)

4  Grafham  dicuut  socam  regis  fuisse  et  esse,  nee  brevem,  nee  saisitorem
vidisse  qui  liberasset  earn  Eustachio. (D.  B.,  i.  fol.  208,  recto.} Hex
Edwardus  habuit  XV.  acras...Milo  Crispen.  tenet  eas  nesciunt  quomodo.
(Ib.  fol.  56,  recto.)  »  Ib.  ii.  p.  25.

304  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1080

manner,  seized  all  estates  over  which  he  had  any  pretension,
and  of  which  the  occupier,  although  a  Norman,  could  not  or
would  not  render  an  account. l

Another  claim  on  his  part  was,  that  every  domain  which
had  paid  any  rent  or  service  to  king  Edward,  should  pay
the  same  rent  or  service  to  him,  although  held  by  a  Norman.
This  claim,  founded  on  a  regular  succession  to  the  rights  of
the  English  king,  which  could  not  be  admitted  by  those  who
had  forcibly  dispossessed  the  English  race,  was  at  first  ill
received  by  the  conquerors.  Exemption  from  taxes  or  any
money  service  beyond  a  voluntary  contribution  now  and  then,
appeared  to  them  the  inviolable  prerogative  of  their  victory,
and  they  regarded  the  condition  of  customary  tax-payers  as
peculiar  to  the  subjugated  nation.2  Many  resisted  the  de-
mands of  the  king,  scorning  to  have  personal  servitude  im-
posed upon  them  for  the  land  which  they  had  conquered.  But
others  submitted;  and  their  compliance,  whether  voluntary
or  purchased  by  William,  weakened  the  opposition  of  the
rest.  Raoul  de  Courbespine  long  refused  to  pay  any  rent  for
the  houses  he  had  taken  in  the  city  of  Canterbury;  and  Hugh
de  Montfort  for  the  lands  he  occupied  in  Essex.3  These  two
chiefs  might  act  thus  cavalierly  with  impunity;  but  the
haughtiness  of  less  powerful  and  less  considerable  men  was
sometimes  severely  punished.  One  Osbern  le  Pecheur
(Fisher),  having  refused  to  pay  the  dues  which  his  land  for-
merly paid  to  king  Edward,  as  depending  on  his  domain,  was
appropriated  by  the  royal  agents,  arid  his  land  offered  to  any
one  who  would  pay  the  dues  demanded.  Raoul  Taille-Bois
paid,  says  the  great  roll,  and  took  possession  of  the  domain
forfeited  by  Osbern  le  Pecheur.4

The  king  thus  endeavoured  to  levy  from  his  own  country-
men, in  the  cities  and  lands  of  his  demesne,  the  tax  esta-
blished by  the  Saxon  law.  As  to  the  English  in  these  cities
and  demesne  lands,  besides  the  tax  rigorously  exacted,  as
being  the  custom  of  the  place,  and  which  was  often  doubled
or  tripled,  they  were  further  subject  to  a  casual,  arbitrary,
variable  impost,  capriciously  and  harshly  levied,  which  the

1  Rationare,  derationare,  reddere  rationem. (D.  B.,  passim.)

2  Consuetude,  custuma,  custumarii,  coustumes,  customs.

3  D.  B.,  i.  fol.  2,  recto;  Ib.  ii.  p.  2,  et  seq.

*  D.  B.,  i.  216.

TO  1086.  J  DISPUTES AMONG THE NORMANS.  305

Normans  called  taille  or  taillage  (tallagium).  The  great  roll
enumerates  the  tallagable  burgesses  of  the  king,  in  cities,
towns,  and  hamlets.  "  The  following  are  the  burgesses  of
the  king  at  Colchester:1  Keolman,  who  holds  a  house  and  five
acres  of  land;  Leofwin,  who  holds  two  houses  and  twenty-
five  acres;  Ulfrik,  Edwin,  Wulfstan,  Manwn,  &c."  The
Norman  soldiers  and  chiefs  also  levied  tallage  on  the  Saxons
who  had  fallen  to  their  lot  in  town  or  country.2  This  is  what,
in  the  language  of  the  conquerors,  was  called  having  a  free
burgess  or  Saxon ;  and  in  this  way  the  free  men  were  reckoned
by  the  head,  were  sold,  given,  exchanged,  lent,  or  even
divided  among  the  Normans.3  The  great  roll  mentions  that
a  certain  viscount  had  in  the  town  of  Ipswich  two  Saxon
burghers,  the  one  on  loan,  the  other  in  pledge  ;4  and  that  king
William,  by  authentic  deed,  had  lent  the  Saxon  Edwig  to
Raoul  Taille-Bois,  to  keep  him  so  long  as  he  should  live.5

Many  intestine  disputes  among  the  conquerors  for  the  spoil
of  the  conquered,  many  invasions  of  Normans  upon  Normans,
as  the  roll  expresses  it,  were  also  recorded  in  every  part  of
England  ;G  for  example,  William  de  Warenne,  in  Bedfordshire,
had  disseised  Walter  Espec  of  a  half-hide  or  half-acre  of
land,  and  had  taken  from  him  two  horses.7  Elsewhere,  Hugh
de  Corbon  had  usurped  from  Roger  Bigot  the  half  of  a  free,
Englishman — that  is  to  say,  five  acres  of  land.  In  Hamp-
shire, William  de  la  Chesnaye  claimed  from  Picot  a  certain
portion  of  land,  under  pretext  that  it  belonged  to  the  Saxon
whose  property  he  had  taken.8  The  last  fact,  and  many
others  of  the  same  kind,  prove  that  the  Normans  regarded  as
their  legitimate  property  all  that  the  ancient  proprietor  could

1  Burgenses  regis. (Ib.  ii.  104.)

8  Omnes  isti  sunt  liberi  homines  Rogerii  Bigot,  et  Normaunus  tenet  eos
de  eo. (Ib.  p.  3AU

3  Istos  liberos  homines  caluinpniatur  Roger  de  Ramis. (D.  B.,  ii.  337.)
Invasit  Hugo  de  Corbun,  sub  Rogerio  Bigot  medietatem  uuius  liberi  ho-
minis. (Ib.  278.)

4  Habet  Normannus  II.  burgenses,  unum  in  vadimonio  contra  euudein,
et  alterum  pro  debito. (Ib.  438.)

5  Hanc  terram  ten  nit  Avigi,  et  potuit  dare  cui  voluit. T.  R.  E.  liauc  ei
postea  W.  rex  concessit,  et  per  suum  brevem  Rndulfo  Tallebose  commodiwit,
ut  eum  servaret  quamdiu  viveret. (Ib.  i.  211.)

6  Invasiones.

7  ...sine  breve  regis  dessaisivit.  &c. (Ib.)  8  Jb.  i.  -U.

VOL.  I.  X

306  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1080

have  legally  claimed,  and  that  the  foreign  invader,  considering
himself  a  natural  successor,  made  the  same  claims,  prosecuted
the  same  civil  suits,  that  the  natural  heir  of  the  Saxon  would
have  done.1  He  summoned  the  English  inhabitants  of  the
district  as  witnesses  to  establish  the  extent  of  the  rights
which  his  substitution  in  place  of  the  man  he  had  killed  or
expelled  had  communicated  to  him.2  Frequently,  the  memory
of  the  inhabitants,  disturbed  by  the  suffering  and  confusion
of  the  conquest,  was  not  equal  to  these  appeals;  frequently,
also,  the  Norman  who  sought  to  dispute  the  right  of  his
countrymen,  refused  to  abide  by  the  deposition  of  the  vile
populace  of  the  conquered.3  In  this  case,  the  only  means  of
terminating  the  dispute  was  by  judicial  combat  between  the
parties,  or  a  trial  in  the  king's  court.4

The  Norman  terrier  speaks  in  many  places  of  unjust  inva-
sions, disseizins,  and  wrongful  pretensions.5  It  seems  curious
to  find  the  word  justice  in  the  register  of  the  expropriation  of
an  entire  people;  a  book  which  cannot  be  properly  understood,
unless  we  bear  in  mind  throughout  every  page  that  the  word
inheritance  means  the  spoliation  of  an  Englishman;  that  every
Englishman  despoiled  by  a  Norman  takes  thenceforth  the
name  of  predecessor  of  the  Norman;  that  the  being  just,  with
a  Norman,  meant  the  abstaining  from  invasion  of  lands  or
houses  of  an  Englishman  killed  or  expelled  by  another  Nor-
man, and  that  the  contrary  is  called  injustice,  as  is  proved  by
the  following  passage:  "  In  the  county  of  Bedford,  Raoul
Taille-Bois  has  unjustly  disseized  Nigel  of  five  hides  of  land,
notoriously  forming  part  of  the  inheritance  of  his  predecessor,
and  part  of  which  is  still  occupied  by  the  concubine  of  the
said  Nigel."

Some  of  the  dispossessed  Saxons  ventured  to  present  them-
selves before  the  commissioners  of  inquiry  to  set  forth  their

1  Hanc  clamant... per  antecessorem...cujus  terras  omnes  W.  rex  sibi  do-
navit. (Tb.  folio  215.)

2  De  hoc  suum  testimonium  adduxit  de — antiquis  liominibus  totius  co-
mitatus. (Ib.  p.  44.)

3  Testimonium  de  villanis  et  vili  plebe. (Ib-}

4  Judicium  per  regem  in  curia  regis  ;  jndicio,  seu  bello,  sen  duello. (Ib.
passim.)

5  Invasit,  injuste  saisivit,  injuste  dissaisivit,  injuste  occupavit. (Ib.
passim.)

6  D.  B.,  i.  fol.  214.

TO  1086.]  FORMATION OF FORESTS.  307

claims;  many  of  these  are  registered,  couched  in  terms  of
humble  supplication  that  no  Norman  employed.  These  men
declared  themselves  poor  and  miserable;  they  appealed  to  the
clemency  and  compassion  of  the  king.1  Those  who,  by  the
most  abject  servility,  succeeded  in  preserving  some  slight
portion  of  their  paternal  inheritance,  were  obliged  to  pay  for
this  favour  with  degrading  or  fantastic  services,  or  received  it
under  the  no  less  humiliating  title  of  alms.  Sons  are  in-
scribed in  the  roll  as  holding  the  property  of  their  fathers  by
alms?  Free  women  retain  their  field  as  alms?  One  woman
preserves  her  husband's  land  on  condition  of  feeding  the
king's  dogs.4  A  mother  and  her  son  receive  their  own  pro-
perty in  gift,  on  condition  of  each  day  saying  prayers  for  the
soul  of  Richard,  the  king's  son.5

This  Richard,  son  of  William  the  Conqueror,  died  in  1081,
crushed  by  his  horse  against  a  tree  in  the  New  Forest.6
This  was  a  space  of  thirty  miles,  newly  planted  with  trees,
between  Salisbury  and  the  sea.  This  district,  before  being
converted  into  wood  land,  contained  more  than  sixty  parishes,
which  the  conqueror  broke  up,  and  whose  inhabitants  he  ex-
pelled.7 It  is  not  known  whether  the  reason  for  this  singular
proceeding  was  purely  politic,  and  whether  William's  spe-
cial object  was  to  provide  a  secure  place  of  debarkation  for
his  succours  from  Normandy,  a  place  where  they  would
encounter  no  Saxon  enemy;  or  whether,  as  most  of  the
ancient  historians  say,  he  merely  designed  to  satisfy  his  pas-
sion and  that  of  his  sons  for  the  chase.  It  is  to  this  inor-
dinate passion  that  are  also  attributed  the  strange  and  cruel
regulations  he  made  respecting  the  carrying  arms  in  the
forests  of  England;  but  there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  these
regulations  had  a  graver  motive,  and  that  they  were  directed
against  the  English,  whor  under  the  pretext  of  hunting,  might
meet  in  arms  for  political  purposes.  "  He  ordered,"  says  a
contemporary  chronicle,  "  that  whoever  should  kill  a  stag  or

i  D.  B.,  i.  fol.  203.

2  ...in  elemosina  coucessit. (Ib.  fol.  218.)  3  Ib.  fol.  G3.

4  ...feminae  Godrici  in  dono,  eo  quod  nutriebat  canes  suos. (Ib.  fol.  57.)

5  Ib.  fol.  141.

6  Nove  Forest. Vide  Spelman,  Glossar.  verbo  foresta.
7  ...et  silvestres  feras  pro  hominibus  ibidem  constituit. (Order.  Vital.,
lib.  x.  p.  781.)

x2

308  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D.  1080

a  hind  should  have  his  eyes  picked  out;  the  protection  given
to -stags  extended  also  to  wild  boars;  and  he  even  made
statutes  to  secure  hares  from  all  danger.  This  king  loved
wild  beasts  as  though  he  had  been  their  father."1  These
laws,  rigorously  enforced  against  the  Saxons,  greatly  increased
their  misery;  for  many  of  them  had  no  means  of  subsistence
but  the  chase.  "  The  poor  murmured,"  adds  the  chronicle
just  cited,  "  but  he  made  no  account  of  their  ill  will,  and  they
were  fain  to  obey  under  pain  of  death."2

William  comprised  within  his  royal  demesne  all  the  great
forests  of  England,  formidable  places  to  the  conquerors,  the
asylum  of  their  last  adversaries.  These  laws,  which  the
Saxon  historians  ridicule  as  laws  to  protect  the  life  of  hares.3
were  a  powerful  protection  to  the  life  of  the  Normans;  and,
in  order  that  their  execution  might  be  the  better  assured,
hunting  in  the  royal  forests  became  a  privilege,  the  conces-
sion of  which  appertained  to  the  king  alone,  who  could  at  will
grant  and  interdict  it.  Many  high  personages  of  Norman
race,  more  alive  to  their  own  convenience  than  to  the  inter-
ests of  the  conquest,  were  indignant  at  this  exclusive  law.4
But  so  long  as  the  spirit  of  nationality  remained  among  the
conquered,  this  objection  of  the  Normans  did  not  prevail
against  the  will  of  their  kings.  Sustained  by  the  instinct  of
political  necessity,  the  sons  of  William  preserved,  as  exclu-
sively as  he  had  done,  the  privilege  of  the  chase;  and  it  was
only  when  this  privilege  ceased  to  be  necessary,  that  their
successors  found  themselves  constrained,  however  unwillingly,
to  surrender  it.5

Then,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  thirteenth  century,  the  parks  of
the  Norman  proprietors  were  no  longer  included  within  the
royal  forests,  and  the  lord  of  each  domain  obtained  the  free
enjoyment  of  his  woods;  his  dogs  were  no  longer  subjected  to
mutilation  of  limbs,6  and  the  royal  foresters,  verderers,  or
viewers,  no  longer  prowled  incessantly  round  his  house  to
surprise  him  in  some  offence  against  the  forest  laws,  and  to

1  Thorn. Rudbovne,  nt  sup.  258. Sua  svvithe  be  lufode  tba  headeor
swylce  he  weere  heora  fader. (Saxon.  Cbron.,  p.  191.)
2  Chron.  Sax.,  p.  101.

3  Item  statuit  de  leporibus  nt  periculo  immunes  essent. (7ft.)

4  II.  '•>  Blackstone's  Commentaries,  ii.  41  f>.

6  Me  amplius  expeditentur. (Charta  Henrici  iii.)

TO  1086.] WILLIAM'S  GRASPING  CONDUCT.  309

make  him  pay  a  heavy  fine.  On  the  contrary,  the  royal  law
for  the  preservation  of  game,  great  and  small,  was  extended
in  favour  of  the  descendants  of  the  rich  Normans,  enabling
them  to  have  game-keepers  of  their  own  to  kill  with  impunity
the  poor  Englishman  who  might  be  detected  laying  wait  for
deer  or  hares.1  At  a  later  period,  the  poor  man  himself,  the
descendant  of  the  Saxons,  having  ceased  to  be  formidable  to
the  rich  heirs  of  the  other  race,  was  only  punished,  when
he  dared  to  hunt,  with  a  year's  imprisonment,  and  the  pro-
viding responsible  bail  to  answer  for  his  not  committing  any
such  crime  for  the  future,  "  in  parks,  or  forests,  or  warrens,
or  fish-ponds,  or  anywhere,  against  the  peace  of  our  lord  the
king."2

The  last  peculiarity  that  we  shall  cite,  as  exhibited  by  the
great  register  of  the  Norman  conquest,  is  that  we  find  there
the  proof  that  king  William  established  as  a  general  law,
that  every  title  to  property  anterior  to  his  invasion,  and  every
act  of  transfer  or  transmission  of  property  made  by  a  man  of
English  race  posterior  to  the  invasion,  was  null  and  void,
unless  he  himself  had  formally  ratified  it.  In  the  first  terror
caused  by  the  conquest,  some  Englishmen  had  made  over
part  of  their  lands  to  churches,  either  in  actual  gift,  for  the
good  of  their  souls  and  bodies,  or  in  feigned  gift,  to  secure
that  portion  to  their  sons,  should  the  domains  of  the  saints  of
England  be  respected  by  the  Normans.  This  precaution
was  futile,  and  when  the  churches  could  not  produce  written
proof  that  the  king  had  confirmed,  the  gift,  or,  in  other  words,
that  he  himself  had  made  it,  the  land  was  seized  to  his
account.3  Such  was  the  case  with  the  domain  of  Ailrik,
who,  before  departing  for  the  war  against  the  Saxons,  had
assigned  his  manor  to  the  convent  of  St.  Peter,  in  Essex;
and  it  was  so  with  the  estate  of  one  Edrik,  made  over  before
the  conquest  to  the  monastery  of  Abingdon.4

This  law  was  more  than  once  put  in  force,  and  all  title  to

1  Si  fugit  et  occidatur  malefactor,  non  obtinebit  jus  nee  appellum.  (Ad-
ditamenta  ad  Matth.  Paris,  i.  156.)  2  Ib.

3  Nortunam  tenuit  Godid  qusedam  fsemina  T.  R.  E....hanc  terram  dedit
...Sancto-Paulo,  postquam  rex  venit  in  Angliam,  sed  non  ostendit  brevem
nee  concessum  regis.  (D.  B.,  ii.  13.)

*  ...Edricus,  qui  eum  tenebat,  deliberavit  ilium  filio  suo  qui  erat  in
Abendone  monachus,  ut  ad  firmam  illud  teneret.  {Ib.  i.  59.)

310  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1080

property  whatsoever  utterly  effaced  and  annihilated  for  the  sons
of  the  Anglo-Saxons.  This  fact  is  attested  by  the  Norman
Bichard  Lenoir,  bishop  of  Ely  about  the  middle  of  the  twelfth
century.  He  relates  that  the  English,  daily  dispossessed  by
their  lords,  addressed  great  complaints  to  the  king,  saying
that  the  ill  treatment  they  had  to  undergo  from  the  other
race,  and  the  hatred  exhibited  towards  them  by  it,  left  them
no  resource  but  to  abandon  the  country.1  After  long  delibe-
ration, the  kings  and  their  council  decided  that  in  future  all
that  a  man  of  English  race  obtained  from  the  lords,  as  pay-
ment for  personal  services,  or  as  the  result  of  a  legal  agree-
ment, should  be  irrevocably  secured  to  him,  but  on  condition
that  he  should  renounce  all  right  founded  upon  anterior
possession.2  "  This  decision,"  adds  the  bishop  of  Ely,  "  was
sage  and  beneficial;  and  it  obliged  the  sons  of  the  conquered
to  seek  the  good  graces  of  their  lords  by  submission,  obe-
dience, and  devotion.  So  that  now  no  Englishman  possessing
lands  or  houses  or  other  property,  is  proprietor  thereof  by
title  of  inheritance  or  paternal  succession,  but  only  in  virtue
of  a  donation  made  to  him  in  recompence  for  his  loyal
services."3

It  was  in  the  year  1086  that  the  compilation  of  the  Great
Roll  of  the  Normans — the  Book  of  Judgment  of  the  Saxons —
was  finished;  and  in  the  same  year  there  was  a  great  convo-
cation of  all  the  conquering  chiefs,  laymen  and  priests.  In
this  council  were  discussed  the  various  claims  registered  in
the  roll  of  inquest,  and  the  discussion  did  not  terminate  with-
out quarrels  between  the  king  and  his  barons;  there  were  grave
conferences  between  them,  says  a  contemporary  chronicle,
upon  the  important  distinction  as  to  what  ought  to  be  defini-
tively regarded  as  legitimate  in  the  occupations  under  the
conquest.4  Most  of  the  individual  invasions  were  ratified;
but  as  some  exceptions  were  made,  there  was  a  discontented
minority  among  the  conquerors.  Several  barons  and  knights
renounced  their  homage,  quitted  William  and  England,  and,

1  Cum  dominis  suis  odiosi  passim  pellerentur,  nee  esset  qui  ablata  resti-
tueret...exosi  et  rebus  spoliati,  ad  aliegenas  transire  cogerentur.  (Dialog,
de  Scaccario,  in  notis  ad  Matth.  Paris,  i.  ad  initiiim.)

2  Ib.  3  Ib.  4  Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  186.

TO  1086.]  RUMOUR OF A DANISH INVASION.  311

crossing  the  Tweed,  went  to  offer  to  Malcolm,  king  of  Scot-
land, the  service  of  their  horses  and  their  arms.1  Malcolm
received  them  favourably,  as,  before  them,  he  had  received
the  emigrant  Saxons;  and  distributed  among  them  portions
of  land,  for  which  they  became  his  liege-men,  his  soldiers  to-
wards and  against  all.  Thus  Scotland  received  an  accession
of  population  entirely  different  from  those  which  had  hitherto
mingled  together  there.  The  Normans,  united  by  a  common
exile  and  a  common  hospitality  with  the  English  who  had  but
lately  fled  before  them,  became,  under  a  new  banner,  their
companions  and  brothers-in-arms.  Equality  reigned  beyond
the  Tweed  between  two  races  of  men  who,  on  the  other  side  of
the  same  river,  were  of  so  different  a  condition;  a  fusion  rapidly
took  place  of  manners  and  even  of  language,  and  the  recol-
lection of  diversity  of  origin  did  not  sever  their  sons,  because
there  was  mingled  with  it  no  recollection  of  foreign  insult
or  oppression.

While  the  conquerors  were  thus  occupied  in  regulating
their  internal  affairs,  they  were  suddenly  disturbed  by  an
alarm  from  without.  The  report  spread  that  a  thousand
Danish  vessels,  sixty  Norwegian  vessels,  and  an  hundred
vessels  from  Flanders,  furnished  by  Robert  de  Frison,  the
new  duke  of  that  country  and  an  enemy  of  the  Normans,
were  assembling  in  the  gulf  of  Lymfiord,  for  the  purpose  of
making  a  descent  upon  England  and  delivering  the  Anglo-
Saxon  people.2  The  kings  of  Denmark,  who,  for  twenty
years  past,  had  successively  encouraged  and  betrayed  the
hopes  of  this  people,  could  not,  it  would  seem,  resolve  entirely
to  abandon  them.  The  insurrection  which,  in  1080,  caused
the  death  of  the  bishop  of  Durham,  appears  to  have  been  en-
couraged by  the  expectation  of  a  descent  of  the  northmen;
for  we  find  these  words  in  the  official  despatches  addressed,
at  the  time,  to  that  bishop:  "The  Danes  are  coming:  care-
fully provide  your  castles  with  provisions  and  arms."3  The

1  Ellis's  Metrical  Romances,  vol.  i.,  introduction,  p.  125.
2  ...ut gentem nobilissimam pristinae  libertati  restitueret. (Hist. S.
Canuti  regis,  aptid  Script,  rer.  Dame.,  iii.  348.) Order.  Vital.,  lib.  vii.  p.
649. Florent.  Wigorn.,  Chron.,  p.  641.

3  Lanfranci,  Opera,  p.  314.

312  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  108o.

Dunes  did  not  come,  and  perhaps  the  extraordinary  precau-
tions recommended  to  bishop  Vuulcher  on  their  account  occa-
sioned the  failure  of  the  outbreak  in  which  he  perished.

But  this  false  alarm  was  nothing  compared  with  that
which  spread  through  Knglund  in  the  year  1085.  The
great  body  of  the  Norman  forces  was  at  once  marched  into
the  eastern  provinces;  poets  were  established  on  the  coasts;
cruisers  put  to  sea;  the  recently  erected  fortresses  were  sur-
rounded with  additional  works,  and  the  walls  of  the  old
cities,  dismantled  by  the  conquerors,  were  rebuilt.1  King
William  published  through  Gaul  the  ban  he  had  proclaimed
twenty  years  before,  when  first  about  to  cross  the  Channel.
He  promised  pay  and  reward  to  every  horse  or  foot  soldier,
who  would  enrol  in  his  service.  An  immense  number  ar-
rived from  all  parts.  Every  country  that  had  furnished  in-
vaders to  effect  the  conquest,  furnished  garrisons  to  defend  it.'2
Fresh  soldiers  were  quartered  in  the  towns  ami  villages;  and
the  Norman  earls,  viscounts,  bishops,  and  abbots  were  or-
dered to  lodge  and  support  them  in  proportion  to  the  extent
of  their  respective  jurisdictions  or  domains.3  To  meet  the
expense  of  this  great  armament,  the  king  revived  the  old  im-
post called  Dane-yhcld,  which,  prior  to  its  being  levied  by
the  Scandinavian  conquerors,  had  been  raised  for  the  defence
of  the  country  against  their  invasions.  It  was  re-established
at  the  rate  of  twelve  pence  in  silver  for  each  acre  of  land.
The  Normans  upon  whom  this  tax  immediately  fell,  reim-
bursed themselves  out  of  the  pockets  of  their  Anglo-Saxon
fanners  or  serfs,  who  thus  paid  to  repel  the  Danes  coming  to
their  aid.  that  which  their  ancestors  had  paid  to  repel  them  as
enemies.4

Bodies  of  troops  overran  the  north-eastern  counties  of  Eng-
land, in  all  directions,  to  devastate  (hem  and  render  them
uninhabitable  either  by  the  Danes,  if  they  landed,  or  by  the
Knglish,  whom  they  suspected  of  favouring  their  landing.*
There  remained  on  the  sea  coast,  within  reach  of  the  vessels,
neither  man,  nor  beast,  nor  fruit  tree.  The  Saxon  popula-
tion was  necessarily  driven  inland,  and,  byway  of  additional

1 Hist.  S.  Cannti,  »/  siiji.  *  Ohron.  Saxon.,  p.  180.

*  76. — Floront.  "Wijjoni.,  p.  (541.

4  "NYilkins,  Concilia  Mu<in,r-/lrit<ni».,  i.  31U.

5  Chron.  Saxon.,  nt  vt}>.

A.D. lOSo.]  DANISH ARMAMENT.  313

precaution  against  any  communication  between  that  popula-
tion and  tho  Danes,  a  royal  ban,  published  by  sound  of
trumpet  in  all  places  lying  near  the  sea,  ordered  the  English
to  assume  Norman  attire,  Norman  weapons,  and  to  shave  their
beards  in  the  Norman  fashion.1  This  singular  order  was
designed  to  deprive  the  Danes  of  the  means  of  distinguishing
the  friends  whom  they  came  to  succour,  from  the  enemies
\\  horn  they  eame  to  tight. -

The  fear  which  inspired  these  precautions  was  not  without
foundation;  there  was  really  a  numerous  fleet,  destined  for
Kngland,  at  anchor  on  the  coast  of  Denmark.

Olaf  Kyr,  king  of  Norway,  son  and  successor  of  that
Harold  who,  seeking  to  conquer  Kngland,  had  obtained  but
seven  feet  of  land  there,  now  came  to  aid  the  nation  which
had  vanquished  and  killed  his  father,  without,  perhaps,  heed-
ing the.  change  in  the  destiny  of  that  people,  and  thinking
that  he  was  going  to  avenge  Harold."  As  to  the  king  of
Denmark,  Knut  the  son  of  Swen,  promoter  of  the  war  and
chief  commander  of  the  armament,  he  understood  the  revo-
lution effected  in  Kngland  by  the  Norman  conquest,  and  it
was  with  a  full  knowledge  of  the  subject  that  he  went  to
succour  the  conquered  against  the.  conquerors.  "  He  had
yielded,"  say  the  Danish  historians,  "to  the  supplications
of  the.  exiled  English,  to  the  messages  received  from  Kng-
land, and  to  the  pity  inspired  in  his  bosom  by  the  miseries
of  a  race  of  men  allied  to  his  own,  a  race  whose  chiefs,  whose
rich  men,  whose  notable  personages  had  been  killed  or
banished)  and  which  found  itself  reduced  to  servitude
under  the  foreign  race  of  French,  who  are  also  called  Ro-
mans"*

These  were,  in  fact,  the  only  two  names  by  which  the
Norman  nation  was  known  in  the  north  of  Kurope,  since  the
last  remains  of  the  Danish  language  had  perished  at  Rouen
and  at  Bayeux.  Though  the  seigneurs  of  Normandy  might
still  readily  prove  their  Scandinavian  descent,  in  forgetting
the  idiom  which  was  the  visible  sign  of  that  descent,  they

1  ...ad  instur  JiMMMOrWN»..Mr  oninia  i'Vunei^eiiis,  quos  ct  Konmnos
dici  pnrtuliinus,  nssimihuv  pnvniut.  (Hist.  S.  Caiiuti,  ut  .<»;>.  [).  MO.)

»  Ib.

3  Sftga  af  Olnfo  Kyrni,  cap.  viii. ;  Snorre's  ll<-i>nskrin<ila,  iii.  180.
*  Hist.  S.  Caimti,  ut  sup.  p.  i)47.

314  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1085.

had  lost  their  title  to  the  family  compact  which,  despite  fre-
quent hostilities,  the  result  of  transient  passions,  united  the
Teutonic  populations  one  with  another.  But  the  Anglo-Saxons
were  still  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  this  fraternity  of  origin;  and
this,  say  the  chroniclers  of  his  nation,  the  king  of  Denmark
acknowledged;  so  that  if  his  enterprise  was  not  wholly  free
from  infusion  of  views  of  personal  ambition,  it  was  at  least
ennobled  by  the  sentiment  of  a  duty  of  humanity  and  relation-
ship. His  fleet  was  detained  in  port  longer  than  he  had  ex-
pected, and,  meanwhile,  emissaries  from  the  Norman  king,
able  and  cunning  as  their  master,  corrupted  with  English
gold  many  of  the  counsellors  and  captains  of  the  Danes.1

The  delay,  at  first  involuntary,  was  protracted  by  these  in-
trigues. The  men  secretly  sold  to  William,  and  especially
the  Danish  bishops,  most  of  whom  allowed  themselves  to  be
gained  over,  repeatedly  succeeded  in  preventing  king  Knut
from  putting  to  sea,  by  creating  all  sorts  of  embarrassments
and  obstacles.  Meantime,  the  soldiers,  tired  of  a  futile  en-
campment, complained  and  murmured  in  their  tents.2  They
demanded  not  to  be  thus  mocked,  and  that  they  should  be  either
sent  upon  their  expedition,  or  be  allowed  to  return  to  their
homes,  their  labours,  and  their  commerce.  They  held  meet-
ings, and  signified  to  the  king  by  deputies  their  resolution  to
disband,  if  the  order  for  departure  was  not  given  forthwith.3
King  Knut  attempted  to  use  rigour  in  order  to  re-establish
discipline.  He  imprisoned  the  leaders  of  the  revolt,  and
sentenced  the  whole  army  to  pay  a  fine  of  so  much  each
man.  The  general  exasperation  far  from  being  calmed  by
these  measures,  increased  to  such  a  degree,  that  in  July,
1086,  there  was  a  general  mutiny,  in  which  the  king  was
killed  by  the  soldiers:4  this  was  the  signal  for  a  civil  war,
which  spread  over  all  Denmark;  and  from  that  time  the  Danish
people,  occupied  with  its  own  quarrels,  forgot  the  Anglo-
Saxons,  their  servitude,  and  their  wrongs.

This  was  the  last  occasion  on  which  the  sympathy  of  the
Northern  Teutons  was  exercised  in  favour  of  the  Teutonic
race  which  inhabited  England.  By  degrees,  the  English,

1  Hist.  S.  Canuti,  ut  sup.  p.  351.  Torfaeus,  Hist.  rer.  Norveg.,  lib.  vi.
p.  393.

2  Hist.  S.  Canuti,  ut  sup.  3  Ib.

*  Ib.  p.  352,  et  seq.

A.D.  1086.] NORMAN  LANGUAGE  IN  ENGLAND. 315

despairing  of  their  own  cause,  ceased  to  recommend  them-
selves and  their  cause  to  the  remembrance  and  support  of  the
northern  nations.  The  exiles  of  the  conquest  died  in  foreign
lands,  and  left  there  children,  who,  forgetting  the  country  of
their  ancestors,  knew  no  other  than  the  land  which  had
given  them  birth.1  Finally,  the  Danish  ambassadors  and
travellers  who  visited  England,  hearing  in  the  houses  of  the
great  and  wealthy  none  but  the  Eomane  tongue  of  Nor-
mandy, and  paying  little  heed  to  the  language  spoken  by  the
traders  in  their  shops,  or  the  neatherds  in  their  yards,
imagined  that  the  whole  population  of  the  country  was  Nor-
man, or  that  the  language  had  changed  since  the  invasion  of
the  Normans.2  Seeing  French  trouveres  in  every  castle  and
city  constituting  the  pastime  of  the  higher  classes  in  Eng-
land, who,  in  fact,  could  have  supposed  that,  sixty  years  be-
fore, the  scalds  of  the  north  had  been  held  in  the  same  favour
there?3  England  accordingly,  from  the  twelfth  century,  was
regarded  by  the  Scandinavian  nations  as  a  country  of  an  abso-
lutely foreign  tongue.  This  opinion  became  so  decided,  that,
in  the  Danish  and  Norwegian  law  of  escheat,  the  English
were  classed  in  the  rank  of  the  least  favoured  nations.  In
the  code  bearing  the  name  of  king  Magnus,  under  the
article  of  successions,  we  find  the  following  words:  "If  men
of  English  race,  or  others  even  still  greater  strangers  to
us — If  Englishmen  or  other  men  speaking  an  idiom  bearing
no  resemblance  to  our  own. . .  ."4  This  want  of  resemblance
could  not  mean  mere  diversity  of  dialects;  for,  even  in  the
present  day,  the  brogue  of  the  northern  provinces  of  Eng-
land is  to  a  certain  extent  intelligible  to  a  Dane  or  Nor-
wegian.5

1  Pontanus,  Rcr.  Danic.  Hist.,  lib.  v.  p.  197.

8  Lingua  vero  in  Anglia  mutata  est,  ubi  Wilhelmus  Notlras  Angliam  su-
begit ;  ex  eo  enim  tempore  in  Anglia  invaluit  lingua  Francico — Normannica
(Walkska).  Saga  af  Gunnlaugi,  cap.  vii.  (Hafniae,  1775)  p.  87.

3  Gunnlaugus  (islandensis)...ad  regem  (Etlielredum)  accessit..."  Car-
men heroicum  de  te  composui  cui  vellem  audiendo  vacares." Rex  ita  fore
annuit,  unde  Gunnlaugus... recitavit...Eadem  turn  Anglias  quae (Dauiae  et.)
Norwegiae  fuit  lingua. (Ib.}

4  Codex  juris  Islandorum  dictus Gragas. T.  de  haered.,  cap.  vi.  and
xviii. ;  dissert,  de  lingua  danica,  apud  Saga  af  Gunnlaugi,  p.  247.

5  The  principal,  indeed  almost  the  sole  difference,  arises  from  the  French
words,  which  have  been  introduced  into  it  in  great  numbers.

316  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1086.

About  the  close  of  the  year  1086,  there  was  a  general
meeting  of  all  the  conquerors  and  sons  of  the  conquerors,  at
Salisbury,  or,  according  to  some  writers,  at  Winchester.
Each  person  of  dignity,  layman  or  priest,  came  at  the  head  of
his  men-at-arms  and  the  feudatories  of  his  domains.  There
were  present  sixty  thousand  men,  all  possessors  of  at  least  a
portion  of  land  sufficient  to  maintain  a  horse,  or  provide  a
complete  suit  of  armour.1  They  renewed  in  succession  their
oath  of  faith  and  homage  to  king  William,  touching  his
hands  and  pronouncing  this  form:  "  I  become  your  man  from,
this  day  forth  for  life,  for  limb,  and  for  worldly  honour,  and
unto  you  shall  be  true  and  faithful,  and  bear  you  forth  for
the  land  that  I  hold  of  you,  so  help  me  God."

The  armed  colony  then  separated,  and  it  was  probably  then
that  the  royal  herald  published,  in  his  name,  the  following
ordinances  :2

"  We  will  and  order  that  the  earls,  barons,  knights,  ser-
geants, and  all  the  free  men  of  this  kingdom,  be  and  hold
themselves  fitly  provided  with  horses  and  arms,  that  they
may  be  ready  at  all  times  to  do  us  the  lawful  service  they  owe
us  for  their  domains  and  holdings.3

"  We  will  that  all  the  free  men  of  this  kingdom  be  leagued
and  united  as  sworn  brothers-in-arms,  to  defend,  maintain,
and  guard  it  to  the  best  of  their  power.

"  We  will  that  all  the  cities,  towns,  castles,  and  hundreds
of  this  kingdom  be  ^guarded  every  night,  and  that  the  inha-
bitants in  turn  keep  watch  and  ward  against  all  enemies  and
evil  doers.

"  We  will  that  all  the  men  brought  by  us  from  beyond  sea,
or  who  have  followed  us,  shall  be,  throughout  the  kingdom,
under  our  peace  and  special  protection;  that  if  one  of  them
be  killed,  his  lord,  within  the  space  of  five  days,  shall  seize
the  murderer;  if  he  fail  in  so  doing,  he  shall  pay  us  a  fine,
conjointly  with  the  English  of  the  hundred  in  which  the
murder  has  been  committed.

"  We  will  that  the  free  men  of  this  kingdom  hold  their
lands  and  possessions  well  and  in  peace,  free  from  all  unjust
exaction  and  all  tallage,  so  that  nothing  be  taken  or  de-

:  i  Saxon.  Chron.,  p.  187. Mattb.  Wpstmon.,  p.  229.

2  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  vii.  p.  649.
3  Selden,  not.  ad  Eadmeri  Hist.  p.  190.

A.D.  1086.]  OPPRESSION OF THE NATIVES.  317

manded  from  them  for  the  free  service  they  owe  us  and  are
bound  to  do  us  in  all  perpetuity.

"  We  will  that  all  shall  observe  and  maintain  the  law  of
king  Edward  with  those  which  we  have  established,  for  the
benefit  of  the  English  and  the  common  weal  of  the  king-
dom."1

This  vain  word,  the  law  of  king  Edward,  was  all  that  re-
mained for  the  future  to  the  Anglo-Saxon  nation  of  its  an-
cient existence;  for  the  condition  of  each  individual  had  been
wholly  changed  by  the  conquest.  From  the  greatest  to  the
smallest,  each  conquered  man  had  been  brought  lower  than  his
former  position:  the  chief  had  lost  his  power,  the  rich  man
his  wealth,  the  free  man  his  independence;  and  he,  whom  the
hard  custom  of  the  period  had  made  to  be  born  a  slave  in  the
house  of  another,  became  the  serf  of  a  stranger,  no  longer
enjoying  the  greater  or  less  consideration  which  the  habit
of  living  together  and  the  community  of  language  had  pro-
cured for  him  on  the  part  of  his  former  master.2

The  English  towns  and  villages  were  unceremoniously
farmed  out  by  the  Norman  earls  and  viscounts,  to  men  who
then  worked  them  for  their  own  profit,  and  as  though  they  were
their  own  property.3  "  He  let  out  to  the  highest  bidder,"
say  the  chronicles,  "his  towns  and  his  manors;  if  there  came
a  bidder  who  offered  more,  he  let  the  farm  to  him;  if  a  third
arrived,  who  offered  a  still  higher  price,  it  was  to  the  third
that  he  adjudged  it.4  He  gave  it  to  the  highest  bidder,  quite
regardless  of  the  enormous  crimes  which  the  farmers  com-
mitted in  levying  taxes  upon  the  poor  people.  He  and  his
barons  were  avaricious  to  excess,  and  capable  of  doing  any-
thing by  which  they  could  gain  money."5

William,  for  his  share  of  the  conquest,  had  nearly  fifteen
hundred  manors:  he  was  king  of  England,  supreme  and  irre-
movable chief  of  the  conquerors  of  the  country;  and  yet  he
was  not  happy.  In  the  sumptuous  courts  he  held  thrice  a

1  Selden,  not.  ad  Eadmeri,  Hist.,  p.  191.

2  Et  jus  libertatis  est  apreptum,  et  jus  mancipii  coangustatum. (Sermo
Lupi  ad  Anglos,  apud  Hickes,  Thesanr.  linyuar.  Septent.,  ii.  100.)
3  He  sette  hys  tonnes  and  hys  londes  to  i'erme  we!  vaste.

(Robei't  of  Gloucester's  Chronicle,  p.  387.)
4  Cliron.  Sax.,  p.  188.
5  Annales  Waverleienses,  ut  sup.  p.  134.

318  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [_A'D'  1086.

year,  the  crown  on  his  head,  at  London,  Winchester,  or
Gloucester,  when  his  companions  in  victory,  and  the  prelates
whom  he  had  instituted,  were  ranged  around  him,  his  coun-
tenance was  sad  and  stern;  he  appeared  uneasy  and  full  of
care,  and  the  possibility  of  a  change  of  fortune  haunted  his
mind.1  He  doubted  the  fidelity  of  his  Normans,  and  the  sub-
mission of  the  English.  He  tormented  himself  as  to  his  future
career,  and  the  fate  of  his  children;  and  consulted,  respecting
Ms  forebodings,  certain  men  renowned  as  sages,  in  this  period
when  divination  was  a  part  of  wisdom.  An  Anglo-Norman
poet  of  the  twelfth  century  represents  him  seated  in  the  midst
of  his  bishops  of  England  and  Normandy,  and  soliciting  them,
with  childish  earnestness,  to  throw  some  light  upon  the  fate
of  his  posterity.2

After  having  subjected  the  variable  and  turbulent  results
of  the  conquest  to  something  like  regular  if  not  legitimate
order,  William  quitted  England  for  the  third  time,  and  crossed
the  Channel,  loaded,  say  the  old  historians,  with  innumer-
able maledictions.3  He  crossed  it,  never  again  to  return  :
for  death,  as  we  shall  soon  see,  kept  him  on  the  opposite
shore.  Among  the  laws  and  ordinances  that  he  left  be-
hind him,  two  only  are  worthy  of  being  mentioned  as  relating
specially  to  the  preservation  of  the  rule  established  by  the
conquest.4  The  first  of  these  two  laws,  which  is  merely  the
accomplishment  of  a  proclamation  already  cited  (if  the  pro-
clamation itself  be  not  another  version  of  it),  had  for  its  ob-
ject to  repress  the  assassinations  committed  on  the  members
of  the  victorious  nation;  it  was  couched  in  these  terms:
"  When  a  Frenchman  is  killed,  or  found  dead  in  any  hun-
dred, the  men  of  the  hundred  shall  apprehend  the  murderer  and
bring  him  to  justice  within  eight  days;  or,  in  default  of  this,
shall  pay  a  fine  of  forty-seven  silver  marks5  as  murdrum."

i  Cliron.  Saxon.,  p.  190. Eadmer,  p.  13.

2  Continuation  du  Brut  de  Wace,  par  un  anonyme;  ap.  Chroniques
Anglo-Normandes,  i.  80 — 94.

3  Thomas  Eudborne,  vt  sup.  p.  258.  4  Eadmer,  p.  6,

5  Leges  Willelm.  Conquest. ;  Ingulf.,  p.  90.  [This  was  the  revival  of  a
law  made  by  king  Knut,  who,  to  prevent  the  secret  killing  of  the  Danes,
enacted  that  if  any  one  was  killed  and  the  slayer  escaped,  the  person  killed
should  be  taken  to  be  a  Dane,  unless  proved  to  be  English  by  his  friends
and  relations ;  on  failure  of  such  proof,  the  vill  had  to  pay  a  murdrum,  or
fine,  of  forty  marks.]

A.D. 1086.] PRESENTMENT OF ENGLISHERIE.  319

An  Anglo-Norman  writer  of  the  twelfth  century  explains
the  grounds  of  this  law  in  the  following  terms:  "In  the  first
years  of  the  new  order  of  things,  those  of  the  English  who
were  allowed  to  live,  spread  a  thousand  snares  for  the  Nor-
mans,1 assassinating  all  those  whom  they  met  alone  in  desert
or  bye  places.  To  suppress  these  assassinations,  king  William
and  his  barons  for  some  years  employed  punishment  and  ex-
quisite tortures  against  the  subjected  people;2  but  these  chas-
tisements producing  little  effect,  it  was  decreed  that  every
district  or  hundred,  as  the  English  call  it,  in  which  a  Norman
should  be  found  dead,  without  any  one  there  being  suspected
of  the  assassination,  should  nevertheless  pay  a  large  sum  of
money  to  the  royal  treasury.  The  salutary  fear  of  this
punishment,  inflicted  on  all  the  inhabitants  in  a  body,  would,
it  was  thought,  procure  safety  for  travellers,  by  inducing  the
men  of  each  district  to  denounce  and  deliver  up  the  culprit,
whose  single  fault  would  otherwise  cause  an  enormous  loss  to
the  whole  place."3

To  avoid  this  loss,  the  men  of  an  hundred  in  which  a
Frenchman — that  is  to  say,  a  Norman  by  birth,  or  an  auxi-
liary of  the  Norman  army — was  found  dead,  hastened  care-
fully to  destroy  every  external  indication  capable  of  proving
that  the  body  was  that  of  a  Frenchman,  for  then  the  hundred
was  not  responsible,  and  the  judge  did  not  pursue  an  inquiry.
But  these  judges  soon  detected  the  trick,  and  frustrated  it  by
a  regulation  equally  singular.  Every  man  found  assassinated
was  deemed  a  Frenchman  unless  the'.;  hundred  could  judi-
cially prove  that  he  was  a  Saxon  by  birth,  which  had  to  be
proved  before  the  royal  judge  by  the  oaths  of  two  men,  near
relations  of  the  deceased  on  the  father's  side,  and  two  women
on  the  mother's.4  Without  these  four  witnesses,  the  quality
of  Englishman,  EngliaTierie^  as  the  Normans  called  it,  was  not
sufficiently  proved,  and  the  hundred  had  to  pay  the  fine.5
Nearly  three  centuries  after  the  invasion,  if  we  may  believe
the  antiquaries,  this  inquest  was  still  held  in  England  on  the

1  Diulogo  de  Scaccario,  in  notis  ad  Matth.  Paris,  i.  ad  init.
2  Id.  ib.  s  Id.  ib.

4  Fleta,  sen  Commentarius  juris  Anylicani,  lib.  i.  cap.  xxx.  p.  46 .'edit,
of  London,  1685.

5  Spelinan.,  Glossar.  verbo  Enfflecheria ; the  Normans  sometimes  pro-
nounced Anglez,  Anglech,  Englez,  englech ;  anglezerie,  cmglecheric.

320  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1086

body  of  every  assassinated  man;  and,  in  the  legal  language  of
the  time,  it  was  called  presentment  of  Englisherie.1

The  other  law  of  the  Conqueror  to  which  we  have  referred
was  designed  to  increase  in  an  exorbitant  manner  the  autho-
rity of  the  bishops  of  England.  These  bishops  were  all
Normans:  it  was  deemed  just  and  necessary  that  their  power
should  be  wholly  exercised  for  the  advantage  of  the  conquest;
and  as  the  warriors  who  had  effected  this  conquest  maintained
it  with  sword  and  lance,  so  the  churchmen  were  called  upon
to  maintain  it  by  political  address  and  religious  influence.
With  these  motives  of  public  utility  was  combined  another,
more  personal  with  regard  to  king  William;  it  was,  that  the
bishops  of  England,  although  installed  by  the  common  counsel
of  all  the  Norman  barons  and  knights,  had  been  selected  from
among  the  chaplains,  the  creatures,  or  the  intimate  friends  of
the  king.2  No  intrigue,  during  the  life  of  William,  ever  dis-
turbed this  arrangement;  never  did  he  create  a  bishop  who
had  any  other  will  than  his.  The  position  of  things  changed,
it  is  true,  under  the  kings  his  successors;  but  the  Conqueror
could  not  foresee  the  future,  and  the  experience  of  his  whole
reign  justified  him  when  he  made  the  following  law: —

"  William,  by  the  grace  of  God,  king  of  England,  to  the
earls,  viscounts,  and  all  the  men  of  England,  French  and
English,  greeting.  Know,  you  and  all  my  other  faithful
subjects,  that  by  the  common  counsel  of  the  archbishops,
bishops,  abbots,  and  lords  of  my  kingdom,  I  have  thought  lit
to  reform  the  episcopal  laws,  which  unfitly  and  contrary  to
all  the  canons  have  been,  up  to  the  time  of  my  conquest,  in
force  in  this  country.3  I  order  that,  for  henceforth,  no  bishop
or  archdeacon  shall  attend  the  courts  of  justice,  to  hold  pleads
of  episcopal  causes,  or  shall  submit  to  the  judgment  of
secular  men  causes  which  relate  to  the  government  of  the
soul.  I  will  that  whosoever  is  summoned  for  any  cause  what-
ever to  appear  before  the  episcopal  justice  seat,  shall  go  to
the  house  of  the  bishop,  or  to  some  place  which  the  bishop
shall  himself  have  chosen  and  named;  let  him  there  plead  his
cause,  and  do  right  before  God  and  the  bishop;  not  according

1  The  law  was  not  abolished  till  the  reign  of  Edw.  III.  (in  1341.)

2  Auglia  Sacra,  and  Wilkhis,  Concilia,  passim.
3  Selden,  not.  ad  Eadmer,  p.  107. Dugdnle,  Monast.  Anglic.,  iii.  308. ;

TO  1087.]  JURISDICTION OF THE CHURCH.  321

to  the  law  of  the  country,  but  according  to  the  canons  and
episcopal  decrees.1  If  any  one,  through  excess  of  pride,  re-
fuse to  appear  before  the  tribunal  of  the  bishop,  he  shall  be
summoned  once,  twice,  thrice;  and  if,  after  these  three  con-
secutive summonings,  he  does  not  appear,  he  shall,be  excom-
municated, and,  if  necessary,  the  power  and  justice  of  the
king  and  the  viscount  shall  be  employed  against  him."2

It  was  in  virtue  of  this  law  that  was  effected  in  England
the  separation  of  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  tribunals,  which
established  for  the  latter  an  absolute  independence  of  all  po-
litical power,  an  independence  which  they  had  never  possessed
in  the  time  of  Anglo-Saxon  nationality.  At  that  period,  the
bishops  were  obliged  to  attend  the  court  of  justice,  which  was
held  twice  a  year  in  each  province  and  three  times  a  year  in
each  district;  they  added  their  accusations  to  those  of  the
ordinary  magistrates,  and  judged  conjointly  with  them  and
the  free  men  of  the  district  the  cases  in  which  the  custom  of
the  age  permitted  them  to  interfere,  those  of  widows,  orphans,
and  churchmen,  of  divorce  and  marriage.  For  these  cases,
as  for  all  others,  there  was  but  one  law,  one  justice,  and
one  tribunal.  The  only  difference  was  that,  when  they
were  tried,  the  bishop  seated  himself  beside  the  sheriff  and
the  alderman,  or  elder  of  the  province;  and  then,  according
to  usage,  sworn  witnesses  testified  as  to  the  facts,  and  the
judges  determined  the  law.3  The  change  in  these  national
customs  dates  only  from  the  Norman  conquest.  It  was  the
Conqueror  who,  bursting  through  the  ancient  rules  of  civil
equality,  gave  power  to  the  high  clergy  of  England  to  hold
courts  in  their  own  palaces,  and  to  employ  the  public  power
in  enforcing  the  attendance  of  the  contumacious;  he  thus  sub-
jected the  royal  power  to  the  obligation  of  executing  the  de-
crees rendered  by  the  ecclesiastical  power,  in  virtue  of  a  legis-
lation which  was  not  that  of  the  country.  William  imposed
this  obligation  on  his  successors,  knowingly  and  purposely,
from  policy  and  not  from  devotion  or  from  fear  of  his

1  lidem,  ib.

2  Charta  Willelm.  i.,  apud  Wilkins,  Concilia,  i.  309.
3  Haebbe  man  tkriwa  on  gear  burhgemote  and  twa  scyregeniote ;  and  tbaer
scyregemote  bisceop  and  se  ealdormau,  and  thser  oegter  taecon  ge  godes  rihte
ge  woruldes  rihte. (Leges  Edgari  regis,  cap.  v. Selden,  uotae  ad  Eadmeri
Hist.,  p.  166.)

VOL.  I.  Y

322  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1087.

bishops,  who  were  all  devoted  to  him.1  Nor  had  the  fear  of
pope  Gregory  VII.  any  influence  upon  this  determination.
For,  notwithstanding  the  services  which  the  court  of  Rome
had  formerly  rendered  him,  the  king  was  ever  prepared  with
a  stern  denial  when  the  pontiff's  demands  were  not  agreeable
to  him.  The  tone  of  one  of  his  letters  to  Gregory  shows
with  what  freedom  of  thought  he  considered  the  pontifical
pretensions  and  his  own  engagements  towards  the  Roman
church.  The  pope  had  to  complain  of  some  delay  in  the  pay-
ment of  the  Peter's  pence  stipulated  in  the  treaty  of  alliance
concluded  at  Rome  in  the  year  1066  ;  he  wrote  to  remind
William  of  this  stipulation,  and  the  money  was  immediately
sent.  But  this  was  not  all;  in  raising  the  banner  of  the  holy
see  against  the  English,  the  Conqueror  seemed  to  have  ac-
knowledged himself  vassal  of  the  church,  and  Gregory,  avail-
ing himself  of  this  circumstance,  did  not  hesitate  to  summon
him  to  do  homage  for  his  conquest,  and  to  swear  the  oath  of
fealty  and  vassalage  between  the  hands  of  a  cardinal.  Wil-
liam answered  in  these  terms:  "  Thy  legate  has  required  me,
on  thy  part,  to  send  money  to  the  Roman  church,  and  to
swear  fealty  to  thee  and  thy  successors;  I  have  admitted  the
first  of  these  demands;  as  to  the  second,  I  neither  have  nor
will  admit  it.  I  will  not  swear  fealty  to  thee,  because  I  have
not  promised  it,  and  because  none  of  my  predecessors  have
sworn  fealty  to  thine."2

In  concluding  the  narrative  of  the  events  just  related,  the
chroniclers  of  English  race  give  way  to  touching  regrets  as
to  the  miseries  of  their  nation.  "  There  is  no  doubt,"  ex-
claim some  of  them,  "that  God  will  no  longer  permit  us
to  be  a  nation,  or  to  possess  honour  and  security."3  Others
compLiin  that  the  name  of  Englishman  has  become  an  oppro-
brium;4 and  it  is  not  only  from  the  pens  of  contemporaries
that  such  complaints  proceed;  the  remembrance  of  a  great  mis-
fortune and  of  a  great  national  shame  is  reproduced,  century
after  century,  in  the  writings  of  the  sons  of  the  Saxons,

1  Curialis  nimis  et  aulicus...pro  famnlatu  suo...stipendiarii...(Matth.
Paris,  Vita  Abbat.  8.  Albani,  i.  47.)  Order.  Vital.,  passim.

8  Seldeu,  uotae  ad  Eadmeri  Hist.,  p.  104.

3  Salutem  et  lionorem  genti  Anglorum...abstulerit,  et  jam  populum  nou
esse  juaserit.  (Joli.  Bromtou,  ut  sup.  p.  984.)  Matth.  Westm.,  Fiores  Hist .,
p.  229.

4  Matth.  Paris,  i.  12.

A.D.  1087.] ASPECT  OF  CONQUERED  ENGLAND. 323

although  more  faintly  as  time  advances.1  In  the  fifteenth
century,  the  distinction  of  ranks  in  England  was  still  attached
to  the  conquest;  and  a  monastic  historian,  not  to  be  suspected
of  revolutionary  theories,  wrote  these  remarkable  words:
"  Jf  there  be  amongst  us  such  a  distance  between  the  various
conditions,  one  must  not  be  astonished  at  it;  it  is  because
there  is  diversity  of  race;  and  if  there  be  so  little  mutual
confidence  and  affection  among  us,  it  is  because  we  are  not
of  the  same  blood."2  Lastly,  an  author  who  lived  in  the  be-
ginning of  the  seventeenth  century,  recals  the  Norman  Con-
quest in  these  words:  the  "  memorie  of  sorrowe"  and  uses
touching  expressions  in  speaking  of  the  families  then  disin-
herited, and  since  fallen  into  the  class  of  the  poor,  of  labourers
and  peasants;3  it  is  the  last  glance  of  regret  thrown  back
on  the  past,  upon  the  event  which  had  brought  into  Eng-
land kings,  nobles,  and  chieftains  of  foreign  race.

If,  retracing  in  his  own  mind  the  facts  he  has  read,  the  reader
would  form  to  himself  a  just  idea  of  what  was  the  England
conquered  by  William  of  Normandy,  he  must  represent  to
himself,  not  a  mere  change  of  government,  nor  the  triumph
of  one  competitor  over  another,  but  the  intrusion  of  a  whole
people  into  the  bosom  of  another  people,  broken  up  by  the
former,  and  the  scattered  fragments  of  which  were  only  ad-
mitted into  the  new  social  order  as  personal  property,  as
clothing  of  the  earth,  to  speak  the  language  of  the  ancient
acts.4  We  must  not  place  on  one  side,  William,  king  and
despot,  and  on  the  other,  subjects  high  or  low,  rich  or  poor,
all  inhabitants  of  England,  and  consequently  all  English;  we
must  imagine  two  nations,  the  English  by  origin  and  the  Eng-
lish by  invasion,  divided  on  the  surface  of  the  same  country;
or  rather  imagine  two  countries  in  a  far  different  condition:

1  Amplas  Anglorum  terras  et  praedia  multa

Distribuens,  quas  adbuc  presens  videt  et  dolet  aBtas.

(Hearne,  notae  ad  Guill.  Neubrig.,  p.  722.)
2  Henric.  Knygliton,  ut  sup.  col.  2343.

3  "  By  "which  greate  violence,  suddaiu  and  lamentable  desolation,  it  may
•wel  have  come  to  passe  that  many  beeing  anciently  of  the  races  and  descents
of  nieny  worthy  families,  yea,  even  of  princes,  have  since  become  poor  arti-
ficers and  pesants." (Verstegan,  A  Restitution  of  Decayed  Intelligence  in.
Antiquities,  p.  178  ;  edit  of  1605,  4to.)

4  Vestura,  fructus  quilibet  agro  hserentes. (Ducange, Glossar.  verbo
Vestura. Spelman,  Gloss,  verbo  Accola,~)

y  2

324  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1087.

the  land  of  the.  Normans,  rich  and  free  from  taxes,  that
of  the  Saxons,  poor,  dependent,  and  oppressed  with  burdens;
the  first  adorned  with  vast  mansions,  with  walled  and  em-
battled castles;  the  second,  sprinkled  with  thatched  cabins  or
half  ruined  huts;  that  peopled  with  happy,  idle  people,  war-
riors and  courtiers,  nobles  and  knights;  this  inhabited
by  men  of  toil  and  sorrow,  farm  labourers  and  mechanics;
on  the  one  side,  luxury  and  insolence;  upon  the  other,  misery
and  envy,  not  the  envy  of  the  poor  at  sight  of  the  riches
of  others,  but  the  envy  of  the  despoiled  in  the  presence  of
their  spoilers.

Lastly,  to  complete  the  picture,  these  two  countries  in  a
manner  are  entwined  one  in  the  other;  they  touch  each  other  at
every  point,  and  yet  they  are  more  distinct  than  if  the  sea
rolled  between  them.  Each  has  its  separate  idiom,  an  idiom
foreign  to  the  other;  the  French  is  the  language  of  the
court,  of  the  castles,  of  the  rich  abbeys,  of  all  the  places  where
power  and  luxury  reign;  the  ancient  language  of  the  land  is
confined  to  the  hearth  of  the  poor,  of  the  serf.  Long,  from
generation  to  generation,  did  these  two  idioms  continue  to
subsist  without  mixing  with  each  other,  remaining  the  one
the  token  of  nobility,  the  other  the  token  of  base  estate.  This
is  expressed  with  a  sort  of  bitterness,  in  some  verses  of  an  old
poet,  who  complains  that  England  in  his  time  offers  the
strange  spectacle  of  a  country  abnegating  its  own  language.

Thus  come  lo!  Engelond  into  Normannes  honde.

And  the  Normannes  ne  couthe  speke  tho  bote  her  owe  speche

And  speke  French  as  dude  atom,  and  her  chyldren  dude  also  teche ;

So  that  heymen  of  this  lond  that  of  her  blod  come

Holdeth  alle  thulke  speche  that  hii  of  hem  nome,

Ac  lowe  men  holdeth  to  englyss  and  to  her  kunde  speche  gut.1

1  Eobert  of  Gloucester,  Chronicle,  p.  364.

BOOK VII.

FROM  THE  DEATH  OF  WILLIAM  THE  CONQUEROR,  TO  THE  LAST
GENERAL  CONSPIRACY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  AGAINST  THE
NORMANS.

1087—1137.

Quarrel  between  king  William  and  Philip  I.,  king  of  France — King  William
burns  the  town  of  Mantes — Last  moments  of  king  William — His  death
—His  funeral— Election  of  William  Rufns— The  goldsmith  Otlio,
banker  of  the  invasion — Verses  in  praise  of  the  Conqueror — Civil  war
among  the  Normans — Termination  of  the  civil  war — Treaty  between
William  Paifus,  king  of  England,  and  his  brother  Eobert,  duke  of  Nor-
mandy— Revolt  of  the  English  monks  of  the  convent  of  St.  Augustin —
Conspiracy  of  the  monks  of  this  convent  against  their  Norman  abbot —
Alliance  between  the  monks  and  the  citizens  of  Canterbury — Tyranny  of
the  Norman  bishops  and  counts — Fresh  vexations  inflicted  upon  the
monks  of  Croyland — New  quarrels  among  the  Normans — Moderation
of  Eudes  Fitz-Hubert — Heavy  burdens  imposed  upon  the  English —
Terror  of  the  English  on  the  approach  of  the  king — Severity  of  the  fo-
rest laws — Last  chase  of  William  Rufus — His  deatli — Henry  elected
•king  of  England — He  addresses  himself  to  the  English — Utter  insin-
cerity of  his  promises — He  wishes  to  marry  an  Englishwoman — Opposi-
tion of  the  Norman  nobles  to  the  contemplated  match — Marriage  of  the
king  to  Editha,  Edgar's  niece — More  civil  war — Revolt  of  earl  Robert
de  Belesme — His  banishment — State  of  the  English  population — Re-
newed quarrel  between  the  king  and  his  brother  Robert — Levy  of  money
in  England — Duke  Robert  becomes  his  brother's  prisoner — The  son  of
duke  Robert  takes  refuge  in  France — Foreign  abbots  installed  into  Eng-
lish monasteries — Sufferings  and  complaints  of  the  English  monks — Po-
pular superstitions — Embarkation  of  the  children  of  king  Henry — Their
shipwreck — Indifference  of  the  English  to  the  calamity  thus  endured  by
the  king  and  the  Norman  families — Invectives  of  the  English  historians
on  this  ocaasion — Mabile,  daughter  of  Robert  Fitz-Aymon — Norman
anecdote — English  anecdote — Trial  and  sentence  of  the  Saxon  Brihtstan
— Anglo-Norman  tribunals — Oath  taken  to  Matilda,  surnamed  the  Em-
press— Marriage  of  Matilda  with  the  earl  of  Anjou — Festivities  at
Rouen  on  the  occasion — Election  of  Stephen  of  Blois — His  popularity
with  the  Norman  barons — His  rupture  with  them — Conspiracy  of  the
English — Flight  of  the  conspirators — Subsequent  insurrections — Diffi-
culties experienced  by  the  historian.

DURING  his  stay  in  Normandy,  in  the  first  months  of  the  year
1087,  king  William  occupied  himself  in  terminating  an  old
dispute  with  Philip  I.,  king  of  France.  Favoured  by  the

326  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1087.

troubles  which  followed  the  death  of  duke  Robert,  the  county
of  Vexin,  situated  between  the  Epte  and  the  Oise,  had  been
dismembered  from  Normandy,  and  re-united  to  France.
William  flattered  himself  that  he  should  be  able  to  recover
this  portion  of  his  inheritance  without  a  war;  and,  pending
the  result  of  the  negotiations,  he  reposed  from  his  fatigues  at
Rouen;  he  even  kept  his  bed,  by  the  advice  of  his  physicians,
who  were  seeking  to  reduce  his  excessive  corpulence  by  a
rigorous  diet.  Thinking  he  had  little  to  fear  from  a  man
absorbed  in  such  cares,  Philip  gave  evasive  replies  to  the  de-
mands of  the  Norman;  and,  on  his  part,  the  latter  seemed  to
take  the  delay  patiently.1  But  the  king  of  France  having
one  day  said  jestingly  to  his  friends:  "By  my  faith,  the  king
of  England  is  very  long  about  his  lying-in;  there  will  be
great  rejoicing  at  his  churching,"  this  sarcasm,  reported  to
William,  offended  him  to  such  a  degree  that  he  forgot  every
thing  but  vengeance.  He  swore  by  his  greatest  oath,  by
the  splendour  and  birth  of  God,  that  he  would  be  churched
at  Notre  Dame-de-Paris,  with  ten  thousand  lances  for  his
candles.2

Suddenly  resuming  his  activity,  he  assembled  his  troops,
and  in  the  month  of  July  entered  France  through  the  ter-
ritory of  which  he  claimed  possession.  The  wrheat  was
still  in  the  fields,  and  the  trees  laden  with  fruit.  He  or-
dered everything  to  be  laid  waste  on  his  way;  the  harvests
were  trodden  under  foot  by  the  cavalry,  the  vines  torn  up,  and
thefruit  trees  cut  down.3  The  first  town  he  came  to  was
Mantes-sur- Seine;  it  was  fired  by  his  order,  and  he  himself,
in  a  sort  of  destructive  phrenzy,  rode  in  the  midst  of  the
flames,  to  enjoy  the  spectacle  and  encourage  his  soldiers.

As  he  was  galloping  over  the  ruins,  his  horse  placed  his
feet  upon  some  burning  embers,  started,  fell,  and  wounded
his  rider  in  the  stomach.  The  agitation  into  which  he  had
thrown  himself  by  riding  about  and  shouting,  the  heat  of  the
fire  and  of  the  weather,  rendered  his  wound  dangerous;4  he
was  conveyed  very  ill  to  Rouen,  and  thence,  unable  to  sup-

1  Calumniam  de  Vulcassino  conaitatu. (Order.  Vital.,  lib.  viii.  p.  655.)
Seditiosorum  frivolis  sophismatibus  usus  est. (7i».)

2  Chron.  de  Normandie ; Eec.  des  Histor.  de  la  France,  xiii.  240. Job,
Bromton,  col.  980.

2  Order,  Yitalis,  ut  snp.  *  Id.  p.  65£.

A.D. 1087.]  LAST MOMENTS  OF WILLIAM.  327

port  the  noise  of  the  streets,  to  a  monastery  outside  the  city.1
He  languished  for  six  weeks,  surrounded  by  physicians  and
priests,  and  his  illness  growing  worse  and  worse,  he  sent
money  to  Mantes,  to  rebuild  the  churches  he  had  burnt;  he
also  sent  sums  to  the  convents  and  poor  of  England,  to  ob-
tain, says  an  old  English  poet,  pardon  for  the  robberies  he
had  committed  there.2  He  ordered  the  Saxons  and  Nor-
mans whom  he  had  imprisoned  to  be  set  at  liberty.  Among
the  former  were  Morkar,  Siward  Beoru,  and  Ulfnoth,  brother
of  king  Harold,  (one  of  the  two  hostages  for  whose  deliver-
ance Harold  made  his  fatal  journey.)3  The  Normans  were
Roger,  formerly  earl  of  Hereford,  and  Eudes  bishop  of  Bayeux,
"William's  half-brother  by  the  mother's  side.

William,  surnamed  Rufus,  and  Henry,  the  king's  two
youngest  sons,  did  not  quit  «his  bedside,  waiting  with  impa-
tience for  him  to  dictate  his  last  will.  Robert,  the  eldest  of
the  three,  had  been  absent  since  his  last  quarrel  with  his
father.  It  was  to  him  that  William,  with  the  consent  of  the
barons  of  Normandy,  had  formerly  left  his  title  of  duke;  and,
notwithstanding  the  malediction  he  had  since  pronounced
upon  Robert,  he  did  not  seek  to  divest  him  of  this  title,  which
the  wishes  of  the  Normans  had  destined  for  him.  "  As  to  the
kingdom  of  England,"  he  said,  "  I  leave  it  to  no  one,  because
I  did  not  inherit  it,  but  acquired  it  by  force,  and  at  the  price
of  blood;  I  replace  it  in  the  hands  of  God,  contenting  myself
with  expressing  the  wish  that  my  son  William,  who  has  ever
been  submissive  to  me  in  all  things,  may  obtain  it,  if  it
please  God,  and  prosper  in  it."  "  And  what  will  you  give
me  then,  my  father?"  energetically  demanded  Henry,  the
youngest  son.  "  I  give  thee,"  said  the  king,  "five  thousand
pounds  in  silver,  from  my  treasury."  "  But  what  can  I  do
with  this  money,  if  I  have  neither  land  nor  house?"  "  Con-
tent ye,  my  son,  and  have  confidence  in  God;  allow  thy  elder
brothers  to  precede  thee;  thy  time  will  come  after  theirs."
Henry  immediately  withdrew  to  receive  the  five  thousand
pounds;  he  had  them  carefully  weighed,  and  deposited  in  a  cof-
fer, strongly  banded  with  iron  and  supplied  with  good  locks.

1  Order.  Vitalis,  ib.

2  To  bete  thulke  robberye,  that  hym  thogte  be  adde  ydo.  (Rob.  of
Gloucester,  p.  369.)

3  Cbron.  Saxon.,  p.  192.

328  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1087.

William  Rufus  departed  at  the  same  time  for  England,  in
order  to  get  crowned.1

On  the  10th  of  September,  at  sunrise,  king  William  was
awakened  by  the  sound  of  bells,  and  asked  what  it  meant;
he  was  answered  that  they  were  ringing  prime  at  the
church  of  Saint  Mary.  He  raised  his  hands,  saying  :  "  I
commend  my  soul  to  Mary,  the  holy  mother  of  God,"  and
almost  immediately  expired.  His  physicians  and  the  other
attendants  who  had  passed  the  night  with  him,  seeing  him  dead,
hastily  mounted  their  horses,  and  went  to  look  after  their
property.  The  servants  and  vassals  of  lower  rank,  after  the
flight  of  their  superiors,  carried  off  the  arms,  plate,  clothes,
linen,  and  everything  portable,  and  also  fled,  leaving  the
body  almost  naked  upon  the  floor.  It  remained,  thus  aban-
doned, several  hours;2  for  thromghout  Rouen  the  people  had
become  as  it  were  intoxicated,  not  with  grief,  but  with  fear
for  the  future;  they  were,  says  an  old  historian,  as  much
troubled  as  though  they  had  seen  an  hostile  army  before  the
gates  of  their  city.  The  men  ran  wildly  to  and  fro,  asking
advice  from  their  wives,  their  friends,  from  the  first  person,
they  met;  they  removed  and  concealed  their  goods,  or  endea-
voured to  sell  them  at  a  loss.

At  last  the  churchmen,  priests,  and  monks,  having  reco-
vered their  senses  and  their  strength,  arranged  a  procession.
Dressed  in  the  habits  of  their  order,  with  the  cross,  candles,
and  censors,  they  came  to  the  corpse,  and  prayed  for  the  soul
of  the  deceased.  The  archbishop  of  Rouen,  William,  ordered
that  the  body  of  the  king  should  be  transported  to  Caen,  and
buried  in  the  cathedral  of  Saint  Stephen  the  proto-martyr,
which  the  king  had  built.  But  his  sons,  his  brothers,  all  his
relations  had  deserted  him;  none  of  his  officers  was  present;
not  one  appeared  to  take  charge  of  his  obsequies;  and  it  was
a  private  country  gentleman,  named  Herluin,  who,  out  of
good  nature  and  for  the  love  of  God,  say  the  historians  of
the  time,  undertook  the  trouble  and  the  expense  of  the  cere-
monial. He  hired  men  and  a  hearse  at  his  own  expense,  re-
moved the  body  to  the  banks  of  the  Seine,  and  thence  upon
a  boat,  by  river  and  by  sea,  to  Caen.  Gilbert,  abbot  of  Saint

1  Saxon  Chron., 659.
2  A  prima  usque  ad  tertiam. (Id.  il,  p.  061.)

A.D.  1087.] THE  CONQUEROR'S  FUNERAL.  329

Stephens,  came,  with  all  his  monks,  to  meet  the  body;  many
priests  and  laymen  joined  them;  but  a  fire  which  suddenly
broke  out  dissolved  the  procession,  and  priests  and  laymen
all  hastened  to  extinguish  it.  The  monks  of  Saint  Stephen
alone  remained,  and  carried  the  body  of  the  king  to  their
house.1

The  inhumation  of  the  great  chief,  the  famous  baron,  as
the  historians  of  the  period  style  him,  was  not  completed  with-
out fresh  incidents.  All  the  bishops  and  abbots  of  Normandy
were  assembled  for  the  ceremony;  they  had  prepared  the
grave  in  the  church,  between  the  choir  and  the  altar;  the
mass  was  finished;  they  were  about  to  lower  the  body,  when
a  man,  advancing  from  the  crowd,  said  aloud  :  "  Priests  and
bishops,  this  land  is  mine;  it  was  the  site  of  my  father's
house;  the  man  for  whom  you  are  now  praying  took  it  from
me  by  force,  to  build  his  church  upon  it.2  I  have  not  sold
my  land;  I  have  not  pawned  it;  I  have  not  forfeited  it;  I
have  not  given  it  :  it  is  mine  by  right,  and  I  demand  it.3  In
the  name  of  God,  I  forbid  the  body  of  the  spoiler  to  be  placed
here,  or  to  be  covered  with  my  glebe."  The  man  who  thus
spoke  was  Asselin  Fitz-Arthur,  and  all  present  confirmed
the  truth  of  what  he  had  said.  The  bishops  made  him  ap-
proach, and  agreed  to  pay  him  sixty  pence  for  the  immediate
place  of  sepulture,  and  to  give  him  equitable  recompence  for
the  rest  of  the  land.  The  king's  body  was  without  a  coffin,
clothed  in  its  royal  habit;  when  they  proceeded  to  place  it  in
the  grave,  which  had  been  constructed  in  masonry,  the  aper-
ture was  found  to  be  too  narrow;  in  forcing  the  body  in,  it
burst.4  They  burnt  abundance  of  incense  and  perfumes,  but
in  vain ;  the  people  dispersed  in  disgust,  and  the  priests  them-
selves, hastening  the  ceremony,  soon  quitted  the  church.5

William  Rufus,  on  his  way  to  England,  learned  the
death  of  his  father  at  the  port  of  Wissant,  near  Calais.  He
hastened  to  Winchester,  the  city  where  the  royal  treasure
was  deposited,  and  gaining  over  William  de  Pont-de-1'Arche,
the  keeper  of  the  treasure,  obtained  the  keys.6  He  had  an
inventory  taken  of  it,  and  weighed  it  carefully;  he  found  it

1  Id.  ib.  2  Id.  ib.

3  Roman  de  Eou,  ii.  302. Chron.  de  Normandie,  ut  sup.  xiii.  242.

4  Pinguissirnus  venter  crepuit. (Ib.)
*  Id.  ib.  «  Dugdale,  Monast.  Anglic.,  ii.  890.

330  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1087.

to  consist  of  60,000  pounds  of  fine  silver,  with  much  gold,
and  a  quantity  of  jewels.1  He  next  assembled  all  the  high
Norman  barons  then  in  England,  announced  the  death  of  the
Conqueror,  was  chosen  king  by  them,  and  crowned  by  arch-
bishop Lanfranc  in  the  cathedral  of  Winchester,  while  the
lords  who  had  remained  in  Normandy  were  holding  a  council
as  to  the  succession.2  Many  of  the  latter  were  desirous  that
the  two  countries  should  have  but  one  and  the  same  govern-
ment; they  wished  to  give  the  crown  to  duke  Robert,  who
had  returned  from  exile;  but  the  activity  of  William  antici-
pated them.

His  first  act  of  royal  authority  was  again  to  imprison  the
Saxons  Ulfnoth,  Morkar,  and  Siward  Beorn,  whom  his
father  had  restored  to  liberty;3  he  then  drew  from  the  treasury
a  great  quantity  of  gold  and  silver,  which  he  gave  to  the
goldsmith  Otho  to  be  converted  into  ornaments  for  the  tomb
of  him  whom  he  had  abandoned  on  his  death  bed.4  The
name  of  the  goldsmith  Otho  merits  a  place  in  this  history,
because  the  territorial  register  of  the  conquest  mentions  him
as  one  of  the  great  proprietors  newly  created.5  Perhaps  he
had  been  the  banker  of  the  invasion,  and  had  advanced  part
of  the  funds  upon  mortgage  of  English  lands;  we  may  easily
believe  this,  for  the  goldsmiths  of  the  middle  ages  were  also
bankers ;  perhaps,  also,  he  had  merely  made  commercial
speculations  in  the  domains  acquired  by  the  lance  and  the
sword,  giving  to  the  adventurers,  those  men-at-arms  errant,  a
class  of  men  so  common  at  that  period,  gold  in  exchange  for
their  lands.

A  sort  of  literary  competition  was  now  entered  into  be-
tween the  Latin  versifiers  of  England  and  of  Normandy,  for
the  epitaph  which  was  to  be  cut  on  the  tomb  of  the  deceased
king;  it  was  Thomas,  archbishop  of  York,  who  carried  off
the  honours.6  Several  pieces  of  verse  and  prose  in  praise
of  the  Conqueror  have  been  preserved  to  our  days,  and
amongst  the  eulogies  bestowed  on  him  by  the  priests  and
literary  men  of  the  period,  there  are  some  very  singular:

1  Ingulf.,  p.  106.  2  Dugdale,  ut  sup.

3  Alured,  Beverlac.,  id  sup.  lib.  ix.  p.  136. Florent.  Wigorn.,  p.  642.

*  Order.  Vitalis,  lib.  viii.  p.  663.

5  Domesday  Book,  ii.  p.  97,  98.

c  Solius  ThonasB — versus  ex  auro  inserti  sunt. (Order.  Vital.,  vt  svp.)

A.D. 1087.] OPPOSITION TO WILLIAM EUFUS.  331

"English  nation!"  exclaims  one  of  them,  "why  hast  thou
troubled  the  repose  of  this  prince,  so  much  the  friend  of
virtue?"1  "  0!  England,"  cries  another,  "thou  wouldst  have
cherished  him,  thou  wouldst  have  esteemed  him  in  the  highest
degree,  had  it  not  been  for  thy  folly  and  thy  wickedness."2
"  His  reign  was  pacific  and  fruitful,"  says  a  third;  "and  his
soul  was  benevolent."3  None  of  the  epitaphs  remain  which
the  conquered  nation  pronounced  upon  him,  unless  we  re-
gard as  an  instance  of  the  popular  exclamations  occasioned
by  his  death,  these  verses  of  an  English  poet  of  the  thirteenth
century:  "  The  days  of  king  William  were  days  of  vexation
and  sorrow,  so  that  much  people  of  England  thought  his  life
too  long."4

Meantime,  the  Anglo-Norman  barons  who  had  not  concurred
in  the  election  of  William  Rufus  returned  to  England,  furious
at  his  having  become  king  without  their  consent;  they  re-
solved to  depose  him,  and  to  substitute  for  him  his  eldest
brother,  Robert,  duke  of  Normandy.5  At  the  head  of  this
party  was  Eudes  de  Bayeux,  brother  to  the  Conqueror,  who
had  just  come  out  of  prison,  and  many  rich  Normans  or
English-Frenchmen,  as  the  Saxon  chronicle  calls  them.6  The
Red  king  (for  so  the  historians  of  the  time  designate  him),7
seeing  that  his  countrymen  conspired  against  him,  called  to
his  aid  the  men  of  English  race,  conciliating  their  support  by
the  hope  of  some  mitigation  of  their  sufferings.8  He  sum-
moned around  him  several  of  those  whom  the  recollection  of

1  Gens  Anglorum,  turbastis  principem,
Qui  virtutis  amabat  tramitem.

(Script,  rer.  Norman.,  p.  318.)
2  Guill.  Pictav.,  p.  207.
3  Cujus  regnum  paciticum,

Fuit  atque  fructiferum.
(Raynaldus  Andegavensis,  Chron.,  apud  rer.  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et

Francic.,  xii.  479.)
4  Ther  was  by  king  Willame's  day  \vorre  arid  sorwe  ynon,

So  that  muchadel  Engelond  tbogte  bis  lyf  to  long.

(Robert  of  Gloucester,  ii.  374.)
5  CJiron.  Saxon.,  p.  192.

6  Tba  riceste  frencisce  men — ealle  frencisce  men. (/£.)
7  Li  ris  ros. (Roman  de  Rou,  ii.  305.) Tbe  ,rede  kyng. (Rob.  of
Gloucest.,  p.  383.)

8  Cbron.  Saxon.,  p.  194.

332  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1087

their  past  power  still  caused  to  be  regarded  by  the  English
nation  as  their  natural  chiefs;  he  promised  them  the  best
laws  they  should  themselves  require,  the  best  which  had  ever
been  in  the  country;1  he  restored  to  them  the  right  to  carry
arms,  and  the  right  of  the  chase;  he  stayed  the  levy  of  im-
posts and  of  all  odious  tributes;  but  this  did  not  last  long,
say  the  contemporary  annals.2

For  these  concessions  of  a  few  days,  and  perhaps  also
from  a  secret  desire  to  come  to  blows  with  the  Normans,3  the
Saxon  chiefs  consented  to  defend  the  king's  cause,  and  pub-
lished in  his  name  and  their  own  this  ancient  proclamation  of
war,  that  which  once  aroused  every  Englishman  capable  of
bearing  arms:  "  Let  each  man  that  is  not  a  nothing,  whether
in  the  town  or  country,  leave  his  house  and  come."4  Thirty
thousand  Saxons  assembled  at  the  appointed  place,  received
arms,  and  were  enrolled  under  the  king's  banner.5  They
were  nearly  all  foot-soldiers;  William  led  them  by  a  rapid
march,  with  his  cavalry,  composed  of  Normans,  to  the  city  of
Rochester,  where  bishop  Eudes  and  the  other  recusant  chiefs
had  fortified  themselves,  awaiting  the  arrival  of  duke  Robert,
to  march  upon  Canterbury  and  London.6

It  appears  that  the  Saxons  of  the  royal  army  displayed
great,  ardour  at  the  siege  of  Rochester.  The  besieged  closely
pressed,  soon  demanded  to  capitulate,  on  condition  of  acknow-
ledging William  for  their  king,  and  of  retaining  under  him
their  lands  and  honours.7  William  at  first  refused;  but  the
Normans  of  his  army,  not  having  the  same  zeal  as  the  Saxons
in  this  war,  which  was  for  them  a  civil  war,  and  not  desiring
to  reduce  their  countrymen  and  relations  to  extremity,  con-
sidered the  king  too  inveterate  against  the  defenders  of  Ro-
chester.8

They  sought  to  appease  him  :  "  We  who  have  aided  thee  in
danger,"  said  they,  "  pray  thee  to  spare  our  countrymen,  our
relatives,  who  are  also  thine,  and  who  aided  thy  father  to  con-
quer England."  The  king  gave  way,  and  at  last  granted  the
besieged  liberty  to  quit  the  city  with  their  arms  and  horses.

1  Job.  Bromtou,  col.  984. Anna!.  Waverleienses,  ut  sup.  p.  130.
2  Ib.  3  Job.  Eromton,  ut  tup.

4  Annales  Waverleienses,  p.  130.

5  Order.  Vitalis,  lib.  viii.  p.  067.  6  Florent.  Wigorn.,  p.  043.

7  Order.  Vitalis,  ut  sup.  s  II.

TO  1088.] RECONCILIATION OF THE NORMANS.  333

Bishop  Eudes  endeavoured  further  to  obtain  that  the  king's
military  music  should  not  play  in  token  of  victory  at  the  de-
parture of  the  garrison,  but  William  angrily  refused,  and
said,  that  he  would  not  make  this  concession  for  a  thousand
gold  marks;  the  Normans  of  Robert's  party  quitted  the  city
which  they  had  not  been  able  to  defend,  with  colours  lowered,
to  the  sound  of  the  royal  trumpets.  At  this  moment  loud
clamours  arose  from  the  English  in  the  royal  army:  "  Bring
us  cords,"  they  cried;  "  we  will  hang  this  traitor  bishop,  with
all  his  accomplices.  0  king!  why  dost  thou  let  him  go  free  ?
He  is  not  worthy  to  live,  the  traitor,  the  perjured  murderer
of  so  many  thousand  men."1

It  was  amidst  these  imprecations  that  the  prelate  who  had
blessed  the  Norman  army  at  the  battle  of  Hastings  quitted
England,  never  more  to  return.  The  war  amongst  the  Nor-
mans lasted  some  time  longer;  but  this  family  quarrel  gra-
dually subsided,  and  terminated  in  a  treaty  between  the  two
parties  and  the  two  brothers.  The  domains  that  the  friends
of  Robert  had  lost  in  England,  for  having  embraced  his  cause,
were  restored  to  them,  and  Robert  himself  resigned  his  pre-
tensions to  the  crown  in  consideration  of  large  territorial  pos-
sessions.2 It  was  agreed  between  the  two  parties,  that  the
king,  if  he  survived  the  duke,  should  have  the  duchy  of  Nor-
mandy, and  that  in  the  contrary  case,  the  duke  should  have
the  kingdom  of  England;  twelve  men  on  the  part  of  the  king,
and  twelve  on  the  part  of  the  duke,  confirmed  this  treaty  by
oath.3  Thus  ended  both  the  Norman  civil  war  and  the
alliance  which  this  war  had  occasioned  between  the  English
and  the  king.  The  popular  concessions  that  the  latter  had
made,  were  all  revoked,  his  promises  belied,  and  the  Saxons
returned  to  their  position  of  oppressed  subjects.4

Near  the  city  of  Canterbury  was  an  ancient  monastery,
founded  in  honour  of  the  missionary  Augustin,  who  con-
verted the  Saxons  and  Angles.  Here  were  preserved,  in  a
higher  degree  than  in  the  religious  houses  of  less  importance,
the  national  spirit,  and  the  remembrance  of  ancient  liberty.
The  Normans  perceived  this,  and  early  endeavoured  to  de-
stroy this  spirit  by  reiterated  humiliations.  The  primate

1  Ib.  p.  668.

2  Florent.  Wigorn.,  p.  644.  3  Ib.

4  Niliil  postmodum  tenuit  quod  promisit. (Job.  Bromtou,  p.  984.)

334  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1088.

Lanfranc  commenced  by  abolishing  the  ancient  privilege  of
the  monks  of  Saint  Augustin,  of  being  exempt  from  all  eccle-
siastical discipline  but  that  of  their  own  abbot.1  Although
the  abbot,  at  this  time,  was  a  Norman,  and  as  such  little
liable  to  any  suspicion  of  indulgence  towards  the  men  of
another  race,  Lanfranc  deprived  him  of  the  charge  of  his
monks,  which  he  himself  assumed;  he  then  forbad  the  bells
of  the  monastery  to  be  rung  before  the  office  had  rung  from
the  cathedral,  paying  no  respect,  says  the  historian,  to  this
maxim  of  the  Holy  Scriptures:  Where  the  spirit  of  the  Lord
is,  there  is  liberty.  The  Saxon  monks  murmured  at  being
subjected  to  this  restriction,  and,  to  manifest  their  discontent,
they  celebrated  the  offices  late,  negligently,  and  with  all  sorts
of  irregularities,  such  as  reversing  the  crosses,  and  walking  in
procession  barefooted  against  the  course  of  the  sun.2  "  They
do  violence  to  us,"  said  they,  "  in  contempt  of  the  canons  of
the  church;  well,  we  will  violate  the  canons  in  the  service  of
the  church."3  They  requested  the  Norman,  their  abbot,  to
transmit  a  protest  from  them  to  the  pope;  but  the  only  reply
of  the  abbot  was  to  punish  them  as  rebels,  and  to  shut  up  the
building,  so  that  they  could  not  go  out.4  This  man,  who
sacrificed  his  personal  independence  out  of  hatred  to  the
Saxons,  died  in  the  year  1088,  and  then  archbishop  Lan-
franc himself  proceeded  to  the  monastery,  taking  with  him  a
Norman  monk,  called  Guy,  a  man  much  beloved  by  the  king.5
He  called  upon  the  monks  of  St.  Augustin,  in  the  name  of
the  royal  authority,  to  receive  and  instal  the  new  abbot  forth-
with; but  all  emphatically  answered  that  they  would  do  no-
thing of  the  sort.6  Lanfranc,  furious  at  this  resistance,  ordered
that  those  who  refused  to  obey  should  immediately  quit  the
monastery.  They  almost  all  departed,  and  the  Norman  was
installed  in  their  absence  with  the  usual  ceremonies.  The
prior  of  the  monastery,  named  Elfwin,  and  several  other
monks,  all  of  Saxon  birth,  were  then  seized  and  imprisoned.
Those  who  had  departed  at  the  command  of  the  archbishop

1  Willelm.  Thorn., Chron.,  apud  Hist.  Anglic,  Script.,  (Selden)  ii.  col.
1791.  a  Ib.  col.  1792.

3  Annal.  Eccles.  Winton. ;  Anglia  Sacra,  i.  298.

4  Willelm.  Thorn.,  ut  sup.
»  Ib.  col.  1793.  .«  Chron.  Sax.,  p.  179.

A.D. 1089.] THE MONKS OF ST. AUSTIN, CANTERBURY. 335

went  and  seated  themselves  on  the  ground  under  the  walls  of
the  castle  of  Canterbury.  They  were  informed  that  a  certain
number  of  hours  was  granted  them  within  which  to  return
to  the  monastery,  but  that  after  that  time  they  would  be  re-
garded and  treated  as  vagabonds;  they  remained  for  awhile
undecided,  but  the  hour  for  refection  came;  they  suffered  from
hunger,  and  many,  repenting,  sent  to  archbishop  Lanfranc  and
promised  obedience.  He  made  them  swear  on  the  relics  of
St.  Augustin  to  remain  faithful  to  this  promise.  They  who
refused  to  take  the  oath  were  imprisoned,  until  weariness  of
captivity  should  render  them  more  docile.  One  of  them,
named  Alfred,  who  fled  and  was  afterwards  found  wan-
dering by  the  road-side,  was  put  in  irons  in  the  archiepiscopal
palace  at  Canterbury.  The  spirit  of  resistance  was  appeased
for  some  months,  and  then  again  became  still  more  violent
than  before;  a  conspiracy  was  formed  against  the  life  of  the
new  abbot  of  foreign  race.  One  of  the  conspirators,  named
Colomban,  was  taken,  brought  before  the  archbishop,  and
questioned  as  to  his  design  of  killing  the  Norman.  "  I  had  that
intention,"  answered  the  monk  boldly,  "  and  assuredly  would
have  executed  it."  Lanfranc  ordered  him  to  be  tied  naked  to
the  doors  of  the  monastery,  and  to  be  publicly  whipped.

In  the  year  1089,  the  primate  Lanfranc  died;  and  the
monks,  delivered  from  the  terror  with  which  he  had  inspired
them,  commenced  a  third  revolt,  of  a  more  serious  character
than  the  two  others.  They  called  to  their  aid  the  Saxon  inha-
bitants of  Canterbury,  who,  embracing  this  quarrel  as  a  national
quarrel,  came  armed  to  the  house  of  the  abbot  of  Saint
Augustin,  and  attacked  it.  The  abbot's  people  resisted,  and
on  both  sides  there  were  several  men  wounded  and  killed.
Guy,  with  great  difficulty,  escaped  from  his  adversaries,  and
hastened  to  shut  himself  up  in  the  cathedral.  On  hearing  of
the  affair,  the  Normans,  Gaucelme,  bishop  of  Winchester,  and
Gondulpb,  bishop  of  Rochester,  hastened  to  Canterbury,
whither  numerous  detachments  of  troops  were  sent  by  the
king's  order.  The  monastery  of  Saint  Augustin  was  occu-
pied militarily;  the  trial  of  the  monks  was  commenced,  and
they  were  condemned  in  a  body  to  receive  corporal  punishment,
which  two  foreign  monks,  Guy  and  Le  Normand,  inflicted  on
them  at  the  discretion  of  the  bishops ;  they  were  then  distri-

336  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1089

buted  in  various  parts  of  England,  and  in  their  place  twenty-
four  monks  and  a  prior  came  from  the  continent.  All  those
inhabitants  of  Canterbury  who  were  taken  by  the  Norman
troops  in  arms  were  condemned  to  lose  their  eyes.

These  struggles,  fruits  of  the  hatred  and  despair  of  the
conquered,  were  reproduced  at  the  same  time  in  many
churches  of  England;  and  generally,  wherever  Saxons,  united
in  a  body,  and  not  reduced  to  the  last  degree  of  slavery,  en-
countered the  chiefs  or  governors  of  foreign  race.  These
chiefs,  whether  priests  or  laymen,  differed  only  in  their  dress;
under  the  coat  of  mail,  or  under  the  cope,  it  was  the  same  in-
solent, cruel,  avaricious  conqueror,  treating  the  conquered  as
beings  of  an  inferior  race  to  his  own.  Jean  de  la  Villette,
bishop  of  Wells,  formerly  a  physician  at  Tours,  pulled  down
the  houses  of  the  canons  of  his  church  to  build  himself  a  palace
with  their  materials.1  Renouf  Flambard,  bishop  of  Lincoln,
formerly  a  valet  to  the  duke  of  Normandy,  committed  such
depredations  in  his  diocese,  that  the  inhabitants  wished  to  die,
said  an  ancient  historian,  rather  than  live  under  his  authority.'2
The  Norman  bishops  went  to  the  altar,  as  the  earls  to  their  mili-
tary reviews,  between  two  rows  of  lances;  they  passed  the
day  in  playing  at  dice,  hunting,  hawking,  and  drinking.3  One
of  them,  in  a  fit  of  gaiety,  had  prepared  for  his  Saxon  monks,
in  the  great  hall  of  the  monastery,  a  repast  at  which  he  made
them  eat  meats  forbidden  by  their  order,  and  served  up  by
women  with  dishevelled  hair  and  half  naked.4  Those  of  the
monks  who  at  this  sight  desired  to  withdraw,  or  who  even
turned  away  their  eyes,  were  maltreated  and  called  hypocrites
by  the  Norman  prelate  and  his  friends.5

Against  such  adversaries  the  remnant  of  the  Anglo-Saxon
clergy  could  not  maintain  any  very  protracted  combat;  every
day,  age  and  persecution  removed  some  of  the  old  monks  or
priests ;  the  resistance,  at  first  energetic,  was  gradually  extin-
guished.6 The  fact  of  being  peopled  by  a  majority  of  men
of  English  race  was  with  any  monastery  ground  for  the  hatred

1  Hist,  de  episcop.  batliou.  et  welleus. ;  Anglia  Sacra,  i.  559.

2  Annal.  eccles.  Wiutoii. ;  Anglia  Sacra,  i.  290.

3  ...ut  majus  illos  consules,  quam  rnonachos,  pro  famulorum  frequentias
putares. (Hen.  Knyghton,  ut  sup.  col.  2367.)

*  II).  col.  2372.  5  Ib.

6  Matth.  Paris,  Vita;  Abbatitm  S,  Albani,  i.  54.

TO  1094.] REVOLT  OF  DE  MOLBRAY.  337

and  oppression  of  the  great.  This  was  experienced  under
William  Rufus,  by  the  monastery  of  Croyland,  already  so  ill
treated  at  the  time  of  the  conquest.  After  a  conflagration
which  had  consumed  part  of  their  houses,  the  Norman  count
of  the  district  in  which  it  stood,  presuming  that  the  charters
of  the  abbey  had  perished  in  the  flames,  summoned  the  monks
to  appear  in  his  court  at  Spalding,  to  produce  their  title.  On
the  appointed  day  they  sent  one  of  their  number,  Trig,  who
took  with  him  their  ancient  charters  in  the  Saxon  language,
confirmed  by  the  Conqueror,  whose  seal  was  appended.  The
monk  displayed  his  parchments  before  the  count  and  his
officers,  who  laughed  at  and  insulted  him,  saying  that  these  bar-
barian and  unintelligible  scrawls  were  of  no  authority.  The
sight  of  the  royal  seal,  however,  produced  some  effect;  the
Norman  viscount,  who  dared  not  break  it  or  publicly  seize
the  charters  to  which  it  was  attached,  allowed  the  monk  to
depart;  but  he  sent  servants  after  him,  armed  with  sticks,  to
seize  him  on  the  road,  and  take  the  charters  from  him.  Trig
only  avoided  them  by  following  a  bye  road.1

The  peace  which  reigned  among  the  conquerors  of  England
was  once  more  disturbed  in  the  year  1094,  by  the  revolt  of
several  chiefs  against  the  king.  One  of  the  causes  of  this
revolt  was  the  exclusive  right  to  hunt  in  the  forests  of  Eng-
land, established  by  William  the  Bastard  and  vigorously
maintained  by  his  son.2  At  the  head  of  the  malcontents  was
Robert,  son  of  Roger  de  Molbray,  earl  of  Northumberland,
who  possessed  two  hundred  and  eighty  manors  in  England.3
Robert  did  not  appear  at  the  court  of  the  king  on  one  of  the
days  fixed  for  the  political  conferences  of  the  barons  and  Anglo-
Norman  knights.  His  absence  excited  suspicion,  and  the
king  issued  a  proclamation  that  every  great  landholder  who
did  not  appear  at  his  court  at  the  approaching  feast  of  Whit-
suntide, should  be  excluded  the  public  peace.  Robert  de
Molbray  did  not  attend,  from  fear  of  being  seized  and  impri-
soned; whereupon  William  despatched  the  royal  troops  to
Northumberland.  He  besieged  and  took  several  castles;  he
blockaded  that  of  Bamborough,  to  which  earl  Robert  had

1  Ingulf.,  p.  107.  2  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  lib.  iv.  p.  12-1.

3  Order.  Vitalis,  lib.  viii.  p.  703.
VOL.  I.  Z

338  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1089

withdrawn,  but  he  could  not  make  himself  master  of  it.  After
many  useless  efforts,  the  king  constructed  opposite  Barn-
borough  a  wooden  fortress,  which  he  called,  in  his  Norman
language  Malveisin,  or  bad  neighbour,  left  a  garrison  in  it,
and  returned  southwards.  The  garrison  of  the  new  fortress
surprised  Robert  in  a  sortie,  wounded  and  made  him  prisoner.
He  was  condemned  to  perpetual  imprisonment,  and  his  accom-
plices were  exiled  from  England.1

The  estates  of  these  banished  men,  in  town  and  country*
remained  for  some  time  without  a  master  and  without  cultiva-
tion. It  appears  that  the  king's  favourites  allowed  them  to
remain  untilled,  after  having  taken  from  them  everything  of
any  value,  indifferent  as  to  property,  the  origin  of  which  and
the  uncertainty  of  political  events,  rendered  it  too  precarious.
On  their  part,  the  royal  officers,  in  order  that  the  exchequer
might  lose  none  of  its  revenues,  continued  to  levy  from  the
town  or  hundred  to  which  the  vacant  property  appertained
the  entire  amount  of  the  territorial  tax,  a  charge  that  fell
upon  the  men  of  English  race.2  The  people  of  Colchester,
according  to  an  old  narrative,  returned  great  thanks  to  Eudes
Fitzhubert,  viscount  or  governor  of  the  town,  for  assuming
in  his  own  name  the  lands  of  the  disinherited  Normans,  and
consenting  to  pay  the  taxes  demanded  in  respect  of  them/'
If  we  may  credit  the  same  account,  this  Eudes  gained  the
love  of  the  people  of  Colchester  by  his  equitable  and  mild
administration.  He  is  the  only  chief  imposed  upon  the
English  by  the  foreign  power  to  whom  history  bears  such  a
testimony.

This  exception  to  the  law  of  the  conquest  did  not  extend
beyond  one  single  town;  everywhere  else  things  followed
their  course,  and  the  royal  officers,  say  the  chronicles,  were
worse  than  robbers;  they  pillaged  without  mercy  the  corn-
loft  of  the  peasant,  and  the  shop  of  the  trader.4  Oxford  was
governed  by  Robert  d'Ouilly,  who  spared  neither  poor  nor
rich;  in  the  north,  Odineau  d'Omfreville  seized  the  goods  of
the  English  in  his  vicinity,  in  order  to  compel  them  to  hew

1  Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  203.

2  Terras  damnatoruni...et  pro  culpis  eliminatorum  dum  nemo  coleret,
exigebantur  tamen  plenaliter  liscalia,  et  hac  de  causa  populus  valde  gra.va
batnr.  (Dugdale,  Monasl,  Atiqfic.,  ii.  890.)

3  Id.  ib.  *  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  x.  p.  7?;).

TO  1094.] PERSECUTION  OF  THE  SAXONS.  339

and  carry  stones  for  the  construction  of  his  castle.1  Around
London,  the  king  also  levied  by  force  troops  of  men  to  con-
struct a  new  wall  for  the  Conqueror's  tower,  a  bridge  over  the
Thames,  and  in  Westminster  a  palace  or  hall  of  audience,  for
the  assemblies  of  his  barons.

"  The  counties  to  whose  share  these  works  fell,"  says  the
Saxon  chronicle,  "  were  cruelly  afflicted;  every  year  that
passed  was  heavy  and  full  of  sorrow,  on  account  of  the  vexa-
tions without  number  and  the  multiplied  taxes."2

Historians  less  laconic  have  transmitted  to  us  some  details
of  the  sorrows  and  torments  that  the  conquered  nation
suffered.  Wherever  the  king  passed  in  his  journeys  through
England,  the  country  was  ravaged  by  his  people.3  When
they  could  not  themselves  use  all  the  provisions  or  goods  that
they  found  in  the  houses  of  the  English,  they  made  the  owner
himself  carry  them  to  the  neighbouring  market,  and  sell  them
for  their  profit;  at  other  times  they  burned  them  for  amuse-
ment, or  if  it  were  wine  or  other  beverage,  washed  the  feet
of  their  horses  with  it.  "  The  ill  treatment  to  which  they
subjected  the  heads  of  families,  their  outrages  upon  the  women,
and  girls,"  adds  the  contemporary  historian,  "  one  would
blush  to  relate;  accordingly,  at  the  first  rumour  of  the  king's
approach,  all  fled  from  their  abodes,  and  retired,  with  what-
ever they  could  carry,  to  the  depths  of  the  forest  or  other
desert  places."4

Fifty  Saxons  who,  by  some  happy  chance,  or  perhaps  by  a
little  political  cowardice,  had  managed  to  retain  a  remnant  of
their  property,  were  accused,  falsely  or  justly,  of  having
hunted  in  the  royal  forests,  and  of  having  killed,  taken,  and
eaten  deer;  such  were  the  terms  of  the  criminal  charge  brought
against  them.  They  denied  the  charge,  and  the  Norman
judges  inflicted  on  them  the  ordeal  by  fire,  which  the  ancient
English  laws  only  sanctioned  when  demanded  by  the  accused.
"  On  the  appointed  day,"  says  an  eye-witness,  "  all  underwent
the  sentence,  without  any  mercy;  it  was  piteous  to  behold;
but  God,  in  preserving  their  hands  from  burning,  showed
clearly  their  innocence,  and  the  wickedness  of  their  perse-

1  Leland,  Collectanea,  iv.  110.

2  CLron.  Saxon.,  p.  20G.

3  Ut  qnaeque  pessundarent,  diriperent,  et  totam  terrain  derastarent.  (Kad-
mer,  p.  94.)  *  Ib.

z  2

340  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [~A.D. 1098

cutors."  When  it  was  reported  to  king  William  that  after
three  days  the  hands  of  the  accused  were  unscathed:  "  What
of  that,"  said  he;  "  God  is  no  judge  of  these  things;  these
matters  concern  me,  and  it  is  I  who  ought  to  judge  them."1
The  historian  does  not  relate  what  the  new  sentence  was,  or
what  the  fate  of  the  unhappy  English,  whom  now  no  pious
fraud  could  save.

The  Saxons,  persecuted  by  William  Rufus  for  transgress-
ing the  laws  of  the  chase,  far  more  rigorously  than  they  had
been  even  by  his  father,  had  no  other  way  of  revenging  them-
selves than  by  calling  him,  in  derision,  keeper  of  the  forests,
and  wild  beast-herd,  and  spreading  sinister  rumours  as  to
these  forests,  into  which  no  man  of  English  race  could  enter
armed  without  risking  his  life.  They  said  that  the  devil,
under  terrible  forms,  appeared  there  to  the  Normans,  and
told  them  of  the  terrible  fate  that  he  reserved  for  the  king
and  his  counsellors.2  This  popular  superstition  obtained
authority  by  the  singular  chance  which  rendered  hunting  in
the  forest  of  England,  and  especially  in  the  New  Forest,  fatal
to  the  race  of  the  Conqueror.  In  the  year  1081,  Richard, eldest
son  of  William  the  Bastard,  had  mortally  wounded  him-
self there;  in  the  month  of  May  of  the  year  1100,  Richard,
son  of  duke  Robert,  and  nephew  of  William  Rufus,  was
killed  there  by  an  arrow  carelessly  shot;3  and,  singular  cir-
cumstance, this  king  himself  also  met  with  the  same  death
there  in  the  July  of  the  same  year.

On  the  morning  of  his  last  day,  he  held  a  grand  breakfast4
with  his  friends  in  Winchester  castle,  and  then  prepared  for
the  proposed  chase.  While  he  was  fastening  his  shoes,  jesting
with  his  guests,  a  workman  presented  to  him  six  new  arrows.
He  examined  them,  praised  the  workmanship,  took  four  to  him-
self, and  gave  the  two  others  to  Walter  Tirel,  saying:  "  Sharp
arrows  for  the  best  shot."  Walter  Tirel  was  a  Frenchman
who  had  great  possessions  in  Poix  and  Ponthieu;  he  was  the
king's  most  cherished  intimate,  and  constant  companion.  At
the  moment  of  departure  there  came  in  a  monk  of  St.  Peter's

1  Ib.  p.  48.

2  Simeon  Dnnelmensis,  Hist.  Dunelm.,  apud  Script,  rer.  Anglic.,  (Sel-
deii)  i.  225. Roger  cle  Hoveden,  p.  468.

3  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  x.  p.  780.
4  Eex  inane  cum  snis  pnrasitis  comedit. (Ib.  p.  782.)

TO 1100.]  DEATH OF WILLIAM RUFUS.  341

abbey  at  Gloucester,  bearing  despatches  from  his  superior.
The  latter,  a  Norman  by  birth  and  named  Serlon,  sent  word,
expressing  the  utmost  uneasiness  at  the  circumstance,  that
one  of  his  monks  (probably  of  English  race)  had  had  a  vision
of  ill-omen  in  his  sleep;  that  he  had  seen  Jesus  Christ  seated
upon  a  throne,  and  at  his  feet  a  woman,  who  supplicated  him
saying:  "  Saviour  of  the  world,  look  down  with  pity  upon
thy  people,  who  suffer  under  the  yoke  of  William."  On
hearing  this  message,  the  king  burst  into  loud  laughter.
"  Do  they  take  me  for  an  Englishman,  with  their  dreams?"
said  he;  "do  they  think  I  am  one  of  the  idiots  that  turn
back  because  an  old  woman  dreams  or  sneezes  ?  Come,
Walter  de  Poix,  to  horse!"1

Henry,  the  king's  brother,  William  de  Breteuil,  and  several
other  lords,  accompanied  him  to  the  forest:  the  hunters  dis-
persed, but  Walter  Tirel  remained  with  the  king,  and  their
dogs  hunted  together.  Both  were  at  their  post  opposite  each
other,  the  arrow  in  the  cross-bow  and  the  finger  on  the
trigger,2  when  a  large  stag,  turned  up  by  the  huntsmen,
advanced  between  the  king  and  his  friend.  William  pulled
the  trigger,  but  the  cord  of  his  crossbow  breaking,  the  arrow
did  not  fly,  and  the  stag,  astonished  at  the  sharp  sound,
stopped  and  looked  around.  The  king  signed  to  his  com-
panion to  shoot,  but  the  latter  did  not  obey  the  signal,  either
because  he  did  not  see  it  or  because  he  did  not  understand  it.
Thereupon  William  impatiently  exclaimed:  "  Shoot,  Walter,
shoot,  in  the  devil's  name  !"3  And  on  the  instant  an  arrow,
either  that  of  Walter  or  from  another  hand,  pierced  his
chest;  he  fell  without  uttering  a  word  and  expired.  Walter
Tirel  ran  to  him;  but  finding  him  without  life,  he  re->
mounted  his  horse,  galloped  to  the  coast,  passed  over  to  Nor-
mandy, and  thence  into  France.

At  the  first  rumour  of  the  king's  death,  all  participating  in
the  chase  hastily  quitted  the  forest  to  see  to  their  affairs.  His
brother  Henry  galloped  to  Winchester  to  the  royal  treasury;4
and  the  body  of  William  Rufus  remained  on  the  ground,
abandoned  as  that  of  the  Conqueror  had  been.  Some  char-r

*  Ib.

-  Knygliton,  lib.  ii.  ut  sup.  col.  2375.
3  Trahe,  trahe  arcarn,  ex  parte  diaboli. (/&•)
*  Order.  Vital.,  ut  sup.

342  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1100.

coal  burners,  who  found  him  pierced  with  the  arrow,  placed
him  in  their  cart,  wrapped  in  rags  through  which  the
blood  trickled  along  the  road.1  In  this  manner  were  the
remains  of  the  second  Norman  king  conveyed  to  Winchester
castle.  Henry,  already  arrived  there,  imperiously  demanded
the  keys  of  the  royal  treasury.  As  the  keepers  were  hesi-
tating, William  de  Breteuil  himself,  arriving  from  the  New
Forest,  entered  all  out  of  breath,  and  opposed  this  demand:
"  Thou  and  I,"  he  said  to  Henry,  "  ought  loyally  to  remem-
ber the  fealty  we  swore  to  the  duke  Robert  thy  brother:  he
has  received  our  oath  of  homage,  and,  absent  or  present,  he  is
entitled  to  it."2  A  violent  quarrel  ensued;  Henry  drew  his
sword,  and,  with  the  aid  of  his  attendants,  who  flocked  in,
took  possession  of  the  treasure  and  of  the  royal  ornaments.

It  was  certainly  true  that,  in  the  terms  of  the  treaty  of
peace  concluded  between  William  and  duke  Robert,  and  sworn
to  by  all  the  Anglo-Norman  barons,  the  crown  was  due  to
the  duke;  but  he  was  then  far  from  England  and  from  Nor-
mandy. The  exhortations  of  pope  Urban  II.  to  all  Chris-
tians to  recover  the  Holy  Land,  had  produced  a  powerful
effect  upon  his  adventurous  spirit,  and  he  was  among  the
first  who  had  departed  with  the  great  levy  en  masse  made  to
the  cry  of  Dieu  le  Veut^  in  the  year  1096,  and  which,  three
years  after,  attained  the  object  of  its  pilgrimage  in  the  capture
of  Jerusalem.  When  the  death  of  his  brother  William  hap-
pened, Robert  was  on  his  return  to  Normandy;  but,  little
suspecting  what  the  delay  would  cost  him,  he  stayed  some
time  to  prosecute  a  love  affair  at  the  court  of  one  of  the
Norman  lords  settled  in  Italy.  Thus  taken  by  surprise,  and
without  a  leader,  his  partisans  could  not  withstand  those  of
Henry.  The  latter,  master  of  the  royal  treasure,  came  to
London,  where  the  principal  Normans  assembled;  and,  three
days  after  the  death  of  his  brother,  he  was  elected  king  by
them  and  solemnly  crowned.3  The  prelates  favoured  him,
because  he  was  greatly  attached  to  them  and  to  the  literature
of  the  period,  a  circumstance  which  procured  for  him  the
surname  of  Clerc,  or  Beauclerc*  It  is  even  said  that  the

1  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  de  Gestis,  &c.,  lib.  iv.  ut  sup.  p.  126.

*  Order.  Vital.,  ut  sup,
3  Chron.  Saxon.,  (Gibson)  p.  208.  4  Job.  Bromton,  col.  997.

A.D. 1100.] HENRY  I.  CONCILIATES  THE  ENGLISH.  343

Saxons  preferred  him  to  his  competitor,  because  he  had  been
born  and  brought  up  in  England.1  He  promised  at  his  coro-
nation to  observe  the  good  laws  of  king  Edward;  but  declared
that  he  would,  like  his  father,  retain  the  exclusive  enjoyment
of  the  forests.2

King  Henry,  the  first  of  the  name,  had  neither  the  faults
nor  the  good  qualities  of  his  eldest  brother  Robert.  The
latter  was  volatile  and  fanciful,  but  generous  and  of  good  faith;
the  other  was  an  able  administrator,  greatly  given  to  dissi-
mulation. Notwithstanding  the  facility  with  which  he  had
ascended  the  throne,  he  thought  it  prudent  not  to  rely  too
entirely  on  the  faith  of  those  who  had  elected  him.  He  sus-
pected the  fidelity  of  the  Normans,  and  resolved  to  create
for  himself  in  England  a  power  independent  of  them,  and  to
arouse,  for  his  own  purposes,  the  patriotism  of  the  Saxons.
He  extended  his  hand  to  the  poor  conquered  natives,  who
were  ever  flattered  in  the  hour  of  danger  and  crushed  when
that  hour  had  passed  away.  He  convoked  their  leading  men,
and,  by  an  interpreter,  addressed  them  in  the  following
terms: —

"My  friends  and  liegemen,  natives  of  this  country,  in
which  I  was  myself  born.  You  know  that  my  brother  would
have  my  crown.  He  is  a  haughty  man,  who  cannot  live  in
repose;  he  openly  despises  you,  holding  you  as  cowards  and
gluttons,  and  would  trample  you  under  his  feet.  But  I,  a
mild  and  pacific  king,  propose  to  maintain  you  in  all  your
ancient  liberties,  and  to  govern  you  by  your  own  counsels,
with  moderation  and  prudence.  I  will  give  you,  if  you  re-
quire it,  a  writing  to  this  effect,  signed  with  my  own  hand,
and  will  confirm  it  by  oath.  Stand  firm,  then,  by  me;  for,  sup-
ported by  English  valour,  I  fear  not  the  mad  menaces  of  the
Normans."3

The  writing  promised  by  the  king  to  the  English,  or,  to
use  the  language  of  the  period,  his  royal  charter,  was  drawn
up;  as  many  copies  of  it  made  as  there  were  Norman,  coun-
ties in  England,  and,  to  invest  it  with  the  more  solemnity,  a
new  seal,  made  for  the  purpose,  was  affixed  to  it.4  The  copies

1  Guilielm.  Neubrig.,  p.  297.  2  Job.  Bromton,  lit  sup.

3  Matthew  Paris,  i.  62.
*  Thomas  Rudborne,  Hist.  Major.  Winton. Anglia  Sacra,  i.  274.

314  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D. 1100.

were  deposited  in  the  principal  church  of  each  county,  but
they  did  not  remain  there  long;  all  were  removed  when  the
king  retracted  his  promises,  and,  in  the  phrase  of  an  ancient
historian,  impudently  falsified  his  word.1  Three  copies  only
remained  which  escaped  by  chance;  one  at  Canterbury,  one
at  York,  and  the  other  at  Saint  Albans.2

1  Matthew  Paris,  loco  citato.

"  ["  This  charter,  which  laid  the  foundation  for  the  subsequent  charters
of  Henry's  successors,  is  entitled  Tnslitutioncs  Hcnrici  Primi.  Matthew
Paris  has  twice  recited  this  charter,  namely,  under  the  years  1100  and
1213,  and  two  copies  of  it  are  entered  iu  the  Red  Book  of  the  Exchequer,
one  of  which  is  prefixed  to  king  Henry's  Jaws,  published  by  Larnbard  and
Wilkins.  It  is  likewise  printed  in  Eichard  of  Hagustald's  history  of  king
Stephen,  and  a  copy  of  it,  taken  from  the  Textus  Roffensis,  has  since  been
published  by  Heame,  and  afterwards  again  by  Mr.  Justice  Blackstone  in  his
Law  Tracts.  This  is  acknowledged  to  be  the  most  correct  copy  of  any,
being  compiled  by  Ernulf,  bishop  of  Rochester,  who  died  A.D.  1114." —
Crabbe,  H.  of  Englisli  Law,  p.  52.]  The  following  translation  is  adopted
from  Mr.  Tboinson's  Historical  Essay  on  Magna  Chart  a,  one  of  the
most  valuable  contributions  to  historical  literature  ever  made :  "  In  the
year  of  onr  Lord's  incarnation  M.  C.  I.,  Henry,  the  son  of  king  William,
after  the  death  of  his  brother  William,  by  the  grace  of  God,  king  of  the
English,  to  all  his  faithful  subjects,  greeting.  Know  ye,  that  because
through  the  mercy  of  God  and  the  common  council  of  the  barons  of  all
England,  I  was  crowned  king  of  the  same,  and  because  the  kingdom  hath
been  oppressed  by  unjust  exactions, — for  the  honour  of  God,  and  the  love
which  I  have  towards  you  all,  I  have  firstly  set  at  liberty  the  Holy  Church
of  God,  so  that  I  will  neither  sell,  nor  let  out  to  farm,  nor  upon  the  death
of  any  archbishop,  or  bishop,  or  abbot,  will  I  take  any  thing  from  the  lord-
ship of  the  church 'or  its  tenants  until  a  successor  shall  have  been  admitted
to  it.  And  I  also  take  away  all  evil  customs  with  which  the  kingdom  of
England  has  been  unjustly  oppressed,  and  which  are  here  in  part  set  down.
If  any  of  my  earls,  or  barons,  or  others  who  hold  of  me,  shall  die,  his  heir
shall  not  redeem  the  estate  as  he  was  wont  to  do  in  the  time  of  my  brother ;
but  shall  relieve  it  by  a  just  and  lawful  relief.  In  like  manner  shall  the
tenants  of  my  barons  relieve  their  lands  of  their  lords  by  a  just  and  lawful
relief.  And  if  any  of  my  barons  or  other  tenants,  will  give  his  daughter,
sister,  niece,  or  kinswoman  in  marriage,  he  shall  treat  with  me  about  it :
but  I  will  neither  take  anything  of  his  for  that  licence,  nor  will  I  prevent
him  giving  her  in  marriage  unless  he  be  willing  to  join  her  to  my  enemies.
And  if  ^pon  the  death  of  a  baron,  or  other  of  my  tenants,  there  remain  a
daughter  and  heir,  I  will  give  her  in  marriage,  together  with  her  lands,  by
the  counsel  of  my  barons.  And  upon  the  death  of  a  man,  if  his  wife  be  left
without  children,  she  shall  have  her  dower  and  marriage-portion;  and  I
will  not  give  her  again  in  marriage  excepting  by  her  own  consent.  But  if
the  wife  be  left  with  children,  she  shall  then  have  her  dower  and  marriage-
portion  whilst  she  lawfully  preserves  her  body ;  and  I  will  not  dispose  of
her  in  marriage,  but  according  to  her  own  will.  And  of  the  lands  and

A.D. 1100.]  MARRIAGE OF HENRY I.  345

The  same  policy  that  induced  Henry  I.  to  take  this  step
with  the  English,  led  him  to  adopt  another  still  more  decisive;
this  was  to  take  a  wife  of  Anglo-Saxon  race.  There  was
then  in  England  an  orphan  daughter  of  Malcolm,  king  of
Scotland,  and  of  Margaret,  sister  of  king  Edgar.  She  was
named  Edith,  and  had  been  brought  up  in  the  abbey  of  Bum-

children,  there  shall  be  appointed  guardians,  being  either  the  wife  or  some
near  kinsman,  who  ought  to  be  just.  And  I  also  command  that  my  barons
conduct  themselves  in  like  manner  towards  the  sons,  daughters,  and  wives,
of  their  tenants.  The  common  mintage  of  money  which  was  accustomed
to  be  taken  in  cities  and  counties,  though  not  paid  in  the  time  of  king  Ed-
ward, 1  do  wholly  forbid  to  be  taken  for  the  future.  If  any  coiner  or  other
person  shall  be  taken  with  false  money,  due  justice  shall  be  done  upon  him.
All  pleas  and  debts  which  were  due  to  my  brother,  I  forgive,  excepting  my
just  farms ;  and  excepting  those  things  which  were  covenanted  for  concern-
ing the  inheritance  of  others,  or  for  those  which  properly  concerned  other
men.  And  if  any  have  engaged  anything  for  his  own  inheritance,  that  I
forgive  ;  with  all  reliefs  which  were  agreed  upon  for  lawful  inheritances.
And  if  any  of  my  barons  or  tenants  lie  sick,  and  he  will  give,  or  designs  to
bequeath  his  money,  I  grant  that  it  shall  be  disposed  of  accordingly.  But
if,  being  prevented  by  war  or  sickness,  he  should  neither  give  nor  dispose  of
his  money,  his  wife,  children,  or  relations,  and  his  lawful  tenants,  shall  di-
vide it  between  them  for  the  good  of  his  soul,  as  it  shall  seem  best  to  them.
If  any  (of  my  barons  or  tenants)  shall  forfeit,  he  shall  not  give  a  pledge  in
forbearance  of  the  fine,  as  v/as  done  in  the  time  of  my  father  and  brother,
excepting  according  to  the  manner  of  the  fine :  so  that  it  shall  be  satisfied
as  it  was  wont  to  be  before  the  time  of  my  father,  in  the  time  of  my  other
ancestors.  But  if  he  be  convicted  of  perfidy  or  any  other  wickedness,  he
shall  make  a  due  satisfaction  for  it.  Also  I  pardon  all  murders,  from  the
day  in  which  I  was  crowned  king :  and  those  which  shall  hereafter  be  com-
mitted shall  have  satisfaction  according  to  the  laws  of  king  Edward.  1
have,  by  the  common  council  of  my  barons,  retained  in  my  hands  all  forests
in  the  same  manner  as  they  were  held  by  my  father.  I  also  grant  of  my
own  free-will  to  knights  who  defend  their  lands  by  their  habergeons,  (that
is  to  say,  tenants  by  military  service,)  that  their  demesne  lands  and  carri-
ages shall  be  free  from  all  guilds  and  payments  to  works :  so  that  being  so
greatly  relieved,  they  may  the  more  easily  provide  themselves  with  horses
and  arms,  better  fitting  my  service  and  the  defence  of  my  kingdom.  I  also
establish  firm  peace  in  the  whole  of  my  realm,  and  command  it  to  be  held
for  the  future.  I  also  restore  to  you  the  law  of  king  Edward,  with  those
amendments  with  which  my  father  improved  it  by  the  counsel  of  his  barons.
If  any  man  hath  taken  anything  of  mine,  or  the  goods  of  another,  since  the
death  of  king  William,  my  brother,  the  whole  shall  speedily  be  restored
without  any  other  satisfaction :  but  if  he  shall  retain  anything,  he  shall  pay
a  heavy  recompence  for  it. — Witnessed  by  Maurice,  bishop  of  London,  and
bishop  Gundulf,  and  William,  bishop  elect  of  Winchester ;  and  earl  Henry,
earl  Simon,  Walter  GifFord,  Robert  de  Montfort,  Eoger  Bigot,  and  Henry
de  Port;  at  London,  when  I  was  crowned."

346  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1101.

sey,  in  Hampshire,  under  the  care  of  another  of  Edgar's  sis-
ters, Christina,  who,  after  taking  refuge  in  Scotland  with  her
brother,  had  assumed  the  veil  in  the  year  1086.  As  a  king's
daughter,  many  of  the  high  Norman  barons  had  sought  Edgar's
niece  in  marriage;  she  was  demanded  of  William  Rufus  by
Alain  de  Breton,  lord  of  Richmond,  in  Yorkshire;  but  Alain
died  before  the  king  had  given  her  to  him.  William  de
Garenne  (Warenne),  earl  of  Surrey,  then  sought  her;  but
for  some  reason  or  other  the  marriage  did  not  take  place.2
It  was  this  lady  whom  king  Henry's  ablest  counsellors  pro-
posed to  him  as  a  wife,  with  a  view  thus  to  gain  the  support  of
the  whole  Anglo-Saxon  race  against  Robert  and  his  partisans.

On  their  part,  many  of  the  English  conceived  the  futile
hope  of  witnessing  the  return  of  the  old  Saxon  times,  when
the  granddaughter  of  the  Saxon  kings  should  wear  the  crown.
Those  who  had  any  relations  with  the  family  of  Edith  went
to  her,  and  intreated  her  not  to  refuse  this  union.3  She
showed  much  repugnance,  it  is  not  precisely  known  for  what
reason;  but  they  who  urged  her  were  not  discouraged,  and  so
beset  her,  says  an  ancient  author,  that  she  at  last  said  yea,
out  of  sheer  weariness  of  saying  nay.  "  Noble  and  gracious
lady,"  they  urged,  "  it  is  in  thy  power  to  retrieve  the  ancient
honour  of  England;  thou  wilt  be  a  sign  of  alliance,  a  pledge
of  reconciliation,  but  if  thou  persist  in  thy  refusal,  eternal
hatred  will  'remain  between  the  two  races,  and  blood  will
not  cease  to  flow."4

As  soon  as  Edgar's  niece  had  given  her  assent,  they  changed
her  name,  and  instead  of  Edith,  she  was  called  Matilda,  which
sounded  more  agreeably  in  Norman  ears.5  This  was  not  the
only  precaution  that  became  necessary;  for  a  strong  party
was  formed  against  the  marriage,  principally  composed  of
those  who  openly  or  secretly  favoured  duke  Robert,  whose
numbers  were  augmented  by  many  who,  from  national  pride,
thought  it  unworthy  of  the  conquerors  of  England  to  have  a
Saxon  woman  for  their  queen.  Their  ill  will  raised  up  all

1  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  de  Gestis,  &c.,  lib.  v.  ut  sup.  p.  164.
2  Order.  Vitalis,  lib.  viii.  p.  702.

3  Matthew  Paris,  i.  08.

4  Instantes  enira  importune  dicebant : 0 mulierum generosissima  ac

gratissima...quod  si  non  feceris,  causa  eris  perennis  inimicitiae  gentium  di-

Tersarum,  et  sanguine  liumani  effusionis  irrestaurabilis.

5  Order.  Vital.,  ut  sup.

AJ>. 1101.]  ANSELM.  347

sorts  of  unforeseen  obstacles;  they  alleged  that  Matilda,
brought  up  from  her  infancy  in  a  convent,  had  been  conse-
crated to  God  by  her  parents;  it  was  reported  that  she  had
been  seen  publicly  wearing  the  veil,  and  this  report  sus-
pended the  celebration  of  the  marriage,  to  the  great  joy  of
those  who  were  opposed  to  it.1

There  was  at  this  time,  in  the  archiepiscopal  throne  of
Canterbury,  a  monk  of  Bee,  named  Anselm,  a  man  of  learning
and  virtue,  to  whom  the  historians  of  the  period  render  this
honorable  testimony,  that  the  native  English  loved  him  as
though  he  had  been  one  of  themselves.2  Anselm  had  come
by  chance  to  England,  in  the  reign  of  the  first  William,  at
the  time  when  Lanfranc,  seeking  to  destroy  the  reputation  of
the  saints  of  English  race,  was  fiercely  attacking  the  sanctity
of  archbishop  Elfeg,  murdered  by  the  Danes.  Entirely  ab-
sorbed with  his  project,  the  primate  conversed  with  the  Nor-
man monk  on  the  history  of  the  Saxon  Elfeg,  and  what  he
called  his  pretended  martyrdom.  "For  my  part,"  answered
Anselm,  "  I  think  this  man  a  martyr  and  truly  a  martyr;  for
he  preferred  to  die  rather  than  injure  his  country.  He  died
for  justice,  as  Saint  John  for  truth,  and  both  for  Christ,  who
is  truth  and  justice."3

Become  primate  in  his  turn,  under  William  Ruf  us,  Anselm
persevered  in  the  spirit  of  equity  which  had  inspired  this
answer,  and  in  his  good  will  towards  the  English.  He  was  one  of
the  most  zealous  partisans  of  the  marriage  sought  by  the  latter,
but  when  he  learned  the  reports  respecting  Edgar's  niece,  he
declared  that  nothing  should  induce  him  to  take  from  God
one  who  was  his  spouse,  to  unite  her  to  a  carnal  husband.
Wishing,  however,  to  assure  himself  of  the  truth,  he  ques-
tioned Matilda,  who  denied  that  she  had  been  consecrated
to  God;  she  even  denied  that  she  had  ever  worn  the  veil
of  her  own  accord,  and  offered  to  prove  this  before  all  the
prelates  of  England.  "  I  must  confess,"  she  said,  "  that  I
have  sometimes  appeared  veiled;  but  only  for  this  reason:  in
my  youth,  when  I  was  under  the  care  of  my  aunt  Christina,
she,  to  protect  me,  as  she  said,  from  the  libertinism  of  the

i  Eadmer,  Hist.  'Nova,  (Selden)  56.  2  Ib.  p.  112.

3  Martyr,  inquit,  videtur  egregius  qui  mori  maluit...Sic  ergo  Johannes
pro  veritate,  sic  et  Elpnegus  pro  justitia.  (Job.  Sarisburiensis,  de  Vita,
Anselmi  ;  Anglia  Sacra,  ii.  163.)

348  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D.  ]  102.

Normans,  who  assailed  the  honour  of  every  woman  they  met,
used  to  place  a  piece  of  black  stuff  on  my  head,  and  when  1
refused  to  wear  it,  she  treated  me  harshly.  In  her  presence,
I  wore  this  cloth,  but  as  soon  as  she  left  me,  I  threw  it  on  the
ground,  and  trampled  on  it  in  childish  anger."1

Anselm,  unwilling  to  act  in  this  great  difficulty  upon  his
own  judgment,  convoked  an  assembly  of  bishops,  abbots,
monks,  and  lay-lords,  in  Rochester.  Several  witnesses  cited
before  this  council  confirmed  the  truth  of  the  girl's  state-
ment. Two  Norman  archdeacons,  William  and  Humbault,
were  sent  to  the  convent  in  which  Matilda  had  been  edu-
cated, and  on  their  return,  deposed  that  the  public  voice,  as
well  as  the  testimony  of  the  sisters,  agreed  with  her  declara-
tion.2 At  the  moment  when  the  assembly  was  about  to  deli-
berate, archbishop  Anselm  withdrew,  that  he  might  not  be
suspected  of  using  any  influence  upon  it;  and  when  he  re-
turned, he  who  spoke  for  all  the  rest  announced,  in  these
terms,  the  common  decision:  "We  think  that  the  girl  is  free,
and  may  dispose  of  her  person,  relying  herein  upon  the
authority  of  a  judgment  pronounced  in  a  similar  case,  by  the
venerable  Lanfranc,  at  a  time  when  the  Saxon  women,  who
had  sought  shelter  in  the  nunneries,  through  fear  of  the  great
William's  soldiers,  demanded  their  liberty."

Archbishop  Anselm  replied  that  he  fully  concurred  in  this
decision,  and,  a  few  days  after,  celebrated  the  marriage  of
the  Norman  king  and  the  niece  of  the  last  king  of  English
race;  but  before  pronouncing  the  nuptial  benediction,  desirous
of  dissipating  all  suspicion,  and  disarming  malignity,  he
ascended  a  platform  raised  for  the  purpose  in  front  of  the
church  door,  and  related  to  the  people  the  inquiry  that  had
been  made  and  the  decision  that  had  been  given  in  accord-
ance with  it.  These  facts  are  stated  by  an  eye-witness,
Edmer,  a  Saxon  by  birth  and  monk  of  Canterbury.

All  these  precautions  could  not  overcome  what  the  histo-
rian Edmer  calls  the  heart-malice  of  certain  men,3  that  is  to
say,  the  repugnance  of  many  of  the  Normans  to  what  they
deemed  the  misalliance  of  their  king.  They  amused  them-
selves at  the  expense  of  the  newly -married  pair,  calling  them
Godrik^  and  Godiva,  employing  these  Saxon  names  by  way

i  Eadmer,  pp.  56,  57.  n-  Id.  ib.  •  Id.  ib.

A.D.  1102.] RECONCILIATION OF ROBERT AND HENRY. 349

of  derision.1  "  Henry  knew  it  and  heard  it,"  says  an  ancient
chronicler,  "  but  he  affected  to  laugh  at  it  heartily,  adroitly
concealing  his  anger."2  When  duke  Robert  had  landed  in
Normandy,  the  irritation  of  the  malcontents  assumed  a  more
serious  character;  many  Anglo-Norman  lords  crossed  the
Channel  to  support  the  rights  of  the  dispossessed  brother,
or  sent  him  encouraging  messages,  inviting  him  to  hasten
to  England,  and  assuring  him  of  their  fidelity,  pursuant  to  the
compact  formerly  concluded  with  William  Rufus.3  And
accordingly,  on  Robert's  landing  in  England,  his  army  was
rapidly  augmented  by  a  great  number  of  barons  and  knights;
but  the  bishops,  the  common  soldiers,  and  the  men  of  Eng-
lish race,  remained  on  the  king's  side.4  The  latter  more  espe-
cially, with  their  old  instinct  of  national  hatred,  ardently
desired  that  the  two  factions  should  fight.  There  was  no
battle  on  the  duke's  disembarkation,  because  Robert  landed  on
the  coast  of  Hampshire,  while  Henry  awaited  him  on  that  of
Sussex.  Some  days  elapsed  before  the  armies  could  meet,
and  the  least  inveterate  among  the  Normans  of  both  parties,
availing  themselves  of  the  interval,  interposed,  and  appeased
this  quarrel  between  brothers  and  countrymen.  It  was  ar-
ranged that  Robert  should  once  more  renounce  his  pretensions
to  the  kingdom  of  England,  for  an  annual  pension  of  two
thousand  pounds  of  silver,  and  that  the  confiscations  made  by
the  king  upon  the  duke's  friends,  and  by  the  duke  upon  the
king's,  should  be  restored.5

This  treaty  deprived  the  English  of  an  occasion  of  satisfy-
ing with  impunity  their  national  aversion  to  the  conquerors,
and  of  killing  the  Normans  under  the  covert  of  a  Norman
banner.  But,  ere  long,  this  occasion  again  presented  itself,
and  was  eagerly  seized.  Robert  de  Belesme,  one  of  the  most
powerful  earls  of  Normandy  and  England,  was  cited  before
the  general  assembly  to  answer  to  forty-five  charges.  Robert
appeared,  and  demanded,  as  was  the  custom,  permission  freely  to
seek  his  friends  and  take  counsel  with  them  as  to  his  defence ;
but  once  out  of  the  council-hall,  he  mounted  his  horse,  and

1  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  de  Gcstis,  &c.,  lib.  v.  ut  sup.  p  l;~)G.  Vocantes  eum.
Godrych  Godcfadijr. (Knyglitou,  lib.  ii.  col.  2'37.">.)

2  Audiebat  hsec  ille  et  formidabiles  cacliinnos,  iram  differens,  ejiciebat.
(Willelm.  Malraesb.,  loco  citato.)

3  Floreut.  Wigorn.,  p.  050.  4  Id.  il.  5  Id.  ib.

350  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1103

hastened  to  one  of  his  strongholds.  The  king  and  lords,  who
had  vainly  awaited  his  answer,  declared  him  a  public  enemy
unless  he  presented  himself  at  the  next  assembly.  But  Robert
de  Belesme,  preparing  for  war,  supplied  with  ammunition  and
arms  his  castles  of  Arundel  and  Tickhill,  and  the  citadel  of
Shrewsbury,  which  was  in  his  keeping.  He  also  fortified
Bridgenorth,  near  the  Welsh  frontier;  and  it  was  towards  this
point,  that  the  royal  army  marched  to  assail  him.

King  Henry  had  been  besieging  Bridgenorth  three  weeks,
when  the  Norman  earls  and  barons  interposed  to  terminate
the  war,  and  to  reconcile.  Robert  de  Belesme  with  the  king.
11  For  they  thought,"  says  an  old  historian,  "  that  the  victory  of
the  king  over  earl  Robert  would  give  him  the  means  to  bend
them  all  to  his  will."  They  came  in  a  great  body  to  Henry,
and  demanded  a  conference,  or,  as  it  was  termed  in  the
French  tongue,  a  parlement,  to  treat  of  peace.  The  assembly
was  held  in  a  plain  near  the  royal  camp.  On  the  side  of  the
neighbouring  hill  was  a  body  of  three  thousand  English,  who,
knowing  the  object  of  the  conference  of  the  Norman  chiefs,
were  greatly  excited,  and  cried:  "  O  king  Henry,  believe  them
not;  they  seek  to  lay  a  snare  for  thee;  we  are  here,  we  will
aid  thee,  and  make  the  attack  for  thee;  agree  to  no  peace
with  the  traitor  until  thou  holdst  him  fast,  dead  or  alive."
For  this  once,  the  Normans  did  not  succeed  in  their  attempt
at  conciliation;  the  siege  of  Bridgenorth  was  vigorously  pro-
secuted, and  the  fortress  taken;  the  capture  of  that  of  Shrews-
bury soon  followed,  and  Robert  de  Belesrae,  compelled  to
capitulate,  was  dispossessed  and  banished.1

The  vanity  of  the  English  enrolled  under  the  royal  banner
might  be  flattered  by  their  military  successes  against  the  in-
surgent Normans,  but  the  nation  at  large  derived  no  relief
from  it;  and,  if  it  was  avenged  on  some  of  its  enemies,  it  was
for  the  profit  of  another  enemy.  Though  the  king  had  mar-
ried a  Saxon  wife  and  had  received  a  Saxon  nickname  from
the  Norman  chiefs,  he  was  a  Norman  at  heart.  His  favourite
minister,  the  count  de  Mculan,  was  conspicuous  among  all  the
other  foreign  dignitaries  for  his  hatred  to  the  natives.2  It  is
true  that  the  popular  voice  surnamed  Matilda  the  good  queen  ;
she  counselled  the  king,  it  is  said,  to  love  the  people;  but

»  Order.  Vital.,  p.  800,  807.  *  Eadiner,  pp.  94.

TO  1105.] EXPEDITION AGAINST DUKE ROBERT.  351

facts  reveal  no  trace  of  her  counsels  or  of  her  influence.1  The
following  is  the  manner  in  which  the  Saxon  chronicle  of  the
monastery  of  Peterborough  prefaces  its  account  of  the  events
that  followed  the  so  eagerly-desired  marriage  of  Henry  with
Edgar's  niece:  "  It  is  not  easy  to  recount  all  the  miseries
with  which  the  country  was  afflicted  this  year,  by  the  unjust
and  constantly -renewed  taxes.  Wherever  the  king  travelled,
the  people  in  his  train  vexed  the  poor  people,  and  committed
in  various  places  murders,  and  set  fire  to  places."  Each  suc-
ceeding year  in  the  chronological  series  is  marked  by  a  repe-
tition of  the  same  complaints,  set  forth  nearly  in  the  same
terms,  and  this  very  monotony  gives  an  additionally  gloomy
colouring  to  the  recital.  "  The  year  1 105  was  most  miserable,
owing  to  the  loss  of  the  harvest,  and  the  taxes,  the  levy  of
which  never  ceased.2  The  year  1110  was  full  of  misery,
owing  to  the  bad  season,  and  the  taxes  which  the  king  raised
for  the  portion  of  his  daughter."  This  daughter,  named  Ma-
tilda, after  her  mother,  and  who  was  at  this  time  five  years
old,  was  married  to  Henry,  fifth  of  the  name,  emperor  of
Germany.  "  All  this,"  says  the  Saxon  chronicle,  "  cost  the
English  nation  dear."3

That  which  cost  it  still  dearer,  was  an  expedition  which
king  Henry  undertook  against  his  brother,  the  duke  of  Nor-
mandy. Personally,  Henry  had  no  motive  to  be  the  first  to
break  the  peace  that  existed  between  himself  and  Robert,  since
the  latter  had  renounced  all  pretensions  to  the  kingdom  of
England.  But  a  short  time  previous,  the  duke  had  paid  a
visit  to  his  brother,  as  to  a  dear  friend;  and  had  even,  in  re-
turn for  the  hospitality  he  received,  given  to  his  sister-in-law
Matilda  the  pension  which,  in  the  terms  of  their  treaty,  the
king  was  to  pay  him.4  This  act  of  courtesy  was  not  the  only
good  office  that  Henry  had  experienced  on  the  part  of  his
eldest  brother,  the  most  generous  and  least  politic  of  this
family.  Formerly,  when  Henry  was  without  lands,  and  dis-
contented with  his  condition,  he  had  endeavoured  to

1  Mold  the  gode  queene  gaf  in  conseile

To  luf  his  folc.
(Robert  of  Bnmne's  Chronicle,  p.  98.) Robert  of  Gloucester's

Chronicle,  p.  193.

2  Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  219.  '  Ib.  p.  213—216.

4  Order.  Vitalis,  lib.  xi.  p.  80D.

352  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1106

Mont  Saint-Michel  in  Normandy.1  Robert  and  William
Rufus  besieged  him  there,  and  closely  pressing  him,  reduced
him  to  a  want  of  water.  The  besieged  sent  to  entreat  his
brothers  not  to  deny  him  the  free  enjoyment  of  that  which
belongs  to  all  men,  and  Robert,  touched  by  this  appeal,
ordered  his  soldiers. to  allow  those  of  Henry  to  supply  them-
selves with  water.  Hereupon,  William  Rufus  was  enraged
with  Robert:  "  You  show  great  skill  in  warfare,"  said  he,
"  you  who  supply  your  enemy  with  drink;  you  have  now
only  to  furnish  him  with  meat  too." — "How!"  answered  the
duke,  "  should  I  leave  a  brother  to  die  of  thirst?  what  other
brother  have  we,  were  we  to  lose  him?"2

The  recollection  of  this  service  and  of  this  fraternal  affec-
tion vanished  from  Henry's  mind  as  soon  as  he  became  king.
He  essayed  by  every  means  to  injure  Robert,  and  even  to
avail  himself  of  his  heedless  character,  facile  even  to  im-
prudence, and  which  rendered  the  duke  of  Normandy  quite
unfit  to  manage  his  affairs.  Many  abuses  and  disorders  were  in-
troduced into  his  duchy,  and,  as  a  consequence,  there  were  many
malcontents,  whom  Robert's  volatility  prevented  him  from
heeding  and  his  easy  nature  from  punishing.  King  Henry  art-
fully availed  himself  of  these  circumstances  to  interfere  in
the  quarrels  between  the  Normans  and  their  duke;  at  first  in
the  character  of  an  intercessor,  and  then,  removing  the
mask  when  discord  recommenced,  as  the  protector  of  Nor-
mandy against  the  ill  government  of  his  brother.  He  called
upon  Robert  to  cede  the  duchy  to  him  in  exchange  for  a  sum
of  money.  "  Thou  hast  the  title  of  lord,"  he  said  to  him  in
his  message,  "  but  thou  art  no  longer  a  lord  in  reality;  for
they  who  should  obey  thee,  scorn  thee."  The  duke  indig-
nantly refused  to  accede  to  this  proposition,  and  Henry  at
once  proceeded  to  compass  his  brother's  downfall  by  force  of
arms.3

Preparing  to  depart  for  Normandy,  he  ordered  a  great
subsidy  of  money  to  be  raised  in  England,  to  defray  the  ex-
penses of  this  expedition;  and  his  collectors  exercised  the

1  Thomas  Rudborne,  lit  sup.  p.  2G;1.

2  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  dc  Gestis,  rcc/.  Angl.  &c.,  lib.  iv.  it!  sup.  p.  1'21.
3  Order.  Vitalis,  p.  820.

TO  1106.]  DEFEAT  OF  ROBERT.  353

most  cruel  violence  towards  the  Saxon  citizens  and  peasants.1
They  drove  from  their  poor  cabins  those  who  had  nothing  to
give;  they  took  out  their  doors  and  windows,  and  carried  off
even  the  least  article  of  furniture.  Against  those  who
appeared  to  possess  anything,  frivolous  charges  were  insti-
tuted: they  dared  not  appear  before  the  courts  of  justice,  and
their  property  was  then  confiscated.2  "  Many  persons,"  says
a  contemporary,  "saw  nothing  new  in  these  grievances,  know-
ing that  they  existed  during  the  whole  reign  of  William,
brother  of  the  present  king,  not  to  speak  of  what  passed  in
the  time  of  their  father.  But,  in  our  days,  there  was  a  reason
why  these  vexations  were  more  hard  and  insupportable  than
ever:  it  was  that  they  were  employed  against  a  people  de-
spoiled of  all,  utterly  ruined,  and  against  whom  their  masters
were  furious  because  they  had  nothing."3  Another  writer  of
the  period  relates  that  troops  of  labouring  men  used  to  come
to  the  king's  palace  or  meet  him  on  his  rides,  and  throw  be-
fore him  their  ploughshares  in  token  of  distress,  and  as  if  to
declare  that  they  renounced  the  cultivation  of  their  native
land  in  despair.4

The  king  departed  for  Normandy,  conquered  duke  Robert,
and  made  him  prisoner,  with  his  most  trusty  friends,  in  a
battle  fought  near  the  castle  of  Tinchebray,  three  leagues
from  Mortain.  A  remarkable  incident  in  this  victory  was,  that
the  Saxon  king,  Edgar,  was  among  the  prisoners.5  Having
renounced  all  hopes  for  his  country  and  for  himself,  he  had
settled  in  Normandy  with  duke  Robert,  whom  he  soon  loved
as  a  brother,  and  whom  he  even  accompanied  to  the  Holy
Land.0  He  was  brought  to  England,  and  the  king,  who
had  married  his  niece,  granted  him  a  small  pension,  upon
which  he  lived  for  the  remainder  of  his  days,  in  the  country,

1  Nullus  in  collectoribus  pietatis  aut miseri cordite  respectus fuit,  sed
eruilelis  exactio  super  omnes  desrevit. (Eadraer,  p.  Ho.)

2  Aliis  atque  aliis  miserabilibus  niodis  affligi  et  crucian. ..Nova  et  exco-
gitata  forisfactu  objiciebantur. (Ib.)

3  Ib.
4  Dialogus  de  Scaccario ; Seldeni  uotse  ad  Eadmeri,  Hittt.,  p.  210.

5  Chroii.  Saxon.,  p.  214.

<;  Ducem... quasi  collactaneum  fratrem  diligebat. (Order.  Vital.,  lib.  x.
p.  778.)

VOL.  I.  A  A

354  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1006

solitary  and  obscure.1  Duke  Robert  experienced,  on  the  "part
of  his  brother,  more  rigorous  treatment;  he  was  sent,  under  a
strong  guard,  to  Cardiff  castle  in  South  Wales,  opposite
Gloucester,  in  a  district  recently  taken  from  the  Welsh.
Robert,  separated  from  England  by  •  the  Severn,  at  first
enjoyed  a  degree  of  liberty;  he  could  walk  about  the  adjacent
country;  but  one  day  he  attempted  to  escape,  and  seized  a
horse;  he  was  pursued,  and  brought  back  to  his  prison,  which
he  never  again  quitted.  Some  historians,  but  of  the  following
century,  relate  that  his  eyes  were  put  out  by  order  of  his
brother.2

At  the  time  of  his  defeat,  Robert  had  a  son  still  under
age,  named  William,  whom  king  Henry  endeavoured  to  get
possession  of,  but  who  was  taken  to  France  by  one  of  his
father's  friends.3  Louis,  king  of  the  French,  adopted  him,
and  had  him  brought  up  in  his  palace;  he  gave  him  horses
and  armour,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  period,  and  feign-
ing to  take  an  interest  in  his  misfortunes,  converted  him  into
a  means  of  disquieting  the  duke-king  his  neighbour,  whose
power  gave  him  umbrage.  In  the  name  of  this  son  of  Robert,
the  king  of  France  formed  a  league  which  was  joined  by  the
Flemings  and  the  Angevins.  King  Henry  was  attacked  on
every  part  of  his  Norman  frontier;  he  lost  towns  and  castles
one  after  another;  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  friends  of  duke
Robert  conspired  against  his  life.4  For  several  years  he
never  slept  without  having  a  sword  and  buckler  at  his  bed's-
head.5  But  however  formidable  the  confederation  of  his  ex-
ternal and  internal  enemies,  it  did  not  prevail  against  the
power  which  he  derived  from  combined  Normandy  and  Eng-
land.

Robert's  young  son  continued  to  live  on  the  wages  of  the
king  of  France,  as  his  vassal,  and  to  follow  this  king  in  his
wars.  They  went  together  to  Flanders,  after  a  sedition  in
which  had  perished  the  duke  of  Flanders,  Karle  or  Charles,

!  Pedetentim  pro  ignavia.o.contemptui  hnberi  caepet...nunc  remotus  et
tacitus,  canos  suos  in  agro  consumit.  (Willelm.  Malmesb.,  dc  Gestis,  &c.,
lib.  iii.  p.  103.)

2  Matth.  Paris,  i.  63.
3  Order.  Vitalis,  lib.  xi.  p.  b38.

4  II).  p.  838,  et  se<j.  Sugerius,  vita  Lodovici  Grossi,  apud  Script,  rer.
Gallic,  et  Francic.,  xii.  44.

s  II).

TO  1107.] FAVOUR  SHOWN  TO  THE  CHURCH. 355

son  of  Knut,  king  of  the  Danes,  who  had  himself  also  been
killed  in  a  revolt.1  The  king  of  France  entered  Flanders,
with  the  sanction  of  the  most  powerful  men  of  the  country,
to  punish  the  murderers  of  the  late  duke:  but,  without  such
sanction  and  solely  by  virtue  of  feudal  suzerainty  (a  right
greatly  questioned),  he  placed  young  William  on  the  throne
of  the  late  duke,  in  furtherance  of  his  object  to  render
him  powerful  and  then  to  oppose  him  to  king  Henry.  There
was  little  resistance  to  this  unpopular  king,  so  long  as  the
king  of  France  and  his  troops  remained  in  Flanders;  but,
after  their  departure,  a  general  revolt  broke  out  against  the
new  lord  imposed  upon  the  country  by  foreigners.  The  war
proceeded  with  various  success  between  the  barons  of  Flan-
ders and  the  son  of  Robert.  The  insurgents  placed  at  their
head  the  count  of  Alsace,  Thiedrik,  of  the  same  race  with
themselves,  and  a  descendant  of  one  of  their  ancient  dukes.
This  popular  candidate  attacked  the  protege  of  the  king  of
France,  who,  wounded  at  the  siege  of  a  town,  died  shortly
afterwards.  Thiedrik  of  Alsace  succeeded  him,  and  king
Louis  found  himself  obliged,  despite  his  lofty  pretensions,  to
acknowledge  as  legitimate  duke  of  the  Flemings,  the  man
whom  they  had  themselves  chosen.2

Prior  to  his  departure  for  the  Continent  to  sustain  the  pro-
tracted war  which  his  nephew  and  the  king  of  France  had  ex>-
cited  against  him,  Henry  had,  with  the  consent  of  his  bishops
and  barons,  introduced  an  extensive  creation  of  abbots  and
prelates.  According  to  the  Saxon  chronicle,  there  had  never
been  so  many  abbots  made  at  once,  as  in  the  forty-first  year
of  the  reign  of  the  French  in  England?  At  this  period,  while
the  daily  intercourse  with  the  church  held  so  great  a  place
in  men's  lives,  such  an  event,  although  of  little  moment  in
our  eyes,  was  far  from  uninfluential  upon  the  destiny  of  the
English  population,  in  as  well  as  out  of  the  cloister.  "  Of  these
new  shepherds,"  says  the  contemporary  Edmer,  "  most  were
rather  wolves  than  shepherds.  We  must  suppose  that  such
was  not  the  king's  intention;  and  yet  this  were  more  probable,
had  he  selected  at  least  a  few  of  the  natives  of  the  country.
But  if  you  were  English,  no  degree  of  virtue  or  merit  could

1  Johau.  Iperius,  Chron.,  apud  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  xiii.  466.

2  Ib.  3  Chron.  Saxon.,  p.  214.

A  A  2

356  THE NORMAN CONQUEST.  [A.D.  1107

procure  you  the  lowest  employment,  whilst  a  foreigner  by
birth  was,  as  such,  judged  worthy  of  any  position.  We  live
in  evil  days."1

Among  the  new  abbots  instituted  by  king  Henry,  in  the
year  1107,  was  conspicuous  a  certain  Henry  de  Poitou,  who
had  come  to  England  because  it  was  a  country  in  which
priests  made  their  fortune  more  speedily  than  elsewhere,
and  lived  under  less  restraint.  This  Poitevin  obtained  from
the  king  the  abbey  of  Peterborough,  and  "  he  demeaned
himself  there,"  says  the  contemporary  chronicle,  "  as  a
hornet  in  a  hive,  seizing  upon  all  he  could  find  to  take  in  the
convent  and  out  of  the  convent,  and  transmitting  all  he
got  to  his  own  country."  He  was  a  monk  of  Cluny,  and  had
promised  the  superior  of  that  order,  by  oath  on  a  relic  of  the
true  cross,  to  procure  for  him  the  entire  property  of  the
abbey  of  Peterborough,  with  all  its  possessions  in  land  and
goods.  At  the  time  the  Saxon  chronicler  wrote,  the  abbot
had  made  his  request  to  the  king,  and  the  royal  decision  was
pending;  "May  God,"  says  the  Saxon  author,  "have  mercy
on  the  monks  of  Peterborough,  and  this  unfortunate  house!
truly  it  is  now  that  they  need  the  aid  of  Christ,  and  of  every
Christian  nation."2

»  These  sufferings,  to  which  we  cannot  refuse  our  compassion,
since  they  were  undergone  by  men,  and  that  the  foreign
government  rendered  them  common  to  both  priests  and  lay-
men, by  daily  depressing  more  and  more  the  hearts  and
minds  of  the  English,  appear  to  have  increased  in  them  the
superstitious  tendencies  of  their  nation  and  their  time;  they
seem  to  have  derived  some  consolation  from  imagining  that
God  from  time  to  time  revealed  his  anger  against  their  op-
pressors by  terrible  signs.  The  Saxon  chronicle  affirms  that,
when  abbot  Henry  the  Poitevin  entered  Peterborough,  there
appeared  at  night,  in  the  forests  between  the  monastery  and
the  town  of  Stamford,  black  huntsmen,  tall  and  of  fearful
forms,  who,  leading  black  dogs  with  glaring  eyes,  and
mounted  on  black  horses,  chased  black  hinds :  "  People
worthy  of  belief  have  seen  them,"  says  the  narrator,  "  and
for  forty  nights  consecutively  the  sound  of  their  horns  was
heard."3  At  Lincoln,  on  the  tomb  of  a  Norman  bishop,  Robert

1  Eadmer,  p.  110.
2  Ghrou.  Saxon.,  pp.  230,  230.  3  Jb.  232.

TO 1120.]  TERMINATION OF THE WAR.  357

Bluet,  a  man  infamous  for  his  debaucheries,  other  phantoms
were  visible  for  several  nights.1  Accounts  were  circulated
of  terrible  visions,  which,  said  the  story,  had  appeared  to  king
Henry  in  his  sleep,  and  so  terrified  him  that  three  times  in
the  same  night  he  had  sprung  from  his  bed  and  seized  his
sword.2  It  was  about  this  time  that  the  pretended  miracles
at  the  tomb  of  Waltheof  were  renewed;3  those  of  king
Edward,  whose  beatification  was  not  contested  by  the
Normans,  on  account  of  his  relationship  to  William  the  Con-
queror, also  occupied  the  imagination  of  the  English.4  But
these  vain  fireside  stories,  these  superstitious  regrets  for  the
men  and  days  that  were  past,  gave  the  people  neither  relief
for  the  present,  nor  hope  for  the  future.

The  son  of  king  Henry  and  Matilda  inherited  none  of  his
mother's  good  will  towards  the  English.  He  was  heard  pub-
licly to  say,  that  if  ever  he  reigned  over  those  miserable  Saxons
he  would  make  them  draw  the  plough,  like  oxen.5  When
this  son,  named  William,  formally  received  his  knightly  arms,
all  the  Norman  barons  accepted  him  as  successor  to  the  king,
and  swore  fealty  to  him.  Shortly  after  this,  he  married  the
daughter  of  Foulques,  earl  of  Anjou.  This  union  detached
the  Angevins  from  the  confederation  formed  by  the  king  of
France,  who  himself  ere  long  abandoned  the  war,  on  condi-
tion that  William,  son  of  Henry,  should  acknowledge  himself
his  vassal  for  Normandy  and  do  him  homage  for  it.G  Peace
being  thus  completely  re-established,  in  the  year  1 1 20,  in
the  beginning  of  winter,  king  Henry,  his  legitimate  son
William,  several  of  his  natural  children,  and  the  Norman
lords  of  England,  prepared  to  return  home.7

The  fleet  was  assembled  in  the  month  of  December,  in  the
port  of  Barfleur.  At  the  moment  of  departure,  one  Thomas
Fitzstephen  came  to  the  king,  and  offering  him  a  gold  mark,

1  ...loci  custodes  nocturnis  timbris  exagitatos. (Kuyghtou,  col.  2304.)  I

*  Ib.  col.  2383.

3  Eisdera  diebus...miranda  vaWe  magnalia  sua  ad  tumbam  Saiicti.  Wal-
devi  rnartyris. (Petri  Blesensis,  Continuat.  Ingulfi,  ut  sup.  p.  116.)
4  Ingulf.,  p.  84.

5  Knyghton,  col.  2382. Job..  Bromton,  col.  1013. Thomas  Walshighara,
Ypodigma  Nenstrias,  apud  Camden,  Anglica,  &c.,  p.  444.

6  Sicut  fiollo,  primus  Normamiiae  dux,  jure  perpetuo  promiserat. (Ano-
nymus,  apud  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  xiv.  16.)

7  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  xii.  p.  867.

358  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1120.

said:  "  Stephen,  son  of  Erard,  my  father,  served  thy  father
all  his  life  upon  the  sea,  and  it  was  he  who  commanded  the
vessel  which  bore  thy  father  to  the  conquest;  lord-king,  I
entreat  thee  to  grant  me  in  fief  the  same  office:  I  have  a  vessel
called  La  Blanche  Nef,  fitly  provided."1  The  king  answered
that  he  had  already  chosen  a  vessel  for  himself,  but  that  to
meet  the  request  of  Fitzstephen,  he  would  confide  to  his
charge  his  two  sons,  his  daughter,  and  their  suite.  The
vessel  which  bore  the  king  sailed  first,  with  a  south  wind,  at
sunset,  and  next  morning  reached  England  in  safety.2  Some-
what later  in  the  evening,  La  Blanche  Nef  set  sail;  the  sailors
who  manned  it  had  asked  for  wine  previous  to  their  departure,
which  the  young  and  joyous  passengers  had  distributed  in
profusion.  The  vessel  was  worked  by  fifty  rowers:  Thomas
Fitzstephen  held  the  helm,  and  the  ship  went  rapidly  on,  in
the  moonlight,  along  the  coast  near  Barfleur.3  The  sailors,
excited  by  the  wine,  made  every  effort  to  overtake  the  king's
ship.  Too  intent  upon  this  object,  they  heedlessly  involved
themselves  among  the  breakers  at  a  place  then  called  the
Has  de  Catte,  now  known  as  the  Ras  de  Catteville*  The
Blanche  Nef,  going  at  her  utmost  speed,  struck  on  a  rock,
which  drove  in  her  left  side:  the  crew  sent  forth  a  cry  of
distress,  which  was  heard  by  the  king's  vessels,  already  on  the
open  sea;  but  no  one  suspected  its  cause.5  The  water  poured
in,  and  the  vessel  sank  with  all  in  it,  to  the  number  of  three
hundred  persons,  among  whom  were  eighteen  women.6  Two
men  alone  clung  to  the  main-mast,  as  it  floated  on  the  water:
a  butcher  of  Rouen,  named ,  Besauld,  and  a  young  man  of
higher  birth,  named  Godefroi,  son  of  Gilbert  de  Laigle.7

Thomas,  the  master  of  La  Blanche  Nef,  after  having  sunk
once,  returned  to  the  surface;  perceiving  the  heads  of  the  two
men  who  held  on  to  the  masT;,  "  And  the  king's  son,"  said  he,
"  what  has  become  of  him?" — "  He  has  not  appeared,  neither
he,  nor  his  sister,  nor  any  of  their  company."  "  Woe  is  me!"
exclaimed  Fitzstephen;  and  he  plunged  beneath  the  waves.
This  December  night  was  extremely  cold,  and  the  most  deli-

1  Ib.  2  Ib.  3  Ib.  868.

4  Willelm.  Gemet.,  p.  297.

5  Order.  Vital.,  loc.  cit.

•  Jb.— Willelm.  Malmesb.,  de  Gestis  reg.  Aug.,  lib.  v.  p.  165.
.  7  Order.  Vital.,  ut  sup.

A.D. 1120.] DENUNCIATION  OF  THE  NOBMANS.  359

cate  of  the  two  survivors,  losing  his  strength,  relinquished  his
hold  on  the  niast  that  supported  him,  and  sank,  commending
his  companion  to  the  mercy  of  God.  Berauld,  the  poorest  of
all,  still  supported  himself  afloat,  in  his  jacket  of  sheep-skin,
and  he  alone  again  saw  the  day;  some  fishermen  picked  him
up  in  their  boat,  and  it  is  from  him  that  the  details  of  the
event  were  learned.1

Most  of  the  English  chroniclers,  in  relating  this  catastrophe,
so  grievous  to  their  masters,  express  but  little  compassion  for
the  misfortune  of  the  Norman  families.  They  call  it  a  Divine
vengeance,  a  judgment  of  God,  and  discern  something  super-
natural in  this  shipwreck  in  fine  weather  and  a  calm  sea.2
They  recal  the  contemptuous  and  malignant  language  of
young  William  with  reference  to  the  Saxons.  "  The  proud
man  said,  I  shall  reign"  exclaims  a  contemporary;  "but  God
said,  It  shall  not  be,  impious  one,  it  shall  not  be ;  and  the  brow
of  the  wicked,  instead  of  wearing  a  diadem  of  gold,  has  been
dashed  against  the  rocks."3  They  accused  the  young  man,  and
those  who  perished  with  him,  of  infamous  vices,  unknown,
they  said,  to  England,  before  the  arrival  of  the  Normans.4
The  invectives  and  accusations  of  these  writers,  indeed,  often
exceed  all  bounds;  as  in  other  cases  do  their  flatteries  and
their  obsequiousness,  manifesting  them  men  who  at  once  hate
and  fear.  "  Thou  hast  seen,"  says  one  of  them,  in  a  letter
which  was  intended  to  remain  secret,  "  thou  hast  seen  Robert
de  Belesme,  that  man  who  made  murder  his  most  agreeable
recreation;  thou  hast  seen  Henry,  earl  of  Warwick,  and  his
son  Roger,  the  ignoble  soul;  thou  hast  seen  king  Henry,  the
murderer  of  so  many  men,  the  violator  of  his  oaths,  the  gaoler

of  his  brother Perhaps  thou  wilt  ask  me,  why  in  my

history  I  so  highly  praised  this  Henry:  I  have  said  that  he
was  remarkable  among  kings  for  his  wisdom,  his  courage,  and
his  wealth;  but  these  kings,  to  whom  we  all  take  the  oath,

1  Order.  Vitalis,  ut  sup.

2  Manifestum  Dei  apparuit  judicium...mare  tranquillo  perierunt. (Ger-
vas.  Cantuar.,  Ghron.,  apnd  Hist.  Angl.  Script.,  (Selden)  iL col. 1339.)
Enormiter  in  mari  tranquillissimo. (Mattli.  Westmon.,  p.  240.)

3  Henric.  Huntind.,  Epist .  de  contemptu  mundi ;  Anglia  Sacra,  ii.  696. :

4  Superbia  tumidi,  luxuries  et  libidinis  omnis  tabe  maculati. (Gervas.
Cantuar.,  loc.  cit.) Scelus  Sodomae  iioviter  in  hac  terra  divulgatum. (Ead-
mer,  p.  24.) >  Nefandum  illud  et  enorme  Normannorum  crimen, (Anglia
Sacra,  ii.  40.)

360  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1120

before  whom  the  very  stars  of  heaven  seem  to  bow,  and  whom
the  women,  the  children,  and  the  idlers  among  men,  gaze  at
on  their  way,  rarely  throughout  their  kingdom  is  there  one
man  to  be  found  so  guilty  as  they;  and  this  has  given  rise  to
the  expression,  royalty  is  crime.'1''1

According  to  the  old  historians,  king  Henry  was  never
seen  to  smile  after  the  shipwreck  of  his  children.  Matilda,
his  wife,  was  dead,  arid  reposed  at  Winchester,  within  a  tomb,
the  epitaph  on  which  was  partly  in  English,  a  circumstance
that  for  many  years  did  not  recur  on  the  monuments  of  the
rich  and  great  of  England.2  Henry  married  a  second  wife,
not  of  Anglo-Saxon  race,  which  had  now  again  fallen  into
contempt  because  the  son  of  the  Conqueror  no  longer  needed
it.  This  new  marriage  of  the  king  was  sterile,  and  all  his
tenderness  was  now  concentrated  upon  a  natural  son,  named
Robert,  the  only  son  who  remained  to  him.3  At  about  the
time  this  son  became  old  enough  to  marry,  it  happened  that
one  Robert  Fitz-Aymon,  a  rich  Norman,  possessor  of  great
domains  in  Gloucestershire,  died,  leaving  as  heiress  of  his
property  an  only  daughter,  called  Aimable,  and  familiarly
Mable  or  Mobile.  King  Henry  negotiated  with  the  relations
of  this  girl  a  marriage  between  her  and  his  son  Robert;  the
relations  consented,  but  Aimable  refused,  and  persisted  in
her  refusal  for  a  long  time,  without  explaining  the  motives
of  her  repugnance,  until  at  last,  driven  to  extremity,  she  de-
clared that  she  would  never  be  the  wife  of  a  man  who  had  not
two  names.

The  two  names,  or  the  double  name,  composed  of  a  Chris-
tian name  and  a  surname,  either  purely  genealogical,  or  in-
dicating the  possession  of  an  estate  or  the  exercise  of  some
office,  was  one  of  the  signs  by  which  the  Norman  race  in
England  was  distinguished  from  the  other  race.4  In  bearing
only  his  own  name,  in  the  centuries  which  followed  the  con-
quest, a  man  incurred  the  risk  of  passing  for  a  Saxon;  and
the  provident  vanity  of  the  heiress  of  Robert  Fitz-Aymon

1  Hen.  Huntind.,  lit  sup.  p.  GOO.

*  Hie  jacet  Matildis  reginn., ah  Anglis  vocata  Mold  the good  queen.
(TLomas  Rudborne,  Hist.  Maj.  Winton. ;  Ang.  Sacra,  i.  277.)

3  Willelm.  Gemet.,  p.  606.

4  Hicksius,  Distertdtio Epistolarls ; Thesaurus Linguarum Septent.,
ii.  97.

TO 1124.]  OPPRESSION OF THE SAXONS.  361

was  alarmed  at  the  idea  that  her  future  husband  might  be
confounded  with  the  mass  of  the  natives.  She  fairly  con-
fessed this  scruple  in  a  conversation  she  had  with  the  king,
and  which  is  related  in  the  following  manner,  by  a  chronicle
in  verse: —

"  Sire,"  said  the  young  Norman,  "  I  know  that  your  eyes
are  fixed  on  me,  much  less  for  myself  than  for  my  inheritance ;
but  having  so  great  an  inheritance,  were  it  not  great  shame  to
take  a  husband  who  has  not  a  double  name?  In  his  lifetime
my  father  was  called  Sir  Robert  Fitz- Aymon.  I  will  not  be-
long to  a  man  whose  name  does  not  also  show  whence  he
comes."  "Well  said,  damsel,"  answered  king  Henry;  "Sir
Robert  Fitz- Aymon  was  the  name  of  thy  father;  Sir  Robert
Fitz-Roi  shall  be  the  name  of  thy  husband."  "  A  fair
name,  I  grant,  and  honourable  for  him  all  his  life;  but  how
shall  be  called  his  sons,  and  his  son's  sons?"  The  king  under-
stood this  question,  and  immediately  answered  :  "  Damsel,
thy  husband  shall  bear  a  name  without  reproach  for  himself
and  his  heirs;  he  shall  be  called  Robert  of  Gloucester,  for  I
will  create  him  earl  of  Gloucester,  him  and  all  who  shall  de-
scend from  him."1

By  the  side  of  this  anecdotal  illustration  of  the  life  and
manners  of  the  conquerors  of  England,  may  be  placed  some
others,  less  amusing,  of  the  fate  of  the  natives.  In  the  year
1124,  Raoul  Basset,  chief  justiciary,  and  several  other  Anglo-
Norman  barons,  held  a  great  assembly  in  Leicestershire;  here
they  summoned  before  them  a  number  of  Saxons,  charged
with  highway  robbery;  that  is  to  say,  with  partisan  warfare,
which  had  succeeded  to  more  regular  defensive  operations
against  the  foreign  power.  Forty-four  of  these,  accused  of
robbing  with  arms  in  their  hands,  were  condemned,  by  judge
Basset  and  his  assessors,  to  death,  and  six  others  to  lose  their
eyes.  "  Persons  worthy  of  credit,"  says  the  contemporary
chronicle,  "  attest  that  most  of  them  died  an  unjust  death;  but
God,  who  sees  all,  knows  that  his  unhappy  people  are  oppressed
beyond  all  justice;  first,  they  are  despoiled  of  their  goods,  and
then  they  are  deprived  of  life.  This  year  was  hard  to  bear:
he  who  possessed  anything,  however  little,  was  robbed  of  it,
by  the  taxes  and  the  decrees  of  the  powerful;  he  who  had
nothing,  died  of  hunger."2

1  Robert  of  Gloucester's  Chronicle,  p.  431,  et  seq.
2  Chroii.  Sax.,  p.  228.

362  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1124

A  circumstance  which  occurred  some  time  before  this  may
throw  some  light  upon  these  decrees,  which  despoiled  the  un-
happy Saxons  of  all.  In  the  sixteenth  year  of  the  reign  of
Henry  I.,  a  man  named  Brithtstan,  living  in  Huntingdon-
shire, wished  to  devote  himself,  with  all  he  possessed,  to  the
monastery  of  St.  Ethelride.  Robert  Malartais,  the  Norman
provost  of  the  hundred,  conceived  that  the  Englishman  only
desired  to  become  a  monk,  in  order  to  escape  the  punishment
of  some  secret  offence  against  the  foreign  power,  and  he  here-
upon accused  him,  as  it  would  appear,  altogether  at  random,
of  having  found  a  treasure  and  appropriated  it  to  his  own  use,
which  was  an  infringement  upon  the  king's  rights;  for  the
Norman  kings  claimed  to  be  born-possessors  of  all  money
found  underground.1  Malartais,  in  the  king's  name,  forbad
the  monks  of  Saint  Ethelride  to  receive  Brithtstan  into  their
monastery ;  he  then  seized  the  Saxon  and  his  wife,  and  sent
them  before  the  justiciary  Raoul  Basset,  at  Huntingdon.  /.The
accused  denied  the  crime  imputed  to  him;  but  the  Normans
called  him  liar,  insulted  him  for  his  short  stature  and  his  ex-
cessive corpulence,  and  pronounced  a  sentence  which  adj  udged
him  and  all  that  he  possessed  to  the  king.  Immediately  after
sentence,  they  demanded  from  the  Englishman  a  declaration
of  his  property,  real  and  personal,  with  the  names  of  his
debtors.  Brithtstan  gave  it;  but  the  judges,  not  satisfied  with
the  statement,  told  him  several  times  that  he  was  an  impudent
liar.  The  Saxon  answered  in  his  language  :  "  My  lords,  God
knows  that  I  speak  the  truth;"  he  repeated  these  words
patiently  several  times,  says  the  historian,  "  without  any-
thing further.1'2  His  wife  was  obliged  to  give  up  fifteen  pence
and  two  rings  that  she  had  about  her,  and  to  swear  that  she
retained  nothing.  The  condemned  man  was  then  taken,  bound
hand  and  foot,  to  London,  thrown  into  prison,  and  loaded  with
iron  chains,  the  weight  of  which  exceeded  his  strength.3

The  sentence  of  the  Saxon  Brithtstan  was  pronounced,  ac-
cording to  the  testimony  of  the  ancient  historian,  in  the
assembly  of  justice;  or,  as  the  Normans  called  it,  la  cour  du
comte,  the  county  court  of  Huntingdon.  These  courts,  in
which  all  causes  were  tried,  except  those  concerning  the  high

1  Leges  Henrici,  i.  cap.  x.  §  i.

2  Wat,  min  lauert,  godel  mihtin  hec  segc  sod,  respoudebat.  (Order*
Vital.,  p.  620.)  s  /6.  630.

TO  1126.] THE  COUNTY  COURT.  363

barons,  which  were  reserved  for  the  King's  Bench,  were  pre-
sided over  by  the  viscount  of  the  county,  whom  the  English
called  sheriff,  or  by  a  circuit  judge,  ajusticier  errant,  as  it
was  called  in  the  Norman  tongue.1  In  the  county-court  sat,
as  judges,  the  possessors  of  free  tenements,  whom  the  Nor-
mans called  Franc  tenants,  and  the  natives  franklings,  adding
a  Saxon  termination  to  the  French  adjective.2  The  county-
court,  like  that  of  the  king,  had  periodical  sessions,  and  those
who  failed  to  attend  them  paid  a  certain  fine  for  having,  as
the  legal  acts  of  the  time  express  it,  left  justice  without
judgment.3  None  had  a  right  to  sit  there,  unless  he  wore  the
sword  and  baldric,  the  insignia  of  Norman  liberty,  and  unless,
moreover,  he  spoke  French.4  The  judges  attended  girt  with
their  swords,  and  thus  kept  away  the  Saxons,  or,  in  the  lan-
guage of  the  old  acts,  the  villeins,  the  country  people,  and  all
men  of  ignoble  and  low  race.5  The  French  language  was,  so
to  speak,  the  criterion  of  a  capacity  to  act  as  a  judge;  and
there  were  even  cases  in  which  the  testimony  of  a  man,  igno-
rant of  the  language  of  the  conquerors,  and  thus  betraying  his
English  descent,  was  not  considered  valid.  This  is  proved  by
a  fact  posterior,  by  more  than  sixty  years,  to  the  period  at
which  we  are  now  arrived.  In  1191,  in  a  dispute  affecting
the  abbot  of  Croyland,  four  persons  gave  evidence  against
him;  these  were  Godfrey  de  Thurleby,  Gaultier  Leroux  de
Hamneby,  William  Fitz-Alfred,  and  Gilbert  de  Bennington.
"  The  false  testimony  given  by  them  was  registered,"  says
the  old  historian,  "  and  not  the  truth  spoken  by  the  abbot;
but  all  present  thought  that  the  judgment  would  be  favour-
able to  him,  because  the  four  witnesses  had  no  knightly  fief,
were  not  girt  with  the  sword,  and  one  of  them  even  could  not
speak  French."6

1  Justitiarii  itinerantes. See  Spelinan,  Gloss.,  verbo  Justitia.

2  Franci  tenentes. The  termination  ling,  in  the  Germanic  languages,  indi-
cates resemblance  or  filiation. When  the  English  ceased  the  practice  of
strongly  aspirating  their  language,  the  word  /rankling  became  franklin.
See  Chaucer's  Canterbury  Talcs.

3  Quod  justitiam  sine  judicio  dimiserunt. (Leges  Henrici,  i.  cap.  xxix.
Si.)

4 Glossar.  ad  Matth.  Paris,  verbo  Assisa.

5  Villani  vero  vel  Cotseti  vel  Ferdingi,  vel  qui  sunt  istius  modi  viles  vel
inopes  personse  non  sunt  inter  legnm  judices  numerandi.  (Leges  Hen.
i.  loc.  cit.)

6  Petrus  Blesensis,  vt  sup.  p.  458.

364  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1126

Of  king  Henry's  two  legitimate  children,  Matilda  still
lived,  the  wife  of  Henry  'V.,  emperor  of  Germany.  She
became  a  widow  in  the  year  1126,  and  returned  to  her  father;
notwithstanding  her  widowhood,  the  Normans  continued  in
courtesy  to  style  her  empress.1  At  Christmas,  Henry  held
his  court,  in  great  pomp,  at  Windsor  castle,  and  all  the
Norman  lords  of  both  countries,  assembled  by  his  invitation,
promised  fealty  to  Matilda,  both  for  the  duchy  of  Normandy
and  for  the  kingdom  of  England,  swearing,  after  her  father's
death,  to  obey  her  as  they  had  obeyed  him.2  The  first  who
took  this  oath  was  Stephen,  son  of  the  earl  of  Blois  and  of
Adele,  daughter  of  William  the  Conqueror,  one  of  the  king's
most  intimate  friends,  and  almost  the  favourite.3  In  the  same
year,  Foulqnes,  earl  of  Anjou,  seized  with  the  new  enthusiasm
of  the  century,  became  what  was  called  a  soldier  of  Christ,
assumed  the  cross,  and  departed  for  Jerusalem.  Uncertain
as  to  his  return,  he  gave  the  earldom  to  his  son  Geoffrey,  sur-
named  Plante  Genest,  from  his  habit  of  wearing  a  sprig  of
flowering  broom  in  his  hat,  instead  of  a  feather.4

King  Henry  conceived  a  great  liking  for  his  young  neigh-
bour, earl  Geoffrey  d' Anjou,  for  his  personal  attractions,  the
elegance  of  his  manners,  and  his  valour;  he  became  his
knightly  godfather,  and  defrayed,  at  his  own  cost,  the  cere-
mony, at  Rouen,  of  his  admission  to  chivalry.5  After  the
bath,  into  which,  according  to  custom,  the  young  knight  was
immersed,  Henry  gave  him,  as  his  knightly  godson,  a  Spanish
charger,  a  suit  of  mail,  lance  and  sword  proof,  gold  spurs,  a
shield  emblazoned  in  gold  with  the  three  lions,  a  helmet  set
with  jewels,  an  ash  lance  with  a  head  of  Poitiers  steel,  and
a  sword,  of  temper  so  fine  that  it  passed  for  the  work  of
Waland,6  the  fabulous  smith  of  northern  traditions.7  The

1  Quoad  vixit  sibi  nomeii  retinens  imperatricis.  (De  Orig.  comit.  Aiide-
gav. ;  apitd  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  xii.  537.)

2  Matth.  Paris,  i.  70.
8  Et  primus  omnium  comes  Blesensis. (Ib.}

4  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  xii.  581,  in  nota  c,  ad  calc.  pag. Chrou.
de  Normandie,  ib.  xiii.  247.

5  Johannes  Monac.  Major.  Moiiast.,  Hist.  Gavfredi  duds  Noi-mann.,  ib.
xii.  520.

6  Galannus  ; the  Volundar  of  the  Scandinavian  Edda,  and  the  Wayland
Smith  of  the  legends  of  England  and  Scotland.

7  Johannes  Monachus,  Inc.  cit.

TO  1133.]  DEATH  OF  HENRY  I.  365

king  of  England's  friendship  was  not  confined  to  these  proofs,
and  he  resolved  to  marry  the  earl  to  his  daughter  Matilda,
the  empress,  and  the  union  was  celebrated,  but  without  the
previous  consent  of  the  lords  of  Normandy  and  England;  a
circumstance  attended  with  most  serious  consequences  to  the
fortunes  of  the  married  pair.1  Their  nuptials  were  celebrated
in  the  Whitsuntide  of  the  year  1127,  and  the  rejoicings  con-
tinued for  three  weeks.2  On  the  first  day,  heralds  in  their
state  costume  went  through  all  the  squares  and  streets  of
Rouen,  making  this  singular  proclamation:  "By  order  of
king  Henry,  let  no  man  here  present,  native  or  foreigner,
rich  or  poor,  noble  or  villein,  be  so  bold  as  to  absent  himself
from  the  royal  rejoicings;  whoever  takes  not  his  share  in  the
entertainments-  and  sports,  shall  be  held  guilty  of  offence  to-
wards his  lord  the  king."3

Of  this  marriage  was  born,  in  the  year  1 133,  a  son  who  was.
called  Henry,  after  his  grandfather,  and  whom  the  Normans
surnamed  Fitz-empress,  son  of  the  empress,  to  distinguish  him
from  the  elder  Henry,  whom  they  called  Fitz-Guillianme-
Conquereur.  On  the  birth  of  his  grandson,  the  Norman  king
once  more  convoked  his  barons  of  Normandy  and  England,
and  required  them  to  acknowledge  as  his  successors,  the  chil-
dren of  his  daughter  after  him  and  after  her;  they  outwardly
consented,  and  swore  fealty.  The  king  died  two  years  after,
in  Normandy,  thinking  that  he  left  an  undisputed  crown  to  his
daughter  and  his  grandson;  but  it  happened  far  otherwise;  on
the  first  intelligence  of  his  death,  Stephen  of  Blois,  his  nephew,
sailed  for  England,  where  he  was  elected  king  by  the  prelates,
earls,  and  barons,  who  had  sworn  to  give  the  kingdom  to  Ma-
tilda.4 The  bishop  of  Salisbury  declared  that  this  oath  was
void,  because  the  king  had  married  his  daughter  without  the
consent  of  the  lords:  others  said  that  it  would  be  shameful  for
so  many  noble  knights  to  be  under  the  orders  of  a  woman.5
Stephen's  election  was  sanctioned  by  the  benediction  of  the
primate  of  Canterbury,  and,  what  was  highly  important  at  this
period,  approved  by  a  bull  of  pope  Innocent  II.

1  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  Histor'ue  NovMic,  lib.  i.  apud  rer.  Angl.  Script.,
(Savile)  p.  175.

2  Job.  Bromton,  col.  101(5.

3  Joban.  MonacbiiSj  tit  sup.  p.  521 .  4  Matth.  Paris,  i.  74.

5  Fore  nirais  turpe  si  tot  nobiles  faeminse  subderentur. (II.)

366  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1135.

"  We  have  learned,"  said  the  pontiff  to  the  new  king,  "that
thou  hast  been  elected  bj  the  common  voice  and  unanimous  con-
sent of  the  lords  and  people,  and  that  thou  hast  been  crowned  by
the  prelates  of  the  kingdom.1  Considering  that  the  suffrages  of
so  great  a  number  of  men  cannot  have  been  combined  in  thy
favour  without  a  special  co-operation  of  the  Divine  grace;
that  besides  thou  art  a  near  relation  of  the  late  king,  and  that
thou  didst  promise  obedience  and  reverence  to  Saint  Peter  on
the  day  of  thy  coronation,  we  admit  all  that  has  been  done  for
thee,  and  adopt  thee  specially,  with  paternal  affection,  for  the
son  of  the  blessed  apostle  Peter,  and  of  the  holy  Roman
church."2

Stephen  of  Blois  was  very  popular  with  the  Anglo-Nor-
mans, because  of  his  tried  valour,  and  his  affable  and  generous
disposition.  He  promised,  on  receiving  the  crown,  to  give  to
each  of  his  barons  the  free  enjoyment  of  the  forests  which
had  been  appropriated  by  king  Henry,  after  the  example  of
the  two  Williams,  and  to  secure  by  proper  instruments  the
liberties  of  the  church  and  of  the  nation.3  The  first  portion

1  Epist.  Innocent.  Papse,  apud  Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.,  xv.  391.

2  Ib.  392.

3  Vovit.  quod  nullius  vel  clerici  vel  laid  sylvas  in  maim  sua  retineret.
(Matth.  Paris,  i.  74.)

"THE  CHABTEB  OF  KING  STEPHEN CONCERNING  THE LIBERTIES  OF  THE
CHURCH  AND  KINGDOM  OF  ENGLAND.

"1,  Stephen,  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  by  consent  of  the  clergy  and  peo-
ple, king  of  England,  and  consecrated  by  William,  archbishop  of  Canter-
bury, and  legate  of  the  holy  Roman  church  ;  and  afterwards  confirmed  by
Innocent,  pontiff  of  the  holy  Roman  see  ; — do  hereby  grant,  in  respect  and
love  of  God,  that  the  holy  church  shall  be  free ;  and  I  confirm  all  reve-
rence due  to  it.  I  promise  to  act  nothing  in  the  church,  nor  in  ecclesias-
tical affairs,  simoniacally,  nor  will  I  permit  it  to  be  done.  I  defend  and
confirm  that  the  power,  justice,  and  dignities,  of  ecclesiastical  persons  and
all  clerks,  and  the  distribution  of  their  goods,  shall  be  in  the  hands  of  the
bishops.  I  grant  and  establish,  that  the  dignities  of  churches  confirmed  by
their  privileges  and  the  customs  held  by  ancient  tenure,  shall  remain  in-
violable. All  the  possessions  and  tenures  of  churches,  which  they  held  on
that  day  when  king  William  my  grandfather  was  alive  and  dead,  1  grant  to
be  free  and  absolute  to  them,  without  any  false  reclamation :  but  if  the
church  shall  hereafter  claim  any  of  those  things  which  were  possessed  or
enjoyed  before  the  death  of  the  king,  and  which  it  HOAV  may  want,  I  reserve
that  to  my  indulgence  and  dispensation,  to  be  either  discussed  or  restored.
But  whatsoever  hath  been  bestowed  upon  it  since  the  king's  death,  either
by  the  liberality  of  the  king,  or  tke  gift  of  great  persons,  or  the  oblation,

A.D. 1135.]  ACCESSION OF STEPHEN.  367

of  the  new  reign  was  peaceful  and  happy,  at  least  for  the
Norman  race.  The  king  was  lavish  and  magnificent  in  his

purchase,  or  any  exchange,  of  faithful  men,  I  confirm,  and  shall  be  conferred
upon  them.  1  promise  to  preserve  peace  and  justice  in  all  things  to  the
utmost  of  my  power.  The  forests  which  William,  my  grandfather,  and
William,  nay  uncle,  have  made  and  held,  I  reserve  to  myself:  but  all  the
rest,  which  king  Henry  had  superadded,  I  restore,  and  grant,  quit,  and  dis-
charged to  the  churches  and  the  kingdom.  If  any  bishop,  or  abbot,  or  other
ecclesiastical  person,  shall  reasonably  distribute  his  goods  before  his  death,
or  appoint  them  to  be  so  distributed,  I  grant  that  it  shall  remain  firm :  but
if  he  be  prevented  by  death,  distribution  of  them  shall  be  made  by  consent
of  his  church  for  the  good  of  his  soul.  Whilst  episcopal  sees  shall  remain
vacant  of  pastors,  both  they  and  all  their  possessions  shall  be  committed  to
the  power  and  keeping  of  clerks,  or  other  honest  men  of  the  same  church,
until  a  pastor  shall  be  canonically  substituted.  All  exactions,  injustice,  and
miskennings,  wickedly  introduced  either  by  sheriffs,  or  by  any  others,  I  to-
tally abolish.  The  good  and  ancient  laws  and  just  customs  in  murders,
pleas,  and  other  causes,  I  will  observe,  and  do  hereby  establish  and  com-
mand to  be  observed.  But  all  this  I  grant,  saving  my  royalty  and  just  dig-
nity. Witnesses :  William,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Hugh,  bishop  of
Kouen,  Henry  (de  Blois),  bishop  of  Winchester,  Eoger,  bishop  of  Salisbury,
Alexander,  bishop  of  Lincoln,  Nigel,  bishop  of  Ely,  Everard,  bishop  of  Nor-
wich, Simon,  bishop  of  Worcester,  Bernard,  bishop  of  St.  David's,  Audoen,
bishop  of  Evreux,  Richard,  bishop  of  Avrancb.es,  Robert  (de  Bethun),  bishop
of  Hereford,  ^Ethelwulf,  bishop  of  Carlisle,  and  Roger,  the  chancellor,  and
Henry,  the  king's  nephew,  and  Robert  (consul),  earl  of  Gloucester,  William,
earl  of  Wan-en,  Rauulph,  (Randle  de  Gernons,)  earl  of  Chester,  Robert,
(Roger  de  Newburgh,)  earl  of  Warwick,  Robert  de  Vere,  and  Milo  de  Glou-
cester, Bryan  Fitz-Earl,  Robert  D'Oyly,  the  constable,  William  Martell,
Hugh  Bigod,  Humphrey  de  Bohun,  Simon  de  Beauchamp  the  Sewer,  Wil-
liam de  Albini,  Eudouius  Martell  the  Butler,  Robert  de  Ferrers,  William
Penr',  of  Nottingham,  Simon  de  Saintliz,  William  de  Albain,  Payne  Fitz-
John,  Hamon  de  St.  Clare,  and  Ilbert  de  Lacy.  At  Oxford,  in  the  year  from
the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord,  1136,  namely  the  first  of  my  reign."

The  other  Charter  of  Liberties  granted  by  this  sovereign,  was  a  short
general  one  for  the  whole  realm ;  it  was  also  written  in  Latin,  without  date,
and  is  preserved  in  an  ancient  entry  in  the  Cottonian  manuscript,  Claudius
D.  II.,  Art.  25,  fol.  73,  or  68  b,  whence  tb,e  following  translation  has  been
made  :  "  Stephen,  by  the  grace  of  God,  king  of  England,  to  the  justiciaries,
sheriffs,  barons,  and  all  his  officers  and  faithful  subjects,  French  and  Eng-
lish, greeting.  Know  ye  that  I  have  granted,  and  by  this  present  charter
have  confirmed  to  all  my  barons  and  people  of  England,  all  the  liberties  and
good  laws  and  customs,  which  Henry,  my  uncle,  gave  and  granted  to  them,
which  were  had  in  the  time  of  king  Edward.  Wherefore  I  will,  and  strictly
command,  that  they  have  and  hold  all  those  good  laws  and  liberties  of  me
and  of  my  heirs,  for  them  and  for  their  heirs,  freely,  fully,  and  securely,
and  prohibit  any  one  to  cause  any  molestation  or  impediment  upon  them, —
upon  my  forfeiture-  Witnessed  by  William  Mart  el,  at  London." — Thomson,
Essay  on  Magna  Charta,  p.  406.

368  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1137.

tastes,  and  most  generous  to  those  around  him.1  He  drew
largely  upon  the  treasure  that  the  Conqueror  had  amassed  and
his  two  successors  augmented;2  he  alienated  or  distributed  in
fiefs  the  lands  that  William  had  reserved  as  his  share  of  the
conquest,  and  which  was  called  the  royal  demesne;  he  gave
independent  earls  and  viscounts  to  districts  and  towns  hitherto
administered  for  the  sole  benefit  of  the  king  by  royal  gover-
nors. Geoffroy  of  Anjou,  Matilda's  husband,  agreed  to  re-
main at  peace  with  him,  for  a  pension  of  five  thousand  marks,
and  Robert  of  Gloucester,  natural  son  of  the  late  king,  who
at  first  manifested  an  intention  of  vindicating  the  rights  of
his  sister,  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  and  homage  to  Stephen.3
But  this  calm  did  not  last  long;  towards  the  year  1137
many  young  barons  and  knights  who  had  fruitlessly  demanded
of  the  new  king  a  portion  of  his  demesne  lands  and  castles,
proceeded  to  take  possession  of  them  by  force.  Hugh  Bigot
seized  Norwich  castle;  one  Robert  that  of  Badington;  the
king  recovered  both,  but  the  spirit  of  opposition  went  on
gaining  strength  from  the  moment  that  it  had  first  manifested
itself.4  The  bastard  son  of  king  Henry  suddenly  broke  the
peace  he  had  sworn  to  Stephen,  and  sent  from  Normandy  a  mes-
sage defying  him,  and  renouncing  his  homage.  "  That  which
induced  Robert  to  take  this  step,"  says  a  contemporary,  "  was
the  answers  given  him  by  many  religious  men  whom  he  con-
sulted, and  especially  an  apostolical  sentence,  as  it  was  called,
of  the  pope,  which  enjoined  him  to  obey  the  oath  he  had
taken  to  Matilda  his  sister,  in  presence  of  their  father."  Thus
was  annulled  the  brief  of  the  same  pope  in  favour  of  king
Stephen;  and  war  could  now  alone  decide  between  the  two
competitors.  The  malcontents,  encouraged  by  the  defection
of  the  late  king's  son,  were  in  movement  throughout  Eng-
land, preparing  for  the  contest.  "  They  have  made  me  king,"
said  Stephen,  "  and  now  they  abandon  me;  but,  by  the  birth
of  God,  they  shall  never  call  me  a  deposed  king."  To  secure
an  army  on  which  he  could  depend,  he  collected  mercenaries

1  Willelra.  Malmesb.,  Hist.  Nov.,  ul  sup.  p.  170.

2  [On  the  accession  of  Stephen,  it  amounted  in  money  to  an  hundred
thousand  pounds,  equivalent  to  J  ,000,000/.  of  our  present  money,  besides  a
vast  quantity  of  jewels  and  plate.]

3  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  Hist.  Nov.,  p.  179.
4  Matth.  Paris,  i.  70.

A.D. 1137.]  LAST NATIONAL CONSPIRACY.  369

from  all  parts  of  Gaul.  "  As  lie  promised  good  pay,  the
soldiers  hastened  to  enrol  themselves;  horsemen  and  light  in-
fantry, especially  Flemish  and  Bretons."1

The  conquering  population  of  England  was  thus  again
divided  into  two  hostile  factions.  The  state  of  things  became
the  same  as  under  the  two  preceding  reigns,  when  the  sons
of  the  conquered  took  part  in  the  quarrels  of  their  masters,
and  turned  the  scale  on  one  side,  in  the  vain  hope  of  im-
proving their  condition.  But  now  that  a  similar  juncture
presented  itself,  taught  by  past  experience,  the  English  stood
apart.  In  the  quarrel  between  Stephen  and  the  partisans
of  Matilda,  they  were  neither  for  the  established  king,  who
pretended  that  his  cause  was  that  of  order  and  of  the  public
peace,  nor  for  the  daughter  of  the  Norman  prince  and  the
Saxon  princess:  they  resolved  to  be  for  themselves;  and  there
was  formed  that  which  had  not  been  seen  since  the  dispersion
of  the  camp  of  Ely,  a  national  conspiracy  for  the  freedom  of
the  country.  "  On  an  appointed  day,"  says  a  contemporary
author,  "  all  the  Normans  in  England  were  to  be  massacred."2

The  historian  does  not  detail  how  this  plot  had  been  ar-
ranged, who  were  its  chiefs,  what  classes  of  men  joined  it,  or
in  what  places  and  at  what  signal  it  was  to  break  out.3  He

1  Willelm.  Malmesb.,  tit  sup.  p.  179,  180.
*  Order.  Vital.,  lib.  xiii.  p.  912.

3  ["  Ordericus  Vitalis  was  a  contemporary  writer,  and  of  good  credit  in
general ;  yet,  as  no  other  ancient  author  mentions  this  plot,  I  think  the
truth  of  it  is  much  to  be  questioned;  especially  as  that  author  is  not  al-
ways so  accurate  in  the  account  he  gives  of  transactions  in  England,  as  in
relating  those  that  happened  in  France  or  Normandy,  where  he  resided.  It
does  not  appear,  even  from  the  story  he  tells,  that  the  king  of  Scotland  him-
self was  privy  to  this  design.  Nor  does  it  seem  at  all  probable,  that  without
any  encouragement  given  by  him,  a  general  massacre  of  the  Normans  in
England  should  be  then  designed  by  the  English,  when,  by  intermarriages
between  the  two  nations  continually  made,  even  from  the  accession  of  Wil-
liam the  Conqueror,  their  blood  was  so  mixed,  and  so  many  families  in  all
parts  of  England  were  the  offspring  of  both.  The  city  of  London,  where
the  greatest  strength  of  the  English  then  lay,  was  well-affected  to  Stephen,  and
continued  to  be  so  till  his  death.  Upon  the  whole  therefore  I  conjecture,
that  if  any  of  them  were  executed  for  a  conspiracy,  while  the  king  was
abroad,  as  Ordericus  Vitalis  relates,  it  was  not  for  a  general  one  against  all
the  Normans,  but  for  a  more  confined  one,  of  private  resentment  and  revenge
against  some  of  those,  to  whom  he  had  confided  the  administration  of  go-
vernment during  his  absence,  particularly  in  the  northern  and  western  parts
of  the  kingdom,  where  the  conspirators  might  be  favoured  by  the  Scotch  and
the  Welsh."]— Lyttleton,  H.  of  Hen.  IT.,  p.  459.

VOL.  I.  B  B

370  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST. [A.D.  1137.

only  relates  that  the  conspirators  of  1137  had  renewed  the
former  alliance  of  the  patriot  Saxons  with  the  men  of  Wales
and  Scotland,  and  that  they  had  even  the  intention  of  placing
a  Scotsman  at  the  head  of  their  emancipated  kingdom,  per-
haps David,  the  reigning  king  of  Scotland,  son  of  Margaret,
Edgar's  sister.  The  enterprise  failed,  because  a  disclosure,
or  perhaps  mere  hints  of  it,  reached  the  Norman  Richard
Lenoir,  bishop  of  Ely,  under  the  seal  of  confession.  At  this
period,  even  the  strongest  minds  never  exposed  themselves  to
the  probable  danger  of  death  without  having  set  their  con-
sciences in  order;  and  when  the  attendance  of  penitents  was
more  than  usually  numerous,  it  was  an  almost  certain  sign
of  some  political  movement.  In  watching  in  this  way  the
proceedings  of  the  Saxons,  the  clergy  of  Norman  race  ful-
filled the  principal  object  of  their  admission  to  office:  for  by
means  of  insidious  questions  put  to  penitents  overflowing
with  devotion,  it  was  easy  to  discover  the  hidden  thought  of
revolt;  and  rarely  could  the  man  whom  the  priest  thus  in-
terrogated defeat  the  craft  of  him  whom  he  deemed  to  have
the  power  to  bind  and  loose  upon  earth  and  in  heaven.  The
bishop  of  Ely  communicated  his  discovery  to  the  other
bishops  and  superior  agents  of  authority:  but  notwithstand-
ing the  promptitude  of  their  measures,  "  many,  and  these  the
most  important  of  the  conspirators,"  says  the  contemporary
author,  "  had  time  to  fly."  They  withdrew  to  Wales,  and
sought  to  excite  her  population  to  make  war  upon  the  Nor-
mans. The  numbers  who  were  taken,  perished  on  the  gibbet
or  by  other  means.1

This  event  took  place  sixty-six  years  after  the  last  defeat
of  the  insurgents  of  Ely,  and  seventy-two  after  the  battle  of
Hastings.  Whether  the  chroniclers  have  not  told  us  all,  or
whether  after  this  time  the  tie  which  bound  Saxon  to  Saxon,
and  made  of  them  one  people,  could  not  be  renewed,  it  would
certainly  appear  that  no  further  projects  of  deliverance,
formed  by  common  accord  among  all  classes  of  the  Anglo-
Saxon  population,  occurred  in  the  succeeding  centuries.  The
old  English  cry,  Down  with  the  Normans!  no  longer  resounds
in  history;  the  later  insurrections  have  for  their  rallying  cry
terms  indicating  not  national  but  civil  war:  thus,  in  the  four-

1  Id.  V).

A.D.  1137.] VAGUENESS  OP  CHRONICLERS.  371

teenth  century,  the  English  peasants,  in  insurrection,  shouted
No  gentlemen  !l  and  in  the  seventeenth,  the  people  in  town
and  country  cried,  No  more  proud  lords  and  rotten  hearted
bishops!  We  shall  still,  however,  to  a  certain  extent,  dis-
cover in  the  facts  we  are  about  to  relate,  traces  of  the  old
hostility  of  the  two  races.

It  has  now  become  very  uncertain  how  long  the  terms
noble  and  rich  were,  in  the  popular  feelings  of  the  English,
synonymous  with  those  of  usurper  and  foreigner;  the  exact
value  of  the  language  of  the  old  historians  is  too  often  a
problem  for  the  modern  historian.  The  former  addressed
themselves  to  people  who  knew,  respecting  their  own  social
position,  many  secrets  which  have  not  come  down  to  posterity;
they  could  safely,  therefore,  be  vague  and  cautiously  unex-
plicit,  for  they  were  understood  at  half  a  word.  But  for  us,  how
is  it  possible  to  understand  the  old  chroniclers,  if  we  are  not
first  acquainted  with  the  aspect  and  physiognomy  of  the  times
in  which  they  wrote?  And  where  can  we  study  these  times
but  in  the  chronicles  themselves?  This  is  the  vicious  circle
in  which  all  the  moderns  who  seek  to  portray  with  fidelity
the  historic  scenes  of  the  old  world,  and  the  happy  or  miser-
able fate  of  the  generations  that  are  gone,  are  constantly  and
necessarily  turning.  Their  work,  full  of  difficulties,  can
never  produce  a  perfect  fruit;  thanked,  then,  let  them  be,  for
even  the  small  portion  of  truth  which  their  toils  so  painfully
resuscitate.

1  "  When  Adam  delved  and  Eve  span,

Who  was  then  the  gentleman  ?"
(Old  verses  quoted  by  Sharon  Turner,  H.  of  the  Anglo-Normans,  ii.)

APPENDIX.

No.  I.  (page  10.)

A.RYMES  PRYDYN  VAWR.

THE GREAT ARMED CONFEDERACY OF BRITAIN.

Dysgogan  awen  !  dygobryssyn  !

Marannedd  a  meuedd,  a  hedd  genbyn,

A  phennaeth  ehelaetb,  a  fraeth  unbyn;

A,  gwedy  dybedd,  anbedd  ymbob  mehyn.

Gwyr  gwycbyr  yn  trydar  casnar  dengyn  :

Escaud  yn  gnovud  rybyd  dyvin:

Gwaetbyl  gwyr  byt  Gaer  Wair  gwascarawdd  allmyn.

Gwnahawnt  gorvoledd  gwedy  gwehyn,

A  cbymod  Cymry,  a  gwyr  Dulyn,

Gwyddyl  Iwerddon,  Mon,  a  Pbrydyu,

Cernyw  a  Cludwys,  eu  cynnwys  genbyn.

Atporion  vydd  Brytbon  pan  dyorpbyn.

Pell  dysgoganer  amser  dybyddyn

TRANSLATION.

Tbe  muse  foretels  tbe  speedy  coming  to  tbe  people  of  tbe  enjoyment

of  wealth  and  peace.

An  ample  dominion,  and  eloquent  princes :
But,  after  tranquillity,  there  will  be  commotion  in  every  tribe,
Tbe  mighty  men  contending  with  barbarous  wrath  :
The  Scots  resolving  to  make  an  assault ;
The  Germans  scattered  the  disturbers  as  far  as  Caer  Wair.
After  tbe  expulsion  they  make  a  triumph,
And  reconciled  the  Cymry,  the  men  of  Dublin,
The  Gwyddyl  of  Ireland,  Anglesey,  and  Scotland.
Cornwall,  and  the  men  of  Alclwyd,  to  their  reception  amongst  us.
In  tbe  end  the  Britons  will  recover  their  sovereignty.
Long  since  has  it  been  predicted  that  they  shall  become

1  Patriotic  song  of  the  Cambrian  bard  Golyddau,  seventh  century.  Cam-
brian Register  for  the  year  1706,  ii.  554,  et  seq.  Myvyri.au  Arcbaiology  of
Wales,  i.  156.

VOL.  I.  C  C

374  APPENDIX NO.  I.

Teyrnedd,  a  bonedd  eu  gorescyn  :
Gwyr  gogledd,  ynghyntedd  yn  eu  cylchyn,
Ymliervedd  eu  rhagwedd  y  ddisgynnyn.
Dysgogan  Merddin.  Cyvervydd  byn.

Yn  Anber  Peryddon,  meirion  meclideyrn
(A  chyn  ni  bai  unrhaith)  llaith  a  Gwynyn.
O  un  ewyllys  bryd,  ydd  ymvrthvynnyn.
Meirion  eu  trethau,  dycliynnullyn
Yngnedoedd  Cymry  nadd  oedd  a  delyn :
Y  sydd  wr  dyledawg  a  levair  hyn —
"  Ni  ddyfai  a  dalai  yngheithiwed."

Mab  Mair,  mawr  ei  air  !  Pryd  na  tbjrdded
Rhag  pennaeth  Saeson,  ac  eu  hofed  !
Pell  bwynt  cyclimyn  i  Wrtheyrn  Gwynedd !
Ev  gyrhaut  Allmyn  i  alltndedd.
Nis  arhaeddwy  neb,  nis  dioes  daear ;
Ni  wyddynt  py  dreiglynt  ymliob  aber.

Pan  brynasant  Danet,  drwy  filed  calledd.
Gau  Hors  a  Hengys  oedd  yn  eu  rhyssedd,
Eu  cynnydd  bu  y  wrthym  yn  anvonliedd :
Gwedi  rhin  dilein,  ceith  ym  ynver.
Dychymmydd  medddawd  mawr  wirawd  o  vedd !

Princes,  and  the  felicity  of  their  enterprise,

Is  when  the  men  of  the  north,  who  dwell  upon  their  borders,

Shall  make  a  descent  into  the  bowels  of  their  land.

'Tis  Merddin  that  foretels. This  will  come  to  pass.

In  Aber  Peryddon,  the  deputies  of  a  Saxon  king,
(Even  before  there  was  a  public  stipulation)  stirred  up  slaughter.
By  an  unanimous  arbitrary  act,  the  deputies,  with  violence,
Demanded,  and  proceeded  to  collect,  a  tribute.
The  Cymry  resolved,  they  were  under  no  obligation  to  pay :
But  it  was  a  man  of  authority  that  made  this  declaration —
"  He  that  pays  shall  not  go  into  captivity  !"

0,  Son  of  Mary,  whose  word  is  sacred !  woe's  the  time  that  we  sprung

not  forth

To  resist  the  dominion  of  the  Saxons — that  we  cherished  them  !
Far  be  the  cowards  of  Vortigern  of  Gwynedd  !
The  Germans  might  have  been  banished  by  them  from  hence.
No  one  would  have  seized,  no  one  would  have  stripped  the  land ;
But  they  knew  not  those  that  lingered  in  every  harbour.

When  the  Germans  purchased  Thanet  by  imposing  craftiness,
In  which  Horse  and  Hengist  chiefly  excelled,
Their  aggrandizement  was  to  us  a  degradation :
After  concerting  the  plot  of  death,  the  slaves  return.
Reflect  on  the  intoxication  at  the  great  banquet  of  mead !

APPENDIX NO.  I.  375

Dychymmyn  angati  angen  Ha\ver !
Dychymmydd  anaelau,  dagrau  gwragedd,
Dychyfroy  edgyllaeth  peunaeth  lledfer  !
Dychymmydd  tristyd  byd  a  ryher,
Pan  vydd  cechmyn  Danet  an  teyrnedd  !

Gwrthotted  trindawd  dyrnawd  a  bwyller —
Y  ddilein  gwlad  Vrytlion,  a  Saeson  yn  anned !
Poet  cynt  eu  rheges  yn  alltudedd,
Na  myned  Cymry  yn  ddivroedd  !

Mab  mair  mawr  ei  air  !  pryd  nas  terddyn
Cymry,  rhag  goeir  breyr  ag  unbyn  !
Cyneircheid,  cyneilweid,  unrhaith  cwynyii !
Un  gor,  uu  gyngor,  un  eisor  ynt.
Nid  oedd  er  mawred  nas  lleverynt ;
Namyn  er  liepcor  goeir  nas  cymmodynt.
I  Dduw  a  Dewi  ydd  ymorchmynuynt:
Taled  gwrthotted  fled  i  Allmyn !
Gwnawnt  hwy  aueireu  eisiau  trevddyn  ;
Cymry  a  Saeson  cyvervyddyn,
I  amlan  ymdreulaw  ag  ymwrthryn.
O  ddirvawr  vyddinawr  pan  ymbrovyn,
Ag  amallt  lavnawr  a  gawr  a  gryn,

Reflect  on  the  violent  deaths  of  many  guests  !
Reflect  on  the  incurable  wounds — the  tears  of  nations,
When  woeful  mourning  was  roused  by  the  cruel  pagan !
Reflect  on  the  calamitous  lot  that  will  befal  us,
When  the  lurkers  of  Thanet  become  our  princes  !

May  the  Trinity  avert  the  stroke  I  have  mentioned —
That  the  Saxons  should  dwell  in  the  laud  of  the  annihilated  Britons !
May  utter  banishment  be  their  portion,  rather
Than  the  Cymry  should  be  deprived  of  their  country !

O,  Son  of  Mary,  whose  word  is  sacred  !  woe's  the  time
When  the  Cymry  withstood  not  the  base  decrees  of  nobles  and  princes  !
Let  them  be  summoned — let  them  be  called  together — let  them  rise

unanimous !

They  have  one  heart,  one  opinion,  one  common  cause.
They  remained  silent  (not  abashed  by  the  presence  of  the  great;
But  to  withhold  their  consent  from  a  base  decree  which  they  disapproved,
Let  them  now  commit  their  cause  to  God  and  to  Dewi,
Who  shall  render  or  refuse  to  the  Germans  the  reward  of  treachery,
Let  our  foes  be  discordant  for  want  of  a  regulating  chief,
But  let  the  Cymry  and  the  Saxons  meet  in  the  field,
For  the  decision  of  the  confused  conflict,  and  the  strife  of  valour.
When  the  foe  tries  the  fortune  of  the  mighty  leader ;
When  the  grove  trembles  with  the  warrior's  shout :
c  c  2

376  APPENDIX NO.  I.

Ag  am  Gwy  gair  cyvergeir,  y  am  Peurllyn,
A  Human  a  ddaw  a  garw  ddisgyn  ;
A,  mal  balaon,  Saeson  syrthyu.

Cymry  cynyrcbeid  cyfun  Ddullyn.
Blaen  wrth  von,  granwynion,  cyvyng  oeddyn
Meirion,  yngwertli  eu  gan,  yn  eu  creinbyn.
Eu  byddyn  yngwaedlin,  via  eu  cylchyn;
Eraill,  ar  eu  traed,  trwy  goed  Cilbyn,
Trwy  Vwrch  y  Ddinas  foras  foyu.
Ebyvel  beb  ddychwel  i  dir  Prydyn,
Attor,  trwy  law  gyngor,  mal  morlithryn.
Meirion  Caer  Geri  ddivri  cwynant
Ebai  i  ddyfryn  a  bryn  uis  dirdwadantj
I  Aber  Peryddon  ni  mad  ddoetbant  ;
Anaelau  drethau  dyobynullant :
Naw  ugain  canhwr  a  ddisgynnant ;
Mawr  watwar,  namyn  pedwar,  nid  atcorant.
Dyhedd  i  eu  gwragedd  a  ddywedant ;
Eu  crysseu  yu  llawu  creu  aroclbant.

Cymry  cyneircbaie,  enaid  dichwant —
Gwyr  Debau  eu  tretbau  a  amygant
Llym  lliveid  llavuawr,  llwyr  y  lladdant :
Ki  bydd  i  veddyg  mwyn  o'r  a  wnaant.

Wben  tbe  battle  is  joined  for  the  Wye  and  the  land  of  lakes,
The  standard  shall  advance,  and  the  terrible  assault ,
And  tbe  Saxons  shall  drop  like  the  buds  of  the  forest.

The  Cymry  were  strengthened  by  the  social  forces  of  Dublin.
The  van  of  the  deputies  was  confused  with  the  rear;  with  pallid  cheek,

in  utter  perplexity,

They  wallowed  on  the  field,  as  the  reward  of  perfidy ;
While  their  army  lay  around  them  in  a  lake  of  gore  :
And  the  remnant,  on  foot,  through  the  wood  of  Killin,
And  through  Bwrch  y  Ddinas  fled,  in  disorder.
This  war  which  will  return  no  more  to  the  laud  of  Prydyn,
Eolls  away,  at  the  signal,  like  a  billow  on  the  deep.
The  deputies  of  Caer  Geri  dolefully  complain
Of  those  that  will  not  resign  their  claim  to  their  vallies  and  hills.
To  Aber  Peryddon  they  came  in  an  evil  hour,
And  fatal  were  the  tributes  they  collected :
The  descent  was  made  by  eighteen  thousand  men  ;
With  great  disgrace  four  hundred  only  returned.
They  told  a  tale  of  peace  to  their  wives,
Who  smelled  their  garments  full  of  gore.

Let  the  Cymry  be  collected,  regardless  of  life —
The  men  of  the  south  will  defend  themselves  from  paying  tribute;
Keen  let  tbe  swords  be  ground  :  they  will  utterly  destroy ;
The  surgeon  shall  reap  no  advantage  from  what  they  do.

APPENDIX NO.  I.  377

Byddinoedd  Cadwaladyr  cadyr  i  deuant.

Byddyrchavwynt  Gymry. Cad  a  wuiiant —

Llaith,  auolaith  ryddysgyrchasant.

Yn  gorphen  eu  trethau  angati  a  wawdant.

Eraill  ar  osgail  ryphlanhasant :

Oes  oeseu,  eu  tretheu  nid  esgorant.

Ynghoed,  ym  maes,  ym  mryn,
Canhwyll,  yu  nhywyll,  a  gerdd  genhyn —
Cynan  yu  rhagwan  ymhob  disgyn.
Saeson  rliag  Brytlion  gwae  a  genyii.
Cadwaladir  yn  baladir  gan  ei  tmbyn,
Trwy  synwyr,  yn  llwyr  yn  eu  dycblyn,
Pan  syrthwynt  eu  clas  dros  eu  herchwyn
Ynghustudd,  a  cbreu  rbudd  ar  rudd  allmyn.
Yn  gborpben  pob  angrheith,  anrheith  dengyn.
Seis  ar  bynt,  byd  Gaer  Wynt,  cynt  pwy  cynt  tecbyn.

Gwyn  eu  byd  hwy  Cymry,  pan  adroddynt
Rymgwarawd  y  Dvindawd  o'r  travallawd  gynt
Na  cbryned  Dyved  na  Glywyssyg.
Nis  gwuaho  molawd  meirion  mecbdeyrn  ;
Na  chyuborion  Saeson  cefyn  ebryn,
"  Nis  gwuaw,  meddut,  meddawt  geubyu,
Heb  daled  o  dyuged." Maint  a  gefyn

Tbe  migbty  hosts  of  Cadwallader  sball  advance.
Let  tbe  Cymry  exalt  tbemselves. Tbey  sball  make  a  slaugbter, —
Tbe  destruction,  tbe  demolition  of  tbe  foe,  wbicb  tbey  have  freely de-
manded.

In  putting  an  end  to  their  vassalage,  tbey  will  mock  at  deatb.
Strangers  bave  tbey  repeatedly  planted  with  tbeir  shafts  ;
But  never,  no  never  will  they  deliver  a  tribute.

In  tbe  forest,  in  the  field,  in  the  mountain —

A  lamp  in  darkness  shall  attend  them —

Conan,  their  leader  in  every  inroad.

The  Saxons,  before  the  Britons,  sball  sing  the  song  of  woe,

Cadwallader,  a  pillar  amongst  bis  princes,

By  bis  wise  conduct  sball  utterly  dismember  tbe  Germans,

When  they  drop  over  the  limits  of  their  sanctuary

In  misery,  and  the  ruddy  gore  stains  their  brow.

Thus  will  be  put.  an  end  to  their  violence  and  plunder  inhuman,

And  the  Saxons  in  their  way  to  Caerwint  shall  fly  in  the  utmost  disorder.

Thrice  happy  the  Cymry  when  they  shall  relate
How  the  Trinity  delivered  them  from  past  calamity,
Let  not  Dyved  nor  Oliwyssig  be  alarmed,
The  deputies  of  the  king  shall  acquire  no  glory ;
Nor  the  leaders  of  the  Saxons  obtain  forage.
"  We  shall  acquire,"  say  they,  "  no  possession  among  them
Without  paying  the  debt  of  fate." Multitudes  may  they  have

378  APPENDIX NO.  I.

0  ymddiveid  veibion,  ac  eraill  ryn.
Trwy  eiriawl  Dewi  a  seint  Prydyn,
Hyd  frwd  Argelo  fohawr  allan.

Dysgogan  awen. Dyddaw  y  dydd
Pan  ddyfo  i  wys,  i  un  gyssul,
Un  gor,  un  gynghor ;  a  Lloeyr  llosgyd,
Yr  gobaitli  Arreiraw  ar  yn  phrydaw  lliiydd  ;
A  cherdd  arallvro,  a  fo  beunydd.
Mi  wyr  cwdd  ym  dda  cwdda  cwdd  vydd.
Dy  chyrchwynt  gywarth  mal  arth  o  vyuydd,

1  dalu  gwynieith,  gwaed  eu  bennydd,
Atoi  peleidral  dyval  dillydd,

Nid  arbetwy  car  corph  eu  gilydd :

Atoi  pen  gaflaw  heb  emenuydd :

Atoi  gwragedd  gweddw,  a  meirch  gweilydd

Atoi'  r  brein  utlir  rbag  utbur  cedwyr,

A  lliaws  Haw  amhar,  cyn  gwascar  lliiydd.

Cennadau  angau  dycbyvervydd,
Pan  favwynt  galanedd  wrtb  eu  henydd.
Ev  dialawr  ar  werth  ei  dreth  beunydd,
A'r  mynycb  genbadau  a'r  gau  liiydd.

Dygorvu  Cymry  trwy  gyvergyr,
Yn  gywair,  gydair,  gydson,  gydfydd :

Of  fatberless  sons — of  otbers,  a  small  number.

Tbrougb  the  intercession  of  Dewi  and  tbe  Saints  of  Prydyn.

They  shall  fly  out  of  the  land  as  far  as  the  stream  of  Argelo.

The  prophetic  song  declares  the  day  shall  arrive
When  men  shall  assemble,  unanimous  in  council,
With  one  heart,  one  design  ;  and  Lloegyr  shall  be  wasted  with  fire.
Arreiraw  shall  rely  upon  our  torrent-hosts.
The  alien  shall  remove — the  pagan  shall  be  put  to  flight.
And  well  I  know  success  awaits  us,  whatever  chance  befals.
Let  the  Cymry  rush  to  conflict,  like  a  bear  from  the  mountain,
To  revenge  the  treacherous  murder  of  their  ancestors  :
And  in  condensing  the  quick  piercing  spears
Let  not  friends  protect  the  bodies  of  each  other,
Let  them  multiply  the  brainless  skulls  of  German  worthies,
Let  them  multiply  their  widow'd  matrons,  and  steeds  without  riders.
Let  them  multiply  the  greedy  ravens  before  the  valiant  warriors,
And  let  there  be  many  a  maimed  hand  before  our  host  separates.

The  messenger  of  death  shall  meet  the  Saxon  chief,
When  the  carcases  of  his  men  are  heaped  about  him  ;
We  shall  be  revenged  on  the  pagan  for  his  oppressive  tribute,
His  frequent  messages,  and  his  treacherous  sway.

The  Cymry  have  been  victorious  in  the  conflict,

True  to  their  cause,  of  one  voice,  one  language,  one  faith :

APPENDIX NO.  II.  379

Dygorvi  Cymry  i  beri  cad,
A  llwytli  lliaws  gwlad  a  gynhullant,
A  Human  glan  Dewi  a  ddyrchavant,
J  dywysaw  Gwyddyl  drwy  Lieingant :
A  gynheu  Dulyn  genhyn  a  savant,
Pan  ddyfont  i'r  gad  nid  ymwadant.

The  Cymry  will  again  be  victorious,  demanding  the  fight  :

Their  tribes,  the  multitude  of  their  land  will  they  collect,

And  the  sacred  banner  of  Dewi  will  they  display

To  conduct  the  Gwyddil  through  Lieingant :

And  the  leaders  of  Dublin  will  stand  firm  in  our  behalf,

When  they  come  into  the  battle  they  will  not  desert  the  cause.

No.  II.  (page  18.)

DECREE  OF  THE  EMPEBOKS  THEODOSIUS  AND  VALENTINIAN,  KELATIVE

TO  THE  SUBJECTION  OF  THE  BISHOPS  OF  GAUL  TO  THE

POPE  OF  EOME. (A.D.  445.)

Impp.  Theodosius  et  Valentlniamis  AA.  Aetio  v.  inl.  comiti  et  magistro
vtriusque  militice  et  patricio.

Certum  est,  etnobis  etimperio  nostro  unicumesse  praesidium  in  supernae
diTinitatis  favore,  ad  quern  promerendum  praecipue  Christiana  fides,  et  vene-
randa  nobis  religio  suffragatur.  Cum  igitur  sedis  apostolicse  primatum
sancti  Petri  meritum,  qui  princeps  est  episcopalis  coronae,  et  romanae  dig-
nitas  Civitatis,  sacrae  etiam  synodi  firmarit  auctoritas,  ne  quid  praeter  aucto-
ritatem  sedis  istius  inlicitum  prsesumptio  adteutare  nitatur.  Tune  enim
demum  ecclesiarum  pax  ubique  servabitur,  si  rectorem  suuin  agnoscat  uni-
versitas.  Haec  cum  hactentis  inviolabiliter  fuerint  custodita,  Hilarius  Are-
latensis,  sicut  venerabilis  viri  Leonis  romaui  papas  fideli  relatione  comperi-
mus,  contumaci  ausu  inlicita  quasdam  praesumenda  tentavit ;  et  ideo  trans-
alpinas  ecclesias  abominabilis  tumultus  iuvasit ;  quod  recens  maxime  tes-
tatur  exemplum.  Hilarius  enim,  qui  episcopus  Arelatensis  vocatur,  ecclesias
romanae  Urbis  inconsulto  pontifice,  indebitas  sibi  ordinationes  episcoporum
sola  temeritate  usurpans  invasit.  Nam  alios  incompetenter  removit,  iude-
center  alios,  invitis  et  repugnantibus  civibus,  ordinavit.  Qui  quidem,  quo-
niam  non  facile  ab  Ms  qui  non  elegerant  recipiebantur,  manum  sibi  cou-
traliebat  armatam,  et  claustra  murorum,  in  hostilem  morem,  vel  obsidione
cingebat,  vel  aggi-essione  reserabat,  et  ad  sedem  quietis  pacem  praedicaturus
per  bella  ducebat.  His  talibus  et  contra  imperil  majestatem,  et  contra
reverentiam  apostolicae  sedis  admissis,  perordinem  religiosi  viri  Urbis  papae
cognitione  discussis,  certa  in  eum  ex  his,  quae  male  ordiuaverat,  lata  sen-
tentia  est.  Et  erat  quidem  ipsa  sententia  per  Gallias  etiam  sine  imperial!

380  APPENDIX NO.  III.

sanctione  valitura.  Quid  enim  tanti  pontificis  auctoritati  in  ecclesias  non
liceret  ?  Sed  nostram  quoque  praeceptionem  haec  ratio  provocavit,  ne  ulterius
vel  Hilario,  quern  adhuc  episcopum  nuncupari  sola  mansueti  praesulis  per-
mittit  humanitas,  nee  cuiquam  alteri  ecclesiasticis  rebus  arma  miscere,  aut
prasceptis  romani  antistitis  liceat  obviare.  Ausibus  etiam  talibus  fides  et
reverentia  nostri  violatur  imperii.  Nee  hoc  solum,  quod  est  maximi  cri-
minis,  submovemus :  verum,  ne  levis  saltern  inter  ecclesias  turba  nascatur,
vel  in  aliquo  minui  religionis  disciplina  videatur,  hoc  perenni  sanctione  de-
cernimus,  ne  quid  tarn  episcopis  gallicanis,  quam  aliarum  provinciarum,
contra  consuetudinem  veterem  liceat,  sine  viri  venerabilis  papae  Urbis
seternae  auctoritate,  tentare ;  sed  illis  omnibusque  pro  lege  sit,  quidquid
sanxit  vel  sanxerit  apostolicae  sedis  auctoritas.  Ita  ut  quisquis  episcoporum
ad  judicium  romani  antistitis  evocatus  venire  neglexerit,  per  moderatorem
ejusdem  provinciae  adesse  cogatur,  per  omnia  servatis,  quae  divi  parentes
nostri  romanae  ecclesiae  detulerunt,  Aeti  P.  K.  A.  Unde  inlustris  et  prse-
clara  magnificentia  tua,  praesentis  edictalis  legis  axictoritate,  faciet  quae  sunt
superius  statuta  servari,  decem  librarum  auri  mulcta  protinus  exigenda  ab
unoquoque  judice,  qni  passus  fuerit  praecepta  nostra  violari.  Et  manu
divina  Divinitas  te  servet  per  multos  annos,  parens  carissime.  Datum  VIII.
Idus  junias  Romae,  Valentiniauo  Augusto  VI.  Consule. — (Script,  rer.  Gallic,
et  Francic.,  i.  768.)

No.  III.  (page  22.)

CONFERENCE  OF  THE  CATHOLIC  AND  AniAN  BlSHOPS  FOE  THE
CONVERSION  OF  THE  KING  OF  THE  BURGUNDIANS.

Collatio  episcoporum,  prcEsertim  Aviti  Viennensis  coram  Gundebaldo
Burgundionum  rege,  adversus  Arianos.

Providente  Domino  ecclesiae  suae,  et  inspirante  pro  salute  totius  gentis
cor  domni  Remigii,  qui  ubique  altaria  destruebat  idolorum,  et  veram  fidem
potenter  cum  multitudine  signorum  amplificabat,  factum  est  ut  episcopi
plures  non  contradicente  rege  congregarentur,  si  fieri  posset,  ut  Ariani,
qui  religionem  christianam  scindebant,  ad  unitateni  possent  reverti.  Quod
ut  melius  fieret  videreturque  id  non  consilio  accidisse  sed  occasione,  domuus
Stephanus  scripsit  ad  episcopos  multos,  et  invitavit  illos  ad  festivitatem
feancti  Justi  quae  instabat,  in  qua  ob  frequentiam  miraculorum  fiebat  con-
cursus  plurimus  populorum.  Venerunt  itaque  de  Vienna  Avitus,  de  Arelate
JEonius,  de  Valentia...de  Massilia...jus,  et  plures  alii,  omnes  catholicae
professionis  et  laudabilis  vitae  in  Domino.  Qui  omnes  ad  salutationem
regis  cum  domno  Stephano  ad  Sarbiniacum,  ubi  tune  erat,  profecti  sunt.
Erant  quidam  inibi  de  potentioribus  arianis  cum  eo,  qui  si  potuissent,  pro-
hibuissent  nostrorum  accessum  ad  regem,  sed,  Domino  cooperante,  nihil
profecerunt.

Post  salutationem  factam,  domnus  Avitus,  cui,  licet  non  esset  senior  nee
dignitate  nee  setate,  tamen  plurimum  deferebatur,  dixit  ad  regem :  "  Si

APPENDIX NO.  III.  381

Excellentia  vestra  vellet  procurare  pacem  ecclesiae,  parati  sumi:s  fidem
nostram  tarn  clare  demonstrare  esse  secundum  Evangelinm  et  apostolos
quod  nulli  dubium  erit,  quam  retinetis  uon  esse  secundum  Deum  et  eccle-
siam.  Habetis  Lie  de  vestris  qui  sunt  instruct!  in  omnibus  scientiis,
jubeatis  ut  nobiscum  alloquantur,  et  videant  si  possint  respondere  rationibus
nostris,  ut  parati  sumus  respondere  rationibus  eorum.  Ad  quae  rex  re-
spondit :  Si  vestra  fides  est  vera,  quare  episcopi  vestri  non  impediunt
regem  Francorum,  qui  mihi  bellum  indixit,  et  se  cum  inimicis  meis  sociavit,
ut  me  destruerent  ?  Nam  non  est  fides  ubi  est  appetentia  alieui,  sitis  san-
guinis  populorum ;  ostendat  fidem  per  opera  sua."

Tune  humiliter  respondit  domnus  Avitus,  faciem  habeus  angelicam  ut  et
sermonem  :  "  Ignoramus,  o  rex,  quo  consilio,  et  qua  de  causa  rex  Franco-
rum  facit  quod  dicitis  ;  sed  Scriptura  nos  docet  quod  propter  derelictionem
legis  Dei  ssepe  subvertuutur  regna,  et  suscitantur  inimici  omni  ex  parte
illis,  qui  se  inimicos  adversus  Deum  constituunt.  Sed  redite  cum  populo
vestro  ad  legem  Dei,  et  ipse  dabit  pacem  iu  finibus  vestris.  Nam  si  habetis
pacem  cum  illo,  liabebitis  et  cum  ceteris,  et  non  prsevalebunt  inimici  vestri."
Cui  rex  :  "  Nonne  legem  Dei  profiteer  ?  Sed  quia  nolo  tres  Deos,  dicitis
quia  non  profiteer  legem  Dei ;  in  scriptura  sancta  non  legi  plures  esse
Deos,  sed  uiium."  Ad  quee  domuus  Avitus... et  cum  videret  regem  pacifice
audientem,  protelavit  sermonem,  et  dixit :  "  O  si  vellet  sagacitas  vestra
cognoscere  quam  bene  fundata  sit  nostra  fides,  quantum  boni  vobis  et
populo  vestro  inde  proveniret !  Nam  et  coelestis  gloria  vobis  non  deesset,
et  pax  et  abundantia  in  tunibus  vestris.  Sed  vestri  cum  siiit  inimici
Christ!,  super  regnum  vestrum  et  super  populum  iram  desuper  accendunt,
quod,  ut  speramus,  non  esset,  si  velletis  audire  monita  nostra,  et  jubere  ut
vestri  sacerdotes  de  his  nobiscHm  colloquantur  coram  sublimitate  vestra  et
populo  vestro  ;  ut  seiatis  quia  Dominus  Jesus  est  aeterni  Patris  seternus
Filius,  et  utrique  coaeternus  Spiritus  Sanctus,  unus  Deus  benedictus  in
saecula,  simulque  ante  tempora,  et  absque  ullo  initio."

Cum  haec  dixisset,  procidit  ad  pedes  regis,  et  amplectens  eos,  flebat
amare ;  procubuerunt  et  omnes  episcopi  cum  eo.  Unde  rex  valde  commo-
tus  est,  et  inclinans  se  usque  ad  eos,  erexit  domnum  Avitum  cum  ceteris,
quibus  amicabiliter  dicit  se  responsum  daturum  illis  super  petitionibus  illo-
rum.  Quod  est  crastiua,  die  factum.  Nam  rex  per  Sagonam  rediens  ad  ur-
bem,  misit  ad  domnos  Stephanum  et  Avitum,  ut  veuireut  apud  ilium.  Qui
cum  veuissent,  rex  dixit  ad  illos :  "  Habetis  quod  postulatis,  nam  sacer-
dotes uiei  parati  sunt  vobis  ostendere,  quod  nullus  potest  esse  coaeternus  et
consubstautialis  Deo.  Sed  nolo  ut  id  fiat  coram  omui  populo,  ne  turbse
excitentur,  sed  tantum  coram  senatoribus  meis,  et  aliis  quos  eligam,  sicut
vos  eligetis  ex  vestris  quos  volueritis,  sed  non  in  magno  numero,  et  id  fiet
die  crastina  in  hoc  loco."  Quo  dicto  episcopi  salutato  rege  discesserunt,  et
reversi  sunt  ut  omuia  intimarent  aliis  episcopis.  Erat  autem  vigilia  sollem-
nitatis  sancti  Just! :  et  licet  optavissent  quod  hoc  fieret  die  sollemnitatem
sequent!,  noluerunt  tameii  propter  tantum  bouum  amplius  procrastinare.
Sed  unanimiter  decreverunt  apud  S.  Justi  sepulcrum  pernoctare,  ut  illo  in-
tercedente  obtinerent  a  Domino  petitioues  cordis  sui.  Evenit  autem  ut  ea
nocte  cum  lector  secundum  morem  iuciperet  lectionem  a  Moyse,  inciderit
in  ilia  verba  Domini :  Sad  ego  indiirabo  cor  cjus,  et  mulliplicabo  signa  et
vstenta  mea  in  terra  j£(/ypti,  et  non  uudiet  vos.  Deinde  cum  post  psalmos
decantatos  recitaret  ex  prophetis,  occurrerunt  verba  Domini  ad  Esaiam  di-

382  APPENDIX NO.  III.

ceutis  :  Vade  ct  dices  populo  huic  :  Audite  audientes,  et  nolite  intelligere,
et  videte  visionem,  et  nolite  cognoscere.  Exceeca  cor  populi  ejus,  et  avres
ejus  aggrava,  ct  ocitlos  ejus  claude,  ne  forte  videat  oculis  suis,  et  auribvs
audiaty  et  intelligat  suo  corde,  et  convertatitr,  et  sanem  eum.  Cumque  ad-
huc  psalmi  fuissent  decantati,  et  legevet  ex  evangelic,  incidit  in  verba  qui-
bus  Salvator  exprobrat  Judseis  hicrednlitatem :  VCR  tibi  Corrazaim,  vce  tibi
jBetzaida,  quia,  si  in  Tyro  et  in  Sidone  virtutes  facta  fuissent  qu<e  sunt
facto;  in  vobis,jam  dudum  in  cilicio  et  cinere  pcenitcntiam  egissent.  Deni-
que  cum  lectio  fieret  ex  apostolo,  pronuntiata  sunt  verba  ilia :  An  divitias
fionitatis  ejus  et  patientiae  et  longanimitatis  contemnis?  Ignoras  quoniam
sustinentia  Dei  ad  pcenitentiam  te  additcit?  8ecundimi  autem  duritiam
tuani  et  impccnitens  cor  thesaurizas  tibi  iram  in  tempore  ira.  Quod  cum
ab  omnibus  episcopis  observatum  fuisset,  cognoverunt  lectiones  illas  sic  oc-
currisse  volente  Domino,  ut  scirent  induratum  esse  cor  regis,  Deumque  il-
ium in  sua  impcenitentia  relinquere,  ad  ostendendum  divitias  justitioe  suae;
unde  valde  tristes  efiecti,  noctem  in  lacrj-mis  transegerunt.  Non  destitenint
tameu  veritateni  nostrse  religionis  contra  arianos  asserere.

Jgitur  tempore  que  rex  jusserat  conveniunt  omnes  episcopi,  et  simul  ad
regiam  vadunt  cum  multis  sacerdotibus  et  diaconibus,  et  quibusdam  de  ca-
tholicis,  inter  quos  erant  Placidus  et  Lucanus,  qui  eraut  de  prsecipuis  mili-
tiaB  regis.  Venerunt  etiam  ariani  cum  suis.  Cum  ergo  sedissent  coram
rege,  domnus  Avitus  pro  catholicis,  Bonifacius  pro  arianis,  sermonem  ha-
buerunt.  Sed  postquam  domnus  Avitus  proposuit  fidem  nostram  cum  testi-
moniis  sacrse  Scripturce,  ut  erat  alter  Tullius,  et  Dominus  inspirabat  gratiain
omnibus  quae  dicebat ;  tanta  consternatio  cecidit  super  arianos,  et  qui  satis
amicabiliter  audientiam  prtebuerat  Bonifacius,  nihil  omnino  respondere  pos-
set ad  rationes  domni  Aviti,  sed  tantum  qusestiones  difficiles  proponeret,
quibus  videbatur  velle  regem  fugitare.  Sed  cum  ab  Avito  urgeretur  ut  re-
sponderet  ad  antedicta,  promittens  se  etiam  responsurum  ad  ea  quse  propo-
suerat,  lion  jiotuit  respondere  ad  unam  de  rationibus  quse  fuerant  a  domno
Avito  propositse,  neque  ullam  pro  defensione  suse  partis  allegare ;  sed  tan-
tum os  suum  in  couviciis  aperiebat,  et  dicebat  catliolicos  esse  praestigiatores,
et  colere  multitudinem  deorum.  Quod  solum  cum  diceret,  videretque  rex
coufusionem  suse  sectes,  sun-exit  de  sua  sede,  dicens  quod  in  crastinum
responderet  Bonifacius.  Discesserunt  ergo  omnes  episcopi :  et  quia  adhuc
dies  non  erat  inclinata,  iverunt  simul  cum  ceteris  catholicis  ad  basilicam
domni  Justi,  confitentes  Dominum  quoniam  bonus,  et  laudantes  eum,  qui
dederat  illis  talem  victoriam  de  inimicis  suis.

Sequent!  vero  die  iterum  ad  regiam  profecti  cum  his  qui  in  prsecedenti
aderant.  Cumque  ingrederentur,  invenemnt  Aredium,  qui  eis  perstiadere
volebat  ut  regredereutur :  dicebat  enim  quod  tales  rixse  exasperabant  animos
multitudinis,  et  quod  non  poterat  aliquid  boni  ex  eis  provenire.  Sed  dom-
nus Stephanus,  qui  sciebat  ilium  favere  arianis,  ut  gratiam  regis  conse-
queretur,  licet  fidem  nostram  profiteretur,  respondit  ei  quod  non  timendum
erat  ne  rixae  procederent  ex  inquisitione  veritatis,  et  amore  salutis  fratrum
suorum ;  imo  nihil  esse  utilius  ad  juugendos  animos  in  sancta  amicitia,
quam  cognoscere  apud  quos  esset  veritas,  quia  ubicumque  est  amabilis  est,
et  professores  ejus  reddit  amabiles.  Addidit  insuper  omnes  hue  venisse
secundum  jussionem  regis :  contra  quod  responsum  non  est  ausus  Aredius
amplius  resilire.  Ingressi  sunt  ergo ;  et  cum  rex  eos  vidisset,  surrexit  in
occursum  eorum,  mediusque  inter  domnum  Stephanum  et  domuum  Avitum,

APPENDIX  NO.  IV.  383

adhtic  multa  locutus  est  contra  Fraucorum  regem,  quern  dicebat  sollicitare
fratreiu  suum  contra  se.  Sed  cum  responderent  praefati  episcopi  quod  non
esset  melior  via  ineundi  pacem.  quam  concordare  in  fide,  et  operam  suano,
si  gratam  haberet,  pollicereutur  pro  tarn  sancto  feeders  conciliando,  nihil
amplius  locutus  est:  sed  unusquisque  locum,  quern  precedent!  die  tenue-
rat,  occitpavit.

Cum  itaque  sedissent,  domnus  Avitus  tarn  lucide  probavit  quod  catholic!
non  plures  deos  adorabant,  ut  sapientiam  ejus  tarn  catholici  quam  adversarii
cum  stupore  mirarentur .  Id  autem  fecit,  ut  responderet  conviciis  qua?  Boni-
facius  in  nostram  fidem  jecerat.  Postquam  ergo  conticuit,  ut  locum  daret
responsionibus  Bouifacii,  nihil  aliud  potuit  ille  dicere,  quam  quod  prece-
dent! die  fecerat :  et  eonviciis  addens  convicia,  tanto  impetu  clamabat,  ut
prse  raucitate  non  posset  amplius  loqui,  et  quasi  suffocaretur.  Quod  cum  rex
vidisset,  et  satis  diu  exspectasset,  tandem  surrexit  vultu  indignationem  prse-
tendens  contra  Bonifacium.  Tune  donmus  Avitus  dixit  ad  regem :  "  Si
sublimitas  vestra  vellet  j  ubere,  ut  hi  responderent  propositionibus'nostris,  ut
posset  judicare  quaenam  fides  esset  retinenda."  Sed  nihil  respondit,  neque
ceteri  ariani  qui  erant  cum  illo :  adeo  stupefacti  erant  de  doctrina  et  sapien-
tia  domni  Aviti.  Qui  cum  videret  eorum  silentium,  subjunxit :  "  Si  vestri
non  possunt  respondere  rationibus  nostris,  quid  obstat  cur  non  omnes  simul
conveniamus  in  eadem  fide  ?"  Tune  murmurantibus  illis,  de  sua  fide  secu-
rus  in  Domino,  addidit:  "  Si  rationes  nostrae  non  possuut  illos  convincere,
non  dubito  quin  Deus  fidem  nostram  miraculo  confirmet.  Jubeat  sublimitas
vestra  ut  tarn  illiquam  nos  eamus  ad  sepulcrum  hominis  Dei  Justi,  et  inter-
rogemus  ilium  de  iiostra  fide,  similiter  et  Bonifacius  de  sua :  et  Dominus
pronuntiabit  per  os  servi  sui  in  quibus  complaceat."  Rex  attomtus  annuere
videbatur  :  sed  inclamare  cceperunt  ariani,  et  dicere  se  pro  fide  sua  manifes-
tanda  facere  nolle,  ut  fecerat  Saul,  et  ideo  maledictus  fuerat ;  aut  recuiTere
ad  incantationes  et  illicita,  sufiicere  sibi  et  habere  Scripturam,  quoe  sit  for-
tior  omnibus  praestigiis  ;  et  haec  semper  repetentes  et  boautes  potius  quam
vociferantes.  Eex  qui  jam  surrexerat,  accipiens  per  manus  domnum  Ste-
phanum  et  domnum  Avitum,  duxit  eos  usque  ad  cubictilum  suum ;  et  cnm
intraret,  amplexus  est  eos,  dicens  ut  orarent  pro  eo.  Cognoverunt  quidem
illis  perplexitatem  et  angustias  cordis  ejus  ;  sed  quia  Pater  ewm  non  traxe-
rat,  non  potuit  venire  ad  Filium,  ut  veritas  impleretur :  Non  est  volentis,
neque  festinantis,  sed  miserentis  Dei. — (Script,  rer.  Gallic,  et  Francic.  iv.
99-101.)

No.  IV.  (page  44.)

SPEECH  OF  A  NORTHUMBRIAN  CHIEF.
Anglo-Saxon  Text.

Thyslic  me  is  gesewen  Cyning  this  andwarde  lif  manna  on  eorthan  to
withmetenysse  thsere  tide  the  us  uncuth  is.  swa  gelic  swa  thu  a?t  swaesen-
dum  sitte  mid  thinum  ealdormannum  and  thegnum  on  winter  tide.  And  sy
fyr  onaeled  and  thin  heall  gewyrmed.  and  hit  rine  and  sniwe  and  styrme  ute»

384

APPENDIX NO.  V.

Cume  thonne  an  spearwa  arid  hrasdlice  the  bus  tliurh  fleo.  thur  othre  dura
in.  thurh  othre  ut  gewite  :  •  hwet  lie  on  tlia  till  the  he  inne  bith.  ne  bitb
ryned  mid  thy  storme  thaes  wintres.  ac  that  bith  an  eagan  brihtm  and  the
laeste  foec.  ac  he  sona  of  wintra  in  winter  eft  cymeth.  Swa  thonne  this
monna  lit' to  medmyclum  faece  setyweth.  Hwaet  ther  foregange.  oththe  hwaet
thoer  afterfylige  we  ne  cunnon  :  •  Forthon  gif  theos  niwe  lare  owiht  cuthlicre
and  geriseulicre  bringe.  heo  thaes  wirthe  is  that  we  thsere  fyligean  :  •  —
(Saxon  translation  of  Bede's  Ecclesiastical  History,  by  king  Alfred,  lib.  ii.
cap.  xii.)

No.  V.  (page  75.)

NATIONAL  SONG  OF  THE  ANGLO-SAXONS,  ox  THE  VICTORY
OF  BBUNANBUKGH.

Athelstan  king

of  earls  the  lord,

rewarder  of  heroes,

and  his  brother  eke,

Edmund  Atheling

elder  of  ancient  race,

slew

with  the  edge  of  their  swords

the  foe  at  Brumby.

The  sons  of  Edward

their  board-walls  clove,

and  hewed  their  banners

with  the  wrecks  of  their  hammers

So  were  they  taught

by  kindred  zeal,

that  they  at  camp  oft,

'gainst  any  robber

their  land  should  defend,

their  hoards  and  homes.

Pursuing  fell

the  Scottish  clans ;

the  men  of  the  fleet

in  numbers  fell ;

'midst  the  din  of  the  field,

the  warrior  swate.

Since  the  sun  was  up

in  morning  tide,

gigantic  light !

glad  over  grounds,

God's  candle  bright,

eternal  Lord !

"till  the  noble  creature

sat  in  the  western  main  :

there  lay  many

of  the  Northern  heroes

under  a  shower  of  arrows,

shot  over  shields;

and  Scotland's  boast,

a  Scythian  race,

the  mighty  seed  of  Mars  !

with  chosen  troops,

throughout  the  day

the  West  Saxons  fierce

pressed  on  the  loathed  bands  ;

hew'd  down  the  fugitives,

and  scattered  the  rear,

with  strong  mill-sharpen'd  blades.

The  Mercians  too

the  hard  hand-play

spared  not  to  any

of  those  that  with  Anlaf

over  the  briny  deep

in  the  ship's  bosom

sought  this  land

for  the  hardy  fight.

Five  kings  lay

in  the  field  of  battle,

in  bloom  of  youtli

pierced  with  swords.

So  seven  eke

of  the  earls  of  Anlaf ;

and  of  the  ship's  crew

unnumber'd  crowds.

There  was  dispersed

the  little  band

of  hardy  Scots,

the  dread  of  Northern  hordes  ;

APPENDIX NO.  V.

385

urged  to  the  noisy  deep,

by  unrelenting  fate  !

The  king  of  the  fleet

with  his  slender  craft

escaped  with  his  life

on  the  felon  flood  ;

and  so  too  Constantine

the  valiant  chief

returned  to  the  north

in  hasty  flight.

The  hoary  Hildrine

cared  not  to  boast

among  his  kindred.

Here  was  his  remnant

of  relations  and  friends

slain  with  the  sword

in  the  crowded  fight.

His  son  too  he  left

in  the  field  of  battle

mangled  with  wounds,

young  at  the  fight.

The  fair-hair'd  youth

had  no  reason  to  boast

of  the  slaught'riug  strife.

Nor  old  Inwood

and  Anlaf  the  more

with  the  wrecks  of  their  army

could  laugh  and  say

that  they  on  the  field

of  stern  command,

better  workmen  were

in  the  conflict  of  banners,

the  clash  of  spears,

the  meeting  of  heroes,

and  the  rustling  of  weapons,

which  they  on  the  field

of  slaughter  played

with  the  sons  of  Edward.

The  Northmen  sail'd

in  their  nailed  ships,

(Saxon

a  dreary  remnant

on  the  roaring  sea  ;

over  deep  water

Dublin  they  sought,

and  Ireland's  shores

in  great  disgrace.

Such  then  the  brothers

both  together,

king  and  Atheling

sought  their  country,

West- Saxon  land

in  fight  triumphant.

They  left  behind  them

raw  to  devour

the  sallow  kite

the  swarthy  raven

with  horny  nib

and  the  hoarse  vulture

with  the  eagle  sivift

to  consume  his  prey  ft

the  greedy  gos-hawk,

and  that  grey  beast

the  wolf  of  the  weald.

No  slaughter  yet

was  greater  made

e'er  in  this  island,

of  people  slain

before  this  same

with  the  edge  of  the  sword

as  the  books  inform  us

of  the  old  historians

since  hither  came

from  the  eastern  shores

the  Angles  and  Saxons

over  the  broad  sea,

fierce  battle-smiths,

o'ercame  the  Welsh,

most  valiant  earls,

and  gain'd  the  land.

Chronicle,  by  lugram,  London,  1823.)

386  APPENDIX NO.  VI.

No.  VI.  (page  164.)

SONO COMPOSED IN BRITTANY ON  THE DEPARTURE OF  "A  YOUNG

BRETON  FOLLOWER  OF  THE  NORMANS,  AND  ON  ma  SHIPWRECK.*

Etre  parrez  Pouldregat  ha  parrez  Plouare,
Ez-euz  tudjentil  iaouank  o  sevel  eunn  arme
Evit  monet  d'ar  brezel  dindan  mab  ann  Dukes
Deuz  dastumet  kalz  a  dud  euz  a  beb  korn  a  Vreiz  ;

Evit  monet  d'ar  brezel  dreist  ar  mor,  da  Vro-zoz.
Me  meuz  ma  mab  Silvestik  ez-int  ous  he  c'hortoz.
Me  meuz  ma  mab  Silvestik  ha  ne  meuz  ne  met-hen,
A  ia  da  heul  ar  strollad,  ha  gand  ar  varc'heien.

Eunn  noz  e  oann  em'  gwele,  ne  oann  ket  kousket  mad,
Me  gleve  merc'hed  Kerlaz  a  gane  son  ma  mab ;
Ha  me  sevel  em'  c'hoanze  raktal  war  ma  gwele  :
— Otrou  doue  ! Silvestik,  pelec'h  oud-de  breme  ?

Marteze  emoud  onspenn  trich'ant  leo  dious  va  zi
Pe  tolet  barz  ar  mor  braz  d'ar  pesked  da  zibri ;
Mar  kerez  bea  chommet  gant  da  vam  ha  da  dad,
Te  vize  bet  dimezet  breman  dimezet  mad  ;

TRANSLATION.

Between  the  parish  of  Pouldregat  and  the  parish  of  Plouare,8  young
gentlemen  levy  an  army  to  go  to  war,  under  the  orders  of  the  son  of  the
duchess,3  who  has  collected  many  people  from  all  parts  of  Brittany.

To  go  to  war,  beyond  the,  sea,  in  the  land  of  the  Saxons.  I  have  a  son
Silvestik,  whom  they  expect;  I  have  a  son,  an  only  son,  my  Silvestik,  who
departs  with  the  army,  in  the  train  of  the  knights.

One  night  that  I  lay  sleepless  in  my  bed,  I  heard  the  girls  of  Kerlaz
singing  the  song  of  my  son  ;  forthwith  1  sat  up,  and  said — Lord  !  Lord  !
Silvestik,  where  art  thou  now  ?

Peradventure  thou  art  more  than  three  hundred  leagues  hence,  or  perhaps
beneath  the  waters  of  the  great  sea,  the  food  of  fishes.  Hadst  thou  con-
sented to  remain  with  thy  father  and  mother,  thou  wouldst  by  this  time  be
espoused,  well  espoused.

1  Barzas  Breiz,  chants  populaires  de  la  Bretagne,  publics  par  M.  Theo-
dore de  La  Villemarque,  i.,  104.

2  Bay  of  Douarnenez,  Lower  Brittany.

3  Alan  or  Alain  Fergan,  son  of  Havoise,  one  of  the  principal  Breton
chiefs  who  followed  William  the  Conqueror  into  England.

APPENDIX NO.  VI.  387

Te  vize  bet  dimezet  hag  eureujed  timad
D'ar  braoa  plac'h  dious  ar  vro,  Mannaik  Pouldregat,
Da  Manua  da  dousik-koant,  ha  vizez  gen-omp-ni
Ha  gand  da  vugaligou  trouz  gaut-he  kreiz  ann  ti.

Me  em  euz  eur  goulmik  glas  tostik  dious  ma  dor,
Ma  hi  e  doull  ar  garrek  war  benn  ar  roz  o  gor;
Me  stago  dious  hi  gouk  me  stago  eul  lizer
Gant  seiennen  va  cured,  ra  zeui  ma  mab  d'ar  ger.

—  Sav  a-le-se,  va  c'houlmik,  sav  war  da  ziou-askel
Da  c'hout  mar  te  a  nichfe,  mar  te  a  nichfe  pell ;

Da  c'hout  mar  te  a  nichfe  gwall  bell  dreist  ar  mor  braz,
Ha  wifez  mar  d-e  ma  mab,  ma  maber  bxihe  c'hoaz  ?

Da  c'hout  mar  te  a  nichfe  tre-beteg  ann  arme
Ha  gasfez  euz  va  mab  paour  timad  kelou  dime  ?

—  Setti  konlmik  glaz  va  mamm  a  gaue  kreiz  ar  c'hoat,
Me  hi  gwell  erru  d'ann  gwern  me  hi  gwel  oc'h  rezat.

— Eurvad  d'hoc'h  hu,  Silvestik,  eurvad  d'hoc'h,  ha  klevet :

Ama  emeuz  eul  lizer  zo  gan-in  d'hoc'h  kaset.

— Benn  tri  bloaz  hag  eunn  devez  me  erruo  da  vad

Benn  tri  bloaz  hagg  eunn  devez  gant  ma  mamm  ha  ma  zad. —

Achuet  oa  ann  daou  vloaz,  achuet  oa  ann  tri  :
— Kenavo  did,  Silvestik,  ne  az  gwelinu  ket  mui ;
Mar  gaffenn  da  eskern  paour  tolet  gand  ar  mare
Ha  me  ho  dastumefe  hag  ho  briatefe. —

Thou  wouldst  be  espoused  to  the  prettiest  girl  of  these  parts,  to  Man-
nack  of  Pouldregat — Manna,  thy  sweet  fair  one,  and  thou  wouldst  be  with
us,  and  have  little  ones  playing  and  making  a  noise  around  thee.

I  have  there,  outside  my  door,  a  little  white  dove  that  makes  its  nest  in
the  hollow  of  the  rock  on  the  hill :  I  will  fasten  a  letter  to  its  neck,  with
my  wedding  riband,  and  my  son  will  return.

Ascend,  my  little  dove,  ascend  on  thy  light  wings  :  fly,  fly  far  hence,  be-
yond the  great  sea,  to  learn  whether  my  son  is  still  alive.

Fly  to  the  army,  and  bring  me  tidings  of  my  poor  boy.

Ah !  here  cometh  my  mother's  white  dove,  that  used  to  coo  in  the  woods
iiround  our  dwelling ;  it  passes  through  the  masts  of  the  fleet,  it  skims  the
waves.

Blessings  on  thee,  Silvestik— blessings  on  thee  !  Hear  me  :  I  have  here
a  letter  for  thee.

In  three  years  and  a  day  I  will  return :  in  three  years  and  a  day,  I

will  be  once  more  with  my  father  and  my  mother.

Two  years  passed  away :  three  years  passed  away.

Adieu,  Silvestik,  I  shall  never  again  see  thee  !  Oh,  could  I  but  find

some  of  thy  bones  on  the  shore,  oh,  I  would  gather  them  up,  I  would  kiss
them,  and  press  them  to  my  bosom.

388

APPENDIX NO.  VII.

Ne  oa  ket  be  c'homz  gaut-hi,  he  c'homz  peur-lavaret
Pa  skoaz  eul  lestr  a  Vreiz  war  ann  of,  ben  kollet,
Pa  skoaz  eul  lestr  a  vro  penn-da-benu  ben  frezet,
Kollet  gant-ben  be  raonnou  bag  lie  gwernou  breet.

Leun  a  oa  a  dud  varo,  den  na  ouife  lavar,

Na  gout  pe  geit  so  amzer  n'he  deuz  gwelet  auu  douar.

Ha  Silvestik  oa  eno,  bogen  na  mamm  na  tad,

Na  minon,  ne  doa  siouaz,  sarret  be  zaou  lagad  !

Sbe  bad  scarce  uttered  tbe  words,  wben  a  ship  from  Britain  was  cast
upon  tbe  shore,  a  ship  of  the  country,  without  oars,  the  masts  broken,  and
filling  with  water.  It  was  cast  upon  tbe  rocks.

It  was  full  of  dead  men ;  no  one  could  say  bow  long  it  bad  been
straggling  on  the  fierce  waters.  Silvestik  was  among  these  dead  men :
neither  father,  nor  mother,  nor  friend  had  closed  his  eyes  !

-No.  VII.  (page  175.)

POETICAL  NARRATIVE  OF  THE  BATTLE  OF  HASTINGS.

NARRATIVE OF  GEOFFROI  GAIMAR.

V  jors  apres  sont  arivez
Fran9ois  ot  IX  mile  uiefs
A  Hastinges  desur  la  mier
Iloec  firent  cbastel  fermer.
Li  rois  Harald,  quant  ceo  oit,
L'evesque  Tared  idonc  saisit
Del  grant  avoir  et  del  hernois
K'il  out  conquis  sur  les  Norreis,
Merleswein  idonc  lessa,
Pur  ost  mander  el  suth  ala,
V  jors  i  mist  al  assembler  ;
Mes  ne  pout  geres  aiiner
Pur  la  grant  gent  ki  ert  oscise
Quant  des  Novels  fist  Dieu  justise.
Tresqu'en  Sutbsexe  Harald  ala
Tieus  come  pout  od  li  mena.
Ses  II  freres  gent  assemblerent,
A  la  bataille  od  lui  alerent,
Li  uns  fut  Gerard,  1'autre  Les  wine,

Centre  la  gent  de  ultre  marine.
Quant  les  escbeles  furent  rengees
Et  de  ferir  apparaillees,
Mult  i  out  genz  d'ambes  douz  par/
De  bardement  semblent  leoparz.
Un  des  Franfois  done  se  hasta,
Devant  les  autres  chevaucha.
Talifer  ert  cil  appellez,
Juglere  hardi  esteit  assez,
Armes  avoit  et  bon  cheval,
Si  ert  bardiz  et  noble  vassal.
Devant  les  autres  cil  se  mist,
Devant  Englois  merveilles  fist.
Sa  lance  prist  par  le  tuet
i  Si  com  ceo  fust  un  bastonet,
Encontre  mont  halt  1'eugetta
Et  par  le  fer  receue  1'a.
Ill  fois  issi  getta  sa  lauce,
La  qtiarte  foiz  puis  s'avance,

Chronique  de  Geoffroi  Gaimar;  Chroniques  Anglo-Nonnandes,  i.  6 — 1.1.

APPENDIX NO.  VII.

389

Entre  les  Englois  la  laun^a,
Parmi  le  cors  un  en  navera,
Puist  trest  s'espee,  arere  vint
Et  getta  1'espee,  qu'il  tint,
Encontre  mont  liaut  le  receit.
L'un  dit  a  1'antre,  qi  ceo  veit,
Que  ceo  estoit  enchantement.
(Jil  se  fieri  devant  la  gent
Quant  III  foiz  out  gette  1'espee.
Le  cheval  ad  la  goule  baee,
Vers  les  Englois  vint  eslesse,
Auquanz  quident  estre  mange
Pur  le  cheval  q'issi  baout.
Li  jugleour  enpres  venout,
De  1'espee  fiert  un  Engleis,
Le  poign  li  fet  voler  maneis  ;
Un  autre  ferit  taut  cum  il  pout,
Mau  guerdon  le  jour  en  out ;
Car  li  Englois  de  totes  parz
Li  launcent  gavelocs  et  darz,
Si  1'occistrent  et  son  destrer :
Mar  demanda  le  coup  primer.
Apres  ico  Franceis  requerent,
E  li  Englois  eucoutre  fierent.
Assez  i  out  leve  grant  cri.
D'ici  q'au  vespre  ne  failli
Ne  le  feiir  ne  le  launcer.
Mult  i  out  mort  meiut  chevalier.
Ne's  sai  noiner,  ne  ruis  mentir.
Li  Englois  alerent  bien  ferir.

Li  quiens  Alain  de  Bretaigne
Bien  i  ferit  od  sa  compaigne.

j  Gil  i  ferit  come  baron.
Mult  bien  le  fireut  Breton.
Od  le  roi  vint  en  ceste  terre
Pur  lui  aider  de  sa  guerre.
Son  cosin  ert,  de  son  lignage,

j  Geutilbome  de  grant  parage,

j  Le  roi  servit  et  ama,

IEt  il  bien  le  guerdona
Richement  li  donna  el  north
•  Bon  chastel  et  bel  et  fort.
En  plusurs  lius  en  Eugleterre
Li  rois  li  donna  de  sa  terre.
Lunges  la  tint  et  puis  finit,
A  Saiut-Edmon  1'om  1'enfouit.
Ore  ai  dit  de  eel  baron,
Repairer  voil  a  ma  raison.
Lui  et  li  autre  tant  en  firent
Que  la  bataille  bien  venquirent.
Et  ceo  sachez  qu'au  chef  de  tour
Euglois  furent  li  pejour,
Et  tournent  a  fuie  el  pre.
Meiut  cors  fut  de  1'alme  voide.
Harold  remist  et  ses  II  frcres.
Par  eus  sont  morz  et  fiz  et  peres,
Et  multz  autres  des  liguages,
Dont  mult  estoit  granz  damages.
Les  wine  et  Gerard  furent  occis.
Li  quiens  William  out  le  pai's.

Narrative  of  Bcnoit  de  Saiiite-Manrc.1

Pas  sis  jor/,  furent  amassees
Les  fteres  gens  des  granz  contrees,
Dune  chevaucha2  vers  les  Herberges.
La  nuit  que  li  ceus  fu  teniegres,
Soprendre  quidout  1'ost  uormant
En  la  pointe  de  1'ajornant,
Si  qu'el  champ  out  ses  genz  armees
Et  ses  batailles  devisees  ;
Enz  la  mer  out  fait  geiiz  entrer
Por  ceus  prendre,  por  ceus  garder
Qui  de  la  bataille  fuireient
Et  qui  as  nefs  revertireient.
Treis  cenz  en  i  orent  e  plus.

Des  ore  ne  quident  que  li  dux
Lor  puisse  eschaper  ne  seit  pris
Ou  en  la  grant  bataille  occis.
A  ce  vout  mult  li  dux  entendre

i  Que  1'om  n'el  peust  sopprendre.

!  Le  seir  en  I'anuitant  oscur
Que  tuit  en  fusseut  plus  seur,
Lor  out  lor  cors  faiz  toz  armer
Ci  que  le  jor  parut  tot  cler.
Samadis  ert,  ce  sui  lisautz.
Dune  prist  treis  legions  mult  granz,
En  treis  ordres  les  devisa
Et  s'autre  gent  r'apareilla,

1  L'estoire  e  la  geuealogie  des  dux  qui  unt  este  par  ordre  en  Kormendie,
by  Benoit  de  Saiute-Maure. Chrouiques  Anglo-Normandes,  i.  -496.

2  Harold.
VOL.  I.  D  D

APPENDIX NO.  VII.

Archers,  serjanz  e  cens  a  pie.
Quant  tuit  furerit  apareillie,
Si  fu  1'enseigue  despleiee,
Que  1'apostoile  out  enveie  [e]
De  la  sainte  iglise  de  Rome.
Assous,  confes,  e'en  est  la  sume,
Chevaucherent,  lor  escuz  pris,
Centre  lor  mortex  enemis.
Cume  sage,  proz  e  discrez,
Les  out  li  dux  amonestez  ;
Eemembre  lor  lor  grant  honor,
Que  puisqu'il  1'orent  a  seignor
Ne  furent  en  mil  leu  vencuz.
Or  est  li  termes  avenuz
Que  lor  valors  estuet  dobler,"
Creistre  e  pareistre  e  afiner.
Ci  n'a  mestier  hobeleiz,
Mais  od  les  branz  d'acer  forbiz
Deflfendre  les  cors  et  les  vies,
Kar  od  tant  seront  acomplies
Les  granz  paines  e  les  travailles,
Ici  finiront  les  batailles,
Ci  receveront  les  granz  loiers
Qu'aveir  deivent  bons  chevaliers
Les  terres,  les  fieus,  les  honors,
Plus  c'unc  n'orent  lor  anceisors.
Par  lor  valor,  par  lor  proeces,
Auront  des  or  les  gmnz  richesces,
Les  granz  tenures  e  les  fieus  ;
Mais  trop  est  perillos  li  gieus.
Si  la  victoire  n'en  est  lor
Et  se  il  ue  sunt  venqueor,
Mort  sunt,  en  ce  n'a  recovrer ;
Kar  fuie  n'i  aureit  mestier,
Recet  ne  chastel  ne  boschage;
Mais  qui  or  sera  proz  e  sage
S'il  mostre  e  face  apareissant,
E  il  sera  par  tot  aidant
Chadel  et  escuz  et  deffense  ;
E  si  chascun  d'eus  se  porpense,
Si  trovera  c'unc  Engleterre
Ne  vout  gaires  nus  horn  conquerre,
Qu'Engleis  la  peussent  deffendre  ;
E  si  deivent  a  ce  entendre,
Que  mult  poent  estre  seur
Dunt  Heraut  est  vers  lui  parjur.
Faus,  enchaaiz,  vient  al  estor
Od  tote  sa  grant  deslionor  ;
Morz  est,  vencuz  e  trespassez,
E  il  vivront  mais  honorez
Del  grand  conquest  qu'iloc  feront,

Qu'enseinble  od  lui  departiront.
Or  n'i  a  plus  mais  del  ferir
E  de  vassaument  conteuir
Que  la  bataille  aient  vencue
Ainz  que  la  nuit  seit  avenue.

Tant  out  Heraut  ses  genz  menees
Par  poi  qu'as  lor  ne  sunt  jostees,
Tant  out  coureiz  faiz  et  sevrez
Qui  ne  vos  serreint  devisez,
Si  bel  annez,  si  richement,
Que  des  armes  d'or  et  d' argent
Eesplentla  terre  d'environ:
Tant  riche  enseigne  e  tant  penon
I  desi)leieut  a  1'avenir.
Alez  se  sunt  entre-ferir
Si  durement  et  od  tel  ire,
Ja  n'orrez  mais  si  fier  martire.
Assemblez  sunt  d'anbes  deuz  parz,
Volent  saettes,  volent  darz
A  teu  fuison  seuz  plus  tenir,
Riens  n'i  ose  Toil  descovrir.
Li  sun  des  cors,  li  hu,  li  cri,
Sunt  entendu  loing  e  oi.
Od  ire  assembla  eel  ovraigne,
Por  tel  ensangla[n]ta  la  plaigne.
Sempres  assez  en  petit  d'ore  $
Se  corrent  si  morteument  sore,
Od  les  haches  danesches  lees
E  od  les  lances  acerees
S'entre-fierent  si  durement
E  si  tres  aireement,
Que  des  costez  e  des  eschines,
Des  dies,  des  braz  et  des  peitrines
S'en  ist  li  sans  a  fais  vermeilz.
Tant  i  a  d'eus  pasmez  e  freiz
Que  ce  n'est  si  merveille  non.
Comencee  est  la  contengon
Od  les  fiers  glaives  esmoluz
Si  pesine,  dunt  dis  mile  escuz
Sunt  despeciez  e  estroez
Et  les  forz  haubers  effundrez,
E  li  boel  et  li  panceil
Eissi  que  de  cler  sane  vermeil,
Qui  des  cors  lor  chet  et  devale,
En  i  a  ja  deu  mile  pale.
Ne  fu  si  1'ovre  non  a  gas
De  ci  que  oiz  fu  li  fiers  glas
Sor  les  heaumes  des  branz  d'acier;
Mas  la  sorst  dol  e  encombrer
A  ceus  qui  trebuchent  des  seles
Et  qui  Tom  espant  les  cerveles

APPENDIX NO. VII.

391

E  (Jill  Tom  tranche  les  viaires.
Eissi  dura  tant  li  afaires
Que  li  coart  e  li  preisie,
Cil  a  cheval  et  cil  a  pie
D'ambesdeus  pavz  furent  a  un.
Dune  fu  le  chaple  si  coniuii
Ci  qu'a  hore  de  midi
Que  nus  de  tant  espie  forbi,
Ne  de  tant  glaive  reluisant,
Ne  de  tant  espee  trenchant
Ne  de  tante  hache  esmolue,
Ne  de  tante  sajette  ague,
Ne  quide  escbaper  ne  eissir.
Tuit  s'abandonent  a  morir.
A  ce  veient  1'ovre  atorner,
Kar,  ke  en  cors  que  en  sane  cler,
Sunt  en  maiz  jusqu'as  genoilz.
Unc  tante  dolerose  voiz,
Ne  tanz  morteus  orribles  criz
Ne  furent  en  un  jor  oiz.

En  ceste  ovraigne  amere  e  fiere
Orent  Engleis  en  teu  maniere
Avantage,  cumje  vos  dirai :
Dunt  li  nostre  orent  grant  esmai,
Qu'encombros  ert  li  leus  e  baut
Ou  estaient  les  genz  Heraut.
Ce  les  fist  tant  le  jor  tenir
Qu'a  eus  faiseit  mal  avenir.
Se  il  fussent  a  plain  trovez,
Mult  fust  ainceis  li  chans  finez :
Mais  mult  greja  les  noz  le  jor
E  qu'en  igal  n'esteit  1'estor.
A  grant  mescbef  les  requereient
La  u  forment  se  defendeient,
Si  que  je  truis  escrit  senz  faille
Qu'a  senestre  de  la  bataille,
Ou  li  nostre  erent  au  contenz,
Vint  un  morteus  esmaiemenz ;
Kar  ue  sai  par  quel  aventure
Qui  trop  dut  estre  pesme  et  dure
Distrent  e  quiderent  plusor
Que  li  dux  fust  mort  en  1'estor :
C'en  fist  a  mil  les  dos  virer
Por  fuir  tot  dreit  a  la  mer.
A  ce  comen£a  teu  merveile
Qu'autretel  mais  ne  sa  pareille
Ne  fu  oie  en  itant  d'ore,
Qu'Engleis  corent  a  Normanz  sore
Fierent,  derompent  les  a  faiz.
Ici  sorst  dolor  e  esrnais.
N'i  eut  rien  deu  retenir,

Ne  deu  champ  ja  plus  maintenir,
Si  deu  nen  feist  marvaument ;
Mais  quant  li  dux  veit  e  entent
Que  sa  gent  est  si  derompue
E  morte,  e  guenchie,  e  veucue,
Si  d'eus  hastif  conrei  ne  prent,
Dol  a  sis  quers  e  dolor  sent;
Par  un  sol  poi  n'esrage  vifs,
Set  qu'il  creient  qu'il  seit  ocis,
E  por  lui  qu'il  quident  mort
Lor  est  venu  cest  desconfort.
Son  chef  desarnie  en  la  bataille
E  del  heaume  e  de  la  veutaille ;
En  si  perillos  leu  mortal
Ou  fenissent  tant  bon  vassal,
Mostrer  se  vout  apertement
Que  bien  sacbent  certainement
Qu'il  est  toz  seins  e  toz  seurs,
Qu'a  lui  tornera  li  bons  eurs  ;
A  ecus  qui  ja  erent  fuiant
Lor  vait,  1'espee  el  poing,  d'avant.
Si  tres  durement  les  manace
Dunt  guerpi  unt  e  champ  e  place
Que  riens  n'en  saureit  reconter.
Qui  dune  1'oist  en  haut  crier :
"  Qu'avez  oi,  genz  senz  volor  ?
Ne  veez-vos  vostre  seignor
Delivre  e  bien  aidanz  e  sains
E  de  victorie  tot  certains  '.'
Tornez  ariere  au  fereiz,
Kar  ja  les  verreiz  desconfiz."
Dune  viiit  poignant  quens  Eustace
Qui  le  due  effreie  e  manace
E  dit:  "Mora  est,  por  veir,  sens  faille,
S'il  ne  se  part  de  la  bataille ;
Nul  recovrer  n'a  mais  es  suens.''
Ci  pout  grant  houto  aveir  li  quens,
Qu'a  trop  mauvaise  e  a  trop  fole
Fu  puis  tenue  la  parole  ;
E  li  dux  ses  gens  tant  sennone
Que  quei's  e  hardement  lor  done  ;
E  quant  ce  est  que  sain  le  veient,
De  nule  rien  plus  ne  s'effreient,
R'adrecent  les  ches  des  cbevaus  ;
E  li  bons  dux,  li  bons  vassaus
Lor  mostre  la  veie  premiers.
Hoc  par  fu  tens  chevaliers

; E  tel  esforz  i  fist  le  jor

Od  le  trancbant  brant  de  color,
Que  chevaliers  fendi  armez
De  ci  qu'es  uuz  des  baudrez  ;

D2

392

APPENDIX NO.  VII.

Hurte  et  abat,  detrenche  e  tue,
E  sa  grant  gent  se  resvertue,
Trovent  Engleis  desconreez
Qui  ja  s'erent  abandonez
A  enchaucier  e  a  occire.
Done  i  out  d'eus  fait  teu  martire
Si  tres  doleros  e  si  grauz
Que  milliers,  si  cum  sui  lisauz,

I  chairent  que  tuit  finerent,
Idunc  quant  Normaut  recovrerent,
En  sane  erent  vers  les  jenoiz.
Ainz  que  partist  icil  tooilz,

Fu  reis  Heraut  morz  abatuz,
Parmi  les  deus  costez  feruz
De  treis  grauz  lances  acerees
Et  par  le  chef  de  dous  esuees
Qui  entrerent  jusqu'as  oreilles
Que  les  plantes  en  out  vermeilles.
Ne  fu  pas  tost  aperceu  :
Por  ce  se  sunt  mult  puis  tenu
Cil  devers  lui  estrangement.
A  eel  estor,  a  eel  content,
Dunt  ci  vos  di  e  dunt  je  vos  cont,
Robert,  fiz  Roger  de  Baumunt,
Vos  di  qui  fu  tens  chevaliers
Si  proz,  si  hardiz  e  si  fiers
E  si  aidanz  que  ceste  istoire
Me  fait  de  lui  mult  grant  memoire,
Mult  redelivrent  forz  les  places

II  e  ses  gens  queus  Eustaces.
Si  n'a  duree  acer  ni  fer
Vers  Guillaume  le  fiz  Osber,
Qu'Engleis  ateigne  si  garniz
De  la  mort  ne  puisse  estre  fiz.
Chevaliers  i  est  forz  e  durs

E  sage,  e  sofranz,  e  seurs  :
E  li  bons  visquens  de  Toarz
N'i  est  ne  mauvais  ne  coarz,
Qui  est  apele  Eimeris  ;
Mult  i  re^iit  le  jor  grant  pris.
Gauter  Gifart,  savum  de  veir,
Qui  out  le  jor  grant  estoveir,
Qu'abatuz  fu  de  son  destrier
Eissi  que  cine  ceuz  chevalier
Des  lor  1'aveient  ja  outre,
Toz  ert  li  secors  oublie,
Quant  li  bons  dux  de  Normendie,
Od  1'espee  d'acer  forbie,
L'ala  secorre  e  delivrer
E  faire  sempres  remouter,
En  si  fait  lieu  n'iert  rnais  retrait

Que  tel  esforz  cum  ceu  seit  fait
Par  un  prince  qui  au  munt  vive.
Nus  ne  content  ne  nus  n'estrive
Que  le  pris  n'en  fust  suens  le  jor
De  la  bataille  et  de  1'estor  ;
Poi  out  de  mort  crieme  e  regart
A  rescorre  Gauter  Gifart.
N'en  i  r'out  gaires  de  plus  buens
Qui  fu  le  jor  Hues  H  quens,
E  Guillaume  cil  de  Warenne
R'ida  a  conquerre  le  regne
Cum  buens  chevalers  et  hardiz.
Uus  Taillefer,  ce  dit  1'escriz,
I  aveit  mult  grant  pris  conquis  ;
Mais  il  i  fu  morz  e  occis.
Taut  esteit  grant  sis  hardemenz
Qu'en  mi  les  presses  de  lor  genz
Se  colout  autresi  seur
Ctime  s'il  i  fust  clos  de  mur ;
Et  puis  qu'il  out  plaies  mortex,
Puis  i  fu-il  si  proz  e  teus
Que  chevalier  de  mil  parage
N'i  fist  le  jor  d'eus  teu  damage,
Ne's  non  pas  toz,  ne  cil  ne  fist
Que  1'estoire  primes  escrit,
Qui  riche  furent  et  vassal
El  dur  estor  pesme  e  mortal.
Si  vousisse  lor  faiz  escrire,
Trop  lunge  chose  fust  a  dire ;
En  treis  quaers  de  parchemin
N'en  venisse-je  pas  a  fin :
Par  ce  covient  1'ovre  a  finer,
Que  tost  s'ennuient  d'escouter,
Eschis  e  peusis  e  destreiz,
Auquant  plusor  soventes  feiz
Qui  a  neient  volent  entendre
Mieuz  qu'as  buenz  faiz  oir  n'aprendre.

[S]i  des  prime,  quant  fu  jostte,
De  ci  qu'a  haute  relevee
Dura  la  bataille  pleniere,
Que  nus  ne  s'en  fu  traiz  arere ;
Mais  quant  la  chose  fu  seue
E  entre  Engleis  aperceue
Que  Heraut  ert  mort  a  devise
E  le  plus  de  sa  gent  occise
E  sis  frere  e  baron  plusors
N'en  i  atendent  uul  secors  ;
Lus  sunt  e  vain,  e  feible,  e  pale
Del  sane  qui  des  cors  lor  deval  [e]  ;
Veient  sei  rompre  e  depart)  r
E  de  totes  parz  envaVr,

APPENDIX NO.  VII.

393

Veient  lor  genz  oeis  e  morte

E  vient  la  unit  qui's  descouforte,

Veient  Norman/  resvigorer

E  lor  force  creistre  e  dobler,

Veient  n'i  a  deffeusion,

Qui  ne  garni  par  esperou

Ou  par  mucer  on  par  foir

Certains  e  fis  est  demorir;

Virent  les  dos,  n'i  a  retor  ;

Le  deffendre  laissentli  lor.

Tens  fit  lor  perte  e  lors  esmais

Que  derompu  sunt  a  un  fais.

Adouc  i  out  glaive  e  martire

Si  grant  n'el  vos  saureiet  riens  dire,

Cele  occise,  cele  dolor.

Tint  tant  cum  point  I  out  deu  jor,

Ne  la  ntiit'ne  failli  la  paine

Ci  que  parut  le  diemaine,

Ce  que  la  terre  ert  encombrose

E  fossee  e  espinose,

C'ocist  Engleis  plus  e  destruist,

Que  nus  a  peine  s'i  esduist.

La  trebuchoent  e  chaeient,

E  cil  a  pie  les  occieient,

Ne  quid  ne  1'sai  ne  je  ne  His

Ne  en  nule  istoire  ne  1'truis

C'unc  si  granz  genz  fust  mais  jostee,

Si  peri  n'eissi  alee

N'eissi  a  neient  revertue.

Si  fu  la  bataille  vencue

Le  premier  jor  d'oitovre  dreit :

E  si  quide-1'om  bien  e  creit

Qu'a  cine  milliers  furent  esme

Cil  des  lor  qui  furent  trove

Sol  eu  grant  champ  del  fereiz

Quant  qu'il  fussent  desconfiz

Estre  1'occise  et  le  martire

Qui  fu  tute  la  nuit  a  tire.

Au  retorner  parmi  les  morz

Veissiez  esjo'ir  les  noz  ;

Mais  li  dux  est  pleins  de  pitie

De  lermes  a  le  vis  moillie

Quant  ii  esgarde  les  ocis.

S'il  tuit  li  furent  enemis

Morteus  vers  lui  e  vers  les  suens,

Dunt  mult  li  unt  ocis  de  buens,

S'il  tot  deit  aveir  joie  grant

D'aver  si  vencu  un  tirant

Vers  lui  parjur,  faus,  desleie

Totevies  a-il  pietie

Que  li  plus  bel  e  li  meillor

E  Deu  regne  tote  la  flor
Seient  eissi  peri  e  mort
Par  sa  grant  coupe  et  par  son  tort.
Cercbez  fu  sis  cors  e  trovez,
En  plus  de  tresze  leus  nafrez  ;
Kar  devers  lui,  si  cum  je  qui,
N'out  meillor  chevaler  de  lui ;
Mais  Deu  ne  crienst  ne  serement
E  por  ce  1'eniprist  malemeut.
Lez  lui  furent  trove  ocis
Audui  si  frere,  ce  m'est  vis  ;
Ne  se  voudrent  de  lui  partir  :
Toz  treis  les  i  covint  morir.
Eissi  Ten  prent  qui  sieti  desert :
Qui  tot  coveite  le  tot  pert.

Cest  glaive  e  ceste  grant  dolor
Que  li  Normant  unt  fait  des  lor
Aveient  pia9a  deservie
Quant  par  lor  tres  grant  felonie.
Occistrent  auvre  e  tanz
De  ses  bons  compaignons  Normanz,
C'unc  puis  ne  fu  ne  s'baissent
E  qu'a  ce  ne  s'atendissent,
Qu'or  en  unt  fait  a  ceste  feiz
Cumpare  uut  lor  grant  desleiz.
Tant  aveit  lor  mautez  duree
Qu'or  es  fenie  e  trespassee.
Alee  est  tote  lor  vertu
Si  qu'a  neient  sunt  revertu.
Deu  regne  ert  mais  la  seignorie
As  eirs  estraiz  de  Normendie ;
Cunquise  1'unt  cum  chevalier
Au  fer  trenchant  e  al  acier.

Au  bie[nj  matin,  empres  mangier,
A  fait  li  dux  les  morz  cercher.
Mult  i  out  piez  e  mains  e  buille  ;
Mais  les  armes  e  la  despuille
Firent  coillir  et  amasser ;
Dune  fist  toz  les  suens  enterrer.
Li  reis  Heraut  fu  seveliz  ;
E  si  me  retrait  li  escriz
Que  sa  mere  por  lui  aveir
Vout  au  due  donner  grant  aveir ;
Mais  n'en  vout  unques  dener  prendre
Ne  por  riens  nule  le  cors  rendre  ;
Mais  a  un  Guillaume  Malet,
Qui  n'ert  tosel  pas  ne  vaslet,
Mais  chevaliers  durs  et  vaillanz. J
Icist  Ten  fu  tant  depreianz
Qu'il  li  donna  a  enfoir
La  ou  li  vendreit  a  plaisir.

394

APPENDIX NO.  VII.

Narrative  of  Eolert  Wace.1

Li  dus  e  li  soens  plus  n'i  firent,
A  lor  herberges  revevtirent,
Tuit  asseur  e  tuit  certain
D'aveir  la  bataille  a  dernain.
Dune  veissiez  haustes  drecier,
Haubers  e  helmes  afaitier,
Estrieus  e  seles  atorner,
Couires  emplir,  ars  encorder,
Eissi  tot  appareillier
Ke  a  cumbattre  aveit  mestier.
Quant  la  bataille  dut  joster,
La  nuit  avant,  90  oi  conter,
Furent  Engleiz  forment  haitiez,
Mult  riant  e  mult  enveisiez ;
Tote  nuit  mangierent  e  burent,
Unkes  la  nuit  el  lit  ne  jurent.
Mult  les  veissiez  demener,
Treper  e  saillir  e  chanter ;
•JBublie,  crient,  e  weissel
E  laticome  e  drincheheil,
Drinc  Hindrewart  e  Drintome
Drinc  Helf  e  drinc  Tame.
Eissi  se  contindrent  Engleiz,
E  li  Normanz  e  li  Frauceiz
Tote  nuit  firent  oreisons,
E  furent  en  aflicions.
De  lor  pechiez  confez  se  firent,
As  proveires  les  regehirent,
Et  qui  n'en  out  proveires  prez,
A  son  veizin  se  fist  confez.
Por  50  ke  samedi  esteit,
Ke  la  bataille  estre  debveit,
Unt  Normanz  pramis  e  voe,
Si  com  li  cler  1'orent  loe,  ,

Ke  a  cet  jor  mez  s'il  veskeient,
Char  ne  saunc  ne  maingereient.
Giffrei,  eveske  de  Constances,
A  plusors  joint  lor  penitances  ;
Cil  regut  li  confessions,
E  dona  li  beneigons.
Cil  de  Baieues  ensement,
Ki  se  contint  mult  noblement ;
Eveske  fu  de  Baessin,
Odes  aveit  nom,  filz  Herluin,
Frere  li  dus  de  par  lor  mere  ;
Granz  esforz  mena  od  son  frere

De  chevaliers  e  d'altre  gent  ;
Manant  fu  mult  d'or  e  d' argent.
D'oitovre  al  quatorzieme  di
Fut  la  bataille  ke  jo  vos  di.
Li  proveires  par  lor  chapeles,
Ki  esteient  par  1'ost  noveles,
Unt  cele  noit  tote  veillie,
Dex  reclame  e  Dex  preie.
Junes  font  et  aflicions
E  lor  privees  oroisons  ;
Salmes  client  e  misereles,
Letanies  e  kerieles ;
Dex  requierent  e  merci  crient.
Patenostres  e  messes  dient ;
Li  uns  :  Spiritus  Domini,
Li  altres  :  Salus  populi,
Plusors  :  Salve,  sancte  parens,
Ki  aparteneit  a  eel  tens,
Kar  samedi  eel  jor  esteit
A  eel  jor  bien  aparteneit.
Quant  li  messes  furent  chantees,
Ki  bien  matin  furent  finees,
Tuit  li  baron  s'entr'asemlerent,
E  1'duc  viudrent,  si  porpalerent
Ke  treis  cunreis  d'armes  fereient
Et  en  treis  lieus  les  assaldreient.
En  un  tertre  s'estut  li  dus,
De  sa  gent  pout  veir  li  plus  ;
Li  baron  1'unt  avirone,
Hautement  a  a  els  parle  :
"  Mult  vos  deis,  dist-il,  toz  amer,
E  mult  me  pois  en  vos  fier,
Mult  vos  dei  e  voil  mercier
Ke  por  mei  avez  passe  mer,
Estes  venu  en  cele  terre,
Ne  vos  en  puiz,  90  peize  mei,
j  Tel  graces  rendre  comme  jo  dei,
Maiz  quant  jo  porrai,  les  rendrai,
£90  aureiz  ke  jo  aurai :
Se  jo  cunquier,  vos  cunquerrez,
Se  jo  prens  terre,  vos  1'aurez.
|  Maiz  jo  di  bien  veraiement :
j  Jo  ne  vins  mie  solement
j  Por  prendre  90  ke  je  demant,
,'  Maiz  por  vengier  li  felunies,
Li  traisuns,  li  feiz  menties,

Roman  de  Eou  et  des  dues  de  Normandie,  by  Eobert  Wace,  II.  183,  et

seq.

APPENDIX NO. VII.

395

Ke  li  homes  de  cest  pais
Unt  fet  a  notre  gent  toz  dis.
Mult  unt  fet  mal  a  mes  parenz ;
Mult  eii  unt  fet  a  altres  gens ;
Par  traisun  font  kank'  il  font,
Ja  altrement  mal  ne  feront.
La  nuit  de  feste  saint  Bri9un
Firent  orrible  traisun,
Bes  Daneiz  firent  grant  dolor,
Toz  les  ocistrent  en  un  jor.
Ne  kuid  mie  ke  pechie  seit
D'ocire  gent  ki  miex  ne  creit :
Ensemle  od  els  mangle  aveient,
E  en  dormant  les  ocieient ;
D'Alwered  avez  bien  oi
Come  Guigne  mult  le  trai :
Salua  li,  poiz  cil  beisa,
Ensemle  od  li  but  e  menga,
Poiz  le  trai,  prist  e  lia,
E  a  felun  rei  le  livra,
Ki  en  lisle  d'Eli  le  mist,
Les  oils  li  creva,  puiy  1'ocist.
A  Gedefort  fist  toz  mener
Cels  de  Normeudie  e  diesmer:
Et  quant  la  diesme  fu  partie,
Oez  com  faite  felonie,
Por  90  ke  trop  grant  li  sembla,
La  diesme  de  rechief  diesma,
Teles  felunies  e  plusors
K'il  unt  fete  a  nos  ancessors
Et  a  nos  amis  ensement,
Ki  se  contindrent  noblement,
Se  Dex  plaist  nos  les  vengerou,
Et  kant  nos  veincu  les  aron,  j
Ke  nos  feron  legi&remeut,
Lor  or  aron  e  lor  argent,
E  lor  aveir  done  plente  ont,
E  li  maneirs  ki  riches  sont.
En  tot  li  mond  n'a  altretant
De  si  fort  gent  ne  si  vaillant
Come  vos  estes  asemblez  ;
Vos  estes  toz  vassals  provez."
— E  cil  comencent  a  crier:
"  Ja  n'en  verrez  un  coarder,
Nus  n'en  a  de  morir  poor,
Se  mestier  est  por  vostre  amor."
— II  lor  repont :  "  Les  vos  merciz,
Por  Dex,  ne  seiez  esbahiz,
Ferez  les  bien  al  comencier ;
N'entendez  mie  a  gaainguer ;
Li  gaain  nos  iert  tot  comun ;

A  plente  en  ara  chescuu ;

Vos  ne  porreiz  mie  garir

Por  estre  en  paiz  ne  por  fuir,

Ja  Engleiz  Normanz  n'ameront

Ne  ja  Normanz  n'esparueront ;

Felons  furent  e  felons  sont,

Faus  furent  et  faus  seront.

Ne  fetes  mie  malvaistie,

Kar  ja  n'aront  de  vos  pitie.

Ne  li  co  art  por  bien  fuir,

Ne  li  hardi  por  bien  ferir,

N'en  iert  des  Engleiz  plus  preisiez.

Ne  n'en  sera  plus  esparniez.

Fuir  poez  jusk'a  la  mer.

Vos  ne  poes  avant  aler;

N'i  troverez  ne  nef  ne  pont,

Et  esturmaus  vos  faldrout;

Et  Engleiz  la  vos  ateindront,

Ki  a  honte  vos  ociront.

Plus  vos  morreiz  en  fuiant

Ke  ne  fereiz  en  combatant ;

Quant  vos  par  fuie  ne  garreiz,

Cumbatez  vos  e  si  veincrez.

Jo  ne  dot  pas  de  la  victoire,

Venuz  somes  por  aveir  gloire ;

La  victoire  est  en  notre  main,

Tuit  en  poez  estre  certain."

— A  50  ke  Willame  diseit

Et  encor  plus  dire  voleit,

Vint  Willame  li  filz  Osber,

Son  cheval  tot  covert  de  fer.

— "  Sire,  dist-il,  trop  demoron ;

Armous  nos  tuit,  alou,  alon !"

— Issi  sunt  as  tentes  ale,

Al  miex  k'il  poent  se  sunt  arme.

Li  dus  fu  mult  en  grant  trepeil,

Tuit  perneient  a  li  cunseil

Mult  enorout  toz  li  vassals,

Mult  donout  armes  e  chevals.

Quant  il  s'apareilla  d'armer,

Sun  boen  haubert  fist  demander,

Sor  sez  bras  1'a  uns  hoem  leve,

Devant  li  dus  1'a  aporte.

Maiz  al  lever  1'a  trestourne

Sainz  k'il  ne  fist  90  de  sun  gre :

Sun  chief  a  li  duz  enz  bote,

Preuf  1'aveit  ja  tot  endosse,

Cels  demers  a  devant  torne,

Arriere  1'a  mult  tost  jete ;

Cil  en  fureut  espoente ;

Ki  li  haubert  unt  esgarde.

396

APPENDIX NO.  VII.

— "  Maint  home,  dist-il,  ai  veu  :

Se  issi  li  fust  avemi,

Ja  hui  maiz  armes  ne  portast

Ne  en  hui  maiz  eu  champ  n'entrast,

Mais  unkes  en  sort  ne  crei

Ne  ne  creirai ;  en  Dex  me  fi,

Kar  il  fet  d'el  tot  son  pleisir,

E  90  k'il  velt  fet  avenir.

Unkes  n'amai  sortiseors,

Ne  ne  crei  devineors  :

A  Dam  le  Deu  tut  me  comant,

Ch'a  mon  haubert  u'alez  dotant ;

Li  haubert  ki  fu  trestuvne,

Et  puiz  me  r'est  a  dreit  done

Senefie  la  tresturnee,

De  la  chose  ki  iert  muee.

Li  noin  ki  ert  de  duche

Verreiz  de  due  en  rei  torne ;

Keis  serai  ki  due  ai  este,

N'en  aiez  mie  altre  pense."

— Dune  se  signa,  li  haubert  prist,

Beissa  sun  chief,  dedens  le  mist,

La9a  sun  helme  et  ceint  s'espee,

Ke  un  varlet  out  aportee.

Sun  boen  cheval  fist  demander,

Ne  poeit  Ten  meillor  trover ;

D'Espaiugne  li  out  enveie

Un  reis  par  mult  grant  amitie ;

Armes  ne  presse  ne  dotast

Se  sis  sires  1'esperonast.

Galtier  Giffart  Tout  amene,

Ki  a  Saint-Jame  aveit  este ;

Tendi  sa  main,  li  regues  prist,

Pie  en  estrieu,  desuz  s'asist ;

Li  cheval  poinst  e  porsailli,

Torua  e  point  e  s'esverti.

Li  visquens  de  Toarz  guarda

Comeut  li  dus  armes  porta ;

A  sa  gent  a  entor  sei  dit :

— "  Home  mez  si  bel  arme  ne  vit,

Ki  si  gentement  cbevalchast,

Ne  ki  si  bel  arme  portast

N'a  ki  haubert  si  avenist,

Ne  ki  lance  si  bien  brandist,

Ni  en  cheval  si  bien  seist,

Ki  si  tornast  ne  si  tenist.

Soz  ciel  tel  chevalier  n'en  a

Beau  quiens  et  beau  rei  sera ;

Cumbate  sei  et  si  veincra  ;

Tot  seit  honi  ki  li  faldra."

— Li  dus  fist  chevals  demander,

Plusors  en  fist  ties  Ji  mener,

Chescun  out  a  1'arcon  devaut

Une  espce  bone  pendant ;

Et  cil  ki  li  chevals  nienerent,

Lances  acerees  porterent.

Dune  furent  arme  li  baron,

Li  chevalier  e  li  gueldon,

En  treis  compaignes  se  partirent,

Et  treiz  compaignes  d'armez  firent.

A  chescuue  des  treiz  compaignes

Out  mult  seiguors  a  chevetaignes,

K'il  ne  feissent  coardie

For  perdre  membre  ne  por  vie.

Li  Dus  apela  un  servant,

Sou  go uf anon  fist  traire  avant

Ke  li  pape  li  enveia,

E  cil  le  traist,  cit  le  despleia ;

Li  duz  le  prist,  suz  le  dre9a,

Eaol  de  Conches  apela;

Portez,  dist-il,  mon  gonfanon

Ne  vos  voil  feire  se  dreit  non ;

Par  dreit  e  par  anceissorie

Deivent  estre  de  Normaudie

Vostre  parent  gonfanonuier,

Mult  fureut  tuit  boen  chevalier.

Grant  merci,  dist  Raol,  aiez,

Ke  nostre  dreit  reconoissiez  ;

Maiz  li  gonfanon,  par  ma  fei,

Ne  sera  hui  porte  par  mei.

Hui  vos  claim  quite  cest  servise;

Si  vos  servirai  d' altre  guise,

D'altre  chose  vos  servirai  :

En  la  bataille  od  vos  irai,

Et  as  Engleiz  me  combatrai

Taut  ke  jo  vis  estre  porrai ;

Saciez  ke  ma  main  plus  valdra

Ke  tels  vint  homes  i  aura.

E  li  Dus  guarda  d' altre  part,

Si  apela  Galtier  Giffart ;

Pel  gonfanon,  dist-il,  pernez,

En  la  bataille  le  portez.

Galtier  Giffart  li  respondi:

Sire,  dist-il,  per  Dex  merci,

Veiez  mon  chief  blanc  e  chanu,

Empeiiie  sui  de  ma  vertu,

Ma  vertu  m'est  afebliee.

E  m'aleiue  mult  empeiriee.

L'ensuigne  estuot  a  tel  tenir,

Ki  lone  travail  poisse  soffrir,

E  jo  serai  en  la  bataille  ;

N'aveiz  home  ki  mielx  i  vaille,

APPENDIX NO. VII.

397

Tant  i  kuid  ferir  od  m'espee,
Ke  tot  eii  iert  ensanglautee.
Dune  dist  li  dus,  par  grant  fierte  :
Seiguors,  par  la  resplendor  De,
Vos  me  volez,  90  crei,  trair,
E  a  eel  grand  busuing  faillir.
Sire,  dist  Giffart,  non  feron  ;
Jamez  ne  feron  traison,
Nel'  refus'  mie  par  felonie,
Mai/  jo  ai  grant  chevaierie
De  soldeiers  e  de  mon  fieu ;
Unkes  mez  jo  n'out  si  bon  lieu
De  vosservircomjo  ore  ai.
Or  se  Dex  plaist  vos  servirai ;
Se  niestier  ert,  por  vos  morreie,
For  vostre  cor,  li  mien  metreie.
En  raeie  fei,  90  dist  li  dus.
Jo  vos  amoe,  or  vos  aim'  plus  ;
Se  jo  en  pniz  escai'per  vis,
Mielx  vos  en  sera  mez  toz  dis.
Dune  apela  im  chevalier
Ke  mult  aveit  oi  preisier,
Tosteins  filz  Rou-le-Blauc  out  non
AI  Bee  en  Caux  aveit  meison  ;
Li  gonfanou  li  a  livre
E  cil  Ten  a  sen  bon  gre,
Parfoudement  Ten  a  cline  :
Volentiers  1'a  e  bien  porte
Encor  en  tieneut  quitement
Lor  eritage  lor  parent.
Quitement  en  deivent  aveir
Lor  eritages  tuit  ses  eir.
Willame  sist  sor  son  destrier ;
Venir  a  fet  avant  Rogier
Ke  Ten  dist  de  Montgomeri  :
Forment,  dist-il,  en  vos  me  fi  :
De  cele  part  de  la  ireiz,
De  cele  part  les  assaldreiz,
E  Guillaume,  im  seneschal,
Li  filz  Osber  nn  boen  vassal,
Ensemble  od  vos  chevalehera
Et  ovec  vos  les  assaldra.
Li  Boilogneiz  e  li  Pohiers.
Aureiz  e  toz  mes  soldeiers.
De  1'altre  palt  Alain  Fergaut
Et  Aimeri  li  cumbatant,
Poitevinz  meront  e  Bretons
E  del  Maine  toz  li  barons
E  jo,  od  totes  mes  granz  genz
Et  od  amiz  et  od  pareuz,
Me  cumbatrai  par  la  grant  presse

U  la  bataille  iert  plus  engresse.
Arme  furent  tuit  li  baron
E  li  chevalier  e  li  gueldon.
La  gent  a  pie  fu  bien  armee,
Chescun  porta  arc  et  espee  ;
Sor  lortestes  orent  chapels,
A  lor  piez  liez  lor  panels  ;
Alquanz  unt  bones  coiries,
K'il  unt  a  lor  ventre  lies  ;
Plusors  orent  vestu  gambais,
Couires  orent  ceiz  et  archais.
Chevaliers  ont  haubers  e  branz,
Chances  de  fer,  helmes  luizanz,
Escuz  as  cols,  as  mains  lor  lances  ;
E  tuit  orent  fet  cognoissances,
Ke  Normant  altre  coueust,
Et  k'entreposture  n'eust ;
Ke  Normant  altre  ne  ferist,
Ne  Franceiz  altre  n'oceist.
Cil  a  pie  aloient  avant
Serreement,  lor  ars  portant ;
Chevaliers  emprez  chevalchoent,
Ki  les  archiers  emprez  gardoent.
Cil  a  cheval  et  cil  a  pie,
Si  com  il  orent  comencie
Tindrent  lor  eire  e  lor  compas,
Serreement  lor  petit  pas
Ke  1'un  1'altre  ne  trespassout,
Ne  n'aprismout  ne  n'esloignout ;
Tuit  aloeut  serreement,
E  tuit  aloent  fierement.
D'ambedui  parz  archiers  esteient,
Ki  a  travers  traire  debveient.
Heraut  out  sez  homes  mandez,
Cels  des  chastels  e  des  citez,
Des  ports,  des  viles  e  des  bors,
Contes,  barons  et  vavassors,
Li  vilain  des  viles  aplouent,
Tels  armes  portent  com  ils  trovent,
Machues  portent  e  granz  pels,
Forches  ferrees  e  tinels.
Engleiz  orent  un  champ  porpris  ;
La  fu  Heraut  od  ses  amis
Et  od  li  baronz  del  pa'is,
Ke  il  out  semons  e  requis.
Venuz  furent  delivrement
Cil  de  Lundres  e  cil  de  Kent,
Cil  de  Herfort  e  cil  d'Essesse,
Cil  de  Suree  e  de  Sussesse,
De  Saint  Edmund  e  de  Sufoc,
!  E  de  Norwis  e  de  Norfoc,

APPENDIX NO.  VII.

De  Cantorbiere  e  cle  Stanfort,

E  cil  vindreut  de  Bedefort,

E  cil  ki  simt  de  Hundetone  ;

Venu  sunt  cil  de  Northantone,

D'Eurowic  e  de  Bokinkeham,

De  Bed  et  de  Notinkeham  :

De  Lindesie  et  de  Nichole

Vindrent  qui  sorent  la  parole.

Decha  deverz  soleil  levant

Veissiez  venir  gent  mult  grant

De  Salebiere  e  de  Dorsete

E  de  Bat  e  de  Sumersete  ;

Mult  en  i  vint  deverz  Glocestre,

E  mult  en  vint  de  Wirecestre,

De  Wincestre  e  de  Hontesire

Et  del  conte  de  Brichesire.

Mult  en  vint  d'altres  cuntrees

Ke  nos  n'avon  mie  nomees  ;

Ne  poon  mie  tot  nomer,

Ne  ne  volon  tot  acouter.

Tuit  cil  ki  armes  porter  porent

Ki  la  novele  del  due  sorent,

Alerent  le  terre  desfendre

D'icels  ki  la  voloent  prendre.

D'ultre  li  humbre  n'i  viut  gaires,

Quer  cil  orent  altres  affaires  ;

Daneiz  les  orent  damagiez

E  Tosti  les  out  empiriez.

Heraut  soutke  Normanz  viendreient,

E  ke  par  main  les  assaldreient ;

Un  champ  out  par  matin  porpris

U  il  a  toz  ses  Engleiz  mis  ;

Par  matin  les  fist  toz  anner

Et  la  bataille  conreer,

Et  il  out  armes  et  ator,

Ki  conveneit  a  tel  seignor.

Li  dus,  90  dist,  le  deit  requerre,

Ki  conquerre  velt  Engleterre,

Et  il,  50  dist,  le  deit  attendre,

Ki  la  terre  li  deit  defendre.

A  sa  gent  dist  e  comamla

Et  a  ses  baronz  cunseilla

Ke  tuit  ensemble  se  tenissent

Et  ensemble  se  defendissent,

Quer  se  diloc  se  desparteient,

A  grant  peine  se  rescovreient.

Normanz,  dist-il,  eunt  boen  vassal,

Vaillant  a  pie  et  a  cheval ;

A  cheval  sunt  boen  chevalier

Et  de  cumbatre  costumier  ;

Se  dedenz  noz  poent  eutrer,

Nient  iert  puiz  del  recovrer.

Lungues  lances  nut  et  espees,

Ke  de  lor  terres  unt  aportees,

E  vos  avez  lances  aigiies

Et  granz  gisarmes  esmolues.

Cuntre  vos  armes  ki  bien  taillent

Ne  kuid  les  lor  gaires  ne  vaillent ;

Trenchiez  quant  ke  trenchier  porreiz

Et  ja  mar  rien  espanereiz.

Heraut  out  grant  pople  e  estult,

De  totes  parz  en  i  vint  mult ;

Mais  multitude  petit  vaut

Se  la  virtu  du  ciel  i  faut.

Plus  or  et  plusor  unt  poiz  di

Ke  Heraut  aveit  gent  petit,

Por  90  ke  a  li  mescha'i ;

Maiz  plusors  dient  e  jel  di,

Ke  cuntre  un  home  altre  enveia

La  gent  al  due  poi  foisonna,

Maiz  li  dus  aveit  veirement

Plusors  baronz  e  meillor  gent :

Plente  out  de  boens  chevaliers

E  grant  plente  de  boeus  archiers.

Geldons  Engleiz  haches  portoent,

E  gisarmes  ki  bien  trenchoeut ;

Fet  orent  devant  els  escuz

De  fenestres  e  d'altres  fuz,

Devant  els  les  orent  levez

Come  cleies  joiuz  e  serrez  ;

N'i  lessierent  nule  jointure,

Fet  en  oreut  devaut  closture.

Par  u  Normanz  entr'elz  venist,

Ke  descunfire  les  volsist.

D'escuz  e  d'aiz  s'avironereut,

Issi  desfendre  se  kuiderent;

Et  s'il  se  fussent  bien  tenu,

Ja  ne  fussent  li  jor  veiucu.

Ja  Normant  ne  si  embastist,

Ke  1'alme  a  hunte  ne  perdist,

Fust  par  hache,  fust  par  gisarme,

U  par  machue  u  par  altre  arme.

Corz  haubers  orent  e  petit

E  helmes  de  sor  lor  vestis.

Li  Reis  Heraut  dist  e  fist  dire

E  fist  banir  com  lor  sire

Ke  chescun  tienge  a  tort  son  vis

Tot  dreit  contre  lor  anemis  ;

Nus  ne  tort  de  la  u  il  est,

E  ki  viendra  la  les  truis  prest :

Ke  ke  Normant  el  altre  face,

Chescun  defende  bien  sa  place.

APPENDIX NO.  VII.

399

Dune  rova  eels  de  Kent  aler

La  u  Normanz  durent  joster,

Kar  90  dient  ke  cil  de  Kent

Deivent  ferir  primierenient ;

U  ke  li  reis  auge  en  estor,

Li  primier  colp  deit  estre  lor.

Cil  de  Lundres,  par  dreite  fei,

Deivent  garder  li  cors  li  Rei,

Tut  entur  li  deiveut  ester,

E  1'estandart  deiveut  garder  ;

Cil  furent  miz  a  1'estandart,

Ke  chescun  le  defent  e  gart.

Quant  Heraut  out  tot  apreste,

E  50  k'il  volt  out  comande,

Emmi  les  Engleiz  est  venu,

Lez  1'esteudart  est  descendu;

Lewine  e  Guert  furent  od  lui ;

Frere  Heraut  furent  andui ;

Asez  out  entur  li  baronz.

Heraut  fu  lez  si  gonfauonz  ;

Li  gonfanou  fu  mult  vaillanz,

D'or  e  de  pierres  reluisanz  ;

Willame  pois  ceste  victoire

Le  fist  porter  a  1'Apostoile,

Por  mostrer  e  metre  en  inemoire

Sun  grant  cunquest  e  sa  grant  gloire.

Engleiz  se  sunt  tenu  serre,

Tuit  de  cumbatre  atalente ;

Un  fosse  unt  d'une  part  fait,

Ki  parmi  la  champaigne  vait.

Entretant  Normanz  aparurent,

D'un  pendant  surstrent  u  il  furent,

D'une  valee  e  d'tm  pendant

Sort  un  cunrei  ki  vint  avant.

Li  reis  Heraut  de  luiug  les  vit,

Guert  apela,  si  li  a  dit  :

Frere,  dist-il,  u  gardes-tu  ?

As-tu  li  dus  qui  vieut  veu  ?

De  cele  gent  ke  jo  rei  la,

La  nostre  gent  mil  mal  n'ara ;

II  a  poi  gent  a  nos  cunquerre,

Mult  ai  grant  gent  en  cele  terre,

Encore  ai  jo  tuz  cumbatauz

Ke  chevaliers  ke  paisanz

Par  quatre  foiz  client  mil  armez.

Par  fei,  dist  Guert,  grant  gent  avez,

Mais  mult  petit  poise  en  bataille

Assemblee  de  vilanaille.

Grant  gent  avez  en  sorquetot,

Mult  creim  Normanz  e  mult  les  dot ;

Tuit  cil  ki  vienent  d'outrenaer

Sunt  mult  a  craindre  e  a  doter.

Bien  sunt  arme,  a  cheval  vunt,

Nos  maisnies  defolerunt.

Mult  unt  lances,  mult  unt  escuz,

Mult  unt  liaubers,  helmes  agttz,

Mult  unt  glaives,  mult  unt  espees,

Ars  e  saetes  barbelees

Les  saetes  suut  mult  isneles,

Mult  plus  tost  vunt  ke  arondeles.

Guert,  dist  Heraut,  ne  t'esmaier,

Dex  nos  pot  Men,  s'il  volt  aidier  :

Ja  par  la  gent  ke  jo  la  vei

Ne  nos  estuet  estre  en  esfrei.

Endementrez  ke  il  parloent

De  celz  Normauz  k'il  esgardoent

Sort  un  altre  cunrei  plus  grant,

Emprez  1' altre  serreement ;

A  une  part  del  champ  tornerent,

E  si  k'as  altres  s'asemblerent.

Heraut  les  vit,  si  les  garda,

Guert  apela,  si  li  mostra  :

Guert,  dit-il,  nos  anemiz  creissent,

Chevaliers  vienent  et  espeissent,

Mult  part  en  vient,  grant  poor  ai  :

Unkes  maiz  taut  ne  m'esmaai,

De  la  bataille  ai  grant  freor,

Mi  cors  en  est  en  grant  poor.

— Heraut,  dist-il,  mal  espleitas

Quant  de  bataille  jor  nomas  ;

(5!  o  peise  mei  ke  cha  venis

E  k'a  Lnndres  ne  remainsis,

U  a  Lundres  u  a  Wincestre.

Mais  ore  est  tart,  ne  pot  maiz  estre.

Sire  frere,  Heraut  a  dit,

Cunseil  ariere  velt  petit ;

Desfendon  nos,  se  nos  poon.

Ne  sai  mez  altre  garison.

Se  tu,  dist  Guert,  a  Lundres  fusses

De  vile  en  vile  aler  peusses,

E  ja  li  dus  ne  te  querist,

Engleiz  dotast  e  tei  cremist

Ariere  alast  u  paix  feist,

Et  tes  regnes  te  remainsist.

Uiikes  creire  ne  me  volsis,

Ne  me  preisa  50  ke  jo  dis  ;

De  la  bataille  jor  meis

Et  a  eel  jor  terme  asseis,

Et  de  tou  gre  si  le  quesis.

Guert,  dist  Heraut,  por  bien  le  fis ;

Jor  li  assis  a  samedi,

Por  £0  ke  samedi  naski  ;

400

APPENDIX NO.  VII.

Ma  mere  dire  me  soleit

Ke  a  eel  jor  bien  m'aviendreit.

Fol  est,  dist  Guert,  ki  en  sort  creit,

Ja  mil  prudhoem  ere  ire  n'i  deit,

Nul  prudhoejn  ne  deit  creire  en  sort.

A  son  jor  a  chescun  sa  mort ;

Tu  dis  ke  samedis  naskis,

A  eel  jor  pos  estre  occis.

Ataut  est  sorse  une  cumpaigne

Ki  covri  tute  la  champaigne  ;

La  fu  li  goufanon  levez,

Ki  de  Borne  fu  aportez  ;

Joste  Pensuigne  ala  li  dus  :

La  fu  li  mielx,  la  fu  li  plus,

La  furent  li  boen  clievalier,

Li  boen  vassal,  li  boen  guerrier  ;

La  furent  li  gentil  baron,

Li  boen  arcbier,  li  boen  geldou,

Ki  debveient  li  dus  garder,

Et  entur  li  debveient  aler.

Li  garcbon  e  1'altre  frapaille  ;

Ki  mestier  n'orent  en  bataille,

Ki  le  menu  berneiz  garderent,

De  verz  un  teltre  s'en  tornerent.  .

Li  proveire  e  li  ordone

En  som  un  tertre  sunt  monte

Por  Dex  preier  et  por  orer,

E  por  la  bataille  esgarder.

Heraut  vit  Willame  venir,

E  li  cbams  vit  d'armes  covrir,

E  vit  Normanz  en  treiz  partir,

Ki  de  treiz  parz  voldrent  ferir :

Ne  sai  kels  deie  plus  doter,

A  paine  pout  itaut  parler :

Nos  somes,  dist-il,  mal  bailli,

Mult  criem  ke  nos  scions  honi.

Li  quens  de  Flandres  m'a  trai ;

Mult  fis  ke  fol  ke  jel'  crei,

Kar  par  sou  brief  m'aveit  mande,

E  par  messaige  esseure

Ke  Willame  ne  porreit  mie

Aveir  si  grant  chevaleiie  ;

Por  90,  dist-il,  me  suiz  targiez,

Ke  me  suis  tant  poi  porchaciez  ;

^o  peise  me  ke  ai  si  fait,

Sun  frere  Guert  a  sei  a  trait,

Miz  se  sunt  juste  1'estandart ;

Chescun  prie  ke  Dex  le  gart.

Envirun  els  lor  parenz  furent

E  li  Baron  ke  il  conurent ;

Toz  les  unt  preie  de  bien  faire.

Nus  ne  s'en  pot  d'iloc  retraire ;
Chescun  out  son  haubert  vestu,
Espee  ceinte,  el  col  1'escu  ;
Granz  baches  tindrent  en  lor  cols.
Dune  il  kuident  ferir  granz  cols.
A  pie  furent  serreement,
Mult  se  coutindrent  fierement ;
Maiz  s'il  seussent  deviner
Mult  deussent  plaindre  e  plorer
Por  la  dolorose  advanture,
Ki  lor  avint  mult  male  e  dure.
Olicrosse  sovent  crioent
E  Godemite  reclamoent ;
Olicrosse  est  en  engleiz
Ke  Sainte  Croix  est  en  franceiz,
E  Godemite  altretant
Com  en  frenceiz  Dex  tot  poissant.
Normanz  orent  treiz  cumpaignies
Por  assaillir  en  treiz  parties  ;
En  treiz  cumpaignes  se  partirent,
E  treiz  cumpaignes  d'armes  firent.
Li  primiers  e  li  secr.nd  vint,
E  poiz  li  tiers  ki  plus  grant  tint :
CjO  fu  li  dus  ovec  sa  gent,
Tuit  ale-rent  hardiement,
Dez  ke  li  dous  ost  s'entrevirent,
Grant  noise  e  grant  temulte  firent ;
Mult  oissiez  graisles  soner
E  boisines  e  cors  corner :
Mult  veissiez  gent  porficbier,
Escuz  lever,  lances  drecier,
1  Tendre  lor  ars,  saetes  prendre,
Prez  d'aissaillir,  prez  de  desfendre.
Engleiz  a  estal  se  teneient
E  li  Normanz  toz  terns  veneient.
Quant  il  virent  Normauz  venir
Mult  veissiez  Engleiz  fremir,
Genz  esmover,  ost  estormir ;
Li  uns  rouir,  li  altres  palir;
Armes  seisir,  escuz  lever  ;
Hardiz  saillir,  coarz  trembler.

Taillefer,  ki  mult  bien  caiitout,
Sor  un  clieval  ki  tost  alout,
Devant  li  dus  alout  cantant
De  Karlemaine  e  de  Eollant,
E  d'Oliver  e  des  vassals
Ki  morurent  en  Rencbevals.
Quant  ils  orent  chevalclrie  tant
K'as  Engleis  vindrent  aprismaut :
Sires,  dist  Taillefer,  merci,
Jo  vos  ai  limgement  servi,

APPENDIX NO. VII.

401

Tut  mon  servise  me  debvez  ;

Hui  si  vos  plaist  me  le  reudez.

For  tut  guerredun  vos  requier,

E  si  vos  voil  forment  preier  :

Otreiez  mei,  ke  jo  u'i  faille,

Li  primier  colp  de  la  bataille,

E  li  dns  respout :  Je  1'otrei.

E  Taillefer  point  a  desrei,

Devant  toz  li  altres  se  mist ;

Un  Engleiz  fed,  si  1'ocist ;

De  so/  le  pis,  parmie  la  paiice

Li  fist  passer  ultre  la  lance

A  terre  esteudu  1'abati.

Poiz  trait  1'espee,  altre  feri,

Poiz  a  crie  :  Venez,  venez  :

Ke  fetes  vos  ?  Ferez,  ferez.

Dune  1'unt  Engleiz  avirone  ;

Al  secund  colp  k'il  out  done,

Eis  vos  noise  leve  e  cri,

D'ainbedui  pavs  pople  estormi.

Normanz  a  assaillir  eutendeut,

E  li  Engleiz  bien  se  defendent ;

Li  uns  fierent,  li  altres  botent,

Tant  sunt  hardi  ne  s'eutre  dotent.

Eis  vos  la  bataille  assemblee,

Dune  encore  est  grant  renomee

Mult  oissiez  grant  corneiz

E  de  lances  grant  froisseiz,

De  maclmes  grant  fereiz,

E  d'espees  grant  chapleiz.

A  la  feie  Engleiz  ruserent,

Et  a  la  feie  retornerent,

E  cil  d'ultre  mer  assailleient,

E  bien  sovent  se  retraeient.

Normanz  escrient :  Dex  aie  ;

La  gent  englesclie  : Ut  s'escrie.

Lors  veissiez  entre  serjanz,

Gelde  d'Engleiz  e  de  Normanz,

Granz  barates  e  granz  medlees,

Buz  de  lances  e  colps  d'espees.

Quant Engleiz cheieut, Normanz

crient,

De  paroles  se  cuntralient,
E  mult  sovent  s'entre  defient,
Maiz  ne  sevent  ke  s'entre  dicut ;
Hardiz  fierent,  cuarz  s'esmaient ;
Normanz  dient  k'  Engleiz  abaient,
For  la  parole  k'il  n'entendent.
Cil  erapierent  e  cil  amendent.
Hardiz  fiei-ent,  cuarz  grandissent
Come  hoems  font  ki  escremissent.
A  1' assaillir  Normauz  entendent,

E  li  Engleiz  bien  se  defendent,
Hauberz  percent  et  escuz  fendent,
Granz colps  receivent, granz colps

rendent,

Cil  vunt  avant,  cil  se  retraient :
De  mainte  guise  s'eutre  assaient.

En  la  champaigne  out  un  fosse  ;
Normanz  1'aveient  adosse :
En  belliaut  1'orent  passe,
Ne  1'aveient  mie  esgarde.
Engleiz  unt  tant  Normanz  haste,
E  tant  empeint  e  tant  bote ;
El  fosse  les  unt  fet  ruser.
Chevals  et  homes  jambeter :
Mult  veissiez  homes  tumber,
Li  uns  sor  li  altres  verser,
E  tresbuchier  et  adenter ;
Ne  s'en  poeient  relever.
Des  Engleiz  i  moreit  asez,
Ke  Normanz  unt  od  els  tirez.
En  tut  li  jor  n'out  mie  tant
En  la  bataille  occiz  Normant,
Com  el  fosse  dedenz  perirent,
(Jo  distrent  ki  li  morz  virent.
Vasletz  ki  as  herneiz  esteient,
E  li  herneiz  garder  debveient.
Voldrent  guerpir  tut  li  herneiz,
For  li  damage  des  Franceiz,
K'el  fosse  virent  tresbuchier,
Ki  ne  poeient  redrecier  ;
Forment  furent  espoente,
For  poi  k'il  ne  s'en  sunt  torne  ;
Li  herneiz  voleient  guerpir
Ne  saveient  kel  part  garir.
Quand  Odes  li  boen  corunez,
Ki  de  Baieues  ert  sacrez,
Poinst,  si  lor  dist :  Estez,  estez  ;
Seiez  en  paiz,  ne  vos  movez  ;
N'aiez  poor  de  nule  rien,
Kar  se  Dex  plaist  nos  viencron  bien
Issi  furent  asseure,
Ne  se  sunt  mie  remue.
Odes  revint  puiguaut  ariere
U  la  bataille  esteit  plus  fiere.
Forment  i  a  li  jor  valu,
Un  haubergeon  aveit  vestu,
Desor  line  chemise  blanche,
Le  fut  li  cors,  juste  la  manche  ;
Sor  un  cheval  tot  blanc  seeit,
Tote  la  gent  le  congnoisseit
Un  baston  teneit  en  son  poing.
La  u  veeit  li  grant  besoing,

402

APPENDIX NO. VII.

Faseit  li  chevaliers  toraer,

E  la  les  faseit  arrester :

Sovent  les  faseit  assaillir,

E  sovent  les  faseit  ferir.

Dez  ke  tierce  del  jor  entra,

Ke  la  bataille  comen9a,

De  si  ke  none  trespassa

Fust  si  de  si,  fust  si  de  la,

Ke  nus  ne  sout  lequel  veincreit,

Ne  ki  la  terre  conquerreit.

De  tutes  parz  si  se  teneient,

E  si  sovent  se  cumbateient,

Ke  nus  ne  saveit  deviner

Ki  debveit  1'altre  sormouter.

Normanz  arcbiers  ki  ars  teneintr

As  Engleiz  mult  espez  traeient

Maiz  de  lor  escuz  se  covreient,

Ke  en  char  ferir  ne  sr  poeient ;

Ne  por  viser,  ne  por  bien  traire,

Ne  lor  poeient  nul  mal  faire.

Cunseil  pristrent  ke  halt  traireient ;

Quat  li  saetes  descendreient,

De  sor  lor  testes  dreit  charreient,

Et  as  viaires  les  ferreieut.

Cel  cunseil  ont  li  arcbier  fait,

Sor  li  Engleiz  unt  en  halt  trait ;

Quant  li  saetes  reveneient,

De  sor  les  testes  lor  chaeient,

Chies  e  viaires  lor  pergoent,

Et  a  plusors  les  oilz  crevoeut;

Ne  n'osoent  les  oilz  ovrir,

Ne  lor  viaires  descovrir.

Saetes  plus  espessement

Voloent  ke  pluie  par  vent

Mult  espes  voloeut  saetes

Ke  Engleiz  clamoent  wibetes.

Issi  avint  k'vme  saete,

Ki  deverz  li  ciel  ert  chaete

Feri  Heraut  desus  Toil  dreit,

Ke  1'un  des  oilz  li  a  toleit ;

Et  Heraut  1'a  par  air  traite,

Getee  a  les  mains,  si  1'a  fraite.

Por  li  chief  ki  li  a  dolu

S'est  apuie  sor  son  escu.

Por  90  soleieat  dire  Engleiz,

E  dient  encore  as  Franceiz

Ke  la  saete  fu  bien  traite

Ki  a  Heraut  fu  en  halt  traite,

E  mult  les  mist  en  grant  orgoil,

Ki  al  rei  Heraut  creva  Toil.

Normanz  aperchurent  e  virent

Ke  Engleiz  si  se  desfendireut,

Et  si  sunt  fort  por  els  desfendre,

Peti  poeient  sor  els  prendre.

Priveement  unt  cunseillie,

Et  entr'els  unt  aparaillie

Ke  des  Engleiz  s'esluignereient,

E  de  fuir  semblant  fereient,

Tant  que  Engleiz  les  porsivront

E  par  les  chams  s'espartiront.

Si  les  poeieut  despartir,

Mielx  les  porreient  assaillir,

E  lor  force  sereit  mult  piere,

Si  porreient  mielx  descunfiere.

E  com  ils  1'orent  dit,  si  firent,

E  li  Engleiz  les  parswirent ;

Poi  e  poi  vunt  Normanz  fuiant,

E  li  Engleiz  les  vunt  suiant.

Tant  cum  Normanz  plus  s'esluignio-

rent

E  li  Engleiz  plus  s'aprochierent.
Par  1'esluignement  des  Franceiz
Kuiderent  e  distrent  Engleiz,
Ke  cil  de  France  s'enfneient,
Ne  ja  mez  ne  retornereient.
La  feinte  fuie  les  dechut,
Par  la  fuie  grant  mal  lor  crut ;
Kar  se  il  se  fussent  tenu,
Ke  il  ne  se  fussent  meu,
Mult  se  fussent  bien  desfendu,
A  grant  paine  fussent  veincu ;
Maiz  come  fol  se  despartirent,
Et  come  fol  les  parswirent.
Mult  veissiez  par  grant  veisdie
Retraire  eels  de  Nonnendie;
Lentement  se  vunt  retraiant
Por  fere  Engleiz  venir  avaut.
Normanz  fuient  et  Engleiz  chacent,
Lauces  aloignent,  baches  haucent.
Quant  il  furent  bien  esbaudi,
E  par  la  champaigne  esparti,
Engleiz  les  aloent  gabant
E  de  paroles  leidissant.
Cuarz,  font-il,  mar  i  venistes
Ki  nos  terres  aveir  volsistes
Nostre  terre  aveir  kuidastes.
Folz  fustes  quant  vos  i  entrastes  :
Nonnendie  vos  iert  trop  luing.
N'i  vendrez  mie  a  eel  besuing ;
Nient  iert  mez  d'arriere  aler;
S'a  un  saut  n'i  poez  voler.
Filz  e  fllles  perduz  avez
Se  la  raer  tot  ne  bevez.
Cil  escotoent  e  soffreient

APPENDIX NO. VII.

403

Ne  saveient  ke  il  diseient,

C}o  lor  ert  vis  k'il  glatisseient,

Kar  lor  langage  n'entendeient.

Al  arester  et  al  torner

Ke  Normant  voldrent  recovrer,

Oissiez  baronz  rapeler,

E  Dex  die  en  halt  crier.

Lor  erre  unt  Normanz  repris

Tome  lor  sunt  emmi  le  vis ;

Done  veissiez  Normanz  torner,

E  es  Eugleiz  entremesler ;

Li  uns  li  altres  eiicuntrer,

E  eels  ferir  e  eels  boter ;

Cil  fiert,  cil  faut,  oil  fiiit,  cil  chace,

E  eil  assome,  e  cil  manace  ;

Normanz encuntre Engleiz  s'ares-

tent,

E  de  ferir  Normanz  s'aprestent.
Mult  veissiez  par  plusnrs  places
Beles  fuies  e  beles  cliaces  ;
Grant  fu  la  gent,  la  place  lee,
Estur  espez,  dure  meslee  ;
De  tutes  parz  bien  se  cumbatent,
Granz  sunt  li  colps,  bien  s'entreba-

tent,

Bien  le  faseient  li  Normant,
Quant  uu  Eugleiz  vint  acorant ;
En  sa  cumpaigne  out  client  armez,
De  plusors  annes  atomez,
Hache  noresche  out  mult  bele,
Plus  de  plain  pie  out  1'alemele,
Bien  fu  arme  a  sa  maniere,
Grant  ert  e  fier,  o  bele  cliiere.
En  la  bataille  el  primer  front,
La  u  Normanz  phis  espez  sont,
En  vint  saillant  plus  tost  ke  cers;
Maint  Normant  mit  li  jor  envers
Od  sa  cumpaigne  k'il  aveit,
A  uu  Normaut  s'en  vint  tot  dreit,
Ki  arme  fu  sor  un  destrier ;
Od  la  hache  ki  fu  d'acier
El  helme  ferir  le  kuida,
Maiz  li  colp  ultre  escoloija;
Par  devant  1'arcou  glaceia
La  bache  ki  mult  bien  trencha;
Li  col  del  cheval  en  travers
Colpa  k'a  terre  vint  li  fers,
E  li  clieval  cbai  avaut
Od  tot  son  mestre  a  terre  jus.
Ne  sai  se  cil  le  feri  plus,
Maiz  li  Normanz  ki  li  colp  virent,
A  grant  merveille  s'esbahireut.

L'assalt  aveient  tot  guerpi,

Quant  Rogier  de  Montgomeri

Vint  poignant,  la  lance  beissie  ;

One  ne  leissa  por  la  coignie

K'il  aveit  sus  el  col  levee,

Ki  mult  esteit  lone  enhanstee,

Ke  il  Engleiz  si  ne  ferist,

K'a  la  terre  platir  le  fist ;

Dune  s'ecria :  ferez,  Franceiz  ;

Nostre  est  li  champ  sor  les  Engleiz.

Dune  veissiez  dure  medlee,

Maint  colp  de  lance  e  niaint  d'espee.

E  veissiez  Engleiz  desfendre,

Chevals  tuer  et  escuz  fendre.

Un  soldeier  i  out  de  France

Ki  fu  de  noble  cuntenauce,

Sor  un  cheval  sist  merveillos ;

Dous  Engleiz  vit  mult  orguillos,

Ki  s'esteient  acumpaignie

Por  90  ke  bien  erent  preisie.

Ensemble  debveient  aler,

Li  uns  debveit  1'altre  garder,

En  lor  cols  aveient  levees

Dui  gisarmes  lunges  e  lees  ;

As  Normanz  feseient  granz  mals,

Homes  tuoeut  e  chevals.

Li  soldeier  les  esgarda,

Vi  li  gisarmes,  si  dota;

Son  boen  cheval  perdre  creineit,

Kar  50  ert  li  mielx  k'il  aveit ;

Volentiers  altre  part  tornast,

Se  cuerdise  ne  semblast,

Maiz  tost  fu  en  altre  pense,

Sun  cheval  a  esperune ;

Poinst  li  cheval,  li  frein  lascha

E  li  cheval  tost  le  porta.

Por  la  crieme  des  dous  gisarmes

L'escuz  leva  par  les  enarmes  :

Un  des  Engleiz  feri  tot  dreit,

Od  la  lance  ke  il  teneit,

Sos  li  menton  en  la  petrine ;

Li  fer  passa  parmi  1'eschiue.

Endementrez  ke  il  versa,

Se  lance  chai  e  froissa,

Et  il  a  le  gibet  seisi

Ki  a  sun  destre  bras  pendi ;

L' altre  Engleiz  a  fern  amont

Ke  tot  li  chief  li  casse  e  font.

Rogier  li  viel,  cil  de  Belmont, "

Assalt  Engleiz  el  primier  front,

A  merveilles  pris  en  i  out  :

(O  pert  as  eirs  ki  riches  sont ;

404

APPENDIX NO. VII.

Bien  poet  Ten  saveir  as  plusors,

Ke  il  orent  boens  ancessors,

E  furent  bien  de  lor  seiguors

Ki  lor  donerent  tels  enors.

De  eel  Kogier  en  descendant

Vint  li  lignage  de  Mellant.

Guillame  ke  Ten  dit  Mallet,

Hardiement  entr'els  se  met ;

Od  1'espee  ki  resflambie,

As  Engleiz  rent  dure  escremie  ;

Maiz  son  escu  si  estroerent,

E  son  cheval  soz  li  toerent,

Et  il  meisme  eussent  mort,

Quant  vint  li  sire  de  Montfort

Et  dam  Willame  de  Vez-Pont ;

Od  granz  maisnies  ke  il  ont

Le  rescotrent  hardiement.

Mult  i  perdirent  de  lor  gent ;

Mallet  firent  monter  maneiz

Sor  un  destrier  tot  freiz.

Bien  firent  eel  de  Beessin,

E  li  baronz  de  Costentin,

E  Neel  de  Saint-Salveor

Mult  s'entremet  d'aveir  1'amor

E  li  boen  gre  de  son  seignor ;

Assalt  Engleiz  o  grant  vigor,

Od  la  petrine  du  destrier

En  fist  maint  li  jor  tresbuchier,

Et  od  1'espee  al  redrecier

Veissie'z  bien  baron  aidier.

Grant  p^ris  eif  out  cil  de  Felgieres,

Ki  de  Bretaigne  ont  gent  mult  fieres,

Henri  li  sire  de  Ferrieres,

E  cil  ki  dune  gardout  Tillieres  ;

Od  eels  baronz  grant  gent  s'asemble,

Sor  Engliez  fierent  .tuit  ensemble ;

Morz  est  u  pris  ki  ne  s'en  enible ;

Tote  la  terre  crole  et  tremble.

De  1'altre  part  out  un  Eugleiz

Ki  leidisseit  mult  li  Franceiz  ;

Od  une  bache  mult  trenchant,

Les  alout  mult  euvaissant.

Un  helme  aveit  tot  fait  de  fust,

Ke  kolp  el  cbief  ne  receust ;

A  ses  draz  1' aveit  atachie,

Et  envirun  son  col  lacie,

Un  chevalier  de  Normendie

Vit  li  forfeit  a  1'estoltie

K'il  alout  des  Normanz  faisant ;

Sor  un  cheval  sist  mult  vaillaut ;

Eve  ne  feu  nel'  retenist,

Se  li  sire  bien  le  poinsist ;
Li  chevalier  1'esperuna
E  li  cheval  tost  le  porta.
Sor  li  helme  1'Engleiz  feri,
De  suz  les  oils  li  abati,
Sor  li  viaire  li  pendi
E  li  Engleiz  sa  main  tendi,
Li  helme  voleit  suz  lever,
E  son  viaire  delivrer ;
E  cil  li  a  un  colp  done,
Li  puing  destrc  li  a  colpe,
E  sa  hache  a  terre  chai.
Et  un  Normand  avant  sailli ;
Od  ses  dous  mains  1'a  relevee,
Ke  il  aveit  mult  golosee ;
Maiz  mult  li  out  corte  dure,
K'il  Tout  sempres  cumperee.
Al  beissier  ke  il  faseit
A  la  hache  ke  il  perueit,
Un  Eugleiz  od  une  coignie,
Ke  il  aveit  lungue  emmancliie,
L'a  si  feru  parmi  li  dos
Ke  toz  li  fet  croissir  les  os :
Tote  poet  Ten  veir  1'entraille.
E  li  pomon  e  la  coraille.
Li  chevalier  al  boen  chevsil
S'en  retorua  ke  il  n'out  mal ;
Maiz  un  Engleiz  ad  eucimtre,
Od  li  cheval  1'as  si  hurte,
Ke  mult  tost  1'a  acravente,
Et  od  li  piez  tot  defole.

Li  boen  citean  de  Roem
Etlajovente  de  Caem,
Et  de  Faleise,  e  d'Argentoeu,
E  d'Anisie,  e  de  Matoen  ;
Cil  ki  ert  sire  d'Aubemare,
E  dam  Willame  de  Romare,
E  li  sire  de  Litehare,
E  cil  de  Touke  e  de  la  Mare,
E  li  sire  de  Neauhou,
Et  uu  chevalier  de  Pirou,
Robet  li  sire  de  Belfou,
E  cil  ki  ert  sire  d'Alnou,
Li  chamberlenc  de  Tancharvile,
E  li  sire  d'Estotevile,
Et  Wiesta«e  d'Abevile,
Et  li  sire  de  Magnevile,
Willame  ke  Ten  dist  Crespin,
E  li  sire  de  Saint-Martin,
E  dam  Willame  des  Moslins,
E  cil  ki  ert  sire  des  Pins  ;

APPENDIX NO. VII.

405

Tuit  oil  furent  en  la  bataille  ;
N'i  a  cil  d'els  ki  mult  n'i  vaille.
Un  vassal  de  Grentemesnil
Fu  mult  li  jor  en  grant  peril ;
Kar  sun  cheval  li  tresporta,
For  poi  ke  il  ne  tresbucha
A  un  boissun  k'il  tressailli :
Par  li  regues  le  frein  rompi,
E  li  cheval  sailli  avant,
Vers  les  Engleiz  ala  corant ;
E  li  Engleiz  ki  s'aperchurent,
Hacb.es  levees  li  corurent ;
Maiz  li  cheval  s'espoenta
Ariere  vint,  dune  il  torna.
De  Meaine  li  vieil  Gifrei,
E  de  Bohon  li  vieil  Onfrei,
De  Cartrai  Onfrei  e  Maugier,
Ki  esteit  novel  chevalier  ;
De  Garenes  i  vint  Willeme,
Mult  li  sist  bien  el  chief  li  helme  ;
Et  li  vieil  Hue  de  Gornai,
Ensemle  o  li  sa  gent  de  Brai.
Ot  la  grant  gent  ke  cil  menerent
Mult  en  ocistrent  e  tuerent.
Et  Engerran  de  Laigle  i  vint,
L'escu  el  col,  la  lance  tint,
Sor  Engleiz  fiert  de  grant  air,
Mult  se  peine  del  due  servir ;
Por  terre  qu'il  li  out  pramise
S'entreniist  mult  de  son  servise.
E  li  visquens  cil  de  Toarz
Ne  fu  mie  li  jor  coarz.
D'Avrencin  i  fu  Richarz,
Ensemble  od  li  cil  de  Biarz,
E  li  sire  de  Solignie,
E  li  boteillier  d'Aubiguie,
Cil  de  Vitrie  e  de  Lacie,
De  val  de  Saire  e  de  Tracie,
E  cil  furent  en  un  conrei,
Sor  Engleiz  fierent  demanei  ;
Ne  dotoent  pel  ne  fosse,
Maint  hoem  unt  eel  jor  enverse  :
Maint  boen  cheval  i  unt  tue,
E  d'els  maint  hoem  i  out  nafre.
Hue  li  sire  de  Montfort,
Cil  d'E spine  e  cil  de  Port,
Cil  de  Corcie  e  cil  de  Jort,
I  unt  eel  jor  maint  Engles  mort,
Cil  ki  fu  sire  de  Reviers,
Grant  plente  out  de  chevaliers ;
Cil  i  ferirent  as  primiers,
VOL.  I.

Engleiz  folent  od  li  destriers.
Li  viel  Willame  de  Moion
Out  avec  li  maint  cumpaignon.
De  Cingueleiz  Raol  Teisson
E  li  viel  Rogier  Marmion
S'i  contindrent  come  baron,
Poiz  on  orent  grant  guerredou.
Joste  la  cumpaigne  Neel
Chevalcha  Raol  de  Gael ;
Bret  esteit  e  Bretonz  menout,
Por  terre  serveit  ke  il  out,
Maiz  il  la  tint  asez  petit,
Kar  il  la  forfist,  90  fu  dit.
Des  Biarz  i  fu  avenals,
Des  Mortiers -Hubert  PaiennLs,
Robert  Bertram  ki  esteit  torz,
Mult  i  out  homes  par  li  morz.
Li  archier  du  Val  de  Roil,
Ensemle  od  els  eels  de  B  retail,
A  maint  Eugleiz  creverent  1'oil
Od  li  saetes  acerees
K'il  aveient  od  els  aportees.
Cels  de  Sole  e  eels  d'Oirevnl,
De  Saint  Johan  e  de  Brehal,
Cels  de  Brius  e  celz  de  Home?,
Veissiez  ferir  mult  de  prez  ;
Li  escuz  sor  lor  chies  meteient,
Li  colps  de  baches  receveieut  ;
Mielx  voleient  iloc  morir,
Ke  a  lor  dreit  seignor  faiilir
Cil  de  Saint-Sever  e  de  Caillie,
E  li  sire  de  Semillie  ;
De  Basquevile  i  fu  Muriels,
De  joste  li  cil  de  Praels,
Cil  de  Goviz  e  de  Saintenls,
Del  viez  Molei  e  de  Monceali.
Cil  ki  ert  sire  de  Pacie,
E  li  seneschals  de  Corcie,
Et  un  chevalier  de  Lacie,
Ensemle  o  els  cils  de  Gascie,
E  cil  d'Oillie  e  de  Sacie,
E  li  sire  de  Vaacie,
Del  Torneor  e  de  Praeres,
E  Willame  de  Coiurabieres,
E  Gilbert  li  viel  d'Asnieres,
De  Chaaignes  e  de  Tovnieres,
Li  viel  Luce  de  Bolebec
E  Dam  Richart  ki  tient  Orbe;1,
E  li  sire  de  Bonnesboz,
E  cil  de  Sap  e  cil  de  Gloz,
E  cil  ki  dune  teneit  Tregoz  ;
E  E

406

APPENDIX NO. VII.

Dous  Engleiz  fist  tenir  por  soz;

L'un  od  sa  lance  acraventa,

L'altre  od  s'espee  escervela,

Poinst  li  cheval,  si  retorna,

Si  ke  Engleiz  ne  le  tocha;

E  li  sire  de  Monfichet,

Ki  de  boz  garder  s'entremet ;

L'ancestre  hue  li  Bigot,

Ki  aveit  terre  a  Male  tot

Et  as  Loges  et  a  Chanon ;

Li  dus  soleit  en  sa  maison

Servir  d'une  seneschaucie ;

Mult  out  od  li  grant  cumpaignie  ;

E  fieu  esteit  son  seneschals,

E  mult  esteit  noble  vassals.

Cil  de  corsage  esteit  petiz,

Maiz  mult  esteit  proz  e  hardiz,

E  por  50  as  Engleiz  hurta

Od  la  grant  gent  ke  il  mena.

La  oissiez  noises  c  criz

E  de  lances  grant  froisseiz  ;

Encuntre  Engleiz  furent  as  lices,

De  lor  lances  firent  esclices.

Od  gisarmes  et  od  coignies

Lor  unt  lor  lances  pescies  ;

Et  cil  unt  lor  espees  traites,

Li  lices  unt  totes  fraites,

E  li  Engleis  par  grant  dehait

Se  sunt  a  1'estandart  retrait.

La  esteient  tuit  assemble

Li  meshaignie  e  li  uafre  ;

Dune  point  li  sire  de  La  Haie,

Nus  n'espargne  ne  ne  manaie,

Ne  nus  ne  fiert  k'a  mort  ne  traiei,

Ne  poet  garir  k'il  fet  plaie.

Cil  de  Vitrie  e  d'Urinie,

Cil  de  Monbrai  e  de  Saie

E  li  sire  de  la  Ferte

Maint  Engleiz  unt  acravente ;

Grant  mal  i  firent  li  plusor,

E  mult  i  perdirent  des  lor  ;

Botevilain  e  Trossebot,

Cil  ne  dotent  ne  colp  ne  hot,

Mult  si  firent  eel  jor  d'air

As  colps  recheivre  et  al  ferir.

Willame  Patric  de  la  Lande

Li  reis  Heraut  forment  demende ;

Co  diseit,  se  il  le  veeit,

De  perjure  1'appe'lereit.

A  la  Lande  fu  1'aveit  veu,

E  Heraut  out  iloc  geu

E  par  la  Lande  fu  passez.
Quant  il  fu  al  due  ameuez,
Ki  a  Avrenches  dune  esteit,
Et  en  Bretaigne  aler  debveit.
La  le  fist  li  dus  chevalier,
Armes  e  dras  li  fist  bailler
A  li  et  a  sez  curnpaingnons,
Poiz  1'enveia  sor  li  Bretons.
Patric  fu  lez  li  dus  armez,
E  mult  esteit  de  li  privez,
Mult  i  out  chevaliers  de  Chauz,
Ki  jostes  firent  et  assauz.
Eugleiz  ne  saveient  joster,
Ne  a  cheval  armes  porter ;
Haches  et  gisarmes  teneient,
Avec  tals  armes  se  cumbateient.
Hoem  qui  od  hache  volt  ferir,
Od  sez  dous  mainz  1'estuet  tenir,
Ne  pot  entendre  a  sei  covrir,
S'il  velt  ferir  de  grant  air  ;
Bien  ferir  et  covrir  ensemble
Ne  pot  Ten  faire,  90  me  semble.
Deverz  un  tertre  unt  pris  estal,
Normanz  unt  miz  deverz  li  val.
Normanz  a  pie  e  a  cheval,
Les  assaillirent  comme  vassal.
Dunct  puinst  Hue  de  Mortemer
Od  li  sire  d'Auviler ;
Cil  d'Onebac  e  de  Saint-Cler
Engleiz  firent  mult  enverser.
Robert  ki  fu  filz  Erneis,
La  lance  aluigne,  1'escu  pris,
A  1'estandart  en  vint  puignant ;
De  son  glaive  ki  fu  tranchant
Fiert  un  Engleiz  ki  ert  devant,
Mort  1'abati  de  maintenant,
Poiz  trait  1'espee  demaneiz,
Maint  colp  feri  sor  les  Engleiz.
A  1'estandart  en  alout  dreit,
Por  90  k'abatre  le  voleit,
Maiz  li  Engleiz  1'avironerent,
Od  lor  gisarmes  le  tuerent :
La  fu  trove  quant  il  fu  quis,
Lez  1'estandart  mort  et  occis.
Li  quens  Robert  de  Moretoing
Ne  se  tint  mie  del  due  loing;
Frere  ert  li  dus  de  par  sa  mere,
Grant  aie  fist  a  son  frere.
Li  sire  poinst  de  Herecort,
Sor  un  cheval  ki  mult  tost  cort,
De  kant  k'il  pot  li  dus  secort.

APPENDIX NO. VII.

407

De  Crievecoer  e  de  Driencort

E  li  sire  de  Briencort

Sueient  li  dus  kel  part  k'il  tort.

Cil  de  Oomhrai  e  oil  d'Alnei,

E  ii  sire  de  Fontenei,

De  Robercil  e  del  Molei

Vunt  demandant  Heraut  li  rei.

As  Engleiz  dient :  ca  estez,

U  est  li  reis  ke  vos  serve/,

Ki  a  Guillame  est  parjurez  ?

Morz  est  s'il  pot  estre  trovez,

Altres  barons  i  out  assez,

Ke  jo  n'ai  mie  encor  nomez  ;

Maiz  jo  ne  poiz  a  toz  entendre,

Ne  de  toz  ne  poiz  raisun  rendre  ;

Ne  poiz  de  toz  li  colps  retraire

No  jo  ne  voil  lunge  ovre  faire ;

Ne  sai  nomer  to/  li  barons

Ne  de  toz  dire  li  sornons

De  Normendie  e  de  Bretaigne,

Ke  li  dus  out  en  sa  cumpaigne.

Mult  out  Hansels  et  Angevins

E  Tuarceiz  e  Poitevins

E  de  Pontif  e  de  Boloigne.

Grant  ert  la  gent,  grant  la  busoigne ;

De  mainte  terre  out  soldeiers,

Cels  por  terre,  eels  por  deniers.

Li  dus  Willame  se  cumbat,
En  la  greiguur  presse  s'embat,
Mult  en  abat,  n'est  ki  rescoe ;
Bien  pert  ke  la  busoigne  ert  soe.
E  cil  ki  tient  son  gonfanon
(Tostein  filz  Rou  li  Blanc  out  non  ;
Del  Bee  joste  Fescam  fu  nez,
Chevalier  proz  e  renomez  ;
Et  quant  li  dus  tournout,  tournout,
Et  quant  arestout,  arestout)
Par  li  granz  presses  s'embateit,
La  u  il  plus  Engleiz  veeit,
E  li  Norman/  les  ocieieut
E  tueient  et  abateient.
Out  li  dus  mult  grant  cumpaignie  ;
De  vavassors  de  Normendie,
Ki  por  lor  seignor  garantir
Se  lesseient  as  cor  ferir.
Alain  Fergant,  quens  de  Bretaigne,
De  Bretons  mene  grant  cumpaigne ;
C'st  une  gent  fiere  e  grifaigne,
Ki  volentiers  prent  e  gaaingne.
Cil  en  ocist  mult  e  mehaigne,
Ne  fiert  Engleis  ki  sus  remaigne.

Bien  se  cumbat  Alaiuz  Ferganz,
Cbevalier  fu  pro/  e  vaillanz  ;
Li  Bretonz  vaid  od  sei  menant,
Des  Engleiz  fait  damage  grant.
Li  sire  de  Saint  Galeri,
E  li  Quens  d'Ou  bien  i  feri,
E  Rogier  de  Mongomeri
E  de  Toarz  Dam  ameri
Se  cuntindrent  come  hardi ;
Ki  li  fierent,  mal  son  bailli.
Li  dus  Willame  mult  s'engoisse,
Sor  li  Engleiz  sa  lance  froisse  ;
D  'aler  a  1'estendart  se  peine
Od  li  grant  pople  ke  il  meine  ;
Mult  s'entremet  de  Heraut  querre,
Ke  par  li  est  tute  la  guerre.  ;
Normauz  vunt  lor  seignor  querant,
E  mult  le  vunt  avironant ;
As  Engleiz  vunt  granz  colps  don  ant,
E  cil  se  vunt  mult  desfendant  ;
Forment,  s'esforcent  e  desfendent,
Lor  anemiz  a  colps  atendent.
Un  i  en  out  de  grant  vigor,
Ke  Ten  teneit  por  luiteor ;
Od  une  hache  k'il  teneit,
As  Normanz  grant  mal  faiseit;
Trestuit  li  pople  le  cremeit,
Kar  les  Normanz  mult  destruieit
Li  dus  poinst,  si  1'ala  ferir ;
Maiz  cil  guencbi,  cil  fist  failHr,
En  travers  sailli  un  grant  saut,
El  col  leva  la  hache  en  haut ;
A  retor  ke  li  dus  faiseit
Por  la  hache  ke  il  cremeit
S'acorsa ;  cil  de  grant  vertu
Sus  a  li  dus  el  chief  feru,
Li  helme  li  a  mult  pleie,
Maiz  ne  1'a  pas  granment  blecie.
Por  poi  k'il  ne  1'  fist  tresbuchier,
Maiz  as  estrieus  s'est  porfichiez,
Delivremeut  s'est  redreciez ;
E  kant  il  se  kuida  vengier
Et  occire  li  pautonier,
Li  pautonier  s'est  trait  artere  ;
Crieme  a  del  due  k'il  ne  1'  fiere.
Entre  les  Eugleiz  vint  saillant,
Maiz  n'i  pout  mie  avoir  garant,
Kar  Normanz  ki  1'orent  veu
L'ont  parsui  e  conseu,
As  fers  des  lances  Font  cosu,
A  terre  1'unt  mort  abatu,
BE  2

408

APPENDIX NO. VII.

La  u  la  presse  ert  plus  espesse  ;
La  cil  de  Kent  e  cil  d'Essesse
A  merveille  se  cumbateient.
E  li  Normanz  ruser  faiseient,
Eu  sus  les  faiseient  retraire,
Ne  lor  poeient  grant  mal  faire.
Li  dus  vit  sa  gent  resortir
E  les  Engleiz  trop  esbaudir ;
Par  les  enarmes  prinst  1'escu,
Porfichie  s'est  de  grant  vertu,
Une  lance  a  prise  e  drecie,
Ke  un  vaslet  li  a  baillie,
Joste  li  prist  sun  gonfanon.
Plus  de  rail  armez  environ,
Ki  del  due  grant  garde  perneient
E  la  u  il  puigneit  puigneient,
Serreement  si  com  il  durent,
Verz  les  Engleiz  ferir  s'esmurent;
Od  la  force  des  boens  destriers

Et  od  li  colps  des  cbevaliers

La  presse  unt  tote  desrompue

Et  la  turbe  avant  els  fendue.

Li  boen  dus  avant  les  conduit,

Maint  encha9a  e  maint  s'emfuit.

Mult  veissiez  Engleiz  tuinber,

Gesir  a  teiTe  e  jambeter,

Et  as  chevals  eels  defoler

Ki  ne  se  poent  relever;

Mult  veissiez  voler  cerveles

Et  a  terre  gesir  boeles.

Mult  en  chai  a  eel  enchaus

Des  plus  riches  et  dus  plus  haus.

Engleiz  par  places  se  astreignent,

Oels  ocient  ke  il  ateignent,

E plus  k'il  poent  s'esvertueut,

Homes  abatent,  clievals  tuent.

Un  Engleiz  a  li  dus  veu,

A  li  ociere  a  entendu  ;

Od  une  lance  k'il  portout

Ferir  le  volt,  mais  il  ne  pout,

Kar  li  dus  1'a  enceiz  feru

E  a  teiTe  jus  abatu.

Grant  fu  la  noise  e  grant  1'occise  ;

Maint  alme  i  out  forz  de  cors  mise ;

Li  vifz  de  suz  li  morz  trespassent,

D'ambes  parz  de  ferir  se  lassent.

Ki  deroter  pot,  si  derote,

E  ki  ne  pot  ferir,  si  bote  ;

Li  forz  cuntre  li  forz  estrivent,

Li  uns  morent,  li  altres  vivent ;

Li  cuarz  se  vout  retraiant

Et  li  bardez  passent  avant.
Mal  est  bailli  ki  entrels  cbiet,
Grant  poor  a  ainz  k'il  reliet,
E  maiut  en  chief,  ki  ne  relieve,
Par  la  grant  presse  inaint  encrievo.
Tant  unt  Normant  avant  einpeint,
K'il  unt  a  1'estnndart  ateint.
Heraut  a  1'estandart  esteit,
A  son  poer  se  desfendeit,
Maiz  mult  esteit  de  Toil  grevez
Por  90  k'il  li  esteit  crevez.
A  la  dolor  ke  il  senteit
Del  colp  del  oil  ki  li  doleit,
Vint  un  armez  par  la  bataille ;
Heraut  feri  sor  la  ventaille,
A  terre  le  fit  tresbuchier;
E  quant  k'il  se  volt  redrecier,
Un  chevalier  le  rabati,
Ki  en  la  cuisse  le  feri,
En  la  cuisse  parmi  le  gros,
La  plaie  fu  de  si  en  1'os.

Guert  vit  Engleiz  amenuisier,
Vit  k'il  n'i  out  nul  recovier,
Vit  son  lignage  dechaeir ;
De  sei  garir  n'out  nul  espeir,
Fuir  s'en  volt,  mais  ne  poeit,
Ke  la  presse  toz  terns  cresseit.
A  tant  ptiiust  li  dus,  si  1' ateint,
Par  grant  air  avant  1'empeint,
Ne  sai  se  de  eel  colp  morut,
Maiz  90  fut  dit  ke  pose  jut.
L'estandart  uut  a  terre  mis,
E  li  reis  Heraut  uut  occis
E  li  meillor  de  ses  amis ;
Li  gonfanon  a  or  unt  pris.
Tel  presse  out  a  Heraut  occire,
Ke  jo  ne  sai  ki  1'occist  dire.
Mult  unt  Engleiz  grant  dol  eu
Del  fei  Heraut  k'il  unt  perdu,
E  del  due  ki  1'aveit  vencti
E  1'estandart  out  abatu.
Mult  lungement  se  cumbatirent
E  lungemeut  se  desfendirent,
De  si  ke  vint  a  la  parfiu
Ke  li  jor  torna  el  declin.
E  dune  unt  bien  aperceu,
E  li  alkanz  recogneu
Ke  1'estandart  esteit  cheu, :
E  la  novele  vint  e  crut
Ke  mort  esteit  Heraut  por  veir.
Ne  kuident  maiz  eecors  aveir ;

APPENDIX NO. VII.

409

De  la  bataille  se  partirent,
Cil  ki  porent  fair  fuirent.
Ne  sai  dire  ne  jo  nel  di,
Ne  jo  n'i  fu,  ne  jo  ne  1'  vi,
Ni  a  mestre  dire  n'oi
Ki  li  reis  Heraut  abati,
Ne  de  kel  arme  il  fa  nafrez,
Maiz  od  li  morz  fu  morz  trovez,
Mort  fu  trovez  entre  li  morz,
Ne  1'  pout  garir  ses  granz  esforz.
Engleiz  ki  del  champ  eschapijrent,
De  si  a  Lundres  ne  finerent :
Co  diseient  e  so  creimeient
Ke  li  Normanz  prez  les  sueient.
Grant  presse  out  a  passer  li  pont,
E  1'ewe  fu  desoz  parfont ;
Por  la  presse  li  pont^froissa,
E  maint  en  1'ewe  tresbucha.
Willame  bien  se  cumbati,
En  mainte  presse  s'embati,
Maint  colp  dona,  maint  colp  recut,
E  par  sa  main  maint  en  morut.
Douz  chevals  out  soz  li  occis,
E  li  tiers  a  par  busuing  pris,
Si  k'il  a  terre  ne  chai,
Ne  de  sane  gute  n'i  perdi.
Coment  que  chescun  le  feist,
Ki  ke  morust  ne  ki  vesquist,
Veir  est  ke  Willame  veinqui.
Des  Engleiz  mult  del  cham  fui
E  maiut  en  morut  par  li  places :
A  Dex  Willeme  en  rent  graces.
Li  dus  Willame  par  fierte,
La  u  1'estendart  out  este
Rova  son  gonfanon  porter,
E  la  le  fist  en  baut  lever ;
C,o  fu  li  signe  qu'il  out  veincu
E  1'estandart  out  abatu.
Entre  li  morz  fist  son  tref  teudre,
E  la  rova  son  hostel  prendre  ;
La  fist  son  mangier  aporter
Et  aparaillier  son  souper.
Eis  vus  Galtier  GifFart  puiguaut:
Sire,  fet-il,  k'alez  faisant  ?
Vos  n'estes  mie  avenament
Remez  od  ceste  morte  gent.
Maint  Engleiz  gist  ensanglente
Entre  li  morz  sain  u  nafre,
Ki  de  lor  sane  se  sunt  soilliej
Et  od  li  morz  de  gre  couchie,,
Ki  par  noit  kuident  relever,

E  par  noit  kuident  escaper  ;

Mais  mult  se  kuident  ainz  vengier,

E  mult  se  kuident  vendre  chier.

Ne  chaut  chescun  de  sa  vie,

Ne  li  chaut  poix  ki  1'ocie,

Mais  ke  il  ait  un  Normant  mort.

Nos  lor  faison,  90  dient,  tort.

Aillors  deussiez  herbergier,

E  faire  vos  eschargaitier

A  mil  u  a  douz  mil  armez

De  eels  u  plus  vos  fiez.

Seit  ennuit  faite  1'eschargaite ;

Nos  ne  savous  ki  nos  agaite;

Fiere  jornee  avon  hui  faite,

Maiz  la  fin  bien  me  plaist  e  haite.

Giffart,  dist  li  dus,  Dex  merci,

Bien  1'avome  fet  tresqu'ici,

Et  se  Dex  le  velt  cunsentir,

E  ke  a  li  viengi  a  pleisir,

Bien  le  feron  d'ore  en  avant ;

De  tot  traion  Dex  a  garant.

Issi  s'en  est  GifFart  tornez

Et  Willame  s'est  desarmez.

A  la  guige  del  col  oster,

Eta  1'helme  del  chief  sevrer

Et  a  1'hauber  del  dos  verser

Vinrent  baronz  e  chevaliers

E  dameisels  et  esquiers  ;

Li  colps  virent  granz  en  1'escu

E  li  helme  ont  quasse  veil.

A  grant  merveille  unt  lot  tenu

E  dient  tuient :  tel  ber  ne  fu

Ki  si  poinsist  e  si  ferist,

Ne  ki  d'armes  tels  faiz  si  fist ;

Poiz  Rollant  ne  poiz  Olivier

N'out  en  terre  tel  chevalier.

Mult  le  preisent,  mult  le  loent,

De  90  k'il  unt  veu  s'esjoent,

Maiz  dolens  sunt  de  lor  amis,

Ki  stmt  en  la  bataille  occis.

Li  dus  fu  entr'els  en  estant

De  bele  groisse  e  de  bel  grant ;

Graces  rendi  al  rei  de  gloire

Par  ki  il  out  eu  victoire,

Li  chevaliers  a  merciez,

Et  li  morz  sovent  regretez.

A  la  champaigue  la  iiuit  jut,

Entre  li  morz  maiuga  e  but.

Diemaine  fu  el  demain ;

Cil  ki  orent  ju  a  eel  plain

E  ki  orent  yeillie  as  chaus

410

APPENDIX NO. VIII.

E  sofert  orent  mainz  ahans,
Par  matin  furent  el  jor  levez  ;
Par  la  champaigne  sunt  ale,
Lor  amis  unt  fait  enterrer,
Gels  k'il  porent  morz  trover.
Li  nobles  dames  de  la  terre
Sunt  alees  lor  maris  querre  ;
Li  unes  vunt  querant  lor  peres,
U  lor  espos,  u  flls,  u  freres  ;
A  lor  villes  les  emporterent,
Et  as  mostiers  les  enterrerent.

Clers  e  proveires  del  pais
Par  requeste  de  lor  amis
Unt  eels  ke  il  troverent  pris ;
Charniers  unt  fait,  cil  unt  enz  mis.
Li  reis  Heraut  fut  emportez,
Et  a  Varham  fu  enteiTez,
Maiz  jo  ne  sais  ki  1'emporta,
Ne  jo  ne  sais  ki  1'enterra.
Maint  en  remest  el  champ  gisant,
Maint  s'en  ala  par  nuit  fuiant.

No.  VHI.  (page  179.)

LETTER  FBOM  M.  AUGUSTIN  THIERRY  TO  M.  DE  LA  FONTENELLE
DE  VAUDOHE,  CORRESPONDING  MEMBER  OF  THJS  INSTITUTE.

"  Sir,

"You  request  my  opinion  of  Mr.  Bolton  Corney's  HesearcJies  and  Con-
jectures on  the  Bayeux  Tapestry  ;T  I  will  give  it  you  as  succinctly  as  I  can.
Mr.  Bolton  Corney's  theory  comprises  two  principal  propositions  :  1 ,  that
the  Bayeux  tapestry  was  not  a  gift  to  the  chapter  of  Bayeux  from  queen
Matilda,  nor,  indeed,  from  any  other  person,  but  was  manufactured  for  the
cathedral  by  the  order  and  at  the  expense  of  the  chapter ;  2,  that  this  vene-
rable monument  is  not  contemporary  with  the  conquest  of  England  by  the
Normans,  but  dates  from  the  period  when  Normandy  was  reunited  to  France.
The  first  proposition  appears  to  be  quite  supported  by  evidence ;  the  second
I  consider  inadmissible.

The  tradition  which  assigned  to  queen  Matilda  the  execution  of  the  piece
of  tapestry  preserved  at  Bayeux,  a  tradition  in  itself  quite  recent  and  tho-
roughly refuted  by  M.  de  la  Hue,  is  now  no  longer  admitted  by  any  one.
As  to  the  second  question,  whether  this  tapestry  was  or  was  not  a  present
made  to  the  church  of  Bayeux,  Mr.  Corney  resolves  it  in  the  negative,
and  this  in  what  appears  to  be  a  very  decisive  manner.  The  inference  from
the  entire  silence  on  the  subject  of  the  ancient  inventories  of  the  church,  he
corroborates  by  proofs  derived  from  the  monument  itself,  demonstrating
that  its  details  are  very  decidedly  impressed  with  the  stamp  of  locality;  that
the  conquest  of  England  by  the  Normans  is  considered  there  almost  entirely
as  it  were  with  reference  to  the  city  and  church  of  Bayeux.  One  bishop
alone  figures  on  the  tapestry,  and  this  the  bishop  of  Bayeux,  who  repeatedly
makes  his  appearance,  and  is  sometimes  designated  merely  by  his  title,
Episcopus.  Again,  of  all  the  lay  personages  represented  around  duke
William,  there  is  no  one  who  bears  an  historical  appellation.  The  names

1  London,  1839.

APPENDIX NO. VIII.  411

constantly  recurring  are  Turold,  Wadard,  Vital,  all  of  them  probably  popular
men  at  Bayeux  ;  indeed,  the  two  latter,  Wadard  and  Vital,  are  registered  in
Domesday  Book,  among  the  feudatories  of  the  church  of  Bayeux,  in  Kent,
Oxfordshire,  and  Lincolnshire.  If  we  combine  with  this  reason  those
which  Mr.  Coruey  deduces  from  the  peculiar  form  and  application  of  the
monument,  we  cannot  but  concur  in  his  opinion  that  the  tapestry  was
ordered  by  the  chapter  of  Bayeux,  and  executed  according  to  its  com-
mission.

I  proceed  to  the  second  proposition,  that  the  Bayeux  tapestry  was  worked
after  the  reannexation  of  Normandy  to  France.  This  hypothesis  needs  no
very  diffuse  refutation,  for  its  author  bases  it  upon  one  sole  circumstance,
the  use  of  the  term  Franci  in  designating  the  Norman  army.  "  William  of
Poitiers,"  he  writes,  "calls  those  who  formed  part  of  the  army  Normanni ;
the  tapestry  always  terms  them  Fraud,  French.  I  regard  tliis  as  a  mistake,
indicative  of  the  period  at  which  the  monument  was  executed."  Now,  in
point  of  fact,  there  is  no  mistake  in  the  matter,  no  grounds  whatever  for
the  presumption  that  the  Bayeux  tapestry  is  otherwise  than  contemporary
with  the  conquest  of  England  by  the  Normans.  The  Anglo-Saxons  them-
selves used  to  designate  by  the  term  French  (Frencan,  Frencisce  men)  all
the  inhabitants  of  Gaul,  without  distinction  of  province  or  of  race.  The
Saxon  Chronicle,  in  the  thousand  places  where  it  mentions  the  chiefs  and
soldiers  of  the  Norman  army,  invariably  calls  them  French.  In  England
this  name  served  to  distinguish  the  conquerors  from  the  indigenous  popula-
tion, not  merely  in  ordinary  language,  but  also  in  legal  acts.  We  read  in,
the  laws  of  William  the  Conqueror,  under  the  article  Mnrdrum,  these  words,
Ki  Franceis  occist,  and  in  the  Latin  version  of  these  laws,  Si  Francigena
inter/edits  fuerit.*  The  employment  of  the  word  Franci  instead  of  Nor-
manni is  not,  then,  any  proof  at  all  that  the  Bayeux  tapestry  is  of  a  date
posterior  to  the  conquest.  If  it  proved  anything,  it  would  be  that  the  ta-
pestry was  executed  not  in  Normandy  but  in  England,  and  that  it  was  to
workmen  and  workwomen  of  the  latter  country  that  the  chapter  of  Bayeux
gave  its  commission.

This  theory,  indeed,  which  I  submit  to  the  opinion  of  archaiologists,  ap-
pears further  confirmed  by  the  orthography  of  certain  words  and  the  em-
ployment of  certain  letters  in  the  legends  we  read  on  the  monument.  We
find  even  in  the  name  of  duke  William,  and  in  that  of  the  city  of  Bayeux,
traces  of  Anglo-Saxon  pronunciation :  Hie  Wido  adduxit  Haroldum  ad
Wilgelmum  Normannonim  ducem ;  Willem  venit  B agios ;  Wilgelm  for
Wilielm,  Bagias  for  Bayeux.  The  diphthong  ea,  one  of  the  peculiarities  of
Anglo-Saxon  orthography,  is  exhibited  in  the  legends  which  contain  the
name  of  king  Edward;  Hie  portatur  corpus  Eadwardi.  Another  legend
presents  this  name  of  a  place,  given  with  exact  accuracy  in  its  Saxon  form;
Atfoderetur  castellum  ad  Hestenca  castra.  Lastly,  the  name  of  Gurth,
(pronounced  Gheurth)  brother  of  king  Harold,  is  spelt  with  three  Saxon
letters  ;  g  having  the  sound  of  ghe  ;  y,  having  that  of  eu,  and  the  d  having
that  of  the  modern  English  th.

Thus,  then,  I  think  with  the  majority  of  the  Saxons  who  have  written  on
the  Bayeux  tapestry,  that  this  tapestry  is  contemporaneous  with  the  great

1  Leges  Will.  Conquist.,  apud  Script,  rer.  Angl.  (Gale)  i.  90.

412  APPENDIX NO. IX.

event  it  represents;  I  think  with  Mr.  Bolton  Corney  that  it  was  executed
at  the  order  and  cost  of  the  chapter  of  Bayeux,  and  I  add,  as  a  conjecture
of  my  own,  that  it  was  manufactured  in  England  and  by  English  workers,
according  to  a  design  transmitted  from  Bayeux.

Receive,  Sir,  the  assurances,  &c.
June  25,  1843. '

No.  IX.  (page  182.)

THE  VALIANT  COURAGE  AND  POLICY  OF  THE  KENTISHMEN  WHICH  OVER-
CAME WILLIAM  THE  CONQUEROR,  WHO  SOUGHT  TO  TAKE  FROM  THEM
THEIR  ANCIENT  LAWS  AND  CUSTOMS,  WHICH  THEY  RETAIN  TO  THIS

> DAY.1

WHEN  as  the  duke  of  Normandy

With  glistering  spear  and  shield,
Had  entered  into  fair  England,

And  foil'd  his  foes  in  field  :

On  Christmas-day  in  solemn  sort

Then  was  he  crowned  here,
By  Albert  archbishop  of  York,

With  many  a  noble  peer.

Which  being  done,  he  changed  quite

The  customs  of  this  land,
And  punisht  such  as  daily  sought

His  statutes  to  withstand:

And  many  cities  he  subdu'd,

Fair  London  with  the  rest ;
But  Kent  did  still  withstand  his  force,

And  did  his  laws  detest.

To  Dover  then  he  took  his  way,

The  castle  down  to  fling,
Which  Arviragus  builded  there,

The  noble  British  king.

Which  when  the  brave  archbishop  bold

Of  Canterbury  knew,
The  abbot  of  saint  Augustine's  eke,

With  all  their  gallant^crew  :

They  set  themselves  in  armour  bright,

These  mischiefs  to  prevent ;
With  all  the  yeomen  brave  and  bold

That  were  in  fruitful  Kent,

1  Evans's  Old  Ballads,  historical  and  narrative,  vol.  i.  p.  34.

APPENDIX NO. IX.  413

At  Canterbury  did  they  meet,

Upon  a  certain  day,
With  sword  and  spear,  with  bill  and  bow,

And  stopt  the  conqueror's  way.

"  Let  us  not  yield,  like  bond-men  poor,

To  Frenchmen  in  their  pride,
But  keep  our  ancient  liberty,

What  chance  so  e'er  betide  :

"  And  rather  die  in  bloody  field,

With  manly  courage  prest,
Than  to  endure  the  servile  yoke,

Which  we  so  much  detest."

Thus  did  the  Kentish  commons  cry

Unto  their  leaders  still,
And  so  march'd  forth  in  warlike  sort,

And  stand  at  Swanscomb-hill :

There  in  the  woods  they  hid  themselves

Under  the  shadow  green,
Thereby  to  get  them  vantage  good,

Of  all  their  foes  unseen.

And  for  the  conqueror's  coming  there

They  privily  laid  wait,
And  thereby  suddenly  appal'd

His  lofty  high  conceit ;

For  when  they  spied  his  approach,

In  place  as  they  did  stand ;
Then  marched  they  to  him  with  speed,

Each  one  a  bough  in  hand.

So  that  unto  the  conqueror's  sight,

Amazed  as  be  stood ;
They  seem'd  to  be  a  walking  grove,

Or  else  a  moving  wood.

The  shape  of  men  he  could  riot  see,

The  boughs  did  hide  them  so  :
And  now  his  heart  with  fear  did  quake,

To  see  a  forest  go.

Before,  behind,  and  on  each  side,

As  he  did  cast  his  eye,
He  spi'd  the  wood  with  sober  pace

Approach  to  him  full  nigh  :

414  APPENDIX NO. IX.

But  when  the  Kentishraen  had  thus
Enclos'd  the  conqueror  round  ;

Most  suddenly  they  drew  their  swords,
And  threw  their  boughs  to  ground ;

Their  banners  they  display  in  sight,
Their  trumpets  sound  a  charge,

Their  ratling  drums  strike  up  alarms,
Their  troops  stretch  out  at  large.

The  conqueror,  with  all  his  train,
Were  hereat  sore  aghast,

And  most  in  peril,  when  they  thought
All  peril  had  been  past.

Unto  the  Kentishmen  he  sent,
The  cause  to  understand;

For  what  intent,  and  for  what  cause
They  took  this  war  in  hand ;

To  whom  they  made  this  short  reply :

"  For  liberty  we  fight,
And  to  enjoy  king  Edward's  laws,

The  which  we  hold  our  right."

Then  said  the  dreadful  conqueror  :
"  You  shall  have  what  you  will,

Your  ancient  customs  and  your  laws,
So  that  you  will  be  still ;

"  And  each  thing  else  that  you  will  crave
With  reason  at  -my  hand ;

So  you  will  but  acknowledge  me
Chief  king  of  fair  England."

The  Kentishmen  agreed  thereon,
And  laid  their  arms  aside ;

And  by  this  means  king  Edward's  laws
In  Kent  doth  still  abide:

And  in  no  place  in  England  else
These  customs  do  remain  :

Which  they  by  manly  policy
Did  of  duke  William  gain.

APPENDIX NO. X.  415

No.  X.  (p.  185.)

DETAILS  OF  THE  SURRENDER  OF  LONDON,  EXTRACTED  FROM  A  CON-
TEMPORARY POEM,  ATTRIBUTED  TO  GUY,  BlSHOP  OF  AMIENS.1

Intus  erat  quidam  contractus  debilitate

Renum,  sicque  pedum  segnis  ab  officio ;
Vulnera  pro  patria  quoniam  numerosa  recepit,

Lectica  vehitur,  mobilitate  carens.
Omnibus  ille  tamen  primatibus  imperat  urbis,

Ejus  et  auxilio  publica  res  agitur.
Huic,  per  legatum,  clam  rex  potiora  revelat

Secreti,  poscens  quatenus  his  faveat.
"  Solum  rex  vocitetur,  ait,  sic  commoda  regni,

Ut  jubet  Ansgardus,2  subdita  cuncta  regat."
Ille  quidem  cautus  caute  legata  recepit,

Cordis  et  occulto  condidit  in  thalamo.
Natu  majores,  omni  levitate  repulsa,

Aggregat,  et  verbis  talibus  alloquitur:
"  Egregii  fratres,  turn  vi,  turn  saepius  arte

(Est  ubi  nee  sensus  vester,  et  actus  ubi  ?)
Cemitis  oppresses  valido  certamine  muros,

Et  circumseptos  cladibus  innumeris  ;
Molis  et  erectse  transcendit  machina  turres,

Ictibus  et  validis  moania  scissa  ruunt,
Casibusamultis,  ex  omni  parte  niina

Eminet,  et  nostra  cordatimore  labant;
Atque  manus  populi,  nimio  percussa  pavore,

Urbis  ad  auxilium  segniter  arma  movet.
Nosque  foris  vastat  gladius,  pavor  angit  et  intus :

Et  nullum  nobis  presidium  superest.
Ergo,  precor,  vobis  si  spes  est  ulla  salutis,

Quatenus  addatis  viribus  ingenium  ;
Est  quum  praecipuum,  si  vis  succumbat  in  actum,

Quod  virtute  nequit,  fiat  ut  ingenio.
Est  igitur  nobis  super  hoc  prudenter  agendum,

Et  pariter  sanum  queerere  consilium.
Censeo  quapropter,  si  vobis  constat  honestum,

Hostes  dum  lateant  omnia  quse  patimur,
Actutum  docilis  noster  legatus  ut  hosti

Mittatur,  verbis  fallere  qui  satagat ;

1  Chroniques  Anglo-Normandes, publiees  par  M.  Francisque Michel,
t.  iii.  p-  31.

2  The  Saxon  orthography  of  this  name  is  Ansgar,  and  sometimes  Asgar.
The  addition  of  the  letter  d  arises  from  a  French  custom,  of  which  we  find
several  examples  in  Guillaume  de  Poitiers,  who  writes  Algardus  for  Alfgar,
and  Morcardus  for  Morkar. See  as  to the  staller  Ansgar,  a  note  of  M.
Auguste  Le  Prevost,  in  his  edition  of  Orderic  Vital,  ii.  154.

416  APPENDIX NO. X.

Servitium  simulet  nee  non  et  foedera  pacis

Et  dextras  dextrse  subdere  si  jubeat."
Omnibus  hoc  placuit ;  dicto  velocius  implent ;

Mittitur  ad  regem  vir  ratione  capax,
Ordine  qui  retulit  decorans  sermone  faceto

Utile  fraternum,  non  secus  ac  proprium.
Sed  quamvis  patula  teneatur  compede  vulpes,

Fallitur  a  rege  fallere  quern  voluit.
Namque  palam  laudat  rex,  atque  latenter  ineptat

Quidquid  ab  Ansgardo  nuntius  attulerat.
Obcsecat  donis  stolidum  verbisque  fefellit,

Prsemia  promittens  innumerosa  sibi.
Ille  retro  rutilo  gradiens  oneratus  ab  auro,

A  quibus  est  missus  talia  dicta  refert :
"  Rex  vobis  pacem  dicit,  profertque  salutem,

Vestris  mandatis  paret  et  absque  dolis.
Sed,  Dominum  testor,  cui  reram  servit  imago,

Post  dictum  regem  nescit  habere  parem  ;
Pulchrior  est  sole,  sapientior  est  Salomone,

Promptior  est  Magno  largior  et  Carolo.
Contulit  Etguardus  quod  rex  donum  sibi  regni

Monstrat  et  affirmat,  vosque  probasse  refert.
Hoc  igitur  superest,  ultra  si  vivere  vultis,

Debita  cum  manibus  reddere  jura  sibi."
Annuit  hoc  vulgus,  justum  probat  esse  senatus,

Et  puerum  regem  coetus  uterque  negat.
Vultibus  in  terra  deflexis,  regis  ad  aulam

Cum  puero  perguut,  agmine  composito,
Reddere  per  claves  urbem,  sedare  furorem

Oblato  quaerunt  munere  cum  manibus.
Novit  ut  adveutum  factus  rex  obvius  illis,

Cum  puero  reliquis  oscula  grata  dedit,
Culpas  indulsit,  gratanter  dona  recepit.

Et  sic  susceptos  tractat  honorifice,
Per  fidei  speciem  proprium  commendat  honorem,

Et  juramentis  perfida  corda  ligat.

No.  XL  (page  190.)

NAMES  OF  THE  PROVINCES  AND  PRINCIPAL  TOWNS  OF  ENGLAND
AS  GIVEN  IN  THE  SAXON  CHRONICLES.

Cant  (Kent);  Cantwaraburh  (Canterbury).
Suthseaxe  (Sussex);  Cissanceaster  (Chichester).
Sudrige  (Surrey).
Middelseaxe  (Middlesex)  ;  Lundene  (London).

APPENDIX NO.  XII.  417

Eastseax  (Essex)  ;  Colneceaster  (Colchester).

Heortfordscyre  (Hertfordshire).

Buccinggahamscyre  (Buckinghamshire).

Oxnafordscyre  (Oxfordshire).

Bearwukscyre  (Berkshire).

Hamtunscyre  (Hampshire);  Wintanceaster  (Winchester).

Wiltunscyre  (Wiltshire);  Searbyrig  (Salisbury).

Dornsetas  (Dorset).

Sumurset  (Somerset).

Defnascyre  (Devonshire);  Exanceaster  (Exeter).

Gornweallas  (Cornwall).

Gleawanceasterscyre  (Gloucestershire ) .

Wigreceasterscyre  (Worcestershire).

Weringwicscyre  (Warwickshire) .

Nordhamtunscyre  (Northamptonshire).

Huntanduuescyre  (Huntingdonshire).

Bedanfordscyre  (Bedfordshire) .

Grantanbrycgscyre  (Cambridgeshire).

Suthfolc  (Suffolk); Gipeswic  (Ipswich).

Northfolc  (Noi-folk);  Northwic  (Norwich).

Lygraceaster  (Leicester).

Steifordscyre  (Staffordshire).

Scrobscyre  (Shropshire);  Scrobbesbyrig  (Shrewsbury).

Ceasterscyre  (Cheshire).

Deorabyscyre  (Derbyshire).

Snotingahamscyre  (Nottinghamshire) ,

Lincolnescyre  (Lincolnshire) .

Eoforwicscyre  (Yorkshire).

Westmoringaland  (Westmoreland) .

Cumbraland  (Cumberland).

Northanhumbraland  (Northumberland) .

No.  XII.  (page  197.)

ANCIENT  LIST  OF  THE  CONQUERORS  OF  ENGLAND.
List  published  by  Andre  Duchcsnc,from  a  Charter  in  Baffle  Abbey.1

Auraerle.  Arundell.  Angenoun.

Audeley.  Avenant.  Archer.

Angilliam.  Abel.  Aspervile."

Argentoun.  Awgers.  Amouerdvile.

:  Aptid  Script,  rer.  Normaun.,  p.  1023.

418

APPENDIX NO. XII.

Arey.'

Akeny.

Albeny.

Asperemound.

Bertram.

Buttecourt.

Broechus.

Byseg.

Bardolf.

Bohun.

Baylife.

Bondeville.

Barbason.

Beer.

Bures.

Bonylayne.

Barbayon.

Berners.

Braybuf.

Brand.

Bonvile.

Burgh.

Busshy.

Blundell.

Breton.

Belasyse.

Bowser.

Bayons.

Bulmere.

Brone.

Beke.

Bowlers.

Banestre.

Belomy.

Belknape.

Beauchamp.

Bandy.

Broyleby.

Burnel.

Belot.

Beufort.

Baudewine.

Burdon.

Berteviley,

Barte.

Bussevile.

Blunt.

Beawper.

Bret.

Barret.

Corlevile.

Barnevale  .

Champeney.

Barry.

Carew.

Bodyt.

Chawnos.

Bertevile.

Clarvaile.

Bertine.

Champaine.

Belew.

Carbonell.

Buschell.

Charles.

Beleuers.

Chareberge.

Buffard.

Chawnes.

Boteler.

Chawmout.

Botvile.

Cheyne.

Brasard.

Cursen.

Belhelme.

Conell.

Braunche.

Chayters.

Bolesur.

Cheynes.

Blundel.

Cater  ay.

Burdet.

Cherecourt.

Bigot.

Chaunvile.

Beaupount.

Clereney.

Bools.

Curly.

Belefroun.

Clyfford.

Barchampe.

Deauvile.

Caraos.

Dercy.

Chanville.

Dine.

Chawent.

Dispeucer.

Chancy.

Daniel.

Couderay.

Denyse.

Colvile.

Druell.

Chamberlaine.

Devaus.

Chambernoune.

Davers.

Cribet.

Doningsels.

Corbine.

Darell.

Corbet.

Delabere.

Coniers.

De  la  Pole.

Chaundos.

De  la  Lind.

Coucy.

De  la  Hill.

Chaworthe.

De  la  Wate.

Claremaus.

De  la  Watche.

Clarell.

Dakeny.

Camnine.

Dauntre.

Chaunduyt.

Desuye.

Clarways.

Dabernoune.

Chantilowe.

Damry.

Colet.

Daveros.

Cressy.

De  la  Vere.

Courtenay.

De  Liele.

Constable.

De  la  Warde.

Chancer.

De  la  Planch.

Cholmelay.

Danway.

APPENDIX NO.  XII.

419

De  Hewse.

Gurdon.

Mortmaine.

Disard.

Gamages.

Muse.

Durant.

Gaunt.

Marteine.

Divry.

Hansard.

Mountbocher.

Estrange.

Hastings.

Malevile.

Estutaville.

Haulay.

Mountney.

Escriols.

Husie.

Maleherbe.

Engayne.

Herne.

Musgros.

Evers.

Hamelyn,

Musard.

Esturney.

Harewell.

Mautravers.

Folvile.

Hardel.

Merke.

Fitz  Water.

Hecket.

Murres.

Fitz  Marmaduk.

Hamound.

Montagu.

Fibert.

Harecord.

Montalent.

Fitz  Roger.

Jarden.

Mandute.

Fitz  Robert.

Jay.

Manle.

Fanecourt.

Janvile.

Malory.

Fitz  Philip.

Jasparvile.

Merny.

Fitz  William.

Karre.

Muffet.

Fitz  Paine.

Karron.

Menpincoy.

Fitz  Alyne.

Kyriell.

Mainard.

Fitz  Raulfe.

Lestrange.

Morell.

Fitz  Browne.

Levony.

Morley.

Foke.

Latomere.

Mountmartin  Yners.

Frevile.

Loveday.

Mauley.

Faconbrige.

Logenton.

Mainwaring.

Frissel.

Level.

Mantell.

Filioll.

Lescrope.

Mayel.

Fitz  Thomas.

Lemare.

Morton.

Fitz  Morice.

Litterile.

Nevile.

Fitz  Hughe.

Lucy.

Neumarche.

Fitz  Warren.

Lisley  or  Liele.

Norton.

Faunvile.

Longspes.

Norbet.

Formay.

Lonschampe.

Norece.

Formiband.

Lastels.

Newborough.

Frison.

Lindsey.

Neele.

Finer.

Loterel.

Normanvile.

Fitz  Urcy.

Longvaile.

Otenel.

Furnivall.

Lewawse.

Olibef.

Fitz  Herbert.

Loy.

Olifaunt.

Fitz  John.

Lave.

Oysell.

Gargrave.

Le  Despenser.

Oliford.

Graunson.

Marmilon.

Oryoll.

Gracy.

Moribray.

Pigot.

Glaunvile.

Morvile.

Pecy.

Gover.

Mauley.

Perecount.

Gascoyne.

Malebranche.

Pershale.

Gray.

Malemaine.

Power.

Golofer.

Muschampe.

Pavnel.

Graunso

Musgrave.

Peche.

Gurly.

Mesni-le-Villers.

Peverell.

420

APPENDIX NO.  XII.

Perot.

Sovervile.

Tirell.

Picard.

Sanford.

Totels.

Pudsey.

Someiy.

Taverner.

Pimeray.

Seint-George.

Valence.

Pounsey.

Seiut-Les.

Vancord.

Punckardon.

Savine.

Vavasour.

Pynchard.

Seint-Clo.

Vender.

Placy.

Seint-Albine.

Verder.

Patine.

Seinte-Barbe.

Verdon.

Pampilion.

Sandevile.

Aubrie  de  Vere.

Poterell.

Seint-More.

Vernoune.

Pekeney.

Seint-Scudemor.

Verlaud.

Perviuke.

Tows.

Verlay.

Penicord.

Toget. •

Vernois.

Quincy.

Talybois.

Verny.

Quintine.

Tucket.

Vilan.

Eose.

Truslot.

Umframvile.

Kidle.

Trusbut.

Unket.

Rynel.

Traynel.

Urnall.

Ecus.

Taket.

Wake.

Etissel.

Talbot.

Waledger.

Eond.

Tanny.

Warde.

Eichmond.

Tibtote.

Wardebus. •

Eocheford.

Trussell.

Waren.

Eeymond.

Turbevile.

Wate.

Seuche.

Turvile.

Wateline.

Seint-Quintine.

Torel.

Watevile.

Seint-Omer.

Tavers.

Woly.

Seint-Amand.

Torel.

Wywell.

Seint-Leger.

List  from  Bromton's  Chronicle.1

Vous  qe  desyrez  assaver
Les  nons  de  grauntz  dela  la  mer,
Qe  vindrent  od  le  conquerour
. William  Bastard  de  graunt  vigoure,
Lours  sunions  issi  vous  devys
Com  je  les  trova  en  escris.
Car  des  propres  nons  force  n'y  a
Puree  q'ill  i  ssont  ckaunges  sa  et  la,
Come  de  Edmonde  en  Edwarde,
De  Baldwyu  en  Bernard,
De  Godwyne  en  Godard.
De  Elys  en  Edwyn,
Et  issint  des  touz  autrez  nons
Come  ils  sont  levez  du  fons  ;
Puree  lour  surnons  que  sont  usez,
Et  ne  sont  pas  sovent  ckaungez,
Vous  ay  escript ;  ore  escotez
Si  vous  oier  les  voylleth.

1  Apud  rer.  Anglic.  Script.,  i.  col.  963,  ed  Selden.

APPENDIX NO. XII.

421

Maundevyle  et  Daundevyle,
Ouiifravyle  et  Downfrevyle, -
Bolvyle  et  Baskarvyle,
Evyle  et  Clevyle,
Morevyle  et  Colevyle,
Warbevyle  et  Carvyle,
Botevyle  et  Stotevyle,
Deverous  et  Cavervyle,
Mooun  et  Bouu,
Vipouu  et  Vinoun,
Baylon  et  Bayloun,
Maris  et  Marmyoun,
Agulis  et  Aguloun,
Chaumburleyn  et  Chaumbursoun,
Vere  et  Vernoun,
Verdyers  et  Verdonn,
Cryel  et  Caroun,
Duminer  et  Dommoun,
Hastyng  et  Cammois,
Bardelfe  Bote  et  Boys,
Warenne  et  Wardeboys,
Rodes  et  Deverois,
Auris  et  Argenten,
Botetour  et  Boteveleyn,
Maleboucb.  et  Malemeyn,
Hautevyle  et  Hauteyn,
Danvey  et  Dyveyn,
Malure  et  Malvesyu,
Morten  et  Mortimer,
Braunz  et  Coltunber,
Seynt-Denis  et  Seynt-Cler,
Seynt-Aubyn  et  Seynt-Omer,
Seynt-Fylbert  Fyens  et  Corner,
Turbevyle  et  Turbemer,
Gorges  et  Spenser,
Brus  et  Boteler,
Crevequel  et  Seynt-Quinteyn,
Deverouge  et  Seynt-Martin,
Seynt-Mor  et  Seynt-Leger,
Seynt-Yigor  et  Seynt-Per,
Avynel  et  Paynell,
Peyvere  et  Peverell,
Rivers  et  Rivel,
Beauchamp  et  Beaupel,
Lou  et  Lovell,
Ros  et  Druell,

Mountabours  et  Mountsorell,
Trussebot  et  Trussell,
Bergos  et  Burnell,
Bra  et  Boterell,
Riset  et  Basset,
VOL,  I.

I  Malevyle  et  Malet,
Bouevyle  et  Bonet,
Nervyle  et  Narbet,
Coynale  et  Corbet,
Mouutayn  et  Mounfycliet,
Geynevyle  et  Gyffard,
Say  et  Seward,
Chary  et  Cbaward,
Pyryton  et  Pypard,
Harecourt  et  Haunsard,
Musegrave  et  Musard,
Mare  et  Mantravers,
Fernz  et  Ferers,
Bernevyle  et  Berners,
Cheyne  et  Chalers,
Daundon  et  Daungers,
Vessi  Gray  et  Graungers,
Bertram  et  Bygod,
Traillyz  et  Tragod,
Penbri  et  Pypotte,
Freyn  et  Folyot,
Dapisoun  et  Talbote,
Sanzaver  et  Saunford,
Vadu  et  Vatorte,
Montagu  et  Mounford,
Forneus  et  Fornyvaus,
Valens  Yle  et  Vaus,
Clarel  et  Clarans,
Aubevyle  et  Seynt-Amauns,
Agantez  et  Dragans,
Malerbe  et  Maudut,
Brewes  et  Chaudut,
Fizowres  et  Fiz  de  Ion,
Cantemor  et  Cantelou,
Braybuffe  et  Huldbynse,
Bolebeke  et  Molyns,
Moleton  et  Besyle,
Richford  et  Desevyle,
Watervyle  et  Dayvyle,
Nebors  et  Nevyle,
Hynoys  Burs  Burgenon,
Ylebon  et  Hyldebrond  Holyo;
Loges  et  Seint-Lou,
Maubauk  et  Seiut-Malou,
Wake  et  Wakevyle,
Coudree  et  Knevyle,
Scales  et  Clermount,
Beauvys  et  Beaumount,
Mouns  et  Mountcbampe,
Nowers  et  Nowchaumpe,
Percy  Crus  et  Lacy,
F  P

422  APPENDIX NO. XII.

Quincy  et  Tracy,
Stokes  et  Somery,
Seynt-Johan  et  Seynt-Jay,
Greyle  et  Seynt-Walry,
Pynkeney  et  Panely,
Mohant  et  Mountchensy,
Loveyn  et  Lucy,
Artoys  et  Arcy,
Grevyle  et  Courcy,

Arras  et  Cressy,
Merle  et  Moubray,
Gornay  et  Courtnay,
Haunstlayng  et  Tornay,
Husee  et  Husay,
Pounchardon  et  Pomeray,
Longevyle  et  Longespay,
Peyns  et  Pountlarge,
Straunge  et  Sauvage.

List  published  by  Leland.*

Un  role  de  ceux  queux  veignont  in  Angleterre  ovesque  roy  William  le-
Conquereur.

Faet  asavoir  que  en  1'an  du  grace  nostre  seigneur  JesuChriste  mil  sisaunt
ses,  per  jour  de  samadi  en  la  feste  S.  Calixte,  vint  William  Bastarde  due  de
Normandie,  cosin  a  noble  roy  seint  Edwarde  le  fiz  de  Emuie  de  Angleter,  et
tua  le  roy  Haraude,  et  lui  tali  le  terre  par  1'eide  des  Normannez  et  aultres
gents  de  divers  terres.  Entre  quils  vint  ovesque  lui  monseir  William  de
Moion  le  Veil,  le  plus  noble  de  tout  1'oste.  Cist  William  de  Moion  avoit  de
sa  retenaunde  en  1'ost  tous  les  grauntz  sieignors  apres  nomez,  si  come  il  est
escript  en  le  liver  des  conquerors,  s'est  a  savoir :  Raol  Taisson  de  Cinqueleis ;
Koger  Marmion  le  Veil ;  Monsieur  Nel  de  Sein  Saviour ;  Raol  de  Gail  qui
fust  Briton ;  Avenel  de  Giars  ;  Hubert  Paignel ;  Robert  Berthram  ;  Raol  le
archer  de  Val  et  le  seir  de  Bricoil ;  li  sires  de  Sole  et  le  sires  de  Sureval ;
li  sires  de  S.  Jelian,  et  li  sires  de  Breal ;  li  sires  de  Breus  et  due  sens  des
homez  ;  li  sires  de  S.  Seu  et  li  sires  de  Cuallie  ;  li  sires  de  Cennllie,  et  li
sire  de  Basqueville ;  li  sires  de  Praels,  et  li  sires  de  Souiz  ;  li  sires  de  Sam-
tels  et  li  sires  de  vientz  Moley ;  li  sires  de  Mouceals  et  li  sires  de  Pacie  ;  li
seneschals  de  Corcye  et  li  sires  de  Lacye ;  li  sires  de  Gacre  et  li  sires  Soil-
lie;  li  sires  de  Sacre ;  li  sires  de  Vaacre  ;  li  sires  de  Torneor  et  li  sires  de
Praerers ;  William  de  Columbiers  et  Gilbert  Dasmeres  le  Veil ;  li  sires  de
Cbaaiones  ;  li  sires  de  Coismieres  le  Veil ;  Hugh  de  Bullebek;  Richard  Or-
berk;  li  sires  de  Bouesboz,  et  li  sires  de  Sap ;  li  sires  de  Gloz  et  li  sires  de
Tregoz ;  li  sires  de  Monfichet  et  Hugh  Bigot ;  li  sires  de  Vitrie,  et  li  sires
Durmie  ;  li  sires  de  Moubray  et  li  sires  de  Saie,  li  sires  de  la  Pert  et  li  sire
Botenilarn  ;  li  sire  Troselet  et  William  Patrick  de  la  Laude ;  Monseir  Hugh
de  Mortimer  et  li  sires  Damyler;  li  sires  de  Dunebek  et  li  sires  de  S.  Clere
et  Robert  Fitz  Herveis,  le  quel  fust  occis  en  labataille  ;  Tons  ycels  seigners
desus  nome  estoient  a  la  retenaunce  Monseir  de  Moion,  si  cum  desus  est
diste.

Another  List  from  Lei  and.2

Et  fait  asavoir  que  toutes  cestes  geutez  dount  lor  sor  nouns  y  sont  escritz
\indrent  ove  William  le  Conquerour  a  de  primes.

1  Collectanea  de  rebus  Britaimicis,  ed.  Hearne,  i.  202.
8  Id.  ib.  206.

APPENDIX NO. XII.

Aumarill  et  Deyncourt.

Bertrem  et  Buttencourt.

Biard  et  Biford.

Bardolf  et  Basset.

Deyville  et  Darcy.

Pygot  et  Percys

Gurnay  et  Greilly.

Tregos  et  Treylly.

Camoys  et  Cameville.

Hautein  et  Hauville.

Wareune  et  Wauncy.

Chauent  et  Chauncy.

Loveyne  et  Lascy.

Graunson  et  Tracy.

Mobaud  et  Mooun.

Bigot  et  Boown.

Marny  et  Maundeville.

Vipount  et  Umfreville.

Morley  et  Moundeville.

Baillof  et  Boundeville.

Estraunge  et  Estoteville.

Moubray  et  Morvile.

Veer  et  Vinoun.

Audel  et  Aungeloim.

Vuasteneys  et  Waville.

Soucbeville  Coudrey  et  Colleville.

Fererers  et  Foleville.

Briaunsoun  et  Baskeville.

Neners  et  Nereville.

Chaumberlayn  et  Chaumberoun.

Fiz  Walter  et  Werdoun.

Argenteyn  et  Avenele.

Eos  et  Eidel.

Hasting  et  Haulley.

Meneville  et  Mauley.

Burnel  et  Buttevillain.

Malebucbe  et  Malemayn.

Morteyne  et  Moitimer.

Comyn  et  Columber. •

S.  Cloyis  et  S.  Clere.

Otinel  et  S.  Thomer.

Gorgeise  et  Gower.

Bruys  et  Dispenser.

Lymesey  et  Latymer.

Boys  et  Boteler.

Fenes  et  Felebert.

Fitz  Roger  et  Fiz  Eobert.

Muse  et  Martine.

Quyncy  et  S.  Quintine.

Lungvilers  et  S.Ligiere.

Griketot  et  Grevequer.

Power  et  Panel,  alias  Paignel.
Tucbet  et  Trusselle,
Pecbe  etPeverelle
Daubenay  et  Deverelle.
Sainct  Amande  et  Adryelle.
Eyvers  et  Ryvel.
Loveday  et  Lovel.
Denyas  et  Druel.
Mountburgb  et  Mounsorel.
Maleville  et  Malet.
Newmarcb  et  Newbet.
Corby  et  Gorbet.
Mounfey  et  Mountfichet.
Gaunt  et  Garre.
Maleberge  et  Marre.
Geneville  et  Gifard.
Someray  et  Howarde.
Perot  et  Pykarde.
Cbaundoys  et  Cbaward.
Delahay  et  Haunsard.
Mussegros  et  Musard.
Main  gun  et  Mouutravers.
Fovecourt  et  Feniers.
Vescy  et  Verders.
Brabasoun  et  Beyers.
Cballouns  et  Cbaleys.
Merldngfel  et  Mourreis.
Fitz  Philip  et  Fliot.
Takel  et  Talbot.
Lenias  et  Levecote.
Tourbeville  et  Tipitot.
Saunzauer  et  Saunford.
Montagu  et  Mountfort.
Forneux  et  Fournivaus,
Valence  et  Vaus.
Clerevalx  et  Clarel.
Dodingle  et  Darel.
Mautalent  et  Maudict.
Cbapes  et  Cbaudut.
Cauntelow  et  Coubray.
Saiuct  Tese  et  Sauvay.
Braund  et  Baybof.
Fitz  Alayne  et  Gilebof.
Mauuys  et  Meulos.
Souley  et  Soules.
Bruys  et  Burgh.
Neville  et  Newburgb.
Fitz  William  et  Watervile.
De  Lalaund  et  de  1'Isle.
Sorel  et  Somery.
S.  John  et  S.  Jory.
F2

4J4

APPENDIX NO. XII.

Wavile  et  Warley.

De  la  Pole  et  Pinkeney.

Mortivaus  et  Mounthensy.

Crescy  et  Courteny.

S.  Leo  et  Luscy.

Bavent  et  Bussy.

Lascels  et  Lovein.

Thays  et  Tony.

Hurel  et  Husee.

Longvil  et  Longespe.

De  Wake  et  De  la  War.

De  la  Marche  et  De  la  Marc.

Constable  et  Tally.

Poynce  et  Paveley.

Tuk  et  Tany.

Mallop  et  Moray.

Paifrer  et  Plukenet.

Bretonn  et  Blundet.

Maihermer  et  Muscket.

Baius  et  Bluet.

Beke  et  Biroune.

Saunz  pour  et  Fitz  Simoun.

Gaugy  et  Gobaude.

Kugetius  et  Fitz  Rohaut.

Peverel  et  Fitz  Payne.

Fitz  Robert  et  Fitz  Aleyne.

Dakeny  et  Dautre.

Menyle  et  Maufe.

Maucovenaunt  et  Mounpinson.

Pikard  et  Pinkadoun.

Gray  et  Graunsoun.

Diseney  et  Dabernoun.

Maoun  et  Mainard.

Banestre  et  Bekard.

Bealum  et  Beauchaump.

Loverak  et  Longcliaump.

Baudyn  et  Bray.

Saluayn  et  Say.

By  et  Rokel.

Fitz  Rafe  et  Rosel.

Fitz  Brian  et  Bracy.

Playce  et  Placy.

Damary  et  Deveroys.

Vavasor  et  Warroys.

Perpounte  et  Fitz  Peris.

Sesee  et  Solers.

Nairmere  et  Fitz  Nele.

Waloys  et  Levele.

Chaumpeneys  et  Chaunceus.

Malebys  et  Mounceus.

Thornv  et  Thornille.

Wace  et  Wyvile.  '
Verboys  et  Waceley.
Pugoys  et  Paiteny.
Galofer  et  Gubioun.
Burdet  et  Boroun.
Daverenge  et  Duylly.
Sovereng  et  SuyUy.
Myiiet  et  Morley.
Tyriet  et  Turley.
Fryville  et  Fresell.
De  la  River  et  Rivel.
Destraunges  et  Delatoun.
Ferrers  et  Pavillioun.
Vallonis  et  Vernoun.
Grymward  et  Gerouu.
Hercy  et  Heroun.
Vendour  et  Veroun.
Glauncourt  et  Chamount.
Bawdewyn  et  Beaumont.
Graundyn  et  Gerdoun.
Blundet  et  Burdoun.
Fitz-Rauf  et  Filiol.
Fitz-Thomas  et  Tibol.
Onatule  et  Cheyui.
Mauliverer  et  Mouncy.
Querru  et  Coingers.
Mauclerk  et  Maners.
Warde  et  Werlay.
Musteys  et  Merlay.
Ban-ay  et  Bretevil.
Tolimer  et  Treville.
Blounte  et  Boseville.
Liffard  et  Osevile.
Benny  et  Boyvile.
Coursoun  et  Courtevile.
Fitz-Morice  et  S.  More.
Broth  et  Barbedor.
Fitz-Hugh  et  Fitz-Henry.
Fitz-Arviz  et  Esturmy.
Walangay  et  Fitzwarin.
Fitz-Raynald  et  Roscelin.
Baret  et  Bourte.
Heryce  et  Harecourt.
Venables  et  Venour.
Hayward  et  Henour.
Dulee  et  De  la  laund.
De  la  Valet  et  Veylaund.
De  la  Plaunche  et  Puterel.
Loring  ct  Loterel.
Fitz-Marmaduk  et  Mountrivel.
Kymarays  et  Kyriel.

APPENDIX NO. XII.

425

Lisours  et  Longvale.
Byiigard  et  Bernevale.
La  Muile  et  Lowuay.
Damot  et  Damay.
Bonet  et  Barry.
Avenel  et  S.  Amary.
Jardyn  et  Jay.
Tourys  et  Tay.
Aimeris  et  Aveneris.
Vilain  et  Valeris.
Fitz  Eustace  et  Eustacy.
Mauches  et  Mascy.
Brian  et  Bidin.
Mo  vet  et  S.  Marline.
Surdevale  et  Sengryn.
Buscel  et  Bevery.
Duraunt  et  Doreny.
Disart  et  Doynell.
Male  Kake  et  Mauncel.
Bernevile  et  Bretevile.
Hameline  et  Hareville.
De  la  Huse  et  Howel.
Tingez  et  Gruyele.

Tinel  et  Travile.
Chartres  et  Chenil.
Belew  et  Bertine.
Mangysir  et  Mauveysin.
Angers  et  Aungewyne.
Tolet  et  Tisoun.
Fermband  et  Frisoun.
S.  Barbe  et  Sageville.
Vernoun  et  Watervile.
Wemerlay  et  Wamervile.
Broy  et  Bromevile.
Bleyn  et  Breicourt.
Tarteray  et  Chercourt.
Oysel  et  Olifard.
Maulovel  et  Maureward.
Kanceis  et  Kevelers.
Liof  et  Lymers.
Rysers  et  Reynevil.
Busard  et  Belevile.
Rivers  et  Ripers.
Percehay  et  Pereris.
Fichent  et  Trivet.

NOTE  FROM  THE  ABBE  DE  LA  RUE'al  WORK,

Recherches  sur  la  Tapisscrle  dc  Bayeux. Caen,  1824.

"  Wace  est  loin  d' avoir  trauscrit  les  noms  de  tous  les  seigneurs  qui  aide-
rent  le  due  Guillaume  dans  son  expedition.1  Aussi,  d'apres  nos  recherckes,
nous  sommes  certains  qu'il  existe  encore  dans  notre  province  beaucoup  de
families  qui  ont  eu  des  branches  etablies  dans  la  Grande-Bretagne,  lors  et
depuis  la  conquete,  et  qui  ont  conserve  les  memes  noms  et  souvent  les
memes  armes.  Mais  comme  ces  noms  ne  sont  pas  tous  inscrits  dans  le
catalogue  de  Wace,  nous  transcrivons  ici  avec  plaisir  ceux  que  nos  reclierches
nous  ont  fait  connaitre :

Achard,
D'Angerville,
D'Annervile,
D'Argouges,
D'Auray,
De  Bailleul,
De  Briqueville,
De  Canouville,
De  Carbonel,
De  Clinchamp,
De  Courcy,

De  Couvert,

De  Cussy,

De  Fribois,

De  Harcourt,

D'Hericy,

De  Houdetot,  "

Mallet  de  Grauville,

De  Mathon,

Du  Merle,

De  Montflquet,

D'Orglande,

De  Percy,

De  Pierre  Pont,

De  St-Germain,

De  Ste-Marie  d'Aigneaux,

De  Touchet,

De  Tournebu,

De  Tilli,

De  Vassi,

De  Vernois,

De  Verdun,

Le  Viconte.'

1  See  ante,  Appendix. .VIII.

426  APPENDIX NO.  XIII.

No.  XIII.  (page  205.)
ENUMERATION OF  THE  LANDS OF BKIHTBIK, POSSESSED BY QUEEN

MATILDA.1

Infra  scriptas  terras  tenult  Brictric,  et  post  reyina' Mathildas.

Rex  tenet  LEVIA.  Tempore  regis  Edwardi  geldebat  pro  i  hida  et  una  vir-
gata  terras.  Terra  est  et  uno  ferling  xn  carucatae.  In  dominio  mi
carucatae  et  vn  servi  et  xx  villain  et  vn  bordarii  cum  x  carucatis.  Ibi
xxx  acrae  prati  et  x  acrse  silvae.  Pasturae  vm  quarentenae  longitudinis  et
mi  quarentenae  latitudinis.  Reddit  ix  libras  ad  numerum.

HALGEWELLE  geldebat  T.  E.  E.  pro  una  virgata  terrae.  Terra  est  v
carucatae.  In  dominio  sunt  n  carucatae  et  vi  servi  et  x  villani  et  i  borda-
rius  cum  v  carucatis.  Ibi  XL  acrae  prati  et  n  acrae  silvae.  Pastura  i
leuca  longitudinis  et  n  quarentenae  latitudinis.  Reddit  LXX  solidos  ad
numerum.

CLOVELIE  T.  R.  E.  geldebat  pro  in  hidis.  Terra  est  xn  carucatae.  In
dominio  sunt  v  carucatas  et  x  servi  et  xvi  villani  et  xi  bordarii  cum  vn
carucatis.  Ibi  xxx  acree  prati  et  XL  acrae  silvae.  Pastura  i  leuca  longitu-
dinis et  dimidia  leuca  latitudinis.  Reddit  xn  libras  ad  numerum.  Olim
reddebat  vi  libras.

BEDEFORD  T.  R.  E.  geldebat  pro  m  hidis.  Terra  est  xxvi  canicatae.
In  dominio  sunt  mi  carucatae  et  xmi  servi  et  xxx  villani  et  vui  bordarii
cum  xx  carucatis.  Ibi  x  acrae  prati  xx  acrae  pasturse  et  CL  acrae  silvae.
Reddit  xvi  libras.  Huic  manerio  adjacebat  una  piscaria.  T.  R.  E.  reddit
xxv  solidos.

LITEHAM  T.  R.  E.  geldebat  pro  una  hida.  Terra  est  vm  carucatae.
In  dominio  sunt:  una  est  carucata  et  vn  servi  et  xn  villani  et  in  bordarii
cum  mi  carucatis.  Ibi  x  acrae  prati  et  xx  acrae  pasturae  et  LX  acrae
silvae.  Reddit  in  libras.

LANGETREV  T.  R.  E.  geldebat  pro  n  hidis  dimidia  virgata  minus.
Terra  est  xx  carucatae.  In  dominio  sunt  n  carucatae  et  vm  servi  et
xxim  villani  et  11  bordarii  cum  xvi  carucatis.  Ibi  xv  acrae  prati.  Silva  i
leuca  longitudinis  et  tantumdem  latitudinis.  Reddit  vii  libras  et  v
solidos.

EDESLEGE  T.  R.  E.  geldebat  pro  in  hidis.  Terra  est  xxii  carucatae.
In  dominio  sunt  nil  carucatae  et  xv  servi  et  xxim  villani  cum  xvi  caru-
catis. Ibi  xv  acrae  prati ;  silva  11  leucse  longitudinis  et  una  leuca  latitu-
dinis. Reddit  xmi  libras.  De  hac  terra  tenet  Walterus  de  rege  unam
virgatam  terrae.  Terra  est  in  carucatae.  Aluuare  tenuit  de  Brictric
T.  R.  E.  nee  poterat  ab  eo  separari.  Huic  manerio  pertinent  11  virgatse
errae  et  dimidia.

IN  TAVETONE  HUNDERT.

WINCHELEIE  T.  R.  E.  geldebat  pro  v  hidis  et  dimidia.  Terra  est  XL
carucatae.  Valet  xx  solidos.  In  dominio  sunt  vm  carucatae  et  xvi  servi
et  LX  villani  cum  XL  carucatis  et  x  porcariis.  Ibi  quatuor  xx  acrae  prati  et
quingentae  acrae  silvae.  Pastura  i  leuca  longitudinis  et  alia  latitudinis  et
parcus  bestiarum.  Reddit  xxx  libras  ad  numerum.  De  ipsa  terra  tenet

1  Domtslay  Book,  i.  101,  recto.

APPENDIX NO.  XIII.  427

Norman  unam  virgatam  terras  et  dimidiam.  Valet  xn  solidos  et  vi
denarios.

AISSE  T.  R.  E.  geldebat  pro  n  hidis  dimidia  virgata  minus.  Terra  est
xv  carucatse.  In  dominio  sunt  n  carucatae,  et  x  servi  et  xini  villani  et  vi
bordarii  cum  x  carucatis.  Et  n  porcarii  reddunt  x  porcos.  Ibi  xx  acrae
prati  et  cc  acrae  silvae.  Pastura  dimidia  leuca  longitudinis  et  tantumdem
latitudinis.  Reddit  vn  libras  ad  numerum.

SLAPEFOBD  T-  R.  E.  geldebat  pro  n  hidis  et  dimidia.  Terra  est  xi  caru-
catae. In  dominio  sunt  in  carucatae,  et  vi  servi  et  vn  porcarii  et  xvin
villani  et  xn  bordarii  cum  vm  carucatis.  Ibi  xx  acrae  prati  et  x  acrae
pasturae  et  cxxx  acrae  silvoe.  Valet  xn  libras  et  xn  solidos.  Huic  manerio
adjacet  EKVESCOME  et  ibi  est  dimidia  virgata  teme.

BICHENTONE  T.  R.  E.  geldebat  pro  i  hida  et  n  virgatis  terrae  et  dimidia.
Terra  est  xvi  carucatae.  In  dominio  sunt  n  carucatae  et  in  servi  et  xini
villain  et  n  bordarii  cum  vn  carucatis.  Ibi  vm  acrse  prati  et  c  acrse
pasturae  et  c  acrae  silvae.  Reddit  xn  libras.  Huic  manerio  addita  est
BICHENELIE  quae  pertinebat  in  Tavestoch  T.  R.  E.  reddit  in  Bichentone
mi  libras.

MORCHET  T.  R,  E.  geldebat  pro  dimidia  hida.  Terra  est  vm  carucatae.
In  dominio  sunt  n  carucatae  et  n  servi  et  vm  villani  cum  in  carucatis.
Ibi  ii  acrae  prati  et  xi  acrae  silvae.  Reddit  mi  libras  ad  numerum.

HOLECUMBE  T.  R.  E.  geldebat  pro  i  hida.  Terra  est  vn  carucatae.  In
dominio  sunt  n  carucatae  et  mi  servi  et  x  villani  et  vm  bordarii  cum  v
carucatis.  Ibi  ex  acrae  silvae.  Reddit  vm  libras  et  xv  solidos.

HALSBRETOJTE  T.  R.  E.  geldebat  pro  v  hidis.  Terra  est  xxvm  caru-
catae. lu  dominio  sunt  mi  carucatae  et  vm  servi  et  XLIII  villani  et  x  bor-
darii cum  xxn  carucatis.  Ibi  n  molini  reddunt  x  solidos  et  xxxvi  acraa
prati.  Pastura  v  quarentenae  longitudinis  et  xm  quarentenae  latitudinis.
Silva  xvi  quarentenae  longitudinis  et  xm  quarentenae  latitudinis.  Reddit
xxvii  libras.  De  hac  terra  hujus  manerii  tenit  Goscelmus  unam  virgatam
terrae  et  ibi  habet  i  carucatam  cum  i  servo  et  i  bordario.  Reddit  x  solidos
in  Alsbretone.

AISBERTONE  T.  R.  E.  geldebat  pro  m  hidis.  Terra  est  x  carucatae.  In
dominio  sunt  n  carucatae  et  mi  servi  et  vn  villani  etvm  bordarii  cum  m
carucatis.  Ibi  n  piscariae  et  una  salina  et  m  acrae  prati  et  XL  acrae  pas-
turae. Silva  i  leuca  longitudinis  et  dimidia  leuca  latitudinis.  Reddit  mi
libras.  Juliel  tenebat  de  regina.

Rex  tenet  ULWARDESDONE.  Boia  tenuit  T.  R.  E.  et  geldebat  pro  una
virgata  terrae  et  dimidia.  Terra  est  n  carucatse  quae  ibi  sunt  cum  m
villanis  et  n  servis.  Ibi  m  acrae  prati  et  n  quarentenae  pasturae.  Silva  n
quarentenae  longitudinis  etj  una  quarentena  latitudinis.  Reddit  x  solidos.
Adolfus  tenet  de  rege.

428  APPENDIX NO.  XIV.

No.  XIV.  (page  206.)
NARRATIVE  OF  THE  IMPRISONMENT  OF  THE  SAXON  BRIHTKIK.*

..  Malde  de  Flandres  fu  nee,

Meis  de  Escoce  fu  appelee

Pur  sa  mere  ke  fu  espuse

Al  roi  de  Escoce  ki  Tout  rove,

Laquele  jadis,  quant  fu  pucele,

Ama  un  conte  d'Engleterre.

Bric'tricb  Mau  le  oi  nomer,

Apres  le  rois  ki  fu  riche  ber.

A  lui  la  pucele  envela  messager

Pur  sa  anmr  a  lui  procurer ;

Meis  Brictricli  Maude  refusa  :

Dunt  ele  mult  se  coruc.  a.

Hastivement  mer  passa

E  a  Willam  Bastard  se  maria.

Quant  Willam  fu  corune

E  Malde  sa  femme  a  reiue  leve,

Icele  Malde  se  purpensa

Coment  vengier  se  purra

De  Brictriche  Mau  k'ele  ama,

Ki  a  femme  preiiclre  la  refusa.

Tant  enchanta  son  seignor,

Le  rei  Willam  le  Conqueror,

Ke  de  Brictricli  Mau  1'ad  grante

De  fuire  de  lui  sa  volente.

La  reine  partot  le  fist  guerreier,

K'ele  li  volt  desheriter.

Pris  fu  a  Haneleye  a  son  rnaner,

Le  jor  que  saint  Wlstan  li  ber

Sa  cbapele  avait  dedie  ;

A  Wincestre  fu  amene,

Ilokes  morut  en  prison

Brictrich  Mau  par  treison.

Quant  il  fu  mort  senz  heir  de  sei,

Son  heritage  seisit  le  rei

E  cum  escheit  tint  en  sa  main,

Dekes  il  feoffa  Robert  fiz  Haim2

Ki  oveke  lui  do  Normondie

Vint  od  mult  grant  chevalerie.

La  terre  ke  Brictrich  li  leissa,

Frauchement  a  Robert  dona.

1  From  the  Continuation  du  Brut  d'Angleterre  de  Wace,  par  un  anonyme,
Chroniques  Anglo-Normandes,  i.  73.

2  The  honour  of  Gloucester,  observes  Sir  H.  Ellis,  in  his  valuable  intro-
duction to  Domesday  Book,  was  really  bestowed  upon  Robert  Fitz  Haimon,
by  William  Rufus, so  that  Wace's  continuator  is  guilty  of  at  least  one
anachronism.

APPENDIX NO. XV.  429

No.  XV.  (page  227.)

EXTRACT  FROM  DOMESDAY-BOOK  RELATIVE  TO  THE  STATE  OF  THE
TOWNS  IMMEDIATELY  AFTER  THE  CONQUEST.1

DOVEEE (DOVER).

Dovere  tempore  regis  Edwardi  reddebat  xvui  libras,  de  quibus  denariis
liabebat  rex  E .  duas  partes  et  comes  Godwinus  tertiam  :  contra  hoc  habebant
canonic!  de  SanctoMartino  medietate  maliam.  Burgeuses  dederunt  xx  naves
vegi  una  vice  in  anno  ad  xv  dies  ;  et  in  unaquaque  navi  erant  homines  xx  et
unus.  Hoc  faciebant  pro  eo  quod  eis  perdonaverat  sacam  et  socani.
Quando  Missatici  regis  veniebant  ibi,  dabaut  pro  caballo  trausducendo  in
denarios  in  hieme  et  n  iu  aestate.  Burgenses  vero  inveniebant  stiremau-
uum  et  unum  aliuni  adjutorem  :  et  si  plus  opus  esset,  de  pecunia  ejus  con-
ducebatur.

A  festivitate  S.  Michaelis  usque  ad  festum  sancti  Andreae,  Treuva  (i.  e.
pax)  regis  erat  in  villa.  Si  quis  earn  infregisset,  iude  praepositus  regis  ac-
cipiebat  communem  emendationem.

Quicumque  mauens  in  villa  assiduus  reddebat  regi  consuetudineai,
quietus  erat  de  thelonio  per  totam  Angliam.  Omnes  hse  consuetudines  erant
ibi,  quando  Wilhelmus  rex  iu  Angliam  venit.  In  ipso  primo  adventu  in
Angliam,  fuit  ipsa  villa  combusta;  etideopretiumejus  non  potuit  computari

1  Hist.  angl.  Script.,  Gale,  iii.  759,  et  seq.  (1  give  a  translation  of  the
two  first  articles  for  the  facilitation  of  the  reader  in  perusing  the  remainder
of  this  document. — TVs.)

"  Dover,  in  the  time  of  king  Edward,  rendered  xvui  pounds,  of  which
sum  Edward  had  n  portions  and  earl  Godwin  a  third.  Besides  this,  the
canons  of  St.  Martins  had  another  portion.  The  burgesses  provided  xx
ships  for  the  monarch,  once  each  year,  for  xv  days,  and  in  each  ship  were
xxi  men.  They  rendered  this  service  because  the  king  had  liberated  them
from  Sac  and  Soc.  When  the  messengers  of  the  monarch  came  to  this
port,  they  paid  in  pence  in  winter  and  n  pence  in  summer  for  the  trans-
portation of  a  horse  ;  but  the  burgesses  found  a  pilot  and  one  assistant ;  if
more  were  required,  they  were  furnished  at  the  king's  expense.

"  From  the  festival  of  St.  Michael  to  St.  Andrew,  the  royal  peace  was
maintained  in  the  town.  Whoever  violated  it,  paid  to  the  king's  officer  the
customary  forfeit.

"  Every  inhabitant  of  this  town  that  paid  the  royal  customs,  was  quit  of
toll  throughout  the  realm  of  England.  All  these  customs  existed  when
king  William  came  to  this  counti-y.  At  his  first  arrival,  this  vill  was
destroyed  by  fire,  and  therefore  its  value  could  not  be  estimated  when  the
bishop  of  Bayeux  received  it.  At  the  present  period,  it  is  valued  at  XL
pounds,  yet  the  mayor  pays  LIV  pounds,  xxiv  to  the  king  ia  money,  of  xx
pence  in  the  ore,  and  xxx  to  the  earl,  in  tale.

"In  Dover  there  are  xxix  houses,  of  which  the  king  has  lost  the  cus-
tomary payments.  Of  these,  Robert  de  Romenil  (Romney)  has  n,  Radulf  de
Ourbespine  (Crookthorne)  in,  William  Fitz-Tydald  i,  William  Fitz-Oger  i,
William  Fitz-Tedold  and  Robert  le  Noir  vi,  William  Fitz-Geoffroi  in,  one
of  which  was  the  Guild-hall  of  the  burgesses  ;  Hugh  de  Moutfort  i,  Duvaiid

430  APPENDIX NO.  XV.

quantum  valebat,  quando  episcopus  Baiocensis  earn  recepit.  Modo  appre-
tiatur  XL  lib.  et  tamen  praepositus  inde  reddit  nv  lib.,  Regt  quidem  xxim
lib.  de  denariis  qui  sunt  xx  in  Ora,  comiti  vero  xxx  lib.  ad  uumerum.

In  Dovere  sunt  xxix  mansurae,  de  quibus  rex  perdidit  consuetudinem.,
De  his  habet  Robertus  de  Romenel  duas.  Radulfus  de  Curbespine  in.
Wilbelmus  filius  Tedaldi  i.  Wilbelmus  filius  Ogeri  i.  Wilhelmus  filius
Tedoldi  et  Robertus  Niger  vi.  Wilhelmus  Gaufredi  in. ;  in  quibus  erat
Gihalla  burgensium.  Hugo  de  Montforts  i  domum.  Durandus  i.  Ranulphus
de  Columbel  i.  Wadardus  vi.  Filius  Modberti  unam.  Et  hi  omnes  de  his
domibus  revocant  episcopum  Baiocensem  ad  protectorem  et  liberatorem  (vel
datorem.)

De  ilia  mansura  quam  tenet  Ranulfus  de  Columbels,  quae  fuit  cujusdam
exulis  (vel  utlagi),  concordant  quod  dimidia  terra  est  regis,  et  Ranulphus
ipse  habet  utrunque.  Hunfridus  (Loripes)  tenet  i  mansuram,  de  qua  erafc
forisfactura  dimidia  regis.  Rogerus  de  Ostreham  fecit  quamdam  domum
super  aquam  regis,  et  tenuit  hue  usque  consuetudinem  regis.  Nee  domus
fuit  ibiT.R.E.

CANTUARIA  (CANTERBURY.)

In  civitate  Cantuaria  habuit  rex  Edwardus  L  et  I  Burgenses,  reddentes
gablum,  et  alios  cc  et  xn  super  quos  habebat  sacam  et  socam,  et  in  molen-

I,  Ranulf  de  Columbel  (Colville)  i,  Wadard  vi,  Fitz-Modbert  r.  And  all
these  depend  on  the  bishop  of  Bayeux  as  their  protector  and  donor.

"Of  the  house  which  Ralph  Colville  occupies,  heretofore  the  property  of
an  exile  or  outlaw,  it  is  agreed  that  one  half  of  it  belongs  to  the  king,  and
the  other  to  Ranulf.  Hunfrid  has  i  house,  one  half  of  it  belongs  to  the
king.  Roger  of  Easterham  erected  a  certain  house  upon  the  king's  water,
and  has  hitherto  observed  the  king's  customs.  There  was  no  house  there
in  the  time  of  king  Edward.

CANTUARIA  (CANTERBURY).

"  In  the  city  of  Canterbury  king  Edward  had  LI  burgesses  paying  rent,
ccxu  others  rendering  suit  and  service  to  his  court,  and  in  mills  of  XL
shillings.  At  the  present  time  there  are  xix  burgesses  paying  rent.  Of  the
xxxn  other  houses,  xi  were  destroyed  to  make  way  for  the  city  ditch.  The
archbishop  has  vn,  and  the  abbot  of  St.  Augustin's  xiv,  in  exchange  for
the  castle ;  there  are  still  ccxu  burgesses  rendering  Sac  and  Soc  to  the
king;  the  in  mills  produce  cvm  shillings,  and  the  toll  yields  LXVIII
shillings.  There  are  vin  acres  of  meadow  which  formerly  belonged  to  the
lieutenants  of  the  king;  they  now  yield  a  rent  of  xv  shillings;  and  there
are  M  acres  of  unproductive  wood,  rented  at  xxiv  shillings.  The  total  value
under  king  Edward  was  LI  pounds,  and  it  was  the  same  when  viscount
Hamo  received  it ;  now  it  is  valued  at  L  pounds  :  yet  the  mayor  now  pays
xxx  pounds  of  pure  silver  coin,  and  xxiv  pounds  in  tale.  Besides  all
this,  the  viscount  receives  ex  shillings.

"  The  burgesses  had  XLV  houses  beyond  the  precincts  of  the  city,  from
which  they  received  rent  and  customary  payments ;  but  the  king  had  Sac
and  Soc  therefore.  The  burgesses  also  had  xxxm  acres  of  land  from  the
king  for  their  guild.  These  houses  and  this  land  Ralph  Colville  holds ;
besides  these,  he  has  LXXX  acres  of  allotted  land,  which  the  burgesses  held
from  the  monarch.  He  has  v  other  acres,  which  rightly  belong  to  a  church.
For  all  these,  Ranulf  appeals  to  the  bishop  of  Bayeux  for  protection,"  &c.  &c.

APPENDIX NO.  XV.  431

dinade  XL  sol.  Modo  Burgenses  gablum  reddeutes  suntxix.  De  xxxn  aliis,
qui  fuerunt.  sunt  vastati  xi  in  fossato  civitatis :  et  archiepiscopus  habet  ex
eis  vn,  et  abb.  S.  Augustini  alios  xiv  pro  excambio  castelli ;  et  adhuc  sunt
cc  et  xu  burgenses,  super  quos  habet  rex  sac  am  et  socam  et  molend.  in
reddunt  c  et  vm  sol.  et  theloneum  redd  LXVIII  sol.  Ibi  vm  acrae  prati,  quas
solebant  esse  legatorum  regis,  modo  reddunt  de  censu  xv  sol.  et  mille  acrae
silvae  infructuosae  de  qua  exeunt  xxiv  solidi.  Tntra  totum  T.R.  E.  valuit
ii  lib.  et  tantumdem  quando  vicecomes  (Hamo)  recepit;  et  modo  L  lib.
appreciatur.  Tamen  qui  tenet  nunc  reddit  xxx  lib.  arsas  et  pensatas  et  xxiv
lib.  ad  numerum.  Super  haec  ornnia  habet  vicecomes  c  et  x  sol.

Burgenses  habuerunt  XLV  mansuras  extra  civitatem,  de  quibus  ipsi  habe-
bant  gablum  et  consuetudinem  ;  rex  autem  liabebat  sacam  et  socam.  Ipsi
quoque  burgenses  habebaut  de  rege  xxxm  acras  terras  in  gildam  suam.
Has  domus  et  hanc  terram  tenet  Rauulfus  de  Columbels ;  habet  etiam  qua-
tuor  xxi  acras  terras  super  haec,  quas  tenebaut  burgenses  in  alodia  de  rege.
Tenet  quoque  v  acras  terras,  quae  juste  pertinent  uni  ecclesiae.  De  liis  om-
nibus revocat  isdem  Eauulfus  ad  protectorem  epis.  Baiocensem.

Kadulfus  de  Curbespiue  habet  iv  mansuras  in  civitate,  quas  tenuit  quaedam
concubina  Heraldi,  de  quibus  est  saca  et  socaregis,  sed  usque  nunc  non  habeit.

Isdem  Eadulfus  tenet  alias  xi  mansuras  de  Epispoco  (Baiocens)  in  ipsa
civitate  quae  fuerunt  Sbern  Biga,  et  reddunt  xi  sol.  et  n  denarios  et  i  obo-
lum.  Per  totam  civitatem  Cantuariae  habet  rex  sacam  et  socam,  excepta
terra  Ecclesise  S.  Trinitatis  et  S.  Augustini,  et  Eddewe  reginae,  et  Alnold
cild,  et  Eiber  Biga,  et  Siret  de  Cilleham.

ROVECESTER  (ROCHESTEB.)

Civitas  Rovecester  T.  R.  E.  valeb.  c  sol.  Quando  episcopus  recepit,  simi-
liter.  Modo  val.  xx  lib.  tamen  ille  qui  tenet  reddit  XL  lib.

CASTRUM  HARUNDEL  (ABUNDEL.)

Robertus  films  Tetbaldi  habet  (in  castro  Harundel)  n  hagas  de  xu  sol.
et  de  hominibus  extraneis  habet  suum  theloneum.  Morinus  habet  consue-
tudinem de  ii  burgensibus  de  xu  denar.  Ernaldtis  iinum  burgensem  de  xu
denariis.  S.  Martinus  i  burgensem  de  xu  denariis.  Radulfus  unam  hagam
de  xu  denariis.  Will,  v  hagas  de  v  sol.  Nigellus  v  hagas  quas  faciunt
servitium.

BURGUM  DE  LEWES (LEWES.)

Burgum  de  Lewes  T.  R.  E.  reddebat  vi  libras  et  iv  sol.  et  m  obolos  de
gablo  et  de  theloneo.  Ibi  rex  E.  habebat  cxxvn  burgenses  in  dominio.
Eoruni  consuetudo  erat,  si  rex  ad  mare  custodiendum  sine  se  mitterre  suos
voluisset,  de  omnibus  hominibus,  cujuscunque  terra  fuisset,  colligebant  xx
sol.  et  hos  habebant  qui  in  navibus  arma  custodiebant.  Qui  in  burgo  ven-
dit,  dat  preeposito  nummuin ;  et  qui  emit,  alium.  De  bove  obolum.  De
homine  iv  denarios,  quocumque  loco  emat  infra  rapura.

Sanguinem  fundens  emendat  per  vn  sol.  et  iv  denarios.  Adulterium  vel
raptum  faciens,  vm  sol.  et  iv  deuarios  emeudat  homo,  et  femina  tantundem.
Rex  habet  hominem  adulterum,  archiepiscopus  feminam.  De  fugitivo  si
recuperatus  fuerit  vm  sol.  et  iv  denarios.  Cum  moneta  revocatur,  dat  xx
sol.  unusquisque  monetarius.  De  his  omnibus  erant  n  partes  regis  et  tertia
comitis.  Modo  per  omuia  reddunt  Burgens.  sicut  tune,  et  xxxvm  sol.  de
super  plus.  De  rapo  de  Pevenesel.  xxxix  mansuras  hospitatoe  et  xx  inhos-

432  APPENDIX NO.  XV.

pitatae,  ex  quibus  rex  habet  xxvi  sol.  et  vi  denarios  et  de  his  habet  Will,  de
Warene  medietatem.  T.  R.  E.  valebant  xxvi  lib. Rex  medietatem  et  comes
aliarn  babet. Modo  val.  xxxivlib.  et  de  novamoneta  c  sol.  et  xvm.
De  bis  omnibus  babet  Will,  medietatem  et  rex  alteram.

G1LDEFORD  (GUILDFOBD.)

In  Gildeford  babet  rex  Willelmus  LXXV  liagas,  in  quibus  inanent  CLXXY
liomiues.  T.R.  E.  reddebant  xxni  lib.  et  in  denarios.  Modo  apprecian-
tur  xxx  lib.  et  tamen  reddunt  xxu  lib.  De  supra  dictis  liagis  habet  Ranul-
fus  clericus  in  hagas,  ubi  manent  vi  homines ;  et  inde  habet  isdem  Ranul-
fus  sacam  et  socam,  nisi  commune  geldum  in  villa  venerit,  unde  nullus
evadat.  Si  homo  ejus  in  villa  delinquit,  et  divadiatus  evadat,  nil  iude  habet
praepositus  regis.  Si  vero  calumniatus  ibi  ^uerit  et  divadiatus,  tune  habet
rex  emendam.  Sic  tenuit  eas  Stigandus  (arch.)

Ranulfus  (vicecomes)  tenet  i  hagam,  quam  hue  usque  tenuit  de  episcopo
Baiocensi:  homines  vero  testificantur  quia  non  adjacet  alicui  manerio,  sed
qui  tenebat  earn  T.  R.  E.  concessit  earn  Tovi  praeposito  villas  pro  emenda-
tione  unius  suae  forisfacturee.

Altera  domus  est  quam  tenet  praepesitns  episcopi  Baiocensis  de  Manerio
Bronlei.  De  hoc  dicunt  homines  de  comitatu,  quod  non  habet  ibi  aliam
rectidudinem,  nisi  quod  quandam  viduam,  cujus  erat  domus,  accepit  praepo-
situs villas,  et  ideo  misit  episcopus  donmm  illam  in  suo  manerio  et  hue  usque
perdidit  rex  consuetudines,  episcopus  autem  habet.

Dicunt  etiam  homines  qui  juraverunt  de  alia  domo  quae  jacet  in  Brunlei,
propter  hoc  tantum  quod  praepositus  Pie  ipsa  villa  fuit  amicus  hominis  illius
qui  hanc  domum  habebat,  et  eo  mortuo  convertit  earn  ad  M.  de  Bronlei.

Walterannus  quoque  desaisivit  quendam  hominem  dettna  domo,  unde  rex
E.  habebat  consuetudinem.  Modo  tenet  earn  Otbertus  cum  consuetudine,
sicut  dicit,  per  regem  W.  Robertus  de  Watevile  tenet  i  domum  quse  redde-
bat  omnem  consuetudinem  T.  R.  E.  Modo  nichil  reddit.

WALINGFORD  (WALLINGFORD.)

In  Burgo  de  Walingeford  habuit  rexEdwardus  vni.  virgatas  terrae  :  et  in
his  erant  ccvxxvi  hagae,  reddentes  xi  lib.  de  gablo,  et  qui  ibi  manebant
faciebant  servitium  regis  cum  equis  vel  per  aquam  usque  ad  Blidberiam,
Reddinges,  Sudtone,  Besentone,  et  hoc  facientibus  dabat  praepositus  merce-
dem  (vel  conredium)  non  de  censu  regis,  sed  de  suo.

Modo  stint  in  ipso  Burgo  cousuetudines  omnes  ut  ante  fuerunt.  Sed  de
hagis  sunt  xm  minus  pro  castello,  sunt  vui  destructse,  et  monetarius  habet
unam  quietam,  quamdiu  facit  monetam.  Saulf  de  Oxenford  habet  unam ;
filius  Alsi  de  Ferendone  unam,  quam  rex  ei  dedit,  ut  dicit  Hunftidus ;  Wis-
delew  habet  unam,  de  qua  reclamat  regem  ad  Warant.  Nigellus  unam  de
Henrico  per  hsereditatem  Soarding,  sed  burgenses^  testificantur  se  nunquam
habuisse.  De  istis  xm  non  habet  rex  consuetudinem  et  adhuc  Will,  de
Ware  habet  unam  hagam,  de  qua  rex  non  habet  consuetudines,  etc.

DORECESTRE  (DORCHESTER.)

In  Dorecestre,  tempore  regis  Edwardi,  erant  CLXXII  domus.  Has  pro
ornni  servitio  regis  se  defendebant  et  geldebant  fro  x  hid.  scilicet  ad  opus
huscarlium  unam  markam  argenti,  exceptis  consuetudinibus  quae  pertinent
ad  nrmam  noctis.  Ibi  erant  n  monetarii,  quisque  eorum  reddebat  regi  unam
markam  argenti  et  xx  sol.  quando  moneta  vertebatur.

APPENDIX NO.  XV.  433

Modo  sunt  ibi  quatuor  xx  et  vui  domus,  et  c  penitus  destructae  a  tern-
pore  Hugonis  vicecomitis  usque  mine.

BRIDEPORT  (BBIDPOBT.)

In  Brideport,  tempore  regis  Ed\v.  erant  cxx  domus  et  ad  omues  servitium
regis  defendebant  se  et  geldebant  pro  v  hidis ;  scilicet  ad  opus  huscarlium
regis  dimid.  markam  argenti,  exceptis  consuetudinibus  quae  pertinent  ad
fmnam  unius  noctis  :  ibi  erat  untis  monetarius,  reddebat  regi  i  mark,  argenti
et  xx  sol.  quando  moueta  vertebatur.

Modo  sunt  ibi  c  domus  et  xx  sunt  ita  destructae,  quod  qui  in  eis  manent
geld,  solvere  non  valent.

WARHAM  (WABEHAM.)

In  Warham  tempore  regis  Edvvar.  erant  CXLIII  domus  in  domiu.  regis.
Haec  villa  ad  omne  servitium  regis  se  defendebat  et  geldebat  pro  x  hid.  sci-
licet I  markam  argeuti  huscarlis  regis,  exceptis  cousuetudinibus  quae  perti-
nent ad  firmam  unius  noctis;  ibi  eraut  n  monetarii,  quisque  reddebat  i
markam  argenti  regi,  et  xx  sol.  quando  moneta  vertebatur.

Modo  sunt  ibi  LXX  domus  et  LXIII  sunt  penitus  destructae  a  tempore
Hugonis  vicecomitis,  etc.

SCEPTESBERIE (SHAFTESBUBY.)

In  burgo  Sceptesberie  T.  R.  E.  erant  c  et  iv  domus  in  dominio  regis.
Haec  villa  ad  omne  servitium  regis  se  defendebat,  et  geldebat  pro  xx  hid.
scilicet  ii  mark,  argenti  huscarlis  regis ;  ibi  erant  in  monetarii,  quisque
reddebat  i  mark,  argenti  et  xx  sol.  quando  moneta  vertebatur,  etc.

EXONIA  (EXETEB.)

In  civitate  Exonia  habet  rex  ccc  domus  xv  minus,  reddentes  consuetu-
dinem  :  haec  reddit  xvni  lib.  per  annum.  De  his  habet  B.  Vicecomes  vi  lib.
ad  pensum  et  arsurarn,  et  Coluinus  xn  lib.  ad  numerum,  in  ministeriis  Eddid
reginae.

In  hac  civitate  sunt  vastatae  XLVIII  domus,  postquam  rex  venit  in
Angliam.

Hasc  civitas,  T.R.  E.,  non  geldebat  nisi  quando  Londonia,  et  Eboracum,
et  Wibtonia  geldebant,  et  hoc  erat  dimid.  markam  argenti,  ad  opus  militare.
Quando  expeditio  ibatper  terrain  aut  per  mare,  serviebat  haec  civitas  quantum
v  hidae  terras.  Barnestapla  vero  et  Lidesord  et  Totenais  serviebat  quantum
ipsa  civitas.

Burgenses  Exonise  urbis  habent  extra  civitatem  ten-am  xii  carucarum,
quae  nullam  consuetudinem  reddunt  nisi  "ad  ipsam  civitatem.

BURGUM  HERTFORD  (HEBTFOBD.)

Burgum  Hertforde  pro  x  hidis  se  defeudebat  T.  R.  E.  et  modo  non  facit.
Ibi  erant  CXLVI  Burgenses  in  soca  regis  Edwardi,  nullam  consuetudiuem
reddiderunt  nisi  geldum  regis  quaudo  colligebatur.

OXENEFORD (OXF9BD.)

Tempore  regis  Edwardi  reddebat  Oxeneford  pro  theloneo  et  gablo  et  om-
nibus aliis  consuetudinibus  per  annum,  regi  quidem  xx  lib.  et  vi  sextaria
rnellis,  comiti  vero  Algaro  x  lib.  adjuncto  molino  quem  infra  civitatem  habe-
bat.  Quando  rex  ibat  in  expeditionem,  burgenses  xx  ibant  cum  eo  pro  om-
nibus aliis,  vel  xx  lib.  dabaht  regi,  ut  omnes  esseut  liberi.

Modo  reddit  Oxeneford  LX  lib.  ad  numerum  de  xx  in  Ora.

434  APPENDIX NO.  XV.

In  ipsa  villa,  tarn  intra  murum  quain  extra,  sunt  CCXLIII  domus  reddentes
geld,  et  exceptis  his  sunt  ibi  quingentae  domus,  xxn  minus,  ita  vastatee  et
destructae  quod  gelduin  non  possent  reddere.

Bex  habet  xx  inansiones  murales  quse  fuerunt  Algari  (coinitis)  T.  K.  E.
reddentes  tune  et  modo  xiv  sol.  n  deuar.  minus,  etc.

Propterea  vocantur  murales  mansiones  quia  si  opus  fuerit,  et  rex  praecepit,
murum  reficient  viz.  unam  ex  his  habuit  antecessor  Walterii  dono  regis  E.
ex  viu  virg.  quae  consuetudinariae  erant  T.  E.  E.,  etc.

Hi  omnes  prescript!  tenent  has  praedictas  mansiones  liberas  propter  repa-
rationem  muri.

Omnes  mansiones  quse  vocantur  murales  T.  E.  E.  liberge  erant  ab  omni
consuetudine,  excepta  expeditione  et  muri  reparatione.

Alwimus  i  (tenet)  domum  liberam  pro  muro  reficiendo ;  de  hac  habet
xxxn  den.  per  annum.  Et  si  murus,  dum  opus  est,  per  eum  qui  debet  non
restauratur,  aut  XL  sol.  regi  emendabit,  aut  domum  suam  perdit.

Omnes  burgenses  Oxeneford  habent  communiter  extra  murum  pastnram
reddentem  vi  sol.  et  vm  denarios.

GLOWECESTEE (GLOUCESTER.)

Tempore  regis  Edwai'di  reddebat  civitas  de  Glowecestre  xxxvi  lib.  nume-
ratas  et  xn  sectaria  mellis  ad  mensuram  burgi,  et  xxxvi  dicras  fern  et  c
virgas  ferreas  ductiles  ad  clavos  navium  regis,  et  quasdam  alias  minutas  con-
suettidines  in  aula  et  in  camera  regis.

Modo  reddit  ipsa  civitas  regi  LX  lib.  de  xx  in  Ora ;  et  de  moneta  habet
rex  xx  lib.,  etc.,  cum  alia  consuetudine,  quae  dat  gablum  sed  aliam  consue-
tudinein  retinet.

Omnes  istae  mansiones  reddebant  regalem  consuetudinem  T.  E.  E.
Modo  rex  W.  nicliil  inde  habet,  etc.,  sed  etiam  domus  erant  ubi  sedet  cas-
tellum,  etc.

WIEECESTEE  (WORCESTER.)

In  civitate  Wirecestre,  habebat  rex  Edw.  hanc  consuetudinem.  Quando
moneta  vertebatur,  quisque  monetarius  dabat  xx  sol.  ad  Lundoniam  pro
cuneis  monetae  accipiendis.  Quando  comitatus  geldebat,  pro  xv  hid.  se
civitas  adqnietabat.  De  eadem  civitate  habebat  ipse  rex  x  lib.  et  comes  Ed-
vinus  vm  lib.  Nullam  aliam  consuetudinem  ibi  rex  capiebat,  praeter  cen-
sum  domorum,  sicnt  unicuique  pertinebat.  Modo  habet  rex  W.  in  dominio
et  partem  regis  et  partem  comitis.  Inde  reddit  vicecomes  xxm  lib.  et  vsol.
nd  pensum,  de  civitate  et  de  dominicis  maneriis  regis  reddebat  cxxm  lib.  et
iv  sol.  ad  pensum.  De  comitatu  vero  reddebat  xvn  lib.  ad  pensum.  Et
adhuc  reddit  x  lib.  denariorum  de  xx  in  Ora,  aut  accipitrem  (norresc)  et
adhuc  c  sol.  reginae  ad  numerum,  et  xx  sol.  de  xx  in  Ora  pro  summario.
Hae  xvn  libra?  ad  pensum  et  xvi  lib.  ad  numerum  sunt  de  placetis  comitatus
et  hundreds,  et  si  inde  non  accipit,  de  siio  proprio  reddit.

HEEEFOED  (HEREFORD.)

In  Hereford  civitate  tempore  regis  Edwardi  erant  c  et  m  homines  com-
manentes  intus  et  extra  murum,  habebaut  has  subterscriptas  consuetudines.

Si  quis  eorurn  voluisset  recedere  de  civitate,  poterat  concessu  praepositi
domum  suam  vendere  alteri  homini,  servitium  debitum  inde  facere  volenti,
et  habebat  praepositus  tertium  denarium  hujus  venditionis.  Quod  si  quis
paupertate  sua  non  potuisset  servitium  facere,  relinquebat  sine  precio  domum

APPENDIX NO.  XV.  435

suam  praeposito,  qui  providebat  ne  domus  vacua  remaneret  et  ne  rex  careret
servitio.

Intra  murum  civitatis  unaquaque  integra  masura  reddebat  vii  denarios  et
obolum,  et  iv  denarios  ad  locandos  caballos,  et  in  diebus  in  Augusto  seca-
bat  ad  Maurdine,  et  una  die  ad  fenum  congregandum  erat,  ubi  vicecomes
volebat.  Qui  equum  liabebat  ter  in  anno  pevgebat  cum  vicecomite  ad  placita
et  ad  hundret  ad  Urmelavia.  Quaudo  rex  venatui  instabat,  de  unaquaque
domo  per  consuetudinem  ibat  unus  homo  ad  stabilitionem  in  silva.  Alii
homines  non  habentes  integras  masuras,  inveniebant  inewardos  ad  aulam,
quando  rex  erat  in  civitate.

Burgensis  cum  caballo  serviens,  cum  moriebatur,  liabebat  rex  equum
et  arma  ejus.  De  eo  qui  equum  non  habebat,  si  moreretur,  habebat  rex
aut  x  sol.  aut  terrain  ejus  cum  domibus.

Si  quis  morte  prseventus  non  divisisset  quse  sua  erant,  rex  liabebat  omnem
ejus  pecuniam.  Has  consuetudines  habebant  in  civitate  habitantes  et  alii  si-
militer  extra  murum  manentes,  nisi  tantum  quod  integra  masura  foris  murum
non  dabat  nisi  in  denar.  et  obolum.  Alise  consuetndines  erant  communes.

Cujuscuuque  uxor  brazabat  intus  et  extra  civitatem,  dabat  x  denarios  per
consuetudinem.

Sex  fabri  erant  in  civitate  :  quisque  eorum  de  sua  forgia  reddebat  unum
denarium,  et  quisque  eorum  faciebat  cxx  ferra  de  ferro  regis,  et  unicuique
eorum  dabantur  in  denarii  inde  per  consuetudinem,  et  isti  fabri  ab  omni
alio  servitio  erant  quieti.

Septem  monetarii  erant  ibi.  Unus  ex  his  erat  monetarius  episcopi.
Quando  moneta  renovabatur,  dabat  quisque  eorum  xvni  sol.  pro  cuneis  re-
cipiendis  ;  et  ex  eo  die  quo  redibant  usque  ad  unum  mensem,  dabat  quisque
eorum  regi  xx  sol.  et  similiter  habebat  epis.  de  suo  monetario  xx  sol.

Quando  veniebat  rex  in  civitatem  quantum  volebat  denar.  faciebant  ei  mo-
netarii, de  argeuto  scilicet  regis,  et  hi  vn  habebant  sacam  et  socham  suam.

Moriente  aliquo  regis  monetario,  habebat  rex  xx  sol.  de  relevamento.
Quod  si  moreretur  non  diviso  censu  suo,  rex  habebat  omnem  censum.

Si  vicecomes  iret  in  Wales  cum  exercitu,  ibant  hi  homines  cum  eo.  Quod
si  quis  ire  jussus  non  iret,  emendabat  regi  XL  sol.

In  ipsa  civitate  habebat  Heraldus  (comes)  xxvn  burgenses,  easdem  con-
suetudines habentes  quas  et  alii  burgenses.

De  hac  civitate  reddebat  prsepositus  xn  lib.  regi  (E.)  et  vi  lib.  comiti
(Heraldo)  et  habebat  in  suo  censu  supradictas  omnes  consuetudines.

Rex  vero  habebat  in  suo  dominio  tres  forisfacturas,  hoc  est  pacem  suam
iufractam,  et  heinfaram,  et  forestellum.

Quicunque  horum  unum  fecisset,  emendabat  c  sol.  regi  cujuscumque
homo  fuisset.

Modo  habet  rex  civitatem  Hereford  in  dominio,  et  anglici  burgenses  ibi
manentes  habent  suas  priores  consuetudines  :  Francigenoe  vero  burgenses
habent  quietas  per  xn  denarios  omnes  forisfacturas,  prseter  tres  supradictas.

Hoec  civitas  reddit  regi  LX  lib.  ad  numerum,  de candidis  denariis,  intra
civitatem  et  xvni  maneria  quoe  in  Hereford  reddunt  firmas  suas,  compu-
tantur  cccxxxv  lib.  et  xvni  sol.  exceptis  placitis  de  hund.  de  comitatu.
GRENTEBRIGE  (CAMBEIDGE.)

Burgum  de  Grentebrige  pro  uno  hundret  se  defend  T.  R.  E.  In  hoc
Burgo  fuerunt  et  sunt  decem  custodies.  In  prima  custodia  tiv  masurce,  ex

436  APPENDIX NO.  XV.

his  ii  sunt  vaste.  In  hac  prima  custodia  habet  Alanus  comes  v  Imrgenses
nichil  reddentes,  etc.  Haec  eadem  una  custodia  pro  duabus  computabatur
T.  R.  E. ;  sed  pro  castro  sunt  destructse  xxviu  domus.

In  secunda  custodia  fuerunt  XL vm  masurae  T.  R.  E.,  etc.

In  tercia  custodia  T.  R.  E.  fuerunt  XLI  masurae,  etc.

In  quarta  custodia  T.  R.  E.  fuerunt  XLV  masurse.

De  consuetudinibus  hujus  villae  vn  lib.  per  annum,  et  de  Landgable  yn
lib.  et  ii  Orae  et  duo  denar.

Burgenses  T.  R.  E.  accommodabant  vicecomiti  carrucas  suas  ter  in  anno.
Modo  novem  vicibus  exiguntur.

Nee  averas  nee  currus  T.  T.  E.  inveniebant,  quse  modo  faciunt  per  con-
suetudinem  impositam.  Reclamant  autem  super  Picotum  vicecomitem,  com-
munem  pasturam  sibi  per  eum  (et  ab  eo)  ablatam.

De  Harieta  Lagemannortun  habuit  isdem  Picot.  vu  lib.  et  unum  pulfri-
dum,  et  unius  militis  anna.

HUNTEDUN  (HUNTINGDON.)

Huntedun  burg  defendebat  se  ad  geld,  regis  pro  quarta  parte  de  hyrstinges-
tan  bund,  pro  L  hid. ;  sed  modo  non  geldat  ita  in  illo  hund.  postquam  rex
W.  geldum  monetse  posuit  in  burgo.  De  toto  hoc  burgo  exibant  T.  R.  E.
de  Landgable  x  lib.  inde  comes  tertiam  partem  habebat,  rex  duas.  De  hoc
censu  remanent  nunc  supra  xx  mansurae,  nbi  castrum  est  xvi  sol.  et  vm
denar.  inter  comitem  et  regem.  Praeter  haec  habebat  rex  xx  lib.  et  comes
x  lib.  de  firma  burgi,  aut  plus  ant  minus,  sicut  poterat  collocare  partem
suam,  etc.

Hanc  terram  colunt  burgenses,  et  locant  per  ministros  regis  et  comitis.
Infra  praedictum  censum  sunt  in  piscatores  in  sol.  reddentes.

In  hoc  burgo  fuerunt  in  monetarii  reddentes  XL  sol.  inter  regem  et  co-
mitem; sed  modo  non  sunt.  T.  R.  E.  reddebant  xxx  lib.,  modo  similiter.

BEDEFORD  (BEDFORD.)

Bedeford  T.  R.  E.  pro  dimidio  hund,  se  defendebat,  et  modo  facit,  in  ex-
peditione  et  in  navibus.  Terra  de  hac  villa  nunquam  fuit  hidata,  nee  modo
est,  prseter  imam  hidam,  quae  jacuit  in  ecclesia  S.  Pauli  in  elemosina,  etc.

LEDECESTRE  (LEICESTER.)

Civitas  de  Ledecestre  tempore  regis  Edwardi  reddebat  per  annum  regi
xxx  lib.  ad  numerum  de  xx  in  Ora  et  xv  sextaria  mellis.

Quando  rex  ibat  in  exercitu  per  terram,  de  ipso  burgo  xn  burgenses
ibant  cum  eo.  Si  vero  per  mare  in  hostem  ibat,  mittebant  ei  iv  equos  de
eodem  burgo  usque  Londoniam,  ad  comportandum  arnia,  vel  alia  quse  opus
esset.

Modo  habet  rex  W.  fpro  omnibus  redditibus  civitatis  ejusdem  et  conri-
tatus  XLII  lib.  et  x  sol.  ad  poudus ;  pro  uuo  accipitre  x  lib.  ad  numerum  :
pro  summario  xx  sol.  De  monetariis  xx  lib.  per  annum  de  xx  in  Ora.  De
his  xx  lib.  habet  Hugo  de  Grentemaisnil  tertium  denarium.

WARWIC  (WARWICK.)

In  burgo  de  Warwic,  habet  rex  in  dominio  suo  cxm  domus,  et  baror.es
regis  habent  cxn  de  quibus  omnibus  rex  habet  geldum  sunm,  etc.  Episco-
pus  de  Wirecestre  habet  LX  masuras,  et  sic  de  cceteris ;  proater  has  supra-

APPENDIX NO.  XV.  437

dictas  masuras  smit  in  ipso  burgo  xix  burgenses  qui  liabent  xix  masuras
cum  saca  et  soca  et  omnibus  consuetudinibus  et  ita  habebant  T.  K.  E.

SCIROPESBERIE  (SHBEWSBUBY.)

Haec  civitas  T.  R.  E.  geldabat  pro  c  hidis.  De  his  habebat  S.  Almundus
u  hid.  et  sic  de  ceteris.

Dicunt  Angligense  burgenses  de  Sciropesberie  multum  grave  sibi  esse,
quod  ipsi  reddunt  totum  geldum,  sicuti  reddebant  T.  R.  E.  quamvis  castel-
lum  comitis  occupaverit  LI  masuras  et  aliae  L  masurae  sint  vastatae,  et  XLIII
Francigense  burgenses  teneant  masuras  geldantes  T.  R.  E.  et  abbatiae  quam
facit  ibi  comes  dederit  ipse  xxxix  burgenses,  olim  similiter  cum  aliis  gel-
dantes.

Intra  totum  sunt  cc  masurse,  vn  minus,  quae  non  geldant.

EBORACUM  (YORK.)

In  Eboraco  civitate  tempore  regis  Edwardi  praeter  scyram  archiepiscopi
fuerunt  vi  scyrae ;  una  ex  his  est  vastata  in  castellis.

Inquinque  scyris  fuerunt  mille  et  quadringentae  etxvm  mansiones  hospi-
tatae. De  una  harum  scyrarum  habet  archiepiscopus  adhuc  tertiam  par-
tem.  In  his  nemo  alius  habebat  consuetudiuem  nisi  ut  burgensis,  praeter
Merlesvainan  una  domo  quae  est  infra  castellum,  et  praeter  canonicos  ubi-
cunque  mansissent,  et  praeter  iv  judices,  quibus  rex  dabat  hoe  donum  per
suum  brevem,  et  quamdiu  vivebant.

Archiepiscopus  autem  de  sua  scyra  habebat  plenam  cousuetudinem.

De  supra  dictis  omnibus  mansionibus  sunt  modo  hospitatae  in  manu
regis  reddentes  consuetudinem  quadringentae,  ix  minus,  inter  magnas  et
parvas ;  et  cccc  mansiones  non  hospitatae,  quoa  reddunt  melior  i  denarium,
et  aliae  minus ;  et  quingentae  et  XL  mansiones  ita  vacuae,  quod  nil  omnino
reddunt,  et  CXLV  mansiones  teuent  Francigeuse.

L1NCOLIA  (LINCOLN.)

In  civitate  Lincolia  erant,  tempore  regis  Edwardi,  novies  centum  et  LXX
mansiones  hospitatae.  Hie  numerus  Anglice  computatur  i  centum  pro  cxx.

In  ipsa  civitate  erant  xii  Lagemaimi,  id  est  habentes  sacam  et  socam,
Hardecnut,  Suartin,  F.  Grimboldi,  Ulf  filius  Suertebrand,  qui  liabuit  Thol
et  Them,  Walraven,  Alwold,  Brictric,  Guret,  Ulbert,  Godric,  F.  Eddeve,  Si-
ward  (presbyter),  Leuwine  (presbyter),  Aleleve  (presbyter).

Modo  sunt  ibi  totidem  habentes  similiter  sacam  et  socam.  Suardinc  (i)
loco  Hardecnut  patris  sui,  Suartinc  (n),  Sortebrand  (in)  loco  Ulf  patris
sui,  Agemund  (iv)  loco  Walraven  patris  sui,  Aluwold  (v),  Goduinus  (vi)
filius  Brictric,  Normauus  (vn),  Crassus  loco  Guret,  Ulbert  (vin),  frater
Ulf  adhuc  vivit,  Pethrus  (ix)  de  Valonges  loco  Godric  filii  Eddeve,  Ul-
noldus  (x)  presbyter  loco  Siward,  presb.  Burnolt  (xi)  loco  patris  sui  Leu-
wine,  qui  modo  est  monachus,  Ledewinus  (xn)  filius  Ravene  loco  Aldene
presbyteri.

Tochi  filius  Outi  habuit  in  civitate  xxx  mansiones  praeter  suam  liallam,
et  ii  ecclesias  et  dimidiam  ;  et  suam  hallam  habuit  quietam  ab  omni  con-
suetudine  et  super  alias  xxx  mansiones  habuit  locationem,  et  prseter  lioc  de
unaquaque  unum  denarium,  id  est  Laugdable.  Super  has  xxx  mansiones
habebat  rex  theloneum  et  forisfacturam,  ut  burgenses  juravenmt.  Sed  his

VOL.  I.  G  G

438

APPENDIX NO.  XV.

jurantibus  contradicit Ulviet  presbyter,  et  offert  se  portaturum  judicium
quod  non  ita  est  sicuti  dicunt,  etc.

Radulfus  Pagenel  habet  i  mansiouem,  etc.,  et  sic  de  ceteris.

Aluredus  nepos  Turoldi  Labet  in.  Toftes  de  terra  sybi,  quantum  rex
sibi  dedit,  in  quibus  babet  omues  consuetudines,  praeter  geldum  de  Mone-
dagio.

Consuetudines  regis  et  comitis  in  Sudlincolia  reddunt  xxin  lib.

In  Nortreding  consuetudines  regis  et  comitis  reddunt  xxiv  lib.

In  Westreding  consuetudines  regis  et  comitis  reddunt  xn  lib.

In  Sudtreding  consuetudines  regis  et  comitis  reddunt  xv  lib.

Pax  manu  regis  vel  sigillo  ejus  data,  si  fuerit  infracta,  emendatur  per
xvin  hundret.  Unum  quoque  hund.  solvit  vni  lib.  duodecim.  hund.  emeu-
daut  regi  et  vi  comiti.

NORWIC (NOBWICH.)

Hoc  de  Norwic.  In  Norwic  erant  tempore  regis  Edwardi  MCCCXX  bur-
genses.  Quorum  nnas  ita  dominicus  regis,  ut  non  posset  recedere  nee
liomagium  facere  sine  licentia  ipsius  cui  erat  nomen  Edstan,  etc.

Tota  hsec  villa  reddebat  T.  R.  E.  xx  lib.  regi  et  comiti  x  lib.  et  praeter
hoc  xxi  sol.  et  iv  denar.  praebendarios,  et  vi  sextarios  mellis,  et  i  ursum  et
vi  canes  ad  ursum ;  et  modo  LXX  lib.  pensum  regis  et  c  sol.  ad  numerum  de
gersuma  reginae,  et  i  asturconem  et  xx  lib.  blancas  comiti  et  xx  sol.  ger-
suma  ad  numerum  G.,  etc.

Franci  de  Norwic  in  novo  burgo  xxxvi  burgenses  et  vi  Anglici  et  ex
annua  consuetudine  reddebat  unusquisque  v  denar.  proster  forisfacturas.
De  hoc  toto  habebat  rex  rex  n  partes  et  comes  tertiam.  Modo  XLI  bur-
genses franci  in  dominio  regis  et  comitis  et  Rogerius  Bigot  habet  L  et  sic  de
nliis.

Tota  haec  terra  burgensium  erat  in  dominio  comitis  Rad.  et  coucessit
earn  regi  in  commune  ad  faciendum  burgum  inter  se  et  regem,  ut  testatur
vicecomes.  Et  omnes  terras  istse,  tam  militum  quam  burgensium,  reddunt
regi  suam  consuetudinem.

CESTRE  (CHESTEB.)

Civitas  de  Cestre,  tempore  regis  Edwardi,  geldabat  pro  L  hidis.  Tres  et
dimidium,  quae  sunt  extra  civitatem  (hoc  est,  una  hida  et  dimidium
ultra  pontem,  et  duae  hidae  in  Neutone,  etRedclive  et  in  burgo  episcopi) ;  hs&
geldabant  cum  civitate.

Tempore  regis  Edwardi  erant  in  ipsa  civitate  cccc  et  xxxi  domus  gel-
dantes  ;  et  preeter  has  habebat  episcopus  LVI  domus  geldantes.  Tune  red-
debat haec  civitas  x  marcas  argent!  et  dimidiam :  duae  partes  eraut  regis  et
tertia  comitis...

Tempore  regis  Edwardi  erant  in  civitate  hac  septem  monetarii,  qui  da-
bant  septem  libras  regi  et  comiti  extra  nrmam,  quaudo  moneta  verte-
batur.

Tune  erant  xn  judices  civitatis  ;  et  hi  erant  de  hominibus  regis  et  epis-
copi et  comitis  ;  barton  si  quis  de  hundret  remanebat  die  quo  sedebant,
sine  excusatione  manifesta,  x  solidis  emendabat  inter  regem  et  comitem.

Ad  murum  civitatis  et  pontem  reaedificandum  de  unaquaque  hida
comitatus  unum  hominem  venire  prsepositus  edicebat ;  cujus  homo  non
veniebat, dominus  ejus  XL  solidos  emeudabat  regiet  comiti;  haec forisfactura
extra  finnam  erat.

APPENDIX NO.  XVI.  439

Haec  civitas  tune  reddebat  de  firma  XLV  libras,  et  tres  timbres  pellium
mortrinium ;  tertia  pars  erat  comitis  et  dute  regis.

Quando  Hugo  comes  recepit,  non  valebat  nisi  xxx  libras.  Valde  enim
erat  vastata :  ducentfe  et  quiuque  domus  minus  ibi  erant  quam  tempore  regis
Edwardi  fuerunt :  modo  totidem  sunt  ibi  quot  inveuit.

Hanc  civitatem  Mundret  tenuit  de  comite  pro  LXX  libris  et  una  mark  a
auri.

Ipse  habuit  ad  firmam,  pro  L  libris  et  una  marka  auri,  omnia  placita
comitis  in  comitatu  et  hundreds  praeter  Inglefeld.

Terra  in  qua  est  templum  sancti  Petri,  quam  Robertas  de  Eodeleud
clamabat  ad  Teiland  (sicut  diratiocinavit  comitatus),  nunquam  pertiuuit  ad
manerium  extra  civitatem,  sed  ad  burgum  pertinet,  et  semper  fuit  in  con-
suetudine  regis  et  comitis,  sicut  aliorum  burgensium.

No.  XVI.  (page  263.)
NARRATIVE  OF  THE  EXPLOITS  AND  DEATH  OF  HEREWARD.*

Un  an  apr&s  1'evesque  Elwine

Et  Siward  Bern  en  la  marine

Meurent  d'Escoce  od  uoef  esnecces,

Tresq'en  Humbre  siglent  es  brecces.

Li  quieus  Morgar  encontre  vint,

Es  niefs  entra,  od  eus  se  tint ;

A  Welle  encoutrerent  les  Englois^

Fuiz  sont  a  Will  am  li  rois.

Taut  ont  parle  de  compaignie,

Chescuns  vont  faire  a  autre  aie.

Un  gentil  home  lur  sire  estoit.

Des  utlaghes  mult  i  avoit.

Par  la  terre  sont  alez

Et  vont  degastant  le  regne.

Li  rois  Willam,  quant  il  ceo  sont,

Mult  fu  irez,  si  Ten  pesout;

S'ost  somonst,  manda  guerroiers,

Francois,  Auglois  et  chevaliers ;

Devers  la  mier  mist  marinaus,

Bucecarles,  valez  as  peaus

E  autres  genz,  dont  tant  i  out.

Nul  ties  assis  aler  n'i  pout ;

E  derichef  par  les  boscages

Furent  gardez  tuz  les  passages,

E  li  marchis  tut  environ

Fut  bien  garde  par  contencon.

1  Chronique  de  Geoffrey  Gaymar  ;  Chroniques  Anglo- Normandes,  i.  1G-27.

440  APPENDIX NO.  XVI.

Apres  ceo  comanda  li  rois
Faire  ponz  outre  les  marois
Et  dist  que  tuz  les  destruieroit ;
Ja  mils  n'en  eschaperoit.
Quant  il  ceo  seurent  en  Ely,
Si  se  sont  mis  en  sa  mevci ;
Tuz  alerent  merci  crier
Fors  Ereward,  qui  mult  fii  bier.
II  eschapa  od  poi  de  gent,
Geri  od  lui,  un  son  parent.
Od  eus  eurent  v  compaignons.
Tins  horns  qui  amenoit  peissons
As  gardeins  long  le  mareis,
Fist  qe  prodom  et  qe  surpreis
En  uu  batel  les  recuillit,
De  ros,  de  glais  tuz  les  coverit,
Vers  les  gardeins  prist  a  nager.
Si  come  un  soir  deit  anuiter,
Vint  pres  des  loges  od  sa  nief.
Fran?ois  estoient  en  un  tref,
Wid  le  viesconte  en  ert  seignour,
Bien  conuissoit  le  pescheour,
Et  Men  seurent  q'il  venoit,
De  lui  nule  garde  n'avoit ;
Le  pescheour  vii'ent  nager,
Nuit  ert  et  sistrent  au  manger.
Fors  de  la  uief  ist  Ereward,
De  hardement  sembloit  leopard,
Si  compaignon  apres  issirent,
Desouz  un  bois  le  tref  choisirent.
A  eus  ala  le  pescheour,
Ereward  ert  seins  son  seignour.
Q'en  dirroie  ? Li  chevaler
Furent  suspris  a  lur  manger.
Oil  entreut,  haches  en  lur  mains ;
De  bien  ferir  ne  sont  vilains,
Normanz  occistrent  et  desconfirent,
Oil  qui  poeient  s'enfuirent.
Grant  fut  1'effrei  par  les  osteaus,
De  la  fuite  sont  communaus,
Chevaus  lessent  euseelez.
Les  otitlaghes  i  sont  montez
Tut  a  leisir  et  seinement,
Onques  n'eurent  desturbement ;
A  eise  erent  de  fere  mal.
Chescuns  choisit  tres  bon  cheval.
Li  bois  sont  pres,  enz  sont  entre,
II  n' alerent  pas  esgarre,
Bien  seurent  tut  eel  pais,
Mult  i  avoit  de  lur  amis.

APPENDIX NO.  XVI.  441

A  une  ville  ou  sont  turnez

Troverent  x  de  lur  privez.

Od  Ereward  cil  se  sont  pris,

Einz  furent  vi  ore  sont  plus  de  dis.

Dis  e  liuit  sont  li  compaignon  ;

Einz  qu'il  passerent  Huutedon,

Eurent  cent  homes  bien  armez,

De  Ereward  liges  privez.

Si  home  erent  et  si  fideil.

Einz  qu'au  demain  levast  sol'eil,

vii  cenz  sont  a  lui  venuz,

En  Bruneswald  1'ont  aconseuz.

Ore  fut  grant  la  compaignie,
Une  cite  ont  assaillie,
Burgh  ossaillirent  cil  forfet :
Bien  tost  en  fut  le  meur  tut  fret ;
Entrent  dedenz,  assez  ont  pris
Or  et  argent  et  veir  et  gris.
Autre  hernois  i  ont  assez,
La  chose  as  moignes  out  tensez.
D'ikec  s'en  vont  a  E  Stamford,
De  ceo  que  peruent  ne  font  tort ;
Car  li  burgois  eurent  brace
Que  Ereward  en  fut  dechace,
Mesle  1'eurent  euvers  le  roi
A  mult  grant  tort  et  a  deslei.
S'il  se  vengoit,  ne  fut  nul  tort,
De  ceux  de  Burgh  et  de  Stanford.
Qu'en  dirroie  ? Par  plusurs  anz
Tint  Ereward  centre  Normanz,
II  et  Winter  son  compaignon
E  dan  Geri  un  gentil  horn,
Alveriz,  Grugan,  Saiswold,  Azecier.
Icil  et  li  altre  guei-reier
Guerreierent  issi  Franceis ;
Si  un  d'els  encentrout  treis
Ne  s'eii  alasent  sanz  asalt.
<yO  pert  uncore  en  Bi-uneswald,
La  u  Gier  se  combati,
Ki  mult  fu  fort  e  fier  e  hardi.
Lui  setme  asailli  Hereward,
Sul  par  son  cors,  n'i  out  reguard,
Les  quatre  oscist,  les  treis  fuirent ;
Naffrez,  sanglant,  cil  s'en  partirent.
En  plusurs  lius  ceo  aviat.
En  contre  vii  tr£s  bien  se  tint,
De  vii  homes  avoit  vertu,
Onques  plus  hardi  ne  fut  veu.

Par  plusurs  anz  tant  guerroia
Si  qe  une  dame  le  manda,

442  APPENDIX NO.  XVI.

Que  de  li  out  oi  parler ;
Par  meinte  foiz  1'ad  fet  mander
Q'a  lui  vensist,  si  li  plesoit ;
L'onor  son  piere  li  dorroit ;
Et,  s'il  la  pernoit  a  muiller,
Bien  porroit  Fraii9ois  guerreier.
€eo  fut  Alfued  qe  90  manda
A  Ereward,  qe  mult  ama;
Par  plusurs  foiz  tant  le  manda
Qe  Ereward  s'apresta.
Vers  lui  ala  ad  mult  de  gent,
Triwes  avoit  tut  veirement,
Au  roi  se  devoit  acorder;
Dedenz  eel  mois  passer  la  mer
Devoit  pur  guerroier  Mausaus,
Qui  ont  an  roi  tolet  chasteaus.
II  i  avoit  ainceis  este,
Walter  del  Bois  avoit  mate,
Et  dan  Geffrei  cil  de  Meine
Tint  en  prison  une  simeine.
Ereward,  qui  doit  aler  en  pees,
D'or  et  d'argent  avoit  meint  fes.

Quant  li  Normant  ceo  eutendirent,
Fruissent  la  pes,  si  Tassaillirent,
A  son  manger  1'ont  assailli.
Si  Ereward  en  fust  garni,
Le  plus  liardi  semblast  couard.
Malemeut  le  gaita  Aaelward,
Son  chapelein :  le  deust  gaiter,
Si  s'endormit  sus  nn  rocher.
Qu'en  dirroie  ?  Suspris  i  fu  ;
Mes  gentement  s'est  contenu,
Si  se  coutiut  come  Icon,
II  et  Winter  son  compaignon.
Quant  mil  haubert  n'i  pout  aveir
Ne  ses  armes  pur  soi  armer,
Ne  sur  destrer  ne  pout  saillir,
Un  escu  prist  q'il  vist  gisir
Etune  lance  et  nne  espee.
L'espee  ceinst,  si  1'ad  nuee,
Devant  trestuz  ses  compaignuns
S'est  acemez  come  tins  Icons,
Mult  fierement  dist  as  Frau§ois  :
"  Triwes  m' avoit  done  li  rois ;
Mes  vus  venez  ireement,
Le  mien  peruez,  tuez  ma  gent,
Suspris  m'avez  a  nion  manger  ;
Fel  traitres,  vendrai  moi  cber."
in  gavelocs  un  sergant  tint,
Sis  horns  estoit,  devaut  li  vint,

APPENDIX NO.  XVI.  443

L'un  en  bailla  a  sou  seignour.

Un  chevalier  aloit  entour,

Par  tout  le  champ  aloit  querant

E  Ereward  mult  demandant.

De  ses  homes  aveit  oscis

E  morz  getez  des-ci  k'a  dis.

Si  come  il  1'alout  demandant,

Li  bier  li  est  venu  devant,

Le  gaveloc  i  fet  aler,

Parmi  1'escu  le  fet  voler.

L'auberc  rumpit,  pas  ne  se  tint,

Le  queor  trencha,  issi  avint ;

E  cil  cha'it,  ne  pout  el  estre,

A  son  morir  n'ont  point  de  prestre.

Done  1'assaillirent  li  Normant,

Traient  a  lui  et  voiit  lan?ant,

De  totes  parz  1'avironerent,

En  plusurs  lius  sen  cors  nafrerent ;

Et  il  fieri  eus  come  sengler

Tant  com  la  lance  pout  durer;

Et  quant  la  lance  li  faillit,

Del  brant  d'ascer  grant  coup  ferit.

Tiel  le  quida  mult  vil  trover,
De  son  cors  1'estuet  achater ;
Et  quant  le  trcevent  si  amer,
Asquanz  n'i  osent  arester ;
Car  il  ferit  vigerousement,
Si's  requist  menu  e  sovent,
Od  s'espee  mi  en  occist,
Des  qu'il  fieri  le  bois  reteutist ;
Mes  done  brusa  le  brant  d'ascer
Desus  1'elme  d'un  chevalier,
Et  il  1'escu  en  ses  mains  prist,
Si  en  fiert  qe  n  Franceis  occist ;
Mes  mi  vindrent  a  son  dos
Qui  1'ont  feru  par  mi  le  cors,
Od  mi  lances  1'ont  feru  ;
N'est  merveille  s'il  est  chen,
A  genuillons  s'agenuilla,
Par  tiel  a'ir  1'escu  getta
Que  uns  de  ceus  qi  1'ont  feru
Fiert  en  volant  si  del  escu
Qu'en  ii  moitiez  li  freint  le  col,
Cil  out  a  non  Eaol  de  Dol,
De  Tuttesbire  estoit  venuz.
Ore  sont  amdui  mort  abatuz
E  Ereward  e  li  Breton,
Baol  de  Dol  avoit  a  non ;
Mes  Alselin  le  paroccist.
Cil  de  Ereward  le  chef  prist,

444  APPENDIX NO.  XVI.

Si  jura  Dieu  et  sa  vertu,

Et  li  autre  qui  1'ont  veu

Par  meinte  foiz  1'ont  fort  jure,

Que  oncques  si  hardi  ne  fut  trove

Et  s'il  eust  eu  od  lui  trois,

Mar  i  entrassent  li  Francis  ;

E  s'il  ne  fust  issi  occis,

Touz  les  cha^ast  fors  del  pais.

END OP VOL. I.

T.  C.  Savill,  Printer,  4,  Chandos-street,  Covent-garden.

•

1

DA Thierry,  Augustin

195 History  of  the  conquest

T455 of  England  by  the  Normans

1847

v.l

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY

8f

LEIONTOH fr  SON,
