A Narrative of the Life and Medical Discoveries of Samuel Thomson
Samuel Thomson
A Narrative of the Life and Medical Discoveries of Samuel Thomson. Boston: 1829.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/2575005R.nlm.nih.gov).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Surgeon General's Office


N.


^C _-_ g — -, - " ■ ^ CIG Q^QC


I

I


/


•


A

NARRATIVE

OF TUB

LIFE AND MEDICAL DISCOVERIES

OF

SAMUEL THOMSON;

CONTAINING

AN ACCOUNT OF HIS SYSTEM OF PRACTICE,

AND • •

XHE MANNER OF CURING DISEASE WITH VEGETABLE MEDICINE?
VPOy A TLAN ENTIRELY NEW;
TO WHICH IS ADDED

i8» Introduction to his New Guide to Health, or Botanic

Family Physician; containing the principles upon

which the system is founded, with remarks

on Fevers, Steaming, Poison, fyc,


FIFTH EDITION

j


WYiUeu by WimseU,


ST. CLAIKSV -f.fi:

PUBLISHED BY HORTON HOWARD/

Howard & Little, Printers.

1829.


District of Massachusetts, to wit :

District Clerk's Office.

BE it remembered, that on the thirty-first day of July A. j
D. 1822, in the forty-seventh year of the In e of

the United States of America, Samuel Thomson, of the said District
bas deposited itfthis office the title of a book, the right whereof he
claims as author and proprietor, in the words follow ing, to wit:

"A Narrative of the Life and Medical Discoveries of Samuel
Thptnsoti, containing an account of hi? System of Traction, and

nerof curing disease with vegetable medioine, upon a plan en-'
pew : to which is added an Introduction to his New Guid<
Eh, or Botanic Family Physician, containing the prii
on, which the system is founded, with remarks on fevers, steaming,
on, &c. — Written by himself."
In conformity to the act of Congress of the United Sfates,entitlcd
act for the encouragement of learning:, by securing the copies
of aps, Charts and Books, to the Authors and Proprietors of such
the time therein mentioned;" and also to an act, en-
i i an act supplementary to an act, entitled 'An act for the en- J
.gernent of learning, by securing the copies of Maps, Charts and ■
fi: 's, tothe Author? and Proprietors of such copies, during the
ti . therein mentioned; and extending the benefits thereof to the
Ail of D'^ignin.'. En^ravinc and Etching Historical and other

JOHN W. DAVIS, Clerk of Mass. Distrkk


ADVERTISEMENT.


Tt has, for a long time, been a subject in which T have felt a
(]•■ ■ i i eres', to publish something wrrtch would ,1 •' only be.
interesting i) lie public, but should convey to. 'hem a correct
knowle i ;•■ of my system of practice, in order that thev might
reip ie i .'{vantage of i he experience 1 have'had in curing dis-
ease by i safe and simple method of rny own invention; an 1
putting it in their power, at all times, to relieve themselves

lies from oiin and -<icknes-», without having to be 2

md exoonse of em pi ying 1 fashionable doctor. One oth-

iject I have ilso hit in view, and that is. to lay before '.be

pu lie a fiir statemen of facts, that they my h%ve a corr t

derlsjeof th-Mr 1 1 3, persecutions ind determined opposition

e received from the medic il faculty, in bringing my sys-

melictne into use among the people.

The fallowing work conl lins a correct narrative of my life, as

fir s it his been connect d with mv medical practice; and the

t I h-ive received from those vliom I have had to de::l

\ ■ ny endeivors to relieve the distress oi my fellow <S

informing then! liow they might prevent orcure dis-
I have added a number of certificates and statements from

who have had much experience, and are we 1 ! qualified to

irrect view of iho utility .md safety of the practice.- -

I have ilso inserted in this volume the Introduction to my I

Guide to Health, or tt >l mic F« mily Physician, in which is fully

.1 the principles upon which the system is founded, and

remarks on fevers, steaming, poison, ike.

By a careful examination of this Narrative, the render will he
to form a pretty uood knowledge of my whole system
of practice, and the different vegetables that I make use of in
every disease; and will be found to contnin much useful
formation on the subject generally. The other part, which" is
intended as a hook of pr:i£tice, con', ins description of the
tables made use of by tnc, and the manner of preparing


ADVERTISEMENT.

and administering them, and general directions for the treat-
ment of all cases of disease. This book will not be pu' into
the hands of any except those who purchase a family right.

Tiie preparing, compounding and administering the medi-
cine contained in my system, in manner and form as laid down
in my book of practice, I claim as my own discovery; all of
which has been secured tome by letlers p.itent, and whoever
makes use of it without authority from me or my agents, make
themselves liable to the penalties of the law. Those who wish
to purchase the right of usingthem in their families, will be ac-
commodated, by application to me or any of my agents duly
authorised.


NARRATIVE

OF THE

LIFE, &c. OF SAMUEL TH02-


THERE is nothing, perhaps, more unpleasant than to write
ones own life; lor in doing it we are obliged to pass ovcragain,
as it were, many scene9,which we might wish to have forgotten
and relate many particulars, which, though they may seem very
important to ourselves, yet would be very uninteresting to the
der. It is no< my intention to attempt to write a history of
my life, nor would it be in my power to do it if I had such a
wish; but. as 1 have been the greater part of my life engaged
in one of the most important pursuits, and which is of more
consequence to the great human family, than any other ■
could be undertaken by man; that of alleviati i misery,

by curing til cases of disease by the most simple, safe and cer-
tain method of practice, I think the public will b< eted to
Jcnow something of me, and the cause of my having taken upon
i .' self so important a calling, without being regularly educated
to tii<? profession, which is thought by the world to be indispensi-
bly necessary; but I shall take the liberty to disagree a little
with them in this particular; for although learning may bi

o in acquiring a profession, yet that alone will
, make a great man where there is no natural gift.
fiving a short sketch of the early part of i
and ralating those accidental circumstances that I rred

during my life, and which were principally the my

engaging in the healing art, will enable the - idge

more correctly, whether I have taken that course, in fulfill
my duty in this life, which Ihe God of nature hath out

forme. Tn doing this, f shall endeavor to give a 'plain and
rrativeof facts as they took place, an.! inly

those particulars of my life, with such of the cases that have-
come under my care, as will convey to the reader t be most
correct information of my svstem of practice in curing disease

A2


6 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

I was born Februar) 9, 1769, in the- town of Aisled, county
of Cheshire, and stnte of New Hampshire. My father John
■Thomson, was born in Northbridge, county of Worcester, and
state of Massacliusetts; he was twenty-five ye;;rs old when I
was horn. My mother's name was Hannah Cobb; she was
born in Med way, Massachusetts, and was four years older than
my fiber. I had one s'ster older than myself, and three bro-
thers and one sister younger,who areali living except my second
brother, who died in his fourteenth year. My oldest sister mar-
ried Samuel Hills, and lives in Surry, New Hampshire, and my
two brothers live in Jericho, Vermont. My youngest sister
:n urraed Walter Mathers, and lives in the stnte of Ohio.

That country was a wilderness when I was born ; my father
had began there about a year before, at which time there was
no house within three miles one way, and about one the other;
there were no roads, and tiiey had to go by marked tiees. The
snow was very deep when they moved there, and my mother had
to iravel over a mile on snow shoes through the woods to get
to their habitation. My parents were poor, having nothing to
begin the world with; but had to depend upon their labor for
support. My father had bought a piece of wild land on credit,
and had to pay for it by his labor in what he could make off the
land, which caused us great hardships and deprivations for a
long time.

As soon as T began to form any correct ideas of things, my
mind was much lrntatedby the impressions made on it by my
parents, who, no doubt with very good intentions, filled my
young head with all kinds of hob-goblins and witch stories,
i h made a very deep impression on my mind, and which
were not entirely Eradicated for many ye- rs. I mention this
as a can on to parent?, not to tell iheir children, any thing but
the truth-: for young children naturally believe whateve- their
parents tell rhem, and when thev frighten them with such s o-
ries, tor the purpose.of making them behave well, it will most
ally have a very bad effect; for when they arrive at years
of discretkm,jand find that 11 those stories are falsehoods, they
will naturally form very unfavorable opinions of their parents
whose duty it is to set them better examples.

Mv father and mother were of the Baptist persuasion, and
were very strict in their religious duties. They al tended meet-
ing every Sabbath, and my father prayed night and mornins in
his firmly. One day they went to meeing, ^nd left me ijdny
sister at home alone, and told us that if we were wicked thev


OF SAMtJEL THOMSON.

should send the hear or the knocker to carry us off. While
they were absent I was at play , when we heard a h;ud knocking
on the outside of the house, which frightened Us very much,
instead of letting us know what it was, tbey told us it was the
knocker they had told us of, and that the bear would always
come if we were wicked and did not mind and do as they told
us. It was several years after that my reason taught me that
this knocker as they called it. was a woodpecker that came on
the end of the house. Parents ought to be careful to impress
on the mifids of young children, correct ideas of thing, and
not mislead their understandings by telling them falsehoods;
for it will bcof the greatest importance as respects theii future-
conduct and pursuits in life.

When I was between three and four years old, my father took
me out with htm to work. The first business I was set to do
was to drive the cows to pasture, and watch the geese, with
other small chores, which occupation kept me all day in the
fields. I was very curious to know the names of all the herbs
which I saw growing, and what they were good for; and to
satisfy my curiosity was constantly making enquiries of those
persons that I happened to be with for that purpose. All the
information I thus obtained, or by my own observation, I care
fully laid up in my memory, and never forgot. There was an
old lady by the name' of Benton lived near us, who used to
attend our family when tne:e was any sickness. At that time
there was no such thing as a Doctor known anions us; there
not being any within ten miles. The whole of her practice
was with roots and herbs, applied to the patiefit.,or give! in hot
drinks, to produce sweating; which always answered the pur-
pose. When one thing did not produce the desired effect, she
would try something else, till they were relieved. Bfeher
attention to the f mily,And the benefits they received from her
skill, we became very much attached to her; and when she used
to go out to collect'roots and hurbs, she would tfake me with
her, and learn me their names, with what they wW good for;
and I used to be very curious in my enquiries, and in tasting
every diingthat I found. The information I thus obtained at
this early age, was afterwards of great use to me.

Sometime in die summer, after I was four years old, being
out in the fields in search of the cows, I discovered a -Jjjant
which h id a singular branch and pods, that 1 had never -core
seen; and 1 had the curiosity to pick some of the pods and


8 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, tc

chew them; the taste and operation produced, was so remarka-
ble, that I never forgot it. I afterwards used to induce other
boys to chew it, merely by way of sport, to see them vomit. I
tried this herb in this way for nearly twenty years, without
knowing any thing of its medical virtues. This plant is what
1 have called the Emetic Herb, and is the most important article
I make use of in my practice. It is very common in most parts
of this country, and may be prepared and used in almost any
manner. It is a certain counter-poison, having never beeu
known to fail to counteract the effects of the most deadly
poison, even when taken in large quantities for self-destruction,
re is no danger to be apprehended from its use, as it is per-
tly harmless in its operation, even when a large quantity is
takes — it operates as an emetic, cleanses the stomach from all
improper aliment, promotes an iniernal heat, which is imme-
diately felt at the extremities, and produces perspiration. The
exclusive right of using this plant for medical purposes is
.secured to me by patent, and my right to the discovery has never
•, disputed; though the Doctors have done every thing they
could to destroy the credit of it, by false statements, representing
it to be a deadly poison, and at the same time they knew to the
contrary, for they have made use of it themselves for several
rs, and have tried to defraud me of the discovery. I feel
perfectly convinced from near thirty years experience of its
medical properties, that the. discovery is of incalculable import-
race, and if properly understood by the people, will be more
1 in curing the diseases incident to this climate, than the
drugs and medicines sold by all the apothecaries in the country.
At five years of age my father put me to hard work, and was
very strict, using the greatest severity towards me. I used to
sutler very much from pains in my hips and back, being lame
from my birth, and the hard work made me so stiff, that in (lie
morning it was with difficulty I oculd walk. My father's seve-
rity towards me made me very unhappy, for I wis constantly in
fear lest he should call and I should not hear him, in which
case, he used to punish me very severely. 1 continued in this
situation till J was eight years old, when my brothers began to be
some help, which took part of the burden off from me. We
suffered great hardships and lived very poorly; bfut we always
had something to ent, and were contented, for we knew of
nothing better; a dish of hean porridge and some potatoes,
were our constant fare, and this was better than many others
had. The greatest part of this winter we had to live in the


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. I

barn. In July my father had got the part of the roof of a new
house covered, and we moved into it; which was more com-
fortable than the bam. About this time my mother was taken*
sick, and was carried to Mrs. Benton's, for her to take care of,
where she remained for several weeks, during which time, by
At this time I had never been to school, or had any chance
whatever to learn to read. My father kept me constantly to
work all the weekdays, and on Sunday I hud to go a considera-
ble distance on foot to meeting, and the rest of the day
kept on my feet in hearing him read the caiechism, creed and
prayers, so that I had little time to rest on that day.

The winter 1 was eight years old, I was very sick with the
canker-rash; but was attended by the widow Benton, who cured
me by making use of such medicine as our country afforded
and I was in a short time able to be about. After I had got
well, my mind was more attentive to the use of roots and herbs
as medicine, than ever. I had at that time a very good know-
ledge of the principal roots and herbs to be founu in that part
of the country, with their names and medical uses; and the
neighbors were in the habit of getting me to go with them to
show them such roots and herbs as the doctors ordered to be
made use of in sickness for syrups, &.c. and by way of sport
they used to call me doctor. While in the field at work I used
often to find the herb, which 1 tasted when four years old, and
gave it to those who worked with me, to see them spit and often
vomit; but I never observed -my bad effect produced by it,
which simple experiments eventually led me to observe the
value of it in disease.

Waen T was about ten years old, there was a school a little
more than a mile from my fathers, whete I had the opportunity
of attending for one month. The weather was cold and the
going bad, which caused me to make very slow progress in ray
learning; but the chance we considered a great privilege, for
the country was new and people poor, and the opportunity for
children to get learning very small. I took a great dislike to
working on a firm, and never could be reconciled to it; for
nothing could strike me with greater dread than to hear the
name of a plough, or any other thins? used on a farm, mentioned.
This I hive always attributed to the hardships I underwent, and
the severity which my father used constantly to exercise towards
me from the time I was five to ten yeats old. At that time I
used (o think that if I ever had any land I would net plough it,


TO NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, kS

and if my father's treatment of me was the effect of his religio*?.
I never wished to have any. This was when he was under tltft
strongest influence of the baptist persuasion, and used 10 be
very zealous in his religious duties, praying night and morning
and sometimes three times a day. He was a man of violent
aud quick temper, and when in his fits of passion, my mother
used frequently to remind him of certain parts of his prayer;
such as this, which J never forgot: "May we live soberly, right*
eously, and godly, in the present evil world." She was a
womnn much respecied in the town where we lived.

About the time 1 was fourteen years old, my father left the
baptist persuasion and embraced that of universal salvation.—*
By grace are ye saved, through faith not of yourselves, it is the
gift of God. If he ever experienced a change of heart for the
bc'iicr, it was at this time; ins love to God and man was git. t
and 1 had great reason to rejoice, for he was like another man in
his house. He continued to enjoy the same belief with much
comfort to the time of his death, which took place in August
J 820, aged 76. My mother remained many years in the full
f of the salvation of all men, and continued so till her
death.

Sometime during the year that I was sixteen years old, I
he rd my parents say, that as my mind was so much taken up
roois and herbs, they thought it best to send me to live
i a Doctor Fuller, of Westmoreland, who was called a root
doctor. This pleased me very much, and in seme measure
raised my ambition; but I was soon after disappointed in my
hopes, for they said I had not learning enough, and they did not
know how to spare me from my work, winch depressed my
spirits and wae very discouraging to me. I now gave up all
he pes of going to any other business, and tried to reconcile
myself to spend my days in working on a faim, which made me
very unhappy. I had little learning and was awkward and
ignorAftt of the world, as my father had never given me any
chance to go into company, to learn how to behave, which
caused me gre.it uneasiness.

In the year 1788, when 1 was in my nineteenth year, mv
father purchased a piece of land on Onion river, in the state of
Vermont, and on the 12th day of October he started from
Alstead, and took me with him, to go to work on the l*nd and
clear up some of it to build a house on, as it was all covered
with wood, in iboul four days .iter our arrival, we were ena.
bled to clear a small spot and to build us a camp to live in ■ wo


OP SAMUEL THOMSON, .1,1

had to do out own cooking and washing; our fare was poor
and wo ; iad to work very hard; but we got along tolerably well
till uie 2d of December, when 1 had the misfortune to cut my
ancle very badly, which accident prevented me from doing any
labor for a long time, and almost deprived me of life. The
wound was a very bad one, as it split the joint and laid the b*ne
entirely bare, so as to lose the juices of my ancle joint to sucU
a degree as to reduce my strength very much. My father sent
for a Doctor Cole, of Jericho, who ordered sweet appletree bark
to be boiled, and the wound to be washed with it, which caused
great pun, and made it much worse, so that in eight days my
strength was almost exhausted; the flesh on my leg «nd thigh
mostly gone, and my life w is despaired of; the Doctor said he
could do no more for me; my f Mher was greatly alarmed about
me, and said that if Dr. Kittendge, of Walpole, could be sent
for, lie thought he might help me; but 1 told him it would be in
yain to send for him, for I could not live so long as it would tike
to go after him, without some immediate assistance. He said
Ledid not know what to dp — I told him that there wasone tbing
I had Ihoucht of, which 1 wished to have tried, if it could be
obtained, h tt I thought would help me. He anxiously inquired
what it was, and I told him if he could find some comfrey root
I would try a piaster m tde of that and turpentine. He imme-
diately went to an old place that was settled before the war, rid
had the good luck to find some; a plaster was prepared by my
directions and applied to my ancle the side opposite to ibe
wound, and had the desired effect; the juices stopped running
in about six hr.urs, and I wag very much relieved; though *he
pain continued to be very severe and 'he inflammation was great;
the juices settled between the skin and bone and caused a sup-
puration, which broke in about three weeks; during which time
I did not have three nights sleep, nor did feat any thing. This
accidental remedy was found through necessity, and was the first
time the mother of* invention held lonh her hand to me. The
success which attended this experiment, and the natural turn of
mv mind to those things, I think was a principal cause of my
continuing to practice the healing art to this time.

Our stock of provisions being now exh usled, and my wound
somewhat better, my father wis very anxious to return to Al-
ytead. He :.sked me if I thought I could bear ihe jonrnev if
he should place me on a bed laid in a sled, T nswered fh t I
was willing to try. He immedi 'tely wen' to work and fixed a
s^led, and put me in it on a straw bed; and on the first day of


NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE,&e.

January, 1789, we beg* n our journey. There was very iilti*
snow, and the road rough, which caused the sled to joli very
much, and my sufferings were grent. It was very doubtful with
my father, and likewise with me, whether I should live to per-
form the journey; but we proceeded on however, without any
thing important happening, except wearing out the runners of
our sled and having to make new ones, and accomplished twenty
miles the first day. At a place whete we stopped all night,
there was a woman whose situation appeared to me so much
worse than my own, that I felt much encouraged. She had
been sick with a fever, and the doctor had given so much poi-
sonous medicine, to break the fever, as lie called it; she was
left in a most miser Lie situation. Her side and shoulder were
in a putrid state, and in full as bad a condition as my ancle.
My father in dressing my wound had drawn a string through
between the heel cord and bone, and another between that and
the skin; so that two-thirds of 4he way round my ancle was
hollow.

At a place where we stopped on the third night, a circum-
stance had occurred, which, from its novelty, I think worth men-
tioning. A young woman who lived in the family had discov-
ered a strong inclination to sleep more thnn what is common;
and had expressed a wish that they would let her sleep enough
once. She went to Led on Sunday night, and did not wako
again 1 ill Tuesday morning, having slept thirty-six hours. On
awaking, she had no idea of having slept more than one night;
but begin to make preparation for washing, as was the custom,
on Mondays, till she was informed that they had washed ihe
day before. Her health was good and she never after that
required more sleep than other persons.

When we got on to the high land there was considerable
enow, and we got along much more comfort ably. I had to be
carried in on the bed and laid by the fire, every night, during
the journey. The people generally where we stopped, reated
me with kindness, and showed much pity for me in my disiress-
ed situatiou; but. they all thought that I should not live to get
through 'he journey. The doctors had advised to have my leg
cut off. as the only means of saving my Kfe, and hll those who
sawmeduring our journey, expressed the same opinion; and I
think it would have been done had I given my consent; but J
positively refused to agree to it, so the plan was given up. I
preferred to take my chance, with my leg on, to having it ir-ken
off; which resolution I have never repented of, to this day.


OF SAMUEL THOMSON" 13

On arriving in Walpole, my father proceeded immediately to
the house of the famous Dr. Kitteridge, to have him dress my
wound, and get his opinion of my situation; he not being at
home, and it being nearly dark, we concluded to put up for the
night, and I was carried in on my bed and laid by the fire. The
doctor soon came home, and on entering the room where I wis,
cried out in a very rough manner, Who have you here? His wife
answered, a sick man. The devil, replied he, I want no sick
man here. I was much terrified by his coarse manner of speak-
ing, and thought if he was so rough in his conversation, what
will lie be when he comes to dress my wound; but I wis hap-
pily disappointed, for he took off the dressing with great care
and handled me very tenderly. On seeing the strings that were
in the wound, he exclaimed, what the dovil are these halters
here for? My father told him they were put in to keep the sore
open. He said he thought the sore open enough now, for it is
all rotten. Being anxious to know his opinion of me, my
father asked him what he thought of my situation. What do I
think? said he, Why I think he will die — and then looking very
pleasantly at me, said, though ( think young man you will get
well first. In the morning he dressed my ancle again and gave
me some salve to use in future; and my father asked him for
his bill, which was, I think, for our keeping and his attending
me, about fifty cents. A great contrast between this and what
is charged at the present time by our regular physi ians; for
they will hardly look at a person without miking them pay two
or three dollars. I have been more particular in describing this
interview with Dr. Kitteridge, on account of his exiraordinary
gkill in surgery, und the great name he acquired, and justly
deserved, among the people throughout the country. His sys-
tem of practice was peculiarly his own, and all the medicines
lie used were prepared by himself, from the roots and herbs of
our own country. He was a very eccentric character and
uncouth in his manners; but he possessed a good heart, and by
benevoleni disposition. He was governed in his practice a
that great plan which is dictated by nature; and the uncommon
success he met with, is evidence enough to satisfy any reasona
ble mind, of the superiority of it, over what is the practice or.
those who become doctors by reading only, with their poison
and their insfrumenlsof torture.

We le't Walpole nnd arrived at our home about noon, and
my mother, brothers and sisters, were much rejoiced to see me
'.hough grieved at my distressed situation; and never was acq


k> NARRATIVE OF T.HE LIFE, ha.

one more in need of the tender rare of friends <han T was at this
U.ne. My mother proved tn mo the old saying, hat a friend
in need is a friend indeed. My c ise was considi red doubtfio
for some time. I was from the first of December to the first of
Mrch unable to walk; but by good nursing and constant ore,
I was enabled in the spring toaliend to the business at horr ■•,
so that my father left mo in charge of the farm, and went with
my brother to Onion river, again to work on his land.

On the 9th of.February, 1790, 1 was twenty-one yer rs of
age, and my father gave me a deed of one-half of his farm in
Alstcad, consisting of one hundred, and twenty-five acres; and
(carried it on far three years, and he had the liberty to take
such stock as be pleased. ffe then made preparations and

noved to Onion river, and left my mother and sister in my
care. Soon after I took a bad cold, which threw me into a
vow fever, In the month of March we all had the mersle ,
ind my mother had what the doctors called the black kind, and
was so bad that her life was despaired of. The disease turned
in and seated on her lungs, and she never recovered her health.
Several doctors attended her without doing her any good; her
cough was very severe and her mouth was sore, and she was
greatly distressed. I attended upon her under the direction of
the doctors, and took the cough and had much the same symp-
toms. She continued to grow worse daily; the doctors gai »
her over, and gave her disease the name of galloping cc risen ,
(ion, which [thought was a very appropriate name — for they
are the riders, and their whip is mercury, opium and vitriol,
and they gijlo'ped her out of the worl-1 in about nine weeks.
She died on the 13th of May, 1790.

I was at this time very low with the same disorder that my
mother died with, <md the doctor often importuned me to t ike
s/ me of his medicine; but 1 declined it, thinking I had rather
die > natural death. He tried to frighten me by telling me it
was ihelasl rinnceof getting help, and he ihought he could
Cure me; but I told him I had observed the effeel his medicine
had on my mother, for she constantly grew worse under therpd
ration of it, and I had ru.j desire to risk it on myself I have
always been of the opinion, thitif-I had followed his advice, 1
should hive been galloped out of the world ihe same as my
mother was; and I have never reported of my refusal to th s i

After my mother died j I undertook to doctor myself,
inade some syrups of such things "3 T h-rl the krnwh m Q f
7/hich relieved my cough; and with the warm weather, 1 so ut


OV SAMUEL THOMSON. l5

Recovered my health, as to be able to work sometime in June,
Being without woman's help, I was obliged to hire such as j
could'get, which proved a disadvantage to my interest, and 1
thought it would be best to find sorno person who would take
:in interest in saving In y property. On the 7th day of July,
1790, I was rn .'Tried to Susan Allen. We were both young and
had great hardships to encounter, but we got along very well,
and both enjoyed good hc-ultli until our first child was born,
which was on the 4th day of July following. My wife was
taken ill on Saturday, and sent for help; she lingered along till
Sunday night, when she became very bad; her situation was
dangerous, and she was in hand constantly the whole night,
untd sunrise the next morning, when she was delivered : but her
senses were gone. During the whole night it was one continued
struggle of forcing nature, which produced so great an injury
to the nervous system as to cause strong convulsion fits in
about an hour after her delivery. The witnessing of this horrid
scene of hu nan butchery, wus one great cause of my paying
attention to midwifery, and my practice has since been very
sueeessful hi it.

Hot fits continued and grew worse; there were six doctors
attended her that day, and a seventh was sent for; but she grew
w >r3e under their care; (or one would give her medicine, and
another said that he did wrong — another would bleed her, and
the other would siy he hid done wronjj, and so on through the
whole. I he ml one of them say that his experience in this case
Wis worth fifty dollars. I found that they were trying their
practice by experiments; and was so dissatisfied with their con*
duct, that at night I told them what 1 thought; and thai I had
heard them accusing each other of doing wrong; but I was
convinced that they had all told the truth, for they had all done
wrung. They all gave her over to die, and I dismissed them
ii 'ving seen enough of their conduct to convince me that they
were doing more hurt than good.

After they were gone, I sent for Dr. Wntta and Dr Fuller,
who were called root doctors. They attended her through the
111 and in the morning about the same hour that they 1 egan,
the fits left her. She had in the whole, eighteen of the mosl
shocking convulsion fits", that had ever been seen by any one
present. The spasms were so violent, that it jarred the wl
house. After the fits had left her, she was entirely senseless*
and was raving distract e I for three days; and then becan i
fcctby stupid, an J lay in that situation for three days;, she then


16 NARRATIVE* Of- THE LIFE, be.

laughed ihree days, and then cried three days; after which she
seemed to awake like a person from sleep, and had no know-
ledge of v\h it had passed, or that she had heen sick, or had a
child. These twodoctors continued to attend her, and used all
the means in their power to strengthen the nervous system. She
gained very slowly, and it was a long time before she got about;
but she never got entirely over it. This sickness put me back
in my business very much, and the expense was above two Hun-
dred dollars.

In about a month after my wife had recovered from her sick-
ness, she was attacked with the cholic, which required all my
attention and that ot the two doctors who attended her before;
but all our exertions appeared to be in vain, for the disease had
■As regular course for several days and then left her. These
attacks continued once a month, or oftener. and it was so much
trouble to go for the doctor so often as I had to, during these
•urns, that I let a young man who studied with Dr. Watts, have
a house on my farm, so as to have him handy; but I soon found
that by having a doctor so near, there was plenty of busiest for
"um; for tfvere wosjBot a menm ro ire year dut wwflt I had some-
body sick in my family. If a child was attacked with any
trifling complaint, the doctor was sent for, and they were sure to
have a long sickness;, so he paid his rent and keeping very easy.
This doctor lived on my farm seven years, during which time I
toad a very good knowledge of all the medicine he made use of,
and his manner of curing disease, which has been of great use
to me. Finding that I h id a natural turn for medical practice,
he spared no pains to give me all the information in his power;
but I had no thought at that time of ever practicing, except it
Was to be able to attend my own family. During the first of his
practice he used chiefly roots end herbs, and his success was very
great in curing canker and old complaints; but he afterwards
got into the fashionable mode of treating his patients, by giving
them apothecary's drugs, which made him more popular with the
^acuity, but less useful to his fellow creatures.

My mind was bent on learning the medical properties of such
vegetables as I met with, and I was constantly in the habit of
tasting every thing of the kind I saw; and having a retentive
memory I have always recollected the taste and use of all that
were ever shown me by others, and likewise of all that I dis-
covered myself. This practice of tasting of herbs and roots
has been of great advance to me, and I have always been able
tt> ascertain what is useful for any particulardi3ea.se by that


OF 1 SAMUEL THOMSON. t?

means. I was often told that I should poison myself by tasting
every thine/ [ saw ; but I thought I ought to.have as much knowl-
edge as a beast, for the Creator had given them on instinct to
discover wh»t is good for food and what is necessary for medi-
cine. I had but very little knowledge of disease at this time;
but had a great inclination to learn whatever I had an oppor-
tunity; and my own experience, which is the best school, had
often called my attention to the subject.

The herb which 1 had discovered svhen four years old, I had
qften met with; but it had never occurred to me that it was of
any value as medicine, until about this time, when mowing
in the field with a number of men one day, I cut a sprig of it 4
and gave to the man next to me, who eat it; when we had got
to the end of ihe piece, which was about six rods, he said that
he believed what I had given him would kill him, for he never
felt so in his life. I looked at him and saw that he was in a
most profuse perspiration, being as wet all over as he could he;
he trembled very much, and there was no more color in him
than a corpse. I told him to go the spring and drink some
water; he attempted to go, and got as far as the wall but was
unable to get over it, and laid down on the ground and vomited
several times. He said be thought he threw off his sfom;>eh
two quarts. I then helped him into the house, and in about
two hours he ate a very hearty dinner, and in the afternoon was
able to do a good half day's labor. He afterwards told me that
he never had any thing to do him so much good in his life; his
appetite was remark-ibly gooJ, and he felt better th an he had
for a long time. This circumstance gave me the first idea of
the medical virtues of this valuable plant, which I have since
found by twenty years experience, (in which time 1 have m; de
use of it in every disease I have met with, to great advantage,)
that it is a discovery of the greatest importance.

In March, 1794, my second daughter was born; and my wife
had no medical assistance except what I could do for her, with
the advice of the doctor who lived on my farm. Af'er this she
w is never again afflicted with the cholic. In the course of this
year the leas of my father's half of the farm expired, and we
made a division of the stock. My b/df was five yearlings and
half a cob ; this, with half the farm, containing about one hun-
dred and twentv-five : icres, was all the property I possessed,
and I wis mostlv cleir of debt. Soon after, I purchased of my
fn'her the fcther half of the farm, for which I save six hundred
andthirty-*ix dollars, payable in stock one half in two years
B2


J 8 JSAkkAT ivfe 6? f 1TE Ufe\ &6

and the other in four. In order to meet these payments, T pur-
chased calves and colts; but it proved hard ibr me, as they
brought when the payment became due but little more than the
first cost, afler having to keep them two years; 1 offered them
to my father for what the hay would have sold for they eat the
Inst year, but be would not agree to it. 1 settled with him,
however, and paid him according to contract. 1 afterwards pur-
chased of a neighbor a small piece of larid, which incommoded
me by keeping the sun from my house part of the forenoon; for
which J agreed to pay him seventy-three dollars and thirty-three
cents, in three years, with interest. This turned out a trouble-
some affair for me, for when I came to pay the interest the second
year, the note was more than when first given, having been
altered ; and I refused to pay any thing. When the note became
due, I would pay no more than what it was given for, and it was
s'jed and my horses and cattle were attached, ll went through
a course of law and cost us both a great deal of expense and
trouble; but. I finally beat him; he lost his note and l recovered
daimge for nis taking my horses and cattle. This was the first
time I had any thing to do with Ihe law, and in the whole it
cost me about one hundred dollars; hut it was a good lesson,
and has been worth to me the expen e e.

When my second daughter was about two years old she was
taken sick, and had what is called the canker rash. Dr. Bliss,
who lived on my farm, was sent for, and he said she had that
disorder as bad as any one he ever saw. He tried his utmost
skill to prevent putrefaction, which lie feared would take place;
but after using every exertion in his power without doing her
any good, he said he could do no more, she must die. She
was senseles3 and the canker was to be seen in her mou'h, nose
.ind ears, and one of her eyes was covered with it and closed;
the other began to swell and turn purple elso. I *slied thf- <'c. c-
lor if he could not keep the canker out of this eye; but he sad
it would be of no use, for she could not live. I told him that if
he could do no more, 1 would try what I could do myself. I
found that if the canker could not be stopped immediately she
would be blind with both eyes. She was so distressed for breath
that she would spring straight up on end in struggling to breathe.
I sat myself in a chair, and held her in my lap, and put a blanket
round us both ; then my wife held a hot spider or shovel between
my feet, and J poured on vinegar to raise a steam, and kept it as
hot as I found she could heir, changing them as soop as they
became cold; and by following this plan for about twenty min-


OF SAMUEL THOMSON.

utcs, she became comfort;; Lie and breathed easy. I kept a cloth
wet with cold water on her eyes, changing it often, as it grew
warm. I followed this plan, steaming her every two hours, foj
about a week, when she began to gain. Her eyes came open
and the one that was the worst, was completely covered with
canker, and was as white as paper. I used a wash of rosemur
to take off the canker; and when the scale came off, the sigh.
came out with it: and it entirely perished. The other eye was
saved, to the astonishment of all who saw her, particularly the
doctor, who used frequently to call to see how she did.
said she was saved entirely by the plan I had pursued, and
great care and attention paid to her. She entirely recovered
from the disease, with the exception of the loss of one eye,
h is enjoyed good health to this time. This was the first of my
finding out the plan of steaming and using cold water. After
this I found by experiene that by putting a hot stone into ;.
thing of hot water, leaving it partly out of the water, and then
pouring vinegar on the stone, was an improvement. Care
should b&taken not to raise the heat too fast; and I used to put
a cloth wet with cold water on the stomach, at the same tin
giving hot medicine to raise the heat inside; and when tli had
been "stemmed in this manner as long as I thought they could
bear it, then rub them all over with a cloth wet with spirit, vine*
gar, or cold water, change their clothes and bed clothes, and
then let them go to bed.

A short time before this daughter was sick, my oldest son
was born, and was very weakly in consequence of his mother's
having previous to his birth, what is called a three months fevt
which experience gave me a pretty good knowledge of the
practice of the doctors in prolonging a disease; for I never
could reconcile myself to the idea, that a doctor could be of any
use if the fever must have its course, and nature had to perform
the cure, at the same time the doctor gets his pay and the credit
of it. If the patient's constitution is so strong as to enable
them to struggle against the operation of the medicine and the
disorder, they will recover; but if not, they run down in what
the doctors call a pallopinor consumption. The doctor proceed-
ed in this way with my wife until I was satisfied of his plan,
when 1 interfered and dismissed him. As soon as she left off
taking his medicine, she began gradually to gain her health and
soon got about.

W ion this son was about six week9 old, he was attacked with
the croup or rattles. He was taken a little before sunset with


c ib NARRATIVE OF THE EIFE, &c

a hoarseness, was very much clogged with phlegm, and breath*
ed with so much difficulty, that he could be heard all over ihe
house. I sent for the doctor, and he attended him till about
ten o'clock at night, without doing him any good, and then
went away, savins that he would not live till morning. After
he was gone, I was again obliged to oall on the mother of in-
vention, and try what I could do myself. I searched the house
for some rattlesnake's oil, and was so fortunate as to find about
three or four drops, which I immediately gave him and it loos-
ened the phlegm, and he soon began to breathe easy; by close
attention through the night, the child was quite comfortable in
the morning. The doctor came in the next day and expressed
great astonishment on finding the child alive; and was anxious
to know by what means he had been relieved from so desperate
a situation. On my informing kim, he seemed well pleased
with the information ; and observed that he was willing to allow,
that the greatest knowledge that doctors ever obtained was
either by accident or through necessity. So the discovery of a
cure for this desperate disease, by necessity, was of great use
both to me and the doctor; notwithstanding, however, the
information he gained of me, instead of giving me credit for it
he charged me for his useless visit.

1 was in the habitat this time of gathering and preserving, in
the proper season, all kinds of medical herbs and roots that t
Was acquainted with, in order to be able at all times to prevent
as well as to cure disease; for I found by experience that one
ounce of preventative was better than a pound of cure. Only
the simple article of mayweed, when a person has taken a bad
cold, by taking a strong cup of the tea when going to bed, will
prevent more disease in one night, with one cent's expense,
thin would be cured by the doctor in one month, and one hun-
dred dollars expense in their charges, apothecaries drugs and
nvrses.

1 had not the most distant idea at this time, of ever engaging
in the practice of medicine, more than to assist my own family;
and little did T think what those severe trials and sufferings I
experienced in the coses that have been mentioned, and which
1 was drove to by necessity, were to r>rm» about. It seemed as
a judgment upon me, that either myself or family, or some one
living with me, were sick most of the time the doctor lived on
mv r trm, which was abo'it seven vears. Since Fhave had more
experience, and become better acquainted with the Subject, f ■ m
aatisfcd in my own mind of the cause. Whenever any of tjbe fa»


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 21

pily took cold, the doctor was sent for, who would always either
h'od or give physic. Taking away the blood reduces the heat
nd gives power to the cold they had taken, which increases the
J reorder, and the coldness of the stomach causes c.-nker; the
physic drives all the determining powers from the surface in-
wardly, and scatters the canker through the stoni .ch .^nd bowels,
which holds the cold inside and drives the heat on the eutside.
The consequence is, that perspiration ceases, because internal
lie it is the sole cause of tin's important evacuation; and a set-
tled fever takes place which will continue as long as the cold
keeps the Upper hand. My experience has taught me that by
giving hot medicine, the internal heat was increased, and by ap-
plying the sterni externally, the natural perspiration was restored,
and by giving medicine to clear the stomach and bowels from
canker, till the cold is driven out and the heat returns, which
is the turn of the fever, they will recover the digestive powers,
so that food will keep the heal where it naturally belongs, which
is the fuel that continues the fire or life of man.

After the «CCicr who lived on my farm, moved away, 1 had
very little sickness in my family. On the birth of my second
son, which was about two years from the birth of the first soty
we had no occasion for a doctor; my wife uiu well, and tne chila
was mush more healthy than the others had been; and I have
never employed a doctor since; for I had found from sad expe-
rience, that they made much more sickness than they cured. —
Whenever any of my family were sick 1 had no difficuLtyJn
restoring them to health by such means as were within ray own
knowledge. As fast as my children arrived at years of discre-
tion, I instructed them how to relieve themselves, and they have
all enjoyed good health ever since. If parents would adopt the
same plan, and depend more upon themselves, and less upon
the doctors, they would avoid much sickness in their families,
as well as save the expense attending the employment of one of
the regulir physicians, whenever any trifling sickness occurs,
whose extravagant charges is a grievious and heavy burthen
upon the people. I shall endeavour to instruct them all in my
power, by giving a plain and clear view of the experience I have
had that they may benefit by it. If they do not, the fault will
not be mine, for I shall have done my duty. I am certain of
the fac% that there is medicine enough in the country within
the reach of every one, to cure all the disease incident to it, if
timely and properly administered.


24 NARRATIVE OF TUE LIFE. &e.

A* the birth of our third son, my wile was again given o\er
by the midwife. Soon after the child was born, she was taken
with tigue fits and cramp in the stomach; she was in great pain
;:nd we were much alarmed at her situation. 1 proposed giving
her some medicine, but the midwife was much opposed to it;
she said she wished to have a doctor, and the sooner the better.
I immediately sent for one, and tried to persuade her to give
something ■which 1 thought would relieve my wife until the doc-
tor could come; but she objected to it, s tying tli it her case was
a very difficult one, and would not allow to be trifled with; sVie
said she was sensible of the dangerous situation my wife was in,
for not one out of twenty lived tlirough it, and probably she
would not be alive in twenty-four hours from that time. We
were thus kept in suspense until the m in returned, and the doc-
tor could not be found, and there w ,s no other within six miles
I then came to the determination of hearing to no one's advice
any longer, but to pursue n;y own plan. 1 told my wife, th ■■! aa
the midwife said she could not live more than tweniy-four hour*
he> hfe could not be Cut short more than i!;*tt time, therefore
there would be no hazard, in trying what I could do to relieve
her. I give her some warm medicine to raise the inward heat,
and then applied: trie steam which was very much opposed by
the midwife; but I persisted in it according to the best of my
judgment and relieved her in about one hour, after she had lain
in thai situation above four hours, without any thing being clone.
The m dwife expressed a great ded of asto-dshmentat the sJc-
c ss I h ,1 m M wi h, an 1 s lid th it I ha i s i ved hor life, for she
vv s* certain that without the maans 1 had used, she could not
h.vi live!. She continued to d> well and recovered. —
Th m ikes the fifth tim ; I h d applied to the mother of inven-
tion for assistance, and in all of them was completely success-
fill.

These tilings began to be taken some no'ice of aboui this
tim;?, and caused much conversation in the neighborhood. My
assistance was called for by some oi the neighbors, and 1 at-
tended several cases with good success. I had previous to this)
time, paid some attention to the farrier business, and had been
useful in that line. This, however, gave occasion for the igno-
rant and credulous to ridicde me and laugh at those whom I
attended; but these things had little weight with tr:o, for I had
i. o other object in view but tobe service' le to my follow crea-
tures, and I was too Ermly fixed in my determination to pursue
that course which I couriered was pointed out as my duty , by


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. id

the experience and many hard trials I had suffered, to be deter-
re I by the foolish remarks of the envious or malicious part of
society.

The last sickness of my wife, I think took place in the year
1799, arjd about two year3 *aflei she had another son and did
well, making five sons that she had in succession; she after-
w trds had mother daughter, which was the last, making eight
eh Idren in die whole that she was the mother of; five sons iruj
three daughters. I mention these particulars in order that the
reader may the better understand many things that took pi cein
my family, which wiii give some idea of the experience nd
trouble I had to encounter in bringing up so large a family,
. ciaUy with the many trials I had logo through in the vane a
33of sickness and 'roubles, which arc naturally attendant on
all families, and of which I had a very large share. The know-
ledge and experience, however, which I gained by these trying
ies, I have reason to 'doss God for, as it has proved to be a
blessing not only to me, but many hundreds who hive been
relieved from sickness an \ distress^ through my me ns; and I
hon.? and trust that it will eventually be the cause of throw ng,
off the veil of ignorance from he eyes of the good people of
this country, and do away the I lind confidence they are se much
in the habit of placing in those who call themselves physici ns,
who fare sumptuously every d v; living in splendor and raagni-
licence, supported by the impositions they prnctice.upon a c-
luded and credulous people; for they hue much more reg rd
for their own interest than they do for the health and happiness
of those who are so unfortunateas 'o have any thing to do with
them If this was the worst side of the picture, it might he
borne with more patience; hut their practice is altogether ex-
perimental, to try the effect of their poisons upon the constitu-
tions of their patients, and if thev happen to give more than
nature can bear, they either die or become miserable lowlids the
rest of their lives, and their friepds console _ themselves w.tu the
ide. dial it is the will of od, nd it is their duty to submit;
the doctor gets well paid for his services, nd that is an end of
the tracre.lv. It may be thought by some 'hat this is a hi-hly
colored picture, md that 1 m uncharitable to ap dy it to all who
practice as physicians; but the truth of the statement ,j re-
sheets what ,re called regular phyw?", or ^itoij* di-
do.™ from the nodical society, w f \\ not be doubted *y ny
- . . v h the subject, an 1 will throw aside pre-

, . ,,., , , i noon it — those wI:om the coat sj;t3

iadice and reflect seriaasi) upon »


24 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, fee.

I am willing should wear it. There are, however, many physi
cians within my knowledge, who do not follow the fashionable
mode of practice of the day, but are governed by their own
judgments, and make use of the vegetable medicine of our own
country, with the mode of treatment most consistent with na-
ture; und what is the conduct of those who have undertaken to
dictate to the people how and by whom they shall be attended
when sick, towards them? Why, means thit would disgrace the
lowest dregs of society, that savages would not be guilty of, are
resorted to for the purpose of injuring them, and destroying their
credit with the public. I have had a pretty large share of this
kind of treatment from the faculty, the particulars of which,
and the sufferings I have undergone, will be given m detail in
-the course of this Narrative.

Sometime in the month, of November, 1802, my children
had the measles, and some of them had them very bad. The
want of knowing how to treat them gave me a great deal of
trouble, much more than it would at the present time, for
experience has taught me that they are very eas) to manage.
One of the children took the disease and gave it to the rest, and
I think we had four down with them at the same time. My
third son had the disorder very bad; they would not come out,
but turned in, and he became stupid. The cankerjwas much in
the throat and mouth, and the rosemary would have no effect.
Putrid symptoms made their appearances, and I was under the
necessity of inventing something for that and for the canker.
I used the steam of vinegar to guard against putrefaction, and
gold thread (or yellew root,) with red oak acorns pounded and
steeped together for the canker. These had the desired effect;
and by close attention he soon got better. The second son was
then taken down pretty much in the same manner, and I pursued
the same mode of treatment, with similar success; but the dis-
ease had so affected his lungs, that 1 feared it would leave him
in a consumption, as was the case with my mother. He could
not speak loud for three weeks. I could get nothing that could
help htm for some time, till at last I gave him several portions
of the emetic herb, which relieved him and he soon got well.
During this sickness we suffered much from fatigue and want of
sleep; for neither my wife nor myself had our clothes off for
twelve nights. This was a good fortnight's school to me, in
which T learned the nature of the mensles; and found it to be
enker and putrefaction. This experience enabled me to relieve
many others in this disease, and likewise in the canker-rash; in


OF 3AMUEL THOMSON. £5

>hcse two disorders, and the small pox, I found a looking-gkss,
in which we may see the nature oi every otiier disease. I had
the small pox in the year 1793, and examined its symptoms with
all the skill I was capable of, to ascertain the nature of the dis-
ease; and found that it was the highest state ot canker and
putrefaction that the human system was capable of receiving —
the measles the next, and the canker-rash the third; and other
disorders pirt.ikc tro of the same, which I am satisfied

IS a key to ?he whole; for by knowing how to cure this, is a
general rufe lo know how to cure all oilier pases.; as the same
means that will put out a large fire will put out a candle.

Soon after my family had got well of the measles, I was sen*
for to see a woman by the name of Rcddmg, in the neighbour-
hood. She had been for many years afflicted with the cholic,
and could get no relief from the doctor. 1 '. I attended her and
found the disorder was caused by canker, and pursued the plan
that my former experience had taught me, which relieved her
from the pain, and so far removed the cause that she never had
another attack of the disease. In this case the cure was so
simple and easily performed, thai it became a subject of ridicule,
for when she was asked about it, she wad ashamed to sry that I
cured her. -The popular practice of the physicians had so much
Influence on the minds of the people, that they thought nothing
could be right but what was done by theft. I attended, in this
family for several years, and always answered the desired pur-
pose; but my practice was so simple, that it was not worthy of
notice, and being dissatisfied with the treatment I received,
refused to do any thing more for them. After this they em-
ployed the more fashionable practitioners, who were re^dy
enough to make the most of a job, nnd they had sickness and
expense enough to satisfy them, for one of the sons was soon
after taken sick and was given over by the doctor, who lefi him
to die; but after he left oil' giving medicine he got well himself,
and the doctor not only had the credit of it, but for this job nd
one othe' - similar, his charges amounted *o over one hundred
dollars. This satisfied me of the foolishness of the people,
whose prejudices are always in favour of any thing that is lash-
ion able, or that is done by those who profess great learning; and
prefer long sickness and expense, if done in this way, to a sim-
ple and natural relief, with a trifling expense.

Soon after this, I was called on to attend a Mrs. Wetberby,
in the neighbourhood, wfco had the sams disorder. She had
been afflicted with the cholic for several years, having periodical
C


NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &•.

tuns of it nbout once a month; and had been under the care
of a number of doctors, who had used all their skill without
affording her any relief, except a temporary one, by slupifymg
her with opium and giving physic, which kept her nlong till
nature could wear it off, when she would get a bale better for
a few days, hnd then have another turn. After hearing of my
curiag Mrs. Redding, they sent for me; 1 give her my medicine
to remove the canker, and steamed her, which gave relief in one
hour. Sue had a very large family to attend to having thirteen
children, and before she had recovered her strength she exposed
herself and had another turn; I attended again and relieved tier
in the same manner us before; but she could not wait till she
rained her strength, and exposed herself again as before, took
cold, and had another turn. Her husband said I only relieved
her for the time, but did not remove the cause, and being dis-
satisfied with what 1 had done, he sent for a doctor to remove
the cause; who carried her through a course of physic, and
reduced her so 'o;v, that she lingered along for eight weeks,
being unable to do any thing the whole tune; they then decided
that she hid the consumption, and give her over to die. After
{he doctors had left her in this situation as incurable, she applied
again to me; but I declined doing any thing for her, as 1 knew
her case was muck more difficult than it was before she applied
to the doctor, and if Isho Id fail in curing her, ihe blame would
all be laid to me, or if she got well I should get no credit by it;
for which reasons I felt very unwilling to do any thing for her.
After finishing my forenoon's work, on going home to dinner 1
found her at my house waiting for me, and she insisted so much
upon my undertaking 1 o cure her, and seethed to have so much
faith in my being able to do it, that I at last told her if she
would come to my hou«e and slay with my wife, who was sick
at that time, 1 would do the best I could to cure her. She readily
consented and staid but three days with us; during which time
I pursued my usual plan of treatment, giving her things to remove
the cuiker, and steaming to produce a natural perspiration; at
the end of the three days she went home, taking with her some
medicine, with directions what to do for herself, and in a short
timeen'rely recovered her health. In less than a year after she
had ancthe. child , which was a conclusion of her having children
or ihecholic, and she ever after enjoyed as good health, as any
woman in the neighborhood; but this cure was done in so
unfashionable a w y, that they were hardlv willing to acknow-
ledge it, and 'hey would not apply to me for relief when any of


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 20

their family were sick, till ihey had failed in getting it in any
Other way.

In about a year after the above case, one of this family, a
young man about sixteen years old, was attacked with a fever;
the doctor was sent for, wbo followed the fashionable course of
practice, and reduced him with mercury and other poison?, so
that he lingered along for three or four months, constantlj grow-
ing worse, til! the doctor said it was a rheumatic fever, and
afterwards that he was in a decline. He had taken so much
mercury that it had settled in his back and hip, and was so stiff
that he could not bring his hands lower than his knees. By
this time the elector had given him over I le, ' nd he was

considered a fit subject for me to undertake vt itb. They applied
to me n i I agreed to take him home to my house, and do the
best 1 could to cure him. It was a difficult task, for I had in
the first place to bring him back to the situation he was irr-
when lie had the fever, and to destroy the effects of the poison
and regulate the system by steaming, to produce a natural per-
spiration; by persuing this plan, and giving such things as I
could get to n store the digestive powers, in two months he was
completely r s ored to health; for which I received but five dol-
lars, and this was more grudgingly paid than if the) had given
a doctor fifty, without doing any good at. all.

In the spring of the year 1805, 1 was sent for to go to Wood-
stock, in Vermont, to attend a young woman, who was consid-
ered in a decline, and the doctors could not help her. I found
her very low, not being able to sit up but very little, f staid
and attended her about a week, and then left her, with medicines
and directions what to do, and returned home. Inabouta menth
1 went again to see her and found her much better, so that she
was able to tide to her father's, which was above twenty miles.
AH this time I had not formed an idea that 1 possessed any
knowledge of disorder or of medicine, move than what I had
learned by accident; and ail the cases I attended were from
necessity- but the? success I had met with and the extraordinary
cures I h d performed, made much talk, and were heard of foj
fifty miles around.

I began to be sent for by the people of this part of the country
30 much, that 1 found it impossible to attend to my farm
family as 1 ought; for the cases I had attended, I had rec
very little or n< thin r, not enough to compensate me for my time;
and I found ii to be my di ity to give up practice a i or to

mak > a bu mess of ii. I consulted with my wife and asked the
advice of my friends, what was best for .me to do; they all


28 NAftRATIYE OF THE LIFE, kc

agreed, that as it seemed to be the natural turn of my mini
if I thought myself capable of 6uch an important undertaking,
it would be best to let my own judgment govern me, and to do
as I thought best. I maturely weighed the matter in my mind,
and viewed it as the greatest trust that any one could engage in.
J considered my wan' of learning and ignorance of mankind,
which almost discouraged me from the undertaking; yet 1 had a
strong inclination for the practice, which seemed impossible to
divest my mind of; and I had always had a very strong aversion
to working on a farrn, as every thing of the kind appeared to me
to be a burthen; the reason of which I could not account for,
as I had carried on the business to good advantage, and had as ,
good a firm as any in the neighborhood. 1 finally concluded
to make usoof that gift which I lhougb.1 the God of nature had
irpplaffted in me; and if i possessed such a gift, I had no
need of learning, for no one can learn that gift. I thought of
what St. Paul says in his epistle to the Corinthians, concerning
the di.Terent gifts by the same spirit; some had the gift of pro-
phecy, another, the £i ! '' of healing, to am ther the workin
miracles. I am satisfied in rny own mind, that every man
made capacitated to s-'-me particular pursuit in life, which, if
he engages in it, he will Le more useful than he would if he
happens to be so unfortunate as to follow a calling or profession,
(hat was not allot'od to him by his maker. This is a very
portant consideration for parents, n^t to make their sr>r>^ learn
trades or professions which are contrary to the.r inclinations and
the natural turn of their minds: fori' is certain if they do,th< y
never can be useful or happy in following them.

I am convinced myself that 1 possess a gift in healing t!;e
ick, because of the extraordinary success I have met with, and
the protection and support Providence has afforded me against
the attacks of all my enemies. Whether T should have been
more useful Lad it been my lot to have had an education, and
learned the profession in the fashionable way, is impossible for
me to say with certainty; probably I should have been dcemd
more honorable in the world; but honor obtained by lean,
without a natural gift, can never in my opinion make a man <
useful to his feilow-creatures. I wish my readers to understand
me, that I do not me in to convey the idpa. that learning is not
necessary and essential in obtaining a proper knowledge of any
profession or ar>; but that going to college will make a wise
man of a fool, is what I am rendy to deny; or that d man can-
not be useful and even great in a profession, or in the arts and


OF SAMUEL . H ■ 39

-cicnccs. without a classical education, is what I think no one
will have the hardihood to attempt to support, as it is contrary
io reason nnrt common sense. We have many examples of somo
of the greatest philo ophers, physicians, and divines the world
ever knew, who wei -taught; and who have d

mote honor -and were greater cm met is to society, than a millior
of (li j ;e wh i have n othing to recommend them bw liav ngJh|i'
i sads crammed with learning, wi1 v
to any great or useful pur]

Among the practicing physicians, I have found, and I bcliev«
it to be a well known fact, that those who are really great in thi
profession and have had the most experience, condemn as mud
as I do, the fashionable mode of practice of the present
and use very little medical poisons, confining themselves in their
treatment of patients to simples principally, and th
such things as will promote digestion and aid natu
of them disapprove of bleeding altogether. Those of this d<
scriptiou, with whom I have had an opportunil;
have treated me with all due attention arid civility; have h
me with pleasure, and been ready to allow me cr<
experience and the discoveries I have made in curing disease.
The op] osition and abuse that ! have met v
formly frnm those to whom I think 1 can wit
name of quacks, or ignoranl pretenders; i heir

! in their self-importance and arroganl - lavioui li
those who have not had the advantages of learning, and a d-
at college. This class compoeea large proportion of the
rd faculty throughout our country; they havi

gh to know how to deceive the^ople, and ket p
ignorance, by covering their doings under a la g tow n,

1o their patients. There can be no good reai
Jhe medical works are kept in a dead Iangu il

deceive and keep the world ignorant of the
may the/bettor impose upon the credulity oi peoffa
it was to be written in our own language every body would un-
derstand itvand judge for themselves; and tb<
would be thrown into the fire before their patients would
them. The ill-treatment that I have received from t!
been mostly where 1 have exposed their ignorance hj ca
those thev had given over to die; in which cases they h
iheir malice by circulating all kinds of false and ridici
reports of me and mv practice, in order to destroy my i
with the people; and lam sorry to say that I have found i
C 2


KARRA7IVK Of THE IslFF, kl>

too ready to join with (hem, oven among those who have been
relieved by me from pain and uch ingratitude 1 can

account, for in no other way, than by the readiness with which
the people follow whatever is fashonablej without reflecting
wheiher it be right or wrong.

After 1 h id come to the determination to make a business of
the medical practice, T found it necessary to fix upon some sys-
tem, or plan for my future government in the treatment of dis-
ease; for what I had done had been as it were from accident
and the necessity arising out of the particular cases that came
under my care, without any fixed plan; in which i had been
governed by mv judgment and the advantages 1 had received
..rom experience. I deemed it necessary r of only as my own
guide; but that whatever discoveries I should make in my prac-
ice, they might he so adapted to my plan, as that my whole
system might be easily taught to others, and preserved for the
benefit cf the world. I had no other assistance than my own
observations and the natural reflections of my own mind, un-
aided by learning or the opinions of others, i took nature for
my guide, and experience as my instructor; and after seriously
considering every part of the subject, I came to certain conclu-
sions concerning disease and the whole animnl economy, which
thirty years' experience has perfectly satisfied me is the only
correct theory. My practice Irs invariably been conform;;! iy
to the general principles upon which my system is founded,
find in no instance have I had reason to doubt the correctness
of its application to cure all cases cf disease when propeily
attended to: for that all disease is the effect of one general
cause, and may be removed by one general remedy, is the foun-
dation upon which I have erected my fabric, and which 1 sh;d)
endeavor to explain in as clear and concise a manner as i am
sapable, with a hope that it may be understood by my readers,
and that they may be convinced of its correctness.

I found after maturely considering thesubject, that all animal
bodies are formed of the four el3incntp,earth,air,f;rcand water.
Earth and water constitute the solids, and air and fire, or heat
are the cause of life and motion. That cold, or lessenino the
power of heat, is the cause of all disease — that to restore heat
to the natural state was the only way by which health could be
produced; and that after restoring the natural heat, by clearing
he system of all obstructions and causing a natural perspiration
Mie stomach would digest the food taken into it, by which means
the whole body is nourished and invigorated, and the heat or


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 3J

nature is enabled to hold its supremacy — that the constitutions
of all mankindj being essentially the same, and diffeiingonly in
the different temparament of the same materials of which they
are composed; it appeared clear to my mind, that all disease
proceeded from one general cause, and might be cured by one
general remedy — that a state of perfect healtharises from a due
balance of temperature of the four elements; but if it is by any
means destroyed the body is* more or less disordered. And
when this is the case, there is always an actual diminution or
absence of the element of fire, or heat; and inpropotion to this
diminution, or absence, the body is affected by its opposite,
winch is cold. And I found that all disorders which the human
family were afflicted with, however various the symptoms, and
different the nane.sby which they are ciliecl, aii<e directly from
obstructed persp.rxtion, which is always caused by cold, or want
of heat ; for if there is a natural heat, it is impossible but tha'
there must be a natural perspiration.

Having fixed upon these general principles, as the only s^lid
foundation upon which a correct and true understanding of the
Subject can be founded, my next business was to ".^certain what
kinds of medicine and treatment would best answer the purpose
in conformity to this universal plan of curing disease; for it
must, I think, be certain, and self evident to every one, thai
whatever will increase the internal heat, remove all obstructions
of the system, restore the digeslive powers of the stomach, and
produce a natural perspiration, is universally applicable in all
cases of disease, and therefore may be considered as a general
ri medy.

The first and most important consideration, was to find a me-
dicine that would establish a natural intern d heat, so as to give
niture its proper command. My emetic herb, (No. 1,) I found
would effectually cleanse the stomach, and would very essen-
tially aid in raising the heat and promoting perspiration; but
would not hold it long enough to effect the desired object so
hut that the cold would return again arid assume its power. It
was like a fire made of shavings; a strong heat for a short time
and then go out. After much experience, and trying every
thing within my knowledge to gain this important point, I fixed
upon the medicine which I have called No. 2, in my patent, for
that purpose; and after using it for many years, 1 am perfectly
convinced that it is the best thing that can be made use of to
hold the heat in thestomich until the system can be cleared of
instructions, so as to produce a natural digestion of the food.


NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &C.

which will nourish the body, establish perspiration and restore
he health of the patient. *I found it to be perfectly safe in all
cases, and never knew any bad effects from administering it.

My next grand object was to get something that would clear
thestomach and bowels from canker, which are more or lose af-
fected by it in all cases of disease to which the humin family
are subject. Canker and putrefaclion are caused by cold, or
want of heat ; for whenever any pact of the body is so affected by
cold as to overpower the natural heat, putrefaction commences,
and if not checked by medicine, or the natural constitution
notigh to overcome its progress it will commun:-
..zie to the blood, when doafh will end the contest between heat
< old by deciding in favor of the latter. I have made use
of a g i y articles, which are useful ir. removing canker;

;'! my preparation called No. 3, is the best for that purpose
that has come to my knowledge; though many other tilings may
be made use of to good effect, all of which I shall give particu-
lescription of in my general directions hereafter.
Having endeavored to convey to my readers in a brief man-
ect idea of the general principles upon which I form-
tern of practice, I shall new give some account of the
dth in the various cases that came under my care
raid the difficulties and opposition that I ha-e had to encounte
II this time against all my enemies. r

My general plan of treatment has been in all cases ofdiscase
to cleanse the stomach by giving No. 1, and produce as great an
-internal heat as 1 could, by giving No, 2, and when necessary,
made use of steaming, in which I have always found great,
benefit, especially in fever?; after this I gave No. 3, to clear off
the canker; and in all cases where the pitient had not previ-
ously become so far reduced as to have nothing tobuild upon,
l have been successful in restoring them to health. 1 found,
; hat fever was a disturbed sivie of the heat, or more properly,
that it was caused by the efforts which nature makes to 1 how off
disease, and therefore ought to be aided in its cause, and treated
as a friend and not as an enemy, as is the practice of the phy-
sicians. In all cases of disease I have found that there is more
or less fever, according to the state of the system ; but that, all
fevers proceed from the same cause, differing only in the symp-
toms; and may be managed and brought to a crisis with much
less trouble than is generally considered practicable, by increas-
ing the internal heat, tiil the cold is driven out, which is the
cause of it. Thus keeping the fountain above the stream, and
every thmg will take its natural course.


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. #

t)uring the year 1805, a very alarming disease prevailed in
Alstead and VVal pole; which was considered the yellow fever,
ond was fatal to many who were attacked by it. I was called
on and attended with very great success, not losing one patient
that I attended ; at the same lime, those who had the regular
physicians, nearly one half of them died. This disease pre-
vailed for about forty days, during which time 1 was at home
Iju* eight nights. } was obliged to be nurse as well as doctor,
and do every thing myself, for the people had no knowledge of
my mode of practice, a.nd I could not depend upon what any
person did except what was under my own immediate inspec-
tion. I pursued the same general plan that I had before adopt-
ed ; but the experience I had from this practice, suggested to
ins minv i nprove nants, which [ had not before thought of, as
respects the mariner of treitment of patients to effect the ob-
jects I i.imed at in curing the disease, which was 10 produce a.
natural perspiration. 1 found great benefit in steaming in the
manner thai f had discovered and practised with my little daugh-
ter; but /found by experience, that by putting a hot stone into
a spider or iron basin, r.nd then wetting the top of the stone
with vinegar, wis an important improvement; and with this
simple method, with a little medicine of my own preparing, an-'"
swered a much better purpose, than all the bleeding and poi-
sonous physic of the doctors. While I was attending those
who were sick, and they found that my mode of treatment re-
lieved them from their d is Uess, (hey were very ready to fi • t r
and give great credit for my practice; but after 1 had worn my-
self out in their service, they began to think that it wis not
done in a fashionable way; and the doctors imde use of every
mean* in their power to ridicule ma and my prictice, for ths
purpose of maintaining their own credit with the people. Thi*
kind of treatment was a new thing to me, as I did not at that
time so well understand the craft, as I have since, from hard
earned experience. The word quackery when used by the
doctors against me, was a very important charm to prejudice the
people against my practice; but I would ask all the 'jar. did pnd
reflecting part of the people the following question, and 1 will
leave them to their consciences to give an answer — Which is
the greatest quack, the oce who relieves them from their sick-
ness by the most simple and safe mean?, without any prc-ten-
tentions to infallibility or skill, more than what nature and expe-
rience his taught him, or the one who, instead of curing dis-
eis". increases it by administering pbisotaous medicines, which


U NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

only tend to prolong the distress of the patient, tiil either the
strength of his natural constitution, or death, relieves him?

I was called upon to attend a man hy the name of Pair-
banks who lived in Walpole; he was taken with bleeding at
the lungs. 1 found him in a very bad condition; the family
judged that he had lost nearly six quarts of blood in twenty-
four hours. He was in despair, and had taken leave of his
family as they considered there was no hopes of his living. —
The doctor was 1 with him when I first entered the house ; but
he ded at my approach. Both his legs were corded hy the doc-
tor, and the first thing I did was to strip off the cords from his
legs; and then gave medicine to get as great u
1 possibly could produce; got him to sweat profusely; then
gave him medicine to clear the canker ; and in four days he was
so well as ,o be able to go out and . ttend to his business

Sometime in October, 1805, I attended a Mrs. Goodel of
Walpole; she had been confined and had taken cold. The
most noted doctors in the town had attended her through what
they called a fever, and she was then pronounced by them to be
in a decline. After thres months practice upon her, they had
got her into so desperate a situation, they gave her over,
and said that her case was so putrid and ulcerated that it was
utterly incurable. She had, in addition to the rest of her diffi-
culties, a cancer on her back. In this desperate situation, if
was thought by her friends that she was a proper subject for me
to undertake with. I, with a great deal of reluctance, under-
took with her, at her earnest solicitation and that of her hus-
band ; but met with much greater success than I expected. In
four weeks she was able to be about the house and do some
work.

fn the'same year I was sent for to attend a woman who had
been in a dropsical way for a number of years. The disease
had of late gained with rapid progress. Her husband had pre-
viously conversed vv^th me upon the subject, and said tint he
had applied to Dr. Sparahawk. and others, and they had agreed
to make a trial of mercury. I told him that it would not an-
swer the purpose; he said he was afraid of it himself; but the
doctors said there was no other possible way. The doctor tried
ins mercurial treatment for several days, which verv ncarlv
proved fatal; for I was sent for in great haste, with a request
that 1 would attend as soon as possible, as thdy expected she
would not live through the day. ] found her situation very
distressing; she said that it appeared to her that she was full ot


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 35

sc lding water. She began '.o turn purple in spots, and it was
expected that mortification hr.d taken jbce. In the fi^st place
I give her about a gill of eheci.erherry and hemlock distilled,
which allayed the heat immediately. This answered (he pur-
pose, till [ could cleir the stomach, and by the greatest exer-
tions, and close attention through the day, I was enabled to re-
lieve her. I attended her for about a week, and she was so tar
recovered as to enjoy comfortable health for twelve years.

Notwithstanding this desperate case was cured, to the aston-
ishment of all who witnessed it, the doctors had so much influ-
ence over the people, and imdesomany false statements about
it, thai 1 got no credit for the cure. This woman's brother had
said that her husband wanted to kill her, or he would not have
sent for roe. Such kind of ingratitude was discouraging to
mi; but did not prevent me from persevering in my duty.

A short time afier the above jjcr.se happened, that woman's
brother who had made the speech aboul me was taken very sick.
with what was called the yellow fever, and sent for me. I at-
tended him and asked him if he wanted to die. Hesa'dno,-
why do you ask that? I told him that! should suppose from the
speech he made about my being sent for to his sister, that he
did or he would not have sent for me, if he believed his own
words. He said he thought differently now. I attended him
through' the day with my new practice. To sweat him I took
hen.io ck boughs, and put a hot stone in the middle of a large
bunch of hem, wrapping the whole in a cloth and poured on
hot water til! it raised a lively steam and then put one at his
feet and another neur his body. I gave him medicine to raise
the inward heat and for the canker; after attending him through
the day I vent home; and on calling to see him the next morn-
ing found that his fever had turn?d, ard he was quite comfort-
able, so that he was soon about his business.

I was about this time sent for to see a child in Surry, a neigh-
boring *own, which was taken very sick, and was entirely stu-
pid. I told the father of the child that it had the canker, and
mde use of my common mode of practice for that difficulty.
Being sent for to go to Walpoie to see two young men who had
been taken the diy before with the prevailing fever, ] left the
child, with directions how to proceed with it. I then started
for Walpoie, a«d found the two voung men violently attacked
with the fever. They had a brother who had been attended
by ihe d'«"tor tor above four weeks for the saaie disease, and was
then just able to sit up. It was thought by all, the two that


& NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, fcc.

were attacked last, were as violently taken as the pth#r was-;
and they expressed a strong wish, that they might le cured
without so long a run as their brother had. I was as anxious
as they were to have a short job, and exerted all my powers to
relieve them, which 1 was enabled to do that night, and left
them in the morning quite comfortable, so that they were soon
4Lie to attend to their work. The brother who had the doctor,

vas un ble to do any thing for several months. The doctor
was paid a heavy bill for his visits; but my cure was done so
quick, that it was thought not to be worthy of their notice, and
I never received a cent from them for my trouble. On return-
ing to the child that I had left the day before, 1 found that the
dociorbad been there and told them that I did not know what
was the matter with the child ; and had persuaded them to give
him the care of it. He filled it with mercury and run it down-,
after having given as much mercury inside as nature could
move, and the bowels grew silent, he then ruhbed mercurial
Ointment on the bowels as long as it had any effect; after which
he agreed that the child had the canker very badly; but he still
oersis'ed in the same course till the child wasted away and died,
in about two months after it was first taken sick. After the
child was dead, its parents were willing to allow that. I under-
stood the disorder bes*. The doctor got twenty-five dollars for
killing the child by inches, and I got nothing.

' In the spring of 1805, a Mrs. Richardson was brought to my
house. She was brought in her bed from Westford, Vermont,
about 130 miles; and was attended by a son and daughter, the
one twenty-one and the other eighteen years of age. The
mother had lain in her bed most part of the time for ten years.
All the doctors in that part of the country had been applied to
without any advantage; and they had spent nearly all their pro-
perty. I undertook with her more from a charitable feeling for
th«? young man and woman, than from any expectation of a
cure. Their conduct towards their helpless mother, was the
greatest example of affection of children to a parent, that 1 ever
witnessed. The young man stated to me that, his mother had
been a year together without opening her eyes; that when she
could open them, they thought her almost well. She was per-
fectly helpless, not being able to do the least thing; not even to
brush off a fly, any more than an infant. She had laid so long
that her knee joints had become stiff.

I began with her by cleansing her stomach and promoting
perspiration; after which, I used to try to give her some exer-


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 37

cise. The first trial I made was to put her bed info a wheel-
barrow and lay her on it; when I would run her out. till she
appeared to be weary ; sometimes I would make a mis-step and
fall, pretending that I bad hurt nie; in order to try to get her to
move herself by frightening her. After exercising her in this
way for a few days, f put her in a wagon, silting on a bed, and
drove her about in that manner; and when her joints became
more limber, 1 sat her on the seat of the wagon. She insisted
that she should fall off, for she said she could not use her feet;
but the driver would sometimes drive on ground that was side-
ling, and rather than turn over she would start her foot unex-
pectedly. After exercising her in this way sometime, 1 put her
on a horse behind her son; she at first insisted that she should
fall off; but when I told her she was at liberty to fall, if she
chose, she would not, choosing rather to exert herself to hold
on. When she had rode a lew miles in this way, I put her on
the horse alone, and after a few trials she would ride very well,
so that in the course of two months she would ride four miles
out and back every day. She used to be tired after riding, and
would lay down and not move for six hours. I continued to
give her medicine to keep up perspiration, and restore the
digestive-powers, and to strengthen the nervous system. I
attended her in this way for three months, and then went with
her and her son and d mghter to Manchester; she rode upwards
of thirty miles in a day, and stood the journey very well. I
never received any p^y for all my trouble and expense of keep-
ing them for three months, except what the two young people
did mare than take care of their mother; but I accomplished
what I undertook, and relieved these two unfortunate orphans
from their burthen; which was more satisfaction to me than to
have received a large sum of money, without doing any good.
J saw ibis woman three years after at the wedding of her son,
and she was quite comfortable, and has enjoyed a tolerable de-
gree of he.dth to this time, being able to wait on herself.

On my return from Manchester I stopped at Walpole, and it
being on the Sabbath,, I attended meeting. In the afte.noon
during service, a young woman was taken in a fit and carried
out of the meeting house. I went out to see her and found that
she had been subject to fits for some time. She was much
bloated, and very large, weighing about three hundred. A few
days after her friends brought, her to my house, and were very
urgent that I should undertake to help her; but I told them J
was satisfied that it would be a very difficult undertaking, andt


38 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &e.

did not feel willing to engage in it; but they were so urgent
I agreed to do what 1 con id tor her. Every time she took medi-
cine, when 1 first began with her, she would have a strong con-
vulsion fit; but T soon got her to sweat freely, and her fits were
at an end. By persevering in my usual plan. o> treatment, I
got a natural perspiration, and ler olhci evapuations became
regular; she was considerably reduced in size, and I have never
heard of her having any fits since. The cause of her fits was
taking sudden cold, and all perspirations and the greater part of
other evacuations ceased, leaving the water in her body.

In the fall of 1805,1 wis sent for to go to Richmond, to see
the familv of Elder Bowles,who were all sick with the dysentery;
and Mrs. Bowles h^d a cancer on her breast. I relieved them
of their disorders, hy my usual mode of practice; and gave t lie
woman medicine for the cancer, which relieved her. I had
occasion to visit her again, and the tumor was about the size of
an egg; but by following my prescriptions, it was dissolved
without causing any pain, and she has been well for twelve
years. I then practiced in different parts of Royylston and War-
wick, and my practicing in these places was the way that ray
m" !e of sweating for the spotted fever, came to be known and
practiced by the physicians in PeteHham. I had discovered
the benefit of steaming by trying it upon my daughter two years
before, and had been constantly practicing it ever since; but
the doctors, though they condemned me and my practice, were
willing to introduce it and take the credit to themselves as an
important discovery.

After returning home T was sent for to attend a woman in the
neighborhood, who had 'ieen under the care of a celebrated
doctor, for a cancer in her breast, He had tortured her with
Ids caustics, till her breast was burnt through to the bone; an'
bv its corrosive nature had caused the cords to draw up int<
knots; lie had likewise burnt her leg to the cords. She ha'
been under his care eleven weeks; until she was much wast
away, and her strength nearly gone. In this situation the doctor
was. willing together off his hands, and wished me to take
charge ofher. After some hesitation I consented, and attended
her three weeks, in which time I healed up her sores, and clear-
ed her of the humor so effectually that she has ever since enjoy-
ed pond health.

While attending upon this case another woman was brought
tome from Hillsborough, who had a cancer on the back ofher
neck. I dissolved the tumor, and cured her by applying my


©F SAMUEL THOMSON. 39

cancer balsam, and the common course of medicine, in three
weeks, without any pain ; and she has ever since enjoyed ood
health.

In the autumn of 1 806, 1 found that a certain doctor of Alstead
had circulated some very foolish and slanderous reports about
me and an old woman, whom I hid attended, and had given to
them so much importance, that many people believed them. I
found that I could prove his assertions, and sued him for defa-
nation; supposing that by appealing to the laws of my country
I could get redress; but I was disappointed in my expectations,
"or 1 was persuaded to leave the case to a reference, and he bad
■aised such a strong prejudice in the mtndsof the people against
me, that they were more ready to favor a man whom they con-
sidered great and learned, because he had been to college, than
to do justice to me; so they gave the case against me, and I had
to pay the cost. Afier this I refused to attend those people who
had assisted in injuring me, and gave them up to their fashiona-
ble doctor. A curse seemed to follow them and his practice;
for the spotted fever prevailed in this place soon after, and the
doctor took charge of those who had sided with him against me,
and if he had been a butcher and used the knife, there would
not have been more destruction among them. Two men who
swore falsely in his favor, and by whose means he got his cause,
were among his first victims; and of the whole that he attended
about nine tenths died. He lost upwards of sixty patients in
the town of Alstead in a short time.

1 attended the funeral of a young man, one of his patients,
who \v:is sick but twenty-four hours, and but twelve under the
operation ofhis medicine. He was as black as a blackberry,
and swelled so as to be difficult to screw down the lid of the
coffin ; when I went into the room where the corpse was, the doc-
tor followed me, and gave directions to have the coffin secured
so as to prevent the corpse being seen; and then began to insult
me, to attract the attention of the people. He said to me, I
understand, sir, that you have a patent to cure such disorders as
that (pointing to the corpse.) I said no, and at the same time
intimated what I thought of him. He put on an air of great
importance,nnd said to me,what can you know about medicine?
you have no learning, you cannot parse one sentence in gram-
mar. I told him I never knew that grammar wis made use of
as medicine; but if a portion of grammar is so much like the
operation of ratsbane, as appears on this corpse, I should never
wish to know the use of it. This unexpected application of tha


40 tiARRATlVE OF THE LIFE, frc.

meaning of what he said, displeased the medical gentleman very
much; and finding that many of the people present had the
same opinion that f had, it irritated him so much, that he
threatened to horsewhip me; but I told him that he might do
what he pleased to me, provided he did not poison me with hia
grammar. He did not attempt to carry his threat intoexecution,
so I have escaped his whip and his poison: but the people wore
justly punished for their ingratitude and folly, in preferring
death and misery, because it was done more fashionably, to a
mode of practice by which they might relieve themselves in a
simple and safe manner.

I have been more particular in relating these circumstances,
in order to show my reasons for refusing to practice so near
home; for I had been in constant practice among them for four
or five years, and had been very successful, not having lost one
patient d u ring the whole time. My house had been constantly
filled with patients from all parts of the country, for which I
had received very little pay; myself and family were worn out
with nursing and attending upon them; so that I was compelled
in a measure, to leave home to free myself and family from so
heavy a burthen. Besides Kelt it more a duty to assist tha-
people in those parts where I had been treated with more friend-
ship, and had received more assistance through my troubles,
than what i h id experienced from those whom I had reason to
consider us under the greatest obligations to me.

In the spring of the year 1806, 1 came to a determination to
go to New York, for the purpose of ascertaining the nature of
the yellow fever, having been impressed with the idea, that this
disease was similar to that which had been prevalent in different
parts of the country, only differing in causes which were local,
I made arrangements with a man to take charge of my farm,
and on the 26th of June, started for Boston, where I took pas-
sane for New York, and sailed on the 3d of July. In passing
through the Sound, I was very sensibly affected by the cold
chills 1 experienced in consequence of the sea air; having never
been on the salt water before, this was new to me; although the
weather wis very hot on the land, f suffered with the cold.—
We arrived at New York in eight days; and the weather was
extremely hot when I landed; this sudden change produced a
powerful effect on my feelings; the cause of vhich 1 was satis-
fied in my own mind, was in consequence of the cold I hut
experienced on the water having reduced (he natural heat of the
body; thus corning into a very warm atmosphere, the external


OF SAMtl£L THOMSON. <1

and internal heat were upon nearly an equal scale, and when
there is an exact balance, so as to stop the determining powers
to the surface, mortification immediately takes place, and death
follows. This is the cause why the fever is so fatal to those
who go from the northward inio a warm climate.

On my arrival I looked round to find a place to board, and
took up my lodgings with a Mr. Kavanagh, an Irishman, and a
Roman Catholic. After spending some time in viewing the
city, T applied to the mayor of the city, and to the Board of
Health, to ascertain whe ther I could have an opportunity to try
the effect of my medicine and system of practice on the pre-
vailing fever. They told me that I could get no pay for il by
law. I went to see Dr. Miller, who was then president of the
board of health, and had some conversation with him upon the
subject. He told me the same as the mayor had, and inquired
of me in what manner I expected to give relief; I told him my
plan was to cause perspiration. He said if I could cause them
to sweat, he though there was a good chance to effect a cure.

After spending several days in New York, I went to West-
chester creek to procure same medhirie. I thought that I Was
going to have the yellow fever, for I felt all the symptoms, as I
thought, of that disease; my strength was nearly gone, my eyes
were yellow, and a noise in mv head; mv tongue was black, and
what pissed my bowels wis like tar. I was among strangers,
and had little money ; \ went to the house of a quaker woman,
and asked her to let me stay w»th her that day; shegave her
consent. Hid but little medicine with me, and could find
nothing that I could relish but salt and vinegar; I used about
half a pint of salt and double the quantity of vinegar, which
gave me relief, and I gained so much strength, that the next
day I was able to return to the city of New York. On my
arrival there, I wasso weak that it was with the greatest difficulty
I could walk to my bo irding house, which was about forty rods
from lie place where we land d. I immediately took Nos. 2 and
3, steeoed, and No. 4. in a short time I began to hav« an appetite,
the first, food that I took was a piece of smoked salmon, and
some ripe peach sauce. Soon recovered my strength and was
able to be about. This satisfied me that I h?d formed a correct
idea of this fatal disejse; that, it was the consequence of losing
the inward heat of 'he body, %«d bringing it to a balance with
the surrounding air; and the onlv method by which a cure can
be effected, is by giving sjcb, medtcineas wll increase the feTCT
or inward hpat, to such a degree to as get the determining
D2


»- NARRATIVE OF i HE LIFE, ke.

power to the surface, by which means perspiration will take
place, fttid which is called the turn of the fever; if this is not
accomplished either by medicine, or by nature being sufficient
to overcome ihe diser.se, mortification will be as certain a con-
sequence as it would be if a person was strangled. The reason
why they lose their strength in so short a time, is because it
depends wholly on the power of inward heat; and as much as
they lose that, so much they lose their -strength and activity.

1 had a good opportunity to prove these facts and to satisfy
myself, by attending upon a Mr. McGowan, who had the yellow
fever. He was the teacher of the Roman Catholic school, and
an acquaintance of Mr. Kavanagh, with whom I boarded, and
who recommended him to my enre. He was attacked about
noon, and was very cold, and had no pain; his eyes were half
closed, and appeared like a person halfway between sleeping
and waking; he lost so much strength that in two hours he was
unable to walk across the room without staggering. J began
with him by giving Nos. 2 and 3, to raise the inward heat and
• lear the stomach, and in an hour after getting him warm, he
was in very extreme pain, so much so that his friends were
alarmed about him; but I told them that it was a favorable
symptom. After being in this situation about an hour, perspi-
ration began and he grew easy; the next day he was out about
his business. The effect in these cases is exactly similar to a
person being recovered after having been drowned. The cold
having overpowered the inward heat, all sensation or feeling
ceases, and of course there is no pain; but as soon as the heat
begins to increase so as to contend with the cold, sensation re-
turns, and the pain will be; very great till the victory is gained by
heat having expelled the cold from the body, when a natural per-
spiration commences, and nature is restored to her empire.

I will here make a few remarks upon the food taken into the
stomach, which is of the utmost importance to the preservation
of health. Whilol was in New York, I took particular notice
of their manner of living; and observed that they subsisted
principally upon fresh provisions, more particularly the poorer
class of people; who are in the habit in warm weather of going
to market at a late hour of the day, and purchasing fresh meat
that is almost in a putrid state, having freequently been killed
ihe night previous, and being badly cooked, by taking it into
..he stomach, will produce certain disease; and I am convinced
that this is one of the greatest causes that those fatal epidemics
prevail in the hot season, in our large seaports. Mutton and


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 4 ;1

Iamb is often drove a great distance from the country, and haw-
ing been heated and fatigued, then are cooled suddenly, which
causes the fat. to turn to water; and often ■ when killed are in
almost a putrid state, and the meat is soft ami flabby. Such
meat as this when brought into the market on a hot day will turn
green under the kidneys in two or three hours, and taken into
the stomach will putrify before it digests, and will communicate
the same to the stomach, and the whole body will be so affected
bv it, as to cause disorder of the worst kind. If people would
get into the practice of eating salt provisions in hot weather
and fresh in cold, it would be a very great preventathe to dis-
ease. One ounce of putrid flesh in the, stomach, is worse than
the effect produced by a whole carcase on the air by its effluvia
Much more might be said upon this important subject; but I
Bhall defer it for the present and shall treat more upon it ha an
other part of the work. It is a subject that has been too much
neglected by our hen 1th officers in this country.

While m'tlic city of New York, I attended an Irishman by
the ni'.me of Doyl, who had the fever-and-ague. This disease
giveS a complete view of my theory of heat and cold; for it is
about an equal balance between the two, heat keeping a little
the upper hand. He had been afflicted with this distressirg
disorder about four months; he had the fits most of the time
every day, and was very bad. I began by giving him such me-
dicine as I usually gave to increase the inward heat of the
body, which subdued the cold, and gave heat the victory over it
and by strictly attending him in this way four days, he was
completly cured. Being short of money, I asked him for some
compensation for my trouble; but he refused and never paid me
a cent; observing, that he must have been getting well before,
for no one ever heard of such a disorder being cured in four

A gentleman whom I had formed an acquaintance with bv
the name of James Quackenbush, who had the care of the state
prison warehouse, finding how I had been treated, invited me to
go to his house and live with lum, which I thankfully accepted.
I was treated with much kindness by him for which he has my
most sincere thanks.

On the 16th of September, I started for home, and took pas-
sive on board a packet for Boston, where I arrived in five days,
and on the 26th reached my home, after an absence of three
months, and found my family well. I was often called on to
practice in the neighborhood; but declined most part of the


44 NARRATIVE OF THE LITT, &c

applications in consequence of the treatment I had received
from them, which lias been before related. In November I went
to Plum Island to collect medicine; on my way I called on Jo-
seph Hale Esq. of Pepperell, and engaged him to come down
with his waggon in about three weeks, to bring back what me-
dicine I should collect. I went by the way of Newburyport;
and after being on the island three or four days, collected such
roots as I wanted and returned to th.it place. While there,bting
in a store in conversation with some persons, there came in a
mm from Salisbury Mills, by the name of Osgood, who sUted
that he was very unwell, and that his wife lay at the point of
death, with the lung fever; that she had been attended by Dr.
French, who had given her over. One of the gentlemen stand-
ing by told him that I was a doctor, and used the medicine of
our own country. He asked me if I would go home with him
and see his wife; asl was waiting for Mr. Hale and nothing to
do, I told him I would, and we immediately started in the
chaise for his home, which was about six miles. On our ar-
rival he introduced me to his wife as a doctor who made use of
the medicine of our country; and asked her if she was willing
that I should undertake to cure her. She said if I thought that
I could help her, she had no objections. 1 gave my opinion that
I could, and undertook, though with some reluctance, as I was
in a strange place and no one that I knew. I proceeded with
her in my usual method of practice, and in about fourteen hours
her fever turned, and the next day she was comfortable and soon
got about.

This cure caused considerable talk among the people in the
neighborhood, who thought very favorably of me and my prac-
tice; but it soon came to the ears of Dr. French, who was very
much enraged to think that one of his patients that he had given
over, should be cured by one whom he called a quack; and at-
tempted to counteract the public impression in my favor, by
circulating a report that the woman was getting better and sat
up the greatest part of the day before Tsaw her; but this w;:s
denied by the woman's husband, and known by many to be false.

While I remained in this place, waiting for Mr. Hale to come
down with his waggon to carry home my medicine, I was called
on to attend several cases, in oil of which I was very success-
ful; most of them were such as had been given over by their
doctors. One of them wis arse of a young man, who had
cut three of his fingers very bidly, so as to lav open the joints.
Dr. French had attended nim three weeks, and they had got so


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 45

bad that he advised him to have them cutoff as the only alter-
native. The young man applied to me for advice I told him
that it" I was in his situation, I should not be willing lo have
them cut off till I had made some further trial to cure tliem
without. He requested me to undertake to cure him, to which
I consented, and began by clearing the wound of mercury, by
washing it with weak lye; I then put on some drops, and did it
up with a bandage which was kept wet with cold water. While
I was dressing the wound, a young man who was studying with
Dr. French, came in and made a great fuss, telling the young
man that f wis going to spoil his hand, i lold him that 1 was
accountable for what was doing, and that if he had any advice
to ofler I was ready to hear him; but he seemed to have nothing
to offer except to find fault, and went off after saying that Dr.
French's bill must, be paid very soon. I continued to dress his
h iid and in ten days he wis well enough to attend his work,
being employed in a nail factory. Soon after, I s : ;w him ihere
at work, and asked him how ins fingers did, he said they were
perfectly cured; he wished to know what my bill was for attend-
ing him. I asked him what Dr. French had charged, and he
said he had sent his bill to his mother, amounting to seventeen
dollars; 1 told him 1 thought that enough for us both, and I
should charge him nothing. His mother was a poor widow,
depending on her labor and that of her son for a living. I re-
mained in this place about two weeks, and the people were very
urgent that. 1 should stay longer, but Mr. Hale having arrived
I left them with a promise tint I would visit them again in the
spring. We arrived at Pepperell, where I remained several days
with Mr. Hale, who was an ingenious blacksmith and chvmisf,
having been much engaged in the preparation of mineral medi-
cine. He had an enquiring turn of mind and was very enthu-
siastic in his undertakings; although he prepared medicines
from minerals, he acknowledged that he was afraid to use them
on account of Iks knowing their poisonous qualities. I con-
vinced him of the superiority of my system of practice, and
instructed him in the use of my medicine, so that he engaged
in it and soon had as much practice as he could attend to; be-
ing so well satisfied of its general application to the cure of all
cases of disease, that he looked no more for it in his miner;.'!
re pa rat ions.

Jn the winter of 1807, [ went with my wifi? to Jericho. Ver-
mont, to visit my father and friends, who lived there. While
:'.,vTC I was called on to sec a number who were sick, among


46 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

whom wa a i young man that had been taken in what is called
cramp convulsion fits. He was first taken on Sunday morning
and continued in fits most of the time till Tuesday; he was at-
tended during this time by the best doctors that could be pro-
cured, without doing him any good. They could not get their
medicine to have any effect upon him; he continued in convul-
sions most of the time, every part of him was as stiff as a wood-
. i image; after trying every thing they could they gave him
over. His father came after me, and just as we entered the
room where the young man was he was taken in a fit. His feet
and hands were drawn in towards his body, his jaws were sot,
his head drawn back, and every part of him as completely fixed
as a statute. The first difficulty was to get him to take any
thing; his jaws were set as tight together as a vise. I tock a
solution of Nos. 1, 2, and 6, as strong as it could be made, and
putting my finger into the corner of his mouth, making a space
between his cheek and teeth, poured some of it down ; and soon
as it touched the glands at the roofs of his tongue, his jaws
came open, and he swallowed some of the medicine; which had
such an effect upon the stomach, that all the spasms immedi-
ately ceased. 1 left him some medicine with directions, and he
entirely recovered his health; I saw him three years after, and
he told me that he had not had a fit since the one above describ-
ed. I was convinced from this circumstance, that the cause of
all cramps or spasms of this kind, is seated in the stomach, and
that all applications for relief in such cases should be made"
there; as it will be of no service to work on the effect as long
as the cause remains.

Before returning home, T was called on by Captain Lyman
of Jericho, to advise with me concerning his son, who had a fe-
ver sore on his thigh, which he had been afflicted with for seven
years. He had been attended by all the doctors in that part of
the country to no advantage. The) had decided that the only
thing which could be done to help him, was to lay open his
thigh and scrape the bone. J told him that I did not see how
they could do that without cutting the great artery, which lay
close to the bone, where they would have to cut. He said he
was satisfied that it would not do, and was very urgent that I
should undertake with him. I told him that it was impossible
for me r o stay at that time; but if his son would g« home with
me, T would undertake to cure him : to which he consented, and
tie young man returned with me; which w;.s in the month of
March. I began with him by giving medicine to correct and


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 47

strengthen the system; bathed the wound with my rheumatic
drops, or No. C, sometimes bathing with cold water to strength:
en it, and after proceeding in this manner for about a month, he
was well enough to do some work: he remained with me till
August, when he wis entirely cured, so that he was able to re-
turn to his father's on foot, a distance of one hundred miles.

In the fall of this year, the dysentery, or camp distemper, as
it was called, was very prevalent in the above named tdwn of
Jericho; and was so mortal that all but two who had the disease
and were attended by the doctors died, having lost above twenty
in a short time. The inhabitants were much planned nd held
a consultation, to advise what to do; and being informed by
the young man above mentioned, that I was at home, they sent
'an express for me, and I immediately made arrangements to
comply with their request. In twenty-four hours I started, and
arrived there on the third day after, and found them waiting
with gre.it anxiety for me, having refused to take any thing from
the doctors. I had an interview with the selectmen of the
town, who had taken upon themselves the care of the sick ;
they informed me that there were about thirty then sick, and
wished me to undertake the care of them. I agreed to take
charge of them on condition that I could have tvvo men to
assist me; this was "complied wi*h, and I commenced my prac-
tice upon thirty in the course of three days. The disorder was
the most distressing of any that I hue ever witnessed. One
man had been speechless for six hours, and was supposed to be
dying; but on my giving him sonr* medicine to warm him, he
seemed to revive like an insect that was warmed by the sun after
having laid in a torpid state through the winter. I had but
little medicine with mo and had to use such as 1 could procure
at this place. I found tbe cause of the disease to be coldness
and c inker: the digestive powers being lost, the stomach became
clogged so that it would not hold the heir. I made use of red
pepper steeped in a tea of sumach leaves, sweetened, and some-
times the I) irk and berries, to rsuse tfie heat and clear off the
canker, which had the desired effect. After taking this tea,
those who were strong enough, I placed over a steam, as long
as they could bear it, and then put them in bed. Those who
were too weak to stand I contrived to have sit over a steam;
and this repeated as occasion required. To restore the diges-
powers, I made use of cherry s*ones, having procured a
large quantity ofthem, that had been laid up and the worms had
eaten oil all "the outside, leaving the stones clean. I pounded


'48 -.HIAT1VE OF THE MFF, &c


Shem fine, then made a tea of black birch bark, and after clean
ing them, by putting them into this tea hot and separating the
meats from the stone part, made a syrup by putting fro?n two to
three ounces of sugar to one quart of the liquor; this was given
freely and answered a good purpose. I continued to attend
upon mv patients, aided by those appointed to assist me, and in
eight days I had completely subdued the disease. They all
recovered except two, who were dying when I first saw them.
I gave the same medicine to the nurses and those exposed to the
disease, as to them that were sick, which prevented their having
the disorder. The same thing will prevent disease that will
cure it.

After finishing my practice in this place, I was sent for and
went to the town of Georgia, about thirty miles distance, where
I practiced with general success for one week, and then returned
to Jericho. Those pilients whom I had attended, were com-
fortable, and soon entirely recovered. The doctors were not
very well pleased with my success, because I informed the peo-
ple how to cure themselves, and they have had no need of their
assistance in that disorder since. They circulated reports for
twenty miles round, that I killed all that I attended; but the
people were all perfectly sitisfied with my practice, and were
willing to give me all credit for my skill, so their malice towards
me was of no avail.

About this time being in the town of Bridgewater, Vermont,
[ was called on to see a young man about 18 years of age, who
had lost the use of his arm by a strain ; it had been in a perish-
ing condition for six months. The flesh appeared to be dead,
and he carried it in a sling; his health was bad. Being unable
to stop to do any thing for him at this tim e, he was sent to my
house. I began with him in my usual manner by giving him
warm medicine, and bathed his arm with the oil of spearmint;
in about ten days he wis well enough to use his arm and do
some work; in about two months he was entirely cured and
returned home.

In the spring of the year 1807, I went to Salisbury, according
to my promise when there the f dl before. On my way there I
stopped at Pel ham; the man at whose house I staid, insisted on
my going to see his fither-in-law, who had the rheumatism very
bad having been confined two months. I attended him three
days, when he was able to walk some, by the assistance of a
cane; he soon got about and was comfortable. While at this
place 1 was sent for to a young woman, sick of a consumption


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 49

3he had been a long time attended by a doctor, who seemed
very willing for my advice; I carried her through a course of
my medicine, and the doctor staid to see the operation of it;
he seemed well pleased with my system of practice, and gave
me much credit, saying that I was the first person he ever knew
that could make his medicine do as he said it would. I was
sent for to attend several cases of consumption and other com-
plaints at this time, in all of which r met with success, and gave-
geueral satisfaction to the people.

After stopping at Pelham three weeks, in which time I had
as much practice as I could attend, I went to Salisbury mills,
where I was very cordially welcomed by all those who had been
attended by me the season before. I was called on to practice
in this place and Newburyport, and my success was so great that
it caused much alarm amongst the doctors, and a class of the
people who were their friends, who did all they could to injure
me, and destroy my credit with the people. A considerable part
of the patients, who were put under ray care, were such as the
doctors had given over, and those being cured by me, had a
tendency to open the eyes of the people, and give them a cor-
rect understanding of the nature of their practice, and convince
them that a simple and speedy cure was more for their interest
and comfort, than long sickness, pain and distress; besides hav-
ing to pay exorbitant doctors' 1 bills, for useless visits and poi-
sonous drugs, which have no other effect than to prolong disease
and destroy the natural constitution of the patient.

Among those doctors who seemed so much enraged against
me, for no other reason that 1 could learn, than because I had
cured people whom they had given over, and instructed them to
assist themselves when sick, without having to apply to them;
there were none that made themselves so conspicuous as Dr.
French. I had considerable practice in his neighborhood, and
was very successful in every case; this seemed to excite his
malice against me to the greatest pitch; he made use of every
means in his power, and took every opportunity to insult and
abuse me both to my face and behind my back. A few of the
inhabitants who were his friends, joined with him, and became
his instruments to injure me; but a large proportion of the peo-
ple were friendly to me, and took great interest in my safety
and success. The doctor and his adherents spread all kinds of
rid iculous reports concerning me and my practice, giving me
the name of the old wizzard; and that my cures were done
under the power of witchcraft. This foolish whim was too
E


NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

ridiculous for me to undertake to contradict; and I therefore
rat ner fivored it, merely for sport; many remarkable circum-
sttnces took place, tending to strengthen this belief, and some
of the silly and weak-minded people really believed that 1 pos-
sessed supernatural powers. This will not appear so strange,
when we take into view, that the people generally were ignorant
of my system of practice, and when they found that I could
cure those diseases that the doctors, in whom they had been in
the habit of putting all their confidence, pronounced as incura-
ble; and that 1 could turn a fever in two days, which would
often take them as many months, they were led to believe that
there was something supernatural in it.

A man who was one of the friends of Dr. French, and who
had been very inimical to me, doing all in his power to injure
and ridicule me, sent word one day by a child, that his calf was
sick, and he wanted me to come and give it a green powder and
a sweat. Knowing that his object was to insult, I returned for
answer, that he must send for Dr. French, and if he could not
cure it, I would come, for that was the way that I had to prac-
tice here. It so happened that the calf died soon after, and his
youngest child was taken suddenly and very dangerously sick.
Not long after he found another calf dead in the field, and about
the same time his oldest son was taken sick. These things
happening in such an extraordinary manner, caused him to
reflect on his conduct towards me, and his conscience con-
demned him, for trying to injure me without cause. He had
the folly to believe, or the wicked nee? to pre;end to believe, that
it was the effect of witchcraft; and wishing to make his peace
with me, sent me word, that if 1 would let his family alone, he
would never do or say any thing more to my injury. This I
readily asserted to; and his children soon after, getting well,
though there was nothing very extraordinary in it, as it might all
be easily accounted for by natural causes; yet it afforded much
conversation among the gossips, and idle busy bodies in the
neighborhood; and was made use of by my enemies to preju-
dice the people against me. Being in company with a young
woman, who belonged to a family that were ray enemies, she,
to insult me, asked me to tell her fortune. I consented, and
knowing her character not to be the most virtuous, and to amuse
nrvself at her exoense, told what had taken place between her
anl 1 certain young man the niffht before. She seemed struck
with astonishment; and said that she was convinced tliat I was
a ",-izzard, for it was impossible that 1 could haje known it


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 51

without the devil had told me. She did not wish me to tell her
any more.

1 practiced in this place and vicinity a few months, and re'
turned home to attend to my farm for the rest of the season.
While at home I was sent for, and attended in different parts of
the country, W& was very successful in my mode of practice,
particularly in places where the dysentery and fevers were most
prevalent; nevnr failing in- any instance of giving relief, and
completely putting a check to those alarming epidemics, which
caused so much terror in many places in the interior of the
country.

In the year of 1 808 I went again to Salisbury, and on my way
there stopped at Pelham and attended and gave relief in several
cases of disease. On my arrival at Salisbury mills, where I
made it my home, 1 was immediately called on to practice in
that place and the adjacent towns. Many came to me from •
different parts, whose cases were desperate, having been given
over by the doctors, such as humors, dropsies, mortifications,
felons, consumptions, &c. Fevers were so quickly cured, and
with so little trouble, that many were unwilling to believe they
had the disease. My success was so great that the people gene-
rally were satisfied of the superiority of my mode of practice
over all others. This created considerable alarm with the doc
tors, and those who sided with them. Dr. French seemed to be
much enraged, and hiving failed to destroy my credit with the
people by false reports, and ridiculous statements of witchcraft,
shifted his course of proceeding, and attempted to frighten me
by threats, which only tended to show the malice he bore me;
for no other reason, that I could conceive of, as I had never
spoken to him, than because of my success in relieving those
he had given over to die. He would frequently cause meto be
sent for in great haste to attend some one in his neighborhood,
who was stated to be very sick: but I saw through these tricks,
and avoided all their snares. It seemed to be his determination,
if lie failed in destroying my practice, to destroy me. Being
in company one day at Salisbury village, with Mr. Jeferniah
Eaton, of Exeter, whose wife was under my care for a dropsical
complaint, I wis sent for four times to visit a young man at the
house of Dr. French ; the last time a man came on horseback m
the greatest haste, and insisted that I should go and see h
I asked why Dr. French did not attend him; be answered
he had rather have me; being convinced from the appearance of
thinsjs, that it was an attempt to put some trick upon me, 1


58 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, kc.

refused to go, and the man returned. In a short time after, Dr
French came into the village, and Mr. Eaton, who was present
when they came after me, asked him what ailed the young m<m
at his house; he said, nothing, but that he was as well as any
body. This revealed the whole secret. Mr. Eaton then asked
him why he caused me to be sent for so many times, under a
false pretence. He said, to see if I dared to come into his neigh-
borhood — that he did not care how much I practiced on that
side of the river; but if 1 came on hie, he would blow my brains
out — that I was a murlerer and he could prove it. Mr. Eaton
observed that it was a heavy accusation to make against a man,
and that he ought to be made to prove his words, or to suffer
the consequeuce — that his wife was under my care, and if f was
a murderer he ought to see to it. Dr. French again repeated
the words, with many threats against me, and showed the spite
and malice of a savage 1 .

Mr. Eaton and other.-? of my friends, considered my life in
danger; and came immediately to ma and related what had
been -.aid by the doc'or; and advised me to be on my guard,
I had to pass his house every day to visit my patients; but did
not consider myself safe in going in the night, nor in tlie day
time without some one with me. I continued in this manner
for several days, and finding his malice towards me to be as
great as ever, and still continuing his threats, with the advice of
my friends, I was induced to have resort to the law for protec-
tion. I went to Newburyport and entered a complaint against
him before a magistrate, who granted a warrant, and he was
brought before him for trial. My case was made out by fully
proving his words; he asked for an adjournment for three hours
to make his defence, which was granted. He then brought
forward evidence in support of his character, and proved by
thern that he had always been a man of his word. The Justice
told -him that bethought he proved too much, and to his disad-
vantage, for it had been fully proved that he was a man of his
Word, went to satisfy the court that the complaint was well
grounded. He was laid under two hundred dollar bonds to
keep the peace, find appear at the next court of common pleas.
He appeared at the next court, was ordered to pay all the costs,
and was discharged from his bail. This was an end of our
controversy for that time; but his malice continued against me
long after, seeking every means to destroy me and prevent my
practicing, that he could devise; but proceeded with more cau-
tion, which caused me a great deal of trouble and much suffer -
as will be hereafter related.


or Samuel Thomson. 53

I continued to practice in this place, and had as many patients
•rs ! could possibly attend upon, notwithstanding the opposition
I constantly met" witth from the doctors and their friends; for
with all their arts and falsehoods they were not able to preveni
those laboring under complaints, which they had found could
not be removed by the fashionable mode of treatment, from
applying to me for relief, none of whom but what were either
cured or received great relief by the practice. Some of the
most extraordinary cases I shall give a particular account of far
the information of the reader.

Mr. Jabez True, the minister of Salisbury, was afflicted with
what the doctors called nettle-rash, or what is commonly called
St. Anthony's five. He stated to me that it was caused by
fighting fire, about twenty-five years before, and that he had
been subject to a breaking out ever since; which at certain
times was very painful and troublesome, as it felt like the sting
of bees, and would swell all over his body. He had applied to
all the doctors in those parts for their advice, but got no assist
ttnee from them. I told him that he had heated himself to such
a degree by violent exercise, and being exposed to the fire, that
there was nearly a balance between the outward and inward heat,
and then cooling too sudden, the inward heat had fallen as-
much below the natural state as it had been above it before, and
the only way to effect a cure was to bring him into the same
state as he was in when fighting the fire. He wished me to
undertake his case. 1 carried him through a course of my me-
dicine, and made use of every means in my power to raise the
inward heat, pursuing my plan with all zeal for two days: when
he became alarmed, and said he felt as though he should die,
for he felt the same as he did when he was fighting the fire. I
then kept him in that situation as much as possible, and it went
down gradually, so as to hold a natural proportion of hec\. My
plan succeeded so completely, that he was perfectly cured and
lias enjoyed good health ever since I attended upon his wife
at the same time, who had been long in a consumption, and had
been given over. She was perfectly cured; and they are now
living in good health, and are ready to testify to the truth of
these statements.

Previously to my difficulty with Dr. French, as has been
before mentioned, Mrs. Eaton and another woman by the name
©f Lifford, came tome at Salisbury mills, from Exeter. Their
complaint was dropsy; and were both desperate cases, having
been ™iven over by the doctor who had attended them. Mrs.
' E<2


64 NARRATIVE OF THE LIHE, &ft.

Eaton was swelled to such a degree, that she could not see
her knees as she sat in a chair, and her limbs in proportion. I
fell unwilling to undertake with them, as I considered there
would he hut little chance of a cure; and declined doing any
thing tor them, and sent them awav, stating that there was no
place that they could get boarded. They went away, as I sup-
posed, to go home; but they soon returned, and said they had
found a plnce where thay could stay, and a young woman had
agreed to nurse them. I undertook with them very reluctantly;
but could not well avoid it. I gave them some medicine, and it
operated favorably on both, especially on Mrs. Lifford; then
gave strict orders to the nurse, to attend them attentively through
the night, and keep up a perspiration; but she almost totally
neglected her duly, spending her time with the young people.
On visiting them in the morning, I was very much hurt to find
my directions neglected. Mrs. Lifford was quite poorly; and
stated to me that the nurse had neglected her, and that she had
got her feet out of bed ; her perspiration had ceased and other
symptoms appeared unfavorable.

I attended upon her through the day, and did all I could to
relieve her, but could not raise a perspiration again. She con-
tinued till the next night about midnight, and died. My hopes
of doing her any good were small ; but think that if she had not
been neglected by the nurse, there might have been some small
chance for her, as the first operation of the medicine was so
favorable. Her bowels were in a very bad state, and had been
almost in a mortified condition for three weeks, and what passed
her was by foree, and very black.

This caused great triumph among my enemies, and Dr.French
tried to have a jury on the body; but he could not prevail; for
the circumstances were well known to many, and all that knew
any thing about it, cleared me from all blame. The nurse said
that I did all I could, and if there was any blame it ought to fall
on her and not on me. So they failed in their attempt to make
me out a murderer; but this ease was laid up to be brought
against me at c not her time. This shows what may be done by
rhe people, and the malice and wickedness of designing men,
who cafe more for their own interested ends, than for the health
and Irippinessof a whole community. The fash ; onablo,educated,
doctor may lose one half his patients without being blamed ; but
if I lose one out of several hundred of the most desperate cases
jjt&Kt of which were given over as incurable, it is called murder


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 55

Mrs . Eaton remained under my care about three weeks, in
which time she was reduced in size eight inches, she then
returned home to Exeter. I had several cases of the dropsy and
consumption from the same town, about this time, who were 3il
relieved : all of them were very solicitous for me to go to Exeter
and practice. As soon as 1 could get the patients under in j
care in a situation to leave them, I left Salisbury nulls, ?n<l
went to Exeter, and commenced practicing in my usual way,
and was applied to from all parts. I had not so many to att"nd
as I had in some places; but they were of the most desperate
nature, such as had been given over by the doctors, in all of
which I met with great success. Many of the cases had been
attended by Dr. Shepherd; he had attended with me upon his
patients at Salisbury; was a very plain, candid sort of a man,
and treated me with much civility. I well remember his first
FjK-ech to me, which was in the following words: "Well, what
are you doing here, are you killing or curing the people?" — I
replied, you must judge about that for yourself. "Well, said lie,
I will watch you, not for fear of your doing harm, but for my
own information — I wish you well, and will do you all the good
I can." I always found him candid and friendly, without any
hypocrisy. lie once called on me to visit with him one of his
patients in the town where he liv<;d, who had the rheumatism in
his back and hips. The doctor had attended him about two
months, and said he had killed the pain, but his back was stiff,
so that he could not bring his hands below his knees. I attend-
ed him about forty eight hours, and then went with him to see
the doctor, which was a half a mile; the doctor appeared to be
much pleased to see him so well, and have the use of his limbs;
for he could stoop and use them as well as he ever could. He
said that he was as glad for the young man's sake as though he
had cured him himself. He frequently came to see Mrs. Eaton
whom I was attending for the dropsy; and expressed much
astonishment at the effect the medicine I gave had in relieving
her of a disease which he had considered incurable. At one
time, when conversing with her upon her situation, and finding
her so much better, having been reduced in size above fifteen
inches, he expressed himself with some warmth on the occasion,
saying that it was what he had never seen or heard of being
done before, and what he had considered impossible to be done
with medicine. Addressing himself to me with much earnest-
ness, inquired how it was that I did it. I replied, you know
doctor that the heat was gone out of the body, and the vjtater had


56 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

filled it up; and all I had to do was to build fire enough in the
body to boil away the water. He burst into a laugh, and said
that it was a system very short.

While practicing in Exeter, 1 had many desperate cases from
the different parts of the country, and from Portsmouth. One
from the latter place I shall mention, being different from what
1 had before witnessed. A woman applied to me who had the
venereal, in consequence, as she stated, of having had a bad
husband; which I believe to be true. She had been attended
by the doctors in Portsmouth for nearly a year, who had filled
her with mercury, for the purpose of cuiing the disorder, till the
remedy had become much worse than the disease. Her case
was alarming, and very difficult; she was brought on a bed, be-
ing unable to sit up; and seemed to be one mass of putrefac-
tion. I proceeded with her in my usual way of treating all
cases where the system is greatly disordered, by giving medicine
to promote perspiration, steaming to throw out (he mercury, and
restore the digestive powers; and in three weeks she returned
home entirely cured. Another woman came to me from the
same place, who had been sick five years, which had been in
consequence of having had the same disease, and the doctors
had filled her with mercury to kill the disorder, as they called it,
then left her to linger out a miserable existence. When she
stated her case to me, I felt very unwilling to undertake with
her, apprehending that it would be very uncertain whether a cure
could be effected, having been of so long standing; but she in»
sisted upon it so strongly, that I could not put her off. After
attending upon her three weeks, however, her health was restor-
ed, and she returned home well; and in less than a year after
she had two children at one birth. She had not had a child for
eight years before. This disease is very easily cured in the first
stages of it, by a common course of medicine, being nothing
more than a high stage of canker seated in the glands of cer-
tain parts of the body, and if not cured; communicates to the
glands of the throat and 01 her parts; by giving mercury the
whole system is completely disordered, and although the disease
may disappear, it is not cured; and there is more difficulty in
getting the mercury out of the body of one in this situation,
than to cure a dozen of the disease who have not taken this dan-
gerous poison.

While in Exeter, i had a case of a young man, son of Col.
Nathaniel Gilman, who was in a decline. lie was about four-
teen years old, and had been troubled with bleeding at the nose.


OF SAMUEL THdMSON. 8

They had made use of such powerful astringents, with corro-
sive sublimate snufFed up the nose, that the blood vessels in that
part seemed to be shrunk up, and his flesh much wasted away;
I carried him through a course of medicine, and gave an equal
circulation of blood through the body, and stopped its course
to the head; then raised a natural perspiiation, restored the di-
gestive powers, and regulated the system, so as to support the
body with food instead of medicine. In a short time he recov-
ered his health, so that he commanded a company of militia at
the alarm at Portsmouth, during the late w;;r.

My success while at this plate, and the many extraordinary
cures 1 performed, gained me great credit among the people;
but the medical faculty became much darmed, and made use of
every artifice to prejudice them against me. The foolish sto-
ries about witchcraft, which hid been made a handle of at Sa-
lisbury, were repeated here, with a thousand other ridiculous
statements, for the purpose of injuring me; but I treated them
with contempt, as not worthy of my notice, except in some instan-
ces, to amuse myself with the credulity of the ignorant, who
were foolish enough to believe such nonsence. I will relate one
circumstance for the purpose of showing upon what grounds
they founded their belief of my possessing supernatural pow-
ers, and which caused much talk among the people at the time
it happened. Mrs. Eaton, where I boarded, had a five dollar
bill stolen out of her pocket-book. She nude-inquiry of all
the family, who denied having any knowledge of it. A girl
that lived in the family denied it so strongly, that I thought she
discovered guilt, and led me to believe that she had taken the
money. I pretended that I could certainly discover who stole
the money, which was believed by many; and told Mrs. Eaton,
in presence of all the family, that if I did not tell who took it
by the next day at twelve o'clock, I would pay the amount lost
myself. In the evening I h.\d them all called into the room, and
took the bible and read from the law of Moses the penalty for
stealing, then took the purse and put it into the place and shut
the book and gave it to Mrs. Elton with strict injunction to put
it under her pillow and let no one touch it; and that the
person who stole the money could have no pence nor rest till
they confessed their guilt. They then all retired to bed. As
soon as it was daylight in the morning, the girl came down
stairs crying, and went to the bed where Mrs. Eaton lay, and
confessed that she took the money; saying that she had o<»-


si


NARRATIVE CF THE LIFE, feci


slept any during the night, as I had said would be the case".
It will be unnecessary to inform the reader, that this wonderful
discovery was brought about by the effect of a guilty conscience
on a credulous and weak mind.

While I was at Exeter, a woman brought her son to me, who
had a fever-sore (so called) on his hip; he had been in this situ-
ation so long, without any assistance, (hat his legs had per-
ished, and he was so much wasted away by the continual dis-
charge of the sore, and his nature become so far spent, that
I felt perfectly satisfied that a cure was impracticable, and de-
clined undertaking with him. This honest declaration on my
part, very much affronted the boy's mother, and she turned
against me, and did me all the hurt she could, because I would
not undertake to do what I knew was impossible for any one to
accomplish. She went with her son to a fashionable doctor,
who said he would cure him out of spite to me. They contin-
ued with the doctor several weeks, till the expense amounted to
about fifty dollars; the lad continued to grow worse till he died.
This woman seemed satisfied with having her son die, after
spending fifty dollars, because it was done in a fashionable
manner; but my refusing to undertake to cure him, was suffi-
cient reason for her to circulate all kinds of false and ridicu-
lous reports about me. However strange this may appear, it is
no more strange than true, for this is but one out of many hun-
dred similar cases, where 1 have received injury when I was en-
titled to credit, by being honest and sincere in my endeavor to
do what I conceived my duty towards my fellow creatures.

About this time, among the rest of my troubles, I met with
a new difficulty, with an apprentice that I had taken, by the
name of William Little, whom I had taken from a state of pov-
erty and sickness, cured him and supported him for two years,
until he had gained knowledge enough of my medicine and sys-
tem of practice to be useful to me, he then proved dishonest.
While I was absent at home, he collected all the money he
could, and sold all my medicine, and then went off. On ray
return I found my debts collected and my medicine gone, so
that I was obliged to go back immediately, to collect more be-
fore I could attend to my practice. This was the first time I
had met with difficulty by employing agents; but since then I
have had experience enough to satisfy me of the difficulty of
trusting to other people; having found but very few of those I
have been under the necessity of employing, who have proved
trusty and honest. I have suffered much pecuniary loss in this


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 59

way, besides in some instances, those I have assisted and given
instruction to, so as to be useful in the practice, have become
my enemies, and been made instrumental to destroy me.

A son of John Underwood, of Portsmouth, was brought to
me while at Exeter, who bad what is called a scalt head. lie
had been afflicted with it for nine years. The doctors had heen
applied to, to no purpose; ind w'.eu he brought him to me,
agreed to give a generous price if f would cure him. I tnok
charge of him and after pursuing m) usual plan of treatment
three weeks, he returned home entirely cured, and his not since
had any appearance of the disease. This man had the mmn-
ness, in order to get clear of paying any thing for curing his
son, to turn against me and my practice, although he ha<l ac-
knowledged that I had snved his life, and had recommended me
to m'T.y others, whom I had relieved; yet to get clear of pay-
ing a trifling sum according to his agreement, he did all he
could to injure me, and through his influence ninny were kept
from being cured. He was taken sick, nnd notwithstanding he
had said so rcuch against my medicine, he ipplied to some who
had the righ* of using it, and was relieved thereby.

Sometime towards the close of the summer, while I was at
Exeter, J was sent for to (jo to Portsmouth to see a young man
by the name of Lebe'.l, who was in a very dangerous situation,
supposed by his friends to be in a dying state,having been given
over by Drs. Cutler and Pierpont at ten o'clock that morning.
I arrived nbout two in the afternoon. He had been attended
by the two doctors above named for upwards of a month to cure
theveneraal; thev had filled him with mercury, so that he had
swelled all over with the poison, The doctors pronounced it to
be the dropsy. His legs had been scarified to let off" the w iter;
the disorder and the mercury had gained the power, and na'ure
had submitted. \ at once pronounced it to be a desperate ense,
and told the French Consul, who hnd the care of him, that I
could give no encouragement that I could do him any good;
but he was very solicitous for me to do something for him. I
told him the only chance was to raise perspiration, and that
twentv-four hours would determine his case; for he would
either be beUer in that time or be dead. The idea ofperspiia-
tion caused him to urge me to try; and he said if I could effect
it he would give me one hundred dollars; the doctors had tried
for a month and could not succeed. 1 gnve him some medi-
cine, then put on the clothes by degrees until he was shielded
from the air and he sweat freely ia about an hour. The two


60 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

doctors were present and seemed astonished at my success
Jhey walked the room, talked low, then went out. I staid with
him till six o'clock and the symptoms seemed to be favorable,
lie sweat profusely and spit much blood. I told the nurse to
keep him in the same situation till I returned, went out and was
gone about an hour and came back again with Mr. Underwood.
When we came into the room, found that the doctors had taken
bimoutof bed and sat him in a chair, and opened the window
sgainsthim. I told them that their conduct would cause his
death and 1 would do no more for him; but should give him up
as 1 heir patient.

It appeared to me that they were afraid I should cure him,
and thus proved the superiority of my practice over theirs, for
they had tried a month to get a perspiration without success,
and I had done it in one hour. The man fainted before I left
the room. I went home with Mr. Underwood and staid that
night, and left them to pursue their own course; the man died
before morning. Instead of getting the hundred dollars as was
agreed, I never got a cent for all rny trouble of coming fifteen
miles and returning back again on foot; and besides ihisloss,
afterwards when I came to bepersecuted by the faculty, the
above two doctors gavetheir depositions against me, in which
I was informed, they swore that I killed this man, notwithstand-
ing they had given him over to die the morning before I saw
him, and they had taken him out of my hands, as above stated.
On being informed that they were trying to support a complaint
against me, I got the depositions of Mr. Underwood and others,
who were knowing to the facts, to contradict these false state-
ments; on finding thatl was determined to oppose them, an4
prove what they had sworn to be all false, they thought proper to
drop the matt ci lj lfcfl t I was informed they had sworn that my
medicine was of a poisonous nature, and if it did not cause the
patient to vomit soon after being taken, they would certainly
die. It is unnecessary for me to contradici this, for its incor-
rectness and absurdity is too well known to all who have asy
knowledge of the medicine I use.

I was frequently in Portsmouth to visit those who had been
sent to me to be attended upon at Exeter. Sometime in Sep-
tember, in 1808, when there, 1 was called on to visit Mr. Rich-
ard Rice, who was sick: with the yellow fever, as it was called.
The reason for his sending for me was in consequence of hav-
ing hesrd th" report* of the doctors, that I sweat my patients
•to death. He conceived an idea that if he could sweat, ixe


OK SAMUEL IHOMOoSI. oO

^iou!d be better; but they would not nllow him to be kept warm.,
taking the clothes off of him and keeping the windows and
doors open — no fire was permitted in the room, while he was
shivering with cold. The plan was to kill the fever, and to
effect this with more certainty, the doctor had bled him, and
told his sister that he had given him as much ratsbane as he
dared to give, and if that did not answer he did not know what
would.

I began to give him medicine a little before night, and in one
hour persj) ration took place. He was so weak that he was un-
able to help himself. In the morning the doctor proposed to
blcedhiic; but he was dismissed. I was with him till the symp-
toms were favorable, and then left him in the care of three per-
sons whom I could confide in. After I was gone, Dr. Brackett
came into ihe room where the patient was, in a great rage, say-
ing lha< tiiey were killing him; for the mortification would soon
take place in consequence of keeping him so warm. He was
as^e 1 by one of (hose present, in w ; «ich case mortification was
r.i wt likely to take pi ce, when the blood is cold and thick,
or warm and thin. He suspected some quibble and would not
give an answer; and it was immaterial which way he answered;
for in either case he had no grounds to support an argument
Upon, bu what might be easily refuted. After he had failed ia
the interference with those who had thec.°re of ihe patient, he
went to his wife and other relations, and tried to frighten them^
but he did not succeed, for they were well satisfied with what
wis doing.

The patient was much out by spells, sometimes imagining

himself to be a lump of ice; but my directions were pursued

bv the person I left in charge of him during the ni<>ht, keeping

up a perspiration; in the morning he was much relieved and had

his right m«nd. He had no pain except in the lower part of the

bowels; to relieve which he was very anxious thai I should give.

him some physic; I opposed this, being confident that it would

not do in such putrid oases. He was so urgent, however, [gave

him some, which operated very soon ; a-nd the consequence was,

that it reinforced his disorder, and threw bun into the greatest

d 'Stress. He asked for more physic, but I told him that I would

not give him any more, for I was satisfied of the impropriety of

riving it in such cases, and I have never given any since. It

checked the persoiv ition, and drew the determining powers

rom the surface inward so that I had to go through the same

process ar/ain of raising perspiration, arid vomiting, which wae

F


« NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &e.

much more difficult than at first, and it was with the greatest
attention that 1 was able to keep off the mortification for twelve
hours, that he was kept back by taking this small dose of phy-
sic. I kept up the perspiration through Friday and Saturday,
and on Sunday morning when I called to see him, he was up
and dressed; on asking how he did, he said as strong as you
are, and took me under his arm and carried me across the room.
On Monday he was down on the wharf attending to his busi-

' ness

This cure caused considerable talk in the town, and because
•it was done ?o quick, the doctors s?.id that there was but little
uiled him, and he would have got well himself if he had taken
the physic and been left alone; but those who saw it were con-
vinced to the contrary; others doubted, and said among them-
selves, how can a man who has no learning and never studied
physic, know how to cure disease. Mr. Rice, however, gave
me credit for the cure, and was very grateful for it, and 1 made
his house my home, when in Portsmouth, and was treated with
much respect. He introduced me to his uncle, Alexander
Rice, Esq. a man of respectability and high standing in that
place; who at first could not believe that so valuable a discov r
ery could be made by a man without an educ' tion. I conversed
with him upon the subject, and explained the principles upon
which my system was founded — how every thing acted under
the nature and operation of the four elements, and by one act-
ing upon another caused all motion — how the element of fire,
by rarifying water and air, keeps 'he whole creation in motion —
how the temperament of the Oody, by adding or diminishing
heat and cold, would promote either life or death. After hear-
ing my explanation, he hec;ime satisfied of its correctness, and
confessed that my natural gift yg s of more value than learning.
He then made known to me his infirmities, and wished me to
take the care of his family, and give him and his wife such h>
formation as would enable them to attend upon themselves and
family in case of sickness. J readily agreed to this, and poon
after carried some of the f-mily through wi'h the medicine, and

.gave them all the inform- linn in my power, of the principle,
and the medicine with which it wis done. Mrs. Rice under-
took the management of the business; she was a kind and af-
fectionate woman, possessing a sound judgment, without fear,
After she had gained the information, she wished me to attend
to carrying her through a course of the medicine, for a bad
humor, called the salt-rheum, which she had been long afflicted;


Of SAMUEL THOMSON. 63

with; she was attended a few times, which effected a complete
cure.

Major Ri'-e had been for many years subject to turns of
the gout; and hid been in some instances confined by it for six
months at a time, and for six weeks not able to sit up, much of
the time not able to lift his hand to his head. He had been
constantly under the care of the most skilful doctors, who
would bleed and blister, and physrc him, till his strength was
exhausted; after attending hirn in this way through the winter,
they said he must wait till warm weather, before he could get
about. When the warm weather came, he would crawl out in
the sun side of the house, and in this way he gradually <r ined
his strength; after this he was > fflicted will) a violent burning''
in his stomach, which was almost as troublesome as the gout.

After he had the right of my medicine, he had frequent turns
of the gout; but no attack of this disease has continued more
than twenty-four hours, before he was completely relieved ; ; nd
he has been but little troubled with the burning of the stomach
since. lie has told me since, that if he could have been as sure
of relief, when he was first subject to the disease* as he is now
certain of it in twenty-four hours, he would have been willing
to give all he was worth. This family has been so much bene
fitted by the use of the medicine, that no sum of money would
be any temptation to them to be deprived of it. This man haf
never been lacking to prove his gratitude to me; in the time oi
my troubles his assistance was of the greatest importance to me
and I shall ever feel grateful to him and his family for then-
goodness.

Soon after T went to Portsmouth, I was sent for to go to
Deerfield, where the dysentery prevailed and had become very
alarming. A young man by the n>me of Fulsom came after
me, and said that the doctor had lost every patient he had at
tended ; that seven h id died and m my were sick; that his father
and two brothers were given over by the doctor that morning to
die.

The young man seemed so anxious, and was so much fright-
ened, that I concluded to go with him; the distance was twenty
eight miles. We started a little before night and arrived there
about ten o'clock. I found the father and the two sons as bad
as they could be and be alive; they were stupid andcold. I
told the mother that it w is very uncertain whether I could help
them. Shs.heggedof me to sive her hush nd's life if -possible.
I told her tiut I could not tell whether they were dying, Or


<>4 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

whether it was the deadly effect of opium. I gave them all
medicine — the two children died in about three hours; but Mr.
Fulsom soon grew better by hiking my medicine. I had not
only the sick to attend to, and do every thing myself; but ihe
opposition of all the neighborhood; there were eight of the
family sick, and if I went out of the house, some person would
open the doors and windows, which would cause a relapse;
while perspiration continued they were easy, but as soon as ihcy
grew cold, the pain would return and be very vioient. In the
morning I was preparing to come away; but the father urged
me so hard to stay, promising that I should be treated in a bet*
ter manner than 1 had been, that I consented, and remained
with them about ten days. I caught the disorder myself and
was very bad; -on taking the medicine, the operation was so
violent that the neighbors were much frightened, and left the
jhouse, and were afraid to come nigh us, leaving us to die alto-
gether. I soon got better, and was able to carry Mr. Fulsom
through for the first time; which relieved him and he soon got
better. In the mean time a small child was brought home sick,
that had been carried away to prevent it from taking the disor-
der, ft was so far gone that the medicine would have no ef-
fect upon it, and it soon died. All that were not in a dying
situation before they took the medicine, were relieved and got
well. 1 attended some thnt had the disorder in other families,
all of whom got well ; fifteen in the whole recovered and three
died. Two years after, the death of these three children was
brought against me en a charge of murder.

All tWat I ever received for my trouble in these cases, was
fifteen dollars; there was no credit given me for curing the fif-
teen out of eighteen, when the doctor hed lost all that he at-
tended; and although he had given over three to die, I cured
one of them twelve hours after. When I left this place, the
doctor adopted my mode of practice as far as he knew it, par-
ticularly in sweating, and about one half lived. Notwithstand-
ing all tin?, the doctor, as 1 was informed, made oath that the
three children died in consequence of taking my medicine; and
the good minister of the parish, I was also informed, testified to
the t?ame thing: though I arn confident that neither of them
knew any thing about me or my medicine. A judgment seem-
ed to follow the clergyman; for a short time after he had lent
his aid in promoting the prosecution against me, a circumstance
took place in his family, which, had it not been done by a fash-
ionable doctor, might have been called murder, [lis wiftt wa*


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 65

$t times troubled with a pain in her face, something like a
cramp; a certain doctor said that he could help her by cutting.
He used the knife and other instruments of torture for four
hours, which stopped her speech, and let loose the juices that
filled the flesh from her breast, so that the blood and water
crowded out of her ears in striving for breath. She remained
in this distressed situation about seven days and died. This
information I had from two respectable men, who were present
at the time of her sufferings and death.

I continued to practice in Portsmouth and its vicinity during
this autumn, and while there, was sent for to go to Salisbury
to see a child that bad been attended by a woman for several
days, who I had given information to, but they said the perspi-
ration would not hold; and they wished for further information,
On seeing the child, I at once "found that they had kept about
an equal balance between the outward and inward heat; when
they gave medicine to raise the inward heat and start the deter-
mining power to the surface, they at the same time kept the
outward heat so high as to counteract it, After explaining to
them the difficulty, I raised the child up and poured on to it a
pint of cold vinegar, and it immediately revived; applied no
more outward heat, but only to shield it from the air; and gave
the warmest medicine inward, on the operation of which, the
child grew cold and very much distressed. As soon as the.
inward heat had gained the full power and drove the cold out,
the circulation became free, and the child was relieved from
pain and fell asleep; the next day the heat was as much higher
than what was natural, as it. had been lower the day before; and
when heat had gained the victory over the cold, the child gain
cd its strength and wis soon about, perfectly recovered.

I had not practiced in Salisbury before, since I went to Exeter,
which was in June, and my returning there seemed to give Dr.
French great offence. He had been to see the child mentioned
above, and tried to discourage the people from using my medi-
cine; and threatened them that lie would have them indicted
by the erand jury, if they made use of any without his consent ;
his threats, however, had very little effect, for the people were
well satisfied of the superiority of my practice over his. About
this time the bonds for his good behavior were out; I did not
appear against him, and when the case was called the court dis-
charged him and his bail, on his paying the cost. The action
was brought on a complaint in behalf of the commonwealth;
but I had caused another action of damage to be brought against!
F 2


66 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFt!

him, which was carried to the Supreme Court, and tried at
Ipswich the spring following. I employed two lawyers to man
age my case, and brought forward two witnesses to prove my
declaration, who swore that the defendant made the assertion,
that J was guilty of murder and he could prove it. His lawyer
admitted the fact, but pleaded justification on the part of his
client, and brought witnesses on the stand to prove that what
he had said was true. The young woman who nursed Mrs.
LilFord, and by whose neglect she took cold, swore to some of
the most ridiculous occurrences concerning the death of that
woman, that could be uttered, which were perfectly contradic-
tory to every thing she had before confessed to be the truth. —
Another young woman, the daughter of a doctor at Deerh'eld,
made a statement to make it appear that I was the cause of tho
death of the three children, who died as has been before re-
lated. I had no knowledge of ever seeing this woman, and have
since ascertained that she was not at the house but once during
the sickness, and then did not go into the room where the sick
were; and her exaggerated account must have been made up
of what she had heard others say.

Thcie tilings were a complete surprise to me, not thinking it
possible that people could be induced to make such exaggerated
Statements under the solemnity of an oath. I could have
brought forward abundance of testimony to have contradicted
the whole evidence against me if there was time, but not expect-
ing that the cause would have taken the course it did, was un-
prepared. There appeared to be a complete combination of the
professional craft against me, both the doctors and lawyers, and
a determination that I should lose the cause, let the evidence
be what it might. My lawyers gave up the case without making
a plea; and the judge gave a very partial charge to the jury,
representing me in the worst point of view that he possibly
could, fiaying that the evidence was sufficient to prove the facts
against me, and that if I had been tried for life, he could not
say whether it would hang me ur send me to the state prison
for life. The jury of course gave their verdict against me, and
I had to pay the cost of the court.

The counsel for Dr. French asked the Judge whether a war-
rant ought not to be issued against me, and be compelled to
recognize to appear at the next court, to which ho answered in
the affirmative. This so frightened my friends, that they were
much alarmed for my safety, and advised me to go out of the
way of my enemies, for they seemed to be determined to destroy


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. M

me. I went to Andover to the house of a friend, whose wife 1
had cured of a cancer, where I was very cordially received, and
staid that night. The next day I went to Salisbury mills, and
made arrangements top;iy the costs of my unfortunate late suit.

In the full of the year 1808, I was sent for to go to Beverly,
to sec the wife of a Mr. Appleton, who was the daughter of
Elder Williams, the Baptist minister in that town, and was very
low in a consumption. She had formerly been afflicted with
the salt-rheum on her hands, and had applied to a doctor for
advice; he lud advised her to make use of a sugar of lead wash.
which drove the disease to her lungs, and she had been in that
situation for a long time, and very little hopes were entertained
of her ever being any better. I carried her through a course
of the medicine, with very good success.

I remained in Beverly about a week ; and while there became
acquainted with Mr. Williams, and also Mr. William Raymond,
to whom I afterwards gave information of my practice, and he
assisted me to attend on my patients; then returned to Ports-
mouth, where I was constantly called on to practice, and had
all the most desperate Cases put under my care, in all of which
I met with very great success.

After staying here about two weeks I returned to Beverly, to
see Mrs, Appleton and other patients there, and found them all
doing well; was called on to attend many desperate cases; in
all of which I effected a cure, except one, who was dying before
I wis called on. While practicing in Beverly I was called on by
a Mr. Lovctt, to attend his son, who was sick, as they supposed,
With a bad cold; some thought it a typhus fever. I was very
much engaged in attending upon the sick at the time, and could
not go with him; he came after me three times before I could
go. On seeing him, found that he complained of a stiff neck,
and appeared very stupid, and had no pnin. His aunt who
took care of him, said that he would certainly die, for he had
Ihe same symptoms as his mother, who died a short time before.
I gave some medicine which relieved him; the next day carried
him through a course of the medicine, and he appeared to be
doing well. Being called on to go to Salem, I left him in the
care of Mr. Raymond, with particular directions to keep in the
house and not expose himself. This was on Wednesday, and I
hc;ird nothing from him, and knew not but what he w,ns dning
well, till the Sunday afternoon following, when I was informed
that he was worse. I immediately inquired of Mr. Raymond,
and learned from him that he had got so much better, he had


68 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, to-

been down to the side of the water, and returned on Friday
night; that the weather was very cold, (being in the month of
December;) that he had been chilled with the cold, and soon
after his return had been taken very ill; he stiid wiih him, on
Saturday night, and that he was raving distracted all night; ihat
he had not given any medicine, thinking that he was too dan-
gerously sick for him to undertake with.

I told the young man's father that it was very doubtful
whether 1 could do any ih;ng that would help him; but that 1
would try and do all I could. 1 found that the patient was so
far gone thai the medicine would have no effect, and in two
hours told him that I could not help his son, and advised him to
call some other advice; this was said in the presence of Elder
Williams and Mr. Raymond. Mr. Lovett made answer, that if
I could not help his son he knew of none who could; and was
very desirous for me to stay with him all night, which I did, and
stood by his bed the whole time. He was much deranged in
his mind till morning, when he came to himself, and was quite
sensible. I then again requested the father to send for some
other doctor, as I was sensible that I could do nothing for him
that would be any ' enefit. He immediately sent fortwo doctors,
and as soon as they arrived I left him in their care. The two
doctors attended him till the next night about ten o'clock, when
he died. I have been more particular in giving the history of
this ca«e, because, two years after, it was brought as a charge
against me for murdering this young man. The father and
friends expressed no dissatisfaction at the time, in regard to my
conduct, except they thought. I ought not to have neglected the
patient so long; but it is a well known fact, that I attended
as soon as I knew of his being worse, and that 'he whole cause
of this second attack was owing to his going out and exposing
himself, and could not be impu'ed as any fault of mine.

In the latter part of December, 1 808 I was sent for to attend
Elder Bowles, the Baptist minister of Salem. I was introduced
to him by Elder Williams, and found him in bed, and very weak
and low, in the last stags of a consumption; all hopes of a
recovery were at an end — his doctors had left him as incurable.
He asked my opinion of his case; I told him that T could not
tell whether there was a possibility of a cure or sot till after
usinTthe medicine; being doubtful whether there was mortifi-
cation or hot. He was a man very much respected and beloved
by his people, and the public anxie'y was very great about him.
He expressed a strong desire that I should undertake with him;


OF SAMUEL THOMSON, CD

I declined doing any tiling until he consulted his deacons 3nd
other members of the church, who were his particular friends,
and their advice taken; which being done, they offered no objec-
tion, but wished him to act his own mind, and whatever the
result should be they would be satisfied. He replied that he
was convinced that he could not live in his present situation
more than a week, and therefore his life could not be shortened
more than that tune; and it was his wish that J should under-
take to cure him. His strength was so far exhausted that it was
With the greatest exertions and difficulty that they could get
him to sit up about three minutes in a day, f*> have his bed made.
I gave his friends as correct an account of his diorder and
the operation of the medicine as I could; and that I did not
wish to do any thing which might cause reflection hereafter;
but they promised that let the result be what it might, they
should be satisfied and would not think hard of me. 0« these
conditions I undertook, and told them that twenty-four hours
time would decid* whether he lived or died. I began to give
the medicine in the morning, which had a very calm and easy
operation; the emetic herb operated very kindly, and threw off
his stomach a large quantity ©f cold jelly, like the white of r.n
jpgg; the perspiration moved gently on and was free; the internal
heat produced by the medicine, fixed the determining power to
the surface, and threw out the putrefaction to such a degree that
the smell was very offensive. Mr. Bowles had a brother present,
who was a doctor; he observed that he did not know whether
the medicine made the putrefaction, or wbe'her it m::de visible
what was secreted in the body; but he was soon convinced on
that head, for when the med icine had cleansed him, all this putrid
smell ceased. While the medicine was in the greatest operation
the perspiration brought out this putrefation to such a degree,
that the nurse in making his bed was so affected with it, that she
fainted and fell on the floor. I attended on him for i bout three
weeks, in which time he was able to set up two or three hours
in a day; his food nourished his body, and his s'rength gained
very fast, considering the season of the year being unfavorable,
I wave him my best advice and left directions how to proceed,
and returned home to my family to spend the rest of the winter
with them. I returned in the spring to see Mr. Bowles, and
found him so far recovered as to be able to ride out, >ndin good
spirits. He soon gained his health, and is now well, and ready
to give testimony of the facts as I have related them.


W M ARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &6.

In the season of 1 809, 1 suffered much. In the first part of
the summer, attended many patients of old complaints; in par-
ticular, one case that I shall mention of a young woman, in
Kitterv, in a consumption. She had been confined to her house
four months; her flesh was exhausted, and had a violent strict-
ure of the lungs, which she said seemed as though there was a
string that drawed her lungs to her back; this caused a dry,
hacking cough, which was very distressing. I could give her
friends no encouragement of a cure; but the young woman and
her friends were so urgent, that 1 undertook with her. Her
courage was very great, and she took the medicineand followed
all my directions with great perseverance. She said she wished
that it micrht either kill or cure, for she did not desire !o live
in the siiuation she was then in. I left her medicines and
directions, and occasionally visited her. My plan of treatment
was followed wilh much attention and zeal for six months, be-
fore I could raise an inward heat which would hold more than
six hoars. She then had what was called a settled fe\er; and
I gave her medicine to get as great an internal heat ae I possibly
could; this caused much alarm among her friends, as they
fhohght she would certcinly die. I told them that the heat
holding, which was the cause of the fever, was the first favorable
symptom that I had seen in her favor. She soon gained her
health, to the astonishment of all her friends and acquaintances.
She continued to enjoy her health till the next season, when
she had another turn of the fever. I attended her in my usual
way, and raised the heat till it completely overpowered the cold
when she Was entirely cured, and has ever since enjoyed good
health.

During this summer a woman applied to mefrcrn a neighbor-
ing town, who had the dropsy , and brought with her a little
girl, that had the rickets very bad, so that she was grown much
out of shape. 1 carried them both through a course of the
medicine, attended them for three or four weeks, and ihengave
the woman information how to relieve herself and the girl,
occasionally visiting them; 'hey both recovered of their com-
plaints, and have enjoyed perfect health since. This woman
paid me the most liberally of any tint 1 had attended, and has
on ■ II occasions manifested her gratitude for the assistance I
afforded her. Another woman from the same town applied to
me, who had a cancer on her bre-st. She had hern under the
care of several doctors, who had by their course of practice
made her worse. I undertook with her and by giving medicine.


OV SAMUEL THOMSON. .*,

to check the canker and promote perspiration effectually re-
lieved her from the dise ise. Many other desperate cases, such
as consumptions, dropsies, cancers, &c most of which had been
given over by the doctors, were attended by me about this
time, which it will be unnecessary for me to particularize; all of
them were either completely cured or essentially relieved r:nd
made comfortable by the system of practice. One case I shall
however, state, beingrather of an extraordinary nature, 10 show
the absurdity of the fashionable manner of treating disease by
the doctors of the present day,

A young lady applied to me who had been much troubled
with lleeding at the stomach. She stated tome that she had
been bled by the doctors forty-two times in two years; and thai
they had bled her seven times in six weeks. So much blood
had been taken from her, that the blood vessels had contracted
»n such a manner that they would hold very little blood ; and the
heat being thereby so much diminished, the water filled the
flesh, and what little blood there was, rushed to her face, while
all the extremities were cold, this produced a deceptive appear-
ance of health, and caused those who judged by outward ap-
pearances, to doubt whether there was any disease; so that she
had not only to bear her own infirmities, but the reproaches of
her acquaintances. 1 kindled heat enough in the body to throw
iff the useless water, which gave the blood room to ciicul tte
through the whole system, instead of circulating as it had done
before, only in the large blood vessels, and they being much
extended by not having heat enough to give it motion, leads the
doctors into the erroneous idea, that there is too much blood,
and resort to the practice of bleeding,which reduces the strength
of the patient and increases the disease. There is no such
thing as a person having too much blood, no more than •here is
bf having too much bone, or too much muscle, or sinews;
nature contrives all things right. The blood may be too thick,
so as not to circulate, and is liable to be diseased like all other
parts of the body; but how taking part of it away, can benefit
the rest, or tend in any way to remove the disease, is what 1
could never reconcile with common sense. After I had carried
this worn in through a full operation of the medicine, and got
the heat to hold, so as to produce a natural perspiration; instead
of appearing to be so fleshy and well as she had done, she fell
away and became quite emaciated ; but as soon as the digestive
powers were restored, so that the food could nourish the body,
she gained her strength and flesh, and in a short time was com-
pletely restored to health.


J2 'NARRATIVE QF THE LIFE, &e.

I was al-out this time called to attend a woman who was very
severely attacked with the spotted fever The first appearance
of it was a pain in her heel, which soon moved up to her hips
and back, from thence to he* stomach and head ; so that in fif-
teen minutes her sight was gone, and in less than half an hour
she w-is senseless and cold ; about this time I saw her and exa-
mined w< 11 tUe cause of the disease: J was well satisfied that it
was ihe eriect of cold having overpowered the inward heat. By
confining her from the air, giving her Nos. 1 and 2, and keep-
inc her in a moderate steam, she in a short time came to her
senses: and the symptoms were exactly similar to a drowned
person coming to, after having life suspended by being under
waier. As soon as the perspiration became free, fill pain ceased
and she was qui tecomf stable; m twenty -four lion s the disease
was completely removed, and she was able to attend to her
work.

The same day I had another case of a child, which the doc-
tor had ^iven over. When I came to this child it was senseless,
and I expected in a moriified state; I gave it the hottest medi-
cine I could get with the emetic; it layabout six bouts silent,
before he medicine had kindled heat enough to cause motion in
the stomach and bowels, when it began to revive, and what came
from it wis black and putrid; the bowels just escaped mortifi-
cation. The child was soon well. These two cases were both
cured in twenty-four hours lime.

When the spotted fever first appeared in Portsmouth, the
doctors had five cases and all of them died. I had five cases
similar, which all lived. Because my patients did not die, the
doctors said they did not have the fever. In this they had much
the advantage of me, for there could be no doubt of theirs ?U
having it, as death was, in most of the cases under their eare,
on their side and decided the question. I have had a great
number of cases of the spotted fever under my care, and in all
of them used the remains of heat as a friend, by kindling it so
as to produce heat enough in the body to overpower and drive
out the cold; and have never failed of success, where there was
any chance of a cure.

Sometime this season T was sent for to attend Captain Trickey,
who was very sick; J examined him and was confident that I
could not help him, and took my hat in order to leave the house.

Hi* family insisted on my stopping and doing something for
Jiim ; but T told them that I thought he was in a dying state, a/id
medicine would do no good. I told his son that in all proba-


m SAMUEL THOMSON. n

biiily, lie would not be alive over twenty-four hours, and that he
had better go for some other help, for I could do him no gqod
I told the wile that I should give no medicine myself, but as
they had some in the house that they knew the nature of, .-he
might give some of it to her husband, which she did. Two
doctor^ were sent for — ihe first one that arrived bled him, and
he soon breathed very short, and grew worse; the oth.;r doelor
came, and said that his breathing short was in eonsequence of
the medicine I had given him; but by this hecid no! gain credit,
for all 'he family knew to the contrary; and the woman soon
after told me of his speech. The patient continued till the
rtejtl day about ten oYJo< k and died. Soon as he was dcd fhe.
doctors and their friends spared no pains to spread the rep it in
every direction, that I had killed this man with my screw u or,
a rmt name given to my emetic herb, in consequence of one
of my patients, when under the operation of it, saying thi t it.
twisl d in him like a screw auger. This was readily seized upon
by the doctois, and made use of for the purpose of trying to
destroy the reputation of this medicine by ridicule — they like-
wse gave similar names to several other articles of my medicine
for the same purpose, and represented them as the names hy
winch I called them. They had likewise given me several
names and titles, by way of reproach; such as the sweat:;
staaming doctor — the Indian doctor — the old wizzor3 — nd
sometimes the quack. Such kind of management, had a great
trffecl on the minds of many weak minded people; they were.
so afraid of ridicule, that those who I had cured were unwilling
to own it, for fear of being laiyrhed at for employing me.

The circumstance of the death of the above mentioned Csp-
Tiin Tnekey, was seized upon by the doctors and fhe ; r friends,
and the most false and absurd representations made hy th^m
through the country, with the intention oT stopping my practice
by getting me indicted for murder, or to drive me r <T; but tny
friends made out a correct statement of the f icts, and had them
p il lished, which put a stop to their career for that time. I
continued my practice, and had a great number of trie most
desperate cases, in most of which I ws successful. Tl eex-
lr ordinary cures I had performed, had the tendency to in; ke
many people believe, that I could cure every one who Had life
in them, let their disease be ever so bad; and where I h-d
attended on those who were given over is incurable, and they
died, .vhe'her I gave them anv medicine or not, f ho report was
immediately circulated that thev were kdled by me, at the same
G


74 NARRATIVE OF THE LIRE, &c.

time the regular doctors would lose their patients everyday,
without their being any notice taken of it. When their patients
died, if appearances were i ver so much against their practice,
••t was said to be the will of the Lord, aad submitted to without
a murmur; but if one happened to die that 1 had any thing to
«!o with, it was readily reported by those interested in destroy-
ing my credit with the people, that I killed them.

I could mention u great number of cases of the cures that I
»erfoimed, if I thought it necessary; but my intention is togive
. e particulars of such only as will have the greatest tendency
v, o convey to the reader the most correct information of my
mode of practice, without repeating any that were treated in a
-imilar manner, to those already given. I shall now proceed to
«ive the particulars of one of the most important circumstances
of my life, in as correct and impartial a manner as I am capa-
ble to do from memory; in order to show what I have suffered
from the persecutions of some of the medical faculty, for no
other reason, is I conceive, than that they feared my practice
would open the eyes of the peop.e, and lessen their importance
with them, by giving such information as would enable them to
cure themselves of disease without the aid of a doctor; and
from many others, who were governed altogether by the pre-
judices they had formed against me by the false reports that had
been circulated about my practice, without having any other
knowledge of me. Many of the latter, however, have since
been convinced of their error, have a very favorable opinion of
itjj system, and are among my best friends.

After practicing in those parts through the season of 1809,
I went home to Surry, where J remained a few weeks, and
returned back to Salisbury; on my way there I made several
Stops in different places where 1 had before practiced, to see my
frie/ids and to give information to those who made use of my
medicine and practice. On my arrival at Salisbury, my friends
informed me that Dr. French had been very busily employed in
my absence, and that he and a deacon Pecker, who was one of
the grand jury, had been to Salem, to the court, and on their
return had said that there had been a bill of indictment found
against me for wilful murder. They advised me to go off* and
keep out of the way; but I told them I should never do that; for
if they h d found a bill against me, the government must prove
the charges, or I must be honorably acquitted. About ten
o'clock at night Pr. French came to the place where I stopped,
with a constable, and made me a prisoner in behalf of the com-


or SAMUEL THOMSON. *§

rnonwealth. I asked the constable to read the warrant, which
he did; by this 1 found that Dr. French was the only complain-
ant, and the justice who granted the warrant ordered me before
him to be examined the next morning. I was then taken by
the constable to Dr. French's house, and keepers were placed
over me to pievent me from escaping. While at his house and
a prisoner, Dr. French took the opportunity to abuse and insult
me in the most shameful manner that can he conceived of, with-
out any provocation on my part; he continued his abuse to me
till between two and three o'clock, when he took his horse and
sat out for Salem to get the indictment. After he was gone, I
found on inquiry of the constable, thxt after he had been before
ihe grand jury and caused me to be indicted, he came home
before the bill was made out, and finding that 1 wr.s at Salisbury,
fearing I might be gone, and he should miss the chance of gratify-
ing his malicious revenge against me, he went to a brother doc-
tor, who was a justice of the peace, before whom he made oath,
tbat he hail probable ground to suspect, and did suspect, that!
had, with malice aforethought, murdered sundry persons in the
course of the ye«ir past, whose names were unknown to the
complainant*; upon which a warrant w s issued against me, and
I was arrested, as before stated, in order to detain and keep me
in custody, till 'he indictment could be obtained.

In the morning I was brought before the said justice, and rut
not being rendy to proceed in my examination, the court was
adjourned till one o'clock; when I was again brought Lefore
him, ind he said he could not try me until the complainant was
present, and adjourned the court again 'ill near night. The
constable took me back to Lis house in the mean time, and put.
me in a back room and left me done, til of them leaving the
house. When they came back, some of thorn asked me why f
did not mike my escape, which 1 might very easily have done.
out of a back window; but [ told them that I stood in no feat
of the consequence, having done nothing whereby I ought to be
punished; that I was taken up as a malefactor, and was deter
mined to be convicied as such, or hnnorabl ted. Just

before night, Dr. French arrivi ith id ordered e

to be delivered up by the Const ble to '' Ri'd fV-r ! r.

French had again vented his spleen upon me by Ihe n.o ' s.vage
abuse that language could express, Saying s murder r ,

and that 1 had murdered fifty and be could prove it — : I
BJMKtld be either hufig or sent to th< State ' • ■ . e

would d» all in his power to have me convicted, i was thtfn


"»» Narrative of the life, &c.

put in irons by the sheriff, and conveyed to the jail in Newbury
port, and confined in a dungeon, with a man who had been con-
victed of an assault on a girl six years of age, nd sentenced to
solitary confinement for one year. He seemed to be glad of
company ; and reminded me of the old saying, that misery loves
company. I was not allowed a chair or a table, and nothing
but a miserable straw bunk on the floor, with one poor blanket
.which had never been washed, I was put into this prison on
the 10th day of November, 1809; the weather was very cold,
and no fire, and not. even the light of the sun, or a candie — and
to complete the whole, the filth ran from the upper rooms into
our ceil, and was so offensive that 1 was almost stifled with the
smell. I tried to rest myself as well as I could, but got no sleep
that night, for 1 felt something crawling over me, which cancel
an itching, and not knowing what the cause was, inquired of
my fellow sufferer; he said that it was the lice, and that there
enough of them to shingle a meeting house.

In the morning there was just light enough shone through
the iron grates to show the horror of my situation. My spirits
and the justness of my cause, prevented mc from making any
lamentation, and I bore my sufferings without complaint. At
breakfast tune I was called on through the grates to take our
miserable breakfast; it consisted of an old tin pot of musty
codec, without sweetening or milk, and was so bad as to be
onsvholsome; with a tin pan containing a hard piece of Indian
bread, and the nape of fish, which was so hard I could not
eat it. This had to serve us tdl three o'clock in the afternoon,
when we hid about an eq.ial fare, which was all we had till the
next morning. The next day Mr. Osgood came from Salisbury
to see me, and on witnessing my miserable situation he was so
much affected that he could scarcely speak. He brought me
some provisions, which 1 was very glad to receive; and when I
was ir>, he wept like a child, lie asked liberty of the jailer to
furnish me with a bed, which was granted, and brought me one,
and other things to make me more comfortable. The next day
I wrote letters to my family, to Dr. Fuller, and to judge Rice,
stating to them my situation.

The bed which was brought me I put on the old one, and
allowed my fellow sufferer a part of it, for which he was very
thankful. I had provisions enough brought rnc by my friends
for us both, and 1 gave him what I did not want; the crusts and
scraps that were left, his poor wife would come and beg to carry


OF SAMUEL THOMSON.

to her starving children, who were dependant on her. fler
Situation, and that of her husband, were so much worse than
mine, that it made me feel more reconciled to my fate,- and I
gave her all I could spare, besides making his condition much
more co nfortable, for which they expressed a great deal of
gratitude.

In a few days after my confinement, Judge Rice came to see
me ind brought with him a lawyer. On consulting upon the
case, they advised me to petition to the judges of the Supreme
Court to hold a special court to try my cause, as theie would lie
no court held by law, it which it could be tried, till the next
fall, and as there could be no bail for an indictment for murder,
I should have to hy in prison nearly a year, whether there was
any thing ag inst me or not. This was the policy of my cue.
mies, thinking thai they could keep me in prist n a year, and in
all probability I should not live that tune, and their ends would
he fully answered.

I sent on a petition, agreeahly to the ad vice of my friends,
and judge Itice undertook to attend to the business, and \o do
every thing to get the prayer of the petition granled. lie
followed the business up wi h greal zeal, and did every thing
that could be done to effect the object, I think he told me that
he or the lawyer, Mr. Binlett, had rode Froth Newbuiyport to
Boston, fifteen times in the course of three weeks, on the busi-
ness. At length idge Parsons! agreed to hold a special court
at Salem, on the 10th day of December, to try the cause; which
was one month from the day I was committed My friends
were very attentive and zealous in my cause, and preparation
was made for the trial.

During this time the weather was very cold, and I suffered
greatly from that cause, and likewise from the badnes - of the
air in our miserable cell, so that I had not much life or ambition.
M i iv of my friends came to see me, and some of them were
permitted to come into the cell; but the air wis so b;d r.nd the
mell so offensive, that they could not stay long. My friend
Dr. Shepherd, came to see me, and was admitted into our dun-
geon. He staid a short time, but Said it w>s so offensive he
must leave ne; that lie would not stay in that place a week for
all XewlmrvDort. On thanksgiving day we were taken "out of
our cell and pul in a room in the upper story, with the other.
prisoners, and took supper together; they consisted of mur-
derers, robbers, thieves. m<l poor debtors. All of us tried to
enjoy our supucr, and be in as good spirits as our condition
G2


NARRATIVE OF THE LIF#, & .

would permit. The most of their complaints were of the filthi-
rtess and bad condition of the prison, in which we all agreed.
Before it was dark I and my companion were waited upon to
our filthy den again. There was nothing in the room to sit
upon higher than the thickness of our bed ; and when 1 wrote
any thing, I had to lay on my belly, in which situation I wrote
the Medical Circular, and several other pieces, which were after-
wards printed.

After I had been in prison about two weeks, my son-in-law
came to see me; I had, before my imprisonment, sent for him to
come to Portsmouth on some business, and en hearing of my
being in prison, he immediately came to Newburyport to see
me. ta lie seemed much more troubled about my situation than
I was myself. I felt perfectly conscious of my innocence and
was satisfied that 1 had done nothing to merit such cruel treat-
ment; therefore my mind was free from reproach; fori had
pursued the course of duty, which I conceived was allotted mc
by my maker, and done every thing in my power to benefit my
fellow creatures. These reflections supported me in my trou-
bles and persecutions, and I was perfectly resigned to my fate.
About this time a lawyer came into the prison and read to me
the indictment, which was in the common form, that T, with
malice aforethought, not having the fear of God before my eyes
but moved by the instigation of the devil, did kill and murder
•he said Lovett, with lobelia, a deadly poison, &c; but feeling
;o perfectly innocent of the charges, which the bill alleged
against me. it had very little effect upon my feelings; knowing
them to be'false, and that they had been brought against me by
ipy enemies, without any provocation on my part.

In the morning of the day that was appointed for me to be
amoved to Sdem for trial, I was taken out of my loathsome
cell by the jailer, who gave me water to wash myself with, and
I was permitted to take my breakfast by a fire, which was the
first time I had seen any for thirty days, and could not bear to
sit near it in consequence of its causing me to feel faint. As
«oon ns I had eat my breakfast the iron shackles were brought
and put on my hinds, which I was obliged to wear till J got to
Salem. The wentker was very, cold and the going bad; we
stopped but once on the way, the distance being ahout twenty
six miles. On our arrival I was delivered over to the care of
the keeper of the prison in Salem, and was confined in a room
in the second story, which was more comfortable than the one I
had left. I was soon informed that Judge Parsons was sick,


OF SAMUEL THOMSON.

and had put off my trial for len days ; so I had to reconcile my-
self to the idea of being confined ten days more without fire
However, I was not without friends; Elder Bowles and Capt.
Russell came to see me the first, night, and Mrs. Russell sent
her servant t\v:ce every day with warm coffee, and other things
for my comfort, for which I have always been grateful ; and
Mrs. Perkins, whom I had cured of a dropsy, sent for my clothes
to wash against the day of my trial.

Many of my friends came to Salem to attend my trial; some
as witnesses, and others to afford <me any assistance in their
power. A few days before my trial, Judge Rice and Mr. Bart-
lett, whom I had employed as my lawyer, held a consuliation
with me, as to the arrangements necessary to be made; when it
was decided that it would be best to have other counsel; and
Mr. Story was agreed upon, who engaged in my cause. I had
also engaged Mr. Bannister, of Newburyport, to assist in the
trial: but lie was of no benefit to me, and afterwards sued me
for fifty dollars at fifty miles distance, to put me to great ex-
pease. In order to be prepared for the trial, my counsel held a
consultation together, and examined the principal witnesses in
the defence. Mr. Bowles, Judge Rice, and several others, gave
great satisfaction as to the value and usefulness of the medicine,
and the variety of cures that had been performed with it within
their knowledge. Dr. Fuller, of Milford, N. M. was present and
made many statements in my favor as to the value of the me-
dicine, and advised to have Dr. Cutler of Hamilton, summoned,
which was done. Every thing was done by my friends that was
in their power, to assist me, and give me a chance for a fair
trial, for which I shall always feel very grateful.

On the 20th day of December, 1809, the Supreme Court
convened to hear my trial, at which Judge Parsons presided,
with Judges Sewell and Parker, assistant Judges. The case
was called about ten o'clock in the morning, and the chief jus-
tice ordered me to be brought from the prison and arraigned at
the bar for trial. I was waited on by two constables, one on
my right and the other on my left, in which situation I wa9
brought from the jail to the court house and placed in tie bar.
The court house was so crow led with the people, that it was
with much difficulty we could get in. After 1 was placed in
the criminal seat, a chair was handed me and I sat down to wait
for further orders. Here [ wis the object for this sreat on-
course of people to look at; some with pity, othe-s with sc<«rn.
In a few minutes I was directed to rise and hold up my right


eo Narrative of the life, & c .

Land, to hear the indictment read, which the grand jury had,
upon their oaths, presented against me. It w,:s in cm ■ n
form, stating that 1 had with malice aforethought, murdered
Ezra Loveit, with lobelia, a deadly poison. I wi;s then directed
by the court lo plead to the indictment, guilty or not guilty — I
plei.d not guilty, and the usual forms in such cases were passed
through, ihe jury called and sworn, and lhe trial commenced.
The solicitor general arose and opened tlie case on the part
of the commonwealth, and made many hard statements against
me, which he said he was a lout to prove; he stated that 1 had
at sundry times killed my patients with Ihe same poison. The
fiist wi'ress celled to the stand on the pari of the government,
was Mr. Lovett, the father of the young man that 1 was accused
of killing. He made a tolerable fair statement of the affair in
general, particularly of coming after me several times before 1
could attend; though I think he exaggerated 'many things
a' ainst me, and told over several fiftitious and ridiculous names,
Which people had given my medicine, by way of ridicule, such
as bull-dog, run-cat, screw-auger, and belly -my-grizzle; all
which had a tendency to prejudice the court and jury against
ine; and I also thought that he omitted to tell many things in
my favor, that must have been within his knowledge; hut there
was nothing in his evidence that in the least criminated me, or
supported the charges in the indictment.

The next witness called was Dr. Howe, to prove that 1 had
administered the poison alleged in the indictment. He stated
that I gave the poison to the said Lovett, and produced a sam-
ple of it, which he said was the root of lobelia. The judge
asked him if lie was positive that it was lobelia — he said he
was, and that I called it coffee. The sample was handed round
for the court to examine, and they all appeared to be afraid of
it, and after they had all satisfied their curiosity, judge Rice
took it in his hand and eat it, which very much surprised them.
The solicitor genenl asked him if he meant to poison himself
in presence of the court. He said it would not hurt him to eat
a. peck of it, which seemed to strike the court with astonish-
ment. Dr. Howe was then called at my request, for cross ex-
looked when growing, as he had sworn to it by the taste and
smell. This seemed to put him to a stand, and after being
speechless for several minutes, he said he had not seen anv so
long lie should not know it if he should see it at this time. —
This so completely contradicted ni did iway all that he had
before stated, that he went off the stand quite east down,


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 8l'

Dr. Cutlet was called on to inform the court what the i
cine was, that Dr. Howe hud declared so positively to be lobi
and after examining it, he said that it appeared to him to be
marsh-rosemary, (which was the fact.) So far, all they had
proved against me was that 1 had given the young man seme
marsh-rosemary, which Dr. Cutler had declared to be a good
cine.

■ young women were brought forward as witnesses, whom
I bad no knowledge of ever seeing before. They made, some
of the must absurd and ridiculous statements about the n
erne, that they said 1 gave the young man, that were probably
ever made in a court of justice before — some of which were
too indecent to be here repeated. One of them said that I
crowded my puke down his throat, and he cried murder till he
died. This was well known to be a falsehood, and that the
story was wholly made up by my enemies, as well as what had
been before stated by those women, for the purpose of trying to
make out something against me. I had two unimpeachable wit-
nesses m court, ready to sweir that I never saw the young man
for more than fourteen hours before he died, during all which
time he was in the care of Dr. Howe; but by not having an op-
portunity to make my defence, in consequence of the govern-
ment not making out their case against me, could not bring
Uiem forward.

John Lemon wis the next witness brought forward on the
part of the commonwealth, and was directed to state what ho
knew about the prisoner at the bar. lie stated that he had
been out of health for two years, being much troubled with a
pain in his breast, and was so bad that he was unable to work-
that he could get no help from the doctors; that he applied to
me and I had cured him in one week; and that was all he knew
about the prisoner at the bar. By this time judge Parsons ap-
peared to be out of patience, and said he wondered what they
had for a grand jury, to Gad a bill on such evidence. The so-
licitor general said he had more evidence which he wished to
bring forward.

Dr. French was called, and as he had been the most basy
actor in the whole business of getting me indicted, and had
been (lie principal cause, by his own evidence, (as I was in-
formed,) oi' the grand jury finding a bill against me, it. was ex-
pected that his evidence now would be sufficient to condemn
me at one; but it turned out like the rest to amount to nothing.
Fie was asked if he knew the prisoner at the bar; he said he


§2 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE,&c.

did. He was then directed to state what lie knew about him.
He said the prisoner had practiced in the part of the country
where he lived, with good success; and his medicine was harm'
less, being gathered by the children for the use of the families.
The judge was about to charge the jury, when the solicitor
general arose and said, that if it was not proved to be murder
it might be found for manslaughter. The judge said, vou hava
nothing against the man, and again repeated that he wondered
what they had for a grand jury. The charge was given to the
jury, when they retired for about five minutes and returned into,
court and gave in their verdict of not guilty.

I was then honorably acquitted, without having had an op-
portunity to have witnesses examined, by whom I expected
to have proved the usefulness and importance of my discovery,
before a large assembly of people, by the testimony of about
twenty-five creditable men, who wee present at the trial; be-
sides contradicting all the evidence produced against me. Af-
ter the trial was raver I was invited to the Sun tavern to supper,
where we enjoyed ourselves for the evening. When we sat
down to the table, several doctois being present, who were so of-
fended at my being acquitted, that they left the table, which
made me think of what the scripture says, that "the wicked
flee when no man pursueth, but the righteous are bold a3 a lion."

During the evening I consulted wilh my friends upon the
subject of prosecuting Dr. French and making him pay dama-
ges for his abuse to me when a prisoner at his house, in 3aying
that I Lad murdered fifty, and he could prove it ; and after hav-
ing had a fair chance, and bavins failed to prove one, it was
thought to be a favorable opportunity to make him pay some-
thins for his conduct towards me, in causing me so much suf-
fering, and for the trouble he had made me and ray friends. A
prosecution was agreed upon, and to bring the action in the
county of York. Judge Rice agreed to be my bail, and like-
wise he undertook to pay my lawyers and witnesses for the
above trial, and paid Mr. R irtlett foitv dollars that night. Mr.
Story was paid twenty dollars, by a contribution of my fr'enrls
in Salem. I staid at Mrs. Russell's that night; I had but little
sleep, for my mind was so much agitited, when (came to oon-
sider what f hid gone through, and the risk I had run in escap-
ing the sn ties of my enemies, with the anxiety of my family
till they got the news of mv acquittal, that sleep Med from my
eyejids, and 1 was more confused than when in prison.


U* SAIVHj£.1j I WUlVlSUiX. 83

The next day I went to Salisbury, and stopped with Mr. Os-
good, where I was first arrested. Mrs. Osgood and a young
woman who hnd been employed by me as a nurse, assisted to
clean my clothes, and clear me of some troublesome com-
panions I had brought with me from the prison; and when I
had paid a visit to all my old friends, who were very glad to see
me, I went to Portsmouth, to recover my health, which was
very much impaired, by being confined forty days in those
filthy and cold prisons, in the coldest part of a remarkable cold
winter. My friends attended upon me and carried me through
a regular course of medicine; but the first operation of it had
little effect, in consequence of my blood being so much chilled,
and it was a long time before I could raise a perspiration that
would hold. 1 am confident that I should not have lived
through the winter in prison, and believe that this was their
plan; for which reason they managed to have me indicted for
murder; knowing in that case there could be no bail taken, and
there would be no court at which I could be tried, for nearly a
year, I should have to Jay in prison that time, and that T should
probably die there, or in any case they would get rid of me for
one year at least, whether there was any thing proved against
me or not; and that in that time the doctors and their dupes
would be enabled to run down the credit of my medicine and
put my practice into disrepute among the people; but I have
been able by good fortune and the kind assistance of my friends,
to defeat their plans. Most of th>se that have been instru-
mental in trying to destroy me and my practice, have had some
judgment befall them, as a reward for their unjust persecutions
and malicious conduct towards me. 1 was credibly informed
that Deacon Pecker, one of the grand jury that found a bill
against me, went with Dr. French to hunt up evidence to come
before himself, in order to have me indicted. A short time af-
ter 1 was put in prison, he had a stroke of the palsy, and has
remained ever since, one half of his body and limbs useless.
Dr. French, one year after I was acquitted, was brought to the
same bur in which I was placed, and convicted for robbing a
grave vard of a dead body, which it was reported he sold for
sixty dollars. He lost all his credit, and was obliged to quit
his country.

In 1 he month of January, of 1 i to, I returned home to my fam~
Uy,and staid till I had in some measure recovered my loss of health
by imprisonment. In March I returned to Portsmouth, and
after taking the advice of my friends, made arrangements fot


84 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

my prosecuting Di. French. The prosecution was commenced
and he was summoned before the court of Common Pleas, in
the county of York. Judge Rice undertook the principal man-
Igemenl of the business, and became toy bail. The action was

called, arid carried to the Supreme Court by demurrer, which
was to sit in Alfred, in October. I attended with my witnesses
and expected to have gone to trial; and after waiting several
dvs to knaw what the defence was going to be, the counsel for
the defendant made their plea of justification. I found that
their plan was to prove that 1 had murdered sundry persons
whom I had attended, and by that means to make it out ih:t
anyone had a right, to call me a murderer; and that for this
p irpose, Dr Fiench had been to every place where I had i rac-
ticed, collecting every case of the death of any that 1 had
attended in this part of the country, and had made out eight
cases, all of which have 'fen before mentioned in Ibis narrative,
most of whom had been given over by the doctors as past cure,
and t ! ie others known to be desperate cases. He hsd oh* ined
the depositions of all that were prejudiced against me, a^d had
collected a mass of evidence to support his defence. After find-
ing what their plan was, it was thought necessary for me to go (o
all the pi : ces where they had been, and get evidence to contradict
thesehighly colored and exaggerated statements, and was under
the necessity of requesting a chl y of the trial for ore week, which
was granted. I proceeded immediately and took ihedepositionsof
iji >e who were knowing to the facts; but found that these weie
not sufficient and went, again to Deerfield and summoned two
in -n t appe r at court and give 'heir verbal testimony. When
I had got ready to come to trial, the defendant was not re: dy,
and got it put off to the next term which would be hold' n at
York the next year. In the spring, before the sitting of the
court, I went to the clerk's office to find what the depositions
were that were filed against me; and the whole appeared to be
a series of exaggerated statements, made by those who were
governed by their prejudices, without having but very little, if
any knowledge of the facts, more than what they obtained by
hearsay. This caused me to redouble my diligence and get
witnesses to appear on the stand to contradict their testimony,
on each case they had alleged against me.

On the day appointed for the trial, every thing was prepared
on my part, to have a fair hearing. Judge Parsons was on he
bench, and seemed, as I thought,- to be determined to have the
*;ase go against me; for he appeared to know overv thing that


vp (jniuutiii i ii\j±iu\jli.


■"was to be in tiie defence before hand. 1 made out my case by
proving the words uttered by the defendant, which were in my
declaration. They then proceeded, in the defence, to make out
ihe eight cases of murder, which were alleged against me. — ■
The first was a case of a man by the name of Hubbard, of
Elliott, who had been dead above two years, the particulars of
which I have before stated. The witnesses brought to support
ise, told a very lamentable and highly colored story; and
T 'nought on to the stand a very respectable witness, who com-
pletely contradicted the whole statement.

The next cases brought up were the three children of Mr.
Fulsom, of Deerfield, the particulars of which have been before
related. A number of depositions were read, which the, de-
fendant had obtained of those that had been my enemies, and
who knew nothing of the matter more than hearsay reports
among themselves. They gave a very highly colored account
of my treatment of the children; so much so, that it would
appear by their stories, that I had taken them in health and had
roasted them to death; never saying a word about the fifteen
thai f cured, some of which had been given over by the doctors.
To rebut the evidence that was produced to [trove that 1 had
killed those children, I brought on to the stand two respectable
witnesses, who were knowing to all the circumstances, being
present at the time of my attending the family. They gave a
correct and particular account of all the circumstances as they
took place — of the situation of the family when I first saw them,
and the violence of the disorder — how the doctors had lost all
their patients that had been attacked with the disorder before I
came — with the number that I had cured by my mode of practice;
and that the doctors afterwards adopted my pian, and saved the
lives of a number by it. The judge interrupted ihem and read
some of the depositions over again; but these witnesses stated
that they were not true, and went on to give some of the par-
ticulars of the opposition 1 met with in my practice from those
very persons whose depositions had been read, when the Judge
seemed to be put out, and attempted to stop them, saying that
they bad said enough. They said th^t hiving been sworn to
tell the whole truth, they felt it their duty to do so.

They nex* brought on the case of a woman who had died at
Beverly, th i*I lid attended, and wi'h it the case of Ezra Lovett
whom I had been tried for murdering. 1 was very glad to have
this case brought up again, as 1 wished to have an opportunity
to prove all the facts relating to it, which I had been prevented


W NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE. to.

from doing on my trial, in consequence of being acquitted with-
out making any defence. The evidence brought forward to
support ihis c ise. were the depositions of those who h id testified
against me on my trial .-it Salem; they were pretty near the
same as then given. After those depositions were read, ! had
called on to tha stand, Elder Williams and Mr. Raymond, who
gave all the particulars of my attending upon the young man,
as h s been before related, which completely contradicted all the
depositions they h id re-d in the case. The Judge interrupted
these witnesses and read the deposition of the girl, who stated
that 1 crowded my pukes down the patient's throat, and he cried
murder till he died. They both positively testified, that there
was not a word of it true; for when he died, and for twelve
hours before. /ic was under the care of Dr. Howe, during which
time 1 did not see him. As to the woman in Beverly, whom
they tried to make out that I had murdered, it was proved by
these witnesses, that she was in a dying condition when 1 first
saw her, and that I so stated it as my opinion at the time, and
that my medicine would not help her.

The next case was that of Mis. LirFord, who died at Salis-
bury the particulars of which have been before given. The
evidence brought to prove this case of murder w.':s the deposition
of the woman who nursed bar, and by whose neglect the patient
took cold, after the medicine had a favorable operation, and
appearances were much in her favor; in c< nseqnence of which
sheh d a relapse, and I could not produce any effect upon her
by the medicine afterwards. This woman confessed at the time,
that she was the only one to blame, and that no fault ought to
be attached to be; but she afterwards was influenced by Dr.
French to turn against me, and made threats that she would
swear to any thing to injure me. After her deposition was
read, T brought a witness on the stand, who completely contra-
dicted everything contained in it; but the judge rend her
dep sit ion to the jury, and directed ihem to pay attention to
tha in preference to the witnesses on the stand.

The eiglnh and last case was that of the son of Thomas
Ne 1, of Portsmouth, who was very violently attacked, and was
attended by Dr. Cutler. I wag called on at night to attend
him, and thought there w-s a possibility of helping him; But
the man whom he lived with would *jot consent that I should
do ny 'hmg for him, and I went, away, after telling them that
he would bi rse or belter before morning, and if he

sns worse he would die. I was called to visit him in the


OF SAMUEL THOMSON.


ffi


morning, and was informed that he was worse, and that his
master had consented to have me attend upon him. I told his
father it was undoubtedly too late; but he insisted upon it so
much, 1 attended, and told them the chance was very small for
doing him any good, as I considered it a desperate case. After
being very hardly urged by his friends, I gave him some medi-
cine, but it had no effect, and about sundown he died. The
doctor who attended him was brought forward to prove that I
murdered the patient. If I recollect rightly, he swore that the
patient had the dropsy in the brain, and that the disorder h id
turned and he was in a fair way to recover; but I came a*>
gave him rny poison pukes and killed him. I brought forward
evidence who swore to the facts as I have above related them,
and that the doctor would give no encouragement of helpi g
the patient, The father of the young man gave his evidence,
end stated that his sou was in a dying situation when 1 gave
him medicine; but the judge interrupted him, and asked if he
was a doctor, to, which he answered no. He then said, the
doctor has stated that his disorder had turned and he was get-
ting better — are you going to contradict the doctor — and thus
managed to do away his testimony.

I have thus given a brief sketch of the evidence in the eight
cases, which were attempted to be proved as murder, in order
to make out justification on the part of the defendant, with my
defence to the same, in as correct a manner as I am able from
memory; and am confident that every circumstance, as I have
related it , can be substantially proved by living witnesses After
the evidence was gone through, the lawyers on both sides made
their pleas, making the case on my part as good and as bad as
they could. The judge then gave his charge to the jury, which
was considered by those who heard it to be the most prejudiced
and partial one that had been ever heard before. He made use
of every means to raise the passions of the jury, and turn them
against me; stating that the defendant was completely justified
in calling me a murderer, for if I was not guilty of wilful mur-
der, it was barbarous, ignorant murder; and he even abused my
lawyers for taking up for me, saying that they ough^ to be paid
in screw augers and bull dogs. The people that were present,
were very much disgusted at his conduct, and they expressed
themselves very freely upon the subject; it was said by some
that our courts, instead of being courts of justice, had become
courts of prejudice. One man said he hoped judge Parsons
would never have another opportunity to set on a cause; which


89 NARRATIVE OP THE LIFE, &c.

prediction turned out true, fur he soon after had a stroke of the
palsy, and as I am informed, died before the next court met.
The jury brought in their verdict of justification on the part of
the defendant, and threw the whole coats on me, which
amounted 10 about two thousand dollars.

When 1 found how the case was going to turn, 1 went to
Portsmouth, and soon after made arrangements to pay the cos's.
Judge Rice was my bail, and undertook to pay all the bills that
f had no! paid at the time. On my settlement with him I owed
tundred dollars for money that he had advanced on my
, for which 1 had no way to secure him, but by giving
imrtgage of my farm; which I did, and it was put on
?si, and never known to any of my friends til! I paid it up.
He charged nothing for all his tune and trouble, through the
whole of my persecutions and trials, for which and foi his kind-
ness and friendship on all occasions, I shall ever consider my-
self under the greatesi obligations.

Sometime in 'he spring of the year, previous to this trial at
York, a young man came to me at Portsmouth, by the name of
Alfred Carpenter, from the town where my family lived; he was
recommended to me by his neighbors-, as being lame and poor,
and wanted my assistance. I took him oui of pity, and instructed
him in my mode of practice, under the expectation that it would
be a benefit to him end thereby he would be able to assist me
in attending the sick.

About, the first of June, 1811, 1 received a letter from Easf-
ort, where I had been the fall before and shown some of my
mode of practice. Some of the people in that place were so
to the letter, requesting me to come there and practice in the
fevers, which prevailed in those parts. I left the care of my
business at Portsmouth with Mr. Carpenter, my apprentice, and
immediately took passage for Eastpoit. where I arrived about
the middle of June. 1 was very gladly received by those who
had written to me,and (hose with whom I had become acquainted
when there before. I agreed to practice under the protection
of those who had sent for me, until 1 had convinced' them of its
Qtility, to which they consented, and promised me all the assist-
ance in their power. 1 was soon called on to practice, and
Jiad all the most desperate cases that could be found, in all of
which 1 met with very great success. There was, I think, at
thai time, five practicing doctors on the Island, among whom
<ny sur.ce<:; in curing the sick caused great alarm; and I soon


OF SAMUEL THOMSON.

experienced the same determined opposition from them, win,
all the arts and plans to destroy me and my practice, that 1 had
experienced from the same class of men in other places. In
order to show some of their conduct towards me, I shall relate
the particulars of some of the cases I attended; but most of
the numerous cases which I had under my care, were so nearly
Bimilarto those that have been already given, and my mode of
treating them being about the same, that it will be unnecessary
to repeat them.

J was sent for to visit a Mrs. Lovett, who was the daughter of
Mr. Delisdernier, at whose house I attended her. She had the
dropsy, and had been under the care of one of the doctors, till
he had given her over as incurable. 1 went to see her in com-
pany with the doctor; but we could not agree as to the cause
and re neily. 1 asked him several questions concerning the
power of the elements, and the effect of heat on the human
system. He answered that the elements had nothing to do with
the case. After giving him my ideas on the subject, which all
appeared new to him, I told him that the contending powers in
this case wis between the fire and wafer: and if I could get
heat enough in the body to make the water volatile, it could not
Stay in the body. He said that anything warm would not
answer for her I then asked him how he thought the hottest
medicine would do. He said that it would produce immediate
death. I then told him that if I did any thing for her, I should
administer the hattest medicine I could give. Finding there
would bo i disadvantage on my part in doing any thing for her,
as the doctor and I could not agree, I left the house. I was
followed by the father and mother and the doctor, who all in-
sisted on my returning; but I told them that notwithstanding
the doctor had uiven her over, if I was to attend her and she
should die, they would s-y that 1 killed her. They promised
that let the consequences be what they might, no bbme should
be alleged against me. Upon which I agreed that I would stop
on condition that two of my friends should be present as wit-
nesses to what w.iss.'.id,and see the first process of the medi-
cine, which was agreed to, and they were sent for, and heard
the statements of the doctor and family. A Captain Mitchell,
from New York, was also present, and heard the conversation
between me and the doctor; and being pleased with the prin-
ciples tint f laid down, which excited his curiosity so much
that he expressed a wish to be present and see the operation of
the medicine, and staid accordingly.
H2


*J KAKRVTfVE Ui- Vlh-. Ltl% Ls.

The doctor pretended to be going away till after 1 had given
the first medicine, and appeared to be very busy g6ing out and

coming in, r.r.d had much conversation with Mrs. Lovett, the
husband's mother, who was the nurse. After the first medicine
had done, which operated veiy favorably, gave directions what
to do, and particularly to keep the patient in perspiration during
the rn<Tht, and left medicine for the purpose; we then went.
home. In the morning I called to see her, and to my surprise,
found her setting with the window up, and exposed to the air as
much as possible; on examination 1 found that no medicine
had been used. On inquiry I found that the doctor had been
in frequently, to see her; and on asking why they had not fol-
lowed my directions, the nurse appeared very cross, and said she
•would not take any of my medicine. 1 told them that they h id
not killed her, but I did not thank then for ihf ir fjood will any
more than if they had done it. I was about leaving the house,
nsl found my directions would not be attended to by the nurse;
but Captain Mitchell was very urgent lor me to continue. I
told him if he would attend upon her and see the medicine
given and every thing done according to my directions, 1 would
continue, to which he agreed. I left the patient in his care and
he attended her fuhfully through the day; at night I visited
her and found the swelling began to abate. He continued his
care of her, and in three days she was able to go up and down
stairs, r.nd in one week she was well. By the influence of the
doctor, the woman and the husband all turned against me,and I
never received any thing for all my trouble but their abuse and
slander. The woman's father and Captain Mitchell, however,
gave me all credit for the cure, and they both purchased a right.
About a year after, at a private assembly of women, this Mrs.
Lovett, the mother-in-kiw of the sick woman, gave an account
of the whole transaction, and stated that there was a private
interview between her nnd the doctor, and it was agreed to go
contrary to my directions, and the doctor said she would die in
the course of the night; and that, he should take me up for
murder, and that she must be an evidence. This appeared to
be almost incredible, that they should be so void of all huui ;, n
feelings, as to be willing to have the weuyin die, in order to
have the opportunity to take me up for murder; bu* two women
who were present when she told he story ,gave their depositions
proving the facts as above stated.

1 continued my practice on this island, at Lubeck, and on
•he main, paying my most particular attention to those who sent


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. &f

forme, and wanted information, I p^c'iced under their inspec-
tion aboul five weeks, and then told them that J had done enough
for a trial, to prove the use oi my medicine, and should do no
more till J knew whether a society could l.t tein.eci. 1 hen ex-
pressed their enure satisfaction, and wished to have a society
formed; a meeting was called for that purpose, and sixteen
signed the articles at the first meeting. Aiier tins a meeting-
was held every week, at which a lecture was given for the pur-
pose o giving information, and for the admission of members;
and eight ouch w< ek, were added during the summer. In the fall
1 went back to Portsmouth to attend to my business theie, and
see to the society which had been formed in that place.

After staying in Portsmouth a few weeks to give information
fo the people, and procuring a stock of medicine, I made ar-
rangements to return toEastport; and sometime in the month
of October I set sail for that place taking with me my appren-
tice and Stephen Sewel. On my arrival 1 introduced Mr. Car-
penter as my apprentice, and got Mr. Sewel into a school as an
intj in which he had fifteen dollars a month, and all his
leisure time he attended to gam information of the practice,
I took a small shop and put into it a good assortment of medi-
cine, and attended to practice till I had got Mr. Carpenter intro-
duced among the people.

While practicing here, I frequently heard of the abuse and
scandal towards me and my practice, from Mrs. Lovett, the old
woman before mentioned, as the nurse of her son's wife, whom
I cured of the dropsy. This old woman was a singular charac-
ter, and was called a witch by the people. I have no faith in
these kind of things, yet her conduct, and certain circumstan-
ces that took place, were very extraordinary, and puzzled and
astonished me more than any thing I had ever met with, and
winch 1 have never been able to account for to this day. Mr.
Carpenter was attending a man. where this woman often" visited,
who had the consumption, and his child, which was sick and
had fits. He came to me and said that the medicine he save
would not have its usual effect ; that the emetic, instead of caus-
ing them to vomit, would make them choak and almost strangle.
I attended them myself, and on giving the medicine it would
operate on the man and not on the child, at one time, and the
next time on the child and not on him. Sometimes the child
Would lay in fits for a whole night, and nothing would have any
eth ct upon if; in the morning it would come out of tuem and
appear to be quite bright and lively. I had never known the


NARRATIVE OF THE LIF.E, kc.

medicine to fail of producing some eflfect before, where the pa-
tient was not so far gone as not to have life enough left to build
upon. 1 can give no reason for this strange ciroumsti n<
isf clow to myself, or which would be thought reasonable by the
reader. The old woman, before mentioned, was frequently in
and out of the house where the man and child were, am! seetn
od to be very much interested about, them; when she was gone
the child would frequently go into violent fits, and when I
steamed it, it was said the old woman would be in great dis-
tress. It caused much conversation among the neighbors; they
believed it to be the power of witchcraft; and that the old wo-
man had a control over the destinies of the man and child, and
was determined to destroy them in order to get her revenge on
me. I have no belief in these things; but must confess that
her strange conduct, and the extraordinary circumstances at-
tending the whole affair, baffled me more than any thing f had
ever met with before. I was unable to do any thing for these
two patients, except sometimes by a temporary relief; they con-
tinued to grow worse, and finding it not in my power to do
them any good, left them, and they both «oon after died.

Whether the extraordinary circumstances attending the two
cases above stated, were caused by a stratagem of the doctors,
in which the old woman was made their agent, to injure me by
causing, in someway or other, poisonous medicines to be admin-
istered to them, xn order to prevent my medicines from having
any salutary effect, is what I do not feel disposed to assert as a
fact; but the many cases in which I have been certain that such
things have been done by the faculty, and their enmity and
uniform opposition to my practice, both at this place and else-
where, as well as the confession made by the old woman, would
tend strongly to confirm such a belief. I could mention a great
number of facts, in addition to what I have said in regard to
this affair, if necessary, which appeared very extnordinay to
me and all who witnessed them; but think that enough has
been said on the subject, and shall leave it to the public to de-
cide between us. There were five doctors at Eastport when I
went there, who had a plenty of business; but my success was
so great, and the people became so well satisfied of the svloeri*
©rity of my system of practice over theirs, that they were soon
relieved from most of their labors; and in a short time Tier,
three of them had to leave the place for want of employment.

I made arrangements to go back to Portsmouth to spend the
winter, and to leave Mr, Carpenter with the care of my busi-


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 9$

lies* and practice at East port, under the protection of John
Burgin, Esq. a man who has been particularly friendly to me on
all occasions. I told him if he would be faithful in my busi-
ness and in selling medicine, that he should have half the pro-
fits after the money was collected; and in December 1 took pas-
sage for Portsmouth. We had a long and tedious passage of
eighteen days; the vessel took fire and our lives were exposed;
but we were fortunate enough to extinguish it without much
damage. I stopped in Portsmouth and practiced some time,
then went to see my family, where I rormined the rest of the
winter, in which time I was employed in collecting and prepar-
ing medicine. I returned to Portsmouth in the spring of 1812,
and after making the necessary arrangement, 1 set sail for East-
port, where I arrived about the first of May. I made a settle-
with Mr. Burgin, and paid him sixty three dollars for the
board of .Mr. Carpenter, and for shop rent. Then furnished the
shop with a complete stock of medicine, to which I added cor-
dials and spirits, the whole of which amounted to about twelve
hundred dollars. There was a great call for medicine this
spring, and also for practice.

After arranging my business, I concluded to return to Ports-
mouth; a short time before I came away, a Mr. Whitney came
to me for assistance, and purchased a right. About the same
time a Mr. M'Fadden applied also for assistance, who had the
consumption, 1 left them both under the care of Mr. Carpen-
ter, and immediately sailed for Portsmouth, where 1 arrived in
safety. Soon after my arrival there, I found that there was go-
ing to be war with Great Britain; in consequence of which I
returned immediately back to Eastport to settle my affairs in
that place. In a short time after my arrival there, the declara-
tion of war came on, and I made the best arrangements of my
business I could, leaving Mr. Carpenter with directions, if there
should any thing happen in consequenceof the war, so as to be
necessary for him to leave the Island, to come to Portsmouth.
Before leaving the place, I called on him for some money, and
all he could pay ine was sixty-four dollars, which was but one
dollar more than I had paid for his hoard and shop rent. The
people were in such confusion it was impossible to set a settle-
ment with any one. J left Mr. Whitney and Mr. M'Fadden in
his care, and left the island about the middle of June, and ar-
rived in Portsmouth in forty-eight hours, where I remained the
greater part of the summery during which time I had constant
practice, and formed some legulations for the society, which was


#4 NARRATIVE OF THE L F , &c.

established there, lor the purpose of greater facility in commu-
nicating information of my system of practice to the people who
wished my assistance. In tlie fall of this year I published my
pamphlet of directions, as many were urgent that I should not
leave the place destitute of the knowledge of my practice and
medicine. Many persons who had been the most urgent for
me to give thetn information, now became the most backward,
and complained that the restrictions were too hard with regard
to their giving the information to others; some of whom hud
never done the least to support the practice or me. When
any of them were sick, they were re dy enough to call on me
for .ssistance; and if I relieved them quick, they thought it
worth nothing, and they run out against my practice, saying I
deserved no pay. This sort of treatment I have met with from
a certain class of people in all placer, where 1 have practiced.
I was treated wilh much attention when they were in danger
from sickness; but when I had cured them 1 was thought no
more of. This kind of ingratitude I have experienced a pretty
large share of during my praciice.

In the month of October, having got my business arranged,
and a stock of medicine prepared, I returned to Eastport. On
my arrival there 1 went to my shop, and found that Mr. Carpen-
ter had gone home, and Mr. McFadden and a Mr. Harvey
left very sick, and only a boy to take care of them and the shop.
Mr. McFadden was verv low with a consumption, and unable
to lay down. I found there was no regulation of the business
in the shop, and the property I had, chiefly gone. I was obliged
to pay every attention to the sick men that had been left in this
manner without assistance. I attended Mr. Harvey, find got
him well enough to go home in a few days; and Mr. McF. d-
den was so put to it for breath, and was so distressed, that i had
to be with him night and day for six weeks and three days,
when Mr. Carpenter returned. Previous to this I fouid tiiat
Mr. McFadden had put his farm into the hands of Mr. Car-
penter as security for his attending him in his sickness; and as
he had no relations, the remainder to go to him and me. ' On
inquiry into the business, I found that he had taken a deed in
his own name, and that all the bills and accounts for his prac-
tice and medicine in my absence were in his own name. I
asked him for a settlement and he refused; I then asked him
what he mean* by his conduct; he said he owed me nothing,
and bid me defiance, saying if I chose I might take the steps of
the law. I could not conceive what he meant by treating me


ur s.a.viut,!-. inujiBUjX,


SJ


in Ihis manner, till after making further inquiry, I found (hat
be li id formed a connection in a family — that i.e h"d been ad-
vised to take the course lie did, and as I had no receipt for the
property, or any written agreement to support my claim, lie could
do with me a? lie pleased, and keep every thing for Ids own bene-
fit. The night after he returned, and before I had any know-
ledge of his intentions, he had robbed the shop of all the ac-
counts, notes, bills, and all other demands, so that I knew no
more about the business than a stranger.

[ frequently tried to get a set dement with Carpenter; but he
said he had none to make with me. Mr. McFadden died shortly
after, and Carpenter came forward and claimed all his property,
saying that it was all willed to him. I asked him why it should
ho willed to him, when 1 had borne the expense and done the
principal part of the labor in taking care of him in his sickness.
lie said 1 must look to him for my pay. I told him that it was
very singular that my apprentice had become my master in one
year; but he denied he was my apprentice, and said that he
was a partner; but I had said, in order to encourage him
to be faithful and do well by me, he should have half the
profits of the practice, and that I had no idea of his having
the whole of my property, bee use 1 made him this promise.
All f could say I found would have no effect, for the more I
tried to reason with him, the more obstinale and impudent he
Was, lie even wen' so far as to say that the shop and all that
Whs in ii was bis, and that I had nothing to do with if ; he called
a witness, and forbid my having any concern in thesh p. I found
there was no other w y for me, but to turn him out and get rid
of him in the beat manner I could; to effect which, I applied
to theownerof the shop and got a writing to prove my claim to
the possession, and immediately look measures <o gei rid of him.
He made all the opposition and gave meal) the trouble fie could;
he wont into the shop while I was absent, and began to throw
the properly out into the street; but 1 soon put a s'op to Ins
career, and secured the property fn m his reach. He still htld
all my books and accounts, which put my business into such
confusion that 1 was unable to collect any of the demands that
were duo; and the only remedy I had was to advertise him as my
apprentice, and forbid all persons having any de lings with him
on my account, or settling with him. My loss by the dishonest
conduct of this man was very considerable, besides the injury
feelings from hisb-se ingratitude to me; for 1 had taken.
him from a state of poverty and distress; supported him, for q


96 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

Long time when he was of very little benefit to mc; and had in-
structed him in my system of practice, and given him all the
information in my power; had introduced him into practice,
and given him every encouragement to enable him not only to
assist me in supporting my system of practice, but to benefit
himself; and after all this, for him to turn against me and treat
me in the manner he did, was a deeper wound to my feelings
than the loss of my property.

After having got clear of Carpenter, I hired a young man
whom I had cured and given information to, and put him into
the shop, and agreed to pay his board for one year, and then
returned to Portsmouth. As Carpenter had bid me defiance,
and threatened to sell my rights and give information to any one
who would buy of him, and, likewise, T found that there was
another plot got up (o destroy me; a petition had been sent on
to the Legislature to have a law passed against quackery, in
which I was named ; and there can be no doubt but what the
whole object of it was to stop my practice; I was at a stand,
and put to much perplexity to know what course it was best to
steer. I found I had enemies on every hand, and was in dan-
ger of falling by some of them. Every thing seemed to conspire
against me; but I had some friends who have never forsaken me;
my courage remained good, and my spirits were never depressed,
and it appeared to me, that the more troubles I had to encounter
die more firmly J was fixed in my determination to persevere
unto the lust.

When I had maturely considered the subject in all its hear-
ings, and exercised my best abilities in devising some plan by
which I could extricate myself from the dangers which threat-
ened me on every hand; and to prevent those rights, which
twenty years' labor, with much suffering and great expense had
given me a just claim to, from being wrested from me — I finally
come to the conclusion that there was only one plan for me to
pursue, with any chance of success; and that was to go on to
Washington and obtain a patent for my discoveries; and put
myself and medicine under the protection of the law of my
country, which would not only secure to me the exclusive right
to my system and medicine, but would put me above the reach
©f the laws of any state.

After coming to the conclusion to go on to the seat of govern-
ment and apply for a patent, I made all necessurv preparation for
$he journey, and started from Portsmouth on the 7»h of February
^nd arrived at Washington on the 23d, The next day after my


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. &

...rival T waited on Captain Nicholas Gihnan, of Exeter, showed
him my credentials and asked his advice what I mast do to
obtain my object. He said that he thought it could not be
made explicit enough to combine the system --nd practice,
without being too long; he however advised n;e to carry my
petition to the patent office; which was then under the control
of Mr. Monroe, Secretary of State. I went to the patent office
and found that Dr. Thornton was the Clerk, and presented him
my petition. He asked me many questions, and then said I
must call again; I called again the next day, and he said the
petition w;is not right — that I must specify the medicine, and
what disorder it must be used in — he said that those medicines
in general terms to cure every thing, was quackery — that I must
particularly designate the medicine, and state how it must be
used, and in what disease. I then waited on Martin Chittenden,
late Governor of Vermont, who was at Washington, and asked
his assistance; he was from the same town where my father
lived, and readijy consented. We made out the specifications
in as correct a manner as we could, and the next day I carried
them to the patent office, and gave them to Dr. Thornton; he
complained much about its being too short a system, and put
me olfonce more. I applied again and asked him for my patent ;
but he said I had not got the botanic names for the articles, and
referred me to Dr. Mitchell, of New York, who was in the
House of Representatives. I applied to him, and requested
bin) to give me the Botanic names to the articles mentioned in my
petition. He wrote them, and I carried them to Dr. Thornton;
but he was unable to read some of the names, one in particular;
he said I must go again to Dr. Mitchell and get him to give il
in some other words, and not tell him that he could not re id it.
1 went, and t lie doctor wrote the sr me word again and ihen w;ote
or -snap-dragon ;" which I Carried to Dr. Thornton, and re-
quested him to put iH the patent my names, and record it for
himself, snap-dragon, or any other name he chore. He then
talked about sending me to Philadelphia, to Dr. Barton, to get
his names.

I found he was determine^ to give me all the trouble he could
and if possible to defeat m^ getting a patent, and I intimated
tint I should go with my complaint to Mr. Monroe, upon which
he seemed a little more disposed to grant my request, and said
he would do without Dr. Birtori'a names. He * hen went to
work to make out the patent, and when he came to the article
of myrrh, he found much fault about that, and said it was good


P8 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

for nothing. I told him that I paid for the patent, and if it was
good for nothing it was my loss. Af'cr much trouble J go! it
put according to my request, and i he medicines to be used
in fevers, cholics, dysenteries and rheumatisms; he then asked
me if I wanted any additions and I told liim to add "the three
first numbers may be used in any other case to promote perspi-
ration, or as an emetic," which he did. J then had to <jo to
•he treasury office and pay my money, and bring him duphcaje
receipts. After all this trouble I at length succeeded in outlin-
ing my patent according to my request, which was completed
and delivered to me on the 3d day of March, 1813.

The next day after 1 had completed my business, was the
.way of inauguration of the President of the United States, anq
f.had the curiosity to stay and see the ceremonies on that occa-
sion. After the ceremonies were over, I went to the si age office
ynd found that the seats were all engaged for a fortnight; and
was obliged to stay till the 13th before I could get a passage
I then took passage in the stage and came on to Philadelphia,
i remained several days for the purpose of seeing i)rs.
flush and Barton, to confer with them upon the subject of intra 1
fiucing my system of practice to the world. I spent considera-
ble time with Dr. Barton; but Dr. Rush was so much engaged,
!hat I was unable to have but little conversation more than stat-
ing my business. He treated me with much politeness, and
-aid that whatever Dr. Barton agreed to he would give his con-
sent, so that my business was chiefly with ihe latter gentleman.
i asked him many questions concerning my system and patent,
and requested his advice of the best mode of introducing it.
He advised me to make friends of some celebrated doctors and
let them try the medicine and give the public such recommend-
ation of it as they should deem correct. I told him that I feared
that if I should do so, they would take the discovery to them-
selves, and deprive me of all credit or benefit from my labors;
and asked him if he though that would not be the case. He
said it might, with some, but he thought there were some of the
profession honorable enough not to do it. 1 asked him if he
would make trial of it himself, and give it such credit as he
should find it to deserve. He said that if I would trust it in
his hands, he should be pleased, and would do justice to me
and the cause. 1 accordingly left some of the medicine with
him, wiih directions how to use it; but before I received any
jfe*'im from him he died; and Dr. Rush ilso died sometime pre-
vious ; by which means 1 was deprived of the influence of these


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 10

two men, which I was confident would otherwise have been
exerted in ray favor.

During my interview with Dr. Barton, we had much conver-
sation upon the subject of the medical skill, and be being quite
sociable and pleasant, 1 expressed myself very freely upon the
fashionable mode oi' practice used by the physicians of the
present day. He acknowledged there was no art or science so
uncultivated as that of medicine. I stated to linn pretty fully
my opinion of the absurdity of bleeding to cure disease; and
pointed out its inconsistency, in as much as the same method
was made use of to cure a sick m in as to kill a well beast. He
• d, and said it was s; range logic enough.
While in the city of Philadelphia, I examined into their mode
of treating : ./ fevc ; and found, to my astonishment,

it appeared to me very extraordinary to
to cure the most fatal disease ever known;
and iffi conn" I i.t that the same manner of treatment would kill
th. This absurd practice being fol-
lowed by the ir. i nt class of the faculty, merely because
been recommended in some particular cases by a great
hi s, I have not Ihe least doubt, destroyed more lives than
have r rer been killed by powder and b dl,iri this country, in the
same tune. Those I met in the streets, who had escaped the
fFe<5ts of bleeding, mercury, and other poisons, carried
death in their countenances; and on conversing with them, they
hey had never been well since they had the fever — that
trV y took so much mercury and opium, they were afraid that
were in a de< line.
v m ining in P! iladelphia aboul two weeks, I went in
thestajre to New York. wh< in a coaster,
and arrived in Ports iouth on th%5tli ^pril. Immedi-
ately if'er:: i public notice in the
newspa) m) having obtained a patent, and forbid -It
>ing upon it under the penalty of the law n
^'k' 1 ;' I ai | ublished a handbill,
rn which F g*ve ih description of the m u • of disease on the
utionofmanj toriditions of disposing of
- "sing un -i : P; and taking anumber
•'•' ! rwndbills >ut for Eastport, where 1 arrived
about the first of }l ty, On my arri\ mdbiHs wen: cir-
•'■" iramomj
them, | th the doctors, who seemed surprised thai


iOa NARRATIVE OF THE LIKE, &c.

1 had obtained a patent. I again called on Mr. Carpenter for a
settlement, but could not obtain one, for his friends advised
against it, telling him that he could still pursue the practice in
spite of my patent, by calling the medicine by different names.
1 furnished my shop with a stock of medicine, and made an
agreement with Mr. Mowe, the young man that I had employed
since Carpenter was dismissed, to continue the practice for me,
and take charge of my business at this place. My expenses for ,
his wages, board, and shop rent was about one dollar per day;
and the amount of the practice and sale of medicine, was about
one hundred dollars per month.

While at Eastport I met with a loss, which I will mention to
show the hard fortune I had to contend with. Wishing to send
one hundred dollars to my friend judge Rice, in part payment
for what I owed him, took two fifty dollar bills and went to the
pos-t-officeand gave them to the post-master, with a letter direct-
ed to Alexander Rice, esq. Portsmouth, requesting him to secure
them in the letter in a proper manner and send it on. The let-
ter was never received in Portsmouth, and no traces of it could
*>e found. I had strong suspicions that the postmaster at East-
port destroyed the letter and kept the money. J made arrange-
ments to inquire further into his conduct; but shortly after, he
fell from a precipice and was killed, which put a stop to pursu-
ing the subject any further; so it turned out a total loss to me.

After settling my business in Eastport, I returned to Ports-
mouth, where I stopped but a short time; and taking Mr. Sewell
with me, went to Portland to introduce my practice in that
place. On our arrival 1 advertised my patent in the newspapers,
and had handbills printed and circulated among the people, giv-
ing the conditions on which I should practice and the manner
of selling family rights, to those who wished the use of my
practice and madicme; and that I should attend to no case
except such as wished to purchase the rights, to give them
information, and prove the utility of the medicine. 1 gave the
information to Mr. Fickett, where we boarded, and a right of
using the medicine for himself and family; and gave informa-
tion to several of his workmen. Soon aficr making myself
known, I had a great number of desperate coses put under my
charge , all of which were cured or essentially relieved. My
success in the cases f attended, most of which were such as had
been given over by the doctors, caused great alarm among those
professional gentlemen who are styled regular physicians; and
I experienced the same opposition from them that I liad met


Of SAMUEL THOMSON. 10!

with in other places. J was followed by them, or their spies,
and all kinds of false and ridiculous reports were circulated
among the people to frighten and prejudice them against me
and my medicine.

Soon after coming to this place, I was called on by Captain
John Alden to attend his wife, who was in a very alarming sit-
uation. She was in a state or pregnancy and had the dropsy,
and was then, as she supposed, several weeks over her time.
She had been in (lie same situation once before and was deliv-
ered by force, and came very near losing her life; the doctors
gave it as their opinion, that if s\v should ever be so again she
would certainly die. J told him that 1 did not attend on any
except those who wished to purchase a rights in which cases
I would give them the information. I e pi ined to hn. 'he
principles upon which my system w is founded, and he purch sed
a right; after which I attended upon his wife, and found her
very low; she had not laid in bed for thre^ weeks, being so put
to it for breath when she lay down, she was obliged to get imme-
diately up again. 1 carried her through a course of the medicine
every day for five days, during which she was reduced in size
about eight inches; her travail then came on natural, and in
about two hours she was delivered of a daughter, and they both
did well. She was able to come down stairs in one week, and
in two weeks she was well enough to be about the house. This
cure so alarmed the doctors, that they circulated a story at a
distance, where the facts were not known, that I was so ignorant
of this woman's situation, *hat I killed her immediately; but
the woman and her husband gave me all credit for the cure, and
appeared very grateful to me for it.

During the summer a son of Captain Alden was violently
seized with the spotted fever; he was taken very suddenly, when
at the pump after water, fell, and was brought into the house
'ess. I attended him, and his jaws being set, administered a,
strong solution of j\os. 1, 2 and 6, by putting my finger between
his cheek and teeth, and pouring in the medicine; squeezing it
round to the back of his teeth, and as soon as it reached the
roots of his tongue, his jaws came open; I then poured down
more of the medicine, and soon after swallowing it, his sense3
came to him, and he spoke; he appeared like a person waking
out of a sleep. As soon as the warm effect of the medicine
was over, he relapsed, and life seemed to go down with the beat.
I found that I could not restore him till T could rarity or lighten
the air — I laid him across the laps of three persons, shielding
12


NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, fee.

^im from external air with a blanket, and put under him a pa;.
with a hot stone in it about half immersed in hot water; win!-
over this steam, again gave the medicine, which raised a perspi
ration; and as the heat raised inside, life gained in proportion:
ai d lien the perspiration had gained so as to be equal to a slate.
of health, the natural vigor of life and action was restored.

1 was cdled on to attend a woman who had a relax, and in a.
few visits restored her to health. One night about midnight I
was sent for to visit this woman in consequence of their being
alarmed about her, the" cause of which I could never learn;
fur on mj arrival she was as well as us-ia!. I returned immedi-
ately home, and was soon after taken in a violent manner with
the s'imc disetse, and was so bad as not to be able to do any
thing for myself. Mr. Sewell attended upon me, and did all lie
could, which had no effect. I w is persuaded that I should not live
lhrefe days wnless I could get some relief; I had no pain, and
every thing 1 took passed through me iri"lwo minutes; nothing
.seemed to warm me. I sent and obtained some butternut bark,
boiled it. and took some as strong as it could be made; as soon
as it began to'opcrnte, 1 followed it with brandy and loaf sugar,
burnt together till it became a syrup; this soon put me in pain;
I then followed my general rule of treatment, and was soon
•"d.

While at Portland I was sent for to see a Mr.Mason, who was
i'ery sick, r.nd it was expected that he would not live through
'he night. He had been attended by the doctors of the town
for a sure on his no?e, which was much inflamed; they had
-»i\ n him so much salt petre to kill the heat, that they almost
killed him. I had the hardest trial to save Ins life of any one
f ever attended ; and was obliged to carry him ihrough a course
of medicine two or three times a week for three months, besides
visiting him every day. The doctors said he would certainly
die, and if he did, they meant to take me up for murder; and
every means were resorted to, by discouraging him, and other
ways, to prevent his getting well; and when he got so as to
he about, and it was decided that he was going to recover under
the operation of the medicine, one, who pretended to he his
friend, gave Imn a bottle of pepper vinegar. I had made a free
use of this article in his case, and he look seme of what was
given him by this friend, and he soon grew worse. The man
who gave him the pepper vinegar, often inquired how he did, and
when told that he wni wor>e, he would say that I should kill
rum, I could not ascertain the reason of this patient being


OF SAMUEL THOMSON, t03

.fleeted in the manner he was, till Mr.Sewell took some of the
same, and was immediately taken in the same manner as the
sick man. He took medicine and got over it, and a short time
after, took some more, and was attacked in a similar manner.
1 then began to mistrust that there was something in the pepper
vinegar, and on examining it, was satisfied that it had been
poisoned to destroy the patient* in order to take advantage of
me. I was obliged to carry them both through a course of the
medicine, and they afterwards had no such turns.

This patient, after about tiiree months close attention, gained
so as to enjoy a comfortable state of health. The undertaking
was very tedious on my part; [ should be hardly willing to go
through the same process again, for any sum whatever. The
destructive effects of salt petre is the worst of any poison I ever
undertook to clear the system of. The only method 1 have
found successful, is to give No. 1 and No. 2, and throw all of
it out of the stomach that can possible be done; and by steam-
ing keep the heat of the body above it — all other poisons can
beendicated by the common course of medicine. I was call-
ed on to attend the sick from all quarters; but few of them
were able to purchase the information, and many who had it
have never paid any thing. The people generally were well
satisfied with its utility; my friends were very zealous in intro-
ducing it among the people; but my opponents were not slack
in doing every thing in their power to prejudice the public
againstTne and the medicine. The doctors seemed much troub-
led at the success of the practice, many having been cured who
were given over by them. One woman, who had been unable
to walk for about nine months after having been confined, and
the doctors could not help her, was attended by Mr. Sewell,
and in a short time restored to a comfortable state of health,
which gave them great offence; and some of them published in
the newspapers, pari of my trial for murder, in ordei to preju-
dice the public against me. I prepared an answer, but they
had so much influence with the printers, tint I was unable to
get it inserted; they had the meanness to circulate the report
(hat I acknowledged the fact because I did not answer their
statement. Thus have the faculty, by such unprincipled con-
due » managed to keep the people Wind to ihe benefit they
ought receive from the use of the medicine, for the purpose of
keeping up their own credit and making hem tributary to them-
selves, without regard to the public good.,


104 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, Lc

This season I wenl to Eastport and collected some money to
pay nay friend Rice; and thinking to make some profit, laid it
om in fish, end sent it to Portland, consigned to my friend
Fickett. When I wenl there myself, sold the fish to him. I
afterwards made a se-tlen ent with him, and took Ins note for
one hundred and sixty-three dollars, which he agreed to pay
Judge Rice, as he was going to Boston in a short time, and he
would Call on bun at Portsmouth for that purpose. I then went
home to ste my family, and in about six months after, returned
to Portsmouth, and on calling on Judge Rice, found to my sur-
prise, that Mr. Fickett. had not p. id he money, that he liad
failed and there was no chance for me to get any thing of him.
So 1 was again disappointed in my expectations of paying this
demand, and it appeared to me that all my hard earnings would
be sacrificed to pay the expense of prosecutions; but my friend
Rice was very indulgent; and instead of complaining, did all
he could to encourage me and keep up my spirits.

In the fall of the year 1813, 1 started from Portland logo to
Eastport, and took Mr. Sewell with me, in order to try to get
a settlement with Mr. Carpenter; as he knew all the particulars
of the agreement between us. After suffering many hardships
and being at great expense, in consequence of having to go part
of the way by water and part by land, owing to ihc war that
then existed, we arrived there on the twelfth day of Novem-
ber. On my arrival I made inquiry concerning my affairs with
Carpenter, and ascertained what proof I could obtain to support
an action against him for the property he had wronged me out
of; and after making an unsuccessful attempt to get my account
books out of his hands, brought an action against him for the
property left in his possession ; this being the only way in which
I could bring him to an account. After much time and ex-
pense 1 at last obtained a judgment against him, got out an
execution, which was levied on the land he had unjustly got a
deed of, and it was finally appraised to me; and after having
to get a writ of ejectment to get Mr. -Tuttle out of possession
of it, who chimed it under a pretended deed from Carpenter,
to prevent it from being attached, I at last got the faim, which
had cost in getting it more than it was worth; so I had to put
up svi'h the loss of all my earnings at Eastport for two years,
with the loss of medicine sold by Carpenter, all of which
amounted to not less than fifteen hundred dollars.

I returned to Portland, where I remained to attend to my
practice and the society that had been formed there, for consid


OK SAM U Kb THUMSLMt; 10J

evabletime; and after settling and arranging my business as
well as I could, left Mr. Sevvell in charge of my affairs there*'
and in January, 1814, returned to Portsmouth, which place 1
made the principal depot of my medicines; having previous to
my returning from the eastward, made arrangements with my
agents to supply them, and all others who had purchased the
rights, with such medicine as they might want, by their apply-
ing to me for them. I had laid in a large stock, the value of
which I estimated to be about one thousand miles-. I went to
Boston and Salem to procure some articles that could not be ob-
tained elsewhere, in order to complete my stock; when absent
the great fire took place at Portsmouth, and all my stock of
medicine was consumed. This was a very serious loss to me,
not only in a pecuniary point of view, but it disarranged all my
plans, and put it out of my power to supply those whom I knew
depended upon me for all such articles as were most important
in the practice. The season was so far advanced that it was
impossible to obtain a new recruit of most of the articles; and
I was obliged to collect a part of what had been sent to differ-
ent places, in order to be able to supply in the best manner I
could, such demands for medicine, as I should be called on for.
In doing this, I was put to great trouble and expense, and in or-
der to make myself whole, was under the necessity of raising
the price of the medicine fifty per cent; this caused much grum-
bling and complaint from the members of the societies in dif-
ferent places, and was taken advantage of by my enemies to in-
jure me all they could.

I sent in the estimate of my loss, to the committee, who had
the charge of the money contributed by the people in different
parts, for the relief of the sufferers by the fire, and afterwards
called on them, with an expectation of receiving my share; but
they said my loss was of such a nature they could not give
me any thing, as I should be able to collect another supply the
next season,°and 1 never received a cent from them. In addition
to my loss by the fire, and other difficulties I had to encounter,
and while I was at Portsmouth using all my exertions to replen-
ish my stock of medicine, and assist those who were suffering
from disease and needed the benefit of my practice, I received
information from Portland that the doctors had obtained one of
my books of direction, which was published expressly for the
information of those who purchased the right of using my sys-
tem of practice, and had some knowledge of it by verbal and
other instruction, had printed an edition of it, and advertised


10(3 OF THE LIFT, &«.

them for sale at thirty-seven and a half cents a copy. Thej
stated in srtisements, that "this invaluable work, which

had heretofore been selling for twenty dollars, may now be had
for : ; m and a half cents;*' and sent them to all pi

where mj societies had been formed, and my practice had been
oduced, for the purpose of putting me down and preventing
the use of my medicine; but after all this pitiful attempt to do
me the great injury which they so fondly anticipated, they gained
nothing by it, except it was the Contempt of all the honest part
of society who were knowing to the circumstances. To put a
stop to these practices, and prevent the public from being im-
posed upon, I caused a notice to be published in the Portsmouth
£i;d Portland papers, cautioning the people against buying
these books, or miking use of the medicine, and trespassing
en my patent, under the penalty of the law in such c 9es pro-
vide Iso offered a reward of fifty dollars to any one who
would give information of any doctor, who should trespass on
my patent, afid ten dollars for any one who should he found
ty of selling the books. This put a stop to the sale of tlie
ks, and prevented them from doing me any injury by this
trick; for those concerned m this disgraceful manoeuvre, were
compelled to acknowledge that my agents could sell mere books
st twenty dollars, than they could at thirty-seven and a half
cents.

I continued in Portsmouth after the loss I met with from the
fire, into! people in that place and vicinity, until I col-

lected another assortment of medicine, during which time fifty
members were added to the society there. I appointed Mr.
John Locke as my agent in Portsmouth, and the society ac-
cepted of him as such, totake the management of the practice
and supply them with medicine; I agreed to allow hii
five per cent, on the sale of rights, and in eighteen months
d led abouvt forty members to the society. He conducted him-
self with the greatest' propriety in the performance' of all the
duties : ssigned him, • -nd in this, as well as in .11 other concerns
which 1 had with him, ban given me the highest satisfaction. I
mention this tribute of pmise to Ins fidelity tlte more readily,

f the very few whom I have put confiden
f have found honest enough to do justice to me and fl : ppeple
(t Ins generally been the case with those f have
agents, thai sis soon as they h ve been sufficient! i J to

attend to the practice with success, and give ..the

people, that they have made it a matter of spec u I


\jr ,-? aiyj uujl. jnumoiJix.


Iff?


hive, by all means that they could devise, attempted to get
the lead ot the practice into tueirown ; deprive me of

the credit and profits of my own discovery; and when 1 h;.ve
found out their designs, and put a stop to their career by de-
priving them of theirjagency, they have uniformly turned against
hip 1 1 id done every ihing in ibeir power to injure me and de-
v the credit of the medicine. This kind of conduct lias
been a very serious evil, and had caused me much trouble and
expense, besides destroying the confidence of the people in
beneficial effects of the medicine and practice, and keeping
back the information necessary for its being properly understood
by them. This, however, has not been the case with all that L
have entrusted with the care of my business as agents, for some
of them have been uniformly honest and faithful, both to me
and to those to whom they have given the information.

Wlnle Mr. Locke was acting as ray agent at Portsmouth, he
g ive offence, by his faithful and upright conduct, to some mem
hers of the society, who wanted to reap nil the advantages and
profits without any labor or expense. They made complaints to
roe of his conduct, and wished him turned out; but on asking
them for their charges against him, (hey said he speculated on
th<< medicine, and sold it one third higher than I did. I told
them that I had been obliged to raise the price in consequence
of my loss by the fire, and that he was not to blame for i'.—
The , however, persisted in their complaints and afier finding
that they could not make me turn against him, they turned
against me. After making further inquiries into the subject, I
satisfied myself of their reasons for wishing Mr. Locke turned
out of the agency. A man by the name of Holm m, whom I
h id four years previous cured of a consumption, as has been be-
fore related, and to whom 1 hid given the information and aii-
thonzed to form a society at Hopkinton, where he had practised
three years without making me any returns, had returned to
Portsmouth and practiced with Mr. Locke as an assistant. —
This man formed a plan to have Mr. Locke turned outm order
to get Ins place himself, and hid managed so as to gain over to
bis side a number of the society, who joined with him in ef-
fecting this ol.ject. They made use of all kinds of intrigue to
get the control of the practice ouiof my hands, by offering to
buv the right for the county, and miny other ways; but I under-
stood their design and refused all their offers.

V the next mnnal meeting of the society, Holman was
chosen their agent without my conbent, and I refused to autho-


108 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &o.

rize him to give information ; for he had deceived me before by
saying on his return to Portsmouth, that he could not form a
society at Hopkinton, which 1 had found out to be false; and
rmny other things in his conduct had caused me to be so much
dissatisfied with all he did, that I declined having any thing
further to do with him. He persisted in practicing and in
eighteen months by his treacherous conduct, run down the
credit of the medicine and practice and broke up the society,
after it had, the eighteen months previous, got under good way
by Mr Locke's agency, and was in a very prosperous condition.

had good reason to believe that Holman was employed by my
enemies to break me up in this place and destroy the credit of
the medicine; for when I was absent I ascertained that he gave
salt-petre and other poisons, under the pretence that by giving
it the night before it would prepare the stomach for my medicine
to be taken in the morning. This was like preparing over night
to build a fire in the morning, by filling the fire-place with snow
and ice. After preparing the stomach in this way. the medi-
cine would have no beneficial effects; and he would then place
the patient over a steam, which caused them to faint. In this
wpy he proved to the members of the society that my mode of
practice was bad, and thus used his influence to destroy the
credit of my medicine in their minds, and make them believe
that I had deceived them. His practice turned out very unsuc-
cessful, and lie lost many of his patients. He had lost more in
six months, than I had lost in six years, which I imputed en-
tirely to his bad conduct.

After my return, finding how things were situated in regard
to the practice; that all the credit I had gained by seven years
labor, had been destroyed in eighteen months, led me to make
particular inquiry into the cause. On visiting his patients I
found some of the pills made of snlt-petre, and also some opium
pills, which he had been in the habit of administering secretly
to his p^ti^nts under the name of my medicine; and after col-
lecting an assortment of his poison, Tcalled a meeting of the
societv, and proved to them that lie had made use of these poi-
sons under the pretence of giving my medicine; and also, that
he had confessed to have given tobacco when colled on to ad-
minister my medicine; all of which satisfied thp society so well
of the baseness of the conduct of their agent that they imme-
diately passed a vote dismissing him from his agency. A com-
mittee was appointed to investigate the whole of his conduct^
and publish a statement of the same, in order to do away the


-- - - m

ftlse impression that had been made on the public mind, and
convince them that the bad success of this man's practice bad
been owing to his own wicked conduct; and not to any fault in
Ihe medicine. 1 was never able, however, to get this committee
to meet and attend to the duty assigned them by the society, al-
though they confessed themselves satisfied of the truth of my
charges against Holman, and of the injury I had sustained by
his conduct; and after waiting six months and finding that they
were more willing that I should sulTer, than that the blame
should fall where it justly belonged, I left them to their more
fashionable practice, and withdrew all my medicine from the
place.

In the spring of the year of 1814, 1 wrote to Mr. Mo we, my
agent at Eastport, to leave that pb.ee, in consequence of the
war becoming troublesome, and come 'o Portsmouth. He came
up in May. I took him with me and went to Surry, where we
continued through the summer, and he assisted me in carrying
on my farm and collecting an assortment of medicine. In Au-
gust we went to Onion river where my father resided, to make a
visit, and collect some articles of medicine that could not be
obtained in Surry. After my return, Mr. Mowe went to Ports-
mouth, and I remained at home till after the harvesting was pver,
then went to Portsmouth to collect medicine, and attended to
some practice. Sometime in December 1 returned home and
found an express had been there tor me to go lo Guilford, sent
by Mr. Davis, whom 1 had attended the year before at Ports-
mouth. I went with all speed, and found his wife sick with a
consumption. I attended her a few days to give them informa-
tion, and sold him the right of using the meoicine; and also
sold some rights to others. I then returned to Portsmouth, and
sent Mr. Mowe to Guilford to practice and give information to
those who had purchased the rights, where he remained till
spring.

During the time Mr. Mowe was at Guilford, he was very
vjecc^sful in the practice, and made some remarkable cures.
Great opposition was made to his practice by the doctors, and
•all the false representations made about it that they could invent,
to prejudice the minds of the people against the medicine and
stop its being introduced among them. After this, another plan
was got up to injure me; societies were formed in the manner
I had formed mine, and members were admitted for two dollars;
the only information given them, was to furnish each member
with one of the pamphlets containing my directions, which had
K


ilO NARRATIVE iit nit ^if^av.

been stolen from a woman and published at Portland, without
my knowledge. In this manner my system of practice in the
hands and under the superintendence of these who were en-
deavoring to destroy me, became popular in Guilford and the
towns adjacent; and had become so important, that a general
invitation was given throughout the neighboring towns for the
people to come and join them in the great improvement of re-
storing the* health of mankind. Thus did these professional
gentlemen tamper with my rights and the credulity of the peo-
ple, for the pitiful purpose of injuring me, by pretending to sell
all my information for two dollars, for which J asked, twenty;
and in their hands called it honorable scientific knowledge.
After these trespasses had become open and general, and the
people had been invited to join it, my agent wrote me a letter
giving information of the transaction, and I went there to
see to it; on my arrival 1 conversed with those who had pur-
chased their rights of me or my agent ; they informed me of the
facts as above related, and said that they had been solicited to
join the society that had been formed ; and ihey wished my ad-
vice, whether they should attend a general meeting which was
to be held in about a fortnight. 1 told them that they had let-
'er attend — they then asked me, if they should be asked for in-
formation what they should do about giving it; I told them that
T thought people joined societies to get information and not to
give it. I employed an attorney to proceedagainst those who
trespassed, and have them punished according to law in such
<;ases provided, and returned to Portsmouth.

Jnthe month of February, 1815, I had an application to go
to Philadelphia and introduce my societies and system of prac-
tice in that city. Thinking it not proper to go alone, I made an
agreement with Mr. John Locke to go with me; and after we
got every thing prepared, he started on the 7th in the morning
to go in the stage, and 1 chose to go by water, and sailed the
same day in a vessel for New York. We had a long and tedious
passage, suffering very much from the cold. We had a gale of
wind which blew us off into the Gulf Stream, and we were
two hundred miles south of our port; on getting into a warmer
latitude the weather became warmer, when we were enabled to
^et clear of the ice with which the vessel was much burdened,
and could set some sail ; and we arrived at New York after a
very rough passage of seventeen days.

During the passage one of the crew had frozen his hands and
feet very badly, and when we got where the weather became


OF SAM URL THOMSON, 1 1 1


warmer he was in the most extreme pain. He said that it seem-
ed as though the hones of his hands arid feet were coming in
pieces; his suffering was so grcal that the tears woujd run from
his eyes, and the sweat down his cheeks, with the pain. I wa^
requested by the captain and crew to do something to relievt
him. J agreed to do the best I could for him, in the cold
comfortless situation we were in. There was no place to keep
a fire under decks, and the weather was so rough that we could
seldom keep any in the caboose on deck. I was obliged to ad-
minister the medicine according to my judgment, in the best
manner I could. In the first pltfce 1 procured handkerchiefs
and cloths enough to wrap his hands and feet up in several
thicknesses, then wet them well with cold water, and wrapped
his hand and feet as well as I could, wetting them with cold
water, and put him in his birth, covered well with blankets, a^d
give him the warmest medicine to take I had with me, and
repeated it to keep the inward heat sufficient to cause a free
circulation in the limbs; and if his hands and feet grew painful,
poured cold water on the cloths, and continued this course of
treatment, of keeping the inward heat above the outward, by
raisin^ the one and letting down the other, til! I got the foun-
tain above the stream ; and in about two hours, freed him from
all pain, to the surprise and astonishment of all the hands on
board. When I come to tako off the cloths the blood had set-
tled under the nails and under the skin, which came off without
any blister being raised, and before we arrived at New York, he
I le t: attend h - watch,
is slid by the captain and crew that this was the -cost.
remarkable cure they bed ever known; and that if he had been
attended in th form, he would have lost his tors if not

his feet, beside ich pain and a long confinement.

It will be necessary to remark, that the greatness of this cure
consisted' in its simplicity; any person could have performed
the same, who had come to years of discretion, by adopting the
same; plan, and many times be the means ot saving the araputa-
[imbs. There is no mvstery in it , the whole plan con-

• in keeping the del* I ' face » ^ ron 1 \ ( J e

ch is the stomach ; from which all the

■ , pP ort tmd warait ien you cannot

cienl to give natur< - -ourse , you

vcr ,hc , butward h eepmg the heat

■ a on the limbs, and raising the in. • when there can

, mortificati ■ ■■■ return from the limbs to the body, any

-,: : .nst a stream.


H2- NARRATIVE O? THE LIFE, &c.

In the case above stated, before I began to do any tiling lov
the man, I duly considered his situation; be had been almost
chilled to death by the extreme cold weather, so that his limbs
had very liftle warmth from the body, not enough to brin;.' then)
to their feeling, until the warm weather raised a lever on the
limbs faster thai? in the body, and m proportion as the heat in
the extremities is raised above ihatm the body, by applying hot
poultices or other similar applications, so much will the whole
system be disordered, and the parts that have been injured will
be extremely painful, arid by a continued application of such
means, the fever or outward heat will increase by the current be-
ing turned inward, till mortification takes plate, when the limbs
have to be taken off to save life; and in- most cases the body
has become so much disordered that they die after all. This
may, I aw confident, be avoided by understanding my plan of
treatment, and pursuing it with zeal, particularly in all cases of
burn 5 ! or freezing.

On my arrival at New York I found Mr. Locke, who had
come in the stage, and had been waiting for me ten days. The
next morning we started in the stage for Philadelphia, where
we arrived that evening, and went to a boarding house and put
up for the night. In the morning we went in search of Elder
Plummet 1 , with whom I had engaged the fall before, to go to
Philadelphia; we found him in the course of the forenoon, and
he expressed much joy at our arrival. He preached a lecture
that evening, and appointed a meeting at- the same place the
next evening for me; at which I attended and gave a lecture.
Tli ere was a large collection of people attended this meeting,
and I gave a full and explicit explanation of the principles upon
which my system is founded. There were two medical students
present, and while I was endeavoring to give a view of the for-
mation of the animal creation out of the four elements; that
heat was life, and cold death; and that the blood was necessary
to life, as being the nourishment of the flesh, and in as much as
it was taken away, so much was life and health diminished; one
of them interrupted me and said that cold was a promotion of
life, and that bleeding was beneficial to preserve life also. I
answered him by stating, that admitting his doctrine to be true,
an animal that had the blood taken fiom it and was frozen,
would be the liveliest creature in the world. This unexpected
retort caused a laugh, and the two medical gentlemen left the
room. I then went on and concluded the explanations I wished

• make, which gave general satisfaction to the people present;


113


and sixteen signed the articles of agreement that night, to ob-
tain the knowledge of the medicine and practice, to whom I
engaged to give information by lectures. We remained there
about a week, in which time about twenty bought the right.

Whan we had completed our business at Philadelphia, we
went on to Washington, where we remained several days, and
had a view of the ruins of the public buildings, which had been
destroyed by the British, when they took possession of that city
about six months previous to our being there. While at the
capital I had an interview with General "Varnum, and somecon-
ver3ation passed between us concerning the pipsiswaj, which
had been found useful in a case of cancer for which I attended
his wife when practicing at Pelham, in the year 1807. He said
that it having been found so useful in all cancerous cases, he
thought it ought to be published in the newspapers or almanac,
for the benefit of those who were afflicted with this dangerous
disease, and expressed- a wish that I would 'do' it. 1 told him
that I thought it would be better for him to publish it than for
me, and he consented; and the nextyear he published it in the
almanac, which was the cause of much speculation in this arti-
cle, and of which I shall give some account in another part of
this work.

After staying in Washington a few days, we went to Alex-
andria, where we remained about a week, in which time I col-
lected some cypress bark, which is known there by the name of
poplar, and what we call poplar, is by them called quaking asp,
on account of the constant shaking of its leaves. While at this
place I fell in company with Captain Davis, of Portsmouth, and
a creed to take Dassage with him and return to that place.-—
Arrangements were made for Mr. Locke to return by land; and
I directed him to stop at Washington and get a copy of my
patent, then to go on to Philadelphia and remain there as long
as it should be necessary to give information to those who pnr-
chased the rights, or any that should wish to purchase them
in that citv, and after paying proper attention to them, to return
to Portsmouth. 1 then went on board the vessel, and we set
sail; and after a long passage arrived safe at Portsmouth about
the 'same time the* Mf; Locke got there.

During this summer I visited Enstport, Portland, Charlestown,
Soutli Reading* and other places where societies had been form-
ed or rights sold to individuals, to give information to the peo-
ple • and in all places where f wont, found the book of directions
which had been clandestinely obtained and published by the
K9


U4 NARRATIVE OF THE liit.. ^.

doctors and others, to injure me by stopping the sale of rights*;
selling at 374 cents. I was under the necessity of putting an
advertisement in the papers, cautioning the people against
this imposition, which put a stop to their sale; but great pains
were taken by my enemies to circulate them among the people;
and this is the way that some of my articles of medicine came
to be made use of through the country, in colds, such as cay-
enne, ginger, &c. In 1815, I published another edition of iny
book of directions, and secured the copy right; but this waa
repriced at Taunton, and I advertised it as before, and stopped
its progress.

In the fall of the year, 1815, 1 went to Cape Cod, to procure
some marsh-rosemary, and collected a quantity, carried it to
Portsmouth and prepared it for use. This is the last time I
have collected any of this article, and as it becomes scarce,
think I shall not make any more use of it. It is too cold and
binding, without using a large share of bayberry bark and cay-
enne with it, to keep the saliva free. I have found other article?
as substitutes, which answer a better purpose, such as hemlock
bark, which I have of late made use of, and found very good,
■white lily roots, witch-hazle, raspberry leaves, and sumach ber-
ries; the hist article is very good alone, steeped and sweetened,
and is as pleasant as wine; it is good for children in cases of
canker, especially in long cases of sickness when other ai tides
become disagreeable to them.

In the spring of the year, 1816, I went again to Cape Cod
for medicine, and found that the spotted fever, or what was call-
ed the cold plague, prevailed there, and the people were much
al irmed, as (hey could get no help fiom the doctors. 1 told
them I had come after medicine where ihey were dying for want
of the knowledge how to use it. They were desirous for me
to try my practice, and satisfy them of its utility. A young
man in the next house to where I was, being attacked with the
fever the day before, I went to see him, and the family expressed
a wish to have me try my medicine. 1 put a blanket round him
and put him by the" fire; took a tea-spoonful of composition,
and added more No. 2, and as much sugar, put it in a tea-cup
and pou.ed to it a wine glass of hot water; when cool enough
to take added a tea-spoonful of the rheumatic drops; he took
it and in fifteen minutes was in a free perspiration — he \i as 'hen
put in bed and a hot stone wrapped in wet cloths put lo his feet
to raise a steam. I then left him in the care of his friends with
t&ms medicine to be given during the night; they kept the [tor-


11*

spiratiou Tree all night, and in the morning heat had gained
the victory, the canker was destroyed, and he was comfortable
and soon got well.

I attended three other persons* in one house, who had been
sick a longer time, and had taken other medicine, so that it was
more difficult to cure them. 1 steeped No. 3, and poured oil'
half a tea-cup full and sweetened it, and .dded half a te L-spoon-
ful of No. 2, wlien cool enough to take put in one tearspdonful
of No. I, and gave it to each of the patients, repeating it three
times, whether they puked or not in that time— kept a hotstOhe
wrapped in wet cloths at their feet, to keep up a steam; while
they were under the operation of the puking and sweating, gave
them as much cider or water to drink as they required. When
they had done vomiting, gave milk porridge freely. As soon
as they had done sweating, and their strength had returned, got
them up and steamed them as long as they could bear it; then
rubbed them over with spirits, water or vinegar, changed their
clothes, and they went to bed* or sat up, as their strength would
permit. I will here remark, for the information of the reader;
that when the patient is so b id as not to be able to get up, they
must be steamed in bed as hot as they can bear it, then set them
up on end, and rub as before mentioned, change their clothes
and bed clothes. This last direction is important to be attended
to; for if their own fj e nc ies are changed without changing the
bed clothes, they i»m absorb a part of the filt/i that has been
discharged through the pores, and add to what remains of the
disorder. This precaution is all important in every case of
disease, and should be paid particular attention to, in order to
guard against taking back any part of what has been thrown oft*
by the operation of the medicine. The nurse, or those who
attend upon the sick, are also in danger from the same cause,
and should be particularly careful to guard against taking the
disorder by breathing in the foul vapor from the bed clothes,
and standing over the patient when under the operation of the
medicine, the principal effect of which is to throw off by per-
spiration and other evacuations, the putrefaction that disease has
engendered in the body. To guard against this, take some hot
bitters, and keep a piece of ginger root in the mouth, occasion-
ally swallowing some of it when most exposed; also take a tea
spoonful of Nos. 2 and 3, steeped in hot water, when going to
bed; one ounce of preventative in this way. is better than •■
nound of cure when sick.


Ho NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE; be.

After relieving these four cases, I was sent for to attend a
woman, who had been sick for a long time. I declined attend-
ing any more unless they would buy the right — this dis]
her so much, because I was not willing to practice and cure all
of them for nothing, that she abused me for my declining to
attend her. Two men bought the right, and they asked me
how much I would take for the light of the whole town. I
offered it to them for the price of twenty rights; but they said
that the sickness had so much abated that the alarm was nearly
over, and declined my offer. This disease first appeared in
Eas'ham the forepart of February, in which month 27 died, in
March, 14, and 5 in April, making in the whole 46 in three
months, in this place. I left some medicine with those who
had purchased the rights, and returned to Boston.

Within a week after my return from Cape Cod, 1 received a
letter from Eastham to come there as soon as possible. I took
a stock of medicine and went on there as quick as I could ; and
on my arrival found that the fever had again made its appear-
ance among the people, with double fatality. J soon found
enough ready to purchase the twenty rights, for which I had
offered to sell the right of the whole town. 1 attended on many
of those who had the disease, in company with the two men
who had purchased the right of me when here before, and
instructed them how to carry the pitie ,lfcSs through a course of
the medicine; and they attended, aim gave information to
others; when they could meet together I gave information by
lectures; those who got the information attended whenever they
were wanted. I pursued my usual mode of treatment, by ad-
ministering the medicine to \ romote a free perspiration, and
when necessary, steamed and gave injections, cleansed the sto-
mach and cleared oft' the canker; the success in curing in this
alarming disease was very great. I staid about two weeks,
during which time there were attended with my medicine
thirty-four cases, of whom only one died, the rest got well.
At the same time, of those who were attended by the regular
doctors, eleven out of twelve died, making in the whole, up-
wards of fiftv deaths in a short time in this place, which was
about one twelfth part of the inhabitants that were at home.
The truth of the above statements is authenticated by tl
4ificates of the Selectmen of the town, and other respectable
inhabitants, which will be inserted in another part of the work.

During my stay this time, I attended the husband of the
woman who had abused me when here before, at the house of


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. J17

his sister; she came there while I was attending upon her hus-
band, and treated me and him m the most abusive .manner, say-
ing that she would sooner die than take any of my medicine, or
have any thing to do with me. After she had vented her spite
to her own satisfaction, she went home, was taken sick on the
way, and was one ot the h>st who died with the fever at this
time. The people generally treated me with kindness and
respect, and took great inlciest in my cause; and the success
of my system of practice in relieving them i'rom this alarming
disease, gave universal satisfaction.

I formed those who had purchased the rights, into a society;
and they chose a committee, whom I authorised as agents to
sell rights and medicine; but this caused a jealousy among thjp
rest of the members, who said I gave privileges to some more
than to others.

1 have formed four societies and given them certain privileges,
by allowing them part of the profits on the sale of rights and
medicine; hut as soon as there was any funds, it has always
created uneasiness among the members. Some of the ignorant
and selfish, would call for their dividends, as though it was bank
stock, instead of feeling grateful lor the advantages they enjoy
by having their diseases cured, and their minds relieved from
the alarming consequences of a disease, with a trifling expense.
1 have since altered my plan, and now have but one society.
Every one who purchases a right for himself and family, be-
comes a member of the Friendly Botanic Society, and is entitled
to all the privileges of a free intercourse with each other, and
to converse with any one who has bought a right, for instruction
and assistance, by advice or otherwise, when called on by a mem-
ber. In this way much more good can be done, and there will
be much more good will towards each other, than where there
is any money depending.

I had now been in praciice, constantly attending upon those
laboring under disease, whenever called on, for about thirty
years; had suffered much both in body and mind, from the per-
secutions 1 had met with, and my unwearied exertions to relieve,
the sick; and to establish my system of practice upon a per-
manent basis, that the people might become satisfied of its supe-
riority over that which is practised by those, styled regular phy-
sicians ; nutting it in their power to become their own physicians,
by enabling every one to relieve themselves and friends, from all
disease incident to our country, by making use of those vege-
table medicines, the produce of our own country, which arc


113 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c;

perfectly safe and easily obtained ; and which, if properly un( i
stood, are fully sufficient m all cases of disease, where there
can be any chance of cure, without any danger of the pernicious
and often fatal consequences attending the administering tli
poisons that the fashionable doctors arc in the habit of gr.
1o their patients.

After having discovered a system, and by much labor and
Constant perseverance reduced it to practice, in a manner thai
had given general satisfaction to all who had become acquainted
with it, and having secured the same by patent, in order that 1
might reap some benefit from my discovery, to support me in
my old age, having by a long series of attendance on the sick,
both as physician and nurse, become almost worn out, I came to
the determination to appoint, some suitable person, who would
do justice to me and the cause, as a general agent, to take the
lead in practice, and give the necessary information to those vv'io
should purchase the rights, which would enable me to retire
from practice, and receive a share of the profits as a reward
for my long sufferings. After considerable inquiry 1 became
acquainted with Ellas Smith, who was recommended as a m. n
til '.yll'jlll I could confide, ard who was every way qualified
suitable person to engage in the undertaking. I TOuTi'd Him Hi
Boston, and in very pooT circumstances; having been for many
yens a public preacher, but in conr-equence of his often chang-
ing his religious principles and engaging in different projects
in winch he had been unsuccessful, he was now without a soci-
ety , or ; ".• . . supporting himself and fr.rnily. He
readily engaged with me, and promised to do every thing in his
power to promote my interest and extend the usefulness of my
system of practice.

1 sold him a family right in December, 131G, and was
family during the win'er, for the purpose of instructing him to
practice, to qualify him to tttend upon the sick and give infor-
mation to others. 1 put the utmost confidence in his honor and
spire;! no pins in communicating to him, without ; ii
whatever, all the knowledge I hid gained, by i ?
both by practice and verbil instruction; under the expectation,
th it when he bee una sufficiently acquainte '
pnetice, I should be rewarded tor my trouble r by his . .
performing his dul 3 as according to hi;

srnll 'lit';': no reranrk upon mj b

expoc-fit'oii-; in regard to Mr. Smith's conduct; and the freiti
I received from h'<:n after he had gained a knowledge n


•

practice from me, to enable him to set up for himself; but shall

proceed to give a short account of what took place during my

com < \i"n with him.

The first cage I attended with him was in his own family. -

His son Had 'he itch v< rj badly,, so that he was nearly one hall
him one raw sore, they had tried the usual remedies with

out any benefit. J showed him the use of No. 3, to wash with
Lop thcsmaitof the sores; then took some rheumatic drops

mid added about one fourth part of spirit? of turpentine and

Washed him with it; this is very painful when applied where
skin is off; to prevent which mix with it some of the wash
leof No3j jit the same time of applying the above, give

some of the composition, especially when going to bed; and
sionally give about fifteen of the drops, shaken together, on

I t a igar. By pursuing this treatment one week, this boy was
entirely cured.

The next case, which was the first we attended together out
of his house, was a young woman who had the ague in her face
I showed him the whole process of curing this complaint;
which was done by putting a small quantity of No. 2 in a cloth,
and placing it between her cheek and teeth; at the same time
giving her some of Nos. 2 and 3 to take, and in two hours she
was cured.

I was constantly with him in practice from February till June
during which time we attended many bad cases with great suc-
cess. A Mrs. Grover came to hisjiouse to be attended, who
had the dropsy. She had been given over by the doctor as in-
curable, and was so much swelled es to be blind, and her body,
and limbs in proportion. Mr. Smith undertook her case under
my direction,and carried her through a course of the medicine
every day for nine days, and then occasionally once or twice a
week till she was cured. She was thus attended under my in-
spection for three weeks, and in four was entirely cured; for
which she gave Mr. Smith about forty dollars. In this case I
did a great part of the labor and he got the pay. About the
third time of carrying her through a course of the medicine, I
was absent; her symptoms appeared unfavorable, and he got
frightened; a nurse woman to whom I had given information,
and who had more experience than he had, came to his assist-
ance, and by using injections relieved her, and prevented morti-
fication. The circumstance of this woman proving that she
was forward of him in information, seemed to fix in Mr. Sm'th's
mind a dnnke to her ever after, as his subseqnenftreatment of
her will show, the particulars of which will be hereafter related,


1=20 NARRATIVE OF THE L1IK, &c.

Another case was of a man that came to his house, who waft
in a declining way, and had taken a great quantity of physic
before he came, which would not operate. On taking my me-
dicine, as soon as he hegan to he warm, so as to cause motion
in his bowels, the physic he had before taken operated and run
him down with a relax; then the dysentery set in and he sutler -
ed much with pain and had discharges of blood. I give Mr.
Smith directions to use injections to clear his bowels of can-
ker and prevent mortification; but he neglected it until I had
told him three days in succession. He then got alarmed ard
sent for me; but before I arrived he had given an injection,
which h;-d relieved the patient. He remained, and was attended
about three weeks and went home in a comfortable state of
health. This man patd Mr. Smith about thirty dollars.

About the same time a man by the name of Jennings applied
to Mr. Smith, who bad lost the use of one of his arms by the
rheumatism. He had been attended by the doctor for nine
months, and had been given over by him as incurable. His arm
was perished, and he was in poor circumstances, having paid
all he had to the doctor; he wanted relief, but said he could pay
nothing for it unless he was cured, so that he could earn some-
thing by his labor. Mr. Smith asked me if I was willing to
assist to cure him on these terms, to which I agreed. We car-
ried him through a course of the medicine and steaming, twice
or three times a week for four weeks, when a cure was eifected.
The last time he was carried through was on election day, and
he expressed a wish to go on the Common in the afternoon, to
which I gave encouragement. The medicine was done about
ten o'clock; he was then steamed and washed all over with pep-
per-sauce. He complained bitterly of the heat and threw him-
self on the bed; I took a tea-spoonful of good cayenne, and
put in two spoonsfuls of pepper-sauce and gave it him to take.
This raised the inward heat so much above the outward, that in
two minutes he was comfortable; and in the afternoon he went
on the common. His arm was restored and he was well from
that time; he afterwards, as I have been informed, paid Mr.
Smith forty dollars for the cure.

A Mrs. Burleigh came to his house about this time, who had
the rheumatism verv badly, so that her joints were grown out of
place; and T assisted in attending her. She had never taken
much medicine, which made it the easier to cure her; as \vc
had nothing to do but remove the disease, without having to


Ul!' SAMULli 1 nufliou IT,

dear the system of poisonous drugs, as is the case in most of
those who "apply for relief in complaints of long standing. She
was carried through the medicine several times and steamed;
the last time, I attended her, and gave the medicine three times,
as usual, which raised a lively perspiration and a fresh color,
showing an equal and natural circulation; hut did no', sicken
or cause her to vomit, as is the case most generally. I mention
this to show that the emetic qualities of the medicine will not
operate where there is no disease. She was then steamed and
washed, and went out of doors, being entirely cured of hci
complaint.

Sometime the last of April or fiistof May, a woman that was
a relation of the nurse, who assisted Mr. Smith, and of wherrt
1 have before spoken, hired a room of him and moved into his
house, and the nurse lived with her. She had more experience
than he had; I had put the utmost confidence in her, and she
had in many instances proved her superiority in a knowledge of
the practice over him. A singular circumstance took place, the
pirticulars of which I shall relate and leave the reader to m"ke
his own inferences. Sometime fn May while I boarded with
Mr. Smith, I lost my pocket book, which contained upwards of
thirty dollars in bank bills, and notes to the amount of frve
hundred dollars. I made strict search for it, and advertised in
the papers, hut have never gained any information of it or the
contents to this day. It was in my coat pocket, and I could
think of no way in which 1 had been exposed, or could lose it,
exceptin his house. I lost it between Friday nigh* and Monday
morning, during which time I attended a woman in his ch i-
ber, and several times had my coat off, which appeared !< in - o
be the only time that it could be taken, or thrt 1 could lose it.
The only persons present in the room wee Mr. Smith and his
wife, and the nurse; I had no suspicions of any persons at the
time. About ten days after, being alone with Mr. Smith, he
asked me if I ever mistruited the nurse being dishonest. 1 told
him no, for if 1 had I should not have in'roduecd her as a nurse.
He then said that there had been a number of thefts commuted
since she had been in the house, both from him and other peo-
ple, and named the articles and circums'ances. He further
said that the girl who lived with him had said that she thought
the nurse was as likely to take my pocket boo! is to fake the
things she had undoubtedly stolen. The circumstances which
he related and the interest he seemed to take in ray loss, con-
ned me hcvond a doubt that this woman had taken my pro
T,


122 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, fee.

perty. During this conversation with him, he said, that ll shj
did not move out of the house he would. The consequence
was, that the family moved out of his house, and I dismissed
the nurse from having any niore to do with my practice. —
Since Mr. Smith has taken to himself the lead in my system of
practice, he has acknowledged that he has become convinced,
beyond a doubt, that this woman was not guilty of taking the
things which she had been accused of; without assigning any
ieason, as 1 have been able to learn, for his having altered his
opinion.

During the time the above circumstances happened, his son
•■a came home, after being absent about four years, but was not
teafed with that affection a child expects to receive in a fathers
house; he was sent off to seek lodgings where he could. Abom
twelve o'clock he returned, not being able to obtain lodgings.
and called up a young man who boarded with Mr. Smith, made
a bitter complaint on account of the uentment he received frory
his father, which he attributed to be owing to the influence of
lis mother-in-law; he took a vial and drank from it, and soon
after fell on the floor. The young man being alarmed, awaked
his father and informed him of the circumstance; before he
got. to his son he was senseless and stiff in every joint. I was
*n bed in the house, and Mr. Smith came immediately to me
and requested my assistance, said that he expected Ira had kill-
ed himself. He showed me the vial and asked what had been
in it. I told him it had obtained laudanum. I got up as soon
as possible, and on going down met Mr. Smith and the young
man bringing Ira up stairs. 1 directed them to lay him on the
hearth, and took a bottle from my pocket, which contained a
strong preparation of Nos. 1, 2 and 6— took his head between
ny knees, his jaws being set, and put my finger between his
cheek and teeth, and poured in some of the medicine from the
bottle; as soon as it reached the glands of his throat, his jaws
became loosed and he swallowed some of it — in five minutes
he vomited — in ten he spoke— in one hour he was clear of the
effects of the opium, and the next day was well. After this the
affVc'ion of the Aither seemed in some measure to return; he
clothed him, took him to Taunton and introduced him into
practice as an assistant. He did very well till his mother-in-law
arrived there, when a difficulty took phec between them, f>nd he
•went off. His father advertisp; 1 him, forbidding all persons
from trusting him on his account. He was absent four years,
when he returned again to his father's house, and was received


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 123

in the same cold and unfeeling manner as before, was not
allowed to slay in tho house, but was obliged to se^k an asylum
among strangers. He staid in town several days, became de-
jected inconsequence, as he said, of the treatment he had met
with at his fatl:er',s house, went over to Charlestown, took a
quantity of laudanum, and was found near the monument
senseless; was earned to the alms-house, where he died, and
was buried from there.

I continued with Mr. Smith, as has been before mentioned,
giving him instruction, till the first of June, when I appointed
him agent, with authority to sell family rights and medicine.
An agreement was drawn up and signed by both parties, in
which it was stipulated thai f was to furnish him with medicine,
and allow him 25 per cent, for selling; and he was to have 50
per cent, for all the rights he sold; which was ten dollars for
each right, for gi . < the necessary information to those who
purchased, and c the pay. His principal dependence

at this time was upon rr.u and the practice, for his support. He
paid me one half of what he received for family rights as he
sold them. The first of July I contemplated going home to
get in my hay; but Mrs. Smith, expecting to be confined soon,
whs very urgent that I should stay till after she was sick, which
detained mo three weeks. T staid accordingly and attended
her through her sickness, for which they gave me great credit
and praise at the tune. I then wenl home to attend to my farm
and £et in my hay; after which I returned to Boston, and in the
f'' 1 went to Capo Cod to attend to som^ business there, and
on my return to Boston I found Mr. Smith's youngest child
sick with the quinsy, or rattles; he had done all he couhf and
given it over to die. The woman had ' ken charge of thechild,
after he had given it up, and some physic. When

the child I gave som< gementof a cine, and they

were very desirous of me to i ometbingfor it. J told them
they had d me very wrong in ng any physic, for t war.
strictly against my orders toevei give any physic in cases where
there er. They observed that there was no appearance

of canker. I told them it would never appear when they gave
physic, for it would reman* inside till mortification decided the
contest.

I began with the child by giving No. 2, which caused violent

struggles - ' roused it from the stupid state in which it had

he moisture appeared in the mouth; then gave some

Wo. 3 stooped, and Nos, 1 and 2 f " c ta,rt ' I cau¥?


NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, Lc.

it to Vomit. This soon gave relief. The women who wove
present, accused me of the greatest cruelty, because I bi
.the child oat of its stupid state, and restored its sense of feeling,
by which means the life of the child was saved. The next
morning its mth was as while as paper with canker; they
were th • batisfied that 1 knew the childs situation best, and
that I had saved its life. I considered the child so much
relieved, that the father and mother would be able to restore il
to perfect health, left it in their care and went out of town. I
^turned the next day about noon, and found that they had
ag»in given it up 'o die; its throat was so filled with canker that
it had not swallowed any thing for Tour hours. I was in sus-
pense whether to do any thing for the child or not; but told the
father and mother 1 thought if it was mine, 1 would nol giv< il
up yet; they wished me to try. 1 took some small quills from
a .wing, a«d stripped Kern, except about three quarters of an
inch nt the point, tied several of them together, which made a
swab, dipped it in canker tea and began by washing the mouth;
then rinsing it with cold water — then washed with ihe tea again,
putting the swab down lower in the throat, which caused it to
gag, and while the tTiroat was open, put it down the swallow,
and look off scales of canker, then rinsed again with cold water.
Spoon as it could swallow, gave some tea of No. 2, a tea-spoon-
ful at a time, and it soon began to struggle for breath, and ap-
poired to be in great distress, similar to a drowned person com-
ing to life. Tn its struggling for breath it discharged considera-
ble phlegm from its nose and mouth; I then gave some more of
the emetic with canker tea, which operated favorably; in two
hours it was able to nurse, and it soon got well, to the great
joy of the father and mother, who said that the life of the child
was saved by my perseverance.

Soon after this child got well, which was in the fall of the
year 1817, Mr. Smith moved to Taunton. Previous to his
removal a man from that place by the name of Eddy applied to
him to be cured of a bad humor, caused by taking mercury.
I assisted in attending upon him part of the time. Mr. Smith
began with him, and on the t'irn of the disorder the t . man and
he got frightened and sent for me. lie had been kept as hot as
he couM bear, with the medicine, for six hours, which increased
the heat of the b.nty sufficient to overpower the cold, the heat
turned inward and drove the cold on the outside; this produces
such a sudden change in ihe whole system, that a person unac-
quainted with the practice would suppose they were dying; but


,r kkmi'&b iilOMsON. 125

there is no danger to be apprehended, if proper measures are
taken and persevered in by keeping up 1he inward Jieat. In
such cases steaming is almost indispensable; for which reason I
have been obliged to steam the patient in most cases where the
complaint has been of long standing, especially when miich
mercury has been taken, as nothing will make it active but heal
This man soon g')t well and relumed home.

I furnished Mr Smith with a stock of medicine, and in the
winter paid him a visit, found him in full practice and Mr. Eddy
assisting him. 1 carried will: me a quantity of medicine,
renewed his stock, and stored the remainder with him. He had
iold several fight?, and was very successful in his practice,
which caused great alarm among the doctors; they circulated
all kinds of false and ridiculous reports about his practice, to
break him up; but not succeeding, they raised a mob and twice
broke o]»en Mr. Smith's house, in his absense, and frightened
his family.

In the spring of this year Mr. Smith moved to Sciluate, to
preach there and to attend to practice; and the medicine left with
him I consigned to Mr. Eddyi by his recommendation. The
amount of the medicine was about one hundred,dollars, and ,1
sent him a note for twenty dollars, which he collected, and
afterwards went off, and I lost the whole amount. During this
season I went to Plymouth to visit some there who had bought
family rights, and returned by the way of Scituate, in order to
visit Mr. Smith, look over his books, and have some settlement
with him. I had let him have medicine as he wanted it. trusting
him to give me credit for what he sold or used. I think he had
given me credit, so that the balance due me at this time, for
what he had, was four hundred dollars, He was unable to pay
me any thing, and 1 returned to Boston.

Mr. Smith afterwards removed his family to Boston, and in
Ihe fall of the year 1818, he said that he was notable to pay me
any money; but he would let me have such things as he could
sp re. I was disposed to be as favorable towards him as I coukd
and took what he chose to offer at his own price. He let me
have two old watches at one hundred dollars, and an old mare
at eighty, which was for medicine at cash prices. I gave him
all the chance of selling rights and medicine, in hopes that he
would be able to do better by me. I often had requested him
to deliver lectures on my system of practice, as this had been a
favorite object with me in appointing him agent; butiever
could prevail with him to do any thing in that wav. Another
L2


12& ISAR&AtlVE 6V ffiE LIFE; fee.

important arrangement I had made vvitli liim was, that lie- was
to assist me in preparing for the press, a work to contain a nar-
rative of my life, and a complete description of my whole sys-
tem. I had written it in the best manner I could, and depended
on him to copy it off and prepare it in a correct manner to be
printed; but he put me off from time to time, and was never
ready to attend to it. All this time I never had any suspicion
of his having a design to wrong me, by usurping Ihe whole load
of the business, and turning every thing to his own advantage.

I continued to keep medicine at. his house, which he had free
access to, and took it when he pleased, giving me credit for it
according to his honesty. T'*ere was two 01 three thousand
dollars worth at a time, in the house. He charged me three
dollars per week for board, for all the time 1 was at his house,
after he returned from the country; and he had given me credit
for only eighty dollars for medicine the year past. On a settle*
ment with him at this time, (1819,) lie owed me about four hun-
dred dollars; I asked him for a due-bill for the balance, but he
refused to give one — and said that Mr. Eddy had received two
hundred dollars worth of the medicine, for which he had receiv-
ed nothing, and he ought not to pay for it. I agreed to lose
one half of it, and allowed one hundred dollars (he same as if
1 had received cash of him. I took a memorandum from his
boo 1 : of what was due 7ne, which was all I had for security.
In o fall pi* the year 1820, 1 had another settlement with Mr.
S , aiid he owed me about four hundred dollars, having re-
ceived no rmnev of him 'he year past. He told me that all ihe
property he had w s a horse and chaise, and that if I did not
have it som 'body else would. I took the horse and chaise at
three hundred dollars, and the hundred dollars 1 agreed to al-
low on Mr. Eddy's account made us, according to his accounts,
about square as to the medicine he had given me credit for.
He made out a statement of fifty-seven family rights that he
had s il I at twenty dollars each, twenty-three of which he had
neyer piid me any thing for; his plea for not paying me for them
was, tint he had not received his pay of those who had bought
them. His agreement with me was, that he should account to
tne for ten dollars for each right sold, and he was to have ten
dollars each for collecting the money and giving the necessary
information to the purchasers.

In the winter of 1819 I went to Philadelphia, and previous
to my going made arrangements with Mr. Smith to publish a new
edition of my book of directions; we revised the former edi-


OF SAMUEL THOMSOft n*

tion, and made such additions as we thought would be necessary
to give a complete and full description of my system, and the
manner of preparing and using the medicine; and 1 directed
him to secure the copy right according to law; I left the whole
care with him to arrange the matter and have it printed. On
my return to Boston in March, he had got it done; but in a man-
ner very unsatisfactory to me, for he had left out twelve pages
of the most useful part of the remarks and directions, and it
was otherwise very incorrectly and badly printed. I asked him
the reason of this, and he said a part of the c6py had got mis-
laid, and the printer had not done his work well. I had noidea
at the time, that he had any design in having this pamphlet
printed in the manner it was; but his subsequent conduct would
justify the belief, that he had previous to this, formed a plan to
usurp the whole of my system of practice, and turn everything
to his own advantage; for he has since attempted to satisfy the
public that my system was no system; and has brought forward
this very book, which was printed under his own inspection and
arranged by him, as a part of his proof that 1 was incapable of
managing mj own discoveries, and of communicating the ne*
cessary information in an intelligible manner to m; ke my system
of practice useful to those who purchase the rights. It is a
well known fact, that some of the most essential parts of the
directions' were to be verbal; and ( had allowed him ten dollars
each, to give the proper instruction to all those to whom he sold
the rights.

Another circumstance that I have recently found ouf, goes to
show a dishonesty in design, to say the least of it. He deposi-
ted the title page of the above mentioned pamphlet, and ob-
tained a certificate from the clerk, in the name of Elias Smith
a? proprietor, and caused it to be printed in the name of Samuel
Thomson as author and proprietor. What his intentions were
in thus publishing a fahse certificate, I shall not attempt to ex-
plain, but leave the reader to judge for himself. If I had
been taken away, he possibly might have come forward and
claimed under it a right to all my discoveries, and eventually
to substitute himself in my place as sole proprietor. From that
time lie neglected the sale of rights, and turned his attention
mostly to practice and preparing hisown medicine. During the
summer of 1820, he employed Mr. Darling to assist him in
practice and preparing medicine, and while with him he prepared
thirty-eight bottles of the rheumatic drops, which by agreement
he was to have of me; be also directed him to take the mate


I :& NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

vials from my stock, which was in his house, and prepared i went;
five pounds of composition, and this was kept a secret from me.
The reason he gave Mr. Darling for not having medicine of me
according to his agreement, was, that he owed me so much now
that he was afraid he should never be able to pay me. I thought
his taking the preparing and selling my medicine to himself,
was a very singular way to pay an old debt.

In May, 1820, Mr. Smith collected together those in Boston
who had bought rights of me or my agents, and formed I hem
into a society, under a new Rame; he wrote a constitution
which they signed; and the members paid one dollar entrance
and were to pay 124 cents per month assessment, for which he
promised them important instructions and cheap medicine.
He was appointed president and treasurer, and after he had ob-
tained their money the meetings were discontinued, and the so-
ciety was broken up in the course of nine months. In this he
appears to have taken the lead of all those who had purchased
the rights of me and made them tributary to himself.

In November I returned from the country and found that he
had advertised, without my knowledge or consent, in the Herald,
a periodical work published by him at that time, "proposals for
publishing by subscription, a book to contain the whole of the
system and practice discovered by Samuel Thomson, and se-
lars — By Elias Smith.' 1 This mostly stopped the sale of rights,
for no one would purchase a right, of me or my agents, at twenty
dollars, when they had the promise of them at five. I went to
him to know what he meant by his conduct in issuing these pro-
posals; he plead innocence, and said lie had no improper de-
sign in doing it.

I was now under the necessity of doing something, in order
to counteract what had been done 'by Mr. Smith, in publishing
the above proposals; and came to the determination to issue
new proposals for publishing a narrative of my life as far as re-
lated to my practice, with a complete description of my system
of practice in curing disease, and the manner of preparing and
using the medicine, secured to me by patent; the price to sub-
the same for himself and family. Mr. Smith undertook to
■write the proposals and get them printed ; after they were struck
off I found he had said in them, by Samuel Thomson and
him what he meant by putting his name with mine— he said, in


OF SAMUEL THOMSON.

time, and let them be distributed.

When I settled with him the last time, I asked him what he
would charge me, to prepare my manuscript for the press; he
said he thought we were to write it together. 1 asked him what
made him think so; he said because his name was oh the pro-
posals with mine. I admitted this; but told him the reason
had assigned for putting his name to it without my consent or
knowledge, lie then intimated that he thought he was to be a
partner with me. I asked him what I ever had of him to entitle
huii to an equal right to all my discoveries. To this he made
no reply, but said he would write it, and we would agree upon
a price afterwards. I told him no — [ must know his price first.
He said he could not tell within fifty dollars. I then told him
we would say no more about it. This conversation, together
with his conduct in regard to the proposals, convinced me be-
yond all doubt, that his design was to destroy me, and take the
whole business to himself. I felt unwilling to trust him any
longer, and took all my books and manuscripts from his house.
His subsequent conduct towards me has fully justified all my
suspicions, and left no room for a doubt, that liis intentions were
to take every advantage of me in his power, and usurp my whole
system of practice.

My system of practice and the credit of my medicine were
never in a mjre prosperous condition than when I begin with
Mr. Smith, to instruct him in a knowledge of all my discover-
ies and experience in curing disease, and appointed him agent.
The people, whereref it became known, were every day becom-
ing convinced of its utility, and the medicine was in great de-
man;! — family rights sold readily, and every thing seemed to
promise conplete success in diffusing a general knowledge of
the practice among all classes of the people; but under his
management, the whole of .my plans have been counteracted,
and my anticipations, m a great measure, have been frustrated.
By his conduct towards me, in his attempt to take the lead of
the practice out of my hands, and destroy my credit with the
public it has not only beet a serious loss to me in a pecuniary
point of view, but the people at large are deprived of the bless-
ings that might be derived by a correct knowledge of my dis-
coveries; and have it in their power to relieve themselves from
sickness an I piin with a trifling expense, and generations yet
u:iborn bo greatly benefitted thereby.


»30 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

I tried to get a settlement with Mr. Smith for the medicine
he had prepared and sold, and also for the rights he had not ac-
counted to me for, with the affairs that remained unadjusted be-
tween us; but could net get him to do any thing about it— :ihd
findino- there was no chance of obtaining an honorable settle-
ment with him, about the first of February, 1821, 1 took all my
medicine from his house, and discontinued all connection or
concern with him ; I was then, after waiting about four years
for him to assist tne in writing, which was one of my greatest
objects in appointing him agent, obliged to publish a pamphlet,
in which i gave some of the principles upon which my system
was founded, with explanations and directions for my practice,
and also to notify the public that I had appointed other agents,
and caution all persons against trespassing on my patent.

He continued to practice and prepare medicine, bidding me
defience. I made several attempts to get an honorable settle-
ment with vm, without success. I employed three persons to
go to him and offer to settle all our difficulty by leaving it to a
reference; but he refused to do any thing; continued to tres-
pass, and made use uf every means to destroy my character by
abusive and false repprts concerning my conduct, both in regard
to my practice and private character. Finding that T couid get
no redress from him, I put an advertisement in the papers, giv-
ing notice that I had deprived him of all authority as my agent;
nnd cautioning the public against receiving any medicine or in-
formation from him under any authority of mine. He redoub-
led his diligence in trespassing, and prepared the medicine and
advertised it for sale under different names from what I hud call-
ed it. I found there was no other way for me 1o do, but to ap-
peal to the laws of my country for justice, and brought an ac-
tion against him for a trespass on my paten*, to be tried at the
Circuit Couri, at the October term, 1 82 1 . The "f.tion was con-
tinued to May term, when it was called up md the judge de-
cided that the specifications in the pafpnt were improperly made
out, not being sufficiently explicit to found any action opon. In
consequence of which I had to become non-siiifed, and stop all
further proceedings against him, till [ could make out new spe-
cifications and obtain a new patent from the Ejo-verriment.

Mr. Smith h s.lately published a book, in which he has given
my system of prc ; ice, with directions for preparing nnd using
the vegetable medicine secured to itip by patent, and my plan of
treatment in curing disease, as far ^s ho kn< w it. Jn the whole
of this work there is not one principle laid down, or one idea


fJt SAMUJSL. l'HUiVISUl\. 131

suggested, except what is taken from other authors, but what he
has obtained from my written or verbal instructions; and gtill
he has the effrontery to publish it to the world as his own dis-
covery, without giving me any credit whatever, except he has
condescended to say, that "Samuel Thomson has made some
imperfect discoveries of disease and medicine, but has not re-
duced any thing to a regular system." This assertion will ap-
pear so perfectly ridiculous to all those who have any knowledge
of my practice, that I shall forbear making any comment upon
it. It is true that he had made alterations in the names of some
of the preparations of medicine; but the articles used and the
manner of using them is the same as mine. Iris also a well
known fact, that he had no knowledge t oi' medicine, or of cur-
ng disease, until I instructed him ; and if what he says be true,
the effect has been very remarkable, inasmuch as his magneti-
cal attraction has drawn all the skill from me to himself, by
which he has taken upon himself the title of physician, and left
me nothing but the appellation of Air. Thomson, the imper-
fect projector.

1 have been more particular in describing Mr. Smith's con-
duct, because it has been an important crisis in the grand plan
for which I have spent a great part of my lne, and suffered much
to bring about; that of establishing a system cf medieal prac-
tice, whereby the people of this highly favored country may
have a knowledge of the means by which they c?n at all times
relieve Ihcmselves from the diseases incident to ovjr country, by
a perfectly safe and simple treatment, and thereby relieve them-
selves from a heavy expense, as well as the oft j n dangerous con-
sequences arising from the employing those who make use of
poisonous drugs and other means, by which they cai:se more
disease than they cure; and in which I consider the public as
well as myself have a deep interest. I have endeavored to make
a correct and faithful statement of his conduct, and the treat-
ment 1 have received from him; every particular of which «an
be substantiated by indisputable testimony if necessary. I now
appeal to the public, and more particularly to all who have been
beneficed by my discoveries, for their aid and countenance in
supporting my just rights against all encroachments, an- 1 , se-
curing to me my claims to whatever of merit or distinctioi 1
am honorably and justly entitled: While I assure them that I
am not to be discouraged or diverted from my grand object by
opposition, or the dishonesty of those who deal deceitfully with
me; but shall persevere in all : i oraible and fair measures to
accomplish what my life has p^noipally been spent in fulrilling,


pZ NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

ADDITIONS TO SECO.\D EDITION— Nov. 1826

Since ihe first edition of my narrative was published, some
circumstances have occurred, which 1 think worth relating; and
shall, therefore, continue to give the reader an account of all
those things relating to my system of practice, and the success
it has met with, up to the present time.

After having failed in my attempt to obtain justice by prose
cuting Elias Smith for trespass, as has been befoie i elated. 1
found it necessary to adopt some new plan of procedure in order
to meet the universal opposition I have in all cases met with,
not only from the medical faculty, but from all those who be-
long to what are called the learned professions. Judge Story
decided that the action could not be sustained, because the spe-
cifications in my patent were not so explicit as to determine
what my claim was. He said it contained a number of recipes
which no doubt were very valuable; but I did not say what part
of it 1 claimed as my own invention. How far tin's opinion was
governed by a preconcerted plan to prevent me from maintain-
ing my claim as the original inventor of a system of practice,
and proving its utility in a court of justice, it would not be pro-
per for me to say; but I have an undoubted right to my own
opinion on the subject; besides I had it from very high author-
ity at the time, that this was the fact, and that I should always
■ find all my efforts to support my claim, frustrated in the same
manner. When I obtained my patent, I had good legal advice
in making out the specifications, besides it was examined ;:nrl
approved by the Attorney General of the United States; and it
was said at the time of the trial, by several gentlemen learned
in the law, to be good; and that the very nature and meaning
of the patent was, that the compounitng and using ihe articles
cified in manner therein set forth, was what I claimed as my
invention.

There was, however, no other way for me to do, but to obtain
another patent; and immediately after the above decision, I set
about getting one that would meet the objection that had been
made to the first. In making new specifications I had the as-
sistance of several gentlemen of the law and others, and every
precaution was taken to have them according to law; but wheth-
er my second patent will be more successful than the first, time
must determine. It embnees the six numbers, composition or
vegetable powders, nerve powder and the application of steim
to raise perspiration; and to put my claim beyond doubt, I ad-


tied at the end as follows, viz: — "The preparing and compound

ilic foregoing vegetable medicine, in manner as herein de-
mentioned, together with the use of steam to produce persptra
lion, 1 claim as my own invention." My second patent is dated
January 28, 1823.

Fn obtaining a patent, it was my principal object to get the
protection of the government against the machinations of my

nies, more than to take advantage of a monopoly; for in
selling family rights, I convey to the purchaser the informatics:
gained by thirty years practice, and for which I am paid a sum
ot money as an equivalent. This I should have a right to do if
there was no patent in the case. Those who purchase the right
have all the advantages of my experience, and also the right to
the use of the medicine, secured to me by patent, and to the
obtaining and preparing it for themselves, without any emolu-

,t to Tup whatever. And in all the numerous cases where 1

aold rights, there have been very few instances where any

objections have l>eei) made to paving for them, where notes had

i given, and tiiese were by those who had been persuaded
by men opposed to me and my practice, and who had interested
views in doing all the injury they could; but where suits have
been commenced to recover on notes given for rights, it has
been decided that the demand is good in law, and the plea set
up, of no value received, is not valid; because the information
given, and the advantages received, is a valuable consideration^
without any reference to the patent right. In all cases where a
person possesses valuable information from his own experience
or ingenuity, there can be no reason why he should not have a
right to sell it to another as well as any other property; and that
all contracts made in such cases should not be binding, provided
there is no fraud or deception used.

When a suitable opportunity offers, I shall avail myself of my
patent rights, for the purpose of stopping the people being im-
posed upon by those who pretend to practice by my system, hav-
ing no authority from me, and h;?ve not a correct knowledge
of°the subject; but. are tampering with all kin Us of medicines
to the injury of their patients and the great detriment of the
credit of my system of prnctiee; for when they happen to l>e
successful, they arrogate to themselves great credit for the cure;
but when the patients die, it is all laid to the door of rny system.
The doctors are reidy enough to avail <hemselves of these
cases, and to publish exagge led accounts of ihem, to preju,
M


.;;4 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

dice the minds of the people against uie. Whenever I again
make an at erapt to vindicate my rights, by appealing to the
laws ot* my country, 1 am determined, if possible, to take such
measures as shall give me a fair chance to obtain justice. All
I .ask is to have a fair opportunity to prove my medicine to be
new and useful, which is all the law requires to make the patent
valid. In doing this, 1 shall sp;:re no expense to have the most
able counsel in the country engaged, and shall not stop at any
decision against me, till carried to the highest judicial tribunal
in the country.

It is a matter of much gratulation to me, and a balm for all
my sufferings, that my system of practice is fast gaining ground
in all parts of the country. The people wherever it is intro-
duced, take a lively interest in the cause, and family rights sell
rapidly; and all who purchase give much credit to the superior
and beneficial effects of tl*e medicine above all others. The
prejudices of those who have been opposed to it, scorn to be fast
wearing away before the light of reason and common sense.
A number of gentlemen, eminent for their scientific researches
and usefulness in society, have become advocates for the cause;
and although they may not be perfecly converted so as to give
up all their former opin tons, yet they allow that the system is
rngenious and philosophical, and that the practice is new and safe.

In introducing my new mode of practice to the ( eople of this
country, I have never sought the patronage or assistance of the
great; and the success it has met with has been altogether
owing to its own merit. There has been no management, or
arts, used to deceive or to flatter the vanity of any one; but in
all cases have endeavored to convince by demonstrating the
truth, by the most plain and simple method of practice, to effect
the object aimed at, and to cure disease by such means as I
thought would cause the least trouble and expense. This pro-
bably has been one of the greatest causes of the opposition I
have met with from the people; for they have so long been in
{he habit of being gulled by designing men, and the ostenta-
tious show of pompous declarations aud high sounding words,
backed by the recommendations of those they have flattered
and deceived, that nothing brought ibrward in a plain and sim-
ple dress seems worthy of notice. . If I had adopted a more
deceptive plan, to suit the follies of the times, I might have
been more successful; but I am satisfied I should have been
'less useful.


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 135

There is one thing which I think cannot ho matter of doubt,
that I have been the cause of awakening a spirit of inquiry
among the people of this country, into the medical practice and
the fashionable manner of treatment in curing disease, from,
which great benefits will be derived to the community. Many-
new contrivances and plans have been introduced by different
men, by me use of vegetables, which unquestionably have taken
their origin from my practice. When 1 began to make use oi
steam, a great deal of noise was made about it throughout the
country, and 1 was called the Steaming and Sweating doctor, by
way of ridicule. It was even stated by the doctors that I
steamed and sweat my patients to death. This no doubt led
some ingenious men to investigate the subject by experiments,
and on discovering that it w is useful in restoring health to the
afflicted, particularly in scrofulous complaints, different contri-
vances hive been introduced to apply steam to the sick. Jenr
nina's vapor bath was highly recommended and considerably
used a few years ng«; but it has been found not to be safe in
cases where there is a high state of inflammation, without the
use of my medicine to first produce an equilibrium in the sys-
tem. A man by the name of Whitlaw has lately introduced
what he calls his medicated vapor bath, which has made con-
siderable stir among 1 he medical faculty.

It seems that this Mr. Whitlaw, from what I can learn of him
from his publication, about six years ago went from this coun-
try to England, and there introduced a new system of practice,
and became celebrated in curing all kinds of scrofulous com-
plaints and diseases of the glands, by means of his method of
applying steam and the use of decoctions from American vege-
tables. ° How he got his knowlege, or what first induced bun
to fix upon this plan, I know not; but it seems, as far as I can
understand him, that helms adopted my system of practice as
rax as lie has been able to get a knowledge of it. He says some-
thing about gaining his knowledge from an Indian in this coun-
try ;°but this is too stale to require any notice. One ot the
great principles upon which my system is founded, is, that all
disease originates in obstructions in the glands, and if not
removed becomes Bcrofulous; and the only remedy is to remove
the obstructions by raising perspiration by steam and hot medi-
cine In all my practice for nearly forty years, there has been
nothing that I have succeeded more completely in, than the cure
of scrofulous complaints, such as salt-rheum, St. Anthony s fire,
scalt heads, cancel h ing evil, rheumatism, and consumption.


»3& NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &e.

It appears that the above gentleman has met with great suc-
cess in England, and that he has had the support and patronage
of many of the first men in the kingdom, who have liberally
contributed to the support of an asylum for the cure of tlie
poor, and that his success has given universal satisfaction. —
And it also appears that he has met with abuse from the medical
faculty, both there and in this country. This was to be expect-
ed, and is the best evidence of its utility. 1 feel no enmity
towards those who are benefitting by my discoveries, and it gives
me much pleasure to think that I have been instrumental in
introducing a new system of medical practice, by which I feci
confident so much benefit will be derived, by relieving in a great
measure, the sum of human misery. But 1 think those gentle-
men who have gained any knowledge from my practice, for
which I have suffered so much for introducing, ought, in justice,
to allow me some credit for the discovery.

It has been my misfortune to meet witli not only opposition
m my practice, but to suffer many wrongs from some with whom
I have had dealings, and this in many cases where those who
have attempted to injure me were among) hose that I considered
under obligations to me. I have related a number of cases in
the course of my narrative; but the disposition in many, still
seems to continue. In selling family rights, ! have always been
as liberal to purchasers as they could wish, particularly where I
was convinced their circumstances made it inconvenient for
them to pay the money down; and have been in the habit of
taking notes payable at a convenient time. This has occasioned
me considerable loss; but in most cases the purchasers have
shown a disposition to pay if in their power — have treated me
with a proper respect, and have been grateful for the favor; with
these I have been satisfied, and no one has had renson to com-
plain of my want of generosity towards them. There have been
seme, however, who hive taken a different course, and have not
fused to comply with their contract; but have, notwith-
standing they have continued to use the medicine, turned
I me and have tried to do me all the harm in their power.
Such conduct has caused me some considerable vexation and
trouble.

At the time I failed in my attempt n;;air,st Elias Smith, in

nonce of the decision against the correctness of the

specifications of my patent, as has be^n before related, I had a

number of notes for rights sold: among them were two against

a person, who had previously expressed gresaJ <"v>l in my causa,


for a right for himself and one for his friend. During tthe
pending of the trial lie took sides with Smith ; and after he
decision, came to the conclusion, or. as I suppose, was told by
Smith, thai the notes could not becollected bylaw, and >e used
to pay for them. I did not wish to pui him to cost and therefore
let the business? rest, in hopes he would think better of it, inJ
pay me according to contract ; but after waiting uniil the notes
were nearly outlawed, and he still refusing to pay* I put one of
them in suit, and the action was tried before the Boston Police
Court. The defence set up was, that the contract was void, in
consequence of the failure of the patent; and also, thai here
was no value received.

The trial was before Mr. Justice One, and was managed by
Mr. Morse for the plaintiff* and Mr. Merrill for the defendant.
On this trid, as on all others in which 1 have been engaged,
there seemed to be the s ime fixed prejudice against me and my
system of practice. The defendant's lawyer opened the defence
with all the old slang about quackery, alluding to the report of
my trial for murder, ml that he was going to make out one of
the greatest Cases of deception and fraud ever known; but when
he came to heir the evidence in support of my claim, and the
great credit, given to my medicine and practice* by marry respect-
able witnesses, he altered his tone very much, and 1 hope bee: mc
convinced of his erroneous impressions; and seemed to abandon
this part of the defence, placing his dependence on the question
of law, as the failure of the patent. This question the judge
seemed not willing to decide alone, and ihe case was continued
for argument before the full court, on this point.

'f^e case was argued before the three judges, who all agreed
in the opinion, that the decision of the Circuit Court did not
affect the patent right; but was a mere suspension, in conse-
quence of an informality in the specification, which did not
debar me from recovering according to the contract. After
this decision another hearing was had, and another attempt made
to prove that the defendant had not been furnished by me with
the necessary information to enable him to practice with safety;
but in this he failed altogether; for it was proved that he had
the pri v.le«e of being a member of the Friendly Botanic Society
and bad also all the advantages that others had, and that he
did not improve it, was his own fault. It was also proved that
he had been in the constant practice of using the medicine in
his family, *nd prepared and offered it for sale to others. In
th* course of the examination, Elias Smith was bronght forward
M2


$i R LtlVE 6l i HE LITE, fee.

ly the defendant to prove, as f presme, that I was not capable
of giving information on my own system of practice; but this
testimony was so contradictory, to say the least of it, that it did
more harm than good to the defendant's cau?e. There was
also a doctor of the regular order introduced in the defence;
but he seemed to know nothing about the practice or the case
before the court, and of course his evidence amounted to very
little, as his opinion upon a subject thst he knew nothing about,
was not of much value, and was very properly objected to by
the plaintiff's counsel.

Iri the course of the trial a great number of gentlemen of
undoubted veracity, were brought forward to prove the utility
of my system of practice, who gave the most perfect testimony
in its favor. Several stated that they were so well convinced
of its superiority over all others, and they were so well satisfied
with the benefits they hud derived from its use, that no sum of
money whatever would induce them to be deprived of a know-
ledge of it. Among the witnesses, an eminent physician of
.Boston, who has oi all occasions been very fiiendly and shown
a warm interest in support of my system of practice, voluntarily
came forward and gave a very fair and candid statement in favor
of its utility, the value of my discoveries, and the important
additions I had made to the Materia Medica.

The judge took several days to make up his judgment, and
finally decided in my favor, giving me the full amount of my
claim; thus settling the principle, that obligations given for
family rights were good in law. This was the first time I have
ever had a chance to prove the utility of my medicine and sys-
tem of practice before a court of law; having alwavs L«..ore
been prevented by some management of the court.

A knowledge of the vegetable medicine that 1 have brought
into use in curing the diseases incident to this country, and what
the faculty call my "novel mode of practice,'"' is fast gaining
ground in all parts of the United States; but in no part of it
of late, has it been more completely successful than in the state
of New York, notwithstanding the virulent opposition the doc-
tors in that slate have made to its progress. They hav<
ceeded in getting a law passed by their legislature, to put a stop
to quackery, as they call all practice, except by those who get a
diploma from some medical society established bv law; depriving
all others the rtght of collecting their demands for medical prac-
tice; and they have also gone one step further than any other
state, by Banking it penal for any one who is not of the regular
dcr, licine to the sick; imposing a fine of twenty-rive


6p SAMUEL THOMSON. l&

dollars on all who offend; thus taking away from those who
are so unfortunate a£ to be sick, all the right of determining
for themselves, who they shall employ to cure them, or what
medicine they shall make use of. The Medical Society of Penn-
sylvania made an attempt to get a similar law passed in that,
state; but the good sense of Governor Shultz put a stop to it,
for which he is entitled to great praise. After they had managed
to get it through the legislature, he refused to sign it, and re-
turned the bill with his reasons; the principal of which was,
that he considered it altogether unconstitutional ; and it is to be
hoped that the enlightened statesman and scholar, now Govern-
or of New York, will use his influence to stop the interested
and monopolizing schemes of the medical faculty in that im-
portant anil enterprising stale.

The remarkable extension of the practice in the state of New-
York, was in a groat measure owing to accident; and proves
what 1 have found to be the case in many other places, that
where it has met with the greatest opposition from the faculty,
the spread of a knowledge of its utility has been the most
vapid and permanent. In the year 1821 m) son, Gyrus Thom-
son, who had settled in Ohio, was passing through the state oi
New York, on a visit, to his friends; while iff Manlius he stop
ped to see a man whom I had authorised to practice, and while
there, was requested by him to go and c ee two patients he had
been requested to attend; both of J I'-r.n had been given over by
the doctors as incurable. One o« them was found to be past
help, very little was done for her, and she soon after died. The
other was cured by the use of the medicine. The death of the
above person wan taken advantage of by the doctors, who cir-
culated a report that she was murdered by the medicine that
had been given her. This produced a strong excitement among
the people who knew nothing about the facts; a warrant was
got through the influence of the doctors, and my son and the
other man were arrested. My son was thrown into prison, and
the other was put under bonds of a thousand dollars, to appear
at the next court. The first, however, after laying in jail
three days, was also enabled to give bonds for his appearance.

Being thus prevented from pursuing his journey, he set hirft-
self down in the town where the above occurrence took place,
and went into practice. The persecutions of the faculty gave
him friends, as it led the people to inquire into their conduct,
and being satisfied of their motives, did all they could to pro-
tect him and increase his practice. His success has been greater
than in any other part of the country, the practice having


' h. NARRATIVE OK THE LIFE, &c.

spread over a country of mora than two hundred miles in ex
tent; and his success in curiug disease has been very {.Meat,
having lost but six patients out of fifteen hundred. This has
caused the fncul j to iollow up their persecutions, in order to
drive bim out of the country; bin he is too firmly established
in tin opinions of the people for them to effect their ob-

ject, i hi ve another son established in t he practice at Albany,
who has been very successful in introducing the knowledge of
it there; and a number of gentlemen of the first respectability
are taking a strong interest in promoting its succe«s.

A writer Ins lately come forward and published a series of
numbers in the Boston Patriot, under the title of "Eclectic," 1
who appears well qualified, and seems disposed, to do me and
my system of practice justice, by laying before the people a cor-
rect view of my case. This practice is now gaining a respecta-
ble stand in all parts, and particularly in Boston, where Mr.
John Locke has lately established himself and is getting a great'
run of practice. lie has accommodations, to receive patients at
his house, nd is well qualified to give relief to the sick.

I shall row bring ihis narrative of those evenls and circum
stances thai have taken place in my life, in which the public are
interested, to a close; having stated every particular thai I
thought worthy of being recorded, in as concise, and plain a
manner as I was capable; and am not without a hope that my
endeavors to promote the public good will be duly appreci'ted.
Some certificates and statements of cases that have been at-
tended under my system of practice, from those who have been
my agents, or who have purchase family rights and have bad
long experience in the effects produced by a use of my medicine,
are subjoined. They furnish much useful information on the
.subject, and will convey a more correct view of the success
which has attended the administering my medicine, and follow-
ing the mode of treatment recommended by my system of prac-
tice, than could be given in any other manner. Reference has
been made to some of them in the course of the foregoing nar-
rative, and their publication in the work seemed necessary to
convey a correct knowledge of'many statements therein given,
to show the safety ^nd success with which various diseases have
been cured by others, who have had no other knowledge of me-
dicine than the instructions received from me; and will, 1 trust,
be sufficient to satisfy every reasr nable person how easy it
would be for every one to become possessed with the means of
curing themselves of disease, without being under the necessity
•of calling the aid of a physician.


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 141

CERTIFICATES AND STATEMENTS,

CONCERNING THE TREATMENT AND CERE OF DISEASE, ONDEk
THE SYSTEM OF PBACTICB DISCOVERED BY DB, SAMUEL
THOMSON.


The following documents have been voluntarily communi-
cated to me by persons of respectable standing in society, cis
evidence of their zeal in promoting a cause in ■ icb they take
a deep interest; and on whom the most, implicit reliance may
be placed for veracity and a thorough knowledge of the subject
upon which they treat. They have keen selected from a mass
of evidence that might be produced in support of the utility of
the system; in fact, certificates of the cure of individual cases
might be obtained sufficient to fill a large volume, if thought
necessary ; but the following, being accounts of the various kinds
of disease incident to our country, most of which were con
sidered desperate, that have been cured in different parts of the
counlry and at different times, and under a variety of circum
Btances, will give a tolerable fair view of the success with which
the practice has been attended.

A remarkable case of Dysentery, in Jericho, Vermont, irn Octo-
ber, i807.

In September of the year 1807, this disease prevatled, and
was very mortal, so that but two out of twenty-two lived that
were under the care of the regular physicians. The disease
seemed to threaten general destruction; so that there were not
enough in health to attend the sick. The inhabitants of the
town bold a consultation as to the best modeof procedure, and
agreed to send f or Dr. Samuel Thomson, of Surrey, N. H. one
hundred and thirty miles distant, which was accordingly done.
In five days he arrived, and I was appointed to wait on him and
attend through the whole.

In three days thirty were committed to his care, and in eight
days, by the use of his medicine, the town was clear of the
disease, with the loss of two only, who were past cure before he
saw them. JOHN PORTER.


and Massachusetts, certify— That we have for four years been
personally acquainted with Dr. Thomson, and his medicine, and
mode of practice, and do say, that we have experienced the


142 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

most safe and speedy relief from complaints common to ihe iri-
habitants of this climate; such as Hemiplegy, Consumptions
Rheumatism. Cliolic, Fevers, Stranguary, &lc. And that we
•ire well satisfied with the benefit we .md our acquaintances have
received by being relieved from the above disorders.

ALEXANDER RICE, STEPHEN NEAL,
JOHN ROGERS, RICHARD RICE,

BENNTNG HALL, HUNKIN LOUD,

JOSHUA JONES, THOMAS CLAPHAM.


This certifies — That I have from my infancy been afflicted
with the Salt Rheum, and for thirty years have had it very bad,
which from year to year had been growing worse. But by r lie
use of Dr. Thomson's medicines I have been entirely relieved,
and I believe radically cured.

ELIZABETH MARSHALL.

Portsmouth, May, 1813.


Extract of a certificate from Eastham, county oj Barnstable.
Mass. containing an account of Dr. Tho?nson's medieine.

In February, 1823, the spoiled fever first appeared in the
town ; eight persons, heads of families, within one mile of each
other died in about thirty-six hours. In three houses, within
one fourth of a mile, ten persons died. In one house was a
mothdr and four Mien. Six physicians in this county at-
tended, but to little or nu purpose. Upwards of forty had died
by the first of May, and but few lived who had the fever. In
this month Dr. Thomson was called on for assistance. He sold
the right of using the medicine to several individuals of the
town, and gave them liberty to administer the same to the sick.
In the course of the month, the men who used the medicine,
relieved upwards of thirty who were seized with this violent
disease, with the loss of but one.

At the same time and place, those who were attended by the
regular physicians, eleven out of the twelve died.

The above is authenticated by the names of the following
persons :

PHILANDER SHAW, Minister of Eastham.
OBED KNOYVEES, one of the Selectmen.
SAMUEL FREEMAN, do.

HARDING KNOWLES, Justice of the Pcaee


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 143

Certificate of the Postmaster of Eastham.

I do hereby certify that the above statement of mortality in
Ibis town, and the success of Dr. Thomson's medicine, was
taken from u journal kept in my house, and is correct.

JOSEPH MAYO.

Agent for the Society, and To simaster.

This certifies, lint at the early age of sixteen, T had a severe
attack of the Rheumatism, which so confined rue to my bed
that I could not bear to be touched or moved, but in the most
e<>sy ;ind gentle manner, being in exquisite pain at times, and
extremely sore in every part of my frame. I continued in this
situation aboi t fur months, and though I had the best medical
said the country ; Horded at that time, I received little or no bene-
fit till the opening of the season, with its warming and refresh-
ing influence, ameliorated my distressing malady, and itgradu-
way.

1 continued to experience every year similar attacks, though
•ere, of shorter or longer continuance, till in the year
r 3,it returned again with unusual and alarming violence.
iesl medical aid was employed, a depletive train of reme-
the bleeding repeated for several days together; blisters were
applied; strong drastic purges often administered; and my regi-
men very low and sp \re. Thus one intention of the physicians,
to wit: depletion, was accomplished, for I was greatly reduced
in less than three weeks, and my strength and spirits in the
same degree. And though my pains were removed in a great
measure, yet my weakness and debility, which were excessive,
seemed to be proportioned to my freedom therefrom, so that I
w.'s v<- ry far from a state of health. 1 was closely confined five
or six months, and it was about two years, before 1 could
attend to my usual avocations. But all that had been hitherto
done, by no means removed the cause of my complaint, for I
continued to be assailed in the same manner each successive
ye<r, and confined for weeks together. Till in the year 1808,
I became acquainted with Dr. Samuel Thomson, and by a know-
ledge of his medicine, its use, and the application thereof, I
have always been relieved when assailed, in twelve or twenty-
four hours to the extent; and have suffered no other confine-
ment from my old malady, or any other, to the present time.
My family likewise have experienced the most beneficial effects


.K-i NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

from the same medicine, in all the complaints common to
part of the country. I find it to answer all the purposes lh»(
medicine can answer, and were it generally used, and its real
value known, chronic complaints which 1 and so many other!
have labored under, so tedious and distressing, would he ban-
ished from the earth.

Many in the vicinity where I reside, whose cases were very
difficult and complicated, to my own personal knowledge, have
been restored to perfect health by this medicine. More tlian
twelve persons of a consumption I could particularly name; one
of a mortification, one of a dropsy, and one of numb palsy, and
others of divers diseases. The cures are truly extraordinary,
and what my ears never heard nor my eyes ever witnessed to be
done by any other medicine. As health is the greatest earthly
blessing, from the highest good will to mankind, and for the
cause of suffering humanity, 1 wish its universal prevalence.

The mode of treatment is according to ihe case. If a slijjJit
bead ache, a pinch of vegetable snuff at once removes the pain,
If severe, in addition to thesnuff we bathe the head with 1 be rheu-
matic drops. If it is obstinate, and the above application insuf-
ficient, in addition to these, we administer a portion of the rheu-
matic drops with No. 2, and seat the patient by the fire, shield
od from the air by a proper covering. This procedure rarely
fails of the desired intention; but should it, the case is serious
and demands a partial or full process of medicine, which clean-
sing the stomach and bowels, remove the cause of pain, and
these produce the desired effect. In case of pain in the sto-
mach, side, or bowels, we give sometimes a portion of the com-
' position, No. 3, or No. 2, in hot water; or from a tea-spoonful
to a great spoonful of the rheumatic drops and bathe Ihe part
with thesame; in cases of obstinpey, and where it is requisite,
let the patient go to bed and apply a hot stone to the part,
wrapped up with a cloth wet with vinegar, and repeat the dose.
But where the patient chooses and is able, he sits by the fire
shielded from the air, as above stated. When in any case,
these lesser administrations fail, and in violent and alarming
attacks, we commence ihe process by giving Nos. 1, 2, and 3,
one after another, or combining the whole and repeating the
same two or three times, or more as the case demands, till a
thorough operation is performed, and in due time repeat the
process, till the patient is convalescent.

ALEXANDER RICE.

tottery, JVvv. 20<7i, 1821.


„ 143

Tiie undersigned having experienced tlie benefit of the medi-
cine of our own country, discovered and used by Dr. Samuel
Thomson, submit the following facts ro'the public, with the
hope that those who are suffering with disense may be induced
to adopt a course so simple and certain to effect a cure. In the
'atter part of the year 1810, many persons in this neighborhood
were afflicted with fevers or other fatal diseases, which Iwfrled
the skill of the best informed physieians. Alaimed at the pro-
gress which disease and death were making among us, some of
us, with our friends, made an arrangement to send to Portsmouth
New Hampshire, for Dr. Thomson, of whose skill and success
we had heard a flattering account. We corned our plan into
effect, and in the spring of 1811 Dr. Thomson or.me among us
and succeeded in demonstrating the superiority of his system
cf practice over every other. Five cases of consumption, sup-
posed to he desperate, were relieved in the course of three
weeks, and all of them restored to health, which they continue
to enjoy to this day. A case of the dropsy, considered hopeless
was completely cured in one week. In consequence of the
success uniformly attending him, about one hundred of the
people in this town and vicinity purchased of him the right
to prepare and use his medicine, for which he bus obtained a
patent. From that, time to the present, his medicine has been
in constant use with undiminished success, and increasing
patronnge. In the time of the late war, when the dysentery,
and other diseases incident to the camp, raged with a fatality
which the skill of the faculty could not arrest, m^nv of the
soldiers applied to Dr. Thomson and were relieved at their own
expense, in preference to having the army surgeons. For (he
lever and ague we believe it to be an unfailing remedy. In
new countries it is invaluable, as it qan be administered 1 v any
one, in the smallest decree acquainted with its use, without
danger to the patient. We are acquainted with many of 'ho
difficulties with which Dr. Thomson has had to contend — the
interest of some, the ignorance of others, and the prejudice of
all, have continually assailed him. With the two first, every
new discovery will have to contend; experience of the good
effects of this system will f nally overcome ihem all : no sick
person within our knowledge, who has given it a fair experi-
ment, has ever given it up to seek other remedies. We wish
Dr. Thomson remunerated for his unwearied labors for the
relief of the diseased ; and hope the United States will pnv
N


J46 NARRATIVE OF THE L1FF.

chase the right, and promulgate a knowledge of the system' fei
the benefit of the whole community.

JOHN BURGIN,
JERKY BURGIN,
t SOLOMON RICE

Eastport, July 19, 1821.

Easiport, Washington county, State of Maine, July 20, 18£1 .
JohnBurgin, Jerry Burgm, and Solomon Rice, who h;:ve
of respectability and entitled to full faith and credit.

I. R. CHADBOURNE, Justice of the Peace.


Eastport, July 14. 1821.
Doctor Samuel Thomson,

■Sir — You inquire of me relative to the benefits I received
from the use of your medicine. I reply, that in February, 1819,
1 was attacked with a violent cold, which terminated in what 1
as well as my friends, considered to be a consumption — it being
a disease which has been fatal to many of our family. J con-
tinued to grow worse until the following June, when J consid-
ered my situation hopeless. The last of June you adminis-
tered your medicine to me, which afforded me great relief. My
health has constantly amended, until it appears to be fully
cine, and .an* your well wisher and friend.

I. R. CHADBOURNE,


Case of Seth Mason, Portland.
He was attended by Dr. Coffin of that place, but his situ-
ation becoming desperate, (for the messenger said it was thought
he could not live two hours,) Dr. Thomson was sent for, and I
attended with him. We arrived at the house at about 1 1 o'clock,
q/ad found the patient in the most anguishing pain and distress!
Dr. Thomson administered a portion of the rheumatic ilrops,
and repeated the dose. In about three hours the patient was
relieved and freed from pain. After this I attended him, and
carried him through a regular process of the medicine several
times, and in about a fortnight he went out; but he soon experi-
enced a most violent relapse, which again threatened his life.
I again applied the medicine in the usual form, which had so
favorable effect as to entourage a perseverance. In about three


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 14"?

of four months lie was able to attend to his business, and now
enjoys as tolerable a degree of health as could be expected,
considering the large quantities of nitre he took previous to our
seeing him. 13 is head was much affected, and so sharp and
acrimonious the matter discharged therefrom, that small bones
came away eaten like a honey-comb. To relieve the distress of
his head and to enable him to breathe through his rinse, which
was greatly swelled, I practiced steaming it with pepper-sauce,
covering his head with a blanket, and pouring it on a hot stone
placed in an iron bason on a chair by the bed side. This caused
copious discharges of matter, some of which once fell into his
eye, which I apprehend would have destroyed it as quick as
vitriol, but for a counter application. He likewise discharged
a great quantity of putrid blood and corruption from his sto-
mach. His case was truly a desperate one, and his recovery
exceeded all expectation.

S. SEWALL.

Scarborough, January 9, 1822.

Case of Mrs. Sally Keating, Portland.
Her complaints arose from taking cold before or afterlying in,.
She had been doctored a whole year by the first physician in
Portland, and given over as incurable when T saw her. She was
much debilitated, and her left side, if I rightly remember, was
in a wasting, perishing state. After such a length of time, her
disorder became chronic, and so confirmed as not easily to be
removed. In my first applications I administered the nerve
powder, syrup, rheumatic drops, andNos. 2* 3, and 4. Sbetook
three or four portions of one or the other of these medicines as
her case required, in the course of the day. A tea-spoonful of
the powder to half a cup full of hot water sweetened, was the
quantity taken at a time, and an eq\ial quantity of No. 2, 3 and
4, separately, was administered in the same manner, and about
a great spoonful of the rheumatic drops, to a portion. The
intention of those applications was to quiet and strengthen the
nerves, and to restore, as far as possible, the digestive powers,
which had been greatly impaired ; and the success exceeded
.notation. This method was continued for some time, till the
patient at last felt encouraged to try a regular course of the
medicine; when some warm med'eine was given as prepara-
tory; No. 3 was steeped, and about half a cup full of the decoc-
tion made strong and sweetened, to which was added a tea-
onful of Nos". 1 and 2, was administered, and once c* twice


■U8 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &<*.

icpeated in short intervals. After the operation was over, the
steam bath was applied, followed with the cold bath. The effect
was highly promising and salutary, and the whole process was
repeated seven ov eight times at proper intervals; her decaying
side was surprisingly restored, and. she was recovered to an
excellent state of health, which she enjoys to this day.

S. SEWALL.
Scarborough, January 1, 1822.


This certifies that for seventeen years past, 1 have been in a
very poor state of health, afflicted with a variety of complaints,
as fevers, cholics', dysentery, &c. which left me in a low, linger-
ing condition; and although 1 sought relief from every quarter
I could hear of, and employed ten or a dozen physicians of
celebrity, I could find no remedy, till in the year 1813 I had
recourse to. Dr. Samuel Thomson's system and medicine, and
went through three courses thereof under the administration
and direction of Mr. S. Sewafl, and was from that time able to
go to work, and fiave been ever since, by an occasional proccas
of the medicine. 1 became a purchaser of the information for
my family's use, seven in number, and find it so well to answer
the purpose in all cases of sickness, that I have not since that
time been at a shillings expense from any other source.

THOMAS SEAVEY.

Scarborough, Aovembcr 2, 1821.


This certifies that my daughter Mary, from her infancy to the
age of sixteen years, had been afflicted with dyspepsy, or indi-
gestion, to such a degree that her stomach would scarcely bear
the lightest kind of food. Application was made to medical
aid, but without any benefit, till September in the year 1814 she
was first under the care of Mr. S. Sevvall, and was carried eight
times through the common process of Dr. Samuel Thomson's
medicine, which, with the aid of his other remedies, removed
her malady, and restored her to a sound state of health, which
she now enjoys. From this time I became a purchaser of the
information for the use of my family, thirteen in number, and
have had more or less sickness; but it lias ever answered tlif»
purpose, nor have I had occasion to try any other medicine

. ISAAC DEERING

Scarborough, November 2, 1821.


This certifies that, for several years past, I have been afflicted
with the chronic rheumatism, and confined from my business
eight or nine weeks together, and so very ill as to need watchers,
and could find no relief from the faculty. In the year 1813 I
became acquainted with Dr. Samuel Thomson's medicine, and
found it beneficial. In the year following I experienced an
attack of my old rheumatic complaint, and was fully relieved"
by a course of the above medicine. Finding it so valuable, I
have not, for myself or family, used any other remedy from that
time to the present.

JOB SEAVEY.

Scarborough, November 6, 1821.


Case of an infant child of Lewis Demotes, Scarborough.

This infant had not been born but about thirty-six hours, when
it was taken very ill with difficulty of breathing; I adminis-
tered a preparation of No. 1, 2 and 3, but with not the least
promising effect. The symptoms became in the highest degree
alarming, and threatened a sudden dissolution. The room
being an open one and quite cold, I concluded the pressure of
this cold air might counteract the operation of the medicine
and thus defeat my design. To remedy this difficulty, I had
the child put to bed and covered all over, and steamed with a
large hot stone wrapped in wet cloths, applied to it, and then
repeated No. 1 , 2 and 3. I soon perceived an alteration for the
better, the child breathed more free and easy by intervals, and
continued to do so till towards morning, about eight hours from
the commencement of my first application, when a most thorough
operation of the medicire took place, and the child was entirely
relieved, and restored to perfect health, nor is there at the pre-
sent time a healthier child in the town.

S. SEW ALL.

Scarborough, November 20, 1821.


Case oj Samuel Libbey's infant child, Scarborough.

A new born child of Samuel Libbey's was so far given over
by the attendant physician, that he said it was not worth while
and a young woman by the name of Eliza Seavey, acquainted
with the medicine, and with nursing, administered. The babe
was carried through a process of the medicine four times, and
Nos. 1, 2 and 3, freelv given at each operation, and though the
N2


150 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

state of the child rendered it a very hopeless case, it being v<
much swelled and the blood so stagnated as to turn of a deep
purple over the surface of the whole body, and although it had
not taken the least thing till the medicine given, yet by persever-
ance it was recovered and restored to the most perfect health,
which it is in the full enjoyment of at the present time.

S. SEWALL.
Scarborough, December 1, 1821,

In the fall of the year 1807, Dr. Samuel Thomson attended
Mrs. Osgood at Salisbury Mills, who was given over with the
lung fever; ker fever was turned in about fourteen bonis by the
use of his medicine; she was soon restored to health; and in
some cases of sores, extraordinary cures were performed at thai
time. In the spring of 1808 Dr. Thomson returned again to
Salisbury and attended to practice; a Mrs. Sawyer. wifeofCapt.
George Sawyer, was relieved of a sickly consumption, and ap-
peared to have been held up by his medicine for five years; two
other women, who were supposed to be more likely to recover,
were attended by tlie regular doctors, and both died in two
months.

Mrs. Sawyer used to express the highest satisfaction in using
f he emetic herb, or lobelia, and said she should rather be de-
prived of her bread, than of this article and cayenne, which
medicine was first brought in use in these parts by Dr. Thom-
son. The emetic he used to give tinctured in spirit, or in pow-
der, which was useful in consumptive and asthmatic complaints

In the spring of 1808 I was relieved of a complaint called
thene'tlespring, or St. Anthony's fire, caused by overheating
myself by fighting fire about twenty-five years before. Several
times in a year I used to have lurns of breaking out and swelling
as though I had been stung with bees, almost all over, especially
in my limbs. The doctor carried me through two courses of
his medicine, then steamed me until I felt ihe same as when 1
fought the fire. 1 was kept with a hot stone al my feel through
the. night, to keep from cooling too sudden, as he said that had
been the cause of my disorder. This process entirely cured
me of this disorder to this day; and I have not used any other
practice since, and have relieved many very obstinate cases in
my family by the same medicine.

3 " JABEZ TRUE, '

Elder of the Baptist Church in Salisbury,

Salisbury, December 6, 1821 »


OP SAMU.LL. THOfflbOfl I3i

in the fall of the year 1 808, Dr. Samuel Thomson was sent for
m tliis town; I attended with him and was knowing to all that
transpired with Mr. Lovett, in his sickness until he died, which
is as follows, viz : Mr. Ezra Lovett came for Dr. Thomson to
visit his son Ezra, who was sick of a. fever; the doctor could
not attend until he had called several times. He gave him
medicine first on Monday evening, and on Wednesday attended
through a full course, and also a cousin of his, who had beer.
given over by all the doctors, in a consumption of the liver, and
was completely cured by one operation, and enjoys his health to
this day. Mr. Ezra Lovett, Jr. was so far relieved that the doc
tor thought he would not need any more medicine, and was
called to see elder Bowles of Salem; but gave Lovelt strict
charge not to go out or expose himself. On the Friday follow-
ing lie \va3 so well that he ventured out and went down the
shore to see his friend; the wind was eastward and extremely
cold; he had a severe relapse and was much out; continued to'
grow worse, and on Saturday night I sat lip with him; his father
wished me to administer some medicine, but I declined, as lie
was so sick; I advised to send to Salem for Dr. Thomson, who
was attending elder Bowles. He was accordingly sent for, and
on Sunday evening he arrived, and on seeing the young man
he expressed great doubts of his recovery. He administered
h# medicine and gave his strict attention to him for about two
hours, and gave him over, as out of the reach of his medicine,
and requested his father to send for some other doctor; but he
declined, s&ying if he could not help him, he did not think any
doctor could ; and requested bim to stay all night — to which he
agreed. Elder Williams was called in to pray with him. In
the morning Dr. Thomson renewed the request to Mr. Lovett to
have another doctor to take charge of his son. He accordingly
called in Doctor Howe and Dr. Fisher, who took chatge of him
about sun rise in the morning. Dr. Thomson then left him
and those doctors attended him until about ten o'clock the next
ninht when lie died. Notwithstanding Dr. Thomson gave him
over in two hours after seeing him, and the doctors administered
their medicine to him for twelve hours, yet about one year after
Dr. Thomson was taken up for the murder of said Lovett, and
no credit given him for the wonderful cure of his cousin, who
was attended with him.

Elder Bowles was attended at the same tir^e, who was in the
last stage of a consumption, and was cured. John Lenwaon
was also cured of a consumption. Isaac Perkins' wife was


15-2 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

cured of a dropsy of a deperate nature; all these cures I was
'.veil knowing to have been done at that timo.

WILLIAM RAYMOND.
Beverly, December 7, 1821.


The following statement of the Rev. E. Williams, the gentle-
man alluded to in t lie foregoing certificate oj Wm. Raymond,
has been lately received and is 7iow published for the inform-
ation of the public.

In the year 1808 I had a daughter (Mrs. Appleton) in a very
declining stale of health, and being on a journey from the
es.stw.ard, in passing through Salisbury, heard much conversa-
tion concerning Dr. Thomson's practice, and of several lemark-
able cures he had performed; particularly of a woman he had
raised from apparently the last stage of a consumption, to com-
fortable health. The thought occurred to me that he might help
my daughter; but to satisfy my own mind, I called to see the
woman above mentioned, and found from her own lips that what
I heard respecting her situation to be correct. On my return
to Beverly I stated to Mr. Appleton and his wife, what I had
seen and heard ; and the consequence was, that Dr. Thomson
was sent for, and came and administered for her; at the same
time observing "that he could set a person on their legs, but
they might be too weak to stand" — and had he seen her before
she was reduced so low, she might have recovered her health.
I ever thought he was instrumental in prolonging her life; and
her death, which took place some months after, was occasioned
by the bursting of a blood vessel in a severe turn of coughing.
I being out of health at that time, took his medicine, and
thought I experienced much relief, as did several others.

I well remember that while Mr. Ezra Lovett was under the
care of Dr. Thomson, he was said in a day or two to have got
comfortable; at which time Rev. Mr. Bowles of Salem, was
very ill and his life almost despaired of; application was made to
me by one of the deacons of the church, respecting my opinion
of Dr. Thomson's practice, and the probability of his being
helpful to Mr. Bowles. I was very cautious of giving any
direct opinion on the subject, well knowing the prejudices of
physicians and people. Very early in the morning of the next
day the same deacon called on me, stating that Mr. Bowies'
case appeared to be desperate; that the physician who attended
him could afford him no relief, and wished me immediately to


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 13»

ting Dr. Thomson to Salem, and introduce him to Mr. Bowles
and some gentlemen of Ins church and society, who were pre-
sent. The result of his visit and attendance on Mr. Bowles,
was manifest to all his acquaintances, in liis speedy relief from
his bodily indisposition and recovery to health. While Dr.
Thomson was attending on Mr. Bowles, Mr. Lovett experi-
enced a relapse of his disorder, in consequence of taking cold
by walking out some distance on a very cold day in the month
of December. Dr. Thomson was immediately sent for; myself
being in the neighborhood was called in; Dr. Thomson ob-
served that Mr. Lovett had done very wrong in going out to
expose himself in such weather, in his situation, and wae very
doubtful whether he should be able to help him. Mr. Lovett
appeared in great distress and partially deranged; at ihe request
of his father, Dr. Thomson administered some medicine, but
apparently without any effect. Dr. Thomson was obliged to
return to Salem to attend on Mr. Bowles, and left Mr. Raymond
to stay with Mr. Lovett, who growing worse, two respectable
physicians in the place were sent for and came; whether or not
they administered any medicine I am not able to say, but on
the following day at night, Mr. Lovett died.

I have read a statement of Mr. Wm. Raymond, which has
been published in Dr. Thomson's Narrative, and so far as my
recollection serves, I tkink it to be correct.

E. WILLIAMS.

Boston, November 1 5, 1 825.

A few statements of the diseases and manner of treatment by
Dr Thomsons system and directions, and the benefit received
under the administration of his medicine; by Stephen
Neal, Esq. of Elliot, Me.

I am now willing to assert, with all the boldness that truth
inspires, that I have made use of the medicine aforesaid, for the
space of ten years last past, in my own family, and in the time
have not used any other medicine, or called on any other phy-
sician for advice. I have administered ihe medicine to a great
number of my friends and neighbors, which generally produced
beneficial effects. I shall state a few of the many cases and the
treatment and advantage received.

In April, 1810, my son, who was in the eighteenth year or
his age, had a severe attack of the palsy on his left side; his
hand was entirely useless: we attended him under the directions
of two respectable physicians until some time in the month of


U^ • .CURATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c. '

i

November following, and in all that lime he received but vet]
little benefit from any thing done. .1 was then advised to i
on Dr. Samuel Thomson and get his opinion and advice, which
I did, he being at that lime an utter stranger to me; I called on
on the doctor and he came to see my son ; and after some con-
versation had passed relative to his situation, the doctor observed
that it was a very unfavorable season of the year, (the beginning
of winter) to undertake to remove the complaint; and he did
not appear willing to undertake so arduous a task as that ap-
peared to be; (his left side at that time was wholly numb) — but
said, if by our best exertions we could keep him where he then
was, until the return of warm weather, we then might stand
some chance to help him; but if he was neglected until that
time, he might not live, or if lie did his case might be out of
the reach of medicine. I then concluded fully to try the expe-
riment; and received medicine with directions from the doctor,
who showed me how to apply the same twice or three times.
I proceeded to follow his directions, which was to place the
patient over a steam made by a gallon bason, with one quart of
water in if, and a hot stone put into the bason, covering the
patient at the same time with blankets sufficient to keep him
from the air, all except his face, and while in this situation gave
him a compound of Nos. 2 and 3, or the composition powder,
to keep up the inward heat, promote perspiration •more freely
and prevent faintness; after pursuing this course as long as the
circumstances of the patient could comfortably bear and neces-
sity required, put him into a warm bed with the hot blankets
about him, with as many hot stones quenched in water, wrapped
in cloths wet with vinegar, as was sufficient to keep up a good
degree of perspiration; then gave a portion of No. 1, and when
that had its operation, placed the patient over the steam again a
few minutes, if able to bear it, then bathed him all over instantly
with cold vinegar or water; then put on dry clean clothes, gave
him a warm bed, put a hot stone at his feet, and gave a portion
of the composition powcler to keep up a moderate perspiration.
We continued this process during the winter as often as twice
or three times a week. I was confident of some gain during
this time: but in the spring he mended much fester, so thai bj
the next fall he could walk and use his hand. 1 then concluded
that J understood something of the use and virtue of the medi-
cine, and r agreed with the doctor to give me Ihe information.
My son continued to mend under the administration of the
jmedicine until quite relieved of that complaint.


November, 1813, a 1 tended 1o a man who had taken a bad
cold and h.jd an attack of the rheumatism; so violently was he
seized that he was utterly helpless, not able to stand on his feet,
or put Ins hand to his mouth. I put him in bed (as he could
not stand over a sie;nn) with hot stones quenched in water
wrapped up in cloths wet with vinegar, at his feet and on each
side, which brought him into a free perspiration, gave him a
decoction of No. 2 and 3, which prepared him for the emetic.
1 kept him in that situation five hours, in which time the medi-
cine had performed its operation. I then changed his clothes,
hathcd him in cold vinegar, and he was then able to dress him-
self and walk with ease and comfort, and has been free from
that complaint ever since.

About the sa>ne time I attended a man who had the cholic
extremely bad ; I gave him a compound of Nos. 2 and 3, which
brought him into a gentle perspiration; then gave him No. 1
iVeely, which operated in about twenty-five minutes, and gave
liim such relief that he went to sleep; the next evening I visited
him again, gave him a second gentle course of medicine, which
entirely relieved him, and he has enjoyed a good state of health
ever since, although before he had been subject to having violent
f the same disease,
fn November, 1816, my daughter appeared to be languishing
under the symptoms of the dropsy, as it proved to be; she con-
tinued to grow large, and no operation of medicine appearing to
have the desired effect; she not being attended to seasonably.
by reason of her not being willing to take medicine, when I
told her of the necessity of it. On the second day of February,
1817, Dr. Thomson was sent for, who came and assisted us in
tapping her and took away seventeen pounds three ounces of
water, and by the constant application of the medicine afore
said, aided by the blessing of divine Providence, she is restored
to health. One other case of a young woman in the vicinity ;
die disease had been apparent not more than fifteen or twenty
days of a dropsical habit. I attended and a cure was obtained
without 'apping, by giving her No. 2 and 3, carrying her through
the steam, giving the emetic, and, bathing her abdomen with the
rheumatic drops, and taking some inwardly. She remains well
as to that complaint.

In April, 1819, Ntthan Nason, Jr. of South Berwick, was

dling a tree, when a bov that was with him ac«identally cut off

the main bone of Nason's leg just above the ancle joint; a

doctor came and placed the bones together, and took two cr


loo NARu.viivr. ui- nit, Lith, no.

three stitches to keep the ends of the bones in their place, which
grew together very exact; but while the leg bone was healing,
the foot became very numb and diseased ; had, as they sard, the
appearance of mortification; the doctor then made several in-
cisions on the bottom of the foot, and found that the flesh (here
hud lost all sense of feeling. The doctor then concluded that
the wound was incurable without cutting off the leg — accord-
ingly the time was set to perform the operation on the 12th of
August. I heard of it the evening before, and went to see Na-
son the next morning; 1 examined his foot and told him I
thought I could cure it. He was much pleased to have his leg
saved, and to be freed from the pains of amputation. The doc-
tors came at eleven o'clock with the necessary apparatus; he
declined having the operation performed, and the doctors went
off. Ndson sent for me the next morning, I attended him and
began my operation on the wound, took out the cotton that was
crowded into the incision on the bottom of the foot, and wash-
ed it with soap and water until it was clean, and then applied
the rheumatic drops, while the poultice was making of upland
willow root bark and the inner rind of white pine, boiled in wa~
te'r. I applied this kind of poultice several days, which, with
the application of the drops, the wound immediately came to
its feeling and soon began to teal; I applied the rheumatic
drops and lint and salve, and gave him some bitters and drops
to take to produce a due circulation, which had the desired
effect; and in about sixty days he was able to walk across the
floor without cane or crutch. He can now walk on his foot tol-
erably well and do any sort of farming business, and enjovs
good health; often expresses hU> thanks to his Maker, and good
will to his friends.

I have experienced the operation of the medicine aforesaid,
in one case of the lock-jaw, so called. I put the boy into a free
perspiration by placing him in bed, after giving him a strong
solution of the emetic and rheumatic drops to still his nerves;
and kept him in a moderate perspiration under the operation of
the medicine, about five or six hours, at which time his spasms
left him, anu he i nmediately recovered so as to return to his bu-
siness. He had been attended four days by one of the regular
physicians, previous to my seeing him, who said, or signified,
that he could do no more.

One case of the typhus fever, among many, I will not omit
to state; a young man was taken with (he disease, who was at-
tended by a physician of the order, about three weeks, gradu-


0,F SAMUEL THOMSON. 15/

three stitches to keep the ends of the bones in their places, which
grew together very exact; but while the leg bone was healing,
the foot became very numb and diseased; had, as ihey said, the
appearance of mortilication; the doctor then made several in-
cisions on the bottom of the foot, and found that the flesh there
had lost all sense of feeling. The doctor then concluded that
the wound was incurable without cutting off the leg — accord-
ingly the time was set to perform the operation on the 12th of
August. I heard of it the evening before and went to see Na-
son the next morning; I examined his foot and told him I
thought I could cure it. He was much pleased to have his ieg
saved, and to be freed from the pains of amputation. The doc-
tors ctme at eleven o'clock wi h the necessary apparatus; he
'declined having the operation performed and the doctors went
off. N'ison sent for mo the next morning, I attended him, and
began my operation on the wound, took out the cotton that was
crow-led into the incision on the bottom of the foot, and w sh-
ed it with soap and water until it. was c!enn, and then applied
the rheumatic drops, while the poultice was leaking of upland
willow root bark and the inner rind of white pine, boiled in wa-
ter. I applied this kind of. poultice several days, which with
the application of the drops, the wound immediately came to
its feeling and soon began to heal; I applied the rheumatic
drops and lint and salve, cind gave him some bitters and drops
to take to produce a due circulation, which had the desired
effect; and in about sixty days he was able to walk across the
floor without cane or crutch. He can now walk on his foot tol-
erably well and do any sort of farmipg business, and enjoys
good health; ofien expresses his thanks to his Maker and good
will to his friends.

I hive experienced the operation of the medicine aforesaid,
in one case of the lock-jaw, so called. I put the boy into a free
perspiration by placing him in bed, after giving him a strong
oluiion of the emetic *nd rheumatic drops to still his nerves;
nd kept him in a moderate perspiration under the operation of
he medicine, about five or six hours, at which time his spasms
eft him, and heli-nmeclial^ly recovered so as to return to his bu-
iness. He hid been attended four days by one of the regular
hysicians, previous to my seeing him, who said, or signified
•i,t he could do no more.

One case of the typhus fever among many, 1 will not omit
to sfVe; a young man was taken with the disease, who was at-
tended by a phvsi#ian of the order, about three weeks, gradu-
O


i58 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, kf.

ally wasting in strength and flesh; his physicians al last dcsp
nig of his recovery, I was called to attend h)in. I placed him
over the steam, gave him Nos. 2 and 3, then put him in bed
with hot stones around him, sufficient to keep up perspiration,
and gave an emetic; when that had operated I changtd liis
clothes, bathed him in cold vinegar, pul him in bed, clean and
comfortable. I carried him through three operations as above,
and in ten days he recovered so far as to ride out; his appetite
returned and his general health amended, and he now enjoys a
good state of health. STEPHEN NEAL.

Eliot, January 18, 1822.

About the year 1809, Dr. Samuel Thomson visited these
parts, and made known his system and method of practice in
this town (Eliot) and though some unfavorable reports were
spread by his enemies we were convinced of their falsity, bv
the remarkable cures that were wrought in our neighborhood
and vicinity; and since by a still more special and intimate
knowledge of the medicine in our own family; where we have
proved to our entire satisfaction its perfect innocence and un-
failing beneficial effects. In the year 1810, we purchased the
information, and have used no other remedy since that time to
ihe present. Our family is large, fourteen in number, and the
different members of it have often been assailed with disease
under one form or other, such as fever cholic, dysentery, spit-
ing of blood, &c. &c. but by the timely application of the me-
dicine, the malady whatever form it assumed, has been immedi-
ately removed, and the patient restored to usual health.

As to the manner of treatment we vary it according to tliGi
nature pf the attack, whether mild or violent. In the first in-
stance of common complaint, we generally give some warm ar-
ticle, to wit; a little cayenne :nd hot water, or composition
powder, No. 3, sometimes Nos. 2 and 4 combined; or a great
spoonful of rheumatic drops, with |No. 2. When these appli-
cations are insufficient and the symptoms violent and alarming,
we make use of Nos. 1, 2, and 3, and carry the patient through
the whole process of the medicine, and repeat it as occasion
reqj es, till the patient recovers.

JOHN RAITT.

ELot, November 28, 1821.


This may certify, that about the year 1803, T was sick with
me pulmonic fever and was attended by Dr. Tilton. I was


OP" SAMUEL THOMSOxNf 159

braced up by the barks, which caused a stricture in breathing
and soon began to swell, winch progressed for about five ye is,
when I was in a dropsical habil and continued to grow worse
until ajury of four doclors held a consultation and pronounced
my case hopeless, giving me over. 1 continued under the care of
Dr. Shepherd, who visited me and said my complaint was beyond
the reach of medicine, and I could not continue over three
weeks. At this lime, in May 1808, I was advised to go to Dr.
Thomson. I wen* to see him although with but little faith, as
my case was so desperate; my breathing was with great diffi-
culty. After being attended through several courses of his
medicine, in three weeks I was reduced about fifteen inches in
bigness. 1 returned home arid hive gained until this day; and
and am now enjoying a better state of health than I have before
injwved for sixteen years. MARY EATON.

Exeter, November 20, 1821.


This may certify, that Hannah my wife, had been afflicted
with the asthma for the spice often years. I applied to the
most eminent physicians, is many as six in nu nber, who used
their utmost skill without the lei st beneficial effects. She had
been unable to lay in bed for six months at a time, in each year,
for a number of years, until in the fv II of the year 1808, I sent
for Dr. Samuel Thomson. He visited her and went with me
into the field and gathered some of the emetic plants, bruised
and tinctured them in spirit, which was his mode at that time
of using it. He gave her one spoonful of the tincture and cay-
enne, which so far relieved her that she lay in bed the greater
part of the first night, which was the first time for six months,
that she had lain in bed By using the same medicine she has
always been able to lay in bed and rest comfortable, for twelve

EPHRAIM COLEMAN.

JVexvington, Dec. 3, 1821.

A young man in Roxbury, from some cause unknown, took
a large dose of ratsbane with the intention of destroying him-
self. Dr. P. was called, and on examining into the circum-
stances, said there was no more chance for him to live than
these would be if his head was cut off. After the doctor had
left him, I being present from curiosity, and having purchased
the riant of using the medicine and practice secured te Dr
Thomson by patent, proposed to the friends of the young man


160 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &•.

to make a trial of the same, to save his life. The friends gi\ .
ing their consent, I administered said medicine, which had such
a very favorable effect, that the next tnornmg he was quite com-
fortable. After he was relieved, Dr P. called to see him and
expressed great astonishment that he was alive, saying that there
was not one case in a thousand that a man could live under
similar circumstances. I attended him three or four days, arid
he is now so far recovered as to yvalk about the room.

ELIJAH SIMONDS
Roxbury, Feb. 23, *82fr.


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

OR,

BOTANIC FAMILY PHYSICIAN.


There are three things which have in a greater or less de-
gree, called the attention of men, viz: Religion, Government,
and Medicine. In ages past, these things were thought by mil-
lions to belong to three classes of men, Priests, Lawyers and
Physicians. The Priests held the things of religion , in their
own hands, and brought the people to their terms; kept the
scriptures in the dead languages, so that the common people
could not read them. Those days of darkness are done away ;
the scriptures are translated into our own language, and each
one is taught to read for himself. Government was once con-
sidered as belonging to a few, who thought themselves "born
only to rule." The common people have now become acquaint-
ed with the great secret of government; and know that "all
men are born free and equal," and that magistrates are put in
authority, or out, by the voice of the people, who chouse them
for their public servants.

While those, and many other things are brought where "com-
mon people" can understand them; the knowledge and use of
medicine, is in a great measure concealed in a dead language,
and a sick man is often obliged to risk his life, where he would
not. risk a dollar; and should the apothecary or his apprentice
make a mistake, the sick man cannot correct it, and thus is ex-
\l to receive an instrument of death, instead of that whicl
would restore him to health had he known good medicine.
()2


162 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, ic.

"It maybe alleged, (said Dr. Buchan,) that laying medi-
cine more open to mankind, would lessen their faith in it. This
indeed would be the case with regard to some; but it would have
a quite contrary effect upon others. I know many people who
physician, who will nevertheless, very readily take a medicine
which they know, and whose qualities they are in some mea-
sure acquainted with."

"Nothing ever can, or will inspire mankind with an absolute
confidence in physicians, but L>y their being open, frank, and un-
disguised in 'heir behaviour."

tk 'f he most effectual way to destroy quackery in any art or
science, is to diffuse the knowledge of it among mankind. Did
phvsicians write their prescriptions in the common language of
the country, and explain their intentions to the patient, as far as
he could understand them, it would enable them to know when
the medicine had the desired effect ; would inspire him witli ab.
solute confidence in the physician; and would make him dread
and detest every man who pretended to cram a secret medicine
or poison down his throat."

It is true that much of what is at this day called medicine, is
deadly poison; and were people to know what is offered them of
this kind, they would absolutely refuse ever to receive it as a
medicine. This I have long seen and known to be true; and
have labored hard for many years to convince them of the evils
that attend such a mode of procedure with the sick; and have
turned my attention to those medicines that grow in our own
country, which the God of nature has prepared for the benefit .of
mankind. Long has a general medicine been sought for, and I
am confident I have found such as are universally applicable in
all c".ses of disease, and which may be used with safety and suc-
cess, in the hands of the people.

4i"ter thirty years study and repeated successful trials of the
medical vegetables of »ur country, in all the discuses incident
to our climate; I can, with well grounded assurance, recommend
my system of practice and medicines to the publie, as salutary
and efficacious.

Great discoveries and improvements have been mrde in vari-
ous arts and sciences since the first settlement of our country,
while its medicines have been very much neglected. As these
medicines, suited to every disease, grow spontaneously upon our
own soil; as they are better adapted to the constitution; i s the
price €>f imported drugs is rery high; it follows, whether we


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 163

consult health, which is of primary importance, or expense, a
decided preference should be given to the former, as an object
of such magnitude as no longer to be neglected . Yet in the in-
troduction of those medicines [ have been violently opposed,
and my theory andjpractice condemned, notwithstanding the de-
monstrative proofs in their favor. But those who thus condemn
have taken no pains to throw oflf prejudice and examine the sub-
ject with candor and impartiality. Such as have, are thoroughly
satisfied of their utility and superior excellence

From those who measure a man's understanding and ability
to be beneficial to his fellow men, only from the acquisition he
has made in literature from books; from such as are governed by
outward appearance, and who will not stoop to examine a sys-
tem on the ground of its intrinsic merit, I expect not encourage-
ment, but opposition. But this will not discourage me. I con-
sider the discovery I have made,of inestimable value to man-
kind, and intended for the great benefit of those who are willing
to receive it.

Being born in a new country, at that time almost an howling
wilderness, my advantages for an education were very small ; but
possessing a natural gift for examining the thingsof Nature, my
mind was left entirely free to follow that inclination, by enquir
ing into the meaning of the great variety of objects around me.

"Possessing a body like other men, I was led to enquire into the
nature of the component parts of what man is made. I found
him composed of the four elements — Earth,Water, Air and Fire.
The earth and water I found were the solids; the air and fire the
fluids. The two first I found to be the component parts ; the two
last kept him in motion. Heat, I found, was life, and Cold death.
Each one who examines into it will find that all constitutions are
life of man. This is contained in two things-food and medicine,
which are in harmony with each other; often grow in the same
field to be use ! by thesame people. People who are capable of
raising their food and preparing the same, may as easily learn to
collect and prep-re all their medicines and administer the same,
when it is needed. Our life depends on heat; food is the fuel
that kindles and continues that heat. The digestive powers being
correct, causes the food to consume; thi« continues the warmth
of the bodv, bv continually supporting the fire.

The stomach is the deposit from which the whole body is sup-
ported. The he it is maintained in the stomach by consuming the
food • and all the body and limbs receive their proportion of


narrative or the life &h.

nourishment and heat from thai source; as the whole room k
warmed by the fire which is consumed in the fire place. The
greater the quantity of wood consumed in the fire place, the
greater the heat in the room. So in the body; the more food,
well digested, the more heat and support through the whole
man. By constantly receiving food into the stomach, which is
sometimes not suitable for the best nourishment, the stomach
becomes foul, so that the food is not well digested. This causes
the body to lose its heat — then the appetite fails; the bones ache
and the man is sick in every part of the whole frame.

This situation of the body shows the need of medicine, and the
kind needed ; which is such as will clear the stomach and bowels
and restore the digestive powers. When this is done, the food will
vaise the heat again, and nourish the whole man. All the art re-
quired to do this is, to know what medicine will do it, and how
to administer it, as a person knows how to clear a stove and the
pipe when clogged with soot, that the fire may burn free, and
the whole room be warmed as before. The body, after being
cleared of whatever clogs it, will consume double the food, and
the food will afford double the nourishment and heat, that it did
before. We know that our life depends on food, and the stomach
being in a situation to receive and digest it. When the stomach
and bowels are clogged, all needed is, the most suitable medicine
to remove the obstruction in the system. All disease is caused
by clogging the system; and all disease is removed by the digestive
powers,so that food may keep up that heat on which life depends.
I have found by experience that the learned doctors are wrong
in considering fever a disease or enemy; the fever is a friend,
and cold the enemy. This I found by their practice in my family
until they had five times given them over to die. Exercising my
own judgment, I followed after them, and relieved my family
every time. After finding a genenl principle respecting fevers,
and reducing that to practice, I found it sure in all disease, where
there was any nature left to build on, and in three years practice
I never lost one patient.

I attended on all the fevers peculiar to our country, and always
used itas a friend, and that returned the gratitude to the patient.
I soon began togive this information to the people, and convinc-
ed many that they might as certainly relieve themselves of their
disuse, as of their hunger. The expense to them to be always
able to relieve themselves and families, would be but small • and
the medicine they may procure and prepare themselves.


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 165

This greatly disturbed the learned doctors, and some of Uiem
undertook to destroy me, by reporting tint. I used poison ; though
they made no mention of my using their instruments of death,
Mercury, Opium, Ratsbane, Nitre, and the Lancet. I consider
ed it my duty to withstand them, though I found my overthrow-
was what they aimed at. A plan was once laid to take me in the
night, but I escaped. Next, I was indicted as though I had given
poison, and a bill brought against me for wilful murder. I was
bound in irwns and thrust into prison, to be kept there through
the winter, without being allowed bail. I petitioned for and
obtained a special court to try the cause, and was honorably ac-
quitted after forty days imprisonment. I maintained my integriy
in the place where my persecution began. In five years, while
vindicating tins new and useful discovery, I lost five thousand
dollars, besides all the persecution, trouble, loss of health, and
reproach which has been in connexion with the losses.

It has bee* acknowledged, even by those who are unfriendly
to me and my practice, that my medicine may be good in some
particular cases, but not in all. But this is an error. For
there are but two great principles in the constitution of things,
whether applied to the mind or body; the principle of life ami
the principle of death. That which contains the principle of
life can never be tortured into an administration of death. If,
then, a medicine is good in any case, it is because it is agreea-
ble to nature, or this principle of life, the very opposite of dis-
ease. If it is agreeable in one case, it must be absolutely so in all,

By the active operation of nature, the whole animal economy
is carried on: and the father of the healing art, Hippocrates
tells us, what is an obvious truth, that Nature is Heat. The
principle is the same in all, differing only in degrees. When
disease invades the frame, it resists in proportion to its force,
till overpowered into submiss ; on, and when extinguished, death
Ifollows, and it ceases to operate alike in all. If then, he>t is
life, and its extinction death, a diminution of this vital flsme,
n every instance, constitutes disease, and is an approximation
to death. All then, that medicine can do in the expulsion of
disorder, is to kindle up the decaying spark, and restore its en-
ergy till it glows in all its wonted vigor. If a direct adminis-
tration can°be made to produce this effect, (and it can,) it is
evidently immaterial what is the name or color of the disease,
whether' bilious, yellow, scarlet or spotted ; whether it is simple
or complicated, or whether nature has one enemy or more.—
Names are arbitrary things; the knowledge of a name is but the-


166 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

cummin and anise, but in the knowledge of the origin of a
malady, and its antidote, lies the weightiei matters of this sci-
ence. This knowledge makes the genuine physician; all with-
out it, is re; 1 quackery.

It has been a general opinion, that extensive study and great
erudition are necessary to form the eminent physician. But <dl
this may be as Paul saith, but science, falsely so called. A man
may have a scientific knowledge of the human frame — he may
know the names in every language of every medicine, mineral
and vegetable, is well as eveiy disease, and yet be a miserable
physician. But there have been men, without this to boast of,
from theeuliest ages of the world, who have "arisen, blest with
the sublimer powers of genius, who have, as it were, with one
look pierced creation, and with one comprehensive view, grasp-
ed the whole circle of science: and left learning itself, toiling
after them in vain. 1 ' A. man never can be great without intel-
lect, and he never can more than fill the measure of his capacity,
There is a power beyond the reach o' art, and there are gifts
thrit study and learning can never rival.

The practice of the regular physicians, that is, those who get
a diploma, at the present time, is not to use those means which
would be most likely to cure disease,- but to try experiments
upon what they have read in books, and to see how much a pa
tient can bear without producing death. After pursuing this
plan during their lives, they know just about- as much as they
did when they began to practice, of what is really useful to
mankind. If a patient dies under their hands, why, it is the
will of God, and they are sure to *get extravagantly paid for
their trouble, and nothing more is said about it; but if one out
of hundreds of my patients die, and where the doctors have
given them over as incurable, they at once cry out, that it is
quackery — that I gave them poison, &c. for the purpose of run-
ning meand rny medicine down, and to prevent its being used by
the people. The fact is well Known to thousands who have
used my medicine, ana to which they are ready to attest, that it
is perfectly harmless; and I defy the faculty to produce one in-
stance wherein it has had any bad effects.

It is true, that the study of anatomy, or structure of the hu-
man Dody, and of the whole animal economy, is pleasing and
useful; nor is there any objection to this, however minute and
critical, ifitisnot to the neglect of firs; great principles, and
the weightier matters of knowledge. But it is no more neces-
sary to mankind at large, to qualify them to administer relief


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. [ffj

from pam and sickness, than to a cook in preparing food to sat-
isfy hunger and nourishing the body. There is one general
cause of hunger, and one general supply of food; one general
cause of disease and one general remedy. One can be satisfied,
and,the other removed, by an infinite variety of articles, best
adapted to those different purposes — That medicine, therefore
tfiat will open obstruction, promote perspiration, and restore di-
gestion's suited to every patient, whatever form the disease as-
sumes, and is universally, applicable. And acute disorders, such
as fevers, cholics, and dysentery, may be relieved thcrebv, in
twenty-four or forty-eight hours, at most.


R EM A R KS OA r FE VERS.

Much has been said and written upon fevers, by the profes-
sedly learned Doctors of Medicine, without throwing the most
profitable light on the subject, or greatly benefitting mankind.
They have been abundantly fruitful in inventing names for dis-
ease, Mid with great care and accuracy distinguished the dif-
ferent symptoms; but they appear quite barren as to the knowl-
edge of their origin and remedy. To the first, but little im-
port nee, comparatively speaking, can be attached; the latter is
of the highest importance to all classes of people.

According to the writings of learned Physicians, there are a
great variety of fevers, some more and some less dangerous. —
But to begin with a definition of the Name. What is fever?
Heat, undoubtedly, though a disturbed operation of it. But is
there in he human frame, more than one kind of heat? Yes,
says the physician, (strange as it may appear,) there is the pleu-
rciic heat, the slow nervous heat, the putrid heat, the hectic
hi- t, the yellow heat, the spotted or cold heat, the typhus or
ignorant heat, and many other heats; and sometimes, (calami-
tous to tell,) one poor patient has the most, or the whole of
these fevers, and dies at last for want of heat.

Is fever or heat a disease? Hippocrates, the acknowledged
fether of physicians, maintained that nature is heat; and he is
conect. Is nature a disease! Surely it is not. Whatiscom-
monlv colled fever, is the effect, and not the cause of disease.
It is the struggle of nature to throw off disease. The cold
causes an obstruction, and fever arises in consequence of that
obstruction, to throw it off. This is universally the case. Re-
move the cause, the effect will ceas^. No person ever yet die,d


r68 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &o,

of a fever! for as death approaches, the patient grows cold, un-
til in death the last sp:nk of lieat is extinguished. Tliis, the
learned doctors cannot deny; and as this is true, they ought, in
justice, to acknowledge that their whole train of depletive re-
medies, such as Weeding, blistering, physicing, starving, with
all their refngeratives; their opium, mercury, arsenic, anti-
mony, nitre, «Scc. are so many deadly engines, combined with
the disease, against the constitution and life of the patient. If
cold, which is the commonly received opinion, (and which is
true,) is the cause of fever, to repeatedly bleed the patient and
administer mercury, opium, nitre, and other refrigerants to re-
store him to health, is as though a man should, to increase a fire
in his room, throw a part of it ou f of the house, and to increase
the rem -tinder, put on water, snow and ice.

As it is a fict that cannot be denied, that fever takes its rise
from one great cause or origin, it follows of course, that one
method of removing that cause, will answer in all cases; and
thegreal principle is to assist nature, which is heat.

A ! the commencement of a fever, by direct and proper applica-
tion of suitable medicine, it can be easily and speedily removed,
and the patient need not be confined long. Twenty-four or forty:
eight hours, to theexfent, are sufficient, and often short of that
time, the fever may be removed, or that which is the cause of it.
But where the pa'ient is left unassisted, to struggle with the dis-
ease, until his strength is exhausted, and more especially, when
the most unnatunl and injurious administrations are made, if a
recovery is possible, it must of necessity take a long time. —
These decl intions are true and have been often proved, and can
be again, to the sal isfaction of every candid person, at the hazard
of any forfeiture the faculty may challenge.

Noiwit hstanding all these tilings, how true are the words of the
intelligent Dr. llervey, who says, "By whit unaccountable per-
versa y m our frame does it appear, that we set ourselves so
much against any thingthat is new? Can any onebehold,wiihout
scora, such drones of physicians, and after the space of so many
hundred yeirs experience and practice of their predecessorsnot
one single medicine has been detected, that hastheleast force di-
rectly to prevent, to oppose, and expel a continued fever? Should
any, by a more sedulous observation, pretend to make the least
step towards the discovery of such remedies, their hatred <iiid
envy would swell against him, as a legion of devils against
virtue; the whole society will dart their malice at him, and tor-
ture htm with all the calumnies imaginable, without sticking at


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 169

any tiling that should destroy him root and branch. For he
who professes to be a reformer of the art of physic, must resolve
to run the hazard of the martyrdom of his reputation, life and
estate.'"

The treatment which the writer has received from some of the
learned physicians since his discovery of the remedy for the fever
and various other diseases, is a proof of the truth of this last say-
ing of Dr. Hervey. They have imprisoned him, and charged
him with every thing cruel and unjust; though upon a fair trial
their violent dealings have come down upon their heads; while
he has not only been proved innocent before the court ,but useful;
having relieved many which the other physicians had given over
to die. 1 will now take notice of the yellow fever. The cause
of this fatal disease is similar to the spotted fever. The cause of
death in the latter, is inconsequence of its producing a balance
by eold,outward and inward ; and in the former there is a balance
of heat outward and inward; both produce the same tiling,
that is a total cessation of motion, which is death. The color
of the skin has given name to both these diseases. The yellow
is caused by the obstruction of the gall; instead of being dis-
charged through its proper vessels, it is forced and diffused
through the pores of the skin. The same effects that are produ-
ced by these two fevers may be observed in the motion of the
sea; when the tide is done running up, there is what is called
slack water, or a balance of power, and the same thing takes
pice when it is done running down; when the fountain is
raised, the water runs from it; but when it is lowered the water
runs towards it. The same cause produces the same effect in
the spotted and yellow fevers; for when a balance of power be-
tween the outward and inward heat takes place, death follows.
alarming, they being most fatal, 1 shall pass over those of a
less alarming nature, and merely observe, that there is no other
difference in all cases of fever, than what is crused by the dif-
ferent decrees of cold, or loss of inward heat, which are 'wo ad-
verse parties in one body, contending for power If the beat
gains the victory, the cold will be disinheiited and health wil I be
restored : but, on the other hand, if cold gains the ascendancy,
heat will be dispossessed of its empire, and death will follow* ot
course As soon as life ceases, the body becomes cold, which
is conclusive evidence, that its gaining the victory is the cause of
death When the power of cold is nearly equal to that of heat,
the fever or strife between the two parties may continue for a
P


170 NARRATIVE OK THE LIFE, Ace.

longer or shorter time, according to circumstances; this is what
is called a long fever, or fever and ague. The battle between cold
and heat will take place periodically, sometimes every day at
other tidies, every other day, and they will leave offabout equal
heat keeping a little the upper hand. In attempting to euro a
case of this kind, we must consider whether the fever is a friend
or an enemy; if it is a friend, which I hold to be the fact, when
the fever-fit is on, increase the power of heat, in order to drive
off the cold, and life will bear the rule; but, on the contrary,
should cold be considered a friend, when the cold-fit is on, by
increasing its power, you drive off the heat, and death must en-
sue. Thus you may promote life or death, by tempering cold
and heat.

Much has been said by the doctors concerningthe turn of a
fever, and how long a time it will run. When it is said that a
fever will turn at such a time, I presume it must mean that it
has been gone; this is true, for it is then gone on the outside,
and is trying to turn again and go inside, where itbelongs. In-
stead of following the dictates of nature and aiding it to subdue
the cold, the doctor uses all his skill to kill he fever. How,
would I ask, in the name of common sense, can any thing turn
when killed? Support the fever and it will return inside; the
cold, which is the cause of disease, will be driven out, and
health will be restored. In all cases called fever, the cause is
the same in a greater or less degree, and may be relieved by one
general remedy. The cold causes canker, and before the can-
ker is seated, the strife will take place between cold and heat;
and while the hot flashes and cold chills remain, it is evidence
tint the canker is not settled, and the hot medicine alone, occa-
sionally assisted by steam, will throw it off; but as the contest
ce.ses, the heat is steady on the ouiside: then canker assumes
the power inside; this is called a settled fever. The truth is,
the canker is fixed on the inside and will ripen and come off in
a short time, if the, fever is kept up so as to overpower the cold.
This idea is new and never was known until my discovery. By
raising the fever with No.s. 1 and 2, and taking oft' the canker
wi f h No. 3, and the same given by injections, we may turn a fe-
ver when we please; but if this is not understood, the canker
will ripen and come off itself, when the fever will turn and go
inside and the cold will be driven out; therefore they will do
much better without a doctor than with. The higher the fever
tuns. tV sooner the cold will be subdued; and if you contend
against die he. t, the longer will be the run of the fever, and
when killed, death follows.


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. tfl

"When a patient is bled, it lessens the heat and gives double
power to the cold; like taking out of one side of the scale and
putting it in the other, which doubles the weight, and turns the
scale in favor of the disease. By giving opium it deadens the
feelings; the small doses of nitre and calomel tend to destroy
what heat remains, and plants new crors of canker, which will
stand in different stages in the body, the same ascorn planted in
the field every week, will keep some in all stages; so is the dif-
ferent degrees in canker. This is the reason why there are so
many different fevers as are named ; when onefever turns anoth-
er sets in and so continues one afier another until the harvest is
all ripe, if the season is long enough: if not. the cold and frost
takes them off — then it is said they died of a fever It might
•with as much propriety be said that the cora killed with frost
died with the heat. The question, whether the heat or cold
killed the patient, is easily decided, for that power which be- rs
rule in the body after death is what killed the patient, which is
cold — as much as that which bears rule when he is alive is heat.
When a person is taken sick, it is common to say, I have got a
cold and am afraid I am going to have a fever; but no fears are
expressed of the cold he has taken; neither is it mentioned
when the cold left him. The fashionable practice is to fight the
remains of heat till the patient dies, by giving cold the victory;
in which case, is it not a fact that the doctor assists the cold to
kill the patient? Would it not have been more reasonable, or
hkely to have cured them, when the fever arose to throw off ihe
cold, to have helped the fever and give nature the victory over
its enemy, when the health would be restored the same as before
they took the cold.

We frequently see in the newspapers, accounts of people dy-
ing in consequence of drinking cold water when very warm. —
Some fall dead instantly, and others linger for several hours;
the doctors have net "been able to afford any relief when
called. The principal symptoms are chills and shivering with
cold, which ts viewed with astonishment by those who witness
it. Proper caution should always be observed by persons when
very warm and thirsty, who goto a pump to drink, by swallow-
ing something hot before drinking the water, and swallowing a
little at a time, which will prevent any fatal effects.

This strange circumstance, of being cold on a hot day, and
which has never been accounted for in a satisfactory manner to
the public, I shall endeavor le explain in as comprehensive and
plain language as lam capable, The component parts of an-


£|(fc NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE.

nnal bodies are earth and water, and life and motion are caused
by fire and air. The inward heat is the fountain oflife, and
as much as that has the power above the outward heat, so
much we have life and strength, and when we lose this power
*ef heat, our strength and faculties decay in proportion; and it
is immaterial whether we lose this power by losing the inward
heat or raising the outward heat above it, as the effect is the
same. If you raise the stream level with the fountain, it a,tops
tha current and all motion will cease; and the same effects will
follow by lowering the fountain to a level with the stream. —
When the outward heat becomes equal with the inward, either
by the ones being raised or the others being lowered, cold as-
sumes the power and death takes place.

The cause of the fatal effects by drinking cold water, is be-
cause the fountain of life is lost by the stream being raised
above the fountain, or the inward heat lowered by throwing in-
to the stomach so large a quantity of cold water as to give the
outward heat the power of balancing the inward, and in pro-
portion as the one approaches to an equality with tiie other, so
the strength is diminished, and when equal, they die.

I shall now make some further remarks on this and other
subjects, with a hope that it maybe beneficial to mankind. — ■
The reason why these extraordinary cases appear so wonderful
to the people, is, because they are unacquainted with the cause.
Why should we wonder at a person being cold on a hot day
when we are not, any more than we should wonder at. another
being hungry, when we have just been eating; or that others
can be in pain, when we are enjoying good health? The one
is as plain and simple as the other, when understood. The
want of inward heat is the cause of their being cold, just as
much as the want of food is the cause of hunger, or the want
of health is the cause of pain. One person may have lost the
natural power of heat, by an effect which others in similar sit-
uations may not have experienced, and will suffer the conse-
quences of cold in proportion to the loss of inward heat; this
is manifest in the different degrees of sickness. If the inward
heat loses its balance of power suddenly, death is immediate;
which is the case in spotted fever and in drowned persons. —
When the inward and outward cold is balanced, life ceases,
and the blood being stopped in its motion, settles in spots,
which appearance has given name to what is called spotted fe-
ver. The same appearances take place on drowned persons^
and from the same cause.


OF ftAMTJF.L THOMSON. 173

The practice of bleeding for the purpose of curing disease.
I consider most unnatural and injurious. Nature never furnish-
es the body with more blood than is necessary for the mainten-
ance of health; to take away part of the blood, therefore, is
taking away just so much of their life, and it is as contrary to na-
ture, as it would be to cut away part of their flesh. Many ex-
periments have been tried by the use of the lancet in fevers;
but I believe it will be allowed by all, that most of them have
proved fatal; and several eminent physicians have died in con-
sequence of trying the experiment on themselves. If the sys-
tem is diseased, the blood becomes as much diseased as any
other part; remove the cause of the disorder and the blood will
recover and become healthy as soon as any other part; but how
taking part of it away can help to cure what remains, can never
be reconciled with common sense.

There is no practice used by the physicians that I consider
more inconsistent with common sense, and at the same time
more inhuman, than blistering to remove disease; particularly
insane persons, or what the doctors call dropsy on the brain ; in
which cases, they shave the head and draw a blister on it. —
Very few patients, if any, ever survive this application. What
would be thought if a scald should be caused by boiling water
to remove disease? Yet there is no difference between this and
a blister made by flies. 1 have witnessed many instances where
great distress and very bad effects have been caused by the use
of blisters; and believe I can truly say, that 1 never knew any
benefit derived from their use. It very frequently causes stran-
guary, when the attempted remedy become* much worse than
tli6 disease

In support of my opinions on the subject, I will give the fol-
lowing extract from the writings of Dr. Hillary, an eminent
physician of London.

► . "I have long observed that blisters are too frequently and
too often improperly used, as they are now so much in fashion.
It is very probable, that we have no one remedy, in all the Ma-
teria Medica, that is so frequently, and so often improperly ap-
plied, not only in too many cases where they cannot possibly
aive any relief, but too often where they musl unavoidably in
Urease the very evil which they are intended to remove or re-
lieve How often do we see them applied, and sometimes
several of them, bv pretended dabblers m physic, not only when
there are no indications for applying them, but where the true
indications are against their application; as. in the beginning
P2


174 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE &$

of most fevers, and especially those of the inflammatory an 1 o t
the putrid kind, where, in the first, the stimulous of i <ri<l
salts of the cantharides, which pass into the blood, must una-
void ibly increase both the stimulous and the momentum of the
blood, which were too great before, and so render the fever in-
flammatory, and all its symptoms worse.

And it is well known that the Cantharides contain a great
qu tnlity of alkcline semi-volatile salts, which pass into the blood,
though they are applied externally; and attenuate, dissolve and
hasten and increase its putrefaction, which is also confirmed by
the putrid alkaline acrimony which they produce in the urine, with
the heat and stranguary which it gives to the urinary passage."


on sts:aming.

Steaming is a very important branch of my system of prac-
tice, which would in many cases without it, be insufficient to
effect a cure. It is of great importance in many cases consid-
ered by the Medical faculty as desperate; and they would be so
under my mode of treatment, if it was not for this manner of
applying heat to the body, for the purpose of reanimating the
system and aiding nature in restoring health. I had but little
knowledge of medicine, when through necessity, J discovered
the use of steaming, to add heat or life to the decaying spark,
and with it I was enabled, by administering such vegetable pre-
parations as I then had a knowledge of, to effect a cure in cases
where the regular practitioners had given them over.

In all cases where the heat of the body is so far exhausted as
not to be rekindled by using the medicine, and being shielded
from the surrounding air by a blanket, or being in bed, and
chills or stupor attend the patient, then applied heat by steaming
becomes indispensably necessary; and heat caused by steam, in
the manner that I use it, is more natural in producing perspira-
tion, than any dry heat that can be applied to the body in any
other manner, which will only serve to dry the air and prevent
perspiration in many cases of disease, where a steam by water
or vinegar would promote it and add a natural warmth to the
body, and thereby increase the life and motion, which has lain
silent in consequence of the cold.

, Dr. Jennings has contrived a plan to apply heat to the body
By a dry vapour, caused by burning spirit, which he calls a va


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 175

pour bath, the idea of which was, I have no doubt, taken from
hearing of my steaming to raise the heat of the body. It may
answer in some cases and stages of disease; but in a settled fe-
ver and other causes where there is a dry inflammation on the
surface of the body, it will not answer any good purpose, and I
think would be dangerous, without the use of my medicine to
first raise a free perspiration; for when the surface of the body
is dry the patient cannot bear it, as it will crowd the head and
cause distress, the same as is produced by burning charcoal, or
from hot stoves in a tight room, and will bring on a difficulty in
breathing, which is not the case in steaming in rny way. This ma-
chine can only be used in bed, where the vapour cannot be applied
to the body equally at the same time, therefore is no better than
a hot dry stone put on each side and to the feet of the patient, for
he can turn himself and get heat from them as well as to have all
the trouble of burning spirit and turning to the vapour of it, to
get warm by this dry heat. When the patient stands over a
steam raised by putting a hot stone in water, which gives a more
equal heat all over the body than can be done in any other man-
ner, it can be raised higher and may be tempered at pleasure by
wetting the face and stomach with cold water as occasion re-
quires.

The method adopted by me, and which has always answered
the desired object, is as follows — Take several stones of differ-
ent sizes and put them in the fire till red hot,then take the small-
est first, and put one of them into a pan or kettle of hot water,
with the stone about half immersed — the patient must be un-
dressed and a blanket put around him so as to shield his whole
body from the air, and then place him over the steam. Change
the stones as often as they grow cool, so as to keep up a lively
steam, and keep them over it; if they are faint, throw a little cold
water on the face and stomach, which will let down the outward
heat and restore the strength — after they have been ovei the
steam long enough, which will generally be about 15 or 20
minutes, they must be washed all over with cold water or spirits
and be put in bed, or may be dressed, a? the circumstancesof the
case shall permit. Before they are placed over the steam, give
a dose of No. 2 and 3, or composition, to raise the inward heat.
When the patient is too weak to stand over the steam, it may
be done in bed, by heating three stones and put them in water
till done hissing, "then wrap themin a number of thicknesses of
cloths wet with water, and put one on each side and one at the


I?6 NARRATIVE Of THE LIFE, fee.

feet, occasionally wetting the face and stomach with cold watei,
when faint.

Many other plans may he contrived in steaming, which would
make less trouble and be more agreeable to the pulient,especially
where they are unable to stand over the steam. An open work-
ed chair may be made, in which they might sit and be steamed
very conveniently; or a settee might be made in the samemanner
in which they might be laid and covered with blankets so as to
shield them from the surrounding air. Such contrivances a3
these would be very convenient in cases where the patient would
have to be carried through a course of medicine rnd steamed a
number of times, as is Irequently necessary, particularly in com-
plaints that have been of long standing.

As I have frequently mentioned a regular course of medicine,
I will here state what is meant by it, and the most proper way
in which it is performed. Firstly, give No. 2 and 3, or compo-
sition, adding a tea-spoonful of No. 6; then steam, and when in
bed repeat it, adding No. 1, which will cleanse the stomach and
assist in keeping up a perspiration; when this has done operat-
ing, give an injection made with the same articles. Where
there are symptoms of nervous affection or spasms, put half a
tea-spoonful of the nerve powder into each dose given, and into
the injection. In violent cases, where immediate relief is need-
ed, Nos. 1 , 2, 3, and 6, may be given together. Injections may
be administered at all times and in all cases of disease to advan-
tage; it can never do harm, and in many cases, they are indis-
pensably necessary, especially where there is canker and inflam-
mation in the bowels, and there is danger of mortification, in
which case, add a teaspoonful of No. 6. In cases of this kind,
the injection should be given -first, or at the same time of giv-
ing the composition, or No. 3.

The use of steaming is good in preventing sickness as well
as curing it. When a person has been exposed to the cold, and
is threatened with disease, it may be prevented, and long sick-
ness and expense saved by a very little trouble, by standing over
a steam and following the directions before given, till the cold
is thoroughly thrown off and a lively perspiration takes place;
then go to bed, taking the stone from the kettle, and wrap it in
wet cloths and put it to the feet. This may be done without th&
medicine when it cannot be had; but is much better to take
something to raise the inward heat at the same time. A tea
made of mayweed or summer-savory, or ginger and hot water
sweetened, may be given, or any thing that is warming. Thi?


OF SAMUEL THOMSON I7f

advice is for the poor, and those who have not a knowledge of
the medicine; and will many times save them much trouble
and long sickness.

Steaming is of the utmost importance in cases of suspended
animation, such as drowned persons; in which case, place the
body over a moderate steam, shielded by a blanket from the
Weight of the external air, and ranfying the air immediately
around them with the steam. Pour into the mouth some of the
tincture of Nos. 1, 2, and 6; and if there is any internal heat-
remaining, there will be muscular motion about the eyes and in
the extremities. If this symptom appears, repeat the dose sev-
eral times, and renew the hot stone, raising the heat by degrees
if the outward heat is raised too sudden, so as to balance the
inward, you will fail cf the desired object, even after life appears.
Tins is the only danger of any difficulty taking place — alvays
bear in mind to keep the fountain above the stream, or the in-
ward heat above the outward, and all will be safe. After life is
restored, put them in bed and keep the perspiration free for
twelve hours, by hot stones wrapped in cloths wet with water,
and occasionally giving the tincture as before mentioned, when
the coldness and obstructions are thrown off, and the patient
will be in the enjoyment of his natural strength. Beware of
bleeding or blowing in the mouth with a bellows, as either will
generally prove fatal.

In many cases of spotted fever, steaming is as necessary as in
drowned persons; such as when they fall apparently dead; then
the same treatment is necessary to lighten the surrounding air
till you can raise the inward heat so as to get the determining
power to the surface. Begin with a small stone and as life gains
increase the steam as the patient can bear it; if the distress is
great, give more hot medicine inside, and as soon as an equili-
brium takes place the pain will cease. In all cases of this kind
the difficulty cannot be removed without applied heat to the
body, and is more natural by steam than by any other means
that can be made use of. In cases of long standing, where the
patient has been run down with mercury and left in a cold and
obstructed state, liable to rheumatism and other similar com-
plaints, they cannot be cured with medicine without applied heat
by steam, as nothing will remove mercury but heat.

* When a pit lent is carried through a course of my medicine
and steamed, who has been long under mercurial treatment;
and while under the operation of the steam, when the heat is at
the high -•'. 'ho face will swell in consequence of the poisonous


V>8 NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, fas,

vapour being condensed by the air, the face being open to -it.
To relieve this, put them in bed, and lake a hot stone wrapped
in several thicknesses of cloth wet with water, pouring on a lii-
tle vinegar, and making a lively steam; put it in the bed and
cover the head with the clothes and let thein breathe the steam
as hot as can be borne, until the sweat covers the swelled parf,
This will in about fifteen or twenty minutes throw out the poi-
son and the swelling will abate. This method also is of great
service in agues and teeth ache caused by cold ; and many other
cases of obstruction from the same cause, especially youn^
children stuffed on the lungs.

To steam small children, the best way is to let them sit in
the lap of a person; covering both with a blanket and set over
the steam, pouring a little vinegar on the stone; or it may be
done in bed with a hot stone, wrapped in cloths wet. with water,
putting on a little vinegar, and covering them with the bed-
clothes laid loosely over them; but in this way you cannot, ex-
ercise so good judgment in tempering the steam, as when you
aTe steamed with them. If the child appears languid and faint,
the outward heat is high enough; put a little cold water on the
face or breast, which will restore the strength, then rub them in
a cloth wet with vinegar, spirit or cold water, put on clean
clothes, and put them in bed, or let them set up, as their strength
will permit. This is safe in all cases of cold and obstructed
perspiration. It ought always to be borne strongly in mind, to
give a child drink often, when under the operation of medicine,
or while steaming; if this is not done they will suffer much, as
they cannot ask for it.

In all cases of falls or bruises, steaming is almost infallible;
and is much better than bleeding, as is the common practice
which tends to destroy the life instead of promoting it. If the
person is not able to stand over the steam, it must be done in
that you have, and keep the perspiration free till the pain and
soreness abates, and the strength will be soon restored. If the
advantages of this mode of treatment were generally known,
bleeding in such cases, or any other, to remove disease, would
never be lesorted to by the wise and prudent.

The use of steaming is to apply heat to the body where it is
deficient, and clear off obstructions caused by cold, which the
operations of the medicine will not raise heat enough to do; for
as the natural heat of the body becomes thereby lower than the
natural state of health, it must by art be raised as much above


or SAMUEL THOMSON. \'J*

as it has been below; and this must be repeated until the di-
gestive powers are restored, sufficient to hold the heat by di-
gesting the food, then the health of the patient will be restored
by eating and drinking such things as the appetite shall require.
In this way the medicine removes disease, and food, by being
properly digested, supports nature and continues that heat on
which life depends.

Some who practice according to my system boast of carrying
their patients through in a shorter time without the trouble of
Steaming; this is easily accounted for; steaming is the most la-
borious part of the practice for those who attend upon the sick,
and the most useful to the patient; as one operation of steam-
ing will be more effectual in removing disease, than four courses
without it; and to omit it is throwing the labor upon the pa-
tient, with the expense of three or four operations more of the
medicine than would be needed, did the person who attends do
his duty faithfully.


ON GIF1J\G POISOW AS MEDJClhE.

The practice of giving poison as medicine, which is so com-
mon among the medical faculty at the present day, is of the ut-
most importance to the public; and is a subject that I wish to
bring home to the serious consideration of the whole body of
the people of this country, and enforce in the strongest manner
or their minds, the pernicious consequences that have happen-
ed, and are daily taking place, by reason of giving mercury, ar-
senic, nitre, opium and other deadly poisons to cure disease.
It is admitted by those who make use of these things, that the
introducing them into the system is very dangerous, and that
they often prove fatal. During thirty year's practice, I have had
opportunity to gain much experience on this subject, and am
ready to declare that 1 am perfectly and decidedly convinced,
beyond all doubt, that there can be no possible good derived
from usin?, in any manner or form whatever, those poisons; but
on the other hand, there is a great deal yf hurt done. More
than nine-tenth of the chronic cases that have come under my
care, have been such as had been run down with some one or
the whole o r the above named medical poisons; and the great-
est difficulty I hire had 1o encounter in removing the complaints
which my patients labored under, has been to clear the system


ISO NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE kc.

of mercury, nitre or opium, and bring them back to the same
state they were in before taking them. It is a very easy tiling
to get them into the system, but very hard to get them out again,

Those who make use of these things as medicine, seem to
cloak the administering them under the specious pretence of
great skill and art in preparing and using them; but this kind of
covering will not blind the people, if they would examine it
and think for themselves, instead of believing that every thing
said or done by a learned man must be right; so poison given
to the sick by a person of the greatest skill, will have exactly
the same effect as it would if given by a fool. The fact is, the
operation of it is diametrically opposed to nature, and every
particle of it that is taken into the system, will strengthen the
power of the enemy to health.

If there should be doubts in the mind of any «ne, of the
tru'h of what I have said concerning the articles I have named
being poisonous and destructive to the constitution and lie- Itli
of man, Twill refer them to the works published by those who
recommend their use; where they will find evidence enough to
satisfy the most credulous, of the dangerous consequences and
fat;d effects, of giving them as medicine. To remove all doubts
of their heing poison I will make a few extracts from standard
medical works, as the best testimony that can be given in the
case.

"■Muriate of Mercury, is one of the most violent poisons with
which we are acquainted. Externally it acts as an escharotic
or caustic; and in solution, it. is used for destroying fungous
flesh, and for removing hepatic eruptions; but even externally,
it must be used with very great caution." Yet reader, this ac-
tive poison is used as medicine, and by being prepared in n dif-
ferent form, and a new name given it, (calomel,) its good quali-
ties ure said to be invaluable, and it is a certain cure for almost
every disease.

"Oxyd of Arsenic, is one of the most sudden and violent
poisons we are acquainted with. Tn mines, it causes the instruc-
tion of numbers of those who explore them : and it. is frequently
the instrument by which victims are sacrificed, either by the
hand of wickedness or imprudence. The fumes of arsenic are
so deleterious to the lungs, that the artist ought to be on his
guard to prevent their inhalation by the mouth; for if the v he
rnixedand svvallowed with the saliva, effects will take place,
similar to those which follow its introduction lhto the stomach
iu a saline state., namely j a sensation of a piercing, gnawing,an«J


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 181

burning kind, accompanied with an accule pain in the stomach
and intestines, which last are violently contorted; convulsive
vomiting; insatiable thirst, from the parched and rough state of
the tongue and throat: hiccough, palpitation of the heart and a
deadly oppression of the breast, succeed next; the matter eject-
ed by the mouth as well as the stools, exhibit a black, fceted, and
pulrid appearance; at length with the mortification of the bow-
els, the pain subsides, and death terminates the sufferings of the
patient." "When the quantity is so very small as not to prove
fatal, tremors, paralysis and lingering hectics succeed."

Notwithstanding this terrible description of the fatal effects
of this article, the author says, "though the most violent of min-
eral poisons,arsenic, according to Murray,equals, when properly
administer^, the first medicines in the class of tonics." "Of
all the diseases, (soys Dr. Duncan,) in which white oxyd of
arsenic has been used internally, there is none in which it has
been so frequently and so successfully employed, as in the cure
of intermittent fevers. We have now the most satisfactory in-
formation concerning this article in the Medical Reports, of
the effects of arsenic in the cure of agues, remitting fever, and
periodical head aches, by Dr. Fowler of Stafford." "Such are
the powers of this medicine, that two grains of it are often suf-
ficient to cure an intermittent that has continued for weeks!"
"As an external remedy, arsenic has long been known as the
basis of the celebrated cancer powders: Arsenic has ever been
applied in substance, sprinkled upon the ulcer: but this mode
of using it is exceedingly painful and extremely dangerous. —
There have been fatal effects produced from its absorption." "No
other escharotic possesses equal powers in cancerous affections;
Unot unfrequently amends the discharge, causes the sore to
contract in size, and cases have been related of its having
effected a cure." But, says Dr. Willich, "we are, on the com-
bined testimony of many medical practitioners, qonspicuous for
their professional zeal and integrity, irresistably induced to de-
clare our opinion, at least, against the internal use of this active
and dangerous medicine." .

I shall leave it to the reader to reconcile, if he can, the m
consistencies and absurdities of the above statements oft]
effects of ratsbane; and ask himself the question, whether it
can be possible for an article, the use of which is attended with
such consequences, can be in any shape or form, proper to be
used as medicine; yei it is a well known fact, that this poison
is in constant use among the faculty, and forms the pnr.cmal tor
Q


m NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

gredientin most of those nostrums sold throughout the country,
under the names of drops, powders, washes, balsams, &.c. and
there can be no doubt, that thousands either die, or become
miserable invalids in consequence.

"Antimony, in the modern nomenclature, is the name given
to a peculiar metal. The antimonial metal is a medicine of the
greatest power of any known substance; a quantity too minute
co be sensible in the most delicate balance^ is capable of pro-
ducing violet effects, if taken dissolved or in a soluble state. ,,
"Sulphureted antimony was employed by the ancients in Col-
lyria, against inflammation of the eyes, and for staining the eye-
brows black. Its internal use does not seem to have been
established till the end of the fifteenth century; and even at
that time it was by many looked upon as poisonous. 1 ' "All the
metalic preparations are uncertain, as it entirely depends on the
state of the stomach, whether they have no action at all, or
operate with dangerous violence.'" "The principal general
medicinal application of antimony has been for the use of febrile
affections. 1 ' "In the latter stage of fever, where debility pre-
vails, its use is inadmissable." Of the propriety of using this
t**metal as medicine, I shall leave it to the reader to judge fur
himself.

"Nitre. Salt-petre This salt, consisting of nitric acid and
potash, is found ready formed on the surface of the soil in warm
numerous disorders. Its virtues are those of a refrigerent and
diuretic. It is usually given in doses from two or three grains to
a scruple, being a very cooling and resolvent medicine,which by
relaxing the spasmodic rigidity of the vessels, promotes not only
the secretion of urine, but at the same time insensible perspira-
tion, in febrile disorders; while it allays thirst and abates heat;
though in malignant cases in which the pulse is low, and the
patients strength exhausted, it produces contrary effects." —
"This powerful salt, when inadvertantly taken in too large quan-
tities, is one of the most fatal poisons." "For some interest-
ing observations relative to the deleterious properties of salt-
petre, the reader is referred to Dr. Mitchell's letter to Dr.
Priestly."

I have found from a series of practical experiments, for many
years, that salt-petre has the most certain and deadly efiects
upon the human system, of any drug that is used as medicine.
Although the effects produced by it are not so immediately
fatal as many others, yet its whole tendency is to counteract the,


ur SAiviutL, THOMSON. 1«3

ferinciples oflife and destroy the operation of nature. Expe-
dience has taught me that it is the most powerful enemy to health
and that it is the mos* difficult opponent to encounter, with any
degree of success, that I have ever met with. Being in its
nature co/rf, there cannot he any other effects produced by it,
than to increase the power of that enemy of heat, and to lessen
its necessary influence.

"Opium, when taken into the stomach, to such an extent as
to have any sensible effect, gives rise to a pleasant serenity of the
mind, in general proceeding to a certain degree of langour and
drowsiness.' 1 "It excites thirst, and renders the mouth dry
and parched." "Taken into the stomach in a large dose, gives
rise to confusion of the head and vertigo. The powers of all
Stimulating causes of making impressions on the body are
diminished; and even at times and in situations when a person
would naturally be awake, sleep is irresistibly induced. In stili
larger doses, it acts in the same manner as the narcotic poisons,
giving rise to virtigo, headache, tremors, delirium and convul-
sions''; and these terminating in a st le of stupor, from which
the person cannot be roused. This stupor is accompanied with
slowness of the pulse, and with stertor inbreathing, and the
scene is terminated in death, attended with the same appear-
ances as take place in an apoplexy." "In intermittens it is said
to h ive been used with good effect." "It is often of very great
service in fevers of the typhoid type." "In small pox, when the
convulsions before eruption are frequent and considerable, opium
is liberally used." "In cholera and pyrosis, it is almost the
only tlung trusted to." "The administration of opium to the
unaccustomed, is sometimes very difficult. The requisite qmn
tity of opium is wonderfully different in different persons, and
in different states of the same person. A quarter of a grain will,
in one adult, produce effects which ten times the quantity will
not do in another. The lowest fatal Jose to the unaccustomed,
as mentioned by authors, seems to be four grains; but a danger
ous dose is to apt to puke, that it has seldom time to occasion
death."

From the above extracts it will readily be seen, that the use
of opium as medicine is very dangerous, at least, if not destruc-
tive to health; its advocates, it will be observed, do not pretend
lhat it will cure any disorder, but is used as a palliative for the
purpose of easing pain, by destroying sensibility. Pain is caused
lv deeease, and there can be no other way to relieve it but by
removing the cause. Sleep produced by opium is unnatural.


1£4 NARRATIVE OF TIIF. LIFE &c.

and affords no relief to tlie patient, being nothing more than a
suspension of iiis senses; and it might with as much propriety
be said, that a state of delirium is beneficial, for a person in that
situation is not sensible of p-tin. The fact is, opium is a poi-
son, and when taken into the system, produces no other etlect
than to strengthen the power of the enemy to health, by dead-
ening the sensible organs of the stomach and intestines, and
preventing them from performing their natural functions so im-
portant to the maintaining of health and life. In all the cases
that have come within my knowledge, where the patient has
been long in the habit of taking opium, 1 have found it almost
impossible, after removing the disease, to restore the digestive
powers of the stomach.

I have made the foregoing extracts on the subject of poison?,
for the purpose of giving a more plain and simple view of the
pernicious consequences caused by their being given as medi-
cine, than 1 could do in any other manner. In this short
address it is impossible to do that justice to the subject that I
could wish, and which its importance demands; but I am not
without hope, that what is here given will satisfy every candid
person who reads it, of the truth of those principles which it has
been at all times my endeavor to inculcate, for the benefit of
mankind, and convince them, that what has a tendency to de-
stroy life, can never be useful in restoring health.

In support of what has been before said on the use of mer-
cury, I will here give a short extract from Dr. Mann's Medical
Sketches, which is but a trifle in comprnson with many cases
that he has given of the fatal effects of that poison. "Calomel
should never be administered, unless the patient is so situated
that the skin may be preserved in its natural warmth. If this
is not attended to during its administration, either the bowels
or the glands of the mouth suffered. To one of these parts
it frequently directed all its stimulating powers, and induced on
one or the other high degrees of inflammation, which terminated
in mortification of the intestines, or destruction of not only the*
muscles, but the bones of the face.

"Four cases under these formidable effects of mercurial ptya-
jism, were admitted into ihe general hospital at Lewistown;
three of whom died with their jaws and faces dreadfully muti-
lated. The fourth recovered with the loss of the inferior max*
ilia on one side, and the teeth on the other. He lived a most
wretched life, deformed in his features, (when I last saw the
patient,) incapable of taking food, except through a small aper-
ture in place of his mouth.


OF SAMUEL THOMSON. 185

There are several vegetables that grow common in this coun-
try, which are pdisons; and in order that the public may be on
their g.iard against using them as medicine, I will here give a
list of those within my knowledge, viz: Garden Hemlock,
Night-shade Apple Peru, I> pv , Henbane, Poke Root, Man-
drake-root, Garget-root, Wild Parsnip, Indigo-weed, Ivy, Dog-
wood, I obacco, and Laurel. In case either of these articles,
or any other poison should be taken through accident, or other-
wise, a strong preparation of No. 1, with a small quantity of No.
2, will be found to be a sovereign remedy.

Cases frequently occur in the country of being poisoned ex-
ternally, by some of the above vegetable poisons, in which they
swell very much. When this happens, by taking No. 2, or
Composition, and washing with the tincture, or the third pre-
paration of No. 1, relief may be speedily obtained.

It is a common thing with the doctors to make use of many of
the above mentioned vegetable poisons as medicine; but I would
caution the public against the use of them in any way whatever j
as they will have no other effect than to increase the difficulty,
and injure the constitution of the patient; beint? deadly poisons
it is impossible that they can do any good. No dumb beast will
ever touch them, and they are correct judges of what is good
for food or medicine.

Great tise is made in many parts of the country of garden
hemlock, (scicuta,) and is recommended by the doctors for many
complaints, to be taken or applied externally. I have been credi-
bly informed that large quantities of this article are collected
and boiled down to a thick substance, by the people in the coun-
try, and sold by them to the doctors and apothecaries. It is
well known to be the greatest poison of any vegetable, and was
used in ancient times to put criminals to death; but this was
before it was ever thought of, that the same article .that would
cause immediate death when taken for that purpose, would also
cure disease.

Many persons that pretend to make use of my system of prac-
tice, are in the habit of using some of the vegetables that I have
mentioned is poisonous. I wish the public to understand that
it is entirely unauthorized by me as there is nothing in my practice
or writing,but what is directly opposed to every thing of a poison-
ous nature being used as medicine ; for it has always been my aim
o ascertain and avoid the use of every thing except such arti
cles as I knew by actual experience to be agreeable to nature, and
also free from all danger or risk in using them to cu,re disease.


NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

therefore c^u' ion the public against putting any confidence in
iich us mike use of either vegetable or mineral poison.
There h ve I cen several cases of death published by the doc-
>rs, which they say were caused by those who practice by my
ystem ; and from the description they have given of the treat-
ment, I have good reason to suppose, if there is any truth at all
.n them, were attended by such as I have before mentioned,
pretending to practice by my system without having a correct
knowledge of it; and who are tampering with every kind of
medicine they can find; for there is no such treatment of dis-
■an be found in my writings or practice. It is very convenient
or them, and his become common, to say, when they happen to
,»e successful, it is their own great improvements; but when the
patient dies, it is then laid to the Thomson system of practice.
'. his is unjust, and ought to be exposed; and I ask all those
who have a wish to promote the practice, te adopt some means
to ascertain the truth, end make it public.


THE DOCTORS WITHOUT A SYSTEM.

That the doctors have no system, is a fact pretty generally
acknowledged by themselves; or atleas f , they have none that has
been fixed upon as a general rule for their practice. Almost
every great, man among them has had a system of his own,
which has been followed by their adherents till some other one
is brought forward more fashionable. This is undoubtedly a
great evil, for it makes every thing "uncertain ; where it is con-
stantly changing, there can be no dependence on any thing, and
the practice must always be experimental; no useful knowledge
can be obtained by the young practitioners, as they will be con-
stantly seeking after new theories. What should we say of a
carpenter who should undertake to repair a building, without
having any rule to work by, and should, for want of one, de-
stroy the half of all he undertook to repair. The employers
would soon lose all confidence in him, and dismiss htm as an
ignorant blockhead. And is it not of infinitely more import-
ance for those who undertake to repair the human body, to have
oome correct rule to work by? Their practice is founded on vis-
ionary theories, which are so uncertain and contradictory that
it is impossible to form any correct general rule as a guide to be


OF SAMUEL THOMSON, M

depended upon. In order to show the opinions of others as
well as my own, I shall make a few extracts from late writers
»n the subject. 'Speaking of the revolutions of medicines, one
■ays :

"We have now noticed the principal revolutions of medicine;
and we plainly perceive that the theory of medicine, not only
has been, but yet is, in an unsettled state, that its practical ap-
plication is wavering, fallacious, and extremely pernicious; and
taking a survey of the various fortunes of the art, we may
well say, with Bacon, that mediaine is a science that hath been
more professed than labored, and yet more labored than advanc-
ed, the labor having been in a circle, but not in progression."

"Theories are but the butterflies of the day — they buzz for
a while and then expire. We can trace for many centuries past,,
one theory overturning another, yet each in its succession pro-
mising itself immortality!"

"The application of the rules which the practitioner lays
down to himself is direct, and in their choice, no one car. en
with impunity. The least erroneous view leads' to some eon-
sequence. We must remember the lives of our fellow creatures
are at stake. For how many cruel and ^premature deaths, how
many impaired and debilitated constitutions have paid for the
folly of theories! — follies, which have proved almost always fa-
cinating. The study of a system is more easy than an investi-
gation of nature; and in practice, it seems to smooth every diffi-
culty."

"In my lectures on the art of physic, (says Dr. Ring,) both
theoretical and practical, I have fully proved that there is no ne-
cessity for that bane of the profession, conjecture or hypothesis;
and if I were asked whether, if I myself were dangerously ill, I
would suffer any hypothetical, however plausable physician, to
unless I wished to risk the loss of my life. 1 could give a re-
markable instance of this.

"Speculation and hypothesis are always at variance with sound
experience and successful practice."

The above extracts evince the pernicious effects of false theo-
ry and hypothesis, which at the present day, constitute nearly
the whole art of physic.

The following just remarks arc copied from the writings ol
the Rev. John Wesley.

"As theories increased, simple medicines were more and more
disregarded a%J Misused; till, in a course of years, the greater


m NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE, &c.

part of them were forgotten, at least in the more polite nation"
Jn the room of these, abundance of new ones were introduced',
by reasoning, speculative men; and those more and more diffi-
cult to be applied, as being more remote from common observa-
tion. Hence rules for the application of these, and medical
books were immensely multiplied; till at length physic became
an abstruse science, quite out of the reach of ordinary men. —
Physicians now began to be held in admiration, as persons who
were something more than human. And profit attended th.cn
employ, as well as honor. So that they had now two weighty
reasons for keeping the bulk of mankind at a distance, that they
might not pry into the mysteries of their profession. To this
end they increased those difficulties, by design, which were in a
manner by accident. They filled their writings with abundance
ol technical termsj utterly unintelligible to plain men
"Those who understood only how to restore the sick to health,
they branded with the name of Empirics, They introduced in-
to practice abundance of compound medicine, consisting of so
many ingredients, that it was scarce possible for common peo-
ple to know which it was that wrought a cure. Abundance of
exotics, neither the nature or names of which their own coun-
trymen understood."

"The history of the art of medicine, in all ages," says Dr.
Blane, "so teems with the fanciful influence of superstitious ob-
servances, the imaginary virtues of medicines, with nugatory,
delusive, inefficient, and capricious practices, fallacious and so-
phistical reasonings, as to render it little more than a chaos of
error, a tissue of deceit unworthy of admission among the use-
ful arts acd liberal pursuits of man."


A Narrative of the Life.. .of Samuel Thomson . Fifth Edition.
Thomson, Samuel
St. Clairsville: 1829
National Library of Medicine
Bethesda, MD 20894

CONDITION ON RECEIPT :

The quarter leather and decorated paper binding was very
worn, particularly at the comers and edges. The leather was
deteriorated and powdery. Parts of the paper were missing.
The front board was detached. The back joint and internal
hinge were broken. The sewing was intact. Most of the pages
were dirty, discolored, acidic, and slightly brittle. Many pages
were water stained. Some pages had a few small tears at the
edges. The inscription in iron gall ink on the front flyleaf was
smeared. The red crayon on the title page was soluble. Other
markings in graphite pencil and stamp ink were stable.

TREATMENT PROVIDED :

The pH was recorded before and after treatment: before 4.0,
after 7.0. The volume was collated and disbound. The inks
were tested for solubility. The head, tail, and pages were dry
cleaned where necessary; the pages were washed and then
buffered (deacidified) with magnesium bicarbonate solution.
Tears were mended and folds guarded where necessary with
Japanese kozo paper and wheat starch paste. The volume was
sewn on linen tapes with linen thread. The volume was case
bound in full cloth. The volume was titled using a gold
stamped leather label. A protective wrapper for the original
boards was constructed using polyester film.

Northeast Document Conservation Center
