ELECTRICITY AND MATTER
J. J. Thomson (1856-1940)
The Silliman Lectures, Yale University, 1903. Westminster: Archibald Constable & Co., 1904.
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier electricityandm01thomgoog.
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

YALE UNIVERSITY
MRS. HEPSA ELY SILLIMAN MEMORIAL LECTURES

ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

ELECTRICITY AND

MATTER

BT

J. J. THOMSON, D.SC., LL.D., Ph.D.. F.R.&

PFLLOW OF TRINITY COLX.BGB, CAMBRIDGE; CAVENDISH
PROFESSOR OP ElCPieiaMKNTAL PlfYS^iCS, CAMBRIDGE

WITH DIAGRAMS

LONDON
ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE & CO., Ltd.

1909

\{? \H5^/

r

LIBRARY

Copyright. 1904, by Yale UniTcrsity, for the
United States of America

Printed by the Scribner Press
New York, U. S. A.

THE SILLIMAN FOUNDATION.

In the year 1883 a legacy of eighty thousand dollars
was left to the President and Fellows of Yale College
in the city of New Haven, to be held in trust, as a
gift from her children, in memory of their beloved and
honored mother Mrs. Hepsa Ely Silliman.

On this foundation Yale College was requested and
directed to establish an annual course of lectures de-
signed to illustrate the presence and providence, the
wisdom and goodness of God, as manifested in the
natural and moral world. These were to be designated
as the Mrs. Hepsa Ely Silliman Memorial Lectures. It
was the belief of the testator that any orderly presenta-
tion of the facts of nature or history contributed to
the end of this foundation more effectively than any
attempt to emphasize the elements of doctrine or of
creed; and he therefore provided that lectures on dog-
matic or polemical theology should be excluded from
the scope of this foundation, and that the subjects should
be selected rather from the domains of natural science
and history, giving special prominence to astronomy,
chemistry, geology, and anatomy.

It was further directed that each annual course should
be made the basis of a volume to form part of a series
constituting a memorial to Mrs. Silliman. The memo-
rial fund came into the possession of the Corporation
of Yale University in the year 1902 ; and the present
volume constitutes the first of the series of memorial
lectures.

V

PREFACE

In these Lectures given at Yale University in
May, 1903, I have attempted to discuss the bear-
ing of the recent advances made in Electrical
Science on our views of the Constitution of Matter
and the Nature of Electricity; two questions
which are probably so intimately connected, that
the solution of the one would supply that of the
other. A characteristic feature of recent Electri-
cal Researches, such as the study and discovery
of Cathode and Rontgen Rays and Radio-active
Substances, has been the very especial degree in
which they have involved the relation between
Matter and Electricity.

In choosing a subject for the Silliman Lectures,
it seemed to me that a consideration of the bear-
ing of recent work on this relationship might be
suitable, especially as such a discussion suggests
multitudes of questions which would furnish ad-
mirable subjects for further investigation by some
of my hearers.

Cambridge, Aug., 1903.

J. J. THOMSON.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER* I

PAGB

Representation of the Electric Field by Lines
OF Force 1

CHAPTER II
Electrical and Bound Mass 36

CHAPTER III

Effects Due to the Acceleration of Faraday

Tubes 53

CHAPTER IV

The Atomic Structure op Electricity ... 71

CHAPTER V
The Constitution of the Atom 90

CHAPTER VI
Radio-activity and^ Radio-active Substances . . 140

ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

CHAPTER I

REPEESENTATION OF THE ELECTEIC FIELD

BY LINES OF FOECE

My object in these lectures is to put before you
in as simple and untechnical a manner as I can
some views as to the nature of electricity, of the
processes going on in the electric field, and of the
connection between electrical and ordinary matter
which have been suggested by the results of recent
investigations.

The progress of electrical science has been
greatly promoted by speculations as to the nature
of electricity. Indeed, it is hardly possible to
overestimate the services rendered by two theories
as old almost as the science itself; I mean the
theories known as the two- and the one-fluid
theories of electricity.

The two-fluid theory explains the phenomena
of electro-statics by supposing that in the universe
there are two fluids, uncreatable and indestruc-

i

2 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

tible, whose presence gives rise to electrical eflPects ;
one of these fluids is called positive, the other
negative electricity, and electrical phenomena
are explained by ascribing to the fluids the fol-
lowing properties. The particles of the positive
fluid repel each other with forces varying inversely
as the square of the distance between them, as do
also the particles of the negative fluid; on the
other hand, the particles of the positive fluid at-
tract those of the negative fluid. The attraction
between two charges, rri and m', of opposite signs
are in one form of the theory supposed to be
exactly equal to the repulsion between two
charges, m and m of the same sign, placed in
the same position as the previous charges. In an-
other development of the theory the attraction is
supposed to slightly exceed the repulsion, so as to
aflford a basis for the explanation of gravitation.

The fluids are supposed to be exceedingly mo-
bile and able to pass with great ease through con-
ductors. The state of electrification of a body is
determined by the difference between the quanti-
ties of the two electric fluids contained by it ; if it
contains more positive fluid than negative it is
positively electrified, if it contains equal quantities
it is uncharged. Since the fluids are uncreatable

LINES OF FORCE 3

and indestructible, the appearance of the positive
fluid in one place must be accompanied by the
departure of the same quantity from some other
place, so that the production of electrification of
one sign must always be accompanied by the pro-
duction of an equal amount of electrification of
the opposite sign.

On this view, every body is supposed to con-
sist of three things : ordinary matter, positive elec-
tricity, negative electricity. The two latter are
supposed to exert forces on themselves and on
each other, but in the earlier form of the theory
no action was contemplated between ordinary
matter and the electric fluids ; it was not until a
comparatively recent date that Helmholtz intro-
duced the idea of a specific attraction between
ordinary matter and the electric fluids. He did this
to explain what is known as contact electricity,
i.e.j the electrical separation produced when two
metals, say zinc and copper, are put in contact
with each other, the zinc becoming positively, the
copper negatively electrified. Helmholtz sup-
posed that there are forces between ordinary mat-
ter and the electric fluids varying for different
kinds of matter, the attraction of zinc for positive
electricity being greater than that of copper, so

4 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

that when these metals are put in contact the
zinc robs the copper of some of its positive
electricity.

There is an indefiniteness about the two-fluid
theory which may be illustrated by the considera-
tion of an unelectrified body. All that the two-
fluid theory tells us about such a body is that it
contains equal quantities of the two fluids. It gives
no information about the amount of either; indeed,
it implies that if equal quantities of the two are
added to the body, the body will be unaltered,
equal quantities of the two fluids exactly neutraliz-
ing each other. K we regard these fluids as being
anything more substantial than the mathematical
symbols + and — this leads us into difficulties ; if
we regard them as physical fluids, for example, we
have to suppose that the mixture of the two fluids
in equal proportions is something so devoid of
physical properties that its existence has never
been detected.

The other fluid theory — the one-fluid theory of
Benjamin Franklin — is not open to this objection.
On this view there is only one electric fluid, the
positive ; the part of the other is taken by ordi-
nary matter, the particles of which are supposed
to repel each other and attract the positive fluid,

LINES OF FORCE 5

just as the particles of the negative fluid do on
the two-fluid theory. Matter when unelectrified
is supposed to be associated with just so much of
the electric fluid that the attraction of the matter
on a portion of the electric fluid outside it is just
sufficient to counteract the repulsion exerted on
the same fluid by the electric fluid associated with
the matter. On this view, if the quantity of mat-
ter in a body is known the quantity of electric
fluid is at once determined.

The services which the fluid theories have ren-
dered to electricity are independent of the notion
of a fluid with any physical properties ; the fluids
were mathematical fictions, intended merely to give
a local habitation to the attractions and repulsions
existing between electrified bodies, and served as
the means by which the splendid mathematical
development of the theory of forces varying in-
versely as the square of the distance which was
inspired by the discovery of gravitation could be
brought to bear on electrical phenomena. As
long as we confine ourself to questions which only
involve the law of forces between electrified bodies,
and the simultaneous production of equal quantities
of + and - electricity, both theories must give
the same results and there can be nothing to

6 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

decide between them. The physicists and mathe-
maticians who did most to develop the "Fluid
Theories " confined themselves to questions of this
kind, and refined and idealized the conception of
these fluids until any reference to their physical
properties was considered almost indelicate. It is
not until we investigate phenomena which involve
the physical properties of the fluid that we can
hope to distinguish between the rival fluid the-
ories. Let us take a case which has actually
arisen. We have been able to measure the masses
associated with given charges of electricity in
gases at low pressures, and it has been found that
the mass associated with a positive charge is im-
mensely greater than that associated with a nega-
tive one. This diflference is what we should
expect on Franklin's one-fluid theory, if that
theory were modified by making the electric fluid
correspond to negative instead of positive elec-
tricity, while we have no reason to anticipate so
great a difference on the two-fluid theory. We
shall, I am sure, be struck by the similarity be-
tween some of the views which we are led to take
by the results of the most recent researches with
those enunciated by Franklin in the very infancy
of the subject.

LINES OF FORCE

Fa/rad(mf% Lme of Force Theory

The fluid theories, from their very nature, imply
the idea of action at a distance. This idea, al-
though its convenience for mathematical analysis
has made it acceptable to many mathematicians, is
one which many of the greatest physicists have
felt utterly unable to accept, and have devoted
much thought and labor to replacing it by some-
thing involving mechanical continuity. Pre-emi-
nent among them is Faraday. Faraday was deeply
influenced by the axiom, or if you prefer it, dogma
that matter cannot act where it is not. Faraday,
who possessed, I believe, almost unrivalled mathe-
matical insight, had had no training in analysis,
so that the convenience of the idea of action at a
distance for purposes of calculation had no chance
of mitigating the repugnance he felt to the idea of
forces acting far away from their base and with
no physical connection with their origin. He
therefore cast about for some way of picturing to
himself the actions in the electric field which
would get rid of the idea of action at a distance,
and replace it by one which would bring into
prominence some continuous connection between
the bodies exerting the forces. He was able to

g BLECTEICITY AND MATTER

do this by the conception of lines of force. As I
shall have continually to make use of this method,
and as I believe its powers and possibilities have
never been adequately realized, I shall devote
some time to the discussion and development of
this conception of the electric field.

The method was suggested to Faraday by tlie
consideration of the lines of force round a bar
magnet. If iron filings are scattered on a smooth
surface near a magnet they arrange themselves as
in Fig. 1 ; well-marked lines can be traced run-

LINES OF FORCE 9

ning from one pole of the magnet to the other ;
the direction of these lines at any point coincides
with the direction of the magnetic force, while the
intensity of the force is indicated by the concen-
tration of the lines. Starting from any point in
the field and travelling always in the direction of
the magnetic force, we shall trace out a line which
will not stop until we reach the negative pole of
the magnet ; if such lines are drawn at all points
in the field, the space through which the magnetic
field extends will be filled with a system of lines,
giving the space a fibrous structure like that pos-
sessed by a stack of hay or straw, the grain of the
structure being along the lines of force. I have
spoken so far only of lines of magnetic force ; the
same considerations will apply to the electric field,
and we may regard the electric field as full of
lines of electric force, which start from positively
and end on negatively electrified bodies. Up to
this point the process has been entirely geometri-
cal, and could have been employed by those who
looked at the question from the point of view of
action at a distance; to Faraday, however, the
lines of force were far more than mathematical
abstractions — they were physical realities. Fara-
day materialized the lines of force and endowed

10 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

them with physical properties so aa to explain the
phenomena of the electric field. Thus he sup-
posed that they were in a state of tension, and
that they repelled each other. Instead of an in-
tangible action at a distance between two electri-
fied bodies, Faraday regarded the whole space
between the bodies as fuU of stretched mutually
repellent springs. The charges of electricity to
which alone an interpretation had been given on
the fluid theories of electricity were on this view
just the ends of these springs, and an electric
charge, instead of being a porb^n of «md oontoed
to the electrified body, was an extensive arsenal
of springs spreading out in all directions to aU
parts of the field.

To make our ideas clear on this point let us
consider some simple cases from Faraday's point
of view. Let us first take the case of two bodies
with equal and opposite charges, whose lines of
force are shown in Fig. 2. You notice that the
lines of force are most dense along A By the line
joining the bodies, and that there are more lines
of force on the side of A nearest to B than on
the opposite side. Consider the eflPect of the
lines of force on A ; the lines are in a state of
tension and are pulling away at -4; as there

LINES OF FORCE H

are more pulling at A on the side nearest to J5
than on the opposite side, the pulls on A toward
£ overpower those pulling A away from ^, so
that A will tend to move toward £; it was in
this way that Faraday pictured to himself the
attraction between oppositely electrified bodies.
Let us now consider the condition of one of the
curved lines of force, such as i^^; it is in a state

FiQ. 2.

of tension and will therefore tend to straighten
itself, how is it prevented from doing this and
maintained in equilibrium in a curved position?
We can see the reason for this if we remember
that the lines of force repel each other and that
the lines are more concentrated in the region be-
tween PQ and A£ than on the other side of
I^Q; thus the repulsion of the lines inside PQ
will be greater than the repulsion of those out-
side and the line PQ will be bent outwards.

12 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

Let US now paas from the case of two oppositely
electrified bodies to that of two similarly elec-
trified ones, the lines of force for which are shown
in Fig. 3. Let us suppose A and £ are positively
electrified; since the lines of force start from
positively and end on negatively electrified bodies,
the lines starting from A and £ will travel away
to join some body or bodies possessing the

negative charges corresponding to the positive
ones on A and -B; let us suppose that these
chaises are a considerable distance away, so that
the lines of force from A would, if £ were not
present, spread out, in the part of the field under
consideration, uniformly in all directions. Consider
now the effect of making the system of lines of
force attached to A and £ approach each other;

LINES OF FORCE

13

since these lines repel each other the lines of force
on the side of A nearest £ will be pushed to the
opposite side of A, so that the lines of force will
now be densest on the far side of A ; thus the
pulls exerted on A in the rear by the lines of
force will be greater than those in the front and
the result will be that A will be pulled away
from £. We notice that the mechanism produc-
ing this repulsion is of exactly the same type as
that which produced the attraction in the pre-
vious case, and we may if we please regard the
repulsion between A and £ as due to the attrac-
tions on A and £ of the
complementary negative
charges which must exist in
other parts of the field.

The results of the repul-
sion of the lines of force
are clearly shown in the case
represented in Fig. 4, that
of two oppositely electrified
plates; you will notice that
the lines of force between
the plates are straight except
near the edges of the plates ; this is what we
should expect as the downward pressure exerted

Fig. 4.

14 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

by the lines of force above a line in this part of
the field will be equal to the upward pressure
exerted by those below it. For a line of force
near the edge of the plate, however, the pressure
of the lines of force below will exceed the press-
ure from those above, and the line of force will
bulge out until its curvature and tension counter-
act the squeeze from inside ; this bulging is very
plainly shown in Fig. 4.

So far our use of the lines of force haa been
descriptive rather than metrical; it is, however,
easy to develop the method so as to make it
metricaL We can do this by introducing the
idea of tubes of force. If through the boundary
of any small closed curve in the electric field we
draw the lines of force, these lines will form a
tubular surface, and if we follow the lines back to
the positively electrified surface from which they
start and forward on to the negatively electrified
surface on which they end, we can prove that the
positive charge enclosed by the tube at its origin
is equal to the negative charge enclosed by it at
its end. By properly choosing the area of the
small curve through which we draw the lines of
force, we may arrange that the charge enclosed by
the tube is equal to the unit charge. Let us call

LINES OF FORCE 15

such a tube a Faraday tube — then each unit of
positive electricity in the field may be regarded
as the origin and each unit of negative electricity
as the termination of a Faraday tube. We regard
these Faraday tubes as having direction, their di-
rection being the same as that of the electric force,
so that the positive direction is from the positive
to the negative end of the tube. If we draw any /
closed surface then the difference between the
number of Faraday tubes which pass out of the
surface and those which pass in will be equal to the
algebraic sum of the charges inside the surface; this
sum is what Maxwell called the electric cUs^lace-
merit through the surface. What Maxwell called
the ehct/ric disfpldcement in any direction at a
point is the number of Faraday tubes which pass
through a unit area through the point drawn at
right angles to that direction, the number being
reckoned algebraically ; i.e.y the lines which pass
through in one direction being taken as positive,
while those which pass through in the opposite
direction are taken as negative, and the number
passing through the area is the difference between
the number passing through positively and the
number passing through negatively. ^

For my own part, I have found the conception

16 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

of Faraday tubes to lend itself mucli more readily
to the formation of a mental picture of the proc-
esses going on in the electric field than that of
electric displacement, and have for many years
abandoned the latter method.

Maxwell took up the question of the ten-
sions and pressures in the lines of force in
the electric field, and carried the problem one
step further than Faraday. By calculating the
amount of these tensions he showed that the
mechanical effects in the electrostatic field could
be explained by supposing that each Faraday
tube force exerted a tension equal to M^ It being
the intensity of the electric force, and that, in
addition to this tension, there was in the medium
through which the tubes pass a hydrostatic
pressure equal to \NItj JV being the density
of the Faraday tubes; i.e., the number passing
through a unit area drawn at right angles to
the electric force. If we consider the effect of
these tensions and pressure on a unit volume of
the medium in the electric field, we see that
they are equivalent to a tension ^ JV^H along
I the direction of the electric force and an equal
I pressure in all directions at right angles to that
force.

}

LINES OF FORCE

17

B

Moving Fa/raday Tubes

Hitherto we have supposed the Faraday tubes
to be at rest, let us now proceed to the study of
the effects produced by the motion of those tubes.
Let us begin with the consideration of a very
simple case — ^that of two parallel
plates, A and By charged, one with
positive the other with negative
electricity, and suppose that after
being charged the plates are con-
nected by a conducting wire, EFG.
This wire will pass through some
of the outlying tubes ; these tubes,
when in a conductor, contract to
molecular dimensions and the repul-
sion they previously exerted on
neighboring tubes will therefore
disappear. Consider the effect of
this on a tube PQ between the
plates; PQ was originally in equilibrium under
its own tension, and the repulsion exerted by the
neighboring tubes. The repulsions due to those
cut hy E F G have now, however, disappeared so
that PQ will no longer be in equilibrium, but will
be pushed towards F F G. Thus, more and more
tubes will be pushed into FFGj and we shall

13 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

have a movement of the whole set of tubes be-
tween the plates toward E FG. Thus, while the
discharge of the plates is going on, the tubes be-
tween the plates are moving at right angles to
themselves. What physical effect accompanies
this movement of the tubes ? The result of con-
necting the plates hj U F Gh^io produce a cur-
rent of electricity flowing from the positively
charged plate through E F G to the negatively
charged plate ; this is, as we know, accompanied
by a magnetic force between the plates. This
magnetic force is at right angles to the plane of
the paper and equal to 47r times the intensity of
the current in the plate, or, if a is the density of
the charge of electricity on the plates and v the
velocity with which the charge moves, the mag-
netic force is equal to 47rcrv.

Here we have two phenomena which do not
take place in the steady electrostatic field, one the
movement of the Faraday tubes, the other
the existence of a magnetic force; this suggests
that there is a connection between the two, and
that motion of the Faraday tubes is accompanied
by the production of magnetic force. I have fol-
lowed up the consequences of this supposition and
have shown that, if the connection between the

LINES OF FORCE 19

magnetic force and the moving tubes is that given |
below, this view will account for Ampfere's laws |
connecting current and magnetic force, and for ]
Faraday's law of the induction of currents. Max- '
welPs great contribution to electrical theory, that
variation in the electric displacement in a dielec-
tric produces magnetic force, follows at once from
this view. For, since the electric displacement is
measured by the density of the Faraday tubes, if
the electric displacement at any place changes,
Faraday tubes must move up to or away from the
place, and motion of Faraday tubes, by hypoth-
esis, implies magnetic force.

The law connecting magnetic force with the
motion of the Faraday tubes is as follows : A
Faraday tube moving with velocity t; at a point
-P, produces at -P a magnetic force whose magni-
tude is 47r V sin 9, the direction of the magnetic
force being at right angles to the Faraday tube,
and also to its direction of motion ; 6 is the angle
between the Faraday tube and the direction in
which it is moving. We see that it is only
the motion of a tube at right angles to itself
which produces magnetic force; no such force
is produced by the gliding of a tube along its
lengtL

20 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

Motion of a Gha/rged Sphere

We shall apply these results to a very simple
and important case — ^the steady motion of a
charged sphere. If the velocity of the sphere is
small compared with that of light then the Fara-
day tubes will, as when the sphere is at rest, be
uniformly distributed and radial in direction.
They will be carried along with the sphere. If
e is the charge on the sphere, O its centre, the

density of the Faraday tubes at -P is -j — tj™-;

so that if t; is the velocity of the sphere, d the

Fig. 6.

angle between OP and the direction of motion of
the sphere, then, according to the above rule, the

magnetic force at P will be — -^ — , the direc-
tion of the force will be at right angles to OP^
and at right angles to the direction of motion of
the sphere ; the lines of magnetic force will thus

LINES OF FORCE 21

be circles, having their centres on the path of the
centre of the sphere and their planes at right \
angles to this path. Thus, a moving charge of
electricity will be accompanied by a magnetic
field. The existence of a magnetic field implies
energy; we know that in a unit volume of the
field at a place where the magnetic force is H

there are '-^ — units of energy, where fi is the

OTT

magnetic permeability of the medium. In the
case of the moving sphere the energy per unit

volume at P is ^-^ — TTpT'* Taking the sum of

this energy for all parts of the field outside the

sphere, we find that it amounts to — ^ , where a

is the radius of the sphere. If m is the mass of
the sphere, the kinetic energy in the sphere is .
\ mv^\ in addition to that we have the energy
outside the sphere, which as we have seen is \

^-3 — ; so that the whole kinetic energy of the '

( 2u ^^\

system is i (m + -o- — j t;*, or the energy is

the same as if the mass of the sphere were

2ijL e^ .
m -\- -^ - instead of m. Thus, in consequence of

22 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

; the electric charge, the mass of the sphere is
' measured by -w—* This is a very important re-

: suit, since it shows that part of the mass of a
charged sphere is due to its charge. I shall later
on have to bring before you considerations which

I show that it is not impossible that the whole mass

\ of a body may arise in the way.

Before passing on to this point, however, I
should like to illustrate the increase which takes
place in the mass of the sphere by some analogies
drawn from other branches of physics. The first of
these is the case of a sphere moving through a
frictionless liquid. When the sphere moves it sets
the fluid around it moving with a velocity propor-
tioned to its own, so that to move the sphere we
we have not merely to move the substance of the
sphere itself, but also the liquid around it ; the
consequence of this is, that the sphere behaves as
if its mass were increased by that of a certain vol-
ume of the liquid. This volume, as was shown by
Green in 1833, is half the volume of the sphere.
In the case of a cylinder moving at right angles to
its length, its mass is increased by the mass of an
equal volume of the liquid. In the case of an
elongated body like a cylinder, the amount by

LINES OF FORCE 23

wMcli the mass is increased depends upon the di-
rection in which the body is moving, being much
smaller when the body moves point foremost
than when moving sideways. The mass of such
a body depends on the direction in which it is
moving.

Let us, however, return to the moving electri-
fied sphere. We have seen that in consequence of

its charge its mass is increased by -^; thus, if it
is moving with the velocity Vy the momentum is

m + Q yv. The additional mo-

mentum -^^ v is not in the sphere, but in the space

surrounding the sphere. There is in this space
ordinary mechanical momentum^ whose resultant is

-^-— V and whose direction is parallel to the di-
rection of motion of the sphere. It is important
to bear in mind that this momentum is not in any
way different from ordinary mechanical momen-
tum and can be given up to or taken from the
momentum of moving bodies. I want to bring
the existence of this momentum before you as
vividly and forcibly as I can, because the recogni-
tion of it makes the behavior of the electric field

24. ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

entirely analogous to that of a mechanical sys-
tem. To take an example, according to Newton's
Third Law of Motion, Action and Reaction are
equal and opposite, so that the momentum in any
direction of any self-contained system is invariable.
Now, in the case of many electrical systems there
are apparant violations of this principle ; thus,
take the case of a charged body at rest struck by
an electric pulse, the charged body when exposed
to the electric force in the pulse acquires velocity
and momentum, so that when the pulse has passed
over it, its momentum is not what it was origi-
nally. Thus, if we confine our attention to the
momentum in the charged body, i.e.^ if we suppose
that momentum is necessarily confined to what we
consider ordinary matter, there has been a viola-
tion of the Third Law of Motion, for the only
momentum recognized on this restricted view
has been changed. The phenomenon is, however,
brought into accordance with this law if we recog-
nize the existence of the momentum in the electric
field ; for, on this view, before the pulse reached
the charged body there was momentum in the
pulse, but none in the body; after the pulse
passed over the body there was some momentum
in the body and a smaller amount in the pulse,

LINES OF FORCE 25

the loss of momentum in the pulse being equal to
the gain of momentum by the body.

We now proceed to consider this momentum
more in detail. I have in my " Recent Researches
on Electricity and Magnetism" calculated the
amount of momentum at any point in the electric
field, and have shown that if iV is the number of
Faraday tubes passing through a unit area drawn
at right angles to their direction, B the magnetic
induction, Q the angle between the induction and
the Faraday tubes, then the momentum per unit
volume is equal \jO N B sin ^, the direction of
the momentum being at right angles to the mag-
netic induction and also to the Faraday tubes.
Many of you will notice that the momentum is
parallel to what is known as Poynting's vector —
the vector whose direction gives the direction in
which energy is flowing through the field.

Moment of Momentum Due to cm Electrified
Point and a Magnetic Pole

To familiarize ourselves with this distribution
of momentum let us consider some simple cases in
detail. Let us begin with the simplest, that of an
electrified point and a magnetic pole; let A^ Fig. 7,
be the point, B the pole. Then, since the momen-

26 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

turn at any point P is at right angles to A jP, the
direction of the Faraday tubes and also to B -P,
the magnetic induction, we see that the momentum
will be perpendicular to the plane A B P\ thus,
if we draw a series of lines such that their direc-
tion at any point coincides with the direction of
the momentum at that point, these lines will form
a series of circles whose planes are perpendicular

to the line A Bj and whose centres
lie along that line. This distribution
of momentum, as far as direction
^p goes, is that possessed by a top spin-
ning around A B. Let us now find
what this distribution of momentum
throughout the field is equivalent to.
It is evident that the resultant
momentum in any direction is zero,
^^- ^- but since the system is spinning
round A Bj the direction of rotation being every-
where the same, there will be a finite moment
of momentum round A B. Calculating the value
of this from the expression for the momentum
given above, we obtain the very simple expression
^77^ as the value of the moment of momentum
about A Bj e being the charge on the point and
m the strength of the pole. By means of this

LINES OF FORCE 27

expression we can at once find the moment of
momentum of any distribution of electrified points
and magnetic poles.

To return to the system of the point and pole,
this conception of the momentum of the system
leads directly to the evaluation of the force acting
on a moving electric charge or a moving magnetic
pole. For suppose that in the time 8 1 the electri-
fied point were to move from A to A\ the
moment of momentum is still erriy but
its axis is along A' B instead of A B. j^
The moment of momentum of the field
has thus changed, but the whole moment
of momentum of the system comprising
point, pole, and field must be constant, so
that the change in the moment of momen-
tum of the field must be accompanied
by an equal and opposite change in the
moment of momentum of the pole and ^^^- ^•
point. The momentum gained by the point must
be equal and opposite to that gained by the
pole, since the whole momentum is zero. If Q is
the angle A B A\ the change in the moment of
momentum is em sin ^, with an axis at right
angles to ^4 ^ in the plane of the paper. Let
8 Z be the change in the momentum of A^ —

28 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

8 I that of B, then 8 I and — 8 / must be
equivalent to a couple whose axis is at right
angles to ^ -B in the plane of the paper, and
whose moment is ^ ?7^ sin ft Thus 8 I must be at
right angles to the plane of the paper and

ts T A ^ • /. em A A^ Bind}
o I. A Ji=em &in0= -j-^

Where <f> is the angle £ A A\ If t; is the
velocity of Ay A A^=v 8 1 and we get

^ r emvsmS St

This change in the momentum may be sup-
posed due to the action of a force F perpen-
dicular to the plane of the paper, JF being the

rate of increase of the momentum, or ^' We thus

^m'y8in<^ . . ^ . ^ _ _

get i^ = — J 7ja ; or the point is acted on by a

force equal to e multiplied by the component of
the magnetic force at right angles to the direction
of motion. The direction of the force acting on
the point is at right angles to its velocity and
also to the magnetic force. There is an equal
and opposite force acting on the magnetic pole.

The value we have found for F is the ordinary
expression for the mechanical force acting on a
moving charged particle in a magnetic field; it

LINES OF FORCE 29

may be written as ev H^m^j where H'*8 is the
strength of the magnetic field. The force acting
on unit charge is therefore v Hbui (f>. This me-
chanical force may be thus regarded as arising
from an electric force v H sin <^, and we may
express the result by saying that when a charged
body is moving in a magnetic field an electric
force virsin<l> is produced. This force is the
well-known electromotive force of induction due
to motion in a magnetic field.

The forces called into play are due to the
relative motion of the pole and point; if these are
moving with the same velocity, the line joining
them will not alter in direction, the moment of
momentum of the system will remain unchanged
and there will not be any forces acting either on
the pole or the point.

The distribution of momentum in the system
of pole and point is similar in some respects to
that in a top spinning about the line A B. We
can illustrate the forces acting on a moving elec-
trified body by the behavior of such a top. Thus,
let Fig. 9 represent a balanced gyroscope spinning
about the axis A £, let the ball at A represent
the electrified point, that at £ the magnetic pole.
Suppose the instrument is spinning with A B

30 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

horizontal, then if with a vertical rod I push
against A B horizontally, the point A will not
merely move horizontally forward in the direction
in which it is pushed, but will also move verti-
cally upward or downward, just as a charged

point would do if pushed forward in the same
way, and if it were acted upon by a m^uetic
pole at B.

MaseweWs Vector Potential

There is a very close connection between the
momentum arising from an electrified point and a

LINES OF FORCE 31

magnetic system, and the Vector Potential of that
system, a quantity which plays a very large part
in Maxwell's Theory of Electricity. From the ex^
pression we have given for the moment of mo-
mentum due to a charged point and a magnetic
pole, we can at once find that due to a charge e of
electricity at a point Py and a little magnet A B ;
let the negative pole of this magnet be at A^ the
positive at B^ and let m be the strength of either
pole. A simple calculation shows that in this
case the axis of the resultant moment of momen-
tum is in the plane P A B 2X right angles to P Oj
O being the middle point of A By and that the
magnitude of the moment of momentum is equal

to e.m. A B jypnf where <^ is the angle A B

makes with O P. This moment of momentum is
equivalent in direction and magnitude to that due

to a momentum e. m. A B r\p% at P directed

at right angles to the plane PABy and another
momentum equal in magnitude and opposite in

direction at O. The vector m A B jrpi at P

at right angles to the plane P A B 1^ the vector
called by Maxwell the Vector Potential at P due
to the Magnet

32 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

Calling this Vector Potential I^ we see that the
momentum due to the charge and the magnet is
equivalent to a momentum elsii P and a momen-
tum — elai the magnet.

We may evidently extend this to any complex
system of magnets, so that if / is the Vector Po-
tential at JP of this system, the momentum in the
field is equivalent to a momentum ^ Z at jP to-
gether with momenta at each of the magnets
equal to

— e (Vector Potential at JP due to that magnet).
If the magnetic field arises entirely from electric
currents instead of from permanent magnets, the
momentum of a system consisting of an electrified
point and the currents will differ in some of its
features from the momentum when the magnetic
field is due to permanent magnets. In the latter
case, as we have seen, there is a moment of mo-
mentum, but no resultant momentum. When,
however, the magnetic field is entirely due to
electric currents, it is easy to show that there is a
resultant momentum, but that the moment of mo-
mentum about any line passing through the elec-
trified particle vanishes. A simple calculation
shows that the whole momentum in the field is
equivalent to a momentum ^ / at the electrified

LINES OF FORCE 33

point I being the Vector Potential at P due to
the currents.

Thus, whether the magnetic field is due to per-
manent magnets or to electric currents or partly
to one and partly to the other, the momentum
when an electrified point is placed in the field at
P is equivalent to a momentum e 1 2X P where 1
is the Vector Potential at P. If the magnetic
field is entirely due to currents this is a complete
representation of the momentum in the field ; if
the magnetic field is partly due to magnets we
have in addition to this momentum at P other
momenta at these magnets ; the magnitude of the
momentum at any particular magnet is — ^ times
the Vector Potential at P due to that magnet.

The well-known expressions for the electro-
motive forces due to Electro-magnetic Induction
follow at once from this result. For, from the
Third Law of Motion, the momentum of any self-
contained system must be constant. Now the
momentum consists of (1) the momentum in the
field ; (2) the momentum of the electrified point,
and (3) the momenta of the magnets or circuits
carrying the currents. Since (1) is equivalent to
a momentum ^ 7 at the electrified particle, we see
that changes in the momentum of the field must

34 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

be accompanied by changes in the momentum of
the particle. Let M be the mass of the electrified
particle, u^ Vy w the components parallel to the
axes of a?, y, z of its velocity, i^, G, Uy the com-
ponents parallel to these axes of the Vector Po-
tential at P, then the momentum of the field is
equivalent to momenta e^y e Gj eH si I^ parallel
to the axes of x, y, z; and the momentum of the
charged point at P has for components MUy Moy
Mw. As the momentum remains constant, Mu +
e F\% constant, hence Mhu and 8 F are simulta-
neous changes in u and Fy

Jf8^ + ^8i^=0;

du dJB

dt dt

From this equation we see that the point with the

charge behaves as if it were acted upon by a me.

chanical force parallel to the axis of x and equal to

— ^ -=— , i.e., by an electric force equal to — -^—
dV ' ^ ^ dt^

In a similar way we see that there are electric
forces — ^ — ^ — --—, parallel to y and z respec-
tively. These are the well-known expressions of
the forces due to electro-magnetic induction, and
we see that they are a direct consequence of the

LINES OF FORCE 35

principle that action and reaction are equal and
opposite.

Readers of Faraday's Experimental Researches
will remember that he is constantly referring to
what he called the " Electrotonic State " ; thus he
regarded a wire traversed by an electric current
as being in the Electrotonic State when in a
magnetic field. No effects due to this state can be
detected as long as the field remains constant ; it
is when it is changing that it is operative. This
Electrotonic State of Faraday is just the inomeirv-
imn existing in the field.

CHAPTER n

ELECTEICAL AND BOUND MASS.

I WISH in this chapter to consider the connec-
tion between the momentum in the electric field
and the Faraday tubes, by which, as I showed in
the last lecture, we can picture to ourselves the
state of such a field. Let us begin by considering
the case of the moving charged sphere. The lines
of electric force are radial ; those of magnetic force
are circles having for a common axis the line of mo-
tion of the centre of the sphere ; the momentum

at a point P is at right
angles to each of these
directions and so is at
right angles to ^ ^ in
the plane containing P
and the line of motion
Fig. 10. ^f the centre of the

sphere. If the number of Faraday tubes passing
through a unit area at P placed at right angles
to O P \^ Ny the magnetic induction at P is,
if fi is the magnetic permeability of the medium

ELECTRICAL MASS 37

surrounding the sphere, ^iriiNv sin 6y v being
the velocity of the sphere and 6 the angle
O P makes with the direction of motion of
the sphere. By the rule given on page 26 the
momentum in unit volume of the medium at P is
iVx ^TT\iNv sin dy or 4:nfi^^v sin 0, and is
in the direction of the component of the veloc-
ity of the Faraday tubes at right angles to their
length. Now this is exactly the momentum which
would be produced if the tubes were to carry
with them, when they move at right angles to
their length, a mass of the surrounding medium
equal to 47r ft iV^® per unit volume, the tubes pos-
sessing no mass themselves and not carrying any
of the medium with them when they glide
through it parallel to their own length. We
suppose in fact the tubes to behave very much as
long and narrow cylinders behave when moving
through water ; these if moving endwise, i.e.y par-
allel to their length, carry very little water along
with them, while when they move sideways, i.e., at
right angles to their axis, each unit length of the
tube carries with it a finite mass of water. When
the length of the cylinder is very great compared
with its breadth, the mass of water carried by it
when moving endwise may be neglected in com-

38 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

pariBon with that carried by it when moving side-
ways ; if the tube had no mass beyond that which
it possesses in virtue of the water it displaces, it
would have mass for sideways but none for end-
wise motion.

We shall call the mass 47r ft J^^ carried by the
tubes in unit volume the mass of the bound ether.
It is a very suggestive fact that the electrostatic
energy £J in unit volume is proportional to M the
mass of the bound ether in that volume. This can

easily be proved as follows : £J = — ^^ , where

K is the specific inductive capacity of the
medium ; while M = 4:7r fi N^j thus,

but — ^ = V^ where Y is the velocity with which
light travels through the medium, hence

thus E is equal to the kinetic energy possessed
by the bound mass when moving with the veloc-
ity of light.

The mass of the bound ether in unit volume is
47r ft iV^* where iVis the number of Faraday tubes ;
thus, the amount of bound mass per unit length of

ELECTRICAL MASS 39

each Faraday tube is 4:7rfiNi We have seen that
this is proportional to the tension in each tube, so
that we may regard the Faraday tubes as tightly
stretched strings of variable mass and tension ; the
tension being, however, always proportional to the
mass per unit length of the string.

Since the mass of ether imprisoned by a Faraday
tube is proportional to iV^ the number of Faraday
tubes in unit volume, we see that the mass and
momentum of a Faraday tube depend not merely
upon the configuration and velocity of the tube
under consideration, but also upon the number
and velocity of the Faraday tubes in its neigh-
borhood. We have many analogies to this in the
case of dynamical systems ; thus, in the case of a
number of cylinders with their axes parallel, mov-
ing about in an incompressible liquid, the momen-
tum of any cylinder depends upon the positions
and velocities of the cylinders in its neighborhood.
The following hydro-dynamical system is one by
which we may illustrate the fact that the bound
mass is proportional to the square of the number
of Faraday tubes per unit volume.

Suppose we have a cylindrical vortex column of
strength m placed in a mass of liquid whose ve-
locity, if not disturbed by the vortex column, would

40 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

be constant both in magnitude and direction, and
at right angles to the axis of the vortex column.
The lines of flow in such a case are represented
in Fig. 11, where A is the section of the vortex

^

^

/

\

11

\

:^

^

5^

column whose axis is supposed to be at right an-
gles to the plane of the paper. We see that some
of these lines in the neighborhood of the column
are closed curvea Since the liquid does not cross
the lines of flow, the liquid inside a closed curve
will always remain in the neighborhood of the col-
umn and wiU move with it. Thus, the column
will imprison a mass of liquid equal to that en-
closed by the largest of the closed lines of flow.
If Ttt. is the strength of the vortex column and a the
velocity of the undisturbed flow of the liquid, we
can easily show that the mass of liquid imprisoned

ELECTRICAL MASS 41

m*

by the column is proportional to — ^. Thus, if

we take m as proportional to the number of
Faraday tubes in unit area, the system illustrates
the connection between the bound mass and the
strength of the electric field.

Effective of Velocity on the Bound Mass

I will now consider another consequence of the
idea that the mass of a charged particle arises from
the mass of ether bound by the Faraday tube as-
sociated with the charge. These tubes, when they
move at right angles to their length, carry with
them an appreciable portion of the ether through
which they move, while when they move parallel
to their length, they glide through the fluid with-
out setting it in motion. Let us consider how a
long, narrow cylinder, shaped like a Faraday tube,
would behave when moving through a liquid.

Such a body, if free to twist in any direction,
will not, as you might expect at first sight, move
point foremost, but will, on the contrary, set itself
broadside to the direction of motion, setting itself
so as to carry with it as much of the fluid through
which it is moving as possible. Many illustra-
tions of this principle could be given, one very

42 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

familiar one is that falling leaves do not fall edge
first, but flutter down with their planes more or
less horizontal.

If we apply this principle to the charged sphere,
we see that the Faraday tubes attached to the
sphere will tend to set themselves at right angles
to the direction of motion of the sphere, so that if
this principle were the only thing to be considered
all the Faraday tubes would be forced up into the
equatorial plane, i.e.^ the plane at right angles to
the direction of motion of the sphere, for in this
position they would all be moving at right angles
to their lengths. We must remember, however,
that the Faraday tubes repel each other, so that
if they were crowded into the equatorial region
the pressure there would be greater than that
near the pole. This would tend to thrust the
Faraday tubes back into the position in which they
are equally distributed all over the sphere. The
actual distribution of the Faraday tubes is a com-
promise between these extremes. They are not
all crowded into the equatorial plane, neither are
they equally distributed, for they are more in the
equatorial regions than in the others ; the excess of
the density of the tubes in these regions increasing
with the speed with which the charge is moving.

ELECTRICAL MASS 43

When a Faraday tube is in the equatorial region
it imprisons more of the ether than when it is
near the poles, so that the displacement of the
Faraday tubes from the pole to the equator will
increase the amount of ether imprisoned by the
tubes, and therefore the mass of the body.

It has been shown (see Heaviside, Phil. Mug.,
April, 1889, "Recent Researches," p. 19) that the
eflfect of the motion of the sphere is to displace
each Faraday tube toward the equatorial plane,
i.e.j the plane through the centre of the sphere at
right angles to its direction of motion, in such a
way that the projection of the tube on this plane
remains the same as for the imif orm distribution of
tubes, but that the distance of every point in the
tube from the equatorial plane is reduced in the
proportion of V V^-v^ to F", where T^ is the veloc-
ity of light through the medium and v the velocity
of the charged body.

From this result we see that it is only when the
velocity of the charged body is comparable with
the velocity of light that the change in distribu-
tion of the Faraday tubes due to the motion of
the body becomes appreciable.

In " Recent Researches on Electricity and Mag-
netism," p. 21, 1 calculated the momentum -ZJ in the

44 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

space surrounding a sphere of radius a, having its

centre at the moving charged body, and showed that

the value of /is given by the following expression :
^ y% If y^\

'2

(l + i-^cos20)|; . . (1)

where as before v and V are respectively the ve-
locities of the particle and the velocity of light,
and is given by the equation

sm = Y'
The mass of the sphere is increased in conse-
quence of the charge by -, and thus we see from

equation (1) that for velocities of the charged
body comparable with that of light the mass of
the body will increase with the velocity. It is
evident from equation (1) that to detect the influ-
ence of velocity on mass we must use exceed-
ingly small particles moving with very high ve-
locities. Now, particles having masses far smaller
than the mass of any known atom or molecule
are shot out from radium with velocities ap-
proaching in some cases to that of light, and the
ratio of the electric charge to the mass for parti-

ELECTRICAL MASS 45

cles of this kind has lately been made the subject
of a very interesting investigation by Kauf mann,
with the results shown in the following table ; the
first column contains the values of the velocities
of the particle expressed in centimetres per sec-
ond, the second column the value of the fraction

— where e is the charge and m the mass of the

particle :

y%

V X 10-"

-xio-'

m

2.83

.62

2.72

.77

2.59

.975

2.48

1.17

2.36

1.31

We see from these values that the value of — di-

m

minishes as the velocity increases, indicating, if

we suppose the charge to remain constant, that

the mass increases with the velocity. Kauf mann's

results give us the means of comparing the part of

the mass due to the electric charge with the part

independent of the electrification; the second

part of the mass is independent of the velocity.

If then we find that the mass varies appreciably

with the velocity, we infer that the part of the

46 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

mass due to the charge must be appreciable in
comparison with that independent of it. To cal-
culate the effect of velocity on the mass of an
electrified system we must make some assump-
tion as to the nature of the system, for the effect
on a charged sphere for example is not quite the
same as that on a charged ellipsoid ; but having
made the assumption and calculated the theoretical
effect of the velocity on the mass, it is easy to de-
duce the ratio of the part of the mass independent
of the charge to that part which at any velocity de-
pends upon the charge. Suppose that the part
of the mass due to electrification is at a velocity
V equal to rriofiv) where f{v) is a known function
of Vj then if J/^, J/„i are the observed masses at
the velocities v and v^ respectively and M the part
of the mass independent of charge, then

two equations from which M and m^ can be de-
termined. Kaufmann, on the assumption that
the charged body behaved like a metal sphere,
the distribution of the lines of force of which
when moving has been determined by G. F. C.
Searle, came to the conclusion that when the parti-
cle was moving slowly the " electrical mass " was

ELECTRICAL MASS 47

about one-fourth of the whole mass. He was care-
ful to point out that this fraction depends upon
the assumption we make as to the nature of the
moving body, as, for example, whether it is spheri-
cal or ellipsoidal, insulating or conducting; and
that with other assumptions his experiments might
show that the whole mass was electrical, which he
evidently regarded as the most probable result.

In the present state of our knowledge of the
constitution of matter, I do not think anything is
gained by attributing to the small negatively
charged bodies shot out by radium and other
bodies the property of metallic conductivity, and
I prefer the simpler assumption that the distribu-
tion of the lines of force round these particles is
the same as that of the lines due to a charged
point, provided we confine our attention to the
field outside a small sphere of radius a having its
centre at the charged point ; on this supposition
the part of the mass due to the charge is the value

of — in equation (1) on page 44. I have calcu-
lated from this expression the ratio of the masses
of the rapidly moving particles given out by ra-
dium to the mass of the same particles when at
rest, or moving slowly, on the assumption that tJie

4g ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

whole of the mass is due to ihs charge and have com-
pared these results with the values of the same
ratio as determined by Kaufmann's experiments.
These results are given in Table (II), the first col-
umn of which contains the values of v^ the veloci-
ties of the particles ; the second p, the number of
times the mass of a particle moving with this ve-
locity exceeds the mass of the same particle when
at rest, determined by equation (1); the third
column p^, the value of this quantity found by
Kaufmann in his experiments.

Table II.

V X lo-^*

cm
sec

p

P*

2.85

3.1

3.09

2.72

2.42

2.43

2.59

2.0

2.04

2.48

1.66

1.83

2.36

1.5

1.65

These results support the view that the wh^le
mass of these electrified particles arises from their
charge.

We have seen that if we regard the Faraday
tubes associated with these moving particles as
being those due to a moving point charge, and

ELECTRICAL MASS 49

confine our attention to the part of the field which
is outside a sphere of radius a concentric with the
charge, the mass m due to the charge e on the
particle is, when the particle is moving slowly,

given by the equation m = ^ — •

In a subsequent lecture I will explain
how the values oi me and e have been deter-
mined ; the result of these determinations is that

- = 10-^ and ^ = 1.2 X 10'^ in C. G. S. elec

e

trostatic units. Substituting these values in the
expression for m we find that a is about 5 X
10"^* <?m, a length very small in comparison with
the value 10'^ cm^ which is usually taken as a good
approximation to the dimensions of a molecule.

We have regarded the mass in this case as due
to the mass of ether carried along by the Faraday
tubes associated with the charge. As these tubes
stretch out to an infinite distance, the mass of the
particle is as it were diffused through space, and
has no definite limit. In consequence, however, of
the very small size of the particle and the fact
that the mass of ether carried by the tubes (being
proportional to the square of the density of the
Faraday tubes) varies inversely as the fourth

50 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

power of the distance from the particle, we find
by a simple calculation that all but the most insig-
nificant fraction of mass is confined to a distance
from the particle which is very small indeed com-
pared with the dimensions ordinarily ascribed to
atoms.

In any system containing electrified bodira a
part of the mass of the system will consist of the
mass of the ether carried along by the Faraday
tubes associated with the electrification. Now
one view of the constitution of matter — a view, I
hope to discuss in a later lecture — is that the
atoms of the various elements are collections of
positive and negative charges held together mainly
by their electric attractions, and, moreover, that
the negatively electrified particles in the atom
(corpuscles I have termed them) are identical
with those small negatively electrified particles
whose properties we have been discussing. On
this view of the constitution of matter, part
of the mass of any body would be the mass of
the ether dragged along by the Faraday tubes
stretching across the atom between the positively
and negatively electrified constituents. The view
I wish to put before you is that it is not merely a
part of the mass of a body which arises in this

ELECTRICAL MASS 51

way, but that the whole mass of any body is just
the mass of ether surrounding the body which is
carried along by the Faraday tubes associated
with the atoms of the body. In fact, that all mass
is mass of the ether, all momentum, momentum of
the ether, and all kinetic energy, kinetic energy
of the ether. This view, it should be said, requires
the density of the ether to be immensely greater
than that of any known substance.

It might be objected that since the mass has to
be carried along by the Faraday tubes and since
the disposition of these depends upon the relative
position of the electrified bodies, the mass of a
collection of a number of positively and negatively
electrified bodies would be constantly changing
with the positions of these bodies, and thus that
mass instead of being, as observation and experi-
ment have shown, constant to a very high degree
of approximation, should vary with changes in
the physical or chemical state of the body.

These objections do not, however, apply to such
a case as that contemplated in the preceding theory,
where the dimensions of one set of the electrified
bodies — the negative ones — are excessively small
in comparison with the distances separating the
various members of the system of electrified bodies.

52 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

When this is the case the concentration of the
lines of force on the small negative bodies — ^the
corpuscles — is so great that practically the whole
of the bound ether is localized around these
bodies, the amount depending only on their size
and charge. Thus, unless we alter the number or
character of the corpuscles, the changes occurring
in the mass through any alteration in their rela-
tive positions will be quite insignificant in com-
parison with the mass of the body.

^

CHAPTER III

EFFECTS DUE TO ACCELERATION OP THE

FARADAY TUBES

Rontgen Rays and Light

We have considered the behavior of the lines
of force when at rest and when moving uniformly,
we shall in this chapter consider the phenomena
which result when the state of motion of the lines
is changing.

Let us begin with the case of a moving charged
point, moving so slowly that the lines of force are
uniformly distributed around it, and consider what
must happen if we suddenly stop the point. The
Faraday tubes associated with the sphere have
inertia; they are also in a state of tension, the
tension at any point being proportional to the mass
per unit length. Any disturbance communicated
to one end of the tube will therefore travel along
it with a constant and finite velocity ; the tube in
fact having very considerable analogy with a
stretched string. Suppose we have a tightly
stretched vertical string moving uniformly, from

54

ELECTRICITY AND JVIATTER

right to left, and that we suddenly stop one end,
A, what will happen to the string ? The end A
will come to rest at once, but the forces called
into play travel at a finite rate, and each part of
the string will in virtue of its inertia continue to
move as if nothing had happened to the end A
until the disturbance starting from A reaches it.
Thus, if V is the velocity with which a disturb-
ance travels along the string, then when a time, ty
has elapsed after the stoppage of A, the parts of
the string at a greater distance than Vt from A
will be unaffected by the stoppage, and will have
the position and velocity they would have had
if the string had continued to move uniformly
forward. The shape of the string at successive
intervals will be as shown in Fig. 12, the length of

A
Fig. 12.

the horizontal portion increasing as its distance
from the fixed end increases.

RONTGEN RAYS AND LIGHT 55

Let US now return to the case of the moving
charged particle which we shall suppose suddenly-
brought to rest, the time occupied by the stoppage
being r. To find the configuration of the Faraday
tubes after a time t has elapsed since the beginning
of the process of bringing the charged particle to
rest, describe with the charged particle as centre
two spheres, one having the radius Vt^ the other
the radius V{t — r), then, since no disturbance can
have reached the Faraday tubes situated outside
the outer sphere, these tubes will be in the posi-
tion they would have occupied if they had moved
forward with the velocity they possessed at the
moment the particle was stopped, while inside the
inner sphere, since the disturbance has passed
over the tubes, they will be in their final positions.
Thus, consider a tube which, when the particle
was stopped was along the line OPQ (Fig. 13) ;
this will be the final position of the tube ; hence at
the time t the portion of this tube inside the inner
sphere will occupy the position <?P, while the
portion P' ^'outside the outer sphere will be in the
position it would have occupied if the particle had
not been reduced to rest, ^>., if O^ is the position
the particle would have occupied if it had not
been stopped, P^Q^ will be a straight line pass-

56 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

ing through O. Thus, to preserve its continuity
the tube must bend round in the shell between the
two spheres, and thus be distorted into the shape
OPP' Q\ Thus, the tube which before the stop-

FiG. 13.

page of the particle was radial, has now in the
shell a tangential component, and this tangential
component implies a tangential electric force.
The stoppage of the particle thus produces a
radical change in the electric field due to the par-
ticle, and gives rise, as the following calculation
will show, to electric and magnetic forces much
greater than those existing in the field when the
particle was moving steadily.

If we suppose that the thickness S of the shell
is so small that the portion of the Faraday tube
inside it may be regarded as straight, then if T is

RONTGEN RAYS AND LIGHT 57

the tangential electric force inside tte pulse, It
the radial force, we have

T P'R 00' sin ^ vt sin 6

B~ PE

(1)

Where v is the velocity with which the particle
was moving before it was stopped, 6 the angle
OP makes with the direction of motion of the
particle, t the time which has elapsed since the par-

tide was stopped ; since R = -Tyj^ and O P =Vt

where T^is the velocity of light, we have, if r = <?P,

T= tf 2if. (2)

The tangential Faraday tubes moving forward
with the velocity T^will produce at P a magnetic
force JI equal to V T^ this force will be at right
angles to the plane of the paper and in the
opposite direction to the magnetic force existing
at P before the stoppage of the particle ; since its
magnitude is given by the equation,

ev sin 6

H =

rh

it exceeds the magnetic force ^ — previously

existing in the proportion of r to S. Thus, the

58 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

pulse produced by the stoppage of the particle is
the seat of intense electric and magnetic forces
which diminish inversely as the distance from the
charged particle, whereas the forces before the
particle was stopped diminished inversely as the
square of the distance ; this pulse travelling out-
ward with the velocity of light constitutes in my
opinion the Rontgen rays which are produced
when the negatively electrified particles which
form the cathode rays are suddenly stopped by
striking against a solid obstacle.

The energy in the pulse can easily be shown

to be equal to

2 ^

3 ~Y'

this energy is radiated outward into space.
The amount of energy thus radiated depends
upon 8, the thickness of the pulse, i.e.^ upon
the abruptness with which the particle is
stopped ; if the particle is stopped instantaneously
the whole energy in the field will be absorbed in
the pulse and radiated away, if it is stopped grad-
ually only a fraction of the energy will be radiated
into space, the remainder will appear as heat at
the place where the cathode rays were stopped.
It is easy to show that the momentima in the

RONTGEN RAYS AND LIGHT 59

pulse at any instant is equal and opposite to the
momentum in the field outside the pulse ; as there
is no momentum in the space through which the
pulse has passed, the whole momentum in the field
after the particle is stopped is zero.

The preceding investigation only applies to the
case when the particle was moving so slowly that
the Faraday tubes before the stoppage of the
pulse were uniformly distributed; the same
principles, however, will give us the effect of
stopping a charged particle whenever the dis-
tribution of the Faraday tubes in the state of
steady motion has been determined.

Let us take, for example, the case when the
particle was initially moving with the velocity of
light; the rule stated on page 43 shows that
before the stoppage the Faraday tubes were
all congregated in the equatorial plane of the
moving particle. To find the configuration of
the Faraday tubes after a time t we proceed as
before by finding the configuration at that time
of the tubes, if the particle had not been stopped.
The tubes would in that case have been in a plane
at a distance Vt in front of the particle. Draw
two spheres having their centres at the particle and
having radii respectively equal to Vt and Vit—- t),

60

ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

where r is the time occupied in stopping the
particle; outside the outer sphere the configura-
tion of the tubes will be the same as if the par-
ticle had not been stopped, i. e.^ the tubes will be
the plane at the distance Vt in front of the par-
ticle, and this plane will touch the outer sphere.
Inside the inner sphere the Faraday tubes will be
uniformly distributed, hence to preserve continuity
these tubes must run round in the shell to join the
sphere as in Fig. 14. We thus have in this case

two pulses, one a
plane pulse propa-
gated in the direc-
tion in which the
particle was mov-
ing before it was
stopped, the other a
V spherical pulse trav-
eUing outward in aU
directions.

The preceding
method can be ap-
plied to the case
when the charged particle, instead of being
stopped, has its velocity altered in any way ; thus,
if the velocity v of the particle instead of being

Flo. 14.

rOntgen rays and light 61

reduced to zero is merely diminislied by A Vy we
can show, as on page 57, that it will give rise to
a pulse in which the magnetic force H is given by
the equation

rr ^^v sin

TO '

and the tangential electric force T by

^_ ^ . A 'i; sin ^

Now the thickness 8 of the pulse is the space
passed over by a wave of light during the time the
velocity of the particle is changing, hence ii St
is the time required to produce the change A t; in
the velocity 8 = VB ty hence we have

^__ e Av sin^ ^ _ e At; sin ^

^~ VTt "7~ V^Wt ~r ^

but ^ is equal to —/, where/ is the acceleration

of the particle, hence we have

TT__ _ e jf Bin 7^— _ ^ /.sin^

These equations show that a charged particle
whose motion is being accelerated produces a pulse
of electric and magnetic forces in which the forces
vary inversely as the distance from the particle.

Thus, if a charged body were made to vibrate in

62 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

such a way that its acceleration went through
periodic changes, periodic waves of electric and
magnetic force would travel out from the charged
body. These waves would, on the Electromag-
netic Theory of Light, be light waves, provided
the periodic changes in the acceleration of the
charged body took place with sufficient rapidity.
The method we have been investigating, in which
we consider the effect produced on the configura-
tion of the Faraday tubes by changes in the mo-
tion of the body, affords a very simple way of
picturing to ourselves the processes going on dur-
ing the propagation of a wave of light through
the ether. We have regarded these as arising
from the propagation of transverse tremors along
the tightly stretched Faraday tubes; in fact, we
are led to take the same view of the propagation
of light as the following extracts from the paper,
"Thoughts on Ray Vibrations," show to have
been taken by Faraday himself. Faraday says,
" The view which I am so bold to put forward
considers therefore radiations as a high species of
vibration in the lines of force which are known
to connect particles and also masses together."

This view of light as due to the tremors in
tightly stretched Faraday tubes raises a question

RONTGEN RAYS AND LIGHT 63

which I have not seen noticed. The Faraday
tubes stretching through the ether cannot be
regarded as entirely filling it. They are rather
to be looked upon as discrete threads embedded
in a continuous ether, giving to the latter a fibrous
structure ; but if this is the case, then on the view
we have taken of a wave of light the wave it-
self must have a structure, and the front of the
wave, instead of being, as it were, uniformly illu-
minated, will be represented by a series of bright
specks on a dark ground, the bright specks cor-
responding to the places where the Faraday tubes
cut the wave front.

Such a view of the constitution of a light wave
would explain a phenomenon which has always
struck me as being very remarkable and difficult
to reconcile with the view that a light wave, or
rather in this case a Rontgen ray, does not posses?
a structure. We have seen that the method of
propagation and constitution of a Rontgen ray
is the same as in a light wave, so that any
general consideration about structure in Ront-
gen rays will apply also to light waves. The
phenomenon in question is this: Rontgen rays
are able to pass very long distances through
gases, and as they pass through the gas they

64 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

ionize it, splitting up the molecules into posi-
tive and negative ions ; the number of molecules
so split up is, however, an exceedingly small frac-
tion, less than one-billionth, even for strong rays, of
the number of molecules in the gas. Now, if the
conditions in the front of the wave are uniform, all
the molecules of the gas are exposed to the same
conditions ; how is it then that so small a propor-
tion of them are split up ? It might be argued that
those split up are in some special condition — that
they possess, for example, an amount of kinetic
energy so much exceeding the average kinetic
energy of the molecules of the gas that, in accord-
ance with Maxwell's Law of Distribution of
Kinetic energy, their number would be exceedingly
small in comparison with the whole number of
molecules of the gas ; but if this were the case the
same law of distribution shows that the number
in this abnormal condition would increase very
rapidly with the temperature, so that the ioniza-
tion produced by the Rontgen rays ought to in-
crease very rapidly as the temperature increases.
Recent experiments made by Mr. McClung in the
Cavendish Laboratory show that no appreciable
increase in the ionization is produced by raising
the temperature of a gas from 1 5° C. to 200° C,

RONTGEN RAYS AND LIGHT 65

wliereas the number of molecules possessing an
abnormal amount of kinetic energy would be
enormously increased by this rise in temperature.
The difficulty in explaining the small ionization is
removed if, instead of supposing the front of the
Rontgen ray to be uniform, we suppose that it con-
sists of specks of great intensity separated by
considerable intervals where the intensity is very
small, for in this case all the molecules in the field,
and probably even different parts of the same
molecule, are not exposed to the same conditions,
and the case becomes analogous to a swarm of
cathode rays passing through the gas, in which
case the number of molecules which get into col-
lision with the rays may be a very small fraction
of the whole number of molecules.

To return, however, to the case of the charged
particle whose motion is accelerated, we have
seen that from the particle electric and magnetic
forces start and travel out radially with the ve-
locity of light, both the radial and magnetic forces
bemg at right angles to the direction in which
they are travelling; but since (see page 25)
each unit volume of the electro-magnetic field has
an amount of momentum equal to the product of
the density of the Faraday tube and the magnetic

gg ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

force, the direction of the momentum being at
right angles to both these quantities, there will be
the wave due to the acceleration of the charged
particle, and indeed in any electric or light wave
momentum in the direction of propagation of the
wave. Thus, if any such wave, for example a
wave of light, is absorbed by the substance through
which it is passing, the momentum in the wave
will be communicated to the absorbing substance,
which will, therefore, experience a force tending to
push it in the direction the light is travelling.
Thus, when light falls normally on a blackened ab-
sorbing substance, it will repel that substance.
This repulsion resulting from radiation was shown
by Maxwell to be a consequence of the Electro-
magnetic Theory of Light ; it has lately been de-
tected and measured by Lebedew by some most
beautiful experiments, which have been confirmed
and extended by Nichols and Hull.

The pressure experienced by the absorbing sub-
stance will be proportional to its area, while the
weight of the substance is proportional to its vol-
ume. Thus, if we halve the linear dimensions we
reduce the weight to one-eighth while we only re-
duce the pressure of radiation to one-quarter ; thus,
by sufficiently reducing the size of the absorbing

RONTGEN RAYS AND LIGHT 67

body we must arrive at a stage when the forces
due to radiation exceed those which, like weight,
are proportional to the volume of the substance.
On this principle, knowing the intensity of the
radiation from the sun, Arrhenius has shown that
for an opaque sphere of unit density 10"^ cm. in
diameter the repulsion due to the radiation from
the sun would just balance the sun's attraction,
while all bodies smaller than this would be re-
pelled from the sun, and he has applied this prin-
ciple to explain the phenomena connected with
the tails of comets. Poynting-has recently shown
that if two spheres of unit density about 39 cm.
in diameter are at the temperature of 27^ C. and
protected from all external radiation, the re-
pulsion due to the radiation emitted from the
spheres will overpower their gravitational at-
traction so that the spheres will repel each
other.

Again, when light is refracted and reflected
at a transparent surface, the course of the light
and therefore the direction of momentum is
changed, so that the refracting substance must
have momentum communicated to it. It is easy
to show that even when the incidence of the light
is oblique the momentum communicated to the

68 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

substance is normal to the refracting surface.
There are many interesting problems connected
with the forces experienced by refracting prisms
when light is passing through them which wiU
suggest themselves to you if you consider the
changes in momentum experienced by the light
wave in its course througt the prism. Tangential
forces due to light have not, so far as I know,
been detected experimentally. These, however,
must exist in certain cases ; such, for example, as
when light incident obliquely is imperfectly re-
flected from a metallic surface.

The waves of electric and magnetic force which
radiate from an accelerated charge particle carry
energy with them. This energy is radiated into
space, so that the particle is constantly losing en-
ergy. The rate at which energy is radiating from

1 e^P
the particle can easily be shown to be q where

e is the charge on the particle,/ its acceleration,
and V the velocity of light. If we take into ac-
count this loss of energy by the particle when its
motion is being accelerated, we find some interest-
ing results. Thus, for example, if a particle of
mass ra and charge e starting from rest is acted
upon by a constant electric force, X, the particle

rOntgen rays and light 69

does not at once attain the acceleration — as it

m

would if there were no loss of energy by radia-
tion; on the contrary, the acceleration of the parti-
cle is initially zero, and it is not until after the

lapse of a time comparable with -t7= — that the

particle acquires even an appreciable fraction of
its final acceleration. Thus, the rate at which the

particle lo^s ene^ is daring the time ^ very

small compared with the ultimate rate. Thus, if
the particle were acted on by a wave of electric

force which only took a time comparable with -^ —

to pass over the particle, the amount of energy ra-
diated by the particle would be a very much smaller
fraction of the energy in the wave than it would be
if the particle took a time equal to a considerable

multiple of tT" to pass over the particle. This has

an important application in explaining the greater
penetrating power of " hard " Eontgen rays than
of " soft " ones. The " hard " rays correspond to
thin pulses, the " soft " ones to thick ones ; so that
a smaller proportion of the energy in the " hard "
rays will be radiated away by the charged particles

70 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

over which they pass than in the case of the "soft''

rays.

By applying the law that the rate at which en-

1 e^-f^
ergy is radiating is eqoal to « -y^ to the case of

a charged particle revolving in a circular orbit un-
der an attractive force varying inversely as the
square of the distance, we find that in this case
the rate of radiation is proportional to the eighth
power of the velocity, or to the fourth power of
the energy. Thus, the rate of loss of energy by
radiation increases very much more rapidly than
the energy of the moving body.

CHAPTER IV

THE ATOMIC STEUCTUEE OP ELECTEICITY

Hitherto we have been dealing chiefly with the
properties of the lines of force, with their ten-
sion, the mass of ether they carry along with them,
and with the propagation of electric disturbances
along them ; in this chapter we shall discuss the
nature of the charges of electricity which form the
beginnings and ends of these lines. We shall show
that there are strong reasons for supposing that
these changes have what may be called an atomic
structure ; any charge being built up of a number
of finite individual charges, all equal to each other :
just as on the atomic theory of matter a quantity
of hydrogen is built up of a number of small par-
ticles called atoms, all the atoms being equal to
each other. If this view of the structure of elec-
tricity is correct, each extremity of a Faraday tube
will be the place from which a constant fixed num-
ber of tubes start or at which they arrive.

Let us first consider the evidence given by the
laws of the electrolysis of liquids. Faraday

72 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

showed that when electricity passes through a
liquid electrolyte, the amount of negative electric-
ity given up to the positive electrode, and of posi-
tive electricity given to the negative electrode, is
proportional to the number of atoms coming up
to the electrode. Let us first consider monovalent
elements, such as hydrogen, chlorine, sodium, and
so on ; he showed that when the same number of
atoms of these substances deliver up their
charges to the electrode, the quantity of electricity
communicated is the same whether the carriers
are atoms of hydrogen, chlorine, or sodium, in-
dicating that each atom of these elements carries
the same charge of electricity. Let us now go to
the divalent elements. We find again that the ions
of all divalent elements carry the same charge,
but that a number of ions of the divalent ele-
ment carry twice the charge carried by the same
number of ions of a univalent element, showing
that each ion of a divalent element carries twice
as much charge as the univalent ion ; again, a tri-
valent ion carries three times the charge of a uni-
valent ion, and so on. Thus, in the case of the elec-
trolysis of solutions the charges carried by the
ions are either the charge on the hydrogen ion or
twice that charge, or three times the charge, and

THE ATOMIC STRUCTURE OF ELECTRICITY 73

SO on. The charges we meet with axe always an
integral multiple of the charge carried by the hy-
drogen atom ; we never meet with fractional parts
of this charge. This very remarkable fact shows,
as Helmholtz said in the Faraday lecture, that
" if we accept the hypothesis that the elementary
substances are composed of atoms, we cannot avoid
the conclusion that electricity, positive as well as
negative, is divided into definite elementary por-
tions which behave like atoms of electricity."

When we consider the conduction of electricity
through gases, the evidence in favor of the atomic
character of electricity is even stronger than it is
in the case of conduction through liquids, chiefly
because we know more about the passage of elec-
tricity through gases than through liquids.

Let us consider for a moment a few of the prop-
erties of gaseous conduction. When a gas has
been put into the conducting state — say, by expos-
ure to Eiintgen rays — ^it remains in this state for
a sufficiently long time after the rays have ceased
to enable us to study its properties. We find that
we can filter the conductivity out of the gas by
sending the gas through a plug of cotton-wool, or
through a water-trap. Thus, the conductivity is
due to something mixed with the gas which can

74 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

be filtered out of it; again, the conductivity is
taken out of the gas when it is sent through a
strong electric field. This result shows that the
constituent to which the conductivity of the gas is
due consists of charged particles, the conductivity
arising from the motion of these particles in the
electric field. We have at the Cavendish Labora-
tory measured the charge of electricity carried by
those particles.

The principle of the method first used is as fol-
lows. If at any time there are in the gas n of these
particles charged positively and n charged nega-
tively, and if each of these carries an electric charge
By we can easily by electrical methods determine n e^
the quantity of electricity of our sign present in
the gas. One method by which this can be done
is to enclose the gas between two parallel metal
plates, one of which is insulated. Now suppose we
suddenly charge up the other plate positively to a
very high potential, this plate will now repel the
positive particles in the gas, and these before they
have time to combine with the negative particles
will be driven against the insulated plate. Thus,
all the positive chai'ge in the gas will be driven
against the insulated plate, where it can be meas-
ured by an electrometer. As this charge is equal

THE ATOMIC STRUCTURE OF ELECTRICITY 75

to 71 ^ we can in this way easily determine n e: ii
then we can devise a means of measuring n we
shall be able to find e. The method by which I
determined n was founded on the discovery by
C. T. R. Wilson that the charged particles act as
nuclei round which small drops of water condense,
when the particles are surrounded by damp air
cooled below the saturation point. In dust-free
air, as Aitken showed, it is very difficult to get a
fog when damp air is cooled, since there are no
nuclei for the drops to condense around ; if there
are charged particles in the dust-free air, however,
a fog will be deposited round these by a supersat-
uration far less than that required to produce any
appreciable effect when no charged particles are
present.

Thus, in sufficiently superaaturated damp air a
cloud is deposited on these charged particles,
and they are thus rendered visible. This is the
first step toward counting them. The drops are,
however, fai* too small and too numerous to be
counted directly. We can, however, get their
number indirectly as follows : suppose we have a
number of these particles in dust-free air in a
closed vessel, the air being saturated with water
vapor, suppose now that we produce a sudden

76 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

expansion of the air in the vessel; this will cool
the air, it will be supersaturated with vapor, and
drops will be deposited round the charged parti-
cles. Now if we know the amount of expansion
produced we can calculate the cooling of the gas,
and therefore the amount of water deposited.
Thus, we know the volume of water in the form of
drops, so that if we know the volume of one drop
we can deduce the number of drops. To find the
size of a drop we make use of an investigation
by Sir George Stokes on the rate at which small
spheres fall through the air. In consequence of
the viscosity of the air small bodies fall exceedingly
slowly, and the smaller they are the slower they
fall. Stokes showed that if a is the radius of a
drop of water, the velocity v with which it falls
through the air is given by the equation

9 ■ '

when g is the acceleration due to gravity = 981

and /jt the coefficient of viscosity of air = .00018;

thus

i; = 1.21 X 10' «%•

hence if we can determine v we can determine
the radius and hence the volume of the drop.

THE ATOMIC STRUCTURE OF ELECTRICITY 77

But V is evidently the velocity with vrhich the
cloud round the charged particle settles down, and
can easily be measured by observing the move-
ment of the top of the cloud. In this way I
found the volume of the drops, and thence n the
number of particles. As n e had been determined
by electrical measurements, the value of e could
be deduced when n was known ; in this way I
found that its value is

3.4 X 10-'^ Electrostatic C. G. S. units.

Experiments were made with air, hydrogen,
and carbonic acid, and it was found that the
ions had the same charge in all these gases; a
strong argument in favor of the atomic character
of electricity.

We can compare the charge on the gaseous ion
with that carried by the hydrogen ion in the elec-
trolysis of solutions in the following way: We
know that the passage of one electro-magnetic
unit of electric charge, or 3 X 10^® electrostatic
units, through acidulated water liberates 1.23 c.c.
of hydrogen at the temperature 15°C. and pressure
of one atmosphere ; if there are iV molecules in a
c.c. of a gas at this temperature and pressure the
number of hydrogen ions in 1.23 c.c. is 2.46 N,

7g ELECTRICITY AND MA'ITER

SO that if m is the charge on the hydrogen ion in
the electrolyis of solution,

or JS'=1.22X10''-f-iV:

Now, ^, the charge on the gas ion is 3.4X10"^®,
hence if ^=3.6X10^^ the charge on the gaseous
ion will equal the charge on the electrolytic ion.
Now, in the kinetic theoiy of gases methods are
investigated for determining this quantity JVJ or
Avogadro's Constant, as it is sometimes called ; the
values obtained by this theory vary somewhat
vnth the assumptions made as to the nature of
the molecule and the nature of the forces which one
molecule exerts on another in its near neighbor-
hood. The value 3.6X10^^ is? however, in good
agreement with some of the best of these deter-
minations, and hence we conclude that the charge
on the gaseous ion is equal to the charge on the
electrolytic ion.

Dr. H. A. Wilson, of the Cavendish Laboratory,
by quite a different method, obtained practically
the same value for e as that given above. His
method was founded on the discovery by C. T. R.
Wilson that it requires less supersaturation to
deposit clouds from moist air on negative ions

THE ATOMIC STRUCTURE OF ELECTRICITY 79

than it does on positive. Thus, by suitably
choosing the supersaturation, we can get the
cloud deposited on the negative ions alone, so
that each drop in the cloud is negatively charged ;
by observing the rate at which the cloud falls we
can, as explained above, determine the weight of
each drop. Now, suppose we place above the
cloud a positively electrified plate, the plate will
attract the cloud, and we can adjust the charge on
the plate until the electric attraction just balances
the weight of a drop, and the drops, like Mahomet's
coffin, hang stationary in the air; if JT is the
electric force then the electric attraction on the
drop is Xe^ when e is the charge on the drop. As
X ^ is equal to the weight of the drop which is
known, and as we can measure X, e can be at once
determined.

Townsend showed that the charge on the
gaseous ion is equal to that on the ion of hydrogen
in ordinaiy electrolysis, by measuring the coeffi-
cient of diffusion of the gaseous ions and com-
paring it with the velocity acquired by the ion
under a given electric force. Let us consider the
case of a volume of ionized gas between two
horizontal planes, and suppose that as long as we
keep in any horizontal layer the number of ions

go ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

remains the same, but that the number varies as
we pass from one layer to another; let x be the
distance of a layer from the lower plane, n
the number of ions of one sign in unit volume
of this layer, then if Z) be the coefficient of
diffusion of the ions, the number of ions which
in one second pass downward through unit area
of the layer is

ax
so that the average velocity of the particles down-
ward is

n dx
The force which sets the ions in motion is the
variation in the partial pressure due to the ions ; if
this pressure is equal to p, the force acting on the

ions in a unit volume is -r-^ and the average force

per ion is - -j—. Now we can find the velocity

which an ion acquires when acted upon by a
known force by measuring, as Rutherford and
Zeleny have done, the velocities acquired by the
ions in an electric field. They showed that this
velocity is proportional to the force acting on the
ion, so that if A is the velocity when the electric

THE ATOMIC STRUCTURE OF ELECTRICITY gl

force is JTand when the force acting on the ion is
therefore X e^ the velocity for unit force will be

-=-, and the velocity when the force is — J^ will
Xe n ax

therefore be

1 dp A ^

n dx Xe^

this velocity we have seen, however, to be equal to

D dn

•

n dx^
hence we have

dp A j^ dn ^-v

dx Xe dx *

Now if the ions behave like a perfect gas, the
pressure p bears a constant ratio to Uj the number
of ions per unit volume. This ratio is the same
for all gases, at the same temperature, so that if
N' is Avogadro's constant, i£,^ the number of mol-
ecules in a cubic centimetre of gas at the atmos-
pheric pressure P

p n

and equation (1) gives us

PA_^

Thus, by knowing D and a we can find the value
of Ne. In this way Townsend found that Ne was

82 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

the same in air, hydrogen, oxygen, and carbonic
acid, and the mean of his values was Ne = 1.24
X 10^^ We have seen that if JS^is the charge on
the hydrogen ion

NE = 1,22 X 10*^.
Thus, these experiments show that ^ =^ or that
the charge on the gaseous ion is equal to the
charge carried by the hydrogen ion in the elec-
trolysis of solutions.

The equality of these charges has also been
proved in a very simple way by H. A. Wilson,
who introduced per second into a volume of air
at a very high temperature, a measured quan-
tity of the vapor of metallic salts. This vapor
got ionized and the mixture of air and vapor ac-
quired very considerable conductivity. The cur-
rent through the vapor increased at first with the
electromotive force used to drive it through the
gas, but this increase did not go on indefinitely,
for after the current had reached a certain value
no further increase in the electromotive force pro-
duced any change in the current. The current, as
in all cases of conduction through gases, attained
a maximum value called the "saturation current,"
which was not exceeded until the electric field ap-
plied to the gas approached the intensity at which

THE ATOMIC STRUCTURE OF ELECTRICITY §3

sparks began to pass througli the gas. Wilson
found that the saturation current through the salt
vapor was just equal to the current which if it
passed through an aqueous solution of the salt
would electrolyse in one second the same amount
of salt as was fed per second into the hot air.

It is worth pointing out that this result gives
us a method of determining Avogadro's Constant
which is independent of any hypothesis as to the
shape or size of molecules, or of the way in which
they act upon each other. If JVis this constant, e
the charge on an ion, then JV e = 1.22 X 10^® and
we have seen that ^ = 3.4 X 10^^ so that iV^= 3.9
X 10'*.

Thus, whether we study the conduction of elec-
tricity through liquids or through gases, we are
led to the conception of a natural unit or atom of
electricity of which all charges are integral mul-
tiples, just as the mass of a quantity of hydro-
gen is an integral multiple of the mass of a
hydrogen atom.

Mass of the Ca/rriers of Electricity

We must now pass on to consider the nature
of the systems which carry the charges, and in
order to have the conditions as simple as possible

84 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

let US begin with the case of a gas at a very low
pressure^ where the motion of the particles is not
impeded by collisions with the molecules of the
gas. Let us suppose that we have a particle of
mass m, carrying a charge e^ moving in the plane
of the paper, and that it is acted on by a uniform
magnetic field at right angles to this plane. We
have seen that under these circumstances the par-
ticle Avill be acted upon by a mechanical force
equal to H e Vy where IT is the magnetic force and
V the velocity of the particle. The direction of
this force is in the plane of the paper at right
angles to the path of the particle. Since the
force is always at right angles to the direction
of motion of the particle, the velocity of the par-
ticle and therefore the magnitude of the force act-
ing upon it will not alter, so that the path of the
particle will be that described by a body acted
upon by a constant normal force. It is easy to show
that this path is a circle whose radius a is given
by the equation

The velocity v of the particle may be deter-
mined by the following method : Suppose the par-
ticle is moving horizontally in the plane of the

THE ATOMIC STRUCTURE OF ELECTRICITY §5

paper, through a uniform magnetic field H^ at
right angles to this plane, the particle will be
acted upon by a vertical force equal to He v. Now,
if in addition to the magnetic force we apply a
vertical electric force JT, this will exert a verti-
cal mechanical force X e on the moving particle.
Let us arrange the direction of JTso that this force
is in the opposite direction to that due to the mag-
net, and adjust the value of X until the two forces
are equal. We can tell when this adjustment has
been made, since in this case the motion of the
particle under the action of the electric and mag-
netic forces will be the same as when both these
forces are absent. When the two forces are equal

we have

X e=^H € Vy or

^ = ^. (2)

Hence if we have methods of tracing the motion
of the particle, we can measure the radius a of the
circle into which it is bent by a constant magnetic
force, and determine the value of the electric force
required to counteract the effect of the magnetic
force. Equations (1) and (2) then give us the

means of finding both v and —

86 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

Values of — for Negatively Mectrifed Pa/rticles

in Gases at Low Pressfwres

The value of - has been determined in this

m

way for the negatively electrified particles which
form the cathode rays which are so conspicuous a
part of the electric discharge through a gas at low
pressures ; and also for the negatively electrified
particles emitted by metals, (1) when exposed to
ultra-violet light, (2) when raised to the tempera-
ture of incandescence. These experiments have
led to the very remarkable result that the value of

— is the same whatever the nature of the ffas in
m °

which the particle may be found, or whatever the
nature of the metal from which it may be sup-
posed to have proceeded. In fact, in every case

p

in which the value of — has been determined for

m

negatively electrified particles moving with veloci-
ties considerably less than the velocity of light, it
has been found to have the constant value about
10^, the units being the centimetre, gram, and
second, and the charge being measured in electro-

magnetic units. As the value of ^ for the hydro-

THE ATOMIC STRUCTURE OF ELECTRICITY 37

gen ion in the electrolysis of liquids is only 10*,
and as we have seen the charge on the gaseous
ion is equal to that on the hydrogen ion in ordi-
nary electrolysis, we see that the mass of a carrier
of the negative charge must be only about one-
thousandth part of the mass of hydrogen atom ;
the mass was for a long time regarded as the small-
est mass able to have an independent existence.

I have proposed the name corpuscle for these
units of negative electricity. These corpuscles
are the same however the electrification may have
arisen or wherever they may be found. Negative
electricity, in a gas at a low pressure, has thus a
structure analogous to that of a gas, the corpuscles
taking the place of the molecules. The " negative
electric fluid," to use the old notation, resembles
a gaseous fluid with a corpuscular instead of a
molecular structure.

Carriers of Positive Elect/rijication

We can apply the same methods to determine

the values of — for the carriers of positive electri-
fication. This has been done by Wien for the
positive electrification found in certain parts of
the discharge in a vacuum tube, and I have

83 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

measured — for the positive electiification given

off by a hot wire. The results of these measure-
ments form a great contrast to those for the nega-

tive electrification, for — for the positive charge,

instead of having, as it has for the negative, the
constant high value 10''', is found never to have a
value greater than 10^, the value it would have if
the carrier were the atom of hydrogen. In many

cases the value of — is very much less than 10^ in-

dicating that in these cases the positive charge is
carried by atoms having a greater mass than that

of the hydrogen atom. The value of — varies with

the nature of the electrodes and with the gas in
the discharge tube, just as it would if the carriers
of the positive charge were the atoms of the
elements which happened to be present when the
positive electrification was produced.

These results lead us to a view of electrification
which has a striking resemblance to that of
Franklin's "One Fluid Theory of Electricity."
Instead of taking, as Franklin did, the electric
fluid to be positive electricity we take it to be
negative. The "electric fluid'* of Franklin coiv

THE ATOMIC STRUCTURE OF ELECTRICITY gQ

responds to an assemblage of corpuscles, negative
electrification being a collection of these corpus-
cles. The transference of electrification from one
place to another is effected by the motion of cor-
puscles from the place where is a gain of positive
electrification to the place where there is a gain
of negative. A positively electrified body is one
that has lost some of its corpuscles. We have
seen that the mass and charge of the corpuscles
have been determined directly by experiment. We
in fact know more about the " electric fluid " than
we know about such fluids as air or water.

CHAPTER V

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM

We have seen that whether we produce the
corpuscles by cathode rays, by ultra-violet light, or
from incandescent metals, and whatever may be
the metals or gases present we always get the same
kind of corpuscles. Since corpuscles similar in all
respects may be obtained from very different agents
and materials, and since the mass of the corpuscles
is less than that of any known atom, we see that
the corpuscle must be a constituent of the atom of
many different substances. That in fact the atoms
of these substances have something in common.

We are thus confronted with the idea that the
atoms of the chemical elements are built up of sim-
pler systems ; an idea which in various forms has
been advanced by more than one chemist. Thus
Prout, in 1815, put forward the view that the
atoms of all the chemical elements are built up of
atoms of hydrogen ; if this were so the combining
weights of all the elements would, on the assump-

s.

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 91

tion that there was no loss of weight when the
atoms of hydrogen combined to form the atom of
some other element, be integers ; a result not in ac-
cordance with observation. To avoid this discrep-
ancy Dumas suggested that the primordial atom
might not be the hydrogen atom, but a smaller
atom having only ODe-half or one-quarter of the
mass of the hydrogen atom. Further support was
given to the idea of the complex nature of the
atom by the discovery by Newlands and Mende-
leeff of what is known as the periodic law, which
shows that there is a periodicity in the properties
of the elements when they are arranged in the or-
der of increasing atomic weights. The simple rela-
tions which exist between the combining weights
of several of the elements having similar chemical
properties, for example, the fact that the combin-
ing weight of sodium is the arithmetic mean of
those of lithium and potassium, all point to the
conclusion that the atoms of the different elements
have something in common. Further evidence in
the same direction is afforded by the similarity in
the structure of the spectra of elements in the same
group in the periodic series, a similarity which re-
cent work on the existence in spectra of series of
lines whose frequencies are connected by definite

92 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

numerical relations has done much to emphasize
and establish ; indeed spectroscopic evidence alone
has led Sir Norman Lockyer for a long time to
advocate the view that the elements are really
compounds which can be dissociated when the
circumstances are suitable. The phenomenon of
radio-activity, of which I shall have to speak later,
carries the argument stUl further, for there seems
good reasons for believing that radios-activity is
due to changes going on within the atoms of the
radio-active substances. If this is so then we
must face the problem of the constitution of the
atom, and see if we can imagine a model which
has in it the potentiality of explaining the re-
markable properties shown by radio-active sub-
stances. It may thus not be superfluous to con-
sider the bearing of the existence of corpuscles on
the problem of the constitution of the atom; and
although the model of the atom to which we are
led by these considerations is very crude and im-
perfect, it may perhaps be of service by suggesting
lines of investigations likely to furnish us with fur-
ther information about the constitution of the
atom.

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 93

TTis Nature of the Unit from lohich the Atoms

a/re Built Up

Starting from the hypothesis that the atom
is an aggregation of a number of simpler systems,
let us consider what is the nature of one of
these systems. We have seen that the cor-
puscle, whose mass is so much less than that of the
atom, is a constituent of the atom, it is natural to
regard the corpuscle as a constituent of the primor-
dial system. The corpuscle, however, carries a
definite charge of negative electricity, and since
with any charge of electricity we always associate
an equal charge of the opposite Idnd, we should
expect the negative charge on the corpuscle to be
associated with an equal charge of positive electri-
city. Let us then take as our primordial system an
electrical doublet, with a negative corpuscle at one
end and an equal positive charge at the other, the
two ends being connected by lines of electric force
which we suppose to have a material existence.
For reasons which will appear later on, we shall
suppose that the volume over which the positive
electricity is spread is very much larger than the
volume of the corpuscle. The lines of force will
therefore be very much more condensed near the

94 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

corpuscle than at any other part of the system, and
therefore the quantity of ether bound by the lines
of force, the mass of which we regard as the mass
of the system, will be very much greater near the
corpuscle than elsewhere. If, as we have sup-
posed, the size of the corpuscle is very small com-
pared with the size of the volume occupied by the
positive electrification, the mass of the system will
practically arise from the mass of bound ether
close to the corpuscle ; thus the mass of the sys-
tem will be practically independent of the position
of its positive end, and will be very approximately
the mass of the corpuscles if alone in the field.
This mass (see page 21) is for each corpuscle

equal to — -, where e is the charge on the corpuscle

and a its radius — a, as we have seen, being about
10-^' cm.

Now suppose we had a universe consisting of
an immense number of these electrical doublets,
which we regard as our primordial system ; if these
were at rest their mutual attraction would draw
them together, just as the attractions of a lot of
little magnets would draw them together if they
were free to move, and aggregations of more than
one system would be formed.

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 95

If, however, the individual systems were orig-
inaUy moving with considerable velocities, the rel-
ative velocity of two systems, when they came
near enough to exercise appreciable attraction on
each other, might be sufficient to carry the sys-
tems apart in spite of their mutual attraction. In
this case the formation of aggregates would be
postponed, until the kinetic energy of the units
had fallen so low that when they came into
collision, the tendency to separate due to their
relative motion was not sufficient to prevent them
remaining together under their mutual attraction.

Let us consider for a moment the way in which
the kinetic energy of such an assemblage of units
would diminish. We have seen (p. 68) that when-
ever the velocity of a charged body is changing
the body is losing energy, since it generates
electrical waves which radiate through space, car-
rying energy with them. Thus, whenever the
units come into collision, i.e.^ whenever they
come so close together that they sensibly acceler-
ate or retard each other's motion, energy will be
radiated away, the whole of which will not be
absorbed by the surrounding units. There will
thus be a steady loss of kinetic energy, and after
a time, although it may be a very long time, the

96 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

kinetic energy will fall to the value at which aggre-
gation of the units into groups of two will begin ;
these will later on be followed by the formation
of aggregates containing a larger number of units.
In considering the question of the further ag-
gregation of these complex groups, we must re-
member that the possibility of aggregation will
depend not merely upon the velocity of the aggre-
gate as a whole, i.e.^ upon the velocity of the
centre of gravity, but also upon the relative ve-
locities of the corpuscles within the aggregate.

Let us picture to ourselves the aggregate as, like
the ^pinus atom of Lord Kelvin, consisting of a
sphere of uniform positive electrification, and ex-
erting therefore a radial electric force proportional
at an internal point to the distance from the centre,
and that the very much smaller negatively electri-
fied corpuscles are moving about
inside it. The number of corpus-
cles is the number of units which
had gone to make up the aggre-
gate, and the total negative elec-
trification on the corpuscles is
equal to the positive electrifica-
tion on the sphere. To fix our ideas let us take
the case shown in Fig. 15 of three corpuscles

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 97

Ay By Gy arranged within the sphere at the comers
of an equilateral triangle, the centre of the triangle
coinciding with the centre of the sphere. First
suppose the corpuscles are at rest ; they will be in
equilibrium when they are at such a distance
from the centre of the sphere that the repulsion
between the corpuscles, which will evidently be
radial, just balances the radial attraction excited
on the corpuscles by the positive electrification of
the sphere. A simple calculation shows that this
will be the case when the distance of the corpuscle
from the centre is equal to .57 times the radius of
the sphere. Next suppose that the corpuscles, in-
stead of being at rest, are describing circular orbits
round the centre of the sphere. Their centrifugal
force wiU carry them farther away from the centre
by an amount depending upon the speed with
which they are rotating in their orbits. As we
increase this speed the distance of the corpuscles
from the centre of the sphere will increase until
at a certain speed the corpuscles will reach the
surface of the sphere ; further increases in speed
will cause them first to rotate outside the sphere
and finally leave the sphere altogether, when the
atom will break up.
In this way we see that the constitution of the

98 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

aggregate will not be permanent, if the kinetic
energy due to the velocity of the corpuscles inside
the sphere relative to the centre of the sphere ex-
ceeds a certain value. We shall, for the sake of
brevity, speak of this kinetic energy of the cor-
puscles within the atom as the corpuscvla/r tern-
peratnire of the atom, and we may express the
preceding result by saying that the atom will not
be stable unless its corpuscular temperature is
below a certain value.

We must be careful to distinguish between cor-
puscular temperature, which is the mean kinetic
energy of the corpuscles inside the atom, and the
molecular temperature, which is the mean kinetic
energy due to the motion of the centre of gravity
of the atom. These temperatures are probably not
in any very close relationship with each other.
They would be proportional to each other if the law
known as the law of equipartition of energy among
the various degrees of freedom of the atom were to
apply. This law is, however, inconsistent with the
physical properties of gases, and in the proof given
of it in the kinetic theory of gases, no estimate is
given of the time required to establish the state con-
templated by the law ; it may be that this time is so
long that gases are never able to get into this state.

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 99

Let US now take the case of two aggregations,
A and -B, whose corpuscular temperatures are high,
though not so high, of course, as to make A and J9
unstable when apart, and suppose, in order to give
them the best possible chance of combining, that
the centres of gravity of A and J9 when quite
close to each other are at rest, will A and £
unite to form a more complex aggregate as they
would if the corpuscles in them were at rest ? We
can easily, I think, see that they will not necessa-
rily do so. For as A and JB approach each other,
under their mutual attractions, the potential en-
ergy due to the separation of A and JB will dimin-
ish and their kinetic energy will increase. This in-
crease in the kinetic energy of the corpuscles in A
and -B will increase the tendency of the corpuscles
to leave their atoms, and if the increase in the kin-
etic energy is considerable A and £ may each lose
one or more corpuscles. The departure of a cor-
puscle will leave A and J^ positively charged,
and they will tend to separate under the repulsion
of these charges. When separated they will have
each a positive charge ; but as there are now free
corpuscles with negative charges moving about in
the region in which A and Ji are situated, these
positive charges will ultimately be neutralized by

100 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

corpuscles striking against A and -B and remain-
ing in combination with them.

We thus conclude that unless the corpuscular
temperature after union is less than a certain limit-
ing value, the union cannot be permanent, the
complex formed being unstable, and incapable of
a permanent existence. Now, the corpuscular
temperature of the aggregate formed by A and £
will depend upon the corpuscular temperatures of
A and J^ before union, and also upon the diminu-
tion in the potential energy of the system occa-
sioned by the union of A and J^. If the corpuscu-
lar temperatures of A and J^ before union were
very high, the corpuscular temperature after imion
would be high also; if they were above a cer-
tain limit, the corpuscular temperature after union
would be too high for stability, and the aggre-
gate AJi would not be formed. Thus, one con-
dition for the formation of complex aggregates is
that the corpuscular temperature of their constitu-
ents before combination should be sufficiently low.

If the molecula/r temperature of the gas in
which A and Ji are molecules is very high, com-
bination may be prevented by the high relative
velocity of A and J^ carrying them apart in spite
of their mutual attraction. The point, however,

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM IQl

which I wish to emphasize is, that we cannot se-
cure the union merely by lowering the molecular
temperature, i.e., by cooling the gas ; union will
be impossible unless the corpuacuh/r temperature,
i.e.j the kinetic energy due to the motion of the
corpuscles inside the atom, is reduced below a cer-
tain value. We may prevent union by raising the
molecular temperature of a gas, but we cannot en-
sure union by lowering it.

Thus, to take a specific example, the reason, on
this view, why the atoms of hydrogen present on
the earth do not combine to form some other ele-
ment, even at the exceedingly low temperature at
which hydrogen becomes liquid, is that even at
this temperature the kinetic energy of the corpus-
cles inside the atom, i.e.j the corpuscular tempera-
ture, is too great. It may be useful to repeat here
what we stated before, that there is no very inti-
mate connection between the corpuscular and mo-
lecular temperatures, and that we may reduce the
latter almost to the absolute zero without greatly
affecting the former.

We shall now proceed to discuss the bearing of
these results on the theory that the different
chemical elements have been gradually evolved by
the aggregation of primordial units.

102 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

Let US suppose that the first stage has been
reached and that we have a number of systems
formed by the union of two units. When first
these binary systems, as we shall call them, were
formed, the corpuscles in the system would have
a considerable amount of kinetic energy. This
would be so, because when the two units have
come together there must be an amount of kinetic
energy produced equal to the diminution in the
potential energy consequent upon the coalescence of
the two units. As these binary systems have or-
iginally high corpuscular temperatures they will
not be likely to combine with each other or with
another unit ; before they can do so the kinetic
energy of the corpuscles must get reduced.

We shall proceed immediately to discuss the
way in which this reduction is effected, but we
shall anticipate the result of the discussion by
saying that it leads to the result that the rate of
decay in the corpuscular temperature probably
varies greatly from one binary system to another.

Some of the systems will therefore probably
have reached a condition in which they are able
to combine with each other or with a single unit
long before others are able to do so. The systems
of the first kind will combine, and thus we shall

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 103

have systems formed, some of which contain three,
others four units, while at the same time there are
many of the binary systems left. Thus, the appear-
ance of the more complex systems need not be
simultaneous with the disappearance of all the sim-
pler ones.

The same principle will apply to the formation
of further aggregations by the systems containing
three or four units ; some of these will be ready to
unite before the others, and we may have systems
containing eight units formed before the more per-
sistent of those containing four, three, two or even
one unit have disappeared. With the further ad-
vance of aggregation the number of difEerent sys-
tems present at one and the same time will in-
crease.

Thus, if we regard the systems containing differ-
ent numbers of units as corresponding to the
different chemical elements, then as the universe
gets older elements of higher and higher atomic
weight may be expected to appear. Their appear-
ance, however, will not involve the annihilation of
the elements of lower atomic weight. The number
of atoms of the latter will, of course, diminish,
since the heavier elements are by hypothesis built
up of material furnished by the lighter. The whole

104 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

of the atoms of the latter would not, however, all
be used up at once, and thus we may have a very
large number of elements existing at one and the
same time.

If, however, there is a continual fall in the cor-
puscular temperature of the atoms through radia-
tion, the lighter elements will disappear in time,
and unless there is disintegration of the heavier
atoms, the atomic weight of the lightest element
surviving will continually increase. On this view,
since hydrogen is the lightest known element and
the atom of hydrogen contains about a thousand
corpuscles, all aggregations of less than a thousand
units have entered into combination and are no
longer free.

The way the Corpuscles vn the Atom Lose or Gam

Kinetic Energy

If the kinetic energy arising from the motion of
the corpuscles relatively to the centre of gravity
of the atom could by collisions be transformed
into kinetic energy due to the motion of the atom
as a whole, i.e.j into molecular temperature, it
would follow from the kinetic theory of gases,
since the number of corpuscles in the atom is ex-
ceedingly large, that the specific heat of a gas at

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 105

constant pressure would be very nearly equal to
the specific heat at constant volume ; whereas, as
a matter of fact, in no gas is there any approach
to equality in these specific heats. We conclude,
therefore, that it is not by collisions that the
kinetic energy of the corpuscles is diminished.

We have seen, however (page 68), that a mov-
ing electrified particle radiates energy whenever
its velocity is changing either in magnitude or
direction. The corpuscles in the atom will thus
emit electric waves, radiating energy and so losing
kinetic energy.

The rate at which energy is lost in this way by
the corpuscles varies very greatly with the num-
ber of the corpuscles and the way in which they
are moving. Thus, if we have a single corpuscle
describing a circular orbit of radius a with uni-
form velocity v^ the loss of energy due to radia-

tion per second is - =^r-^, where e is the charge on

the corpuscles and V the velocity of light. If
instead of a single corpuscle we had two corpus-
cles at opposite ends of a diameter moving round
the same orbit with the same velocity as the sin-
gle corpuscle, the loss of energy per second from the
two would be very much less than from the single

106 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

corpuscle, and the smaller the velocity of the cor-
puscle the greater would be the diminution in
the loss of energy produced by increasing the
number of corpuscles. The effect produced by
increasing the number of corpuscles is shown in
the following table, which gives the rate of radia-
tion for each corpuscle for various numbers of
corpuscles arranged at equal angular intervals
round the circular orbit.

The table applies to two cases ; in one the veloc-
ity of the corpuscles is taken as one-tenth that of
light, and in the second as one-hundredth. The
radiation from a single corpuscle is in each case
taken as unity.

Number of corpuscles. Radiation from each corpuscle.

_ V _ ^

*' 10 *'"■ 100

1 1 1

2 9.6x10-3 9.6x10-*

3 4.6 X 10-« 4.6x10-'

4 1.7x10-* 1.7 X 10-«>

5 5.6 X 10-« 5.6x10-"

6 1.6 X 10-^ 1.6 X 10-w

Thus, we see that the radiation from each of a
group of six corpuscles moving with one-tenth the
velocity of light is less than one-five-millionth part
of the radiation from a single corpuscle, describ-

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 107

ing the same orbit with the same velocity, while,
when the velocity of the corpuscles is only one-
hundredth of that of light, the reduction in the
radiation is very much greater.

If the corpuscles are displaced from the sym-
metrical position in which they are situated at
equal intervals round a circle whose centre is at
rest, the rate of radiation will be very much in-
creased. In the case of an atom containing a large
number of corpuscles the variation in the rate at
which energy is radiated will vary very rapidly
with the way the corpuscles are moving about in
the atom. Thus, for example, if we had a large
number of corpuscles following close on one an-
other's heels round a circular orbit the radiation
would be exceedingly small ; it would vanish alto-
gether if the corpuscles were so close together
that they formed a continuous ring of negative
electrification. If the same number of particles
were moving about irregularly in the atom, then
though the kinetic energy possessed by the cor-
puscles in the second case might be no greater
than in the first, the rate of radiation, i.e.j of cor-
puscular cooling, would be immensely greater.

Thus, we see that in the radiation of energy
from corpuscles whose velocity is not uniform we

108 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

have a process going on which will gradually cool
the corpuscular temperature of the atom, and so,
if the view we have been discussing is correct,
enable the atom to form further aggregations and
thus tend to the formation of new chemical ele-
ments.

This cooling process must be an exceedingly
slow one, for although the corpuscular tempera-
ture when the atom of a new element is formed
is likely to be exceedingly high, and the lowering
in that temperature required before the atom can
enter again into fresh aggregations very large,
yet we have evidence that some of the elements
must have existed unchanged for many thousands,
nay, millions of years ; we have, indeed, no direct
evidence of any change at all in the atom. I
think, however, that some of the phenomena of
radio-activity to which I shall have to allude later,
aflEord, I will not say a proof of, but a very strong
presumption in favor of some such secular changes
taking place in the atom.

We must remember, too, that the corpuscles in
any atom are receiving and absorbing radiation
from other atoms. This will tend to raise the
corpuscular temperature of the atom and thus
help to lengthen the time required for that

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 109

temperature to fall to the point where fresh
aggregations of the atom may be formed.

The fact that the rate of radiation depends so
much upon the way the corpuscles are moving
about in the atom indicates that the lives of the
different atoms of any particular element will not
be equal; some of these atoms will be ready to
enter upon fresh changes long before the others.
It is important to realize how large are the
amoxmts of energy involved in the formation of a
complex atom or in any reaiTangement of the con-
figuration of the corpuscles inside it. If we have
an atom containing n corpuscles each with a
charge e measured in electrostatic units, the total
quantity of negative electricity in the atom is n e
and there is an equal quantity of positive elec-
tricity distributed through the sphere of positive
electrification; hence, the work required to sep-
arate the atom into its constituent units will be

comparable with ^^ — I , a being the radius of the

sphere containing the corpuscles. Thus, as the
atom has been formed by the aggregation of these

units ^^ — ^ will be of the same order of magni-
tude as the kinetic energy imparted to those con-

110 ELECTRICITY AXD MATTER

8titaente duriiig their whole history, from the
time they started as separate units, down to the
time they became members of the atom under
consideration. They will in this period have radi-
ated away a large quantity of this energy, but the
following calculation will show what an enormous
amount of kinetic energy the corpuscles in the
atom must possess even if they have only retained
an exceediDgly small fraction of that communi-

cated to them. Let us calculate the value of

(ney

a

for all the atoms in a gram of the substance ; let
iV^ be the number of these atoms in a gram, then

N^- — ^ is the value of the energy acquired by these

atoms. If Jf is the mass of an atom NM'=- 1, thus:

j^jnef _ 1 {ne)\
a M a ^

but if m is the mass of a corpuscle

7im = J/,
and therefore

a ma*

now when e is measured in electrostatic units

— = 3 X 10^^ and ^ = 3.4 X lO*^* ;
m

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM m

and therefore

jVr (2^^^ 10,2 X 10 ^ X — . (1)

Let us take the case of the hydrogen atom for
which n = 1000, and take for a the value usually
assumed in the kinetic theory of gases for the
radius of the atom, i.e,y 10"® cm. then

jSrilLfl = 1.02 X 10^» ergs;
a

this amount of energy would be sufficient to lift a
million tons through a height considerably ex-
ceeding one hundred yards. We see, too, from
(1) that this energy is proportional to the num-
ber of corpuscles, so that the greater the molecu-
lar weight of an element, the greater will be the
amount of energy stored up in the atoms in each
gram.

We shall return to the subject of the internal
changes in the atom when we discuss some of
the phenomena of radio-activity, but before doing
so it is desirable to consider more closely the way
the corpuscles arrange themselves in the atom.
We shall begin with the case where the corpuscles
are at rest. The corpuscles are supposed to be in
a sphere of uniform positive electrification which
produces a radial attractive force on each cor-

112 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

puscle proportional to its distance from the centre
of the sphere, and the problem is to arrange the

corpuscles in the sphere so that
they are in equiUbrium under this
attraction and their mutual re-
pulsions. If there are only two
corpuscles, A B^ we can see at
once that they will be in equi-

FlG. 16.

librium if placed so that A B
and the centre of the sphere are in the same
straight line and OA = OB = ^ the radius of the
sphere.

If there are three corpuscles, AB 0^ they will
be in equilibrium of -4 ^ C^ as an equilateral tri-
angle with its centre at O and
OA=OB=OC=(^y, or .57
times the radius of the sphere.

If there are four corpuscles
these will be in equilibrium if
placed at the angular points of a

, 11.1. Fig. 15.

regular tetrahedron with its cen-
tre at the centre of the sphere. In these cases the
corpuscles are all on the surface of a sphere con-
centric with the sphere of positive electrification,
and we might sup^H^se that whatever the number
of corpuscles the iK>sition of equilibrium would be

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM II3

one of symmetrical distributioD over the surface
of a sphere. Such a distribution would indeed
technically be one of equilibrium, but a mathe-
matical calculation shows that unless the number
of corpuscles is quite small, say seven or eight at
the most, this arrangement is unstable and so can
never persist. When the number of corpuscles is
greater than this limiting number, the corpuscles
break up into two groups. One group containing
the smaller number of corpuscles is on the surface
of a small body concentric with the sphere ; the
remainder are on the surface of a larger concen-
tric body. When the number of corpuscles is
still further increased there comes a stage when
the equilibrium cannot be stable even with two
groups, and the corpuscles now divide themselves
into three groups, arranged on the surfaces of con-
centric shells ; and as we go on increasing the
number we pass through stages in which more and
more groups are necessary for equilibrium. With
any considerable number of corpuscles the prob-
lem of finding the distribution when in equilibrium
becomes too complex for calculation ; and we have
to turn to experiment and see if we can make a
model in which the forces producing equilibrium
are similar to those we have supposed to be at

114 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

work in the corpuscle. Such a model is afforded
by a very simple and beautiful experiment first
made, I think, by Professor Mayer. In this experi-
ment a number of little magnets are floated in a
vessel of water. The magnets are steel needles
magnetized to equal strengths and are floated by
being thrust through small disks of cork. The
magnets are placed so that the positive poles are
either all above or all below the surface of the
water. These positive poles, like the corpuscles,
repel each other with forces varying inversely as
the distance between them. The attractive force
is provided by a negative pole (if the little mag-
nets have their positive poles above the water) sus-
pended some distance above the surface of the
water. This pole will exert on the positive poles
of the little floating magnets an attractive force
the component of which, parallel to the surface
of the water, will be radial, directed to Oy the
projection of the negative pole on the surface of
the water, a;nd if the negative pole is some dis-
tance above the surface the component of the force
to O will be very approximately proportional to
the distance from O. Thus the forces on the poles
of the floating magnets vrill be very similar to those
acting on the corpuscle in our hypothetical atom ;

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM

115

the chief difference being that the corpuscles are
free to move about in all directions in space, while
the poles of the floating magnets are constrained
to move in a plane parallel to the surface of the
water.

The configurations which the floating magnets
assume as the number of magnets increases from
two up to nineteen is shown in Fig. 17, which
was given by Mayer.

(B)@

Fig. 17.

The configuration taken up when the magnets
are more numerous can be found from the follow-
ing table, which is also due to Mayer. From this
table it will be seen that when the number of
floating magnets does not exceed five the magnets

116

ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

arrange themselves at the comers of a regular
polygon, five at the corners of a pentagon, four at
the corners of a square and so on. When the
number is greater than five this arrangement no
longer holds. Thus, six magnets do not arrange
themselves at the comers of a hexagon, but divide
into two systems, one magnet being at the centre
and five outside it at the corners of a regular penta-
gon. This arrangement in two groups lasts until
there are fifteen magnets, when we have three
groups ; with twenty-seven magnets we get four
groups and so on.

Arrcmgement of Magnets (Ma/yer)

1.

2.

3.

4.

6.

jl-5 (2.6 (3.7 (4.8 (

-1-6 (2.7 (3.8 (4.9 (

5

6
1 . 7

9

7
8
7

10
10
11

3
3
3

7
7
8
8
8

18 . 8

10
11
10
11
12
18

r4 .

4 .
4 .
4 .

8 . 12

8 . 13

9 . 12
9 . 18

r6 . 9 . 12
\5 . 9 . 18

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM

117

■<

1.

2.

ri . 6

. 9

. 12

i''

7 . 10 .

15

1 . 5

. 9

. 13

i^-

. 7 . 12 .

14

1 . 6

. 9

. 12

1 . 6

. 10

. 12

1 . 6

. 10

. 13

1 . 6

. 11

. 2

1 . 6

. 11

. 13

1 . 6

. 11

. U

.1 . 6

. 11

. 16

3. 4.

3 . 7 . 12 . 13 ri . 9 . 13 . U
3 . 7 . 12 . 14^4.9 . 13. 16
3 . 7 . 13 . 14 [4 . 9 . 14 . 16
13 . 7 13 . 15

Where, for example, 3. 7, 12. 13 means that
thirty-five magnets arrange themselves so that
there is a ring of three magnets inside, then a ring
of seven, then one of twelve, and one of thirteen
outside.

I think this table affords many suggestions tow-
ard the explanation of some of the properties
possessed by atoms. Let us take, for example, the
chemical law called the Periodic Law ; according
to this law if we arrange the elements in order of
increasing atomic weights, then taking an element
of low atomic weight, say lithium, we find certain
properties associated with it. These properties
are not possessed by the elements immediately
following it in the series of increasing atomic
weight ; but they appear again when we come to
sodium, then they disappear again for a time.

llg ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

but reappear when we reach potassium, and so
on. Let us now consider the arrangements of
the floating magnets, and suppose that the number
of magnets is proportional to the combining weight
of an element. Then, if any property were asso-
ciated with the triangular arrangement of magnets,
it would be possessed by the elements whose com-
bining weight was on this scale three, but would
not appear again until we reached the combining
weight ten, when it reappears, as for ten magnets
we have the triangular arrangement in the middle
and a ring of seven magnets outside. When the
number of magnets is increased the triangular
arrangement disappears for a time, but reappears
with twenty magnets, and again with thirty-five,
the triangular arrangement appearing and dis-
appearing in a way analogous to the behavior of
the properties of the elements in the Periodic
Law. As an example of a property that might
very well be associated with a particular grouping
of the corpuscles, let us take the times of vibra-
tion of the system, as shown by the position of
the lines in the spectrum of the element. First
let us take the case of three corpuscles by them-
selves in the positively electrified sphere. The
three corpuscles have nine degrees of freedom, so

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM

119

that there are nine possible periods. Some of
these periods in this case would be infinitely long,
and several of the possible periods would be equal
to each other, so that we should not get nine dif-
ferent periods.

Suppose that the lines in the spectrum of the
three corpuscles are as represented in Fig. 18 a,

a c e

U

e 3 / e

A B e E

^

A

B

i

m
*

i

) £

Fig. 18.

where the figures under the lines represent the
number of periods which coalesce at that line ; i.e.y
regarding the periods as given by an equation with
nine roots, we suppose that there is only one root
giving the period corresponding to the line -4,
while corresponding to B there are two equal
roots, three equal roots corresponding to C> one

120 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

root, to O^ and two to E. These periods would
have certain numerical relations to emjh other, in-
dependent of the chai'ge on the corpuscle, the size
of the sphere in which they are placed, or their
distance from the centre of the sphere. Each of
these quantities, although it does not affect the
ratio of the periods, will have a great effect upon
the absolute value of any one of them. Now,
suppose that these three corpuscles, instead of
being alone in the sphere, form but one out of
several groups in it, just as the triangle of mag-
nets forms a constituent of the grouping of 3, 10,
20, and 35 magnets. Let us consider how the
presence of the other groups would affect the
periods of vibration of the three corpuscles. The
absolute values of the periods would generally be
entirely different, but the relationship existing be-
tween the various periods would be much more
persistent, and although it might be modified it
would not be destroyed. Using the phraseology of
the Planetary Theory, we may regard the motion
of the three corpuscles as "disturbed" by the
other groups.

When the group of three corpuscles was by it-
self there were several displacements which gave
the same period of vibration; for example^ corre-

CONSTITUTION OP THE ATOM 121

sponding to the line C there were three displace-
ments, all giving the same period. When, how*^
ever, there are other groups present, then these
different displacements will no longer be sym-
metrical with respect to these groups, so that the
three periods will no longer be quite equal. They
would, however, be very nearly equal unless the
effect of the other groups is very large. Thus,
in the spectrum, (7, instead of being a single line,
would become a triplet, while B and E would be-
come doublets. A D would remain single lines.

Thus, the spectrum would now resemble Fig.
18 J ; the more groups there are surrounding the
group of three the more will the motion of the
latter be disturbed and the greater the separation
of the constituents of the triplets and doublets.
The appearance as the number of groups increases
is shown in Fig. 18 5, <?. Thus, if we regarded
the element which contain this particular group-
ing of corpuscles as being in the same group in the
classification of elements according to the Periodic
Law, we should get in the spectra of these ele-
ments homologous series of lines, the distances be-
tween the components of the doublets and triplets
increasing with the atomic weight of the elements.
The investigations of Rydberg, Runge and Pag-

122 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

chen and Keyser have shown the existence in the
spectra of elements of the same group series of
lines having properties in many respects analogous
to those we have described.

Another point of interest given by Mayer's ex-
periments is that there is more than one stable
configuration for the same number of magnets;
these configurations correspond to different amounts
of potential energy, so that the passage from the
configuration of greater potential energy to that of
less would give kinetic energy to the corpuscle.
From the values of the potential energy stored
in the atom, of which we gave an estimate on
page 111, we infer that a change by even a small
fraction in that potential energy would develop
an amount of kinetic energy which if converted
into heat would greatly transcend the amount of
heat developed when the atoms undergo any known
chemical combination.

An inspection of the table shows that there are
certain places in it where the nature of the con-
figuration changes very rapidly with the number
of magnets ; thus, five magnets form one group,
whHe six magnets form two ; fourteen magnets
form two groups, fifteen three ; twenty - seven
magnets form three groups, twenty-eight four.

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 123

and 80 on. If we arrange the chemical elements
in the order of their atomic weights we find there
are certain places where the difference in proper-
ties of consecutive elements is exceptionally great ;
thus, for example, we have extreme differences in
properties between fluorine and sodium. Then
there is more or less continuity in the properties
until we get to chlorine, which is followed by
potassium; the next break occurs at bromine
and rubidium and so on. This effect seems
analogous to that due to the regrouping of the
magnets.

So far we have supposed the corpuscles to be
at rest ; if, however, they are in a state of steady
motion and describing circular orbits round the
centre of the sphere, the effect of the centrifugal
force arising from this motion will be to drive the
corpuscles farther away from the centre of the
sphere, without, in many cases, destroying the
character of the configuration. Thus, for example,
if we have three corpuscles in the sphere, they
will, in the state of steady motion, as when they
are at rest, be situated at the corners of an equi-
angular triangle ; this triangle will, however, be
rotating round the centre of the sphere, and the
distance of the corpuscles from the centre will be

124 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

greater than when they are at rest and will in-
crease with the velocity of the corpuscles.

There are, however, many cases in which rota-
tion is essential for the stability of the configura-
tion. Thus, take the case of four corpuscles.
These, if rotating rapidly, are in stable steady
motion when at the comers of a square, the plane
of the square being at right angles to the axis of
rotation ; when, however, the velocity of rotation
of the corpuscles falls below a certain value, the
arrangement of four corpuscles in one plane be-
comes unstable, and the corpuscles tend to place
themselves at the comers of a regular tetrahedron,
which is the stable arrangement when the cor-
puscles are at rest. The system of four corpuscles
at the comers of a square may be compared with
a spinning top, the top like the corpuscles being
unstable unless its velocity of rotation exceeds
a certain critical value. Let us suppose that
initially the velocity of the corpuscles exceeds
this value, but that in some way or another the
corpuscles gradually lose their kinetic energy;
the square arrangement will persist until the ve-
locity of the corpuscles is reduced to the critical
value. The arrangement will then become un-
stable, and there will be a convulsion in the sys-

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 125

tern accompanied by a great evolution of kinetic
energy.

Similar considerations will apply to many as-
semblages of corpuscles. In such cases the con-
figuration when the corpuscles are rotating with
great rapidity will (as in the case of the four cor-
puscles) be essentially different from the configu-
ration of the same number of corpuscles when at
rest. Hence there must be some critical velocity
of the corpuscles, such that, for velocities greater
than the critical one, a configuration is stable,
which becomes unstable when the velocity is
reduced below the critical value. When the ve-
locity sinks below the critical value, instability
sets in, and there is a kind of convulsion or ex-
plosion, accompanied by a great diminution in the
potential energy and a corresponding increase in
the kinetic energy of the corpuscles. This increase
in the kinetic energy of the corpuscles may be
sufficient to detach considerable numbers of them
from the original assemblage.

These considerations have a very direct bearing
on the view of the constitution of the atoms which
we have taken in this chapter, for they show that
with atoms of a special kind, i.e., with special
atomic weights, the corpuscular cooling caused by

126 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

the radiation from the moving corpuscles wHch
we have supposed to be slowly going on, might,
when it reached a certain stage, produce instabil-
ity inside the atom, and produce such an in-
crease in the kinetic energy of the corpuscles as
U. give rise to ^Uj inc^ radiation, and it
might be detacliinent of a portion of the atom.
It would cause the atom to emit energy; this
energy being derived from the potential energy
due to the arrangement of the corpuscles in the
atom. We shall see when we consider the phe-
nomenon of radio-activity that there is a class of
bodies which show phenomena analogous to those
just described.

On the view that the lighter elements are
formed first by the aggregation of the unit
doublet, the negative element of which is the cor-
puscle, and that it is by the combination of the
atoms of the lighter elements that the atoms of
the heavier elements are produced, we should ex-
pect the corpuscles in the heavy atoms to be ar-
ranged as it were in bundles, the arrangement of
the corpuscles in each bundle being similar to the
arrangement in the atom of some lighter element.
In the heavier atom these bundles would act as
subsidiary units, each bundle corresponding to

k

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 127

one of the magnets in the model formed by the
floating magnets, while inside the bundle them-
selves the corpuscle would be the analogue of
the magnet.

We must now go on to see whether an atom
built up in the way we have supposed could pos-
sess any of the properties of the real atom. Is
there, for example, in this model of an atom any
scope for the electro-chemical properties of the
real atom ; such properties, for example, as those
illustrated by the division of the chemical ele-
ments into two classes, electro-positive and electro-
negative. Why, for example, if this is the con-
stitution of the atom, does an atom of sodium or
potassium tend to acquire a positive, the atom of
chlorine a negative charge of electricity ? Again,
is there anything in the model of the atom to
suggest the possession of such a property as that
called by the chemists valency ; i.e.y the property
which enables us to divide the elements into
groups, called monads, dyads, triads, such that in
a compound formed by any two elements of the
first group the molecule of the compound will
contain the same number of atoms of each element,
while in a compound formed by an element A in
the first group with one B in the second, the mole-

128 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

cule of the compound contains twice as many
atoms of ^ as of B^ and so on ?

Let us now turn to the properties of the model
atom. It contains a very large number of corpus-
cles in rapid motion. We have evidence from the
phenomena connected with the conduction of
electricity through gases that one or more of these
corpuscles can be detached from the atom.
These may escape owing to their high veloc-
ity enabling them to travel beyond the attrac-
tion of the atom. They may be detached also by
collision of the atom with other rapidly moving
atoms or free corpuscles. When once a corpuscle
has escaped from an atom the latter will have a pos-
itive charge. This will make it more difficult for
a second negatively electrified corpuscle to escape,
for in consequence of the positive charge on the
atom the latter will attract the second corpuscle
more strongly than it did the first. Now we can
readily conceive that the ease with which a par-
ticle will escape from, or be knocked out of, an
atom may vary very much in the atoms of the dif-
ferent elements. In some atoms the velocities of
the corpuscles may be so great that a corpuscle
escapes at once from the atom. It may even be
that after one has escaped, the attraction of the

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 129

positive electrification thus left on the atom is
not sufficient to restrain a second, or even a third,
corpuscle from escaping. Such atoms vrould ac-
quire positive charges of one, two, or three units,
according as they lost one, two, or three corpus-
cles. On the other hand, there may be atoms in
which the velocities of the corpuscles are so small
that few, if any, corpuscles escape of their own
accord, nay, they may even be able to receive
one or even more than one corpuscle before the
repulsion exerted by the negative electrification
on these foreign corpuscles forces any of the
original corpuscles out. Atoms of this kind if
placed in a region where corpuscles were present
would by aggregation with these corpuscles re-
ceive a negative charge. The magnitude of the
negative charge would depend upon the firmness
with which the atom held its corpuscles. If a
negative charge of one corpuscle were not suf-
ficient to expel a corpuscle while the negative
charge of two corpuscles could do so, the maxi-
mum negative charge on the atom would be one
unit. If two corpuscles were not sufficient to expel
a corpuscle, but three were, the maximum nega-
tive charge would be two units, and so on. Thus,
the atoms of this class tend to get charged with

130 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

negative electricity and correspond to the electro-
negative chemical elements, while the atoms of the
class we first considered, and which readUy lose
corpuscles, acquire a positive charge and corre-
spond to the atoms of the electro-positive elements.
We might conceive atoms in which the equilib-
rium of the corpuscles was so nicely balanced
that though they do not of themselves lose a cor-
puscle, and so do not acquire a positive charge, the
repulsion exerted by a foreign corpuscle coming
on to the atom would be sufficient to drive out a
corpuscle. Such an atom would be incapable of
receiving a charge either of positive or negative
electricity.

Suppose we have a number of the atoms that
readily lose their corpuscles mixed with a num-
ber of those that can retain a foreign corpuscle.
Let us call an atom of the first class Ay one of the
second By and suppose that the A atoms are of
the kind that lose one corpuscle while the B atoms
are of the kind that can retain one, but not more
than one : then the corpuscles which escape from
the .*( atoms will ultimatelv find a home on the B
atom$« and if there are an equal number of the
two kind$ of atom^ present we shall get ultimate-
ly all the .1 atoms with the unit positive charge^

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 131

all the B atoms with the unit negative charge.
These oppositely electrified atoms will attract each
other, and we shall get the compound A B
formed. If the A atoms had been of the kind
that lost two corpuscles, and the B atoms the
same as before, then the A atoms would get the
charge of two positive units, the B atoms a charge
of one unit of negative electricity. Thus, to form
a neutral system two of the B atoms must com-
bine with one of the -4's and thus the compound
A B^ would be formed.

Thus, from this point of view a univalent elec-
tro-positive atom is one which, under the circum-
stances prevailing when combination is taking
place, has to lose one and only one corpuscle be-
fore stability is attained ; a univalent electro-neg-
ative atom is one which can receive one but not
more than one corpuscle without driving off other
corpuscles from the atom; a divalent electro-
positive atom is one that loses two corpuscles and
no more, and so on. The valency of the atom
thus depends upon the ease with which corpus-
cles can escape from or be received by the atom ;
this may be influenced by the circumstances
existing when combination is taking place. Thus,
it would be easier for a corpuscle, when once it

132 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

had got outside the atom, to escape being pulled
back again into it by the attraction of its positive
electrification, if the atom were surrounded by good
conductors than if it were isolated in space. We
can understand, then, why the valency of an atom
may in some degree be influenced by the physical
conditions under which combination is taking place.
On the view that the attraction between the
atoms in a chemical compound is electrical in its
origin, the ability of an element to enter into
chemical combination depends upon its atom hav-
ing the power of acquiring a charge of electricity.
This, on the preceding view, implies either that the
uncharged atom is unstable and has to lose one or
more corpuscles before it can get into a steady
state, or else that it is so stable that it can retain
one or more additional corpuscles without any of
the original corpuscles being driven out. If the
range of stability is such that the atom, though
stable when uncharged, becomes unstable when it
receives an additional corpuscle, the atom will not
be able to receive a charge either of positive or
negative electricity, and will therefore not be able
to enter into chemical combination. Such an atom
would have the properties of the atoms of such
elements as argon or helium.

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 133

The view that the forces which bind together
the atoms in the molecules of chemical compounds
are electrical in their origin, was first proposed
by Berzelius ; it was also the view of Davy and of
Faraday. Helmholtz, too, declared that the
mightiest of the chemical forces are electrical in
their origin. Chemists in general seem, however,
to have made but little use of this idea, having
apparently found the conception of ^' bonds of
affinity " more fruitful. This doctrine of bonds
is, however, when regarded in one aspect almost
identical with the electrical theory. The theory
of bonds when represented graphically supposes
that from each univalent atom a straight line
(the symbol of a bond) proceeds; a divalent
atom is at the end of two such lines, a trivalent
atom at the end of three, and so on ; and that
when the chemical compound is represented by a
graphic formula in this way, each atom must be
at the end of the proper number of the lines
which represent the bonds. Now, on the electrical
view of chemical combination, a univalent atom
has one unit charge, if we take as our unit of
charge the charge on the corpuscle ; the atom is
therefore the beginning or end of one unit Fara-
day tube : the beginning if the charge on the

.,*

134 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

atom is positive, the end if the charge is nega-
tive, A divalent atom has two units of charge and
therefore it is the origin or termination of two
unit Faraday tubes. Thus, if we interpret the
"bond" of the chemist as indicating a unit Fara-
day tube, connecting charged atoms in the mole-
cule, the structural formulae of the chemist can
be at once translated into the electrical theory.
There is, however, one point of difference which
deserves a little consideration : the symbol indi-
cating a bond on the chemical theory is not re-
garded as having direction ; no difference is made
on this theory between one end of a bond and
the other. On the electrical theory, however, there
is a difference between the ends, as one end cor-
responds to a positive, the other to a negative
charge. An example or two may perhaps be the
easiest way of indicating the effect of this consid-
eration. Let us take the gas ethane whose structu-
ral formula is written

•» Q OH^

According to the chemical view there is no diffe^

(CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 135

ence between the two carbon atoms in this com-
pound ; there would, however, be a difference on
the electrical view. For let us suppose that the
hydrogen atoms are all negatively electrified; the
three Faraday tubes going from the hydrogen atoms
to each carbon atom give a positive charge of
three units on each carbon atom. But in addition
to the Faraday tubes coming from the hydrogen
atoms, there is one tube which goes from one car-
bon atom to the other. This means an additional
positive charge on one carbon atom and a nega-
tive charge on the other. Thus, one of the carbon
atoms will have a charge of four positive units,
while the other will have a charge of three positive
and one negative unit, i.e.^ two positive units ; so
that on this view the two carbon atoms are not in
the same state. A still greater difference must
exist between the atoms when we have what is
called double linking, i.e.y when the carbon atoms
are supposed to be connected by two bonds, as in
the compound

e

Ht

136 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

Here, if one carbon atom had a charge of four posi-
tive units, the other would have a charge of two
positive and two negative units.

We might expect to discover such differences
as are indicated by these considerations by the in-
vestigation of which are known as additive prop-
erties, i.e.j properties which can be calculated
when the chemical constitution of the molecule
is known. Thus, \%i AB C represent the atoms of
three chemical elements, then if p is the value of
some physical constant for the molecule of A^
q the value for jBg, and r for 62, then if this con-
stant obeys the additive law, its value for a mole-
cule of the substance whose chemical composition
is represented by the formula A^ Bj C^ is

We can only expect relations like this to hold when
the atoms which occur in the different compounds
corresponding to different values oi x y z are
the same. If the atom A occurs in different states
in different compounds we should have to use
different values of p for these compounds.

A well-known instance of the additive prop-
erty is the refractive power of different substances
for light, and in this case chemists find it neces-

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 137

saiy to use different values for the refraction due
a carbon atom according as the atom is doubly or
singly linked. They use, however, the same value
for the refraction of the carbon atom when singly
linked with another atom as when, as in the com-
pound C H^^, it is not linked with another carbon
atom at all.

It may be urged that although we can conceive
that one atom in a compound should be positively
and the other negatively electrified when the
atoms are of different kinds, it is not easy to do
so when the atoms are of the same kind, as they
are in the molecules of the elementary gases
^, 6^2> ^1 and so on. With reference to this
point we may remark that the electrical state of
an atom, depending as it does on the power of
the atom to emit or retain corpuscles, may be very
largely influenced by circumstances external to
the atom. Thus, for an example, an atom in a gas
when surrounded by rapidly moving atoms or
corpuscles which keep striking against it may
have corpuscles driven out of it by these collisions
and thus become positively electrified. On the
other hand, we should expect that, ceteris paribuSj
the atom would be less likely to lose a corpuscle
when it is in a gas than when in a solid or a

138 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

liquid. For when in a gas after a corpuscle has
just left the atom it has nothing beyond its own
velocity to rely upon to escape from the attraction
of the positively electrified atom, since the other
atoms are too far away to exert any forces upon
it. When, however, the atom is in a liquid or a
solid, the attractions of the other atoms which
crowd round this atom may, when once a corpus-
cle has left its atom, help it to avoid falling
back again into atom. As an instance of this
effect we may take the case of mercury in the
liquid and gaseous states. In the liquid state
mercury is a good conductor of electricity. One
way of regarding this electrical conductivity is
to suppose that corpuscles leave the atoms of the
mercury and wander about through the inter-
stices between the atoms. These charged cor-
puscles when acted upon by an electric force
are set in motion and constitute an electric cur-
rent, the conductivity of the liquid mercury in-
dicating the presence of a large number of cor-
puscles. When, however, mercury is in the gaseous
state, its electrical conductivity has been shown by
Strutt to be an exceedingly small fraction of the
conductivity possessed by the same number of
molecules when gaseous. We have thus indications

CONSTITUTION OF THE ATOM 139

that the atoms even of an electro-positive sub-
stance like mercury may only lose comparatively
few corpuscles when in the gaseous state. Sup-
pose then that we had a great number of atoms
all of one kind in the gaseous state and thus mov-
ing about and coming into collision with each
other ; the more rapidly moving ones, since they
would make the most violent collisions, would be
more likely to lose corpuscles than the slower
ones. The faster ones would thus by the loss of
their corpuscles become positively electrified,
while the corpuscles driven off would, if the
atoms were not too electro-positive to be able to
retain a negative charge even when in the gase-
ous state, tend to find a home on the more slowly
moving atoms. Thus, some of the atoms would
get positively, others negatively electrified, and
those with changes of opposite signs would com-
bine to form a diatomic molecule. This argu-
ment would not apply to very electro-positive
gases. These we should not expect to form mole-
cules, but since there would be many free cor-
puscles in the gas we should expect them to
possess considerable electrical conductivity.

CHAPTER VI

EADIO-AOTIVITY AND KADIO-ACTIVE SUB-

STANCES

In 1896 Becquerel discovered that uranium
and its salts possess the power of giving out rays
which, like Eontgen and cathode rays, affect a
photographic plate, and make a gas through which
they pass a conductor of electricity. In 1898
Schmidt discovered that thorium possesses similar
properties. This power of emitting rays is called
radio-activity, and substances which possess the
power are said to be radio-active.

This property of uranium led to a careful ex-
amination of a large number of minerals contain-
ing this substance, and M. and Mme. Curie found
that some of these, and notably some specimens of
pitch-blende, were more radio-active than equal
volumes of pure uranium, although only a fraction
of these minerals consisted of uranium. This in-
dicated that these minerals contained a substance
or substances much more radio-active than uran-
ium itself, and a systematic attempt was made to

RADIO-ACTIVE SUBSTANCES I41

isolate these substances. After a long investigation,
conducted with marvellous skill and perseverance,
M. and Mme. Curie, with the collaboration of MM.
Bemont and Debierne, succeeded in establishing
the existence of three new radio-active substances
in pitch-blende : radium associated with the ba-
rium in the mineral, and closely resembling it in
its chemical properties ; polonium associated with
the bismuth, and actinium with the thorium. They
succeeded in isolating the first of these and deter-
mined its combining weight, which was found to be
225. Its spectrum has been discovered and exam-
ined by Demar9ay. Neither polonium nor actinium
has yet been isolated, nor have their spectra
been observed. The activity of polonium has
been found to be fugitive, dying away in some
months after its preparation.

These radio-active substances are not confined
to rare minerals. I have lately found that many
specimens of water from deep wells contain a
radio-active gas, and Elster and Geitel have found
that a similar gas is contained in the soil.

These radio-active substances may be expected
to be of the greatest possible assistance in the task
of investigating problems dealing with the nature
of the atom, and with the changes that go on in

142 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

the atom from time to time. For the properties
possessed by these substances are so marked as to
make the detection of exceedingly minute quanti-
ties of them a matter of comparative ease. The
quantity of these substances which can be detected
is to the corresponding amount of the other ele-
ments which have to be detected by the ordinary
methods of chemical analysis, in the proportion of
a second to thousands of years. Thus, changes
which would have to go on for almost geological
epochs with the non-radio-active substances, be-
fore they became large enough to be detected,
could with radio-active substances prove appreci-
able effects in the course of a few hours.

Chardcter of the Radiation

Rutherford found that the radiation from uran
ium, and it has subsequently been found that the
same is true for thorium and radium, is made up
of three distinct types which he calls the a, ^, and
y radiations.

The a radiation is very easily absorbed, being
unable to penetrate more than a few millimetres
of air at atmospheric pressure, the fi radiation is
much more penetrating, while the y radiation is
the most penetrating of all. Investigations of the

RADIO-ACTIVE SUBSTANCES I43

effects of magnetic and electric forces on these
three types of radiation have shown that they are
of entirely different characters. Becquerel showed
that the fi rays were deflected by electric and mag-
netic forces, the direction of the deflection show-
ing that the rays carried a charge of negative elec-
tricity. He determined, using the method described

/>

in Chapter IV, the value of — , the ratio of the

m

charge to the mass of the carriers of the negative

electricity ; he found that it was about 10''^, and that

the velocity for some of the rays was more than

two-thirds that of light. He thus proved that the

fi rays consisted of corpuscles travelling at prodig-

ions speeds.

The a rays are not nearly so easily deflected as

the fi rays, but Eutherford has recently shown

that they can be deflected, and the direction of

deflection shows that they carry a positive charge.

He finds, and his measurements have been con

firmed by Des Coudres, that the ratio of — is 6 X

m

10', and the velocity of these particles is 2 X 10*

centimetres per second. The value of — shows that

m

the carriers of the positive electrification have

144 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

masses comparable with those of ordinary atoms ;

thus — for hydrogen is 10* and for helium 2.5 X
m

10^ The very high velocity with which these are
shot out involves an enormous expenditure of en-
ergy, a point to which we shall return later. One
of the most interesting things about this result is

that the value of — shows that the atoms shot off

ra

are not the atoms of radium, indicating either that
radium is a compound containing lighter elements
or else that the atom of radium is disintegrating

into such elements. The value of — for the a

rays obtained by Rutherford and Des Coudres
suggests the existence of a gas heavier than hy-
drogen but lighter than helium. The y rays, as
far as we know, are not deflected either by mag-
netic or electric forces.

There is considerable resemblance between a
radio-active substance and a substance emitting
secondary radiation under the influence of Ront-
gen rays : the secondary radiation is known to
contain radiation of the /S and y types ; and as
part of the radiation is exceedingly easily absorbed,
being unable to penetrate more than a millimetre
or so of air at atmospheric pressure, it is possible

RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES 145

that closer investigation may show that a rays, i.e.,
positively electrified particles, are present also.
This analogy mses the question as to whether
there may not, in the case of the body struck by
the Rontgen rays, be a liberation of energy
such as we shall see occurs in the case of the
radio-active substances, the energy emitted by the
radiating substances being greater than the energy
in the Rontgen rays falling upon it ; this excess of
energy being derived from changes taking place
in the atoms of the body exposed to the Rontgen
rays. This point seems worthy of investigation,
for it might lead to a way of doing by external
agency what radio-active bodies can do spontane-
ously, i.e.j liberate the energy locked up in the
atom.

JEmanation from Madio-Active Substances

Rutherford proved that thorium emits some-
thing which is radio-active and which is wafted
about by currents of air as if it were a gas; in
order to avoid prejudging the question as to the
physical state in which the substance given off by
radium exists, Rutherford called it the " emacia-
tion." The emanation can pass through water or
the strongest acid and can be raised to tempera-

146 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

tures at which platinum is incandescent without
suffering any loss of radio-activity. In this inertness
it resembles the gases argon and helium, the latter
of which is almost always found associated with
thorium. The radio-activity of the thorium emana-
tion is very transient, sinking to half its value in
about one minute.

The Curies found that radium also gives off
a radio-active emanation which is much more
persistent than that given off by thorium, taking
about four days to sink to half its activity.

There seems every reason for thinking that
those emanations are radio-active matter • in the
gaseous form ; they can be wafted from one place
to another by currents of air ; like a gas they dif-
fuse through a porous plug at a rate which shows
that their density is very high. They diffuse
gradually through air and other gases. The coeffi-
cient of diffusion of the radium emanation through
air has been measured by Rutherford and Miss
Brooks and they concluded that the density of
the emanation was about eighty. The emanation
of radium has been liquefied by Rutherford and
Soddy ; and I have, by the kindness of Professor
Dewar, been able to liquefy the radio-active gas
found in water from deep weUs, which very

RADIO-ACTIVE SUBSTANCES 147

closely resembles the emanation and is quite
possibly identical with it. In short the emana-
tions seem to satisfy every test of the gaseous
state that can be applied to them. It is true
that they are not capable of detection by any
chemical tests of the ordinary type, nor can they
be detected by spectrum analysis, but this is only
because they are present in very minute quantities
— quantities far too small to be detected even by
spectrum analysis, a method of detection which is
exceedingly rough when compared with the elec-
trical methods which we are able to employ for
radio-active substances. It is not, I think, an ex-
aggeration to say that it is possible to detect with
certainty by the electrical method a quantity of a
radio-active substance less than one-hundred-thou-
sandth part of the least quantity which could be
detected by spectrum analysis.

Each portion of a salt of radium or thorium is
giving off the emanation, whether that portion be
on the inside or the outside of the salt; the
emanation coming from the interior of a salt, how-
ever, does not escape into the air, but gets entangled
in the salt and accumulates. If such a radio-
active salt is dissolved in water, there is at first a
great evolution of the emanation which has been

148 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

stored up in the solid salt. The emanation can be
extracted from the water either by boiling the
water or bubbling air through it. The stored up
emanation can also be driven off from salts in the
solid state by raising them to a very high tem-
perature.

Induced Radio-Activity

Rutherford discovered that substances exposed
to the emanation from thorium become radio-active,
and the Curies discovered almost simultaneously
that the same property is possessed by the emana-
tion from radium. This phenomenon is called in-
duced radio-activity. The amount of induced
radio-activity does not depend upon the nature of
the substance on which it is induced ; thus, paper
becomes as radio-active as metal when placed
in contact with the emanations of thorium or
radium.

The induced radio-activity is especially de-
veloped on substances which are negatively elec-
trified. Thus, if the emanation is contained in a
closed vessel, in which a negatively electrified wire
is placed, the induced radio-activity is concentrated
on the negatively electrified wire, and this induced
activity can be detected on negatively electrified

RADIO-ACTIVE SUBSTANCES 149

bodies when it is too weak to be detected on on-
electrified surfaces. The fact that the nature of
the induced radio-activity does not depend on the
substance in which it is induced points to its being
due to a radio-active substance which is deposited
from the emanation on substances with which it
comes in contact.

Further evidence of this is afforded by an ex-
periment made by Miss Gates, in which the in-
duced radio-activity on a fine wire was, by raising
it to incandescence, driven off the wire and de-
posited on the surrounding surfaces. The induced
radio-activity due to the thorium emanation is
very different from that due to the radium emana-
tion, for whereas the activity of the thorium ema-
nation is so transient that it drops to half its
value in one minute, the induced radio-activity
due to it takes about eleven hours to fall in the
same proportion. The emanation due to radium,
which is much more lasting than the thorium
emanation, taking about four days instead of one
minute to fall to half its value, gives rise to a very
much less durable induced radio-activity, one fall,
ing to half its value in about forty minutes instead
of, as in the case of thorium, eleven hours. The
emanation due to actinium is said only to be active

150 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

for a few seconds, but the induced radio-activity
due to it seems to be nearly as permanent as that
due to radium.

Separation of the Active Constituent from Thxyri/wm

Rutherford and Soddy, in a most interesting
and important investigation, have shown that the
radio-activity of thorium is due to the passage of
the thorium into a form which they call ThX^
which they showed could be separated from the
rest of the thorium by chemical means. When this
separation has been effected the thoritun left be-
hind is for a time deprived of most of its radio-activ-
ity, which is now to be found in the ThX, The
radio-activity of the thorium X slowly decays while
that of the rest of the thorium increases until it
has recovered its original activity. While this has
been going on, the radio-activity of the T h ^has
vanished. The time taken for the radio-activity
of the ThXixy die away to half its original value
has been shown by Rutherford and Soddy to be
equal to the time taken by the thorium from which
the ThX has been separated to recover half its
original activity. All these results support the
view that the radio active part of the thorium, the
thorium X, is continually being produced from the

RADIO-ACTIVE SUBSTANCES 151

thorium itself ; so that if the activity of thorium
X were permanent, the radio-activity of the tho-
rium would continually increase. The radio-activ.
ity of the thorium X, however, steadily dies away.
This prevents the unlimited increase of the radio-
activity of the mixture, which will reach a steady
value when the increase in the radio-activity due
to the production of fresh ThX i& balanced by
the decay in the activity of that already produced.
The question arises as to what becomes of the
Th X and the emanation when thev have lost their
radio-activity. This dead ThXy bs> we may call
it, is accumulating all the time in the thorium;
but inasmuch as it has lost its radio-activity, we
have only the ordinary methods of chemical analy-
sis to rely upon, and as these are almost infinitely
less delicate than the tests we can apply to radio-
active substances, it might take almost geological
epochs to accumulate enough of the dead ThX
to make detection possible by chemical analysis.
It seems possible that a careful examination of the
minerals in which thorium and radium occur
might yield important information. It is remark-
able that heHum is almost invariably a constitu-
ent of these minerals.
You will have noticed how closely, as pointed

152 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

out by Rutherford and Soddy, the production of
radio-activity seems connected with changes tak-
ing place in the radio-active substance. Thus, to
take the case of thorium, which is the one on
which we have the fullest information, we have first
the change of thorium into thorium X, then the
change of the thorium X into the emanation and
the substance forming the a rays. The radio-
activity of the emanation is accompanied by a fur-
ther transformation, one of the products being the
substance which produces induced radio-activity.

On this view the substance while radio-active
is continually being transformed from one state
to another. These transformations may be ao*
companied by the liberation of sufficient energy
to supply that carried off by the rays it emits
while radio-active. The very large amount of
energy emitted by radio-active substances is strik-
ingly shown by some recent experiments of the
Curies on the salts of radium. They find that those
salts give out so much energy that the absorption
of this by the salt itself is sufficent to keep the
temperature of the salt permanently above that of
the air by a very appreciable amount — ^in one of
their experiments as much as 1.5® C. It appears
from their measurements that a gram of radiunj

RADIO-ACTIVE SUBSTANCES 153

gives out enough energy per hour to raise the
temperature of its own weight of water from the
freezing to the boiling point. This evolution of
energy goes on uninterruptedly and apparently
without diminution. If, however, the views we
have just explained are true, this energy arises
from the transformation of radium into other
forms of matter, and its evolution must cease when
the stock of radium is exhausted ; unless, indeed,
this stock is continually being replenished by the
transformation of other chemical elements into
radium.

We may make a rough guess as to the probable
duration of a sample of radium by combining the
result that a gram of radium gives out 100
calories per hour with Rutherford's result that
the a rays are particles having masses comparable
with the mass of an atom of hydrogen projected
with a velocity of about 2X10* centimetres per
second ; for let us suppose that the heat measured
by the Curies is due to the bombardment of the
radium salt by these particles, and to get a
superior limit to the time the radium vdll last,
let us make the assumption that the whole of the
mass of radium gets transformed into the a par-
ticles (as a matter of fact we know that the emana-

154 ELECTRiciry and matter

tion is produced as well as the a particles). Let
X be the life in hours of a gram of radium ;
then since the gram emits per hour 100 calories,
or 4.2 X 10* ergs, the amount of energy emitted by
the radium during its life is a? X 4.2 X 10* ei^.
If iV^is the number of a particles emitted in this
time, m the mass of one of them in grams, v
the velocity, then the energy in the a particles is
^ j^mv^y but this is to be equal to a? X 4.2 X 10*
ergs, hence J iV^m t;® = a? X 4.2 X 10* ; but if the
gram of radium is converted into the a particles,
^m = 1^ and by Rutherford's experiments v = 2

X 10*, hence we have x=^ ^ ^ ^ ^q, = 2^

hours, or about 50,000 years.

From this estimate we should expect the life
of a piece of radium to be of the order of 50,000
years. This result shows that we could not
expect to detect any measurable changes in the
space of a few months. In the course of its life
the gram of radium will have given out about
5 X 10^* calories, a result which shows that if this
energy is derived from transformations in the
state of the radium, the energy developed in these
transformations must be on a very much greater
scale than that developed in any known chemical

RADIO-ACTIVE SUBSTAJ^CfiS I55

reactions. On the vie w" we have taken the difEer-
ence between the case of radium and that of or-
dinary chemical reactions is that in the latter the
changes are molecular, while in the case of ra-
dium the changes are atomic, being of the nature
of a decomposition of the elements. The example
given on page (111) shows how large an amount
of energy may be stored up in the atom if we re-
gard it as built up of a number of corpuscles.

We may, I think, get some light on the processes
going on in radium by considering the behavior
of a model atom of the kind described on page
124, and which may be typified by the case of
the corpuscles which when K>tating with a high
velocity are stable when arranged in a certain
way, which arrangement becomes unstable when
the energy sinks below a certain value and is
succeeded by another configuration. A top spin-
ning about a vertical axis is another model of the
same type. This is stable when in a vertical
position if the kinetic energy due to its rotation
exceeds a certain value. If this energy were
gradually to decrease, then, when it reached the
critical value, the top would become unstable and
would fall down, and in so doing would give a
considerable amount of kinetic energy.

156 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

Let US follow, then, the behavior of an atom of
this type, i.e.y one which is stable in one configura-
tion of steady motion when the kinetic energy of
the corpuscles exceeds a certain value, but be-
comes unstable and passes into a different config-
uration when the kinetic energy sinks below that
value. Suppose now that the atom starts with an
amount of kinetic energy well above the critical
value, the kinetic energy will decrease in conse-
quence of the radiation from the rapidly moving
corpuscles; but as long as the motion remains
steady the rate of decrease vrill be exceedingly
slow, and it may be thousands of years before the
energy approaches the critical value. When it gets
close to this value, the motion will be very easily
disturbed and there will probably be considerable
departure from the configuration for steady motion
accompanied by a great increase in the rate at
which kinetic energy is loss by radiation. The atom
now emits a much greater number of rays and the
kinetic energy rapidly approaches the critical
value ; when it reaches this value the crash comes,
the original configuration is broken up, there is a
great decrease in the potential energy of the sys-
tem accompanied by an equal increase in the
kinetic energy of the corpuscles. The increase in

RADIO-ACTIVE SUBSTANCES 157

the velocity of the corpuscles may cause the dis*
ruption of the atom into two or more systems, cor-
responding to the emission of the a rays and
the emanation.

If the emanation is an atom of the same type
as the original atom, i.e., one whose configuration
for steady motion depends on its kinetic energy,
the process is repeated for the emanation, but in a
very much shorter time, and is repeated again for
the various radio-active substances, such as the
induced radio-active substance formed out of the
emanation.

We have regarded the energy emitted by
radium and other radio-active substances as de-
rived from an internal source, i.e., changes in the
constitution of the atom ; as changes of this kind
have not hitherto been recognized, it is desirable
to discuss the question of other possible sources
of this energy. One source which at once sug-
gests itself is external to the radium. We might
suppose that the radium obtained its energy by
absorbing some form of radiation which is passing
through all bodies on the surface of the earth,
but which is not absorbed to any extent by any
but those which are radio-active. This radiation
must be of a very penetrating character, for radium

158 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

retains its activity when surrounded by tliicklead
or when placed in a deep cellar. We are &miliar
with forms of Rontgen rays, and of rays given
out by radium itself, which can produce appreci-
able effects after passing through several inches of
lead, so that the idea of the existence of very pene-
trating radiation does not seem so improbable as it
would have done a few years ago. It is interest-
ing to remember that very penetrating radiation
was introduced by Le Sage more than a century
ago to explain gravitation. Le Sage supposed
that the universe was thronged with exceedingly
small particles moving with very high velocities.
He called these ultra-mundane corpuscles and as-
sumed that they were so penetrating that they
could pass throuffh masses as large as the sun or
the pLets without suflermg more th«x a very
slight absorption. They were, however, absorbed
to a slight extent and gave up to the bodies
through which they passed a small fraction of
their momentum. If the direction of the ultra-
mundane corpuscles passing through a body were
uniformly distributed, the momentum communi-
cated by them to the body would not tend to move
it in one direction rather than another, so that
a body A alone in the universe and exposed to

RADIO-ACTIVE SUBSTANCES 159

bombardment by Le Sage's corpuscles would re-
main at rest ; if, however, there is a second body
B in the neighborhood of Aj B will shield off
from A some of the corpuscles moving in the
direction B A ; thus, A will not receive as much
momentum in this direction as it did when it was
alone in the field, but in the latter case it only re-
ceived enough momentum in this direction to keep
it in equilibrium ; hence, when B is present, the
momentum in the opposite direction will get the
upper hand so that A will move in the direction,
A B^ i,€.y will be attracted to B. Maxwell pointed
out that this transference of momentum from Le
Sage's corpuscles to the body through which they
were passing involved the loss of kinetic energy
by the corpuscles ; and that if the loss of momen-
tum were sufficient to account for gravitation,
the kinetic energy lost by the ultra-mundane cor-
puscles would be sufficient, if converted into heat,
to keep the gravitating body white hot. The
fact that all bodies are not white hot was urged
by Maxwell as an argument against Le Sage's
theory. It is not necessary, however, to suppose
that the energy of the corpuscles is transformed
into heat ; we might imagine it transformed into a
very penetrating radiation which might escape

160 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

from the gravitating body. A simple calculation
will show that the amount of kinetic energy
transformed per second in each gram of the
gravitating body must be enormously greater than
that given out in the same time by one gram of
radium.

We have seen in the first chapter that waves
of electric and magnetic force possess momentum
in their direction of propagation; we might there-
fore replace Le Sage's corpuscles by very pene-
trating Rontgen rays. Those, if absorbed, would
give up momentum to the bodies through which
they pass, and similar consideration to those
given by Le Sage would show that two bodies
would attract each other inversely as the square
of the distance between them. If the absorption
of these waves per unit volume depended only
upon, and was proportional to, the density, the
attraction between the bodies would be directly
proportional to the product of their masses. It
ought to be mentioned that on this view any
changes in gravitation would be propagated with
the velocity of light; whereas, astronomers be-
lieve they have established that it travels with a
very much greater velocity.

As in the case of Le Sage's corpuscles, the loss

RADIO-ACTIVE SUBSTANCES 161

of momentum by the Rontgen rays would be ac-
companied by a loss of energy ; for each unit of
momentum lost v units of energy would be lost, v
being the velocity of light. If this energy were
transformed into that of rays of the same type as
the incident rays, a little reflection will show that
he absorption of the rays would not produce
gravitational attraction. To get such attraction
the transformed rays must be of a more pene-
trating type than the original rays. Again, as
in the case of Le Sage's corpuscles, the absorp-
tion of energy from these rays, if they are the
cause of gravitation, must be enormous — so great
that the energy emitted by radium would be but
an exceedingly small fraction of the energy being
transformed within it. From these considerations
I think that the magnitude of the energy radiated
from radium is not a valid argument against the
energy being derived from radiation. The reason
which induces me to think that the source of the
energy is in the atom of radium itself and not ex-
ternal to it is that the radio-activity of substances
is, in aU cases in which we have been able to local-
ize it, a transient property. No substance goes on
being radio-active for very long. It may be asked
how can this statement be reconciled with the fact

162 ELECTRICITY AND MATTER

that thorium and radium keep up their activity
without any appreciable falling ojff with time.
The answer to this is that, as Rutherford and
Soddy have shown in the case of thorium, it is
only an exceedingly small fraction of the mass
which is at any one time radio-active, and that this
radio-active portion loses its activity in a few
hours, and has to be replaced by a fresh supply
from the non-radio-active thorium. Take any of
the radio-active substances we have described, the
ThX^ the emanations from thorium or radium,
the substance which produces induced radio-
activity, all these are active for at the most a few
days and then lose this property. This is what
we should expect on the view that the source of
the radio-activity is a change in the atom ; it is
not what we should expect if the source were ex-
ternal radiation.
