THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER
J. J. Thomson (1856-1940)
London: Archibald Constable & Co., 1907.
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier corpusculartheo01thomgoog.
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY

OF MATTER

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

The Discharge of Electricity through
Gases.

Crown Svo, 4/6 net.

Electricity and Matter.

Price 5/- net.

ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE & CO. LTD.

THE CORPUSCULAR

THEORY OF MATTER

BY

J. J. THOMSON, M.A. FR.S. D.Sc. LL.D. Ph.D.

PROFESSOR OF EXPERIMENTAL PHYSICS, CAMBRIDGE, AND PROFESSOR
OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY AT THE ROYAL INSTITUTION, LONDON.

NEW YORK

CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS

1907

PREFACE

Tms book is an expansion of a course of lectures given at
the Boyal Institution in the Spring of 1906. It contains a
description of the properties of corpuscles and their
apphcation to the explanation of some physical phenomena.
In the earlier chapters a considerable amount of attention
is devoted to the consideration of the theory that many
of the properties of metals are due to the motion of
corpuscles diffused throughout the metal. This theory has
received strong support from the investigations of Drude
and Lorentz ; the former has shown that the theory gives an
approximately correct value for the ratio of the thermal
and electrical conductivities of pure metals and the latter
that it accounts for the long-wave radiation from hot
bodies. I give reasons for thinking that the theory in its
usual form requires the presence of so many corpuscles
that their specific heat would exceed the actual specific heat
of the metal. I have proposed a modification of the theory
which is not open to this objection and which makes the
ratio of the conductivities and the long- wave radiation of
the right magnitude.

The later chapters contain a discussion of the properties
of an atom built up of corpuscles and of positive electricity,
the positive electricity being supposed to occupy a much
larger volume than the corpuscles. The properties of an
atom of this kind are shown to resemble in many respects
those of the atoms of the chemical elements. I think that a
theory which enables us to picture a kind of model atom
and to interpret chemical and physical results in terms of

293684

vi PREFACE.

such model may be useful even though the models are
crude, for if we picture to ourselves how the model atom,
must be behaving in some particular physical or chemical
process, we not only gain a very vivid conception of the
process, but also often suggestions that the process under
consideration must be connected with other processes, and
thus further investigations are promoted by this method ; it
also has the advantage of emphasising the unity of chemical
and electrical action.

In Chapter VII. I give reasons for thinking that the
number of corpuscles in an atom of an element is not
greatly in excess of the atomic weight of the element, thus
in particular that the number of corpuscles in an atom of
hydrogen is not large. Some writers seem to think that
this makes the conception of the model atom more difficult.
I am unable to follow this view ; it seems to me to make
the conception easier, since it makes the number of
possible atoms much more nearly equal to the number of
the chemical elements. It has, however, an important
bearing on our conception of the origin of the mass of the
atom, as if the number of corpuscles in the atom is of the
same order as the atomic weight we cannot regard the
mass of an atom as mainly or even appreciably due to the
mass of the corpuscles.

I am indebted to Mr. G. W. C. Kaye for assisting in
revising the proof sheets.

J. J. Thomson.

Cambridge,

Jttly^h, 1907.

CONTENTS

CHAP. PACK

I. Introduction — Cokpuscles in Vacuum Tubes . . 1

n. The Origin of the Mass of the Corpuscle . . 28

HI. Properties of a Corpuscle 43

rV. Corpuscular Theory of Metallic Conduction . 49

V. The Second Theory of Electrical Conduction . 86

VI. The Arrangement of Corpuscles in the Atom . 103

Vn. On the Number of Corpuscles in an Atom . . 142

INDEX 169

THE

CORPUSCULAR THEORY

OF MATTER

CHAPTEE I.

The theory of the constitution of matter which I propose
to discuss in these lectures, is one which supposes that the
various properties of matter may be regarded as arising
from electrical effects. The basis of the theory is electricity,
and its object is to construct a model atom, made up of
specified arrangements of positive and negative electricity,
which shall imitate as far as possible the properties of the
real atom. We shall postulate that the attractions and
repulsions between the electrical charges in the atom follow
the familiar law of the inverse square of the distance,
though, of course, we have only direct experimental proof
of this law when the magnitude of the charges and the
distances between them are enormously greater than those
which can occur in the atom. We shall not attempt to go
behind these forces and discuss the mechanism by which
they might be produced. The theory is not an ultimate
one ; its object is physical rather than metaphysical. From
the point of view of the physicist, a theory of matter is a
policy rather than a creed; its object is to connect or
co-ordinate apparently diverse phenomena, and above all
to suggest, stimulate and direct experiment. It ought to
furnish a compass which, if followed, will lead the observer
further and further into previously unexplored regions.

T.M. B

2 THE COEPUSCULAE THEOEY OF MATTEE.

Whether these regions will be barren or fertile experience
alone will decide ; but, at any rate, one who is guided in
this way will travel onward in a definite direction, and will
not wander aimlessly to and fro.

The corpuscular theory of matter with its assumptions of
electrical charges and the forces between them is not nearly
so fundamental as the vortex atom theory of matter, in
which all that is postulated is an incompressible, friction-
less liquid possessing inertia and capable of transmitting
pressure. On this theory the difference between matter
and non-matter and between one kind of matter and
another is a difference between the kinds of motion in the
incompressible liquid at various places, matter being those
portions of the liquid in which there is vortex motion.
The simplicity of the assumptions of the vortex atom theory
are, however, somewhat dearly purchased at the cost of the
mathematical difficulties which are met with in its develop-
ment ; and for many purposes a theory whose consequences
are easily followed is preferable to one which is more
fundamental but also more unwieldy. We shall, however,
often have occasion to avail ourselves of the analogy which
exists between the properties of lines of electric force in the
electric field and lines of vortex motion in an incompressible
fluid.

To return to the corpuscular theory. This theory, as I
have said, supposes that the atom is made up of positive
and negative electricity. A distinctive feature of this
theory — the one from which it derives its name — is the
peculiar way in which the negative electricity occurs both in
the atom and when free from matter. We suppose that the
negative electricity always occurs as exceedingly fine par-
ticles called corpuscles, and that all these corpuscles, when-
ever they occur, are always of the same size and always carry
the same quantity of electricity. Whatever may prove to
be the constitution of the atom, we have direct experi-
mental proof of the existence of these corpuscles, and I will
begin the discussion of the corpuscular theory with a
description of the discovery and properties of corpuscles.

CORPUSCLES IN VACUUM TUBES. 8

Corpuscles in Vacuum Tubes.

The first place in which corpuscles were detected was a
highly exhausted tube through which an electric discharge
was passing. When I send an electric discharge through
this highly exhausted tube you will notice that the sides of
the tube glow with a vivid green phosphorescence. That
this is due to something proceeding in straight lines from
the cathode — the electrode where the negative electricity
enters the tube — can be shown in the following way :
the experiment is one made many years ago by Sir William
Crookes. A Maltese cross made of thin mica is placed
between the cathode and the walls of the tube. You will
notice that when I send the discharge through the tube,
the green phosphorescence does not now extend all over
the end of the tube as it did in the tube without the cross.
There is a well-defined cross in which there is no phos-
phorescence at the end of the tube ; the mica cross has
thrown a shadow on the tube, and the shape of the shadow
proves that the phosphorescence is due to something,
travelling from the cathode in straight lines, which is
stopped by a thin plate of mica. The green phosphorescence
is caused by cathode rays, and at one time there was a keen
controversy as to the nature of these rays. Two views
were prevalent,, one, which was chiefly supported by
English physicists, was that the rays are negatively electri-
fied bodies shot off from the cathode with great velocity ;
the other view, which was held by the great majority of
German physicists, was that the rays are some kind of
ethereal vibrations or waves.

The arguments in favour of the rays being negatively
charged particles are (1) that they are deflected by
a magnet in just the same way as moving negatively
electrified particles. We know that such particles when
a magnet is placed near them are acted upon by a
force whose direction is at right angles to the magnetic
force, and also at right angles to the direction in which the
particles are moving. Thus, if the particles are moving

b2

J

4 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

horizontally from east to west, and the magnetic force is
horizontal and from north to south, the force acting on the
n^atively electrified particles will be vertical and down-
wards.

When the magnet is placed so that the magnetic force is
along the direction in which the particle is moving the
latter will not be affected by the magnet. By placing the
magnet in suitable positions I can show you that the
cathode particles move in the way indicated by the theory.
The observations that can be made in lecture are neces-
sarily very rough and incomplete; but I may add that
elaborate and accurate measurements of the movement of

FIG. 1.

cathode rays under magnetic forces have shown that in this
respect the rays behave exactly as if they were moving
electrified particles.

The next step made in the proof that the rays are nega-
tively charged particles, was to show that when they are
caught in a metal vessel they give up to it a charge of
negative electricity. This was first done by Perrin. I
have here a modification of his experiment. A ia a, metal
cylinder with a hole in it. It is placed so as to be out of
the way of the rays coming from C, unless they are deflected
by a magnet, and is connected with an electroscope. You
see that when the rays do not pass through the hole in the
cylinder the electroscope does not receive a charge. I now,
by means of a magnet, deflect the rays so that they pass
through the hole in the cylinder. You see by the divergence

CORPUSCLES IN VACUUM TUBES. 5

of the gold-leaves that the electroscope is charged, and on
testing the sign of the charge we find that it is negative.

Deflection of the Bays by a Charged Body.

If the rays are charged with negative electricity they
ought to be deflected by an electrified body as well as by a
magnet. In the earlier experiments made on this point no
such deflection was observed. The reason of this has been
shown to be that when the cathode rays pass through a gas
they make it a conductor of electricity, so that if there is
any appreciable quantity of gas in the vessel through

which the rays are passing, this gas will become a con-
ductor of electricity, and the rays will be surrounded by a
conductor which will screen them from the effects of
electric force just as the metal covering of an electroscope
screens off all external electric effects. By exhausting the
vacuum tube until there was only an exceedingly small
quantity of air left in to be made a conductor, I was able
to get rid of this effect and to obtain the electric deflec-
tion of the cathode rays. The arrangement I used for this
purpose is shown in Fig. 2. The rays on their way through
the tube pass between two parallel plates. A, B, which can be
connected with the poles of a battery of storage cells. The
pressure in the tube is very low. You will notice that the
rays are very considerably deflected when I connect the
plates with the poles of the battery, and that the direction

6 THE COEPUSCULAE THEORY OF MATTER.

of the deflection shows that the rays are negatively
charged.

We can also show the effect of magnetic and electric force
on these rays if we avail ourselves of the discovery made by
Wehnelt, that lime when raised to a red heat emits when
negatively charged large quantities of cathode rays. I have
here a tube whose cathode is a strip of platinum on which
there is a speck of lime. When the piece of platinum is
made very hot, a potential difference of 100 volts or so is
sufficient to make a stream of cathode rays start from this
speck ; you will be able to trace the course of the rays by
the luminosity they produce as they pass through the gas.

FIG. 3.

You can see the rays as a thin line of bluish light coming
from a point on the cathode ; on bringing a magnet near it
the line becomes curved, and I can bend it into a circle or a
spiral, and make it turn round and go right behind the
cathode from which it started. This arrangement shows
in a very striking way the magnetic deflection of the rays.
To show the electrostatic deflection I use the tube shown in
Fig. 3. I charge up the plate B negatively so that it repels
the pencil of rays which approach it from the spot of lime on
the cathode, C. You see that the pencil of rays is deflected
from the plate and pursues a curved path whose distance
from th6 plate I can increase or diminish by increasing or
diminishing the negative charge on the plate.

CORPUSCLES IN VACUUM TUBES. 7

"We have seen that the cathode rays behave under every
test that we have applied as if they are negatively elec-
trified particles ; we have seen that they carry a negative
charge of electricity and are deflected by electric and
magnetic forces just as negatively electrified particles
would be*

Hertz showed, however, that the cathode particles possess
another property which seemed inconsistent with the idea
that they are particles of matter, for he found that they
were able to penetrate very thin sheets of metal, for
example, pieces of gold-leaf placed between them and the
glass, and produce appreciable luminosity on the glass after
doing so. The idea of particles as large as the molecules of
a gas passing through a solid plate was a somewhat startling

o

H

FIG. 4.

one in an age which knew not radium — which does project
particles of this size through pieces of metal much thicker
than gold-leaf — and this led me to investigate more closely
the nature of the particles which form the cathode rays.

. The principle of the method used is as follows : "When a
particle carrying a charge e is moving with the velocity v
across the lines of force in a magnetic field, placed so that
the lines of magnetic force are at right angles to the motion
of the particle, then if H is the magnetic force, the
moving particle will be acted on by a force equal to He v.
This force acts in the direction which is at right angles to
the magnetic force and to the direction of motion of the
particle, so that if the particle is moving horizontally as in
the figure and the magnetic force is at right angles to the
plane of the paper and towards the reader, then the negatively

8 THE COEPUSCULAE THEOEY OF MATTES.

electrified particle will be acted on by a vertical and upward
force. The pencil of rays will therefore be deflected upwards
and with it the patch of green phosphorescence where it
strikes the walls of the tube. Let now the two parallel plate»
A and B (Fig. 2) between which the pencil of rays is moving
be charged with electricity so that the upper plate is nega-
tively and the lower plate positively electrified, the cathode
rays will be repelled from the upper plate with a force Xe
where X is the electric force between the plates. Thus, if the
plates are charged when the magnetic field is acting on the
rays, the magnetic force will tend to send the rays upwards,
while the charge on the plates will tend to send them down-
wards. We can adjust the electric and magnetic forces
until they balance and the pencil of rays passes horizon-
tally in a straight line between the plates, the green patch
of phosphorescence being undisturbed. When this is the
case, the force He v due to the magnetic field is equal to
Xe — the force due to the electric field — and we have

Hev = Xe

X

or t? = —

H

Thus, if we measure, as we can without difficulty, the
values of X and H when the rays are not deflected, we can
determine the value of v, the velocity of the particles. The
velocity of the rays found in this way is very great; it
varies largely with the pressure of the gas left in the tube.
In a very highly exhausted tube it may be 1/3 the velocity of
light or about 60,000 miles per second ; in tubes not so
highly exhausted it may not be more than 5,000 miles per
second, but in all cases when the cathode rays are produced
in tubes their velocity is much greater than the velocity of
any other moving body with which we are acquainted. It
is, for example, many thousand times the average velocity
with which the molecules of hydrogen are moving at
ordinary temperatures, or indeed at any temperature yet
realised.

COBPUSCLES IN VACUUM TUBES. 9

Determination of e/m.

Having found the velocity of the rays, let us in the pre-
ceding experiment take away the magnetic force and leave
the rays to the action of the electric force alope. Then the
particles forming the rays are acted upon by a constant
vertical downward force and the problem is practically that
of a bullet projected horizontally with a velocity v and fall-
ing under gravity. We know that in time t the body will
fall a depth equal to ^ g t^ where g is the vertical accelera-
tion ; in our case the vertical acceleration is equal to X e/m
where in is the mass of the particle, the time it is falling
is l/v where I is the length of path measured horizontally,
and V the velocity of projection. Thus, the depth the
particle has fallen when it reaches the glass, i.e., the down-
ward displacement of the patch of phosphorescence where
the rays strike the glass, is equal to

1 Xe l^

2 m v^

We can easily measure d the distance the phosphorescent
patch is lowered, and as we have found v and X and I are
easily measured, we can find e/m from the equation :

_e ^ 2dv^
m X l^

The results of the determinations of the values of elm
made by this method are very interesting, for it is found
that however the cathode rays are produced we always
get the same value of e/m for all the particles in the
rays. We may, for example, by altering the shape of the
discharge tube and the pressure of the gas in the tube, pro-
duce great changes in the velocity of the particles, but unless
the velocity of the particles becomes so great that they are
moving nearly as fast as light, when, as we shall see, other
considerations have to be taken into account, the value of
elin is constant. The value of e/m is not merely inde-
pendent of the velocity. What is even more remarkable is
that it is independent of the kind of electrodes we use and

10 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

also of the kind of gas in the tube. The particles which
form the cathode rays must come either from the gas in the
tube or from the electrodes ; we may, however, use any
kind of substance we please for the electrodes and fill the
tube with gas of any kind, and yet the value of e/m will
remain unaltered.

This constant value is, when we measure e/m in the
C. G. S. system of magnetic units, equal to about 1*7 x 107.
If we compare this with the value of the ratio of the mass
to the charge of electricity carried by any system previously-
known, we find that it is of quite a different order of magni-
tude. Before the cathode rays were investigated the charged
atom of hydrogen met with in the electrolysis of liquids
was the system which had the greatest known value for
eJMy and in this case the value is only 10* ; hence for the
corpuscle in the cathode rays the value of ejm is 1,700 times
the value of the corresponding quantity for the charged
hydrogen atom. This discrepancy must arise in one or
other of two ways, either the mass of the corpuscle must be
very small compared with that of the atom of hydrogen,
which until quite recently was the smallest mass recognised
in physics, or else the charge on the corpuscle must be very-
much greater than that on the hydrogen atom. Now it has
been shown by a method which I shall shortly describe that
the electric charge is practically the same in the two cases ;
hence we are driven to the conclusion that the mass of the
corpuscle is only about 1/1700 of that of the hydrogen
atom. Thus the atom is not the ultimate limit to the sub-
division of matter; we may go further and get to the
corpuscle, and at this stage the corpuscle is the same from
whatever source it may be derived.

^ Corpuscles very widely distributed.

It is not only from what may be regarded as a somewhat
artificial and sophisticated source, viz., cathode rays, that
we can obtain corpuscles. When once they had been
discovered it was found that they were of very general
occurrence. They are given out by metals when raised to

COEPUSCLES IN VACUUM TUBES. 11

a red heat : you have already seen what a copious supply
is given out by hot lime. Any substance when heated gives
out corpuscles to some extent ; indeed, we can detect the
emission of them from some substances, such as rubidium
and the alloy of sodium and potassium, even when they are
cold; and it is perhaps allowable to suppose that there
is some emission by all substances, though our instruments
are not at present sufficiently delicate to detect it unless it
is unusually large.

Corpuscles are also given out by metals and other bodies,
but especially by the alkali metals, when these are exposed
to light. They are being continually given out in large
quantities, and with very great velocities by radio-active
substances such as uranium and radium ; they are pro-
duced in large quantities when salts are put into flames,
and there is good reason to suppose that corpuscles reach
us from the sun.

The corpuscle is thus very widely distributed, but where-
ever it is found it preserves its individuality, ejvi being
always equal to a certain constant value.

The corpuscle appears to form a part of all kinds of
matter under the most diverse conditions ; it seems natural,
therefore, to regard it as one of the bficks of which atoms
are built up.

Magnitude of the Electric Charge carried by the

Corpuscle.

I shall now return to the proof that the very large value
of ejm for the corpuscle as compared with that for the atom
of hydrogen is due to the smallness of m the mass, and not
to the greatness of e the charge. We can do this by
actually measuring the value of e, availing ourselves for
this purpose of a discovery by C. T. E. Wilson, that a
charged particle acts as a nucleus round which water
vapour condenses, and forms drops of water. If we have air
saturated with water vapour and cool it so that it would be
supersaturated if there were no deposition of moisture, we
know that if any dust is present, the particles of dust act

12 THE CORPUSCULAR THEOBY OF MATTER.

as nuclei round which the water condenses and we get the
too familiar phenomena of fog and rain. If the air is quite
duBt-free we can, however, cool it very considerably without
any deposition of moietare taking place. If there is no
duet, C- T. B. Wilson has shown that the cloud does not
form until the temperature has heen lowered to such a
point that the supersaturation is about eightfold. When,
however, this temperature is reached, a thick fog forme,
even in dust-free air. When charged particles are present

in the gas, Wilson showed that a much smaller amount of

cooling is sufficient to produce the fog, a fourfold super-
saturation being all that is required when the charged
particles are those which occur in a gas when it is in the
state in which it conducts electricity. Each of the charged
particles becomes the centre round which a drop of water
forms ; the drops form a cloud, and thus the charged par-
ticles, however small to begin with, now become visible and
can be observed. The effect of the charged particles on the
formation of a cloud can be shown very, distinctly by the

COEPUSCLES IN VACUUM TUBES. 18

following experiment. The vessel A, which is in contact
with water, is saturated with moisture at the temperature
of the room. This vessel is in communication with B, a
cylinder in which a large piston, (7, slides up and down ; the
piston, to begin with, is at the top of its travel ; then by
suddenly exhausting the air from below the piston, the
pressure of the air above it will force it down with great
rapidity, and the air in the vessel A will expand very
quickly. When, however, air expands it gets cool ; thus the
air in A gets colder, and as it was saturated with moisture
before cooling, it is now supersaturated. If there is no
dust present, no deposition of moisture will take place
unless the air in A is cooled to such a low temperature that
the amount of moisture required to saturate it is only
about 1/8 of that actually present. Now the amount of
cooling, and therefore of supersaturation, depends upon the*
travel of the piston ; the greater the travel the greater the
cooling. I can regulate this travel so that the super-
saturation is less than eightfold, and greater than four-
fold. We now free the air from dust by forming cloud after
cloud in the dusty air, as the clouds fall they carry the
dust down with them, just as in nature the air is cleared by
showers. We find at last that when we make the expansion
no cloud is visible. We now put the gas in a conducting
state by bringing a little radium near the vessel A ; this fills
the gas with large quantities of both positively and nega-
tively electrified particles. On making the expansion now,
an exceedingly dense cloud is formed. That this is due to
the electrification in the gas can be shown by the following
experiment: Along the inside walls of the vessel A we have two
vertical insulated plates which can be electrified; if these
plates are electrified they will drag the charged particles out
of the gas as fast as they are formed, so that by electrifying
the plates we can get rid of, or at any rate largely reduce,
the number of electrified particles in the gas. I now repeat
the experiment, electrifying the plates before bringing up
the radium. You see that the presence of the radium hardly
increases the small amount of cloud. I now discharge the

14 THE CORPUSCULAE THEOBY OF MATTER.

plates, and on making the expansion the cloud is so dense
as to be quite opaque.

We can use the drops to find the charge on the particles,
for when we know the travel of the piston we can deduce
the amount of supersaturation, and hence the amount of
water deposited when the cloud forms. The water is
deposited in the form of a number of small drops all of the ^
same size ;. thus the number of drops will be the volume of
the water deposited divided by the volume of one of the
drops. Hence, if we find the volume of one of the drops
we can find the number of drops which are formed round
the charged particles. If the particles are not too numerous,
each will have a drop round it, and we can thus find the
number of electrified particles.

If we observe the rate at which the drops slowly fall down
we can determine the size of the drops. In consequence of
the viscosity or friction of the air small bodies do not fall
with a constantly accelerated velocity, but soon reach a speed
which remains uniform for the rest of the fall ; the smaller
the body the slower this speed, and Sir George Stokes has
shown that z?, the speed at which a drop of rain falls, is
given by the formula —

2 a a

3

9 H-

where a is the radius of the drop, g the acceleration due
to gravity, and fi the co-eflBicient of viscosity of the air. If
we substitute the values of g and /x, we get

V = 1-28 X 10« a^

Hence, if we measure v we can determine a, the radius of
the drop. We can, in this way, find the volume of a drop,
and may therefore, as explained above, calculate the number
of drops, and therefore the number of electrified particles.
It is a simple matter to find, by electrical methods, the total
quantity of electricity on these particles ; and hence, as we
know the number of particles, we can deduce at once the
charge on each particle.

COEPUSCLES IN VACUUM TUBES. 15

This was the method by which I first determined the
charge on the particle. H. A. Wilson has since used a
simpler method founded on the following principles.
C- T. E. Wilson has shown that the drops of water condense
more easily on negatively electrified particles than on
positively electrified ones. Thus, by adjusting the expansion,
it is possible to get drops of water round the negative
particles and not round the positive ; with this expansion,
therefore, all the drops are negatively electrified. The size
of these drops, and therefore their weight, can, as before,
be determined by measuring the speed at which they fall
under gravity. Suppose now, that we hold above the drops
a positively electrified body, then since the drops are
negatively electrified they will be attracted towards the
positive electricity and thus the downward force on the
drops will be diminished, and they will not fall so rapidly
as they did when free from electrical attraction. If we
adjust the electrical attraction so that the upward force on
each drop is equal to the weight of the drop, the drops will
not fall at all, but will, like Mahomet's cofl&n, remain sus-
pended between heaven and earth. If, then, we adjust the
electrical force until the drops are in equilibrium and neither
fall nor rise, we know that the upward force on the drop is
equal to the weight of the drop, which we have already
determined by measuring the rate of fall when the drop
was not exposed to any electrical force. If X is the electrical
force, e the charge on the drop, and w its weight, we have,
when there is equilibrium —

X e = w.

Since X can easily be measured, and w is known, we can
use this relation to determine e, the charge on the drop.
The value of e found by these methods is 3*1 X 10"-^^ electro-
static units, or 10"^^ electromagnetic units. This value is
the same as that of the charge carried by a hydrogen atom
in the electrolysis of dilute solutions, an approximate value
of which has long been known.

It might be objected that the charge measured in the

16 THE COEPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

preceding experiments is the charge on a molecule or
collection of molecules of the gas, and not the charge on
a corpuscle. This objection does not, however, apply to
another form in which I tried the experiment, where the
charges on the particles were got, not by exposing the gas
to the effects of radium, but by allowing ultra-violet light to
fall on a metal plate in contact with the gas. In this case,
as experiments made in a very high vacuum show, the
electrification which is entirely negative escapes from the
metal in the form of corpuscles. When a gas is present,
the corpuscles strike against the molecules of the gas and
stick to them. Thus, though it is the molecules which are
charged, the charge on a molecule is equal to the charge on
a corpuscle, and when we determine the charge on the
molecules by the methods I have just described, we deter-
mine the charge carried by the corpuscle. The value of the
charge when the electrification is produced by ultra-violet
light is the same as when the electrification is produced by
radium.

"We have just seen that e, the charge on the corpuscle, is
in electromagnetic units, equal to 10"^, and we have pre-
viously found that e/m, vi being the mass of a corpuscle, is
equal to 1*7 X 10^, hence vi = 6 X 10"^ grammes.

We can realise more easily what this means if we express
the mass of the corpuscle in terms of the mass of the atom
of hydrogen. We have seen that for the corpuscle
e/m = 1*7 X 10"^ ; while if E is the charge carried by an
atom of hydrogen in the electrolysis of dilute solutions, and
M the mass of the hydrogen atom, E/M = 10*; hence
ejm = 1700 E/M. We have already stated that the
value of e found by the preceding methods agrees well
with the value of E, which has long been approximately
known. Townsend has used a method in which the value
of e/E is directly measured and has showed in this way also
that e is equal to E ; hence, since e/m = 1700 ElM, we have
M = 1700 7w, i.e., the mass of a corpuscle is only about
1/1700 part of the mass of the hydrogen atom.

In all known cases in which negative electricity occurs in

COEPUSCLES IN VACUUM TUBES. 17

gases at very low pressures it occurs in the form of
corpuscles, small bodies with an invariable charge and
mass. The case is entirely different with positive electricity.

The Cabriers of Positive Electricity.

We get examples of positively charged particles in various
phenomena. One of the first cases to be investigated was
that of the " Canalstrahlen " discovered by Goldstein. I have
here a highly exhausted tube with a cathode, through
which a large number of holes has been bored. When I
send a discharge through this tube you will see the cathode
rays shooting out in front of the cathode. In addition to
these, you see other rays streaming through the holes in
the cathode, and travelling through the gas at the back of

)

FIG. 6.

the cathode. These are called " Canalstrahlen." You notice
that, like the cathode rays, they make the gas luminous as
they pass through it, but the colour of the luminosity due
to the canalstrahlen is not the same as that due to the
cathode rays. The distinction is exceptionally well marked
in helium, where the luminosity due to the canalstrahlen is
tawny, and that due to the cathode rays bluish. The
luminosity, too, produced when the rays strike against a
solid is also of quite a different character. This is well
show6 by allowing both cathode rays and canalstrahlen to
strike against lithium chloride. Under the cathode rays
the salt gives out a steely blue light, and the spectrum is a
continuous one ; under the canalstrahlen the salt gives out
a brilliant red light, and the spectrum shows the lithium
line. It is a very interesting fact that the lines in the
spectra of the alkali metals are very much more easily

T.M. c

18 THE COBPUSCULAE THEORY OF MATTER.

obtained when the canalstrahlen fall on salts of the metal
than when they fall on the metal itself. Thus when a pool
of the liquid alloy of sodium and potassium is bombarded by
canalstrahlen the specks of oxide on the surface shine with
a bright yellow light, while the untarnished part of the
surface is quite dark.

The canalstrahlen are deflected by a magnet, though not
to anything like the same extent as the cathode rays. Their
deflection, too, is in the opposite direction, showing that
they are positively charged.

Value of elm for the Particles in the Canalstrahlen.

W. Wien has applied the methods described in connection
with the cathode rays to determine the value of ejm for the
particles in the canalstrahlen. The contrast between the
results obtained for the two rays is very interesting. In
the case of the cathode rays the velocity of different rays
in the same tube may be different, but the value of e/m for
these rays is independent of the velocity as well as of the
nature of the gas and the electrodes. In the case of the
canalstrahlen we get in the same pencil of rays not merely
variations in the velocity, but also variations in the value
of e/m. The difference between the values of e/m for the
cathode rays and the canalstrahlen is also very remarkable.
Eor the cathode rays «/m always equal to I'TXlO^; while
for canalstrahlen the greatest value ever observed is 10*,
which is also the value of e/m for the hydrogen ions in the
electrolysis of dilute solutions. When the canalstrahlen
pass through hydrogen the value of e/m for a large portion
of the rays is 10*. There are, however, some rays present
even in hydrogen, for which e/m is much less than 10^, and
which are but slightly deflected even by very intense
magnetic fields. When the canalstrahlen pass through
very pure oxygen, Wien found that the value of e/in for
the most conspicuous rays was about 760, which is not far
from what it would be if the charge were the same as for
the canalstrahlen in hydrogen, while the mass was greater
in the proportion of the mass of an atom of oxygen to that

COBPUSCLES IN VACUUM TUBES.

19

of an atom of hydrogen. Along with these rays in oxygen
there were others having still smaller values of e/m, and
some having e/m equal to 10*.

As the canalstrahlen or rays of positive electricity are
a very promising field for investigations on the nature
of positive electricity, I have recently made a series of
experiments on these rays in different gases, measuring
the deflections they experience when exposed to electric
and magnetic forces and thus deducing the values of e/m
and V. 1 find, when the pressure of the gas is not too low.

I M C

FIG. 7.

The portions with the cross shading is the deflection under both
electric and magnetic force ; the portion with vertical shading the
deflection under magnetic force ; that with the horizontal sh^ng
under electric force alone.

that the bright spot produced by the impact of these
rays on the phosphorescent screen is deflected by electric
and magnetic forces into a continuous band extending, as
shown in Fig. 7, on both sides of the undeflected portion,
the portion on one side (cc) is very much fainter than that
on the other, and also somewhat shorter. The direction
of the deflection of the band cc shows that it is produced
by particles charged with negative electricity, while the
brighter band bb is due to particles charged with positive
electricity. The negatively charged particles which pro-
duce the band cc are not corpuscles, for from the deflections
in this band we can find the value of e/m ; as this value

o2

20 THE CORPUSCULAE THEOEY OF MATTER.

comes out of the order 10*, we see thf^t the mass of the
carrier is comparable with that of an atom, and therefore
immensely greater than that of a corpuscle. When the
pressure is very low the portion of the phosphorescence
deflected in the negative direction disappears and the phos-
phorescent spot, instead of being stretched by the electric
and magnetic forces into a continuous band, is broken up
into two patches, as in the curved parts of Figs. 8 and 9.
Fig. 8 is the appearance at exceedingly low pressures, Fig. 9
that at a somewhat higher pressure. For one of these patches
the maximum value of elm is about 10*, and for the other
about 5 X 10^ The appearance of the patches and the values
of e/m at these very low pressures are the same whether

i

oo

FIG. 8. FIG. 9.

The curved patches represent the
deflection under both electric
and magnetic force.

the tube is filled originally with air, hydrogen, or helium.
Another experiment I tried was to exhaust the tube until
the pressure was too low for the discharge to pass, and then
to introduce into the tube a very small quantity of gas, this
increases the pressure and the discharge is able to pass
through the tube. The following gases were admitted into
the tube: air, carbonic oxide, oxygen, hydrogen, helium,
argon and neon, but whatever the gas the appearance of the
phosphorescence was the same. In every case there were
two patches, one having e/m = 10*, the other e/m = 5 X 10^.
At these very low pressures the intensity of the electric
field in the discharge tube is very great.

When the pressure in the tube is not very low the nature
of the positive rays depends to a very considerable extent

COEPUSCLES IN VACUUM TUBES.

21

upon the kind of gas with which the tube is filled. Thus,
for example, in air at these pressures the phosphorescent
spot is stretched out into a straight .band as in Fig. 7; the
maximum value of e/m for this band is 10*. In hydrogen
at suitable pressures we get the spot stretched out into two
bands as in Fig. 10 ; for one of these bands the maximum

FIG. 10.

value of e/m is 10*, while for the other it is 5 X 10®. In
helium we also get two bands as in Fig. 11, but while the
maximum value of e/m in one of these bands is 10*, the
same as for the corresponding band in hydrogen, the
maximum value of e/m in the other band is only 2'5 X 10®.
We see from this that the ratio of the masses of the carriers

FIG, 11.

in the two bands is equal to the ratio of the masses of the
atoms of hydrogen and helium.

At some pressures we get three bands in helium, the
value of e/m being respectively 10*, 5 X 10®, and 2*5 X 10®.

The continuous band into which the bright phosphorescent
spot is stretched out when the pressure is not exceedingly
low can be explained as follows : —

The rays on their way to the screen have to pass
through gas which is ionised by the passage through it of

22 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

the rays; this gas will therefore contain free corpuscles.
The particles which constitute the rays start with a charge
of positive electricity ; some of these in their journey
through the gas may attract a corpuscle, the negative
charge on which will neutralise the positive charge on the
particle. The particles when in this neutral state may be
ionised by collision and reacquire a positive charge, or by
attracting another corpuscle they may become negatively
charged, and this process may be repeated several times in
their journey to the screen. Thus, some of the particles,
instead of being positively charged for the whole of the
time they are exposed to electric and magnetic forces, may
be for a part of that time without a charge or even have a
negative charge. Now the deflection of a particle will be
proportional to the average value of its charge while
under the action of electric and magnetic forces; if the
particle is without charge for a part of the time, its deflec-
tion will be less than that of a particle which has retained
its positive charge for the whole of the journey, while the
small number of particles, which have a negative charge
for a longer time than they have a positive, will be deflected
in the opposite direction and produce the faint tail of
phosphorescence which is deflected in the opposite direction
to the main portion.

It is remarkable and suggestive that even when great
care is taken to eliminate hydrogen from the tube, we get
at all pressures a large quantity of rays for which e/m is
equal to 10*, the value for the hydrogen atom ; and in
many cases this is the only definite value of e/m to be
observed, for the continuous band in which we have all
values of e/m is due, as we have seen, not to changes in m,
but to changes in the average value of e.

If the presence of rays for which e/m = W was entirely
due to hydrogen present as an impurity in the gas with
which the tube is filled, the positive particles being hydrogen
ionised by the corpuscles projected from the cathode, we
should have expected, since the ionisation consists in the
detachment of a corpuscle from the molecule, that the

COEPUSCLES IN VACUUM TUBES. 23

positively charged particles would be molecules and not
atoms of hydrogen.

Again, at very low pressures, when the electric field is
very intense, we get the same two types of carriers what-
ever kind of gas is in the tube. For one of these types
e/m = 10* and for the other e/m = 5xl0^; the second value
corresponds to the positive particles which are given out by
radio-active substances. The most obvious interpretation
of this result is that under the conditions existing in the
discharge tube at these very low pressures all gases give
off positive particles which resemble corpuscles, in so far
as they are independent of the nature of the gas from
which they are derived, but which differ from the corpuscles
in having masses comparable with the mass of an atom of
hydrogen, while the mass of a corpuscle is only 1/1700 of
this mass. One type of positive particle has a mass equal
to that of an atom of hydrogen, the other type has a mass
double this; and the experiments I have just described
indicate that when the pressure is very low and the electric
field very intense, all the positively electrified particles are
of one or other of these types.

We have seen that for the positively charged particles
in the canalstrahlen the value of ejm depends, when the
pressure is not too low, on the kind of gas in the tube, and
is such that the least value of m is comparable with the
mass of an atom of hydrogen, and is thus always immensely
greater than the carriers of the negative charge in the
cathode rays. We know of no case where the mass of the
positively charged particle is less than that of an atom of
hydrogen.

Positive Ions from Hot Wires.

When a metallic wire is raised to a red heat it gives out
positively electrified particles. I have investigated the
values of ejm for these particles, and find that they show
the same peculiarities as the positively charged particles in
the canalstrahlen. The particles given off by the wire are
not all alike. Some have one value of ejm, others another,

24 THE CORPUSCULAE THEOBY OF MATTER,

but the greatest value I found in my experiments where
the wire was surrounded by air at a low pressure was 720,
and there were many particles for which e/m was very
much smaller, and which were hcffdly affected even by very
strong magnetic fields.

PosirnrE Ions from Radio-aotivb Substances.

The various radio-active substances, such as radium^
polonium, uranium, and actinium, shoot out with great
velocity positively electrified particles which are called X rays.
The values of e/m for these particles have been measured by
Rutherford, Des Goudres, Mackenzie, and Huff, and for all
the substances hitherto examined— radium and its trans-
formation products, polonium, and actinium — the value of
elm is the same and equal to 5 X 10^ the same as for one
type of ray in the vacuum tube. The velocity with which
the particles move varies considerably from one substance
to another. As these substances all give off helium, there
is prima Jacie evidence that the a particles are helium.
For a helium atom with a single charge, ejm is 2*5 X 10^,
hence if the a particles are helium atoms they must carry
a double charge ; the large value of ejm shows that the
carriers of the positive charge must be atoms, or molecules
of some substance with a small atomic weight. Hydrogen
and helium are the only substances with an atomic weight
small enough to be compatible with so large a value of ejm
as 5,000, and of these, helium is known to be given off
by radio-active substances, whereas we have as yet no
evidence that there is any evolution of hydrogen.

Positive particles having ejm = 5 X 10^ are found,
as we have seen, in all vacuum tubes carrying an electric
discharge when the pressure in the tube is very low;
the velocity of these particles is very much less than
that of the a particles. From the researches of
Bragg, Kleeman, and Rutherford, it appears that the a
particles lose their power of ionisation and of producing
phosphorescence when their velocity is reduced by passing
through absorbing substances to about 10* em/sec. The

COKPUSCLES IN VACUUM TUBES- 25

interesting point about this result is that the positively
electrified particles in a discharge tube can produce ionisa-
tion and phosphorescence when their velocity is very much
smaller than this.

This may possibly be due to the a particles being much
fewer in number than the positively charged particles in a
discharge tube ; and that as the a particles are so few and
far between, a particle in its attempts at ionisation or at
producing phosphorescence receives no assistance from its
companions. Thus, if ionisation or phosphorescence requires
a certain amount of energy to be communicated to a
system, all that energy has to come from one particle.
When, however, as in a discharge tube, the stream of
particles is much more concentrated, the energy required
by the system may be derived from more than one particle,
the energy given to the system by one particle not having
been entirely lost before additional energy is supplied by
another particle. Thus the effects produced by the particles
might be cumulative and the system might ultimately
receive the required amount of energy by contributions frojn
several particles. Thus, although the contribution from
any one particle might be insufficient to produce ionisation
or phosphorescence, the cumulative effects of several might
be able to do so.

Another way in which the sudden loss of ionising power
might occur is that the power of producing ionisation may
be dependent on the possession of an electric charge by
the particle, and that when the velocity of the particle
falls below a certain value, the particle is no longer able to
escape from a negatively charged corpuscle when it passes
close to it, but retains the corpuscle as a kind of satellite,
the two forming an electrically neutral system, and that
inasmuch as the chance of ionisation by collision diminishes
as the velocity increases, when the velocity exceeds a certain
value, such a neutral system is not so likely to be ionised
and again acquire a charge of electricity as the more slowly
moving particles in a discharge tube.

These investigations on the properties of the carriers of

26 THE COEPUSCULAE THEOEY OF MATTEE.

positive electricity prove: (1) that whereas in gases at very
low pressures ttie carriers of negative electricity have an ex-
ceedinglj small mass, only about 1/1700 of that of the
hydrogen atom, the mass of the carriers of positive elec-
tricity is never less than that of the hydrogen atom;
(2) that while the carrier of negative electricity, the cor-
puscle, has the same mass from whatever source it may be
derived, the mass of the carrier ol the positive charge may
be variable : thus in hydrogen the smallest of the positive
particles seems to be the hydrogen atom, while in helium,
at not too low a pressure, the carrier of the positive electricity
is partly, at any rate, the helium atom. All the evidence
at our disposal shows that even in gases at the lowest pres-
sures the positive electricity is always carried by bodies at
least as large as atoms ; the negative electricity, on the other
hand, is under the same circumstances carried by corpuscles,
bodies with a constant and exceedingly small mass.

The simplest interpretation of these results is that the
positive ions are the atoms or groups of atoms of various
elements from which one or more corpuscles have been
removed. That, in fact, the corpuscles are the vehicles by
which electricity is carried from one body to another, a
positively electrified body differing from the same body
when unelectrified in having lost some of its corpuscles while
the negative electrified body is one with more corpuscles
than the unelectrified one.

In the old one-fluid theory of electricity, positive or
negative electrification was due to an excess or deficiency
of an " electric fluid.^* On the view we are considering
positive or negative electrification is due to a defect or
excess in the number of corpuscles. The two views have
much in common if we suppose that the " electric fluid "
is built up of corpuscles.

In the corpuscular theory of matter we suppose that the
atoms of the elements are made up of positive and negative
electricity, the negative electricity occurring in the form of
corpuscles. In an unelectrified atom there are as many units
of positive electricity as there are of negative ; an atom with

COEPUSCLES IN VACUUM TUBES. 27

a unit positive charge is a neutral atom which has lost one
corpuscle, while an atom with a unit negative charge is a
neutral atom to which an additional corpuscle has been
attached. No positively electrified body has yet been found
with a mass less than that of a hydrogen atom. We cannot,
however, without further investigation infer from this that
the mass of the unit charge of positive electricity is equal
to the mass of the hydrogen atom, for all we know about the
electrified system is, that the positive electricity is in excess
by one unit over the negative electricity ; any system con-
taining n units of positive electricity and (n - 1) corpuscles
would satisfy this condition whatever might be the value
of n. Before we can deduce any conclusions as to the mass
of the unit of positive electricity we must know something
about the number of corpuscles in the system. We shall
give, later on, methods by which we can obtain this infor-
mation ; we may, however, state here that these methods
indicate that the number of corpuscles in an atom of any
element is proportional to the atomic weight of the element
— it is a multiple, and not a large one, of the atomic weight of
the element. If this result is right, there cannot be a large
number of corpuscles and therefore of units of positive
electricity in an atom of hydrogen, and as the mass of a
corpuscle is very small compared with that of an atom of
hydrogen, it follows that only a small fraction of the mass
of the atom can be due to the corpuscle. The bulk of the
mass must be due to the positive electricity, and therefore
the mass of unit positive charge must be large compared
with that of the corpuscle — the unit negative charge.

From the experiments described on p. 19 we conclude
that positive electricity is made up of units, which are inde-
pendent of the nature of the substance which is the seat of
the electrification.

CHAPTER n.

THB ORIGIN OF THE MASS OF THE COBPUSCL&.

The origin of the mass of the corpuscle is very interesting,
for it has been shown that this mass arises entirely from
the charge of electricity on the corpuscle. We can see
how this comes about in the following way. If I take
an uncharged body of mass M at rest and set it moving
with the velocity F, the work I shall have to do on
the body is equal to the kinetic energy it has acquired,
i.e., to \ MV^. If, however, the body is charged with
electricity I shall have to do more work to set it moving
with the same velocity, for a moving charged body pro-
duces magnetic force, it is surrounded by a magnetic field

FIG. 12.

and this field contains energy ; thus when I set the body
in motion I have to supply the energy for this magnetic as
well as for the kinetic energy of the body. If the charged
body is moving along the line OX, the magnetic force at a
point P is at right angles to the plane POX ; thus the lines
of magnetic forces are circles having OX for their axis. The

magnitude of the force at P is equal to ^ riT^ where

denotes the angle POX. Now in a magnetic field the energy
per unit volume at any place where the magnetic force is

i

ORIGIN OP THE MASS OF THE CORPUSCLE. 29

equal to H is H^/Stt. Thus the energy per unit volume at
P arising from the magnetic force produced by the moving

charge is ~~ ^ — /^^' , and by taking the sum of the

energy throughout the volume surrounding the charge, we
find the amount of energy in the magnetic field. If the
moving body is a conducting sphere of radius a, a simple
calculation shows that the energy in the magnetic field is

equal to — . The energy which has to be supplied to

set the sphere in motion is this energy plus the kinetic
energy of the sphere, i.e., it is equal to

3>

1 / . 2 e*\ T/

Thus the energy is the same as if it were the kinetic

2 e^
energy of a sphere with a mass ^ + ^ — instead of m.

Thus the apparent mass of the electrified body is not m but

2 e^
m + - — . The seat of this increase in mass is not in the

8 a
electrified body itself but in the space around it, just as if
the ether in that space were set in motion by the passage
through it of the lines of force proceeding from the charged
body, and that the increase in the mass of the charged
body arose from the mass of the ether set in motion by the
lines of electric force. It may make the consideration of
this increase in mass clearer if we take a case which is not
electrical but in which an increase in the apparent mass
occurs from causes which are easily understood. Suppose
that we start a sphere of mass M with a velocity F in a
vacuum, the work which has to be done on the sphere is
I M VK Let us now immerse the sphere in water : the
work required to start the sphere with the same velocity
will evidently be greater than when it was in the vacuum, for
the motion of the sphere will set the water around it in

80 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

motion. The water will have kinetic energy, and this, as

well as the kinetic energy of the sphere, has to be supplied

when the sphere is moved. It has been shown by Sir

George Stokes that the energy in the water is equal to

J Ml V^ where Mi is the mass of half the volume of the

water displaced by the sphere. Thus the energy required

to start the sphere is J {M + Mi) F^, and the sphere

behaves as if its mass were M + Mi and not M, and for

many purposes we could neglect the effect of the water if

we supposed the mass of the sphere to be increased in the

way indicated. If we suppose the lines of electric force

proceeding from the -charged body to set the ether in

motion and assume the ether has mass, then the origin of the

increase of mass arising from electrification would be very

analogous to the case just considered. The increase in

2 e^
mass due to the charge is - — ; thus for a given charge

the increase in the mass is greater for a small body than for
a large one. Now for bodies of ordinary size this increase
of mass due to electrification is for any realisable charges
quite insignificant in comparison with the ordinary mass.
But since this addition to the mass increases rapidly as
the body gets smaller, the question arises, whether in the
case of these charged and exceedingly small corpuscles
the electrical mass, as we may call it, may not be quite
appreciable in comparison with the other (mechanical) mass.
We shall now show that this is the case; indeed for
corpuscles there is no other mass : all the mass is
electrical.

The method by which this result has been. arrived at is
as follows : The distribution of magnetic force near a
moving electrified particle depends upon the velocity of.
the particle, and when the velocity approaches that of light,
is of quite a different character from that near a slowly
moving particle. Perhaps the clearest way of seeing this is
to follow the changes which occur in the distribution of the
electric force round a charged body as its velocity is
gradually increased. When the body is at rest the electric

J

TT

ORIGIN OF THE MASS OF THE CORPUSCLE. 31

force is uniiormly diBtribated round the body, i.e., as long
as we keep at the eame distance from the charged body
the electric force remaina the same whether we are to the
east, west, north or soath ot the particle ; the linee of force
which come from the body spread out uniformly in all
directions. When the body is moving this is no longer the
case, for if the body is moving along the line OA (Fig. 13),
the lines of electric force tend to leave the regions in the
neighbourhood of OA and OB, which we shall call the
polar regions, and crowd towards a plane drawn throi^h
O at right angles to OA ; the regions in the neighbourhood

of this plane we shall call the equatorial regions. This
crowding of the lines of force is exceedingly slight when the
velocity of the body is only a small fraction of that of light,
but it becomes very marked when the velocity of the body
is nearly equal to that velocity ; and when the body moves
at the same speed as light all the lines of force leave the
region round OA and crowd into the plane through at
right angles to OA, i.e., the lines of force have swung round
until they are all at right angles to the direction in which
the particle is moving. The effect of this crowding of the
lines of force towards the equatorial plane is to weaken the
magnetic force in the polar and increase it in the equatorial

82 THE COEPUSCULAR THEOEY OP MATTEE.

regions. The polar regions are those where the magnetic
force was originally weak, the equatorial regions those
where it was strong. Thus the effect of the crowding is
to increase relatively the strength of the field in the strong
parts of the field and to weaken it in the weak parts. This
makes the energy in the field greater than if there were no

crowding, in which case the energy is -- where e is

3 Ob

the charge, v the velocity and a the radius of the sphere.

When we allow for the crowding, the energy will be

-- a , where a is a quantity which will be equal to

unity when v is small compared with c the velocity of

light, but becomes very large when v approaches c. The

2 e^
part of the mass arising from the charge is — a — , thus

o d

since a depends npon t*-the velocity of the particle— the
electrical mass will depend upon r, and thus this part of
the mass has the peculiarity that it is not constant but
depends upon the velocity of the particle. Thus if an
appreciable part of the mass of the corpuscle is electrical
in origin, the mass of rapidly moving corpuscles will be
greater than that of slow ones, while if the mass were in
the main mechanical, it would be independent of the
velocity. Eadium gives out corpuscles which move with
velocities comparable with that of light and which are
therefore very suitable for testing whether or not this
increase in the mass of a corpuscle with its velocity takes
place. This test has been applied by Kaufmann, who has
measured the value of m/e for the various corpuscles moving
with different velocities given out by radium. We can
calculate the value of the coefficient a— the quantity which
expresses the effect of the velocity on the mass. The value
of this quantity depends to some extent on the view we
take as to the distribution of electricity on the corpuscle ;
we get slightly different values according as we suppose
the electricity to be distributed over the surface of a con-
ducting sphere of radius a, or rigidly distributed over the

H)EIGIN OF THE MASS OF THE COEPUSCLE. 38

surface of a non-conducting sphere of the same radius, or
uniformly distributed throughout the volume of such a
sphere. In calculating these differences we have to suppose
the charge on the sphere divided up into smaller parts and
that each of these small parts obeys the ordinary laws of
electrostatics. If we suppose that the charge on the
corpuscles is the unit of negative electricity, it is not
permissible to assume that smaller portions will obey the
ordinary laws of electrostatic attraction.

Perhaps the simplest assumption we can make is that
the energy is the same as that outside a sphere of radius a
moving with the velocity V and with a charge e at its
centre. I have calculated the value of a on this supposition ;
the results are given in the following Table. The first
column of the Table contains the velocity of the corpuscles,
which were the object of Kaufmann's experiments ; the
second column, the values found by Kaufmann for the ratio
of the mass of corpuscles moving with this velocity to
the mass of a slowly moving corpuscle, and the third
column the value of a calculated on the preceding
hypothesis.

\.

Velocity of Corpuscle.

^ Ratio of Mass to that of a Slow
Corpuscle.

a

2-85 X lO^^ cmlsec.
2-72 X 10^^ cmlsec.
2-59 X 10^® cmlsec.
2-48 X 10^^ cmlsec.
2-36 X l(fi^ cmlsec.

3-09
2-43
2-04
1-88
1-65

31

2-42

2-0

1-66

1-5

You will notice that the second and third columns are
almost identical ; the second column, however, expresses
the increase of the whole mass; the third column, the
increase of the electrical mass. We see that these are
practically equal to each^ther, hence we conclude that the
whole of the mass of the corpuscle is electrical. This elec-
trical mass has its origin in the region round the corpuscle

T.M. D

84 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OP MATTER.

and is not resident in the corpuscle itself ; hence, from our
point of view, each corpuscle may be said to extend through-
out the whole universe, a result which is interesting in
connection with the dogma that two bodies cannot occupy
the same space.

From the result that the whole of the mass is electrical
we are able to deduce the size of the corpuscle, for if in
is the mass,

2 e^
m = —- — .

8 a

Now we have seen that e/ju = I'l X 10^, and that in
electromagnetic measure e = 10^. Substituting these values
we find that a the radius of the corpuscle = 10"^ cm. The
radius of the atom is usually taken as about 10"^ cm., hence
the radius of a corpuscle is only about the one-hundred-
thousandth part of the radius of the atom. The potential

energy due to the charge is - , if V is the velocity of

light; this potential ener(2:y is about the same in
amount as the kinetic energy possessed by an a particle
moving with a velocity about one-fiftieth that of light.

Evidence op the Existence of Corpuscles afforded by

THE Zeeman Effect.

The existence of corpuscles is confirmed in a very
striking way by the effect produced by a magnetic field
on the lines of the spectrum and known as the Zeeman
effect. Zeeman found that when the luminous body
giving out the spectrum is placed in a strong magnetic
field, many of the lines which are single before the
application of the field are resolved into three or more
components. The simplest case is when a line originally
single is resolved into three components, the luminous body
being looked at in a direction at right angles to the lines of
magnetic force ; the middle line of the three occupies its
old position, and the side lines are separated from it by an
amount proportional to the magnetic force. All the lines

OEIGIN OF THE MASS OF THE CORPUSCLE. 85

are plane polarised, the plane of polarisation of the middle
line being at right angles to that of the side lines. If the
same line is looked at in the direction of the magnetic force,
the middle line is absent and the two side lines are
circularly polarised in opposite senses.

The theory of this simple case, which was first given by
Lorentz, is as follows : Let us assume that the vibrating
system giving out the line is a charged body, and that it is
vibrating under the action of a force whose magnitude is
directly proportional to the distance of the vibrating body
from a fixed point, and whose direction always passes
through the point. Suppose that is the fixed point and
P the electrified body, and let us suppose that the latter is
describing a circular orbit round ; let m be the mass of

FIG. 14.

the body, ftOP the force acting upon it ; then the radial
acceleration towards O is equal to v^/OP, v being the
velocity of the body. But the product of the mass and the
radial acceleration is equal to the radial force /^OP, hence

"^ ^' = ,..0P

OP
If <o is the angular velocity, v = <a.OP, hence

„2 = i^ or 0.= /^
m \ m

The time of vibration is the time OP takes to make a
complete revolution or 27r/w ; thus w, which is called the
frequency of the vibration, is proportional to the number of
vibrations per second. In this case the frequency of vibra-
tion will evidently be the same whether P goes round in
the direction of the hands of a watch or in the opposite

d2

86 THE COBPUSCULAR THEOEY OF MATTER.

direction. Let now a magnetic force at right angles to the
plane of the paper and downwards act upon the charged
body. As we have had occasion to remark before, when a
charged body moves in a magnetic field it is acted upon by
a force which is at right angles to its direction of motion
and also to the magnetic force, and equal to Hev sin
where H is the magnetic force, e the charge on the body, v
its velocity, and B the angle between the directions of H
and V.

Let now the charged particle be describing a circle in the
direction indicated by the arrow round O, the magnetic
force being at right angles to the plane of the paper and
downwards. The force due to the magnetic field will be radial
and in this case directed inwards, and equal to Hev; hence,
in addition to the radial force fi.OP, we have the force
Hev; equating the product of the mass and the radial
acceleration to the radial force we have

m^ = /^.OP + He. V (1)

and since i; = w X OP

h'

m m 2 m ^m4m

thus u) is greater than before, and if />i/m is large compared
with He/m and equal to o)% we have

. 1 He

0) = (i>o 4- - —

2 m
approximately ; wq is the frequency without the magnetic

field, thus the change in the frequency is — — , and in

this case it is an increase.

Suppose, however, that P were describing , the circle
in the opposite direction, then, since the direction of
motion is reversed the force produced Ky the magnetic
field will be reversed and the force will now be outwards
instead of inwards ; thus, instead of equation (1) we have

OEIGIN OF THE MASS OF THE CORPUSCLE. 87

and this treated in the same way as equation (1) leads to
the result

(I) = U)n — —

1 He

2 m

Thus the frequency of vibrations in this direction is
diminished by an amount equal to that by which the
frequency in the opposite direction is increased. Thus the
charged body will go round faster in one direction than

tlQ, 15.

in the opposite. I have here an experiment to illustrate a
similar efifect in a mechanical system. A conical pendulum
has for the bob a fly wheel which can be caused to rotate about
its axis of rotation. The rotating fly wheel causes a force
to act on the bob of the pendulum ; this force is at right
angles to the direction of motion of the bob, and is
proportional to its velocity. It is thus analogous to
the force acting on the charged particle due to the
magnetic field. The radial force on the electrified particle

38 THE COEPUSCULAE THEOEY OF MATTEE.

is represented by the component of gravity at right angles
to the axis of the pendulum. I set this pendulum swinging
as a conical pendulum with the fly wheel not in rotation.
As you would naturally suppose, it goes round just as fast in
the direction of the hands of a watch as in the opposite
direction. I now set the fly wheel in rapid rotation and
repeat the experiment. You see that now the pendulum
goes round distinctly more rapidly in one direction than in
the opposite, and the direction in which the rotation is most
rapid is that in which the rotation of the pendulum is in the
same direction as that of the fly wheel.

We see from these considerations that a corpuscle which,
when free from magnetic force, would vibrate with the same
frequency in whatever direction it might be displaced will
no longer do so when placed in a magnetic field. If the
corpuscle is displaced so as to move along the lines of
magnetic force, the force on the corpuscle due to the
magnetic field will vanish, since it is proportional to
the sine of the angle 'between the magnetic force and the
direction of motion of the particle ; and in this case the
frequency will be the same as without the field. When,
however, the corpuscle vibrates in the plane at right angles
to the lines of magnetic force the frequency will be w +

i — if it goes round in one direction, and w — ^ — if
m m

it goes round in the other. Thus in the magnetic field

the corpuscles will vibrate with the three frequencies w,

TTp TTp

<a 4- i — , o) — J — ; one of these being the same as
m m

when it was undisturbed. Thus, in the spectroscope

there will be three lines instead of one, the middle line

being in the undisturbed position. If, however, we look at

the corpuscle in the direction of the magnetic force, since

the vibrations corresponding to the undisturbed position of

the lines are those in which the vibrations are along the

lines of magnetic force, and since a vibrating electrified

particle does not send out any light along the line of its

vibration, no light will come from the corpuscle to an eye

OBIGIN OF THE MASS OP THE COEPUSCLE. 39

situated along a line of magnetic force passing through the
corpuscle, so that in this case the central line will be absent,
while the two side lines which correspond to circular orbits
described by the corpuscle in opposite directions will give
rise to circularly polarised light. By finding the sense of
rotation of the light in the line whose frequency is greater
than the undisturbed light, it has been shown that the
light is due to a negatively electrified body. By measuring
the displacement of the lines we can determine the change

He

in frequency, i.e., J — , so that if H is known, ejm can be

III'

determined. In this way Zeeman has found the value of

ejin to be of the order lO*^, the same as that deduced by the

direct methods previously described. The values of ejm

got in this way are not the same for all lines of the spectra,

but when the lines are divided up into series, as in Paschen

and Eunge's method, the different lines in the same series

all give the same value of ejm.

The displacement of the lines produced by the magnetic
field is proportional to ejm, and thus for light due to the
oscillations of a corpuscle the displacement will be more
than a thousand times greater than that due to the vibra-
tion of any positive ion with which we are acquainted. It
requires very delicate apparatus to detect the displacement
when ejm is 10*^ : a displacement one-thousandth part of
this would be quite inappreciable by any means at present
at our disposal, hence we may conclude that the light in
any lines which show the Zeeman effect (and in line
spectra as distinct from band spectra, all lines do show this
effect to some extent) is due to the vibrations of corpuscles
and not of atoms.

The Zeeman effect is so important a method of finding
out something about the structure of the atom and the
nature of the vibrating systems in a luminous gas, that it
is desirable to consider a little more in detail the nature of
the conclusions to be drawn from this effect. In the first
place it is only a special type of vibration that will show
the Zeeman effect. The simple case we considered was

40 THE COKPUSCULAE THEORY OF MATTER.

when the corpuscle was attracted to (Fig. 14) by a force
proportional to OP; this force is the same in all directions,
so that if the corpuscle is displaced from O and then let go it
will vibrate in the same period in whatever direction it may
be displaced: such a corpuscle shows the Zeeman effect.
If, however, the force on P were different in different
directions so that the times of vibration of the corpuscle
depended on the direction in which it was displaced,
then the vibrations would not have shown this effect.
The influence of the magnetic force would have been of a
lower order altogether than in the preceding case. A single
particle placed in a field of force of the most general
character might vibrate with three different periods and
thus give out a spectrum containing three lines, but if such
a particle were placed in a magnetic field these lines would
not show the Zeeman effect ; all that the magnetic force

A B

0---0

FIG. 16.

could do would be to slightly alter the periods by an amount
infinitesimal in comparison with that observed in the
Zeeman effect. There could be no resolution of the lines
into triplets ; it is only in the special case when the periods
all become the same that the Zeeman effect occurs. We can
easily imagine cases in which some lines might show the
Zeeman effect, while others would not do so. Take the case
of two corpuscles A and B attracted to a point O (Fig. 16)
and repelling each other, they will settle into a position of
equilibrium when the repulsion between them balances the
attraction exerted by 0. In the most general case there
would be six different frequencies of vibration (each
corpuscle contributing three) arid none of these would
show the Zeeman effect. In the special case where the
force exerted by is the same in all directions, three of
these frequencies coincide, two others vanish, and there is
one remaining isolated. The spectrum is reduced to two

OKIGIN OF THE MASS OF THE CORPUSCLE. 41

lines ; one of these (that corresponding to the coalescence
of the three lines) would show the normal Zeeman effect
while the other would not show it at all. With more com-
plicated systems we might have several lines showing the
Zeeman effect accompanied by others which do not show it.
When more lines than one show the Zeeman effect, the
magnitude of the effect may differ from line to line. Thus,
take the case of four corpuscles mutually repelling each
other and attracted towards a point 0. In the most general
case this system would have twelve different frequencies, three
for each corpuscle, and as long as these remained different
none of them would show the Zeeman effect. If, however,
the force exerted by is the same in all directions, two sets
of three of these frequencies become equal, three frequencies
vanish, two others coincide, and one remains isolated ; the
twelve frequencies are now reduced to four, the two lines cor-
responding to the setsof three frequencies which had coalesced
will both show the Zeeman effect, but not to the same extent,
the alteration in frequency for one line being the normal

He
amount i — while for the other line it is only half that
m

amount. The other lines do not show the Zeeman effect.
The reader who is interested in this subject is referred for
other instances of systems illustrating this effect to a
paper by the writer in the Proceedings of the Cambridge
Philosophical Society, vol. xiii., p. 39.

It is remarkable that, as far as our knowledge extends, all
the lines in a line spectrum show the Zeeman effect. This
might arise from the vibrating systems being single
corpuscles, only influenced slightly, if at all, by neigh-
bouring corpuscles, or it might arise from the vibrations of
more complicated systems, provided the radiation corre-
sponding to frequencies which on the theory would not show
the Zeeman effect, has great diflSculty in leaving the
vibrating system. We have an example of the second
condition in the case of two corpuscles shown in Fig. 16 ;
the vibration which does not show the Zeeman effect is the
one when the middle point of A and B remains at rest

42 THE COEPUSCULAR THEORY OP MATTER.

and A and B are approaching or receding from it with
equal velocities ; thus the charged corpuscles are moving
with equal velocities in opposite directions and their effects,
at a distance from large compared with OA and OB will
neutralise each other. On the other hand, the vibrations
which show the Zeeman effect are those. in which A and B
are moving in the same direction, so that the effects due to
one will supplement those due to the other, and thus the
intensity of the radiation from this vibration will greatly
exceed that from the other ; thus this vibration might give
rise to visible radiation while the other did not. The
vibration of a system of corpuscles which produces the
greatest effect at a distance, is the one where all the
corpuscles move with the same speed and in the same
direction ; it can be easily shown that for this case the
effect of a magnetic field is to increase or diminish , all the

He

frequencies by the normal amount J —

A case in which the Zeeman effect might be abnormally
large is the following : — Suppose we have two corpuscles
A ,and B moving round the circumference of a circle with
constant angular velocity o), always keeping at opposite ends
of a diameter, then the frequency of the optical or magnetic
effect produced by this system is not co but 2 <i),for each particle
has only to go half way round the circumference to make the
state of the system recur. If now we place the system in a
magnetic field where the magnetic force is perpendicular to

the circle the angular velocity co will become o> + i — and

He

the frequency of the system 2 w + — , thus "the change m

the frequency is — , which is twice the normal effect.

m

CHAPTEE III.

PROPERTIES OF A CORPUSCLE.

Having demonstrated the existence of corpuscles, it will
be convenient for purposes of reference to summarise their
properties.

Magnetic Force due to Corpuscles.

A moving corpuscle produces around it a magnetic field.
If the corpuscle is moving in a straight line with a uniform
velocity v, which is small compared with the velocity of

FIG. 17.

light, it produces a magnetic field in which the lines of
magnetic force are circles having the line along which
the corpuscle is moving for their axis; the magni-

tude of the force at a point P is equal to r— ^ sin 0, where

e is the charge on the moving particle 0, and the
angle between OP and OX — the line along which the
corpuscle is moving. The direction of the force at P
(Fig. 17) is at right angles to the plane POX and down-
wards from the plane of the paper if the negatively charged
particle is moving in the direction OX, The magnetic
force thus vanishes along the line of motion of the particle
and is greatest in the plane through at right angles to

44 THE COEPUSCULAK THEOEY OF MATTEE.

the direction of motion ; the distribution of force is sym-
metrical with respect to this plane.

If the velocity of the uniformly moving particle is so
great that it is comparable with c the velocity of light, the
intensity of the magnetic force at P is represented by the
more complicated expression

(^ v^\ e V sin 6 o

The direction of the force is the same as before. The effect
of the greater velocity is to make the magnetic force
relatively weaker in the parts of the field near OX and
stronger in those near the equatorial plane, until when
the speed of the corpuscle is equal to that of light the
magnetic force is zero everywhere except in the equatorial
plane, where it is infinite.

Electric Field round the Moving Corpuscle.

The direction of the electric force at P is along OP^ and
whatever be the speed at which the corpuscle is moving,
the electric force E and the magnetic force // are connected
by the relation

c^ H = V E sin B ;

thus when the corpuscle is moving slowly

E = '''

r^

the same value as when the particle is at rest (remembering
that e is measured in electro-magnetic units).
When the corpuscle is moving more rapidly we have

E = (6-2 - V^) ^2 t

r2 (l — I2 «in^ ^)

and in this case the electric force is no longer uniformly
distributed, but is more intense towards the equatorial
regions than in the polar regions near OX. When the

PEOPEETIES OF A COEPUSCLE. 45

corpuscle moves with the velocity of light all the lines of
electric force are in the plane through at right angles to
OX.

When the corpuscle is moving uniformly the lines of force
are carried along as if they were rigidly attached to it, but
wlien the velocity of the corpuscle changes this is no longer
the case, and some very interesting phenomena occur. We
can illustrate this by considering what happens if a cor-

FIQ. 18.

puscle which has been moving uniformly is suddenly stopped.
Let us take the case when the velocity with which the par-
ticle is moving before it is stopped is small compared
with the velocity of light; then before the stoppage the
lines of force were uniformly distributed and were moving
forward with the velocity v. When the corpuscle is stopped,
the ends of the lines of force on the corpuscle will be
stopped also ; but fixing one end will not at once stop the
whole of the line of force, for the impulse which stops the
tube travels along the line of force with the velocity of
light, and thus takes a finite time to reach the outlying

46 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

parts of the tube. Hence when a time t has elapsed after
the stoppage, it is only the parts of the lines of force
which are inside a sphere whose radius is ct which have
been stopped. The lines of force outside this sphere
will be in the same position as if the corpuscle had
not been stopped, i.e., they will pass through O', the
position the corpuscle would have occupied at the time t if
the stoppage had not taken place. Thus the line of force
which, when the corpuscle was stopped was in the position
OQ will, at the time t be distorted in the way shown in
Fig 18. Inside the sphere of radius ct the line of force will
be at rest along OQ ; outside the sphere it will be moving
forward with the velocity r, and will pass through 0', the
point would have reached at the time ^ if it had not been
stopped. Since the line of force remains intact it must be
bent round at the surface of the sphere so that the portion
inside the sphere may be in connection with that outside.
Since the lines of force along the surface are tangential
there will be, over the surface of the sphere, a tangential
electric force. This tangential force will be on the surface
of a sphere of radius ct and will travel outwards with the
velocity of light. If the stoppage of the sphere took a
short time ir, then the tangential part of the lines of force
will be in the spherical shell between the spheres whose
radii are ct and c {t — ir), f being the time which has elapsed
since the stoppage began, aqd ^ — tt since it was completed.
This shell of thickness c-rr^ filled with tangential lines of
electric force, travels outwards with the velocity of light.
The electric force in the shell is very large compared with the
force in the same region before the shell is stopped. We can
prove that the magnitude of the force at a point P in the shell

C P 7) ^Ifh

is equal — s— > where 8 is the thickness of the shell,

Or ' o

and the angle POX, Before the corpuscle was stopped

the force was -— r, thus the ratio of the force after the

OP'^

V OP
stoppage to the force before is equal to — r- sin B. As S

PEOPEETIES OF A COEPUSCLE. 47

is very small compared with OP, this ratio is very large ;
thus the stoppage of the corpuscle causes a thin shell of
intense electric force to travel outwards with the velocity of
light. These pulses of intense electric force constitute, I
think, Eontgen rays, which are produced when cathode
rays are suddenly stopped by striking against a solid
obstacle. The electric force in the pulse is accompanied

by a magnetic force equal in magnitude to ^J^^ and at

right angles to the plane VOX, The energy in the pulse
due to this distribution of magnetic and electric force is

equal to f — - — ; it is thus greater when the thickness of the

o

pulse is small than when it is large. The thickness of the
pulse is, however, proportional to the abruptness with
which the corpuscle is stopped ; and as the energy in the
pulse is radiated away it follows that the more abruptly
the corpuscles are stopped the greater the amount of energy
radiated away as Eontgen rays. If the corpuscle is stopped
so abruptly that the thickness of the pulse is reduced to
the diameter of the corpuscle the whole of the energy in
the magnetic field round the corpuscle is radiated away.
If the corpuscle is stopped more slowly only a fraction of
this energy escapes as Eontgen rays.

Inside the shell, i.e., in the spac^ bounded on the out-
side by the sphere of radius OP ( = ci), there is no mag-
netic force, while outside the sphere whose radius is OP
the magnet force is the same as it would be if the particle
had not been stopped, i.e., at the point Q it is equal to

7y-?^^ sin <t>, where 0' is where would have been if the

corpuscle had gone on moving uniformly, and <^ is the angle
QO* X. The pulse in its outward passage wipes out, as
it were, the magnetic force from each place as it passes
over it.

We have seen that when the corpuscle is stopped there
is a pulse of strong electric and magnetic force produced
which carries energy away. It is not necessary that the

48 THE COEPUSCULAE THEOEY OF MATTEB.

corpuscle should be reduced to rest for this pulse to be
formed ; any change in the velocity will produce a similar
pulse, though the forces in the pulse will not be so intense
as when the stoppage is complete. Since any change in
the velocity produces this tangential electric field, such a
field is a necessary accompaniment of a corpuscle whose
motion is accelerated, and we can show that if when at the
particle has an acceleration/ along OX, then after a time t has
elapsed there will be at a point P distant ct from O a

6 f 8Vft

tangential electric force equal to V^p and a magnetic
force at right angles both to P and the electric force,

€ f SXtl

equal to i^ . The rate at which energy is being

radiated from the corpuscle has been shown by Larmor to
be equal to § — ^ ; thus a corpuscle whose velocity is
changing loses energy by radiation.

CHAPTEE IV.

CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION.

We now proceed to apply these properties of corpuscles
to the explanation of some physical phenomena ; the
first case we shall take is that of conduction of electricity
by metals.

On the corpuscular theory of electric conduction through
metals the electric current is carried by the drifting of
negatively electrified corpuscles against the current. Since
the corpuscles and not the atoms of the metal carry the
current, the passage of the current through the metal does
not imply the existence of any transport of these atoms
along the current ; this transport has often been looked for
but never detected. We shall consider two methods by
which this transport might be brought about.

In the first method we suppose that all the corpuscles
which take part in the conduction of electricity have got
into what may be called temperature equilibrium with
their surroundings, i.e., that they have made so many
collisions that their mean kinetic energy has become equal
to that of a molecule of a gas at the temperature of the
metal. This implies that the corpuscles are free not merely
at the instant the current is passing but that at this time
they have already been free for a time sufficiently long to
allow them to have made enough collisions to have got into
temperature equilibrium with the metal in which they are
moving. The corpuscles we consider are thus those
whose freedom is of long duration. On this view the drift
of the corpuscles which forms the current is brought about
by ' the direct action of the electric field on the free
corpuscles.

Second Method. — It is easy to see, however, that a

T.M. E

50 THE COEPUSCULAR THEORY OP MATTER.

current could be carried through the metal by corpuscles
which went straight out of one atom and lodged at their
first impact in another ; such corpuscles would not be free
in the sense in which the word was previously used and
would have no opportunities of getting into temperature
equilibrium with their surroundings. To see how conduc-
tion could be brought about by such corpuscles, we notice
that the liberation of corpuscles from the atoms must be
brought about by some process which depends upon the
proximity of the metallic atoms. We see this because the
ratio of the conductivity of a metal in a state of vapour to
the conductivity of the same metal when in the solid state
is exceedingly small compared with the ratio of the densities
in the two states. Some interesting experiments on this
point have been made by Strutt, who found that when mercury
was heated in a vessel to a red heat, so that the pressure
and density must have been exceedingly large, the con-
ductivity of the vapour was only about one-ten millionth of
the conductivity of solid mercury. If, however, corpuscles
readily leave one atom and pass into another when the atoms
of the metal are closely packed together, we can see how the
electricity could pass without any accumulation of free
corpuscles. For, to fix our ideas, imagine that the atoms
of the metal act on each other as if each atom were an
electric doublet, i.e., as if it had positive electricity on
one side and negative on another. A collection of such
atoms if pressed close together would exert considerable
force on each other, and the force exerted by an atom A
on another B, might cause a corpuscle to be torn out of B.
If this got free and knocked about for a considerable time
it would form one of the class of corpuscles previously con-
sidered, but even if it went straight from B into A it might
still help to carry the current. If the atoms were arranged
without any order, then, though there might be interchange
of corpuscles between neighbouring atoms, there would be no
flux of corpuscles in one direction rather than another, and
therefore no current. Suppose, however, that the atoms
get polarised under the action of an electric force, which

THEOEY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 51

force is, say, horizontal and from left to right, then the
atoms will have a tendency to arrange themselves so that
the negative ends are to the left, the positive ones to the
right. Consider two neighbouring atoms A and B (Fig. 19) :
if a corpuscle is dragged out of A into B it will start from
the negative end of A and go to the positive end of B ; there
will thus be more corpuscles going from right to left than
in any other direction ; this will give rise to a current from
left to right, i.e., in the direction of the electric force.

We shall develop the consequences of each of these
theories so as to get material by which they can be tested.

A piece of metal on the first of these theories contains a
large number of free corpuscles disposed through its volume.
These corpuscles can move freely between the atoms of the
metal just as the molecules of air move freely about in the

0©0©0®e©0©0®

^

FI^. 19.

interstices of a porous body. The corpuscles come into colli-
sion with the atoms of the metal and with each other and at
these impacts suffer changes in velocity and momentum;
in fact, these collisions play just the same part as the
collisions between molecules do in the kinetic theory of
gases. In that theory it is shown that the result of such
collisions is to produce a steady state in which the mean
kinetic energy of a molecule depends only upon the absolute
temperature : it is independent of the pressure or the nature
of the gas, thus it is the same for hydrogen as for air. We
may regard the corpuscles as being a very light gas, so that
the mean kinetic energy of the corpuscles will only depend
upon the temperature and will be the same as the mean
kinetic energy of a molecule of hydrogen at that tempera-
ture. As, however, the mass of a corpuscle is only about
1/1700 of that of an atom of hydrogen, and therefore only
about 1/3400 of that of a molecule of hydrogen, the mean

E 2

52 THE C0EPU8CULAB THEORY OF MATTEE.

value of the square of the velocity of a corpuscle must be
8400 times that of the same quantity for the molecule of
hydrogen at the same temperature. Thus the average velocity
of the corpuscle must be about 58 times that of a molecule
of hydrogen at the temperature of the metal in which the
molecules are situated. At 0° C. the mean velocity of the
hydrogen molecule is about 1*7 X l(fi cm/sec, hence the
average velocity of the corpuscles in a metal at this
temperature is about 10^ cm/sec, or approximately 60 miles
per sec. Though these corpuscles are charged, yet since as
many are moving in one direction as in the opposite, there
will be on the average no flow of electricity in the metal.
The case is, however, altered when an electric force acts
throughout the metal. Although the change produced in the
velocity of the corpuscles by this force is, in general, very
small compared with the average velocity of translation of the
corpuscles, yet it is in the same direction for all of them, and
produces a kind of wind causing the corpuscles to flow in the
opposite direction to the electric force (since the charge on
the corpuscle is negative), the velocity of the wind being the
velocity imparted to the corpuscles by the electric force.
If li is this velocity and n the number of corpuscles per unit
volume of the metal, the number of corpuscles which in one
second cross a unit area drawn at right angles to the electric
force is n u^ and if e is the charge on a corpuscle, the quantity
of electricity carried through this area per second isnue ; this
quantity is the intensity of electric current in the metal ; if
we denote it by i, we have the equation i = n u e. We now
proceed to find u in terms of X the electric force in the
metal. While the corpuscle is moving in a free path in the
interval between two collisions, the electric force acts upon it
and tends to make it move in the opposite direction to itself.
When, however, a collision occurs, the shock is so violent
that the corpuscle moves off in much the same way,
and with much the same velocity, as if it had not been
under the electric field. Thus the effect of the electric
field is, so to speak, undone at each collision; after the
collision the electric force has to begin again, and the

THEOEY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 53

velocity communicated by the electric field to the corpuscle
will be that which it gives to it during its free path. Jeans
has shown that there is a slight persistence of an effect
produced on a molecule after an encounter with another
molecule, that each collision does not, as it were, entirely
wipe out all the effects of the previous history of the
molecule. To calculate the amount of this persistence we
have to know the nature of the effect we call a collision ; in
our case the effect is not of importance. If m is the mass
of the corpuscle, the velocity the corpuscle owes to the
action of the electric force increases uniformly from zero at

the beginning of the free path to X — ^ at the end, t

m

being the time between two collisions; hence the mean
velocity due to the force is - XS t, and this is the velocity

given to the particles by the electric force. If we care
to take into account the persistence of the impression
produced by the electric force we can do so by introduc-
ing a factor /3 into the expression and saying that

the average velocity u due to the electric field is - ^S — t.

2 /n

Unless, however, we have a knowledge of the nature of the

collision between a corpuscle and the atom, all that we can

determine about ^ is that it is a quantity somewhat greater

than unity. Since w = - ^ — t, and i = n u e, we have
^^ 2 m

1 pXe^t

2 VI

Now unless the electric force is enormously large the
change in the velocity of the corpuscle due to the electric force
will be quite insignificant in comparison with v — the average
velocity of translation of the corpuscle. We may therefore put
t = k/v, where X is the mean free path of a corpuscle, hence

1 ^ Xe^ \ 1 r, Xe^ \ V

2 vh t' 2 m v^

Now lit v^ is twice the average kinetic energy of a

64 THE COEPUSCULAE THEORY OF MATTER.

corpuscle, and therefore twice the kinetic energy of a
molecule of hydrogen at the same temperature; m v^ is
thus equal to 2 a ^ where is the absolute temperature and
2a = 7-2x 10-1V273.
From the relation —

* = o ^ ^ 2- = -J -^'^^^ ^^

2 mv^ 4 a $

we see that the specific conductivity of the metal is equal
tofine^XvlAaO] thus the specific conductivity on this theory
is independent of the electric force X, so that Ohm's law is
true.

If the electric force were so large that the velocity
generated in a corpuscle during its free path were large
compared with the average velocity of a corpuscle, the
relation between current and electric force would take a
different form. In this case the velocity of the particle is
generated by the field, so that if w is this velocity then

- mw^=:Xe\orw=^ a/ — ; the average velocity

is one-half of this, i.e., U ^- — , and the current

t = n 6 \/ — Thus in this case the current, instead of

^ 2 m

being proportional to the electric force, would be propor-
tional to the square root of it, so that Ohm's law would no
longer hold. This state of affairs would, however, only
occur when the electric force was exceedingly large, too
large to be realised by any means we have at present at our
command. For it requires X 6 X to be large compared with
the mean kinetic energy of a corpuscle, which at 0° C.
is equal to 8*6 X 10" '^ Now e is 10'^, thus X A. must be large
compared with 3*6 x 10^. . We do not know the free path
of a corpuscle in a metal, but as the free path in air
whose density at atmospheric pressure is only "OOIS is only
10"*^ cms., the free path in a metal can hardly be greater
than 10~^ cms. Thus the value of X necessary to give to

THEORY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 55

the corpuscle an amount of kinetic energy large compared
with that it possesses in virtue of the temperature of the
metal, must be of the order 10^^ i.e., a million volts per
centimetre. We have no experimental evidence as to how
a conductor would behave under forces of this magnitude.

If we assume that X is of the order 10"'^ we can get an
estimate of n — the number of corpuscles in a cubic centi-
metre of the metal. Let us take for example silver, whose
specific conductivity is 1/1600 at 0° C. ; we have, using the
expression we have found for the conductivity —

1 P n e^ \v ^

1600 "" 4 ad '

if we puf e = lO'^o, X = lO'^, v = lO'', ^S = 1, 2 a ^ =
7-2 X 10-1^ we find 71 = 9 X lO^s.

Now, in a cubic centimetre of silver there are about
1*6 X 10^ atoms of silver, and thus from this very rough
estimate we conclude that even in a good conductor like
silver the number of corpuscles is a quantity comparable
with the number of atoms.

If the carriers instead of being corpuscles were bodies
with a greater mass the number of carriers would be greater
than that just found. For we see from the preceding
formula that if the carriers are in temperature equilibrium
with the metal n \v must be constant if the conductivity is
given. Hence if the mass of the carriers were much greater
than that of a corpuscle and therefore i? and X much smaller,
n would have to be much larger, that is, the number of
carriers in silver would have to be much greater than the
number of atoms of silver, a result which shows that the
mass of a carrier cannot be comparable with that of an atom.

Comparison op the Thermal with the Electrical

Conductivity.

If one part of the metal is at a higher temperature than
another, the average kinetic energy of the corpuscles in
the hot parts will be greater than that in the cold. In
consequence of the collisions which they make with the atoms

56 THE COEPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

of the metal, resulting in alterations in the energy, the cor-
puscles will carry heat from the hot to the cold parts of the
metal ; thus a part at least of the conduction of heat through
the metal will be due to the corpuscles. If we assume that the
whole of the conduction arises in this way, we can find an
expression for the thermal conductivity in terms of the
quantities which express the electrical conductivity. It is
proved in treatises on the kinetic theory of gases that k the
thermal conductivity of a gas is given by the expression —

k = ^ n Xv a

(see Jean's " Kinetic Theory of Gases," p. 259). Here k is
measured in mechanical units, and the effect of persistence
of the velocities after the collisions has been neglected.
Hence to compare k with c the electrical conductivity we
must in the expression for the latter quantity put )8 = 1 ;

doing this, we obtain —

nkv e^

c =

4ae

hence— , / 4 , a?

"I' - 8 ^-

Thus neither n nor X, the quantities which vary from
metal to metal, appears in the expression for c/A;, so that the
theory of corpuscular conduction leads to the conclusion
that the ratio of the electrical to the thermal conductivity
should be the same for all metals and should vary inversely
as the absolute temperature of the metals.

We can calculate the numerical value of the ratio of the
two conductivities on the preceding theory as follows : Up is
the pressure of a gas in which there are n molecules per
cubic centimetre,.^ the absolute temperature, then —

p =: ^ a . n;

hence — a __ 3 p

e 2 n e'

Now e is the charge on an atom of hydrogen, and if n is
the number of hydrogen molecules in a cubic centimetre of
gas at a pressure of one atmosphere (i.e., 10® dynes), and

THEORY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 57

at 0° C, we have, since one electromagnetic unit of
electricity liberates 1*2 cubic centimetres of hydrogen at
this pressure and temperature —

hence at 0° C. —

2-4 ne = 1;

aO

= 3-6 X 10«,

so that at this temperature —

*^ = _^ f^ = 6-3 X 10^^ in absolute measure.
c 3 e^ 278

The following are the values of k/c for a large number of
metals as determined by Jaeger and Diesselhorst in their
most valuable paper on this subject : —

Materi&l.

Thermal conductivity.

Temperature coefficient

■ ■■ ** V^ ' li ASS A •

Electrical conductivity.

of this ratio.

At 18* C.

Per cent.

Copper, commercial

6-76 X 10'"

Copper (1), pure

6-65 X 10^"

0-89

Copper (2), pure

6-71 X W

0-39

Silver, pure

6-86 X 10^"

0-37

Gold(l)

7-27 X 10">

0-86

Gold (2), pure

7-09 X lO^"

0-37

Nickel

6-99 X IQi"

0-39

2jinc (1)

7-05 X 10"

0-38

Zinc (2), pure

6-72 X 10"

0-88

Cadmium, pure

7-06 X 10"

0-37

Lead, pure

7-15 X 10"

0-40

Tin, pure

7-86 X 10"

0-34

Aluminium

6-86 X 10"

0-43

Platinum (1)

7-76 X 10^°

Platinum (2), pure

7-58 X 10"

0-46

Palladium

7-64 X 10"

0-46

Iron (1)

8-02 X 10"

0-48

Iron (2)

8-38 X 10"

0-44

Steel

9-08 X 10"

0-85

Bismuth

9-64 X 10"

0-15

Constantan (60 Cu 40 Ni)

11-06 X 10"

0-28

Manganine

(84 Cu 4 Ni 12 Mn)

9-14 X 10"

0-27

58 . THE COEPUSCULAK THEORY OP MATTER.

It will be seen that the observed values of the ratios of the
thermal and electrical conductivities of many metals agree
closely with the result deduced from theory, while others
show considerable deviations. Again, the temperature
coefficient of this ratio is for many metals in agreement
with the theory. On the theory the ratio is proportional
to the absolute temperature ; this gives a temperature
coefficient of '366 per cent., and we see that for many
metals the temperature coefficient is of this or^er.

In the case of alloys the ratio of the thermal to the

0.08

10

80 90 100

20 30 40 so 60 70
Percentage oF Bismuth

FIG. 20.

electrical conductivity is not nearly so constant as it is for
pure metals. Even with alloys, however, any considerable
variation in the electrical conductivity is accompanied by a
corresponding variation in the thermal conductivity ; this is
illustrated by the curves given in Fig. 20, taken from a paper
by Schulze {Ann. der Phy,, ix., p. 584), and which repre-
sent the variations in both the electrical and thermal con-
ductivities of alloys of bismuth and lead with the percentage
amount of bismuth in the alloy. It will be noticed that the
two curves are approximately parallel and have their
minimum ordinate at about the same place. As a rule,

THEORY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 59

although there are some exceptions, the ratio of the thermal
to the electrical conductivity is larger for alloys than for
pure metals. This and many other properties of conduc-
tion of electricity through alloys can be explained by some
considerations given by Lord Rayleigh {Nature, LIV., p. 154,
" Collected Works,'* vol. iv., p. 232). Lord Rayleigh points
out that in the case of a mixture of metals there is,
owing to their thermo-electric properties, a source of
something which cannot be distinguished by experiments
from resistance, which is absent when the metals are pure.
To see this, let us suppose that the mixed metals are
arranged in thin layers, the adjacent layers being of
different metals, and that the current passes through the
body at right angles to the faces of the layer. Now when
a current of electricity passes across the junction of two
metals Peltier showed that the junction was heated if the
current passed one way, cooled if it passed the opposite
way, and that the rate of heat production or absorption was
proportional to the current passing across the junction.
Thus, where the current passes through the system of
alternate layers of the two metals, one face of each layer
will be cooled and the other heated, and thus in the pile
of layers differences of temperature proportional to the
current will be established. These will set up a
thermoelectric force, tending to oppose the current,
proportional to the intensity of the current. Such
a force would produce exactly the same effect as a
resistance. Thus in a mixture of metals there is, in
addition to the resistance, a * false resistance ' due to thermo-
electric causes which is absent in the case of pure metals.
This false resistance being superposed on the other
resistance makes the electrical resistance of alloys greater
than the value indicated by the preceding theory. This
result gives an explanation of the fact that the ratio of the
thermal to the electrical resistance is greater for alloys than
it is for pure metals.

The experiments of Dewar and Fleming on the effect of
very low temperatures on the resistance of pure metals and

60 THE COEPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

alloys show that there is a fundamental difference between
the resistances of pure metals and mixtures, for while the
resistance of pure metals diminishes uniformly as the
temperature diminishes and would apparently vanish not
far from the absolute zero of temperature, the resistance of
alloys gives no indication of disappearing at these very low
temperatures, but apparently tends to a finite limit.

The electrical conductivity of a metal is proportional to n
the number of free corpuscles per unit volume. Now, since
a free corpuscle will continually be getting caught by and
attached to an atom, the corpuscles, when the metal is in a
steady state, must be in statical equilibrium ; the number
of fresh corpuscles produced in unit time being equal to the
number which disappear by re-combination with the atoms
in the same time. We should expect the number of
re-combinations in unit time to be proportional to the
number of collisions in that time, i.e., to njr ; where r is
the interval between two collisions ; t is equal to Xjv where
A is the free path and v the velocity of the corpuscle.
Hence the number of re-combinations in unit time will be

71 V

equal to y ^ where y represents the proportion between

the number of collisions which result in re-combination and
the whole number of collisions. If q is the number of
corpuscles produced per cubic centimetre per second, we
have when there is statical equilibrium —

n V

Thus c the electrical conductivity of a metal is expressed
by the equation —

4 y aS '

For most pure metals the conductivity is inversely pro-
portional to the absolute temperature 0, hence we conclude
that q A2 must be independent of the temperature. Now
we should not expect X to vary more rapidly with the
temperature than the distance between two molecules, a

THEOEY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 61

quantity whose variation with the temperature is of the
same order as that of the linear dimensions of the body, and
therefore represented by the coefl&cient of thermal expansion,
a very small quantity ; thus, since q >? is independent of
the temperature, and >? only varies slowly with the
temperature, the variations of q with temperature can
only be slight, hence we conclude that the dissociation of
the atom which produces the corpuscles cannot, to any
considerable extent be the effect of temperature.

We should expect to have fewer free corpuscles and
therefore smaller conductivity in a salt of the metal than
in the metal itself. For in the salt the atoms of the metal
are all positively electrified and have already lost corpuscles,
which have found a permanent home on the atoms of the
electro-negative element. From the positively electrified
metal atoms corpuscles will find it difficult to escape, and
the rate of production of free corpuscles will be very much
lower than in the pure metal, where in addition to positively
electrified atoms neutral and negatively electrified atoms of
the metal are present.

LoRENTz Theory op Eadiation.

Badiation of heat may be produced by the impact of
corpuscles. When a corpuscle comes into collision with an
atom it experiences rapid changes in its velocity, and
therefore will, as explained on p. 46, emit pulses of intense
electric and magnetic force ; the thickness of these pulses
will be the distance traversed by light during the time
occupied by a collision. Thus, if we consider any atom of
the metal, it will be from time to time, as the corpuscles
strike against it, the centre of pulses of intense electric and
magnetic force. These forces at a point near the atom
will vary in a very abrupt manner. A pulse of intense
electric force, lasting for a very short time, will pass over
the point, then there will be an interval in which the
electric force disappears, and again, after the space of time
between two collisions, another intense pulse will pass over

62 THE COEPUSCULAR THEORY OP MATTER.

the point. Now though the electric force jumps about in
this abrupt way, we know by the theorem due to Fourier
that it can be represented as the sum of a number of terms,
each of which is of the form cos (pt + e) where t represents
the time. Each of these terms represents a harmonic wave
of electric force, and by the electro-magnetic theory of light
a harmonic wave of electric force is a wave of light or radiant
heat. Thus we can represent the irregular, jerky electric
field produced by the collision as arising from the super-
position of a number of waves of light or radiant heat, and
if we can calculate the amplitude of vibration of the dis-
turbance of any period, we can calculate at once the energy
in the light of this period emitted by one moIecule,^ and
therefore, by summation, by the metal.

Of the whole group of waves which represent the electric
field due to the collisions, Lorentz has shown how to calculate
the amplitudes of those whose wave length is very large
indeed compared with the free path of the corpuscles, and
has shown that the energy in the vibrations whose fre-
quency is between q and Bq given out per second per unit
of area of a plate where thickness is A is equal to —

A q^ dq . « x

€ represents the velocity of light, e the charge on the
corpuscle, \ the mean free path of a corpuscle, and v its
mean velocity of translation. This represents the rate at
which the body emits energy. To find the amount of
energy of this frequency present in the body when the
radiation is in a steady state, we must take into account the
absorption of this energy in its course through the body.
For imagine a body built up of piles of parallel plates;
then if there were no absorption the energy emitted by the
most distant portions would reach any point Q, and if the
size of the body were infinite the amount of energy per unit
volume at Q would be infinite also. If, however, there was
strong absorption, so that the radiation was practically all
absorbed in the space of one millimetre, then it is evident

THEOEY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 63

that the portions of the body whose distance from Q is more
than one millimetre will not send any energy to Q, and how-
ever large the body may be the energy at Q will be finite.
When the energy in the body has settled down into a steady
state, the energy given out by any portion must be equal to
the amount acquired by absorption. This principle enables
us to find the amount of energy per unit volume of the body
when the radiation is in a steady state. The absorption of
these very long waves in a conductor is due to the same
cause as the production of heat in the conductor when an
electric current passes through it, since these waves are made
up of electric and magnetic forces. When an electric force X
acts on a conductor and produces an electric current whose
intensity is i, the rate at which energy is absorbed per unit
volume is Xi, or if cr is the specific resistance of tlie con-
ductor the rate at which energy is absorbed is equal to X^/cr,
since a-i = X. We must express this in terms of E the energy
per unit volume in the conductor. One half of this energy
is due to the electric field, the other half to the magnetic
field which accompanies it; the energy per unit volume due

X^
to the electric field is - — j, c being the velocity of light

X^
through the medium, hence E = j— ^, and X^=^4ir c^ E,

hence X^/<r the rate at which energy is absorbed per unit
volume is equal to —

4 wc^E

cr

and the rate per unit area of a plate of thickness A is —

or

Now in a steady state the energy emitted is equal to the
energy absorbed; the expression for the rate at which
energy is emitted is given on p. 62 ; equating this to the
rate at which the energy is absorbed, we have —

o- O ir^ C

64 THE C0RPU8CULAK THEORY OF MATTER.

but (see p. 56) —

1 e^\nv

"^ ~iae
when B is the absolute temperature. Substituting this
value for l/o-, equation (1) becomes —

AaB 6^C

The quantities n and A. which differentiate one substance
from another occur in the same form on both sides of the
equation : one side expresses the absorption, the other the
radiation, and we see that the ratio of the two is inde-
pendent of the nature of the substance. Hence this view
of radiation would explain Kirchhoflf^s law that good radia-
tors are also good absorbers. Dividing out the common
factors from equation (2), we get —

Yp 2 a ^ 2 J

or if A. is the wave length of the vibration whose frequency
is q we have, since —

3 = 2.-,

and this is the expression for the amount of energy per
unit volume whose wave length is between X and d X when
the absolute temperature is 0. This expression does not
involve any constant which depends upon the nature of
the body, hence it would be the same at the same tempera-
ture for all bodies. The expression for.jB is of the type

f {^ 0) --g^ , where / (A 6) denotes a function of X and 6. The

A.

researches of Wien have shown that it is only a formula of
this type which fits in with the values of the radiation
observed by him and others in experiments with bodies at
different temperatures. The preceding expression is of the
type suggested by Lord Eayleigh (PhiL Mag., June, 1900).
Since a represents the mean kinetic energy of any gas

THEORY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 65

at the absolute temperature 6^ we can calculate the value
of a, and thus arrive at a numerical estimate of the amount
of radiation given by the preceding expression. If we find
this coincides with the observed amount it will be a strong
confirmation of the theory.

By the kinetic theory of gases, if jp is the pressure,
N the number of molecules per unit volume of the gas —

v =. ~ N mv^y

3 ^^

hence ^ mv^, the mean kinetic energy of a particle, is equal
to 3 pI2 Ny but ^ m v^ = aO, hence —

_ 3p

aO =

2N

Now at the pressure of 760 millimetres of mercury and
a temperature of 0° C, p = 10«, = 273, and iV= 4 X 10^^
hence a = 1*32 X 10"^^ Assuming that the radiation is
expressed by equation (1), we can use the equation if we
know the amount of radiation to find a, and Lorentz finds
from the experiments made by Lummer and Pringsheim and
Kurlbaum on the amount of radiation given out by hot bodies
that a = 1'2 X 10"^^. Thus the argument between theory
and the results of experiment is very satisfactory and gives
us considerable confidence in the truth of the theory. It
ought, however, to be pointed out that we should get the
same expression for the radiant energy E, whatever may
be the mass or charge of the moving electrified bodies,
which are supposed to generate this energy by their col-
lisions and absorb it by their motion in the electric field,
provided that the mean kinetic energy of these bodies had the
same value as that we have assumed for the corpuscles.

The energy calculated in this way by Lorentz is only a
part of the energy radiated in consequence of the collisions.
It is that part which, when the electric forces produced by
the collisions is expressed by Fourier's method as the sum
of a number of harmonic components, corresponds to the
part of the disturbance which can be expressed by the

T.M. F

66 THE COEPUSCULAE THEORY OF MATTER.

terms with exceedingly long wave lengths. But the dis-
turbance, as we have seen, consists in a succession of
exceedingly thin pulses, the thickness of the pulse being
comparable with the distance passed over by light in the
time occupied by a collision, while the part calculated by
Lorentz is only the part which can be represented by
harmonic terms whose wave length is long compared with
the distance passed over by light, not in the short space
occupied by a collision, but in the much longer interval
which elapses between two collisions. It is evident that
Lorentz' 8 investigation leaves out of consideration a large
part of the radiation, and that this part, arising from the
accumulation of a number of thin pulses, will be analogous
to the Rontgen rays — that, in fact, they will be Eontgen
rays, mainly of a very absorbable type, since the corpuscles
which produce them are moving much more slowly than
the cathode rays in the ordinary Eontgen ray bulb. In
fact, a mathematical investigation leads us to the con-
clusion that, of the energy radiated at a collision, there
will be more of this type than the long wave type calculated
by Lorentz. The character of the radiation will depend
upon the time taken by a collision between the corpuscle
and a molecule, if this time is so short that the distance
travelled by light during the collision is very small
compared with the wave length of light in the visible part
of the spectrum, then the resulting radiation will be of the
Eontgen ray type and not visible light. If, however, the
time of collision is so prolonged that light during this time
can travel over a distance comparable with the wave length
of light in the visible part of the spectrum, then the
resulting radiation will be visible light, and the maximum
intensity of this light will be in that part of the spectrum
where the wave length is comparable with the distance
travelled by light during a collision, i.e., when the period
of vibration of the light is comparable with the time of
a collision. The intensity of light having smaller wave
lengths than this will rapidly fall off as the wave length
diminishes. Thus in the case of these prolonged collisions

THEOKY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 67

the radiation would be ordinary light, the intensity rising
to a maximum at a particular part of the spectrum and
then diminishing rapidly in the region of smaller wave
lengths. These are characteristic properties of the radiation
emitted by a black body. We know, however, the character
of the radiation from such a body depends only upon the
temperature and not at all upon the nature of the body,
thus the colour of the light at which the intensity of the
radiation is a maximum depends only on the temperature
moving towards the blue end of the spectrum as the
temperature is increased. On the theory that this radiation
arises from the collision of corpuscles the wave length
where the intensity of the radiation is a maximum depends
on the duration of the collision ; hence, if the radiation
from hot substances arises in the way we have supposed,
the duration of a collision between a corpuscle and a
molecule of the substance must be independent of the
nature of the substance and depend only upon the
temperature, and the higher the temperature the shorter
must be the duration of the collision.

By the application of the Second Law of Thermodynamics
it has been shown that when the body is at the absolute
temperature the amount of energy in the part of the
spectrum comprised between wave lengths X and A + d A.
must be of the form A."^ <^ (A. ^) d \; where <^ is a function
which cannot be determined by thermodynamical principles
alone. The mathematical theory of the production of
radiation by collisions shows that this energy is given by

an expression of the form X-^ F ( tt^t) ^ ^ where T is

the duration of the collision V the velocity of light and
F represents a function whose form depends upon the
nature of the forces exerted during the collision. Comparing
these two expressions we see that T must be conversely
proportional to 0, that is, inversely proportional to the
square of the velocity of the corpuscles. The velocity of
corpuscles at 0° C. when in temperature equilibrium with
their surroundings is about 10'' cm./sec, the wave length at

F 2

68 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

which the intensity is greatest at 0° C. is about 10"^ cm.
In a Rontgen ray bulb giving out hard rays the velocity of
the corpuscles may be about 10^° cm./sec, or 10^ times the
velocity of those in the metal ; hence, if the law of duration
of impacts is true, the radiation produced by the impact of
the corpuscles in the tube should be a maximum for a wave
length of 10~^ll(fi or 10"® cm., as this is of the same order
as the thickness of a pulse of very penetrating Rontgen
radiation ; this test, as far as it goes, confirms the law of
the duration of collisions.

The Effect of a Magnetic Field on the Flow of an
Electric Current: The "Hall Effect."

Hall found that the lines of flow of an electric current
through a metallic conductor are distorted when the con-
ductor is placed in a magnetic field. The distortion is of
the character which would be produced if an additional
electromotive force were to act at right angles to the
original one producing the current, and also at right
angles to the magnetic force. Thus if a horizontal
electromotive force producing a current from right to left
acts on a thin piece of metal in the plane of the paper, if
the plate is placed in a magnetic field whose lines of force
are at right angles to the plane of the paper and down-
wards, the current is distorted as if a small vertical electro-
motive force in the plane of the paper acted upon the
metal. In some metals — for example, bismuth and silver —
this force would be vertically upwards ; in others, such as
iron, cobalt, and tellurium, the force would be vertically
downwards. In some alloys it is said that the force is in
one direction for small magnetic forces and in the opposite
direction for large ones. In many cases it is not propor-
tional to the magnetic force. The theory of electric con-
duction we have been considering would indicate a
distortion of the lines of flow of a current by a magnetic
field, as the following considerations will show.

Suppose a current of electricity flows from right to
left through the plate. This, on the view of the

THEORY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 69

current previously taken, indicates that the negative cor-
puscles have, on the average, a finite velocity from left to
right. Let the average value of this velocity of drift of the
negative corpuscles be u. If a magnetic force downwards
at right angles to the plate acts on these corpuscles, they
will be acted on by a vertically upward force in the plane
of the paper, equal numerically to Heu, where e is the
magnitude of the charge on the corpuscle, and H is the
intensity of the magnetic force. The force on the corpuscle
is the same as if there were an electromotive force acting
vertically downwards in the plane of the paper. Thus, there
would be a distortion of the lines of flow of the same sign
and character as the Hall effect in bismuth. If, however,
this were a complete representation of the action of the
magnetic field on the current, the Hall effect would be of
the same sign — the sign it has for bismuth — in all metals,
and would always be proportional to the magnetic force ;
neither of these statements is true. Inasmuch as the Hall
effect would be of the opposite sign, if the carriers of the
electricity through the metal were positively charged par-
ticles instead of negatively charged ones, some physicists,
in order to explain the existence of Hall effects of opposite
signs, have assumed that electricity is carried through metals
by two types of carriers, one positively the other negatively
electrified; in some metals the negative carriers are pre-
dominant, in others the positive. There are, I think, two
very serious objections to this assumption. In the first
place we have no evidence of the existence of positively
electrified particles able to thread their way with facility
through metals, and in the second place the assumption
does not explain the various phenomena connected with the
Hall effect. It would indeed explain the existence of Hall
effects of different signs, but on this hypothesis the amount
of the Hall effect would be proportional to the magnetic
force, which is by no means the case for all substances.

The complexity of the laws of the Hall effect suggests
that it is due to several causes, but we can, without calling
in the aid of positively charged carriers of electricity, see

70 THE CORPUSCULAE THEORY OF MATTER.

other sources for the variation in sign, and the failure to
be directly proportional to the magnetic force. In the pre-
ceding investigation we have considered merely the effect of
the magnetic force on the particle during its free path, and
have neglected any influence of the magnetic force on the
collisions between the corpuscles and the molecules.
We can, however, easily see how a magnetic field might
make suitable molecules arrange themselves so that they
produce a rotatory effect on the motion of a corpuscle when
the corpuscle came into collision with the molecule, and
that the sign of this effect might in some cases be the same
as, in others opposite to, the rotation produced by the
magnetic field when the corpuscle was travelling over its
free path. Thus — to take a simple instance — imagine a body
whose molecules are little magnets ; then if the body is
placed in a magnetic field such that the lines of force are
vertical and downwards, the molecules of the body will
arrange themselves so that their axes tend to be vertical,
the negative poles being at the top, the positive at the
bottom. Then close to the magnet, in the region between
its poles, the lines of force due to the magnet will be
in the opposite direction to those due to the magnetic
field, and the intensity of the force close in to the magnet
may be very much greater than that of the external field.
In this case when the corpuscle came into collision with a
molecule the velocity would be rotated in the opposite
direction to its rotation by the magnetic field before it came
into collision with the magnet, i.e., while it was travelling
over its mean free path. In this case the expression for
the Hall effect would consist of two terms, one arising from
the free path, the other from the collisions, and these terms
would be of opposite signs. If the molecules were small
portions of a diamagnetic substance it is easy to see that
the effect due to the collisions would be of the same sign as
that due to the free path. It is perhaps worthy of note
that, with the exception of tellurium, which has quite an
abnormal value, the substance for which the Hall effect has
the largest negative value, calling the free path effect

THEORY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 71

positive, is iron. It woald be interesting to see if in
exceedingly strong magnetic fields, much stronger than those
required to saturate the iron, the Hall effect would change
sign.

We must, however, I think, be careful not to import from
the kinetic theory of gases ideas about the free paths of
corpuscles which may not be applicable in the case of
metals. The study of metals by means of micro-photo-
graphy has shown that their structure is extremely complex.
This is illustrated by Fig. 21, which represents the
appearance under the microscope of a piece of cadmiun

FIG. 21.

when polished and stained. A piece of metal apparently
consists of an assemblage of a vast number of small crystals,
and the appearance of the metal when strained past the limit
of perfect elasticity shows that under strain these crystals
can slip past each other. The structure of a piece of metal
is thus quite distinct, from that of a gas, where the particles
are distributed at equally spaced intervals. In a metal, on
the other hand, it would seem that the molecules of the
metal are collected in clusters, each cluster containing
several molecules, and that the metal is built up of aggre-
gates of such clusters. The collisions which determine the
free path of a corpuscle may be with these clusters and not

72 THE COEPUSCULAE THEOEY OF MATTEE.

with the individual molecules, and if this were so, large
variations in the free path might be brought about by
variations in the number of molecules in each cluster with-
out any variation of corresponding magnitude in the density
of the metal. Thus, to take a simple case, suppose that the
clusters are little spheres, and let us compare the free paths of
a corpuscle (1) when there are n spheres of radius a per unit
volume ; and (2) when there are m spheres of radius b, the
amount of matter per unit volume being the same in the
two cases, so that w a^ = rw b\ If \i and A, are respectively
the free paths in the two cases, then —

Ai := 5 and Ag =

and since n a^ = m 6® we have —

Xi/Aa = a/b.

So that in this case the free path would be proportional
to the radius of the cluster. Thus the bigger the cluster
the longer the free path. It follows that if a rise in tem-
perature caused the clusters to break up to some extent and
become smaller, it would produce a considerable diminution
in the free path of a corpuscle without any marked change
in the density, whereas in a gas a rise in temperature unac-
companied by a change in density would, if the collisions
between the molecules of a gas were like those between
hard elastic spheres, produce no change in the free path.
If the theory of conduction of electricity by corpuscles in
temperature equilibrium with their surroundings is true, we
must, I think, suppose that there is large variation of the
free path with the temperature and with the nature of the
metal. We shall see Irom the consideration of the Peltier
effect that the number of free corpuscles per unit volume
does not, in general, vary greatly from one metal to another;
so that the very large variations in the electrical resistance
of metals must arise much more from variations in the free
paths of the corpuscles than from variations in the number
of corpuscles. Hence the ratio of the free paths of the

THEOEY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 73

corpuscles will be of the same order as the ratio of their
conductivities for electricity. Now, if the free paths of the
corpuscles in the metal were determined by the ^ame con-
siderations as in a gas, i.e., if A. were to be equal to N/ir o?,
N being the number of molecules per unit volume, and
a the radius of the molecules, we can show that the varia-
tions in A would not be nearly large enough to explain the
variation in the electrical conductivity. For we can deter-
mine N by dividing the density of the metal by its atomic
weight, and we can get some information as to the value of
a^ from the values of the refractive indices of compounds of
the different metals. Doing this, we find that the variations
in 1/A^ TT a^ are not nearly so large as the variations in the
electric conductivity, and that there is little, if any,
correspondence between these quantities. Moreover, if
the theory we are discussing is correct there must not
merely be large variations in the value of A for the different
metals, but even in the same metal at different tempera-
tures. This follows from the consideration of the Thomson
effect, i.e.y the convection of heat by an electric current flowing
along an unequally heated conductor.

Peltier Difference of Potential between Metals.

Suppose that we place two metals A and B, which are at
the same temperature, in contact, and that the pressure of
the corpuscles (i.e., J N m v^ where N is the number of
corpuscles in unit volume, m the mass, v the mean velocity
of the corpuscles) in A is greater than that in B. Then cor-
puscles will flow from A to B ; but as these corpuscles are
negatively charged, the flow of corpuscles will charge B
negatively and A positively. The attraction of the positive
electricity in A will tend to prevent the corpuscles escaping
from it, and the flow will cease when the attraction of the
positive electricity in A and the repulsion of the negative in
B just balances the effect of the difference in pressure. The
positive electrification in A and the negative in B will be
close to the surface of separation, and these two electrifications

74 THE COEPUSCULAE THEOEY OF MATTEE.

will produce a difference in electric potential between A and
B, which we can calculate in the following way.

Let us suppose that there is a thin layer between the
substances A B, in which the transition from A to B takes
place gradually. Let N be the number of corpuscles
per unit volume at a point distant x from one of the
boundaries of this layer, p the pressure of the corpuscles
at this point, and X the electric force. Then if e is the
charge on a corpuscle, the force acting on the corpuscles
per unit volume is X Ne. This, when there is equilibrium,
must be balanced by the force arising from the variation
in pressure as we pass from one side of the layer to the

other. The force due to the pressure is j^, hence —

^ = XNe.
a X

But if is the absolute temperature —

hence, if the temperature is constant across the layer, we

have —

2 .1 dN _ ^^

8 N ax

Integrating both sides of this equation across the layer,

we get —

2 a ^ , Nl jr

- • — lo^ — = \ .
8 e "iVa '

where V is the difference in potential between the two sides

of the layer and N^ and N^ are the numbers of corpuscles per

unit volume in A and B respectively. Thus in crossing

the junction of two metals there will, unless the number of

corpuscles in the two metals is the same, be a finite change

in potential. Now f a Oje =pjNe, and since it is the same

for all gases we may take the case of hydrogen at 0° C.

and atmospheric pressure for which p = 10^, and Ne = '41 ;

thus at 0^ C. f a 6le = 2*5 X 10*^, so that in volts—

F=l--^log^^ (1)

40 273 ^ Ni ^ '

THEORY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 75

The potential differences which arise in this way are not
comparable with the volta differences of potential between
metals in contact, for to produce a potential difference of
one volt, log Ni/N^ = 40, or NJN^ = 2-36 X 10"— a result
quite incompatible with the comparative values of the
resistances of two such metals as copper and zinc. Com-
paratively small variations in the number of corpuscles
would, however, produce potential differences quite com-
parable with those measured by the Peltier effect, i.e., the
heating or cooling of the junction of two metals when an
electric current passes across them. Thus, to take a case
where the Peltier effect is exceptionally large, that of
antimony and bismuth, whose F at 0° C. is about 1/30 of
a volt, we see from equation (1) that for these metals
log {NJN^ = 1-33, or nJn^ = 3-8. Thus, if the number of
corpuscles in the unit volume of antimony were about
four times that in bismuth we should, on this theory, get
Peltier effects of about the right amount. Since the Peltier
effect for antimony and bismuth is very much larger than
that for most pairs of metals, we see that the theory
indicates that in general the number of free corpuscles
per unit volume does not vary much from one metal to
another. From the Peltier effects of each metal with a
standard metal we can get the ratio of the number of
corpuscles in these metals to the number in the standard
metal. Having done this, since at the same temperature
the conductivity of the metals is proportional to the pro-
duct of the number of corpuscles per unit volume and the
free path of a corpuscle in the metal, we can get the ratio
of the free paths in the different metals, and we can then
see whether the free paths obtained in this way can be
reconciled with the other properties of the metals. The
result of such a comparison leads, I think, to the con-
clusion that the mechanism by which we have supposed
the electric current to be conveyed through a conductor is
at most only a part and not the whole of the process of
metallic conduction. One reason for this conclusion is the
large changes which take place in the electrical resistance

76 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

of some metals at fusion, changes which do not seem to be
accompanied by any corresponding change in their thermo-
electric quality. Thus the conductivities of tin, zinc and
lead at their melting points are, when the metals are in the
solid state, about twice what they are in the liquid. These
metals all contract on solidification, so that the average
distance between the molecules is greater in the liquid
than in the solid state. The electrical conductivity varies
as the product of N the number of corpuscles per unit
volume, and X the free path of a corpuscle. Since the
distance between the molecules is greater in the liquid
than in the solid state, we should expect the free path of
the corpuscles to be greater, but if A"i Aj and N^ K are
respectively the values of A'^ A. in the solid and liquid states,
A^i Ai = 2 A^a ^2, and since A, is greater than Aj, A\ must be
greater than 2 A^2. A reference to equation (1) will show
that this involves a Peltier effect between the solid and the
liquid metal of about half ihe magnitude of that between
bismuth and antimony, and thus, as these effects go,
exceedingly large. Now Fitzgerald, Minarelli and Ober-
meyer, as quoted by G. Wiedemann, *'Elektricitat," ii., p. 289,
could detect no sudden change in thermo-electric circuits
with these metals when they passed from the solid to the
liquid state, whereas if the number of free corpuscles had
diminished to one half, the effect would have been very
conspicuous. There is thus a discrepancy between the
results of the determination of the relative number of
corpuscles in the two states by data derived (1) from
thermo-electric phenomena; (2) from their electric resistance.
This discrepancy is so large that it is impossible to suppose
it is due to any errors in the data derived from experiment.

The Thomson Effect.

Lord Kelvin showed that in some metals an electric
current carries heat from the hot to the cold parts of the
metal, while in other metals the transference of heat is in
the opposite direction. Let us calculate what this trans-
ference of heat would be on the theory we are discussing.

THEORY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 77

Let A B he A bar of metal, and let the temperature
increase from A to B. If the pressure of the corpuscles
depends upon the temperature there must be electromotive
forces along the bar to keep the corpuscles from drifting
under these pressure differences. If p is the pressure of
the corpuscle at a point distant x from the end A, then the
force acting on the corpuscles included between two planes
at distances x, x + ^x, from A, is, per unit area of these

planes, equal to A x -j^ and acts from right to left. To

(t X

balance this we must have an electromotive force X tending
to move the corpuscles from left to right, determined by
the equation —

X e n ^ X -= -^ A X

a X

or — Xe = - --^,

71 a X

where n is the number of corpuscles per unit volume at a
distance x from A. If ^ is the absolute temperature of the
bar at A we have (see page 65) —

hence —

p = n a 6.
^ 3

Xe =: = — (a n 0).

3n a X

Hence a corpuscle in travelling from x -{- S x to x will
abstract from the metal an amount of heat whose mechanical
equivalent i& X e 8 x, or —

- - -r— (an 0) a X,
Q n a X

The corpuscle when at a; + ^ ^ lias an amount of kinetic

energy equal to a (^ + --r—clxj, while at a; its kinetic energy

is reduced to a 0, hence the corpuscle will communicate to
the metal between x and x-^-dx Si,n amount of heat equal

78 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

d $
to a-=— dx; thus the total amount of heat commuDieated by

the corpuscle to the metal is —

I

dO 2 1 d . . J ,

a —— — — - (a n 0)r dXf

dx S n d X )

If the current i is flowing in the direction in which x
increases, the number of corpuscles which cross, unit area
in unit time, in the opposite direction to the current
is i/e, and the mechanical equivalent of the heat they
communicate to the metal betwfeen the places where the
temperatures of the metal are respectively 6 and + dO is
equal to —

'-(--^^-^Aan6))d6.
e \ 3 n d 6 /

But if o- is the " specific heat of electricity in the metal,"
this amount of heat is by definition equal to —

— i a- d

the minus sign being inserted- because the current is
flowing from the cold to the hot part of the circuit;
hience —

1 / 2 1 d , ff,\

(r= — -(a— _- — - {a n 6))

e \ 3 n d J

= _ « Jl _2fli- lognl W

3e I d6 ^ \

_ 2 a . d (2)

The term q— in the expression for o- is the same for all

metals, and since the electro-motive force round a thermo-
electric circuit consisting of two metals only involves the
diference of the specific heats of electricity in the metals,
this term will not affect the electromotive force round the

THEOEY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 79

circuit. It will, however, affect the amount of heat
developed in the conductor, and we shall find that unless

this term is very nearly balanced by the term -q — -te^^S ^^

the amount of heat developed by the flow of a current
through an unequally heated conductor would be far
greater than the amount actually observed.

For a/Se is about 0*46 X 10^, so that the amount of
heat expressed by the first term in equation (1) developed by
a unit current in flowing between two places where the
temperature differed by 1° C. would equal "45 X 1074*2 X
10'^, or 1*07 X 10"* calories per second.

The metal in which this heat effect is largest is, as far as
our present knowledge extends, bismuth, and. for this
metal the observed effect is only about *3 X 10"* calories,
or about 1/3 of the amount expressed by the term a/3 e,
and the effect in bismuth is very much greater than in any
other metal ; hence since o- is small compared with a/3 e, we
have by equation (1)

log n ^ — log ^ + a constant

approximately, so that approximately n will vary as
^a, i,e., the number of free corpuscles will vary approxi-
mately as the square root of the absolute temperature. If
the specific heat of electricity is positive the number of
free corpuscles will vary a little more rapidly than this
with the temperature. If the specific heat is negative it
will vary a little less rapidly. This variation of the
number of free corpuscles with the temperature involves a
still more rapid variation of the mean free path. For
(see p. 54) we have seen that the electrical conductivity is
proportional to n ^ v / B. Now v is proportional to $^ and n,
as we have just seen, varies approximately according to the
same law, hence the electrical conductivity is approximately
proportional to X the free path of the corpuscles in the
metal. But for many pure metals the electrical con-
ductivity varies approximately as the reciprocal of the

80 THE COEPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER

absolute temperature ; hence for these metals the mean
free path must also vary with the temperature in the same
way, i.e., be inversely proportional to the absolute tempera-
ture. This rapid variation of the free path with the
temperature would not be possible if the structure of the
metal were analogous to that of a gas compressed so that
the distances between the molecules were all diminished in
the same proportion. We have seen that if the metal
consisted of aggregations of molecules which broke up to
some extent as the temperature rose, we might get
a rapid variation of the mean free path, with the tempera-
ture. Since the free path, according to this theory,
varies approximately as the reciprocal of the absolute
temperature, the free paths at the low temperatures
which can be obtained by the use of liquid air or liquid
hydrogen ought to be much greater than at ordinary
laboratory temperatures. Thus the effects which depend
on the free path, such as the effect of magnetic force on
electrical resistance, or the absorption of light by the
metal (which should vary greatly according as the time of
vibration of the light is greater or less than the time
occupied by a corpuscle to describe its free path), would be
greatly affected by the lowering of the temperature :
experiments on these points would be valuable tests of the
theory. If A. varies as 1/0, kjv the time occupied by a cor-
puscle in describing its free path will vary as IjB^. The
velocity acquired by a corpuscle under a constant electric
force will also vary as 1/^s and will thus diminish rapidly
as the temperature increases.

The Numbeb of Free Corpuscles in Unit Volume

OF THE Metal.

We can determine from the amount of heat absorbed or
developed when a current of electricity passes across the
junction of two metals, the ratio of the number of cor-
puscles in unit volume of the two metals, and from the
Thomson effect we can determine the change in this
number for any one metal with the temperature. Hence,

THEOEY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 81

if we can determine the number of corpuscles per unit
volume in any one metal at any one temperature, we can
deduce the number in any other metal at any temperature.

We shall now pass on to the consideration of methods
to determine the absolute number of corpuscles per unit
volume ; since the electrical conductivity gives us the value
of n X, a method of determining X will also lead to the
determination of n. We shall begin with those methods
which lead to the direct determination of n.

One of the simplest of these in principle is founded on the
consideration of what takes place when a charge of
electricity is communicated to a piece of metal. Let us, to
fix our ideas, suppose that the charge is a negative one and
that it is carried by free corpuscles. These corpuscles must
occupy a layer of finite thickness at the surface of the
metal, for if the layer were reduced to infinitesimal thick-
ness the pressure exerted by these corpuscles would be vastly
greater than the pressure exerted by the corpuscles in the
interior of the metal, and the consequence would be that
corpuscles would diffuse from the layer into the interior
of the metal. The corpuscles will diffuse until the electric
force exerted by their charges is just able to balance the
forces arising from the difference of pressure between the
surface and the interior. We can calculate the thickness of
the layer occupied by the negative charge in the following
way : Let A be the face of a fiat piece of metal having a
negative charge; let n be the number of corpuscles per
unit volume before the charge was communicated to the
metal, n -f ^ the number at a point at a distance x from the
surface of the plate after the charge was communicated,
p the pressure of the corpuscles at this distance, and X the
electric force tending to stop the corpuscles from moving
from left to right. Then when the corpuscles have got
into a steady state —

but p = § a (« -f f) ^, where a e is the mean kinetic

T.M. G

82 THE COEPUSCULAR THEOKY OF MATTEE.

energy of a corpuscle at the absolute temperature 0, and
since n does not depend upon x, we have, assuming that f
is small compared with n —

8 dx

but — dX . .

if e is measured in electrostatic units, hence —

8 dx"

-^ o, -^— g = iir e^ n $,

or — $ = A

€

-px

4 IT P Tt

where p^ = —^ — — and -4 is a constant. To find A we have

» a a

^ y^ ^ rf a; = ^, if Q is the charge per unit area ; hence

e A
substituting for f, — = Q, or

e

Thus the value of $ is appreciable until x is large com-
pared with l/jt>; we may thus take l/p or (a 6/6 ir e^ n)* as
the measure of the thickness of the layer occupied by the
electricity ; substituting for aO and e the values 8*6 X 10~^*
and 8 X 10"^^ we find that, at 0° C,

1

)*

" = j 10^15 7rn|
Now since — d X . .

we have — X = ^xQ t-"'

^ p

This is the difference in potential between the surface and
a point in the interior, hence we see that if we communicate
a charge of electricity to a hollow conductor whose surface

THEOEY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 83

is kept at zero potential, the interior of that conductor will
not, as is usually assumed in electrostatics, remain at zero
potential, but will change by 4 ^ Qjp where Q is the charge
per unit area of the conductor. Hence, if we measure the
change produced by a known charge we shall determine p
and hence n by the equation 15 tt w = 10® p^. If the number
of corpuscles is comparable with the number of molecules
of the metal, which we may take as between 10^ and 10^^,
jp will be comparable with 10®, and so the thickness of the
layer through which the electricity is distributed will be of
the order of 10"® cm. In this case the change in the
potential of the interior produced by any feasible charge
will be small, but not perhaps too small to be measurable.
If the conductor were exposed to air at atmospheric pressure
the greatest value of 4 ^ Q possible without sparking would
be 100 in electrostatic measure. By embedding the con-
ductor in a solid dielectric, such as paraffin, we could
probably increase 4 tt Q to 1000 without discharge. If 4 ^ Q
is 10^ and p = 10®, the change in potential would be 10"^ in
electrostatic measure, or 3 X 10"^ of a volt, and this ought
to be capable of measurement.

Experiments have been made by Bose and others to see if
the electrical resistance would be altered by giving a charge
of electricity to a very thin conductor ; so far these have led
to negative results. We might at first sight expect that if
we increased the supply of negative corpuscles by com-
municating a charge of negative electricity to the strip of
metal we should increase the conductivity ; but this need
not necessarily be the case, for suppose the surface instead
of being flat were corrugated, then the charge would be all
at the tops of the corrugations ; but this would be quite out
of the way of a current flowing through the film, which would
take the short circuit through the base of the corrugations.
As the electricity only penetrates a distance comparable with
the size of a molecule, it is impossible to avoid an effect of
this kind, however carefully the surface is polished.

We can, however, find both lower and upper limits to the
number of free corpuscles, and as these limits lead to

G 2

84 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

contradiction we sball, after investigating them, proceed to
the consideration of the question whether the other view
of the function and disposition of the corpuscles alluded to
on page 49 is less open to objection.

We can obtain a lower limit to the number of free
corpuscles per unit volume of a metal by the consideration
of the results of the experiments of Rubens and Hagen on
the reflection of long waves from the surface of metals. It
follows from these experiments that the electrical con-
ductivity of metals when waves whose length equals 25 /t,
yx being 10~^ cm., pass through them is the same as the
conductivity under steady electrical forces, and that even
when the waves are as short as 4 ft the electrical conductivity
is within about 20 per cent, of that for steady forces. We
can easily show that if k is the conductivity under steady
forces ; then when the forces vary as sin n t the conductivity

sifi 1ft T
will be proportional to k — ^ 712 > where 2 T is the interval

between two collisions. Thus, unless this interval be small
compared with the period of the electric force the con-
ductivity will be very materially reduced. Thus if T were
as great as one quarter of the period of the force, so that

IT

n T = ^, the conductivity would be reduced to l/(7r/2)2, or "4

of its steady value. As the diminution of the conductivity

for light waves whose length is 4 /x, is less than this, we

conclude that the interval between two collisions is less

than one-quarter the period of this light, or less than

8'3 X 10"^^ sec. Hence u the velocity under unit electric

1 e
force, since it is equal to ^ ~ T, will be less than

i 8*8 X 10-^^—, and since k the conductivity is n e u, n

k 10^^ m
will be greater than k/eUy i.e., than -t.^ 2 '

For silver k is about 5 X 10-*, and since e/m = 1*7 X 10''
and e = 10"^, we see that n for this metal must be greater
than 1-8 X 10^.

THEOEY OF METALLIC CONDUCTION. 85

It is this result which leads to the difficulty to which we
have alluded, for if there were this number of corpuscles
per unit volume, then, since the energy possessed by each
corpuscle at the temperature ^ is a ^, the energy required
to raise the temperature of the corpuscles in unit volume
of the metal by 1° C. is n a, and since a = 1*5 X 10"^®
(see page 65), the energy which would have to be communi-
cated to unit volume of the silver to raise the, temperature
of the corpuscles alone would be greater than 1*3 X 1*8
X 10^ ergs., or about 6 gram calories. But to raise the
temperature of a cubic centimetre of silver one degree, only
requires about 0*6 calories, and this includes the energy
required to raise the temperature of the atoms of the metal
as well as that of the corpuscles. We thus get to a con-
tradiction. The value of the specific heats of the metals
shows that the corpuscles cannot exceed a certain number,
but this number is far too small to produce the observed
conductivities if the intervals between the collisions are as
small as is required by the behaviour of the metals in
Eubens' experiments.

CHAPTER V.

THE SECOND THEORY OF ELECTRICAL CONDUCTION.

We shall now proceed to develop the second theory of
electrical conductivity and see whether it is as successful in
explaining the relation between the thermal and electrical
conductivities as the other one, and whether or not it is
open to the same objections.

On this theory the corpuscles are supposed to be pulled
out of the atoms of the metal by the action of the surrounding
atoms. In order to get a sufficiently dej&nite idea of this
process to enable us to calculate the amount of electrical

e© 0© (E^ e© e© 0®

FIG. 22.

conductivity which it would produce, we shall suppose that
in the metal there is a large number of doublets, formed by
the union of a positively electrified atom with a negatively
electrified one, and that the interchange of corpuscles takes
place by a corpuscle leaving the negative component of one
of these doublets and going to the positive constituent of the
other. Under the action of the electric force these doublets
tend to arrange themselves along that line in the way
indicated in Fig. 22, much in the same way as the Grotthus
chains in the old theory of electrolysis. The corpuscles
moving in the direction of the arrows will give rise to a
drift of negative electricity against the direction of the
electric force or a current of positive electricity in the same
direction as the force.

We now proceed to calculate the magnitude of the current

THEORY OF ELECTRICAL CONDUCTION. 87

produced in this way. Consider a doublet formed by a
charge of electricity + ^» connected with another charge — e,
and placed in an electric field where the intensity of the
electric force is X. The potential energy ol the doublet,
when its axis (the line joining the negative to the positive
charge) makes an angle with the direction of the electric
force, is — X e d cos Oy where d is the distance between the
charges in the doublet. If the doublets distribute them-
selves as they would in a gas in which the distribution of
potential energy follows Maxwell's law, the number pos-

-hV

sessing potential energy V will be proportional to
where 1/ft = f a ^, a 6 being as before the mean kinetic of a
molecule at the absolute temperature 0. Then the number
of doublets whose axes make an angle between B and 6 + dO
with the direction of X, is proportional to ^^^^^^ sin d 0^
and the average value of cos for these doublets is equal to

r ^xedco80 ^^^ e sinOd e

r ^^x^d<^» sin Ode.

Now Xedh will, unless the electric force greatly exceeds
the value it has in any ordinary case of metallic conduction,
be exceedingly small, for the potential difference through
which the charge e must fall in order to acquire the energy
possessed by a molecule at the temperature 0° C, is about
1/25 of a volt, and h is proportional to the reciprocal of
this energy, thus unless the electric field is so strong that
there is in the space between the two components of the
doublet a fall of potential comparable with this, liXed will
be small. But when this is so —

r ^^'^"^^ COS sin Ode= IftXed
and— y ^^'^"^'^ sin B d 6 = 2,

hence the mean value of cos iQ-^hXe d, or g "^jf
If each doublet discharges a corpuscle 2? times a second, then

88 THE CORPUSCULAE THEORY OP MATTER.

in consequence of the polarisation we have just investigated,
the resultant flow of corpuscles will be the same as if each
doublet discharged a corpuscle parallel but in the opposite

direction to the electric force p X 5 • — -^ times per second.

Hence, if n is the number of doublets per unit volume, b the
distance between the centres of the doublets, the current
through unit area will be equal to —

2 e- X d pnb
9 ^ *

If we assume that the orientation of the axes of the
doublets in a metal follows the same law as in a gas, this
will be the expression for the current through the metal,
hence c the electrical conductivity will be given by the
expression —

__ 2 e^ d p n b

C —— — • m

9 aB

Thermal Conductivity,

If we suppose that the kinetic energy of the corpuscle in
a doublet is proportional to the kinetic energy, i.e., to the
temperature of the doublet, the interchange of corpuscles
will carry heat from the hot parts of the metal to the cold,
and will thus give rise to the conduction of heat. Let us
suppose that the kinetic energy of a corpuscle when in
a doublet at temperature ^ is a ^. If the corpuscle goes
from a doublet where the temperature is ^ + S ^ to one where
the temperature is ^, it will, when the latter doublet has
lost a corpuscle to make way for the one coming, have
caused a transference of heat equal to a 8 ^. Consider
now the transference of heat across a plane at right angles
to the temperature gradient. The number of corpuscles
crossing this plane in unit time is equal to i^nb . p. If the
difference of temperature between the adjacent doublets
is 8 ^, this will transfer

~-n b p a S
3 ^

THEOEY OF ELECTRICAL CONDUCTION. 89

units of heat across the plane in unit time, but as b is the

do
distance between the doublets S 6 ^ -j— b, where x is

a X

measured in the direction of the flow of heat. Hence k the

thermal conductivity is given by the equation —

ic = — nh^ p a.
o

Thus on this theory k/c, the ratio of the thermal to the
electrical conductivity is equal to —

3 ba^e
2 d e2 '

On the theory discussed before this ratio was equal to —

4: a^O

2

3 e

In a substance in which the doublets are so numerous as
to be almost in contact, d and b will be very nearly equal
to each other, and in this case the ratio of the conductivities
on the new theory would be to that on the old in the pro-
portion of 9 to 8. When the doublets are more sparsely
disseminated b will be greater than d and the ratio of the
conductivities given by the new theory will be greater than
that given by the old. The agreement between theory
and the results of experiment is at least as good in the
new theory as in the old, for the new theory gives for good
conductors results of the right order of magnitude, while
the presence of the factor b/d indicates that the ratio is not
an absolute constant for all substances but varies within
small limits for good conductors and wider ones for bad
ones. All this is in agreement with experience.

Theory op Connection between Eadiant Energy and the

Temperature.

We have seen (p. 61) that Lorentz has shown that
the long wave radiation can be regarded as a part of the

90 THE COEPUSCULAE THEOEY OF MATTEE.

electromagnetic pulses emitted when the moving cor-
puscles come into collision with the atoms of the substance
through which they are moving, and he has given an
expression for the amount of the energy calculated on
this principle, which agrees well with that found by
experiment. But in the new theory, as in the old, we have
the sudden starting and stopping of charged corpuscles and
therefore the incessant production of electromagnetic pulses;
these when resolved by the aid of Fourier's theorem will
be represented by a series of waves, having all possible
wave lengths from zero to infinity. We must see if the
energy in the long wave length radiation at a given
temperature would on the new theory be approximately
equal to that on the old.

It will be necessary to examine a little more closely than
we have hitherto done the theory of the radiation from metals
due to the stopping and starting of electrified systems
inside the m6tal. "We have already (see p. 64) quoted an
expression due to Lorentz for the amount of the very long
wave length radiation due to the stopping of corpuscles.
We can, however, by the following method, obtain an
expression for the energy corresponding to any wave lengths
emitted by unit volume of the metal. In the case of very
long waves this expression coincides with that given by
Lorentz.

We have seen that when the motion of an electrified
particle is accelerated it gives off pulses of electric and
magnetic force. If / is the acceleration of a charged body
0, at the time t, the magnetic force at a point P at a timo

t + , is ^^,\ where is the angle OP makes the

c c OP ^

direction of the acceleration, and c the velocity of light.

The energy per unit volume at P due to this magnetic field

is equal to ~ — where H = ^ -^ ^^" , and the amount of

O TT c OP

this energy, which flows out radially through unit area at
P, is c H^/8 TT. Integrating over the surface of the sphere
with centre and radius OP we find that the flow of energy

THEOEY OF ELECTEICAL CONDUCTION. 91

due to the magnetic field is, in unit time - —f-. There is

an equal flow of energy due to the electric field, hence the
rate at which the charged body is radiating energy is

-^ — ^, a result first given by Larmor.

The total amount of energy radiated is

3 c ^-00 -^

When we know /as a function of t we can find the total
amount of energy radiated. If we wish to find how much
of this energy corresponds to light between assigned limits
of wave length we must express, / by Fourier's theorem, in
terms of an harmonic function of the time.

Let us take the following case as representing the
stopping and starting of a charged particle in a solid. The
particle starts from rest, for a time h has a uniform
acceleration p, at the end of this time it has got up speed
and now moves for a time t^ with uniform velocity, at
the end of this time it comes into collision, and we suppose
that now an acceleration — jS acts for a time h and reduces
it to rest again.

Thus /when expressed as a function of the time, if the
time t = is taken as the time when it is at the middle
of its free path, has the following values —

/=^ from ^ = — 00 to < = — ^<i + I)
/=/?fromt=-(ti+ |)tot=-|
/ = from < = - *i to « = ^
1 f- -i8from*=|to« = fi+|
J = from t = ti + ^tot=QO

92 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

Now by Fourier's theorem we have, if <^ (t) is a function
off,

<l>(t) =- r /^'^ 4> («) C08 q{u — t)dq du

applying this to our case, and performing the integrations,
we find

/. 4: p / sin q^ sin q ^ ^ "*" ^ . . ,
f = — - / ^2 "Z sin q t . d q.

IT

Now Lord Rayleigh has shown {Philosophical Magazine,
June, 1889, p. 466) that if

^ {t) = - /* /i iq) sin qt . d q
r " (<!> (<))« dt = ^ /; CA (q))'' d q,

hence —

- d q
The energy radiated from the charged body is equal to

9 />2 -+00

hence if there are s collisions per unit volume per second
the energy radiated from unit volume per second is

32 ^3 ^2 A" siu^ q ^ sin^ q ^Jl+M

6 .0 J dq,

and the energy corresponding to waves which have a
frequency between q and q -{- d qi& equal to

.2 ^ h „,-„2 ^ Ui + ^2)
a X

82^^a ^2 ^ 7^ U)

^

THEOEY OP ELECTEICAL CONDUCTION. 98

In the case considered by Lorentz the waves are very
long, i.e., q is small compared with l/ti, or l/(fi + ^2) and

8 = — - ; in this case the preceding expression reduces to

A

"^i — ^eih + t^'q^dq. {B)

X 8 TT c

Now P = v/tiy and if h, i-e., the time occupied by the
collisions is small compared with t^ the time spent in
describing the free path, A. = r <2, so that the preceding
expressions become

n V ^ — A. q^ a q.

8 TTC ^ ^

1 TIS X, V

Now A:, the electric conductivity, = -7 ^, so that the

energy radiated from unit volume in unit time is

8 a ^ 7. 2

3 TTC

k (f dq.

We can get an expression for the stream of radiant

energy by using the principle that when things have got

into a steady state, the amount of energy absorbed by unit

volume in unit tim6 is equal to the energy radiated from

that volume in the same time. If E is the electric force in

the stream of radiant energy i the intensity of the current,

the energy absorbed in unit volume per unit time is E i,

or, k E^ since i = k E. Now TT, the energy per unit

K E^
volume, is equal to -r — where K is the specific inductive

capacity in electromagnetic units ; hence the rate at which

energy is absorbed is ^ W, and this, when things are

in a steady state, must be equal to the energy radiated,
hence we have

^ '"' ^^ iir ^ ^ ^ h ^2 ^ ^

94 THE COBPUSCULAK THEORY OF MATTER.

the energy in the stream of radiant energy due to waves
having a frequency between q and q -\- d qiB equal to

2 a»K , ,

If fi is the refractive index of the substance

K = mV^,
hence the density of the stream of radiant energy is

a result which Lorentz has shown agrees well with the actual
determinations of the radiation. We must remember that
this result only holds when the frequency of the waves is
very small, not merely because it is only in this case that
the expression A reduces to B, but also because when the
frequency is large the conductivity A: will not have the
value we have assigned to it.

To return to the expression A for the amount of energy
radiated. We see that the maximum amount of the energy
for a given difference of frequency wDl be when the fre-
quency is such that qh is small and q {ti + tg) finite, i.e.,
when the time of vibration of the light is comparable with
the time occupied in running over the free path :
the energy in the light with this frequency is greater
than in the light whose frequency is very small ; we can,
however, easily show that, as we should expect, the
greatest amount of energy is in the waves whose time of
vibration is comparable with ti, the time occupied by a
collision.

We can see this as follows; — since the rate of radiation of

energy is - -^, then U the amount radiated by one
«> c

corpuscle in the case we have considered is —

THEORY OF ELECTRICAL CONDUCTION. 95

When the frequency is very small, the energy radiated
having a frequency between q and ^ + ^ ^ is

\ '^ P' h' ih + h? q^ dq,

or L^i the total energy of waves having frequencies between
o and q is given by the equation

y CTT

as both qti and q (Ji + ^) are very small, Ui is only a
small fraction of C/, the total amount of energy radiated.

Next take the case when q ti is very small and q {ti + t^
finite ; in this case the energy between q and q + d qis

^ t ^Ui^ sin^ l^t±M d q,

O CTT 2

and U2 the value of this over a range q is given by the
equation —

U2 = ^'^P^ti.q h.

O CTT

Since q h is small, we see that U2 is small compared
with U ; it is, however, large compared with f/i, the long
wave thermal radiation. Since Ui and U2 are each small
compared with [/, we see that by far the larger part of ihe
energy will be in the light whose time of vibration is of
the same order as the time occupied by a collision. If this
time depends on the temperature diminishing as the
temperature increases, and if at a certain temperature it was
of the same order as the time of vibration of visible light,
the radiation at that temperature would be mainly visible
light and the higher the temperature the bluer the light.

The assumptions we made as to the nature of the
acceleration of the charged body, that it was equal to P for
a short interval ^1, then equal to for a time equal to ta,
and then equal to — ^ for a time h, is perhaps more
appropriate to the first theory of metallic conduction than
to the second, where we suppose the charged body pulled
out of an atom by the attraction of B, and being suddenly

96 THE COEPUSCULAR THEORY OP MATTER.

stopped when it strikes against B. For this case it is more
appropriate to suppose that / is equal to ^2 for a time t2,
and then equal to — ^1 for a very short time h, where

^2 fg = ^1 tl.

By applying the same method as before we can easily
show that the energy of light with frequency between q and
q + d q radiated in unit time from unit volume is —

- 2j3i jSa sin ^ sin ^ cos q {h + tj)) %

or

u Tf C \ 9.0 I 2/2

_ ^'^""2' '"^^ cosqih + t^)dq.
qh qta J

For very small values of q this rednces to

« 5 — A" tl" «i + t^^ fdq;
o ^ c

or, since i\ is small compared with t^^

h—P^^k'q^dq.
o -T c

Now J ^^2 12^ is the space passed over by the charged
body while its motion is being accelerated ; it is, therefore,
equal to &, the distance separating the systems between
which the charged body travels, hence the energy radiated
from unit volume per second is —

If W is the stream of radiant energy between these

limits of frequency flowing through the body we have as

before

4 ^ fc c^ TTT 2 s e^

W=^"—b^q^dq,

^ ^ TT C

THEOEY OF ELECTEICAL CONDUCTION. 97

i?7here k is the electrical conductivity, and on this theory

, 2 e^ p n b d

"" 9 aO

Now 8 = n fj?, hence

TT^S ^0 pb O.

while on the other theory it was (see page 94) given by
the equation —

If, as we should expect in a good conductor, b is very
nearly equal to d, the radiation on the new theory is to
that on the old as 9 to 8. Thus the expressions are so
nearly equal that in the present state of our knowledge we
cannot say that in this respect the one theory agrees better
with the facts than the other.

On this theory by far the greater part of the radiation
which starts from the metal is of exceedingly short wave
length, the time of vibration being comparable with ti.

Peltier and Thomson Effects.

These effects on the theory first discussed, that corpuscles
are distributed throughout the metal and are in temperature
equilibrium with it, may be regarded as arising in the
following way. If there are n corpuscles per unit volume
and V is their average velocity, then through unit area in
the metal, ^nv corpuscles will in one second pass through in
one direction. Hence if we have two metals A and B in
contact, and if n v in 4 is not the same as in B, the number
of corpuscles that flow from A to B will not be the same as
the number that flow from B to A. To fix our ideas, let us
suppose that the flow through A is greater than that
through B ; A will lose more corpuscles than it will gain
and so will become positively, while B will be negatively,
electrified. This distribution of electricity will tend to
diminish the flow of corpuscles from A and increase that

T.M. H

98 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

from B, and the charges of electricity will accnmalate until
they have made the two flows equal, when things will be in
a steady state. This accumulation of positive electricity
on A and of negative on B will form an ** electric double
layer " between the coatings of which there is a finite poten-
tial difference which is a measure of the Peltier effect at the
junction of the metals. Similarly, if the flow ^nv depends
u}X)n the temperature of the metal, the transport of
corpuscles through each section of an unequally heated
conductor will vary, and the state of the conductor cannot
be steady : the difference in the amount flowing through
different sections will produce an accumulation of electricity
along the conductor ; this will produce an electric force
which, by increasing the flow where it was small and
diminishing it where it was large, will make the flow uniform
throughout the conductor. These forces represent the
Thomson effect.

In the second theory, where the corpuscles are supposed
to start from one electric doublet and come to rest on
another, there is a movement of corpuscles throughout the
body, and we easily see that, with the notation of page 88,
the number of corpuscles which pass in one second, in one
direction through unit area, is

1 ,

Hence, as before, if two metals A and B are in contact and
if np b ioT A is not the same as for £, one metal will gain
and the other lose electricity: thus there will be an accumu-
lation of electricity at the junction producing an electric
field; this field will increase the flow in one metal and
retard it in the other until the two flows are equal.

The manner in which the electric force affects the flow of
the corpuscles is essentially different in the two theories.
On the first theory the electric force acts on the free
corpuscles, accelerating those in one metal and retarding
those in the other, while on the second theory the alteration
in the flow is brought about by the action of the electric

THEOEY OF ELECTRICAL CONDUCTION. 99

field on the doublets which are supposed to be dispersed
through the metal and not on the free corpuscles. If the
axes of these doublets are distributed uniformly in all
directions, then the flow of corpuscles produced by the detach-
ment of corpuscles from the doublets will be uniform in all
directions. If, however, an electric force which we may
suppose to be parallel to the axis of x acts on the metal, it
will polarise the distribution of the axes of the doublets
and will make more point in the direction of the axis of x
than in the opposite direction ; thus this electric force will
diminish the flow of corpuscles along the positive direction
of X while it will increase the flow in the opposite direction.
We see that by the application of suitable electric forces we
can increase or diminish the flow in any direction. At the
junction of two metals the initial inequality in the flow of
corpuscles across the junction will cause an accumulation
of electricity, and this will go on until the forces due to this
electrification have made the flows in the two metals equal
to each other ; it is these forces which give rise to the
Peltier effect, while the Thomson effect is represented by
the forces which are required to make the flow of cor-
puscles uniform at all points in an unequally heated
conductor.

On the Hall Effect and the Effect of a Magnetic
Field on Electrical Besistance.

The Hall effect, on the second theory of metallic con-
duction, originates in the action of the magnetic field on
the distribution of the axes of the doublet which are
supposed to exist in the metal, while on the first theory
it arose from the action of the magnetic field on the ,
corpuscles.

To see how it arise? on the second theory, let us suppose
that AB is a doublet and that an electric force parallel to the
axis of X acts upon it ; this electric field will give rise to a
couple tending to bring the axis of the doublet in line with the
force. If the motion of the doublet takes place in a magrietic ^

H 2

-» -• J

i

100 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OP MATTER.

field, then as soon as the doablet begins to move the mov-
ing positive and negative charges at its ends will be acted
upon by forces which are at right angles to the magnetic
force and at right angles also to the direction of motion of
the charges. If the doublet were turning about a point mid-
way between the charges, the velocity of the negative
charge would be equal ai^d opposite to that of the positive, so
that the same force would be exerted by the magnetic field on
the two charges, and the joint efifect of the two forces on the
doublet would be to pull it bodily in some direction without
deflecting the axis ; in this case there would not be any
Hall effect. Suppose, however, that the doublet were not
turning about the point midway between the charges, so

FIG. 23.

that the velocities of these charges were not equal and j

opposite, then the force due to the magnetic field on the
one would not be equal to that on the other ; the forces
would have a finite moment about an axis through the
point about which the doublet is turning, and there would
be a couple tending to deflect the axis of the doublet. If the
couples arising in this way all tended to twist the axes of
the doublets in one direction, there would be an excess of
the axes pointing in this direction over those pointing in
the opposite, and therefore a current in that direction ; thus
the magnetic force might give rise to side currents
analogous to those which constitute the Hall effect.

To follow this effect into greater detail, let us consider '

._T^it will happen when the point about which the doublet

t «• t

THEOEY OF ELECTEICAL CONDUCTION, 101

AB turns coincides with one of the charges, say, the
negative charge A ; let the magnetic force act in the
direction OY^ the electric force along OX (Fig. 23). Con-
sider a doublet AB originally in the plane XOY, then, under
the action of the electric force, AB will begin to approach
OXf but as the positive charge moves in the magnetic field
it will be acted on by a downward force, making B dip
below the plane XOY, and thus making the negative end of
the doublet be above the positive end. This would have
the effect of making more doublets have their negative ends
above the positive than below it; there would thus be a
vertically downward current of electricity, i.e., a current at
right angles to both the magnetic and electric forces, i.e.,
a current in the direction of the Hall effect. If the positive
end of the doublet had been fixed instead of the negative
end, the couple tending to twist the axis of the doublet would
be reversed, and there would be a majority of doublets
having their positive ends above the negative, i.e., there
would be a current of electricity vertically upwards instead
of downwards. This would correspond to a Hall effect of
the opposite sign to the preceding. The sign of the Hall
effect would depend upon whether the positive or the
negative end of the doublet moves the faster when the
doublet is deflected by the electric force. The bias which
the axis of the doublet experiences in consequence of the
magnetic force makes the average angle made by the axis
of the doublet with the direction of the electric force
greater than it would be if the magnetic force were absent,
just as the average angle made with the vertical by a
pendulum having for a bob a gyroscope in rapid rotation
IS greater than that for the pendulum started from the
same position with the bob at rest. This increase in the
angle between the direction of the electric force and the
axes of the doublets means that the polarisation and
therefore the electric current is less than it would be if the
magnetic force were absent, or, as we may express it, the
resistance of the conductor is increased by the magnetic
force.

102 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OP MATTER.

It will be noticed that the expressions we have found for
the electrical and thermal conductivities, the radiation, and
the other electrical effects do not involve the mass of the
carrier, so that the results would hold if the carriers were
bodies having a much greater mass than that of a
corpuscle.

4

i

CHAPTEE YI.

THE ARRA.NGEMBNT OP CORPUSCLES IN THE ATOM.

We have seen that corpuscles are always of the same
kind whatever may be the nature of the substance from
which they originate ; this, in conjunction with the fact ,
that their mass is much smaller than that of any known
atom, suggests that they are a constituent of all atoms ; that,
in short, corpuscles are an essential part of the structure of
the atoms of the different elements. This consideration
makes it important to consider the ways in which groups of
corpuscles can arrange themselves so as to be in equilibrium.
Since the corpuscles are all negatively electrified, they repel
each other, and thus, unless there is some force tending to
hold them together, no group in which the distances between
the corpuscles is finite can be in equilibrium. As the atoms of
the elements in their normal states are electrically neutral,
the negative electricity on the corpuscles they contain must
be balanced by an equivalent amount of positive electricity ;
the atoms must, along with the corpuscles, contain positive
electricity. The form in which this positive electricity
occurs in the atom is at present a matter about which we
have very little information. No positively electrified body
has yet been found having a mass less than that of an atom
of hydrogen. All the positively electrified systems in gases
at low pressures seem to be atoms which, neutral in their
normal state, have become positively charged by losing a
corpuscle. In default of exact knowledge of the nature of
the way in which positive electricity occurs in the atom, we
shall consider a case in which the positive electricity is dis-
tributed in the way most amenable to mathematical calcula-
tion, i.e., when it occurs as a sphere of uniform density,
throughout which the corpuscles are distributed. The positive

104 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

electricity attracts the corpuscles to the centre of the sphere,
while their mutual repulsion drives them away from it ;
when in equilibrium they will be distributed in such a
way that the attraction of the positive electrification is
balanced by the repulsion of the other corpuscles.

Let us now consider the problem as to how 1...2...3... n
corpuscles would arrange themselves if placed in a sphere
filled with positive electricity of uniform density, the total
negative charge on the corpuscles being equivalent to the
positive charge in the sphere.

When there is only one corpuscle the solution is very
simple : the corpuscle will evidently go to the centre of the
sphere. The potential energy possessed by the dififerent
arrangements is a quantity of considerable importance in
the theory of the subject. We shall call Q the amount of
work required to remove each portion of electricity to an
infinite distance from its nearest neighbour ; thus in the case
of the single corpuscle we should have to do work to drag
the corpuscle out of the sphere and then carry it away to
an infinite distance from it ; when we have done this we
should be left with the sphere of positive electricity, the
various parts of which would repel each other ; if we let
these parts recede from each other until they were infinitely
remote we should gain work. The difference between the
work spent in removing the negative from the positive and
that gained by allowing the positive to scatter is Q the
amount of work required to separate completely the
electrical charges. When there is only one corpuscle we

i 9 ^2

can easily show that Q = :r7^ — , where e is the charge on a

corpuscle measured in electrostatic units and a is the radius
of the sphere.

When there are two corpuscles inside a sphere of positive
electricity they will, when in equilibrium, be situated - at
two points A and B, in a straight line with the centre of

the sphere and such that OA = OB=^y where a is the

radius of the sphere. We can easily show that in this position

AREANGEMENT OF COEPUSCLES IN ATOM. 105 .

the repulsion between A and B is just balanced by the
attraction of the positive electricity and also that the
equilibrium is stable. We may point oufc that A B the
distance between the corpuscles is equal to the radius of
the sphere of positive electrification. In this case we can

show that Q =. -p:—.

10 a

Thus if the radius of the sphere of positive electrification
remained constant, Q for a system containing two corpuscles
in a single sphere would be greater than Q for the arrange-
ment in which each corpuscle is placed in a sphere of
positive electrification of its own, for in the latter case we

9 ^2 21 e^

have seen that Q = 2 X tt. — and this is less than ztt. —.

^ 10 a 10 a

Thus the arrangement with the two corpuscles inside one
sphere is more stable than that where there are two spheres
with a single corpuscle inside each : thus if we had a number
of single corpuscles each inside its own sphere, they would
not be so stable as if they were to coagulate and form systems
each containing more than one corpuscle. There would there-
fore be a tendency for a large number of systems containing
single corpuscles to form more complex systems. This result
depends upon the assumption that the size of the sphere of
positive electrification for the system containing two cor-
puscles is the same as that of the sphere containing only
one corpuscle. If we had assumed that when two systems
unite the volume of the sphere of positive electricity for
the combined system is the sum of the volumes of the
individual systems, then a for the combined system would
be 2 J or 1*25 times a for the single system. Taking this
into account, we find that Q for the combined system is
less than the sum of the values of Q for the individual
system ; in this case the system containing two corpuscles
would not be so stable as two systems each containing one
corpuscle, so that the tendency now would be towards
dissociation rather than association.

Three corpuscles inside a single sphere will be in stable
equilibrium when at the corners of an equilateral triangle

106 THE CORPUSCULAE THEORY OF MATTER.

\i hose centre is at the centre of the sphere and whose side is
equal in length to the radius of that sphere; thus for three as
for two corpuscles the equilibrium position is determined by
the condition that the distance between two corpuscles is
equal to the radius of the sphere of positive electrification.

For the case of three corpuscles Q = ^-- — , and thus

10 a

again we see that if the radius of the sphere of positive
electricity is invariable, the arrangement with three cor-
puscles inside one sphere is more stable than three single
corpuscles each inside its own sphere, or than one corpuscle
inside one sphere and two corpuscles inside another sphere ;
thus again the tendency would be towards aggregation. If,
however, the positive electricity instead of being invariable
in size were invariable in density, we see that the tendency
would be for the complex system to dissociate into the
simpler ones.

Four corpuscles if at rest cannot be in equilibrium when
in one plane, although the co-planar arrangement is possible
and stable when the four are in rapid rotation. When there
is no rotation the corpuscles, when in stable equilibrium, are
arranged at the corners of a regular tetrahedron whose
centre is at the centre of the sphere of positive electrifica-
tion and whose side is equal to the radius of that sphere ;
thus we again have the result that the distance between the
corpuscles is equal to the radius of the positive sphere.

For four corpuscles Q = -^— . We see that the values of

a 10

Q per corpuscle are for the arrangements of 1, 2, 8, 4 cor-
puscles in the proportion of 6 : 7 : 8 : 9 if the radius of the
positive sphere is invariable.

Six corpuscles will be in stable equilibrium at the comers
of a regular octahedron, but it can be shown that the equi-
librium of eight corpuscles at the corners of a cube is
unstable. The general problem of finding how n corpuscles
will distribute themselves inside the sphere is very com-
plicated, and I have not succeeded in solving it ; we can,
however, solve the special case where the corpuscles are

AERANGEMENT OF CORPUSCLES IN ATOM. 107

confined to a plane passing through the centre of the
sphere, and from the results obtained from this solution we
may infer some of the properties of the more general
distribution. The analytical solution of the problem when
the motion of the corpuscles is confined to one plane is
given in a paper by the author in the Philosophical Magazine
for March, 1904 ; we shall refer to that paper for the
analysis and quote here only the results.

If we have n corpuscles arranged at the corners of a
regular polygon with n sides with its centre at the centre of
the sphere of positive electrification, each corpuscle being
thus at the same distance r from the centre of this sphere,
we can find a value of r, so that the repulsion exerted by
the (m -— 1) corpuscles on the remaining corpuscle is equal to
the attraction of the positive electricity on that corpuscle ;
the ring of corpuscles would then be in equilibrium. But it
is shown in the paper referred to that if n is greater than 5
the equilibrium is unstable and so cannot exist ; thus 5 is
the greatest number of corpuscles which can be in equili-
brium as a. single ring. It is shown, however, that we
can have a ring containing more than five corpuscles in
equilibrium if there are other corpuscles inside the ring.
Thus, though a ring of six corpuscles at the corners
of a regular hexagon is unstable by itself, it becomes
stable when there is another corpuscle placed at the
centre of the hexagon, and rings of seven and eight
corpuscles are also made stable by placing one corpuscle
inside them. To miake a ring of nine corpuscles stable,
however, we must have two corpuscles inside it, and
the number of corpuscles required inside a ring to keep it
stable increases very rapidly with the number of corpuscles
in the ring. This is shown by the following Table, where n
represents the number of corpuscles in the ring and i the
number of corpuscles which must be placed inside the ring
to keep it in stable equilibrium : —

w. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 12. 18. 15. 20. 80. 40.
t. 0. 1. 1. 1. 2. 3. 8 10. 15. 89. 101. 232.

108 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

When n is large t is proportional to n^. We thus see
that in the case when the corpuscles are confined to one
plane they will arrange themselves in a series of concentric
rings. When we have determined the relation between n and
I, i.e., have found that i =f{n) where / is a known func-
tion, the problem of finding the configuration of ^corpuscles
when in stable equilibrium admits of a very simple solution.
When the number of rings is as small as possible the
number of corpuscles in each ring will be as large as
possible. If Hi is the number in the outer ring then there
will be N — n^ inside it, and if these are just sufficient to
keep the outer ring in stable equiUbrium N ^ ni = f {n^.

/(«)

FIG. 24.

the solution of this equation will give us rii. To find v^, the
number in the next ring, we evidently have the equation —

iV — Wi — «a =/(na),

while nj, the number in the next ring, is given by the

equation —

JST — Wi — Wj=/(n3),
and so on.

These equations can be solved very rapidly by a graphical
method. Draw the graph whose abscissa =/(n) and whose
ordinate is n ; the values of/ (n) for a series of values of n
are given on page 107 ; from these values the curve (Fig. 24)
has been constructed.

To find how a number of corpuscles equal to N will
arrange themselves, measure off along the axis of abscissae
a distance from equal to N. Let O P be this distance ;
through P draw the straight line P Q inclined at an angle

AEEANGEMENT OF COEPUSCLES IN ATOM. 109

of 185° to the horizontal axis, intersecting the curve in Q,
draw the ordinate Q Jf , then the integral part ot Q M will
be the value of rii, the number of corpuscles in the outside
ring. For evidently

OM=f(QM)

and Jlf = P — P M, and since P Q is inclined at 45°
to the axis, Q M = P M ; hence

OP-QM=f{QM).

comparing this with the equation N — ni =f (ni), we see
that the integral part of Q M is equal to n^.

To get the value of ti,, the number of the corpuscles in
the second ring, we mark oflf the abscissa Pi = iV — Wi ;
if Q M is an integer P^ will coincide with M ; from Pi
draw Pi Qi parallel to P Q^ cutting the curve in Qi ; if Q^ Mi
is the ordinate at Qi, the integral part of Qi Mi will be the
value of Wj. To get % mark oflf P2 = -^ — wi — ng and
draw Pa Qa parallel to P Q ; the integral part of Q^ M^ will be
the value W3. In this way we can, in a very short time, find
the numbers of corpuscles in ,the various rings.

The following Table giving the various rings for corpuscles
ranging in number from 1 to 100 has been calculated in this
way; the first row contains the numbers for which there is
only one ring, the second those with two rings, the third
those with three, and so on : —

NuMBEBS OF Corpuscles in Obder.

12 3 4 5

5 6 7 8 8 8 9 10 10 10 11
11112333455

{n 11 11 12 12 12 13^13 13 13 13 U 14 15 15

■ 5 6 7 7 8 8 8 8 9 10 10 10 10 10 11

11111233334466 5

15 16 15 16 .16 16 16 16 16 16 17 17 17 17 17 17 17

,11 11 11 11 12 12 12 13 13 13 13 13 13 14 14 15 15

5 6 7 7 7 8 8 8 8 9 9 10 10 10 10 10 11

Vl 1111122333344555

17 18 18 18 18 18 19 19 19 19 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 21 21

15 15 15 15 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 17 17 17 17 17 17 17 17

11 11 11 11 11 12 12 12 12 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 14 14 15 15 15

5 5 6 7 7 7 7 8 8 8 8 8 9 9 10 10 10 10 10 10 11

111111112223333446566

110 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

Number of Cobpdscles in Ordeb — continued.

2! 21 21 21 21 21 21 21 22 22 22 22 22 22 22 22 23 23 23 23 23 23 23 24
17 18 18 18 18 18 19 19 19 19 19 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 21 21 21
15 15 15 15 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 17 17 17 17 17 17 17 17 17 17
11 11 11 11 11 12 12 12 12 12 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 14 U 15 15 15 15
5 5 6 7 7 7 7 8 8 8 8 8 8 9 9 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 11 11
1111111112223333344555 5 5

24 24 24 24 24 24 24
21 21 21 21 21 21 21
17 18 18 18 18 18 19
15 15 15 15 16 16 16
11 11 11 11 11 12 12
5 5 6 7 7 7 7
•1111111

We can investigate the equilibrium of corpuscles in one
plane by experiment as well as by analysis, using a
method introduced for a different purpose by an American
physicist, Professor Mayer. The problem of the arrange-
ment of the corpuscles is to find how a number of bodies
which repel each other with forces inversely proportional to
the square of the distance between them will arrange them-
selves when under the action of an attractive force tending
to drag them to a fixed point. For the experimental method
the corpuscles are replaced by magnetised needles pushed
through cork discs and floating on water. Care sliould be
taken that the needles are equally magnetised. These
needles, having their poles all pointing in the same way,
repel each other like the corpuscles. The attractive force is
produced by a large magnet placed above the surface of the
water, the lower pole of this niagnet being of the opposite
sign to that of the upper poles of the floating magnets. The
component along the surface of the water of the force due
to this magnet is directed to the point on the surface
vertically below the pole of the magnet, and is approximately
proportional to the distance from this point. The forces
acting on the magnets are thus analogous to those acting on
the corpuscles.

If we throw needle after needle into the water we shall
find that they will arrange themselves in definite patterns,
three needles at the corners of a triangle, four at the corners
of a square, five at the corners of a pentagon; when, however,

).

ABRAKGEMENT OF CORPUSCLES IN ATOM. Ill

we throw in a sixth needle this sequence is broken ; the six
jieedles do not arrange themselves at the comers of a hexagon,
but five go to the corners of a pentagon and one goes to
the middle. When we throw in a seventh needle we get a
ring o! six with one at the centre ; thus a ring of six, though
unstable when hollow, becomes stable as soon as one
is put in the inside. This is an example of a fundamental
principle in the stable configurations of corpuscles; the

structure must be substantial ; we cannot have a great
display of corpuscles on the outside and nothing in. the
inside. It, however, we have a good foundation of cor-
puscles — if, for example, we tie a considerable number of
needles together lor the inside — wecanhavearingcontaining
a large number of corpuscles in stable equilibrium nround
it, although five is the greatest number of corpuscles tliat
can be in equilibrium in a hollow ring. By the aid of these
floating magnets we can illustrate the configurations for

112 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OP MATTER.

considerable numbers of corpuscles, and verify the Table
previously given.

Another method, due to Professor R. W. Wood, is to
replace the magnets floating on water by iron spheres
floating on mercury; these spheres get magnetised by
induction by the large magnet placed above them and repel
each other — though in this case the repulsive force does not
vary inversely as the square of the distance — while they are
attracted by the external magnet ; the iron spheres arrange
themselves in patterns analogous to those formed by the
magnets. Dr. Monckman used, instead of magnets,
elongated conductors floating vertically in water ; these were
electrified by induction by a charged body held above tbe
surface of tbe water; the conductors, being similarly
electrified, repelled each other and were attracted towards
the electrified body ; under these forces they formed patterns
similar to those formed by the floating raa^^nets.

We see from this experimental illustration, as well as by
tbe analytical investigation, that a number of corpuscles
will, if confined to one plane, arrange themselves in a series
of rings, the number of corpuscles in the ring increasing as
the radius of the ring increases.

It we refer to the arrangements of the different numbers of
corpuscles given on page 109, we see that the numbers which
come in the same vertical columns are arranged in patterns
which have much in common, for each arrangement is
obtained by adding another storey to the one above it.
Thus, to take the first column, we have the pattern 5, 1,
the one below it is 11, 5, 1 ; the one below this 15, 11, 5, 1;
the one below this 17, 15, 11, 5, 1 ; then 21, 17, 15, 11, 5, 1 ;
and then 24, 21, 17, 15, 11, 5, 1. We should expect the
properties of the atoms formed of such arrangements of
corpuscles to have many points of resemblance. Take, for
example, the vibrations of the corpuscles; these may be
divided into two sets. The first set consists of those
arising from the rotation of the corpuscles around their
prbits. If all the corpuscles in an atom have the same

igular velocity, the frequency of the vibrations produced

AEEANGEMENT OF COEPUSCLES IN ATOM. 113

}jy the rotation of the ring of corpuscles is proportional fco
the number of corpuscles in the ring; and thus in the
•spectrum of each of the elements corresponding to the
arrangements of corpuscles found in a vertical column in
the Table, there would be a series of lines whose frequencies
would be in a constant ratio to each other, this ratio being
the ratio of the numbers of corpuscles in the various
rings.

The second set of vibrations are those corresponding to
the displacement of a ring from its circular shape. If the
distance of a corpuscle from the nearest member in its own
ring is small compared with its distance from its nearest
neighbour on another ring, the effect of the outer ring will
only ** disturb " the vibrations of the ring without altering
' their fundamental character. Thus we should expect the
various elements in a vertical column to give corresponding
groups of associated lines. We might, in short, expect the
various elements corresponding to the arrangements of the
corpuscles contained in the same vertical column, to have
many properties, chemical as well as physical, in common.
If we suppose that the atomic weight of an element is
proportional to the number of corpuscles contained in its
atom, — and we shall give later on evidence in favour of this
view, — we may regard -the similarity in properties of these
arrangements of corpuscles in the same vertical column as
similar to a very striking property of the chemical elements,
i.e., the property expressed by the periodic law. We
know that if we arrange the elements in the order of
their atomic weights, then as we proceed to consider the
elements in this order, we come across an element —
say lithium — with a certain property ; we go on, and after
passing many elements which do not resemble lithium,
we come to another, sodium, having many properties in
common with lithium; then, as we go on we lose these
properties for a time, coming across them again when we
arrive at potassium, and so on. We find here just the
same recurrence of properties at considerable intervals
that we should get if the atoms contained numbers of

T.M. I

114 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

corpuscles proportional to their atomic weight. Consider
a series of atoms, such that the atom of the pth member
is formed from that of the (p— l)th by the addition of a
single ring, i.e., is a compound, so to speak, of the Cp — l)th
atom with a fresh ring. Such a series would belong to
elements which are in the same group according to the
periodic law, i.e., these elements form a series which, if
arranged according to Mendel6ef's table would all be in
the same vertical column.

The properties of these configurations of corpuscles have
further analogies with the properties of real atoms. To
illustrate this let us consider the properties of all the
configurations of corpuscles which have 20 corpuscles in the
outside ring. The smallest number of corpuscles which
has an outer ring of 20 is 59 ; in this case the number of
corpuscles inside the ring is only just sufficient to make
the outer ring stable, this ring will therefore be on the
verge of instability, and when the corpuscles in the ring
are displaced the forces of restitution urging them back
to their original positions will be small. Thus, when this
ring is subject to disturbances from an external source, a
corpuscle will easily be detached from it, and the group
will, by losing a negatively electrified corpuscle, acquire a
charge of positive electricity; the group will thus resemble
the atom of a strongly electropositive element. When we
pass from 59 to 60 corpuscles the outer ring is more stable!
because there are more corpuscles inside it; the corre-
sponding atom will, therefore, not be so strongly electro-
positive as that containing only 59 corpuscles. The
addition of each successive corpuscle will make it more
difficult to detach corpuscles from the outer ring, and will,
therefore, make the corresponding atom less electro-positive.
The increase in the stability of the ring, and consequently
in the electro-negative character of the corresponding atom,
will go on increasing until we have as many as 67 corpuscles
in the group, when the stability of the outer ring will be a
maximum. A great change in the properties of the group
will occur when the number of corpuscles increases from

AEEANGEMENT OF COEPUSCLES IN ATOM. 115

67 to 68, for with 68 corpuscles the number in the outer
ring is 21 ; these 21 corpuscles are, however, only just
stable, and, like the outer ring of 20 in the arrangement of
59 corpuscles, would readily lose a corpuscle. The atom
corresponding to this arrangement would, therefore, be
strongly electro-positive.

The properties of the groups of 59 and 67 corpuscles,
which are respectively at the beginning and end of the
series which has 20 corpuscles in the outer ring, deserve
especial consideration. The arrangement of corpuscles in
the group of 59, though near the verge of instability and
therefore very liable to lose a negative corpuscle and thus
acquire a positive charge, would not be able to retain this
charge. For when it had lost a corpuscle the 58 corpuscles
left would arrange themselves in the grouping corresponding
to 58 corpuscles, which is the last to have an outer ring of
19 corpuscles ; this ring is therefore exceedingly stable, so
that no further corpuscles would escape from it, while the
positive charge on the system due to the escape of the
59th corpuscle would attract the surrounding corpuscles.
Thus this arrangement could not remain permanently
charged with positive electricity, for as soon as one
corpuscle escaped it would be replaced by another. If,
however, corpuscles were shot into the arrangement of 59
from outside, each additional corpuscle would increase the
stability of the system until the number reached 67 ; the
arrangement corresponding to 68 would be very unstable,
so when this number was reached the system would lose
corpuscles. Thus a charge of 8 units of negative electricity
could be forced into this group, which would correspond,
therefore, to an atom with a valency for a positive charge,
and a valency 8 for a negative one.

Let us now consider the properties of the group of 67
corpuscles. The outer ring of this would be very stable,
but if an additional corpuscle were added to the group the
68 corpuscles would arrange themselves with a ring of 21
on the outside, as 68 is the smallest number of corpuscles
with an outer ring of 21 ; the ring is very unstable, and

I 2

116 THE COEPUSCULAE THEORY OP MATTEE.

easily loses the corpuscle it has gained, thus the arrange-
ment could not permanently be negatively charged — it would
act like the atom of an element of no electro-negative
valency. On the other hand, the arrangement would be
stable if one, two, three up to eight corpuscles were abstracted
from it, although from the firmness with which they are
held this detachment of corpuscles would be difficult;
as each corpuscle abstracted leaves the arrangement with
a positive charge, the work required to remove the succes-
sive corpuscles would tend to increase. This tendency
would be to , some extent compensated by the diminishing
stability of the arrangements 66, 65, 64,... 59; but when once
59 is reached, not only have we to overcome the positive
charge, but also the great stability of the arrangement of
58 corpuscles, so that eight would be the greatest number of
corpuscles we could hope to remove from the group ; thus
the atom represented by this group would have an electro-
positive valency represented by 8, while its electro-negative
valency is zero.

Let us now consider the group containing 60 corpuscles.
This will be the most electro-positive of the series ; it can,
however, only retain permanently a positive charge of one
unit of electricity, corresponding to the removal of one
corpuscle, for when it has lost two corpuscles we should have
the group 58 as we had when we removed one corpuscle
from the group 59 ; and in the present case the group
would be more likely to attract a corpuscle than when
we started from 59 instead of 60, for it would have a
charge of two positive units instead of one. Thus the
atom represented by the group of 60 would have an electro-
positive valency of one. If we force additional corpuscles
into the group so that the corpuscles increase to 61, 62, 63,
67, the arrangements become more and more stable ; when,
however, we get to 68 we have an arrangement which
is nearly unstable and which will readily give oflf
corpuscles. Thus seven is the greatest number of cor-
puscles we could hope to force into this group, so that the
atom represented by it would have an electro-negative

I

AERANGEMENT OF CORPUSCLES IN ATOM. 117

valency of seven. We have seen that the electro-positive
valency is one.

The group of 66 corpuscles would be the most electro-
negative of the series, but would only be able to retain a
charge of one unit, for if it acquired two units the group
would consist of 68 corpuscles, an arrangement which, as we
have seen, rapidly loses its corpuscles. The atom correspond-
ing to the group 66 will thus have an electro-negative valency
of one. We see, too, that seven corpuscles could be extracted
from the group without destroying its stability ; thus the
atom corresponding to this group would have an electro-
positive valency seven.

The group of 61 corpuscles would not part with its
corpuscles so readily as the group of 60, but on the other
hand it could afford to lose two, as it is not reduced to 58
corpuscles until it has lost a third corpuscle, and 58 is the
number when the tendency to attract and retain corpuscles
would suddenly rise ; thus the atom corresponding to the
group 61 would have an electro-positive valency of 2. In
the same way as before we see that it could find room for 6
corpuscles, so that the corresponding atom might have an
electro-negative valency of 6. In a similar way we see
that the group of 62 would correspond to an electro -negative
atom with an electro-negative valency of 8 and an electro-
positive valency of 5. The group 63 is an atom with an
electro-negative valency of 4 and an electro-positive valency
of 4. Thus, tabulating our results, we have the following
properties of the series of atoms corresponding to the groups
containing from 59 to 67 corpuscles : —

No. of corpuscles 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67

Valency { +^ +^ +2 +» +^ "^ "^ "1 "O

I -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 +5 +6 +7 +8

Electro-positive. Electro-negative.

This sequence of properties is very like that observed in
the case of the atoms of the elements.

118 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.
Thus we have the series of elements —

He.

Li.

Be. B.

C

N.

0.

F.

Ne.

Ne.

Na.

Mg. Al.

Si.

P.

s.

CI.

Arg.

The first and last element in each of these series has no
valency, the second is a monovalent electro-positive element,
the last but »one a monovalent electro-negative element,
the third is a divalent electro-positive element, the last bat
two a divalent electro-negative element, and so on.

In our Table we have assigned two valencies to the element
according as it acts as an electro-positive or an electro-
negative element, and we notice that the sum of these
valencies is constant and equal to 8. It is interesting to
find that Abegg,^ from purely chemical considerations, shows
that the valency of an element is very different when it acts
as the electro-positive constituent of a compound from its
valency when it is the electro-negative constituent. Thus
chlorine has the valency 1 in a compound like HCl, in
which it is the electro-negative constituent, but has much
higher valencies when combined with very electro-negative
elements such as oxygen. Iodine, too, is another striking
instance; it is monovalent when combined with electro-
positive elements like the metal, but has a much higher
valency when combined with more electro-negative elements
as in the compound I CI5. The view that the same element
is sometimes the positive constituent and in other combina-
tions the negative constituent of a compound has received
further confirmation recently by some remarkable
experiments made by Walden.

The sum of the positive and negative valencies would
depend upon the number of corpuscles assumed to be in
the outer ring. If we take the number in the outer ring to
be 20 the sum of the positive and negative valencies is 8 ;
this happens to agree with the number usually assigned to
this sum by chemists ; this agreement with the results
given by the model atom is, however, quite accidental.

1 " Zeitschrif t f ur Anorganische Chemie," 39, p. 330, 1904; **Zeits-
chrift fur Physikalisclie Chemie," 43, p. 385, 1903.

AEEANGEMENT OF COEPUSCLES IN ATOM. 119

It may not be out of place here to again emphasise
the statement that the special arrangement of corpuscles
in which they are supposed to be confined to one plane,
and in which the positive electricity attracts them with a
force proportional to their distance from a fixed point, has
been chosen because it is the one most amenable to mathe-
matical treatment. My object has been to show that stable
arrangements of corpuscles would have many properties in
common with real atoms, and I have attempted to illustrate
these properties by considering a special case chosen solely
on the ground of simplicity. The number of corpuscles
corresponding to any particular property would doubtless
be different if we took a three- instead of a two- dimensional
distribution of corpuscles, or if instead of supposing the
attractive force exerted by the positive electricity to vary
directly as the distance from a fixed point we assumed that
the density of the positive electricity inside the sphere was
not uniform, in which case the attraction would follow a
much more complicated law.

The two-fold valency would be a property of the atom
whatever its structure, provided that, as in the special case
of corpuscles confined to one plane, there is a great change
of stability in passing through certain groups of corpuscles,
the number of corpuscles in these critical groups being, say,
Niy N2, iVg. . . . The work required to add a corpuscle to, or
take one away from, a group of corpuscles would be
abnormally great when the change in the number of
corpuscles involved the passage through or into one of these
critical numbers ; thus these critical numbers maybe regarded
as barriers which cannot easily be passed. As an atom
containing N^ + ^* corpuscles could lose n corpuscles and
gain A^8 - (N^ + n) without crossing one of these barriers,
such an atom would have a maximum positive valency n
and a maximum negative valency N^ - {N^ -f n).

We may also look at the question from the following point
of view : we may express the tendency of a group of corpuscles
to shed a corpuscle as arising from the equivalent of a cor-
puscular pressure in the* atom, and we may express the

120 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER,

preceding result by saying that when the number of cor-
puscles increases through one of the values A^i, iVg, ^3 ...,
say JVi, the corpuscular pressure abruptly increases, and
then falls gradually as the number of corpuscles increases
to N2, when again the pressure abruptly increases. Thus
for a group of corpuscles intermediate in number between
Ni and N^ we could go on adding corpuscles without
increasing the corpuscular pressure (though of course we
should increase the repulsion arising from the negative
charge on these corpuscles) until we reached A^2, but since
at N2 the corpuscular pressure rapidly increases, we could
not without great difficulty increase the number of cor-
puscles to iVg + !• Again, we could take away corpuscles
from the original group without diminishing the corpus-
cular pressure until the number of corpuscles is reduced
to Ni. Since the corpuscular pressure abruptly falls at this
point it would be difficult to extract another corpuscle from
the group. Thus if N the number of corpuscles in this
group =1 Ni + 71, the maximum number of corpuscles we
could extract would be n, i.e., the maximum positive valency
would be w, while the greatest number we could add would
be A'^a — (A^i + 72), and this would be the maximum negative
valency.

■

Forces between the Atoms. Chemical Combination.

A very important and interesting subject of investigation
is the nature of the forces that would be exerted between
groups of corpuscles and its application to the theory of
chemical combination.

We shall begin by considering the forces between two
groups in some simple cases. Let us begin with the
simplest of all when we have a single corpuscle at the
centre of a sphere of positive electrification. Let us take
two such systems equal in all respects, then as long as one
is wholly outside the other there will be neither attraction
nor repulsion between the systems ; when, however, the
spheres cut, as in Fig. 26, the systems will attract each other*
To see this, consider the action of the system ^4 on -B ; there

AERANGEMENT OF CORPUSCLES IN ATOM. 121

will be no action on that part of B whi6li is- outside A,
while the action on the part of the positive electricity
of B which is inside A will be an attraction towards the
centre of A, for inside a sphere the force due to the
negative corpuscle at the centre is greater than that due
to the positive electricity. The corpuscles will remain
at the centres of their respective spheres until they
come so close together that the centre of one sphere
lies inside the other sphere ; when this stage is reached
the corpuscles begin to be displaced and are pushed apart
so as to be outside the line joining the two centres. In
this case there is no difference in the electrification of the
spheres ; we cannot say that one is positively the other
negatively electrified ; and if the spheres were separated

Eio. 26.

after having been together they would each be neutral, the
positive electricity in each sphere being balanced by the
negative charge at the centre. We thus see that it is
possible to have forces electrical in their origin binding the
two systems together without a resultant charge on either
system. If, however, the spheres were of very different
size, then if they were brought close enough together the
two corpuscles would go inside one sphere and would
remain so after the spheres were pulled apart ; thus one
sphere would be positively, the other negatively, electrified.
Lord Kelvin has shown that it is the smaller sphere that
acquires the additional corpuscle, and has proved that
when two spheres whose radii are in the proportion of
3 to 1 are gradually brought together, the corpuscle
which originally was at the centre of the larger sphere

122 THE COEPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

will be transferred to the inside of the smaller when the
distance between the centres of the two spheres is reduced
to between 2'6 and 2*7 times the radius of the smaller
sphere. With systems containing only one corpuscle the
only way in which one system can differ from the other is in
the size of the sphere of positive electrification. The pre-
ceding result is a special case of the general principle that a
transference of corpuscles from one group of corpuscles to
another different group may occur when the two groups are
brought close together. The general nature of this effect
may be understood from the following considerations. If
we have two groups of corpuscles A and B such that the
work required to detach a corpuscle from A is less than that
required to detach one from B, then when A and B are
brought close together there will be a tendency for a
corpuscle to go from A into J5, and therefore for A to get
positively, B negatively, electrified. The system A corre-
sponds — to take the case considered on page 117 — to the
groups in the earlier part of the series from 59 to 67, the
system B to the groups in the later part. We may repre-
sent this effect in a way which is easily handled, by saying
that inside the group of corpuscles, or atom, there is a
certain corpuscular pressure, and that when two atoms are
brought near together the corpuscles tend to pass from the
atom where the corpuscular pressure is high to one where
it is low. This corpuscular pressure, by which we represent
the electric forces inside the atom, is high when the work
required to detach a corpuscle from the atom is small, low
when this work is large. Thus in our example the corpus-
cular pressure is high when the number of corpuscles inside
the outer ring is. only just sufficient to make that ring
stable, while it is low when the number of corpuscles inside
is considerably greater than the minimum number required
for equilibrium, i.e., the pressure is high in the electro-
positive elements, low in the electro-negative ones. We
see, too, that the positive valency of an electro-positive
element is the greatest number of corpuscles it can lose
before the corpuscular pressure suffers a great diminution.

AEEANGEMENT OF CORPUSCLES IN ATOM. 128

To take an illustration : in the group of 60 corpuscles we say
that the corpuscular pressure is high since there is only one
more corpuscle inside the outer ring than the minimum
number required to make that ring stable; if, however,
two corpuscles were to leave the system, the number would
be reduced to 58, and the group 58 has an outer ring
of 19 with the maximum number of corpuscles inside it ;
the system has thus great stability, and would thus be
represented by one with a low corpuscular pressure. The
negative valency of an electro-positive element is the
greatest number of corpuscles which can be added without
producing a sudden increase in the corpuscular pressure.
Thus, to take the case quoted before, if eight corpuscles were
added to the group of 60 corpuscles, we should get 68
corpuscles ; now 68 is the smallest number of corpuscles
which has as many as 21 corpuscles in the outer ring, thus
there is only the minimum number inside required for
stability, so that the corresponding corpuscular pressure is
very high, while if we added seven corpuscles to the group
of 60 we should have 67 corpuscles, and as this is the largest
number of corpuscles which has 20 in the outside ring, there
is the maximum number inside the ring ; the stability is
thus very great, and the corresponding corpuscular pressure
low. We thus see that seven is the greatest electro-negative
valency for the group 60.

The negative valency of the electro-negative elements,
which have atoms in which the corpuscular pressure is low,
is the number of corpuscles which can be added without
producing a sudden increase in the corpuscular pressure.
Thus, to take an example, the atom corresponding to the
group of 66 corpuscles has an electro-negative valency of one,
for if it received 2 corpuscles the corpuscles would arrange
themselves like the group 68, which, as we have seen, has a
very high corpuscular pressure.

The electro-positive valency of these elements is the
greatest possible number of corpuscles which can be taken
from them without producing an abrupt diminution in the
corpuscular pressure. Thus, to take the group of 66, if we

124 THE CORPUSCULAE THEORY OF MATTER.

take away 7 corpuscles we get the arrangement correspond-
ing to 59, which is nearly unstable, and in which, therefore,
the corpuscular pressure is very high. If, however, we take
away 8 corpuscles, we have only 58 left, and this arrange-
ment is very stable, as it is the largest number of corpuscles
whicli has as few as 19 in the outer ring, so that the
corpuscular pressure is very low; thus the corpuscular
pressure is diminished abruptly when, having already
detached 7, we detach an additional corpuscle ; hence we see
that the electro-positive valency of the group 60 is 7.

To sum up, if the electro-positive valency of an atom is
n, then we can extract n corpuscles without diminishing
the corpuscular pressure, but if we detach an additional
corpuscle the corpuscular pressure will suddenly fall ; if the
electro-negative valency of an atom is m, we can add m
corpuscles without increasing the corpuscular pressure, but
the addition of the {m -j- l)th will cause a large increase in
the pressure.

Let us see now how these considerations apply to the
chemical combinations of the different elements. Let us
suppose that we have two different atoms A and B close
together, and that the element of which A is an atom is
more electro-positive than the one of which B is an atom ;
this on our view means that the corpuscular pressure in the
atom A is greater than that in By so when A and B are put
close together a corpuscle will tend to go from A to B, and
thus A would get positively, B negatively electrified. The
loss of the corpuscle by the electro-positive atom would,
if its positive valency were greater than unity, tend to
increase the corpuscular pressure in A, while the gain of
a corpuscle by B would, unless it were negatively univalent,
lower its corpuscular pressure; this effect would tend to
make the flow of corpuscles from ^ to -B continue; on the
other hand, the positive electrification on A and the negative
on B would tend to stop the flow. Let us suppose that the
electro-positive valency of A is unity, then if a second cor-
puscle were to escape from A the corpuscular pressure, as we
have seen above, would fall abruptly, so that instead of the

AKRANGEMENT OF CORPUSCLES IN ATOM. 125

pressure gradient being down from ^ to 5 it would be in the
opposite direction, and the corpuscle would come back ; thus
A would not lose more than one corpuscle. If the negative
valency of B were unity then B would not be in a condition
to receive more than one corpuscle, for if it received two
the corpuscular pressure would suddenly increase, and cor-
puscles would tend to leave B instead of coming into it ;
if, however, B had an electro-negative valency of 2 it
could receive another corpuscle without increase in pres-
sure, and though it could not receive this from A, if
another atom A' similar to A were brought to it, a cor-
puscle might flow from A' into JB, and thus B would get
charged with two units of negative electricity, A and A'
each having a positive charge of one unit ; thus B might
hold by the electrostatic attraction two atoms A and A' in
combination. It could not, however, hold a third atom,
because if another atom A'\ similar to A and A\ were
brought up to it, and if another corpuscle were to flow
into jB, the corpuscular pressure in B would experience a
large increase, since, as its valency is only two, it cannot
receive more than two corpuscles without having its cor-
puscular pressure largely increased. Thus B can hold two,
but not more than two, univalent atoms in combination ;
if, however, B had been trivalent instead of divalent, it
could receive 3 corpuscles without increasing the corpuscular
pressure, so that a corpuscle might flow from a third atom
^" into By and B be able to keep 8 atoms A, A', A'\ in
combination. It must be noticed, however, that the trans-
ference of the corpuscles from the atoms A'y A'\ which are
supposed to come into the neighbourhood of B after A has
transferred its corpuscles, will take place under less favour-
able condiiions than the transference of the corpuscle from
Ay the atom first brought into its neighbourhood. For
when A approached B both were supposed uncharged, but
after the corpuscle from A has gone into -B, B has a nega-
tive charge, and the corpuscle going from A* will have to
surmount the electrostatic repulsion due to the charge.
Again, after A' has discharged its corpuscle, B will be

126 THE COEPUSCULAR THEOBY OF MATTER.

charged with two units of negative electricity, and the cor-
puscle going from A" will have to overcome a greater
repulsion than that experienced by the corpuscle from A\
Thus we see that in the case of a multivalent atom it may
be more difficult to fill up the later valencies than the earlier
ones. The existence of '* unsaturated " compounds, such as
PCIq, MnCki naay be taken as an illustration of this
point.

Again, this difficulty will produce the most marked
eflfects when the difference of corpuscular pressure tending
to drive the corpuscles from one atom to the other is small,
i.e,, when the elements resemble each other in properties.
We should thus expect that the valency of one ele-
ment towards an element of somewhat similar properties
would be less than its valency towards a widely dissimilar
element.

The terms electro-negative and electro-positive are only
relative, and an element may be electro-positive to one
substance and electro-negative to another. It would appear
from the preceding considerations that the valency of an
element where it is acting as the electro-negative consti-
tuent of a compound may be very different from the valency
when it is the electro-positive constituent. Thus, to take
the group of 60 corpuscles as an example, when it is in com-
bination with a more electro-negative element, i.e., one
where the corpuscular pressure is lower, it can, as we have
seen, only lose one corpuscle, i.e., its electro-positive valency
is one. But if the group 60 were placed near a group G
with a still higher corpuscular pressure,. so that corpuscles
flow into the group 60 instead of flowing out of it, then,
since we have seen that the corpuscular pressure of the
group 60 will not be suddenly increased by the addition of
corpuscles until the number of corpuscles added exceeds 7,
we see that the group of 60 might receive as many as 7
corpuscles from such groups as (?, and would therefore have
a valency 7. There are many compounds which suggest a
difference of this kind. Thus iodine appears monovalent
in the compound H J, in which it is the electro-negative

ARRANGEMENT OF CORPUSCLES IN ATOM. 127

element, while it is sexavalent in the compound I Fq, in
which it is probably the positive element.

We gee that on these views the valency of an element is
not a constant quantity ; it depends on whether the element
is the electro-positive or electro-negative constituent of the
compound, and even when the sign of its charge is the
same, on the nature of the element with which it is in
combination, an element having a smaller valency when
combined with one of similar properties than when in com-
bination with one from which it differs more widely.

In the cases of chemical combination we have considered,
we have supposed that there is a transference of corpuscles
from one atom to the other, and that the attraction between
the positive and negative electrification resulting from this
transference helps to bind together the elements in the
compound. The case, however, of two equal spheres, each
with a single corpuscle at its centre, considered on p. 121,
shows that there may be attractions between atoms con-
sisting of groups of corpuscles without any transference of
corpuscles, i.e., when neither atom gets charged with
electricity. A very important question arises when we con-
sider the combination of two similar atoms in the molecule
of an elementary gas : is there or is there not a transference
of electricity in this case — i.e., does one atom acquire a charge
of positive, the other of negative, electricity ? If two similar
atoms or groups of corpuscles are brought together, a
symmetrical distribution of corpuscles, i.e., one in which
there is no transference of corpuscles, will certainly be one of
equilibrium. The question, however, is, is the equilibrium
stable? We can easily give examples in which the equili-
brium of symmetrical arrangements is unstable. Take for
example the case of two electrified drops of water placed
in a vessel which they very nearly fill, let condensation
on the sides of the vessel be prevented, so that the vapour
from one drop condenses on the other. There will be
equilibrium if the drops are equal, but this equilibrium
will be unstable, for if one drop were to differ ever so
little in size from the other, the smaller drop would evaporate

128 THE COEPUSCULAE THEOEY OP MATTER

more rapidly than the larger ; thus the big drop would get
bigger by condensation, and the little drop smaller. When
the little drop got below a certain size the electrical charge
would so lower its vapour pressure that it would sink to
that of the big drop, and there would be equilibrium, and in
this case the equilibrum would be stable, for if the little
drop were to get smaller its vapour pressure would diminish
so rapidly that water would condense on it and it would
grow bigger; while if it got bigger the vapour pressure
would increase and the drop would become smaller. Thus

FIG. 27.

two charged drops of water, equal in all respects to begin
with, will not remain equal, and the stable configuration will
not be two equal drops, but one big and one little drop.

Another example in which the forces concerned bear a
somewhat close analogy to those at work in the atom is the
following : —

Let us represent an atom in the normal state by a closed
glass vessel partly filled with water and suspended from a
spring balance. To represent the effect of the influence of an
atom on an equal atom near to it, let us suppose that the
water in two similar vessels is connected by a syphon, as in

AEKANGEMENT OF COEPUSCLES IN ATOM. 129

Fig. 27, then though there could be equihbrium without any
transference of water from A to B, it is easy to see that the
equilibrium would be unstable. For suppose a little water
were to flow from A to B, this would make B heavier and it
would descend ; the water in B would now be at a lower level
than that in ^, so that the water instead of flowing back as
it would if the equilibrium were stable would continue to
flow into B, and the flow would go on until the pressure
due to the compression of the air confined above B was
suflScient to balance the pressure difference arising from
the difference of level. Thus the coupling up of the two
would produce a transference of water from the one to the
other, or, if we suppose that the water represents an electric
charge, the one would be positively, the other negatively,
electrified.

In the case of groups of corpuscles we should have forces
between the groups with somewhat the same properties as
those discussed in the last example. Thus, take one of
the arrangements discussed on page 117, say the group of
62: this is more stable than the group of 61 and less stable
than that of 63, or, as we have expressed it, the corpuscular
pressure in the group 62 is less than that in 61 and greater
than that in 63. Now suppose two groups each containing
62 were brought near together, and suppose a corpuscle
were transferred from one group to the other, so that one
group contained 61 and the other 63, as the pressure in the
group 61 is greater than that in the group containing 63,
the corpuscles would tend to go on flowing from 61 to 63
instead of coming back, that is, if one got by chance a nega-
tive charge, that charge would tend to increase until the
electrostatic repulsion due to the negative charge was
suflicient to counterbalance the effect of corpuscular pres-
sure. Thus we see in this case that the stable configuration
for two groups placed within range of each other's action is
one in which there is a positive charge on one group and a
negative charge on the other. If we apply these considera-
tions to the case of atoms, we arrive at the conclusion
that when two atoms of the same kind come so near

T.M. K

180 THE COEPUSCULAR THEOEY OF MATTER.

together as to exert appreciable forces on each other one of
them may become positively, the other negatively, electrified.
Thus the two atoms in a diatomic molecule of an elemen-
tary gas may be oppositely electrified, and the forces
which hold two similar atoms together in the molecule of
an elementary substance may be quite similar to those
which hold together two dissimilar atoms in the molecule
of a compound. The maximum charge which an atom
could receive when in combination with an atom of the
same kind would be the same as the maximum charge when
combined with an atom of a different kind, and would be
determined by its valency. We can, as the example on
page 121 shows, conceive of attractions between atoms of
the same kind even when the atoms do not get oppositely
electrified ; but the properties of molecules of simple and
compound gases seem to testify in favour of the view that
the forces which hold the similar atoms together in the
molecule of an elementary gas are of the same character as
those at work binding together dissimilar atoms in the
molecule of a compound. Thus, for example, gases such as
helium or argon, whose atoms do not combine with the
atoms of other gases to form compounds, do not combine
with each other to form diatomic molecules. Again, when,
as in carbon compounds, we have atoms of the same kind in
combination with each other, the bonds uniting a carbon
atom to another carbon atom are treated as following the
same laws as to valency as those which bind the carbon
atoms to atoms of a different kind.

The view that the atoms in a molecule are oppositely
charged receives support from some experiments made by
Walden, in which it was found that electrolytic conduction
took place when bromine and iodine were dissolved in
certain solvents, the bromine or iodine appearing at both
electrodes, the results being consistent with the view that
the bromine or iodine molecules are dissociated into the
ions JBr+, Br^ or 7^., /_. The view is also supported
by the fact that when the molecules of an elementary gas
are dissociated by heat, as in the case of iodine vapour, the

AEEANGEMENT OF COEPUSCLES IN ATOM. 181

electric conductivity of the dissociated gas is very high,
showing that there are large quantities of both positive
and negative ions present in the dissociated gas.

The optical properties of gases, especially the refractive
index and the dispersion, would, as we shall see, be largely
influenced by opposite charges existing on the atoms in
the molecule — in fact, we should expect the dispersion in a
gas in which the two atoms in the molecule carry opposite
charges would be of quite a different order from the dis-
persion of a gas whose molecules consist of uncharged
atoms. The numerous experiments which have been made
on the dispersion of gases do not afford any evidence of the
existence of any wide divergence between the dispersion of
compound and of elementary gases; hence we may conclude
that if the atoms in the molecules of the compound gas
are charged with electricity, the atoms of the molecules of
elementary gases are also charged.

The positive charge on one atom and the negative charge
on the other produces a difference between the atoms which
might lead to a want of symmetry in compounds which
from their formulae appear perfectly symmetrical. Thus,
to take an example, ethane is represented by the formula —

H H

H^C C^H

H H

but if we regard the coupling up of one carbon atom with
another as accompanied by a transference of a corpuscle
from the one atom to another, the two carbon atoms will
not carry equal charges. If all the hydrogen atoms are
charged with one unit of positive electricity one of the
carbons will have a charge of four units of negative
electricity while the other will only have two units ; thus of
the two systems C H3, one will carry a positive charge,
the other a negative one.

This would involve the possibility of two isomeric com-
pounds of the composition C2 H5 CI, one when the chlorine

K 2

182 THE COEPUSCULAE THEOEY OP MATTEB.

is attached to the carbon atom with the charge 4, the
other when it is attached to the carbon atom with the
charge 2. I am not aware that there is any evidence
of the existence of isomeric forms of C2 H^ CI ; it
might be expected that even if both were stable they
would have very different degrees of stability. It must
be remembered that in considering the possibility of
the existence of isomers from purely geometrical con-
siderations all questions as to stability are ignored, so
that isomers which are indicated by geometry as possible
may be dynamically unstable and thus incapable of
preparation.

If we consider compounds in which the carbon atoms are
linked by more bonds than one we see the possibility from
geometrical considerations of isomers among the hydro-
carbons themselves. Thus consider ethylene —

in which the carbon atoms are united by double bonds. If we
regard each bond as involving the transference of a corpuscle
from one carbon atom to the other, we might have two
isomers; in one the transference of the corpuscle having
been in the same direction along each bond, one
carbon atom has lost and the other gained two units of
negative electricity; in the other modification the transfer-
ence of corpuscles has been in one direction along one
bond and in the opposite direction along the other, so
that on the whole the charge on the carbon atom has
not been affected by the linkage. This form of com-
pound is much more symmetrical than the preceding
and will not give rise to so many isomers when chlorine
is substituted for hydrogen. Again, even with single
linkage between the carbon atoms we might have isomers
among the hydro-carbons when the number of carbon

r ^

AEEANGEMENT OF COEPUSCLES IN ATOM. 133

atoms is greater than two. Thus consider the hydrocarbon
represented by the formula —

H H H

H-

•Ca Cs

H

H

H H

We might have one compound in which the linkage between
Ci C2 caused a corpuscle to go from Ci to C2, and that
between Cg C3 sent a corpuscle from Cq to Cq; the result
would be that C3 is negatively and d positively . charged
relatively to C2. Or again, if a corpuscle went as before
from Ci to C2, but the linkage between C2 and C3 caused a
corpuscle to go from C3 to C2, instead of from C2 to Cs,
Ci and Cs would be both charged positively relatively to C29
and this would differ from the preceding arrangement. We
should get a third case if the linkage between the carbon
atoms caused one corpuscle to go from C2 to (7i and another
from C2 to Cq; in this case both Ci and C3 would be charged
negatively relative to C2. We should of course get a larger
number of isomers if we had a large number of carbon
atoms.

We thus see that in the carbon compounds the charge
carried by the carbon atom will depend upon whether the
elements combined with the carbon are electro-positive or
electro-negative with respect to that element. Thus
in the compound —

E

H-

■C-

-F

G

where C is the carbon atom and E F O H are mono-
valent atoms of other elements, if these elements are all

184 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

electro-positive with regard to carbon, the carbon atom
will carry a charge of 4 units of negative electricity, while
if they are all electro-negative it will carry a charge of
4 units of positive electricity ; if one is electro-positive the
others electro-negative the charge on C will be 2 units of
positive, and so on. Thus the properties of the carbon atom
will depend upon the elements with which it is in combina-
tion. This variation in the properties might be difficult to
detect in the saturated compound, but might be expected to
exert more influence in organic radicles such

which enter into compounds by the linkage of their carbon
atoms with other atoms; the facility with which this linkage
takes place might be gravely affected by the sign and magni-
tude of the electric charge carried by the carbon atom, and
this seems to be in accordance with the results of observa-
tions, as Van t 'Hoff in his " Ansichten iiber Organischen
Chemie '' gives several instances of changes produced in the
carbon atom in organic radicles by changes in the elements
with which it is in combination.

A system of four atoms, each possessing unit positive and
unit negative valency rigidly attached to each other and
forming the four corners of a regular tetrahedron, would
possess the same chemical properties as the carbon atom ;
two such atoms could be united by one, two, or three bonds,
while the free valencies not satisfied by the connection
between the atoms would be satisfied by any univalent
atoms whether electro-positive or electro-negative.

We might also expect to see traces of the influence of the
properties of the atom we have been considering on the
boiling points of liquids or on the temperature at which
gases are liquefied, as these depend on the forces exerted
between different molecules of the substance, an increase

AREANGEMENT OF CORPUSCLES IN ATOM, 135

in these forces tending to raise the boiling point of a liquid
and increase the ease with which a gas is liquefied. These
forces also influence the connection between the pressure and
volume of a gas ; they are, for example, responsible for the
term ajv^ in Van der Waals equation —

(p + 3) {v-h) = Re,

and from tlie values of a we can deduce a measure of the
intensity of these forces. It is more satisfactory to take a
as the index of these forces than to use the boiling point or
even the critical temperature for this purpose, as the
latter depend upon h the size of the molecule as well as
upon the inter-molecular forces. Another useful measure
of the strength of their forces is the amount of heat required
to turn one gramme molecule of the substance f fom the
liquid into the gaseous state, as this quantity is directly
proportional to the work required to drag away a molecule
of compound against the attraction exerted upon it by a
slab of the substance in the liquid state.

Let us now endeavour to picture to ourselves how these
forces may arise. When an atom in a compound is ** un-
saturated " we should expect it to exert considerable attrac-
tion on other atoms, because we know that under suitable
conditions it is able to attract some other atoms so firmly
that they become permanently attached to it. But even
when an atom in a molecule is " saturated," i.e., when no
transference of corpuscles to or from it is possible, forces
between two neighbouring atoms may exist although they
are not able to drag the corpuscles from one atom to another
and thus establish a ** chemical bond " between the atoms.
The force between two atoms will, among other things, depend
upon the ease with which the corpuscles can move about
in the atoms, for just the same reason that the force between
two oppositely electrified bodies is greater when these bodies
are conductors of electricity in which the electricity can
move about and electrostatic induction come into play,

186 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

than when they are insulators in which the electricity is
fixed.

If an atom is unsaturated, it means that there are still
some corpuscles which have comparative freedom of motion,
for under suitable conditions these can be moved into or out
of the atom when it acquires its maximum valency ; thus
we should expect that a molecule containing an unsaturated
atom would exert considerable forces upon other molecules,
and thus would tend to make the gas depart from Boyle's
law and to be easily liquefiable. But even when all the
atoms in the molecule are saturated and the valency cor-
puscles transferred there may still remain some mobility of
the corpuscles, although not suflScient to enable them to get
clear of the atom ; this mobility may not be the same for
the atoms of the different elements, and may be different
for the same atom according as it is exerting positive or
negative valency ; in other words, the attraction of an atom
may not be wholly exhausted when its valency is satisfied,
and the residual attraction may depend not only upon the
nature of the atom but also upon whether it is exerting its
positive or negative valencies.

Let us take some examples. Marsh gas C Hi, is a gas
which is not easily liquefied and in which the attraction
between the molecules is small ; when, however, one of the
hydrogen atoms is replaced by -ff we get methyl alcohol,
which is a liquid at ordinary temperatures and whose
molecules exert considerable attractions on each other. If,
as many chemists maintain, oxygen may be tetravalent, then
the oxygen in C Hs H iq unsaturated, and can exert con-
siderable attractions on other atoms; the hydrogen which it
replaced was saturated, and could not therefore exert nearly
such large attractions. Again, chlorine is very far from
being a perfect gas, and the wide deviations it shows from
Boyle's law indicates that the residual attractions between
the molecules is very considerable. Chlorine seems to retain
this residual attraction when in combination with other
elements, for the result of replacing the hydrogen atoms in
C Hi by chlorine atoms as in the compounds C Hq CI,

AERANGEMENT OF CORPUSCLES IN ATOM. 137

C H2 Chi C H CI3, C Chi is to produce substances which
depart more and more from being perfect gases as their
chlorine content is increased ; indeed, the later ones are
fluid at ordinary temperatures. Assuming that the
hydrogen atom is positively, and the chlorine atom nega-
tively, charged, the charge carried by the carbon atom varies
from — 4 in (7 H4 to + 4 in (7 Ch> and it is an interesting
subject of inquiry whether the residual attraction of the
carbon atom is afifected by the charge ; the residual attraction
of chlorine, however, is so great that it would probably swamp
the effect of the carbon. Since the residual attraction of
hydrogen is very small we should have a better chance
of detecting changes in the residual attraction of carbon if
we worked with compounds containing nothing but hydrogen
in addition to the carbon. A study of the values of a in Van
der Waals' equation for such compounds as C2 He, C2 H^,
C2 H2t in which the carbon atoms carry charges which vary
from one compound to another, might throw some light on this
question. In the compound C Hi the carbon is supposed to
carry a charge of — 4, and in C O (if the oxygen is tetra-
valent) a charge of + 4 ; the value of a for C Hi is '0379, and
that for C is less, viz., "0284, although the residual attrac-
tion of oxygen is probably greater than that of hydrogen.
This, as far as it goes, is in favour of the view that the
residual attraction of carbon is greater when it is negatively
than when it is positively charged.

Besides affecting the relation between the pressure and
volume, the residual attraction has apparently a great effect
upon the specific inductive capacity of the substance. Thus,
for example, the liquids which contain the radicles H,
JVO2, COH, have generally very large specific inductive
capacities ; and moreover, as Drude has shown, frequently
show anomalous dispersion for electric waves whose wave
lengths are enormously greater than the size of a molecule ;
this suggests that the large residual attraction between
the molecules leads to the formation of aggregates con-
taining a very large number of molecules, and that
the exceptionally large value of the specific inductive

188 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OP MATTER.

capacity is due to the presence in these liquids of such
aggregates.

On the view of chemical combination given above, the
valency of an element depends upon the number of
corpuscles which can be transferred to or from an atom of
the element by the action of atoms of other elements.
For each valency bond established between two atoms the
transference of one corpuscle from the one atom to the
other has taken place, the atom receiving the corpuscle
acquiring a unit charge of negative electricity, the other
by the loss of the corpuscle acquiring a unit charge of
positive. This electrical process may be represented by
the production of a unit tube of electric force between the
two atoms, the tube starting from the positive and ending
on the negative atom. In this way we can give a physical
interpretation to the lines by which in graphical formulae
the chemists represent the valency bonds, these lines
lepresenting the tubes of force which stretch between the
atoms connected by the bond. Thus, for example, the lines
in the graphical formula —

represent the tubes of electric force which stretch between
the carbon atom and the four hydrogen atoms. There is,
however, one important difference between the lines repre-
senting the bonds and the tubes of electric force. The
lines used by the chemist are not supposed to have direc-
tion. Thus, in the two compounds —

the lines joining the carbon atom to the hydrogen atom are
not distinguished in any way from those joining the

AREANGEMENT OF CORPUSCLES IN ATOM. 139

carbon to the chlorine atoms. On the electrical theory,
however, the tubes of electric force are regarded as having
direction starting from the positive and ending on the
negative atom ; thus, if the hydrogen atoms are positively
electrified in marsh gas and the chlorine atoms negatively
electrified in carbon tetrachloride, the graphical formulse
representing them would be —

respectively, indicating that the carbon atom is not in the
same condition in the two compounds, as in one case it is
the terminus, in the other the origin of the tubes of electric
force.

A method of investigating the magnitude and nature of
the residual attraction exerted by a gas which seems not
unlikely to lead to interesting results, is to find the effect
produced on the velocity of the ions, positive as well as
negative, through air when a small quantity of the gas under
consideration is mixed with the air. Thus, to take an
example of the effect we are considering, it has been found
that in carefully dried gases the velocity of the negative ion
is considerably greater than that of the positive when the
electric forces acting on themr are equal. If, however, a
little water vapour is added to the gas it produces a con-
siderable diminution in the velocity of the negative ion
while it hardly affects that of the positive. It seems quite
possible that this is due to the residual attraction of the OH
radicle in the water for a negative charge, making the water
molecules attract the negative ions more strongly than
they do the positive ones, so that the water molecules will
tend to attach themselves to the negative ions, and by
loading them up diminish their velocity. It would be
interesting to test this result by seeing whether other gases
which contain the hydroxyl group Oiii^ possess, like water,

V

rf J

» J ■* - J

140 THE COKPUSCULAE THEORY OF MATTER.

the power of loading up negative ions to a greater extent
than they do positive ones ; whether also there are not other
radicles or atoms which give to the compounds in which
they occur the same property ; and whether, though as yet
undiscovered, there may not be other atoms or radicles
which possess the power of loading up the positive ion more
than the negative one.

Another property which may perhaps throw light on the
different states of the two atoms in an elementary gas is
the magnetic qualities possessed by some elements even
when in the gaseous state. Perhaps one of the most
interesting things in physics is the magnetic quality of
oxygen. This gas when in the molecular condition is
strongly magnetic ; and ozone is even more magnetic than
oxygen. Oxygen is so magnetic that liquid oxygen will fly
to the poles of a bar magnet placed near it. But although
oxygen is so magnetic in the molecular condition, it does
not, with few exceptions, of which the most noticeable is
nitric oxide (A^ 0), preserve this quality in its compounds.
Thus a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen in the proportion
of two volumes of hydrogen to one of oxygen is magnetic,
but if the hydrogen and oxygen, instead of being mechani-
cally mixed, enter into chemical combination and form
water vapour, the result is a diamagnetic substance. Again,
equal volumes of oxygen and carbonic acid gas contain the
same amount of oxygen, yet the oxygen is magnetic, the
carbonic acid diamagnetic.

I am inclined to think that this property of oxygen is due
to one of the atoms in a molecule of oxygen being in a state
in which the atom is not usually found in oxygen com-
pounds, and that it is to the atoms in this state that
oxygen owes its magnetic quality. If we suppose that the
two atoms in the molecule of oxygen are held together by
electrical forces, one atom being positively, the other
negatively electrified, then in the molecule of oxygen we
have a positively electrified atom of oxygen, i.e., an atom
which has lost at least one, and probably more than one,
corpuscle, while in at any rate the vast majority of oxygen

c •• V ^ ,

AEEANGEMENT OP COEPUSCLES IN ATOM. 141

compounds the oxygen atom is negatively electrified. Now, if
we suppose that the oxygen atom which has lost corpuscles —
i.e., the positively electrified one — is magnetic, while the one
which has gained them — Le., the negatively electrified atom —
is either non-magnetic or diamagnetic, we can evidently
easily account for oxygen being magnetic in O2, and non-
magnetic or diamagnetic in its compounds. In support of
this view we may urge that a similar phenomenon seems
to occur in the case of iron, for Townsend has shown
that in solutions of iron salts the magnetic qualities of
the iron depend greatly upon the nature of the salts : thus for
all ferric salts the coefficient of magnetisation is equal to aA^
where N is the number of atoms of iron in unit volume of the
solution, and a is a constant which does not depend upon
the element with which the iron is in combination. Again,
the coefficient of magnetisation of all ferrous salts is j8 N,
where /? is again independent of the other constituent of the
salt ; /3 is not the same as a ; both the ferrous and ferric
salts are strongly magnetic, and in them it will be noticed
that the iron atom is positively charged. When, however,
the iron atom occurs in the negative part of the molecule,
as in the ferricyanides, Townsend proved that it showed
no magnetic quality, the ferricyanides being no more
magnetic than salts not containing iron. This shows that
the iron atom may be magnetic or non-magnetic according
as it is on the positively or negatively electrified side of the
molecule; and the phenomena associated with the magnetism
of oxygen and its compounds indicate that the oxygen atom
possesses a similar property.

CHAPTER VII.

ON THE NUMBEB OF CORPUSCLES IN AN ATOM.

If we take the view that corpuscles are an essential
constituent of the atom, one of the most fundamental
questions to be answered is, how many corpuscles are
there in an atom?

We shall consider three methods by which an estimate
of the number of corpuscles in an atom may be obtained.

Method I. — Secondary Rontgen Radiation.

This method is based on the determination of the pro-
portion between the energy in a beam of primary Rontgen
rays passing through a gas and that in the secondary Rontgen
rays emitted by the gas through which the primary rays
are passing.

When an electrified body is suddenly set in motion, or if
when in rapid motion it is suddenly stopped, pulses of intense
electric and magnetic force start from the body and travel
outwards through space with the velocity of light. The
pulses produced when the rapidly moving electrified particles
in a vacuum tube, called cathode rays, strike against the walls
of the tube and have their velocities rapidly diminished,
constitute on our hypothesis the well-known Rontgen rays.
We regard, then, the Rontgen rays as very thin pulses of
intense electric and magnetic force. When such a pulse
strikes against a corpuscle the electric force in the pulse
acting on the electric charge on the corpuscle in a very
short time makes the corpuscle move with a great velocity.
This sudden starting of the electrified corpuscle produces
another pulse of electric and magnetic force, and the aggre-
gate of such pulses constitutes the secondary radiation

NUMBEE OF CORPUSCLES IN AN- ATOM. 148

emitted by fche substance containing the corpuscles. The
corpuscle will emit the pulse only while the velocity is
changing, and if the corpuscle is free, or if the other forces
acting upon it are small compared with those in the pulse
of primary Rontgen radiation, the change in the velocity
of the corpuscle will take place while, and only while, the
primary pulse is passing over it, and the thickness of the
secondary pulse will be the same as that of the primary ; in
this case the quality of the secondary radiation as measured
by its penetrating power will be the same as that of the
primary. If, however, the corpuscle, after being displaced
by the primary ray, is acted upon by very intense forces
due to the proximity of other corpuscles, it is evident that
the character of the secondary pulse will not be the same
as when those forces are small, for in the latter case the
acceleration of the corpuscle will sink to a very small value
as soon as the primary pulse has left the corpuscle, so
that the primary and secondary pulses will have the same
thickness, while in the former case the acceleration of the
corpuscle will be large long after the pulse has passed the
corpuscle ; thus the breadth of the secondary pulse will be
much increased, and the secondary radiation will be of a
much more absorbable type than the primary. Again, if
the primary pulse is so thick or the corpuscles are so closely
packed that before the pulse has left one corpuscle it over-
laps another, the pulses emitted by the corpuscles will not
be separated by a finite interval, but will overlap and produce
a pulse thicker than the primary one. Thus if we find that
the secondary radiation is of the same type as the primary,
we may conclude that the pulses are so thin that they act
upon the corpuscles one at a time, and also that the forces
of restitution called into play by the displacement of the
corpuscle are small compared with the forces exerted on the
corpuscle by the electric force in the primary pulse. When these
conditions are fulfilled it can be shown (see J. J. Thomson,
" Conduction of Electricity through Gases,'* 2nd edition,
p. 326) that the energy of the secondary radiation emitted
per unit time per unit volume of a space containing corpuscles

144 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

is equal to -g j- times the energy in the primary radiation

passing through unit volume in that time. A'' is the number
of corpuscles per unit volume, e the charge on a corpuscle,
and 771 its mass.

Now Barkla, who has made very valuable investigations
on the Secondary Badiation produced by Rontgen rays,
finds that for elements with small atomic weight the
quality of the secondary radiation is the same as that of
the primary. He finds, too, in accordance with the expres-
sion just found, that the proportion between the energy of
the secondary radiation from such elements and the primary
radiation is independent of the nature of the primary radia-
tion, and that for different substances this ratio is directly
proportional to the density of the substance. Since this

Sir Ne^
ratio is equal to -^ t* this result shows that the number

of corpuscles in unit volume is proportional to the density
of the substance, and since the density is equal to the
number of atoms per unit volume multiplied by the atomic
weight, it follows from this result that the number of
corpuscles in an atom is proportional to the atomic weight
of the substance, e.g., that the number of corpuscles in an
atom of oxygen is sixteen times that in an atom of hydrogen,
and so on.

Barlila finds that the energy of the secondary radiation
from one cubic centimetre of air at atmospheric pressure is
about '00025 that of the primary radiation passing through
it. Hence we have —

^^ = -00026.

Now ^ = 1-2 X 10-20 and ejm = 1*7 x 10"^. Substituting
these values, we find —

Ne = 10.

If n is the number of molecules in a cubic centimetre of air
at atmospheric pressure and 0° C. we know —

ne = •4.

NUMBER OF CORPUSCLES IN AN ATOM. 145

Thus N = 25n, so that the molecules of air contain on the
average about twenty-five corpuscles. The molecular
weight of nitrogen is 28 ; this result suggests that the
number of corpuscles in the atom of nitrogen is equal to
the atomic weight of nitrogen. Since the energy scattered
by different gases is proportional to the density of the gas,
the number of corpuscles per unit volume must be also
proportional to the density ; hence if the number of
corpuscles in an atom of any one substance is equal to
the atomic weight of that substance, the number in an atom
of any substance whatever must be equal to the atomic
weight of that substance.

As this is a question of very great importance it is neces-
sary to consider carefully the assumptions made in proving

that the energy radiated per unit volume is equal to -^ — g-

times the energy in the primary rays. N is the number
of corpuscles set in motion by the primary pulse ; we have
assumed that all the corpuscles are set in motion. It might
be that some of the corpuscles are bound to the sphere of
positive electrification by forces so strong that practically
the corpuscles are rigidly attached to the atom and can-
not move without dragging the whole atom with them ; the
acceleration of corpuscles such as these would be so small
that they would give rise to very little radiation in com-
parison with the freely moving corpuscles, so that any
method based on secondary radiation would not be able to
detect these fixed corpuscles. We shall see, however, that
such could be detected by our second method.

Another assumption made was that the pulse of Rontgen
radiation was so thin as not to contain more than one cor-
puscle at once. In favour of this is the fact that the secondary
radiation from light substances is of the same quality as
the primary, whereas if the pulse covered several corpuscles
at once, the thickness of the pulse of the secondary radiation
would be greater than that of the primary pulse by the
distance between two corpuscles if the pulse at each collision
passed over two corpuscles before it got free from a corpuscle,

T.M. L

146 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OP MATTER.

by twice this distance if it passed over three, and so on. This
would make a great difference in the quality of the secondary
radiation if the thickness of the primary pulse were only
a small multiple of the distance between two corpuscles. It
would make comparatively little difference if the thickness
of the pulse were much greater than the diameter of an
atom ; so that the identity of the secondary and primary
radiation is not inconsistent with very thick pulses, although
it is so with moderately thick ones. If the pulses are
thicker than the atom, then all the corpuscles in an atom
will be moving as if they were a single charged body, with
a charge p e, and a mass p m it p is the number of
corpuscles in the atom; hence the energy radiated

per atom will be -^ ^; if n is the number of atoms

per unit volume, the energy radiated per unit volume is

S TT e^

-Q — 2 '^ P^' Since experiment shows that this is pro-
portional to the density, t.e., to n M if M is the atomic
weight, we see that if the Rontgen radiation were of this
character p^ would be proportional to M, so that p, the
number of corpuscles in the atom, would be proportional
to the square root of the atomic weight.

The fact that the secondary radiation from light liquids
and solids, as well as of gases, is of the same character as
that of the primary, shows, however, that the pulses in the
primary radiation cannot be so thick as we have supposed,
for if the thickness of the pulse were much greater than the
diameter of an atom then such a pulse on passing through
a solid or liquid consisting of such atoms would never be
free from corpuscles, and the secondary pulse would be very
much thicker and more drawn out than the primary.

When the primary pulse is thicker than the atom and
the electric force is in the same direction from back to front,
the energy radiated per atom is proportional to the square
of the number of corpuscles in the atom instead of to the
first power of the number, as it is when the pulses are
thin ; thus the radiation increases more rapidly with the

NUMBER OF CORPUSCLES IN AN ATOM. 147

number of corpuscles for thick pulses of this type than
for thin ones. This, however, is only true when the
electric force is uniform in direction throughout the pulse.
When the electric force in the pulse, instead of being
uniformly in one direction, is in one direction in the front
of the pulse and in the opposite direction in the rear,
the radiation from a thick pulse will be less than from
a thin one, for the corpuscles in the rear of the thick pulse
will have opposite accelerations to those in the front ; the
electric and magnetic forces produced by them will be in
opposite directions, they will neutralise each other's
effects, and the radiation from the two combined will be
much less than from either individually. On the other
hand, when the pulse is so thin that it can only cover one
corpuscle at a time the radiation from each corpuscle will
spread out independently and the energy radiated will be
directly proportional to the number of corpuscles.

The secondary radiation from substances with large atomic
weights is not entirely of the same character as the primary
radiation, indeed, from these substances by far the greater
part of the secondary radiation consists of cathode rays of
an easily absorbable type, so that as a whole the secondary
radiation is very much less penetrating than the primary.
Barkla found that the amount of secondary radiation of the
same penetrating type as the primary produced by sub-
stances with large atomic weights is often less than that
from the lighter elements ; in the case of the latter, however,
practically all the secondary radiation is of a penetrating
type, while this type forms only a fraction of the total
radiation from the heavier elements. We should expect
the penetrating radiation to begin to diminish if the cor-
puscles in the atom get so crowded that the Rontgen pulses
spread over more than one corpuscle at once, provided that the
direction of the electric force in the pulse is reversed between
the front and the rear of the pulse. Barkla found that with
the rays he used, the elements of smaller atomic weight
than calcium gave off secondary radiation of the same type
as the primary, while the secondary radiation from calcium

L 2

148 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

and elements with larger atomic weights consisted chiefly
of easily absorbable cathode rays. I found that the element
at which the change took place depended upon the quality
of the primary rays, and that with very soft rays the
change in the character of the secondary radiation can take
place at lighter elements than calcium.

If, as the result of the passage of the primary rays
through the gas, the gas is ionized, i.e., if corpuscles are
detached from the atoms, the collisions made by these
corpuscles will increase the secondary radiation ; this
increase will, however, consist of a radiation which is not
in general of the same type as the primary.

Second Method of Estimating the Number of Corpuscles
IN AN Atom : by Determining the Opacity of a Sub-
stance TO Cathode Rays.

If a cathode ray is travellintr with a very high velocity
through a collection of corpuscles, then when it passes close
to one of the corpuscles it will be deflected ; as the result of
such deflections a bundle of cathode rays originally parallel to
the axis of x will getmore and more diffuse as they pass through
the substance, and the number passing in unit time through a
unit area at right angles to the axis of x will get smaller and
smaller as the length of path of the rays increases. The
amount of deflection experienced.by the moving corpuscle will
depend to some extent upon the firmness with which the cor-
puscles in the absorbing substance are held in their positions
of equilibrium by the forces inside the atom. The solution of
the problem when these forces are taken into account would
be exceedingly difficult and complex. We may, however,
represent to some extent the action of these forces by
increasing the mass of the corpuscles in the absorbing sub-
stance, the effect of a corpuscle that is held absolutely
rigidly by the forces acting upon it being the same as if it
were free from such forces but had an infinite mass.

It can be shown that on these suppositions the number of
corpuscles which pass through unit area at right angles to
the X axis, at a distance ^ from the place where the stream of

X = 4

NUMBEE OF COEPUSCLES IN AN ATOM. 149

corpuscles enters the substance, is equal to Jo <"**, where
Jo is the number when a; = o and —

{See J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mag.y June, 1906, ** Conduction
of Electricity through Gases,'* 2nd edition, p. 377.)

In this expression N is the number of corpuscles per unit
volume of the absorbing substance, e the charge on a
corpuscle in electro-magnetic units. Mi the mass of a
corpuscle in the atoms of the absorbing substance, M^
that of the moving corpuscle, V the velocity of the moving
corpuscle, Vq the velocity of light, and a the distance between
the corpuscles in the atoms of the absorbing substance ; A. is
the coefficient of absorption of the cathode rays in the sub-
stance. We can express the value of A. in terms of P, the
number of corpuscles in an atom of the absorbing substance,
for if d is the density of the substance, /* the mass of an
atom, P d = Nfi, thus —

X

d

A ^^'

f;«y

Afi + Ma
Ml Ml

Now

e/M,

= 1-7 X 107

e

= 1-2

X 10-20

Hi Ml ^ \e\VoJ Mi+M, J

— = 10^ Iw, where iv is the atomic weight of the

absorbing substance, and Fq = 3 X 10^® is the velocity
of light.

Substituting these values we find —

A ^ 47rP fV 1-05 Ml + M2 . (afVy MiXM2 _.\
d w F* ^ 30 Ml ^\e^\vjMi + M2 r

The absorption considered in this investigation is that due
to the scattering of the corpuscles by collisions with other
corpuscles ; the change in the kinetic energy of the colliding
corpuscle is neglected. This absorption is analogous to" the

150 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

scattering which takes place when a ray of light passes
through a layer of powdered glass. As it is important to
have a clear idea of what is meant by this coefficient we
shall consider a special case. Suppose the incident
corpuscles form a thin cylindrical beam E F G H; after
passing through the absorbing substance this beam will be
scattered, and its section will be much larger. The coefficient
of absorption we have investigated is measured by the
diminution in the energy passing across a section of
L M N Pf the prolongation of the incident beam, and not
to the diminution in the total amount of energy passing
through the plate ; this will of course be much less than the
diminution in the energy passing through a section of
L M N P. Thus if the corpuscles originate from a radio-
active substance placed in a metal tube E F G H, the
coefficient of absorption of the plate is measured by the
diminution in the number which pass through a tube
L M N Py the prologation of the tube in which the radio-
active substance is placed, and not by the diminution in
the number of corpuscles which find their way through the
plate. In the experiments hitherto made on the absorption
of the P rays the quantity measured has been the ionisation
produced by all the rays which emerge from the absorbing
layer ; this may explain the reason why the values of ^/d
obtained by various physicists for the ^ rays given out by
radio-active substances are much smaller than the values for
rapidly-moving cathode rays produced in a vacuum tube,
when the absorptions have been determined by measuring
the quantity passing through a constant area, like that of
the section of the tube L M N P, and not the quantity
passing through the wliole of the absorbing plate. That
this difference is very marked and too great to be accounted
for by differences in the velocities of the corpuscles may be
seen from the fact that \/d varies from 5 to 10, for the /S
rays from uranium, which, according to Becquerel, have a
velocity of 1*6 X 10^^ cm/sec, while Becker found that for
cathode rays with a velocity of 10^*^ cm/sec. \/d varied
between 1,200 and 2,000. Some experiments recently

NUMBER OF CORPUSCLES IN AN ATOM. 151

made at the Cavendish Laboratory by Mr. Crowther have
shown that when A. is the diminution in the quantity of
rays passing through unit area X/d for rays from
uranium is as much as 150. As the quantity measured
in the experiment with the cathode rays corresponds to our
coefficient of absorption, while that for the uranium rays
does not, we shall use the former to determine the value
of P/w.

Taking the case investigated by Becker, where V = 10^^
and putting Mi = M2, we find from the equation on page
149 that—

^ = 67^1og.ft#-iy

But {see p. 34) ikf = -||- where b = lO'^^ ^nj ^g ^Yie
radius of a corpuscle, hence —

-d = '' .7 ''^- (^nrwr^ -

if we take a to be of the order 10"^

d = ^^w ^'^' (27)

approximately — __ rc/^ ^

w

As X/d varies between 1,200 and 2,000, we see from this
that P/w cannot be large, i.e., that the number of corpuscles
in the atom must be of the same order as the atomic
weight.

This method supplements the preceding method (p. 142),
for on the former method corpuscles which are so firmly
held that they are not moved by the Rontgen rays would
not be accounted for. The present method is not open to
this objection ; on the other hand, this method involves the
assumption that, however small may be the distance
between the corpuscles, the repulsion between them varies
inversely as the square of the distance.

162 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OP MATTER.

The Information Given by the Optical Pbopebties of
Bodies on the Stbuctube of the Atom.

We could estimate the number of corpuscles if we had
measurements of the dispersion of light by a monatomic gas.
For it can be shown (see Phil. Mag., June, 1906) that if the
atom contains n corpuscles in a sphere of uniform positive
electrification, the refractive index ft of the gas for light
waves with a frequency |) is given by the equation —

fjfl - 1 _ j'TrNimlP + ME e) (1)

ft^ + 2 ^ir p {M e + mE) --m M p^

here N is the number of atoms per cubic centimetre, e the
charge on a corpuscle whose mass is m, M the mass of the
sphere of positive electrification, E the magnitude of the
positive charge, so that E = n e, p is the density of
the positive electricity. The waves of light are supposed
to be very much longer than the diameter of an atom, so
that the electric force in the light wave is regarded as
constant throughout an atom.

For infinitely long waves p = o, hence

H-^ — 1 _ NE
/^' + 2- p '

= N (volume of the sphere of positive electrification).

= volume occupied by these spheres per cubic centimetre
of the gas.

This value agrees with that given by Mossotti's theory,
where the atoms are regarded as perfectly conducting
spheres.

If the term in p^ is small, Equation (1) may be written —

P? - 1 _ N E J^.iVfm 3^ 1

/t2 + 2 p I '^ E e ' 4.irp M-^nm^l

2

N E

e^' 4:Tr p ' n {M + n m) )

M

tbe only factor which involves n is ,,^ . r and this is

n{M-\-7i m)

always less than Ijn, thus the dispersion (for the same sized

J

NUMBEK OP CORPUSCLES IN AN ATOM. 168

atom) will diminish rapidly as n increases, and by measure-
ments of the dispersion we could get an estimate of the value
of n. Though we have at present no measurements of the
dispersion of the monatomic gases, there seems reason
from some experiments made by Lord Eayleigh to believe
that it is of the same order as for diatomic gases. The
dispersion of hydrogen has been shown by Ketteler to be
given by the formula —

At^- 1 ^1 ( 2-8014 X 10-* + 2 X lO-^M \
,^2 + 2 3 V \^)

where X is the wave length.

Comparing this with the above formula, and remembering

2 TT T^

that 2? = — T— where V is the velocity of light, we find —

- -^rr-. = 1 approximately.

n M +nm ^^ '^

This result shows that n cannot differ much from unity,
hence it a monatomic gas had the same density and the
same optical properties as hydrogen, it could not have many
corpuscles in the atom. This result confirms those given
by the preceding methods, that the number of corpuscles
in the atom is proportional to the atomic weight.

The preceding expression for the refractive index of a
gas involves the assumption that the force exerted by the
positive electricity tending to bring a corpuscle back to its
original position when displaced is equal to /a times the
displacement where ft is the same for all the corpuscles.
This assumption, however, is not true for diatomic mole-
cules where the atoms are held together by the forces
resulting from the displacement of the valency corpuscles.
Thus, to take a simple case, when we have two atoms each
containing one corpuscle, the atoms being of different sizes,
when the smaller atom gets a certain distance inside the
larger one, the corpuscle which was originally at the centre
of the larger atom suddenly jumps into the smaller one and
takes up a position at E inside the smaller atom, E being
on the same side of B, the centre of the smaller atom, as A

154 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OP MATTER.

the centre of the larger one. The eorpusde which was
originally at B is displaced to Fy F and E being on
opposite sides of B. The corpuscle at E corresponds to the
valency corpuscle.

Consider this corpuscle when it was in a position Ei
before moving into the smaller atom : if it is displaced
through a distance (, the forces due to the positive electri-
fication tending to bring it back to its original position are

\ "^^jTW ^ /^' while if Fi was the corresponding position

of jF', the forces tending to bring it back are f-^+pjf, where

a and h are the radii of the larger and smaller atoms respec-
tively. The coefficients of ^in these expressions are different,
and the preceding investigation does not apply. To find the
expression for the refractive index in a case like this we
may inake use of a theorem due to Lorentz, which states
that the refractive index /jl for light whose frequency isp, due
to a system of electrified particles with a charge e and
mass in, and having pi, p^, ps, . . . for the frequencies of
their vibrations about their positions of equilibrium, is
given by the equation —

L + N2- +

m

^'^1 ( ^^'^

pi — p^

where iVi is the number of systems per unit volume
having the frequency p\, N^ the number having the
frequency p2f and so on.

It follows from this expression that the systems for
which pr is small make the largest contributions to the value
ot (jjfi — 1) I ifjfi -\- 2). When pr is small the force of restitution
tending to bring the electrified particle back to its original
position when it is displaced from it, is small, so that the
particles which are easily displaced are those which have
the greatest influence on the rrfraction. If we suppose that
there are some particles which are so much more easily dis-
placed than others that their influence on the refractive
index swamps that of the other particles, and if we suppose

NUMBER OF CORPUSCLES IN AN ATOM. 155

that these loosely held particles have all the same period 2>09
then we shall have, if N is the number of these particles
per unit volume —

tt2

+

1

—

m

Po' - P"

Now there is a number of substances for which the
relation between the refractive index and the frequency
can be expressed by the simple relation —

/i^- 1 A

and the experiments of Ketteler and others furnish us with
the values of A. Comparing this with the preceding
expression for (ft^ — 1) / (ft^ + 2) we see that —

A =

N

e

2

m

Now since we know e/m and e, we can from this equation
determine N, the number of these systems in unit volume.
This has been done by Drude, who finds that the number
determined in this way is greater than the number of atoms
in that volume but not very much greater ; it is very seldom,
for example, as much as ten times greater. Also Drude found
that the greater the chemical valency of the atoms in the
refracting substance the greater was the number of the
refracting systems per atom. Since in substances of great
atomic weight the number of these refracting systems is
only three or four times the number of the atoms, and
therefore small compared with the number of corpuscles, it
is evident that the corpuscles in the atom do not all take
the same share in producing refraction, but that practically
the whole of the work is done by a small fraction of the
corpuscles, and that the greater the valency the larger is the
number of corpuscles which give rise to refraction. We
should expect a result of this kind, for the valency gives an
indication of the number of corpuscles displaced, and these
corpuscles, which are displaced by the action of one atom

156 THE CORPUSCULAR -THEORY OF MATTER.

on others, are in all probability much less firmly fixed than
those which retain their positions under this action ; thus
since the valency corpuscles are the ones most easily moved
they are the ones which produce the greatest effect upon the
refractive index. The optical properties of other than mon-
atomic gases are thus complicated by considerations which
make them unsuitable for determining the total number of
corpuscles in the atom.

In a discussion of the optical properties of gases we must
consider a very obvious objection to the view that the num-
ber of corpuscles in the atom is not a large multiple of the
atomic weight. The objection is as follows : If the lines in
the spectrum are due to the vibrations of the corpuscles in
the atom, then since for n corpuscles there are 3n degrees
of freedom, the maximum number of different periods of
vibration of the system, i.e., of lines in the spectrum, is 3w.
Hence on this view the number of corpuscles in the atom
could not be less than one-third the number of lines in the
spectrum, and this would for many elements be very much
greater than the number representing the atomic weight.
The case is, however, even stronger than this, for all, or
nearly all, the lines in the line spectra of the elements show
the Zeeman effect, i.e., they can be resolved by a magnetic
field into at least three components ; thus each line showing
this effect must correspond, not to a single isolated period,
but to the coalescence of three equal periods. Now if we
consider the theory of the vibrations of a system of n cor-
puscles, we find that p^, where p is the frequency of a vibra-
tion, is given by an equation of the 3n degree, which could
have at most Sn different roots. Many of these roots, how-
ever, would be isolated and the lines in the spectrum
corresponding to them would not show the Zeeman effect ;
it is only the comparatively small number of frequencies, for
which three of the roots of the equation are equal, which
would give rise to lines having the properties of the lines
in the spectrum. Thus if the spectrum of a body arose
from the vibrations of the corpuscles in the atoms the
number of corpuscles would have to be very greatly in excess

NUMBEE OF CORPUSCLES IN AN ATOM. 157

of the number of lines in the spectrum, and therefore very
much larger than the atomic weight.

I would urge against this objection that we have no
evidence that the majority of the lines in the spectrum
of an element arise from the atoms when in the normal
state. Luminosity occurs when a gas is either traversed
by an electric current or when it is raised to a high tem-
perature, and in either case the gas is ionized, i.e., we have,
in addition to the normal atoms, positively charged ions
and negatively electrified corpuscles. A positively electrified
ion and a corpuscle might form a system analogous to the
solar system, in which the positively electrified ion, with its
large mass, takes the part of the sun while the corpuscles
circulate round it as planets. The forces acting oh the
corpuscles are in part due to the attraction of the positive
charge which produces a force varying inversely as the
square of the distance, and in part due to the forces arising
from the corpuscles and positive electricity within the ion.
Thus, except in the case where there is a single corpuscle at
the centre of a sphere of positive electrification, these forces
will be finite and will vary not only with the distance of
the corpuscle from the ion but also with the angular
position of the corpuscle.

Now the question arises whether such a system could
give rise to vibrations having definite periods separated
by finite intervals as in the case of the line spectrum of
the gas. In order that the corpuscle outside the ion may
give a definite line it must revolve in a closed orbit; if
orbits having all possible periods within certain limits were
possible, then the systems of ions and corpuscles would
give a continuous and not a line spectrum. Now if the
forces between the positive ion and the corpuscle were
simply a central force varying inversely as the square of
the distance, there would be an infinite number of elliptic
orbits for the corpuscle with continuously varying periods,
and the spectrum would be a continuous one. When, how-
ever, as in our case, the force between the ion and the cor-
puscle is much more complex, the number of possible

158 THE CORPUSCULAB THEORY OF MATTER

periodic orbits becomes much more limited. For some lainrs
of force no periodic orbits at all exist; this, for example, is
the case where the total force on the corpuscle is that due
to a simple electrical doublet.

The results obtained by Sir George Darwin in his paper
on " Periodic Orbits " in the Actct-Mathematica have an im-
portant bearing on the question we are discussing. Darwin
discusses the possible periodic orbits of a particle of infini-
tesimal mass under the action of the sun and a planet

FIG. 28.

whose mass is 1/10 that of the sun. If we consider the
orbits in which the particle moves as a satellite round the
planet, the forces acting on the particle will consist of a
central force varying inversely as the square of the distance
and a force due to the attraction of the sun. We can resolve
this force into two forces, one acting towards the planet and
the other at right angles to the line joining the planet with
its satellite, and we get some resemblance between these
forces and those on a corpuscle arising from a very simple
atom with a positive charge. The radial attraction due to the
positive charge corresponds to the attraction of the planet,

NUMBEE OP CORPUSCLES IN AN ATOM. 159

-while the forces due to the corpuscles and sphere of positive
electrification, though probably much more complex, may
be compared with the attraction of the sun.

Now Darwin found that in the neighbourhood of the planet
there is a region (unshaded area b, Fig. 28) through which
no periodic orbit can pass, and though with the proportion
between the masses of the sun and planet of 10 to 1, the
region is not closed, Darwin expresses the opinion that with
a larger value of this ratio this space would extend to an
annular ring round the planet. We may, perhaps, imitate
the greater complexity of the forces exerted by the atom
over those at work in Darwin's problem by supposing that
not one but several suns disturb the motion of the satellite ;
when it seems not improbable that we might have several
rings instead of one in which periodic orbits are impossible.
If these rings grow we might get to a condition of things
in which the paths of periodic orbits are confined to a
number of annuli (1), (2)...(n), between these rings. If the
times of describing the orbits in region (1) vary from Ti to
Ti + A Tu those in the region (2) from Ta to Ta + A Ta,
and so on, the lines in the spectrum given out by systems
formed by the positive ion and one corpuscle, wo aid consist
of a line of finite width corresponding to periods of vibration
varying from Ti to Ti + A 2\, followed by another line
with periods from Ta to Ta + A Ta, and so on: if A Ti/Tu
A T2JT2 are small these lines will be sharp, while if these
quantities are appreciable the lines will be broad. On this
view the different lines are given out by different systems,
the line 2\ by a positive ion and a corpuscle travelling
round the region (1), the line Ta by a positive ion and a cor-
puscle travelling round the region (2). If there were two
corpuscles travelling round the same ion, one corpuscle
being in region (1) the other in region (2), the two corpuscles
would repel each other and soon make the orbits very
irregular. The very large variations that take place in the
relative intensities of different lines in the spectra produced
by electrical discharges, by slight alterations in the discharge
seem in accordance with the view that the different lines

160 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

originate in different systems. The periods Ti Ta-.-are deter •
minate if we know the law of force exerted by the ion ; the
values will be connected with each other by certain relations :
in other words, the vibrations corresponding to Ti, Ta- . . would
form what is called in spectroscopy a series. If we had an
ion with a charge of two units of electricity instead of one.

V.

Fig. 29.

the regions (1) (2)... would be displaced and the times Tu
Ta,.-' altered, so that we should get a new series.

Any line arising from the revolution of a corpuscle in
a closed orbit would show the Zeeman effect.

Another way of regarding the problem which leads to
similar results is as follows : — Suppose we regard the charged
ion as a Boscovichian atom exerting a central force on a
corpuscle which changes from repulsion to attraction and
from attraction to repulsion several times between the

NUMBEE OF CORPUSCLES IN AN ATOM, 161

surface of the ion and a point at a distance from the surface
comparable with molecular distance, such a force, for
example, as is represented graphically in Pig. (29) where
the abscissae represent distances from the atom, and the
ordinates the forces exerted by the atom on a corpuscle at a
distance represented by the abscissa, the forces being
repulsions when the representative point is below the line;
attractions when it is above it. Now from any point where
the force is attractive it is possible to project a corpuscle at
right angles to the radius with such a velocity that it will,
if free from disturbance, describe a circular orbit round the
atom. The theory of central orbits shows, however, that
only under a certain condition would these orbits be stable
and able to exist in a system like that in a luminous gas
subject to external disturbances. The condition that the
circular orbit should be stable when its radius is a is that
if P, the central attractive force due to the atom at a
distance 7*, is written in the form P = w^ <^ (w), where

u = 1/r, then

<i>{a) a a

Now this condition will only be satisfied at parts of the
Boscovichian curve; if these parts are denoted by the
thickened portions of the curve in Fig. 29, the possible
orbits will be confined to distances from the atom corre-
sponding to the dotted belts in the figure, and we shall
get the. same conditions as before and the same arguments

will apply.

It might be urged against the view that the vibrations
in the line spectra of the elements are due to systems
manufactured in the flame or in the electric discharge, and
which do not exist in the normal atom, that the reversals
of the bright lines in a spectrum show that in the reversing
layer there are systems which have the same periods as
those producing the lines, and therefore if the reversing
layer consists of gas in its normal state there must in such
a gas be systems having the same periods of vibration as

T.M. M

162 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER

the lines in the spectrum. It must, however, be remembered
that in at any rate the great majority of eases the reversing
layer does not consist of gas in its normal state ; this layer
is in the immediate neighbourhood of the luminous gas in
the arc, spark or flame, or is itself at a high temperature.
In all these cases it is ionised, i.e., contains positive ions
and corpuscles which may build up a system like those
which we have supposed to be the origin of the bright lines,
and absorb the light having the same period as those
lines.

On the Origin of the Mass of the Atom.

Since the mass of a corpuscle is only about one- seventeen-
hundredth part of that of an atom of hydrogen, it follows
that if there are only a few corpuscles in the hydrogen
atom the mass of the atom must in the main be due to its
other constituent — the positive electricity. Now we have
seen that the mass of the corpuscle may be regarded as
arising wholly from its charge, and it might appear that
this result obliged us to regard mass as arising in two
distinct ways, the origin of one kind of mass — that of the
corpuscles — being electrical, while that of the rest of the
atom is mechanical. It is, however, I think, possible to
take a point of view from which this separation of the
nature of these two masses disappears. In my "Electricity
and Matter " (p. 6) I showed that we might regard the mass
of a corpuscle as the mass of the ether carried along by
the tubes of electric force attached to the corpuscle as they
move through the ether. An example taken from vortex
motion through a fluid may make this idea clearer. When
a vortex ring moves through the fluid it carries along with
it a volume of the fluid which may be very much greater
than the volume of the ring itself ; in fact, if the ring is
very thin and the velocity very great, the volume of the
ring will be quite insignificant with that of the fluid which
it carries along with it. Now the effective mass of the ring
will be the mass of the ring itself plus the mass of the
fluid it carries with it, and when the ring is thin the

NUMBEE OF COEPUSCLES IN AN ATOM. 163

effective mass will be practically that of the attached
fluid. The ring is a closed curve without ends. Let us
consider the case of a vortex filament which is not closed
but which has ends. The theory of vortex motion teaches
us that these ends must, if they are not on the free surface
of the liquid, be on bodies or cavities in the liquid. Let us
suppose that the ends are on two bodies, A and B, which
are so light as to have no appreciable mass of their own.
Now when the system consisting of A and B and the con-
necting vortex filament moves through the fluid it will
carry with it a certain volume of the fluid, and if the fila-
ment is very thin the effective mass of the system will be the
mass of this fluid carried along with it by the system. Now
this fluid is carried (1) by the vortex filament ; (2) by the
bodies A and B ; if, for example, the latter are spheres,
they will each carry along with them a volume of the fluid
amounting to one-half of their own volume. Let us com-
pare this system with that of a unit of positive electricity
connected by tubes of electric force with a unit of negative
electricity, the tubes of electric force corresponding to the
vortex filament and the seat of the positive and negative
electrification to the bodies A and B. We may suppose
that when this system moves through the ether it carries
some of the ether along with it ; the portion carried by the
tubes of force will depend on the distribution of these tubes,
and since this distribution depends on the velocity, the
mass of the ether carried along in this way will depend
upon the velocity ; the portions of the ether carried by the
seats of the electrification will, if our analogy holds, not
depend upon the velocity. We may interpret the results of
the experiments described on page 33 as indicating that the
amount of the ether carried by the seat of the negative
electrification is very small compared with that carried by
the tubes of electric force, and the result that the mass of
the positive electricity is large compared with that of the cor-
puscle as indicating that the amount of ether carried along
by the seat of the positive electricity is very large compared
with that carried by the tubes of electric force and the seat

164 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

of the negative electricity ; that, in fact, the system of the
positive and negative units of electricity is analogous to a
large sphere connected with vortex filaments with a very
small one, the large sphere corresponding to the positive
electrification, the small one to the negative.

On the Size of the Sphere of Positive

Electrification.

The connection between the volume of the sphere of
positive electrification and the number of corpuscles in the
atom is a very important question on the theory of the
structure of the atom which we have been discussing.
The number of corpuscles in the atom is equal to the
number of units of positive electricity in the sphere, and is
proportional to the atomic weight.

The great majority of the methods by which the size of
atoms is determined do not give the geometrical boundary
of the atom, but what is called the range of molecular
iiction, i.e., the greatest distance at which the forces due
to the atom produce appreciable effect ; they give, in fact^
the dynamical rather than the geometrical boundary of the
atom. On a theory such as that of Boscovich, in which the
atoms are regarded merely as centres of force, the dynamical
boundary is the only one which has to be considered ; but
in a theory such as the one we have been discussing, where
we regard the atom as having a definite size and shape, we
have to consider the geometrical as well as the dynamical
boundary of the atom.

There is one method, however, by which we can in certain
cases deduce the geometrical boundary of the atom, for we
have seen that for a monatomic gas, if /* is the refractive
index for infinitely long waves —

2-1

where a is the radius of the sphere of positive electrification
and iV the number of atoms per unit volume of the gas.

NUMBEE OF CORPUSCLES IN AN ATOM. 165
For a gas /it is so nearly equal to unity that we may write
- (/I — 1) for ^g , so that for gases fj^ - 1 will be pro-

portional to the volume of the sphere of positive electrifica-
tion. The following Table, the data for which are taken
from the paper by Cuthbertson and Metcalfe (Phil. Trans.^
A., vol. 207, p. 188, 1907), gives the value of ft — 1 for many
of the elements when in the gaseous state : —

Gas.

Helium . .

72 X 10-«

4

18

Neon . .

137 X 10-«

20

6-85

Argon . .

508 X 10-«

40

12-7

Krypton .

850 X 10-«

80

10-6

Xenon . .

1878 X 10-«

128

10-7

Mercury .

1866 X 10-«

200

9-8

Hydrogen .

189 X 10-«

1

139

Nitrogen .
■ Phosphorus

297 X 10-«

14

21

1197 X 10-«

81

39

(Arsenic

1550 X 10-^

75

20

Oxygen

270 X 10-*

16

17

Sulphur .

1101 X io-«

82

84

1 Selenium .

1565 X 10-«

79

20

(Tellurium .

2495 X 10-«

127

20

(Zinc . .
(Cadmium .

2060 X 10- «

65

80

2675 X 10-«

112

1

1

24

10«xO*- l)/(atomic
weight).

For the lighter elements the variations in (/a - 1)/ (atomic
weight) are very irregular, but for those of large atomic
weight in one group this quantity is fairly constant, indi-
cating that the volume of the sphere of positive electrification
is roughly proportional to the atomic weight when there are
a great many corpuscles in the atom.

In many compounds of the lighter elements the value of

T.M.

M^

166 THE CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF MATTER.

(/A— 1) does not increase nearly as rapidly as the density »
and for a considerable number of sach compounds the value
of (fi-* 1) at constant temperature and pi-essure is, as Traube
has shown, approximately proportional to the sum of the
valencies of the atoms in a molecule of the compound.
The preceding table shows that this result does not apply
to the heavier elements.

We may illustrate the efiect of valency on the refractive
index in the following way : — We have supposed that there
are in the atom some corpuscles equal in number to the
valency which are especially easily moved. To represent
the mobility of these corpuscles let us suppose that they
are placed in a shell of positive electricity of small density
around the much denser core which contains the rest of the
corpuscles and the equivalent quantity of positive electricity.
Thus we may picture the atom as having a crowded centre,
surrounded by a rarified atmosphere through which a few
corpuscles are scattered, the positive electricity in the
atmosphere being equivalent to the negative charge on the
corpuscles scattered through it.

Now we can easily see that the value of (/* — 1) for a
collection of atoms of this kind will consist of two terms,
one proportional to the volume of the atmosphere, and the
other proportional to the volume of the core. The volume
of the atmosphere will be proportional to the number of
corpuscles in it, i.e., to the positive valency, while the
volume of the core will be proportional to the number of
the remaining corpuscles ; this for elements whose atomic
weight is large compared with their valency, will be pro-
portional to the atomic weight.

Thus, the value of (ft— 1) will consist of- two terms, one
proportional to the valency, the other to the atomic weight.
When the atomic weight is not great the first term may be
the important one, while for the heavier elements the
effect of the atomic weight may overpower that of the
valency.

The dispersion of the substance is influenced by the
valency atoms to an even greater extent than the refractivity

NUMBER OF CORPUSCLES IN AN ATOM. 167

for we can show that ft, the refractive index for waves,
of length Ay is given hy the equation

/u,2 — 1 _ „ I r» 2 ^* 1 8ir

= Po + Po'

+ <;>o + Qo' ^2 - -^

where X is the number of atoms per cubic centimetre,
VI and e the mass and charge of a corpuscle, Pq the part of
(fj?—!) I (At^+2) due to the core for infinitely long waves, Qq.
the part due to the atmosphere, n the number of corpuscles
in the core, p the number of valency corpuscles. Since p is in
general small compared with //, we see that unless Pq is
large compared with Qo, the part of the co-efficient of l/A^"
which depends on Qq will be much larger than that which
depends on Pq, i.e., the dispersion will depend chiefly on.
the valency atoms.

As these valency atoms are easily detached we should
expect that they would increase the amount of ionization
when the gas is ionized by some external means. Bragg,
finds that the number of ions produced by the a rays
from radium in equal volumes of different gases at the
same temperature and pressure is proportional to the
molecular volume of the gas. As this molecular volume is
proportional to 0^— 1), and as the valency corpuscles have
great influence on this quantity for the lighter elements, we
see that thev also increase the ionization.

INDEX.

A.

a PARTICLES, properties of, 25

value of e/m for, 24
Abegg, on valency, 118
Absorption of cathode rays, 148,

150
Alloys, thermal and electrical

conductivity of, 58, 69 I
Anomalous dispersion, 187
Arrangement of corpuscles in

atom, 108 et aeq.
Atom, Boscovichian, 160

number of corpuscles in,

142 et seq.
origin of mass of, 162
volume of, 164
Atoms, forces between, 120

forces between like atoms
in a molecule, 127
Attraction, residual, 137

B.

Barkla, energy of secondary

radiation, 144, 147
Becker, absorption of cathode

rays, 150
Becquerel, velocity of 3 rays from

uranium, 150
Bonds, chemical, 186
Boscovichian atom, 160
Bose, effect of electric charge on

electric resistance of a metal, 88
Boyle's law, interpretation of

deviations from, 186
Bragg, properties of a particles,

25

C.

Canalstbahlbn, 17

spectrum produced by, 18
value of e/m for, 18 et seq.
Carbon atom, 188, 184
Cathode rays,

absorption of, 148, 150
determination of velocity of, 8
electrostatic deflection of, 5
magnetic deflection of, 7
penetration of. Hertz experi-
ments, 7
Charge of negative electricity

carried by cathode rays, 4
Chemical combination, 120
Combination, chemical, 120
Condensation of water drops, 11
Conduction, electric, corpuscular

theory of, 49, 86
Conduction metallic, corpuscular

theory of, 49 et seq.
Conduction thermal, corpuscular

theory of, 55, 88
Corpuscle, electric field due to, 44
magnetic field due to, 44
origin of mass of, 28
Corpuscles,

arrangement in one plane, 107

definition of 2

electric charge carried by, 11

mass of, 16

number in an atom, 142 et seq,

number of per unit volume of

a metal, 80

occurrence of, 10

Corpuscular pressure, 119

170

INDEX.

Corpuscular theory, statement

of, 1
theory of radiation, 61 et seq,
Orookes, Sir W., experiment with

cathode rays, 3
Cuthbertson and Metcalfe, refrac-
tivity of gases, 166

D.
Dabwin, Sm G., periodic orbits,

158
Deflection of cathode rays
by an electric field, 5
by a magnetic field, 7
Des Coudres, value of ejm for a

particles, 24
Dewar and Fleming, effect of
temperature on resistance of
metals and alloys, 59
Diesselhorst and Jaeger, electric
and thermal conductivities, 57
Dispersion, anomalous, 137
Dispersion of light, 152

influence of valency on, 155
Drude, anomalous dispersion, 137
effect of valency on disper-
sion, 155

E.

Electric charge carried by a cor-
puscle, 11
conduction, corpuscular

theory of, 49, 86
field due to corpuscles,

44
force, tubes of, 138
Electricity, one fluid theory of, 26
Electrolysis of bromine and iodine

solutions, 130
Electropositive and electronega-
tive elements, 114

valency, 117, 122
Electrostatic deflection ol cathode

rays, 5
ejm values for a particles, 24

elm values for canalstrahlen, 18 et

seq,
corpuscles, 32

Ethane, 131
Ethylene, 132

F.

Fitzgerald, Peltier effect, 76
Fleming and Dewar, effect of tem-
perature on resistance of metals
and alloys, 59
Floating magnets, arrangement

of, 110
Force, tubes of, 138
Forces between atoms, 120

between like atoms in
molecule, 127
Fomrier, analysis of radiation, 65,
91

G.

Gases, refractivity of, 165
Goldstein, canalstrahlen, 17

H.

Haoen and Rubens, electric con-
ductivity of metals, 84

Hall effect, 68, 99

HeHum, canalstrahlen in, 21

Hertz, penetration of cathode
rays, 7

Huff, value of efm for a particles,
24

Hydrogen, canalstrahlen in, 21
dispersion of, 153

I.

Ions, velocity of, 139

Iron salts, magnetism of, 141

Isomers, 131

J.

Jaeger and Diesselhorst, electric
and thermal conductivities, 57

INDEX.

171

K

Eaufmann, values of e/m for

rapidly moving corpuscles, 32
Ketteler, formula for dispersion,

153
Kelvin, forces between electrified

systems, 121
Eleeman, properties of a particles,

25

L.

Labmor, radiation from moving

corpuscle, 91
Light, dispersion of, 153
Lorentz, formula for dispersion of
Ught, 153
theory of radiation, 61
Zeeman effect, 35

M.
Mackenzie, value of ejin for a

particles, 24
Magnetic deflection of cathode
rays, 7
force due to moving
corpuscles, 43
effect of, on flow
of a current, 68
Magnetism of iron salts, 141

oxygen, 140
Magnets, arrangement of floating,

110
Mass of atom, origin of, 162

corpuscle, origin of, 28
Mayer, experiments with floating

magnets, 110
Mercury vapour, conductivity of,

50
Minarelli, thermo-electric effects,

76
Metcalfe and Guthbertson, re-

fractivity of gases, 165
Molecule, forces between atoms

in, 127
Monckman, experiments with
floating electrified bodies, 112

N.

Number of corpuscles

in an atom, 142 et aeq,
per imit volume of a metaU
80

0.

Obebmateb, thermoelectric

effects, 76
Orbits periodic, 157
Origin of spectra, 157
Oxygen, magnetism of, 140

P.

Peltieb difference of potential^

73,07
Periodic orbits, 157
Perrin, negative charge carried by

cathode rays,
Positive electricity, 17
from hot wires, 23
from radioactive substances^

24
size of sphere of, 164
Pressure, corpuscular, 119
Pulses produced by stopping and
starting corpuscles, 45

R.

Badiation, corpuscular theory of,

61
Badicles organic, 134
Bayleigh (Lord), 92

conductivity of alloys, 59
Befractivity of gases, 165
Besistance, effect of magnetic

field on electrical, 101
Beversal of lines in spectra, 161
Bontgen radiation, secondary, 142
Bontgen rays, theory of, 47

172

INDEX.

Rubens and Hagen, conductivity

of metals, 84
Rutherford, value of «/wi for a

particles, 24

S.

Saturated compounds, 135
Schulze, thermal and electric con-
ductivity, 58
Secondary Rontgen radiation, 142
Size of sphere of positive electri-
fication, 164
Spectrum, origin of, 167

produced by canal-

strahlen, 18
reversal of lines in, 161
Sphere of uniform positive elec-
trification, 164
Stokes (Sir G. G.),
energy due to a sphere
moving in water, 29
velocity of falling drops, 14
Strutt, conductivity of mercury
vapour, 50

T.

Thermal conductivity, coTpus-

cular theory of, 55, 88
Thomson effect, 76, 97
Townsend, magnetism of iron

salts, 141
Traube, volume and valency, 166
Tubes of electric force, 188

U.

Unsaturated compounds, 126,
185

V,

Valency, 115 et seq,

corpuscles, 166

positive and negative, 117
Van der Waals equation, 135
Vant Hoff, organic radicles, 134
Velocity of ions, 139
Volume of atom, 164
Vortex atom theory of matter, 2
motion, analogy with elec-
trical system, 162

W.

Walden, electrolysis of bromine
and iodine solutions,
130
on valency, 118
Wehnelt, lime coated cathode, 6
Wien W., value of e/w for canal-

strahlen, 18
Wilson, C. T. R., condensation of

water drops, 11
Wilson, H. A., measurement of

charge on drops, 15
Wood, experiments with floating

magnets, 112
Work required to disintegrate

atom, 104

Z.
Zeeman effect, 34, 156
