SEMITIC MAGIC


ITS ORIGINS AND DEVELOPMENT.


I


SEMITIC MAGIC


ITS ORIGINS AND DEVELOPMENT.


BY


iC CAMPBELL THOMPSON, M.A. (Cantar).


Attention Patron:

This volume is too fragile iar any future repair.
Please handle with great care.

UnVBnnY OF MKHKAN UKAIY-OONSBRVA'nON ft BOOK REPAIR


London:

LUZAC & CO.

1908.


iZ>


PBINTBD BY

STBPBBK AU6TIK AND 80KB, LTD.

MBRTPOKD.


'J


TO MY UNCLE

FREDERIC THOMPSON,

WHOSE COUNSELS

ON THE HILLSIDE, BY THE LOCHSIDE, AND ON THE

BROAD WATERS,
HAVE OFTTIM|:S SERVED ME.


PREFACE.

The theories put forward or maintained in this book
are based on a study of that intricate demonology
which has gradually developed throughout the lands
of Western Asia. The earliest written records of this
magic are found in the cuneiform incantation tablets
from Assyria ; and, aided by the various stepping-
stones afforded by Rabbinic tradition, Syriac monkish
writings, and Arabic tales, we can trace its growth
and decadence through three thousand years down to
its survival in modem Oriental superstition. Further-
more, the parallels afforded by Aryan and Hamitic
nations show how close the grooves are in which savage
ideas run, and that the principles of magic are, broadly
speaking, coincident in each separate nation, and yet,
as far as we know, of independent invention. All these
superstitions combine to throw light on many of the
peculiar customs of the Old Testament, and help to
explain the hidden reason why these customs existed.
From a study of the characteristics of the evil spirits,
which the Semite believed to exist everywhere, certain
deductions can be made which bear intimately on our
knowledge of the origins of certain tabus and the
principle of atonement. These may be briefly stated
thus : —


Xll PBEFACK,

(1) All evil spirits could inflict bodily hurt on man.

(2) The relations between spirits and human beings
were so close that both semi-divine and semi-demoniac
offspring could be bom of intermarriage between them,
either of human mothers or fathers.

(3) From this belief in intermarriage with spirits
arose the tabus on certain sexual functions. These
(according to the present theory) indicate the advent,
proximity, or presence of marriageable demons who
would tolerate no meddling in their amours. Hence
the tribesman, fearing their jealousy, segregated the
contaminated person from the rest of the tribe for such
time as he deemed expedient.

(4) It frequently happened that, in spite of the care
taken to isolate all persons or things tabu, a man might
break an ' unwitting ' tabu, and as a result would
fall sick from the attack of a resentful spirit. The
priest was then called in to exorcise the demon, which
he was able to do by a transference of the demoniac
influence from the body of his patient into some other
object.

(5) This is the base of the atonement principle. The
priest first of all inveigled or drove out the demon
from the sick man into a wax figure or slaughtered kid,
and he was then able to destroy it. As civilisation
proceeded, the most probable theory is that the original
idea of the slaughtered kid became merged in that of
the ordinary sacrifice representing a common meal with
the god. The carcase of the kid then played the part


rUEPACK. XIU

of a 'sin-offering' in the sense in which it is now
understood, instead of being a receptacle for the demon
cozened iovth from the patient.

(6) Having proceeded thus far, the principle of
substitution for the firstborn demands attention. This
apparently takes its origin in primitive cannibal feasts,
the horror of which was softened as the Semites
advanced in progress. With their migration perhaps
to a more fertile land where stress of poverty and
famine did not demand such extremities as cannibalism,
and also from a contemporaneous rise in civilisation,
it became natural to substitute a beast for a tribesman
at the tribal sacrificial feasts.

The study of tabu from the Assyrian side has been
comparatively neglected, and yet the evidence hitherto
gleaned from the cuneiform writings shows that it
existed in practically the same forms in Mesopotamia
as in other countries. I had hoped to find more proof
of its presence in certain cuneiform tablets dealing with
medical and kindred subjects in the British Museum,
but my two applications for permission to copy un-
published tablets of this nature were refused by the
Museum authorities. Hence the material at hand for
a study of a most interesting branch of Comparative
Religion is more imperfect than I could have wished,
and the relative scientific value of what we actually
know on this subject is proportionate to the amount
of evidence which may be afforded at some later date
by these privy documents.


XIY PKEFACE.

It is almost unnecessary to say how much I am
indebted to Robertson Smith's Religion of the Semites
and Frazer's OoLden Bough for the many quotations
bearing on this subject which I have taken from them ;
to the Encyclopcedia BiMica and Jewish Encydopcedia ;
to that storehouse of Arabic folklore, Doughty's Arabia
Deserta ; to Curtiss' Primitive Semitic Religion ; to
Skeat's Malay Magic ; and to King's various works
on Assyrian religion.

To my uncle, Frederic Thompson, I owe hearty
thanks, not only for the care and trouble which he
has taken in reading the proof - sheets, but also for
many appropriate suggestions of which I have gladly
availed myself.

Such a book as this must necessarily be imperfect,,
and not everyone will agree with the deductions that
have been made. But, as Hume says in his discussion
on Miracles, "a wise man, therefore, proportions his
belief to the evidence ... he weighs the opposite
experiments: he considers which side is supported by
the greater number of experiments : to that side he
indines with doubt and hesitation; and when at last
he fixes his judgment, the evidence exceeds not what
we properly call probability"


R. Campbell Thompson.


London.
Jvtly^ 1908.


CONTENTS.

PA0B6.

Introduction xvii-lxviii

I. The Demons and GhostM 1-94

II. Demoniac Possesfdon and Tabu 95-141

III. Sympathetic Magic 142-174

IV. The Atonement Sacrifice 176-218

v. The Redemption of the Firstborn .... 219-244

Appendix 245-256

Index 257-283

List of Biblical Quotations 285-286


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS.


A.J.S.L.

CI.S.
C.T.

DeviLi

G.B.

J.A.

J.A.O.S.

J.A.O.

J.B.L.

J.£.S.

J.Q.

K

Maklu

•

O.TJ.C.

P.E.F.

P.S.B.A.

a

Surpu

T.S.B.A.
W.A.I.
Z.A.
Z.D.M.G.


American Journal of Semitic Languages.

Haupt, Akkadieche und Sumerische KeiUchri/Uexte,

Gorpiii Inecriptionum Semiticarum.

Cuneiform Texts from Babylonian Tablets (British Muaeum
publications).

ThomiKion, Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia,

Frazer, Oolden Bough.

Journal Asiatique,

Journal of the American Oriental Society,

Journal of the Asiatic Society.

Journal of Biblical Literature.

Journal of the Ethnological Society.

Jewish Quarterly.

References to Koiiyuujik Tablets in the British Museum.

The Maklu Series, published by Tallqvist, Die assyrische
Beschworungsserie Maglu.

Robertson Smith, Old Testament in the Jewish Church,

Palestine Exploration Fund

Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archaeology.

References to Tablets in the British Maseiun found by
George Smith.

The Surpu Series, published by Zimmem, Die Beschworungs^
tafdn Surpu.

Transactions of the Society of Biblical Archaeology.

Rawlinson, Inscriptions of Western Asia.

Zeitschrift jur Assyriclogie.

Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenldndischen Oesellschaft.


\


INTRODUCTION.

''Maoic and sorcery, though they lay outside of i;4igion
and were forbidden arts in all the civilised states of
antiquity, were yet never regarded as mere imposture.''^
The difficulty lies in distinguishing magic from religion,
and we can best quote the broad definition laid down by
Bobertson Smith, that the difference between religion and
magic is that, while the former is the worship for the good
of the community, magic is the supernatural relation for
the individual.^ When it is remembered how great an
influence the principle of Atonement has in the Levitical
laws, and yet, on the other hand, that a Babylonian
sorcerer will conjure a demon forth from a sick man with
a little dough figure, just as though he were a vindictive
wizard of the Middle Ages, using the selfsame word as
the Hebrews as the name of his exorcism, the difficulty
will at once be apparent. We have, therefore, to examine
much more than the mere spell of an Arab sMkh for

' Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites, 90.

' Martin Del Rio {Disquisitiones Magicce, 1699, i, 12) thus defines
magic : '* Ut sit ars seu facultas, vi create, & non supernaturali, qusBdam
mira & insolita efficiens, quorum ratio sensum & communem hominum
captum superat." On the beliefis in magic current in the Middle Ages,
the curious will find an exhaustive account in Horst's Zavher Bibliotkeky
and it is refreshing to read even in a book published as late as 1898
{The Book of Sacred Magic of Ahramelin the Sage, ed. Mathers) the
remarks which aire written by the editor who apparently expects to
be taken seriously ; his explanatory Introduction is intended purely
and solely as a help to genuine Occult students, and ends with his
defiance, "that for the opinion of the ordinary literary critic who
neither understands nor believes in Occultism, I care nothing. '


XVlll PRQSSTS AND WIZARDS.

a lovesick Bedawi, or the amulet of some Syrian wise-
woman against the Evil Eye ; the principles which underlie
such wizardry go deep into the roots of religion itself, and
for this reason, if for no other, magic and witchcraft deserve
to be considered as something more than the impotent
trickery of charlatans. As religious principles developed
themselves among primitive savages, men began to learn
something of the mysterious natural forces which would
enable one tribal wizard to pit himself in ghostly combat
against the warlock of another clan, and defeat him by
his superior magic. When Elijah, priest of Yahweh,
challenges the priests of Baal to a test of comparison
between his god and theirs, he is only doing what medicine-
men of different savage tribes always do ; ^ and in this
intertribal warfare of witch-doctors we can see how different
classes arose among those who wrought in spiritual matters.
First, the priest who was the head of the profession, and '
after him a successive line of magic-workers in grades of
decreasing power, until we arrive at the bottom rung of the
ladder, the witch whose business it is to cast spells, or i
make love-philtres or diet-drinks of herbs for a miserable '
price. Then, when the existence of this lower order of /

1 1 Kings xviii. Similarly, Pharaoh's magicians cast down their
wands, which become serpents and are finally swallowed by Aaron's
serpent, in the witch-doctor combat before the King of Egypt. Maury,
La Magie et VAstrologiey 40, explains this (quoting Lane's Manners and
Customs^ ii, 103) by a trick the magicians have of throwing a viper
into a kind of trance through compressing its head, and making it
appear as a rod. He quotes also Th. Pavie, Sur le$ HarviSy Remie des
Deux Monday xlv, 461. Al-Beid&wi (quoted Sale, EoraUy Surah vii)
says that these magicians imposed on the bystanders with pieces of
rope and wood which they made to writhe like serpents. Other
instances of Old Testament magic are contained in Exod. xv, 25, where
the waters of Marah are made sweet by casting in a tree, or (xvii, 6)
where the striking of the rock causes water to flow.


CONJURING TRICKS. xix

sorcerers is fully established and accredited, to whom the
credulous or malicious poor will resort for aid in subterfuge,
it behoves the priestly caste to set about defeating the
machinations of such foes to law and order. For these
lesser magicians, being able to invoke the powers of
darkness, cause much of the tribute debit to the priests
to find its way by illegal channels into their own pockets,
and it is such upstart rivals who impoverish the temple.
From this arise so many of the decrees against sorcerers
who have dared to set themselves in opposition to the
established caste.

The men of old never mistrusted the power of the
sorcerer merely because he was of low degree ; to them
he was quite as capable of laying a spell as the priest
was of removing it. Hence we find that, although mere
conjuring is to-day reckoned the lowest depths to which
magic can descend, one of the most blatant tricks possible
is described in the Assyrian legend of the Creation itself.
The gods assemble themselves to praise Marduk in chorus :
''Then they set in their midst a garment, and unto
Marduk their first-born they spake : ' May thy fate, lord,
be supreme among the gods to destroy or create; speak
thou the word, and (thy command) shall be fulfilled.
Command now and let the garment vanish, and speak
the word again and let the garment reappear ! ' Then
he spake with his mouth, and the garment vanished ;
again he commanded it, and the garment reappeared." ^
In no wise more advanced is the story of the rod becoming
a.serpent in Exodus iv, and Mohammedan tradition relates
that Abraham himself was able to work similar magic ;

^ Creation Series, Tablet IV, ed. King, Seven Tablets of Creation, 61.


CONJTJBING TBICKS.

that when he cut the birds in pieces in his sacrifice — an
eagle (or dove, as others say), a peacock, a raven, and
a cock — ^he retained only their heads whole, and mixed
the flesh and feathers, laying them in four parts on four
mountains. Then, when he called to each by name, they
rejoined themselves in their first shapes to their heads.^
Still more puerile are the trivial performances of conjurers
related in later Jewish literature; B. Ashi says that he
saw a man scatter strips of silk from his nose,^ and
B. Hyya is told the story of a rider of a camel who cut
off the head of the camel with his sword, and thereafter
rang a bell, and the camel stood up. B. Hyya answers,
"Did you see, after it stood up, that the place was dirty
from blood and dust? There was nothing. Hence it was
only a dazzling of the eyes."'

* Sale, Koran, Surah ii.

' Sanhedrin (ed. Rodkinson), vii, 197.

^ Ibid., 198. Even in the creation of man (in the Jehovist account)
man is first fashioned from clay, a story expanded by Arab tradition,
which relates that the Angel of Death took black, red, and white earth
to God to form man, and for this reason men are of different colours
(Mas^udi^ Prairies d*Or, i, 52). Gabriel, Michael, and Israfil were sent
by God, one after another, to fetch seven handfiils of earth to create
Adam (Korarif Surah ii). According to Berossus, the Babylonian
tradition maintained that man was made of the blood of Bel mixed
with earth, and the fragment of cuneiform tablet identified by Mr. King
{Seven Tablets of Creation, Iviii) recounts that Marduk announces his
intention of forming man from blood and fashioning bone. In the
same way in the Gilgamish Epic (i, col. ii, 1. 33) Arum " forms a man
of Anu in her heart" She washes her hands, kneads a piece of clay,
and thus creates Ea-bani. In this method of changing one material to
something more valuable we may see the prototype of that goal of every
wizard of the Middle Ages, the Philosopher's Stone. Even in a Syriac
story (Brooks, A Si/riac Fragment, Z.D.M.G., 1900, 217) we find it told
of one Isaac, who had been appointed to Karrhai, and there entertained
a strange monk. This monk, on leaving, told Isaac to bring him
a piece of lead, and having melted it he took an elixir from a little
wallet and poured it thereon, and it changed its colour and became gold.


CLASSES OF PRIESTS. ZXl

These tricks, hypnotic or otherwise^ represent the least
effective side of magic, and have little bearing on the
more serious uses to which it was put. Sorcerers in olden
days were far more concerned with the utilitarian side of
their craft than in working sterile wonders merely to
please -a crowd of sightseers ; theirs was the graver duty
of freeing mankind from tabus of uncleanness^ of casting
out demons from possessed folk, or relieving them from
some spell laid upon them by a malignant witch. Theirs,
also^ was the power to ward off all hostile ghosts^ to lay
troublesome spirits under a ban that they might not
torment such mortals as lay within their reach. The
priesthood in which such powers were vested formed a
large class, particularly in the systematized methods of
Babylonia, and their functions were manifold, allotted
severally to different divisions of the caste, each with a
descriptive name.

In atfcient Mesopotamian lore we may class the ritual
tablets into three categories, according to the priest who
performed the ceremonies; one for the iarii-priests, or
seers, a second for the o/tjpu-priests, who approximate to
wizards, and a third for the zammaru-^neBts, or chanters.
Zimmem has collected much material about them ; the
ba)^ is met with as far back as the time of Hammurabi,^
and, according to Martin, he belonged to a special caste
which tradition took back as far as Enmeduranki, King
of Sippar, the town sacred to Samai. Enmeduranki
had received from SamaS and Adad the initiation to
mysterious rites, the art of the baru, and he communicated
it to the diviners of Sippar and Babylon. The batUt

> King, Letten of Hammurabi, 17, 14 ; 42, 14.


zxu CLASSES OF PRIESTS.

consults gods on the future by the inspection of the liver
and entrails, and also by the observation of the flight of
birds : " The observation of oil in water, the secret of
Anu, Bel, and Ea; the tablet of the gods, the sachet of
leather of the oracles of the heavens and earth, the (wand)
of cedar dear to the great gods." ^ As among the Jewish
priests, the baH^ (and asipu too) had their liturgical vest-
ments, which they changed frequently during the ceremony.^

It is through these ftaril - priests that Agukakrime
(1500 B.C.) makes an enquiry; in the Kutha creation
legend the king asks of the gods through these same
seers, before he goes out against the enemy. The Cultus-
tablet of Sippar treats of the installation of a bari to
the Sun Temple, of the renewal of the privileges of this
seer under the succeeding king, and also of the appoint-
ment of a successor (980-950 b.c). A$$umasirpal (884-
860 B.C.) mentions in his annals how, when he was
besieging a hostile Aramean tribe, he captured a seer
who went at the head of the enemy, and Sennacherib
seeks through the barA-seera the causes of his father's
violent death. It is they, also, who are the medium for
the favourable oracle which Esarhaddon receives concerning
his reconstruction of Babylon.

The functions of the aitpu (which is probably synonymous
with maitnasu) are different. He is the incantation-priest
and exorcist who cleanses tabus of undeanness and removes
bans, and he is the magician who chants the rites prescribed
in such magical texts as the Surpu, Maklu, and Utukku
series. In his hands also lies the power of performing


* Martin, Textet Reliffieux^ 1903, xiv.

* Ibid., xvi.


EXORCISM OF DEVILS. ZXIU

the atonement ceremony, to which a chapter will be
devoted later.^

A more precise view of his functions may be gathered
from the following quotations from the Assyrian exorcisms
which are to be recited over sick people : —

" Incantation : —

(The man) of £a am I,

(The man) of Damkina am I,

The messenger of Marduk am I,

My spell is the spell of Ea,

My incantation is the incantation of Marduk,

The circle' of Ea is in my hand.

The tamarisk, the powerful weapon of Anu,

In my hand I hold,

The dAte-spathe, mighty in decision,

In my hand I hold."'

" Incantation : —

He that stilleth all to rest, that pacifieth all,

By whose incantation everything is at peace,

He is the great Lord Ea,

Stilling all to rest, and pacifying all.

By whose incantation everything is at peace.

When I draw nigh unto the sick man

All shall be assuaged.

I am the magician bom of Eridu,

Begotten in Eridu and Subari.

When I draw nigh unto the sick man

May Ea, King of the Deep, safeguard me ! '' *

" Incantation : —

Ea, King of the Deep, to see . . .
I, the magician, am thy slave.

^ The functions of the barH and {liipu are taken from Zimmem's
description of them, Bittuiltafeln, 82 ff. See also Martin, Textes
Religieux^ xiii, on the aHpu,

' L^surtu, i.e. the magic circle, or perhaps ban.

' See my Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia, i, 23.

* Ibid., i, 26.


XXIV WIZARDS AND WITCHES.

March thou on my right hand,

Assist (me) on my left ;

Add thy pure spell to mine,

Add thy pure voice to mine,

Vouchsafe (to me) pure words,

Make fortunate the utterances of my mouth,

Ordain that my decisions be happy,

Let me be blessed where'er I tread.

Let the man whom I (now) touch be blessed.

Before me may lucky thoughts be spoken,

After me may a lucky finger be pointed.

Oh that thou wert my guardian genius,

And my guardian spirit !

O Qod that blesseth, Marduk,

Let me be blessed, where'er my path may be !

Thy power shall god and man proclaim ;

This man shall do thy service,

And I too, the magician, thy slave." ^

"Unto the house on entering . . .

Samas (is) before me;

Sin (is) behind [me],

Nergal (is) at [my] right hand,

Ninib (is) at my left hand ;
/When 1 draw near unto the sick man,
( When I lay my hand on the head of the sick man,
v^ay a kindly Spirit, a kindly Guardian, stand at my side." *

It is with the ritual of the aiipu and maimaiu that the
following chapters are chiefly concerned.

Of the zammaru less is known .than of these other two,
but from his name he sang or chanted the ceremonials
allotted to him.

On the other hand, the kaisapu and kaHaptu (in Hebrew
kaSldph) are the wizard and witch who lay bans or cast
spells on people, exponents of black magic, whose devices

* Devils and Evil SpiriU of Babylonia^ i, 27.
» Ibid., i, 15.


WIZARDS AND WITCHES. XXV

the more legitimate priest-magician combated.^ The second
law of the Hammurabi code is framed against this pro-
miscuous tampering with dangerous arts —

*' If a man has charged a man with sorcery and has not justified
himself he who is chained with sorcery shall go to the river, he
shall plunge into the river, and if the river overcome him, he who
accused him shall take to himself his house. If the river makes
that man to be innocent, and he be saved, he who accused iiim shall
be put to death. He who plunged into the river shall take to
himself the house of him who accused him."'

The Maklu series is devoted to charms and spells recited

against hostile magicians who have practised their arts

against the suppliant, who appeals for divine aid in the

following terms: —

" Incantation : —
The witch that roameth the streets.
Entering houses, prowling through towns.
Going through the broad places, walking up and down.
She standeth in thn street and tumeth her feet.
Through the broad place she hindereth passage.
Of the well-favoured man she snatcheth away the love.
Of the well-favoured maid she stealeth away the fruit.
By her glance she taketh away her desire.
She looketh on a man, and snatcheth away his love,
She looketh on a maid, and snatcheth away her fruit.
A witch hath looked on me and pursued me,
With her venom she hath hindered my passage.
With her sorcery she hath stopped my way.
My god and my goddess cry over my body."'

He goes on to say that he has made an image of the

witch, and calls on the Fire-god to burn it —

1 For a discussion on the meanings of the various words foi magicians
in Hebrew, see Encycl. BiM,, 1116 ; Baudissin, Studienj 141. On the
ideas in earlier times about Biblical sorcerers, see Martin Del Rio,
DisqtasitioneSf bk. i, 14.

' Of. Num. zzii, 5, where Balak, the king of Moab, sends to Balaam
asking him to curse Israel.

» Maklu, Tablet III, 1 ff.


XXVI WIZARDS AND WITCHES.


" Incantation : —


Whoever thou art, witch,

In whose heart is the word of my misfortune,

On whose tongue is bom my spell.

On whose lip is bom my sorcery.

In whose footsteps death standeth,

witch, I seize thy mouth, I seize thy tongue,

1 seize thine eyes as they glance,
I seize thy feet as they walk,

I seize thy knees as they bend,

I seize thy hands as they twist,

I bind thy hand behind thee,

May Sin destroy thy body in front.

May he cast thee into an abyss of water and fire,

witch, like the circlet of this seal,

May thy face grow yellow and green." *

"The wizard or witch
Sits in the shade of the wall,
Sits making spells against me,
Fashioning images of me ;

But I send against thee the ^a^^af^an-plant and sesame,
To undo the spell.

And force back thy words into thy mouth.
May the magic thou hast made
Recoil upon thyself,
May the images thou hast fashioned
Assume thy character.
May the water thou hast hidden (?)
Be thine own !

May thy incantation not draw nigh me, i

May thy words not reach me! i

By the command of Ea, Samas, Marduk, and Belit." '

» Maklu, Tablet III, 1. 89 ff. \

2 Ibid., Tablet V, 1 ff. K. 10333 is an incantation which shows how
evil may be repelled from the threshold of a house. " Repeat this
incantation three times over the threshold and the evil foot . . . will
not approach the house of the man." K. 9496 gives the line " When
a man kii^i kak-kak (« uiepUyhi sorcery bewitches him," and goes
on to give details for his release.

I


WIZARDS AND WITCHES. XXVll

Or in Tablet I :—
" Incantation : —

The spell of my soroereaa is evil,

Her word shall turn back to her own mouth, her tongue shall
be cut off.

May the gods of night smite her in her magic,

May the three watches of the night loose her evil sorcery,

May her mouth be fat, may her tongue be salt.

May the word of my evil which she hath spoken be poured out
like tallow.

May the magic which she hath worked be crumbled like salt.

Her knot is loosed, her work is destroyed.

All her spells fill the desert.

By the command which the gods of night have spoken.

Perform the incantation.


Incantation :—

Earth, earth, O earth,

Qilgamish is the lord of your ban !

All that ye do I know.

All that I do ye know not,

All that my sorceresses have done is broken, loosed without

release.

Perform the incantation.


Incantation : —

My city is Sappan, my city is Sappan,

Of my city Sappan there are two gates,

One to the east and one to the west.

One towards the rising of the stm, the other towards its setting.

I bear a box, a pot, (and) maitakal-^\&nty

To give water to the gods of heaven.

As I have brought ye purification.

So do ye purify me."

Perform the incantation.


Incantation : —

I am despatched, I come : I am sent, I bring the message :

Marduk, the lord of magic, hath sent me against the might of

my wizard and my witch,
... I have called ; hear the [word] of the earth ! '*


• • •


XXYIU WIZAUDS AND WITCHES.

This incident of making a city is paralleled in Indian
charms for a woman at childbirth. In order to avoid
abortion, the sorcerer makes three small huts which lie
west and east, each having two doors, one to the west and
the other to the east. The woman, clad in a black robe,
enters the westernmost by the western door. Water mixed
with satnpAta is cast on the lead {" les plombs," see op. cit.,
55) ; the woman walks on the lead, which is placed on
a leaf of palAqa}

The Assyrian text rans on —

" Ho, my witch or tsorceress !
Thy bounds are the whole world,
Thou canst pass over all mountains,
Yet I know and have steadfast confidence ;
In my street is watch kept.
Near my door have I posted a servant.
On the right and left of my door
I have set Lugalgirra and Allamu,
The gods of the watch that tear out the heart
And wrench (?) the kidneys
That they may kill my witch and I may live."'

*' I cherish thee, myself,
I cherish thee, my body.
As the Plain-god cherisheth his cattle.

Or the ewe her lamb, or the gazelle her young, or the ass her foal.
Or as the water-ditch cherisheth the earth,
And the earth receiveth her seed —
I perform an incantation for myself
That it may be favourable to myself
And drive out the evil,
And may the great gods remove the spell from my body.''*

* The rites continue, and the curious will find them in Victor Henry,
La MagU dans VInde Antique, 1904, 142.

« Maklu, vi, 118.

* Ibid., vii, 23. A charm similar to this is found in the medical text
0. T., xxiii, 4, 1. 9, and 10, 1. 26.


WIZARDS AND WITCHES. XXIX

It is quaint to see the witch of the old nursery tales
who rides on a broomstick repeated in the Arab lore.
*' ho, I saw four women, one of them riding upon a broom,
and one of them riding upon a fan. I therefore knew,
king, that they were enchantresses, who would enter
thy city."^ The silver bullet is likewise resistless, and
no known amulet will protect the wearer against this
magic. Doughty^ tells of Metaab (Ibn Kashid), prince
of Shammar after his brother Tellal, who wore a hyab
against bullets, but it did not prevail against a silver one
with which his nephews killed him.

According to Mohammedans the wizard is an infidel
and deserves death,' the fate threatened to sorceresses in
Exodus,^ while Deuteronomy^ demands the expulsion of
the sorcerer. Doughty has two stories of the power of
Arabian witches ; one of a patient who was * fascinated,'
and lamented " it is ne/s, a spirit, which besets me,'' adding
that this sort of thing was common in their parts, the
work of women with their sly philtres and maleficent
drinks.® His description of the Eheybar witches is to
the point : " How may a witch that has an husband gad
abroad by night, and the goodman not know itP If
she take betwixt her fingers only a little of the ashes
of the hearth and sprinkle it on his forehead, the dead
sleep will fall upon him till the morning." ^


^ Story in Note 61 to chapter xzi, Laue, Arabian Nights,

' Arabia Deserta, i, 267.

' Klein, Religion of Islam^ 181.

* xxii, 18.
» xviii, 10.

* Arabia DesertUy ii, 384.

^ Ibid., 106 ; see Sprenger, Malleus MaUficarum (1580), 84, Cur
magis foeniina superstitiosoi reperiantur f


XXX MAGIC IN THB NEW TESTAMENT.

The Moghrebi (* Western ') is always recognized as
a sorcerer in the Arab folk-tales, and even Psellus tells
a story which bears witness to the power always ascribed
to Moghrebi wizards. A man at Elason said he had learnt
something of the black art 'Hhroagh a certain vagabond
African/' who took him by night to a mountain, gave him
a certain herb to eat, spat into his mouth, and anointed
his eyes with an unguent. He was thereby enabled to see
<<a host of dsemons, from among which he perceived a sort
of raven fly towards him, and down his throat into his
stomach.^' *

Several references are to be found in the New Testament,
notably Simon of Samaria,* and the magus, Elymas. who
became blind at the instance of Paul.^ Others, '^strolling
Jews, exorcists," used the holy name of Jesus to cast out
devils;^ and "not a few of them that practised curious
arts brought their books together, and burned them in
the sight of all." ^ Divination, too, was recognized.
"A certain maid haying a spirit of divination . . . which
brought her masters much gain by soothsaying."^

In Sanhedrin'^ Babbi Akiba says that an enchanter is one
who calculates times and hours and says, " To-day is good
to start on a journey,® to-morrow will be a lucky day for

* Psellus (eleventh century), Dialogue on the Operation of Doemont^
ed. CoUisson, 38.

« Acts viii, 9. » Acts xiii, 6 flf.

* Acts xix, 13. * Acts xix, 19.

* Acts xvi, 16.

^ Fol. 65, col. 2, quoted Horshon, Talmudic MuceUany.

* Doughty B^jeaks of the custom among the Arabs of foretelling
lucky days : " S&lih, hearing I would depart, asked me privately had
I found by divination tamyU, if the chance were good for this day's
journey ? When I enquired of his art, * What ! * said he, *you know
not this ? how, but by drawing certain lines in the sand ! and it is


HEBREW WIZARDS. XXXl

selling, the year before the sabbatical year ia generally
good for growing wheat, the pulling up [instead of
cutting] of pease will preserve them from being spoiled."
According to the Kabbis, '* An enchanter is he who augurs
ill when his bread drops from his mouth, or if he drops
the stick that supports him from his hand, or if his son
calls after him, or a crow caws in his hearing, or a deer
crosses his path, or he sees a serpent at his right hand, or
a fox on his left." There is a curious story in Peaachim
of a man bewitched by a former wife.^ ''The statement
elsewhere that ten, eight, six, and four are excluded from
the even numbers which are injurious only refers to acts
caused by evil spirits; but where witchcraft is concerned,
even those and more numbers may prove injurious, as it
happened that a man once divorced his wife, and she then
became the wife of a wine-dealer. The first husband would
generally go to that wine-dealer for his wine, and they
tried to bewitch him, but without success ; for he was
always careful to avoid the even numbers. One day he


much used here ' " {Arabia Deserta^ i, 162). It is also to be found in
the modern magical MSS. In the Assyrian letter- tablets it is no
imcommon thing to find the astronomers making the same calculations.
K. 565 (Harper, Assyrian and Babylonian Letters, vol. i) is a letter to
the king from two priests, who say, " It is well for the journey ; the
second day is good, the fourth day always (or very) good." In K. 167
{ibidem) the writer excuses himself from setting out on a journey
because the day is unfavourable. Km. 73 (Harper, vol. iv) tells the
king that the 20th, 22nd, and 25th of the month are lucky for entering
into contracts. Omens from all forms of portents are numerous in
Assyrian (see Boissier, Textes RelcUifs aux Frisages), Even in the
letter K. 551 (Harper, vol. ii) the priest relates how a fox fell into a pit
in the city of AsSur, but wajs got out. Among the modern Egyptians
Saturday is not a day to begin a journey on, shave, or cut the nails
(Lane, Manners and OustomSy 331).
> Ed. Rodkinson, 228.


XXXU ABAB WIZARDS.

imbibed too freely, and after drinking his sixteenth cup
he became confused and did not know how many he had
drunk. So they saw to it that he drank an eyen number,
and then succeeded in bewitching him. When he went
into the street he was met by a certain merchant, who
said, 'I see a murdered man walking before me.' Not
being able to proceed farther, the drunken man embraced
a tree for support, when the tree emitted a groan and
dried up, and the man was killed." But even witchcraft
has no effect against a heavenly decree, according to
K. Hanina. There was a woman who tried to take earth
(for sorcery) from beneath his foot, and he said, '^If you
think you will succeed in affecting me with your witchcraft,
go on and do so, as I am not afraid.''^

It is curious to see that there is an Arab tradition that
magic will not work while he that works it is asleep.
Sadiir and Ghadiir, who were two of the Egyptian
magicians pitted against Moses, the sons of a famous
sorcerer, were sent for to court, and their mother persuaded
them to go to their father's tomb to ask his advice. The
father answered their call and told them, among other
things, that enchantments have no effect while the enchanter
is asleep.^

Although the power of evil spirits was much feared,
yet wise men could sometimes overreach Satan himself in
cunning. Such tales exist, especially among the modern
Arabs, who delight to relate such legends, particularly if
they redound to the credit of local patriotism. Iblis once
sent his son to an assembly of honourable people with
a flint stone, and told him to have the flint stone woven.

* Sankedrifiy ed. Rodkinson, vii, 197.

* Sale, Koran, Surah vii.


ARAB LEGENDS OF SATAN. XXXlll

He came in and said, ''My father sends his peace, and
wishes to have this flint stone woven." A man with
a goat-beard said, ''Tell your father to have it spun, and
then we will weave if The son went back, and the
Devil was very angry, and told his son never to put forth
any suggestion when a goat-bearded man was present, " for
he is more devilish than we."^ Curiously enough, Kabbi
Joshua ben Hananiah makes a similar request in a contest
against the wise men of Athens, who have required him
to sew together the fragments of a broken millstone. He
asks in reply for a few threads made of the fibre of the
stone.^ The good folk of Mosul, too, have ever prided
themselves on a ready wit against the Devil. Time was,
as my servant related to m€,^ when Iblis came to Mosul
and found a man planting onions. They fell to talking,
and in their fellowship agreed to divide the produce of
the garden. Then, on a day when the onions were ready,
the partners went to their vegetable patch and the man
said, "Master, wilt thou take as thy half that which is
above ground, or that which is below P" Now the Devil
saw the good green shoots of the onions sprouting high,
and so carried these off* as his share, leaving the gardener
chuckling over his bargain. But when wheat time came
round, and the man was sowing his glebe on a day, the
Devil looked over the ditch and complained that he had
made nothing out of the compact. " This time," quoth he,
we will divide differently, and thou shalt take the tops";
and so it fell out. They visited the tilth together when
the com was ripe, and the fellah reaped the field and

» Baldensperger, P,KF., 1893, 207.

' Tabnudy BeJtoroth, 86, quoted JewUh EneycLy i, 289.

» For the Arabic version see P,S.B,A.y January, 1908.


XXXlY ASSYRIAN MAGIC.

took away the ears, leaving the Devil stubbing up the
roots. Presently, after he had been digging for a month,
he began to find out his error, and went to the man, who
was cheerily threshing his portion. "This is a paltry
quibble,'' said Iblis, ''thou hast cozened me this twice."
" Nay," said the former, " I gave thee thy desire ; and
furthermore, thou didst not thresh out thine onion-tops,
as I am doing with this." So it was a sanguine Devil
that went away to beat the dry onion-stalks, but in vain ;
and he left Mosul sullenly, stalking away in dudgeon, and
stopping once in a while to shake his hand against so
crafty a town. "Cursed be ye, ye tricksters! who can
outmatch devilry like yours?"

In the present book the Assyrian incantation-tablets are
frequently used as a base for the various hypotheses put
forward, this being the most logical method at present
available. In the cuneiform tablets we have the actual
wizardry in vogue at the time they were written, which
runs at least from the seventh century onwards until the
time when cuneiform ceased to be used. Moreover, in
these texts we are dealing with no underhand sorcery
surreptitiously carried on, but fair and open magic of
which the value is attested by the excellent language in
which they are couched, and the high regard in which
the class which made such a profession theirs was held.
Throughout the rest of the civilized world Chaldean
magic was indeed a name to conjure by, particularly
from its astrological side, which through its thoroughness
had gained great repute. "Stand now," says Isaiah,^
"with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy
sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth ;

' xlvii, 12, 13.


THE RENOWN OF THE CHALDEANS. XXXV

if 80 be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest
prevail. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels.
Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly
prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from the things
that shall come upon thee." The word Kasditn, ' Chaldeans/
in Assyrian Kaldu, a people dwelling on the Lower
Euphrates and Tigris, assumes at the time that the Book
of Daniel was written the significance of 'magicians.'
The Syriac writers attest the same notoriety. '^Bardesan
saith: 'Have you read the books of the Chaldeans which
are in Babylon, in which are written what the stars
efiect by their associations at the Nativities of men P ' " ^
Plutarch' quotes the Chaldeans as believing that, of
the planets, two are beneficent gods, two are hostile,
and three are neutral. The heading to a book in late
Hebrew (called " The Wisdom of the Chaldeans '*) runs :
''This is the book used by the Chaldeans (which
they composed) through their meditations and speculations
in divine wisdom, and through the overflow of the
spirit of prophecy upon them, by their strong adherence
to their wisdom and to their meditations in the divine
wisdom and their speculations concerning the spheres
(planets) and the spirits that rule those spheres and
move them.'*' Among Greek writers we find Strabo*
(died A.D. 24) saying that the Chaldeans were skilled in
astronomy and the casting of horoscopes, and ^lian^
(third century a.d.) quotes both Babylonians and Chaldeans
as possessing a considerable knowledge of astronomy.

' Spicilegium, ed. Cureton, 16.

* De hid., xlviii.

' Gaster, P,S,B,A., 1900, 338.

* xri, i, 6.

* Peri Zoon, A, xxii, ed. Hercher, Paris.


XXXYl MODEHN HAGICAL BOOKS.

Diodorus Siculus,^ a contemporary of Augustus, says that

the Babylonian priests observed the position of certain

stars in order to cast horoscopes, and that they interpreted

dreams and derived omens from the movement of birds

and from eclipses and earthquakes. Magic is said to

have been introduced among the Greeks by (Ethanes,

who came into Greece with Xerxes, and dispersed the

rudiments of it wherever he had an opportunity. It was

afterwards much improved and brought to perfection by

Democritus, who is said to have learned it out of the

writings of certain Phoenicians.^ Horace' voices the

popular view —

"Tu, ne qusesieris (scire nefas) quern mibi, quern tibi
Finem di dedeiint, Leuconoe, nee Babylonios
Temptaris numeros."

Indeed, in modern times in the East, from Morocco to
Mesopotamia, books of magic are by no means rare, and
manuscripts in Arabic, Hebrew, Gershuni, and Syriac
can frequently be bought, all dealing with some form of
magic or popular medicine. In Suakin in the Soudan
I was offered a printed book of astrology in Arabic,
illustrated by the most grotesque and bizarre woodcuts
of the signs of the Zodiac, the blocks for which seem to
have done duty in other places. Such books existed in
manuscript in ancient days, as is vouched for by the
story of the Sibylline books or the passage in Acts xix, 19 :
'' Not a few of them that practised curious arts brought
their books together, and burned them in the sight of all.'^

It is to ASsurbanipal, King of Assyria B.C. 668-626,
that we owe, in the main, our knowledge of cuneiform

' ii, 29.

* Potter, Arch, Orac, i, 406.

* Canninay i, 11.


A BABYLONIAN LETTER. XXXVli

magic, for during his reign book-collecting became a
passion with him, and he had established a system of
obtaining copies of the best tablets in all Irak. The great
temple-cities in Babylonia afforded him an inexhaustible
source to draw on for the formation of his library in
Nineyehi and to this end many scribes were set to work
to copy and translate the ancient tablets. For the temples
of these cities were like the modern monasteries which still
exist in the East, each having its library of manuscripts,
and it was from these that the king obtained his material
and made the base of his great work. By some happy
chance there are still extant two duplicate copies of a
letter which was written by a king to a city of Babylonia,
ordering those in authority to search the hidden store of
records laid in the shrines of the gods. These two date
from the later Babylonian Empire, and it is quite possible
that they are copies of the original letter that was sent
by A$§urbanipal more than a hundred years previously,
and preserved in Babylonia as a valuable record, for it is
on the model of the royal letters of his period : —

*' The word of the King unto Sadunu : I am well, mayst
thou be happy. The day that thou seest this letter of
minci take with thee Sum&, the son of Suma-ukina,
Bel-etir, his brother, Aplft, the son of Arkat-il&ni, and
such people of Borsippa as thou knowest, and seek out
all the tablets which are in their houses, and all the
tablets laid up in the Temple of Ezida, and collect the
tablets of the ... of the King, of the tablets for
the days of the month Nisan, the stone ... of the
month Tisri, of the series Bit'8ala\^ the stone . . .

^ The IncaDtation BU-Sala* is kaown from K. 2832, a list of incan-
tations published in King's Babylonian Magic and Sorcery, xiz.


xxxvm THE INCANTATION SERIES.

for * reckoning the day/ ^ the four stone . . . for the
head of the royal bed and the royal . . . the woods
urhurinnu and cedar for the head of the royal bed^ the
series ^Incantation:— May Ea and Marduk complete
wisdom/ all the series that there are relating to war,
besides all their copious documents that there are, the
series 'In battle a staff (P) shall not come near the man/
the series edin-na dib-bi-da e-oal tuk-ra, spells, prayers,
stone inscriptions and those that are excellent for (my)
royalty, the series (P) Takpirti ali igi-nioin-na (although
this is a trouble) and whatever may be necessary in the
palace, and seek out the rare tablets such as are to be
found on your route, but do not exist in Assyria, and
send them to me. I am sending the authority for the
iatam and iaku officials. Thou shalt put them in thy
strong-box. No one shall withhold tablets from thee ;
and if there be any tablet or spell which I have not
made mention of to you, and thou shalt learn of (it),
and it is good for my palace, search for it and get it
and send it to me."^

But in addition to the magical tablets from AsSur-
banipal's library, many come from Babylonia, written
during the later Babylonian Empire. Some of them date
to the reign of Alexander and others are as late as
the Arsacid period, and there is consequently no lack
of material. These grimoire% were written in series of
several tablets, each set being given some name. The best


* On the phrase "reckoning the day" see my Reports of the
Magicians and Astrologers, xix. It refers to the calculation of the
duration of the month, as to whether it will consist of twenty-nine or
thirty days.

' B.M. Nos. 25676 and 25678. See my Late Babylonian Letters^ 3 ff.


THE SUHFU' SERIES. XXXIX

V

known at present are the Maklu (' Burning '), Surpu

(' Consuming 0, Utukki iimn&U ('Evil Spirits'), f»'»
(' Headaches '), Asakki marsUti (' Fever Sickness ' ^), Labartu
{* Hag-demon '), and Nii kati (' Raising of the hand ').
There are also large classes of both ceremonial and medical
texts which throw considerable light on the magical
practices.

The series Maklu contains eight tablets all giving directions,
as has been shown earlier in this chapter, for incantations
and spells against wizards and witches. The motive which
runs through the whole series instructs the bewitched person
how to make figures of his enemies and then destroy them
with prayers.* If they are to be burnt, then the Fire- god
is the object of adoration —

" O flaming Fire-god, mighty son of Ann,
Thou art the fiercest of thy brothers ;
Thou that canst give judgment like Sin and Samas,
Judge thou my case and grant me a decision !
Burn up my sorcerer and sorceress !
O Fire-god, bum up my sorcerer and sorceress !
Fire-god, consume my sorcerer and sorceress !
O Fire-god, bum them !
O Fire-god, consume them !
Fire-god, overpower them !
O Fire-god, destroy them !
O Fire-god, carry them off ! " '

The series Surpu consists of nine tablets which contain
prayers, incantations, and exorcisms against the Ban or
tabu which lies on the man through some unknown sin
or uncleanness. The priest recites a list of sins which

1 The exact translation is not certain. The reading asahku (and not
aXakku) was shown to be correct by Morgenstem, Doctrine of Sin in
Bab. Rd.y 1906, 18.

^ This is discussed more fully in the chapter on Sympathetic Magic.

» Maklu, Tablet II, 1. 92.


■~ - ^-^


xl THE UTUKKI LIMNUTI- SERIES.

the man may have committed, and so laid himself open
to the Ban which is now plaguing him.

" Hath he set a son at variance with a father,
A father with a son,
A daughter with a mother,
A mother with a daughter,''^

and so on. A great many of the sins are those which
are now reckoned as moral offences, all pointing to a very
highly civilized community, and .include the use of false
weights, the acceptance of money wrongfully earned, lying,
stealing, adultery, and murder. But there is another
stratum underlying them which decidedly points to a
distinction between those persons who are ceremonially
clean and those who are not; briefly, a proof of the
existence of the tabu among the Babylonians. This question
is discussed at length in the chapter devoted to the subject.

The series utug-^ul-a-mes or Utukki Umniitij 'Evil
Spirits,' is, as its name implies, a series of spells directed
against the attacks of demons, goblins, and ghosts, and
it consisted originally of at least sixteen tablets, of which
we have now the third, fifth, and sixteenth in an almost
complete form, and the greater part of four others, besides
several large fragments of the remainder. They are for
the use of priests or exorcists in driving out the devils
from possessed persons, and the general tenor is the same
throughout the whole text. Deyils are to be combated
by invoking the gods to help, that they may be laid under
a ban or divine tabu.^ The most important point is that

» Surpu, Tablet II, L 20.

' Both gods and demons have the power of putting a ban on others ;
Tiamat, in the Creation Legend, when attacked by Marduk, " recited
an incantation, pronounced her spell" (King, Seven Tablets, 71,
Tablet IV, 1. 91).


THE ASAKKI MAR8UT1 AND TY' J- SERIES. xli

a categorical description shall be giyen of the particular
demon in question, and to this end, as it is obviously
impossible for the magician to make an exact diagnosis,
he runs through long lists of the names and descriptions
.of evil spirits.

/ Two series, written for the purpose of curing various

/ bodily ills (the Aaakki marsuti and Ti'i) are similar to the

preceding in many points. These ailments are treated as

, devils, and exorcised frequently with ' atonement '-offerings ;

; that is to say, sympathetic magic is at the base of the

! treatment, and the evil influence is transferred to a wax

^ figure representing the sick man, or even the carcase of a

pig or kid.^ The Aaakki tnara&ti originally consisted of at

least twelve tablets, while the Ti'i ended at the ninth tablet.

The series called '' The Baising of the Hand " (i.e. prayer)

is another devoted to magic. It consists of prayers and

incantations to various deities, sometimes being intended

to remove the evils attendant on eclipses. These powers

are often accompanied by directions for certain ceremonies

and rites, such as placing a censer and burning incense.

The series Labat^tu, as its name implies, concerns the
evil spirit or ' hag-demon ' which gives its name to these
texts, a kind of female devil who attacks children especially.
Three tablets are at present extant, giving directions for
making figures of the labartu and the incantations to be
repeated over them.'

The Babylonian ritual was as elaborate as the Jewish.
Bitual ceremonies consisted, with the Babylonians as with


^ This is discussed more fully in the chapter on the Atouemeut
Sacrifice.

' See the next chapter for a fuller description of the lahartu, and
the methods employed against her. •


xlii THE RITUAL TABLETS.

other nations, of interminable repetitions and tedious
directions for the proper number of censers, tables, wine-
jugs, and other furniture used in making sacrifices, of
instructions for the different sorts of food, flesh, and wine
which must be used, and how each is to be treated. The
following is a specimen: —

"Before the rising of the sun thou shalt prepare one offering for

Samas :
One censer thou shalt place before Samas,
One censer thou shalt place before Adad,
One censer thou shalt place before Marduk,
One censer thou shalt place before Aa,
One censer thou shalt place before Bunene,
One censer thou shalt place before Kettu,
One censer thou shalt place before Mesaru,
One censer thou shalt place before the god of the man,
A table thou shalt place behind the censer which is before Samas :
Thou shalt place thereon four jugs of sesame wine,
Thou shalt set thereon three times twelve loaves made of wheat,
Thou shalt add a mixture of honey and butter, and sprinkle with

salt :
A table thou shalt place behind the censer which is before Adad,
A table thou shalt place behind the censer which is before

Marduk." »

And so on.

The medical texts are also of great help in the study of
Assyrian demonology, inasmuch as the physician was
always receptive of aid from the sister art. Hence, inter-
spersed among prescriptions of drugs and herbs, we find
short incantations scattered through the pharmacopoeia,
for the Babylonian medicine-man was but a witch-doctor
with a herbalist's knowledge of simples combined with

1 Zimmem, BahylonUche Religion, ii, 1, 105 ; see also Gray, in
AMyrian and Babylonian Literature (ed. R. F. Harper), 403. Many
similar tablets have been published by Zimmem, loc. cit.


THE LEGEND OF THE WORM. xliii

an ingenuous belief in abracadabra. These spells, brief
though they be, often reveal some little superstition, some
remnant of folk-tale, which sometimes reappear in the
traditions of the dwellers in modern Irak. The belief in
little worms that eat the teeth is current in Mesopotamia,
in China, and among the Malays, and yet it can be
shown to have existed in Babylonia two thousand years
ago and more. This is the cuneiform legend: —

"After Anu [had created the Heavens],
The Heavens created [the Earth],
The Earth created the Rivers,
The Rivers created the Canals,
The Canals created the Marshes,
The Marshes created the Worm.
Came the Worm (and) wept before the Sun-god,
Before Ea came her tears.

* What wilt thou give me for my food,
What wilt thou give me for my devouring * ? '

* I will give thee ripe figs,'
And scented . . . wood."

* What are these ripe figs to me.
Or scented . . . wood ?

Let me drink among the teeth,

And set me on the gums(?).

That I may devour* the blood of the teeth.

And of their gums (?) destroy the strength (?),*

Then shall I hold the bolt of the door.

* Since thou hast said this, worm,

£a shall smite thee with the might of his fist.

» Literally destroy.*

' In my translation in Devils and Evil SpiriU this was probably
incorrectly translated as ' dried bones.' is-ma is the word in question,
and I read it as a Semitic word u-ma, connected with DltV. * bone.'
More probably it should be regarded as an ideogram for tittu (see
Muss-Amolt, Dictionary^ sub voce), i.e. H^KJ^ .

' The line. is difi&cult because of an unusual ideogram.

^ Kusadj unknown elsewhere.


xliv THE HEART-PLiiNT.


Prayer for the Toothache.


Ritual for this : — Mix fermented drink, the plant salcilhir^ and oil
together, repeat the incantation three times, (and) put it on his
tooth." »

In Mosul I was given some dried henbane berries, which
had been brought down from the hills, and was told on
good native authority that a man with toothache would
fumigate his teeth with them until the * worm ' dropped
out of his mouth.^

The same principle of 'developed' magic is apparent in
the charm of the 'Heart-plant/ which is presumably the
Hyo8cyamu8 muticus, which grows in Sinai (Makan), the
Arabs calling it sakran, ' drunken * —

** The Heart-plant sprang up in Makan, and the Moon-god [rooted it

out and],
[Planted it in the mountains] ; the Sun-god brought it down from

the mountains [and]
[Planted it in] the earth ; its root filleth the earth, its horns stretch

out to heaven.
[It seized on the heart of the Sun-god when] he . . . , it seized on

the heart of the Moon -god in the clouds, it seized on the heart of

the ox in the stall,
[It seized on the heart of the goat] in the fold, it seized on the heart

of the ass in the stable,
[It seized on the heart of the] dog in the kennel, it seized on the

heart of the pig in the stye,
[It seized on the heart of the] man in his pleasure, it seized on the

heart of the maid in her sleeping-chamber,

[It seized on the heart of N.], son of N., . . . " '

1 Devils a'iid Evil Spirits, ii, 160.

3 In Les Plantes Magiques, ed. S^ir, 1902, it is recommended to rub
the gums with Senecio vulgaris and then replant it.

» KUchler, Beitr. zur Kenntnis der Assyr.-BabyL Medizin, 9. * Stable,*
* kennel,' * stye,* * pleasure,' * sleeping-chamber' are all a little doubtful
as translations. On the Hyoscyamus see preface to Devils, i.


CEREMONY FOE REBUILDING A TEMPLE. xlv

The principle is adopted in other forms of magic —

" When the wall of a temple falls (it is necessary) to dig the foundation.
The haril'Beer shall bless (?) the place of this house.
In a favourable month, on a fortunate day, in the night, they shall

light an abra for Ea and Marduk,
Make offerings to Ea and Marduk ; the priest shall make a prayer.
The singer shall sing a dirge : in the morning over the beams of that

house,
Three offerings thou shalt offer to Ea, Samas, and Marduk,
360 cakes of wheat meal, dates, (and) a^er-meal thou shalt offer,
Honey-syrup, butter, and sweet oil {senine) [thou shalt offer],
Three oc^o^r-vessels thou shalt place, [and fill (?) them] with wine,
A brazier thou shalt place . . .
Thou shalt sacrifice two lambs . . .

V

The priest shall sing before [Ea], Samas, and Marduk,

[Several lines brokenJ]
... a censer the priest shall bring.
And shall pour forth the [honey-syrup], butter, milk, sesame-wine,.

wine, and sweet oil.
And he shall repeat the incantation 'When Anu created the heaven ^

in front of the brickwork.


'When Anu created the heaven,

Ea created the Ocean, his dwelling,

Ea in the Ocean pulled off a piece of clay.

He fashioned the God of Brickwork for the renewal . . .

He formed reeds and oanebrakes for the use of building.


1 n


It goes on to describe the various gods, etc.^ who take
part in building.

The reference to ancient occurrences, when cures are
being effected, occur likewise in Egyptian magic. For
inflammations there was a remedy among the Egyptians,
compounded with the milk of a woman that had borne
a man-child, and over this a charm to be recited : '' my
son Horus! it bums on the hills; no water is there, na

* Weissbach, Bab. MiseelleUy 32.


xlvi THREE COMPONENTS IN AN INCANTATION.

helper is there; bring water over the flood (i.e. the water
of the inundation) to put out the fire.'' Wiedemana
explains this as a myth of universal conflagration, and
just as Horus had extinguished the flames on that occasion
so would he subdue the inflammation.^

In all magic three things are necessary for the perfect
exorcism. First, the Word of Power, by which the sorcerer

F

'invokes divine or supernatural aid to influence the object
of his undertaking. Secondly, the knowledge of the name
or description of the person or demon he is working his
charm against, with something more tangible, be it nail-
parings or hair, in the human case. Thirdly, some drug,
to which was originally ascribed a power vouchsafed by
the gods for the welfare of mankind, or some charm or
amulet, or, in the broadest sense, something material, even

\ a wax figure or 'atonement' sacrifice, to aid the physician
in his final effort. Almost all incantations can be split
up into three main divisions, each with its origin in these
three desideratives.

The Word of Power consists in its simplest form of t\\e
name of some divine being or thing, called in to help thb
magician with superhuman aid. In the New Testaments
its use is obvious. "Master, we saw one casting ouft
devils in thy name " ^ exactly expresses the beliefs of all
time, and more instructive still is the rebuke which the
Pharisees brought down on themselves by saying, " This
fellow doth not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the
prince of the devils." ^ Just as a Christian monk, Rabban
Hormizd the Persian, banned ''the devils of the impure

1 Wiedemann, Religion^ 273, quoting Pap. EberSy pi. Ixix, 1. 3 ff.
* Mark ix, 38 : cf. also Matt, vii, 22 ; Luke ix, 49.
3 Matt, xii, 24.


THE WOKD OF POWER. xlvii

Ignatius" with the words "By Jesas Christ I bind you,
ye trembling horde/' ^ so would an Assyrian magician,
a thousand years earlier, end his spells against demons
by saying, " By heaven be ye banned ! by earth be ye
banned ! " >

But the Assyrian exorcisms show a far more elaborate
growth. Ea and Marduk are the two most powerful gods
in Assyrian sorcery, the latter, as the son of Ea, being
appealed to by the magician to act as intermediary with
his father, who is learned in all spells. In numerous
incantations it is recognized as a regular formula to repeat
the legend of Marduk going to his father Ea for advice ;
and this was such a common procedure that the later
scribes abbreviated the incident by putting the initial
words of the three principal phrases in the story : " Marduk
hath seen " ; " What I " ; " Go, my son." The full recital
is as follows : —

" Marduk hath seen him (the sick man), and hath entered
the house of his father Ea, and hath said : ' Father,
headache from the underworld hath gone forth.'' Twice
he hath said unto him, 'What this man hath done he
knoweth not ; whereby may he be relieved P ' Ea hath

* Budge, Uistones of Rabban Homiizd, 474. * To bind ' is simply
to lay under a ban. It runs through all Assyrian magic : it is said of
the Sun-god ki iukmra tapattar, "him that is bound thou loosest''
(Gray, iSannaS Religious Texts, 18-19, 1. 17), and cUtama mvdt riksihmu
muhallik raggi mupaUir NAM-BUL-Bi-e, "thou knowest their bonds,
destroying evil, making release" {W.A,I.^ iv, 17, rev. 14).

^ Christian priests in the Orient were capable of turning their
power of 'banning' to practical account, as is clear from Jacob of
Edessa, Qtu AlI^ *' Concerning a priest who writes a curse and hangs it
on a tree that no man may eat of the fruit " (Robertson Smith, Religion
of the Semites, 164).

* This line is always varied, it being the first line of the tablet


xlviii PABALLELS FROM TUB MALAYS.

answered his son Marduk, '0 my son^ what dost thou not
know, what more can I give thee P Marduk, what dost
thou not know, what can I add to thy knowledge P What
I know, thou knowest also. Go, my son Marduk . . . ' " ;
and Ea then gives his son the prescription to be used in
healing the patient. This method of quoting at length
such an episode is merely the development of the Word
of Power.^

Malay ceremonies are very similar in principle to those
of the Babylonians. To make a ' neutralising ' charm the
magician must say —

''Not mine are these materials,
They are the materials of KSmal-ul-hakim ;
Not to me belougs this neutralising charm,
To Malim Saidi belongs this neutralising charm.
It is not I who apply it,
It is Malim Karimun who applies it."^

In an Assyrian medical text the parallel is complete —

"(The sickness) will not return unto N., son of N.
The Incantation is not invented of mankind,
It is the Incantation of Ba'u and Quia,
The Incantation of Nin-aha-kuddu, the lord of incantation :
It is the J who have performed,
And I have adopted."'

The story of Marduk going to his father Ea for
a prescription is duplicated in Hermes Trismegistus, in

* Jastrow says {Religion, German ed., 275) that from the fact that
Ea and Eridu are so often mentioned, the theory is suggested that we
may ultimately trace many incantations to the temple of Ea that once
stood in Eridu ; and that when Qirru and Nuzku are mentioned the
incantations must be referred to the authority of the priests of the
temples of these goda On the gods of the incantation see ibid., 289.

' Skeat, Malay Magic, 427.

» P,S.B.A,, February, 1908. The text is from my copy in C.T,, xxiii,
3, 13 ff., and 10, 20 ff.


I


TBEASURES GUAHDED BT SACBED WORDS. xlix

his dialogues with his son : " In Hermes it is said, / am
afraid, Father, of the enemy in my home : To whom he made
answer^ Son, take the Dog of Corascene, and the bitch of
Armenia, and joyn them together,*' etc.^

In Egypt, as far back as 3500 b.c., it is stated in the
Pyramid texts of Unas that a book with words of magical
power was buried with him. In Egyptian lore a demon
coidd do no more mischief to a man who called him correctly
by name in the Underworld, and if the deceased named
a gate it flew open before him.' It is only ''Open,
sesame" in another form.

Treasures are kept locked by means of- sacred words.
It is said that Hermes Abootat built treasure-chambers
in Upper Egypt, and set up stones containing magic
inscriptions, which he locked and guarded by the charm of
a certain magic alphabet "extracted from the regions of
darkness." This story (with the alphabet) is given in
the Ancient Alphabets of Ahmad ibn Abubekr.' In an
Ethiopic work. The Magic Book of the Disciples, it is
said : " And everybody who believes and invokes and reads
[the long list of names], by these names of Christ let him
be saved from sin, and from all bad and wicked and
treacherous men, and from all di8ease[s] of soul and body,
and from all demons and evil spirits."^ In late Hebrew
charms the sorcerer calls on angels or other heavenly
powers to help him : " Ye holy, powerful angels, I adjure
you, just as this pot is burnt in the fire, so shall ye


» Salmon, Kaltd, 1707 (in his Medicina Pract, 299).
3 Wiedemann, Realms of Egyptian Dead, 62.
* Ed. Hammer, 1806, 6. It is curious to see the belief of the modem
Arabs that the Jinn are guardians of a hidden treasure (see p. 62)
« Littmann, J,A,0,S., xxv, 26.

d


1 KNOWLEDGE OF THE NAME IN MAGIC.

burn in fire the heart of N., son of N. (to follow), after
N., the son (or daughter) of N." ^ In the Talmud there
is a story of B. Joshua and R. Akiba, who, on going to
the baths, saw a magician who uttered a magic word and
held them prisoners. In return, B. Joshua pronounced
the word of power that he knew, and immediately the
door barred the way for the magician's egress.'

Enough has been said on this use of magical names
as words of power; the second component of the perfect
charm was that the magician should know something, eyen
if only the name, of the person or demon whom he hoped
to bring into subjection. The origin of this would appear
to have arisen in the beliefs about hair, rags, or nail-
parings, which are collected and wrought into the charm
as the connecting links between it and the victim. If
these are wanting, then the name alone will be enough,
for want of anything better; in the case of a demon it
is obviously the only emanation that the sorcerer can


1 See my article Tha Folklore of Mossotd, RS.B.A., 1907, 170, No. 9.
This is particularly the case with the name iao (see Baudissiu, Sttidien,
189). Hebrew magic was always respected by Qentile nations, as is
testified to by the way in which the Hebrew divine names are used as
words of power. In the Greek incantations this use is prevalent (sec
Leemans, Papyri GhrcBci), and even in Demotic Egyptian it is found.
To prevent a shipwreck a Demotic papyrus prescribes the following :
** Ce nom, ei tu Tinvoques au-devant d'(une) tempdte, elle sera sans
naufrage, k cause des nomes des Dioskoros qui (sont) dedans, afin qu'il
sauve tu crieras : Anuk, Adonai, la formule (est d'une langue) ^trang^re,
il donnera une grande force (et) il n'y aura pas de d^sastre" (Groff,
Etudes 8ur la Sorcellerie, mimoires prisentis d Vinstitut igt/ptien, Cairo,
1897, iii, fasa iv). Groff sees in this Anuk Adonai a possible
emendation for ^^HK HSK in Jonah. In the Greek papyri the
Assyrian name EreSkigal has been found under the form EpttrxiyaX.
This was pointed out first by Legge {P.S,B.A.y February, 1901, 47).

* Sankedrin, vii (19).


CEREMONIES. li

obtain of him, and hence to learn the name came to be
regarded as the equivalent of obtaining something more
tangible.^ This is the reason for the long catalogues of
devils that the Babylonian wizard repeats in the hope
that he may hit on the correct diagnosis of the disease
demon, who will straightway come forth when he perceives
that his name is known. ''Whether thou art an evil
Spirit, or an evil Demon, or an evil Ghost, or an evil
Devil, or an evil God, or an evil Fiend, or sickness, or
death, or Phantom of Night, or Wraith of Night, or fever,
or . evil pestilence, be thou removed from before me," ^ or
even longer catalogues of ghosts of people who have died
unnatural deaths, or have been left unburied, who have
returned to torment the living that the rites necessary to
give them rest may be paid.'

The third and last part of the spell, as we have already
mentioned, is the ceremony with water, drugs, amulets,
wax figures, etc. The simplest form that this can take
is pure water with which the demoniac is washed, plainly
with the principle of cleansing lying underneath it.^ When\
a man has fallen sick of a headache, the Assyrian magician
takes water from two streams, at the spot where they runi
into one another, which, 1^ the cross-roads, is always e^
place for magic. With this water he sprinkles the patient,
adding due enchantments.^ For some other form of disease
the priest will cleanse him with water in which certain
herbs have been steeped,* a custom still prevalent among
the Malays. After childbirth among the Malays a part

* This is more fully discussed in the chapter on the Atonement.
» DeviU and EvU Spirits, i, 16, 17, IL 164 ff. « Ibid., xxx ff.

^ On the holiness of water see Baudissin, Stttdien, ii, 148.
» Denis, ii, Tablet * ?,' 1. 66 ff. • Ibid, Tablet * T,' L 30 ff.


lii THE INCANTATION OF ERIDU.

of the ceremony consists in administering an extraordinary
mixture^ called in Selangor the 'Hundred Herbs/ but in
Malacca merely 'pot-herbs/ which is concocted from all
kinds of herbs, roots, and spices. The ingredients are put
into a large yessel of water and left to soak, a portion of
the liquor being strained off and given to the patient as
a potion every morning for about ten days.^

Anotiier Assyrian spell is still more explicit — ''May
all that is evil ... [in the body] of N., [be carried off]
with the water of his body and the washings of his hands,
and may the river carry it away down-stream."^ The
explanation of the phrase "perform the Incantation of
Eridu," which is so often prescribed, must be some simple
ceremony of this kind, for Eridu is the home of Ea, the
sea-god. It is not probable, as an alternative explanation,
that the doctors recommended a frequent use of the
ceremony which begins "In E^ridu groweth the kiikanii^*' ^
the possibility being that the scribe, as usual, refers to
the spell by part of its first line. It is very elaborate,
however, to be merely an adjunct to the main exorcism,
and further, in this same text mention is made of an
" Incantation of the Deep," which is probably a purification
of a similar kind.

The following treatment is interesting : —

" [Marduk hath seen :] * What I ' ; Go, my son,
Against the (fever-)heat and cold unkindly for the flesh,
Fill a bowl with water from a pool that no hand hath touched,
Put therein tamarisk, moLitakal^ ginger (?), homed alkali, mixed (?)
wine,

^ Skeat, Malay Magic, 347.

* W.AJ.y ii, 516, 11. 1 ff. For the evil influences washed away by
water see footnote to p. 129.

» Devils, i. Tablet * K,' L 183 ff*. The Sumerian begins with the
word NUN-Ki, i.e. Eridu.


WATER IN MAGIC. liii

Put therein a shining (?) ring,

Give him pure water to drink,

Pour the water upon this man,

Pull up a root of saffron,

Pound (?) up pure salt and pure alkali.

Fat of the mcUku-hird, brought from the mountains put therein, and

Anoint (therewith) the body of that man seven timea*' ^

Elsewhere the rabiau-deTaon is thus washed away : '
<<May Marduk, eldest son of Eridu, sprinkle him with
pure water, clean water, bright water/ limpid water, with
the water twice seven times ; may he be pure, may he be
clean; let the evil rabisu go forth and stand away from
him; may a kindly sidu-geniuA, may a kindly lamassu-
genius be present near his body.''

But far above ordinary water was the sacredness of the
Euphrates. Tacitus ' relates that the Armenians reverenced
it; Lucian^ says that twice a year a great concourse of
worshippers assembled at the Temple (of Hierapolis)
bearing water from "the sea," a synonym for the
Euphrates, which was poured out in the temple. Among
the Arabs, if water from the Euphrates is procurable, it
should be sprinkled on the new-born babe's forehead.^
To the Hebrews it was always "the River," and the
Talmud contains some reference to this veneration. At
the sight of Babylon one should recite five benedictions;
thus, on seeing the Euphrates: "Praised be the Author

» ff.il./., iv, 26, 7.

' Haupt, A.S.KT., 11, iii, 1. On another text dealing with puri-
fication by water see W,A,L, ii, 68, No. 6.

' Quoted by Minas Tch^raz on Armenian Magic, Tram, Ninth Or.
Congr,^ ii, 826.

« De Dea Syria, § 13. Quoted by Robertson Smith, Rel. Sem.y 232.
He compares also Melito, Spicilegium Syriacum, 25. To the dwellers in
Mesopotamia the Euphrates was the sea (Philostratus, Vita ApolL, i, 20).

' Hadji Khan, With PilgrirM to Mecca, 47.


liv WATER IN MAGIC.

of Creation '' ; at the sight of the idols, ** Praised be He
who is long8u£fering " ; at the sight of the ruins of
the palace of Nebuchadnezzary " Praised be He who hath
destroyed the palace of this impious one ** ; on seeing the
place of the fiery furnace of Hanania, or Daniel's den of
lions, "Praised be He who performed miracles in favour
of our ancestors in this place." If one sees the place
(now desert) from which men used to take earth to spread
on animals {** which constitutes a sort of baptism "),
''Praised be He that talketh and acteth, who ordereth
and keepeth His promises" (to destroy idolatry}.^ Older
than these customs, probably, is the Assyrian hymn —

"0 thou River, who didst create all things,
When the great gods dug thee out
They set prosperity upon thy banks,
Within thee Ea, the King of the Deep, created his dwelling."'

But most rivers were doubtless famous in their own
localities. In Palestine it was the Jordan which could heal
leprosy, as in the case of Naaman,' and remove the tabu,
just as in later times John baptized all the region round
about therein.^

The origin is doubtless to be sought in the worship of
river-gods, just as in modem times in Palestine streams
are venerated because of their local saint. Shfikh Yuseph
el-hagg, of Nebk, says with respect to the saint who has
charge of the streams at Nebk, whose name is Mohammed
el-Ghuffary, that he appears in various forms : ** sometimes
as an old man, sometimes as a young man in white, but

^ Berakhothj ix, 2, ed. Schwab, 151.

« L. W. King, Seven Tablets, i, 129. » 2 Kings v, 10.

* Matt, iii, 5. On Baptism and Christian Archaeology see Stadia
BiUica, v, 239-361.


ASHES IN MAGIC. Iv

always in human form; some see him at night, others
see him by day, some see him in dreams, only those who
have the light in their hearts see him." ^

From these cases it is but a step to the 'holy water/
In the extraordinary ceremony for the ordeal of adultery
in Numbers v, 11 S., the priest takes ''holy water" in an
earthen vessel and puts dust of the floor of the tabernacle
therein, while the accused woman is brought before Yahweh
with her hair unbound and a meal-offering in her hands.
Then the priest is to make the woman swear, writing the
oath in a book and washing it out in the " water of
bitterness," which the woman must then drink. If the
accusation be true, then she shall swell up and her thigh
fall away, but if false, then nothing shall happen.^

Among the Greeks purification by water was common
in the case of demoniac possession. After the exorcism
of the evil divinity, the patient was washed clean of the
sins which had brought on the sickness, the body and soul
being purified by water and fumigations (OvfiidfiaTa).^

One of the most curious directions for making magic
A- ashes for purification is contained in Numbers.^ A red
heifer without blemish is to be slaughtered, and the priest
must then sprinkle some of the blood seven times before
the tabernacle of the congregation. The whole of the
carcase is then to be burnt, and the priest is to cast cedar,
hyssop, and scarlet into the fire in which the heifer is
being consumed. He then must purify himself, and a
clean man gathers up the ashes "for a water of separation,"
as "a purification for sin." W,hen any of the people

^ Curtiss, Prim, JSem. BeLy 79, note 2.

* Bel, SenLy 180 ; Jeunsh EncycLy i, 217.

3 Maury, La Magie, 264. * xix, 1 ff.


Ivi ASHES IN MAGIC.

became unclean through a death in a tent, the method of
cleansing was to take some of these ashes and mix them
with running water in a vessel. A clean man was then
to take hyssop, dip in this water, and sprinkle rt on the
tent, the vessels therein, and the persons who had become
unclean by reason of the corpse.

Sale^ points out the similarity of this story of the red
heifer with an Arab parallel of a cow-calf left by a father
to his son. His mother told him to sell the calf for three
pieces of gold; an angel accosted him on the way to
market, and offered six pieces, but the son declined to
sell until his mother consented. He therefore returned
home, obtained his mother's permission, and again met
the angel, who this time offered him twice as much,
provided that he would say nothing of it to his mother.
The young man, however, did not agree, and his mother
perceived that it was an angel that had spoken. The
dngel then declared that the Israelites would at some time
bay that heifer at any price. Shortly afterwards a murder
was committed and, in the absence of evidence as to the
criminal, God commanded that a cow with such and such
marks should be killed, and this applied only to the heifer
in question. The Israelites were obliged to buy her at
as much gold as her hide would hold, a tradition similar
to that contained in the history of the word ^vpa-a ; and
then they sacrificed the heifer, and, by divine direction,
struck the dead body with part of it. The corpse revived,
accused the murderer by name, and then fell back dead.^


^ Koran, Surah ii.

* On the ideas of blood breaking forth from a corpse at the presence
of the murderer, and on the use of blood to determine correct ancestry
(by its absorption into bones), see Kohut, J,A.O.S., xziv, 129.


FUMIGATION IN MAGIC. Ivii

Besides cleansing by water, fumigation with a censer
was also employed by the Assyrians, just as it is by the
modem Arabs, and the cuneiform texts prescribe that
a censer and a lighted match be added to the wizard's
ceremony. There was also a method of safeguarding the
sick man from the onset of fiends by placing him in the
middle of an enchanted circle of flour or other crushed
material as a kind of haram through which no spirit could
break. The 'atonement' ceremony complete, the warlock
fumigates the patient, throwing the * atonement ' (in
this case a kid) into the street, and then surrounding the
man with a magic circle of flour.^ In the story of Tobit,
Azarias speaks thus of the fish which had leapt out of
the Tigris : ** Touching the heart and the liver, if a devil
or an evil spirit trouble any, we must make a smoke
thereof before the man or the woman, and the party shall
be no more vexed'' ; ' and ultimately Tobias, on his wedding-
night, takes the ashes of perfumes and puts the heart and
liver of the fish thereon and drives away the evil spirit
which is afflicting Sarah, the bride, into Egypt, where the
angel binds him.' There is an echo of this legend in
a Macedonian charm for one possessed by demons. The
sufferer is to wear the glands from the mouth of a fish,
and be fumigated with them, ''and the demons will flee
from him."^ Among the Malays there is a custom of
averting the evil consequences of what is called " insulting

1 Devilsy ii, 36, which should probably be translated thus, and not
as I have given it there ; cf. also Haupt, A.S.K.T,, 11, ii: ^^ Enclose
the man with kusurra (flour), flour of lime, surroimd the shut gate
right and left. The ban is loosed, and all evil is dissipated."

« Tobit vi, 7.

' Tobit viii, 2, 3.

* Abbott, Macedonian Folklore, 232.


lyiii THE MAGIC CIBCLE.

the night/' that is, if a guest should not have remained
more than two nights, bat should have been suffered to
go away before fulfilling the three nights demanded by
custom. The receipt runs: ''Take assafcetida, sulphur,
kunyit Vrm (an evil-smelling root), onion skins, dried
areca-nut husk, lemon-grass leaves, and an old mat or
cloth, burn them, and leave the ashes for about an hour
at sunset on the floor of the passage in front of the door." ^

The use of a censer to fumigate the man would appear
to have its origin in fire-purification, although there is the
second possibility that it is the evil stench which drives the
demon away. The live coal borne by the seraph to touch
Isaiah's mouth to take away undeanness^ is paralleled in
the law of Numbers,' which directs that gold, silver, brass,
iron, tin, lead, and anything that will stand fire is to be
first passed through the flame and then cleansed with the
'' water of separation," that it may be clean.^

To return to the magic circle which has already been
mentioned. The Assyrian sorcerer is advised to make
seven little winged figures to set before the god Nergal,
with the following spell : —

'' I have spread a dark dress on their upraised arms,
I have bouud their arms with a coloured oord, setting (thereby)

tamarisk {et-u) (and) the heart of the palm ;
I have completed the umrtu (magic circle), with a sprinkling of lime

have I surrounded them,

^ Skeat, Malay Magic^ 351.

» vi, 6.

» xxxi, 22, 23.

* I have seen an Arab ibex hunter in the Sinaitic Peninsula, after
we had had no luck for several days, fire one of the thorn bushes of
the desert and jump over it as it blazed, presumably to cut off the
bad fortune dogging his steps {Man^ June, 1905). There are several
instances in Frazer's Golden Bought iii, 273.


THE MAGIC CIRCLE. lix

The flour of Nisaba (the corn-god), the ban of the great gods, I have

set around them,
At the head of these seven with fearful wings I have set a figure

of Nergal,
I have placed Nuzku (the fire-god) at their head in the brazier,
I have set two twin figures . . . (?) ^ complete in form, to whelm

the evil devil, at the head of the sick man right and left,
I have set a fig\u« of Lugalgirra, that hath no rival, in the founda-
tions (?) ' of the house,
A figure of Sitlamtaea, that hath no rival,
I have set a figure of Narudu, the sister of the great gods, below

the bed.
That no evil may draw nigh, I have set Amel-dispu and Latarag at

the door,
I have set a hidduppu at the door to drive away all evil,
Twin warriors of lime I have fastened within the door.
Twin warriors . . . (?) ' of bitumeu on the threshold of the door

right and left I have set.
Two guardian figures of Ea and Marduk I have set within the door

right and left ;
The Incantation is the Incantation of Marduk, the magician is the

figure of Marduk,
N., son of N., whose god is N., whose goddess is N., in whose body

the sickness lieth,
Perform for him the incantation when the cattle come home, when

the cattle go out,
ye pure ofispring of the Deep, ye sons of Ea,
Eat what is good, drink what is sweet, that nothing evil draw nigh

against your watching." *

In India the magic circle is represented by a rampart
of black pebbles, with which the magician surrounds the


* KUfurtUi,

« RikU,

' Sa unuUi.

^ Zimmern, Ritualtafdn^ 168, 11. 2 fi*. See also the chapter on
Demoniac Possession and Tabu for another instance of the magic circle
(p. 123).


Ix THE MAGIC CIBCLE.

bed of the woman at childbirth to ward off the approach
of demoDs.^

This magic circle, as a protection for the magician^ was
always used in mediaeval magic^ and it is quite clear that
we have a prototype of it in this Assyrian yrizardry. The
use of such an enclosure is given in Francis Barrett's
Magu8? where directions may be found for calling spirits
into it. The * blessing ' for a protective circle is as
follows : — '^ In the name of the holy, blessed, and glorious
Trinity, proceed we to our work in these mysteries to
accomplish that which we desire; we therefore, in the
names aforesaid, consecrate this piece of ground for our
defence, so that no spirit whatsoever shall be able to break
these boundaries, neither be able to cause injury nor
detriment to any of us here assembled ; but that they may
be compelled to stand before this circle, and answer truly
our demands." For such as care to know the theories'
about the magic circle in latter-day 'magic,' Mathers, in
his Introduction to the Booh of Sacred Magic of Abramelin^
says it is true that in the Convocation of the Spirits as
laid down by the author, it is not necessary to form a Magic
Circle for defence and protection. He suggests, however,
that the " Licence to Depart " should not be omitted,
'' because the Evil Forces will be only too glad to revenge
themselves on the Operator for having disturbed them,
should he incautiously quit the Circle without having
previously sent them away."

Armed with all these things — the word of power, the
acquisition of some part of the enemy, the use of the

^ Yictor Henry, La Magie dan* VInde Antiquej 1904, 142.

» 1801, 99 ff.

' -1458, ed. 1898, xxxvii.


AMULETS. Ixi

magic circle and holy water^ and the knowledge of the
magical properties of substances — ^the ancient warlock was
well fitted for his trade. He was then capable of defying
hostile demons or summoning friendly spirits, of driving
out disease or casting spells, of making amulets to guard
the credulous who came to him. Furthermore, he had
a certain stock-in-trade of tricks which were a steady
source of revenue. Lovesick youths and maidens always
hoped for some result from his philtres or love-charms ;
at the demand of jealousy, he was ever ready to put hatred
between husband and wife; and for such as had not the
pluck or skill even to use a dagger on a dark night, his
little effigies, pierced with pins, would bring death to
a rival. He was at once a physician and wonder-worker
for such as would pay him fee.

To wear amulets on the person has always appealed to
the savage mind, and the word 'phylactery' exactly expresses
their use. From the blue beads plaited into horses' manes
and tails, or sewn into children's skull caps, up to the
elaborate skin purses containing long charms written out
by the bazar-'soribe, they remain as much a perpetual charm
to the Semites as the cross is to Christians. Further-
more, in the case of sickness, magic names endued with
power can be written on parchment and steeped in water,
which the patient must drink to be healed. "At el-Hejr
the gate Arabs demanded of me hijaba or amulets ; such
papers, written with the names of XJUah, they would steep
in water and think themselves happy when they had drunk
it down." ^ To drink the ink in which magical names
have been written is so well known that few examples need

^ Doughty, Arabia Deserta, i, 155.


Ixii AMULETS.

be quoted. A late Hebrew grimoire prescribes a talisman
to be washed off and drunk by one who has been bitten
by a mad dog ^ ; for love, that certain ^ seals ' be written
and put into a vessel of water from which the youth
drinks^ ''and he will love thee with a strong love/''

The 'hand' is a favourite hi^'ab (amulet) worn by
Arabs and Persians. It is so curiously similar to the
thunderbolt of Adad, worn in the necklet of the Assyrian
kings along with the emblems for the sun, the moon, and
YenuSy that it may ^ be a survival. When at Tak-i-Bustan
in Persia, I noticed a small boy wearing a silver circlet
round his neck, on which were strung two hands of
this kind and the figure of the new moon. The whole
was strikingly similar to that figured on the Ninevite
sculptures.'

Jastrow {Religion, German edition, p. 339) points out
that the Assyrian amulet given in Myhrman, Labartu iii,
46-7, is to be compared to the Hebrew Sabriri, beriri, riri,
in, ri, etc. {Abodah Zarah, 12, i). The Assyrian runs —

Ki

rti'ti li'hi-ki

rii-ti la li-bi-H

la li-hi

pii

pii'ti Sa an-zi-ii'ti

ia an-zi'ii

iu an-zi'ii

an-zi'iL

1 Folklore of Mossoul, P.S.B.A,, December, 1907, 327, No. 66.

» Ibid., November, 1907, 287, No. 67.

> Cf. Martin Del Rio, Disquisitionesy bk. i, 59 : " Hue referendum,
si iiguram attendunt, quod Hispahicis pueris ex Gagate ad coUum
deligant, manu in derisum inserto intra digitos primores pollice con-
formate, Higam vocant." This was probably due to Moorish influence.


CORNELIANS AS AMULETS. Ixiii


S. 504 is an incantation of the same kind —


V


SiptU, KI-KI-KI

ZU-ZU-ZU

KA-KA-KA-KA

EN-EN-EN-EN-EN-EN-EN ....
BUR-BUR-BUR-BUK

It is not infrequent to find that a natural desire to
calculate the efficacy of amulets leads to tests such as
artificers will subject their armour-plate to. The Magharby
of the Sinaitio Peninsula make an amulet of a strip
of parchment, the same length as the man for whose
protection it is intended, and coyered with writing. It
is then fastened on an animal as a trial of its potency,
and a bullet fired at it. If the animal escapes, the charm
has proved its worth, and can be trusted against anything
but a silver bullet, against which no amulet is known.^
I heard of similar tests in Mosul, the writing being tied
to a fowl, and the fowl shot at.^ Judging by the average
Arab markmanship with a revolver (or rifle, for that
matter, unless fired from a rest), the amulet should prove
satisfactory in nine cases out of ten.

In Egypt and the Soudan, and probably still further
eastward, small pierced cornelians in the shape of arrow-
heads are worn threaded on necklets. I believe that this
is a superstition that can be traced to the Assyrian medical
texts. In these latter incantations there are directions
given for threading certain stones on hair to be worn by
the patient who is apparently suffering from rheumatism.
The name of these signifies * wheat-stones,' and they


» W. E. Jennings-Bramley, P.KF,, 1906, 198.
« Folklore of Mououl, P,S.B.A., 1906, 81.


Ixiy LOYE CHABHS.

are further described in a historical inscription as *' wheat-
stones, whereof the shape is fashioned as the seeds of
cucumberSy such as are held in price for necklets, a stone
that granteth (?) the obtaining of favour and confidence,
that no sickness draw near to man.'' The comparison with
corn and seeds of cucumber is too obvious to be missed.^
The Assyrian prescription runs — '^Spin together hair from
a dog and hair from a lion (and) thread three cornelians
(thereon), [bind it on, and he shall recover]. '^

Love-philtres and charms for hatred are frequent in
the magical books. Even the staid historian Josephus
relates a story of a love-potion.^ And to go back still
further, the mandrakes of Genesis ' were to have the same
effect. In later Eastern magic, love-charms are made of
the brain of the hoopoe pounded up and administered in
a cake with proper ceremony,^ or of magic wicks inscribed
with invocations and burnt in a lamp.^ The bones of a
frog, buried for seven days and then exhumed, would, if
cast into water, automatically show themselves good for
either love or hatred ; if they sank, they would form the
base of a charm for hate, but if they floated they were


1 See my article, P,S.B,A,f February, 1908. In this text is a case of
the Assyrian physician burning his patient on the affected place, just
as his modem Arab descendant does. " Hold the flesh of his loins in
the flame of a torch '' are the directions followed by the barbarian of
the present day.

' Jewish War J i, zxx, § 1. Compare the discussions in Sprenger,
MaUeus Maleficarum, 1580 : " An malefici mentes horainum ad
amorem, vel odium valeant immutare " (p. 98) ; " An generativam
potentiam seu actum Venereum malefici impedire possunt quod Male-
ficium in bulla continetur'' (p. 114).

' XXX, 14.

♦ Folklore of Mossotd, P.S.B.A,, November, 1907, 286, No. 41.

» Ibid., December, 1907, 330, No. 92.


HATE CHABM6. IxY

to aid lovers.^ Charms^ too, were made for the girls who
were not sought in marriage,' for the love of disdainful
women,' and, still more diplomatic of aU, " for love, when
thou wishest that a woman should come after thee, and
thou shouldst please her father and mother/'^

In the Syriac Paradise of the Holy Fathers^ there is
a story told of an Egyptian who had fallen in love with
another man's wife, and, his suit being unavailing, he has
recourse to a magician to make the woman love him or
the husband hate her. The magician transforms the wife
into a mare, which causes complications in the household,
and finally she is restored to her former shape by the
holy man Macarius, who takes water, blesses it, and throws
it over her head.

Another demand which sorcery supplied was to put
hatred between the members of a family. This is
mentioned in the Eoran,^ which says that men learnt
from Harut and Marut a charm by which they might
cause division between a man and his wife; ''but they
hurt none thereby unless by Qod's permission.'^ In later
Hebrew magic the result was attained if the egg of
a black hen boiled in urine were given half to a dog and
half to a cat, with the .charm " As these hate one another,
so may hatred fall between N. and N."^ The hatred
between cat and dog is an old legend in Palestine. Once
upon a time, when the world was young, to each and

» Folklore of Mossoul, PS.B.A,, November, 1907, 287, No. 59.

» Ibid., No. 56. » Ibid., December, 1907, 329, Nos. 83, 84.

* Ibid., November, 1907, 286, No. 43.

» Ed. Budge, 1907, i, 115. • Surah ii

' Folklore of Mossoul, P,S,B.A., November, 1907, 287, No. 60.
There is a Syriac charm for "reconciliation in the household" given
in Gollancz, Selection of Charms^ 94.


Ixvi CHARMS TO ESCAPE FROM PRISON.

every kind of animal a duty was assigned. The dog and
the cat were relieved from menial duty, because of the
faithfulness of the one and the cleanliness of the other,
and a written document was given them in attestation
thereof, and the dog took charge of it. He buried it
where he kept his stock of old bones, but this privilege
of exemption so roused the envy of the horse, ass, and
ox that they bribed the rat to burrow underground and
destroy the charter. Since the loss of this document the
dog has been liable, on account of his carelessness, to
be tied or chained up by his master, and what is more,
the cat has never forgiven him.^

Escape from prison was to be obtained from charms.
In Ethiopic legend a certain man who lay bound in prison
for the sake of Christ appealed to the Virgin, and she
appeared in the form of a bird and flew out of the prison
with him.' This was doubtless modelled on the story in
the New Testament of Peter's release from gaol.' In
later magic, the prisoner must get hold of three fresh
eggs laid that day, boil them hard, shell them, and write
on each three magic words and eat the eggs, " and he shall
go forth by God's help."*

To be invisible was another attainment also to be sought
after. From directions in the late Hebrew MSS., a ring
of copper and iron engraved with certain magic signs
and worn on the person would secure this result ; or the
heart of a black cat dried and steeped in honey, and worn
either at the beginning of the month or with the waning

» Hanauor, Palestinian Animal Folklore^ P.E.F.^ 1904, 265.
' Budgo, Lives of Mahd Sey6n and Qahra KristSs, btxi.
' Acta xii, 7 ft*.
* FoU'lore of Mossoul^ P.SM,A.^ December, 1907, 327, No. 68.


CHARMS TO DRY UP WATER. Ixvii

moon.^ In the Greek papyrus pabliabed by LeemanSy^
if a man take a hawk's egg and gild one-half, and smear
the other half with cinnabar, he will be invisible if he
carry this with him and pronounce the magio word over it.
Just as we find charms for sowing dissension in the family
circle, which is accounted a breach of tabu in the Surpu
list, so also to tamper with a neighbour's water-channels
(a serious misdeed in a hot country, and one reckoned as
tabu also by the Assyrians) can be effected by magic.
These charms are an indirect source for increasing our
knowledge of tabu, and for this reason, if for none other,
they are well worth the trouble of collecting. Reinaud
describes an Arabic talismanic plaque meant to make
water disappear from a cistern or weU. Ibn Khaldun
refers to this practice, saying that in Africa people who
wish to obtain this result use the figure of a man drawing
a bucket vrith a cord in his hands from the bottom of
a well. On his chest the letter s is marked three times,
and W between the legs, which, as Reinaud remarks, is
exactly what occurs on the plaque. Ibn Khaldun adds
that a bird must be sacrificed and the talisman rubbed
with the blood; then sandarach, incense, and myrrh must
be burnt to fumigate it. After this it should be covered
with silk bound with two woollen threads, the auspicious
moment for doing all this being when Leo rises on the
horizon.' The mixture of silk and woollen threads is a con-
firmation of the theory that the Levitical law ^ " neither
shall a garment mingled of linen and woollen come upon

» Folklore of Moumd, P.S.B.A.^ November, 1907, 286, Nos. 47 and 49.

' Papyri Orceci^ 98.

' Reinaud, Monumens Afusulmans du Due de Blacasj ii, 334.

* xix, 19.


Ixviii SUMMARY.

thee " is due to an aversion to magic. A Hebrew charm
*' to dry up a river ** is to write a magical name on a stone
from the same water on the Sabbath, and cast it into the
stream.^ Many such charms are to be found in the Sepher
Eaziel and the Sword of Moses, The former contains
methods for turning the heart of a woman, putting love
between husband and wife, filling the house with smoke
and fire, and many other receipts of the same nature.

Enough has been said, however, on the magicians and
their literature and powers. Their warfare against the
goblins and ghosts demanded a knowledge of certain
prescribed rules which made their magic efiectual when
properly performed. Their :personal risk from demoniac
attacks was small, and in many cases the magic circle
was a safeguard, although it seems to have been used
more to protect the sick man in early times than the
priest. But provided that they knew the proper word of
power, displayed an ostentatious knowledge of their ghostly
assailant, nothing further was wanting to a successful issue
than some concrete charm as an effective aid to the
demon's expulsion.

' Folklore of Mossouly P.S.B.A.,, December, 1907, 327, No. 73.


I.


THE DEMONS AND GHOSTS.


Throughout the Near East, from prehistoric times down to
the present day, the inhabitants haye been firmly convinced
that supernatural beings, to use a general expression, are
capable of inflicting grievous hurt upon them, and that
the maladies and bodily ills to which they are subject are
directly due to this baneful power. The modern natives
of Irak, Syria, and Barbary have inherited from their
forebears a legacy of superstitions and beliefs which show
little variation from their pristine simplicity, and throw
new light on many ancient Semitic ideas. Although in
most instances the specific names for the demons of one
Semitic dialect have no etymological connection with
those of another (and the few cases in Hebrew and
Syriac which are in opposition to this statement seem
to have been borrowed at a comparatively late period)
the ideas which are still current show us that the more
ancient forms of hobgoblins, vampires, spooks, and devils
exist imder various titles^ with the several attributes that
were assigned to them by the Babylonians, who cultivated
one of the most elaborate and intricate systems of ancient
magic that we know. In making an examination into the
ancient witchcraft we shall therefore avail ourselves of

^ For the names of demons in late Hebrew see Schwab, VocabtUaire
de V Angelologie^ and the lists in The Book of Sacred Magic, ed. Mathers ;
in Egyptian, Wiedemann, Der OStter- und Daemonennamen ; in Greek,
Leemans, Paptfri Oroeci ; Dieterich, Papyrus Magica ; Legge, P,S,B.A.y
Feb. 1901, 41.

B


2 CLASSES OP SPIRITS.

as much of modem folklore as may serve to elucidate the
older superstitions, and by a comparison of the magic of
the ancients with that of their descendants try to obtain
some glimpse of the beliefs of the primitive Semite.

It will be admitted readily that, when once a system
of demonology has been evolved, at loait tbreo chlsses of
spirits must be recognized. The simplest and most universal
form of these was the disembodied spirit, the souls of men
or women who, having died, had changed their earthly
shape for an incorporeal one. Second to thiscomes the
supernatural being who never was earthly, a phantom or
demon, often of such grotesque or horrid shape as savage
imagination might invent. Lastlyj we have a class of
demons half-ghostly, half-human, the offspring of inter-
marriage between human beings and the spirit world,
just as we find demigods of half divine origin in all
mythologies. Taking each of these classes in turn, we
shall be able, by a comparison of the different ideas
prevailing among the Semitic and other peoples of the
East, to form some substantial basis for a critical insight
into this phase of theology. Inasmuch as the Assyrian
incantations show a systematized demonology, which is at
the same time the earliest at our disposal, the several
Assyrian names for devils form an excellent starting-
point in the various species.

The first class, then, is that of the disembodied spirit.
The main idea concerning this ghost is that it returns to
this world from the place of the departed spirits, making
its presence observed either by a visible appearance as it
was in the flesh, or by making an unseen attack on
some man so that he is stricken down by disease. The
reasons for its restlessness are many : the soul finds


GHOSTS. 3

no peace if its corporeal shape is unburied^ or if its
descendants cease to feed it by paying it its due rites,
libations, or sacrifices, or for a hundred other causes
which are frequently set forth at length in the cuneiform
incantations. Among the Assyrians the word used for
this ghost was edimmu,^ and like other nations they
believed that the soul could return to earth, and to these
ghosts they ascribed many of their bodily ills. In ordinary
circumstances, when a person died and was duly buried
his soul entered the underworld, " the House of Darkness,
the seat of the god Irkalla, the house from which none
that enter come forth again," ^ where it was compelled
to feed on dust and mud. Of Shedl among the Hebrews,
according to the most primitive beliefs, we have very
little direct knowledge. In historic times its principal
characteristic is darkness,' the word for * dust ' being
used as a synonym.^ It was under the earth,^ and was
described as a place from which one did not return,^
and, as in the Assyrian picture in the Descent of Ishtar,
it is portrayed as a city with gates.^ The dead would


1 The two texts published by L. W. King (O.T, iii, 2-4, and v;'4-7)
and translated by Hunger {Bechenoahrsagwng bei den- Babiftoniem,
1903} show, as Hunger points out (p. 32), that we must read edimmu,
and not ekimmu. The variants e'di-im-mi and e'te-im-mi-im leave no
manner of doubt that ekimmu is wrong. I had hitherto thought that
it meant the * thing snatched away ' {Devils, i, xxii), as it has always
been referred to the root ekimu, *to rob,' although with what is
probably an impossible translation (having regard to the form), *the
seizor.'

' See Jeremias, VorsteUungen vom Leben nach dem Tode, 59 S. In
W.A.L, iv, 27, 1-3, it is Tammuz, the husband of Ishtar, who is
described as Ruler of Hades.

» Job X, 21. * Job xvii, 16. » Job xi, 8.

* Job vii, 10. ' Isa. xxxviii, 10, etc.


4 EABBINIC BELIEFS.

be kaown by tbeir dress — the old man by his robe,^ the
soldier by his sword.^ But Sbedl is independent of
Yahweh in early times, and there is little change down to
the fourth century b.c. In the primitive belief, when
a man dies he is removed from the jurisdiction of
Yahweb,^ and there are no more relations between them.^
The Rabbis believed that there was " a place called
ni23 ^n, which derives its name from the fact that it is
assigned to the departed spirits of men. It represents
a building with a courtyard, encircled by a fence. Before
the courtyard flows a river, adjoining which is a field.
Every day Dumah leads out the spirits to pasture in the

•

field and to drink of the river.'' ^ The Kabbalists believed
in metempsychosis from the body of one species into the
body of another species. Some of the later sages of the
Kabbala say that the soul of an unclean person will
transmigrate into an unclean animal, or into creeping
things or reptiles. For one form of uncleanness, the
soul will be invested with the body of a Oentile, who
will become a proselyte ; for another, the soul will pass
into the body of a mule ; for others, it transmigrates
into an ass, a woman of Ashdod, a bat, a rabbit or
a hare, a she-mule or a camel. Ishmael transmigrated
first into the she-ass of Balaam, and subsequently into
the ass of Rabbi Pinchas ben Yair.^


^ 1 Sam. xxviii, 14. ' Ezek. xxxii, 27 ; cf. also Isa. xiv.

' Ps. Ixxxviii, 6.

* Isa. xxxviii, 18. These passages have been taken from the articles
in the Encyclopcedia Bihlica, sub Deady Eschatology, and SheCL

* Bender, J.Q,., vi, 338, quoting Mid. Khillim (ed. Buber, 51, 6).

* NiahmoUh Charin, xiii, No. 14, quoted Hershon, Talm, Misc., 326.
For further reference to this subject, see Hershon, loc. cit., and Franck,
La Kabbale, chap. v.


MOHAMMEDAN BELIEFS.

According to Sale, the Mohammedans have various
beliefs concerning the future destination of the souls of
the dead. Some say that they stay near the tombs with
the liberty of going where they please ; ^ others that
they are with Adam in the lowest heaven, or in Zemzem,^
or that they stay near the graves for seven days, or
that they are all in the trumpet which is to wake the
dead, or finally, that they take the form of white birds
under the throne of God.^ When an infidel comes forth
from the grave, his works shall be presented to him
under the ugliest form he ever beheld, and it shall
ride upon him> Certain of the Arabs, believing in a
metempsychosis, thought that, of the blood near the dead
person's brain, was formed a bird named Hamfth, which
once in a hundred years visited the sepulchre ; though
others say, this bird is animated by the soul of him who
is unjustly slain, and continually cries oakuni, oskuni,
"give me to drink," meaning of the murderer's blood,
till his death be avenged; and then it flies away.^ When
a corpse is laid in the grave, the Mohammedans say he
is received by an angel, who gives him notice of the
coming of the two examiners, which are two black angels
of a terrible appearance named Monker and Nakir.^ If

^ Hence the belief, which is still curreDt in Palestine, that the dead
may drink from the hollows scooped in the tops of tombs where the
rain-water gathers (Baldensperger, P,E.F., 1893, 217).

* This is in the case of believers, Zemzem being the well near Mekka.
Unbelievers go to the well of Borhdt in Hadramaut.

' Sale, Koi'an, Prelim, Discourse^ sect. iv. * Ibid., Surah vi.

s Ibid., sect i. On the Mandean idea of the soul meeting Shitil,
one of the first emanations, see Schulim Ochser, A Mandean Hymn of
the Soul, A,J,S,L,, voL xxii, 287. On the curious Sjriac Hymn of the
Soul see Bevan, Texts and Studies, vol. v, No. 3.

• Ibid., sect. iv.


6 STEIAC BELIEFS.

a man pass by the grave of a friend, he should hail the
sold with a greeting.^ •

The Syriac beliefs are given in the Book of the Bee:'
" When the soul goes forth from the body, as Abb&
Isaiah says, the angels go with it : then the hosts of
darkness go forth to meet it, seeking to seize it and examine
it, if there be anything of theirs in it ... As to
where the souls abide from the time they leave their bodies
until the resurrection, some say that they are taken up
to heaven, that is, to the region of the spirit, where the
celestial hosts dwell. Others say that they go to Paradise,
that is, to the place which is abundantly supplied with
good things of the mystery of the revelations of God ;
and that the souls of sinners lie in darkness in the abyss
of Eden outside Paradise. Others say that they are buried
with their bodies; that is to say, as the two were buried
in God at baptism, so also will they now dwell in Him
until the day of resurrection. Others say that they stand
at the mouth of the graves and await their Redeemer ; that
is to say, they possess the knowledge of the resurrection of
their bodies. Others say that they are as it were in a
slumber, because of the shortness of the time/'

The Yezidis (the devil-worshippers of the Sinjar Hills
in Mesopotamia) say that the spirits of wicked men take
up their abode in dogs, pigs, donkeys, horses, or, after
suffering a while, rehabilitate as men. The spirits of the
good inhabit the air to show the secrets of our world.'

» Wellhausen, Reste, 2nd ed., 183 (and cf. 177 ff.) ; on the whole
subject see Jacob, Lehen der vorislamischen Beduinen, 143.

» Ed. Budge, 131.

* Chabot, J. A., voL vii, 1896, 128. A picture of SheCl according to
Ethiopic beliefs is given in Budge, Lives of Mahd Seydn ai\d Oabra
Krestds, xxxiii.


ASSYRIAN GHOSTS. 7

Now if the attentions of its friends on earth should cease,
and the soul should find nothing to eat or drink, then it
was driven by force of hunger to come back to earth to
demand its due. This is described on an Assyrian tablet
which begins —

" The gods which seize (upon man)
Have come forth from the grave ;
The evil wind-gusts

Have come forth from the grave ;
To demand the payment of rites and the pouring of
libations
They have come forth from the grave ;
All that is evil of those seven ^
Hath come like a whirlwind.*' '

Or another —

" The evil Spirit, the evil Demon, the evil Ghost, the evil Devil,
From the earth have come forth ;
From the Pure Abode unto earth they have come forth ;
In heaven they are unknown.
On earth they are not understood.
They neither stand nor sit.
He cannot eat food nor drink water." *

In this latter text, however, the reference is more to
devils or demons than to ghosts, but, as will be seen later,
the classes of spirits are much confused with one another.

One of the most interesting passages in the Gilgamish
legend describes the raising of the spectre of Ea-bani

#

^ I have adopted Hehn's correction of my previous translation :
"jene Sieben [in der semitischen Zeile ; ihre Ge8amtheit>=8ie alle]"
{Siebeiizahl und Sabbat, 1907, 5).

2 DeviU, ii, Tablet * Y.'

» Ibid., Tablet * CO.' The last line refers to the patient ; cf. ibid.,
Tablets 'A,' 15 ; XI, 67 ; IX, 63; *T,' 25. The "Pure Abode'' is
a name for Eridu (cf. Devils, xv, 5).


8 ASSYRIAN NECROMANCY.

from Hades. The Babylonian hero Gilgamish attempts to

see his friend Ea-bani, who has died, and the god Nergal

is directed by Ea to restore Ea-bani to earth. The shade ^

of the dead man rises through an opening made by the god

in the eartb '' like the wind/' a transparent spectre in human

shape.^ Ea-bani then describes what he has seen in the

underworld —

" The man whose corpse lieth in the desert —
Thou and I have often seen such an one — '

His spirit resteth not in the earth ;

The man whose spirit hath none to care for it —
Thou and I have often seen such an one —

The dregs of the vessel, the leavings of the feast,

And that which is cast out into the street are his food/* *

This last is also the condition of the neglected spirit
according to the Egyptian theology. If offerings were not
paid to the deceased in Egypt, he was obliged to wander
into unclean places to eat such filth and drink such dirty
water as he might find in tbe course of his wretched
waadering8.»

^ Uttbkku is the Assyrian word used in this instance. Cf. the story
of Odysseus raising Teiresias.

* Cf. Job iv, 15, " Then a spirit (breath) passed before my face."
' Tamur atamar, which Jensen translates ** sahst du, sehe ich."

* Tablet XII.

' Book of the Dead, chapters 52, 53. See Wiedemann, Realms of
Egyptian Dead, 44. An Egyptian stela puts into the mouth of a dead
wife the following adjuration to her living husband ! " my comrade,
my husband ! Cease not to eat and drink, to be drunken, to enjoy the
love of women, to hold festival. Follow thy longings by day and night.
Qive care no room in thy heart. For the West land [a domain of the
dead] is a land of sleep and darkness, a dwelling-place wherein those who
are there remain. They sleep in their mummy forms, they wake no
more to see their comrades, they see neither father nor mother, their
heart does not yearn for wife and children. On earth each drinks
the water of life, but I suffer with thirst. Water comes to him that
sojourns on earth, but I pine for the water that is by me. I long for


HEBREW NECROMANCY. 9

A similar belief in necromancy is shown among the
Hebrews, for Saul goes to visit a "woman with a familiar
spirit" at En-dor. She brings up Samuel out of the
earth, and he answers the questions which Saul wishes
to ask.^ The very name of a class of magicians, muselu
edimmu, " Raiser of the departed spirit," ^ among the
Assyrians, shows how great a hold such practices had over
the people. In Mohammedan tradition Christ raises Shem,
the son of Noah, who, thinking he had been called to
judgment, came out of his grave with his head half grey,
" whereas men did not grow grey in his days " ; after
which he immediately died again.^

the breeze on the bank of the river to soothe my heart in its woe.
For the name of the god who rules here is * Total Death/ At his call
all men come unto him, trembling with fear. He makes no difference
between gods and men ; in his eyes high and low are equal. He shows
no favour to him who loves him ; he carries away the child from his
mother and the grey-haired man alike. None comes to worship him,
for he is not gracious to his worshippers, and he pays no heed to him
who brings gifts to him'* (Wiedemann, The Heahns of the Egyptian
Dead, translated by Hutchison, 28). It is clear that offerings of
sacrificial blood and libations, when poured on the ground, were
believed to percolate through to the supernatural beings under the
earth. When Ea-bani and Gilgamish desire a dream they ascend
a mountain and dig a hole and pour an offering of upuiUu-mi&aX
into it, as an offering to the mountain, praying: '*0 mountain, bring
a dream [to Earbani] ; grant him [dreams, . . . . -god] " (v,
cols, ii-iii, 1. 46).
^__LJLSam. xxviii, 7. Tertullian says {De Idol., quoted Conybeare,
c/lQ., viii, 604): "The magicians call up ghosts (p/iantasmata\ and
dishonour the souls of those long dead ; they smother young boys to
make them gasp out oracles ; they play off marvels with the trickery
of jugglers.'* Cf. 1 Sam. ii, 6, of Yahweh bringing down to She61 and
raising up.

» W.AJ,, ii, 61, 2, r. 20, 21.

^ Sale, KoraUy note to Surah iii. For the Palestinian belief,
cf. the story of Lazarus (see EncycL BibL, 2744) ; for the raising
of the dead among the Greeks, see Potter, Archosologia Grceca, 7th ed.,


10 DESECRATION OF GRATES.

If the bones of the dead were removed from the tomb,
the spirit at once became restless, and was compelled to
roam about the earth homeless. AsSurbanipal relates how
he desecrated the tombs of the kings of Elam by carrying
away their bones and causing their rites to cease, that
their spirits might have no rest.^ In Egypt Cambyses
had Amasis' body dragged forth from its tomb to be
mangled and burnt.^ On the other hand, SamaS-dum-ukin
relates that he reinstated the rites and libations to the
kings who had preceded him, which had, for a time, been
abrogated.'

It was usual to curse future desecrators: "May his
name be destroyed, may his seed be blotted out, may
his life be ended in want and famine, may his corpse be
cast out that it may have no tomb."^ On the sarcophagus
of Eshmunazar the Phoenician king has inscribed a curse
on all those who shall disturb his rest : " May they have
no resting-place with the Shades, nor be buried in a grave,
nor have son or seed." ^ And there is evidently some idea
of this in Jeremiah's prophecy : ^ ''At that time, saith the


i, 348 ; Rouse, Greek Votive Offerings, 3. The grave is always the
most likely place to see a spirit. In 1906, when I was travelling
in the Eastern provinces of the Soudan,^ among the Bishartn and
Hadendowas, one of the Soudanese servants, who was left in sole
charge of the camp for a few nights, declared that he had seen a ghost
rise from a grave close by and approach him.

» W.AJ., V, 6, 70 ff. » Herodotus, iii, 16.

^ Lehmann, Samasaumukiny ii, 21.

* W.A.L, V, 61, 48 ff. a, quoted Jeremias, Vorstellungeti vom Leben
nach dem Tode, 47.

» C.I.S., i, 3, 1. 8.

• Jer. viii, 1 ff. On the digging of foreign tombs for bones see
Jeremias, Vorstell., 54 ff. Note also that the bones of Joseph are
carried home by Moses, Exod. xiii, 19.


DESECRATION OF GRAVES. 11

Lord, they shall bring out the bones of the kings of
Judah, and the bones of his princes, and the bones of the
priests, and the bones of the prophets, and the bones of
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves: and
they shall spread them before the sun, and the moon, and
all the host of heaven, whom they have loved, and whom
they have served, and after whom they have walked, and
whom they have sought, and whom they have worshipped :
they shall not be gathered, nor be buried ; they shall be
for dung upon the face of the earth/'

Similarly, in the tomb inscriptions of Hejra in Arabia,
written in Nabatean about the beginning of our era, the
maker of a family vault frequently calls down curses on
future meddlers. ''May Dusara and Mandthu and Kai§ah
curse all who shall sell this tomb or buy it, or pledge it
or give it away, or let it out for hire, or write any
inscription thereon, or bury therein any except those whose
names are mentioned, for this tomb and inscription are
haram, as the haram of the Nabateans and Shalameans." ^
The ancient superstitions on the effect of disturbing a
grave reappear in the modem Mohammedan opinion ; it
was by the best advice that Lord Kitchener caused the
destruction of the Mahdi's body after the battle of
Omdurman in 1898.*

Whether the Assyrians believed in kismet is uncertain. In
the legend of Z& we read of the Tablets of Destiny being
stolen by Z& from Heaven. Simtu is the usual word for
' fate,' and a common euphemism for ' death ' is to say iimtu
ubiliu, * fate carried him off.'


1 CLS.y No. 197, Huber 29, Eiiting 2.

3 See H. R. Hall, OhLxde to Egypt wid the Sudan (Murray), [109].


12 DESTINY AMONG THE ASSYRIANS.

Akuratu zarH simtum uhtil
Agarinnu alitti ittar kur-nu-gi.

" I rest alone ; the father, destiny hath carried him off,
The mother that bore me hath gone to the land whence none
return." ^

Marduk is the god musim iimdte ia ildni kalama,^ " thai
determineth tlie fates of all the gods/' But the phrase ina
Am la simtiiu urruhis imtut (Sennacherib, v, 2), "he died
prematurely in a day la iimtisu" shows that the idea is more
that of 'the allotted span,' here at any rate, than of any
predestination. A possible reference to Tablets of Destiny
is to be found in Exod. xxxii, 33, '^ Whosoever hath sinned
against me, him will I blot out of my book" (of Tahweh).
Among the Arabs Al-lauhu^l'Mah/uz is the name for 'the
preserved tablet ' on which the decrees of God are recorded
with reference to mankind.^

The possibility of avoiding death is the subject of an
incident in the Epic of Gilgamish. After Ea-bani's death,
Gilgamish, in terror of such a fate, goes in search of Sit-
napishtim : " I, indeed, will not die like Ea-bani ; woe hath
entered my body ; I fear death.'' But Sit-napishtim tells
him that he cannot escape the common lot, but there is
a wonderful plant called iibu ismhir amelu ("the old
man made young to manhood"). Gilgamish starts in
search of it, saying that he will eat of it and return to
his youth. He finds the plant and comes on a pool of
cool water in which he bathes, but a snake, a denizen of
the spring, scents the plant and darts out and carries it
off, leaving Gilgamish lamenting over its loss.^

* Martin, Textes Religieux^ 164-6, 11. 9, 10.

» Hehn, Beitr, zur Assyr.^ v, 375, D.T. 109, 1. 6.
5 Hughes, Diet, of lalam^ 285.

* Gilgamish Epic ; see Jensen, Keiliruchr, Bihliothek^ 203 fL


i


I


GHOSTS. 13

Under oertain circumstances the soul of a dead man
never entered the underworld. For instance, it is a
universal belief that the departed spirit can find no
rest so long as its body remains unburied.^ In the
Assyrian incantations we find long lists of ghosts exorcised,
each severally described with the reason of its return.^ The
reason that these lists are so long is that the sorcerer, as
has been explained elsewhere, may show that he knows
the name of the particular ghost he is exorcising.

" Whether thou art a ghost that hath come from the earth . . .
Or one that lieth dead in the desert,

Or one that lieth dead in the desert, uncovered with earth . . .
Or a ghost unburied,
Or a ghost that none careth for,
Or a ghost with none to make offerings,
Or a ghost with none to pour libations, * .

Or a ghost that hath left no posterity." ' *

We may see in these last lines one of the reasons for
the great desire of the Semites for children, particularly
males, to perpetuate the family name. Indeed, this is not
surprising when it is remembered how universal a custom it
is to sacrifice to the dead, with the duty naturally devolving
upon the children. It is as common among Semites as
among other nations. It was clearly a belief among the
Assyrians ; it is the same with the Hebrews : " I have not
eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have I put away


' In the O.T. the bodies of men hanged were buried carefully
(Joshua viii, 29).

» Devils, i. Tablet IV, coL iv, 41.

' The last line, "that hath left no posterity," is a translation of zaJkar
iume la iM, literally " that hath no naming of a name," i.e. one that
carries on the family name.


14 OFFERINGS TO THE DEAD.

thereof, being unclean, nor g^yen thereof for the dead." ^
An Assyrian text describes the feast of an evil spirit : " Thy
food is the food of ghosts, thy drink is the drink of ghosts."^
In the Nestorian burial service' it is said that the dead
are more abundantly helped by k&rbdni and requiems and
alms which are done in their behalf, " and they attain rest
of their souls and expiation of their sins,, without doubt.''
Among the Sabians a feast used to be made to the dead
in the month of Tisri. Each man would buy all sorts of
food, meat, or fresh and dried fruit, and cook sweetmeats,
burning them all night for the dead, and also pouring
libations on the fire. They had also a curious custom of
burning the thigh-bone of a camel for the '^Dog of the
Witch " (Hekate), that he may not bark at the dead.^
The Persians used to believe that the ghosts of their
ancestors were in the habit of returning to one of their
feasts (Tabarj&n).^

Among the later Hebrews, parents were forbidden to
wash during the first days of the mourning for their dead


1 Deut. xxvi, 14. On offerings to the dead among the Hebrews see
Schwally, Ikis Leben nach dent Tode, 31. "Are we to think of the
mere uuluckiness of anything connected with the dead (Hos. iz, 4), or
of some form of worship as in Isa. viii, 19 ?" {Encyd, £ibl,, 840).

» i)ei;i7«, i, Tablet * A,' 17 ff.

* Isaac H. Hall, Hehraica^ iv, 198.

* En-Nedlm, i, v, § 7, Chwolsohn, Die Stabler, ii, 31.

^ Mohammed Abd-Thaleb Dimeshki, ibid. 232. Of. Frazer, Oolden
Bough, iii, 88, quoting a peculiar belief of the Athenians from
Hesychius, that the souls of the dead came back from the nether world
and went about the city. The people smeared their houses with pitch,
apparently thinking that they would thus be rendered unrecognisable.
See also Frazer, Joum^ Anthrop. Inst,, xv, 64 ff., for ghosts and the
disposal of the dead body. On the worship of ghosts in the East see
Lyall, Asiatic Studies, 1899, 145 ff.


THE RETURN OF THE GHOST. 15

child.^ As long as the body remained unburied, the parents
were excused from reading the Shema' and the wearing of
phylacteries. There was also a custom of turning seats
upside down "in sign of mourning." This was done as
soon as the dead was carried out of the house. On the
eve of Saturday the seats were replaced, but on the
Saturday evening they were turned up again. Three
explanations were given by the Kabbis for this : (1) From
an explanation of Job ii, 13, where the expression used
is " they sat with him, |^*3^!^,7," and not on the earth.
(2) God gave a form in His likeness, now turned face
upwards in death as a punishment for sin ; hence the
couches should be turned up. (3) It is on the couch that
a birth takes place ; hence at death it should be turned up.
Notwithstanding these elaborate explanations, I think the
idea is to prevent the ghost returning to sit in the house.
Similarly, as long as the corpse is above ground the
mourners should eat with neighbours ; if they have no
neighbours, in any chamber but the customary dining-
room. In default of this, some separation between them
and the dead should be made, or, in the impossibility of
doing even this, they should turn, at least for eating,
towards the opposite wall ^ in the room. Among the Jews
in Palestine at the present day, unless the Kaddish is
said after a man's death, he cannot rest.' The modem
Arabs and Syrians consider that a man has obligations
towards the dead which must not be neglected, and they
tell stories of the way in which departed spirits left to
shift for themselves have returned to their descendants


* Berakhoth^ ii, 7 (6), ed. Schwab, i, 46. ' Ibid., ill, 1.

' Masterman, Bibl, Worldy xxii, 250.


16 OFFERINGS TO THE DEAD.

in dreams at night, reproaching them for their lack of
filial daty.^ Among the Nusairiyeh there is a sacrifice
for the dead, and a parent may say at the sacrifice
'^redeem soul by seal/' that is, redeem the soul of the
dead man by the soul of the animal to be kiUed as
victim.^ Among certain Arabs, when they died, their
camel was tied to their sepulchre, and so left without
meat and drink to perish, and accompany them to the
other world, lest they should be obliged at the resurrection
to go on foot.^ According to Curtiss, an Arab often
leaves a sum in his will to be expended in the sacrifice of
a victim in his behalf.^ On the day of Korban, the great
sacrifice on Mount Arafat, each Arab family kills as
many camels as there have been deaths of adult persons
during the last year in that family, seven sheep being
the full substitute for one camel.^ Palgrave explains, in
his chapter Ma'an to the Djouf Arabs, that the souls of
the dead "are pleased with, nay, require sacrifices at
their tombs, and the blood thus shed nourishes and
satiates them." ^ In Palestine the tops of tombs are
sometimes made concave to allow the rain - water to
accumulate there that the dead may drink.^ These are
paralleled in the veKvia of the Odyssey,^ in which the
ghosts drink greedily of the sacrificial blood.

We have therefore ample evidence that the Semites
generally paid rites and made ofierings to the dead, under
the impression that they were feeding the ghosts, and


1 Curtiss,Prm. Sent, Bel,, 178, 206. * Ibid., 208.

^ Sale, Koran, sect. i. * Loc. cit., 206.

* Burckhardt, Notes on the Bedouins and Wahahia, i, 99.

• i, 33.

7 Baldensperger, P,KF,, 1893, 217. « xi.


NAILING DOWN THE GHOST. 17

that if they ceased to offer sustenance to the souls of- their
ancestors they might render themselves liable to affliction
or even possession by the hungry souls of the departed.

But there are many other accidents which prevent a soul
from entering into rest : —

'* He that lieth in a ditch . . .
He that no grave covereth . . .
He that lieth uncovered.
Whose head is uncovered with dust,
The king's son that lieth in the desert
Or in the ruins,
The hero whom they have slain with the sword." ^

Among the modem Arabs the soul of a murdered man
must be nailed down. If a man is murdered in Egypt
his afrit rises from the ground where his blood has been
shed, but it can be restrained by driving a new nail which
has never been used into the ground at the spot where the
murder was committed.' I met with such a case in Tripoli
(Barbary). While I was waiting for my caravan to be
made up for a journey round the inland districts, the
proprietor of the little Italian locanda showed me a nail
which had been driven into the paving of the porch floor.
A few years before, a native had been murdered close
to the door, and immediately the neighbouring Arabs
thronged thither with hammer and nail, and thus secured
the freedom of the place from being haunted by the dead
man's soul. Some time after the proprietor attempted to
remove the nail, but he was at once prevented, on the
grounds that the ghost would thereby be released.

^ WA.L, ii, 17; Haupt, A.S.K.T., 11, ii, 6. Cf. Num. xix, 16,
" And whosoever in the open field toucheth one that is slain with
a sword .... shall be unclean seven days.''

' Sayce, Cairene Folklore^ Folklore^ ii, 389.


18 NAILING DOWN THE SPIRIT.

«

While on the subject of nailing down a demon, the
method in vogue for curing a headache at Mosul is worth
quoting. The sMkh comes and lays his hands on the
patient's head and then drives a nail into the wall, thus
obviously transfixing the devil therewith.^ Frazer, in the
Golden Bought quotes other instances, notably two among
the Arabs, one (from Leared) of a house in Mogador
haunted by spirits and devils who threw stones about, but
were finally laid by a holy man pronouncing an incantation
and driving a nail into the wall. The second is mentioned
by Lane^ similar to the cure for headache that I met in
Mosul ; the people of Cairo sufiering from migraine used
to knock a nail into the great wooden door of the old
South Gate. According to Baldensperger,' the Mared,
a very tall Arab ghost, appears chiefly where people have
been killed, and the Mohammedans use big iron or wooden
pegs to prevent such ghosts appearing.

A similar belief may be traced in the story of Rabbi
Isaac Luria when he was passing the great academy of
Rabbi Yochanan in Tiberias. He showed his dis()iples a hole
in the wall, sajring, '' In this stone there is a transmigrated
soul, and it cries that I should pray on its behaU."^

But in addition to these ghosts we find that the souls of
men and women who had died prematurely were compelled
to haunt mankind until they were laid to rest. Among
these we find mentioned in Assyrian spelh


1 See my article F.S.B.A., Feb. 1906, 80-1. » iii, 33-4.

' F.E.F,, 1899, 149. On the Mared appearing where a murder had
been committed, see G. Robinson Lees, Village Life in Palestiiie, 217.

*• Hershon, Talm. MUc.y 327, quoting Kabbala, Emeh Hamelech,
fol. 11, coL 2.


GHOSTS OF THOSE WHO HAVE DIED PREMATUEELY. 19

'* He that hath died of hunger in prison,
He that hath died of thirst in prison,
The hungry man who in his hunger hath not smelt the smell of

(food),
He whom the bank of a river hath let perish, and he hath died.
He that hath died in the plain or the marsh,
He whom the Storm-gocT hath submerged in the plain." ^

" A woman (that hath died) a virgin,
A man (that hath died) immarried." '

'< A (sacred ?) harlot (that hath died), whose body is sick,
A woman (that hath died) in travail,
A woman (that hath died) with a babe at the bfeast,
A weeping woman (that hath died) with a babe at the breast,
An evil man (that hath died)." '

This list is further elaborated by the details that it
may be the ghost of a dead woman who was nursing

1 W,A,L, ii, 17, 22 ff., and Haupt, A,B,K.T,, 11, ii, 22 ff.

2 Devils, i. Tablet IV, iv, 45-6. See the notes as to the actual
meaning of ' virgin ' and * unmarried,' which cannot be said to be
absolutely certain, although the evidence is distinctly favourable to
such a translation. Besides, in Haupt, A.S.K.T., 11, i, 15, two other
phrases describing ghosts, la mutir irti and idu xu-un-da-ri-a,
seem to point to a similar meaning. According to Eustathius
{ad, II. zxiii, 141, p. 1293), among the Greeks it was customary to
place on the grave of those who died unmarried a water-jar called
Loutrophoros, in token that the dead had died unbathed and without
offspring (J. E. Harrison, Prolegomenay 622).

» Ibid., V, 21 ff. ; Tablet V, i, 51 ff For the 'weeping woman'
I would suggest that her babe has also died. I venture to think the
explanation that they are all ghosts of dead people to be a better one
than that of M. Fossey : " Enfin une personne ordiuairement inoffensive
peut, k certains moments, deveuir dangereuse ; telles sont la femme
qui allaite, la femme morte d'un cancer au sein, et la femme enceinte.
La prostitu^ est exorcist comme un veritable d^mon " {La Magie, 50).
That it is not mentioned specifically that they are dead is no stumbling-
block. It was, I think, clearly understood, and further, the ill-omened
mention of death was in many cases thus avoided, just as it was among
the Qreeks : ** a purification for you to whom it is meet and right,"
i.e. the dead (J. E. Harrison, loc. cit., 60).


20 WOMEN DYING IN CHILDBED.

her child, whose breast was sweet, bitter, ulcerated, or
wounded;^ or of a woman with child, whose womb was
healthy, loosened (patru), cast (rumm6)^ or not healthy.*
The untimely birth, again, seems to have been counted as
a ghost.'

Now this curious ghost, the woman who has died in
childbirth, is universal.* Doughty relates how in Arabia
he " heard scritching owls sometimes in the night ; then
the nomad wives and children answered them with mocking
again, ' Ymgebfts ! Ymgeb&s ! ' The hareem said, ' It is
a wailful woman, eeeking her lost child through the
wilderness, which was tamed into this forlorn bird.' " ^
Among the Malays, if a woman die in childbirth she is
supposed to become a langsuyar, or flying demon, a female
familiar. To prevent this, glass beads are put in the
mouth of the corpse, a hen's egg is put under the armpits^
and needles in the palms of the hands. This stops the
dead woman shrieking, waving her arms, or opening her


^ Oefele, Zeits. fUr Aasyr.^ ziv, 360, explains museniktu sa ina mihif
tuli imut as one that has died of carcinoma. Among modem Arabs
the bad milk of nurses is held to be one of the things (along with the
poison of serpents, scorpions, mad dogs, etc.) against which a magical
cup will be efficacious by its virtue (Reinaud, Monumetu MusulmaMs^
ii, 340).

« Haupt, A.8,K,T,, 11, i, 35.

* Ibid., i, 13, ispu kubu ia . . . Jastrow {Rdigion^ German ed., 367)
explains this as " Friihgoburt." The ia . . . may be the beginning of
a translation of the corresponding Sumerian irn nu-til-la, *^that
which doth not complete the month (?).'' Cf. also the banning
of Devils and Evil Spirits, Tablet IV : "They are that which was
spawned in the creation of Anu, children of the earth they were bom ;.
they are that which a woman in travail [hath brought forth dead ? 7]^
which an evil foster-mother [hath ...]."

* See Frazer, Odden Bough, ii, 345.
^ Arabia Deserta, i, 305.


WOBiEN DYING IN CHILDBED. 21

hands.^ The original langmyar was supposed to be a kind
of night owl, like the Lilith of Rabbinic tradition, and is
similar, therefore, to the ghost of which Doughty speaks.
Among the Arabs of Palestine, the Egyptian eagle owl is
an enchanted woman, who possesses baneful influences over
childbirth. I^either the name of the child nor the bird
must be mentioned within a few days of the birth, as the
sorceress (the owl) would take the child.^ In more ancient
Arabic lore the owl is a human incarnation,' and Laila
took this form in flying from the grave of her beloved.^

Among the modern Jews of Lemburg, if a woman dies
pregnant, it is supposed to be undesirable for her sake and
that of the congregation that the foetus should be buried
with the body. The corpse is therefore bathed at mid-
night, and after half an hour the name of the dead is
called seven times, and a shofar blown seven times in her
ear. The corpse with many groans will then give birth
to a dead undeveloped child.^

The Sakai of Perak, when they make a necklace-charm,
repeat this invocation : —

''OM ! Die, Mati-anak, buried under the earth heaped up

for the Roadway.
What is the origin of thy existence ?
Demon of the blood of a person dead in childbirth,
That is the origin of thy existence.

Mati-anak of the River-banks, return to the River-banks ;
Mati-anak of the ' outcrop/ return to the outcrop ;
Pluck out with spells and neutralise again and again the

demon Mati-anak.
Descend, poison of the Mati-anak ;
Rise, neutraliser of mine.''

^ Skeat, Malay Magic (quoting Sir William Maxwell), 325.

» Baldensperger, P.E.F., 1893, 212. > Wellhausen, ReaU, 167.

* Ibid., 183. B Jewish Encyd,, article Superatitiont,


22 WOMEN DYING IN CHILDBED.

The magician then spits twice on the necklace, which
must be made of plants pulled up, and not cut or dug
up.^ This latter rite brings it into connection with the
tabu against pulling up plants.

To quote one or two instances from other than Semitic
nations, in the Banks Islands, Melanesia, the ghost of
a woman who has died in childbed cannot go away to
Panoi or ghostland, if her child lives, for she cannot leave
the baby behind. In the Pelew Islands, when a woman
has died in childbed, her spirit comes and cries, '' Give me
the child I " ^ In India the same ghost appears.'

There id a curious story current in Mosul about a woman
who died and was buried before her child was bom.^ This
story I heard in Mosul, and I learnt that it was also told
in Baghdad when I was there, and curiously enough, when
at Luxor some time after, an Arab boy told me that a near
relation of his, his father or uncle, who was a native of
Mosul, had also repeated it to him. The story goes that
after the woman was buried in a tomb, her son was bom
and lived and grew up in that tomb for about ten years,
when he was found by a man digging into the grave. The
boy was taken out, fed and clothed, and lived to a good old
age. It is therefore to be presumed that during his childhood
in the tomb the boy was fed in some supernatural manner
that would seem to imply the return of the mother's spirit.^

^ Skeat and Blagden, Fagan Races of the Malay Peninsula^ i, 153.

2 Frazer, Golden Bough (quotiug Codrington, and Eubary), ii, 345.

' Crooke, Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India^ i, 269.

* P.S.B.A,, Feb. 1906, 82.

^ It is the custom among the Jews in Paleatine, if a woman die in
childbirth, to keep the husband out of the room (Masterman, Bibl,
Worldj zxii, 249). Among the Greeks, the clothes of women who died
thus were left at the grave of Iphigeneia in Halse (Rouse, Oreek Votive
(fferings, 252).


/'


DEAD VIRGINS. ABOETIONS. 23

^ Dead Tirgins and men who die unmarried^ we shall
discuss later. Be it noted, however, that the Assyrian
words used to describe such ghosts show that full-grown
and marriageable people are intended, and not immature
children, and, from all the evidence, it seems likely that
they were supposed to be wedded to incubi or auccubte^
who claimed them after their death.

The ' untimely birth ' or abortion, if the restoration of
the Assyrian text is correct, is an extremely probable ghost.
According to Rabbinic traditions, "an infant cut or torn
at birth, a miscarriage, or bom alive at the eighth month,
or bom dead at the ninth — all the religious ceremonies
do not apply to it." ^ We may therefore infer that the
Jews believed it to be the result of some ulterior cause.
Again, it is laid down in the Talmud^ that the dwellings
of heathens must be considered unclean, because it was
supposed that they buried their miscarriages in their hoases.!
According to the legends of the later Jewish demonology,
devils are not so much fallen angels as immature creatures
or abortions.' Mohammed is said to have ordered prayers
to be said over an untimely birth, when supplication should
be made for the father and mother, for forgiveness and
mercy.*

I Talmud, Ebel RcMcUhi, ed. Rodkinson, viii, 2.

' Fesachinij ed. Rodkinson, v, 14. ' Horst, Zauber Bibltotheky ii, 391.

^ Hughes, Diet, of Islam, 4. As a legend worth mentioning, the
Arab belief about Eve's first child is interesting. When Eve was
pregnant the Devil came to her and asked her if she knew what, she
carried, and suggested that it might be a beast. He appeared again,
and pretended that by his prayers he would obtain of Qod that it
should be a son in Adam's likeness, if they would call him Abdo*l-hareth
instead of Abd Allah. When the child was bom it died (Sale, Koran,
note to Surah viii). In Malay ideas deformed children may be the
result of violating certain animal tabus (Skeat, Malay Magic, 349).


24 CLAIK ON FRIENDS.

Now if any one of these diaembodied souls came back
to earth for some reason, it might fasten itself on any
mortal who had been in some way connected with him
in this world, or had been brought either Tisnally or by
contact into relations with the corpse. The chance
sharing of food, oil, or clothes ^ during life constituted an
act which gave the spirit after death a claim to return
to its friend or even casual acquaintance, to demand the
rites which would give it rest. Nay, less, the mere act
of eating, drinking, anointing, or dressing oneself in
company with another person, without giving or receiving
anything, was enough reason for the ghost to single out
his victim and seize upon him until, perforce, the man
was compelled to suggest that he would pay it its due
rites if it left him in peace. The living man, thus tor-
mented, makes no promises; he merely threatens that
no offerings shall be made to the dead until the spirit
leaves him free. Tablets IV and V of the " Evil Spirit "
series render this quite clear in Assyrian tradition, and
the incantation seems worth putting in in full : — ^

'* Whether thou be one with whom on a day I have eateu,
Or with whom on a day I have drunk,
Or with whom on a day I have anointed myself,

1 Cf. Tobit i, 16 : ** And in the days of Enemessar I did many
almsdeeds to my brethren ; I gave my bread to the hungry and my
garments to the naked ; and if I saw any of my race dead, and cast
forth on the wall of Nineveh, I buried him."

« Devils, i, Tablet IV, coL v, 34 ff, ; cf. Tablet V, col. 1, 11. 58 ff. ;
Haupt, A,S.K.T,f 11, ii, 16. On the question of vengeance of the dead,
notice the story in Berakhoth, iii, 3 (ed. Schwab, 298} : *^ Has not
R. Papa related that someone having despised Samuel, a gutter fell on
his head from above and broke his skull (was not this the vengeance of
the defunct ?). No, since it was the question of a great wise man, the
Lord himself intervened in his favour.^


DESCRIPTIONS OF GHOSTS IN ASSYRIAN. 25

Or with whom on a day I have clothed myself,

Or whether thou be one with whom I have entered and eaten,

Or with whom I have entered and drunk,

Or with whom I have entered and anointed myself,

Or with whom I have entered and clothed myself,

Or whether thou be one with whom I have eaten food when I was

hungry.
Or with whom I have drunk water when I was thirsty.
Or with whom I have anointed myself with oil when I was sore.
Or with whom when I was cold I have clothed myself with

a garment from (?) his loins,
(Whatever thou be) until thou art removed,
Until thou departest from the body of the man, the son of his god,
Thou shalt have no food to eat,
Thou shalt have no water to drink.
Thou shalt not stretch forth thy hand
Unto the table of my father Bel, my creator.
Neither with sea water, nor with sweet water.
Nor with bad water, nor with Tigris water,
Nor with Euphrates water, nor with pond water.
Nor with river water shalt thou be covered.
If thou wouldst fly up to heaven
Thou shalt have no wings ;
If thou wouldst lurk in ambush on earth
Thou shalt secure no resting-place.
Unto the man, the son of his god, come not nigh,
Get thee hence !

Place not thy head upon his head.
Place not thy hand upon his hand,
Place not thy foot upon his foot,
With thy hand touch him not,
Turn not round against him,
Lift not thine eye against him.
Look not behind thee,
Gibber not against him.
Into the house enter thou not,
Through the fence break thou not,
Into the chamber enter thou not.
In the midst of the city encircle him not.
Near him make no circuit ;


26 TABU ON SEEING CORPSE.

By the word of Ea

May the man, the son of his god,

Become pure, become clean, become bright !

Like a vessel of lard may he be cleansed.

Like a vessel of butter may he be clean I

Unto Samas, chief of the gods, commend him,

Through Samas, chief of the gods, ,

May his welfare be secured at the kindly hands of the gods." ^

With regard to tbe mere action of seeing a dead body,
the whole is laid down clearly in a ritual tablet published
by Zimmern : — ^

*' When a man looketh upon a corpse ^ and the spirit (edimmu) seizeth

upon him . . .

Thou must sanctify the dwelling (?), lay down upunttL-ineaX . . .

In the morning for nothing evil a sorcerer [and sorceress] . . .
• ■•••••••■•• •

Make . . . figures of the sorcerer and sorceress . . .

Thou shalt cause to take ; with clothes for each day thou shalt

dress them, with fine oil anoint [them] . . .
Before the sun thou shalt sprinkle the ktsar with pure water, thou

shalt set clean seats for the god . . .
Thou shalt spread out shining (?) garments, an altar [thou must

place] for the god . . .
Three times a meal thou shalt set before Samas, Ea, and Marduk,
Dates, aier-meal thou shalt pour forth, thou shalt set three adagur-

vessels,
Three censers of incense thou shalt set, thou shalt pour forth corn

of all kinds.


^ There are other ghosts mentioned in these lists less easy of
explanation. " One that hath been torn from a date-palm " (Tablet IV,
col. V, 1) may possibly be the origin of the belief in Pes, Ilia, that it
is dangerous to walk between two palm-trees. Boissier ( Textes Relatifs,
100) thinks that it refers to one that has fallen from it while climbing,
a very probable explanation.

* RUtLoltafeln, 164.

^ Written ba-bad. Although this is an unusual expression, the
translation appears to be correct.


THE EETURNING SPIRIT. 27

For the ghosts of his family, on the left of the ofiferiogs thou shalt

set a seat,
For the ghosts of his family, on the left of the ghosts on the left

a seat thou shalt set,
For the ghosts of the family thou shalt pour libations and offer gifts."

It is unnecessary to point out the universal taba, both
among Semites and other races, on the dead body^ but
it is interesting to see these views on this subject. The
dead body is, of course, in itself tabu ; the Hebrew ^ and
Mohammedan^ laws show this distinctly.

Among the Arabs a woman in childbed must get up
and go out of the house when a corpse is carried past, or
death may ensue to both mother and child.' The Arab,
again, must recite a prescribed formula of prayer on the
passing of a funeral procession, and also on his seeing the
firstfruits of the season and its flowers.^ The dead, it is
said, will hear his voice if, on crossing a cemetery, he
cry aloud : '' ye people of the grave, may peace be
with you, of both sexes of the Faithful."^ Among the
Jews in Palestine a dead body is not for a moment
left alone, it being thought that wandering spirits might
take possession of it. After a death, for seven days
a lamp must be kept burning all the time. Should it
be accidentally extinguished, it is considered a bad sign.
Near the lamp are placed a cup of water and a towel, as


» Lev. V, 2 ; xxii, 4.

• Sale, Koran, Prelim. Discourse, sect. iv. Cf. Burckhardt, I^otes on
the Bedouins and Wahahis, i, 99.

» Baldensperger, P.KF., 1894, 143.

^ It was interesting to see how anxious my Mosul servant was, just
as we were leaving Baghdad in 1905, to get ahead of a funeral pro-
cession which was about to cross our path.

^ Hadji Khan, With the Pilgrims to Mecca, 43.


28 SPIBIT TRANSFERRED TO WATER.

it 18 supposed that the spirit comes to wash there.^ As
soon as a death has clearly occurred, all water in the
house is poured out and all looking-glasses are turned to
the wall, *^ lest the spirit see itself reflected in the glass/' ^
This superstition of water may be connected with the idea
in Numbers xix, 15 : " Every open vessel which has no
covering bound upon it is unclean" when a man dies in
a tent. It seems to have been an accepted belief that
spirits might be transferred to water; for instance, among
the Assyrians we find an incantation for a sick man made
over a little figure of dough thus : —

" Put water upon the man and
Pour forth the water of the incantation ;
Bring forth a censer (and) a torch ;
As the water trickleth away from his body,
So may the pestilence in his body trickle away ;
Return this water to a cup and
Pour it forth in the broad places ;
That the broad places may carry away
The evil influence which hath brought low (his) strength.*''

Or in the Tablet of the Ban: —

** Like water may they pour it out,
Like a goblet may they dash it in pieces,
Like a tile may they break it/' *

Or in one of the "Evil Spirit" texts: —

** The evil spirit (and) ghost that appear in the desert,
Pestilence that hast touched the man for harm,

^ Masterman, Biblical Worlds xxii, 256-7.

• Ibid., 255. This fear of reflection is shown in the Shi'ah tradition
if a Muslim gaze into a looking-glass before saying his prayers he will
be guilty of worshipping his own likeness (Hadji Khan, With the Pilgrims
to JHfecca, 42).

=» Devile, ii. Tablet * T,' Rev. 1. 3 ff. * Ibid., Tablet • V,' 1. 60 fL


SPIRIT TRANSFERRED TO WATER. 29

The Tongue that is banefuUy fastened on the man,
May thej be broken in pieces like a goblet,
May they be poured forth like water." '

The idea of the magician in his exorcism is that the
evil spirits have been transferred to the bowl of water,
and that when the water has been poared away and
the pot broken all the evil influence will be dissipated.
This is the idea in the Maronite rite of baptism. The
priest enters the church bearing the child, and, after
various ceremonies, approaches the font and pours water
into it, and, after lighting a candle, he adjures the evil
spirit to depart from the water " that it may be a fountain
causing eternal life.'' After several responsive sentences
he drops three drops of tallow in the water, at the same
time praying that the Lord may drive out every evil spirit
and Satanic wile from the water.^

The Rabbinic idea of the soul of a murderer trans-
migrating to water is the same. They say : " The mystical
sign of this is indicated in (Deut. xii, 16) 'Ye shall pour
it upon the earth as water'; and the meaning is, he is
continually rolling on and on without any rest. Therefore
let no man drink (direct) from a running tap or spout,
but from the hollow of his hands, lest a soul pass into
him, and that the soul of a wicked sinner."^ To drink
water drawn overnight is one of the things (along with
sleeping all night in a cemetery or throwing one's nail
parings into the street) which cause a man to *' sin against
himself." ^ If a man drinks water at night he exposes

I Ibid., i, Tablet * C,' col. ii, 1. 156. ' Bliss, P.E.F,, 1892, 214.

' Hershon, Talm. Misc., 328, quoting Kabbala, Emeh Hamelechy
fol. 153, cols. 1, 2.
* JViddahy fol 17, col. 1.


30 SPIRIT TRANSFERRED TO WATER.

himself to the power of Shabriri, the demon of blindneBS.
If he is with some one else, he should say, '* I am
thirsty " ; but, if alone, he must tap on the lid of the
jug and address himself by his own name and the name
of his mother, saying, ''#Thy mother has bid thee beware
of Shabriri, briri, riri, iri, ri, in a white cup." ^ On the
eves of Wednesday and the Sabbath one should not drink
water except out of white vessels, and after having recited
Ps. xxix, 3-9, or other magical formulae, for it is on those
nights that Agrath bath Mahlath is abroad with her train
of eighteen myriads of messengers of destruction.^

The Jews of Galicia break a pot or dish in front of a
child to drive away the demon of convulsions,' and among
the Arabs, when any evil is apprehended from a person,
it is customary to break a piece of pottery behind his
back.^ The Levitical laws for vessels rendered tabu by
the touch of unclean beasts show a parallel ; some are to
be put in water, but those of earthenware are to be broken.^

Now it is to this transference of evils that we must
refer the peculiar custom in vogue at weddings in the East,
and at the risk of diverging from the main subject of
this chapter for the moment it is worth an examination.
A jug of water is placed on the head of the bride at an
Arab wedding in Palestine when she reaches the door of
the new house, "as a sign of complete submission to her
husband," and when she steps into the house she must
call on the name of God as she passes over the lintel,


^ AbodahZarahy fol. 12, coL 2, quoted Hershoa, Talm. Muc,, 232.
See Introduction.
3 Fes., 3a and 1125, quoted Jewish Ericycl.y eitb Denwiwlogy.

* Jew. Encycl.j xi, 600.

* Lane, Manners and Customs^ 324. ^ zi, 29-38.


SPIRIT TRANSFERRED TO WATER. 31

because the J&n live below. The bridegroom strikes the
jug as she passes, throwing it down and breaking it. He
also holds a sword over her.^ According to Spoer^ who
was present at a wedding at Siloan^, the bride put a little
leaven to her forehead and fastened some to the doorpost
of the new house, and entered the room with a water-jar
on her head, *' symbolizing her future duties." ^

Surely this is not the proper explanation for so peculiar
a custom. The '* calling on the name of Otod," the breaking
of the pot by the bridegroom, and the prophylactic sword
(i.e. iron) can only point to an ancient rite of exorcism
over the devils who are always ready to attack newly
wedded folk by transferring them to the bowl of water
with a " word of power/' and then dispersing them by the
destruction of the pot. Among the Yezidis, for instance,
the marriage customs seem to throw some additional light
on this, for the bride on her arrival at the house of her
betrothed is struck by him with a Selala (small stone),
symbolizing that she is under his power, and again by
a loaf of bread, signifying that ^' she should be compassionate
on the poor." ' A remnant of the jai*-breakiDg reappears in
the Gairene custom of hanging large chandeliers in front of
a bridegroom's house and, by breaking a large jar, " divert
the attention of the spectators . . lest an envious eye should
cause the chandelier to fall."^ In the tract Callah it is
said by the Babbis that whoever takes drink from the
hand of a bride, it is as if he had drunk from the hand

» Baldensperger, P.E.F., 1894, 136, 138.

* Hans H. Spoer, Biblical Worlds xxvi, 13.

» Chabot, Notice sur lea Yezidis, J.A., vii, 1896, 127. Both of these
actions can be referred to customs of driving demons away.

* Lane, Manners and Cuatoms^ quoted Arabian Nights, voL iv, note 44.


32 LAYING THE GHOST.

of a harlot. He who receives a cup from the hands of
a bride and drinks therefrom has no portion in the world
to come.^ There are special dispensations allowing fiances
to wash their faces on the Day of Atonement.*

There is another Assyrian tablet dealing with the
laying of ghosts.^ As usual, long formulse containing
the descriptions of all possible apparitions are prescribed,
in order that the magician may show that he knows the
name of the haunting spirit — "A brother's ghost, or
a twin, or one unnamed, or with none to pay it rites, or
one slain by the sword, or one that hath died by fault of
god or sin of king" (col. i, 11. 6-8), or "the ghost of
one imburied, or of a brother, or anything evil"*
(col. i, 1. 23). The ceremonies appointed for the laying
of the spirit are as follows : Seven small loaves of roast *
com, the hoof of a dark-coloured ox, flour of roast com,
and a little leaven ^ are necessary; then, after, a libation,
there is a spell —

" ye dead folk, whose cities are heaps of earth, whose . . . are
sorrowful, why have ye appeared unto me ?
I will not come to Kutha I Ye are a crowd of ghosts : why do ye
cast your enchantments upon me ? "

The flour and leaven are to be kneaded into a paste
in the horn of another ox, and a libation poured into


1

2


Hershoii, Talm. Misc., 236, Tract Callak.

See further, under Royal Tabus.
3 K. 2175 ; see my article F.S.B.A., Nov. 1906, 219 ff. Compare
also K 2604, beginning : ** When the ghost of a man's father appears,"
and K. 1 293 (Harper, Letters, No. 461 ) : " The figure of the dead man
in clay," followed by the necessary rites.

* It is also possible to translate here "or of an evil brother or
sister." But cf. Meissner, Ritualtafeln, 152, No. 45, 1. 9.

* On this translation see the footnote, loc. cit., 224.


LAYING THE GHOST. 33

a hole in the earth (just as Gilgamish pours his offering
into the earth when asking a dream). Eutha, in this
incantation, is the underworld ; it occurs in the story of
the Descent of Ishtar, where the porter of Hades says,
"Enter, O Lady, let Kutha be glad at [thee]."^ After
further ceremonies the leavened dough is to be placed in
the hoof of the first ox, and another libation poured out,
with an incantation to Sama§.

In the same tablet is a prayer entitled "Prayer for
when a dead man appeareth unto a living man for evil,
to turn him back that he appear not." The ceremony
begins with the following directions: —

" Spin a variegated and a scarlet thread together, and tie
seven knots in it; thou shalt mix together oil of cedar,
spittle of the man, the leavened doagh, earth from an old
grave, a tortoise's (?) mouth (P), a thorn (P), earth from the
roots of the caper,^ earth of ants; thou shalt sprinkle the
knots with this. While thou tiest them, thou shalt repeat
this incantation [(and) bind it] on the temples [of the
man]. Thus shalt thou tighten it, until the darkening


^ See King, Babylonian Religion^ 180.

' Compare the story iu the Armenian version of the Life of St. Nino
(F. C. Conjbeare in Studia Biblica, v, 75) about the childless couple :
" And a luminous man said to me (St. Nino) : ' Go into the garden,
and from the root of a cedar (or pine) sapling by the rose-bushes
thou shalt take earth, and give it to them to eat in the name of
the Lord, and He will give them offspring.''' Cf. also ibid., p. 23.
With regard to the ''earth of ants," according to Bochart, it was
a custom with the Arabs to place an ant in the hand of a new-born
child, with a prayer that he might grow up wise and sagacious
{EncycL Bibl,^ i, 176). In late Hebrew magic "dust from an
ant-heap" put into a written charm and hung up in the workshop
brought prosperity in business {Folklore of Mououl^ P,S,B. A, ^ March,
1906, 103, No. 6).


34 LAYING THE GHOST.

of the white part of the face and the whitening of the
dark-coloured part of the face takes place " ^ . . .

The latter part of this incantation prescribes that figures
of the dead man and the living person to whom the spirit
has appeared be made, and libations made before both;
then the figure of the dead man is to be buried in a
grave, and that of the living man is to be washed in
pure water, thus typifying the burial of the body of
the ghost and the cleansing of the living man. The
accompanying spell is to be recited : —

** O Sun-god, king of heaven and earth, judge of what is above and
below, lord of the dead, ruler of the living,
Sun-god, the dead who have risen and appeared, whether the

ghost of my father or of my mother, or the ghost of my brother,
Or of my sister, let them accept this, and leave me free ! "

Then the following ceremony is to be performed. In the
morning at early twilight the kisar must be sprinkled
with pure water, and a censer lighted for the Sun-god,
to await him at his rising, burning buraiu-wooi or gum;
a libation of sesame-wine must be made, and a libation of
asses' urine poured forth three times. Thus will the dead
be stayed.

Yet another method is given in the same tablet : *^ When
a dead man appeareth unto a living man . . . thou
shalt make [a figure] of clay, and write his name on the
left side with a stylus ; thou shalt put it in a gazelle's
horn and its face . . . and in the shade of a caper-
bush or in the shade of a thorn-bush thou shalt dig a
hole and bury it.'*

^ For the difficult words in this passage see the whole article. The
last passage is somewhat doubtfuL


OMENS FROM GHOSTS. 35

If a man is attacked by a ghost,^ he is to be anointed
with various substances^ and '' the hand of the ghost ''
will be removed. Even the fright from a ghost can be
assuaged by certain prayers.^

It is also among the charges brought against the hostile
wizard in the Maklu-oerieSf^ that he has made a figure of
the enchanted person (for whom the health-giving rites
are being performed), and has delivered it to a corpse, or
allowed it to look at it, or laid it near or on one, or in
a grave, or he has put the sick man's water by the side
of or on a corpse.

From these latter texts it will hardly be necessary to
adduce further proof that the ancient Assyrians were firmly
convinced that they might actually see ghosts, and that
there was no doubt that this might happen to any man.
Yet if any more evidence be needed, the omen tablet
E. 8693^ will furnish it. This text gives a list of the
probable occurrences to be expected if a ghost appears in
the house of a man.

** When a ghost appeareth in the house of a man there will be a

destruction of that house ;
When ditto speaketh and hearkeneth (for an answer), destruction of

that house, the man will die and (there will be) lamentation.
When ditto ^standeth over the bed, overthrow of the bed and house."

The same thing will happen if it is under the bed. We
thus see that it was counted an evil omen, if an apparition


' K. 4075.

' K. 3398. For both see Bezold's Catalogue of the Kimyunjik
Collection.

» Maklu, Tablet IV.

^ Compare also S. 392 : '' When a ghost gibbers in the house of
A man in the middle watch," or '* in the morning watch."


36 PARALLEL FROM MALAYS.

showed itself in a house, either silent or gibbering in
expectation of some answer ; further, we now have evidence
for the belief among the Assyrians in the ghost which walks
at night and comes to the bedside, a universal tradition.

There is an interesting parallel to these rites among
the Dyaks or Malays of some of the western tribes of
Borneo. If one of these natives falls to vomiting, he
believes that one of his deceased kinsfolk is responsible^
and he repairs to a wise-man or a wise-woman for help.
This exorcist pulls out one of his hairs, and calls on the
names of his dead relations ; the name at which the lock
gives forth a sound is the name of the guilty one. The
physician, generally an old woman, then says to the ghost :
" Go back to your grave : what do you come here for P
The soul of the sick man does not choose to be called by
you, and will remain yet a long time in its body." Then
she puts some ashes from the hearth in a winnowing fan,
and moulds out of them a small figure or image in
human likeness. Seven times she moves the basket with
the little ashen figure up and down before the patient,
taking care not to obliterate the figure, while at the same
time she says: ^'Sickness, settle in the head, belly, hands,
etc., then quickly pass into the corresponding part of the
image," whereupon the patient spits on the image and
pushes it from him with his left hand. Next the beldame
lights a candle and goes to the grave of the person whose
ghost is doing all the mischief, and throws thereon the
figure of ashes, calling out : *' Ghost, plague the sick man
no longer, and stay in your grave that he may see you
no more." ^

* E. L. M. Kuhr, Schetzen uit Borneo's Westerafdeeling^ quoted by
Frazer, Oolden Bought i, 267.


THE EXTERNAL SOUL. 37

To retarn to our subject, the departed soul. Having
seen to how great an extent the ancient Semites believed
in the individuality of the soul after deaths it now remains,
as a corollary, to look into the question of a belief peculiar
to savage races, the separation of the soul from the human
being during life; that is to say, whether the Semites
believed at all in the possibility of a man guarding his
soul in some other place than his body. On this subject
Frazer, in his discussion of this savage idea, quotes the
story of Seyf el-Mulook in the Arabian Nights,^ where
the jinnies soul is in the crop of a sparrow, which is in
a box, in another box, within seven boxes, in seven chests
in a coffer of marble, and as an Oriental parallel he
compares the story of the Two Brothers in Egyptian.^
For other examples among the Semites, we may mention
a Syrian Arab story,' where a Princess Hisn says to a Jew :
'' I beg of you, tell me where your soul is, so that I and
it may be company for each other during the day." He
said to her: "In the wooden lock of the door.*' She
put a bunch of flowers on the door, and began to act as
though she was talking with it. The Jew came in the
evening, and saw the door decorated. He said to her :
" What ! are you crazy P '* She said to him : " I beg of
you, where is your soul ? " He said to her : "In the
broom." She began to laugh at him, so that he would
think she loved him. The third day she said to him:
"I beg of you, tell me where your soul is?" He told
her that his soul was inside some cotton in a little box in
the foot of a lame gazelle. She said to him : " How shall


* Oolden Bough, iii, 378. * Papyrus lyOrhimy.

' Huxley, J.A.O.S,, xxiii, 287.


38 THE EXTERNAL SOUL.

I get it P " He replied : '^ By means of three hairs from
my beard/'

The story of Samson guarding his strength in his hair
seems to have something in keeping with this belief, and
another passage in the Old Testament, Ezek. xiii, 18,
is noteworthy: "Woe to the women that sew pillows
upon all elbows, and make kerchiefs for the head of
persons of every stature to hunt souls.'' According to
Mohammedan traditicHi, the soul of Adam had been created
thousands of years before the making of the clay body,
and it at first refused to enter its human dwelling. At
last God forced it violently through Adam's nose, which
caused him to sneeze.^ In Assyrian there is an incantation
directing the sorcerer —

*' Bind the head of the sick man,
And bind the neck of the sick man, *

And bind the soul (or life) of the sick man/''

The remark of an old Fijian chief that a newborn child
is scarcely a human being, as its spirit has not yet come
to it, is very suggestive in this connection.^

We have now to turn to the second class of spirits, those
that are entirely inhuman and supernatural. They exist
in the fertile imagination of the Semites in countless hordes,
and their names are legion ; and as it is impossible to
compare accurately the r61es of each separate demon in the
respective Semitic languages, the best way will be to
examine the characteristics of each successively.

1 Jewish Encyclopcsdia, 178.

* DevUs, ii, Tablet IX, 1. 80 ff. M. Fossey, in his Za Magie Assyrienne^
suggests that this is " peut-dtre . . . un euphdmisme pour designer le
membre viril.'*

' Fison and Howitt, Kamilaro and Kumai, 190.


XHE UTUKKU. 39

Again taking Assyrian as the base, the first matter that
lies before us in the oft-repeated line Utukku limnu, oUl
limnu, edimmu limnu, gallu limnu, iiu limnu, rabisu limnu,
"Evil Spirit, evil Demon, evil Ghost, evil Devil, evil God,
evil Fiend." The edimmu we have already dealt with,
the a/6 belongs to the third class, being half human, and
the '' evil God " yields but little more than its self-
contained idea, so that we have only to treat of the
utukku, the gaim, and the rabisu.

The utukku is, once at least,^ used of the wraith of a
dead man coming back to earth, but it is not easy to say
wherein the difierence lies between it and the edimmu.
But from the fact that we find it only once, with certainty,
taking the place of the edimmu, we shall probably be
right in ascribing to it a far wider scope. It was certainly
a spirit that lurked in the desert,^ the common home of
many Semitic devils, lying in wait for man, or it might
have its home in the mountains, sea, or graveyard,' and
evil would befall him on whom it merely cast its eye.^
The following text describes the province of a spirit whose
name is unfortunately lost, through a break in the tablet.
It is possible, however, that it is the utukku : —

'* The evil Spirit' robbeth . . . and roameth over the land,
The evil Spirit which shroudeth the land as with a garment,
The evil Spirit which against the man angrily . . .
The evil Spirit is a devil which heareth not,


^ The Gilgamish episode ; see King, Bab, Rdigion, 175.
» DeviU, i, Tablet III, 1. 28, p. 5.
» W,AJ, , ii, 17, i, 3 ; and Haupt, A.S.K.T., 11, i, 3.
* DeviU, i, Tablet * C,' 1. 179.

^ The Sumerian word is lost, and the Assyrian translation represents
it by a dittchsigix.


40 THE JRABI9IT.

The evil Spirit is a devil which hath no shame,

The evil Spirit is a devil which spawneth evilly,

The evil Spirit which bringeth woe on the land,

The evil Spirit which hunteth over the land,

The evil Spirit which chaseth living beings,

The evil Spirit is a pestilence which . . . the hand,

The evil Spirit which fiercely hunteth the land,

The evil Spirit which fiercely raiseth trouble in the land,

The evil Spirit which receiveth not . . .

The evil Spirit which draweth up the little ones like fish from the

water.
The evil Spirit which casteth down the elders , . .
The evil Spirit which striketh grey-haired old men and women." *

The gallii is sexless.^ It is a word used in classical
Assyrian as a term of abuse, being used by Sennacherib
to describe the hostile Babylonians^ in the phrase galli
limniiti, 'evil devils/^

The rabisu, as its name implies, is a lurking demon which
sets the hair of the body on end,^ just as in Job iv, 15 :
" Then a spirit passed before my face ; the hair of my
flesh stood up." This 'lurker' may be compared to the
Syriac bdr egdrd, a demon who sat on the roof and
jumped on a man as he came out of the house, the man
so afflicted being known as d'bdr egdrd}

1 Ibid., ii, 127.

* DeviU and Evil Spirits, Tablet V, col. iv, 1. 17.
» G. Smith, Hutory of Senn., 114, 1. 6.

* W.A.I., V, 50; i, 51. I once heard a Suez Arab in the Sinaitic
Peninsula explaining how he could always tell whether a black man
was a demon or not ; his hair would always stand up on end of its own
accord if the negro whom he passed in the street were a supernatural
visitant.

B 1^1 1 IS^f Payne Smith, Thesaurua, 31, "dssmon lunaris qui quovis

mensis lunaris initio luna exagitatur (lunaticus fit), riecnon is, qui
a luna ad lunam cruciabatur a dsemone qui eum cruciabat."


THE LABARTU. 41

The labartu, labasu, and ahhazu are a triad frequently
found together. Of the first-named, we find a whole series
of incantations written against her. She is a female demon,
the daughter of Anu,^ and she makes her home in the
mountains, or cane-brakes of the marshes. Children were
particularly exposed to her attacks.

It is curious to see how solicitous the Semites were in
guarding their babes from the malign influence of such
lamuB. For instance, the spells against the lahartu include
an incantation to be written on a stone and hung round
the child's neck —

** * Labartu, [daughter] of Anu/ is her first name ;
The second, ' Sister of the [gods] of the streets ' ;
The third, ' Sword that splitteth the head ' ;
The fourth, * Wood-kindler * ;
The fifth, * Goddess of awful mien ' ;
The sixth, * The trusted, accepted of Irnina * ;
The seventh, * By the great gods mayst thou be exorcised ; with
the bird of heaven mayst thou fly away.' " ^

Gaster ' has published a Hebrew charm as follows : '' If
thou wishest to protect a young babe from an evil spirit
and from the host of l^ahalatb, write these angels on
a tablet of gold in Assyrian writing (Ashuri)^ and carry
it with thee, and thou needst not fear any evil either
from (for) a big man or a small child.'' In the Testa-
ment of Solomon Obizuth is the name of the female spirit
that visits women in childbirth, and if she is lucky she


» Haupt, A.S.K.T., 11, iii, 59.

' W.A.L, iv, 56, i, 1 ; Myhrman, Zeits. fur Assyr,^ xvi, 165.

> RS.B.A,, 1900, 340.

* I.e. square character in Hebrew.


42 THE LABARTU.

strangles the babe.^ The Maronites have the same ideas
about hanging prophylactic amulets on children. Bliss ^
describes a leaflet folded in a piece of leather and worn
as a charm. It is inscribed with a prayer to St. Cyprian
to preserve all who read it, wear it, or put it in their
houses or on beasts, that they may be safe from the Evil
Eye, from the sheuiows of night, from evil spirits lurking
in things animate or inanimate, in food or drink. This
is put on a child who is afraid of ghosts. Among the
Arabs, if a child wish to be delivered from nightmare
and its terrdrs, he must say to Allah, '' I take refuge in
thee from the evil of Satan." ' Their equivalent for the
child-witch is called Umm-el-Suhyan.^


^ Conybeare, Jewish Quarterly ^ xi, 30. On Byzantine amulets
against female demons, see Schlumberger, Melanges d'ArchSoloffie
Byzantine, 117. Hanauer relates (P.E.F,, 1904, 266) the tale told by
a Spanish Jewess about the spirit of La Broosha (a form of Lilith), who
often takes the shape of a cat. It concerned her grandmother at the
time that she gave birth to a child, the mother of this Jewess. It is
a custom that for nine days after a birth neither mother nor child
should be left alone in a room, but this precaution was temporarily
omitted. The woman who was nursing the sick mother left the room,
and when she returned the patient related a dream of a great black cat
having come into the room and turned itself into ajar. A cat mewed
in the street and the jar became a cat again. It came to the bed,
took the baby and went to the window and said, " Shall I throw ? "
" Throw,'' said the cat outside. This happened thrice with the same
answer, and the cat then threw the baby out of the window and
disappeared herself at the entrance of the nurse, who at once noticed
the baby was not in the cradle. In order not to alarm the mother she
explained that she herself had taken the child, and then dashed out
of the house to see a cat crossing a field with a babe in its mouth. As
she pursued she uttered a form of adjuration which forced the beast to
drop the child.

« P.^.F., 1892, 318.

* Hadji Khan, With Pilgrims to Mecca, 44.

* Zwemer, Arahia, 283.


THE SELU AND LAMASSU. 43

Doubtless the Dragon of Revelation/ which stood before
the woman in travail, is to be placed under this head; at
any rate, the Dragon of the Testament of Solomon has
some of these characteristics : ^ /' There came before me
a dragon, three-headed, of fearful hue. And I questioned
him, ' Who .art thoup' And he answered me, 'I am
a caltrop-like (Tpt^oXaZb?) spirit, whose activity is in three
lines. But I blind children in women's wombs and twirl
their ears round, and I make them deaf and mute.'"

Of the ahhazUy ' seizer,' and the labasu practically nothing
is known, unless the former is considered to be the same
as that ahhazu described in the medical texts, where
a man may be ' filled ' by a disease of this name.'

Two others are mentioned in the cuneiform magical
texts, the aidu and lamaasu. The former may be the
name for either a guardian deity or an evil spirit. As
a power of evil it is found in an invocation beginning
'^ Spirit (sidu) which minisheth heaven and earth, which
minisheth the land; spirit which minisheth the land, of
giant strength, and giant tread." ^

It is also found in a list of spirits, before the 'Evil
Eye ' ; * or is described as an ' evil genius ' {sidu),^ and
the sixteenth tablet of the '' Evil Spirits " begins —

** The evil gods are raging storms,
Ruthless spirits (Sidu) created in heaven's vault." ^

It is exorcised by the sick man —

'' Spirit (SMu) that standest close at hand,
At my cry go forth therefrom unto the street !

* xii, 4. 2 E^j Conybeare, J.Q.^ xi, 29.
» Kiichler, Assyr.-Bahyl. Medkin, 60, 11. 28, 30, 31, etc.

* Devas, Tablet V, col. iv, 1. 8 ff. « Ibid., Tablet XVI, 1. 346.

* Ibid., Tablet 'L,' L 5. ' Ibid., Tablet XVI, 1. 1.


44 THE SEDIM.

Spirit that standeth near,

At my cry go forth [therefrom unto the street]." ^

It also takes its place with the utukku and rahisu —

*' The great genius {sedu)^ spirit and fiend^
Which roam the broad places for men." '

'* The evil spirit hath lain in wait in the desert, unto the side of
the man [hath drawn nigh],
The evil genius (Jsidxi) for ever is rampant,
And none can [resist him]." '

" The raging genius, the evil demon." *

It is in its quality as an evil spirit that the surrounding
Semitic nations borrowed the word from the Assyrians.
It occurs as DHB^ in Deut. xxxii. 17, and Ps. cvi, 37,
and in Aramaic {i{n^{5f, !>!• ; in later times it is the

subject of much discussion among the Rabbis. For instance,
the iMim are said in the Talmud^ to possess six quali-
fications, three of which belong to man, and three to the
angels, for though they eat, drink, multiply, and die as
men do, they have wings, foreknowledge of the future, .
and can traverse the world from one end to the other,
just like the angels. Indeed, according to some, they
can assume any shape and form they like, being able to
see without being seen themselves. Others say that they
were begotten by two angels named Aza and Azael on
I^aamah, the daughter of Lamech, before the Flood.^

» Ibid., Tablet * G,' 1. 14. ' Ibid., Tablet * N,' col. i, L 9.

» Ibid., Tablet ' T,' 1. 1.

* Tallqvist, Maqlu, vii, 124. Cf. also i, 136.

* Ahothy ed. Kodkinson, i (ix), 123.

* Sale, Koran (quoting Zohar), Prelim, Discourse^ sect. iv.


GUABDIAN ANGELS. 45

But^ inasmuch as this became a generic term in late
times for devils generally, it will be more expedient to
discnss it further on under the broader view of super-
natural beings.

The iSdu, however, to return to its Assyrian phase, was
also looked upon as a beneficent spirit, thus approximating
to the idea of guardian angels. With the lamassu, which
appears always as a kindly spirit, it is appealed to at the
end of invocations, both being frequently invoked to be
present after the evil spirit has been cast out. The
exerciser, for instance, will ban the evil spirit thus: —

•' May the god Dubsag-Unug-ki, the patron of KuUabi,
For my life and health follow affer me ;
A kindly Guardian (Sedu) marcheth on my right,
A kindly Spirit {lamassu) marcheth on my left** ^

'* When I draw near unto the sick man,
When I lay my hand on the head of the sick man,
May a kindly Guardian {iidu\ a kindly Spirit (lamassu) stand at
my side." *

The gods perform the Incantation of the Deep —

*' That a kindly Guardian, a kindly Spirit, may stand at the side of
the man, the son of his god." ^ *

'* May the evil Spirit (utukku) which hath seized him (the sick man)
stand aside,
May a kindly Guardian {sidu) stand at his head,
May a kindly Spirit {latnassu) stand continually at his side." *


» Devils, i, Tablet III, 1. 88 ff. « Ibid., 1. 149.

» Ibid., Tablet ' K,' 1. 205.

* Ibid., 1. 220. For other instances cf. op. cit., ii. Tablet * L,' 1. 9 ;
* N,' iii, 1. 27 ; vi, 1. 15 ; xi, 1. 96.


46 GUARDIAN ANGELS.

The magician ends his spell with a prayer to Ea —

'* Oh that thou wert my guardian Genius (Sidu)
And my guardian Spirit {laTnoMuy^ '

While on the subject of guardian spirits, it will liere
be fitting to look into the question of guardian angels, to
see how far the Assyrian beliefs tally with those of the
other Semites. The Rabbis maintained that every man
had two guardian angels who accompanied him.^ The
Mohammedans say that two such angels attend on every
man to observe and write down his actions;' according
to the peasants of Palestine, one is on each shoulder,
and they are greeted at the end of every prayer by
turning towards them, right and left. They write down
every deed accomplished during the daytime, or as long as
the person is awaked We have to consider, in relation
to this, the two phrases which so constantly occur in
cuneiform religious texts, '' the man, son of his god," and
'' his god and his goddess," the latter occurring frequently
in the so-called Penitential Psalms. The former is to be
found in the incantations, and seems to be used to indicate
that the man really has a god as his protector against the
evil spirit who is being exorcised. Thus such phrases as:
'' Unto the man, the son of his god, come not nigh " ; ^
** Until thou departest from the man, the son of his god " ; ^


» Ibid., i, Tablet III, 1. 284 ff.

• Hag.y 16a, quoted Jewish Encyd,y svh Angelology,
^ Sale, Korariy Prelim, Disc, sect. iv.

* Baldensperger, P,E.F,, 1893, 309. On the question of the relation
of 'messengers' or * angels' with evil spirits, see JewUh Encycl,^
sub voce.

* Devils, vol. i, Tablet IV, vi, 3 ff.

• Ibid., Tablet V, ii, 56 ; iii, 37.


THE SEVEN SPIRITS. 47

''From the man, the son of his god, may they depart
from his body," ^ etc., are common, but the reference
is doubtless to a particular god to whom the man has
attJEiched himself either by local influence or family tradition,
or, when we consider the extraordinary number of go4-
names used in composite personal names, we may perhaps
assume that the man thought himself to be under the
aegis of such god as formed a component of his name. It
is more likely, if we are to see any reference to ' guardian
angels' in Assyrian literature, that we shall find it in
the phrase "his god and his goddess." ''He that hath no
god," we are told in an incantation against Headache,^
"Headache will seize on his body when he walketh in
the street."

In addition to the Assyrian demons known by distinctive
names, there are the 'Seven Spirits' which combine in
their persons almost all the traditional Eastern ideas of
jinny aghufdl, and afarit.

** Seven are they ! Seven are they I
In the Ocean Deep, seven are they !
Battening in Heaven, seven are they !
Bred in the depths of the Ocean ;
Nor male nor female are they,
But are as.the roaming wind-blast,
No wife have they, no son can they beget ;
Knowing neither mercy nor pity,
They hearken not to prayer or supplication.
They are as horses reared amid the hills,
The Evil Ones of Ea ;
Throne-bearers to the gods are they,
They stand in the highway to befoul the path ;

^ Ibid., iii, 47. » Ibid., Tablet IX, 194.


48 THE SEVEN SPIKIT8.

Evil are they, evil are they !
Seven are they, seven are they,
Twice seven are they ! " *

** Destructive storms (and) evil winds are they,*
An evil blast that heraldeth ' the baneful storm,
An evil blast, forerunner of the baneful storm.
They are mighty children, mighty sons,
Heralds of the Pestilence.
Throne-bearers of Ereskigal,
They are the flood which rusheth through the land.
Seven gods of the broad earth,
Seven robber (?)-gods are they,
Seven gods of might.
Seven evil gods.
Seven evil demons.
Seven evil demons of oppression.
Seven in heaven and seven on earth." *

'' Spirits that minish heaven and earth,

That minish the land,

Spirits that minish the land,

Of giant strength.

Of giant strength and giant tread,

Demons (like) raging bulls, great ghosts.

Ghosts that break through all houses,

Demons that have no shame.

Seven are they 1
' Knowing no care, they grind the land like com ;

Knowing no mercy, they rage^gainst mankind,

They spill their blood like rain,


1 Ibid., Tablet V, col. v, 1. 28.

' Maury, La Magie, 102, quoting Cleni, Alex., Stromal.,, vi, 268
(ed. Potter, ii, 754), says that pestilences, tempests, and hail were
regarded as the work of demons, and this superstition continued among
almost all the Christians of the Middle Ages.

» Literally * beholdeth.' '

* DeviU mid Evil Spirits, i. Tablet V, col. ii, 1. 66 ff.


THE 8EVEN SPIRITS.


49


Devouring their flesh (and) sacking their veins.

They are demons full of violence, ceaselessly devouring blood." ^

** Warriors twice seven are they,
That in a single (7) spawning in the creation of Anu were

spawned ;
They are the roaming wind-blast.
No wife have they, no son do they beget ;
Sense they know not.** '

'* From land to land they roam,
Driving the maid from her chamber,
Sending the man forth from his home,
Expelling the son from the house of his father.
Hunting the pigeons from their cotes,
Driving the bird from its nest,
Making the swallow fly forth from its hole,
Smiting both oxen and sheep.
They are the evil spirits that chase the great storms,
Bringing a blight on the land." '

" Through the gloomy street by night they roam,
[Smiting] sheepfold and cattle-pen. .
The land [as with door and ?] bolt they [shut up].
In the city like a snare they are set.
Through the door like a snake they glide.
Through the hinge like the wind they blow.
Estranging the wife from the embrace of a husband,
Snatching the child from the loins * of a man." ^

" They creep like a snake on their bellies,
They make the chamber to stink like mice.
They give tongue like a pack of hounds." •

*' Rending above, bringing destruction below.
They are the children of the underworld,
Loudly roaring above, gibbering below,
They are the bitter venom of the gods ;


* Ibid., col. iv, 1. 8.

» Ibid., Tablet IV, col. i, 1. 24 flF.

« Ibid., col. ii, 1. 12 ff.


» Ibid., col. iv, 1. 60 ff.

* Literally * knees.'

• Ibid., Tablet *C,'l. 213 ff.

E


=^=T7-


60 THE SEVEN SPIRITS.

They are the great storms directed from heaven,

They are the owls which hoot over a city,

They are the children born of earth,

That in the creation of Anu were spawned.

Over the highest wall and through the thickest wall,

Like a storm flood they can pass.

Breaking through from house to house ;

No door can shut them out, no bolt can turn them back.'* ^

These Seven Spirits reappear in later times, both in
Syriac and in Palestinian magic. The tradition of the
Unclean Spirit in the Gospel of St. Luke (xi, 24) un-
doubtedly echoes this Assyrian poem : '' The unclean spirit,
when he is gone out of the man, passeth through
waterless places, seeking rest; and finding none, .he
saith, I will turn back unto my house whence I came out
And when lie is come, he findeth it swept and garnished.
Then goeth he, and taketh to him seven other spirits
more evil than himself.'* But we have a still more curious
tradition in Syriac which describes the Seven Spirits almost
exactly as they were known to the earlier inhabitants of
Mesopotamia.

" IFor] the fold of cattle.^

" ^ Seven accursed brothers, accursed sons ! destructive
'' ' ones, sons of men of destruction ! Why do you creep
" ' along on your knees and move upon your hands P '

1 Ibid., Tablet V, col. i, 1. 10.

' What is evidently a similar charm in Assyrian for cattle is given
in W.A.L, iv, 18, 6 :—

*^ The evil demon, the evil devil seek the resting-place (for sheep)
in the desert, destroying the resting-place like nuikl.
The Aiokku casteth down in the horses' stable,
It hath filled the mouth of the asses with dust, and estrangeth
their matrix,


THE SEVEN SPIRITS. 51

And they replied, ' We go on our hands, so that we may
' eat flesh, and we crawl along upon our hands, so that
' we may drink blood/ As soon as I saw it, I pre-
Teuted them from devouriDg, and I cursed and bound
them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, saying: 'May you not proceed on your way, nor
'finish your journey, and may God break your teeth,
' and cut the veins of your neck, and the sinews thereof,
' that you approach not the sheep nor the oxen of the
* person who carries [sc. these writs] ! I bind you in
' the name of Gabriel and Michael, I bind you by that
'angel who judged the woman that combed (the hair
*of) her head on the eve of Holy Sunday. May they
'vanish as smoke from before the wind for ever and
' ever. Amen.' " ^
Beliar sends seven evil spirits against man.^ In Rev. zv, 6,


The ass in foal, the ass that beareth, it maketh cast their young,
The little ass yet imweaned it will not [let suck] the milk,
Id their fold it [briugeth] woe,
A kindly spirit (?) in the pen hath passed (7) and
... to the side climbeth (?)
Marduk, son of Eridu,

. . . when he cometh, casteth a glance at this sheep-pen and
Unto his father Ea, unto \he house entereth and saith —
'[Father], the Plague-god (?) roameth the desert like a hurricane.'
[Ea hath answered him : ' What I,' etc.] : * Gk», my son,*
. . . take the urigallu,
. . . open the pen,
. . ride ..."

In Arab lore beasts are able to perceive the approach of spirits.
Cocks crow and asses bray, and with this Wellhausen compares the
story of Balaam's ass {Reste, 151).

* H. Gollancz, Selection of Chamu, 87.

' Testament of Twelve Patriarchs^ Reub. 2, quoted Charles, The
Ascension of Isaiah^ 7.


62 THE SEVEN SPIRITS.

there is mention of ** seven angels that had the seven
plagues/' and we may surely see some echo of the seven
evil spirits in "These things saith he that hath the seven
Spirits of God, and the seven stars " ; ^ " And there were
seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are
the seven Spirits of Qod."^ Again, between the seven
Assyrian spirits and the seven devas or arch-demons of
Zoroastrianism there must undoubtedly be some connection.'

The curious description of these spirits as throne-bearers
explains the tradition of the Hajryot, in the late Hebrew
theology, who carry God's Throne.* Moreover, there is a
class of angels in Mohammedanism, called Throne-bearers,
who are said to be at present four, but on the day of
resurrection they will be strengthened by an additional
four, who will then bear the throne of C^od above them.^

Their predilection for human blood, as described in the
cuneiform incantation, is in keeping with all the traditions
of the grisly mediaeval vampires. In an Ethiopic charm
an invocation is thus made : " Thus make perish, O Lord,
all demons and evil spirits who eat flesh and drink blood:
who crush the bones and seduce the children of men ;
drive them away, Lord, by the power of these thy names
and by the prayer of thy holy Disciples, from thy servant." ^

To the seven evil spirits was due the eclipse of the
moon. The sixteenth tablet of the series "Evil Spirits"
describes how the Seven Spirits attacked the Moon-god and


* Rev. iii, 1. ' Rev. iv, 5. Cf. also v, 6.
» Encycl, Bibl., 1073.

* On the subject of angels carrying the prayers of men to the Throne
of Qod, see Tobit xii, 12, 15 ; Baruch, Apoc, Gk., xi.

* Koran^ Surahs xl, Ixix. Cf. Klein, Rel. of Islam^ 66.

* Littmann, J.A.O.S.^ xxv, 35.


ECLIPSES. 53

dimmed his light, and there is little doubt that this was
a popular explanation of such a phenomenon. Although
it must be admitted that their attack is made against the
crescent of the moon, as the Assyrian text runs, this is
probably due to poetic licence, and is not a serious bar
to the rational explanation of this text, which, after all,
only reiterates the common savage belief. The modem
Semite is as certain of this as were his ancestors, and it is
a common custom nowadays for the township to turn out
with every noisy kitchen implement they can lay hands on
to drive away the spirits attacking the moon. Doughty,^
while at Teima, saw the housewives making great clamour
of pots and pans '' to help the labouring planet " in its
eclipse. In the Malay Peninsula the Besisi do the same,^
and the Mohammedans of Macedonia, considering an eclipse
a portent of bloodshed, meet it with reports of firearms.^
From St. Maxime de Turin ^ it is evident that even the
Christians of his time admitted that it was necessary to
raise a hubbub during eclipses to prevent magicians hurting
the moon.^

* Arabia Deserta, i, 289. On noise driving evil spirits away see
Frazer, Golden Bought iii, 66, 91 ; Tyler, Primitive CiUture, 4th ed.,
i, 329. The later Hebrews drove off the SSdim at funerals by blowing a
«Ao/ar-trumpet (Yalk., Badash, Mita, 47, quoted Jewish Encycl.^ iv, 520).

* Skeat and Blagden, Pagan RaceSy ii, 298.
' Abbott, Macedonian Folklore, 72.

* Homil, (1618), 703, quoted Maury, La Magie, 182.

^ The belief in a dragon or fish that swallows the moon is curiously
widespread. The Metawileh have this superstition (Fallscheer, P.E.F.^
1889, 130) ; so also the Peruvians ; and the South Sea Islanders hold
that the Sun and Moon have been swallowed by an offended deity
whom they induced by liberal offerings to eject the luminaries from his
stomach (Tylor, Prim. Cult., 4th ed., 329 ff.). When it is remembered
that Jonah was swallowed by the "great fish" for three days (the
period of the moon's disappearance at the end of the month) the


54 ECLIPSES.


The Assyrian text runs-


** The Evil Qods are raging storms,
Ruthless spirits created in the vault of heaven ;
Workers of woe are they,
That each day raise their wicked heads for evil
To wreak destruction . . .
Of these Seven [the first] is the South Wind . . .
The second is a dragon with mouth agape,
That none can [withstand 7].

The third is a grim leopard which carries off (?) young (?)...
The fourth is a terrible serpent . . .

The fifth is a furious beast (?) after which no restraint (?)...
The sixth is a rampant . . . which against God and king . . .
The seventh is an evil wind-storm which ...»
These seven are the messengers of Anu, the king,
Bearing gloom from city to city,
Tempests that furiously scour the heavens,
Dense clouds that bring gloom over the sky,
Rushing wind-gusts, casting darkness over the brightest day.
Forcing their way with the baneful wind-storms.
Mighty destroyers are they, the deluge of the Storm-god,
Stalking at the right hand of the Storm-god.
In the foimdation of heaven like lightning they [flash],
To wreak destruction they lead the way.
In heaven's breadth, the home of Anu, the king.
They take their stand for evil, and none oppose."

coincidence is worth considering. Jonah is the Hebrew word for
' dove,' and it was at Harran, the city sacred to the Moon-god, that the
dove was not sacrificed (Robertson Smith, Religion of Semites^ quoting
AI-Nadim, 294).

* Compare the devils sent to St. A nthony in the Syriac Paradise of
the Fathers (ed. Budge, 1907, i, 14) : "Now it is very easy for the
Enemy to create apparitions and appearances of such a character
that they shall be deemed real and actual objects, and [straightway]
phantasms of this kind caused a phantom earthquake, and they rent
asunder the four comers of the house, and entered therein in a body
from all sides. One had the form of a lion, and another had the
appearance of a wolf, and another was like unto a panther, and all the
others were in the forms and similitudes of serpents, and of vipers, and
of scorpions.**


ECLIPSES. 55

The tablet goes on to relate how these seven spirits
attacked the Moon-god, and Bel, hearing of the mischief
they had done, sent his servant Nuzku to take counsel with
Ea against them —

" my minister, Nuzku !
Bear my message unto the Ocean Deep,
Tell unto Ea in the Ocean Deep
The tidings of my son Sin, the Moon-god,
Who in heaven hath been grievously bedimmed."

Ea heard the messi^ which Nuzku brought, and bit his
lip in grief ; he summoned his son Marduk and conveyed to
him the tidings of the Moon-god.

After this the tablet becomes mutilated for ten lines,
and, when it recommences, it gives the directions for the
sick man's treatment. Evidently this connection of an
eclipse of the moon with disease lends itself to the explanation
that certain sicknesses were due, indirectly at least, to such
phenomena, or at any rate that mankind was peculiarly
susceptible to such attacks during the moon's disappearance.
Many indeed were the prayers made to avert the evil
from an eclipse ; in certain of the '' Prayers of the Lifting
of the Hand" we find the phrase ''in the evil of an
eclipse of the moon which in such and such a month on such
and such a day has taken place, in the evil of the powersi
of the portents, evil and not good which are in my
palace and my land."^ The following is a prayer offered
up by Sama§-§um-ukin, the brother of ASSurbanipal, against
the evil of an eclipse of the moon, which has apparently
been foretold from preceding events : —

^ King, Bah, Magic and Sorcenfy zzv.


66 THE SEVEN SPIRITS.

** . . . great lady, kindly mother,
Amid the many stars of heaven
Thou art mistress . . .

I, Samas-sum-ukin, the king, servant of his god.
Vicegerent of his god Mardak (and) his goddess Sarpanitum,
Of the evils of the eclipse of the moon, fixed for the fifteenth

day of Shebat,
Of the evils of the signs and omens, evil, baneful.
Which have occurred in my palace and my land,
I am afraid, and I fear, and I tremble !
Let not these evils draw near to me or my house !
Accept the upunttt-pl&ni from me and receive my prayer." ^

There is a long tablet which gives more details of these
seven demons which the Fire-god is supposed to relate to
his friend Marduk —

" Those seven were bom in the Mountain of Sunset,
And were reared in the Mountain of Dawn,
They dwell within the caverns of the earth.
And amid the desolate places of the earth they live.
Unknown in heaven and earth.
They are arrayed with terror,
Among the wise gods there is no knowledge of them.
They have no name in heaven or earth ;
Those seven gallop over the Mountain of Sunset,
And on the Mountain 6f Dawn they cry ;
Through the caverns of the earth they creep,
(And) amid the desolate places of the earth they lie.
Nowhere are they known, in heaven nor earth are they
discovered." '

In the Syriac Sayings of the Holy Fathers certain monks
hear the voices of devils in the air as they are praying
with the sounds of armour, horses, and many horsemen.'

^ Scheil, Une Saison defouilleSy 96.

« DeviU and Evil Spirits, vol. i. Tablet * K,' 1. 84 flf.

' Ed. Budge, The Paradise of the Fathers, 1907, ii, 208.


THE JINN. 57

The Jinn and kindred spirits of the Arabs have all the
characteristics of the various demons of Assyrian times.
They are corporeal beings, more like beasts than men, for
they are ordinarily represented as hairy, or have some
animal shape, such as that of an ostrich or snake. If
a jinni is killed, a solid carcase remains, but they have
certain mysterious powers of appearing, or of temporarily
assuming human form,^ and when they are offended they
can avenge themselves by sending disease or madness.^
"They have, for the most part, no friendly or stated
relations with men,^ but are outside the pale of man's
society, and frequent savage and deserted places far from
the wonted tread of men. It appears from several poetical
passages of the Old Testament that the Northern Semites
believed in demons of a precisely similar kind, hairy
beings* (se'lrim), nocturnal monsters (lUith),^ which haunted
waste and desolate places in fellowship with jackals and
ostriches." They can eat, drink, and propagate their
species, and are even subject to death,^ so that they
correspond to the Hebrew sedim in certain respects.

^ Inversely, the Sei'ar in Hadramaut, in time of drought, can
change to were- wolves. Makrizi, I)e Valle HadramatU^ 19, quoted
Robertson Smith, Rel. Sem., 88.

* Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites, 1894, 120.

' But they do meet on certain grounds. See ibid., 128.

^ Compare the Mohammedau story of Bilkis, Queen of Sheba, who
married Solomou. She had hair on her ankles and was thus shown to
be 2kjinniyyah by descent {Jeioish EncycL, i, 605). Maimonides, in his
Guide to the Perplexed, says : " Some sects among the Sabeaus
worshipped demons, and imagined that these assumed the forms of
goats, and called them therefore * goats * " (iii, xlvi). On the S^iHm
see Baudissin, Studien, 137.

* But see p. 66.

* Klein, Religion of Islanty 67.


■^TT"


»58 THE JINN.

The demons of the Rabbinic tradition {iidlm or tnazzlkln)
are said to have been created by the Almighty. " He
had created their souls, and was about to create their
bodies when the Sabbath set in, and he did not create
them." ^ As to their numbers, it is said that Agrath
bath Mahlath^ haunts the air with her train of eighteen
myriads of messengers of destruction on the eves of
Wednesdays and Saturdays. After creating the earth
God peopled it with Jinn before placing Adam there;
" He created them of fire clear from smoke," ' and among
them was Iblis.^ Half of the Jinn are good and half
are malignant beings, and they inhabit the seven stages
which form the edifice of the underworld,^ just as the
Babylonian demons lived in Ekurra.^ Malignity of the
soil is ascribed by the Arabs to the ground demons or earth-
folk, BO that husbandmen sprinkle new ploughland with
the blood of a peace-ofiering ; similarly, when they build
they sprinkle blood on the stones, lest the workmen's
lives should be endangered.^ Again, while still on the
subject of sacrificing to Jinn, when the people of Kerak
go into the harvest-fields they often occupy caves, but
not until they have killed a sacrifice at the entrance to
the spirits.^ When the natives of Hamath repair the
largest water-wheel there, they sacrifice a ram to the
Afrit who inhabits the sluice, before re-starting it, in
order to propitiate him. Otherwise, someone is sure to be


^ Bereshith Rabba, vii.

* Pesachim^ 1126 {Jetc. Encycl.y 616).

' Korariy Surah Iv. * M*i.s*udi, Prairies d^or^ i, 50.

* Doughty, Arabia Deserta, i, 259. « DeviU, ii, Tablet * P.*

' Doughty, op. cit., i, 136. ® Curtiss, Bibl. World, xxi, 253.


THE JINN. 59

killed by the wheel in the sluice-way.* Leviticus xvii, 7,
has some bearing on this subject : '' And they shall no
more sacrifice their sacrifices unto the he-goats (or satyrs,
i.e. s'irtmy Jinn), after whom they go a-whoring."

An Egyptian will commonly exclaim " Destoor " when
pouring forth water or other h'quids on the ground, thereby
asking permission or craving pardon of any Jinn that
might be there,^ and this reverence is to be found among
the Yezidis, who fear to scald the " little devils."' According
to Palestinian tradition, a certain man was killed by the
J&n because he passed water on their heads through a fissure
in the field.^

At Calirrhoe (Zerka Ma'in) there is a jinni, who is
also called a tceli, who lives below the ground to keep
the fire going which heats the hot spring.^ There is
a rather different tradition concerning one of the hot springs
in the Sinaitic Peninsula. This is the Hammam Faraun
('Pharaoh's bath'), and the grumblings and mutterings
which can be heard at the mouth of the cavern near the
exit of the hot stream are the groans uttered by Pharaoh
and his dead host writhing on the coals in the place of
the damned.

The Jinn ride on foxes, gazelles, and porcupines, but
avoid the hare because it is supposed to menstruate.^ When
a herd of camels refuses to drink, the Arabs will sometimes
beat the male beasts on the back to drive away the Jinn,


* Curtiss, Prim. Sern. Rel., 198.

' Lane, Manners and Customs, 1890, 203.
' A. V. Williams Jackson, Persia^ 12.

♦ Baldenspfirger, P.KF,, 1893, 205.

* Curtiss, Prim. Sem. Rel, 89, 198.

• Sihah (quoted Rohertson Smith, Kinship, 246).


60 THE GHOUL.

who are riding them and frightening the females.^
Eccentric movements of a dust whirlwind are supposed
to be the visible signs of a battle between two clans of
Jinn,^ and in the Eastern Soudan, among the Bisharln,
I have heard these tourbillons of dust called eructationes
(kBtnonum. The Bedouin of East Africa stab the centre
of a dust-storm with their creeses in order to drive away
the evil spirit which is believed to be riding on the
blast.^ Hughes says that the Arabs exclaim Hadld!
hadid! " Iron ! iron ! " when doing this.*

The Jinn may ' possess ' a person, and hence the word
majniiny a madman ; the Palestinian belief is stated in
John Tiy 20: ''He hath a devil, and is mad."

The ghoul is another Arab spirit. According to Doughty ^
her appearance is as follows : — " A Cyclops' eye set in
the midst of her human-like head, long beak of jaws, in
the ends one or two great sharp tushes, long neck; her
arms like chickens' fledgeling wings, the fingers of her
hands not divided ; the body big as a camel's, but in
shape as the ostrich; the sex is only feminine, she has
a foot as the ass' hoof ^ and a foot as an ostrich. She
entices passengers, calling to them over the waste by
their names, so that they think it is their own mother's
or their sister's voice." One of the Arabs had seen this
beast, '' which is of the Jin kind, lie dead upon the land

* Certeux and Caruoy, UAlgerie Traditionelley quoted Frazer, O.B.^
ill, 129.

2 Yakut, iii, 478. » gee Coiiybeare, J,Q., ix, 461.

* BicL of Mam^ 136.

* Arabia Deserta^ i, 53 ; see the picture on 54.

* Cf. Origen, quoted Conybeare, Jewish Quarterly^ ix, 100 : "As
many demons as live in dry places and have their bodies rather dry as
are, they say, the demons with donkey's legs."


THE MARED. 61

Upon a time when he rode with a foray in the Jeheyna
marches.'' This is rather like the picture of the Ethiopic
devils in the Lives of Mabd Seydn and Oabra Krisids
(ed. Budge), p. xxxiii, which have horns, tails, and wings,
their right foot being a claw and the left a hoof. According
to the Hebrew tradition, demons proverbially had cocks'
feet.^ ''He who wishes to know about them must take
sifted ashes, and sprinkle them by his bedside, and in
the morning he will see marks as of cocks' feet. He who
wishes to see them must take the foetus of a black she-
cat, itself a black one : a first-born, the daughter of
a firstborn: and bum it in the fire, and pulverise it, and
fill his eyes with it, and he will see them."^ The ashes
of a black cat are a popular form of magicians' stock-in-
trade in the modem Arabic books on sorcery, and the
directions run, to take a black cat, of deep blackness,
without any white in it, and take nothing of it but
its heart ; then to take swallows, which are called ' birds
of paradise,' and bum them until they become ashes.
This ash will be of the greatest service in magic.^

Of other Arab demons there is the Mdred, a tall
spirit which generally appears when someone has been
killed.^ To lay the M&red, dust is sprinkled by the
manslayer over the blood of his victim.^ It snatches
away a bride, in the story of Abu Mohammed the Lazy,
in the Arabian Nights.

* Jewish BncycL, article AsmodetUy ii, 218.

' Berakhoth, 6a ; see Blau, Das AltjUdische Zauberwesen, 11, where
references are given for demons having cocks' feet and no shadow.
' MS. (modern) which I bought in Mosul.

* Baldensperger, P.KF., 1893, 206 ; ibid., 1899, 149. Robinson Lees,
Village Life in Palestine, 217.

* Lees, loc. cit.


62 THE KIRD AND RASCAL,

t

The Kird is another spirit. One day it sat upon the
shoulders of a man, and when he arrived at his village
he was dumb. But by the Khatib of the village ordering
him to perspire and read the pain away for seven days,
he recovered his speech, but remained a stammerer.^

The JRassad is generally the guardian of some treasure,
and may take the form of a man, colt, cock, or chicken
with young ; he haunts almost all caves. There is a story
of a man in Safri^ being told by an Algerian that a stone
in his courtyard contained a treasure, but it could not
be obtained without his wife's blood. They resolved to
kill her, but while she was killing a cock for supper she
cut her finger over the stone, and, on the blood dropping
thereon, the gold came forth.^ The idea that devils are
guardians of enormous treasure is very prevalent among
the Arabs, and I met with it at Mosul in this wise.
My servant had lost three mejidia (about nine shillings),
and, having found a Muslim sorcerer that understood
what to do, obtained a charm from him. This was
a piece of paper inscribed with various invocations and
cabalistic figures, which was to be left near the place
where the money had been lost. If the demons who
inhabit the air had taken it to add to their treasure, they
would return it at midnight; if it had been stolen by
human hands, then would they write the name of the
thief on the paper.' Doughty,^ on this subject, says
that on the landmark rock el-Howw&ra in the plain of


* Baldensperger, P,E,F., 1893, 206 ; ibid., 1899, 149.


2 Loc. cit., 1893, 206 ; ibid., 1899, 149.

3 See my article RS,B.A., 1906, February, 81.
* Arabia Deseria^ i, 170,


MONSTERS. 63

Med&in S&lih a great treasure lies, in the opinion of the
Moors in the Eella, sealed in a turret-like stone chamber
in the keeping of an Afrit.

The 'horseleach' of Pro v. xxx, 15, is nothing more
than a flesh-devouring ghoul ; the Hebrew word is 'aliikdh,
the equivalent of the Arabic *aulak, as was pointed out
by Wellhausen.^

To this class of beings we must add some peculiar forms
of deities, whose description is fully portrayed in the
cuneiform tablets. One, a sea-monster, a * form ' of Ea, is
thus described: ''The head is the head of a serpent; from
his nostrils mucus (P) trickles, his mouth being beslavered
with water ; the ears are like those of a basilisk, his horns
are twisted into three curls, he wears a veil in his headband;
the body is that of a Suh fish, full of stars, the base of
his feet are claws, the sole of his foot having no heel." ^
More important, from an anthropological standpoint, is
the picture of Nin-tu, a ' form ' of the goddess Mah, '* The
head (has) a fillet and a horn . . . She wears a head
ornament, she wears a fly (P).' She wears a veil; the
fist of a man ; she is girt about the loins, her breast
being open. In her left arm she holds a babe sucking
her breast, inclining towards her right arm ; from her


^ Reste, 149.

> Devils, ii, 149. The word translated * form ' appears to be fairly
certain.

' This word is lanisatu in the text, ordinarily a kind of fly, although
what it means here is doubtful. That it means a fly of some kind is
quite clear from the determination in its ideogram, and I think we
shall not be mistaken in seeing its cognate in the modern Arabic

^^J^U, a mosquito, Just as almattu in Assyrian « the Arabic ^3u«.l,
and lamattu = iL^J (see my note in P.S,B.A.^ 1906, 226).


64 THE MOTHEE-GODDESS.

head to her loins the body is that of a naked woman;
from the loins to the sole of the foot scales like those of
a snake are visible : her navel is composed of a circlet." ^
It seems extremely probable that we have here the model
for the numerous little clay figures which have been found
from time to time during excavations, possessing these
characteristics, and we shall not be far wrong in considering
them as votive o£ferings made by barren women who desired
offspring.^ Nin-tu doubtless occupied among the peoples
of Mesopotamia the position which Hathor held among the
Egyptians, and the Virgin Mary among Oriental Christians,
a form of mother-goddess who plays such an important
part in many mythologies.

In Jewish demonology we find Keteb Meriri, a demon
who reigns from 10 in the morning to 3 in the
afternoon from the 17th of Tammuz to the 9th of
Ab, described as having the head of a calf with one
revolving horn in the middle, and an eye in the breast,
the whole body being covered with scales, hair, and eyes ; *
and the curious reader will see many points of similarity
in Assyrian texts kindred to those that are quoted above.^
The form of sea-monster seems to find a parallel in the
Testament of Solomon ^ in the demon which has the

1 Devils, ii, 147.

' Martin, in his Textes Religietix, 21, has published the translation
of a text for a man desiring to know whether he will have male
issue : " Samas, lord of judgment, Adad, lord of the vision . . .
the lady N., his wife, who hath dwelt for long under his protection
. . . hath borne only girls, and there is no male (issue) and his heart
is sad." I have translated sal-mes (i.e. sinniSdti) as 'girls,' as
preferable to Martin's Kalmesy * heureusement.'

' Jewish Enci/cL, iv, 516.

* See Devils J ii, 151, etc.

* Ed. Conybeare, J.Q., xi, 33.


SEMI-HUMAN DEMONS. 65

shape of a horse in front and behind a fish^ '* a sea-demon
who creates a destructive wave." But this rather looks
like a plagiarism of a Greek sea-horse.

And while on the subject of the mother-goddess, it
seems very probable that we have one akin to the poly-
mastoid Diana of the Ephesians in the Assyrian Queen
of Nineveh, described (ostensibly by Nabil) in the prayer
of ASSurbanipal ^ — "Thou wert the babe, O A§§urbanipal,
whom I left in charge of the Queen of Nineveh; thou
wert the weakling, As§urbanipal, whom I placed (P)
at the breast (?) of the Queen of Nineveh ; of the iour
breasts which were put to thy mouth, two thou didst
suck, with two thou didst cover thy face."

We now come to the third class of spirits, those that
are half human and half supernatural. From the stand-
point of their peculiar existence, they must be accounted
the most interesting of the three species, for it is not
merely from the interest attaching to their nature that
they are valuable, but the beliefs in their origin throw
such light on primitive ideas as cannot be reckoned too
highly. The evidence that they were a very popular
form of phantom is so well-attested and convincing as to
a£ford a firm base for certain theories on tabu that I hope
to bring forward.

Ooing back again for the third time to the Assyrian
incantations, as the earliest systematised beliefs, we must
first of all discuss an interesting triad of ghostly visitants —
the lilu, lilUu, and ardat lili. The second is obviously
the feminine counterpart of the first, but it is difficult


^ See Martin, Textes Rdigieux^ 29. The line in question runs
irhi zizi Sa ina pika kJcna II tennik II tahallap anapanika.


66 LILITH.

to disoriminate accurately between the characteristics of
the lilttu and ardat lilL Both the latter are, howevery
female demons, the femininity of the ardat lili being
especially emphasized by the word ardatu, which always
has reference to the woman of marriageable age. The
ardat lili seems to have had much closer relations with
human beings than the lilitu, and she takes over the
functions of the Lilith of the Hebrews, which is obviously
the etymological equivalent of lilitu. These functions
are no more nor less than that she becomes the ghostly
wife of men, probably unmarried ones if there is anything
in the comparative folklore of the Arabs, by reason of
her desire which forces her to roam abroad until she find
a mate. It is from this that we may find a derivation
for the words lil& and lilitu ; they are certainly not
connected with the Hebrew lailah, 'night,' as they
either come from a Semitic root rt/V, or from a Sumerian
word LiL. If it be the former, there is no difficulty in
referring them at once to the words laMt, ' to be abundant,'
and lulii, ' lasciviousness, wantonness.'^ That the Rabbis

should have compared H/v, * night,' with TSww, 'Lilith,'
was very natural, but in view of the Assyrian or Sumerian
origin of the word this is now untenable.

Let us now examine the evidence for the nature of this
triad. In a list of phantoms we find the following mention
made of two demons : —

^ This view is also held hy Martin, Testes Rdigieux^ 25. That an
angel of lust was known to the Kabbis is apparent from Bereshith
Rabba, Izzzv, quoted Maimonides, Quide to the Perplexed^ ii, c. vi, in
regard to the relation between Judah and Tamar : ^ Rabbi Jochanan
said that Judah was about to pass by [without noticing Tamar], but
Gkxl caused the angel of lust, i.e. the libidinous disposition, to present
himself to him."


LILITH. 67

*' The ardat lUt that hath no husband,
The idlu lilt that hath no wife." ^

The latter is merely the male counterpart of the first,
occurring only here as far as I know, with stress laid on
its masculinity, idlu being the word for a grown man of
full strength.

We have, therefore, four phantoms of this nature to
discuss, the HMl, the lilitu, and the ardat lill, with a rare
counterpart, the idlu lili. Leaying the last-named alone
for the present, the ardat lili, the true equivalent of the
Lilith, is the best known, and the Assyrian incantations
are quite clear in their descriptions of her character.

First, then, we find from the text quoted that she has
no husband. This is amplified by the prayer to the Sun
on behalf of a possessed man —

'* He on whom an evil spirit hath roshed,
He whom an evil demon hath enveloped in his bed.
He whom an evil ghost hath cast down in^the night,
He whom a great devil hath smitten,
He whose limbs an evil god hath racked (?),
He the hair of whose body an evil fiend hath set on end.
He whom ... [a hag-demon] hath seized.
He whom [a ghoul] hath cast down,
He whom a robber-sprite hath afiOicted,
He whom the ardat lilt hath looked upon,
The man with whom the ardat lili hath had union." '


^ Haupt, A,S.K.T., 11, ii, 30.

' W.A.I.^ V, 50, i, 41. The Assyrian of these two lines runs : —
ia ardat lilt ihiruSu, idlu Sa ardat lilt ikrimuht.
Another text gives the following amplifications : — ardat lilt ina apti
amdi izzUea ardatu la Hmta \ » ia kima sinniiti la arihatu \ » ia kima
niini&i la iiakpatu (Sm. 49, Bezold, Catalogue^ 1376). ^" The ardat lUi
attacketh the man's dwelling, a maid untimely dead (?), a maid that
cannot menstruate (? cf. ^^^) like a woman, that hath no modesty
(?c£ •SiQJ) like a woman."


68 LILITH.

The iilib and lilitu must have had something of the same
character, although we know very little about them; the
question then arises as to the idlu liliy which is, as far as
I know, aircL^ Tijeyofievov. I was inclined to think at
first ^ that the idlu lili was nothing more than an academic
invention of the scribes, parallel to the ardat lili, inasmuch
as this text in which it occurs is merely a grammatical
composition made up of phrases occurring in cuneiform
grimoires ; but when it is remembered, first, that women in
Semitic religion are liable to conceive through supernatural
means, and that, secondly, these Assyrian incantations, as
we have them, are written only from the male standpoint
(doubtless verbally altered in exorcising sickness in women),
there are the strongest possible groimds for the existence
of a male counterpart of the ardat lili in the phantasmagoria
of the Babylonians. At any rate, it is absolutely certain
that whether we consider the fellow of the ardat lili to
have been called lilu or idlu lili, the fact remains that
women, as much as men, were exposed to the possibility
of marriage with Jinn and other invisible powers. In late
Hebrew tradition Lailah is prince of conception.'

That Jinn can intermarry with human beings is a well-
attested belief of the Arabs.^ Such folk are always solitary


1 Devils^ I, zxzii, n. 1. > Jewish Enct/cLj i, 588.

' Compare the idea of the Qreek Sirens, who are very aimilar (J. E.
Harrison, Prolegomena^ 203). It was laid down by Martin Del Bio
{DisquisitioneSy 1599, i, 178) : " Axioma I sit, sclent Malefici et Lamis&
cum deemonibus, illi quidem succubis, has vero incubis, actum Venerium
exercere." " Axioma II potest etiam ex huiusmodi concubitu dsemonis
incufci proles nasci.'* About two hundred years later Francis Barrett
published The Magvs, in which (p. 23) the curious will see the beliefs
current among those who held that magic was a true science, concerning
the s^mi-human monsterSj born of human and immortal parent& On


MEN MARRIED TO SPIRITS. 69

and unmarried. Jallalo'ddin ^ explains that the advantage
which men received from Jinn was their raising and

the belief in siuicubi&nd incubiy see Horst, Zauber Bihliothek, vi, 116,
who on p. 118 quotes a discussioa about them in a book published
a hundred years after Melancthon's Physik (1550) on the theme that
some think that "Demons who have assumed human shapes can
mingle and generate with human beings.'' This the author of the book
published in 1650 denies, on the ground that deest enim Dcemonibus
semen. Sprenger (MaUeus Idaleficarum, 1580) has a chapter headed
An per dcsniones incubos et succubos detur hominum procreatio (p. 37),
which he answers : " Dssmones non vivificant aliquod corpus, ergo nee
semen poterunt movere localiter de loco ad locum " (p. 39). See also Wier,
Histoires, 288. Frangois de la Mirandole (quoted on p. 326 of Jean
Wier*s Histoires^ 1579) says : " J'ay conu un homme nomm^ Benoist
Bema, aag^ de septantecinq ans, du nombrede ces sacrificateurs que
nous nommons prestres, lequel par Tespace de plus de quarante ans
avoit couch^ avec un Daemon, qui lui estoit familier, et lui aparassoit
en forme de feme." Psellus (eleventh century), in his Dialogue on
the Operation of Dcemons (ed. CoUisson, 30-32), relates of a con-
versation with a monk in Mesopotamia, " who really was an initiated
inspector of dasmonic phantasms : these magical practices he after-
wards abandoned as worthless and deceptive, and having made his
recantation, attached himself to the true doctrine, which we profess,
and assiduously applying himself, underwent a course of instruction at
my hands ; he accordingly told me many and extraordinary things
about deomons ; and once on my asking if daamons were capable of
animal passion, ' Not a doubt of it,' said he. Quemadmodom et sperma
nonnulli eorum emittunt et vermes quosdam spermate procreant. At
' incredibile est, inquam excrementi quicquam dsemonibus inesse, vasave
spermatica e^ vitalia vasa quidem eis, inquit illi, hujusmodi nulla
insunt, superflui autem seu excrementi nescio quid emittunt hoc mihi
asserenti credito . . . 'And are there many descriptions of
dssmons, Marcus ? ' I asked again. ' There are many * said he, * and
of every possible variety of figure and conformation, so that the air is
full of them, both that above and that around us, the earth and the
sea are full of them, and the lowest subterranean depths.' " Marcus
then recounts the daemons which Thracian affects to despise, but
quotes a species Leliurium, "speaking in his barbarous vernacular
tongue, a name which signifies Igneous." On demons generally see
Psellus, Hypotypose dee anciens dogmes dee ChaldSene^ ed. Chaignet
{Damaeciue le Diadoqtie, Lee Premiere Prineipee, iii, 229).
Quoted Sale's Koran, Surah vi.


70 MEN MARRIED TO SPIRITS.

satisfying their lust and their appetites. The clan of 'Amr
b. Yarbu' was descended from a si'ldt, or she-demon, who
became the wife of their human father.^ Palgrave cites
it also.^ Sayce quotes as an instance that *' about fifteen
years ago there was a man in Cairo who was unmarried,
but had an invisible ginna as wife. One day, however,
he saw a woman and loved her, and two days later he
died. It should be added that in Egypt, where early
marriages are the rule, bachelors who have reached the
prime of life are believed to be married to 'af&rit or ginn."'
Another case, mentioned by Baldensperger,^ was that of
an epileptic servant who maintained that a female jinni
was in love with him, and used to strike him half dead
to the ground. At Mosul there was the same tradition,
and I met with it while discussing Jinn and kindred
subjects on the mound of Nineveh one evening, when
incidentally (and entirely spontaneously) one of the men,
YakAb, told me that he knew a man in Mosul who declared
that he was visited at nights by a spirit in the form of
a beautiful woman, who had already borne him three
children, and he was so pleased with this minage that he.
scorned a conventional marriage.^

Habbinic literature is full of the doings of Lilith, who
bore to Adam devils, spirits, and Itlln (the Assyrian lilu)}
Whoever slept alone in a room was likely to be beset by


^ Robertson Smith, quoting Ibn Doreid, KUab al-ishtikaJc, 139, Rd.
Sem., 50.
» i, 33.

» Cairene Folklore^ Folklore, 1900, xi, 388.
* RKF., 1899, 149 ; cf. 1893, 205.
8 P.-S.^.il., Feb. 1906, 83.
' Eisenmenger, ErUdecktes Jvdentum, ii, 413.


LILITH. 71

her.^ The Habbis believed, too, that a man might have
children by allying himself with a demon,^ and although
they might, not be visible to human beings, yet when that
man was dying they would hover round his bed, to hail
him as their father.^ At the funeral of a bachelor the Jews
of Kurdistan cast sand before the coffin to blind the eyes
of the unbegotten children of the deceased.^ Similarly, the
Assyrian demon alii owes its parentage to a human being.^
Bar Shalmon, the legendary son-in-law of Asmodeus, the
demon, after marrying his daughter, a princess, becomes
the father of a son by her, but deserts her. The princess
then pretends to renounce him, but begs a final kiss, which
kills him.^ Another demon of the same kind named Omias
is described as saying (in the Testament of Solomon) : "Those
who are consumed with desire for noble virgins upon earth
. . . these I strangle. But in case there is no disposition
to sleep, I am changed into three forms. Whenever men
come to be enamoured of women, I metamorphose myself
into a comely female, and I take hold of the men in their
sleep and play with them." ''

In Palestine it is said sometimes that women find that
their best gowns, which they had carefully put away in
their bridal chests, have been worn by female spirits during

^ Sabbath, 1516, quoted Blau, Deis Altjiid, Zaubenc, 12. Eabba
relates how he saw Hurmiz, the daughter of Lilith. There is also
a certain person or demon, it is unknown which, called Hurnim bar
Lilith (Talmud, Baba Bathra, ed. Rodkinson, v, 203).

* Eisenmenger, op. cit., 421.

' Ibid., 425. This was their explanation of the ba*al k'ri.

* Jewish EncycLy xi, 600.

' AlA ia ina maial mv4i amelu ina Sitti irihhil atta {Devils, i,
Tablet * B,' 18).

* See Jewish EncycL, 510.

' Conybeare, Jewish Quarterly, xi, 17.


72 DEMIGODS.

their confinement, because they did not utter the name of
God in locking them up.^ Presumably the female spirit
bedecks herself with a wedding gown, when its proper
owner is separated from her husband, in order to attract
his attentions. Among the Jews in Palestine, Lilith (or
the evil eye in general) is averted from the bed by hanging
a charm over it consisting of a special cabalistic paper in
Hebrew together with a piece of rue, garlic, and a fragment
of looking-glass. On the first possible Sabbath all the
relations assemble in the patient's room and make a hideous
noise to drive away evil spirits.^

On the other hand, women are equally open to attack
from demons. Whatever view may be held of the
B*ni Sldhim, who took wives of the daughters of men^

* Cortiss, Prim, Sem, Rel,^ 115.

* Masterman, Bibl. Worlds ixii, 249. For pictures of Hebrew
amulets hung up against Lilith, see Jewish Encyd,^ 8vb voce Amulets.
See also P. D. Scott-Moncrieff, P,S.B.A,y xxvii, 1905, 26, for a photograph
of a Hebrew amulet (iuscription) from Morocco. On Jewish Lilith-
worship in Mesopotamia, see Z.D.M.G.^ iz, 461 ff. The Jews of the
present day write on the bed of the woman in child^rth, and on the

four walls of the chamber: Jn'hh pH TWi) UlIK^ "Adam and

Eve, Get out, O Lilith " (Buxt. Lex,, 1140).

' Cf. Robertson Smith, Bel, Sem,, 60 : ''In one of the few fragments
of old mythology which have been transplanted unaltered into the
Hebrew Scriptures, we read of the sons of gods who took wives of the
daughters of men . . . such a hero is the Izdubar of Babylonian myth."
Examples of such fabricated genealogies will be found in McLennan,
Studies in Ancient History^ ch. iz. To the subject of the B^nS Eldkim
Horst {ZayJber Biblioihek, ii, 391) adds the so-called " Scheias-Teufel,"
''welche ihr grosstes VergnUgen daran sinden, ihre Excremente an
Orten abnulegen, wo man's am wenigsten vermuthet, und dadurch die
Menschen in peinliche Verlegenheit zu bringen." Martin Del Rio
(1599, bk. ii, 180) remarks, "vetustas obtrudit suos semideos,
Hercules, Sarpedooes, iBneas, Seruios Tullos ; Anglia, Merlinum ;
Pannonia, Hunnos ex Arlunis strigibus Gk>thiciB et Faunis natos," etc.


OFFSPRING OF WOMEN AND DEVILS. 73

(and it seems only reasonable to conneot this legend with
this form of superstition), Hebrew tradition undoubtedly
shows an acceptance of this belief.

The parentage of Isaac is but thinly disguised/ and
there is a remarkable story in Ezek. xxiii, where Yahweh
marries two sisters and begets children by them. ''This
is an allegory. But when even a late prophet does not
hesitate to introduce this conception as a figure of speech,
it may be reasonably supposed that an earlier time found
it only natural that Yahweh, as well as other gods,
should have children by graciously visiting women of his
choice."* Again, it is the "Angel of Yahweh" who
foretells the birth of Samson.' According to Mohammedan
tradition, it was Gabriel's breath, which he breathed into
the Virgin Mary, that caused the conception.^ In Pirke
R,EL xxi, xxii, Cain's real father was not Adam, but
one of the demons.^ In Assyrian mythology the amours
of the goddess Ishtar with human beings are too well
known to need repeating.

In the Book of Enoch,^ wicked spirits are said to
have been bom of women and the 'holy watchers,' and
Justin Martyr says that demons are the offspring of
angels who yielded to the embraces of earthly women.'

> Encyd. Bibl,, 4692 : Gen. xxi, 1, 2 : "And the Lord visited Sarah
as he had said, and the Lord did unto Sarah as he had spoken.
And Sarah conceived, and hare Abraham a son in his old age."

' See EncycL BiU,, article Son of Ood, 4690.

' Judges xiii, 3.

* Sale, Koran, Surah xix, n. r.

' On angel intermarriage with human beings see Jetnsh EncycL^
ntb voce Fall of Angels,

• C. XV.

^ Apol, ii, 446 ; both these cases are quoted by Conjbeare, Jetoish
Quarterly, viii, 597, 603.


74 THE STORY OF TOBIAS.

In the Slavonic Book of Enoch Satan is the seducer and
paramour of Eve. The very fact that ecclesiastics argue
against this belief in their writings^ shows how strong
the belief in them must have been: ''Now see, my
brother readers, and know that this" (of angels having
intercourse with mankind) ''is neither in the nature of
spiritual beings, nor in the nature of 'the impure and
evil-doing demons who love adultery ; for there are no
males and females amongst them, nor has there been even
one added to their number siDce they fell. If the devils
were able to have intercourse with women, they would
not leave one single virgin undefiled in the whole human
race." In the Koran, too, Sale annotates the remark :
" They say, God hath begotten children ; God forbid ! "
with the explanation : " This is spoken not only of the
Christians and of the Jews (for they are accused of holding
Ozair, or Ezra, to be the Son of God), but also of the
pagan Arabs, who imagined the angels to be the daughters
of God." *

Asmodeus, the demon, who first appears in the Book
of Tobit, is made responsible for the danger in men
marrying Sarah, the daughter of Haguel, and he must
be "bound" before Tobias can wed his bride.* The
phrase "for a devil loveth her,"* together with the whole

* Bezold, Die SchatzhoMe, 18.

' Surah ii. Paul believed that demons could be warded off and their
influence repelled by the chalehi or headdress of the Jewish women.
This, as Dean Farrar admits {Life of Christ, appendix viii) is the true
meaning of PauFs rule, that women should veil themselves in church
"because of the angels" (Conybeare, J.Q.^ viii, 579). According to
a tradition of Mohammed, everyone is touched at birth by the devil,
except Mary and her Son, between whom and the evil spirit God
placed a veil (Sale, Koran, note to Surah iii).

' Tobit iii, 17. * Ibid., vi, 14.


THE STORY OF TOBIAS. 75

•

story, shows how great a hold the belief had obtained.

Dr. Gaster has published two hitherto unknown versions of

the Tobit Legend^ which relate that '' Tobiyah remembered

the words of Raphael, and he took the heart of the fish

and put it on a censer and burnt it under the clothes

of Sarah. And Ashmedai received the smell and he

fled instantly.'' According to the Testament of Solomon

Asmodeus is made to say, ''I am called Asmodeus among

mortals, and my business is to plot against the newly

wedded, so that they may not know one another. And

I sever them utterly by many calamities, and I waste away

the beauty of virgin women, and estrange their hearts . . .

I transport men into fits of madness and desire, when they

have wives of their own, so that they leave them, and go

o£f by night and day to others that belong to other men."^

He describes his own parentage as being from an angel's

seed by a daughter of man.' He was the counterpart of

Lilith, as being dangerous to women. From this it seems

apparent that the antagonism of Asmodeus towards the

newly-wed arose primarily from the idea that he jealously

guarded to himself some kind of ju% primcB noctis, and

that he was always ready to attack anyone who should

interfere with his possible harlm. His functions are the

same as those of a demon of some of the native tribes of

Central Queensland, who is a noxious being called Molonga,

who prowls unseen, and would kill men and violate women

if certain ceremonies were not performed.^

Azazel was familiar to the Rabbis as the seducer of men
and women.^ In the Testament of Solomon^ one of the


1 RS.B.A., xix, 37. * J.Q., xi, 20. ' Ibid., ch. xxi.

* Roth, £thn. Studies, 120 ff., quoted Frazer, Oolden Bought iii, 94.

* Tanna d. b. R, Yishma^ely quoted Eticycl, BibL, ii, 366.


76 SPIRITS MARRIED TO WOMEN.

demons is described as having the form of a dragon with
the face and hands of a man. " I am the so-called winged
dragon, and I chamber not with many women, but only
with a few that are of fair shape, which possess the name
of xuli, of this star. And I pair with them in the guise
of a spirit winged in form, coitum habens per nates. And
she on whom I have leapt goes heavy with child, and
that which is bom of her becomes eros.'* ^ In the Arabian
Nights, in the story of the Second Royal Mendicant, the
efreet says : " man, it is allowed us by. our law, if a wife
be guilty of incontinence, to put her to death. This woman
I carried o£f on her wedding-night, when she was twelve
years of age, and she was acquainted with no man but me/'
Among modem Arabs the belief goes still further, that
a dead husband may revisit his wife. It is said that
a woman in Nebk took the bath of ceremonial purification,
because she dreamed she had received a visit from her
dead husband. A certain man in Nebk was currently
believed to have been the offspring of such a union, and
no reproach was ever cast upon his mother.* Cognate with
this was the action of a barren woman who rushed up to
the corpse of a man after he had been executed for
murder.*

Somewhat similar to Asmodeus is the Arab spirit called
Karina, a female demon accompanying every woman, and


^ Conybeare, J.Q., xi, 31. "But since such offspring cannot be
carried by men, the woman in question breaks wind."

' Curtiss, Prim. Sem, Ret., 115-16.

^ Ibid., 116. There is a tradition in some remote (Jewish) com*
munities that a woman may be married to the dead {Jewish EncycL^ xi,
599). On the superstitions of eating corpses of men executed see
Bcrgemann, Die Verbreitung der Anthropophagie^ 21.


THE KARINA. 77

having as many children as her counterpart. Just as
Lilith took the place of Eve, evidently the Karina is
intended, in one of her phases (that of bearing children),
to do the same for each man. She is very dangerous to
pregnant women and newly married people; that is to
say, just as Asmodeus becomes jealous of interference with
his rights, so does the Karina admit of no dallying with
other women. She is said to destroy the creative power
of men^ and to make women barren, and to her is due
epilepsy as the penalty for pouring water over the threshold
of the door without naming God, on a Friday, or to
quench .the fire. She may appear as an owl, a Jewess,
a camel, or a black man. There is a story that Solomon
once met a singular-looking woman and asked her whether
she was J&n or human. She answered that she was the
Karina. '' I put hatred between husband and wife, I make
women miscarry, I make them barren, I make men impotent,
I make husbands love other men's wives, women other
women's husbands ; in short, I do all contrary to the
happiness of wedded life."*

That barren women among the Semites believe in divine
intervention to give them children is evident from the
Old and New Testament, as well as from other sources.
Indeed, so many of the stories point to a materialistic
conception, that we must not suppose that the primitive
origin of such a belief arose from any ideas of abstract


1 Presumably in the same way the Assyrian demons (Tablet * K ')
"steal away desire (?) and bring to nought the seed." Cf. Sprenger,
Malleus Maleficarum (1580), about witches (p. 141) : " Quod obstetrices
malefic83 conceptus in utero diversis modis interimunt, aborsum pro-
corant, et ubi hoc non faciunt, Deemonibus nates infantes offerunf

' See Baldensperger, P.E,F., 1899, 149 ; 1893, 206 ; 1906, 99.


78 DEMIGODS.

answer to prayer. When Yahweh visits Sarah,^ or Leah,*
or the angel of Yahweh' comes to Samson's mother,^ we
must surely see a remnant of tradition bearing on the
divine origin of Isaac, and the sons of Leah, as well as the
Nazarite Samson.

Herodotus has handed down the belief which was current
about the Temple of Bel at Babylon.^ '' No man is suffered
to sleep here, but the apartment is occupied by a female,
whom the Chaldean priests afi&rm that their deity selects
from the whole nation as the object of his pleasures. They
have a tradition which cannot easily obtain credit, that
their deity enters this temple and reposes at night on this
couch. A similar assertion is also made by the Egyptians
of Thebes; for in the interior part of the temple of the
Theban Jupiter, a woman in like manner sleeps. Of these
two women it is presumed that neither of them is ever
introduced to the other sex."

The existence of the Assyrian kizrUi, uhdti, and harimdii
is worth mentioning in this connection.

In a certain family in Nebk the wife, a perfectly
respectable woman, apparently with the consent of her
husband, considers it wrong to refuse a * holy man.' ^


* Gen. xxi, 1.

3 " And Yahweh saw that Leah was hated, and he opened her womb **
(Gen. xxix, 31),
' Judges xiii, 3.

* To this day Moslems at Hamath swear by Dei penis. In the
village of Bludan, 25 miles west of Damascus, which is composed of
Greek Christians of a very low type, the same oath is heard on the
lips of women. Curtiss, Prim, Sem. ReL, 113.

* Bk. i, ch. cbutii-clxxxii.

* Note in Curtiss, Prim, Sem, Bel,, 150. On saints in India see
Lyall, Asiatic Studies, 1884, 21 ff.


BARREN WOMEN. 79

One Hanna Khizani of Hamath visited Tanta in Egypt,
and saw the great annual festival of Seiyid Alimed
el-Bedawi, '' probably the most popular saint in Egypt/'
when there were upwards of half a million persons present,
including singers, dancers, jugglers, and showmen of every
kind. It is at this festival that some of the honourable
women vow the use of their bodies to the first one who
happens to approach them.^ Sexual excesses were practised
down to quite modem times at the annual festival of the
Prophet Elijah, within the enclosure of the monastery on
the top of Mount Garmel.^

What throws more light on this peculiar idea is the
ubiquity of the belief among the modern Arabs. There
is abundant evidence to show how persistently the childless
women cling to the belief that a visit to a sanctuary (in
its broadest sense) will remove the stigma. Running water
which has some sacred connection, either with a tceli, holy
man, saint, or hero, is the most usual aim of these childless
pilgrims. In some of the channels of the Orontes, the first
night that the water is allowed to flow, there is a special
virtue of procreation, and barren women stand therein,
waiting for the onrush of the water.' At Kiriaten, at the
so-called Baths of Solomon, is a famous shrine, called Abu
Rabah, for women who desire children. They really regard


1 Ibid., 154.

' See this and other instances, Curtiss, BihL World, zxiii, 327, and
ibid, on temporary marriages. Sozomen speaks of an ancient custom
of yielding up virgins to prostitution when on the eve of marriage to
those to whom they had been betrothed, at Heliopolis, near Mount
Libanus {Ecdes. HUt.y bk. v, eh. 10). Herodotus speaks of the custom
of the women devoting themselves to Venus among the Babylonians
and Cyprians (i, cxcix).

' Curtiss, Prim, Sem. ReL, 117.


80 ' BARREN WOMEN.

the tceli of the shrine as the father of children born thus ;

they allow the hot air to stream up their bodies, saying —

•* Oh, Abu Rabah !
To thee come the white ones,
To thee come the fair ones,
With thee is the generation,
With us is the conception." ^

There is a cave at Juneh, in which is a pool of water, to
which the same power is attributed.^ At the stream of
Tell-el-k&di the barren women bathe with the same object,'
and hundreds visit the shrine of Sa'dadin at JSba, appearing
the following year, each with a child on her arm, and
bringing a sacrifice.^ The shrine of Chidr at Beirut contains
in its court a well of holy water (called deker, * male '), and
barren women bathe therein. If they conceive a child he
is called Ohidr.' In Palestine, a man who has not had
a child promises a /edu if only he may receive the gift of
one from a certain saint. If it should be born, when it is
several days old they put the blood of the sacrifice offered
in payment of the vow on its forehead.'

» Ibid. » Ibid., 119. > Curtiss, Bibl World, xxiii, 100.

« Ibid., 98. <^ Ibid., 332 ; see 336.

• Prim, Sem. Eel,, 201. Compare John v, 4. This story of the
spirit which troubled the water bears analogy to the Assyrian text
about the word of Marduk ( W.A.L, iv, 26, 4, 1. 6 ff. ; Hehn, Beitr.
fur Aasyriologie, v, 332) : —

Ana tdnUi uiarma tanUum H gdUat

Ana 8U9i uiarma suHL idammum

• • •

Ana agt Paratti uSarma

Amat *^^ Marduk ahtrrakku idaUah,

** Unto the sea it penetrateth, and the sea heaveth ;
Unto the marsh it penetrateth, and the marsh groaneth ;
Unto the Euphrates flood it penetrateth, and the word of
Marduk troubleth the river-bed.''
. On other holy wells and springs, such as Zemzem at Mecca, Jidlal
77l^^y of Eshmunazar, Paneas, etc., see Baudissin, Studien, 154.


THE ALU. 81

Again, to wliat class of beings are we to refer the
Scorpion-men of the Gilgamish legend, and '' the people
who had the bodies of birds of the holes (i.e. bats), men
with the faces of ravens,'' which the gods created?^
Are we to assume that these were formed out of clay
or by some such handicraft, or are we to refer them to
a more primitive period, when the connection of men
and gods by way of totems was much closer than it
grew to be in after times P

At any rate, there is no doubt whatever about the
semi-human parentage of the Assyrian spirit alu.^ It
is a demon which hides itself in dark corners and caverns
in the rock, haunting ruins and deserted buildings, and
slinking through the streets at night like a pariah dog.
It lies in wait for the unwary, ready to rush out from
its hiding-place ''to envelop him as with a garment,"
or, coming into the bedchamber by night, it steals sleep
away from men by threatening to pounce upon them,
should they dare to close their eyes.' ''The man whom
an evil aia hath enveloped on his bed'^^ shows the
Babylonian belief in what the Arabs call the Kabua or
Kabus en-ndm, a nightmare " which throws itself heavily
on a sleeper, preventing him from moving or opening
his eyes, and which disappears as soon as he awakes." ^

^ CuthsBan Legend, King, Seven Tablets of Creation^ 143, 11 10-11.
Cf. Rev. ix, 7 : '* And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses
prepared for war ; and upon their heads as it were crowns like unto
gold, and their faces were as men's faces."

3 The incantations are explicit on this point, the line " Whether
thou art an evil alH which the man hath created on a bed of night in
sleep " bearing the same idea as the Rabbis had of demons procreated
through k^ri.

» Devils, Tablet ' B.' * W,AJ,, iv, 60; i, 44.

^ Sayce, Cairene Folklore, Folklore, ii, 387. This was one form of the


82 FEVER.

Besides these actual demons various diseases were
personified in the same way. Fever, Headache, and
such like were all devils to be exorcised —

'* Incantation : —

The evil Fever hath come like a deluge, and

Girt with dread brilliance it filleth the broad earth,

Enveloped in terror, clothed with fear ;

It roameth through the street, it is let loose in the road ;

It standeth beside a man, yet none can see it,

It sitteth beside a man, yet none can [see it].

When it entereth the house its appearance is xmknowD,

When it goeth forth [from the house] it is not perceived." ^

Or from one of the '' Headache '' tablets we learn —

** Headache hath come forth from the Underworld,
It hath come forth from the dwelling of Bel,
From amid the mountains it hath descended upon the land.
From the ends of the mountains it hath descended upon the land.
From the fields not to return it hath descended,
With the mountain-goat into the fold it hath descended.
With the ibex unto the Open-homed flocks it hath descended.
With the Open-homed unto the Big-homed it hath descended." >

This peculiar idea of a personified disease having its
home in the mountains reappears in a Syriac charm
against lunacy — ** [O Evil Spirit of Lunacy], you will
needs go forth from the bones, from the sinews, from


incubus which so exercised the minds of the mediaeval demonologists.
Jean Wier (in his Histories, IHsptUes et Discoun, des Illusions et
Impostures des Diables, 1579, 284) says, on the illusion of the incubus,
that there is in the art of medicine a malady called Incubus by the
Latins, such that those who are attacked by it believe themselves to
be supporting a burden in their sleep, which prevents their breathing,
and consequently also their speaking. His is an interesting book on
all sorts of discussions of this nature.

' DeviU, ii, 11. * Ibid., Tablet III, Series Ti4.


HEADACHE. 83

the flesh, from the skioy and from the hair unto the
ground, and from the ground (passing) to iron, and from
iron to stone, and from stone (you will pass on) to the
mountain/' ^

A Metawileh charm, which is kept in a leather purse
runs : *^ I haye rested upon God. Away from me, O feyer,
from Abdallah the son of Hosein." *

The Ninth Tablet of the Series ** Headache ** is similar.

^ Incantation : —

Headache roameth over the desert, blowing like the wind,
Flashing like lightning it is loosed above and below ;
It cutteth off him who feareth not his god like a reed,
like a stalk of henna it slitteth his thews.
It wasteth the flesh of him who hath no protecting goddess,
Flashing like a heavenly star it cometh like the dew ;
/ It standeth hostile against the wayfarer, scorching him like the day.
This man it hath struck, and
Like one with heart disease he staggereth.
Like one bereft of reason he is broken,
Like that which hath been cast into the fire he is shrivelled,
Like a wild ass . . . his eyes are fiill of cloud,
On himself he feedeth, bound in death." '

Dimetu is another disease personified.^

Namtaru, the Plague-god, is also addressed in the
incantations. In the one in which the physician is
directed to make a figure of his patient in dough, so

I

\

^ H. GoUancz, Sdection of Charms, 91.

» Fallflcheer, P,B.F., 1889, 128. > Devils, ii, 66.

* The question arises whether we are to see in dimetu (as connected

with the Hebrew ^YI, a menstruating woman) merely the more
general word for ' sickness,' or some more specific use of this word as
the personification of menstruation, in accordance with the special
meaning in Hebrew. On arihatu, connected with arhu, 'month,'
possibly having this signification, see suprct, p. 67.



NAMTARXJ.


that the Flagae-god may be induced to leave the man he
is tormenting and enter his image, he is thus described : —

" Incantation : —

Plague-god that devoureth the land like fire,

Plague-god that attacketh the man like a fever,

Plague-god that roameth like the wind over the desert,

Plague-god that seizeth on the man like an evil thing.

Plague-god that tormenteth the man like a pestilence,

Plague-god that hath no hands or feet, that wandereth by night,

Plague-god that teareth the sick man in shreds like a leek.

That hath bound his members,

That hath brought low his full strength [like a plant (?)]

[At night] on his bed he cannot sleep.

It hath subjected . . .

It hath seized on his loins ;

His god is far distant from him,

His goddess from his body \a afar.

Marduk hath seen him (etc.).

•What I' (etc.).

'Go, my son (Marduk),

PuU off a piece of clay from the deep,

Fashion a figure of his bodily form (therefrom) and

Place it on the loins of the sick man by night,

At dawn make the atonement for his body.

Perform the Incantation of Eridu,

Turn his face to the west,

That the evil Plague-demon which hath seized upon him

May vanish away from him.' " *

Among the Assyrians the custom existed of hanging
up amulets of inscribed clay to guard the house from
evil, just as is done to this day by many nations. In
the British Museum are two tablets^ inscribed with the
legend of Ura, another spirit of pestilence. These have

* DeniUf ii, 99 ; cf. W.A,Ly iv, 27, 4, 54. Nanitaru roM kk rafiMatu
ramdj " great Namtaru, girt with dread.'
' L. W. King, Zett8. fiir Auyr., xi, 50.


If


URA.


85


a rectangular projection at the top which is pierced
horizontally^ by which it was evidently intended that
the tablet should be hung up. This upper projection
in one case is inscribed, very much after the irregular
manner of the charms of the Middle Ages, thus : —



and on the upper edge, above the word " God " : " May
the shrine of Assur and Melam (P) be over this house ! "

The inscription on the tablets is a quotation from the
legend of TJra, the Plague-god, beginning —

** When Ura was appeased . . .
The gods all of them . . .

The Igigi, the Anunnaki, all those that went before him . . .
Then Ura opened his mouth and unto . . . spake ;
* Pay heed, all of you, to my words . . ,


^ What this means is doubtful. For a tablet similar in shape
compare Km. 2, 263 (Bezold, C€Udloffue\ which has the same projection
for suspension, and contains an address to Ishtar : " To Ishtar, great
lady, queen of the Igigi and Anunnaki, whose power the gods, her
fathers, have increased . . . the destruction of mine enemies, the
attainment of all my desires, with many gifts to Ishtar, dwelling in
Arbela, my lady I present." In the British Museum is a bronze
plaque of a similar shape from Nimroud, with a mythological scene
figured on it, and beneath this and on the reverse an inscription
dedicated to Nabii by Assur-ri^iia in gratitude for the preservation
of the lives of himself and other men, with a list of the offerings
presented (houses, land, etc.), which these beneficiaries have given
to the god (Nimroud Gallery, Case <A,' No. 130).


86 THE ANGEL OF DEATH.

That which I evolved in my former sin is evil,

In my heart I was angry and the people I cast down/"*

The legend of Ura, tlie plague-spirit, contains an interesting
chant —

*' Ura was angry, and determined

To ravage the whole world,

But Ishum, his counsellor, appeased him

That he abandoned [his wrath] . . .

And thus spake the hero Ura: —

'Whosoever shall praise this song,

In his shrine may plenty abound . . .

Whosoever shall magnify my name,

May he rule the four quarters of the world ;

Whosoever shall proclaim the glory of my valour,

Shall have none to oppose him;

The singer who chants it shall not die in pestilence.

But unto king and noble his speech shall be well pleasing ;
; The scribe who learns it shall escape from the foe . . .

In the shrine of the peoples where he cries my name continually

His understanding will increase.

In the house where this tablet is set,

Tho* I, Ura, be angry or the Imina-bi gods bring havoc,

Yet the dagger of pestilence shall not approach it,

Immunity shall rest upon it.'"'


Now to how great an extent are we to compare the
Rabbinic traditions of the Angel of Death (Sammael),
Satan, and many of the other demons of this kindP The
Angel of Death, in an Arabic Midrash, is described as
a decrepit old man, when sent to take Abraham. In the
Old Testament he is possibly to be seen in the Angel of
the Lord who kills 185,000 of the Assyrians (2 Kings
xix, 35), or "the Destroyer" (Exod. xii, 23), and the
angel in 2 Sam. xxiv, 16. The Rabbis found him in

' See King, loc. cit. ' King, Fint Steps in Assyrian^ 219.


SATAN. 87

Ps. Ixxxix, 48, where the Targum translates '^ There is no
man who lives and, seeing the angel of death, can deliver
his soul from his hand/' ^ Sammael, of frequent occurrence
in Habbinic writings, is generally supposed to be composed
of DD * poison' and 7M 'God.' This etymology is based
on the belief that the Angel of Death puts an end to
man's existence by the inAision of a drop of gall or
wormwood.^ In late Syriac tales' the Angel of Death
is often described. Satan (for which there is apparently
no root in Assyrian, although in Arabic the root itn occurs,
meaning 'to oppose') is a distinct personality mentioned
only three times in the Old Testament (Zech. iii. Job i, ii,
1 Ghron. xxi, 1), all of which are post-Exilic, the earliest
being about 519 b.c. and the last 300 b.c. In Ps. cix, 6,
and probably Ecclus. xxi, 27, it is a human adversary
that is referred to. In Zechariah he is obviously (from
the rebuke administered to him) in an inferior position;
in Job the subordination is still clear; in Chronicles the
independence of Satan has become as complete as it ever
did. The ' tempter ' is an advanced stage ; even in Job,
far less in Zechariah, the Satan is not in any distinct
manner opposed to God. This, at the earliest, he becomes
in Chronicles.^

^ See Jewish Encycl,, i, 89. On the Angel of Death see Bender,
J.Q,, vi, 331.

> J.Q.y vi, 325 ; see also Franck, La KahbdU^ 169.

' Der Neu-AramaUch Dialekt des Tur-^Abdin, ed. Prym and Socio,
1881. In one of them a young man shares his bread with the angel
(p. 298).

« The whole of this description of Satan has been taken from the
article in Cheyne's Encydopcedia BihlicOy sub voce. See also Bender
on Satan, «/.$., vi, 329, and the Jewish Encydopcediay sub voce. The
whole question of Talmudic angels and demons is gone into carefully
by Brecher, Das TranscendentcUe im Talmud^ 1850.


88 THE EVIL EYE.

The curiously persistent belief in the power of the
Evil Eye for harm was as real in Mesopotamia among
the Assyrians as it is among the modem Arabs. It is
frequently mentioned in incantations among the possible
causes which have rendered the patient sick« and it is
described thus: —

*' The roving Evil Eye hath looked on the neighbourhood, and
vanished afar,
Hath looked on the vicinity, and vanished afar,
It hath looked on the chamber of the land, and vanished afar,
It hath looked on the wanderer,
And like wood cut for kindling (?) it hath bent his neck.''

And the exorcism ends —

'* Thou man, son of his god.
The Eye which hath looked upon thee for harm, .
The Eye which hath looked upon thee for evil . . .
May Ba'u smite it with flaz(?),
May Gunura [smite it] with a great oar(?)
Like rain which is let fall from heaven,
Directed unto earth,
So may Ea, king of the Deep, remove it from thy body." '

Belief in it is universal in Palestine.^ It can throw
down a house, break a plough, make persons sick or kill
them, as well as animals or plants. The simplest cure for
a stroke of the Evil Eye is to take a bit of clothing of
the person that has had the bad quality, a rag or other
object, and burn it below the person struck. Another
method is to place pieces of alum, salt, incense, and tamarisk
(if Mohammedans are concerned), or a piece of palm from

1 Devils, ii, Tablet * U.' On the whole subject see Elworthy, The
Evil Eye ; J. Tuchmann in Milusine, iii.
* Cf. Mark vii, 22, " lasciviousness, an evil eye, railing."


THE EVIL EYE. 89

Palm Sunday (for Christians), in a pan on the fire, and
take tlie child round it seven times; as soon as something
cracks in the pan tlie spell is broken.^ If some European
should pat the head of a child in the presence of a native
nurse, the woman on reaching home will take the child
into a room, place it on the floor, and then collecting
some dust in a shovel from each of the four corners will
throw it on the fire, exclaiming, "Fie on thee. Evil Eye ! " *
Charms in the shape of a silver eye are placed on the heads
of children "with sore eyes, or to prevent eye disease."^
It is rather a question, in such a case, whether this custom
has not taken its origin in the idea of repelling the Evil
Eye from the child.

It is personified in a Syriac charm: "The Evil Eye
went forth from the stone of the rock, and the Angel
Gabriel met her.^'^ In Arabia the possessor of the
Evil Eye can strike down a bird flying with his glance.^
In the Sinaitic Peninsula a young camel is protected
from it by a hollow stone hung roung its neck.® Among
the modern Jews of New York, the antidote is to take
a handful of salt and pass it round the head of the
bewitched child, throwing a little in each corner, and
the remainder over the threshold. Another is for the
mother to kiss her child three times, spitting after
each kiss.^

While I was riding from Aleppo to D6r-ez-z6r in

» Baldensperger, P,RF., 1893, 211 ; 1899, 150.

• G. Kobinson Lees, Village Life in Palestine, 214.
» Bliss, P.KF., 1892, 319.

• H. GoUancz, Selection of Charms, 93.

• Doughty, Arabia Deserta, i, 548.

« Jennings Bramley, P.E,F., 1906, 205.
^ Jewish Encyd.y sub voce Superstition,


i


■■»^i


90 THE HAUNTS OF DEMONS.

1904, the otnbashi (sergeant) of my escort complained of
an injured wrist, which he declared was probably due
to a certain woman having cast an evil eye upon him
while he was doing some work before he started.

It is quite the usual thing in Mesopotamia to protect
children from the Evil Eye by fastening small blue
objects to their caps. Similarly, the owners of valuable
mares will ward off evil by knotting small beads into the
mane or tail. In the houses they suspend small bags
of leather containing charms from the ceiUng for a similar
purpose. In Cairo "it is a very common custom ... to
hang an aloe-plant over the door of the house" with the
idea of securing good luck.^

The usual haunts of demons are deserts, caverns, and
ruins.^ "O thou evil demon, turn thee to get hence;
O thou that dwelleth in ruins, get thee to thy ruins," '
voices the tradition of all peoples that have ever believed
in ghosts. Maimonides speaks of the demons and ghouls
that dwell in the wastes.^ The old Arab belief is that the
ghosts of the dead dwell in graveyards, rains, and desert
places' and the desert is full of spirits.' The modern
Egyptian believes that the Jinn inhabit rivers, ruined houses,
wells, baths, ovens, and even the latrine.' The ghoul of
the Arabs lives in the desert, and appears to travellers in


' Lane, Manners and Customs, 1890, 236.

^ The aborigines of Australia believe that every thicket, most
watering-places, and all rocky places abound with evil spirits (Oldfield,
quoted Frazer, 0,B., iii, 41).

' Deoils, i, Tablet * B,' 1. 56.

* Quoted Chwolsohn, Die Ssabier, ii, 458.

* Wellhausen, BestCf 157. « Ibid., 149.
^ Lane, Manners and CiLstoms^ 203.


HAUNTED HOUSES. 91

a friendly guise in order to make them lose their wayJ
Christ goes into the wilderness and there meets the devil.^
The Unclean Spirit of Palestinian tradition passes through
waterless places.' In Rabbinic literature the particular
spots haunted by demons are caper-bushes and spear-
worts^ where they dwell in groups of sixty; nut-trees,
where they form in groups of nine; shady spots on
moonlight nights, especially the roofs of houses, under
gutters, or near ruins; cemeteries and privies; water,
oil, and bread-crumbs cast on the ground^

Haunted houses are as common among the Arabs as
with Western peoples, and anyone who has lived in
Oriental towns will recall houses of which the rent was


1 Mastidt, Prairies d'Or, iii, 318.

* Matt, iv, 1.

* Luke zi, 24.

* For authorities see Jewish Enci/clopcedia, iv, 516. The Talmud
tells a story that during a famine a pious man gave a dinar to a poor
man on New Year's Eve, and his wife scolded him so that he preferred
to pass the night in a cemetery rather than at home. There he over-
heard two spirits speaking to one another, and one invited the other to
perambulate the world to learn what punishment is to be inflicted
upon men. The second, however, said it could not leave the cemetery,
because it had been buried in a bed of reeds {Berakhoth, Talmud of
Babylon, i, 3, ed. Schwab, 296). Maury {La Magie, 194) quotes the
Rabbinic belief that demons lived in deserts or unclean places, dung-
heaps, cloaca:, and obscure places. Francis Barrett {The Magus, 1801,
102) explains in all seriousness that the best places for ghost-raising
are churchyards, or, better still, where criminals have been 'executed or
where a " great public slaughter of men " has taken place ; or even
better than these, the place where some dead carcase that came by
violent death which is not yet expiated, "for the expiation of those
places is likewise a holy rite duly to be adhibited to the burial of the
bodies, and often prohibits the soul returning to its body, and expels
the same afar off to the place of judgment.'' On graveyards as the
haunt of ghosts, while the soul is in the next world, see Jevons,
Introduction to the History of Rdigion, 2nd edition, 1902, 49.


92 HAUNTED HOUSES.

down to the lowest pitch through suspicion of their
being haunted. While in Mosul I was told the common
tale of death by fright from imaginary ghosts, how
a certain man was challenged to visit a haunted house
at night, the belief being that the demon waited behind
the door to spring out on any who should knock. The
man set out one evening, and on his not returning, his
friends went to see what had happened to him, and
found him dead at the very door with his abba caught
on a nail.^ The same type of story is, I believe, told
in English of the man who dies from fright because his
clothes have got entangled in the coffin of a dead man.

The belief that spectres inhabit ruins is universal in
Semitic ghost stories. The Syriac legends are full of it;
in one of the anecdotes in Thomas of Marga's history,'
the story is told that '' while a certain man was passing at
night along the road by the side of a fire-temple of the
Magians which had been a ruin for some time, devils sprang
out upon him in the form of black ravens, and they entered
into him and convulsed him." In an Ethiopic magical
prayer written for 'Ahita Mik&61 the same belief appears,
for it prescribes certain glorious names, probably to be
recited, "at the front and at the doors if thou wouldst
enter into a house which is old or in ruins or unclean.''^
One of the reasons given by the Rabbis for not entering
ruins is to avoid demons.^


» See my article, P.S.B.A., 1906, 82.

2 Ed. Budge, ii, 599. Compare Rev. xviii, 2: "Fallen, fallen is
Babylon the great, and is become a habitation of devils, and a hold of
every unclean spirit, and a hold of every unclean and hateful bird."

* Budge, Ladi/ Meitx MSS,, Nos. 2-5, 216.

* Berakhoth, i, 4, ed. Schwab, 227.


SUMMARY. 93

According to Origen, demons haunt the air and cause
plagues, droughts, and bad seasons.^ The localities most
affected by their presence are temples and shrines, where
incense is burned and blood-offerings made,^ the slaughter
of victims being in itself enough to lure them to heathen
temples. But even without this they can be attracted to
a place and laid therein by the use of certain incantations.'

We may therefore briefly sum up the contents of this
chapter as follows : — First, the ghost or spectre of a dead
man reappearing was and is as vivid in the minds of all
Semites as in other peoples, and the character of such
wraiths was markedly similar to most popular superstitions
of this kind. A spirit might be raised from the dead ; it
might return of its own accord to haunt men ; it had the
power to inflict harm or disease on those whom it attacked,
in order to secure the payment of its dues; and, finally,
the sorcerers, just like their con/rires of later periods and
other climes, believed that their exorcisms could ' lay ' such
perturbed spirits. Secondly, we have seen that the Semites
believed in a wonderful phantasmagoria of spooks, goblins,
demons, and fiends of hideous and borrid shape unsurpassed
by the fertile imagination of the Middle Ages, which
brought sickness on mankind. Thirdly, we must account
as the most important class (in view of certain deductions
to be made in succeeding chapters) those semi-human spirits,
or semi-divine beings, born either of a human father or
mother. This belief was universal among the Semites. That
is to say, down to the present day they have believed in


1 C. CeU., i, 31, quoted Conybeare, J.Q., ix, 60.
« Ibid., vii, 35, 64
» Ibid., iii, 34.


94 SUMMARY.

a yisitation from supemataral beings who could ally them-
selves temporarily with a man or woman, and have children,
in the former case to inhabit the ghostly, imseen world,
and in the second to be born on earth. Instances of such
alliances of gods and men in classic mythology are so well
known as not to need mention. Further, throughout the
whole discussion, it has been obvious that the Semitic idea
of spirits difEers hardly, if at all, from the superstitions of
all other peoples.


95


II.


DEMONIAC POSSESSION AND TABU.


In the preceding chapter we have seen how all forms of
devils and spectres exist in the minds of the Semites, and
the next step in succession is the question of demoniac
possession in its relation to tabu. This latter word,
borrowed by anthropologists from Polynesia, is used to
define that peculiar ban which savages lay on certain
actions or states, from an idea of either inherent holiness
or nncleanness connected with them. That the principle
of tabu actually existed among all the Semites in its
full savage force at one time or another, requires no
discussion, for its presence has long been recognized, not
only in the literature of these ancient nations, but also
in the customs of the modern nomad Arab tribes; it is
obvious from a comparison between their laws and those
of more savage races who have not attained that pitch
of civilisation which admits of a veneer to cover over
their primitive customs. But the reason tchy tabu existed
demands the most searching scrutiny into the early records
of folklore, and it may be that Semitic literature, despite
its civilised polish, may help in places where the customs
of savage races offer no clue to their origin.

In the discussion of this question, the first point to
be considered is the view that the Semites held of the
origin of disease. The cuneiform tablets again, earlier than
anything that we yet possess on this subject, at least in


96 SICKNESS AND DEMONIAC POSSESSION.

a comparatively unedited form, afford the most yalaable
evidence of all, and we shall approach fundamentals more
nearly through the Assyrian exorcisms than by other
means. By gradual and successive pieces of evidence,
drawn from all the series of cuneiform spells which were
quoted in the Introduction, it will appear clear, I think,
that the object of these incantations was to heal people
suffering from disease, which will be seen to be only
another name for spirit obsession in its widest sense, and
that such people, by the very reason of their sickness,
were presumed to have incurred a breach of tabu.^

With the simpler literature of the cuneiform tablets
before us, it should be possible to unravel the more
elaborate mysticism of the later Semites, and hence the
first task is to deduce therefrom such of the Semitic super-
stitions about disease as will afford a base from which to
go further afield.

No one can read much of the incantation literature of
the Assyrians without recognizing how sickness was ascribed
to the attacks of Jinn or spirits of different forms : — ^

1 On the universal belief that disease is due to spirits see Tylor,
Primitive Culture^ 4th ed., ii, 127.

* Cf. Blau, Das Altjud. Zauherw., 14. Naturally it is not only to
demons that sickness is primarily due ; the gods of course are omni-
potent in this respect. Ishtar curses Gilgamish after he slays her
divine bull, and he is smitten with a sore sickness, doubtless in con-
sequence (King, Babylonian Religion, 164), and, to quote one instance
out of many from the medical texts, " when (a man) is smitten on his
neck, it is the hand of Adad ; when he is smitten on the neck and his
breast hurts him, it is the hand of Ishtar on the necklace " (S. 951).
Joshua the Stylite (ed. Wright, xxvi, 17) puts the matter quite
tersely, referring to the year of Alexander, " And as all the people had
sinned, all of them were smitten with the plague.'' Cf. Exod. viii, 19 :
" This is the finger of God."

It is apparent from this incantation to the star MuitabarrA mAtdnu :


SICKNESS DUE TO DEMONS. 97

" Evil fiends are they, from the Underworld they have gone forth,
They are the messengers of Bel, lord of the world.
The evil Spirit that in the desert smiteth the living man,
The evil Demon that like a cloak enshroudeth the man.
The evil Ghost, the evil Devil that seize upon the body,
The Hag-demon (and) Ghonl that smite the body with sickness.
The Phantom of night (Hid) that in the desert roameth abroad.
Unto the side of the wanderer ' have drawn nigh,
Casting a woeful fever upon his body.
A ban (mamit) of evil hath settled on his body,
An evil disease on his body they have cast,
An evil plague hath settled on his body.
An evil venom on his body they have cast,
An evil curse hath settled on his body,
■ Evil (and) sin on his body they have cast.
Venom (and) wickedness have settled upon him." *

" Incantation : —

MtUftabartH mUtdnu, great lord, merciful god.

That taketh the hands, the brave who looseth charms, the extolled

that giveth life to the man,
I, Samas-sum-ukin, servant of his god,
Thy slave, mourn, groan, sigh,

A violent sickness, a fire, the seizure of the god [Nergal ?],
An evil sickness, an Utukku-demon, fever in my body,
A baneful disease . . . with me,
On my couch of mourning ... I call to thee.
Against some god known or unknown

1 have committed a sin, or have risen in rebellion ;

I fear, I am afraid of the glory of the face of thy divinity, [thy]
greatness.

May the water of my grief reach thee, that the anger of thy heart
be appeased." (Scheil, Uiie Saison defouilles d Sippar^ 95.)

Even saints, in modem Arabic belief, can inflict sickness as a punish-
ment. According to Curtiss {Primitive Semitic Religion^ 168) a woman
appealed to a saint (Abbas), by shaking the pall on his tomb, that he
should make her recalcitrant lover, for whom she had made her husband
divorce her, return to her, and the saint visited him with sickness.
The marriage ceremony waa concluded at his shrine.

I A frequent name for the sick man in texts of this kind.

» Devils, i, Tablet III, 1. 23 ff.


^Mi


98 SICKNESS DUE TO DEMONS.

One of the most important points to notice in this
text is the use of mamif, 'the tabu/^ in parallelism to
diseases.

Again in the same tablet —

'' The sick man upon whom sickness hath seized,
Fever (hath taken up) its seat upon him.
When I (the magician) draw near unto the sick man,
When I examine the muscles of the sick man.
When I compose his limbs,
When I sprinkle the water of Ea on the sick man,
When I subdue (?) the sick man,
When I bring low the strength of the sick man,
When I recite an incantation over the sick man.
When I perform the Incantation of Eridu,
May a kindly Spirit, a kindly Quardian be present at my side.
Whether thou art an evil Spirit or an evil Demon,
Or an evil Ghost or an evil Devil,
Or an evil Qod or an evil Fiend,
Or Hag-demon or Ghoul or Robber-sprite,
Or Phantom of night, or Wraith of night.
Or Handmaiden of the Phantom,
Or evil Pestilence, or noisome Fever,
Or pain, or sorcery, or any evil,
Or Headache, or Shivering, or . . . (?), or Terror,
Or an evil man, or evil face.
Or evil spell, or evil tongue, or evil mouth, or sorcery, or

any evil.
Be thou removed from before me ! " ^

The fourth and fifth tablets of the same series are
entirely taken up with descriptions of demons or ghosts^
which have attacked the man : '' From the man, the son
of his god, may they depart from his body, and from his

^ The exact meaning of this word is discussed at length later in
this chapter.
« Ibid., iii, 178 ff.


SICKNESS DUE TO DEMONS. 99

body may they issue forth ! '' ^ The sixteenth tablet is
destined to avert the evil which an eclipse, caused by
the evil spirits, has apparently brought upon a man.'
Tablet ^A' begins with a description of the demons'
who "like a flood are gathered together '* —

" (Until) this man revolteth against himself,
No food can he eat, no water can he drink.
But with woe each day is he sated/'

But devils in general are combated as sickness in the
series Asakku (translated provisionally ' Fever ' ; at any
rate it is the name of some disease), and they are exorcised
so that they depart from the body of the sick man : —

^* Fever, unto the man, against his head, hath drawn nigh.
Disease {Namtaru) unto the man, against his life, hath drawn nigh.
An evil Spirit against his neck hath drawn nigh.
An evil Demon against bis breast hath drawn nigh.
An evil Ghost against his belly hath drawn nigh,
An evil Qod against his foot hath drawn nigh ;
These seven together have seized upon him.
His body as (with) a consuming fire they devour (?)."*

As with Fever, so is it with Headache {ti^u), which is
reckoned a demon coming forth from the Underworld;^
Namiaru^ another disease, is similarly considered personified,^

* DevilSf V, col. iii, 48 flf.

' See preceding chapter, p. 52.

s Laham in 1. 7, and compare " they spare not " in L 5 ; cf. also
lL33flr.

« Ibid., vol. ii, Tablet XI, 1. 1 ff. Cf. Tylor, Primitive Ctdture,
4th ed., 127, of New Zealand folklore : '*We hear, too, of an idea
of the parts of the body — ^forehead, breast, stomach, feet^ etc. — being
apportioned each to a deity who inflicts aches and pains and ailmei>ts
there."

« Ibid., Tablet * P.' « See Tablet ' R.' * ' :


100 THE DEMONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.

and the Spirit of the Evil Eye has been discussed elsewhere.^
Even in medical texts^ which are comparatively, although
by no means entirely, free from the black art, a man may
be filled by ahhazu, some form of disease bearing the same
name as one of the demons.' The rabisu, too, was another
devil which could bring disease, to be exorcised in the
following terms : — " May Marduk, eldest son of Eridu,
sprinkle him (the sick man) with pure water, clean water,
bright water, limpid water, with the water twice seven
times, that he may be pure, be clean; let the evil rabisu
demon go forth and stand away from him ; may a kindly
sMu, a kindly lamassu, be present near his body."^

Leaving the period at which these cuneiform texts were
edited (i.e., from the seventh century under the patronage
of ASSurbanipal until the decadence of the later Southern
empire), and descending to New Testament times and
thought, the conceptions are of a similar nature. Conybeare
gives a detail of his results in the examination of the
demonology of this period as follows : — " (1) The world is
full of evil demons presided over by Satan. Without flesh
or bones they hover in the air or haunt the earth, especially
its waterless places and the neighbourhood of tombs. (2) They
cause in man all sin and disease and death ... To be sick
is to have a devil inside one ... (3) They are as a rule
invisible ... (4) They will pass from one person to another^
and from human beings into animals. (7) Before the advent


* See p. 88.

» KUchler, Assyr.-Babyl, Medizin, 60, 11. 28, 30, 31, etc.

» Haupt, A,S.K.T., 11, ii,ll. 73 flf. Simeon Lindinger (De Ebrceorum
veterfim arte medica^ 73, quoting ^^Stanlei hist, philos,^ 15, c. 16")
remcirks : " Chaldsei vetustissimi jam opinati sunt, dromones irrepere
in ilia, creare furorem, et morbum sacrum."


THE DEMONS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 101

of the Messiah, the Jews knew names, at the naming of
which over the possessed, the demons took to flight. But
Jesus of Nazareth authorized his followers to use no name
but his own/' ^

Take, for instance, the case of the epileptic son in
Matt, xvii, 14, and Mark ix, 14 : " Master, I brought
unto thee my son, which hath a dumb spirit ; and whereso-
ever it taketh him, it dasheth him down ; and he foameth
and grindeth his teeth and pineth away . . . And they
brought him unto him : and when he saw him, straightway
the spirit tare him grievously : and he fell on the ground
and wallowed foaming. And he asked his father, How
long time is it since this hath come unto himP And he
said, From a child. And oft-times it hath cast him both
into the fire and into the waters.'' Then Christ rebukes
the unclean spirit, saying, ''Thou dumb and deaf spirit,
I command thee, come out of him, and enter no more
into him. And having cried out and torn him much, he
' came out." The old ideas of the Arabs are the same,
trances, epilepsy, fever, epidemics, and madness being all
ascribed to Jinn,^ and the modern Jews of Jerusalem


* Demonoloffy of the New Testament^ Jewish Quarterly^ viii, 588.

* Wellhausen, Reete^ 155. According to the Mosul tradition, which
was repeated to me hj my servant Mejtd, a certain monk of Ddr Mftr
£lia (a moDastery about an hour's distance) was appealed to by a woman
who said she had been abandoned by a caravan and left on the road,
and she prayed for leave to sleep there. He admitted her, and when
night came he blew out his lamp, but hearing her approach softly he
kicked her out of the monastery with one kick. Presently she came
back in the guise of another woman, but this time he entirely refused
her admittance. Then certain demons took counsel together and said :
" He will not sin with her, so we must go to the daughter of the Sultan,
and one of us must enter her so that she become mad and make herself
naked, and he will be defeated." And so it fell out; but when the


102 THE DEMONS OF PALESTINE.

are in no wise more advanced in their present treatment of
such diseases. When a Jew is afflicted with madness, the
falling sickness, or the like, his room is cleaned and white-
washed, all holy books being remoyed, and the patient
may not pray or mention holy words. The witch-doctress
prepares a little wheat, barley, salt, water, milk, honey,
four or six eggs, and some sweetmeats or sugar, and,
mixing all these together at midnight, she scatters some
of the mixture round the sick bed, on the threshold, and
in the four corners of the room, reciting in a whisper as
follows: —

'' My Lords, I beseech you to pity, compassionate, and
have mercy upon the soul (or life) of your servant (or
slave, if it be a woman), the patient (giving the name),
the son (or daughter) of your maid (giving the mother's
name), and overlook his (or her) trespass; and if he (or
she) have sinned and done any evil to you, forgive
and pardon his (or her) sins ; give him (or her) life
and restore his (or her) health and strength. (If to
a barren woman, she adds) Open her womb and restore
to her the fruits of her body. (If to those who lose
young children) Give life to their sons and daughters,
and let this honey (or sugar) be to sweeten your mouths
and palates, the wheat and barley to feed your cattle and
sheep, and the water and salt to establish peace, friendship,
love, brotherhood, an everlasting covenant of salt between
us and you." Here she breaks the eggs and pours the


Sultan sent his servants to fetch the monk, the holy man shut his eyes
when he drew near and successfully exorcised the demon. When
the demon came forth, the monk commanded that they should bring
one of the large stones used for crushing hurgh\d, and put it on the
devil's head. They did so and cut off his head.


THE DEMONS OF PALESTINE. 103

same in the aforementioDed places, kneels, and prostrates
herself, kisses the ground several times, and proceeds
with these words : " Here I offer you life for life, in order
that ye may restore the life of this patient/' '

' A. Goodrich-Freer, Some JewUh Folklore from Jerusalem^ Folklore^
1904, zv, 2, 186. There is a peculiar form of so-called demouiac
possession in Abyssinia : — ** 1 had the satisfaction of seeing in Gaffat
a case of hovda. This term is given to a phenomenon of mental
abstraction, which the natives explain as ' being possessed by a devil.'
The case I am about to mention happened to a female in the service of
one of the Europeans. Her symptoms began in a kind of fainting fit,
in which the fingers were clenched in the palms of the hands, the eyes
glazed, the nostrils distended, and the whole body stiff and inflexible.
Afterwards she commenced a hideous laugh in imitation of the hyena,
and began running about on all fours ; she was then seized by the
bystanders, and a bouda doctor having been called in, this individual
began questioning her as to the person who had possessed her with this
hyena devil. She said he was a man living in Gooderoo, south of
Abyssinia, and also told how long the spirit would be in possession,
and what was required to expel him. Great care must be taken of
persons thus afflicted, as cases of this kind sometimes end in death.
All their demands for dress, food, trifles of any sort, must be strictly
attended to. In the height of the frenzy they will sometimes carry out
the idea of their hyena identity to such an extent as to attack any
animal that may happen to be in the way. One woman fancied she
would like a little donkey-flesh ; so to satisfy her strange taste she
seized hold by her teeth to the hinder part of one which happened
to be near. Off went the astonished beast at a pace that nothing in
the form of persuasion will lead him to adopt for the gratification of
man. Off, too, clinging tight with her teeth to his haunches, went
the frenzied girl. Only force would induce her to forego the tender
morsel

" They have several cures for this strange attack ; but the never-
failing one is a mixture of some obscene filth, which is concealed in
some part of the house, whereupon the woman is said to go directly on
all fours to where it is and swallow it. This would seem incredible
but thousands of corroborative facts, known to Abyssinian residents
put it beyond a doubt.

" The power of possessing persons with the devil is attributed mostly
to Jewish blacksmiths ; and women and children are terrified when
they meet, in a solitary place, a blacksmith who is a Jew. These


104 THE DEMONS OF PALESTINE.

Now the Arab belief shows how tenacious such super-
stitions are in the East.^ Gurtiss^ tells of a boy who had
epileptic fits. ''The boy felt the spirit coming up through

I

sorcerers are also said to be endued with the power of changing the
shape of the object of their incantations ^ (Dufton, A Journey through
Abyssinia, 167).

Stern describes the symptoms of the bouda — " The possessed woman,
as if struck by a magnetic wire, burst into loud fits of laughter and
the paroxysms of a raving maniac. . . . She tried to bite, kick, and
tear everyone within reach ; and when she found herself foiled in all
those mischievous attempts, she convulsively grasped the uupaved
wet floor, and in imitation of the hyena gave utterance to the most
discordant sounds."

The cure was as follows. The exorcist ''with one hand laid an
amulet on her heaving bosom, whilst with the other he made her smell
a rag, in which the root of a strong scented plant, a bone of a hyena,
and some other abominable unguents were bound up '' ( Wanderings
among the Falashas, 154).

In exorcising tigritiya^ a form of possession allied to the boud<i, after
the devil has been driven out " a sheep or a fowl is killed, boiled on
the embers, and eaten with bread. The patient's friends partake of
this food when the devil goes out of her. The bones and remains of
the meat are burned with fire, and the fragments of the bread buried
in the ground. These are so left for the devil, that if he should come
back to the place he may remain and feed, and not go on and bother
the woman'' ( Parky ns. Life in Abyssinia, 300). All these quotations
are taken from Hayes, The Source of the Blue Nile, 286.

^ It is interesting to read Lucian, Philopseudes, ch. 16, § 44 : —
AWa vavT€9 itratTi top 'Svpou rou ex ryy JJaXaitrrtvrf^ rov ewl Totntvv
ffofptarijiff oaov9 yrapaXafitvv KaTawiTrroma^ 7rpo9 t^v ffeXyvfjv xai
Tw o(p0a\fiw itatrrpiipovrav icai a(f>pov irifiirKafievovi to ffro/ma ofiiv^
dvnTTijai Kai airoTrefnrei dpTtov9 ewl fuaOv^ fiGr^aXus d'7raWd(a9 twv
Setuwp. iw€tSdv f^dp cTriar^ K€i/icvot9 kuI epffrai oOev eitreXtjXvOafftv
€19 TO trw/iia, o /i€v voawv avro9 atwira, 6 iaifiwv Be awoKptverat
E\\iyi/ifa;v fj pappapl^tvv ^ o$€v av avro9 if oVojs re koI SOep
eTrtfXOep €9 rov auOptoTrov. o Be opKov9 eTrdytvif el Ce firj TreiffOcnj Kai
aTTeiXwu i^eXavvci top Baifiopa, if^fu) f^ouv Kai eiCov e^idvra fieXava
Kai KairvwBii rrjv \poidv,

» Prim. Sent, ReL, 153.


THE DEMONS OF PALESTINE. 105

him. The Sheik gave the boy such a heavy blow on the
shoulder as to make a wound ; through this wound the
spirit came out of him." Among the Maronites, devils
are said to be cast out in the village churches. ''Many
stories are told, with ludicrous remarks, of the evil spirit,
who may mock the priest, saying, 'Get out of my sight,
you and your cross ' ; or may call out to the crowd,
proposing to enter this one or that one, who promptly turns
and runs. In one case it is said that the priest beat a girl
on the head with his shoe for two hours before a very
impudent spirit came out of her, but at length the picture
of St. Antony floated of itself from the altar and touched her
lips, whereupon the devil left her, and she asked for food,
which she had not touched for two weeks." ^ Baldensperger
relates another instance : ^ " A woman living next field to
ours in Jaffa was seized by a man wrapped in white, and
with a pointed cap on. She was struck dumb by terror,
and ran into the house, but could show only by signs that
something extraordinary had happened. Immediately a
skeikh from Saknet Abu Darwish, near by, was fetched, who
brought his sacred books — ghost-books — and, to begin with,
administered a severe flogging to the patient ; then, burning
incense all the time, he began questioning — ' Who art
thou P ' (Ghost) {out of the icoman) * A Jew.' ' How cam'st
thou hither ? ' 'I was killed on the spot.' * Where art
thou come from P ' ' I am from NablAs.' ' When wast
thou killed ? ' ' Twelve years ago.' * Come forth of this
woman 1 ' 'I will not.' ' I have fire here and will burn
thee.' * Where shall I go out ? ' ' From the little toe.'
'I would like to come out by the eye, by the nose, etc'

* Bliss, P.KF., 1892, 144. « P.KF., 1893, 214.


106 THE DEMONS OF PALESTINE.

After long disputing, the ghost with a terrible shake of
the body and the leg, fled by the toe;^ the exhausted
woman . lay down and recovered her speech. An amulet
was then written and put in a small leather bag, which
was well waxed with beeswax, through which the Jftn cannot
penetrate." Similarly, Curtiss ^ tells another story of a girl
possessed by an evil spirit. "The holy man commanded
the spirit to come out of her. He replied, 'I will come
out of her head.' ' But if you do,' said the holy man,
* you will destroy it.' " At last the spirit proposed to come
out of her toe, and this was permitted.

Earlier tradition shows the same thing. In the Greek
Papyri^ there are directions for driving out a demon by
pronouncing the name, and applying sulphur and bitumen
to the nostrils, whereat it will cry and go forth. Josephus ^
relates how he saw Eleazar draw out a malignant demon
by holding a ring under the nose of the possessed man,
under the seal of which was one of the roots recommended
by Solomon. By these means, with magical incantations,
he drew out the evil demon through the man's nostrils.
Barnabas, in the epistle ascribed to him, speaks of the
Black One getting a chance ''of creeping into us"^; and
in Mosul to-day, if a man falls in a fit or a faint, he
is supposed to have been struck on the head by Sdda,


1 For another iDstance of the devil of a possessed person coming out
of the big toe, see Masterman, Bibl, World, 1900, 269.

» rrim. Sem, Rel, 152. •

3 Leemans, Papyri Greedy ii, 100, 1. 30 ff. * Ant., viii, 2, 5.

* Quoted Conybeare, Deniondogy of New Testament, J»Q., viii, 694.
Porphyry, being a vegetarian, says that those bad spirits (the Keres)
specially delight in blood and impurities generally, and they "creep
into people who make use of such things " (J. E. Harrison, Prolegomenay
168).


THE DEMONS OF PALESTINE. 107

i.e. a black demon, though in this case female. In the
case of epilepsy in the same town, a HMkh comes and lays
a knife on the patient's head; then dates are brought and
fumigated with incense, the magician meanwhile uttering
various chants over them, and then, after spitting on them,
he gives them to the patient to eat.^

According to Sozomen,^ Arsacius was endowed by God
with the power of exorcising demons. A man possessed
with a demon once ran through the market-place with
a naked sword in his hand. The people fled from him,
and the whole city was in confusion. Arsacius went out
to meet him, and called upon him in the name of Christ,
and at that name the demon was expelled, and the man
restored to sanity. At the tomb of Hilarion, the divine,
a native of Thabatha, near Gaza, many diseases were
healed and demons expelled at his tomb.^ There are the
germinal ideas of possession in Homer, the Baifuov <rrvy€p6<;
causing a wasting sickness (Od. v, 396), and Saifiovat/
refers to insanity in ^schylus, Euripides, Aristophanes,
and Plutarch.* In the Palestinian tradition, the cure for
a man possessed was to take roots of herbs, burn them
under him, and surround him with water, whereupon the
spirit would flee.*

From these instances the relations between devils and


I See my article, P.S.B.A., 1906, 77. I am indebted to M. Abdullah
Michael, of Mosul, for the latter exorcism.
' JEccles, HUt.^ bk. iv, ch. xvi.
' Ibid., bk. iii, ch. xiv.

* Eneycl, Bibl., 1071. On the Greek ideas of epilepsy see Hippo-
crates, ed. Littr^, vi, .362. It is the iepa votro^y Encycl. Bibl.^ 845.

* Pesik^ ed. Biiber, 40a. An Ethiopic method is published by
Littmann, Arde'et, J.A.O.S., xxv, 32 ; and for the Egyptian see the
story of the Possessed Princess of Bekhten.


108 SAVAGE TABUS.

disease, not only madness and fits, but also fever, head-
ache, and minor ills, are plainly very closely connected in
the savage Semitic mind, and their treatment demands
a magician or priest rather than a qoalified doctor. Having
established this proposition, the next question that presents
itself is that of the tabu.

In the primitive communities of modern savages there
are always certain internal restrictions, both social and
religious, arising, in the broadest sense, from the fear or
respect of the supernatural. The study of this branch
of folklore has grown steadily with our increasing know-
ledge of the customs of savage tribes, and it provides us
with a means of elucidating much that would otherwise be
inexplicable in the religion of the peoples of the Nearer
East. Now, in this custom of tabu, there is not only
the idea of primary danger to the person who first incurs
the tabu by his actions, but there is also a secondary
contagious ban to which anyone may become liable from
communication with the tabooed man, or things belonging
to him.^ The savage believes that supernatural beings can
and will, in their more hostile character, exercise an
influence (in the widest sense) over such human beings as
thus incur the risk of their visitations, and that the
person thus tabooed can communicate his dangerous state
by contagion.

The reason for the origin of this secondary superstition
is not far to seek ; the primitive conception of contagious
tabu arose from the savage argument from the particular


^ A most convincing indication of this among the Hebrews is shown
in Num. xvi, 26 : " Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked
men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins.''


THE REASON FOR THE TABU OX A CORPSE. 109

to the general. This will be the more apparent if we
take the obvious case of a man who has died in his bed
of some infectious disease. If savage man in his innocence
meddles with the corpse or takes the infected bed to his
kraaly the chances are seriously in favour of his contracting
the same disease also within a short time. His fellow-
tribesmen can then explain his death in two ways. Either
it is the ghost of the dead man returning to plague the
careless savage who has now, by his act, established that
connection which must always exist between spirits and
mortals before a ghost is in a position ^ to demand
its due rites; or the man has attracted the hostilitv of
the evil spirit who overcame the dead man, and will
brook no interference with his prey. It is immaterial,
from the standpoint of the origin of contagious tabu,
which view we take, and probably primitive man would
have some difficulty in making any certain distinction;
contagious tabu must have arisen in some such manner,
whatever the savage explanation may have been. Of
course, this holds good only in the case of the man who
has died of sickness, but it is from this very case that
the savage probably argues that all dead bodies and their
belongings are dangerous. He probably draws no rigid
distinction between those that die naturally in their beds
or are carried off by disease, and so the corpse of the one
is as much tabu as that of the other. Hence, just as he
assumes that all dead bodies are unclean through the
potentialities of the souls for evil, so also will he consider
any bed on which people have died capable of transmitting


^ See p. 24, whei'e it is clear that the soul of a dead man can bring
sickness on a man who has had some connection with him during life.


110 UNCLEAN TABUS.

the dangerous tabu, because he has seen contagion arise
in the special case oF the disease-infected belongiogs. By
analogy in the case of the other unclean tabus, the
belongings of such persons who are under these tabus are
also unclean and dangerous.

The foregoing short explanation has been offered as
a standpoint round which the evidence brought forward
in this chapter may centre, and we shall be better able
to see to what degree the Semites had evolved a systematic
and workable theory concerning the tabus of uncleanness.

It is naturally the tabu of uncleanness, distinct from
the other, that of holiness, that we have to deal with
in particular. The tabu of holiness is the outcome of
the fear of transgression against the divinity, or, what
comes to the same thiug, respect for the godhead; but
the tabu of uncleanness has a very different origin,
although fear of the supernatural is at the base of this
also. It is easy to assume that a breach of some of
the 'unclean' laws is unpleasing to the tribal god,
particularly in the Biblical legislation; but this theory
does not account for the whole of even these, not to
mention the far wider scope of the ordinary savage
tabus of the present day. As Robertson Smith points
out, this assumption is a later development to be found
in the Levitical Law.^

We have, then, to discuss the similarities of modem
savage 'unclean' tabus with the ancient Semitic laws,
particularly as they are found in the Old Testament, the
cuneiform tablets, and the writings of Arabic and Syriac
authors. The tabus on holy things are comparatively

* Religion of the Semites^ 153.


ROBERTSON SMITH ON TABU. Ill

well known, and it is the 'unclean' tabus which are still
somewhat obscure.

The following are quotations from what Robertson Smith,
in his Religion of the Semites^ says of the two forms of
tabu, holiness and uncleanness. He goes into the question
very thoroughly; he shows "that holiness is essentially
a restriction on the licence of man in the free use of
natural things," ^ and that '' the ancient Semites, like
other early races, deemed holiness to be propagated by
physical contagion.''^ "When men establish relations
with the powers that haunt a spot, it is at once necessary
that there should be rules of conduct towards them and
their surroundings. These rules, moreover, have two
aspects. On the one hand, the god and his worshippers
form a single community — primarily, let us suppose,
a community of kinship— and so all the social laws that
regulate men's conduct towards a clansman are applicable
to their relations to a god. But, on the other hand, the
god has natural relations to certain physical things, and
these must be respected also; he has himself a natural
life and natural habits in which he must not be molested
... In all their dealings with natural things men must
be on their guard to respect the divine prerogative, and
this they are able to do by knowing and observing the
rules of holiness, which prescribe definite restrictions and
limitations in their dealings with the god and all natural
things that in any way pertain to the god." ' Among


» p. 150. » p. 146.

• p. 151. "The penalty for the violation of a tabu was either
religious or civiL The religious penalty inflicted by the offended
atuas or spirits generally took the form of a disease : the offender


112 CUNEIFORM TABLETS AND TABU,

savages, as he says, all tabas do not belong to religion
proper, but appear in many cases to be precautions
against contact with evil spirits and the like,^ and it is
with these latter that we are concerned. *' Women after
childbirth, men who have touched a dead body, and so
forth, are temporarily taboo and separated from human
society, just as the same persons are unclean in Semitic
religion. In these cases the person under taboo is not
regarded as holy, for he is separated from approach to
the sanctuary as well as from contact with men; but
his act or condition is somehow associated with super-
natural dangers, arising, according to the common savage
explanation, from the presence of formidable spirits
which are shunned like an infectious disease. ... In
rules of holiness the motive is respect for the god, in
rules of uncleanness it is primarily fear of an unknown
or hostile power, though ultimately, as we see in -the
Levitical legislation, the law of clean and unclean may
be brought within the sphere of divine ordinances, on
the view that uncleanness is hateful to God and must
be avoided by all that have to do with Him."^

Since the publication of Robertson Smith's erudite .and
scientific work, the study of the cuneiform inscriptions
has provided a new factor in the interpretation of Semitic
religion. The translations of Assyrian texts had not, at
the time that he wrote, reached a pitch of sufficient
accuracy to be trustworthy ; nor was enough material at


swelled up and died, the notion being that the atua or emissary (often
an infant spirit) had entered into him and devoured his vitals **
{Encycl, Brit,^ art. Tabu),

I p. 152 ' p. 153.


TABU ON MARRIAGE, ETC. 113

hand to enable him to avail himself of this most important
branch of the science. But since then hundreds of tablets
bearing on the subject have been made available to scholars,
and the value that they have in this study cannot be over-
estimated, as they represent a series of beliefs probably
far more ancient than the epoch at which the tablets
which we now possess were actually written. Further, the
translations are now much more trustworthy, partly because
of the large number of new texts now published, which
afford ample means of explaining doubtful phrases by
parallel passages, and partly bepause Assyriology has made
rapid strides in other branches in the last two decades.
The whole of the Assyrian religion is therefore a com-
paratively fresh source to draw from, and it is in the
arcana of exorcisms and magical invocations that we may
hope to find material to explain some of the difficult
questions of the tabus of uncleanness.

Starting with this clue, and taking savage beliefs as
the handmaid of our investigations, we shall see that,
besides the tabus on the dead, the uncleanness that rests
with all sexual functions is most marked. Marriage,
a woman in her courses,^ or the man with an issue, the
birth of a child (with the risk to which all babes appear
liable until some time after birth), are all curiously
tabooed, and, as Robertson Smith says, are nevertheless
" often involuntary, and often innocent, or even necessary
to society. The savage, accordingly, imposes a taboo on
a woman in childbed, or during her courses, and on
the man who touches a corpse, not out of any regard
for the gods, but simply because birth and everything

^ Particularly the first occasion.


114 TABU ON THE CORPSE.

connected with the propagation of the species on the one
hand, and disease and death on the other, seem to him to
involve the action of superhuman agencies of a dangerous
kind." ^ It lies with us now to follow this line of thought,
and see why this should be, and how it afiects the Semitic
religion, not only in the more obvious precautions against
demons, but in the theories of the Atonement and of the
first-bom.

The tabu on dead bodies is the most obvious at first sight,
and one that is frequently met with in Semitic literature.
Among the Israelites, all that were unclean through the
dead were put outside the camp so as not to defile it,' and
in the Mohammedan religion ablution is necessary after
approaching a dead body.' In the Apocrypha, Tobit, after
having buried a corpse, sleeps by the wall of the courtyard
as one who is polluted.^ The dead Oalloi priests of Syria
were borne to the suburbs by their companions to be
buried, and stones were there piled on them. Those that
bore them were not allowed to enter the temple for seven
days after, lest the act should be nefas, or if any of them
looked on a corpse he was unclean for that day, and not
allowed to enter the temple, but after that day he might
be cleansed. Those who belonged to the family of the dead
man were tabu for thirty days, and might only then enter
with shaven head.^ The Nestorians were accustomed, in
going out of the village with the corpse, to lay the bier


^ Religion of the Semites, 446.

' Num. y, 1 ; cf. Num. ix, 6. lu old Israel kings were buried near
the temple, thus defiling it (Ezek xliii, 7-9).
' Sale, Koran, Prelim, Disc,^ sect iv.
* Tobit ii, 9.
' Lucian, De Syria Dea, ed. Joannis Benedicti, ii, 682.


TABU ON THE CORPSE IN ASSYRIA. 115

in a clean place and there perform fully three *&ntn.^
Here the * clean place ' is, as it is in the atonement ritual
of the Hebrews and Assyrians, not a euphemism for an
'unclean place/ but a spot where there is least likelihood
of the presence of demons, always unwelcome visitors at
funerals. With the Arabs, a piece of iron or a sword is
placed on the belly of the corpse " to prevent its becoming
swollen/' which presumably means that the iron, always
powerful in magic, will prevent the return of the spirit.'
For the same reason the orifices of the body, whereby
a ghost might force entrance, are closed, the jaw being
bound up, the eyes shut, and the nostrils and other openings
stufied with cotton.^ Doughty tells of a man who refused
to descend a well haunted by Jinn before filling his ears
with cotton,^ and when B. Jossi went into unclaimed
ground (a likely haunt of devils) with cotton wadding in
his ears, all his contemporaries objected.^ In the Talmud ^
it is said that if a man who has just been bled goes out
and meets a corpse, his face will become yellow ; if he
meets a murderer, he will die ; or if a pig, he will become
scabby.

Among the Assyrians, the danger of tabu from a corpse
is amply vouched for by the cuneiform tablets. To look
on a dead body demanded a purifying ceremony,^ and if
a hostile wizard laid the waxen effigy of a man near a
corpse, subsequent evil was sure to attack the victim.^

^ For a fall description of the Kestorian ritual for washing the dead,
etc., see the MS. (a.d. 1735) published by Isaac H. Hall, Hebratca, iv, 82.

s Klein, Religion of hlam^ 147. On iron as a protection against evil,
see Goldziher, Archivfiir Religumvnstenschaft, 1907, 41.

' Lane, Arabian Nights^ vi, note *^ * Arabia Deserta, ii, 199.

* Sabbath, ed. Rodkinson, i, 126. « Ibid., ii, 286.

' See p. 26. « See p. 35.


116 TABU ON MENSTRUATION.

It is the Assyrian literature which shows the clearest of
all that the spirit may return to attack those with whom
it has been connected in life.^ The departed spirit is never
▼ery far distant from its earthly remains, and, as we have
seen, if a man contract a disease after touching a corpse,
his illness is supposed to be due perhaps to the devil who
has killed his friend, but more probably to the return of
the ghost.' The ghost becomes a malignant spirit who will
resent any meddling with its body, or will inflict disease
on its descendants or connections in order to obtain its due
rites. Hence arises the tabu on corpses, and this explanation
will be of service in a fuller understanding of the tabus on
the sexual functions.^

These sexual tabus were long ago clearly shown to
exist among certain of the Semites by Robertson Smith,
who brought forward evidence of the tabu on menstruation^
from the Koran,^ etc., for the Arabs, Fihrist^ for the
Syrian heathen, while it is hardly necessary to quote
Leviticus^ and Numbers® for the Hebrews. It was said
also that the black stone of the Caaba became black (from
being white) by the touch of a meustruous woman.'
As Robertson Smith has shown, there were special tabus
against sexual intercourse at certain definite times among
the Arabs, Minseans, and Hebrews. ^^ The rules of sexual


» See p. 24. » See p. 24.

' On the question of tabooing a murderer among savage tribes see
Frazer, Qclden Bought i, 332 ff. It seems clear that the man is tabu
from the fear of the ghost returning. Frazer quotes Num. xxxi, 19-24.

• Rel Sem., 446 ff. ' ii, 222. See WeUhausen, Reste, 170 ffl

• 319, 1. 18. ^ XV ; xxii, 4.

• V, 1. • Sale, Koran, Prelim. Disc., sect iv.

*^ ReL SenUy 454. Compare : " If ye be sick, or on a journey, or any
of you come from easing nature, or have touched women, and find no


AMONG THE HEBREWS. 117

uncleanness for these latter are very strict, and the Old
Testament laws are full of them.^

To add a few more examples to those quoted by
Robertson Smith, we may mention that Josephus says
that everyone, even foreigners, were allowed to enter
the first court of the Temple except menstruous women.'
According to the Talmud, if a woman at the beginning
of her period passes between two men, she thereby kills
one of them; if she passes between them towards the
end of her period, she causes them to quarrel violently.'
In Hofioth^ the following ten objects interfere with
one's studies : '' passing under the rope of a camel, and
particularly under the camel itself ; passing between two
camels, between two women, the passing of a woman
between two men, passing through the obnoxious odour
of a carcase, passing under a bridge where nature has


water, take fine clean sand and rub your faces and your hands there-
with " (Sale, Koran, Surah v).

^ Lev. XV, 18, and the tabu against approaching Sinai after such an
act (Ex. xix, 15). Sexual intercourse is forbidden in a room wherein
is a Sepher Torah (Roll of the Law), unless this be placed in a panel
ten spans higher than the bed, or enveloped in a cloth (Berakhoth,
iii, 4, ed. Schwab, 68). For the ha'al k'ri (man unclean by
nocturnal pollution), Lev. xv, 16. In Berakhoth (iii, 4, ed. Schwab,
63) the ha^cd Jjc'ri is directed to make only a mental recitation, without
accompanying.it with anterior or posterior benediction. Compare
lamblichus. On the Mysteries^ ed. Taylor, 2nd ed., 1895, 9-10 :
'* Though the Gods, likewise, do not hear him who invokes them, if he
is impure from venereal connections, yet, at the same time, they do
not refuse to lead any one to illegal venery," and " why is it requisite
that the inspector [who presides over the sacred rites] ought not to
touch a dead body 1 "

' Against Apion, i, § 8, ed. Shilleto.

' Mergel, Die Medizin dtr Talmudisten, 15, quoted Frazer, G.B.,
iii, 223.

* Talmud, ed. Rodkinson, x, 27.


118 AMONG THE HEBREWS.

not been running for forty days, the eating of half-
baked bread, of meat taken out with the spoon with
which skimming is done, drinking from a well streaming
through a cemetery, looking on the face of a corpse.''
Almost everyone of these is an obvious tabu.

Rabbinic laws elsewhere demand that a woman during
all the days of her separation shall be as if under a ban.
A story is told of a woman whose husband died in the
prime of Ufe, and she made plaint to Elijah. '' What,"
said the prophet, ''was his wont with thee in the first
days of thy separation P " " Babbi, he did not even touch
me with his little finger." "But in the last daysP"
asked Elijah ; and she answered, '' Babbi, I used to eat
and drink with him, and to sleep with him fully dressed
on the bed, and his boc^ touched mine, but with no
intention of anything else." Then said Elijah, " Blessed
be the Omnipotent that killed him, because it is written
(Lev. xviii, 19) ' Shalt thou not approach.' " ^ There is
a story in the Leaflet Callah ^ of a woman saying, " When
I entered my bridal chamber I was a Niddah, and con-
sequently my husband kept away from me, and there
came unto me a wedding guest, and this son was (bom)
to me. Thus it was found that the boy was a bastard,
and a Ben hanniddah." It is to be noted that Niddah
(a woman in her courses) is from the root H*!^^ which in
Piel means 'to lay under a ban.'

In Palestine at the present day, women in their separation
are not allowed into the presence of a woman in childbed,

^ Ibid., Tract. Ahothy i (ix), 11, 12. According to RabbiDic tradition,
menstruation and the pain of prim» noctis were part of the curse of
Eve, ibid., 6.

' Quoted Hershon, Talmm MUc,y 44.


IN PALESTINE. 119

as very serious illness is believed to follow such visits.^
In Syria a woman that has her courses may neither salt
nor pickle, for the people think that whatever she might
prepare thus would not keep.' One of the three important
duties among the Jewesses in Palestine is to attend to
the special regulation for their sex regarding ceremonial
UDcleannesSy' the other two being to throw a lump of dough
on the fire on the eve of the Sabbath and to light the
Sabbath candles. To neglect these means suffering in child-
birth. Maimonides * says that ** the practice of the Sabians,
even at present general in the East, among the few
still left of the Magi, was to keep a menstruous woman in
a house by herself, to burn that upon which she treads,
and to consider as unclean everyone that speaks with her ;
even if a wind passed over her and a clean person, the
latter was unclean in the eyes of the Sabians." According
to Zoroaster, the menstruous flow, at least in its abnormal
manifestations, is a work of Ahriman, or the devil.^

Arguing from the known to the unknown, the next
question that arises is how far these tabus have been met
with in the Assyrian religious texts. We have seen that

1 Baldensperger, RKF., 1894, 129.

* £ijtibAh€la,ZeUs,des<ieiUs, Palctest Vereins,, vii, 111, quoted Frazer,
G. B., iii, 224.

» Masterman, Bihl World, xxi, 277.

^ Guide to the Perplexed, iii, xlvii. See Chwolsobn, Die Ssabier, ii, 483.

s Darmesteter, Zend-Avesta, i, xcii. In the Talmud ( Tofnoy viii, 1,
ed. Schwab, vol. v, 247) it is the woman in childbed who is allowed to
wear sandals on the Day of Atonement, ''lest she catch cold" by
leaving them off as other folks must. But the reason is probably from
the danger to others who tread in her footsteps, as this passage from
Maimonides clearly shows. On the other hand, it is a question whether
this coincides with the admonition of Berakhoth (iii, ed. Schwab, 69),
that one carrying a dead body should go without shoes, "for it may
happen that a shoe be torn and he be interrupted in this religious duty."


120 AMONG THE ASSYRIANS.

the savage tabus on all circumstances connected with
birth exist among the Arabs, Syrians, and Hebrews; it
should therefore be no difficult thing to prove the same
superstitions in Assyria. Indeed, the extraordinary thing
would be if the law of the unclean tabu were not the
same in all the Semitic tribes.

With regard to the woman in her courses, the tablet,
S. 49 ^ throws some light on this tabu. It is a lexico-
graphical text, evidently describing ghosts, and there are
mentioned therein (a) ardat lill ina apti ameli izzika
(b) ardatu la iimta (c) ardatu ia kima ainniiti la arihatu
(d) ardatu ia kima ainniiti la nakpatu, " (a) The ghoul
(lilith) works harm in the dwelling of a man, (6) the maid
(who has died) before her time,' (c) the maid who cannot
menstruate as women do, (d) the maid who hath no
womanly modesty (?)." The word in (c) is probably to
be connected with arhu, 'month.' Now, although nothing
is said of any tabu here, it is clear that in {a) a spirit is
meant, and hence (6), (c), and (d) will all be ghosts of
some kind. As a matter of fact they come into the same
category as the ghost of the nursing mother, the sacred
courtesan, and the others mentioned on p. 19 ; they are
maidens dead through some peculiarity. Hence some
mystical significance was clearly attached to the absence
of this monthly function, or there would have been no
mention of the girl in such a list of ghosts.

There is, as a kind of cumulative evidence, the in-
cantation that mentions the " woman with unwashen

^ Text quoted Bezold, Catalogue^ 1376. See also p. 67.
• ^ La iimta appears to be an apocopated phrase. SinUu is * destiny,'
and there is a phrase ina Urn la HmtiSu urruhii imtut, " he died before
his time " (see Muss-Amolt, Diet., sub voce).


TABU ON MARRIAGE IN ASSYRIA, 121

hands " ; ^ it is clear at least that women particularly
might in some fashion be unclean, if the text does not
offer an ulterior meaning, after the fashion of Semitic
euphemisms ; further, in one of the ' Headache ' ^ tablets
it is laid down that it is to be an ' old woman ' (pariumtu)
who is to bray certain vegetables together with clean hands
to make a medicament for the aching head of the sick
man. This can only mean that she is past the age of
risk from such tabus. On the other hand, it must be
admitted that no limit is given as to the age of the
' wise woman ' employed in spinning the magic cord.'
In the Apocrypha^ it is said of the Babylonian gods that
*' the menstruous woman and the woman in childbed
touch their sacrifices," but there is no need to take this
literally. It does show that the writer, who became thus
patriotically abusive, was well aware of the uncleanness
of such a proceeding. How much reliance must be placed
on this statement is consonant with the improbability of
a woman in childbed having anything to do with sacrifices.

The tablet K. 2389 prescribes the ceremonies with
which the Assyrians cleansed themselves after marriage
or the k*rL They run as follows : — (1) [Enuma tna (?) ]
NA zikaru u ainnisfn lu tna muai lu inn nim muU hi . . .
lu enuma tna maidli-iu sindfi-au l^ufsu] (2) siptu *^^ Samau
ear 8ame(e) u ir8itim(h'm) inim-inim-ma enuma amelu lu
tna iutti In ina bar! (?) hi mu -du-u In la mu - du - u
tulU'SU tt- . . . (3) NAM - BUL - Bi - HUL zikori^ u sinni"
idti^ SVD^ ana a-ha-mii . . .

''[When are in] cohabitation a man and woman either
in the night, or in ... of the night, or . . . , or when

* See p. 129. « ix, 132. » Ibid., 76. * Baruch vi, 29.


122 TABU ON CHILDBIRTH IN ASSYRIA.

on his bed his urine [goes forth] ; Incantation ' O Sun-
god, king of heaven and earth.' Prayer for when a man
either in a dream or in a vision (?), witting or unwitting,
his breast ... A ceremony to free from evil, for distant (P)
men and women who ... to one another ..."

The restorations, which I have suggested, seem quite
probable, and it is evident that both cohabitation and the
k'ri were reckoned as unclean among the Assyrians as
among other Semites. Moreover, the a/u-demon may be
created ''on a bed of night in sleep," and this is good
evidence for a tabu in such a case.^ With regard to the
cohabitation-tabu, Herodotus ^ adds additional proof to
our tablet, by saying that among the Babylonians and
Arabs every act of sexual intercourse was immediately
followed by a fumigation and an ablution.

For the tabu on childbirth, two tablets' seem to throw
light on Assyrian beliefs. These give the various cere-
monies and rites to be performed for women in such
a condition. That such rites exist is enough to show that
some supernatural evil had to be guarded against, and
hence the fear of risk in childbirth was associated with
ghostly dangers equally among the Assyrians as by other
nations. Moreover, when it is remembered that one of
the Assyrian ghosts is the woman who has died in giving
birth to a child, it requires little acumen to deduce that
a woman in such a state was held to be in close relation
with demoniac influences. It is the same form of argument
that holds good for the corpse ; the dead man becomes

* i.a, on the analogy of his Rabbinic traditioDs that the ba^al ifri
had had union with a restless 'spirit who would bear him children.
» i, 198.
> K. 2413 aud K. 11647, see Bezold, Cataloffue, 441 and lisa


THE MAMn? OR TABU. 123

a ghost, potentially malignant to those that meddle with

the body, which is therefore held to be tabu.

As it is now clear, I think, that the Semites in general

considered a tabu to lie on corpses, childbirth, menstruation,

issues, or marriage, we can now proceed to the discussion

of tabu as indicated in the Surpu-^QTiQA by the word

mamit. In the Assyrian religion the importance of the

tnamit (which may be both a ban and an oath) is one of

the most conspicuous ideas presented. It is sung of

particularly in a tablet beginning '' Ban ! Ban ! Barrier

that none can pass," being the description of the holy

defence which the gods are able to provide for the faithful

against the powers of darkness, " a snare without escape

set for evil." Water and flour appear to be used in the

charm,^ and the connection with the Holy Wafer or Host,

used as a defence against yampires, is obvious.

* ^ Ban ! Ban ! Barrier that none can pass,
Barrier of the gods, that none may break,
Barrier of heaven and earth that none can change,
Which no god may annul,
Nor god nor man can loose,
A snare without escape, set for evil,
A net whence none can issue forth, spread for evil
Whether it be evil Spirit, or evil Demon, or evil Qhost,
Or Evil Devil, or evil God, or evil Fiend,
Or Hag-demon, or Ghoul, or Robber-sprite,
Or Phantom, or Night-wraith, or Handmaid of the Phantom,
Or evil Plague, or Fever sickness, or unclean Disease,
Which hath attacked the shining waters of Ea,
May the snare of £a catch it ;

1 " The shining waters of Ea ^ and " the net of Nisaba," the corn-god.
It seems to have been the custom to fence about the patient (or perhaps
the magician) with a ring of flour or meal as a magic circle, just in the
same way that the mediaeval sorcerers stood within a similar charmed
ring when invoking spirita See Introduction.


124 THE MAMIT OR TABU.

Or which hath assailed the meal of Niaaba,

May the net of Nisaba entrap it ;

Or which hath broken the barrier,

Let not the barrier of the gods,

The barrier of heaven and earth, let it go free ;

Or which reverenceth not the great gods,

Maj the great gods entrap it,

Maj the great gods curse it ;

Or which attacketh the house.

Into a closed dwelling may they cause it to enter ;

Or which circleth round about.

Into a place without escape may they bring it ;

Or which is shut in by the house door.

Into a house without exit may they cause it to enter ;

Or that which passeth the door and bolt,

With door and bolt, a bar immovable, may they withhold it ;

Or which bloweth in at the threshold and hinge.

Or which forceth a way through bar and latch,

Like water may they pour it out,

Like a goblet may they dash it in pieces,

Like a tile may they break it ;

Or which passeth over the wall,

Its wing may they cut off;

Or which [lieth] in a chamber,

Its throat may they cut ;

Or which looketh in at a side chamber,

Its face may they smite ;

Or which muttereth in a . . . chamber,

Its mouth may they shut;

Or which roameth loose in an upper chamber.

With a beisou without opening may they cover it ;

Or which at dawn is darkened,

At dawn to a place of sunrise may they take it " ^

Again« this word mamit occurs constantly in the 8urpu-
series, which is largely devoted to spells for its removal
from the sick man who has appealed for release. The

^ Devils, ii, 119.


THE MAMIT OR TABU. 125

value of these Surpu tablets in this matter cannot be

overestimated, for we find in one tablet a list of one

hundred and sixty-tbree transgressions of every possible

kind of mamit, which the man may have incurred,^ and

Marduk can remove. This is the beginning of the third

tablet : —

'* The mamit of all kinds which hath seized on the man,
Marduk, the priest of the gods, loose th." '

If these mamit be considered in detail it will at once
be recognized that the Poljmesian tabu is a near equivalent
of the Assyrian word. To this end let us examine this
and the other tablets of the same series which deal with
the mamit. Some are obviously mucb older than others,
at any rate in their present guise. Adultery, murder,
and theft are all considered tabu, yet in the form in which
they are exorcised they are not, according to modem
conventiou, of the same class of ideas as those tabus against
contact witb unclean vessels. We may therefore begin
with the latter, simpler ideas of uncleanness, which pre-
sumably are in their earliest dress and are briefly and
simply set forth.

Of the simple, * UDclean ' tabus, then, we find the

following : —

iii, 21. Mamit ina kasi (?) la saripium ^ mi kitH,

*' Tabu of drinking water from an uncleaned cup.*'

* Compare Plutarch {De Supet'st^ vii), " describing the hapless plight
of the man who thinks that affliction comes to him as a punishment
for sin. * It is useless to speak to him, to try and Help him. He
sits girt about with foul rags, and many a time he strips himself and
rolls about naked in the mud ; he accuses himself of sins of omission
and conmiission, he has eaten something or drunk something, or
walked in some road the divinity forbade him'" (J. R Harrison,
Prolegomena^ 617).

> Zimmem, Ritualt., 12. ' Sariptu is literally ^ unrefined.'


»?


126 THE MAMIT OR TABU.

22. Mamit rihiti nadanu u kt^alu,
" Tabu of giving or asking the lees.*' >

114. Mamit ina usurti mahar "« Samai aradu.
" Tabu of going before the sun when ^l^XJ^ ,

r

115. Mamit tamU amelu lapatu.

" Tabu of touching a man, when one is ' banned.' " '

116. Mamit tam'A katsu ana Hi u ^^ IStar tarasu.

** Tabu of making prayer to god or goddess, when one is
* banned.' "

117. Mamit itti tamt dababu.

" Tabu of holding converse with one under a ban."

118. Mamit akali tami akalu,

" Tabu of eating the bread of one under a ban."

119. Mamit mi tami iata,

" Tabu of drinking the water of one under a ban."

120. Mamit rii^tti tamt Sat'A,

" Tabu of drinking what one under a ban hath left."

121. Mamit itti hil ami dahahu,

" Tabu of holding converse with one who lieth under a sin."

122. Mamit akali hU ami akalu.

" Tabu of eating the bread of one who lieth under a sin."


^ Cfl Hughes, Diet, of Islam, 103 : " When anyone eats he must not
wash his fingers until he has first licked them ; whoever eats a dish
and licks it afterwards, the dish intercedes with Qod for him ; whoever
eats from a plate and licks it afterwards, the dish says to him : * May
God free you from hell as you have freed me from the devils licking me.' "

^ The translation of iimrtu here, on which the sense of the line
depends, is uncertain. It is not certain whether this is to be referred
to the savage custom of preventing women in their courses and sick
men from seeing the sun, or whether it is a prohibition against appearing
in the Sun-temple when unclean. Samas is used in this tablet as we
should use the word ' sun ' (cf. L 23). Ufurtu is the word translated
* barrier ' in the second line of the Tablet of the Ban quoted above.
Zimmem, in the Surpu, translates it Zauberkreit, I think, however,
that it is quite possible to hold this other view.

* i.a * imclean.'


THE MAMIT OR TABU. 127

123. Mamit mS hil ami SatH^

" Tabu of drinking the water of one who lieth under a sin."

124. Mamit rihit hil ami SatA.

" Tabu of drinking what one that lieth under a sin hath left"

125. Mamit abut bSl ar[ni sabat]u.

" Tabu of making intercession for one that lieth under a sin."

Or the sick man may be tabu from tlie following causes: —

ii, 99. Ana pan tamt iteiir,

*' He hath gone before one under a ban."

100. Tama ana paniiu iteHr.

" One imder a ban hath come before him."

101. Ina erU tami ittatil.

" He hath slept on the bed of one imder a ban."

102. Ina kussi tami ittaSab,

" He hath sat on the chair of one under a ban."

103. Ina paMuri tami itakal.

" He hath eaten out of the dish of one under a ban."

104. Ina kdsi tami utalr,

" He hath drunk out ofthe cup of one under a ban." *

From these primitive conceptions of tabu we can readily
understand how the ordinary moral code of life arose.
'' Breaches of social order are recognized as offences

* See also Tablet VIII, 1. 44, Itti unamit kussi Suhti erU maiali u-tamHy
" From the tabu of chair, stool, bed, couch, and one imder a ban (may
they free him)." This tablet of the Surpu-series is paralleled by the
description of a sorcerer of the Abipones (Jevons, Introd, to Hist, of
Religion, 2nd ed., Ill, quoting Dobrizhoflfer). In the case of private
calamity, " at his first coming the physician overwhelms the sick man
with an hundred questions : * Where were you yesterday ? ' says he,
* what roads did you tread ? Did you overturn the jug and spill the
drink prepared from the maize ? What ? have you imprudently given
the flesh of a tortoise, stag, or boar [totem gods] to be devoured by
dogs ? ' Should the sick man confess to having done any of these
things, * It is well,' replies the physician, * we have discovered the cause
of your disorder.' "


128 • THE MAMIT OR TABU.

against the holiness of the deity, and the development of
law and morals is made possible, at a stage when human
sanctions are still wanting, or too imperfectly administered
to have much power, by the belief that the restrictions
on human licence, which are necessary to social well-
being, are conditions imposed by the god for the
maintenance of a good understanding between himself and
his worshippers." ^ It is to this, therefore, that we must
refer the reason for the heterogeneous tabus in the
Surpu tablets, when we find side by side with contagious
tabus of uncleanness what is to us the more moral
side of holy tabus — adultery, murder, theft, and even the
stirring up of strife. The very commingling of such
tabus, which were all believed to be, in their breach, the
reason for disease (else the Surpn would never have been
written), throws much light first on the relatively high
danger from unclean contagion, as from the ' deadly '
sins, and secondly the conception of sin as it originated
in the Semitic mind.^

I have gone thus fully into this meaning of mamit that
there may be no doubt as to the actual sense of the word ;
it is the savage tabu in all its power. In another tablet,
although no mention is made of the mamit, the man (or
more probably the priest, from 1. 10) has come imder
a tabu of uncleanlinesf


^ Robertson Smith, ReL Sem,, 154.

* And incidentally the probability of the composite character of this
list of tabus and the whole of the t^urptt,

^ DeviUj ii, Tablet ' AA.' Line 10 runs : " Father, his magician hath
trodden in something poured out," etc. Are we to consider any of this
imcleanuess due to ulterior causes, for which the scribes have employed
euphemisms ? When the euphemistic synonyms frequent among other

Semites are remembered (such as ^\ Isa. Ivii, 8 (?), and D^ /i*l


THE MAMIT OR TABU. 129

"While he walked in the street,
. . . while he walked in the street,
While he made his way through the broad places,
While he walked along the streets and ways.
He trod in something that had been poured forth, or
He put his foot in some unclean water,
Or cast his eye on the water of unwashen hands,'
Or came in contact with a woman of unclean hands,
Or glanced at a maid with unwashen hands.
Or his hand touched a bewitched woman,
Or he came in contact with a man of imclean hands,
Or saw one with imwashen hands,
Or his hand touched one of unclean body."

frequently) it does not seem impossible. On the other hand, the
closing ceremony of the Eighth Tablet of the Surpu (L 72), for the man
under the tabu, says : " May (the tabu) be poured like the water of thy
body and the washings of the hands." The ka-luh-u- [da], a purification
ceremony, probably the same as the tablet quoted above, which is the
eighth tablet of the series luh-ka, is prescribed in K. 2519 (Martin,
Textes R^igieux^ 1903, 220, 1. 9) as advisable if the god vouchsafes no
answer in the omens which the seer is observing.

' Evil could always be washed from the hands with water. According
to Shabbath, lQ9a (Hershon, 43) " it were better to cut the hands off
than to touch the eye, or the nose, or the mouth, or the ear, etc. (i.e. the
orifices by which a demon may enter, as is clear from p. 115), with them,
without having first washed them. Unwashed hands may cause blind-
ness, deafness, foulness of breath, or a polypus. It is taught that
Rabbi Nathan had said, ^ The evil spirit Bath Chorin, which rests upon
the hands at night, is very strict ; he will not depart until water is
poured upon the hands three times over.' " When the fingers are washed
in the morning they should be held downwards and extended, that the
evil spirits which hover about man in the night-time may be washed
off (Jeiffish EticycLy xi, 600). Shibbeta is a female demon, bringing
croup to persons, especially children, who leave their hands unwashed
in the morning {HuL, 1076, Ta*^an,^ 206, Yoma^ 776, quoted Jeioish
Encycl,^ iv, 617). It is dangerous even to borrow a drink of water, or
step over water poured out {Pes. Ilia), and in Gahcia it is recom-
mended not to leave a tank of water uncovered during the Passover^
even while pouring water therein (which should be done through
a cloth) {Je\oi$k Encyel.y article Superstitions), Pilate washes his
hands before the multitude, saying, " I am innocent of the blood of this


130 UNCLEAN TABUS.

The evidence before us, then, shows that the primitive
tabu on uncleanness existed as much among the Assyrians
as among the Hebrews, Arabs, and other Semites. It is
quite clear that these mamit in the Surpu - series were
written for people who had incurred a tabu, not merely
directly, but by coming in contact with another person
'charged' with the contagion. Indeed, when this highly
developed Assyrian system of contagion from tabu is
taken into account with the universal similarity of such
tabus in all parts of the world, it would be no great
deduction to assume that primitive tabus were no more
absent from Assyrian theology than they were from
Hebrew, Arab, or other Semitic beliefs. But the basic

righteous man " (Matt, xxvii, 24) ; and in the J/a/:?M-series (Tablet vii,
coL iii, 1. 143) the man imder the ban says ittui-a Seru amsi l^ataia,
" The morning hath risen, I have washed my hands." That unwashen
hands were tabu in classical worship is clear from Porph}Ty, who says
that there was a programma fixed up that no man should go beyond
the TreptppauTYfpiov till he had washed his hands ; and so great a crime
was it accounted to omit this ceremony that Timarchides relates
a story of one Asterius who was struck dead with thunder because he
had approached the altar of Jupiter with unwashed hands (Potter,
ArchoBoloqia Orceca, 1832, i, 262). Among the Hebrews this is paralleled
by the law of Num. i, 61, that it is death for any but a priest to approach
the tabernacle (see Robertson Smith, O.T. in Jeansh Church, 229).
Among the Moslems there are various opinions which conflict with one
another on the subject of the cleanness or uncleanness of water. On
the whole, however, the side generally accepted is that water, the taste,
colour, or smell of which has not been changed is to be considered as
clean (Klein, Hdigion of Ulam^ 122). In the Levitical law the tabu of
eating that which dies by itself can be removed by washing (Lev. xvii,
15). The following Assyrian text throws further light on this behef
(TF.A/., ii, 516, 5):—

" All evil, . . . which exists in the body of N.,

May it be carried off with the water of his body, the washings from
his hands, . . .

And may the river carry it away down-stream.

Ban ! By heaven be thou exorcised, by earth be thou exorcised \ "


UNCLEAN TABUS. 131

facts of such customs are apparent from several tablets,
as we have already seen, without our being compelled
to deduce them. We know that the corpse is tabu, for
a purificatory ritual was incumbent on any Assyrian who
touched or even looked upon a dead man.^ Secondly, we
know that there were rites to be performed for women
in childbirth,^ and that the woman who died in giving
birth to her babe became a ghost.' Thirdly, the girl who
cannot menstruate in a regular way is mentioned with
supernatural beings,^ and ''the woman with unwashen
hands " can render a priest unclean.^ Lastly, marriage
and the k'ri demand that the Assyrian, as much as the
other Semites, should purify himself.^ These facts prove
convincingly that dead bodies, menstruation, childbirth,
sexual intercourse, and accidental emissions were all tabu
in Babylonia as in other parts of the Semitic East. The
next point which demands consideration is why these
tabus existed at all, or why man should have established
a series of laws which are for the most part apparently
unreasonable. It is consequently this problem of apparent
unreasonableness that remains to be solved, that we may
discover by what process of reasoning primitive man
evolved a system of tabus which are practically the same
all the world over.

It is a recognized fact, as has been mentioned before,
that at the back of the savage brain is the ever-present
idea in these tabus of some formidable spirits ready to
attack any man who should transgress the limits of what
is admitted as the peculiar demoniac right. It remains to

» See p. 26. » See p. 122. ' See p. 19

* See p. 120. « See p. 128. « See p. 121.


134 TABU ON MARRIAGE AND CHILDBIRTH.

folk from the remainder of the tribe, lest their presence
should provoke an attack from the spirit in its nocturnal
wanderings.

If there be any truth in this explanation there should
be some similarity in the tabu on marriage and childbirtb.
This, too, seems very probable. In the case of marriage
the story of Tobit ofEers the best possible example.^ Tobias,
before his marriage with Sarah, goes in terror of the
devil which also loves her, '' which hurteth no man but
those which come unto her." But after the wedding he
is able to drive away the demon with various evil smells.^
The previous husbands have been slain by the demon,
who regards himself as a constant lover in this case,
brooking no attempt to share his harim. The case is
the same in the story of Nur-ed-Din and hi% Son in the
Arabian Nights : '' Thy father thou knowest not, nor do
we know him ; for the Sult&n married her to the hump-
backed groom, and the Jinn came and prevented him."
Among the Arabs it was held especially necessary to
take precautions against demons on the consummation of
marriage.'

1 Tobit vi, 14

* Ibid, viii, 2. In another version " Tobiyah remembered the words
of Raphael, and he took the heart of the fish and put it on a censer,
and burnt it under the clothes of Sarah. And Ashmedai received the
smell, and he fled instantly " (Gaster, Two Unknown, Hebrew Versions
of the Tobit Legend^ P.S.B.A.y ziz, 37). It is the business of Ashmedai
to j)lot against the newly wedded {Test of Solomon, J.Q.j xi, 20).

' Wellhausen, Reste (2), 165. Among modem Arabs a wedding must
not take place when the moon is under an eclipse or in the sign of
Scorpio, the best time being between the 26th and the end of the lunar
month (Hadji Khan, With the Pilgrims to Mecca, 46). Among the
Yezidis cohabitation is forbidden on the night of Wednesday and Friday
(Chabot, Journal Asiatique, vii, 1896, 127). Noteworthy, too, is the
ciistom among the later Hebrews. " A canopy may be made for dead


REASON FOR UNCLEAN TABU. 136

What other reason can there be for all this ceremonial
uncleanness of marriage except that men feared to meddle
with the rights of spirits who had a prior right to any
or all of the women of the tribe P Why, for instance,
should the later Hebrews have laid an embargo on two
sisters marrjing on the same day, lest the evil eye fall
on the parents,^ or on intercourse with a woman in a bed
where a child sleeps, lest the child become epileptic?^


bridegrooms and brides, and either eatable or uneatable things may be
himg on it So is the decree of R Meir. R. Jehudah, however, said :
Only unripe things — viz., unripe nuts, unripe x^^^^^fi tongus [sic] of
purple, and flasks of Arabian oil, but not when they are ripe, nor ripe
pomegranates, nor flasks of sweet oil, as whatever hangs on the canopy,
no benefit may be derived from it. Strings of fish, pieces of meat, may
be thrown before the dead bridegroom or bride in the summer, but not
in rain-time ; and even during the summer they must not do so with
cooked fish or other eatables, which will be spoiled after they are thrown
on the ground" {Ebel Rabbathiy ed. Rodk., 30), Note also the custom
in Arabia of making a bird fly away with the uncleanness of widowhood
of a widow before remarriage (Robertson Smith, Rel, Sem,, 422, with
Assyrian parallel in the Records of the Past^ ix, 151). There is a curious
story told by Masterman (Bibl. World, xxii, 254) of a Palestinian Jew,
who married several women, all of whom died in childbirth. Thinking
that he was under some magical spell, he went through the form of
marriage with a cow, the wedding-ring being actually placed on the
cow's horn. The cow was then killed, and the man immediately married
again, the curse having been, as he thought, removed.

' Sefer Hasldtm, quoted Jewish Enci/cL, xi, 601.

* Pesachiniy ed. Rodkinson, v, 232. The danger which the newly
married bride incurs from demons in passing the threshold of the
new house has been already discussed (p. 30) ; we may also add
here a quotation from Pesachim (ibid, 170), that it was permitted to
a bride to avert her face from the company while eating the paschal
sacrifice, traditionally explained because of her bashfulness, but quite
as probably a survival of the fear of her presence attracting malignant
spirits. It is a Smineh ordinance that the bride wash her feet in
a clean vessel and sprinkle the water in the comers of the chamber,
that a blessing may result from this (Nuzhet el-Mutaamil, quoted
Lane, Arabian Nights, iv, note 39).


136 TABU ON CHILDBIRTH.

The former becomes intelligible if we recognize the power
of disappointed demons to yisit their revenge on the
parents for a too great loss in one day, and the meaning
of the latter is equally clear when the demoniac origin of
epilepsy is remembered.

Again, in the case of childbirth ^ the same ' uncleanness '
of tabu attaches to the woman, and if she dies in giving
birth to her child she becomes a ghost which will return
for its babe. The infant, too, incurs the risk of attack
from female spirits such as the lilith, the lamia, or the
labartu. According to Indian folklore the woman in this
condition is exposed to exceptional perils, a thousand
demons, lascivious tncubi, gathering round her.^ Hence
we may infer that the danger from spirits which renders
the woman unclean may be either due to the jealousy of
such female demons as may be supposed to have had con-
nection with the father and resent her bearing a child to
him ; or it may be from the tncubi, who account themselves
the lovers of the woman, and are hovering near on such
an occasion as the birth of a child. They may either be
hostile because the babe is not theirs, or be anxious for
the advent of their demon-child in an untimely birth.
Among the Orang Laut a great clamour is made as soon
as a child is bom to them. All present unite in shouting
and in beating anything which will make a noise, and the
greater the din the better. The hubbub lasts for anything
from ten minutes to half an hour, being especially intended


' Wellhausen, however, considers that Lev. xii, 2, implies xv, 19 :
the law of uncleanness of childbearing might be an extension by
analogy of the older law of the uncleanness of menstruation (C.H., 148).

' Victor Henry, La Magie datis VInde Antiqite, 1904, 140.


TABU ON CHILDBIRTH. 137

to drive away any evil spirits whicli might otherwise attack
either mother or child. ^

To quote a story of somewhat earlier date, Psellus tells
of a woman who in her confinement was very ill and raved
extravagantly, mattering in a barbarous tongue. So they
brought ''a very old bald-headed man . . . who, standing
with his sword drawn beside the bed, afiected to be angry
with the invalid, and upbraided her much in his own
tongue" (Armenian), and the woman answered him. On
his growing more vituperative, she was overcome and fell
asleep. The bystanders thought she spoke in Armenian
also, and when she recovered she declared that " a sort of
darksome spectre, resembling a woman, with the hair
dishevelled/' sprang upon her.^

Whether the demons are tncubi or jealous spirit-wives,
they are dangerous to the people who approach the woman,
and, such being the case, she is tabu. Many modern
superstitions throw light on this. The tribes of the Malay
Peninsula light fires near a mother at childbirth to scare
away evil spirits.' In the Tyrol it is said that a woman
in childbed should never take off her wedding ring, or
spirits and witches will have power over her.^ According
to the modem Jews of Minsk, if you go alone to call
a midwife your course will be lengthened or troubled by
devils.^ In Syria the woman in such a condition must
get up and go out of the house when a corpse is carried


^ Skeat and Blagden, Pagan Races of the Malay Pemnsida, ii, 26.

• Psellus (eleventh cent), Dialogite on the Operation of DcemonSf
ed. CollissoD, .39.

* Tyler, Prim, Cult.^ 4th ed., ii, 195, quoting Journ. Ind. Archip,
^ Frazer, Qolden Bough, i, 402.

' Jewish EncycLy xi, 600.


138 ROYAL TABU.

past, or deatli may ensue to botli mother and child.^ The
eyidence, therefore, that we have before us, seems to prove
that this is the solution of the problem. Spirits both
male and female could manifestly intermarry in the tribe,
and such persons as gave evidence of demoniac or diyine
selection were carefully tabooed, lest communion with them
should bring down the jealous spirit wrath.

We may leave these tabus to pass on to the instances
of the Royal Tabu, or special tabu on kings, among the
Semites. It is a well-recognized custom among savage
races that tbeir chief shall be subject to special tabus
wbich are not binding upon the common people, for in
primitive times the more prominent tbe cbief is the more
does he become the representative figure-head of the
tribe. Tbere is no need to give the details of savage
customs, which are well known, and require no further
elucidation.^ Among tbe Assyrians traces of this Royal
Tabu occur in the ' bemerology ' texts. There are certain
acts from which the king must abstain on the seventh,
fourteenth, nineteenth, twenty-first, and twenty-eighth day
of the month ; that is to say, every seventh day with
the forty-ninth (seven x seven) day from the first of
the preceding month. For instance, ''The seventh day
(of the second Elul) is the festival of Marduk and
Sarpanitum. A lucky day. An evil day. The shepherd


1 Baldensperger, P,E.F.^ 1894, 143. It is an old custom among the
Sephardim, if labour is protracted, to set a chair in the middle of the
room for Sitt Miriam (the Lady Mary), who is invited to come in and
assist, but as soon as the child arrives is as hurriedly invited to retire
(Masterman, Jewish Customs^ Bibl. Worlds xxii, 248).

* The whole matter of savage tabus on royalty is set forth in Frazer's
Golden Bough,


ROYAL TABU. 139

of the widespreading peoples must not eat flesh that has
been cooked over coak nor bread cooked in ashes.^ He
must not change the raiment of his body, nor put on clean
{or white) clothes. He must not offer a libation. The
king must not ride forth in his chariot, and must not
speak loudly.' The priest must not make enquiry in
a secret place. The physician must not lay his hand
on the sick. It is unfitted for making a curse.^ In the
evening the king should make offerings and offer sacrifices
to Marduk and Ishtar; his prayer will be acceptable to
the god." Two important points to notice in this
hemerology, before going further, are the two phrases


» Compare the tabu in Shabbath, Talmud, ed. Schwab, iv, 25, that no
meat, onion, or egg should be put to roast on the eve of the sabbath,
unless it can be finished cooking that day. Bread was not to be put in
the oven or a cake on the ashes imless there was time for a light crust
to form on the surface before the beginning of the Sabbath. The
Assyrian word for *brpad cooked in ashes' is aial tumri (Devils, ii,
18) ; it is the Hebrew D*SX*1 HHy , the panis subcinericus of the
Vulgate. For the use in magic compare the instances given in Devils^
loc. cit., and Chwolsohn, Die Seabier, ii, 27 : " Den 27 (Tammuz) feiem
die Manner ein Mysterion des Schem&l, zu Ehren der Qenien, der
Damonen und der Gottheiten. Sie machen viele Aschenkuchen aus
Mehl, Terebinthenbeeren, getrockneten Weinbeeren (Rosinen, Zibeben)
imd geschalten Niissen, wie die Hirten zu thun pflegen." These
prohibitions on cooking probably arise from some tabu against fire ;
compare Exod. xxxv, 3, "Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your
habitations upon the Sabbath," and Lev. x, 1, 2, where the offering of
strange fire meets with the punishment of fire which comes forth from
Yahweh. Josephus (Bell. Jud.^ ii, 8, 9) says that the Essenes strictly
observed the rules to cook no food and light no fire on the Sabbath.

* To raise the voice is tabu to a murderer among the Omahas
(Frazer, Oolden Bough, i, 340, quoting Dorsey).

' Often hemerology texts mark this in different form : " On the
nineteenth of lyyar he who uttereth a ban — a god will seize upon him "
(W.A,I., V, pi. 48). On the tabu on work on holy days see Jevons,
Introduction, 2nd ed., 65 ff.


140 ROYAL TABU.

"a lucky day" and "an evil day," aad tlie distinction
between the king and some person who is called " the
shepherd of the widespreading peoples." If this latter is
merely an equivalent for 'king/ as seems quite probable,
it is not unlikely that we have here a text that is a
recension from two different versions. The two antithetic
epithets for " the day " are quite in accord with this.

K. 3597 is another tablet prescribing things which the
king must not do on a certain day —

Ina Hme-iu Sarru ana tinuri {lySu ul ikan'ab


ialtii ul itame


aSar puzri amatu ul iSakan

kA ul iSSattH
M ul iptarahi.


" On that day

the king must

not

approach his

fireplace (?),

He must not

speak loudly,


He must not make enquiry

in 1

\ secret place,



He must not drink vegetables (?)
He must not cut off vegetables (?)."

The Hebrews, too, had their Royal Tabus: "When
a ruler sinueth, and doeth unwittingly any one of all
the things which Yahweh his God hath commanded not
to be done, and is guilty," ^ he shall make atonement.
In the Talmud^ there is a tradition that only the king

* Lev. iv, 22. * Yoma^ viii, i, ed. Schwab, v, 247.


OTHER TABUS. 141

and brides are allowed to wash their faces on the Day
of Atonement.

' Holy ' tabus do not come within the scope of this
book. Under this heading roust come many of the tabus
mentioned in the hemerologiee.^ For instance, among the
Assyrians, to eat fish on the ninth of lyyar rendered
men liable to sickness; in Syria the eating of fish, which
were sacred to Atargatis, was held to restdt in a sickness
of ulcers, swellings, or wasting disease.^ Even dates at
times were tabu to the Assyrians, and if they were eaten
on certain forbidden days ophthalmia was supposed to
result. To cross a river on the twentieth of Ab would
also bring sickness.

But these, and kindred others, belong more probably
to the ' sacred ' tabus, along with the ' unclean ' totem-
beasts, and have no place here. This chapter will have
served its purpose if a case has been made out for the
theory that the dread attaching to the sexual functions is
due to a belief in jealous and lustful spirits.


^ The quotations are from W.A.I., v, 48.
' Robertson Smith, Eel. Sem., 449.


142


III.


SYMPATHETIC MAGIC.


Hitherto the discussion has been confined to the nature
of the demon and its power of obsessing mankind; it
remains to treat of what Tylor^ describes as 'Hhe pro-
ceedings of the exorcist who talks to it, coaxes it or
threatens it, makes offerings to it, entices or drives it
out of the patient's body, and induces it to take up its
abode in some other." Much of the magician's art con-
sisted in his ability to transfer a spiritual power from its
abode into some object under his control. In other words, he
employed a form of that peculiar wizardry which is known
as sympathetic magic. This force is not merely a source
of power for the magician over the human soul alone, but
proTides him with a means of attack or defence against
such evil spirits or demons as may be arrayed against
him. It is a species of sorcery which shows itself in its
crudest form in the use of small figures of wax or other
plastic materials fashioned with incantations in the likeness
of some enemy, and then pierced with nails and pins, or
melted before the fire, that their human counterpart may
by these means be made to suffer all kinds of torment.
This is the more intelligible when, by the recognized
rules of magic, it is considered more effective to obtain
some portion of the victim's nails or hair, or earth from
his footsteps, or even his name, as an additional connection

' Primitive Culture^ 4th ed., ii, 125.


WAX FIGURES. 143

whereby the wax figure may be brought into still closer
affinity with its prototype. In this case the sorcerer
possesses something definite or tangible belonging to his
foe, and although the mere image over which the exorcisms
will be repeated is enough by itself, yet it is obviously
more satisfactory to hold in possession something which
is specifically identified with the person in question. This
form of magic appeals especially to the popular mind, and
there are abundant traces of its use among civilized peoples
from very early times to the present day. For instance,
among the ancient Egyptians the use of wax figures can
be traced back as far as the old kingdom. A story in the
Westcar Papyrus relates that a certain official in the reign
of a king of the third dynasty, about 3830 r.c, made
a crocodile in wax which was to devour his enemy, and
this superstition continued in Egypt down to quite late
times. In the second tale of Ehamuas, written in Demotic
Egyptian, a certain Ethiopian named Hor, "son of the
negress," is overheard to say that he would send his
magic up to Egypt, and thus overcome the king of that
land. On this reaching the ears of the Viceroy of Ethiopia,
this Hor is brought to court into the presence, and the
Viceroy commands him to perform this feat, promising
all kinds of rewards if he succeed. Thereupon Hor
makes a litter of wax for four runners, and on reading
certain formulas over them he " makes them live " ; then
he commands them to go up to Egypt and bring back
with them Pharaoh, who is to be beaten with five hundred
blows of the stick and taken back to Egypt within six
hours.^

' F. LL Griffith, Stories of the High Priests of Memphis, 65. On
such figures among the Greeks see J. E. Harrison, Prolegomena, 138.


144 WAX FIGURES,

In late Hebrew magic the saroe procedure is imitated:
" If thou wishest to cause anyone to perish, take clay from
two river banks and make an image therewith, write upon
it the man*s name, then take seven stalks from seven date-
trees and make a bow with horsehair (?) ; set up the
image in a convenient place, stretch thy bow, shoot the
stalks at it, and with every one say the prescribed words,
which begin with D*lHp^ and end with ^DlDTfi, adding
* Destroyed be N., son of N.' " * The Jews of Mosul have
in their magic-books similar directions : *' Take new wax
and make of it a figure of the enemy, and his name, and
the name of his mother, and then pierce it with a thorn
in many holes and fill it with fine black glass, and make
a box of wax and put the figure in the box and write
these names and put (them) under its head ; and thou
shalt bury it in a grave three days old (P), and thou
shalt see with regard to the enemy all that thou wouldst,
and this is what thou shalt write : Apapi Akpi§ AkpiSin
Athsamis, I adjure you that just as fire continually devoureth
the figures of N., son of N., on the altar, (so) it shall not
be quenched in the heart of N., son of K."^ Or the
waxen image is to be pierced with needles.^

^ Jewish Encycl.^ tub voce Amulet^ i, 548.

* The Folklore of Mossoul, P.S.B.A., 1906, 103, No. 7.

' Ibid., No. 8. For another instance in Hebrew of making an image
to kill a man see Gaster, Sword of Moses^ No. 68. The Nabatean
sorcerers of the Lower Euphrates, as described by Ibn Khaldun (14th
century), had the same practices : — " We saw with our own eyes one of
these individuals making the image of a person he wished to bewitch.
These images are composed of things, the qualities of which bear
a certain relation to the intentions and the projects of the operator,
and which represent by means of symbols the names and the qualities
of the imfortunate victim, in order to unite and disimite them. The
magician afterwards pronounces some words over the image which he


WAX FIGURES AMONG THE MALAYS, 145

To come down to quite modern times, examples may be
cited from the customs of various savage races. The
Malays believe in this in its simplest form, moulding
a figure of their enemy in the wax of a deserted
honeycomb and mixing therein his nail-parings or such
other parts of him as they can obtain, and this is then
melted over a flame or transfixed with pins. The whole
performance is accompanied by spells which are chanted
over the figure, thereby giving the magician power to
assimilate the nature of his enemy to the waxen image.^
It is unnecessary to repeat all the numerous well-known
cases of this form of superstition, which supplies an
intelligible and workable base wherefrom it is easy to
observe a gradual development in the idea underlying
the whole principle of sympathy in magic.^

The collecting of dust, nail-parings, spittle, and such
like, as an addition to the spell, is quite as common in


has just placed before him, and which is a real or symbolical repre-
sentation of the person whom he wishes to bewitch ; then he blows
and emits from his mouth a little saliva which had collected there,
and at the same time makes those organs vibrate which are used in
the utterance of this malevolent formula ; next he holds over this
symbolical image a cord which he has prepared with this intention,
making a knot in it to signify that he is acting with resolution and
persistence, that at the moment when he spat he made a compact with
the demon who acted as his associate in the operation, and to show that
he is acting with a determined resolution to consolidate the charm.
To these processes and malevolent words a wicked spirit is imited,
which comes forth from the operator's mouth covered with saliva.
Many evil spirits then descend, and the result of all is that the magician
causes the victim to be attacked by the desired evil" (Lenormant,
Chald, Moffic, quoting Slane, i, 177). See also Origen, vi, 30, for
magical figures.

* Skeat, Malay Magic^ 669.

' On this subject see Frazer, Ooldeii Bough^ i, 10.


146 NAIL-PARINGS AND DUST.

the modem ritual as in the ancient. Lumholtz ^ says
that, in order to be able to practise his arts against any
black man, the wizard must be in possession of some
article that has belonged to him, such as his hair, or the
food left in his camp. Among the Malays, the soil from
the footprint of the intended victim is recognized as
useful in charms.' According to the Mohammedans, Al-
S&meri, when he cast the golden calf of the Israelites,
took dust from the hoofprints of the horse of the angel
Gabriel, and threw it into the mouth of the calf, which
immediately became animated.^ Similar is the late Hebrew
charm for killing an enemy : '* Take dust from the grave
of a murdered man who hath been slain with iron, and
take water from three wells which are not in sight of
each other, and knead the dust with the water, and make
it into a cake and throw it into the house of thine
enemy, saying, * As this lord of the dust was slain, so
may N., son of N., be slain.' " * In an Assyrian charm
the dust from a temple is an ingredient.^ Another Hebrew
charm, this time for a woman that has been separated
from her husband through enchantment and wishes to
rejoin him, runs : " Thou shalt take a hair of the woman,
and a thread which she hath bound on him(?), and dust
from beneath her feet, and a little coriander-seed, and
thou shalt put them in a (piece of) cloth and bind it with
the aforementioned thread, and hang the cloth in a place
under which the man is, and put the coriander-seed upon

* Among Cannibals^ 1889, 280, quoted Elworthy, Evil Eye, 73.
' Skeat, Malay Magic, 568 ; Frazer, Oolden Bough, i, 281 if.

' Sale, Koran, Surah ii, note.

* Folklore of Mossoul, P.S.B.A., 1906, p. 104, No. 12.

* Martin, Testes Religieux, 243.


NAIL-PARINGS, HAIR, AND DUST, 147

the man, and thou Bhalt say: * Anusin Anuain Atetin
Atetin, do ye subdue and bring N., daughter of N., swiftly,
swiftly, swiftly, with speed, with speed, with speed, at
once, at once, at once ; and then shall she come without
a doubt/ "^ The Arabian solwdn, or draught that makes
the mourner forget his grief, consists of water with which
is mingled dust from the grave.' Again, the use of spittle
in magic is well known from the miracles in the New
Testament, and many instances of its use are given by
Frazer.' Doughty relates how a young mother, an Arab
woman, brought her wretched babe and bade him spit on
the child's sore eyes.*

In the Talmud,' Ameimar says: ''The superior of the
witches told me that when a person meets any of them
he should mutter thus : ' May a potsherd of boiling dung
be stuffed into your mouths, you ugly witches! May the
hair with which you perform your sorcery be torn from
your heads, so that ye become bald ! May the wind scatter
the crumbs wherewith ye do your divinations ! May your
spices be scattered, and may the wind blow away the
safiron you hold in your hands for the practising of
sorcery ! ' " Again, among the Rabbis, three things were
said respecting the finger-nails: ''He who trims his
nails and buries the parings is a pious man; he who
bums these is a righteous man; but he who throws
them away is a wicked man, for mischance might follow
should a female step over them."^

» P.S.B.A., loo. cit., No. 28. » Wellhausen, Reste, 142.

' olden Boughy i, 389. * Arabia Deserta^ i, 627.

* Pesachim, foL 110, cols, i, ii, quoted Hershon, Talmudic Miscellany ^
230.

* Moed KataUy foL 18, ool. i, quoted Hershon, Talmttdic Miscellany , 49.


148 KNOWING THE NAME.

A prayer in Ethiopic published by Littmann,^ shows
the same fear: ''Save us, Lord our God, by the power
of these Thy names from all keepers of magic art, who
corrupt the soul and who make poisons with skin and
pillows, with sweat and the nails of our hands and the
hair of our heads and the nails of our feet and with the
hair of our eye[brows] and the hair of our clothes and
the hair of our girdles, and where we eat and drink, out
of our whole souls and bodies.'' Among the Sabians,
according to Maimonides,^ ** another custom, which is
still widespread, is this : whatever is separated from the
body, as hair, nail, or blood, is unclean."

Just in the same way, a knowledge of the name of
one's enemy, be he human or spiritual, gives enormously
increased power to the magician.' The natives of many
modern savage tribes are afraid to disclose their names
lest some enemy should hear it and thereby lay them
under a spell. An Australian black is always very
unwilling to tell his real name, doubtless through fear
of sorcerers.^ The Arabs have similar ideas ; Doughty
tells of one Tollog, the Moabib sMkh, who, whilst he
was handling his medicine book, turning over the leaves
to see the pictures, shrank from allowing the Englishman
to write down his name. ''Khalil," said he, shrinking
with a sudden apprehension, ''I do pray thee, write not
my name ! " ^ The modern Abyssinian believes in demons

1 Arde'et, J,A,O.S., xxv, 40.

* Onide to the Perplexed, iii, xlvii.

3 On this see Frazer, Golden Bough, i, 413 ; Jevons, Introduction
to the History of Religion, 2nd ed., 60.

* R. Brough Smyth, Aborigines of Victoria, i, 469, quoted 0.B,,
i, 404.

^ Arabia Deserta, i, 425.


KNOWING THE NAME. 149

being constantly on the watch to steal a Christian's
name if they can,^ and it is the custom to conceal the
real name by which a person is baptized, and to call
him only by a sort of nickname which bis mother
gives him on leaving the church. The reason for this
is that the bouda (or possession) cannot act upon a person
whose name he does not know.' In the magic of the
Middle Ages, if a demon was slow to appear at the
command of the wizard, he rendered himself liable to
be cursed and buried in oblivion, because his master
knew his name and 'seal.' In one of the books on
magic the student of sorcery is recommended to write
the seal of the demon on a piece of parchment, and put
it into a box '' with brimstone, asafcetida, and other
stinking perfumes"; he must then exorcise the demon
and threaten to destroy him. ''I, who am the servant
of the Most High . . . will excommunicate thee, will
destroy thy name and seal which I have in this box,
will burn them with unquenchable fire, and bury them
in unending oblivion."'

Among the ancient Egyptians the monster Apep could
be destroyed by making a wax figure of him, and casting
it into the fire after writing his name upon it;* and in
Palestinian demonology the same thing is apparent in the
words of the Unclean Spirit : " Art thou come to destroy
us P I know thee who thou art ; the Holy One of God." '
In the Assyrian incantation against the ghost of a dead

^ Lejean, Voyage en Abyssinie, 78.
' Parkyns, Life in Abyssinia^ 300.

* A. E. Waite, The Book of Black Magic, 199.

* Budge, Eg. Magic, 171.

* Luke iv, 34.


150 WAX FIGURES IN ASSYRIA.

man, quoted on p. 34, the figure is made in clay and
the dead man's name inscribed on it.

In the Testament of Solomon the king asks a demon
to tell him the name of a certain spirit, and the demon
says, '' I cannot tell thee. For if I tell his name I render
myself incurable."^ According to Origen every demon
must be addressed by his local name, and not by one
translated into another tongue.'

In the same primitive form this custom is found among
the Assyrians. Not only was it possible for a man to
make an enchanted wax figure of anyone whom he desired
to hurt, but it was also the recognized means of counter
attack that the person so assailed should make corresponding
figures, and thus bring his antagonist's power to nought.
If an Assyrian imagined himself bewitched or laid under
a spell in consequence of some sickness which had befallen
him, he had recourse to a magician who aided him with
counter charms and incantations against the witch or
wizard who had obtained power over him. Figures repre-
senting these were moulded, and the following incantation
recited over them : —

" I cry unto you, O gods of night,
Unto you I cry through the night, the veiled bride ;
I cry at eventide, at midnight, and at dawn ;
For a sorceress hath bewitched me,
An enchantress hath enchanted me ;
My god and my goddess wail over me,
Over the sickness (?) wherewith I am stricken.
I stand sleepless night and day,
For they have choked my mouth with herbs,'
And with upuntu have stopped my mouth,

» Ed. Conybeare, t/.Q., xi, 26.

' C. Cels., V, 45, quoted Conybeare, J.§., ix, 66. ' Cf. p. 147.


WAX FIGURES IN ASSYRIA, 151

So that they have lessened my drink,

And my joy hath turned to grief and my delight to mourning.

Rise up, ye great gods, and consider my cause,

Qive judgment, and take cognizance of my way.

I have fashioned an image of my sorcerer or sorceress.

Of my wizard or my witch.

And I have placed it beneath yoir and I plead my cause.

As they have wrought evil and sought out the imclean

So may they die, but let me live ! " ^

Further on in the tablet the magician continues his
spell thus : —

" I close the pass, I shut the wall,
I restrain the magic of the whole world.
Anu and Anatu have sent unto me : —
' Whom shall I send to the Mistress of the Desert ? '
Put a gag on the mouth of my wizard and my witch,
Perform the incantation of Marduk, the leader of the gods.
They shall cry unto thee (Mistress), but answer them not.
They shall speak unto thee, but hear them not ;
If I cry to thee, answer me.
If I speak unto thee, hear me.

By the command which Anu and Anatu and the Mistress of
the Desert have spoken."'

" [Incantation.] These are figures of my wizard,
These are figures of my witch,
Of my sorcerer and my sorceress,
Of my wizard and my witch.


... I know them not

Evil [sorcery, magic, witchcraft], spells.


1 Series Maklu, Tablet I (ed. Tallqvist). The Tablet K 249, published
by Boissier, Revue Semitique^ ii (1894), 135, prescribes the neceasaiy
medicinal plants for Enuma amelu upiSu limutti ilammihi, " when evil
sorcery besets a man.'*

» Maklu, i, 48 ff.

' Here follow twenty names for possible foes, witch-doctors, etc.

* Six mutilated lines.


152 WAX FIGURES IN ASSYRIA.

[Fire-god], judge, who defeatest the wicked and hostile, overcome

them that I be not destroyed !
They have made [images like] my images, likened to my form,
They have seized my . . . , have broken my neck,
They have attacked my . . . , have fastened on my loins.
They have weakened my . . . , have taken away my courage.
They have enraged [the gods against me], have weakened my

strength.
They have . . . , they have boimd my knees.
They have filled me with . . . and pain.
They have made me eat . . .
They have made me drink . . .
They have poured on me . . .
They have anointed me with a salve of evil plants,
As a corpse they have looked upon me.
They have laid the water of my life in a grave.
They have enraged against me god, king, lord, and prince.
Thou, O Fire-god, that bumest my wizard and my witch,
That destroyest the iniquity of the seed of my wizard and my

witch,
It is thou that destroyest evil.
I call on thee, like Samas the judge.
Give me a decision, judge my cause.
Bum my wizard and my witch,
Devour my enemies, dissipate my foes ;
May thy dread light reach them.
Like water from a skin-bottle in a leak(?) may they be brought

to an end,
Like the hewing of a stone may their fingers be cut off.
By thy mighty command, that cannot be changed,
And thy true favour, which cannot be altered.

Perform the incantation."

The ceremony ends by burning the figures of demons.^

1 The wizard is also accused of having delivered the figure of the sick
man to a corpse, or of having shut it within a wall or under the threshold,
or at the entrance (?) of a wall, or in a bridge that men might trample
on it ; or of having buried it in the hole of a canal-digger (?) or in
a^gardener's channel ; or of having delivered it to the power of Labartu,
the daughter of Anu, or to the Fire-god, the son of Anu (iv, 27).


HAIR, SPITTLE, AND RAGS. 153

The fear that the man's hair or spittle, or rags of his
clothing, should have come into the possession of his enemy
is clearly indicated in one of the prayers to Nuzku —

'^ Those who have made images in my shape,
^yho have likened them unto my form,
Who have taken of my spittle, plucked out my hair,
Tom my garments or gathered the cast-off dust of my feet,
May the warrior Fire-god dissolve their spell ! " ^

What is more, we have a full description of such vestigia
as gave help in magic in an incantation text : — '' The
sorcery of spittle which is spat forth evilly by the mouth,
the bond of sorcery bound evilly, the shaving of the 'side,'
ditto of the body, the parings of the nails, rag (P), strip (P),
an old shoe, a cut lace ; ' refuse ' which hath ' made atone-
ment' on the body, food which the body of a man hath
digested, food which in eating hath been rejected, water
which hath been left over in drinking, evil spittle which
the dust hath not covered, the air of the desert^ hath


> Tallqvist, Maqluj Tablet 1, 1. 131. The entire point of this passage
has been missed both by Tallqvist and Jastrow (Religion, 286) ; the
latter, following Tallqvist {Maqlu, 39), translates —

" Who have taken away my breath, torn my hairs,
Who have rent my clothes, have hindered my feet from treading
the dust."

The Ass3rrian for these lines is —

ruHi'ia ilka iarti-ia imlusu

m

tUinni-ia ibtuku etiku eprdti Sepi-ia Upuiu.

But the last phrase (literally ** the passing of the dust of my feet ")
surely must refer to the common custom of taking the dust from the
footprints and kneading it into the image. The meaning of the word
iapdhi is uncertain, but from epir iepi-ia iapsu {W.A.L, iv, 67 ; i, 55)
*to gather' seems to be fairly correct. Muss-Amolt seems to have
found the right idea in aufwiihlen.

' Or, with the Sumerian, * to the desert'


154 MATERIALS FOR FIGURES.

not carried off(Py'^ In a list of plants which appear to
have a magical significance, one of them is prescribed
" in the dust of a man's tread/' probably as an amulet,
and another ''in the dust of the great gate kameti (or
kaiiptty «

The suppliant might use tallow, bronze, clay, bitumen,
dung (P), wood, and other materials for his little images,
and these were then cast ceremonially into a brazier, that
the Fire-god might consume them-^

" mighty Fire-god, dread light of day,
That guidest aright both gods and princes,
That judgest evil men and women.
Rise up in judgment with me, like the Warrior Sun ;
Qrant me a decision, judge my cause,
Bum up my sorcerer and sorceress,
Devour mine enemies, bring to nought my foes.
And may thine awful light overcome them."'

The third tablet of the series Maklu^ from which the
preceding charms are taken, contains a more elaborate
ceremony than either of the two preceding. The same
images are made, but they are to be placed in the model
of a ship which was then broken to pieces, probably after
being placed in a basin of water.

" She who hath bewitched me, hath laid me imder a spell.
Hath cast me into the river flood,
Hath cast me into the river depth,
Unto the witch hath said 'Bewitch,'


^ Haupt, A,S,K,T.y 11, i, 60.

» C.T., xiv, pi. 44, cols. 1-2, 11. 12, 9. Cf. pL 42, K. 274, IL 22, 28 (?).

' Mahluy Tablet II. A psalm to Ishtar, pubhshed by L. W. King,
Seven Tablets^ 222, although full of phrases such as are found in the
so-called Penitential Psalms, shows what the intention of the sick
man is (L 65 : " put an end to the evil bewitchments of my body ").


CEREMONIES WITH A SHIP. 155

Unto the enchantress hath said 'Enchant,'

May this be as her ship,

Like this ship may she be wrecked,

May her spell be wrecked, and upon her

And upon her image may it recoil,

May her cause fail, but let mine succeed."

" My ship the Moon-god hath fitted out.
Between its masts (?) it carries * Release,'
Sorcerer and sorceress sit therein,
Wizard and witch sit therein,
Enchanter and enchantress sit therein."

Apparently from the mutilated line which follows, " [and
now] the rigging is cut," the bewitched man here begins
to destroy the ship, with the figures of his tormentors
inside it, and finally it is cast into the fire and burnt.
This method of making a ship full of one's enemies was
not confined to Babylonia, for there is a very curious
instance of it related of Nectanebus in the Ethiopic
traditions of Alexander the Great. In addition to the
ordinary charms of this character which this Egyptian
magician possessed, such as influencing Olympias by means
of a figure made of plants with magical properties and
inscribed with her name/ he was able to overcome his
enemies in the following manner : — '' Now as concerning
this man [Nectanebus], whenever [his] enemies lifted
themselves up against him to do battle with him, he
did not march out against them with soldiers, and
armies, and an array of spears, but it was his wont to go
into his palace and to shut the door upon himself. He
then took a brazen vessel, and having filled it with water
to resemble the sea he muttered over it certain words which

I Budge, Life and Exploits of Alexander the Oreat^ ii, 16.


156 RITUAL BEFORE BATTLE.

he knew. If the enemy came against him [by sea] he used
to make models of ships out of wax [melted] over a fire,
and to place upon the water these waxen ships, that were
[intended] to represent the ships [of the enemy] which
were on the sea. Then he muttered over them the names
of the gods of the country, and other awful and terrible
names, and then he set the waxen ships on the water in
his basin, in resemblance of the ships which were on the
sea. If the enemy rose up against him on the sea he made
the waxen ships to sink, and he thereby also submerged the
ships of the enemy who wished to come to do battle with
him. And if it happened [that the enemy came against
him] by land he was wont to make models of the horse-
[men] in wax like unto the soldiers of the army who were
coming to do battle with him, and having muttered over
them the awful and terrible names [which he knew] the
soldiers of the enemy were suddenly overcome before his
face, and the enemy went down before him, and submitted
unto him.'* ^


1 Budge, Life and Exploits of Alexander the Oreaty ii, 4, 5. Are we
to consider Ezek. iv, 1, 2, a parallel in any way ? " Take thee a tile,
and lay it before thee, and pourtray upon it a city, even Jerusalem :
and lay siege against it, and build forts against it."

Among certain savage tribes demons are expelled by being sent
away in vehicles of various kinds. Frazer says that a common one
is a little ship or boat. For instance, he quotes (iii, 97) Fran9ois
Valentyn, Oud-en nisuw Ost-Indien, iii, 14, who describes a rite in
Ceram which takes place when a village suffers from sickness. A little
ship is made and filled with rice, tobacco, eggs, and so forth, and the
sicknesses are addressed in a valedictory incantation as though they
were demons, and adjured never to return. The ship is then carried
to the seashore, and is allowed to drift away. Similar ceremonies
are in vogue in Timor-laut (Riedel, De sluik en kroeshange rassen
tusichen Selebes, p. 304, quoted Frazer, Golden Bought iii, 98) and in the


RITUAL BEFORE BATTLE. 157

A similar story is told of Aristotle in Ethiopic, for it is
related that he gave Alexander a box filled with figures of
his enemies with their swords bent and bowstrings cut,
placed face downwards and nailed in, the whole being
secured with an iron chain. ^

Among the Babylonians the proceedings which took place
before battle were very closely akin. The ritual is worth
giving in full —

*' Ritual : when an enemy [attacks] the king and his land . . .
The king shall go forth on the right wiug of the army,
And thou shalt sweep (?) the earth (?) clean, and sprinkle pure

water,
And set [three] altars, one for Istar, one for Samai, and one for

Nergal,
And ofifer each a loaf of wheaten meal.
And make a mash of honey and butter,
Poiu-ing in dates and . . . -meal, and sacrifice three full-grown

sheep,


island of Buro (Riedel, op. cit., p. 25) ; and see many other interesting
forms of the same ceremony.

Note also the end of an incantation against spirits among the Malays,
in a boat ceremony, which bears a great resemblance to the wording of
the Assyrian spell on p. 25 —

" Go ye to the ocean which has no wave,
And the x)lain where no herb grows,
And never return hither.
But if ye return hither.
Ye shall be consumed by the curse.
At sea ye shall get no drink,
Ashore ye shall get no food.
But gape in vain about the world."

(Skeat, Malay Ifagic, pp. 433-5, quoted Frazer, Golden Bough, iii,
100.) Compare also the annual expulsion by boats in Frazer, iii, 105 ;
and for similar superstitions in China, Elworthy, Ecil Eye^ 438, quoting
PMic Health, 1894, 376.

» Ibid, 362.


158 RITUAL BEFORE BATTLE.

Flesh of the right thigh, hirua-fLesh, and lume-flesh thou shalt

ofiFer,
Sprinkle upuntu with cypress on a censer,
And make a libation of [honey], butter, wine, oil, and scented (?)

oil
Then shalt thou make an image of the foe in tallow,
Bend backwards his face with a cord ;
The Eunuch (?) of the king, who is named like his master,
Shall . . . the robes (?) of the king . . .
Shall stand l)efore the preparation and repeat this formula before

Samas." *

The method against a foe proyided by a Hebrew manu-
script from Mosul is interesting from its similarity to a story
of Mohammed. Mohammed, at the victory near Mecca in
the second year of the Hejra, by the direction of Gabriel
took a handful of gravel, and threw it towards the enemy,
saying " May their faces be confounded ! " whereupon
they immediately turned their backs and fled.^ The

* Zimmem, liitualtafeln^ 173. Frazcr {Oolden Bought i, 14) quotes
a similar custom among the Hindoos from Hillebrandt, Vedische Opfer
und Zauher^ in which effigies of the soldiers, horses, elephants, and
chariots of a hostile army were modelled in dough, and then pulled
in pieces. For other Semitic customs before going into action Robertson
Smith {Rd. Seni., 1894, 37) quotes 1 Sam. iv, 7, the Carthaginians with
Philip of Macedon, and the Arab tradition " Yaghuth went forth with
us against Morad." Curtiss (Bibl. World j xxiii, 97) describes the
prcjmrations for battle among the Ruala, a subdivision of the Aeneze,
how they sacrifice to Abu'd-Duhiir that he may come and help them
to victory, and sprinkle the blood on the merkab of the camel on which
the sUkh?s sister or daughter rides into little. She ixsrfumes her
hair, puts antimony on her eyelids, exxx>ses her bosom, and makes
herself as handsome as possible, and it is around the merkab that the
battle rages.

' Sale, Koran, Surah iii. For other instances of throwing sand or
stones we may compare a story in Ethiopic (Littmann, Arde'et, J.A.O.S.,
XXV, 30), which relates how the disciples came to a place where
many demons were assembled, but on their taking up sand in their
hands and looking up to heaven, with the prayer " Disperse, O Lord,


WAX FIGURES ATTRACTING THE DISEASE-DEMON. 159

Hebrew charm is as follows : — " For war : Take dust from
under thy left foot and say over it these names and scatter
it against them (the enemy), and they shall no more be
able to make war ; and this is what thou shalt say : ' In
the name of Loki Yoel Antsel. (Another book) Antiel
and Mehothiel Yoy Hia Abniel Ahamnel Yiol Wahi Yokiel
MiSkathiel Yah — ^by your purity that ye may bind all kinds
of fighting for brigandage against N., son of N., henceforth
and for ever until the wrath pass. Amen, so may the
will be. ' " 1

The wax-figure procedure is also used in an inverse way
for a sick man to rid hipa of the devil that possesses him.
This was by fashioning an image of the patient in clay,
wax, or dough,^ and with the proper charms the magician
hoped to induce the demon to leave the human body and
enter its waxen counterpart. For instance, one tablet '
directs that a piece of sea-clay should be taken and
moulded into the likeness of the patient and placed on
his loins at night in order that the Plague-god might be
expelled. Further, at dawn the " atonement for his body "
was to be made, the ^^Incantation of Eridu" performed,
and the man's face turned to the west. A similar text


all demons who beset us ; by the i)ower of these, Thy holy names, close
their mouths and destroy their power," they annihilated the demons by
casting the sand against them. Similarly, the Haj pilgrims throw
pebbles on reaching the Jamratii'l-*Aqaba shortly after sunrise. Seven
successive times each casts a pebble at the pillar in order to confound
the devils who are supi)osed to be there (Klein, Religion of hlaniy 170 ;
cf. Jewish Encj/cL, i, 89). In Sinai, when an Arab passes the mound
of Abu Zenna, he casts a stone against it in opprobrium.

» Folklore of Mossoul, P.S.B.A., 1906, 105, No. 21.

» Dough is also used by the Malays (Skeat, Malay Magic, 452).

3 Devils, Tablet « R.'


160 WAX FIGURES ATTRACTING THE DISEASE-DEMON.

directs the image to be made in dough, and the physician
is to bring water to the man, allowing it to trickle down,
with the following directions: —

'^ Bring forth a censer and a torch.
As the water trickleth away from his body,
So may the pestilence in his body trickle away ;
Return these waters into a cup and
Pour them forth in the market-place."*

The Asakku, probably some kind of fever, was driven
out also in this way. Marduk goes to his father, Ea, for
help (a common device in this class of texts), and is thus
advised : —

" Fashion an image of his form in dough on the ground, and
Set a king over him and
Take his hand before the Sun, and
Repeat the incantation sar-azao-ga, and
[Pour (?) ] water on his head [and] *


{The re^nainder is much mutilated.)

Another late Hebrew charm prescribes the same kind of
thing : " If thou wishest to heal a man from enchantment,
or from an evil spirit, or from folly (' madness '), or from
any of the things mentioned, then draw the picture of
a man on virgin parchment with both hands outstretched ;
under the right hand draw the image of a little man, and
write on his shoulder Ariel ; at his feet draw the image
of another man, but draw it with red ink, for this is an
angel appointed over fire, and write on his shoulder (or,
variant, on his forehead) Lahabiel, and under them the
following conjuration : I conjure thee, Raphael, thou and
thy servants who are called by thy name, and whose name

1 Ibid., Tablet * T.' ^ w.A.L, v, 50, ii, 67.


CHAKM AGAINST THE LABARTU. 161

is included in their names, viz., Rahabiel, Phaniel, Ariel,
Lahabiel, in the name of Azbuga, that thou healest so
and so from all illness and all hurt and all evil spirit.
Amen, Amen, Amen, Sela, Sela, Sela." ^

One of the rituals in the series Labartu directs that
on the first day in the morning the figure of a labartu
or ' hag-demon ' shall be made, '' as one that (is bound)
in prison,'' and twelve cakes of some peculiar meal laid
before her, and a libation of water poured out. A black
dog must then be added to the figure, the heart of a young
pig placed on her mouth, and an offering made of bahru-
fruit, white bread, and a salve-box (P). The incantation
which accompanies this ceremony is to be repeated at dawn,
midday, and evening, and the figure is to be put at the
sick man's head for three days, and on the third day, as
the day draws to its close, it is to be buried in the comer
of the wall.^

In a mutilated tablet a prescription is given for healing
some disease or plague. After the recital of a long chant
the sorcerer makes a small figure of tbe patient in clay (P),
and then binds ^Hhe hair of a white goat and the hair
of a black goat " round his head. The clay figure is

* Gaster, P,S.B.A.y 190(), 339. The picture of a man was reckoned
quite as effective as wax : e.g., a modem MS. from Mosul (Hebrew)
provides that if a figure of an enemy be painted in safiron on parch-
ment with his name, >vith various signs inscribed upon it, and put in
the earth with the left hand imtil he tread on it, and then finally it be
pounded with a hammer, so shall the enemy be smitten and have no
rest, either day or night {The Folklore of Mossoxd^ P,S,B.A,, 1906,
107, No. 32). Or if an image of an angel was drawn (in a love-charm)
with the * Thunderstone* {ebeji barak) and placed on a closed door, that
door would open by itself (Gaster, RS,B.A., 1900, 344).

' W.A.L, iv, 55 ; i, r. 20 ; Myhrman, Die Labartu- Texte^ Z.A.j
xvi, 193.


162 PARALLELS AMONG THE MALAYS.

then laid on his body, the Incantation of Ea is performed,
and the patient's face is then turned to the west, and by
these means the evil influence is removed.^

A curious parallel is to be found among the Malays,
both from its similarity to the preceding and also in its
use of particoloured cords, of which more will be seen
later. The Malay magicians have a practice of making
little images of dough of beasts, birds, etc., which are
placed on a sacrificial tray together with betel-leaves,
cigarettes, and tapers. " One of the tapers is made to
stand upon a silver dollar, with the end of a piece of
particoloured thread inserted between the dollar and the
foot of the taper, and the other end of this thread is
given to the patient to hold while the necessary charm
is being repeated." The devil is supposed to enter the
images, and as soon as this has happened the magician
*' looses three slip-knots and repeats a charm to induce the
evil spirit to go, and throws away the untied knots outside
the house." ^ The use of this particoloured cord occurs
elsewhere in Malay sorcery.' Similar are the methods of
Indian conjurors to remove devils. They take water
from seven or nine different places, put it into a new
earthen pot, together with a few of the leaves of seven or
nine different trees and plants, and read once over it, if
intended for the removal of the devil, enchantment, etc.,
certain chapters; or if to change bad luck, they read a
chapter and, after blowing on the water, set it aside. They


1 Devils, Tablet * S.'

' Skeat, Malay Magic, 432. The charm begins : " I have made
a substitute for you."
• e.g., ibid., 569.


PAKALLEL8 IN INDIA. 163

then place in front of the patient a human figure, or that
of Hunnoman (the monkey-headed god) ; tie to its neck one
end of a cord formed of three kinds of coloured thread, and
the other to the patient's waist or neck, before whom thej
deposit cocoanuts, flowers, a piece of yellow cloth, etc. ; and
taking nine limes, they repeat the aet-ool-koorsee over each,
and divide them into two, placed on the head, shoulders,
loins, back, knees, and feet of the patient respectively;
then bathe him with the above-mentioned pot of water. In
bathing they necessarily dig the place a little, to allow of
the water being absorbed into the earth ; for should any
other person happen to put his pot on the water the same
misfortune would befall him as did the patient.^


^ Jafiiir Shurreef and Herklots, Qanoon-e-hlain, 258. Frazer {Golden
Bought ii, 348 ftl) quotes many instances which throw light on the
Assyrian incantation : — " The Alfoors of Minahassa, in Celebes, will
sometimes transport a sick man to another house, while they leave on
his bed a dummy made up of a pillow and clothes. This dummy the
demon is supposed to mistake for the sick man, who subsequently
recovers" {Graafland). " In certain of the western districts of Borneo,
if a man is taken suddenly and violently sick, the physician, who in
this part of the w^orld is generally an old woman, fashions a wooden
image and brings it seven times into contact with the sufferer's head,
while she says : ' This image serves to take the place of the sick man ;
sickness, pass over into the image.' Then "with some rice, salt, and
tobacco in a little basket, the substitute is carried to the spot where
the evil spirit Ls supposed to have entered into the man. There it is
set upright on the ground, after the physician has invoked the spirit
as follows : * O devil, here is an image which stands instead of the sick
man. Release the soul of the sick man and plague the image, for it is
indeed prettier and better than he ' " {Kiihr^. " Similarly, in the island
of Dama, between New Guinea and Celebes, where sickness is ascribed
to the agency of demons, the doctor makes a doll of palm-leaf and lays
it, together with some betel, rice, and half of an empty egg-shell on the
patient's head. Lured by this bait the demon quits the sufferer's body
and enters the palm-leaf doll, which the wily doctor thereupon promptly
decapitates " {RiedeV).


164 PARTICOLOURED THREADS.

Again, in Indian magic, in order to drive out demons
from women the following is part of the procedure. The
* fairy- women ' (who " are an illiterate class of people ;
many of them do not so much as know the name of God ")
take " three diflPerent coloured silk or cotton thread, either
plain or twisted, and form gunda, that is, they form twenty-
one or twenty-two knots on it. The MooUas or Seeanas, in
making each knot, read some incantation or other over it,
and blow upon it; and when finished it is fastened to the
neck or upper arm of the patient."*

Now this use of particoloured threads in Eastern magic
is a distinct reminiscence of the Mesopotamian wizardry,
of which several instances are to be found in Assyrian
incantations. As an example we find a development of


* Qanoon-e'Islaniy 262. There are curious j)arallels from the more
Western writers. " Petronius, writing of certain incantations performed
for the purjwse of freeing a certain Encolpius from a spell, says : * She
then took from her bosom a web of twisted threads of various colours,
and bound it on my neck ' " {Petr. SaC, 131) ; and Persius speaks of
tying threads of many colours on the necks of infants as a charm
against fascination {Sat.^ ii, 31). Both these instances are quoted by
Elworthy, Evil Eye^ 68, 59. Cf. the use of the blue ribband prescribed
as necessary in the Hebrew fringes in Num. xv, 38, and the badge of
Ethiopian Christianity, worn by all classes, which is a blue neck-thread
{mateh) of silk or wool (A. J. Hayes, The Source of the Blue Nile^ 250).
There are two curious charms from late Jewish sources (Barclay, The
Talmud^ 20) for bleeding at the nose, which include a double thread.
The man must take a root of grass, the cord of an old bed, paper,
saffron, and the red part of the inside of a palm-tree, and bum them
together ; and then take some wool, and twist two threads, dip them
in vinegar, roll them in ashes, and put them into his nose ; or let him
look out for a stream of water which flows from east to west, and let
him go and stand with one leg on each side of it, and take with his
right hand some mud from under his left foot, and with his left hand
from under his right foot, and then he must twist two threads of wool
and dip them into the mud, and put them into his nose.


TYING KNOTS. 165

sympathetic magic in the sixth tablet of the Surpu series,
where directions are given for removing a tabu from a man,
by binding to his limbs a double cord of black and white
threads which has been twisted on a spindle.

" He hath turned his [stei)9 ?] to a Temple-woman (?),
Ishtar hath sent her Temple -woman (?),
Hath seated the wise woman on a couch,
That she may spin white and black wool into a double cord,
A strong cord, a mighty cord, a twi-coloured cord on a spindle,
A cord to overcome the Ban :
Against the evil course of human Ban,
Against a divine curse,
A cord to overcome the Ban.
He hath bomid it on the head,
On the hand and foot of this man.
Marduk,^ the son of Eridu, the Prince,
With his imdefiled hands cutteth it off.
That the Ban — its cord —
May go forth to the desert, to a clean place,
That the evil Ban may stand aside,
And this man may be clean and undefiled,
Into the favouring hands of his god may he be commended."

Here again it is evident that the disease is transferred
by the power of the magician's spell to the twisted thread,
which is tied on the patient's limbs and then cut off and
thrown away. If a man have a headache the procedure is
exactly similar ; the magician is to go out into the desert at
sunset and find a certain wild plant, possibly a kind of
cucumber, ** which springs up by itself," and after covering
his head he must make a meal-circle round it. Then before
the sun rises the plant must be torn up by the roots and


^ On the power of Marduk to release mankind from all tabus see
p. 125.


166 TYING KNOTS.

tied on to the head and neck of the sick man with the hair
from a kid, and the headache will go, never to return,
" like straw which the wind whirleth away." ^ Another
ceremony is prescribed elsewhere for the same complaint ;
the head of the patient must be bound with a bundle of
twigs ^ with magical words, and at eventide this is to be
cut off and thrown into the street '' that the sickness of his
head may be assuaged, and that the headache, which hath
fallen upon the man like the dew, may be removed."'
By tying knots and at the same time chanting some magic
words a wizard or witch could cast a tabu on an enemy,
as is clear from the Maklu tablet, which ends one incan-
tation against such malevolent beings with these words : —

** Her knot is loosed, her sorcery is brought to nought,
And all her charms fill the desert."*

In driving away a headache the following spell was used
by the priest: —

" Take the hair of a virgin kid,
Let a wise woman si)in it on the right side,
And double it on the left ;
Bind twice seven knots
And i^erform the Incantation of Eridu,
Bind (therewith) the head of the sick man,
Bind (therewith) the neck of the sick man,
Bind (therewith) his life,'
Bind up his limbs ;
Go round" his couch,

Cast the water of the Incantation over him,
That the headache may ascend to heaven


* Devils, Tablet IX, 1. 50, of the series " Headache."

' The meaning of the Assyrian words are not quite certain.

' Devih, Tablet * P.' * W.A.I., iv, 49, 34a.

* Or * soul.' • Or * stand roimd.'


I PARALLEL FROM PERSIA. 167

Like the smoke of a peaceful homestead,
And like the lees of water poured out
It may go down into the earth." *

A further use of the cord in headache cures is found in
the same tablet.^ Unfortunately the beginning is lost, but
at the end directions are given for spinning a threefold
cord,* and tying twice seven knots in it, and after per-
forming the Incantation of Eridu this is to be tied on the
head of the sick man. The headache will then go.

Another incantation for the sick runs : —

" Weave thou a two-coloured cord from the hair of a virgin kid

and from the wool of a virgin lamb,
Upon the limbs of the king, son of his god, bind it ;
Then shall the king, the son of his god.
Who holdeth the life of the land like the Crescent of the

Moon-god,
Place it as a glory on his head.
Like the new Crascent of the Moon ..." *

The change from the more usual ** the man, son of his
god " to ** the king, son of his god *' is interesting.

O'Donovan tells the story of a similar method in use among
the modern Persians for removing fever. A woman whose
daughter was sick of a fever came to him with a handful of
camel's hair that he might make it into a charm for her.
He himself, being ignorant of the method by which this
should be done, handed it over to a Khan who was with
him. ''By means of a spindle the camel's hair was spun
to a stout thread, the Khan all the time droning some verses
from the Koran or some necromantic chant. When the
thread was finished it was of considerable length, and


» Devils, ii. Tablet IX, 1. 74. » Ibid., 1. 230.

» Cf. Eccles. iv, 12. * Devils, i. Tablet XVI, L 180.


168 PARALLELS FEOM THE ARABS.

folding it three times upon itself he respun it. Then he
proceeded to tie seven knots upon the string. Before
drawing each knot hard he blew upon it. This, tied in
the form of a bracelet, was to be worn on the wrist of the
patient. Each day one of the knots was to be untied and
blown upon, and when the seventh knot had been undone
the whole of the thread was to be made into a ball and
thrown into the river, carrying, as was supposed, the illness
with it." 1

Among the Semites other than Assyrian the same ideas
hold good. ^'In the Koran there is an allusion to the
mischief of 'those who puff into knots/ and an Arab
commentator on the passage explains that the knots refer
to women who practise magic by tying knots in cords, and
then blowing and spitting upon them. He goes on to relate
how, once upon a time, a wicked Jew bewitched the prophet
Mohammed himself by tying nine knots on a string, which
he then hid in a well. So the prophet fell ill, and nobody
knows what might have happened if the Archangel Gabriel
had not opportunely revealed to the holy man the place
where the knotted cord was concealed. The trusty Ali
soon fetched the baleful thing from the well ; and the
prophet recited over it certain charms, which were specially
revealed to him for the purpose. At every verse of the
charms a knot untied itself, and the prophet experienced
a certain relief." * A charm against fever, given me on
the mound of Eouyunjik (Nineveh) by an Arab boy

^ Merv Oasis, ii, 319.

' Frazer, Golden Botigh, i, 397, quoting Professor A. A Bevan. The
two surdt of the Koran which concern the blowing into knots, etc., Bxe
quoted on a talismanic plaque brought from Egypt (described JReinaud,
Monumeiis Musulmanes du Due de BlacaSy ii, 325).


TYING KNOTS. 169

named Sh^kho, who was by way of having a reputation as
a magician, was one which is strikingly similar to those
quoted above. The physician who is called in to cure
a patient takes a thread of cotton, single and not plaited
threefold, and ties seven knots in it, putting it on the
patient's wrist. After seven or eight days, if the fever still
continue, he must keep it on ; but if it passes he may throw
it away. He must then make bread and throw it to the
dogs, which was explained to me as a kind of thank-
offering, but the root-idea is obviously much deeper down.^
Among certain of the modern Jews, in the case of hard
labour ensuing during confinement, the unmarried girls of
the house should unbraid their hair and let it loose on their
shoulders;^ in South Russia, in making a shroud they
avoid tying knots.* In the Sword of Moses,^ in order to
catch a lion by the ear " say No. 91 and make seven knots
in the fringes of thy girdle and repeat these words into
each knot and you will catch him." According to Hughes,^
the Order of the Bakhtashiyah (founded by a native of
Bukhara) use a mystic girdle as their symbol, which they
put off and on seven times, saying —

" I tie up greediness and unbind generosity,

I tie up anger and unbind meekness,

I tie up avarice and unbind piety,

I tie up ignorance and imbind the fear of God,

I tie up passion and unbind the love of God,

I tie up hunger and unbind (spiritual) contentment,

I tie up Satanism and unbind Divineness."

» Folklore of Mossoul, P.S.B.A., 1906, 80.

* In Kovno, Rumania, quoted Jeto. EncycL, xi, 600.

' Ibid., 601. On the whole subject of knots see Frazer, Golden
Bough, i, 392.

* Ed. Gaster, 41. • Dictionary of hlam^ 118.


170 PARTICOLOURED CORDS.

Among the later Hebrews the following is given as a cure
for night blindness. Take a hair rope, and bind one end to
the patient's leg and the other to a dog's, and then let
children clatter a potsherd after him, calling out : '^ Old
man ! dog ! fool ! cock ! " He must then collect seven
pieces of meat from seven houses, and set them at the
cross-bar of the threshold, and then eat them on the town-
middens ; then he must untie the rope and say : '^ Blindness
of N., son of N., leave N., son of N., and be brushed into the
pupil of the eye of the dog." ^ Abramelin, the sage,^
declares that in Austria he found an infinitude of magicians
who only occupied themselves in killing and maiming men,
in putting discord among married people, in causing
divorces, and in tying witch-knots in osier or willow
branches to stop the flow of milk in nursing women.

In an Assyrian exorcism for ophthalmia black and white
threads (or hairs) are to be woven together, with seven
and seven knots tied therein, and during the knotting an
incantation is to be muttered ; the thread ' of black hair
is then to be fastened to the sick eye, and the white one
to the sound eye.^ The tablet S. 1301 (for some sickness P)
directs that a black ka-stone be tied into a black hair or
thread with seven knots, an incantation repeated during
the process, and the whole bound on the left hand.


^ Hcrshon, Talnuidic Miscellany, quoting " The Fragment " of W. H.
Lowe (Gittin, fol. 69, col. 1).

' The Book of Sacred Magic of Abramelin^ the Sage, a Hebrew MS. of
1458, ed. Mathers, 20. The Talmud (Sabbath, xv) gives regulations for
the tying and untying of knots on the Sabbath. Directions for loosing
knots are given in the Surpu-senes, v-vi, Zimmem, 35.

^ Meaning of the Assjrrian word rather uncertain.

* W.A.r.,iv,29*,4,c, i, 15.


PARTICOLOURED CORDS. 171

Another eye-charm, for amitrrikanu or 'yellowness/ pre-
scribes binding "pure strands of red wool^ which have
been brought by the pure hand of . . . " on the right
hand.2 A ritual against sickness runs thus: —

" Bind white wool doubled in spinning on his bed, front and sides,
Bind black wool doubled in spinning on him, on his left hand,
That there may enter no evil spirit, nor evil demon,
Nor evil ghost, nor evil devil, nor evil god, nor evil fiend,
Nor hag-demon, nor ghoul, nor robber-sprite,
Nor incubus, nor suocuba, nor phantom-maid,
Nor sorcery, nor witchcraft, nor magic, nor calamity.
Nor spells that are not good —
That they may not lay their head to his,
Their hand to his,
Their feet to his.
That they may not draw nigh." ^

Elsewhere the priest is directed to say over a sick man
*' Ea hath sent me " three times, and to untie a knot which
has been tied ; then the sick man is to go home without
looking behind him.^

* Sonny (Arch, /. Rel.^ 1906, 525) in his article Rote Farbe im Toten-
kulte considers the use of red to be in imitation of blood. See also
Von Duhn, Rot wid Tot^ ibid., i.

» Haupt, A.S.K.T., 11, ii, 45.
^ Ibid., 55.

* King, Bahylonian Magic and Sorcery, 58, 99 fF. It is curious to
see how this prohibition against looking backwards recurs in ancient
superstitions (see Frazer, Golden Bough, iii, 104). One of the charms
given to a Mekkan talisman-monger was handed to him with directions
that a bit of paper, inscribed with a few words to the dead, should be
borne to a neighbouring cemetery and buried near the entrance, the
magician having to bring back a handful of the sand. " Be careful,
on returning, not to look behind you, for if you do so you will be torn
in a million pieces that will be distributed among those that lie there.
Look ahead, and your life will be safe." The story goes that he buried
the paper and took up the sand, but immediately he heard thunder and
the voices of the dead crying, "0 Abdullah-ben-Jafar, take not the


172 TYING KNOTS.

The primitive Eastern court of justice is described in the
cuneiform tablets in a way that seems to bear on these
knots — " When a man hath an enemy that bringeth an
accusation against him, twisting his words, or uttering
slanders, or backbiting, without making a true charge,
enmeshing him with the magic of unknown evil sorcery.
If god, king, lord, prince, and officers shall rise up and
in the gate of the palace they are opposed to him and
are angry with him for the accusation (?) ; then shall
he loose the evil knot which he hath knotted," ^ etc.

A parallel to this tying of knots is the binding of evil
spirits, or even the tongue * or other members of human


sand away, else you will be cut in bits. Stop ! Stop ! Stop ! " and he
shuddered and lost consciousness (Hadji Khan, With the PUgrims to
Mecca, 278). A similar idea was ciurent in Mosul, my servant Mejtd
telling me that if a man desired a charm he was to take a dead hoopoe,
with a piece of inscribed paper tied to it, to a cemetery, and lay it near
a grave at night. He must then read some book, while the demons
gather roimd, without turning to look roimd. If he should look round
the demons will have power to attack him (Folklore of Mossotd,
P,S,B.A.y 1906, 79). It is possibly also found in an Assyrian incan-
tation : " The angry, quaking storm [which if one] seeth, he tumeth
not, nor looketh back again " (Devils, ii, 13).

1 W.A.L, iv, 55, 2.

* There is a Coptic charm which shows this clearly — " In the name
of God, etc. The t^dng of the tongue of (?) Gharlb, son of Sitt el-Kull ;
the speaker (?) shall not be able to speak. The tying of his tongue as
against Thijar, daughter of my lady (?) by virtue of these names here.
Amen." ( The following magical signs would stand for the * names.^)
"God, who hath bound the heaven and bound the earth, He shall
(or may He) bind the mouth and the tongue of Gharlb, son of Sitt
el-Kidl, that he be not able to move his lips and speak an evil word
against Thy . . . (?), the (?Thy) daughter, the (?Thy) servant Thfijir
(sic), to her (?) in the presence of Gharlb, son of Sitt el-KulL God,
who hath confined the sun in the place of his setting, and confined
the moon and confined the stars and confined the winds in the midst
of heaven, Lord God, do Thou confine and bind the mouth and the


HOMCEOPATHY. 173

beings. Many instances are quoted by Frazer (Golden
Bough, i, 394), the most useful for our purpose being the
belief in the Middle Ages in Europe that the consummation
of marriage could be prevented by anyone who, while the
wedding ceremony was taking place, either locked a lock
or tied a knot in a cord, and then threw the knot or the
cord away. He says that a net, from its affluence of
knots, has always been considered in Russia very efficacious
against sorcerers, and the connection of the Assyrian
* ban ' with a net or snare is in keeping with this.^
Aniat'ka saparra siru sa ana iami u ir^ltim tarmt (TF.A,!.,
iv, 26, 4, 44), "Thy command is a mighty net spread
over heaven and earth," addressed probably to Marduk,
shows the same idea.

Besides waxen figures and knots, there are endless forms
of sympathetic magic which bear the stamp of homoeopathy.
In the Sinaitic Peninsula an Arab will give his child
burnt scorpion to swallow, in the belief that this form of
sympathetic prophylactic will render him invulnerable to
scorpion poison.^ It is no different from the superstition


tx)ngue of Gh., son of S., that he be not able to have power to speak
an evil word against Thijar, daughter of my lady (?). I adjure thee,
I conjure (you /), by the voice which went up from the cross, until
the seven broken seals, depart from him. I adjure you, I conjure
you, that ye . . . " (Crum, RS.B.A., 1902, 329).

» DeviU, ii, 119.

» W. E. Jennings-Bramley, P,E.F., 1906, 197. Nothing is too
abominable to be dnmk or eaten in magical charms. Burckhardt
(Notes on the Bedouins and WahabiSf i, 262) says that he saw an Arab
immediately on rising in the morning swallow whole draughts of camel's
urine because a physician (i.e. a barber) of Mekka had advised him to
do so as a certain remedy for oppression in the breast. Another, in the
last stages of consumption, was directed to eat nothing but the raw liver
of a male camel for a fortnight.


174 SUMMARY.

in ancient Greece and Rome that fields sown with seed
can be protected from mice by scattering the ashes of cats
upon them,^ or that the head of a dog burnt and reduced
to ashes, and kneaded with Tinegar, should be used by the
Arabs for hydrophobia.' Talmudic medicine recommends
the reticulation between the lobes of the liver of the dog
for such a malady.' It is the old story of the " hair of
the dog that bit one." Two reasons are given in this
tractate for rabies; one is that an evil spirit passes into
the beast, the other is that a neophyte learning to become
a witch first practises her enchantments on dogs.^

We need not, however, go further into the subject here.
Enough has been said to show the principles of transmission
by which the sorcerer expels the demon from his patient
into some body which will give him control over it. For
our purpose, such magic is principally important because of
the bearing it has on one side of the atonement ceremonies.


* Blau, D<xs Al^jUd. Zauberw.^ 35.

* Ibn Zohr, quoted by Camussi, Z.A.^ xi, 1888, 384. Dr. Leclerc
adds that the canine tooth carried on the person is itseful against
hydrophobia.

' Toma^ viii, 5.

* Ibid., 6.


IV.

THE ATONEMENT SACRIFICE.


From the preceding chapters it will have been seen that
tabus which are other than *holy' in their origin
are due to demoniac possession or obsession; that the
operations of spirits and the technical ' uncleanness ' of
the tribesman are all inseparably connected; and that it
is the priest-sorcerer's part to remove these, and render the
tribesman capable of taking his part again in the social
life of his clan. From the illustrations of sympathetic
magic in general, it is clear that the magician reckons
among his most excellent treatments the transference of
devils from such as are obsessed; in point of fact, from
all sick people whose trouble is due to the initiative of
some spirit. The next step is to employ these deductions
in the elucidation of the Biblical system of Atonements
which plays such a part in the Jewish religion.

The word used in Hebrew for performing the Atone-
ment ceremony is *1S3 kipper, the corresponding Syriac
root meaning ' to wash away.* ^ The word in Arabic

1 See Robertson Smith {0. T.J. C, 38 1 ). Cf. Koberle, SUnde utid Oiiade
im rel. leben, 1905, 18, "nach Zimmem . . . soviel wie *wegwischen,*
und ahnliche Aasdnicke mehr." He quotes also SchmoUer, St. Kr., 1891,
2t)5, on this subject. On his views on sin as sickness see ibid., 20 ;
on the * kappara ' (whatever language this may be) see ibid., 317. For
explanations of the rite of * atonement' the following are noteworthy :

"Dieser Siihnritus bedeutet keine VerbUndung zwischen Gott und
Mennschen im naiven Verstande des Alterthums, als Veranstaltung
des gottlichen Willens bedeutet er ein Mysterium. Man empfand den
Schauer des Unverstandlichen, wenn hier im Blute des Siindopfers die
Beziehung zwischen Gott imd Volk neu geknupft wurde. Aber wie
mit dem Sundopfer des Versohnungstages, so steht es mit jedem
Siindopfer imd uberhaupt dem gesammten Opferdienst. Eine pracise


176 KIPPER AND KUPPURU.

for an ' atonement ' of this kind is haffarah^ or more

Antwort auf die Frage, wie denn der Opferdienst auf Gott entwirke,
wusste man schwerlich zu geben. Deutlich ist nur, dass der Gedanke
der Communion mit der Gottheit im alten Sinne fur die Juden immoglich
geworden war." — Smend, Lehrh. d. A lit. Ret., 1893, 323.

"Auch RiEHM (Begriff der Siihne, S. 63 ff.) hat sich gegen die
Satisfactionstheorie erklart, hat aber doch das Siindopferthier als
Gegenstand des austilgenden Gottesfluches ansehen wollen : es werde
durch den austilgenden Eifer Gottes vemichtet, theils durch das Essen,
wozu die Priester verpflichtet sind, theils durch das Verbrennen ausser-
halb des Lagers. Riehm beruft sich namentlich darauf, dass das
Siindopferfleisch etwas Grauenerregendes sei, und nur dann konne
der Siinder sich der Wiederherstellung seines Verhaltnisses zu seinem
Gott in voller Beruhigung freuen, wenn die Gefahr, damit in Beriihrung
zu kommen, beseitigt sei. Aber wenn dem so ware, warum die For-
denmg, dass das Thier an reiner Stelle ausserhalb des Lagers verbrannt
werden solle, wie kbnnte auch die Minha, als Siindopfer der Armen,
dem Priester in derselben Weise zutallen wie jedes audere Speisopfer ?
Vielmehr als Hochheiliges gefalhrdet das Siindopferfleisch die Menschen,
darum muss es fortgeschafft werden, entweder durch das Essen der
Priester oder wenn dieser selbst an der zu erlangenden Suhne betheiligt
ist durch die Verbrennung ausserhalb des Lagers. Ware diese Ver-
brennung noch integrirender Bestandtheil der Opferhandlung, so wiirde
sie gewiss am Heiligthum voUsogen werden." — Nowack, Lehrbttch der
Hehr. Arch., 1894, ii, 233.

Moore, Encycl, Bibl., 4219, says of uucleanness : "Whereas originally it
was a physical thing whose evil was in itself, it becomes in the national
religion a pollution offensive to Yahw6 ; it is incomjmtible with his
holiness and the holiness which he demands of all that approach him ;
its consequences are not only natural but penal ; it requires to be not
merely purged but expiated. Uncleanness is in this light a moral wrong
and involves guilt. On the other hand, a not inconsiderable class of
what we regard as moral offences were included in the category of
taboos requiring puriflcations. We have difficulty in realising that
guilt was believed to have the same physically contagious quaHty as
uncleanness — one man who had touched hirem (mH) ^ovld infect and
bring defeat upon a whole army (Josh. vii). Almost equally strange to
us is the notion that guilt, like uncleanness, can be contracted without
knowledge and intention ; and that the first intimation a man may have
that he has offended God is that he suffers the consequences {aJiam\ with
its converse, that misfortune is the evidence that he has offended without
knowing how." See also Knobel, Leviticus, ed. Dillmaun, 1880, 417.
* This occurs four times in the Koran (Hughes, Diet, of hlam 259).


KIFFER AND KUPFURU. Ill

commonlj fidyah (Jedu), and according to Curtiss,^ who
quotes one Derwish Hatib of Der Atiyeh, in the -Syrian
Deserty a lecturer who leads the mosque- service in that
Tillage, '*Fedou means that it redeems the other, in place
of the other, substitute for the other. Something is going
to happen to a man, and the sacrifice is a substitute for
him. It prevents disease, sufierings, robbery, and enmity
. . . Both repentance and the fedou cover." From a
passage quoted above on p. 84, the use of the word
'atonement' will have suggested that the Assyrians were
in the habit of performing some ceremony akin to that
of the Hebrews. The most striking coincidence is, first,
the parallel use of the word kuppuru in Assyrian with
the Hebrew kipper. In the Old Testament kipper is
undoubtedly an old word, although in the distinctively
priestly phraseology (Ezekiel and 'P') it becomes more
technical than in its other occurrences. Its subject is
then the priest or sometimes the offering.' In the cunei-
form texts the word kuppuru is found in the incantations
against disease, with a noun takpirtu from the same root.
For instance, this latter word occurs in a cuneiform
ceremony, thus:—

" [Cast] his takpirtu to the crossways,
Leave his puhu to the kurpi (ash-heaps ?) of the land." '

* Prim, Sem, ReL, 196.

' Driver, Deuteronomy, 426, and also Robertson Smith, O.T, in Jewish
Churchy 381. G. F. Moore (Encycl BibL, 4220) says that this word
" is not so common in old tdrdth as might be expected. It occurs with
especial frequency in the old laws for trespass offering."

' Devils, ii, 3, Asakku Series, Tablet III, L 5 ff. On takpiraii and
the comparison of *1B3 {kipper) with it, see Martin, Textes Religieux,
1903, xiii. From the parallelism of S. 747, r. 4 (Craig, Religious Texts,
ii, 4), "May Ea jowArfa /a ukinnu . . . my puhu which he hath prepared


178 ASSYRIAN AND ARAB ATONEMENTS.

Now these Assyrian incantations, which may have had
their origin among the Sumerians, are undoubtedly older
than the Priestly Code in its present form, and the actaal
evidence of the tablets themselves from AsSurbanipal's
Library show that such ceremonies existed in Assyria at
least as early as 626 B.C. Hence it is certain that the
Babylonians did not borrow the idea of the 'atonement'
ceremony from the Hebrews during the Captivity. On
the other hand, taking into account that scapegoats and
other forms of 'atonements' are common all over the
world, it is unlikely that the Hebrews borrowed much of
this form of exorcism in Babylon, although perhaps they
may have somewhat modified their views in accordance
with the beliefs of their captors. The most reasonable
explanation, especially when the Arab fedu or kajfdrah
ceremonies are taken into account, is that all the Semites
drew these beliefs from their common ancestry, and
retained the primitive nomenclature {k-p-r) which shows
how extremely ancient the custom must be. To remove
an unclean tabu from a person by means of a substituted
'atonement' animal is obviously a form of sympathetic
magic, and as such the ceremony will easily be recognized
as very primitive.


(accept ?), may Marduk dinanua Sa ibbanH likimgir (?) make acceptable
my dinanu which hath been made." The lines preceding these refer to
the mamit or *ban' which the man has incurred. From Tablet N
{Devils, ii), iii, 45, 46 (urisu dinanu Sa ameluti, " the kid is the dinanu
for mankind") it is evident that dinanu has the significance of
' substitute,' and if so, its parallel puhu will have a similar meaning,
which will fit in with our context. Hence this translation may be
offered provisionally : —

" [Cast] his * atonement ' to the crossways,
Leave his * substitute' to the ash-heaps (?) of the land."


DEMONS ENTICED OUT OF THE SICK MAN. 179

BobertsoQ Smith maintains that in the Hebrew ideas
"all atoning rites are ultimately to be regarded as owing
their efficacy to a communication of divine life to the
worshippers, and to the establishment or confirmation of
a living bond between them and their god/' ^ and that
"the conception of piacular rites as a satisfaction for sin
appears to have arisen after the original sense of the
theanthropic sacrifice for a kindred animal was forgotten,
and mainly in connection with the view that the life of
the victim was the equivalent of the life of a human
member of the religious community."^


* Religion of the SemiteSy 439.

' Ibid., 416. He x>oints out here that "in the older literature, when
exceptional and piacular rites are interpreted an satisfactions for sin,
the offence is always a definite one, and the piacular rite has not a stated
and periodical character, but is directly addressed to the atonement of
a particular sin or course of sinful life," and " in the Levitical ritual
all piacula, both public and private, refer only to sins committed un-
wittingly" (p. 423). For later \4ews on the DB^N see KOberle, op. cit., 81.

The recent views on Babylonian sacrifices given in the JSnct/clopcedia
Biblica (4120) are those of Jeremias, who says : — " Here, of course, we
must divest ourselves of all theological preconceptions, and jiut aside
all such notions as that of an atoning efficacy attaching to the blood
as the seat of life, or of a divine wrath that expends itself upon the
sacrificial animal, or even of a raUio vicaria, when we speak of the idea
of propitiation as underlying Babylonian sacrifices. ... At the same
time it is significant and by no means accidental — it has its roots firmly
planted in the very nature of the religious ideas involved — that every-
thing offered with the object of averting evil of any kind whatsoever
was associated with the notions of a propitiatory, cleansing, purifying
efficacy." Further on (4125) he says, " Singular to say, however, that
(the Babylonian cultus) shows not the faintest trace of eiiam, hattdth ;
we may assume that the sin and the trespass offering of the Hebrew
T6rah, although all that we know of their technique is wholly of
post-exilic date, were entirely of Israelite growth." I do not think,
however, that this second statement can be upheld for a moment ;
and the language of the former is so involved and peculiar that it is
difficult to see how far the author has grasped his subject.


180 DEMONS ENTICED OUT OF THE SICK MAN.

It is with the very greatest diffidence that I think, in
view of the evidence which Assyriology brings forward,
that this explanation cannot altogether be upheld. That
the life of the victim was held to be the equivalent of
a human member of the tribe would certainly appear to
be true; but I cannot believe that there is any idea of
communication of divine life or confirmation of a bond
with the god. The trend of evidence seems to me to
point to a primitive system of providing a substitute-
victim^ for the devil whose connection with the man has
brought down a tabu. In every exorcism of demons, it
is necessary to have some object into which the spirit
may be attracted or driven, in point of fact a Leyden
jar in which the malign influence may be isolated under
control. It is all the same whether it is the devils who
must be sent into the Gadarene swine, or the Jinni
corked up in the brass bottle by Solomon. They are safe
so long as they can be enticed or forced by magic words
into something which the magician can ultimately destroy
or guard religiously. He may then either burn it in
clean places where no spirit comrades can lend their aid,
or cast it into the deep sea so that no meddlers can by
chance free the evil demon. This point is emphasized by
the study of the Assyrian exorcisms; that the disease
demon must be gently or forcibly persuaded to leave the
human body to enter the dead animal or wax figure
which is placed near, and so be brought into subjection.

^ We are not now discussing the primitive redemption of the first- i

bom. This has nothing to do with the trespass oflfering or similar
atonements, and the two owe their origin to two distinct and
separate practices. We shall return to the redemption of the first-
bom later on.


ASSYRIAN AND HEBREW ATONEMENTS. 181

£6berle realizes the idea of the removal of sin by
cleansing- 'atonements' and exorcisms among the Baby-
lonians, but he does not apply it to the Hebrew procedure.
Apparently it is the blood-sprinkling which is his obstacle
to any comparison between the two.^ But it is hardly
likely that the two are of different origin.

1 " Aber mag es sich damit verhalten, wie es will, ohne Zweifel ist
die kultische Slihne in Babjlonien bekannt. Sie hat dort nirgends
den Zweck, den Menschen vor der Gk)ttheit zu schlitzen, vielmehr ist
sie ein Reinigungs — , Heilungs — iind Ezorcismus-Akt. Doch weist
die Eigenart der hebralschen Siihneriten eher auf die primitiven ur-
semitischen Opferformen hin, wonach die SUhne durch Blutbestreichung
(an Stella des Blutgenusses) die gelockerte Gemeinschaft zwischen Gott
und Mensch wiederherstelt " (Siinde und Onade im rel, leben des Volkes
Israel, 1905, 318).

" Die unreinen Zustande gelten nun einmal als Dinge, welche GotteB
Heiligkeit verletzen und ihm missfallig sind. Sie sind im Sinne
des priesterlichen Gesetzgebers nicht Modifikationen menschlicher
Schwache, sondem eher noch Modifikationen menschlicher imd kreatur-
hcher Verderbnis . . . ; wenn auch nicht so deutlich wie sonst diese
Komiption als Folge der Siinde hingestellt wird " (ibid, 319).

"Siindig wird man dmx^h Beriihrung Genuss u. s. w. von Dingen,
die tabu sind ; wir sehen hier hinein in die primitivsten Formen der
religiOsen Beurteilung der Siinde ; daneben finden wir auch den mehr
sittlichen Masstab, wenn die Siinde als £mp5rung wider die Gottheit,
als Abweichmig vom rechten Weg, als Ubertretung gottlicher Gebote
gefasst wird " (ibid, 20). Compare also Dillmann's edition of Knobel's
LeviticiUf 1880, 381, " War n&mlich der Zweck entweder die Siihnung
einer bestimmten Siinde oder die Entsiindigung Uberhaiipt, so hatte
das Siindopfer einzutreten, bestehend in einem mannlichen oder weil>
lichen Vierfussler (verschieden je nach der Personen des Darbringers),
meist aiis dem Ziegenvich, ersatzweise in einer Taube (und nur im
Kothfall in etwas Mehl) ; die Hauptsache dabei war die SUhnung
durch das Blut." Jastrow, in the German edition of his Religion of the
Babylonians, xvi, 325, says : *' Man rechnete mit der Moglichkeit dass
die Angrifie der Damonen eine Strafe fur irgend welche begangenen
Siinden sein konnten. Auch hierfur bietet die Schurpu-Serie eiu
beachtens wertes Beispiel. Die zweite Tafel enthalt namlich eine lange
Liste von Ubeltaten um derentwillen jemand in die Gewalt der
Damonen oder Zauberer geraten konnte.''


\ 182 ATONEMENTS AND SIN-OFFEBINGS.

If, then, we look into the specific cases for which the
atonement, sin, and trespass offerings are prescribed in
the Old Testament, it will be seen that they fall into five
classes : —

(1) The Periodic. The Feasts (Passover, Pentecost, and Taberaacles),

the Day of Atonement, and the scapegoat (Lev. zvi, xxiii ;
Num. xxviii, xxix). Cf. Ezek. xlv, 18 flf.,* and the more vague
Exod. XXX, 10, and the ' atonement * money of 15.

(2) The Individual.

(a) * Leprosy,' and the house in which * leprosy' breaks
out (Lev. xiii-xiv).

(b) Touching anything unclean (Lev. v, 2 ; Num. xix, 17 ff. ),
a Nazarite touching a dead body (Num. vi, 9 ff.), a woman
after childbirth (Lev. xii, 2 ff.), a man or woman with an
abnormal issue (Lev. xv, 2 ff.).

(o) Transgressing against the holy things or command-
ments of Yahweh unwittingly (Lev. v, 15-17 ; xxii, 14),
unwitting sin (Lev. iv, 1 ff., 27 ff. ; v, 17 ; Num. xv, 27).

(d) Oaths (Lev. v, 1, 4).

(e) Lying, deception, robbery, etc., or finding lost things
and lying about them (Lev. vi), or any sin (Num. v, 6).

(/) Having intercourse with bondmaid promised to another
(Lev. xix, 20 ff.).

(3) The Royal: * unwitting' sin of the ruler (Lev. iv, 22 ff.).

(4) The Priestly : initiation to * consecrate ' or * cleanse ' them

(Exod. 2udx, 1 ff. ; Lev. viii, 1 ff. ; xvi, 5, 6 ; Num. viii, 6).
Cf. Lev. iv, 3. As a corollary to these come the ordinances
of Ezek. xliii, 18 ff. Cf. also the Nazarite, Num. vi, 13 ff.

(5) The Tribal: * unwitting' sin (Lev. iv, 13 ff. ; Num. xv, 24).

A plague is removed from the tribe (Num. xvi, 46 ff.).
Cf. Lev. ix.

There are also the vague ' atonements ' of Lev. i, which
have possibly arisen from a confusion with the ordinary
sacrifice.

* On Ezekiel and the * holy ' laws see Klostermann, Der Pentateuch^
1893, 368 ff.


SUGGESTED ORIGIN OF PIACULA. 183

Starting with the hypothesis that piacnlar offerings had
their origin in the custom of providing a substitute to absorb
the evil action of supernatural agency, we shall take each
case separately and see how far it stands the test of com-
parison with similar superstitions among savages.

Take first that case of Periodic Atonement which is the
most prominent instance in Hebrew folklore^ that of the
scapegoat.^ Two goats are to be taken, and one of them


* I have ttiken the liberty of giving the salient instances in risumi
which have been collected by Dr. Frazer in his Golden Bough (iii, 14).
A Malagasy was informed by a diviner that he was doomed. to a bloody
death, but that possibly he might avert his fate by performing a certain
rite. Carrying a small vessel full of blood upon his head, he was to
moimt upon the back of a bullock ; while thus mounted, he was to spill
the blood upon the bullock's head, and then send the animal away
into the wilderness, whence it might never return (Ellis). The Battas
of Sumatra have a ceremony which they call " making the curse to fly
away." When a woman is childless, a sacrifice is offered to the gods
of three grasshoppers, representing a head of cattle, a buffalo, and
a horse. Then a swallow is set free with the prayer that the curse
may fall upon the bird and fly away with it (Kodding). Among the
Majhwar, a Dravidian race of South Mirzapur, if a man has died of
a contagious disease, such as cholera, the village priest walks in front
of the funeral procession with a chicken in his hands, which he lets
loose in the direction of some other village as a scapegoat to carry the
infection away (Crooke). Amongst the Burghers or Badagas of the
Neilgherry Hills in Southern India, when a death has taken place,
the sins of the deceased are laid upon a buffalo calf. A set form of
confession of sins, the same for everyone, is recited aloud, then the calf
is set free, and is never afterwards used for common purposes. " The
idea of this ceremony is that the sins of the deceased enter the calf
or that the task of his absolution is laid on it. They say that the calf
very soon disappears, and that it is never after heard of" (Harkness).

He gives the following examples also. Chickens daubed with
vermilion, goats, or even pigs as a last resource, are driven away
from cholera-swept villages in Central India, in the hope that the
disease may depart (Panjab Notes and Queries^ i, 48, § 418 ; Frazer,
Oolden Bought iii, 101). In 1886, during the smallpox, the people of
Jeypur made puja to a goat, marched it to the Ghats, and let it loose


184 SAVAGE CUSTOMS IN ATONEMENT.

sacrificed as a sin-offering, and the other sent away into
the wilderness for 'Azazel' to bear all the iniquities of
the people into a solitary land.^ Frazer has shown how


on the X)lain8 (Fawcett, J,A,S.y Bombay, i, 213 ; Frazer, Oolden Bought
iii, 102). In the case of the Aymara Indians of Bolivia and Peru,
the scax^^^t was a llama (Forbes, J.E.S., London, ii, 237 ; Frazer,
Oolden Bough, iii, 104).

The i)eriodic expulsion of evils is gone into at great length by Frazer,
iii, 70 ff., who instances — (1) The Esquimaux of Alaska, who choose the
moment of the sim's reappearance to himt the mischievous spirit Tuna
from every house. (2) The Iroquois inaug\irated the new year in
January, February, or March, and on one day the ceremony of driving
away the evil spirits from the village took place. (3) In September the
Incas of Peru celebrated a festival called Situa, the object of which was
to banish from the caj)ital and its vicinity all disease and trouble.
(4) The negroes of Guinea annually banish the devil from all the towns
with much ceremony. (5) Among the Hos of North-Eastem India,
the great festival of the year is held in January. An evil spirit is at
this time supposed to infest the place, and has to be driven out by
processions shouting. (6) In Bali, to the east of Java, the |)eople
have periodic expulsions, generally on the day of the * dark moon ' in
the ninth month. (7) The Shans of Southern China annually expel the
fire-spirit. (8) On the last night of the year there is obsen^ed in most
Japanese houses a ceremony called " the exorcism of the evil spirit."
(9) In Tonquin a general expulsion of malevolent spirits commonly
took place once a year. (10) In Cambodia it takes x>lace in March.
(11) Among the heathen Wotyaks of East Russia on the last day of the
year, or New Year's Day. He quotes many other instances.

He goes on further to discuss scapegoats, and compares— (1) the
embodied devils, i.e. men dressed as devils chased to the mountains,
among the Pomos of California ; and (2) the Mandan Indians who chased
a man painted to represent the devil at their annual festival.

' Lev. xvi. According to the Mishna, the Hebrew scapegoat was not
allowed to go free in the wilderness, but was killed by being pushed
over a precipice (Toma, vi, 6 ; De Dea Syria, Iviii, quoted by Robertson
Smith, Rel. Sent,, 418). The common peox^le in hastening the departure
of the scapegoat used to pull pieces of its hair to accelerate its pace
( Voma, vi, 4). On the Day of Atonement it is forbidden to eat, drink,
wash, perfume, put on shoes, or cohabit with a woman {Beixtkhoth, iii, 4).
Note that pre-exilic worship knows no such day as is d&scribed in
Lev. xvi (Encycl. BibL, 384).


SAVAGE CUSTOMS IN ATONEMENT. 185

this yearly atonement is a regular custom among many
savage tribes, and this is ample proof that it was not
peculiar to the Hebrews through some special revelation.
Hitherto, however, this annual scapegoat has not been
met with in the cuneiform inscriptions, as far as I know,
but such negative evidence is naturally valueless to prove
that the custom did not exist in Assyria.^

The second class contains the remarkable rites in this
Hebrew atonement system for cleansing the Meper' or
the house in which leprosy' has appeared. The origin
of these spells is clearly to be found in the principle of
sympathetic magic. The priest is to take two birds, cedar,
scarlet, and hyssop, and after killing one of the birds in
an earthen vessel over running water, he is to dip the
remainder in the blood of the dead bird and in running
water, and to sprinkle the man or the house seven times;
but he shall let go the living bird out of the city into


^ M. Fossey {La MagleAuyrienne^ 85) satisfactorily refutes Mr. Prince's
theory of the living scapegoat in Assyrian which he put forward in the
J,A,0,S, (1900, xxi, 1-22), basing it on the cuneiform text published by
Haupt {Akkad. u, Sumer. KeiUchrifttexte, 104-5). Since then, however,
Mr. Prince has put forward another article {Journal Aaiatique, July-
August, 1903, 133) maintaining his previous proposition from the same
text, which he translates as follows : — " Prends le bouquetin qui allege
la douleur ; place sa tSte sur la t^te du malade ; du cdt^ du roi, fils de
son dieu (c'est-k-dire le patient), chasse-le ; que sa salive dans sa bouche
coule librement (soit l&ch^) ; que le roi soit pur ; qu'il soit sain."
M. Fossey has answered it in footnotes to the same paper, and, as he
properly points out, ' chasse-le ' is not the right translation for u-me-tb-
QUR-GUR, which should be rendered by the Assyrian equivalent, kuppir,
' make the atonement for.' Consequently there is nothing to show that
the houquetin was alive, and from a comparison of similar texts in
which the animal has obviously been slaughtered (see pp. 203 fif.) it
is plain that M. Fossey is correct when he says that it was killed
{La Magie Assyrienne^ 86).


186 EVIL CARBIED AWAY BY BIRDS.

the open fields.^ One of the so-called Penitential Psalms,
which is, in fact, more probably a ceremony for cleansing
a man from taba when he wishes to see something in a
dream, is very closely connected with this Levitical charm.
The Assyrian suppliant prays to his god and goddess —

" That my iniquity may be loosed (and) my sin be blotted out,
That my trespass be loosed, my bonds be cast off,
That the seven winds cjarry oflf my bane !

Let me cast off my evil that the bird may fly up to heaven with it,
That the fish may carry off" my affliction, that the river may bear

it away.
That the creeping thing of the field may receive my iniquity (and)

the flowing water of the stream wash me clean !
Let me shine forth as a golden . . .

That I may be worthy in thy sight as a circlet (?) of diamonds !
Remove my guilt, keep safe my life, that I may keep holy thy

temeno8(?)» and stand before thee.
Let my sin pass with my evil,' that I be safe with thee !
Vouchsafe to me to see a favourable dream.
Be happy the dream that I see, be true the dream that I see !
Turn to fair omen the dream that I shall see.
May Mahir, the god of dreams, stand at my head.
Let me enter into E-sagila, the palace of the house of life." *

Birds are frequently used this way in Semitic magic*


» The Talmud on Leprosy (xii, i) enlarges on this in the following
way : " All buildings receive uncleanness in leprosy except the buildings
of foreigners. He who buys houses from foreigners must first inspect
them. A roimd house, a three-cornered house, a house built on a ship
or on a mast, or one built on four beams, do not receive uncleanness in
leprosy. But if the house is square, even though it be built on four
pillars, it receives uncleanness in leprosy."

' Lussur kUallaJca,

' Itti lumni futika anni,

« W.A,L, iv, 69,2, rev. 1. 10 ff.

» Birds are used in later Hebrew magic in charms to make an enemy
become a fugitive. A man had only to write certain words in a bird's
blood and bind them on the bird's foot and let it fly in the open


THE HOUSE IN WHICH LEPROSY APPEARS. 187

In Arabia, as has been mentioned elsewhere, a widow lets
a bird fly away with the uncleanness of her widowhood.
But there is a still closer parallel in Assyrian to this
Levitical magic, found in an incantation prescribed for
cleansing a house in which 'sorcery' (upSaiu) has broken
out, which runs as follows: — "As the water of the Sun-
god is borne from the roof (?) ^ when he goeth down, so shall
the sorcery which hath appeared in the man's house,
destroying ^ the house, admit [its] bondage (P).' Pour upon
the plaister-liquid wine, date wine, and beer from corn^
. . . the vessel of the mixture (P) thou shalt overlay with
thy feet and come (awayP)^ ... at sunset shall be cast
into the river; the man that carrieth it^ shall not enter
the house for seven (P) days.''

" On the second day thou shalt cleanse the house with
a vessel of pure water, (^{^(-tamarisk), dilbat-'plajit,
ginger (P), dwarf-palm, skin of a great ox, ' strong copper,'

fields. If it flew away, this was a uign of the flight of the euemy ; if
it returned, he would die {FolJUore of Mossout, P.S.B.A,^ 1906, 106,
No. 23). Or, after drawing certain images and writing the name of the
man and his mother, he might tie his charm to the wings of a dove or
other bird, and say, ^ I conjure thee, Qaphsiel, and thy whole host that
thou drive away So and So, that he be wandering about, to and fro, in
the same manner as the Lord drove Cain away,'' etc., and then let it
fly (Gaster, P.S.B.A., 1900, 346).

* Uru, * beam.' ' SibSurat biti.

* GI-GA-TU QAR-an, i.e. dupHkki Uakanian),

* Cf. Lev. xiv, 42, "and he shall take other mortar, and shall plaister
the house." The words in Assyrian are a-im-par, i.e. me ga^L

' . . . karpati lia Su-luk-ha ta-kat-tam ina Sepd^^-ka-ma titebbi,

* Cf. Lev. xiv, 46, " Moreover, he that goeth into the house all the
while that it is shut up shall be imcleau imtil the even." Num. xix, 10,
** And he that gathereth the a^hes of the heifer shall wash his clothes,
and be unclean until the even."

^ The Assyrian number may be ' seven.' Seven days is the limit in
Lev. xiv, 38, for the priest to shut up the house imtil his return.


188 PARALLEL IN ASSYRIAN.

a torch of ^rti (-tamarisk) , the marrow of the palm, (and)

birbirrida-Gom,^ Thou shalt overlay the floor' of the

whole house with bitumen, plaister, and oil of cedar; at

each door [of god ^] thou shalt set a censer (burning) cypress

and cedar. That man he shall sprinkle with water,^ and

the man who dwelleth . . . ^ nothing approach the man.''

Then follows this spell: —

" Incantation : —

Break the bonds of her who hath bewitched me,

Bring to nought the mutterings of her who hath cast spells on me,

Turn her sorcery to wind.

Her mutterings to air ;

All that she hath done or wrought in magic

May the wind carry away I

May it bring her days to ruin and a broken heart,

May it bring down her years to wretchedness and woe I

May she die, but let me recover;

May her sorcery, her magic, her spells be loosed.

By command of Ea, Samas, Marduk,

And the Princess B61it-ili.

Perform the Incantation.


Prayer when sorcery appeareth in a man's house. Thou shalt
wash in water . . . • (and) ofter ' a black ox. Repeat this incantation
seven times and the sorcery will be loosed." *

> Cf. V. J52, " And he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the
bird, and with the running water, and with the living bird, and with
the cedar wood, and with the hyssop and with the scarlet."

■ Sippu.

^ Why this ilu is in I cannot explain, unless the text should read

l^l^n /a-fln

♦ Or, " That man shall sprinkle water." Cf. v. 61, " and sprinkle the
house seven times."

* I cannot translate BU-UM en-na ud-da al til-la satisfactorily.
It may mean "... imtil the day of his recovery."

• ki-dah'hi tu-sarnah 1

' tu-gar-rih ? or tu-ia-kal ?

• FF.i^./., iv, 59, 1.


V


HOUSES IMMUNE FBOM MAGIC. 189

There is evidently something akin in this Assyrian
upiaiu (sorcery) to the Hebrew WTX ('leprosy').^ In
Leviticus, the house may show a plague in its walls " with
hollow strakes/ greenish or reddish/' which may or may
not increase in seven days. This is clearly some form of
damp or dry-rot. Evidently the early house-builders
associated it with magic, and the Levitical account merely
retains the primitive beliefs. The amplification in the
Talmud (given in note 1, on p. 186) also hints that the
origin is to be sought in hostile magic. The round house
is immune, and this recalls the wizard's circle. The three-
cornered house is the same, doubtless from the magical
number three, and we may also instance the pentacle
in comparison with its angular shape. A ship, according
to the Talmud, is always 'clean' (Sabbathy ix, 2), and
hence cabins and fighting-tops will be also clean; the
immunity of the house built on four beams is not so easy
to explain, when it is particularized that a square house
is not exempt.^

We have seen, then, that the scapegoat atonement
and the purification ceremony for the 'leper' and the
'leprous' house are ordinary savage magic. With this
as an indication we may pursue our investigations into
the other unclean tabus on the individual, taking first
those which cannot be called 'sins' by any extension of


^ There is no evidence that leprosy in the modem sense of the word
existed among the Jews at this period ; the DV^Tt comprised a number
of cutaneous disorders, chief among which are vitiligo and psoriasis
(Schamberg, BibL World, xiii, 1899, 162). This, however, does not
apply to the house.

* If, however, the 'beams' be understood as 'piles,' the house will
come into the same category as the ship, the water being the safeguard.


190 UNCLEAN TABUS.

the word. Touching anything unclean or a dead body,
a woman after childbirth, or abnormal issues, clearly
represent the tabooed condition of one who not only runs
the risk of danger from spirits, but may have given
physical indication of the effects of their hostility. All
these demand piacular offerings; the corpse may so infect
a tribesman that he invites the return of the restless
ghost to plague him with sickness. Similarly, that which
is 'unclean' will have latent potentialities for disease.
The woman in childbed is infectious through the jealousy
of spirits who are hostile because of the successful result
of her marriage with a man, and she herself may even
die from their attack, as in puerperal fever. Abnormal
issues are, by their nature, diseases, and are clearly due
to demons. It is to be noticed that the tabus against
ordinary issues — those wherein the function is perfectly
natural or regular — do not require an 'atonement,' but
merely a purificatory ritual. This coincides entirely with
our knowledge of the ostensible operation of the spirits;
the ba^al k'H and the woman in her courses are not supposed
to be ' possessed ' by the lascivious demon, whose power is
merely transient. There is no question of disease in
these cases; the condition is a peculiarity to which any
member of the tribe may be subject without resultant
hurt, and the succuba or incubus leaves the person. .To
the savage mind this is a certainty, because no man or
woman is permanently sick from such natural functions,
nor do they die. Hence, after the lilu or litith has
departed, purification is the only rite demanded. But,
on the other hand, abnormal issues come under the head
of protracted possession (disease), and demand an elaborate
atonement to drive out the demon, who intends remaining.


UNWITTING SINS. 191

Similarly, eating 'unclean' beasts demands only pari*
fication (Lev. xi, 40), and this can easily be traced to its
primitive source. The 'unclean' beast is the totem-beast
which it is nefas to kill or eat, except on great occasions,
but there is often nothing inherently unclean or dangerous
about its flesh to produce sickness. Hence, accidental
experiment probably showed the savage that the spirit
infection or divine wrath did not follow as a matter of
course if he did eat it occasionally, and nothing more
was necessary to cleanse him from this breach than puri-
fication. Doubtless many things, without fins and scales,
were capable of making him very sick at certain seasons,
but there are obviously many totems which are absolutely
innocuous.

A most important question in these 'atonements' is the
meaning of the ' unwitting sins,' and, as this seems the
best point to discuss them, we must leave the explanation
of the other special tabus until later.

There are surely a hundred sins or breaches of tabu
that a man may commit daily in all innocence without
knowing that he has actually broken any of the tribal
laws, notably in the matter of contagion. If he has
done these 'unwittingly,' how will he know when to
bring his piacular oflering, and even then, what is the
particular reason for the sacrifice?

There must clearly be some physical and apparent result
from his breach of tabu. This is certain, otherwise the
Levitical law would never describe the action prior to the
atonement as an 'unwitting' sin. Hence, by applying
a hypothesis of the connection of demons with tabu and
sickness, the obvious explanation is that the man falls
sick and is at a loss to know what he has done t^at


192 CONNECTION BETWEEN SIN AND SICKNESS.

should have brought down such a supernatural yisitation.
He therefore goes to the priest-physician for relief; he
cannot remember all his previous actions, so that the
priest may exorcise the particular form of demon which
is troubling him, and hence the only diagnosis possible is
that of an ' unwitting ' sin or breach of tabu. This is
clearly indicated in the Assyrian /Su;^t<-series. The man
has fallen sick, and the priest is to heal him with the
treatment prescribed in these tablets. But, although it
is perfectly clear from the internal evidence of the text
that the man is ill, it is to a breach of the mamit or
tabu that such disease is ascribed, and it is the particular
'sin' which the patient has committed which the priest
is trying to cleanse. The possible tabus which the sick
man may have broken are given in a hundred and sixty-
three forms in the third tablet each under the title mamit
The fifth tablet begins with the line '* An evil curse {arrat)
like a galML-demon hath attacked the man," and the aid
of sympathetic magic is called in to drive it away, by
shredding and burning garlic, dates, hair, and wool. The
seventh tablet begins still more explicitly —

** Dimetu hath gone forth from the deep,
Mamit hath come down from the heavens,
An ahhazu-demon hath covered (?) the earth as with grass ;
Unto the four winds, overwhehning with dread, burning like fire,
They smite the folk of all places, torturing their bodies."

It is therefore obvious that demons, tabu, and sickness
were all held to be in close relation to one another, and
that a breach of tabu rendered a man liable to attract
the attention of a spirit, which might affect him with
disease. The very fact that the sorcerer-priest, in treating
hi« patient according to the rules in the ^tii^ti-senesy


UNWITTING 8IN8. 193

repeats a hundred and sixty- three tabus^ shows that he
does not know exactly what ' sin ' the man has committed.
Just as he will run through a long category of spirit
names when he exorcises the demon from the sick man,
so will he gabble off a string of trespasses, in any one of
which the man may have been guilty. It is immaterial
whether he knows which one it is ; provided that hia
diagnosis mentions the name of the demon in the one
case, or the sin in the other, it is enough. We have,
therefore, ample proof that the /Stif^ti-series was written
in order to provide the magicians with the means of
cleansing sick men from the effect of ' unwitting * sins.

From this it is an easy step to imderstand that the
'unwitting' sins of Leviticus were always followed by
some physical manifestation in the unlucky man; or in-
versely, sickness was held to be the result of an ' imwitting '
breach of tabu, which demanded an ' atonement ' to free the
sick man from the demon he had attracted.^

^ Here I should state the views of Koberle {Sunde und Onade, 1906,
24) on the Babylonian ideas : ** Wie Siinde, Krankheit und Verhezung
zusammen gehOren, so Vei^gebung, Heilimg und kraftiger Ezorcismus.
Der Sunder ist Patient, die Heilsverwirklichung eine Eur. Qnade,
Vergebung, Errettung, Befreiung, Ldsung des Bannes ils.w. beziehen
sich durchaus auf das aussere Ergehen des Betenden.'' Cf. Morgenstem's
views in The Doctrine of Sin in the Babylonian Rdigiony 1905, 3 :
'* In the Babylonian religious hterature the expressions, sin, uncleanli-
ness, sickness, possession by evil spirits, are pure synonyms. They
denote an evil state of the body, the result of the divine anger " \ but he
says, '* sin must originally have been purely ritual. Either the man had
neglected to offer his sacrifice, or else had not offered it properly. . . .
Before the layman could bring sacrifice, he had to be ritually clean. . . .
Sin was thus originally merely the transgression of ritual laws, and as
such appears throughout the Babylonian religious literature '' (ibid, 2).
If I understand rightly what is meant by ' ritual,' I cannot agree with
him. Many * sins,' as we have seen, arose from the breach of unclean
tabus ; the original idea was that a demoniac attack followed any


194 THE BURNT-OFFERINa AND THE ATONEMENT.

The next point to discuBS is the distinction which is

made in 'offering' the sacrificial meal and the substitute,

or in other words, the burnt-offering and the 'atonement/

The bumt-offeriDg is the direct descendant of the sacrificial

feast to which the god, in common with all the tribe, was

invited. In later times, however, it was entirely consumed

on the altar. But the sin-offering is treated in several

ways. Sometimes the directions are for the flesh, skin, and

dung to be burnt outside the camp, while the fat, the caul,

and the kidneys, etc., are to be burnt on the altar,^ while

the blood is to be sprinkled round about. Frequently, on

the other hand, nothing is said of the consumption of the

carcase;' sometimes the priests may eat it,' unless some

of tbe blood has been brought into the tabernacle of the

congregation, when the whole must be 'burnt. The best

explanation of tbese apparent contradictions seems to be

that there is a confusion of two systems, one of which is

the more primitive method of cleansing the sick from

their tabu. The uses of the blood and fat in these ' atone- )

ments' demand some research into their origin, and we

must find some hypothesis for the reason why the beast

was slaughtered instead of having its neck broken, and

why the fat was burnt on the altar.

meddling with unclean i)ersons. But, originally at least, such a breach
did not necessarily imply any immediate relations with a god, but were
entirely distinct, and i)rimarily concerned the danger to fellow-
tribesmen. Doubtless an * unclean ' man came to be excluded from
the worship, but 'ritual' has nothing to do with the primitive ideas
here. Again, his hypothesis that sin is due to a man not offering his
sacrifice duly or properly needs little disproof if the Surpu-tahus be
read with intelhgence. At the same time he is quite correct, I believe,
when he says, " the curing of sickness, the expulsion of evil spirits, and
the expiation of sin, are identical " (ibid., 6).

* Exod xxix ; Lev. iv ; Lev. viii (cf. ix).

' Exod. XXX ; Lev. iv, xv, xxiii. ' Lev. vi, xiv.


BLOOD IN THE A.TONEMENT SA.CRIFICE. 195

The ' blood ' question is, I think, to be explained thus :—
If we go back to the most primitive ideas, dissociating
our views from the later (and probably corrupt) customs
of the Old Testament, we find that the magician has
to inveigle the demon out of the sick person into the
substitute. Since he knows that evil spirits are particularly
attracted by blood, he cuts the throat of the beast which
is henceforth to be the receptacle of the demoniac influence.
Throughout the whole conception of the Hebrew idea it is
the shedding of the blood, that is the life, which effects the
atonement. ''For it is the blood which maketh atonement
by reason of the life'' (Lev. xvii, 11), which is amplified
in Heb. ix, 22, ''and according to the law, I may almost
say, all things are cleansed with blood, and apart from
the shedding of blood there is no remission." That to the
Hebrews the blood was the life is shown in Lev. xvii, 14,
and Deut. xii, 23, and it is worthy of remark, in this con-
nection, that in the Assyrian creation-texts the gods arm
their champion Marduk, saying, " Go, and cut off the life
of Tiamat, and let the wind carry her blood into secret
places,"^ and when Marduk creates man he does it with
his blood.* Moreover, the Assyrian exorcisms describe the
devils as " ceaselessly devouring blood." ' There are two
quotations from later writers which are worth considering,
one from Maimonides : ^ " Although blood was very unclean
in the eyes of the Sabians, they nevertheless partook of it,
because they thought it was the food of spirits; by eating
it man has something in common with the spirits, which

1 King, Seven Tablets of Creation, 61 ; Tablet IV, 11. 31, 32. Cf.
IL 131, 132.
» Ibid, 87. » See p. 49.

* Ouide to the Perplexed, iii, xlvi ; Chwolaohn, Die Ssabier, ii, 480.


196 BLOOD IN THE ATONEMENT SACMFICB.

join him and tell him future events^ according to the
notion which people generally have of spirits. There
were^ however, people who objected to eating blood, as a
thing naturally disliked by man; they killed a beast,
received the blood in a vessel or in a pot, and ate of the
flesh of that beast, whilst sitting round the blood. They
imagined that in this manner the spirits would come to
partake of the blood which was their food, whilst the
idolaters ^were eating the flesh ; that love, brotherhood,
and friendship with the spirits was established, because
they dined with the latter at one place and at the same
time; that the spirits would appear to them in dreams,
inform them of coming events, and be favourable to
them.'* The second is from Origen:^ ''The slaughter of
victims is in itself enough to lure the demons to the
heathen temples. But even without that, they can be
attracted to a place and laid therein by use of certain
incantations.*' Are we to consider that these two writers
are merely designating the gods of neighbouring worshippers
as 'devils,* in accordance with local fanaticism, or must
we here see some reminiscence of substitution to demons?
What must be recognized is that this slaughter is by no
means a sacrificial meal; in the Assyrian texts the beast
is shown not to be eaten. Frequently directions are given
for it to be thrown away, as containing the evil influence,
and as such unfit for food.

Pursuing the analogy of the attraction that blood has
for spirits, we should see in the custom of burning the
fat on the altar some similar design. It seems quite
logical to say that, just as the smell of newly-shed blood

^ Conybeare, J,Q.^ ix, 61, quoting (7. CeU,<^ iii, 34.


BURNT FAT PLEASING TO GODS AND DEMONS. 197

invites the presence of devils, so will the sweet odour of
burnt fat act as a bait, just as it is a sweet sayoar unto
Tahweh. "The fat is Tahweh's/'i and this is to be
paralleled from many savage tribes.' Devils can be re-
pelled by an evil stench, as in the case of Asmodeas, and
gods can be attracted by the sweet savour of sacrifice,
as happened after the Flood, both in the Hebrew and
Babylonian accounts. Further, melted fat is the only

4

fluid, other than blood, that can be offered in a libation
from the sacrifice, which should be taken into account in
reckoning its holiness. We shall not be far wrong in
ascribing the possession of a keen sense of smell to all
the Semitic spiritual world, in agreement with their other
rapacious appetites. Armed with the practical knowledge
of the irresistible attraction of blood and pleasant savour,
the sorcerer could wheedle the most recalcitrant devil from
his patient.

This, however, does not explain why, although the * atone-
ment' is so charged with demoniac influence, it occasionally
became the priests', or why the holy altar of Yahweh should
have been the place for the sacrifice. I do not think,
however, that it requires great acumen to see that the
piacular offerings of the Old Testament are in an extremel^
confused state when they are compared with each other J
Ordinances are given for the disposal of the 'atonement'
sacrifices, which seem most arbitrary in their differences.
Nay, in one case (in the first chapter of Leviticus), the
'atonement' idea is obviously confused with a sacrifice of

* Lev. iii, 16.

' Robertson Smith, Rd. Sem,^ 380 ff. On the burning of fat see
ibid, 386. On his views of the viscera, kidneys, and liver being the
seats of emotion, or more broadly, *' the fat of the omentum and the
organs that lie in and near it," see ibid., 379.


198 CONFUSION OF OFFERINGS.

burnt - offering. One has only to compare the modem
Semitic folklore to see how entirely the two rites, sacrificial
feasts and piacular substitutes, have been confused with
one another. The fact must be recognized that analogy,
a process universally admitted by scholars, is responsible
for this confusion, and that the Levitical injunction ^ '' they
shall no more offer their sacrifices to devils" indicates
a natural desire to bring the ' atonement ' sacrifices into
accord with the ideas of dedication.

We may therefore presume that later magicians perhaps
learnt that the substitute, which was supposed to have


> Lev. xvii, 7. Cf. 1 Cor. x, 20. On the contradictions in the
different atonement ceremonies compare Wellhausen, Die Comp, dei
ffexat ufui Histor. BUcher des Alien Testaments^ 18.99, 136 : '*Ich will
nur auf einen Punkt aufmerksam machen, namlich auf die Dififerenz
in dem Sundopferritus, von der schon der Nachtrag Lev. 10, 16-20, Akt
genommen hat. In Lev. 4 wird das Blut beim gew5hnlichen Sundopfer
an die HOmer des Brandopferaltars gestrichen, dagegen beim Siindopfer
des Hohenpriesters und des Volkes in das Innere der Hiitte gebracht,
an den Vorhang gesprengt und an die Horner des Raucheraltars
gestrichen. Dieser Unterschied wird Exod. 29 und Lev. 9 nicht
gemacht, vielmehr wird 29, 12. 9, 9. 15 auch beim Sundopfer des
Hohenpriesters und des Volkes das Blut nur an den Opferaltar
gestrichen. Ss ist dies aber hier offenbar der solenne Ritus, denn
es hat keinen Sinn anzunehmen, bei der Einweihung der Hiitte sei
ausnahmsweise drei Male eine weniger feierliche Form beliebt worden,
und ausserdem wird 29, 14. 9, 11. 16 das Fleisch grade so draussen
vor dem Lager verbrannt, wie es uach Lev. 4 nur bei den heiligsten
SUndopfem geschieht, deren Blut in das Innere der HUtte gekommen
ist. Also eine unleugbare und unauflosbare Differenz. Lev. 4 geht
einen Schritt Uber Exod. 29. Lev. 9 hinaus, die Steigerung
erscheint auch darin, dass hier als Sundopfer des Volkes eine Farre
gefordert wird, wahrend Lev. 9 (vgl. Kap. 16) nur ein Ziegenbock.
Schliesslich scheint es nach der Unterschrift 7, 38, als ob die Uber-
schrift 1, 1 erst spater zugesetzt worden sei, um Lev. 1-7 in die
Stiftshtittengesetzgebung einzufiigen ; jedoch wird die letztere sachlich
vorausgesetzt." Of course, a god aided in the * atonement ' ; cf. p. 210,
where a pig is killed " before Samas."


THE CLEAN PLACE. 199

absorbed the demoniac influence, was not always so deadly
as their ancestors had accounted it. An Oriental wizard,
not too well blessed with this world's goods, is not unlikely
to haye been loth to let a good lamb be thrown away, and
his surreptitious feast may perhaps have given rise to this
alternative method of the disposal of the carcase. ' Heathen '
priests were always under suspicion of battening on the
deity's food unknown to the worshippers, as we learn from
the apocryphal story of Bel and the Dragon, and there
was probably not much to choose in the matter of accep-
tance of perquisites between the priests of one nation or
another ; out of this, as a corollary, a second explanation
arises, which will also include the use of the holy altar, and
that is, that these piacular offerings as we now have them
had begun to be so confounded with the sacrifices of burnt-
offerings, and the real significance of their origin so lost,
that much of the atonement ritual had been brought into
similitude with the traditions of the tribal sacrificial feast,
although several of the salient features remained.

We have next to settle what is meant by the ordinance
which directs that the ashes of the piacular offering are
to be taken to a " clean place where the ashes are poured
out." The Levitical phrase is exactly paralleled in the
Assyrian jSwiT^ti-series, "let the tabu, its bond go forth to
the desert, the clean place." ^ There is, however, no reason
to suppose with Haupt (and, following him, Meissner ^) that
this is a euphemism for an unclean place. ' Unclean


» Ed. Meissner, 33, Tablet V, 1. 165. Cf. Knobel, ed. Dillmann,
LeviticitSf 1880, 383 : " jenes hatte man an reinen Orten (den Zehnten
an jeglichen Ort) und im Zustand der Reinheit, dieses am heiligen Ort
und natiirlich auch im Zustand der Reinheit zu geniessen."

' J.B.L., xiz, 65.


200 THE BARREN VALLEY.

places' are cemeteries, ruins, latrines, and the like, such
as are inhabited by demons who would resent the approach
of any mortal thus ill-treating one of their number, and
would doubtless help the devil imprisoned in the 'atone-
ment.' The Rabbis considered that it was proper for a
man, on going into an unclean place, to beg the two angels
which accompanied him to wait until he should return.^
Obviously the reason is that these angels were not strong
enough to cope with the local devils, if they trespassed
on their domain. This maintains in the spirit world
the Semitic principle which compels a traveller to obtain
a foreign sMkh's permission previous to crossing his
territory.

In the rite of Deut. xxi, 1, the reason for the '' barren
valley" being chosen is, according to Dillmann, Ewald,
and Keil, in order that the purifying blood may not be
uncovered and lose its virtue; according to Robertson
Smith, that it may avoid all risk of contact with sacrosanct
flesh.* But it may be only in accord with the idea of the
scapegoat which is sent into the desert. Jeremias ' quotes
Josephus as saying that the second scapegoat, before the
burning, had to be brought to a very clean place (et9
KaOapmrarov ^^oi/oiW, Ant,^ iii, 10, 3). Again, are we to
see in this deposition of tabooed articles outside the camp
an explanation why, at the capture of Jericho (Josh, vi, 23),
they put Rahab and her family 'outside the camp,' the
remainder of the inhabitants being 'devoted'?^

1 Berakkoth^ 606, quoted Jewish EncycL sub voce Angelology.

» Encycl BibL, 846. » Ibid., 4123.

* In an Assyrian text (see p. 177) we find hirpi indicated as the
locality for disposing of the * substitute' after the ceremony. Stik
irhittiy * cross-roads/ is apparently the place where the * atonement ' is


THE ATONEMENT EXORCISM. 201

Alter this rather lengthy digression on the 'unwitting'
sins we may return to the other special cases of 'atone-
ments.' For the moment we shall omit the 'atonements'
for oaths and ordinary ' sin ' (cases d^ e) ; the ' unwitting '
sin of the ruler (case 3) comes under two heads, that of


to be put, but the text is mutilated. With regard to kurpi = ' ash-
heaps,' it is so purely conjectural that it afifords no room for discussion.
The word occurs elsewhere in Macmillan's article in Beitr. fiir Assyr.^
V, 534, ana mu-tu . . . kurpi kurpi uSabri, The * cross-roads,' on the
other hand, are difficult of explanation, for they are the resort of
spirits ; Hecate is often to be found there, and in the Testament of
Solomon (Conybeare, J.Q., xi, 26) the demon Envy says, " In the cross-
ways also I have many services to render " (see Frazer, Golden Bough,
iii, 80 ; Maury, La Magie, 176). In Talmudic medicine, to heal an
issue of blood, the patient was to sit at a parting of the ways with a cup
of wine in her hand, and some one coming up behind her was to cry out
suddenly, "Be healed of thine issue of blood " (Creighton, Eiwycl. Bibl.,
3006). Maimonides {Guide to the Perplexed, iii, xxxvii) quotes the
Talmud (Chullin, 11 a) as saying that the uterus of animals which have
been selected for the sanctuary must be buried and not suspended
from a tree or buried at the cross-roads, because " this is one of the
ways of the Amorite." The suspension of placenta on trees occurs in
savage anthropology. **In the Babar Archipelago, between New
Guinea and Celebes, the placenta are mixed with ashes and put in
a small basket, which seven women, each of them armed with a sword,
hang up on a tree of a particular kind {Citrus hystrix). The women
carry swords for the purpose of frightening the evil spirits ; otherwise
these mischievous beings might get hold of the placenta, and thereby
make the child sick '' (Riedel, Die sluik en kroeeharige rassen tusschen
Selebee en Paptm, quoted Frazer, Golden Bough, i, 54). The Talmudic
charm for the issue of blood is merely an instance of sympathetic
magic ; the cup of wine represents the blood, and the sudden start
caused by the unexpected cry will cause the person to spill it. This is,
of course, typical of what will happen to the issue. Presumably the
cross-roads have some particular influence on this * atonement' (the
wine is little more) in the same way as in the Assyrian text. The
Phoenician inscriptions do not throw any light, as far as I know, on
the 'atonement' system ; in the text C.LS., i, 237, 252, the parts of
the sacrifice to be taken by the offerer are mentioned, but the meanings
of the words for sacrifices are not entirely determined.


202 THE ATONEMENT EXORCISM.

the Royal Tabu,^ explained on p. 138, and the ' unwitting '
sin of the individuali which has already been discussed.
The Tribal 'Atonement' (case 5) for * unwitting' sin is
of a similar nature. The Priestly * Atonement ' (case 4) is
clearly to be accounted as a method of cleansing the
priest-elect from any unknown breach of tabu which must
be removed before he can be consecrated, and this must
be the explanation of Num. xxix, 1 ff. Our next step is
to substantiate our theory from the Assyrian incantations.
We have seen that the * atonement ' of the Hebrews in
which the bird flies away with uncleanness is ordinary
magic, and the transference of ills to waxen figures or
animals is as common among the Semites as with other
savages. In Assyrian folklore this was one of the
commonest ways of exorcising a demon to go forth from
the sick man, and, what is more, as we have already
mentioned, the word in frequent use is kuppiiru, radically
the same as the word for ' atone ' in Hebrew. The process
is simple : the priest slaughters an animal, pig or kid,
as a substitute for the sick man, so that he may thus, as
Tylor says, coax the demon, threaten it, make offerings to

1 One of the Assyrian * atonements ' published by Zimmeni {Ritual-
tafdn, 137) gives the ceremony for purifying the king —

" Thou shalt make pure ' atonements ' for the king,
Bringing a censer (and) a torch to him,
Washing him in a water bowl ;

Fill [two] tttr^i^a^ar-vessels with water from the bowl,
Putting cedar (and) cypress in the water,
Put two * atonement '-vessels there ;

The king shall hold one ' atonement '-vessel on his right and his
left hand,"

The rest is mutilated. Unfortunately the preceding part of the
tablet is lost, and we cannot tell why a purification is needed. But it
certainly points to the principle of Royal Tabu.


* atonement' for the evil eye. 203

it| entice or drive it out of his patient's body, to induce
it to take up its abode in some other. The connection
between the Hebrew and Assyrian ceremonies will be
obvious to anyone who reads the following quotations
from the cuneiform tablets, l^hey are all exorcisms for
persons suffering from some sickness. For instance, in the
case of the asakku-diBease, Marduk is given the following
advice by his father Ea, and the priest follows it in healing
the sick man : — ^

**Take a white kid of Tammuz,'
Lay it down facing the sick man,
Take out its heart and
Place it in the hand of that man ;
Perform the Incantation of Eridu ;
The kid whose heart thou hast taken out
Is unclean 3 food with which thou makest atonement for
the man ;

» Devils, ii, Tablet XI, 1. 73 ff.

' Comparable with this is Xenocrates' dictum that the blood of
the kid was useful against epilepsy (Ibn el-Belthar, Notices de* MSS.,
XXV, 93).

5 Lu'u or W, for which see my article, P.S.B,A.j Feb. 1908. As the
word is important, the reasons for adopting the meaning * unclean'
or * filthy' are repeated here. It may also have the meaning of

'excrement,' which is paralleled by the Syriac Mr^ sterciu, •J^'i^s


i


' dross of iron.' Lu^u has the particular meaning of ' filthy ' in
regard to streets : ullila sullUunu lu'uti, ' I cleansed their filthy streets'
{B,A,f i, 10, quoted Muss-Amolt, 464), and there is also a group har-
TV'VA^lU'-i gi-ri'ti (Briinnow, No. 8596). A classical text (Sennacherib,
vi, 16) gives * the deluge of my fighting kiina li-e zumurSun ishup swept
away their bodies like dung ' (Delitzsch, H. W.B,, 374, refers, possibly,
to another lii). It has to be some plastic material, for little magical
figures are made from it : e.g., MaMu ii, 113, inim-inim-ma, mussaprata
nadi (?) salam It kak, ' Prayer of uttering a chant (?) over a figure of
It (Le. dung),' parallel hymns to this being recited over figures of
bitumen, bronze, etc., in the same tablet. Compare also iv, 41
(ialmdni) lu ia iddH [lu] ia titu Iti ia It, " (figures) either of bitumen.


204 * atonement' for the evil eye.

Bring forth a censer (and) a torch

Scatter it in the street ;

Surround that man with meal,

Perform the Incantation of Eridu,

Invoke the great gods

That the evil Spirit, the evil Demon, the evil Ghost,

The Hag-demon, the Ghoul, the fever or heavy sickness,

Which is in the body of the man,

May be removed and go forth from the house ! "

or clay, or It (dung)." Tallqvist translates *honig,* but this cannot
be correct In the grammatical text, K. 246 (i, 65, W,J,I., ii, 17),
two ' unclean ' substances are mentioned : It Sa tna zumri kuppuru,
paralleled by akalu ia zumur ameli muShtdu, The latter must be
'food which a man's body has expressed' (less probably 'rejected,*
i.e. vomited), and hence the former must have a meaning, at least, in
connection. Kuppuru is, as is now unnecessary to explain, ' to make
atonement,' and the U is constantly used in connection with it, and
hence we may try a tentative translation : ' refuse which has made
atonement for the body of a man.' The sense of this last passage
becomes clear from the present text : ' The kid, whereof thou hast
taken out the heart, (becomes) IVi-tooA (unclean), with which thou shalt
make atonement for the man ; bring a censer (and) a torch, scatter
it (the unclean food) in the street' Another such is Tablet ' T,'
line 38 (ibid.), Akala It tna kakkadi-Su iukun-ma^ ' set refuse-food at
his head.'

An additional argument for the meaning ' excrement ' is found in
Maklu viii, 87, 88 ; // kurummati Jfa-^-^^ salam «»»*'« kaSktpi u •«'
kaUapti akal U epni-ma libbi kurummati turuh-ma. ' Make two meals
of dung, one each for the figures of sorcerer and sorceress, and make
invocation over the food.' Tallqvist translates 'mache von leckerhafber
Nahrung,' but this seems less probable. Hostile magicians in eifigy
are not treated well, and the most abominable food is set before them
to drive them away. Delicacies are more likely to attract them than
to attain the desiied object. The directions finish with an injunction
to place these ' meals ' right and left of them, repeat an incantation,
and then give them to *dog and bitch.' Cf. pp. 169, 207. In an
incantation against rheumatism {P,8.B.A.y Feb. 1908), the priest must
put one ka of leaven on the ^ur-reed, and put the sick foot thereon,
and ' make the atonement ' for the foot with the li (refuse) of the leaven.
Again the use appears to be pregnant ; it will become ' refuse ' when it
has done its work. Kuchler, in treating of this word, shortly (in his
Afift. Bab,, Medizin) translates it by * dough,' which seems less probable.


PARALLEL FROM MALAY MAGIC. 205

The Evil Eye, which has smitten the patient, is thus

exorcised : —

"The roving Evil Eye
Hath looked on the neighbourhood and hath vanished far away,
Hath looked on the vicinity and hath vanished far away,
Hath looked on the chamber of the land and hath vanished far away,.
It hath looked on the wanderer,

And like wood cut ofif for kindling (?) it hath bent his neck.
Ea hath seen this man and
Hath placed food at his head,
Hath brought food nigh to his body,
Hath shown favour for his life ;
Thou man, son of his god.

May the food which I have brought to thy head —
May the food with which I have made an 'atonement' for thy

body,
Assuage thy sickness (?), and thou be restored,
That thy foot may stand in the land of life ; ^
Thou man, son of his god,
The Eye which hath looked on thee for harm,
The Eye which hath looked on thee for evil.


May Ba'u smite [it] with flax(?).

May Qunura [smite it] with a great oar (?),

Like rain which is let fall from heaven directed unto earth,

So may Ea, King of the Deep, remove it from thy body.'' *

A ceremony so similar as to be worthy of careful com-
parison occurs among the Malays. Whenever a person
is suffering from the influence of a waxen image^ the
Malay magician rubs him all over with limes in order
to cast out the mischief. These limes must be of seven
different kinds^ and three of each kind are necessary.
When they have been obtained he must fumigate them
with incense, and repeat a charm overnight. Early next
morning three thicknesses of itraA-leaves must be laid.

» Cf. Jer. xi, 19. • Devils, ii, 113.


y


206 CEREMONY FROM THE *S C^iJP Cr-8ERIES.

down for the patient to stand on duriDg the lustration,
and the limes are to be squeezed into a bowl and used
partly for washing and partly medicinally. ''The 'trash'
of the limes (after squeezing) is wrapped up in a birah-
leaf at evening, and either carried out to the sea (into
which it is dropped) or deposited ashore at a safe distance
from the house/' ^ This 'trash' must be the lu^u or akal
li'i, 'unclean food/ of the Assyrian incantations.

In the case of headache, sympathetic magic forms the
treatment ; a hat (?) of reeds is to be put on the man, and
the pain-demon will be absorbed in it. It is then broken
and the baneful obsession is dissipated —

"Take a clean reed and
Measure that man, and
Make a reed-hat (?), and
Perform the Incantation of Eridu ; and
Make the atonement for the man, the son of his god,
And break it upon him,
That it be his substitute ; '

That the e\il Spirit, the evil Demon may stand aside
And a kindly Spirit, a kindly Guardian be present/''

In another Assyrian text, which is the part of the
Seventh Tablet of the /Stirj^u-series hitherto wanting and
unknown, seven loaves of pure dough form the medicine
to remove the tabu. After various ceremonies with these
the magician makes an ' atonement ' for the man who has
fallen sick, and puts his spittle on the ' atonement.' The
' atonement * (i e. the loaves) is then to be carried into the
desert to a 'clean place,' and there, under one of the low
thorn shrubs which are scattered over such places, it is to


1 Skeat, Malay Magic^ 431. ' Dinanu.

' Devas, ii. Tablet VIII, col. i, L 20 ff.


^atonement' with the body op a pig. 207

be left. The ' clean place ' has already been recognized in
the Hebrew ceremonies, but there is a still more curious
survival of the Assyrian charm in the Hejaz at the present
day. Zwemer tells of a tradition there, that if a child is
very ill the mother will take seven flat loaves of bread and
put them under its pillow. The next morning these are
given to the dogs.^

1 Arabia, 283. Other instances of casting bread to the dogs after
a spell in Mesopotamia are given on pp. 169, 204. A parallel occurs in
Ezod. zzii, 31, " And ye shall be holy men to me : therefore ye shall
not eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field : ye shall cast it to
the dogs." There is a theory that the "flesh that is torn" is the flesh
mangled by wild beasts which were supposed to be forms of Jinn (see
Robertson Smith, Rel, Sem., 126). Hence the motive in both instances
is practically the same ; the bread has absorbed the tabu of the
sickness-devil, and the torn flesh has become contaminated (tabu) by
the afrit of the jungle or desert.

With regard to the use of bread, there is a curious story told by
Raldensperger (P.E. F., 1893, 209) about the stones called the Farde,
north of Beit Nuba, which are traditionally a petrified procession.
A woman was just putting her dough into the oven when a procession
went by. She took up her child, and finding it dirty wiped it with
a loaf of bread and threw the bread away. The sacredness of the bread
turned the whole procession, man and beast, to stone. In Sale's Koran
{Prelim, Disc., sect, i, Al Mostatraf) it is related that a lump of dough
w.as worshipped by the tribe of Hantfa, " who used it with more respect
than the Papists do theirs," presuming not to eat it till they were
compelled to it by famine. Again (ibid., sect, ii), the sect of Colly ridians
in Arabia introduced the Virgin Mary for God, or worshipped her as
such, ofiering her a sort of twisted cake called collyris ; compare the
making of cakes to the queen of heaven in Jer. vii, 18. On the sanctity
of bread cf. also C. T. Wilson, Peasant Life tVi the Holy Land, 54. Its
use, 'especially in the form of paste or liquid, is frequent in the Assyrian
inscriptions, particularly to make the circle which is tabu to evil spirits.

It is almost unnecessary to quote the leavened and shewbread of
the Old Testament : the influence of this is shown in the Talmud, in
the directions for searching the house on the eve of Nisan 14 to see
that no place contains any leavened bread {Pesachim, i, 1, ed. Schwab,
V, 1). On the sanctity of bread in Macedonia see Abbott, Macedonian
Folklore, 103.


208 'atonement' with the body op a pig.

The next cuneiform ' atonement ' is one of great interest,
as it goes into details much more fully —

"Marduk [hath seen; * What I'; *Qo, my son/ (Marduk)].*
[Take] a sucking-pig [and] . . .
[At] the head of the sick man [put it (?) and]
Take out its heart and
Above the heart of the sick man [put it],
[Sprinkle] its blood on the sides of the bed [and]
Divide the pig over his limbs and
Spread it on the sick man ; then
Cleanse thou that man with pure water from the Deep
And wash him clean and
Bring near him a censer (and) a torch ;
Twice seven loaves cooked in the ashes against the shut door

place, and
Give the pig in his stead and
Let the flesh be as his flesh,
And the blood as his blood,
And let him hold it ;
Let the heart be as his heart
(Which thou hast placed upon his heart)
And let him hold it ;

[That the] . . . may be in his stead . . .
That the pig may be a substitute for him . . .
That the evil Spirit, the evil Demon may stand aside,
That a kindly Spirit, a kindly Guardian be present."'

The most remarkable parallel to this spell is contained
in the New Testament story of the Gadarene swine.*
The devils which possess the two men beseech Jesus Christ,
if He cast them out, to send them into the herd of swine
which is feeding close at hand. When the devils leave


I On these abbreviations see Introduction.
« Devils, ii, Tablet « N,' col. ii, 1. 41 ff.

8 Wellhausen points out {Reste, 1*8) that the word N1HB^> *herd,*
is used both of swine and demons.


PARALLEL TO THE GADARENE SWINE. 209

the men and take up their abode in the herd, the swine,
according to the story, go mad and rush down the hill
into the water, where they are drowned. The idea is quite
in accord with savage beliefs; the disease-devil leaves the
man at the command of a higher power, and is transferred
to some beast which, either dead or alive, acts as a substitute.^
From the Assyrian incantation it is easy to infer that
the pig was not ' unclean * in the way that it is now held
to be by Jews or Mohammedans. The latter believe that
in extremities the flesh can be used as a medicine, and
Zwemer relates that Arab patients would come to him for
a small piece to cure one in desperate straits.' Swine fat
appears to have been also used in Assyrian medicine,^ and
it is recorded in an astrological report that a sow farrowed
with one of the piglets double, with eight legs and two
tails. The monster was promptly conserved in salt.^ In
one of the hemerology texts ^ it is laid down that if a man
eats flesh of swine on the 30th of Ab (i.e. when the
moon is invisible) boils will break out upon him, or if he


^ Psellus' monk Marcus of Mesopotamia explains that the devils
entered the swine, not from hostile intention, but ** from a vehement
desire for animal heat" {Dialogue on the Operation of DcemonSy
ed. Collisson, 1843, 35).

* Arabia, 281. On the sucking-pig sacrificed among the Qreeks,
see Am. Joum, of Phil,, 1900, 256 ; for other instances of pigs in
magic, see Elworthj, EvU Eye, 333 ff. ; on their unclean or sacred
character, see Fra2ser, Oolden Bough, ii, 304 ; in atonement, see Frazer,
Adonis, Attis, Osiris, 193, note 2.

3 KUchler, Assyr.-Bab. Medizin, 86.

^ Reports of the Magicians and Astrologers, ii, xci. Manetho makes
mention of marvels such as this, ie. the birth of an eight-legged lamb
(Wiedemann, Religion, 265).

* W,AJ., V, 48-9. Compare the views held about the pig in the
Egyptian Book of the Dead, chapter 112.


210 ^atonement' with the body of a kid.

eats flesh of swine or oxen ^ on the 27th of Tisri various
things will happen to him.

The very fact that certain days are prohibited admits of
the presumption that pork was lawful as food on other
occasions.' There is yet another religious text prescribing
a pig in the ritual : " Sacrifice a pig before Sama§, (and)
thou shalt imprison their sorceries in the body of the pig." '
Gould anything be clearer P

In this next case, although the word kuppuru is not
usedy the ceremony is similar, and approaches closely to some
of the Arab ritual quoted further on —

" Incantation : —

An evil Fever rests upon the body of the man,

It hath covered the wanderer as with a garment,
! It holdeth his hands and feet,
' It racketh his limbs.

The great Prince Ea, lord of magic,

Of Ea (?)...

Laid a kid at his head in front of him.

Unto the Chieftain he spake (saying) :


1 It is interesting to see the ox also regarded as tabu as much as the
pig. It is well known that among certain of the Semites the ox was
one of the tabu-animals, as also was the camel (Robertson Smith,
Rd. Sem,), and both these latter are still so in Mesopotamia. It is
a great insult in Mosul to say that a man eats of their flesh. An
Assyrian incantation shows some tendency towards the idea of paying
respect to oxen, perhaps a reminiscence of an older totem-worship :
" the great ox, mighty ox, that treadeth pure fodder, hath come to the
meadow, raising up plenty, sowing com, making bright the field ; my
pure hands pour libation before thee " {W.A,L, iv, 23, 1, col. i).

' Inanimate things, according to the Moslems, are all clean and do
not defile, except wine and intoxicating drinks. Animals are all clean,
except the dog and the pig. When dead, however, all animals are
unclean, except man, fish, locusts, worms in apples, and insects like
the fiy and the beetle (Klein, Religion of Islam, 122).

* K. 6172, Craig, ii, v ; Fossey, La Magie, 459.


PARALLELS FROM THE ARABS. 211

'The kid is the substitute for mankind,

The kid for his life he giveth,

The head of the kid for the head of the man he giveth,

The neck of the kid for the neck of the man he giveth,

The breast of the kid for the breast of the man he giveth,

The ... [of the kid for the ... of the man] he giveth,* ^

By the magic of the Word of Ea [ . . . the son of Eridu (?)],

[Let the Incantation of the Deep of Eridu never] be unloosed.'''

Among the Moslems of the present day this form of
substitution still holds good. At the shrine of Abdu
Khadir, the largest mosque in Baghdad, the Indian Moslems
who come thither on a pilgrimage offer sacrifices there;
" they vow that if a man who is ill begins to recover he
shall go to the shrine. He is stripped to the waist. Then
two men lift a lamb or a kid above his head, and bathe his
face, shoulders, and the upper part of his body with the blood.
While the butcher kills the animal the sheik repeats the
first sura of the Koran. They also wrap him in the skin
of the animal.^'' Among the Algerian Jews there is a custom
somewhat similar. To cure sickness, they go with an Arab
sorceress to a spring, kill a black cock, -and smear with
blood the chest, forehead, etc., of the patient. Then they
light a fire and sprinkle fire and patient with blood.^ In
Palestine it is the same. ''The very morning we visited
the shrine of Nebi YehAdah a goat was killed for a woman
of the Fudl Arabs who was suffering from fever. They
put some of the blood on her forehead, and some on the


^ It is uncertain how many more of the lines ending " he giveth ''
were originally in the text.

• DeviU, ii, Tablet 'N,' col. iii, L 29 ff.

> Curtiss, Prim. Sem, Rel, (quoting Surur, a native of Baghdad), 205.

^ Benjamin II, Eight Tears in Asia and Africa^ quoted Jew. EncyeL^
xi, 600.


212 EXORCISM AGAINST HEADACHE.

wall of the makslm. The form of vow used for the
restoration of a child who is ill is : '0 Nebi Teh&dah,
have mercy on this boy, my son/ " ^ The ninth of Tisri

A

is called Ed eUj6j (i.e. Feast of Chickens) on account of

the number of chickens slaughtered by the Jews throughout

the land. '' Every individual should provide himself with

a chicken — its colour white, if possible — a cock for every

male, a hen for every female, aad for a pregnant

woman a cock and two hens, that is, a hen for herself and

one of each sex for the unborn child to make sure he

or she is represented rightly . . . The head of the

family must sacrifice the birds, first whirling each one

three times around his head, exclaiming each time : ' Let

this cock (or hen) be an atonement for me ; let it be my

substitute ; let the bird die ; but let life and happiness be

to me and to all Israel. Amen.' He then kills the bird,

saying, ' I have deserved thus to die.' The blood is poured

out on the ground (as is always done when the Jews kill),

and the chickens are eaten.'' ^ At Musulleh, where is

a shrine good for sore eyes, if a man sick with ophthalmia

takes a cock and, after cutting off its head, puts a drop

of blood in each eye and gives the cock to some poor

person, he will recover.*

Another Assyrian exorcism against headache runs —

" Take a bundle of twigs (?) and
At the confluence of two streams* take thou water and
Perform thy pure incantation over this water, and
With thy pure exorcism cleanse and
With this water sprinkle the man, son of his god, and

» Curtiss, BM. World, xxiii, 100.

' Masterman, BiU. World, xxiii, 27.

' Curtiss, Prim. Sem, Eel., 141.

^ A locality often prescribed as holy for taking water ; cf. DeviU, i, Iz..


PURIFICATION IN ASSYRIAN. 213

Bind . . . upon his head . . .
When he eats, let him be sated, ^
At eventide cut it off and
Cast it into the broad places

That the sickness of his bead may be assuaged, and
That the headache, which like the dew hath fallen, may be
removed." '

The '' bundle of twigs " (the value of the translation is
fairly well vouched for) occurs also in another incantation —

'* Perform thy goodly incantation and
Make perfect the waters thereof with priestcraft, and
With thy pure incantation do thou cleanse (the sick man) and
Take a bundle of twigs (?),
Povur the waters thereof on it." '

The Malagasy, who consider all disease inflicted by an
evil spirit, have recourse to a diviner who removes the
sickness by means of a * faditra * ; this is some object such
as a little grass, ashes, a sheep, a pumpkin, the water with
which the patient has rinsed his mouth, and when the
priest has counted on it the evils which may afflict the
patient and charged the 'faditra' to take them away for
ever, it is thrown away, and the malady with it.*

The following is an excellent instance of the removal of
a tabu by purification and fumigation, where the ' tabu '
is expelled to ' a clean place ' : —

" Incantation : —

Pure water . . .

Water from the Euphrates which in a place . . .
Water which hath been kept aright in the deep,
The pure mouth of Ea hath purified it,


1


Translation doubtful.
» Ibid., ii. Tablet * P,' 1. 63 ff.
» Ibid., ii, series Luh-ka, Tablet VIII, 1. 53 ff.
* Tylor, Primitive Culture, 4th ed., vol. ii, p. 146, quoting Ellis.


214 PURIFICATION IN ASSYBLiN.

The Children of the Deep, seven are thej,

They purify the water, cleanse it, make it limpid,

Before your father Ea,

Before your mother Damkina,

May it be pure, be bright, be clean ;

That the Evil Tongue may stand aside.


Prayer : Rei)eat the incantation three times before the bowl of water.


"Incantation :—

The River God, brightly shining.

Before whom (is) the Ban, whose attack like a demon

Bindeth all lands as the twilight doth the heights above,

May Bamas, when he riseth, remove the darkness thereof, that

it may not be held back in the house,
That the Ban may go forth to the desert, a clean place.
Ban, by heaven be thou exorcised, by earth be thou exorcised !

Prayer for removing the Ban : fumigate him on the bank of a river.


" Incantation : —

■

Fire- god, chief, high uix>n earth.

Hero, son of the Deep, high upon earth,

Fire-god, by thy pure fire.

Thou bringest light into the house of darkness,

Thou settest a destiny to all things named,

It is thou that meltest copper and lead.

It is thou that purgeth silver and gold.

It is thou that art the comrade of Ninkasi,

It is thou that repelleth the evil that cometh by night.

May the members of the man, son of his god, be cleansed,

May he be bright as the heaven.

May he shine like the earth,

May he be resplendent as the midst of heaven !

May the evil tongue (?) [stand] aside!


Prayer for removing the Ban . . ."*


» H'M./., iv, 14, 2.


^WIPING away' a tabu AMONG THE MALAYS. 215

In the instances of purification by water we may
perhaps see the original idea of ' wiping ' tabu away, as
in the Syriac Vphar, In the Malay ceremony already
quoted (p. 205) the magician ' wipes away ' the tabu with
the limes. In Tonga, a person under a tabu caused by
touching a chief cannot feed himself until the tabu has
been removed by his touching the soles of a superior chief's
feet with his hands and then rinsing his hands in water,
or (if water is scarce) rubbing them with the juice of the
plantain or banana. When a Maori chief became tabu
by touching the sore head of his child, he would on the
following day rub his hands over with potato or fern
root which had been cooked over a sacred fire. This was
then carried to the head of the family in the female line,
who ate it.^

We can now return to the Levitical tabu on rash oaths.
It is less clear what we are to understand as the real
necessity for an atonement for this. Obviously it is absurd
to suppose that the same offering would compensate for
oaths involving undertakings of both extreme difficulty and
extreme triviality ; if this were so, a man need only admit
that his oath was a rash one, and offer an animal to be
exempt from the performance of any sworn act of devotion.
From the quotation from Lev. v given below,^ it is plain


' These are quoted from Frazer's article Taboo ^ EiicycL Britannka.

- ** And if any one sin, in that he heareth the voice of adjuration,
he being a witness, whether he hath seen or known, if he do not
utter it, then he shall bear his iniquity : or if any one touch any
unclean thing, whether it be the carcase of an unclean beast, or the
carcase of unclean cattle, or the carcase of unclean creeping things,
and it be hidden from him, and he be unclean, then he shall be guilty :
or if he touch the unclean ness of man, whatsoever his uncleanness
be wherewith he is unclean, and it be hid from him ; when he


216 OATHS AXD VOWS.

that such oaths are reckoned parallel to the unclean tabu
of contagion for which similar atonements must be made
to free the man from the ban ; does a man who swears to
perform a rash act lay himself under a tabu until he
shall have completed his taskP Take the instances in
Greek mythology, as Miss Jane Harrison, who recognizes the
same difficulty, has collected them : " It is less obvious at
first why cifxirfia [offerings destroyed] were always employed
in the taking of oaths ... In the ordinary ritual of
the taking of oaths, the oath-taker actually stood upon
the pieces of the slaughtered animal . . . Tyndareus
sacrificed a horse and made Helen's suitors take an oath,
causing them to stand on the cut-up pieces of the horse —
having made them take the oath, he buried the horse . . .
It was said Herakles had given an oath to the sons of
Neleus on the cut pieces of a boar ..." Pausanias
says, " ' With the men of old days the rule was as regards
a sacrificial animal on which an oath had been taken that
it should be no more accounted as eatable for men.' "
Miss Harrison explains the custom of standing on the
fragments of the victim as pointing "clearly to the
identification of oath-taker and sacrifice. The victim was
hewn in bits; so if the oath- taker perjure himself will
he be hewn in bits." ^ I venture with diffidence to put

knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty : or if any one swear rashly with
his lips to do evil, or to do good, whatsoever it be that a man shall
utter rashly with an oath, and it be hid from him ; when he knoweth
of it, then he shall be guilty in one of these things : and it shall be,
when he shall be guilty in one of these things, that he shall confess
that wherein he hath sinned : and he shall bring his guilt offering
unto Yahweh for his sin which he hath sinned, a female from the
flock, a lamb or a goat, for a sin offering ; and the priest shall make
atonement for him em concerning his sin.''

* J. E. Harrison, Prolegotnena^ 66. /


OATHS AND VOWS. 217

forward another explanation in view of the Biblical law.
The oath-taker calls some supernatural power ^ to witness
that he makes a promise ; he hereby renders himself tabu
for some reason, as the Levitical parallels show. Consonant
with the rules for other unclean tabus, he presents an
'atonement' to rid himself of this tabu, to admit of his
continuing as an ordinary member of society in intercourse
with his fellows ; it does not exempt him from the necessity
of carrying out his vow, it merely (to the savage mind)
removes the contagious tabu which he has incurred by the
act of invoking divine power. It is a savage analogy, but
I think a plausible explanation. The Greek instances are
clear ; at the very moment the vow is taken the oath-taker
kills the beast, which is not used as food, and hence cannot
be considered as a feast shared with the god he has
invoked. It is made away with as charged with dangerous
influence, just as the 'unclean' atonements are in the
Hebrew law. Jevons' remarks on oaths are distinctly
pertinent here : '' Probably the earliest oaths are those
of 'compurgation,' and the person thus freeing himself
from the charge made against him does so by voluntarily
making himself taboo, by 'eating fetish' or otherwise
devoting himself to the god."*

Lastly, the sins committed ' wittingly ' (cases e and /)
were all cleansed by an atonement. Both in Leviticus
and the St/i^^ti -series offences indicating more serious


* The meaning of the Hebrew word for * swearing * is * to come
under the influence of seven things ' (see Robertson Smith, Rel, Sem.,
182 ; Wellhausen, Reste, 18(1), i^ossibly to repeat a promise seven times
(the magical number). Com^mre the Assyrian sibitti Hu ana pan ereb
^f^Samii mamit iu-ut-me (Martin, Textes Relig., 1900, 28).

• Introduction to the HUtory of Religion, 2nd ed., 1902, 64 fF.


218 PRESUMPTUOUS SINS.

misdeeds than the mere infringement of a tabu are placed
side by side with breaches of ' uncleanness/ Yet in the
Assyrian series either is recognized as the possible cause
of sickness in man, and in the Hebrew law both demand
an 'atonement.' Some are undoubtedly the direct
descendants of breaches of the demon-tabus, and others
are clearly offences against holy things belonging to the
tribal god. Two explanations are therefore open to us.
One is that every breach of tabu was visited by demoniac
possession, either directly or through the divine wrath
which caused angels and ministers to inflict their plagues
on men. The other is that as religious, beliefs grew and
the origins were forgotten, men brought * atonements *
for every breach of tabu, arguing by analogy that they
could remove the risk of punishment by what ultimately
was regarded as a piacular offering. The original object
of the 'atonement' was disregarded, and, as undoubtedly
appears in the Old Testament, the carcases of beasts
slaughtered as substitutes to attract the plague-devil became
the offerings of men guilty of presumptuous ' sin.' The
last stage is reached when the carcase is eaten by the
priests as though it were an ordinary sacrifice.

Originally, then, we may presume, from the meaning of
the word k'phar in connection with savage methods of
cleansing tabu, that the ' atonement ' ceremony was intended
to wash away a demoniac or ' sin ' tabu in water. In other
words, the demon was to be transferred to water and thus
removed. In addition to this we have the ' sin ' offering,
which was originally a beast substituted for the man whom
the demon had attacked, which was intended to receive
the devil after he had been exorcised.


219


V.


THE REDEMPTION OP THE FIRSTBORN.


One of the most interesting problems in Semitic folklore
is the question of the origin of the firstborn-substitution.
Yahweh is related to have said: "Sanctify unto me all
the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the womb among the
children of Israel; both of man and of beast : it is mine." ^
This is amplified elsewhere : ^ " Thou shalt set apart unto
Yahweh all that openeth the womb, and every firstling
which thou hast that cometh of a beast; the males shall
be Yahweh's. And every firstling of an ass thou shalt
redeem with a lamb ; and if thou wilt not redeem it, then
thou shalt break its neck : and all the firstborn of man
among thy sons thou shalt redeem." In Numbers' the
law is thus laid down : " Every thing that openeth the
womb, of all flesh, which they offer unto Yahweh, both
of man and beast, shall be thine (Aaron's) : nevertheless
the firstborn of man shalt thou surely redeem, and the
firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou redeem. And those
that are to be redeemed of them from a month old shalt
thou redeem, according to thine estimation, for the money
of five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary (the same
is twenty gerahs). But the firstling of an ox, or the
firstling of a sheep, or the firstling of a goat, thou shalt
not redeem ; they are holy : thou shalt sprinkle their blood

1 Exod. xiii, 2. » Ibid., 12 ff. » xviii, 15 ff.


220 TRADITIONAL ORIGINS OP REDEMPTION.

upon the altar, and shalt burn their fat for an offering
made by fire, for a sweet savour unto Yahweh.''

One tradition (Jehovist) assigns the origin of this custom
to the smiting of the firstborn in Egypt: *'For all the
firstborn are mine; on the day that I smote all the
firstborn in the land of Egypt I hallowed unto me all
the firstborn in Israel, both man and beast : mine shall
they be: I am Tahweh."^ A second (Elohist)* legend
of the substitution of a ram for the sacrifice of the firstborn
is the more primitive story of Abraham and Isaac. As
an additional story Jephthah's vow may be cited, in which
a female (firstborn) is dedicated. In this case, however,
no redemption is spoken of, the statement being that he
did with her according to the vow he had vowed.

It is therefore clear that two different traditions,
apparently of an academic nature, had sprung up at a very
early time to explain what was a fundamental custom
among the Hebrews. It was allowed to the tribe to
substitute a firstborn beast for a firstborn child, which
was clearly held to belong to the tribal god ; what is more,
from the passage in Num. xviii, 15, ' unclean ' beasts
were the ' property ' of the deity, and had to be redeemed.
When this passage is taken into account with the ass
of Exod. xiii, 13, which was to be redeemed with a lamb,
or be killed by having its neck broken, it seems clear
that the passage about the 'unclean' beasts has descended
from a time when such beasts (i.e. totems) were held


* Num. iii, 13.

' Gen. xxii, I flf. Yahweh does not occur in the story except in the
name of the place, Jehovah -jireh, its explanation, the "ar.gel of
yahweh," and the epilogue.


SACRIFICE OP TOTEMS. 221

eligible for sacrificed Now this must have been before
the idea of ' unclean * came in, at a time when the various
Semitic tribes regarded the tabu-beasts of the Old Testament
laws as their totems. If this argument has any weight,
the parallelism in the case of the firstborn babe is obvious ;
it was a human sacrifice from those early times when the
distinctions between the classes of life, beast or man, were
not so finely drawn.^ This is nothing new; Frazer has
clearly demonstrated that the God of the Hebrews plainly
regarded the firstborn of men and the firstlings of
animals as His own,^ and he says,^ ''we know that the
Semites were in the habit of sacrificing some of the children,
generally the firstborn, either as a tribute regularly due
to the deity ^ or to appease his anger in seasons of public
danger or calamity."

It is unnecessary to quote all the well-known instances
of human sacrifice at length.^ We may, however, mention

^ On the grave occasions when this was permissible. On the custom
of killing the totem on occasions of grave stress see Frazer, Totemism^ 7 ;
he maintains that the totem sacrament has become a well-authenticated
fact {Golden Boughy 2nd ed., i, xix).

' There is no necessity to go into the details of this kiushix^ between
man and beast ; it is a well-recognized form of primitive belief, and
shows itself in later ages in gods that are half beast, and in omens and
tales of women bringing forth animals.

' Golden Bought ii, 45. « Adonis, Attis, Osirts, 34.

• On this compare Robertson Smith, ReL Sem.y 463 : " Yet . . .
it seems absolutely impossible that, at the very early date when the
Hebrews and Arabs lived together, any tribute could have been
paid to the god as chief or king ; and even in the form of the sacrifice
of firstlings which is found among the Hebrews, there seem to be
indications that the parallelism with the offering of first-fruits is less
complete than at first sight it seems to be." Nowiick, however, in his
Lehrbitch der ffebr. Arch., 1894, ii, 255, says : " Wie die Erstgeburt
vom Vieh, so gehoren Jahve auch die Erstlinge von den Feldfriichten."

^ Sir John Marsham, in the seventeenth century in bis Chronicum


222 TRADITION OF THE ORIGIN OF MAGIC.

some additional examples which may be of use in our
argument. There is an interesting tradition in Bezold's
Schdtzhohle} how in the ninetieth year of Terah magic
appeared on the earth in the city of Ur, which Horon
the son of Eber had built. A rich inhabitant died, and
his son made an image of gold to put over the grave,
and posted a watcher. Then came Satan and took up
his abode in the image, speaking to the young man as
though it were his father; and one day thieves stole
everything belonging to the young man, who came to

(76-78, 300-304), mentions the instances of the Phoenicians sacrificing
to Saturn one of the dearest of their people (Philo, Bib. ex Sanchon.\
the Dumatii in Arabia who, Diodorus says, sacrificed a child every
year, and other cases of human sacrifices. He gives Porphyry's story
(p. 301) that Amosis abolished the law for the slaying of men at
Heliopolis in Egypt, as Manetho bears witness in his book of Antiquity
and Piety. They were sacrificed to Juno, and were examined, as were
the pure calves that were also sealed with them ; they were sacrificed
three in a day. In whose stead Amosis commanded that men of wax,
of the same number, should be substituted. Another (p. 77), also from
Porphyry, is the story of Cronus " [whom the Phoenicians name Israel
(it should be II)]," who had by a nymph named Anobret an only-
begotten son, and he in dread of great dangers adorned this son with
royal ap^mrel and ofiered him in sacrifice. Whiston, in His Josepkus
(840 ff.), has collected the following passages bearing on human sacrifice
in the Old Testament: Lev. xx, 2; Deut. xii, 30, 31 ; xviii, 18; 2 Kings
xvi, 3 ; xvii, 31 ; xxiii, 10 ; Ps. cvi, 37, 38 ; Jer. vii, 30-32 ; xix, 3-5 ;
xxxii, 35 ; Ezek. xvi, 20, 21 ; Wisd. xii, 4-6. See also Daumer,
Le Culte de Moloch, 1842, ed. Ewerbeck, Qu'est-ce qvs la Bible, 1850, 2 :
" L'ancienne religion de Molise, avant d'etre radoucie, ordonnait de tuer
sans exception, en Thonneur du Moloch- Jehovah, les prdmices du sexe
masculin parmi les auimaux et k plus forte raison parmi les hommes.'*
He is excellent in his anthropological comparisons of human sacrifice
(p. 18, e.g., the eldest son in Florida, quoted from Majer, Diet, de la
Mythologie, ii, 91), although his philology is at fault (pp. 24, 27).
See also Ghillanys, 1842 (ed. Ewerbeck, ibid.), Les Sacrifices humains
chez les Hibreux, 207 ; especially among the Semites " race anthro-
pothyste par excellence " (p. 216).
» p. 32.


THE QUESTION OF HUMAN SACRIPICE IN ASSYRIA. 223

his father's grave in tears. Satan thereupon promised
that all should be restored if only the young man would
sacrifice his little son, which he did. Then Satan came
forth and entered into the young man and taught him
" magic, incantation, divinations, Chaldeeism, destinies, haps,
and fates." And from that time on men began to sacrifice
their children to demons and to worship idols. There
are also stories told of such sacrifice among the Sabians.^

The existence of human sacrifice among the Babylonians
and Assyrians is not easy to prove satisfactorily. Jeremias ^
considers it to be the probability that ''the Babylonians
practised human sacrifice secretly without formally taking
it up into the recognised worship," a remark which I must
confess I am unable to understand fully. Is it meant
to apply to those peoples at all periods of the four
thousand years which we know of them? What should
be their object in practising it secretly P The remark
seems to be such a vague and unsubstantiated depreciation
of the enemies of Israel that it is no help to any scientific
investigation.

In 1875 Professor Sayce^ published two texts which he
considered proved the existence of human sacrifice among
the Babylonians, but his views were combated and refuted
by Ball^ in 1892. One of these texts was from an

* En-Nedinij i, v, § 5, Chwolsohn, Die Ssabier, ii, 28. M. C. de
Percival (ii, 101, quoted Hughes, Diet of hlam, 184) mentions a
Qhassanide prince who was sacrificed to Venus by Munzir, king of
Hira\ Psellius (eleventh century), in his Dialogtte on thi Operation of
Daemons (ed. Collisson, 1843, p. 25), speaks of the sexual orgies among
the Euchitaa and the Gnosti "at the time when we celebrate the
Passion of our Lord," and how they sacrificed their unnatural offspring
nine months later.

* Encycl. BibL, 4122. ' T.S.B.A., iv, 1875, 29.

* RS.B.A., xiv, 1892, 149.


224 THE QUESTION OF HUMAN SACRIFICE IN ASSYRIA.

omen tablet which Sayce translated "When the Air-god
(is) fine, prosperity. On the high places the son is
burnt." This, however, is incorrect, and Ball's translation,
though not exact, was accurate enough to disprove the
sacrifice theory — " The rain of Rimmon is violent ; the
sprouting grain on the ridges (or terraced slopes) is
minished, is laid bare(P)."^ The second text is that
given in this book on p. 210, and Professor Sayce maintained
as late as 1902^ that his interpretation still held good as
seeming to show that the firstborn of man was included
among the sacrifices that were deemed acceptable to heaven.
This depended on his translation of unsu, 'offspring,'
which Ball (loc. cit.) in 1892 had challenged, and substituted
' fatling * for it. Hence we have as yet no proof of human
sacrifice from Assyrian ritual tablets.

Again, a great deal too much stress, I think, has been
laid on the witness of seal-cylinders. It is frequently
very difficult to explain the subjects engraved on them,
and the representation of the slaughter of human beings,
even when a god is shown to be present, is not necessarily
human sacrifice. It is doubtful whether the seal-cylinders
published by M^nant^ or BalP for the evidence of such

I The text runs enuma ^^^ Adad ^jA-Hu inadi se-qu-um itia kiblah-mb§
isahhar (tub) a-ru-ur^ and has therefore reference to thunder, not rain.
The last word arur I should prefer to translate * is scorched.' Ball's
interpretation *is minished' {isahhar) is perfectly correct, as it is
a word frequently used in these texts in this connection.

^ Oiford Lectures^ 467. Even were the meaning * (human) offspring '
possible, there would then be no support that it meant 'firstborn.'
I think, however, no one, on reading the incantation, can now believe
that there is any question of human sacrifice.

' Recherches sur la Olyptique Onentale^ 150 ; Catalogue De Clercq,
Nos. 176-82.

* P,S,B.A,, xiv, 1892, 149.


MODEBN CUSTOMS OP REDEMPTION. 226

a custom can really be admitted as final proof. That
many of them depict the slaying of men is quite clear;
but that this can be shown to be sacrifice is quite a different
matter.

The fact is, human sacrifice goes out in proportion as
civilization comes in, and probably by the time men are
able to commit their religious ritual to writing human
sacrifice has ceased to be a regular or periodic rite. It
may appear sporadically, as an actual occurrence, in historic
texts; but it will probably have been entirely eliminated
from any written ceremonial which represents the belief
of the majority. When a conqueror has himself portrayed
hewing captives in pieces before his god, the reason is
far more likely to be diplomatic than religious. At any
rate, it is a far different form of sacrifice from a propitiatory
offering of one's own tribe, which was probably a custom
descended from a cannibal feast. The more ciyilized the
community the more abhorrent does human sacrifice
become, and just as the Assyrians were the highest
civilized of all the Semitic nations before our era, so in
proportion will the fewest traces of this custom exist
in their records. Hence it is extremely improbable that
any ritual will be found describing human sacrifice, or
any record that proves its existence except as a sporadic
occurrence.

From the ancient tradition we may turn to the modem
customs. Among the Jews in Palestine the firstborn son
is redeemed to-day as of old. A priest takes from his
parents the price of this redemption, the sum being about
eighteen shillings, after receiving which the priest holds
the money over the head of the child, and says in Hebrew — \
'* This instead of that, this in exchange for that, this in >


226 MODERN CUSTOMS OF REDEMPTION.

remission of that. May this child enter into life, into
the law, and into the fear of heaven ! May it be God's
will that whereas he has been admitted to redemption, so
may he enter into the law, the nuptial canopy, and into
good deeds! Amen/' He then places his hand on the
child's head and gives the priestly blessing.^ It is sig-
nificant, by the way, that the modem Semites, while they
do not lay their hands upon the head of the sacrifice in
ordinary cases, yet they do lay their hands on it if someone
else kills it.^

At a shrine near Beirut sheep, goats, and bullocks are
sacrificed in payment of vows. The formula used is '' I kill
this sheep as a fedu for Abdullah." The slayer dips his
index finger in blood and daubs it on the forehead of the
one for whom the vow was made, and he steps over the
blood.»

The modem Arab fedu ceremonies offer a close parallel.
"The servant of the 'Chair' at Zebedani related the
following: 'The mother of a boy, when she slaughters
a sacrifice vowed on his behalf, takes some of the blood
and puts it on his skin. They call the sacrifice fedau.
Taking the blood from the place where the sacrifice is
slaughtered is equivalent to taking the blessing of the
place and putting it on the child.' " ^ Similarly, '' they
go through the opening sura of the Koran, address the
spirits {el-Akiab), and say, 'This is from thee and unto
thee (God), and, God, receive it from such an one, the
son of such a mother, as a redemption {/edou) in behalf


^ Masterman, Bibl. Warldy xxii, 260. On putting blood on doorposts
in Palestine see Curtiss, Prim, Sem, Rel., 181, 188.
« Curtiss, loc. cit, 149. » Curtiss, Bibl World, xxiii, 332.

* Curtiss, Prim. Sem. Rel.^ 200.


MODERN CUSTOMS OF REDEMPTION. 227

of him/ This sacrifice is a sacrifice of thanksgiving
looking backward." ^ In Arabia, if one sacrifice for
healthy the death of the ewe or the goat they think to
be accepted in exchange for the camel's life or his own
life, life for life.^ In Syria they kill animals ' on behalf
of the dead, for the spirit, calling them fedu* These
sacrifices go before the deceased as light, to serve him in
the next life as he approaches God, becoming a kaff&rah
for his sins.^

The ''sacrifice between the feet" is made in Palestine
on behalf of a pilgrim on his return from Mekka, Jerusalem,
or for some one who has been a long way away from
home. "The ceremony consists in a sheep or a goat
being slaughtered for the one who returns. Just before
he enters the door of the house he stands with his legs
spread out so that there is room for the victim to be
placed between them." The victim's throat is cut, and
some of the blood is put on his forehead. If he is a
Christian, it is marked in the sign of a cross.^

1 Curtiss, Prim, Sem, Rd.y 196. * Doughty, Arabia Deserta^ i, 452.

' At Rome, accordiug to Ovid, each father of a family, as the festival
of the Lemuria came round and all was still, arose, and standing
with bare feet he made a special sign with his fingers and thumb to
keep off any ghost. Thrice he washes his hands in spring water, then
he turns round and takes black beans into his mouth ; with face
averted he spits them away, and as he spits them says, *' These I send
forth, with these beans I redeem myself and mine " (J. £. Harrison,
Prolegomena, 35). There is a story told of Al-Xooman, sumamed Abu
Kab(is, who in a drunken fit ordered two of his intimate companions to
be buried alive. When he came to himself he was so grieved that he
set aside two days, on one of which he sacrificed whomsoever he might
meet, and sprinkled the blood on the monument he erected to them ;
on the other, he that met him was dismissed with safety with magnificent
gifts (Sale, Koran^ Prdim. Disc,^ sect. i).

* Curtiss, Prim. Setn. Rel„ 178. • Ibid., 177.


228 THE FEDV.

When a man finishes a house, he makes a sacrifice on
the doorstep as a redemption for the building. "Every
house must have its death, a man, woman, child, or
animal.^ God has appointed a fedou for every building
through sacrifice. If God has accepted the sacrifice, he
has redeemed the house." ^ According to an orthodox
Moslem, on moving from house to house, or in occupying
a new building, a man will kill the fedou the first night
that he sleeps therein ; '' the object is the bursting forth
of blood unto the face of God. ... It is for himself
and family a redemption. It keeps off disease and the
jinn."' The shikh of Eafr Harib, above the Sea of ,
Galilee, explained to Mr. Curtiss that the people sacrifice
a victim on the threshold for the new house, "because
every place, land, or spot on the earth has its own dwellers,
lest one of the family die in this land. Because it is not
theirs, they redeem the family by a fedou, one or all." ^ In
Hums, if a man has bought a new house and its inhabitants
had been unlucky, the owner will make some change,
such as taking up an old stone on the threshold and
laying a new one in its place. Then the sacrifice is
offered on that threshold, the people calling it " presenting
a kaffArah:' »

^ In Borneo there is a custom of making holes to receive the posts,
and men are killed and placed therein, " so that the house being founded
in blood may stand ^ (McLennan, Sttuiies, 22), Compare Joshua vi, 26,
" With the loss of his firstborn shall he lay the foundation thereof, and
with the loss of his youngest son shall he set up the gates of it/' The
Malays sacrifice a fowl, a goat, or a buffalo in such a case (Skeat,
Malay Magic^ 143). ' Curtiss, loc. cit., 196.

» Ibid., 197. * Curtiss, Bihl World, xxi, 253.

^ Ibid., 254. For the sacrifice for a tent see loc. cit., 253. On
building rites generally see Gittde, Melusine, iii, 497; Sartori, Das
Bauopfer, Zeits, fur Ethxol., 1898, xxx, 1 ff.


THE 'AKIKAH. 229

According to Robertson Smith/ among the Arabs in
the time of Mohammed it was common to sacrifice a sheep
on the birth of a child, and then to shave the head of the
infant and daub the scalp with the blood of the victim.
This ceremony, called 'akikah, or ' the cutting of the hair/
was designed to avert evil from the child, and was evidently
an act of dedication by which the infant was brought under
the protection of the god of the community. Lane describes
the 'akikah-ceremony thus (the parallel with the Assyrian
texts quoted on pp. 208, 211 being very striking) : "The
person should say, on slaying the victim, '0 God, verily
this akeekah is a ransom for my son, such a one ; its blood
for his blood, and its flesh for his flesh, and its bone for his
bone, and its skin for his skin, and its hair for his hair.
G-od, make it a ransom for my son from hell-fire.' A bone
of the victim should not be broken." ^ In Nebk they offer
sacrifice for a boy when seven days old without breaking
bones, lest the child's bones also be broken.^

In Arabia Doughty noticed a custom that, when a man
child was born, the father would slay an ewe, but would
give nothing for a female.^ Similar in idea to this is the
custom in some localities (in Palestine) that only male
animals should be used in sacrifices. The Nusairiyeh and
Ismailiyeh consider females unfit for food or for sacrifice.^
This is probably due to a natural economy, which holds^
the female more valuable than the male.


^ Religion of the Semites^ 328. See Kinship, 152. See also on the
akikah, Wellhausen, Reste Arabischen ffeidentums, 174.

* Arabian Nights, chap, iv, note No. 24.
' Curtiss, PHm, Sem, ReL, 178.

* Arabia Deserta, i, 452.

* Curtiss, Prim. Setn. Rel., p. 173.


230 SUBSTITUTION AMONG OTHER NATIONS.

It was clearly not confined to the Semites. '* There was
a sanctuary of Artemis at Munychia. A bear came into
it and was killed by the Athenians. A famine followed^
and the god gave an oracle that the famine should cease
if someone woidd sacrifice his daughter to the goddess.
Embaros was the only man who promised to do it, on
condition that he and his family should have the priesthood
for life. He disguised his daughter and hid her in the
sanctuary, and dressed a goat in a garment and sacrificed
it as his daughter." ^

Among the Malays, '' if the spirit craves a human victim
a cock may be substituted." ^

Finally, we may turn to a curious instance of sacrificial
substitution closely allied to this. It is related in the
royal annals of Sennacherib that, when that king went
down to the Persian Gulf, he offered gifts to Ea, the lord
of the sea —

" Before them at the side of the Qulf
I stood and offered up pure victims
Unto Ea, the King of the Deep ;
With golden ships, a golden fish, a golden . . .
Into the depths of the sea I cast.
And then I sent my ships across speedily
Against the city of Naglti." '

The offering of the Golden Ship is intended to propitiate
Ea and satisfy the hunger of the sea for ships, thus
paying toll beforehand that the real ships may proceed
on their way in safety.*

^ J. E. Harrison, Prolegomena^ 72.

» Skeat, Malay Magic, 72. 3 W.A.L, iii, 12, 2.

* For similar instances see Frazer, Q olden Bough, ii. Xerxes, to
give another royal parallel, after flogging the Hellespont offers sacrifices
on the bridge and casts into the waters the golden bowl which he had


SUBSTITUTION AMONG OTHER NATIONS. 231

From these instances it seems that the origin of the
substitution has been forgotten by those that practise it.
The reasons given for doing it are so many and various
that it is obvious they are only attempts at an explanation
for continuing the practice of an old custom among a
conservative people. In the instance of Abraham, the
ram is a burnt sacrifice to God; in the Numbers theory,
the firstborn belongs to Yahweh, in memory of the
passover ; ^ the Arab sacrifices for the safe return of the
pilgrim are a thankoffering, which may be referred to
many causes ; the redemption of buildings is clearly a
substitution or atonement to avert evil, just as the
sickness-devil is given the 'atonement' of a sheep. The
'akikah'Ceremony is an act of dedication, according to
Robertson Smith. We have therefore to decide on the
balance of probabilities, and the questions to be debated
on the origin of such a custom are three in number.
The possibilities are that the sacrifice of the firstborn is
due to (I) some theory, similar to that of the ordinary
atonement for tabu, that future danger (tabu, sickness.


used in libation, with a golden crater and a Persian sword (Rouise,
Oreek Votive Oferings, 311 ; Herodotus, vii, 64 ; for instances of gifts
cast into a holy spring see Robertson Smith, Hel, Sem., 177). Even at
this day at Gaza they have a custom of throwing bread into the sea as
an offering or vow to its inhabitants (Baldensperger, P.E.F., 1893,
216), and the victims immolated to Suleim&n Ibn Daild (the weli of
two hot springs near the Dead Sea) are sacrificed in such a manner
that the blood goes into the water (Curtiss, Blbl, World, zxi, 257).
Among the Maronites the neck of the sheep is laid on the prow of
a ship and the throat is so cut that the blood runs into the sea. The
victim is then thrown into the bay as a sacrifice to St Qeorge or Seyide
(ibid., xxiii, 336).

* Frazer gives what is probably the true origin of the Passover
(Oolden Bough, ii, 49).


232 SUBSTITUTION AMONG OTHER NATIONS.

and *8in') can be removed by such a sacrifice, either
from the parents or the community; or (2) an idea that
the divine, proprietary right, so strongly insisted on
particularly in the Hebrew laws, is due to the right of
the gods to have connection with the women of the
tribe, who thus bear semi-divine children; or (3) the
idea that such a sacrifice of children was in primitive
times as much a sharing of a meal with the deity as any
other sacrifice, which, traced to its logical conclusion, would
show the primitive Semitic savage to be a cannibal.

To discover the meaning of such a peculiar custom, it
is plain that we must go back to the very depths of
savagery. The fact that the Hebrews, at an early period,
were divided between at least two divergent h}rpotheses
for the origin of the custom of vicarious dedications,
probably neither of them correct, shows how old the real
reason for such substitution must be; and if we go
further and push this limit beyond the period when
there was some more logical reason for the custom than
the glorification of the piety of a tribal hero or the dis-
comfiture of an ancient enemy, we are then only reaching
back to the fringe of savagery.

This is presumably a time when the savage is learning
that a human being is of a higher economic, social, and
rational value than an animal, and that animal life is not
on the same plane as human in religious affairs. He
therefore ceases to sacrifice his children as a regular
custom, and substitutes beasts from the flocks in their
place. Yet, although he forsakes the actual methods of
his ancestors, he doubtless allows 'make-believe' to enter
somewhat into his procedure. By an ingenuous display
of blood he cozens his god into believing that the highest


SUBSTITUTION AMONG OTHER NATIONS. 233

form of meat has been provided for the feast. If we
once admit that the offering was a sacrifice of the firstborn
to the gods (such as reappeared at sporadic intervals in
the later civilized communities in time of stress), and that
a lamb or kid might take the place of the human being
in a sacrificial meal, it is difficult to find any other
explanation save that the origin is to be sought in
a cannibal feast to which the gods were invited. The
story of Abraham, although probably affording little clue
to the actual origin, at least points to a sacrifice of a form
similar to the sacrificial meal. What is more, in the
cases in which a human being is in question, there is no
idea of it being carried out in any other way except that
of a bloody sacrifice by knife or fire.

The redemption of the ass goes far to confirm this. If
the ass is not redeemed, the throat was not to be cut, but
its neck was to be broken. In the primitive sacrifice
where the offering represents the communal meal, the
throat of the beast is cut and the blood poured out ; why,
then, should the ass be different?

Frazer concludes that a distinction was drawn between
sheep, oxen, and goats on the one hand, and men and
asses on the other ; and he explains that because the
Israelites did not eat the ass themselves, they concluded
probably their god did not do so either; ''and the price
of the redemption was a Iamb which was burnt as a
vicarious sacrifice instead of the ass, on the hypothesis,
apparently, that roast lamb is likely to be more palatable
to the Supreme Being than roast donkey." Robertson
Smith ^ seems to have found the same difficulty about

» Rel Sem., 463.


234 SUBSTITUTION AMONG OTHEE NATIONS.

the ass : ** that some form of taboo lies also at the
bottom of the sacrifice of firstlings, appears from the
provision of the older Hebrew law that if a firstling ass
is not redeemed by its owner, its neck shall be broken/'
I would offer the following as an explanation ; the reason
for sacrificing kids or lambs is that they are to be eaten,
and the blood is therefore poured out on the ground, but
the ass is a beast of burden, and not food, and as such
was slain in such a way as to leave the body apparently
perfect so that it might perform the deity's work in the
abode of the gods. Naturally the throat would not be
cut, because it was not a sacrificial feast.

From this the deduction is clear. If the beast is not
ceremonially slaughtered and cooked, it will not be a
sacrificial meal ; conversely, all offerings that are slain
with a knife, and burnt, represent the communal feast.
Just as the divine effigy was anointed after the manner
pleasing to itching man, so were the appetites of the god
satisfied. He intermarried with the tribe and fed at the
same table off the same food.^ Hence the lamb, which
is substituted in more civilized times for the firstborn,
and offered at the common table, represents the more
primitive cannibal sacrifice.' Even in some of the modem
fedu ceremonies the blood of the surrogate is daubed on
the child, in which we may see an attempt to perpetrate

1 See Robertson Smith, Rd. Sent.

' The soul of man, which is inseparably connected with the blood,
docs not descend to Sheol unless the body is buried. Hence, pre-
sumably, while the body of the ass remained above ground, the
'shade' doubtless served the tribal god. On the other hand, slaves
who accompany their dead human lords to the netherworld are buried
with them. However, we do not know what became of the carcase of
the ass in primitive times.


NOT PROPHYLACTIC ATONEMENT. 235

a very common religious fraud. The deity is deceived by
the bloodstained appearance of the child, and at the same
time he feeds on the carcase of the victim.

There seems to be little difficulty in eliminating the
first theory of prophylactic atonement. Every firstborn
of man or beast is held to belong to the gods. Nay,
more, the firstborn of sacred totem beasts are divine
property for sacrifice. Now it is extremely improbable
that a savage who owns large possessions in herds and
wives will sacrifice not only a lamb or a kid from every
fertile female in his flocks, but even his own firstborn to
save himself from harm. This would, in the case of a
rich man, entail an unlimited destruction of property to
obtain a very problematic result. Still more is it unlikely
that he will be allowed to kill the firstborn of the totem
merely to preserve his individual life. Totems may be
Ipjled and eaten at solemn tribal meetings, but not by
unlicensed imits. Moreover, prophylactic atonement of this
kind approaches the nature of the * atonement ' for tabu or
sin-offering, such as has been described in the preceding
chapter. The spirit causing the mischief changes its human
ahode for the animal into which it is driven after leaving
the man's body. But this, as we have seen, makes the
animal really * unclean,' tabu, and uneatable, because it is
filled with the spirit. So, if we return to our argument of
the rich savage, such a slaughter of scores or hundreds of
firstborn represents a corresponding waste, which is absurd.

The second possibility, that of possession by reason of
paternity, is unlikely. * Although it be granted that the
rights of tribal god or gods are recognized among the
harlm, and that totemism and animal-shaped gods give
colour to a belief in intermixture between gods and beasts


236 NOT RIGHT OF PATERNITY.

at a period of ignorance, the argument against such
a hypothesis is clear. Heroic demigods have, for obvious
reasons, never been sacrificed in babyhood, and yet they
are clearly the result of the union between gods and
women. Again, it is difficult to see how the law of the
firstfruits of vegetables, etc., could be wrested into analogy.

Furthermore, although this argument has little force
by reason of its proposed explanation, demons as well as
gods married the girls of the tribe; but in this case, it
is quite likely that the offspring are the abortions, and
especially those with physical disabilities who are excluded
categorically from the priesthood.

The third sacrificial theory has already been discussed,
and seems the most probable.^

Agreeing with Frazer, " we can hardly resist the
conclusion that, before the practice of redeeming them
was introduced, the Hebrews, like the^ other branches
of the Semitic race, regularly sacrificed their firstborn
children by the fire or the knife" (ibid., 49). He main-
tains (p. 51) against Wellhausen {Prolegomena, 3rd ed., 90)

I Riehm's theory is, I think, untenable : " Sebstverstandlich sollte
die menschliche Erstgeburt nicht geopfert werden ; vermoge ihres
besonderen Angehorigkeitsverhaltnisses an Jehova galten die Erstge-
borenen vielmehr urspriinglich als die zum Dieust am Heiligtum
verpflichteten leibeigenen knechte Jehova's " {Handw6rterhuch des BihL
Alt., 1893, i, 411). Isaac is obviously a burnt sacrifice. The Levites
are chosen ''from among the children of Israel instead of all the
firstborn that openeth the matrix among the children of Israel "
(Num. iii, 12). Also the existence of the Nazarite class must not be
forgotten. To this day in Syria women vow to give a son to God,
who is regarded as a sort of Nazarite, and his hair is not cut until he
comes of age (Curtiss, Prim. Sem. ReL, 153, note).

' In view of our having no evidence that the Assyrians sacrificed
their firstborn, I should suggest the substitution of " other " for
" the other."


BUT PROBABLY INDICATING CANNIBALISM. 237

and Robertson Smith ^ {IteL Sepn., 2iid ed., 464) that this
redemption is a modification of the sacrifice of the firstborn,
and he quotes in support of this the customs of many
savage tribes. In some parts of ^ew South Wales the
firstborn child of every woman is eaten as a religious
ceremony ; in Senjero, East Africa, many families offer
up their firstborn as sacrifices. Among some tribes of
South East Africa, when a woman's husband has been
killed in battle, and she marries again, the first child after
her second marriage must be put to death. If it were
not killed an accident would befall the second spouse,
and the woman herself would be barren.^

On this third hypothesis, that the dedication of the
firstborn to the deity had its origin in sacrifice, we can
proceed to examine the evidence for cannibalism at such
a sacrificial meal. Robertson Smith certainly more than
hints at such a proceeding.' The probability of such

^ Robertson Smith says here : ''To conclude from this that at one
time the Hebrews actually sacrificed all their firstborn sons is absurd.^

2 He also quotes the heathen Russians as sacrificing their firstborn,
with other instances.

9 «< Wherever we find the doctrine of substitution of animal life for
that of man, we also find examples of actual human sacrifice, some-
times confined to seasons of extreme peril, and sometimes practised
periodically at solemn annual rites. I apprehend that this is the
point from which the special development of piacular sacrifices, and
the distinction between them and ordinary sacrifices, takes its start.
It was impossible that the sacrificial customs should continue immodified
where the victim was held to represent a man and a tribesman, for even
savages commonly refuse to eat their own kinsfolk, and to growing
civilisation the idea that the gods had ordained meals of human flesh,
or of flesh that was as sacred as that of a man, was too repulsive to be
long retained. . . . Whether the custom of actually eating the flesh
survived in historical times in any case of human sacrifice is more than
doubtful " {Rel Sem., 366).

He tries to show from this repulsion that in any offering simulating


238 PREHISTOBIC CANNIBALISM.

a hypothesis will rest first on the evidence pro and con
of the prevalence of cannibalism among prehistoric peoples
and modem savages in general, and, secondly, in traditions
of the Semitic nations in particular, and the local forces
which might lead to such a custom.

Tylor, in his article " Cannibalism " in the Encyclapcedia
Bntannica, says : '' It has been well argued that had the
men of the quaternary period been cannibals, we should
find the bones generally cracked for the marrow like
those of beasts, which is not the case (Le Hon, L* Homme
Fossile, p. 68) ; also, that as regards the ancient people
of the shell-mounds, had they eaten their own species
they would have thrown the human bones into the rubbish
heaps with those of beasts and fishes (Lubbock, Prehistoric
Times f p. 232). The discovery of some few ancient human
remains, the state of which seems to indicate that the
flesh had been eaten, may perhaps be taken to show that
prehistoric savages were in this respect like those of
modern times, neither free from cannibalism nor universally
practising it." At the same time the evidence brought
forward at the Congris Internationale pour lee Etudes


human sacrifice the sacrificial meal tended to fall out of use, and in
the case of animal piacula the sacrificial meal is generally wanting, or
confined to the priests (pp. 367-368). By his theory of piacula, his
explanation of the reason for throwing the carcases outside the camp
is rather forced. He maintains (pp. 369-376) that the substitution
and human sacrifices closely parallel the burning of the fiesh of the
Hebrew sin-offerings outside the camp, and that there is hardly any
doubt that originally the true sacrifice, i.e, the shedding of the blood,
as in the Hebrew sin-offering, took place at the temple, and the
burning was a distinct act.

There is, however, by our theory of demoniac exorcism, no necessity
to connect the sin-offering with the substitution of the firstborn. The
rites take their origin from two widely distinct sources.


PREHISTORIC CANNIBALISM. 239

PrihMoriqueB in 1867 (2nd session, Paris) shows that
prehistoric man at one period of his existence did certainly
eat his feUow.^

That cannibalism under stress of famine was recognized
as a possibility among the Assyrians is proved by the
tablet K. 4541,^ which is described by Bezold in his
Catalogue as a mythological legend, bearing mention of
an ancient Babylonian ruler, during whose reign wars,
discord, and slavery appeared on the earth, and giving an
account of the origin of the Assyrian Empire. All the
verbs, however, in the passage he quotes are in the
present tense (and not past), and his proposed explanation
is due to a blunder. The translation runs : '' That prince
shall see woe, his heart shall be grieved; during his rule
battle and strife shall not cease, in that reign brother
shall eat his brother, men shall sell their children for


^ M. Spring proved cannibalism in the cave of Chauveau (p. 159) ;
M. Schaaffausen in Ultz, Westphalia ; M. Messikommer in Robenhausen
(evidence held indecisive) ; M. Cldment in Saint- Aubin (human bones
perforated) ; M. Roujou in Villeneuve-Saint-Georges ; M. Bouvet in
Guyane ; M. de Lastic in the cave of Bruniquel ; M. de Mehedin in
Mexico. For other instances of prehistoric cannibalism in £urope
and elsewhere, see Richard Andrde, Die ATithropophagie^ 1887, 2 ff. ;
Bergemann, Die Verhreitwng der Anthropopkagie, 1893, 6 ff. For the
literature on cannibalism see Gaidoz, M^usine^ iii, 33*7. For an article
with a plate showing prehistoric human bones split to extract the
marrow, see Matiegka, Miithetl. d. Anthrop, Oesellsckaft in Wien,
xxvi, 129. Bergemann quotes many classical passages for certain
forms of cannibalism, notably Herodotus (i, 216) for the Massagetee
who killed people when they grew old, and the mythical stories of
Tantalus, Atreus, and Polyphemus.

' Rubu H maruita immar, id itab libbiht. adi SarrAtiSu tahazu
u kahlum id ipparrasu^ ina palt Suatu ahu ahiSu ikkal niH mdreHna
ana kaspi ipaUaru, mdtdti Utenii inniUd^ idlu ardata \iz]zih u ardatu
izzih idli, ummu di mdrti bdhi-Sa iddily buSu Bahili ana kirih su-kdin-ki
^m'tu j^iSn/ri irruh.


240 CANNIBALISM AMONGST THE SEMITES.

money; the lancU shall be raised up one against another.
The man shall desert the maid and the maid desert the
man; mother shall bolt her door against daughter. The
property of Babylon shall come into Subarti and Assyria/'
It is clearly a text that threatens evil on the ruler of
the land for some reason or other.

There is another passage which points to human flesh
being eaten by gods. This is from the Labartu-senea : ^
''There came the daughter of Anu to Bel, her father,
and said, ' Bring me, my father Bel, what I ask of thee :
the flesh of men not good, the blood of men . . .' "
But this is an incantation, and no very great stress must
be laid on it.

The Arabs have been clearly shown to have eaten
human flesh.^

The existence of cannibalism among the Hebrews was
maintained by Ghillanys^ and Daumer^ as far back as
1842. The latter says: "De cette manidre, on n'immolait
que des enfans de la noblesse ; ceux du menu peuple
et les autres victimes humaines servaient apres leur
mort k remplir de leur chair et de leur sang les plats du
banquet religieux ; on n'en jetait dans le feu que leurs
OS, qu'on avait eu soin de garder intacts et sans les
endommager." "La f6te du Passah appartenait k Tancien
culte molochiste; c'^tait la grande f£te universelle de
rimmolation de la chair humaine, le banquet des


^ Mjhrman, Z.A., xvi, 175, 1. 33 ff.

* Robertson Smith, Kinship and Marriage^ 1903, 291 ff. ; Qoldziher,
ifber KannibalUmus am Orientalischen Qtnellen, Qlobus^ 1896, Izz,
No. 16,

' Les Sacrifices Hutnains chez Us HSbreux^ 1842.

* Le Oulte du Moloch, 1842, 2 ff.


CANNIBALISM AMONGST THE SEMITES. 241

cannibales mangeant la chair, buvant le sang des enfans
sacrifi^Sy et jetant dans le feu les os fion brUSn des
victimes."

Whether there remains enough evidence to show that
the Hebrews of the more historical period did eat human
flesh is doubtful ; but that their traditions indicate that
their Semitic forefathers did so is, I think, quite obvious.
This is Bergemann's view, and he says that it is clear
from Num. xxiii, 24, that the blood of enemies slain in
battle was drunk in the most ancient period. Further,
Num. xxiv, 8, shows that their flesh was eaten.^ The only
difficulty that would arise about the eating of the firstborn
is the prejudice that some savages have against eating
kindred flesh. For this reason the wilder South American
tribes, according to Cieza de Leon, bred children they
might lawfully eat from wives of alien stock, the father
being reckoned not akin to his children who follow the
maternal line.' On the other hand, Steinmetz, in his
EndokannibalUmuSy has attempted to bring all cases of
cannibalism under the term ' endocannibalism,' or custom
of eating relations and kindred. This is quoted by Deniker,'
who says* that the theory meets with the difficulty that
certain Australian tribes avoid eating their relations (except
young children) and exchange between the various tribes.
If, however, the kindred children be admitted as eatable,
there is no obstacle to our theory of the Semites eating
their firstborn.

The reason for the origin of cannibalism, if it existed
among the Semites at an early period, as seems very

» BergemanD, Die Verbreitung der Anthropophagi^ 1893, 12.
» Andrew Lang, PerrauWs Tales, cviii.
» Races et Peuples de la Terre, 1900, 176.


242 CANNIBALISM AMONGST THE SEMITES.

probable, is not far to seek. Arabia, the home of the
Semites, at least before they split up into their various
nationalities, is one of the most barren lands. ''Indeed,
that the pressure of famine had far more to do with the
origin of infanticide than family pride had, can be doubtful
to no one who realises the fact — vividly brought out in
Mr. Doughty's travels — that the nomads of Arabia suffer
constantly from hunger during a great part of the year." ^
Necessity is one of the three reasons admitted for anthropo-
phagy, the other two being gluttony and superstition ;
and therefore we shall probably not be wrong in thinking
that the early Semites were driven by force of hunger to
devour their children, and at the same time reduce their
numbers. Doubtless this scarcity of food was one of the
chief factors in driving them to look for better and more
fertile lands ; and, as soon as they settled in the richer
pastures of Mesopotamia, economic reasons would suggest
the substitution of lambs and kids for the sacrifice of their
own kin. Against this it may be urged that up to the
present no trace of this form of substitution has been
found in cuneiform. Yet it must not be forgotten that
much of the Babylonian religion, as we know it, comes
from the Sumerians, who inhabited these fertile valleys
long before the Semites arrived. And hence we may
assume that they had never been driven by famine to eat
human flesh.

Why the firstborn only should have been selected is
not clear. There is nothing more appetizing about the
first of a family than the second, and there is nothing
peculiarly pure about them, for the pure beast in magic

^ Robertson Smith, Kinship, 294.


SELECTION OP THE FIRSTBORN. 243

is the virginJ It is, however, a custom which compels
every mother to take her turn, and at any rate it secures
a sure propitiation of the god. If the gods are admitted
to have regular dues paid by the tribe, this is the surest
way of attaining such a result. To defer the gift until
a second crop might, by failure or unexpected barrenness,
bring down the divine wrath. But so many things have
to be taken into account, that it is difficult to evolve a
satisfactory theory. Priestly or kingly influence doubtless
had its eflbct on the tribute of rich tribesmen.

We may reasonably consider, then, that the primitive
Semite, long before historic times, was a cannibal, and
devoured the firstborn of the tribe at a sacrificial meal.
As time went on and the tribe grew richer in flocks, it
became the custom to substitute a firstborn kid for the
eldest child. Yet in times of great national stress the
Semitic mind would revert to primitive tradition, perhaps
instinctively, and the firstborn would be sacrificed to
the god. The people of historical times had doubtless
forgotten that human sacrifice represented a commensal
cannibal meal, and regarded it either as a '^ self-denying
ordinance" to ofler their best, or else looked upon it
as a surrogate for the whole people on the analogy of
other substitutes.

Yet the fact must never be lost sight of that the Iamb
brought as a sin-offering took its' origin in the carcase of

1 But cf. Robertson Smith, Rd. Sent,, 464 : " In point of fact, even
in old times, when exceptional circumstances called for a human victim,
it was a child, and by preference a firstborn or only child, that was
selected by the peoples in and around Palestine. This is commonly
explained as the most costly oflfering a man can make ; but it is rather
to be regarded as the choice, for a special purpose, of the mont sacred
kind of victim."


244 SELECnON OP THE FIRSTBORN.

the beast which was intended as a bait to inveigle the
evil spirit out of the sick man. On the other hand, the
substitution of the lamb for the firstborn arises, as we
have seen, out of a primitive cannibal sacrifice. The
origins of the two rites are absolutely dissimilar, whatever
may have been the ultimate phase to which a process of
analogy brought them.


\


245


APPENDIX.


I. — Thb Lists of Bbeaches of Tabu in the Surpu Series.

As has been stated on p. 124, the Smyu Series contains
a long list of the possible tabus which the sick man may
have broken unwittingly. They may be grouped under the
followincr heads : —

o • • •

(1) Of gods and their worship.

II, 5. " Hath he sinned against his god, hath he sinned against his
goddess ? "

32. " Is it an unknown sin against a god, is it an unknown sin
against a goddess ? "

33. " Hath he spumed a god, hath he slighted a goddess ?"

34. " Is it against his god that his sin (is) or against his goddess
his misdeed ? "

74. " Is it in anything that he hath slighted his god or goddess V*

81. " Hath he made god or his goddess angry with him ? "

122. " He seeketh of the gods of heaven, the shrines of earth."

123. " He seeketh at the shrine of lord or lady."

Ill, 138-148. " Marduk can loose the tabu of Anu, Anatu, Bel, Belit,
Ea, Damkina, Sin, Ningal, Samas, Aa, Adad, Sala, Marduk,
Sarpanit, Nabii, Tasmit, Ninib, Belit-Nippiu*, . . . Quia, , . .
and BaU"

Cf. also lY, 9, " Loose ... of sin against a god/' and

II, 11, ''. . . his goddess hath he despised P" Here also
should come II, 128, *^ He seeketh of the temple" ; III, 52,
''Tabu against passing the bounds of a god"; probably

III, 45, " [Ban of angel (sidu)] and lamasau - genius " ;
III, 68, 69, " Tabu of Ninib . . . ," " Tabu of shrine and
temple " ; 71, " Tabu of the god stlakki . . ." ; 72-76, " Tabu
of the god of (such-and-such) . . . /' the latter part of the
lines being mutilated.

Cf. Old Testament, First and Third Commandments :
Exod. xxii, 20 (" He that sacrificeth unto any god, save unto
Yahweh only ") ; cf. also 28, but this is more probably to be
put under the head of sedition.


246 APPENDIX.

(2) Of off»in0i to god*.
It, 77-80. " [Ih it anything] he h&th BaocLified (or) he hatb ■ . . ,
and then withheld t Anything which he hath praenUd (?)
. . , but eaten himself 1 Anything which he hath . . .
and made a prayer ? Hatb be abrogated a due ofiering ? "
III, 3L "[Tabu] of deBtroying (I) an cpffering(l), of pouring a
libatioD(?) away into waUr."
64. " Tabu of eating the flesh of an offering."

Here perhaps should be placed Till, 39, " From Ae Uba
of . . . city, hooM, staff, rod, turtu, tabu, and making an
ofiering " ; II, 86, " Hath be incarred a tabu in making an
offering ? "

See Robertson Smith, Rel. 8em., 450, etc., and compare
Deut. xxiii, 21, " When thou shalt vow a vow unto Tahweh
thy God, thou shalt not be slack to pay it."

The Egyptian Negative Confession, " I have not spoiled
the bread of offering in the temples, I have not taken
away from the bread of offering of the gods, I have not
diminished offerings " (Wiedemann, Religion of the Ancient
Egyptiam, 251).

(3) Ofrtlatioiu and friends.

II, 20-28. " Hath he set bod at variance with father, father with son,
mother with daughter, daughter with mother, mother-in-law
with daugbter-in-law, daughter-in-law with mother-in-law,
brother with his brother, comrade with his comrade, friend
with hid friend?"
3fi. " Oppreeiiion agaimit a htnnu, hatred ogainut an elder

brother."
36. " Hatb he despised father (or) mother, hath be reviled an
elder sister ?"
Ill, 3-1 1. " Tabu falling on a man through father, mother, grand-
father, grandmother, brother, sister, the seven members of
his father's house, old or young, near or distant relatives,
progeny or Huclding, comrade or fellow, friend or com-
panion." Cf also 166-158, 161, and IV, 37, which included
some of these.
VIII, 41, 42. " From the tabu of a brother, companion, friend, fellow,
partner, fellow-townsman (of protecting or being hostile
to) ; from the tabu of elder brother, elder sister, father or
mother (of protecting or being hostile to)."


APPENDIX. 247

VIII, 61, 52. " From [the tabu of slave or] handmaid, master or
mistress (of protecting or being hostile to) ; from [the tabu
of . . .] of princess, witch, harlot, courtesan (?)."
65. " From the tabu of wife, concubine, (or) son (of protecting
or being hostile to)."

Under this head must come —

II, 51-63. *' Hath he not spared a man mirantiiiu, hath he driven
forth the good man from his folk, hath he scattered
a well-knit family?"
72, 73. ** Is it through a company which he hath scattered
(that he hath incurred a tabu) ? Is it through a well-knit
troop which he hath split up ? "

Here also must come III, 55, " Tabu of being agreed with
an adversary, and then being hostile " ; 162, '' [Tabu from]
kinsfolk (P) and relatives" ; and probably 163, ''[Tabu from
offspring] and suckling."

Gf. Old Testament, Fifth Commandment : Exod. xxi, 15
{" And he that smiteth his father or his mother shall surely
be put to death"); similarly, in v. 17, he that curses his
parents; Lev. xix, 32 ; xx, 9 ; Deut. xxvii, 16.

Here must be added —

II, 29-31. *' Hath he not let a captive go free, hath he not let loose
a prisoner, hath he not let one in prison see the light, hath
he said of a captive * Seize him ! ' or of a prisoner * Bind
him!'?"

(4) Of murder,

II, 49. « Hath he shed his neighbour's blood ? "

87. " Hath he incurred a tabu from life ? "
III, 34. " Tabu of apx)roaching (?) his friend (?) and slaying him."

Cf. Old Testament, Sixth Commandment.

(6) 0/ adultery
II, 48. " Hath he approached his neighbour's wife ? "

Cf. Old Testament, Seventh Commandment: Lev. xviii,
1 ff. ; XX, 10.

(6) Of stealing and cheating.

II, 42, 43. ** Hath he used a false balance, hath he taken a wrong
price, hath he [not taken a righteous] price "
45-47. ^* Hath he set a false boundary, hath he not set a true
boimdary, hath he removed landmark, border, or boimdary ?"


248 APPENDIX.

Ill, 56. " Tabu of fixing border or boundary."
VIII, 34. " From the tabu of . . . border, boundary, or landmark."
II, 47. " Hath he entered his neighbour's house ? "
50. " Hath he stolen his neighbour's garment ? "
61. " Hath he been instilting, robbed, or caused to rob ? "
VIII, 47-49. " From the tabu of giving with a small measure, shekel,
or mana, and taking with a large one."
50. " From the tabu of using a false balance, of taking a wrong
price from one under a tabu (?) *'

Here also add IT, 114, ''He asketh of the BAR-measure,
and the KA-measure."

Cf . Old Testament, Eighth Commandment : Exod. xxii, 1 ff.
C' If a man shall steal an ox ") ; Lev. xix. II ('' Ye shall not
steal"); xix, 35, 36 (''Ye shall do no unrighteousness in
judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or in measure. Just
balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall
ye have"); Deut. xxv, 13 ("Thou shalt not have in thy
bag divers weights, a great and a small "). Cf. vv. 14, 15 ;
Deut. xix, 14 ; and xxvii, 17 (landmarks).

One of the great crimes of which the Midianites were
guilty was the using of diverse measures and weights, a great
and a small, buying by one and selling by another (Sale,
Koran, quoting Al Beidawi in D'Herbelot, BibL Orient,).

(7) Of lying or breakiiig promises.

II, 6. " Hath he said * no ' for * yes/ or * yes ' for * no ' ? "

38, 39. " Hath he said * there is ' for * there is not,* or * there is

not ' for * there is ' ? "
56-57. " Hath he been straight with his mouth but not true in
his heart, hath his mouth said * yea ' but his heart * nay ' ;
in anything hath he meditated imrighteousness ? "
75. " Hath he promised with heart and mouth (and) not given ? "
III, 51. " [Tabu of] saying and denying."
VIII, 56. "From the tabu of promising pleasure and joy, and then
denying it and not giving it."

Cf. Old Testament, Ninth Commandment : Exod. xxiii, 1 ;
Lev. xix, 11 ff.

(8) Of speech.
II, 8. " Hath he spoken what is unholy . . . ? "

12-14. " Hath he spoken evil . . . ? Hath he spoken what is
impure . . . ? Hath he let intrigue be discussed 7 "


APPENDIX. 249

II, 41. " Hath he spoken wickedness . . . ?"

63-65. " Is his mouth loose (?) (or) foul, are his Hps deceitftil (?)

(or) perverse, hath he taught what is impure, hath he

inculcated that which is unseemly?"
82. " Hath he stood up in an assembly and spoken what is not

correct ? "

(9) Of bribery.

II, 16. " Hath he caused a judge to receive [a bribe (?)] ? "
III, 24 " Tabu of giving a bribed judgment"

Gf. Exod. xxiii, 8, " And thou shalt take no gift ; for a gift
blindeth them that have sight, and perverteth the words of the
righteous"; Ley. xix, 15, ''Te shall do no unrighteousness
in judgment: thou shalt not respect the person of the poor,
nor honour the person of the mighty, but in righteousness
shalt thou judge thy neighbour."


(10) Of sedition and the like.

II, 19. "... Hath he made its city turn ? "
54. " Hath he opposed one in authority ? *^
96-98. "Hath he wronged his city, hath he spread abroad
a rumour against his city, hath he made evil the speech
of his city?"
Ill, 131. " Ban of rebellion and revolt."

Cf. VIII, 63, " From the tabu of . . . prefect, officer, and
judge."

Cf. Exod. xxii, 28, " Thou shalt not revile God {margin,
judges), nor curse a ruler of thy people."

(11) Variotu vague refereTicee to wrong.

II, 37. " Hath he given in small things, and refused in great ? ''

44. " Hath he deposed the rightful heir, hath he set up the wrong

heir?"
58-60. " Hath he transgressed the right, hath he offended (?),

hath he abolished, driven away, destroyed, ?, ?, ? "
62. " Hath he set his hand to evil ? "
66. « Hath he followed after evil ? "


la


t


260 APPENDIX.

II, 67. "* Hath he pattfjed over the bounds of right ? "
68. ** Hath he done what in not pure ? "
70, 71. '^ l8 it throu^ any grievous harm that he hath done ?

In it by the many fdna which he hath committed ? "
94, 95. Tapdd uktalns, [aryta tapdi ittatallak (difficult of ex-
planation).
Ill, 12, 13. ^ Tabu of right or wrong, heavy or light"

Here fthonld come the mutilated lines III, 127-130,
''Tabu of weak and . . • , sin and fever (P), of making
a mistake (P), of sin and misdeed " ; III, 160, " Tabu of

• • • SlU • • •

(12) Of water,

III, 38, 39. ^ Tabu of being aaked for a runnel for one day, and
refusing, of being asked for a ditch and refusing.**
53. '* Tabu of 8topx>iiig & neighbour's canaL''

Here must come II, 117-119, "He seeketh of irrigation-
machine, well, or river '* ; III, 47, " [Tabu of well P] and
river," and possibly 48, 49, ** [Tabu of] dam and ferry, . . .
and bridge " ; VIII, 35-37, " From the tabu of runnel,
canal, bridge, passage, way, or road, from the tabu of ship,
river, dam, ferry, booth, and reed-hut (P), from the tabu of
balihu, runnel, spring, watercourse, and fortress " ; III, 59,
" Tabu of urinating into a river or vomiting into a river " ;
133, "Tabu of . . . and Euphrates/'

Cf. the Egyptian Negative Confession (Wiedemann, Itei.
An. Sg., 261), " I have not turned aside the water (from
a neighbour's field) at the time of inundation, I have not
cut off an arm of the river in its course."

(13) 0//ire,

II, 110. " Of the lighted coal-i>an, of the torch, of the bellows he

seeketh."
Ill, 16. "Tabu of bellows and coal-pau."
132. " Tabu of fire and coal-pan."
VIII, 68. " From the tabu of oven, flame (?), stove, coal-pan, . . . , and
bellows."

Here, too, may come III, 16, ''Tabu of pointing at the
fire " ; and 18, " Tabu of casting fire in a man's face."


APPENDIX. 261

All these tabus seem to have reference to respect paid to
fire. Fire was not allowed to be kindled on the Sabbath by
the Hebrews (Exod. xxxt, 3), and such nations as especially
reverence fire show clearly how such tabus originated. For
instancOi the Parsees will not suffer a menstruous woman
to see fire or even look on a lighted taper (Frazer, Golden
Bough, iii, 224, quoting G. Eo£Emann). Such tabus are
based on local sacra ; in Homer (IL, v, 499) the threshing-
floor, the winnowing-fan, and meal are all held to be sacred.

(14) O/fceapoiis.

Ill, 27-29. '* Tabu of bow or chariot, bronze dagger, or spear, lance,
or bow."
VIII, 60. " From the tabu of being banned by a bow, chariot, iron
dagger, or lanoe.''

Here also must come III, 67, '' Tabu of drawing a weapon
in a company"; VIII, 46, "From the tabu of rending
garments and drawing an iron dagger " (cf. Ill, 36, *' Tabu
of drawing a bukannu in a company '') ; III, 57, " Tabu of
destroying a chariot and touching its riksu"

The explanation of this tabu on weapons may perhaps
be sought in the consecration of warriors before battle :
" warriors are consecrated persons, subject to special taboos "
(Bobertson Smith, Bel. Sem., 402). The ban on drawing
a sword in an assembly is paralleled in later times by the
mess-room law which forbids a weapon to be unsheathed.
** Rending garments and drawing a sword " may be compared
to the custom of the Arabs who cast down their turbans,
symbolizing a fight to the death.

(15) Of writing materials,
II, 113. " He seeketh of the tablet and reed-pen.''

(16) Qf mourning,

yill, 45. ** From the ban of rending one's garments, breaking one's
breastpiece, and beating one's breast."

Of. Lev. xxi, 10, where the high priest is not to unbind
his hair nor rend his clothes.


f»r


%'/l APF£5IfIX.

'17, Of 9or*xr^.
n, 6&, ** lUth Ik; net Lin baryl Xf> ^Jt^xrf or witchcraft ? '

Ct noU ' <m p. 126, to III, 114.

Ct EzocL xxiiy 18, '^Thoa shalt not suffer a witch to
lire '' ; Ler. xiz, 26, '' Neither shall ye use enchantments, nor
prsctise aogurf/' Cf. alto 31 ; zx, 6, 27 ; Dent XTiii, 11.

^\Hj ^}f pointing vith th/i finger,

n, *?^ (*3, ** Hath h#^r lUfMmd a t-ibu by {x^inting bin finger at a person
— tJrtj |ierv/fj #/f ^tber or nioiher, elder brother or ftister,
friwKl '^rt' n*;ighU>ur, g^jd or king, master or mistress ?"
1 1 1, 16, ** TfiUi (4 ijTrtnling at the fire."

Cf, II, 7, " Hath he pointed his finger . . . ? "

(19/ Of runMiroke.
Ill, 23, ** Tabu from Kitting on a »eat in the hud."

(20) OfbeoBU.

Ill, 3^1. ** Tabu against Mtriking the young of beaHts."

42. **[Tabu] of aHking a man for wild beasts at the side of
a cattle-MtalL"

Here also add II, 115, 116, "He asketh of domestic and
wild beasts/' and for want of a better place; YIII, 40,
'< From the tabu of having found chance oxen (or) sheep
belonging to men and taking them '' ; and III, 36, " Tabu
of slaughtering a sheep and touching its riksu (?)"

Cf . IjOv. xxii, 27, ** When a bullock or a sheep or a goat
18 brought forth, then it shall be seven days under the dam "
(before being sacrificed) ; Deut. xxii, 6, " If a bird's nest
chance to be before thee/' etc. Of. Sabbath, xix, 1, "If (on
the Sabbath) one hunts a wild beast or a bird which one has
on one's domain, it is not a guilty act, but it is a crime to
wound them."

Exod. xxiii, 4, " If thou meet thine enemy's ox or his ass
going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him again " ;
Deut. xxii, 1, " Thou shalt not see thy brother's ox or his
sheep go astray, and hide thyself from them."


APPENDIX. 253

(21) 0/ uprooting plants and reeds,

III, 25, 26. " Tabu of tearing up plants in the desert, of cutting reeds
in the marshes."
VIII, 33. " From the tabu of cutting canes, brakes, reeds, of tearing
up plants or kankaUu (some plant)."

Cf. Ill, 40, " [Tabu of] uprooting plants (?) in a field" ;
65, "Tabu of . . . a reed in a bundle (P) " ; VIII, 57, " From
the tabu of uprooting the caper, the thorn, the tamarisk,
(and) the date-palm." Here we must add III, 46, " [Tabu
of] tamarisk and date-palm."

Parallels for this tabu will be found in Robertson Smith's
Rel. Sem.f 142, 145. Among the Sakai, before they fell
trees in a forest, all tools are charmed to avoid accidents
which might be brought about by evil spirits (Skeat and
Blagden, Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula^ i, 345).


(22) Of various tabus.

Tabu] of laying . . . before (?) a man."
Tabu] of food (?) and drink (?) . . . the way."


Ill, 32. "
33. "

37. " Tabu of tapalu and seal (?)." (Cf. also III, 85, 86.)

(23) Of tabus on various places,

II, 120, 121. " He seeketh of ship, hinnu^ boat, he seeketh of East
and West."
124-127. " He seeketh of the exit and entrance of the city, of
the exit and entrance of the main gate, of the exit and
entrance of the house, of the street."
1 29. *' He seeketh of the road."
Ill, 61-63. " Tabu of mountain and precipice, height and wady^
pass and . . ."
66. " Tabu from door and bolt . . ."
VI II, 31 . " From the tabu of field, garden, house, street, path, dwellings
and chamber.'*
54. " From the tabu of house, . . . , city gate, field, garden^

and resting-place."
59. " From the tabu of hedge, . . . , threshold, guard, door,
bolt, and . . ."

Compare the Talmudic ordinances concerning clean and
unclean houses (p. 186); also the 'Or/a, which says that


254 APPENDIX.

trees planted on a public way, or by an idolater, or by
a thief, or in a ship, or sprouting spontaneously are subject
to the *orla,

(24) OfforvM of oaths.

Ill, 14. " Tabu of raifling a ois-mar and then swearing by a god."

17. " Tabu of raising fire and then swearing by a god."

41. "Tabu of taking an irrigation-machine and swearing by
a god."

43. " Tabu of swearing (tom^, being banned (?)) by sunrise."

44. " Tabu of raising unwashen hands and swearing by a god."
VIII, 43. " From the tabu of breaking a dish, shattering a cup, and

swearing by a god"

Cf. Lev. xix, 12. The story of Hector is pertinent here ;
he fears to pour the libation of dark wine with unwashen
hands, nor may he pray to Zeus when bespattered with gore
(Tylor, Primitive CuUnrey 4th ed., ii, 439).

(25) Unclassified.

Ill, 134-137. " Tabu from . . . and assembly, from dead man or living
man, from male destroyer or female destroyer (Zimmem
says that these are demons), known or unknown."

These last two occur again in III, 164, 165. There are
also forty-nine tabus mutilated or entirely destroyed.

(26) Of the * undean * tabtis.

For the details of these see pp. 125 ff. Add here also —

II, 106-109. " He seeketh (to know whether his tabu cometh) from

couch, seat, dish, or the offering of a cup."
Ill, 19, 20. " Tabu from cup or dish, bed or couch."

(Here, too, perhaps comes 1. 58, " Tabu of drinking water
from a sarsarn")

VIII, 44. " From the tabu of seat, stool, bed, couch, and being bound."

Perhaps also III, 22, " Tabu of giving or asking the
dregs."


APPENDIX. 256

(27) Varioui forms of tabu,

II, 83-86. " Whether by something loosed, which he knoweth not, he
hath incurred a tabu, (or) by receiving (something) he hath
incurred a tabu, (or) by ... he hath incurred a tabu."

The particular point to be observed in this list of tabus is
that many actions or states are omitted which are well known
to be tabu. Notwithstanding the fact that forty-nine lines
are so mutilated as to be untranslatable, it is distinctly
noticeable that none of the primary unclean tabus are
mentioned; childbirth, menstruation, the A;Vi, marriage,
touching a dead body (unless the brief mention in 25 be
accounted evidence), although the * holy' tabus are included
in comprehensive phrases. The reason for this is twofold ;
either the unclean tabus are such that in their breach they
do not result in sickness, but merely demand purification
(such as menstruation and the hWi) ; or, albeit they are of
such a nature as to bring sickness, they are so obvious as to
leave no doubt as to what has been the cause of the trouble
(such as puerperal fever after childbirth). To say this is
only a reiteration of the theory that the Surpu series is
intended to deal with the ' unwitting ' sins. On the other
hand, it may be urged that although the primary unclean
tabus are not mentioned, the secondary contagious tabus are
quoted at great length; but the reason for this is clear.
The primary tabus are in themselves, as we have said above,
either innocuous (with regard to disease) or patent to the
most heedless; but contagion from such is a very different
matter ; for example, the lilith who regards herself as
a spirit- wife brings no harm to her human husband, and yet
will retaliate on any other who shall interfere with her.
Hence this very point adds to our demonstration of the
theory of the ' unwitting ' sins.

II. — On LooxiNa on a Corpse, p. 35.

It is doubtful whether the translation of ana pagri ihirtiinni,
given on p. 35 in the sense of having allowed the wax-figure
to look on a corpse, is valid. The passage is more probably


256 APPENDIX.

to be rendered '* they have looked upoD me as a corpse/'
similar to 1. 13 on p. 152. But the tabu is certain, from p. 26.

III. — On the meaking of qvzalu, p. 52.

GU-ZA-LAL = guzalu, which has been translated ' throne-
bearers/ for Gil-GU-ZA = . ku88Uf * throne/ and lal = naiii,
* to bear.' This meaning is, however, challenged, although
nothing satisfactorily definite has been suggested as an
alternative. The comparison, therefore, between the Assyrian
spirits and the ' throne-bearers ' of Hebrew and Mohammedan
tradition rests on the evidence pro or con for the exact
meaning of this word (see Muss-Arnolt, Dict.^ 214).

lY. — Additional Note to p. 76, on babren women touching the

COBPSE OF A MAN EXECUTED FOB MUBDEB.

** The remedy for sterility was for the woman who wished
to become a mother to step over the corpse of an executed
criminal, or into a basin of water which had been used to
wash his corpse, or to tread on a human skull, or walk
between the tombs of a cemetery, or step over some antique
resemblance of a cat or other relic of old Egypt " (Lord
Cromer's Modern Hgupt, ii, 505).

V. — Additional Note to p. 53, on the connection between

Jonah and the Moon.

On the superstitions of Arabs concerning the swallowing
of the moon, and the bearing of this on the story of Jonah^
see G. A. Smith, The Book of the Twelve Prophets, 1899,
ii, 524 ; see also Hans Schmitt, Jona, 1907.


257


INDEX.


Abbbxviatxons : — A = Arabic ; Ab = Abyssinian ; As = Assyrian ; C = Coptic ; E s
Egyptian; £th=Ethiopic; Qs Greek; H= Hebrew; I = Indian; L= Latin;
M= Malay; Macs Macedonian; Med=Medi8eYal, Middle Ages; N.T. eNew
Testament ; P « Persian ; Pal » Palestinian ; Phoen = Phoenician ; S s Syriac ;
Sab=Sabian; T=Tezidi.


Aa, zlii, 245.

Aaron, xviii, 219.

Ab, month, in magic, As, 141, 209 ;

H, 64.
Abb& Isaiah, 6.
Abbas, 97.
AbdnEhadir, 211.
Abipones, 127.
Abortions: as ghosts. A, H, M, 23;

As, 20, 23 ; not to be buried with

body of mother, H, 21 ; as demoniac

offspring, 132, 236.
Abraham, xix, 73, 86, 220, 231, 233.
Abramelin, xrii, Ix, 170.
Abn'dt-Pnhar, 158.
Abu KabOs, 227.
Abn Mohammed the Lazy, 62.
Abu Babah, 79, 80.
Abu Zenna, 159.
Abyssinia, patsitn.
Adad (Storm -god), xxi, xlii, bdi, 19,

54, 64, 96, 224, 245.
^<{0^ttr-Tes8el, xlv, 26.
Adam, xx, 5, 23, 38, 58, 70, 72, 73.
Adonai, 1.

iElian quoted, xxxri.
iBneas, 72.
Aeneze tribe, 158.
JEschylns, 107.
Africa, Ixrii (see Moghrehi) ; East, 60,

237.
AfHt, 17, 47, 59, 63, 70, 76, 132, 207 ;

see Demont.
Agrath bath Mablath, 30, 41, 58.
Agukakrime, xxii.


^AAo^M-demon, 41, 43, 100, 192.

Ahmad ibn Abubekr, xlix.

Ahriman, 119.

*Akikah, 229, 231.

Alaska, 184.

Aleppo, 89.

Alexander, xxxviii, 96, 155, 157.

Alfoors of Minahassa, 163.

Algerians, 62, 211.

Ali, 168.

Alkali in magic, As, lii, liii.

Allah, (XX), avi), bd, (5), (23), (30), 42,
(72), (74), (77), (83), (226). (228),
(229), (236).

Allamu, xxriii.

Allegory of Tahweh begetting children ,73.

Al-Nooman, 227.

Aloe hung up, A, 90.

Al-Sameri, 146.

Altar, 26, 130, 157, 194, 197, 198, 199,
220.

^M-demon, 39, 71, 81, 122.

*Aimh, 63.

Alum in magic. A, 88.

Amasis, 10, 222.

Ameimar, 147.

AfneUdispttf lix.

America, South, 241. ^

Amorite, 201.

'Amr b. Tarbu*, descended from she-
demon, 70.

Amulets, xviii, li, bd ; A, xxix, bdii, 90,
106; Ab, 104; As, 41, 84, 154;
Maronite, 42 ; against Lilith, 72.

AmurrikanUt 171.

8


258


INDEX.


Anato, 151, 245.

Angels, M, Mi, 6, 52; H, 23, 160,

161 ; daughters of God, A, 74 ;

guardian, 46, 200 ; intermarriage with

human beings, see Denumt.

Angel of Death, A, xx, 86 ; H, 86, 87 ;

8,87.
Angel of Lust, H, 66.
Angel of Tahweh, 73, 78, 86, 220.
Animal forms of demons, see J)emoM.
Annual expulsion of demons, 157.
Anobret, 222.

Anointing as diyine due, 133, 234.
Ants in magic, A, As, H, 33.
Anu, XX, xxii, xxiii, xxxix, xliii, xlr, 20,
41, 49, 50, 54, 55, 151, 152, 240, 245.
Anuk, 1.
Anunnaki, 85.
Apep, 149.
Aplii, xxxTii.
Arabia, Arabs, pauitn,
Arafat, 16.
Arameans, xxii.
Arbela, 85.

Ardat lilt, spirit, 65 £P., 120.
Ardatu emphasizes femininity, 66.
Areca in magic, M, Iviii.
Ariel, 160, 161.

Arihaiu (* menstruating ' P), 67, 83.
Aristophanes, 107.
Aristotle, 157.
Arkat-ilAni, xxxvii.
Arluni, 72.
Arm in magic, 164.
Armenia, xlix, liii.
Arrowheads as amulets. A, Ixiii.
Arsacid period, xxxriii.
Arsacius, 107.
Artemis, 230.
Arum, XX.

Asafodtidainmagic, M, Iviii; Med, 149.
Atakku (* feyer ' P), 50, 82, 99, 160, 203

(see Fever) ; not oiakku^ xxxix ; Series,

xU.
Aiam, 176, 179.
Ash in magic. A, xxix, 61, 174 ; As, 139,

208; Babar,201; 0,174; H,ly,lvi,

61,164,187; M,lTiii,36; Malagasy,

213; Tobit, Irii.


Ash-heaps, As, 177.

Ashdod, metempsychosis of unclean

person into woman of, H, 4.
^ftjpM-prieets, xxiif.
Asmodeus, 71, 74 if., 77, 134, 197;
bom of angel and woman, 75 ; plots
against newly wedded, 75, 134.
Ass in magic. A, Ixri, 51, 60 ; As, xlir,
50, 51 ; H, 219, 220, 233, 234, 252 ;
metempsychosis of unclean person into,
H, 4; T, 6; Balaam's ass, 4, 51;
asses' urine as libation. As, 34 ; hoof,
foot of ghoul, 60.
AJSur, xxxi, 85.
AlSurbanipal, xxxrii, xxxriii, 10, 55, 65,

100, 178.
Aisumafirpal, xxii.
AiSur-risila, 85.
Assyria, pattim.
Asterius, legend, 130.
Astride, H, 164.
Astronomy, xxxt if.
Atargatis, 141.
Ater'me8\ in magic, xlr, 26.
Athenians, xxxiii, 14, 230.
Atonement, xvii, xli, xlri, 114, 175 if. ;
As, xxiii, Ivii, 84, 153, 159, 177-9,
181 if. ; H, 177-81, 182 if.; not eaten,
0, 216; contradictions between the
atonement ceremonies (Wellhausen),
198; day of, 119, 141, 182, 184.
Atonement-money, 182, 225.
Atreus, 239.
Augustas, xxxri.
'Aulak, 63.

Australia, 90, 148, 241.
Austria, 170.
Aymara Indians, 184.
Aza, 44.
Azael, 44.
Azarias, Ivii.
Azazel, 75, 184.
Azbuga, 161.

Baal, xviii.

Ba'al k'ri (one unclean from noctumal

pollution), 71, 117, 122, 190; see

Tabu.
Babar Archipelago, 201.


INDEX.


259


Babes, danger to (see Labartu), 164;

H, 129; stolen by oats, A, 42; chann

against losing, A, 102 ; mother dying

with babe at breast becoming ghost,

19 ; new-born sprinkled, A, liii ; Fiji

ideas, 38.
Babylon, xxi, zxii, xxxy, liii, 78, 79, 02,

178, 239, 240.
Babylonians, pauitn.
Bachelor-ghost, see Ohost ; married to

spirit, 66 if. *
Backwards, looking, in magic, 171 ; A,

171, 172, 226; As, 172 (P); Boman,

227.
Badagas, 183.
Baghdad, 22, 27, 211.
Bags hung up as amulets. A, 90 ; cf. H,

146.
i^aArtt-fruit, 161.
Bakhtashiyah, 169.
Balaam, xxr.
Balaam's ass, 4, 51.
Balak, xxy.
Bali in Jara, 184.

Ban, Tablet of the. As, 28, 123, 126.
Banana in magic, Tonga, 215.
Banks Islands, 22.
Banning eril spirits, see Binding.
Baptism, Hy, 29.
Barbary, 1, 17.
Bardesan, xxzr.
Bdr-0ffdrdf demon, 40.
Barley in magic, 102.
Barnabas, Epistle of, 106.
Barren Yalley, 200.
Barren women desiring ofiEspring, 76 if. ;

(charm against barrenness, A, 102, 256 ;

H, 102) ; figures offered by(P), As,

64 ; Sumatra sacrifice for, 183 ; S.E.

Africa superstition, 237.
Barrett, Francis, Iz, 68, 91.
Bar Shalmon, 71.
^aril-priests, xxi if., xlr.
Basket in magic, M, 36, 201 (cf. 163).
Bat, metempsychosis of udclean person-

into, H, 4.
Bat-men with raren faces, As, 81.
Bath Horin, 129.
Baths haunted, see Demons,


Battas of Sumatra, 183.

Battie-ritual, As, 157 ; A, H, P, 158 ;

E (Eth), 156.
Ba*n, xlTiii, 88, 205, 245.
Beads in magic. A, 38 ; M, 28.
Beans in magic, Boman, 227.
Bear in magic, 230.
Beard in magic, A, 38.
Beasts in magic (see under different

names), M, 162.
Beating to drire away spirits. A, 60,

105 (of. H, 161); T, 81; Xerxes

flogging HeUespont, 230.
Bed in magic, 109 ; As, lix, 35, 127,

165, 166, 171, 208; H, 102, 164.
Bee, Book of the, quoted, 6.
Beelzebub, xlri.

Beer in magic, A, 210 ; As, xlir, 187.
Beetle in magic. A, 210.
Beirut, 80, 226.
Beit Nuba, 207.

Bekhten, Possessed Princess of, 107.
Bel, XX, xxii, 25, 55, 78, 82, 97, 240,

245 ; selects woman, 78 ; Temple

of, 78.
Bel and the Dragon, 199.
Bel-e^, xxxYii.
Beliar, 51.
BeUt, xxYi, 245.
Belit-m, 188.
BeUt-Nippur, 245.
Belly in magic, M, 36.
Berossus quoted, xx.
Besisi, 53.

Betel-leaYcs in magic, M, 162, 163.
Bilkis, 57.
Binding a spirit, xxi ; As, xlYii, 45, 172 ;

S, xlvii, 51; Tobit, lyii, 74; the

tongue, G, 172.
Bird in magic, xxxri, 202 ; A, IxYii, 5,

135, 187; As, xxii, 41, 49, 81, 135,

186; Eth, Ixvi; H, 185-8, 252; M,

162; N.T., 02; Sumatra, 183. See

Batf Coek, Dove, Eagle, Owl, Paradite,

Peacock, Pigeon, Raven, Sparrow, and

Swallow,
Bisharin, 10, 60.
Bitch in magic, xlix, 204.
£it'Sala\ incantation, xxxTiii.


260


INDEX.


Bitumen in magic, As, lix, 164, 188,

203 ; 0, 106.
Black in magic. A, xx, 61, 107, 211 ;
As, 154, 161, 165, 170, 171, 188;
Barnabas, 106 ; H, Ixy, Ixti, 61, 211 ;
I, xxriii, lix ; Lucian, 104 ; Boman,
227 ; S, 92.
Black man, demon as, A, 40, 77 (cf.

107) ; Barnabas, 106.
Blacksmiths, Jewish, accredited with
magic in Abyssinia, 103.

Blindness, H, 30, 129, 170 ; Test, of
Sol., 43. See Ophthalmia.

Blood in magic, 195 if., 203 ; A, 5 ;
M, 21 ; Sab, 148 ; sprinkled, 181 ;
A, Ixni, 211 ; As, 208 ; H, W, 194,
212; Malagasy, 183; dost sprinkled
on, of murdered man, A, 61 ; on altar,
220 ; on honse, A, 58, 228 ; H, 185,
188 (cf. footnote, 228) ; on door-
posts, A, 226 ; on monument. A, 227 ;
on plonghland, A, 58 ; on saddle. A,
158 ; unlocks treasure. A, 62 ; lures
demons, see Demon* ; feeds ghosts, A,
G, 16; of sacrifice, on forehead, A,
80, 226, 227 ; on skin. A, 226, 229 ;
runs into water. A, 231 ; superstition
about bleeding, M; H, 115; as seat
of life, 179, 195 ; used in writing, H,
186 ; to create man, As, xx, 195.

Blowing in magic, see Breath,

BIndan, 78.

Blue in magic. A, Ixi, 90 ; Ab, 164 ;
H, 164.

B'ng Eldhim, 72.

Boarinmagic, 0,216; M, 127. SeePi^.

Body in magic. A, 211.

Boils, 209.

BoUvia, 184.

Bone in magic. As, xx, xliii.

Bone of hyena in magic, Ab, 104.

Bones of frog in magic, H, Ixir.

Bones removed, see Grave,

Borhdt, 5.

Borneo, 36, 163, 228.

Borsippa, xxxvii.

Bottle in magic, A, 180.

Bouda, demoniac possession in, Abyssinia,
103, 149.


Bow in magic, H, 144.

Box in magic. A, 37 ; As, xxTii, 161 (P) ;

H, 144 ; Med, 149.
Brain in magic, Ixiv.
Brazier in magic (see Center) ^ As, xIy, lix.
Bread in magic. A, 169, 207, 231 ; As,

xlu, xIy, 139, 157, 161, 206, 208 ; H,

xxxi, 91, 118, 139, 207; Mac, 207 ;

Sab, 139 ; T, 31.
Breaking neck of animal, instead of

sacrificing, H, 194, 220, 233; not

breaking bones. A, 229.
Breaking pot, etc., to dissipate demons^

A, 30, 31; As, 28, 124, 206 (cf.

254) ; H, 30.
Breast in magic. A, As, 211.
Breath in magic. A, 73, 168 ; I, 162 ;

IbnEhaldun, 145; P, 168; cf. hot

air of Abu Babah, 80; foulness of,

H, 129.
Brickwork, god of, xIy.
Bride, tabu against taking water from,

H, 31, 32 ; allowed to wash on Toma,

H, 32 ; washes her feet. A, 135 ;

snatched away by M^ed, 61 ; customs-

concerning, 30 if., 135.
Bridegrooms, customs concerning, 30 ff.,.

135.
Bridge in magic, As, 152 ; H, 117.
Brimstone in magic, Med, 149; see-

Sulphur.
Bronze in magic, As, 154, 203.
Broom in magic. A, xxix, 37.
Bruniquel, 239.
Buffalo in magic, I, Sumatra, 183 ; M,

228.
Building rites, 228 (see Blood) ; As,.

xlv.
Bukhara, 169.
Bull, diyine, 96.
Bundle of twigs (P) in magic, As, 166,.

212, 213.
Bunene, xlii.

Buratu-irood, see Cypress,
Burghers, 183.

Burial of horse slaughtered, O, 216.
Burning in healing. A, Ixiv, 105; As,

Ixiy.
Bumt-oifering, 194 if. (cf. It).


INDEX.


261


Boro, 167.

Butter in magio, As, xlii, xIt, 157, 158.

Bynay Iri.

Bysantme amulets, 42.

Caaba, Stone of the, 116.

Gain, 187.

Gain's father a demon, 73.

Gairo, 18, 31, 70, 90.

Gall in magic. A, 146 ; £, 222 ; H, 64.

Galifomia, 184.

Galirrhoe (Zerka Ma'in), 59.

Gambodia, 184.

Gambyses, 10.

Gamel in magic. A, 16, 60, 77, 173, 210,

227; H, XX, 117; P, 167; Sab, 14;

in metempsychosis, H, 4.
Gandle in magic, H, 119 ; M, 36 ;

Maronite, 29.
Gannibalism, 232 if. ; eating corpse of

man executed for murder, 76.
Gaper in magic. As, 33, 34, 253 ; H, 91.
Gaptivity, 178.
Garmel, 79.

Garthaginian battle ritual, 158.
Gat in magic. A, Ixrif., 61, 256; 6,

174; H, Ixyif., 61; carry off sleeping

babes, A, 42.
Cattle in magic. As, lix ; charm for,

As(P), S, 50; perceire spirits. A, H,

51 ; attacked by demons. As, 49.

See Ox,
Caul in magic, H, 194.
Cayes haunted, see Demont.
Cedar in magic, Armen., 33 ; As, xxii,

xxxTiii, 188, 202 ; H, It, 185, 188 ;

oil of, in magic. As, 33, 188.
Celebes, 163, 201.
Cemetery haunted, see Demoru,
Censer in magic, Iriii ; A, Ivii ; As, xli,

xlii, xIt, iTii, 26. 28, 34, 158, 160,

188, 202, 204, 208 ; Tobit, 75, 134

(of. A, 89, and the hot air of Abu

Babah, 80).
Geram, 156.

Chair in magic. A, 138 ; As, 127.
Chaldeans, xxxir, xxxt, xxxri, 100.
Challox in magic, 135.
Chariot in magic, I, 158.


ChauTeau, 239.

Chest in magic, A, 37.

Chicken in magic, A, 62; Ab, 104;
H, 212; I, 183; M. 228.

Chidr, 80.

Child, see Baie9,

Childbed, Childbirth, woman dying in,
becomes ghost, A, 20, 22 (cf. 27) ;
As, 19, 131 (cf. 6, 22; H, 21, 22) ;
I, 22 ; M, 20, 21 ; Melanesia, Pelew,
22; bewitched. Pal, 135; woman in,
dangers to, 137; A, 169; charm
for, I, xxTiii, Ix ; M, li ; must not
see menstruating woman. A, 118 ;
must rise when corpse is carried past,
A, 27, 137 ; Tinted by Obizuth, Test,
of Sol., 41 ; guarded by amulet, H,
72 ; wears sandals, H, 119 ; see Tabu.
Virgin Mary assists at, 138.

* Children of the Deep,' 214.
Child-witch, A, 43; tabu on, 112.

See Labartu and Owl,
China, xliii, 157, 184.
Christ, XXX, xlTii, xlix, Ixri, 9, (51),

74, 91, 101, 107, 208, 223 ; inLucian,

104.
Christian superstitions of the Middle

Ages, XTii, Ix, 48, 53, 68, SI, 91,

149, 173.
Cigarettes in magic, M, 162.
Cinnabar in magic, 6, Ixrii.
Girde, Magic, Ixif., Ixriii, 189; As,

xxiii, IriifF., 123, 126(7), 165, 204,

207 ; I, lix ; Pal, 102.
Clay in magic. A, xx, 38 ; As, xx, xIt,

32, 34, 64, 81, 84, 150, 154, 159,

161,204; H, XX, 144.

* Clean ' man, H, It.

Clean place in magic, 180, 199 ; As, 165,

199, 206, 214 ; H, 199 (cf. 238) ;

S, 115.
Cloth in magic. A, 88 ; H, 146 ; 1, 163 ;

M, Iriii.
Clothes in magic. As, Wiii, 26 ; 6, 22 ;

clean. As, 138.
Coal in magic, H, Inii.
Cock in magic. A, 61, 62, 211, 212 (cf.

As, 63) ; H, xx, 61, 170 ; M, 230.
Cocoanuts in magic, I, 163.


262


INDEX.


Coffer of marble in ma^c, A, 37*
Cohabitation, tabu on Wednesday and

Friday, T, 134; in bed in which child

sleeps, H, 135. See Tabu.
Coin in magic, M, 162.
Gollyridians, 207.
Coloured threads or hairs in magic. As,

33, 165 ft.; I, 163, 164; M, 162;

Boman, 164.
Colt in magic, A, 62.
Combing hair on Sunday, tradition, 8,51.
Consecration of priests, H, 182.
Consumption, remedy for. A, 173.
Contagious tabu, see Tabu»
Copper in magic, As, 187 ; H, Ixvi.
Coptic charm, 172.
Corascene, zliz.
Cords in magic. As, lyiii, 121, 158,

164 if. ; H, 164, 170; I, 163;

Ibn Khaldun, 145 ; M, 162 ; P, 168.

See Coloured threadt.
Coriander in magic, H, 146.
Com in magic, Ab, 26, 32, 188 ; see

Cornelians as amulets. A, bdii, Ixiy.

Comers of room in magic, A, 89, 135 ;
As, 161; H, 89, 186; Pal, 102.

Corpse, Arab beliefs about, 5, 137;
tabu on, see Tabu ; looking on, tabu.
As, 26, 35, 115, 131; H, 118; 8,
114, but see Appendix, 255; when
unburied, ghost returns, As, 8, 13, 17,
32 ; of murdered man, ghost returns,
A, 61 ; touching, of man executed for
murder, 76 (cf. 266) ; eating ditto, 76.

Cotton in magic. A, 37, 115, 169 ; H,
115; I, 164.

Court, Eastern, of justice, 172.

Cow in magic. Pal, 135.

Creeping things in magic, As, 186 ;
H, 4.

Crocodile in magic, E, 143.

Cronus, 222.

Cross in magic, Ixi ; A, 227.

Crossways in magic, li, 177, 201.

Croup, H, 129.

Crow in magic, zzxi.

Crumbs in magic, H, 91, 147.

Cucumber (P) in magic. As, 165.


Cup in magic. A, 20; As, 125, 127;

H, 30, 32.
Curses on desecrators of tomb. As, Phoen,

10; Nab, 11.
Cutting up slaughtered animal m oath,

O, 216.
Cypress in magic. As, 34, 158, 188, 202.
Cyprian women, prostitution of, 79.

Dama, 163.

Damascus, 78.

Damkina, xxiii, 214, 245.

Daniel, xxxy, Ut.

Dark colour, Iviii, 32.

Dates in magic. A, 107; As, xxiii, xIt,

26, 141, 157, 187, 192 ; H, 144.
DsTid, 231.
Dawn in magic, As, 56, 84, 161, 165;

see Morning.
Days, lucky, xxx if. ; reckoning the

day, xxxviii.
Dead (see OHobU) : raised. A, 9 ; As, 7,

9 ; G, 8, 9 ; H, 9 ; Med. Chr., 91 ;

bones of, remoTcd, see Grave; offerings

to. A, 15, 16; As, 13 ff.; 6, 16; H,

13 ff. ; Sab, 14; obligations to, S, 14,

15 ; greeting, A, 5.
Dead Sea, 231.
Deafness, H, 129,
Death (see Mourning) : due to God, H,

118 ; angel of, see Angel.
Deep, see Sea.
Deer in magic, H, xxxi.
Deformed children the result of riolating

certain animal tabus, M, 23 ; see

Abortione and Imperfect men.
Del Rio, Martin, quoted, xrii, xxt, Ixii,

68, 72.
Demigods, 182, 236.
Democritus, xxxW.
Demons, names of, 1 ; * Scheiss-Teufel,'

72 ; classes of, 2 ; in N.T., 100.
Assume any form, H, 44; animal

forms, A, 57, 60, 62, 77 ; As, 8, 54 ;

H, Eth, 61 ; camels, A, 77 ; with

cocks* feet, H, 61 (of. As, 63) ; with

donkeys* legs. A, 60 ; Origen, 60 ;

dragons, As, 54 (f) ; Test, of Sol.,

76 ; goat, Sab, 57 ; leopard, As, 54 ;


INDEX.


263


lion, 8, 54 ; ostriches, A, 57 (cf. 60) ;
owls, A, 21, 77; As, 60; M, 21;
panther, 8, 64 ; rayen, xxx ; scorpions,
8, 64 ; snake, A, 67 (cf. As, 12, 64) ;
8, 64 ; wolf, 8, 64 ; hairy. A, 67 ;
assume human form. A, 67, 62, 77 ;
Med, 69 ; Test, of 8ol., 71 ; without
shadow, H, 61 ; iuTisihle, without
flesh or bones, H, 44; N.T., 100.

Eat, A, 68 ; Ab, 104 (lick dishes
A, 126); doYOur blood, 196; As

48, 49, 196; Eth, 62; H, 44
Maimonides, 196; Origen, 93, 196 if.
Porphyry, 106; 8, 61 (cf. sacrifice
A, 68) ; flesh, A, H, 63 ; Eth, 62
8, 61 ; diink. A, 68 ; H, 44 ; smell
Origen, 93 (of. Tobit, 76, 134, 197)
intermarry with human beings, 236
A, 68-70, 74, 76; As, 66 fl., 132
G, 68 ; H, 71, 73 ; Queensland, 76
8, 74 ; Test, of 8ol., 76 ; Tobit, 74
134 (Lilith attacks solitary sleepers
H, 70 ; 8atan seduces Ere, H, 74
demon in form of woman as tempta
tion. A, 101, cf. Test, of Sol., 71
have power over woman without
wedding ring, 137 ; dangerous to
newly wedded, 134) ; propagate, A,
68 ; H, 44 (this denied. As, 49 ; 8,
74) ; some sexless, As, 40, 47, 49 ;
take away creative power, A, 77 ; As,

49, 77 ; die, A, 68, 61 ; H, 44.
Fly, H, 44 (cf. Origen, 93; cf.

100) ; can pass all doors. As, 60, but
not wax. A, 106 ; creep. As, 49, 66 ;
8, 61 ; fight, A, 60 ; stink, As, 49 ;
howl, roar, As, 49 ; ride, A, 69, 60 ;
have foreknowledge, H, 44; guard
treasure, A, 62, 63 (cf. xlix ; T, 6) ;
wear dresses of women, A, 71 ; write,
A, 62 (cf. 46) ; mislead travellers,
A, 60, 90.

Bring disease, 2 if., 93; As, 48,
96 (cf. 181); Pal, 100; 'Chaldeans,'
100; death. A, 68, 69; dumbness,
A, 62; plagues, droughts, and bad
seasons, Origen, 93 (cf . 48) ; malignity
of soil, A, 68 ; earthquakes, 8, 64 ;
storms. As, 43, 48, 49, 60, 64 ; Med,


48; dust-storms. A, Bisharin, 60;
eclipses. As, 62 if.

Possession by demons, 93, 96 ; A,
60, 101, 104, 107; Ab, 103; O,
106, 107; H, 101; Lucian, 104;
Maronite, 106 ; N.T., 100 ; Pal, 60,
101 ; Josephus, Porphyry, 106 ; 8, 40,
92 (see Madneif) ; apportioned to
various members of the body. As,
N.Z., 99 (cf. M, 36); enter body
by orifices, A, H, 116 ; exit by toe,
A, 106, 106 ; by nostrils, Josephus,
106 ; excluded by veil. A, N.T., 74 ;
by wax, A, 106; driven away by
noise, A, H, M, Mac, Med, 63 ; Orang
Laut, 136; Pal, 72; fire, M, 137;
beating. A, 60, 106 ; T, 31 ; stench,
Tobit, Ivii, Iviii, 76, 134, 197 (cf.
Med, 149); thrown sand, etc., A,
169 ; Eth, 168 ; hiid by incantation,
Origen, 196; nailed down, A, 17,
18; « bound,' M, 167; Med, 149;
Origen, 93; 8, xlvii, 61; Tobit,
74 ; summary, 93 ; can be transferred
to figures, M, 162 ; from one person
to another, and from human beings
into animals, N.T., 100; to water,
A, 31; As, 28; H, 29; Maronite,
29; can be recognized. A, 40; are
ofbpring of human beings and spirits
(cf. 2, 66, 93), As, 66, 71 ; H, 70,
71 ; Kurd, 71 ; Book of Enoch and
Test, of 8ol., 76 ; tradition denied,
8, 74; are immature creatures or
abortions, H, 23.

Earth-demons, A, T, 69 ; fear of
scalding them, A, Pal, T, 69 ; come
from Underworld, As, 97 ; seven spirits.
As, 7, 47 if. ; Pal, 60, 62 ; 8, 60, 61 ;
Test. Twelve Patr., 61 ; Zoroaster, 62 ;
throne-bearers. As, 47, 48 (P) ; A, H,
62. 8ee Appendix.

Haunt baths. A, 90 ; caper bushes,
H, 91 ; caves. A, 68, 62, 90 ; As, 66,
81, 90; Maimonides, 90 ; deserts. A,
90 ; As, 28, 39, 44, 66, 84, 90, 97,
161; Eth, 92; H, 67, 91, 116; M,
167 ; Maimonides, 90 ; N.T., 91, 100 ;
Origen, 60 ; Pal, 91 ; food and drink.


\


264


INDEX.


H, 91 ; Maronite, 42 ; grayeyards, 200 ;
A (cf. 6, 171, 172); As, 7, 39 ; H, 29,
91, 118 ; Med, 91 ; N.T., 100 ; houses,
A, 91, 92 ; latrines, 200; A, 90; H,
91 ; marshes, As, 41 ; mountainfl, As,
39, 41, 82; S, 83; * Moantain of
Sunset and Mountain of Dawn,' As,
66 (cf . Arab superstition about Jebel
l^af) ; nut-trees, H, 91 ; OTons, A,
90 ; places of execution, etc.. A, 61 ;
Med, 91 ; rivers, A, 90 ; rocky places,
Australia, 90 ; ruins, 200 ; A, 90, 92 ;
As, 81, 90; Eth, 92; H, 91, 92;
Maimonides, 90 ; Origen, 60 ; Pal, 91 ;
S, 92 ; sea. As, 39 ; shadows on moon-
light nights, H, 91 (cf . Maronite, 42) ;
spearworts, H, 91 ; stone, S, 83, 89 ;
temples and shrines where incense and
blood are offered, Origen, 93 ; thickets
and watering-places, Australia, 90;
wells, A, 90, 115; H, 118.

Ddr Atiyeh, 177.

Ddr-ez-zdr, 89.

D^ M&r Elia, monastery, 101.

Descent of Ishtar, 3, 33.

Desecration of grayes, see Grave.

Desert, xxyii, 165, 166; haunt of
demons, see Demant; see also 153,
Clean place. Lady of the Desert^
Plain-god, and Scapegoat,

Destiny, A, H, 12 ; As, 11, 12.

' Destroyer,' H, 86.

Deyil, the, see Iblie, Satan.

Diana of the Ephesians, 65.

Dilbat-'piaiii in magic, 187.

Dimetu, 83, 192.

DinanUf 178.

Diodorus quoted, zzxri, 222.

Dioskoros, 1.

Dish in magic. As, 127.

Diyinations, A, As, xxxi ; H, xxxi,
147.

Dog in magic, xlix ; A, Ixy if., 169, 174,
207, 210; As, xliy, bay, 49, 161,
204; H, bdi, Ixy, 170, 207; spirit
of wicked transmigrating into, T, 6 ;
*Dog of the Witch,' 14; easting
bread to dogs, see 169, 204, 207 ;
cf. 127.


Donkey, spirit of wicked transmigrating
into, T, 6 ; see Ate.

Door in magic. A, 90 ; As, xxyiii, lix,
208 ; Eth, 92 ; H, 1, 161.

Doorpost in magic, A, 31, 226 ; lock,
A, 37 ; Med, 173. See Threthold.

Dough in magic, As, xvii, 28, 33, 83,
160, 206, 207 ; H, 119, 207 ; 1, 168 ;
M, 159, 162.

Doye in magic, H, xx, 181, 187 ; not
sacrificed at Harran, 54.

Dragon, As. 54 (?) ; of Reyelation, 43 ;
Test, of Sol., 43 ; swallows moon. A,
Peru, South Sea, 53 ; demons in
shape of. Test, of Sol., 76; Belaud,
199 ; As, 54 (?).

Dream, xxxri; A, ly; As, 9, 33, 186;
Maronite, 42.

Dregs in magic. As, 126, 254 (cf. Eth,
148) ; sayage, 146. SeeZu*u,Itefi4se,
and Tabu.

Drinking magic writing. A, Ixi ; H, iy,
Ixi.

Dubsag-Unug-kii 45.

Dumah, 4.

Dumatii, 222.

Dung in magic, As, 153 if., 203, 204 ;
H, 147, 194. See Lu'u.

Dungheaps haunted (see Demont iu
magic), H, 170 ; cf. As, 177.

DuiSara, 11.

Dust in magic, 142 ; A, 89 ; Armen, 33 ;
As, 33 ; H, liy, 33 ; (sand) Kurdistan,
71 ; sprinkled on blood of murdered
man. A, 61 ; (grayel) cast against
enemy. A, 158 ; (dust) H, 159 ; (sand
against demons) Eth, 158; {stones)
A, 159 ; equiyalent of water in puri-
fication, A, 117; food of spirits. As,
3 ; synonym of Underworld, H, 3 ;
dust-storm caused by demons. A,
Bisharin, 60; taken from cemetery
(sand), A, 171 ; from graye. A, 147 ;
As, 33; H, 146; from footprint,
A, sayage, 146; As, 163, 154; H,
xxxii, 146, 164 ; mud from riyer, H,
164 ; from temple. As, 146 ; from
floor of tabernacle, H, ly.
Dyaks, 36.


INDEX.


265


£a, zzii, zjdii, xxvi, xzzTiii, xliii, zIt,
zlyii, zlTiii, Ui, Ut, lix, 8, 26, 46, 47,
61, 66, 63, 88, 98, 123, 160, 162,
171, 188, 203, 206, 210, 211, 213,
214, 230, 246.

Ea-bani, zx, 7if., 12.

Eagle in magic, H, zz.

Ear in magic, Test, of Sol., 43.

Earth (see Clap and Dutt), offering
poured into, 0, 32, 33.

Earth-demons, see Demons.

Earthquake, zzzyi ; see Demons.

East in magic, As, zzvii, 263 ; H, 164 ;
I, zzTiii.

Eating with iriends, superstitions about.
As, H, 16; eating carcase of sin-
offering, 194 ; of atonement-oifering,
H, 212; eating magic writing, H,
IzTi. See Tabu.

Eber, 222.

Eclipse (due to demons, see Demons) ^
zzzvi. As, zli, 99; sickness due to,
As, 66 ; weddings must not take place
during, A, 134.

Ed-el-jftj, 212.

Eden, S, 6.

Edessa, zlvii.

Edimmu (correct reading for ekimmu, 3],
see Ohost.

Eggs in magic, 6, Izvii ; H, Izt, Izyi,
102,139; E.Indies, 166, 163; M, 20.

Egypt, zviii, zliz, Ini, Iziii, Izt, 8, 10,
17, 69, 64, 70, 78, 79, 143, 149,
168, 220, 222, 246, 260, 266.

Eight in magic. A, 62, 169 ; H, zzzi.

Ekimmu (read edimmu^ 3), see Ohost.

Ekurra, see Underworld.

Elam, 10.

Elason, zzz.

Eleazar, 106.

Elephant in magic, I, 168.

El-Hejr, Ixi.

EI-Howwara, 63.

Elijah, ZTiii, 118; festival, 79.

Elul, month, 138.

Elymas, zzz.

Embaros, 230.

Emissions, seminal, see Bd^al k*r%.

Encolpius, 164.


En-dor, witch of, 9.

Enemeesar, 24.

England, 72.

Enmeduranki, zzi.

Enoch, Book of, quoted, 73; SlaTonic, 74.

Enquiry, tabu on making, As, 139,

140.
Entrails in magic. As, zzii ; H, 197.
Enyy (Demon), 201.
Ephesus, 66.
Epilepsy, 108 ; A, 101, 104 ff., 107 ; G,

107. 203; H, 102, 136, 136; N.T.,

101 ; see Demons.
Eredkigal, 1, 48.
Eridu, zziii, zlviii, lii, liii, 7, 61, 84, 98,

100, 169, 166, 166, 167, 203, 204,

206, 211; Incantation of , lii, 84, 98,

169, 166,203, 206, 211.
E-sagila, 186.
Esarhaddon, zzii.
Eshmunazar, 10, 80.
Esquimauz, 184.
Essenes, 139.
Ethiopians, passim,
EuchitsB, 223.
Euphemisms, U, 19, 38, 116, 121, 128,

199.
Euphrates, zzzv, liii, 26, 80, 144, 213,

250.
Euripides, 107.
Eustathius quoted, 19.
Eve, 23, 72, 74,77, 118.
Even numbers in magic, H, zzxi, zzzii.
Evening in magic. As, 169, 161, 166,

213; H, 187. %w Sunset.
Evil Eye, zviii ; A, 88 if. ; As, 43, 88,

100 (cf. 39), 206; H, 89, 136;

Maronite, 42; N.T., 88; S, 89;

averted from bed, H, 72 ; by be*ds or

headdress, A, 90 (on the Evil Eye

among the Hebrews see Aaron Bray's

article in Ophthalmology ^ April, 1908,

p. 427 if.).
Evil man as ghost, 19.
Ezcesses, A, 79 ; Psellus, 223.
Eztemal soul, see Ohost.
Eye in magic, 89.
Ezida, zzzvii.
Ezra, 74.


266


INDEX.


Face in magic, A, 211.

Faditra, Malagasy magic, 213.

* Fairy- women,' I, 164.

Fan in magic, A, xxix; M, 36. See
Tabu.

Farde, stones of, 207.

Fat in magic. As, zxTii ; H, 194 if., 220.

Fauns, 72.

Feasts of the Hebrews, 182.

February in magic, Iroquois, 184.

Fedu, 80, 177, 178, 226 if.

Feet in magic. A, 227 ; As, 171 ; Tonga,
215 ; bare feet, Roman, 227.

Female in magic, A, 60, 227, 229 ; H,
4, 147, 216, 220.

Fern in magic, Maori, 215.

Fever, 101, 108, 210; As, lii, 82(?),
99 (P) ; see Atakku ; charma against,
A, 83, 168,211; P, 167.

Fifteenth day in magic, As, 56.

Figs in magic, As, zliii.

Figures of plastic material in magic,
xli, xlTi, U, lix, Ixi, 142 if., 173, 180,
202 ; Ab, zvii, xxri, lyiii, 28, 32, 34,
35, 83, 84, 116, 150 if., 159, 161,
203, 255 ; £, 143, 149 (Eth), 156,
222; 6, 143; H, 144; I, 158, 163
(cf. examples, 163); Ibn Khaldun,
144; M, 36, 145, 162, 205; oifered
by barren women, As, 64 ; of sorcerers
in counter-attack, As, xxziz, 26, 150 if.

Fihrist quoted, 116.

Fiji, 38.

Finger in magic. A, 226 ; Roman, 227 ;
cf. tabu on pointing with finger, As,
252.

Finger of God, H, 97 ; cf . * hand of
God,' As, 96.

Fire in magic, A, Iviii, bay, 77, 89, 105,
211; As, 140; H, xUx, lyiii, Ixiy,
Ixyiii, 58, 119, 144, 160, 220; M,
137, 146; Med, 149. See Fire-god
and Tabu.

Fire-god (see Nuzhu)^ zxy, xxxix, 66,
162-4, 184, 214.

Firstborn in magic, 114, 180, 219 if.;
H, 61.

Firstfruits in magic, 180, 219 if. ; A,
27; H, 221.


Fish in magic (cf. 53), A, 210; Ab,

141 (cf. 63), 186; H, 136; Mac,

lyii; S, 141; Test, of Sol., 66;

Tobit, Ivii, 76, 134.
Fiye in magic (cf . pentacle), 189 ; H, liii.
Flax in magic. As, 88 (P).
Flood, 44, 197.
Florida, 222.
Flour in magic, see Meal.
Flowers in magic. A, 37 ; I, 163.
Fly in magic. A, 210 ; As, 63.
Food in magic. As, 163, 204, 206 ; Etii,

148. See DemoM and Ohoat.
Foot in magic, Ab, 166.
Forehead reoeiying blood of sacrifice,

A, 80, 211, 226, 227; ashes. A,

XXX ; leaven. A, 31 ; water. A, liii.
Foreigners in magic, H, 186.
Forty in magic, H, 118.
Forty-nine in magic. As, 138.
Four in magic. A, 62, 89; Ab, xxxi,

xlii; H, XX, xxxi, 102, 186.
Fourteen in magic. As, 138 ; H, 207.
Fowl in magic, A, Ixiii ; Ab, 104 ; M,

228.
Fox in magic. A, 59 ; As, xxxi ; H,

xxxi.
Friday in magic. A, 77 ; H, 16, 30, 68,

145 ; Y, 134.
Fright from ghost, see Ohost.
Fringes in magic, H, 169.
Frog in magic, H, Ixiy.
Fruit in magic, Sab, 14.
Fudl Arabs, 211.
Fumigation, A, hii, Ixyii, 88, 107, 122 ;

As, lyii, 122, 213, 214 ; G, ly ; H,

107 ; M, 205 ; Mac, lyii ; Tobit, lyii.

See Censer. '
Funerals, see Mourning.

Gabriel, xx, 61, 73, 89, 146, 168, 168.

Gadarene swine, 180, 208.

Gaffat, 103.

Galicia, 30, 129.

Galilee, Sea of, 228.

Gall in magic, H, 87.

Galloi priests, 114.

GaUk, 39, 40, 192.

Garlic in magic. As, 192 ; Pal, 72.


INDEX.


267


Garment in magic, As, xix ; see Chth§$.
Gate in magic. As, xxTii, Ivii, 164 ; £,

zlix.
Gaza, 107, 231.
Gazelle in magic, A, 69.
Gazelle's horn in magic, As, 34 ; foot

in magic, A, 37.
Gentile, metempsychosis of unclean

person into, H, 4.
GhadCir, zxxiL
GhasBanide prince, 223.
Ghosts : —
Ediftimu (not ekinmH), 3, 26, 39.
Return, 2 if., 24, 93; As, 3, 7 ; E,8;
G, 14; H, 8, 40(F); in white,
A, 106; from the grave, As, 7;
Hadendowa, 10 ; Arabic beliefs, 6,
27 ; M, 36.
Of persons untimely dead :
Abortions (cf. 21), A, 23 ; As, 20,

23 ; H, M, 23.
Bachelors, As, 19, 23 ; G, 19.
Dead of hunger, thirst, drowning,
in the desert, marsh, or storm,
As, 19.
Diseased women. As, 20.
Dying by fault of god or sin of

king. As, 32.
Evil man, As, 19.
Falling (?) from date-palm. As, 26.
Harlots (1^, As, 19, 120.
Immodest (?) women, As, 67, 120.
Murdered men. A, 6, 17 ; As, 17,

32; cf. H, 17.
Virgins, As, 19, 23, 67, 120 ;

G, 19.
Women, 67, 120 ; at childbirth. A,
20, 22 (cf. 27) ; As, 19, 120 ;
G,22; cf. H,21,22; 1,22; H,
20, 21; Melanesia, 22; Pelew
Is. , 22 ; with babe at breast dying
also. As, 19 ; who cannot men-
struate. As, 67, 120.
The owl as ghost. A, M, 21.
Restless ghosts :
As, 13 ; of unburied body, 3 ; As,

8, 13, 17, 32.
Unfed by descendants, 3 ; As, 7, 8,
13,32, 116; £,8; H, 13.


Return to wash, H, 27 ; to sit, H,

16 ; to those with whom they

had connection during life, As,

24,26,32, 116.

Attack of ghosts, 93; As, 36,

109.
Fright from ghosts, A , 92 ; As, 86 ;

Maronite, 42.
Dead husband returning to wife,
A, 76 (cf. women married to dead,
H, 76).
liaying ghosts :
By exorcism, 93 ; As, 24, 32 ; M,
36 (cf. Origen, 93) ; by nailing
down. A, 17, 18.
They feed on dust and mud. As, 3 ;
drink wat^ at tombs, A, 6, 16 ;
eat dregs. As, £, 8 ; blood, A,
G, 16 ; food and drink. As, 14 ;
can speak. A, 171 ; pasture and
drink, H, 4; thirst, £, 8; can
sit(?), H, 16; cannot stand or
sit. As, 7.
Raising ghosts, 93 ; A, 9 ; As, 7, 9 ;
G, 8, 9 ; H, 9 ; Med. Ghr., 91.
Ghosts, summary, 93 ; external soul. A,
37, 38 ; As, 38 ; £, 37 ; Fiji, 38 ;
H, 38 ; transmigration. A, 6 ; H, 4,
18 ; T, 6 ; binding the soul. As, 38,
166.
Ghost-food, As, 8 ; see Dead.
Ghost-omens, As, 36.
Ghost- worship in the East, 14 ; see

Demotu,
Ghosts of the family. As, 27, 32, 34.
Ghoul described, 60, 90.
Gilganush, xx, xxrii, 7fl., 12, 33, 39,

72, 81, 96.
Ginger (I) in magic. As, lii, 187.
Gimi, xlviii.
OX9-MAB, 264.

Glands of fish in magic, Mac, Irii.
Glass in magic, H, 144 ; M, 20.
Gnosti, 223.
Goat in magic, 67, 69, 233 ; A, 211,

226, 227 ; As, xUt, 82, 161 ; G, 230 ;

H, 183, 198, 216, 219, 262 ; I,

183 ; M, 228. 8ee Kid.
Goat-beard in magic. A, xxxiii.


268


INDEX.


God; Bukhara, 169 ; I, 164. See Allah
and Tahweh,

Oodfl attracted by sweet smell, As, H, 1 97 ;
eTil god, Ab, 39 ; fault of god, As, 32 ;
gods of night, As, xxvii, 150 ; of the
watch, As, zxriii ; ' son of his god,'
As, 25, 46 if., 167, 206, 245 (cf. 84,
126) ; wise gods. As, 56.

Gold in magic, 222 ; As, 230 ; 6, Ixrii ;
H, 41, 146; P, 230; S, zz.

Gooderoo, 103.

Goths, 72.

Grass in magic, H, 164; Malagasy,
213.

Grasshoppers in magic, Sumatra, 183.

Grave in magic, 144 ; A, 256 ; sacred.
Pal, 107 ; desecration of, As, Phoen,
Nab, 10; remoyal of bones. As, £,
H, 10 ; Mahdi*stomb, 11 ; dust from,
A, 147 ; As, 33 ; H, 146 ; haunted, see
Denuma ; ghosts from grayes. As, 7 ;
Hadendowa, 10 ; bed of reeds prevents
ghost rising, H, 91.

Greece, xxzvi, 174.

Greeks, pauim.

Green in magic, H, 189.

Guardian angels, 46.

Guiana, 239.

Guilt-offering, 216.

Guinea, 184.

Gttla, zlWii, 245.

Gunura, 88, 205.

Gutter(-shadow) haunted, H, 91.

Hadendowas, 10.

Hades, see Underworld.

Hadhramaut, 5, 57.

Hair in magic, xlvi, 1, 142 ; A, 38, 229,
236 ; As, Ixiii, Ixiv, 153, 161, 166,
170, 192 ; H, 38, 40, 146, 147, 170,
184 ; M, 36 ; P, 167 ; S, 51 ; Sab,
148 ; savage, 146 ; see Threadt ; on
legs, indication of jmniyaht A, 67 ;
unbound, H, 1?, 169.

Haj superstition, 159.

HalflB, 22.

Half-human spirits, 2, 65, 93, 132.

Saltappan-jlluii, xzvi.

Ham&h, 5.


Hamath, 68, 78, 79.

Hammam Faraun, 59.

Hammer in magic, H, 161.

Hammurabi, zzi, zzt.

Hanania, liv.

Hand in magic. As, 165 ; M, 36 ; hand

of God, As, 96 (cf. H, < finger of

God,' 96) ; hand of ghost. As, 35 ;

as amulet, Ixii.
Hanged, superstitions about men, 13, 76,

and Appendix, 256.
Hanifa, 207.
Hare in magic, A, 69 ; metempsychosis

of unclean person into, H, 4.
Rarim&tu 78.
Harlots in magic. As, 247 ; H, 32 ; as

ghosts(P), As, 19 (cf. 78).
Harran, 54.
Harut, IxT.
Hofar M&wethy 4.
Hat (?) in magic, As, 206.
Hate-charms, hd, Iziyff.
Hathor, 64.
HaU&th, 179.

Haunted places, see Detnont,
Hawk in magic, G, Ixvii.
Hayyot (throne-bearers), 52.
Head in magic, 226; A, 229 ; As, 33, 38,

161, 165, 166, 171, 206, 211, 213;

H, XX, 38 ; M, 36; Maori, 215.
Headache, 108; A, 18; (^'m), xlvii, li,

47, 98, 121, 165, 166, 167, 206, 212,

213 ; coming from Underworld, xlirii,

82, 99; from mountains and deserts.

As, 82, 83.
Headdress warding off demons (Paul),

74 ; evil eye. A, 90.
Heart in magic. A, 61 ; As, xlir, 161,

203, 204, 208 ; H, IxYi ; Tobit, Ivii.
Heart-plant, As, xUt.
Hebrews, poisim.
Hector, 254.

Heifer in magic, A, Ivi ; H, It, 187.
Hejaz, 207.
Hejra, 11.
Hekate, 14, 201.
Helen, 216.

Heliopolis, 79 (in Syria), 222 (in Egypt).
Hellespont, 230.


INDEX.


269


Hen in magic, H, Ixt, 212.

HenlMne in magic, A, xUt.

Hercoles, 72, 216.

HtTtm, 1/6.

Hennes Abootat, zliz.

Hermes Trismegistos, xlviii, xlix.

Herodotus quoted, 10, 78, 79, 122,

239.
Hesychius quoted, 14.
Hierapolis, liii.
Hilarion, 107.
Hindu magic, 158.
iTtiMa-fleeh, 168.
Hippocrates, 107.
I^ira, 223.
Hifn, Princess, 37.
Hollow stone in magic, A, 89.
Holy Ghost, 51.
Holy tabus, see Tabu.
Homer, see 0dy$9€y and Iliad.
Honey in magic. As, zlii, xIt, 157, 158 ;

H, IxTi ; Pal, 102.
Hoof in magic. A, 37, 60 ; As, 32, 33 ;

£th, 61.
Hoopoe, A, Izir, 172.
Hor, 143.

Horace quoted, xxxri.
Horn in magic, As, 32, 34.
Horon, 222.
Horse in magic. A, Ix^i, 146; As, 50

(cf. 47); G, 216; I, 158; 8, 57;

Sumatra, 183; Test, of Sol., 65;

transmigration into, T, 6.
Horsehair (?) in magic, H, 144.
Horseleach, 63.
Horsemen of the air, S, 57.
Horns, xIt, xlTi.
Hos of India, 184.
Hot springs, 59.
House in magic, 228 ; As (cf. xxvii), 35,

235; H, 186, 189; I, xxriii ; unclean,

H, 23, 186, 253 ; leprosy breaks out,

182, 185 ff. ; sorcery. As, 187 ; Pan-

nonia, 72.
SuldupfUt lix.
Human sacrifice, 221 if.
Hums, 228.

Hundred in magic, M, lii.
Hunnoman, 163.


Huns, 72.

Hunting souls, H, 38 ; see Ghott.

Hurmiz, daughter of lilith, 71 .

Humim, son of Lilith, 71.

Husband returns as ghost. A, 76 ; ex»

eluded from room of wife dying in

chUdbirth, A, 22.
Hydrophobia, A, 174; H, Ixii, 20.
Hyena in magic, Ab, 104.
Hyoicyamua mtUmu^ xUt.
Hyssop in magic, H, It, Ivi, 185, 188.

lamblichus, 117.

lao, 1.

Ibex in magic. As, 82.

Iblis, xxxiii, xxxiy.

Ibn Ehaldun quoted, Ixvii, 144.

Idlu lilt, 67, 68 ; see Denum$.

Igigi, 85.

Ignatius, xlvii.

11, 222.

Iliad, 251.

Imina-bi, 86.

Immaculate conception, 73.

Imperfect (malformed) men, 132; M, 23.

* Incantation of Ea,' 162 ; of Eridu, lii,

84. 98, 159, 166, 167, 203, 204,

206, 211, 212; of the Deep, As, lii,.

45, 214.
Incas of Peru, 184.
Incense in magic, 133; A, Ixyii, 88,

107 ; As, xU, 26, 214 ; M, 205 ; lures

demons, Origen, 93.
Incubus, 23, 68, 82, 136, 171.
India, passim,

* Individual ' atonement, 182.
Infidel, 5.

Infidels in Mohammedan religion, 5.
Intermarriage of human beings with

demons, see I^emont ; with gods, 132 ;

As, 73, 78 ; E, H, 78 ; with spirits,

234 ; A, 79.
Invisibility, charms for, Ixviff.
Invoking Christ's voice, G, 173 ; on

invoking mighty names, see Names.
Iphigeneia, 22.
Irak, xxxvii, xliii, 1.
Irkalla, 3, 33 ; see also Vndencorld.
Imina, 41.


270


INDEX.


Iron in magic, A, 18, 31, 60, 107, 115 ;

Babar, 201 ; Eth, 157; H, IxtI, 17,

146; M(P), 20; Psellos, 137; S, 83.
Iroquois, 184.

Irrigation-maohine in magic, As, 254.
Isaac, 78, 220, 236 ; as demigod, 73.
Isaac, a certain Syrian, xz.
Isaiah, xzzt, lyiii.
Ishmael, 4.
Ishtar, 3, 33, 73, 85, 96, 139, 154, 157,

166.
Ishum, 86.
Ismailiyeh, 229.
Israel, xxt, Ivi, 114, 146, 179, 212, 219,

220, 222, 223, 233, 236.
Israfil, XX.

Issue of blood, H, 201.
lyyar, month, 139, 141.
Izdubar (= Gilgamish), 72.

Jackal in magic. A, 57.

Jacob of Edessa, xlvii.

Jaffa, 105.

Jallalo'ddin, 69.

Jamratu'l-Aqaba, 159.

jan, 31, 59, 77, 106.

January in magic, I, Iroquois, 184.

Japan, 184.

Java, 184.

Jeba, 80.

Jehejma marches, 61.

Jeho?ah-jireh, 220.

Jephthah, 220.

Jeremiah, 10.

Jericho, 20C.

Jerusalem, 11, 101, 156, 227.

Jew in magic, 37, 103, 105, 168.

Jewess, l^arina as. A, 77.

Jewish blacksmiths accredited with magic,

Ab, 103.
Jeypur, 183.
Jidlal (Tidlal), 80.
Jinn described, 57 fl. ; see Demont,
Jonah, 53, 54, 256.
Jordan, liy.
Joseph, 10.
Josephus quoted, bar, 106, 117, 139,

200.
Joshua the Stylite quoted, 96.


Journey, days good for, xxxff.

Judah, 11, 66.

Juneh, 80.

Juno, 222.

Jupiter, 1 30 ; (Theban) selects woman, 78.

Justin Martyr quoted, 73.

Eabbala, 4, 18, 29.

KabuSf or Kabus en-ndm, 81.

Kaffirah, 176, 178, 227, 228.

Kafr Harib, 228.

Kaiiah, 11.

Kaldu, xxxy.

Ka-luh^u-lda], 129.

Kaphsiel, 187.

Karina^ 76 if.; in animal form, dangerous
to newly wedded and pregnant women,
destroying creatiye power, 77.

Earrhai, xx.

Easdim, xxxy.

KaiUphy xxir.

Kaiiapu and kaiiaptu, xxiv.

X^mal-ul-hakim, xlriii.

Eerak, 58.

Eerchiefs in magic, H, 38.

Eeres, 106.

Kefeb MeriHf 64.

Eettu, xlii.

Ehamuas, 143.

Eheybar, xxix.

Eid in magic, xU, 202, 234, 235, 242 ;
A, 211 ; As, Ivii, 166, 167, 178, 203,
204, 210, 211 ; 6, 203 ; H, 181, 233,
234.

Eidneys in magic, H, 194, 197.

Kipper^ 175, 177.

Ifird, 62 ; renders dumb, ibid,

Eiriaten, 79.

Kilkan^^ Hi.

Eismet, see Destiny.

Eiss in magic, 71 ; H, 89 ; Pal, 103.

Eitchener, Lord, 11.

Kitrtti, 78; cf. TempU-woman{^), 165.

Eneeling in magic. Pal, 103.

Enots in magic. A, 90, 168, 169 ; As,
xxYii, 33, 166, 167, 170-3 ; H, 169,
170; I, 164; Ibn Ehaldun, 145; M,
162 ; Med, 173 ; P, 168.

Korban, Day of. A, 16.


INDEX.


271


Kouyunjik, 168.
K^phar, 216, 218.

JKT'rt, nootarnal emission, 81, 122, 131,
' 132, 133, 255 ; see Ba'al k*H.
Knllabi, 45.

Kunyit t'rut (Malay), ItUi.
Kuppuru, 177, 185, 202, 204, 210.
KnrdiBtan, 71.
Kurpu, 177, 200 ff.
Kuttttra-tova, Ivii.

Eiitha, xxii ; (== Underworld), 32, 33.
See also Uhdencorld,

Zabaitu, zli, 41, 136, 152, 161, 240;
Series, zli. See also Child-wUcht La
Broosha, and Lamia,

Laba9U, 41, 43, 99.

La Brootha (LiUth), 42.

Lace in magic. As, 153.

* Lady of the Desert,' 15, 151 ; cf.
IfaAr/M-series, Tablet lY.

Lahabiel, 160, 161.

Laila, 21.

Lailab, not connected etymolog^cally
with Lilith, 66; as prince of con-
ception, H, 68.

LamoMU, liii, 43 ff., 100, 245.

Lamattu (= ant), 63.

Lamb in magic, 234, 235, 242 ; A, 211 ;
As, xlT, 167 ; £, 209 ; H, 216, 219,
220, 233, 234.

Lamech, 44.

Lamia, 41, 68, 136; A, Byzantine,
Maronite, 42 ; H, 41. See also Child-
toiteh, LabartUf and La Brootha,

Lamp in magic, H, 27 ; N.T., 52.

Lamfatu, 63.

Land of No Return, 3, 12 ; see Under-
world,

Langsuyar, 20, 21.

Latarag, liz.

Latins, 82.

Latrine haunted, see Demons,

Laying hands on sacrifice, 226.

Lazarus, 9.

Lead in magic, I, xxriii ; S, xz.

Leah, 78.

Leather in magic, A, 83, 90, 106 ; As,
xxii; Maronite, 42.


Leaven in magic, A, 31; As, 32, 33,
204 ; H, 207.

Leares in magic, I, xxriii, 162 ; M, Iviii,
205.

Lees in magic. As, 153 ; see Dregt,

Left hand in magic, A, 46 ; As, xxir,
xxTiii, lyii, lix, 27, 34, 166, 170, 171,
202 ; H, xxxi, 164 ; M, 36.

Leg in magic, H, 170.

Leliurium, 69.

Lemburg superstition, 21.

Lemon grass in magic, M, Iviii.

Lemuria, 227.

Leo in magic, Ixrii.

Leopard, As, 54.

Leprosy, H, liv, 182, 185 fl. ; ezplana*
tion of Biblical, 188.

Leuconoe, xxxvi.

Levites, 236.

Libanus, 79.

Libation, 139; poured out, As, 32-4,
161 ; into earth, As, 9, 32, 33.

LtUn, 70.

LiUth, 21, 42, 57, 66, 67, 71, 75, 77,
120, 133, 136, 190, 225; attacks
solitary sleepers, 70 ; arerted from
bed, worshipped, 72 ; no etymological
connection with Lailah, 66 ; counter-
part of Asmodeus, 75 ; see Za Brootha
and Lamia,

Liitiu, 65 ff .

LilA, 65 ff., 97, 190.

Lime in magic, As, Mi, Iviii, lix.

Limes in magic, I, 163; M, 25, 205,
206, 215.

Lindinger quoted, 100.

Lion in magic, As, Ixiy; H, Ut, 169;
S, 54.

Liyer in magic. A, 173 ; As, xxii ; H,
174, 197 ; Tobit, lyii.

Llama in magic, 184.

Loaves in magic, see Br$ad,

Lock of door in magic. A, 37; Med, 173.

Locust-men, N.T., 81 ; see Oraahoppert,

Locusts in magic, 210.

Loins in magic. As, 84, 159.

Looking on a corpse tabu, As, 26, 35,
115, 131; H, 118; S, 114; but see
Appendix, 255.


272


INDEX.


Looking-glflM in magic, A, H, 28 ; Pal.

Jews, 72.
Love-chamiB, bd, Ixii, bay ff.
Lncian quoted, liii, 104, 114.
Lugalgiira, xzTiii, lix.
Zuh'ka, 129.
Lunacy charm, 8, 82 ; see Pouettion

by Demoiu in Demons,
Lust, Angel of, H, 66.
Xm'm, 203.
Luxor, 22.

Macarius, Ixt.

Macedonia, Irii, 61, 63, 168, 207.

Madness, 108, 160 ; ascnbed to demons,

A, 67, 60, 101, 102; H, 102; IJ.T.,

60.
Magharby, Ixiii.
Magians, 92, 119.
Magic, distinction between, and religion,

xvii.
Magicians, see under Attpu^ BarA, Mai-

maki, ZammarUf and Jhrieats ; muielA

gdimmUf * Raiser of the departed

spirit,' As, 9.
Mah, goddess, 63.
Mab(a)lath, see Agrath.
Mahdi, 11.
Mahir, 186.
MaUnonides quoted, 67, 66, 90, 119,

148, 196, 201.
Maize-drink in magic, M, 127.
Majhwar, 183.
Makan, zUt.
JTnAr^M-series, xxxix.
Malacca, lii.
Malagasy scapegoat, 183; atonement,

213.
Malays, pastim.

Male in magic. A, 229 ; H, 219.
Malim Kaximun, xlviii.
Malim Saidi, zlviii.
Mamit, 97, 98, 123 ff., 178, 192; see

Tabu.
Mandan Indians, 184.
Mandean superstition, 6.
Mandrakes, Ixiv.
Manetho quoted, 209, 222.
Maniithu, 11.


Maoris, 216.

Marah, zriii.

March in magic, Cambodia, Iroquois,
184.

Marduk, xiz, zz, xziii, xxiv, zzyi, zxriii,
xxxviii, xl, xlu, xlr, xlrii, xlriii, lu,
Uii, lix, 12, 26, 61, 55, 66, 80, 84,
86, 100, 126, 138, 139, 161, 160,
166, 173, 178, 188,' 196, 203, 208,
246.

Mare in magic, 8, Ixr.

Mttred, 18, 61 ; snatches away bride, 61.

Marga, Thomas of, quoted, 92.

Maronites, ptusim.

Marriage: danger to newly wedded, 30fl.,
134, 136 ; A, 77, 134 ; Test, of 8ol.,
76; preyented, Med, 173; symbolic,
with a cow, Pal, 136 ; discord between
married folk. As, 49 ; H, 170. 8ee
Tabu.

Marut, IxT.

Maimasu, xxii, xxir.

MassagetsB, 239.

lfaJ^toA»/-plant, xxrii, lii.

Mati-Anak, 21.

Matku-hM, liii.

Mazztktn, 68.

Meal or flour in magic. As, Ivii, lix, 26,
32, 123, 139, 167, 166, 204; H, It,
181 ; Sab, 139.

Meat in magic, 139 ; As, 168 ; H, 136,
170,207; Sab, 14.

Med&in S&lih, 63.

Mekka, 6, 80, 168, 171, 173, 227.

Melam (?), 86.

Melancthon quoted, 69.

Melanesia, 22.

Melito quoted, liii.

Menstruation, As, 67; H, 83; theory
of, explained as eridence of visit of
eril spirit, 133. See T(^u.

Mercury, 97.

Merlin, 72.

MeSaru, xlii.

Mesopotamia, xxxri, xliii, liii, 6, 60^
64, 72, 90, 209, 249.

Mesopotamian superstition quoted by
Psellus, 69.

Metaab (Ibn Bashid), xxix.


INDEX.


273


Metawileh, 63, 83.

MetempsychoBis, A, 5 ; H, 4 ; T, 6.

Mexico, 239.

Mice prevented, 174 ; in magic, As, 49.

Michael, ix, 61.

Midday, Ab, 161.

Middle watch in magic, Ab, 36 ; Pal, 102.

Midianites, 248.

Midwife, sapentition about, H, 137.

Milk in magic, A, 20; As, xly; Pal.

Jews, 102 ; human, £, xIt.
Minahassa, 163.
Minsans, 116.
Minhah, 176.
Minsk, 137.

Mirandole, Fran9oiB de la, quoted, 69.
Mirzapur, South, 183.
' MiBtress of the Desert,' 16, 151.
Moab, xxY.
Moahib, 148.

Modesty, lack of, resulting in ghost (?), 67.
Mogador, 18.

Moghrebi as magician, xxx, 62.
Mohammed, 23, 74, 158, 168, 229.
Mohammed el-GhulEary, liy.
Moloch, 222.
Molonga, 75.
Money in redemption, 219, 225 ; cf. A,

16 ; £, 209.
Monkir, 5.

Monsters, As, 63, 81, 209 ; H, 64.
Moon (see Edipae) ,As, Ixii ; H, 1 1 ; S,40 ;
in Scorpio unlucky for weddings. A,
134 ; beginning of month and waning
moon faTourable, H, Ixvi } end of
month favourable. A, 134 ; Java, 184 ;
unfavourable, As, 209 ; swallowed, 63,
256.
Moon-god, xliv, 52, 54, 55, 155, 167 ;

see Sin»
Morad, 158.
Morning in magic, As, 161 ; watch,

As, 35.
Morocco, xxxvi, 18, 72.
Moses, xxxii, Ixviii, 10, 169, 222.
Mosul, xxxiii, xxxiv, xliv, Ixiii, 18, 22,
27, 61, 62, 70, 92, 101, 106, 107,
144, 158, 161, 172, 210.
Mother-goddess, 63.


Mountain of Dawn and of Sunset, As, 56.

Mountains, home of headache. As, 82 ;
lunacy, S, 83. See Demom,

Mourning customs. A, 27 ; H, 13 ; Pal.
Jews, 27; S, 114; fear of funeral
passing in front. A, 27 ; faddish for
dead man, 16 ; demons driven away at
funeral by noise, H, 53; Jews bum
lamp seven days after death, pour out
water, 27; turn looking-glasses to
wall, 28 ; spirit returns after funeral
to wash, H, 27 (see also Ihad and
Solw&n) ; one who bears a corpse not
to wear shoes, H, 119; burial by
heaping up stones, S, 114.

Mouth, filling the, in magic. As, 160,
151 ; H, 147.

Mule, metempeychosLs of unclean person
into, H, 4.

Munychia, 230.

Munsir, 223.

Murdered man as ghost, see Ohat;
superstition about grave of, H, 146.

Murderers, 116, 256 ; A, Ivi, 76 ; H, 29,
115.

Muttabarr^-mtttdnu, 97*

Musulleh, 212.

Myrrh in magic. A, IxviL

Naamah, 44.

Naaman, liv.

Nabateans, 11, 144.

Nabms, 105.

Naba, 65, 85, 245.

Nagiti, 230.

Nailing down spirits, A, 17, 18.

Nail-parings in magic, xlvi, 1, 142 ;
A, xxxi; As, 153; £th, 148; H,
29, 147 ; M, 145 ; Sab, 148.

Nakir, 5.

Xakpatu, * modest' (P), 67.

Names in magic, 107, 142, 144, 148;
A, 30, 42, 72, 77, 148; Ab, 148;
As, 26, 158 ; Austr, 148 ; C, 172 ;
£, xlix; £ (£th), 155; £th, xlix,
52, 92, 148; H, Ixviii, 144, 159,
160 ; M, 36 ; Maronite, 29, 42 ; N.T.,
xxx, 101 ; Pal, 107 ; S, 51 ; ink in
which they are written to be drunk,


274


INDEX.


!▼, Ixi if. ; not to be mentioned, A,
21 ; knowing name of demon, ilyi,

1. Ix; A«, xU. 32, 149; E, 149;
G, 106; Med, 149; Origen, 160;
Test, of Sol., 150.
Nuntaru, 51(^,83 if., 99.
Nanida, lix.
NatiTities, xxxr.
Nazazeth, 101.

Nazarite ritual, 182 ; clam, 236.
NebiTehiidali, 211, 212.
Nebk. Uy, 76, 78, 229.
Nebocbadnezzar, Ut.
Neck in magic, Ab, 38, 96, 166, 211 ;

£, 164 ; I, 163, 164 ; L, 164.
Necklaoe-chaim, M, 21, 22.
Nectaneboa, 156.
Needles in magic (siron?), H, 144;

M, 20.
Negroes, 184.
Neilgberry Hilla, 183.
Nelens, 216.

Nergal, xxiv, Iviu, Ux, 8, 97 (P), 157.

Neetorians, 14, 114, 116.

Netin magic, Ajb, 123,173; Rosaia, 173.

New Guinea, 163, 201.

New South Wales, 237.

New things in magic, A, 17.

New year in magic, Japan, Buasia, 184 ;
H, 91 ; New York, 89.

New Zealand, 99.

Nicknames, Ab, 149.

Niddah (menstruating woman), 118, 133.

Nightmare,A,81; As,67,81; Maronite,42.

Nimroud, plaque from, 86.

Nin-aba-^uddu, xlriii.

Nine in magic. A, 42, 168 ; As, 141 ;
H, 91, 212 ; I, 162, 163.

Nineteen in magic. As, 138, 139.

Mneyeh, xxxvii, Ixii, 24, 66, 70, 169 ;
Queen of, 66.

Ningal, 246.

Ninib, xxir, 246.

Ninkasi, 214.

Nin-tu, 63, 64.

Nisaba, lix, 123, 124.

Nisan, month, xxxTiii, 207.

J^Tm Iro/t-series, xxxix.

Noah, 9.


Noise driring away demona, see Dimon9,

Noon in magic. As, 161.

Nose in magic, A, 38 ; H, 164.

Nnr-ed-Din, 134.

Nuraing-women, danger to, 170.

Nusairiyeh, 16, 229.

Nuts in magic, H, 135 ; Sab, 139.

Nut-trees in magic, H, 91.

Nuzku, xlviii, lix, bb, 163 ; see Fire-^od,

Oar in magic. As, 88 (?).

Oath on Iki penU, A, 78 ; Jephthah's

TOW, 220. See Tabu,
Obizuth, 41.
Odysseus, 8.
Odyssey, 16, 107.
CEthanes, xxxyi.

Offerings, 53; As, 139, 157, 161; to
dead. As, H, 13 ff.; Sab, 14; in
gratitude. A, 169 (?) ; As, 86 ; poured
into earth, As, 9, 32, 33 ; cast into
aea, A, 231 ; As, P, 230. See also
SacrifieeM vidi Lead,
Offspring, Semitic desire for, 13, 64.
Oil in magic, As, xxii, xliy, xly, 26,

33, 168, 188; H, 91, 136.
Old woman in magic, As, 121.
Olympias, 166.
Omahas, 139.
Omdurman, 11.

Omens from ghoets, 36 ; obserred, xxxi,
129; from monstrous births, 209, 221;
eclipses, As, 56 ff .
Onion in magic, H, 139 ; M, lyiii.
Ophthahnia, As, 141, 170, 171 ; H, 212.

See Blindneu.
Oracles, 9, 223 ; see Enqmry,
Orang Laut, 136.
Ordeal by water, As, xxy ; for adultery,

H,ly.
Orifices of body entrance of spirit. A,
116; H, 115, 129; cf. 132. (See
Skeat, JVatoy Magie, 401.)
Origen quoted, 60, 93, 145, 150, 196.
Omias, 71.
Orontee, 79.

Osiers in magic, H, 170.
Ostrich, form of Jinn, A, 67; ghoul,
60 ; in magic. A, 58.


INDBX.


275


Ovens haunted, see I>emoHt,

OTid quoted, 227.

Owl as spirit, A, 20, 21, 77 ; As, 60 ;

M, 20, 21.
Ox in magic, 233 ; A, 210, 226 ; As,

zUt, 32, 33, 49, 187, 188, 210, 252 ;

H, 198, 219, 248, 252; Malagasy,

183 ; S, 51.
Ozair, 74.

Palestine, pauim.

Palm in magic, As, Iviii, 26, 187, 188,

253; Celebes, 163; Pal, 88; H,

164.
Paneas, 80.
Pannonia, 72.

Panoi = ghostland in Melanesia, 22.
Paradise, S, 6 ; birds of. A, 61.
Parchment in magic, A, Ixiii ; H, 160,

161 ; Med, 149.
Parsees, 251.

Passover, 129, 135, 182, 231, 240.
Pausanias quoted, 216.
Peacock in magic, H, xz.
Peas in magic, zxxi.
Pelew Islands, 22.
Pentecost, 182.
Perak, 21.

'Periodic' Atonements, 184; H, 182.
Persia, Persians, Ixii, 14, 167.
Persian Gulf, 230.
Persius quoted, 164.
Peru, 53, 184.
Petronius quoted, 164.
Phaniel, 161.

Pharaoh, xviii, 143 ; A, 59.
Pharisees, zlvi.
Philip of Macedon, 158.
Philosopher's stone, xx.
Phoenicians, xxxvi, 10, 201, 221, 222.
Physician prohibited from healing on

Sabbath, As, 139.
Pickling useless if done by menstmous

woman, A, 119.
Picture in magic, H, 160, 161, 187;

Maronite, 105.
Pig, spirit of wicked tranamigTating

into, T, 6 ; in magic, xli, xliv, 202,

209 ; A, 209, 210 ; Abiponee, 127 ;


As, 161, 208 if.; £, 209; G, 209;
H, 115, 209; I, 183; N.T., 180,
208.

Pigeon in magic, As, 49.

Hlate, 129.

Piles for houses in magic, H, 186, 189.

Pillows in magic, A, 207 ; Eth, 148 ;
H, 38.

Pins in magic, M, 145.

Pitch in magic, G, 14.

Placenta in magic, 201.

Plague removed, H, 182.

Phigue-god, As, 48 (?), 51 (?), 83 i!.. 99,
159 ; see Namtaru and Ura.

Phun-god, xxviii.

Planets, xzxv.

Plantain in magic, Tonga, 215.

Plants in magic, A, xxx ; Ab, 104 ; As,
U, 12, 121, 150-4 ; £ (Bth), 155 ; H,
107 ; Josephus, 106 ; M, U, lii ; puUed
up, tabu, see Taiu.

Plaque, magical, Ixvii, 168.

Plaster in magic. As, 187, 188; H,
187.

Plutarch quoted, xxxv, 107, 125.

Polynesia, 95, 125.

Polyphemus, 239.

Polypus, H, 129.

Pomegranate in magic, 135.

Pomoe of California, 184.

Porcupine in magic, A, 59.

Porphyry quoted, 106, 130, 222.

Pot in magic. As, xxvii ; broken. A, 30,
31 ; As, (28), (29), (214) ; H, xlix, Iv,
(Ivi), (Ixii), (28), 80, 170, 185; I,
162, 163; M. lu (cf. 206) ; S, 196.

Potato in magic, Maori, 215.

Prehistoric man, 238.

Prieetly Code, 177, 178.

Priests, xviil, xxiif., xlif., xlv; conse-
crated, 182, 202 ; allowed to eat sin-
offering, 194 if. ; when not allowed
to make divination. As, 139 ; Galloi
prieslB, 114.

Prison; escape from, in magic, Ixvi.

Prostituiionof women, BabyloniayCyprus,
Hdiopolis, 79 ; A, 78, 79.

Psdlus quoted, xxx, 69, 137, 209, 223.

Fnhu, 177.


n


276


nn)EX.


Pampkin in magic, Malagasy, 213.
* Pore Abode ' « Erida, 7.
Purple in magic, 135.

' Qoeen of Heaven,' H, 207.
' Queen of Nineveh,' 65.
Queenaland, Central, 75.

Babba, 71.

Babban Hormizd, xlvi.

Babbi Akiba, xzx, 1.

Rabbi Ashi, zx.

Babbi Hanina, zxxii.

Babbi Hyya, zx.

Babbi Isaac Loria, 18.

Babbi Jehudah, 135.

Babbi Joshua, 1.

Babbi Joshua ben Hananiah, izxiii.

Babbi Meir, 135.

Babbi Nathan, 129.

Babbi Papa, 24.

Babbi Pinchas ben Tair, 4.

Babbi Yochanan, 18, 66.

Babbit, metempsychosis of unclean person

into, Kabbala, 4.
Babies, A, 20, 174 ; H, Izii, 174.
SabifH-demoTL, liii, 39, 40, 44, 100.
Bag in magic, 1 ; A, 88 ; Ab, 104 ; As,

153.
Baguel, 74.
Bahab, 200.
Bahabiel, 161.
Bain-time in magic, 135.
Baising dead, see Dead and Oho»t9»
Baisins in magic, 139.
Bam in magic, H, 220, 231.
Baphael, 75, 134, 160.
Jtoffodt 62 ; guardian of treasure, A, 62.
Bat in magic, A, Ixvi.
Bavensinmagio,A,zxz; H, xx; 8,92;

raven faces of bat-men, As, 81.
Beading ihema*, tabu on, 15.
Bed in magic. A, xx ; As, 171 ; H, Iv,

Ivi, 160; I, 183. See ^S^Mir^^
Bedeeming the life, Pal, 102; the soul,

A, 16; the firstborn, 180, 219 ff.; in

Borne, 227.
Beed in magic. As, 204, 206, 253 ; reed-
bed prevents spirit leavinggrave, H, 91 .


* Befuse ' in magic. As, 153, 204 ; see

Z«'».
Beptilee, As, 186 ; H, 4.
Besurrection, A, 16 ; S, 6.
Bhenmatasm, As, Ixiii, 204.
Bice in magic, Borneo, Celebes, 163;

£. Indies, 156.
Bight hand or side in magic, A, 46;

As, xxiv, xxviii, Ivii, lix, 157, 166,

171, 202 ; H, xxxi, 164.
Bing in magic. As, lii ; H, Ixvi ;

Josephus, 106; Pal, 135; Tyrol^

137.
Bimmon, see Adad.
Bio, Martin Del, quoted, xvii, xxv, Ixii,.

68, 72.
Biver-god, As, liv, 214.
Bivers, confluence of two, in magic, As,

li, 154, 212 ; cf. H, 144 ; haunted,

see Detnom ; carry away tabu, As, lii,

130, 186, 187 ; Pen, 168 ; clay from

river-banks, H, 144, 164 ; in ordeal,

xxv ; charm to dry up, H, Ixviii.
Bobenhausen, 239.
Bocky places haunted, 90.
Bome, 174, 227.
Boof( -shadow) haunted, H, 91.
Boots in magic, H, 164 ; Josephus, 106 ;

Pal, 107.
Bope in magic. A, xviii.
Bound in magic, H, 186, 189.
Boyal Tabu, see Tabu.
Buala, battle ritual, 158.
Bue in magic, Pal. Jews, 72.
Buins haunted, see Detnont.
Bunning water in magic, see Water,
Bussia, 169, 173, 184, 237.

Sabbath, Ixviii, 15, 61, 58, 72, 119,.
138ff., 170, 252.

Sabians, 14, 57, 119, 148, 195, 223.

Sacred names invoked, see Namee,

Sacrifices, 80, 93, 121, 133, 139, 157,
194 fP., 221 fP.; to dead. A, G, 16;
Phoen, 201 ; to demons. A, 58 ; H,
198 ; Sprenger, 77 ; human, A, 133 ;
As, 223 ff. ; H, 22 1 ff . See also under
the names of sacrificial animals.

Sa*dadin, 80.


INDEX.


277


Sadunu, zxxrii.

SadCbr, xxni.

BaAron in magic, As, liii ; H, 147, 161,

164.
Safri^, 62.
Saint-Aubin, 239.
Saints, A, 79 ff . ; inflict punishment,

A, 97 ; in India, 78.
Sakai of Perak, 21, 253.
Sakilkir'piaxii, zliv.
Saknet Abu Darwtsh, 105.
Sala, 245.
Salt in magic, A, 88, 119 ; As, xxTii,

xlii, liii ; Borneo, 163 ; H, 89, 102 ;

Pal, 102.
Samaria, zxx.
Samal, xxi, zxii (Sun), xxir, xxvi, xzziz,

xlii, xliii (Sun), xUt (Sun), xlr, xlyii

(Sun), Ixii (Sun), 26, 33, 34, 64, 67

(Sun), 122 (Sun), 126, 152, 154 (Sun),

157, 158, 160 (Sun), 187 (Sun), 188,
^ 210, 214, 217, 245, 252 (Sun).
8amaii-8um-ukin, 10, 55, 56, 97.
Sammael, 86, 87.
Samson, 38, 73, 78.
Samuel, 9, 24.
Sandarach, Ixrii.
l^appan, xxvii.
Sarah, 73, 78.
Sarah, daughter of Raguel, Ivii, 74, 75,

134.
Savazoff-ga, 160.
i^arpanitum, 56, 138, 245.
Sarpedon, 72.
SaUn, xxxiiif., 42, 74, 86, 87, 100, 222,

223 ; the Devil, 23 ; the enemy, 54.
Saturday, A, xxxi; H, 15, 119.
Saturn, 222.
Saul, 9.
Scapegoat, 178, 182 ff., 200; no proof

of its existence in Assyria, 185.
Scarlet in magic, H, W, 185, 188;

threads or hair in magic, see iiMf.
Scents, Oriental desire for, 133.
< Soheiss-Teufel,' 72.
Scorpio, moon in, unlucky time for

weddings, A, 134.
Scorpion in magic. A, 20, 173 ; S, 54.
Scorpion-men, 81.


Sea in magic, 180 ; A, 231 ; As, xxiii,
xIt, lii, Ut, lix, 25, 55, 88, 159,
205, 208, 214, 230 ; £ (Eth), 155,
156; M, 157, 206; P, 230; S, liu;
haunted, 39 (cf. 47} ; see Ineantaium
oftheLiep*

Sea-monster, 64 ff.

Seals in magic, C, 173; H, Ixii; of

^ demon, 149.

Sm, 44.

iidim^ 44, 55, 6^^ 58 ; see Demon:

Sedu, liii, 43 ff., 100, 245 ; see Demm:

$ei*ar change to were-wolres, 57.

Seiyid Ahmed el-Bedawi, 79.

Selangor, lii.

Semi-human spirits, 2, 65, 93; see
Demons,

Seneeio vulgaris, xlir.

Senjero, 237.

Sennacherib, xxii, 12, 40, 230.

Sephardim, 138.

Sepher Sasiel, Ixviii.

September in magic, Inoas, 184.

SOTaph, Iviii.

Serpent, see Snake,

Senrius Tullius, 72.

Sesame in magic. A, xlix ; As, xxvi.

Sesame-wine in magic. As, xlii, xlr, 34.

Seyen in magic. A, xx, 5, 16, 37, 58,
62, 89, 166, 167, 169, 207, 229 ; As,
liii, iTiii, lix, 32, 33, 100, 138, 166,
167, 170, 187, 188, 206, 208, 214 ;
Babar, 201; Borneo, 163; C, 173;
H, It, Ixiv, 17, 21, 27, 144, 170,
185 ff., 217, 252; I, 162; M. 36,
205; N.T., 52; P, 168; S, 114.
See Demons, the Seven Spirits.

Seyf el-HuIook, 37.

Seyide, 231.

Shabriri, 30 (see Ixii).

Shade of moonlight haunted, see Demons.

Shadowless demons, H, 61.

Shalameans, 11.

Shammar, xxix.

Shans of China, 184.

Sharing in magic, A, xxxi, 229; As,
153; S, 114.

Sheba, 57.

Shebat, 56.


278


INDEX.


Sheep, A, ld» 226, 227, 229, 231 ; Ab,
104; Ai, 49, 50fP., 157; H, 219,
233, 252 ; Malagasy, 213; S, 61.

Shein, 9.

Shemai, 139.

Shedl, 3, 4, 6, 9, 234 ; see Underworld.

Shewbread, 207.

Shi'ah tradition, 28.

Shibbeta, 129.

Ships in magic, 154 if. ; A, 231 ; As,
230, 253 ; H, 186, 189, 254 ; £, 1.

ShitU, 6.

Shoes worn by women in childbed, H,
119; but [not by one carrying coipse,
H, 119; in magic, As, 153; H, 184.

Shoulders in magic, A, 211 ; I, 163.

Shroud in magic, H, 169.

Sibylline books, xixvi.

Sickness due to demons (see Demons),
As, 96 ; Celebes, 163 ; N.T., ' Chal-
deans,* 100 ; to eclipse, As, 55 ; to
saints, A, 97 ; to gods, 96 ; to breach
of Ubu, 96, 119, 191 fP., 218; to
unwashed hands, 129 ; to eating fish
or dates, 14 1 ; to crossing a riTcr, 141 .

Si'Ut, 70.

Silk in magic, A, Ixrii ; Ab, 164 ; H,
XX ; I, 164.

Siloam, 31.

SUver in magic, A, xxix, Ixiii, 89 ; P,
Ldi.

Simon of Samaria, xxx.

Sin, xxiy, xxW, xxxix, 55, 245 ; see
Moori'pod.

Sin, 193 ; origin of, among Semites, 128.

Sin-offering, 182 ff., 194,216, 218,243.

Sinai, 117.

Sinaitic Peninsula, xUt, lyiii, Ixiii, 40,
59, 89, 159, 173.

Sinjar Hills, 6.

Sippar, xxi, xxii.

Sirens, 68.

8'Mm, 57, 59.

Sisters, two marrying on the same day
tabu, H, 135.

Sitlamtaea, lix.

$it-napishtim, 12.

Situa, 184.

Six in magic, H, xxxi, 102.


Sixty in magic, H, 91.
Skimming-spoon in magic, H, 118.
Skin in magic, A, 211 ; As, 187 ; £th,

148.
Skull in magic, A, 256.
Sleep, A, XXX ; magic does not work if

sorcerer is asleep. A, xxxii.
Smoke in magic, H, Ixviii.
Snake in magic. A, 20 ; As, 12, 49, 54,

63, 64 ; £, XTiii, xix ; H, xxxi ; S,

54 ; form of Jinn, 57.
SSda, Arab demon, 107.
Solomon, 57, 77, 106, 150, 180^ 231 ;

Baths of, 79.
Solw^H, 147.

Son of God, 73, 74 ; see B'ni JSUMm.
Soudan, xxxTi, Ixiii, 10, 11, 60.
Soul, see Ohoet ; hymn of, S, 5 ; beliefs

concerning, 3 ff. ; transmigration of,

see GKoat ; external soul, see Ohoet,
South Sea Islands, 53.
Sozomen quoted, 79, 107.
Spain (' ex Gagate '), Ixii.
Sparrow in magic, A, 37*
Speaking with tabooed person renders

tabu. Sab, 119.
Spearworts in magic, H, 91.
a^yia, 216.

Spices in magic, H, 147 ; M, lii.
Spinning in magic, As, bdv, 166, 167,

171 ; P, 167.
Spirit, see Demone, OhoeU ; spirit- wife,

66, 67 ; classes of, 2.
Spitting in magic, Roman, 227.
Spittle in magic, 33, 145 ; A, xt, 89,

107, 147, 168; As, 33, 153, 185,

206 ; Ibn Ehaldun, 145 ; M, 22, 36 ;

N.T., 147 ; Psellus, xxx-
Sprenger quoted, xxx, Ixiy, 69, 77.
Spring in magic. A, 211.
Square in magic, H, 186, 189.
St. Anthony, 54, 105.
St. Cyprian, 42.
St. George, 231.
St. John, liv.
St. Maxime de Turin, 53.
St. Nino, 33.
St. Paul, xxx, 74.
St. Peter, IxTi.


INDEX.


279


Stag in magic, Abipones, 127.

Stench drives away demons, see Detnons.

Stick in magic, H, xxxi.

Stolen money to be restored by magic,
A, 62.

Stone in magic, A, xxziii, 89, 158 if. ;
As, Ixiii; H, Ixviii, 18, 207; I, lix ;
S, 83, 89; T, 31 ; Philosopher's
Stone, XX.

Stones thrown by demons, A, 18.

Storm-god, see Adad.

Storms caused by demons, As, 43, 48,
54 ; Med, 48.

Strabo quoted, xxxt.

Street (market-place, broad places) in
magic. As, 41, 43, 44, 47, 129, 160,
166, 204, 213.

Suakin, xxxri.

Snbari, xxiii.

Subarti, 240.

Substitutes in magic, 103, 163, 178,
180, 183, 195, 202, 218; A, 177.
229; As, 178, 206, 208, 211; G,
230; H, 212 (cf. 226, 226 ff.); M,
162, 230 ; N.T., 209.

Succuba, succubus, 23, 68ff., 171.

Suez, 40.

Sugar in magic. Pal, 102.

Sulphur in magic, 6, 106 ; M, Iviii.

^ See £rittutone,

Sumft, xxxvii.

Suma-ukina, xxxvii.

Sumatra, 183.

SufM-^&ih,' 158,

Sumerians, 178.

Summer in magic, 135.

Sun (see SamaS)^ Esquimaux, 184; H,
1 1 ; South Sea Islands, 53 ; unclean
woman not allowed to see, 133 ; sun-
rise in magic. A, 159 ; As, xxvii,
xlii, 165, 254; sunset in magic, As,
xxrii, 66, 187. 217 ; M, Iviii.

i^ur^-series, xxxix.

Surrounding with water, H, 107 ; with
meal. As. 204 ; with lime. As, Ivii ff.
See also Circle.

Swallows in magic, A, 61 ; As, 49 ;
Sumatra, 183.

Sweat in magic, Eth, 148.


Sweetmeats in magic, Pal, 102 ; Sab, 14.
Sword in magic, see Iron,
*' Sword of Moses," Ixviii, 169.
Sympathetic magic, 142 ff., 173,. 178.
Sjrria, passim,

Tabarjan, 14.

Tabernacle, It, 130.

Tabernacles, Feast of, 182.

Table in magic, As, xlii, 25.

Tabu, xxi, xxii, xxxix, xl, Ht, Ixrii,
95ff., 108ff., 130 ff., 178, 180 ff., 231,
245 ff.; contagious, 30, 108, 125 ff.,
182, 190; H, Maori. 215 ; holy, 110,
245; unclean, 110, 254; touching
hSremy H, 176, 215 ; speaking with
tabooed person. As, Sab, 1 19 ; cleansed,
As, 186 ; overcome by magic. As, 165.

— on adultery, 247.

— on beasts, 262; M. 23; passing
under the rope of a camel, or under
the camel itself, or between two
camels, H, 117.

— on bribery, 249.

— on cardinal sins, 125. 128 ; fl*. 182.
See abo under the names.

— on clothes, etc. ; clean clothes, As,
139 ; wearing phylacteries, H, 15 ;
putting on shoes, H, 119, 184.

— on cursing, 139.

— on dead bodies, 109, 112, 190; A.
27, 118, 210; As, 26, 27, 115,
131 ff., 254; H. Ivi, 17, 27, 118,
182. 255; lamblichus. 117; S, 114;
Tobit, 114 ; passing odour of carcase,
H, 117 ; sleeping in a cemetery,
H, 29.

— on dregs. As, 126, 254 (cf. 153).

— on easing nature. A, 116; H, 132.

— on families, 246, 247.

— on fire, 250. 252 ; As, 140, 254 ;
H, 139. {See 9\fioBke&t, Malay Moffie,
319.)

— on food. H, 184 ; eating with friends,
H, 15; things cooked in fire (on
Sabbath). As, 139 ; half-baked bread
or meat taken with a skimming-spoon,
H, 118; bread cooked in ashes or
cooked meat, As, 139 ; eating totems.


280


INDEX.


191 ; giring toteniB (animals) to dogs
to eat, Abipones, 127; eating torn
flesh, H, 207 ; upsetting maize drink,
Abipones, 127 ; drinking vegetables (P),
As, 140 (cf. 2-54) ; drinking water
drawn oyemight, H, 29; drinking
from a grayeyard well, H, 118.
Tabn on lying, 248 ; H, 182.

— on monming, 251.

— on murder, 257.

— on murderers, 116.

— on nail-parings being scattered, H, 29.

— on oaths, 254 ; G, 216 ff. ; H, 182,
215, 216 ff.

— on offerings, 189, 246.

— on perfume, H, 184.

— on physician's work, 139.

— on plimts, pulling up, 253 ; As, 140 ;
M, 22 (cf. uxi, 165).

— on pointing with finger, 252.

— on priestiy tabus. As, 139 ; H, 182,
202.

— on prisoners, 247.

— on riding forth, 139.

— Royal, As, 138 ff., 202 ; H, 182,
202; Tonga, 215.

— Sabbath, 138; H, 252; speaking
loudly. As, 139, 140 ; riding, As,
139 ; making enquiry. As, 139 ;
cooking, E, 139 (cf. As, 139).

— on sedition, 249.

— on seeing the sun, 126.

— on sexual functions (113, 116):
marriage, 113, 134 ff.; A, 116 ff.;
As, 121 ff., 131, 255; H, 116ff.,
184; lamblichus, 117; Min, 116;
cohabitation in bed where child sleeps,
H, 135 ; two sisters marrying on same
day, H, 135 ; intercourse with bond-
maid promised to another, H, 182;
menstruation, 113, 190; A, 116ff. ;
As, 120 ff., 126, 131, 255 ; H, 116 ff.,
136; P, 251; S, 116; issues, 113,
190; As, 121 ff., 131, 255; H, 117,
182; childbirth, 112, 113, 134ff.,
190; As, 122, 131, 135, 255; H,
136, 182.

— on sorcery, 252.

— on speech, loose, 249.


Tabu on stealing and cheating, 248.

— on strife, stirring up, 128.

— on sunstroke. As, 252.
~ Tribal, 182.

— on various places (253) : threshing-
floor, winnowing fan (and meal), 251.

— on yessels, 30.

— on Toice raised (cf. xxxi), 139, 140.

— on washing, H, 14, 32, 140, 184 ;
unwashed hands, 120, 129 ff.; tabu
removed by washing, H, 180. See also
JFathinff.

— on water, 250; on pouring out,
H, 28 ; on the ground. A, Pal, T,
59; on passing under a bridge over
a dry watercourse, H, 117 ; from
unclean, I, 163. See also, on
JFathinff.

— on weapons, 251. (See also Skeat,
Malay Magie, 258, 259.)

— on women : a woman passing between
two men, or a num passing between
two women (risk of menstruous tabu ?),
H, 117 ; widowhood. A, 135.

— on work, 138 ff.

— on writing materials, 251.
Tacitus quoted, liii.
Tak-i-Bustan, Ixii.
TakpirtUf zxxviii, 177.

Tallow in magic. As, xxvii, 154, 158 ;

Maronite, 29. See Wax,
Tamar, 66.
Tamarisk in magic. A, 88, 253 ; As,

xziii, m, Iviu, 187, 188.
Tammuz, 3, 203 ; month, 64, 139.
Tanta, 79.
Tantalus, 239.

Taper in magic, M, 62 ; see Torch,
Tasmit, 245.
Tearing up plants in magic. As, 165 ;

see Tabu,
Teima, 53.
Teiresias, 8.
Tellal, xzix.
TeU-el-kadi, 80.
Temple, 93 ; of Bel, 78 ; of Ezida, zxxvu ;

of Hierapolis, liii ; of Jerusalem, 117;

of Samaj, zxii ; of Theban Jupiter,

78 ; fire-temple, 92.


INDEX.


281


Ten in magio, H, mi ; BC, lii.

Tent, saorifioe for, 228.

Terah, 222.

Terebinth in magic, 139.

Tertullian quoted, 9.

Test of amulet, Ixiii.

Thabatha, 107.

Tbeban Jupiter selects woman, 78.

Theft (stolen money) to be restored by

magic, A, 62.
Thickets haunted, 90.
Thigh, 168; of woman, swelling, H,

It ; of camel in magic. Sab, 14.
Thirty in magic, As, 209 ; S, 114.
Thirty-six in magic. As, xlii.
Thomas of Marga quoted, 92.
Thorn in magic. A, Ivili; As, 33 (P),

34, 206, 253.
Threads in magic. A, Ixvii, 169 ; H,

Ixrii, 146 ; coloured or Tariegated (see

Colound and Cor^Q, A, 169; As,

33, 166, 170 ; H, 146 ; L, 164 ; M,

162.
Three in magic, A, Ixtu, 37, 38, 42, 89 ;

As, zxri, zlii, zliy, zIy, Ixir, 26, 34,

167, 161, 167, 171, 214 ; £, 222 ;

H, 63, 89, 129, 144 (?), 146, 186, 189,

212 ; I, xxviii, 163, 164 ; H, Iviii,

162, 206; Haronite, 29; P, 168;

Roman, 227 ; Test, of Sol., 43.
Three hundred and sixty in magic, As,

xlv.
Threshold in magic, 136 ; A, 17, 30, 77,

227, 228; As, xxri, lix, Ixir, 152,

188; H, 89, 170; M, Mii; Pal,

102 ; S, 116.
Throne of Ood, A, 6, 62.
Throne-bearers, 47, 48, 62; but see

Appendix, 266.
Thunder in magic. A, 171 ; bolt. As,

Ixii ; stone, H, 161.
Tiamat, xl, 196.
Tiberias, 18.
Tigris, xxxY, Ivii, 26.
Tigritiya, Abyssinian madness, 104.
7*t't-series, xli.
Timarchides quoted, 130.
Timor-laut, 166.
Tisri, month, xxxTiii, 14, 210, 212.


Tobacco in magic, Borneo, 163; £.

Indies, 166.
Tobias, Ivii, 74, 76, 134.
Tobit, iTii, 114, 134; cf. 136 for similar

story.
Toe, place of exit for demon. A, 106, 106.
Tomb, see Grave,
Tonga, 215.

Tongue in magic, C, etc., 172.
Tonquin, 184.
Tooth in magic. A, xlir, 174 ; As, xliii,

xlir ; China, M, xliii.
Torch in magic, As, Ivii, 28, 160, 202,

204, 208 ; see Taper.
Tom flesh, H, 207.
Tortoise in magic, As, 33 (?) ; Abipones,

127.
Totems, 191, 221, 236.
Touching corpse of man executed for

murder, A, 76 (cf. Appendix, 266).
Touching unclean things, see Tabu.
Towel in magic, H, 27.
Transference of spirits to water, see

Demone ; to animals and wax figures,

see Atonement,
Transmigration, 4 ff. ; H, 18, 29.
Treasures, xlix, 62.
Trees in magic, xviii, 201 ; H, xxxii ;

S, xlyii.
Trespass offering, 177, 180, 182.
Trinity, Ix, 61.
Tripoli, 17.

Trumpet in magic, A, 6 ; H, 21, 63.
Tuesday in magic, H, 30, 68.
Tumnt, 139.

Tuna, Esquimaux spirit, 184.
Turning seats upside down after death,

H, 16.
Twelre in magic, As, xlii, 161.
Twenty in magic, As, xxxi, 141.
Twenty-eight in magic, As, 138.
Twenty-five in magic, As, xxxi.
Twenty-one in magic, As, 138; I, 164.
Twenty-seyen in magic. As, 210.
Twenty-two in magic. As, xxxi ; I, 164.
Twigs in magic. As, 166, 212, 213.
Two in magic. A, Ixvii, 46 ; As, xxxi,

xIy, U, lix, 166, 166, 202, 204, 212;

H, IxTii, 46, 144, 164, 200 ; H, 32 ;


282


INDEX.


S, liii ; see Coloured for two-coloiired

cords.
Two Brothers, Tale of the, 37.
Tyndarens, 216.
Tyrol, 137.

Uhati, 78.

Ultz (Westphalia), 239.

Umm'el'Subyan, 42.

Unas, zlix.

TJnhuried ghost, see Gho8t.

Unclean : heasts, 4, 191, 216 ff. ; food,

203 ; place, H, 91, 200.
Underworld, A, 5, 58 ; As, zlvii, 3, 8,

12, 49, 82, 97, 99 ; £, xlix, 8 ; Eth,

6; H, 3, 4; Melanesia, 22 ; (Kntha),

32, 33 ; (Ekurra), 68, 82. See SheSl.
Unguent in magic. A, zxx; As, liii,

35, 162, 161 (P).
Unripe things in magic, H, 136.
Untimely birth aa ghost, see Abortion.
Untimely dead as ghost, see Ghott,
Unwashed hands in magic, As, 120;

see Tabu.
* Unwitting' sins, 182, 191 ff, ; cf. 266.
Upuntu-meal or -plant in magic, 9, 26,

66, 160, 158.
Ur, 222.
Ura, 84 ff.
Urine, Ixr ; of ass in libation. As, 34 ;

of camel as medicine, A, 173.
Uript, 224.

Urkarinnu-ytood, xxxriii.
Ufurtu, xxiii, Iviii, 126.
Uterus of animals in magic, 201.
Utukki limn&tif xl.
Utukku, 8, 39, 44, 46, 97.

Vampires, 62.

Variegated threads or hair in magic, As,

33 ; see (floured.
Veils protect from demons, 74.
Venus, Ixii, 79, 223.
Villeneuve-Saint-Oeorges, 239.
Vinegar in magic. A, 174 ; H, 164.
Virgin Idd, As, 166, 167.
Virgin lamb, As, 167.
Virgin Mary, lx?i, 64, 73, 74, 138, 207.
Virgin parchment, H, 160.


Virgins as ghosts, see Oho$U married to

spirits ; see Woimn.
Viscera in magic, H, 197.
Vomiting in magic, As, 163, 204, 260 ;

M, 36.

Wafer, Holy, in magic, 123.

Waist in magic, I, 163.

Washing in magic, A, 122, 126, 136,

266 ; As, xx, lii, 34, 122, 129 fP., 188,

202, 208, 212, 213, 254 ; G, It, 130 ;

H, 14, 28, 129, 140, 184, 187;

1, 163 ; Eoman, 227; S, 116; Tonga,

215.
Watches of the night. As, xx^ii ; see

Morning and Middle.
Water in magic, li, Ixi, 218 ; A, IxTii,

28-32, 77, 114, 117. 130, 186, 256 ;

As, xxii, xxTi, xxvii, lii, liii, 26, 26,

28-32, 34, 98, 100, 123, 129 fP., 152,

163, 167, 160, 161, 166, 187, 188,

202, 208, 212-14; E (Eth), 155;

G, 28 ; H, xviii, Iv, Iviii, 27-32, 91,

129, 146 ; I,xxviii, 162, 163 ; M,lii;

Malagasy, 213; Maronite, 28-32;

Pal, 102, 107 ; S, Ixv ; Tonga, 216.
Running, A, 79 ; H, Ivi, 29, 164

(cf. 117), 186, 188 (cf. As, 254).
Spring, Roman, 227.
Watering-places haunted, 90 ; give con-
ception, 79, 80; troubled by spirit, 80.
Wax in magic, xli, xlyi, li, 142, 159 ;

As, 115, 150; E, 143, 149, 222;

(Eth), 156 ; H, 144 ; M, 146, 206 ;

impassable by demons, A, 106 (cf.

wax dropped in water at Maronite

baptism, 29).
Weddings, A, 30, 134 ; H, 136 ; Y, 31.
Wednesday in magic, Y, 134.
Wells in magic. A, Ixvii, 6, 168 ; H,

146 ; haunted, see Demons.
West in magic. As, xxvii, 84, 159, 162,

263 ; E, 8 ; H, 164 ; I, xxviii.
Westcar Papyrus, 143.
Wheat in magic. As, xlii, xlv ; H, xxxi ;

Pal, 102. See Com.
* Wheat-stones,' Ixiiiff.
White in magic, A, xx, Iv, 6, 105 ; As,

161, 166, 170, 171, 203 ; H, 30, 212.


nn)£X.


283


Wicks in magic, Ixir.

Widowhood undean, A, 186, 187.

Wier quoted, 69, 82.

Willow in magic, H, 170.

Wind in magic. As, 7, 8, 54, 60, 83 ;

bears tabu, Sab, 119 (cf. As, 166) ;

sorcery, H, 147.
Wine in magic. A, 210 ; As, xlv, lii,

158, 187 ; H, 201.
Wiping away a tabu, 215.
Wise-woman, As, 121, 165, 166 ; Babar,

201 ; Borneo, 36, 163 ; I, 164.
Witches, xxi, xxivff., 68, 77, 147,

150 fP., 166, 188, 252.
'Witting' sins, 217.
Wizards, 68 ; casting spell, zxiy ff., Ixiy,

166; Ab, 103; wise-man, Borneo, 36.
Wolf, S, 54.
Wolves, were*, 57.
Women married to spirits, 72 ; see

Virffifu (see also Barren and OhoiU) ;

stepping OTer nail-parings, H, 147.
Wood in magic, A, xriii, 8 ; As, xliii,

154; Borneo, 163.
Wool in magic, A, IxTii ; Ab, 164 ; As,

167, 171, 192; H, Ixyii, 164.
Word of power, xlyi ff., Ix, Ixri, Ixyii,

Ixyiii, 31, 42.


Worm in magic. A, xliv, 210 ; As, xliii.

(On worms in teeth see Skeat, Malay

Magie, 359.)
Wormwood in magic, H, 87.
Wotyaks, 184.
Wrist in magic, A, 169 ; P, 168.

Xenocrates quoted, 203.
Xerxes, xxxyi, 230.

TaghQth, 158.

Yahweh, xyiii, ly, (Ixyi), 4, (6), 9, (11),
12, 24, 29, (33), (38), (51), (52),
(58), (66), 78, (74). 78, 86, (107),
(118), 139, 140, (148), (149), (158),
(172), 176, 182, 187, 197, 216, 219,
220, 222, 226, 231, 236, 246.

Tellow in magic, I, 163.

Tezidis, 6, 31, 59.

Tuseph el-hagg, liy.

^miruirti-priests, xxiff., xly ('singer')

Zebedani, 226.

Zemzem, 5, 80.

Zerka Ma'in, 59.

Zeus, 254.

Zoroaster quoted, 119 (cf. 52)

Za, 11.


285


LIST OF BIBLICAL QUOTATIONS.


Genesis: —

xii, 1, 2 .
X2ii, Iff.
xxix, 31 .
XXX, 14

Exodus : —
iv . . .
viii, 19
xii, 23 . .
xiii, 2, 12 fP.
xiii» 13
xiii, 19
XV, 25 . .
XYii, 6 . .
xviii, 15 ff.
xix, 15
xxi, 17
xxii, 1 . .
xxii, 18 .
xxii, 20 .
xxii, 2S .
xxii, 31 .
xxiii, 1
xxiii, 4
xxiii, 8
xxix, IfF. 182
xxix, 12, 14

A A X • • •

XXX, 10, Id
xxxii, 33 .

XXXT, 3 .


page
73,78
. 220
. 78
. Ixiy


xriii, XIX
. 97
. 86
. 219
. 220
. 10

. XVlll
. XYIU

. 219

117, 247

. 247

. 248

xxix, 252

. 246

246, 249
. 207
. 248
. 252
. 249

, 194, 198
. 198
. 194
. 182
. 12

139, 251


Letitxcts : —
i . . .
i, 1-7 . .
iii, 16 . .
iv . . .


182
198
197
194, 198


iv, 1 fP., 3, 13 ff. 182
iv, 22 . . 140, 182
iv, 27 ff. . . . 182

V 215

y, Iff., loff. . 182


Leyiticvs (cont
V, 2. .
vi . .
vii, 38.
viii, Iff.
IX . .182
ix, 9-15
X. I. 2 .
X. 16-20
xi, 29-38
xii, 2 .
xii, 2 ff.
xiii . .
xiv . .
xiv, 38, 46
xiv, 51, 52

XV . . .

XV, 2 ff . .
XV, 16-18
XV, 19 . .
xvi. . 182
xrii, 7 . .
xvii, 11, 14
xvii, 15 .
xviii, 1 ff. .
xviii, 19 .
xix, 11
xix, 12 .
xix, 15 .
xix, 19 .
xix, 20 ff.
xix, 26, 31
xix, 32 .
xix, 35, 36
XX, 2 . .
XX, 6 . .
XX, 9, 10 .
xxi, 10
xxii, 4 . .
xxii, 14
xxii, 27

• • •

XXIU . .


y.— page
. 27
. 182
. 198

182, 194

194, 198
. 198
. 139
. 198
. 30
. 136
. 182
. 182

182, 194
. 187
. 188

116, 194
. 182
. 117
. 136

184, 198
59, 198
. 195
. 130
. 247
. 118
. 248
. 254

117» 249
. Ixvii
. 182
. 252
. 247
. 248
. 222
. 252
. 247
. 251
27, 116
. 182
. 252

182, 194


Numbers: —
1,51 .
lu, 12 .
iii, 13 .

▼, 1 .

V, 6

V, 11 ff.
vi, 1
vi, 9ff.
vi, 13 ff.
viu, 6 .
ix, 6 .
XV, 24
XV, 27 .
XV, 38 .
xvi, 26
xvi, 46
xviii, 15 ff
xix, 1 ff.
xix, 10
xix, 15
xix, 16.
xix, 17 ff.
xxii, 4
xxii, 5
xxiii, 24
xxiv, 8
xxviii .
xxix, 1 ff.
xxxi, 19-24
xxxi, 22, 23

Deuteronomy
xu, 16
xu, 23
xii, 30, 31
xviii, 10
xviii, 11
xviii, 18
xix, 14
xxi, 1 .
xxii, 1 .


page

. 130

. 236

. 220

114, 116

. 182

. It

. 114

. 182

. 182

. 182

. 114

. 182

. 182

. 164

. 108

. 182

219, 220

. It

. 187

. 28

. 17

. 182

. 116

XXT,

. 241
. 241
. 182
182, 202
. 110
. Iviii


20
195
222
xxix
252
222
248
200
252.


286


LIST OF BIBLICAL QUOTATIONS.


DiVT. (cont.) : — page

xxii, 6. ... 252

xxiii, 21 ... 246

XXV, 13-16 . . 248

xxYi, 14 . . . 14

xxni, 16 ... 247

xxvii, 17 . . . 248

xxxii» 17 . . . 44

Joshua: —

Yi, 23 . . . . 200

Ti, 26 . . . . 228

Tii 176

viii, 29 ... 13

JuDOBs : —
xiii, 3 ... 73, 78

1 Samuel: —

ii, 6 . . . . 9

iv, 7 . . . . 1/58

xxviii, 7 . . . 9

xxTiii, 14 . . • 4

2 Sakuil: —

xxiv, 16 . . . 86

1 EiNOs: —

xviii .... xviii

2 Kings: —

V, 10 . . . . liv

xvi, 3 .... 222

xTii, 31 ... 222

xix, 36 . . . 86

xxiii, 10 . . . 222

1 Chroniclbs: —

xxi, 1 . . . . 87

Job: —

i, ii 87

ii, 13 . . . . 16

iv, 16 . . . 8, 40

vii, 10 . . . . 3

X, 21 ... . 3

xi, 8 . . . . 3

XTii, 16 . . . 3

Psalms: —

xxix, 3-9 .. . 30

Ixxxviii, 6 . . 4

Ixxxix, 48 . . 87
cvi, 37 . . . 44, 222

cvi, 38 . . . . 222

cix, 6 . . . . 87


PROTERRS : —

xxvii, 9
XXX, 16 .

ECCLBSIASTBS :

iv, 12 . .

Isaiah: —
vi, 6 . .
viii, 19
xiv . . .
xxxviii, 10
xxxviii, 18
xlvii, 12, 13
Ivii, 8 . .

Jbrbmiah : —
vii, 18 .
^•ii, 30-2
viii. Iff.
xi, 19 .
xix, 3-5
xxxii, 36

Ezbkibl: —
iv. 1, 2
xiii, 18
xvi, 20, 21

• • •

XXUl .

xxxii, 27
xliu, 7-9
xliii, 18 ff.
xlv, 18 ff.

HosBA : —
ix, 4 . .

Jonah : —
i, 14 . .
i, 17 . .

Zbchariau : —

• • •

m . . .

Matthbw : —
ui, 6 . .
iv, 1 . .
vii, 22 . .
viii, 28 ff.
xii, 24 . .
xvii, 14 .
xxvii, 24 .

Mark: —
V, 1 ff.
vii, 22 . .


page

133

63

167

Iviii
14

4
3

4

XXXV

128

207
222
10
206
222
222

166

38

222

73

4

114

182

182

14

1
53

87

liv
91
xlvi
208
xlvi
101
130

208
88


page

. 101

xlvi

. 149
. 208
. xlvi
60,91

. 80
60

. XXX

. Ixvi

XXX
. XXX
. XXX

XXX. xxxvi


Mark (oont.) : —
ix, 14 .
ix, 38 .

Lukb: —
iv, 34 .
viii, 26 ff.
ix, 49 .
xi, 24 .

John : —
▼.4 .
X, 20 .

Acts: —
vui, 9 .
xii, 7ff.
xui, 6 .
xvi, 16
xix, 13
xix, 19

1 Corinthians
X, 20 ... . 198

Hbbrbws : —
ix, 22 . . . . 196

Rbtblation: —

iii, 1 . . . . 62

iv, 6 . . . . 62

V, 6 . . -. . 62

ix, 7 . . . . 81

xii, 4 . . . . 43

XV, 6 ... . 61

xviii, 2 ... 92

Tobit: —
i, 16 . . . . 24
ii, 9 .... 114
iii, 17 ... . 74
vi, 7 . . . . Ivii
vi. 14 . . . 74, 134
viu, 2 . . Ivii, 134
viii. 3 . . . . Ivii
xii, 12, 16 . . 62

Wisdom : —
xii, 4-6 ... 222

ECCLBSIASTICUS : —

xxi, 27 ... 87
Bauuch : —
vi, 29 . . . . 121
