==============================================================================
The Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia, Vol. I: Evil Spirits (Utukki Limnuti)
R. Campbell Thompson (1876-1941) (1903)
Edition staged: London: Luzac (Semitic Text and Translation Series, Vol. XIV), 1903. Internet Archive scan.
Source: Internet Archive — https://archive.org/details/the-devils-and-evil-spirits-of-babylonia-r.-campbell-thompson
Rights: Public Domain. Published 1903, before 1930; author died 1941.
Language: English (with Akkadian transliteration)
Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library (antarctic-labs.com).
English translations of Babylonian/Assyrian anti-demon incantations (Utukki Limnuti series etc.): the classic PD English source for Mesopotamian demonology. Volume 1 of 2.
==============================================================================

j
I


LUZAC'S SEMITIC TEXT
AND TRANSLATION SERIES


LEUTE


3 1761 03638 1580


aame
he 1
we —
—TF


JLusac s
Semitic Tert an Translation Series.


Dol. XIV.


Microsoft Corporation


http://www.archive.org/details/devilsevilspirit01tha |
Li


Anzac's Semitic Cert and Translation Series.


VOL. I: THE LAUGHABLE STORIES COLLECTED BY BAR-HEBRZUS.


VOL.


VOL.


VOL.


VOL.


VOL.


VOL.


VOL.


VOL.


Syriac Text and Translation, with Notes, Introduction, etc.
By E. A. Wallis Budge. 215. net.


II: THE LETTERS AND INSCRIPTIONS OF HAMMURABI,
KING or BABYLON, ABOUT B.C. 2200; to which are added
a series of letters of other kings of the First Dynasty of
Babylon. Vol. I: Introduction and Babylonian Texts.
lr L. W.iKing., 215. net.


III: THE LETTERS AND INSCRIPTIONS OF HAMMURABI,
KING OF BABYLON, ABOUT B.C. 2200; to which are added
a series of letters of other kings of the First Dynasty of
Babylon. Vol. II: Babylonian Texts, continued. By
ie. W. King. 185. net.


IV: THE HISTORY OF THE VIRGIN MARY, AND THE
HISTORY OF THE LIKENESS OF CHRIST. Vol. I: Syriac
Texts. By E. A. Wallis Budge. 12s. 6d. net.


V: THE HISTORY OF THE VIRGIN MARY, AND THE
HISTORY OF THE LIKENESS OF CHRIST. Vol. II: English
Translations. By E. A. Wallis Budge. os. 62. net.


VI: THE REPORTS OF THE MAGICIANS AND ASTROLOGERS
oF NINEVEH AND BABYLON. Vol. 1: Cuneiform Texts. By
R. C. Thompson. 125. 6d. net.


VII: THE REPORTS OF THE MAGICIANS AND ASTROLOGERS
OF NINEVEH AND BABYLON. Vol. II: English Translation
and Transliteration. By R. C. Thompson. 125. 6d. net.


VIII: THE LETTERS AND INSCRIPTIONS OF HAMMURABI,
KING OF BABYLON, ABOUT B.C. 2200; to which are added
a series of letters of other kings of the First Dynasty of
Babylon. Vol. III: English Translations, with Translitera-
tions, Commentary, Vocabularies, Introduction, etc. By
mW. King. 185. net.


IX: THE HISTORIES OF RABBAN HORMIZD THE PERSIAN
AND RABBAN BAR-'IDTA. Vol. 1: Syriac Texts. By E. A.
Wallis Budge. 125. 6d. net.


VOL.


VOL.


VOL.


VOL.


VOL.


VOL.


MOL.


VOL.


MOTE


WOL.


X: THE HISTORIES oF RABBAN HORMIZD THE PERSIAN
AND RABBAN BAR-'ĪDTĀ. Vol. II: English Translations.
By E. A. Wallis Budge. 12s. 6d. net.


XI: THE HISTORIES oF RABBAN HORMIZD THE PERSIAN
AND RABBAN BAR-'IDTA. Vol. III: English Translation
of the Metrical Life of Rabban Hormizd by Sergius of
Adhórbáijàn. By E. A. Wallis Budge. 10s. 6d. net.


XII: THE SEVEN TABLETS OF CREATION. Vol. I: English
Translations, Transliterations, Glossary, Introduction, etc.
By L. W. King. 185. net.


XIII: THE SEVEN TABLETS oF CREATION. Vol. II:
Supplementary [ Babylonian and Assyrian! Texts. By L. W.
King. 155. net.


XIV: THE DEVILS AND Evit Spirits oF BABYLONIA,
transliterated and translated, with Introduction. Vol. I.
By R. C. Thompson. (Zn the Press.)


XV: THE DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA,
transliterated and translated, with Vocabulary, Indexes,
and an Introduction. Vol. II. By R. C. Thompson.
(Zn the Press.)


XVI: THE History or BARALAM AND YEWASEF. The
Ethiopic Version, translated from the Arabic by Enbákóm,
for the Ethiopian king Galáwdéwás, A.D. 1553. Vol. I,
Part 1: the Ethiopic Text. By E. A. Wallis Budge. (fa
the Press.)


XVII: THE History or BARALAM AND YEWASEF. The
Ethiopic Version, translated from the Arabic by Enbákóm,
for the Ethiopian king Galáwdéwás, A.D. 1553. Vol. I,
Part 2: the Ethiopic Text, continued. By E. A. Wallis
Budge. (ln the Press.)


XVIII: THE History or BARALAM AND YEWAsSEF. The
Ethiopic Version, translated from the Arabic by Enbákóm,
for the Ethiopic king Galáwdéwás, A.D. 1553. Vol. II:
English Translation, Introduction, etc. By E. A. Wallis
Budge. (Zn the Press.)


XIX: A CONTRIBUTION TO BABYLONIAN HISTORY, being
a series of Babylonian Historical Texts with English Trans-
lations. By L. W. King. (Zn the Press.)


THE DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS
OF BABYLONIA.


Pee:


- i — di x:


ES


= di A3 +
# YA F = F.
RATA T ALA A dad 13 f "rA x l
STE datēt "y e i
ge) gra jap (fieri A
d CIE H 7:17] Mi A Ai j^ $ ds


Satir


| d Bus ek laj pr PI
w , > 4 T. A: 2 ; i P 3 F = B


put "e rs F `e dng `
CT td ad al


»


Er Z= > DC la sa pè F. 4) i.

THAT ET
za yo 4 à an. MG * = 1-4 2 a. l p. sessi

mp dpi F ; 14 pré” gg š


ka f pr


ka


poc, ZS? ABA penn SU Kä | a
ye Ni SA Irt LE EAGLE
dif aech Lg AF dee Figs FFG


igs A
i SE) ie? NET


F | E $
= ai ANE d EE Ko


Part of the tablet supposed to contain a mention of the Babylonian
Garden of Eden (K. 111).


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS


OF .


BABYLONIA,


NG BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN INCANTATIONS AGAINST THE
JEMONS, GHOULS, VAMPIRES, HOBGOBLINS, GHOSTS, AND
KINDRED EVIL SPIRITS, WHICH ATTACK MANKIND.


‘RANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL CUNEIFORM TEXTS, WITH
TRANSLITERATIONS, VOCABULARY, NOTES, ETC.


BY


EW CAMPBELL THOMPSON, M.A.


TANT IN THE DEPARTMENT OF EGYPTIAN AND ASSYRIAN ANTIQUITIES, BRITISH MUSEUM.


YOL. bh
p A K d q 27 Le
— ŠĪ
o fe 1. dom
London :
WUZAC AND CO.
1903.
z a eserved. SEEN BY 7
[All Rights Reserved.)
: PRESERVATION


SERVICES
| DATE


HERTFORD:


PRINTED BY STEPHEN AUSTIN AND SONS.


JO MY FATHER,


ACT WALI E. THOMPSON, M.D.


(Preface.


Tue object of the two volumes which form the present
work is to supply the student of Assyrian Demonology
with English transliterations and translations, with the
necessary notes, etc., of the documents printed in
the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Parts of Cuneiform
Texts from Babylonian Tablets, etc. which have
been recently issued by the Trustees of the British
Museum. An examination of these two Parts will
show that they contain copies of all the Tablets
belonging to the Series UTUKKI LIMNUTI, AŠAKKI
Meni and Tri vie, “Evil Spirits,” “ Fever
Sickness,” and “ Headache,” which have now been
identified, together with the texts of a considerable
number of compositions of a similar character.

These collections of Evil Spirit Texts form large and
important sections of the native literature concerning
Babylonian and Assyrian Demonology, and there is
reason to believe that the material now published
represents about one-half of that belonging to the
three Series mentioned above which was known to
the scribes of Assurbanipal. Of the condition of
the archetypes in pre-Babylonian times we have no
information whatever, but there is no reason to doubt
that the versions which were adopted as standard


XII PREFACE.


texts in the reign of Assurbanipal represented sub-
stantially the readings of the primitive documents. We
are, in short, justified in assuming that we have in our
hands at the present time tolerably accurate copies of
the exorcisms and spells which the Sumerian and his
Babylonian successor employed, some six or seven
thousand years ago, to avert the attacks of devils, and
to ward off malign influences of every kind.

The first to make known to the world the character
of the Evil Spirit Texts was the late General H. C.
Rawlinson, Bart, G.C.B., who published in the
Fourth Volume of the Cunezform Inscriptions of
Western Asta, London, 1875, as much of the text
of the Fifth and Sixteenth Tablets as had then been
identified. During the period of the preparation .of
the seventy plates which form the Fourth Volume
printed copies of many of them were supplied to
M. Francois Lenormant, and to various other scholars,
and M. Lenormant issued some months before the
appearance of the British Museum publication his
La Magie chez les Chaldeennes et les Origines
Accadiennes, in which he gave renderings of several
of the texts relating to Evil Spirits. In the year
1887 Professor Sayce, in his /lzddert Lectures,
gave English translations of the greater number of
the texts with which M. Lenormant had already
dealt, as well as of others. The translations, however,
of both these scholars were necessarily incomplete, for
the simple reason that only a portion of the available


PREFACE. XIII


material had been published by the late Sir Henry
Rawlinson, who made no pretence of publishing in
his immortal Corpus of cuneiform texts more than
specimens of the various classes of literature which
were known to the Babylonians and Assyrians.
Subsequently several of the texts of this class have
been studied and referred to in the publications of
various Assyriologists, but the present work represents
the first attempt which has been made to deal with
any of the groups of the Evil Spirit Texts as a whole,
and of course no connected translations of them have
before appeared.

In this and the following volume of Messrs. Luzac's
* Semitic Text and Translation Series " transliterations

and translations of about two hundred and forty tablets
and fragments belonging to various collections in the
British Museum are given, and it is believed that
about one hundred and sixty of these are published in
Cuneiform Texts from Babylonian Tablets, etc., Parts
XVI and XVII, for the first time. The present
publication is intended to do for the “Evil Spirit”
Series, and the Series relating to Fevers and Head-
aches, what Professor Zimmern has done for the
Shurp Series, and Professor Tallqvist for the Maki
Series.

The reader's attention is called to the fact that
where it has been impossible to assign to Tablets
their correct position in their Series, they have been
EMEN by the letters “A,” "B," "C, etc. In


XIV PREFACE.


translating the texts the renderings into English
have been made as literal as possible, and wherever
possible the Assyrian word has been translated by
the same English equivalent.

The material given in the following pages will
be found to afford abundant proof of the fact that
a considerable proportion of the magical practices
which are in use in the East to the present day
were well known to the inhabitants of Mesopotamia
several thousands of years ago, and that many of them
were borrowed by the Hebrews and other dwellers in
Syria and Persia from their neighbours on the Tigris
and Euphrates.

As was to be expected, a number of misconceptions
have arisen during the last few years as to the purport
of certain magical texts, and as an example of this
may be specially mentioned the views which have been
promulgated concerning Tablet “ K,” (IL 183 ff.), for
it has been confidently asserted that this document
contains an allusion to the Biblical Garden of Eden.
The text of this tablet mentions a place called Eridu,
and a plant or tree named Zseazé, of dense growth
and shining appearance, which grew beside the abyss,
i.e. the Ocean or Sea; the place where the plant
grew was said to be the couch of a god. Immediately
following these statements is a reference to Shamash
and Tammuz, who are said to dwell “in its interior,"
and mention is next made of the ‘mouths of the
rivers.” Such are the statements of the tablet, but,


PREFACE. XW


A — n. MÀ — — p  -- —


basing their opinion on certain interpretations of the
above text, some Assvriologists have asserted that
the Babvlonian Garden of Eden was in the immediate
vicinitv of Eridu, and thev have identified the tree or
plant with the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and
Evil, which was believed to grow in the Hebrew
Paradise. Quite recently, however, the missing portion
of this text has been identified, and it is now clear that
the text is an incantation and nothing more. This
document, the opening lines of which have been so
strangely misunderstood, indicated to the magician,
who was about to treat his afflicted patient, that
a certain kind of plant or tree, the original of which,
according to tradition, grew in Eridu, and afforded
a dwelling to Shamash and Tammuz, contained magical
properties ; and acting on this information the magician
was directed to make use of a portion of the kiskaznzi
plant or tree on behalf of the said patient. The text
actually states that the gods themselves made use of
this plant to work a miracle of healing, and the
implication is that as the #zskan“ plant was on. this
occasion of great benefit, it may again. be made to
perform the healing of a sufferer, always provided
that suitable Words of Power were recited by a duly
qualified person, and appropriate ceremonies were per-
formed, before the plant itself was used as a remedy.
Thus there is no reason for believing that the text
of Tablet “ K” contains any allusion to the Garden
of Eden, or that the plant £is&azz is anything more


XVI PREFACE.


than a herb or shrub which was used in working
magic. Further, the identification of the kiskans
plant with the “vine” has nothing to rest upon, and
still less does it in any way represent the Babylonian
equivalent of the Tree of Life. “ The mouths of the
rivers" have nothing to do with the four rivers of the
Hebrew Paradise, and the new fragment leaves no
room for doubt that the line in which they are
mentioned merely explains the locality from which the
gods obtained the plant, namely, from the confluence
of two streams or rivers.

To Mr. L. W. King I owe many thanks for his
friendly help in this work, and especially his assistance
in reading doubtful signs on the clay tablets.

In conclusion, my thanks are due to Dr. E. A.
Wallis Budge for much kind help, and for his numerous
suggestions in such parts of the volume as deal with
comparative magic.


R. CAMPBELL THOMPSON.


LoNDON, June Ist, 1903.


mer OF TABLETS.


SERIES UTUKKI LIMNUTI.


TABLET III.—K. 224 + 2,378: K. 8,262 : K. 9,314 : S. 715 and
Rm. 541 (probably parts of the same tablet) : D.T. 271:
No. 35,611: No. 38,594 (Part XVI, Plates 1-8) : S. 996
(Part XVI, Plate 50).


TABLET IV.—K. 2,355 + 3,212 and K. 4,892 + 4,938 and K. 4,857
+ 4,887 and K. 5,123 (fragments of the same tablet):
K. 5,020 + 5,129 + 81-7-27, 249: K. 2,578 + 4,641 + 5,166
+ 5,256 and K. 4,632 + 4,889 + 5,038 + 5,130 + D. T. 287
(fragments of the same tablet); K. 2,410 + 5,442: K. 5,082
(Part XVI, Plates 9-11): No. 45,744 (Part XVI, Plate 50) :
No. 36,589 (Part XVII, Plate 46).


TABLET V.—K. 2,507 + 3,255 + S. 1,425 : K. 2,528 + D.T. 7:
NSE) 3,121 : K. 3,218 : K. 4,658 + 9,367: K. 4,943
+ 6,043: K. 5,096 + 5,725 + 13,547: K. 8,508 : K. 9,405 +
E EE 10,175 : K. 12,000, £ : K. 12,000, x: K. 13,536:
ING) 38,798 : No. 45,539 : No. 46,296 + 46,374 + 46,408
(Part XVI, Plates 12-16): K. 12,921: K. 14,219 (Part XVI,
Plate 41).


TABLET X.—K. 4,947 (Part XVI, Plate 17) + K. 4,988 (Part XVII,
Plate 49).


TABLET XV.—No. 47,736 (Part XVI, Plate 18).


TABLET XVI.—K. 2,406 and K. 9,390 (probably parts of the same
BIEN K. 2,968 : K. 2,977 3,116: K. 3,122 : K. 4,627 +
Memos K. 4,870 : K.4,904 + 5,294 + 5,363 : K. 5,156 +
MOI 5,238 : S. 1,448 : 81-274, 410, 0: No. 33,712 :
No. 34,106 : No. 36,690 (Part XVI, Plates 19-23) : No. 47,852
(Part XVII, Plates 47-48).


TABLET “ A.”—No. 55,473 : K. 4,965 (Part XVI, Plates 24-26):
No. 46,288 : K. 4,856 (Part XVII, Plate 3). This tablet
precedes Tablet “ B."


XVIII LIST OF TABLETS:


TABLET “ B.”—K. 5,009 + 5,060 and K. 3,152 + 5,244. a + 8371-18,
769 (parts of the same tablet) : K. 4,661 + 4,821 + 4,939 +
5,086 + 5,164 + 5,697 + 11,576: K. 5,143 and K. 5,292
(parts of the same tablet): K. 5,330: No. 35,056 + 35,191
+ 35,193 (Part XVI, Plates 27-29).


TABLET “C.”—K. 2,435: K. 2,470 and K. 5,290 + 8,059 (probably
parts of the same tablet): K. 4,863 + 13,311 and S. 69
(probably parts of the same tablet): K. 4,955 + 11,116 +
Rm. 269 : K. 4,970 : K. 5,079 + 12,030: K. 5,251 : K. 8,475
+ 12,040 : S. 793 (Part XVI, Plates 30-34): K. 4,011
(+ 4,955, etc.) : K. 6,602 : K. 11,903 (Part XVI, Plate 41):
K. 4,917 : K. 8,476: 81-2-4, 332 : No. 60,886 (Part XVII,
Plate 46).


TABLET “ D.”—K. 4,871: K. 5,005 (Part XVI, Plates 35-36).


TABLET “ E."—K. 2,337 + 4,971 + 6,022: K. 5,100 and Rm. 314
(probably parts of the same tablet) (Part XVI, Plate 37).


TABLET '' F."—K. 3,054 (Part XVI, Plate 38).
TABLET *' G.”—K. 5,179 (Part XVI, Plate 39).


TABLETS “ H,” “1,” «*J."—No. 52,456 : No. 38,447 : K. 4,825
(Part XVI, Plates 40-41) and small fragment K. 10,185
(Part XVI, Plate 41).


TABLET OF A SIMILAR SERIES


TABLET '"K."—K. 111 + 2,754 + 5,227 + 5,295 + 7,525 + 7,632
+ 7,633: K. 3,235 + 4,959 + 5,178 and K. 4,626 + 5,115 +
12,000, aa (probably parts of the same tablet): K. 4,867 and
K. 12,000, 66 (probably parts of the same tablet) : K. 4,886 :
K. 4,905 + D. T. 150 + Rm. 243: K. 5,120: K. 5,133 + 5,336
+ 9,391 and K. 5,183 (parts of the same tablet): K. 11,543 :
No. 36,690 (reverse): No. 55,479 + 55,548 and No. 55,608
(parts of the same tablet) (Plates 42—49).


Iran" a.


Introduction.


From the earliest times Eastern races, in common
with the rest of mankind, have always held a firm
belief in the existence of evil spirits, ghosts, and all
kindred powers. The phenomena of death, the
mystery of disease and sickness, and all the other
events of common occurrence in daily life gave rise to
speculations about the unseen world, which gradually
led to a distinction, although slight at all times,
between good and evil spirits. The early Semitic
people of Babylonia, whoever they may have been
or wherever they may have migrated from, found
a theology ready to their hands in their adopted
country, which they took over from its primitive
inhabitants the Sumerians, doubtless grafting to it
many of the beliefs of their forefathers. To the latest
times, down to a century or two before the Christian
era, they retained the doctrines in their original
language, making interlinear translations of them for
use in the temples and among the doctors, and it is
owing to this that we can speak with tolerable
certainty on many points of the early religion of
Babylonia. |

There is little comparatively that shows traces of
original Semitic composition in the books and docu-
ments relating to spirits, for by far the greater part


XXII INTRODUCTION.


of the enormous mass of material of this class is
written in the Sumerian language, either with or
without a Babylonian or Assyrian translation, and
the numerous Sumerian words for the various forms
of spirits and demons were either incorporated bodily
in the newcomers’ language, with, of course, the
necessary phonetic changes, or were translated either
exactly or paraphrastically. Indeed, it is a remarkable
thing that that portion of the Semitic stock which
entered Babylonia, although receptive on all points,
!|seems to have been very limited in original ideas
regarding the ghost world ; and this is not unnatural,
since at that early period the Semite can hardly have
been much more than a nomad possessing only the
beginnings of a civilization. He recognized “gods”
(singular, ILU; plural ILANI') in common with the
rest of his stock; he seems to have had some idea
that the soul or EKIMMU, literally “the thing which
is snatched away," ? possessed supernatural powers,
or at least an existence; but beyond this it is
exceedingly difficult to say how much of his later
psychology and eschatology was original, and how
much was borrowed. This much seems certain,


! The original meaning of ILU, like the Hebrew ON. is of course


unknown. The Sumerians indicated the word “god” by a star (4),
and we are therefore justified in assuming that the Sumerians
believed that their gods inhabited the sky.

* The form ekzmmu is distinctly against the view that it means
“the snatcher," which would probably be zkkzmu.


DEMONS AMONG THE SEMITES XXIII


however, that words like UTUKKU “spirit,” ALÒ
"demon," LILG some form of ghost with feminine
counterparts LILITU and ARDAT LILI, and probably
GALLO “devil,” were all borrowed from the Sumerians,
and the names of two others, RABISU “lurker "
AHHAZU ''seizer, are probably free renderings of
Sumerian words for which the Babylonian had no
exact equivalents. All these words occur in set
phrases constantly in the incantations, and of the
other names for spirits we find the following list:
ILU, EKIMMU, SEDU, LABARTU, LABASU, and LAMASSU ;
of these the first two have already been explained, but
of the linguistic origin of the remainder very little is
known. Indeed, among the other Semitic tribes, with
_the exception of the Arabs, the comparative paucity
of words signifying demons is very marked, and most


and


of the few which they employ are borrowed directly
from Babylonia, the Hebrews using DNY (De, SÈDU)
and no» (De, LILĪTU), and in Rabbinic times WI
and rod (De, LILU). Pn, which is another word used
by the Rabbis to mean “spirit,” is the ordinary word


in Hebrew for this, and corresponds to EKIMMU.


It is therefore evident that when the Semitic
Babylonian took over the learning of his Sumerian
predecessors, he seems also to have unconsciously
adapted and enlarged his ideas to fit their beliefs,
receiving their doctrines in their entirety as worthy
of implicit trust, and in the belief that his teachers


XXIV INTRODUCTION.


must necessarily understand the supernatural powers
peculiar to their own country.


(1) THE various CLASSES or EVIL SPIRITS.


The primitive Sumerian recognized three distinct
classes of evil spirit, all ready to torment the hapless
wanderer.’ First came the disembodied human soul
which could find no rest, and so wandered up and
down the face of the earth; secondly, the’ gruesome
spirits which were half human and half demon; and
thirdly, the fiends and devils who were of the same
nature as the gods, who rode on the noxious winds,
or brought storms and pestilence. Each of these
three kinds was divided up into classes according to
the several characteristics of the evil spirits which
composed them, and the six chief of these are
enumerated in the constantly recurring line UTUKKU
LIMNU ALU LIMNU EKIMMU LIMNU GALLU LIMNU ILU
LIMNU RABISU LIMNU, “ Evil Spirit, evil Demon, evil
Ghost, evil Devil, evil God, evil Fiend," but this by
no means includes all the powers of evil, for this list
is frequently amplified by the additions LABARTU
LABASU AHHAZU LILU LILITU ARDAT LILI, all various
forms of malignant spirits.

The first evil spirit, UTUKKU, was originally a spirit,
spectre, or ghost, since it is once at least used of the


1 For the special meaning of this word in magical texts, see
infra, p. xxviii.


RAISING THE DEAD. XXV


spectre of a dead man raised from the Underworld. `
This form of magic—necromancy—was a favourite ^^^


method employed for looking into the future in the East
in ancient times, and a remarkable instance of it occurs
in the Epic of Gilgamish. The story runs that the
hero Gilgamish appeals to the god Nergal to restore
his friend Ea-bani to him, and his prayer is answered,
for the god opens the earth and the UTUKKU of Ea-bani


rises up “like the wind,” that is, probably a transparent '


spectre in the human shape of Ea-bani, who converses
with Gilgamish. The same ideas and beliefs were
current among the Hebrews, for when Saul goes to
visit the “woman with a familiar spirit" at En-dor
she brings up Samuel out of the earth, and he answers
the questions which Saul wishes to ask? Among
the Assyrians “ Raiser of the Departed Spirit"? was
a recognized title of the sorcerer, and from this and
the story in the Gilgamish Epic it is evident that such
practices aS necromancy were not uncommon. How
far the UTUKKU differed from the EKIMMU (which is the
proper word for a departed spirit) is difficult to say; it
was a ghost or spectre that either lurked in the desert
lying in wait for man,* or it might have its home


1 L. W. King, Babylonian Religion, p. 75.
DE ari”, XXviii, 7.
3 WAT, ii, 51, 2, T. 20, 21. MULU SAG PYROS


amlablet III, P. 28, p. s. uk? €^


C R °A


(4


XXVI INTRODUCTION.


in the mountains, sea, or graveyard,’ and evil would
befall him on whom it merely cast its eye.”

The second of the six, the ALU, is a demon that
hides itself in dark corners and caverns in the rock,
haunting ruins and deserted buildings and slinking
through the streets at night like a pariah dog. It lies
in wait for the unwary, ready to rush out from its
hiding-place to “envelop him as with a garment,”
or, coming into the bedchamber by night, it steals
sleep away from weary mortals by standing over their
beds and threatening to pounce upon them should they
dare to close their eyes? It is a horrible apparition,
at times without mouth, limbs, or ears, a half-human,
half-devilish creation borne probably by the ghoulish
LILITU or ARDAT LILi to some man to whom she has
attached herself.* This latter tradition remained current
long after Babylon had fallen, and it reappears in the
Rabbinic stories which relate how Lilith bore to Adam
demons and spirits. The Rabbis were of opinion
that a man might have children by allying himself
with a demon,* and although they would naturally
not be visible to human beings, yet when that man


1 W.A.7L., ii,-17, i, 3, and Haupt, Akkad Mu Sumer KG
p. 825.1, 3%

? Tablet“ C,- L 79; p- 152

3 For these see Tablet " B."

t See Tablet “ B,” |. 18.

5 Eisenmenger, Entdecktes Judentum, 11, 413.

° ibid., p. 4298


LILITH. XXVII


was dying they would hover round his bed, and after
his death would hail him as their father." There
seems to be an allusion to this monstrous connection
in the following extract from an Assyrian hymn to
the Sun-god :—?
* He on whom an evil Spirit hath rushed,
* He whom an evil Demon hath enveloped in his
bed,
* He whom an evil Ghost hath cast down in the
night,
* He whom a great Devil hath smitten,
* He whose limbs an evil God hath racked (?),
* He—the hair of whose body an evil Fiend hath
set on end,”
* He whom . . . [a Hag-demon] hath seized,
* He whom [a Ghoul] hath cast down,
* He whom a Robber-sprite hath afflicted,
“ He whom the Handmaid * of the Night-Phantom
hath wedded,
“The man“ with whom the Handmaid of the
Night-Phantom hath had union *."
The third is the EKIMMU or Departed Spirit, the
soul of the dead person which for some reason


mbid., p. 425.

IE 4. 7., v, 50, 1, 41.

BET, Job, iv, 15, “Then a spirit passed before my face; the hair
of my flesh stood up."

4 c Handmaid" and “man” are translations of the Assyrian
words which have special reference to persons of marriageable age.


5 ikrimu, Syriac 5049. cam, are" acu?


EŻ


XXVIII INTRODUCTION.


cannot rest, and wanders as a spectre over the
earth. After death, the souls of men and women
who died in the ordinary course of nature entered
into the Underworld, **the House of Darkness, the
seat of the god Irkalla, the House from which none
that enter come forth again," where they remained
trying to eke out a wretched existence by feeding
on dust and mud, and receiving the offerings and
libations paid to them by their descendants and
relations on earth. If for any reason these attentions
should cease, and the spirit of the dead man be forgotten,
then it was forced by hunger and thirst to come forth
from its abode in Hades to seek on earth the food
and water which no longer filtered through to satisfy
Its wants, and, roaming up and down, it sought what
it might devour. If it found a luckless man who had
wandered far from his fellows into haunted places,’
it fastened upon him, plaguing and tormenting him
until such time as a priest should drive it away with
exorcisms. This is expressly stated on a tablet of
this class which runs :—


* The gods which seize (upon man)
Have come forth from the grave;
“ The evil wind-gusts
Have come forth from the grave ;


1 This is the interpretation of the word mu/faliku, “ wanderer,”
which occurs so often in the magical texts to indicate the patient.


ANCESTOR-WORSHIP. XXIX


“To demand the payment of rites and the pouring
out of libations,
They have come forth from the grave;
“ All that is evil in their hosts, like a whirlwind
Hath come forth"from the grave.” !


Or again :—

MWNE evil Spirit, the evil Demon, the evil Ghost,
the evil Devil,

“ From the earth have come forth ;

“From the Underworld unto the land they have
come forth ;

“ In heaven they are unknown,

“ On earth they are not understood,

“ They neither stand nor sit,

“ Nor eat nor drink.” *


In making offerings to the dead lies the base of the
principle of ancestor-worship; the descendants give
food and drink to the manes of their forefathers that
they may not need to return to earth to demand from
the living the care and attention that is their due. Even
in the enlightened period of the later Assyrian empire,
about B.c. 650, this belief was prevalent among the


1 Tablet “ Y," vol. ii. Among the ancient Egyptians, if offerings
were not paid to the deceased, he was obliged to wander into un-
clean places to eat such filth and drink such dirty water as he might
find in the course of his wretched wanderings (Budge, Book of the
Dead, chapters 52-53).

tablet € CC," vol. ii.


XXX INTRODUCTION.


highest in the land, for we find Aššurbanipal dese-
crating the ancient tombs of the Kings of Elam and
carrying away their bones and causing the rites paid
to them to cease, so that their spirits might have no
rest.” In the Epic of Gilgamish, when the wraith of
Ea-bani has been raised from the dead by Nergal, it
describes the Underworld :— *
“ The man whose corpse lieth in the desert —
“ Thou and I have oft seen such an one—
“ His spirit resteth not in the earth ;
“ The man whose spirit hath none to care for it—
“Thou and I have oft seen such an one—

“ The dregs of the vessel, the leavings of the feast,

“ And that which is cast out into the street are

his food."

But under certain circumstances the soul of a dead
man never entered the Underworld, as is clear from
the poem quoted above. The exzmmu-spirit of an
unburied corpse could find no rest and remained
prowling about the earth so long as its body was
above ground. In the Fourth Tablet of the Series
“Evil Spirits" various disembodied ghosts are
exorcised and addressed individually :— $

4 Whether thou art a ghost unburied,

“ Or a ghost that none careth for,

“Ora ghost with none to make offerings to it.”


! "WEA. 7: 6, joui.
? King, Babylonian Religion, p. 176; Gilgamish Epic, Tablet xii.
* Tablet GV Sealey; 5.


VARIOUS FORMS OF GHOSTS. XXXI


4 Or a ghost that hath none to pour libations to it,

“ Or a ghost that hath no posterity.”

This last line shows that the duty of making
oblations to the dead devolved, as was natural, on the
eldest son and direct descendants, and this is one of
the reasons for the overwhelming desire of the Semite
for children to perpetuate the family name. There
are other instances in which souls which cannot
obtain rest are mentioned, e.g. :—

“ He that lieth in a ditch

“ He that no grave covereth

“He that lieth uncovered,

“ Whose head is uncovered with dust,

“ The king's son that lieth in the desert,

“ Or in the ruins,

“ The hero whom they have slain with the sword.” '

But in addition to the ghosts of the unburied or
uncared-for dead, the souls of men and women who
died violent or unnatural deaths or who departed this
life before fulfilling or completing certain duties could
obtain no rest, and were compelled to remain as dis-
embodied spirits to haunt mankind, until they were
laid to rest by exorcism. Among these may be
mentioned the following :—

“He that hath died of hunger in prison,

“ He that hath died of thirst in prison,


! K. 156, col. ii, l. 6 f, W.A.Z. ii, and Haupt, Akkad. u.
Sumer. Keilschr., p. 86.


XXXII INTRODUCTION.


“The hungry man who in his hunger hath not
smelt the smell of food,

* He whom the bank of a river hath made to perish,

* He that hath died in the desert or marshes,

* He that a storm hath overwhelmed in the desert,

* The Night-wraith that hath no husband,

“ The Night-fiend' that hath no wife,

“He that hath posterity ! and he that hath none.” *


Many of these ghosts are merely elaborations of the
preceding class, being the souls of those who were
lost or forgotten. The “ Night-wraith that hath no
husband,” who has the same characteristics as the
Lilith of Rabbinic tradition, will be referred to again
later on. The words “ He that hath no posterity”
of course refer to the man who has no descendants to
pay him due rites. |

Other ghosts are the women who die in childbirth
or while nursing their babes. The idea is that they
will return in some form to seek their child.?


1 I very much doubt the existence of a '' Night-fiend (literally
Man of the Night Spirit) that hath no wife." The LiLo, LILITU,
and ARDAT LILI (“ Night-wraith, Woman of the Night Spirit”)
occur constantly in the incantations, but I am not aware of any
occurrence of IDLU LILI (“ Man of the Night Spirit”), and it seems
most probable that this line is only a scribe's parallel to the
previous one, the text being entirely a grammatical composition for
the use of students. “ He that hath posterity” is quite similar:
See p. xxxi.

? K. 156, col. ii, l. 22 ff., WALZ, ii, 17, and Haupt, ARONA
Sumer. Keilschr., p. 88.


s See pp. 41, £5.


THE LANGSUYAR. XXXIII


— MÀ n ÀÀÀÀ—À


This is a common form of ghost in Oriental
countries. Doughty relates! how in Arabia he
“heard scritching owls sometimes in the night; then
“ the nomad wives and children answered them with
“ mocking again, Ymgebas/ Ymgebas! The hareem
“said, It is a wailful woman, seeking her lost child
“through the wilderness, which was turned into this
“forlorn bird." Among the Malays, if a woman dies
in childbirth, she is supposed to become a langsuyar
or flying demon, a female familiar. To prevent this
glass beads are put in the mouth of the corpse, a hen's
egg is put under the armpits, and needles in the palms
of the hands. This stops the dead woman shrieking,
waving her arms, or opening her hands? The
original Langsuyar was supposed to be a kind of
night owl,’ like the Lilith of Rabbinic tradition," and
is similar therefore to the ghost of which Doughty
speaks. In India the ghost of a woman who dies in
childbed is a very terrible demon indeed.’

The souls of the devoted temple-women who die
of disease, and of men or maidens who have reached
a marriageable age and yet die unmarried, are also
included in the category of ghosts.*


! Arabia Deserta, vol. i, p. 305.
2 Skeat, Malay Magic, p. 325 (quoting Sir William Maxwell).
IIA... p. 325.
maD, XXXIV, 14.
5 Crooke, Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern Indta, vol. i,
p. 269.
MWE DA V ibid., col. iv, 1.45 ff., p. 38; col. v, l. 21, p. 4o.
C


XXXIV INTRODUCTION.


If an ektmmu which could find no rest came back
to earth he might fasten himself on anyone who had
beén in some way connected with him in this world.
The chance sharing of food, oil, or clothes during life
constituted an act which gave the spirit after death
a claim to return to its friend or even casual ac-
quaintance to demand the rites which would give it
peace. Even the mere act of eating, drinking, or
anointing or dressing oneself in company with another
person without receiving or giving anything was
enough. Such ghosts are denounced individually
in three paragraphs of four lines each at the end of
a long incantation where all possible kinds of
spectres are exorcised :—

“ Whether thou be one with whom on a day I have

eaten, |

“ Or with whom on a day I have drunk,

“ Or with whom on a day I have anointed myself,

“ Or with whom on a day I have put on apparel."
The other paragraphs are similar—“ Whether thou
be one with whom I have entered and eaten,” and
“whether thou be one with whom I have eaten food
when I was hungry," and so on.! Moreover, if a man
only looked upon a corpse he rendered himself liable
to be attacked by the departed spirit.”


1 Tablet IV, col. v, 1. 35 ff., and Tablet Vy col i, 158:
? On this and the ceremonies prescribed to free the man from
the ghost, see Zimmern, Rituraltafeln, p. 164.


MME GALLO. Xxx


The belief in the EKIMMU-spirit had obtained such
a hold over the Assyrians, that they even went the
length of deducing omens from the appearance of such
a ghost in a house. As a rule it was held to be an
evil omen, whether it was merely a silent apparition
or whether it gibbered or uttered some words and
awaited some response; it foretold certainly the
destruction of the house, and in the latter case the
owner of the house would die in addition. The same
omen-text! bears witness to the prevalence of the
universal belief in apparitions which come during
the night to the bedside where the man lies, and
describes their actions over or under the bed.

The threat that is held over the heads of all
_ spectres of this class is that no rites shall be paid to
them until they have departed. Whether they are to
be rewarded with their due after they have left the
possessed man is not stated.

The fourth spirit is the GALLO, a devil which perhaps
sometimes assumes the form of a bull, since it is once
described as “the 22777, the headstrong bull, the great
ghost"? Like the a/z it prowls about the streets of
the city, and apparently it is neither male nor female ;?
in fact, it is sexless. The word is used in classical
Assyrian as a term of abuse, for we find Sennacherib
describing the hostile Babylonians as gallu lmnitt,


“evil devils." *


MC. 8,603. 4 Mablet V. col. i, late:
IB. C * G. Smith, Diet, of Senn., p. 114, 1. 6.


XXXVI INTRODUCTION.


The fifth supernatural being is ILU LIMNU, or “evil
god,” presumably a more general term, for it is left
indefinite, and there are few, if any, descriptions of it
like the other spirits.

The sixth spirit, the RABISU, as its name implies,
is a lurking demon which, as the text quoted above
shows,! sets the hair of the body on end, but little is
known of its other characteristics.

Of the three next, the LABARTU, LABASU, and AHHAZU,
the LABARTU has a whole series of texts written against
her. It is a female demon, the daughter of Anu, the
trusted and accepted of Irnina, and she makes her
home in the mountains, or cane-brakes of the marshes.
Especially were children exposed to her attacks, and in
the Series called by her name, which gives directions
for driving her away, there are special ceremonies to
be performed in connection with certain mystic words
which are to be written on a stone and hung round
the neck of a child.”

The Anuazu or ''Seizer' was a demon of some
kind, but we know nothing of its attributes, and the
same may be said of the LABASU, which is here
translated “ghoul”; the meaning, however, is quite
uncertain.

Another triad of demons bore the interesting names
of LILU, LILITU, and ARDAT LILI. The second iS


1 p. xxvii.


2 Myhrman, Z.A., xvi, p. 147.


LILITH. XXXVII


obviously the feminine counterpart of the first, but it is
difficult to discriminate between LILITU and the third,
ARDAT LILI.  LiLiru is undoubtedly the word from
which the Hebrew Lilith was borrowed, which occurs
in Isaiah, xxxiv, 14, “ The wild beasts of the desert
shall also meet with the wild beasts of the island,
and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; the screech owl
(MY) also shall rest there, and find for herself a place


3)


of rest.” The Rabbinic literature also is full of legends
of her doings. According to tradition she bore to
Adam devils, spirits, and čz (i.e. the same word as
the Assyrian LILU). But although there is no doubt
that the LILITU was a night spirit, it is improbable
that the Lilith should have any real connection with
the Hebrew Zai/a/, “night.” The Rabbis naturally
assumed that there was such a connection, and on
the face of it such a comparison was plausible; but
the evidence of the Assyrian word LILU shows that
we can no longer accept what would otherwise be
a reasonable derivation. If we are to find a Semitic
derivation for it at all, and if it has not been taken
over from the Sumerian, which seems most probable,
it may be connected with 4444, “to be abundant,"
lalt, “ laxuriousness.” and Zei “lasciviousness,
wantonness."? |

The ARDAT LILI differs from the LILITU in that her


PVE isemmenger, il, p. 4.13.
2 This is the view held by Martin, Zex/es Religieux, p. 25.


"E.


XXXVIII INTRODUCTION.


relations with human beings are much closer, and
she thus takes over the functions of the Hebrew
Lilith. The word arpatu, as has been explained
above, always implies a marriageable woman, and
this use bears further testimony to this. In one of
the magical texts the sick man is described as one
whom the ARDAT LILI has wedded.! In the explana-
tory text K. 156,* mention is made of the ARDAT LILI
“that has no husband,” a restless ghost that wanders
up and down, forced by her desire to roam abroad,
unable to rest quietly until she is satisfied. She
therefore appears to have been the spirit of a woman,
such as that which came to tempt St. Antony, and it
is probably she who gives birth to the ALŪ or devil
half-human, half-spectre, while the LiLiru, although
the female counterpart of the LILO, was less human in
its characteristics.

These were the principal spirits, but they formed
only a single class of the powers of evil which might
attack man. Witchcraft, sorcery, the Evil Eye, which
cast a baneful glance, the Evil Tongue, which let
fall a minatory word, and the evil man, were all foes
which the exorcist had to meet. The Evil Eye is
a very real terror to the Oriental, and it is even
personified as a demon in a Syriac charm :—“ The
Evil Eye went forth from the stone of the rock,


1 See p. xxvii.
“See p. xxxii.


a ee —— À—


ree EVIL EVE. XXXIX


l


and the angel Gabriel met her."! There is a similar


' text in Assyrian about it :—


“It hath looked on the traveller,
“ And like wood cut for poles
“It hath bent his neck.

“ Ea hath seen this man and

“ Hath: placed food at his head,

4 Hath brought food for his body,


* Hath shown favour for his life.” ?


The “evil man” may possibly have an echo in the
old Rabbinic tradition, that the souls of the wicked
when they die are the devils which are in this world.

The Underworld Exurra, the dwelling of the god
Bel, was the abode of demons, whence they went forth to
seize upon men.* This was a tradition which descended
to the Arabs concerning the Jinn, of which half are
malignant and half good demons, and they inhabit the
seven stages which form the edifice of the Under-
world :* in passing it is worth noting that the Arabic
for a madman is majia, or one possessed by Jinn.
The Babylonian devils also dwelt in Eridu as the
servants of Ea and Damkina, ready to pounce on
the hapless “wanderer.”* “The lonely mountains, too,


H. Gollancz, Selection of Charms, p. 93.
Tablet ** U," Vol. II.

Eisenmenger, ii, p. 427.

Tablet” P,” Vol. II.

Doughty, Arabia Deserta, vol. i, p. 259.
Tablet XV, p. 87.


en ao m O CO m


XL INTRODUCTION.


were the home of many spectres, and from a recently
identified text we learn that :—


* Headache hath come forth from the Underworld,

“ It hath come forth from the Dwelling of Bel,

“ From amid the mountains it hath descended upon
the land,

“ From the ends of the mountains it hath descended
upon the land,

“ From the fields not to return it hath descended,

* With the mountain-goat unto the fold it hath
descended,

“ With the ibex unto the Open-horned flocks it hath
descended,

* With the Open-horned unto the Big-horned it
hath descended.” !


There is certainly an echo of this in the Syriac
magic lore, in one of the charms against lunacy which
ends:— . . . “[O Evil Spirit of Lunacy, | you
“will needs go forth from the bones, from the sinews,
“ from the flesh, from the skin, and from the hair unto
“the ground, and from the ground (passing) to iron,
* and from iron to stone, and from stone (you will
“pass on) to the mountain. This writing must be
" sealed. Amen! Amen!l”

The deserts and ruins were also favourite haunts of


"Taben, Series 4/4 Vol]
? H. Gollancz, Selection of Charms, p. 91.


HAUNTED HOUSES. XLI


ghosts and goblins.! The ghoul of the Arabs dwells
in the desert and appears to travellers in a friendly
guise in order to make them lose their way,’ and in
the same way in the Assyrian belief it is the traveller
who is most liable to attacks.

The occupation of ruins by spectres is a universal
superstition, and one to be explained by the belief that
the spirit prefers a house if it can obtain it, and that
it selects a deserted habitation because there are no
longer in it any amulets or charms, or tutelary gods
to keep it out. An inhabited house they may attack
and force a way in temporarily, but on their presence
there becoming known, the owner will at once take
steps to render it untenable by them and drive them
forth with the help of the exorcist. For this reason
also the desert and inaccessible mountains, as affording
dwellings far remote from mankind, were assigned
as the probable locality for all malignant powers.
A Syriac story of the ninth century testifies to this
belief concerning ruins, for we read: " And while
“a certain man was passing at night along the road
“ by the side of a fire temple of the Magians which
“had been a ruin for some time, devils sprang out
“upon him in the form of black ravens, and they


3 3


“ entered into him and convulsed him. In an


1 See Tablet " B," 1. 98, p. 139.
Was adi, Prairies d'Or, iii, p. 318.
3 Budge, Thomas of Marga, vol. ii, p. 599.


XLII INTRODUCTION.


Ethiopic magical prayer written for 'Ahita Mikael the
same belief appears, for it prescribes certain glorious
names, probably to be recited, “at the front and at the
“ doors if thou wouldst enter into a house which is old
€ or in ruins or unclean.”'

In the New Testament the Saviour goes into the
wilderness and there. meets the devil.’


(2) THE SEVEN EVIL SPIRITS.

There are certain spirits described as “ the Seven’
around whom a great many poems were composed
and welded into the incantations and spells. The
best known is the Invocation against the Seven :—


)


4 Seven are they! Seven remo

“ In the Ocean Deep seven are they !

“ Battening in Heaven seven are they,

* Bred in the depths of Ocean.

“ Nor male nor female are they,

“ But are as the roaming windblast,

* No wife have they, no son can they beget ;

* Knowing neither mercy nor pity,

“ They hearken not to prayer or supplication.

“ They are as horses reared among the hills . . .”*


“ Of these seven [the first] is the South Wind .
“ The second is a dragon with mouth agape
“ That none can [withstand];


1 Budge, Lady Meux MSS., Nos. 2-5, p. 216.
2 Mati vi”.
3 TablēiVcol. v; l: 28.


THE SEVEN SPIRITS. XDNI


* The third is a grim leopard

“ That carrieth off children

“ The fourth is a terrible serpent

“ The fifth is a furious beast (?)

“ After which no restraint

“ The sixth is a rampant

“ Which against god and king

“ The seventh is an evil windstorm

“ Which TAFAL. c e

“These seven are the Messengers of Anu, the
king,

“ Bearing gloom from city to city,

“ T'empests that furiously scour the heavens,

“ Dense clouds that over the sky bring gloom,

“Rushing windgusts, casting darkness oer the
brightest day,

“ Forcing their way with baneful windstorms.

* Mighty destroyers, the deluge of the Storm-God,

“ Stalking at the right hand of the Storm-God.” 1


These Seven Spirits constantly reappear in various


shapes and forms in the legends of other Semitic
nations. The old Palestinian tradition of the Unclean


Spirit undoubtedly owes something of its origin to
them :—" The unclean spirit, when he is gone out of
“the man, passeth through waterless places, seeking
“rest; and finding none, he saith, I will turn back


! Tablet XVI, 1. 13.


X LIV INTRODUCTION.


a


“unto my house whence I came out. And when he
“is come, he findeth it swept and garnished. Then
4 goeth he and taketh to him seven other spirits more
“evil than himself . . ."! But a still more striking
evidence of the conservatism of Eastern tradition is
shown in a Syriac charm which is worth quoting in full.


“ [For] the fold of cattle.


* “Seven accursed brothers, accursed sons! de-
'structive ones, sons of men of destruction! Why
‘do you creep along on your knees and move upon
‘your hands?’ And they replied, ‘We go on our
‘hands, so that we may eat flesh, and we crawl along
“ “upon our hands, so that we may drink blood.’ As
“soon as I saw it, I prevented them from devouring,
* and I cursed and bound them in the name of the
“ Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, saying, ‘ May
‘you not proceed on your way, nor finish your
‘journey, and may God break your teeth, and cut
‘the veins of your neck, and the sinews thereof, that
‘you approach not the sheep nor the oxen of the
“person who carries (sc. these writs]! I bind you
‘in the name of Gabriel and Michael. I bind you
‘by that angel who judged the woman that combed
“ “(the hair of) her head on the eve of Holy Sunday.
* ' May they vanish as smoke from before the wind
“ “for ever and ever, Amen!’ ” 2


a
A


a
=


m
e


A
a


=


=


é


6


a


A
A


a
a


¢


a


¢


e


-L Luke, X5 Se 2 H. Gollancz, Selection of Charms.


1
THE SEVEN SPIRITS. XLV


As will be seen from the following excerpts from
the Assyrian poems, the Seven Spirits altered but little
as time went on :—


“ They creep like a snake on their bellies,
4 They make the chamber to stink like mice,


“They give tongue like a pack of hounds.” !


“ Over the highest wall and through the thickest
wall,

“ Like a stormflood they can pass,

“ Breaking through from house to house ;

“ No door can shut them out,

* No bolt can turn them back,

“ For through the portal like a snake they creep,

“ And through the hinges like the wind they blow.” 2


It is they who rush over a city on the storm clouds,
bringing devastation in their train, and from them
come all hurricanes and tempests. They unsettle
everyone that they may meet, bringing unrest, disorder,
and confusion into the world, and to them is due the
restlessness and desire for wandering which come
upon men.


“ They scour from land to land,

“ Driving the maid from her chamber,
“ And the man from his home,

“ And the son from his father’s house.


Tablet CL 1.219
2 Wablet W cel. L l. as.


XLVI INTRODUCTION.


“ They hunt the doves from their cotes,
“ And drive the bird from its nest,
“ And chase the martin from its hole.” !


The Syriac belief described above in their assailing
the byres and stables was primitive Sumerian and
not a late development.

“ Through the gloomy street by night they roam,

“ [Smiting] sheepfold and cattle-pen ;

e Shutting up the land [as with door and] bolt.” ?


“ Rending in pieces on high, bringing destruction
below,

“They are the Children of the Underworld.

“ Loudly roaring above, gibbering below,

“ They are the bitter venom of the gods.

“They are the great storms directed from Heaven,

“They are the owls which hoot over a city. $


They feed on mankind like vampires.


* Knowing no care, they grind the land like corn,
* Knowing no mercy, they rage against mankind,
“ They spill their blood like rain
“ Devouring their flesh and sucking their veins.

* ak * * * *


“ They are demons full of violence
“ Ceaselessly devouring blood.” *


si Tablet IV, L20

2aibid., Tablet IV, col. i, tare
3 Tablet V, col. i, l. 10.

* Tablet V, col. iv, l. 18.


URA, THE PLAGUE-GOD. XLVII


The power of spreading particular diseases was
attributed to certain demons such as Ura, the plague-
spirit, and Ashakku, the fever-spirit. There is a
legend about Ura, the plague-spirit, which gives the
vainglorious speech he made to Ishum :—

* Ura was angry, and determined

“ To ravage the whole world,

* But Ishum, his counsellor, appeased him

“ That he abandoned [his wrath]

“ And thus spake the hero Ura :—

** * Whosoever shall praise this song,

“ “In his shrine may plenty abound

“ * Whosoever shall magnify my name,

“ “May he rule the four quarters of the world ;

“ * Whosoever shall proclaim the glory of my valour

“ «Shall have none to oppose him;

“ “The singer who chants it shall not die in pestilence,

“ But unto king and noble his speech shall be well-

pleasing ;

“ “The scribe who learns it shall escape from the

foe :

“ “In the shrine of the peoples where he cries my

name continually

“ “His understanding will I increase.

“ “In the house where this tablet is set,

““Tho' I, Ura, be angry or the Imina-bi gods bring

havoc,

‘Yet the dagger of pestilence shall not approach it,
‘Immunity shall rest upon it. ”*


Lt


! L. W. King, First Steps in Assyrian, p. 219.


XLVIII INTRODUCTION.


(3) CHARMS AND MAGICAL PREPARATIONS.


As auxiliaries to the spells which he chanted, the
magician would use various substances, animal,
vegetable, or mineral, which had a ceremonial im-
portance and were probably endued with magical
power. In many instances these are of the same
nature as amulets, and it is often easy to see how
they have acquired their potency. Of these the
simplest was pure water, which was sprinkled over
the possessed person at the conclusion of an incan-
tation, and this had a double meaning, symbolizing
as it did the cleansing of the man from the spell and
the presence of the great god Ea, whose emanation
always remained in water and whose aid was invoked
by these means. In order to drive out a Headache
Demon, Marduk, according to the legend, came to
Ea for advice, and he was told to take water at the
confluence of two streams and sprinkle it over the
man, performing as he did so certain ceremonies.!

Meteoric iron or aerolites? seem to have been used
as charms or amulets, and this is quite as intelligible
as the use of water, since from the nature of them
both they are obtained from the habitations of the
gods. But when we come to tamarisks, reeds, and
other plants, or flour, or hair from beasts, it is not
so easy to see why such materials should have been


! Sep. Ix:
2 See note to p. 105.


THE TAMARISK IN MAGIC. XLIX


adopted for magical purposes. A branch of tamarisk
or the date-spathe! were held aloft in the hand during
the exorcism which was to repel the attacks of demons
and lay them under a ban, and this shows that they
were possessed of magical power. Here we can see
an idea similar to that of the use of water in magic,
for just as water contains the power of the god Ea,
so will any piece of tamarisk contain the emanation
of the tree-spirit which lives in the sacred tamarisk-
shrub. This use of branches in magic shows that
the early inhabitants of Babylonia were in no wise
different from other nations in believing that trees
were inhabited by spirits or gods, and it is on this
principle of giving a sentient or perhaps divine
nature to inanimate objects that so many of the
amulets can be explained. There is a curious con-
hrmation of this use of branches in Babylonian magic
on a bowl from Niffer, in the centre of which is the
figure of a man, rudely drawn, holding up a branch
of some tree in his hand. The rest of the bowl is
inscribed with a Hebrew incantation to be recited.?


i see p. 23.

2 Manna is obtained from the tamarisk, and it is very probable
that while a branch of the tree itself was brandished aloft as
a visible sign, its medicinal products were used internally to cure
the patient. '' Manna is a laxative, and a suitable expectorant in
febrile affections of the lungs” (Stillé, Maisch, etc., Zhe National
Dispensatory, p. 1019).

3 Hilprecht, Explorations in Bible Lands, p. 447. The bowl is, of
course, much later than these cuneiform texts.


L INTRODUCTION.


Certain birds possessed supernatural powers, notably
the raven and the hawk :—


“ A raven, the bird that helpeth the gods,
“ In my right hand I hold;

“ A hawk, to flutter in thine evil face,

“ In my left hand I thrust forward." !


Among the Semites the raven was always associated
with the supernatural. It was one of the birds sent
forth by Noah from the Ark. The Arabs consider
it a bird of ill-omen which foretells death and disaster,?
and it is unlawful food according to the Moslem law.?
In the Syriac History of the Blessed Virgin Mary?
a certain young man is possessed by devils, but they
are driven forth by exorcism and take the form of
ravens; and in Thomas of Marga the same belief is
testified to.?

One of the stories of Bar-Hebrzus relates how in
a certain village “a troop of devils appeared in the
“ form of men, and they said to the villagers, ‘ Behold,
“ “a camel hath strayed away from us: give us a man
““that he may search for him.” And when they
‘brought out a man to them to look for the camel,
“ he saw ravens flying about, and he made his escape,


el B LES

? G. E. Post in Dictionary of the Bible (ed. Hastings), sub voce.

? Hughes, Dictionary of Islam, p. 5350.

* Ed. E. A. Wallis Budge, p. 47.

? Ed. E. A. Wallis Budge, vol. ii, p. 599. For the quotation see
p. xli.


RAVENS AND OWLS. LI


“and went into the village and said, ‘In very truth,
“ “these are devils and not men; furthermore, they
“ “have lost no camel.” "!

Devils assailed Rabban-bar-‘idta in the form of
“black stinking ravens” which flew up and tried to
force themselves into his cell to destroy him, but were
driven back to the sorcerer who sent them, by reason
of his night-long prayers.?

The hawk is another of the magic birds of the East.
It was the emblem of Horus in Egypt," which at once
shows in how great a respect it was held. In the
Syriac stories of Alexander, Nectanebus sends a drug
to Philip of Macedon by means of an enchanted hawk,
and it showed him a dream.*

On the other hand, the owl was a bird of ill-omen
among the Assyrians, as it is among the more modern
Semites. Dr. Budge informs me that in many villages
in the Soudan this same view is held of the za or
owl If an owl hooted over an Assyrian city it was
supposed to be the work of the Seven Devils? The
Arabs of the present day consider the owl to be the
wraith of a woman seeking her child.” In Syria “an owl
heard hooting by a sick man is an omen of his death.””


The Laughable Stories of Bar-Hebraus, ed. E. A. Wallis Budge,
. cccxci, p. 96.
Budge, Stories of Rabban Hormizd, p. 245.
Budge, Egyptian Religion, p. 107.
Budge, Alexander, p. 8.
pec. 51.
See p. xxxiii.
Frederick Sessions, Folklore Notes, Folklore, vol. ix, p. 18.


- ane wend m


LII INTRODUCTION.


———Á


It is regarded by the Malagasy as a bird of ill-omen,
and is called by them the “spirit bird,” for they think
it to be an embodiment of spirits, and its hoot in the
night is a presage of evil! All three birds were
unclean to the Hebrews, according to the Levitical
law.” Aelian also bears witness to these traditions by
saying that it is considered by men to be a bird that
presages evil."

Animals and their hair were largely used in cere-
monies, and great stress was laid on the beasts being
virgin. A young pig, a virgin kid, or its hair are
frequently mentioned, and this condition of ceremonial
cleanness was imposed on the use of such beasts even
down to the Middle Ages. The * virgin kid" was
largely used by the wizards of a few hundred years
ago in making parchment to be inscribed with magical
spells.*

In order to prevent the entrance of demons into
the house the Assyrians hung up various plants near
the door. |

“The Fleabane (?) on the lintel of the door I have

hung,

“St. John's wort (?), caper (?), and wheatears on

the latch I have hung,


“With a halter as a roving ass thy body I restrain."?


.! James Sibree, jun., Folklore, vol. ii, p. 34.
2 Leviticus, xi, 15-16.

3 De Natura Animalium, X, XXXVII.

4 Waite, Zhe Book of Black Magic, p. 209.

5 Tablet" Bee


TRADITION IN MAGIC. LIII


— —


This custom has survived among the Jews of the
present day, who hang aloes or cacti from the arch
of the doorway as amulets.!

Spittle had great power in Blibslonian sorcery,
particularly in bewitching men or casting spells upon
them. Inthe Third Tablet of the series “ Evil Spirits,”
the priest claims that Ea has added his spittle to his,
and although what it refers to is not quite clear, it
is evident that considerable importance is attached to
it^ Presumably the spittle took some part in the
ceremonial, just as it was used in Palestine a few
centuries later. In the New Testament it is said of
Christ that He '' spat on the ground, and made clay
of the spittle, and He anointed the eyes of the blind
man with the clay." $ |


(4) TRADITIONAL Forms or Exorcisms.

The Sumerians were very fond of repeating in
their magical prescriptions long traditional stories of
the gods, their doings, and how they were the first
to discover the beneficent properties of the charms
which were in daily use. Such a story is found in
the text which begins “In Eridu groweth the dark
kiškani,” which is worth giving in full here, because
of certain interpretations which have been suggested
for it :—


1 G. M. Mackie, article “ Amulets," Dictionary of the Bible, ed.
Hastings, 1898.

“edh. 13, |. 110.

3 John, ix, 6.


LIV INTRODUCTION.


“ In Eridu groweth the dark kiskanz

“ That springeth forth in a place undefiled,

+ Whereof the brilliance is shining lapis

“ Which reacheth unto Ocean ;

“From Ea its way in Eridu

“ Is bountiful in luxuriance,

“Where earth is, there is its place,

“ And the Couch of the Goddess Id its home.

“ In an undefiled dwelling like a forest grove

“ Its shade spreadeth abroad, and none may enter in.

“ In its depths (are) Shamash and Tammuz.

“ At the confluence of two streams

“ The gods Ka-Hegal, Shi-Dugal, (and)

of Eridu

“ [Have gathered] this kiskanz, [and over the man |

“ Have performed the Incantation of the Deep,

“ (And) at the head of the wanderer have set (it).

“ That a kindly Guardian, a kindly Spirit

“ May stand at the side of the man, the son of his god.

“The . . . which seizethlonithelhi me

“ Of him whose face hath not been turned towards it

“ [From where] he lieth, may it retard its foot.

“Mayanevil . . . stand aside therefrom,

“May . . . from the mouth of the king restrain

it on the way.

“ May Ishtar, [the Lady | mighty, wise, and pure,

“ From the dwelling-place cut it off.”

The explanation of this text which has hitherto
found credence among certain Assyriologists is that


THE GARDEN OF EDEN. LV


it contains nothing less than a reference to the
Garden of Eden as it was known to the Babylonians.
This view was originated by Professor Sayce in his
Hibbert Lectures (1887, p. 237), who draws a com-
parison between this and the Biblical descriptions,
and this is still maintained by him and Mr. Pinches
in their respective books, The Religions of Ancient
Egypt and Babylonia (Gifford Lectures, 1902, p. 385)
and The Old Testament in the light of the Historical
Records of Assyria and Babylonia (1902, p. 71). As
it is an important point to consider, it will be as well
to examine the evidence in detail; but first it must
be remarked that since the last publication of this
text considerable additions have been made to it, as
has been mentioned in the preface. Mr. Pinches
bases his translation on that of Professor Sayce's
rendering in 1887 :—'


! Professor Sayce's latest translation (Gifford Lectures, 1902,
p. 386) differs somewhat from that in the Mibbert Lectures :—
s In Eridu a vine grew overshadowing; in a holy place was
it brought forth ;
“ its root was of bright lapis, set in the world beneath.
“ The path of Ea was in Eridu, teeming with fertility.
s His seat (there) is the centre of the earth;
* his couch is the bed of the primeval mother.
* Into the heart of its holy house, which spreads its shade like
a forest, hath no man entered.
“ In its midst is Tammuz,
** between the mouths of the rivers on both sides."
Professor Sayce considers that Hommel may be right in trans-
lating &zs&az£ “ palm ” instead of “ vine."


LVI INTRODUCTION.


“Incantation : ‘(In) Eridu a dark vine grew, it was
made in a glorious place,

“ “Its appearance (as) lapis-lazuli, plan beside
the Abyss,

“ «Which is Ae's path, filling Éridu with fertility.

“ “Its seat is the (central) point of the earth,

“< Its dwelling is the couch of Nammu.

“ “To the glorious house, which is like a forest, its
shadow extends,

“ “No man enters its midst.

“ “In its interior is the Sun-god, and the peerless
mother of Tammuz.


“ < Between the mouths of the rivers (which are) on
both sides.’ "


" Here the text breaks off, and where it again
“ becomes legible, the phrases are those of an ordinary
‘incantation, whose connecting link with the above
“ poetical lines is lost” Mr. Pinches draws the
following conclusions from this text :—(a) That Eridu
“was, to the Babylonians, as a garden of Eden,
“ wherein grew a glorious tree, to all appearance
“a vine, for the adjective ‘dark’ may very reasonably
“ be regarded as referring to its fruit. Strange must
“have been its appearance, for it is described as
* resembling ‘white lapis-lazuli, that is, the beautiful
“ stone of that kind mottled blue and white.” (ó) “The
“ probability that it was conceived by the Babylonians
*as a garden is strengthened by the fact that the
“god Aé, and his path, z.e. the rivers, filled the place


ia^


THE GARDEN OF EDEN. LVII


“with fertility, and it was, moreover, the abode of the
4 river-god Nammu, whose streams, the Tigris and
4 Euphrates, flowed on both sides." (c) “There, too,
“dwelt the Sun, making the garden fruitful with his
“ ever-vivifying beams, whilst ‘the peerless mother
“of Tammuz,’ probably a name of Damkina, added,
“ by her fructifying showers, to the fertility that the
“ two great rivers brought down from the mountains
“from which they flowed.” (d) * To complete still
“further the parallel with the Biblical Eden, it was
“ represented as a place to which access was forbidden,
“ for ‘no man entered its midst,’ as in the case of the
4 Garden of Eden after the fall.”

But I very much doubt whether the words in the
text will bear the interpretation which has been put
upon them, or that the points of similarity are sufficiently
marked to justify the comparison. First, as to the
meaning of kiskani, which is supposed to be the
Tree of Life, and has been identified with the vine.
The kiskant is a plant or tree divided in the
Assyrian syllabaries into three classes,! fis “ white,"
salmi “dark,” and sám: “brown.” Mr. Pinches,
who translates samz “grey or blue,"? considers
that these colours refer to the fruit of the tree, and


= brings forward in support of his theory that the vine
N <


„ S the.only plant growing in the country with these


€


N Y Ba


TEL. 45, 4; ll. 53 ff.
, 2 The exact meaning is uncertain. The word, however, is used
as an epithet of gold (see Delitzsch, Æ. W.B., sub voce).


LVIII INTRODUCTION.


three colours of fruit, and that the kiskani is mentioned
in the bilingual lists among plants of the vine species.
But the colours may refer equally well to the flowers
of the tree or plant, and no inference can be drawn
from its position on the tablet on which the word
occurs, for it is separated from the eight species of
vine by two words, one of which is zs-sz sal-m (“ black
wood"). Indeed, if any inference at all is to be drawn
from its connection on this tablet (W. A.Z., ii, No. 4)
it is distinctly improbable that £zskanz means a vine,
since each of the eight species mentioned is marked
in Sumerian with a special sign for “vine,” and
the Sumerian for £iskanż has no such specification
attached.

It is, however, unnecessary to imagine a mytho-
logical meaning for kiskanż. The text in question is
for a sick man, and the £zsanz is to afford the remedy
for his disease. We have seen that it is a vegetable,
plant or shrub, identified by the three colours white,
and probably blue and brown, which grows thickly like
a grove by the river-side near Eridu in Southern
Dabylonia, and it now remains to identify this shrub.
Mr. H. H. W. Pearson, of the Royal Gardens at
Kew, informs me that the description coincides with
that of the Astragalus, of which there are many
varieties. From the Astragalus gummzfer! is obtained


! e The source of Tragacanth had been known for centuries to
“be some of the spiny species of As/ragalus growing in Asia


THE GARDEN OF EDEN. LIX


Tragacanth, which possesses emollient and demulcent
properties, and it was used by the Greek physicians
as far back as the fourth or fifth centuries, to allay
cough and hoarseness and to promote expectoration.’
It is still to be obtained in the bazaars of Bagdad,
whither it comes from Persia.? It seems, therefore,
very probable that the AzseazZ is one of the varieties
of astragalus from which Tragacanth is procured.
Again, ana apst tarsu (l. 2) cannot mean “planted
beside the Abyss," but is more probably “stretcheth
Oat unto the Ocean Deep,” ie, the water. The
fourth line has been given a remarkable meaning by
the totally unwarranted insertion which Professor Sayce
was the first to make, of the word “(central),” the
whole line thus running, “Its seat is the (central) point
of the earth,” or, in Professor Sayce’s later translation,
“His seat (there) is the centre of the earth.” But
the line is nothing more than “its seat is the earth,”
1.e., its roots go deep into the earth, and it has nothing


* Minor.” All the principal species from which Tragacanth is
obtained are natives of the mountainous districts in the East;
Asia Minor, Armenia, Persia and Kurdistan, Syria, and Greece.
The Astragalus gummifer is “a small shrub, about 2 feet in
“height . . . . leaves very numerous, closely placed, spreading
“in all directions about 12 inch long, pinnate, the rachis very
“€ hard, stiff, smooth, yellow, terminating in a very sharp point,
“ and persistent for some years as a woody spine" (Bentley and
Trimen, Medicinal Plants, No. 73).


! Stillé, Maisch, etc., Zhe National Dispensatory, pp. 1642—1643.
2 Felix Jones, Memoirs (1857), p. 402.


LX | INTRODUCTION.


whatever to do with the óupaños yòs, as Professor
Sayce originally suggested (Hibbert Lectures, p. 238).
Further, there are no grounds for Mr. Pinches' trans-
lation * the peerless mother of Tammuz," in the line
“ In its midst are Shamash and Tammuz.”

Mr. Pinches’ arguments may thus be met one by
one :—

(a) That Eridu was as a Garden of Eden there is
absolutely no reason to believe. "There is no reference
at all to any garden in the text, and the natural
interpretation is the one to follow, namely, that the
kiskanú grew wild.

(6) The presence of a river does not presuppose
the presence of a garden, as Mr. Pinches would have
us believe. Besides, the rivers which are mentioned
have nothing to do with the River with Four Heads
of Genesis, but have a purely ceremonial meaning,
of which the explanation is this. The gods plucked
the plant near to where two streams ran into one
another, this being always a place with a magical
significance. For instance, the magician is elsewhere
directed to “take water at the confluence of two
streams, and with this water perform a purifying
incantation,”* or, again, he is to “take an earthen
vessel which hath come from a great kiln, and at the
confluence of two streams to bale up (?) water.” *


1 Tablet EP MONO:
? Tablet VIII of the series LUH-KA (Vol. II), “ AA,” l. 31.


THE GARDEN OF EDEN. LXI


Inasmuch as the locality is the same in all three
instances, and the texts are all of the same class, it
follows that if the first are the Rivers of Eden, so also
must be the second and third, which is obviously
absurd. In the two last cases it is clear that a place
attainable by mortals is intended, and so also is it in
the Eridu text. The magician is intended to imitate
the gods and pluck the &zskanw from an earthly spot
in order to heal his patient therewith, just as the gods,
whose example he follows, did in times long past.

(c) The mention of the presence of the Sun-god and
Tammuz "in its midst " does not by any means imply
the existence of a divine garden for their habitation.
Three explanations of this line are possible, first, that
it has an entirely mythological reference, in which case
the gods mentioned are some form of tree-spirit. If
- this be the case, there is still no proof that the &zs£az£
was the Tree of Knowledge, since the belief in tree-
spirits is general in early communities, and it would
be straining the whole idea to narrow one ill-defined
and vague instance down to such a very special case
as the Biblical tree. Secondly, if the explanation be
purely physical, and is merely the description of the
ordinary characteristics of the plant wrapped up in
theological language, implying that it thrives in the
Sun, just as its path is that of Ea, that is, that it lives
near water, still less can it be referred to the Tree
in Genesis. Probably, however, the explanation is
a twofold combination of the above, pointing to its


LXII INTRODUCTION.


divine connection by reason of its peculiar habitat and
position. The case with all magical plants used as
charms in these incantations is the same, that they
should have some divine association and connection
whence their power should emanate.’

(d) The last point, “that no man enters its midst,"
is the one point of similarity which this text bears
with the Biblical Eden. It has been shown above
that there is no mention whatever of a garden and
no reason to suppose that any is referred to; that
the £zskanu is certainly not a vine, being probably
nothing more than a flowering and perhaps thorny
shrub, and that its association with the gods is similar
to other plants used in incantations, since it is merely
intended to explain the origin, of its power in magic.
So that the last point mentioned above is the only
remaining support for the Eden-theory. Now, it is
obvious that the phrase cannot refer to Eridu, since
this was a city of human habitation, and therefore it can
only refer to the £zskanu, which “grows like a forest”
or “grove,” as the text itself says, and herein lies the
interpretation. Either by reason of its thick growth
or from its thorny character, or both, it is difficult to
force a passage through, and no man can push his
way into the depths of its thickets except with extreme
trouble.


l As parallels, compare the description of the “ Heart-plant”
(Küchler, Zeztrüge zur Kenntnis der Assyrischen Medizin, p. 9) and
the Legend of the Worm (quoted below).


THE CEGEND OF THE WORM. LXIII


In all this text there is no mention of any of the
following characteristics of the Biblical Garden of
Eden: the planting of a garden by a god, the existence
of every tree therein, the tree of life, the tree of know-
ledge of good and evil or its fruit, the four-headed
river, the presence of the serpent, and the Cherubim
and the flaming sword.

The real explanation of the text is perfectly simple
without straining after Biblical comparisons. The
kiskanu-plant, according to tradition, grew in Eridu
when the gods were nearer to mankind than in after
days, and it was they who originally plucked it for
medicinal use from the place where it grew where two
streams met, and performed with it certain ceremonies.
Their actions stamped the prescription as infallible, and
sanctioned the repetition of the ceremonies in later
days, so that any more modern magician or priest, in
treating his patient, might have a divine model to
Este This is „all that is meant, and there is
absolutely no reference to any Garden of Eden.

As another instance of the fondness of the Baby-
lonians for going back to the most primitive periods
for their models in such matters, I may cite the Legend
of the Worm,' which has been hitherto unknown :—


“ After Anu [had created the Heavens],
“The Heavens created [the Earth),


1 Legend of the Worm, vol. ii. The text is published in Cun.
Texts, part xvii, pl. 50.


LXIV INTRODUCTION.


“ The Earth created the Rivers,

“ The Rivers created the Canals,

“The Canals created the Marshes,

““The Marshes created the Worm.

“ Came the Worm and wept before Shamash,
“ Before Ea came her tears :—

‘What wilt thou give me for my food,


‘What wilt thou give me to devour ?’


(€


Lt


“<I will give thee dried bones,


“< And scented . . . wood
“< Nay, what these dried bones of thine to me,
“< And thy scented . . . -wood?


“ * Let me drink among the teeth,

“ “And set me on the gums ;

“ “That I may devour the blood of the teeth,
“ “And of their gums destroy their strength
c “Then shall I hold the bolt of the door.’ " !


The incantation is really one which was written for
people with toothache, which was believed to be due
to the gnawing of small worms. By repeating the
story of the creation and subsequent action of the
original Worm, the magician shows that he clearly
has knowledge of the name of his enemy and his
methods, always a fundamental principle in magic, and
he may then proceed with his instructions :


“So must thou say this: O Worm!
“ May Ea smite thee with the might of his fist ! "


! Compare Ecclesiastes, xii, 4.


CONCLUSION. LXV


and after chanting the incantation three times, he
must rub a mixture of beer, a certain plant probably
of a pungent nature, and oil on the tooth of his patient.
From the facts stated in the above pages, the reader
will be able to glean an idea of the scope and contents
of one group of Sumerian magical texts, and it is
hoped that the information therein given will induce
the student of comparative folklore to investigate this
important subject. It will, of course, be understood
that the exact meanings of certain words are still
obscure, but with the publication of new texts and
further study, there is every reason for believing that
we may shortly attain to a tolerably accurate know-
ledge of the ceremonies, enchantments, and spells
which the Sumerian sorcerer employed in dealing with
credulous clients some six thousand years ago.


'SNON3G NVINOTAĦVU


II @LV id


Transliterations
and


Translations.


Series Utukkti Pimnitt.


Che Third Tablet.


(PEATE L.)
à 6 e e 1
—. ` . - bat - ma
[MU] - UN - ZU - ZU - NE
a" al- mad- ma
MU - UN - SI - IN - GAL - LA - NA
5.. ““Eridu ina na - di - e - a
. . . NAM-SUB MU-UN-SI-IN-SUM-MA-TA
fC Sip- tu ina na- di- e- a
ALAD - *SIG - GA ID - MU KAN - GUB


IO.


IS:


la-mas-si dum-ki i-da-a-a li- iz- giz
DINGIR-NIN-GIR-SU  LUGAL  GIŠ-KU-GE KAN-PA
mo be-el kak - ku lu-u-ta- ma - a2 - ta
UTUG-HUL A-LA-HUL GIDIM-HUL MULLA-HUL
DINGIR-HUL MASKIM-HUL
E-NE-NE-NE su-nu lim-nu-tum  HUL-A- MES
SU-MU ana zu-um-ri-za a-a it-hu-nt NAM-BA-TE-MAL-E-NE
IGI-MU ana pa-ni-ia a-a u-lan-mi-nu-ni
NAM -BA-HUL-E- NE
EGIR-MU ana ar-ki-ia a-a u-lt-ku-ni NAM-BA-GIN-GIN-NE
E-MU ana bíti? -ia [a-a t-ru-bu-nt| NAM-BA-TU-TU-NE
*UR-MU ana u-ri-za a-a [ib-bal-ki-tu]-ni
NAM - BAL- BAL-E-NE
E-KI-TUS-A-MU ana bit Sub-ti-[la a-a i-ru-bu-ni]
NAST- BA - TU = TU - NE


Series “The Evil Spirits.”


—s ———


Che Third Labret.


(Pratt 1.)


I - ER
5. When I petit [the Incantation] of Eridu,
When I perform the Incantation
May a kindly Guardian stand at my sie
10. By Ningirsu, master of the sword, mayest thou be
exorcised !
Evil Spirit, evil Demon, evil Ghost, evil Devil,
evil God, evil Fiend,
Evil are they!
Unto my body may they not draw nigh,
15. Before me may they wreak no evil.
Nor follow behind me,
Into my house may they not enter,
My fence may they not break through,
Into my chamber may they not enter.


! Traces of preceding lines on 35,611: (a). . . EN (0)... EN
(c). . . ana-ku (d). . . [DINGIR-SILIG]-MULU-SAR ME-EN
(Dv ().-...qm&-MAnL(s). =. ¿a (P).
IN-TUR-RA-NE (7) . . . ub(?)-ma(?) (J). . < IN-GAR-RA.


? 35,611 omits. 3 K. 9,314, bi-ti.


4. DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


20. ZI AN-NA  KAN-PA [Z] KI-A  KAN-PA
nis [saméle)] Iu-u-ta-ma-a-ta nis irsitimitim)
[lu - u - ta - ma - a] - ta


INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL- A- KAN
EN E- NE- NE- NE MASKIM - HUL - A - MES
Šu - nu ra - bi - su lim - nu - ti su - nu


25. E-A E-KUR-TA 25! -tu bit? ekurri it-ta-su-ni 54-7244 E-A-MES
DINGIR-EN-LIL-LA LUGAL KUR-KUR- RA- GE
E-NE-NE-NE MULU -KIN -GA-A- MES
sa ™, dēl 4465 mdr sip-ri su-mu
We TUL EDIN-NA MULU-TIL-LA BA-AN-GAZ
| u-tuk-ku lim-nu sa ina si-rim+ amelu bal-tu" i-nar-ru
30, A- LÀ- HUL -IK -E TU - GIM MU=UN pr w
a-lu-u lim-nu sa ki-ma su-ba-a-ta® i-kat-ta-mu
GIDIM-HUL MULLA-HUL SU-NA BA-NI-IB-DIB-DIB-BI
e-kim-mu lim-nu gal-lu-u lim-nu sa z¿u-um-ra
¿-Ram-11u-u
DINGIR-RAB-KAN-ME DINGIR-RAB-KAN-ME"-A SU-NA
BA-NI-IN §-GIG-GA 9
35. la-bar-tum la-ba-su sa  zu-um-ra u-sam-ra-su
LIL-LA EDIN-NA NI- KAS- KAS - ES - A- AN
li-lu-u sa ma sirim  tt-ta-na-as-rab-bi-tu
(Puare ID)
MULU-GISGAL-LU PAP-HAL-LA BAR-KU MU-UN-NA-TE-ES


ana ameli mut-tal-li-ku® ina a-ha-ti 1tt-hu-u


! K. 22 an Pis 0,314, Rel. ? K. 9,314, oun

3 K. 224, be-el ma-ta-a-[ tī |. t K. 220e 7i:

sak 22472: 6 K. 224, su-ba-li.
7 K. 224 omits. SIC 224, IB.

° K.224 adds A-AN. V MK. a


DEE LIMNUTI, TABLET III. 5


20. By Heaven be thou exorcised! By Earth be
thou exorcised !


IPRAVER AGAINST THE EviL SPIRITS.


Incantation :—
Evil fiends are they !
25. From the Underworld* they have gone forth,
They are the Messengers of Bel, Lord of the
World.
The evil Spirit that in the desert smiteth the
living man,
30. The evil Demon that hike a cloak enshroudeth
the man,
The evil Ghost, the evil Devil that seize upon
the body,
35. The Hag-demon (and) Ghoul that smite the
body with sickness,
The Phantom of Night that in the desert roameth
abroad,”


(PLATE II.)
Unto the side of the wanderer have drawn nigh,


a Ekurru. On the meaning *' Underworld,” see Jensen, Kosmologee,
p. 185, and Jastrow, Religion, p. 558.

b /ffanasrabbitu: for the meaning of this word compare the
following passages: Tablet V, v, 40, sunu zakiku muttasrabbituti
šunu, “They are the roaming stormwind” ; Devils and Evil Spirits,
vol. ii, Tablet € N,” col. i, ll. 11-12, Sċdu utukku rabisu rabbuti $a
ana niši?! ribáti ittanasrabbitu, “The great demons, spirits, and
fiends that prowl about the broad places for men”; ibid.,
Tablet “R,” 1. 6, ša ina sirim kima zakiki ittanasrabbitu, “who
roam about the desert like the wind.”


6 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


40. AZAG - TUR- RA SU-NA . MI-NI-IN-GAR- RI - ES
a-sak-eu mar-sa ina  zumvril-Su  iš-ku-nu
HUL NAM-NE-SUB-BA SU-NA GAL-LA-NA


ma-mit — li-mut-tum ina zumri? -su — ib-Su-u


U-MU-UN-HUL-A SU-NA $ MI-NI-IN-GAR-RI-ES
45. u-mu-un-na-a lim-nu* ina sumri*-Su i$-bu-nu?


NAM-TAR-HUL-BI-TA nam-ta-va lim-na ina zumri?-su
id-Su-u SU-NA GAL-LA-NA
UH(?)- HUL- BI- TA zm-fa li-mut-ta ina zumvri?-Su
is-ku-ui SU-NA GAL-LA-NA
BAR-RA-NA AS-HUL ar-rat li-mui-ta" ina zu-um-ri-Su
s ¿b-Su-u GAL-LA-NA
HUL NAM-TAG-GA lum-na ar-na' ina  zumri?-su
is-ku-ui SU-NA GAL-LA-NA
50. UH(?) NAM-TAG-GA im-ta Se-ir-ta® e-li-su ib-Su-u
MUH-NA GAL-LA-NA
Si HUL-A : li-mut-tab is-ku- : MU-UN-GA-GA
su mut - HUL IGI” - HUL KA - HUL EME - HUL
53 10 UH (?)- HUL UH (2) - sue UH(?)-RI-A GAR-SA-A
GAR - HUL - GIM - MA
[MULU]-TUR-RA SU-NA sa ma zu-mur mar-si"
2S-Sak(?)-mu . . . IN-GAR-RI
55.. . GIG DUG-SIR-GIM (?) MU- UN - DA - AB- GE-GE
Bo ee. WA ki-ma kar-pat ša-har-ra [im-tum?] u-Sa-[al-la]-mu
5: GAR-SA-A GAR-HUL-GIM-MA KA-MU-UN-DA-AB


MAL (?)
58 u-pi-su lim-nu-tum $a pa-a u-kas-su-u
55 UH(?)-ZU HUL-BI-TA EME  BA-NI-IN-DIB-DIB-BI
60. kis-pi lim-[nt] sa b-saall-nu  u-sab-ba-tum
Cl LUGĀ fer. . E-A DINGIR HUL - IK -E


GL be- lu K | alu lim- nu


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET III. 7


40. Casting a woeful fever upon his body. Have pw.
A ban of evil hath settled on his body, |
45. An evil disease on his body they have cast,
An evil plague hath settled on his body,
An evil venom on his body they have cast,
An evil curse hath settled on his body,
Evil (and) sin on his body they have cast,
50. Venom (and) wickedness have settled on him,
sí Evil they have cast (upon him).
. The evil man, he whose face is evil, he whose
mouth is evil, he whose tongue is evil,
5: Evil spell, witchcraft, sorcery,
Enchantment, and all evil,
54 Which rest on the body of the sick man `
55. * . . . . which like a clay vessel hath con-
sumed the spittle,
57 The enchantment and all evil that have closed


the mouth,
60. The baneful witchcraft which hath seized the
tongue,
Meteo . . = , the evil god,
T K. owa, ka. 2 47,852, 2u-um-ri.
3 K. 224, BAR-KU. eK. 224, Wi.
9 43062, n. $ 47,852, fum.
"47,852, nu.


° 47,852, for this line [7m]-Zum sir-tum, etc.
? 47,852 translates this line [amelu lim-nu] pa-ni lim-nu pu-u
lim-nu li-Sa-nu lim-nu.
0 47,852 translates this line [kis]-p: ru-hu-u ru-su-u u-sa-se-e
[mimma lim-nu), and for UH (?) -RI-A reads UH (?) -A-RI-A.
L a 2 sa. 2 47,852 omits.
2 Line doubtful.


e
yo
>


8 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


6%  KASKAL-DAGAL-LA-TA-GIM | MULU -GI GALE LU SDD
BA - AN - SI - ES
6 4 ina har-ra-nu! ra-pa-as-tum ana amelu* su-a-tum
1-SI-VU
65. GA- E MULU DINGIR - EN - KI - GA ME - EN
GA-E MULU DINGIR-DAM-GAL-NUN-NA ME-EN?
GA-E MULU-KIN-GA-A DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR ME-EN 3
GAR - TUR - RA-A- NI MULU- TIL LA - A - NI SO


mar - SU vu - US - SU ana bul - lu - tu

70. EN-GAL DINGIR-EN-KI-GE MU-UN-SI-IN-GIN-NA
belu * rabu(u) “F-a z$ - pur - an - mi

TU - AZAG -GA-A- NI TU - MU GAL - LA - NA

ta - a - Su el- lu ana  te-e-a îs- kun

KA - AZAG - GA - A - NI KA - MU GAL - LA - NA
JE. pi - i- šu el - lu ana ft - ta is - kun


UH(?) -AZAG-GA-A-NI UH(?)-MU GAL- LA -NA
i-mat-su el- [lu Jana im-ti-ia is- kun
MU - AZAG- GA - A - NI MU - MU GAL - LA - NA
ik - vīb-šu el-lu? ana thk-vi-@i-1a EES

(PLATE III.)
80. ZAG-MES HE-IM-MA-AN-HUL-A MULU-TUR-RA® SU-NA


—


GAL-LA-NA
mu-sal-pit es-ri-e-li" ša ina zu-mur mar-su® ba-sa-a
TU - DUG - GA I DINGIR - EN - KI - GA - GE
zna " INE a - mat “E - va


E-NE-NE-NE IIUL-A-MES HE-IM-MA-AN-SIR-RI-ES-A-AN
85. Su - nu lim - nu - ti li - in - na - as - hu
GI$- MA- NU GIS-KU-MAH AN-NA-GE ŠU-MU
MU - UN - DA -AN -GAL
e-ri kak-ku si-t-ri sa ““A-nm ina kata” -ta
na-sa-ku


UTUKKI LIMNOTI, TABLET III. 9


On the high road have attacked this man.
65. The man of Ea am I!
The man of Damkina am I!
The messenger of Marduk am I!
To revive the ( )* sick man,
70. The great lord Ea hath sent me;
He hath /added his pure spell /to mine,
75. He hath/added his pure voice to mine,
He hath/added his pure spittle to) mine,
He hath added his pure prayer to mine.
Graes III.)
Though that WEEN resteth on the body of the


sick man
80. Had power to destroy temples,”
Yet by the magic of the Word of Ea
85. These evil ones will be put to flight.
The tamarisk,* the powerful weapon of Anu,


NOS 0 I 1, zu. B 47852, a- me-lu.
3 Translated on 47,852 . . +. [a@]-na-ku.
e E SC all Sa, bes . » M 47,852, be-lu.

: 990, eilu. 39,594 + + NA.
7 S. 996, mes-ri-fi. E 17,852, sa; S. 996, sa.
V 40,852, Ea. 0 S.996, tum.


1 $.996, si-ra.

a Russu. Possibly either for ru’ut-su (“ his spittle”) or from the
root rasásu, which may perhaps be the Chaldee r'sas (Levy, Chald.
Wòrter0., ii, 429) meaning “to smite.” Neither are, however, probable.

b S. 996 has mesriti, “ limbs.”

c Eru (GIS-MA-NU). From Zimmern’s Rifualtafeln, Nos. 46-47
(p. 156, l. 15), VII salme eri, “Seven images of eru-wood,” it is
clear that this is a wood, and not a wooden object. It occurs
frequently in these texts, and the best Semitic word to compare
it with is the Syriac “ara (Brockelmann, Lexicon, p. 259, a),
“ tamarisk.”


10 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


DINGIR-DUB-SAG-UNUG-KI “LIGIR KUL-UNUG-KI-GE
NAM-TIL-LA SILIM-MA-MU


Eé eu Ae og


EGIR - MU GIN - GIN - NE


go. "". ma-gi-ri Kul-la-bi' ana ba-la-ti-da u sa-la-mi-ta
arki? -ia lit-tal-lak


UTUG-* ŠIG-GA  ID-ZI-DA-MU MU-UN-DA-AN-GIN-NA
Se-e-du dum-ki ina im-ni-ia a-la-kus
ALAD-*SIG-GA ID-GUB-BU-MU MU-UN-DA-AN-GIN-NA
la-mas-st dum-ki ima  Ssu-me-li-ta  a-la-ku?


95. DINGIR - NIN 4-AN-NA DUP-SAR-MAH ARALI - GE


SAR-AZAG
A
NAM-SUB — (AZAG-GA?  MU-UN-NA-AN-ŠIT
“oo Qup-sar-ra-tum 6 — sir-tum? sa A-ra-al-li-e


sip-tu — ellitim(tim) ina pant-ia® — i-man-ni?
DINGIR-NIN-GIR-SU LUGAL GIS-KU-GE  KAN-PA


IOO. UTUG-HUL A-LA-HUL GIDIM-HUL MULLA-H[UL
DINGIR - HUL MASKIM - HUL]


E- NE- NE- NE HUL- A- MES?
SU-MU NAM-BA-TE-MAL-E-NEM: IGI- MU - N[AM-
BA-HUL]-E-NE
104-105. EGIR-MU NAM-BA-GIN-GIN-NE : E-MU NAM-[BA-
TU-TU |-NE
*UR- MU NAM -BA - BAL - BAL - E - NE: E- KI- TUŠ-
A-[MU NAM-BA-TU-TU]-NE
a. ZI | AN- NA KAN-PA ZI KI-A [KAN -PA]


1 K.8 265 07 ° K. 8,262, ar ki, A
° K. 8,262, Jaga * 47,852 inserts NA.
5 47,952, IGI-MU for AZAG-GA. Š 47,852, rat for ra-tum.


UTUKKI LIMNOTI, TABLET III. II


90.


95.


IOO.


In my hands I hold.
May the god Dubsag-Unug-ki,* the patron of
Kullabi,


° For my life and health follow after me.


A kindly Guardian marcheth on my right,

A kindly Spirit marcheth on my left,

Nin-Anna,' the mighty Scribe of the Underworld,

Reciteth a purifying incantation before me.

By Ningirsu, master of the sword, mayest thou
be exorcised !

Evil Spirit, evil Demon, evil Ghost,

Evil Devil, evil God, Ge Fiend,

Evil are they, 75. el One.

Unto my body may they not draw nigh,

Before me may they wreak no evil,

Nor follow behind me,


105. Into my house may they not enter,
My fence may they not break through,
Into my chamber may they not enter.
a. By Heaven be thou exorcised! By Earth be
thou exorcised !
7,652. Ju. 8 47,852, i-na pa-nt-ta.
o IK. 8,262, m 1 MES-MES according to the text.
= IK. 8,262, DA.


a Dubsag-Uruk: DUB-SAG (Briinnow, List, Nos. 3,937-3,938) is
translated kudmu and makru, i.e. “first,” “chief.” For Kullabi or
Kullaba, see W.A.Z., v, 41, 14, g.

I “ Lady of Heaven.”


12


Son


A.


108.


I IO.


115.


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABVLONIA.


INIM - INIM - MA  UTUG - HUL “A WAN


EN DINGIR-EN-KI E-NE: Sa '", su-nu sa, su-mu:
DINGIR

DINGIR-EN-KUR-SIG-NUN-ME-UBARA  E-NE  DINGIR-
NIN-KUR-SIG-NUN-[ME-UBARA  E-NE]

A-DA-PA NUN-ME NUN -KI -GA - [GE]

GA-E  MULU-TU-TU DINGIR-EN-KI-GA-[GE ME-ENJ

GA-E MULU-KIN-GA-A DINGIR-SILIG-MULU- SAR [ME-EN]

GAR - TUR - RA-A- NI MULU - TIL - LA- A- [NI -KU]


. EN-GAL  DINGIR-EN-KI-GE  MU-UN-SI-IN-[GIN-NA]


TU - AZAG - GA- A - NI TU -MU GAL - [LA - NA]
KA - AZAG -GA-A-[NI KA-MU  GAL-LA-NAJ
UH(?) AZAG-GA-[A- NI UH(?)-MU GAL-LA-NAJ
MU AZAG - GA-[A- NI MU-MU GAL = BA SÉ
UTUG-HUL  A-LA-[HUL  GIDIM-HUL MULLA-HUL
DINGIR-HUL MASKIM-HULJ
GA MASKIM
lu ra- bi = su
' IGl-MU-TA ZI [AN-NA KAN-PA ZI KIA KAN-PA]
NAM-TAR AZAG GAR-GIG GAR-SA-[A GAR-HUL-GIM-MA]
nam-ta-ri? | a-Sak-ku  ma-ru-us-tu [up-Sa-Su-u
mimma] lim-nu
SU MULU-GISGAL-LU PAP-HAL-LA-GE A-NA
GI-ES


ina zumur? ameli“ mut-tal-li-ku”  [i-zn-[na-as-&u]


1 49,0529 8 E. ? fpe nu.
3 47,852, zu-mur. 4 47,852, a-me-lu.
5 18.222, MI.


d.


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET III. 13


PRAVER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.


Incantation :—


C.


Of Ea are they, of [Damkina] are they!


d. Of En-kur-sig-nunme-ubara' are they,


Of Nin-kur-sig-nunme-ubara are they,


e. Of Adapa, the ruler of Eridu, are they!
f. lam the sorcerer-priest of Ea,
g. I am the messenger of Marduk ;


A.
1.
108.


I IO.


I I5.


To revive the ( )' sick man

The great lord Ea hath sent me;

He hath added his pure spell to mine,

He hath added his pure voice to mine,

He hath added his pure spittle to mine,

He hath added his pure prayer to mine.

Whether thou art an evil Spirit or an evil Demon,

Or an evil Ghost or an evil Devil,

Or an evil God or an evil Fiend,

fiend Er. .

Be thou removed from before me!

By Heaven be thou exorcised! By Earth be
thou exorcised !

May the pestilence, fever, pain, sorcery, and
all evil

De removed from the body of the wanderer.


a According to W.A.Z., ii, 56,48,c, [DINGIR...]-KUR-SIG (Z-sr-mu)-


NUN-ME = ““Us-mu-u sukkalli ““EN-KI-GA-GE, i.e. the minister of
Ea, and it is possible that this is the same as DINGIR-EN-KUR-SIG-
NUNME-UBARA (Briinnow, Zzs/, No. 2,833). DINGIR-NIN-KUR-SIG-
NUNME-UBARA is read Ninkum (Brünnow, No. 11,013).


b See note to I. 69.


I4 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


I20. SU-MU = NAM-BA-TE-MAL-E!-NE  BAR-KU  HE-IM-
[TA-GUB]

ana zumri-ta* a-a il-fin-nu ina a-ha-a-ti li-iz-ziz

 EGIR-MU : ana  arki-ila a-a tir-du-ni$ : NAM-
[BA-GIN-GIN-NE]

ZI DINGIR - GAL - GAL - E- NE- GE [KAN - PA]*

ms ilmi” rabiti” lu - u - ta - mu - [u]*

125. NA - AN = GUB “Grann KA - SAR - BI F

a-a ik- ka - lu vri- kis - su lip - pa - dir


(PLATE IV.)


INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL - {A - KAN]


EN GA - E MULU - TU - TU GA-SURRU - MAH
[DINGIR - EN - KI - GE]
a-il-pu ša-an-gam-mat- hu sa ""[E - a]
130. NAG-DUB ra-am-ku sa ““Eridi a-na-ku
TU NEIN . . . BABA KU(?) .
Si-pat . . . pa-sa-hu tk-[kal?|
TUR (?) RA (?)
mat - Su “hal . oe
I35.. . . . . . AGE BAU) GEJS


TAG

ISHU . . . 3
140. as - kup - pat

E-A- KU


ana bili ma e-vi- bit , a
DINGIR-BABBAR IGI-MU-KU DINGIR-SIS-KI [EGIR-MU-KU]
im Samsu ina pani-ia “Sin ina ar[ki-ta]


UTUKKI LIMNOTI, TABLET III. 15


120. Unto mv bodv mav thev not come nigh,
Mav thev get hence from near me, |
May they not follow after me.

By the Great Gods may they be exorcised ! *
May he not be held in bondage, `
125. May his fetters be loosened !


(PLATE IV.) :


PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.


Incantation :—
I am the sorcerer-priest of [ Ea],
130. I am the magician of Eridu,


[Lines 131-138 much broken. ]
140. The threshold


Unto the house on entering
Shamash (is) before me,


Sin (is) behind [me],


1 K. 224 omits.

2 47,852, zu-mur-1ia.

20952, u.

* 47,852, I-RI-PA HA-BA-RA-DU-UN.
5 47,852, u-tam-mi-ka

$ K. 224, mah.


* 47,852, “ By the Great Gods I exorcise thee, that thou mayst
depart!”


16 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


I45. DINGIR - NE - URU - GAL ID - ZI - DA - [MU]
"* Nergal ina zn - Hi - [za]

DINGIR - NIN- IB ID- GUB- BU- [MU]
m ina ŠU - me - li - za

MULU - TUR - RA - KU TE - MAL - DA! - MU - NE
150. ana mar - su? ina je? - ft -e-a


SAG | MULU-TUR-RA-KUÍ SU-US-GAR-RA-MU-NE
zna kak-ka-du 5 mar-su* ka-ti ina um-mu-di-1a
6UTUG-*ŠIG-GA ALAD-*SIG-GA DA-MU  KAN-GUB
UTUG-HUL  A-LA-ŅUL  GIDIM-HUL MULLA-HUL
DINGIR-HUL MASKIM-HUL


155. TUR-RA NAM-BAD  LIL-LA  EN-NA  KI-EL-LIL-LA
EN-NA AZAG NAM-TAR-HUL-HE-A
lu-u mur-su mu-tum' li-lu-u li-li-lum3 a-sak-ku
nam-ta-ru® lim-nu
? IGI- MU- TA E- TA BA- RA- E
dup - pir ina pa-ni-ta as“-tm bíti si-i
11 GA-E MULU-TU-TU DINGIR-EN-KI-GA ME-EN
160. GA-E MULU-TUR-RA-KU TU-MU MU-UN-NA-AN
Vona-ku ana mar-su sip - tum
UTUG-HUL A-LA-HUL GIDIM-HUL MULLA-HUL
[DINGIR-HUL MASKIM-HUL]
TUR-RA NAM-TAR LIL-LA EN-NA KI-EL-[LIL-LA EN-NA]P
AZAG | NAM-[TAR-HUL-HE-A]
165. ? IGI-MU-TA ZI AN-NA KAN-PA [ZI KI-A KAN-PA]


! 47,852, E-NE. = 96715, St; 47952
5 S. at pra 52, d. VS. 715, GE.
5 S. 715, kad, and 47,852, ka-di, for ka-du.


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET III. 17
145. Nergal (is) at [my] right hand,
Ninib (is) at my left hand ;
150. When I draw near unto the sick man,
When I lay my hand on the head of the sick man,
May a kindly Spirit, a kindly Guardian stand at
my side.
Whether thou art an evil Spirit or an evil Demon,
Or an evil Ghost or an evil Devil,
Or an evil God or an evil Fiend,
155. Or sickness, or death, or Phantom of Night,
Or Wraith of Night, or fever, or evil pestilence,
Be thou removed from before me,
Out of the house go forth!
(For) I am the sorcerer-priest of Ea,
160. It is I who [recite] the incantation for the sick
man
Whether thou be an evil Spirit or an evil Demon,
Or an evil Ghost or an evil Devil,
[Or an evil God or an evil Fiend],
Or sickness, or death, or Phantom of Night,
Or Wraith of Night, or disease, or evil pestilence,
165. Be thou removed from before me!


“ Line translated on 47,852: se-e-du dum-ki.la-mas-su dum-ki


daa . . . and on S. 715 [še]-7d dum-ki la-mas-si dum-ki
i-da-a-a li-12-212.

3.715, fa; 47,852, u-lit. $ 47,852, Zm.

P 49,8525 77. ES. jas, ul.


u S.715 translates [a-s7]-u sa ““E-a[ana-ku].
2 47,852 omits this line. 15 47,852, E-NE KI-EL-E-NE.
2


18 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABEEONTA.


MULU - GISGAL - LU DU DINGIR-RA-NA BA- RA-
[AN-TE-MAL-DA]


(PLATE V.)
BA - RA- AN - [GE - GE - E - NE]
ZI AN- NA KAN - PA ZI KI-A [KAN - PA]


INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL - [A - KAN]


170. EN GA- E ! DINGIR- ID ME-EN GA-E


sa SH ana- ku Sa "e
RIG - SAR MULU - TIL - LA KALAM - MA
a- si- pu mu- bal- lit mati”. EB
MAS - MAS -GAL-GAL-LA URU-A GIN
175. M mut-tal-lik a-lu


GU-GIR KA SU-LUH-HA NUN-KI-GA
a-ši-pu | "" Eridi ša — fü-i-$u me-su-u
MULU-TUR-RA NAM-TAR MU-UN-DIB-BI 3 AZAG
NA-AN-TA
mar-sa $a  nam-ta-ri*  ts-ba-tu-su®  a-sak-ku
eli-šu  sub-tum


180. MULU- TUR- RA- KU TE- MAL- E ĉ- NE - MU- [NE]
SA MULU - TUR - RA- EU ZU-ZU-5-NE . . .

bu -a-ni mar - su" ina la - ma - di - ta

ID - ŠU - GIR - BI BAD - BAD - DA - [MU - NE]?

mes - vi - tà - Su ina pu - uk - ku - di - ta

I85. A DINGIR-EN-KI-GE MULU-TUR-RA *SUD-*SUD-DA-MU-NE
me-e® “E-a Mar su ina sa-la-hi-ta

! 47,852 inserts MULU. * 47,852, ma-a-lu.


° 47,852, BA. t 47,852, Zar for fa-rz.


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET III. I9


By Heaven be thou exorcised! [By Earth be
thou exorcised ! |
Unto the man, the son of his god, come not nigh,
(ETUATE V.)
Get thee hence! Rewin An
By Heaven be thou exorcised! By Earth [be
thou exorcised !]


PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.


170. Incantation :—
Of the goddess Id* am I, of the god (?)
[am I],
A sorcerer that giveth life unto the land,
175. A potent wizard that patrolleth the city,
A sorcerer of Eridu whose mouth is purified
[am 1].
The sick man upon whom sickness hath seized,
Fever (hath taken up) its seat upon him.
When I draw near unto the sick man,
180. When I examine? the muscles of the sick man,
When I compose his limbs,
185. When I sprinkle the water of Ea on the sick man,


5 47,852, tuš for fu-šu. 5 K. 8,262, DA-MU.
E352. sa. 8 K.8,262 ... PA-DA-MU-NE.
? K.224, A-MES for me-e. 10 47,952, NAKBU for L-a.


ET sand K. 8,262; sa.


a The goddess Id, according to Briinnow, Zis/ No. 10,223, was
the mother of Ea.
PE. "learn"


20 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


MULU - TUR - RA HU - LUH - WA -IMU S


mar - sa na! gui = lu = ti - ta

TE MULU - TUR SU RA - RA - DA - MU - NE
100. li - it mar - sa? ina} ma - Sa - di - ta
MUH MULU - TUR - RA - GE GU - DE - MU - NE

e -li mar - si? zna Sa-St-e-a


NAM-SUB NUN-KI-GA : Si-pat ““Eridi ina na-di-e-a :
SUM-MU-DA *- MU *- NE
UTUG-*ŠIG-GA ALAD-*SIG-GA DA-GE KAN -GUB
195. UTUG-HUL A-LA-HUL GIDIM-HUL MULLA-HUL
DINGIR-HUL MASKIM-[HUL]
DINGIR- RAB- KAN - ME DINGIR-RAB- KAN -[ME]?- A
DINGIR-RAB-KAN-[ME-KIL]
MULU-LIL-LA KI-EL-LIL  KI-EL-GIDĊ-DA-KAR-RA
NAM-TAR-HUL-IK AZAG-GAR-GIG' GAR-GIG GAR-SA-A
GAR-HUL-GIM-MA
ISUR-AS)-SUB A HA-AN-TUM ` U - ŠUŠ-ŠUB
200. MULU - HUL IGI - HUL
UH (p) ?-HUL EME-HUL KA-HUL-A GAR-SA-A
GAR-HUL-GIM-MA


| 420052 1300. 2: K. 2285 (7
55422352. SA. t 35,611 omits.
5 ME is omitted on 35,611. 6 K. 9,262, 0D.


1 S. 996 inserts TUR-RA-NU-DUG-GA.

8 S. 996 inserts US. |

° $.996 . . . UH(?)-ZU UH(?) A-RI-A GAR-SA-A GAR-HUL-
GIM-MA.


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET III. 21


When I subdue' the sick man,

190. When I bring low the strength of the sick man,
When I recite an incantation over the sick man,
When I perform the Incantation of Eridu,

May a kindly Spirit, a kindly Guardian, be present
at my side. )

195. Whether thou art an evil Spirit or an evil Demon,
Or an evil Ghost or an evil Devil,

Or an evil God or an evil Fiend,

Or Hag-demon or Ghoul or Robber Sprite,

Or Phantom of Night or Wraith of Night,

Or Handmaiden of the Phantom,

Or evil pestilence or noisome fever,

Or pain or sorcery or any evil,

"Or headache or shivering or (?) or terror,

200. Or an evil man or evil face,

Or evil spell, or evil tongue, or evil mouth, or
sorcery, or any evil,


a Gullutia. From W.A.Z., iv, 26 (4), 46, tam-tum si-i gal-ta-at
(“the sea heaves”), galalu has evidently the meaning of
* quaking" (whence its more common meaning of ‘quaking
with fear"), but here the translation * when I have shaken the
sick man" is unlikely. It is more probable that just as the
magician reduces the strength of the sick man (cf. the following
line), and thereby that of the devil in him, so will he frighten into
subjection the evil power which has possessed the body ofthe patient.

> Restore the first characters, SUR-AS, and compare pl. 31, l. 102,
which should read SUR-AS-SUB A-HA-AN-TUM U-ŠU-UŠ-ŠUB, etc.
bu Deeds and Evil Spirits, vol. ii, Tablet “O,” ll 11-12,
SUR-AS-SUB is translated /7--u Su-ru-ub-bu-[u]. “The meaning of
A-HA-AN-TUM is doubtful; A-HA-AN —zus& (Brünnow, List
No. 11,704). U-SU-SUB is probably to be translated Aarbasu; see
pl. 46, ll. 168-169, where har-ba-$u is certainly to be restored as the
translation of u-šu-[ŠUB J.


22


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


?-LA IGI-MU-TA ZI AN-NA KAN-PA ZI KI-A KAN-PA


INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL- A- KAN!


EN IGA E — MULU DINGIR-EN-KI-GA ME-EN


(Pram VI)


205.


2l.


GA-E MULU ` DINGIR-DAM-GAL-NUN-NA  ME-EN
* GA-E MULU-KIN-GA-A DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR ME-EN
TU-MU /zz-a tu-u sa ""E.a5 TU DINGIR-EN-KI-GE
TU-TU-MU  375-H9  sip-tumi sa "Marduk TU-TU
` DINGIR-SILIG-MULU- 8AR-GE
GIS-HAR DINGIR-EN-KI-GE SU-MU MU-UN-DA-AN-GAL
u - su -rat “E-at ia ķa-ti-ta ba-sa-a
GIS-MA-NU GIS-KU-MAH  AN-NA-GE SU-MU
MU - UN - DA - AN - GAL
GIS-PA-SANGA  PA-AN-GAL-GAL-LA ŠUMU  MU-UN-
DA- AN - GAL
Iq-ra Sa par-su rabi-tu ina ka-ti-ta na-sa-ku
SU - MU NAM - BA - TE - MAL -.E - NE
ana zumri - ta a -a it hu - ni
IGI - MU - KU NAM - BA - HUL - E - NE
EGIR - MU - KU NAM - BA - GIN - GIN, - NE
a- na ar - ki - ia a-a z£ - li - ku - nu


Seo KAN - GUB NAM - MU - UN - DA - US - EN


220. KI-GUB- BU- NE BA- RA- AN-DA!! - GUB- BU-NE-EN


a - Sav as - gig" - su la ta - az - za - zi 13


! 47,85200%.
2 47,852 translates: ša '' Za ana-ku.
3 47,852 translates: sa ““ Dam-ki-an-na ana-ku.


|


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET III. 23


Be thou removed from before me!
By Heaven be thou exorcised! By Earth be
thou exorcised !


PRAYER AGAINST THE EvIL SPIRITS.


Incantation :—


The man of Ea am I,


(PLATE VI.)


205.


DIO,


215.


220.


The man of Damkina am I,

The messenger of Marduk am I,

My spell is the spell of Ea,

My incantation is the incantation of Marduk,

The Ban of Ea is in my hand,

The tamarisk, the powerful weapon of Anu,

In my hand I hold ;

The date spathe, mighty in decision,

In my hand I hold.

Unto my body may they not draw nigh,

Defore me may they wreak no evil,

Nor follow behind me.

On the threshold where I stand, let them not set
themselves ;

Where I stand, there stand thou not!


* 47,852 translates: mar sip-ri Sa ** Marduk ana-ku.


5 47,852, te-e ša ““ Ea. S 1743852. lu

"47,962, lu; 385594, Zi. 5 47,852, [u]-sur-lu ™ Ea.

° 47,852, [gi |-Sim-ma-ri Sa par-si rab-bu-tu ina ka-ti-ta na-Sa-ku.
47,852 translates . . . a-a ir-du-ni.

l 47,852 omits. 22,8525 27.


9 47,852, las-za-az-zi for ta-az-za-zi.


24


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


225.


230.


Se.


240.


Kh- TUS - A - MU BA-RA-AN- DA- TUS - U - NE HN
a - sar as Sa -mbu la tu - us - Sab
KI - AL - GIN - A BA - RA - AL - GIN - A
i-a» al - la- ku la tal - lak
' KI- TU- TU-DA-MU-KU — /BA- RA- Ak TU- TU- NE
a - sar lr - vu - bu la tir! - vu - ub


27] ANNA  KAN-PA Z KI-A KEIN


A


INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL - A - KAN


a


[EN] GAR-GAR-RA  GAR-GAR-RA  GAR-BI-KI GAR-
GAR-RA-E-NE
nu-nt-1h mimma sum-su mu-pa-as-sii* mimma sum-su
Sa ina Sip-ti-su mimma Sum-su  f-pa-as-Sa-hu?
EN-GAL DINGIR-EN-KI-GE GAR-GAR-RA GAR-GAR-RA
GAR-BI-KI GAR-GAR-RA-E-NE
belu rabu(u) sa A a (ditto) 6
MULU-TUR-RA-KU TE-MAL-E-NE-MU-NE GAR ? - KI
GAR-GAR-RA-E-NE
ana mar-sa ina te-hi-e-a mimma Sum-Su i-pa-as-sa-lu 8
MULU-TU-TU NUN-KI-GA-GE MU-UN?-UD-DA ME-EN
a-ši pu sa ana  ""Eridu i-ba-nu-u ana-ku
NUN-KI- A-ĦA-BEKU MU-UN-NA-RI KAN-ME-EN
ša ina “Eridi u  Su-ba-ri ri-hu-u a-na-ku
GA-E  MULU-TUR-RA-KU MU-UN-NA-AN-TE-MAL


ana -ku ana mar-sa ima teW-hi-e-a


(PLATE VII.)


DINGIR-EN-KI LUGAL ZU-AB-GE GA-E NU-UN-GA-HE-A


“E-a sar ap-si-i ta-a-st" N-is-sur-an-ni


/


UUD a LIMNUTI, TABLET III. 25


2 30.


240.


Where I sit, there sit thou not!


=, Where I walk, there walk thou not!


Where I enter, there enter thou not!
By Heaven be thou exorcised! By Earth be
thou exorcised !


PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.


[Incantation :— |

He that stilleth all to rest, that pacifieth ell,
That pacifieth all by his incantation,

He is the Great Lord Ea,

Stilling all to rest, and pacifying all,
Pacifying everything, whatever it be,


. When I draw nigh unto the sick man,


He will pacify everything, whatever it be.
I am the magician born of Eridu,
Begotten in Eridu and Shubari.

When I draw nigh unto the sick man,


(BEATE Y LI.)


May Ea, King of the Deep, safeguard me :


Eso. le.

2 47,852 translates [s Samele lu-u-ta-mat nis irsitim(tim)
lu-u-ta-mat. 3 47,852, GE.

4 47,852, mu-sap-si-th. 5 47,852, ha.

ML do do. do. do. 7 47,852 inserts Bk

° 87,952, sak. ? 47,852 inserts TU.


P ees, li. PAG SBS ah.


20 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYEONIA.


245. GI - ŠIS GI . . . . . . . NON S P SK B
gi) . o a... 2 ONE DD
IGI - MU - [KU] HE - EN - LAH - LAH - GI - ES
ana pa - [nè - 2 la lu-u-ka-a-a-an
[Hiatus of about four lines.)
DINGIR - NIN -A- HAS DU :
utm a - hat “A - [mad m
255. DINGIR-ID NIN A-GUB-BA LAH-LAH-GA
“Id be -dlit  agubbe-e el - [z] . .
DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR DU NUN-KI-GA-GE GIG-BI .. .


“Marduk mar ““Ervidi mur-sa su-a-tum...
INIM - INIM - MA [UTUG - HUL - A - KAN]


260. EN DINGIR-EN-KI LUGAL ZU-AB-GE DI-PA-[DA] .
“E-a sar ap-si-i a-ta- [a]
GA - E | MULU = TU n URU - an
ana - ku a- si- pu arad - ka
ID-ZI-DA-MU-KU GIN-NA-AB ID-GUB-BU-MU-KU DAH-AB
265. ina tm-ni-ia aliko ina su-me-li-ta  ta-ru-us
TU - MU TU - AZAG - GA - ZU GAR - RA - AB
ta-a-ka el-lu ana te-e-a su - kun
KA - MU KA - AZAG - A = ZU GAR - RA - AB


pi -i -ka eli a- na? pi- ia šu - kun


270. KA - AZAG - “GAr MU *SIG - GA - AB
a - ma - tum? ellitim(tim) í dum? - mi - tk

KA- TA  DUGÓ-GA-MU HE- EN - SILIM - MA - AB

ki - bit pi - ta sul - lim

ME - MU EL- E- NE DUG - GA - AB


275. par - şi- ta ul - lu - du? ķi - bt


245.


255.


260.


265.


270.


225.


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET III. 27


RISE. | . of Eridu
Stand continually before me.
[Hiatus of about two lines.)
(May) Nin-akha-kuddu, sister of Anu, . . ,
Id, Lady of pure waters,


Marduk, son of Eridu, [remove] this sickness.


PRAYER AGAINST THE Evi. SPIRITS.


Incantation :—

O Ea King of the Deep, to see .

I, the magician, am thy slave.

March thou on my right hand,

Be present* on my left ;

Add thy pure spell unto mine,

Add thy pure voice unto mine,

Vouchsafe (to me) pure words,

Make fortunate the utterances of my mouth,


Ordain that my decisions be happy,


38,594 has here fir, 47,852 . . . Ou sa.
Rm. 541, ana for a-za. SS and Rn. 541, fz.


Rm. 541, du-um. $ Rm. 541 inserts AZAG.


1
2
t K. 224, el-li-ta; Rm. 541, el-li-tu..
5
7


peo, la.


a Jarus; ardsu = Syriac era’, “met” (Brockelmann, Lexzcon
Syriacum, p. 28, a). :


28 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


KI - GIR GIN - NA - MU - GA AN - SI - IL
e - ma al - la- ku lu - us - lim
MULU SU-TAG-GA-MU HE-EN - SILIM - MA - AB
amelu! a - lap - pa - tu? lis - lim

(PLATE VIII.)
280. IGI- MU- TA KA-GAR-*SIG-GA HE-EN-DUG-GA
ana pa-ni*-ta e-gir-tum* damiktim(tim)? lik-ka-bi
BAR -MU -TA SU-*SIG-GA . HE- EN - DU - DU


ana ar-kiS-1a u-ba-nu damiktim(tim) lit-ta-ri-1s


NUTUG - *SIG - GA - MU KAN - ME - EN
lu - u? še - e - duš dum - ki - ta at - ta?
ALAD -*SIG -GA - MU [KAN - ME] - EN


lu - ut la - mas - st dum - ki - ta at - tu

DINGIR  SILIM-MA-MU ` DINGIR-[SILIG-MULU-SAR]
lini”? mu - sal - li - mu itu Marduk

290. KI-GIR GIN-NA-MU SILIM-MA HE-[EN-SILIM-MA]-AB
e-ma tal-lak+ti-ia sa-la-mu ls = (lim)
DINGIR-MULU-BA-GE NAM-MATI-ZU HE-EN-IB-BA

¿lu a - me Alt nar - bi - ka lik -w
MULU-GIŠGAL-LU-BI — KA-TAR-ZU — HÉ-EN-SLIL-LA

205. [amelu} su - u da-l-l-ka dlid - lul
U GA-E MULU-TU-TU URU-ZU KA-TAR-ZU GA-SI-IL-LA

— u a-na-ku a-Si-pu arad-ka da-li-li-ka lud-lul TU EN


U [TNIM - JINIM - MA UTUG - HUL - [A - KAN]


[EN A-AN-NA] A-RI-A-MES DU KI IN-TU-UD-DA-MES


4
P A


A


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET III. 29


Let me be blessed where'er I tread,
Let the man whom I (now) touch be blessed.
(PLATE VIII.)
280. Before me may lucky thoughts be spoken,
After me may a lucky finger be pointed.
285. Oh that thou wert my guardian Genius,
And my guardian Spirit!
O god? that blesseth, Marduk,
290. Let me be blessed, where'er my path may be!
Thy power shall god and man proclaim ;
295. This man shall do thy service,
And I too, the magician, thy slave.


Perform the Incantation.
PRAYER AGAINST THE Evi. SPIRITS.
| Incantation :—They are that which] was spawned
in the Creation of Anu,


Children of the Earth they were born.


! K. 224, a-me-lu; D.T. 241, a-mi-lu.


2 K.224 and Rm. 541, Zum. 3 D.T. 271, pani for pa-ni.

m 224 Rm. 541, and D.T. 271, r7.

5 K.224, da-me-ak-li. 5 D.T. 271, arki for ar-ki.

1 Rm. 541 omits. 8 K. 224 and Rm. 541, zd for e-du.
ak. 224, du. Y K. 224, amelu.


1 38,594 omits this line.
* The plural here must be a scribe's mistake.


Che Gourtb Tablet.


Cor: I (PLATE IX).
: EN A-AN-NA A-RI-A-MES DU! [KI IN-TU-UD-DA-MES]


sa ri-hu-ut ™ A-nim ri-hu-[u mardni” irsitim aldu]


UMMEDA
sa la - ri - ti
5. UM - ME - GA - LA SIS - A I
ša mu-Se-nik-tt li-(mut-ti).
ARALI
ina a-ra-al-li-e
URUGAL - LA - AS
IO. na kab - rim


KA - GAL , "DINGIR - BABBAR - $U - [a].
ina a-bu-ul [eb  Samsi)
TAK - DU - DU
— ab-na [szhirta] .
(6? TAR - GAL |
ab - [na rabta]


[Hiatus of several lines. ]


20.. . . . DINGIR-GIR BA-AN-DA(?)-TIG-IM-MI-[IN-GAR ?]
u Nergal u - kan - ma - [su]
DUG-KURUN-NA GAZ-ZA-GIM HAR-SAG-GA . . ..
sar(?)- ka (?)-su(?)-nu kima kar-fa' £a -ra -ni

ht - pt -ti
MA - DA - MA - DA - BI MU - UN - LAH - LAH - GI - [ES]


25. ma -a -ta ana ma-a-tt it-ta-na-al-la-[ku]


Che Sourt$ Tablet.


Cor. I (PLATE EX).
Incantation :—


They are that which was spawned in the Creation
of Anu,


[Children of the Earth they were born].


They are that which a woman in travail [....


hath brought forth |,*
5. They are that which an evil foster-mother [hath


suckled |,
In the Underworld [ are they |,
10. In the tomb [ are they |,


In the Great Gate of Sunset [are they],
A small stone


15. A large stone
[Hiatus of several lines.)


ão. . Nergal they have subdued,
Their . . . like a shattered wine goblet . . . ,


25. From land to land they roam,


* K.2,410 has I (instead of DU, which is apparently the better
reading from the catchline of the preceding tablet).


2 I.e., probably abortions.


20.


35.


40.


COL.


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


KI-EL DAGAL- A - NI - TA} BA - RA - GIBIS - NE
ar - da -tu ina mas-ta-ki-sa* u-se-el-lu-u
GURUS E-UR*- A- NI- TA BA- RA- E- NE
id -la ina bit e-mu-ti-Sa? u-se-su-u
DU E- AD - DA*- A- NI- TA BA - RA - E- NE
ma-a-va ina bit a-bi5-šu u-se- 6 su - u
TU-HU AB-LA-BI-TA BA - RA- AN - DIB - DIB- BI- NE
su-um-ma-t ina a-pa-li-si'-na t-bar-rum
*NAMSAB ID-BUL-BI-TA BA- RA-GIBIS- NE
is-su-vu tna ab-ri-šu  u-$e-el-lu-u
NAM-HU U-KI-*SIG-GA-BI-TA BA-AN-RA-AN-RI-RI-E-NE
si -nun-tu ina kin - ni - Sa u- sap- ra- šu
GUD : IN-GE-GE-E-NE LU IN-GE-GE-E-NE
al- pi i- sab- bi- tu im-me-ra i- $ab -bi - tu
U-GAL-GAL-LA-A-MEŠ UTUG-HUL NIGIN-NA-MES
umu (mu) radūti *” u-tuk-ku lim-nu-tum sa-i-du $ su-nu


SAG - GIŠ KALAM -MA MU - UN “RAS RA


Sa ma- a- fu Z- nar- rum Šu - nu
II.
GAR - ERIM - MA SAG - DU

ina li - pit - tu z - Sit- li


KUR - RA DUG - SAR - GIM
DINGIR-NIN-DU-U-NA DUP-SAR-MAH
C w

ba - lum “Be-lit— si-ri— dup-sar-[
GIR KUR-RA-GE NU - MU - UN

Se - e - pu ana ¿rsitimltimi) ul
E- SU KUR-RA-GE NU- MU - UN - DA

su - li ir - si- tt ul


[Hiatus of several lines. ]


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET IV. 38


— — — —


Driving the maiden from her chamber,
Sending the man forth from his home,

30. Expelling the son from the house of his father,
Hunting the pigeons from their cotes,

35. Driving the bird from its nest,
Making the swallow fly forth from its hole,
Smiting both oxen and sheep.


40. They are the evil spirits that chase the great


storms,
Bringing a blight on the land.


GOL. II.
In the enclosure


The land like a bowl
5. Without Beltis, mighty scribe
Foot to earth [they ?] cannot


The paths of earth [they ?] cannot


[ Hiatus of several lines. |


20,550 TI.

36,589, šu.

36,589, TUM.

36,589 omits.

36,589, abi for a-bi.

36,589 inserts zs.

36,589, su[ -nu 7).

K. 2,578 inserts Z after du.


ony Ma ù We G BY ra


G2


34 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF pApyro NA


y> >


SILA SIG-GA . . . GE MU-UN-LAH-[LAH-GI-ES]
ina su-ki sa-[ku-um]-mi ina mu-st it-ta-na-[al-la-ku]
TURIN . . . . . . E-NE AMAS IN
15. tar-ba-sa i . . . . Su-pu-ra i


KALAM-MA  GIS-GAL[GIS-SAGIL]-GIM MU-UN-NA-
RA-AB

ma-a-tu [kima (2) dalti u) me-di-li zt-
ERI - A ME - GIM MU - UN - GA - GA - E - [NE]
ina ali ki-ma ku-li it-ta -na -as - ki - [uu]
20. GIS-GAL-A SIR-GIM MU-UN-SUR-SUR-E-[NE]
ina dal-ti ki-ma si-ri it-ta-na-as- la-[lu]
GIS-ZA-RA IMI-GIM MU-UN-ZA-LA-AH-HI-E-[NE]
ana sir! ki-ma sa-a-m  1-[2k- ku]


DAM UR MULU KA-BA-RA-AN-[NAM(?)- NE]


25 as-Sa-ta ma ut-li ameli i- lar - [vu - u]
DU  DU-UB MULU KA-BA-RA-AN-ZI-[ZI-E-NE]


ma-a-ra zna 6.r-ki ameh u-sat-[bu-u]


[The whole of Col. III is wanting.]


Cor IV.
ZI DINGIR-PA-TE-SI-GAL-ZU-AB NU-[DU-DA] A-AB . .
"is MS la - bu-ut-te-e
MULU - GISGAL - LU DU DINGIR - [RA - Na]
(PLATE X.)
5. sa amelt "nar [ele = su]


= De


KI GUB-BA-NA BA-RA-AN-DA- [GUB - BU - NE - EN]


CA n ec


a - sar is? gi - zu la — ta-[az- zi - iz]


UTUKKI LIMNŪTI, TABLET IV. 35


Through the gloomy street by night they roam,
15. [Smiting] sheepfold and cattle-pen.
The land [as with door and 7) bolt they [shut up],
In the city like a snare* they are set,
20. Through the door like a snake they glide,”
Through the hinge? like the wind they blow,


25. Estranging the wife from the embrace of a
husband,
Snatching the child from the loins* of a man.


[The whole of Col. III is wanting. ]
(gon. IV.
By the god Patesi-Gal-Zuab,* Chief of the Sea,


{mayest thou be exorcised |.


(CUATE X.)
5. (And) concerning the man, son of his god,


EK. 2,578 adds zi.
B £74,857, 22.


> Kulu (Tallqvist, Jfaglu, p. 148). As there are two different
groups in Sumerian which are both rendered by ku/u in these texts
(ME as here, and GAR-ME-GAR, v. i, 42), it is possible that there is
another meaning for it besides '' burning," which does not seem to
fit here. Cf. the Chaldaic kola, “a snare” (Levy, Chaldatsches
Wörterbuch, vol. ii, p. 350). Cf. also Haupt, Akkad. u. Sumer. Keils.,
p. 121, K. 5,332, kulu sukun-ma manma ilu la iba’ (“ Set a trap that
no god can escape ”).

b /ftanaslalu: VSaldlu, “to steal,” and so in a passive con-
jugation, “to go stealthily.” Cf. Heb. yithgannébh, 2 Sam. xix, 4,
“go by stealth," and Syr. g'nab naphsheh. See also Tablet V, i, 33.

e gir (v. sirri, Tablet V, i, 35). Cf. Syr. sar tha, “a hinge."

d birki, literally “knees.”

e “Great Ruler of the Deep.”


36


10.


e


ZO.


25.


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


DUR
KI TUS-A- NA BA-RA-AN-DA- TUS- [U-NE-EN |


ki Chu - yen Dre AT esi TIEG


a - sar us - Sa - bu la di: [us - sab]
Wen AL - GIN - A BA - RA - AL - GIN - [A]
[a - sar] 311 - la - ku ( To tal - la£


K1 [TU- TU-DA- MU]-KU BA-RA-AN-DA-TU-TU-NE


4€ Z 40


[a = e zr - vu - y^ la tir - ru - ub

BA - RA - AN - DA - US - EN

Le ai] . 9: . su la te - vid - di - $u

KI - [A Tal DA-GE  BA-RA-AN-DA- AN-BUR-RI?

` ina AAA na-a-vi la tap-pa-as-Sir-Su

KIR A-[AB]- BA - GE BA - RA - AN - DA BAD

ma ki-rib tam -tu la te-tb-bir-su

ZI es GAL- , GAL - LA - E- NE - GE KAN - RIERA
` HA-BA-RA- DU- UN p

mif — dám"  'rabúti” u - tam - mi - ka


lu - ta - at = tal mE


INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL - A tro
EN EN -IE ANA - GAL “ITA KI - DAGA test
GIS -IKU - Pb = GA- A ANI NAM
be-lum — i$-tu samelè) | vabüti" — irsitim(tzm)
rapastim(tzm) u - ou - un - [šu zs - kun]


EN-GAL DINGIR-EN-KI-GE ANA-GAL-TA KI-DAGAL-KU...
[be - Zum] rabu(u) Tee [2rs2tim[tóm)
vapastini(tini))


( Hiatus of several lines.)


Lë


20.


IO.


25.


 UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET IV. SC


Where he standeth,* there stand thou not!
Where he is seated," there sit thou not!

[ Where] he goeth,* there go thou not!
[Where] he entereth,* there enter thou not!
[Unto his . . . | pursue him not!

On the bank of a river loose” him not!

In the middle of the sea over him pass not!
By the Great Gods I exorcise thee,


That thou mayest depart !


PRAYER AGAINST THE EviL SPIRITS.


Incantation :—

The lord from the broad heavens unto the wide
earth [inclined his] ear,

The great lord Ea from the broad heavens unto


the wide earth


[Hiatus of several lines.]


NE. 49857, al.
"PS 49857, na.


2 K. 4,857 uses the first person.


WIT e. his boat.


38


40.


45.


50.


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


arsitam(lz1)
NU - GIG `
, ana ka-dis-[£7] .
SU - BAD A WA Aa
ka -ti mu-u-tum li(?)-pi- tum
l DINGIR-NIN-UK DINGIR-NIN-ME DINGIR
DINGIR-NIN-KI-GAL: ™,, al-ti [”, :] DAM DINGIR-
[NIN-A-ZU]
A NU-MU?-SU-NAG — KA-NU-MU-UN[  ]-1B-[PIS?]
naw ir-mu-ku ul u-sal-li- [šu 2]
DAK -KI-GALY-E-NE “DE ZE AN
ina su-ba-li ra-ba-(ti|* sub-tum el-li-(tum| . .
GIDIM KUR - TA? GIBIS $ - IB - IB ME - [EN]
lu-u e-kim-mu sa ts-tu-u irsitim(tim) il-la-a-Lku at-ta]
MULU-LIL-BA MKINA NU-TUK-A KAN-ME-EN
lu-u li-lu-u sa  ma-a-a-al-tum la i-Su-u at-ta
KI EL NU -UN -ZU - A - AN KAN - ME - EN
lu-u ar-da(?)-tum la la-mit-tum at-ta
GURUS ID- NU- E' KAN- ME- EN
[u -u ad]-lu la mus - te- en -nu-u at-ta
MULU - EDIN - NA ŠUB - BA KAN - ME - EN
[la-u Sa ima] sti-e-ri na-du-u at-ta
MULU-EDIN-NA BA .. NE IŠ NU-DUL-LA KAN-ME-EN
[lu-u sa ina si-e-ri] na-du-u e-pi-ri la kat-mu at-ta
MULU-EDIN-NA . . . . . . iii. . KANSAS
lu-u sa (ina si-e-ri) ;


MULU


(Some lines wanting. |


ME ii. AAA m — —


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET IV. 39


earth

Unto the harlot
35. The hand of death (?)

Ninuk, Ninme, (and)

Ninkigal, the wife of [Ninazu].

They pour forth no water, they utter no spells,*
40. In a lofty, shining abode

Whether thou art a ghost that hath come from

the earth,


Or a phantom of night that hath no couch,
45. Or a woman (that hath died) a virgin,”

Or a man (that hath died) unmarried,°

Or one that lieth dead in the desert,


Or one that lieth dead in the desert, uncovered
with earth,


50. Or one that in the desert
Or one that


[Some lines wanting.]


1 45,744 translatesthisline™,, = u . . .


2 45,744 inserts UN. 3 45,744. inserts LA.
t 45,744 for this has $u-ba-a-tum rab-ba-a-tum.
° 45,744; RA. $ 45,744, MULU . . (?).


SS... LAL-E.

2 Usalli[ su ?]; šalāšu = “to do something three times,” probably
for reciting incantations. Cf. the Legend of the Worm (vol. ii), r. 26,
sipti III-šu ana eli tamannu(nu). The first half of the line refers to
libations as offerings.

b Lamiltum; lamádu = “to learn,” probably here with an ulterior
meaning, like the Hebrew yada‘, ** to know."

° Mustennii = “one that changes the condition of.” From the
parallel passage in the previous line it evidently has the meaning
of “ marrying,” and possibly affords a clue to the interpretation of
the Hebrew šdxd in Esther ii, 9.


40 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.
Core
[MULU  GIS]-GISIMMAR-TA  BA-AN-ZI-IR-ZI-IR-RI-DA
KAN-ME-EN
[/u-u] sa is-tu gi-Sim-ma-ri th-hi-il-sa-a at-tu
[MULU GIS] - MA - BI A *SIG- GA KAN - ME- EN
[lu-u] sa ina e-lip-pi ina me-e tt-bu-u a
5. GIDIM MULU KI- NU- TUM-MA KAN - ME - EN
lu-u e-kim-mu la — kib-rum 4
GIDIM MULU SAG-LI-TAR NU-TUK-A KAN-ME-EN
lu-u e-kim-mu sa pa-ki-da la i-su-u 3
GIDIM MULU KI-*SIG-GA NU-TUK-A  KAN-ME-EN
TO: lu-u e-kim-mu sa ka-sap ki-is-pi la i-Su-a ,
GIDIM MULU A-DE-A NU-TUK-A KAN-ME-EN
[lu-u] e-kim-mu sa na-ak mee la ¿Suu ,
[GIDIM] MULU  MU-PA-DA NU-TUK-A KAN-ME-EN
[la-u] e-kim-mu sa za-kar su-me la ¿Suu ,,
15. [DINGIR] - RAB - KAN - ME KAN - ME - EN
[la] - u la - bar = tum "
[DINGIR - RAB - KAN - ME] - A KAN - ME - EN
[lu - u la - Ga] - su ki
[DINGIR - RAB - KAN - ME - KIL] KAN - ME - EN
20. [Zu - u ah - ha - zu] =
(NU - GIG ŠA - TUR - RAJ KAN - ME - EN
[lu-u ka-dis-tu sa lib-ba-sa... u 1
(UMMEDA KAN - ME - EN]
[lu - u ta - vi - tu ” ]
[UM - ME - GA - LA KAN - ME - EN]
lit - u mu - še - (nik - tu 5 ]
25. IR - RA UM - [ME - GA - LA KAN - ME - EN]


lu-u ba- ki-tu mu - [še - nik - tu 5 ]


7


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET IV. 41


CoL. V.


IO.


15.


20),


25.


Or one that hath been torn from a date-palm,

Or one that cometh through the waters in a boat,
Or a ghost unburied,

Or a ghost that none careth for,

Or a ghost with none to make offerings,

Or a ghost with none to pour libations,

Or a ghost that hath no posterity,*

Or a hag-demon,

Or a ghoul,

Or a robber-sprite,

[Or a harlot (that hath died) whose body is sick],
[Or a woman (that hath died) in travail],


Or a woman (that hath died) with a babe at the


breast,


Or a weeping’ woman (that hath died) with a


babe at the breast,'


a Zakar sume, i.e., one that carries on the family name.


> From this it must be inferred that the ghost is that of a nursing
woman whose babe is dead.


42» DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.
MULU-HUL-K : lu-u lim-[nu , : KAN-ME-EN]
UTUG - HUL us [KAN - ME - EN]

lu - u u - [Luk - ku lim - nu S ]
30. UB - DA - GUB - [GUB - BU KAN - ME - EN]
lu - u mut - [ta - al - lik tub - ki " ]
DA - GUB - [GUB - BU KAN - ME - EN]
lu-u mut-ta-[al-hk sa-ha-ti " ]
U -SU -US GA BRODA NEIN KAN - ME- EN]
35. lu-u sa umama) it-ti-su (lu- kul , |
U-SU-US | GA-BA-DA-AN-[NAK  KAN-ME-EN)
(PLATE XI.) d
lu-u sa umama) at-ti-su [lu-us-t , l
U-SU-US GA-BA-DA-AN-SES [KAN-ME-EN]
lu-u Sa umama) it-ti-su lu-[up]pa-sis (l, |
40. U - SU - US GA - BA - DA- AN - KU KAN - ME- EN
lu-u sa  uma(ma) it-ti-su lul-ta-bis ,,
GA-AN-TU GA-BA-DA-AN-KU KAN- ME - EN
lu-u ša  du-ru-um-ma il-fl-Su lu-kual ,
GA-AN-TU  GA-BA-DA-AN-NAK KAN-ME-EN
45. GA-AN- TU GA- BA-DA- AN- SES KAN- ME-EN
GA-AN-TU  GA-BA-DA-AN-KU  [KAN-ME-EN]
[SA-GAR]-TUK-A-MU-NE GAR GA-BA-DA-AN-KU
| TKAN-ME-EN]
[u-u] Sa ina bu-ri-ta a-ka-la! it-til-su lu-kul ,,
[IMMA - TA- TUK]-A-MU-NE A GA-BA-DA-AN-NAK
KAN-ME-EN
so. 3[IH-TAG]-GA-A-MU-NE NI GA-BA-DA-AN-SES


KAN-ME-EN


20:


35:


UTUKKI LIMNŪTI, TABLET IV. 43


Or an evil man (that hath died),
Or an [evil] spirit, `


Or one that haunteth [the neighbourhood |,


Or one that haunteth [the vicinity |.
Or whether thou be one with whom on a day


[I have eaten],


(PLATE XI.)


40.


45.


50.


Or with whom on a day [I have drunk],

Or with whom on a day I have anointed myself,

Or with whom on a day I have clothed myself,

Or whether thou be one with whom I have
entered and eaten,

Or with whom I have entered and drunk,

Or with whom I have entered and anointed
myself,

Or with whom I have entered and clothed myself,

Or whether thou be one with whom I have eaten
food when I was hungry,

Or with whom I have drunk water when I was
thirsty,


Or with whom I have anointed myself with oil


when I was sore,


! K. 5,020, 44. 2 K. 5,020, 1271 for V-A.


3 K. 5,020 translates . . .-1a Sam-na tt-tt-Su lu-up-pa-Sis


1)


44 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


[A-SED-DE-TUK]-A-MU !-NE UR-RA-NA-KU GA-BA-DA-
AN-KU KAN-ME-EN
[lu-u ina ku-usl-st-ta ina ut-li-su su-ba-tu itti-Su
lul-ta-bi$ at-tu
[SU] MULU - GISGAL - LU DU DINGIR - RA - NA
55. [ ] gu - mur ameli mar ili-su
. [EN- NA BA- RA-AN]- TA- RI-EN- NA- AS EN- NA
BA-RA-AN-TA
ZI - GA - EN - NA - AŠ
[a-di la  tal-as-suu adi la — ta-as-su-hu
[U BA-RA-AN-DA]-AB-KU-E A BA-RA-AN-DA-AB-NAK-E
60. [a - ka-la e] ta-kul me-e e tal-ti
[GIS-BANSUR A]-A MUH-ZU DINGIR-EN-LIL-LA-GE
SU-ZU  BA-RA-NE-IN-TUM
[passuri] a-bi “Bel [a-li]-di-ka ka-at-ka e tu-bil
[A A-AB-BA A-DUG]-GA A-SIS [A ID]-MAS-TIG-GAR
[me-e tam]-ti u ee ta-bu-[ti me-e lim-nu-ti
me-e ""“|-di-zk-lat
65. [A ID- UD- KIB]- NUN- KI- NA A PU-[TA A ID-DA
BA-RA-AN ]-SU-SU-NE
[me-e Puj-rat-li ,, bu-ri [ „ ra-a-ri e takkatim]
[ANA- KU] BA-RI-EN JPA = [NA - AN - TUK = TUK - E]
(zna Samele)]  map-ris-ma kap-[pi e te-irsi]
Cor. WE
KI - KU BA - GUB - BA TUS NAM -*BI - GA -CF
ina irsitim(tim) mik-la-ma sub-ta e [ta-as-kun]
MULU - GISGAL - LU DU DINGIR-RA-NA BA-RA-
AN-TE-MAL-[ DA]
BA-RA-AN-GE-GE-E-[NE]
5. SAG-ZU SAG-GA-NA NAM-BA-DA-AB-MUK
kak-kad-ka | ana kak-ka-di-su la ta-sak-kan


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET IV. 45


Or with whom when I was cold I have clothed
his nakedness with a garment,

(Whatever thou be) until thou art removed,

55. Until thou departest from the body of the man,

the son of his god,

60. Thou shalt have no food to eat,
Thou shalt have no water to drink,
Thou shalt not stretch forth thy hand
Unto the [table] of my father Bel, thy creator,
Neither with sea [water], nor with sweet water,
Nor with bad water, nor with Tigris water,

65. Nor with Euphrates [water], nor with pond water,
[Nor with river water] shalt thou be covered.
If thou wouldst fly up to heaven
Thou shalt have no wings,

SoL. VT.

If thou wouldst lurk in ambush on earth
Thou shalt secure no resting-place.
Unto the man, the son of his god, come not nigh,
Get thee hence! «FÉ


5. Place not thy head upon his head,


' K. 5,020, . . . TAG-GA for the beginning of this line.


46


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.
[Su]-zu ŠU- NA NAM-BA-DA-AN-GA-GA
[fa - ti] -ka ana ka-ti-sa la ta-sak - kan


GIR - ZU GIR - NA NAM - BA - DA - AN - GA - GA


10. se -ip -ka ana se-pi-su la ta- sak - kan
SU - ZU SU - NA AB - TAG

| ina ka - ti - ka la ta - lap - pat - su
yat uw [ j- sw
ki- sad- ka [ la — tal- sa- har- su

I5. IGL- ZU [ ] SU - DA- AB- L- ER
in - ka [ la taS- $a- a ]

EGIR - ZU [ ] SI - NA- AN -SI- IN - BAR- RI
aua arki - ka la tap - fal - la - as

MUH - NA GU - BA- RA- AN - DA - AB - [DE - E]

20. e- li- sn la là- sa- as- si
E- As KU NAM- BA- TU- TU- NE

a - na bi - ti [da te - ru - ut)

"UR - A = KU NAM - MU - [UN] - DA- PAL- E

a- na u- rt [ča tab - bal- kit]

25. E - KI- TUS - A - NA NAM - BA! - TU - TU - NE
a~ na bit [sub - ti) la te - ru - ub - su
SA-ERI-A- TA NAM-MU-UN-DA?- NIGIN - E- NE
ina lib bi ah? la tal - ta - nam - mi - su?

BAR- TA-BI-KU NAM-MU-UN-DA?- NIGIN- E- NE

30. ina a-ha-a-t® la ta-ga-na- ah - har? - su


I DINGIR-EN-KI-GE MULU-GISGAL-LU DU DINGIR-RA-NA

ma a-mat *E-a amd mar? ili < su
HE-EN-AZAG-GA  HE-EN-EL-LA ME-EN-LAH-LAĦ-GA Y
DUG-BUR-S$AGAN-GIM | U- ME- NI- HU^- LUH - LUH


ki -ma Au. pn stk- ka-ti lim-te-ts-si™


10.


15.


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET IV. 47


Place not thy [hand] upon his hand,

Place not thy foot upon his foot,

With thy hand touch him not,

Turn [not] thy back upon him,

Lift not thine eye [against him), ..;.
Look not behind thee,

Gibber not against him,

Into the house enter thou not,

Through the fence break thou not,

Into the chamber enter thou not,

In the midst of the city encircle him not,
Near him make no circuit ;

By the Word of Ea

May the man, the son of his god,

Become pure, become clean, become bright!
Like a vessel of lard* may he be cleansed,


! 45,744, MU-UN. * 45,744, BA for MU-UN-DA.
S 45,744, dd, t 45,744, MIS for mi-su,

? 45,744 omits, * 45,744, um.

! 45.744, fas-fan-na-har for ta-sa-na-ak-bar.

* 45,744, La for L-a.

° 45,744» a-me-lu ma-ri for ameli mar.

W 45,744 translates 77-7 77-97-70 di-nam-mi=ri,

U 45,744, for this line kima busur sik-kat lim-ie-si.


^ Sikta/u has a variant Sappatu in the twelfth tablet of the
Gilgamish Epic (Haupt, Bewrūge, i, 48; K. 3,475, i, l 45, and
K. 2,774, ii, l. 22) which is probably to be connected with the
Syriac shipiia, adeps, lardum (Payne Smith, Zhesaurus, 4,201).


48 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


DUG-BUR-NI-NUN-NA-GIM U-ME-NI-SU ! -UB-SU ! -UB

ki - ma bu - ri? hi - me - ti” lis- ta - kili

DINGIR-BABBAR SAG-KAL DINGIR-RI-E*-NE-GE ŠU-NA
U-ME-NI-SUM

ana “Samsi a- ša - rid didi pi- kid- su-ma

40. DINGIR-BABBAR SAG-KAL DINGIR-RI-E ?- NE-GE

SILIM-MA-NA SU-* SAG®-GA DINGIR-RA-NA-KU'

HE - EN - SI - IN - GE - GE

ana ““ Samsi a-Sa-rid ilòni" šal-mu-us-su ana ka-at


dam-ka-a-tu


sa dani” lp- pa- kid TE EN


INIM = INIM- “MA UBUG - HUL TA KAN


SEN A-ZA-AD  GAR-S$E  BA-NIGIN- NA- BA- E
43. .. . A-DUG- GA- NA UTUG - HUL A- RI- A
Depp Wee UTUG- HUL - MES?

Mit ™™ Assur- [bani - apli]


Sar kissati sar mata tu AI


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET IV. 49


Like a vessel of butter may he be clean!


Unto Shamash, Chief of the gods, commend him, ^ -


ibtd Shamash, Chief of the gods,
May his welfare be MES at the kindly hands
of the gods.


Exorcism, incantation.
PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.


Incantation :—
Cold and rain that minish all things . .
They are the evil Spirits in the Creation of Anu


spawned.
FOURTH TABLET OF THE SERIES “ THE EviL Spirits.”


45.7414, SU. ? K. 2,410, kima for ki-ma.

MS 5,123, m5

t 45,744, for this line kim-ma bu-ru hi-me-tum lis-tak-kil-nu.

5 45,744 transposes RI and E. P 455784, Y SIG.

7 45,744, RI-NE-GE for RA-NA-KU.

8 45,744 here has IM-DUP Sa arki-su, “Tablet which follows it,”
and then the line EN A-ZA-AD GAR-SE-GAR-SE?-GAR NIGIN-NA-
BA-E-NE.

° K. 2,410 states that it was copied from a Babylonian original..


Che Giftb Tablet.


Coun] (FLATE XIM


IO.


s


20.


EN A-ZA-AD GAR-SE BA NIGIN “NA SM


...[A-DUG-GA- NA] UTUG-HUL A-RI-A
Su-ru-ub-bu-u  har-ba-$u mu-na-as-šir nap-har


. Su u-tuk-ku lim-nu ša ri-hu-ut ““A-nim ri-hu-u


. NAM-TAR DU KI-*AG-GA DINGIR-EN - LIL- LA


U - TU- UD-DA  DINGIR - NIN -KI-GAL -LA - GE
nam - ta - ru ma - ru na - ram us
Z - lit - ża u Nin - ki - gal
AN - NA GUR - RU! - US NE - IN - SIR - RU - US
KI - TA KAR - RA NE - IN - SIG - GA
e-lis ig-su-su-ma sap-lis kar-ra id-du-u
E - NE- NE- NE DIM - MA ARALI MEŠ
Su -nu bi-nu-ut A-ra-al-li-e Su- nu
AN-TA GU-DE-DE-A-MEŠ KI-TA GU-BAL-BAL-A-MEŠ


e-lis t-Sag-gu-mu  Sap-lis i-sab-bu-ru su-nu


P UNT SI DINGIR - RI - E - NE MES
¿ - mat mar - ti ša lant?" SU - nu
U = GAL ANA - TÉ SU - BAR - RA MEŠ


timu(mu) -rab-bu-tum Sa ul-tu same)

US - SU - YU - Ni SU = nu
DINGIR-NIN-BUL-BUL-HU URU-A ? GA-GA-A-MES
es-se-pu sa ina ali t-sag-gu-mu su-mu
A-AN-NA A-RI-A-MES DU KI-IN-GUB TU-UD-DA-A-MES
ša ri-hu-ut “A-nm ri-hu-u marêm?” i-lit-ti


ivsitim(tin) su-nu


Che Fiftb Sabet.


OBVERSE.
Cor. I (PENTIL ).
Incantation :—
Cold and rain that minish all things, . . .
"They are the evil Spirits* in the creation of Anu
spawned.


5. Plague Gods," the beloved sons? of Bel,

The offspring of Ninkigal.

10. Rending in pieces on high,
Bringing destruction below,
They are the Children of the Underworld.

15. Loudly roaring on high,
Gibbering' below,
They are the bitter venom of the gods.
The great storms directed from heaven—those

are they,

20. The owl, that hoots over a city—that is they,

They are the children born of Earth,


! K. 4,943 omits.


@ Singular in the text.

> Cf. W.A.L., ii, 20, 48—49, sabarum sa issuri (“chirping of a
bird”), i.e. the Syriac s'bar, garrivit. Cf. also ina Serím lam issuru
sabari, “in the morning before a bird chirps” (D.T. 57, rev. 2).

e Essepu, the Hebrew yansuph according to Delitzsch, Prole-
gomena, p. 80.


52


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


. FUR-BAD-DA “UR-DAGAL-LA A-MI-GIM NI-UL-UL-NE


25.


30.


35.


40.


45.


u-vi e-lu-li uri vap-Su-ti ki-ma a-gi-e i-Sur-rum
E -TA E-A- KU IN - BAL - BAL - E - NE
as'-tu bi-ti ana bi-ti it-ta-nab-lak-ka-tu


E-NE-NE-NE GIS-GAL NU-UN-GA-A


GIŠ - ŠAGIL NU - UN - GA - A - MEŠ

ŠU - NU dal -tu ul i- kal- lu - šu - nu - tt

me - de - lu ul u - tar - [su] - nu - ti
GIS-GAL-A SIR-GIM MU-UN-SUR-SUR-[RI]-E-NE


ma dal-ti ki-ma si-ri it-ta-[na-as]-la=- lu
GIS-ZA-RA IMI-GIM MU-UN-ZA-LA-[AH-HI]-E-NE
[za] enn ki-ma sa-a-n i-zik-ku
DAM UR MULU -GE? BA-RA-AN - NAM - NE
as- sa -ta ina u-li ameli t-tar-ru-u
DU | DU-UB! MULU-GE*  BA-RA-AN-ZI-ZI-E-NE
` ma-m5 inas bir=ki ameli m SA
GURUS  E-UR-A-NI- TA! BA = RA - GIBIŠŠ- NE
id - la? ina bit e-mu-ti-Su u-se-15-su-u
E-NE-NE-NE U-DI GAR-ME-GAR!! EGIR- BI
MULU-RA  U$-SA?
su-nu ku -lu kull-vu sa ar-kilt ameli rak-su su-nu
DINGIR MULU-GISGAL-LU SIBA U-KI-KI-GA B
MULU-GISGAL-LU E
1625, ameli ri--um' mus-te--u ri-ta ana! ameli
DINGIR-DINGIR-RA-NA-KU !? SUK-KU MU-UN-DIB-BI WES


ša diu ana" ku-ru-um-ma-ti? —as-ba-tu-Su


UTUKKI LIMNŪTI, TABLET V. 53


"d


f


That in the creation of Anu were spawned.


25. The highest walls, the thickest walls,


Like a flood they pass.
From house to house they break through,


30. No door can shut them out,


No bolt can turn them back,
Through the door like a snake they glide,


35. Through the hinge like the wind they blow;


Estranging the wife from the embrace of a
husband, |
Snatching the child from the loins of a man, /..


40. Sending the man forth from his home.


They are the burning pain
That bindeth itself upon the back of a man.


Dei 45. The god of the man is a shepherd


yy» EI?


Who seeketh pasture for the man,
Whose godsunto food leadeth him. MUN DIBRI


1
3
5


1


19


18.565043, WI. - * 46,296, DAM MULU-KA ..
46,296, BIR for DU-UB. t 46,296, KA.

K. 10,175, a-ra; 46,296, ri. 6 46,296, 1-14.

46,296, hi-bi, ** broken,” for E-UR-A-NI-TA.

K. 3,121 and 46,296, UD-DU. ° 46,296, lu.

46,296, bz-1f. u 46,206, GAL.


2 46,296, U-DI for US-SA. 13 46,296 inserts u.


K. 3,121, arki, 46,296, ar-ka, for ar-ki.

46,296 omits.

46,296, ilu a-me-lu ri-e-|”?]-u mu-us-te-mu-u ri--tu ana a-me-lu.
IK. 3, ME u. 53598. 3,121, d-na

K. 3,121 omits va: it is doubtful whether K.2,507 had more


than one DINGIR: 46,296 has DINGIR-RI-E-NE-KU.


24


22


46,296, DIB. WIS. 3,121 and K. 10,175, ma.
46,296, /um.


54


50.


55.


60.


65.


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


DINGIR - LUGAL - KAN - ME!
DINGIR = LUGAL - KAN ME - A


DINGIR - LUGAL - KAN - ME - KIL


NU “CIC SA = TUR - RA
UMMEDA ?
IR UM[MEDA ?]


MULU - HUL - IK
UTUG - HUL
UB- DA- GUB- GUB- BU


DA - GUB- GUB- BU


KAN - ME -
KAN - ME -
KAN - ME -
KAN - ME -
KAN - ME -
KAN - ME =
KAN - ME -
KAN - ME -
KAN - ME -
KAN - ME -


U-SU-US [GA- BA- DA- AN- EU KAN] - ME-


v


U-SU-US [GA-BA-DA-AN-NAK KAN] - ME -


U-SU-US [GA-BA-DA-AN - SES
U-SU-US [GA - BA - DA - AN - KU
GA-AN-TU [GA-BA-DA-AN-KU
GA-AN-TU GA-[BA-DA-AN-NAK
GA - AN - TU GA - BA - [DA - AN - SES


GA-AN-TU  GA-BA-[DA- AN - KU


SA-GAR-TUK-A-MU-NE  GAR
KAN - ME- EN
IMMA-TA-TUK-A-MU-NE A

KAN-ME-EN


KAN] - ME -


KAN] - ME -


KAN] - ME -


KAN] - ME -
JKAN - ME -


JKAN - ME -


EN


EN


EN


EN


EN


EN


EN


EN


EN


EN


EN


EN


EN


EN


EN


EN


EN


EN


GA-BA-DA- AN - KU


GA-BA-DA-AN-NAK


! K. 5,121 translates: A E


? 46,296, GA-LA for ME-DA.


50.


535:


60.


65.


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET V. 53


Whether thou be a hag-demon,

Or a ghoul,

Or a robber-sprite,

Or a harlot (that hath died) whose body is sick,

Or a woman (that hath died) in travail,

Or a weeping woman (that hath died) with a
babe at the breast,

Or an evil man (that hath died),

Or an evil spirit,

Or one that haunteth the neighbourhood,

Or one that haunteth the vicinity,

Or whether thou be one with whom on a day
[I have eaten],

Or with whom on a day [I have drunk]

Or with whom on a day [I have anointed myself |

Or with whom on a day [I have clothed myself]

Or whether thou be one with whom I have
entered and eaten,

Or with whom I have entered and drunk,

Or with whom I have entered and anointed
myself,

Or with whom I have entered and clothed myself,

Or whether thou be one with whom I have eaten
food when I was hungry,

Or with whom I have drunk water when I was
thirsty,


56 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


Cor. IL
IH-TUK!- A-MU-NE NI GA-BA-DA-AN-SES KAN-ME-EN


A-SED-DE-TUK 2- A-MU-NE  UR-RA-NA-KU  GA-BA-DA-
AN-KU KAN-ME-EN
`AZAG SAG-BA DINGIR-A-NUN-NA-GE-E-NE SAG-KI? - BI
KAN-PA
a-Sak-ku = ma-mit “A-nun-na-ki  u-tam-me-ka
5. MULU-HUL * AZAG. SAG-BA DINGIR-A-NUN-NA-GE-E-NE
SAG-KI?- BI KAN-PA
lim-nu a-[sak]-ku ma-mit "Nr A-nun-na-kt"
u-tam-me-ka
[AZAG] MU-UN-NA-TE-GA MULU-TUR-RA-KU
Z MU - UN - NA - TERGAN
(PLATE XIII.)
a-Sak-ku sa te-il-ħu-u ana mar-si e ta-at-hi


AZAG ZI AN-NA KAN-PA ZI KI-A y KAN-PA


IO. a-Sak-ku nts same(e) lu-u-ta-ma-a-ta nis trsitim(tine) »
ZI DINGIR - EN - KI - E - NE KAN - PA
ZI DINGIR - NIN - KI - E - NE KAN - PA
ZI DINGIR - EN - UL - E - NE KAN - PA
ZI DINGIR - NIN - UL - E - NE KAN - PA
15. ZI DINGIR - EN - KUR - KUR-E-NE KAN - FA
ZI DINGIR - NIN - KUR-KUR-E-NE KAN - PA
ZI DINGIR - EN - DA - SURIM - MA KAN - PA
ZI DINGIR - NIN - DA - SURIM - MA KAN - PA
ZI DINGIR - EN - DUL - AZAG - GA KAN - PA
20. ZI DINGIR - NIN - DUL - AZAG - GA KAN =


ZI DINGIR - EN - UD - TIL - LA KAN - PA


7


d


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET V. , ba


G OL. 11.


5.


Or with whom I have anointed myself with oil
when I was sore,

Or with whom when I was cold I have clothed
his nakedness with a garment,

O fever, I exorcise thee by the ban of the Spirits
of Heaven.

O evil one, O fever, I exorcise thee by the ban
of the Spirits of Heaven.

O fever that hath come nigh,


(PLATE XIII.)


IO.


3


20.


Come not nigh unto the sick man,


O fever! By Heaven be thou exorcised! By
Earth be thou exorcised!


By Ea mayest thou be exorcised,

By Damkina mayest thou be exorcised,

By En-ul mayest thou be exorcised,

By Nin-ul mayest thou be exorcised,

By En-kur-kur mayest thou be exorcised,

By Nin-kur-kur mayest thou be exorcised,

By En-da-shurimma mayest thou be exorcised,
By Nin-da-shurimma mayest thou be exorcised,
By En-dul-azagga* mayest thou be exorcised,
By Nin-dul-azagga mayest thou be exorcised,
By En-ud-tilla mayest thou be exorcised,


! K. 3,121, TAG-GA. ? K. 3,121, SA-TAG-GA for DE-TUK.
"RSS Dou. "US 3,021, HUL-IK.
> K. 3,121 ,, for A-nun-na-ki. 5 K. 3,121, NA.


a Le, probably Nabu (cf. Briinnow, No. 9,609). Mindul azagga
should therefore be Tashmitum.


58


2m


30.


35.


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


ZI DINGIR = NIN - UD = TIL? = WA KAN - PA
ZI DINGIR - EN ME- SAR - RA KAN - PA
ZI DINGIR - NIN - ME - SAR - RA KAN - PA


ZI DINGIB E DINGIR-EN-LIL-LA-GE KAN-PA
nif bee a-bi um-mi? sa “ Bel lu-u-ta-ma-a-ta*
ZI DINGIR-NIN-AMA-A-A DINGIR-NIN-LIL-LA-GE KAN-PA
nis be-el-li? a-bi um-miċ sa ™ „1 [u-u-ta-ma-a-ta*
ZI DINGIR-SIS-KI GIS?- MA SAG-BA-DA-A-NI ID-DA
NU-BAL-E-MA ? KAN-PA
nis '' Sin sa e-lip? ta-me “-$u na-a-ru™ la 1b-bt-ru™
lu-u-ta-ma-a-ta 4
ZI DINGIR-BABBAR LUGAL DIKUD 12 DINGIR-RI-E-NE-GE
KAN-PA
nis Sambi beli da-a-a-ni“ ša ilâni”
ln-u-ta-ma-a-ta 5
ZI DINGIR-NINNI DUG-GA-A-NI!Č DINGIR-A-NUN-NA
l-A AN SAG-NU-UN-GA-GA— DA+KAN WT
nis * Is- tar ša a-na 8 ki-bi 9 - ti-ša 99 ™ A-nun-na-ki
2 js- a-nu la i-ir-ru lu-u-|[ta-ma-a-ta]
ZI DINGIR-ID AMA DINGIR-EN-KI-GA-GE KAN-PA
nis "^ | um-me? ™ E-a lu-u-[ta-ma-a-ta]”
ZI DINGIR-NINA DU-SAL DINGIR-EN-KI-GA-GE KAN-PA


nis  "". mari ™ E-a [lu-u-ta-ma-a-ta]?


40. ZI DINGIR-NIN-TAR-A AB-KU UTUL-LU-U-A KAN-PA


ilu


nis » y--i% u-tul-la-ti $


UTCKET LIMNUTI, TABLET V. 59


By Nin-ud-tilla mayest thou be exorcised,

By En-me-sharra mayest thou be exorcised,

By Nin-me-sharra mayest thou be exorcised,

By the lord, the father and mother of Bel, mayest
thou be exorcised,

By the lady, the father and mother of Beltis,
mayest thou be exorcised,


30. By Sin, whose Bark of Destiny crosses no river,
mayest thou be exorcised,
By Shamash, lord judge of the gods, mayest thou
be exorcised,
35. By Ishtar, at whose word each of the Anunnaki
standeth fast, mayest thou be exorcised,
By Id, the mother of Ea, mayest thou be
exorcised,
By Nina, daughter of Ea, mayest thou be
exorcised,
40. By Nin-tara, the shepherd of flocks, mayest thou
be exorcised,
1 46,296, BAD(TIL). 2 208206, 1/1.
3 46,296, mu. “ 46,296, lu-u-la-mat.
* 46,296, fum. 6 46,296, ma.
1 46,296, NIN-LIL. 8 46,296 omits.
° 46,296 inserts -f7. 10 46,296, m.


11


46,296, 71.


12 46,296, Aż-bi, “broken,” for DINGIR-BABBAR LUGAL DIKUD.
13 46,296, bélu for be-ili. M 46,296, nu.

18. 46,296, lu-u-ta-maf; K. 2,954, probably ,,

MK. 2,954, NA for Ā-NI.


17 46,296, E-NE-KAN-PA: . . ru for DA-KAN.

12 K. 2,954, ana for a-za. 296.295, 011.

20 46,296, Su. 22 46,296, 2 AA la’-ir ditto.
“ K. 2,954, mi. GEA 3


"ORO 46,296, 71-6 um.


60


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BĦEVBEONTA.


45.


50.


55.


60.


1


3


ZI DINGIR-GIS-BIL SAG . . . AD!(?) KUR-RA-GEJKAN
nis "" ,  sak-ka-nak-ka? irsitim(tim) Ni |
ZI DINGIR-NIN-GIS-ZI-DA GU-ZA-LA KUR-RA-GE KAN
nis "Nr, gu-za[lu-u sa irsitim(tim) 3 ]
ZI GIS - GAL KUR - RA IMINA - BI KAN
nis da-[lat  irsitimitim) si-ba  , ]
ZI GIS - SAGIL KUR - RA IMINA- BI KAN
ZI  DINGIR-NE-GAB NI-GAB-GAL KUR-RA-GE KAN
nis AA a " irsitimltim) lu-u-ta-ma-tu
ZI DINGIR-HUS-BI-SANGA DAM DINGIR-NAM-
TAR - RA- GE KAN
MeS ü: 3 al - ti Nam - ta - ri E
ZI DINGIR-GAN-DIM-AZAG DU-SAL ZU-AB-GE KAN
mis * A mar-ti ap-st-t lu-u-ta-ma-tu
SMOLU = GISGAL (2) - LU DU - DINGIR - RA - NA
EN-NA  BA-RA-AN-TA-RI-IN- NA-AS EN - NA
BA-RA-AN-ZI * -GA-EN-NA-AS
U BA-RA-AN-DA-AB-KU-E A  BA-RA-AN-DA-AB-NAK-E
GIS-BANSUR A-A  MUH-ZU  DINGIR-EN-LIL-LA-GE
SU-ZU  BA-RA-NE-IN-GUB?
A  A-AB-BA A-DUG® A-SIS® A  ID-MAS-TIG-GAR
A ID-UD-KIB-NUN-KI
A PU-TA A ID-DA BA-RA-AN-SU-SU n


46,296 . . a KAN E? WEE
K. 12,000, z. inserts (ZI AN-NA KAN-PA Z]I KI-A [KAN-PA ].


4 K. 12,000, k, n insert TA. 5 K. 3,218 and-K. 12,000.90, TUNE


6


K. 12,000, & inserts A.


45.


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET V. 61


By Gishbil, high priest of the earth, mayest thou
be exorcised,

By Ningishzida, throne-bearer of the earth,
mayest thou be exorcised,

By the Seven Gates of the Earth mayest thou


be exorcised,


. By the Seven Bolts of the Earth mayest thou


50.


Ss


60.


be exorcised,

By Negab, the great Warden of the Earth,
mayest thou be exorcised,

By Khushbishanga, the wife of Namtar, mayest
thou be exorcised,

By Gan-dim-azag, the daughter of the Ocean
Deep, mayest thou be exorcised :

(Whatever thou be) until thou art removed,
until thou departest

From the man, the son of his god,

Thou shalt have no food to eat,

Thou shalt have no water to drink,

Thou shalt not stretch forth thy hand

Unto the table of my father Bel, thy creator.

Neither with sea-water, nor with sweet water,

Nor with bad water, nor with Tigris water,

Nor with Euphrates water, nor with pond water,


Nor with river water shalt thou be covered.


62 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BESBONTA.


ANA-KU BA-RI-EN PA-NA-AN-TUK-TUK-E!

KI - KU BA - GUB - BA KU - NAM - BI - GA - GA

MULU-GISGAL(?)-LU | DU-DINGIR-RA-NA BA-RA-AN-
TE-MAL-DA BA-RA-AN-GE-GE-E-NE


INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL - A= KN


65. EN —U-SU-US IMI- HUL 1 GIM - MA — A - MES
fümu(mu) ub-bu-tum sa-a-ri lim-nu-tum' su-nu
Cor ci


U - HUL IM - HUL SI - GAB - A - MES

Amu( mu) ša limuttim(£im) im-hul-lu a-me-ru-ti su-nu

U - "EET IM - HUL ŠI - GUB- A- MES

fimu(snu) sa limuttim(tim) im-hul-lu a-lik mah-ri
su-nu

5. DU AS- A- MES IBILA AŠ- A- MES


ma-ru-u* git®-ma-lu-tum ap-lu git?-ma-lu-tum Su-nu
MULU - KIN -GA - A LIL - LA - DA-RA A- MES
marant” $ip-vi Sa nam -ta-ru su-nu


GU - ZA - LA DINGIK - NIN - EP YOn S


10. gu - za - lu = U ša Us NE Su - nu
A - MA - TU KALAM - MA NIGIN 8- NA - MES
a-bu-bu Sa ma matt ts-ga-nun-du — su-nu

VII- A-AN DINGIR ANA - DAGAL - LA - MES

si - bil ilami” same(e) rap - šu - ti

15. VII-A-AN DINGIR KALAM-MA-DAGAL-LA-MES
si - bit lant?’ ma - a - ti ra - pa - as-ti


VII-A-AN DINGIR-UR-UR-RI-A*- MES : sz slam"
mas-Si--u-li

VII-A-AN DINGIR V/J//-A-AN-MES!: sb tam?”
kis-Sa-ti


UTUKKI LIMNOTI, TABLET V. 63


———  — —-.—


If thou wouldst fly up to heaven

Thou shalt have no wings,

If thou wouldst lurk in ambush on earth
Thou shalt secure no resting-place.
Unto the man, the son of his god,
Come not nigh,

Get thee hence!


PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.


65. Incantation :—


COL.


IO.


ic.


sch A @ =


ARA


K


Destructive storms (and) evil winds are they,
III:

An evil blast that heraldeth * the baneful storm,
An evil blast, forerunner of the baneful storm.


. They are mighty children, mighty sons,


Heralds of the Pestilence,

Throne-bearers of Ninkigal,

They are the flood which rusheth through the
land.

Seven gods of the broad heaven,

Seven gods of the broad earth,

Seven robber gods are they.

Seven gods of might,


. 3,218 OMIS. * K

13,2888, 2000, "L.3,rīĻomits.

BI er KI). SERE S I ZIVI

. 3,121, Nin-ki-gal. 5 13,128; KILSKIL.
" Literally Sbeholdeth.'


13; 2 aes LÈ


64 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


e
e


A AN DINGIR - HUL- A- MES

20. si- bil lani Ai lim- nu- tum

VII-A-AN DINGIR-LUGAL-KAN-ME HUL-A-MES

(PLATE XIN)

| st - bit la - bar - til lam - nu tum

VII-A-AN DINGIR-RAB-KAN-ME-A SED-DE HUL-A-MES

si - bit la-bar-tum* l-’-bu lim - nu - tum

25. ANA VII - A - AN KI VIT - A - AN

ina samele) si-bit ina irsitim(tim)  si-bit-ma

UTUG-HUL A-LA-HUL GIDIM-HUL MULLA- HUL

DINGIR - HUL MASKIM - HUL

ZI AN - NA KAN - PA ZI KI - A KAN - PA

ZI DINGIR-EN-LIL-LA LUGAL KUR-KUR-RA-GE KAN-PA

30. nis ““ 8 bel. ma-ta-[a-ti|* lu-u-ta-ma-tu?

ZI DINGIR-NIN-LIL-LA NIN KUPU s KAN-PA

l mi en i be - lit mátáti lu - u - ta - ma - tu?

ZI DINGIR-NIN-IB IBILA E-SAR-RA-GE KAN-PA
Ke" CB C apil E - sar - va 1


35. ZI DINGIR- NINNI NIN KUR-KUR-— RA -CEEE


`


SI - JN = BABBAR S KAP GE KAN - PA
nis ™ „ be-lit mátátit mu-nam-mi-rat mu-si
lu-u-ta-ma-tu Š
EN-NA SU MULU-GIŠGAL(?)-LU DU DINGIR-RA-NA


7 6U BA-RA-AN-DA-AB-KU-E A BA-RA-AN-DA-AB-NAK-E


SEN NAM - TAR AZAG KALAM - MA ZI - ZI


40. Mam-la-ru? a-sak-ku sa mati  i-na-as-sa-hu


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET V. 65


— ——-—— — 7


20. Seven evil gods,

Seven evil demons,?
(PLATE XIV.)

Seven evil demons of oppression,

25. Seven in heaven and seven on earth.
Evil Spirit, evil Demon, evil Ghost,
Evil Devil, evil God, evil Fiend.
By Heaven be thou exorcised!’ By Earth be

thou exorcised !
30. By Bel, Lord of the World, mayest thou be


exorcised,

By Beltis, Lady of the World, mayest thou be
exorcised !

By Ninib, son of Esharra, mayest thou be
exorcised !


35. By Ishtar, Mistress of the World,
Who enlighteneth the night, mayest thou be
exorcised |
Until thou art removed, until thou departest
From the body of the man, the son of his god,
Thou shalt have no food to eat,
Thou shalt have no water to drink.


Incantation :—
40. Pestilence and fever that ravage the land,


DK. 3121, Jug. ? K. 3,121, la-ba-si for la-bar-tum.

SE. 22r, Del, t K.25,528 and K. 3121, Matan”.

GER „

° K. 2,528 here inserts the following line:—u . . .-EN-NA-AS
EN-NA BA-RA-AN-ZI-GA-EN-NA-AS.

7 38,798, INIM-INIM-MA . . . , omitting l. 38.

8 K. 2,528, INIM-INIM-MA UTUG-HUL-A-KAN.

9 38,798, 71.

a labartu.


> Or “be ye exorcised! " and so on all through. See variant l. 65.


5


66


45.


50.


55.


60.


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABWEONTA.


TUR - RA SI - LUL KALAM - MA ZI = IR = ZI zg
S ure su! di-libgti sa mát t- as - sa - Su
SU'- NU - DUG - GA BAR - RÀ - NU - "SIG - GA
„r Sa a-na? si-iS-ri la fa-a- bu ana zu-um-ri la dam- ku
UTUG-HUL A-LA-HUL GIDIM-HUL MULLA-HUL
DINGIR-HUL MASKIM-HUL?#


MULU = HUL | IGI'- HUL KA - YUL “EME - Kë


NALA


MULU - GISGAL (MELO "uU DINGIR- Se A su N El

KAN-NI-IB-TA-E BAR-RA-NI-TA KAN-RI-IB-E-NE
sa ameli mar aili-su ina zumri?-5u li-its-sub-u

ina sumri-su l-15 -su-u

SU-MU : ana au-um- ri-ta a-a tt-hu-nt : NAM-BA-TE-MAL-DA

IGI - MU : ana pani -ia a-a u-lam-me-nu-ni :
NAM - BA - HUL - E - NE

EGIR - MU : ana arki-ta a-a ial-li-ku-u-ni:
NAM - BA - GIN - GIN - NE


E-MU : ana biti-1a a-a 1-ru-bu-u-ni : NAM-BA-TU-TU-NE


*UR - MU NAM - BA - BAL - BAL - E? - NE
ana u - ZER a-a 20 - bal - ki - tu -mni
E - KI - TUS -A - MU NAM - BA - TU - TU - NE
ana bit sub - li - ta a-a zrubu* - ni


ZI AN - NA KAN - PA ZI KI - A KAN - PA
ni-ts Samele) Iu-ta-ma-tu  nt1s  trsttim(tim)

lu-ta-ma-tu

ZI DINGIR-EN-LIL-LA LUGAL KUR-KUR-RA-GE KAN-PA

ZI DINGIR-NIN-LIL-LA NIN KUR-KUR-RA-GE KAN-PA

ZI DINGIR-NIN-IB UR-SAG-LIG-GA DINGIR-
EN-LIL-LA-Gp LAN EE

ZI DINGIR-NUZKU LUH-MAH DINGIR-EN-LIL-LA-GE
KAN-PA


45.


50.


0:


60.


UTUKKI LIMNŪTI, TABLET V. 67


Sickness and woe that oppress the land,

Harmful to the flesh, tmclean to the body.

Evil Spirit, evil Demon, evil Ghost,

Evil Devil, evil God, evil Fiend,

Evil man, evil face, evil mouth, evil tongue,

From the man, the son of his god,

May they depart from his body

And from his body may they issue forth !

Unto my body may they not draw nigh,

Before me may they wreak no evil,

Nor follow behind me,

Into my house may they not enter,

My fence may they not break through,

Into my chamber may they not enter.

By Heaven be thou exorcised! By Earth be
thou exorcised !

By Bel, Lord of the World, mayest thou be
exorcised,

By Beltis, Lady of the World, mayest thou be
exorcised,

By Ninib, the mighty warrior of Bel, mayest thou
be exorcised,


By Nuzku, the powerful minister of Bel, mayest
thou be exorcised,


K. GERE | . s; 38,798, mu-ru-us.
K. 2,528 and 38,798, aza for a-za.
K. 2,528 omits.


K. 2,528 and K. 9,405, 2u-um-rt.


1
2
3
* Latter half of line added from K. 2528 and K. 9,405.
5
6


K. 296287 sm 1 K. 2,528 and K. 9,405 omit.


68


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


65.


COL.


IO.


15.


ZI DINGIR-EN-ZU-NA DU-SAG DINGIR-EN-LIL-LA-GE


KAN-PA
ZI  DINGIR-NINNI NIN KI-SU-LU-KU-GAR-RA ! -GE
KAN-PA?
uis “IS-tar be-lit um-ma-ni lu?- ta- ma -tut
IV.


le:
ZI DINGIR-NI LUGAL  GU-DUG-GA-GE SKAN-PAŻ
nis “Adadi be-ili® sa vi-gim-su ta-a-bu ,
ZI DINGIR-BABBAR LUGAL SA-DA'-GE 5KAN-PA?


nis U Samsi Dbe- 9 di-mi lu-u- ta -ma - tu?


ZI DINGIR-A-NUN-NA !? DINGIR-GAL-GAL "-E-NE 12


KAN-PA 2


nis ™A -nun -na -ki ilani” vabütit?  ,.
INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL - A - KAN


EN ANA KI: BA MULU-KI-BA--ALAD KI-BA-E
mu-na -sir samele) u  ¿rsitimltim) — se-e-du
"Hu-na-as-sir  ma-a-ti
ALAD KI - BA SU - AN - NA - GE
se-e-du mu-na-as-Sir ma-a-ti sa e-mu-ka-su sa-ka-a
SU - AN - NA - GE GIR - GIN - NA AN - NA - GE
Sa emu-ka-Su sa-ka-a  tal-lak-ta-Su  Sa-ka-at
MULLA GUD = UEM MU GUD - MAN “wa
gal-lu-u  al-fpu na-ki-pu e-kimamu — ra-bu-u
GUD E-DU-A : e-kim-mu sa kal bite” tt-ta-nab-lak-ka-tum :
BAL-BAL-E-MES
MULLA UR NU - TUK VII - NA — a


gal-lu-u sa bul-ta la i-u-u  si-bit-ti- Su-nu


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET V. 69


By Sin, the firstborn of Bel, mayest thou be
exorcised,


65. By Ishtar, mistress of mankind, mayest thou be
exorcised,
Cor. EV.
By Adad, the lord of goodly sound, mayest thou
be exorcised,


By Shamash, the lord of judgment, mayest thou
be exorcised,


5. By the Anunnaki, the great gods, mayest thou
be exorcised,


PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL Spirits.


Incantation :—

Spirits that minish heaven and earth, A
That minish the land,

10. Spirits that minish the land,
Of giant strength,
Of giant strength and giant tread,

15. Demons (like) raging bulls, great ghosts,
Ghosts that break through all houses,

Demons that have no shame, 57 et.) Lë AW,

Seven are they!


1 K. 2,528 omits. 2 45,539 omits PA.
* K. 2,528 and 45,539 insert u. * 45,539, mat for ma-tu.
' 45,539 adds „


s K. 5,096, lim. 7 45,539, TAR.

A ° K. 3,121 ,, for lu-u-ta-ma-tu.
0 K. 5,096 inserts GE-NE. H 45,539 inserts LA.

1? 45,539 inserts GE. 5 K. 5,096 ,, for A-nun-na-ki.


4 K. $121 and K. 5,096 insert as.


70


20.


25.


30.


35.


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


SAL-DUG-GA : kun-ma-a ul i-du-u : NU-UN-ZU-MES
KALAM - MA ZID - GIM MU! - MU! - MES
ma-a- tu? ki-ma £i-me? i- kam - mu-u


E
; NU - UN - ZU “Man


KAR - RA

e- Wi- Mal ul Z- du- u

UKU - KU Zi - GA- A®- MEŠ

a- na | Mise” na - ad - ru

SU _NE”-IN-KU-KU-MEŠ MUD SUR-SUR ?- MES
US | NAK-NAK-[MES]

a-kil St-t-rt mu-Sa-az-nin da-me? sa-tu-u us-la-ti

BA (?)-A KI *SIG-ALAM-BI DINGIR-RI-E-NE-MES

2(?)-2u-su a-sar Ou-un-na-an-ni-e? sa ilani” su-nu

E-BI DINGIR-DUL-AZAG-GA DINGIR-SURIM DINGIR-SE-
TIR MU-UN-SI-ES-A-AN

ina bi-ti “Dul-azag-ga sa lah-ra ™ „ du-us-Su-u

MULLA GAR - NE- SUB TIG - DIR- MES

gal-lu-u sa rag-gu ma-lu-u su-nu

US KU - KU - MES SUD - NU - DU- MU MES

a-kil da-mi wi mu-par-ku-ti Su -nu

NAM - NE- SUB MA  U-ME-NI-KUD UB-DA TIN

NAM-BA-GUR-RU-DA
ma-mit tum-me-Su-nu-ti-ma ana tub-ki u Sa-ha-ti


a-a i-tu-ru-n.


(PLATE XV.)


ZI AN-NA KAN-PA-NE-ES ZI KI-A KAN-PA-NE-ES


UTUKKI LIMNOTI, TABLET V. 7%


Knowing no car
20. They grind the land like corn ;
Knowing no mercy,
25. They rage against mankind ;
They spill their blood like rain
Devouring their flesh (and) sucking their veins,
* Where the images of the gods are, there they
quake (?)
In the Temple of Nabū,” who fertilizeth the
shoots (?) of wheat.
They are demons full of violence,
35. Ceaselessly devouring blood.
Invoke the ban against them,
That they no more return to this neighbourhood.


(PLATE XV.)
By Heaven be ye exorcised! By Earth be ye
exorcised !
ta. 39921, TU. ? K. 3,121, Zeen,
KK up n eK. 3,121, Mn
* K. 3,121 inserts Sv. $ K. 3,121 omits.
TK idi, BE $ K. 3,121 inserts RA.
y D


s The mutilated condition of this and the following line prevents
any trustworthy rendering. The zin zzzsz is very doubtful; lakra
is doubtful, although justified as a translation of DINGIR-SURIM by
Brünnow, No. 10,252. Zahra is supposed to be the Hebrew rákél,
a ewe (Muss-Arnolt, Dictionary, p. 479), and there seems to be
a parallel in the Arabic root raghala, suxit ma/rem ; iv, lactavit ;
grana in spicis producere coeperunt sa/a; cf. also raghlun
(Freytag, Lexicon, ii, p. 169a). A

b “God of the holy mound.”


7£ DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABMEONTA.


INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL = A mwen


2


A
— cen 5


| SIM Je
40. EN GAR-UD-DU GAR-UD-DU GAR-NAM-MA US-SIR
[ka]-a-a-tu ha-a-a-t-tu mur-te-1d-du-u mimma sum-su
- DIN - MA PI A AN - NA - ven


[2] - na arsitam(tim) vi - hu - ut same(e)

; ANA - GIM SU NU - TE - MAL

45. eee DE - ma same(e)
[Za 21] - ku- u

"S BI


[Hiatus of about eight lines.)


DINGIR - NIN . .*“ V
ef ber
HUL-DUB . . . . [ZI AN-NA KAN-PA ZI KIJA
KAN-PA,
INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL - A - KAN


60. EN UR - SAG | V//]- NA A-DU J/-NA- MES
kar -ra - [du | siti] a-di si-ma Su -nu
Cor: V.

A-RI-A AS A-MEŠ A-RI-A-BAJAN-NA-GE TU-UD-DA-MES
sa ri-hu-su-nu is-ta-al 2) ina vi-hu-ut ™ A-nim

ib-ba-uu-u Šu-nu
E- NE - NE -NE LIL - LA KAS! - KAS! MEŠ
5. su-nu za-ki-ku mut-tas-ra-bi-tu-ti? SU-NU
DAM NU-TUK-MES DU NU-TU-UD-DA- MES


as-sa-tu ul ak-zu mani ul al-du sumu


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET V. 73


PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.


Incantation :—
40. Uprooting everything, uprooting everything,
Overthrowing everything, whatever its name ;
On earth the spawn of heaven
na: kee heaven
they shall not draw nigh


[Hiatus of about four lines. ]


Beltis (?), lady of


| By Heaven be ye — ! T" Earth |
be ye exorcised!


PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.


Incantation :—
60. Warriors twice seven are they,
Cor. V.
That in a single (?) spawning in the creation of
Anu were spawned ;
5. They are the roaming windblast ;
No wife have they, no son do they beget,


E 121, SIR.
Sg 3.121, /u.
"S 3,121, a-ra.


74 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


BANDA NU - UN ZUS MEŠ
ta- stm- tu! ul 2- du- Ti
10. ANSU - KUR - RA HAR - SAG - TA E - A - MES


si-su-u Sa ina sadi(t) tr - du - u su- nu
DINGIR-EN-KI-GE : sa  ""E-a lzm-nu-tum su-au
SIS - A - MES
GU-ZA-LA : gu-ug?-ga-lu-u sa alan” su-nu
DINGIR-RI-E-NE $ -MES
E-SIR- RA LU-LU-A SILA- A GUB - BA - MES
lis: su-la-a a-na* da-la-hi ina suki? dt-ta-nam-za-az-zu
52-4
IGI DINGIR-NE-URU-GAL UR-SAG-LIG-GA DINGIR-
EN-LIL-LA-GE MU-UN-LAH-LAH-GI-ES
ina ma-har Ti kar-ra-du® dan-nu' sa “BAS
it-ta-na-al-la-ku su-au
971 AN-NA KAN-PA ZI KI-A KAN-PAY
ZI  DINGIR-EN-ZU-NA EN AN-AÉ-GIRI-BAR-RA-GE
KAN-PA
20. 4i-1$? “Sin bel“ nam-ra si-zt lu-tama-tu
ZI DINGIR-PA-SAG-GA GIR SILA-A SIG-GA-GE KAN-PA
ni-is14 TT Sum na-gir su-ki sa-Eu-um-mi lu-ta-ma-tu Y
SU  MULU-GISGAL(?)-LU DU  DINGIR- RA NA
BA-RA-AN-TE-MAL-DA BA-RA-AN-GE-GE-NE
ana sumur ameli mar ili-su la te-tich-hi la


tasanik


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET V. 75


- PP A EED


Sense they know not.
10. They are as horses reared among the hills ;
The Evil Ones of Ea,
Throne-bearers to the gods are they ;
15. They stand in the highway to befoul the path,
Marching before the Plague God, the mighty
warrior of Bel.
By Heaven be thou exorcised! By Earth be thou
exorcised !
20. By Sin, lord of the Brilliant Rising, mayest thou
be exorcised,


By Ishum, overseer of foul streets, mayest thou


be exorcised,
Unto the body of the man, son of his god,


Approach not nor draw nigh!


1 K. 5,12 n. ? K. 8,508 omits.

SK. 2,528 awa Na. 658 insert A.

* K.2,528, aza for a-na. 5 K.2,528 and K. 4,658, su-ki.
SK. 2,528 and K. 4,658, di. OMe. 2,520 and K. 4,658,.ni.


5 K.z,s28 and Wi 32658 a

° K.8,508 translates 2:8 same(e) lu-u-ta-l mat nis trsitim lu-u-ta-mat |).
10 K. 2,528 and K. 4,658 insert NE-ES.

1 K. 2,528 inserts NE-ES.

" K.4,658 and K. 8,508, nis for ni-15.

3 K. 2,528 and K. 4,658, de-el.

4 K. 4,658, nis for zi-is. 15 K., 2,528 ,, for-/u-/a-ma-tu.


76


25.


30.


35-


40.


45.


50.


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


IGI -NA BAD - DU! A-GA- NM BAD - DUR
ana ` pa-ni-su 2-51 ana ar-ki-Su 1-51

INIM - INIM- MA UTUG - HUL- A- KAN

EN Vk- NA- MES VII - NA- MES
st -bit - tt Su - nu Si - bit - ti Su - nu?

ĪDīĪM- “ZU= m- TA VII- NA- MW
ma  na-kab? ap-st-t si-bit-ti Šu - nu

SE: IR - SA ANA DUG= GAS NA VII NA MES


zu--u*-nu-t? | ina  Samele)  st-btt-ti su-nu
IDIM - ZU - AB - WA B - ZINĀM TA E - A MES


ma na - kab ap-si-t tna ku-um-me
iy - bu - U SU - nu
U SAL | NU- MES U US NU- MES


ul  zi9-bka-ru Su-nu ul sin-nis-a-ti" su-nu
E- NE- NE- NE LIL- LA  KAS? - KAS? - MES
fu-nu za-ki-ku mut-tas-rab-bi-tu-ti” Su-nu
DAM NU-TUK- A- MEŠ DU NU - TU-UD-DA-MES


aš-ša-tu? ul  ah-zu man" ul al-du su-nu


GAR - SU AG - AG- DA NU - UN! - ZU - MES
e - li - va ga - ma - lu" ul 2 - dit - u
A-RA-ZU SIGISSE (?)-SIGISSE (?)-RA GIS-NU-TUK-A !! -MES
ik - vi - 078 tas - li - tu | ul i-sim-mu-u


ANSU - KUR - RA HAR - SAG - TA E-A- MES


si-su-u Sa ima sadin) iv-bu-u SU-HU
DINGIR- EN- KI- GE ŠIS - SIS - MES
ša XE- d lim- nu- ti SZ - nu
GU- ZA- LA DINGIR - RI- E- NE MES


gu - za - lu - u ša kini ^ Šu - nu


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET V. Ge


25. Get hence from before him, get hence from


behind him!


PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.


Incantation :—
Seven are they, seven are they,
30. In the Ocean Deep seven are they,
Battening * in Heaven seven are they,


35. In the Ocean Deep as their “home they were


reared,
Nor male or female are they,
40. They are as the roaming windblast,
No wife have they, no son do they beget ;
Knowing neither mercy nor pity,
45. They hearken not unto prayer or supplication.
They are as horses reared among the hills ; l
50. The Evil Ones of Ea,
Throne-bearers to the gods are they.


I. 3,121, DA. ? K.3,121 ,, for sż-dil-fi su-nu.
* K. 3,121, nak-bi for na-kab. 4 K. 3,121and K. 4,658 omit.
Me zin r I K: 4,658, am. S Kwo, zik.


Steen, > Ku 3121, SER,
UK. 3 Na zz. 10 3121. twe
TK. 3,721 omits. " EE 2821573.
15 3 wan Da. VAK. 3, nou, la.


sU o: m:
a Zvunuti, Hebrew żin (Jer. v, 8).


78 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF PW: PONTIA.


!E-SIR- RA LU-LU-A SILA- A GUB- BA - MES

l su-la-a ana da-la-hi ina su-ki tt-ta-na-za-su Su-nu

55. SIS-SI-MES:  /im-nu-ti? šu-nu — Lim-nu-ti* $u-1u:

ŠIS - SI?- MES

VII-NA-MES | VII-NA-MES  VI[:-A-DU J/-NA-MES
si-Dit-li Su-nu si-bit-ti Su-nu si-bit a-di Si-na Su-nu

ZI AN-NA KAN-PA-NE-ES ZI KI-A KAN-PA-NE-ES

(PLATE XV)


INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL - A


Core. |
UTUG - HUL MU - UN - DA - RU - US
u-tuk-ku lim-nu | i-ta-vu- us
MUD - NA- A IM - MÀ - AN - US
-5 la na - bu -u ir - te - di - Su
5. [MULU] SU-BI  NU-E-NE IM-MA-AN-US
ša ina eu-mur la su-pu-u ir-te-di-su


SU - NI IN - RA SU -AANI nU IM-ME-IN-GAR


ka-as-su 2111-has-ma ana ka-tt-Su 2$-kun
GIR-NI IN-RA GIR-A-NI-KU IM-ME-IN-GAR
10. $e-ib-su zm-has-ma ana Se-pi-su Z5-Eun


SAG-GA-NI IN-KA SAG-GA-A-NI-KU IM-ME-IN-GAR

kak-ka-su im-has-ma ana kak-ka-di-su  is-kum

NAM-BI-KU GE-BARA-KI AZAG-GA-TA IM-MA-DA-
[AN-TU-TU]


ana sim-[ti-su ana gi-pa-a-ri el-li e-ru-ub-ma)


[Hiatus of about four lines.)


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET V. 79


They stand in the highway to befoul the path,
55. Evil are they, evil are they!
Seven are they, seven are they,
Twice seven are they!
By Heaven be ye exorcised! By Earth be ye
exorcised !
: (PLATE XVI.)


PRAVER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.


Cot. VI.
| Incantation | —
An evil spirit . . . hath overcome him,
[Something] unnamed hath seized upon him,
5. Something impure for the body hath seized upon
him,


His hand it hath smitten and. Ta hand it hath
Be (se. Maw vx» Pas (ej?


set upon,
IO. His foot it hath smitten and his foot it hath set
upon,
His head it hath smitten and his head it hath >
set upon ; f


* Unto a pure field for his fate it hath entered and
A ME Pere FAG (ie Ba kl,


[Hiatus of two lines.]


' Line omitted on K. 3,121. E, 121b mn.
4E 121 AA. i K. 3,127 mserts NA.
^ Restored from the explanatory text S. 48. Apparently it


means that the evil spirit has entered the '' pure field ” to seize
upon the man.


80 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABWEONTA.


ZO. WIUG . . à
u - tk REESE |
ana bit a-a i-mwe[aò] EE
UTUG-HUL DIB-BA-A-NI BAR-KU HE-IM-TA-GUB
| u-tuk-ku  lim-nu ka-mu-su ina ahali li-is-siż


25. UTUG-*SIG-GA ALAD-*ŠIG-GA HE-EN-LAH-LAH-GI-ES
INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL - A - KAN
EN | UTUG- HUL- IX GIDIM BAD KUR-RA


Duppi yt UTUG - HUL - A - MES


UTUKKI LIMNOTI, TABLET V. 8I


20. The [evil] spirit
Let it not enter the house
May the evil Spirit that hath seized him stand
aside,
25. May a kindly Spirit, a kindly Guardian be


pr esent.


*


KRAVER AGAINST THE Evil SPIRITS.


Incantation: “ The Evil Spirit, the Ghost that
destroyeth the land.”


FirtH TABLET OF THE SERIES “The EviL SPIRITS.”


Che Tenth Fabret.


OBVERSE.
(PLATE XVII.)
a . . sap(?)-la-a-ti sa ap-si-[i]
[MULU]-SAR UKU SAR-TA(?)-U-TU ZU-AB-TA
ME-EN
kis- sat nisi?! sa ap-si-i a-na-ku
5.. . . MULU-SAR DUL-DUL UTUG-HUL DIB-BA ME-EN


-bt-tb u-tuk-ku lim-nu ka-mu-u  a-na-ku
[MULU]-SAR DUL-DUL A-LA-HUL DIB-BA ME-EN
[-G2-20] a-lu-u lim-nu  ka-mu-u — a-na-ku
[MULU-SAR] DUL-DUL GIDIM-HUL DIB-BA ME-EN
IO. . . [-02-26 e-kim]-mu lim-nu ka-mu-u a-[na-ku]
. . . [MULU SAR DUL-DUL] MUL-LA-HUL
DIB-[BA ME - EN]

[-b2-26 gal]-lu-u lim-nu ka-[mu-u a-na-ku]
. . . [MULU-SAR DUL]-DUL DINGIR-HUL DIB-[BA ME-EN]
[-02-:20 . i]Jum lim-nu ka-[mu-u a-na-ku ]
I5. . . . [MULU-SAR DUL-DUL MASKIM-HUL DIB-BA ME-EN]
[-bi-ib  ra-bi-su lim-nu  ka-mu-u a-na-ku]
[MULU-SAR DUL-DUL LUGAL-RAB-KAN-ME

DIB-BA ME-EN]

PART XVII (PLATE SEE

[-02-20] la-bar-tum [£a-u-u a-na-ku |
[MULU-SAR] DUL-DUL LUGAL-RAB-KAN-ME-A

DIB-BA [ME-EN]
20.. . . [-&-:] la-ba-su ka-mu-u [a-na-ku]
[MULU-SAR] DUL-DUL LUGAL-RAB-KAN-ME-KIL

DIB-BA [ME-EN]
[- 02-20] ak-ka-zu ka-mu-u a-na-[ka]


Che Tenth Labret.


OBVERSE.
(PLATE XVII.)
of the Deep T
of multitudes of people of the Deep am I,
DENM WE au (7) who. . . . the evil
Spirit seizeth, am I,
[of Marduk (7), who . . . | the evil
Demon seizeth, am I,
DES orar due (?) who . . . ]the evil
Ghost seizeth, am I,
. [ef Marduk (7), who . . . | the evil


Devil seizeth, [am T],
[of Marduk (?) who . . . | the evil
God seizeth, [am I],
Dx Pn who . . . the evil


Fiend seizeth, am I],


PART XVII (PLATE XLIX).


fof Marduk (?), who . . . | the
Hag-demon [seizeth, am I],
so. p Marduk (?) whe . . . | the
Ghoul seizeth, [am I], |
[of Marduk (?), who . . . | the


Robber-sprite seizeth, am I,


94


pom .


JOU


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


[MULU-SAR DUL]-DUL MULU-LIL-LA DIB-BA
ME-EN

[-ò2-26]  li-lu-u ka-mu-u a-na-[ku]

. [MULU-SAR DUL]-DUL KI-EL-LIL-LA DIB-BA ME-EN

[-d¢-26 | ER-E]-5 ka-mu-u a-na-ku

[MULU-SAR DUL-DUL KI-EL]-UD-DA-KAR-RA
DIB-BA ME-EN

[-di-26= ar-da-at H] ka-mu-u a-na-ku

Dok + + + v.s. w w 2v +. DIBBA “MENN

[£a] - mu - ua - na - ku

[DIB-BA] ME-EN


REVERSE.

(b). . . . tul-lai(c). . . “(Gwan
(d). ..... "El. . im
(f)... . tanakkiki) (g). . . . "sume tu-tah-ha
(h). . . . -mu ana bet ili suáti riksi (1) o
T Samsi ( D... EE Samsu (kie
[““ SILIG]-MULU-SAR /anakkas(kas) (1) . . . . GAR-MES
tasakkan(an) (m). . . . . . fimeti tasakkan(an)
(n). . . . . . saluppí KU - A - TIR tasarrak(ak)
(0. . . . £wk&an(an) (p)... . . Man
(DD... . . ["Zin]aG?) u "sume (v) [tutahha]

BI fanakki(ki) (s) . . . . ™ Samsi
tamannu(nu)

dup - pir lim - nu se - e(?)


[Duo AF UTUG - HUL - MES


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET X. 85


[of Marduk (?), who . . . | the
Phantom of Night seizeth, am I,
DX Mk () who . : . | the
Night Wraith seizeth, am I, |
. [of Marduk (?) who . . . | the hand-


maiden of the Phantom seizeth, am I,
D _ . . seieth, am I,


[seizeth], am I.
[The Reverse contains fragmentary directions for ceremonies.]


remove, the evil


TENTH TABLET OF THE SERIES “ THE EviL Spirits.”


Che Gifteentb Tablet.


OBVERSE.
(PLATE XVIII.)
EN DINGIR-EN-KI-E-NE [DINGIR-NIN-KI-E-NE A-MES]


sa U^» sw- m sa , wonn
DINGIR-EN-KI DINGIR-NIN-KI EN . e
sa “ , 4 FO. be- le “VAN

5. NUN-KI KI-TUS-AZAG-GA-NI-KU SUB-NA-ES-A-AN
[ina] ` “ Eridi sub-ta el-li-ti us - bu - ni


MULU-TUR-RA DU  DINGIR-RA-NA ŠI-MU-UN-ŠI-IN-
BAR-RA-ES-A-AN
MU - UN - NA - TE - ES
mar-st mar ili-su ip-pal-su-šu it-Au-su
IO . . . . NUN-KI-GA GU-[MU-UN-NA-]AN-DE-ES-A-AN
ID-BA-[AN]-DA-AN-AG-ES
ina au vide 25 - Sil - MA U-Ma--i-m
KI GANA GA MU - RA - AB - BI(?)
me(?) du ka(?)-a(?)-i-au e-si-tum


MULU . . GA-A MU-RA-AB-BI (?)
I... . LFS sar- ri- ih- tum)
d NUN - KI- GA
. « AZAG = TCA GA DU «a
.-tu as-ri el-le . ED
ME (2)
20.. . . . . . . „i KP D D W E
HAR- SAG- GE
ša - di - Z
REVERSE.


[UTUG]-HUL  [A-LA-HUL BAR-KU  HE-IM-TA-GUB]
UTUG-* SIG-GA AL[AD *SIG-GA HE-EN-LAH-LAH-GI-ES]


INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL - [A - KAN]


EN U - DU - DU - MES [DINGIR - HUL - A - MES]


Che Fifteentb Labret,


OBVERSE.


(PLATE XVIII.)


IO.


Of Ea are they, of [Damkina] are they,
OFEa and Damkina, the lord . . . are they,


. In the hallowed dwelling Eridu they were seated,


(And) they beheld the sick man, the son of his
god,

(And) drew nigh unto him,

In Eridu they shrieked and hastened on ;


REVERSE.
[May the] evil [Spirit, the evil Demon, stand
away from him],
[May a] kindly Spirit, [a kindly] Guardian, [be


present].
PRAYER AGAINST THE Evir SPIRITS.


Incantation :—


“(The Evil Gods] are raging storms.” *


a According to the colophon, No. 47,736 was made for
Marduk-bani-apli, the son of Mukalmu, the Priest of Marduk, by
kem = the son of Misirai :—


. ki-ma labiri-su Sa-fir-ma up-pu- .

a-na ka-bi e-li mati š

za-mar su-bal-ku-tu dup-pi min Marduk- bm apli
mar "Mu-kal-mu “" bari *™ Marduk

kala Y "Itti- "" Marduk-balalu mar "Mi-sir-a-a.


Che Etrteentb Tablet.


(PLATE XIX.)
EN U - DU - DU - MES DINGIR - HUL - A - MES
dmi? mut-tak-pu-tum ani?! lim-nu-tum su-nu
ALAD US - NU - KU DU - NE - A SIG ; GA - MES


KC


se-e-du la pa-du-tum! sa ina su-puk Same(e)


5. ib-ba-nu-u su-nu
E - NE - NE - NE GAR - GIG SA - A - MES
SU - nu e - fis ma - vu - us- ti Ssu-nu


SAG-HUL  HA-ZA?- MES U-SU-US-E GAR-HUL-DIB-BA
SAG - GIS- RA- RA- E- NE
IO. mu-kil kakkad limuttim(tim)3 ša timi(mi)-šam-ma
ana limuiti


nir - tu ana na-a-rsr .... pan
VII-BI-TA USU-A-AN IM-GISGAL-[LU]
ina st-bit-ti su-nu | . . . | Su-u-tu


II-KAM-MA  USUMGAL KA-GAL KAB(?) MULU NA
ME . . MU-UN


15. sa-nu-u u-Sum-gal-lim sa pi-i-Su pi-tu-u
ma - am - ma [Za]
JII-KAM-MA GIR-DU HUS..... KAR-RA BA (?).


sal-su® nim-ru® iz-zu sa pi-i-ri e(?)-[ki-mu] .
JIV-KAM-MA SIR-AGA HU-LAH-HA
20. ri - bu -u stb -bu gal - ti
V-KAM-MA GIR-KU(?)-ZI-GA A-GA-BI-KU TU .. NU-UN ..
ha-as-sa abbu?  ma-ad-ru? $a ana arki®-su
ni--a la
VI-[KAM-MA] . .. ZI-GA DINGIR-LUGAL-LA-KU .....


sis-[Su] . . . -u ti-bu-u sa ana ili U sarri....


The Sirteentb CaBfet.


(PLATE XIX.)
The Evil Gods are raging storms,


5. Ruthless spirits created in the vault of heaven ;

Workers of woe are they,

10. That each day raise their evil heads for evil,
To wreak destruction
Of these seven [the first] is the South Wind .

I5. The second is a dragon with mouth agape
That none can [withstand ? |,
The third is a grim leopard that carries off (?)

young |
20. The fourth is a terrible serpent


The fifth is a furious beast (2), after which no
restraint (?)


The sixth isa rampant . . . which against


god and king


! 3406,75. ? 34,106 inserts A.

3 345106, l-mui-tum. * 34,106, man for ma-am.
6 K poon u. $ 34,106 and K. 4,904, 77.
348106, 07. 5054: 100, 77.


° K. 4,870, ar-[kf].

a Abbu, the meaning of which is at present quite uncertain.
From the Sumerian GIR in the line above (since GIR-DU is translated
nimru in l. 18), this would seem to.be the name of a wild beast.
Cf. also the Arabic (>, “ serpent," which Wellhausen (Skizzen,
iii, 171, 217) suggests in comparison with the Hebrew name Z70542.


90


2B


30)


35-


40.


Ee


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


VII-KAM-MA IM-MIR-RA IM-HUL-A GE(?) .
si-bu-u me-hu-u sa-a-ru lim-nu sa gi(?)-s ...
VII-BI E-NE MULU-KIN-GA-A ANA LUGAL-LA-A-MES
si-bit-ti Su-nu mår sip-ri sa ““ A-nim sar-ri su-nu
ERI - ERI-A- AN AN - USAN - DA  GA-GA - MES
a-li ana a-li da-um-ma-ta i-sak-ka-nu su-nu
IM-DAL-HA-MUN  AN-NA-GE ŠUR-BI NIGIN-NA-MES
a-sam-su-tum Sa ina same(e) 12-21-1$ is-sa-nun-du Su-nu
IM-DIR !-SIR-RA AN-NA-GE IM-A-AN-HI-ŠI IN-GA-GA-MES
ir-pi-tum sa-pi-tum sa tna samele) da-um-ma-ta
i-Sak-ka-nu su-nu
IM-DAL-ZI-GA  U-LAH-GA  HI-SI MI-NI-IN-GAR-RI-ES
Zi-ak? sa-a-ri te-bu-tum sa ina úme(me) nam-ri
e- tu- ta i- sak- ka- mu su- mu
IM - HUL IM - HUL - BI - TA DU - DU - AE
it-ti im-hulh ša-a-ri lim-ni d-Sur-ru su-nu
U-NE-RA-RA I(?)-1(?) KA-HAR-AK-DA- MES
vi-hi-is-ti “Adadi te-šu-u kar-du-te  Su-nu
ID - ZID - DA. DINGIR - NI LAH - LAS MEŠ
ina i-mit-ti “Adadi il- la-[ku su- nu]
AN - UR - RA NIM = GIR - CM
ina t-sid Samele) ki-ma bir-ki it-ta-[mab-ri-ku su-nu]
SAG -GIS-RA-RA-E-NE  SAG-TA
ni-ir-tu ana na-a-ri ina mah-ri il-la-ku [su-nu]
ANA-DAGAL-LA KI-TUS DINGIR-LUGAL-LA-GE HUL-
DIB-BI LAH-GA-[ MES]
GAB - RI NU = TUK - A- MES
ina samele) vrap-su-ti su-bat ™ A-nim sar-ri


lim-nts iz-za-zu-ma ma-hi-ra ul t-su-u


25.


30.


35.


40.


45.


50.


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET XVI. QI


The seventh is an evil windstorm which

These seven are the Messengers of Anu, the
king,

Bearing gloom from city to city,

Tempests* that furiously scour the heavens,

Dense clouds* that bring gloom over the sky,


Rushing windgusts,* casting darkness over the


brightest day,
Forcing their way with the baneful windstorms.


Mighty destroyers are they, the deluge of the
Storm-God,


Stalking at the right hand of the Storm-God.
In the height of heaven like lightning they [flash],
To wreak destruction they lead the way,


In heaven’s breadth, the home of Anu, the king,


! 36,690 inserts E.
? 36,690 inserts £z.


a Singular.


92 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


`


U-BI-A DINGIR-EN-LIL-LA DIMMU-BI GIS-NE-IN-TUK-A


I SA- BI- KU BA- AN- BU- I

t-nu-šu "hr Bel tee-ma  Su-a-tum  is-me-ma

BIS. a- ma-ta ana lib-bi-Su is-du- ud
DINGIR-EN-KI-DA MAS-SU-MAH DINGIR-RI-E-NE-GE
AD- BA- NI- IB- GE - GE


it-ti ““É-a mas-si-e si-vi sa uani” im-ta-lik-ma
DINGIR-SIS-KI | DINGIR-BABBAR ` DINGIR-NINNI-GE `
DU-HE-A  SI-DI-E-NE
60. IM - MA - NI - IN - GAR
in Sin Sambu u “IStar šu-puk Samele) ana
su-te-su-ri uk-tin-nu
ANA - DA NAM - EN - NA KIS AN - NA - GE
MU - UN - NE- SI- IN - HAL - HAL - LA
it-ti '"" A-nine be-lu-ut kis-sat samele) t-zu-us-su-nu-ti


TIT - A - AN - NE- NE DINGIR - DU NE - NE - IR
(PLATE XX.)
65. "ana Sse-lal-ti-su-nu ilâni” marani? - su


GIG- ANA- NE- GA- E BA- GUB- BA SUH-NU-GUE-MA
E-NE-NE-NE MU-UN-NE-SI-IN-AG-GI-ES
mu-sa u ur-Ya u-zu-uz-zu la na-par-ka Su-nu-ti
u-ma-'-tr-Su-nu-ti
70. U-BI-A V//-BI DINGIR-HUL-A-MES DU-HE-A DU-DU-MES
¿-nu-$u —si-bit-tli-su-mu ilani” im u;
ina Su-puk same(e) z-sur-ru
UM-SAG-TA  UD-SIR DINGIR-EN-ZU-NA SUR-BI
4 BA-AN-DIB-BI-ES
ina ma -kar ™ Nannari(ri) “Sin iz-zi-is
2l - ta - nam = mu - u
75. ŠUL DINGIR-BABBAR DINGIR-NI UR-SAG ID-NI-KU-A
= BA-NI-IB-GE-GE-ES
id-la! “Sambu ““Adadu kar-du ana i-di-Su-nu


ut-tir-ru


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET XVI. 93


They take their stand for evil, and none oppose.


55. When Bel heard these tidings and pondered in


inte his heart,


With Ea, the mighty Guide" of the gods, he


took counsel, .
60./ And Sin, Shamash, and Ishtar,”
Whom he bad set to rule the firmament:
With Anu," apportioning among them


The dominion of the heavenly host.


(PLATE XX.)
65. These three gods, his offspring,


He ordained to stand by night and day un-
ceasingly.
70. When the seven evil gods
Forced their way into the vault of heaven,


They clustered angrily round before the Crescent
of the Moon God,


75. (And) won over to their aid Shamash the mighty


and Adad the warrior,


MÒ. 14458. Yi.


a Massu, of which the exact meaning is at present unknown.
> The Moon, the Sun, and Venus.
e The heavens.


94


80.


85.


90.


95.


IOO.


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.
DINGIR-NINNI-GE ANA-DA! KI-TUS-AZAG? MU-UN-RI
NAM-LUGAL-LA
AN - NA - KU IR - HU - MU - UN - SA
Z Ig-tap it-ti “A-nim sarri sub-tu ellitim(tim)
ir-me-ma ana sarru-ut samele) t-kap-pu-ud
DINGIR-LUGAL-E-A DINGIR-GAL-GAL


E - NE - DA - NU - ME -A


sa ma ba- li eg me
U-BI-A WIT. A.
Z- nu - SU si - bit E
SAG TAB KALAM(?) KALAM . . . . . .


. UL A-AN (?)
ina — vi-e$ Sur-rt-t ana e
lè - mut - LA erg
SIR (?)-TA KA-AZAG-GA-TA MU
ana(?) sa-at-ti pi-t-su el-[l].
[DINGIR]-EN-ZU-NA ZIR NAM-[MULU-GISGAL-LU] .


“Sin . . -- . . . gi-ir a-me-lu-[ti]
[dal ?] - ka - ti ma - a - ti
«Vs. ox oe (EB SIG - SIG - GA - BI BA - TIL
.. . . . -um id-da-li-ih-ma Sa-ku-um-mis i-šib


. NI-IN-SU-MU-UG-GA KI-TUS NAM-EN-NA NU-TUS
[musa (2) ul ur-ra a-dir ina su-bat be-lu-ti-Su ul a-sib
[DINGIR]-HUL-A-MES MULU-KIN-GA-A DINGIR-LUGAL-
LA-MES
wani” lim-nu-tum mar-sip-ri sa "" A-nim sar-vi Su-nu
SAG-HUL HA-ZA-MES GIG  BA-UR-UR-RA- MES
mu-kil kakkad limuttim tim) ina mu-si tt-ta-na-
ar-ra-yu su-nu


80.


85.


90.


BB).


IOO.


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET XVI. 95


(And) Ishtar who with Anu the king
Hath founded a shining dwelling,
And hath planned the dominion of the heavens,
God and king the great gods
Without whom
When [those] seven .
At the first [began to work ?] evil

his pure mouth |
Sin . . . the seed of mankind.

troubling (?) the land,

was troubled and sate in gloom,
(By night and] day he was dark,
Nor dwelt in the seat of his rule.
The evil.gods, the messengers of Anu the king,


Raising their evil heads went to and fro* through
the night,


1 S. 1,448, AN-NA-GE for GE ANA-DA.


? S. 1,448 inserts GA.


a Literally, “ shook themselves.”


96


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


105.


I IO.


(IS.


120.


nés.


GAR - HUL- A KIN - KIN - NA MES
li- mut- tu E le- mi- =e ŠU - nu
ANA-SA-GA-TA IMI-GIM KALAMA-TA  ZI-GA-MEŠ
25-tu ki-rib Samele) ki-ma sa-a-ri ana ma-a-ti
2t-te-bu-ni su-nu
DINGIR - EN - LIL- LA SUL DINGIR - EN - ZU - NA
SU - MU - UG - GA - NI


« e "EE id - li e San na - an - dur - sa
AN - NA IGI - GAB - MU - UN - E - A
ina same(e) ¿ = mur - ma
EN BUH = A ~- NI DINGIR - NUZKU - RA


GU - MU - UN - AN - DE - E |
be-lum ana  suk-kal-li-šu “Nuzku  t-Sts-st
` LUH-MU DINGIR-NUZKU I-MU ZU-AB-KU TUM-MA-AB
suk-kal-li ™ Nuzku a-ma-ti ana ap-st-t bi-1-li
DIMMU DU - MU DINGIR - EN'- ZU - NA AN - NA
SU-MU-UG-GA-BI GIG-GA
te-tm ma-ri-ia “Sin sa ina samele) mar-si-15
[ ]-ad-[ rz]
DINGIR-EN-KI TU-RA . .  ŠU-A-AŠ-AN-NA-AN-GI
ana “ÉE-a ina af-si-ci 5u-un-ni-sum-ma
DINGIR - NUZKU I LUGAL - LA - GE SAG-SAR-A-
BA - SI- IN - NA - AG
“Nuzku a-mat be-ili-su it-ta-'-id-ma
DINGIR- EN -KI- GE TU-RA-GE GIR-PAP = HAL - LA
MU - UN - GIN `
a-na "E-a ina ap-si-i fu-ri-du il-lak
DINGIR-NUN MAS-SU-MAII EN DINGIR-NU-DIM-MUD-RA


a-na ru-bt-e mas-su-u  $1-t-vi belu Ré


I IO.


HIG.


120.


Do


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET XVI. 97


. Searching out wickedness,


Rushing loose over the land

Like the wind from the depths of the heavens.
Bel saw the darkening of the hero Sin in heaven,
And the lord spake unto his minister Nuzku :
“O my minister Nuzku!

“ Bear my message unto the Ocean Deep,

“ Tell unto Ea in the Ocean Deep

“The tidings of my son Sin,

“Who in heaven hath been grievously bedimmed.”
And Nuzku, praising the message of his master,
Went therefore unto Ea in the Ocean Deep;


Unto Ea the prince, the mighty guide and lord,


1 K. 4904 begins DINGIR .....


98 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


DINGIR-NUZKU I LUGAL-LA-GE IIAL-BI-SU-A
BA-AN-NA-AN-GI

"^" Vusku a-mat be-ili-šu a-hi-en-na-a us-|ta|-an-na-(a |

DINGIR-EN-KI-KA-GE TU-RA-GE  I-BI GIS-NE-IN-TUK

im F-a ia ap-st-t ama-tu' Su-a-tu 15-me?-ma

130. SU -BI KA-NE-IN-TAR U-A KA-BI NE-IN-SI

sa-pat-su  iS-Sukò-ma "u-a ffl-l-Su um-tal*-l

DINGIR-EN-KI DU-NI  DINGIR- SILIG -MULU -ŠAR
GU-NAM-MI-IN-DE I MI-NI-IN?- DIB-BA


im F-a mári-su9 * Marduk is-si-ma a-ma-ta u-sah-haz'


GIN - NA DU - MU DINGIR - SILIG - MULU - SAR
135. a - lik ma - vi Marduk


DU-KUŠ UD-SIR DINGIR-EN-ZU-NA? AN-NA
|... SU-MU-UG-GA-BI GIG-GA
mar” ru-bi-e na-an-na-ri" * Sin sa ina samele)
mar-si-1$ '-ad-ru
(PLATE XXI.)
SU-MU-UG-GA-BI AN-NA? MAS-TIG-GAR-MU-UN-E-A
na - an? - dur - Su ina Samele) Su-pu-tu
140. V//-BI-E-NE DINGIR-HUL-A-MES MULU-BAD-GA P MES
IM-NU-TE-MAL-DA-MES
si-bit-ti Su-nu dánif MW lim-nu-tum mus-mi-lu-ti 18
la a-diru-ti Su-nu
VII-BI-E-NE DINGIR-HUL-A-MES A-MA-TU-GIM ZI


KALAM-MA
BA - AN - UR - UR - A- MES
st-bit-tt Ššu-nu o dáni"WM Lim-nu-tum sa kima“
a-bu-bi 8
145. 12% - bu - ma mati 1-ba-'-u SU - NU
KALAM - MA IM - MIR - RA - GIM ZI - ZI - MES


e e ` e a D v
ana? oma-a-ti kima me? - fie ti'?-bu-m su-nu


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET XVI. 99


Nuzku there repeated the message of his master.
Ea in the Ocean Deep heard this message,

130. And bit his lip and filled his mouth with wailing.
Ea called unto his son Marduk,
And with a message entrusted him:

135. “ Go, my son Marduk,
“Son of a Prince, the Crescent of the Moon God
“In heaven hath been grievously bedimmed ;


MET XXI.)


* The darkening thereof is visible throughout the
heavens.


140. “ Those seven evil gods, death-dealing without
fear,


“Those seven evil gods, rushing on like a flood,
145. “ Have scoured the land,


“Have attacked the land like a storm,


MS - ur. = 3 a ETS ea = a ME < ES GE


! K. 4,904, mat for ma-tu. * K. 4,904, [m ]i-e.

3 K. 4,904, Su-uk. + K. 4,904, fa-al.

5 K. 4,904, MU-UN for MI-NI-IN. ê 33,712, [ma]-ra-a-su.
7 K. 4,904, ha-az.

* K. 4,904 omits KU; 33,712, NUN-NA for KU.

9 K. 4,904 omits. m 200712, Mae

"K. 4,904, fe-mi mári-1a for the beginning of this line.

E KN ood. B K. 4,904 inserts A.

" K. 4,901 omits 2. 8K. 4,007.


^ K. 4.004 m K. 4,904, ki-ma.
n K. 4,904, du. WE. 4,904, Ze:
? K. 4,904, a-na. ? ak. 43904, mu


IOO


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF AAA


DUP-SAG-TA UD- SIR DINGIR-EN-ZU-NA SUR -BI
7 BA-AN-DIB-BI-ES
INA ma-har na-an-na-ri  * Sin 12-21-15
2l-ta-nam-mu-u


150. SUL DINGIR-BABBAR DINGIR-NI UR-SAG A!- NI-KU-A
BA-NI-IB-GE-GE-ES plus.
dla (l Šamšu [”Jddadu  kar-du a-na
z-di-Su-nu ut-tir-yu
IM - MI - IN - DIB - BI -E - NE
ra- a- ti 2- tak- su
[Hiatus of about fourteen lines.]
(168) MI . . . (169) . . . (170) 50 enn
(172). . . . . 73) . BE IS
us ma bit bal-ti u  mes- vi
me - lam -me t-su-u tap - fi
KA E-GAL-LA-GE GU // TAB
ma ba- ab e-kal-li ka-a
KUBU-LI-IN TAR-A (SIG Ris
189. SIG - SAL-?- UŠ- NU -ZU U-ME- NI- NU- NU
u-li-in-na bur-ru-um-ta sa-rat u-ni-ki
la pi-ti-li Sa-rat bu-hat-ti la pi-te-te ti-me-ma
LUGAL-E DU - DINGIR - RA- NA ID-SU-GIR-BI
U-ME-NI-KESDA-KESDA
LUGAL-E DU-DINGIR-RA-NA UD-SIR-DINGIR-EN-ZU-NA-
GIM ZI KALAM-MA SU-UL
185. Sar-ru mar ill-$Su sa ki-ma na-an-nan ™ Sin


na- pis- ti matt u- kal- lu
UD - SIR - BI- GIM SAG-BI SUÚ ŠI CUR SS
ki-ma  ma-an-na-yi td-dt-St-t ina ri-st-Su Sa-lum-


[ma-ti is-su)


[Hiatus of about eleven lines. |


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET XVI. IOI


ee — — MÀ


“Clustering angrily round the Crescent of the
Moon God,


“Have won over to their aid Shamash the
mighty and Adad the warrior.


4 “Holding
[Hiatus of about ten lines. |


I Mg lon of Plenteous Increáse


| They have power .
|


In the palace-gate a cord
180. Weave thou a two-coloured cord* from the hair
of a virgin kid and from the wool of a virgin
lamb,
Upon the limbs of the king," son of his god,
bind it, |
185. Then shall the king,” the son of his god
Who holdeth the life of the land like the Crescent
of the Moon God,
Placing it as a glory on his head,
Like the new Crescent of the Moon,


[Hiatus of about five lines.]


EE 6 186. ID.


a Ulinnu. Cf. Syriac heláná, in kel’ tha d kelana, stola seu orarium
(Brockelmann, Lexicon Syriacum, p. 83, 6).

> The use of the word šarru here instead of the common amelu is
very similar to that in certain of the Prayers of the Raising of the
Hand (King, Bab. Magic and Sorcery, xxiii), ep, No. 2, l. 26,
dupl. D, “ I, thy servant, Ashurbanipal, the son of his god... .”


102


200.


210.


215:


220...


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONTA.


GAR - HUL
lim - nu tn - na
GIS-MA-NU GIŠ-KU-LIG-GA-TA KA-[KA]  SAG-GA-NA
U-ME-NI-GAR
era kak-ka dan-na rig-ma(?)-ta ina ri-si-su


Su-Eun-ma


NAM - SUB NUN+ KI GA U - ME - NI - SOM
si- pat alt FOL 2- di- ma
CAR SINA GI - BIL sī U - ME - NI =e


A - GUB - BA A - AZAG - GA NA - RI - GA - A - AN
"S me?! el-u- ti ul - lil - Su - ma
LUGAL - E DU - DINGIR - RA - NA U - ME - NI - EL
U - ME - NI - LAH - LAH - GA
UTUG-HUL  A-LA-ŅUL  GIDIM-HUL MULCA TUN


DINGIR - HUL MAŠKIM - HUL
E- [A] NAM- BA- TU- TU- NE
ana [bíti | a-a l - yu - bu - ni
DA E - GAL - LA - GE NAM - BA - TE - MAL - NE
z - da - at ekalli a-a at - hu -u -ni
LUGAL - LA - RA NAM - BA - TE - MAL - NE
ana Sar - rt a-a it - hu - u - ni
ERI - A NAM - BA - NIGIN - E - NE


asu a = 2 a-a zs - sah - ru = u - nt
NAM - BA - TU - TU - NE


a-a 2-7u-bu-u-nt
[Hiatus of about three lines. ]


RI - He


200.


210),


as.


UTUKKI LIMNŪTI, TABLET XVI. 103


Evil
Place at his head the tamarisk,


The mighty weapon of . . . ,


. Perform the Incantation of Eridu,


Bring unto him a censer, a torch,
With the purest water wash him,


And cleanse and purify the king," the son of
his god.


Evil Spirit, evil Demon, evil Ghost, evil Devil,

Evil God, evil Fiend,

Into the [house] may they not enter,

Unto the walls of the palace may they not draw
nigh,

Unto the king may they not draw nigh,

Around the city may they not circle,


may they not enter.


[Hiatus of about two lines.]


e See Wote 0, p. 101.


104 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


INIM - INIM - MA [UTUG - HUL - A] - KAN
EN . . UL ....... S
MI()-RA-A .......... JON
bie + , + + + + + (0 B
230. SAG - BU- BU-I , . . . . . . , . 2m

(PLATE XXII.)

Sar-ri-vu la(?)........ pain
E-NE-NE-NE...... SCENE
su -nu úmulma) la pa-ku(?)-u(?) . . . su-au
E-NE-NE-NE . . . . onn
235) e-la Sa Su-nu . . Same(e) ilu ma-am-man ul in-nam-bi
ANA DINGIR-EN-LIL-LA GU-NAM-MI-IN-DE-ES


"4-nu-um u "Be im - bu- su -nu ti
DINGIR-EN-ZU-NA [ANA]-ŠA-TA SU-MU-UG-GA-GI-ES


“Sin ina [lib] samele) u - Sa di-n


240. . . . . . , . . . . I S
25 - Au - tu
ES


( Hiatus of several lines.)


tu

245; . CNN

MULU  DU-DINGIR- RA- NA.
URUDU-GAR-LIG-GA UR-SAG AN-NA-[GE ZA-PA-RAM]-
ME-NE-[A-NI]

HU-LUH-HA GAR-HUL BA-AB-SIR-RI SU-U-ME-TI
GIS-MA-NU GIS-KU-LIG-GA-TA KA-KA U-ME-NI-IN-GAR
250. NAM - SUB NUN - KI - GA U - ME - NI - SUM


L e ki


Fa b 10,6. 300.
/


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET XVI. 105


PRAYER AGAINST [THE EviL Spirits].


Incantation :—
WRegingestommay . . . . are they,
ENEMIES X. . . . are they,


. (PLATE XXII.)
They are the storm


235. Over that which is theirs in heaven


No god hath been proclaimed,
Anu and Bel proclaimed them.
They have darkened the Moon God in the


heavens,
240. They have torn away


. [Hiatus of several lines.]


The man, son of his god
Take thou the potent meteorite* of heaven,
Which by the roar of its awful might removeth
all evil,
Place the tamarisk,
The mighty weapon of . . . ,
250. Perform the Incantation of Eridu,


* URUDU-GAR-LIG-GA ; GAR-LIG-GA=e-ru-u (Cun. Texts, part xii,
pl. 36, cols. iii-iv, 45); URUDU-GAR-LIG-GA =e-ra-a dan-nu
(W.A.L, iv, 13, i, 18-19: at-ta e-ra-a dan-nu ki-ma mas-ki
“Thou (bendest 7) strong copper like skin"). URUDU-GAR-LIG-GA
from its determinative is evidently some metal or metal object.
From the description of it given here (“the potent erú of heaven,
which by the roar of its awful might") and the addition on
Tablet “A,” i, 3o, “ Place him where the thunder roars,” it is
probable that it signifies a meteorite or meteoric iron.


109


255.


260.


205.


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.
U- UL- UL- MES DINGIR - HUL- [A - MES]


ZI ANA-DINGIR-EN-LIL-LA-BI ! KAN-[PA]
GABA - ZU ZI - BA - RA - AB


2- vat- ka


A- GA- ZD, mw. |
ana ar- ki- ka
E- A NAM- BA- {[TU- TU- “NÈ
GIS- ZA - RA? NAM - BA- IM- [IM- E- NE]
ERI - A? NAM - BA - [NIGIN - E- NE]
E - TVA BA - RA - ES
U - UL - UL - MES DINGIR - HUL - [A - MES]
UTUG - HUL A - LA - HUL GIDIM - HUL


MULLA - HUL DINGIR-(HUL- MASKIM- HUL]
ZI AN - NA KAN - PA ZI KI- A [KAN - PA]


INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL- A - KAN


EN U-GAL ANA-TA SU-BAR-RA-MES [DINGIR-HUL A-MES]


! fimu(mu) rabúti? sa [ultu same) us-su-ru-[nz ilani
limnuti sunu]


[Hiatus of several lines. ]


1 34,106 translates: mis ““A-mim . . . .

? 34,106 translates: zna sir-ri

3 34,106 translates: ana a-/t a-a is-

* 34,106 translates: z$-/u lib biti li-su-

5 K.2,406 translates: u/

$ K. 2,406 omits.

! 34,106 ends here with (a) kima labiri-Su satir-ma . . .


(b).


m HN TA


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET XVI. 107


O raging storms, ye evil gods!
By Anu and Bel may ye be exorcised!
Thy breast
255. Behind thee .
Into the house may they not [enter],
Through the hinge [may they not crawl $),
Around the city may they not circle!
260. Go ye forth from the house,
O raging storms, ye evil gods!
Evil Spirit, evil Demon, evil Ghost,
Evil Devil, [evil] God, [evil Fiend],
By Heaven be ye exorcised! By Earth be ye


exorcised !
265. PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.
Incantation :—


Great storms directed from heaven,


They are the evil gods!


[Hiatus of several lines. ]


= The Sumerian IM (Brünnow, No. 4,822) has the value Salí, “to
sink” (into water), and we must supply some such meaning here.
Jzikku is used of spirits d/owing through the hinge elsewhere
(Tablet V, i, 35).


108


ETO. —


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


sirma KI
[DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR : GAR-GA]-E : GIN-NA DU-MU


RAM - ME - NE


27


205:


209!


U-GAL  ANA-TA SU BAR-RA-MES DINGIR-HUL-A-MES
AN -NA  HA-BA-GIBIS- NE KI- TUS - BI- KU
HA- BA- AN- GE- GE- E- NE


ana Samele) li-lu-u-ma ana Sub-ti-su-nu li-tu-ru


. UTUG-HUL ` A-LA-HUL KI-TUS HA-BA-GIBIS-NE


u-tuk-ku lim-nu a-lu-u lim-nu ana irsitim(tim)
la-ri-du

GIDIM-HUL MULLA-HUL ERI-TA HA-BA-RA-E

e-kim-mu lin-nu gal-lu-u lim-nu is-tu ali li-su-u


ZI DINGIR-GAL-GAL-E-NE-GE U-MU-UN-NI- PA


p A NAM - pw TUE PS NE
Zb RA NAM- MU- UN- DA- PATER


DA-DA E-GAL-LA-GE NAM-BA-TE-MÉEOUOBM
BAD NA t AN -

ALAD Ec GNE

E - SIR - RA


ERI - A


[Hiatus of several lines.]


270.


2o. s


280.


285.


UTUKKI EIMNÜTI, TABLET XVI. IO9


Marduk hath seen him : (etc.)
“What I: fete.)
“Gou, son: (etc. )*


[Hiatus of several lines.)


Great storms directed from heaven,

They are the evil gods!

Unto heaven may they ascend,

Unto their abodes may they return!

May the evil Spirit, the evil Demon,

Into the earth descend!

May the evil Ghost, the evil Devil,

Go forth from the city!

By the great Gods may ye be exorcised !

Into the house may they not enter,

The fence may they not break through,

Unto the neighbourhood of the palace may they
not draw nigh,

The wall


The guardian spirit of the palace .


. The street


Phe city .


[Hiatus of several lines.)


Ke Tablet “A,” l. 17.
TOE U. 247.


IIO DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF 'BABYLONIXA.


š HUL i
. UH(?)-ZU UH(?)-RI-A GAR-SA-A GAR-HUL-A..
ZI AN-NA KAN-PA ZI KI-A KAN - PA


295. INIM-INIM -MA DINGIR-HUL TAR-RU-DA-KAN
e men | Y 4 tī ee chi

LEN GI -AZACI IEC L GAP PA GI-SUK-AZAG-GA

GIS - BANSUR - EL - LA? DINGIR - RI - E - NE A

GI - URUDU - SUN “TAB WA SU - ZI RITA

ka-an pa-as-ti sa sa-lum-ma-tu ra-mu-u


300. GA-E MULU-KIN-GA-A DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR ME-EN


mår - Sp -ri sa “Marduk a - na? - £u
NAM - SUB NA - RI - GA NE - IN - SUM
sip - tum eliitum(tum) ina na -di-e-a


A-*SIR GIS-SA-KA-NA-TA KI-TA INE N PEP


305. id-da-a it , EE ar - me - ma
(PLATE ADMI.)

DINGIR - E- A i? = A KAT TI

LIA zna biti li- SA

UTUG-*SIG-GA ALAD-*ŠIG-GA E-A HE-EN-TU-TU-NE

UTUG - HUL A = TA TI GIDIM - HUL


| K. 2,406 translates | ka-nu-u el-lu ka-nu]-u ra-bu-u ka-an ap-pa-
ri el-lu.

? K. 2,406 translates [ka-an pa |-as-Su-ri el-Iu sa ilani”.

3 K. 2,406, ana for a-na.


a Pastí. It is possible that this is the same as the Hebrew
pisteh, “Max,” but the Sumerian seems to suggest a copper vessel.

b GIS-SA-KA-NA, for which no Assyrian equivalent has been given.
It occurs also in Tablet “C” (pl. 32), l. 163 [GIS-GAM]-MA
(= kippati) GIS-SA-KA-NA-GE. Now kippatu is the Syriac kappetha


UFUKKISLIMNUTI, TABLET XVI. I


witchcraft, sorcery, enchantment, and all
evil,
By Heaven be ye exorcised! By Earth be ye
exorcised !


295. PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL GOD WHICH


EULTETH OFF.


Incantation :—

A clean reed, a long reed,

A reed from an undefiled brake,

A clean vessel of the gods,

A stalk of flax* encircled with a glory.
300. I am the messenger of Marduk,

As I perform the pure incantation,
305. I put bitumen on the door” beneath,


| (PLATE XXIII.)

That Ea may rest within the house.
May a kindly Spirit, a kindly Guardian,
Enter the house.

May no evil Spirit or evil Demon,


(Brockelmann, Lexicon, p. 163, a), “arch,” so that “ Arch of the
GIS-SA-KA-NA ” clearly points to the meaning “ door” for the latter
word (e, the actual door as the Sumerian “ wood: middle: door"
shows, and not merely the whole doorway, gateposts and all).
This is still further borne out by the present passage ‘‘I put
bitumen on the door beneath,” in order that Ea (the god of the
water supposed to be spilt on the floor) may remain within the
house, and not drain away over the threshold into the street.


112 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF-BABYLONIA.


310. MULLA - HUL DINGIR - HUL MASKIM - HUL
LUGAL - RA NAM - BA - TE - MAL - E - NE
ZI AN- NA KAN-PA ZI KI-A KAN - PA
INIM - INIM - MA GI - DUR - GIL - MA - KAN


EN SIG S2
BIS. , — RE
sa - rat en -[zi]


DINGIR - NIN - NI (2)
alu
320. AMAS


ina (supuri)
[Hiatus of several lines.)


325. E GOAL = LA A NAM - BA - TU - TU - NE
LUGAL - LA - RA NAM - BA - TE - MAL - E - NE
ZI AN - NA ` KAN - PA ZI KI- A KAN - PA


INIM-INIM-MA SIG-UZ-SIG-GA RIK-KAR-KAN


EN  MULU-HUL  MULU-HUL  MULU-BI MULU-HUL
330. lim -nu li- mun a-me-lu su-u li- mun


MULU - BI NAM - MULU - GIŠGAL - LU MULU - HUL
MULU -BI MULU = HUL


v D . ke D
a-me -lk su-u ina fil-50 l -man E


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET XVI. 113
310. Or evil Ghost or evil Devil,
Or evil God or evil Fiend,
Draw nigh unto the King.
By Heaven be ye exorcised! By Earth be ye


exorcised |!
PRAYER OF THE REED EL |. (2X
Incantation :—


EN. Goats hair
The goddess.
320. In the cattle-pen


[Hiatus of several lines.)


325. Into the house may they not enter,
Unto the King may they not draw nigh.
By Heaven be ye exorcised! By Earth be ye
exorcised !


PRAYER OF THE HAIR or THE YELLOW
GOAT (AND) THE Kip.


[Incantation :—
330. He that is evil is evil,
Tharmean is evil:
That man among men is evil,


That man is evil.


IIA DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABVEONTA.


[SA]-TUR NAM-MULU-GISGAL-LU SIR TIK-KIL-DUG-GA

ma SA - sur — ni-si swa u - kan - ni - nu

335. MULU-BI NAM-MULU-GISGAL-LU GU I(?) SA-A LAL-E
amelul su-u ina n-s ka-a e-sa-a


ana Se -e-ti tar - su

NI - BI - À iu” A GU - DE - A - NI - TA

UT MULU - RA SU - SU

340. pu - luh - ta = šu sa-'-i-rat ri - gim - SU

| zm - tu amelu z - sal - [lah]
KI GIG - GA - BI HUE Aa NI DU "MH


ŠA - BI GUR US - NU - UN - GIR(?)


a- sar | ma-ru-us-ti-su  lim-[ni]


345. lab - ba Su Z - kas - sa - as
? ALAD IGI - HUL DINGIR - HUL
ŠTUR - RA NE - IB - DIB
AMAS - A NE - IB - DIB
IDR Bi MULU - NU - NA
350. s... . AND us (?)
SA - BI - A DINGIR - BABBAR BA
BU . . . . , A l
ana — libbiiu “Sami ul . . . . i-kab-bi
DINGIR-BABBAR  NE-E-TA SU-[BI] . . SIR-RA-A-AN
SE it Samsu ina an -ni - ti kat - su lt - 1s - sul
MUGAL - MU DINGIR - EN - KE GE *SAG - GA
TAG - TACU | ZA - A - WON


INIM-INIM-MA DINGIR-HUL TAR-RU-DA-KAN


EN U AS DINGIR [erasure] HUL
360. Dubhu XVI UTUG - HUL - MES
Ekal *”* ASSur-bani-apli Sar kissati sar mms WA


(Etc.)


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET XVI. 115


In the midst* of mankind
They have let (him) lurk’ (like) a snake ;


335. That man is set among men as a.cord that is


stretched out for a net .
He hath sprinkled the mancas with venom,
The terror of him Stifling his cries.
Where his evil pain [hath smitten |
It hath torn his heart
Spirit, evil eye, evil god
Hunting the sheepfold
Hunting the cattle-pen
His side the man "TE:
Unto his heart E |]. hath spoken


. By this (incantation) may Shamash remove his


hand,
O my lord Ea! Thine is the power to brighten
and bless! a


PRAYER AGAINST THE EviL GOD WHICH
CUTTETH OFF.


— P n — — — —  — —— M ——


Incantation :—“ A storm | erasure | evil.


360. SIXTEENTH TABLET OF THE SERIES “THE EvIL


SPIRITS.”


! K. 5,238, a-me-lu.

? K. 5,238 translates se-e-du ša

° K. 5,238 translates /ar-ba-sa t-ba (?)

tk 2077, - O nor . . K. 4,627, DINGIR- EE (r) .


Sasur, apparently literally ** the womb.”
Ukanninu: cf. W.A.Z., iv, 43, iii, 6, z/dni kima kalbi kunnunu


(parallel to rabsu), “The gods crouched like dogs."


4 ÉL )


Tablet “A.”


OBVERSE.
Cor. | (Beare XXIV).
BU E
ar
pak (2) - ku
NU Ju


5. + + + + ma sg] . . . . [a] Zann
. . [DINGIR-RAB]-KAN-ME-A EGIR MULU-RA SU-SU
la-ba-su arki ameli 2-sal-la-hu
[SA-GIG LIKIR-GIG] TUR-RA  SAG-GIG GISGAL-LU
MULU-RA DUL-LA
[mu-ru-us libl-bi &iis lib-bi mur-su ti--i a-lu-u sa
ameli kat-me
IO. [MULU . . ]GIN  U-GIM  MU-UN-DA-RU-US SI-NA
BA-NI-IN-SU-ES
a-me-lu mut-tal-lik kima úmulmu) th-mu-su-ma
mar-tu  ig-sa-nu-us
MULU-GISGAL-LU-BI ZI-NI-TA NI-BAL-BAL-E ZI-GIM
MU-UN-ZI |
a-me-lu su-u it-li na-pis-ti-Su it-ta-nab-kat (sic)
ki- ma a- gir i ti- sa- ap - pu- '
L5. U NU-U N-DX-AB"ISSUSE A NU-UN-DA-AB-NAK-E
'U-U-A A-A U-ME-NI-IB-ZAL-ZAL : zna u-a-a #mi(mi)-Sam


us - tab -ri


CaBfet "o"


OBVERSE.


Cor. I (PLATOA XIV).


E desert . . . they spare not,
the ghoul after the man hath sprinkled
Spreading heart disease, heartache,
Sickness (and) disease over the city * of the man,
Io. Scorching» the wanderer like the day,
And filling him with bitterness ;
Like a flood they are gathered together,
(Until) this man revolteth against himself.
15. No food can he eat, no water can he drink,
But with woe each day ts he sated.
Marduk hath seen $ (him and
(Into the house of his father Ea hath entered and
spoken,
(Olea tic, o NE


2 Or * Heart disease, heartache, sickness, disease, the demon
which envelopeth the man."

b Jhmusu; cf. Syriac A'ma, aruit.

e Jsappu’; cf. Syriac s’pha, coacervavit.

d The following lines are abbreviated in the text (as they
frequently are) by division-marks. The incident is given in full in
part xvii, pl. 26, Tablet “ P," the only difference being in the line
which Marduk speaks to his father, which is the first line of
the tablet. Similarly, in the sixth tablet of the series Shurpu
(W.A.7., iv, 7, i, 16-32), where the lines are also written out,
Marduk quotes the first line of the tablet. Unfortunately, here it
cannot be supplied.


118 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS CR


DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR IGI:  GAR-GA-E: GIN-NA
DU-MU
A DUG - A - SA - AM U - ME - NI - DE
mé?! a - sa - am -me -e Sit - pu - uk - ma
20. GIS-SINIG U-IN-NU-US SA-BI U MEDINE
A - BI NAM - SUB NUN-KI-GA U-ME-NI-SUM
| MULU-GISGAL-LU-BI A U-ME-NI-SU : 2 GAR-NA
GIBILLA | U- ME-NI-E
NAM-TAR SU MULU KA-NI-GAL-LA A-GIM
HE-IM-MA-AN-SUR-SUR-RI
nam-ta-ri? sa ina su-mur ameli ba-Su-u kima me-e
li-1s-vu-ur
25. dò wè OO UR-SAG AN-NA-GE ZA-PA-RAMĒME-
M
NR-A-NI HD LU I ES
GAR - HUL BA - AB - SIR - RA SU- U - ME- TI
mu kar-va-du t “A-nim (sa tna) ri-gim me-lam-mi-su
gal-tu


mimma lim-nu t-na-as-sa-hu li-ki-e-ma


! K. 4,965 inserts translation amelu $u-[ a-tu |

2 K. 4,965 inserts translation GAR-NA mak . E

AA 1 K. 4,965, rad for ra-du.

a Binu; see Brockelmann, Lexicon, p. 37, b, under the Syriac dina.

^ The line GAR-NA GI-BIL-LA U-ME-NI-E is translated in Cuz.
Texts, part xvii, pl. s, ili, 5, by ,, 5: -a Su Oi- -SU m.

e Lisrur; the word saráru appears to have the meaning of
trickling when used in conjunction with liquids: cf. W.A.Z,
iv, 20, 3, obv. 16, kakkaka usumgallu $a islu pišu imtu la inattuku,
4 Thy weapon is a serpent whose mouth is unslavered with venom,”
paralleled in the next line by damu la isarruru, “ not slobbering
blood”; masaku is the Hebrew na/hak, “to pour out.” When used
of a star, saráru seems to mean “to appear" or “flash into


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET “ A.” 119


(Twice he hath said unto him,


(*What this man shall do he knoweth not
whereby he may be relieved."


(Ea hath answered his son Marduk,


(*O my son, what dost thou not know, what
more can I give thee?


(“O Marduk, what dost thou not know, what can
I add unto thy knowledge ?)


“ What I (know, thou knowest also),

“ Go, my son, (Marduk) ;

“ Pour forth water from an asaz;5/):-vessel,
20. “ Lay a sprig * of mashtaka! on his heart,


* With the water perform the Incantation of
Eridu,


“ Sprinkle this man with the water,
“ Bring unto him a censer,” a torch,


“That the Plague-demon, which resteth in the
body of the man,


“ Like the water may trickle away !"


25. “ Take thou the potent meteorite of heaven, — Me“


“ Which by the roar of its awful might removeth
all evil.


appearance"; cf. Cun. Texts, part xvii, pl. 19, l. 12, kima kakkab
Samame isarrur, “(Headache) like a heavenly star comes on”;
part xvi, pl. 25, 1. 53, . . limas kima kakkabu isarrulr),
“ , . . banefully like a star comes on.” Cf. also the astrological
texts, e.g., my Reports of the Magicians and Astrologers, No. 28, rev. 2,
[Ana] kakkabu isrurma, etc. The idea of motion is shown in
Tablet ** V," part xvii, pl. 34, l. 28, where zsarruru is parallel to
'irru, and again pl. 35, l. 59, where it is parallel to 22//ku.


120 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF PWEMWEONTA.


KI ZA-PA-KAM SUM-MU U-ME-NI-DE-A DAH-ZU-HI (?)-A
30. a-sar ri-giml  na-du-u u-sub-Sum-ma lu-ri-su-ka
TU - DUG - GA? I DINGIR - EN - KI - GA - GE
3 URUDU-GAR-LIG-GA UR-SAG AN-NA-GE ZA-PA-RAM-
ME-NE-A-NI HU-MU-RA-AB-DAH-E
UTUG - HUL A - LA - HUL HA - BA - RA - E
u-tuk-ku lim-nu a-lu-u lim-nu lit-ta-si
35. GIDIM-HUL MULLA-HUL HA-BA-RA-E : DINGIR-HUL
MASKIM-HUL : ,,
(PLATE XO
DINGIR-LUGAL-KAN-ME DINGIR-LUGAL-KAN-ME-A
EGIR MULU-RA SU-SU HA-BA-RA-E
SA-GIG LIKIR-GIG TURRA SAG-GIG-GA GISGAL-LU
. MULU-RA DUL-LA
ZI DINGIR-GAL-GAL-E-NE-GE U-ME-NI-PA . . HA-BA-RA-E
HA - BA- RA- AN- LAH- LAH - GI- ES
40. SILIM-MA-NA SU-*SIG-GA DINGIR - RA - NA - KU
HE-EN-SI-IN-GE-GE


INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUE AR


EN UMUG-|IVE A-LAÀ-HUNE MULU GIG-BAR-A-KU SILA-A
KIL-DA
u-tuk-ku lim-nu a-lu-u lim-nu Sa ana miu-u-Si-i ina
su-u-ka par-ku
GIDIM-HUL MULLA-HUL MULU GIG-BAT V E-SIR
KIL-BA f
45. e-kim-mu din-uu gal-lu-u lim-nu sa ana mu-u-Si-i
wna su-la-a par-| ku]
. BAD-SA-AN-SA-SA GAR-NAM-MA NU-UN-KAD-KAD . |


[e]-mu-kis taS-Sa-as-Su Sa mimma Sum-su la is-st-bu


3)


UTUKKI LIMNÚTI, TABLET “A. 121


30. -“ Place him where the thunder roar is uttered,
that it may help thee,
“ By the magic of the word of Ea
“ May the potent meteorite of heaven
“ With its awful roar help thee,
35. “ That the evil Spirit and the evil Demon may
go forth,
“ That the evil Ghost and the evil Devil may go
forth,
“ That the evil God and the evil Fiend may go
forth,
(PLATE XXV.)
“ That the Hag-demon and the Ghoul may go
forth
“ That have sprinkled (water) after the man,
“ That have spread heart disease, heartache,
“ Sickness (and) disease over the city of the man.” 2
By the, Great Gods|I;exorcise/you,
That ye may go forth, and get hence!
40. May his welfare be secured at the kindly hands /..
of the gods. (


PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.


Incantation :—
O evil Spirit, O evil Demon, that have power by
night over the street,
45. O evil Ghost, O evil Devil, at have power by `
night over the path,
O thou that bringest affliction in thy might, and
leavest nothing untouched,


K. 4,965, ru mu for ri-gim.
K. 4,965 inserts translation : 277. MM
K. 4,965 inserts translation ,, -u kar-rad |


Dee ROVE ON D. 117.


1
2
3


122 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABVLONTA.


IGI - HUS- A MELAM ZAG - SIR
ša pani iz-zu  me-lam-mu — ki-is-su-[ru]
50.. . . . A *SUG-GA NU-UN-ZU A
na (?)--i-ri sa ma-ga-ri la t-du-[u] .
HUL-BI-TA MUL-GIM SUR-SUR-RI-E-[NE]
lim-niš kima  kak-ka-bu i-sar-ru-[ru]
RA MULU GIG-BAR-A-KU E-A-NI-KUJBA


[Sa] ana mu-u-si-t ana biti


Ui
UA


[Cols. II and III fragmentary. ]


REVERSE.
Con Mi a:


INIM - INIM - MA [UTUG - HUL - A - KAN]


EN UTUG-HUL [EDIN-NA-ZU] .

u-|tuk-ku lim-nu ana. si-n]
Corde

[A-LA - HUL] EDIN - NA - ZU
a-lu-[u] lun-nu a-na s|[í - z]

[GIDIM - HUL] EDIN - NA - ZU
e-kim [mu] lim-nu ana se].

5. [MULLA - HUL] EDIN - NA - ZU

gat-lu-[u] lim-nu ana  si-[rz)


ZU ŠU- KAN - NE - IN - [TIL = 9


v a To TA ka li - ki
SUKU a, °

[PAD] - ZUN - ZU SU - KAN - NE - IN - TIL - [LA]
Aka DES == shou ki nè TA


SAR - iMd <
10. pi - ru - um - mat? - Fa Ue = A1


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET “ A.” 128


—


whose face is wrathful, girt about with


brilliance,
50.. . . . . that knoweth no kindness,
banefully like a star cometb on,
PES). by night unto the house .


[Cols. II and III fragmentary.]


REVERSE.
CoL. MI, as.


PRAYER [AGAINST THE EvIL SPIRITS].


Incantation :—
O evil Spirit, [get thee (?) to thé desert !]


ora
O evil Demon, [get thee (?)] to thé desert!


O evil Ghost, [get thee (?)] to thé desert!
5. O evil Devil, [get thee (?)] to thé desert!
Take thy couch (?),
10. Take thy food,


Wasema . . . na--la
"5.550 inserts z.
3 46,288, kur-um-mat.


124


20.


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF "BABYLON:


SU-A-LIL-LA-ZU SU - KAN RE -IN- HUE
ER - mu ka- ki? lè? - ki
KI-GUB - BA-ZU DINGIR-BABBAR-E-A* NU-ME-A


Y
man - ga - as- ka ul sa si-it ™ Samsi(st)


. KI- TUS-A-ZU. DINGIR- BABBAR-SU- A? NU N I DE
šu - bat - ka Z Misa e - rib = Samsi(si)

U- KU- ZU | U- KU GIDIM- MA- GE
ma - ka - lu - ka wma-ka-lu-u® e- kim - mu

A- NAK- ZU A- NAK GIDIM - MA - GE
mas - kit? - ka mas - ti - ti e - kim - mu


(PLATE XXVI


35.


30.


MULU - GISGAL - LU DU DINGIR - RA = NM
a= we - Th ma- vis JAM x
UBE UB TAY NAM- BA- GUB- BU- NE


> ma


ma tub-ka-a-ti"” la ta-at-ta- nam - sa- su


DA - DA - TA” BA - RA - AN - KU - U - NE
ina sa-ha-a-t2 la ta-at-ta- na- a$- sa- ab -su
SA- ZU- A- TA NAM: BA- GA- E MM
ina MON [2/2 ŠĪ] la fa - nam - E
KI - TA (?) - BI - KU NAM - BA - NIGIN - E - [NE]
ma? a-ha-a-tu la ta-sa- na- har- su
KI. NA KUR-RA-KU!® GIG-GIG-GA-ZU-KU GIN-NA
ana kib-ru us(?) . . ersetim(tim) ana ik-li-ti-ka at-lak
ZI DINGIR-GAL-GAL-E-NE-GE I-RI-PA DHA


RA = DU - UN


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET “ A.” 125


Take thy girdle."

Sunrise is no standing-place for thee,
I5. Sunset is no seat for thee,

Thy food is the food of ghosts,


20. Thy drink is the drink of ghosts ;


(PLATE XXVI.)
Stand not in the vicinity,


25. Sit not in the neighbourhood
Of the man, the son of his god.
In the city circle him not,
30. Nor go about at his side.
tree tice tome tomb(?) . . . of earth to thy
darkness !
By the Great Gods I exorcise thee, that thou


mayest depart.


` 1 K.4,856 and K. 4,965, ruk.
? K. 4,856, K. 4,965, and 46,288, £a.


3 K. 4,856 inserts z. i K.4,856, NE.

5 K.4,856 adds Ku. us oo . a
"EK 44,965, ma-al-li-11; 46,288, mas-ti-1f.

8 K. 4,965, mar for ma-rt. ? 46,288 inserts $'.
46,2898 „. “AN-DA. N 46,288, lu.

2 16,288, lib-Di. B 46,288, a-lu.

M 46,288, mi-[ zs]. 5 K. 4,965, 7-na (?).


16 46,288, GE.


a Naru(k)ka; evidently an article of leather for binding or
girdling (cf. Brūnnow, Zzs/, No. 244). Possibly it is connected
with the Syriac ‘erketha, a girdle (Brockelmann, p. 262, a).


126 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


35. EN HULIK KAN-ME-EN HUL-IK S KAN MES
kima labiri - šu dr c ME
dupp 2 ri tl B gl = epu $ apl


plu
” Mu -na - pir - ili -su apil "Et


O


” Beli - SU - nu aplu
40. [7 0] Marduk (?) - lu - ud - a
sig Zënn IV sain yo
[sa ” Si - lu] - uk - su


[sattu XV an he ti -uk - sw] sai á


35:


40.


UTUKKI LIMNOTI, TABLET “ A.” 127


Incantation :—“ Whether thou art an evil man,
whether thou art an evil man."

Like its former copy, written and explained.

Tablet of Bel-epus, the son of

Munapir-ilisu, the son of Etir (?)-ikbi (?)

[by the hand of (?)] Belisunu, the son of

Marduk (?) -ludda.

Month . . . . fourth day, one hundred and
eighth year*


[of Sele]ucus and


[the forty-fourth of Antiochus], the kings.


fl es 204 B.C:


Tablet “08.”


OBVERSE.
(PLATE XAVIL)
EN HUL-IK KAN-ME-EN HUL-IK KAN-ME-EN
lu -u lim -nu at-tu lu-u lim av
A-LA-HUL-IK : lu-u a-lu-u lim-nu at-ta: KAN-ME-EN
A-LA-HUL INGAR-DIRIG-GA-GIM MULU-RA IN-GUL-'U-A


KAN-ME-EN
5. y Sa ki-ma t-ga-ri t-kup-pu-ma eli ameli tb-ba-tu at-tu
A-LA-HUL KA A(?) ... . IB-SAR-SAR . . . . KAN-ME-EN


y Sa pa-a i-pa-Su-u-[ma(?) ka(?)|-ti(?) u se-pi (2?)
[4]-&as-su-4 at-tu
A-LA-HUL KA NU-TUK - [A] KAN - ME- EN


"EC. pa-a la ¿ - SU - U at -

10. A SELA E ME - GIM NU-TUK-A KAN -ME-EN
" sa bt-na-a-tt la lēsa u

A - LA - HUL GIS - NU - TUK - A KAN - ME - EN

= la SE - mu - u at = fa
[A]-LA-HUL  SI-GU NU-TUK-A  KAN- ME- EN

I5. e sa si - mi la 2 = SWEN at - ta


[A]-LA-HUL KI DINGIR-BABBAR KAM IGI-NA-AN-GAB-
RU-U-A KAN-ME-EN
y Sa it-ti ™ Samsi [ina (?) dikari (?)] i-nam-ma-ru
at-ta
[A-LA]-HUL KI-NA GIG-A MULU U-DI IN-UR-RA!-U-A
KAN-ME-EN
a sa ina ma-a-a-al mu-Si ameu ina sit-ti
t-rt-th-hu-u at-ta
20. A-LA-HUL U-DI? wKARKAR-RI  MULU-A? GUB
MU-NE-IN-GUB-BU . . KAN-ME-EN
„ e-kim sil-ti sa ameli ana ta-ba-li (elei at-ta]


tablet “03.”


OBVERSE.


(PLATE XXVII.)
Incantation :—


MO.


ER


20.


Whether thou art an evil man, whether thou art
an evil man,


Or an evil demon,


. Or an evil demon that hath fallen like a wall


And hath crushed the man,

Or an evil demon that gibbereth

And bindeth hands and feet (?),

Or an evil demon that hath no mouth,
Or an evil demon that hath no limbs,
Or an evil demon that cannot hear,
Or an evil demon that hath no form,


«


Or an evil demon that in a goblet (?) flasheth in
the sun, l


Or an evil demon that the man hath created
On a bed by night in sleep,
Or an evil demon stealing sleep away
Ready to carry off the man,

4,661 . . UR for UR-RA.


LK,
2 K. 4,661, KA-AN-USAN for U-DI.
3 K. 4,661 omits.


I 30 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


A-LA-HUL DINGIR GIG-A — GIN-GIN SU BIL-LA
NI-NU-TEMEN-[NA KAN-ME-EN]
» Wu mut-tallik mu-st sa Kati lu--a-tt la
pa-lal-ha_ at-tal
A-LA-HUL MULU-RA NA-A ANSU-GIM NI-KABAR
[KAN-ME-EN]
SE » sa e-li ameli rab-su-ma kima imen [:r-ta-bi (2)
at-ta]
A-LA-HUL SIGISSE-SIGISSE NU-UN-ZU-A KU-KUR-GA
| KAN-ME-EN]


sa ni-ka-a la i-du-u-ma as-pa (?)-[as-it(?) . .


»


at-ta]
A-LA-HUL (MULU RA . „EI
[KAN-ME-EN]
» sa ameli ki-lma . . . . .. .. DK
30 A-LA-HUL MULU-RA . . . +. . GIM
[KAN-ME-EN]
» Sa ameli (ki maļ... ir s22) . . INN


A-LA-HUL | MULU-RA DA GIM  SU-NE-IN
[KAN-ME-EN]
» Sa ameli ki-ma' gu*(?) . .. ti u-sar.
[af- fa |
A-LA-HUL SU-DIN-HU KI-IN-TAR-GIM GIG-A IN
[KAN-ME-EN]


D y Sa kima su-ud-din-nu ina ni-gi-is-si tna
mu-Si . . . [at-ta]
(PLATE XXVIII.)
[A-LA-HUL] . . . . KI GIG-GIG-GA-NI CES


[KAN-ME-EN]
y Sa kima ts-sur-ru mu-si a-Sar ik-li-ti tt-ta-ap-
[ras at-ta]


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET “ B." 131


Or an evil demon, a god that roameth by night,
Whose unclean hands know no reverence,
Or an evil demon, couching like an ass,

25. That lurketh in wait for the man,


Or an evil demon that knoweth not sacrifice of


beasts or herbs (Gi


Or an evil demon that like . . . . the man,
20. Oran evil demon that like . . . the man,
Or an evil demon that like . . . . the man,


35. Or an evil demon that like a bat (?) [dwelleth] in


caverns by night,


(PLATE XXVIII.)
Or an evil demon that like a bird of night flieth


in dark places,


! 35,056, kima for ki-ma.


? Or su, or sa.


a Aspasti(?). For this word see Cun. Texts, xiv, pl. 50, l. 62,
and Meissner, Zezts. für Assyr., vi, p. 296.


132 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.
[A-LA]-HUL MULU-RA SA-DUL-GIM AB'-DUL-U-A
KAN-ME-EN
» sa ameli Rima? ka-tim-ti? i-kat-ta-mu at-ta
40. A-LA-HUL MULU-RA SA-AL-HAB-GIM AB-SU-SU-’U *-A
KAN-ME-EN |
» Sa ameli ki-ma? al-In-kap-pi' t-sah-ha-pu at-ta
A-LA-HUL GIG-U-NA-GIM SI-GAB NU-TUK-A KAN-ME-EN
yo SA kima? mu-si nt-it-las la i-Su-u at-ta
A-LA-HUL LUL-A-ERI-SIG-GA-GIM GIG-A NI-DU-DU
KAN-ME-EN. _
zi. » 95a ki-ma? se-lib? ali ša-ku-mis ina mu-si
i-dui"  at-ta
GA-E MULU-TU-TU MULU 12-SANGA-MAH ME-AZAG-GA
NUN-KI-GA. ME-EN
a-Si-pu jfa-anM- gam-ma-hu mu-ul*-lil par-si
sa “Eridi a-nalt-ku
MULU-KIN-GA-A IGI-GIN-RA DINGIR-EN-KI-GE ME-EN
mar" sip-ri a-lik mah-ri sa *™ E-a! a-nall-ku
50. DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR MAS-MAS AZAG-ZU DU-SAG
DINGIR-EN-KI-GE MULU-KIN-GA-A ME-EN
sa ““Marduk mas-mas" en-ki mdru!8 ris-ti-z"
sa "Hat mdr sip-ri-su a-na™-ku
GU-TU-GAL NUN-KI-GA-GE NAM-SUB-GALAM-MA ME-EN
a-sip” “Eridi $a si-pat-su nak-lat? a-nall-ku
l 35,050 IB. ? 35,056, kima for ki-ma.
3 35,056, Zum. * 35,056 inserts z.
? 35,056, pu. * 35,056, Ju.


* K. 3,152, DU-DU . . . ; 35,056, BUR-BUR-'-U-U-A for DU-DU.
$ 35,056 originally a-/u-u lim-nu, in place of ,, from ll. 5-45.

° 35,056, sil-li-bu for se-li5. 10 35,056, um-mi-15 for mis.

u K. a 152, aw [ul |: 35,056, duukklu.

M 35,056™@mits.


x
`


EI MANTI, TABLET “B.” 133


Or an evil demon that envelopeth the man
As it were with a coverlet,
40. Or an evil demon that enshroudeth the man
As it were with a sack,
Or an evil demon that like night hath no
brightness,
45. Or an evil demon that by night


Like a pariah dog" prowleth? in the mud,"
The Sorcerer - priest that maketh clear the
ordinances of Eridu am I,


The Herald that goeth before Ea am I,
50. Of Marduk, sage magician (and) eldest son of Ea,
The Herald am I,


The Exorciser of Eridu, most cunning in magic
AH :


455050, mul for mu-ul.
M K. 5,330 and 35,056, ana for a-na.


35,056, mar. 16. 35,056, NAKBU for L-a.
u K. 5,330, 99 : 35,050, mas-ma-Su.
18. 35,056, ma-ri. 19 35,096, Zu-u for ti-i..


22 K. 5,330, ana for a-za.


^ K. 3,152, [a-$7]-pu; 35,056, a-Si-pu.

* 355056, Ja-af.

a Literally “fox of the city."

b /dul: dalu is a synonym for aléku, W.A.7., ii, 35, 53, and the
corresponding root in Syriac is dëi, se movit, tremuit. Apparently
dalu has the idea of moving furżivelv, and if so, possibly the word
^" datalu means a “scout.” See A./.S.Z., xvii, 3, April, 1901, p. 163,
note, and cf. l. 67, mudalla.

e Sakummis: from a comparison of the Fifth Tablet, col. v, l. 15
(“They stand in the highway to befoul the path”), with 1. 22
(** Ishum, overseer of suki Sakummi”), Sakummu has evidently the
meaning “foul” or * muddy Cf. W.A.Z., iv, zo, l. 4, lib dli ahat
ali siru bamátt sakummatu usamlima usalika namuis, “ The middle of
the city, the side of the city, the plain, the high places I filled with
mud and turned to ruins.”


— ^
bbs A


134 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF 'BABVLONIA.


A- LAGHDL «ZI- GAS ZUKU :GABCZU ZI -ZI!- NE
55. a-lu-u lim-nu ana? na-sa-hi-ka i-rat-ka  mi--i
MULU - TIL- LA A-RI-A A-RI-A-KU GINSJNEN
a-sib na-me-e ana na-me-ka at-lak
EN-GAL DINGIR-EN-KI-GE  ID-MUS-DA-AN
bélu*  rabu(u)? “E-a u-ma-'-ir-an-[ui]S
60. TU - DUG - GA - A? NI KA - MU NE - IN - DUG
»9 - SU ana pi - ta u tib
| GAR-NA V//-NA ME-EL-LA-GE? SU-MU NE-IN-MAL
yo SI-Dit-li su-nu Sa pav-si el-lu-ti® ana
ka - ti-za"  u-ma-al -la
UGA-HU HU LIGIR DINGIR-RI-E-NE-GE ID-ZI-DA
MU-NE-IN-TAB
65. a-ri-ba is-su-ra na-ri-iy Wani” ina im-ni-ta
at-mu-uh
SUKR-DUSHU HU KA-ZAL-LA IGI-HUL-IK-ZU-KU
ID-KAB-BU MU-NE-IN-US
y ls-SU-YA mu-dal-la ina pa-nt-ka lim-nu-ti'
ma su-me-li-za ¿irM-di- su
KU-TIG-E-SA NI-TEMEN-NA-GE  TIG-GA  NE-IN-KU
na-ah-lap-ta sa-an-ta sa pu-luh-ti ah-ha-lap-ka
JO. KU-SA-KU NI-GAL-LA-GE | BAR-AZAG-GA NE-IN-KU


su-ba-ta sa-a-ma su-bat naim-ri-ar-ri zu-mur el»


u - labs. bis - ka


55


60.


65.


70.


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET * p." 135


O thou evil demon, turn thee to get hence,


O thou that dwelleth in ruins, get thee to thy
ruins,


For the great lord Ea hath sent me;

He hath prepared his spell for my mouth

With a censer for those Seven, for clear decision,
He hath filled my hand.

A raven, the bird that helpeth the gods,

In my right hand I hold ;

A hawk, to flutter* in thine evil face,

In my left hand I thrust forward ;

With the sombre? garb of awe I clothe thee,

In sombre dress I robe thee,


A glorious dress for a pure body.


! K. 3,152 inserts GA. E 31152. 2 7a..


3 35,056 inserts UN. * 35,056, be-lu.

5 35,056, ra-bu-u. $ 35,056, na.

7 35,056 omits GA-A. WIK, 3,158 TU.

? 35,056, EL (?)E (?)NE (7) for EL-LA-GE.

10 36,006, fi. H 35,056, kala “-mu.

2 35,056, mal for ma-al.

5 35,056, ri. H 35,056, ar.

15 35,056, el-lu. 16 35,056, 27-/a for u-lab.


Nu & See note to l. 45.
b Or “ blue.”


136 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


(PLATE XXIX.)
KIS-HUL GIS-ZAG-DU KA-NA-GE NE-IN-LAL
Au-la-a ina  hiitti sa — ba-a-bi:— a-lul-Llal
GIS-ISIMU GIS-NIM AS-A-AN GIS-DU-TA NE-IN-[LAL]
75. pi-ri- bal-ti il-ti ina _  stk-ka-tim  a-lul-[la]
SU - USAN - TA ANSU - KAR - RA - GIM SU - ZU
NE - IN - DUB - DUB
ina ki-na-zi ki-ma i-me-ri mun-nar-bt 2u-mur-ka
u-zar-ri-[2b ? |
UTUG-[HUL] ZI-GA-AB A-LA-HUL ZI-GA-AB
u-tuk-ku lim-nu na-an-si-ik a-lu-u lim-nu te-bi
80. SU MULU-GISGAL-LU DU  DINGIR-RA-NA A-LA-HUL
ZI-GA-AB
ina zu-mur ameli már ili-Su a-lu-u lim-nu te'-bi
USUG - DINGIR- E- A- TA NAM -BA-GUB ENN
NAM - BA - NIGIN - E - NE
ma esr “E- la ta-at-ta-nam-za-az la
ta-as-sa-na-ah-hav
E-A-UB-UB-TA NAM-BA-GUB-BU-NE NAM-BA-NIGIN-E-NE
85. ma — tub-kat bit la  ta-at-ta-nam-za-az la
ta-as-sa-na-ah-har
E-A GA - BA - GUB NAM - BA - AB = BI SEN
ina biti lu - uz - ziz la ta - kab - bi
UB - UB- TA GA-BA-GUB NAM - BA - AB - BI - EN
ma tub-ka-a-ti lu- uz - giz la ta- kab - dt
90. [DA - DA]- TA GA-BA-GUB NAM - BA - AB - BI- EN


[ina sa-ha-a]-t lu-uz- ziz la ta-kab-bi


UTUKKI LIMNOTI, TABLET “B.” 137


(PLATE XXIX.)
Fleabane (?)* on the lintel of the door I have
hung,
75. St. John’s wort (?),? caper (?),° and wheatears'
On the latch I have hung ;
With a halter as a roving ass
Thy body I restrain ; i
O evil Spirit, get thee hence,
Depart, O evil Demon!
80. From the body of the man, the son of his god,
O evil Demon, depart !
In the Temple of Ea stand not, nor circle around;
85. In the precincts of the house stand not, nor
circle around:
“In the house will I stand,” say thou not,
“In the precincts will I stand,” say thou not,


go. “In the neighbourhood will I stand,” say thou
not,


I 52, ti.


a Hula, possibly the Syriac Ala (Payne Smith, Thesaurus,
p. 1,273, a), which has been identified with the fleabane.

b Piri’, probably the Syriac pera, hypericum (Brockelmann,
Pwan, a).

e Balti. On W.A.Z., ii, 23, 31-32, bala, ballu, and amumestu are
given as synonyms. Bala is possibly the Syriac 07 (Payne Smith,
Thesaurus, p. 527, a), medicamentum quoddam, sc. radix capparis
Spinosae.

4 Mti. The Sumerian is AS-A-AN, i.e. “ wheat.” Cf. the
Hebrew Āzftim and Syriac Žefefha (Brockelmann, p. 109, a), YA n-f.


138 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


[UrUG - HUL] E - BA - RA KI - BAD - DU - KU


[x] - tuk - ku lim-nu si-i ana ni-sa-a-tt


[A - LA] - HUL GIN - NA A - RI - A - KU
95. [a] - lu-u lim-nu at-lak ana na - me - €
[KI] - GUB - BA - ZU KI - SAG KUD - DA
[man] - za - az - ka as - ru par - su

[KI] - TUS - A - ZU E - ŠUB - BA A - RI - A
Su - bat - ka bitu na - du - u har - bu


100. [?-LA] IGI-MU-TA (ZI  AN-NA  KAN]PA ZI
KI-[A KAN]-PA |
[dup-pir ultu pani-ia nis samele) lu-ta-ma]-a nis


(ersićtim(tim)| lu-ta-ma-ta


[INIM - INIM - MA UTUG] - HUL - A - KAN

[ ] NA - A - AN ZI - GA
[Ekal ""“Assur-bani-apli | sarru rabu sarru

dan-nu| Sar kissati sav """" Asšuri*!


(Ete


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET “ B.” 139


O evil Spirit, get thee forth to distant places,
95. O evil Demon, hie thee unto the ruins,

Where thou standest is forbidden ground, ^

A ruined, desolate house is thy home ; E


100. [Be thou removed from before me! By
Heaven] be thou exorcised!


By [Earth] be thou exorcised!
PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.


Hucemtation]" .—. . . . =. . removeth”


Tablet “E.”


Cor. I (B) 'MPEATE XXX).


a.”
b. si sa ameli la ra (2)
C. UTUG - PUL- IK —
d. sé sa da - mu x».
e. UTUG - UL - Mx
SE 5 sa ri - gun
UTUG - HUL - IK KUR EI
= 354 tna ma-a-tu  it-ta-[na-as-rab-bi-tu?]
45. *GA-E SANGU (?)-UH (?)-TU GA-TU-[SURRU-MAH].....
a-Si-pu sa-an-gam-ma-lu sa" . . . [a-na-ku]
SEN - NA . .
ê be - lum ;
NUN *TUR - RA- GE MU - UN
50. ru - bu - u ina ap - st -í
EGIR - MU ? NAM - NE - IN - GI
ar - ki - ta la [ta - Sag - gum?|
EGIR - MU GU - NU'- MU - UN - DA - AB - RA - RA
ar - ki - ia la ta - sa - [as - sz?]
55. MULU - HUL - IK SU - NAM - [BA - zi = 2
lime - ma? la tu- sah- [faz?]
UTUG - HUL - IK SU - NAM - BA - [ZI - ZI?]
u-tuk-ka® — lim-na? la tu-sa-[ab- haz ?]


t Col. I (A) contains the following ends of lines: —
(1). . . BAD KUR-RA, (2). . . šadi), (3). . . KAS KASETES
(4). . . [22]-ta-na-as-rab-bi-fu, (5). < . TU-TU, (6)... t-kam-mu:u,
(7) . . . BIR-RA, (8). . . 2-$a-as-su-u, (9) . . . la se-mu-u,


=


Tablet “E.”


Cor.I(B) (PLATE XXX.)
6. O evil Spirit that hath . . . the man,
(CY erick that . . . blood
42. O evil Spirit whose roar


O evil Spirit that [roameth] o’er a land,


45. I am the Sorcerer-priest of.


The lord .


50. The prince in the Bep


NE


Behind me [howl] not!
Behind me shriek not!


Unto the evil Spirit deliver (?) him (?) not!


(Gt suza)... DI-A, (12).


(10) .

(13)... AR (14)... [aS-2]-S4, (15) < . . [NIGIN]-E,
(16) [:s-sa]-nun-du, (17). + . BI, (18).

Gig) us PA(?)-RA, (20). . . -al-pu, (21) . < . [NIGIN]-E,
(22)... [7s-sa]-nun-du, (23). . . LU, (24) ... [t-dal]-la-Au,
IEEE (27). . . SU, (28) .. . (r-sah-ha|-la,
(29)... DU-DU, (30) . . . -zam-du-u, (31) . . . -hu-Su, and


traces of ll. 32-41.
` Cuneiform Texts, part xvii, pl. 46.


D 33 a oO om &


K.2,470 . . . limenu.

60,886 has [GA]-E GAM UH (?)-TU GA-DUB
60,886 has . . . E MU

60,886 has. . . . -an-ni

K. 8,476 omits; K. 4,917, NAM.

K. 8,476, nu. ? K. 8,476, kui


Unto that which is evil deliver (?) him (?) not!


142


60.


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


MULU - TUR - RA - KU NAM - BA - TE - [MAL - NE]
ana mar - si e ta alt- £i]
MULU - TUR - RA - KU NAM - BA - GE - [GE - NE]
ana mar - si e ta - [at = ?]


` ZI DINGIR-GAL-GAL-E-NE!-GE I-RI-PA HA-BA-[RA-DU-UN]


65.


70.


75:


80.


85.


2 mis want” rabúti?! u-tam-me-[ka lu-ta-at-tal-lak]


INIM - INIM - NA ` UTUG - HUL - [A - KAN]


EN UTUG - HUL - IK NAM - BA - TE - [MAL - NE]


u - tuk - ku lim - nu e ta - at - [hi - su]
A- LA = HUL -E NAM - BA - TE - MAL - NE
a-lu-u lim - [nau] e ta - at - lt - su
GIDIM - HUL -IK - NAM - BA - TE - MAL - NE
e - kim - [mu lim - nu] e ta-at-i- su
MULLA = HUL - Ti NAM - BA - TE - MAL - NE
gal - [lu - u lam - nu] e la - at - hi - su
DINGIR - HUL - IK NAM - BA - TE - MAL - NE
ilu [deme - nu] e fa - at - hi - su
MASKIM HUC - IK NAM - BA - TE - MAL - NE
ra - [bi - su lim - nu) e ča - at - hi - šu
DINGIR - RAB - KAN - ME ‘NAM - BA - TE - MAL =P;
[la - bar - tu e] ta - at - hi - su
DINGIR -RAB-KAN-ME-A [NAM- BA]- TE- MAL- NE
[ča - ba- su e ta- at]- &- su
[DINGIR-RAB-KAN-ME-KIL NAM-BA-TE]-MAL-NE
[ak - ka - zu e ta - at] - hi = su
[MULU - LIL - LA NAM - BA - TE - MAL] - NE
Is la- wu e ta- atl- hi- su


UFUKRN LIMNUTI, TABLET "c." 143


60. Unto the sick man draw not nigh,


Unto the sick man come not,


By the Great Gods I exorcise thee that thou


mayest depart.


65. PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.
Incantation :—
O evil Spirit, approach him not,
O evil Demon, approach him not,
70. O evil Ghost, approach him not,
O evil Devil, approach him not,
75. O evil God, approach him not,
O evil Fiend, approach him not,
O Hag-demon, approach him not,
80. O Ghoul, approach him not,
[O Robber-sprite], approach him not,
85. [O Phantom of Night], approach him not,


* K. 8,476 omits.
* K. 2,470 omits this line. E


144


90. .


COL:


95.


IOO.


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


[KI - EL - LIL LA NAM - BA - TE - MAL] - NE
(e - 2 = 77 e fa- at- kil- su

[KI - EL- UD- DA-KAR- RA NAM-BA -TE - MAL] - NE
[ar - da - at li - li -i e ta - at - hi] - su
[NAM - BA - TE - MAL] - NE

[e la - at] - hi - su


[NAM - BA - TE - MAL]- NE


[Hiatus.]
MUY - SU L K . . . . , . S
II (PLATE XXXI).
SAG - GIG KA - GIG $A - GIG LIKIR - GIG
mu-ru-us kak-ka-di , sin-nt , hbbi ki-is lib-bi
IGI-GIG AZAG: mu-ru-us i-ni a-sak-ku sa-ma-nu :
SA-MA-NA


UTUG-HUL A-LA-HUL GIDIM-HUL- MULLA-HUL
DINGIR-HUL MASKIM-HUL


DINGIR - RAB!-KAN-ME DINGIR-RAB!-KAN - ME- A
DINGIR-RAB-KAN-ME-KIL


MULU-LIL-LA  KI-EL-LIL-LA KI-EL-UD-DA  KAR-RA

NAM-TAR-HUL-IK AZAG-GIG-GA TUR-RA-NU-DUG-GA

GAR - GIG GAR - SA - A GAR - HUL - GIM - MA

SUR-AS-SUB A-HA-AN-TUM U-SU-US-SUB DUB-GIM-MA
BAR-GIS-RA

SILA-A GIN-GIN AB-BA SU-SU GIS-SAGIL TU-TU-E-NE


mut-tal-lik SU-Ri mu-ta-at-bi-1k a-pa-a-li
mu-tir-ru* -bu me? - di-lu


UTUKKI DIMNUTI, TABLET “C. 145


— ÀÀ—M — —— — DD


(O Night Wraith], approach him not,
[O Handmaiden of the Phantom] approach him
not,
Ga... approach him not,
approach him not,


[ Hiatus. ]


Sickness, .
Cor. I -Għire XXXI).
95. Sickness of the head, of the teeth, of the heart,


heartache,

Sickness of the eye, fever, poison (?),*

Evil Spirit, evil Demon, evil Ghost, evil Devil,
evil God, evil Fiend,

Hag-demon, Ghoul, Robber-sprite,

Phantom of Night, Night Wraith, Handmaiden
of the Phantom,

100. Evil pestilence, noisome fever, baneful sickness,
Pain, sorcery, or any evil,
» Headache, shivering, (2), tenor ar (3

Roaming the streets, dispersed through dwellings,

penetrating bolts,


' K. 4,863, LUGAL. Be 5.703977.

° 189995, Mi.

2 Samanu, possibly connected with the Syriac samma, pl. sammáné
(Brockelmann, p. 228, 0), ‘‘ poison.”

b See note to Tablet III, I. 199. For DUB-GIM-MA I do not
know any Assyrian equivalent. BAR-GIS-RA is translated "-7-/u
(W.AJ., v, 50, 29-30, 0), apparently parallel to asakku, but no
satisfactory meaning has been suggested for it.


IO


146 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


105. MULU - HUL IGI - HUL KA - HUL EME - HUL
lim-nu sa pa-an! lim-nu pu-u lim-nu li-Ša-nu ,,
2 UH (?)-HUL UH (?)-ZU UH (?)? -A-RI-A GAR-SA-A GAR-HUL
-GIM-MA-TA 1
SA-E-A-TA : 15-tu ki-rib biti «st -2: ES
“MULU-CISGAL-LU DU DINGIR-RA-NA BA-RA-AN-TE-MAL
-NE BA-RA-AN-GE-GE-E-NE
IIO. GIS-GU-ZA-NA : ` ina  ku-us-si- su la tu-sab-su:
NAM-BA-TUS-NE-EN
GIS-* NAD-DA-NA : ina — ir-si-su la ta-na-al:
NAM-BA-NA-U-NE-EN
* UR-KU: ana u-ri-Su la te-el-li- su: NAM-BA-GIBIS-NE
E-KI-TUS-A-NA : ana bit sub-ti-su la te-ru-ub-su:
NAM-BA-TU-TU-NE
ZE AN-NA-KI-BI-DA-GE I-RI-PA HA-BA-RASDU DN
115. nis samele) u trsitim(tim) u - tam - me - ka
lu - u - ta - at - ta - lak


INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL- A- KAN


EN UTUG-HUL-IK MULU - SA - KU - AB - SA - SA


u - tuk - ku lim - nu hab - bt - lu
MASKIM - HUL - IK UB - DA . GUB - GUB - BU
120. ra - bi -su lim -nu mut- ta - az -ziz tub- ki


GIDU- TUL MULLA - HUL U - NU - KU - KU - NE
e-kim-mu lim-nu gal-lu-u lim-nu la sa-li-la
[E-NE]-NE-NE HUL-A-MES ERI-A NIGIN-NA-A-MES
(Sumu lim]-nu-ti sa ina ali is-sa-nun-du su-nu
(oe, IM MI - IN (GAZES
z - pa - al - li - lu


DIUINUM MIMMUTI, TABLET "C." 147


wawa Se


105.


115.


Evil man, he whose face is evil, he whose mouth
is evil, he whose tongue is evil,
Evil spell, witchcraft, sorcery,
Enchantment and all evil,
From the house go forth!
Unto the man, the son of his god, come not nigh,
Get thee hence!
In his seat sit thou not,
On his couch lie thou not,
Over his fence rise thou not,
Into his chamber enter thou not,
By Heaven and Earth I exorcise thee,
That thou mayest depart.


PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.


Imeantation :—


The evil Spirit that destroyeth,

The evil Fiend that lurketh near,

The evil Ghost and evil Devil that find no rest,
These are they that scour the city,

Scattering * |


1 K. 4,863, mi.

? K. 4,863 translates [Aus l-u ru-hu-u ru-[su-u] .
3 5.793 inseres Zu. $5. 793 omits.
3


K. 4,863 translates (a ]-za ameli mar ili-| šu |


a Jpalltlu. Cf. Syriac pall, adspersit, fregit (Brockelmann,
Lexicon, P 272, a).


148 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


IM - MI-IN-SUM-E- NE
MR A 2-ta-ab-ba-hu

(PLATE XXXII.)
[TU - TU] - NE

130... . . . + .. .. AG
A - MES
-ku - U
GAZ(?) - AK - E- NE

L i A A ¿ - Sag - gt - su
135.. . + + + + IM MI - IN SERE
EE mm ki-ma nu-ni ina me-e d-sah-ha-lu
[SIGISSE - SIGISSE — NU]-UN -ZU-MES A- RA - ZU

NU - UN - ZU - MES

[¿R-ri-bi ul i-du-u)  tas-litu ul i-du-u

MI - IN - DUL IGI- NA BA-AN-MI-MI

140.. . . . [2-kat-tam]-ma t-mi-su u-ta-at-tu-u
TM [NU - UN] - ¿EER
[d] u-ta-ad- de

NAM - ŠUB BA - AN - SUM
! Sip -tu id-di
145... IIA


wl - pu - tum
HUL
a(?)
REVERSE.


[Several lines wanting. ]
a. [pi -ti -ik-ti a-a ib- bal] - ki- tu - {u - ni]
b. [UTUG-HUL-IK:  u-tuk-ku lim-nu| a-na st-rt-ka:
[EDIN-NA-ZU-KU]


150. (A-LA-HUL-IK:  a-lu-u lm-au) ana — si-ri-ka:
[EDIN-NA-ZU-KU]
151. [MU NU - TUK MU - NE AN] - ZAK - [KU]


c. [su-ma ul i-Suou Sum-Sul.nu ana pa-at [samee)


UTURKTINANÜTL TABLET “C.” 149


Slaughtering
(PLATE XXXII.)


130. Seizing upon


Rending in pieces
135. . . . like fish from the water they draw forth:
Knowing neither prayer nor supplication.
140. They cover his . . . anddarken his eyes,
20. 0. not known.


He performs the incantation
[Several lines broken or wanting.]


REVERSE.


a. May they not break through [the mud wall].
6. [O evil Spirit], to thy desert !
150. [O evil Demon| to thy desert!


c. [O they that have no name (their name)], unto
the breadth [of heaven !}°


a Isahhalu: cf. the Chald. $'hal (Levy, Chald. Worterb., p. 468, a)
which is the word used in Exod. ii, 10, for drawing Moses forth
from the water.

b See lly nes tie, pa 153.


150 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


152. [DINGIR-PA-SAG-GA . . . : “I-Sum]. . . -emi-s:
MULU-GISGAL-LU-ZU-KU

d. [TU-DUG-GA: ina „-e a-mat  "JE-a: I
DINGIR-EN-[KI-GA-GE]

153.. . . . . . mar’ ~ Eridi: DU NUN-KLGSSED


154. [TU-TU ZU-AB NUN-KI-GA] NAM-MU-UN-DA-AN-BUR-RA


e. [si-pat ap-si-è ““JEridi a-a  ip-pa-as-ra


155. [INIM - INIM - MA] UTUG - HUL-A - KAN


[EN] UTUG-HUL-IK GIDIM  MAS-TIG-GAR EDIN-NA
u-tuk-ku lim-nu e-kim-mu sa ina si-eri Su-pu-u
NAM-TAR MULU HUL-IK : nam-ta-ru sa ameli lim-nis
lal-pu-tum : TAG-GA-ZU
MEME GAR-HUL-GIM-MA MULU KESDA(DA) - GE
160. li - Sa - nu $a itti! ameli lim -mis ir-rak- su
DUG-GIM : ?ki-ma kar-pa-ti la-ik-[tap-pu-u:
HE]- EN - TA - GAZ
A-GIM : "kima  me-e lit-[tab-ku:) | HE-EN-TA-DE
[GIS-GAM]-MA — GIS-SA-KA-NA-GE — NA-AN-TA-BAL-E
kip -pa-t . . . . . a-a ib-bal-ki-tit ni
165. . . . . . . [a-a z6]bal-ki-(u-mt: NA-AN-TA-BAL-E
[UTUG-HUL EDIN-NA-ZU-KU] A-LA-HUL EDIN-NA-ZU-KU
UTUG-HUL E-A-TIL-LA ŠU- NU-GAR-RA-ZU-KU
DINGIR - MULU - GISGAL - LU - GE
u-tuk-ku lim-nu sa ina biti tus-bu-[u]
Wu u ameu ana la ga-ma li-ka
(PLATE XXX MI)
UTUG-HUL A-LA-HUL  GIDIM-[HUL] MULLA-HUL
DINGIR-HUL MASKIM-HUL


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET “C.” ISI


ime [sum] . . . Men,
d. [By the magic of the] word of Ea,
153. . . . the son of Eridu,


154. [Let the Incantation of the Deep] of Eridu never
be unloosed !


[PRAYER AGAINST] THE EVIL SPIRITS.


| Incantation | :—
The evil Spirit (and) Ghost that appear in the
desert,
O Pestilence that hast touched the man for harm,
160. The Tongue that is banefully fastened on the
man,
May they be broken in pieces like a goblet, " 8
May they be poured forth like water, ide
May they not break through the lintel of the
door.
165. May they not break through the
[O evil Spirit, to thy desert!] O evil Demon, to
thy desert!
O evil Spirit that dwellest in the house


God and man to spare thee not . . . . eget)


j
t^ li -


(PLATE XXXIII.)

Whether it be evil Spirit or evil Demon,
Or evil Ghost or evil Devil,

Or evil God or evil Fiend,


AE, 25.1, 27- fr.
? K. 5,290 omits these translation lines.


152 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BARVEONTA.


1/0: LA-DUG "BUR -ZI— DUG - KA - BUR=GIM AN - AS-A-AN
KAN- NB (IB - GAZ - GAZ


ki-ma has-bt pur-st-it pa-ha-ri ina vi-bi-ti lih-tap-pu-u
INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL- A - BAN


EN UTUG-HUL-IK GIDIM MULU EDIN-NA TAG GS
u-tuk-ku lim-nu e-kim-mu Sa ina sil=ri

ameli tal - pu - ut
175. NAM - TAR MULU SAG - GA TAG - [GA] - ZU
nam - ta - ru sa kak-kad ameli tal- pu - ut
KA-HUL-IK EME=TIUE SS MU ? - ERIM - MA - GE
pu-u lim-nu  li-Ssa-nu — li-mut-tu mu-ta-[mi]-u
UTUG-HUL-IK MULU IGI?- MU - UN - BI- IN- BAR- RA
180. u - tuk - ku lim -nu sa ameli ip- pal- la - su
*GAR-SA-A  UH(?)-HUL-IK MULU-NAM-ERIM-MA-GE
u = pi - [šu kis]-pi lim-nu-ti sa ma-mi-ti
DUG-GIM [:£ ki-ma] kar-pa-ti l-th-tap-pu-u:

HE - EN - TA - GAZ
A-GIM :€ [ki-ma] me-e  lit-tab-ku : [HE]-EN-TA-DE
185. IM - RU - A NA - AN - TA - BAL - E
Cpa =li -1 = z a - [a 20] - bal - kit - u - ni
UTUG-HUL-IK :9 u-tuk-ku lim-nu a-na  si-ri-ka :

EDIN-NA-ZU-KU
A-LA-HUL-IK :$ a-lu-u — lim-nu ana — siri-ka :
EDIN-NA-ZU-KU

MU NU-TUK MU-NE AN-ZAK-KU : su-ma ul i-su-u


Sum-Su-nu ana pat samele)


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET “ C.” 153


170. Like the sherd that is cast aside * by the potter
May they be broken in the broad places.


PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.


Incantation :—


O evil Spirit (or) Ghost that hath touched the


man in the desert,
175. O Pestilence that hath touched the head of the
man,
The evil Mouth (or) evil Tongue that hath
uttered a spell,
180. The evil Spirit that hath looked on the man,
The enchantment or evil sorcery of a ban,
May they be broken in pieces like a goblet,
May they be poured forth like water,
185. May they not break through the mud wall.
O evil Spirit, to thy desert!
O evil Demon, to thy desert!


O they that have no name (their name), unto
the breadth of heaven!


1 K. 4,955 inserts e. “ K. 2,470 inserts NAM.

? K. 2,470 omits.

2269 insertestwo lines: (a) A . . . . (6) a- :
5 1225270, Jee 5 K. 2,470 omits this line.


2 Pursit, from parásu, “to separate."

b Presumably this refers to certain demons whose names are
unknown on earth, and the magician here addresses them with the
inclusive term “their name,” i.e., whatever their name may be.


I 54 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


190. DINGIR-PA-SAG-GA . . . [MULU-GISGAL-LU-ZU-KU]


TU-DUG-GA I DINGIR-EN-KI-GA-[GE:] . . . [DU
NUN-KI-GA-GE |


TU-TU ZU-AB NUN-KI-GA [NAM-MU-UN-DA-AN-BUR-RA]


INIM - INIM - MA [UTUG - HUL - A - KAN]


EN UTUG-HULJAK EDIN-NA" ID BA w
195. u-tuk-ku limnüti? sa ina si-ri is-su-nu tar... .
AMA


UR-SAG DU DAGAL AS-AwMES OP] KA


kar - ra - du . . . ts - ta - [al]


( Hiatus. |
(PLATE XXXIV.)


GURUS E- UR-A-NI- TA BA - RA - [E - NE]

1 NI-BI-A SIR-GIM MU-UN-SUR-SUR-RI-E-| NE|

ina ra-ma-ni-Su-nu ki-ma si-ir? it-ta-na-as-lal-lu

215; AN-NIN-KIS-GIM UR-E-GAR-RA-GE IR-SI-NI-IN-NA-
AG-E-NE 2

kima — Šik-Ri-e | a-sur-ra-a —ous-sa-nu sun

UR-KU-GIM . NIGIN-E  SI-MU-UN-SI-IN-BAR-RI-E-NE

kima kal-bi sa-[:]-du it-ta-nab-ra-ar-vu — Su-nu

UTUG-HUL  A-LA-HUL GIDIM-HUL MULLA-[UUL]

DINGIR-HUL MASKIM-HUL


220. ZI AN - NA KAN - BA ZI KI - A KAN - PA


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET “C.” 155


ponia . . . ~ [men]


Dy the magic of the word of Ea,
the son of Eridu


Let the Incantation of the Deep of Eridu [never
be unloosed |!


PRAYER AGAINST THE (EVIL Spirits].


Incantation :—


195. The evil Spirits whose hands in the desert
Warriors, sons of one mother, seven [are they |.
[ Hiatus. ]
(PLATE XXXIV.)
They drive forth the man from his home.
Upon themselves like a snake they glide,
215. Like mice they make the chamber stink,
Like hunting dogs they give tongue.*
Be thou evil Spirit or evil Demon,
Or evil Ghost or evil Devil,
Or evil God or evil Fiend,
220. By Heaven be thou exorcised! By Earth be
thou exorcised !


' K.8,475 translates . . . -šu u-se-zs-[qu-u].
“ K. 5,079 and K. 8,475, 71.


a [ttanabrarru: according to W.A.Z., v, 28, vii-viii, 62, bararum
=tkkillum, “wailing,” and, as Muss-Arnolt suggests, it may be
connected with barbaru, “ jackal.”


156


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


EN-NA SU  MULU-GISGAL-LU DU  DINGIR-RA-NA !

EN-NA  BA-RA-AN-TA-RI  EN-NA  BA-RA-AN-ZI-GA
EN-NA-AS ?

U BA-RA-AN-DA-AB-KU-E A BA-RA-AN-DA-AB-NAK-E

GIS-BANSUR A-A MUH-ZU-NE DINGIR-EN-LIL-LA-[GE
SU-ZU BAJ-RA-NE-IN-TUM


225. A A-AB-BA A-DUG-A A-SIS-A A ID-[MAS-TIG-GAR] A


230.


ID-UD-KIB-NUN-KI
[A  PUL]TA A ID[DA  BA-RA-AN]-SU-SU-NE
[ANA -KU BA- RI- EN PA-NA- A]JN- TUK - TUK
[KI- KU BA-GUB-BA TUŠ | NAM-BI]-GA- GA
[MULU-GISGAL-LU DU  DINGIR-RA-NA  BA-RA-AN-TE-
MAL-DA BA-RA-AN-G]E-GE-NE
[ZI  AN-NA-KI-BI-DA-GE  I-RI-PA HA-BA-RJA-DU-UN


[INIM - INIM - MA UTUG - HUL] - A - KAN

+ ou + + w s 9 ES S Su - SU

. un
1K. 8,475 translates . . än,


* K. 8,475 translates . . . [fa-as]-su-hu.


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET “C.” 157


(Whatever thou be), until thou art removed,
Until thou departest from the body of the man,
the son of his god,
Thou shalt have no food to eat,
Thou shalt have no water to drink,
Thou shalt not stretch forth thy hand
Unto the table of my father Bel, thy creator,
Neither with sea water, nor with sweet water,
Nor with bad water, nor with | Tigris] water,
Nor with Euphrates water, nor with [pond water |,
Nor with river water shalt thou be covered.
[If thou wouldst fly up to heaven]
Thou shalt have [no wings |,
[If thou wouldst lurk in ambush on earth]
Thou shalt secure [no resting-place l.
[Unto the man, the son of his god, come not
nigh],
Get thee hence!
| By Heaven and Earth I exorcise thee],
That thou mayest depart.


. [PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL Spirits. |


[Incantation :—] “ See. that in the
street ME heleh. M


Com


15.


20.


SE


Tablet “HD.”


[The Obverse is entirely lost. ]


REVERSE.


III (PLATE <).
(1) DINGIR..., (2).... (3) .... (4 OMMI
(5) ameln m... (6) URUDU-GAm .— . A
(8) dE JON. E (To) MULU ... . I
ameli tk-
MULU - GIŠGAL - LU - BI
amelu — su-u
URUDU-GAR-LIG-GA UR-SAG `AN-[NA]
e“ -u kar-rad “A= mim
KU-U:LI-IN¢TAR-A  GAR-UR-* SIM-[MA]
u-li-in-na -bur-ru-un-ta | . . bad]
I-NE-GAR-NA ZAG GIS-" NAD-DA-NA
kut-vi-in-na sa nak-ķa- . . lir-sa-su)
SA DINGIR-SUR TUG-GA  AN-NA-GE MULU
ina lib-bi " Saluli(lè) sa su-ba-ta |? Anim]
KU-SUR-RA : fu-sur-ra-a e-sir-[ma:  U-ME-NI-HAR]
ZAG KU-SUR-RA IM-* DAR-RA : 2-da-af , -e me-e(?) . .
KA-BAR-RA ID-ZI-DA ID-KAB-BU [U-ME (?)-NI (?)-HAR]
ba-ab ka-ma-a im-na u su-[me-la].
KA-BI NAM-TIL-LA : zna ba-bi-su ba-la-ta
SAG-BI NAM-ERIM-BUR-RU-DA GAR-HUL
ma-mit la pa-ša-ri mimma(ma) lt1n-| nu]


U-I-KAM : mumu) ak-kal lis-tab-ri


Tablet “D.”


[ The Obverse is entirely lost. ]


REVERSE.


Kor. IIB (PEATE XXXV).
This man mm .
15. [Take] the potent meteorite of heaven
| Bind] a two-coloured cord
A smoke offering which . . . his couch .
20. Under the shadow of the Robe of Heaven . .
Fasten a bandage and
* Wash (?) in water (?) the ends of the bandage,
25. With the door locked right and left [shut (?)
him in|,
Within his door life [shall he receive (?)].
A ban that cannot be loosed [on] everything
evil
When he? eats, may he be satisfied !


2 IM-DARA ( W.A.Z., v, 27, 13, €, which is probably to be restored
this way) = [%]a-a-pu, with which we may compare the Syriac
háph (Brockelmann, Lexicon, p. 106, 0), lavit. It seems possible
that the scribe has here added the word mé, ** water," but the text
is so mutilated that no restorations are trustworthy. The explana-
tory text K. 246 (Haupt, Akkad. u. Sum. Ketls., pp. 92-93, ll. 14 ff.)
has: MULU-GISGAL-LU-BI KU-SUR-RA U-U-ME-NI-HAR KU-SUR-RA-A


IM-BABBAR-RA KA-BAR-RA ID-ZI-DA ID-KAB-BU U-BA(?). . HAR,
which is translated a-me-lu Su-a-tu | Ru-sur-ra-a e-sir-ma | ku-sur-ra-a
ša . . . [gals-sí baba ka-ma-a [im]-na u Su-me-la


b First person in the text.


160 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


— —


30. DINGIR-USAN-AN-NA “BIR-HUL-DUB-BA SU  MULU-
GISGAL-LU DU DINGIR-RA-[NA]
MU-UN-NA-AN-TE
('' Sz-me]-tan „-e , -[e ina] zu-mur a-me-li mår
ill-$u  tu-uh-[ fz |
[HUL]-DUB-BA SAG-GA-NA U-ME-NI-[KESDA]
sa ,-e kak-ka-su  ru-Eu-us - [ma]
35. [UTUG-HUL AJ-LA-HUL GIDIM-HUL- MULLA-HUL
DINGIR-HUL MASKIM-[HUL]
[u-tuk-ku] lim-nu a-lu-u lim-nu e-kim-mu lm-nu
gal-lu-u lim-nu ilu lim-nu ra-bi-su |lim-nu|
[DINGIR-RAB-KAN]-ME DINGIR-RAB-KAN-ME-A : /a-bar-
tum la-ba-su afi-ha-zu: DINGIR-RAB-KAN-ME-KIL
UTUG-MULU-DIB-BA: , m-tuk-ku  ba-mu-u sa ameli
e-kim-mu sa ameli sab-tu: GIDIM-MULU-DIB-BA
MULU-HUL IGI-HUL KA-HUL EME-IJUL : lim-nu sa pa-ni
lim-nu pu-u lim-nu li-Sa-nu lim-uu
40. SAG - GIG KA - GIG SA - GIG LIKIR - GIG


mu-ru-us kak-ka-di , sin-m ,, tlb-li ki-is lib-bi


a Hulduppi. This word occurs with the determinative for
* wood," but more commonly with the determinative *BIR
(= urisu ?). It is difficult to see what its exact meaning is, but the
following additional passages are instructive : — W.4./., iv, 21,
1. 27-29, ana mimma lim-ni NU-TE-e "^ , (= MULU-*LAL)
dw (= La-la-rak) ina ba-a-bi ul-ziz, ana mimma lim-ni ta-ra-di
,, (= BIR-HUL-DUB-BA) ina mi-ik-rit babi ul-ziz, “To prevent any
evil drawing nigh I have set up MULU- “ LAL (and) Latarak by the
door, to drive away any evil I have set the Aulduppu before the


door.” Zimmern, Rifualtafeln, p. 122, 20 ff., arki su ina * BIR


UTURKI LIMNUTI, TABLET “D.” 161


30. In the evening place a hulduppú ? +
Near the body of the man, the don of his god;
Bind on his head the . . . of the kulduppr ;
35. Whether it be an evil Spirit, or an evil Demon,
Or an evil Ghost, or an evil Devil, or an evil
God, or an [evil] Fiend,
Or a Hag-demon, or a Ghoul, or a Robber-sprite,
Or an evil Spirit that holdeth the man in its grip,
Or an evil Ghost that hath seized on the man,


Or an evil man, or one whose face is evil, whose


mouth is evil, whose tongue is evil,


40. Headache, toothache, heart disease, or heartache,


hulduppele) ina $ BIR gibille(e) ina LU-TI-LA(-e) ina URUDU-SA-KAL-
GA(-e) ima sugugalle(-e) ina zer? ekalla tu-hap, “ Afterwards must
thou, with Aulduppu, with the torch, with the ‘living sheep,’ with
‘strong copper,’ with the ‘ skin of the great bull,’ with seed corn,
purify the palace.” Cun. Texts, part xvii, pl. 28, ll. 54-55
| Aulduppa]-a ina ma-a-a-li-Su kut-tim-šu-ma, “With... hulduppú
on his bed cover him and... ,” and ibid., 1. 67, [INIM-INIM-MA |
SU “BIR-HUL-DUB-BA MULU-TUR-RA DUL LA, “ [Prayer]
: the skin(?) of (?) a hulduppú cover the sick man.”
Tablet ** F,” pl. 38, col. iii, l. 13, GIS-MA-NU GIS-HUL-DUB-BA ...
* [Let him carve] a Aulduppti of tamarisk.” Tablet “K.” 1. 140 ff,
e-ri " hul-dup-pu-u sa ra-bi-si sa ina lib-bi-su ™ E-a su-mu zak-ru ina
Sip-ti sir-ti si-pat E-ri-du sa te-lil-ti ap-pa u is-di i-Sa-a-ti lu-pu-ut-ma,
“A tamarisk hulduppú of a fiend, whereon is inscribed the name of
Ea, with the all-powerful incantation, the Incantation of Eridu of
Purification, set alight both in front and behind . . ." From this
latter passage the #“ Aulduppd would appear to mean “figure.”


LI


162 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABY LONIA.


INIM-INIM-MA-NE-E SAG-GA-NA HE-IB-TA-AN-ZIZI-E DR
Sip-li an-ni-ti ina vi-Si-sa— di-in-na-as-hu
S. NA HE-EN-GUB-BA MAL-LA NA-AN-DAK ...


JS. 2 2. 0. 2. s. A


GOL. IV (PLATE EE
dmu(mu) ta-sil-ti sa ina  Eridi ir-bu-u:
KUR-KUR-GA
TA: fünu(mu) dam-ku ša ina zir La-gas
su-pu-u : E-A
E-A: Ámu(ima) sa pa-ni ba-nu-u tar-bit
Ki-e-si: UH-KI-GE
[SIR] - PUR - LA - KI - GE DIKUD - MAH
5. [^ A-da-pļa  da-a-a-nu  si-it-m sa La-ga-as
DUG-GA NAM-TIL-LA SUM-MU AN-SUR
* KUR (?)-RU-KI-GE
-ris-si ba-la-ta 1-nam-di-nu su-lul Su-ru-ub-ba-ak
NE NIN GAB -NUCI SAG = GA S
BA - AN - LAH - LAH - GI - ES
ti šu-nu ir-Su-tum Sa la im-mali-ba-yu ina
ri-Si-Su li-iz-zi-zu
IO.. . . MULU-BA-GE SIGISSE-SIGISSE HE-EN-NA-AB-BI
amelu  su-a-tum tas-li-tum tek-bu-u
E-NE TU .. . . BAD-GA NAM-TIL-LA SUM-MU
GAB AN-GA-GA-A
stp-ti ba-la-ti
1... S
ga-na-? li-pu-us


Mi. ka-a-a-nu


UNUS LINN UTI, TABLET “D.” 163


[By] this incantation at his head may they be


removed


NNUS. may it stand


Cor. IV (PLATE XXXVI).


The Pleasant Day risensforth from Eridu,

The Gentle Day that hath appeared in Lagash,

The Day of shining Presence sprung from Kish,
5. Adapa (?), puissant judge of Lagash,


The Shadow of Shurubbak, granting life to the
suppliant (?),


With their wise [counsel ?] unopposed

May they take their stand at his head :
10. May they utter a prayer [for ?] this man ;

May they perform an incantation of life
15. May they make


firm


164 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS GEES


TE-MAL
. [4] t-hu-su
20. . . +. + + A
ru (P)-kus-ma
SAG-BI . . HE-EN-GUB-BU-US
la us-su ina vi-si-su li-12-218
. [BAR]-BI-KU HA-BA-RA-AN-GUE-[BA]
25. , + + + + + + + + tha a-ha-a-ti SAA
AS(?) SAR  TAB-BA U :
-ma(?)-Si ki-is-ru-ti su-[un-nu-ti)
LAL INIM-INIM-MA U . . S
[pu] - ru - us sip-tu  i(P)-[di?-ma]
30. [SU-*SAG]-GA DINGIR-RA-NA-KU IIE-EN-SI-IN-[GE-GE]
(ma | kal-at dam-ka-a-ti sa [2li-Sauzlap-pa-kid)
SAG-GA-NA NAM E.


-łn ina — fl-$l-5SU a-a
š NAM-TIL-LA H E-EN-NA
35... ou « . . BN ba-la-ti lit


UDG E-NUN- NA- TA E-A-NA
IS - tu ku - um - me ima a - si - su
SU  MULU-GISGAL-LU PAP-HAL-LA DU
DINGIR-RA-NA
Sa ameli  mut-tal-li-ki mar —ali-Su
40... . . . . [%] Samas lit-hi: HE-EN-NA-AN-TE-MAL
[DINGIR-SILIG-ELIM-NUN- NA DU-SAG-ZU-AB-GE]
SAG-GA TAG-TAG-BI ZA-A-KAN
[ Marduk mar ris-tu-u Sa ap-si-i bu-u|n-nu-u
du-uin-mu-ku ku-um-ma


[INIM - INIM - MA] UTUG - HUL - A - KAN


— JE —À nn — o _— si


20. .


SÉ


30.


40. .


UTUKKI LIMNUTI, TABLET “D.” 165


May they draw nigh unto him


May . . . that goeth not forth, stand at his
head,

May . . . . . . stand away from him

| Tie] double (?) knots

Make a decision . . . , perform the incantation,

[Into the] kindly [hands] of. his god let him be


[commended |
at his head let them not
life may they grant [him],
es when he goeth forth from the
dwelling i
[Unto the body] of the wanderer, the son of his
god,
may Shamash draw nigh,
O Marduk, eldest son of the Ocean Deep!
Thine is the power to brighten and bless.


PRAYER AGAINST THE EVIL Spirits.


Tablet “E.”


(PLATE XXXVII.)


à TO


uy


1v-Št-Šu e-sir-ma
MULLA-IIUL MULU-RA NAM-BA-TE-[MAL] .


[gal-lu u lim-au a-na] ameli a-a it-hu-u-[nz]


SAG - BI U - ME - NI - [GAR]
zna vi - Si - SU šu - kun - [ma]
BAR - KU HE - IM - TA - [GUB]


su-li-ik-ma ina  a-ha-a-ti li-123-218

GAR - SA - A NAM - BA - TE- MAL-E- NE
i > tum Q) w-pi- su a= a it-fhu-su
[SU]-LAH-LAH-GA-A-NI-TA  HE-IM-MA-AN-SED-DE
(zna Ral - ti- šu e -l-ti Ul-pa-as-si-th


[SU]-*SAG-GA DINGIR-RA-NA-KU HE-EN-SI-IN-GE-GE


[INIM - INIM - MA] UTUG - HUL = A- KAN
AN
[EN UTUG-HUL] . . . DINGIR-EDIN-NA  GIN-A
[a]-tuk-ka — lim-nu sa ina si-eri  tl-la-ku
AN i
DINGIR - EDIN - NA DUL - LA


Lm Jona K sa ana si-el-ri i-kat-ta?-mu
DINGIR - EDIN - NA LA = a
[lèm-au sa ina] si-eri  1t-te-ni--lu-u
DINGIR - EN - LIL- LA SE - IR -ZI - DA
Es nam - vu

DINGIR - EN DU SA - BI!


NN. ES KUKUA Al- RIO


Tablet “E.”


(PLATE XXXVII.)


[With] . . . surround his bed and .
That . . . noevil devil may draw nigh unto
the man,
pw 3t is head,
Let pass by . . . . and let it stand aside,
That . . . . no sorcery may draw nigh
unto him.


10. That by his pure hand he may be assuaged,
: That unto the kindly [hands]* of his god he may


be commended.
[PRAYER AGAINST] THE EVIL SPIRITS.
Incantation :—


15. The evil Spirit that stalketh in the desert,
The evil [Demon ?] that shroudeth (man) in the


desert,
The evil [Ghost?] that lieth in the desert,
Zosis... Bel radiant,
VE) Bel...
[Evil Spirits] . . . spawned in the tomb,
1 Rm. 314 omits. * K. 2,337, mit
š Kan 314. e "wu.


a For this line see Cun. Texts, part xvii, pl. 22, l. 145.


168 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


VE BI
25... . . me 07000707 NU IM-TE-MAL-DA-BI


2 MU - UN= TAR - RI - ES AN


Lo. NI

+ 2 « U er: mt - au

GIN DU - MU

30.. . . ... 2... $U- U T EB
. +` + + + ée ww s s. s. s. s. . dé O El


SU - BI U-ME- NI - TAG - TAG


—


gumri - su lu - up = pi - tt - ma
e ou . 1: ab-kal-lu abrik-ku ka-la-su-nu : KAL-A-BI
35.. vou. SA-AŻAG G HU - MU - RA - AB- SAR- RA
ri -ik -sa el-la li-ir-ku-su- ka
. . ID-DAR “BIR HAR-SAG-GA-GE DUBBIN
AM-GUL ,DAR-A

u-ri-as Sadi?) sa su-pur ri-me bu-un-nu-u
TA NA NE HAR-SAG-GA-TA owa
40.. . . -rt-nt-su-nu kut-ri-in-nu sa ul-tu sadi(2) ib-bab-la
MU-UN-E DA-BI-TA . . O¢(?)-’ Sa-ha-tu?

ri-di-ma : GIN-A

‘ail — piany

SAR DINGIR-PA-TE-SI-MAH U-ME-NI-IB-TE-SUM
-kil-ti Si-pat Ċ',, i-di-sum-ma
E . . . BA- NI - IB fu


45.-............ e


x...


30.


JI


40.


45. .


UTURET BWAYUTI, TABLET "E." 169


themselves,

they have ordained,

= they take their stand,

[* Marduk hath seen: What I :] “Go, my son,
(Marduk),

“ Take

Spade) . . . . touch his body.

Ü Ruler (and) chieftain of all of them,

“ With a clean bandage let them bind thee,

*. . . of a kid of the mountains which hath
polished a bull's hoof,

* With their . . . asa smoke-offering brought
from the mountains,

*. . . unto the neighbourhood go down and

* Perform for him the Incantation of the God

Patesi-mah P


at his going forth


l Rm. 314 . . . -li-Su-au sir-tum.
2 Rm. 314 for this line has . . . s-Sim-mu.
3 K. 5,100, Za.

at ce Tablet “A, l. 17 ff.

> “Supreme Ruler.” (aee Man: ai


170


Ser


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS CNN


[Reverse of K. 5,100 ]


BAR . . . ou... SIG = OMS
ma... [ma]-Li-as . . . ku(?) ma-ft-ts
GAR-[HUL-GIM-MA] ?- LAL
mimma (ma) lim]- nu dup - pir
UTUG-HUL A-[LA-HUL  GI]DIM-IUL MULLA-HUL
E-TA HA-BA-R[A-E]
u-tuk-ku  liminu a-lu-u lim]-nu  e-kim-nu
lim-nu gal-lu-u lim-nu is-Ltu bite stil
U-NE-Z[[(?)] . . . ZI AN-NA KAN-PA [ZI KI-A KAN-PA]
na-an-si-[th] . . . [mu] samele) lu-u-ta-[mai


nis arsitim(tim) lu-u-ta-mat]


UIUI ILENNOTI TABLET “E.” 171


[Reverse of K. 5,100.]
BER . . smiting
50. Whatever is evil, be thou removed . . . . 1
O evil Spirit, ev[il Demon], evil Ghost, evil Devil,
Go forth from the house (and) depart!
Dy Heaven be thou exorcised! [By Earth be


thou exorcised l)


55. Incantation :—


Tablet “6.”


Cor. III (PLATE XS VIL


IO.


15


COL.


* BIR UTUG ;
U-Vi-SU [u-tuk-ku]
U-GIG-A ŠU-ŠU-BI
mu-u-Sa u ur-ra ina
MULU-GISGAL-LU-BI BARA-" SIG-GA
amelu su-u ia ,-e
E-NUN-AZAG-GA KI NAM-TIL-[LA]
ku - um - mu el- lu as - vu sa [balan]
URUDU-* SIG-TAK-ALAM AZAG-ZU
TAG-GAM-ME  KUBABBAR GIŠ-TIR AZAG
gur-gur-ru  en-ku mudi "A.
sa-a$-sa-ru sa sar-pi ana Kkis-ti Letz
GIS-MA-NU  GIS-HUL-DUB-BA . .
TUN U-ME-NI-TAG : ¿na pa-a-st .
ALAM NAM-TIL-LA : ws . .
MU-MUD-NA-A-BI: . . . . .
IV.
Sa ms am . e. VB
*BIR@)-GiG) LU IDE E
MU BI TAG-GA : wa


BIRING DUG- GA SAN


u-fl-sa el-la ..


tabBfet IU S


Bor. 111 (PLATE XXXVII.


A kid. -.
Night and day in. :
5. That man at a lucky shrine

A pure dwelling, the abode of life

10. Let a wise (and) cunning coppersmith
[Take an axe of gold(?)* and] a silver pruning-

knife b pa

Unto a grove undefiled,
[Let him carve] a Aulauppr of tamarisk
Touch it with the axe

15. An image (?) of life
[Inscribe thereon] the name of his


Vor. TV.
A dark-coloured kid .
Touch its :
5. An undefiled kid .


a On this restoration see Zimmern, Zivtueltafeln, p. 140,
Nos. 31-37, l. 45, and p. 156, Nos. 46-47, l. 12.

b This restores the word sa-a$-|Sa-ru] in W.A.7., iv, 18, 3, col. ii,
l. 2, which evidently means some small tool. Cf. the Syriac
láthwárd, subula (Payne Smith, Thesaurus, col. 4,516).


174 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


DINGIR-NIN-HAR-SAG-GA-GE * BIR-GIG
ma  te-im 7 Be-lit-ili u-ri-sa — sal-[ma]
KA-AZAG MAH-DI NAM-SUB NUN-KI-GA-GE


10. ma pi-t el-li ti-is-ka-ri si-pat “Eridi....t
— MULU - GISGAL - LU DU - DINGIR - [RA] - NA
ANA- GIM HE- [EN- AZAG|]~ GA
KI- GM HE- [EN- EL| SW
S SAG SAG
SA - ANA - GIM HE - [EN - LAH - LAH] - GA
I5. EME - HUL - IK BAR-KU  : HE- [IM - TA] - GUB
[INIM - INIM] - MA UTUG - [HUL] - A - KAN


HA-LA BA-AN-US . . . BI(?) NU* SAG!

| Duppu- AMMA) UTUG-HUL-A-KAN . . . . Akkadi*™
gab-rt Bab ®©

tu(?) mar.” Mu-kal-lim “"A-[BA] * Marduk


20.. . . . ["""Subhna]-nu-esir sar a
^" Nabu-apli-[iddina| sar Babili **
IS-lu-yu Sa-hr-ma sa-mk . . . ka tig


sum up-pu-us

“vab-dupsarri® ša  ”*Assur-[bant]-apli
Sap" A ti

[^"|rab-dupsarri" . . dup-sarri . S
ki-rib "Arba-di


— -


1 The colophon mentions Shalmaneser (II), King of Assvria, and
Nabü-apli-iddina, King of Babylon, both living in the ninth
century B.C.


UTUKKI LIMNÜTI, TABLET “F. 175


— —


At the command of the Lady of the Gods
The dark-coloured kid .
10. With a clear (and) loud voice
| Perform] the Incantation of Eridu,
May the man, the son of his god,
Become pure as Heaven,
Clean as Earth,
Bright as the middle of the Heavens,
15. May the Evil Tongue be absent from him!


PRAYER AGAINST THE [EviL] Spirits.


Tablet “B.”


OBVERSE.


Got. I (PLATE 2


[asz-Su sul-ku st-il tu Şamsi ni-rib-šu su-ķu e-rib
im Šamši($ti)
[UTUG-HUL A-LA]-HUL  GIDIM-HUL MULLA-HUL
DINGIR-HUL MASKIM-HUL
(u-tukeku lim-nu] a-lu-u lint-nu e-kint-mu  lun-nu
gal-lu-u lun-nu ilu lim-nu ra-bi-su |lim-nu]
5.. . . + . SU GIR-GIN-GIN-A-TA: tua bt-e-li ana
li-mut-ti ina t-tal-lu-ki-Su
E-A IM-MA-AN-DA-AN-TI-ES : 2/ bi-ti ““Is-tar
bi-tím lu-tar du-[5u]
BA-AN- . . . : la-mas-si bil
pu-us-ra i ta-hal
..A(2)... E-A-GE UR-BI IM-MA-AN-DA-AN-UR-GI-ES
ana $1 (2)-zp (?)-ta si-lir ra-bi $a biti mil-ha-11$
2 tar-ru
10... . A DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR ME-EN MAS-MAS
ANA-KI-A DEIB-DIB-BI MULE pu
iu Marduk mas-mas Same) u irsiim(tim)
tu-mu-[w£]  Lm-nu-ti- [ver ? |
IGI-IGI E-TA E-IB-TA GAB-ZUNIGI PL


- ina biti 1 ta-as-si 1-1at-ka fit-1


Tablet “B.”


OBVERSE.


(Bar. (PLATE XXXIX).


[It hath its exit] at the Street of Dawn"
(And) its entrance at the Street of Sunset.
Be it [evil Spirit] or evil Demon
Or evil Ghost or evil Devil
Or evil God or evil Fiend,
s. When it cometh to the house for evil
May.the God (and) Goddess of the house drive
[it] forth.
O thou Guardian Spirit of the inner chamber,
tremble not!
O ye [spirits] . . . , great and small of the
house alike, quake not!
10 O . . . . Marduk, magician of heaven and
earth, seize upon its iniquity !
O... , go not forth from the house,
turn back !


a Or “ Street of the East” and *' Street of the West.”


b IGI-IGI = harranu; possibly here we may restore “O way-
farer.”


178 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


GIDIM UB . . . BU. . A GU-MUTA- OS
SIA KU. Ub-[pu] |
IS: se-e-du [Sa ina tub-ki iz]za-au ina rig-mt-1a
ul-tu tub-kt ana su-[u-kt si-i]
GIDIM DA... . GARO)  GU-MU-TA [DA-TA
SILA-A-KU] E |
Se-e-du $a ia [Sakati] . . . sa ia rig-mi-ta


[ul-tu sahali ana su-u-ki si-i]
| TA SILA - A - SU NEN


hu te lu . . . [ana] su-u-[ki siz]
. UN(?) IB(?) ANA TU... SILA-A KU EA
20.. . . . Zi te sur . . . [ana su-u-ki si-i]
REVERSE.
Corp
25... . SI... ATE


ša biti la tah-ta-na- a (2). L- E:
MA (9) DIR-TA XNAM-BA-ZA-LA-AH-HI-EN : il-22


Sa-a-m kip . . . [la ta-zik-ku|
E-NA-TA NAM-BA-TU-TU-E-NE: ZER a-st-t la
tir-[ru-Ou]


TUR-RA-TA NAM-BA-TU-TU-NE: AH e-ri-bi
"la [tir-ru-Ou]

30. . . . EN NA-AN-TUS-EN: la ta-az-za-zi la tu-[sab]
GE-GE-E-NE NAM-BA-GUR-GUR-E-[NE]
[la ta-at]-ta-an-nu-ur-ra la ta-as-sa-na-Qu-[ur]
[ZI] ANA-KI-BI-DA-GE KAN-RI-PA HA-BA-RA-DU-[UN]
[ns samele) u itrsitem(tim) u-tam-me-ka

lu-ta-at-ta-lak [TU EN]


35. . 9 . SE PA) U-TU-UD DEE e
[Duppi] . . . “9 UTUG - [HUILA =


UZSUKKI LMÁNUTL TABLET “G.” 179


15. O Spirit that standest close at hand,
At my cry go forth therefrom unto the street!
O Spirit that standeth near,
At my cry go forth [therefrom unto the street]!
go forth unto the street!


EU so forth unto the street!
REVERSE.
Cor. IV.
EE plunder net the . . . of the
house,
With the . . . wind blow not,


With one that goeth forth come not in,

With one that cometh in, come not in,
30. Stand not, sit not,

Return not, turn not round!

By Heaven and Earth I exorcise thee,


That thou mayest depart!


Eb. . . begotten


L |rH TABLET OF THE SERIES “ THE Evin Spirits.”


CaBfet “D.”


OBVERSE.
(ELAwE XL.)
GU - BA(?) - DE
25 - SU

GA MU RA 5

[w] - su - rat “EE =a?)
5.. . . . AK-DA DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR

ana(?) se(?)-e-ti sa ™ Marduk

MULU = TU - TU


„ma (?) a - Si - pu
AN
LI DINGIR - EDIN - NA SAR-A
IO. . . . lu-u ša ina si-ir 10-ba-na-a ul
LA ZU
REVERSE.
E KA. NE A


BA - RA - AN - DA
E - A - A - KU ME
NES. [ana] bíti a-[a i- ru- ub]
EN VT -HUL DIB-BA]-A-[NI] BAR-KU [HE-IM-TA-GUB]
[UTUG - "ŠIG- GA ALAD]- *ŠIG- GA HE- EN - DA-
[LAH - LAH - GI - ES]


[INIM - INIM - MJA UTUG - HUL - [A - KAN]


Tablet “1.”


REVERSE.
SBDATE XL.)
LUGAL-GE
EE. . . . LUGALE-GE
LUGAL-GE-MAH
PES. . .« . . LÜGAE-GE


KA-A-NI SU-NI-TA KAN-NI-IB-TA-E


. £u-um-ri-su lit-ta-as-si-ma ina a-ha-a-ti [li-iz-ziz]


. . BAR - KU HE - IM - [TA - GUB]

+ . . [Z] -nu ma a-ka-a-ti li-tz-2ti-[12)]

10. [UTUG- * SIG-GA ALAD]-*SIG-GA  HE-EN-DA-LAH-
LAH-[GI-ES]


[u-tuk-ku dum-kt se-e-du dum]-ki 1-da-a-šu


lu-u-ka-a-a-an


[INIM - INIM - MA] UTUG - HUL - A - [KAN]


AN-NA MU-UN-NIGIN-E-[NE]

B. . I-A-AN MU - BI - IM

VE S [UTUG]- HUL- MES NU - AL - BAD
o. — zi sa


lr dup-sar sihru


SE v (?) Se (2)


\


Cabtet “3.”


OBVERSE.
(PLATE XLI.)
2.9 25.545.522»... GE - GES


[INIM - INIM] - MA UTUG - HUL - A - KAN


[EN UT]UG - HUL - IK AZAG EDIN - NA
5. [u - tuk) - ku lim -nu a-Sak-ku sa s¿- vi
[NAM] - TAR MULU HUL - IK TAG - GA - ZU


[ram] - ta- ru sa ameli lim-nis tal-pu -tum
[UTUG]- HUL- IK MULU  MU-UN-SI-IN- BAR- RA

(u ~ tuk] - ku lim-nu sa ameli ip-pal-la-su

IC. . +. . [HUL]-IK MULU MU-UN-SI-IN - DUL- LA
2... lim-m Sa ameli i-kat-ta-mu


HUL-IK MULU MULU SA


eu + + + « . NA SAN

. . -pi lim- nu - tum

15... . +< +< 2 G
. + + + + + s. LBB EN: T


c. [&-2h]-tap-pu-u


Sabet “3.”


OBVERSE.
BELATE XLI.)


| PRAYER] AGAINST THE EVIL SPIRITS.*


5. The evil Spirit (and) Fever of the desert,”
O Pestilence that hast touched the man for harm,
The evil Spirit which hath cast its glance on the
man,


10. The evil [Demon] which hath enshrouded the


man,


3


2 The ending of the reverse of Tablet ** H " is the same as that
of the Fifth Tablet, p. 80, but unless the text of the obverse fills
the hiatus of ll. 47-55, which does not, as far as can be judged at
present, seem probable, Tablet '' H " must be regarded as part of
a separate Tablet.

b This line and the similar lines in Tablet “C” (156 and 173)
have been translated thus in preference to ‘‘The evil Spirit (is)
the Fever of the desert,” for the reason that the verb /a/pu/ in
Tablet ** C," l. 174, is in the second person.


Tablet “R.”


(PLATE XLI


25... . . . . . . . . 995. . . ` OO


ki - na sak -pu(?) Su - nu

LA HUL *SIG - *SIG - GA— A - MES

[ma]-a-ti lim-nis  t-sap-pa-nu  Su-nu

30.. . . . MES KI-A  KIN-KIN- NA— A - MES!

[Sa]-ku-misS as-bu Sap-lis it-ta-ab-ra-ru su-nu

RA KUR - KU - GAR - RA — MES

e(?)- i -ku la i-nam(?)-du-u su-nu

U-RI-IN-MA-NE-HA-A U-GIG-GIG-GA— MES

35. u-ri-an-nu sa-af-pu-tum sa na-ma-ru ut-tu-u (sul-nu
(Prare P ENI)

IM-HUL-BI-TA MU-UN-DA-RU-UŠ ID-NU-UN-UŠ (?) MEŠ

it-ti tm-hul-li i-zik-ku ul ¿im-[mah-ha-ru šu|-nu


IM-SU-ZI GISGAL-LU-GIM MU-UN-DA-RI-ES MELAM


w


MES
pu-luh-ti  sa-lum-ma-ta kima a-li-e  ra-mu-u


me-lanonu . . . Su-nu


CaBfet “B.”


(Fosse XLII.)


they overwhelm
balefully they cover the land,
30. They dwell in gloom [on high], below they


howl,
(N or) are they ready (?) to pass by
.35. They are the widespreading clouds* which
darken the day,
(PLATE XLIII.)
With the storm wind they blow, and cannot be
withstood.


Haloed with awful brilliance like a demon,


They carry terror far and wide ;


! K. 5085, MES.
a Urinnu occurs also in W.A.L, i, 15, 57 (Tiglath-Pileser), ša


nubalusu kima urinni eli mātīšu Suparruru, “whose net like a cloud


is spread over his land.”


186 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


40. ASTE KI-NA UD-ZAL-LI-DA-GE MELAM SU-SU— A-MES
pu-uz-ra ma-a-a-la ki-ma úmi(mi) u-nam-ma-ru
me-lam-mu sah-pu šu-nu
E-NE-NE-NE SILA-A-TA .. . BA-AN-LAH-GI-ES GIR
KUR-RA-GE BA-AN-SIG-GA-ES .
su-nu ina rt-bt-tt iz-za-zu-ma tal-lak-ti ma-a-ti
u-sak-ha-ri


E - DINGIR - E - NE - GE BA - AN - RI-RI A-MES


45. bi - ta -at tláni?! iy - ta - nab - bu - [u su - nu]
KU - KUR- MAL LA BA - AN - DUB- DUB - BU - [MES]
mas (?) - ha - tt ar is - sar - rak) Su - [nu]
SIGISSE [NU]-BAL UB-GUB-BI HUL BA-AN . . .


[wpe] ul i-nak-ki Su-nu-ti a-lak-ta-su-nu lim-ne .
50. . . . NIN-BI-TA AB-BA GURUS(?)-RA AN-NU-BI ID..
. . +. nim-ti a-ha a-ha-ti id-lu si-i-bi sa la ili
. . . [A-A] DU-A-NI-TA RI[... BA]-AN-KAR-KAR-ES
KI-A BA-AN-LAH-GI-ES
a-bi it-ti [mari-Su mit (?)-ka (P)l-vis im-su-'-u-ma
ana irsitim(tim) us-te-ri-du'
IB-LAH-ES ` ZIR-BI — BA-AN-KAL-KAL-ES
55.. . . [fe?]e-mu — zs-u-u-ma gi-ri?  u-tak-ki-ru
. . BA - AN - SIG - GA? - ES
pa su - un - li * 25 - hu - tu”
UMMEDA - BI BA - AN - GABA - ES


[zu - še] - nik - ti tla-ri-ti tp- tu - vu


INCANTATION OF A SIMILAR SERIES, TABLET “K.” 187


40. They make the secrets of the couch as clear as
the day,
Spreading terror afar.
They stand in the broad places
And circle round the highways of the land,
45. (In) the temples of the gods they exalt them-
selves (?)
They pour no libations of oil (?) *
Nor offer sacrifices ;
Evil is their way.
50. . . . brother, sister, hero, old man, (all) without
a god,
the father together with his son they rob
And fell them to the earth.


55. They steal away desire (?) and bring to nought
the seed,


fi enii . . . . . of the loins,
They rend the [womb ?*] of the nursing mother,
And of the woman in travail.


EUEI; . . . rv. ME 605671.
3 K.4,905, GI. DUK M 905, Zu.
MIC 4,005, uf.


a Mashati; if the reading mas be correct, we may compare the
Syriac mesha, “oil” (Brockelmann, p. 195, 0).

> Sunti, possibly a feminine form of sunu, “side” or “loins,”
a synonym of z//u. For an analogous case of a feminine bye-form
compare Supilu sa sinnisti and Supiltu, W.A.Z., ii, 28, 43, d and 45, e.

e For this restoration cf. W.A.Z., ii, 17, ii, 41: faritu ša kirimmasa
patru.


188 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


60.. . . [BA]-AN-GAZ SA-HA-LAM-MA BA-AN-GAR-RI-ES
¿-du-ku-ma sah - lu -uk - til ts- ku -nu
MU-UN-SIR- RI- ES KALAM - KUR- RA - GE
BA - AN - SIG - GI - EŠ
[Same (e) u irsitim(tim)  is-su-hu-ma nisi”
matt u-sip-pu

mic EU $

FOE . + + + KISADU-NE-RA BA-AN-DIB-BI-ES DINGIR-BI
LA BA-RA-E
O). sambu) ir-si-li? ki-sa-da-nu-us-su-nu" is-sab-tu-ma
tlu-su* ul ip-du-u |
KI-BI- TA LA BA-RA-E GIŠ- HAR-BI BA-HUL
iv-si-ti! ul th-du-u u-sur?-ta-su-nu lim-ni-it
AN-NA  AN-NI-BIÉ-NE IM-MA-AN-BU-IÉ-ES ANA?
NU-E-A BA-AN-BAD-DA-ES$
ana samé(e) sa-Eis? is-du-du-u*-ma a-na” same)
sa la a-a” -yi ts-su-u
70. MUL-AN-NA AS DUB-BI LA  BA-RA-AN(-DU-DU-ES
EN-NUN ES-SAP-Br-TA P
ina kak-kab  sa-ma-mil* ul u-ta-ad-du-u ina
ma-ag-sa-ra 9 - q19- tt se-lal-ti Si-na
NUN SAG-MAH AN-NA IM-MA-AN-BU-IÍ-ES A-A-NI™
LA BA-AN-ZU-US
ru-bu-u  a-sa-ri-du  şi-i-ri$ a-na" same)
t719-du-du% -ma a-ba”-su ul idi
DINGIR-BIL-GI AN-TA MAH ŠI-GIN GAL GU AŠ-BAR-
MAH AN-NA
76. ”  sa-ku-u si-i-ri'8 a-Sa-ri-du ra-bu? -u pa-ri-ts


purusst si-t-ri® sa ™ A-nim


INCANTATION OF A SIMILAR SERIES, TABLET “K.” 189


60.


65.


70.


75


RR E e


They slay the [offspring ?| and spread destruction ;

Whey carry of the | . . of heaven and
earth,

And cut off* the people of the land.

They fasten their hold on heaven and earth and
spare not their gods."

On earth they are ruthless,

Evil 1s their ban ;

Unto heaven on high they betake themselves,

And unto the impenetrable heaven hie them far
away,

Unknown amid the celestial stars

In their three watches.

The prince, the mighty chieftain, unto heaven
had betaken himself,

And his father knew it not ;

The Fire God, high and powerful,


Great chieftain who giveth the awful decisions of
Heaven,


mis. 4:905, tu. | ? K. 4,905, z7sztim(t2m).


* K. 4,905 omits (?) su-au. 1 K. 4,905 omits.
5 K. 4,905, su-ur. € K. 4,905 inserts E.


* K. 4,867 and -K. 4,905 insert NA.


8


K. 4,867 and K. 4,905, DU UŠ for DA-ES.


° K. 4,905, ki-es. 12 K. 4,905, ana.


—


I
12


K. 4,867 and K. 4,905 omit.
K. 4,867, III-A-AN; K. 4,905, NA III-A-AN for EŠ-ŠA. 44-56


E20 567,1 KU. “ K. 4,905, same(e).

“ K.4,905, sar for as-sa-ra. 16 K. 4,867 omits.

MWE: 4,005, NA. 8 K. 4,905, ru for 7-77.

MK. 4,005, 15. " K.4,867 and K. 4,905, ud.
? K. 4867, bu. “ K. 2,905, rabi.


K. 4,905, rim for 2-77.


a Usippu: cf. Syriac sdph, periit (Brockelmann, p. 222, a), and
W.A.L., iv, 19, 3, 46: nakru dannu kima kane idi usip[ |mi (MU- UN-
SIG-SIG-GI).


P Literally “of heaven and earth the necks thereof they seize


upon.


190


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


(PLATE XLIV.)


BO. .


85.


90.


95.


[DINGIR]-BIL-GI TUKUL-LI  KI-*AG-GA-A-NI DA-BI
DA-AB-GUB

ud — 20-71 na-ram-Su it-li-Su '-ram-ma

[HUL] - IK VII - BI SI - MI - IN - ZU - US


[lim] -nu-ti st-bit-ti-su-nu um-ta-ad-di
E U-BI-KU-KI-GAR-RA-BI SA-BI MU-UN-DA-AP M

st - tul - ti. a-sa-bi-su  im-tal-lik
[DINGIR ]-BIL-GI


U-TU-UD-DA-A-MES
ME-A-BI


ina
VII-BI ME-A-BI
KUL-GA-A-MES
““  si-Dit-li-Su-nu e-ka-a-ma al-du e-ka-a-ma tr-bu-u
VII-BI  HAR-SAG GIG-GA BA-U-TU-UD-DA-A-MES
si-Dit-la-Su-nu ina sa-ad e-rib ™ Samsisi) '-al-du
VII -BI HAR-SAG BABBAR-RA BA-KUL-A-MES
st-bit-ti-su-nu ina sa-ad si ™ Samsi ši) ir-bu-u
KI-IN-TAR KUR!- RA- GE DURUN(?)-NA-A- MES
ina it - ta - na-as-sa- bu


KISLAH


ZZ - Si - tt
AB - TA - HA - A- A- MES


Nl - gt - ¿$ - $Z

KUR - RA - GE
wt-te-nt-en-bu-u
MELAM


ina nī - du - ti? 1x- ti (sic)
E-NE-NE-NE ANA  KI-A NU-UN-ZU-MES
DUL-LA-A-MES Ké
su-nu ina same(e) u irsitim(tim) ul 2l-lam-ma-du
me-lam-mu kat-mu su-nu
DINGIR - GAL - AN - ZU - BI
tha‘ Mami? ul
MU-BI ANA KI-A LA BA-AN-GAL-LA-A-MES
Sum-su-nu ina samele) ir-si-? ul 105-ba-aš-ši
VII-BI KUR-GIG-GA-TA HU-UB'-MU-UN-SIR-SIR-E-NE


v
Si-Dil-ti-Su-nu iu Sams Sz)


NU - UN - ZU «MN,


ir - Su - li u = ta - ad - OM


ma | sa-ad — e-rib


il-ta-na-as-Su-mu


INCANTATION OF A SIMILAR SERIES, TABLET “K.” 191


M'PATE XLIV.)


The Fire God, his beloved comrade,
With him started forth and


The evil of those seven became known.


80. While he sate himself down he pondered ;
“O Fire God, those seven,
“Where were they born, where were they reared ?
85. “ Those seven were born in the Mountain of
Sunset,
“And were reared in the Mountain of Dawn,
“They dwell within the caverns of the earth,
go. “And amid the desolate places of the earth they
live,
“Unknown in heaven and earth
“They are arrayed with terror,
95. " Among the Wise Gods there is no knowledge
of them, :
“They have no name in heaven or earth;
“ Those seven gallop over the Mountain of
Sunset,
' 36,690, E. 2 36,690, fu.
3 36,690, zrsztim( lim). * 36,690 omits.
° K. 4,886, u irsitim(tim). € K.4,886, z.
;


K.4,886 . . . HUB for HU-UB.


192


IOO.


105.


IIO.


115.


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


VII-BI KUR-UT-TA-E-NE  IM-MA-NI-IN-DI- ES
si-bit-ti-$u-nu ina Saad — siit f€Samsilsi)
im -mal -lil -lu Fame
KI-IN-TAR KUR-RA-GE GIR-MU-UN-GA-GA-A-MES
ma ni-gi-si“ ir-gi-ti? tt-ta-na-ah-lal-lu
KISLAH KUR - RA - GE GU - MU- UN - LAL - ES
ma n-du-ti ir-si-U? iwt-te-ni-’-lu-u
E-NE-NE-NE GAR NU-UN-ZU-MES ANA KI-A
NU-UN *-ZU-MES
su-nu ina mimma sum-su ul u-ta-ad-du-u ina
same(e) u ¿rsitimitim) ul al-lam-ma-du
DINGIR-ASARU BA-AN-NA-TE  I-BI HU-MU-KA wen
[a-nja “Marduk fi°-hi-e®-ma  a-mat'
su -a-ti8 lik- bi- ka
HUL-IK V//-BI IGI-ZU 9.NA BA-AN-SUM 1 ID- * AG-GA-BI
HU-MU-RA-AB-SUM-MU
sa lim-nu-ti W. si-bit-ti-su-nu ma-la a-na 2 pa-ni-ka
l-Sl-vVUu ur-ta-su-nu lid-din-ka
DUG-BI DUG-GA SUG(?)GA DIKUD-MAH AN-NA
sa kt-bit® pi-i-Su ma-ag-ra-tu da-a-a-nu si-i-ru®
sa ™ Anim l
DINGIR-BIL-GI  DINGIR-ASARU BA-AN-NA-TE I-BI
BA-AN-NA-AB-BI
v ana” * Marduk it-hi-e-ma a-mat' Ššu-a ti?


ik-bi-is


(PLATE XLV.)


GIS-LAL KI-NAD-DA-NA GIG-A-BI-KU!* | I-BI
GIS-NE-IN-TUK-A


ma kul-ti ma-a-a-al mu-Si a-mat Su-a-ti 1S-mi-ce-ma


AJ


INCANTATION OF A SIMILAR SERIES, TABLET *K." 193


100. “And on the Mountain of Dawn they cry ;*
“Through the caverns of the earth they creep,
105. “(And) amid the desolate places of the earth
they lie.
“ Nowhere are they known,
“In heaven nor earth are they discovered.
“Draw nigh, (then), unto Marduk,
“That he may explain this matter to thee,
“That he may vouchsafe unto thee an explanation
“ Of the evil of these seven
110. “That are arrayed against thee.
“For kindly is the instruction of his mouth,
“The puissant judge of Heaven."
115. So the Fire God drew nigh unto Marduk,
And told him of this matter ;
(PLATE XLV.)
He under the canopy ” of his couch of night
Gave ear to this matter,


! K. 4,886, me. 9703806, 15.

3 K. 4,886, zrsitim(tim). > E 5,155 omits.
EUIS 1,543, fe. $ K. 11,543 omits.
USI 33, ma-iu Y K. 11,943, ma-lai

IK. 9), ds q, vu. ME 0545 inserts A.


ND 5,133 amd K. 11,543, SI-ES. U K. 11,543, tu.

U K.5,133 and K. 11,543, ana.  K. 11,545, (0 Il-22.

E 5,133 and K. 11,543; ra? for ra-£u.

5 K. 133, FE for 1-ru. IMS. 5,133 oits.

17 K. 5,133 omits a-na. i2 B 5055, TA.

2 Immallilu: Syr. mallel, ** utter a sound, speak.”

b Kulti, the Chaldee kilha (Levy, Chald. Worterb., p. 364, a),
a canopy or bedchamber. "This word was apparently recognized
by Sayce (Hibbert Lectures, p. 470), who translates it thus.


13


194 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


DU WI DINGIR - EN - KI - RA E-A BA-SI-IN - TU
GU - MU - UN - NA - AN - DE - E
a-na a-bi-šu ““E-a a-na biti i-vu-um-ma t-sa-as-si
I20. . . .: A-A-MU DINGIR-BIL-GI DINGIR-BABBAR-E-TA
GUL-GA DUG-BI MU-UN-NA-AB-BI
ab “GGubil ana gt ™ Samsisi) is-nik-ma
pu-uz-rat-si-na it-fl-ha-a
VII-BI A-DU BA-AN-ZU KI-BI IN-KI-KI-GA
SAG - NA - AN -GI -U- MU- UN- NA- AN- SUM
al-ka-ka-a' -ti si-bit-ti-Su-nu la-ma-du as-ra-ti-Su-nu
Si-te--a hi-Sam-ma
125. DINGIR(?)-BUR-SIL-SA-A DU NUN-KI-GA-GE
rap - sa uz - ni? mar SE - vi AN
DINGIR-EN-KI DU-NA DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR
MU-UN-NA-NI-IB-GE-GE
"E.g ma - va - sut iu Marduk tp - pal
DU -MU V//-BI KUR-TA DUR -RU - NA - MES
130. ma9-vi si-bit-ti-Su-nu ina tr-si-ti% as-bu
VII-BI KUR-TA : si-bit-ti-Su-nu is'-tu irsitim(tim)
u8-su-ni : E-A!-MEŠ


VII - BI KUR-TA BA-U-TU-UD-DA-Al-MES

st - bit - ti - Su-nu ina ir- si- ti? °-al-du

VII - BI KUR „rā BA - GUL - GA 10_ A - MES

del Si - bit - ti - su - nu ina tv - gr - til 77 - bu - U


DA-DA E?-*TUR-RA-GE UMUN-E BA-AN-NA-TE-ES
i-da-at ap-si-i ana ka-ba-su? — it-hu-ul-ni


GIN-NA DU-MU: a-lik malt-vi * Marduk: DINGIR-
SILIK-MULU-SAR


INCANTATION OF A SIMILAR’ SERIES, TABLET “K.” 195


And entered the house;
And spake/unto his father Ea:


EO my father, the Fire God hath arrived at the
Place of Dawn,
“And hath penetrated its secrets ;
“Speed thee to learn the ways of those seven,
“ (And) to seek out their places.”
125. Then the sage son of Eridu, Ea,
Gave answer to his son Marduk :

130. “O my son, those seven dwell in the earth,
“Those seven have come forth from the earth;
“Those seven in the earth were born,

135. “Those seven in the earth were reared ;

“They have come nigh to tread the Bounds of
Ocean.
“Go, O my son Marduk,
Ei 5,133 omits. SES 4005, tu.
MÈ 505 and K. 5,133, | [Eridi].
+ K. 4,905, mdri-šu. 5 K. 4,905 inserts a.
£ K. 4,905 and K. 5,133, 27si/im(Żirn).
1 K.4,905, ul. s K.4,905 and K. 5,135, 21-/a.


° K. 4,905, irsitim( tim).

? K. 4,905 and K. 5,133, KUR-KUR-GA for GUL-GA.

1 K, 4,905, 2rsitim(tim); K. 12,000, BB, zrszZzm[ lim |.

12 K.4,905 and K. 12,000, BB omit.

DRK 4905 and K. 5,133, s. 4 K.4,905 inserts a.


196


DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


140.


145.


150.


GIS-MA-NU GIS-HUL-DUB-BA  UTUG-E-NE-GE


p 7" hul- dup - bu - u? sa ra-bi-si
SA - BI DINGIR - EN - KI - GE MU PA - DA
sa ina lib-bi-su “E-a su-mu zak- ru
INIM-INIM-MA TU-MAH NUN-KI-GA NA-RI-GA 3
ina  Sip-li sir-ti Si-pat E-ri-du* sa te-lil-ti
UR-PA-BI BIL  U-NE-TAG  MULU-TUR-RA  V//-BI
IM-TE-MAL-E-NE-GE?
ap-pa u 1iš-di%5 i-sa-a-ti" lu-pu-ut-ma ana marsi’
si-Dit-li-Su-nu a-a tt-hu-u
SA-PAR-DAGAL-LA KI-DAGAL-LA NA-A U-ME-NI-SUB?
ki-ma 1 sa-pa-ri rap-Si ina as-ri rap-Si su-ni-' H -il
t-di-1na
AN - BIL U-GIG-BI SAG-GA-NA HE-EN Gen
ina ka-ra-ri-e mu-Si'? u ur-ra ina ri-si-su lu-u®
-ka-a-a-an
GIG-A SILA E-SIR-RA UNI-E-NE!-GE SU-NAP
HE-EN-DA-AN 16 -GAL |
mu-st'® su-uV -ku su-la-a u na-ma-ri'8 ina ka-tt-su
lu-u-na-si
= RI |
GIG-BAR-A-AN U-DI-DUG-GA-GE 9? KI-NA SAG MULU-
GISGAL-LU PAP-HAL-LA-GE HE- EN-GUB-BU-US ??
ina mu-st ma-sal” ina Sit-ti ta-ab-ti ina ma-a-a-lu™


ina ri-es a-me-lu? mut-tal-li-ka lu-u*-ka-a-a-an


INCANTATION OF A SIMILAR SERIES, TABLET “K.” 107


140.


145.


IN 5.


d ` ed
w < © al] o


E.
K.
K.
Ke
K.


“A tamarisk Aulduppit of a fiend

s Whereon is inscribed the name of Ea,

“With the all-powerful incantation,

“The Incantation of Eridu of Purification,

“Set it alight both in front and behind,

“That these seven may not draw nigh unto the
sick man.

“Asa wide net spread in a wide place set it,

“And smouldering * by night and day

“At his head let it stand.

“ By night (it is) a highway, a path,

“And at dawn let him hold it in his hand.

“At midnight in a gentle sleep in bed

“ At the head of the wanderer let it stand.”


4,905, 74.
moose, t-a; K.4,626 ,, -e.

2000 GAA AN. — * E 4,626, “x [Eridu].
4,626, NU-TE-MAL-DA-GE. $ K.4,905, ap-pu u il-du.
4,905, tu for a-ti. 8 K. 4,626, mar-si.


K. 4,626, NE-IN-SUB for ME-NI-SUB.
K. 4,905, kima. " K. 12,000, BB omits '.


K. 4,905, su.


Ka 005, K. 4,626, and K. 5,133 omit.


14
"15
16
17
19
21


23


K. 4,905, LI-DI ; K. 4,626, [L]I-DA for E-NE.


K. 4,905 and K. 4,626, BI.
K. 4,626, K. 5,133, and K. 12,000, BB omit.


K. 4,905 omits. “ K. 4,905 and K. 4,626, ru.
K. 4,905, BI. 2 K. 4,905, BA-NI-IN-GAR-RI-ES.
K. 4,905, as-li. “K. 4,905 and K. 4,626, li.


K. 4,626 and K. 4,905, amelu. % K. 4,626 and K. 4,905, ki.
K. 4,626 and K. 5,133 omit.


"c l-iteralivx “on fire.”


198 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


(PLATE XLVI.) =
155. UR - SAG EU ER KIN - GA - A NID B
kar -ra-du | a-na  ib-vi-$u i- sap- par
DINGIR-BIL-GI MASKIM-BI-KU HA-BA-RA-AN-GUB-BA
M a - na? f - bi - su - ti - Su li - 12 - giz
160. HUL -IK V//-BI HE-IB-TA-AN-ZI-ZI SU-BI
HE-IB-TA-SIR-RI-ES..
lim-nu-ti  si-bit-ti-Su li-is-suh-ma ina  zummi-su
lit-ru-ud
U- ŠA- DUG- GA UTUG GIS- BAR- RA
(mu(mu) da-'-i-ku va-bi-si la kak- ku


DINGIR-BIL-GI ID-DAN MAH GABA-BI HE-EN-GE-GE


165. im emu-kan si-i(?)-[ir]-ti  trat-su [tir
DINGIR-NIN-KI-GAL DAM DINGIR-NIN-{A-ZU |-GE
IGI-BI KI KUR-KU  HA-BA-RA-AN-GA-GA

Lows spe ki kar Š


w  al-ti™ , pa-ni-[ša a-na as]-ri sa-nam-ma lis-kun


SAG-GIG ŠA-GIG U-SU[SUB . . . . LU SED-DE
; fl-u su-ru-ub-bu-u [far-ba-su . . . ]ti ku-us-su


170. DINGIR-NIN-A-HA-KUD-DU SU-BI HA-BA-AN-ZI-ZI
SAG-BI HA-BA-AN-GUB-BA
vw, tna gumri-Su l-is-suh-Ma ina  ri-Su-Su
lu-u-ka-a-a-an 1
TU = DUG - GA DINGIR = NIN = A = HA KUD DEE


ina T - e sa = T
NAM - SUB NUN - Ki- GAS GE
175. ina s=. m sa E- ri- du


ZU-AB NUN-KI-GA TU-MAH NA-AN-GE-GE KAN-PA
tna [st]-pat ap-si-i u E-ri-du sir-ti" la tar-su (2)
Ec
lik-ka-bi


INCANTATION OF A SIMILAR SERIES, TABLET “K.” 199


160.


170.


gees: XLVI.)


The hero sent unto his comrade,
“Let the Fire God stand up against his demons,


“That he may remove the evil of those seven,
and drive them forth from his body,

“(For) a fiend unarmed (?) is a raging tempest.

“May the Fire God, supreme of power, turn it
back:

“May Ereshkigal, the wife of Ninazu, turn her
face elsewhere. |

** Headache, shivering, heartache, ? .. . , cold,

“May Nin-akha-kuddu remove them from his
body,

“ And stand continually at the sick man's head.

“With the spell of Nin-aha-kuddu,

“ And the Incantation of Eridu,

“With the Incantation of the Ocean Deep and
Eridu


+ Mighty (and) unconquerable let it be uttered ;


* K. 4,626 and 4,905, NA for E-NE.

2 K. 4,626 and 4,905, GIS-BAR ana for ,, a-na.
"Mo TU AE ki . . . for,-t.

+ K. 5,120, Sip-li sir-tim sa ap-si-i u “[Eridi].


200 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


DINGIR-PA-SAG-GA LIGIR-GAL MASKIM-MAH DINGIR-
RI-E-NE-GE  SAG-GA-NA  GUB-BA GIG EN-
NUN-MU-HE-A!

"^ J-Šum na-gir? ra-bu-u ra-bt-st si-d-vi sa ilani * ina


180. ri-Si-Su li-lz-zi-iz?-ma tna mu-st lu-u-na-sir-Su
GIG-UD-DA  AN-BABBAR-RA ŠU-*ŠIG-GA HA-BA-RA-
AN-GA-GA


mu-si* u? ur-ra a-na® kata”


lu-pa-kid “TU EN


v
im Samsi dam-ka-a-ti


7


EN | NUN-KI GIS-KIN-GIG-ES  KI-EL-TA  SIR-A
ina E-ri-du? kis-ka-nu-u sal-mu ir-bi ina as-ri Y el-la
20-Ga-ni
185. SUH- ME- BI SI-ZAGIN-A  ZU-AB-TA 'LAL-E
Zt- -mu- su uk-nu-u ib-bi sa a-na ap-si-i tar-su
DINGIR-KI-GE 2GIN-GIN-A-TA NUN-KI-GA HE-GAL
* SIG-GA-A-AN !Š
ša "" E-a1 tal-lak-ta-su ina E-ri-du® hegallt
ma-la-a-ti
1 K. 5,120, HE-EN-GUR-BA after NA.
K. 5,120, ebe 5 K. 5,120, 272 for a
K. 912055 5 K. 5,120 OMIS.


° K. 5,120, ana.
7


2
4


This line is replaced by INIM-INIM-MA GIS-MA-NU SAG
on K. 5,120.


Š 55.470, E-A. ° K. 5,120 and455,479, 227 a
10 55,608... ba a-sar for ina a$-ri. * 55,608 inserts NI.

7 $5,479 insert KU 13 55,608... SU-SU-GA-A.

14 $5,479, NAKBU. 15 $5,479, “DAN


a Kiskanti. From the description of the kiskani salmu in these
lines it may be inferred that it grew wild (it ‘‘springeth forth in
a place undefiled "), it was of thick or dense growth (*' bountiful in
luxuriance,” “like a forest grove”), its locality was the river bank
(“where earth is, there is its place, and the Couch of the Goddess Id
(the River Goddess) its home"). It occurs in the grammatical lists


d


INCANTATION OF A SIMILAR SERIES, TABLET "K. 201


“ May Ishum, the great overseer,
“ The potent sprite of the Gods,
180. “Stand at his head and guard him through the
night.
“Unto the kindly hands of Shamash
“ Night and day may he commend him.”
Exorcism, incantation.


Incantation :— |
In Eridu groweth the dark kzskanu ° PP
That springeth forth in a place undefiled,

185. Whereof the brilliance is shining lapis
Which reacheth unto Ocean ;
From Ea its way in Eridu
Is bountiful in luxuriance,


(IW. A.Z., ii, 45, 4, l. 52 ff.), where three kinds are mentioned, prsa
(“white "), salmi (** dark "), and sami (“brown ” ?), and a few lines
below several kinds of vine are explained. The determinative in
Sumerian is GIS, “ wood,” and not v, *' plant,” or SAR (postpositive),
„and it does not occur in the plant lists still extant (see Cun.
Texts, part xiv), or in the list of vegetables, etc, in Merodach
Baladan’s Garden (ibid., pl. 50); and since three varieties are
known (white, blue (7), and brown), kiskang must therefore be the
name of several species of tree or shrub bearing different coloured
flowers, berries, or fruit. From the first line of this incantation we
know that it grew in Eridu (i.e. Southern Babylonia) Everything
points to its being a real shrub or tree and not a mythical one, and
Mr. H. H. W. Pearson, of the Royal Gardens at Kew, has kindly
suggested to me that the asfragalus, of which there are more than
thirty varieties (v. also Mr. Pearson's article on Palestinian Flora in
Encyclopaedia Biblica, under Palestine), agrees with the description
given above. On the possibility of its being one of the tragacanth-
bearing varieties, and the various explanations of this text, see
Introduction.


202 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


KI- TUS- A- NA KI- SI- KUR- A- AN

190. su - bat- su: a- sar Ir- si- lim ma

KI - NA- A p DINGIR- ID- A- AN
Ri-15-SU-SU ma-a-a- ly? sa SS


»
E-AZAG-GA-A-NI-TA GIS-TIR GIŠ-MI LAL-E SA-BI
MULU  NU-MU-UN-DU-TU-TU-NE
[]-xa* biti el-lu sa ki-ma kis-ti® sil-la-su
tar-su ana lib-bl-Su man-ma la ir-ru-bu
195. SA DINGIR - BABBAR [DINGIR] - DAGAL - GAL BUR -
AN - NA - GE


tna ki - vi - bi - SU te C q YY Dumu - zi
(PLATE XLVII.)
RI - BA - AN - NA ID KA - // - VĒ


ma bi-ritt pi-i nma-vra-[a-ti] ki-lal-la-an
DINGIR-KA-HE-GAL DINGIR-IGI-DU-GAL HERE
200. GIS-KIN-BI SU-IM-MA-AN-HU MUH-[MULU] .
wn» "» p sa “Eridi kis-ka-nu-u su-[a-tu
¿s-bu-Su-1ma elt ameli]
si-pat ap-st-t ad-[du-u]
SAG MULU - GISGAL - LU - PAP - HAL - LA - GE
BA - NI - IN - GAR - [RA]
ina vi-es ameli mut-tal-li-ku as-ku-[nu]
205. MULU-GISGAL-LU DU DINGIR-RA-NA UTUG "SIGN
ALAD- “SIG-GA HE-EN-LAH-LAH-[GI-ES]
sa ameli mar ¿$e se-id dum-ki  la-mas-si
du-un-ku? a-da-a-su lu-ka-a-[a]-an
LAL -GE SUĊ-DIB-BA IGI-BI SA-BI
NU - MU? - UN - TAR - RA
du (?)-ti-i  sa-bit kati sa pa-ni-Su a-na
kir-biS-$u la sum-mu


INCANTATION OF A SIMILAR SERIES, TABLET “K.” 203


Where earth is, there is its place,


190. And the Couch of the Goddess Id its home.


195.


In an undefiled dwelling like a forest grove


Its shade spreadeth abroad, and none may
entegtiti.


In its depths (are) Shamash and Tammuz.


(PLATE XLVII.)


At the confluence of two ' streams


200. The gods Ka-Hegal, Shi-Dugal, (and)


of Eridu
[Have gathered] this Żeskanz, [and over the


man |


Have performed the Incantation of the Deep,
(And) at the head of the wanderer have set (it).


205. That a kindly Guardian, a kindly Spirit
May stand at the side of the man, thé son of his
god.
The . . . which seizeth on the hand
Of him whose face hath not been turned
towards it
| 55,479, -al-tum (2). * 55,479, ina.
25555479, Zum. $35,183, 97-22.


5


K. 5,183, dum-ki.


6 Thus, and not BA as in the text.
* K. 5,183 omits. 8 K 5,183, ana ki-rib.


“ Literally “ between the mouths of two (or both) streams.” On
the meaning of sabásu, see Introduction.


204 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONTA.


LAL - E GIR - BI} HA - BA - AN - KUD

210. . . . it-te-mi-'-lau-u | s$e-ip-su li-ip-ru-us
c. HUL BAR-KU  J HE-IM- TA - GUB

o. cha?) li-mut-ti ina a-ka-a-ti ll-is-żiż

AN-NA  KA(?) LUGAL-LA-GE GIR-A-AN
HU-MU-UN-DA-AN-GUB

-e (?)-ri ()) sa pi sarm ina  ur-hu lik-lis

215. [NIN - GAL] ZU AZAG DINGIR- NINNI GEES
HU - MU^- DA- AN - KUD

[be-el]-ti rabf-fà  mu-du-ti el-lit3 “[S-tar ina

biti lip-ru-us-su
“[UTUG-HUL]  A-LA-HUL GIDIM-HUL MULLA-HUL
DINGIR-HUL MASKIM-HUL

ŠZI [AN]- NA KAN-PA ZI KI-A KAN - PA
MULU-GISGAL-[LU] a-me-la mar ili-Su : DU
DINGIR - RA - NA

220. UTUG-HUL DIB-BA-A-NI BAR-KU HE-IM-TA-GUB
u-tuk-ku lim-nu ka-mu-Su ina a-ha-a-ti li-12-z18
UTUG-[*SIG]-GA SAG-GA-NA HE-EN-GUB-BA
[se-e-du da)m-ku ina ri-si-Su li-12-2iz


ALAD-[*SIG-GA ID-BI] HU-MU-UN-DA-AN-GUB


225. la-mas-[st — dam-&u idjla-a-su  lu-u-ka-a-a-ai
DINGIR -RA . . . . . . . HE -EN - GUB - BA?
U li - tg - giz


DINGIR - EN -[KI-GA?] . . . . . . . HETE
“[E-a?] . .. .. . DSS
230. MULU - [GISGAL - LU- BI] . . . ME UR BESSE


[amele Su-a) ...... . at = ta cM


INCANTATION OF A SIMILAR SERIES, TABLET “K.” 205


[From where] he lieth, may it retard its foot.
210. Mayanevil . . . stand aside therefrom,
May . . . from the mouth of the king
restrain it on the way.
215. May Ishtar, [the Lady] mighty, wise, and pure,
From the dwelling-place cut it off.
[O evil Spirit] evil Demon, evil Ghost, evil
Devil, evil God, evil Fiend l
By Heaven be ye exorcised! By Earth be ye
exorcised !
The man, the son of his god,
220. May the evil Spirit that hath seized him stand
aside !
May a kindly Guardian stand at his head,
225. May a kindly Spirit stand continually at his side,
May . . .
Let [this man ?] praise Ea (?)


230. Let [this man ?] praise


stand,


LN 5,133) NI. ? K. 3,235 inserts UN.

ANN 2 235, li-li.

t K. 3,235 translates (a) . . . e-kim-mu lim-au, (b) . . . ra-bi su
lim-nu. |

5 K. 3,235 translates . . . 2rsilim(tim) lu-u-la-mat; K. 4,626
translates mis Ae

5 K. 3,235 inserts the ends of two lines, (a) . . . DA-AN-GUB-BA,


(b) . . . -Su li-iz-ziz after l. 225.


206 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS ORESBABVEONIS


I [DINGIR- EN- KI- GE PA]- HE- E- A-


[a - mat ve Hc a lis - te =
[DINGIR - DAM - GAL - NUN - NA HE - EN] - SI - DI - E
25. ("Dam - ki- na] di- tw M
[DINGIR-SILIG-ELIM-NUN-NA DU-SAG ZU-AB-GE


$AG-G]A TAG-TAG-BI ZA-A-KAN


(PLATE XLVIII.)


GA - GAT DOS GE


Ends of lines 238-251 :—(238) . . . SAR-TA GAR-RA,
(239) . . . [rik-sa?]-a-ti šak-nu, (240) . . . GIS-
BANSUR-GE, (241) ... fa-as-su-ri, (242) . . . NAM-
LUGAL-LA-GE, (243) . . . -mat sar-ru-ti, (244) . .
ZI(?) UR-SAG-GA-GE, (245) . . . &ar-da-a-ti, (246)

.. GUB-BA, (247)... zz-za-a2, (248) ... US-SA,
(249)... en-da, (250) . . . NA-GE, (251) nn
[Hiatus of about nine lines.)

kis
SAG - GA - NA BA - NI - IN - GAR
"I ša “A-nim ia ri-st-Su ts-ku-un-MNA
255. [UTUG-*SIG-GA] ALAD-*SIG-GA DINGIR-SAG-GAG-GA-GIM

[SAG]-GA-NA HE-EN-LAH-LAH-GI-ES
» » kima tlt ba-ni-Su ina ri-st-su lu-u-ka-a-a-an

SAG GAR-* SIG-GA-A-NI HE-EN-TUK-TUK-E-NE
ri -is -su ana da-me-tk-te dli- kil = la

260. UTUG-HUL A-LA-HUL GIDIM-HUL MULLA-HUL
DINGIR-HUL MASKIM-HUL


DINGIR-RAB-KAN-ME DINGIR-RAB-KAN-ME-A DINGIR-
RAB-KAN-ME-KIL


> 3)


INCANTATION OF A SIMILAR SERIES, TABLET "K. 207


May [the word of Ea] make clear!

235. May [Damkina] direct aright !
[O Marduk, eldest son of the Ocean Deep l)
Thine is the power [to brighten] and bless."


(PLATE XLVIII.)


| Incantation |


[Ends of ll. 238-251 remaining. ]


[Hiatus of about five lines.)


He hath put the [potent meteorite ?] of heaven
at his head,


255. That a kindly Spirit (and) a kindly Guardian,
Like the God that created him,
May stand at his head continually,
To exalt his head to favour,
260. Whether it be an evil Spirit or an evil Demon,
Or an evil Ghost or an evil Devil,
Or an evil God or an evil Fiend,
Or a Hag-demon,
Or a Ghoul,


2 ‘These lines are restored from Cuz. Texts, part xvii, pl. i, ll. 30 ff.,
and pl. 26, ll. 80 ff.


208 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA.


MULU-LIL-LA  KI-EL-LIL-LA KI-EL-UD-DA  KAR-R/
UH (?)-HUL UH(?)-ZU UH(?)-RI-A GAR-SA-A GAR-HUL-


GIM-MA
BAR- KU HE - IM - TA- GUN
265. UTUG-*SIG-GA  [ALAD]-*ŠIG-GA | HE-EN-DA-LAH-
LAH-GI-ES
INIM-INIM-MA . . . MULU-TUR-RA IN
GIS-KIR
. . KU SAL-*SIG-GA BUR - SU -MA DAS


270. [ID]-ZI-DA-KU — MU-UN-KESDA ID-KAB-BU
sin-nis-tu da-me-ik-tu pur-su-[um-tu] .
-łu vu-'-tu sa “Ts - tar [ana EE
[li - ir- ku -uls-ma ana su -me i . A
. . . BI ID-SU-GIR-BI U - ME - |NI- KEŠDAJ
275. [NAM - SUB] NUN - KI- GA U - ME - [NI - SUM]
BI-A  U- ME- [NI]
(PLATE XLIX.)
. wou oun ARS me - e
[GAR - NA GI] - BIL - LA
[GI] - BIL - LA
[Small hiatus.]


280.. . . DESDE


— À— l =


UTUG - HUL SIG(?)
ZU MULU - TUR- RA ID . S


GIG- GA KI-A mm
-ru-vu-tu mur -sa ana ma-a-ti td-ku . .


INCANTATION OF A SIMILAR SERIES, TABLET “K.” 209


Or a Robber-sprite,
Or a Phantom of Night,
Or a Wraith of Night,
Or the Handmaid of the Phantom,
Or evil spell, witchcraft, sorcery,
Enchantment or any evil,
May it stand aside!
265. May a kindly Spirit (and) a kindly Guardian
Be present.


Incantation . . . . the sick man


Incantation


270. Let a woman pure and aged
Foi his rigat them... . spittle of Ishtar,
And on his left E.
[Of that man] do thou [bind] his limbs,
275. [Perform the Incantation] of Eridu,
water
(PLATE XLIX.)
| Bring unto him a censer] and a torch,
a censer


[Small hiatus.]


| Incantation | :— |
[casteth ?] disease upon the land,


210 DEVILS AND EVIL SPIRITS OF BABYLONIA,
285. . [G]I- NA NAM - MULU - GISGAL - LU - GE
co... . Sa a-m-MN
GIG-GA MULU-RA MU-UN-NA-AN-GAR
¿ - Sa - ti 2-ha-am-ma - tu
00. 5. « Z - tas kin
200. E SAG - GA - NA GUB - BA
[a ri-si] ameli ka-a-a-nu
[SAG] - GA- NA GUB - BA
Sa ina ri-es ameli tz - za - ZU
DINGIR-BABBAR-GE UH(?) MULU-RA  SU-SU
295. [sa] “San a Samsi im-tum amelu 25-Sa-an


300.


305.


So.


[DINGIR]-DINGIR-NINNI-GE UH(?) MULU-RA SU-SU
sa “Is -tar im-tum amu ts - ga - AN
UTUG DINGIR-RAB-KAN-ME UH(?) MULU-RA SU-SU
sa se-e-di u la-bar- ti zm - tum is- sa - an
DINGIR-NIN-A-ZU LUGAL GIS-KU-GE UH(?) MULU-RA
SU-SU
sa ™ „ sar kak-ki im-tum amelu is-sa-an
DINGIR-LUGAL DINGIR  SILA-A-*SIG-GA-GE UH (?)
MULU-RA-SU-SU
sa , U su-ki sa-£u-um-me im-tum amelu is-[sa-an]
DINGIR-PA-SAG-GA LIGIR GIG U NA
[sa “I]-Sum na-gir mu-St
{ Hiatus. ]
U-ZAG-HI-LI-SAR . 2 ,. PE
Bus 0... we aw II
EL
el


INCANTATION OF A SIMILAR: SERIES, TABLET “K.” 211


— — w... SS


Bab... » of mankind,
that burneth [like] fire
sick . . hath settled on the man,
200. . . . at the head of the- man standeth
continually,
The . . . which at the head of the man
standeth,


295. From Sin and Shamash hath filled the man with
venom, |
From Ishtar hath filled the man with venom,
From Spirit and Hag-demon hath filled the man
with venom,
300. From Ninazu, king of the sword, hath filled the
man with venom,
From Sharru, the god of foul streets, hath filled
the man with venom,
305. From Ishum, overseer of night . . [hath filled
the man with venom].


en


ni PU D uu
