The Life of Buddha as Legend and History (E.J. Thomas, 1927)
==========================================================
E.J. Thomas's 1927 critical life of the Buddha — the landmark scholarly biography separating legend from history. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

feo eis 


GC] z 
ea 
j SG; 
Learning on Thought 3% 
without SF, 4! without 
PN H 
thought iC learning 
s Ss bs s 
Is P54 1S ss 
labor =| ( @]|_ perilous 
Se 7 e 
lost xd: \\ Confucius x 
SS ig 
4>S Presented 
Far Eastern IK Mh through the 
Collection SY generselty 
=~ weve donet™ 
oh i \ 
Cf 8 ere” y ue. 
Bas ea | 
Mount Union College Library 


via 
¥ 


aca ae 
Paes Fok 
a oe +s f iB 


4 
oh 
ths 


oe “ 
: . af ea) ny 
hike e — 


Bite Life of Buddha 


as Legend and History 


By 


EDWARD J. THOMAS 
M.A., D.Litt. (St. Andrews) 


Author of The History of Buddhist Thought, 
Early Buddhist Scriptures, etc. 


plas it 
ws 
LONDON 
ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL LTD 
BROADWAY HOUSE: 68-74 CARTER LANE, E.C.4 


First published Marck 1927 
Second Edition (with a few corrections) March 1931 
Third Edition, (Revised) 1949 
Reprinted 1952 
Keprinted 1956 


A full list of The History of Civilization series 
will be found at the end of this volume 


ETS RF 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
LUND HUMPHRIES 
LONDON Q BRADFORD 


PREFACE 


GINCe the appearance of the epoch-making works of 

Rhys Davids, Kern, and Oldenberg, the sources for the 
history of Buddha and Buddhism have been greatly increased. 
The accessions to our knowledge of the Pali texts are indeed 
chiefly due to Rhys Davids, but these new data have never 
been incorporated with previous results, nor has an estimate 
been made of the extent to which they modify earlier 
conclusions. 

The present work attempts to set forth what is known 
from the records, and to utilise information that has never 
yet been presented in a Western form. Even now much of 
the material is accessible only in works published in Burma, 
Siam, and Ceylon, but the great work begun by Rhys Davids 
in establishing the Pali Text Society is still vivified by his 
spirit, and continues in the fruitful labours of his successors. 
Not the least of his achievements is the Pali Text Society’s 
Dictionary, now completed by Dr. W. Stede. All the Pah 
passages quoted in the course of this work have been either 
translated or retranslated by me in the light of the evidence 
accumulated by these scholars. 

There has been a tendency in Germany and England to 
depend almost entirely on the Pali sources, neglecting the 
works of schools preserved in Sanskrit, and in Tibetan and 
Chinese translations from the Sanskrit, which although often 
later than the Pali, yet are parallel and more or less indepen- 
dent traditions, and cannot safely be ignored. The Pah 
itself is no primitive record, but the growth of a long tradition 
in one school. The Sanskrit needs to be equally closely 
analysed ; and if the result tends to show the historical 
weakness of a narrative based on one set of records, the 
final conclusions are all the more reliable. 


vi PREFACE 


All the traditions are subordinate to the fact of the 
establishing of a system of doctrine and a religious order. 
The earliest form of the doctrine is still a matter of controversy, 
but it is possible to separate off much that is agreed to be the 
development of later centuries. One important fact brought 
out by the comparison of Sanskrit sources is the fundamental 
doctrinal agreement in the earlier schools, a result which makes 
it impossible to treat the Pali tradition as a truncated or 
perverted form of a nobler teaching. Mahayana doctrines 
are doubtless older than the works in which we find them 
expounded, but they do not belong to the oldest schools. 

How far Buddhism now possesses validity as a religion is 
a further question, on which opinions diverge greatly. 
A recent writer has said that “ all that has hitherto been held 
to be the ancient Buddha doctrine is false, inasmuch as 
its root idea, with the passage of time, has no longer been 
understood, nay has actually been perverted into its very 
opposite’?! For this writer Buddhism is “ not one religion 
among many others, but as the most perfect reflection of 
the highest actuality, the Absolute Religion’. It may be 
that this writer is not so exclusively in possession of the 
truth as his words seem to imply, but while such views are 
held, it is surely of the first importance to know what our 
documents actually say, and what the earliest interpreters 
thought they meant. 

What lies before us, as well as behind us, has been well 
put by Mrs. Rhys Davids: ‘‘ When believers in the East 
and historians in the West will come out of the traditional 
attitude—when we shall not hear church-editing called 
Buddha-vacanam, and thought of as Gotama-vacanam— 
when we shall no more read: ‘ The Buddha laid down this 
and denied that ’, but ‘ the Buddhist church did so ’—then 
we shall at last be fit to try to pull down superstructure 
and seek for the man . . .”? 


' G. Grimm, The Doctrine of the Buddha, the religion of reason. Leipzig, 1926. 
® Majjhima Index, editor's note, p. vi. 
9 


PREFACE Vii 


My greatest thanks are due to Miss C. M. Ridding of 
Girton College, who has read and criticised much of the 
work in manuscript, and to Miss O.G. Farmer, Mary Bateson 
Fellow of Newnham College, for reading and criticising the 
proofs. To Professor Sir William Ridgeway, Sc.D., F.B.A., 
who helped and encouraged me at all stages of the work, 
I am no longer able to express my thanks and gratitude. 
I am also greatly indebted for valuable discussions and 
information on special points to Professor S. N. Dasgupta, 
Ph.D., Dr. G. S. Ghurye, Reader in Sociology in Bombay 
University, and Professor K. Rama Pisharoti, M.A., Principal 
of the Sanskrit College, Tripunittura. 

Epwarp J. THomas. 


PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 


de HE accessions to our knowledge of Buddhism during the last 
twenty years have consisted chiefly in establishing the fact 
of the existence of a Sanskrit Canon parallel to the Pali. When 
the Pali Scriptures were first brought to light there was a tendency 
to ignore all the Sanskrit sources. This was at the time 
inevitable, for the few Sanskrit works then known were very late 
and mingled with Mahayana doctrines. But now more and more 
portions of the Sanskrit form of the Scriptures are being dis- 
covered. Much of their contents was known from Chinese and 
Tibetan translations, and the evidence to be drawn from them 
has already been used in the present work. Although there were 
many schools or sécts, there was only one Canon, with differences 
of detail and arrangement such as might be expected in the case 
of records for long preserved by memory. They were in a 
Prakrit dialect, and were finally committed to writing in Pali by 
the Theravada school and by the Sarvastivadins in Sanskrit. 
Another school, of which less is known, was that of the 
Mahasanghikas. Some examples of these parallel recensions are 
given in the author’s Early Buddhist Scriptures. 

Although these schools developed special doctrines, nothing 
of these divergences is found in the Canon itself. The variants 


vii PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 


that occur usually refer to historical or legendary events in the 
narrative portions attached to most of the discourses. The 
latest and most detailed piece of research on these variant 
records has been done by Dr. E. Waldschmidt, who has treated 
the Mahdaparinibbana-sutta in great detail. He has collected all 
the Sanskrit passages that have been recovered and has compared 
them with the other known documents in Pali, Tibetan, and 
Chinese. Japanese scholars, in particular M. Anesaki and 
C. Akanuma, working from the Chinese, have analysed the four 
collections of discourses (Agamas or Nikayas) common to all 
known schools, so that it is now possible to form a connected 
view of the Sarvastivada Canon. The Vinaya of the Sarvastiva- 
dins, of which the late M. Finot has edited the fundamental list 
of rules known as the Prdatimoksha-sutra, shows equally clearly 
how the schools held to their authoritative texts. Here, as in the 
case of the Suttas, the divergences lie in the legendary matter, 
in which there came to be wide differences between the various 
schools. The result of all this is not to weaken the authority of 
the Pali Canon, but to show how all schools inherited an authori- 
tative series of texts. It reduces the likelihood of the notion 
that behind this tradition lay a forgotten or misunderstood form 
of primitive Buddhism. 
EDWARD J. THOMAS. 
Oriental Faculty Library, 
Downing Place, Cambridge. 
May, 1948. 


CONTENTS 


Crap. 
Preface : 
Introdarisad eens sources 
I. The ancestry of Buddha 
Note on the geography of early Buddtisa 
II. The home and family of Buddha . 
III. The birth of Buddha 
IV. Infancy and youth 
V. The Great Renunciation 
VI. Austerities and Enlightenment 
VII. The first preaching 
VIII. Spread of the Doctrine . 
IX. Legends of the twenty years’ deni et 
X. Rival Schools. Devadatta and Ajatasattu 
XI. The last days ? : : 
XII. The Order . ; 
XIII. Buddhism as a religion . 
XIV. Buddhism as a philosophy 
XV. Buddha and myth 
XVI. Buddha and history : 
XVII. Buddhism and Christianity . 
Appendix. The Buddhist Scriptures 
The Theravada (Pali) Canon 
Canonical works of other schools 
Bibliography 
Index : 


113 
124 
143 


173 


211 


237 


249 


257 


279 
289 


PLATES 


PLATE PacE 
I. THe ENLIGHTENMENT . : ; ; Front. 
II. ABOVE: TEMPTATION BY MARA’S 
DAUGHTERS facing 54 
BELOW: GOTAMA’S FLIGHT 
III. Mrracte oF THE Parrs at SAVATTHI Bs 98 
IV. AJATASATTU VISITS BUDDHA a 138 


Norr.—Plate I is from an image of the ninth century found at the great stipa 
of Borobudur in Java. It shows the established Indian form of the Buddha . 
image, which had developed from the Gandhara type. It has the earth-touching 
pose of hands (bhimisparsa-mudra@). Pl. If from the Amaravati staipa in the 
Madras Presidency (2nd cent. A.p.) is an earlier Indian development of the 
Gandhara type. Pl- III (lst cent. B.c.) shows the Gandhara type (North-West 
India), from which all images of Buddha are derived. The pose is that of turning 
the Wheel of the Doctrine (Dharmacakra-mudra), in which the Four Truths are 
being enumerated. Pl. IV from the Stipa of Bharhut or Barhut, a hundred miles 
south-west of Allahabad (2nd cent. B.c.), belongs to a period before images of 
Buddha were made. Three stages of the visit of the king to Buddha are shown, 
as described in the Sdmaniiaphala-sutta (below pp. 138, 179). In the bottom left- 
hand corner he is setting out with his wives, each on an elephant. On the right 
he is alighting from the kneeling elephant, and above he is saluting Buddha, who 
is represented only by his footmarks and seat. The inscription down the right- 
hand pillar is: Ajdtasata bhagavato vamdate, ‘ Ajatasattu reveres the Lord’s [feet]. 

The illustrations are drawn from W. Cohn, Indische Plastik, Bruno Cassirer 
Verlag, Berlin, 1921. 


ABBREVIATIONS 


Digha : Digha-nikaya (quoted by vol. and page of text. The pages of the 
translation, Dialogues of the Buddha, are not given, as this also gives the page 
number of the text). 

Dial. : Dialogues of the Buddha, tr. by T. W. Rhys Davids. 

Majjh.: Majjhima-nikaya. 

Samy.: Samyutta-nikaya. 

Ang.: Anguttara-nikaya. 

Jat.: Jataka. (Quotations are always from the Commentary.) 

Dhp.: Dhammapada. 

Sn.; Sutta-nipata. 

Vin.: Vinaya. 

Dpvm.: Dipavamsa. 

Mhvm,: Mahavamsa. 

Lal.: Lalita-vistara (quoted by page of Calcutta ed., and of Lefmann). 

Mvastu: Mahavastu. 

Lotus : Saddharmapundarika. 

Divy : Divyavadana. 

EB.: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th ed. 

ERE. : Hastings’ Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics. 

JA.: Journal Asiatique. 

JPTS.: Journal of the Pali Text Society. 

JRAS. : Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 

SBE. : Sacred Books of the East. 

ZDMG: Zeitschrift der deutschen Morgenlindischen Gesellschaft. 


PRONUNCIATION. 


The vowels in Pali and Sanskrit are the same as in German or Italian, except 
that short a has the sound of uw in but. The consonants are mostly as in English : 
g is always hard, c has the sound of ch in church. The dentals, t, d, etc., are true 
dentals pronounced with the tongue against the teeth. The cerebrals, t, d, etc. (indi- 
cated by a dot below) are pronounced with the tongue drawn against the hard 
palate. In the case of the aspirated letters, th, ph, etc., the sound is a stop plus 
@ simultaneous aspiration. The accent is on the long syllable as in Latin: Suddh- 


ddana, uddna, jataka, nikaya, tisita, Ldlita-vistara. 


CHRONOLOGY 


B.C. 

563 Birth of Gotama Buddha. 

643 Accession of Bimbisara king of the 
Magadhas. (Pasenadi king of 
the Kosalas.) 

534 The Great Renunciation. 

528 The Enlightenment. 


491 Accession of Ajatasattu 
(Death of Pasenadi and destruc- 
tion of the Sakyas.) 
483 Nirvana of Buddha. 
First Council at Rajagaha. 


459 Accession of Udayabhadda. 

443-435 Anuruddha and Munda, 
Magadha kings. 

411 Accession of Susunaga. 

393 Accession of Kalasoka. 

383-2 Second Council at Vesali: 

365-343 Ten sons of Kalasoka. 

343-321 The nine Nandas, Dhanananda 
the last of them slain by 
Canakka, 

323 Accession of Candagutta. 


297 Accession of Bindusara. 


269 Accession of Asoka. 
265 Coronation of Asoka. 
247 Third Council at Pataliputta. 


246 Mission of Mahinda to Ceylon. 
237-6 Death of Asoka. 


B.C. 
539 Cyrus takes Babylon. 


c. 516 Inscriptions of Darius I mention- 
ing India and Gandhara among 
his provinces. 

490 Battle of Marathon. 


80-479 Xerxes’ 
Greece. 
army. 


expedition against 
Indian soldiers in his 


431-404 Peloponnesian War. 


338 Battle of Chaeronea. 
333 Alexander defeats Darius at Issus. 


327-5 Alexander’s Indian Expedition. 

323 Death of Alexander. 

304-3 Treaty between Seleucus Nicator 
and Candagutta. Residence of 
Megasthenes at the court of 
Candagutta. 

Deimachus at the court of Bindu- 
sara. 


247-207 Devanampiya Tissa king of 
Ceylon. 


INTRODUCTION 


BN is the grave as well as the cradle of religions. They 

have disappeared not merely with the crumbling of 
ancient civilisations, but have been swept away before the 
victorious progress of new forms of belief. One of the 
most widely spread of these spiritual conquerors has been 
Buddhism, extending from India over great portions of 
southern and central Asia and permeating the ancient 
religions of China and Japan. 

Yet until modern times nothing of the real nature of 
Buddhism was known. ‘The scientific investigators who 
followed in the train of Alexander the Great describe 
various Indian religious sects, but do not specifically mention 
Buddhism. The first Christian writer to mention Buddha 
is Clement of Alexandria at the end of the second century, who 
speaks of ‘‘ those of the Indians that obey the precepts of 
Boutta, whom through exaggeration of his dignity they 
honour as a god.’”?! Buddha was also known to the Mani- 
chaeans. Al Biriini quotes a work by Mani (c. 216-276 a.D.), 
the Shabirkan, in which the great heretic claims as three of 
his predecessors Buddha, Zoroaster, and Jesus.2, The Acts 
of Archelaus (early fourth century), which purport to be 
the record of a debate between Mani and a bishop Archelaus, 
speak of a predecessor of Mani, Terebinthus, who spread 
a report about himself, saying that he was filled with all 
the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was now called not Tere- 
binthus but Budda. He pretended that he had been born of 
a virgin and brought up by an angel on the mountains.? 
This work was known to St. Jerome, and from it he may 
have got his statement that Buddha was born of a virgin. 
The Acts do not say that Buddha was of virgin birth, but 


1 Strom. I, xv, 7]. 

2 Al Birani, Chronol. of ancient Nations, tr. Sachau, p. 190. 

3 Hegemonius, Acta Archelai, LXIII, ed. Beeson, Leipzig, 1906. The work is not 
held to te historical, but Hegemonius used older documents. The reading Buddam 
varies, but is shown to be correct by the quotations in Epiphanius and the historian 
Socrates. 


XiV INTR®DUCTION 


only that Terebinthus, who called himself Buddha, made 
that claim. St. Jerome attributes to the gymnosophists the 
belief that ‘‘a virgin gave birth from her side to Budda, 
the chief person of their teaching.’?! His statement about 
the virgin birth may be as much a confusion as his view that 
Buddha’s followers were the gymnosophists. There were 
_gymnosophists or naked ascetics in India, but they were 
not Buddhists. 

In the thirteenth century Marco Po to had heard of 
Buddha in Ceylon, whom he named by his Mongolian title 
of Sagamoni Barcan, a fact which makes it probable that 
some of his information came from Mongolia. He describes 
him as the son of the king of Ceylon and the first great idol- 
founder, though he knew of his greatness as a moral teacher, 
and declared that if he had been a Christian, he would have 
been a great saint of our Lord Jesus Christ, so good and pure 
was the life he led.? 

In 1660 RosertT Knox, an English seaman, was taken 
prisoner by the Singhalese, and remained in captivity nineteen 
years. He mentions Buddha as “a great God, whom they 
call Buddou, to whom the Salvation of Souls belongs. Him 
they believe once to have come upon the earth. And when 
he was here, that he did usually sit under a large shady Tree, 
called Bogahah.” * But a much more circumstantial account 
was given by SIMON DE LA LOUBERE, envoy from Louis XIV 
to the king of Siam in 1687-8.4 He had passages from Pali 
books translated, which give some of the Buddha legend in 
an intelligible form. He too thought that Buddha was the 
son of a king of Ceylon. The Indian missionaries of the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were much more 
astray. The Carmelite PAULINUS a S. BARTHOLOMAEO (1790) 
confused Buddha with the Hindu God Budha (the planet 
Mercury), and also tried to identify him with the Egyptian 
god Thout (Thoth).® 

Real knowledge could come only from an _ actual 

1 Adv. Jovin. I 42. 

2 Bk. III, ch. 15 (Yule, ii p. 138; Ramusio, III, ch. 23). 

3 An Historical Relation of Ceylon, 1681; repr. Glasgow, 1911. 

4 Description du Royaume de Siam, Paris, 1691; tr. as A New Historical Relation 
of the Kingdom of Siam, London, 1693, p. 163 ff. 

5 Sidharubam, Rome, 1790, p. 57. The extraordinary difficulties which some of 


the greatest scholars of this time and later found in getting at the actual records 
can be seen from Rémusat’s Mélanges posthumes, Paris, 1843. 


INTRODUCTION XV 


acquaintance with the Buddhist writings, and in the first 
half of the nineteenth century two names stand out beyond 
all others. These are ALEXANDER Csoma DE KOrés, the 
Hungarian scholar, and Brian Houcuton Hopcson, who 
spent over twenty years in Nepal, and for ten years 
was British Resident there (7833-43). /Csoma set out in 
1820 in the hope of finding the origin of his nation, and spent 
four years in a Buddhist monastery in Tibet. He failed 
in the object of his search, but at Calcutta he found a copy 
of the Tibetan Buddhist Scriptures, the Kanjur (Bkah hgyur), 
and the collection of commentaries and other works forming 
the Tanjur (Bstan hgyur). His analyses of both these 
collections, which are mainly translations from the Sanskrit, 
were published in 1836 and 1839, together with Notices on 
the life of Shakya, extracted from the Tibetan authorities. 

Hodgson’s work in its results was even more important. 
During his residence in Nepal he collected over 400 Sanskrit 
MSS., which he presented to the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
the Royal Asiatic Society, the Société Asiatique, and other 
libraries, and besides these many works in modern languages 
and in Tibetan. Those MSS. presented to Paris libraries 
came into the hands of the first Sanskrit scholar of Europe, 
EucENE Burnour, and it was on the basis of these and on 
the arrangement of the Scriptures as given in Csoma’s Analysis 
that he wrote his Introduction a Vhistoire du Buddhisme 
indien (1844). He also translated one of the works sent by 
Hodgson, the Saddharmapundarika, as Le Lotus de la bonne 
Loi (1852). 

Other investigators in this field were not in general directly 
concerned with the history of Buddhism, but there were two 
scholars whose work, drawn from Tibetan sources, contributed 
the most important historical material before the discovery 
of Pali works. Franz ANTON VON SCHIEFNER published 
in 1845 a life of Buddha from the Tibetan, and in 1847 
PuHILIprpE Epovarp Foucaux issued the Tibetan text with 
a French translation of the Lalita-vistara, a life of Buddha 
down to the beginning of his preaching. The Sanskrit text 
of the latter began to be published by the Asiatic Society 
of Bengal in 1853. This is the work that became to the 
scholars of the time the chief source for the legend of 
Buddha’s life. 


XV INTRODUCTION 


But investigations of Buddhism had already begun from 
a very different source. GEORGE TURNOUR of the Ceylon 
Civil Service in 1836 brought out the Mahdvamsa, an ancient 
history of Buddhism in India and Ceylon, and the first 
important Pali work to be published. He also edited and 
translated several discourses of Buddha from the Pali. 
A controversy at once arose as to whether Pali or Sanskrit 
was the language of Buddha, but neither party saw that 
they were begging the main question. How do we know that 
this language was either Pali or Sanskrit ? We have no right 
to take for granted that either language was the primary 
one, nor can we assume that because a certain work is in 
Sanskrit, it is later than any in Pali. But what is certain 
about the works discovered by Hodgson is that they belong 
to a very late, and in some cases to a very corrupt stage of 
Buddhism. All Burnouf’s Sanskrit sources were much 
later than the Pali, except so far as earlier passages were 
embedded in them. In one branch of these Sanskrit writings 
the compilers actually claim to have received new revela- 
tions from Maitreya, the great being now waiting in heaven 
to become the future Buddha. It is not surprising that 
scholars failed to find any historical basis in this material, 
or even to reach any general agreement or conclusions. 
H. H. Wilson writing with the results of. Burnouf’s work 
before him held it ‘‘ not impossible, after all, that Sakya 
Muni is an unreal being, and that all that is related of him 
is as much a fiction as is that of his preceding migrations.” 1 
The Russian scholar Vasiliev in the same year declared 
that “‘ Russian, French, English, and German scholars have 
in fact written much on this subject. I have read through 
most of their works in my time, but through them I have 
not learnt to know Buddhism.” ? 

It became clear that, whatever value the Pali Scriptures 
might have, it would be necessary to investigate them. 
The investigation is yet far from being completed, but it 
is chiefly due to three scholars that the texts have now 
been printed and made accessible. Victor FAusBOLL, the 
Danish scholar, in 1854, published the Dhammapada, a 


1 Buddha and Buddhism in JRAS. XVI (1856), p. 248. 
* Buddhism, preface. 


INTRODUCTION xvii 


collection of religious verses and the first text of the Pali 
Scriptures to be edited in Europe. From 1877 to 1896 he 
edited the Jdtaka with a long Pali commentary which contains 
a biography of the earlier life of Buddha. HERMANN OLDEN- 
BERG edited the Vinaya (1879-83), the ‘ Discipkne’, 
and in 1881 THomas Wiztiam Ruys Davinps founded the 
Pali Text Society. For over forty years this scholar devoted 
himself to the editing of all the unpublished texts, and 
through his own devotion and enthusiasm, which inspired 
a large number of fellow workers, the Sutta and Abhidhamma 
divisions of the Scriptures are now finally complete in 
more than fifty volumes. These with Oldenberg’s Vinaya 
form the Pali Canon. The first tendency of Pali scholars 
was naturally to ignore everything but the Pali tradition, 
but we have later learned much about other forms of the 
Buddhist Canon as existing in Chinese and Tibetan transla- 
tions. These, although they warn us against trusting 
exclusively to Pali, only emphasise the relative importance 
and antiquity of the Pali against the late and degenerate 
forms that have survived in Nepal and Tibet. It is no 
longer possible to pit the Lalita-vistara against the Pali 
as a source of history, and to base theories on documents 
that can be proved to be accretions and inventions of later 
centuries. 

It is undeniable that in the story of Buddha there has been 
a growth, and even in the oldest documents we can trace 
records of varying antiquity. In the following pages an 
attempt will be made to distinguish the earliest accounts, 
but this does not touch the fundamental question. Is there 
a historical basis at all? It must be remembered that some 
recognised scholars have denied and still deny that the story 
of Buddha contains any record of historical events. We 
further have the undoubted fact that various well-known 
characters once accepted as historical are now consigned to 
legendary fiction, such as Dido of Carthage, Prester John, 
Pope Joan, and Sir John Mandeville. The reply to those 
who would treat Buddha in the same way is not to offer 
a series of syliogisms, and say, therefore the historical 
character is proved. The opponents must be challenged 
to produce a theory more credible. 

The matter stands just as in the case of any historical 

6 


aa 


XVill INTRODUCTION 


person, say Socrates, Muhammad, or Bonaparte. We 
have many records, many related facts, dates, and archaeo- 
logical remains, as well as the actually existing Buddhistic 
peoples with their systems. Do these data point to an origin 
in the growth and spread of a myth, in which the religious 
belief. in a god has been gradually converted into an 
apparently historical event, or is the basis a historical person 
who lived in the sixth century B.c.? An indolent scepticism 
which will not take the trouble to offer some hypothesis 
more credible than the view which it discards does not 
come within the range of serious discussion. The first step 
however is not to debate these views, but to present the 
positive evidence. 


THE SOURCES 


The Scriptures and their commentaries—The Buddhist 
Scriptures have often been consciously or unconsciously 
brought into comparison with the writings of the New 
Testament. The result is extremely misleading unless the 
differences as historical records are also realised. The com- 
position of the Gospels and Epistles is not without problems, 
but the questions concerning the origination and growth 
of the Buddhist Canon are far more complex. Buddhism 
spread rapidly, and soon split up into schools. The Singhalese 
Chronicles as well as Buddhist Sanskrit works record the 
names of eighteen schools that arose before the end of the 
second century after Buddha’s death. Some of these were 
merely schools and disappeared, but others became definite 
sects with their own Scriptures. As the authoritative teaching 
represented by the dogmatic utterances and discourses of 
the Founder were not recorded in writing, but were memorised 
by each school, differences inevitably began to appear.! 
The earliest period at which we have evidence for the 


1 Learning by memory is sometimes supposed to bea more faithful method of 
recording than writing, but it is open to greater dangers of corruption. In the case 
of the Vedas, where there was no doctrinal motive for change, and where extra- 
ordinary means were taken to preserve a pure text, there are remarkable differences 
in hymns found in the recensions of the various schools. We find the same feature 
in passages preserved both in Pali and Sanskrit works. Another fruitful source of 
corruption due to memorising is the difficulty of determining the source or author- 
ship of particular documents. The Buddhists themselves, when the ascription 
of some of the canonical works to Buddha himself has appeared too incongruous, . 
have attributed them to one or other of the more famous disciples. 


INTRODUCTION xix 


existence of a body of Scriptures approximating to the 
present Canon is at the third Council held B.c. 247, 236 
years after the death of Buddha. But this was only the 
assembly of one school, the Theravdda, and it is the Canon 
of this school which we now possess. From the Chincse 
translations and fragments of Sanskrit works still in existence 
we can be sure that other forms of the Canon already existed 
in other schools. The Canon of the Theravada, ‘ the School 
of the Elders,’ is divided, as in the other schools, into the 
Dhamma, the doctrine as comprised in the Suttas, or dis- 
courses, the Vinaya, the disciplinary rules for the monks, 
and the Abhidhamma, scholastic elaborations of the Dhamma. 
These are analysed in the Appendix. The original language 
is held to have been, and probably was in fact, Magadhi, 
the language of the Magadhas, among whom the doctrine 
was first spread. But the present Scriptures are preserved 
by the Singhalese, Burmese, and Siamese in a dialect known 
from the time of the commentaries as PAli (lit. ‘ text’ of the 
Scriptures), and there is no general agreement among scholars 
as to the district where this dialect originated. 

In the Dhamma and Vinaya we possess, not a historical 
framework containing discourses, as in the case of the 
Gospels, but simply discourses and other dogmatic utterances, 
to which traditions and commentarial legends have later 
become attached. This is most clearly seen in the case of 
the Vinaya, where the whole, except the statement of each 
rule, is an accretion of legendary matter.\ But the same is 
also true of the Discourses. The legends have no sacrosanct 
character, except perhaps in the eyes of modern pious 
Buddhists, but are recognised by the commentators as being 
the traditions of the schools that repeated the texts, and 
sometimes different versions of the same event are recorded. 
Certain passages are also expressly recognised as being 
additions of the revisers.1_ In the commentaries proper 
and in other works based on them we find separate traditions, 
which later were elaborated into a continuous legend. They 
often show a distinct development from those preserved in 
the Canon. The earliest form of the Sanskrit tradition is 


1 A quite separate problem, which does not concern us at this point, is to 
determine how far we have Buddha's utterances in the Discourses after discarding 
the legends ; see Ch. XVI. 


XX INTRODUCTION 


the collection of legends preserved in the Tibetan Scriptures, 
chiefly in the Vinaya. The most important have been trans- 
lated by W. W. Rockhill as Life of the Buddha. Later Sanskrit 
works are the Mahdvastu and the Lalita-vistara, both of 
them showing traces of being based on originals in a popular 
dialect, and both of them being canonical in certain schools. 

e Mahdavastu,‘the Great Story,’ is drawn from the Vinaya 
“of the Lokottara branch of the Mahasanghika school.} It 
contains, like the Vinaya of other schools, a great mass of 
legends, and its original basis of disciplinary rules has mostly 
disappeared or become disguised through its importance 
as a collection of tales and poems. These often correspond 
verbally with the Pali texts, but still more with the legends 
of the Pali commentaries. The Lalita-vistara, ‘ the extended 
account of the sports ’ (of the future Buddha) is a continuous 
narrative of the life of Buddha from his decision to be born 
down to his first sermon. In its present form it is a Mahayana 
stitra, but some portions both im prose and verse correspond 
closely with Pali passages, and are probably quite as old. 
They are survivals of a Canon that must once have existed 
side by side with the Pali, and of the kind which is still 
found in Tibetan and Chinese translations. Other verse 
portions are in the so-called gatha-dialect, the dialect of the 
gathas or verses, also called mixed Sanskrit, but it is essentially 
Prakrit, a popular dialect, which has been turned into Sanskrit 
so far as the metre would allow. The Mahayana framework 
of the whole, in which the compiler has arranged his materials, 
is necessarily later still. Its date in its present form is put 
by Winternitz in the third century a.p. 

Another Sanskrit work, the Abhinishkramana-siitra, now 
exists only in a Chinese translation... An abridged transla- 
tion in English has been published by Beal as The Romantic 
Legend of Sdkya-Buddha (London, 1875). According to the 
Chinese translator it was one of several lives of the kind.. 
It gives the story of Buddha down to the early period of his 
preaching, and represents the legend much as it is found in 
the Mahdvastu, but arranged as a continuous story. These 
three works represent a later stage of the legend than we 
find in the Pali and Tibetan Vinaya. They are definite 
compilations by individuals on the basis of the earlier texts — 


1 A work with the same title exists in Tibetan. 


INTRODUCTION xxi 


and commentaries, and the growth of the legend therein can 
be easily seen. 


~~In the Pali there is also a similar class of works. The 


/Nidana-katha, forming the introduction to the Jataka 


\Fpaea hs 


commentary, like the Abhinishkramana-sitra gives the story 
of Buddha down to the events after the Enlightenment, 
but it also records the previous periods from the time cycles 
ago, when at the feet of Dipankara, the Buddha of that 
time, he first formed the resolution to become. a Buddha. 
The commentary on the Buddhvamsa has a similar account, 
and also gives, or rather invents, a chronology for the first 
twenty years of his preaching. It is on such material that 
still later works in Singhalese and Burmese are based ; and 
now that their sources are accessible, they are chiefly interesting 
as examples of hagiographical industry. The same is true of 
the Tibetan work composed in 1734, which has been 
summarised in German by Schiefner as Eine tibetische 
Lebensbeschreibung Cakja Muni’s, and Klaproth’s Vie de 
Bouddha d’aprés les livres mongols. Several other works in 
Siamese and Cambodian do not need special mention. 
These documents do not in themselves form a basis for 
a historical account. It is impossible to determine from them 
any credible chronology, and the Buddhists themselves 
failed to do so. The various calculations for the date of 
Buddha’s death in Pali and Sanskrit works vary by centuries. 
The Chronicles and Purdnas.—The basis for a chronology 
is found in the two Pali chronicles and the Hindu Puranas, 
to which may be added the data drawn from Jain works. 
The Puranas are a number of compositions containing 
theological, cosmological, and legendary matter in the 
style of the epic poems. They are the nearest approach to 
historical works that we find in ancient India, though their 
aim was not the mere recording of events, but the glorifica- 
tion of the royal patrons at whose courts they were recited. 
With this purpose they give the genealogies of various ruling 
families of Northern India, and in these we have a genuine 
tradition ; but the genealogies are fitted on to the general 
cosmological theories, and are carried back through earlier 
ages to Manu, the first man of this cycle, the son of Vivasvant 
or the Sun. Other pedigrees are traced back to Atri, whose 


1 A, Leclére, Les livres sacrés du Cambodge, Paris, 1906. 


XXil INTRODUCTION 


son was Soma or the Moon. From the solar or lunar dynasty 
various royal lines traced their ancestry, and it was probably 
due to puranic influence that the ancestry of Buddha was 
evolved into a solar dynasty, and that Buddha thus received 
his epithet of ddiccabandhu, ‘ kinsman of the sun.’ 

The Pali Chronicles in their form as literary works are 
undoubtedly later than the genealogical portion of the Puranas, 
and correspond to them in two important features, first in 
the mythological genealogy down to Buddha’s family, which 
is made a branch of the royal house of the Kosalas, and 
secondly in the historical traditions of the kings of the 
Magadhas. The Chronicles have been treated as if the 
question were that of their historicity as against the testi- 
mony of the Puranas, but the real question is whether there 
is a historical basis for a tradition that in both cases has 
been preserved by the very imperfect means of oral trans- 
mission. The actual historical deductions need not be 
discussed at this point, as we are concerned only with the 
question of the possibility of placing the life of Buddha 
within a definite period of Indian history. What is certain 
is that the Pali Chronicles of Ceylon do not “‘ stand on their 
own tottering feet ”’, but that their records of Indian history 
are traditions that originated in India, and must be judged 
in conjunction with the rest. They are corroborated in 
their main outlines by the puranic and Jain traditions ; and 
as they were not composed as royal panegyrics, there is less 
likelihood of the perversion of facts than in the Puranas. 

The chronological relations with general history have been 
determined by the discovery of Sir William Jones that the 
Candagutta (Candragupta) of the Chronicles and Puranas 
is the Sandrocottos of Strabo and Justin, the Indian king 
who about 303 B.c.!.made a treaty with Seleucus Nicator, 
and at whose court Megasthenes resided for some years as 
ambassador. 

The Chronicles are the Dipavamsa, ‘the Island Chronicle,’ 
and the Mahdvamsa, ‘the Great Chronicle.’ The former 
belongs to the fourth century a.D., and was composed in 
Pali on the basis of old Singhalese commentaries. The 
Mahdvamsa is a rehandling of the same material with 
additional matter referring to Singhalese history, and 


1 The latest discussion of the chronology is in Hultzsch, Inscr. of Asoka, p. XX XV. 


INTRODUCTION xxii 


belongs to the fifth century. Both works begin with Buddha’s 
enlightenment and the early events of his preaching, followed 
by the legend of his miraculous visits to Ceylon, and a list 
of the dynasties of the kings of this cycle down to Buddha. 
Then follows the history of the three Councils and the kings 
of the Magadhas down to Asoka, and the mission of his son 
Mahinda to Ceylon. The rest consists of the history of 
Ceylon down to king Mahasena (352 a.p.). The Mahdvamsa 
continued to receive additions recording the history of 
Ceylon down to a much later period. 

The relation of the Pali sources to the Sanskrit has recently 
been stated by M. Masson Oursel in an interesting note in 
his Esquisse d’une histoire de la philosophie indienne. 


During the second half of the nineteenth century the problem of 
the Buddhist sources was debated between partisans of the authenticity 
of the Pali Canon and partisans of the authenticity of the Sanskrit. 
The first, whose protagonist was Oldenberg, allowed the relative 
integrity of the Pali Canon preserved in Ceylon. The Sanskrit works, 
relatively poor, composed chiefly of the Lalitavistara and the Maha- 
vastu, appeared to them fragmentary, derived, and mixed with 
adventitious elements. The others, who like Burnouf draw from 
materials brought from Nepal by Hodgson, rely on Northern documents. 
Noticing the multiplicity of sects attested by the most ancient witnesses 
they refuse to hold the Pali Canon as solely primitive, although so 
complete. Minayeff is their chief authority. The twentieth century 
has renewed the question by minute criticism of texts and widened the 
discussion. The Sanskrit Canon has been immensely increased by the 
discovery in Tibetan and Chinese of documents translated from 
Sanskrit originals now lost, but which put the philologists in possession 
of methods more and more certain. Further, the Chinese collection 
has preserved for us not a single Canon, but fragments of several, 
as well as five Vinayas. Finally, the discoveries in Central Asia make 
it certain that there existed a plurality of Canons as much developed 
as the Pali. Hence there is nothing to justify the ancient prejudice 
that one of these Canons, e.g. the Pali, should be more ancient than 
the others. Strong presumptions allow us to infer the existence of 
one or more versions, from which have come both Pali and Sanskrit 
texts and others as well, without doubt in more ancient dialects. 


This passage illustrates the confusion of thought which 
has existed even in the mere statement of the problem. 
Noscholar maintains that the Pali Canon is “solely primitive’’, 
and the discovery of forms of the Canon in Chinese has 
only helped to lay bare the Sanskrit works as “ fragmentary, 
derived, and mixed with adventitious elements’. But the 


XXiv INTRODUCTION 


real question in dispute was that of the relative value of 
the legendary or quasi-historical matter. On this point 
Senart in writing his Essai sur la légende du Buddha said, 
‘“‘le Lalita Vistara demeure la source principale des récits 
qui font l’objet des présentes recherches, mais non pas la 
source unique.”’ That was an intelligible position in 18738, 
when the Pali Canon was practically unknown, but since then 
no supporter of the Sanskrit tradition has brought forward 
anything from the Chinese or from the documents of Central 
Asia to support the Lalita-vistara as a rival of the Pali. 
This work is still, as Rhys Davids said, “‘ of about the same 
value as some mediaeval poem would be of the real facts of 
the Gospel history.’ 1 

On the other hand there is a fact that has not always been 
recognised. We have nothing, even in the Pali, at all like “ the 
real facts of the Gospel history ” to put in the place of the 
Sanskrit legend. We have merely other forms of the same 
legend, some earlier and some later. If it were merely 
_ @ question of asking what is the net value of the history to 
be gathered from the Lalita-vistara, we could deal with it 
very summarily, but it is a legend which has grown, and 
which we can trace at different stages. More properly 
speaking it is the growth of a number of legends, which 
existed separately before they were united in the form of a 
continuous life in the Lalita-vistara and other lives of Buddha. 
From this point of view there is no rivalry between schools. 
_Every particle of evidence presents itself either as testimony 
to the growth of the Buddhist tradition or as material for 
its historical foundation. 


1 Hibbert Lectures, 1881, p. 197. 


CHAPTER I 


THE ANCESTRY OF BUDDHA 


HERE is no continuous life of Buddha } in the Scriptures. 
The isolated events found therein have in some cases 
been woven by the commentators, along with additional 
incidents, into a longer narrative. The Jataka commentator, 
in order to introduce the tales of Buddha’s previous births, 
gives an account of his life down to the time when he is 
supposed to have begun to illustrate his preaching by these 
tales. The commentator of the Buddhavamsa is able to 
specify the various places where Buddha kept Retreat 
during the rainy season for the first twenty years of his 
ministry. The Sanskrit works also show a similar develop- 
ment. First there are the separate legends of the . 
taries (preserved in the Tibetan) and those of the Mahdavastu ; 
and these in the Lalita-vistara and similar works have been 
elaborated into a regular biography. 

It is impossible to draw a strict line between the legends 
in the Canon and those in the commentaries. Some of the 
latter are undoubtedly later inventions, but all of them belong 
to a period far removed from the stage which might be 
considered to be the record, or to be based on the record, of 
an eyewitness. Everything, even in the Scriptures, has 
passed through several stages of transmission, and what- 
ever the period of the actual discourses, the legends by which 
they are accompanied are in no case contemporary. Some 
of the scriptural legends, such as the descent from heaven, 


1 Buddha, ‘ the enlightened,’ is properly his title only after his enlightenment. 
Before then he is a Bodhisatta (Skt. Bodhisattva), ‘ a being of (or destined for) 
enlightenment.’ As Buddha he is represented as being mentioned or addressed 
by disciples as Bhagava (Bhagavat), ‘Lord,’ a term common to various Hindu 
sects as the title of their founder or their special deity. The graceful phrase ‘ the 
Blessed One’, sometimes used to represent this word, is in no way a translation. 
Tathagata is the title used when he speaks of himself. Etymologically it means 
“he who has gone (or come) thus’, but the exact sense is disputed. Sakyamuni, 
‘the sage of the Sakyas,’ is a common title found in Sanskrit works. Non- 
buddhists are made to refer to him by his clan-name Gotama, or as mahdsamana, 
‘the great ascetic.’ His personal name, Siddhattha or Sarvarthasiddha, is die- 


cussed below. 
B 


2 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


and the miracles of the birth and death, are just those which 
show most clearly the growth of apocryphal additions, as 
well as the development of a dogmatic system of belief about 
the person and functions of Buddha. Anather. arent: 


“of “the ee sear This cannot be ignored, as “it occurs 
in both the Pali and Sanskrit Scriptures. 

The only firm ground from which we can start is not 
history, but the fact that a legend in a definite form existed 
in the first and second centuries after Buddha’s death. 
Evidently if this is to be judged from the point of view 
of its historical value, it must be taken as a whole, the most 
incredible and fantastic as well as the most seemingly veracious 
portions. We may reject unpalatable ‘parts, but eannot 
ignore them without suppressing valuable evidence as to the 
character of our witnesses. 

One element which is usually found unpalatable to modern 
thought is the eam ous? and one way of dealing with 
it has been simply to-suppress the miraculous features.1 
The presence of miracle does not of itself invalidate a legend. 
The story that a certain arahat attended an assembly may 
be true, even if we are told that he passed through the air 
on his way thither. To the chronicler this feature was 
miraculous, but at the same time quite normal for an arahat. 
When however we are told that Buddha paid three visits to 
Ceylon, we get no nearer to historical fact by suppressing 
the circumstance that he went through the air. The presence 
of miracle has in fact little to do with the question whether 
some historical basis underlies a legend. Normal circum- 
stances are quite as likely to be invented as miracles. A 
much more important means of testing a legend is to compare 
the different forms in which it appears. It may have been 
elaborated, or an elaborate legend may have been rationalised. 
Additional incidents may be inserted in awkward places, 
or quite contradictory accounts of the same circumstance 
may be recorded. 


1 E.g. Canon Liddon’s life of Buddha in Essays and Addresses, London, 1892, 
carefully ignores every miraculous feature, though he draws it from one of the 
latest and most fantastic versions of the story. Cf. also the article Buddha 
in EB. 


THE ANCESTRY OF BUDDHA 3 


It is often possible to make a clear-cut distinction in the 
strata of tradition in cases where a legend occurs in the 
Scriptures differing in character and circumstances from 
one or more versions of it in the commentaries, and where in 
the latter. contradictory details are found. All such details 
can be swept away as accretions, and the difference between 
the strata is found so frequently that we can indicate an 
earlier stage of tradition when the elaborate stories did not 
exist. It is not an argument from silence to infer from the 
canonical accounts of the Enlightenment that when they 
were compiled nothing was known of the words. supposed 
to have been uttered by Buddha on that occasion. If one 
version of these words had been preserved, it might represent 
an old tradition outside the scriptural account. But we 
find at least six conflicting versions, two of them in the 
Pali. All of them are more or less intelligent guesses, made 
by searching the Scriptures to find out which among Buddha’s 
utterances must have been the first, not an old tradition 
concerning what those words actually were. 

Another important distinction lies in the fantastic 
character of the legends of Buddha’s life before his enlighten- 
ment as compared with those afterwards, when he was residing 
in a district where the legends began to be collected. It is 
not till Buddha has left his home and comes to the Magadha 
country that we find the slightest reference to any historical 
or geographical fact independent of his personal life. The 
period of his youth in a distant country, before he won fame 
and honour as a teacher, would be largely, if not wholly, a 
‘blank, and would be all the more easily and eagerly filled up 
by the imaginations of his disciples. 

But if the legends of this period are to be judged, and some 
estimate of their character as historical evidence is to be 
made, they must be considered in the form in which they 
have come down to us, and not after judicious expurgation. 
They throw light on the character of the canonical accounts, 
and also illustrate the Buddhist theories of cosmogony 
and other dogmatic beliefs. It is in fact necessary to start 
with the beginning of the world, for to this point is traced 
back the ancestry of Buddha. 

In Brahminical thought, as far back as the Vedic period, 

1 See Ch. VI. 


4 | THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


there is no creation of the world in the Jewish sense. It is 
periodically evolving and dissolving into its elements, and 
its originator and preserver as it starts on a new cycle (kalpa) 
of development is the god Prajapati, or Brahma, with whom 
he comes to be identified, and as he is known to the Buddhists. 
This theory of recurring cycles was also Buddhistic, but the 
view that Brahma was the originator of a new cycle is 
directly ridiculed in the Buddhist Scriptures. That Brahma 
exists the Buddhist did not deny. Brahma in a discourse 
attributed to Buddha is even made to declare that he is 
“the subduer, the unsubdued, the beholder of all, the 
subjecter, god,! who makes, who forms, the chief appointer, 
the controller, the father of those that have been and shall 
be’. But this is merely an illusion of Brahma. Really, says 
the Buddhist, he is as much bound in the chain of existence 
as any other being. He is the first to wake at the beginning 
of a new cycle, and thinks he is the first of beings. He wishes 
to have other beings, and when they appear in their turn, 
thinks he has produced them. This is part of the argument 
directed against those who undertake to explain the origin 
of the universe and of the soul. Whether they are eternal 
or notis a question not to be asked by one intent on the goal 
taught by Buddha. 

This teaching, even if it does not go back to Buddha himself 
is a doctrine found in the Pali Canon. But in the same docu- 
ments we also find an account of the genesis of the universe. 
The Patika-sutta® is a legend, in which a foolish student is 
dissatisfied because Buddha will not work a miracle or declare 
the beginning of things. After his departure Buddha declares 
that he does know, and explains how the universe evolves at 
a new cycle, expressly rejecting the view that it is the work 
of a god or Brahma. This is repeated in the Aggafifia-sutta, 
and continues with an account of the further development 
of the first beings. These were at first purely spiritual, 
but gradually became more and more materialised, until 
passions and evil practices arose. Thereupon. the. people 


1 God or Lord, issara (Skt. tSvara). It is this word and the question of a god 
in this sense, as ruler and controller of the universe, that forms the bone of 
contention between the theistic and atheistic schools of Indian philosophy ; 
ef. Dasgupta, Yoga as philosophy and pos p. 164. 

* Brahmajala-sutta. Digha, i 18 ff 

3 Digha, iii 1 ff. 


THE ANCESTRY OF BUDDHA 5 


assembled, and chose the fairest and ablest, that he might 
be wroth, reprove, and banish. He became Mahasammata, 
the first king, and originator of the kshatriya caste. The 
other three original castes were differentiated subsequently. 
In this version of the origin of the castes we have another 
direct contradiction of Hindu theory,! but a direct imitation 
of popular Hindu methods, as we find them in puranic 
literature. Two of the express purposes of a Purana are to 
explain the origin of the universe and to give the genealogies 
of royal families. 

In the commentaries and the chronicles the descent of the 
kings is continued down to Buddha, and the whole legend is 
also found in the Mahdvastu and the Tibetan Vinaya.? 
The genealogy is that of the Kosala kings, and some of the 
names are identical with the Kosala genealogies of the 
Puranas, such as the famous Dasaratha and Rama, and 
Ikshvaku. There can be no doubt that the Buddhists, not 
content with simply putting aside unprofitable questions, 
evolved a theory of the origin of the world in direct opposition 
to their brahminical rivals.*» The rivalry appears also in other 
details, as when the brahmin ‘teacher’ of the Vedas 
(ajjhayaka, Skt. adhyapaka) is explained in an uncompli- 
mentary oe and is given the meaning ‘ he who does not 
meditate’ (a-jjhdyaka); and although the Sakyas belong 
to the race of the Sun, this is said to mean, not that they 
trace their descent from this primitive ancestor, as in the 
Puranas, but that two of their predecessors were born from 
eggs, which were formed from coagulated blood and semen 
of their father Gautama, and hatched by the sun.* From one 
of the eggs came the famous Ikshvaku, who in the Puranas 


1 Qn the Vedic theory of ‘ creation’ by Prajapati see Rig-veda X 121, and on 
the origin of the four castes X 90; translated in Vedic Hymns by E. J. Thomas, 
1923. That the brahmin theory of caste is deliberately rejected is shown by 
the Madhura-sutta, where the orthodox view that the brahmin was born from 
the mouth of Brahma is referred to. Majjh. ii 84; transl. in JRAS. 1894, 

. 341 ff. 

‘ 2 Mvastu, i 338 ff.; Rockhill, ch. i; the genealogies are given in Dpvm. iii, 
Mhvm. ii. The story of the origin of things and portions of the genealogies are 
in the Digha put into the mouth of Buddha. There is no reason to ascribe this 
to pious fraud. The legends arose and were preserved by memory as anonymous 
productions. As the doctrine was held that Buddha was omniscient, he must 
on the Buddhist view have known all these things, and in fact only he could have 
known them truly. Hence in the codifications of the Scriptures it was quite 
natural that these records should have been attributed to him. 

§ Rockhill, p. 11. 


6 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


is the immediate son of Manu, son of the Sun. But the 
Buddhists place between Ikshvaku and their primeval 
king Mahasammata an enormous genealogy, and make 
Ikshvaku merely the ancestor of the later Kosalas and of 
the Sakya branch of the solar race. The name however in 
Pali is Okkaka, and it cannot by any device be treated 
as a form of the name Ikshvaku. But the Buddhist Sanskrit 
accounts give this puranic name, where the Pali has Okkaka. 
The Pali is evidently more primitive, as the name of one of 
Okkaka’s sons is Okkamukha (torch-face), a derivative 
of Okkaka. The form Ikshvaku adopted in the Sanskrit 
looks like a deliberate accommodation to the name in the 
puranic story. 

In the legend of Ambattha in the Digha the origin of the 
Sakyas themselves is given. Ambattha, an accomplished 
young student} under the brahmin teacher Pokkharasadi, 
complains to Buddha of the rudeness of the Sakyas to him 
in their assembly. Buddha tells him of their origin and pure 
descent from king Okkaka, and of Ambattha’s own descent 
from the same king and a slave girl : 


But, Ambattha, if you remember your name and clan on your 
mother’s and father’s side, the Sakyas are nobly born, and you are 
the son of a slave-girl of the Sakyas. Now the Sakyas hold king 
Okkaka to be their ancestor. Long ago king Okkaka, whose queen 
was dear and pleasing to him, wished to transfer the kingdom to her 
son, and banished the elder princes [by another wife] Okkamukha, 
Karakanda, Hatthinika, and Sinipura? from the kingdom. After 
their banishment they lived on the slopes of the Himalayas by the 


1 Called a young Brahman, Dial.,i 109, but he was not of the pure brahmin 
caste. His name is his caste name, and the Ambatthas (Ambashthas), as the 
story shows, were a mixed caste. According to the Law-book of Manu, x 13, 
they were due, not, as here, to a kshatriya and a slave (presumably sidra), but 
to a brahmin father and a vaisya mother. The origin of caste is a pre-buddhistic 
question, and so is the theory that there were four original castes, from which the 
others are held to have been derived by intermixture. That the modern caste 
rules and the castes themselves, with their constant tendency to subdivision, 
are now very different from those of the Buddhist books or even of the Mahabharata 
and Manu, requires no proving. But the strictness of caste rules is shown from 
the legend itself, as the brahmins and kshatriyas could expel a member by shaving 
his head and pouring ashes on it, refusing him a seat and water and a share in 
sacrifices and burial rites. Digha, i 98. It needs to be noticed that the views 
in the Buddhist books concerning caste are the views held at the time of the 
compilers. What were the actual social rules prevailing in the lifetime of Buddha 
and in his own tribe is much more problematical. 

* Several of these names are corrupt. The Mahavastu,i 348, makes six of them, 
which Sone editor reduces to five, but four are required by the legend, as will be 
seen below. 


THE ANCESTRY OF BUDDHA 7 


banks of a lotus-pool, where there was a great sika-grove. They 
being apprehensive of their difference! of caste consorted with their 
sisters. King Okkaka inquired of the ministers in his retinue where 
the princes now dwelt. “There is, O king, on the slopes of the 
Himalayas, by the banks of a lotus-pool, a great sika-grove. Here 
they now dwell. Being apprehensive of their difference of caste they 
consort with their sisters.’ So king Okkika uttered this fervent 
utterance : “ Able (sakya) truly are the princes. Supremely able truly 
are the princes.” ? Henceforth they were known as Sakyas, and 
Okkaka was the ancestor of the Sakya race. 


This is only part of the complete legend, which is given in 
full in the Mahdvastu, in the Tibetan Vinaya, and in several 
places in the Pali commentaries. The following is from 
Buddhaghosa’s commentary on the above passage : 


This is the story in order. Among the kings of the first age, it is 
said, king Mahasammata had a son named Roja. The son of Roja 
was Vararoja, of Vararoja Kalyana, of Kalyana Varakalyana, of 
Varakalyana Mandhata, of Mandhata Varamandhata, of Varamandhata 
Uposatha, of Uposatha Cara, of Cara Upacara, of Upacara Makhadeva. 
In the succession of Makhadeva * there were 84,000 kshatriyas. After 
these were the three lineages of Okkaka. Of these Okkaka of the 
third lineage had five queens, Bhatta, Citta, Jantii, Jalini, and 
Visakha. Each of the five had five hundred female attendants. The 
eldest had four sons, Okkamukha, Karakanda, Hatthinika, and 
Sinipura, and five daughters, Piya, Suppiya, Ananda, Vijita, and 
Vijitasena. After giving birth to nine children she died. Now the 
king married another young and beautiful king’s daughter, and made 
her his chief queen. She gave birth to a son named Jantu. On the 
fifth day she adorned him and showed him to the king. The king 
was delighted, and offered her a boon. She took counsel with her 
Telatives and besought the kingdom for her son. . The king reviled 
her and said, ‘‘ Perish, base woman, you want to destroy my sons.” 
But she coaxed the king again and again in private, and begged, 
saying, “O king, falsehood is not fitting,” and so on. So the king 
addressed his sons, ‘“‘ My sons, on seeing the youngest of you, prince 
Jantu, I gave his mother a boon. She wishes to transfer the kingdom 
to her son. Do you, taking whatever elephants, horses, and chariots 
you want, except the state elephant, horse, and chariot, go away, 


1 Mvastu, i 351, probably more correctly, reads jatisamdosabhayena, ‘ through 
fear of corrupting their caste.’ 

2 There is a pun here, as sakya also means ‘ belonging to the sika-tree’. This 
derivation, as Dr. Hoey has shown, may be correct. They would be‘ the people 
of the sal-forest tracts’. The saka is the sal-tree, Shorea robusta, not the teak, 
Tectona grandis, which is not indigenous in the Nepal Terai forests. JRAS., 
1906, p. 453. 

. This is the phrase regularly used by the commentator when he is repeating 
an earlier account. 

4 This king with more of the genealogy occurs in Majjh. ii 74. 


8 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


and after my decease come back and rule the kingdom.” So he sent 
them away with eight ministers. 

They made lamentations and wept, “ Father, pardon our fault,’ 
and saying farewell to the king and the royal women they took leave 
of the king, saying, “ We are going with our brothers,” and set off 
with their sisters from the city attended with a fourfold army. Many 
people thinking that the princes after their father’s decease would 
return and rule the kingdom, decided to go and attend on them, and 
followed them. On the first day the army marched one league, on 
the second day two leagues, and on the third three. The brothers 
took counsel, and said, “ This force is great. If we were to crush 
some neighbouring king and take his land, it would not suffice for us. 
Why should we oppress others? Jambudipa is great, let us build 
a city in the forest.” So going towards the Himalayas they sought 
a place for a city. 

At that time our Bodhisatta had been born in a noble brahmin’s 
family. He was known as the brahmin Kapila, and leaving the world 
he became a sage, and having built a hut of leaves dwelt on the slopes 
of the Himalayas on the banks of a lotus pool in a saka-grove. Now 
he knew the science of earthquakes, by which he could perceive defects 
for eighty cubits above in the air and below in the earth. When 
lions and tigers and such animals pursued the deer and boars, and 
cats went after the frogs and mice, they were not able to follow them 
on.arriving at that place, but were even menaced by them and turned 
back. Knowing that this was the best place on the earth he built 
his hut of leaves there. 

On seeing the princes in their search for a place for a city coming 
to his district, he inquired about the matter, and finding out he showed 
them compassion, and said, “ A city built on the place of this leaf- 
hut will become the chief city of Jambudipa. Here a single man 
among those born there will be able to overcome a hundred or even 
a thousand men. Build the city here, and make the king’s palace 
on the place of the leafhut; for by putting it on this site even the 
son of a Candala would surpass a universal king in power.” ‘“ Does 
not the site belong to you, reverend sir?” “ Do not think of it being 
my site. Make a leafhut for me on a slope, and build a city and call 
it Kapilavatthu.” They did so, and resided there. 

Then the ministers thought, “these youths are grown up. If they 
were with their father, he would make marriage alliances, but now 
it is our task.” So they took counsel with the princes, who said, 
“we find no daughters of kshatriyas who are like ourselves (in birth), 
nor kshatriya princes like our sisters, and through union with those. 
of unlike birth the sons who are born will be impure either on the 
mother’s or the father’s side. Let us then consort with our sisters.” 
Through apprehension of difference of caste they set the eldest sister 
in place of mother, and consorted with the rest. As they increased 
with sons atid daughters, their eldest sister became later afflicted 


1 Reading szkare with the Colombo edition, not sukara. 


THE ANCESTRY OF BUDDHA 9 


with leprosy, and her limbs were like the kovilara flower. The princes 
thinking that this disease would come upon anyone who should sit, 
stand, or eat with her, took her one day in a chariot as though going 
to sport in the park, and entering the forest dug a lotus pool with a 
house in the earth. There they placed her, and providing her with 
different kinds of food covered it with mud and came away. At 
that time the king of Benares named Rama had leprosy, and being 
loathed by his ladies and dancing-girls in his agitation gave the kingdom 
to his eldest son, entered the forest, and there living on woodland 
leaves and fruits soon became healthy and of a golden colour. As 
he wandered here and there he saw a great hollow tree, and clearing 
a place within it to the size of sixteen cubits he fitted a door and window, 
fastened a ladder to it, and lived there. With a fire in a charcoal 
vessel he used to lie at night listening to the sourds of animals and 
birds. Noticing that in such and such a place a lion made a noise, 
in such a place a tiger, he would go there when it became light, and 
taking the remains of meat cook and eat it. 

One day as he was seated after lighting a fire at dawn, a tiger came 
attracted by the scent of the king’s daughter, and stirring the mud 
about the place made a hole in the covering. On seeing the tiger 
through the hole she was terrified and uttered a cry. He heard the 
sound, noticed that it was a woman’s voice, and went early to the place. 


“Who is there?” he said. ‘“‘ A woman, sir.” ‘‘ Of what caste are 
you?” “Tam the daughter of king Okkaka, sir.” ‘Come out.” 
“T cannot, sir.” “ Why ?” “TI have a skin disease.” 


After asking about the whole matter, and finding she would not 
come out owing to her kshatriya pride, he made known to her that 
he was a kshatriya, gave her a ladder, and drew her out. He took her 
to his dwelling, showed her the medicinal food that he had himself 
eaten, and in no long time made her healthy and of a golden colour, 
and consorted with her. The first time she gave birth to two sons, 
and again to two, and so on for sixteen times. Thus there were thirty- 
two brothers. They gradually grew up, and their father taught them 
all the arts. 

Now one day a certain inhabitant of the city of King Rama, who 
was seeking for jewels on the mountain, saw th king and recognized 
him. “I know your majesty,” he said. Then the king asked him 
all the news. Just at that moment the boys came. On seeing them 
he asked who they were, and being told that they were Rama’s sons 
he inquired about their mother’s family. ‘‘ Now Ihave a story to tell,” 
he thought, and went to the city and informed the king. The king 
decided to bring back his father, went there with a fourfold army, 
and saluting him asked him to accept the kingdom. ‘‘ Enough, my 
son,” he replied, ‘‘ remove this tree for me here and build a city.” 

He did so, and owing to removing the kola-tree for the city and 
through doing it on the tiger-path (vyagghapatha), he caused the origin 
of the two names of the city, Kolanagara? and Vyagghapajja, and 

1 Inthe Mahavastu version the exiled king’s name is given as Kola, and from 
this the name of the Koliyas is explained. Mvastu, i 353. 


10 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


saluting his father went to his own city. When the princes had grown 
up, their mother said to them, “ children, the Sakyas who dwell in 
Kapilavatthu are your maternal uncles. Your uncles’ daughters 
have the same style of hair and dress as you. When’ they come to 
the bathing-place, go there, and let each take the one that pleases 
him. They went there, and when the girls had bathed and were 
drying their hair, they each took one and making known their names 
came away. The Sakya rajis on hearing of it thought, “let it be, 
to be sure they are our kinsfolk,” and kept silence. This is the origin 
of the Sakyas and Koliyas, and thus the family of the Sakyas and 
Koliyas making intermarriages came down unbroken to the time 
of Buddha. 


We learn from the Mahdvastu that Ikshvaku was king of 
the Kosalas, and this is what we should expect. The city 
from which the princes were banished was Saketa, i.e. 
Ayodhya. This is rather a late feature, as Savatthi was the 
earlicr capital, and is regularly referred to as such in the 
Suttas. By the term ‘late’ we may mean anything within 
a thousand years of Buddha’s death ; and within this period 
we cannot deny the possibility of additions to the Pali as 
well as to other forms of the Canon. However early we may 
put the date of a canonical collection, we can certainly deny 
that such legends formed an original part of it. To the 
commentator, to whom the legend was evidently true, it 
was quite natural to assume that the omniscient Buddha 
knew it, and hence told it. 

The descent of kings from the first Sakyas is continued 
in the Mahdvastu, the Tibetan, and the Pali Chronicles ; but 
the differences between each are so great that its interest 
is chiefly to show that there is no agreement upon one version 
of the genealogy. The lists in the Chronicles are the most 
evidently artificial, as several kings who appear in the 
Jatakas, and who are hence previous incarnations of Buddha, 
have been inserted. 

But there is a special interest in the question of the origin 
of the legend of the Sakyas. It was pointed out by Fausbdll + 
that the story has correspondences with the Ramayana 
story, and one version of this story is found in the Jatakas. 
This is the Dasaratha-jataka (No. 461). King Dasaratha of 


1 Indische Studien, v 412 ff. (1862). Fausbdll there: gives the story of the 


Sakyas from the commentary on Sn. II 13, now published in the PTS. edition, 
vol. ii 356 ff. 


THE ANCESTRY OF BUDDHA ll 


Benares has three children, Rama, Lakkhana, and a daughter 
Sita. The queen dies, and his next queen obtains for her 
son Bharata the boon that he shall succeed to the kingdom. 
The king fearing her jealousy banishes Lakkhana and Rama, 
and Sita chooses to accompany them. They go to the 
Himalaya for twelve years, as the soothsayers tell the king 
that he has so long to live. But at the end of nine years he 
dies of grief, and Bharata goes to fetch his brothers back. 
Rama refuses to return until the end of the prescribed twelve 
years, and for the remaining three years his sandals rule the 
kingdom, after which he returns as king, and makes Sita 
his queen. 

This shows certain differences in details from the Rama- 
yana epic. The exiles go to the Himalaya (a common feature 
in the Jatakas), not to the Deccan. There is no rape of 
Sita, who is here not the daughter of the king of Videha, 
but the sister of Rama, and the king in the epic dies soon after 
Rama’s departure. But the names of all the persons 
mentioned are identical, and the general course of events 
is the same as those of the Ayodhyd-kanda down to and 
including the installing of the sandals in Rama’s absence. 
Benares replaces Saketa or Ayodhya, and this may be due 
to the mechanical way in which the king of Benares in the 
Jatakas is introduced again and again. The form in which 
we have the Dasaratha-jataka belongs to the fifth century A.D., 
and is a retranslation into Pali from a Singhalese version. 
There is no doubt that the epic is older than this, but there 
is no need to suppose direct derivation in either direction. 
The legend itself probably existed before the epic, and would 
still continue to exist in a popular form, independent of the 
additions or inventions introduced by Valmiki. The verses 
of the Jataka, unlike those of some of the tales, do not 
appear to be very old. One is in the Ramayana itself, and 
five are in the Sammdaparibbdjaniya-sutta of the Sutta-nipdta 
(578, 576, 588, 585, 591), and they have every appearance of 
being drawn from the sutta, and not vice versa. The special 
moral of the Jataka, on the duty of not grieving for the dead, 
is also a feature of the Ramayana (II, ch. 105). 

The importance to us of the Rama story’is its resemblance 
to the Sakya legend. The chief motive is the same: elder 
sons are banished owing to the jealousy of a favourite wife, 


12 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


who obtains the kingdom for her own son. That the 
resemblance was also recognised by the Pali commentators 
is shown by the fact that some of the phraseology in each 
tale is identical. There is further the unusual feature that 
as the four banished brothers marry their sisters, so in the 
Jataka Rama marries his sister Sita. One story has been 
modelled on the other, and we cannot doubt that the Rama 
story ‘is the model. The other alternative would be to 
suppose both the Dasaratha-jataka and the Ramayana to 
be based on the Sakya legend. It was a favourite theory of 
Benfey that Buddhism was a great source for Indian legends, 
but the whole evidence of the Jataka is against it.1 Non- 
buddhistic and even antibuddhistic tales have been swept 
into the collection, and adapted or used without any 
Buddhistic colouring for the teaching of ethical commonplaces. 

Both the Buddhist account of the origin of things and the 
genealogy and legends of the Sakyas show the influence of 
Hindu, especially puranic, tradition. The contradictions 
between the various versions as well as the borrowing of 
names and pedigrees exclude any probability that we have 
a basis of history in the Sakya genealogy. The basis is the 
historical fact of the existence, of the Sakyas and Koliyas, 
on which an imaginative structure of legend has been built. 
This legend, if not in all its details, has been incorporated 
in what is usually considered to be the most ancient evidence. 
It is in fact the most ancient, except in so far as we can succeed 
in separating strata of evidence in the Canon itself. A 
preliminary separation can be made, as has been pointed 
out,” without any reliance on subjective criteria, by excluding 
the numerous passages attributed by the texts themselves 
to authors other than Buddha, and also by separating the 
legendary parts, which are often recorded as commentary 
without being treated as Buddha’s utterance. A subjective 
element is introduced as soon as we seek to construct a 
probable history out of the legends, and it has usually been 
done in a quite arbitrary manner. The foregoing legends 
are ignored, and the history begins with the contemporaries 
of Buddha, the Sakyas and his immediate relatives among 
them. Further, one form alone of the legend of Buddha’s 


1 See Jataka Tales, Introd. p. 2 ff. 
2 See Introduction and Appendix, p. 250. 


THE ANCESTRY OF BUDDHA 13 


family is taken, or as much of it as appears plausible, 
and the others.are quietly dismissed. It is this portion of 
the legend which has now to be examined. 


NoTE ON THE GEOGRAPHY OF EARLY BUDDHISM 


The home of Buddhism lies in what is now South Behar, west of 
Bengal and south of the Ganges. This was the country of the 
Magadhas with the capital at Rajagaha (Rajgir). East of these were 
the Angas, whose chief city was Campa North of the Magadhas 
and on the other side of the Ganges-were tribes of Vajjis (chief town 
Vesali), and still farther north the Mallas. West of the Magadhas 
were the KAsis, whose chief city was Benares on the Ganges. The 
kingdom of the Kosalas (capital Savatthi or Sravasti) extended north 
of the Kasis as far as the Himalayas, and on the northern borders 
were settled the Sakyas and their neighbours on the east the Koliyas. 
All these are tribal names, and it is misleading to use the terms Anga, 
Magadha, etc., as if they were names of countries. In the sixth century 
B.C. the Magadhas and Kosalas had developed out of trtbal organisa- 
tions into two rival kingdoms, the K4asis being absorbed by the Kosalas, 
and the Angas by the Magadhas. These are all the peoples that have 
any claim to be connected with the scenes of events in Buddha’s life: 
Our earliest evidence is in the Digha and Majjhima, in which the 
introductory or legendary. passages of the discourses state where 
Buddha was staying when the discourses were given. The places 
mentioned cannot be taken as actual evidence contemporary with 
Buddha. They form rather -part of the stock tradition of the two 
schools of repeaters. But that the tradition is very old is indicated 
by what is omitted. There is in these collections no indication of 
places where Buddha actually stayed beyond the countries of the Kasis, 
Kosalas, Angas, Magadhas, Kurus, Vajjis and Mallas. Even Benares, 
which occurs over and over again in the commentaries, is rarely 
mentioned in the Canon. 

In several places of the Scriptures a regular list of places is mentioned, 
and we can see from-the variations and the widening geographical 
range, how it has been gradually extended. Even the shortest form 
of the list probably represents a later period of greater geographical 
knowledge than is shown in the stock list of names of localities where 
discourses were given. It occurs in the Janavasabha-sutta,’ a legend 
in which Buddha tells the fate of disciples who have died in various 
countries, and in addition to those mentioned above are given the 
Cetis and Vamsas (Vatsas) west of Prayaéga (Allahabad), the Kuru- 
Pafcalas, north-west of the Kosalas, and still further west the 
Macchas and Sirasenas. This list of twelve is further extended in the 
Anguttara® by the addition of four more, the Assakas of South India, 

1 Digha, ii 200 ff. 

2 The list of sixteen has been stated to occur several times, but it is merely 
the same passage repeated (Ang. i 213; iv 252, 256, 260). The sixteen countries 
are referred to in Lal. 24 (22), where only eight places are named, and 
Mvastu,i 198; ii 2, where no names are given. 


14 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


the Avantis north of the Vindhyas, and in the extreme north the 
Gandharas and Kambojas. These are the so-called sixteen powers, 
and this list of sixteen has been supposed to be very old, perhaps even 
pre-Buddhistic ; but it is much more likely to be due to gradual 
accretion, especially as the last four names, which are quite absent 
from the oldest collections, are mentioned frequently in the com- 
mentaries and later documents. In the still later Niddesa the list is 
found with further variations. The Sdgaras and the Kalingas of south- 
eastern India are introduced, and the Yonas (Greeks or Persians) are 
substituted for the Gandharas. The Siamese edition of the Niddesa 
reduces the number to eleven. In any case only the first six names 
concern us, as the others never occur as the scenes of any events, 
and are indeed far distant from the region of the earliest Buddhism. 
Bengal (Vanga) is nowhere mentioned in the four Nikayas, nor is 
Ceylon. 

There is no real knowledge of any part of the Deccan. The Assakas 
of the list of sixteen are said to have been settled on the Godavari, 
and a single reference to this river is found in the introductory verses 
to the Parayana section of the Suttanipata (977). The Parayana 
is indeed old, but itis introduced by a legend expressly called vatthu- 
gatha, “‘ verses of the story.” There is no reason for thinking that 
this legend in its present form 1s of the same age as the Parayana. 
It is in quite a different style, and like the prose introductions of other 
discourses of the Suttanipata it explains the occasion of the poems 
that follow, but most of it is in verse. It is probable that an earlier 
prose version preceded the verse, as the story still has two endings, 
the first in prose, and the second in verse, which gives the same matter 
and uses some of the same phraseology as the prose. It is evident 
that even though the legend may be old, the same cannot be said of 
the details that may have been introduced when it was recast. The 
legend describes a journey which is a circuitous route from the Godavari 
past Ujjeni, and includes most of the places famous in Buddhist legend, 
Kosambi, Saketa, Savatthi, Setavya, Kapilavatthu, Kusinara, Pavia, 
Bhoganagara, Vesali, and the city of the Magadhas (Rajagaha). The 
course of the journey may well represent an actual route established 
when these places had become the objects of pilgrimage. 

Theré is also a list of cities, which belongs to the same stratum 
of legend as the list of countries. In the account of Buddha’s death 

anda is made to say that the Lord ought not to pass away in a small 
town like Kusinara: there are great cities like Campa, Rajagaha, 
Savatthi, Saketa, Kosambi, and Benares.2. Campa of the Angas was 
near the modern Bhagalpur. Rajagaha is also called Giribbaja. This 
was the hill-town of old Rajagaha, surrounded by five hills. The 
new town is said to have-been built by Bimbisdra. The capital of the 
Magadhas was afterwards Pataliputta.s Buddha before his passing 
away is recorded to have prophesied that the town which Ajatasattu 


1 Hence the absurdity of calling the doctrine found in Pali writings “‘ southern 
Buddhism”. 2 Digha, ii 146, 169. 
® Known to the Greeks as Palibothra, the modern Patna. 


THE ANCESTRY OF BUDDHA 15 


was then building on the Ganges at Pataligama to ward off the Vajjis, 
would become .a chief city Pataliputta. The tradition of the rise of the 
city implied in the prophecy is evidently all the more trustworthy 
as history, if it is taken to represent not a prophecy, but the actual 
enowedes of the compiler at a time when the city was in faet the 
capital. 

Savatthi was the capital of the Kosalas, and its site is discussed 
below. In the Radmdyana the capital is Ayodhya (Pali Ayojjha, 
modern Oudh or Ajodhya, near Faizabad), and in later works it is 
identified with Saketa. There can be little doubt that Saketa is the 
Ayodhya of the Sanskrit books. The difference of name may be due to 
Saketa being the name of the district, in the same way as Benares 
gets the name Kasi; or Ayodhyd, which means ‘ the unconquerable ’, 
may have been a new name given by some victorious king. The 
probability is that with the extension of the Kosala power to the 
south Saketa or Ayodhya took the place of Savatthi as the capital. 
The Ramayana tradition would thus represent a later stage historically 
than the Buddhistic. Ayojjha is mentioned twice in the Canon 
(Samy. iii 140, iv 179), and in both places is said to be on the Ganges. 
But as it was certainly not on this river, this can only be an unintelligent 
tradition, especially as in one of these passages Kosambi is read for 
Ayojjha in one MS. Kosambi was the capital of the Vamsas or Vatsas, 
and was identified by Cunningham with the two villages of Kosam 
on the Jumna, some ninety miles west of Allahabad. Evidently 
no weight can be attached to the Samyutta passage which puts it on 
the Ganges. V. A. Smith held that it was further south, in one of the 
states of Baghelkhand.* 

Vesali (VaiSali), is generally agreed to be the ruins at Basar in the 
Muzaffarpur District of North Behar.? Takkasila, known to the 
Greeks as Taxila, was the capital of the Gandharas. It is frequently 
mentioned in the commentaries, especially as a place of education. 
This was no doubt the fact at the time when Buddhism had spread 
to the North West. But it is never mentioned in the Suttas, and there 
is no reason to think that it was known in earlier times. 


1 JRAS. 1898, 503 ff. 
2 Cunningham, Arch. S. Reports, i 55; JRAS. 1902, 267. 


CHAPTER II 
THE HOME AND FAMILY OF BUDDHA 


ee country of the Sakyas or Sakiyas (Skt. Sakyas) is 

known only from Buddhist writings. Modern investiga- 
tion has placed it in the north-eastern portion of the United 
Provinces, and along the borders of Nepal between Bahraich 
and Gorakhpur. The earliest information about it is in the 
introductory passages of the Discourses, which frequently 
mention the capital Kapilavatthu (Skt. Kapilavastu), 
various villages or townships of the Sakyas, and Savatthi 
(Skt. Sravasti), the capital of the Kosalas. From these we 
learn very little about their geographical position, though 
we may infer that the names, like those of such well-known 
places as Rajagaha, Vesali, and Benares, are real. They are 
just those elements in the tradition that are least likely 
to have been invented. Our actual knowledge of the places 
is derived from three sources, the traditions preserved in 
the commentaries and in compilations based on them, the 
accounts of the Chinese pilgrims who visited the sacred 
places, Fa Hien (399-414 a.p.), Hiuen Tsiang (629-645 a.D.), 
and modern archeological discoveries. 

The name of the city from which the Sakya princes were 
exiled, when they founded Kapilavatthu, is not named in the 
Pali legend. In the Mahdvastu it is called Saketa (Ayodhya), 
the city of the Kasi-Kosala king. The princes are said to have 
gone north, and to have founded Kapilavatthu on the slopes 
of the Himalayas. Saketa appears to be the only place that 
will fit both forms of the legend, and this suggests that the 
story as we possess it is not older than the time when Saketa 
replaced Savatthi as the Kosala capital.2 The city from 

ty. A. Smith in P. C. Mukherji, A Report on a Tour of exploration of the 
antiquities of the Tarai, p. 18. “‘ I am disposed to think that the Sakya country 
was the Terai extending eastward from the point where the Rapti leaves the 
hills to the little Gandak, that is to say, between the kingdoms of Sravasti and 
Ramagrama (KE. long. 81° 53’ to 83° 49’). The southern boundary cannot at 
present be defined.” 

2 The Tibetan, representing a still later invention, says that the city was Potala 
(in the Indus delta); Rockhill, p. 11. R. 8S. Hardy ‘Man. Budh. p. 135) says 


Benares. This is probably a pure mistake, as Benares in the legend was the city 
of Rama or Kola, the ancestor of the Koliyas. 


THE HOME AND FAMILY OF BUDDHA 17 


which the princes started could not be the Savatthi of the 
Chinese pilgrims, as they place it north-west of Kapilavatthu. 
In the legend the city is six leagues (yojanas) south of 
Kapilavatthu, and if we take Childers’ reckoning of twelve 
miles to a yojana, Saketa fits exactly... For the pilgrims 
a yojana appears to have been about seven miles. 

Cunningham identified Savatthi with Saheth Maheth, a 
collection of ruins on the west border of the Gonda district in 
Oudh on the south of the river Rapti, 58 miles from Fyzabad.? 
In 1875 A. C. L. Carlleyle, from excavations that he made 
at Bhuila in the Basti district, held that his own identification 
of this place with Kapilavatthu was “‘ pretty nearly certain, 
if not absolutely conclusive ”.2 But further discoveries led 
to an approximate identification of Kapilavatthu at a place 
east north east of Saheth Maheth, while according to the 
Chinese pilgrims it was to the south east. The result was 
that V. A. Smith put Savatthi further north west. He 
claimed to have discovered it on the Rapti within the borders 
of Nepal, a few miles north east of Naipalganj Road station. 
But this was only traces of ruins, which according to his 
calculations agreed more closely with the accounts of the 
Chinese pilgrims. Even so he had, like Cunningham, to 
“‘ correct ” the distances and figures in the accounts, until he 
harmonised them by deciding that the Kapilavatthu shown to 
Fa Hien was a different place from that seen by Hiuen Tsiang. 
But the discovery of further inscriptions at Saheth Maheth 
has made it most probable that this place was the site of 
Savatthi, at least in historical times.6 The difficulty still 
remains that it is west south west of Kapilavatthu, while 
the pilgrims put it north west. 

More definite results have followed from the discoveries 
in the region of Kapilavatthu. In March 1895 an inscription 


1 In Angutt. com. i 384, 406, Savatthi is seven yojanas from Saketa and forty- 
five from Rajagaha. 

2 Four Reporis made during the years 1862-65. Arch. Survey, i, p. 330 ff. 
Anc. Geog. of India, i, p. 407. 

3 Report of Tours in the Central Doab and Gorakhpur in 1874-75 and 1875-76. 
Arch. Survey, xii, p, 108. 

4 Kauésambi and Sravasti, JRAS. 1898 p. 503; of. S. Konow, Ind. Ant. 1908, 

180. 
% 5 See Sir J. Marshall, Notes on archeological exploration in India, 1908-9, 
JRAS. 1909, p. 1061. 

0 


ig THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


on a pillar in the Magadhi language was discovered on the 
bank of a large tank called Nigali Sagar, near the village of 
Nigliva in Nepal, 38 miles north west of Uska Bazar station 
in the Basti district. It states that King Piyadasi (Skt. 
Priyadargin, Asoka’s title in inscriptions), after he had 
been consecrated king fourteen years, increased the stupa 
of Buddha Konakamana to the double, and having been 
consecrated [twenty] years came himself and worshipped.* 
As this stiipa is mentioned by Fa Hien, who puts Kapilavatthu 
a yojana (some seven miles) east of the stupa, it was at first 
thought that the site of the city had been determined. But 
the pillar was not in its original position, and there was no 
trace of the stupa.?_ The next year (1896) a pillar, also within 
the borders of Nepal and thirteen miles south west of Nigliva, 
was discovered near the village of Padaria,? and was found 
to bear an inscription thus translated by Dr. Hultzsch : * 


When king Devanampriya Priyadarsin had been anointed twenty 
years, he came himself and worshipped (this spot), because the Buddha 
Sakyamuni was born here. He both caused to be made a stone bearing 
a horse (?) ; and caused a stone pillar to be set up (in order to show) 


1 Inscriptions of Asoka, ed. Hultzsch, p. 165; cf. Hp. Ind. v 1, p. 6. 

2 Dr. Fuhrer, who found the pillar, claimed to have also discovered the great 
stiipa itself close by, and gave an elaborate description of it. But unfortunately 
for himself he next discovered the still more important Padaria pillar, and the 
further investigation of this led to the revelation of the fictions in his account. 
It is only necessary to quote V. A. Smith’s statement that ‘‘ every word is false ’’, 
and that the inscriptions produced by Fiihrer were “‘ impudent forgeries ”’’. 
Smith came to the conclusion that the pillar had been moved about eight or 
thirteen miles from its original position either at Sisania or Palta Devi. Mukherji, 
Report, p. 4. Fihrer’s own account was in Monograph on Buddha Sakyamuni’s 
birth-place in the Nepalese Tarai. Allahabad, 1897. It has been withdrawn 
from circulation. 

3 According to Fihrer “‘ this deserted site is still locally called Rummindei.” 
Monograph, p. 28. This statement was generally accepted before Dr. Fihrer’s 
imaginativeness was discovered, and is still incautiously repeated. Yet he 
admitted that it was not the name used by the present Nepalese officials. ‘‘ It 
is a curious fact (ie says) that the true meaning of this ancient Buddhistic name 
has long been forgotten, as the et Nepalese officials believe the word to 
signify the sthdn of Ripa-devi.”’ V. A. Smith said, “the name Rummindéi, 
of which a variant form Rupadéi (sic) is known to the hill-men, is that of the 
shrine near the top of the mound of ruins.” Ind. Ant. 1905, p. 1. This gives 
no further evidence for Fihrer’s assertion, and it appears that neither the 
Nepalese officials nor the hill-men called it Rummindei. 

4 Inscriptions of Asoka, p. 164; cf. Buhler, JRAS. 1897, pp. 429, 615. The 
pillar was seen by Hiuen Tsiang, who speaks of the figure of a horse on the top, 
which by the contrivance of a wicked dragon was broken off in the middle and 
fell to the ground. The horse has disappeared, and the pillar has been split, 
apparently by lightning, down to the middle. 


THE HOME AND FAMILY OF BUDDHA 19 


that the Blessed one was born here. (He) made the village of Lummini 
free of taxes, and paying (only) an eighth part (of the produce). 

The name of the place in both Pali and Sanskrit accounts 
is Lumbini.1 A Hindu temple close by now contains a 
representation in stone of the birth of Buddha from the 
side of queen Maya. 

This fixes the traditional site of Buddha’s birthplace, 
and implies that Kapilavatthu itself must be some miles 
to the west. But the accounts of the pilgrims are so divergent 
that no general agreement has been reached in identifying 
all the sites. V. A. Smith says, ‘‘ although nearly all the 
holy places shown to Fa Hien were also shown to Hiuen 
Tsiang, who notes several others in addition, yet the descrip- 
tions vary so materially that it is difficult to believe that the 
two writers are describing the same places.’’2 Accordingly 
Smith came to the conclusion that the Kapilavatthu shown 
to Fa Hien was at Piprava, nine miles south west of Padaria, 
and that Tilaura Kot, fourteen miles. north west, is the 
Kapilavatthu seen by Hiuen Tsiang. The view that they 
saw different places is not at all improbable. The inhabitants 
of the district would certainly be ready to point out places 
to sightseers, and there may well have been rival identifica- 
tions of the legendary sites. 

It is clear that the pilgrims came with a knowledge of 
the legends and of all the miracles, and for them it was only 
a question of identifying the localities. They appear to have 
seen all they wished to see, including the places where the 
youthful Bodhisatta threw the elephant over the city moat, 
and where he shot an arrow thirty li (ten miles). The 
Kapilavatthu pointed out to Fa Hien was a place where “ no 
king nor people are to be found ; it is just like a wilderness, 
except for priests and some tens of families’. Hiuen Tsiang 
three centuries later found it deserted, and the villages few 
and waste. Some forty miles further east the pilgrims found 
in the country of the Mallas the city of Ramagama, and still 
further on Kusinara, where Buddha passed away. Both 
places are now unknown. 


1 Jat. i 52; Lal. 94 (82); the name in the adjectival form Lumbineyye occurs 
once in the Suttas, but only in the legend of Asita attached to the Nalaka- 
sutta, see p. 38. 

2 In Mukherji, Report, p. 15; cf. his article Kapilavastuin ERE. The theory 
of two Kapilavatthus is rejected by Dr. Hoey and Major W. Vost, JRAS. 1906, 
pp. 453, 553. 


20 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Still another discovery of the highest interest for the 
later history of Buddha was made two years later, when 
Mr. W. C. Peppé in 1898 opened at Piprava a stipa containing 
five vessels, one of which bears an inscription in letters like 
those of the Asokan inscriptions. The contents have been 
held to be relics of Buddha.? 

Throughout the commentaries and Sanskrit works the 
legend prevails that Buddha was the son of a king, the 
descendant of a long line of famous ancestors, and that he 
would have become a universal king, had he not renounced 
the world. It is only in occasional phraseology, inherited 
from earlier traditions or due to an actual knowledge of the 
Sakya tribe, that we find traces of a different state of things. 
The period of great kingdoms, such as the Kosalas and 
Magadhas, was probably a recent development, and the title 
of raja need not have implied more than the head of a tribe. 
We know of tribes, such as the Vajjis, where the organisation 
was aristocratic, each of the nobles being a raja. There are 
traces of aristocratic rule in the legends of the Sakyas. 
We find the assembly of the Sakyas mentioned and the 
rajas spoken of in the plural, and there are legends which 
imply that their city was of little account. In the account 
of Buddha’s death Ananda mentions six great cities where 
it would be more fitting for Buddha to pass away, but 
Kapilavatthu is not one of them; and amongst those who 
receive. a share of the relics are king Ajatasattu and the 
Sakyas of Kapilavatthu, but no king of the Sakyas is 
mentioned. The Sakyas are treated like the local tribes 
round them, the Koliyas, Mallas, different groups of 
Licchavis and others, who were overrun by the empire of 
the Magadhas. Equally significantly, in a dialogue of king 
Pasenadi with Buddha, the king describes both himself 
and Buddha as Kosalas.? 

1 The inscription is discussed in Ch. XI, p. 160. There is a curious list of kings, 
descendants of Ikshvaku, in the Puranas, in which occur in succession Sajijaya, 
Sakya, Suddhodana, Rahula (or Ratula, or Siddhartha, or Pushkala), and 
Prasenajit. Safijaya occurs also in the Buddhist genealogy. Sakya has here 
been converted from a tribal to a personal name. Buddha himself as Siddhartha, 
is made king in succession to his father Suddhodana, but is also confused with 
his own son Rahula, and is succeeded by Prasenajit, the Pasenadi of Pali works, 
who was the Kosala king contemporary with Buddha. The list appears to be 
a confused survival of the Buddhist tradition. Vishnu-p. iv 22, 3; Vayu-p. 
| xxxvii 283-4; Matsya-p. cclxxi 12. It is in the still later Bhagavata-purana 


that Buddha is made the ninth incarnation of Vishnu. 
* Majjhima, ii 124. 


THE HOME AND FAMILY OF BUDDHA 21 


Oldenberg refers to the poem in the Sutta-nipdta on the 
visit of Asita to the infant Buddha as a proof that his father 
was not a king. Asita is there said to approach the dwelling 
(bhavana) of Suddhodana. But the purely negative fact 
that it is not called a palace can scarcely be used as an 
argument, when it is remembered that the poem is in an 
elaborate metre, and that the word in question is frequently 
used of the dwelling of the gods. More important is the poem 
on the meeting of the Bodhisatta with Bimbisara, soon 
after the Great Renunciation. When the Bodhisatta arrives 
as a wandering ascetic at Rajagaha, king Bimbisadra goes 
to see him, offers him wealth, and asks about his birth. 
The Bodhisatta replies, “‘ there is, O king, a country on the 
slope of the Himalayas, rich in wealth and heroes, who dwell 
among the Kosalas. They are descendants of the sun 
(adicca) by clan, Sakyas by birth. From that family I have 
gone out, O king, having no longing for sensual desires ’’.1 
Similarly in the Sonadanda-sutta, in a long list of praises of 
Buddha it is said that “the ascetic Gotama has gone forth 
from a high family, from an unbroken kshatriya family. 
He has gone forth from a family, rich, of great wealth, of 
great possessions ”’.2 But these instances are. only traces 
of a state of things never realised by the chroniclers them- 
selves. All has been overlaid by the legend of a kingly family, 
which might have attained universal empire. The Sutta- 
mipata itself contains the theory of the marks of a 
Great Man, according to which Buddha would become 
a universal monarch, unless he should leave the world 
and become king of the Dhamma. The brahmin Sela 
addresses him : 


To be a king beseemeth thee, 

A lord, a universal king, 

A victor of the four-wayed earth, 
Lord of the wide Rose-apple land. 


The kshatriyas and the lesser kings 
Are joined in fealty to thee ; 

As king of kings and lord of men 
Rule thy kingdom, O Gotama. 


1 §n. 422-3 ; the same poem with variants in Mrastu, ii, 198-9; the account in 
Rockhill, p. 27, appears to be a translation of the same poem. 
2 Digha, i 115. 


22 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Buddha replies : 
A king am I indeed, O Sela, 
King of the Dhamma, incomparable. 
Through the Dhamma I turn the wheel, 
The wheel whose course may not be stayed. 

The Sakya tribe belonged to the Gotama clan (gotta, Skt. 
gotra). A gotra, lit. ‘cow-stall’, is a clan whose members 
claim to be all descended from one ancestor—in this case 
the ancient brahmin rishi Gotama; and his descendants 
are known as Gotamas or in Sanskrit by the derived name 
Gautamas.1 In the same way the descendants of the rishi 
Vasishtha are Vasishthas (Pali, Vasetthas). This raises 
a difficulty. Why should a family of the kshatriya or warrior 
caste, proud of its birth, claim to belong to a brahmin gotra ? 
Oldenberg in the first-edition of his Buddha mentioned 
Burnouf’s conjecture as a possible though unsatisfactory 
explanation, namely, that in the pravara ceremony at the 
beginning of the Vedic sacrifice the rishi ancestors of the 
sacrificer are enumerated by the hotar priest in a formula 
addressed to Agni, but when the sacrificer is not a brahmin, 
the ancestors of the family priest are enumerated.? There 
is not enough evidence to prove whether the fact of this 
custom was actually the reason for the Sakyas being 
Gotamas. We do not know how far brahminical customs 
were established in this region in the sixth century B.c. 
From the commentators we learn nothing, and it is not likely 
that they could have explained the social practices in force 
several centuries earlier. But there are other facts in harmony 
with the supposition that some such custom may be the 
explanation. We find the neighbouring tribes of Mallas, 
who also claimed to be kshatriyas, addressed as Vasetthas 
after another Vedic rishi Vasishtha, while the first three 
of the six previous Buddhas are said to be kshatriyas of 
the Kondafifia gotra,? and Buddha himself is addressed 
as Angirasa, i.e. descendant of Angiras, who with Gotama 
is oné of the three ancestors of the Gotama clan that are 

1 On gotras see Max Miller, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 380, and 
the notes of Jolly in his translation of Vishnu-smrtt, p. 106, and Ndrada-smrti, 
p. 166. SBE. vii, xxxiii. 

Par AC Brahmana, VII 25; cf. the notes in the translations of Haug and 

3 Jotipala in the Sarabhanga-jataka_(522) is a Kondafifia, but"he is a brahmin 


and son of the family priest. So was the Kondajfifia who was one of Buddha’s 
first disciples, as he was one of the brahmins who prophesied at the name-giving. 


THE HOME AND FAMILY OF BUDDHA 23 


enumerated in the pravara ceremony.! The later Buddhists 
appear to have lost all knowledge of the Vedic rishi, for the 
Tibetan legend explains the name Gautama by making one 
of Buddha’s own ancestors Gautama.? It would be simple 
enough if we could thus explain the Gotama of the Sakyas 
as merely another person of the same name, but it would 
not explain Buddha’s epithet Angirasa, nor the Vedic name 
of the Mallas. We may take it as a fact without claiming to 
be certain of the explanation, that some of these warrior 
tribes did lay claim to brahmin gotras. 

Non-Aryan customs may have survived among these 
peoples. The names of Sakya villages have largely a most 
un-Aryan appearance, and in the legends there are incidents 
that could scarcely have been invented in a completely 
brahminised community. One: of these is the story of the 
Sakya princes marrying their sisters. It recurs in the legend 
of the quarrel between the Sakyas and Koliyas in Buddha’s 
time, when the Koliyas make it a ground of reproach against 
the Sakyas. Both Buddha and his father marry wives of 
the prohibited degree within the same gotra. 

We have no reason to assume that the peoples of north-east 
India were Aryan in the sense that the Vedic Indians were 
Aryan. The basic population appears to be that of the 
Kols or Mundas. The language of the Myndas is quite 
distinct from that of the Dravidians, and is akin to that 
of the communities now settled on the borders of Assam.* 
Brahminism has spread by peaceful penetration, for in spite 
of its caste exclusiveness the absorption of new tribes has 
gone on through the centuries. Those who accept the 
religious rites have become admitted by the fiction of 
additional castes.4 But beneath all this spread of culture 
the old beliefs and customs of another civilisation have 
remained alive. 

The story of Buddha’s birth and youth is a continuation 
of the legend of the royal line of the Sakyas, but there 
is even less of this story to be found in the Canon than 
there is of the early genealogy of the royal house; and 
the portions that appear in the Canon are exactly those 


1 Aévalayana, Srauta-sitra, 12, 11, 1. 

2 Rockhill, p. 10, above p. 5. 

® Baines, Ethnography (Castes and Tribes), § 3. Strassburg, 1912. 
4 Baines, ibid., § 4. 


24 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


that are agreed to form no original part of it. Their signifi 
cance and value will appear when they are analysed at 
length. Kern has been blamed for combining the legends 
of different schools into one narrative. This is evidently 
an unsound method, whether we wish to test the value of 
the divergent accounts, or merely to reproduce them as they 
appeared to the various schools of adherents. The result 
is something that no school would recognise. On the other 
hand to reproduce the version of merely one branch is to 
disguise contradictions, and that not ‘completely. In a 
comparison of the works of different schools we have the 
clearest proof that the legends have grown, that new names 
have been added, and implicit or shortly recorded events 
have been enlarged and interpreted in various ways. No 
one accepts any one of the versions as historical, but it is 
impossible to ignore these developments unless we are 
to be content with the largely subjective selection of events 
made by western scholars to produce a plausible or credible 
narrative. 

The legend of the Sakyas which has been given above 
concludes as follows : 

Thus the succession of the Sakyas and Koliyas, making inter- 
marriages with one another, came down to king Sihahanu. Now 
Sihahanu had five sons, Suddhodana, Amitodana, Dhotodana, 
Sukkodana, and Sukkhodana.! Of these Suddhodana ruled the 
kingdom, and of his wife Mahamaya the Great Being was conceived, 
after he had fulfilled the Perfections as told in the Nidana of the Jataka. 

The Ceylon Chronicles, which draw from the commentaries, 
add Jayasena, Sihahanu’s father, Sihahanu’s sister Yasodhara, 
besides five sons and two daughters Amita and Pamita. 
The Tibetan gives only four sons, omitting Sukkhodana or 
Sakkodana, and also Pamita, but adding three other 
daughters, Suddha, Sukla, and Drona, names evidently 
modelled on those of the brothers. The Mahdvastu also gives 
these four sons and one daughter Amita. The Pali and the 
Lalita-vistara know only Maya or Mahamaya and Maha- 
pajapati, as wives of Suddhodana, and according to the Pali 
they are the daughters of Afijana, son of Devadaha the 


1 The names mean respectively, having pure rice, having unmeasured rice, 
having washed rice, having white rice, having fine rice. In the Mahavastu 
Amitodana appears as Amritodana, having immortal rice. Sn. com. i 356; 
BMvs. i 355 ; Rockhill, p. 13. They are not proper Sanskrit forms but Prakrit. 


THE HOME AND FAMILY OF BUDDHA 25 


Sakya.1_ Mahapajapati in the Lalita-vistara also appears 
as Mahaprajavati, a form that suggests its real meaning, 
‘rich in offspring ’.2 The accounts diverge greatly in the 
other sources. In the Tibetan their names are Maya and 
Mahamaya, that is, one name is duplicated, and in the 
Lalita-vistara as well as in the Tibetan their father’s name 
is Suprabuddha the Sakya. In the Mahdvastu Maya has 
developed into four. According to this curious story her 
father’s name was Subhiiti the Sakya of Devadaha, whose 
wife was a Koliya lady. He had seven daughters, Maya, 
Mahamaya, Atimaya, Anantamaya, Ciliya, Kolivasa, and 
Mahaprajapati. Suddhodana ordered his ministers to find 
a suitable wife for him, and they reported that the fairest 
of all was Maya. He asked for her in marriage, and was told 
that she would be given to him when her six elder sisters 
were married. Thereupon Suddhodana asked for all seven 
and received them. He placed Maya and Mah§aprajapati 
in his seraglio, and gave the five others to his five brothers. 
There is a contradiction, but in the Mahdvastu no surprising 
one, that just previously Suddhodana is said to have had 
only three brothers. The Tibetan gives a quite different story, 
according to which Suprabuddha offered both his daughters 
to king Simhahanu for his son prince Suddhodana. He took 
the younger, Mahamayad, but had to refuse Maya (i.e. 
according to the other legends Mahapajapati), owing to 
the Sakya law allowing a man only one wife. Afterwards, 
when Suddhodana had won a victory, he was allowed two 
wives and married Maya. 


1 His township Devadaha is Sakyan in all the accounts, and is not, as is some- 
times said, identical with the Koliya Vyagghapajja or Koliyanagara. It is 
mentioned three times as a place where a sutta was given. The commentary 
interprets deva as ‘-king’, and says that the name is from a pool of the Sakya- 
rajas used for festive occasions, called Devadaha because ‘ placed by the kings ’. 
(Majjh. ii 214.) In Pali it would naturally mean ‘ pool of the god ’, but it is not 
certain that the name is Pal. In the Mahdavastu it appears as Devadaha. 

2 It has no connexion, though the comparison has been made, with the Vedic 
god Prajapati, ‘ Lord of beings.’ Windisch says that it is no personal name, 
but indicates her function, her place in the family. This may once have been 
its sense, as it occurs with the meaning wife, but in the legend it is merely a proper 
name. Maya has also troubled the mythologists, and the attempt has been 
made to connect her with the Maya-doctrine of Vedanta. But the sense of Maya 
as cosmic illusion does not exist either in Pali or Sanskrit in the works that record 
her name. Maya is magic power, deception. The idea of the magic power of 
beauty is often expressed in a woman’s name, such as Ummadanti, ‘ thé 
intoxicating,’ Pabhavati, ‘the prepossessing,’ Manohara, ‘ captivating the 
mind.’ 


THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


26 


yedeleg -p eke -p 


‘SHTOINOWHO HHL OL SNITYOOOV SGIDOTYaENGD 4HL F 
\843384pprg “uz) 
eq epeaag ae Se 
(nueyenig JO wos “euepoyppng “um) (nueqeyig JO "p “eyrury -uz) 
fer itp Tuvd¢pusg 
| 


(vuesehep JO uog ‘nueyeyrg “ur) (euosefep JO ‘p “ereypose x “t) 
euvooey VNVCN 


N 
| 


uedyeg ayy ‘VAVaVAEG 


aie 
(eyppnqeddng jo ‘p “guvooeyeppeyg “ur) 
[epaeny] (eyppng) VHLLVHAaIg 
[epueuy ] | | 
(eqppnqeddng ‘ur) | (euelay jo s19943nep ‘nedefeg pue vhepy uz) 
SyTUTeg *p wu a) suepoymMy euepoyyng vueporyeg suepojoyq VNVdoHadag 
| 


(eqepeaag JO Uos ‘euefuy ‘un) (eqepeaog JO "p ‘eueooeyy “u) 


Bivypose 4 Jez48nep OQNVHVHIg 
| 
VNESVAVE 


CHAPTER III 
THE BIRTH OF BUDDHA 


8 date of the birth of Gotama Buddha is usually placed 
about the year 563 B.c.1 In two places of the Scriptures 
he is said to be the son of Suddhodana and queen Maya. 
The first of these passages in the Mahdpaddna-sutta is really 
a legend, which gives not only the length of life, city, caste, 
parents, and chief disciples, but also in exactly the same 
phraseology the same details concerning the six previous 
Buddhas, the first of whom, Vipassin, lived ninety-one cycles 
before Gotama. The other is in the Buddhavamsa, a poem 
not reckoned as canonical by all schools, which uses much the 
same phraseology, and extends the information to twenty- 
four preceding Buddhas.2 This indicates a growth in the 
legend, as the series of the last six Buddhas (Vipassin or 
Vipascit, Sikhin, Vessabhti or Visvabhi, Kakucchanda or 
Krakucchanda, Konagamana or Kanakamuni, and Kassapa 
or Kasyapa) is common to other schools. 
Extension of the legend went on in other schools also, 
but in different ways. The Laliia-vistara has a list of fifty- 
four Buddhas, and the Mahdvastu more than a hundred, 


1 This depends on the date of death at the age of eighty, the traditional 
Singhalese date of which is 544 8.0. It is not an ancient tradition, but one made 
by calculating backwards and adding together the regnal years of the Magadha 
kings. The reason for modifying it is that Asoka is said in the Chronicles to have 
been consecrated 218 years after the Nirvana, and if we place the date of the 
accession of his grandfather Candragupta in 323 B.o., this gives the date 483 B.c. 
As the fundamental date which determines the others is the date of the treaty 
of Candragupta with Seleucus Nicator, and this is not quite certain, there are 
still a few years of uncertainty. There is also the fact that we cannot directly 
verify the number 218, but it is in harmony with what we know from the Puranas 
and Jain works of the sequence of the Magadha kings. The excess in the 
Singhslese computation may have arisen through fractions of years in the reigns 
of successive kings being reckoned as whole years. The calculations of other 
schools do not need discussion. A common one in China and Japan is 1067 B.o. 
Fourteen other dates are given by Csoma from Tibetan sources. Gram. Tib. 

255. 

: 2 This does not mean that there were only twenty-four preceding Buddhas, but 
that only these twenty-four prophesied of Gotama. There are still others 
mentioned in the poem. 


28 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


but both of them include Dipankara, the Buddha under 
whom Gotama made his resolution to win enlightenment. 
Even the earliest form of the legend in the Pali tells of the 
birth, renunciation, enlightenment, and _ first preaching 
of Vipassin ir almost the same words as are used of Gotama. 
All the forms of.the legend of Buddha’s birth assume that 
he was the son of a king. It is generally agreed that this is 
unhistorical, and it has been usual to deduct the evidently 
incredible portions and leave the rest as history. It is true 
that we find passages which speak merely of Buddha belonging 
to a high kshatriya family, and of pure descent on both sides 
for seven generations back, but these passages show no 
knowledge of the names and incidents connected with his 
birth. It is only in the legend of his kingly descent that 
we find any mention of his parent’s names, and the question 
remains for consideration whether we are justified in selecting 
from this legend the portions that appear credible, or whether 
the whole legend is not the invention of a period that added 
the names not only of Buddha’s uncles and cousins, but also 
of his wife and parents. 

Portions of this legend exist in the Canon. As a continuous 
account it appears first in the Jataka commentary and 
Lalita-vistara. Gotama, having in a previous birth made the 
resolution under Dipankara to become a Buddha, was reborn 
after many births in the Tusita heaven,? where he stayed 
until the due time for his rebirth in his last existence. When | 
the gods announce that a new Buddha is to arise, the 
Bodhisatta makes five investigations, and considers first 
the time. In the early period of a cycle, when the years of 
men are more than 100,000, they do not recognise what old 
age and death is, and hence it is not the time to preach to them. 
Nor is it when the age is too short, as the exhortation has no 
time to take effect, but it is when the age of men is about a 
hundred years. As the age was then a hundred, he saw that 
it was the time to be born. Next he considers the continent, 
and chooses Jambudipa (Rose-apple Island), that is, India, 
according to the ancient geographical conception, which 


1 See Ch. XV and XVI. 

3 The universe from the lowest hell to the limit of existence is divided into 
the world of desire (kima), the world of form, and the formless world. The 
Tusita heaven is the fourth of the six heavens of the world of desire. 


THE BIRTH OF BUDDHA 29 


makes it one of the four great islands of the world with mount 
Meru in the middle. Thirdly he considers the country. This 
is Majjhimadesa, ‘the Middle District,’ for that is where 
Buddhas, great disciples, and universal monarchs are born, 
and therein is Kapilavatthu.! Fourthly he considers the 
family, which is brahmin or kshatriya, not of any lower 
caste ; and as the kshatriya, the warrior caste, was then in 
honour, he chose that, and said, “‘ king Suddhodana shall be 
my father.” Then considering the qualities of a mother 
he chose queen Mahamaya, Maya the great, and saw that 
her life would last ten (lunar) months and seven days. In 
the Lalita-vistara the parents are omitted from the investiga- 
tions, but the Bodhisatta describes the sixty-four qualities 
required for the family, and thirty-two for the mother, and 
from the description the gods identify the parents. He then 
took leave of the gods and descended to earth, and according 
to the Lalita-vistara appointed the Bodhisatta Maitreya, 
who is to be the next Buddha, as viceroy in heaven in his 
place. 

The story that follows of the conception and birth has two 
features that make an analysis of its different forms worth 
while. We possess the account in the Canon itself as well as 
in later works, and thus have an example of the historical 
aspect of the oldest evidence. Secondly, the whole story 
has been brought into comparison with the miraculous 
birth in the Gospels, and it forms one of the elements in the 
question of the historical relations between Buddhism and 
Christianity. The canonical account is given in the Discourse 
of the Wondrous and Marvellous Events,? in which the 
favourite disciple Ananda recites to Buddha the events of the 
conception and birth. Ananda is also made to state that 
he heard them from the Lord. This is not an inspired state- 
ment, but natural for a commentator to make, for to him it 
was obviously true. Ananda was held to have learnt and 
recited all the discourses, and the truth concerning the 
marvellous events could only have come from Buddha. 


1 The commentator here quotes the Vinaya commentary, but the places that 
define the Middle District are unidentifiable. It is evidently not the same as 
the classical Madhyadesa of Manu, ii 21. 

2 Acchariyabbhutadhamma-sutta, Majjh. iii, 118. The identical events are 
recounted of Vipassin Buddha in Mahapadana-sutia, Digha, ii 12. 


30 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Face to face, reverend one, have I heard from the Lord, face to face 
have I received: “born mindful and conscious, Ananda, the 
Bodhisatta was born in a Tusita body.” And, reverend one, that the 
Bodhisatta, mindful and conscious, was born in a Tusita body, this 
I remember as a wondrous and marvellous thing of the Lord. 

Mindful and conscious the Bodhisatta stayed in the Tusita body. 

Throughout his full span of life the Bodhisatta stayed in the Tusita 
body. 

Mindful and conscious the Bodhisatta descending from the Tusita 
body entered the womb of his mother. 

When the Bodhisatta descending from the Tusita body entered 
the womb of his mother, then in the world with its gods, Maras, and 
Brahmas, among the creatures with ascetics, brahmins, gods, and 
men, appears? a boundless great splendour surpassing the divine 
majesty of the gods. And in the spaces between the worlds, gloomy, 
open, dark, of darkness and obscurity, where too this moon and sun 
so mighty and majestic are unable to shine, even there a boundless 
great splendour appears surpassing the divine majesty of the gods. 
And the beings that have been reborn there perceive one another by 
that splendour, and think, “ surely, sirs, there are other beings that 
have been reborn here.” And this universe of ten thousand worlds 
shakes and trembles and quakes, and a boundless great splendour 
appears in the world surpassing the divine majesty of the gods. 

When the Bodhisatta has entered his mother, four gods approach 
her to protect the four quarters (saying), “ let nought human or super- 
human or anything else hurt the Bodhisatta or the Bodhisatta’s 
mother.” 

When the Bodhisatta has entered his mother, the Bodhisatta’s 
mother has the regular moral qualities of abstaining from taking life, 
from theft, from wrongful indulgence in senstal desires, from falsehood, 
and from occasions of carelessness in the use of intoxicants. 

When the Bodhisatta has entered his mother, there arises in the 
Bodhisatta’s mother no thought of men connected with the senses, 
and the Bodhisatta’s mother is not to be overcome by any man of 
passionate heart. 

When the Bodhisatta has entered his mother, the Bodhisatta’s 
mother is in possession of the five senses, and is surrounded and 
endowed with the five senses. 

When the Bodhisatta has entered his mother, no scenes arises 
in the Bodhisatta’s mother, she is happy with unwearied body. And 
the Bodhisatta’s mother sees within her body the Bodhisatta with 
all his limbs and complete sense-organs. Like a beryl jewel, pure, 
noble, eiglit-sided, excellently worked, and threaded with a blue, 
yellow, red, white, or yellowish thread: a man who could see might 
take it in his hand, and looking at it say, “this beryl jewel, pure, 


1 The introductory and concluding sentences of this paragraph are repeated 
in all the following paragraphs with the corresponding changes of wording. 

® Here the tense changes to the present, not the historic present, because the 
events are held to happen to all Bodhisattas, 


THE BIRTH OF BUDDHA 31 


noble, eight-sided, excellently worked, is threaded with blue, yellow, 
ted, white, or yellowish thread.”’ Even so the Bodhisatta. . . 

When the Bodhisatta has been born seven days, the Bodhisatta’s 
mother dies. She is reborn in a Tusita body. 

As other women give birth nine or ten (lunar) months after con- 
ception, not so does the Bodhisatta’s mother give birth. The 
Bodhisatta’s mother .gives birth to the Bodhisatta ten months after 
conception. As other women give birth sitting or lying down, not so 
does the Bodhisatta’s mother give birth. The Bodhisatta’s mother 
gives birth to the Bodhisatta standing. 

When the Bodhisatta is born, first the gods take him, and then 
human beings. 

When the Bodhisatta is born, he does not fall to the ground. Four 
gods take him and set him before his mother, saying, “ rejoice, lady. 
A mighty son has been born to thee.” 

When the Bodhisatta is born, he is born clean, unstained with liquid, 
unstained with phlegm, unstained with blood, unstained with any 
filth, but pure and clean. Just as when a gem is placed on Benares 
cloth, the gem does not stain the cloth, nor the cloth the gem—and 
why? On account of the pureness of both—even so when the 
Bodhisatta is born, he is born clean. . . 

When the Bodhisatta is born, two streams of water fall from the 
sky, one of cold and one of hot water, wherewith they perform the 
washing for the Bodhisatta and his mother. 

As soon as born the Bodhisatta firmly standing with even feet goes 
towards the north with seven long steps, a white parasol being hcld 
over him [by the gods]. He surveys all the quarters, and in a lordly 
voice says, “ I am the chief in the world, I am the best in the world, 
I am the first in the world. This is my last birth. There is now no 
existence again.” 


This is followed by the description of an earthquake 
in the same terms as it took place at his conception. These 
events occur in a continuous story in the Niddnakatha, and 
it is in this form that they are the best known : 


At that time in the city of Kapilavatthu the festival of the full 
moon day of the month Asalha (June-July) had been. proclaimed, 
and many people celebrated it. Queen Maya from the seventh day 
before full moon celebrated the festival without intoxicants and with 
abundance of garlands and perfumes. Rising early on the seventh 
day she bathed in scented water, and bestowed a great gift of 400,000 
pieces as alms. Fully adorned she ate of choice food, took upon 
herself the uposatha vows, entered her adorned state bedchamber, 
lay down on the bed, and falling asleep dreamt this dream : the four 
great kings, it seemed, raised her together with the bed, and taking 
her to the Himalayas set her on the Manosila tableland of sixty leagues 
beneath a great sal-tree seven leagues high, and stood on one side. 
Then their queens came and took her to the Anotatta lake, bathed 


32 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


her to remove human stain, robed her in heavenly clothing, anointed 
her with perfumes, and bedecked her with divine flowers. Not far 
away is a silver mountain, and thereon a golden mansion. There 
they prepared a divine bed with its head to the east, and laid her upon 
it. Now the Bodhisatta became a white elephant. Not far from there 
is a golden mountain, and going there he descended from it, alighted 
on the silver mountain, approaching it from the direction of the north. 
In his trunk, which was like a silver rope, he held a white lotus, then 
trumpeting he entered the golden mansion, made a rightwise circle 
three times round his mother’s bed, smote her right side, and appeared. 
to enter her womb. Thus when the moon was in the lunar mansion 
Uttarasalha,! he received a new existence. The next day the queen 
awoke and told her dream to the king. The king summoned sixty- 
four eminent brahmins, showed them honour, and satisfied them with 
excellent. food and other presents. Then when they were satisfied 
with these pleasures, he caused the dream to be told, and asked what 
would happen. The brahmins said, “be not anxious, O king, the 
queen has conceived, a male not a female, and thou shalt have a son, 
and if he dwells in a house he will become a king, a universal monarch ; 
if he leaves his house and goes forth from the world, he will become 
a Buddha, a remover in the world of the veil (of ignorance).” ! 


Then follows the account of the earthquake, and a list 
of the thirty-two signs that appear at this time. The first 
of them is the boundless great light ; and as though desirous 
to behold its glory the blind receive their sight, the deaf 
hear, the dumb speak, the cripples become straight-limbed, 
the lame walk, and the fire in all the hells is extinguished. 
The other events down to the birth follow much as in the 
Discourse, and then the narrative continues : 


Queen Mahamaya bearing the Bodhisatta for ten months like oil 
in a bowl, when her time was come, desired to go to her relatives’ house, 
and addressed king Suddhodana, “I wish, O king, to go to Devadaha, 
the city of my family.” The king approved, and caused the road 
from Kapilavatthu to Devadaha to be made smooth and adorned 
with vessels filled with plantains, flags, and banners, and seating her 
in a golden palanquin borne by a thousand courtiers sent her with a 
great retinue. Between the two cities and belonging to the inhabitants 
of both is a pleasure grove of sal-trees named the Lumbini grove. 
At that time from the roots to the tips of the branches it was one mass 
of flowers, and from within the branches and flowers hosts of bees 
of the five colours and various flocks of birds sported, singing sweetly. 


1 The Indian lunar zodiac is divided into 27 or 28 constellations. The 
Buddhists preserved the whole 28, Niddesa, i382. The list of them is given in 
Lal. 502-6 ; Divy. 639 ff. ; Mahavyutpatti 165. Cf. Sun, Moon, and Stars (Buddhist) 
in ERE. 


THE BIRTH OF BUDDHA 33 


When the queen saw it, a desire to sport in the grove arose. The 
courtiers brought the queen and entered the grove. She went to the 
foot of a great sal-tree, and desired to seize a branch. The branch 
like the tip of a supple reed bent down and came within reach of her 
hand. Stretching out her hand she seized the branch. Thereupon 
she was shaken with the throes of birth. So the multitude set up 
a curtain for her and retired. Holding the branch and even while 
standing she was delivered. At that moment the four pure-minded 
Mahabrahmas came with a golden net, and therewith reeeiving the 
Bodhisatta set him before his mother, and said, “ rejoice, O queen, 
a mighty son has been born to thee.” And as other beings when born 
come forth stained with impure matter, not so the Bodhisatta. But 
the Bodhisatta like a preacher of the Doctrine descending from the 
seat of Doctrine, like a man descending stairs, stretched out his two 
hands and feet, and standing unsoiled and unstained by any impurity, 
shining like a jewel laid on Benares cloth, descended from his mother. 
Nevertheless to do honour to the Bodhisatta and his mother two 
streams of water descended from the sky, and performed the regular 
ceremony on the bodies of the Bodhisatta and his mother. Then 
from the hands of the Brahmas, who stood and received him in a 
golden net, the four Great Kings received him on a ceremonial robe 
of antelope skin soft to the touch, and from their hands human beings 
received him on a silken cushion, and when he was freed from the hands 
of human beings, he stood on the earth and looked at the eastern 
quarter. Gods and men then worshipped him with scented garlands, 
and said, “ Great Being, there is here none like thee, much less superior 
anywhere.” So having examined the four quarters, the intermediate 
quarters, the nadir and the zenith, ten quarters, and not seeing anyone 
like himself he said, “ this is the northern quarter,” 1 and took seven 
steps. While Mahabrahma held a white parasol over him, and 
Suyama a fan, and other divinities followed with the other symbols 
of royalty in their hands, he stopped at the seventh step, and raising 
his lordly voice, “ I am the chief in the world,” he roared his lion-roar. 


On this day seven other beings also tame into existence : 
the Tree of Enlightenment, the mother of Rahula (his future 
wife), the four vases of treasure, his elephant, his horse 
Kanthaka, his charioteer Channa, and Kaludayin the 
minister’s son. They all appear again in the legend. The 
Bodhisatta was escorted back to Kapilavatthu the same day 
by the inhabitants of both cities. His mother died, as the 
mothers of all Bodhisattas do, seven days afterwards. The 


1 This can also mean, “‘ this is the supreme quarter.’’ There is here probably 
a play on words, as there certainly is in Lal. 96 (84), where he takes seven steps 
to each of the four quarters, the nadir, and the zenith, and at each utters a phrase 
which contains a pun on the name of the quarter. In the canonical account 
(above, p. 31), he is merely said to go towards the north. 


D 


34 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


day of his conception was the fullmoon day of Uttarasalha, 
the second of the two lunar constellations from which the 
month Asalha or Asadha (June-July) takes its name. This 
corresponds with the traditional date of his birth on the 
full moon day of Visékha or Vaisaékha (April-May). But 
in the Lalita-vistara this is given as the date of the conception, 
and there are many other differences in the Sanskrit account. 
It describes the descent of the Bodhisatta in the form of an 
elephant as an actual event, and immediately adds in verse 
an evidently older account of the same event, but described 
as a dream of queen Maya. On waking she goes with her 
women to a grove of asoka-trees and sends for the king, who 
is unable to enter, until the gods of the Pure Abode inform 
him of what has happened. She asks him to send for 
brahmins, and they interpret the dream. Then follows an 
elaborate description of the state of the Bodhisatta and his 
worship by innumerable gods and Bodhisattas during the 
ten months. | 

Maya makes no mention of her intention to go to Devadaha, 
but merely wishes to go and sport in the Lumbini grove.? She 
expresses her wish to the king in verse, and speaks there of 
sal-trees, but in the following prose she seizes not a sal 
branch, but a plaksha at the nroment of birth. Both Lalita- 
vistara and Mahdvastu say that the Bodhisatta came from 
her right side, and particularly add that her right side was 
uninjured.? Finally the Bodhisatta is brought back to the 
city-not on the same day, but on the seventh day after. 

It is clear that neither form of these legends as it stands 
can be taken as a record of events. But why should the 
Niddna-katha be treated as at least in outline possible 
history, and the others ignored ? Apparently because the 
Pali is held to be the older. This is pure illusion. It is not 
the question of the age of the Canon, but the quite different 
matter of the age of the commentary, and we have no 


1 This is also the traditional date of his enlightenment and his death. Although 
the year was probably at this time solar, the months were lunar, and intercalation 
was necessary. In 1922 the Feast of Wesak (Visikha) in Ceylon was at full 
moon on May 10. 

2 In Mvastu, ii 18 her father Subhiti sends to the king with the message, “ let 
the queen come and give-birth here.” 

* Lal. 109 (96); Mvastu ii 20. St. Jerome seems to have had a knowledge of 
this incident ; cf. Introduction. 


THE BIRTH OF BUDDHA 35 


reason to think the Pali to be older than the Lalita-vistara. 
The commentary is based on an older commentary in 
Singhalese, which goes back to older material that originated 
in India. But the Lalita-vistara also contains earlier matter, 
and it has not gone through such a process of retranslation, 
other than the sanskritising of a more popular dialect. The 
result is that the language of the Sanskrit often corresponds 
verbally with passages in the Pali Canon, and much more 
closely than does the Palicommentary, which has passed from 
a translation into Singhalese and back into Pali. The 
legendary, possibly traditional, matter in both the Pali 
and Sanskrit comes from earlier commentaries, and we have 
no reason to hold one to be more worthy of credit than the 
other. 

The doctrinal aspect of the incarnation of a Bodhisatta 
or potential Buddha involves some of the most characteristie 
features of Hindu belief. The Vedic religion had developed on 
the philosophical side into the doctrine of the soul (dtman) 
as an ultimate reality, either as the one universal soul, or 
as an infinity of souls involved in matter. Buddhism appears 
to know only this second form, as it appears in the Sankhya 
philosophy and Jainism, and this it denied by asserting that 
there was nothing behind the physical and mental elements 
that constitute the empirical individual. These elements 
are always changing, but they are never totally dispersed, 
until the power that holds them together and impels them 
to rebirth is extinguished. This power is thirst, craving, 
desire for existence (tanhd, Skt. trsna). 

At death the individual transmigrates, and passes into a 
new body and a new existence, which is more or less happy 
according to the amount of good or bad action (karma) that 
he has previously performed. Transmigration according 
to Buddhist theory may take place in various ways, but 
in the case of one who is reborn as a human being there are 
normally present the father, the mother of childbearing age, 


1 On the name Lumbini see p. 19. Dr. Hackmann (Buddhism as a Religion, 
p. 2) says: ‘‘ On the spot where the child was born, some hundreds of years 
later, King ASoka raised a memorial tablet with an inscription commemorating 
the event, and it was this tablet which was discovered in December, 1896; so 
that both the event and the spot where it took place are beyond all doubt.” It 
is only necessary to note the extraordinary reasoning that infers the certainty 
of an event because a legend existed some hundreds of years later. 


36 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


and the gandhabba, the disembodied individual to be 
reincarnated.} 

The oldest accounts of Buddha’s ancestry appear to 
presuppose nothing abnormal about his birth, and merely 
speak of his being well born both on his mother’s and 
father’s side for seven generations back.2 According to the 
later legend he is born not as other human beings, but in 
the same way as a universal king he descends from the 
Tusita heaven by his own choice, and with this his father is 
not concerned. This is not properly a virgin birth, but it 
may be called parthogenetic, that is, Suddhodana was not 
his progenitor. The Lalita-vistara says that at the time of 
the midsummer festival Maya approached the king to ask 
a boon, and said that she was taking upon herself the eight- 
fold Uposatha vows. ‘‘O lord of men, make not of me an 
object of desire ... Be there nought unmeritorious to 
thee, O king; for a long time grant me to undertake the 
vows of morality.”’? This is also implied in the Niddna- 
katha, not only by the narrative itself but also by the queen 
undertaking the Uposatha vows for a definite period. 

An attempt has been made to find the doctrine of the 
virgin birth in the Mahdvastu (i 147) which Barth translated, 
‘““pas méme en pensée, elles (les méres des Bodhisattvas) 
n’ont aucun rapport charnel avec leur époux.” * But the 
text really says, “‘even in thought no passion (rdga) arises 
in them for any men, beginning with their husbands,” and 
that the Mahdvastu does not really differ from the doctrine 
of the other works is shown by its recording the request of 
the queen to Suddhodana (ii 5, i 201), “‘it is my wish, O 
delight of the Sakyas, to pass the night without thee.” > 

It is this story in which Mr. A. J. Edmunds proposes to 
find Indian influence on Christianity. He brings it into 
connexion with the words of St. Luke, i, 35: ‘‘ The Holy 
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest 
shall overshadow thee.” It is unnecessary to expound him, 


1 Majjh. i 266; Avadanasat. 13 f. 

2 Digha, i 113. 

3 Lal. 46 (42). 

4 Journ. des Savants, aot, 1899, p. 468. 

5 Even this view is not shared by all schools, for the Tibetan Vinaya is explicit 
in recognising the union of the parents, Rockhill, p. 15, quoted more in detail 
by Foucaux, Rgya tch’er rol pa, vol. 2, p. xxi. 


THE BIRTH OF BUDDHA 37 


as the whole force of the comparison lies in the alleged 
resemblance of the stories before us. Is there enough 
similarity between the stories to make us think that the 
Gospel account is a corrupt borrowing of the Indian one ? 
A final consideration may be left until the other more striking 
parallels have been considered. 


CHAPTER IV 
INFANCY AND YOUTH 


Os the day of the Bodhisatta’s birth a sage (ist, Skt. risht) 

named Asita, ‘the black,’ dwelling in the Himalayas 
beholds the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three sporting 
in the sky, and inquires of them the reason of their delight. 
They tell him that the Bodhisatta has been born in the 
world of men in a village of the Sakyas in the Lumbini 
country, and that he will turn the Wheel of the Doctrine in 
the park Isipatana (the deer-park at Benares). Asita goes 
to the dwelling of Suddhodana and asks to see the boy. The 
Sakyas show him the child, and he is filled with delight 
and receives much joy. He recognises in him the marks of 
a Great Man, and declares, ‘“‘ supreme is he, the highest of 
men.” Then remembering his own passing away he weeps, 
and the Sakyas anxiously ask if there will be misfortune for 
the boy. Asita replies that he sees nothing hurtful to the 
boy: he will attain Enlightenment and preach the Doctrine, 
but Asita is pained because his own life is short, and he will 
not be able to hear the Doctrine preached. The sage returns 
and rouses his nephew Nalaka. When his nephew shall hear 
of the coming of a Buddha, he is to go and inquire, and 
practise the religious life with that Lord. Nalaka dwells 
with guarded senses in expectation of the Victor, and when 
the time has arrived goes to Buddha and asks him about the 
state of a monk (muni). 

This is a summary of what is probably the oldest version 
of the story of Asita, the Buddhist Simeon, as given in the 
Ndlaka-sutta of the Sutta-nipadta. It forms a good example 
of what frequently passes as canonical matter. A number of 
the separate poems of this work contain prose introductions 
stating the circumstances in which they were given. No one 
maintains that they are as old as the poems, and they may 
quite well be centuries later. In the case of several poems 
of this work the introductions are in verse, and are clearly 
marked off from the poems themselves by being called 


INFANCY AND YOUTH 39 


vatthugathd, ‘ verses of the story,’ as in the case of this sutta. 
The question of the date of the sutta is quite different from 
the question of the origin of the legend and of its becoming 
attached to this sutta. It is clearly late, as is shown by the 
reference to the thirty-two marks; and as it is in general 
agreement with the Sanskrit accounts, there is nothing to 
prove that it is as early as the pre-Christian era. The sutta 
itself has not the slightest reference to the legend, and is 
merely an instance of a discourse which has had a legendary 
account of the circumstances of its delivery attached to it. 

In the Lalita-vistara there are two versions, prose and verse, 
and there is no trace of their being ¢onnected- with the 
Nalaka-discourse. Their chief difference from the Pali is 
that the interview with the king is given in detail, while in 
the Pali, although Suddhodana’s dwelling is mentioned, the 
conversation takes place only with the Sakyas. The prose 
is as follows : 


Then king Suddhodana assembling all the Sakyas investigated 
whether the boy would become a king, a universal ruler, or whether 
he would renounce the world to wander as an ascetic. And at that time 
on the side of a peak of the Himalayas dwelt a great sage named Asita, 
having the five attainments, together with his nephew Naradatta. 
At the moment when the Bodhisatta was born he beheld many 
marvellous wonders: the gods over the space of the sky making the 
word ‘“‘ Buddha ” resound, waving their garments, and ‘coursing hither 
and thither in delight. He thought, what if I were to observe? He 
observing with his divine eye beheld all Jambudvipa, and in the great 
city called Kapila, in the house of king Suddhodana, the boy who 
had been born, shining with the brilliance of a hundred merits, honoured 
by all the world, and adorned with the thirty-two marks of a great 
man. And beholding again he addressed his pupil Naradatta. 


Hereupon he tells his pupil of the birth of a son to 
Suddhodana, and recites to him the prophecy which he 
afterwards repeats to the king. 


So the great sage Asita with his nephew Naradatta like a royal 
‘swan rose up and flew through the air to the great city of Kapila- 
vatthu, and on arriving laid aside his magic power, entered Kapila- 
vatthu on foot, arrived at the abode of king Suddhodana, and stood 
at the door of the house. Now Asita the sage beheld at the door of 
king Suddhodana’s house many hundred thousand beings assembled, 
so he approached the doorkeeper and said, “go, man, inform king 
Suddhodana that a sage is standing at the door.” Then the doorkeeper 
approached king Suddhodana and with clasped hands said to the king, 
“know, O king, that an aged sage, old and advanced in years stands 


40 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


at the door, and says that he desires to see the king.” The king 
prepared a scat for Asita and said to the man, “let the sage enter.” 
So the man coming out of the palace told Asita to enter. Now Asita 
approached king Suddhodana and standing in front of him said, 
“ victory, victory, O king, live long, and rule thy kingdom righteously. 
Then the king paid reverence to the feet of Asita, and invited him to 
a seat; and seeing him seated in comfort said, “ I remember not to 
have seen thee, O sage. With what purpose hast thou come hither ? 
What is the cause?” Thereupon Asita said to the king, “a son 
has been born to thee, O king; desiring to see him I have come.” 
The king said, “the boy is asleep. O sage, wait a short while until 
he wakes.” The sage said, “not long, O king, do such great beings 
sleep. Such good beings are by nature wakeful.” Thus did the 
Bodhisatta out of compassion for Asita the great sage make a sign 
of awaking. Then the king taking the boy Sarvarthasiddha well 
and duly in both hands brought him into the presence of the sage. 
Thus Asita observing beheld the Bodhisatta endowed with the thirty- 
two marks of a great man and adorned with the eighty minor marks, 
his body surpassing that of Sakra, Brahma, and the world-protectors, 
with glory surpassing a hundred and thousand-fold, and he breathed 
forth this solemn utterance: “‘ marvellous verily is this person that has 
appeared in the world,” and rising from his seat clasped his hands, 
fell at the Bodhisatta’s feet, made a rightwise circuit round, and taking 
the Bodhisatta stood in contemplation. /He beheld the Bodhisatta’s 
thirty two marks of a great man, endowed with which a man has two 
careers and no other. If he dwells in a house, he will become a king, 
a universal monarch.! . . . But if he goes forth from a house to a house- 
less life, he will become a Tathagata, loudly proclaimed, a fully 
enlightened Buddha.” And looking at him he wept, and shedding 
tears sighed deeply. 

The king beheld Asita weeping, shedding tears, and sighing deeply. 
And beholding him the hair of his body rose, and in distress he hastily 
said to Asita, “why, O sage, dost thou weep and shed tears, and sigh 
deeply ? Surely there is no misfortune for the boy?” At this Asita 
said to the king, ‘“‘ O king, I weep not for the sake of the boy. There 
will be no misfortune for him, but I weep for myself. And why ? 
I, O king, am old, aged, advanced in years, and this boy Sarvartha- 
siddha will without doubt attain supreme complete enlightenment. 
And having done so will turn the supreme Wheel of the Doctrine that 
has not been turned by ascetic or brahmin, or god, or Mara, or by 
any other in the world ; for the weal and happiness of the world will 
he teach the Doctrine. The religious life, the Doctrine, good in the 
beginning, good in the middle, good in the end, complete in the letter 
and the spirit, whole, pure, he will proclaim... As, O king, an udumbara 
flower at some time and place arises in the world,” even so at some time 


1 Here the text gives a reference to a full list of a universal monarch’s attributes, 

2 The udumbara being a kind of fig has no visible flowers. In the Sutta- 
nipata 5, one who seeks reality in existing things is said to be like one who looks 
for a flower on udumbara trees. 


INFANCY AND YOUTH 41 


and. place after countless cycles reverend Buddhas arise in the world. 
This boy will without doubt attain supreme complete enlightenment, 
and having done so will take countless beings across the ocean of 
transmigration to the other side and establish them in the immortal 
state. But we shall not see that. Buddha-jewel. Hence, O king, 
I weep, and in sadness I sigh deeply, for I shall not be able to reverence 
him. As it is found in our mantras, Vedas, and law-books, not fit 
is it that the boy Sarvarthasiddha should dwellin a house. And why?” 


Hereupon Asita gives the list of the thirty-two marks ! and 
the eighty minor marks, and repeats his prophecy. The 
king is delighted, falls at the feet of his son, and utters a 
verse in reverence. 


So the king gratified the great sage Asita together with Naradatta 
his nephew with suitable food, and having given him robes made a 
rightwise circuit round him. Then Asita by his magic power departed 
through the air and arrived at his hermitage. Thereupon Asita 
said to Naradatta his nephew, ‘‘ when thou shalt hear, Naradatta, 
that a Buddha has arisen in the world, then go and abandon the world 
under his teaching. This shall be for a long time for thy weal and 
welfare and happiness.” 


This is immediately followed by the same account in verse, 
and in the elaborate classical metre known as sardilavikridita. 
Unlike some of the verse recensions of the incidents it does 
not differ essentially from the prose. One peculiarity both 
of the prose and the verse is that Asita takes with him his 
nephew and pupil, here called Naradatta, though he flies 
through the air by his magic power, without any mention of 
the mode of locomotion of his pupil. In the Mahdvastu version 
his pupil is called Nalaka as in the Pali, but Asita is there said 
to come from the south. He is the son of a brahmin of 
Ujjeni, and lives in a hermitage on the Vindhya mountains. 
But the most striking difference from the canonical Pali 
account is the Pali of the Niddna-katha, which is as follows : 


On the very day (of his birth) the assembly of the gods in the heaven 
of the Thirty-three sported rejoicing and shaking their garments, 
saying, “in the city Kapilavatthu, to king Suddhodana, a son is born. 
This boy will sit on the seat of Enlightenment and become a Buddha.” 
At that time an ascetic named Ka@ladevala, possessor of the eight 
attainments, who frequented the house of king Suddhodana, went 
after his meal for the sake of being in the open air to the dwelling 
of the Thirty-three, and seated there in the open air saw the gods, 
and asked, “ why are you sporting with such delighted minds? Tell 


1 See the list in Ch. XV. 


42 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


me too the cause.” The gods said, “sir, a son is born to king 
Suddhodana. He will sit on the seat of Enlightenment, and becoming 
a Buddha will turn the wheel of the Doctrine, and we shall be able 
to see his infinite Buddha-grace, and hear the Doctrine. For this 
cause are we delighted.”’ The ascetic hearing what they said quickly 
descended from the world of the gods, entered the royal abode, and 
sitting on the seat prepared for him said, “they say a son has been 
born to thee, O king, I would see him.” The king ordered the boy 
arrayed in his adornments to be brought, and wished to cause him 
te do reverence to the ascetic. The Bodhisatta’s feet turned up and 
placed themselves on the ascetic’s matted hair. For there is no one 
fitting to be reverenced by the nature of a Bodhisatta, and if in their 
ignorance they had put the Bodhisatta’s head at the feet of the ascetic, 
the ascetic’s head would have split into seven pieces. The ascetic 
thought it was not fitting to destroy himself, and arose from his seat 
and stretched out his clasped hands to the Bodhisatta. The king 
seeing the marvel himself did reverence to his son. The ascetic had 
the memory of forty past cycles and of forty to come, eighty in all, 
and seeing that the Bodhisatta possessed the signs he called to 
remembrance whether he would become a Buddha or not, and knowing 
that he would certainly become a Buddha said, “ this is a marvellous 
person,” and smiled. Then calling to remembrance whether he should 
be able to see him when he had become a Buddha, he saw that he would 
not be able, but having died he could not attain enlightenment through 
a hundred or even a thousand Buddhas, and would be reborn in the 
Formless world. And thinking, “such a marvellous person, when he 
has become Buddha, I shall not be able to see: great verily will be 
my loss,” he wept. The people seeing this asked, “our noble one 
just now smiled, and then began to weep. Can it be, reverend sir, 
that there will be any misfortune to our noble son?” “ There will 
be no misfortune to him. Without doubt he will become a Buddha.” 
“Then why didst thou weep?” “ Thinking that I shall not be able 
to see him when he has become Buddha ; great verily will be my loss, 
and lamenting for myself I weep,” he said. Then thinking whether 
there was any one among his relatives who would be able to see him 
or not when he had become Buddha, he called to remembrance and 
saw his nephew, the boy Nalaka. He went to his sister’s house and 
said, “where is thy son Nalaka?” “In the house, noble one.” 
“Summon him.” When Nalaka had come to his presence he said, 
“my dear, in the family of king Suddhodana a son has been born, 
an embryo Buddha. After thirty-five years he will become a Buddha. 
Thou wilt be able to see this. Renounce the world even to-day.” 
The boy had been born in a house possessing wealth of eight hundred 
and seventy millions, and thinking that his uncle would not command 
him without a reason, got yellow robes and an earthen bowl from a shop, 
removed his hair and beard, put on the yellow robes, and stretching 
out his clasped hands in the direction of the Bodhisatta said, “ my 
going forth is under the leadership of that supreme being.” He then 
made obeisance to him, put his bowl in a bag, swung it over his shoulder, 


INFANCY AND YOUTH 43 


and entering the Himalayas lived the life of an ascetic. After the 
Great Enlightenment he came to see Buddha, who repeated to him 
the discourse “the Way of Nalaka”. Then he returned to the 
Himalayas, attained arahatship, continued to live for seven months 
following the most excellent path, and standing near a golden hill 
attained complete Nirvana. 


In this version there is no rishi but a tapasa, an ascetic 
who practises austerities. His name is Kaladevala, ‘ Devala 
the black,’ and he is not a stranger to the king, but gets his 
living by frequenting the palace. On seeing the boy he smiles 
and then weeps. This incident of smiling and weeping is a 
very common Indian folktale feature. These striking 
differences can be explained from the source of the story. 
It comes from the Singhalese commentary retranslated into 
Pali. Hence the rishi appears as a tdpasa, and his name 
Asita becomes the synonymous Kala (-devala).+ 

Not only Seydel and Edmunds, but also Pischel, see in 
this story the original of the story of Simeon (Luke ii, 22-82). 
The differences between them, says Pischel, are less than the 
correspondence. Edmunds also brings in the appearance of 
the angels to the shepherds (Luke ii, 8-15), as parallel to 
the gods sporting in the sky. Nevertheless Asita was not 
expecting a Buddha, he did not depart in peace, but with 
lamentation, and he did not live to see the Buddha come. 
What constitutes a preponderance of resemblances depends 
on very subjective considerations, and the question can only 
be fairly judged when all the similar stories have been taken 
into account. 

On the fifth day the ceremony of name-giving took place. 
A hundred and eight brahmins were invited to the festival 
at the palace, and eight of these were interpreters of bodily 
marks. On the day of the conception they had had a dream, 
and seven of them held up two fingers and prophesied that 
one who had such marks as the Bodhisatta would become 
either a universal king or a Buddha ; but the eighth, a young 
man known from his clan as Kondajifia, held up one finger, 
and prophesied his Buddhahood as a certainty. The brahmins 

1 The name probably comes from that of a brahmin rishi, Asita Devala; cf. 
Windisch in Kuhn Festschrift, p. 1 ff. There are still further differences in the 
Tibetan. Nalaka on leaving the world goes to Benares and first joins a company 
of brahmins, amongst whom he becomes known as Katyayana, and after his 


conversion as Mahakatyayana, that is, he is identified with one of the greatest 
of the disciples. Rockhill, p. 18. 


4A, THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


also told the king that his son would leave the world after 
seeing the four signs, an old man, a sick man, a corpse, and 
an ascetic. Accordingly guards were stationed at the four 
quarters to prevent these four from coming to the sight 
of his son. 

This is the account of the Niddna-kathd, which omits to 
mention the name bestowed, but later on uses the name 
Siddhattha, which in the Lalita-vistara is Siddhartha, ‘ he 
whose aim is accomplished,’ but the latter authority, as 
well as the Mahdvastu, usually gives the name as 
Sarvarthasiddha, ‘he who has accomplished all his aims.’ 
There is no real contradiction between these forms, since as 
they are significant and of practically the same meaning, 
the variation is quite conceivable. But these late authorities 
are the only evidence. The name according to the Lalita- 
vistara does not bear its obvious meaning, but was given to 
the Bodhisatta by Suddhodana, because his own aims had 
all been accomplished. It is a natural title to be applied by 
his disciples to the enlightened Buddha, and it may naturally 
be inferred that a mere epithet has been converted into a 
proper name, and that the divergent stories of the name- 
giving have been built upon it. 

The most striking example of a variety of legends based 
upon a single incident is seen in the way in which a passage 
of the Scriptures has been expounded in at least four ways. 
In the Majjhima* Buddha in describing his strivings before 
enlightenment says that while practising austerities he 
remembered that at the time when his father the Sakyan 
was working, he was seated beneath the cool shade of a rose- 
apple tree, and attained the first trance.t When was this, 
and what was the work? That is the kind of question that 
the commentator has to answer, and if he does not know, 
he must invent. Hence we get the explanation in the com- 
mentary on the Majjhima, which is repeated in the Niddna- 
kathad. It is to the effect that on a certain day the state 
ploughing of the king took place. There were a thousand 


* Majjh. i 246 (quoted in full below, p. 64 ff.) ; Lal. ch. xviii 330 (263). Thisis 
an example of an old canonical passage embodied in the latter work. Except for 
variants and additions it corresponds verbally with the Pali, but for pitu sakkassa 
kammante ‘ during the work of my father the Sakyan,’ it reads pitur udyane, 
‘in my father’s park.’ Hence the difference in the Sanskrit accounts, which all 
refer toa park, Cf. Mvastu, ii 45 ff. ; Rockhill, p. 22. For the trances see p. 181. 


INFANCY AND YOUTH AS 


ploughs, a hundred and eight of which were of silver for the 
courtiers, except one golden one for the king. The farmers 
ploughed with the rest. The boy was taken and placed on a 
couch within a screen beneath a rose-apple tree. The nurses 
left him, and he sat up cross-legged, practised in and out 
breathing, and attained the first trance. On the return of the 
nurses the shadows of the other trees had turned, but that of 
the rose-apple had stood still. The king was informed, and on 
coming and seeing the miracle he did reverence to his son, 
saying, ‘“‘My dear, this is the second reverence paid to 
thee.” 1 

According to the Mahdvastu the boy was taken by the king 
with his seraglio to the park. In this version he was old 
enough to walk about, and came to a farming village, where 
he saw a serpent and a frog turned up by the ploughs. The 
frog was taken for food and the serpent thrown away. This 
roused great agitation in the Bodhisatta, and he sat during 
the morning beneath a rose-apple tree and attained the first 
trance. Five rishis, who came flying through the air on their 
way from the Himalayas to the Vindhyas, were not able to 
pass beyond him, and they were informed by the gods of the 
reason why. ‘They alighted and recited verses in his honour. 
At meal time the boy could not be found, but after a search 
by the ministers he was discovered under the tree, the 
shadow of which had not moved, and the king came and did 
reverence to his feet. 

The Lalita-vistara has two versions, prose and verse, 
closely connected with the Mahavastu account, as many of 
the verses and the incident of the rishis are the same. But it 
is there said to have taken place after the Bodhisatta had 
grown. He set out with a number of courtiers’ sons to look 
at a farming village, and after seeing it entered a park, sat 
cross-legged beneath a rose-apple tree, and attained the whole 
four degrees of trance. The rishis arrived and recited their 
verses. His father not seeing him was anxious, and he was 
found under the shadow of the tree by one of the courtiers. 

The Tibetan puts the event still later in life. It was at the 


1 The ceremonial ploughing may have reference to an actual ancient custom, 
but there is no reasdn to assume that it was Sakyan. If it were a custom known 
to the commentator, it would have to be sought not among the Sakyas, but in 
the country where the commentary was compiled. 


46 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


age of twenty-nine, after he had seen the four signs that 
warned him to leave the world. His father to divert his mind 
had sent him to a farming village, where he saw the toil of 
the ploughmen, and set them free. Then he meditated under 
the tree as before. The same account is implied in the 
Divydvadana, where it is mentioned between the seeing of the 
four signs and the great Renunciation.} 

The Sanskrit accounts relate a story which appears to have 
arisen in the same way from the explanation in a commentary 
of a canonical expression.2, Buddha is called devdtideva, 
‘ god surpassing the gods.’ The chapter in the Lalita-vistara 
on ‘ Taking to the temple’ is devoted to this. At his birth 
the chief Sakyas assembled and asked the king that the boy 
should be taken to the temple. The king approved, and 
ordered Mahapajapati to adorn the boy. While she was 
doing so, with a most sweet voice he asked his aunt where he 
was being taken. On learning he smiled, and in three verses 
pointed out that the gods had already addressed him as 
devatideva, and that there was no god like him, much less 
greater. But he went, conforming to the custom of the 
world. As soon as the Bodhisatta’s right foot was set in the 
temple, the unconscious images of the gods, Siva, Skanda, 
Narayana, Kuvera, Moon, Sun, Vaisravana, Sakra, Brahma, 
the World-protectors, and others were all upset from their 
places, fell at the Bodhisatta’s feet, and showing their own 
shapes praised him in verses. 

In the Mahdvastu version the temple is that of the goddess 
Abhaya, ‘ without fear or danger,’ a name that is known as 
the title of several gods. In the Tibetan account he is 
worshipped by his father on this occasion as devdtideva, 
and that is why he is called god surpassing the gods. Here 
again the Divydvadana tradition is the same as the Tibetan.® 

Among the very late additions to the story in the Lalita- 
vistara is the visit of the Bodhisatta to the writing school. 
He is taken there in great pomp, and the writing master 
Visvamitra falls on the ground before his glory. The boy 


1 Rockhill, p. 22; Divy. p. 391. This story too has been made the original 
of one of the Gospel events. The reader may be invited to conclude which, 
before consulting eh. xvii. 

2 Lal. 134 (117); Mvastu, ii 26; Rockhill, p. 17. According to van den Bergh 
van Eysinga it is the original of the story of the Baptism. 

> Rockhill, p. 17; Divy. 391. 


INFANCY AND YOUTH AT 


takes the writing tablet, asks which alphabet his master is 
going to teach him, and gives a list of sixty-four kinds, 
including those of the Chinese and the Huns. When the boys 
repeat the alphabet, at each letter a moral truth is uttered, 
which begins with, or contains that letter, and this takes 
place through the wonderful power of the Bodhisatta. 

Of the life of the Bodhisatta between the events of his birth 
and his renunciation we have only one incident mentioned in 
the Canon, that is, Buddha’s account of his luxurious life as 
prince : 

I was delicate, O monks, extremely delicate, excessively delicate. 
In my father’s dwelling lotus-pools had been made, in one blue lotuses, 
in another red, in another white, all for my sake. I used no sandal- 
wood that was not of Benares, my dress was of Benares cloth, my tunic, 
my under-robe, and cloak. Night and day a white parasol was held 
over me so that I should not be touched by cold or heat, by dust or 
weeds or dew. 

I had three palaces, one for the cold season, one for the hot, and 
one for the season of rains. Through the four rainy months, in the 
palace for the rainy season, entertained by female minstrels I did not 
come down from the palace; and as in the dwellings of others food 
from the husks of rice is given to the slaves and workmen together 
with sour gruel, so in my father’s dwelling rice and meat was given 
to the slaves and workmen.! 

The portion of this description that refers to the three 
palaces recurs several times, recorded of different individuals, 
and is so general that it might have been told of Buddha 
without the help of a single word of tradition. It is evidently 
an older stage of legend than what we find in the com- 
mentaries, as will be seen more especially from the 
immediately following part which describes the great 
Renunciation. This stage is important in suggesting that all 
the additional details of the stories that have been grouped 
round the incident of the three palaces are purely imaginary. 
There are two accounts in the Pali commentaries and several 
in Sanskrit. Of the latter it is sufficient to take the Lalita- 
vistara version as typical. They all differ among themselves 
in ascribing different motives to the events and in. altering 
their sequence. 

The Pali commentary on the above passage describes the 


1 Ang. i 145; the same in a more elaborate form in Mvastu, ii 115 ; cf. Majjh. 
i 504, where Buddha tells of the three palaces, and Digha ii 21, where the same 
is told of Vipassin Buddha. In Vin. i 15 it is told of Yasa. 


48 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


wonderful details of the three palaces, which were built for 
the Bodhisatta when he reached his sixteenth year, and then 
continues : 


Thus when the three palaces were ready, the king thought that as 
his son was grown up, he would raise the royal parasol over him and 
see the glory of his kingdom. He sent letters to the Sakyas saying, 
“my son is grown up, and I intend to establish him in the kingdom. 
Let all send the girls that have grown up in their houses to this house.” 
On hearing the message they said, “the young man is merely fair 
and fit to look upon, but he knows no art. He will not be able to 
support a wife. We will not send our daughters.” When the king 
heard this, he went into his son’s presence and said, “ what art should 
the Bodhisatta show, my son?” ‘“‘I must string the bow requiring 
the strength of a thousand men, so let it be brought.” The king had 
it brought and gave it to him. The Great Being sitting on a couch 
had the bow brought to him, and wrapping the string round his toe 
he drew it with his toe and strung the bow. Taking a stick in his 
left hand he drew it with his right and struck the string. The whole 
city was roused. People asked what the sound was, and said it 
thundered. But others said, “do you not know that it is not 
thundering, but that prince Angirasa has strung the bow requiring 
the strength of a thousand men? He is striking the string, and 
that is the sound of the blow.” By so much the minds of the Sakyas 
were decided. The Great Being asked what else he was to do. 
(Twelve marvellous feats with the bow are then described.) And this 
was not all, but on that day the Great Being conforming to the custom 
of the world displayed all his art. Then the Sakya kings arrayed 
each his own daughter and sent them. They were forty thousand 
dancing girls. So the Great Being dwelt in his three palaces like a 
god. 


The Jataka commentary tells of the palaces and of the 
dancing-girls provided by his father, when he had reached the 
age of sixteen, but does not say that they were given by the 
Sakyas, and it adds, ‘‘ the mother of Rahula was his chief 
queen.” Then it proceeds to give the story of his feats with 
the bow, which were performed at the request of the Sakyas, 
not to prove his fitness for marriage, but because they 
wondered what one who had learnt no art would do if a war 
broke out. 

The simplicity of this story has been contrasted with the 
Sanskrit legend, but it does not show any nearer approach 
to history. It shows a stage in which two commentators of 
one school had not yet agreed on the same story, and one of 
them does not even mention his marriage. Oldenberg tells 


INFANCY AND YOUTH 49 


us that one of the later texts gives the name of Buddha’s 
wife as Bhaddakaccd, and that it allows us to assume that 
she was his only legitimate consort. He also says that the 
northern texts give other names. It is probable that Oldenberg 
did not consider this account strictly historical, but by 
ignoring all the other evidence he makes it appear as if the 
Pali gave a single account, which may go back to early 
tradition. The later text to which he refers is Morris’s edition 
of the Buddhavamsa (XXVI 15): ‘‘ Bhaddakaccé (or 
Bhaddikacca) by name was his wife, Rahula was the name of 
his son.” But the Colombo edition of the commentary, 
which quotes this passage, ignores Bhaddakacca. it gives 
the name as Yasodhara, a name popularly supposed to be 
cdnfined to ‘northern texts,’ and it also gives the reading 
of other recensions, which have Subhaddaka&. The name 
Bhaddakacca itself, like Subhaddaka, is only a metrical 
adaptation of Bhadd& Kaccana, or as in the Mahdvamsa 
Bhaddakaccana. She is in fact mentioned in an older text 
(Ang. i 25), in a list of thirteen nuns, and is there said to 
be the chief of those who had obtained supernatural psychic 
powers (abhinna), but she is not called Buddha’s wife. It is 
the commentary that says she married the Bodhisatta. 
It tells us little that is definite, except that she was the 
daughter of Suppabuddha the Sakya, and it gives a wrong 
explanation of her name. Kaccana is a brahmin clan name, 
like Gotama, but the commentator knows so little of this 
that he explains it as being for kaftcana ‘ gold,’ and says that 
she was so called because her body was like fine gold. It is 
clear that the identification with Buddha’s wife is com- 
mentarial, and that four different names in the Pali—for the 
above names are not all—would not have been invented, if 
there had been an old authoritative tradition.? 

Pischel’s treatment of the question is still more surprising. 
He tells us that ‘‘ we do not learn the name of Buddha’s 
wife from the old texts. These always call her Rahulamata, 
‘the mother of Rahula’”’. The old texts to which he refers 
are the Jatakas, but they do not mention her at all. It is 

1 Even in the Buddhavamsa the mention of his wife is probably an addition. In 
this work the biography of Buddha occurs twice, first as a prophecy of Dipankara, 
who gives the names of his mother and father, but not his wife, and then tells 


of his enlightenment and chief disciples. In the second form, asrecited by Buddha, 
the names of his three palaces, his wife and son, and other details are added. 


50 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


the late commentary thereon that calls her the mother of 
Rahula, but even then not always. In the commentary on 
two of the Jatakas (281 and 485) she is called Bimba and 
Bimbasundari, ‘ Bimba the beautiful.’ This tradition does 
not stand alone, as the commentary on the Mahdpadana- 
sutta in giving a list of the wives of the last seven Buddhas 
also calls her Bimba, and adds that ‘‘ queen Bimba after the 
birth of prince Rahula was known-as the mother of Rahula ”’. 
The Jinacarita, a thirteenth century work composed in 
Ceylon, which follows the commentaries closely, calls her in. 
one place Yasodhara and in another Bimba (vv. 172, 895). 
As the name Yasodhara is given to her in the Mahdvastu and 
in ASvaghosha’s poem, as well as in the Pali, and the poetical 
variant Yasovati occurs in the Lalitavistara, it was evidently 
accepted by various schools, and appears to be a wider if not 
older tradition than Bhadda, Subhaddaka, and Bimba. 

In the prose of the Lalitavistara Buddha’s wife is Gopa* 
and daughter of the Sakya Dandapani. When the king decides 
to give a wife to his son, five hundred Sakyas offer their 
daughters, and the kjng decides to let him choose. His choice 
falls on Gopa, but her father refuses until he has proved his 
skill in the arts, which include not only archery, but also 
writing, arithmetic, and many other sciences. And the 
Bodhisatta conforming to the practice of the world lived with 
Gopa in the midst of eighty-four thousand women. 

In spite of its many marvels this version has an interest 
in being like the Pali an attempt to fill up the blank between 
his birth and enlightenment. It differs from both the Pali 
accounts in placing the incident of the three palaces not at 
the time of his marriage, but thirteen years later, when he 
was already reflecting on abandoning the world. The com- 
mentaries have taken a canonical incident, and as in the case 
of the meditation under the rose-apple tree, have eye ops 
it In various ways. 


1 Still other names are given by Rockhill, but he has combined several legends, 
and has not made it clear whether Buddha had three wives, or whether inconsistent. 
accounts have been mixed up. 

2 In the list of these there is considerable resemblance to the lists of the 
accomplishments.of the hero in the romances of Kadambaré and Dasakumaracarita. 


CHAPTER V 
THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 


pas the age of twenty-nine Gotama after a life spent in 
worldly enjoyments was startled out of his ease at 
the first sight of old age, sickness, and death, and fleeing 
secretly at night from his home became an ascetic.1 This is 
essentially what the later tradition tells us, but the Scriptures 
preserve earlier accounts of his conversion, which not only 
imply that this tradition did not then exist, but are in conflict 
with it. One of these occurs in the continuation of the above- 
quoted description of the luxurious life in the three palaces. 


Then, O monks, did I, endowed with such majesty and such excessive 
delicacy, think thus, “an ignorant, ordinary person, who is himself 
subject to old age, not beyond the sphere of old age, on seeing an old 
man is troubled, ashamed, and disgusted, extending the thought te 
himself. I too am subject to old age, not beyond the sphere of old age, 
and should I, who am subject to old age, not beyond the sphere of 
old age, on seeing an old man be troubled, ashamed, and disgusted ? ”’ 
This seemed to me not fitting. As I thus reflected on it, all the elation ” 
in youth utterly disappeared. 


The same is then repeated of sickness and death, and “ the 
elation in life utterly disappeared.”” Here we have the first 
mention of the signs that according to the legend awakened 
in Gotama’s mind the problems of existence, his first sight 
of an old man, a sick man, and a corpse, to which is added 
the fourth sign of an ascetic. It is easy to see how the above 
account can have been developed into the story of his actually 
meeting these objects, but not how, if the story is a real 
biographical event, it can have been converted into this 
abstract form. 

Another canonical passage, the Sutta of the Noble Search 
(Majjh. i 163), also put into Buddha’s mouth, describes his 
conversion in still more general terms : 


1 That he left the world at the age of twenty-nine, and died at eighty is implied 
in the verses quoted in the _Mahaparinibbana- -sutta, Digha, ii 151. 
2 The world is mada, lit. ‘ intoxication.’ 


Sys THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Thus, O monks, before my enlightenment, while yet a Bodhisatta 
and not fully enlightened, being myself subject to birth I sought 
out the nature of birth, being subject to old age I sought out the nature 
of old age, of sickness, of death, of sorrow, of impurity. Then I 
thought, “ what if I being myself subject to birth were to seck out the 
nature of birth . . . and having seen the wretchedness of the nature 
of birth, were to seek out the unborn, the supreme peace of Nirvana.” 
(Repeated similarly of old age, sickness, death, sorrow, and impurity.) 


In these accounts we have no definite historical circam- 
stances mentioned, nor any trace of the events of the legend 
as we find it in the commentarics and later works. These 
have elaborated a story, the different forms of which have so 
many contradictory details that they appear as independent 
inventions, based upon the abstract statements of the earlier 
texts. 

According to the Jataka commentary Suddhodana on the 
name-giving day, after hearing from the eight brahmins the 
prophecy that his son, if he saw the four signs, would leave 
the world, set guards to ward them off from the sight of his 
son. But while the Bodhisatta was living in luxury in his 
three palaces the gods decided that it was time to rouse him. 


Now one day the Bodhisatta wishing to go to the park summoned 
his charioteer, and told him to harness the chariot. He obeyed, and 
adorning the great splendid chariot with all its adornments yoked 
the four state horses white as lotus-petals, and informed the Bodhisatta. 
The Bodhisatta aseended the chariot, which was like a vehicle of the 
gods; and went towards the park. The gods thought, “the time for 
prince Siddhattha to attain enlightenment is at hand: we will show 
him a previous sign.” So they made a god appear, worn out with 
old age, with broken teeth, grey hair, bent, with broken-down body, 
a stick in his hand, and trembling. It was the Bodhisatta and the 
charioteer (only) who saw him. The Bodhisatta asked his charioteer, 
as in the Mahapadana-sutta, “what man is this? Even his hair is 
not like that of others,” and on hearing his reply said, “woe to birth, 
when the old age of one that is born shall be known.” With agitated 
heart he thereupon returned and ascended his palace. The king 
asked why his son had returned so quickly. “‘O king, he has seen 
an old man, and on seeing an old man he will leave the world.” “ By 
this you are ruining me. Get together dancing girls for my son. If 
he enjoys luxury, he will have no thought of leaving the world.” And 
so saying he increased the guards, and set them in all directions to 
the distance of half a league. 


On other days the gods represented a sick man and a corpse, 
and on each occasion he turned back in his agitation. 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 53 


At length the day of the Great Renunciation arrived. He 
set out for the park as before, and saw a man who had 
abandoned the world. The charioteer inspired by the gods 
explained, and praised the virtues of renunciation. That 
day the Bodhisatta, taking pleasure in the thought of 
abandoning the world, went on to the park. After bathing he 
sat on the royal rock of state to be robed, and as his 
attendants stood round about him, Sakka, king of the gods, 
perceived that he would make the Great Renunciation at 
midnight, and sent the god Vissakamma in the likeness of the 
royal barber to adorn him. When he was returning in 
majesty to the city, his father sent him a message that the 
mother of Rahula had borne a son. The Bodhisatta on hearing 
said, ‘“‘ Rahula is born, a bond i$ born,” and his father 
therefore gave the order, ‘“‘ let prince Rahula be his name.” ? 
At his entry occurred. the well-known event that forms 
a parallel to the incident in Luke xi, 27: 


At that time a kshatriya maiden named Kis& Gotami had gone to 
the roof of the palace, and seeing the beauty and glory of the Bodhisatta, 
as he made a.rightwise circuit round the city, she was filled with joy 
and delight, and breathed forth this solemn utterance : 


Happy indeed is the mother, 
Happy indeed is the father, 
Happy indeed is the wife, 
Who has such a husband. 


The Bodhisatta heard, and thought, “even so she spoke. On her 
seeing such a form a mother’s heart becomes happy, a father’s heart 
becomes happy, a wife’s heart becomes happy. Now when what is 
extinguished is the heart happy?” And with aversion in his heart 
for lusts he thought, “ when the fire of passion is extinguished, it is 


1 This incident appears to be an attempt to explain the name Rahula, but 
Rahula does not. mean a bond. It is a diminutive of Rahu, the monster who 
swallows the sun or moon during an eclipse, and it would be a natural name 
for a person born at such a time. (See Art. Sun, Moon, and Stars, Buddhist, 
ERE.) Personal names derived from stars or constellations are very common. 
This astronomical explanation of the name is the one given in Schiefner, T'1b. 
Lebensb. § 10, which says that the Moon was eclipsed at Rahula’s birth. In 
Mvastu, ii 159 he descends from the Tushita heaven on the night of the Renuncia- 
tion, as according to this work he is born like a Bodhisatta without the inter- 
vention of his father. In Rockhill, p. 24, he appears to have been conceived 
seven days before. ; ' j ; ‘ Pe. 

2 The word for ‘ happy’ is nibbuta, literally meaning ‘ extinguished ’, as it is 
used in the next sentence; the state of being extinguished is nibbana, the Pali 
form of Sanskrit nirvana. As will be seen from this passage, there is no reference 
to the question of the extinction of the individual or personality at death. That 
for the Buddhist is a further question. 


54 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


happy, when the fire of illusion, when pride, false views, and all the 
lusts and pains are extinguished, it is happy. She has taught me a 
good lesson, for I am searching for extinguishment (Nirvana). Even 
to-day I must reject and renounce a household life, and go forth from 
the world to seek Nirvana. Let this be her fee for teaching.” And 
loosing from his neck a pearl necklace worth 100,000 pieces, he sent it to 
Kis& Gotami. She thought that prince Siddhattha was in love with 
her, and had sent her a present, and she was filled with delight. But 
the Bodhisatta with great glory and majesty ascended his palace, 
and lay down on the bed. 


He awoke to find his female musicians sleeping round 
him in disgusting attitudes. Then filled with loathing for 
his worldly life he made his decision, and ordered his 
charioteer Channa to saddle his horse Kanthaka. 


The Bodhisatta having sent Channa thought, “now I will look 
at my son,” and rising from where he had been sitting cross-legged 
he went to the abode of the mother of Rahula, and opened the door 
of the chamber. Just then a lamp of scented oil was burning. On 
the bed strewn with heaps of jessamine and other flowers the mother 
of Rahula was sleeping with her hand on her son’s head. The 
Bodhisatta standing with his foot on the threshold looked, and thought, 
“if I move aside the queen’s hand and take my son, the queen will 
awake and this will be an obstacle to my going. When I have become 
a Buddha, I will come back and see him,” and he descended from the 
palace. But what is said in the Jitaka commentary,” that “at that 
time prince Rahula had been born seven days”’, is not in the other 
commentaries. Hence the account given above should be received. 


He left the city on his horse Kanthaka with the 
charioteer clinging to the tail. Divinities muffled the sound of 
his going, and the city gate was opened by the god that dwelt 
in it. At that moment the tempter Mara came, and standing 
in the air said, ‘sir, depart not. On the seventh day from 
now the jewel-wheel of empire will appear, and thou shalt 
rule over the four great islands and the two hundred small 
islands that surround them. Turn back, sir.’? The Bodhisatta 
refused, and Mara replied, “‘ henceforth, whenever thou 
hast a thought of lust or malice or cruelty, I shall know.” 


1 According to Mvastu ii 157 the lady’s name was Mrigi, and she was the mother 
of Ananda. In the account in Rockhill, p. 24, she became the Bodhisatta’s wife, 
seven days before he left home. 

® The old, probably Singhalese, commentary used by the commentator in 
compiling his own work, showing that there were different traditions even in 
the Theravada school. 


PLATE II 


ANH 


Peek 


Above: TEMPTATION BY MARA’S DAUGHTERS 
Below: GOTAMA’S FLIGHT 
[ face p. 54 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 55 


And seeking for an entrance, like a shadow never leaving him, 
he followed him.} 

_ It was on the full-moon day of the month Uttarasalha 
(June—July) that the Bodhisatta departed. A desire to look 
again at the city arose, and the great earth turned round, so 
that he should not have to look back. At that place he 
indicated the site which was to become the Kanthaka- 
nivattana shrine (the turning round of Kanthaka). 
Accompanied by gods he went beyond three kingdoms, 
a distance of thirty leagues, reached the river Anoma, and his 
horse crossed it at one leap. Then giving his ornaments to 
his charioteer he took his sword and cut off his hair. It was 
thus reduced to two fingers in length, and curling to the right 
clung to his head, and like his beard remained so throughout 
his life. He threw his hair and beard into the sky. They rose a 
league high, and staying there were a sign that he would 
become Buddha. Sakka appeared and placed them in a shrine 
in the heaven of the Thirty-three gods. Then a Mahabrahma, 
who had been his friend Ghatikara in a former life, came and 
gave him the eight requisites of a monk—three robes, bowl, 
razor, needle, girdle, and water-strainer. When he sent back 
his charioteer, his horse had listened to their talk, and thinking 
that he would never see his master again, died of a broken 
heart, and was reborn as a god. 

This account as a whole is not found in the Scriptures, 
but the story in its main outlines is told of Vipassin Buddha 
in the Mahdpadana-sutta (Digha ii 21 ff.), a discourse which, 
as we have seen, belongs to a period that had developed the 
doctrines of the marvellous career of all Bodhisattas and of 
six previous Buddhas. It is probably only due to the practice 
of abbreviating repetitions that the story is not told at length 
of all the seven. The whole is legend, with no claim to 
be the historic words of Buddha. The Jataka adds several 
personal incidents, some of which are in contradiction with 
other post-canonical versions, and are probably peculiar to the 
Pali. Two of these are of special interest. The shrine of the 
Turning back of Kanthaka (Kanthakanivattana) was no doubt 
a real shrine known to the authorities on which the Pali 
commentator depended. But whether the commentator 


1 This is the first recorded temptation by Mara. Mara is held to have fulfilled 
his threat, and to have taken every opportunity of tempting Buddha throughout 
his life. 


56 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


has interpreted it correctly is doubtful, as according 
to his own account there was no turning round of 
Kanthaka at that place, but the Bodhisatta ‘“‘kept him facing 
on the way he was to go”. It is more likely that the place 
was where the charioteer with the horse finally took leave of 
his master, and identical with the shrine mentioned in 
the Lalita-vistara, the Turning back of Chandaka 
(Chandakanivartana), at the place where the charioteer 
Channa or Chandaka left the Bodhisatta and returned with 
the horse. The other incident of the Bodhisatta’s hair 
turning in curls to the right after being cut, is in accordance 
with the actual practice of thus representing the curls on 
images of Buddha. But images of this kind, as will be seen, 
are not of the earliest type of representations of Buddha, 
and cannot be put before the second century of the Christian 
era. This is entirely in harmony with what we can conclude 
independently of the late date of the commentary itself. 

Another incident of this legend occurs in the canonical 
Vimanavatthu (VII 7), and Mahdvastu (ii 190), where the 
elder Moggallana visits the heaven of the Thirty-three, and 
sees the god Kanthaka, who explains that he was formerly 
the Bodhisatta’s horse, and tells the story of the flight. 

The Lalita-vistara differs from the Pali not only in the 
multiplication of incidents, but also by Mahayana additions. 
One of these is the whole of chapter xiii, ‘The Exhorting.’ 
The gods say that it is the rule (dharmata) that a Bodhisatta 
in his last existence should be exhorted in his seraglio by the 
Buddhas of the ten points of space. These exhort him in 
124 stanzas, and even the music of the seraglio turns into 
words to ripen his purpose. 

The narrative proper begins with chapter xiv. The 
Bodhisatta causes the king to dream, and the king in his 
dream sees his son leaving the world. On waking he builds 
three palaces for him, each guarded by five hundred men. 
The visits to the park and the seeing of the four signs are 
much the same as in other accounts. Gopa then dreams 
ominous dreams, but they are interpreted favourably by the 
Bodhisatta.1_ He himself also dreams, and rises to ask his 


1 There is here a striking difference from the conception of the Bodhisatta’s 
wife in the Pali, where she is identified with a nun who attains arahatship. Here 
the Bodhisatta interprets one of her dreams as meaning that she will be reborn 
@8 @ man in her next existence. 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 194 


father’s permission to leave the world, but promises to stay 
if he will grant four boons, that he may be always young, 
always healthy, of unending life, and always happy. The 
king declares them impossible, and the Bodhisatta then asks 
that there may be no rebirth for him. The king refuses 
permission, and sets new guards. 

The Bodhisatta then meditates in the seraglio, makes his 
resolution at midnight, and summons his charioteer Chandaka, 
who tries in vain to persuade him to seek enjoyment first. 
The gods put the city to sleep, and accompanied by them he 
goes beyond the Sakyas, the Kodyas (Koliyas), and the 
Mallas, and at daybreak reaches the town Anuvaineya of 
the Maineyas, six leagues away. There he gives his ornaments 
and the horse to Chandaka. On the place where Chandaka 
turned back a shrine was built called the Turning back of 
Chandaka. The Bodhisatta cuts off his:hair and changes his 
robes for yellow ones, which are given him by one of the gods 
of the Pure Abode. There a shrine was built called the Taking 
of the Yellow Robes (Kdshdyagrahana). 

The seraglio and the king awake, and seeing a god bringing 
the Bodhisatta’s royal robes, and Chandaka following with 
the horse and the ornaments, think that the Bodhisatta has 
been killed for the sake of his precious robes, but Chandaka 
tells them that it is impossible to bring back the Bodhisatta 
until he has attained complete enlightenment. For a long 
time the ornaments were worn by the Sakyas Bhadrika 
Mahandma, and Aniruddha, but as they were too heavy even 
for Narayana (Vishnu), Mahapajapati unable through grief 
to bear the sight of them threw them into a lotus-pool. 
This. became known as the Ornaments-pool (Abharana- 
pushkarint). 

The question now arises whether we can assume that there 
is a basis of historical reality for these two legends. The 
appearances of the gods and the miracles need not detain us, 
as these may quite well have been added to a real story by 
people who devoutly believed in such things. Nor are the 
contradictions fatal. These may be independent accretions. 
The statement that the Bodhisatta travelled thirty leagues 
(over 200 miles) between midnight and dawn may well be an 
exaggeration, and one account makes the distance only six 
leagues (some forty-five miles). When one account says that 


58 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


the horse died, and another that he was brought back, and 
that Rabula was born on the night of the Renunciation, or 
seven days before, or that he was only conceived then, 
evidently one of them is incorrect, if not all. The reference to 
the shrines commemorating various miraculous events only 
proves that at a period of some seven or eight centuries at 
least after Buddha’s death the legends about them were 
established. 

If Buddha is a historical personage, it is clear that a 
Renunciation took place, and nothing more is needed as the 
basis for a wholly fictitious legend. In the case of the four 
signs we have scriptural evidence for holding that the story 
of the four visits to the park is only the historicising of a 
canonical passage which knows nothing of these events.. The 
events have been merely built up out of the meditation on. 
old age, sickness, and death. We find the same state of things 
in the story of the Renunciation. The oldest canonical 
accounts given above of Gotama’s leaving the world are quite 
different from the later legend. They are repeated in various 
parts of the Scriptures, and in the sutta addressed to the 
Jain-Mahasaccaka (Majjh. i 240) they are quite mechanically 
combined. 


Now before my enlightenment, while yet a bodhisatta and not 
yet fully enlightened, I thought, oppressive is life in a house, a place 
of dust. In the free air is abandonment of the world. Not easy 
is it for him who dwells in a house to practise a completely full, 
completely pure, and perfect religious life. What if I remove my 
hair and beard, and putting on yellow robes go forth from a house to 
a houseless life. 

Now at another time, while yet a boy, a black-haired lad in the 
prime of youth, in the first stage of life, while my unwilling mother 
and father wept with tear-stained faces, I cut off my hair and beard, 
and putting on yellow robes went forth from a house to a houseless life. 


That is all, and even if the compiler of this sutta knew the 
later legend, he is here using the phraseology of a period which 
ignores the whole of it. It makes the Bodhisatta leave the 
world not at the age of twenty-nine, but when quite a boy 
(dahara). The reference to hair and beard is a formal state- 
ment, made here because it is used in describing any ascetic, 
even the boy Nalaka, the nephew of Asita. To strip the legend 
of its miracles and contradictions is to leave a nucleus that 
is as foreign to the oldest sources as all the rest. Oldenberg 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 59 


himself rejects it as highly coloured poetry, and for the 
canonical accounts only claims that they are unadorned 
fragments of the little that an older generation knew, or 
thought that it knew, of those things. 

An important element in this legend is the story of Buddha’s 
wife and his son Rahula. Oldenberg says that the statements 
concerning them should be all the less held to be invented, 
the more frequently they occur in the older tradition without 
the person of Rahula or his mother being used for a didactic 
purpose or for bringing out pathetic situations.! This is true 
in a sense. There are no pathetic situations, because the 
persons are not mentioned in the older tradition at all. The 
name Bhadda Kaccané is only one of the three or four persons 
identified by the later tradition with Buddha’s wife, and 
the identification is not made by the older texts.2_ The case 
stands exactly the same with Rahula. He is never mentioned 
in the older texts as Buddha’s son. There are, it is true, four 
or more Rdahula-sutias, and three Rdhulovdda-suttas,? where 
he merely appears as an interlocutor like other monks. In 
‘the Theragdtha, a late work which the commentators them- 
selves admit to be in parts no earlier than the third Council, 
Rahula is made to say, “I am son of Buddha.” But this 
evidence would also prove that Buddha had four sons, for 
three other elders in this work say the same thing. 
Sirivaddha says, ‘‘I am the son of the incomparable one,” 
Kassapa of Gaya says, ‘‘ I am a true son of Buddha,” and 
Kaludayin says, “‘I am Buddha’s son.” But all Buddha’s 
disciples are frequently called in the same language Buddha’s 
true or genuine sons, puttd orasd, ‘ sons of the breast.’ * 

That Buddha should have had a wife is not only natural 
but according to Indian ideas inevitable. To marry is one of 


1 Buddha, p.119; but they are certainly used for didactic and pathetic purposes 
in the commentaries. 
§ See above, p. 49. 
3 Sn. 335; Samy. iii 135, 1386; iv 105; Ang. ii 164; Majjh.i 414, 420; 
iii 277. 
4 Therag. 295, 41, 348, 536; ef. Samy. iii 83: 
Who understand the khandhas five, 
In the good Doctrine live their life, 
Worthy of praises, righteous men, 
These are the Buddha’s genuine sons. 
So Kassapa the Great describes himself, Samy. ii 221, and Buddha tells his disciples, 
when asked who they are, to say that they are true sons of the Lord, Digha, 
iii 84. 


60 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


the duties of a person living in the world. The chroniclers did 
not need to start from the historic fact that Buddha had a 
wife and son. This may be true, and may rest on unwritten 
tradition, but it is certain that the tradition has preserved 
no information about them. Among the various guesses con- 
cerning Buddha’s wife, the view that identified her with 
Bhadda Kaccana, an otherwise entirely unknown nun in the 
list of great disciples, is not unanimous even in the Pali 
commentators. They searched the Scriptures, and in the 
same list they found Rahula, ‘ the chief of those who desire 
instruction.’ Even the Pali commentarial tradition is 
uncertain about him, and the other traditions show that they, 
if not all the others, had nothing certain to tell us. 


CHAPTER VI 
AUSTERITIES AND ENLIGHTENMENT 


Ce aren on leaving his home had gone eastwards, and 

the three countries of the Sakyas, Koliyas, and Mallas, 
through which he is said to have passed, are at least 
geographical possibilities. But nothing is known of the 
district at which he first arrived. The Pali commentaries 
call it the river Anoma, thirty leagues from Kapilavatthu, 
and say that he then went to the mango-grove of Anupiya, 
a place which in the Canon is mentioned as a township. 
The Mahdvastu speaks not of a river, but of a town Anomiya, 
twelve leagues away among the Mallas. In the Lalita-vistara 
it is a township six leagues away, Anuvaineya or Anumaineya 
of the Maineyas beyond the Mallas. These statements may 
point to an actual locality somewhere east of Kapilavatthu, 
which was, traditionally at least, the place to which Gotama 
fled ; but if so, they-aiso point to the complete absence of any 
real knowledge of its nature. To assume that the Pali 
version has preserved the truth would be mere credulity. 
It is not a question here of canonical matter, but of the 
commentaries, and these like the Sanskrit. works are later 
than the supposed évents by centuries.} 

The chief events of the next years up to the Enlightenment 
are recorded in the Scriptures, and we have again parallel 
and more developed accounts in the commentaries and 
Sanskrit works. It may be asked whether the variations and 
additions in the latter really are accretions, or whether the 
canonical accounts have selected certain events from a longer 
story then existing, which we only get complete in the com- 
mentaries. This can only be properly seen after the events’ 
have been given, but it may be said that a-continuous account 


1 Jat.i 65; Mvastu ii 189; Lal. 277 (225); it is evidently impossible to find 
a certain explanation of al] these names, but the following may be suggested. 
Anupiya was a real place'in the Malla country, mentioned in the Canon. It 
probably became traditionally identified as the place of Gotama’s first retreat, 
and all the other names are corruptions of Anupiya in that popular language 
which lies behind the language of both Pali and Sanskrit works. 


62 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


of the period occurs more than once in the Scriptures,! and 
that several of the most striking of the events known to the 
commentaries are not once mentioned in the four Nikayas. 
Some of the events in both are developed later in different 
ways, or inserted in different chronological order, and the 
probability is that the canonical accounts tell all that was 
known as legend at the time when the narratives now included 
in the suttas were compiled. 

From the Scriptures we learn that Gotama first sought. 
instruction under two religious teachers, found them 
unsatisfying, and for six years practised austerities in the 
company of five disciples. Then abandoning his fasting and 
self-tortures he thought of a new method of religious 
exercise, and won enlightenment. After hesitating whether 
he should attempt to convert the world, he went to Benares, 
met the five disciples, who had deserted him when he gave 
up his austerities, and converted them. In addition to this. 
there are several incidents recorded in ballad form, which 
in spite of their being usually referred to as ‘ old legends ’, 
are probably versifications of commentarial matter. 

It is at this stage of the story that we first light upon persons. 
and places for which there is evidence outside Buddhist 
sources. The accounts are given as being related by Buddha. 
himself, but it is easy to seethat pious chroniclers have worked 
over older legends. These passages require to be set forth, 
both because they throw light on the character of the later 
stories, and also because they contain some of the earliest 
statements of fundamental doctrines. The prominent aspect 
in the six years striving is the discovery of the right way of 
mystical concentration. The training under the two teachers. 
is no philosophical doctrine, but the teaching of a certain 
method of meditation, which has to be learnt and practised. 

The Mahdsaccaka-sutta (Majjh. i 240 ff.) after describing 
the going forth as given above, continues : 


Thus having gone forth from the world I strove after the good, 
and searching for the supreme state of peace I went to Alara Kalama, 
and having approached him said, ‘‘ I wish, friend Kalama, to practise 
the religious life in this doctrine and discipline.” Thereupon Alara 


1 See Majyjh. i, 23, 117, 167, 247-9; ii 983-4; these are repetitions, and this 
means that the redactor or redactors of this collection incorporated an older 
document. The Chain of Causation, although known to the redactor, does not 
occur in it. 


AUSTERITIES AND ENLIGHTENMENT 63 


Kalama said to me, “ abide friend, such is the doctrine that an intelligent 
man in no long time may of himself comprehend, realise, and attain 
my teaching ‘and abide in it.” In no long time and quickly did I 
master that doctrine. So to this extent merely by moving the lips 
and repeating what had been recited, I and others made the profession, 
“TI declare-the doctrine of the knowledge, the doctrine of the elder 
I know and perceive.” Then I thought, “it is not merely by faith 
that Alara proclaims his doctrine (saying), that of himself he has 
comprehended, realised, attained it, and abides in it. Verily, Alara 
abides knowing and perceiving this doctrine.” So I approached 
Alara, and said to him, “ friend Kalama, what is the extent of this 
doctrine which of yourself you have comprehended, realised, and 
attained, and which you proclaim?” Thereupon Alara proclaimed 
the Attainment of the state of Nothingness.1_ Then I thought, “ Alara 
has faith, but I too have faith. Not only has he energy, I too have 
energy. Not only has he mindfulness, I too have mindfulness. Not 
only has he concentration, I too have concentration. Not only has he 
wisdom, I too have wisdom. What if I strive to realise that doctrine 
of which Alara proclaims that of himself he has comprehended, realised, 
attained it, and abides in it.” Then in no long time I quickly 
comprehended, realised, and attained the doctrine, and abode in it. 

So I approached Alara, and said to him, “is that the extent of the 
doctrine which of yourself you have comprehended, realised, and 
attained, and which you proclaim?” “ That is the extent, friend.” 
“I too, friend, of myself have comprehended, realised, and attained 
this doctrine, and abide in it.” “Gain to us, friend,- great gain is 
it to us, who behold as friend such a fellow student. Thus it is, the 
doctrine that I of myself have comprehended, realised, attained, 
and proclaim, that doctrine you of yourself have comprehended, 
realised, attained, and abide in . . . thus it is, as I am so are you, as 
you are so am I. Come now, friend, we two will devote ourselves 
to this company.” Thus it was, Alara my teacher set me his pupil 
as equal to himself, and honoured me with eminent honour. Then 
I thought, “‘ this doctrine extending to the Attainment of the state 
of Nothingness does not conduce to aversion, absence of passion, 
cessation, tranquillity, higher knowledge, Nirvana.” So without 
tending this doctrine I abandoned it in disgust. 


The visit to Uddaka Ramaputta is then described in almost 
the same terms, but here the doctrine was that which had 
been realised and proclaimed by Rama, the father of Uddaka. 
This was the Attainment of the state of Neither-consciousness- 
nor-nonconsciousness (the fourth Buddhist Attainment), 
and Uddaka proposed not to make Gotama equal to himself, 


1 This is the third Attainment, or the seventh of the eight Attainments of the 
Buddhists, reckoning the trances as the first four. The com. understands that 
the six lower ones are also implied. These are discussed in ch. xiii. For the 


supposed philosophy of Ajara see ch. xvi. 


64 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


but to set him over the whole company of disciples as their 
teacher. This doctrine he also found unsatisfactory and 
abandoned. 


Then striving after the good, and searching for the supreme state 
of peace, I gradually made my way to the Magadhas, and went to 
Uruvela, the army-township.! There I saw a delightful spot with a 
pleasant grove, a river flowing delightfully with clear water and good 
fords, and round about a place for seeking alms. Then I thought, 
truly a delightful spot with a pleasant grove, a river flowing delightfully 
with clear water and good fords, and round about a place for seeking 
alms. This surely is a fit place for the striving of a high-born one 
intent on striving. Then I sat down there: a fit place is this for 
striving. 

The account of the strivings is introduced by three similes 
which then occurred to Gotama. That of a man trying to 
kindle fire by rubbing a fire-stick on wet green wood plunged 
in water. He can get no fire, and like him are the ascetics 
whose passions are not calmed. Whether they experience 
sudden, sharp, keen, and severe pains or not, they cannot 
attain knowledge and enlightenment. So it is in the second 
case, if a man rubs a fire-stick on wet green wood, even if it 
is out of the water. In the third case he takes dry wood, 
and can kindle fire. Even so ascetics who are removed from 
passion, in whom the passions are abandoned and calmed, 
may possibly attain knowledge and enlightenment. The 
importance of this passage lies partly in its being very old, 
as it is found in Sanskrit works as well,? but also in respect to 
the question whether the Buddhist method of concentration 
owes anything to other systems. It will be seen that Gotama 
is represented as beginning by adopting well known practices : 


Then I thought, what if I now set my teeth, press my tongue to 
my palate, and restrain, crush, and burn out my mind with my mind. 
(I did so) and sweat flowed from my armpits. Just as if a strong man 
were to seize a weaker man by the head or shoulder ... . so did I set my 
teeth . . . and sweat flowed from my armpits. I undertook resolute 
effort, unconfused mindfulness was set up, but my body was unquiet 
and uncalmed, even through the painful striving that overwhelmed 
me. Nevertheless such painful feeling as arose did not overpower 
my mind.? 

1 Senad-nigama; later accounts turn this into Sendni-nigama, ‘ the township 
pate eet or of the general’; Lal. 311 (248) has senapati-grama, ‘ general’s 
Village. 

2 Lal. 309 (246); Mvastu, ii 121. : 

2 This passage (I undertook . . . mind) recurs after the déscription of each of 
the following austerities. 


AUSTERITIES AND ENLIGHTENMENT — 65 


Then I thought, what if I now practise trance without breathing. 
So I restrained breathing in and out from mouth and nose. And as 
I did so, there was a violent sound of winds issuing from my ears. 
Just as there is a violent sound from the blowing of a blacksmith’s 
bellows, even so as I did so there was a violent sound. . . Then I thought, 
what if I now practise trance without breathing. So'I restrained 
breathing in and out from mouth, nose, and ears. And as I did so 
violent winds disturbed my head. Just as if a strong man were to 
crush one’s head with the point of a sword, even so did violent winds 
disturb my head. . . 

(He practises holding his breath again three times, and the pains 
are as if a strap were being twisted round his head, as if a butcher 
were cutting his body with a sharp knife, and as if two strong men 
were holding a weaker one over a fire of coals.) Nevertheless such 
painful feeling as arose did not overpower my mind. 

Some divinities seeing me then said, “ the ascetic Gotama is dead.” 
Some divinities said, “ not dead is the ascetic Gotama, but he is dying.”’ 
Some said, “ not dead is the ascetic Gotama, nor dying. The ascetic 
Gotama is an arahat; such is the behaviour of an arahat.”’ 

Then I thought, what if I refrain altogether from food. So the 
divinities approached me and said, “sir, do not refrain altogether 
from food. If you do so, we will feed you with divine food through 
the pores of your hair, and with this keep you alive.” Then I thought 
that if I were to undertake to refrain altogether from eating, and 
these divinities were to feed me with divine food through the pores of 
my hair, and with it keep me alive, this would be acting falsely on 
my part.! So I refused, saying, no more of this. 

Then I thought, what if I were to take food only in small amounts, 
as much as my hollowed palm would hold, juice of beans, vetches, 
chickpeas, or pulse. (He does so.) My body became extremely lean. 
Like asitikapabba or kalapabba ? plants became aJl my limbs through 
the little food. The mark of my seat was like a camel’s footprint 
through the little food. The bones of my spine when bent and 
straightened were like a row of spindles through the little food. As 
the beams of an old shed stick out, so did my ribs stick out through 
the little food. And as in a deep well the deep low-lying sparkling 
of the waters is seen, so in my eye-sockets was seen the deep low-lying 
sparkling of my eyes through the little food. And as a bitter gourd 
cat off raw is cracked and withered through wind and sun, so was 
the skin of my head withered through the little food. When I thought 
I would touch the skin of my stomach, I actually took hold of my 
spine, and when I thought I would touch my spine, I took hold of the 
skin of my stomach, so much did the skin of my stomach cling to my 
spine through the little food. When I thought I would ease myself, 
I thereupon fell prone through the little food. To relieve my body 


1 Lal. 330 (264), adds, ‘‘ the villagers dwelling round would think that the ascetic 
Gotama does not eat.” 
2 Names of plants, both meaning ‘ having black joints’. 


66 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


I stroked my limbs with my hand, and as I did so the decayed hairs 
fell from my body through the little food. 

Some human beings seeing me then said, “the ascetic Gotama 
is black.” Some said, “ not black is the ascetic Gotama, he is brown.” 
Others said “ not black is the ascetic Gotama, nor brown, his skin is 
that of a mangura-fish,” 1 so much had the pure clean colour of my 
skin been destroyed by the little food. 

Then I thought, those-ascetics and brahmins in the past, who have 
suffered sudden, sharp, keen, severe pains, at the most have not suffered 
more than this. (Similarly of those in the future and present.) But 
by this severe mortification I do not attain superhuman truly noble 
knowledge and insight. Perhaps there is another way to enlighten- 
ment. Then I thought, now I realise that when my father the Sakyan 
was working,” I was seated under the cool shade of a rose-apple tree, 
and without sensual desires, without evil ideas, I attained and abode 
in the first trance of joy and pleasure? arising from seclusion, and 
combined with reasoning and investigation. Perhaps this is the way 
to enlightenment. Then arose in conformity with mindfulness the 
consciousness that this was the way to enlightenment. Then I thought, 
why should I fear the happy state that is without sensual desires and 
without evil ideas? And I thought, I do not fear that happy state 
which is without sensual desires and without evil ideas. 

Then I thought, it is not easy to gain that happy state while my 
body is so very lean. What if I now ‘take solid food, rice and sour 
milk. . . Now at that time five monks were attending me, thinking, 
“‘ when the ascetic Gotama gains the Doctrine, he will tell it to us.” 
But when I took solid food, rice and sour milk, then the five monks 
left me in disgust, saying, “ the ‘ascetic Gotama lives in abundance, 
he has given up striving, and has turned to a life of abundance.” 

Now having taken solid food and gained strength, without sensual 
desires, without evil ideas I attained and abode in the first trance of 
joy and pleasure, arising from seclusion and combined with reasoning 
and investigation. Nevertheless such pleasant feeling as arose did 
not overpower my mind.* With the ceasing of reasoning and investiga- 
tion I attained and abode in the second trance of joy and pleasure arising 
from concentration, with internal serenity and fixing of the mind on 
one point without reasoning and investigation. With equanimity 
towards joy and aversion I abode mindful and conscious, and 
experienced bodily pleasure, what the noble ones describe as ‘ dwelling 
with equanimity, mindful, and happily’, and attained and abode in 
the third trance. Abandoning pleasure and abandoning pain, even 


1 In the Sanskrit madgura, said to be a sheat fish. 

2 See p. 44. 

® Or ‘ state of happiness’ (sukha), ‘ pleasure’ is often too strong a term; the 
word is used of the pleasant or happy in any sense, especially of feeling, and is. 
cross to dukkha ‘ painful’. See Rhys Davids, Pali-Hnglish Dictionary, s.v. 

ukkha. 

4 This sentence is repeated as a.refrain after each stage of trance. In the 
corresponding account (Majjh. i 21) it does not occur at all. 


AUSTERITIES AND ENLIGHTENMENT 67 


before the disappearance of elation and depression, I attained and 
abode in the fourth trance, which is without pain and pleasure, and 
with purity of mindfulness and equanimity. 

Thus with mind concentrated, purified, cleansed, spotless, with the 
defilements gone, supple, dexterous, firm, and impassible, I directed 
my mind to the knowledge of the remembrance of my former existences. 
I remembered many former existences, such as, one birth, two births, 
three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, 
a hundred thousand births ; many cycles of dissolution of the universe, 
many cycles of its evolution, many of its dissolution and evolution ; 
there I was of such and such a name, clan, colour,! livelihood, such 
pleasure and pain did I suffer, and such was the end of my life. Passing 
away thence I was born elsewhere. There too I was of such and such 
a name, clan, colour, livelihood, such pleasure and pain did I suffer, 
and such was the end of my life. Passing away thence I was reborn 
here. Thus do I remember my many former existences with their 
special modes and details. This was the first knowledge that I gained 
in the first watch of the night. Ignorance was dispelled, knowledge 
arose. Darkness was dispelled, light arose. So is it with him who 
abides vigilant, strenuous and resolute. 

Thus with mind concentrated, purified, cleansed, spotless, with 
the defilements gone, supple, dexterous, firm and impassible, I directed 
my mind to the passing away and rebirth of beings. With divine, 
purified, superhuman vision I saw beings passing away and being 
reborn, low and high, of good and bad colour, in happy or miserable 
existences according to their karma. Those beings who lead evil 
lives in deed, word, or thought, who speak evil of the noble ones, of 
false views, who acquire karma through their false views, at the dissolu- 
tion of the body after death are reborn in a state of misery and suffering 
in hell. But those beings who lead good lives in deed, word, and 
thought, who speak no evil of the noble ones, of right views, who 
acquire karma through their right views, at the dissolution of the body 
after death are reborn in a happy state in the world of heaven. . . This 
was the second knowledge that I gained in the second watch of the 
night. . . 

Thas with mind concentrated, purified, cleansed, spotless, with 
the defilements gone, supple, dexterous, firm, and impassible, I directed 
my mind to the knowledge of the destruction of the asavas.? I duly 
realized (the truth) ‘this is pain,’ I duly realized (the truth) ‘ this is 
the cause of pain,’ I duly realized (the truth) ‘ this is the destruction 
of pain,’ and I duly realized (the truth) ‘ this is the way that leads to 


1 Or‘ caste’. The com. takes it literally, and says that Buddha in his last 
birth but one was of a golden colour. 

2 We know exactly what is understood by the asavas, as they are here stated 
to consist of sensual desire (kama), desire for existence (bhava), and ignorance 
(avijja). To these was later added false view (dittht), as a development of avijja. 
The word has been translated ‘ depravities ’, but it does not necessarily imply 
sinful propensities. It may include the most innocent natural impulses, so far 
as they are expressions of the clinging to existence. The word corresponds to 
Skt. dsrava ‘ flowing in’, and this literal sense fits with its use by the Jains, who 


68 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


the destruction of pain.’ I duly realized ‘these are-the asavas’ .. . 
‘this is the cause of the asavas’ .. . ‘ this is the destruction of the 
asavas’ ... ‘this is the way that leads to the destruction of the 
asavas.’ As I thus knew and thus perceived, my mind was emancipated 
from the dsava of sensual desire, from the dsava of desire for existence, 
and from the dsava of ignorance. And in me emancipated arose the 
knowledge of my emancipation. I realized that destroyed is rebirth, 
the religious life has been led, done is -what was to be done, there is 
nought (for me) beyond this world. This was the third knowledge 
that I_gained in the last watch of the night. Ignorance was dispelled, 
knowledge arose. Darkness was dispelled, light arose. So is it with 
him who abides vigilant, strenuous, and resolute. 


The most remarkable feature in this recital is the entire 
absence of any temptation by Mara. There is even no mention 
of the famous tree under which the enlightenment (bodh1) was 
attained.! It will also be seen that the later authorities put 
additional events in different places. This is an indication 
that such events were not a part of the original story, and 
that they came to be inserted in one place or another 
according to individual ideas of fitness. The Jataka tells us 
that Gotama, after staying seven days at Anupiya, went on 
foot straight to Rajagaha, the Magadha capital, in one day, 
a distance of some two hundred miles, and began to beg. 
The royal officers reported his arrival to the king (Bimbisara), 
who in astonishment seeing him from the palace ordered them 
to follow and observe. If he was a non-human being he would 
vanish, if a divinity he would go through the air, if a naga 
into the ground, but if a man he would eat his alms. He was 
seen to go to the Pandava hill, and overcoming his disgust 
at the unusual food to eat it. The king then came, and pleased 


understood karma in a material sense, and conceived it as entering and pervading 
the individual. This sense is never found in Buddhism, which appears to have 
adopted the term as used already in a technical sense, and to have reinterpreted 
it. The commentators did not know its origin, as they conneet it with two routs 
su ‘ to press (liquor) ’ and pa-su ‘ to beget’. Dhammasangani, com. p. 48. 

1 The tree is mentioned in the list.of the trees of the last seven Buddhas in 
Mahapadana-s., Digha ii 4, and is said to be an Assatiha, the sacred fig-tree, 
Ficus religiosa. The Buddhists shared with the older religion the popular belief 
that trees are divine beings. It is seen throughout the Jatakas and in the legend 
in which Gotama is mistaken for a tree-god (below, p. 70). In the Lalita-vistara 
there are four gods of the Bodhi-tree (bodhivrksadevatah). For Senart the Bodhi- 
tree is not a piece of popular legend attached to a histdric person, but an example 
of an ancient myth (the winning of ambrosia) which has become historicised ; 
of. La légende du Buddha, ch. 3. ‘‘Nous arrivons en derniére analyse & cette 
phrase mythologique: ‘Le Buddha s’empara de l’arbre; Mara s’efforga en 
vain de la lui enlever,’ comme & la base premiére de tous les développements 
légendaires ou moraux que présentent les rédactions définitives.”’ 


AUSTERITIES AND ENLIGHTENMENT 69 


at his deportment offered him entire sovereignty, but Gotama 
refused, saying that he had left the world with the desire for 
the highest enlightenment. Yet though he rejected the 
repeated requests of the king, he promised to visit his kingdom 
first on becoming Buddha, and then journeyed by stages to the 
teachers Alara and Uddaka. The Therigdthé commentary, 
which is probably a later work, says that he first went to the 
hermitage of Bhaggava. 

The Jataka adds that the full account is to be found in the 
sutta of the Going-forth (Pabbajjd-sutta) with its com- 
mentary. Yet this sutta, found both in the Pali and in the 
Mahdavastu,' differs curiously from the Jataka. The king sees 
him first, and noticing his beauty and downcast eyes sends 
messengers to find where he lives, then visits him, offers him 
wealth, and asks of what family he is. Gotama tells him, but 
does not mention that he is a king’s son, and says that he has 
no desire for pleasures, but seeing the evil of pleasures, and 
looking on renunciation as peace, he is going to strive. Here 
the sutta ends, but the Mahdvastu adds two verses in a different 
metre containing Bimbisara’s request and Gotama’s promise 
that he will return and preach the doctrine in his kingdom. 
This incident is also added by the Pali commentator on the 
sutta. 

But the Mahdvastu places this event after the visit to 
Alara, and says that Gotama after leaving Kanthaka paid a 
visit to the hermitage of Vasishtha, and then stayed with 
Alara. It was after leaving the latter that he went to 
Rajagaha and saw Bimbisara, and at the same place applied 
himself to the teaching of Udraka (Uddaka). But the 
Mahdvastu also gives another account, according to which, 
after leaving the world, he went straight to Vaisali without 
any previous visits, joined Alara, and after rejecting his 
teaching went to Rajagaha and practised the teaching of 
Udraka. Here we have an earlier account which like the 
earliest Pali knows nothing of the Bimbisara story.? 

The Lalita-vistara is much more elaborate. After receiving 
his ascetic’s robes Gotama is entertained at the hermitage 


1 Qn. 405-424 ; Mvastu, ii 198-200 ; the Tibetan account in Rockhill is probably 
a translation of the same verses; Lal. 297 (240) has a different verse account. 

% Mvastu, ii 117-120; cf. ii 195-206. Another indication that the Bimbisara 
story is an addition is that in the canonical account Gotama does not reach the 
Magadha country until after leaving both his teachers. 


70 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


of the brahmin woman Saki, then at that of the brahmin 
woman Padmé, and then by the brahmin sage Raivata and by 
Rajaka, son of Trimandika, until he reaches Vaisali and joins 
Alara. The story of meeting Bimbisadra at Rajagaha is told 
by the insertion of a poem in mixed Sanskrit, which concludes 
by saying that Gotama left the city and went to the banks of 
the Nerafijara, thus ignoring the visit to Uddaka (Rudraka). 
The prose of the next chapter however continues with the 
story of his study under Uddaka in much the same language 
as the Pali. 

The additional events of the six years’ striving have 
an interest chiefly as examples of the inventiveness of the 
commentators. When he fainted under his austerities, and 
news was taken to his father that he was dead, Suddhodana 
refused to believe, because of the prophecy of Kaladevala. 
His mother came from heaven, and uttered pathetic verses 
of lamentation, but he revived and promised that he would 
live and soon become Buddha. When he decided to take usual 
food again, says the Jataka, it was given him by a girl 
Sujata,? who had been born in the family of a householder 
named Senani of the township of Senani® at Uruvela. She 
had uttered a wish to a banyan-tree, and vowed a yearly 
offering to it if she should have a son. The wish having 
been fulfilled, she sent her maid Punna to prepare the place 
for the offering. This was on the very day of the Enlighten- 
ment, full moon day of the month Visékha (April—May), 
and Punna finding Gotama sitting beneath the banyan, 
thought he was the god of the tree who had come down. The 
‘night before he had dreamt five great dreams,* and had risen 


1 Probably not as Foucaux translates, ‘ de la famille de Gakya.’ 

* In Lal. 334-7 (267-270) nine other girls are added, who provide him with food 
during the period of his austerities. In Divy. 392, there are two called Nanda 
and Nandabala. 

§ This is how the Jataka commentator interprets the ambiguous words of the 
text of Majjh.; see p. 64. 

‘ The dreams are given in the Scriptures: (1) The world appeared asa great 
couch, and the Himalaya mountain as the pillow. His left hand was plunged 
in the eastern ocean, his right in the western, and his feet in the southern. This 
meant the complete enlightenment attained by the Tathagata. (2) A plant 
called tiriya came from his hand, and rose and touched the sky. This was the 
noble Eightfold Path, (3) White worms with black heads crept up as far as his 
knees and covered them. These were white-robed householders, who come to 
the Tathagata asa refuge. (4) Four birds of different colours came from the four 
quarters, and falling at his feet became entirely white. These were the four 
castes, who leaving a household life for the doctrine taught by the Tathagata, 


AUSTERITIES AND ENLIGHTENMENT 71 


with the certainty that he would that day become Buddha. 
Sujata came and offered him the food in a golden bowl, and 
the earthen one that he had miraculously received at his 
renunciation vanished. ‘He took the bow] to the river bank, 
bathed at a ford or bathing place called Suppatitthita, 
and ate the food. This was his only meal for forty-nine days. 
Then he set the bowl on the river saying, “‘ if to-day I shali 
be able to become a Buddha, let this bowl go up stream ; 
if not, let it go down stream.” It floated to the middle of the 
river, then up stream as swift as a horse for a distance of 
eighty hands, and sank down in a whirlpool to the abode of 
Kala, a Naga king. There it struck against the bowls of the 
three previous Buddhas (of this cycle) and stayed as the 
lowest of them. Having passed the day in a grove of sal- 
trees he went at evening along the wide road towards the 
Bodhi-tree accompanied by divinities, who sang and honoured 
him with sweet flowers. At that time a grass-cutter Sotthiya 
(Svastika) met him, and gave him eight handfuls of grass. 
After trying each of the four directions he chose the east, the 
unshakeable place taken by all the Buddhas for smiting down 
the cage of defilements; and holding the grass by the ends 
shook it out, when it became a seat fourteen hands long. 
He sat down cross-legged and upright with the words, 
“skin, sinew, and bone may dry up as it will, my flesh and 
blood may dry in my body, but without attaining complete 
enlightenment I will not leave this seat.” 

At this point begins the attack of Mara, the Lord of the 
world of passion, but there is a canonical passage to be con- 
sidered first, which contains what may be the first suggestion 
of the legend. This is the Padhdna-sutta (Discourse of 
Striving).1 It is a legend in which Mara comes to Gotama 
while he is on the bank of the Nerafijara practising austerities, 
and tempts him to abandon his striving and devote himself 
to doing good works. The Pali version is a combination of 
at least two poems; but in spite of the modern taste for 
dissecting documents, this analysis seems to have been left 
to the Pali commentator, who points out the separate parts. 
and additions. There can be no doubt that he is mainly right, 


realise the highest release. (5) He was walking on a mountain of dung without 
being defiled by it. This was the Tathagata, who receives the requisites, but 
enjoys them without being attached to them. Angut. iii 240; Moastu ii 136. 

i Sutta-nipata, 425-449 ; the Sanskrit versions in Mvastu ii 238 ; Lal. 327 (261). 


72 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


as the first part, which deals with the events before the 
Enlightenment, is found as a separate poem in both the 
Sanskrit versions. There are minor differences in the Sanskrit, 
which it is not necessary to notice. The Lalita-vistara intro- 
duces the poem with the words, ‘“‘ Mara the wicked one, 
O monks, followed close behind the Bodhisattva, as he was 
practising austerities for six years, seeking and pursuing an 
entrance, and at no time succeeding in finding any. And 
finding none he departed gloomy and sorrowful.” The Pali 
version is as follows : 


To me intent on striving by the Nerafijara river, exerting myself 
in contemplation to win the calm of peace, came Namuci? uttering 
compassionate speech. 

“Lean art thou and ill-favoured, near to thee is death. Death 
hath a thousand parts, only one part of thee is life. Live, good sir; 
life is better. Living thou shalt do good works. 

If thou livest the religious life, if thou sacrificest the fire-sacrifice, 
mauch good is stored up. What hast thou to do with striving ? 

Hard is the path of striving, hard to perform, and hard to attain.” 
These verses did Mara speak, standing in the presence of the Buddha.? 

Then to Mara speaking thus did the Lord say: “ Friend of the 
slothful, evil one, for thine own sake hast thou come hither. 

No need for even the least work of merit is found in me. Them 
that have need of merits let Mara deign to address. 

Faith is found in me, and heroism and wisdom. Why dost thou 
ask about life from me, who am thus intent ? 

The streams even of rivers may this wind dry up. How should 
not my blood dry up, when I am intent ? 

When the blood dries up, the bile and phlegm dry up. When the 
flesh wastes away, still more does the mind become tranquil. Still 
more does my mindfulness, my wisdom and concentration become 
firm. 

While I live thus, having attained the last sensation, my mind 
looks not to lusts. Behold the purity of a being. 

Lusts (kama) are thy first army, the second is called Aversion (aratz). 
Thy third is Hunger-and-thirst . The fourth is called Craving (tanha).® 

Thy fifth Sloth-and-indolence, the sixth is called Cowardice. Thy 
seventh is Doubt, thy eighth Hypocrisy and Stupidity. 

Gain, Fame, Honour, and Glory falsely obtained, the Lauding of 
oneself and Contemning of others. 


1 The name of a Vedic demon applied to Mara. 

2 He was evidently not Buddha at the time, as the commentator points out. 
Both Mvastu and Lal. have ‘ Bodhisatva ’. 

8 Three of these become personified as the daughters of Mara: Raga or Rati 
(2 form of lust), Arati, and Tanha (Trsna), and tempt him after the enlightenment. 
Samy. i 124, Lal. 490 (378). In Lal. they also tempt him under the Bodhi-tree. 


AUSTERITIES AND ENLIGHTENMENT 73 


This, Namuci, is thy army, the host of thee the Black One. The 
coward overcomes it not, but he that overcomes it gains happiness. 

I am wearing munja-grass1; shame on life in this world! Better 
to me is death in battle than that I should live defeated. 

Plunged in this battle some ascetics and brahmins are (not) ? found. 
They know not the way on which the virtuous go. 

Seeing the army on all sides I go to meet Mara arrayed with his 
elephant in the battle. He shall not drive me from my post. 

That army of thine, which the world of gods and men conquers 
not, even that with my wisdom will I smite, as an unbaked earthen 
bowl with a stone. 

Having controlled my intention and well-set mindfulness from 
kingdom to kingdom will I wander, training disciples far and wide. 

Not careless they, but intent, and performing the teaching of me 
who am free from lust, they shall go where having gone they do not 


grieve. 


Here the Lalita-vistara, omitting the last verse, ends. 
It adds in prose, “ at these words Mara the evil one pained, 
dejected, depressed, and sorrowful vanished from thence.” 
The rest of the poem in the Pali is as follows : 


(Mara speaks :) “For seven years have I followed the Lord step 
by step. Ican find no entrance to the All-enlightened, the watchful one. 
As a crow went after a stone that looked like a lump of fat, thinking, 
surely here I shall find a tender morsel, here perchance is something 


sweet, 

And finding no sweetness there, the crow departed thence; so 
like a crow attacking a rock, in disgust I leave Gotama.” 

The lute of Mara who was overcome with grief slipped from beneath 
his arm. Then in dejection the Yakkha disappeared from thence. 


Windisch supposed that the reference to seven years implied 

a difference from the tradition that makes the austerities last 

only six years. But the Pali tradition, not only in the com- 
mentary, but also in the Seven-years sutta (Samy. 1 122), 

in which the last two of the above verses recur, understands 

that these words of Mara refer to a later temptation in the 

seventh year from the Renunciation, at a time when Buddha 

was, as Mara calls him, the All-enlightened. There is no con- 

versation, as there is in the former part, but only a soliloquy 


of Mara. 


1 A sign that a warrior intends to devote himself in battle. 

2 Omitted in Sanskrit, probably rightly. , 

? Oldenberg also rejects the view that there is a difference in the tradition. 
On the mythological aspect Windisch’s Mara und Buddha is most important, 
but naturally has little to do with historical questions. 


74 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


The whole story of the contest with Mara is a mythological 
development, and theories of its origin must be postponed. 
It is not found in the Pali Canon, except that phrases in some 
of the later parts, such as Mara’s army (Mdrasena), Mara’s 
assembly (Mdraparisad), victor of Mara (Mdrabhibhi),* 
imply that the legend was then known. Even Gotama’s 
doubts and questionings assumed by the rationalists as the 
origin of the legend of the contest are no part of the Enlighten- 
ment story. The commentator on this sutta evidently knew 
the whole legend, as he assumes that the six verses beginning 
‘ Seeing the army ’, were spoken by Gotama under the Bodhi- 
tree. This description of passions and evil impulses personified 
as armies may well be the starting point of the story, as found 
in the commentaries and Lalita-vistara, of the superhuman 
beings that drive away the gods, and attack Gotama in vain 
with showers of blazing weapons and such horrors. The 
account in the Mahdvastu (ii 281) differs considerably both 
from the Pali commentaries and the Lalita-vistara, and is 
probably earlier than both. Some of the verbose repetitions 
are here abbreviated : 


Then, O monks, did Mara the evil one, distressed, dejected, inwardly 
burning with the arrow of pain, assemble a great fourfold army, and 
standing before the Bodhisatva utter a great roar, “seize him, drag 
him, slay him ; good luck to the troop of Mara.” Then the Bodhisatva, 
unfearing, unterrified, without horripilation, removed from his robe 
his golden arms with netted hands and copper-hued nails, and as though 
with his right-hand lightly touching a balance, with his right hand 
stroked his head three times, with his right hand stroked his couch, 
and with his right hand smote the earth. Then the great earth roared 
and sounded forth a deep and terrible sound. Mara’s army so mighty, 
so well-arrayed, alarmed, terrified, agitated, distracted, and horrified, 
dispersed and melted away. The elephants, horses, chariots, ‘infantry, 
and auxiliaries sank down. Some fell on their hands, some on their 
faces, some in contortions, some on their backs, some on their left 
side, some on their right. And Mara the evil one reflected, and wrote 
with a reed on the ground, “ the ascetic Gotama will escape from my 
reali.” 


Two features that appear in the various accounts are his 
touching the earth to'call it as a witness (a favourite attitude 
represented in statues), and his first words after the Enlighten- 
ment. The Pali commentator gives them as follows : 


1 Digha ii 261; iii 260; Therag. 839. 


AUSTERITIES AND ENLIGHTENMENT 75 


Now Mara on hearing these words (Lusts are thy first army, etc.) 
said, ; Seeing such a yakkha as me dost thou not fear, O monk ? ” 
Verily, I fear not, Mara.” ‘‘ Why dost thou not fear ? ” “ Through 

having performed the perfections of the merits of almsgiving and 
others.” “ Who knows that thou hast given alms?” “Is there need 
of a witness here, evil one ? When in one birth I became Vessantara 
and gave alms, through the power thereof this great earth quaked 
seven times in six ways, and gave witness.” Thereupon the great 
earth as far as the ocean quaked, uttering a terrible sound. And 
Mara terrified at hearing it like a dropped stone lowered his flag, and 
fled with his host. Then the Great Being in the three watches having 
realised the three knowledges uttered at dawn this udana : 

Through worldly round of many births 

I ran my course unceasingly,} 

Seeking the maker of the house: 

Painful is birth again and again. 

House-builder! I behold thee now, 

Again a house thou shalt not build ; 

All thy rafters are broken now, 

The ridge-pole also is destroyed; 

My mind, its elements dissolved, 

The end of cravings has attained. 

Mara at the sound of this udéna approached and said, “he knows 
that he is Buddha. Verily I will follow him to see his conduct. If 
there is any slip in deed or word of his, I will harass him.” And 
having followed him for six years during his stage as Bodhisatta he 
followed him for a year after his attaining Buddhahood. Then finding 
no slip in the Lord he spoke these verses of disgust, ‘ For seven years, 
etc. ee 

The above verses spoken by Buddha, occur in the 
Dhammapada (158, 154), but there is nothing in them 
peculiarly applicable to a Buddha. They express the 
enlightenment to which any disciple may attain on the 
Noble Eightfold Path, and we may have all the less hesitation 
in treating them as the floating verses of some unknown 
arahat, not only because earlier accounts ignore them, but 
also because the earliest passage in which an udana is 
mentioned gives a quite different set of stanzas, that is, the 
Mahdvagga of the Vinaya.2, The commentator on the 
Dhammasangani*® also follows the Vinaya account, but 

1 Taking anibbisam as an adverb, it is usually understood as a participle ‘not 
finding’; the Sanskrit has punadh punah, ‘ again and again.’ 

2 Vin. i, 2; Vinaya Texts, i, 78; the whole passage recurs in Udana I. i. 

8 P.17; Buddhaghosa commenting on the Digha (i 16) gives both sets of verses ; 
even the commentary on the Vinaya itself gives the Dhammapada verses, but 


adds, “‘ some say that he spoke the udana-verse in the Khandhaka, ‘ when verily 
things are manifested.’ ”’ 


76 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


adds the Dhammapada verses as being according to the 
reciters of the Digha Buddha’s first utterance. The verses in 
the Vinaya are these : 


When verily things are manifested 
Unto the strenuous meditating brahmin,1 

Then do his doubtings vanish away completely, 
For he knows things together with their causes. 


When verily things are manifested 

Unto the strenuous, meditating brahmin, 

Then do his doubtings vanish away completely, 
For he has reached the destruction of the causes. 


When verily things are manifested 

Unto the strenuous, meditating brahmin, 

He stands and smites away the host of Mara, 
Even as the sun the firmament enlightens. 


In this passage Buddha is said to have meditated on the 
Chain of Causation three times in direct and reverse order, 
and at the end of each of the three watches of the night to 
have repeated the first, second, and third stanzas respectively 
as udanas. As the verses with their references to causes 
appear to refer to the formula of the Chain of Causation, and 
immediately follow it, they have less intrinsic vraisemblance 
than the Dhammapada verses, since this formula is quite 
absent from the earliest accounts of the Enlightenment. 

But this is not all. The Mahdvastu in one of its accounts 
gives as the first words another udana representing an entirely 
new point of view: 


Pleasant is ripening of merit, 

Moreover his desire succeeds ; 

Quickly to the supremest peace 

And bliss does he attainment win. 

In front of him portentous loom 

The deities of Mara’s host ; 

Hindrance to him they cannot cause, 
When he his merit has performed.” 


Here the point is not the enlightenment, in view of which 
indeed the accumulation of merit has no significance, but the 
former good deeds by which he confuted Mara. Merit 
however holds an important place in later doctrine of the 


1 For the Buddhists the true brahmin is the true disciple, see p. 132. 
® Mvastu ii 286. 


AUSTERITIES AND ENLIGHTENMENT 77 


progress of a bodhisattva, and these verses bear a strong 
resemblance to the first of the verses given as Buddha’s 
first words in the Lalita-vistara,! a definitely Mahayana work. 
These latter are in mixed Sanskrit, and in a different metre 
from those in the Mahdvastu, but many of the words as well 
as the thought are the same. They look like a rewriting of the 
verses of the Mahdvastu to suit the metre of the poem in 
which they are recorded : 


The ripening of merit is pleasant, removing all pain ; 

The desire succeeds and attains of the man with merit. 

Quickly he touches enlightenment, having smitten down Mara ; 
The path of peace he goes, to the cool state of bliss 


Who then would be sated with performing merit ? 

Who would be sated with hearing the immortal Doctrine ? 
In a lonely dwelling who would be sated ? 

Who would be sated with doing good ? 


These verses form part of a poem incorporated by the author 
of the Lalita-vistara at the end of the chapter recounting 
Buddha’s enlightenment ; but in the prose part of the work, 
a few pages before, the compiler gives an account in prose, 
and says that the gods after Buddha’s enlightenment 
expected him to make a sign : 


So the Tathagata, seeing that the gods had become confused, rese 
in the air to the height of seven palm-trees, and standing there breathed 
forth this udana : 

Cut off is the road, the dust is laid, dried up are the asavas, they flow 


not again. 
When the road is cut off, it turns not: this indeed is called the end 


of pain.? 
This account is also given in the Mahdvastu (ii 416) in 
another version of the enlightenment : 


The gods holding scented garlands stood wondering whether the 
mind of the Lord was released. The Lord by his mind knowing the 
mind of those gods at that time spoke to those gods this udana, which 
dispersed their doubts : 

Having cut off craving I abandon the dust. Dried up are the dsavas, 
they flow not. 
The road cut off turns not: this indeed is the end of pain. 


1 Lal. 454 (355); the verses given in the Beal, Rom. Legend, p. 225, probably 


represent the same original. : ; 
2 Lal. 448 (351) printed as prose in Calcutta edition, but Lefmann has recognised 


the udana as verse. 


78 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


In these two accounts we evidently have the same udana. 
It is meant for verse (arya), but is so corrupt that in both 
places it has been printed as prose. We can however trace 
it in an older and evidently metrical form in the Pali. It 
there reads : . 


He has cut off craving, he has gone to absence of desire. Dried up 
is the stream, it flows not. 
The road cut off turns not: this indeed is the end of pain. 


Here, as the preservation of the metrical form shows, we 
have a more primitive and correct form of the udana. But in 
the Pali it has no reference to Buddha’s enlightenment. The 
two Sanskrit versions are evidently adaptations, modified 
in order to fit into the Enlightenment legend. The Mahdvastu 
is not content with this account, but goes on to give three 
stanzas. The first two describe how the gods on finding out 
the truth scatter flowers. The third is the same verse as the 
first of the udanas given in the Vinaya. Then follow the 
words, ‘ This is the Chain of Causation in direct order.” 
No Chain of Causation has in fact been given here, though it 
does occur in the Pali Vinaya, but the text is so corrupt that 
it may well have dropped out. Then follows the second of the 
Vinaya stanzas, with the statement, “‘ This is the Chain of 
Causation in reverse order,” and lastly the third stanza 
introduced by the words, ‘‘So then at this time the Lord 
uttered this udana.”” But it immediately goes on to say, “‘ So 
then the Lord on first attaining enlightenment at this time 
uttered this udana,’” and it gives over again the udana, 
‘ Pleasant is the ripening of merit,’ which had been given in 
its previous account. 

There is still another account, most instructive in suggesting 
how these legends of the first words of Buddha arose. In the 
Tibetan Vinaya* three stanzas quite different from any of 
the former are given as Buddha’s first words. The counter- 
parts of two occur in the Pali Scriptures, but each verse is 
there isolated in quite different places. In the Tibetan 


1 Ud. VII 2, reading vyaga; ‘road’ (vatiam, Skt. varima and vartmam) is 
translated by Winternitz ‘ wheel ’. 

2 Rockhill, Life of the Buddha, p. 33. 

3 Udana, 112; Samy. iii 26; and perhaps Theragatha, 254. Rockhill’s version 
of the third stanza in Udénavarga differs from that which he gives in the Vinaya, 
probably owing to a different Tibetan rendering of the Sanskrit. 


AUSTERITIES AND ENLIGHTENMENT 79 


Udanavarga, however, they occur together, and in the same 
order as in the Tibetan Vinaya : 


The joy of pleasures in the world, 

And the great joy of heaven, 

Compared with the joy of the destruction of craving 
Are not worth a sixteenth part. 


Sorry is he whose burden is heavy, 
And happy is he who has cast it down ; 
When once he has cast off his burden, 
He will seek to be burdened no more. 


When all existences are put away, 
When all notions are at an end, 
When all things are perfectly known, 
Then no more will craving come back. 


The natural inference is that it was not until these stanzas 
- had been brought together in their present sequence in the 
anthology of the Uddnavarga that they could be treated as 
connected, and that only after this could the legend that 
they were the three verses of Buddha at his enlightenment 
have been applied to them. A remarkable fact is that the first 
of them occurs in a continuous passage in the Mahabharata ' 
with no trace of the other two. 

The disciples held that in the account of Buddha’s death 
they had the record of his last words. It was equally clear 
to them that in the collection of Buddha’s utterances there 
must somewhere be contained the first that he spoke. Hence 
the continuous efforts to decide which this must be. But 
unlike some of the other legends no unanimity in this case 
was ever reached. Even within the same school there is no 
unanimity, nor even within the same book. 

These are the chief events of the six years of austerities 
and the Enlightenment. Between the canonical account and 
the story usually told there is a gap of several centuries. 
Even the canonical story is not contemporary tradition, and 
the first quéstion to ask is not whether the additional stories 
are historical, but whether they are as old as the canonical 


1 Mbh. xii 174, 48. It may not have come straight from the epic, but may 
have been one of the many verses of the epic found scattered throughout Indian 
literature and in the Pali Canon itself. It is quoted in a 13th century Sanskrit 
work on style, Sahityadarpana 240, in illustration of the state of mind of tran- 


quillity (santa). 


80 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


account. In some cases they contradict it ; others contradict 
one another, and have the appearance of commentators’ 
inventions which have developed differently in different 
schools. This is seen not only in the various elaborations of 
Buddha’s contest with Mara, but in the different accounts 
of his meditation under the rose-apple tree, his Journey to 
Rajagaha or Vesalf, and his first words. The meeting with 
Bimbis&ra is not only told variously, but is inserted in the 
narrative at different places. Another example is the story 
of the five monks. They are first mentioned in the Canon as 
the five monks (pafica bhikkhi), who left Gotama when he 
abandoned his austerities. Later on they are known as ‘ the 
elders of the series. of five’ (paficavaggiyathera). The Jataka 
tells us that one of these was Kondafifia, the youngest of the 
eight brahmins who prophesied at Gotama’s birth. The seven 
others died, and when Gotama left the world, Kondania 
went to their sons and asked them to go with him, but only 
four consented. According to the Lalita-vistara they were 
Uddaka’s pupils, who on finding that Gotama rejected 
Uddaka’s teaching, thought that he would become a teacher 
in the world, and went with him to Rajagaha. In this work 
they are called the bhadravargiyad, ‘the series of wealthy 
ones’; but in the Pali the bhaddavaggiyd are quite different 
persons. The Tibetan story (Rockhill, p. 28) is that 
Suddhodana on hearing that his son was staying with Uddaka 
sent three hundred men to attend him, and Suppabuddha 
sent two hundred. But Gotama retained only five, who 
became the five monks. Evidently two schools at least knew 
nothing of the facts. All three stories are of the same kind as 
many that grew up and were adopted by commentators. 

The canonical account tells what was known, and probably 
all that was known, a century or two after Buddha’s death. 
Its importance.is mainly doctrinal and psychological. In 
the description of the austerities we find what the Buddhist 
considered to be the wrong ways of striving. In the description 
of the Enlightenment we have the ‘ right concentration ’ of 
the Noble Eightfold Path, for each noble disciple may follow 
the Path discovered by the All-enlightened. 


CHAPTER VII 
THE FIRST PREACHING 


ere story of the Enlightenment as given in the Majjhima 
(above p. 64 ff.) continues directly with the journey to 
Benares and the conversion of the five monks. 


Then I thought, now I have gained the doctrine, profound, hard to 
perceive, hard to know, tranquil, transcendent, beyond the sphere 
of reasoning, subtle, to be known by the wise. Mankind is intent 
on its attachments, and takes delight and pleasure in them. For 
mankind, intent on its attachments . . . it is hard to see the principle 
of causality, origination by way of cause. Hard to see is the principle 
of the cessation of all compound things, the renunciation of clinging 
to rebirth, the extinction of all craving, absence of passion, cessation, 
Nirvana. 

But if I were to teach the Doctrine, and others did not understand 
it, it would be a weariness to me, a vexation. Then also there naturally 
occurred to me these verses unheard before : 


Through painful striving have I gained it, 
Away with now proclaiming it ; 

By those beset with lust and hate 

Not easily is this Doctrine learnt. 

This Doctrine, fine, against the stream, 
Subtle, profound, and hard to see, 

They will not see it, lust-inflamed, 

Beneath the mass of darkness veiled. 


Thus, monks, as I reflected, my mind turned to inaction, not to 
teaching the Doctrine. Then Brahma Sahampati knowing the delibera- 
tion of my mind thought, “ verily the world is being destroyed, verily 
the world is going to destruction, in that the mind of the Tathagata, 
the arahat, the fully enlightened, turns to inaction and not to teaching 
the Doctrine.” Then Brahma Sahampati, just as a strong man might 
stretch out his bent arm, or bend his stretched-out arm, so did he 
disappear from the Brahma-world and appear before me. And 
arranging his upper robe on one shoulder he bent down his clasped 
hands to me and said, “‘ may the reverend Lord teach the Doctrine, 
may the Sugata} teach the Doctrine. There are beings of little 
impurity that are falling away through not hearing the Doctrine.” 
Thus said Brahma Sahampati, and having spoken he said further : 


1 Another title of Buddha, ‘ he who has well gone.’ 
G 


82 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Among the Magadhas arose in ancient times 

Doctrine impure, with many blemishes devised. 

Open for them the door of the Immortal, 

The Doctrine let them hear proclaimed with pureness. 


As one upon a rocky mountain standing 

Beholdeth all the people round about him, 

Even thus, O thou with wisdom filled, ascending 
The palace of the Doctrine, all-beholder, 

Look down, thou griefless one, upon the people 
Plunged in their griefs, by birth and age o’erpowered. 


Rise up, O hero, victor in battle, 

O caravan-leader, free from the debt (of birth), go through the world. 
May the Lord deigu to teach the Doctrine ; 

Knowers of it will they become. 


Then perceiving Brahma’s request, and on account of my pity 
for beings, I surveyed the world with my Buddha-vision. I saw beings 
of little impurity, of much impurity, of keen or dull faculties, of good 
or bad conditions, easy or hard to teach, and some too I saw who 
perceived the dangers and faults affecting a future life. And just 
as in the case of blue, red, or white lotuses, some are bofn in the water, 
grow in the water, do not rise out of the water, but grow plunged in it, 
some are born in the water, grow in the water, and remain sprinkled 
with water, while some are born in the water, grow in the water, but 
stand out above the water, unstained by the water, even so surveying 
the world with my Buddha-vision I saw beings of little impurity 
(etce., as above). Then I addressed Brahma Sahampati in a verse : 


Open to them are the doors of the Immortal, O Brahma. 
Let them that have ears cast off their faith+ 
Perceiving the vexation I uttered not the doctrine 
Eminent and excellent among men, O Brahma. 


Then Brahma Sahampati thinking, ‘“ I have been the occasion of the 
Lord preaching the Doctrine,” saluted me, went round me passing 
to the right and disappeared from there. 

Now I thought, “to whom shall I first teach the doctrine? Who 
will learn the Doctrine quickly?” And I thought, “this Alara 
Kalama is learned, wise, and intelligent, and has for long been of little 
impurity ; what if I first teach him the Doctrine? He will soon learn 
it.” Then a divinity approached me and said, “ reverend sir, Alara 
Kalama has been dead seven days.” And the knowledge and insight 
arose in me that Alara Kalama had been dead seven days. (Then 
Buddha thinks of Uddaka, but he had died the evening before, and 
he then thinks of the five monks.) ‘‘ The five monks did much for me, 


1 Probably corrupt. The faith must be their present base beliefs. Mvastu, 
iii 319 reads ‘ injurious faith ’. 


THE FIRST PREACHING 83 


who attended me when I was intent on striving. What if I first teach 
the Doctrine to the five monks?” Then I thought, ‘‘ where do the 
five monks now dwell?” And with my divine vision, purified and 
superhuman, I saw the five monks dwelling at Benares in the deer 
park of Isipatana. So having stayed at Urvela as long as I wished, 
I made my way to Benares. 

When I had set out on the high road between Gaya and the Bodhi- 
tree, the Ajivika ascetic Upaka saw me, and on seeing me he said, 
“your faculties friend, are clear, the colour of your skin is pure and 
clean. Whom do you follow, friend, in leaving the world? Who is 
your teacher, and whose doctrine do you approve ?”’ At this I replied 
to Upaka the Ajivika in verses: 


Victorious over all, omniscient am I, 

In all things (of the world) free from defilement ; 
Leaving all, with craving gone, emancipated, 

And knowledge all self-gained, whom should I follow ? 


Instructor, teacher, have I none, 
One like to me is nowhere found ; 
In the world with its gods and men 
No one is there to rival me. 


I am an arahat in the world, 

I am a teacher most supreme ; 
Alone am I the All-enlightened, 

I have won coolness, won Nirvana. 


To set going the Wheel of Doctrine 
To Kasi city now I go; 

And in the blinded world the Drum 
of the Immortal will I beat. 


“Then according to what you profess, friend, you deserve to be 
an unlimited victor,” said Upaka. 


Victors like me are they indeed, 
Who have destroyed the dsavas ; 
Conquered by me are evil things, 
Hence am I a victor, Upaka. 


Thereupon Upaka said, “ would that it might be so, friend,” shook 
his head, and went off on a by-path. Then by gradual journeying 
I came to Benares, to the deer-park of Isipatana.1 The five monks 
saw me coming from afar, and on seeing me they decided among them- 
selves, ‘this, friends, is the ascetic Gotama coming, who lives in 


1 Lal. 528 (406) gives details of the stages. Buddha having no money to pay 
the ferryman crossed the Ganges through the air, in consequence of which 
Bimbisara abolished the tolls for ascetics. 


84 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


abundance, who has given up exertion, and has turned to a life of 
abundance. We must not greet him, nor rise in respect, nor take his 
bowl and robe, but we will set a seat for him. If he wishes he may 
sit down.” But as I approached, so the five monks were not able 
to abide by their decision. One approached and took my bowl and 
robe, one prepared a seat, and one set water for my feet. And then 
they addressed me by name, and by the title ‘ friend’. At this I 
said to the five monks, ‘‘ monks, do not address the Tathagata by 
name or by the title ‘friend’, Iam an arahat, a Tathagata, fully 
enlightened. Give ear, monks, I have attained the immortal, I instruct, 
I teach the Doctrine. If you: walk according to the teaching for 
the sake of which well-born youths rightly go forth from a house to 
a houseless life, you will, even in this life, learn, realise, and attain the 
end of a religious life and abide in it.”. Thereat the five monks said to 
me, “‘ by that exercise, friend Gotama, by that course and practice of 
self-mortification, you have not gained that superhuman truly noble 
knowledge and insight. Will you, when you now live in abundance, 
have given up exertion, and have turned to a-life of abundance, gain 
that supernatural truly noble knowledge and insight?” Thereat I 
said to the monks, “ monks, the Tathagata does not live in abundance, 
he has not given up exertion, and has not turned to a life of abundance. 
The Tathagata, monks, is an arahat, fully enlightened. Give ear, 
monks (etc. as above, and the monks ask the question a second and 
a third time).’’ Thereat I said to the five monks, “do you perceive, 
monks, that I have never spoken to you thus before now?” “ Never 
“thus, reverend sir.” “I am an arahat (etc. as above).” Then I was 
able to convince the five brethren. I admonished two of the monks, 
and three monks went for alms. When the three monks returned with 
the alms we six lived upon them. Then I admonished three of the 
monks, and two went for alms. When the two monks returned, 
we six lived upon them. So the five monks were thus admonished 
and. instructed by me, and they being themselves liable to birth, 
seeing the wretchedness in the nature of birth, and seeking out the 
unborn, the supreme peace, Nirvana, gained the unborn, the supreme 
peace, Nirvana..... The knowledge and insight arose in them that 
their release is unshaken, this is the last birth, there is no existence 
again. 


Here the continuous story as given in the Canon ends. 
It is continued from the attainment of enlightenment down 
to the conversion of the two chief disciples in the intro- 
duction to the second part of the Vinaya (the Khandhakas).? 


1 Avuso, the term by which elders address one another; it is probably the 
vocative of @yasma, ‘ elder.’ 

2 These narratives, though now forming a part of the Vinaya, are not canonical 
in the same sense as the Suttas, though they quote much canonical matter, but 
are historical commentary, as Rhys Davids and Oldenberg have shown in their 
translation in Vin. Texts, i, pp. xv—xxi. 


THE FIRST PREACHING 85 


After this we have no continuous account of Buddha’s life, 
until we come to the Mahdparinibbdna-sutta, which tells of 
the last year of his life, his death, and burial. There are late 
compilations that profess to relate the whole life, but every- 
thing in them with any claim to be old tradition is found in 
the commentaries. 

According to the Vinaya! Buddha remained four weeks 
at the Bodhi-tree, during the first week under the tree, where 
he meditated on the Chain of Causation, and during the 
second at the banyan-tree of the goat herd (ajapdla),? where 
he was accosted by a haughty brahmin, who asked him what 
are the things that make a brahmin. For the third week he 
went to a tree Mucalinda, and during a seven days’ storm a 
naga, a serpent king Mucalinda, wound his body round 
Buddha, and protected him with his hood. It was at this time 
according to the Jataka that Mara’s daughters came and made 
a last attempt to move him.? The last week was spent in 
meditation under a tree called rajayatana ‘abode of the 
king’, perhaps a tree-god. Later authorities extend this 
period over seven weeks.‘ In the Jataka the additions come 
after the first week, the second being spent by Buddha near 
the Bodhi-tree, at which he gazed without winking, and where 
the Animisa shrine, ‘shrine of non-winking,’ was built. 
The third week he walked on the jewelled promenade 
(Ratana-cankama shrine), and the fourth was spent in the 
jewelled house (Ratana-ghara shrine), where he thought out 
the Abhidhamma Pitaka. These shrines were probably real 
places or sites in the time of the commentators, like those 
marking Buddha’s flight from home (p: 55), and convenient 
objects for the growth of the legend. 

At the end of the four (or seven) weeks two merchants came, 
Tapussa and Bhallika, travelling from Ukkula (Orissa), 
and being warned by a divinity they approached Buddha 
and offered him rice and honey cakes. Buddha thought, 
“‘ Tathagatas do not accept food in their hands. With what 


1 Vin. i 1 ff.; Vin. Texts, i 73 ff. 

2 It was here where Mara came tempting him to attain Nirvana at once. Digha, 
ii 112, below, p. 147. 

3 Jat. i 78; also told in Samy. i 124, Lal. 490 (378). 

4 Jat.i77; Lal. 488 (377); Mvastu iii 273. A verse account in Lal, 499 (385), 
as Oldenberg has pointed out, apparently makes the period only one week, and 
this is also seen in the Tibetan account; Rockhill, p. 34. 


86 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


shall I accept the rice and honey cakes ?”” So the four Great 
Kings, the gods of the four quarters, brought four stone 
bowls, which he accepted, and from which he ate the food. 

After the meal the merchants bowed with their heads at 
his feet, and said, ‘“‘ we go, Lord, to the Lord as a refuge, we 
go to the Doctrine as a refuge. May the Lord receive us from 
this day forth, while life shall last, as lay disciples, who have 
gone (to him) as a refuge.’”’ These were the first lay disciples 
in the world admitted by the twofold formula.? This accepting 
of disciples comes in awkwardly immediately before the 
doubts of Buddha whether he shall proclaim his doctrine to 
the world, but he does not give them instruction. In the 
Lalita-vistara account he pronounces a long charm bestowing 
on them wealth and good fortune in the four quarters and 
under the twenty-eight lunar constellations. All-the incidents 
up to this point appear to be insertions in the older story, which 
is now taken up again by the Vinaya. It tells in the same 
canonical language as in the Majjhima, but given in the third 
person, of the visit of Brahma, the wish to instruct his former 
teachers, the meeting with Upaka, and the journey to Benares 
to find the five monks. 

The Vinaya tells us that Buddha thereupon preached a 
discourse to the monks. The earlier account not only omits 
it, but says that Buddha instructed two of them while three 
went for alms, and then three while two went for alms, until 
they attained Nirvana. In other words, the legend of the 
first sermon had not yet originated. It is of course possible 
to believe that in the story of the first sermon we have an 
old tradition independent of the Canon, but in the canonical 
account there is nothing to show that the compiler knew 
anything of it. It is this canonical account which is adopted 
by the commentators, and the story of the sermon inserted 
in it. The commentators knew that Buddha must have 
preached a sermon, and in the Scriptures they found, just 
as they found his first enlightened utterance, the sermon 


1 The Jataka says that the gods first offered four sapphire bowls, which Buddha 
refused. Then he took the four stone ones, which fitted together and became 
one. Lal, 495 (382) says that bowls of gold, silver, and various kinds of precious 
stones were offered and refused. The reason of these additions is evidently 
because such bowls are forbidden in the Vinaya rules. Vin. ii 112; Vin. Tezte, 
iii 82. 
* Omitting taking refuge in the Order of monks, which did not yet exist. 


THE FIRST PREACHING 87 


which certainly contains the fundamental principles of 
Buddhism. 
THE First SERMON} 


These two extremes, O monks, are not to be practised by one who 
has gone forth from the world. What are the two? That conjoined 
with the passions, low, vulgar, common, ignoble, and useless, and that 
conjoined with self-torture, painful, ignoble, and useless. Avoiding 
these two extremes the Tathagata has gained the knowledge of the 
Middle Way, which gives sight and knowledge, and tends to calm, 
to insight, enlightenment, Nirvana. 

What, O monks, is the Middle Way, which gives sight...? Itis the 
noble Eightfold Path, namely, right views, right intention, right speech, 
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right 
concentration. This, O monks, is the Middle Way... 

(1) Now this, O monks, is the noble truth of pain: birth is painful, 
old age is painful, sickness is painful, death is painful, sorrow, lamenta- 
tion, dejection, and despair are painful. Contact with unpleasant 
things is painful, not getting what one wishes is painful. In short 
the five khandhas of grasping are painful. 

(2) Now this, O monks, is the noble truth af the cause of pain: 
that craving, which leads to rebirth, combined with pleasure and lust, 
finding pleasure here and there, namely the craving for passion, the 
craving for existence, the craving for non-existence. 

(3) Now this, O monks, is the noble truth of the cessation of pain : 
the cessation without a remainder of that craving, abandonment, 
forsaking, release, non-attachment. 

(4) Now this, O monks, is the noble truth of the way that leads to 
the cessation of pain: this is the noble Kightfold Path, namely, right 
views, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, 
right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration. ‘ This is the noble 
truth of pain.’ Thus, O monks, among doctrines unheard before, 
in me sight and knowledge arose, wisdom, knowledge, light arose. 
‘This noble truth of pain must be comprehended.’ Thus, O monks, 
among doctrines unheard before, by me was this truth comprehended. 
And thus, O monks, among doctrines unheard before, in me sight 
and knowledge arose. (Repeated in the same words for the other 
truths, except that the second, the cause of pain, is to be abandoned, 
the third, the cessation of pain, is to be realised, and the fourth, the 
noble Eightfold Path, is to be practised.) 

As long as in these noble truths my threefold knowledge and insight 
duly with its twelve divisions was not well purified, even so long, O 
monks, in the world with its gods, Mara, Brahma, with ascetics, 


1 Called in the later literature Dhammacakkappavattana-sutta, ‘ Sutta of Turning 
the Wheel of the Doctrine.’ It occurs in the Canon, Samy. v 420. The Sanskrit 
versions agree in essentials ; Lal. 540 (416) ; Mvastu, iii330. The Tibetan preserves 
the statement about the instruction of the monks two and three at a time, and 
inserts the sermon before it. 


88 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


brahmins, gods and men, I had not attained the highest complete 
enlightenment. Thus I knew. 

But when in these noble truths my threefold knowledge and insight 
duly with its twelve divisions was well purified, then, O monks, in 
the world . ... I had attained the highest complete enlightenment. 
Thus [ knew. " Knowledge arose in me, insight arose that the release 
of my mind is unshakeable; this is my last existence; now there 


is no rebirth. 


At the end of the sermon Kondajifia attained the knowledge 
that everything that is subject to origination is also subject 
to cessation. And the news that the Wheel of the Doctrine 
had been turned by the Lord was shouted by the earth- 
dwelling gods, and carried from rank to rank of gods up to the 
world of Brahma. Then the Lord uttered this udana: “‘ Verily 
Kondajifia has attained the knowledge (afifidsi); verily 
Kondafifia has attained the knowledge.” So his name 
became Annata-Kondafiia, ‘ Kondafifia who has attained 
the knowledge.’ He then asked to receive the pabbajja, 
the ceremony of leaving the world, and the upasampada, 
the ceremony of ordination, and was admitted with the 
words, ‘‘ come, monk (ehi bhikkhu)y, well proclaimed is the 
doctrine ; lead a religious life for making a complete end of 
pain.” This is held to be the original form of ordination as 
conferred by Buddha himself. After further instruction 
Vappa and Bhaddiya were admitted, and finally Mahanama 
and Assaji. 

Buddha then preached to them on the non-existence of the 
soul. The soul (déman) which is denied is not the self of actual 
experience, but a theory of the permanent nature of the soul, 
a reality held to be behind all the psychical phenomena. 
The argument is that whatever part of the individual is 
taken, bodily or mental, we cannot point to any one element 
in it as permanent, and when the individual is free from any 
passion (raga) or craving (tanhd), which impel these elements 
to rebirth, he is emancipated. 


SERMON on THE Marxs or Non-Sout 4 


The body, monks, is soulless, If the body, monks, were the soul, 
this body would not be subject to sickness, and it would be possible 
in the case of the body to say, ‘let my body be thus, let my body not 


1 Anattalakkhana-sutta, given in the Canon (Samy. iii 66), as Pafca-sutta. 


THE FIRST PREACHING 89 


be thus.’ Now because the body is soulless, monks, therefore the 
body is subject to sickness, and it is not possible in the case of the 
body to say, ‘let my body be thus, let my body not be thus.’ 

Feeling is soulless . . . perception is soulless... The aggregates are 
soulless. . 1 

Consciousness is soulless. For if consciousness were the soul, this 
consciousness would not be subject to sickness, and it would be possible 
in the case of consciousness to say, ‘let my consciousness be thus, 
let my consciousness not be thus.’ 

Now because consciousness is soulless, therefore consciousness is 
subject to sickness, and it is not possible in the case of consciousness 
to say, ‘let my consciousness be thus, let my consciousness not be 
thus.” 

What think you, monks, is the body permanent or impermanent ? 

Impermanent, Lord. 

But is the impermanent painful or pleasant ? 

Painful, Lord. 

But is it fitting to consider what is impermanent, painful, and 
subject to change as, ‘ this is mine, this am I, this is my soul’ ? 

No indeed, Lord. 

(And so of feeling, perception, the aggregates, and consciousness.) 
Therefore in truth, monks, whatever body, past, future, or present, 
internal or external, gross or subtle, low or eminent, near or far, is 
to be looked on by him who duly and rightly understands, as, ‘all this 
body is not mine, not this am I, not mine is the soul.’ (And so of 
feeling, etc.) 

Thus perceiving, monks, the learned noble disciple feels loathing 
for the body, for feeling, for perception, for the aggregates, for con- 
sciousness. Feeling disgust he becomes free from passion, through 
freedom from passion he is emancipated, and in the emancipated one 
arises the knowledge of his emancipation. He understands that 
destroyed is rebirth, the religious life has been led, done is what was 
to be done, there is nought (for him) beyond this world. 

Thus said the Lord. The five monks rejoiced at the utterance of 
the Lord, and when this exposition was uttered, the hearts of 
five monks not clinging (to existence) were emancipated from the 
asavas.” 


At that time a young man named Yasa, son of a wealthy 
gildmaster, was living in luxury at Benares. Waking up one 
night he found his palace attendants and musicians asleep 
in unseemly attitudes, and with the same cry of disgust that 
Buddha had used on leaving the world went out from his 
house and the city (the gates of which were opened for him 
by non-human beings) to the deer park of Isipatana, where he 


1 The same statement is repeated in the case of each element. 
2 Le. they attained full enlightenment as arahats. 


90 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


found Buddha at dawn. Buddha consoled him, and taught 
him the Four Truths. His father followed the marks of his 
slippers to the park, and Buddha made Yasa invisible. Then 
he instructed the gildmaster, who took his refuge as a lay 
disciple in the Buddha, the Doctrine, and the Order of monks. 
He was thus the first lay person who became a disciple 
through the threefold formula. Yasa meanwhile had heard 
the instruction, and attained full enlightenment with the 
destruction of the dsavas. Then Buddha made him visible 
again, and explained to his father that one whose mind has 
become quite free from attachment to the world cannot return 
to it again. Yasa was then ordained, and became the seventh 
member of the Order. 

The first two women to become lay disciples were the 
mother and former wife of Yasa, at whose house Buddha 
accepted a meal. Next four friends of Yasa, then fifty, 
entered the Order, and all became arahats. There were now 
sixty monks, and we are told that Buddha then sent them out 
in different directions to preach the doctrine. The motive of 
this narrative appears to be to introduce a formula of ad- 
mission to the Order by the monks. The preachers brought 
back so many candidates for admission that Buddha was 
obliged to allow the monks themselves to perform the 
ceremony. It consisted in removing the hair, assuming the 
yellow robe, and reciting three times the threefold taking 
refuge in Buddha, the Doctrine, and the Order. This is held 
to be the second form or ordination prescribed by Buddha. 
A much more elaborate ritual is given later in the Vinaya, 
and is still used. 

After keeping Retreat,? the three months of seclusion during 
the rains (vassa), Buddha returned to Uruvela, and on the 
way found a party of thirty wealthy young men, who had 
been sporting with their wives in a grove. One of them had 
no wife, and for him they had taken a courtesan, but while 


1 Much of the circumstances and language of the description of his flight are 
identical with the story of the Great Renunciation, which Rhys Davids held was 
modelled on this story of Yasa. Vin. Texts, i, 102. This certainly deprives the 
legend of Buddha’s flight of any claim to be history, but it is not easy to decide 
which story was the model. ‘ 

® Two so-called temptations by Mara occur in this account, one after sending 
the disciples to preach, and one after Retreat. They consist of verses, in which 
Mara asserts that Buddha is in his power, and Buddha denies it. Both occur 
in Samy. i 1065, 111. 


THE FIRST PREACHING 91 


they were not noticing she had taken their things and fled. 
They came seeking her, and inquired of Buddha whether he 
had seen a woman. ‘‘ What do you think, young men,” 
Buddha replied, ‘‘ which is better, for you to go in search of 
a@ woman, or to go in search of yourselves?” ‘‘ It is better, 
Lord, for us to go in search of ourselves.”” Buddha then told 
them to sit down, and preaching to them converted and 
ordained them. There is a strange divergence here from the 
Sanskrit tradition. The thirty are here called ‘ the friends of 
the series of wealthy ones ’ (bhaddavaggiyd). But this name in 
the form bhadravargiya is the name given by the Sanskrit 
authorities to the five monks. The contradiction is without 
explanation, and from the point of view of history none is 
necessary. 

At Uruvela lived a matted-haired ascetic known as Uruvela 
Kassapa with five hundred disciples. Further down the river 
lived his brothers, Nadi Kassapa (Kassapa of the river) 
with three hundred disciples, and Gaya Kassapa (of the village 
of Gaya) with two hundred. The story of their conversion by 
Buddha is a great contrast to the picture of Buddha’s 
character and methods that: prevails in the canonical stories, 
and closely resembles the tales of astonishing miracles and 
magic worked by arahats in the late compilations of Sanskrit 
authorities. Buddha by his magical powers overcame two 
nagas that vomited smoke and flame, received visits from 
various gods, read the thoughts of Uruvela Kassapa, split 
wood, created stoves for them to use after bathing in the cold 
weather, and worked in all 8,500 miracles. Still Kassapa 
persisted in his thought, ‘‘ the great ascetic is of great magic 
and of great power, but he is not an arahat like me.” Finally 
Buddha decided to startle him, and said, “ you are not-an 
arahat, Kassapa, you have not attained the path of arahat- 
ship; nor is this the way by which you will become an 
arahat or attain arahatship.”” Thereupon Kassapa bowed with 
his head at the feet of the Lord and asked for ordination. 
Buddha told-him to consult his pupils, and they cut off their 
matted hair, threw it with their sacrificial utensils into the 
river, and were all ordained. The pupils of Nadi Kassapa 


1 See p. 80; even the meaning of the phrase is uncertain; Rhys Davids says 
wealthy’; Pischel‘ die schéne Gruppe bildend’; it may also mean ‘ the group 
headed by Bhadra ’ 


92 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


seeing the things floating down the river came to inquire if 
some misfortune had happened. On finding out the truth 
they all did the same and were ordained. Exactly the same 
thing happened to Gaya Kassapa and his pupils. On the 
hill at Gaya (Gaydsisa) Buddha preached to them the Fire- 
sermon, and they all attained arahatship. 

Taking with him the Kassapas and their thousand pupils 
Buddha went ‘on to Rajagaha, where king Seniya Bimbisara__ 
heard of his arrival, and came with a great host of citizens 
to visit him. The multitude wondered whether ‘the great 
ascetic’ was practising the religious life under Uruvela 
Kassapa, or whether the latter was his pupil, and Buddha 
to make the truth clear to the people put questions to Uruvela 
Kassapa. Kassapa having explained why he had abandoned 
his fire-worship rose from his seat, bowed with his head at 
the feet of the Lord, and said, ‘‘ my teacher, Lord, is the Lord ; 
I am the disciple. My teacher, Lord, is the Lord; I am the 
disciple.” After Buddha had preached, Bimbis&ra rose and 
said, ‘“‘ formerly, Lord, when I was a prince, I made five 
wishes, and they are now fulfilled: I thought, would that I 
might be consecrated king ; this was my first wish, and it is 
now fulfilled. May the arahat, the all-enlightened, come to 
my kingdom ; this was my second wish, and it is now fulfilled. 
May I do honour to the Lord; this was my third wish, and 
it is now fulfilled. May the Lord teach me the doctrine ; 
this was my fourth wish, and it is now fulfilled. May I under- 
stand the doctrine of the Lord, this was my fifth wish, and it 
is now fulfilled.” 1 Buddha then accepted an invitation to 
a meal with his followers for the next day, and went to the 
palace preceded by Sakka, king of the gods, in the form of a 
young brahmin student singing his praises. The king served 
‘Buddha with his own hands, and then made the donation 
to Buddha and the Order of a park known as the Veluvana 
(Bamboo grove), conveniently near Rajagaha. 

The chronology implied in these legends is fairly clear and 
consistent for the first year. The Enlightenment took place 
at full moon of the month Visaékha (April-May). Then follow 
the events up to the three months of Retreat (July to 
September). The next three months up to the visit of 


1 This does not agree exactly with the story of Bimbisara’s first meeting with 
Buddha, p. 69, at which time he was already king. 


THE FIRST PREACHING 93 


Bimbisara were spent, according to the Jataka, with the 
Kassapas, and this agrees with Buddha providing stoves for 
the ascetics who had to bathe in the cold weather. The 
following two months were spent at Rajagaha, and it was 
during this period that the next event recorded in the Vinaya 
occurred, 

At Rajagaha lived Sajijaya, an ascetic with two hundred 
and fifty pupils, among whom were Sariputta and Moggallana. 
These two had made one another a promise that whoever 
should first win the immortal should tell the other. Sariputta 
saw the elder Assaji going early in the morning for alms, 
with decorous walk and looks and motion of his arms, with 
downcast eyes and perfect deportment. He thought, surely 
this is one of the monks who are arahats, or who have entered 
on the path of arahatship; but thinking it not the right 
time to inquire he followed him until he had done begging. 
Then he approached and greeted him, and said, “ your 
faculties, friend, are clear, the colour of your skin is pure and 
clean, whom do you follow, friend, in leaving the world ? 
Who is your teacher, and whose doctrine do you approve ? ” 
Assaji told him that it was under the great ascetic, the son of 
the Sakya of the Sakya family. Then Sariputta asked of his 
master’s teaching, but Assaji replied that he had only 
recently left the world, and could not expound the doctrine 
and discipline at length, but could tell him the meaning 
shortly.1 Sariputta said : 


Well, friend, tell little or much, 
But tell me just the meaning. 
Just the meaning is what I want ; 
Why speak many words ? 


So Assaji uttered this statement of the doctrine : 


Of things that proceed from a cause 
Their cause the Tathagata has told, 
And also their cessation ; 
Thus teaches the great ascetic. 
Then the spotless eye of the doctrine arose in Sariputta, the 
knowledge that everything that is subject to origination is 
also subject to cessation and he replied : 


1 This does not harmonise with the fact that he was an arahat, and one of the 
sixty who had been sent out to preach. 


94 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


If that is the extent of the doctrine, 

You have penetrated to the sorrowless state, 
Unseen throughout the past 

Through many myriads of ages.? 


Then Sariputta went to teil his friend the good news, and 
Moggallana said, ‘‘ your faculties, friend, are clear, the colour 
of your skin is pure and clean, can it be that you have 
attained the immortal?” ‘‘ Yes, friend, I have attained the 
immortal,” and Sariputta told him all, and with the recital 
the same recognition of the truth arose in Moggallana. The 
two then went to the other disciples of Safijaya, and informed 
them that they now recognised Buddha as their teacher, 
and that they intended to go to him. The disciples declared 
that it was for the sake of Sariputta and his friend that they 
were there, and that they would go with them. Sajfijaya 
refused to go himself three times, and when they went, hot 
blood came from his mouth. When Buddha saw them 
coming he prophesied : 


These two companions are coming, 
Kolita and Upatissa ; 

They shal! be my pair of disciples, 
The chief, an excellent pair. 


They bowed with their heads at his feet, asked for 
ordination, and were ordained with the formula of ‘ come 
monks’. 

The commentators are able to give us much more detail 
of the lives of these two famous disciples.? Sariputta was born 
near Rajagaha at Upatissa-village, hence his personal name, 
Upatissa. His mother was Ripasari, a brahmin woman, and 
hence he was known as Sariputta, ‘the son of Sari.’ In 
Sanskrit works his name appears as Saradvatiputra and other 
forms. Moggallana was born at the neighbouring Kolita- 
village, and through being the son of the chief family of 


1 All these verses except the second have been printed as prose, but they are 
in arya metre like the second, even if now corrupted. This is an indication of 
the late date of the legend, at least in its existing form. According to Prof. 
Leumann the metre is not found in Jain works earlier than the Christian era,, 
and all the examples in Buddhist works are certainly late. See Nettip., Introd. 
p. xxii. The reply. of Assaji corresponds to the Sanskrit verse beginning Ye 
dharma hetuprabhava, found inscribed in many places in North India, but occurring 
in Pali only in this legend. 

2 Dhp. com. i 88 ff.; Angut. com. i 155 fi. 


THE FIRST PREACHING 95 


Kolita was named Kolita. His mother was a brahmin woman, 
Moggali. The two were born on the same day, grew up and 
left the world together to seek the doctrine of release under 
Safijaya, but learnt all he had to tell them, and then wandered 
over all India in search of a teacher. After making their 
mutual promise they returned home, until Sariputta 
discovered Assaji, as has been told. Unlike the other disciples 
they did not attain full enlightenment at once. Moggallana 
attained it after a week, and for Sariputta a whole fortnight 
was required. This was owing to the greatness of those 
perfections (pdrami) attained by the disciples, just as a king, 
when setting out, requires far greater preparations than a 
poor man. The other disciples murmured that they should 
have been at once appointed chief disciples over the heads of 
older ones like the five, but Buddha pointed out that he was 
not guilty of favouritism. These two in previous lives had 
made the wish to become the chief disciples of a Buddha, and 
their wish was now fulfilled. 

Whatever may be thought of the older story, this portion 
at least has the appearance of being pure invention. It differs 
in essential points from the accounts preserved in the Tibetan 
and Chinese (Rockhill, p. 44), and gives impossible inter- 
pretations of the names. Upatissa is really ‘minor Tissa’, 
and would naturally be the name of one whosé father was 
Tissa, a very common personal name, and this is the actual 
explanation given by the Tibetan.1 The commentary does 
not even know the name of Sariputta’s village, which was 
Nalaka, or in Sanskrit works Nalandé. Moggallana (Skt. 
Maudgalyayana) is a clan name, and Kolita his personal name. 
‘ Upatissa-village ’ and ‘ Kolita-village ’ are merely inventions 
based on their names. It is possible that the commentator 
intended them to mean the villages of the Upatissa clan and 
Kolita clan. 

Little further is told of the two chief disciples that can be 
called historical. They do not appear in events after Buddha’s 
death, and this fact, rather than the legends of their deaths, is 
evidence that they died before him. Sariputta, ‘the 
chief of those endowed with insight,’ is often represented 
as preaching or instructing younger monks. His title 


1 Rockhill, 44; in Dhp. com. his father is Vanganta. The legends of their 
deaths are given below in ch. x, 


96 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Dhammasenfpati, ‘ general of the Doctrine,’ is a develop- 
ment of the idea of Buddha’s destiny as a universal king. 
Just as Buddha by rejecting universal empire became 
Dhammaraja, king of the Doctrine, so Sariputta becomes his 
general, and turns the Wheel after him. Moggallana ‘the 
chief of those with magic powers ’” (tddhi) frequently visited 
the heavens and other worlds to find out the destiny of 
anyone who had died. 

In view of the large number of converts it is not surprising 
to find that the Vinaya records a growing hostility among 
the Magadha people, who accused Buddha of being intent 
on producing childlessness, widowhood, and the breaking up 
of families. They recited scornfully a verse about the 
pupils of Sanjaya, but Buddha gave the monks a verse to 
repeat in reply, and in seven days the noise disappeared. 


CHAPTER VIII 


SPREAD OF THE DOCTRINE 


Bvppsa had returned with the converted Kassapas 

to Rajagaha in mid-winter, and according to the 
commentators stayed there two months.! His next visif was 
to his father’s home. It is not recorded in the Canon, but the 
verses Of the elder Kaludayin, given in the collection of verses 
uttered by the elders, imply the story, and are unintelligible 
without it.2 The commentary on these verses says that 
Kaludayin (Udayin the black) was the son of a courtier of 
Suddhodana, who was born on Buddha’s birthday, and grew 
up with him as his playmate. When Suddhodana heard that 
Buddha was preaching at Rajagaha, he sent a courtier with 
a thousand men to invite him. These arrived while he was 
preaching, and as they stood at the edge of the crowd and 
listened to the doctrine, they attained arahatship. Buddha 
at once ordained them, and they suddenly appeared with 
bowls and robes in the guise of elders of a hundred years’ 
standing. Now arahats are indifferent to things of the world, 
so they never gave Buddha his father’s message. Suddhodana 


1 According to the calculation here adopted this (the year of the Enlighten- 
ment) was 528 B.o, The sequence of events during the forty-five years of Buddha’s 
ministry can often be approximately determined, but except for the Renunciation 
at the age of twenty-nine, the Enlightenment six years later, and death at eighty, 
there is nothing like an exact chronology. The commentators invented one for 
the first twenty years, into which they fitted the various legends, and this is the 
basis of the scheme adopted in the Burmese life translated by Bigandet, and 
followed by Kern and Rhys Davids. The places where he stayed each year 
are thus given in the commentary on the Buddhavamsa: (1) Benares, 
(2-4) Rajagaha, (5) Vesali, (6) Mankula hill, (7) Heaven of the Thirty-three, 
(8) Bhagga near Sumsumara hill, (9) Kosambi, (10) Parileyyaka wood, (11) brahmin 
village of Nala, (12) Verafija, (13) Caliya hill, (14) Jetavana (Savatthi), (15) Kapila- 
vatthu, (16) Alavi, (17) Rajagaha, (18) Caliya hill, (19) Rajagaha. Thereafter ho 
stayed permanently at Savatthi, either in the vihara of Jetavana or in the 
Pubbarama. This list really implies the legends of the commentaries, Vesali 
being the place where he was staying when he allowed the admission of women, 
Parileyyaka, where he went during a serious quarrel among the monks, etc. In 
the Tibetan the whole forty-five years have been fixed, seventeen of them at 
Jetavana, eight at Rajagaha, and the rest at various places. Schiefner, T%b. 
Leb, § 11. 

9 Therag. 527-536 and com.; Ang. com. i 301; Jat. i 87; Dhp. com.i 115, 
iii 163, where the story is continued. 

H 


98 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


sent another courtier and a thousand men with the same 
result, and so on for nine times. Then he asked Kaludayin 
to go, who-promised to bring Buddha, if he might be allowed 
to leave the world. Like the rest he entered the Order, but 
delayed to give the message until the beginning of spring, 
full-moon day of the month Phagguna (Feb.—Mar.), when 
Buddha had been two months at Rajagaha. Then Kaludayin 
seeing that the time was suitable for travelling uttered his 
invitation, which forms his verses in the Theragatha : 

Aflame are now the trees, O reverend Master, 

Bringing forth fruit they have cast off last year’s leaves, 

Like blazing fires all shining in their splendour : 

Full of delights, great hero, is the season. 

The Jataka says that he went on thus for sixty verses, 
but the Theragdthad give only nine. One verse is specially 
interesting in which he reminds Buddha of his family : 


Suddhodana is the great sage’s father, 

The mother of the Buddha is named Maya, 

Who bore the Bodhisatta in her bosom, 

And having died in the Three-heavens rejoices. 

Buddha set out for Kapilavatthu with 20,000 arahats, 
journeying by slow stages. Kaludayin went on before 
through the air to the king, who did not recognise him, so 
he explained to the king his identity by saying : 

A son am I of Buddha, the achiever of the impossible, 

The Angirasa, the peerless one, the perfect ; 


The father of my father art thou, O Sakya, 
And through the Doctrine thou, Gotama, art my grandfather.! 


He then preached to the king and his court, and won their 
favour, so that he became ‘the chief of those who make 
families well disposed ’. 

When Buddha and his company arrived, the Sakyas 
provided a residence for them in the Nigrodha park ; but as 
he saw that his proud kinsmen did not intend to make 
obeisance to him, he rose in the air and performed the miracle 
of the pairs.2. And as his father had reverenced him at his 


1 Te, Kaludayin having become a ‘son of Buddha’ is now grandson of” 
-‘Suddhodansa, who is here addressed by his clan name Gotama. 

9 Yamaka-patthariya. For a long time the nature of this extraordinary 
performance was not understood, but we now possess canonical descriptions. 
Patisambhidamagga, i 125; Mvastu, iii 115. Buddha roge in the air, flames of 
fire came from the upper part of his body and streams of water from the lower 


PLATE III 


MIRACLE OF THE PAIRS AT SAVATTHI 


GVIEE 


face p. 98 


[ 


SPREAD OF THE DOCTRINE 99 


birth, and secondly at the miracle of the rose-apple trec, so 
now for the third time he bowed at his son’s fect, and not one 
of the Sakyas was able to refrain from doing the same. 

After he had come down from the sky a storm of rain broke, 
but it wetted only those who wished to be wet, at which they 
marvelled, and Buddha said, ‘‘ not only now did a shower 
of rain fall on an assembly of my kinsfolk, but it did so also 
in the far. past.’’ He then told them the story of his earthly 
existence as king’ Vessantara, which immediately preceded 
his birth in the Tusita heaven. After the discourse they 
dispersed, but there was not one raja ? or minister who asked 
him to come and receive alms. Therefore next day he went 
begging in the city from house to house with his monks. The 
report went about that prince Siddhattha was going for alms, 
and the multitude opened their windows to look at him. 
Buddha’s wife too saw him and told the king, who with 
agitated heart hurried to him and asked him why he was 
disgracing his family. ‘It is our custom, O king,” said 
Buddha. “Surely, Lord, our lineage is the kshatriya lineage 
of Mahasammata, and not one kshatriya has ever practised 
begging.”’ “ That royal lineage is your lineage, O king, but 
mine is the Buddha lineage of Dipankara, Kondania (etc., 
down to) Kassapa. These and many thousands of Buddhas 
have gained their livelihood by begging,” and standing in 
the middle of the street he said : 


One should rise up and not be slothful, 
One should practise well the Dhamma ; . 

Who practises the Dhamma rests in bliss 
Both in this world and the next. 


part. Then the process was reversed. Next fire came from the right side of his 
body and water from the left, and so on through twenty-two variations of pairs. 
He then created a jewelled promenade in the sky, and walking along it produced 
the illusion that he was standing or sitting or lying down, and varied the illusions 
ina similar way. The Jataka says that he performed it on three other occasions, 
at his enlightenment to'remove the doubt of the gods, at the meeting with Patika, 
and at Ganda’s mango-tree. 

1 Vessantara-jataka, No. 547. 

2 The reference to rajas is a preservation of the tradition that all the Sakya 
nobles were rajais. The other commentaries distinguish the king as maharaja, 
and say that though he did not invite Buddha, yet he prepared a meal. Buddha 
however begged from house to house, because that was what all previous Buddhas 
had. done. 

2? The last Buddha before Gotama. He is often called dasabala ‘ of the 
ten powers’, a title common to all Buddhas, but used specially of him to dis- 
tinguish him from the'other Kassapas. 


100 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


The king was immediately established in the first stage of 
conversion, the fruit of Entering-the-stream.1 He took 
Buddha’s bowl, and conducted him with his monks to the 
palace, where they received a meal. Afterwards all the 
women of the palace, except the mother of Rahula, came and 
did reverence. Buddha said : 

One should practise well the Dhamma, 
One should not practise evil : 

Who practises the Dhamma rests in bliss 
Both in this world and the next. 

Then Mahapajapati was established in the fruit of the first 
stage, and Suddhodana in the second, the stage of the Once- 
returner, who returns to be reborn only once before attaining 
Nirvana. The mother of Rahula, when asked by her 
attendants to go, said, “‘ if I have any excellence, my master 
will come himself to my presence, and when he comes I will 
reverence him.’’ Buddha handed his bowl to the king, and 
saying, ‘‘ the king’s daughter may do reverence as she wishes, 
she is not to be blamed,” went with the two chief disciples 
to her chamber, and sat on the appointed seat. She came 
swiftly, clasped his ankles, placed his feet round her head, 
and did reverence to him according to her desire. The king 
told of her great love, and said, ‘‘ Lord, my daughter, when 
she heard that you were wearing yellow robes, put on yellow 
robes; when she heard of your having one meal a day, 
herself took one meal; when she knew that you had given up 
a large bed, she lay on a narrow couch; and when she knew 
that you had given up garlands and scents, she gave 
them up.” 2 ; 

Buddha pointed out that she had also proved her devotion 
in a former life, for when she was a fairy named Canda, 
a king had shot her husband with a poisoned arrow, and 
hoped to win her love. But she so taunted the gods, saying, 
*‘ are there no world guardians, or are they gone abroad, or 


1 The Jataka mentions in this place the king’s attainment of the four stages, 
without implying that they took place on the same occasion. See com. on Dhp. 
9 and Therag. 157-8. 

2 Also told in Mvastu, ii 234, which further tells how at the same time she 
remained faithful to her husband, and rejected the advances of Devadatta, and 
Sundarananda, ii 69. She also adorned herself and tried to tempt him back at 
the time of his visit, and even sent him a love-philtre, which Buddha gave to 
Rahula, with the result that Rahula could not be prevented from following Buddha, 
iii 141-8, 266-271. 


SPREAD OF THE DOCTRINE 101 


are they dead that they do not protect my husband ? ” that 
Sakka came down and restored him to life.? 

On the following day was being celebrated the royal con- 
secration of Nanda, half-brother of Buddha and son of 
Mah4pajapati. This seems to have been his consecration 
as heir apparent. such as had taken place in Buddha’s case 
at the age of sixteen. It was also the occasion of Nanda’s 
marriage and entering his house. Buddha came and gave 
Nanda his bow! to hold, and then after uttering a mangala, 
or auspicious formula, rose to go without taking back the 
bowl. Nanda did not venture to ask him to take it back, 
even when his bride appealed to him, and he followed Buddha 
as far as the monastery. Then Buddha asked him if he was 
going to leave the world, and out of reverence for the Master 
Nanda said, “yes, I am going to leave the world,” and 
Buddha ordered him to be ordained.? 

After seven days the mother of Rahula adorned her son, 
and sent him to Buddha, saying to him, “see, dear, that 
golden-coloured ascetic, looking like Brahma, and attended 
by twenty thousand ascetics. He is your father, and he had 
four great vases of treasure, but since he left the world we 
do not see them. Go and ask for your inheritance, and say 
that you are the prince, and that when you are consecrated 
king you will be a universal monarch and in need of wealth, 
for the son is owner of what belonged to the father.” 

He went to Buddha, who was dining in the palace, and 
seized with love for him said, “‘ pleasant, ascetic, is your 
shadow,” and much else that was becoming. After the meal 
he said, “‘ give me my inheritance, ascetic,” and followed 
Buddha, who did not turn him back, nor were the attendants 
able to do so. On arriving at the park Buddha thought, 
‘““his father’s wealth that he asks for is liable to change and 
trouble; now, I will give him the sevenfold noble wealth 
that I received at the foot of the Bodhi-tree, and make him 
owner of an inheritance beyond this world.” So he told 
Sariputta to admit him to the Order. 


1 Candakinnara-jat. (485) iv 282., 

2 Jt is not surprising that there should be a story of Nanda wishing to leave 
the Order. Buddha took him to the Heaven of the Thirty-three and showed 
him the nymphs, so superior in beauty to his own wife that he decided to stay 
in the Order in order to gain this heaven in another existence. But the ridioule 
of the other monks shamed him out of that intention. Udana, III 2. 


102 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


The whole of the story of this visit to Kapilavatthu is 
strictly speaking post-canonical, but the ordination of Rahula 
is told as. above in the Vinaya, though with less detail.1 
After the ordination of Rahula Suddhodana came to Buddha 
and asked a boon. ‘‘ When the Lord abandoned the world, 
it was no small pain to me, so when Nanda did so, and 
especially so in the case of Rahula. The love of a son cuts 
through the skin, having cut through the skin it cuts through 
the hide, the flesh, the sinew, the bone, the marrow. 
Grant, Lord, that the noble ones may not confer the pabbajja 
ordination on a son without the permission of his mother and 
father.” This was granted and made a Vinaya rule. The 
reference here to Nanda shows that his story as well as that 
of Rahula was known to the Vinaya, and that the compiler 
has probably recorded merely enough of the legend to explain 
the rule from its supposed historical origin. 

The next day after an early meal Suddhodana seated by 
Buddha said, ‘‘ Lord, at the time when you were practising 
austerities, a divinity came to me, and said, ‘ your son is 
dead,’ but I did not. believe him, and replied, ‘my son will 
not die without attaining enlightenment.’”’ Buddha then 
told a story how Suddhodana in a former life, even when 
bones were shown to him as his son’s, refused to believe that 
his son was dead. And the king was established in the fruit 
of the third path, that of the Non-returner, who never returns 
to be born in this world. 

It is on the occasion of this visit that the legends put the 
conversion of two of the best known of Buddha’s followers, 
Ananda, the beloved disciple, and Devadatta, the Buddhist 
Judas.2 We are told that at Buddha’s birth 80,000 Sakyas 
had each dedicated a son to form a retinue for him, when he 
should become either a Buddha or a universal king as 
prophesied. These now entered the Order, and set out with 
Buddha on his return to Rajagaha. In one family however 
were two nobles, Mahanadma and Anuruddha, sons of 
Amitodana, neither of whom had left the world.2 Mahanama 

1 Vin. i 82; Vin. Texts, i 210. 

® Dhp. com. i 133; iv 124; Angut. com. i 183, 292; Jat.i 87; the account 
ocho conversion of the six here given follows the earlier and simpler account in 


* Elsewhere (Angut. com. i 292) Ananda is called a son of Amitodana, but the ~ 
point of this story is that there were only two sons, one of whom was in duty bound 


SPREAD OF THE DOCTRINE 103 


therefore proposed that one of them should do so. Anuruddha, 
who was very delicately nurtured, and like Buddha had three 
palaces for the three seasons, declared it impossible for him ; 
but Mahanama persuaded him by pointing out the difficulties 
of a household life, and the never ending labour of farming. 
Anuruddha’s mother, after at first refusing, gaye him 
permission if his companion Bhaddiya, raja of the Sakyas, 
would go with him. She thought that as Bhaddiya was ruling 
over the Sakyas, this would be impossible. Bhaddiya 
promised, and after proposing to postpone the departure for 
seven years gradually reduced the time to seven days, until 
he should have handed over the rule to his sons and brothers. 
The two then set out with four others, Ananda, Bhagu, 
Kimbila, and Devadatta, to the park, as if they were going 
for sport, taking with them their barber Upali. After going 
some distance they removed their ornaments, and sent 
Upali back with them, but he being afraid of the anger of the 
Sakyas soon returned, and went along with the six. They 
found Buddha at Anupiya on the route to Rajagaha, the place 
where he had first stayed in his flight from home; and there 
they made their request that Upali might be admitted first, 
in order that their Sakya pride might be humbled through 
having their former attendant as their senior. : 
During the following Retreat Bhaddiya attained the three 
knowledges, and thus became an arahat. Anuruddha won 
the second of these knowledges, the divine eye, which sees 
the arising and passing away of beings, and Ananda realised 
the fruit of the First Path. Devadatta acquired the kind of 
magical power (iddhi) that is possible to unconverted persons. 
The appointment of Ananda as Buddha’s personal attendant 
and the schism of Devadatta belong to a much later date. 
The additional circumstances of this story given in the 
commentaries show the process of legend-making going on. 
The details of their previous lives there given are equally 
circumstantial. But there is no reason to seek a historical 
basis even for the earliest form. The story appears to be 
modelled on that of Buddha’s flight. In both there is a 
delicately nurtured youth, a secret flight to the same place 


to leave the world. As all these parentages have been fitted later on to the indi- 
viduals, it is unnecessary to unravel them, They differ in many points from those 
given in the Tibetan. 


104 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


to which Buddha went, and an attendant sent back with the 
ornaments. Bhaddiya is called Sakya-raja, but it is unnecessary 
to suppose a contradiction with the story that Suddhodana 
was king. He would be a raja like the other Sakya nobles, 
and he ruled in the sense of sharing the government with 
them. In the story no difficulty is raised about his retiring, 
beyond the arrangements in his own family. In a later incident 
Bhaddiya speaks of his bliss in dwelling alone in the forest, 
and contrasts it with his former life as raja, when he was ill 
at ease though protected on all sides, but he never speaks of 
having abandoned the duties of kingship. In this account the 
idea of the aristocratic government of the city by a number of 
rajas or nobles appears to be preserved, but in the Tibetan 
the king is a monarch, such as was known to the Magadhas 
in later times. This account records that Suddhodana 
abdicated, and offered the throne to each of his brothers, who 
refused it. Bhadrika (i.e. Bhaddiya) was then made king, 
and when he was asked to become a monk, his reason for at 
first refusing was that Devadatta would become king. 
Therefore in order to prevent this Devadatta was persuaded to 
become a monk as well. The significance of these divergent 
accounts is that they illustrate how the later the legends are 
the more divergent they become through having been 
invented independently in different schools. 

On returning to Rajagaha Buddha stayed in the Sitavana. 
It is at. this period that the commentaries place the founding 
of the famous monastery of the Jetavana at Savatthi.! 
The story is told in the Vinaya, but the date is not there 
indicated. Sudatta, a householder of Savatthi, known from 
his bounty as Anathapindika or Anathapindada, ‘giver of 
alms to the unprotected,’ came to Rajagaha on some business. 
His sister was the wife of the gildmaster of Rajagaha, and 
when he arrived he found the gildmaster preparing a meal for 
Buddha and his monks, on so great a scale that he thought 
that a wedding was in progress, or that the king had been 
invited. On learning the truth he was eager to visit Buddha, 
and did so the next day. He was converted, and invited 
Buddha to a meal, providing everything himself in spite of 
the request of the gildmaster and the king to be allowed to 
do so. After the meal he invited Buddha to spend Retreat 

1 Vin. ii 154; Jat.i92; Angut. com, i384. 


SPREAD OF THE DOCTRINE 105 


at Savatthi, and Buddha accepted, saying, ‘‘ the Tathagatas, 
householder, take pleasure in empty dwelling places.” 
Anathapindika replied, ‘“‘commanded, Lord, commanded, 
Sugata,” and prepared parks, stopping places, and gifts at 
stages along the road to Savatthi. 

Understanding the request implied in Buddha’s acceptance 
he looked out for a quiet place near Savatthi where Buddha 
might dwell, and saw the park of prince Jeta. Jeta told him 
that it was not for sale, even if it were covered with kotis 
(ten millions) of gold pieces. Anathapindika offered to take 
it on those terms, but Jeta said that no bargain had been 
struck. The ministers, to whom the question was submitted, 
decided that it was a bargain, and Anathapindika brought 
cartloads of gold to cover the grove of Jeta (the Jetavana). 
A small space remained uncovered, and Jeta asked that this 
might be his gift. Anathapindika agreed, and on that part 
Jeta built the gateway with a storehouse. The commentaries 
add other details, including the exact price (fifty-four kotis) 
and the size of the parks of the six previous Buddhas, which 
had all been situated on the same spot. 

Anathapindika appears in the list of the eighty chief 
disciples, with the title of ‘ chief of almsgivers’. The famous 
laywoman who had the same title was Visakha of Savatthi, 
and her legend, may be conveniently given here.1 She was 
the daughter of a gildmaster of Bhaddiya, a town in the Anga 
country, and was converted by Buddha in her youth. Her 
father Dhanafijaya was sent by Bimbisara to Pasenadi, who 
had requested to have a wealthy person in his kingdom. On 
his way to Savatthi he stayed at a place seven leagues 
away, and finding it pleasant asked Pasenadi that he might 
settle there. His wish was granted, and because the place 
was first inhabited in the evening (sdyam), it was named 
Saketa. Visakha was married to Punnavaddhana, son of 
Migara, a gildmaster of Savatthi. Migara was a follower of 
the naked ascetics, and they finding that she was a disciple 
of Buddha advised him to dismiss her. Although he did not 
do so, he subsequently brought charges against her, and when 
she succeeded in having them disproved, she refused to stay 


1 Dhp. com. i 384; Angut.com.i 404; Aggaifa-s. (Digha) com., where the 
founding of her monastery is told more explicitly. The Tibetan accounts differ ; 
Rockhill, p. 70; Schiefner, 71d. Tales ,110. 


106 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


unless she were allowed to minister to the Buddhist monks. 
When Buddha himself came, Migaéra was converted, and 
because he won the fruit of the First Path through his 
daughter-in-law, he saluted her as his mother. Hence her 
title of ‘ Migara’s mother ’. 

On one occasion she went to hear Buddha preach, and 
removed her gorgeous headdress on entering the monastery. 
It was forgotten by her servant on her return, and laid aside 
by Ananda. She then refused to take it again, but ordered 
it to be sold for the benefit of the monks. It was so costly 
that a purchaser could not be found, and she devoted the 
amount at which it was assessed to building a monastery at 
Savatthi in the Pubbdraima, ‘the Eastern Park.’ When 
Buddha had settled permanently at Savatthi he spent Retreat 
alternately here and in the Jetavana. 

This is an example of one of the latest of the legends in the, 
commentaries. The whole of it.is probably later than any of 
the references to Visakha in the Vinaya. The most attractive 
of these is the incident where she asked permission to bestow 
eight kinds of permanent alms, and told how, if she heard 
of the death of a monk of Savatthi, she would rejoice to know 
that he was one to whom she. had been able to do good. 
Buddha asked what blessing she expected to find. She replied 
“‘in this way, Lord, that the monks who have spent 
Retreat in different places will come to the Lord and ask, 
saying, ‘a monk, Lord, of such a name has died ; what is his 
future career and lot?’ And the Lord will explain that he 
had reached the fruit of the first, second, or third stage or 
that he had attained arahatship.1 Then I shall come and ask, 
‘did that noble one ever come in the past to Savatthi?’ 
If they tell me that that monk had come to Savatthi, my 
object will be attained, in the thought that without doubt 
that noble one has had a robe for the rains, or that there 
has been food for an incoming monk, or that there has been 
food for a departing monk, or for one who was sick, or for his 
attendant, or that there was medicine, or a permanent supply 
of gruel.2, And when I think of this, gladness will arise, and 


1 It was through the second of the three knowledges of an arahat that Buddha 
could tell these things. 


s The eighth boon, which she does not mention here, was bathing-dresses for 
the nuns, 


SPREAD OF THE DOCTRINE 107 


from gladness joy, and with gladness of heart my whole self 
will be at peace, and being at peace I shall feel happiness, 
and in that happiness my heart will be concentrated. That 
will be an exercise in my faculties, in my powers, and in the 
constituents of enlightenment. This, Lord, is the blessing 
that I perceive in asking the eight boons of the Tathagata.” } 

This incident illustrates a feature that will become clearer 
when the doctrine is discussed, the fact that the new teaching 
was not merely a way of salvation for those who had-come to 
feel the emptiness of all earthly pleasures. It was also a guide 
of life for those in the world, and it taught the duties of social 
life not merely as a means of accumulating merit, but as a 
moral discipline. The above passage, whether historical or 
not, is a testimony to the enthusiasm and moral illumination 
which as a fact of history the teaching of Buddha inspired 
among the laity. 

The preceding legends place the founding of three of 
the most important monasteries, those at Rdajagaha, 
Kapilavatthu, and Savatthi within two years of the first 
preaching. These dates need not be taken as historical, as 
they are nowhere found in the older sources, and appear to 
be merely the inferences of the compilers of the legends. But 
the use of fixed residences must have been early, as no 
travelling was possible during the three or four months of the 
rainy season. 

The establishing of an order of female ascetics has become 
attached to three legends, the admission of Mahapajapati 
as the first nun, and (as a natural inference) the previous 
death of Suddhodana, together with Buddha’s visit to his 
home to settle a dispute between the Sakyas and the Koliyas.? 
In the fifth year after his enlightenment Buddha stayed at 
Vesali in the Pinnacled Hall (Kitagarasala), and at this time 
Suddhodana died, and realised arahatship ‘ under the white 
umbrella’, i.e. while still holding the symbol of royalty. 
Buddha flew through the air, and preached to his father on 
his deathbed. It was at this time, according to one account, 
that a quarrel had broken out between the Sakyas and their 
neighbours the Koliyas about the irrigation of the river 
Rohini, which divided their lands. Buddha persuaded them 


1 Vin. i293; Vin. Texts, ii 223. 
2 Jat. v 412; Therig. com. 141; Sn. com. 357; Angut. com. i 341. 


108 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


to make peace, and it was then that the widowed 
Mahapajapati went to Buddha in the Nigrodha park and asked 
that women might be allowed to leave the world under the 
doctrine and discipline of the Tathagata.1_ Buddha refused 
three times, and returned to Vesali. Mahapajapati then cut 
off her hair, put on yellow robes, and followed after him 
with other Sakya women. They arrived with swollen feet 
and covered with dust, and Ananda found them weeping 
outside the door. He met them and took their request to 
Buddha, who again refused three times. Then Ananda said, 
‘is a woman, Lord, who has gone forth from a house to a 
houseless life in the doctrine and discipline declared by the 
Tathagata, capable of realizing the fruit of Entering-the- 
stream, or of the Once-returner, or of the Non-returner, or 
Arahatship?” ‘“‘A woman is’ capable, Ananda.” “If so, 
Lord, Mahdpajapati Gotami, the aunt of the Lord, was of 
great service, she was his nurse and foster-mother, and gave 
him milk, and when his mother died, fed him from her own 
breast. It were good, Lord, for women to be allowed to go 
forth...” ‘If, Ananda, Mahadpajapati will take upon herself 
the eight Strict Rules, let this be her ordination.” 

Ananda went to Mahapajapati, stated the rules, and said, 
“if, Gotami, you will take upon yourself these eight Strict 
Rules, this will be your ordination.”? Mahapajapati replied, 
‘¢ just as, reverend Ananda, a woman or a man, who is young 
and fond of adornment, after washing his head receives a 
garland of lotus or jasmine or atimuttaka flowers, takes it 
with both hands, and puts it on his head, even so do I take 
upon myself these eight Strict Rules, not to be transgressed 
while life shall last.” 

The eight Strict Rules (garudhamma) are, (1) a nun even 
of a hundred years’ standing shall (first) salute a monk and 
rise up before him, even if he is only just ordained; (2) 
a nun shall not spend Retreat in a place where there is no 
monk ; (3) twice a month a nun shall ask from the Order of 
monks the time of Uposatha (fortnightly meeting), and the 
time when a monk will come to give admonition; (4) after 
Retreat the final ceremony (pavdrand) is to be held by the 
nuns both in the assembly of the monks and of the nuns ; 


» What follows is according to the account in Ang, iv 274 (repeated in Vin, ii 
253), but no dates are there indicated. 


SPREAD OF THE DOCTRINE 109 


(5) certain offences are to be dealt with by both assemblies ; 
(6) a novice who has been trained in the six rules for two years 
is to ask for ordination from both assemblies; (7) a nun is 
not to rebuke or abuse a monk on any pretext ; (8) from this 
day forth utterance (i.e. official statement) of nuns to monks 
is forbidden, of monks to nuns it is not forbidden. 

Ananda returned, saluted Buddha, sat down at one side, 
and told him that Mahapajapati had accepted the rules. 
Buddha replied, “‘ if women had not received the going forth 
in the doctrine and discipline, the religious system 
(brahmacariya) would have lasted long, the good doctrine 
would have stayed for a thousand years; but as women 
have gone forth, now the religious system will not last 
long, now, Ananda, the good doctrine will last only five 
hundred years. For just as houses, where there are many 
women and few men, are easily broken into by robbers, even 
so in the doctrine and discipline in which a woman goes forth 
the religious system will not last long}... And just as a man 
might in anticipation make a dyke for a great reservoir, 
so that the water should not overflow, even so, Ananda. 
have I in anticipation prescribed these eight Strict Rules for 
the nuns, not to be transgressed while life shall last.” 

This judgment passed on the advisability of the admission 
of women as nuns doubtless represents a view held in the 
Order. It is seen also in the story of the first Council, at 
the end of which Ananda was compelled to ask pardon for a 
number of faults. Among others he declared that he could 
see no fault in having striven for the ordination of 
Mah4pajapati on the ground of her fostering care, nevertheless, 
out of faith in the reverend members of the Council he con- 
fessed it as such. 

There is nothing like a history of the nuns. In the account 
of Buddha’s death they are not mentioned except in the 
formal description of the community as consisting of monks, 
nuns, laymen, and laywomen.? What we know of them 
directly comes from isolated legends and from the set of 
regulations for nuns in the Vinaya. The story of Mahapajapatt 


1 Two other similes follow of disease attacking a field of rice and a field of 
sugar-cane, 

4 A later tradition says that Ananda allowed women to salute the Lord’s body 
first. Members of the families of the Mallas are probably meant. 


110 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


appears to be taken by Oldenberg as having a historical 
basis, but it is just the kind of legend that would be added 
to the historical fact of the establishment of the Order. The 
most thorough treatment of the whole question of the nuns 
is by Miss M. E. Lulius van Goor, who rejects the legend 
entirely.! 

Although the founding of the women’s Order was in the 
fifth year of the preaching, Ananda is spoken of as being 
Buddha’s attendant. This does not harmonise with the 
legend that he was appointed in the twentieth year, when 
Buddha had permanently settled at Savatthi. On the other 
hand it seems impossible to put the death of Suddhodana 
as late as this. The reason for making Mahapajapati the first 
nun is obvious, and she could not well have become one before 
her husband’s death. Still later accounts add that Buddha’s 
wife Bhadd& Kaccénaé and Mahapajapati’s daughter Nanda 
entered the Order at the same time. Over seventy nuns are 
recorded in the Therigatha.2, The twelve mentioned with 
Mahapajapati in the list of the eighty great disciples might 
be expected to be more historical, but all that we know of them 
comes from the same set of legends as in the Therigatha 
commentary. Khema was wife of Bimbisara, and is recorded 
to have given instruction to king Pasenadi.2 A whole sutta 
is attributed to Dhammadinna, ‘ chief of those that discourse 
on the Doctrine.’ Kis&é Gotami, ‘Gotami_ the lean,’ 
according to one account, was the lady who uttered a verse 
in praise of Buddha, at the time when he entered Kapilavatthu 
in triumph just before his renunciation. In the commentaries 
however she was born at Savatthi and married there. Her 
boy djed when he was able to run about, and in her distress 
she téok him on her hip, and went about asking for medicine. 
One wise man thought that no one but Buddha would know 
of any, and sent her to him. Buddha said, “‘ you have done 
well to come here for medicine. Go into the city and get a 
mustard seed from a house where no one has died.” She was. 


1 De Buddhistische Non, J.eiden, 1915, 
5 2 On the historical character of these see Mrs, Rhys Davids in Psalms of the 

isters. ; 

3 Samy. iv 374, quoted below, ch. XIII. 

4 Cullavedalla-s. Majjh. i 299; it is one of a number of suttas that consist of a 
series of questions and answers, and looks Jike a catechism that has been converted. 
into a discourse, 


SPREAD OF THE DOCTRINE 111 


cheered and went, but soon found that Buddha in his com- 
passion had sent her to learn the truth. She went to a 
cemetery, laid her child there, and taking him by the hand 
said, “‘ little son, I thought that death had happened to you 
alone ; but it is not to you alone, it is common to all people.” 
There she left him, and returned to Buddha, who asked her 
if she had got the mustard seed. ‘‘ That work is done, Lord,” 
she said, ‘“‘ grant me support.”’ Buddha replied : 


Him whose mind is set upon 

The love of children and of cattle, 
As on a sleeping village comes a flood, 
Even so comes death and seizes him. 


Then She won the stage of Entering the Stream, and asked 
for ordination. After attaining arahatship she became ‘ the 
first of those that wear rough robes.’ 

It has been stated that there were non-Buddhist female 
ascetics in the time of Buddha. This cannot be disproved, 
but there is not the slightest historical evidence for it. What 
we find are stories in the commentaries compiled at a time 
when there was great rivalry between Buddhists and Jains, 
and when both sects had an order of nuns. Sariputta is said 
to have converted a Jain girl, Patacara, who offered, if she 
were defeated in a dispute, to marry the victor if he were a 
layman, or to join his Order if he were a monk. She appears 
to be the same Patacara of whom quite a different story is 
told elsewhere.! The notorious Cifica is not called a Jain, but 
a student (mdnavikd) in some ascetic Order. She was 
persuaded by members of the hostile sect to pretend to pay 
visits to Buddha at the Jetavana, and then to simulate 
pregnancy. Her false accusation was revealed by the help 
of the god Sakka, and then the earth opened. and she was 
swallowed up in the lowest hell.* 

A similar story is told of Sundari, a female ascetic 
(paribbajika). She also was persuaded by members of her sect 
to pretend that she paid visits to Buddha at Jetavana. The 
plotters then had her killed, and her body was found in the 
Jetavana. When Buddha’s monks were accused of the 
murder and reviled, he told them to reply : 


1 Jat.iiil; of. Psalms of the Sisters, p. 68. 
2 Jat, iv 187; Dhp. com. iii, 178. 


112 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


To hell he goes that says the thing that is not, 
And he who does, and says, ‘I have not done it.’ 
Both in another life the same fate suffer, 

In the next world the doers of base actions. 


The people then said that the sons of the Sakya could not 
have done it, and in seven days the rumour disappeared. 
The commentaries say that the hired murderers got drunk, 
and in their quarrelling revealed the truth. The king through 
his spies found out, and compelled the originators of the 
murder to proclaim the truth throughout the city, and the 
honour of Buddha increased more and more.? 


1 Ud.1V 8; Jat.ii 415; Dhp. iii 474. 


CHAPTER IX 
LEGENDS OF THE TWENTY YEARS’ WANDERING 


alee preceding legends, even those that are connected with 

undoubted historical events, show little relation to any 
teal chronology. This is still more the case with the succeeding 
legends. The older the records are the more indefinite are 
the dates of the circumstances, whether miraculous or not. 
Even if some of the dates are real, they are now indistinguish- 
able in the sequence of events that have become associated 
with the list of places where Buddha is said to have kept 
Retreat for the first twenty years.1 To the fourth year of 
the preaching is referred the conversion of Uggasena. He was 
a gildmaster’s son of Rajagaha, who fell in love with an acrobat 
and married her. As he found that she despised him, he learnt 
her art and became a skilful tumbler. Buddha knew that he 
was ready for conversion, and entering the city while 
Uggasena was displaying his skill withdrew the attention of 
all the people from his feats. Then he preached to Uggasena, 
who attained arahatship at once. This was because in a 
previous existence he had given food to an arahat, and had 
made a wish to be a sharer in the doctrine to which he had 
attained, and his wife who had done the same was also 
converted.? In the fifth year he stayed at Vesali, from where 
he paid a flying visit to his home at his father’s death as 
described above. 

In the sixth year the Miracle of the Pairs was performed 
again. The ce antaegs at Rajagaha, in order to find out if 
arahats really existed, had set up a sandalwood bowl at the 
end of a long bamboo, and challenged “anyone to rise in the 
air by magic power (iddhi) and get it down. The leaders of the 
six sects? were unable to do so, but the elder Pindola 


1 See note p. 97; none of the events of this chapter are referred to particular 
dates in the passages of the Canon where some of them are recorded. 

2 Dhp. com. iv 59. 

8 Usually called the heretics. They were six religious bodies in rivalry with 
Buddhism ; see next chapter, p. 129. 


I 


114 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Bharadvaja at the suggestion of Moggallana performed the 
feat. When Buddha came, he forbade both the use of wooden 
bowls and the display of magic powers. At this the heretics 
were delighted, as they were able to say that they were 
ready to work miracles if Buddha’s disciples would do the 
same. Buddha therefore promised to perform one himself, 
and pointed out to Bimbisara that he had the right to do so, 
just as the king might eat mangoes in his own garden, but 
would punish anyone else who took them. 

The occasion was so important that Buddha decided to 
carry out his promise four months later at Savatthi, at the 
foot of Ganda’s mango tree. When the time came the heretics 
pulled up all the mango trees for a league round, but Ganda, 
the king’s gardener, found a ripe mango and presented it 
to Buddha. He was told to plant the seed, and no sooner had 
Buddha washed his hands over it than it sprang up into a 
tree fifty hands high. Buddha then created a jewelled 
promenade in the sky, and after refusing the offer of six 
disciples to work wonders performed the Miracle of the Pairs, 
as he had formerly done at Kapilavatthu. 

Buddha on reflecting knew that former Buddhas after 
performing this miracle had gone to the Heaven of the thirty- 
three to preach the Abhidhamma to their mothers. Therefore 
with three strides he rose to this heaven, and there kept the 
seventh Retreat. During the three months of this period he 
was visited by Sariputta and Moggallana, and he told the 
latter that he would descend not at Savatthi, but at Sankassa 
thirty leagues away. There he came down a ladder of jewels 
with one of gold on the right for the gods, and one of silver 
on the left for Brahma. At the spot where all the Buddhas 
set their right foot on the ground was a permanent shrine. 
The Chinese pilgrims visited the place, but in their time the 
ladders had sunk nearly into the earth.! It is at this period, 
when Buddha’s fame had so increased, that the heretics 
are said to have attempted to destroy his reputation by means 
of the plot of Cifica.? 

While Buddha was journeying among the Bhaggas in the 

1 Dhp. com. iii 199; Jat, iv 265; Fa-hien (Giles) p. 24; Hiuen Tsiang (Beal), 
i 203 ; the story of Pindola’s miracle is told in Vin. ii 110; the descent from heaven 
is supposed to be referred to in Suttanipata TV 16, which consists of an answer toa 


question put by Sariputta to Buddha after his descent. 
2 See p. 111. 


THE TWENTY YEARS’ WANDERING 115 


eighth year, he entered the town of Sumsumiaragiri, and a 
householder Nakulapita with his wife came. As soon as they 
saw him they said, “that is our son,” and fell at his feet 
saying, “son, you have left us for such a long time, where 
have you been living?” The reason was that Nakulapita 
had been his father five hundred times in former births, his 
paternal uncle in five hundred, his grandfather in five hundred, 
and his maternal uncle in five hundred more. And his wife 
Nakulamata had been his mother, aunt, and grandmother. 
That is why they could not help making a sign. Buddha did 
not directly take notice of the sign, but he preached to them 
and established them in the fruit of Entering the Stream. 
When he visited them afterwards, they gave him a meal, 
and both of them declared that neither of them had done the 
other any injury in thought, much less in deed, and expressed 
the wish that they might continue to live together both in this 
life and the next. Buddha when putting the chief lay disciples 
in ranks told the monks this story, and placed these two as 
the chief of those that win confidence. 

In the ninth year Buddha was at Kosambi.2? Magandiya 
a brahmin had a daughter Magandiya, and he thought that 
Buddha was the only suitable husband for her. But her 
mother knew the three Vedas and the verses about bodily 
marks, and seeing Buddha’s footprint she knew that he was 
free from passion. Still her father insisted on offering her to 
Buddha, but in vain. This is the story which the commentaries 
give to explain the occasion of the Mdgandiya-sutta, in which 
Buddha tells how he had escaped from the seduction of Mara’s 
daughters : 


Having seen Craving, Aversion, and Lust, 
No desire had I for the pleasures of love ; 
That body filled with urine and dung 

Even with my foot I did not wish to touch. 


But Magandiya thought this an insult to herself, and even 
after she had become the wife of king Udena of Kosambi 
cherished hatred against Buddha. When she found that 


1 Angut. com. i 400, 

2 Jt is doubtful if Buddha ever went so far west as Kosambi. There were later 
important monasteries there, and this is sufficient to explain the existence of 
legends attached to it. The community localised or invented stories of Buddha’s 
residence in this region. 


116 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Samavati, another consort of Udena, was devoted to the 
Buddhists, she laid plots against her, and finally brought 
about her death with five hundred attendants in the con- 
flagration of her palace.* 

It is in the tenth year that we first hear of a dissension in 
the Order. In the Vinaya occur certain rules for settling 
disputes. Like all the rules they are referred to particular 
incidents that gave occasion to Buddha to promulgate the 
regulations by which such matters were to be settled. In this 
case an unnamed monk of Kosambi is said to have refused 
to recognise that he had committed an offence. On Buddhist 
principles an action cannot be said to be wrong unless the 
offender consciously intends it, but nevertheless the monk 
was excommunicated. Hence a great dissension arose. On 
the one hand he had broken a rule and was treated as an 
offender, but on the other hand he ought not to have been 
so treated, if he could not see that he had done wrong. The 
legends recorded on this occasion are probably not mere 
inventions to illustrate the rules, but their connexion with 
the rules may be quite arbitrary. 

Buddha counselled concord, and told the story of Dighiti, 
a former king of the Kosalas. This king was defeated by 
Brahmadatta, king of the Kasis, and went with his son 
Dighavu to live in disguise at Benares. He was betrayed by 
his barber and executed after giving his son certain advice. 
His son still in disguise became Brahmadatta’s personal 
attendant, and on getting the king into his power during a 
hunting expedition, revealed who he was, and in accordance 
with his father’s advice, “‘ do not look long, do not look short ; 
for not by hatred are hatreds calmed; by non-hatred are 
hatreds calmed,” pardoned the king and was restored to his 
kingdom.? However legendary this story may be, it doubtless 
reflects an earlier stage of political conditions, before ‘the 
power of the Kosalas had subjected that of the KAsis. 

Still Buddha was unable to reconcile the monks, and he 


1 8n. IV 9; Dhp. com. i 199-222; the burning of Samiavati is referred to in 
Udana, IV 10, 
2 Almost the words of Dhp. 4: 
For not by hatred are hatreds calmed 
Here in this world at any time ; 
But by non-hatred are they calmed 
This is an everlasting Dhamma. 


THE TWENTY YEARS’ WANDERING 117 


retired alone to keep retreat in the Parileyyaka forest, where 
he was protected and attended by a friendly elephant, 
which was tired of living with the herd. At the end of three 
months the monks were repentant, and came to Buddha at 
Savatthi to ask pardon.} 

In the eleventh year Buddha was at the village of Ekanala 
in the Magadha country. A brahmin farmer Kasibharadvaja 
was ploughing and distributing food. Buddha came and 
stood for alms, but the brahmin said, “‘I plough and sow, 
and having done sol eat. Do you, ascetic, plough and sow 
and then eat.” Buddha replied that he did so, and the farmer 
said, ‘‘ We do not see Gotama’s yoke or plough or plough- 
share or goad or oxen.”” Buddha replied in verses : 


Faith is the seed, penance the rain, 
Wisdom is my yoke and plough ; 
Modesty the pole, mind the yoke-tie, 
Mindfulness my ploughshare and goad. 


Guarded in action, guarded in speech, 
Restrained in food and eating, 

I make truth my hoe to cut away, 
Tenderness is my deliverance. 


Exertion is my beast of burden 

That bears me to the state of peace ; 
Without turning back it goes, 

Where having gone one grieves not. 


Even so is this ploughing ploughed ; 
Its fruit is the immortal. 

Having ploughed this ploughing 
One is freed from all pain.? 


The story of the stay at Veranja forms the introduction 
to the Vinaya, and is attributed by the commentaries to the 
twelfth year. The brahmin Veranja had heard of the fame 
of Buddha, and came to see him. He had been told that 
Buddha did not salute aged brahmins or rise up before them 


1 Vin. i 337; Jat. iii 486; Dhp. com.i 53; the story of Buddha going to the 
forest is told in Udana, IV 5, but there the reason is merely that he found life in 
Kosambi uncomfortable, because the place was crowded with monks, nuns, lay 
people, and heretics, The Kosambiya-s, and Upakkilesa-s., Majjh. i 320, iii 152, 
are said to have been given on the occasion the quarrel. 

3 This is the Kasibharadvija-sutta, Sn. 1 4 and Samy. i 172, which contains a 
prose conclusion telling of the conversion of the farmer. 


118 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


and offer them a seat. Buddha replied that he did not see 
a brahmin in the whole world to whom he ought to do that. 
If the Tathagata were to do so to anyone, that person’s 
head would split into pieces. Verafija then asked a series 
of questions on Buddhist practice, and Buddha concluded 
by reciting his attaining of enlightenment. The conversa- 
tion ends with the conversion of Verafija, who invited Buddha 
with his monks to spend Retreat there. 

At that time there was a famine, and five hundred horse- 
merchants supplied the monks with food. Moggallana 
proposed to get food by exercising his magic powers, but 
Buddha dissuaded him. S4riputta received from Buddha an 
explanation why the religious systems of the three previous 
Buddhas lasted for a long time, but those of the three 
preceding them did not. After Retreat Buddha went to take 
leave of Verajija before setting out on his journeying, as 
Buddhas regularly do after receiving such an invitation. 
Veraiija admitted that he had invited Buddha to spend 
Retreat with him, and that he had not kept his promise, 
but it was due to his having so many duties in the house. 
He invited Buddha and the monks to a meal for the next 
day, and afterwards presented a set of three robes to Buddha 
and a pair to each of the monks. This somewhat disconnected 
account has been filled out in the commentaries by making 
the neglect shown by the brahmin to be due to his being 
possessed by Mara} 

The thirteenth year was spent at Calika hill, and the elder 
Meghiya was then Buddha’s attendant. He received 
permission to go for alms to the village of Jantu. On his 
return he saw a pleasant mango-grove near the river, and 
asked Buddha if he might go there to meditate. Buddha 
asked him to wait, as they were alone, but after three requests 
he gave permission. Meghiya went, but was surprised to 
find that he was oppressed by evil thoughts. The reason 
was, as Buddha told him, that five things are required 
by one whose mind is not yet ripe for release : a good friend, 
the restraint of the moral rules, proper discourse that tends 
to Nirvana, energy in abandoning evil thoughts with firm- 
ness in producing good thoughts, and lastly the acquiring 
of insight. It is not until a monk has had this preliminary 

1 Vin. iti 1-11; Jat, iii 494 ; Dhp. com. ii 153. 


THE TWENTY YEARS’ WANDERING 119 


training that he is fit to practise the higher stages of 
meditation. 

In the fourteenth year, which was spent at Savatthi, 
Rahula received full ordination (upasampadd). The reason 
of this is that the Vinaya prescribes that ordination is not 
to be conferred before the age of twenty,? and according 
to the Pali tradition Rahula was now of that age. 

Suppabuddha, Buddha’s father-in-law, acquires an evil 
character in the later legends. His death is recorded to have 
taken place in the fifteenth year. Because Buddha had 
renounced his wife (Suppabuddha’s daughter), Suppabuddha 
was angry. He got drunk and sat in the streets of Kapila- 
vatthu refusing to let Buddha pass. Buddha had to turn 
back, but he told Ananda that within seven days Suppa- 
buddha would be swallowed up by the earth at the foot of 
his palace. When this was reported to Suppabuddha, he 
decided not to come down, and stationed men on each of 
the seven stories to prevent him. But Buddha declared : 


Not in the air, not in the midst of ocean, 

Nor if one enters a cavern in the mountains, 

Can in the world a region be discovered, 

Where if he stand Death cannot overpower him. 


On the seventh day a horse of Suppabuddha broke loose, 
and he started to catch it. The doors on each of the stories 
opened of themselves, and the men stationed there threw 
him down. When he reached the bottom, the earth opened 
and he was swallowed up in the lowest hell of Avici.$ 

The events of the Alavaka-sutta are placed in the sixteenth 
year. Buddha was at Alavi, and stayed for a night in the 
dwelling of the yakkha Alavaka, a demon that fed on human 
flesh. The demon came and told Buddha to come 
out, then to go in, until after four times Buddha refused to 
dosoany more. Then Alavaka threatened to destroy Buddha 
unless he could answer a question. The four questions and 
answers in verse with the conversion of the demon form 
the discourse proper.‘ 

In the commentaries there is a characteristic way ol 
explaining the omniscience of Buddha. Twice a day he 


1 Angut. iv 354; Udana IV 1. 2 Vin. i 78, 93. 
% Dhp. com. iii 44. « Sn. I 10. 


120 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


‘surveys the world’, and extends his ‘net of knowledge’ 
over all.! In the seventeenth year he was at Savatthi, and 
on surveying the world in the morning he observed at 
Alavi a poor farmer who was ripe for conversion. He there- 
fore decided to go and preach there. The farmer’s ox had 
strayed away, and he was all day in finding it, but he decided 
that he still had time to go and pay his respects to Buddha, 
and set off without taking food. At. Alavi Buddha with the 
monks had received a meal, but he waited until the farmer 
should come before returning thanks (which consisted in 
giving a discourse). On the farmer’s arrival Buddha ordered 
that he should first receiye some food, and then after seeing 
that his wants were relieved and his mind had become 
tranquil, he gave him a discourse on the Four Truths, and 
established him in the fruit of Entering the Stream.? 

A similar story of the eighteenth year is told of a weaver’s 
daughter, who three years before had heard a discourse 
from Buddha on meditation on death. Hearing that Buddha 
was going to preach again at Alavi she wished to go, but 
she had first to finish a task for her father. For her sake 
Buddha had come thirty leagues, and he waited for her 
before beginning to preach, as he had done for the poor 
farmer. He knew that her death was at hand, and he wished 
her to be converted so that she should be certain of her 
future state2 Owing to her previous meditation she was 
able to answer four questions that the others did not under- 
stand, and attained the stage of Entering the Stream. 
When she returned home, she was accidentally struck and 
killed by the falling of part of the loom, and Buddha consoled 
her father with the thought of the frequency of death.4 

These stories, even if they are due to the piety of the 
community, show all the more how deeply the spirit of the | 
founder inspired his followers. In the Dhammapada occurs 
the verse : 


Tn no long time this body will lie on the ground, 
Thrown away, unconscious, like a useless log of wood. 


This might be taken to imply entire disregard for bodily 
welfare, such as has been only too much in evidence in the 


1 See p. 213. 2 Dhp. com. iii 262, 
® See he Mirror of the Doctrine, below, p.145. * Dhp. com. iii 170, 


THE TWENTY YEARS’ WANDERING 121 


ascetic ideal. But it is of this very verse that one of the most 
striking stories of Buddha’s practical human sympathy is 
told. A monk, Tissa of Savatthi, was attacked by a malignant 
skin disease, and his body became so offensive that he was 
put outside and left uncared for. Buddha when surveying 
the world perceived him, came to the monastery, heated 
water to bathe him, and was going to take him into the 
bathroom, but the monks insisted on doing so. Then he 
had Tissa’s robes washed and dried, and himself bathed him. 
It was when the monk was clothed in dry garments with his 
body refreshed and his mind calm, that he received from 
Buddha the teaching about the body. He then attained 
arahatship and died, and Buddha explained from his former 
actions the cause of his disease, and why he had now attained 
Nirvana. 

In the twentieth year Buddha converted the notorious 
robber known as Angulimala, ‘ having a garland of fingers,’ 
from the way in which he treated his victims. As Buddha 
was going to Savatthi for alms Angulimdla followed him, 
but Buddha by an exercise of magic power caused him to 
stand still, and told him that he was not standing still. 
Angulimala inquired : 


As thou goest, monk, thou sayest ‘I stand still’, 

And to me who stand thou sayest ‘thou standest not’. 
I ask thee, monk, ths question : 

How standest thou still and I stand not ? 

I stand stil], Angulimala, in every wise ; 

Towards all living things have I laid aside violence ; 
But thou to all living things art unrestrained ; 
Therefore I stand still and thou standest not. 


Angulimala was converted and became a monk. King 
Pasenadi had heard of him, and on visiting Buddha expressed 
his horror at Angulimala’s enormities. Then Buddha 
to Pasenadi’s alarm pointed him out sitting near them, 
but Buddha told the king that he had nothing to fear, 
and the king then offered to supply Angulimala with robes 
and the other requisites. Angulimala however replied, 
“enough, O king, I have my three robes,” and Pasenadi 
complimented Buddha as the tamer of the untamed. 


1 Dhp. com. i 319. 


122 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Once when Angulimala was going for alms he saw a woman 
in the throes of childbirth and told Buddha. Buddha told 
him to go and perform an Act of Truth,! and say, “‘ In that 
I, sister, from the day of my birth have not consciously 
deprived any living being of life, by this truth may health 
be to thee and thy unborn child.” Angulimala pointed 
out that he could not truthfully say this, and Buddha told 
him to repeat it but to add “from the day I was born of 
the Noble Birth”. He did so, and the woman was at once 
relieved. At another time he was stoned by people and his 
bowl broken. Buddha showed that it was due to the ripening 
of his karma, and that he was now suffering the fruit of his 
evil deeds for which he might have suffered in hell for ages.? 

It was also in the twentieth year that Ananda was appointed 
as permanent attendant to Buddha. Before this time monks 
had taken it in turn each day to carry his bowl and robe. 
One day he was going with the elder Nagasamala as attendant, 
and where the road divided the elder said “‘ That is the way, 
Lord, we will go by that’. But Buddha said, ‘“‘ This is the 
way, Nagasamila, we will go by this.”” Yet the elder, though 
told three times, put the bowl and robe on the ground, and 
saying “‘ Here, Lord, is your bowl and robe”, went off. 
On the way he met with robbers, who beat him, broke his 
bowl, and tore his robe. The elder Meghiya, who had once 
left Buddha to go and meditate in a mango grove, was 
overcome by evil thoughts. Buddha therefore at Savatthi 
declared that he must have a permanent attendant, as he 
was growing old. Sariputta rose and offered himself, hut 
Buddha told him that his work was in exhorting, and he 
also rejected the offers of Moggallana and the eighty chief 
disciples. Ananda sat silent and did not venture to ask 


1 The Act of Truth (saccakiriya) is common Hindu belief. When it is performed 
with complete truthfulness, it subdues even the gods, At the wooing of Damayanti 
four gods assumed the form of her lover Nala, and she was unable to distinguish 
him. But by asseverating that she had chosen Nala and had never in thought or 
word transgressed, she compelled them to assume their true forms. Nalopakhyana 
V 17 ff. (Moh. IIT 6). 

? The whole of this legend is canonical, Angulimdla-sutta, Majjh. ii 98; Dhp. 
com, iii 169. ' 

® Udana, VIII 7; according to the com. Buddha compelled him to take them 
up again. The incident of Meghiya is Udana, IV 1, and Buddha finally allowed 
him to go, but according to the com. he was disobedient, see p. 118, There are also 
differences in the account of the appointment of Ananda in the com, on Maha- 
padana-s., Digha, ii 6. 


THE TWENTY YEARS’ WANDERING 1238 


until Buddha spoke, and then he offered under eight 
conditions: if he might refuse four things, that if Buddha 
received a fine robe, it was not to be given to him, that he 
should not have alms that were given to Buddha, that he 
should not dwell in Buddha’s scented chamber, and that if 
Buddha received a personal invitation it was not to include 
him. The four things he wished to accept were that if Buddha 
received an invitation he was to accompany him, that if 
people from a distance came to see Buddha he should be able 
to present them to him, that he should be able to approach 
Buddha whenever he should wish, and that whatever teaching 
Buddha should give in his absence, Buddha should repeat 
it to him. 

Ananda for the following twenty-five years was thus the 
permanent attendant of Buddha. The legend given above 
of his conversion implies that he had already been a monk 
for twenty years, but in his verses (Therag. 1039) he is made 
to say that he has been for twenty-five years a learner, 
so that he must have become a monk in the twentieth year 
of Buddha’s preaching. As this is no doubt an earlier tradition 
it discredits the whole story given above of his entering 
the Order with Devadatta. Rhys Davids accepts the story 
but shifts it forward twenty years.} 


1 See art. Devadatta, ERE, 


| CHAPTER X 
RIVAL SCHOOLS. DEVADATTA AND AJATASATTU 


ee teaching of Buddha was partly a reform and partly 
an innovation. The result is that in the Buddhist 
records an important place is taken up by polemical discussion. 
both with the prevailing Brahminism and with other schools 
in revolt against orthodox views. We possess many 
Brahminical works of ritual and philosophy as old and older 
than Buddhism, but none of them were in direct contact 
with the new movements. The centre of brahmin culture 
was much further west,! and of this a picture has been drawn 
by Oldenberg. ‘‘ The brahmins standing outside the tribe 
and the people were enclosed in a great society, which 
extended as far as the precepts of the Veda prevailed. They 
represented a caste of thinkers, whose forms of life with 
their strength and weakness included in germ the strength 
and weakness of their thought. They were hemmed in within 
a self-created world, cut off from the refreshing breeze of 
living life, unshaken in their boundless belief in themselves 
and in their own omnipotence, at the side of which all that 
gave reality to the life of others necessarily appeared small 
and contemptible.” 2 

This is Brahminism as portrayed according to the ideals 
of their sacred books, and we may doubt whether it faithfully 
represents the actual conditions even of their own caste. 
The brahmins were not ascetics, but had social and family 
duties as well. Still less can we apply it as a picture of social 
conditions in the time of Buddha. Much must remain 
problematical, as we are in fact dependent on the statements 
of Buddhists and Jains for the state of Brahminism among 


1 The separation between early Buddhism and the Brahminism that we know 
is also clear from brahmin sources, ‘“ All the earlier and later Vedic texts displayed 
a marked antipathy towards the people of Magadha. . . . In the Smriti literature 
Meyadha was included in the list of countries migration to which was strictly 
forbidden, and a penance was necessary for having gone there,” J.N, Samaddar, 
The Glories of Magadha, p. 6, Patna, 1925, 

3 Buddha, p. 16, 


RIVAL SCHOOLS 125 


the Magadhas and Kosalas. The essential question is that 
of the teaching of the brahmins as opposed to Buddhist 
dogmas, and brahmin views may have been partially mis- 
represented both through lack of knowledge and through 
polemical bias. 

The brahmins as a caste are never treated as philosophers. 
They were attacked on certain definite points: the nature of 
caste, the value of sacrifice, and their worship of Brahma. 
Objections were urged both on general ethical grounds and 
also with regard to the way of emancipation. We do not 
find in the Pali Canon anything that can be taken as a report 
of historical events. We have a number of suttas with 
stereotyped arguments, which are often verbally reproduced 
in different contexts. They are evidently elaborated from 
traditional matter, which appears to have been sometimes 
misunderstood by the redactors. One of the best known is 
the Tevijja-sutta, on the threefold knowledge. Two brahmins, 
Vasettha and Bharadvaja, one the pupil of Pokkharasadi 
and the other of Tarukkha, dispute about the straight path, 
which leads him who acts according to it into the company 
of the Brahma-gods.2 They agree to put their difficulty 
before Buddha. Vasettha says that there are various paths, 
and mentions several brahmin schools. The names are 
corrupt, but there is little doubt that they refer to two schools 
of the Yajur-Veda, the Adhvaryus and Taittiriyas, a Sima- 
veda school, the Chandogyas, and a Rig-veda school, the 
Bahvreas. Vasettha says that they all lead aright, just as 
various paths to a village all lead to the village. Buddha 
compels him to admit that-no brahmin or even any of the 
ancient sages have seen Brahma face to face. They cannot 
even point out the way to the moon and sun, which they can 
see. They are like a man in love, who cannot say who the 
lady is, or like one who builds a staircase without knowing 
where the palace is to be, or like one wishing to cross a river 
who should call the other side to come to him. The brahmins 
of the three Vedas reject those things that make a man a 
brahmin, they are bound and attached to the five pleasures 


1 Digha, i 235. : 

2 This is Rhys Davids’ translation in the Pali Text Society’s Dictionary. The 
earlier translation, ‘ state of union with Brahma,’ gave a specious resemblance 
to an allusion to Upanishadic doctrine not elsewhere found in the suttas. 


126 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


of sense, they gannot see the danger therein or understand 
that they are no support, and it is impossible for them after 
death to attain to the company of the Brahma-gods. 

This does not tell us much about the positive teaching 
of Brahminism, nor are the brahmin pupils made to use any 
arguments in their own defence. The passage is merely a 
dramatic introduction to the positive Buddhist teaching 
of the Brahma-viharas which follows. In Buddhist contro- 
versial method it is a peculiarity to adopt the terms of its 
opponents and to give them a new sense. One instance 
of this is the title of this sutta, for the threefold knowledge, 
i.e. of the three Vedas, means in the Buddhist sense the three 
knowledges that an arahat attains on enlightenment. So 
the name brahmin means not merely a member of this caste, 
but is used frequently for the Buddhist arahat—he is the 
true brahmin. In the same way brahma is used in compounds 
without any reference to the god, but apparently in the sense 
of ‘excellent, perfect’. It is possible that Brahma-vihara 
is a brahminical term, but what we know of it is as used by 
the Buddhists to describe a certain kind of concentration. 
It would literally mean ‘dwelling with Brahma’, and it 
retains that meaning in so far that it is believed that one who 
practises this form of concentration is reborn in the Brahma- 
world. 

The rest of the sutta describes the first two stages of the 
training of a monk, the moral rules and concentration, 
but in the latter instead of a description of the four trances 
and other mystical practices as in previous suttas, the four 
brahma-viharas are given : 


The monk abides pervading one quarter having his mind accompanied 
by love,! likewise the second, third, and fourth. Thus above, below, 
around, everywhere he abides pervading the entire world with his 
mind accompanied by love, with abundant, great unlimited freedom 
from hatred and malice. 


The three other vihadras are described in the same way, 


1 Or friendliness, but it is love, for Buddhaghosa tells a story of a man who 
understood it of love in a very un-Buddhistic way. Law’s description appears 
to fit the Buddhist conception: “‘ By love I do not mean any natural tenderness 
which is more or less in people according to their constitutions, but I mean a 
larger principle of the soul, founded in reason and piety, which makes us tender, 
kind, and benevolent to all our fellow-creatures, as creatures of God, and for his 
sake,’ Serious Call, ch. XX. 


RIVAL SCHOOLS 127 


in which the monk pervades the world with compassion, 
sympathy, and equanimity. 

This form of concentration is placed by Buddhaghosa 
immediately before the attainments of the Formless world. 
It may have been introduced from another school, since 
it is said in the Makhddeva-sutta (Majjh. ii 76), to have been 
practised by a long series of ancient kings, and the practice 
of it is there depreciated, as it leads only to. rebirth in the 
Brahma-world, and not like the Eightfold Path to enlighten- 
ment and Nirvana.! 

A more definite statement of the brahmins’ claim is given 
in the Sonadanda-sutia (Digha,i111). The brahmin Sonadanda 
is made to state that there are five things through which 
a man is truly called a brahmin. (1) He is well-born on both 
sides for seven generations back, (2) he is a repeater of the 
three Vedas and of the related sciences, (3) he is handsome 
and of brahma-colour and brahma-splendour, (4) he is 
virtuous, (5) he is a learned and wise man, and the first or 
second of those who hold out the sacrificial spoon. Sonadanda 
at once agrees to leave out the first three as unnecessary, 
which is at least what the Buddhist position required, 
but insists that virtue and wisdom are essential, and what 
these are Buddha proceeds to tell him. 

The question of caste here touched upon receives much 
fuller treatment in several suttas.2. The claim of the brahmins, 
which is found as early as the Rig-veda, is stated in the 
Madhura-suita (Majjh. ii 84) as being that “‘ the brahmins 
are the best colour (caste); the other colour is base. The 
brahmins are the white colour; the other colour is black. 
The brahmins are purified, not the non-brahmins. The 
brahmins are the genuine sons of Brahma, born from his 
mouth, Brahma-born, Brahma-created, heirs of Brahma.’’ 
This doctrine is met from two points of view. On the one hand 
it is held, not that caste is indifferent, but that the kshatriya 
caste, not the brahmin, is the best. Buddha quotes an 
ancient verse : 


1 It occurs in fact in the Yoga-sutras, I 33, so that borrowing from some form of 
Yoga is probable. 

2 Digha, i 87 ; iii 80; Majjh.ii 83, 125, 147, 177, 196 (= Sn. IIT 9) ; see references 
p. 5 note. 


128 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


The kshatriya is best among the folk 

Of those that put their trust in clans ; 

The man endowed with wisdom and conduct 
He is best among gods and men. 


This was doubtless a view generally held in kshatriya 
families, and the pride of the Sakyas in their caste is frequently 
mentioned. All the Buddhas arise, says the legend, only in 
one of the two highest castes. There is nothing to show that 
Buddha tried to abolish caste as a social institution. There 
‘was no reason why he should do so in so far as his teaching 
could be enforced that the true brahmin was the virtuous 
brahmin. But within the Order caste did disappear, and 
there are many instances of low caste persons being admitted 
as monks. 

It has been maintained that the Order was at first 
aristocratic, and that its members were drawn from the 
higher castes—a natural reaction against the quite untenable 
view that the movement was specially a message of salvation 
to the poor and needy. But we do not possess any records 
which may be said to picture the spiritual temper of the first 
evangelists. Buddha is said to have declared : 


Just as, O monks, the great rivers, such as the Ganges, Jumna, 
Aciravati, Sarabhi, and Mahi, when they fall into the ocean lose 
their former names and gotras, and are known as the ocean, even so 
do the four castes of kshatriyas, brahmins, vaiSyas, and Sidras, when 
they have gone forth in the Doctrine and Discipline taught by the 
Tathagata from a house to a houseless life, lose their former names 
and gotras, and are known as ascetics, sons of the Sakyan.1 


This teaching is no doubt primitive, and if the form in which 
it is stated is that of a later generation, it only shows all 
the more clearly what the established teaching had then 
become. Nor was this confined to one school, for the Lalita- 
vistara also points a moral for the laity, when it says that 
the Bodhisatta did not regard caste in choosing a wife. 

The ritual questions of sacrifice and meat-eating are treated 
from the same ethical point of view. Moral action is higher 
than even a bloodless sacrifice, and still higher is the Noble 
Path. The worship of the six quarters is not wrong, but should 
be done by fulfilling the moral duties towards six classes 
of fellow creatures. 


1 Udana V 5; cf. also the Five Dreams, p. 70 


RIVAL SCHOOLS 129 


As meat-eating was made an ethical question, the ritual 
aspect ceased to have a meaning for the Buddhist. Hence 
the practice was not in itself condemned, but only in so far 
as the partaker was in some way contributory to killing or 
giving pain. The position is stated most clearly in the 
Jivaka-sutta (Majjh. i 868). Jivaka} told Buddha that he 
had heard that people killed living things intending them 
for Buddha, and that he ate the meat prepared on that 
account. He asked if such persons were truth-speakers 
and did not accuse the Lord falsely. Buddha replied that 
it was not true, but that in three cases meat must not be 
eaten: if it has been seen, heard, or suspected that it was 
intended for the person. Ifa monk who practises the brahma- 
vihara of love accepts an invitation in a village, he does not 
think, ‘‘ verily this householder is providing me with excellent 
food ; may he provide me with excellent food in the future ”’. 
He eats the food without being fettered and infatuated. 
“What do you think, Jivaka, does the monk at that time 
think of injury to himself, to others, or to both ?”” “‘ Certainly 
not, Lord.” ‘‘ Does not a monk at that time take blameless 
food ?”? “ Even so, Lord.”’ 

The teaching is the same in the Vinaya, where Buddha 
is said to have accepted a meal from the Jain general, Siha, 
who had provided meat. The report went about that he 
had killed an ox for Buddha, but the fact was that he had 
sent for meat already killed in order to furnish the meal. 
The Vinaya forbids certain kinds of flesh, human, that of 
elephants, horses, dogs, and certain wild animals.? 

There are frequent references to heretical schools of 
teachers. In the legend of Ajatasattu’s visit to Buddha the 
king says that he has previously paid visits to six of these, 
and repeats their doctrines. They are Pirana Kassapa, 
who taught the doctrine of non-action, i.e. the absence 
of merit in any virtuous action and of demerit in even the 
greatest crimes ; Makkhali-Gosala, who admitted the fact 

1 The famous physician of Bimbisara and Ajatasattu. The commentaries explain 
his title Komarabhacca as meaning ‘ brought up by the prince’, and give an 


elaborate story based on this meaning, but Rhys Davids said that it means ‘ child- 
doctor’, All the stories about him, which are post-canonical, are probably equally 


baseless. 

2 Vin. i 218, 237; macchamamsa is expressly allowed. This is usually taken to 
mean ‘ flesh of fish ’, but it may mean, as Kern takes it, ‘flesh and fish.’ In any 
case, as the above instances show, meat under proper conditions was permissible. 


K 


130 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


of depravity, but said that purification was attained merely 
by transmigration, not by any action of the individual ; 
Ajita Kesakambalin, who taught the doctrine of ‘ cutting 
off’, i.e. annihilation at death; Pakudha Kaccayana, 
who maintained the existence of seven permanent, uncreated 
substances; the Nigantha (Jain) Nataputta, who taught 
that a Nigantha, ‘one free from bonds,’ is restrained by 
restraints in four directions; Sajfijaya Belatthaputta, who 
prevaricated and refused to affirm any doctrine positive 
or negative. 

This passage is no doubt old, as it contains traces of a 
dialect differing from Pali. Some of the teachers are known 
as historical persons, but there is nothing historical to be 
drawn from this statement of their doctrines, which have 
been misunderstood and confused by the Buddhists. The 
views of the first four are also given in the Sandaka-sutia 
(Majjh. i 518), where they are called immoral systems 
(abrahmacariya), but no names are there mentioned, and part 
of the doctrine which in the former passage is attributed 
to Gosala is combined with that of Pakudha, and Gosdla’s 
classification of beings is attributed in Angvtt. iii 388 to 
Pirana Kassapa. Evidently even if these doctrines were 
taught in Buddha’s time, it is not certain that the Buddhists 
have applied them to the right persons. 

Gosala is well known from the Jain Scriptures, where he 
is called an Ajivika. This term, says Hoernle, was probably 
a name given by opponents, meaning one who followed 
the ascetic life for the sake of a livelihood (djiva). Hence we 
cannot infer that the name, which is found as late as the 
thirteenth century, always refers to the followers of Gosala, 
nor is it applied to him in Buddhist writings. Gosala joined 
the Jain leader, but they quarrelled and separated.1 Great 
hostility towards the sect is shown by the Buddhists, as in 
the story where Buddha says that in all the ninety-one cycles 
that he remembers he cannot think of any Ajivika who went 
to heaven except one, and even he was a believer in karma.” 

1 See Hoernle’s edition of Uvaisagadasio, and his article, Ajivikas in ERE; 
B. Barua, The Ajivikas, in Journ. of Dep. of Letters, Univ. of Calcutta, vol. 2. 

2 Majjh. i 483; this severity is because the system is classed as immoral. 
Jainism is put among the unsatisfying systems, and the tolerant attitude of 


Buddhism towards it is shown in the above story of Stha. Buddha approves of 
Siha, even after his conversion, continuing to give alms to the Jains, 


RIVAL SCHOOLS 1381 


; N&taputta, known to the Jains as Mahavira their leader, 
is often referred to in the Buddhist Scriptures, but in this 
passage there is no clear statement of the Jain position, 
and according to Jacobi there has been confusion with the 
views of Mahavira’s predecessor Paréva. His doctrine in 
relation to Buddhism is discussed below. The Sandaka-sutta 
gives a further list of four religious systems, which though 
not immoral are unsatisfying. The first of them is evidently 
intended for that of the Niganthas, for the teacher is described 
in exactly the same terms as Nataputta’s pupils describe 
their teacher in the Ciladukkhakkhandha-sutta (Majjh. i 92) 
but the rest merely tells of his foolish behaviour in saying 
that he did certain things because he had to do so, without 
stating any recognisable Jain doctrine. The fourth of the 
unsatisfying systems mentions no doctrine, but merely 
describes the prevarication of the teacher, and is evidently 
identical with the method of Safijaya. 

The one great schism within the Order in Buddha’s lifetime 
was that of Devadatta. It is clear that separate incidents 
have been added to the various stages in the story of the 
career of this disciple. To these no doubt belong all the 
events of his youth. He was the son of Suppabuddha 
according to the Chronicles, and hence both: cousin and 
brother-in-law of Buddha, but according to Sanskrit accounts 
the son of Amritodana, another uncle of Buddha. The 
stories of his youth are examples of his malice, which 
finally culminated in his attempts to kill Buddha and in his 
schism. When the youthful Bodhisatta was going to display 
his skill in the arts, a white elephant was being brought 
for him, and Devadatta out of envy killed it. He quarrelled 
with the Bodhisatta about a goose that he had shot, and after 
the Renunciation made love to Yasodhara, who in this 
account was not his sister but his cousin. The Pali knows 
nothing of these stories, and says that his first grudge against 
Buddha was when he was not allowed to take Buddha’s 
place as leader. 

Even the Pali stories of Devadatta’s earlier life appear 
to be quite unconnected with the main legend. He is said 
to have entered the Order at the beginning of Buddha’s 
ministry, and the scattered references to him in the Nikayas 
are probably outgrowths of the later legend. He is mentioned 


182 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


without any trace of hostility in a list of eleven of the chief 
elders, who approached Buddha, and as they came Buddha 
said, ‘‘ These are brahmins coming, O monks.” A certain 
monk who was a brahmin by birth said, “‘ In what respect, 
Lord, is one a brahmin, and what are the things that make 
him a brahmin ? ” Buddha replied : 


They that have expelled evil thoughts, 

And in conduct are ever mindful, 

The enlightened, whose fetters are destroyed, 
They truly in the world are brahmins.} 


There is nothing here to suggest the future schismatic, 
but on another occasion Buddha, when looking at certain 
groups of monks, declared that Devadatta and those with 
him had evil wishes.2 It is only in the Vinaya and later 
works that we get the connected story of his defection, 
though fragments of it occur in the Anguttara.® 

Some eight years before Buddha’s death Devadatta 
being eager for gain and honour thought he would win over 
prince Ajatasattu.4 During his training he had acquired 
magic powers, and he now assumed the form of a child with 
a girdle of snakes, and terrified Ajatasattu by appearing in 
his lap. Then he assumed his proper form, and Ajatasattu 
marvelling at the wonder paid him great honour. By this 
his pride was increased, and he conceived the idea of taking 
Buddha’s place as leader ; but as soon as this thought arose, 
his magic power disappeared. His plan was revealed to 
Moggallana by a deceased pupil of the latter, who assumed 
a mental body and came to inform him. But Buddha said 
that the matter was not to be talked of, as the foolish man 
‘would reveal himself. 

While Buddha was once preaching at Rajagaha, Devadatta 
came and asked that Buddha, as he was old, might hand over 
the Order of monks and allow Devadatta to lead it. Buddha 
refused, and as Devadatta persisted, said, ‘‘ Not even to 
Sariputta and Moggallana would I hand over the Order, 


1 Ud. I 5. 

2 Samy. ii 156. 

: ho ii 196; Jat. v 333; Dhp. com. i 133; cf. Angut. ii 73; iii 123, 402 ; 
iv 160. 

4 Who succeeded his father Bimbisara, according to the chronology here adopted, 
in 491 B.0, His title is Vedehiputta, ‘ son of the Videha lady.’ There are different 
stories as to who she was—probably all inventions to explain-the name. 


RIVAL SCHOOLS 133 


and would I to thee, vile one, to be vomited like spittle ?” 
Thereat Devadatta angry and displeased went away. 
Buddha caused the Order to issue an Act of Proclamation 
that in anything done by Devadatta neither Buddha nor the 
Doctrine nor the Order was to be recognised, but only 
Devadatta. 

Devadatta then went to Ajatasattu and proposed that he 
himself should kill Buddha, and that Ajatasattu should kill 
his father Bimbisaéra. Ajatasattu took a dagger and went 
to do so, but being found by the ministers he confessed 
his purpose. The ministers advised that he and all the 
plotters should be slain, but his father finding out who was 
the real instigator pardoned his son and handed over the 
kingdom to him. . 

Meanwhile Devadatta having received archers from 
Ajatasattu put one on a certain path, two on another, and 
so on up to sixteen, and told them to kill Buddha. But when 
the first man approached Buddha, he was terrified, and his 
body became stiff. Buddha told him not to fear, and the man 
threw down his weapons and confessed his intended crime, 
whereupon Buddha preached to him, converted him, and sent 
him back by a different path. The next two archers not seeing 
the man return went and found Buddha seated beneath a 
tree, and they came to him and were converted. The same 
happened to all the rest. The first man returned to Devadatta, 
and said he was unable to kill Buddha, because he was of 
such great magic power. Devadatta then decided to kill 
Buddha himself. 

While Buddha was walking in the shade of Gijjhaktita Hill, 
Devadatta hurled a great rock down. It was stopped by 
two peaks, but splinters struck Buddha’s foot and caused 
blood to flow. Buddha looked up and said, ‘‘ Great demerit, 
evil man, have you produced for yourself, in that with 
murderous thought you have caused the blood of a Tathagata 
to flow’”’. The monks wished to have a guard provided, 
but Buddha pointed out to them that it was impossible 
for anyone to deprive him of life, for Tathagatas attain 
Nirvana in the ordinary course. 

Devadatta next caused the elephant-keepers to let loose 
a fierce elephant, Nalagiri, on the road by which Buddha 


1 Rhys Davids says, “‘ the Iddhi here must be the power of religious persuasion.” 


184 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


was to come. The monks warned Buddha three times, 
but he refused to turn back, and again pointed out that it 
was impossible for him to be killed. As the elephant came 
on, he pervaded it with love, and it became quite subdued. 

After this Devadatta’s gain and honour decreased, and 
he decided with three others to create a schism. They went 
to Buddha and asked that five rules should be established : 
(1) that monks should dwell all their lives in the forest, 
(2) that they should live only on alms begged, and not 
accept an invitation, (3) that they should wear only discarded 
rags, and not accept a robe from a layman, (4) that they 
should dwell at the foot of a tree, not under a roof, (5) that 
throughout life they should not eat fish or flesh. Buddha 
pointed out that all-these rules were permissible, except during 
the rainy season sleeping under a tree, but he refused to make 
them compulsory. Then Devadatta was pleased, and in 
spite of Buddha’s warnings of the awful results through 
karma of the sin of schism, went about with his party making 
the foolish believe that Buddha was given to luxury and 
abundance. He next informed Ananda that he was going to 
hold the Uposatha meeting and carry out proceedings 
of the Order without Buddha; and persuading five hundred 
recently ordained monks from Vesali to join him went out 
to Gayasisa hill. 

Buddha sent Saériputta and Moggallana to win back the 
mistaken monks, and when Devadatta saw them, he thought, 
in spite of his friend Kokalika’s warning, that they were 
coming to join him. They sat listening while Devadatta 
preached far into the night until he was tired. He then asked 
Sariputta to address the assembly, while he himself rested, 
and Sadriputta and Moggallana preached with such effect 
that they persuaded the whole five hundred to return. When 
Devadatta was awakened by Kokalika and found what had 
happened, hot blood came from his mouth. Buddha received 
the schismatic monks who returned, and refused to make a 
rule that they should be reordained; it was sufficient if 
they confessed their offence ; but he declared that Devadatta 
was destined to states of punishment, to hell, doomed to stay 
there for a cycle, and incurable. 

Other incidents recorded in the commentaries seem to 
show that events did not move quite so rapidly; but as 


RIVAL SCHOOLS 135 


they appear to be apocryphal, they may be a quite artificial 
extending of the story. One of these concerns a nun in 
Devadatta’s community. In cases where a married woman 
entered the Order it was quite possible for children to be 
born in the monastery. One such person joined Devadatta’s 
party, and when she was found to be pregnant, she was 
expelled by Devadatta, but she was taken to Buddha and 
her chastity proved. The child was brought up by the 
king, and hence was known as Kumara (prince) Kassapa. 

The commentaries say that when Buddha was wounded 
by Devadatta, he was taken to the mango grove of Jivaka 
the physician, and there tended by him. When the mad 
elephant came (which had been made drunk by Devadatta), 
Ananda stood in front and said, ‘ Let this elephant kill 
me first,” and Buddha was compelled to use his magic power 
to remove him. Devadatta after his defeat was sick for nine 
months, and then desired to see Buddha, but Buddha said 
it would not be possible in this life. He was however brought 
on a litter, but when he reached the Jetavana he sank into 
the earth down to the Avici hell. Buddha declared that 
after 100,000 cycles he would be reborn as a paccekz-buddha 
named Atthissara.? 

According to the Saddharma-pundarika he is to become 
not a pacceka-buddha (one who does not preach), but a 
complete Buddha, a Tathagata named Devaraja.2 This is 
in accordance with the Mahayana teaching that every 
individual may attain this state. The same authority says 
that Devadatta in an earlier existence helped Gotama 
to acquire the six perfections and other qualities of a 
Bodhisatta. How Devadatta helped him is explained in a 
Mongol work, which comes from a Mahayana source, and 
is probably part of the same teaching. ‘‘ Stupid men believe 
wrongly and assert that Devadatta has been an opponent 
or enemy of Buddha. That the sublime Bodhisatta Deva- 
datta during five hundred births, in which Buddha was going 
through the career of a Bodhisatta, inflicted on him all 
possible evil and suffering was simply in order to establish 
the excellence and high qualities of the Bodhisatta.”’ ® 


1 Dhp. com. * Lotus, ch. XI, tr. 
3 pee 0 a 4. “Schmidt, Geschichte der Ost- pr fae nig - 311, St. Petersburg, 
1829 


136 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


The Pali legend seems at first sight as if it may be a post- 
canonical development of stray references in the Canon. 
Devadatta is never mentioned in the Digha, and only twice 
in the Majjhima, but in the latter occurs a legend which 
implies the existence of the whole story. In the Abhaya- 
rdjakumdra-sutta prince Abhaya is said to have associated 
with the Niganthas at Rajagaha. Nataputta suggested 
that the prince should go to Buddha and win fame by asking 
Buddha a question that would put him in a dilemma. “Go 
to the ascetic Gotama and ask if he would utter that speech 
which is unpleasant and disagreeable to others. If he says 
yes, then ask how he differs from the common people, for 
the common people utter speech that is unpleasant and 
disagreeable to others. But if he denies, then ask why he 
said of Devadatta that he was destined to states of punish- 
ment, to hell, doomed to stay there for a cycle, and incurable ; 
for at that speech Devadatta was angry and displeased. 
If the ascetic Gotama is asked this question, he will be 
neither able to swallow up nor down.” Abhaya went, 
but looking at the sun thought it too late, and invited Buddha 
to a meal for the next day, when he put his question, whether 
Buddha uttered unpleasant and disagreeable speech. Buddha 
however answered, ‘“‘ Not absolutely.” ‘‘ The Niganthas 
have heard so,” said Abhaya. Buddha asked why he said 
that, and then Abhaya had to explain the whole plot. There 
was a small child sitting in Abhaya’s lap at the time, and 
Buddha asked, ‘‘ What do you think, prince? If this boy 
through the carelessness of you or his nurse were to get a 
stick or a pebble in his mouth, what would you do?” “I 
should take it from him, Lord, and if I could not get it at 
once, I should seize his head with my left hand, and bending 
my finger get it with my right hand, even if I drew blood. 
And why ? Because I have compassion on the boy.” ‘‘ Even 
SO, prince, speech that the Tathagata knows to be untrue, 
false, and useless, and also unpleasant and disagreeable 
to others, he does not speak; that which he knows to be 
true, real, but useless, and also unpleasant and disagreeable 
to others that too he does not speak ; that which he knows 
to be true, real, and useful, and also unpleasant and dis- 
agreeable to others, in that case he knows the right time to 
express it. Speech that he knows to be untrue, false, and 


RIVAL SCHOOLS 137 


useless, and also pleasant and agreeable to others, he does 
not speak; that which is true, real, but useless, and also 
pleasant and agreeable to others, that too he does not speak ; 
but that which is true, real, and useful, and also pleasant and 
agreeable to others, in that case he knows the right time 
to express it.” 

It is clear from this incident that the story of Devadatta 
was an accepted fact to the compilers of the Majjhima. 
However much invention there may be in it, we are still 
left with the question whether a schism actually took place, 
or whether the whole story is a romance that has developed 
from incidents about a rebellious monk. Rhys Davids 
once thought that a reference to the sect of Devadatta 
might be implied in a list of ten classes of ascetics found 
in Anguttara, iii 276, among which occurs the sect of 
Gotamakas, Gotama here being possibly the clan-name 
of Devadatta. But the commentary has no knowledge of 
this, and Rhys Davids appears to have discarded his surmise, 
for in his article on Buddhist Law he treats these sects as 
existent before the rise of Buddhism.! This is borne out by 
the fact that the Gotamakas are mentioned as Gautamas 
in the Lalita-vistara (492) in a list of nine sects, and they 
are evidently identical, as several of the classes correspond 
with the Pali; but they are there represented as previous to 
Buddha’s teaching. They meet him and address him in the 
sixth week after his enlightenment, as he was going to the 
goat-herd’s tree. In any case no trace of the party appears 
in the subsequent history. 

There is no reason why Devadatta’s party, if it had continued 
to exist, should have been ignored, for the records mention 
the unruly Subhadda, the later dispute with the Vajji monks, 
and the eighteen schools. The probability of a historical 
kernel for the story lies, as Oldenberg has pointed out, in 
the statement of the five rules.2. This rather implies an 
actual dispute in the Order. The stories of Devadatta’s 
crimes may be as much the invention of his enemies as those 
of the misdeeds of his youth. When we come down to the 
fifth century A.D., we find that Fa Hien mentions the existence 


1 Dial. i 222; articles Devadatta and Law (Buddhist) in ERE. 

3 The first four rules are included in the dhutangas, 13 ascetic rules (12 in Sanskrit 
works) to be optiorially adopted by the monks, They occur in the supplement 
to the Vinaya (v 131), and do not appear to be early. 


138 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


of a body that followed Devadatta, and made offerings to 
the three previous Buddhas, but not to Sakyamuni.! It 
may even be the case that this body consciously adopted 
Devadatta’s rules, but there is nothing to suggest that it 
had continued to exist in complete obscurity from the 
time of Devadatta for a thousand years. 

The Vinaya legend says that Bimbisara resigned his 
kingdom to his son Ajatasattu. From the Digha we learn that 
Ajatasattu finally killed his father, for at his meeting with 
Buddha, after hearing the discourse on the advantages 
of the ascetic life, he said, ‘‘ Trangression overcame me, 
Lord, in that in folly, stupidity, and wickedness, for the 
sake of lordship I deprived my righteous father, the righteous 
king, of life. May the Lord accept my transgression as 
transgression that I may be restrained in the future.” ? 
According to the Chronicles he killed his father eight years 
before Buddha’s death. Hoernle infers from the Jain 
authorities that he had ascended the throne when his 
father resigned it ten years before. Jain accounts say that 
Ajatasattu during the early years of his reign was engaged 
in a great war with Cedaga, king of Vesali, for the possession 
of an extraordinary elephant.? The Pali authorities know 
nothing of this king, who may have been one of the rajas of 
the aristocratic government of the Vajjis, but they speak of 
Ajatasattu intending to make war on the Vajjis in the year 
before Buddha’s death.4 

Just as Bimbiséra became the supporter of Buddha in 
the Magadha country, so Pasenadi, king of the Kosalas, 
is represented as becoming his royal patron at Savatthi. 
The story of this king’s later life belongs to the commentaries, 
but allusions to it appear in the Canon. Bimbisara had 
married a sister of Pasenadi, and when he was killed by his 
son she died of grief. The revenue of a Kasi village had 
been assigned to her as part of her dowry, but after BimbisAra’s 


1 Ed. Giles, p. 35. 

? Buddha accepts his confession, and this has been taken as if it were the end of 
the matter, and as if Ajatasattu were let off far too easily. But he would still have 
to bear the effect of his karma in the future, as the great Moggallana had to the 
day of his death. Buddha after Ajatasattu’s departure mentions one punishment 
that overtook him in his present life, for it was owing to this sin that the spotless 
eye of the Doctrine did not arise within him at that meeting. 

8 See references in Hoernle’s art. Ajivikas, ERE. 

* Digha ii 72; cf. Majjh. i 231. 


PLATE IV 


AJATASATTU VISITS BUDDHA 


[ face p. 138 


RIVAL SCHOOLS 139 


murder Pasenadi refused to continue it. Hence he was 
at war with his nephew with varying success, until on 
following the military advice of certain old monks he captured 
Ajatasattu alive, and peace was finally made by his giving 
his daughter to Ajatasattu with the revenue of the disputed 
village as her bath-money.! 

It is during the reign of Pasenadi’s son that the legends 
put the destruction of the Sakyas. Pasenadi is said to have 
wished to gain the confidence of the Buddhist monks, and 
thought that he could do so by forming a marriage alliance 
with the Sakyas. He accordingly sent messengers to them 
applying for a Sakya maiden as wife. The Sakyas had too 
much family pride to consent, but fearing his hostility 
they offered him Vasabhakhattiya, a daughter of the Sakya 
Mahanama by a slave woman. The messengers were on the 
look out for treachery, but by a trick they were made to 
believe that she ate out of the same dish with her father, 
and was therefore of pure caste. She was accepted, and gave 
birth to a son Vidiidabha, who grew up, and when paying 
a visit to his mother’s relatives accidentally discovered his 
low origin. He then swore to take revenge on them when he 
should become king. 

Pasenadi’s general was Bandhula, but the king becoming 
afraid of his growing power had him and his sons killed. 
He put in his place Bandhula’s nephew Digha Karayana, 
who was secretly enraged with the king. Once the king took 
Digha with him while on a visit to Buddha in a Sakya village. 
_ It is this visit which is recorded in the Dhammacetiya-sutta 
(Majjh. ii 118), at the end of which the king said, ‘‘ The Lord 
is a kshatriya, I too am a kshatriya; the Lord is eighty 
years of age, I too am eighty years of age.’’ But while 
Pasenadi was conversing, Digha hurried off with most of 
the attendants and the symbols of royalty to Savatthi, and 
set Vididabha on the throne. Pasenadi finding himself 
deserted went towards Rajagaha intending to seek the help 
of Ajatasattu, but he died of exposure on the way, and his 
nephew gave him burial. Vidiidabha on becoming king 
remembered his grudge against the Sakyas, and made plans 
for an expedition. Buddha as he was surveying the world, 
perceived Vididabha’s intention, and went and induced 

1 Samy. i 68 ff.; Jat. ii 403. 


140 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


him to turn back. Three times he did this, but on the fourth 
occasion he found that the consequences of the karma of 
the Sakyas in poisoning the water of the river could no 
longer be averted, and this time he did not go out. So the 
king slew all the Sakyas down to (beginning with) sucklings. 

It is impossible to ascertain what amount of truth may 
underlie this legend, but its origin can be best explained 
on the supposition that there actually was a massacre. It 
is in conflict with the description of the division of Buddha’s 
relics, according to which the Sakyas sent to receive a share, 
over which they built a stipa; but all we can infer from this 
account is that at the time when it was composed, there 
were eight relic-shrines in existence, one of which was said 
to be that of the Sakyas. It is probable that this contra- 
diction has given rise to still later legends explaining how some 
of the Sakyas escaped. The Dhammapada commentary 
describes the massacre in almost the same phrase as the 
Jataka, but instead of ‘ all’ it says ‘ the rest of’ the Sakyas, 
and tells how some of the fugitives by using an ambiguous 
phrase escaped the vengeance of Vididabha. MHiuen Tsiang 
is still more explicit. According to him one of the Sakyas 
who escaped reached Udyana (in the extreme north west 
of India), and became king there. He was succeeded by 
his son Uttarasena. When the relics of Buddha were about 
to be divided, Uttarasena arrived as a claimant, but coming 
from 2 border country he was treated with ‘little regard by 
the others. Then the devas published afresh the words 
which the Tathagata uttered when he was about to die, 
assigning a share to Uttarasena, and the king obtained 
his portion of the relics, which he brought back, and erected 
a stiipa in his city of Mungali.? 

The two chief disciples, Sariputta and Moggallana, are 
said in the commentaries to have died shortly before Buddha. 
But more trustworthy evidence than these accounts lies in 
the fact that they are never mentioned as alive after Buddha’s 
death. For the commentators a difficulty was raised owing 
to the story in the Mahdparinibbdna-sutia that Sariputta 
made his great utterance of faith in Buddha while the latter 
was on his last journey from Rajagaha to the place where he 
passed away. Hence the death of Sariputta had to be put 


1 Digha, ii 165; Jat.iv 144; Dhp. com.i344; Hiuen Tsiang (Beal), ii 126. 


RIVAL SCHOOLS 141 


still later than this, on the full-moon day of the month 
Kattika (Oct.-Nov.), and the death of Moggallana a fortnight 
afterwards. Buddhaghosa is thus compelled to insert these 
events after the last Retreat which Buddha kept near 
Vesali.} 

It was at this time, says Buddhaghosa, that Buddha went 
from Vesali to Savatthi, and Sariputta came and showed 
himself to Buddha. Sariputta then practised concentration, 
and finding that the chief disciples attain Nirvana before 
the Buddhas saw that his store of life would last seven 
days. But he decided to convert his mother first, and to 
die in the room where he was born. Having obtained 
Buddha’s permission, and after giving a display of magic 
power and teaching the brethren for the last time, he set 
out for Nalaka, his home near Rajagaha. There his mother 
prepared his room for him and lodgings for five hundred 
monks. During his sickness the four Great Kings, Sakka, 
Brahma, and other gods visited him. His mother was 
astonished to know who they were, and thought, “‘ So much 
is my son’s greatness: Ah, what will the greatness of my 
son’s Lord and teacher be like!” Sariputta thought it was 
the right fime to instruct her, and established her in the 
fruit of the First Path. Then he thought, ‘‘ Now I have given 
my mother, the brahmin lady Ripasari, the recompense for 
my maintenance; with so much she will have enough,” 
and dismissed her. He assembled the monks, and addressing 
them for the last time, asked pardon for anything he had done 
that they did not like, and at dawn attained Nirvana. The 
elder Cunda took his bowl, robes, and strainer with the relics 
to Savatthi, and Buddha having caused a relic-shrine to be 
made for them went to Rajagaha. 

At that time Moggallana was living at Rajagaha on Isigili 
hill. He used to go to the world of the gods and tell of the 
disciples of Buddha who were reborn there, and of the 
disciples of the heretics, who were reborn in hell. The 
heretics saw their honour decreasing, and decided to bring 
about his death. They paid a thousand pieces to a robber 
to go and murder him, but when Moggallana saw him coming 
he rose in the air by his magic power. This happened for 
six days, but on the seventh he could not do so, as the power 

1 Digha com, on ii 102; death of Moggallana in Jat. v 125; Dhp. com. iii 65. 


142 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


of his former karma overcame him. In a previous life he 
had decided with his wife to kill his aged parents, and took 
them in a car to the forest. There making a noise like 
robbers he beat them, and they, as their sight was dim, not 
recognising their son called out that robbers were killing 
them, and told him to flee. Then Moggallana thought, 
“* Even when they are being beaten they think of my welfare : 
I am doing what is unfitting.” So he pretended that the 
robbers were fleeing, and took them home again.! But his 
karma remained unexhausted like fire hidden under ashes, 
and overtook him in his last body, so that he was unable 
to rise in the air. The robbers crushed his bones and left him 
for dead, but he retained consciousness, and by the force of 
concentration covering himself with a clothing of trance, 
went to Buddha, asked his permission, and attained Nirvana. 
Buddha took the relics and had a shrine made for them 
at the entrance of the Veluvana monastery. Then having 
given a discourse at Ukkacela on the Nirvana of these two 
disciples he returned to Vesali and resumed his journey. 

These two legends, if not in the strict sense edifying, 
have an instructive aspect in showing that a relic-shrine to 
Sariputta was known at SAvatthi, and one to Moggallana 
at Rajagaha, no doubt existing there in later times. That 
is the reason for the strange geographical arrangement by 
which Buddha breaks his journey to go to Savatthi to 
receive the relics and then to Rajagaha. The death of the two 
disciples had to be put at this period simply because an 
incident relating to Sariputta was inserted in the Pali story 
of Buddha’s last journey. But it is not placed there by 
the Tibetan, and seems to have been inserted as a suitable 
addition by the Pali compiler. That Sariputta did die in the 
room where he was born, and that Moggallana met with 
a violent end, looks like genuine tradition, but it can scarcely 
be said that with this we reach a firm basis of history. 


1 According to the Dhp. com. he actually killed them, 


CHAPTER XI 


THE LAST DAYS 


od (face account of Buddha’s last days is contained in three 

suttas.1 These are not properly speaking discourses. 
but portions of legend in which discourses have been inserted. 
The chief of them, the Great Discourse of the attainment of 
Nirvana, is known to have existed in several schools. It 
tells of the journey of Buddha from Rajagaha across the 
Ganges to Vesali, where he spent Retreat for the last time, 
and then by stages to Kusinara in the country of the Mallas, 
where he passed away. The references in it to the practice 
of pilgrimages, to later events mentioned in the form of 
prophecies, and allusions that show a developed form of the 
Canon, indicate that it is one of the very latest portions 
of the Scriptures. 

The sutta opens with a visit to Buddha, who was staying 
at Rajagaha on Gijjhakita hill, from a royal minister of 
king Ajatasattu. The minister informed him that the king 
was intending to make war on the Vajji tribes. Buddha 
told him of the discourse that he had once delivered to 
the Vajjis on the seven conditions of prosperity ; and the 
minister admitted that the king’s plan was impracticable, 
unless he could create dissension among them. Buddha 
thereupon assembled the monks, and gave them a discourse 
on the same seven conditions of their own prosperity, followed 
by four other lists, and a list of six. 

Buddha then set out with a large attendance of monks 
to Ambalatthika and then to Nalanda, evidently going 
northwards, as his goal was Vesali. It was at Nalanda 
that Sariputta uttered his ‘lion roar’ (sthandda) of faith 
in Buddha. ‘Such, Lord, is my faith in the Lord, that 
there has not been, will not be, nor is there now another 
ascetic or brahmin greater or of more wisdom, that is to 

1 Mahaparinibbana-s., analysed in this chapter, Mahdsudassana-s., a discourse 
delivered by Buddha on his death bed, and Janavasabha-s., Buddka’s story of 


the visit of Bimbisara after death to this world, told at Nadika ; the ‘ lion-roar’ 
of Sariputta also exists in separate suttas, and is here probably an insertion. 


144 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


say, in enlightenment.” On being questioned he admitted 
that his knowledge had not penetrated the mind of the 
Buddhas of the past, and future, or even of the Buddha of 
the present ; but just as in a royal border fortress, which 
has but onc gate, and no other entrance big enough even for 
a cat, the doorkeeper knows that all beings that enter it must 
do so by the gate, even so did Sariputta understand the 
drift of the doctrine. Like the Buddhas of the past and 
future, ‘‘ The Lord, the arahat, the completely enlightened, 
having abandoned the five hindrances, having comprehended 
the defilements of the mind that weaken, having the mind 
well fixed on the four subjects of mindfulness, and having 
duly practised the seven constituents of enlightenment, 
is enlightened with the highest complete enlightenment.” 
Buddha then went on to Pataligama, a village on the south 
bank of the Ganges, and addressed the villagers in their 
hall on the five evil consequences of immorality and the 
advantages of morality. At this time the Magadha ministers 
were building a fortress there for repelling the Vajjis. Buddha 
with his divine vision saw the tutelary divinities! of the 
houses that were being built ; and as they were gods of high 
rank, and were influencing the minds of powerful persons 
to build there, he prophesied the future greatness of the 
place as the city Pataliputta. The next day he accepted a 
meal from the ministers, and when he left they said, ‘‘ The 
gate by which the ascetic Gotama departs will be named the 
Gotama gate, and the ford by which he crosses the Ganges 
will be the Gotama ford.” There can be little doubt that in 
the time of the compiler of the legend there were two places 
thus named. The Ganges however was in flood, and people 
were crossing it in boats and rafts, but Buddha, just as a 
strong man might stretch out or bend his arm, disappeared 
from one bank of the Ganges and stood on the other 
bank together with his monks. Then he uttered an udana: 


They that cross the expanse of ocean, 

Making a bridge across the pools, 

While the people bind rafts— 

They that have reached the other shore are the wise. 


1 The idea of tutelary divinities of a house is common Indian belief, and is found 
in the Vedas. (Hymn to Vastoshpati, Rigveda, VII 84.) The Jataks (i 226) tells 
of such a divinity that lived in the fourth story of Anaithapindika’s house, and tried 
to persuade him to give up his services to Buddha, 


THE LAST DAYS 145 


He then went on to Kotigama, and addressed the monks 
on the Four Truths, ending with the words : 


Through not perceiving the Four Noble Truths, 

One is reborn for long ages in birth after birth ; 

These truths are perceived ; that which leads to existence is done away ; 
The root of pain is cut off ; now there is rebirth no more. 


His next stay was with the Nadikas of Nadika (or Natika), 
where Ananda mentioned to him the names of a number 
of monks, nuns, and lay people, who had died there; and 
Buddha told in which of the four stages each of them had 
died.1_ But he declared that it was troublesome for him to 
do this, and gave Ananda the formula of the Mirror of the 
Doctrine, by which a disciple could tell for himself that he 
was free from rebirth in hell, as an animal, from the realm 
of ghosts (petas), from the lower states of suffering, that he 
had entered the stream, and that he was destined for 
enlightenment. The Mirror consists in having unwavering 
faith in Buddha, the Doctrine, and the Order. Such a one 
is possessed of the moral rules dear to the Noble Ones, the 
rules that are whole, unbroken, unspotted, unblemished, 
productive of freedom, extolled by the wise, unsullied, and 
tending to concentration. 

Going on to Vesali he stayed in the grove of Ambapili, 
where he gave a short discourse to the monks on being 
circumspect and mindful in their actions. Ambapali was a 
famous courtesan of Vesali, and on hearing of Buddha’s 
arrival she drove out from the city to see him, and after 
hearing a discourse invited him with the monks to a meal 
for the next day. This he accepted, and had to refuse the 
Licchavis of Vesali, who came with a similar request. After 
the meal Ambap§4li took a low seat, and sitting on it said, 
**T give, Lord, this park to the Order of monks with Buddha 
at the head.’? Buddha accepted it, and after staying there 
some time went on to the village of Beluva. There he deter- 
mined to keep Retreat, and told the monks to keep Retreat 
at Vesali. After entering on Retreat he became dangerously 
ill, but he repressed his sickness, saying, ‘‘ It would not be 
fitting for me to attain Nirvana without having addressed 
my attendants, and without having taken leave of the 

1 It was on this occasion that he is said to have told the stury recorded as the 


Janavasabha-sutta. 
rt 


146 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Order of monks.” Ananda was alarmed, but said that he 
had one consolation: ‘“‘ The Lord will not attain Nirvana 
before be has determined something about the Order.” 
Buddha replied, ‘‘ What does the Order expect of me? 
I have taught the Doctrine without making any imner and 
outer, and herein the Tathagata has not the closed fist of 
a teacher with regard to doctrines. It would be one who 
should say, ‘I will lead the Order,’ or ‘the Order looks up 
to me’, who would determine something about the Order. 
But the Tathagata does not think, ‘I will lead the Order’, 
or ‘The Order looks up to me’. Why then should the 
Tathagata determine something about the Order? I am 
now old, advanced in age and years, and in my eightieth 
year. As an old cart keeps together fastened with thongs, 
even so does the body of the Tathagata keep together. 
At the time when the Tathagata not reflecting on any 
external sign (sensation), and with the cessation of each of 
the senses attains and abides in signless concentration of 
mind, then only, Ananda, is the body of the Tathagata well. 
Therefore, Ananda, dwell as having refuges in yourselves, 
resorts ! in yourselves and not elsewhere, as having refuges 
in the Doctrine, resorts in the Doctrine and not elsewhere’’. 
He concluded by propounding the four subjects of mindful- 
ness, and declared, ‘“‘ Whoever now or after my decease 
shall dwell as having refuges in themselves, resorts in them- 
selves and not elsewhere, as having refuges in the Doctrine, 
resorts in the Doctrine and not elsewhere, these my monks, 
Ananda, shall reach to the limit of darkness (rebirth), whoever 
are desirous of learning.” 

The next day he went into Vesali to beg, and on returning 
sat with Ananda by the Capala shrine. There he told Ananda 
that one who has practised the four magic powers could remain 
alive for a cycle ? or for what remains of a cycle, and that he 
had practised these powers himself. But though he gave 
such a clear hint, Ananda was not able to see it, and did not 
ask him to remain, so much was Ananda’s heart possessed 
by Mara. A second and a third time Buddha repeated his 


* Altadipa, not‘ lights to yourselves’ ; the word dipa (dvipa), ‘ island,’ is only 
a synonym for sarana, ‘ refuge.’ 

* This is the natural meaning of kappa,and Mvastu, iii 225 evidently takes it in 
this sense, but Buddhaghosa says it means the full life of a man at that time 
100 years, 


THE LAST DAYS. 147 


statement without effect. He then dismissed Ananda, 
who went and sat down at the foot of a tree not far away, 
and Mara approaching Buddha said: ‘‘ May the Lord now 
attain Nirvana, may the Sugata attain Nirvana. It is now 
time for the Lord to attain Nirvana.” Buddha replied 
that he would not do so as long as his monks were not skilled 
and learned and able to expound, teach, and explain. Mara 
said that all this was now done, and repeated his request, 
and the same reply was made about the nuns, and also in 
the same formal language about laymen and lay women. 
Then Buddha said that he would not do so until his religious 
system should be prosperous, flourishing, extended, held 
by many, widely spread, and well proclaimed by gods and 
men. Mara replied declaring that the whole of this had 
come to pass, and Buddha having ingeniously obtained this 
testimony from the enemy said, “ Trouble not, evil one, 
in no long time the Tathagata will attain Nirvana. The 
Tathagata will attain Nirvana in three months from now.” 
Then he shook off the sum of his remaining life, and as he 
did so there was a great earthquake and thunder. Ananda 
marvelled, and came and asked Buddha the cause. Buddha 
gave him a discourse on the eight causes of earthquakes. 
(1) The first is owing to the earth standing on water, the water 
on winds, and the winds on space. When the winds blow, 
they shake the water, and the water shakes the earth. (2) 
When an ascetic or brahmin acquiring magic power (iddht), 
or a divinity of great power practises limited earth-perception 
or unlimited water-perception, then he shakes the earth. 
The other six cases are (8) when a Bodhisatta is conceived, 
(4) is born, (5) attains enlightenment, (6) as Buddha turns 
the Wheel of the Doctrine, (7) shakes off his sum of life, 
(8) attains Nirvana without a remainder of upadi. 

Then follow lists of the eight assemblies and Buddha’s 
conduct therein, the eight stages of mastery, and the eight 
stages of release. The two latter lists are classifications 
of states of mind attained by concentration. Buddha then 
told how just after his enlightenment Mara tempted him 
with exactly the same words as he had used on the present 
occasion, and repeated the whole conversation with Mara 
that had just taken place. Thereupon it struck Ananda 
to ask Buddha to stay for a cycle, but Buddha blamed him 


148 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


for not asking before, and mentioned sixteen places where he 
might have done so. “If, Ananda, you had asked the 
Tathagata, he might have refused twice, but he would have 
assented the third time. Therefore, Ananda, this was herein 
a fault of yours, this was an offence.” 

The harshness of this reproof we may be sure was not due 
to Buddha, but to the feelings which arose in the community 
after the origination of this legend. It appears also in the 
story of the first Council, according to which Ananda was 
made to confess his fault before the Order. 

Ananda was then sent to assemble the Vesali monks in the 
hall, and Buddha exhorted them on practising the doctrines 
he had taught them in order that the religious life might last 
long. Then he added, ‘“‘ Come now, monks, I address you : 
subject to decay are compound things, strive with earnestness. 
In no long time the Tathagata will attain Nirvana. The 
Tathagata will attain Nirvana in three months from now.” 

The next day on returning from begging in Vesali, he 
looked back at the city for the last time, and then went 
to the village of Bhandagama. There he preached on the 
four things which being understood destroy rebirth—morality, 
concentration, insight, release. He then passed through 
the villages of Hatthigima, Ambagama, and Jambugiéma,! 
and stayed at Bhoganagara. There he addressed the monks 
on the four Great Authorities. This is a method for deter- 
mining what is actually the doctrine. It shows the arrange- 
ment of the Master’s teaching not only as Dhamma and 
Vinaya, but also as Matika, the ‘ lists ’ forming the systematic 
treatment of the Dhamma known as the Abhidhamma. 
It is no invention of the compiler’s, but he found it in another 
part of the Scriptures, probably in the same place where 
we find it now, Anguttara, ii 167ff. It is a kind of test that 
we should expect to be drawn up by the Community in order 
to settle doubts about the authorised teaching before the 
Scriptures were committed to writing. The four possibilities 
are (1) when a monk declares that he has heard anything 


2 These names mean Elephant-village, Mango-village, and Roseapple-village. 
They are unknown, but there is no reason why they should be inventions, They 
were evidently on the road northwards to the Malla country, and were probably 
known to the compilers of the legends, It is noteworthy that Anupiya, although 
it is in the Malla country is not mentioned. This indicates that the route to 
Kusinaraé went further to the east. 


THE LAST DAYS 149 


directly from the Lord as being Dhamma or Vinaya, and 
the Lord’s teaching, the monks are to examine the Sutta 
or Vinaya to find out if it is there. Similarly, (2) if he claims 
to have heard it from an assembly of the Order at a certain 
place, (3) from a number of learned elders, who have learnt the 
Dhamma, Vinaya, and Matika, or (4) from a single learned elder. 

After leaving Bhoganagara Buddha went to Pava,) and 
stayed in the mango grove of Cunda, the smith. There 
Cunda provided a meal ? with excellent food, hard and soft, 
and a large amount of sikaramaddava® Before the meal 
Buddha said, “‘ Serve me, Cunda, with the sikaramaddava 
that you have prepared, and serve the Order with the other 
hard and soft food.” Cunda did so, and after the meal 
Buddha- told him to throw the remainder of the 
sukaramaddava into a hole, as he saw no one in the world 
who could digest it other than the Tathagata. Then sharp 
sickness arose, with flow of blood, and violent deadly pains, 
but Buddha mindful and conscious controlled them without 
complaining, and set out with Ananda for Kusinara. 

On the way he came to a tree, and told Ananda to spread 
a robe fourfold for him to sit on, as he was suffering. There 
he asked for water to drink from the stream, but Ananda 
said that five hundred carts had just passed over, and the water 
was flowing muddy and turbid. Not far away was the 
river Kakuttha (or Kukuttha), where the Lord could drink 
and bathe his limbs.4 Three times Buddha asked, and when 


1 Mahavira, the Jain leader, is said to have died at Pava (Skt. Papa), but this 
is a place identified by the Jains with the modern village of Pawapuri in the Patna 
District, The Pava of Buddha was within a day’s journey of Kusinara. 

2 This was Buddha’s last meal. All that follows took place within the same day. 

3 The word means pig’s soft food, but does not indicate whether it means food 
made of pigs’ flesh, or food eaten by pigs. The word however is not the obvious 
sikaramamsa, ‘ pigs’ flesh,’ which we should expect, if this were meant. Buddha- 
ghosa definitely takes it as meaning the flesh of a pig, and so did the Great Com- 
mentary according to the Udana commentator, who quotes from it, and says: 
“* sikaramaddava in the Great Commentary is said to be the flesh of a pig made 
soft and oily ; but some say it was not pigs’ flesh (sikaramamsa) but the sprout 
of a plant trodden by pigs ; others that it was a mushroom (ahicchattaka) growing 
in a place trodden by pigs; others again have taken it in the sense of a flavouring 
substance’”’; Udana com.i 399. Rhys Davids, Dial. ii 137 translates ‘ a quantity 
of truffles’, K, E. Neumann Majjhima tr., Vorrede, p. xx, says‘ Eberlust .., der 
Name irgend einer essbaren Pilzart’. J. F. Fleet is still more precise, ‘ The 
succulent parts, the titbits, of a young wild boar,’ JRAS. 1909, p. 21. These 
are unprovable theories, All we know is that the oldest commentators held 
it to be pigs’ flesh. 

4 In the Tibetan the turbid stream appears to be the Kakuttha and the river 
where he bathed the Hirafifiiavati mentioned below. 


150 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Ananda went to the stream, he found the water flowing 
clear and pure, which he took in a bowl, marvelling at the 
wondrous power of the Tathagata. 

While Buddha rested there, Pukkusa, a Malla and pupil 
of Alara Kalama, came and told how Alara was once sitting 
in the open air, and did not see or hear five hundred passing 
carts, though he was conscious and awake. Buddha replied 
that when hc himself was at Atuma, it rained, poured, 
and lightened, and two farmers were struck and four oxen. 
When a great crowd collected, Buddha inquired why, and 
was told what had happened, but although awake in the open 
air, he had seen and heard nothing. Pukkusa was so much 
impressed that he became a lay disciple, and presented 
Buddha with a pair of gold-coloured robes. Buddha accepted 
them, and said, ‘‘ Clothe me with one, Pukkusa, and Ananda 
with the other.”” When Pukkusa had gone, Ananda brought 
the pair of robes near to the body of the Lord,! and they 
seemed to have lost their glow. This was by contrast with 
the marvellous brightness and clearness of skin of Buddha, 
and he told Ananda. that this takes place on two occasions : 
on the night when the Tathagata attains enlightenment, 
and on the night when he attains Nirvana without a remainder 
of upadi,? and this would take place in the last watch of 
the night at Kusinara. 

On arriving at the river Kakuttha he bathed and drank, 
and going to a mango grove lay down on his right side in the 
attitude of a lion with one foot on the other, thinking of 
the right time to gct up.. He then told Ananda that Cunda 
might be blamed for the meal that he had given, but his 
remorse was to be dispelled, and he was to be told thus : 


It was gain to thee, friend Cunda, great gain to thee, that.the 
Tathagata received his last alms from thee and attained Nirvana. 
Face to face with the Lord, friend Cunda. have I heard, face to face 
have I received, that these two alms are of equal fruit and equal result, 
far surpassing in fruit and blessing other alms. What are the two ? 
The alms that a Tathagata receives when he attains supreme complete 
enlightenment, and the alms that he receives when he attains Nirvana 
with the element of Nirvana that is without upadi. Cunda the smith 
has done a deed (lit. heaped up karma) tending to long life, to good 


* Putting one on as an undergarment and one as an upper, says Buddhaghosa. 
* Those constituents of the self, which remain until finally dispersed at the 
death of ono who attains Nirvana. 


THE LAST DAYS 151 


birth, to happiness, to fame, to heaven, to lordship. Thus is the 
remorse of Cunda to be dispelled. 


After crossing the river Hirafifiavati Buddha reached the 
grove of sal trees at Kusinara,! and said, ‘‘ Come, Ananda, 
arrange a bed with the head to the north, I am suffering, 
and would lie down.” He then lay down in the lion attitude 
on his right side, and though it was out of season, flowers 
fell from the sal trees in full bloom, and covered his body. 
Divine mandarava flowers and sandalwood powder fell from 
the sky, and divine music and singing sounded through the 
air in his honour. But Buddha said that it was not merely 
so that he was honoured. ‘‘ The monk, nun, layman, or 
lay woman who dwells devoted to the greater and lesser 
doctrines, who is intent on doing right, and acts according to 
the doctrines, he it is who reveres, honours, venerates, 
and worships the Tathagata with the highest worship.” 

At that time the elder Upavana was standing in front of 
Buddha fanning him. Buddha said, “Go away, monk, 
do not stand in front of me.” Ananda wondered why 
Buddha should speak severely to Upavina, who had been 
attendant for so long, but Buddha explained that there 
were gods of the ten world-systems assembled to see him, 
that there was not a place the size of the point of a hair for 
twelve leagues round that was not filled with them, and 
they were complaining that the monk obstructed their 
view. 

Ananda then asked for instruction on several points. 
It had been the custom for the monks to come after Retreat 
to see and attend on Buddha, but what was to be done 
after the Lord’s decease ? There are four places, said Buddha, 
worthy to be seen by a faithful disciple, places that will 
rouse his devotion: the place where the Tathagata was 
born, the place where he attained enlightenment, where 
he began to turn the Wheel of the Doctrine, and where he 
attained complete Nirvana. All those who make pilgrimages 
to these shrines and die in faith will after death be reborn 
in heaven. 

‘** How are we to act, Lord, with regard to women?” 


1 This place was identified by Cunningham with Kasia in the Gorakhpur 
District. V. A. Smith thought it was in a still undiscovered place in Nepal, 
some 30 miles east of Kathmandu. JRAS. 1902, p. 139. 


152 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


‘‘Not seeing them, Ananda.” ‘If we see them, how are 
we to act?” ‘‘No speaking, Ananda.”’ ‘“‘ What must be done 
by one who speaks?” ‘‘Mindfulness must be exercised, 
Ananda.” 

On being asked how the burial was to be carried out 
Buddha said that believing laymen, kshatriyas and others 
would see to it. It was to be like that of a universal king, 
and the cairn or stipa was to be at four cross roads. He 
further gave a list of persons who were worthy of a stiipa. 

Ananda then went into the monastery,! and taking hold 
of the lintel stood weeping, ‘“‘ Alas, I am a learner with still 
much to do, and my Master is going to attain Nirvana, 
who was so kind to me.”’. Buddha sent for him and consoled 
him, pointing out how all things must change, how he had 
attended Buddha with singlehearted and unbounded love 
of deed, word, and thought, and exhorted him to strive 
earnestly and soon be free from the dsavas. He went on to 
point out to the monks four wonderful qualities in Ananda. 

Ananda tried to persuade him not to pass away at a small 
insignificant place like Kusinara, but Buddha told him 
that it was once Kusavati, the royal city of the universal 
king Mahasudassana, and prosperous like a city of the 
gods? and straightway sent Ananda to announce to the 
Mallas of Kusinara that he would pass away at the third 
watch in the night, and to invite them to come and see him 
for the last time. They came with their whole families, 
and so many were they that Ananda was unable to announce 
each individually to Buddha, but presénted them by families. 

An ascetic of the place named Subhadda had heard the 
news, and thinking that Buddha might resolve his doubts 
came to see him. Ananda tried to repel him, but Buddha 
overhearing allowed him to enter, and converted him. He 
was admitted, and in no long time became an arahat. 

Several minor rules of discipline are said to have been 
decided on this occasion: the mode in which the younger 
and elder monks are to be addressed, the permission to 
abolish some lesser precepts, and the infliction of the brahma- 


1 Vthara ; the compiler appears to have introduced an account not in harmony 
with the previous details, 

? This has been expanded into the story of this king, which immediately follows 
this sutta as the Mahdsudassana-sutta. 


THE LAST DAYS 153 


punishment on the monk Channa. Finally Buddha asked 
the assembled monks to speak if any one had any doubt. 
All were silent, and Ananda expressed his astonishment, 
and declared his faith that there was not a single monk 
who had any doubt. Buddha said, “ Through faith you 
spoke, Ananda, but the Tathagata has the actual knowledge 
that in this Order there is not a single monk who has any 
doubt or uncertainty either about the Buddha, the Doctrine, 
the Order, the Path, or the Way. Of these five hundred 
even the latest monk has entered the stream, is not liable 
to birth in a state of suffering, and is certainly destined for 
enlightenment.”” Then addressing the monks he said, 
“Now then, monks, I address you; subject to decay are 
compound things : strive with earnestness.” These were the 
last words of the Tathagata. 

Then passing into the first trance, up to the second, third, 
and fourth, and into the five stages of attainments he reached 
the stage of the cessation of consciousness and feeling. 
Ananda said, ‘‘ Reverend Anuruddha, the Lord has attained 
Nirvana.” ‘No, Ananda, the Lord has not attained 
Nirvana, he has reached the stage of the cessation of con- 
sciousness and feeling.” He then passed back through the 
stages to the first trance, and again up to the fourth, and 
from this stage he attained Nirvana.? 

There was a great earthquake and terrifying thunder, 
and Brahma Sahampati uttered these verses : 


All beings in the universe 

Shall lay aside their compound state. 
Even so a Teacher such as he, 

The man unrivalled in the world, 
Tathagata with the powers endowed, 
The Enlightened, has Nirvang reached. 


1 These are Vinaya rules, and are probably taken and inserted here from the 
Vinaya legends. 

2 The reason of this order of the stages is probably that the attaining of 
Nirvana from the fourth stage of trance was the original form of the legend, and 
that when the other stages were added this circumstance of the fourth trance 
coming last was still preserved in the above way. The following verses differ 
in number and order in the Sanskrit and in versions preserved in the Tibetan 
and Chinese. They have been discussed by Oldenberg, Studien zur Gesch. des 
buddh. Kanon, p. 169 (K. Ges. d. Wiss. Gott., Phil.-hist. Kl., 1912); M. 
Przyluski, Le Parinirvana et les funérailles du Buddha, JA, wai-juin, 
1918, p. 485 ff. : 


154 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 
Sakka, king of the gods, said : 


Impermanent, alas! are compounds ; 
They rise up and they pass away ; 
Having arisen then they cease, 
And their extinguishing is bliss. 

The elder Anuruddha uttered these verses : 
No breathing in or out was there 
Of him with firm-established heart, 
When the great sage attaining peace 
Free from all passion passed away ; 
Then he with heart released from clinging 
Controlled and bore his suffering. 
As the extinction of a flame. 
Even so was his heart’s release. 


The elder Ananda uttered this verse : 


Then was a terrifying awe, 

Then was a horrifying dread, 

When he of all the marks possessed, 
The Enlightened, had Nirvana reached. 


Amid the lamentation of all except those of the brethren 
who were free from passion, Anuruddha consoled them with 
the Master’s teaching that there is change and separation 
from all pleasant things and that everything having an origin 
must decay. 

The next day Anuruddha sent Ananda into Kusinara 
to inform the Mallas, and they came with scents, garlands, 
all kinds of music, and five hundred sets of robes to do honour 
to the body of the Lord with dancing, singing, music, garlands, 
and scents. For six days this continued, and on the seventh 
they decided to take the body by the south to cremate it. 
Eight chief men of the Mallas prepared to do so, but they 
could not raise the body. Anuruddha explained to them 
that it was the purpose of the gods that they should go by 
the north, take it to the middle of the city by the north 
gate, out by the east gate to the Makuta-bandhana shrine, 
and there perform the ceremonies. Immediately they had 
assented to this, the whole of the town was covered knee- 
deep with mandarava flowers that fell from the sky. Then 
Ananda told the Mallas how to prepare the body for cremation, 
according to the instructions that he had received from 
Buddha. 


THE LAST DAYS 155 


At this point the narrative is interrupted by two incidents. 
Kassapa the Great with a company of monks arrived from 
Pava. While on the way he had met an Ajivika ascetic with 
one of the mandarava flowers that had fallen from the 
sky, and from him he learned of Buddha’s death. Among 
the company was a certain Subhadda,! who had entered the 
Order in his old age, and he said, “‘ Enough, friends, do not 
grieve or lament; we are well freed from the great ascetic. 
We have been troubled by being told, ‘This is befitting 
to you, this is not befitting to you.’ Now we can do what we 
wish, and refrain from doing what we do not wish.” But 
Kassapa consoled the company with the Master’s teaching 
that there is change and separation from all pleasant things. 

Meanwhile four chiefs of the Mallas tried to light the 
funeral pyre, but were unable. Anuruddha explained to them 
that it was the purpose of the gods that the pyre should not 
light until Kassapa the Great had come and saluted it. 
When he arrived with his company of five hundred and had 
done reverence to the pyre, it caught fire of itself. It burned 
without leaving behind any of the skin, flesh, sinews, or 
fluid of the joints, or any ash and soot. Streams of water 
came from the sky and extinguished it, and the Mallas 
extinguished it with scented water. Then they put a fence 
of spears round, and continued the celebration for seven 
days. 

Ajatasattu, king of the Magadhas, heard the news, and sent 
a messenger to say, ‘‘ The Lord was a kshatriya. I too ama 
kshatriya ; I am worthy of a share of the relics of the Lord. 
I will erect a stiipa over the relics of the Lord and make a 
feast.”’> The Licchavis also of Vesali, the Sakyas of Kapila- 
vatthu, the Bulis of Allakappa, the Koliyas of Ramagama, 
a brahmin of Vethadipa, and the Mallas of Pava asked 
for a share. But the Mallas of Kusinara in their assembly 
refused to make a division, as the Lord had attained Nirvana 
in their domain. Then the brahmin Dona counselled concord, 
and proposed to divide the relics into eight equal parts 
for each of the eight claimants. Having done so he asked for 

1 This monk has been without reason identified with the Subhadda mentioned 
above, But the latter was not in the company of Kassapa; he was at Kusinara 


and was converted on the day of Buddha’s death, of which this unruly Subhadda 
had heard nothing. According to the Tibetan he obtained permission from 


Buddha to pass away first. 


156 #THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


himself the measuring vessel, over which he erected a stiipa 
and made a feast. The Moriyas of Pipphalivana came too 
late for a share and received the ashes. Two lists. then 
follow, one of the ten divisions as given above, and another 
in verse giving an extended list of the places where the 
measures (dona) 1 of Buddha’s relics are worshipped. These 
passages are discussed below. 

The Mahdparinibbdna-sutta was once held to be one of 
the earliest in the Pali Canon, but Rhys Davids’ analysis 
of it,2 which shows that most of it occurs in other parts of 
the Scriptures, makes it at first sight appear doubtful whether 
we have anything that may be called a whole. A closer 
examination however makes it clear that these passages are 
not strung together to make a sutta. They are separate 
discourses inserted in a continuous narrative. The narrative 
itself is a late legend, as the references to shrines and to 
methods of determining what are Buddha’s utterances 
show. Some of the discourses may even be Buddha’s words, 
but we have only the testimony of the narrator for holding 
that they were uttered on these particular occasions. We 
have good reasons to believe from their characteristic form 
that they were taken directly from the other parts of the 
Canon where they are still found. These parts are chiefly 
the Anguttara and the Uddna. The former work arranges 
all its matters according to the number of subjects discussed, 
and the Anguttara passages found in this sutta have exactly 
the same feature—such as seven conditions of welfare, five 
consequences of wrong doing, eight causes of earthquake, 
etc. The first of these passages is indeed stated to be one 
which Buddha had delivered at a previous time. Similarly 
the passages that occur in the Uddna all end in this sutta 
with the fervent utterance, the actual udana, as in the 
collection of that name. 

It is clear also that the narrative portion of the sutta 
was enlarged. Parallel narrative portions are found in the 
Samyutta. Three of the incidents have been made so 
extensive that in the Pali they are treated as separate suttas. 
These are the Mahdsudassana-sutta, the Janavasabha-sutta, 


1 Divy. 380 speaks of a dronastupa, ‘ measure-stiipa,’ or stipa of Drona ; this 
gig de an ven of the name of the brahmin as Drona or Dona. 
ial. ii 72. 


THE LAST DAYS 157 


and the Sampasddaniya-sutta. The first of these in both the 
Tibetan and the Chinese recensions is incorporated in the 
sutta. The last of these (an enlargement of the ‘ lion-roar’ 
of Sariputta) is shown to be an addition from its absence 
in the Tibetan, and its omission is not a mere accident, 
but because Sariputta’s death is there said to have taken 
place at an earlier date. The nucleus of the whole, the 
account of Buddha’s death from his last words down to 
the lamentations of the monks, also occurs as a separate 
sutta.} 

As compared with the stories in the commentaries of 
Buddha’s youth, the story of his death is an earlier document, 
but from its references to Buddha’s conception and birth 
and to the legends of his being destined for universal kingship 
or Buddhahood it is clear that the legendary story of his 
birth was already in existence. The difference between 
them as historical documents is that the stories of the birth 
and infancy refer to an earlier time, of which details of 
biography and even the very basis are not likely to have 
been known or remembered. But at the time of Buddha’s 
death there was a community which was interested in 
preserving a record of him, and which must have possessed 
many unwritten accounts. What his contemporaries actually 
knew and remembered we cannot tell, because what we 
possess is the tradition recorded in a formal manner at a 
much later date, but earlier than the time of Asoka.? There 
is at least the attempt to give the record as a contemporary 
document, shown in the greatness of Pataliputta being stated 
in the form of a prophecy. Except to the eye of faith this is 
evidence of a late date to be classed with the references 
to pilgrimages to shrines, the worship of Buddha, the three- 
fold division of the Scriptures, and the numerous miracles, 
all of which show the essential facts mingled inextricably 
with the dogmatic beliefs about the person of a Buddha. 

The implied chronology of events in the sutta is vague, 
but sufficient to show that it is not consistent with later 
tradition. After Retreat, i.e. about the end of September, 
Buddha met the monks, and told them that he would attain 


1 Samy. i 157; the most extensive comparison with other recensions is by 


Przyluski, JA., 1918, 85 ff., 401 ff.; 1919, 365 ff. 
2 The final recension may be still later, for even the commentary admits that 


there are late additions, as will be seen below. 


158 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Nirvana in three months. This implies in the following 
December or January, and harmonises with the statement 
that the sal trees (Shorea robusta) were in bloom out of season 
when he passed away.!_ But the date given in the later Pali 
tradition is three months later than this, full-moon day of 
Visikha (April-May),? and the fact that this is also the 
traditional date of the birth and of the Enlightenment is 
sufficient to suggest how it arose. 

Hiuen Tsiang ° also gives this date as the general tradition, 
but says that the Sarvastivadins give the day of Buddha’s 
death as on the eighth of the last half of the month Karttika 
(Oct.-Nov.), ie. a week before full moon in this month. 
This cannot be made to fit the sutta, as it implies less than 
three months, but it is the date which Fleet has tried to 
establish as historical, and which he made 18 Oct. 483 B.c.4 
His argument consisted in assuming that the year was 
483 B.c., that Retreat would suitably begin 25 June, and that 
the prediction of his death uttered to Mara may be reasonably 
referred to the end of the first, three weeks of Retreat. But the 
identical prediction was made also to the monks, and the very 
next day Buddha resumed his journey, which shows that the 
prediction is to be put at the end of the period of Retreat. 
The Sarvastivadin tradition may be old, but there is nothing 
to show that it was canonical, and even if a precise canonical 
date should ever be found, it would remain more probable 
that it was an addition to the legend, rather than that a 
really old tradition had been lost by the compilers of our 
present sutta. 

The sutta closes with two lists of relics, and we can quite 
well believe with the Pali commentator that they are later 
additions. The first repeats the ten divisions as described 
above, over each of which a stipa was raised, and concludes 
with the words, ‘even so was it in the past. This is 
evidently intended to describe what the compiler understood 
to be the primitive distribution. The commentator says 


1 They could scarcely be said to be out of season in May. ‘“* Never quite leaf- 
less, the young foliage appears in March with the flowers. The seed ripens in 
June.” D. Brandis; Indian Trees, p. 69, London, 1906; cf. Roxburgh, Flore 
Indica, p. 440, Calcutta, 1874. 

2 Mhem. iii 2; Vin. com. i 4 (Vin, iii 383). 

8 Beal, ii 33. 

4 The day on which Buddha died, JRAS. 1909, p. 1 ff. 


THE LAST DAYS 159 


that these words (and he appears to mean the whole list) 
were added at the third Council, i.e. in the time of Asoka. 
Another list then follows in verse : 


Hight are the measures of the Buddha’s relics. 
Seven measures do they honour in Jambudipa ; 
And one of the Incomparable Being 

In Ramagiama the Naga-rajas honour. 

One tooth by the Tidiva gods is worshipped, 

And in Gandhara city one is honoured ; 

In the Kalinga-raja’s realm one also. 

Another still the Naga-rajas honour. 


This list, says the commentator, was spoken by the elders 
in Ceylon. It may be that the Ceylon elders added it to the 
Pali Canon, but they did not compose it, as it is found also 
in the Tibetan form of the sutta. It is evidently intended 
to describe a later arrangement of the relics than that in 
the first list describing how it was in the past. The reference 
to Gandhara shows that it is late, for it was only in Asoka’s 
time that missionaries were being sent there to preach the 
Doctrine.t It is also implied here that Ramagaima was not 
in India. This is explained by a legend in the Mahdvamsa 
which says that Ramagaéma was overwhelmed by a flood 
and the urn of relics carried out to sea. There it was found 
by the Nagas and preserved in their abode, Ramagama of 
the Nagas.? Some story of this kind is evidently implied 
by the reference to the Nagas in the verses, and the dis- 
appearance from Ramagama of the Mallas of one measure 
of relics is likely to be historical. 

The commentary then gives the story of the fate of the 
eight relic-shrines down to the time of Asoka. Mahakassapa 
fearing danger to the relics persuaded Ajatasattu to have 
one shrine made for them at Rajagaha. The elder collected 
them, but left enough at each of the places for the purpose 
of worship, and took none of those at Ramagama, as the 
Nagas had taken them, and he knew that in the future 
they would be deposited in a great shrine in the Great 


1 Mhvm, xii; this is borne out by Asoka’s inscriptions, 

2 Buddha on his deathbed prophesied that these relics would be taken to the 
Naga world, and afterwards preserved in the great stiipa in Ceylon. This stupa 
was built by Dutthagamani, king of Ceylon 101-77 3B.c. and the monks sent 
Sonuttara, who obtained these relics for it from the Nagas. Mhum, xxx 17 ff. 

3 The account of the relics in Bigandet ii 91 ff., 134 ff., is directly taken from 
this commentary. There is a similar story about them in Divy. 380. 


160 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Monastery of Ceylon. Those which he collected were 
elaborately stored by Ajatasattu in the ground, and a stone 
stipa built above them. The elder in due time attained 
Nirvana, and the king and people died. This appears to 
imply that the place was forgotten. 

When Asoka had come to the throne, he built 84,000 
monasteries and wished to distribute relics arong them. 
At Rajagaha he opened a shrine but found no relics, and 
also examined the other places in vain except Ramagama, 
which the Nagas did not allow him to touch. On returning 
to Rajagaha he summoned the four assemblies, and asked 
if they had heard of any relic-treasury. An old elder told how 
his father had deposited a casket in a certain stone shrine, 
and told him to remember it. The king with the help of 
Sakka then had this shrine opened and found the relics 
deposited by Ajatasattu, He left enough there for the 
purpose of worship, and had the rest distributed among 
the 84,000 monasteries. 

This scarcely looks like trustworthy tradition. The 
story of the 84,000 shrines means that at a time when many 
shrines existed throughout India, their foundation was 
attributed to Asoka, but evidently we cannot proceed on 
the assumption that we have in the sutta a contemporary 
account of the building of the eight relic-shrines, and that 
one of these remained untouched until the end of the 19th 
century. The legend would scarcely have arisen unless 
there had been actual changes in the locality of the relics. 
The question has become actual through the discovery 
of shrines containing relics in the region of Kapilavatthu 
and also in Gandhara. 

In 1898 Mr. W. C. Peppé, according to the report by Dr. 
Biihler,! excavated a stiipa now called Pipravakot, situated 
on his estate half a mile from the Nepalese frontier and 
fourteen miles south east of the ruins of Kapilavatthu. 
In its interior stone chamber he found a number of relic 
vessels—two stone vases, one small stone casket, one large 
stone lota, and a crystal bowl with a fish handle—containing 


1 JRAS. 1898, 387; later discussions by W. C. Peppé, 573; by V. A. Smith, 
868; by T. Bloch, 1899, 425; by Rhys Davids, 1901, 397; by J. F. Fleet, 1905, 
679; 1906, 149, 655, 881; by F. W. Thomas, 1906, 452; by R. Pischel in 
ZDMG. 1902, 157; by A. Barth in Journal des Savants, 1906, 541, transl. in Ind. 
Ant, 1907, 117. 


THE LAST DAYS 161 


bones, cut stones, stars and square pieces of gold leaf with 
impressions of a lion. Round the rim of the lid of one of the 
stone vessels runs an inscription in characters like those of 
Asoka’s inscriptions but without long vowels. Every word 
is clear, but great diversity of opinion arose about the 
translation, and hence about the significance of the whole, 
and without some discussion it is impossible even to transcribe 
it. The inscription forms a complete circle. Unfortunately 
Dr. Biihler’s first readings were made from an eye-copy 
forwarded by the notorious Dr. Fiihrer, who omitted every 
final m, as well as the first letter of the word iyam, which 
consists of three dots, and which he apparently took for the 
end of the inscription. All the earlier interpreters were 
thus misled. It was not till seven years later that J. F. Fleet 
pointed out that in one place the letters yanam are above the 
line, and evidently the last inscribed. They are the end 
of the inscription, and the engraver had no room for them 
in the circle. Still later it was shown by Dr. F. W. Thomas 
that the inscription is in arya verse. Yet most of the discussion 
concerning it went on before these significant facts were 
discovered. The inscription according to Peppé’s reading 
with Fleet’s changes then becomes : 


sukitibhatinam sabhaginikanam saputadalanam 
iyam salilanidhane budhasa bhagavate sakiyanam. 


‘““Of the Sukiti-brothers with their sisters, children, 
and wives: this is the relic-treasury of the Lord Buddha 
of the Sakyas.” } 
But this is not a solution of all the difficulties. The first 
word was taken to mean ‘ Sukiti’s brothers ’, or ‘ Sukiti and 
his brothers’, or ‘ pious brothers’, or again as ‘ brothers 
of the well-famed one’. Pischel held that it was to be read 
sukitt not sukiti, and means ‘pious foundation (fromme 
Stiftung) of the brothers’. The last word sakiyadnam, ‘ of 
the Sakyas,’ may also be scanned sdktydnam, in which case 
it might mean ‘own, relatives of’. Fleet held that this 
was the meaning, and translated it, “this is a deposit of 
relics; (namely) of the kinsmen of Buddha the Blessed 

1 Laders following Fihrer’s order translates: ‘‘ This receptacle of the relics 
of Budha (Buddha), the Holy One (bhagavat), of the Sakivas (Sakyas), (is the 


gift) of the brothers of Sukiti (Sukirti), jointly with their sisters, with their sons 
and their wives.” App. to Hpigr. Ind. x, No. 931. 


M 


162 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


One.”?! On this view it is a relic shrine, not of Buddha, 
but of certain persons who claimed to be his relatives, and 
the shrine was erected by survivors of the Sakyas massacred 
by Vidudabha several years before Buddha’s death.? 

The various explanations have been most fully discussed 
by Barth. Those which rest on the early misreading can 
be put aside. Another misconception was to assume that 
if the inscription is not a forgery, it must be contemporary 
with the death of Buddha. But all the positive evidence 
is in favour of its being of the period of Asoka—the metre, 
and the fact that the letters are identical with those on the 
Asokan inscriptions. It omits long vowels, but there are 
others of the Asokan period that do so. In fact the only 
reason for putting it two centuries earlier was the hope of 
identifying it with the share of the relics received by the 
Sakyas. It was supposed that the inscription stated that 
Sakyas were the depositors, but this was only due to the 
words being read in the wrong order, and through interpreting 
the first word as ‘ brothers of the Well-famed One’, Le. 
Buddha. This epithet swkiti has never been found as a term 
to describe Buddha, nor is it likely that he would be described 
in two different ways in a short inscription. It is best under- 
stood as the personal name of one of the family that deposited 
the relics. The other interpretations as ‘ pious brothers’ 
or as ‘pious foundation of the brothers’, apart from 
grammatical difficulties, would leave the brothers entirely 
unspecified. 

We thus have an inscription recording simply the name of 
the donors, the nature of the deposit, and the name of the 
person to whom the relics are attributed. It is possible that 
in the time of Asoka they were held to be the share of relics 
traditionally given to the Sakyas. The evidence is in favour 
of their being placed in the third century in the shrine where 
they were found, but the relics themselves may be much 


\ 1 His reasons for this translation were (1) the order of the words, but his reasons 
never appear to have convinced other scholars, and (2) the curious nature of 
the relics, which are more likely to belong to a family than to a Buddha, but it 
is a question of what may have been thought likely by the Buddhists of the third 
century B.O. 

2 According to the Dhammapada form of the legend; see p. 140. 

3 A. Barth, loc. cit., where the minutiae of the grammatical difficulties will be 
found. 


THE LAST DAYS 163 


earlier, and criticism has nothing to say against the claim 
that they are authentic. 

The second list of relics mentions four teeth, two of them 
in India, and both of the latter are mentioned in later 
accounts. That in Gandhara may be the one recorded by 
Hiuen Tsiang, who speaks of a stiipa outside the capital 
of the kingdom of Kashmir, containing a tooth of Buddha. 
The tooth of the Kalinga-raja was at Dantapura in south 
India. According to the Mahdvamsa it was taken to Ceylon 
in the reign of Meghavanna in the fourth century a.D., 
and met with many changes of fortune. It is this which is 
held by the Buddhists to be that now preserved at Kandy. 

Other stiipas in Gandhara are mentioned by the Chinese 
pilgrims, and relics have been found there. Though they have 
no direct relation with those of the ancient lists, they have 
an interest in connexion with the question of the depositing 
of relics. 

The stipa at Shah-ji-ki-dheri outside Peshawar was(~ 
excavated by Dr. Spooner, and in March 1909 a relic-casket 
was found therein. He says, ‘‘ The relic-casket itself . . . isa 
round metal vessel, 5 inches in diameter and 4 inches in height 
from the base to the edge of the lid. This lid originally 
supported three metal figures in the round, a seated Buddha 
figure m the centre (which was still in position), with a 
standing Bodhisattva figure on either side. These two 
figures, as well as the halo from behind the Buddha’s head, 
had become detached . . . The same shock apparently which 
dislodged the Bodhisattvas loosed the bottom of the casket 
also... On this bottom was found a six-sided crystal 
reliquary measuring about 24 x 14 inches, and beside it 
a round clay sealing . . . This seal had originally closed 
the small orifice which had been hollowed out to a depth 
of about an inch in one end of the six-sided crystal, and 
within which the sacred relics were still tightly packed. These 
consist of three small fragments of bone, and are undoubtedly 
the original relics deposited in the stipa by Kanishka which 
Hiuen-Thsang tells us were the relics of Gautama Buddha.” ? 

1 Mhvm, continuation of xxxvii; Dathavamsa, JPTS. 1884, English trans- 
lation by Sir M. Coomaraswamy, 1874 ; text and translation by Dr. B. C. Law, 
Calcutta, 1925. J. Gerson da Cunha, Memoir on the history of the Tooth-relic of 


Ceylon, London, 1875. 
2 Arch. Surv., Report 1908-9, p. 49. 


164 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


The name of Kanishka is found on the casket, which thus 
belongs to the end of the first century A.D. 

In 1918-14 Sir John Marshall discovered at Taxila? 
relics of a still earlier date. Some of these have been presented 
to the Buddhists of Ceylon, and were thus described by their 
discoverer, when he made the presentation at Kandy, 8rd 
February, 1917. ‘‘ The relic chamber was square and of 
small dimensions, and was placed not in the body of the 
dagaba, as is usually the case, but at a depth of six feet 
below its foundations. In it there were four small earthen- 
ware lamps—one in each corner of the chamber—four coins 
of the Scythian Kings Maues and Azes I, and a vase of 
steatite. The vase contained a miniature casket of gold 
together with three safety pins of gold and some small 
beads of ruby, garnet, amethyst, and crystal; and inside 
the miniature gold casket again, were some beads of bone 
and ruby with some pieces of silver leaf, coral and stone, 
and with them the bone relic. All of these articles except 
the lamps, which are of no particular interest, are enclosed 
within this casket of silver and gold, which itself is a replica 
of one of the small dagabas of ancient Taxila. The two 
kings Maues and Azes I, to whom the coins appertain, belong 
to the Scythic or Saka dynasty, and are known to have been 
reigning in the first century before our era. The presence 
of their coins, taken in conjunction with the structural 
character of the dagaba and other collateral evidence, leaves 
no room for doubt that the relics were enshrined before 
the beginning of the Christian era.”’ 2 

1 Identified with ruins east and north-east of Saraikula, a eee 20 miles 
north-west of Rawalpindi. 


2 The Pioneer, March 16, 1917; full report in Arch. Surv, Report 1912-13, 
p- 18 ff.; JRAS. 1914, 973 ff. 


CHAPTER XII 


THE ORDER 


ol pete oldest account of the history of the Order after 

Buddha’s death is in the last two chapters of the 
Cullavagga of the Vinaya, which give the history of the 
first and second Councils.1_ This means that our authority 
for the first Council is more than a century, probably two 
centuries, after the event. It has been mentioned that 
when the news of Buddha’s death was brought to Kassapa 
the Great and his monks, one of them, Subhadda, expressed 
his satisfaction that they were now free from the restraint 
of Buddha’s authority. It is this incident which the Culla- 
vagga says was the occasion of Kassapa proposing that there 
should be a recital of the Dhamma and Vinaya. But the 
earlier Digha account makes no mention of a council. Hence, 
said Oldenberg, it proves that the Digha knew nothing 
of a council, and the story of the first Council is pure 
invention.2, But it proves nothing of the kind. It only 
proves that the compiler of the Digha shows no trace of 
connecting Subhadda’s outburst with the summoning of 
a Council. There was no reason why he should do so in the 
middle of an account of Buddha’s death. It may be the case 
that the incident of Subhadda was not the actual occasion 
of the Council. This does not prove that the Council was a 
fiction, but only that the inference of the Cullavagga as to 
its cause was a mistake. Only to this extent can we speak 
of proved invention, or rather of mistaken inference, with 
regard to the historical fact of a Council. Nevertheless, 
if the assumption that the Council was a real event is the 
most natural conclusion, it by no means follows that a faith- 
ful record of the proceedings has been preserved. 


1 Vin, ii 284 ff.; this is the account of the Theravada school. Other much 
later accounts are given in Schiefner, Tib. Leb., and Taranatha’s Hist. of Buddhism. 

2 Vin. i, Introd., p. xxxvii; in Buddha, p. 391, he merely speaks of the account 
being ‘‘ durchaus unhistorisch”’, That may well be so in the case of a quite 
hist rical event, 


166 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


As no written record was made, the account is a tradition 
which became modified by what the compiler knew of the 
circumstances of a later time. The Cullavagga says that 
Kassapa addressed the monks, and told them of his receiving 
the news of the death of Buddha and of the remark of 
Subhadda. This is given in almost the same words as in the 
Mahdparinibbana-sutta. It then goes on with the statement 
that he proposed to recite the Dhamma and Vinaya so that 
it might be known what they really are. The monks then 
asked him to choose the members, and he chose 499 arahats. 
He was also asked to choose Ananda, for Ananda knew the 
Dhamma and Vinaya, although he was not yet an arahat. 
They decided to spend Retreat at Rajagaha and then recite 
the Dhamma and Vinaya.? 

In the first month they repaired dilapidations. The day 
before the assembly Ananda strove far into the night to 
attain complete enlightenment, and succeeded at dawn. 
Kassapa on the motion of the assembly first questioned 
Upali on the Vinaya, asking where the first rule was 
promulgated, concerning whom, the subject of it, and other 
details, and so on throughout the Vinaya. These details are 
what one who learns the Vinaya is expected to know, and they 
are inserted here on the assumption of the compiler that the 
whole arrangement and method of reciting was as he himself 
knew it. In the same way Ananda was questioned about each 
sutta of the Dhamma, and beginning with the Digha he 
recited the five Nikayas. 

Ananda then informed the assembly that the Lord had told 
him that if the Order wished, it might revoke the lesser 
precepts. But Ananda had forgotten to ask which these 
were, and the assembly decided to retain the whole. Ananda 
was blamed for his forgetfulness, and had to confess it as a 
fault. He had also to confess the fault of stepping on the 
Lord’s robe worn during Retreat when sewing it; causing 
the body of the departed Lord to be saluted first by women, 
so that it was soiled by their tears ; not asking the Lord to 
remain for a cycle; and obtaining the admission of women 
to the Order. All these he confessed out of faith in the 


1 The tradition of the Chronicles is that the Council was held under the patronage 
of Ajatasattu on Vebhara, one of the five hills of Rajagaha, at the entrance to 
the Sattapanni cave, and lasted seven months. 


THE ORDER 167 


Order, though he could not see that he was to blame. Even 
these unhistorical details are in no sense inventions of the 
compiler of the account. He found them as history, and 
added them to another detail—the event of the Council 
itself—which also he did not invent. The truth of the belief 
that there was actually a Council must depend on the claim 
to credibility of the tradition that such a Council took place. 
It is not proved to be invention by the fact that it has been 
garnished with inappropriate or anachronistic details. 

The compiler records that the recital included the five 
Nikayas. This shows that he thought the Dhamma to 
have already existed in the form in which he knew it. The 
omission of the Abhidhamma only proves that it was not yct 
known as a separate Pitaka. At the same time it is unneces- 
sary to suppose that anything like the Abhidhamma was in 
existence at the first recital of the Dhamma. The references 
in parts of the Canon to the Matika, the lists of the Abhi- 
dhamma, are probably later than the first Council.? 

There are two facts which go to show that another and 
less elaborate arrangement preceded the present one. Buddha- 
ghosa gives in addition to the present order an arrangement 
in which the five Nikayas are not divisions of the Dhamma, 
but of the whole Canon, and in the fifth are included both 
the Vinaya and Abhidhamma. Further, a probably still 
earlier arrangement of the Canon according to nine angas or 
constituents is also referred to.2 This appears to be prior 
to the division into Nikayas, and to describe various portions 
according to their contents and literary character. As the 
angas are found only in a traditional list, the exact meaning 
of some of the terms is not certain. They are sutta (discourse), 
geyya (prose and verse), veyyadkarana (analysis), gathd (verse), 
udadna (fervent utterances), itivuttaka (passages beginning, 
‘thus it was said’), jdtaka (tales, probably birth-tales), 
abbhutadhamma (marvellous events), vedalla (a term applied 
to certain suttas). In Sanskrit works this list has been 
extended to twelve divisions. 

The recital of the Vinaya is said to have included the 


1 The reports of the Council that come through the Sanskrit do not add more 
credible details. One of them is that Kassapa himself recited the Abhidhamma, 
Schiefner, 7ib. Leb. Hiuen Tsiang (Beal) ii, 164. 

9 Majjh. i 113, ete. 


168 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


stating of the circumstances owing to which each rule was 
given. Evidently the compiler thought that the later 
legendary commentary was included. There is however 
more reason than in the case of the Dhamma for thinking 
that the rules themselves had assumed a definite form 
during Buddha’s life. These form the Patimokkha, the collec- 
tion of 227 rules recited on Uposatha days at full moon and 
new moon in the fortnightly meetings of the Order of each 
district. Even these are extended in the commentary by 
qualifications and exceptions such as inevitably develop 
in any system of casuistics. It is impossible to assume that 
we have the Pdatimokkha in its primitive form, for though 
there. is general agreement between different schools, the 
number is not identical in all. A determination of the 
rules of the Discipline would be the most urgent need, as it was 
also at the second Council. It is this in both cases that has 
a good claim to be considered the historical kernel. 

There was no general head of the Order, but the rank of 
seniority between individuals was strictly preserved. In 
the Ordination service the ceremony of measuring the shadow 
of the sun is observed, so that the exact seniority may be 
known.! The Dipavamsa speaks of ‘ heads of the Discipline ’ 
(vinayapdmokkha), and gives a list of them down to the 
third Council: Upali, Dasaka, Sonaka, Siggava together 
with Candavajji, Tissa Moggaliputta. This may represent 
a list of the senior elders at Rajagaha, but its correctness 
cannot be tested. There are other lists that come from 
Sanskrit sources which do not agree with this.2_ Within 
each district the Order of monks governed itself, and this 
fact is enough to explain the number of schools that 
subsequently arose. 

The Chronicles say that Ajatasattu reigned for fourteen 
years after the death of Buddha. He was killed by his son 
Udayabhadda, who reigned sixteen years. He too was 
killed by his son, Anuruddhaka, who in his turn was killed 
by his son Munda. The combined reigns of the two last 


1 The Ordination service, Upasampada-kammavaca, has been published and 
translated by J. F. Dickson, Venice, 1875, and JRAS. 1875, p. 1 ff. 

2 Kern, Gesch. ii 266. 

* Ananda is said to have declared to a brahmin that no monk had been set up 
either by Buddha or by the Order to be a refuge to them after Buddha’s death. 
They have refuges in themselves and in the Doctrine: Majjh. iii 9; ef. p. 146, 


THE ORDER 169 


were eight years. The son of Munda, Nagadasaka, also killed 
his father, and reigned twenty-four years. Then the citizens 
said, ‘This is a race of parricides,’ deposed Nagadasaka, 
and consecrated the minister Susunaga as king. He reigned 
eighteen years, and was succeeded by his son Kalasoka, 
‘Asoka the black.’1 It was in his reign, a century after 
Buddha’s death, that certain monks of Vesali introduced 
a relaxing of the rules. They held that the following ten 
points were permissible : 


1. To keep salt in a horn. 

2. To eat food when the shadow of the sun had passed two fingers 
breadth beyond noon. 

3. For one who had eaten to go again into the village and eat. 

4. For monks dwelling in the same district to hold more than one 
Uposatha. 

5. To carry out proceedings when the assembly was incomplete. 

6. To follow a practice because it was done by one’s tutor or teacher. 

7 For one who had finished his meal to drink milk that had turned 
but had not yet become curd. 

8. To drink strong drink before it had fermented. 

9. To sit on a rug (not the proper size) if it had no fringes. 

10. To make use of gold and silver. 


The matter reached a head when the elder Yasa, son of 
Kakandaka, came to Vesali and found the laity on Uposatha 
day making contributions of money to the Order. Against 
this he protested, and the subsequent proceedings, recorded 
in a story of much circumstantial detail, were finally concluded 
by the condemnation of the ten points at the Council of the 
seven hundred held at Vesali. What the historical kernel 
may be, apart from the ten points, is more difficult to 
ascertain than in the case of the first Council. One reason 
is that we have more abundant accounts of the second 
Council. The Cullavagga calls it the Council of the Vinaya. 
The Mahdvamsa story is essentially the same, but it goes 
on to say that when the ten points were settled, the elder 
Revata held a Council of the Dhamma under the patronage 
of Kalasoka. Buddhaghosa in his commentary on the 
Vinaya follows this account. _ 

The Dipavamsa tells us that after the wicked monks had 


1 For the chronology see Geiger, transl. of Mhum; V. A. Smith, Karly Hist. 
of India, ch. 2; Kern Gesch, ii 226 ff. The Chronicles distinguish this Asoka 
from the later Dhammasoka. In Téranatha they are ¢onfused or identified. 


170 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


been defeated, they formed another party, and held a rival 
council of ten thousand members, known as.the Great Council 
(mahdsangiti), and that it drew up a perverted recension of 
the Scriptures.1 There can be no doubt that a recension 
differing from that of the Theravada existed, even though 
its relation to the second Council is doubtful. It is at this 
time that all the records place the origination of the eighteen 
schools. Seventeen of these, says the Ditpavamsa, were 
schismatic, and the first of them was that of the 
Mahasanghikas, who held the rival council. Of most of 
the rest little definite is known.? Some of the names imply 
that they were bodies residing in certain districts, a circum- 
stance that would favour the rise of peculiar views. Some 
are named from their characteristic doctrines, and others 
apparently from the names of their leaders. Mrs. Rhys 
Davids has shown that the commentator on the Kathdvatthu 
refers to less than half of the eighteen schools as existent 
in his time. Some of them probably did not for long preserve 
a continuous existence, but the list remained and became 
traditional. 

The story of the third Council shows the process of fission 
going much further. While the accounts of the first two 
Councils are found in Sanskrit sources as well as in the 
Pali, that is, in different schools, this Council belongs to the 
Theravada school alone. Kalasoka reigned twenty-eight 
years, and was followed by his ten brothers, who together 
reigned twenty-two years. Then followed the nine Nandas, 
whose combined rule was also twenty-two years, and of whom 
the last was Dhanananda. He was slain by the great minister 
Canakka (Canakya), who raised to the throne Candagutta 
(Candragupta) of the race of the Moriyas. It was this king, 
known to the West as Sandrocottus or Sandrokyptos, 
who made a treaty with Seleucus Nicator about 804 B.c. 
He reigned twenty-four years, his son Bindusara twenty- 
eight, and was succeeded by his son Asoka. 

The legend of the great Asoka, as told in the Chronicles, 
is that during his father’s lifetime he was made viceroy in 


1 See the passage quoted in the Appendix, p. 252. 

2 For a discussion of the Pali and Sanskrit accounts of these schools see 
Mrs. Rhys Davids’ Prefatory Notes to Points of Controversy (transl. of 
Kathavatthu). 


THE ORDER 171 


Ujjeni, and there his son Mahinda and his daughter Sangha- 
mitté were born. At his father’s death he slew his hundred 
brothers and seized the throne. Four years afterwards he 
was consecrated king. This was 218 years after Nirvana. 
On hearing the preaching of the elder Nigrodha he was 
established in the Refuges and the Precepts, and because 
there were 84,000 sections in the Dhamma, he caused 84,000 
monasteries to be built. He became known as Dhammasoka, 
and his ‘children Mahinda and Sanghamittaé entered the 
Order. 

The heretics then lost gain and honour, and as they came 
into the monasteries, it was for seven years impossible 
for the Uposatha ceremonies to be carried out. A minister, 
who was sent by the king to order them to be performed, 
was foolish enough to try and enforce the command by killing 
some of the monks. Asoka much agitated at the event 
appealed to' the elder Tissa Moggaliputta to know if he was 
involved in the guilt of bloodshed, but the elder told him 
that if the mind was not defiled, there was no resulting 
karma. Then Asoka assembled the total number of monks, 
and asked them what the doctrine of Buddha was. All 
those who gave heretical answers he turned out, 60,000 
in all. The rest declared that they were Vibhajjavadins, 
followers of the doctrine of analysis, which the elder declared 
to be that of Buddha.. Thenceforth the Order held Uposatha 
in concord. ) 

Tissa chose a thousand learned monks to make a collection 
of the Dhamma, and held a council of the Dhamma as had 
been done by the elders Kassapa and Yasa. In the assembly 
he spoke the work Kathdvatthu for the crushing of other 
schools. 

The second and third Councils are usually accepted as 
historical, but the same critical principles which reject the 
first Council would also condemn the others, and Dr. Franke 
quite consistently does so. A conflict of historical principle 
is involved, as will be seen later in the discussion of the 
historicity of the whole period down to Asoka. 

The records that we possess were preserved in such a way 
that it was impossible to avoid the addition of later legends 
and misinterpretations in the record of facts, so that the 
resulting account is not history in the modern sense. But 


172 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


the basis is a central circumstance without which the 
legends would not have accumulated. Are we to judge 
this by the contradictions in the details and reject it 
all, or to conclude that the chroniclers, who undoubtedly 
aimed at telling the truth, have preserved the kernel of 
the whole ? 


CHAPTER XIII 
BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 


od Gas most primitive formulation of Buddhism is probably 

found in the four Noble Truths.1 These involve a 
certain conception of the nature of the world and of man. 
The first three insist on pain as a fact of existence, on a 
theory of its cause, and on a method of its suppression. 
This method is stated in the fourth truth, the Noble Eightfold 
Path. It is this way of escape from pain with the attaining 
of a permanent state of repose which, as a course of moral and 
spiritual training to be followed by the individual, constitutes 
Buddhism as a religion. 

All Indian religions are dominated by a single conception, 
which goes back to pre-Indian times. In both Vedic and 
Old Persian it is expressed by the same word? meaning 
‘law’. It is the view that all things and beings follow or 
ought to follow a certain course prescribed for them. This 
course is based upon the actual nature and constitution 
of the existing world, through which the sun rises duly, 
the seasons return, and each individual part performs its 
own function. The possibility of such a conception must 
have arisen very early in the formation and growth of the 
association of individuals in societies. A member of a tribe 
must act in certain ways supposed to be advantageous to 
his fellow individuals and himself, and certain other actions 
are forbidden. From the later Vedic period we find this con- 
ception expressed as dharma covering every form of human 
action. It includes morals, but is much wider, and its ritual 
aspect is seen in the Brahminical sacrificial literature of 
Buddhist and pre-Buddhist times, which prescribes the 
most minute details, down to the shape and number of the 
bricks in the altar, and which, perhaps owing to our 
fragmentary knowledge of the sources, makes the sacrificial 
and ritual ceremonies appear to overshadow all other 


1 See the First Sermon, above p. 87. 
2 Vedic rta; O. Pers. arta-, seen in names like Artaxerxes; Avestan ashe. 


174 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


activities. This is the dharma of the priests who controlled 
the sacrifices, and who also undertook to interpret the 
corresponding dharma of the warriors, the householders, 
and the serfs. 

But in the sixth century B.c. protests had already arisen, 
not against dharma, but against the view taken by the class 
of brahmins concerning their own functions, and what they 
declared to be the dharma of the other divisions of society. 
Brahminism had not yet reached the extreme east of India, 
and even in the home of Buddhism was probably recent enough 
to have met with opposition and counter-claims. The claim 
of. the Sakyas to belong to the best caste, that of the warriors, 
is well known; and though in the discourses the brahmins 
are treated respectfully, their claims are criticised and 
rejected. This was not peculiar to Buddhism, for there is 
no reason to doubt that the legends about other non- 
brahminical teachers and ascetics who had left the world 
represent a real state of affairs. These teachers were all in 
revolt against the established view of dharma, and offered 
new systems, both theories of existence and ways of salvation 
ranging from mere hedonism and materialism to the most 
extreme forms of self-torture. Two other conceptions which 
Buddhism found current in the thought of the time were 
the dogmas of karma, ‘ action’, and of samsdra, transmigration 
or rebirth. They are the Indian answers to the eternal 
problems of pain and evil. A man does wrong and suffers 
for it. But he may suffer when he has done no apparent 
wrong. Hence his wrong was done in a former life, and if 
he does wrong and apparently receives na retribution, he 
will be punished for his sin in another birth. Like all theories 
that accept sin and evil as positive realities, the doctrine 
of rebirth rests upon faith, and ultimately on the faith that 


1 The word dharma (Pali dhamma) includes conceptions for which there is no 
one word in western languages. Mrs. Rhys Davids has translated it ‘ norm. 
Buddhism, ch. 2. Dharma, as being the principle by which a man regulates his 
life, often corresponds with ‘ religion’, but includes social and ritual activities. 
Hence it may sometimes be translated ‘law’. It is not external law, but the 
principles by which a man should act! When the teaching concerning dharma 
is formulated in a system, it becomes a body of teaching, and it is in this sense 
that the Dhamma of Buddha is translated ‘ doctrine . Another distinct use of 
the word ia in the sense of ‘ thing ’ or‘ object’, In this sense dhammé are objects 
of the mind, and hence they may be ideas or presentations. In primitive Buddhism 
they are presentations of an objective reality, but they are the starting point for 
later subjectivist theories; cf. p. 195 note. 


BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 175 


sin must find its punishment. Buddhism took over the 
established belief without questioning, and the doctrine was 
even defended by.the stories of Buddhist arahats with the 
faculty of perceiying the destinies of those who had died, 
and of individuals who returned from another world to tell 
their fate. The world being thus a place where a certain 
course of action was necessary for welfare, and the individual 
being certain that for any error he would one day be punished, 
it was necessary for him to know what dharma to follow, 
and what the real nature of the world was, so far as it affected 
his course of action. Rival teachers were ready, each 
claiming to have found the way. 

It is on the side of morality that Buddhism is best known 
in the West; and it is on this side that the greatness and 
originality of the founder’s system is seen, whether considered 
in its historical development in discarding or reforming 
current views, or in relation to other systems that mark 
a definite progress in the ethical ideals of humanity. It 
was not merely a rule of life for ascetics, but also a system 
for laymen, applicable in all the duties of daily life; and in 
the case of the monk the moral principles remain an essential 
part of the training of one who has set before himself the aim 
of reaching the highest goal in his present life. We do not 
need to question the fact that Buddha adopted the best of 
the moral teaching that he found. Every system arises out 
-of its predecessor, and Buddha himself is represented as 
blaming the Brahmins for having degenerated from their 
former pure morality. There were many in the world, as 
Brahma told Buddha when he began to preach, who were 
ready to receive the new teaching ; and to these the revelation 
came with an authority for which their moral natures longed. 
Further, as being the ‘eternal dhamma’ it was inherent 
in the true nature of things, and Buddha was held to have 
rediscovered what had been mostly lost. 

Two features that distinguished Buddhist ethics are the 
practical and workable system that it evolved for lay 
people, and the skill with which practices in current belief 
or ritual were spiritualised and given a moral significance. 
In the discourse to the brahmin Kitadanta Buddha tells 
how an ancient king wished to perform a great sacrifice, 
and how he was finally induced by his family priest to 


176 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


perform it so that no oxen, goats, fowls, swine, or other 
living things were slain, no trees were cut down for the 
sacrificial posts, no grass for strewing was cut, the slaves 
and servants were not beaten, but did their work without 
weeping and fear of punishment.} 

Kitadanta asks what sacrifice is more eminent and of 
greater fruit than this. Buddha says the giving of alms to 
virtuous ascetics, still greater is regular giving to the four- 
fold Order, still greater is taking refuge in the Buddha, 
and still greater is keeping with well-disposed mind the 
learner’s sentences. These are the five moral rules, binding 
on all lay people: refraining from killing, from taking what 
is not given, from wrongful indulgence in the passions, 
from lying, and from intoxicants. 

In the Exhortation to Singalaka ? Buddha is represented 
as finding a householder worshipping the six quarters (the 
cardinal points, nadir, and zenith). His father, he says, had 
‘told him to do so. Buddha does not reprove him for doing 
this, but says the quarters ought not to be worshipped in 
that way. He points out the four sins, killing, stealing, 
wrongful indulgence in the passions, and lying; four 
occasions of wrong doing, partiality, hatred, stupidity and 
fear; six ways of losing wealth, and six dangers in each of 
them ; four kinds of enemies that look like friends, and four 
kinds of true friends. 

The trué disciple worships the quarters by looking on 
mother and father as the east. He says “I have been 
cherished by them, and I will cherish them; I will do them 
service, I will maintain the family, and I will make offerings 
to the departed spirits.”” And the parents make return 
to him in five ways, and so of the other quarters. He worships 
the south by duties to his teachers, the west by cherishing 
and being faithful to his wife, the north by devotion to his 
friends, the nadir by caring for his slaves and servants, 
and the zenith by caring for ascetics and brahmins. This 


1 Kitadanta-sutta, Digha, i 127; an interesting feature of the legend is that 
Kitadanta after hearing the story asks Buddha why he did not say, ° thus I have 
heard,’ but, ‘ so it then was,’ and ‘ thus it so happened.’ The reason was that 
Buddha was telling his own experience, for he was the family priest at the time. 

2 Singalovada-sutla, Digha, iii 180; it is no doubt a very late work, but it shows 
how Buddhist ethical teaching developed and effectively carried on the founder's 
teaching. 


BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 177 


has been called ‘the whole duty of the Buddhist layman ’, 
but it is very far from being the whole duty, even for the 
layman. Moral action leads to rewards of happiness in the 
present or another existence, and this is emphatically taught, 
but it cannot lead to salvation, to complete escape from a 
kind of existence in which all is transitory, and hence painful. 
Even the, layman has set before him, in the four stages of 
the Path, a course of training which at once raises him above 
the aim of seeking final happiness in the reward of good 
deeds. 

The arrangement of the Path in four stages is frequently 
found in later works, and though it occurs in the Canon, 
it is probably a reclassification of earlier teaching. ‘Lay 
people are frequently represented as attaining the first 
three stages. 

In the first stage he who has entered the stream (sotdpanna) 
destroys the three bonds (belief in a permanent self, doubt, 
and trust in good works and ceremonies); he is freed from 
liability to be reborn in a state of suffering, and is destined 
for enlightenment. 

In the second stage having destroyed the three bonds, 
and reducing passion, hatred, and confusion of mind, he 
becomes a once-returner (sakaddgdmi), and (if he dies in this 
state), returns only once to the world before making an end 
of pain. 

Thirdly having destroyed the five lower bonds (the three 
above with sensuality and malice),! he becomes reborn in a 
higher existence, and not being liable to return to this world 
(andgami), attains Nirvana there. 

In these three stages there is no aiming at the accumulation 
of meritorious action. The moral training remains an 
essential part, in which the actual tendencies and principles 
that lead to immoral action are eradicated, but more funda- 
mental is the eradication of all those tendencies that are 
expressions of thirst or craving (tanhd) for any form of 
existence in the universe. This craving, in its different forms 
classified as the bonds, the hindrances, and the 4savas, is 
destroyed with the knowledge of the origin of pain and of the 
way in which it ceases. Then the fourth stage, that of the 

1 The five higher bonds finally destroyed are desire for the world of form, 
desire for the formless world, pride, haughtiness, and ignorance, 
N 


178 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


arahat, is reached, and the individual, if he has not already 
left the world, ceases ipso facto to be a layman. He has 
rid himself of the craving which for the common man makes 
worldly life desirable, and ‘‘ abides in the realisation of 
emancipation of heart and emancipation of insight.” 
The way to this supreme experience is the Noble Eightfold 
Path: right views, right intention, right speech, right 
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, 
and right concentration. 

In considering the subject historically, it is natural to ask 
not merely what we find in the developed system, but what 
we may hold to have been actually taught by Buddha. We 
can point to certain elements which must be fundamental, 
and to much which is certainly scholastic addition, but no 
distinct line can be drawn between the two. The first thirteen 
suttas of the Digha, for instance, contain a list of moral rules 
known as the Silas. This has no doubt been inserted by 
the redactor, who has adapted it to each of the discourses. 
Yet it cannot be called older than the discourses themselves : 
it is certainly only older than the present redaction of these 
discourses. But other portions of the discourses are evidently 
ancient, and may belong to the primitive teaching. They 
are sections which occur repeatedly in other places. Like 
all these passages intended for repetition they would be 
liable to be added to, and all that can be claimed is that if 
they are not the ipsissima verba of Buddha, they are the 
oldest passages which represent the Doctrine as it was 
understood by the disciples. By taking one of these discourses 
it will be possible to see what the teaching was at a certain 
stage, and from this to judge the attempts that have been 
made to extract or reconstruct a primitive teaching. As a 
matter of fact the portions that appear to be additions do 
not seek to modify the doctrines or to introduce new and 
opposing principles. 


1 Buddhism has been called pessimistic,but it is so only in the sense in which 
all religions are pessimistic that inculcate asceticism, and place true happiness 
above the pleasures of sense. ‘‘ If, and in so far as, the Buddha held this earthly 
existence capable of producing perfected types of humanity, then, even if he 
cherished no dream of eternal bliss unspeakable, and no vision of a future sodality 
of purified mankind on earth, he was in a certain way and to a certain degree 
optimistic rather than the reverse, in the value he set on life.” Mrs. Rhys Davids 
in Buddhism, vol. 2, Rangoon, 1907. 


BUDDHISM AS A _ RELIGION 179 


Among these discourses the fullest exposition of the 
Buddhist training is found in the sutta on the fruits of being 
an ascetic.! It is inserted in a legend of king Ajatasattu, 
who is said to have come to Buddha after having inquired 
of the leaders of six rival schools. The reply of Buddha 
forms a description of the progress of the monk through 
the stages of morality and concentration to insight with 
the acquiring of complete enlightenment. 

The king asks if Buddha can explain what fruit (advantage) 
can be seen in this world in the ascetic life. Buddha, after 
pointing out the advantages that even a slave or a house- 
holder wins merely by leaving the world, takes the case 
when a Buddha has arisen. A man hears the Doctrine, 
and acquires faith in the Buddha. He finds that he cannot 
lead a truly religious life in a house, and he leaves the world. 
He (1) keeps the moral rules, (2) protects the door of his 
sensuous faculties, and (3) acquiring mindfulness and alertness 
he is (4) content. The detailed explanation of the first of 
these divisions is, given in the section known as the Silas, 
the Moralities, which are subdivided into small, middle, and 
great, and are here given with some abbreviation. 


MoRALITY 


In the first division of the primary moral rules the monk abandons 
the killing of living things, lays aside the use of a stick or knife, and 
full of pity he dwells with compassion for the welfare of all living 
things. 

Rone the taking of what is not given he takes and expects 
only what is given, and dwells without thieving. 

Abandoning incontinence he lives apart in perfect chastity. 

Abandoning falsehood he speaks the truth, is truthful, faithful, 
trustworthy, and breaks not his word to people. 

Abandoning slander he does not tell what he has heard in one place 
to cause dissension elsewhere. He heals divisions and encourages 
friendships, delighting in concord and speaking what produces it. 

Abandoning harsh language his speech is blameless, pleasant to the 
ear, reaching the heart, urbane, and attractive to the multitude. 

Abandoning frivolous language he speaks duly and in accordance 
with the doctrine and discipline, and his speech is such as to be 
remembered, elegant, clear, and to the point. 

Then follow a number of further rules applying especially to his 
lifeas monk. He eats at the right time, does not see displays of dancing 


1 Samannaphala-sutta, Digha, i 47. 


180 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


and music, does not use garlands, scents and ornaments, or a high 
bed. He does not take gold and silver and certain kinds of food, 
or accept property in slaves, animals, or land. He does not act as a 
go-between, or take part in buying and selling, and the dishonest 
practices connected therewith. 

The Middle Moralities include avoiding the injuring of seedlings, 
the storing up of food and various articles, the seeing of spectacles, 
displays of animal fighting, matches, contests, sports, and army 
manoeuvres, all kinds of games of chance and gambling, the use of 
luxurious furniture, cosmetics, shampooing, and various ways of tending 
the body. The monk does not indulge in vulgar talk and tales, or 
wrangle about the doctrine, or act as messenger for kings and others, 
or practise the deceitful interpretation of signs. 

The Great Moralities include the avoiding of many arts and practices 
of which the brahmins were especially accused, such as the mterpreéta- 
tion of signs on the body, portents, dreams, marks made by rats, 
the performance of various sacrifices and magical ceremonies, the 
interpretation of lucky marks on things, persons, and animals, 
prophesying victory to an army, foretelling astronomical events, 
famines, epidemics, lucky days, and the ase of spells. 


Although Buddhist ethics is ascetic in the sense of involving 
the rejection by the monk of all sensuous pleasures, it is 
remarkable how little the mere abstinence from pleasure is 
emphasised in these moral rules. Self-mortification on the 
other hand is strongly denounced, as in the first sermon 
(p. 87), and its condemnation is implied in the description 
of Buddha’s mistaken austerities before his enlightenment. 
There is also a recurring list of the ascetic practices of the 
naked ascetics, e.g. Digha, i166; cf. Rhys Davids’ introduction 
to this sutta, Dial. i 206. 


CONCENTRATION 


Buddha next goes on to describe the advantages of con- 
centration (samadhi). This term is much wider than ‘ mystic 
meditation ’, and includes spiritual exercises and all the 
methods of mental training that lead to enlightenment. 
Among these is the practice of concentrating the mind on 
a particular object, through which it becomes more and more 
intently fixed, and passes through certain psychical phases 
as the sphere of consciousness becomes narrowed and 
intensified, and at the same time shut off from outside 
influences. The resemblance to Western mysticism in the 
methods and phenomena produced will be noticed later. 


BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 181 


The monk guards the door of his sensuous faculties by being 
restrained in whatever he apprehends by the five senses and by the 
inner sense of the mind as a sixth, not inquiring into physical details 
closely.1 He is thus protected from greed and disappointment, evil 
ideas do not master him, and he enjoys unimpaired happiness. 

The monk next acquires mindfulness and full consciousness of what he 
is about, whether in coming and going, looking, stretching himself, 
wearing his robe and bowl, and in all the actions of daily life, so that 
he does not through carelessness act in an unseemly manner. He is 
then content, and takes his robe and bowl with him as a bird takes 
its wings. 

With these four qualifications, morality, guarding the senses, mindful- 
ness of behaviour, and contentedness, the monk dwells in a lonely 
place, at the foot of a tree in a forest, on a hill or in a mountain cave 
or a vemetery, and after his meal sits cross-legged and upright, setting 
up mindfulness before him. He abandons greed, dwells with greed 
dispelled from his heart, and purifies his heart from greed, (2) from 
malice, dwelling with compassion for the good of all living things, (3) 
from sloth, (4) distraction, and (5) from doubt. When he sees in 
himself the disappearance of these five hindrances, exultation arises, 
as he exults joy arises, as his mind feels joy his body becomes serene 
and feels pleasure, and as it feels pleasure * his mind is concentrated. 


Then follows the description of the four stages of trance. 
They are produced by various methods of meditation on 
various subjects, and here we have only the description 


of the resulting states of consciousness. 

(1) The monk free from the passions and evil thoughts attains and 
abides in the first trance of pleasure with joy, which is accompanied 
by reasoning and investigation, and arises from seclusion. He suffuses, 
fills, and permeates his body with the pleasure and joy arising from 
seclusion, and there is nothing in his body untouched by this pleasure 
and joy arising from seclusion. 

(2) Again, with the ceasing of reasoning and investigation, in a state 
of internal serenity with his mind fixed on one point, he attains and 
abides in the second trance of pleasure with joy produced by con- 
centration, without reasoning and investigation. He suffuses, fills, 


1 E.g., if he receives food, he will not examine closely what kind it is; see 
Buddhaghosa’s explanations in Visuddhi-magga, ch. 1, pp. 20, 28. 

2 This pleasure is a feature of the Middle Way. The pleasures of the senses 
are rejected and also the other extreme, which aims at self-mortification. Buddha 
is represented as discovering during his austerities that there was a pleasure in right 
concentration that need not be rejected. ‘ Joy’ is an inexact rendering of pitt, 
says Mr, Aung. It is zest felt by an agent in his occupation, or excitement of 
feeling accompanying special attention to some object. Comp. p. 243. : 

3 Jhana, Skt. dhyana; the term trance is merely a makeshift, and $ mystic 
meditation ’ is too vague ; ‘ ecstasy,’ which in Western mysticism is the culmination 
of the whole process in an inexpressible experience, is out of place, as the jhanas 
are only four stages in a much more extended scheme. It may of course be the 
case that they once formed the whole of the mystic process, 


182 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


and permeates his body with the pleasure and joy produced by con- 
centration, and there is nothing in his body untouched by it. 

(3) Again, with equanimity towards joy and aversion he abides 
mindful‘and conscious, and experiences the pleasure that the noble 
ones call ‘dwelling with equanimity, mindful, and happily’, and 
attains and abides in the third trance. He suffuses, fills, and permeates 
his body with pleasure, without joy, and there is nothing in his body 
untouched by it. 

(4) Again, abandoning pleasure and pain, even before the 
disappearance of elation and depression he attains and abides in the 
fourth trance which is without pain and pleasure, and with the purity 
of mindfulness and equanimity. He sits permeating his body with 
mind purified and cleansed, and there is nothing in his body untouched 
by it. 

Insicut } 


The monk has so far purified his mind and heart, and 
continues his training with his attention directed to the 
actual realisation of the truths. With these practices he 
acquires supernormal powers. 


With mind concentrated, purified, cleansed, spotless, with the 
defilements gone, supple, ready to act, firm, impassible, he directs his 
attention to knowledge and insight. He understands that this my 
body has a shape, consists of the four elements, was produced by 
a mother and father, a collection of milk and gruel, subject to rubbing, 
pounding, breaking, and dissolution, and on this my consciousness 
rests, hereto it is bound. 

He then directs his attention to creating a mind-formed body. 
From his body he creates a mind-formed body having shape, and with 
all its limbs and faculties. 

He directs his attention to various kinds of magical powers (¢ddhi). 
From being one he becomes many, and from being many becomes 
one. He goes across walls and hills without obstruction, plunges 
into and out of the earth, goes over water as if on dry land, passes 
through the air sitting cross-legged, and even touches the mighty 
moon and sun with his hand, and reaches to the world of Brahma. 

With purified divine ear he hears divine and human sounds both 
distant and near. 

He understands the state of the minds of other beings. 

The last three stages attained are called the knowledges (vija). 

(1) The monk directs his attention to remembering his former 
existences. He remembers thousands of births and many cycles 
of existence, and knows that in such a place he was a being of ‘such 
a name and clan, and had certain experiences and length of life in each 
of these births. 


1 The word is panna, wisdom or understanding, but it is here the wisdom which 
consists in insight into the truths, and the resulting state is enlightenment, sambodhi. 
Another word, dassané, ‘ seeing,’ has also to be translated insight, 


BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 183 


(2) He directs his attention to the knowledge of the passing away 
and rebirth of beings. With divine purified vision he sees evil doers 
being reborn in hell, and the virtuous in heaven, just as a man in a 
palace may see persons entering and coming out of a house. 

(3) He then directs his attention to the knowledge of the destruction 
of the dsavas.1 He duly understands, ‘ this is pain,’ ‘ this is the cause 
of pain,’ ‘ this is the cessation of pain,’ ‘ this is the way leading to the 
cessation of pain.’ He duly understands, ‘these are the dsavas,’ 
“this is the cause of the dsavas,’ ‘ this is the cessation of the dsavas,’ 
‘this is the way to the cessation of the asavas.’ When he thus knows 
and thus perceives, his mind is released from the asava of lust, from 
the dsava of (desire for) existence, from the asava of ignorance. In 
the released is the knowledge of his release; he understands that 
rebirth is destroyed, the religious life has been led, done is what was 
to be done, there is nothing further beyond this world.? 


It may readily be admitted that this scheme as we now 
find it has undergone enlargement. The lists of moral 
offences as well as the different types of concentration 
would be very liable to receive additions. But even as it 
stands the scheme appears to be old, in that it omits several 
developments found in late works, as in Buddhaghosa’s 
Visuddhi-magga, where it is arranged in forty methods of 
meditation (kammatthdna) by which the trances and other 
stages are produced.® Four (or five) of these are the attain- 
ments (samdpatti), and need special mention here, as they 
are said to have been attained by Buddha at his final Nirvana. 
As they are not mentioned in the older accounts as a part 
of the training, they probably were originally an independent 


1 See p. 67; it is significant that this attaining of the truths is not expressed 
according to the formula of the Chain of Causation, nor is the formula mentioned 
in the Canonical account of the enlightenment of Buddha. 

2 An example of another and still later classification of the teaching is found 
in the thirty-seven principles tending to enlightenment (bodhipakkhika dhamma) 
which include: (1) four meditations, on the body, feelings, the mind, and thoughts 
(i.e. on the hindrances and constituents of enlightenment); (2) the four right 
exertions ; (3) the four kinds of magic power ; (+) the five faculties of faith, courage, 
mindfulness, concentration, and insight; (5) the five powers (the same as the 
faculties from a different standpoint); (6) the seven constituents of enlighten- 
ment, mindfulness, investigation of the Doctrine, courage, joy, serenity, concentra- 
tion, and equanimity ; (7) the Nokle Eightfold Path. 

3 Ten kasina meditations (with the attention fixed on earth, water, etc.), ten 
meditations on different stages of a decaying corpse, six or ten remembrances 
(on Buddha, the Doctrine, the Order, morality, renunciation, the gods, etc.), four 
Brahmaviharas (producing and suffusing all around with love, compassion, 
sympathy, equanimity), four attainments of druppa (formlessness), one on the 
four foods, and one on the four elements, For the brahmaviharas, see p. 126. 
The kasina practices are mentioned in the later parts of the Canon, Angut. v 46, 
Digha, iii 268, and are fully expounded by Buddhaghosa in Visuddhi-magga. 


184 THE LIFE OF. BUDDHA 


and parallel method of concentration; but they have 
become treated as a continuation of the trances, and with 
these form the eight or (with the addition of a fifth) nine 
attainments. By means of the four trances the disciple 
rises out of the realm of sensual passion (karma), and by means 
of the attainments beyond the realm of shape or form (riipa) 


(1) Passing entirely beyond the perceptions of bodily shape, with 
the disappearance of the perceptions of resistance, not reflecting on 
the perceptions of diversity, (he perceives) ‘space is infinite,’ and 
attains and abides in the stage of the infinity of space. 

(2) Passing entirely beyond the stage of the infinity of space, (he 
perceives) ‘ consciousness is infinite’, and attains and abides in the 
stage of the infinity of consciousness. 

(3) Passing entirely beyond the stage of the infinity of consciousness, 
(he perceives) ‘there is nothing,’ and attains and abides in the stage 
of nothingness. 

(4) Passing entirely beyond the stage of nothingness he attains 
and abides in the stage of neither consciousness nor non-consciousness.? 


It is usually held that the practice of concentration is 
borrowed from the methods of the Yoga philosophy. This 
is probable, but little direct evidence is available. We are 
told in the legends that Buddha studied under Alara Kalama 
and Uddaka the son of Rama, but all we learn is that the 
former made the goal consist in the attainment of the stage 
of nothingness, and the latter in the attainment of the 
stage of neither consciousness nor non-consciousness. These 
are Buddhist terms for two of the attainments, and there 
is no reason to suppose that the legend is recording exact 
details of fact about two teachers who were dead before 
Buddha began to preach. The compiler is using the only 
terms he knew to express the imperfect efforts of Buddha’s 
predecessors.? 

All that we know of the Yoga system is later than Buddhism, 
and no direct comparison can be made about the origins, 


1 The account of the Nirvana shows still further elaboration, as it adds a fifth 
stage, that of the cessation of consciousness and feeling, but it is not from 
there that Buddha departs. He comes down to the first trance, ascends again 
to the fourth, and then “rising from the fourth trance the Lord straightway 
attained Nirvana’”’. 

® There is one other reference to Alara in the Canon, which shows that he was 
looked upon as a practiser of concentration. See p. 150. When we come down to the 
second century A.D., we find much more detailed accounts of his philosophy in 
Asvaghosha’s Buddhacarita, ch. 12, and they have even been treated as evidence 
for the sixth century B.c. Their historical value is discussed in ch. xvi. 


BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 185 


but we find it assumed in Buddhist works that the practice 
of concentration was not original in Buddhism. What was 
claimed as original was the true method—right concentration. 
A more important cause of the resemblance between Buddhist 
practice and Yoga is the fact that they developed side by 
side. Not only would there be comparison and imitation, 
but a member of one sect might pass over to the other and 
take his methods with him. It is possibly owing to the rivalry 
of systems that we find included among the Buddhist methods 
the acquisition of exceptional psychical powers. They are 
exceptional, not strictly abnormal or supernatural according 
to Indian views, but only the normal results of following 
out the prescribed practices. They become prominent in 
late Buddhist accounts, where we find two distinct ways of 
regarding them. On the one hand there is the tendency 
to look upon them, like miracles, as testimonies for converting 
unbelievers, as in the story of the conversion of the three 
Kassapas and of Buddha’s miracles at Kapilavatthu. He 
is frequently represented as sending out a mind-formed 
image of himself to help or warn a disciple, and as reading 
the minds of others. On the other hand the acquiring of 
these powers is elsewhere depreciated as not leading to the 
end. Buddha himself is said to have forbidden his disciples 
to exercise them, though various arahats are admitted to 
have possessed them in different degrees. Even the knowledge 
of one’s former existences, says Buddhaghosa, may be 
obtained by non-Buddhists, but they remember only forty 
cycles owing to their dulness of understanding. In the 
discourse to Mahali Buddha describes the power of seeing 
divine shapes and hearing divine sounds, but “ not for the 
sake of realising these practices of concentration do monks 
follow the religious life with me ”’. 

The practice of concentration has a predominant position 
both in the Digha and the Majjhima, but it cannot be assumed 
that the attainment of even the highest mystical state was 
the only method. The states are in no sense the end, but only 
a means to the winning of knowledge, ‘“‘the attainment, 
comprehending, and realising even in this life emancipation 
of heart and emancipztion of insight.” In the legend of the 
early career of Vipassin Buddha. the main events correspond 
with that of Gotama, the prophecy at his birth based on the 


186 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


thirty-two marks, the three palaces, the four signs he 
renunciation, and the enlightenment. But in Vipassin’s 
enlightment there is no word of special mystic processes. 
He meditated and thought out the tenfold Chain of Causation, 
and with the knowledge of the cessation of each link vision 
and knowledge arose. 

In the practice of Buddhist mysticism there is more corre- 
spondence than might seem with the type which makes the 
end union with God. The latter type is defined by Bremond, 
who is speaking from a strictly Catholic standpoint, in a way 
which shows their common features. He describes it as a 
natural disposition, which leads certain souls to seize directly 
and lovingly, by a kind of sudden grasp, the spiritual hidden 
below sensible experiences, the one in the many, order in 
confusion, the eternal in the transient and the divine in the 
created. 

This may be almost entirely applied to Buddhist mysticism, 
which is no mere production of a subjective psychic state, but 
in intention at least the attaining to reality in phenomena, 
to the eternal truth of things as rightly apprehended. “‘ One 
and all,” says Dr. M. Ba-han, “ are seized with a consuming 
desire (which becomes an intense religious experience) to 
achieve a direct and immediate realisation of the Supremely 
Real—call it what they may—in the here and the now. To 
arrive at their end they invariably awaken the inherent 
divine potentialities, while keeping the mind in a state of 
perfect repose by absolute seclusion from the outside reality.’”? 

The methods and psychical processes involved also corre- 
spond. In both there must be a preceding course of moral 
training, followed by meditation and concentration, in which 
the attention is confined to one object, accompanied by a 
narrowing and intensification of consciousness with certain 
emotional changes. Suddenly a new experience occurs. 
To the Christian mystic it is nothing due to any effort of his 
own, but something given—‘‘the presence of God felt.” 
To draw a real parallel here is impossible. The Buddhist 


1 H. Bremond, Hist, littéraire du sentiment religieux en France, i 517, Paris, 1916. 

2 William Blake, his mysticism, p. 194. The fundamental difference between 
the mysticism of orthodox Catholicism and Indian mysticism is that the latter 
is pantheistic and assumes the ultimate identity of the divine and the human, 
that is, the difference lies in the cosmological theory involved rather than in the 
psychical state. 


BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 187 


recognises no external help. He believes himself to have 
already reached far higher than anything that he 
acknowledges as God, but he does experience a sudden 
realisation (sacchikiriyd), when the full knowledge of the 
truths becomes manifest to him, and he attains the state of 
arahat.} 

The state to which the monk has now attained is the other 
shore, the immortal (i.e. permanent) or fixed state, Nirvana. 
The word Nirvana (Pali nibbdna), ‘ blowing out, extinction,’ 
is not peculiarly Buddhistic, and its application varies with 
the conception that each school of religion has formed of 
the chief end of man.? For the Buddhist it is, as is clear 
from the above passages, the extinction of craving, of the 
desire for existence in all its forms, and the consequent 
cessation of pain.® 

From lust and from desire detached, 
The monk with insight here and now 
Has gone to the immortal peace, 
The unchangeable Nirvana-state. 

It is unnecessary to discuss the view that Nirvana means 
the extinction of the individual. No such view has ever been 
supported from the texts, and there is abundant evidence 
as to its real meaning, the extinction of craving in this life, 
as Rhys Davids always insisted. The metaphor of craving 
as fire and of its continuance as grasping (application of 
fuel), is frequent. Thus in the Discourse on Fuel or Grasping : 


In one who abides surveying the enjoyment in things that make 
for grasping craving increases. Grasping is caused by craving, the 


1 Cf. F. Heiler,; Die buddh. Versenkungen, pp. 366, 379 (Aufsdlze HE. Kuhn 
gewidmet, Breslau, 1916), who astonishingly asserts that one who has reached the 
fourth jhana is an arahat, and declares that this stage, in which there is equanimity 
(perfect balance between different emotions), is parallel to Plotinus’s union with 
the One, Spinoza’s amor Dei intellectualis, and the “ mystic death” of Mme. 
Guyon. The reader can form his own opinion of this from the texts given above, 
but it is no easy matter to equate the corresponding psychical states. For a 
thoroughly sound treatment of the subject see Mrs. Rhys Davids’ Buddhism and 
Buddhist Psychology. 

2 The verb parinibbati “ to attain extinction”’ has become connected with 
another root (var) meaning to cover. The etymology however throws no light 
on the doctrinal question as to what it is that is extinguished. 

3 The works of Rhys Davids and Oldenberg do not need special mention here, 
Earlier discussions are Colebrooke, Essays ii 424; Burnouf, Introd. 18, 589; 
Max Miiller, Introd. to Buddhaghosha’s Parables, xxxix; J. d’Alwis, Buddhist 
Nirvéna; Childers, Pali Dict. (Nibbainam) ; see also art. Nirvana in ERE (biblio- 
graphy); L. de la Vallée Poussin, The way to Nirvana; F. O. Schrader, On the 
problem of Nirvana, JPTS. 1904-5. 


188 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


desire for existence by grasping, birth by the desire for existence, 
and old age and death by birth. Grief, lamentation, pain, sorrow, 
and despair arise. Even so is the origin of all this mass of pain. 

Just as if a great mass of fire were burning of ten, twenty, thirty, 
or forty loads of faggots, and a man from time to time were to throw 
on it dry grasses, dry cow-dung, and dry faggots ; even so a great mass 
of fire with that feeding and that fuel would burn for a long time. . . 

In one who abides surveying the misery in things that make for 
grasping, craving ceases. With the ceasing of craving grasping ceases, 
with the ceasing of grasping desire for existence ceases, with the desire 
for existence birth ceases, and with the ceasing of birth old age and 
death cease. Grief, lamentation, pain, sorrow, and despair cease. 
Even so is the cessation of all this mass of pain. 

Just as if a great mass of fire were burning of ten, twenty, thirty, 
or forty loads of faggots, and a man were not from time to time to 
throw on it dry grasses, dry cow-dung, or dry faggots ; even so a great 
mass of fire with the exhaustion of the original fuel, and being unfed 
with any more would go out. 

Even so when one abides contemplating the misery in things that 
make for grasping, craving ceases. With the ceasing of craving 
grasping ceases. . . Even so is the ceasing of all this mass of pain. 


A more subtle question is what happens at death to him 
who has attained Nirvana in this life. It is impossible to 
point with certainty to the Scriptures and say, here are 
Buddha’s own words, but we do find there the way in which 
the disciples understood his teaching. A remarkable feature 
of the passages collected by Oldenberg is the fact that even 
in the Scriptures the most important statements are not 
given as Buddha’s own words, but as the exposition of 
disciples, showing that they had to depend on their own 
inferences. 

The ascetic Malunkyaputta is said to have asked Buddha 
a number of questions, one of which was whether a Tathagata 
exists after death. Buddha refused to say whether he exists, 
whether he does not exist, whether he exists and does not 
exist, or whether he is non-existent and not non-existent 
after death. 


And why, Malunkyaputta, have I not explained it? Because it 
does not tend to the advantage of the religious life, to aversion, absence 
of passion, cessation, calm, insight, enlightenment, Nirvana. There- 
fore have I not explained it.? 


1 Upadana-sutta, Samy. ii 84. 
® Calamalunkyaputia-sutta, Majjh. i 426; cf. Brahmajala-sutta, Digha, i 4 
““ The body of the Tathagata stays with that which leads to existence cut off. As 


BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 189 


The standpoint that the Lord has not explained it runs 
through all the passages on the subject, to which different 
explanations and reasons are added. Such is the dialogue 
attributed to the nun Khema and king Pasenadi. To all his 
questions she replies, “‘ the Lord has not explained.” 


“Why has the Lord not explained ?’’ ‘‘ Let me ask you a question, 
O king, and as it suits you, so explain it. What think you, O king ? 
Have you an accountant or reckoner or estimater who can count 
the sand of the Ganges, and say, so many grains, or so many hundred, 
thousand, or hundred thousand grains?” “No, reverend one.” 
“Have you an accountant who can measure the water of the ocean, 
and say, 80 Many measures of water, or so many hundred, thousand, 
or hundred thousand measures?” ‘‘ No, reverend one.” ‘‘ And 
why?” “Reverend one, the ocean is deep, immeasurable, unfathom- 
able.” “Even so, O king, that body by which one might define a 
Tathagata is relinquished, cut off at the root, uprooted like a palm- 
tree, brought to nought, not to arise in the future. Freed from the 
designation of body a Tathagata is deep, immeasurable, unfathomable 
as the ocean. 


This is repeated for the other four constituents of the 
individual. Here the question is stated with regard to a 
Tathagata, but as the next example shows, it applies 
to anyone who has reached Nirvana. 

A disciple Yamaka formed the heretical view that he 
understood the Doctrine as taught by the Lord to be that a 
monk free from the dsavas after the destruction of his body 
is cut off, destroyed, and does not exist after death. The 
refutation is again attributed to a disciple. Sariputta asks 
him whether the Tathagata is the body, or in the body, or 
other than the body (and similarly of the other constituents), 
whether he is all the five constituents together, or whether 
he is without them all. In each case the monk denies, and 
Sariputta says that in this life a Tathagata is not to be com- 
prehended in truth and reality, and that hence he has no 
right to say that a monk free from the dsavas with the 
destruction of his body is cut off, destroyed, and does not 
exist after death. 

The clearest statement against annihilation (wecheda) is 
in the certainly late compilation of the Uddna (VIII 1-4): 


long as his body shall stay, so long shall gods and men behold him, With the 
destruction of his body, after the consummation of life, gods and men shall not 


behold him.” 


190 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


There is a stage (Gyatana), where there is neither earth nor water 
nor fire nor wind, nor the stage of the infinity of space, nor the stage 
of the infinity of consciousness, nor the stage of nothingness, nor the 
stage of neither consciousness nor non-consciousness. There is not 
this world, nor the other world, nor sun and moon. That, O monks, 
I call neither coming nor going nor staying nor passing away nor arising ; 
without support, or going on, or basis is it. This is the end of pain. 

There is an unborn, an unbecome, an unmade, an uncompounded ; 
if there were not, there would be no escape from the born, the become, 
the made, and the compounded. 


But this led to no positive conception,! and we find in 
the much later Questions of Milinda (78) a tendency to a 
negative interpretation : 


The Lord has reached Nirvana with the extinction of the root which 
consists in the complete passing away of the khandhas. The Lord 
has perished, and it is impossible to point him out, saying, “ here he is,’ 
and ‘ there he is’. But the Lord can be pointed out in the body of the 
Doctrine, for the Doctrine was taught by the Lord. 


The kind of Nirvana here mentioned refers to a distinction 
of two Nirvanas made by the commentators. They had to 
explain how it was that Buddha is said to have attained it 
under the Bodhi-tree and also at death. It is only the former 
that is referred to in the oldest texts, or rather the distinction 
had not yet been made. In the Dhammapada (89) we 
read : 

Who in the ways of enlightenment 

Fully and well have trained their minds, 
And in the abandonment of clinging 
Delight, no longer grasping aught, 

Free from the dsavas, shining ones, 

They in the world have reached Nirvana. 


The commentator here on ‘ reached Nirvana ’ (parinibbuta) 
explains the two kinds, the first as here described, on attaining 
arahatship, and the discarding of the round of defilements 
but with a remainder of upddi (i.e. the khandhas, which 
still constitute him as an individual); and secondly with the 
cessation of the last thought, the discarding of the round of 
khandhas, without a remainder of upddi. This distinction 


1 Nor is there anything to show that it refers to existence after death. 
There is no doubt about a positive conception in Mahayana teaching. In the 
Lotus, when Buddha is preaching on Vulture Hill, innumerable millions of past 
Tathagatas com> to hear the recital of this sutra. See Kern’s translation, ch. XI, 
This siitra also teaches that all beings may become Tathagatas. 


BUDDHISM AS A RELIGION 191 


cannot be called primitive, but the solution is in harmony 
with the rest of Buddhist psychology. 

If a positive statement could be found anywhere, we should 
expect it in the enraptured utterances of the enlightened 
disciples. But this is the conclusion of the most sympathetic 
interpreter of the verses of the nuns : 


She (the nun) is never led to look forward to bliss in terms of time, 
positive or negative. . . It may be that in harping in highest exultation 
how they had won to, and touched, the Path Ambrosial—the Amatam 
Padam—Nibbana, they implied some state inconceivable to thought, 
inexpressible by language, while the one and the other are limited 
to concepts and terms of life ; and yet a state which, while not in time 
or space, positively constitutes the sequel of the glorious and blissful 
days of this life’s residuum. Nevertheless, their verses do not seem 
to betray anything that can be construed as a consciousness that 
hidden glories, more wonderful than the brief span of ‘ cool’ and calm 
that they now know as Arahants, are awaiting them.” 


1 The discussion of the question by Western scholars has been largely barren, 
because it was begun before any of the relevant passages in the Scriptures were 
known. Inferences were drawn not from any actual statements in the Scriptures, 
but from what was supposed to be the logical result of Buddhist principles. It is 
now clear that there is no passage which asserts what is called a negative view, 
and it is certain that the doctrine of annihilation, the view that a released person 
is ‘‘cut off, destroyed and does not exist after death’’, is rejected. It is also 
certain that Nirvana is looked upon as a kind of existence entirely different from 
the transitory and impermanent nature of mundane experience. Hence it 
cannot be expressed in the positive terms that apply to existence as we know it. 

2 Mrs. Rhys Davids, Psalms of the Sisters, Introd. xxxi. 


CHAPTER XIV 
BUDDHISM AS A PHILOSOPHY 


A STORY in the Dhammapada commentary illustrates 

the distinction made in Buddhism between the letter 
and the spirit, between a mere knowledge of the precepts 
and principles of the system, and the actual attainment of a 
state of salvation. Two friends had entered the Order. One 
of them was old, and could not learn much by heart, so he was 
told to practise contemplation, and attained arahatship. The 
other learnt the whole Scriptures, and became a great teacher. 
He once went to pay a visit to his old friend, and Buddha 
who perceived his intention thought that the learned monk 
might try to confuse the old man, and therefore went to put 
the questions himself.. He asked the learned monk a question 
about the first Trance, which he answered correctly, as well 
as other subtle questions about the Attainments. But when 
he asked him about the Path of Entering the Stream he could 
not reply, while the old man, who had actually entered the 
stream and reached all the other stages, answered one question 
after another. The disciples of the learned teacher murmured 
at Buddha’s praise of an ignorant monk, but he told them that 
their teacher was like a man who keeps cows for hire, while 
the other was like the owner, who enjoys the five products 
of the cow. 

Right views are an essential part of the Noble Path, and 
Buddhism, however much it avoids useless inquiries, inevitably 
takes up a metaphysical attitude in its statement of the Four 
Truths. It has indeed been asserted that Buddhism has no 
metaphysics, but if by metaphysics we mean the systematic 
interpretation of experience, it has as much right to the name 
as any other Indian system. Not only is it metaphysical in the 
statement of its own fundamental principles, but it took 
over much of the world-conception of Indian thought. 
Buddhism, like all the Indian philosophies, was never, as in 
the West, a mere theoretical structure due to a curiosity to 
know how the world goes round. The Indian systems all 


BUDDHISM AS A PHILOSOPHY _ 193 


insist on knowledge, because true knowledge is made essential 
to the attaining of salvation. 

The first Truth of Buddhism makes a general statement 
about the nature of the world : existence is painful, not merely 
here, but any form of existence in the universe (loka) as con- 
ceived by the Buddhists. This is one of the fundamental 
truths only to be fully realised with the attaining of complete 
enlightenment. The second Truth, that pain has a cause, 
has led to those developments of thought that constitute the 
chief claim of Buddhism to be called a philosophy. The third 
Truth asserts that pain can be brought to an end. These two 
Truths have been expanded into the Chain of Causation, the 
Paticcasamuppdda, ‘ origin by way of cause.’ 

From ignorance as cause arise the aggregates (sankha@ra), from the 
aggregates as cause arises consciousness, from consciousness as cause 
arises name-and-form (mind and body), from name-and-form as cause 
arises the sphere of the six (senses), from the sphere of the six as cause 
contact, from contact as cause sensation, from sensation as cause 
craving, from craving as cause grasping, from grasping as cause 
becoming, from becoming as cause birth, from birth as cause arise 
old age, death, grief, lamentation, pain, dejection, and despair. Even 
so is the origination of all this mass of pain. 

There have been many attempts to expound the exact 
logical connexion of thought in this formula. First the 
assumption was made that there is a logical connexion, and 
then the only problem was to discover it. But we have no 
reason to think that the formula is a part of primitive 
Buddhism, nor that it was invented as a whole. In the 
Scriptures we find several such schemes of causal relations 
differing both in, the order of the links and the number. In 
the Digha, where the fullest canonical treatment is found, 
it occurs once with ten and once with nine links. In the 
Discourse on Fuel the first seven links are omitted, and the 
series begins naturally enough with the root cause of craving.’ 

Pischel holding that theoretical Buddhism rests entirely 
on Sankhya-Yoga compared and mostly identified each link 
in the Chain with a-corresponding Sankhya or Yoga term, 
and held that practically all was borrowed from Sankhya- 
Yoga. The sankharas are the vasanAs, vinnhana is identical 

1 See the sutta quoted, p. 187; still other differences are found; cf. Mrs. Rhys 
Davids on Mahanidana-sutta in Dial. ii 42; the above form with twelve links is 


that which finally became established in all schools, Samy. ii 1, Lal. 444 ff. 
ce) 


194 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


with the lingaéarira, ndmariipa with buddhi, upadana with 
dharmadharmau, and bhava with samsrti. All this is quite 
unprovable, as we do not know that the Sankhya with these 
technical terms even existed when the Chain was formulated. 
In any case it does not tell us what the Buddhists understood 
by it. The Sankhya terms state the stages of evolution from 
a primordial matter (prakrti). This conception is not found in 
Buddhism, and Buddhaghosa expressly denies that ignorance 
is to be understood as an uncaused root cause like prakrti.} 

Senart’s examination leads to a very different and more 
probable result. The Chain is not a logical whole, but a late 
construction in which primitive categories are amalgamated.* 
We can see some of the earlier attempts at a formulation in 
the Canon itself, and the borrowing of certain terms from 
some form of Sankhya and Yoga, or at least some of the 
current philosophical notions, is very probable. But 
a theoretical reconstruction of the historical origin of the 
terms would not tell us how they were interpreted by the 
Buddhists. More important than adding another unauthorised 
theory of its primitive meaning will be to begin by stating 
how it was understood by the earliest commentators. This 
interpretation is not primitive, but it gives us the traditional 
view adopted by Buddhists, and as will be seen differs in 
several respects from that in the Mahdnidana-sutta attributed 
to Buddha himself. 

Buddhaghosa ? says that the special mark of ignorance is 
not knowing, its essence is delusion, it appears as covering, 
and its immediate cause is the asavas. Elsewhere we find 
ignorance as one of the asavas, not an effect of them. This is 
not the only case where the terms of the series have to be 
applied in special senses. 

From ignorance arise the aggregates (sankharas). The 
term sankhara is found used in three senses. It may mean 
any compounded thing. It is also used of the group of mental 


1 Vis. M. 525; he admits that in one sense both ignorance and craving for 
existence may be called root causes, but not uncaused, for ignorance originates 
from the Asavas. 

2 E. Senart, Mélanges de C. Harlez, p. 281 ff., Leyde, 1896. 

3 Vis. M. ch. 17; a Sanskrit commentary in Candamehéroshana-tantra, JRAS. 
1897, p. 463; other Buddhist interpretations agreeing in essence are in Comp. of 
Philosophy (with Aung’s comments), and Yamakami, Systems of Buddhistic Thought. 
For the figure of a wheel see Georgius, Alphabetum Tibetanum, Rome, 1762, repro- 
duced in Waddell, The Buddhism of Tibet. 


BUDDHISM AS A PHILOSOPHY 195 


constituents in the fivefold division of the individual, but in 
this formula Buddhaghosa takes the aggregates as being 
expressions of will. ‘‘ Their special mark is performing, their 
essence is striving, they appear as will, and their immediate 
cause is ignorance.” They are not merely will as a faculty, 
but acts of will producing karma good or bad, and in their 
totality they are karma. 

From the aggregates arises consciousness (vifividna). ‘* Its 
mark is knowing, its essence is to precede,! and it appears 
in rebirth.” Consciousness is thus interpreted here as rebirth- 
consciousness. This is the state in which the individual 
exists as disembodied at the moment of conception. Such 
consciousness however is not a continuum persisting from 
rebirth to rebirth, but only one factor in the ever-changing 
forms of the individual, which at one stage becomes the cause 
of the next. 

The succeeding links are more obvious, and _ here 
Buddhaghosa’s etymologies do not help to explain. From 
consciousness arises name-and-form (ndmaripa), the concrete 
individual consisting of the immaterial part (ndma) and the 
material (riipa). Ndmaripa is an upanishadic term, and is 
all the more likely to have been borrowed as there is another 
more usual division of the individual into the five khandhas, 
one of which is ripa, body. Nama corresponds with the other 
four immaterial groups. ; 

From name-and-form arises the sphere of the six 
(saldyatana), i.e. the six sense organs including mind (mano). 

From the sphere of the six arises contact (phassa), not 
merely ‘touch’, but the contact of each sense organ, eye- 
contact, etc., through its appropriate ‘ door ’. 

From contact arises sensation (vedand). This term usually 
means feeling, divided into pleasant, painful, and indifferent, 
but Buddhaghosa appears to use it predominantly of 
sensation, as he divides it into six, and says that it ariscs 
through contact of the eye and each of the other sense organs. 
He does not however exclude feeling, for he also says, “* the 
three vedands are the cause of craving.”’ 

From sensation arises craving, thirst (tanhd). Apart from 


1 Because it comes first in apprehending objects ; cf. Dhp. 1, ‘“‘ Things (objects) 
are preceded by mind.” Buddhaghosa expressly identifies citta, thought, mano 
mind, and viivdna, consciousness. 


196 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


this formula this is the fundamental cause through which 
every individual in any state clings to existence. 
Buddhaghosa here applies the threefold division into the 
craving for sensuous pleasure (kama), the craving for existence, 
and for non-existence, and subdivides it according to each of 
the senses. When the craving for visible things goes along 
the field of sight, and proceeds by enjoying the object by 
means of sensuous enjoyment, then there is the craving 
for sensuous pleasure. When the individual thinks that the 
object is stable and permanent, and the craving proceeds 
along with the heresy of permanence, then there is the craving 
for existence, since passion accompanied by the heresy of 
permanence is such craving. But when the individual thinks 
that the object is annihilated and destroyed, and craving 
develops along with the heresy of annihilation, then there is 
the craving for non-existence. This is applied to each of the 
other senses, subdivided according to internal and external 
objects, and again subdivided according to past, present, 
and future. 

From craving arises grasping (updddna). Upadana, 
which also means fuel, is that which keeps the craving active 
and feeds it like fuel. Its four forms are sensuous pleasure, 
heresy, belief in rites and ceremonies, and the doctrine of an 
atman. 

From grasping arises becoming (bhava). One canonical 
meaning of bhava is existence or coming to be in one of the 
three divisions of existence, the region of sensuous desire, 
of form, and of the formless world. But in the formula 
becoming is divided by Buddhaghosa into becoming as karma 
- and becoming as arising or rebirth (uppatti). The former is 
identified with the different manifestations of will (greed, 
etc.), so that they are identical with the sankharas. Becoming 
as arising is the totality of the khandhas of the individual 
produced by karma. This is the sense in which becoming is 
used when it is said to arise from grasping. But when it is 
said that from becoming arises birth (7ati), it is becoming as 
karma that is meant. Becoming is both the result of the 
previous link and the cause of the next. Here, as in the 
passage from the second to the third link, there is a passing 
from one existence to another, and from birth arises old age 
and death. 


BUDDHISM AS A PHILOSOPHY 197 


It will be seen that according to this interpretation the 
series covers three existences. The first two links are said 
to refer to past existence, the links from consciousness to 
becoming to existence in the present, and the last two to 
existence in the future. This makes the sequence more 
intelligible, but no reason is given for the repetition of what 
is essentially the same in any birth. Mr. Aung emphasises 
the identity by arranging one group under the two others, 
and showing how they correspond. The stage from con- 
sciousness to sensation, says Mr. Aung, illustrates the passive 
side of life (uppatti-bhava), and from craving to becoming the 
active side of life (kamma-bhava), the working out of arising 
as karma. In the stage from birth to old age and death 
(future life) only the passive side is expressed, and in the 
stage from ignorance to action (sankhdras) only the active 
side. 

What is certainly an older interpretation of the formula 
occurs in the Mahdniddna-sutta (Digha, ii 55). Here there are 
only nine links, the first two and the fifth (the six senses) 
being omitted. Contact has as cause not the six senses but 
name-and-form. There are other peculiarities in it. It is 
first stated in reverse order beginning with old age and death, 
which have birth as cause, down to name-and-form, which 
has consciousness as cause. But then another paragraph 
is added saying that consciousness has as its cause name-and- 
form. Evidently the conception of the whole series recurrent 
as a wheel had not yet arisen. It is then restated in direct 
order, beginning with consciousness, and a tenth link is made 
by dividing the. last into two, so that grief, lamentation, 
etc., are a final link having old age and death as cause. 

The interpretation of each link in reverse order then follows. 
It differs from Buddhaghosa in explaining becoming without 
any reference to karma. Bhava is merely coming to be in one 
of the three divisions of existence. The four divisions of 
grasping are the same as in Buddhaghosa, and sensation 
is divided according to the six senses. Consciousness is also 
described as rebirth-consciousness even more emphatically 
than by Buddhaghosa, and it is stated that there would be 
no conception or birth of an individual (name-and-form) 
unless the consciousness of an infant descended into the womb 
of the mother. Hence name-and-form has consciousness as 


198 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


cause. But the exposition continues, ‘“‘ should consciousness 
not get a foundation in the individual, would there be in the 
future the production and arising of birth, old age, death, and 
pain?’’ ‘‘ No, Lord.” ‘Therefore this is the cause? of con- 
sciousness, that is to say, name-and-form.” Consciousness 
and name-and-form are thus made causes of one another. 

Another peculiar feature is that in the middle of the 
exposition another chain of causes is inserted after sensation, 
which makes sensation the cause of craving, and then the 
sequence is craving, greed, discrimination, desire and passion, 
attachment, acquiring, avarice, hoarding, and ending with 
“the use of a. stick and knife, quarrelling, disputing, 
recrimination, backbiting, lying, and many other evil 
actions.” This is no doubt an interpolation, as the list occurs 
independently in Anguttura, iv 400, and the word for cause 
(paticca) is different from that used in the main links. The 
whole exposition is said to have been given to Ananda, who 
had rashly said that arising by way of cause appeared to him 
quite clear. It is evidently older than Buddhaghosa’s inter- 
pretation, and is probably the oldest record of an attempt to 
introduce logical consistency into the sequence. That it was 
not looked upon as bearing a clear and obvious meaning by 
the compiler of this sutta is shown by the reproof to Ananda, 
which he puts into the mouth of Buddha, for saying that it is 
clear, when it is “profound, even in its appearance 
profound.” 

The advantage to be expected from the independent 
investigations of modern scholars is that a treatment free 
from dogmatic assumptions might lead to the discovery 
of a more primitive train of thought. But the chief fact 
that results is that no agreement has been reached.? This 
strengthens the view of Senart that no real logical connexion 
is to be found in a sequence that has been put together 
from various sources. Even the Buddhist commentators 
have had to interpret the terms in special senses, and to divide 
it into three lives, thus making independent divisions that 


» Four synonyms of cause are here used in the text, One is nidana, a name by 
which the terms of the Formula are often known. 

® See Oltramare’s analysis of ten theories in La Formule des douze causes, Genéve. 
1909, the bibliography in Mrs, Rhys Davids’ art. Paticcasamuppada in ERE., 
Senart, loc, cit., and Keith, Buddhist Philosophy, p. 97. 


BUDDHISM AS A PHILOSOPHY i199 


correspond with some of the more rudimentary forms in 
the Canon. 

Although the formula as such has only a historic interest, 
it has an importance in its being an early attempt to formulate 
a rational law of causation, on which the individual could act. 
This is the fact that Mrs. Rhys Davids has emphasised. 
In the midst of a world of thought permeated by animistic 
and polytheistic notions it put the conception of a regular 
sequence of events not caused by the arbitrary will of a deity, 
but with each series of events rising out of the previous one. 
This is implicit in the formula itself, but the conception 
was also recognised and stated, as in Majjh. ii 82. 

Let the beginning be, Udayin, let the end be. I will teach you the 
Doctrine : when that exists, this exists ; with the arising of that this 
arises; when that does not exist, this does not exist; with the 
cessation of that this ceases. 

But this statement was never followed by any applicaticn 
of it as a universal philosophical principle. The interest lay 
not in a general law of causation, but in the law of the cause 
of pain, and this became stereotyped in the Causal Formula. 
Existence in the world is pain, and by the coming to know 
how things are causally related escape from pain is possible. 
This is the logical side, but for a truth which required not 
to be merely asserted but realised as the result of a long 
course of training obvious logical connexion was not the 
first requirement. It had been declared to belong to the truths 
that are beyond the sphere of logic, subtle, and to be perceived 
by the wise in the flash of insight that comes after long 
meditation and concentration. 

The fullest canonical statement of the attitude of Buddhism 
to other systems is found in the Brahmajala-sutta (Digha, i 1). 
Sixty-two doctrines are there mentioned and set aside, 
but not one of them can be definitely identified with that 
of any Indian system as now known. The chief cause 
of this is probably that Buddhism was not in close contact 
with upanishadic thought, but we further find that the 
theories are not, as they have been called, systems, nor 
even the record of disputes with any actual opponents. 
They are abstract classifications of certain principles which 
appear again and again in the same formal recital, and show 
no evidence of real discussions with living exponents. Even 


200 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


if they originated in such discussions, they have become 
mere lists of dogmas. But if they cannot be taken as trust- 
worthy statements of the views of opponents, they at least 
tell us the Buddhist position on those points. They fall into 
two groups : 

There are those who hold views about the beginning 
of things in eighteen ways (pubbantakappikda) : 

(1) Some hold in four ways that the self or soul (diman) 
and the universe (loka) are eternal. 

(2) Some hold in four ways that the self and universe 
are in some respects eternal and in some not. 

(8) Some hold that the universe is finite, or infinite, or finite 
and infinite, or neither finite nor infinite. 

(4) Some wriggle like eels in four ways and refuse a clear 
answer. 

(5) Some assert in two ways that the self and the universe 
have arisen without a cause. 

Some hold views about the future in forty-four ways : 

(1) They hold in sixteen ways that the self is conscious 
after death. 

(2) In eight ways that it is unconscious after death. 

(8) In eight ways that it is neither conscious nor unconscious 
after death. 

(4) They hold in seven ways the annihilation of the 
individual. 

(5) They hold that Nirvana consists in the enjoyment 
of this life in five ways, either in the pleasures of sense or 
in one of the four trances. 

These appear to be all the views that the compiler thought 
of as being held. The heretics are all caught in this ‘ net 
of Brahma ’, just as a fisherman with a fine net might drag 
a small pool, and think, ‘ whatever living things of any size 
that there are in this pool, they are all in the net.’ The 
large number of views is only apparent, as many differ only 
on unessential points. The first four views are really identical, 
and the only variation is that in the first the holder of the 
view can remember 100,000 past births, in the second he 
can remember his births through ten cycles, and in the third 
through forty cycles. The fourth case is more important, 
as the holder of this view is addicted to logic and investiga- 
tion, and says, ‘‘ eternal are the self and the universe, barren, 


BUDDHISM AS A PHILOSOPHY 201 


standing as on a peak, standing firm as a pillar; and these 
beings transmigrate, pass away, and arise, but it is eternal.” 
Franke ! identifies this view with Sankhya, and it is so vague 
that the possibility cannot be denied. -Oldenberg 2 prefers 
to find Sankhya in the eighth view, which holds that the 
sense-organs form an impermanent, changeable Atman, 
but that there is also a permanent atman not liable to change 
called thought, mind, or consciousness. This so far from 
being Sankhya as we know it is rather opposed to the Sankhya 
doctrine, which makes the 4tman or purusha an ultimate 
behind all the forms of the phenomenal consciousness. 

Among all these views there is no expressed contradiction 
or even recognition of the Vedanta theory of an Atman or 
brahman as the one ultimate reality. Though the personal 
Brahma is recognised, what is denied is not the Vedanta 
doctrine, but the view that Brahma is the maker or disposer 
of a new cycle. He is really an individual who has been 
reborn from a still higher state of existence owing to the 
exhaustion of his merit, and who does not remember his 
former birth. 

Two of the views are assigned in other suttas to certain 
teachers. The doctrine of those who wriggle like eels is said 
to be that of Sanjaya Belatthaputta, and the annihilation 
doctrine that of Ajita Kesakambalin.? 

All these views are rejected not because they are profound 
or unknowable. The Tathagata knows other things far higher 
than these, which are profound, hard to see, hard to under- 
stand, calm, excellent, beyond the sphere of logic, subtle, 
to be perceived only by the wise, and these are what he him- 
self has comprehended and realised and now proclaims. 

The same points are also treated somewhat differently in 
the well-known list of the undetermined questions.‘ 

(1) Whether the universe is eternal or not. 

(2) Whether the universe is finite or not. 

(8) Whether the vital principle (jzva) is the same as or 
other than the body. 

(4) Whether after death a Tathagata exists or not, whether 


1 Digha, transl. p. 23. 

2 Dic Lehre der Upan. p. 295. 

3 p. 130. 

4 Digha,i 187; Majjh.i 431; Dharmasamgraha, 137. 


202 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


he exists and does not exist, whether he is neither existent 
nor non-existent. 

Here, again, it is not maintained that the questions are 
unknowable, but only that they have not been determined by 
Buddha. ‘ For the matter does not tend to advantage, to 
the principle of the religious life, to aversion, absence of 
passion, cessation, calm, comprehension, enlightenment, 
Nirvana.” 

To this extent Buddhism may be said to be agnostic, not 
in teaching the fundamental unknowability of the nature of 
things as in Spencerian agnosticism, but in excluding from 
investigation certain. definite problems! which were useless 
to the practical aim of the. seeker after freedom from pain. 
To human reason they are problems still. 

For the Buddhist faced with the fact of pain the 
fundamental problem was the nature of the self. The doctrine 
on this question is formulated in the analysis of the individual 
into: five groups, the khandhas: the body (ripa), feeling 
(vedana), perception (savnd), the aggregates (sankhdra), and 
consciousness (vifividna). Not only the self, but all things are 
analysed into the elements that may be perceived in them. 
‘ Ali things are without an atman,’ just as a chariot is nothing 
but the totality of chariot-pole, axle, wheels, frame, and 
banner-pole. The argument has a remarkable parallel with 
the position of Hume : 


The idea of a substance, as well as of a mode, is nothing but a collection 
of simple ideas, that are united by the imagination, and have a particular 
name assigned to them, by which we are able to recal, either to our- 
selves or others, that collection. But the difference betwixt these 
ideas consists in this, that the particular qualities which form a sub- 
stance are commonly refer’d to an unknown something, in which 
they are supposed to inhere.* 


On the 4tman question the Buddhist position derives its 
strength from the boldness of the opposite theory. It was 
easy to argue against the theory of a soul which was accom- 
panied hy confident statements that could never be verified 
in experience. Yet the belief contains a principle which in 


* These problems are the only ground for the charge of agnosticism, but this is 
how one expounder muddles the question: “‘ To all requests for enlightenment 
and teaching on the subject of the supernatural he steadily, if the sacred books 
may be trusted, opposed a negative.” Art. God (Buddhist) in ERE. 

2 Treatise, Bk. i, 1 § 6. 


BUDDHISM AS A PHILOSOPHY 203 


spite of the Buddhists and the Humists has never been 
banished from philosophy. Why should these groups of 
sensations and thoughts appear as independent centres, each 
representing the world in miniature? As William James 
says, “when Peter and Paul wake up in the same bed, and 
recognise that they have been asleep, each one of them 
mentally reaches back and makes connexion with but one 
of the two streams of thought which were broken up by the 
sleeping hours.” The problem of individuality touched 
Vedanta equally, and there it was solved either by making 
each individual ultimate within the paramatman, or by resort 
to the doctrine that plurality is illusion, mdyéd. But no 
mention of the mdyd doctrine appears in early Buddhism, and 
it is generally agreed that when it appears in Vedanta it 
is a borrowing from the later forms of Buddhism itself.? 
To what form of the 4tman doctrine the Buddhist canonical 
position was originally opposed is not clear. It might refer 
to some form of Sankhya or to the Jains (Niganthas), but 
there is nothing in the use of terms to show that Sankhya 
was directly opposed, nor is it the 4tman doctrine that forms 
the chief subject in the disputes recorded with the Niganthas. 

To decide how far the formula of the five khandhas is 
primitive as the expression of the doctrine of non-soul is 
as difficult as in the case of the Chain of Causation. It is set 
forth in the second sermon which Buddha is said to have 
preached, but this sermon with its formal divisions and 
questions and answers has the appearance of being a product 
of Abhidhamma method converted into a dialogue. What- 
ever may be the way in which the doctrine was first 
formulated, it now forms with the Chain of Causation the 
chief theoretical basis of Buddhism. In the Abhidhamma the 
sankharas are expanded into a list of fifty-two constituents, 
the various psychic states that arise and pass away. The 
senses and sense-organs are also subdivided according to 
functions and powers, and the aim appears to have -been 
to analyse the self exhaustively into its elements, no one of 
which could be identified with a permanent atman. 

There have been many attempts to get behind this 


1 Textbook of Psychol. p. 158. 
2 Dasgupta, A History of Indian Philos, vol.i pp. 437, shige 
3 See the sermon p. 88 above. 


204 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


formulation of Buddhist principles. Once it was the fashion 
to represent Buddha as a thoroughgoing rationalist, opposed 
to all forms of ‘animism’, and teaching atheism and final 
annihilation. In the view of another writer : 


A ce Bouddhisme aristocratique et philosophant . . . l’historien 
doit opposer un Bouddhisme non clérical, dont l’existence, pour étre 
attestée par des documents moins circonstanciés, n’est pas moins 
certaine: la foi dans les milieux différents prend des formes diverses. 
L’homme extraordinaire en qui les rationalistes virent un Bouddha, 
fut adoré par les peuples; il trouva les fidéles (Bhaktas) dans les 
milieux non absorbés par la méditation savante et la pratique des 
observances, parmi les laics, non déshabitués, comme étaient les 
Aupanisadas, de la priére et de l’adoration, adeptes fervents d’un 
Kathénothéisme accommodant et superstitieux.” 4 


For Mrs. Rhys Davids Buddha is still the gracious teacher, 
teaching doctrines far more palatable than those which 
his disciples thought they had so carefully preserved : 


In time this original quarrel with the 4tmanist position diverged. 
In Buddhism it became an irrational denial of the man as man; he was 
reduced to his instruments, body and mind. . . With the rejection of 
divinity in the self, the self himself, the man, the person, the spirit 
using mind and body was also rejected.? 


This is a sufficiently severe judgment on Buddhism, but 
the pious hope that it was once something better before it 
became an “ irrational denial’? must remain at the side of 
the other views of these pubbantakapptka until some positive 
point of agreement can be reached. They all agree in holding 
that the primitive teaching must have been something 
different from what the earliest Scriptures and commentators 
thought it was. 

The attitude of Buddhism regarding karma and trans- 
migration differs from common Indian belief not in the 
doctrines, but only in the position that they hold in the scheme 
of salvation. It has been held that the Buddhist doctrine 
of the self contradicted transmigration, but an individual 
may transmigrate whether he consists of an a4tman or only 
a bundle of khandhas. It is just because he has not succeeded 
in bringing about the final dissolution of the khandhas: that 
he transmigrates. What is in contradiction with this is not 


1 L. de la Vallée Poussin, Bouddhisme, p. 37, London, 1898. 
2 Editorial note to Kindred Sayings, vol. 3. 


BUDDHISM AS A PHILOSOPHY 205 


Buddhism but Childers’s theory that at death the khandhas 
were destroyed, and that the only connexion between two 
existences was the karma. The mistake of Childers was 
almost inevitable at a time when no examination of decisive 
texts was possible, but it has been repeated without the 
slightest attempt at verification. The ever changing bundle 
of khandhas may be said to be new from moment to moment, 
and. hence from birth to birth. But from birth to birth it 
remains a changing bundle, until it is finally dispersed with 
the extinction of craving.1 Another mistake has been to hold 
that karma is the cause of rebirth, and that Nirvana 
is attained when all karma is exhausted. It is, of course, 
karma that determines the kind of rebirth, good or bad 
according to merit, but craving is the impelling force. This 
may be seen all the more clearly from the fact that exhaustion 
of karma was the ideal of the Jains,? and this Jain position 
was directly opposed by the Buddhists. After the atman- 
theory it was the chief principle on which the two systems 
differed. Buddha is recorded as saying : 

I went to the Niganthas, and said, “is it true, friends, that you 
Niganthas hold this theory and view that whatever an individual 
experiences, whether pleasurable, painful, or indifferent, is all the effect 
of his previous karma, and that so by the extinction of old karmas 
through penance and by the non-performance of new karmas there is no 
outflow in the future, and that through there being no outflow in the 
future there will be destruction of karma, through destruction of 
karma destruction of pain, through the destruction of pain destruction 
of feeling, and through destruction of feeling all pain will be 
exhausted ? ” 

The Niganthas thus asked by me admitted it, and I said, “do you 
know that you were existent previously and not non-existent ?” 
“No, friend.” ‘Do you know, friends, whether in the past you 
certainly performed evil karma?” ‘No, friend.’ “Do you know, 
friends, that you performed such or such evil karma?” “No, friend.” 
“Well, friends, do you know whether so much pain is exhausted, 
or so much is still to be exhausted, or whether, when so much is 
exhausted, all pain will be exhausted?” “No, friend.” “ Well, 
friends, do you know the abandonment of evil principles in this life 
and the acquirement of good ones?” “ No, friend.” ® 

Buddha tells them that if they knew these things, it would 
be fitting for them to hold their doctrine of karma. The 


1 Cf. Windisch, Buddha's Geburt, p. 37, and the Buddhist theory of 


transmigration, above p. 35. 
2 See p. 231. 3 Majjh. ii 214. 


206 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Niganthas say that their master is omniscient, and he has 
said to them : 

You have previously done evil karma. This you exhaust by these 
severe austerities. But in that you are here and now restrained in 
body, speech, and mind, this in the future is the non-performance 


of evil karma. So by the extinction of old karmas through penance 
and non-performance of new karmas there is no outflow in the future. 


Buddha goes on to argue that the Niganthas are not con- 
sistent with their principles, and that their striving is not 
fruitful, but the question of chief interest is the doctrine that 
Buddha puts in its place. A monk may find that while he 
lives at ease evil ideas increase, and he may practise striving 
directed to pain (i.e. a form of striving which involves painful 
effort), but at another time he does not do so, just as an 
arrow-maker may apply two firebrands to an arrow to 
straighten it, but does not do so when his end is effected. A 
monk of Buddha leaves the world, abandons the sins of 
killing, injury, theft, incontinence, lying, bad language, etc., 
follows the monastic rules, is freed from the bonds of greed, 
malice, sloth, distraction and remorse, and doubt. He 
practises the trances, and is finally emancipated from the 
asavas of lust, desire for existence, and ignorance. The whole 
aim of this training is not to erase the effect of actions already 
done, but to eradicate from the individual those principles 
and tendencies that lead to evil actions and strengthen the 
ties with sensuous existence. The last bond that is destroyed 
is the ignorance that causes the individual to cling to 
existence in any form. This clinging is grasping (updddna) 
and in another form craving (tanhd), and to this he must be 
purely indifferent. He must not even be attached to 
indifference. In another discourse after Buddha has 
explained that attachment to existence even in the highest 
spheres leads to rebirth, Ananda asks : 


In this case, Lord, a monk has reached the indifference in which 
he says, “ it would not be, it might not be for me, it will not be, 
it will not be for me, what is, what has been, that I abandon.” 
Does that monk, Lord, attain Nirvana ? 

In this case, Ananda, one monk might attain Nirvana, another not. 

What is the reason, Lord, what the cause, why one might attain 
Nirvana and another not ? 

The monk reaches the indifference in which he says, “it would not 
be” (etc.), but he is pleased with the indifference, he welcomes it, 


BUDDHISM AS A PHILOSOPHY 207 


and is attached to it. His consciousness is dependent on it and has 
a grasping for it. The monk with grasping does not attain Nirvana. 


Jainism is the most extreme form of kiriyavdda, the doctrine 
that salvation is attained through works. Opposed to this 
is the doctrine of non-action, that the way is only through 
knowledge, or as in the case of Pirana Kassapa and others 
that all actions are fatally determined. Buddhism does not 
appear to have solved the antinomy of free will, except by 
teaching without any subtlety that right action is a part of 
the Noble Path. A Jain layman is recorded to have asked 
Buddha if he taught the doctrine of non-action, and Buddha 
replied : 

There is a way in which one might say of me that the ascetic Gotama 
holds the principle of non-action, teaches the doctrine of non-action, 
aud by this leads his disciples ; and there is a way in which one might 
rightly say of me that the ascetic Gotama holds the principle of action, 
teaches the doctrine of action, and by this leads his disciples. 

And how might one rightly say of me that the ascetic Gotama 
holds the principle of non-action? I proclaim the non-doing of evil 
conduct of body, speech, and thought. I proclaim the non-doing 
of various kinds of wicked and evil things. 

And how might one say of me that the ascetic Gotama holds the 
principle of action? I proclaim the doing of good conduct of body, 
speech, and thought. I proclaim the doing of various kinds of good 
things.* 

The details of Buddhist cosmology need not detain us, as 
the fantastic structure appears to be merely based on the 
astronomical and geographical views of the time, but much 
of it was evidently elaborated and extended more or less 
independently by the Buddhists. The whole universe, 
corresponding to the egg of Brahma, is divided into three 
regions, the kamaloka, the world of sensuous feeling extending 
from the lowest hell beneath the earth up to and including 
the six lowest heavens. Above this is the riipaloka, including 
the Brahma-heavens in sixteen stages, and higher still up to 
the limit of existence the ariipaloka, the formless world 
divided into tiers according to the degrees of the attainments. 
But this is only one universe. There are other systems of 
these spherical universes, and in the spaces between them are 
special hells.? 


1 Angut, iv 182. 
2 For details see Cosmology and State of the Dead in ERE. 


208 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


What distinguishes this essentially from general Hindu 
polytheism is the position of the gods. The whole pantheon 
as it existed in popular belief was: taken over and even 
multiplied, but the doctrine of non-soul was extended to the 
gods also. This made no difference to their actual functions 
as rulers. They were still beings who could confer favours 
and punish. Each god remained such as long as the merit 
lasted that placed him in his position, and as soon as he passed 
away there was another ready to take his place. So far from 
there being any expressed atheism as in Sankhya, meditation 
on the gods is one of the six Recollections thus given by 
Buddhaghosa : 

One who desires to practise recollection on divinities should practise 
it endowed with the virtues of faith etc. resulting in accordance with 
the Noble Path, and alone and secluded he should set the divinities 
as witnesses, recollecting bis virtues of faith etc. thus: there are the 
gods who are the four Great Kings, the Tavatimsa gods (of the 
heaven of the Thirty-three), the Yama, Tusita, Nimmanarati, and 
Paranimmitavasavatti gods; there are the gods of the Brahma-world, 
and gods beyond these; these gods endowed with such faith have 
departed thence (from their former state) and have arisen here (i.e. 
in whatever heaven they now are). In me also such faith is found. 
Endowed with such morality . . . with such learning . . . with such 
renunciation . . . with such wisdom these gods have departed thence 
and have arisen here. In me also such wisdom is found. 

These are the gods of the current polytheism,-and they are 
recollected not to be worshipped, but in order to be realised 
in their proper places in the scheme of things. It is doubtful 
if God as an ultimate reality, an ens realissimum as in Vedanta 
or Platonism, was conceived, but the denial of such a con- 
ception is implicit, and it is certainly denied that Brahma is 
the Lord, or the maker of the universe, or omniscient. Equally 
important from the standpoint of theistic religion is the 
exclusion of the gods from any share in the plan of salvation. 
The disciple neither desires the heaven of Brahma, nor looks 
to him for help in attaining the goal. He aims at attaining 
the ultimately real, and this is Nirvana. It is not stated in 
such a way that it can be identified with God, but it may be 
said to be feeling after an expression of the same truth. 

Most of the metaphysical principles in their earliest 
ascertainable form may be called implicit. They were rather 


1 Vis. M, 225; the words of the Recollection are taken from Angut, iii 287. 


BUDDHISM AS A PHILOSOPHY 209 


assumed as facts of experience than established as theories 
in opposition to rivals. The Sankhya doctrine of the atman 
was a conscious theory of spiritual monadism opposed to 
pantheism. The Buddhist appealed to the obvious fact of 
the existence of separate individuals. The doctrines of 
dharma and karma, which appear to make a moral governor 
of the world superfluous, were to the Indian not theories that 
had developed within a social system, but undisputable 
facts. The later theories that grew out of this rudimentary 
system were due to the gradual recognition of hidden 
problems. A doctrine held by some of the Sarvastivadins was 
that all things are existent (sarvam asti). According to the 
Kathdavatthu their peculiar theory arose from the problem 
of time. Can the past and the future be said to be existent ? 
And if not, is actual existence only momentary ? The most 
important development was the epistemological theories of 
the Mahayana schools, and these were certainly centuries 
later than the position which assumed without questioning 
and contradiction the objectivity of an external world. 

It is possible to raise the question whether the earliest form 
in which we find the doctrines faithfully represents the 
primitive position. If Buddhism ‘ became an irrational 
denial ’’, what was it before it became so? No one has ever 
seriously attempted to show that there was once anything 
more primitive, or that any views other than those we know 
could be called Buddhism. In its denial of a supreme Lord 
Buddhism agreed with Sankhya and Jainism, and its chief 
claim to intellectual independence of these systems lay in 
the fact that it denied a permanent self. There is no rivalry 
between the Pali and other schools in their canonical sources. 
They developed new problems, but all accepted the same 
Scriptural utterances as their authority. We can see within 
the Canon the tendency to analysis and the growth of new 
formulations and classifications, but nothing to indicate 
that Buddhism ever lost hold of the doctrines once delivered 
to the disciples, until the subjective idealism of the Mahayana 
became a solvent in which external reality disappeared and 
Nirvana became identical with transmigration. In another 
important respect however Mahayana shows the growth 


1 On these developments see Dasgupta, op. cit., ch. 5; A. B. Keith, Buddhist 
Philosophy, part 3. 
P 


210 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


of mythological doctrines, which were probably developed 
from ideas existing in the earlier schools. These concern 
the nature of a Bodhisatta and a Buddha, with consequent 
modifications of the conception of the disciple’s career, and 
bring us to the problem of Buddha as a mythological 
character. 


CHAPTER XV 
BUDDHA AND MYTH 


(px the Triple Jewel the great problem has always been the 

person of Buddha. The Doctrine and Discipline as 
officially recorded can be determined, but the conception of 
the enlightened One has undergone great changes. Hence the 
modern theories which either rationalise everything, or 
mythologise everything, or hold that Buddha himself had 
claims which necessarily conferred upon him a place as high 
as the greatest of the gods.1 

The first question therefore is not whether it is possible to 
rationalise the traditions, but, as Professor Keith emphasises, 
whether the evidence they furnish for early Buddhist belief 
justifies our doing so. The opposition of, Pali versus Sanskrit 
has not the significance that it once had. This meant the 
rivalry between the legends in the Pali commentaries and 
those in the Lalita-vistara’as sources of history. But all 
these legends are attached to older documents of various 
schools, and it is now possible to get from them a different 
kind of historical evidence more certain than that of the 
legends, that is, we can find what these schools actually 
believed about the nature of a Buddha, and what they held 
to be the false views of other schools. 

There is no doubt that in the Pali Scriptures we have the 
earliest materials, but as the collection of one school it has 
to be determined whether in its assertions and negations this 
school was opposing other dogmatic views which had an 
equal claim to be primitive. It is also necessary to avoid 
begging the question by assuming that the conception of 
Buddha as a merely human being is the earliest, and that more 
developed views originated later. One great division between 
earlier and later documents can be made with certainty, 


1 This last is Prof. A. B. Keith’s view, but on his view of the historicity of the 
records it is difficult to see how it can be proved that any such claims were made 
by the historical Buddha. 

of Cf. Oldenberg, Buddha, pp. 89, 91. 


212 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


that is between the canonical statements and the com- 
mentaries. In the latter we find dogmas some of them never 
broached in the texts, and others that first appear in what are 
admittedly the latest compositions in the Canon. Within 
the Canon itself the distinction between early and late has 
often been made from very arbitrary considerations, but there 
is a broad division between the suttas of the first four Nikayas 
and the Abhidhamma. The suttas, if not in all their details, 
were common to several schools, but the Abhidhamma is 
probably peculiar to the Theravadins, and it shows its late- 
ness by quoting the suttas as we now find them. It also 
contains as one section the Kathdvatthu or ‘ Points of Con- 
troversy ’, between schools which all accepted the authority 
of the suttas. 

The Majjhima contains several accounts of the knowledges 
and powers attained by Buddha at his enlightenment. 
These are the four trances and the three knowledges, and are 
merely those which any arahat attains. They are included in 
the longer list of the fruits of being a monk, and all the super- 
normal attainments, the working of miracles, feats of 
levitation and thought-reading, are held to be attainable 
by all who practise right concentration. Although these 
qualities are common to a Buddha and his disciples, a Buddha 
differs in two respects. Firstly, he not only, like all arahats, 
knows the Path, but he has discovered it. As Ananda 
declared : 


There is no one monk entirely and completely endowed with those 
qualities with which the Lord, the arahat, the all-enlightened, was 
endowed. For the Lord was the producer of the unproduced Path, 
the preacher of the Path that had not been originated, the knower, 
cognizer, perceiver of the Path. But now the disciples are followers 
of the Path, being endowed with it afterwards.? 


This appears to be all in this passage that distinguishes 
a Buddha from an arahat, but there is a second quality some- 
times asserted, which in the post-canonical literature becomes 


1 Sce above, p.181 Whether these and the incidents mentioned below are 
historical is not now in question. The point here is that they were facts for the 
disciples, and it was in the light of them that they elaborated their views of the 
nature of a Buddha. 

® Majjh. iii 8; attributed to Buddha himself in Samy. iii 66. Buddha's qualities 
ras oe ee as the ten powers (bala), some of which belong to disciples, 

athaw. 1. 


BUDDHA AND MYTH 218 


a standing epithet. He is omniscient (sabbafiiiu). This is 
explained in various ways, and according to Buddhist 
accounts was a quality claimed also by the Jain leader, who 
declared that he was all-knowing and all-seeing, and professed 
that he had complete knowledge and insight, and that whether 
he was walking, standing, asleep, or awake, knowledge and 
insight were continually present. Buddha was asked by a 
wandering ascetic whether anyone who described Buddha 
himself in these terms would be speaking truthfully. Buddha 
denied it, and said that if anyone wished to describe him 
truthfully and not slander him, he would say, “ the ascetic 
Gotama possesses the three knowledges,” and these he 
described as the three knowledges attained on enlightenment.! 
Here no more is claimed for him than for any arahat, but the 
doctrine of his omniscience did become the accepted view. 

King Pasenadi had heard a report that Buddha had 
declared it impossible for any ascetic or brahmin to be 
omniscient, and he asked Buddha if he had said so, or anything 
like it. Buddha replied that what he had really said was that 
it was impossible for anyone to know and see everything at 
one and the same time. It is this mode of explaining 
omniscience that is later adopted, especially in the com- 
mentary on the Dhammapada.’ Buddha has not all knowledge 
present in his mind, but he can extend the net of his knowledge 
over the whole world, and thus bring any part of it within 
his consciousness. The fullest account is given in the Niddesa 
(I 855). Buddha has five kinds of vision. (1) With the eye 
of flesh he can see for a league all round by day and night. 
Even if a single marked sesame seed were to be thrown into 
a load of seeds he could pick it out, so pure is his vision. 
(2) With his divine eye he can see beings being born and 
passing away, and he knows their merit and demerit. If he 
wishes he can see one world, two worlds, and so on up-to 
three thousand world-systems and beyond. (8) With the eye 
of wisdom (pana) he is the producer of the unproduced 
Path, which the disciples now follow. There is nothing 
unknown, unseen, unperceived, unrealised; untouched by 
his wisdom. Everything past, present, and future comes 

1 Majjh. i 482, 2 Ibid. ii 127. 

3 E.g.i319; this work also explains why Buddha makes inquiries of the monks, 


when he already knows, The real explanation of course is that in the earlier 
works there is no theory of omniscience. 


214 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


within the range of his knowledge. (4) With his Buddha-eye 
he surveyed the world and saw beings of little impurity, of 
great impurity, of keen or dull faculties and conditions.* 
He knows that one man is given up to passion, others to 
hatred, illusion, reasoning, faith, or knowledge. And according 
to their requirements he preaches to each on impurity, love, 
contemplation, etc. This is human knowledge infinitely 
extended, for it is said that those who have wisdom even like 
Sariputta move in the region of Buddha’s knowledge like 
birds in space. (5) His all-seeing eye is called omniscience. 
As he is endowed with this there is nothing unseen by him. 

In these statements there is quite clearly a development 
from the earlier canonical utterances, in which omniscience 
is sometimes not even asserted, to the developed theories of 
these works of the Abhidhamma stage. It will be seen 
that in the Niddesa there is no hesitation in applying to 
Buddha qualities that are held to be divine. This work 
discusses the meaning of deva (god), and divides gods into 
three classes, (1) gods by convention, i.e. kings, princes, and 
queens, deva being a regular form of royal address ; (2) gods 
by birth, i.e. gods in the ordinary sense, from the four great 
Kings up to the Brahma-gods and beyond ; (8) gods of purity, 
i.e. the disciples who are arahats and the pacceka-buddhas. 
The Lord himself is the god, the super-god (atideva), the god 
beyond the gods (devatideva) over the conventional gods, 
over the gods by birth and the gods of purity. 

It is thus possible to say that Buddha is called a god, but 
only in the sense in which the term god is defined by 
Buddhists. Every arahat has qualities that place him above 
the gods of the current polytheism. But neither Buddha nor 
the arahat has become a god in the sense of the originator 
of the universe or its ultimate reality. Such a conception 
indeed never appears, for the polytheistic standpoint remains 
in the doctrine that there have been many Buddhas, and in 
the view that all arahats are ‘gods’, and even this 
classification of gods, which arose from the necessity of 
explaining the term devdtideva never appears in the suttas.? 

f v 2S phraseology is drawn from the account of Buddha first deciding to preach ; 
j * "rhe polytheiatic standpoint is also seen in one of the verses of the nuns, where 


Khema declares that she worships Buddha, while others worship the lunar constella- 
tions and fire. T'herig, 144, 145, A further stage of divinisation appears when past 


BUDDHA AND MYTH 215 


In one canonical passage it is denied.that Buddha is a god, 
but it is also there denied that he isa man. Being asked by 
a brahmin whether he was a god, a gandharva, a yaksha, or 
a man, he denied them all, and the brahmin asked what then 
he could be. Buddha replied : 


Those 4savas, through the non-abandonment of which I might have 
become a god, have been abandoned and cut off at the root, like a 
cut off palm tree, with complete cessation of becoming, and without 
liability to arise in the future ; and likewise those 4savas through which 
I might have become a gandharva, a yaksha, or a man. Just as a 
blue, red, or white lotus born and growing in the water rises and stays 
beyond it. unstained by the water, even so born and growing in the 
world, and having overcome the world, do I dwell unstained by the 
world. Remember, brahmin, that J am a Buddha.t 


The gods and other beings are such because of their being 
subject to the dsavas. <A god, i.e. ‘god by birth’, is 
one who through his asavas has attained that position. And 
so the denial that Buddha is a man is the denial that he is one 
who like all those who are not arahats is still in bondage to 
the asavas. Evidently the possibility of a god free from all 
bonds is not even thought of. The stage that Buddha has 
reached is lokuttara, supramundane. The whole of the Path 
with Nirvana is lokutiara, for it raises the individual out of 
the causal chain of birth and decay, and sets him on a course 
that leads to the permanent and undying state. 

This conception of the supramundane again is one that has 
developed in Abhidhamma, and has become a special tenet 
in several schools. Buddha was held by some to be supra- 
mundane in all respects, and hence not subject to the same 
conditions of existence as ordinary human beings, a view 
quite parallel to the Christian heresy of docetism. The 
Kathdvatthu 2 tells us that the Vetulyaka school held that as 
Buddha was ‘ undefiled by the world ’, he was not really born, 
but was represented on earth by a mind-born appearance, 
and another school that as he was above all human feeling, 
he felt no compassion. The Andhakas also were docetic, 


Buddhas are conceived as still existing. Waddell says that the Lotus of the Good Law 
is ‘‘ a theistic development of the Buddha-theory, which represents Saékyamuni 
as the supreme god of the universe,” art, Lotus in ERE. But the very next article 
by dela Vallée Poussin says “ this god is not God. There is not a single word in 
the Lotus which is not capable of an orthodox, i.e, ‘ atheistic ’ interpretation ’’. 
1 Angut. ii 38. 
2 Kathav, XVIII 1-3 ; IT 10, etc. 


216 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


holding that in his ordinary acts he was supramundane, and 
that his power of working miracles was unlimited. Docetism 
also appears in the Mahdvastu, as is implied in the name of the 
school to which it belonged, the Lokottaravadins. There 
(ii 20) the Tathagatas are said to be born from the right side 
of their mothers, which is not broken because they have a 
mind-formed body.! 

To show that Buddha was looked upon as a man is not 
sufficient to prove that he was originally conceived as merely 
human. The incarnation of a divine being is a well-known 
feature of Hindu mythology, and the theory has to be con- 
sidered whether Buddha was merely such another avatar of 
a god. This view has been put forth and worked out in most 
detail by H. Kern.? In the whole marvellous legend of 
Buddha, and it lost no marvel as he told it, Kern declared 
that he was unable to see a single untruth. It is all literally 
true, but it is the truth of myth, all the legends of Buddha 
being descriptions of the sun and other heavenly bodies. He 
did not deny that Buddha may have existed, but held that 
all the stories we have are mythological descriptions of natural 
phenomena. Buddha’s meditation on the twelvefold chain of 
causation represents the rising of the sun at the spring 
equinox and the twelve months, but it is also a creation myth 
and more. “ The sun-god had to be represented not only as 
creator, but also as physician, as Apollo, as healer and saviour. 

. Hence the four truths of the physician were also fitted 
in, and thus we see under the appearance of a dry scholastic 
formula a rational fusion of a description of sunrise with the 
indication of the beginning of the year, a combination of a 
myth of creation and of salvation.” 

Buddha’s two former teachers, who had died before him, 
mean two stars that disappear in the light of the sun. The 
Gautama who according to the Tibetan was an ancestor 
of Buddha, is the early dawn, or perhaps the planet Jupiter. 
He too fades before the rising sun. The going to Benares at 
midsummer to preach the first sermon, a journey of 18 hours, 
means that the sun was 18 hours above the horizon on the 


1 For the later developments of docetic views see Anesaki’s art. Docetism 
aera and for Lokuttara doctrine De la Vallée Poussin, art. Bodhisattva 
in 

2 Geschiedenis, i 232 etc,, and in still further detail in his translation of the Lotus. 


BUDDHA AND MYTH 217 


longest day.1_ Kassapa of Uruvela, who became Buddha’s 
disciple, is also the personified dawn, and his brightness 
also was lost in the glory of the sun. The six heretics are the 
false lights of the five planets and the moon. Rahula is 
naturally an eclipse: he was born at the time when the 
Bodhisatta disappeared. Mara is the spirit of darkness 
defeated and driven away by the sun-god.? Buddha himself 
is Vishnu incarnated as Krishna.? 

It would be no surprising fact if in the growth of the legend 
some actual sun-myth traits had been adopted from Hindu 
mythology. But even those that have been pointed out are 
inconclusive, and to Kern they were not mere additions, 
for this would have spoiled his theory, but belonged to the 
basis of the myth. The contest between the Bodhisatta 
and Mara, said Kern, belongs in its chief features at least 
to the most ancient legends of our race. For anyone who 
chooses it is quite possible to put it beside the fight of Indra 
with Vritra, of Beowulf with Grendel, and the labours of 
Hercules, but it is not possible to say that it is one of the oldest 
parts of the Buddha legend. There is no trace of it in the 
earliest accounts. It may even be called a sun-myth, but this 
only goes to. show that the legend to which it is attached 
was something else.4 

Buddha’s title ddityabandhu, ‘kinsman of the sun,’ is 
also an unfortunate fact for the sun-myth, even if it is 
translated with Kern ‘a sort of sun’. It is so evidently 
a part of the family legend, which makes the Sakyas, 
like many other noble Indian families, belong to the 
solar race. 

The cakravartin with his wheel of empire is also probably 
pre-Buddhist. For the Buddhists the wheel was not the 


1 The Indian day and night is divided into 30 hours, hence we are to suppose 
that the place was about 33° north, perhaps in the Panjab or Kashmir. Kern, 
loc, cit. i 240. 

2 The name of Mara as a mythological being is not found outside Buddhism. 
It occurs in Sanskrit in the sense of ‘ death’, Kern in accordance with his theory 
ignored this, and connected it with mala‘ dirt’, and Latin malus, or perhaps Skt. 
marict ‘ ray, mirage ’. 

3 There is not the slightest evidence that the idea of avatars of Vishnu existed 
at the time when the Suttas were compiled. In Niddesa i 89 the worship of Krishna 
ander the name Vasudeva is mentioned in a list of popular religions. 

4 The fact that Buddha went up to the heaven of the thirty-three in three 
strides like Vishnu (above p. 114) would have been welzome to Kern ; but it is the 
addition of a late commentary. 


218 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


sun. It may be maintained that it once had that meaning, 
but that was before the Buddhists knew of it. 

The basis of the sun-myth theory does not rest on anything 
so explicit as these instances. It consists in treating the 
persons and incidents as an allegory of astronomical events, 
and trusting for proof to the fitness with which they fall into 
the astronomical scheme. For Kern it was one of the most 
important sections of comparative Aryan mythology, but 
it is not now taken for granted that all myths are nature- 
myths, or that all myths are prehistoric.1 The Indian 
imagination has continued to invent stories and develop new 
conceptions of the gods down to present times, but there is 
no evidence to show that the habit of telling allegorical 
stories of natural phenomena assumed for the Vedic period 
was alive a thousand years later. 

In the doctrine of the nature of a Buddha we can see the 
development of new conceptions. The most important of 
these, besides those that have been mentioned, are the belief 
in previous Buddhas, the theory of a Great Man (mahda- 
purusha), who is to. become either a universal ruler or a 
Buddha, the thirty-two bodily marks of such a being, and 
the theory of a Bodhisattva. 

It has been held that the belief in previous Buddhas 
points to the actual existence of at least some of them. We 
know that Asoka enlarged the stiipa of Konagamana, the 
fifth of the six preceding Buddhas, and the Chinese pilgrims 
visited the stupas of the last three of them. This only proves 
that the legends concerning them then existed, but it does 
not prove these Buddhas to be historical, any more than the 
footprint of Buddha on Adam’s Peak proves that he visited 
Ceylon.? 

Six previous Buddhas are mentioned in the Suttas. These 
agree with the list of six in Sanskrit works, but the longer 


1“ Es ist bekannt, dass die Entstehuny der Mythen und ihr Verhaltnis zum 
geschichtlich Thatsaichlichen sehr verschieden erklart worden ist. Man ist jetzt 
zu der Einsicht gelangt, dass ein allgemein giltiges Prinzip durchaus nicht auf- 
zustellen ist, da die Mythen auf verschiedene Art entstehen undsichsehr verschieden- 
artig zu dem Geschichtlichen verhalten, dass daher jeder Mythenkreis . . . aus 
seinen eigenen Bedingungen heraus zu analysieren und zu erklaren ist.” KE. 
Bernheim, Lehrbuch der historischen Methode, p. 459. 

2 Kern says that it is quite unjust to think that the Singhalese have invented 
this story from national pride. Ceylon (Lanka) is visited every year by Buddha 
(the sun) in his southern course, Geschiedenis, i 270. 


BUDDHA AND MYTH 219 


lists vary, though all agree in mentioning Dipankara, under 
whom Gotama (as the brahmin Sumedha) made the vow 
to become a Buddha, and who first prophesied his career. 
This theory of a succession of teachers is common to the 
Jains, and here there is some evidence that at least one 
historical teacher preceded Mahavira.! In the case of the 
Buddhists there is no reason to doubt that the varying 
additions to the list of six are all more or less independent 
inventions and enlargements of an earlier form of legend, 
and the fact that even the six are absent from most parts 
of the Pali Canon makes it probable that they too do not 
belong to the earliest tradition. This is also the case with 
the future Buddha Metteyya (Maitreya), who is mentioned 
once in the suttas. The theory of a Great Man is 
undoubtedly originally non-Buddhist. Here it is only 
necessary to discuss it as it was developed by the Buddhists. 
It is found as part of the legend that Buddha was a king’s 
son, and had the marks of a Great Man. If he had remained 
in the world, he would have become a universal ruler, a 
cakravartin. The original meaning of this term, as even 
Kern admitted, was probably ‘one who controls (vartayati) or 
rules over the sphere of his power (cakra) ’, but it came to be 
understood as ‘one who turns a cakra’. With this change 
of interpretation cakra became a blank term to be given 
a@ meaning according to the ideas of fitness of the com- 
mentators. It is usually understood as ‘ wheel’, but how the 
wheel was conceived never clearly appears in the legends. 
The wheel is one of the seven treasures of a universal 
ruler, and is described in the Mahdsudassana-sutta as “a 
divine wheel-jewel with a thousand spokes, complete in 
all its parts with rim and nave”. The marks of wheels 
on the feet of Buddha are described in exactly the same 
terms. The sutta deseribes how in ancient times the wheel- 
jewel appeared in the eastern quarter to Mahdsudassana, 
king of Kus4vati, the later Kusinara, who sprinkled it, 
and said, “‘ may the reverend wheel-jewel appear, may the 
reverend wheel-jewel conquer.” He followed it with a 
fourfold army, and received the homage of all kings in the 
eastern region. Then it plunged into the eastern ocean, 
and appeared in the same way in the south, west, and north, 
1 H. Jacobi, art. Jainism in ERE. 


220 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


and in each region the kings paid homage. Finally the wheel- 
jewel having conquered the whole earth as far as the ocean 
came back and stood at the door of the inner apartments.’ 
Whatever the wheel may have once meant, it is here the 
symbol of universal rule, and all the phraseology about 
turning the Wheel of the Doctrine is merely the adaptation 
of this symbol to the spiritual reign of the king of the Dhamma. 

The thirty-two bodily marks (lakkhana) of Buddha indicate 
most clearly the borrowing of a popular belief. Among the 
practices reproved as base sciences in the Great Morality 
is the interpreting of the bodily marks of women, men, 
children and slaves, and it is described still more fully in 
the Niddesa.2, This however did not destroy the belief that 
such a science exists, and in all the forms of the legend of 
Buddha’s birth we find the mention of his marks, which 
were interpreted by the sage Asita or by brahmin priests. 
There are thirty-two such marks, which indicate that the 
individual is a Great Man, and will become either a universal 
ruler or a Buddha. 

He has (1) well-set feet, (2) wheels with a thousand spokes 
and rim and nave on the soles of his feet, (8) projecting 
heels, (4) long fingers, (5) soft hands and feet, (6) netted 
hands and feet, (7) prominent ankles, (8) antelope limbs, 
(9) when standing or not stooping his hands reach to his 
knees, (10) the private member is in a sheath, (11) he has a 
golden colour, (12) soft skin, (18) there is one hair to each 
pore of the skin, (14) the hairs of the body are black, rising 
straight and curling to the right, (15) he is very straight 
of body, (16) he has seven prominences, (17) the front part 
of his body is like a lion, (18) he has the space between the 
shoulders filled out, (19) his height is equal to his outstretched 
arms, (20) he has even shoulders, (21) keen taste, (22) a lion- 


* Rhys Davids called this “‘ nothing more nor less than a spiritualjzed sun-myth ”’ 
without explaining the strange behaviour of the sun. Dial. ii 196. The cakra is 
more usually explained as the royal chariot wheel, but it does not seem that the 
myth was ever rationalised to this extent. It is one of the king’s seven marvellous 
treasures, each having a special virtue, among which are the magic gem, whose 
light extends for a league all round, the elephant and horse that fly through 
the air, and the householder, who can see hidden wealth in the ground, The cakra 
has the special power of subduing all rivals. 

2 Digha, i 9, see above, p. 180 ; Niddesa, I 381. 

® Digha, ii 17, in the account of Vipassin ; iii 142, describing Buddha ; In Lal, 
120 (105) and Dharmasamgraha, lxxxiii the order is different, and there are minor 
variations, 


BUDDHA AND MYTH 221 


jaw, (23) forty teeth, (24) even teeth, (25) is not gap-toothed, 
(26) has very white teeth, (27) a large tongue, (28) a voice 
like Brahma and as soft as a cuckoo’s, (29) very black eyes, 
(80) eyelashes like an ox, (31) white hair between the eyebrows, 
and (32) his head is the shape of a cap (unhisasisa). 

Besides these there are eighty minor marks (anuvyafjana) : 
having nails copper-coloured, glossy, and prominent, having 
fingers bright (?), and regular, having the sinews hidden, 
without knots, etc. 

Several of the marks have a special interest in relation 
to the statues of Buddha, and their true significance has 
been discussed by M. Foucher.* In the earliest representa- 
tions of scenes in Buddha’s life, as at Bharhut (8rd 
century B.c.) the figure of Buddha is not found. The preaching 
of the first sermon is indicated by the figure of a wheel, 
and the fact that it was in a park is shown by the figures 
of deer. At Sanchi in the scene of the conversion of Kassapa 
of Uruvela all the persons concerned are portrayed, except 
that there is no Buddha. What the actual sentiment of 
believers was that led to this omission we do not know. 
It was not the custom to do it, says M. Foucher. 

It is in sculptures of the Gandhara school in the first 
century B.c. that the earliest figures of Buddha are found. 
With new believers in the foreign invaders, new sculptors 
introducing the ideals of Hellenistic art, and no doubt a 
newer and different school of Buddhism, there was a break 
in the tradition. A type of the figure of Buddha modelled 
on that of Apollo was created, from which the Indian and 
all others are derived. In the Gandhara type the hair is 
long and gathered up with a band into a bunch forming a 
prominence on the top of the head. It is this feature which, 
M. Foucher maintains, explains the peculiar shape of the 
head on the later Indian form. On this the prominence 
remains, but it becomes part of the skull, and the sculptor 
being unable to reproduce the flowing lines of hair covered . 
the head with small circular knobs, which are sometimes 
elaborated into curls turning to the right. The hair of the 


1 Lists in Lal, 121 (106); Dharmasamgraha, \xxxiv; referred to Jat. 112; 
Vimanav. com. 323. 

2 On the whole of this question see A. Foucher, L’art gréco-bouddhique du 
Gandhara, and The Beginnings of Buddhist art. 


222 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


head is not mentioned at all in the Pali, but the Lalita- 
vistara, which omits marks 15 and 24, inserts two others : 
having an even and wide forehead, and having the hair 
of the head turning to the right in black locks like a peacock’s 
tail or mixed collyrium. 

The doctrine of marks may be old, but the lists that we 
possess have developed from the Gandharian, and they 
cannot be put earlier than the Christian era. Clearly the 
lists that contain these marks are very late also, and two 
considerations need to be made. The suttas which speak of 
a cakravartin are evidently among the latest parts of the 
Canon. They belong to a stage in which the whole legend of 
a cakravartin was fully developed as we find it in the 
commentaries. It is also probable that the actual lists of 
marks, as we possess them, are later still, and have been 
added as comments to the text. They have undergone 
changes, as the differences between the Pali and Sanskrit 
lists show. The list of minor marks is still later, and in the 
Pali they are found only in the commentaries. In any case 
we cannot be sure that the actual lists recorded are identical 
with those which may have existed when the doctrine of 
marks was adopted. 

The epithet ‘having the hands and feet with a net (or 
netted)’ or as the Lalita-vistara says, ‘having the fingers, 
hands, and feet with a net,’ has been taken to mean that 
the fingers and toes were webbed, and some of the Gandhara 
statues actually have webbed fingers. But this was only a 
device of the sculptor to give strength to parts likely to be 
broken, since this feature only occurs when the fingers stand 
out. Buddhaghosa appears to have known this view, as he 
denies that the fingers were webbed,! and says that one with 
such a defect could not receive ordination. That the network 
of lines on the hand was originally intended is a sufficient 
explanation. Buddhaghosa’s own view is not likely to be 
the primitive one. He says that the four fingers and five 
toes were of equal length (as he no doubt saw them on 
statues), and that when Buddha entwined his fingers they 
were like a window with a lattice made by a skilful carpenter. 
The unna of white hair (Skt. arnd, lit. ‘ wool’) is said both 


1 Na cammena parinaddho angulantaro ; the web appears to be implied in Divy. 
56, jalavanaddhena, 


BUDDHA AND MYTH 223 


in Pali and Sanskrit to be between the eyebrows. Buddha- 
ghosa says that it arose between the eyebrows at the top 
of the nose, but that it went up and grew in the middle 
of the forehead. It is thus represented on statues as a 
circular lump, or sometimes by the insertion of a precious stone. 
In Mahayana siitras the ray of light which Buddha at times 
emits comes from this, and illumines the worlds. 

In the Pali commentaries rays of six colours (six being 
the traditional number of colours) are said to issue from 
Buddha’s body. They are not usually conceived as issuing 
from the unna, but as extending in a halo from all parts of 
his body to the distance of a fathom. If he wishes he hides 
them with his robe and goes about like an ordinary monk. 
In one case however he emitted a dark ray from the unna, 
which plunged everything in black darkness, and then 
another, which was like the rising of a thousand moons.! 

The theory of a bodhisatta is clearly the extension of the 
doctrines held concerning a Buddha. Gotama was a bodhi- 
satta ever since he made the vow to become a Buddha. 
After that in his successive lives he was proceeding on his 
predestined career, and acquiring merits which led to: his 
final achievement. In particular he performed ten supreme 
virtues or perfections (pdrami), which are likewise performed 
by every bodhisatta: almsgiving, morality, renunciation, 
wisdom, energy, patience, truthfulness, resolution, love, 
and equanimity. 

This doctrine of the vow, the career, and the perfections 
is absent from the four Nikayas, and was evidently quite 
unknown when they were compiled. But it cannot be 
assumed that its first appearance in the Theravada school 
coincides with its origin. It may have been introduced 
from some other school. We know from the Kathdvatthu 
that various schools were in contact, and that they appealed 
to. the same authoritative texts, so that the Theravadins 
may have adopted a current doctrine that harmonised with 
their own principles. We already find in it all the factors 
for the great development that it attained in Mahayana 
schools. The difference in the latter is that every individual 
may make the vow to become a bodhisatta and finally a 
Buddha. He then aims not merely at his own salvation. 


1 Jat.i 444; Vimanav. com. 323; Dhp. com. ii 41, iii 102. 


224 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


but at acquiring merits by which he can win the salvation 
of countless others.) 

It has been thought that at the side of the official doctrine 
as we find it in the Pali there was a non-clerical Buddhism, 
and that among the lay people addicted to prayer and 
adoration there were those who made a god of Buddha and 
worshipped him as such. This would not be surprising, 
but to call this non-clerical Buddhism is rather like codifying 
the beliefs of an Italian peasant and calling it non-clerical 
Catholicism. When we come to Mahayana utterances, 
we find enough fervent adoration without seeking it in lay 
enthusiasm. 

In one of the longest statements in the suttas of what laymen 
thought about Buddha there is no mention of anything 
divine.2, Sonadanda declares that he is going to visit Buddha 
for the good report that he has heard of him. After describing 
the ascetic Gotama as well born on both sides for seven 
generations back, he continues the recital : 


The ascetic Gotama has abandoned a great family circle. He has 
abandoned great wealth of gold (stored) both below and above ground. 
Even while a boy, a black-haired lad in the prime of youth, in the first 
stage of life he has gone forth from a house to a houseless life. While 
his unwilling mother and father wept with tear-stained faces he cut 
off his hair and beard, and donning yellow robes has gone forth from 
a-house to a houseless life. He is beautiful, fair, attractive, with 
lovely complexion like Brahma, in colour and presence not inferior 
to look upon. He is virtuous, of noble virtue, of good virtue, endowed 
with good virtue ; of beautiful voice and speech, endowed with urbane 
voice, clear and distinct for expounding the meaning. He is the 
teacher of the teachers of many, without lust, passion, or fickleness. 
He teaches the brahmin race the doctrine of action and sets forth 
righteousness. He has gone forth from a high family from an unbroken 
kshatriya family, from a family, rich, of great wealth, of great 
possessions. Men cross kingdoms and countries to come and ask 
him questions. Many thousands of divinities have taken refuge with 
him. This good report has gone abroad about him: “he is the Lord, 
the arahat, the fully enlightened, endowed with knowledge and conduct, 
who has well gone (sugata), the knower of the world, the supreme 
charioteer of men to be tamed, teacher of gods and men, the Buddha, 
the Lord.” He is endowed with the thirty-two marks of a Great 
Man, offering welcome, friendly, polite, not frowning, speaking plainly 


1 For the great elaboration of the bodhisatta doctrine when it became the 
central belief see Art. Bodhisativa in ERE. 
2 Digha, i 115 ff.; attributed to Cankin in Majjh. ii 166. 


BUDDHA AND MYTH 225 


and willingly. He is respected, honoured, revered, and esteemed 
by the four assemblies. Many gods and men are devoted to him. 
In whatever village or town he enters non-human beings do not hurt 
men. 


Further his fame is described as such that the kings Bimbisara 
and Pasenadi and the brahmin Pokkharasadi with their 
whole families have taken refuge with him. 

This is not strictly the view of a non-Buddhist layman, 
but only what the compiler of the sutta thought to be the 
natural view for a well-disposed layman to hold. It sums 
up what has been said above about the development of 
the legend as we find it in the Canon. Buddha is descended 
from a wealthy family of the kshatriya caste. He has 
abandoned great wealth, and has become a widely-known 
teacher. The wealth is naturally connected by the com- 
mentator with the four vases of treasure that originated 
at his birth,! and the present allusion may well be the source 
of the later legend. As in the story of the meeting with 
Bimbisara there is no reference to his royal birth. The mention 
of the thirty-two marks is natural in the mouth of a brahmin, 
if the view taken above is accepted that it is the adoption 
of a popular belief in personal marks, for which it was the 
custom to seek interpretation from soothsayers. The actual 
interpretation of those marks that we possess may be due 
entirely to later Buddhist sagacity, and we know that some 
of them were in fact invented from a study of the peculiarities 
in the Indian style of images. 

Two distinct questions here present themselves, the 
question of the historical existence of a teacher in North 
India, and the quite different question of the credibility of 
the stories that are told about him. Just as in the case of 
the Scriptures of the Buddhists, which were compared 
with the Gospels without any examination of the real facts, 
so the personalities of the founders have been brought into 
relation. Ever since the time of David Strauss there has 
existed a tendency, resting upon a subconscious wish, to 
mythologise the Gospel story. In the treatment of Buddhism 
the same impulse had an opposite effect. Not merely was it 
a relief to revolt against a tyrannous theology, but in 
Buddhism appeared a religion equally moral and far more 


1 pp. 33, 101. 


226 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


rationalistic. Hence the usual attitude to Buddhism in 
England and Germany has been to accept Buddha and his 
career as historical, that is, so far as represented in the 
judiciously compressed accounts presented to Western 
readers. 

The archeological evidence is important, but less decisive 
than has been thought. ‘‘ When Asoka himself appears 
as witness,” says Oldenberg, ‘will anyone doubt that 
here (at Piprava) in truth and reality lay the realm of the 
Sakyas ?” Asoka’s inscription is only the testimony that 
he believed what he went to see, the site of an event that had 
happened two centuries before, and he believed equally in 
Konagamana. Taken alone it proves no more than the 
testimony of any devotee to the truth of the relics that 
he reveres. Asoka’s inscription shows that Piprava was 
certainly the accepted site of Buddha’s birthplace in the 
third century B.c. It is the circumstance that this does not 
stand alone that makes it impossible to put the Sakya 
territory elsewhere than in the Himalaya region north of 
Saketa or Ayodhya. The archeological evidence itself 
rests on a tradition, but it allows us to date this tradition 
with certainty much earlier than would be otherwise possible. 
With the evidence from archeology the topographical data 
in the suttas agree. They may not be the oldest part of the 
Canon, but they are older than the legends of the com- 
mentaries, they were compiled by those who had actual 
knowledge of the places, and they are explicable only on the 
supposition that a real tradition and a real knowledge of 
the localities were preserved. This tradition is a continuous 
one, and the centre of it is the person of Buddha. Whatever 
additions to the legend there may be, the further we go back 
the less do we find those features that. give colour to the 
theory of a sun myth, or to anything but the view that he 
was a historical personage, a great religious reformer 
and moral teacher, and the proclaimer of the Noble 
Eightfold Path. * 


CHAPTER XVI 
BUDDHA AND HISTORY 


A Pes earliest conception of the nature of Buddha that we 

find is that he was a human being. He comes to have 
superhuman attributes ascribed to him, but they are not 
those of the popular gods of the time. The attributes also 
develop, but on quite different lines from the conceptions 
of contemporary polytheism. This is the evidence of the 
canonical documents, and the evidence of the legends of the 
life of Buddha tells the same story. 

A quite distinct question from that of the nature of a 
Buddha is to ask how much actual biographical history is 
contained in the reports of Gotama’s life. There are three 
periods round which the legends are grouped, the early life, 
the Renunciation and Enlightenment, and the public career. 
It is quite possible to hold that the legends are based on the 
actual career of a man: it is a very different matter to hold 
that by applying the canons of historical criticism we can 
extract the thread of a credible story. What can first be 
separated is the biographical element in the Canon. The 
principle of distinction lies in the material itself, for these 
canonical passages are certainly centuries older than the 
commentaries. As a youth Gotama leaves his weeping parents, 
renounces the wealth of a high-born kshatriya family, and 
becomes an ascetic. After attaining enlightenment and 
founding an Order his life is spent in travelling and preaching 
through the lands of the Magadhas and Kosalas, until he 
finally settles at Savatthi. Even in certain portions of the 
Canon we find longer legends incorporated, but they are still 
very different from those in the commentaries. 

The usual method of treating these passages has been 
to fit the later and the earlier accounts together and to 
make the later legends the real basis. But it is an illusion 
to imagine that the Pali, because it contains the earliest 
and most complete form of the Canon, differs essentially 
from the Sanskrit accounts in the legends attached to it. 


228 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Without discussing this point further it will be sufficient 
to mention the actual results attained in constructing a 
biography from the legends of Buddha’s youth. The chief 
elements of these are the references to ‘his parents, his 
youthful training, his renunciation, his two teachers, and the 
temptation by Mara. 

In the four Nikayas the only occurrence of the name - of 
Buddha’s father is in the Mahdpaddna-sutta, which gives the 
names of the fathers of the six previous Buddhas as well. 
There he is called Suddhodana, and his royal city is Kapila- 
vatthu. The four names of his brothers, all ending in -odana, 
are evidently fictitious, says Oldenberg. But how are we to 
know that the name of Suddhodana, like the names of the 
fathers of the other six Buddhas, is not equally fictitious ? 
We have no means of deciding, and all we can say is that a 
name meaning ‘ having pure rice’ would be a natural one 
for a man whose wealth depended on rice culture. It would 
also be natural for tradition to preserve the real name, and 
equally natural in expanding the legend to invent other 
names on the same model. The rule of the Sakyas was 
probably aristocratic, in which each of the nobles was a 
rija, but to say that Suddhodana was one of these nobles 
is a mere rationalising of the later legend. The older legends 
know nothing either of a king or of Suddhodana, and speak 
merely of the Sakya tribe, rich in stores of gold, a high 
family of unbroken kshatriya descent. 

The story of the incidents that caused Gotama to leave 
his home has a parallel in the Canon. We find there no 
mention of his meeting with an old man, a sick man, and 
a corpse, but instead a meditation on old age, sickness, and 
death. Can we think that the events would have been 
put in this abstract form, if they had been then known ? 
Although the later legend says that he was married at 
sixteen, and left the world at twenty-nine, it may be held 
that there is no necessary contradiction with the canonical 
statement that he left his home ‘ while a boy, a black-haired 
lad in the prime of youth’, as this is the repetition of a 
stereotyped description ; but it does look as if the picturesque 
details of his flight, or in fact any details, were then unknown. 
That he had a wife and son we may readily assume, but it is 
not necessary to add more to what has been said above about 


BUDDHA AND HISTORY 229 


the name and family of ‘ the mother of Rahula ’, or about the 
illusory belief that his son is mentioned in the Canon. 

Of his six years’ striving weknow from the Canon only 
what the Majjhima tells us (above p. 62 ff.). His two teachers 
are described as practising concentration, and what they 
inculeated were two of the so-called Attainments, which 
are also a part of the Buddhist system, but probably 
not a primitive part of it. It seems very unlikely that the 
compiler of the sutta a century or two later had any real 
knowledge of. the facts of their teaching. He had to 
describe their imperfect methods, and he gives them in 
what are exact descriptions of two Buddhist practices. 

Nothing about the philosophical systems of these teachers 
is said either in the Canon or out of it until we come to 
ASvaghosha’s poem of the first or second century a.p.! 
There we are told that Arada or Alara first described his 
philosophy concisely to Gotama. It has a resemblance 
to the Sankhya philosophy, but is without some of its most 
characteristic doctrines. R. Schmidt calls it an older form 
of Sankhya. Windisch supposes that ASvaghosha introduced 
only what he needed for his purpose. The point is important 
only with regard to the question of the origin of Buddhistic 
principles, and even then only on the supposition that 
ASvaghosha is faithfully describing a system in the form 
in which it existed before Buddha began to preach. This 
is entirely improbable. The terminology used is neither 
that of early Sankhya nor of early Buddhism. 

More important is Asvaghosha’s account of the replies 
of the two teachers to Gotama’s question about the religious 
life and the obtaining of final release. Alara’s reply consists 
of a description identical with the methods of the Buddhist 
monk up to the last Attainment but one. The monk reaches 
the four trances, and then successively attains space, the 
infinite, and nothingness. These last three stages are concise 
statements of the first three of the four Attainments. This 
account corresponds to the statement in the Pali that Alara 
taught the Attainment of the state of Nothingness. The 
description of Uddaka’s doctrine also corresponds with the 
Pali in making his teaching the fourth Attainment, Asva- 
ghosha has thus added nothing essential to the canonical 


1 Buddhacarita, xii 17 ff. 


230 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


statement beyond giving an independent account of a 
philosophical system which has no appearance of being 
historical. 

The accounts of the Enlightenment in the Majjhima are 
remarkable in being confined to describing Buddha’s victory 
as consisting in the discovery of the true method of con- 
centration after the trial and rejection of the practices of 
other ascetics, and there is no mention of Mara or the 
Bodhi-tree. It contains direct evidence to show how some 
of the later incidents have developed out of mere epithets. 
It speaks of the river ‘ with good fords’ (suppatitthd), and 
this in the Jataka is turned into a proper name, Suppatitthita. 
The neighbouring ‘army-township’ (send-nigama), which 
was probably unknown or unintelligible to the com- 
mentators, becomes in the Jataka the township of a person 
named Senani, and in the Lalita-vistara the general’s village 
(sendpati-grama). 

History has been found even in the story of the contest 
with Mara. When Gotama had sat down beneath the tree 
with the determination not to rise until he had won enlighten- 
ment, what are we to understand by the attacks of Mara’s 
armies? It means, said Rhys Davids, that “all his old 
temptations came back upon him with renewed force. For 
years he had looked at all earthly good through the medium 
of a philosophy which taught him that it, without exception, 
contained within itself the seeds of bitterness and was 
altogether worthless and impermanent; but now to his 
wavering faith the sweet delights of home and love, the 
charms of wealth and power, began to show themselves 
in a different light, and glow again with attractive colours. 
He doubted and agonised in his doubt ;_ but as the sun set, 
the religious side of his nature had won the victory, and 
seems to have come out even purified from the struggle ”’.1 
But can we assume that the elaborators of the Mara story 
were recording ‘“‘a subjective experience under the form 
of an objective reality ”, and did they know or think that 
this was the real psychological experience that Buddha 
went through? Pischel’s view is entirely different. The 
oldest form of the Temptation story, he says, is that in 
which Mara tempted Buddha after his enlightenment, 


1 Art, Buddha in EB. 


BUDDHA AND HISTORY 231 


under the Goatherd’s tree, asking him to attain Nirvana at 
once. ‘‘ The meaning of the first story of the Temptation 
is quite clear from the oldest texts. In its place they make 
Buddha doubt whether he should reserve his knowledge 
or teach it to men. There is nothing else in the Temptation 
story.’ 1 Here we have the theory that the origin of the 
Mara legend is another legend of Mara referring to the 
period after the Enlightenment, and this again is supposed 
to originate from the legend of Buddha’s doubting whether 
to preach, in which Mara does not appear. 

The question is further complicated by the fact that there 
is a parallel story among the Jains. In the Kalpa-sitra 
of the Jain Canon is given the life of Parsva, the last but 
one of the Tirthakaras or leaders of the Jains. His enlighten- 
ment is there told, but there is no mention of a contest with 
an enemy, any more than Mara occurs in the canonical 
Buddhist account. But according to a Jain commentary 
Parsva had to meet the attacks of a demon resembling 
Mara. When he sat under an asoka tree to win enlighten- 
ment, this enemy, an asura god Meghamilin, attacked him 
in the form of a lion, and then sent a storm of rain to drown 
him. But the naga-king Dharana came and protected him 
by wrapping his serpent body round him, and covering 
him with his hood. 


Then the asura seeing such great firmness of the Lord, with his mind 
smitten with great astonishment and his pride calmed, made obeisance 
to the victorious one, and went to his own place. Dharana also seeing 
the danger was gone went to his place. On the eighty-fourth day 
after the renunciation (of ParSva), on the fourth day of the dark half 
of the month Caitra . . . in the hermitage under an asoka tree on a stone 
slab, while he was calmly seated, calmly having made his decision 
not made before, and having followed in order the observances of 
the devotees, with the annihilation of the four kinds of destructive 
karma, there arose in Paréva complete knowledge illumining with 
its light the whole world.” 


Here the enemy of Parésva is easily explained, as Meghaméalin 
had been his rival in former births, just as Devadatta in 
former births was the enemy of the future Buddha. For 
both there was a contest and a victory under a tree. But 


1 Leben des Buddha, p. 23. 
2 Com. on Uttaradhyayana-siitra; see complete text and translation by J. 
Charpentier, in ZDMG, Ixix (1915), p. 321 ff. 


232 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Buddha’s enemy was a supernatural being, whose origin we 
do not know. The story of the protection of Parsva by the 
Naga king really corresponds with the unmotived story 
of the protection of Buddha from a storm by a naga after 
his enlightenment. The parallelism goes further, for the 
mother of Paréva had fourteen great dreams at his conception, 
and the interpreters prophesied that he would become either 
a universal king or a Tirthakara. Like Buddha he displayed 
marvellous knowledge as a boy when sent to a teacher. 
It appears as if the legends grew side by side and mutually 
influenced the rival hagiographers. They do not belong 
either to the canon of the Buddhists or of the Jains. Some 
popular mythological belief no doubt lies behind the Buddhist 
legend, as Mara is sometimes named Namuci, a well-known 
Vedic demon. For the Buddhists he is a god who takes 
a certain recognised rank among the gods of the Kama- 
sphere. He is not, like Satan, the tempter to merely moral 
evil, but to any action which is the expression of kdma, the 
sensuous nature of the individual. 

Oldenberg’s defence of the Enlightenment amounts to 
maintaining the truth of the psychological experience. To 
many this will scarcely need proving. In a system which 
teaches a sudden conversion and the realising of the truth, 
when after long meditation ‘ a light goes up ’, a system which 
further prescribes the mystic practices, and illustrates them 
again and again in the conversions and testimonies of 
disciples who attained full knowledge, can we doubt that 
this was also the fundamental experience of the Master ? 
To what he told his disciples they may have added items 
of their own experience, as they certainly added hagiographical 
details, but without it there would have been neither Buddha 
nor Buddhism. 

The fact that we can separate the reports of the earlier 
life of Buddha into an earlier and a later stratum increases 
the credibility of the little that is told in the earlier account. 
The very circumstance that there is so little detail shows 
that the inventiveness of believers was not then at work. 
The one case where we have in the Canon a circumstantial 
account of this period of his life—the six years’ striving and 
Enlightenment—is a passage which corresponds almost 
word for word with the legend in the Vinaya, and which 


BUDDHA AND HISTORY 233 


probably represents a portion of the later legend incorporated 
in a sutta. This is all the more likely because other 
accounts in the Majjhima describe the enlightenment 
without any reference to- local details. 

The story in the Majjhima continues down to the conversion 
of the five monks, and is also contained in the Vinaya, 
but considerably enlarged and with the addition of -other 
legends. Yet it is the Vinaya account which Oldenberg 
makes the basis of the narrative. It had become, he says, 
traditionally fixed ‘in sehr alter Zeit ’, but he nowhere says 
what is to be understood by very old, nor why it should 
be called fixed. It is this portion which contains what 
can scarcely be called a fixed account of Buddha’s first words. 
It records his first sermon, his performance of thousands 
of miracles, and the founding of two monasteries. 

It has been the attempt to prove too much, and to construct 
a detailed biography from birth to old age, that has resulted 
in a scepticism extending to the individuality of Buddha 
himself. From the time of the public preaching the growth 
of legends was as active as before. The difference from the 
earlier period is that they originated in the region where they 
were held to have occurred, and that a basis of fact is much 
more likely. After the founding of a community there 
were eyewitnesses and a continuous tradition in which 
actual events could be remembered. But they were preserved 
as legends, and the growth can be seen particularly in the 
later tradition which undertook to assign many legends to 
particular years (in a way quite different from the Sanskrit 
tradition), and also in the great conglomeration known as 
the Mahdparinibbana-sutta. What we find in the canonical 
accounts of Buddha’s public life is little more than the 
record of preaching and of journeys between the various 
cities, Rajagaha, Vesali, and Savatthi, which formed the 
chief centres of the new movement. 

It is not surprising that the weaving into a narrative 
of the more attractive legends, all of them late, should 
have led to entire scepticism about the whole. R. O. Franke 
says, ‘I should not wish to make it appear as if I believed 
that we know even the very least about the founder of this 
doctrine. Naturally somebody (or somebodies) has (or have) 
created it, otherwise it would not be there. But who this 


234 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


somebody was, and whether there were not rather several 
somebodies, we have no knowledge.” + 

This however is not the generally accepted view, and for it 
to be accepted it would be necessary to go on and show 
that the theory that the records are all inventions—mytho- 
logical or otherwise—is the more credible view, and this 
has certainly not been done. The legends show the common 
features of such records. There are accretions, which we 
can in some cases identify, and there is the absence of any 
historical sense, which results in interpreting real events 
according to later ideas. These things occur in cases where 
the main facts of the legends are quite certain.? 

But besides the legends of the Scriptures and the com- 
mentaries there are other sources, which make it possible to 
place the life in a definite period of Indian history. We 
have the Chronicles of Ceylon, which for the period from 
the time of Buddha to that of Asoka rest on Indian sources, 
and deal with a known period of Indian history. Parallel 
to these are the historical elements in the Puranas and Jain 
writings,? which by their correspondences support the view 
that the Chronicles derive their statements from the old 
commentaries taken to Ceylon along with the Scriptures. 
The material for the study of this question has not yet been 
completely analysed nor even yet made fully accessible to 
Western scholars ; and it cannot be said that a final conclusion 
has been reached which would afford a common standing- 
ground for those who have taken the easy course of merely 
recording the legends as old or very old, and others who 
find in them only the results of devout imagination.* All 


1 ZDMG., 1915, 455. 


2 It is a dogmatic position or fashion, which, like Mommsen’s treatment of the 
legends of the regal! period of Rome, sweeps them all away. Sir William Ridgewa 
has shown not merely how genuine tradition for such a period could be preserved, 
but gives striking instances which prove how such records have actually been 
preserved for quite as long a time by popular tradition alone, See his paper On the 
value of Tradition respecting the early Kings of Rome, in Proc. Cambridge Philol. 
Soc., 8 Nov. 1917. 

3 Tt is only recently that these two sources have been investigated from this 
point of view ; see the chapters thereon by Rapson and Charpentier in Cambridge 
History of India, vol. i. 

* For the literature of the subject and the best statement of the question see 
Winternitz, Gesch. der ind. Litt., ii 167 ff., 357 ff.; also Geiger Dipavamsa und 
Mahavamsa, and introduction to his translation of Mahavamsa. The views of Prof. 
Franke are in flat contradiction with those of Oldenberg, Geiger, and Winternitz. 
His conclusions may be studied in The Buddhist Councils at Rajagaha and Vesdli, 
JPTS. 1908, and in the introduction to his translation of Dighanikaya; cf. also 


BUDDHA AND HISTORY 235 


these historical questions are grouped round a still more 
fundamental one, the question whether in this system, which 
has inspired the beliefs and hopes of a greater number of 
mankind than any other, it can be said that we possess the 
actual words of the Founder. In one sense it can. When all 
the traditional matter and all the passages ascribed to 
disciples are abstracted, we possess a large number of 
discourses, poems, and other sayings that claim to be 
Buddha’s own words. There can be no reasonable doubt » 
that the community started not merely with a code of 
monastic rules devised by the Founder, but also with a 
body of doctrinal utterances. The wish to preserve every 
statement of Buddha would lead to the inclusion of other 
texts in an Order which continued to spread the Doctrine, 
and to teach not only its professed members but also the laity. 

Even the early Buddhists soon found difficulties in deter- 
mining the actual word of Buddha, and attempted to draw 
up rules for deciding.1 We further find records of disputes 
as to whether certain portions of the Scriptures were actually 
Buddha’s words or only those of disciples. For us, even 
with stricter methods of criticism, it is still more difficult 
to make a clear distinction between what may have been 
gradually incorporated and the original nucleus. But the 
nucleus is there, even though we may never succeed in 
separating it, or in deciding what the earliest form of it may 
have been. 

Some general principles for distinguishing earlier and later 
elements have been advanced, but without many results 
of value. The idea that only the regular prose sermons 
have a claim to be primitive comes from the old tendency 
to compare the Christian Gospels. This is merely confusing, 
for Buddha was not only a popular preacher, but in the 
first place the teacher of an Order. An instructive verse to 
be learnt, or the explanation of a technical formula, would be 


his articles Dipavamsa und Mahavamsa, Vienna Or, Journ. 1907, 203 ff., and Das 
einheitliche Thema des Dighanikaya, ibid. 1913, 198 ; Rhys Davids was also entirery 
sceptical about the chronology. In his last utterance he repeated his statement of 
fifty years ago that we cannot trust the 218 years which the Chronicles allege 
to have elapsed from the commencement of the Buddhist era down to the time 
of Asoka. He further held that the endeavours on the basis of other traditions to 
arrive at a more exact date for the birth of Buddha are open to still more serious 
objections. See Cambridge History of India, vol. i, 171, 172. 
1 See the Four Great Authorities, p. 148. 


236 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


quite as likely to belong to the primitive collection as an 
address to a village of carpenters. It has been held that the 
verse passages show by their peculiar grammatical forms 
that they belong to the oldest part of the Tipitaka literature, 
but the absurdity of this position can easily be seen. The 
verses have preserved these forms just because they are in 
verse, and only in so far as their metrical character required. 
But prose passages quite as old could be entirely changed, 
and inevitably would be changed when learnt by one who 
spoke another dialect. There is at the same time no reason 
to doubt that Buddha may have recorded much of his 
teaching in verse. It was the common Indian practice 
to do so, and some of the verse passages have a great 
resemblance both in form and matter to early Upanishad 
poems. Even some of the suttas that take the form of 
commentaries cannot merely for that reason be put late. 
In no particular case perhaps can they be shown to be very 
early, for any commentary was likely to become incorporated, 
but there is no intrinsic reason why Buddha should not have 
taught his disciples privately in this way. 

In these pages the teaching has been stated not in the way 
in which it may appeal to the presuppositions of the Western 
mind, but as we find it in the earliest records, and as its 
earliest followers understood it. As such it is expressed in 
characteristically Indian conceptions, the theory of recurring 
cycles of the development and dissolution of the universe, 
the doctrinés of karma, and the preexistence and rebirth 
of individuals, together with a psychological theory of its 
own. It may be that much of this can be discarded as 
unessential or legendary matter, but without this matter 
it is not possible to understand how it arose and what it meant 
as a stage in the history of Indian religion and philosophy. 
Like all the Indian systems it remains essentially a religion, 
a way of salvation. It offers an interpretation of experience, 
but the fundamental experience that it recognises is an 
emotional one, and until this emotion is roused, until it is 
felt that the pleasures of sense are transitory, and that 
existence in the world of sense is consequently painful, 
not even the initial step to the path of escape has been taken. 


1 Even in the Gospels there’ is a commentary on the Parable of the Sower, 
Luke viii 9-15, remarkably like some of those in the suttas. 


CHAPTER XVII 
BUDDHISM AND CHRISTIANITY 


WE find as early as St. Jerome a tendency to compare 

the life of Buddha with the Gospel story. The heretic 
Jovinian had been rash enough to assert that virginity was 
a state no higher than that of marriage, and St. Jerome to 
show how greatly virginity was esteemed among the Pagans 
refers to some of their fables of virgin births, and one of his 
instances is that of Buddha. Nothing is known of the 
source of this statement, but the attempt has been made to 
support it from the much later Mongol books. Senart repeats 
it, and says, “‘le dogme, cher surtout aux Mongols, de la 
virginité de la mere du Bouddha, dogme dont l’existence 
est expressément constaté par saint Jérome, est contenu 
en germe dans toutes les versions de la légende ”’.! 

Perhaps Senart did not mean that what St. Jerome said 
was evidence for its existence among the Mongols, but only 
for the existence of the dogma, but what is his evidence ? 
He refers to K6ppen, 1.76, 77. There we find that Koppen 
says that the documents speak only of Buddha’s mother 
not yet having borne a child, and that for a long time before 
she had not consorted with her husband. ‘ Die Mongolen, 
jedoch, die einfaltigsten und glaubigsten aller Buddhisten, 
sollen auf die Jungfraulichkeit der K6nigin von Kapilavastu 
grosses Gewicht legen.” Képpen ventures on no assertion 
of his own, and adds, ‘“‘ das versichert wenigstens A. Csoma, 
As. Res. xx 299.” We turn to Csoma, and find that he 
says, ‘I do not find any mention in the Tibetan books made 
of Maya Dévi’s virginity, upon which the Mongol accounts 
lay so much stress.” 

We thus get back to 1839 before finding anyone who can 
tell us of any Mongolian accounts. There were at least two 
lives of Buddha from the Mongolian, when Csoma wrote. 
In 1824 Klaproth gave a Vie de Bouddha d’aprés les livres 
mongols,? and there clearly enough it is stated of Buddha’s 


1 J.A. 1874, avril-mai, p. 384; not all forms of the legend have it ; see p. 36. 
2 JA. 1824, p. 9 ff. 


238 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


father that ‘‘ il épousa Maha-mai (Maha-maya), qui, quoique 
vierge, concut par l’influence divine, un fils, le 15 du dernier 
mois d’été.”” Was Csoma referring to this? If so, it was 
unfortunate, as the whole article is only a translation from 
Klaproth’s original German, which he gave in Asia Polyglotta 
(1823); and in the German no phrase like quoique vierge 
occurs. Even if it is not, as it appears to be, the invention 
of Klaproth’s translator, there is nothing to prove that it 
came from a Mongolian book. A little later I. J. Schmidt 
published an actual Mongolian text, The History of the Eastern 
Mongols by Sanang Setsen, with a German translation, 
which contains a short life of Buddha, but has no mention | 
of the virgin birth, supposed to be so dear to the Mongols. 

It is needless to pursue this ignis fatuus any further, 
as it is idle for the history of the legend. The mythologisers 
caught at this supposed evidence, as they were anxious to 
prove his birth miraculous. Yet it was quite unnecessary, 
for several forms of the Indian legend concede all they 
want. These accounts make the conception of Buddha 
consist in his descent from heaven by his own choice, with which 
process his father was not concerned. 

Although in the earliest legends there is no mention of this 
miraculous birth, yet the belief may be pre-Christian. Even 
so the question whether it has influenced Christian dogma 
does not seem to deserve further discussion, and may be left 
to the reader.1 All the important passages for determining 
the question of the relation of the Gospel accounts to 
Buddhism have been collected by Seydel and van den 
Bergh van Eysinga, and there is no need to refer to earlier 
fantastic treatment.? Van den Bergh finds fifteen instances 
of parallels to incidents in the Gospels that are important 
enough for discussion. 

1. Simeon in the Temple (Luke ii 25 ff.). This is generally 
admitted to be the most important of the parallels, and is 
accepted by van den Bergh, Pischel, and others. The 
resemblances as well as the differences may be compared 
in the story as given above,*® but a final decision will rest 

1 See above, p. 36. The Annunciation also has been compared by A. J. Edmunds 
with the interpretation of Mahamaya’s dream by the brahmins. His theories 
have been sufficiently discussed by L. de la Vallée Poussin in Revue Biblique, 


1906, p. 353 fi. 
2 See Bibliography. 3 p. 38 ff. 


BUDDHISM AND CHRISTIANITY 239 


on the actual historical: relations between Buddhist and 
Christian communities in the first century a.p. One 
comparison made by van den Bergh may not be at first sight 
obvious. Simeon “came by the Spirit into the Temple ”. 
Van den Bergh says that it is unlikely that this means 
“auf Antrieb des Heiligen Geistes””’, and apparently takes 
€v 7@ mvedpar. to mean “through the air”. This was in 
fact the way in which Asita came to visit the infant Gotama. 

2. The visit to Jerusalem (Luke, ii 41 ff.). Seydel compares 
this with the Lalita-vistara version of the story of Gotama 
meditating under a rose-apple tree and being missed by his 
father.1_ Van den Bergh admits that there was no feast, 
and that the gods who came to visit Gotama can scarcely 
be compared with the Jewish doctors, but considers it 
important enough to presuppose the possibility of Indian 
influence. 

3. The Baptism. When the infant Gotama was being 
taken to the temple, he pointed out that it was unnecessary, 
as he was superior to the gods, yet he went conforming to 
the custom of the world. The Gospel parallel to this is 
Matt. i113. ‘‘ Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh 
us to fulfil all righteousness ’”. Here there is no hesitation 
to be baptized. The hesitation is on the part of John the 
Baptist. But in a passage of the Gospel according to the 
Hebrews we read: “‘ Behold the mother of the Lord and 
his brethren said to him: John the Baptist baptizeth for 
the remission of sins; let us go and be baptized by him. 
But he said to them, in what have I sinned that I should 
go and be baptized by him, save perchance it is this very thing 
which I said, that it is ignorance ?”’* Van den Bergh holds 
that this is the original form of the Gospel account. It 
is clear that if it were, the parallel would be. closer. 

4. The Temptation. Comparison is here complicated, 
as Buddha was tempted by Mara on several occasions 
throughout his life. Wan den Bergh finds the correspondence 
less in the promises of Satan than in the framework. The 
Buddhist framework is said to be: a preceding glorification, 
temptation in the wilderness, fasting, Mara departs defeated, 
waits for a more favourable time, the victor is praised by the 


ep AG. 2p. 46. 3 Quoted by Jerome, Adv, Pelag, iii 2. 


240 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


gods. But this framework is not Buddhist. It is simply the 
attempt to fit the Buddhist events, drawn from half a dozen 
different works, into the Christian framework. The preceding 
glorification in the Gospel is at the Baptism, but with Buddha 
it takes place after the great contest with Mara. The 
‘“‘ wilderness ” of Buddha was ‘a delightful spot with a 
pleasant grove”, near a township where he could go for 
alms.!_ Mara departs after failing to persuade him to give 
up his austerities, but not finally defeated, as he returns and 
attempts to drive him from the Bodhi-tree. Then Buddha 
is praised by the gods, and parallel to this is “angels came and 
ministered unto him”, but Mara continues to tempt him 
to the end of his life. It is still possible to maintain that some 
form of the Buddhist legend was known to the Evangelists, 
but not by asserting that the scattered events as we know 
them fit into the legend. 

5. Praise by Kisaé Gotami.2 This incident has naturally 
been compared with Luke xi 27: ‘‘ And it came to pass, as 
he spake these things, a certain woman of the company 
lifted up her voice, and said to him, Blessed is the womb that 
bare thee and the paps which thou hast sucked.” Again the 
question of Biblical criticism arises, as this and the next 
verse, says van den Bergh, have been misplaced by St. Luke. 
In that case what is more likely than that they have been 
borrowed from a Buddhist book ? But when van den Bergh 
goes on to say that the Buddhist story is from a southern 
canonical work certainly centuries older than St. Luke, 
it must be pointed out that the work is not canonical, but 
a composition of the fifth century a.p., and that the story 
cannot properly be called southern, as it occurs also in the 
Tibetan. It is thus ‘ northern ’, and it is this fact that makes 
it possibly but not certainly older than the Gospels. 

6. The widow’s mite (Mark xii 41-44, Luke xxi 1-4). 
The parallel here is with a story in a work of Agvaghosha 
certainly later than the Gospels. A poor maiden, who 
had heard the monks preaching, “‘ recollected that some time 
betore she had found in a dungheap two mites (copper mites), 
so taking these forthwith she offered them as a gift to the 


1 


p: 64. 2p. 53. 
4 Liter th the anecdote is translated by Beal, Abstract of four lectures, 
p. 170. 


BUDDHISM AND CHRISTIANITY 241 


priesthood in charity. At this time the president (sthavira), 
who . . . could read the motives (heart) of men, disregarding 
the rich gifts of others and beholding the deep principle of 
faith dwelling in the heart of this poor woman .. . burst 
forth with (an utterance in verses).”” Soon after the king 
passes by and sees her, and finally makes her his chief queen. 
There are other Buddhist stories illustrating the truth that 
the value of a gift does not depend on the mere amount. 
Neither religion needed to borrow this truth, but it is the 
fact that two coins are mentioned which gives force to the 
idea of borrowing. Chronology is against the probability 
that it was on the part of the Evangelists. 

7. Peter walking on the sea (Matt. xiv 28). The intro- 
duction to Jataka No. 190 tells how a lay disciple was once 
going to the Jetavana to see Buddha : 


He arrived at the bank of the river Aciravati in the evening. As 
the ferryman had drawn the boat up on the beach, and had gone to 
listen to the Doctrine, the disciple saw no boat at the ferry, so finding 
joy in making Buddha the object of his meditation he walked across 
the river. His feet did not sink in the water. He went as though 
on the surface of the earth, bat when he reached the middle he saw 
waves. Then his joy in meditating on the Buddha grew small, and 
his feet began to sink. But making firm his joy in meditating on the 
Buddha, he went on the surface of the water, entered the Jetavana, 
saluted the Teacher, and sat on one side. 


The story cannot be proved to be pre-Christian, but the 
idea certainly is, as the power of going over water as if on 
dry land is one of the magic powers attained by concentra- 
tion.1 The story is not one of the Jataka tales, but belongs 
to the introductory part explaining how the following tale 
came to be told. There is no likelihood of its being old, 
as these introductions appear to be often the invention 
of the commentator. Van den Bergh only ventures to say 
that it appears to him not impossible that the incident of 
St. Peter is borrowed from an Indian circle of thought. 

8. The Samaritan woman. “‘ How is it that thou, being 
a Jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria ? 
for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans ”’. 
Joh. iv 9. In the Divydvadana, p. 611 ff., occurs a sutta which 
appears to come from the Canon of the Sarvastivadins : 


1 p. 182. 


242 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Thus have I heard: at that time the Lord dwelt at Sravasti in the 

Jetavana, in the park of Andthapindada. Now the elder Ananda 
dressed early, and taking his bowl and robe entered the great city of 
Sravasti for alms. After his round, and having finished his meal he 
approached a certain well. At that time a Matanga (outcast) girl 
named Prakrti was at the well drawing water. So the elder Ananda 
said to the Matanga girl, “ give me water, sister, I wish to drink.” 
At this she replied, ‘I am a Matanga girl, reverend Ananda.” “TI do 
not ask you, sister, about your family or caste, but if you have any 
water left over, give it me, I wish to drink.” Then she gave Ananda 
the water. Ananda having drunk it went away, and she finding in 
Ananda’s body, mouth, and voice a good and excellent sign fell into 
meditation, and awaking passion thought, may the noble Ananda 
be my husband. My mother is a great magician, she will be able to 
bring him. 
The rest of the story tells how she asks her mother to bring 
Ananda, and her mother promises to do so, unless he is 
dead or without passion.1 Her mother utters a spell, and 
Ananda is drawn to the village, but Buddha perceives and 
utters a counter spell, which brings him back. She explains 
to her daughter that Buddha’s spells are the stronger. Buddha 
then gives Ananda a spell, but the girl follows him about, 
and he implores Buddha’s help. Finally Buddha converts 
her and she enters the Order and wins arahatship, whereat the 
people and king Pasenadi are astonished. Buddha tells the 
king a long story of her and Ananda in a previous birth. 

Here is one of the clearest cases where the Gospel incident 
can be explained out of the actual circumstances of the 
time without any idea of borrowing. Van den Bergh even 
quotes Rashi to the effect that it is unlawful for a Jew to 
eat the bread of a Samaritan and to drink his wine, but he 
holds that the great hostility between the two peoples only 
applies to a later age. The effect of this argument is to 
make it appear that the story is more natural in a Buddhistic 
than a Christian setting. 

9. The end of the world. The comparison is here not with 
the Gospels but with 2 Pet. ii 10-12: ‘“* The day of the Lord 
will come as a thief in the night; in which the heavens shall 
pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt 
with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are 
therein shall be burned up. Seeing then that all these things 


1 Tt is well known that Ananda did not attain arahatship (with the extinction of 
passion) until after Buddha’s death. 


BUDDHISM AND CHRISTIANITY 243 


shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be 
in all holy conversation and godliness ”’. 

The parallel is again with the Introduction to the Jataka, 
in which the mode of announcement of a new cycle is 
explained : 

The gods named Lokabytha of the Kama-region, bareheaded, with 

dishevelled hair and weeping faces, wiping away the tears with their 
hands, wearing red robes, and having their dress in disorder come to 
the region of men and thus announce: sirs (marisa), at the end of 
100,000 years a new cycle will arise, this world will be destroyed, 
and the great ocean will dry up, this great earth and Sineru the king of 
mountains will burn and be destroyed. Sirs, practise friendliness, 
practise compassion, sympathy, and equanimity. Support your 
mother, support your father, honour the eldest in the family. 
The points of comparison are (1) that in the Epistle (iii 8) the 
people are addressed as ‘beloved’, and in the Pali as 
marisa. Rhys Davids quite fairly translated this word as 
‘friends’. but it is merely a respectful form of address, 
and has nothing of the force of ‘ beloved’. (2) In both a new 
order of things is to be introduced by a world conflagration. 
In the Epistle the new dispensation is the day of God and 
the final triumph of righteousness, but the new cycle of the 
Buddhist is a mere repetition of the unending cycles of the 
same worldly existence. (8) In both the need of a virtuous 
life is taught. 

It can be said with certainty in this case that the Pali 
passage is later than the Epistle. It is based on a canonical 
passage in Anguttara iv 100, and any comparison should 
really be made with this. There it is said that first rain 
ceases to fall, the small rivers then the great rivers dry up, 
the lakes and finally the ocean. Mount Sineru smokes and 
bursts into flame, which reaches as far as the world of 
Brahma. The only moral drawn is the truth that all 
compound things are impermanent and unstable. The 
first and third points of comparison thus disappear, and the 
second is reduced to the mere conflagration. The new 
heavens and new earth and the final judgment are well known 
Hebrew ideas, and are quite absent from Buddhism, in 
which the next cycle repeats the state of the old one. 

These are all the parallels that van den Bergh considers 
of any value, but he adds six more, which Seydel and others 
find important. 


244 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


10. The Annunciation. This needs no further discussion. 
The Biblical aspect has been well treated by G. Faber.1 

11. Choosing the disciples (John i 35 ff). In the oldest 
accounts no mention is made of how Buddha came to have 
five disciples. It is probably this fact which led to the 
invention of various stories to explain where they came from. 
Buddha does not really choose them in any case. In the 
later Pali they were persuaded to follow Buddha at his 
renunciation by a brahmin who had foretold his future 
Buddhahood. In the Sanskrit they were five selected from 
among the attendants sent him by his father and uncle, 
or they were disciples of Rudraka, who joined Gotama 
because they thought he was going to become a teacher 
in the world.2 In every case they joined him before he 
became a teacher. Van den Bergh ignores all this, and makes 
the choosing consist in Buddha’s going to Benares to teach the 
doctrine first to his old disciples. It is at this point that 
Seydel finds a really striking parallel. 

12. Nathanael (John i 48). ‘‘ When thou wast under the 
fig tree, I saw thee”. However, it was Buddha, not a 
disciple, who was under the fig tree. Therefore Seydel turns 
ovra into wv, and makes the sentence mean, ‘‘When I was 
under the fig tree, I saw thee’. Buddha was in fact under 
a fig tree, or very near one, when ‘“ with divine vision, 
purified and superhuman ”’, he saw the five monks dwelling 
at Benares. With this alteration of the text we thus get not 
only a parallel, but an equally good piece of Bible exegesis. 

13. The Prodigal Son (Luke, xv 11-82). The Lotus 
ch. 4 has a parable of a prodigal son, which has an interest 
of its own, in showing the relation of Mahayana Buddhism 
to other schools. The ‘ Vehicle of the Disciples ’, as Hinayana 
is called, is not reprobated, but is treated as a lower stage. 
Disciples who think they have attained enlightenment 
are like a man who left his father and went into foreign 
lands for many years. He returned in poverty, but did not 
know his father, who had grown rich. His father in disguise 
gave him employment, and after twenty years fell sick 
and entrusted his son with his wealth. But the son did not 
want it, as he was content with his pay. The son when 


1 Buddhistische und Neutestamentl. Erzahlungen, p. 31; cf. p. 29 above. 
3 
p. 80. 


BUDDHISM AND CHRISTIANITY 245 


his father died was acknowledged by him, and received all 
his father’s wealth. Even so are the Disciples (the followers 
of Hinayana), who for long are content with receiving 
Nirvana as pay, but who finally receive omniscience, the whole 
wealth of their father Buddha. 

As this parable belongs to a work that in its earliest form 
is not earlier than the second century a.D., there is no question 
of borrowing by the Evangelist, but as van den Bergh holds, 
there is the possibility of both parables being based on an 
earlier story. 

14. The man that was born blind. ‘‘ Master, who did sin, 
this man, or his parents, that he was born blind ?”’ John ix 2. 
This according to Seydel is one of the most striking proofs 
of Buddhist influence, and he refers again to Lotus, ch. 5. 
A man who was born blind did not believe that there were 
handsome or ugly shapes. There was a physician who knew 
all diseases, and who saw that the man’s blindness had 
originated in his sinful actions in: former times. Through 
him the man recovered his sight and saw his former 
foolishness. 

We have here the general Indian doctrines of karma 
and preexistence, but the teaching of the Gospel is anti- 
Buddhist, for the reply to the question is, ‘neither hath 
this man sinned, nor his parents.’”?> What may be claimed as 
Buddhist is at most the possibility of such a belief among 
the persons who asked the question. But the belief in pre- 
existence was neither peculiarly Buddhist nor Indian. It 
was also Pythagorean, and was well known to the Greeks. 
How the Jews actually acquired it may be questioned, 
but it was scarcely from an Indian work of the second 
century. 

15. The Transfiguration. ‘‘ His face did shine as the sun, 
and his raiment was white as the light.”” Matt. xvii 2. A 
transfiguration is said to take place twice in the life of Buddha. 
Just before his death his body became so bright that the 
new golden robes that he was wearing seemed to have lost 
their lustre. It was then that he declared that this takes 
place on two occasions, at his enlightenment and when he 
attains final Nirvana. This is the whole of the evidence, 
as Bigandet’s Life of Gawdama quoted by van den Bergh 
is a mere Burmese reproduction of this passage 


246 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


Even this simple incident has given rise to complications. 
As it stands it is merely one item common to two entirely 
different lives. Van den Bergh therefore tries to prove 
that there were originally two cases of transfiguration in 
the Gospel story, one at the Baptism and one at the 
Ascension. St. Matthew, he thinks, has omitted the former, 
and has misplaced the actual Transfiguration story, which 
ought to come after the Resurrection. This may be left 
to the Biblical critics, and so may his proof of a Transfigura- 
tion after the Baptism. He points out that the words from 
Heaven are almost the same after the Baptism as after the 
Transfiguration, and that two of the apocryphal Gospels 
refer to fire at the Baptism. The Gospel according to the 
Hebrews says that “‘ fire appeared above the water ”’, and the 
Ebionite Gospel that ‘‘straightway a great light shone 
round the place”. This is scarcely a transfiguration, and 
rather proves how small the points of comparison become 
when looked at in detail. 

16. The miracle of the loaves and fishes. Another late 
Buddhist story that has been brought into comparison 
(Introduction to Jataka No. 78), is about a gildmaster and 
his wife, who provided a meal for Buddha and his five hundred 
disciples with some cakes which they had made. 


The wife placed a cake in the bowl of the Tathagata. The Teacher 
took as much as was sufficient, and likewise the five hundred monks. 
The gildmaster went round giving milk, melted butter, honey, and 
sugar, and the Teacher with the five hundred monks finished his meal. 
The great gildmaster and his wife also ate as much as they wished, 
but there was no end of the cakes, and even when the whole monastery 
of monks and eaters of broken meat had received, there was no sign 
of finishing. They informed the Lord, “ Lord, the cake is not coming 
to an end.” ‘“‘ Then throw it down by the gate of the Jetavana.” 
So they threw it down a place where there is a slope near the gate. 
And to-day that place at the end of the slope is known as the Kapalla- 
piva (Pan-cake). 


This belongs to the same part of the Jataka as the tale of 
the disciple walking on the water, and the same remarks 


apply. 


The validity of these parallels in furnishing evidence for 
the incorporation of Buddhist legends in the Gospels has 
sometimes been judged merely by the amount of resemblance 


BUDDHISM AND CHRISTIANITY 247 


to be found between them, and the different conclusions 
drawn show how very subjective are the results. But there 
are two considerations that might lead to firmer ground. 
Firstly, whether there is enough reason to think that Buddhist 
legends can have reached Palestine in the first century A.D. 
Van den Bergh devotes a careful chapter to this inquiry, 
but some of the facts adduced are not to the point. To refer 
to the Pafcatantra being translated from Sanskrit into 
Pahlavi in the sixth century a.p. is idle, but we know that 
Greece had been in contact with Persia for centuries, just as 
Persia had had political and trade relations with India 
even before the age of Alexander. Thus the possibility of the 
transmission of legends cannot be denied, but the particular 
way in which it may have taken place has never heen shown. 
Seydel assumed that an actual Buddhist document was 
known to the Evangelists, but the legends on which he 
relied come from no one Buddhist work, and his parallels 
have to be gleaned from the Pali Scriptures, Sanskrit works, 
and legends scattered about the Pali commentaries and 
Chinese translations. 

The second point raises the question of Biblical criticism. 
The Gospel stories all belong to the first century a.p. They 
were all written down at a time when a living tradition 
and memory of the events may have existed. For one school 
this tradition did exist. The story of the Samaritan woman 
or the choosing of the disciples was told because there really 
was a Samaritan woman and disciples who had been fishermen. 
In this case we are dealing with historical events, so that 
any resemblances to the legend of Buddha are merely 
accidental curiosities. For others the Gospels even in their 
earliest form are not a collection of actual memories, but 
only the attempts of the early Christians to imagine a historic 
setting for their peculiar beliefs. ven in this case the 
question whether Indian legends contributed to the resulting 
structure is a question of literary history that has never been 
convincingly decided, and in many cases never seriously 
considered. 

If scholars could come to an agreement on what instances 
are ‘cogent parallels’ or cases of actual borrowing, we 
should then have the data of a problem for the historians 
to decide. But so far this hope is illusory. Seydel’s fifty 


248 THE LIFE OF BUDDHA 


instances are reduced by van den Bergh to nine. In propor- 
tion to the investigator’s direct knowledge of the Buddhist 
sources the number seems to decrease. E. W. Hopkins 
discusses five ‘ cogent parallels’, but does not consider any 
of them very probable.1 Garbe assumes direct borrowing 
in four cases, Simeon, the Temptation, Peter walking on the 
sea, and the Miracle of the loaves and fishes. Charpentier 
considers Simeon the only unobjecticnable example.’ 
Other scholars reject all connexion. In any case the chief 
events of the life—birth, renunciation, enlightenment, and 
death, the very items which might give strength to the 
comparison—disappear from the question. 

Van den Bergh van Eysinga also discusses instances 
of parallels in the Apocryphal Gospels. Some of these works 
show a knowledge of names connected with North West 
India, and the relationship depends here upon the contact 
between Indian culture and early Christian missions in the 
Kast. This is a quite different question from that of the 
presence of Indian legends in Palestine, and lends no additional 
support to a theory concerning the canonical Gospels that 
breaks down in every one of its supposed proofs. 


1 India Old and New, pp. 125, 144. 
2 ZDMG., 1915, 442, reviewing Garbe’s Indien und das Christentum. 


APPENDIX 


THE BUDDHIST SCRIPTURES 


ee purpose of this Appendix is to analyse the texts of 

> the various recensions of the Canon mainly with the 
view of indicating the legendary and historical matter which 
they contain. Although they form a closed collection of 
_ authoritative utterances, they possess certain distinct 
features distinguishing them from the Scriptures of other 
religions, and these features are found in all the compilations 
held by different sects to be the word of Buddha. 

The earliest known form is the Canon of the Theravada 
school, preserved in the Pali language, but we also possess 
portions of the recensions of other related sects in Sanskrit, 
as well as in translations into Chinese and Tibetan made from 
Sanskrit or in some cases probably from Pali or a similar 
dialect. There are further the documents of the schools 
that sprang from the great doctrinal developments known 
as the Mahayana. In these the discourses are usually modelled 
on the form of earlier works, and claim to have been delivered 
like the other discourses in definite places by Buddha himself. 
They frequently embody older matter identical with passages 
in the Pali texts. 

It will be convenient to treat in the first place of the most 
completely preserved collection, the Pali Canon. This, 
although now forming the Scriptures of the Singhalese, 
Burmese, and Siamese Buddhists, arose in India. It is divided 
into Sutta (Discourses), Vinaya (Discipline), and Abhidhamma 
(a systematising and development of the doctrines of the 
Sutta). These three collections are known from the time of 
the commentaries as the Pitakas (Baskets), or the 
Tipitaka (Threefold-basket). 

The texts do not profess to form a uniform whole, every 
word of which is revealed, as in the case of the Vedas, the 
Bible, or the Koran. That which is revealed is the word of 
Buddha (Buddhavacana) or the word of the Lord. But in 


250 APPENDIX 


the texts there is much which does not claim to be in any 
sense Buddha’s utterance. This is recognised by the Buddhist 
commentators themselves, as when they explain that certain 
sentences or whole verses have been added by the revisers 
at one of the Councils.! It is also recognised or implied 
in the considerable number of discourses which are attributed 
to various disciples, and this not merely in the commentaries, 
but in the text itself. In some cases these discourses are said 
to have been given after the death of Buddha. In the two 
oldest collections of discourses, the Digha and the Majjhima, 
there are over twenty discourses attributed to disciples, 
and the Anguttara contains a legend of a disciple and king 
Munda, who reigned half a century after Buddha’s death. 
In other cases one of the disciples, especially Kaccana the 
Great, is said to expound at length a sentence or short 
discourse given by Buddha. Thcologically these facts are not 
important, as all the doctrine taught by the disciples is held 
to have been first expounded by Buddha, and hence in a 
doctrinal sense these later discourses may be held to be the 
word of Buddha also. But they do show that the Scriptures 
as we possess them make no claim to be exclusively the 
utterances of Buddha in the form in which they might 
conceivably have stood as remembered immediately after 
his death. 

A still more important fact is that some of the Suttas are 
not proper discourses but legends.: A legend may possibly 
be as old as the discourse to which it refers, but many of the 
actual legends are evidently inventions. When we are told 
of four gods who visit Buddha, and give him a spell? to 
ward off evil spirits, or of a disciple who visits the thirty- 
three gods, and when being shown over the heavenly palace 
startles them by shaking it with his toe, we are evidently 
dealing neither with the word of Buddha himself nor with 
historical tradition. Even in the case of non-miraculous 

1 K.g., Dhammapila states this in his commentary on several verses in the 
Theri-gatha. On the last verse of the Padhana-sutta (above p. 73) the commenta- 
tor says, ‘some maintain that the holders of the council (sangitikara) said it. 
This does not commend itself to us.” The whole of the Thera- and Theri-gatha 
is an example of the freedom with which the word of Buddha was understood, as 
they are the verses of disciples, The verses of one monk, who lived in Bindusara’s 
time, nearly two centuries after Buddha’s death, are said to have been added at 
the third Council (Therag. 381-6). 


* Digha, No. 32, There are other instances of spells in the Scriptures, and they 
come to be the word of Buddha, because he repeats them to the monks, : 


THE BUDDHIST SCRIPTURES 251 


legends we have no reason for putting them on the level of 
the actual discourses and treating the matter as a uniform 
whole. When historical or legendary passages occur in a 
discourse and are attributed directly to Buddha, the question 
in each case arises whether they are to be treated as trans- 
formed legendary matter. But apart from these there are 
many purely narrative portions that can be clearly separated 
from the actual discourses. Such portions are usually 
quite stereotyped, and recur with the same phraseology in 
various places. 

The simplest form of these additions is the introductory 
part of a sutta, stating where Buddha was at the time, and 
adding that he then addressed the monks. Longer passages 
also occur, which evidently belong to the stock traditions 
of schools of reciters. Sometimes a discourse appears with 
an introduction in one place, and is repeated without it 
in another or with a different introduction. These explanatory 
passages however are quite distinct from the later com- 
mentaries proper, and now form a part of the Canon. They 
represent the tradition as it existed when the Scriptures 
were finally revised. 

To speak without qualification of the final revision of 
the Scriptures is perhaps to take too much for granted, 
but it is usually held that the general arrangement was fixed 
at the third Council, 247 s.c. There are certain works, 
particularly in the fifth Nikaya discussed below, concerning 
which other conclusions may be drawn. 

It is from this period, more than two centuries after 
Buddha’s death, that we must start in an inquiry about the 
age of the canonical texts. In the present state of our 
knowledge we cannot in any instance declare that Buddha 
said so and so. The fact that we start from is that we have. 
a collection of documents, which were held some two centuries 
after Buddha to contain his utterances. The Chronicles tell 
us that in the time of king Vattagamani Abhaya (29-17 B.c.) 
the monks of Ceylon, seeing the decay of beings, assembled 
and caused the three Pitakas with their commentary, 
which they had before handed down orally, to be written 
in books.! This official recording in writing would not 


1 Dpvum, xx 20,21; Mhum. xxxiii 100, 101. There had been a time of great 
political confusion, as the king had been dethroned for fourteen years by the 
invading Tamils, 


252 APPENDIX 


exclude the possibility of much of the Canon having already 
been written, but what is quite certain is that originally 
and for a long period the Scriptures were preserved only 
by memory. We know in particular of two schools that applied 
themselves to learning different sections of the texts, 
the Dighabhanakas, ‘reciters of the Digha,’ and _ the 
Majjhimabhanakas, ‘reciters of the Majjhima.’ We also 
know that these schools preserved contradictory legends 
concerning the discourses. It is easy to see how with this 
method of preserving the Doctrine differences of tradition 
would arise. There would be no certain method of preserving 
a definite order, as in the case of a written and numbered 
record. There would also be the danger of unwittingly 
including discourse; or commentaries which might be 
expositions of the pure Doctrine, but which were not an 
original part of the collection. An instance occurs in the 
case of the Satipatthdna-sutta. It is found both in the 
Digha (No. 22) and Majjhima (No. 10), but in the former case 
a long passage of commentary on the Four Truths has 
been incorporated. 

We have a direct piece of evidence to show that differences 
in the Canon did arise at an early period, and they are 
just such differences as we should expect would develop 
in an orally preserved Canon. It is a common tradition 
of all the schools that sects began to develop in the second 
century after Buddha’s death. The statement in the Dipavamsa 
is that after the second Council (held a century after Buddha’s 
death), the defeated monks held a council of their own 
known as the Great Council, and the members of it are also 
said to have revised the Scriptures. The account of the 
changes that they introduced is of course an eax parte state- 
ment, made from the point of view of the Theravada school, 
but it is clear that the author of the record knew of another 
form of the Canon differing in certain important respects 
from that of his own school. The account is as follows : 

The monks of the Great Council made a reversed teaching. They 
broke up the original collection and made another Collection. 

They put the Sutta collected in one place into another. They 
broke up the sense and the doctrine in the five Nikayas. 

The monks not knowing what was taught with exposition and what 


without exposition, the primary sense and the inferred, composing 
another utterance established another sense. 


THE BUDDHIST SCRIPTURES 253 


Under cover of the letter those monks destroyed much sense. 
Rejecting some portion of the Sutta and the profound Vinaya they made 
another counterfeit Sutta and Vinaya. 

The Parivara, the summary of the sense (of the Vinaya), the six 
sections of the Abhidhamma, the Patisambhida, the Niddesa, and 
caren portion of the Jataka—so much they set aside and made 
others. 


Abandoning the arrangement of nouns and genders, the adornments 
of style, and the original nature (of words) they made others. 


These revisers are thus charged with changing the order 
of the discourses, introducing spurious ones, rejecting certain 
works, and altering the grammar. We at least learn that 
the differences thus described were there, and they are 
exactly of the kind that we should expect to arise, even 
without any deliberate wish for change, in the case of texts 
preserved orally by independent communities where various 
dialects were spoken. In the Pali Canon itself we find 
different recensions of the same discourse. Those portions 
which are said to have been rejected by the members of the 
Great Couneil are just those which modern criticism rejects 
as not forming an original part of the Canon. They all contain 
the doctrine of Buddha, and embody much which purports 
to be his actual words, but as distinct works they have 
been compiled later. On a strict interpretation of the word 
of Buddha it is quite intelligible that a school which had not 
adopted these portions into its tradition should declare 
them to be spurious. The reference to grammatical changes 
is also significant. It implies that there was a form of the 
Canon in a different dialect from that of the Theravada 
school. That there was such a form or forms we may be 
quite certain. Discourses preserved orally would inevitably 
be modified in language by a repeater whose own speech 
was a different dialect. 

The statement has been made that Buddha allowed 
anyone to repeat the Scriptures in his own dialect, but the 
facts are these: In the Vinaya? there is a story that two 
monks of brahmin origin came to Buddha and explained 
that certain monks of various names, clans, castes, and 
families were corrupting the word of Buddha with their 
own grammar (nirutti), and asked that they might draw up 


1 Dpum, v 32-38. 
3 Cullavagga, Vin. ii 139; Vin. Texts, iii 149 ff. 


254 APPENDIX 


the word of Buddha in metre (chandaso). Buddha refused. 
‘* T order you, monks, to master the word of Buddha (Buddha- 
vacanam) in its own grammar.” There is no need to think 
that this was an actual event in Buddha’s life. All the 
rules are in the same formal way attributed to Buddha, 
but it implies that at some period there was a tendency 
to versify the texts, and that it was forbidden by this rule. 
Buddhaghosa in commenting on this passage explains 
‘in metre’ as meaning ‘like the Veda in the Sanskrit 
language’. Whether Sanskrit was really meant may be 
doubted, but chandaso does mean in metre. It is not 
grammatically possible to make sakdya niruttiyd, ‘in its 
own grammar,’ mean ‘each in his own dialect’, nor did 
Buddhaghosa so understand it. According to him it meant 
that the primitive Magadhi language, the own grammar 
or dialect of the texts, was to be preserved. He expressly 
says, ‘the language of the Magadhas spoken by the All- 
enlightened.’ The wish to versify the texts as a help to 
memory is seen in the Parivdra, the last section of the 
Vinaya, which is practically a versified summary of the 
Vinaya rules. In the post-canonical literature we have works 
like the Khuddasikkhé and the Miulasikkhad, both verse 
compendiums of the Vinaya, and the Abhidhammdavatara 
and Rupdripavibhaga similarly summarising the Abhi- 
dhamma. All that this story allows us to infer is that there 
was once an attempt to versify the Canon, and that it was 
rejected, at least to the extent that the versifications were 
not allowed to take the place of the fundamental texts. 

In the Vinaya there is the same division between the 
actual utterances attributed to Buddha, which are here the 
rules of discipline, and the explanatory matter. The latter 
has long been recognised as commentarial. It consists of 
a verbal commentary on certain portions with a general 
commentary on the whole purporting to explain how each 
rule came to be promulgated. There can be no doubt that a 
body of rules must have been one of the original features 
of the Order, but it is also certain that what we possess 
is a collection of gradual growth. Each rule however is 
attributed directly to Buddha, and is held to have been 
enjoined on the occasion when the question of a certain 
practice arose in the Order, or when some offence had been 


THE BUDDHIST SCRIPTURES 255 


committed. A monk was required to learn where each rule 
was promulgated, the person who gave occasion to the rule, 
and the subject-matter of it. The compilation includes a 
history of the first and second Councils, but makes no mention 
of the third held in the time of Asoka, and in the list of 
sacred texts said to have been recited at the first Council 
it ignores the Abhidhamma. 

The fact that the Abhidhamma is not mentioned, and that 
in the suttas only Dhamma and Vinaya are usually referred 
to, in itself merely proves that at one time the Abhidhamma 
did not form a separate Pitaka. It is however not held even 
by the Buddhist commentators to be the word of Buddha in 
the same sense as the suttas. One section of it, the Kathd- 
vatthu, is said to have been ‘ taught’ or promulgated at the 
second Council. The commentators say that it was rejected 
by some on the ground that it was set forth 218 years after the 
death of Buddha by Moggaliputta Tissa, and hence being only 
a disciple’s utterance should be rejected. But the view is 
taken that only the mdtzkd, the list of principles taught in it, 
is directly due to Buddha, who set forth the list foreseeing 
the heresies that would arise. ‘‘And Moggaliputta Tissa, 
when he taught this work, taught not by his own knowledge, 
but by the method given by the Teacher, and according to 
the matikad which he had set forth, and so the whole work 
became the utterance of Buddha.”! As an example of this 
method the commentator mentions the Madhupindika-sutta 
(Majjh. i 108), in which a statement made by Buddha is 
enlarged and expounded by Kaccana. 

So far as known the seven works of which the Abhidhamma 
consists are peculiar to the Theravada school, but other 
schools possessed an Abhidhamma, and the fact that very 
different views concerning it were held by different sects is 
shown from the account of Taranatha, a late Tibetan writer, 
who is probably reproducing earlier traditions. He says 
that the Vaibhashikas (another name for the Sarvastivada 
school) hold the seven Abhidharma books to to be the word 
of Buddha; that the Sautrantikas hold them to have been 
composed by simple disciples, and falsely given out as the 


1 Com, on Dhammasangani, p. 4; how absurd it would be to suppose that the 
work itself was the composition of Tissa, or even of one man, is shown by Mrs. Rhys 
Davids, Points of Controversy, Introd. 


256 APPENDIX 


word of Buddha collected by Sariputta etc.; that some 
teachers say they are indeed Buddha’s word, but that 
expressions composed by simple disciples have been intro- 
duced, as is the case with the suttas of different schools. 

Taranatha here records a view very like that of Buddha- 
ghosa, and not essentially different from the modern critical 
view that the Abhidhamma is a systematising and develop- 
ment of principles drawn from the Dhamma as found 
in the Suttas. So far as known the legendary matter in the 
Canon of other schools appears to be very similar to that 
of the Theravada. The Suttas of various sects as found in 
Chinese have been analysed by Professors Takakusu and 
Anesaki, and they are shown to present a general resemblance 
to the Pali with certain differences, which indicate that they 
go back to a common unwritten tradition, gradually diverging 
as it came to be preserved and commented on by different 
schools of repeaters. ‘‘ The tradition preserved in the Chinese 
versions,” says Anesaki, “is neither a corrupted form of, 
nor a later deviation from, the Pali one, but the two branches 
of traditions are brothers or cousins.” The differences prove 
that there was a development of the tradition, but the main 
lines of agreement are definitely in favour of the antiquity 
of the Pali tradition as against the Sanskrit. 

It is necessary to make a distinction between the earlier 
schools whose Canon is preserved in Sanskrit and the later 
Mahayana schools. Even the Mahayana teachers of the 
‘Great Vehicle’ did not reject the older tradition, which 
they stigmatised as Hinaydna, ‘ the Low Vehicle,’ but added 
to it. The chief Mahayana work purporting to be historical 
is the Lalita-vistara, and it corresponds, not with the older 
Canon, but with the matter of the commentaries. At the 
same time it has preserved passages as old as anything 
in the Pali. These passages often correspond with the Pali 
text, but appear to come from the Sarvastivada school. 
The same is true of the Mahdvastu. This work has 
incorporated some Mahayana material, but belongs to the 
Lokottaravada school, a branch of the Mahasanghikas. 
It contains much which belongs to a school that existed 
side by side with the Theravada, and drew from the same 
‘traditions. 

1 Taranatha (Schiefner), p. 156. 


THE THERAVADA (PALI) CANON 


eee following is a list of the contents of this Canon as 
known to Buddhaghosa in the fifth century a.p. 


A. SUTTA-PITAKA (DHAMMA) 
1. DIGHA-NIKAYA 


The division of long discourses arranged in three vaggas 
or series. In the corresponding collection in Chinese there 
are thirty discourses, twenty-six of which have been identified 
by Anesaki with the Pali. Discourses attributed to disciples 
are marked with an asterisk. 


SILAKKHANDHA-VAGGA 


(The series containing the Moralities. In each of these 
is inserted a document known as the Silas, lists of different 
kinds of moral action.) 


1. Brahmajala-sutta. ‘The Net of Brahma.’ Buddha 
says that he is rightly praised not for mere morality, but for 
the deep wise things that he has realised and proclaims. 
He gives a list of sixty-two forms of speculation about the 
world and the self held by other teachers. 

2. Sdmarifiaphala-sutia. ‘The fruits of being an ascetic.’ 
Ajatasattu visits Buddha, who explains the advantages of 
being a Buddhist monk, from the lowest privileges up to 
arahatship. 

8. Ambattha-sutia. A dialogue on caste with Ambattha. 
It contains part of a legend of king Okkaka, from whom 
Buddha was descended. 

4. Sonadanda-sutta. A dialogue with the brahmin 
Sonadanda, on the qualities of the true brahmin. 

5. Kitadanta-sutta. A dialogue with the brahmin 
Kitadanta against animal sacrifice. 

6. Mahdli-sutta. A dialogue with Mahali on divine 
vision. Higher than this is the training leading to full 
knowledge. . 


8 


258 APPENDIX 


7. Jdaliya-sutta. On whether life is the same as the body, 
a question not revealed, and not fitting for one who follows 
the training of the monk. 

8. Kassapasithandda-sutta. A dialogue with the naked 
ascetic Kassapa against self-mortification. 

9. Potthapdda-sutia. A discussion with Potthapada 
on questions concerning the soul, which Buddha refuses to 
answer because they do not conduce to enlightenment and 
Nirvana. 

*10, Subha-suita. A discourse on training attributed 
to Ananda, addressed to the brahmin pupil Subha soon 
after Buddha’s death. 

11. Kevaddha-sutta. Buddha refuses to allow one of his 
monks to work a miracle. He approves only of the miracle 
of instruction. Story of the monk who visited the gods for 
an answer to a question and was referred to Buddha. 

12. Lohicca-suita. Dialogue with the brahmin Lohicca 
on the duty of a teacher to impart instruction. 

13. Tevijja-sutta. On the vanity of a knowledge of the 
three Vedas for attaining to the company of the Brahma- 
gods. 

MAHA-VAGGA 


14. Mahdpaddana-sutta. An account by Buddha of the 
six previous Buddhas and of Gotama himself, the previous 
ages in which they appeared, caste, family, length of life, 
Bodhi-tree, chief disciples, number of assemblies, attendant, 
father, mother, and city, with a second discourse on Vipassin 
Buddha from the time of his leaving the Tusita heaven to 
the beginning of his preaching. 

15. Mahdnidadna-sutia. On the Chain of Causation and 
theories of the soul. 

16. Maha-Parinibbana-sutia. The legend of the last days 
and death of Buddha, and the distribution of the relics. 

17. Mahdsudassana-sutta. The story of Buddha in his 
previous existence as king Sudassana, told by Buddha on 
his death-bed. 

18. Janavasabha-sutta. An extension of the discourse 
to the people of Nadika, as given in No. 16, in which Buddha 
repeats a story told him by the yakkha Janavasabha. 

19. Mahda-Govinda-sutta. The heavenly musician Paf- 
casikha appears to Buddha and tells him of his visit to 


THERAVADA (PALI) CANON 259 


heaven, where he has seen Brahma Sanamkumara, who 
told him the story of Mahagovinda. He asks Buddha 
if he remembers it, and Buddha says that he himself was 
Mahagovinda. 

20. Mahd-Samaya-sutta. The discourse of the Great 
Assembly. The gods of the Pure Abode visit Buddha, who 
enumcrates them in a poem of 151 lines. 

21. Sakkapariha-sutta. The god Sakka visits Buddha, 
asks him ten questions, and learns the truth that everything 
that arises is subject to destruction. 

22. Mahd-Satipatthana-sutta. Discourse of the four 
meditations (on the body, sensations, feelings, ideas), with 
a commentary on the Four Truths. 

*23. Pdydsi-sutta. The elder Kumiarakassapa converts 
Payasi from the heresy that there is no future life or reward 
of actions. Payasi dies, and the monk Gavampati visits 
heaven and learns about his state. 


PATIKA-VAGGA 


24. Pdtika-sutta. Story of a disciple who follows other 
teachers because Buddha does not work a miracle or expound 
the beginning of things. In the course of the dialogue 
Buddha does both. 

25. Udumbarikasthandda-sutta. A discussion of Buddha 
with the ascetic Nigrodha in Queen Udumbarika’s park on 
two kinds of asccticism. 

26. Cakkavattisthandda-sutta. Legend of the universal 
king with gradual corruption of morals and their restoration, 
and prophecy of the future Buddha Metteyya. 

27. Aggafna-sutta. A discussion on caste, with an 
exposition of the beginning of things, as in No. 24, continued 
down to the origin of the castes and their true meaning. 

28. Sampasddaniya-sutta. A dialogue of Buddha with 
Sariputta, who expresses his faith in Buddha and describes 
Buddha’s teaching. Buddha tells him to repeat it frequently 
to the disciples. 

29. Pdsddika-sutta. News is brought of the death of 
Nataputta (the Jain leader), and Buddha discourses on the 
imperfect and the perfect teacher and the conduct of the 
monks, 


260 APPENDIX 


30. Lakkhana-sutta. On the 82 marks of a Great Man 
(a universal king or a Buddha), interwoven with a poem 
in 20 sections, each introduced with the words ‘ Here it is 
said ’. 

81. Singdlovdda-sutta. Buddha finds the householder 
Singala worshipping the six quarters, and expounds the duties 
of a layman by explaining this worship as fulfilling one’s 
duties to sjx classes of persons (parents, etc). 

*32. Atdndtiya-sutta. The Four Great Kings visit 
Buddha and give him a spell (in verse) to serve as protection 
against evil spirits. Buddha repeats it to the monks. 

*33. Sangiti-sutta. Buddha opens a new assembly-hall 
at Pava, and afterwards being tired asks Sariputta to 
address the brethren. Sariputta gives a list of single doctrines 
or principles, followed by a list of two, and so on up to groups 
of ten. 

*34. Dasuttara-suita. Sariputta in the presence of 
Buddha gives the ‘ Ten-in-addition’ discourse, consisting 
of ten single doctrines, ten twofold doctrines, and so on 
up to ten tens. 


2. MAJJHIMA-NIKAYA 


The division of discourses of medium length. It is arranged 
in fifteen vaggas, and roughly classified according to subjects. 
Some of these are named from the first sutta. The fourth 
and fifth are two ‘ series of pairs’. Then follow discourses to 
householders, monks, wandering ascetics, kings, etc. This 
division differs considerably from the Chinese, which contains 
much that is in the third and fourth divisions of the Pali. 


MULAPARIYAYA-VAGGA 


1. Miulapariydya-sutta. On duly knowing the roots of 
all things from the elements up to Nirvana. 

2. Sabbdsava-sutta. On seven ways of destroying all the 
asavas. 

3. Dhammaddydda-sutta. That the monks should be the 
heirs of the Doctrine, not of their physical wants, with a 
discourse by Sariputta. 

4. Bhayabherava-sutta. On the fears and terrors of the 
forest, with Buddha’s account of his attaining enlighten- 
ment. 


THERAVADA (PALI) CANON 261 


*5. Anangana-sutta. A dialogue between Sariputta and 
Moggallana on defilement. 

8. Akankheyya-sutta. On the things that a monk may 
wish for. 

7. Vatthipama-sutta. Simile of a dirty cloth and a 
defiled mind. 

8. Sallekha-sutta. On the way to remove false views. 

*9. Sammdditthi-sutta. An address to the monks on 
true views by Sariputta. 

10. Satipatthdna-sutta. The same as Digha No. 22, 
without the commentary on the Four Truths. 


SIHANADA-VAGGA 


11, 12. Sthandda-sutta. (Cila- and Mahda-). Two 
discourses on various points of doctrine. In the latter Buddha 
describes the food-austerities of ascetics, which he also 
practised.. The description partly recurs in No. 36 in the 
account of his austerities before enlightenment. 

13. Mahd-Dukkhakkhandha-sutta. Explanation of a 
question on desires and feelings put to the monks by certain 
wandering ascetics. 

14, Cila-Dukkhakkhandha-sutia. The same question 
discussed, with Buddha’s account of his visit to the Jains, 
who held that pain was to be destroyed by destroying old 
karma by means of self-mortification, and by preventing 
the arising of new. 

*15. Anumdna-sutia. By Moggallina on the admonishing 
of monks and self-examination. There is no reference to 
Buddha throughout. 

16. Cetokhila-suita. On the five obstinacies and the five 
bondages of the mind. 

17. Vanapattha-sutta. On life in the lonely forest. 

18. Madhupindika-sutta. Buddha gives a short state- 
ment of his doctrine, and Kaccana expounds it at length. 

19. Dvedhavitakka-sutta. Buddha’s account of his 
deliberations before his enlightenment on sensual desires, 
etc., with a repetition of his attaining enlightenment as 


in No, 4. 
20. Vitakkasanthdna-sutta. On the method of meditating 


so as to dispel evil doubts. 


262 APPENDIX 


THIRD VAGGA 


21. Kakacipama-sutta. ‘Simile of the saw.’ On not 
getting angry when reproved. Even if a monk were to be 
sawn limb from limb, he would not be following Buddha’s 
teaching if he became angry. 

22. Alagaddiipama-sutta. ‘Simile of the water-snake.’ 
A monk is reproved for heresy. Learning the Doctrine 
wrongly is like catching a snake by the tail. 

28. Vammika-sutta. A divinity tells the elder Kumars 
Kassapa a parable of an ant-hill that smokes by night, 
blazes by day, and of a monk who commanded by a brahmin 
digs into it and discovers certain objects. Buddha expounded 
the ant-hill as the human body. The brahmin is Buddha 
himself. 

24. Rathavinita-sutta. Buddha asks the monks after 
Retreat which of them has kept the rules best. He is told 
Punna. Sariputta goes to visit him and asks him why 
he leads the religious life. Punna rejects all the reasons 
suggested, and says it is only for Nirvana, but admits that 
Nirvana would be impossible without those reasons. 

25. Nivdpa-sutta. Parable of Mara as a hunter, who 
lays bait for deer. 

26. Ariyapariyesana-sutta. On noble and ignoble inquiry, 
with Buddha’s account of his leaving home, his study with 
the two teachers, and his attaining enlightenment. 

27. Ciila-Hatthipadopama-sutta. On the training of the 
disciple, with a simile of the elephant’s foot.. 

*28. Mahd-Hatthipadopama-sutta. A discourse by Sari- 
putta on the Noble truths, with a simile. of the elephant’s 
foot. 

29. Mahd-Saropama-sutta. On the danger of gain and 
honour with a simile of seeking the pith (true essence), said 
to be preached when Devadatta left the Order. 

80. Cila-Saropama-sutta. On attaining the essence of 
the Doctrine, with a simile of seeking the pith. 


MAHAYAMAKA-VAGGA 


31. Cijla-Gosinga-sutta. A conversation of Buddha with 
three monks, who tell him of their attainments. 

82. Maha-Gosinga-sutta. A conversation between six 
monks, who discuss what. makes the forest beautiful. 


THERAVADA (PALI) CANON 263 


33. Mahd-Gopdlaka-sutta. On the eleven bad and good 
qualities of a herdsman. 

84. Cila-Gopdlaka-sutta. Simile of the foolish and wise 
herdsman crossing a river. 

35. Cila-Saccaka-sutta. A public discussion between 
Buddha and the Jain Saccaka on the five groups (khandhas) 
of the individual. 

86. Mahd-Saccaka-sutta. On meditation on mind and 
body, with Buddha’s account of his leaving the world, 
his austerities, and enlightenment. 

37. Cula-Tanhasankhaya-sutta. The god Sakka visits 
Buddha to ask a question, and’ Moggallana follows him to 
heaven to see if he has understood the answer. 

838. Mahd-Tanhdsankhaya-sutta. Refutation of the heresy 
of a monk, who thinks that it is consciousness that trans- 
migrates. 

39, 40. Assapura-sutta (Maha- and Cila-). On the duties 
of an ascetic, given at Assapura. 


CuLAYAMAKA-VAGGA 


41. Sdleyyaka-sutta. A discourse to the brahmins of 
Sala, on the reasons why some beings go to heaven and 
some to hell. 

42. Veranjaka-sutta. The same discourse repeated 
to householders from Verafja. 

*43, *44, Vedalla-sutta (Mahda- and Ciila-). Twodiscourses 
in the form of commentary on certain psychological terms, 
(1) by Sariputta to Mahakotthita, (2) by the nun Dhamma- 
dinna to the layman Visakha. 

45, 46. Dhammasamdddana-sutta (Cila- and Mahd-). On 
the ripening of pleasure and pain in the future. 

47. Vimamsaka-sutta. On the method to be followed 
by a monk in investigating certain questions. 

48. Kosambiya-sutta. A discourse to the monks of 
Kosambi, who were quarrelling violently. 

49. Brahmanimantanika-sutta. Buddha tells the monks 
how he went to the heaven of Brahma to convert Baka, one 
of the inhabitants, from the heresy of permanency. 

'*50., Madratajjaniya-sutta. Story of Mara, who gets 
into Moggallana’s stomach. Moggallana calls him out and 
reads him a lesson by reminding him of the time when 


264 APPENDIX 


Moggallana himself was a Mara named Disi, and Mara was 
his nephew. 
GAHAPATI-VAGGA 


51. Kandaraka-sutta. Conversation with Pessa and 
Kandaraka, and discourse on the four kinds of individuals. 

*52. Atthakandgara-sutta. A discourse by Ananda to 
an inhabitant of Atthaka, on the ways to Nirvana. 

*53. Sekha-sutta. Buddha opens a new assembly-hall 
at Kapilavatthu, and afterwards being tired asks Ananda 
to address the Sakyas. Ananda gives a discourse on the 
training of the disciple. : 

54. Potaliya-sutta. Buddha explains to Potali what 
cutting oneself off from worldly practice really means. 

55. Jivaka-sutta. Jivaka asks if it is true that Buddha 
approves of taking life and eating meat. Buddha shows 
by examples that it is false, and that a monk eats meat only 
if he has not seen, heard, or suspected that it was specially 
prepared for him. 

56. Updli-sutta. Story of the householder Up§li, who is 
sent by the Jain leader Nataputta to argue with Buddha, 
but is converted. 

57. Kukkuravatika-sutta. A dialogue on karma between 
Buddha and two ascetics, one of whom lives like a dog, 
and one like an ox. 

58. Abhayardjakumara-sutta. Prince Abhaya is sént 
by the Jain Nataputta to confute Buddha by asking a 
two-fold question concerning the severe condemnation 
passed on Devadatta by Buddha. 

59. Bahuvedaniya-sutta. On the classifications of feelings 
and on the highest feeling. 

60. Apannaka-sutta. On the ‘ Certain Doctrine’ against 
various heresies. 

BHIKKHU-VAGGA 


61. Ambalatthikd-Rahulovadda-sutta. Discourse on false- 
hood given by Buddha to Rahula. 

62. Mahd-Rahulovdda-sutta. Advice to Rahula on con- 
templation by breathing in and out and on contemplating 
the elements. 

63. Cula-Mdlunkya-sutta. On the undetermined questions. 

64. Mahda-Mdlunkya-sutta. On the five lower bonds. 


THERAVADA (PALI) CANON ~~ 265 


65. Bhaddali-sutita. Bhaddali confesses. his faults to 
Buddha and receives instruction. 

66. Latukikopama-sutta. On keeping the rules about 
times of eating and on leaving the world, with simile of the 
quail. 

67. Cdtuma-sutta. Buddha is offended at a band of 
noisy monks at Catunia, but is appeased and gives a discourse 
on the four dangers. 

68. Nalakapdna-sutta. Buddha questions Anuruddha 
and six other disciples about their leaving the world and about 
other points of his teaching. 

69. Gulissdni-sutta. Rules to be kept by those who, 
like Gulissani, live in the forest. 

70. Kitdgiri-sutta. On eating at wrong times, and on 
the conduct to be followed by seven classes of monks. 


PARIBBAJAKA-VAGGA 


71. Tevijja-Vacchagotta-sutta. Buddha visits the ascetic 
Vacchagotta and claims that he is called tevijja (knowing 
the three Vedas) because he has the knowledge of his former 
existences, the divine eye, and knowledge of the destruction 
of the asavas. 

72. Aggi-Vacchagotta-sutta. On the undetermined 
questions, as in No. 63. 

78. Mahd-Vacchagotta-sutta. An explanation to the 
ascetic Vacchagotta on the conduct of the disciples and 
the attainments of the monks. 

74. Dighanakha-sutta. Buddha refutes the ascetic Digha- 
nakha, and expounds the nature of the body and the three 
feelings. Sariputta on this occasion attains full knowledge. 

75. Mdgandiya-sutta. On abandoning sensual desires 
and craving, with Buddha’s account of his abandoning 
his life of pleasure in the three palaces. 

*76. Sandaka-sutta. An address by Ananda to the 
ascetic Sandaka on various heresies. 

77. .Mahd-Sakuluddyi-sutta. On the five reasons why 
Buddha is honoured. 

78. Samanamandikd-sutta. On the four or the ten 
qualities that make an individual perfectly virtuous. 

79. Cila-Sakuluddyi-sutta. A story of the Jain leader 
Nataputta, and on the true way to a wholly happy world. 


266 APPENDIX 


80. Vekhanassa-sutta. A repetition of part of No. 79, 
and on the five senses. 


RAJA-VAGGA 


81. Ghatikdra-sutta. Buddha tells Ananda of his previous 
existence as Jotipala and his friend Ghatikara. 

82. Ratthapdla-sutta. Story of Ratthapala whose parents 
object to his entering the Order, and who try to entice him 
back to the world. 

88. Makhddeva-sutta. Story of Buddha in his previous 
existence as king Makhadeva, and of his descendants down 
to king Nimi. 

*84. Madhura-sutta. A discourse given after Buddha’s 
death by Kaccana to king Madhura of Avanti, on the true 
meaning of caste. 

85. Bodhirdjakum4ara-sutta. Story of Buddha’s visit 
tO prince Bodhi. He tells of his leaving home, striving, 
and winning enlightenment as in No. 26 and No. 36. 

86. Angulimdla-sutta. Story of the conversion of Anguli- 
mala the robber. 

87. Piyajatika-sutta. Buddha’s counsel to a man who 
had lost a son, and the dispute of king Pasenadi and his 
wife thereon. 

*88. Bdhitika-sutta. Ananda answers a question on 
conduct put by Pasenadi, who presents him with an outer 
robe (bahitika). 

89. Dhammacetiya-sutta. Pasenadi visits Buddha, who 
explains the excellence of the religious life. 

90. Kannakatthala-sutta. A conversation between Buddha 
and Pasenadi on Buddha’s omniscience, on caste, and on 
whether the gods return to this world. 


BrAnuMANA-VAGCGA 


91. Brahmayu-sutta. On the thirty-two marks on 
Buddha’s body, and the conversion of the brahmin Brahmayu. 

92. Sela-sutta. The ascetic Keniya invites Buddha 
and the monks to a feast. The Brahmin Sela sees the thirty- 
two marks and is converted. (This recurs in Sn. III 7.) 

93. Assaldyana-sutta. The young brahmin Assalayana 
is persuaded to discuss caste with Buddha. This is one 
of the longest suttas on the subject. 


THERAVADA (PALI) CANON 267 


*94. Ghotamukha-sutta. A discourse after Buddha’s 
death by the elder Udena on the best individual and the best 
assembly. Ghotamukha builds an assembly-hall for the 
Order. 

95. Canki-sutta. Discourse on the doctrines of the 
brahmins. 

96. Hsukdri-sutta. Discourse on castes from the point 
of view of their respective functions. 

*97. Dhdnanjani-sutta. Story of the brahmin Dhanafijani, 
who is told by Sariputta that family duties are no excuse 
for wrongdoing. 

98. Vdsettha-sutta. Discourse mostly in verse on the 
true brahmin, whether he is so by birth or by deeds. (This 
recurs in Sn. III 9.) 

99. Subha-sutta. On whether a man can do more good 
as a householder or by leaving the world. 

100. Sangdrava-sutia. Story of the believing brahmin 
woman, and a discourse on the religious life according to 
different schools, with Buddha’s account of his leaving his 
home and. his striving as in No. 26 and No. 86. 


DEVADAHA-VAGGA 


101. Devadaha-sutta. Buddha gives an account of his 
discussion with the Niganthas concerning their view that 
destruction of pain is obtained by destruction of karma. 
He shows that the monk attains his end not by experiencing 
pain or by avoiding the pleasure that is in accordance with 
the Doctrine, but by following out the training taught by 
Buddha. 

102. Paficatiaya-sutta. On five theories of the soul, 
which Buddha reduces to three. Buddha shows that 
he has passed beyond them, and that his doctrine of release 
does not depend on any form of them. 

103. Kinti-sutta. Rules, said to be given by Buddha, 
on the method of treating monks who dispute about the 
meaning and the letter of the Doctrine, and those who 
commit transgressions. 

104. Sdmagdama-sutta. News is brought of the death of 
Nataputta (as in Digha, No. 29), and Buddha gives four 
causes of dispute, four ways of dealing with disputes, and 
six principles of harmony in the Order. 


268 APPENDIX 


105. Sunakkhatta-sutta. On five classes of individuals, 
intent on the world, etc., and a simile of extracting the 
arrow of craving. 

106. Ananjasappdya-sutta. On the various ways of 
meditating on impassibility and the attainments, and 
on true release. 

107. Ganaka-Moggalldna-sutta. Instruction to the 
accountant Moggallana on the training of the disciples. 

*108. Gopaka-Moggallana-sutta. Anarida after Buddha’s 
death explains how Buddha differs from any of his disciples. 
He tells the minister Vassakara that there is no monk set up 
by Buddha to ‘take his place, but that the monks have 
recourse to the Doctrine. 

109. Mahd-Punnama-sutta. Buddha on the night of 
full moon ‘answers the questions of a monk concerning 
the khandhas. 

110. Cula-Punnama-sutta. Buddha on the night of 
full moon shows that a bad man cannot know a bad or 
good man, but a good man can know both. 


ANUPADA-VAGGA 


111. Anupada-sutta. Buddha eulogises Sariputta. 

112. Chabbisodana-sutta. On the questions that are 
to be put to a monk who declares that he has attained full 
knowledge. 

118. Sappurisa-sutta. On the good and bad qualities 
of a monk. 

114. Sevitabba-asevitabba-suita. Buddha states the right 
and wrong way of practising the duties and doctrines of a 
monk, and Sariputta expounds them at length. 

115. Bahudhatuka-sutta. Lists of elements and principles 
arranged as a dialogue between Buddha and Ananda. 

116. Isigili-sutta. Buddha explains the name of the 
Isigili hill, and gives the names of the pacceka-buddhas 
who formerly dwelt there. 

117. Mahd-Cattadrisaka-sutta. Exposition of the Noble 
Kightfold path with the addition of right knowledge and 
right emancipation. 

118. Andpdnasati-sutta. On the method and merits 
of practising meditation by in and out breathing. 


THERAVADA (PALI) CANON 269 


119. Kdyagatdsati-sutta. On the method and merits 
of meditation on the body. 

120.. Samkhdaruppatti-sutta. On the rebirth of the 
elements of an individual according as he directs his mind. 


SUNNATA-VAGGA 


121. Cula-Sufifiata-sutta. On meditating on emptiness. 

122. Mahd-Sufifiata-sutta. Instruction to Ananda on 
practising internal emptiness. 

123. Acchariyabbhutadhamma-sutta. On the marvellous 
and wonderful things in the life of a Bodhisatta, from the 
time of his leaving heaven to his birth. A repetition of part 
of Digha No. 14, but applied to Buddha himself. 

*124. Bakkula-sutta. Bakkula recounts how he has 
lived for eighty years to his friend Acela-Kassapa, and thereby 
converts him. 

125. Dantabhiimi-sutta. Aciravata fails to teach prince 
Jayasena, and Buddha by means of similes from elephant- 
training shows him how a person is to be taught. 

126. Bhimija-sutta. Prince Jayasena asks Bhimija a 
question, and Bhumija having answered it goes to Buddha to 
find out if the answer is correct. 

*127. Anuruddha-sutta. Anuruddha accepts an invitation 
from the householder Paficakanga, and explains to him two 
kinds of emancipation of mind. 

128. Upakkilesa-sutta. Story of Buddha trying to appease 
a quarrel of the Kosambi monks, and his conversation 
with three monks on proper meditation. 

129. Bdlapandita-sutta. On the punishments after death 
of the fool who sins, and the rewards of the wise man who 
does well. 

180. Devadiita-sutta. Buddha with his divine eye sees 
the destiny of beings, and describes the fate in hell of those 
who have neglected the messengers of death. 


VIBHANGA-VAGGA 


181. Bhaddekaratta-sutta. A poem of four verses with 
commentary on striving in the present. 

*132. Ananda-bhaddekaratta-sutta. The same poem as 
expounded by Ananda. 


270 : APPENDIX 


*138. Mahdkaccadna-bhaddekaratta-sutta. The same poem 
expounded at length by Mahakaccana. 

184. Lomasakangiya-bhaddekaratta-sutta. Buddha expounds 
the same verses to Lomasakangiya. 

185. Cula-kammavibhanga-sutta. Buddha explains the 
different physical and mental qualities of individuals and 
their fortunes as due to karma. 

136. Mahd-kammavibhanga-sutta. An ascetic falsely 
accuses Buddha of saying that karma is useless, and Buddha 
expounds his own views. | 

137. Saldyatanavibhanga-sutia. Buddha gives the analysis 
of the six senses. 

*138. Uddesavibhanga-sutta. Buddha utters a_ state- 
ment about consciousness, which Mahakaccana expounds 
in detail. 

189. Aranavibhanga-sutta. The statement and exposition 
of the middle path of peace between two extremes. 

140. Dhdatuvibhanga-sutta. The analysis of the elements. 
The discourse is inserted in the story of Pukkusati, a disciple 
who had not seen Buddha, but who recognised him by his 
preaching. 

*141. Saccavibhanga-sutia. Statement of the Four Noble 
Truths by Buddha, followed by a commentary, which is 
attributed to Sariputta. 

142. Dakkhinadvibhanga-sutta. Mahapajapati offers a pair 
of robes to Buddha, who explains the different kinds of 
persons to receive gifts and the different kinds of givers. 


SALAYATANA-VAGGA 


143. Andthapindikovadda-sutta. Story of the illness and 
death of Anathapindika, who is instructed on his deathbed 
by Sariputta, and after being reborn in the Tusita heaven 
returns to visit Buddha. 

144. Channovdda-sutta. Story of the elder Channa, 
who when sick was instructed by Sariputta, and who finally 
committed suicide. 

145. Punnovdda-sutia. Buddha’s instruction to Punna 
on bearing pleasure and pain. Punna tells how he will 
behave if he is illtreated by his countrymen. 


THERAVADA (PALI) CANON 271 


146. Nandakovdda-sutta: Mahapajapati with 500 nuns 
asks Buddha to instruct them. He tells Nandaka to do so, 
who catechises them on impermanence. 

147. Cila-Rahulovada-sutta. Buddha takes Rahula to 
the forest and catechises him on impermanence. Many 
thousands of gods come to listen. 

148. Chachakka-sutta. On the six sixes (of the senses). 

149. Mahd-Saldyatanika-sutta. On rightly knowing 
the senses. 

150. Nagaravindeyya-sutta. Buddha instructs the people 
of Nagaravinda on the kind of ascetics and brahmins that 
are to be honoured. 

151. Pindapdtapdarisuddhi-sutta. Instruction to Sariputta 
on the considerations to be undertaken by the disciple 
throughout the whole course of his training. 

152. Indriyabhdvand-sutta. Buddha rejects the method 
of the brahmin Pardsariya for training the senses and expounds 
his own method. 


3. SAMYUTTA-NIKAYA 


The division of ‘connected’ suttas. These are in five 
series, subdivided into smaller groups (samyuttas), and 
these into series (vaggas) containing the separate suttas. 
Classification according to subject is very partial, and the 
titles are usually that of the first in the group, or the name 
of the interlocutor. 

1. Sagdtha-vagga, the series with verses (gathas) each 
sutta containing one or more stanzas. It contains 11 
samyuttas, divided according to the characters appearing in 
the suttas, gods, the king of the Kosalas, Mara, etc. 

2. Niddna-vagga, named from the first of the 10 samyuttas, 
which begins with suttas on the Nidanas, the 12 links in 
the Chain of Causation. 

8. Khandha-vagga, with 18 samyuttas, beginning with 
suttas on the five khandhas. 

4. Saldyatana-vagga, with 10 samyuttas, named from 
the first group, which deals with the six senses. 

5. Mahd-vagga, ‘the great series’ of 12 samyuttas, 
beginning with suttas on the Eightfold Path. 


272 APPENDIX 
4. ANGUTTARA-NIKAYA 


In this division the classification is purely numerical. 
There are eleven groups (nipatas), the subjects of the first 
being single things, followed by groups of two and so on, 
up to groups of eleven (anga-uttara ‘ one member in addition ’). 
The first gives a list of the one sight, the one sound, the one 
scent, etc., that occupy the thought of a man or woman. 
The last is a list of the eleven good and eleven bad qualities 
of a herdsman, and the corresponding qualities of a monk. 
Each nipata is divided into vaggas, which contain ten or 
more suttas. 


5. KHUDDAKA-NIKAYA 


The division of small books, as Buddhaghosa explains it. 
He gives two lists of contents in one of which the first work 
does not occur, but the separate suttas in it mostly recur 
in other parts of the Scriptures.1 This Nikaéya appears to 
have grown gradually with the accumulation of such smaller 
collections, which evidently did not belong to the older 
Nikayas. It is not found in the Canon of those schools that 
were translated into Chinese, though separate Chinese 
translations of much of the contents exist. 

1. Khuddaka-padtha. ‘The reading of small passages,’ 
containing 

(1) Saranatiaya. The repetition three times of taking 
refuge in Buddha, the Doctrine, and the Order. 

(2) Dasasikkhadpada. The ten moral rules to be observed 
by monks. The first five are to be observed by laymen. 

(3) Dvattimsdkdra. List of the 82 constituents of the 
body. 

(4) Kumdrapattha. A catechism of ten questions for 
novices. 

(5) Mangala-sutta. A poem in answer to a question on 
what is the highest good fortune (mangala). 

(6) Ratana-sutta. A poem on the Three Jewels, Buddha, 
the Doctrine, and the Order, forming a charm to win the 
good will of spirits. 


* Com, on Digha,i15,17. His com. on Vin.i 18 includes Khp, but the Chinese 
translation omits it, showing that it is there an interpolation. 


THERAVADA (PALI) CANON 278 


(7) Tirokudda-sutta. A poem on making offerings to 
the ghosts (petas) of departed relatives. 

(8) Nidhikanda-sutta. A poem on the storing up of 
true treasure. 

(9) Metta-sutta. A poem on friendliness. 

2. Dhammapada. ‘ Words of the Doctrine,’ a collection 
of 423 stanzas, arranged in 26 vaggas. 

8. Udana, a collection of 80 udanas in eight vaggas, solemn 
utterances by Buddha on special occasions. They are mostly 
in verse, and accompanied with a prose account of the 
circumstances that caused them to be spoken. 

4. Itivuttaka, a collection of 112 short suttas in 4 nipatas, 
each accompanied with verses. The verses are usually intro- 
duced by iti vuccati, ‘ thus it is said.’ 

5. Suttanipata, ‘Collection of suttas.? This work is 
important both on account of the legendary matter that it 
contains, and also beeause of the complexity of its com- 
position. The suttas are in verse with introductions usually 
in prose, but in several cases versified. 

(1) Uraga-vagga, named from the first sutta, with 12 suttas. 
The third is the Khaggavisdna-sutta, the Rhinoceros discourse, 
named from its refrain, ‘ let (the monk) wander alone, like a 
rhinoceros.’ In the Mahdvastu, i 357, the pratyeka-buddhas 
disappear from the Rishipatana of Benares on hearing of the 
approach of a new Buddha, each repeating one of the verses. 
It was commented on in the Culla-Niddesa, probably before 
it was incorporated here. 

(2) Cuila-vagga. The ‘ small series ’ with 14 suttas. 

(83) Mahd-vagga. The ‘great series’ with 12 suttas. 
This contains three important legends. (a) The Pabbajja- 
sutta, an account of Buddha’s renunciation and conversation 
with Bimbisdra before his enlightenment. A form of this 
occurs in the Mahdvastu, ii 198. (b) Padhdna-sutta, the ‘ sutta 
of striving’ and temptation by Mara. This partly recurs in 
the Mahdvastu, ii 288, and the Lalita-vistara, 329. (c) 
Ndlaka-sutia. This is a discourse on the state of a recluse 
(muni), but the introductory verses (called vatthu-gatha, 
‘verses of the story ’) give the tale of the visit of Asita to 
the infant Bodhisatta. 

(4) Atthaka-vagga. ‘The series of eights’ with 16 suttas, 
four of which have 8 verses. The title was turned. into 

1s 


274 APPENDIX 


Sanskrit as Artha-varga, and was so understood by the Chinese 
translators, but no one has explained what this title means 
nor interpreted the second sutta Guhatthaka as anything 
but ‘the eight verses on the cave’, and similarly with the 
three following suttas, Dutthatthaka, Suddhatthaka, and 
Paramattaka, each of eight verses. The fact that it is com- 
mented on separately in the Mahd-Niddesa (see below), and 
was translated into Chinese, makes it probable that it was 
once a separate work. 

(5) Pdrdyana-vagga. ‘The series of the final aim,’ 16 
questions with answers by Buddha in verse. The introductory 
verses (vatthugatha) give the story of the sage Bavari, who 
visits Buddha, and whose disciples ask the questions. The 
story in a later form has been found among the MS. discoveries 
in Central Asia in Uigurian and Tocharian.1 The suttas 
are commented on in the Culla-Niddesa, but the introductory 
verses are there ignored. 

6. Vimdna-vatthu, ‘ Stories of celestial mansions,’ 85 poems 
in seven vaggas, in which beings who have been reborn in one 
of the heavens explain the acts of merit that led to their 
reward. 

7. Peta-vatthu, ‘ Stories of petas,’ beings condemned for 
their former misdeeds to a wretched existence as ghosts. 
Fifty-one poems in four vaggas on the same model as 
Vimana-vatthu. 

8. Thera-gathd. ‘ Verses of the elders,’ stanzas attributed 
to 264 elders. 

9. Theri-gatha. A similar collection of stanzas attributed 
to about 100 nuns. 

10. Jdtaka. Verses belonging to 547 tales of previous 
existences of Buddha. The tales themselves are in a com- 
mentary of the fifth century a.p., which claims to be trans- 
lated from the Singhalese. The Singhalese itself was probably 
a translation of an older Pali work, as several of the tales 
have been preserved in other parts of the Canon in a more 
ancient style. The introductory part of the commentary, 
known as the Niddna-kathd, gives a life of Buddha down to the 
presentation of the Jetavana and monastery at Savatthi. 

11. Niddesa, divided into Maha-Niddesa, a commentary 
on the Aithaka-vagga of the Sutta-nipdia, and the Culla- 

1 Sieg und Siegling, T'ocharische Sprachreste, i, p. 101. 


THERAVADA (PALI) CANON 275 


Niddesa, a commentary on the Pdrdyana-vagga and 
Khaggavisdna-sutta of the.same work. It has itself been 
commented on in the Saddhammapajjotika, which attributes 
the work to Sariputta. 

12. Patisambhida-magga. ‘The way of analysis.’ An 
analysis of various concepts, knowledge, heresy, the practice 
of breathing in meditating, etc. Much of it is in question 
and answer, in the style of the Abhidhamma works. 

18. Apadana. Tales in verse of the lives and previous lives 
of monks and nuns. 

14. Buddhavamsa. ‘ History of the Buddhas,’ in which 
Buddha gives in response to a question by Sariputta an 
account (in verse) of his first forming the resolve to become 
Buddha, and the history of the twenty-four previous Buddhas 
who prophesied concerning him, concluding with an account 
of himself. 

15. Cariyd-pitaka. Thirty-five tales from the Jataka 
in verse, and arranged according to the ten perfections, 
alms-giving, morality, etc., attained by Buddha. It is 
incomplete, as only seven of the perfections are illustrated. 


B. VINAYA-PITAKA 


The rules of discipline are arranged in two partly 
independent compilations, to which a later supplement has 
been added. 


I. Swuttavibhanga. A classification of offences in eight 
groups beginning with the four pdrdjika rules on offences 
that involve exclusion from the Order. These are incontinence, 
theft, taking life or persuading to suicide, and false boasting 
of supernatural attainments. The total number of rules is 
227. The whole conforms exactly to the rules of the 
Patimokkha 2 recited at Uposatha meetings of the Order. It 
is followed by the Bhikkhuni-sutiavibhanga, a_ similar 
arrangement of rules for nuns. 


1 This shows the Buddhist attitude towards suicide. There are however several 
legends of monks committing suicide at the moment of attaining arahatship. 
Naturally in such a case no rebirth is possible. See the story of Godhika, Samy. i 120 

8 «The two Patimokkhas’ (i.e. for monks and for nuns) are reckoned as the first 
part of the Vinaya in the Vinaya Commentary, i 18, 252 


276 APPENDIX 


II. The Khandhakas, arranged in two series. 


1. Mahdavagga. 
(1) Rules for admission to the Order. 
(2) The Uposatha meeting and recital of the Patimokkha. 
(8) Residence during retreat in the rainy season (vassa). 
(4) The ceremony concluding retreat (pavdranda). 
(5) Rules for the use of articles of dress and furniture. 
(6) Medicine and food. 
(7) The kathina ceremonies, the annual distribution of 
robes. 
(8) The material of robes, sleeping regulations, and rules 
for sick monks. 
(9) The mode of executing proceedings by the Order. 
(10) Proceedings in cases of dissensions in the Order. 
2. Cullavagga. 
(1, 2) Rules for dealing with offences that come before 
the Order. 
(8) Reinstatement of monks. 
(4) Rules for dealing with questions that arise. 
(5) Miscellaneous rules for bathing, dress, etc. 
(6) Dwellings, furniture, lodgings. 
(7) Schism. 
(8) The treatment of different classes of monks, and the 
duties of teachers and novices. 
(9) Exclusion from the Patimokkha. 
(10) The ordination and instruction of nuns. 
(11) History of the first Council at Rajagaha. 
(12) History of the second Council at Vesali. 


Ill. Parivdra. Summaries and classifications of the rules. 


The rules in the Suttavibhanga and the Khandhakas are 
each accompanied by a narrative recording some event which 
was the occasion of the rule. Some of these are purely formal, 
merely stating that a monk or group of monks committed 
some offence or followed a certain practice, whereupon 
Buddha laid down a decision. But many real legends have 
been included, especially in the Mahavagga and Cullavagga, 
as well as many discourses from the Nikayas. The rules of 
admission to the Order are preceded by the story of the events 
immediately following the Enlightenment, the beginning of 


THERAVADA (PALI) CANON 277 


the preaching, and the admission of the first disciples. The 
story of Rahula is given in connexion with the conditions 
required from candidates for admission, and the rules 
concerning schism are the occasion for an account of 
Devadatta’s plots. 


C. ABHIDHAMMA-PITAKA 


Before the contents of this division were known, it was 
supposed that Abhidhamma meant ‘ metaphysics’. We now 
know that it is not systematic philosophy, but a special 
treatment of the Dhamma as found in the Sutta-pitaka. 
So far as first principles are discussed, they are these already 
propounded in the Suttas, but are analysed in this division 
in questions and answers, and elaborately classified. Most of 
the matter is psychological and logical, in which the 
fundamental doctrines are not discussed, but taken for 
granted. 

1. Dhammasangani. ‘Enumeration of dhammas,’ i.e. 
mental elements or processes. 

2. Vibhanga. ‘Distinction or determination.’ Further 
analysis of the matter of the foregoing. 

3. Dhatukatha. ‘Discussion of elements.’ On the mental 
elements and their relations to other categories. 

4. Puggalapanfatti. ‘Description of individuals,’ 
especially according to their stages along the Path. 

5. Kathdvatthu. ‘Subjects of discussion,’ discussions 
and refutations of the heretical views of various sects. 

6. Yamaka. ‘ Book of pairs,’ called by Geiger an applied 
logic. The subject matter is psychology, and the analysis is 
arranged as pairs of questions. 

% Patthina. ‘Book of relations,’ an analysis of the 
relations (causality, etc.) of things in twenty-four groups. 


CANONICAL WORKS OF OTHER SCHOOLS 


las works of other schools containing historical matter, 
so far as they are accessible, are given in the Biblio- 
graphy, and it is unnecessary to add a list of those that 
exist in the enormous Tibetan and Chinese collections. A 
complete list of those in the Tibetan is given by Csoma de 
K6rés, and of the Chinese works by Bunyiu Nanjio. Some 
of the latter have been analysed by Anesaki and Takakusu. 

A list of eighty-six works of a Mahayana Canon is given 
in the Mahdvyutpatti (65, 87 ff), most of which are found in 
the Tibetan. It is followed by a list which almost corresponds 
with what we know of the Sarvastivada Canon, as follows : 

Tripitaka: Sitra, Abhidharma, Vinaya. Then follows a 
list of the Abhidharma works : 

Prajnaptisastra, Samgitiparyaya, Dharmaskandha, Dhdatu- 
kaya, Jndnaprasthana, Prakaranapadda.1 The four Nikayas 
(called Agamas in the Sanskrit) then follow : 

Ekottarikagama, Madhyamagama, Dirghagama, Samyukta- 
gama. The divisions of the Vinaya are: Vinayavibhanga, 
Vinayavastu, Vinayakshudraka. The first two of these probably 
correspond respectively with the Swuttavibhanga and 
Khandhakas of the Pali, and the third is evidently a 
minor work. 


Among the hundreds of Buddhist Sanskrit works sent by 
Hodgson from Nepal ? less than a dozen correspond with the 
names given in the Mahdvyutpatti. Among them are nine 
Mahayana sitras held in special honour in Nepal, known as 
the nine Dharmas : 

Ashtasdhasrika Prajidparamita, Saddharmapundarika, 
Lalitavistara, Lankdvatara, Suvarnaprabhadsa, Gandavyiha, 
Tathagataguhyaka, Samddhiradja, and Dagabhimisvara. 

1 This corresponds with the list of the Sarvastivadin Abhidhamma, as found in 
Chinese, which however contains one more, the Vijidnakaya. They have been 


analysed from the Chinese by Prof. Takakusu. JPTS. 1904-5. 
? See lists in Sir W. Hunter’s Life of B. H. Hodgson. London, 1896. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY } 


Tue PAutt Canon 


HE Pali Sutta-pitaka and Abhidhamma-pitaka have been 
published by the Pali Text Society between 1882 and 1927. 
The Vinaya-pitaka was edited by H. Oldenberg in 1879-83, and 
has been re-issued by the Pali Text Society. The text and 
translation of the Patimokkha were published by J. F. Dickson, 
JRAS. 1876, and the text by J. Minaev, St. Petersburg, 1869. 
The Jataka together with its commentary, ed. by V. Fausbdll, 
6 vols. and index, London, 1877-97. 


TRANSLATIONS 


Vinaya Texts, Oxford, 1881-5. (SBE. 13, 17, 20) (Translation 
of the Khandhakas and Patimokkha. The rest of the Vinaya is 
being translated by Miss J. B. Horner in SBB.) 

Dialogues of the Buddha, tr. by T. W. Rhys Davids (Digha- 
nikaya), 3 vols., 1899-1921. (SBB. 2-4.) 

Further Dialogues of the Buddha, tr. by Lord Chalmers 
(Majjhima-nikaya). 1926-7. (SBB. 5, 6.) 

The Book of the Kindred Sayings, tr. by Mrs. Rhys Davids and 
F. L. Woodward (Samyutta-nikaya), 1918-1930. (PTS. Transl. 
Series, 7, 10, etc.) 

The Book of the Gradual Sayings, tr. by F. L. Woodward 
(Anguttara-nikaya), 1932 ff. (PTS. Transl. Series.) 

Dhammapada: Verses on Dhamma, and Khuddaka-patha: the 
text of the Minor Sayings, re-ed. and tr. by Mrs. Rhys Davids, 1931. 
(SBB. 7.) 

Buddhist Legends, tr. from the Dhammapada commentary by 
E. W. Burlingame. Cambridge, Mass., 1921. 

The Udana, tr. from the Pali by D. M. Strong, 1902. 

The Itivuttaka, tr. by J. H. More. New York, 1908. 


1 In this revised bibliography works entirely obsolete have been omitted. 
Full bibliographies are given in Subject Index of the British Museum, 1881 ff. 
H. L. Held, Deutsche Bibliographie des Buddhismus, 1916. From 1928 Bibliographie 
bouddhique, forming vols. 3, 5, 6, etc. of Buddhica, Paris, 1929 ff. References 

Mahayana works are given in the author’s History of Buddhist Thought. 


280 APPENDIX 


The Sutta-nipata, tr. by V. Fausboll. Oxford, 1898. (SBE. 10.) 

Psalms of the Early Buddhists: Psalms of the Brethren, 1913. 
Psalms of the Sisters, 1909 (Theragatha, Therigatha). Tr. by 
Mrs. Rhys Davids. (PTS. Transl. Series.) 

Buddhist Birth Stories, tr. by T. W. Rhys Davids, 1880. New 
ed., 1925 (contains the Ntdanakatha and first 40 stories). 

The Jataka, tr. under the editorship of E. B. Cowell. 6 vols. 
and index. Cambridge, 1895-1913. (Complete except for the 
Nidanakatha, which is translated in Buddlust Birth Stortes.) 

Jataka Tales, with introd. and notes by H. T. Francis and 
E. J. Thomas. Cambridge, 1916. (Contains translations of 
114 tales.) 

A Buddhist Manual of Psychological Ethics, tr. by Mrs. Rhys 
Davids (Dhammasangant), 1900. (Or. Tr. Fund. N.S. xu.) 
Points of Controversy or Subjects of Discourse, being a translation 
of the Katha-vatthu, by S. Z. Aung and Mrs. Rhys Davids, 1915. 
(PTS Transl. Series.) 

Puggala-pannatti, designation of human types, tr. by B. C. Law, 
1915. (PTS. Transl. Series.) 

The Expositor. Buddhagosa’s Commentary on the Dham- 
masangant, tr. by Maung Tin and Mrs. Rhys Davids (Atthasalini). 
2 vols., 1921-2. (PTS Transl. Series.) 

Early Buddhist Scriptures. A selection tr. and ed. by E. J. 
Thomas. London, 1935. 


CANONICAL WORKS OF OTHER SCHOOLS 


Analysts of the Dulva, by A.Csoma Kérési (Asiatic Researches, 
XX, p. 41 ff., Calcutta, 1836-9. Followed in the same volume by 
Notices on the Life of Shakya, extracted from the Tibetan 
authorities; Analysis of the Sher-chin, Phal-chhen, Dkon-séks, — 
Do-dé, Nydng-dds, and Gyut, being the 2nd-7th divisions of the 
Tibetan work, entitles the Kah-gyur [Kanjur]; and Abstract of the 
Contents of the Bstan-hgyur [Tanjur]. The legendary matter’ 
contained in these extracts has been translated more fully in the 
two following works.) 

Fragments extraits du Kandjour, traduits du tibétain par M. 
Léon Feer. Paris, 1883. (Annales du Musée Guimet, 5.) 

The Life of the Buddha, derived from Tibetan works in the 
Bkah-hgyur and the Bstan-hgyur, translated by W. W. Rockhill. 
London, 1884. (Triibner’s Or. Series.) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 281 


The Lalita Vistara, ed. by Rajendraldla Mitra. Calcutte, 1877. 
(Bibl. Indica.) 

Lahta Vistara, hrsg. von. S. Lefmann. 2 vols. Hallea S., 
1902-8. (A French version from the Tibetan was given by 
P. Foucaux with his edition of the Tibetan text, Rgya tch’er rol pa, 
Paris, 1847-8. The first five chapters were translated from the 
Calcutta text by Lefmann, Berlin, 1874, and the whole by 
Foucaux in Annales du Musée Guimet, vol. 6, Paris, 1884.) 

The Romantic Legend of Sakya Buddha, from the Chinese- 
Sanscrit by S. Beal. London, 1875. (Said to be a translation of 
the Abhimtshkramana-sitra. A work with this title is found in 
the Tibetan. The Chinese title given by Beal means ‘Life of 
Buddha and his Disciples’. The Chinese translation gives the 
names of other lines of Buddha used in different schools, which 
Beal thought referred to the same work. See above, p.xx.) 

Le Mahdvastu, texte sanscrit publié par E. Senart. 3 vols., 
1882-97. (Contains an analysis of the contents in French.) 

The Divydvadana, ed. by E. B. Cowell and R. A. Neil. 
Cambridge, 1886. 

Dr. E. Waldschmidt has made a most important contribution 
to the problem of the legendary tradition of early Buddhism in 
the two following works: 

Beitrage zur Textgeschtchte des Mahaparinirvanasitra. (Nach- 

richten von der Ges. d. Wiss. zu Gottingen. Philol.-hist. K1. 
Fachgruppe m1. N.F. 11, 3.) Géttingen, 1939. 
Die Uberlieferung vom Lebensende des Buddha. Eine ver- 
gleichende Analyse des Mahaparinirvanasitra und seiner Textent- 
sprechungen. (Abh. der Akad. d. Wiss. in Géttingen. Philol.- 
hist. Kl. 3. Folge, 29.) Gdttingen, 1944. 

A Sarvastivadin version of the Pratimokska-sitra with a 
translation from the Chinese by E. Huber was published by 
L. Finot in Journ. As. 1913, Nov.-Dec., p. 465 ff. 

M. Anesaki. Some Problems of the Textual History of the 
Buddhist Scriptures, and the Four Buddhist Agamas in Chinese. 
In Trans. As Soc. Japan, Xxxv, parts 2,3. Tokyo, 1908. 

C. Akanuma. The Comparative Catalogue of Chinese Agamas 
and Pali Nikdyas. Nagoya, 1929. 

Bruchstiicke des Sanskritkanons der Buddhisten aus Idykutsart. 
In Sitz. der k. pr. Akad., 1904, p. 807 ff. 

Manuscript Remains of Buddhist Literature raat in Eastern 
Turkestan, ed. by A. F. R. Hoernle. Oxford, 1916. 


282 APPENDIX 


J. Takakusu. On the Abhidharma literature of the Sar- 
vastivadins. J.P.T.S.,1905. (Contains summaries of the seven 
Abhidharma works.) 

Documents d’Abhidharma, trad. et annotés par L. de la Vallée 
Poussin. BEFEO, xxx, 1931. 


Non-CANONICAL LIVES OF BUDDHA 


Nidanakatha of the Jataka. (Tr. in Buddhist Birth Stortes. 
See above.) 

Jinacarita. JPTS, 1904-5. (A life in Pali verses ed. and 
tr. by W. H. D. Rouse.) 

Life of Gaudama, a translation from the Burmese book entitled 
Ma-la-len-ga-ra Wottoo [Malalankara-vatthu], by Chester 
Bennett. Journ. Amer. Or. Soc., Vol. 3, 1853. 

The Life or Legend of Gaudama, with annotations, the Way to 
Neibban, and notice on the phongyies or Burmese monks. By 
the Right Rev. P. Bigandet. 4thed., 1911. (Like the foregoing 
a transl. of Mdaldlankdara-vatthu with legends from other sources.) 

The Buddhacarita of Asvaghosha, ed. by E. B. Cowell. Oxford, 
1893. (Tr.in SBE vol. 49. The Sanscrit text is imperfect, and 
the whole has been tr. from the Chinese version by S. Beal. 
S.B.E. vol. 19. E. H. Johnston has translated ch. x to XXVIH 
from the Tibetan in Acta Ortentalta, vol. 15, 1937.) 

J. Klaproth. Asta Polyglotta. Paris, 1823. (Contains Leben 
des Budd‘a nach mongolischen Nachrichten. A French version 
appeared in Journ. As., vol.4, pp. 9 ff., 1824.) 

Eine tibetische Lebensbeschretbung Cakjamuni’s, in Auszuge 
mitgetheilt von A. Schiefner. St. Petersburg, 1851. 

Geschichte der Ost-Mongolen, verfasst von Ssanang Ssetsen, aus 
dem Mongolischen iibersetzt von I. J. Schmidt. St. Peters- 
burg, 1829. 


CHRONICLES 


The Dipavamsa, ed. and tr. by H. Oldenberg. London, 1879. 

The Mahdavamsa, ed. by W. Geiger. London, 1908. (This, 
the original portion, consists of 37 chapters. The continuation, 
sometimes known as Cilavamsa, was ed. by Geiger in 2 vols., 
1925-7.) 


Vamsatthappakasini, commentary on the Mahavamsa, ed. by 
G. P. Malalasekera. 2 vols. London, 1935. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 283 


The Mahavamsa, tr. by W. Geiger and M. H. Bode. 1912. 

The Cilavamsa, tr. by Mrs. C. M. Rickmers. 2 vols. 1929-30. 

Mahda-bodhi-vamsa, ed. by S. A. Strong. London, 1891. 

Taranathae de doctrinae buddhicacin India propagatione narratio. 
Contextum tibeticum ed. A. Schiefner. Petropoli, 1863. (Tr. 
by Schiefner as Tdrandtha’s Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indien. 
St. Petersburg, 1869.) 

Foe koue kt, ou relation des royaumes bouddhiques: voyage dans 
la Tartarie, dans l Afghanistan et dans I’ Inde, exécuté, a la fin du 
vr’ siécle, par Chy Fa Hian. Trad. du chinois et commenté par 
A. Rémusat. Paris, 1836. 

Travels of Fa-Hian and Sung-Yun, Buddhist pilgrims from 
China to India (400 A.D. and 513 A.D.). Tr. by S. Beal, 1869. 

A record of Buddhistic Kingdoms. An account by the Chinese 
monk Fa-Hien of his travels in India and Ceylon (399-414 A.D.). 
Tr. by J Legge, 1886. 

The travels of Fa-hsian (399-414 A.D.), or record of the Buddhist 
kingdoms. Re-translated by H. A. Giles. Cambridge, 1923. 

Mémoires sur les contrées occidentales, traduits du sanskrit en 
chinois, en l’an 648 par Hiouen-thsang, et du chinois en francais 
par S. Julien. Paris, 1857-8. 

Si-yu-ki, Buddhist records of the western world, tr. from the 
Chinese of Hiuen Tsiang (A.D. 629), by S. Beal. London, 1884. 
(Contains also the travels of Fa-Hian and Sung-Yun.) 

Histoire de la vie de Hiouen-thsang et de ses voyages dans |’ Inde 
depuis l’an 629 jusqu’en 645, par Hoei-li et Yen-thsong. Tra- 
duite par S. Julien. Paris, 1853. 

The life of Hiuen-tstang by the Shamans Hwai-liand Yen-tsung, 
with a preface containing an account of the works of I-tsing, by 
S. Beal. London, 1885. New ed. with preface by L. Cranmer- 
Byng, 1911. 

Mémotre composé a Tépoque de la grande dynastie T'ang sur 
les religieux qut allérent chercher la loi dans les pays d’Occtdent. 
Par I-tsing, trad. par E. Chavannes, Paris, 1894. 

A record of the Buddhist religion, as practised in India and the 
Malay Archipelago (A.D. 671-695). By I-tsing, tr. by J. 
Takakusu. Oxford, 1896. 


MODERN WorRKS 


B. H. Hodgson. Sketch of Buddhism, derived from the 
Bauddha Scriptures of Nepal. (Trans. RAS., vol. 2, pp. 222 ff., 


284 APPENDIX 


1830. Reprinted without the plates in Essays on the languages, 
literature and religion of Nepal and Tibet. London, 1875.) 

E. Burnouf. Introduction a [histoire du Buddhisme indien, 
vol. 1. Paris, 1845. (The second volume never appeared, but 
at the author’s death his translation of the Saddharma-pundarika, 
Le Lotus de la borne lot, was published with memoirs which partly 
supply its place. Paris, 1852.) 

R. S. Hardy. A manual of Budhism in its modern develop- 
ment. London, 1853, 2nd ed., 1880. 

C. F. Koeppen. Die Religion des Buddha. 2 vols. (Die 
Religion des Buddha und thre Entstehung. Die lamatsche 
Hierarchte und Kirche.) Berlin, 1857-9. 

V. P. Vasiliev. Buddhism. Vol. 1. St. Petersburg. (Publ. 
in Russian, 1857; in German, 1860; in French, 1865.) 

J. Barthélemy Saint-Hilaire. Le Bouddha et sa religion. 
Paris, 1860. (English tr., London, 1895.) 

T. W. R. Davids. Buddhism. London, 1877. (This epoch- 
making book was often reprinted, but never entirely revised, and 
does not exactly represent the author’s later views. These will be 
found in the works.mentioned below, and also in his articles in 
the Encyclopedia Britannica and Hastings’ Encyclopedia of 
Religion and Ethics, further in the introductions to Dialogues of 
the Buddha, and last of all in the chapter on the Early History of 
the Buddhists, in vol. 1 of The Cambridge History of India, 
Cambridge, 1922.) 

E. Senart. Essai sur la légende du Buddha, son caractére et ses 
origines. Paris, 1882. {First appeared in Journ. As., aott- 
sept., 1873 ff.) 

H. Oldenberg. Buddha, sein Leben, seine Lehre, seine Gemeinde. 
Berlin, 1881; 8th and 9th ed., 1921. (English tr. of first ed., 
London, 1882; French tr. of 3rd ed., Paris, 1903.) 

J. H. C. Kern. Geschiedenis van het Buddhisme in Indié. 
Haarlem, 1882-4. (German tr. Der Buddhismus und seine Ges- 
chichte in Indien. Leipzig, 1884; French, Htstoire du Bouddhisme 
dans V Inde. Paris, 1901-3.) 

Manual of Indian Buddhism. Strasbourg, 1896. 

E. Hardy. Der Buddhismus nach dilteren Péli-Werken. 
Miinster i. W., 1890. 

E. Windisch. Madara und Buddha. (Abh. der k. sachs. Ges. 
d. Wiss., philol.-hist. Classe, xxxvi.) Leipzig, 1895. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 285 


—— Buddha’s Geburt und die Lehre von der Seelenwanderung. 
(Ibid tv.) Leipzig, 1909. 

R.S.Copleston. Buddhism, primitive and present, in Magadha 
and Ceylon. London, 1892; 2nd ed., 1908. 

H.F.Hackmann. Buddhismas a religion, its historical develop- 
ment and tts present conditions. London, 1910. 

R. Pischel. Leben und Lehre des Buddha. Leipzig, 1905. 
3rd ed. by H. Liiders, 1916. 

A. Hillebrandt. Buddhas Leben und Lehre. Berlin, 1925. 

C. A. F. Rhys Davids. Gotama the man. 1928. 

—  Sakya or Buddhist origins. 1932. 
Manual of Buddhism. 1932. 

J. Przyluski. Le Bouddhisme. Paris, 1932. 

J. G. Jennings. The Veddantic Buddhism of the Buddha. 
London, 1947. 


DOCTRINE AND DISCIPLINE 


R. S. Hardy. Eastern Monachism. London, 1850. 

—— The legends and theortes of the Buddhists. London, 1866. 

E. J. Eitel. Buddhism tn tts historical, theoretical and popular 
aspects. 2nded. London, 1873. 

T. W. R. Davids. Lectures on the origin and growth of religion, 
as tllustrated by some points in the history of Indian Buddhism. 
(Hibbert Lectures.) London, 1897. 

Buddhism, tts history and literature. (American lec- 
tures.) New York, 1896. 

I. P. Minaev. Recherches sur le Bouddhisme, trad. du russe. 
Paris, 1894. 

J. A. Eklund. Ntrvéna, en religionshtstorisk undersokning. 
(Résumé in German.) Upsala, 1899. 

Compendium of Philosophy, being a translation of the Abhid- 
hammattha-sangaha, by S. Z, Aung, revised and ed. by Mrs. Rhys 
Davids. London, 1910. 

Yamakami Sdgen. Systems of Buddhistic thought. Calcutta, 
1912. 

C. A. F. Rhys Davids. Buddhist psychology. 1914; 2nd ed., 
1924. 

H. Oldenberg. Die Lehre der Upanishaden und die Anfange 
des Buddhismus, Gottingen, 1915. 

L. de la Vallée Poussin. The Way to Nirvana. Cambridge, 
1917. 


286 APPENDIX 


M. Winternitz. Die buddistische Litteratur und die hetligen 
Texte der Jainas. (Gesch. der Ind. Lit. vol.2.) Leipzig, 1920. 
Sir C. Eliot. Hinduism and Buddhism. 1921. 
S. Dasgupta. A history of Indian philosophy. Vol. 1. 
Cambridge, 1922. 
A. B. Keith. Buddhist Philosophy in India and Ceylon. 
Oxford, 1923. 
P. Oltramare. La théosophte bouddhque. Paris, 1923. 
T. Stcherbatsky. The central conception of Buddhism and the 
meaning of the word Dharma. London, 1923. 
S. Dutt. Early Buddhist Monachism. London, 1924. 
G. Grimm. Die Lehre des Buddha, die Religion der Vernunft. 
-Miinchen, 1925. 
E. J. Thomas. History of Buddhist Thought. London, 1933. 
B.C. Law. Concepts of Buddhism. Amsterdam, 1937. 
J. Evola. La dottrina del risveglio: Saggio sull’ascest 
buddhtsta. Bari. 1943. 


ARCHZOLOGY AND ART 

A. Foucher. Les scénes figurées de la légende de Bouddha. 
Paris, 1896. 

—— Etude sur Piconographte bouddhique de Inde, d@aprés 
des textes tnédits Paris, 1905. 

—— Lart gréco-bouddhique du Gandhara. 2 vols. Paris, 
1905-8. 

—— The beginnings of Buddhist art and other essays. Paris, 
London, 1917. 

A. Griinwedel. Buddhistische Kunst in Indien. Berlin, 1893. 
(Tr. as Buddhist art in Indta. London, 1901.) 

P.C. Mukherji. <A report on a tour of exploration of the antiqut- 


tses in the Tarat, Nepal, and the region of Kapilavastu. Calcutta, 
1901. 

T. W.R. Davids. Buddhist India. London, 1903. 

V.A.Smith. A history of fineartin Indtaand Ceylon. Oxford, 
1911. 2nd ed. revised by K. de B. Codrington. Oxford, 1930. 

H. Focillon. L’art bouddhique. Paris, 1921. 

B. Bhattacharyya. The Indian Buddhist Iconography. Lon- 
don, 1925. 

Sir A. Cunningham. The ancient geography of India. Vol. 1. 
London, 1871. 


F.L. Pullé. La cartografia antica dell’ India. Firenze, 1901-5. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 287 


BUDDHISM AND CHRISTIANITY 


All the references of importance are given in the first two 
following works: 

G. A. van den Bergh van Eysinga. Indische Einfliisse auf 
evangelische Erzahlungen. Gottingen, 1904. (Revised ed. and 
tr. of Indische invloeden op oude christelijke verhalen. Leiden, 
1901.) 

G. Faber. Buddistische und Neutestamentliche Erzahlungen. 
Das Problem threr gegenseitigen Beeinflussung untersucht. Leipzig, 
1913. 

Among earlier works may be mentioned: 

R. Seydel. Das Evangelium von Jesu in seinen Verhdltnissen 
zu Buddha. Saga und Buddha-Lehre mit fortlaufender Ricksicht 
auf andere Religionskreise untersucht. Leipzig, 1882. 

A. Lillie. The influence of Buddhism on Primitive Christianity. 
London, 1893. (Issued in new ed. as India in Primitive 
Christianity. 1909.) 

A. J. Edmunds and M. Anesaki. Buddhist and Christian 
Gospels, being Gospel Parallels from Pali texts. Philadelphia, 
1908-9. 

H. Haas. ‘Das Scherflein der Wittwe’ und seine Entsprechung 
tm Tripitaka. Leipzig, 1922. 

The most sober judgments on the question will be found in 
Windisch, Buddha’s Geburt (above) and J. Kennedy, Article on the 
Gospels of the Infancy, etc., in JRAS. 1917; p. 209 ff. 


THE BARLAAM AND JOASAPH LEGEND 


Barlaam and Joasaph. Withan English tr. by G. R. Woodward 
and H. Mattingly. (Loeb Classical Library.) London, 1914. 

E. Kuhn. Barlaam und Joasaph, eine lnblographische- 
literargesch. Studie. Miinchen, 1897. 

H. Giinter. Buddha in der abenlandischen Legende? Leipzig, 
1922. 

Atticle ‘‘Barlaam and Josaphat”’ in Encycl. Brit. 14th ed. 

Earlier theories of the origin of the work have been made 
obsolete by the discovery in Turfan by von Le Coq of a 
Manichaean recension. The results are given by P. Alfaric in 
La vie chrétienne du Bouddha (Journ. As., 1917, Sept.—Oct., 
p. 271 ff.). He holds that the story, which shows evidence of 


288 APPENDIX 


contact with the Lalta-vistava and other Indian tales, reached 
the West through a Manichaean work, but that there must be 
some intermediate form of the story between this and the forms 
now known. According to this theory it cannot be earlier than 
the third century A.D., so that it is quite removed from the 
problem of Buddhist influence on the Gospels. 


INDEX 


Abhaya, prince, 136, 264 

Abhaya, goddess, 46 

Abhidhamma, xvii, xix, 85, 114, 148, 
167, 203, 212, 215, 254 ff., 275, 
278; pitaka, 277 

Abhififia, 49 

Act of Truth, 122 

Adhvaryus, 125 

Adiccabandhu, Adityabandhu, xxii, 
21, 217 

Aggajiifia-sutta, 4, 259 

Aggregates, see Sankhara 

Agnosticism, 202 

Ajatasattu, 14, 20, 129, 132, 
138, 139, 143, 155, 159, 
166, 168, 179, 257 

Ajita Kesakambalin, 130, 201 

Ajivikas, 83, 130, 155 

Alara Kalama, 62, 63, 69, 70, 150, 
184, 216, 229; death, 82 

Alavaka-sutta, 119 

Alavi, 119, 120 

Allakappa, 155 

Ambagama, 148 

Ambalatthika, 143 

Ambapali, 145 

Ambashtha, caste, 6 

Ambattha, student, 6 

Amita, 24, 26 

Amitodana, Amritodana, 24, 26, 102, 
131 

Anagami, see Non-returner 

Ananda, 14, 29, 54, 102, 103, 106, 
108 ff., 119, 134, 145 ff., 168, 
198, 206, 242, 258, 264, 265, 
268, 269; appointed attendant, 
122, 123; recites the suttas, 166 

Anantamaya, 25 

Anathapindika (-pindada), 104, 105, 
144; death, 270 

Anattalakkhana-sutta, 88 

Andhakas, 215 

Anesaki, M., 256, 257 

Angas, people, 13, 105 

Angas, nine of the Canon, 167 

Angiras, 22 

Angirasa, 23, 48, 98 

Angulimala, 121, 122, 266 

Anguttara-nikaya, 272 

Animisa shrine, 85 

Afijana, 24, 26 

Annihilation, 130, 189, 196, 200, 201 

Annunciation, 36, 238, 244 


133, 
160, 


Anoma, 55, 61 

Anomiya, 61 

Anotatta, lake, 31 

Anupiya, 61, 68, 103, 148 

Anuruddha (Aniruddha), 57, 
103, 153 ff., 265, 269 

Anuruddhaka, 168 

Anuvaineya, Anumaineya, 57, 61 

Arahat, 84, 89, 103, 108, 111, 126, 
78) 1875 214 

Aruppa, see Attainments 

Asavas, 67, 89, 152, 177, 183, 189, 
194, 215, 260 

Asalha, 31, 34 

Asita, 19, 21, 38 ff., 58, 220, 239, 
273, see Kaladevala 

Asoka (Dhamma), xxiii, 18, 35, 157, 
159) °160)- 162;" 17032 177" e218; 
226, 235, 255; consecrated, 27 ; 
see Kalasoka 

Assaji, 88, 93 

Assakas, 13, 14 

Asvaghosha, 50, 184, 229, 240 

Atheistic schools, 4 

Atimaya, 25 

Atman, see Soul 

Attainments, 63, 153, 183, 184, 193, 
229 

Atthaka-vagga, 273, 274 

Atthissara, 135 

Atuma, 150 

Aung, S. Z., 194, 197 

Austerities, 61 ff., 70, 87, 261; con- 
demnea, 87, 180 

Avantis, 14 

Avatars, 216, 217 

Avici, 119, 135 

Ayojjha, Ayodhya (Oudh), 10, 11, 
15, 16, 225 


102, 


Ba-han, M., 186 

Bahvrcas, 125 

Bandhula, 139 

Baptism, 239 

Barhut, 221 

Barlaam and Joasaph, 288 

Barth, A., 36, 160, 162 

Beluva, 145 

Benares, 9, 11, 13, 14, 62, 83, 86, 89, 
116, 216 

Benfey, T., 12 

Bengal, 14 

Beowulf, 217 


290 


Bergh van Eysinga, G. A. van den, 
238 ff. 


Bhaddakacca, 49 

Bhaddakaccana, 26, 49, 59, 60, 110 

Bhaddavaggiya, bhadravargiya, 80, 91 

Bhaddiya (Bhadrika) Sakya raja, 57, 
103 ff. 

Bhaddiya, one of the five monks, 88 

Bhaddiya, town, 105 

Bhagava, 1 

Bhaggava, 69 

Bhagu, 103 

Bhallika, 85 

Bhandagama, 148 

Bharata, 11 

Bharhut, Barhut, 221 

Bhava, 196, 197 

Bhoganagara, 14, 148, 149 

Bimba, Bimbasundari, 50 

Bimbisara, 14, 21, 68 ff., 80, 83, 92, 
105, 110, 114, 132, 133, 225; 
death, 138 

Bindusara, 170, 250 

Biraini (Al-), xiii 

Bodhi, see Enlightenment 

Bodhipakkhika dhamma, 183 

Bodhi-tree, 33, 68, 71, 83, 85, 101, 
230, 258 

Bodhisatta, 1, 29 .; incarnation, 
35, 147, 269; displays his skill, 
19, 48, 50; doctrine of, 223, 224 

Bonds, three, five, ten, 177 

Brahma, 4, 33, 40, 46, u8, 114, 125, 
141, 201, 214; persuades 
Buddha to preach, 81, 82; 
world of, 88, 182, 207, 208 243 

Brahmadatta, 116 

Brahmajala-sutta, 199 ff., 257 

Brahma-viharas, 126, 127, 183 

Brahminism, 23, 124 ff., 174, 175 


Brahmins, born from Brahma, 5, 
125 ff.; claims, 174, 267; the 
true, 126, 132, 267 

Bremond, H., 186 

Buddha, titles, ancestry, 1; home 
and family, 16 ff.; conception, 
32030; Zoey DIrth a2 ception 


infancy and youth, 38 ff.; first 
words, 3, 31, 33, 75 ff.; aus- 
terities, 61 ff.; enlightenment, 
3, 66 ff., 92; first preaching, 
81 ff.; twenty years wandering, 
113 ff.; last journey, 143 ff. ; 
death, 153, 158; as myth, 211 ; 
qualities of, 212; omniscient, 
213, 214; five kinds of vision, 
213; visits to Ceylon, 3, 218; 


as a god, 214, 224; previous 
Buddhas, 27, 218, 258; word 
of, xviii ff., 234 ff:;. _ see 


Renunciation 


INDEX 


Buddhaghosa, 7, 183, 222, 254 ff., 
272: on the Chain of Causation, 
194 ff. 

Buddhavamsa, xxi, 1, 27, 49, 97, 275 

Budha (Mercury), xiv 

Buhler, J. G., 18, 160 

Bulis, 155 

Burnouf, E., xv 


Cakravartin, see Universal king 

Calika (Caliya) hill, 97, 118 

Campa (Bhagalpur), 13, 14 

Canakka, Canakya, 170 

Candi, fairy, 100 

Candagutta, Candragupta, xxii, 27, 
170 

Candavajji, 168 

Cankin, 224 

Canon, xviii ff., 1 ff., 34, 35, 249 ff. ; 
in metre, 254 ; list of Theravada 
works, 257 ff.; of Sarvastivada, 
278; see Pitakas 

Capala shrine, 146 

Carlleyle, A. C. L., 17 

Castes, 23, 29, 70, 127, 128; origin, 
6, 259, 266, 267; mixed, 6 

Cedaga, 138 

Cetis, 13 

Ceylon, xiv, xxiii, 2, 14, 159, 160, 
163, 218 

Chain of Causation, 62, 76, 78, 85, 
183, 186, 193 ff., 258; five 
links, 193; nine or ten, 193, 197 

Chandakanivartana shrine, 56, 57 

Chandogyas, 125 

Channa, Chandaka, 
54, 56, 57 

Channa, elder, 153; a monk who 
committed suicide, 270 

Chinese writing, 47 

Christianity, 29, 36, 43, 46, 53, 225, 
237 ff. 

Chronicles of Ceylon, xvi, xxi ff., 10, 
24, 234, 251 

Chronology, 27, 92, 97, 113, 157, 158, 
169, 234, 235, 283 

Cificaé, 111, 114 

Clan, see Gotra 

Clement of Alexandria, xiii 

Concentration, mystical, 62, 
180 ff. 

Consciousness, 195, 197, 198 

Cosmogony, 3 ff 

Cosmology 207 

Council, the Great, 170, 252, 253 

Councils, xxiii, 109, 165 ff., 250 ff., 
255 

Craving, 35, 72, 177, 187, 188, 193, 
195, 206 

Creation, Buddhist legend of, 4; 

Hindu, 5 


charioteer, 33, 


64, 


INDEX 


Csoma de Korés, A., xv, 27, 237 
Ciliya, 25 

Cunda, elder, 141 

Cunda, smith, 149 ff. 

Cunningham, Sir A., 15, 17, 151 
Cycle (kalpa), 4, 146, 236; new, 243 


Damayanti, 122 

Dandapani, 26, 50 

Dantapura, 163 

Dasabala, 99 

Dasaka, 168 

Dasaratha, 5, 10; jataka; 10 ff. 

Davids, T. W. Rhys, xvii, 84, 90, 
123, 125, 129, 133, 137, 149, 160, 
187, 208, 220, 230, 235, 243, 284 

Davids, Mrs. Rhys, 110, 170, 178, 
187, 191, 193, 199, 204 

Devadaha, city, 25, 32, 34 

Devadaha, king, 24, 26 

Devadatta, 26, 100 ff., 123, 131 ff., 
23a; 262)0264,, 277 >) his ‘five 
rules, 134; death, 135 

Devaraja, 135 

Devatideva, see Gods 

Dhamma, 173 ff., 209 

Dhammacakkappavattana-sutta, 
86 ff. 

Dhammadinna, 110, 263 

Dhammapala, 250 

Dhammasenapati, 96 

Dhanananda, 170 

Dhanafijaya, 105 

Dharana, naga, 231 

Dharma, see Dhamma 

Dhotodana, 24, 26 

Dhutangas, 137 

Dhyana, see Trances 

Digha Karayana, 139 

Dighabhanakas, 252 

Digha-nikaya, 257 ff. 

Dighavu, 116 

Dighiti, 116 

Dipankara, xxi, 28, 49, 99, 219 

Dipavamsa, see Chronicles 

Disciples, see Five monks 

Discourse on Fuel, 187, 193 

Divine eye, 67, 183, 185, 269 

Docetism, 215, 216 

Dona (Drona), 155 

Dravidians, 23 

Dreams, 31, 34, 56; 

Drona, 24 

Dutthagamani, 159 


the five, 70 


Earthquakes, 30, 32, 153; causes, 
147 ; science of, 8 
Eastern Park, 106 


Eightfold Path, 87, 127, 178, 183, 
268 
Ekanala, 117 


291 

Elephant, white, 32, 34; of the 
Bodhisatta, 33, 131 

Enlightenment, 227, 230, 260 ff.; 


seven constituents, 183; see 
Buddha 

Entering the Stream, 100, 111, 115, 
120, 177, 192 


Fa Hien, 16 ff. 

Fausbdéll, V., xvi, 10 

First sermon, 86 ff. 

Fish-eating, 129, 134, 137 

Five monks, see Order 

Five rules of Devadatta, 134, 137 

Fleet, J. F., 149, 158, 160 ff. 

Foucaux, P. E., xv 

Foucher, A., 221, 286 

Four signs, 44, 51 ff., 58 

vie hte 87, 145, 173, 192, 193, 
59 

Franke, R. O., 171, 201, 233, 234 

Free will, 207 

Fiihrer, A. A., 18, 161 


Ganda, 99; his mango-tree, 114 

Gandhabba, 36 

Gandhara art, 221 ff. 

Gandharas, 14, 15, 159, 160, 163 

Ganges, 15, 83, 143, 144 

Garudhamma, see Strict rules 

Gatha-dialect, xx 

Gautama, ancestor of Buddha, 5, 23, 
216; gotra, 22 

Gautamas, sect, 137 

Gaya, 83 

Gayasisa, 134 

Geography, 13 ff. 

Ghatikara, 55, 266 

Gijjhakita, 133, 143 

Giribbaja, 14 

Goat-herd’s tree, 85, 137 

Godavari, 14 

Godhika, 275 


Gods in Buddhism, 208; three 
classes, 214, 215; devatideva, 46, 
214 
Gopa, 50, 56 
Gosala, 129, 130 
Gospels, xviii, 225, 235, 236; 


apocryphal, 248 
Gotama, 1, 21, 23; gate, ford, 144; 
gotra, 22 ; rishi, 22; see Buddha 
Gotamakas, 137 
Gotra, 22 
Great Authorities, four, 148, 235 
Great Kings, four, 33, 86, 141 
Great Man, 21, 38 ff., 218 ff., 260 
Gymnosophists, xiv; see Jains 


Hackmann, H. F., 35, 285 
Hatthigama, 148 


U—1 


292 


Heiler, F., 187 

Hell, 111, 112, 134 ff., 141, 145, 207 
Hercules, 217 

Heretics, 171; six, 113, 129 ff., 217 
Hinayana, 244, 256 

Hirafifiavati, 149, 151 

Hiuen Tsiang, 16 ff., 158, 163 
Hodgson, B. H., xv; 278 

Hoernle, R. A. F., 130, 138 

Huns, writing, 47 


Iddhi, see Magic power 

Ikshvaku, 5, 6. 20 

Images of Buddha, 56, 221 ff. 
Indra and Vritra, 217; cf. Sakka 
Insight (pafifia), 182, 183, 213 
Isigili, hill, 141, 268 

Isipatana, 38, 83, 89 


Jains (Niganthas) Jainism, 35, 58, 
67, 129, 203, 205, 207, 209, 219, 
261, 263, 267; literature, 27, 
111, 130, 136, 138, 231, 234 

Jambudipa, 8, 28, 39, 159 

Jambugama, 148 

james, W., 203 

Jantu, village, 118 

Jataka, xvii, xxi, 274 

Jayasena, 24, 26 

Jerome, St., xiii, 34, 237, 239 

Jeta, 105 

Jetavana, 104 ff., 111, 241, 242 

Jhana, see Trances 

Jinacarita, 50, 282 

Jivaka, 129, 264 

Jones, Sir W., xxii 

Jumna, 15 


Kaccana (Katyayana) the Great, 43, 
250, 255, 261, 266, 270 

Kaccana, 26, 49 

Kakucchanda, Krakucchanda, 27 

Kakuttha, 149, 150 

Kala, naga, 71 

Kalasoka, 169, 170 

Kaladevala, 41, 43, 70; see Asita 

Kalingas, 14, 159, 163 

Kalpa, see Cycle 

Kalpa-sitra, 231 

Kaludayin, 33, 59, 97, 98 

Kambojas, 14 

‘“Kammatthanas, forty, 183 

Kandy, 163, 164 

Kanishka, 163, 164 

Kanthaka, 33, 54, 56, 69 

Kanthakanivattana shrine, 55, 56 

Kapila, brahmin, 8 

Kapilavatthu, Kapilavastu, 8, 14, 
16 ff., 29, 31 ff., 39, 41, 61, 102, 
107, 110, 119, 155, 160, 185, 
228, 264 


INDEX 


Karma, 35, 130, 140, 142, 150, 174, 
204 ff., 209, 231, 236, 245, 261, 
264, 267, 270 

Kashayagrahana shrine, 57 

Kashmir, 163 

Kasia, 151 

Kasibharadvaja, 117; sutta, 117 

Kasina meditations, 183 

Kasis, 13, 15, 83, 116, 138 

Kassapa, ascetic (acela), 258, 269 

Kassapa (Kasyapa) Buddha, 27, 
99 


Kassapa of Gaya, 59, 91 ff.; 185 

Kassapa the great, 59, 155, 159, 
165 ff. 

Kassapa (Kumara), 135, 259, 262 

Kassapa of the river (Nadi), 91 ff. 

Kassapa of Uruvela, 91 ff., 217, 
221 

Kathavatthu, spoken by Tissa, 171, 
209, 212,-223, 255,277 

Kattika (Karttika) month, 141, 158 

Keith, A. B., 211 

Kern, H., 24, 129, 216 ff. 

Khandhas, five, 35, 59, 
202 ff., 263, 268 

Khema, 110, 189, 214 

Khuddaka-nikaya, 272 

Kimbila, 103 

Kisa Gotami, 53, 54, 110, 240 

Klaproth, J., xxi, 237 

Knowledges, three, 182, 212, 213 

Knox, R., xiv 

Kokdlika, 134 

Kola, king, 9, 16 

Kolanagara, 9, 25 

Kolita, 94; see Moggallana 

Kolivasa, 25 

Koliyas, Kodyas, 9, 10, 12, 13, 16, 
20, 23, 24, 57, 61, 107, 155 

Kols, 23 

Konagamana, Konakamana (Kana-~- 
kamuni), 18, 27, 218, 226 

Kondafifia, Afifiata-, 43, 80, 88; 
Buddha, 99; gotra, 22 

Kosalas, 10, 13, 15, 16, 20, 116, 138 

Kosam, 15 

Kosambi, 14, 15, 17, 115, 116, 263, 
269 


190, 195, 


Kotigama, 145 

Krishna, 217 

Kshatriyas, 5, 127, 128, 155, 225; 
gotra of, 22 

Kukuttha, 149 

Kurus, 13 ~ 

Kusavati, 152, 219 

Kusinara, 14, 19, 143, 148 ff., 154, 
219 

Kitadanta, 175, 176, 257 

Kuatagarasala, 107 

Kuvera, 46 


INDEX 


Lakkhana, 11 

Lalita-vistara, xx, xxiv, 1, 24, 25, 
27 ff., 34 ff., 39 ff., 44 ff., 50, 56, 
61, 73), 74, 77; 211, 222, 230, 239, 
288 

La Loubére, S. de, xiv 

Learmer’s sentences, 176 

Licchavis, 20, 145, 155 

Kiddon, Ho PZ 

Lion roar of Sariputta, 143, 144, 157 

Lokottaravadins, xx, 216, 256 

Lokuttara, 215 

Liiders, H., 161. 

Lumbini, Lummini, 19, 32, 34, 35, 
38; stipa at, see Piprava 

Lunar mansions, 32, 86, 214 


Macchas, 13 

Madhyadesa, 29 

Magadhas, 13, 20, 64, 82, 96, 117, 
124, 138, 144, 254 

Magadhi, xix, 18, 254 

Magandiya, 115, 265 

Magandiya, 115, 116 

Magic power, 91, 96, 103, 113, 118, 
132, 133, 135, 141, 146, 182, 183 

Mahabharata, 122; quoted, 79 

Mahakatyadyana, see Kaccana the 
Great 

Mahali, 185, 257 

Mahanama, one of the five monks, 88 

Mahanama, Sakya, 57, 102, 103, 139 

Mahanidana-sutta, 197, 258 

Mahapadana-sutta, 27, 50, 55, 68, 
228, 258 

Mahapajapati, Mahaprajavati, 24 ff., 
46, 57, 100, 101, 107 ff., 270, 271 

Mahaparinibbana-sutta, 51,85, 143 ff., 
258 


Mahapurusha, see Great man 

Mahasaccaka, 58 

Mahasammata, 5, 6, 7, 99 

Mahasanghikas, xx, 170, 256 

Mahdsudassana, 152, 219, 258 

Mahavamsa, see Chronicles 

Mahavastu, xx, l, 5, 7, 9, 10, 13, 16, 
ane 2o. 27, 04, G6, 41; 44 of, 
61, 69, 77, 256 

Mahavira, see Nataputta 

Mahayana, xx, 56, 77, 135, 209, 
223, 224, 244, 249, 256; Canon, 
278 

Mahinda, xxiii, 171 

Maineyas, 57, 61 

Maitreya, see Metteyya 

Majjhimabhanakas, 252 

Majjhimadesa, 29 

Majjhima-nikaya, 44, 81, 260 ff. 

Makhadeva, 7, 266 

Makkhali-Gosala, see Gosala 

Makuta-bandhana shrine, 154 


293 


Mallas; 13, 19, 20, 22) 23;.457,.61, 
143, 152, 154, 155 

Malunkyaputta, 188 

Manichaeans, xiii, 288 

Manosila, 31 

Manu, ancestor, 6; law-book, 6, 29 

Mara, 40, 54, 68, 71 ff., 80, 85, 90, 
118, 146, 147, 217, 230 ff., 239, 
240, 263; army, 72, 74; Jain 
parallel, 231; daughters, 72, 85 

Marks of a great man, 21, 39, 40, 
218, 220 ff., 260, 266; minor 
marks, 221, 222 

Marshall, Sir J., 164 

Matanga girl, 242 

Matika, 148, 149, 167, 255 

Maya (Maha-), 19, 24, 25 ff., 29, 
31, 32, 34, 36, 98, 237, 238 

May4-doctrine, 25, 203 

Meat-eating, 128, 129, 134, 264 

Meditation, forty methods, 183; see 
Concentration 

Megasthenes, xxii 

Meghamialin, 231 

Meghiya, 118, 122 

Merit, 76, 177, 223 


Meru, 29; Sineru, 243 
Metteyya, Maitreya, xvi, 29, 219, 
259 


Middle District, 29 

Migara, 105, 106; 
Visakha 

Miracle, 2, 91, 185, 233, 258 ;— of 
rose-apple tree, 44 ff., 66, 99; 
of) (the! pairs, 98,5 113), 91145 
of loaves and fishes, 246 

Mirror of the Doctrine, 120, 145 

Moggali, 95 

Moggaliputta, see Tissa 

Moggallana, 56, 93 ff., 114, 118, 122, 
132, 134, 138, 261, 263; death, 
140 ff. 

Mongols, xiv, 237, 238 

Monks, see Order 

Moon, god, 46; Soma, xxii 

Moral, rules, five, 30,176, 179, 272 

Moralities (Silas), 178 ff., 220, 257 

Morality in Buddhism, 175 ff. 

Moriyas, 156, 170 

Mrigi, 54 

Mucalinda, 85, 232 

Munda, 168, 169 

Mundas, 23 

Mungali, 140 

Munja-grass, 73 

Mysticism, 180; christian, 186; see 
Concentration, Trances, Yoga 

Mythology, xviii, 68, 216 ff. 


mother of, see 


Nadika, Natika, 143, 145, 258 
Nagadasaka, 169 


294 


Nagarjuna, 191 

Nagas, 71, 85, 159, 160, 231, 232 

Nagasamala, 122 

Naked ascetics, xiv, 105, 180 

Nakulapita, Nakulamata, 115 

Nalagiri, 133 

Nalaka, 38, 41, 42, 58; Naradatta, 
39, 41; Nalaka-sutta, 19, 38, 
39, 43, 273 

Nalaka, village, 95, 141 

Nalanda, 95, 143 \ 

Namaripa, 195 

Namuci, 72, 73, 232 

Nanda, 26, 101, 103 

Nanda, Mahapajapati’s daughter, 
110 


Nanda and Nandabala, 70 

Nandas, nine, 170 

Naradatta, see Nalaka 

Narayana, 46, 57 

Nataputta (Mahavira), 130, 131, 136, 
149, 213, 219, 259, 264, 265, 267 

Nathanael, 244 

Nerafijara, 70 ff. 

Net of knowledge, 120, 213 

Neumann, K. E., 149 

Nibbana, see Nirvana 

Nidana-katha, xxi, 41 ff., 274, 280 

Niddesa, 14, 253, 274 

Nigali Sagar, 18 

Niganthas, see Jains 

Nigliva, 18 

Nigrodha, elder, 171 

Nigrodha park, 108 

Nirvana, 53, 54, 63, 83, 86, 118, 121, 
127, 133, 141, 142, 145 ff., 160, 
183, 184, 187 ff., 206, 260, 262, 
264; as the ultimately real, 
208; won during lifetime, 83; 
two kinds, 150, 190; lokuttara, 
215; in Mahayana, 191, 209; 
other theories, 200 

Non-returner, 102, 108, 177 

Nuns, 107 ff., 135, 191 


Okkaka, 6, 7, 9 

Okkamukha, 6 

Oldenberg, H., xvii, 21, 22, 48, 49, 
58, 59, 84, 110, 124, 137, 153, 
165, 187, 188, 201, 226, 232, 
233 

Omniscience, 213, 214, 266 

Once-returner, 100, 108, 177 

Order of monks, 86, 90, 146, 165 ff. ; 
the five monks, 66, 80, 83, 84, 
244 

Ordination, 88, 90; service, 168 

Ornaments pool, 57 


Pabbajja, 88; sutta, 69, 273 
Pacceka-buddha, 135, 214, 268, 273 


INDEX 


Padaria, 18 

Padhana-sutta, 71 ff., 250, 273 

Padma, 70 

Pakudha Kaccayana, 130 

Pamita, 24, 26 

Pajica-sutta, 88 

Pajicalas, 13 

Pandava hill, 68 

Piradyana, 14, 274, 275 

Parileyyaka forest, 117 

Parsva, 131, 231, 232 

Pasenadi, Prasenajit, 20, 105, 110, 
121;- 138), 9139, 9189) 922552425 
266 

Patacara, 111 

Pataligama, 14, 144 

Pataliputta (Patna), 14, 144, 157 

Path, four stages, 177; see Eightfold 

Paticcasamuppada, see Chain 

Patika, 99; sutta, 4, 259 

Patimokkha, 168, 275 

Paulinus a S. Bartholomaeo, xiv 

Pava, 14, 149, 155, 260 

Pavarana, 108 

Pawapuri, 149 

Peppé, W. C., 20, 160, 161 

Perfections, 75, 95, 135, 223 

Permanence, heresy, 196, 201 

Peter walking on the sea, 241 

Pessimism, 178 

Phagguna, 98 

Pilgrimages, 151 

Pindola Bharadvaja, 113 

Pinnacled Hall, 107 

Pipphalivana, 156 

Piprava (-kot), 19, 160, 226 

Pischel, R., 43, 49, 91, 160, 161, 193, 
230 

Pitakas, 167, 249, 251, 255, 257; see 
Canon 

Piyadasi, see Asoka (Dhamma) 

Pleasure in contemplation, 66, 181 

Ploughing festival, 44 ~ 

Pokkharasadi, 6, 

Polo, Marco, xiv 

Polytheism, 208, 214, 215, 

Potala, 16 

Prajapati, creator, 4, 5, 25 

Prajapati, see Mahapajapati 

Prakrti, 194 

Pravara ceremony, 22 

Prayaga (Allahabad), 13 

Prodigal, son, 244 

Pubbarama, 106 

Pukkusa, 150 

Punna, 262, 270 

Punna, 70 

Punnavaddhana, 105 

Parana Kassapa, 129, 130, 207 

Puranas, xxi ff , 5, 12, 20, 27, 234 

Pushkala, 20 


125, 225 


INDEX 


Questions of Milinda, 190 


Radhakrishnan, Prof., 191 

Rahu, 53 

Rahula, 20, 49, 53, 54, 58 ff., 100 ff., 
Mi ib OXY hile Gare] 

Rahula, mother of, 33, 48 ff., 53, 54, 


100, 229; ordained, 110; see 
Bhaddakaccana 

Raivata, 70 

Rajagaha, 13, 14, 17, 21, 68 ff., 


80, 92 ff., 97, 103, 104, 107, 113, 
136, 139 ff., 143, 159, 160, 168 
Rajaka, 70 
Rajayatana tree, 85 
Rama of Ayodhya, 5, 11, 12 
Rama, of Benares, 9, 16 
Ramagama, 16, 19, 155, 159, 160 
Ramagama of the Nagas, 159 
Ramayana, 10, 11, 12, 15 
Rapti, 17 
Ratanacankama shrine, 85 
Ratana-ghara shrine, 85 
Rays of light from Buddha, of six 
colours, 223 
Rebirth, see Transmigration 
Rebirth-consciousness, 195, 197 
Recollections, see Remembrances 
Relics, 155, 156, 158 ff. 


Remembrances, six, ten, 183, 208 


Renunciation, Great, 21, 51 ff, 
227;-228 

Requisites, eight, 55 

Retreat, 90 


Revata, elder, 169 

Ridgeway, Sir W., 234 

Rig-veda, 125, 144 

Rohini, river, 107 

Rose-apple, miracle of, 44 ff., 66, 80 
Rudraka, see Uddaka 

Rummindei, 18 

Ripasari, 94, 141 


Sacrifice, 128, 175, 176 

Sagaras, 14 

Saheth (Seth) Maheth, 17 

Sakadagami, see Once-returner 

Saka-tree, 7 

Saketa, 10, 11, 15 ff., 105, 226 

Saki, 70 

Sakka, Sakra, 40, 46, 53, 55, 92, 101, 
111, 141, 154, 160, 259, 263 

Sakkodana, 24, 26 

Sakya, king, 20 

Sakyamuni, 1, 18, 138, 215 

Sakyas, solar race, 5, 21, 23, 24, 57, 


61, 93, 107, 155, 161, 174, 
264; origin, 6, 7, 12, 217; 
rajas, 10, 20, 99, 104, 228; 


295 


country, 16; clan, 22; destruc- 
tion, 139, 140, 162; share of 
relics, 140 

Sal-tree, 7, 33 

Samadhi, see Concentration 

Samafifiaphala-sutta, 179 ff., 257 

Samapatti, see Attainments 

Samaritan woman, 241 

Samavati, 116 

Samaveda, 125 

Samsara, see Transmigration 

Samyutta-nikaya, 271 

Sanchy, 221 

Sandrocottos, see Candagutta 

Sanghamitta, 171 

Safijaya, king, 20; ascetic, 93 ff. 

Safijaya Belatthaputta, 130, 201 

Sankassa, 114 

Sankhara, 193 ff., 202, 203 

Sankhya, 35, 193, 194, 201, 203, 208, 
209, 229 

Sariputta, 93 ff., 101, 111, 114, 118, 
122; 132; 134, G89. 52145, 256: 
260 ff:, 265, 268, 270, 271, 275; 
lion-roar, 143, 144, 157, 259; 
death, 140 ff. 

Sarvarthasiddha, 1, 40, 41, 44 

Sarvastivadins, 158, 209, 241, 255, 
256; Canon, 278 

Sattapanni cave, 166 

Sautrantikas, AN 

Savatthi, Sravasti, 10, 14 ff., 104 ff., 
LTO 1419 120 e122 e138; 
141, 242 

Schiefner, F. A. von, xv, xxi, 97, 
282, 283 ‘ 

Schools, eighteen, xviii, 137, 170, 
WAR VAe 58) 

Scriptures, see Canon 

Sects, list of nine, 137; see Heretics 

Sela, 21, 266 

Seleucus Nicator, xxii, 27, 170 

Self-mortification, see Austerities 

Senani, 64, 70, 230; -nigama, 64 

Sena-nigama, 64, 230 

Senapati-grama, 64, 230 

Senart, E., on the Bodhi-tree, 68 ; 
on the Chain of Causation, 194, 
198; on the virgin birth, 237 ; 
on the Lalita-vistara, xxiv 

Sermon on Marks of Non-Soul, 
88 

Seven-years sutta, 73 

Seydel, R., 238, 243 ff. 

Shah-ji-ki-dheri, 163 

Siddhattha, Siddhartha, 1, 20, 26, 44, 
99 

Siggava, 168 

Siha, 129, 130 

Sihahanu (Simha-) 24 ff. 


296 


Sikhin, 27 

Silas, see Moralities 

Simeon, 43, 238 

Singalaka, exhortation to, 176, 260 

Sirivaddha, 59 

Sitanelieer2, 

Sitavana, 104 

Siva, 46 

Six sects, see Heretics 

Sixteen powers, 13, 14 

Sixty-two doctrines, 199 

Skanda, 46 

Smith, V. A., 16 ff., 160 

Solar race, xxi, 5, 21 

Sonadanda, 127, 224, 257; sutta, 21 

Sonaka, 168 

Sonuttara, 159 

Sotapanna, see Entering the Stream 

Sotthiya, Svastika, 71 

Soul, 4, 35, 88; theories of, 200 ff. 

Spells, charms, 242, 250, 260, 272 

Spooner, Dr., 163 

Strauss, D., 225 

Strict rules, eight, for nuns, 108. 

Subhadda, arahat, 152, 155 

Subhadda, unruly monk, 137, 155, 
165, 166 ; 

Subhaddaka, 49 

Subhiti, father of Maya, 25, 34 

Sudatta, 104, see Anathapindika 

Suddha, 24 

Suddhodana, 20, 21, 24, 25 ff., 29, 
36, 39 ff., 44, 52, 70, 80, 97 ff., 
100, 102, 104, 228; death, 107, 
113 

Sugata, 81, 147, 224 

Suicide, 275; of Channa, 270; of 
Godhika, 275 

Sujata, 70, 71 

Stkaramaddava, 149 

Sukiti, Sukirti, 161, 162 

Sukkhodana, 24 

Sukkodana, 24, 26 

Sukla, 24 

Sumedha, 219 

Sumsumiaragiri, 115 

Sun, god, 46; ancestor, xxi; myth, 
217, 218, 226 

Sundarananda, 100 

Sundari, 111 

Suppabuddha (Supra-), brother of 
Maya, 26, 49, 131; death, 119 

Suppatitthita, 71, 230 

Suprabuddha, father of Maya, 25 

Strasenas, 13 

Susunaga, 169 

Sutta, xix, 249, 257 


— Suttanipata, 14, 21, 38, 40 


Suyama, 33 
Svastika, 71 


INDEX 


Takakusu, J., 256 

Taittiriyas, 125 

Taking to the temple, 46, 239 

Takkasila (Taxila), 15, 164 

Tanha (trsna), see Craving 

Tapussa, 85 

Taranatha, 255, 256, 283 

Tarukkha, 125 

Tathagata, 1, 40, 188 ff., 201, 216 

Taxila, 15, 164 

Temptation by Mara, 54, 68, 71 ff., 
90, 217, 230 ff. 

Ten points of the Vesali monks, 169 

Tevijja-sutta, 125 ff., 258 

Theravada, xix, 223, 252, 253, 255, 
256; Canon, 257 ff. 

Thomas, F. W., 160, 161 

Three palaces, 47, 48, 52, 56 

Tibetan Scriptures, xv, xxiii, 278, 
281 


Tilaura Kot, 19 

Tipitaka, 249; see Canon 

Tissa Moggaliputta, 168, 171, 255 

Tissa of Savatthi, 121 

Tooth of Buddha at Kandy, 163 

Trances, 45, 63 ff., 142, 153, 181 ff., 
192 

Transfiguration, 150, 245, 246 

Transmigration, 35, 174, 175, 191, 
204 ff. 

Tree of Enlightenment, see Bodhi- 
tree 

Truths, see Four 

Turnour, G., xvi 

Tusita heaven, 28, 30, 31, 36, 53, 99 

Tutelary gods, 144 


Ucchedavada, see Annihilation 

Udayabhadda, 168 

Udayin, 199 

Uddaka Ramaputta, 63, 69, 70, 80, 
82, 184, 216, 229 

Udena, king, 115, 116 

Udyana, 140 

Uggasena, 113 

Ujjeni, 14, 171 

Ukkacela, 142 

Ukkula, 85 

Undetermined questions, 188, 201 

Unhisa, 221 

Universal king, 20, 21, 32, 36, 
39, 40, 43, 101, 217 ff., 259, 260 

Unnayeccomeess 

Upadana-sutta, 188 

Upadi, 190 

Upaka, 83, 86 

Upali, 103, 168 

Upanishads, 125, 195, 199 

Upasampada, 88, 119 

Upatissa, 94, see Sariputta 


INDEX 297 


Upavana, 151 

Uposatha, 108, 134, 168, 169, 171; 
vows, 31, 36 

Uruvela, 64, 70, 83, 90, 91 

UttarasajJha, 32, 34, 55 

Uttarasena, 140 


Vaibhashikas, 255 

Vaisali, see Vesali 

Vaisravana, 46 

Vajji monks, 137, 169, 170 
Vajjis, 13, 15, 20, 138, 143, 144 
Vamsas (Vatsas), 13, 15 


Vanga, 14 

Vanganta, 95 

Vappa, 88 
Vasabhakhattiya, 139 
Vasettha, 125; gotra, 22 


Vasiliev, V. P., xvi, 284 

Vasishtha, rishi, 22; hermit, 69 

Vassa, see Retreat 

Vasudeva, 217 

Vattagamani, 251 

Vatthugatha, 14, 39, 273, 274 

Vebhara, 166 

Vedanta, 201, 203, 208 

Vedas, xviii 41, 144, 254, 258; 
three, 115, 125 ff., 265 

Vedehiputta, 132 

Vedic religion, 35 ; period, 218 

Veluvana, 92, 142 

Verafija, brahmin, 117, 118 

Verafja, 117, 263 

Vesali (Basar), 13 ff., 69, 80, 107, 
108, 113, 134, 138, 141 ff., 145 ff., 
155, 169 

Vessabhi, ViSvabha, 27 

Vessantara, 75, 99 

Vethadipa, 155 

Vetulyakas, 215 

Vibhajjavadins, 171 

Videha, 11, 132 

Vidadabha, 139, 162 

Vinaya, xvii, xix, 165 ff., 249, 254 ; 
heads of, 168; pitaka, 275 ff. 


Vindhyas, 14, 41, 45 

Vipassin (Vipascit), 27 ff., 47, 55, 
185, 186, 220, 258 

Virgin birth, 36, 237, 238 

Visakha, Vaisakha, month, 34, 92, 
158 

Visakha, 105 ff. 

Vishnu, 20, 57; three steps, 217 

Vissakamma, 53 

Visvamitra, 46 

Vyagghapajja, 9, 25 


Wesak, feast, 34 

Wheel of the Doctrine, 40, 83, 88, 
151, 220 

Wheel of Universal king, 219, 220 

Widow’s mite, 240 

Wilson, H. H., xvi 

Windisch, E., 25, 43, 73, 229 

Winternitz, M., xx, 234 

Wisdom, see Insight 

Women, first lay disciples, 90; 
admitted to the Order, 107 ff., 
166; saluted the Lord’s body 
first, 109, 166; see Nuns 


Yajur-Veda, 125 

Yamaka, 189 ; book, 277 

Yamaka-patihariya, see Miracle of 
the pairs 

Yasa, 47, 89, 90 

Yasa, at the second Council, 169 

Yasodhara, sister of Sihahanu, 24, 
26 

Yasodhara, wife of Buddha, 49, 50, 
131 


Yasovati, 50 

Yoga philosophy, 184, 185, 193 
Yoga-sitras, 127 

Yojana, 17 

Yonas, 14 


Zoroaster, xiii 


THE HISTORY OF 
CIVILIZATION 


Edited by 
C. K. OGDEN 


of Magdalene College, Cambridge 


Published by 
ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL LTD 
BROADWAY HOUSE: 68-74 CARTER LANE, LONDON, E.C.4. 
1956 


Roy. 8vo. 
PREHISTORY AND ANTIQUITY 


The Earth Before History: Man’s Origin and the Origin of Life. By 
Edmond Perrier, late Hon. Director of the Natural History Museum 
of France. With four maps. {1 3s. 


Language: a Linguistic Introduction to History. By J. Vendryes, 
Professor in the University of Paris. £1 tos. 


The Dawn of European Civilization. By V. Gordon Childe, D.Litt., 
D.Sc., Professor of Prehistoric Europeon Archaeology, University of 
London. New edition, revised and enlarged. With 155 illustrations 
and four maps. 1 8s. 


A Geographical Introduction to History. By Lucien Febvre, Professor 
in the University of Strasburg. With 7 maps. £1 Ios. 


From Tribe to Empire: Social Organization among the Primitives and 
in the Ancient East. By A. Moret, Professor in the University of 
Paris, and G. Davy, University of Dijon. With 47 illustrations and 
seven maps. {£1 5s. 


EARLY EMPIRES 


Israel, from its Beginnings to the Middle of the Eighth Century. By A. 
Lods, Professor at the Sorbonne. With 16 plates, three maps, and 38 
text illustrations. {1 15s: 


The Prophets and the Rise of Judaism. By A. Lods, Professor at the 
Sorbonne. With eight plates. £1 tos. 


GREECE 


The Greek City, and its Institutions. By G. Glotz, Professor of Greek 
History in the University of Paris. 1 tos. 


ROME 


Primitive Italy, and the Beginnings of Roman Imperialism. By Leon 
Homo, Professor in the University of Lyons. With 13 maps and 
plans. £1 8s. 


The Roman Spirit in Religion, Thought and Art. By A. Grenier, Pro- 
fessor in the University of Strasburg. With 16 plates, and 16 text 
illustrations. 1 8s. 


Rome the Law-Giver. By J. Declareuil, Professor in the University of 
Toulouse. £1 8s. 


The Economic Life of the Ancient World. By J. Toutain, Director 
at L’Ecole des Hautes Etudes. With six maps, £1 10s. 


Greatness and Decline of the Celts. By H. Hubert. With three maps. 
INAS: 


BEYOND THE ROMAN EMPIRE 


Chinese Civilization. By Marcel Granet, Professor at the School of 
Oriental Languages, Paris. With 12 plates and 5 maps. 1 15s. 


The Life of Buddha, as Legend and History. By E. J. Thomas, D.Litt., 
Under Librarian in the University Library, Cambridge. With four 
plates. £1 8s. 


A History of Buddhist Thought. By E. J. Thomas, D.Litt. With four 
plates. £1 Ios. 


Ancient India and Indian Civilization. By P. Masson-Oursel, H. de 
Willman-Grabowska, and P. Stern. With five maps, 16 plates and 
24 black and white illustrations. f1 12s. 


CHRISTIANITY AND THE MIDDLE AGES 


Life and Work in Medieval Europe, V- XV Century. By P. Boissonnade, 
Professor in the University of Poitiers. Introduction by Eileen 
Power, D.Litt. With eight plates. £1 tos. 


Life and Work in Modern Europe, XV-XVIII Century. By G. Renard, 
Professor at the College of France, and G. Weulersse, Professor at the 
Lycée Carnot. Introduction by Eileen Power, D.Litt. With eight 
plates. {1 8s. 


Travel and Travellers of the Middle Ages. Edited by A. P. Newton, 
Rhodes Professor of Imperial History in the University of London. 
With eight plates and maps. {1 5s. 


Chivalry : its Historical Significance and Civilizing Influence. Edited by 
Edgar Prestage, Camdens Professor in the University of London. 
With 24 plates. £1 3s. 


The End of the Ancient World, and the Beginnings of the Middle Ages. 
By Ferdinand Lot, Professor in the University of Paris. With three 
plates and three maps. £1 12s. 


The Feudal Monarchy in France and England from the Tenth to the 
Thirteenth Century. By Ch. Petit-Dutaillis, Member of L’Institut de 
France. With 2 maps. £1 8s. 


The Jewish World in the Time of Jesus. By Charles Guignebert, 
Professor of the History of Christianity at the Sorbonne. {1 4s. 


SUBJECT HISTORIES 
The History of Music. By Cecil Gray. £1. 


All prices are net. 


PRINTED BY HEADLEY BROTHERS LTD 109 KINGSWAY LONDON WC2 AND ASHFORD KENT 


Mi ae JM 
Date Dre 


WITHDRAWN 


UNIV OF MOUNT UNION LIBRARY 


Mount Union College Libraries 
294.3 T455L MB 
Thomas, E. J./The life of Buddha as | 


3 7048 00093 7983 


| 


dees Setes 


RG 22 Jes PII29 


Shee 


us
