New Guide to Health; or, Botanic Family Physician
Samuel Thomson, 1827
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Thomson's New Guide to Health (1827) — the botanic-medicine manifesto that launched the Thomsonian movement: America's first great alternative-medicine revolt. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/2575008R.nlm.nih.gov). This 1827 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

NATIONAL  LIBRARY  OF  MEDICINE
Washington


7PZ4


*0V^*s


RAM?  THOMSON- J£«£f37ST.


y/r.i  ,/ili/r  m  11 111/  /i  l//r//rr.  r')r  r//  /l  r/ //  n  1/       ifiY/i        /1 1  ln./i  //


,/iii/rni  11 111/ A l//r//rr.  t'il  r/l  it  rr //  t

,,t  Jlty  y'.''  /f6y


7


NEW


OR,


Botanic  Family  Physician.

CONTAINING

A  COMPLETE  SYSTEM  OF  PRACTICE
UPON  A  PLAN  ENTIRELY  NEW;


yilTa  A  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  VEGETABLES  MADE  USE  OF,  AND
DIRECTIONS  FOR  PREPARING  AND  ADMINISTERING  THEM  TO
CURE  DISEASE.

TO  WHICH  IS  ADDED


A  DESCRIPTION  OF  SEVERAL  CASES  OF  DISEASE  ATTENDED  BY  THK
AUTHOR,  WITH  THE. ^»E%*A;i^£jpME?<T  AMD  CORE..


£Y  SAMUEL  THOMSON.


eolututms:

gRIKTSD  AND  PUBLISHED  BY  HORTON  HOWAtffc,


WB

<=\00


Wistrlct  of  Massachusetts,  ie  wit:

District  Clerk's  Office.

BE  it  remembered,  that  on  the  twenty-third  day  of  November,
A.  D.  1822,  in  the  forty-seventh  year  of  the  Independence  of
the  United  States  of  America,  Samuel  Thomson,  of  the  said  District,
has  deposited  in  this  office  the  title  of  a'  book,  the  right  when  of
be  claims  as  author  and   proprietor,  in  the  words  following:,  to  wit:

"New  Guide  to  Health  ;  or,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  Con-
taining a  complete  System  of  Practice,  upon  a  plan  entirely  new;
[preparing  and  administering  them  to  cure  disease.  To  which  is  ad-
ded a  description  of  several  cases  of  disease  attended  by  the  author,
with  the  mode  of  treatment  and  cure.     By  Samuel  Thomson."

In  conformity  to  the  act  of  Congress  of  the  United  States,  entitled
"An  act  for  the  encouragement  of  learning,  by  securing  the  copies
of  Maps,  Charts  and  Book«,  to  the  Authors  and  Proprietors  of  such
copies,  during  the  time  therein  mentioned  ;"  and  also  to  an  act,  en-
titled "An  act  suplementary  to  an  act,  entitled  'An  act  for  the  en-
couragement of  learning,  by  securing  the  copies  of  Maps,  Charts  and
Books,  to  the  Authors  and  Proprietors  of  such  copies,  during  the
times  therein  mentioned;  and  extending  the  benefits  thereof  to  the
-, Arts  of  Designing,  Engraving  and  Etching  Historical  and  other
ErintSi"



TO  THIS  PUBLIC,

*Fhk  preparing  the  following  work  for  the  press  has  been  «.
task  of  much  difficulty  and  labor;  for  1o  comprise  in  a  short'
compass,  and  to  convey  a  correct  understanding  of  the  subject,
liom  such  a  mass  of  materials  as  I  have  been  enabled  to  col-
lect by  thirly  years  practice,  is  a  business  of  no  small  magni-
tude. The  plan  that  has  been  adopted  I  thought  the  best  to
give  a  correct  knowledge  of  my  system  of  practice;  and  am
confident  that  the  descriptions  and  directions  are  sufficiently  ex-
plained to  be  understood  by  all  those  who  take  an  interest  in
this  important  subject.  Much  more  might  have  been  written;
but  the  main  object  has  been  to  confine  it  to  the  practice,  and
nothing  more  is  stated  of  the  theory,  than  what  was  necessary
to  give  a  general  knowledge  of  the  system.  If  any  errors  should
be  discovered,  it  is  hoped  that  they  will  be  viewed  with  can-
dour; for  in  first  publishing  a  work,  such  things  are  to  be  ex-
pected; but  much  care  has  been  taken  that  there  should  be  no
error  which  would  Cause  any  mistake  in  the  practice,  or  prepare
ing  the  medicine.

Many  persons  are  practising  by  my  system,  who  are  in  the.
habit  of  pretending  that  they  have  made  great  improvements,
and  in  some  instances  it  is  well  known  that  poisonous  drugs
have  been  made  use  of  under  the  name  of  my  medicine,  which
has  counteracted  its  operation,  and  thereby  tended  to  destroy  'he
confidence  of  the  public  in  my  system  of  practice;  this  lias
never  been  authorized  by  me.  The  public  are  therefore  cau-<
tioned  against  such  conduct,  and  all  those  who  are  well  disposed
towards  my  system,  are  desired  to  lend  their  aid  in  exposing  all
sue})  dishonest  practices,  in  order  that  justice  may  be  done.—
Those  who  possess  this  work,  m-iy,  by  examining  it,  be  b.^ta
detect  any  improper  deviations  therefrom ;  and  they  are  ass  wed


AGREEMENT.

;fcatany  practice  which  is  not  comformable  to  the  directions
given,  and  does  not  agree  with  the  principles  herein  laid  dowtfj
Js  unauthorised  by  me.


AGREEMENT.

The  subscriber,  who  is  the  discoverer  and  proprietor  of  the
system  of  medical  practice  conlained  in  this  work,  agrees  to
give,  whenever  applied  to,  any  information,  that  shall  be  neces-
sary to  give  a  complete  understanding  of  the  obtaining,  prepar-
ing and  using  all  such  vegetables  as  are  made  use  of  in  said
system,  to  all  those  who  purchase  the  right;  and  the  purchasers,
in  consideration  of  the  above  information,  and  also  what  is  con-
tained in  this  book,  agree,  in  the  spirit  cf  mutual  interest  and.
honor,  not  to  reveal  any  part  of  said  information,  to  any  per-
son, except  those  who  purchase  ihe  right,  to  the  injury  of  the
proprietor,  under  the  penalty  of  forfeiting  their  word  and  honor,
and  all  right  to  the  use  of  the  medicine.  And  every  person
who  purchases  the  right,  is  to  be  considered  a  member  of  the
Friendly  Botanic  Society,  and  entitled  to  a  free  intercourse  with
fhe  members  fofr  information  and  firiendlv  assistance.

SAMUEL  THOMSON.


A  NEW

#HIBE  TO  ffiEBAMSlS

OR,

BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.


INTRODUCTION.

There  aro  three  tilings  which  have  in  a  greater  or  less  de-
gree, called  the  attention  of*  men,  viz:  Religion,  Government,
and  Medicine.  In  ages  past,  these  things  were  thought  by  mil-
lions to  belong  to  three  classes  of  men,  Pnesis,  Lawyers  and
Physicians.  The  Priests  held  the  things  of  religion  in  their
«wn  hands,  and  brought  the  people  to  their  terms;  kept  the
scriptures  in  the  dead  languages,  so  that  the  common  people
could  not  read  them.  Those  days  of  darkness  are  done-  away;
the  scriptures  are  translated  into  our  own  language,  and  each
one  is  taught  to  read  for  himself.  Government  was  once  con-
sidered as  belonging  to  a  few7,  who  thought  themselves  "born
•nly  to  rule."  The  common  people  have  now  become  acquaint-
©d  with  the  great  secret  of  government;  and  know  that  "all
men  are  born  free  and  equal,"  and  that  magistrates  are  put  in
authority,  or  out,  by  the  voice  of  t lie  people,  who  choose  them
for  their  public  servants.

While  these,  and  many  other  things  are  brought  where  "com-
mon  people"  can  understand  them;  the  knowledge  and  use  of
■medicine,  is  in  a  great  measure  concealed  in  a  dead  langi?  ge,
and  a  sick  man  is  often  obliged  to  risk  his  life,  where  he  would
not  risk  a  dollar;  and  should  the  apothecary  or  his  apprentice
make  a  mistake,  the  sick  man  cannot  correct  it,  and  thus  is  ex-
posed o  receive  an  instrument  of  death,  instead  of  tha  whiclj
ivould  restore  him  to  health  had  he  known  good  medicinei

A  2


ft  new  guide  to  Health  ;•

"It  maybe  alleged,  (said  Dr.  fiuchan,)  that  laying  medi*
cine  more  open  to  mankind,  would  lessen  their  i'aith  in  it.  This
indeed  would  be  the  case  with  regard  to  some ;  but  it  would  have
a  quite  contrary  effect  upon  others.  1  know  many  people  who
have  the  utmost  dread  and  horror  of  every  thing  prescribed  by  a
physician,  who  will  nevertheless,  very  readily  take  a  medicine
winch  they  know,  and  whose  qualilies  they  are  in  some  measure
acquainted  with."

"Nothing  ever  can,  or  will  inspire  mankind  with  an  absolute
confidence  in  physicians,  but  by  their  being  open,  frank,  and  un-
disguised in  their  behaviour."

"The  most  effectual  way  to  destroy  quackery  in  any  art  or
Science,  is  to  diffuse  the  knowledge  of  it  among  mankind.  Did
physicians  write  their  prescriptions  in  the  common  language  of
the  country,  and  explain  their  intentions  to  the  patient,  as  far  as
he  could  understand  them,  it  would  enable  them  to  know  when
the  medicine  had  the  desired  effect;  would  inspire  him  with  ab-
solute confidence  in  the  physician ;  and  would  make  him  dread
and  detest  every  man  who  pretended  to  cram  a  secret  medicine
er  poison  down  his  threat."

It  is  true  that  much  of  what  is  at  this  day  called  medicine,  is
deadly  poison ;  and  were  people  to  know  what  is  offered  them  of
this  kind,  they  would  absolutely  refuse  ever  to  receive  it  as  a
medicine.  This  I  have  long  seen  and  known  to  he  true;  and
have  labored  hard  for  many  years  to  convince  them  of  tiie  evils
that  attend  such  a  mode  of  procedure  with  the  sick;  and  have
turned  my  attention  to  those  medicines  that  grow  in  our  own
country,  which  the  God  of  n:  tute  ha*  prepared  for  the  benefit  of
mankind.  Lon<j  has  ageneral  medicine  beerisougbt  for,  and  I
am  confident  I  have  found  such  as  are  universally  applicable  in
all  cases  of  disease,  and  which  may  be  used  with  safety  and  suc-
cess, in  the  hands  of  the  people.

After  thirty  years  study  and  repeated  successful  trials  of  the
medicinal  vegetables  of  our  country,  in  all  the  diseases  incident
to  our  climate;  I  can,  with  well  grounded  assurance,  recommend
my  system  of  practice  and  medicines  to  the  public,  as  salutary
and  efficacious.

Creat  discoveries  and  improvements  have  been  made  in  vari-
ous arts  and  sciences  since  ihe  first  settlement  of  our  country,
while  its  medicines  have  been  very  much  neglected.  As  these
medicines,  suited  to  every  disease,  grow  spontaneously  upon  our
own  soil;  as  they  are  better  adapted  to  the  constitution;  as  the
jprice  ©f  imported  drugs  is  very  high ;  it  follows,  whether  we


6ft,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  rHYSieTAS.  t

consult  health,  which  is  of  primary  importonce,  or  expense,  u
decided  preference  should  be  given  to  the  former,  as  an  object
of  such  magnitude  as  no  longer  to  be  neglected.  Yet  in  the  in-
troduction of  those  medicines  I  have  been  violently  opposed,
and  my  theory  and  practice  condemned,  notwithstanding  the  de-
monstrative proofs  in  their  favor.  But  those  who  thus  condemn
have  taken  no  pains  to  throw  off  prejudice  and  examine  the  sub-
ject with  candor  and  impartiality.  Such  as  have  are  thoroughly
satisfied  of  their  utility  and  superior  excellence.

From  those  who  measure  a  man's  understanding  and  ability
to  be  beneficial  to  his  fellow  men,  only  from  the  acquisition  lie
has  made  in  literature  from  books ;  •  from  such  as  are  governed  by
outward  appearance,  and  who  will  not  stoop  to  examine  a  sys-
tem on  the  ground  of  its  intrinsic  merit,  I  expect  not  encourage-
ment, but  opposition.  But  this  will  not  discourage  me.  1  con
sider  the  discovery  I  have  made,  of  inestimable  value  to  man-
kind, and  intended  for  the  great  benefit  of  those  who  are  willing
to  receive  it.

Being  bom  in  a  new  country,  at  that  time  almost  an  howling
wilderness,  my  advantages  for  an  education  were  very  small ;  but
possessing  a  natural  gift  for  examining  the  things  of  Nature,  my
mind  was  left  entirely  free  to  follow  that  inclination,  by
ing  in*o  the  meaning  of  the  great  variety  of  objects  around  me

Possessing  a  body  like  other  men,  I  was  led  to  enquire  into  ihfe
nature  of  the  component  parts  of  what  man  is  made.  I  found
him  composed  of  the  four  elements — Earth,  Water,  Air  and  Fire;
The  eartli  and  water  I  found  were  the  solids ;  the  air  and  fire  the
fluids.  The  two  first  I  found  to  be  the  component  parts;  the  two
Last  kept  him  in  motion.  Heat,  I  found,  was  life;  and  Cold,  death.
Each  one  who  examines  into  it  will  find  that  all  constitutions  are
alike.  I  shall  now  describe  the  fuel  which  continues  the  fire,  or
life  of  man.  This  is  contained  in  two  things-food  and  medicines;
which  are  in  harmony  with  each  other;  often  grow  in  the  same
field  to  be  used  by  the  same  people.  People  whoarecapaMeofjt
raising  their  food  and  preparing  the  same,  may  as  easily  learn  to
collect  and  prepare  all  their  medicines  and  administer  the  same,,
when  it  is  needed.  Our  life  depends  on  heat;  food  is  the  fuel
that  kindles  and  continues  that  heat.  The  digestive  powers  being
correct,  causes  the  food  to  consume;  this  continues  the  warmth
of  the  body,  by  continually  supporting  the  fire.

The  stomach  is  the  deposit  from  which  he  whole  body  is  sup>-
ported.  The  heat  is  maintained  in  the  stomach  by  consuming  the
food;  and  all  the  body  and  limbs  receive  their  proportion  ftf


9  ShBW  GtTrBB  TO  HEALTH;

nourishment  and  heat  from  thai  source;  as  the  whole  room  is
warmed  by  the  fire  which  is  consumed  in  the  fire  place.  The
greater  the  quantity  of  wood  consumed  in  the  fire  place,  the
greater  the  heat  in*the. room.  So  in  the  body;  the  more  food,
well  digested,  the  more  beat  and  support  through  the  whole
man.  By  constantly  receiving  food  into  the  stomach,  which  is
sometimes  not  suitable  for  1  he  host  nourishment,  the  stomach
becomes  foul,  so  thatthefood  is  not  well  digested.  This  causes
the  body  to  lose  its  heat — then  the  appetite  fills;  the  bones  ache
and  the  man  is  sick  in  every  part  of  Lhe  whole  frame.

This  situation  of  the  body  shows  the  need  of  medicine,  and  the
kind  needed;  which  is  such  as.  will  clear  the  stomach  and  bowels
and  restore  the  digestive  powers.  When  tins  is  done,  the  food  will
raise  the  heat  again,  and  nourish  the  whole  man.  All  the  art  re-
quired to  do  this  is,  to  know  what  medicine  will  do  it,  and  how
..  to  administer  it,  as  a  person  knows  how  to  clear  a  stove  and  the
pipe  when  clogged  with  soot,  that  the  fire  may  burn  free,  and
the  whole  room  be  warmed  as  before.  The  "body,  after  being
cleared  of  whatever  clops  it,  will  consume  double  the  food,  and
the  food  will  afford  double  the  nourishment  and  heat,  that  it  did
before.  We  know  that  our  life  depends  on  food,  and  the  stomach
being  in  a  situation  to  receive  and  digest  it.  When  the  stomach
and  bowels  are  clogged,  all  needed  is,  the  most  suitable  medicine
to  remove  the  obstruction  in-thesvstem.  All  disease  is  caused
by  clogging  the  system ;  and  all  disease  is  removed  by  the  digestive
powers,  so  that  food  may  keep  up  that  heat  on  which  life  depends.

I  have  found  by  experience,  that  the  learned  doctors  are  wrong
in  considering  fever  a  disease  or  enemy;  the  fever  is  a  friend,
and  cold  the  enemy.  This  I  found  by  their  practice  in  my  family
until  they  had  five  times  given  them  over  to.  die.  Exercising  my
own  judgment,  I  followed  after  them,  and  relieved  my  family
every  time.  After  finding  a  general  principle  respecting  fevers,
and  reducing  that  to  practice,  I  found  it  sure  in  all  disease,  where
there  was  any  nature  left  to  build  on,  and  in  three  years  practice
I  never  lost  one  patient.

I  attended  on  all  the  fevers  peculiar  to  our  country,  and  always
used  it  as  a  friend,  and  that  returned  the  gratitude  to  the  patient,
I  soon  began  to  give  this  information  to  the  people,  and  convinc-
ed many  that  they  might  as  certainly  relieve  themselves  of  their
disease,  as  of  their  hunger.  The  expense  to  them  to  be  always
jlble  o  relieve  themselves  and  families,  would  be  but  small;  aad
%&  medicine  they  may  procure  aad  prepare  themselves*


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  9

This  greatly  disturbed  (he  learned  doctors,  and  some  of  them
undertook  to  destroy  me,  by  reporting  that  I  used  poison ;  though
they  made  no  mention  of  my  using  their  instruments  of  death.
Mercury,  Opium,  Ratsbane,  Nitre,  and  the  Lancet.  I  consider-
ed it  my  duty  to  withstand  them,  though  I  found  my  overthrow
was  what  they  aimed  a'.  A  plan  was  once  had  to  take  me  in  the
night,  hut  I  escaped.  Next,  1  was  indicted  as  though  I  had  given
poison,  and  a  bill  brought  against  me  for  wilful  murder.  I  was"
bound  in  irons  and  thrust,  into  prison,  to  be  kept  there  through
the  winter,  without  being  allowed  bad.  I  petitioned  for  and
obtained  a  special  court  to  try  the  cause,  and  was  honorably  ac-
quitted after  forty  days  imprisonment.  I  maintained  my  integrity
in  the  place  where  my  persecution  began.  In  five  years,  while
vindicating  this  new  and  useful  discovery,  I  lost  five  thousand
dollars,  besides  all  the  persecution,  trouble,  loss  of  health,  and
reproach  which  has  been  in  connexion  with  the  losses.

It  has  been  acknowledged,  even  by  those  who  are  unfriendly
to  me  and  my  practice,  that  my  medicine  may  he  good  in  some
particular  cases,  but  not  in  all.  But  this  is  an  error.  For
there  are  but  two  great  principles  in  the  constitution  of  things,
whether  applied  to  the  mind  or  body;  the  principle  of  life  and
the  principle  of  death.  That  which  contains  the  principle  of
life  c:n  never  be  tortured  into  an  administration  of  death.  If#
then,  a  medicine  is  good  in  any  case,  it  is  because  it  is  agreea-
ble to  nature,  or  this  principle  of  life,  the  very  opposite  of  dis-
ease. If  it  is  agreeable  inone  case,  it  must  be  absolutely  so  in  all.

By  the  active  operation  of  nature,  the  whole  animal  economy
is  carried  on:  and  the  father  of  the  healing  art,  Hippocrates^
tells  us,  what  is  an  obvious  truth,  that  Nature  is  ITeixt.  The
principle  is  the  same  in  all,  differing  only  in  degree.  When
disease  invades  the  frame,  it  resists  in  proportion  to  its  force,
till  overpowered  into  submission,  and  when  extinguished,  <'e  ill
follows,  and  it  ceases  to  operate  alike  mall.  If  then,  he;  is
life,  audits  extinction  death,  a  diminution  of  this  vital  flumey
in  every  instance,  cOris'titutes  disease,  and  is  an  approximation^
tode  :h.  AH  then,  that  medicine  can  do  in  the  expulsion  of
disorder,  is  to  kindle  up  the  decaying  spark,  and  restore  ts  en-
ergy till  itglows  in  .11  its  wonted  vigor.  If  a  direct  adrn
tration  can  be  made  to  produce  this  effect,  (and  it  can.)  it  is
evidently  immaterial  what  is  the  name  or  color  of  the  d  seas
i  r  b  Uious,  yellow,  scarlet  or  spotted  ;  whether  it  is  s:mpl
or  complicated,  or  whether  nature  has  one  enemy  or  more
Barnes  are  arbitrary  things;  the  knowledge  of  a  name  is  but  tlte


M


10  NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH,;

cummin  *nd  anise,  but  in  the  knowledge  of  the  origin  <>  <.
maktdy,  and  its  antidote,  lies  the  weightier  matters  of  this  sci*
ence.  '  This  knowledge  makes  tJiegenume  physician;  all  witty
out  it,  is  real  quackery.

3  been  a  general  opkvon,  that  extensive  study  and  greaft
erudi  i  tare  nefeeissary  to  form  the  eminei  t  physician.  J5:if  all
this  may  be",  as  Paul  saith,  bul  science,  falsely  so  called.  .\  man
may  ■■.i.i-  ■>.  scientific  knowledge  of  the  human  frame — he  may
know  the  names  in  every  language  of  every  medicine,  mineral
and  vegetable,  as  well  as  every  disease,  and  yet  be  a  miserable.
physician.  But  there  have  been  men,  without  this  to  boast  of!,
from  theearliesl  ages  of  the  world,  who  have  ''arisen,  blest  with
the  sutfhfner  powers  of  genius,  who  have,  as  it  were,  withon*
look  pierced  creation,  and  with  one  comprehensive  view,  ti-
ed the  whole  circle  of  science:  and  leftjearhing  itself,  toiling
after  them  in  vain."  A  mm  never  can  be  great  without  intel-
lect, and  he  never  can  more  than  fill  the  measure  of  his  capacity.
There  is  a  power  beyond  the  reach  of  art,  and  there  are  gift*
that  study  and  learning  can  never  rival.

The  practice  of  the  regular  physician*,  thai  i-f  those  who  get,
a  diploma,  at  the  present  time,  is  not.  to  use  those  means  whiek
would'be  most  likely  to  cure  disease;  but  to  try  experiments,
upon  what  they  have  read  in  books,  and  to  see  how  much  a  pa-
tient can  bear  without  producing  death.  After  pursuing  thifl
plan  during  their  lives,  they  know  just  about  as  much  as  titer
did  when  they  began  to  practice,  of  what  is  really  useful  t#
mankind.  If  a  patient  dies  under  their  hands,  why,  it  is  the
will  of  God,  and  they  are  sure  to  get  extravagantly  paid  for
their  trouble,  and  nothings;  more  is  said  about  it;  but  if  one  out
of  hundreds  of  my  patients  die,  and  where  the  doctors  have-
given  them  over  as  incurable,  they  at  once  cry  out,  that  it  is
quackery — that  I  gave  them  poison,  &-C.  for  the  purpose  of  run-
ning me  and  my  medicine  down,  and  to  prevent  its  being  used  by
the  people.  The  fact  is  well  known  to  thousands  who  have
used  my  medicine,  and  to  which  they  are  ready  to  attest,  that  it
is  perfectly  harmless;  and  I  defy  the  faculty  to  produce  one  in-
stance wherein  it  has  had  any  had  effects.

It  js  trur-,  that  the  study  of  anatomy,  or  structure  of  the  hu-
man body,  and  of  the  whole  animal  economy,  is  pleasing  and
useful ;  nor  is  there  any  objection  to  this,  however  minute  and
critical,  if  it  is  not  to  (he  neglect  of  fust  great  principles,  and
the  weightier  m  titers  of  knowledge.  But  it  is  no  more  n<  i
sary  to  mankind  at.  large.,  lo  qualify  them  to    administer  ?


dR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN,  ll

tjf'ous  pain  and  sickness,  fh;in  to  a  cook  in  preparing  food  to  sat-
isfy hunger  and  nourishing  the  body.  There  is  one  general
oause  of  hunger  and  one  general  supply  of  food;  one  general
OHuse  of  disease  and  one  general  remedy.  One  can  be  satisfied,
and  the  other  removed,  by  an  infinite  variety  of  ariicles,  best.
adapted  to  those  dillerent  purposes — That  medicine,  therefore
that  will  open  obstruction,  promote  perspiration,  and  restore  di-
gestion, is  suited  to  every  pttient,  whatever  form  the  disease  as-
sumes, and  is  universally  applicable;  And  acute  disorders,  such
as  fevers, cholics,  and  dyseritary,  may  be  relieved  thereby,  in
.twenty-four  or  forty-eight  hours,  at  most.


REMARKS   ON  FEVER S.

Much  has  been  said  and  written  upon  fevers,  by  the  profess
odlv  learned  Doctors  of  Medicine,  without  throwing  (he  most
profitable  light  on  the  subject,  of  greatly  benefitting  mankind.
They  have  been  abundantly  fruitful  in  inventing  names  for  dis-
ease, and  with  great  care  and  accuracy  distinguished  the  dif-
ferent symptoms;  but  they  appear  quite  barren  as  to  the  knowl-
edge of  their  origin  and  remedy.  To  the  first,  but  little  im-
portance, comparatively  speaking, can  be  attached;  thelaiter  is
«f  the  highest  importance  to  -ill  classes  of  people.

According  to  the  writings  of  learned  Physicians,  there  are  a
great  variety  of  fevers,  some  more  and  some  less  dangerous. —
But  to  begin  with  a  definition  of  the  Name.  What  is  fever?
Heat,  undoubtedly,  though  a  disturbed  operation  of  it.  But  is
therein  the  human  feme,  more  dian  one  kind  of  heat?  Yes,
gays  the  physician,  (strange  as  it  may  appear,)  ihere  is  the  pleu>
retic  heat,  the  slow  nervous  heat,  the  putrid  hear,  the  hectic
heat,  the  yellow  heat,  the  spotted  or  cold  heat,  the  typhus  or
ienorant  heat,  and  many  other  heats;  and  sometimes,  (calami-
tous to  tell,)  one  poor  patient  has  the  most,  or  the  whole  of
these  fevers,  .nd  dies  at  last  for  want  of  heat.

Is  fever  or  heat  a  disease?  Hippocrates,  the  acknowledged
father  of  physicians,  maintained  that  nature  is  heat;  and  lie  is
correct.  Is  nature  a  disease?  Surely  it  is  not.  What  is  com-
monly called  fever,  is  the  effect,  and"  not  the  cause  of  disease,
It  is  "the  struggle  of  nature  to  throw  off  disease.  The  cold
causes  an  obstruction,  and  fever  arises  in  consequence  of  that
obstruction,  to  threw  it  off.  This  is  universally  the  case.  Re-
-move  the  cause,  the  effect  will  cease.    No  person  ever  yet  die^


0  NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH;

of  a  fever!  for  9s  death  approaches,  the  patient  grows  cold,  no
til  in  death,  the  las!  spark  of  heat  is  extinguished.  This,  tin
learned  doctors  cannot  deny;  and  as  this  is  true,  they  ought,  in
justice,  10  acknowledge  that  their  whole  train  of  depletive  re-
medics,  such  as  bleeding,  blistering,  physicing,  starving,  with
all  their  refrige^atives;  their  opium,  mercury,  arsenic,  an-
timony, nitre,  &c.  arc  so  many  deadly  engines,  combined  with
the  disease,  against  the  constitution  and  life  of  the  patient.  It
opld,  which  is  the  commonly  received  opinion,  (and  which  is
true,)  is  the  cause  of  fever,  to  repfeatedly  bleed  the  patient  and
administer  mercury,  opium,  >:  it: c,  a. id  other  refrigerents  to  re-
store him  to  health,  is  as  though  a  man  should,  to  increase  a  fire
in  his  room,  throw  a  part  of  it  ou<  of  the  house,  and  to  increase
the  remainder,  put  on  water,  snow  and  ice!

As  it  is  a  fact,  that  cannot  be  denied,  that  fever  takes  its  rise
from  one  great  cause  or  origin,  it  follows  of  course,  that  one
method  of  removing  that  cause,  will  answer  in  all  cases;  and
the  greal  principle  is  to  assist  nature,  which  is  heat.

At  the  commencement  of  a  fever,  by  direct  and  proper  applica-
tion of  suitable  medicine,  it  can  be  easily  and  speedily  removed,
and  'he  patient  need  not  be  confined  long.  Twen'y-four  or  forty-
eight  hours,  to  the  exten',  are  sufficient,  and  often  short  of  that
time,  the  fever  may  he  removed,  or  that  which  is  the  cause  of  it.
Hut  where  the  patient  is  lefi  unassisted,  to  struggle  with  the  dis-
ease, until  his,  b  rength  is  exhausted,  and  move  especially,  when
the  most  unnatural  and  injurious  administrations  are  made,  if  a
recovery  is  possible,  it  mnst  of  necessity  take  a  long  time. —
These  declarations  are  true  and  have  been  often  proved,  and  can
be  again,  to  the  satisfaction  of  every  c>ndidperson?  at  the  hazard
of  any  forfeiture  the  faculty  may  challenge.

Notwithstanding  all  these  things,  how  true  are  the  words  of  the
intelligent  Dr.  Ifervey,  who  says,  '•!>/  what  unaccountable  per-
versity in  our  frame  does  it  appear,  tha£  we  set  ourselves  so
much  against  any  thing  tha*  is  new  ?  Can  any  one  behold,  wil  hout
scorn,  such  drones  of  physicians,  and  after  the  space  of  so  many
hundred  years  experience  and  practice  of  their  predecessor,  not
one  single  medicine  has  been  detected,  that  has  the  least  force  di-
rectly to  prevent,  to  oppose,  and  expel  a  continued  fever?  Should
any,  by  a  more  sedulous  observation,  pretend  to  make  the  least
•step  towards  the  discovery  of  such  remedies,  their  hatred  and
envy  would  swell  against  him,  as  a  legion  of  devils  against
"irtue;  the  whole  society  will  dart  their  malice  at  him,  and  tor-
toe  him  with  all  the  calumnies  imaginable^  without  sacking  b*


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN,  *3

any  tiling  that  should  destroy   him   root  and  branch.     For  he

'Alio  professes  to  be  a  reformer  of  the  art  of  physic,  must  resolve
to  run  the  hazard  of  the  martyrdom  of  his  reputation,  life  and  es-
tate."

The  treatment  which  the  writer  has  received  from  some  of  the
learned  physicians  since  his  discovery  of  the  remedy  for  the  fever,
and  various  other  diseases,  is  a  proof  of  the  truth  of  this  last  say-
ing of  Dr.  Hervey.  They  have  imprisoned  him,  and  charged
him  with  every  thing  cruel  tmd  unjust;  though  upon  a  fair  trial
their  violent  dealings  have  come  down  upon  their  heads;  while
he  his  not  only  been  proved  innocent  before  the  court,  but  useful;
having  relieved  many  which  the  other  physicians  h  d  given  over
to  die.  I  will  now  take  notice  of  the  yellow  fever.  -The  c  iuse
of  this  fatal  dise  ise  is  similar  to  the  spotted  fever.  The  cause  of
death  in  the  litter,  is  in  consequence  of  its  producing  a  balance
by  cold,  outward  and  inward;  and  in  the  former  there  is  a  balance
of  he  it  outward  and  inwrd;  both  produce  the  sura  thing,
that  is  a  tot  il  cessation  of  motion,  which  is  death.  The  colour
of  the  skin  has  given  n  me  to  both  these  diseases.  The  yellow
is  caused  by  the  obstruction  of  the  gall;  inste  d  of  being  dis-
charged through  its  proper  vessels,  it  is  forced  and  diffused
through  the  pores  of  the  skin.  The  same  effects  that  are  produ-
ced by  these  two  fevers  may  be  observed  in  the  motion  of  the
sea;  when  the  tide  is  done  running  up,  there  is  what  is  called
slack  wa^er,  or  a  balance  of  power,  and  the  s  me  thing  takes
place  when  it  is  done  running  down;  when  the  fountain  is
raised,  the  water  runs  from  it;  but  when  it  is  lowered  the  water
runs  towards  it.  The  sime  cause  produces  the  sime  effect  in
thesootted  tnd  yellow  fevers;  for  when  a  balance  of  power  be-
tween the  outward  and  inw  Ird  heat  takes  place,  death  follows.

Hiving  described  the  two  kinds  of  fever  which  are  the  most
alarming,  they  being  most  fatal,  I  sh  11  p'ss  over  those  of  a
less  al-irming  nature,  and  merely  observe,  that  there  is  no  other
difference  in  all  cases  of  fever,  than  what  is  caused  by  t'e  dif-
ferent degrees  of  cold,  or  loss  of  inw  :rd  heat,  which  are  two  ad-
verse parties  in  one  body,  contending  for  power.  If  the  heat
gains  the  victory,  the  cold  will  he  disinherited  a-nl  health  will  be
restored:  but,  on  the  other  hind,  if  cold  guns  the  ascendency,
heat  will  be  dispossessed  of  its  empire,  and  death  will  follow  of
course.  As  soon  is  life  cea^es^  the  body  becomes  odd,  which
is  conclusive  evidence  that  its  <?  lining  the  victory  is  the  cause  of
death.  When  the  power  of  "old  is  ne  irly  equal  to  that  of  heat,
'he  fever  or  strife  between  the  two  parties,  may  continue  fern

B


J4  NEW  GUIDE  TO  HHAiV-PI] .

longer  or  shorter  time,  according  to  circumstances;  this i9  what-
's c  illed  a  long  fever,or  fever  and  ague.  The  Wattle  between  cold
and  heat  will  take  place  periodically,  sometimes  every  day,  at
Nother  times,  every  other  day,  anil  they  will  leave  off  about  e<jiial,
heat  keeping  a  little  the  upper  hand.  In  attempting  to  cure  a
(Jase  of  this  kind,  we  must  consider  whe;her  the  fever  is  a  friend
•r  an  enemy;  if  it  is  a  friend,  which  I  hold  to  be  the  fact,  when
the  fever-fit  is  on,  incre.se  the  power  of  heat,  in  order  to  drive
off  the  cold,  and  life  will  hear  the  rule;  hut,  on  the  contrary,,
should  cold  be  considered  a  friend,  when  the  cold-fit  is  on,  by
mcreasing  its  power,  you  drveoffthe  heat,  mid  death  must  en-
Sue.  Thus  you  may  promote  life  or  death,  by  tempering  cold
and  heat.

Much  has  been  said  by  the  doctors  concerning  the  turn  of  a
fever,  and  how  long  a  time  it  will  run.  When  it  is  said  that  a
fever  will  turn  at  such  a  time,  I  presume  it  must  mean  that  it
h;s  been  gone;  this  is  true,  for  it  is  then  gone  on  the  outside,
and  is  trying  to  turn  again  and  go  inside,  where  it  belongs.  In-
stead of  following  the  dictates  of  nature  and  aiding  it  to  subdue
{fee  cold,  t lie  doctor  uses  all  his  skill  to  kill  the  fever.  How,
Would  I  ask,  in  the  name  of  common  sense,  can  any  thing  turn
when  killed?  Support  the  fever  and  it  will  return  inside;  the
<jold,  which  is  the  cause  of  disease,  will  be  driven  out,' and
health  will  be  restored.  In  all  cases  called  fever,  the  c  use  is
bhe  same  in  a  sweater  or  less  degree,  and  my  be  relieved  by  one
general  remedy.  The  cold  causes  c  inker,  and  before  the  c  n-
ker  is  seated,  the  strife  will  <take  place  between  cold  •  ml  heafy
and  while  the  hot  flashes  and  cold  chills  rem  in,  it  is  e^  idence
that  the  canker  is  not  settled,  and  the  hot  medicine  alone, occa-
sionally assisted  by  steam,  will  throw  it  off;  but  as  the  contest
ceases  the  heat  is  steady  on  the  outside  j  then  canker  assumes
the  power  inside;  this  is  called  a  settled  fever.  The  truth  is,
the  canker  is  fr.ed  on  the  inside.and  will  ripen  and  come  -  ff  in
a  short  time,  if  the  fever  is  kept  op  so  as  to  overpowei  the  cold.
This  idea  is  new  and  never  was  known  until  my  discovery.  By
raising  the  fever  with  Nos.  1  and  2,  and  taking  off  tfl(!  canker
with  No.  3,  and  the  same  given  by  injections,  we  mav  turn  a  fe-
ver when  we  ple-se;  but  if  this  is  not  understood,  the  canker
Will  ripen  and  come  oft" itself,  when  the  fever  will  turn  and  go
inside  and  the  cold  willlie  driven  out;  therefore  they  will  do
much  better  without  a  doctor  than  with.  The  higher  "the  fever
*unp.  the  sooner  the  cold  will  be  subdued;  nd  if  von  contend
against  the  heat,  the  longer  will  be  the  run  of  the  fover.  and
when  killed,  death  follows


©R,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  1$

When  a  patient  is  bled,  it  lessens  the  lieu t  and  gives  double
'fowor  to  the  colo  ;  like  taking  out  of  one  side  oi'  the  scale  and
putting  it  in  the  other,  which  doubles  the  weigh;,  and  turns  thf
scale  in  favor  of  the  disease.  By  giving  opium  it  deadens  the
feelings;  the  small  doses  of  nitre  and  calomel  lend  to  destroy
wh<  t  heat  rem  ins, and  plants  new  crops.of  canker,  which  will
st  nd  in  different  stages  in  the  body,  the  same  as  corn  planted  in
the  field  every  week,  will  keep  some  in  all  stages;  so  is  the  dif-
ferent degrees  in  canker.  This  is  the  re:  son  why  there  are  sq
many  diiierent  fevers  is  are  named;  when  one  fever  turns  anothr
or  sets  in  and  so  continues  one  after  another  until  the  harvest  is;
all  ripe,  if  the  se'son  is  long  enough:  if  not,  the  cold  and  frost-
takes  them  off — then  it  is  said  they  died  of  a  fever.  It  might
with  as  much  propriety  be  said  that  the  corn  killed  with  frost,
died  with  the  heat.  The  question,  whether  the  heat  or  cold
killed  the  patient,  is  easily  decided,  for  that  power  which  bears
rule  in  the  body  after  death  is  what  killed  the  patient,  which  is
col! — as  much  as  that  winch  bears  rule  when  he  is  alive  isheat.
When  a  person  is  taken  sick,  it  is  common  to  say,  I  hdvo  got  a
(gold  nd  am  afraid  1  am  going  to  have  a  fever;  but  no  fears  are
•xpressed  of  the  cold  he  has  taken;  neither  is  it  mentioned
when  the  cold  left  him.  The  fashionable  practice  is  to  fight  the
remains  of  heat  till  the  patient  dies,  by  giving  cold  the  victory^
in  which  case,  is  it  not  a  fact  that  the  doctor  assists  the  cold  to
kill  the  patient?  Would  it  not  have  been  more  reasonable,  or
likely  to  have  cured  them,  when  the  fever  arose  to  throw  offthe
cold,  to  have  helped  the  fever  and  give  nature  the  victory  over
its  enemy,  when  the  health  would  be  restored  the  same  as  before
fhev  took  the  cold.

We  frequently  see  in  the  newspapers,  accounts'of  people  dy-
ing inconsequence  of  drinking  cold  water  when  very  warm.-**
Some  f;l!  dead  inst  ntly,  and  ethers  linger  for  several  hours*;
the  dbctprs  have  not  1  eeri  i  ble  to  afford  any  relief  when
•ailed.  The  principal  symptoms  are  chills  and  shivering  wilt
*old,  which  is  Viewed  with  astonishment  by  those  who  witness
it.  Proper  caution  should  alw  ivs  be  obseived  by  persons  wl  cui
very  warm  and  thirsty",  who  go  to  a  pump  to  drink,  by  swallow
hing  hot  before  drinking  the  water,  and  swallowing  a
little  at  a  time,  which  will  prevent  any  fatal  effects.

This  sfr  hge  circumstance,  of  being  cold  en  a  hot  dry,  and
which  has  never  been  accounted  for  in  a  satisfl  ctory  maimer  to
the  public,!  sh:  11  endeavour  to  explain  in  as  comprehensive  and
.plain  language   es  I  am  capable.     The  component  parts  of  ah


IS  SEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH;

»:iril  bodies  are  earth  and  water,  and  life  and  motion  are  caused!
by  fiie  and  air.  The  inward  heat  is  the  fountain  of  life,  anrf
as  much  as  that  has  the  power  above  the  outward  heat,  so
much  we,have  life  and  strength,  and  when  we  lose  this  power
of  heat,  our  strength  and  faculties  decay  in  proportion;  and  it
is  iiinn  i  en;  i  wlittLt  r  \  ■  li  .  ■  diis  ;  i  vyi  ,  by  losing  the  inward
heit  or  raisingMie  outward  heat  above  it.  as  the  efletl  is  the
same.  If  you  raise  the  sire  m  level  with  the  fountain,  it  stops
the  current  and  "11  motion  will  ce  ise;  :  nd  the  s  rnc  effects  will
fellow  by  lowering  the  fountain  to  a  level  with  the  stre  m\
When  the  outward  heal  becomes  equal  with  the  inward,  either
by  the  ones  being  raised  or  the  others  being  'lowered,  cold  as-
sumes the  power  and  death  takes  place.

The  cause  of  the  fatal  effects  by  drinking  cold  water,  is  be-
cause the  fountain  of  life  is  lost  by  the  stream  being  raised
above  the  fountain,  or  the  inward  heat  loweied  Ly  throwing  in-
to the  stomach  so  large  a  quantity  of  cold  water  as  to  give  the
outward  heat  the  power  of  balancing  the  inward,  and  in  pro-
portion as  the  one  approaches  to  an  equality  with  the  other,  so
the  strength  is  diminished,  and  when  equal,"  they  die.

Ishill  now  make  some  further  rem  ,rks  on  this  and  other
subjects,  with  a  hope  that  it  may  be  beneficial  to  mankind. —
The  reason  why  these  extraordinary  cases  appear  so  wonderful
to  the  people,  is,  because  they  are  urn  cquainted  with  the  cause.
Why  should  we  wonder  at  a  person  being  cold  on  a  hot  di  y
when  we  are  not,  any  more  than  we  should  wonder  at  another
being  hungry,  when  we  have  just  been  eating;  or  that  others
can  be  in  pain,  when  we  are  enjoying  good  hei  1th?  The  one
isasplain  and  simple  as  the  other,  when  understood.  The
want  of  inw  ;rd  heat  is  the  cause  of  their  being  cold,  just  bs
auch  as  the  want  of  food  is  thee;  use  of  hunger,  ot  the  \\  nt
of  health  is  the  c  use  of  pin.  One  person  m  y  hate  lest  the
natural  power  of  heat,  by  n  effect  which  others  in  shr.ih'.r  sit-
aat  nns  m  y  not  have  experienced,  ■■  nd  will  sutler  the  conse-
quencesof  cold  in  proportion  to  (he  less  of  inward  heat;  is
is  ur  nifest  in  the  different  degte<  s  i  f  -  ckness.  If  the  inu  rd
heat  loses  its bal  nceof  power  suddenly, •death  is  immedi  le;
which  is  the  e  se  in  spotted  fever  nrj  i„  drowned  persons'
Pv  hen  the  inward  nd  out  ward  cold  is  h  1  need,  life  ce  sesj
and  the  blood  being  shopped  in  its  motion,  settles  in
w1  ich  ppenr  nceh;S  .  iven  n  me  to  whnl  is  <  lied  spetl
•<'  ■  '"!;'  s  me  pi  e  -  nces  toko  place  on  drowned  persons
and  from  the  same  cause.


•&,  B#TANI#  FAMILY  PHYMCIA5J.  I?

yiio  praqtice  of  bleeding  for  the  purpose  of  curing  disease,
I  consider  most  unnatural  and  injurious.  Nature  never  furnish--
'^s  the  body  with  more  blood  than  is  necessary  for  the  mainten-
ance of  health;  to  take  away  part  of  the  blood,  therefore,  is
taking  away  just  so  much  of  liieir  life,  audit  is  as  contrary  to  na-
ture, s  i:  would  he  to  cut  away  part  of  their  rlesh.  Many  ex-
periments have  been  tried  by  the  use  of  the  lancet  in  Fevers;
but  f  believe  it  will'  be  allowed  by  all,  that  most  of  them  have
proved  fatal;  and  several  eminent  physicians  have  died  in  eon
sequence  of  trying  the  experiment  on  themselves.  If  the  sys-
tem is  diseased,  the  blood  becomes  as  much  diseased  as  any
other  par' ;  remove  the  cause  of  the  disorder  and  the  blood  wij)
recover  and  become  healthy  as  soon  ;'S  any  other  part;  but  how
taking  part  of  it  away  can  help  to  cure  what  remains,  can  nev$s
be  reconciled  with  common  sense.

There  is  no  practice  used  by  the  physicians  that  I  consider.
more  inconsistent  with  common  sense,  and  t  the  same  time
more  inhuman,  than  blistering  to  remove  disease;  particularly
ins-1  ne  persons,  or  what  the  doctors  call  dropsy  on  the  brain  ;  in
which  c  ses,  they  shave  (he  head  and  draw  a  blister  on  it. —
Very  few  patients,  if  any,  ever  survive  this  application.  What,
would  be  thought  if  a  sc aid  should  be  caused  by  boiling  water
to  remove  disease?  Yet  there  is  no  difference  between' this  and
a  blister  made  by  flies.  I  have  witnessed  many  instances  wh«  re
great  distress  and  very  bad  effects  have  been  caused  by  the  use
of  blisters;  and  believe  I  can  truly  say,  that  I  never  knew  i  ;v
benefit  derived  from  their  use.  It  very  frequently  causes  sii  n>
guary,  when  the  attempted  remedy  becomes  much  worse  than
the  disease.

In  support  of  my  opinions  on  the  subject,  I  will  give  the  foL
lowing  extract  from  the  writings  of  Dr.  Hillary,  an  eminent
physician  of  London.

"I  have  long  "observed  that  blisters  are  too  frequently  and.
too  often  improperly  used,  as  they  are  now  so  much  in  fashion.
It  is  very  probable,  that  we  have  no  one  remedy,  in  all  the  Ma-
teria Medica,  that  i3  so  frequently,  and  so  often  improperly  ap-
plied, not  only  in  too  many  cases  where  they  cannot  possibly
give  any  relief,  but  too  often  where  they  must  unavoidably  in-
crease the  very  evil  which  they  are  intended  to  remove  or  re?
lieve.  How  often  do  we  see  them  applied,  and  sometimes,
several  of  them,  by  pretended  dabblers  in  physic,  not  only  when
there  are  no  indications  for  applying  them,  but  where  the  true
■j&dicatiens  are  against  their  amplication;  as,  ia  the  beginning


II  NV,W  OUiDE  TO  HEALTH;

of  most  fevers,  and  especially,  those  of  the  inflammatoty  and  of
the  putrid  kind,  where^  in  the  first,  Uie  srimulpus  of  the  icjid

if  the  cantitariiles,  which  pass  into  the  blood,  must  una-
voidably increase  Loth  the  stimulous  mid  the  momentum  o     life

,  which  were  too  great  before,  and  so  render  the  fevei  in-
flammatory, and  all  its  symptoms  wo

And  it  is  well  known  that  he  Cantharides  cent;  in  a  great
quantity  of  alkalinesemi-vol:  tile  s  1  s,  wh  <  h  ; .  .ss  n  o  he  I  i<  od,
though  they  are  applh  J  ex  <  rnally;  a  nd  att<  nuate,  diss<  I

:  and  increase  its  putrefi  ction,  which  is.  also  coni  irried  hy
i       Ik  line  acrimony  which  they  produce  in  the  urine,  with
the  heat  and  stranguary  which  it  gives  to  the  urinary  pass;  ge.?8


Steaming  is  a  very  important  br:  nch  of  my  system  ef  prac-
tice, which  would  in  many  cases  without  b,be  insurucieu'i  to
ehecl  ci  re.  It  is<  f  gre;  I  in  porl  rue  m  manv  cist  set  hsid
•red  by  the  medical  f-oulty  .s  desperate;  nd  tiny  would  e  so
under  my  mode  of  tie  'men!,  if  i  w  s  not  for  this  mannei  of
applying  heat  to  the  body,  for  die  purpose  of  reenim  ling  the
system  md  aiding  nature  in  restoring  he  1th.  I  had  but  lnile
knowledge  of  medicine,  when  through  ftecessify,  J  discovered
the  use  of  steaming,  to  add  bet  or  life  to  the  decaying  spark,
and  vithi:  Iw  s  enabled,  by  administering  such  vegetable  pre-
P  r  'ions  as  I  then  had  a  knowledge  of,  to  effect  a  cure  in  cases
where  'he  regal  r  practitioners  had  given  them  over.

in  all  c  ses  wiiere  the  he  t  of  the  body  is  so  far  exhausted  as
not  to'le  rekindled  by  using  the  medicine,  and  being  shielded
from  the  surrounding  air  by  a  blanket,  or  being  in  bed,  and
chills  of  stupor  attend* the  patient, then  applied  he  tby  steaming
bee  m  s  irrdispensibly  necessary;  and  heat  caused  by  ste?.m,  in
the  manner  that  I  use  it,  is  more  nnur  1  in  producing  perspira-
tion, than  any  diy  heat  that  can  be  applied  to  the  body  in  i  .  y

0  her  manner,  which  will  only  serve  to  dry  tire  air  and  prevent
perspira  ion  in  many  c;  ses  of  disease,  where  a  steam  1  y  water
o<  vinegar  would  promote  it.  and  add  a  natural  warmth  to  the
body,  and  thereby  increase  the  life  and  motion,  which  has  lain
silent  in  consequence  of  the  cold.

Dr.  Jennings  has  contrived  a  plan  to  apply  heal  to  the  body

1  v  a  dry  vapour,  caused  by  burning  spirit,  which  he  calls  a  va-


Oil,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN".  1$

vour  bath,  the  idea  of  wn  ch  w  is,  1  have  no  ken  from

he  ling  of  my  steaming  to  raise  the  heat  of  the  body.  It  m  y
answer  in  some  cases  and  stages  of  disease*;  hut  in  ;.  settled  .<.-
ver  and  other  causes  where  mere  is  a  dry  inii. -11,111  a!  <  d  on  the
surface  oi'  the  body,  it  will  not  answer  any  pood  purpose,  -.-nd  I
think  would  he  dangerous,  without  the  use  of  my  medicine  to
first  raise  a  free  perspiration;  for  when  the  surface  of  the  body
is  dry  the  patient  cannot  bear  it,  as  it  will  crowd  to  the  head  nil
cause  distress,  the  same  as  is  produced  by  burning-  charcoal,  or
from  hot  stoves  in  a  tight  room,  and  will  bring  on  a  difficulty  m
breathing,  which  is  not  the  case  in  steaming  in  my  way.  '1  his  ma-
chine can  only  be  used  iri  bed,  where  the  v:  pourc  nnot  1  e  applied
t;j  the  body  equally  at  the  same  time,  therefoie  is  no  better  th<  n
a  hot  dry  stone  put  on  each  side  and  to  the  feet  of  the  p  .vient,  for
he  can  turn  himself  and  get  heat  from  them  as  well  as  to  have  ;<ll
the  trouble  of  burning  spirit  and  turning  to  the  vapour  of  ir,  to
get  warm  by  this  dry  heat.  When  the  patient  stands  over  a
steam  raised  by  putting  a  hot  stone  in  water,  which  gives  i  more
equal  heat  all  over  the  body  than  can  be  clone  in  any  other  in  in-
ner, it  can  be  raised  higher,  and  may  be  tempered  at  pie.  sure  by
wetting  the  face  and  stomach  with  cold  water  as  occasion  re-
quires.

The  method  adopted  by  me,  and  which  has  always  answered
the  desired  object,  is  as  follows — Take  several  stones  of  dil
erit  sizes  and  put  them  in  the  fire  till  red  hot,  then  take  the  small-
est first,  and  put  one  of  them  into  a  pan  or  kettle  of  hot  v\  tier,
with  the  stone  about  half  immersed — the  patient  must  1  e  i  n->
dressed  and  a  blanket  put  around  him  so  as  to  shield  his  whole
body  from  the  air,  and  then  place  him  over  the  stc;  m.  Change
the  stones  as  often  as  they  grow  cool,  so  as  to  keep  up  a  lively
steam,  and  keep  them  over  it;  if  they  are  faint,  throw  a  little  cold
water  on  the  face  and  stomach,,  which  will  let  down  the  outward
heat  and  restore  the  strength — after  ihey  have  been  over  the
m  long  enough,  which  will  generally  he  about  15  or  20
minutes,  they  must  be  washed,  all  over  with  cold  water  or  spirits
and  be  put  in  bed,  or  may  be  dressed,  as  the  circumstances  of  I  he
case  shall  permit.  Before  they  are  placed  over  the  steam,  give
a  dose  of  No.  2  and  3,  or  composition,  to  raise  the  inward  heat.
When  the  patient  is  too  weak  to  stand  over  the  steam,  it  may
be  done  in  bed,  by  heating  three  stones  and  put  them  in  water
till  done  hissing,  then  wrap  them  in  a  number  of  thicknesses  of
cloths  wet  with  water,  and  put  one  on  each  side  and  one  at  the


2#  mm  our»E  to  ht-atth;

foot,  occasionally  wetting  the  face  and  stomach  with  eokl  water,
when

.  other  vh:ui  may  be  contrived  in  steaming,  which  would
ItoakeJess  troul  lea  -.1  be  mi  re  I  itothe patient, <

where  they  are  unal  le  to  stand  over  the, steam.  An  (  pen  work-
ed chair  may  be  made,  in  which  th<  v  ii  ighl  si1  and  be  stean  ed
very  convenient!^;  ora  settee  might  be  made  in  the'saraemai  ner
in  which  they  might  be  laid  and  covered  wjlh  blankets  so  as  to
shield    then  frn     the  rig  air.     Such  contrivances  as

tl  ese  would  be  vei  nl  in  cas<  s  where  lh<  |  atienl  would

have  to  be  carried  through  acpi  rse  oj  medii  ii  e  and  steamed  a
s  is  frequently  necessi  ry,  particularly  in  conk-
plaints  thai  een  of  long  standing.

As  !  sntly  mentioned  a  regular  course  of  medicine.,

I  will  In  is  meant  by  it,  and  the  most  proper  way

in  which  if  is  performed.  Firstly,  give  No.  2  and  3,  or  compo-
■'  tea-spoonfi  l<  "  fo.  6 ;  then  ste»m,  and  when  in
bed  repeat  it,  ad  ling  No.  1,  which  will  cle  nse  thestomacl  and
assisi  in  km]  ing  up  a  inspiration ;  when  this  has  done  op<  I  it-
ing,  give  an  injection  ra  de  with   the  licles.     Where

there  arc  symptoms  of  nervous  affection,  or  sp  sins,  put  half  a
■spoonful  of  the  nerve  powder  into  each  dose  given,  and  into
the  injection.  In  violent  cases,  where  immediate  relief  is  need-
ed, Nos.  1 ,  2,  3,  and  6,  may  be  given  together.  Injections  may
be  administered  at  all  times  and  in  all  cases  of  disease  to  advan-
tage; it  ran  never  do  harm,  and  in  many  eases,  they  are  indis-
pensably necessary,  especi  dly  where  there  is  canker  and  inflan>
nation  in  the  bowels,  and  there  is  danger  of  mortification,  in
which  case,  add  a  tea-spooofur  of  No.  G.  In  cases  of  this  kind.,
the  injection  should  be  given  first,  or  at  the  same  time  of  giv-
ing the  composition,  or  No.  3.

The  use  of  steaming  is  good  in  preventing  sickness  as  well
•as  curing  if.  When  a  person  has  been  exposed  to  the  cold,  and
is  threatened  with  disease,  it  may  be  prevented,  and  long  sick-
■css  and  expense  saved  by  a  very  little  trouble,  by  standing  over
a  steam  and  following  the  directions  before  given,  till  the  cold
is  thoroughly  thrown  off  nd  a  lively  perspiration  takes  place;
then  go  to  bed,  faking  the  slone  from  the  kettle,  and  wrap  ii  in
wet  cloths  and  pu1  it  to  the  feet      Thig  may  ^  ^^  withont  l))e

medicine  when  it  cannot  be  had;  but  is  much  better  to  takt

something  to  raise  the  inward  heat  at  the  same  time.  A  tea
.made  of  mayweed  or  summer-savory,  or  ginger  and  hot  water
sweetened,  may  be  given,  or  any  thing  that  re  warning,     Thfe


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN*  -2i

3  is  for  the  poor  and  those  who  have  not  a  knowledge  of
the  medicine;  nncl  will  many  times  save  them  much  trouble
end  long  sickness.

.  Steaming  is  of  the  utmost  importance  in  cases  of  suspended
animation  j  such  as  drowned  persons;  in  which  case,  place  the
body  over  a  moderate  steam,  shielded  by  a  blanket  from  the
weight  of  the  external  air,  ;>nd  ratifying  the  air  immediately
around  them  with  the  steam.  Four  into  the  month  seme  of  the
tincture  of  'Spa.  1,  2,  and  6;  and  if  there  is  any  infernal  heat
remaining)  there  will  be  muscul:  r  motion  about  the  eyes  and  in
the  extremities.  l(  this  symptom  appears,  repeal  the  dose  sev-
eral times,  and  renew  the  ho',  stones,  raising  the  heat  by  degre  <  s;
if  the  outward  heat  is  raised  loo  sudden,  so  as  to  balance  the
inward,  you  will  fail  of  the  desired  object,  even  after  life  appears.
This  is  the  only  danger  of  any  difficulty  taking  place — always
bear  in  mind  to  keep  the  fountain  above  the  stream,  or  the  in-
ward heat  above  the  outward,  and  all  will  be  safe.  After  life  is
restored,  put  them  in  bed  and  keep  the  perspiration  free  for
twelve  hours,  by  hot  stones  wrapped  in  cloths  wet  with  water,
and  occasionally  giving  the  tincture  as  before  mentioned,  when
the  coldness  and  obstructions  are  thrown  off',  and  the  patient
will  be  in  the  enjoyment  of  his  natural  strength.  Eeware  of
bleeding  or  blowing  in  the  mouth  with  a  bellows,  as  either  will
generally  prove  fatal.

In  many  cases  of  spotted  fever,  steaming  is  as  necessary  r  sin
drowned  persons;  such  as  when  they  fall  ■  pparentlydead;  then
the  same  treatment  is  necessary  to  lighten  die  surrounding  air
till  you  can  raise  the  inward  heat  so  as  to  get  the  determining
power  to  the  surf;  ce.  Begin  with  a  small  stone  and  as  life  :•
increase  the  steam  is  the  patient  can  bear  it;  if  the  distress  is
it,  give  mcie  hot  medicine  inside,  and  as  soon  as  an  equili-
brium takes  place  the  pain  will  cense.  In  all  cases  of  this  kind
the  difficulty  cannot  be  removed  without  applied  heat  t<  (he
body,  and  is  more  natural  by  steam  than  by  any  other  rh<

can  be  made  use  of  fn  cases  of  longest;  nding,  where  the
j)  fni  has  been  run  down  with  mercury  and  left  in  a  cold  i  d
obstructed  state,  liable  to  rheumatism  and  ether  similar  com-
p':i;irs,  they  cannot  becured  with  medicine  without  applied  heat
by  ste  m.as  nothing  will  remove  mercury  bu1  heat.
*  When  a  patient  is  carried  through  a  course  of  my  o  edicina
and  ste  med,  who  has  been  long  under  mercurial   tre:   rm1;

while  under  the  opera  ion  of  the  steam,  when  the  he>"i    is  a$
the  highest,  the  face  will  swell,  in  consei  the  poisonous


ft  JEW  GUIDE  TO  HE4LTJ*;

vapour  feeing  c(  ndensed  by  the  air,  Hie  f  ce  being  open  (•  if.**
To  relieve  this,  put  them  in  bed,  and  taken  hot  stoni  v.  pped
in  seven  1  thicknesses  of  cloth  wet  with  Water,  pouring  on  a  lit-
He  vinegar,  and  malting  a  lively  ste  in;  put  it  in  the  bed  and
cover  the  head  with  the'  clothes  i  nd  let  (hem  1  reatl  e  th<  Bteartf
as  ho  as  cat!  be  borne*  until  the  sweat  covers  the  swelled  part
This  will  in  about  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  throw  out  thepoi-
*  n  i  nd  the  swelling  will  abate.  This  method  also  is  of  great
service  in  agues  and  ;<  e  h  Che  caused  by  cold;  and  ninny  other
c  ses  of  obstruction  from  the  same  cause,  especially  young
children  stuffed  on  the  lungs.

To  steam  small  children,  the  best  wry  is  to  let  them  sit  in
the  1.  pof  a  pet-sen;  covering  both  with  "a  blanket  and  set  over
the  steam,  pouring  a  little  vinegar  on" .the  stone;  or  it.may  b«
done  in  bed  with     hot  stone,  wrapped  in  cloths  wet  with  w.'ter,
putting  on  a  little  vinegar,  and  covering  them  with   the  bed-
Clot  eslaid  loosely  over  them;  but  in   this  way  you  cannot  ex-
ercise bo  good  judgment  in  tempering  the  steam,  as  when  vou
are  steanwd  wi»h  them,     U  the  child  appears  languid  and  faini
toe  outward  he  t  is  high  enough;  put  a  Little  fold  water  on  the
i  ce  or  breast,  which  will  restore  the  strength,  then" rub  them  in
a  cloth  wet  with  vinegar,   spirit  or  cold   water,  put  on  clean
elopes,  and  put  them  in  bed,  or  let  them  set  up,  as  their  strength
v.  i    permit.     This  is  safe  in  all  cases  of  cold  and    obstructed
perspiration      It  ought  always  to  be  borne  strongly  in  mind,  t«
give  achild  drink  often,  when  under  the  operation  of  medicine
or  while  steaming;  if  this  is  not  done  they  will  suffer  mud,.  »
cannot  ask  for  it.
In  all  cases  of  falls   or  bruises,  steaming  is  almost  inf  llible;
and   is  much  better  than  bleeding,  as  is  the  common   pracl
which  tends  <o  destroy  the  life  instead  of  promoting  it       If  ..he
person  is  not  able  to  stand  over  the  steam,  it   must  be  done  ill
bed,  rS  has  been  described.     (Jive  the  hottest  medicine  ,„side
Ui     v  u  have,  and  keep  the  perspiration  free  till  the  pain  and
soreness  abates,  and  the  strength  will  be  soon  restored      If  the
advnn  -ges  of  this  mode  of  treatment  were  generally  knew;,'.
bleeding  m  such  e  ses,  or  any  other,  to  remove  disease,  wo
never  he  resorted  to  by  the  wise  and  prudent

The  use  of  stemming  is  to  apply  heat  to  the  body  where  it  k

tt T^r\?™f  .obrt~««»c«u»id  by  cold,  winch    he
•pernt,    ns  of  ,  )e  nl0f|lcIno  W!|]  nof  r?)jse  ^^

Z£*uZ  T '  Hi ihv  body  becomes  the**y '--  »&  >£

** '  State*f  faeal^  lt  n»wt  by  art  be  raised  a,  MOCli  above


dR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  2&

-vta  it  his  been  below;  and  tins  must  be  repeated  until  the  di-
gestive powers  are  restored,  sufficient  to  hold  the  heat  by  di-
gesting the  food,  then  the  health  of  the  patient  will  be  restored
by  eating  and  drinking  such  tilings  as  the  appetite  sh -ill  require.
In  this  way  the  medicine  removes  disease,  and  food,  by  beino'
properly  digested,  supports  nature  and  continues  that  heat  oa
which  life  depends.

Some  who  practice  according  to  my  system  boast  of  carrying
fheir  patients  through  in  a  shorter  time  without  the  trouble  of
steiming;  this  is  easily  accounted  for;  stemming  is  tiie  most  la-
borious part  of  the  practice  for  those  who  attend  upon  the  sick*
and  the  most  useful  to  the  patient;  is  one  operation  of  steam-
ing will  be  more  effectual  in  removing  diseise,  than  four  courses
without  it;  and  to  omit  it  is  throwing  the  1  bor  upon  the  pa-
tient, with  the  expense  of  three  or  four  operations  more  of  the
medicine  th  in  would  be  needed,  did  the  person  who  attend*  *!•
his  duty  faithfully.


ON  giving  poison  as  medicine.

The  practice  of  giving  poison  s  medicine,  which  is  so  com--
men  among  the  medical  faculty  at  the  present  day,  is  of  the  ut-
most importance  to  the  public;  and  is  a  subject  that  I  wish  te
bring  home  to  the  serious  consideration  of  the  whole  body  of
the  people  of  this  country,  and  enforce  in  the  strongest  man-
He*  on  their  minds  the  pernicious  consequences  that  have  hap-
pened, and  are  daily  taking  place  by  reason  of  giving  mercury,
arsenic,  nitre,  opium  and  other  deadly  poisons  to  cure  disease.
It  is  admitted  by  those  who  make  use  of  these  things,  that  the
introducing  them  into  the  system  is  very  dangerous  and  that
they  often  prove  fatal.  During  thirty  year's  practice,  I  have
had  opportunity  to  gain  much  experience  on  this  subject,  and
am  ready  to  declare  that  I  am  perfectly  and  decidedly  convinc-
ed, beyond  all  doubt,  that  there  canbeno  possible  good  derived
from  using,  in  any  manner  or  form  whatever,  those  poisons;  but
on  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  hurt  done.  More
than  nine  tenths  of  the  chronic  c^ses  that  have  come  under  my
care,  have  been  such  as  had  been  run  down  with  some  one  or
the  whole  of  the  above  named  medical  poisons;  and  the  great-
est difficulty  I  have  had  to  encounter  in  removing  the  com-
jflaiate  which  my  patient*;  labored  a»der,  has  been  t»  dear  *he>


NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH;

:\.  of  mercury,  nitre,  or  opium,and  bring  them  back  (o  tLr
ie  st.ile  they  were  in  before  t  ■kin;:  them,      it  is  ;i   very  easy
thing  to  get  them  into  the  system,  but  very  hud  to  get  them
out  again.

Those  who  make  u?c  of  these  things  as  medicine,  seem  to
cloak  the  administering  them  under  the  specious  pretence  of
great  skill  and  art  in  preparing  :  nd  using  them;  but  this  kind  of
covering  will  not  blind  the  people,  if  they  would  examine  it  and
think  for  themselves,  inste  d  of  believing  that  every  thing  said
cr  done  by  a  learned  m  n  must  be  right ;  for  poison  given  to  the
fiick  by  '  person  of  thegreutesi  skill,  will  have  exactly  thesame
uifect  as  it  would  if  given  by  a  fool. — The  fact  is,  the  operation
of  it  is  diametrically  opposed  to  nature,  and  every  particle  of  it,
that  isl  ken  into  the  system,  will  strengthen  the  powers  of  the
enemy  to  health,  ff  there  should  be  doubts  in  the  minds  of  any
one  of  he  truth  of  wh  t  I  havesaid  concerning  the  articles  I
hive  u'm(\l  being  poisonous  and  destructive  to  the  constitution
and  health, of  man,  I  will  refer  them  to  the  works  published  by
those  who  recommend  their  use;  where  they  will  find  evidence
enough  to  §  tisfy  the  most  credulous,  of  the  di  ngerous  conse-
quences nd  fatal  effects,  oftgiving  them  as  medicine.  To  remove
all  doub  s  of  their  being  poison  [will  make  a  few  extracts  from
stand  rd  medical  works,  <s;!  imony  that  can  be  given

in  thee  se.

"Muriate  of  Mercury,  is  one  >f  the  most  violent  poisons
witli  which  we  ire  icqu  in  ed.  Externally  it  acts  is  an  escha-
rotic  or  a  caustic ;  md  in  solu  ion,  il  is  used  for  destroying  funr
go-  is  flrsli,  and  for  removing  hepatic  eruptions;  but  even  ex ter-
nally,  it  'mist  be  used  vi  h  ret  greal  caution."  Yet,  reader,
this  >e.tive  poison  is  used  s  medicine, and  by  beinj.r  prepared
in  :  di  'erent  fo-m,  ind  a  new  name  [riven  it,  (calomel.)  its  good
qualities  ares  id  to  be  in.  du  Lie,  and  it  is  a  certiin  cure  for
almos'  every  d;s"  se.

"Oral  of  Arsenic,  is  one  of  the  most  sudden  and  \
poisons  we  ire  ■■  [u  in  1  with.  In  mines,  it  causes  the  de-
struction of  numbers  of  those  who  exolore  them;  and  it  is  fre-
quently 'he  instrument  bv  which  victims  are  sacrificed,  either  by
the  'i  n  I  of  wickedness  or  imprudence.  The  fumes  of  arsenic
are  so  deleterious  to  the  lungs,  that  the  artist  ought  to  be  on  his
guard  to  prevent  their  ex'-  ktion  bv  the  mouth;  for  if  they  be
mixed  and  sw  dlowe  !  .  effects  will  take  place  simi-

lar to  'hose  whirli  follow  il  i  introduction  into  the  stdmach  in  a
^line.  sfctc:  namely,  a  sensation  of  a  piercing,  gnawing,  and


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN",  &

Burning  kind,  accompanied  with  an  acute  pain  in  the  stomach
and  intestines,  which  last  are  violently  contorted ;  convulsive
Vomiting;  insatiable  thirst,  from  the  parched  and  rough  state  of
the  tongue  and  throat:  hiccough,  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  a
deadly  oppression  of  the  breast,  succeed  next;  the  matter  eject-
ed by  the  mouth  as  well  as  the  stools,  exhibit  a  black,  fceted,  i  nd
putrid  appearance;  at  length  with  the  mortification  of  the  bow-
els, the  pain  subsides,  and  death  terminates  the  sufferings  of  the
patient."  "When  the  quantity  is  so  very  small  as  not  to  prove
fetal,  tremors,  paralysis  and  lingering  hectics  succeed."

Notwithstanding  tins  terrible  description  of  the  fatal  effects
of  this  article,  the  author  says,  "though  the  most  violent  of  min-
eral poisons,  arsenic,  according  to  Murray,  equals,  when  properly
administered,  the  first  medicines  in  the  class  of  tonics."  "Of
all  the  diseases,  (siys  Dr.  Duncan,)  in  which. white  oxyd  of
arsenic  has  been  used  internally,  there  is  none  in  which  ';  '  >s
been  so  frequently  and  so  successfully  employed,  ;3  in  the  euro
of  interm  ttent  fevers.  We  have  now  the  most  satisfactory  in-
formation concerning  this  article,  in  1  he  Medical  Reports,  of
the  effects  of  arsenic  in  the  cure  of  agues,  remitting  fever,  d
periodic  d  headaches,  by  Dr.  Fowler  of  Stafford."  "Such  e
the  powers  of  this  medicine,  that  two  grains  of  it  are  often  suf-
ficient  to  cure  an  intermittent  that  has  continued  forweek^!,r
:'  Vs  an  external  remedy,  arsenic  h  s  long  been  known  ;  s  the
basis  of  the  celebrated  cancer  powders :  Arsenic  has  ever  l  eeh
applied  in  substance,  sprinkled  upon  'he  ulcer:  but  t'us  mode
of  using  it  is  exceeding'y  p  iniful  and  extremely  dangerous. —
There  have  been  f  :tal  effects  produced  from  its  absorption."  "No
other  esclnroiic  possesses  equal  powers  in  cancerous  affectioi  sf
«t  not  unfrequentry  amends  the  discharge,  causes  the  sore  to
con'ric*  in  size,  nd  cases  have  been  related  of  its  Irving
effected  a  cure."  But,  says  Dr.  Wilfich,  "we  °ro,  on  the  com
bined  tes'imony  of  many  medical  pr  cHti(  ners,  conspicuous  for
their  profession  d  ze  d  and  integrity,  irresistibly,  induced  to  de-
clare our  opinion,  it  least,  against  the  internal  use  of  this  active
and  dangerous  medicine."

F  shall  leave  it  to  the  reader  to  reconcile,  if  he  can,  the  in-
consistencies and  absurdities  of  the  above  statements,  of  'he
effects  of  ratsbane;  and  ask  himself  the  question,  whether  it
can  be  possible  for  an  article,  the  use  of  which  is  attended  with
such  consequences,  en  be  in  any  shape  or  form,  proper  to  be
used  is  medicine;  yet,  it  is  a  well  known  fact,  that  th's  poison
?9  in  constant  use  among  the  faculty,  and  form3  the  principal  h>


fcd  2JEW  GUIDE  T©  WEALTH;

jredient  in  most  of  those  nostrums  sold  throughout  theeeuntijj-'j
under  the  names  of  drops,  powders,  washes,  balsams,  &c.  <  iid
there  can  be  no  doubt,  that  thousands  either  die,  or  become
miserable  invalids  in  consequence.

"Antimony,  in  the  modern  nomenclature,  is  the  name  given
ft)  a  peculiar  metal.     The  emfimoni.i  metal  is  a  medicine  of  the
greatest  power  of  any  known  strbs%nce;  a  quantity  too  minute
to  be  sensible  in  the  most  dehcate  balance,  is  capable  of  pro-
ducing- violent  effects,  if  taken  dissolved  or  in  a  soluable  sfa»e."
''Snlpbureted  antimony  was  employed  by  the  ancienis  in  Col
fyria,  against  inflammation  of  the  eyes,  and  for  staining  the  eye-
brows black.     Its  intern;  1   use  does   not  seem  to  have  been
established   till  ihe  end  of  the  fifteenth   century;  ;  nd  even  at
that  time  it  was  by  many  looked  upon  as  poisonous."     "All  the
metalic  preparations  are  uncertain,  as  it  entirely  depends  on  the
state  of  the  stomach,   whether  they  have  no  action  at   all,  or-
operate   with  dangerous   violence.1'     "The  principal   general
medicinal  application  of  antimony  has  been  for  the  use  of  febrile
affections."     "In  the  latter  stage  of  fever,  where  debility   pie-
vails,  its  use  is  inadmissible."     Of  the  propriety  of  using  this
metal   as  medicine,  I  shall  leave  it  to  the  reader  to  judge  for
himself.

"Nitre.  Salt-petre.  This  salt,  consisling  of  nitric  acid  and
potash,  is  found  ready  formed  on  the  surf  :ee  of  the  soil  in  warm
climates."  "Purified  nitre  i;?  prescribed  with  advantage  in
numerous  disorders.  Its  virtues  ;  re  il.ose  of  a  refrigerent  tnd
diuretic.  It.  is  usually  given  in  doses  from  two  or  three  grains  to
a  scruple,  being  a  very  cooling  and  resolvent  medicine,  which  by
relaxing  the  spasmodic  rigidity  or  the  vessels,  promotes  not  only
the  secretion  of  urine,  but  at  the  s 'me  time  insensible  perspira-
tion, in  febrile  disorders;  while  it  allays  thirst  and  abates  heat;
though  in  malignant  cases  m  which  the  pulse  is  low,  and  the
p-tient's  strength  exhausted,  it  produces  contrary  effects." —
'/This  powerful  salt,  when  inadvertently  Ir.ken  in  too  large  quan-
tities, is  one  of  the  most  fftal  poisons."  "For  some  interest-
ing observations  relative  to  the  deleterious  properties  of  salt-
petre,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Dr.  Mitchell's  letter  to  Dr.
Priestly."

T  have  found  from  a  series  of  practical  experiment,  for  many
years,  that  salt-petre  has  the  most  certain  and  deadly  effects
upon  *he  human  system,  of  any  drug  that  is  used  as  medicine.
Although  the  effects  produced  by  it  are  not  so  immediately
fatal  as  many  ethers,  yet  its  wfeole  tendency  is  hs  counteract  the


Oft,  BOTANIC  FAMILY'  PI'lVfelCUN,  ,2J

principles  of  life  and  destroy  the  operation  of  nature.  Expo*
rience  has  taught  me  that  it  is  the  most  powerful  enemy  to  health,
and  tint  it  is  the  mos;  difficult  opponent  to  encounter,  with  anj
degree  of  success,  ihat  1  have  ever  met  with.  Being  in  its
nature  cold,  there  cannot  be  any  other  effects  produced  by  it,
than  to  increase  ths  power  of  that  enemy  of  heat,  and  to  lessen
itsnecess'ry  influence.

"Opium,  when  ken  into  the  stomach,  to  such  an  extent,  as
to  have  any  sensible  effect,  gives  rise  to  a  pleasant  serenity  of  the
mind,  in  general  proceeding  to  a  certain  degree  of  languorand
drowsiness."  "It  excites  lhirst,  and  renders  the  mouth  dry
and  p  (relied.'"  "Taken  into  the  stomach  in  n  larger  dose,  give?
rise  vo  confusion  of  the  head  and  vertigo.  The  powers  of  all
stimulating  causes  of  miking  impressions  on  the  body  are
diminished;  and  even  at  times  and  in  situations  when  a  person
would  naturally  be  awake;  sleep  is  irresistibly  induced.  In  still
larger  doses,  it  acrs  in  the  same  manner  as  the  narcotic  poisons,
'giving  rise  to  vertigo,  headache,  tremors,  delirium  and  convul-
sion-;; md  the3e  terminating  io  a  state  of  stupor,  from  which
the  person  cannot  be  roused.  This  stupor  is  accompanied  with
slowness  of  the  pulse,  an i  with  stertor  in  breathing,  md  'he
scene  is  terminated  in  death,  attended  wiih  the  same  appear-
ances as  take.pl  vce  in  an  apoplexy."  "In  intermittents  it  is  said
to  hive  been  used  with  good  effect.'1  "It  is  often  of  very  great
Service  in  fevers  of  the  typhoid  type."  "In  small  pox,  when  the
Convulsions  before  eruption  ire  frequent  and  considerable,  opium
is  liberally  used."  "In  cholera  and  pyrosis,  it  is  almost  the
©nly  thing  trusted  to."  "The  administration  of  opium  to  the
U'i  iccustomed,  is  sometimes  very  difficult.  The  requisite  quan-
tity of  opium  is  wonderfully  different  in  different  persons,  and
in  different  states  of  the  same  person.  A  quarter  of  a  grain  will,
ta  one  ad  lit,  produce  effects  which  ten  times  the  quantity  will
not  lo  in  another.  TIig  lowest  fatal  dose  to  the  unaccustomed,
as  mentioned  by  authors,  see  us  to  he  four  grains;  but  a  danger-
rae  is  so  apt  tj  puke,  that  it  has  seldom  time  to  occasion
i."

From  the  above  extracts  if  will  readily  he  seen,  that  the  us&
of  opium  is  medicine  is  very  dangerous,  at  least,  if  not  destruc-
tive fo  health;  its  advocales,  it  will  be  observed,  do  not  pretend
that  it  will  cure  any  disorder,  but  is  used  as  a  palliative  for  the
purpose  of  eisingpain,  by  destroying  sensibility.  Pain  is  caused
bv  disease,  and  there  cm  be  no  other  way  fo  relieve  if  but  by
respoving  the  cause.     Sleep  produced  by  opium  is  unnaturaK


g8  NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH;

and  affords  no  reliei'  to  the  patient,  being  nothing  more  than  a
suspension  of  his  senses;  and  il  might  with  as  much  propriety
be  said,  thai  a  s;ate  of  delirium  is  bei  eficit  J,  for  a  person  in  that
situation  :s  not  sensible  of  pain.  The  fact  is,  opium  is  a  poi-
son, and  when  taken  into  ;!i.:  system)  produces  no  other  ci'i-ct
than  to  strengthen  t;  e  power  of  tlie  *  nemy  to  health,  b)  dead-
ening the  sens. I  ie  org  ns  of  the  stomach  and  intestines,  and
preventing  ti^em  from  performing  'heir  iuMur.;l  functions  so  im-
portant to  the  maintaining  of  health  and  life.  In  all  the  cases
that  have  come  within  my  knowledge,  where  ihe  patient  has
been  long  in  the  habit  of  taking  opium,  1  have  found  it  almost
impossible,  after  removing  the  disease  to  restore  the  digestive
powers  of  the  stomach.

I  hive  made  the  foregoing  extracts  on  the  subject  of  poisons,
for  the  purpose  of  giving  a  more  pi  lin  and  simple  view  of  the
pernicious  consequences  caused  by  their  being  given  as  medi-
cine, than  I  could  do  in  any  other  manner.  In  this  short
address  it  is  impossible  to  do  that,  justice  to  the  subject  that  I
could  wish,  and  winch  its  importance  demands;  but  I   am  not

-wiuiuui  nope,  Trw  vtmi  is  nere  given  will  s^nsry  every  candic?
person  who  reads  it,  of  the  truth  of  those  principles  which  it  has
been  at  all  times  my  endeavor  to  inculcate,  for  the  benefit  of
mankind,  and  convince  them,  that  what  has  a  tendency  to  de-
stroy life;,  can  never  be  useful  in  restoring  health.

In  support  of  what  has  been  before  said  on  the  use  of  mer-
twry,  I  will  here  give  a  short  extract  from  Dl  Mann's  Medical
Sketches,  which  is  but  a  trifle  in  comparison  with  the  many  cases
that  he  has  given  of  the  fatal  effects  of  ihat  poison.  "Calomel
Should  never  be  administered,  unless  the  patient  is  so  situated
that  the  skin  may  be  preserved  in  its  natural  warmth.  If  this
is  nOt  attended  1o  during  its  administration,  either  the  bowels
or  the  glands  of  the  mouth  suffered.  To  one  of  these  parts
ifc frequently  directed  all  its  stimulating  powers,  nnd  induced  on
oneor  1  he  other  high  degrees  of  inflammation,  which  terminated
in  mortification  of  the  intestines,  or  destruction  of  not  only  the
muscles,  but  the  bones  of  Ihe  faoe.

"Four  cases  under  these  formidable  effects  of  mercuric!  ptya-
lism,  were  admitted  into  the  general  hospital  at  Lewistownj
three  of  whom  died  with  their  jaws  and  faces  dreadfully  muti-
lated. The  fourth  recovered  with  the  loss  of  the  inferior  max-
illa on  one  side,  and  the  teeth  on  the  other.  He  lived  n  most
wretched  life,  deformed  in  his  features,  (when  1  lasf  saw  thp
patient,)  incapable  of  taking  food,  except  through  a  small
aperture  in  place  of  his  mouth."


OR,  B3TANIC  FAMILY    PHYSICIAN.  fi£

There  arc  several  vegetables  that  grow  common  in  thia  coun-
try, which  are  poisons;  and  in  order  that  the  public  may  be  on
their  guard  against  using  them  as  medicine,  I  will  here  give  a
lis  of  those  within  my  knowledge,  viz:  Garden  Hemlock,
Night-sh  ide,  Apple  Peru,  Poppy,  Henbane,  Poke-root,  Man-
drake-root, Garget-root,  Wild  Parsnip,  Indigo-weed,  Ivy,  Dog-
wood, Tobacco,  and  Laurel.  In  case  either  of  these  articles,
or  iny  other  poison  should  be  taken  through  accident,  or  other-
wise, a  strong  preparation  of  No.  1,  with  a  small  quantity  of  No
2,  will  be  found  to  be  a  sovereign  remedy.

C  ises  frequently  occur  in  the  country  of  being  poisoned  ex*
ternally,  by  some  of  the  above  vegetable  poisons,  in  which  they
swell  very  much.  When  this  happens,  by  taking  No.  2,  or
Composition,  and  washing  with  the  tincture,, or  the  third  prepa*
ration  of  No.  1,  relief  m  ay  be  speedily  obtained.

It  is  a  common  thing  with  the  doctors  to  make 'use  of  many  of
She  above  mentioned  vegetable  poisons  as  medicine;  but  I  would
caution  the  public  against  the  use  of  them  in  any  way  whatever*
as  they  will  hive  no  other  effect  than  to  increase  the  difficulty,
and  injure  the  constitution  of  the  patient;  being  deadly  poisons*
it  is  impossible  'hit  they  can  do  any  good.  No  dumb^Jist  will
ever  touch  them,  and  they  are  correct  judges  of  what  is  good
for  food  or  medicine.

Great  use  is  made  in  many  parts  of  the  country  of  garden
hemlock,  (scicutT,)  and  is  recommended  by  the  doctors  for  many
complaints,  to  be  t  iken  or  applied  externally.  I  have  been  credt-
hly  informed  that  large  quantities  of  this  article  are  collected
and  boiled  down  to  a  thick  substance,  by  the  people  in  the  court,-
try,  and  said  by  them  to  the  doctors  and  apothecaries.  It  is
well  known  to  be  the  greatest  poison  of  any  vegetable,  and  was
used  in  ancient  times  to  put  criminals  to  death;  but  this  w  -s
before  it  was  ever  thought  of,  that  the  same  article  that  would
oause  immediate  death  when  taken  for  that  purpose,  would  :dso
cure  disease.

Mmy  persons  tint  pretend  to  make  use  of  my  system  of  prac
lice,  are  in  the  habit  of  using  some  of  the  vegetables  that  I  have
mentioned  as  poisonous.  I  wish  the  public  to  understand  tha-t
it  is  entirely  unauthorised  by  me  as  there  is  nothing  in  my  practice
or  writing,  but  what  it  directly  opposed  to  every  thing  of  a  poison'
ous  nature  being  used  as  medicine;  for  it  has  always  been  my :  im.
to  ascertain  and  avoid  the  useof  everything  except  such  rti-
cles  as  Iknew  by  ictu  d  experience  to  be  agreeable  to  n~turc,  ~nd
tijso  free  from  all  danger  or  risk  in  using  them  to  cure  diseaen

C  3


$0  NEW  GIH0S  TO  HEALTH;

j  Iierefove  caution  Ihe  public  against  pul  ing  i  ny  confidence  in
uch  as  make  use  of  either  vegetal  le  or  mineral  poison.
There  has  been  sevei  of  death  published  1  y  the  doc-

tors,  which  they  say  were  c"  used  by  those  who  practice  by  raj
aysterh;  and  from  the  description  they  h  ve  given  of  the  treat-
ment, I  have  |ood  reason  to  suppose,  if  there  is  ny  truth  at  all
in  i hem,  were  by  such  as  I  have  before  mentioned,

pretending  to  practice  by  my  system  without  having  a  correct
knowledge  oT  it;  and  who  are  tampering  with  every  kind  of
medicine  h ■•}  can  find;  for  there  is  no  such  treatmenl  of  dia»
ea.se,  is  they  cteacribe,  ever  been  recommended  by  me  or  that
can  be  found  in  my  writings  or  practice.  It  is  very  convenient
for  them,  and  has  become  common,  to  soy,  when  they  h  ppen  lo
be  successful,  it  is  their  own  great  improvements;  bul  when  the
patienl  dies,  it  is  then  laid  to  the  Thomson  system  of  practice.
This  is  unjust,  and  ought  to  be  exposed:  and  I  ask  11  those
who  have  a  wish  to  promote  the  practice,  to  adopt  some  means
ft)  ascertain  the  truth,  and  make  it  public.


THE  DOCTORS  WITHOUT  A  SYSTEM.

Tint  the  doctors  hive  no  systCW;  is  a  fact  pretty  generally
acknowledged  by  themselves;  or  at  least,  they  have  none  !lvt  has
been  fixed  upon  as  ^general  rule  r°r  their  practice.  Almost
every  great  man  among  them  has  had  a  system  of  his  own,
which  has  been  followed  by  their  adherents  till  some  other  one
is  brought  forward  more  fashionable.  This  is  undoubtedly  a
great  evil,  for  it  makes  every  thing  uncertain;  where  it  is  con-
st intly  changing,  there  can  be  no  dependence  on  i  ny  thing,  r<nd
the  practice  must  always  be  experimental ;  no  useful  knowledge
oan  be  obtained  by  the  young  practitioners,  as"  they  will  be  con-
stantly seeking  after  new  theories.  What  should  we  say  of  a
carpenter  who  should  undertake  to  repair  a  building,  without
h  vine  any  rule  to  work  by,  -nd  should,  for  wnnl  of  one,  de-
stroy the  hrlf  of  •11  he  undertook  to  repair.  The  employers
would  soon  lose  all  confidence  in  him,  and  disrmss  bun  s  ^n
ignorant  blockhead.  And  is  it  not  of  infinitely  more  import-
ance for  those  who  undertake  to  repair  the  hum  n  body,  to  have
>ome  correct  rule  to  work  by?  Their  pr  ctice  ;s  founded  on  vis-
ion ry  theories,  which  are  s<  uncertrin  snd  contradictory  that
ft  79  impossible  to  form  any  correct  general  rule  as  a  guide  to  be


Oil,  TUVPANIG  FAMILY  PHYSlfcfAff.  W

depended  upon.  In  order  to  show  the  opinions  of  others  as
well  s  my  own.  f  shall  make  a  few  extracts  from  1  tte  writers
on  fie.  subject.  Speaking  of  the  revolutions  of  medicine?,  one
says:

"We  have  now  noticed  the  principal  revolutions  of  medicine,
and  we  plainly  perceive  that  the   theory  of  medicine,  not  only
has  been,  hut  is  yet,  in  an  unsettled  state,  tint  its  practical  ap?
plication  is  wavering,  fallacious,  and  extremely  pernicious;
taking  a   survey    of  the  various  fortunes  of  the  art,  we
well  s^v,  with  13  icon,  that  medicine  is  a  science  that  h  ;
more  professed  than  labored,  and  yet  more  labored  than  ad
cd,  the  labor  hiving  been  in  a  circle,  but  not  in  progression."

"Theories  are  hut  the  butterflies  of  the  dav — they  !■
a.  while  and  then  expire.     We  can  trace  for  ra  ny  centuries
one  theory  overturning  another,  yet  each  in  its  succession  pro-
mis  ng  itself  immortality."

•'The  application  of  the  rules  which  the  practitionei
down  to  himself  is  direct,  and  in  t heir  choice,  no  one  can  err
with  mipnnUv.  The  ler'St  erroneous  view  leads  to  some  con-
sequence. We  must  remember  the  lives  of  our  fellow  ere  ilures
are  M  siakfi.  For  how  nriny  cruel  and  premature  deaths,  how
m  my  impaired  and  dehiUfated  constitutions  have  paid  f<
folly  of  theories! — follies,  which  ir,;e  proved  almost  always  fa-
cia tin?.     The  study  of  a  system  is  mora  easy  than  an  investi-

■i  of  nature;  and  in  pr  ictice,  it  seems  to  smooth  ever
en  I  v."

"Tn  my  lectures  on  the  art  of  physic,  (  ys  Dr.  Rirt£',)  I  (  h
theoretical  and  pne'ic  1,  I  have  fully  prove  I  that  ne*

cessity  for  that  b  ne  of  the  profession,  conjecture  >r  '•     <tkesis;
and  if  I  were  asked  whether,  if. I  myself  were  d  ingerd  I

wo'ilrl  suffer  .;nv  hypothetical,  however  playsil  le  physic        'o
prescribe  for  my  malady,  my  answer  would  be  no.  no,

unless  T  wished  to  risk  the  loss  of  my  life.     1  could  give  a  re-
m  rk  ible  ins  wee  of  this.

"Speculation   and   hypothesis  r,re  always  rice  witfi

sound  experience  and  successful  practice  "

The  ibove  extracts  evince  the  pernicious  ('fleets  of  false,  U  fi-
ery nd  hypothesis^  which  at  the  present  d  y,  constitute  nearly
the  whole  irt  of  physic.

The  following  just  remarks  are  copied  from  the  writings  of
the  Rev.  !o)in  Wesley.

se  I,  sininh1  medicines  were  more  and  more
disiey  .ided  and  disused;  till,  in  a  course  of  years,  the  gre    "*■


<£  8f£W  OUIDT:  TO  HEALTH;

5>  irt  of  them  were,  forgotten,  at  least  in  the  more  polite  nation?;
In  the  room  of  these,  abundance  of  new  ones  were  introduced,
fey  reasoning,  speculative  men;  and  those  mere  and  more  diffi
cult  to  be  applied,  us  being  more  remote  from  common  ol  serva
tion.  Hence  rules  for  the  application  of  lliese,  and  medical
books  were  immensely  multiplied;  ti-11  at  length  physic  bee:  me
an  ibstruse  science,  quite  out  of  the  reach  cf  ordinary  men.—
Physicians  now  began  to  be  held  in  admiration,  as  persons  who
were  something  more  than  human.  And  profit  attended  their
employ,  as  well  as  honor.  So  that  they  hd  new  two  weighty
reasons  for  keeping  the  bulk  of  mankind  at  a  distance,  that,  they
might  not  pry  into  the  mysteries  of  their  profession.  To  this
end  they  incre;  scd  those  difficulties,  by  design,  which  were  in  a
manner  by  accident.  They  filled  their  writings  with  abundance"
of  technical  terms,  utterly  unintelligible  to  plain  men.

"Those  who  understood  only  how  to  restore  the  sick  to  health,
they  branded  with  the  name  of  Empirics.  They  introduced  in-
to practice  abundance  of  compound  medicine,  consisting  of  so
many  ingredients,  that  it  was  scan  e  possible  for  common  peo-
ple to  know  which  it.  was  that  wrought  a  cure.  Abundance  of
exotics,  neither  the  nature  cr  names  of  which  their  own  coun*
trymen  understood."

"The  history  of  the  art  of  medicine,  in  all  ages,"  says  Dr
Blue,  "so  teems  with  the  fanciful  influence  of  superstitious  ob-
servances, the  imaginary  virtues  of  medicines,  with  nugatory,
d(  Iusive,  inefficient,  and  capricious  pri  ctices,  fallacious  and  so-
phistical reasonings,  as  to  render  it  little  more  than  a  chaos  of
error,  t  tissue  of  deceit  unworthy  of  admission  among  the  use-
ful arts  and  liberal  pursuits  of  mart,0


DESCRIPTION'

or  TUB

m  wmwmtk


m

USED  IN  MY  SYSTEM  OP  PRACTICE,


ly  describing  (hose  vegetables  which  I  make  use  of  in  remov-
ing disease  and   restoring  the  health  of  the  patient,  agreeably
to  my  system  of  practice,  I  shall  mention  those  only  wbi      I
have  found  most  useful  by  a  long  series  of  practical  knowlei
and  in  the  use  of  which  1  have  been  successful  in  effecting  the

•esu-eu  Otfject.  A  great  number  of  articles  in  the  vegel  He
kingdom,  that  are  useful  as  medicine,  might  be  desi  ribed  nd
their  medical  virtues  pointed  out,  if  I  thought  it  would  be  ben-
eficial; in  fact  I  am  confident  there  are  very  few  vegetable  pro-
ductions of  our  country,  that  I  have  not  a  tolerable  good  know-
ledge of,  it  having  been  my  principal  study  for  above  thirty  yearsj
but  to  undertake  to  describe  them  all,  would  be  useless  and  un-
profitable to  my  readers,  and  could  lead  to  no  good  result. —
The  plan  that  I  Inve  adopted  in  describing  such  articles  as  I
have  thought  necessiry  to  mention,  and  giving  directions  how
to  prepare  and  administer  them,  is  to  class  them  under  the  num-
bers which  form  my  system  of  practice;  this  was  thought  to  '  e
the  best  way  to  give  a  correct  and  full  understanding  of  the
whole  subject.  Each  number  is  calculated  to  effect  a  certain
object,  which  is  stited  in  the  heading  to  each  as  they  are  intro-
duced; every  article,  therefore,  that  is  useful  in  promoting  such
object,  will  be  described  as  applicable  to  the  number  under
which  it  is  classed.  The  three  first  are  used  to  remove  disc  sc
andjjhe  others  as  restoratives.  There  are  a  number  of  prepa-
rations and  compounds,  lhat  1  have  made  use  of  and  found  good
in  curing  various  complaints;  the  directions  for  making, there
and  a  description  of  the  articles  of  which  they  are  composed
arc  given  as  far  as  was  deemed  necessary.  The  manner  of  ap-
plying them  will  be  hereafter  more  particularly  stated,  when  I


.  39  WEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH ;

come  to  give  an  account  of  the  manner  of  treating  some  of  the
most  important  cases  of  disease  which  have  come  under  mV
oare.

No.  I. — To  cleanse  the  Stomach,  overpower
the  cold,  and  promote  a  free  perspiration

EMETIC  HEEB. LOBELIA  INFLATA  of  Lin<£US.

In  giving  a  description  of  this  valuable  herb,  I  shall  be  more
particular,  because  it  is  the  most  important  article  m^de  use  of
in  my  system  of  practice,  without  which  it  would  be  incom-
plete, and  the  medical  virtues  of  which  and  the  administering
it  in  curing  disease,  I  claim  as  my  own  discovery.  The  first
knowledge  I  ever  had  of  it,  was  obtained  bv  accident  more
than  forty  ye  :rs  ago;  and  never  had  any  information  whatever
concerning  it,  except  what  I  have  gained  bv  mv  own  experience
.A  great  ded  has  been  said  ol  late  about  this  riant,  both  in  f  -
vor  and  'gainst  its  utility  as  a  medicine;  but  all  that  iho  feculrjt
have  said  or  published  concerning  it,  only  shows  Hieir  ignorance
on  the  subject;  for  there  is  very  little  truth  in  what  they  have
etaied  concerning  its  medical  properties,  except  wherein  they
have  admitted  it  to  be  a  certain  cure  for  Hie  asthma,  one  of  (he
most  distressing  complaints  that  human  nature  is  subject  to.—
It  is  a  truth  which  cannot  be  disputed  by  anv  one,  that  all  they
have  known  about  this  article,  and  the  experiments  that  have
been  made  to  ascertain  its  value,  originated  in  mv  making  use
of  it  in  my  prac'ice.

In  the  course  of  mv  practice,  a  number  of  the  doctors  dis-
covered that  the  medicine  I  made  use  of,  produced  effects  which
astonished  them,  and  which  they  could  not  account  for-  this
induced  them  to  conclude,  that  because  it  was  so  powerful  in
removing  disease,  it  must  be  poison.  This  I  think  can  be  very.
satisfactorily  accounted  for;  they  have  no  knowledge  of  any
thing  in  all  their  medical  science,  which  is  capable  of  produc-
ing a  powerful  effect  upon  the  human  system  except  wlvl  ts
poisonous,  and  therefore  naturally  form  their  opinions  agreea-
bly  to  this  erroneous  theory.  There  is  a  power  to  produce  l,fe
and  a  power  to  produce  de  t.th,  which  are  of  course  directly  op.

™  Z  2\  f  I1'"  i,R<1  Vm'QVCT  U'mh  '°  Proraote  life  cannot
[£?  4  '  i  ltS  Kwer  1,<J  Rver  s°  gre^.  In  tins  consists  all:
t.ie  chij  -rence  between  my  system  of  practice  and  that  of  th>


I
&R,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN,  &.

parsed  doctors.  In  consequence  of  their  thus  forming  ah
erroneous  opinion  of  this  herb,  which  they  had  no  knowledge  off
they  undertook  to  represent  it  as  a  deadly  poison;  >nd  in  order
to  destroy  my  practice,  they  raised  a  hue-and-cry  about  my
killing  my  patients  by  administering  it  to  them.  Some  of  the
faculty  even  made  oath,  that  it  was  poison,  and  when  t;  ken  into
the  stomach,  if  it  did  not  cause  immediate  vomiting  it  was  cer
tain  death.  It  is  unnecessary  for  me  now  to  point  out  the  fal-
sity of  this,  for  the  fict  is  pretty  well  known,  that  tl  eve  is  no
de  ith  in  it;  but,  on  (he  contrary,  that  there  is  no  vegetable  thai
the  earth  produces,  more  harmless  in  its  effects  on  ihe  human
system,  and  none  more  powerful  in  removing  disease  and  pro-
mo nig  health.

There  is  no  mention  made  of  this  herb,  by  any  author,  that  I
have  heen  able  to  find,  previous  to  my  discovering  it,  excepting
by  Linseuf,  who  h  is  given  a  correct  description  of  it  under  the
name  of  Lobelia  Inf]  ita  ;  but  there  is  nothing  said  of  its  medical
properties,  it  is  therefore  re  son  tble  to  conclude  that  they  were
not  known  till  I  discovered  it,  ?nd  proved  it  to  be  useful.     When
the  ficulty  first  made  the  discovery  that  I  used  the  Emetic  Herb
in  my  practice,  they  declared  it  to  be  s  deadly  poison;  and  while
persecuting  me  by  every  means  in  their  power,  and  representing
to  the  world  that  I   killed  my  patients  with  it,  they  were  very
ready  to  call  it  my  medicine  and  allow  it  to  be  my  own  discovery;
but  since  their  ignor  n>  o-of  it  has  been  exposed,  and  they  find
it  is  going  to  become  an  article  of  great  value,  an  attempt  seems
to  be  making  to  rob  me  of  all  the  credit  for  causing  its  value  t^
be  known,-  and  the  profits  which  belong  to  me  for  the  discovery..
In  which  some  who  have  been  instructed  by  me  are  ready  to  join,
for  the  purpose  of  promoting  their  own  interest  at  my  expense.
Dr.  Thacher  in  his  Dispensatory  has  undertaken  to  give  an
account  of  this  herb;  but  is  very  erroneous,  except  in  the  descrip-
tion of  it,  which  is  nearly  correct.     It  appears  that  all  the  knowl-
edge he  has  on  the  subject,  is  to  its  virtues,  is  borrowed  from  others
and  is  probably  derived  from  the  ridiculous  ideas  entertained  of
its  power  by  those  doctors  who  knew  nothing  about  it  except  what
they  gained  by  my  making  use  of  it  as  has  been  before  stated.
As  "o  its  being  dangerous  to  administer  it,  and  that  if  it  does  not
puke,  it  frequently  destroys  the  patient,  and  sometimes  in  five  or
six  hours;  and  that  even  horses  and  cattle  have  been  supposed  to
be  killed  by  earing  it  accidentally,  is  a3  absurd  as  it  is  untrue,  and
only  proves  *!i^;r  ignorance  of  the  article.     He  tells  a  melancholy
•story  about  the  Lobelia  Inflata  being  administered  by  the  adventiir  ~


•i'Hvr  «™»fc  tf*  HSAT.TtI',

of  a  noted  empiric,  who  he  says  frequency  ndiuiau-.*

■■i,  nOil  of  the  powdered  leaves  and

often  repe  ted;  wTiick  be  says  famishes  alarming  examples  of

its    el<   erious  properties  and  fatal  effects.     This,  there  is  no

doiu  to  me,  and  took  its  rise  from  the  false  statements

Girchl  ted   about  meat  the  time  of  my   trial,  to  prejudice  the

puhli  Ice.     It  is  true,  the  dose  that  I  usually

prescribed  is   a   le  -spognful  <S1  the  powder;  but   that  it  ever

produced     ny  '  is  is  altogether  incorrect,  and  is  well

n  to  be  so  by  all  who   h  -vv  any  correct  knowledge  on  the

rt.

Wh:t    is  quoted  in  nsatory,   from  the  Rev.  Dr.  M

r,  concerning  this  herb,  is,  in  gener  1,  correct,  particularly

as  it   regards  its  being  .1   spe  Ihe   asthma;  though  ho

is     bout   its  effects  when
in   into  the  sioma.ch;  he  says,  "if  Ihe  quantity  ben   little
incre  perotes  as  an  emetic  and  then   as  a  cathartic,  its

\u  rnuc'i  the  s  me  'S  ill      saf  ihe  common  emetics  and
his  he  is  mistaken,  for  it   is  entirely  different
from  letic  known;    mi!     s   to  its  operating   as  a

Gr  knew  it  to  have  such    n  effect  in  all  my  practice.
And  1  certainly  ought  to  know  something  about  it.  after  having
m    le  use  of  it  for  'hove  twenty  yei  rs,    nd   administering  it  iu
form  and  in  inner  that  it.  c  n  I  e  given,  and  for  every  dis-
come  within  my  knowledge.     It   appears  that  : s.11
he  Mid  other  doctors  have  got  of  this  herb  being
•1    in  curing  disease,  particularly  in  the  asthma,  was  ob-
ained  from  me;  for  when  1   w  s  prosecuted,  I  wis  obliged  to
expose  my  discoveries  to  show  ihe  falsity  of  the  indictment. —
Dr.  Cutler  was   brought  forward  as  a  witness  at  my  trial,  to
prove'  the  virtues  of  this  plant,  by  his  evidence,  that  he  cured
himself  of  the  asthma  with   it.     He  sys  the  first  information
he  had  of  its  being  good  for  that  comprint  was  from  Dr.  Dru-
ry,  of  Mirblehe  id.     In  the  full  of  the  year  1807,  I  introduced
the  use  of  the  Emetic  Herb  tinctured  in  spirits,  for  the  asthma
and  other  complaints  of  the  lungs,  and  cured  several  of  the  con-
sumption.    In    1808,1  cured  a  woman  in   Newington,  of  the
asthnv,  who  had  not  bin  in  her  bed  for  six  months.     I  gathered
some  of  the  young   plants  not  bigger  than   a  dollar,  bruised
them,  and  tinctured  them  in   spirits,  gave  her  the  tincture  and
she  lay  in  bed  the  first  night.     I  showed  her  what  it  was  and
how  to  prep-'ire    nd  use  it,  and  by  taking  this  and  other  things
according  to  my  direction,  she  has  euioyed  a  comfortable  statr.


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  -W

of  health  for  twelve  years,  and  has  never  been  obliged  to  sit  up
one  night  since.  The  same  fall  I  used  it  in  Beverly  and  Salem-,
and  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  all  the  information  concerning
the  value  of  this  article  was  obtained  from  my  practice.

After  Dr.  Cutler  h  id  given  his  testimony  of  the  virtues  of  this
herb,  and  the  doctors  having  become  convinced  of  its  value,  they
come  forward  and  say  it  is  good  medicine  in  skilful  hands.  Who,
I  would  ask,  is  more  skilful  than  he  who  discovered  it,  and  taught
them  how  to  prepare  and  use  it  in  curing  one  of  the  most  distress-
ing complaints  known?  If  it  is  a  good  medicine  it  is  mine  and  1
am  entitled  to  the  credit  of  introducing  it  into  use,  and  have
paid  dear  for  it;  if  it  is  poison  the  doctors  do  not  need  it,  as  they
have  enough  of  that  now.  Dr.  Thacher  undertakes  to  make
it  appear  that  the  fatal  effects  he  tells  about  its  producing,  waa
owing  to  the  quantity  given;  and  says,  I  administered  a  tea-
spoonful  of  the  powder;  and  when  he  comes  to  give  directions
for  using  it,  says  that  from  10  to  20  grains  may  be  given  with
safety.  •  It  appears  strange  that,  different  terms  should  produce
such  different  effects  in  the  operation  of  medicine.  If  tea-
spoonful  is  given  by  an  empiric,  its  effects  are  fatal;  but  if  the
same  quantity  is  administered  by  a  learned  doctor  and  called
grains,  it  is  a  useful  medicine!

This  herb  is  described  in  Thacher's  Dispensatory  under  the
names  of  Lobelia  Inflata,  Lobelia  Emetica,  Emetic  Weed,  and
Indian  Tobacco;  and  several  other  names  have  been  given  it,
some  by  way  of  ridicule  :nd  others  for  the  purpose  of  ere  ling  a
prejudice  against  it;  all  of  which  has  so  confounded  it  witli  other
articles  that  there  is  a  difficulty  in  ascertaining  what  they  mean
to  describe.  I  have  been  informed  there  is  a  poisonous  root
grows  in  the  Southern  States,  called  Lobelia,  which  has  been
used  as  a  medicine;  the  calling  this  herb  by  that,  name,  has  pro-
bably been  one  reason  of  its  Leing  thought  to  be  poison.  Why  it
has  had  the  name  of  Indian  Tobacco  given  it,  I  know  not :  there
is  a  plant  that  is  called  by  that  name,  which  grows  in  this  country,
but  is  entirely  different  from  this  herb  both  in  appearance  and
medical  virtues.  In  the  United  States  Pharmacopeia  there  is
directions  given  for  preparing  the  tincture  of  Indian  Tobacco;
whether  they  mean  this  herb  or  the  plant  that  has  been  always
called  by  that  name,  does  not  appear;  but  it  is  probable  they  mean
the  emetic  herb  and  that  all  the  knowledge  they  have  of  it  is
from  Dr.  Cutler's  description .  It  is  said  by  Thacher  that  it  was
employed  by  the  aborigines  and  by  those  who  deal  in  Indian
remedies  $  and  others  who  are  attempting  to  rob  me  of  the  discev-

D


gg  $IW   GUI©r:  TO  HHAliTH,

ervafiectto  behove  the  same  thing;  but  this  is  founded  altogetiig
upon  conjecture  for  they  cannot  produce  a  single  instance  of  its
having  been  employed  as  a  medicine  till  I  made  use  of  it.  The
feci  is  it  is  a  new  article,  wholly  unknown  to  the  medical  faculty
tilll  introduced  it  into  use,  and  the  best  evidence  of  this  is,  that
they  are  now  ignorant  of  its  powers;  and  ail  the  knowledge  they
have  of  it  has  been  obtained  from  my  practice.  It  would  be
folly  for  me  to  undertake  to  say  but  that  it  may  have  been  used
try  the  natives  of  this  country;  but  one  thing  I  am  certain  of.
that  I  never  had  any  knowledge  of  their  using  it,  nor  received
any  information  concerning  it  from  them  or  any  one  else.

The  Emetic  Herb  may  be  found  in  the  first  stages  of  i1s
growth  at  all  times  through  the  summer,  from  ihe  bigness  of  a
six  cent  piece  to  that  of  a  dollar  and  larger,  lying  flat  on  the
ground,  in  a  round  form,  like  a  rose  pressed  ilat,  in  order  to  heap
the  weight  of  snow  which  lays  on  it  during  the  winter,  and  is
■subject  to  be  winter-killed  like  wheal.  In  the  spring  it  looks
yellow  and  pale,  like  other  things  suffering  from  wet  and  cold;
>,ut  when  the  returning  sun  spreads  forth  its  enlivening  rays  upon
it,  lifts  up  its  leaves  and  shoots  fortli  a  stalk  to  the  height  of
from  twelve  to  fifteen  inches,  with  a  number  of  branches,  car-
rying up  its  leaves  with  ils  growth.  In  July  it  puts  forth  small
pointed  pale  blue  blossoms,  which  is  followed  by  small  podB
about  the  size  of  a  white  bean,  containing  numerous  very  small
.sends.  This  pod  is  an  exact  resemblance  of  the  human  stomach,
having  an  inlet  and  outlet  higher  than  the  middle;  from  the
inlet  it  receives  nourishment  and  by  the  outlet  discharges  the
seeds.  It  comes  to  maturity  about  the  first  of  September,  when
the  leaves  and  pods  turn  a  little  yellow;  this  is  the  best  time  to
gather  it.  It  is  what  is  called  by  botanists  a  biennial  plant,  cr
pf  only  two  years  existence.

This  plant  is  common  in  all  parts  of  this  country.  Wherever
the  land  is  fertile  enough  to  yield  support  for  its  inhabitants  it
m:>y  be  found.  It  is  confined  to  no  soil  which  is  fit  for  cultiva-
tion, from  the  highest  mountains  to  the  lowest  volleys.  In  hot
and  wet  seasons  it  is  most  plenty  on  dry  and  warm  landf —
in  hot  and  dry  seasons  on  clayey  and  heavy  lands.  When  the
season  is  cold,  either  wet  or  dry,  it  rarely  makes  its  appearance;
and  if  the  summer  and  fall  is  very  dry  the  seed  does  not  come
up,  and  of  course  there  will  be  very  little  to  be  found  the  next
season.  I  have  been  in  senreh  of  this  herb  from  Boston  to
Canada,  and  was  not  ?hle  to  collet '  mere  than  two  pounds;  and
:n  .ssare  FBupejrs  I  have  net  bejen  able  to  collect  any.    I  rnentipn


OR,  DOTAXitf  FAMILY  PHYSI&AN.  3|

to  show  the  uncertainty  of  its  growth,  and  to  put  the  peopVs
on  their  guard  to  be  careful  and  lay  up  a  good  slock,  of  it  when
plenty.  In  the  year  1807,  if  I  had  offered  a  reward  of  a  thou-
sand dollars  for  a  pound  of  this  herb,  I  should  not  have  been
able  to  have  obtained  it.  I  have  seen  the  time  that  I  would  havt
given  two  dollars  for  an  ounce  of  the  powder,  but  there  was
none  to  be  had  ;  which  necessity  taught  me  to  lay  up  all  I  could
obtain  when  it  was  plenty.

In  seasons  when  this  herb  is  plenty  it  may  be  found  growing
in  highways  and  pastures,  by  the  side  of  old  turnpikes,  and  iu
stubble  laid,  particularly  where  it  has  been  laid  down  to  gra&s
the  year  before;  when  grass  is  scarce  it  is  eaten  by  cattle,  and
is  hard  to  be  found  when  full  grown.  It  is  a  wild  plant  and  a
native  of  this  country;  but  there  is  no  doubt  of  its  being  com-
mon to  other  countries.  It  may  1)0  transplanted  and  cultivated
in  gardens  and  will  be  much  larger  and  more  vigorous  than
when  growing  wild.  If  some  stalks  are  left  it  will  sow  itself,
and  probably  may  be  produced  from  the  seed ;  but  how  lon<?  the
seeds  rem  tin  in  the  ground  before  they  come  up,  I  do  not  know.,
never  having  made  any  experiments  to  ascertain  the  fact.  It  is
cert i.in  that  it  is  produced  from  the  seed,  and  there  is  no  good
reason  to  suppose  that  it  may  not  be  cultivated  in  gardens  Oom
the  seed  as  well  is  other  vegetables;  I  thing  it  most  probable,
however,  from  the  nature  of  the  plant,  that  it  will  not  eocne  up
till  the  seeds  have  lain  at  least  one  winter  in  the  ground.

This  plant  is  different  in  one  very  important  particular,  from
all  others  that  I  hive  a  knowledge  of,  that  the  same  quantity
will  produce  the  same  effect  in  all  stages  of  its  growth,  from  its
firs*  appearance  till  it  comes  to  maturity;  but  the  best  time  for
gathering  it  as  has  before  been  mentioned,  is  when  the  leave?
and  pods  begin  to  turn  yellow,  for  then  the  seed  is  ripe  and  you
have  all  there  can  be  of  it.  It  should  then  be  cut  and  kept
dean,  and  spread  in  a  large  chamber  or  loft,  to  dry,  where  it  ie
open  to  the  air  in  the  day  time  and  to  be  shut  from  the  damp  ah-
during  the  night.  When  perfectly  dry,  shake  out  the  seed  and
sift  it  through  a  common  me^l  sieve,  and  preserve  it  by  itself,
.  beat  off  the  leaves  and  pods  from  the  stalks  end  preserve
them  clean.  This  herb  mny  Le  prepared  for  use  in  three  differ-
ent ways,  viz:  1st,  the  powdered  leaves  and  pods.  2d.  A.
tincture  made  from  the  green  herb  with  spirit.  3d.  The  seeds
Seduced  to  a  fine  powder  and   compounded  with  Ncs.  2  and  6..

I.  After  the  leaves  and  pods  are  separated  from  the  stalk?,
pound  or  grind  them  in  a  mortar  to  fine  powder,  sift  it  through


40  NEW  GUIDE  T©  HEALTH;

a  fine  sieve,  and  preserve  it  from  the  air.  This  is  the  most  c<  m
mon  preparation,  and  may  be  given  in  many  different  wi
either  by  itself  or  compounded  with  other  articles.  For  a  com-
mon doso  take  a  tea-spoonful  of  this  powder  with  the  same
quantity  of  sugar  in  half  a  tea-cupful  of  warm  water,  or  a  tea
of  No.  3,  may  be  used  instead  of  tlie  water;  this  dose  may  be
taken  all  at  one  time,  or  at  three  times,  at  intervals  of  ten  min-
utes. For  a  young  child  strain  off  The  liquor  and  give  a  part
as  circumstances  shall  require.  There  is  but  one  way  in  which
this  herb  can  be  prepared  that  it  will  refuse  its  services,  and
that  is  when  boded  or  scalded ;  it  is  therefore  important  to  bear
in  mind  that  there  must  never  be  any  thing  put  to  it  warmer
than  a  blood  heat.

2.  T6  prepare  the  tincture,  take  the  green  herb  in  any  stape
of  its  growth,  (if  the  small  plants  are  used  take  roots  and  all)
put  them  into  a  mortar  and  pound  them  fine,  then  add  the  same
quantity  of  good  spirits;  when  well  pounded  and  worked
together,  strain  it  through  a  fine  cloth  and  squeeze  and  press  it
hard  to  get  out  all  the  juice;  save  the  liquor  in  bottles,  clcse
stopped,  for  use.  Good  vinegar,  or  pepper-sauce  may  be  used
instead  of  the  spirit.  Prepared  in  this  manner  it  is  an  effectual
counter- poison,  either  taken,  or  externally  applied.  It  is  also
an  excellent  medicine  for  the  asthma  and  all  complaints  of  the
kings.  This  i3  the  only  way  in  which  the  doctors  have  made
nse  of  the  Emetic  Herb;  and  they  acknowledge  it  to  be  one  of
the  best  remedies  in  many  complaints,  that  has  been  found,
though  they  know  but  little  about  it.  For  a  dose  take  from
half  to  a  tea-spoonful,  lis  effect  will  he  more  certain  if  about
the  same  quantity  of  No.  2,  is  added,  and  in  all  cases  where
there  are  nervous  symptoms  add  half  a  tea-spoonful  of  nerve
powder  (Umbil)  to  the  dose.

2.  Reduce  the  seeds  to  a  fine  powder  in  a  mortar,  and  take
half  an  ounce  of  this  powder,  or  about  a  large  spoonful,  with
the  same  quanlity  of  No.  2,  made  line,  and  put  them  in  a  gill
of  No.  C,  adding  a  tea-spoonful  of  Umbil;  to  be  kept  close
topped  in  a  bottle  for  use;  when  taken  to  be  well  shaken  toge-
ther. This  preparation  is  for  the  most  violent  attacks  of  dis-
ease, sucii  as  lock-jaw,  bite  of  mad  dog,  drowned  persons,  fits,
spasms,  and  in  all  cases  of  suspended  animation,  where  the
vital  spark  is  nearly  extinct.  It  will  go  through  the  system  like
electricity,  giving  heat  and  life  to  every  part.  In  cases  where
the  spasms  are  so  violent  that  they  are  stiff,  and  the  jaws  become
-jot,  by  pouring  some  of  this  liquid  into  the  mouth  between  the


Oft,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.

Cfheek  and  teeth,  as  soon  as  it  touches  the  glands  at  the  roots  o  :
the  tongue,  the  spasms  will  relax,  and  the  jaws  will  become
loosened  so  that  the  mouth  will  open;  then  give  a  dose  of -it,
find  5  thespasros  have  abated, repeat  it,  and  afterwards-

;.ivo  a  tea  of  No.  3,  for  enker.  This  course  1  never  knew  fail
of  giving  relief.  It  is  good  in  less  violent  cases,  to  bring  out
the  meazles  and  small  pox;  and  if  applied  to  pimples,  warts.
•fee.  will  remove  them.  J  have  cured  three  dogs  with  this  pre-
'ion,  who  were  under  the  most  violent  symptoms  cf  hydro-
phobia; one  of  my  agents  cured  a  man  with  it  who  had  been
bitten  by  a  m  id  dog;  arid  I  have  not  the  least  doubt  of  its  bein£
a  specific  for  that  disease.     For  a  dose  t.:ke  a  tea-spoonful.

Much  has  been  said  of  the  power  of  the  Emetic  Herb,  and
some  have  expressed  fears  of  it  on  that  account;  but  I  car.
assure  the  public,  that  there  is  not  the  least  danger  in  using  it:
T  have  given  it  to  children  from  one  day  old  to  persons  of  eighty
years.  It  is  most  powerful  in  removing  disejse,  but  innocent
on  nature.  Its  operation  in  different  persons,  is  according  to
their  different  tempers,  moving  with  the  natural  current  of  the
vinimal  spirits.  There  is  two  cases  where  ibis  medicine  will  not
operate,  viz:  when  the  patient  is  dying,  and  where  there  is  no
death.  There  can  be  no  war  where  there  is  no  enemy.  When
there  is  no  cold  in  the  body  there  is  nothing  to  contend  against.
aad  when  there  is  no  beat  in  the  body  there  is  nothing  to  kindle;
in  either  case  therefore  this  medicine  is  silent  and  harmless.  It
is  calculated  to  remove  the  cause  and  no  more,  as  food  removes
hunger  and  drink  thirst.  It  clears  all  obstructions  to  the  extre-
mities, without  regard  to  the  names  of  disease,  until  it  produces
an  equilibrium  in  the  system,  and  will  be  felt  in  the  fingers  and
toes,  producing  a  prickling  feeling  like  that  caused  by  a  knocl:
of  the  elbow;  this  symptom  is  alarming  to  those  unacquainted
with  its  operation;  but  is  always  favorable,  being  a  certain
indication  of  the  turn  ef  the  disorder,  and  they  generally  gain
from  that  time.

In  regard  to  the  quantity  to  be  given  as  a  dose  it  is  matter  o''
Jess  consequence  than  is  generally  imagined.     The  most  im-
portant thing  is  to  give  enough  to  produce  the  desired  effec «
too  little  is  given  it  will  worry  the  patient,  and  do  little  good/
if  more   is  given  than  what   is  necessary,  the  surplus  wii!  Ik
thrown  off,  and  is  a  waste  of  medicine.     I  have  given  direr'  ions
what  I  consider  as  a  proper  dose  in  common  cases,  of  the  di
cut  preparations,  but  still,  it  must  be  left  to  the  judgment  •  .f  thos.<
who  use  ;  r,  how  much  to  give.     The  most  safe  way  will  1  •  -  to  srto


42  MSVV   GUIDE  TO  HEALTH!

smallest  prescribed  dose  first,  then  repeat  it  till  it  produce
the  wished  operation.  In  cases  where  the  stomach  is  cold  and
very  foul,  its  operation  will  he  slow  and  uncertain;  in  which
Case  give  No.  2,  which  will  assist  it  in  doing  its  work.

When  this  medicine  is  given  to  patients  that  are  in  a  decline

or  are  laboring  under  a  disease  of  long  standing,  the  symptoms

■ndicaling  a  crisis  will  not  take  place  till  they  have  been  carried

through  from  three  to  eight  courses  of  medicirie;  and  the  lower

they  have  been  the  more  alarming  wil  1  be  the  symptoms.     I  have

seen  some  who  would  lay  and  sob  like  a  child  that  had  been

punished,  for  two  hours,  not  rble  to  speak  or  to  raise  their  hand

(o  their  head;  and  the  next  day  be  about,  and  soon  get  well. —

In  cases  where  they  have  taken  considerable  opium,  and  this  me-

ibirc  is  administered,  it  will  in  its  operation  produce  Ihe  same

ppearances  and  symptom?  that  is  produced  by  cpium  when  first

yven,  which  having  lain  dormant,  is  roused  inlo  action  by  the

enlivening  qualities  of  this  medicine,  and  they  will  be   thrown

n  senseless  state;  the  whole  system  will  be  one  complete

of  confusion,  tumbling  in  every  direction;  will  take  two

hree  to  hold  them  on  the  bed  ;  they  grow  cold  as  though  dying;

emaming  in  this  way  from  two  to  eight  hours,  and  (hen  awake,

like  one  from  sleep  after  a  good  nights  rest;  bo  entirely  calm

ird  sensible  as  though  nothing  had  ailed  them.     It  is  seldom

ever  have  more  than  one  of  these  turns;  as  it  is  the  1;  st

of  the  disease,  and  they  generally  begin  to  recover  from

ilir.t   time.     I   have  been   more  particular   in  describing   these

Is  of  the  medicine,  as  they  are  very  alarming  to  ihcse  iinac-

rplainted  with  them,  in  order  to  show  that  there  is  no  danger  to

ipprehended,  as  it  is  certain  evidence  of  a  favorable  turn  of

the  disease.

The  Emetic  Herb  is  of  great  value  is  preventing  sickness  as
well  as  curing  if;  by  taking  a  dose  when  first  attacked  by  any
complaint  it  will  throw  it  of,  and  frequently  prevent  long  sick-
ness.    It  not  only  acts  as  an  emetic,  and  throws  off  the  stomach
' ;,'  thing  that  nature  docs  not  require  for  the  support  of  the
r  'stem;  but  extends  its  effects  to  every  part  of  the  body.     It  is
;hing,  enlivening,  quickening,  and  has  a  great  power  in
removing  all  obstructions;  but  it  soon  exhausts  itself,  and  if  not
followed  by  some  other  medicine  to  hold  the  vital  heat  till  na-
ture is  able  to  support  itself  by  digesting  the  food,  it  will  not  be
ufficient  to  remove  a  disease  that  has  become  seated.     To
feet  this  important  object  put  me  to  much  trouble,  -nd  after
'  ying  many  experiments  to  get  something  that  would  answer


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  fHYSICiAK.  #

tne  purpose  I  (bund  that  what  is  described  under  No.  2,  was  the
beat  and  only  medicine  I  have  a  knowledge  of,  that  would  hold
the  heat  in  the  stomach,  and  not  evaporate;  and  by  giving  No.
3,  to  remove  the  canker,  which  is  the  great  cause  of  disease;
and  then  following  with  Ncs.  4  and  5,  to  correct  the  bile,  re-
store the  digestion,  and  strengthen  the  system,  I  have  had  little
trouble  in  effectn?  a  cure.  Directions  for  preparing  thtcc  will
be  hereafter  given.


No.  2. —  To  retain  the  internal  vital  heat  of
the  system  and  cause  a  free  perspiration,

Cayenne. —  Capsicum.

This  article  being  so  well  known  it  will  be  unnecessary  to  be
very  particular  in  describing  it.  It  has  been  a  long  time  used
for  culinary  purposes,  and  comes  to  us  prepared  for  use  by  be-
ing ground  to  powder  and  a  proportion  of  salt  mixt  with  it;
this  destroys,  in  some  degree,  its  stimulating  effects  and  mokes
it  less  pungent;  but  it  is  not  so  good  for  medicine  as  in  the  pure
state.  It  is  said  to  be  a  native  of  South  America,  and  is  culti-
vated in  many  of  the  West  India  Islands;  that  which  comes  to
this  country  is  brought  from  Demerara  and  Jamaica.  It  also
grows  in  other  parts  of  the  world;  I  once  bought  one  hundred
pounds  of  it  in  the  pod,  which  was  brought  from  the  coast  of
Guinea;  had  it  ground  at  Portsmouth,  and  it  was  as  good  as
any  I  ever  used.  There  are  several  species  that  are  described
under  the  name  of  capsicum;  all  of  which  are  about  the  same,
as  to  their  stimulating  qualities.  The  pods  only  are  used ;  they
are  long  and  pointed,  are  of  a  green  color  till  ripe,  when  they
turn  of  a  bright  orange  red.  When  the  pods  are  green  they  are
gathered  and  preserved  in  salt  and  water  and  brought  to  this
country  in  bottles,  when  vinegar  is  put  to  them,  which  is  sold
under  the  name  of  pepper-sauce.  The  ripe  pods  ground  to  a
powder  is  what  is  used  for  medicine  and  cooking;  but  the  pep-
per-sauce is  very  good  to  be  taken  as  medicine  and  applied  ex-
ternally ;  the  green  pods  hold  their  attracting  power  till  ripe,  and
therefore  keep  their  strength  much  longer  when  put  in  vinegar;
as  the  bottle  may  be  filled  up  a  number  of  times  and  the  strength
seems  to  be  the  same;  but  when  the  ripe  pods  are  put  in  vine-
gar, the  first  time  will  take  nearly  all  the  strength.


^  NfcW  GUIDE  TO  HfeALtrt;

I  shnll  not  undertake  to  dispute  but  that  Cayenne  has  teen,
used  for  medical  purposes  long  before  I  had  any  knowledge  of
it;  and  that  it  is  one  of  the  safest  and  best  articles  ever  discov-
ered, io  remove  disease,  I  know  to  bo  a  fact,  from  long  experV
enoe;  but.  it  is  equally  true,  that  the  medical  faculty  never  con-
sidered it  of  much  value,  and  the  people  had  no  knowledge  of
it  as  -  medicine,  till  I  introduced  it,  by  making'  use  of  if  in  my
practice.  Mention  is  made  of  Cayenne  in  the  Edinburgh^  pig'
pen satory,  as  chiefly  employed  for  culinary  purposes,  but  (hat
of  lite  it  has  been  employed  also  in  the  practice  of  medicine.
The  author  says  thai  "there  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  furnishes
one  of  the  purest  and  Strongest  stimulants  which  can  be  intro-
duced into  the  stomach;  while,  at  *he  ssmetime, il  has  nothing
«f  the  narcotic  eilects  of  ardent  spires.  It  is  said  to  have  been
used  with  success  in  curing  some  cases  of  disease,  that  had  re-
sis'ed  all  other  remedies.'"  All  this  I  am  satisfied  is  true,  for
if  given  as  a  medicine  it  always  will  be  found  useful;  hut  all
the  knowledge  they  had  of  it  s^  ems  to  have  been  derived  from  a
few  experiments  that  had  been  made,  without  fixing  upon  any
particular  manner  of  preparing  or  administering  it,  or  in  what
disease,  as  is  the  ease  with  rll  other  articles  that  are  introduced
into  general  practice.  In  Thachers  Dispensatory  the  same  ac-
count is  given  of  Cayenne,  as  in  the  Edinburgh,  and  in  almost
the  same  words.

I  never  had  any  knowledge  of  Cayenne  being  useful  as  as  a.
medicine,  or  that  it  had  ever  been  used  as  such,  till  1  discovered
it  by  accident,  as  has  been  the  ease  with  most  other  articles  used
by  me.  After  I  had  fixed  upon  a  system  for  my  government  in
practiee,  I  found  much  difficulty  in  gettingsomeihing  that  would
not  only  produce  a  strong  heat  in  the  body,  but  would  retain  it
till  the  canker  could  be  removed  and  the  digestive  powers  restor-
ed, so  that  the  food  by  being  properly  digested,  would  maintain
the  natural  heat.  I  tried  a  great  number  of  articles  that  were
of  hot  nature;  but  could  find  nothing  that  would  hold  the
he- 1  any  length  of  time.  I  made  use  of  ginger,  mustard,  horse-
radish, peppermint,  butternut  bark,  and  m  my  other  hot  things;
but  they  were  all  more  or  less  volatile,  and  would  not  have  the
desired  effect.  With  thesey  however,  and  the  emetic  herb,  to-
gether with  the  aid  of  steam,  I  was  enabled  to  practice  with
pretty  general  success.  Ir  the  f.dl  of  the  year  1805,  1  was  out.
in  search  of  Umbil,  on  a  mountain,  in  Walpole,  N.  11.  I  wen'
into  a  house  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  io  inquire  for  some  rat
flesnake  oil;  while  in  the  house  I  saw  a  large  string  of  red


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  4i

peppers  hanging  in  the  room,  which  put  me  in  mind  of  what  I
had  been  a  long  time  in  search  of,  to  retain  the  internal  heat.
I  knew  them  to  be  very  hot;  but  did  not  know  of  what  nature.
I  obtained  these  peppers,  carried  them  home,  reduced  them  to
powder,  and  took  some  of  the  powder  myself  and  found  it  to  an-
swer the  purpose  better  than  any  thing  else  I  had  made  use  of.
I  put  it  in  spirit  with  the  Emetic  Herb,  and  gave  the  tincture
mixed  in  a  tea  of  witch  hazle  leaves,  and  found  that  it  would
retain  the  heat  in  the  stomach  after  puking;  and  preserve  the
strength  of  the  patient  in  proportion.  I  made  use  of  it  in  dif-
ferent ways  for  two  years,  and  always  with  good  success.

In  the  fall  of  1807, 1  was  in  Newburyport,  and  saw  a  bottle  of
pepper-sauce,  being  the  first  I  had  ever  seen;  I  bought  it  and
carried  it.  home;  got  some  of  the  same  kind  of  pepper  that  was
dried,  which  I  put  into  the  bottle,  this  made  it  very  hot.  On
my  home  way  was  taken  unwell,  and  was  quite  cold ;  I  took  a
swallow  from  the  bottle,  which  caused  violent  pain  for  a  few
minutes,  when  it  produced  perpiration,  and  I  soon  grew  easy.
I  aftewards  tried  it  and  found  that  after  it  had  expelled  the  cold,
it  would  not  cause  pain.  From  the  experiments,  I  became  con-
vinced that  this  kind  of  pepper  was  much  stronger  and  would
be  better  for  medical  use  than  the  common  red  pepper.  Soon
after  this  I  was  again  in  Newburyport  and  made  inquiry  and
found  some  Cayenne;  but  it  was  prepared  with  salt  for  table
Use,  which  injured  it  for  medical  purposes.  I  tried  it  by  tasting,
and  selected  that  which  had  the  least  salt  in  it.  I  afterwards
made  use  of  this  article,  and  found  it  to  answer  all  the  purposes
wished:  and  was  the  very  thing  I  had  long  been  in  search  of.
The  next  year  I  went  to  Portsmouth  and  made  inquiries  con-
cerning Cayenne,  and  from  those  who  dealt  in  the  article  I
learned,  that  it  was  brought  to  this  country  from  Demerara  and
Jamaica,  prepared  only  for  table  use,  and  that  salt  was  put  with
it  to  preserve  it  and  make  it  more  palatable.  I  became  acquaint-
ed with  a  Frenoh  gentleman  who  had  a  brother  in  Bemeraraj,
and  made  arrangements  with  him  to  send  to  his  brother  and  re-
quest him  to  procure  some,  and  have  it  prepared  without  salt.
He  did  so,  and  sent  out  a  box  containing  about  eighty  pounds
w.  a  pure  state.  I  sent  also  by'  many  others,  that  were  going
to  the  places  where  it  grows,,  to  procure  all  they  could  :  in  conse-
quence of  which  large  quantities  were  imported  into  Portsmouth,
much  more  than  there  was  immediate  demand  for.  I  was  not
able  to  purchase  but  a  small  part  of  what  was  brought,  and  it
^ag  bought  up  by  others  on  speculation,  and  sent  to  Boston.;


46  SEW  GUIDE  TO  HKALTH-;

the  consequence  was  that  the  price  was  so  much  reduced,  tnai
it  would  not  bring  the  first  cost, -which  put  a  stop  to  its  being  im-
ported, and  it  h;is  since  been  very  sc;  rce.

When  I  first  began  to  use  this  article,  it  caused  much  talk
among  the  people  in  Portsmouth  and  the  adjoining  towns;  rhfe
doctors  tried  to  frighten  them  by  telling  that  1  made  use  of  Cay-
enne pepper  as  a  medicine,  and  that  it  would  burn  up  the  sto-
mach and  lungs  as  bad  as  vitriol.  The  people  generally,  how
ever,  became  convinced  by  using  it,  that  all  the  doctors  said
about  it  was  frise,  and  it  only  proved  their  ignorance  of  its  me-
dical virtues  and  their  malignity  towards  me.  It  soon  came  into
general  use,  and  the  knowledge  of  its  being  useful  in  curing
disease  was  spread  all  through  the  country.  I  made  use  of  it
in  curing  the  spotted  fever,  and  where  it  was  known,  was  the
only  thing  depended  on  for  that  disease.  I  have  made  use  of
Cayenne  in  all  kinds  of  disease,  and  have  given  it  to  patients  of
all  ages  and  under  every  circumstance  that  has  come  under  my
practice;  and  can  assure  the  public*  that  it  is  perfectly  harmless,
never  having  known  it  to  produce  any  bad  effects  whatever.  It
is  no  doubt  the  most  powerful  stimulant  known;  its  power  is
entirely  congenial  to  nature,  being  powerful  only  in  raising  raid
mainlining  that  heat  on  which  life  depends.  It  is  extremely
pungent,  and  when  taken  sets  the  mouth  as  it  were  on  fire;  this
lasts,  however,  but  a  few  minutes,  and  I  consider  it  essentially  a
benefit,  for  its  effects  on  the  glands  cruses  the  saliva  to  flow  freely
and  leaves  the  mouth  clean  and  moist.

The  only   preparation  necessary,  is  to  have  it   ground  os
pounded  to  a  fine  powder.     For  a   dose,  from   half  to  a  tea*
spoonful  may  betaken  in  hot  water  sweetened,  or  the  same
quantity  nmy  be  mixed  with  either  of  the  other  numbers  when
taken.     It  will   produce  a  free  perspiration,   which   should  be
kept  up  by  repeating  the  dose,  until  the  disease  is  removed.     A
nful,  with  an  equal  quantity  of  cr-mmon  salt,  put  into  a  gill
of  vinegir,  makes  a  very  good  sauce,  to  be  eaten  on  meat,  and
will   assist   the  appetite  and    strengthen  the   digesture.     One
spoonful  of  this  preparation  may  be  taken   to  good  advanh
and  will  remove  faint,  sinking  feelings,  which  seme  are  sul
to,  especdly  in  the  spring  of  the  year.     Peppers-sauce  is  good
iv.r  the  s -me  purpose.     A  tea-spoonful  of  (  V  yenne  m;  y  be  1
in  a  tumbler  of  cider,  and  is  much  belter  than  ardent  spit
There  is  scarce  any  preparation  cf  medicine  fbat  I  make  nse  of
in  which  i  do  no!  put  some  of  this  article.     It  will  cure  the  ague
in  the  face,  by  taking  a  dose,,  and  tying  a  small  quantity  in  lire


<>R,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PIIYSICttAtf.  <j£

Woth,  and  pat  it  between  the  cheek  and  teeth  en  the  side  that
«  affected,  setting  by  the  fire  covered  with  a  blanket.  It  fe
good  to  put  on  old  sores.

RED  PEPPER:-.

These  are  very  plenty  in  this  country,  being  cultivated  in
gardens,  and  -re  principally  made  use  of  for  pickling;  for  which
purpose  the  pods  are  gathered  when  green  and  preserved  in
vinegar.  If  is  of  the  same  nature  as  Cayenne  pepper,  but  not
so  strong;  and  is  the  best  substitute  for  that  article,  of  any
thing  I  have  ever  found.  For  medical  use  they  should  not  be
gathered  till  ripe,  when  they  are  of  a  bright  red  color;  should
ie  reduced  to  a  fine  powder,  nnd  may  be  used  instead  of  Cay-
enne, when  that  article  cannot  be  obtained.

GINGER.

This  is  a  root  which  is  brought  from  foreign  countries,  and  k
too  well  known  to  need  any  farther  description.  Tt  is  a  very
good  article,  having  a  warming  and  agreeable  effect  on  the
stomach.  Tt  is  a  powerful  slimulant,  and  is  not  volatile  liVc
m"nv  other  hot  articles;  and  is  the  next  best  thing  to  raise  the
inw.nd  heat  and  promote  perspiration;  and  may  be  used  with
good  success  for  that  purpose,  as  a  substitute  for  Cayenne,
when  that  or  the  red  peppers  cannot  be  had.  It  is  sold  in  the
shops  ground,  but.  is  sometimes  mixed  with  the  other  articles
to  increase  the  quantity,  and  is  not  so  strong.  The  best  way
is  to  get  the  roots  and  grind  or  pound  them  to  a  fine  powHer.
The  dose  must  bo,  regulated  according  to  circumstances;  if
givon  to  raise  the  internal  heat  and  cause  perspiration,  it  must
be  rrne-ted  till  it  has  the  desired  effect.  It  makes  an  excellent
.poultice,  mixed  with  pounded  cracker,  or  slippery  elm  bark,  for
which  T  make  much  use  of  it.  To  keop  a  piece  of  the  root  in
(lie  mouth  and  chew  it.  like  tobacco,  swallowing  the  juice,  is
verv  gon.1  for  a  cough,  and  those  of  a  consumptive  habit;  and
this  should  be  also  done  by  all  who  are  exposed  to  any  conta-
gion, or  are  attending  on  the  sick,  as  it  will  guard  the  stomach
as  nst  taking  the  disease.  It  may  be  taken  in  hot  water
sweetened,  or  in  a  tea  of  No.  8.

BLACK  PEPPER.

This  may  he  used  to  good  advantage  as  a  substitute  for  the
foregoing  articles*  vtkevi  they  are  not  to  be  hai,  and  may  tyr


48  NEW  GUIDE  T©  HEALTH;

prepared  and  administered  in  the  same  mariner.  These  four
that  I  have  mentioned,  are  all  the  articles  I  have  been  able  to
find,  that  would  hold  the  heat  of  the  body  for  any  length  of
time;  all  the  others  that  I  have  tried,  are  so  volatile  that  they
do  Little  good.


No.  3. — To  scour  the  Stomach  and  Bowels,
and  remove  the  Canker.

Under  this  head  I  shall  describe  such  vegetable  productions
as  are  good  for  Canker,  and  which  I  have  found  to  be  best
in  removing  the  thrush  from  the  throat,  stomach  and  bowels,
caused  by  cold,  and  there  will  be  more  or  less  of  it  in  all  cases
of  disease;  for  when  cold  gets  the  power  over  tbe  inward  heat,
the  stomach  and  bowels  become  coated  with  canker,  which  pre-
vents those  numerous  little  vessels  calculated  to  nourish  the
system  from  performing  their  duty.  A  cure  therefore  cannot
be  effected  without  removing  this  difficulty,  which  must  be  done
by  such  things  as  are  best  calculated  to  scour  off  the  canker  and
leave  the  juicos  flowing  free.  There  are  many  articles  which
are  good  for  this,  but  I-shall  mention  only  such  as  I  have  found
to  be  the  best.  Several  things  that  are  used  for  canker  are  too
binding,  and  do  more  hurt  than  good,  as  they  cause  obstruc-
tions. I  have  adopted  a  rule  to  ascertain  what  is  good  for
canker,  which  I  have  found  very  useful;  and  shall  here  give
it  as  a  guide  for  others;  that  is,"  to  chew  some  of  the  artfcle,
and  if  it  causes  the  saliva  to  flow  freelv,  and  leaves  the  mouth
clean  and  moist,  it  is  good ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  if  it  dries  up
the  juices,  and  leaves  the  mouth  rough  and  dry,  it  is  bad  and
should  be  avoided.

BAYBERRV,  or  CANDLEBERRY.

This  is  a  species  of  the  myrtle  from  which  wax  is  obtained
from  the  berries,  and  grows  common  in  many  parts  of  this
country.  It  is  a  shrub  growing  from  two  to  four  feet  high,  and
w  easily  known  by  the  berries  which  it  produces  annually,  con-
taining wax  in  abundance;  these  grow  on  the  branches  close  to
them,  similar  to  the  juniper;  the  leaves  are  of  a  deep  green.
Tke  bark  of  the  roots  is  what  is  used  for  medicine,  and  should


Cm,  BOTANIC  PAMfiLY  PH*Sl<3f  Ajfr  S$"

tc  collectod  in  the  spring  before  it  puts  forth  its  leaves,  or  in
the  fall,  after  done  growing,  as  then  the  sap  is  in  the  roots;  this
should   be  attended  to  in  gathering  all  kinds  of  medical  roots;
but  those  things  that  the  tops  are  iised,  should  be  collected  in
the  summer  when  nearly  full  grown,  as  then  the  sjp  is  in  the
Cop.     The  roots  should  be  dug  and  cleaned  from  the  dirt,  and
pounded  with  a  millet  or  club,  when  the  bark  is  easily  separated
from  thestalk,  and  may  be  obtained  with  little  trouble.     It  should
be  dried  in   a  chamber  or  loft,  where  it  is  not  exposed  to  the
weather;  and  when  perfectly  dry,  should  be  ground  or  pounded
to  a  fine  powder.     It  is  an  excellent  medicine  either  taken  by
itself  or  compounded  with  other  articles;  and  is  the  best,  thing
for  canker  of  any  article  I  have  ever  found.     It  is  highly  stimu-
lating and  very  pungent,  pricking  the  gbnds   and  causing  the
saliva  and  other  juices  to  flow  freely.     Is  good  used   as  tooth
powder,  cleanses  the  teeth  and  gums  and  removes  the  scurvy;
taken  as  snutT,  it  clears  the  head  and  relieves  the  head-ache.
It  may  be  given  to  advantage  in  a  relax,  and  all  disorders  of  !  he
bowels.     When   the  stomach  is  very  foul,  it  will   frequefl  'y
operate  as  an  emetic.     For  a  dose  t  ike  a  tea-spoonful  in  ho*
water  sweetened.

WHITE    POND    LILY — the  Root.

This  is  well  known  from  the  beaut' "ul  flower  which  it  bears^
opening  only  to  the  sun  nd  closing  igain  at  night.  It;  a
in  fresh  water  ponds,  and  ;s  common  in  ill  parts  of  this  coun  ry
where  I  have  been.  The  best  time  to  >  'her  v.  is  mi  tb<  fall  of
the  year,  when  dry  and  the  water  in  the  ponds  is  low,  as  m  y
then  be  obtained  with  little  iiinc  ilty.  )•  h  s  large  roots,  « I  h
should  be  dug,  washed  cle:.  fpli  into  strips,  nd  dried  s  a
been  directed  for  the  Bayberry  roS\  br.rk.  When  perfectly  <  y,
it  should  be  pounded  in  a  mortar,  and  preserved  for  use.  his
article  is  a  very  good  medicine  fo>  canker  and  all  complaim  of
the  bowels,  given  in  a  tea  alone,  or  mixed  with  other  art.

hemlock — the  innef  Bark.

This  is  the  common  Hemlock  tree  and  grows  in  all  parts  of
JWew  England.  The  best  for  medicine  is  to  peel  the  bark  From
the  young  tree  and  shave  the  rn?s  "roin  the  outside,  uid  preserve
only  the  inner  rind;  dry  it  carefully,  and  pound  or  grind  it  o  a
powder.    A  tea  made  by  putting  boiling  water  to  this  bark*  ss  a

&


IS'EW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH.

good  medicine  for  canker  ;nd  many  other  complaints.  'The
tirst  of  my  using  the  Hemlock  bark  cs  medicine,  was  in  1814,
being  in  want  of  something  for  canker,  1  tried  some  of  it  by
•.hewing,  and  found  it  to  answer,  made  use  of  it  to  good  advan-
tage. Since  then,  have  been  in  constant  use  of  it,  and  have
always  found  it  a  very  good  medicine,  both  for  canker  and  other
complaints  of  the  bowels  and  stomach.  A  tea  made  of  this
bark,  is  very  good  and  nwy  be  used  freely;  it  is  good  to  give
the  emetic  and  No.  2  in,  and  may  be  used  for  drink  in  all  cases
of  sickness,  especially  when  going  through  a  course  cf  medicine
and  ste ming.  This,  with  Baybcrry  bark  and  the  Lily  root,
forms  No.  3,  or  what  has  been  commonly  called  coffee,  though
many  other  things  may  be  added,  or  either  of  them  may  be  used
to  advantage  alone.  The  boughs,  made  into  a  tea,  are  very
good  tor  the  gravel  and  other  obstructions  of  the  urinary  passages,
and  for  rheumatism.

MARSH    ROSEMARY the    Boot.

This  article  is  very  well  known  in  all  parts  of  this  country.,
and  has  been  made  use  of  for  canker  and  sore  mouth.  I  have
made  use  oi'  it  with  Bayberry  bark  as  No.  3,  in  my  practice,  for
many  years  with  good  success;  but  after  finding  that  the  Lily
root  and  Hemlock  bark  were  better,  have  mostly  laid  it  :  side*
Lis  so  binding  in  its  nature  that  it  is  not  safe  to  use  it  without  a
targe  proportion  of  the  Bayberry  bark.

sumach — the  Bark,  Leaves  and  Berries.

This  appears  to  be  a  new  article  in  medicine,  entirely  un-
known to  the  medical  faculty,  as  no  mention  is  made  of  it  by
anv  author.  The  first  of  my  knowledge  that  it  was  good  for
canker  was  when  at  Onion  river,  in  1807,  attending  the  dysentery;
being  in  want  of  something  to  clear  the  stomach  and  bowels  in
that  complaint,  found  that  the  bark,  leaves  or  berries  answered
the  purpose  extremely  well,  and  have  made  much  use  of  it  ever
since.  It  is  well  known,  and  is  found  in  all  parts  of  the  country;
some  of  it  grows  from  eight  to  twelve  feet  high,  and  has  large
Spreading  branches;  the  berries  grow  in  lanje  bunches,  and  whe»
ripe  are  a  deep  red  colour,  of  a  pleasant  sour  taste;  and  are
Used  by  the  country  people  to  dye  with.  The  leaves  and  young
■  sprouts  are  made  use  of  in  tanning  Morocco  leather.  For
medicjhc,  the  bark  should  be  peeled  when  full  of  sap,  the  leave?,


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  p\

t
when  fall  grown,  and  the  berries,  when  ripe;  they  should  he
earefully  dried,  and  when  used  us  part  of  No.  3,  should  be
pounded  and  may  be  used  altogether  or  eiiher  sep  rate.  A  tea
made  of!  eiiher  or  altogether,  is  very  good  and  in  u  be  given  with
safety  in  almost  all  complaints,  or  put  into  the  injections;  It  will
scour  the  stomach  and  bowels,  and  is  good  for  stfangu  try,  is  it
promotes  urine  and  relieves  difficulties  in  the  Sidneys,  by  remov-
ing obstructions  and  strengthening  those  parts  1  Is  tte  been  in
the  dibit  of  late  years,  of  miking  use  of  this  article  with  Bay*
berry  bark  and  Lily  root,  or  Hemlock  bark,  equal  parts,  for  Nft.
3,  or  coffee,  and  it  has  always  answered  a  good  purpose.

witch-hazle — the  Leaves.

I  found  the  use  of  this  article  as  medicine,  when  I  was  quite
young;  and  have  made  much  use  of  it  in  all  my  practice.  It  is
too  well  known  in  the  country  to  need  any  description;  is  a
small  tree  or  bush  and  arows  very  common,  especially  in  new
burl.  A  tea  made  of  the  leaves,  is  an  excellent  medicine  in
many  complaints,  and  may  be  freely  used  to  advantage,  it  is
the  best  thing  for  bleeding  at  the  stomach  of  any  article  I  have
ever  found,  either  by  giving  a  tea  made  ot  the  dry  leaves,  or
chewing  them  when  green;  have  cured  several  with  it.  This
complaint  is  caused  by  canker  eating  off'  the  small  blood  vessels,
and  this  medicine  will  remove  the  canker  and  stop  the  bleeding.
I  have  made  much  use  qf  tae  tea  mule  strong  for  injections,
and  found  it  in  all  complaints  o4'  tiie  bowels  to  be  very  servicea-
ble. An  injection  made  of  this  tea  with  a  li;tle  No.  2,  is  good
for  the  piles  and  many  complaints  commoa  to  females;  and  in
bearing-down  pains  it  will  a'Ford  immediate  relief,,  if  properly
administered.  These  leaves  may  be  used  in  No.  3,  to  good
advantage,' as  a  substitute  for  either  of  the  otbsr  articles,  or
alone  for  the  .same  purpose.

tiizD  kaspb^kky — the  Leaves.

This  is  an  excellent  article,  and  I  believe  was  never  made  use
of  as  medicine,  till  discovered  by  me.  When  at  Eastport,  I
hid  no  article  with  ine  good  for  canker  and  resorted  to  my  old
rule  of  tasting,  and  found  that  these  loaves  were  good  for  that
complaint;  mule  into  a  strong  'oa,  it  answered  every  purpose
wished.  I  gathered  a  large  quantity  of  the  leaves  and  d
jthem,  and  have  been  in  constant  use  of  it  as  a  medicine


4*  NEW  GUI&E  TO  HEALTfi;

since,  and  have  found  it  an  excellent  article,  both  for  canker  and
many  other  complaints;  for  relax  and  other  bowel  complaints  of
children,  it  is  the  best  thing  that  I  have  found;  by  giving  ihe
tea  and  using  it  in  the  injections,  it  affords  immediate  relic  —
A  tea  made  of  the  leaves,  sweetened,  with  milk  in  it,  is  very
pleasant,  and  may  be  used  freely.  It  is  the  best  thing  for  women
in  travail  of  any  article  I  know  of.  Uive  a  strong  lea  of  it,  with  a
little  No.  2,  sweetened,  and  it  will  regulate  every  thing  as  na-
ture requires.  If  the  pains  arc  untimely,  it  will  make  all  quiel
m"  timely  and  lingering,  give  more  No.  2,  and  Umbil  in  the  tea
When  tbe  child  is  born,  give  it  some  of  tfie  lea  with  sugar  and
milk  in  it ;  this  prevents  sore  mouth ;  and  the  tea  is  good  to  wash
sore  nipples  with.  A  poultice  made  with  this  tea  and  cracker,  ,
or  slippery  elm  bark,  is  very  good  for  burns  or  scalds;  if  the
skin  is  off,  by  applying  this  poultice  or  washing  with  the  tea,  it
■will  harden  and  stop  smarting.  It  may  be  used  in  No.  3,  as  l
substitute  for  other  articles,  or  alone,  to  good  effect.

sqtjaw-m eed — Indian  name,  Cocash.

This  is  known  in  the  country  by  the  name  of  frost-weed,  ox
meadow  scabish;  it  is  a  wild  weed,  and  grows  in  wet  land,  by
the  sides  of  brooks;  it  has  a  stalk  that  grows  four  or  five  feet
high,  which  is  rough  and  woolly  with  a  narrow  leaf;  and  bears
a  blue  blossom  late  in  the  fall,  which  remains  till  the  frost  kills
it.     The  root  lives  through  the  winter  and   in  the  spring  puts
forth  a  new  stalk ;  the  leaves  at  the  bottom  remain  green  through
the  winter.     The  roots  and  top  are  used  for  medicine;  it  has  a
fragrant  taste  and  smell  like  lovage.     It  was  the  first  thing  I  ever
knew  used  for  canker,  and  was  given  to  me  when  I  had  the
canker-rash,  being  considered  (hen   the  best   article  known  for
canker;  I  have  frequently  used  it  for  that  complaint  and  found
it  very  good.     Take   the  green  roots  and  leaves,  bruise  them,
and  pour  on  hot  water;  give  this  tea  sweetened.     It  may  be
kept  by  adding  a  little  spirit,  and  is  good  for  rheumatism  and
nervous  affections.     It  is  perfectly  harmless  and  may  be  used
freely.     It  makes  a  very  good  bitter  tinctured  with  hot  water
and  spirit,  and  is  good  far  dizziness  and  cold  hands  and  feet


OH,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  S3

No.    4. — Bitters,  to    correct  the    Bile   and
restore   Digestion.

BITTER    HERB,  Or    BALMONV.

This  herb  grows  in  wet  mowing  land  by  the  side  of  brooks^
it  is  about  the  size  of  mint,  the  leaves  some  larger;  the  stalk  is
four  squ  re;  the  leaves  are  of  a  dark  green,  of  a  sweetish  bitter
taste.  I  beats  a  white  blossom  of  singular  form,  resembling  a
Snake's  head  with  the  mouth  open.  This  herb  is  very  good  to
Correct  the  bile  and  create  an  appetite.  A  tea  of  it  may  be
used  alone,  or  it  mav  be  added  to  the  other  articles  described
under  this  number,  which  are  all  calculated  to  restore  the
digestive  powers.

FOI\L  A  R    BASK.

There  are  several  species  of  the  poplar  tree,  thai:  grow  com-
mon in  this  country.  One  kind  is  railed  the  white  poplar  and
another  stinking  poplar;  the  bark  of  both  these  kinds  are  good
for  medicine;  but  the  latter  is  the  best,  being  the  most  biter.
It  h as  tags  h  mging  on  the  limbs,  which  remain  on  till  it  le  -  es
out,  whifch  is  about  a  week  later  than  the  other  kind.  It  has  short
brittle  twigs,  which  are  extremely  bitter  to  the  taste;  The  inner
bark  given  in  tea  is  one  of  the  best  articles  to  regulate  the  bile*
and  restore  the  digestive  power?,  of  any  thing  I  have  ever  used.
The  bark  may  be  taken  from  the  body  of  the  tree,  the  limbs,  or
the  roots,  and  the  outside  shaved  o!f  and  preserve  the  inner
brk,  which  should  be  dried  and  carefully  preserved  for  use.
To  make  the  bitters,  (\o.  4.)  it  should  be  pounded  or  ground
fine,  and  mixed  with  the  other  articles,  or  it  may  be  used  alone
for  the  s  :  me  ^purpose.  To  make  a  ten,  take  a  handful  of  'he
bark  pounded  or  cut  into  small  strips  and  put  into  a  quart  mug
and  fill  it  with  boiling  water,  which  if  taken  freely  will  relieve
a  relax,  headiche,  f'.infness  at  the  stomach,  and  many  her
complaints  caused  by  bad  digestion.  Is  good  for  obstructions
of  the  urine  an  1  weakness  in  the  loins;  and  those  of  a  consumpt-
ive habit  will  find  great  relief  ia  using  this  tea  freely.

barberry— the  Bark,

This  is  a  well  known  shrub,  producing  red  berries,  of  a  pleas>
9,nt  sour  taste,  which  are  much  used  as  a  pickle,  and  are  zls'o

E  £


54  NEW  GUIDE  TO  ttEALtfr;

preserved  with  sugar  or  molasses.  The  hark  of  the  root  ©f  top
is  a  good  hitter  and  useful  to  correct  the  hile  and  assist  the
digestur*.  The  bark  should  be  collected  at  the  proper  §eas^n,
carefully  dried  and  pounded  or  ground  to  fine  powder;  and  is
osed  as  a  part  of  the  bitters  (No.  4.)  A  tea  made  of  this  hark
is  very  good  for  all  cases  of  indigestion,  and  may  he  freely  used.

BITTER-ROOT,  CT  WANDERING    ?IILK-WEED.

This  valuable  vegetable  grows  in  meadows  and  in  hedges^
and  in  appearance  is  something  like  buckwheat,  having  similar
white  blossoms;  when  the  stalk  is  broken  it  discharges  a  milky
subftance;  it  has  two  small  pods  about  the  size  of  the  cabbage
I  pods,  with  a  silky  substance.  This  herb  is  wandering,  that
is,  the  roots  run  about  under  ground  to  a  considerable  distance,
and  produces  many  stalks,  which  grow  up  from  difierent  parts  of
fhe  root  to  the  height  of  about  two  feet.  The  kind  that  is  com-
monly known  by  the  name  of  wandering  milk-week,  grows  only
cm  upland  ;  there  is  another  kind  which  grows  near  rivers  and  on
islands,  where  high  water  flows  over  it — this  differs  some  from
the  other  in  appearance;  the  roots  run  deep  in  the  sand;  it  has
leaves  and  pods  like  the  first,  and  both  are  good  for  medicine.
The  br.rk  of  the  root  is  used.  The  roots  should  be  dug  and
dried;  and  when  perfectly  dry  may  be  pounded  in  a  mortar,
V.ien  the  bark  is  easily  separated  from  the  woody  part.  Thi9
toe'  is  very  hitter  and  is  one  of  the  greatest  correctors  of  the
b  le  I  know  of;  and  is  an  excellent  medicine  to  remove  costive-
Dess,  as  it  will  cause  the  bowels  to  move  in  a  natural  manner.
A  s'rong  decoction  of  this  root,  nude  by  steeping  it  in  hot
water,  if  drank  freely  will  operate  as  a  cathartic,  and  some'.imes
as  an  emetic;  and  is  most  sure  to  threw  off  a  fever  in  its  first
Stages,     It  should  be  used  m  all  cases  of  costiveness.

GOLDEN   6EAL,  OT  OHIO    KERCVJMA — the  Root.

This  article  grews  only  in  the  western  country;  I  am  not  well
enough  acquainted  with  the  herb  to  give  a  description  of  it ;  but
of  the  medical  virtues  of  the  root  I  have  had  a  sufficient  expe-
rience to  recommend  it  as  a  very  pleasant  bitter,  and  in  cases
where  the  ford  in  the  siomachof  weak  patients  causes  distress,
a  tea-spoonful  of  the  powder  given  in  hut  water  sweetened,  will
five  immedia  e  relief.  It  is  an  excellent  corrector  of  the  bile
sfifid  ma;  be  used  for  that  purpose  alone,  or  with  the  bitter  roofr,


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY   PHYSICIAN,  55.

or  may  be  compounded  with  either  or  all  the  articles  described
(aider  this  number,  to  restore  the  digestive  powers.


The  purposes  for  which  the  orticles  described  under  this  head
are  used,  is  to  regulate  the  stomach,  so  that  the  food  taker  into
it  may  be  properly  digested;  and  I  have  mentioned  enough  to
enable  those  who  make  use  of  the  practice  to  effect  that  object,
if  properly  attended  to.  This  is  a  very  important  part  of  the
system  of  practice,  for  unless  the  food  is  digested,  it  is  impos-
sible to  keep  up  that  heat  upon  which  life  depends.


No.  5. — Syrup  for  the  Dysentery,  to  strength-
en the  Stomach  and  Bowels,  and  restort
weak  patients.

The  articles  used  in  this  preparation  are  the  bark  of  poplar
and  bayberry,  (vhich  have  been  described.)  peach-meats,  OS
meats  of  cherry-si  ones,  sugar  and  brandy.

1>EACH-MEATS.

The  meats  that  are  in  the  peach-stones  have  long  been  used
as  medicine,  and  need  but  little  to  be  said  bout  them,  except
tfv  t  they  are  of  (Treat  value  to  strengthen  the  stomach  and
bowels  and  restore  the  digesture;  for  which  purpose  I  h.  ve
made  much  use  of  them,  and  always  to  200  I  dv  int  ge.  Mad*
into  a  cordial,  with  other  articles,  in  the  manner  as  will  be  here-
after directed,  forms  one  of  the  best  remedies  I  know  of,  to
recover  the  natural  tone  of  the  stomach  ifter  long  sickness ;  nd
to  restore  weak  patients,  particularly  iadysentery.  A  tea  made
of  the  leaves  of  tho  peach-tree  is  very  wood  for  complaints  in
children  and  young  people,  and  will  remove  cholic.

CHERRY-STONES.

The  meats  of  the  wild  cherry-stones  re  very  erood  and  may
be  used  instead  of  the  peach-meatsr,  when  they  1  ■'  -  d.

Get  these  stones  as  clean  as  possible,  when  well  dried  poun5


CT>  KEW  GU1BE  TO  HEALTH;

thorn  in  a  mortar,  and  separate  iJjo  meals  from  the  stone*,  vrnicli
is  done  with  little  trouble;  take  the  same  quantify  as  is  directed
of  the  peach-meats,  and  it  will  answer  equally  as  well.  A  tea
m  ile  of  the  cherries  pounded  with-  the  stones  and  steeped  in
hot  water;  sweetened  with  loaf  sugar,  to  which  add  a  little
brandy,  is  good  to  restore  the  digestive  powers  and  create  an
appetite.

Bitter  almonds   may  he   used   as  a  substitute  for  the  pcach-
Jfneats  or  cherry-stones,  when  they  cannot  be  had.


Xo.  6. — Rheumatic  Drops,  to  remove  pain4
prevent  mortification,  and  promote  a  na-
tural heat.


■nncipal  articles  used  in  this  preparation,  are  high  wines',
proof  brandy,  gum  myrrh  and   Cayenne;  for  external
tion  spirits  of  turpentine  is  added]  ind  sometimes  gum
amphor.     The  manner  of  preparing  will  be  hereafter  given.


or
ap

Camphor.

GUM   MYRRH.


This  is  a  gum  obtained  from  a  tree  which  grows  in  the  East-
Indies,  and  isbrought  to  this  country  and  sold  by  the  i  potheca-
ries  for  medical  uses:  there  is  nofcBing  sold  by  them  thai  pos-
sesses more  useful  and  medical  properties  than  this  article;
though  the  doctors  seem  to  have  hut  little  knowledge  of  its  vir-
tues. All  those  who  I  have  heard  express  an  opinion  upon  it,
Consider  it  of  very  little  value.  When  1  obtained  my  patent,
Dr.  Thornton,  the  clerk  of  the  Patent  Office,  said  it  was  good
for  nothing;  all  this  however  does  not  lessen  its  value  The
first  knowledge  I  had  of  it  was  when  I  was  laid  up  with  mv
lame  ancle  at  Onion  river,  as  has  been  before  related  in  my  nar-
rative. An  old  man  from  Canada  passing  that  wav  and  hearing  of;
my  case  called  to  see  me,  and  observing  the  putrid  state  f  was  in,
told  my  father  that  gum  myrrh  would  be  good  for  me,  as  it  was
an  excedent  article  to  prevent  mortification.  He  immediately
Obf:  med  some  of  the  tincture,  and  not  having  a  syringe  he  took
son  -in  his  mouth  ■■  nd  squwfed  it  through  a  iinll  into  the  wound  •
the  sm  uting  was  severe  for  a  short  time.  Bv  t  sting  it  himself
Sr.d  fending  it  a  pleasant  bitter,  he  gave  me  some  to  take;   h*


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  hV

Using  it  there  wis  a  favorable  alteration,  both  in  my  bodily
health  nd  in  the  state  of  rny  wound.  After  this  I  had  great
faith  in  this  article  and  was  seldom  without  it.  When  I  ccmc
to  have  a  f  mily  I  in<de  much  use  of  myrrh;  it  v/as  one  of  the
principal  articles  used  in  restoring  my  wife,  when  given  over  by
the  midwife,  as  reliie  I  in  my  n  irrative.  In  several  c  sc-s  of  baa
wounds  arid  old  sores,  it  afforde/J  great  relief;  and  in  what  the
doctors  call  worm  complain  ts  in  ch  ldren,by  giving  the  tincture
i  such  symptoms  appeared,  it  removed  them.  ^  used  it  at
time  by  making  a  tincture  with  spiri';  bet  after  having  a
fledge  of  Cayenne,  {  put  some  6C  this  with  it,  which  made
it  much  better.  I  found  out  by  accident  tint  boiling  it  would
prevent  the  fumes  of  the  spirit  from  rising  to  the  head,  which
would  othewise,  in  some  cases,  produce  bad  effects,  particularly
in  such  as  were  subject  to  hysterical  affection.  This  was  the
origin  of  my  rheumatic  drops,  a  preparation  which  has  pro\ed
more  generally  useful  than  any  one  compound  I  make  use  of.
In  selecting  myrrh  for  use,  take  that  of  a  light  brown  color,
somewhat  transparent,  and  of  a  bitter  taste,  a  little  pungent.
It  should  be  reduced  to  a  fine  powdor,  by  being  pounded  in  a
mortar,  before  used.

SPIRIT  OP  TURPENTINE.

This  article  is  too  well  known  to  need  any  description,  being
U'od  by  painters.  The  only  way  in  which  I  use  it  is  in  such
preparations  as  are  intended  for  external  application,  in  which  I
have  found  it  useful.  A  proportion  of  it  should  be  added  to
the  rheumatic  drops,  when  used  for  the  itch  or  other  bad  humors-.
It  is  a  powerful  article,  and  should  be  used  with  caution.

Gt7M  CAMrilOR.

I  shall  say  but  little  about,  this  article,  as  I  never  found  any
very  great  advantages  from  its  use,  though  \  never  knew  it  to  do
any  harm.  It  is  made  much  use  of,  and  I  think  there  is  more
credit  given  to  it  than  what  it  deserves.  I  hrve  been  in  the  habit
of  adding  some  of  it  to  the  rheumatic  drops,  when  used  for
bad  sprains,  and  in  such  cases  have  found  it  useful;  and  I  have
no  doubt  but  that  it  may  lie  sometimes  given  to  advantage  to
ivirm  the  stomach  and  relieve  pain;  but  there  are  other  articles
<vhich  I  make  use  of  for  that  purpose^  that  are  much  better


t#  NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH;

Nerve  Powder.

AMERICAN  valeeia N,  or  iadies'  slipper:    sometime*  cathct
UMBIL,  or  Male  and  Female  nervine.

There  pre  four  species  of  this  valuable  vegetable,  one  male

and  tli.ee  fern  ile;  the  mile  is  called  yellow  umbil,  and  grows  in
swamps,  and  wet  land;  has"  a  la*rge  cluster  *f  fibrous  roots  mailed
together,  joined  to  ot,  which  puts  forth  several  stalks

that  grow-aboutiysw  feel  I  s  leaves  something  resembling

the  poke  leaf.  The  female  kinds  are  distinguished  by  the  color
of  the  blossoms,  which  are  red,  red  and  white,  and  white.  The
red  has  bul  two  leaves,  which  grow  out  of  the  ground  and  lean
over  to  the  right  and  left,  between  which  a  single  stalk  shoots
up  to  the  height  of  from  eight  to  ten  inches,  bearing  on  its  lop
a  red  blossom  of  a  very  singular  form,  that  gives  it  the  name  of
female  umbil.  This  kind  is  found  on  high  ledges  and  in
swamps.  The  red  and  white,  and  white  umbil,  grows  only  in
swamps,  and  is  in  larger  clusters  of  roots  than  the  yellow,  1  ut
in  a  similar  form;  its  top  is  similar  to  the  red,  except  the  color
of  (lie  blossom.  The  yellow  and  red  are  the  best  for  medicine:
the  roots  should  be  dug  in  the  fall  when  done  growing,  or  in
the  spring  before  the  top  puts  forth.  If  dug  when  growing,  the
roots  will  nearly  all  dry  up.  When  the  roots  ore  dug,  they
should  be  washed  clean,  carefully  dried,  and  pounded  or  ground
to  a  fine  powder,  sifted  through  a  fine  sieve  and  preserved  from
the  air  for  use.

This  powder  is  the  best  ncnino  known;  I  have  made  great
use  of  it,  and  line  always  found  it  to  produce  the  most  benefi-
cial effects,  in  all  cases  of  nervous  affection,  and  in  hysterical
symptoms;  in  fact  it  would  be  difficult  to  get  along  with  mi
practice  in  many  cases  without  this  important  article.  It  is
perfectly  harmless  and  may  be  used  in  all  cases  of  disease  with
safety ,j  and  is  much  better  than  opium,  which  is  generally  given
in  cases  of  spasmodic,  affection,  and  which  only  deadens  the
ngs and  Believes  pain  only  by  destroying  sensibility,  without
doing  any  good.  It  has  been  supposed  by  the  doctors  to  be  of
a  n  rcotic  nature;  but  this  is  a  mistake.  They  have  drawn  this4
conclusion,  T  suppose,  from  its  tendency  to  promote  sleep;  but
this  is  altogether  owing  to  its  quieting  the  nerves  and  leaving
the  patient  at  ease,  when  nature  requires  sleep  to  recover  the
natural  tone  of  the  system.  Half  a.  tea-spoonfnl  may  he  giver;
it  water  sweetened,  and  thg  dc  d  if  necessary;  cr


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  <&

■  the  same  quantity  may  be  mixed  with  a  dose  of  either  the  other
numbers,  when  given,  and  put  into  the  injections;  and  where
f.here  is  nervous  symptoms  it  should  never  be  dispensed  with,     ■


I  have  thus  far  given  a  description  of  all  the  important  vege-
tables made  use  of  in  my  system  of  practice,  vviih  the  manner
of  preparing  and  using  them.  I  shall  now  proceed  to  describe
a  number  of  articles  of  less  importance,  all  of  which  i  have
used  and  found  good  in  various  complaints.  Some  of  them
form  a  part  of  my  medical  preparations,  and  many  others  may
he  used  as  substitutes  for  some  that  have  been  mentioned. —
They  are  all  of  a  warming  nature  and  may  be  used  to  advarj
tage  in  throwing  off  disease  in  its  first  stages.

SPEARMINT,

This  is  a  well  known  herb,  and  makes  a  very  pleasant  tea-,
which  may  be  freely  used  in  sickness.  The  most  valuable  pro-
perty it  possesses  is  to  stop  vomiting.  Jf  the  Emeiic  Herb,  or
any  other  cause  should  produce  violent  vomiting,  by  giving  a
strong  tea  made  of  this  herb  it  will  stop  it,  and  sit  pleasantly  or
ihe  stomach.

PEPPERMINT,

This  article  is  very  hot  in  its  nature,  and  may  be  used  to.
•advantage  to  promote  perspiration  and  overpower  the  col«J.  i,
have  frequently  used  it  for  that  purpose  with  success;  but  it  is
volatile  and  will  not  retain  the  heat  long  in  the  stomach.  In
colds  and  slight  attacks  of  disease,  to  drink  freely  of  a  tea
made  of  this  herb  on  going  to  bed,  will  throw  it  off.  The
essence  put  in  warm  water  is  good  to  give  children,  and  will
relieve  pain,  in  the  stomach  and  bowels.  A  few  drops  of  the
eil  given  in  warm  wrater,  or  on  loaf  sugar,  is  good  for  the  same.
purpose.

PENNYROYAL,

This  herb  grows  common  in  all  p  rts  of  the  country,  and  is
too  well  known  to  need  any  description.  It  is  an  article  of
great  value  in  medicine,  and  a  tea  of  it  may  be  freely  used  in
all  cases  of  sickness.  It  is  good  for  the  stomach,  being  warm-
fng  and  cleansing^  if  drank  freely,  will  produce  perspiration),


•2)  SEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH*;

and  remove  obstructions!  In  colds  and  slight  attacks  of  dis<
it  will  be  likt  ly  to  throw  it  off,  ;:nd  prevent  sickness.  It  is  very
good  for  children,  and  will  remove  pain  in  the  bowels  and  wind,
i  :ng  through  a  course  of  medicine,  a  tea  of  this  herb  may
be  given  for  drink,  and  will  cause  the  medicine  to  have  a  pleas-
ant operation.

SiniMER6AVOB¥.

This  herb  grows  in  gardens,  and  is  made  use  of  to  seasba
meats  in  cooking;  it  is  of  a  very  pleasant  flavor  and  of  a  hot
nature.  A  tea  of  it  is  good  for  colds  and  may  be  used  freely  in
case  of  sickness.  There  is  an  oil  made  from  this  herb,  which
will  cure  the  toothache,  by  putting  a  little  on  cotton  wool  and
applying  it  to  the  affected  tooth.

HOARHOFNB,

This  plant  grows  common  in  this  country,  and  is  made  much
accounl  of  in  removing  cough.  An  infusion  made  of  the
leaves,  sweetened  with  honey,  is  good  for  the  asthma,  and  all
Complaints  of  the  lungs.  The  syrup  of  this  plant  will  loosen
tough  phlegm  and  remove  hoarseness  caused  by  a  bad  cold.  The
hoarhound  candy  is  very  useful  for  such  as  are  troubled  with
cough,  particularly  old  people,  and  those  that  are  short  winded.

ELECAMPANE.

The  root  of  this  plant  made  into  syrup,  is  good  for  a  cough;
•and  I  have  made  use  of  it  for  that  purpose  with  advantage  in
many  cases,  and  cm  recommend  it  as  a  safe  and  useful  remedy
in  complaints  of  that  kind.

MAYWEED.

A  tea  made  of  this  herb,  to  be  drank  hot  when  going  to  lied.
Is  very  <food  for  a  cold;  and  in  slight  attacks  of  the  fever  if
used  freely  and  a  hot  stone  put  to  the  feet,  will,  in  most  cases,
throw  it  off.  It  grows  common  in  old  fields,  and  by  the  sides
<)f  roads.

WORMWOOD.

This  herb  is  a  very  wholesome  bitter,  and  may  be  taken  t«
^vantage  in  different  ways,    It  is  of  a  hot  nature,  and  is  gwd


QjR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICiArt.  Ot

for  the  stomach,  to  create  an  appetite,  and  assist  the  digesture.
It  may  be  taken  in  tea,  or  the  green  herb  may  be  pounded  and
tinctured  in  spnit,  winch  is  good  to  apply  to  a  bru.se  or  sprain,

TANZV.

This  is  a  hot  hitter  herb,  grows  common  in  highways,  and  is
cultivated  in  gardens.  A  tea  made  of  tiiis  herb  is  good  ibr  hys-
terics and  other,  female  complaints;  it  will  strengthen  those  that
have  weak  reins  and  kidneys,  and  is  good  for  the  stranguary,  or
stoppage  of  urine.  The  green  leaves  pounded,  are  good  to  put
pn  bruises  and  sprains,  and  will  allay  the  swelling.

CHAMOMILE.

This  is  a  well  known  herb,  the  flowers  are  sold  by  the  apothe
•;aries  and  are  made  much  use  of  in  a  tea  for  many  complaints
It  is  good  given  in  a  tea  for  bowel  complaints,  and  extern  llf
applied,  will  relieve  sprains,  bruises,  ana  swellings,  and  remove
callouses,  corns,  tfcc.and  restore  shrunk  sinews.

BITTER-SWEET..

This  herb  has  long  been  esteemed  as  a  medicine  of  consider-
able value  for  many  complaints.  It  grows  common  in  this
country,  in  hedges  where  the  ground  is  moist,  and  the  top  runs
along  the  ground  or  climbs  on  bushes.  lis  taste  when  chewed
is  first  bitter,  and  then  sweet,  which  has  given  its  name.  It  is
said  to  be  a  good. medicine  for  internal  injuries  and  to  remove
obstructions,  which  I  have  no  doubt  is  correct;  but  the  only  way
I  make  use  of  it,  is  for  external  application;  the  bark  of  the
root  with  chamomile  and  wormwood  makes  an  ointment  of  great
value,  which  is  an  excellent  thing  for  a  bruise,  sprain,  callus*
^welling,  or  for  corns.

MULLEN.

The  leaves  of  this  plant  are  very  good  to  bring  down  swelling
and  to  restore  contracted  sinews,  by  pounding  them  and  applying
them  warm  to  the  part  affected.  For  external  use,  they  arc  an
excellent  article  in  many  complaints.  This  herb  is  too  wcH
known  to  need  any  description.  It  is  an  important  article  in
my  strengthening  plaster,

F


■r  -in*  ikar  -vzazi  fc*  tse  fcrr  End  applied  to  $

-    •  ..         •      -_:_^i.-*    :    .:.G  c-use  pain;  and
-     ;  ~_"    :l:    .  --  "  r  -  rain,  as  11  will
§■£    It  5  «A.  rse  c-f  in  tbe  frengtheninj?


S'ew-England;

■    - ;  :       ■  :•".  from  which

.  —    5  :      -..■... .-.  be  found  ia

_-.-■-.*■  -     for  medicine,

fully  dried j

r.    This

nto  a  syrup,

taken  in  the

: :.  tor  asthma,

lungs,

ions  for


ree  triangu-

n«c«Eta  stalk,  on  the

-     ■     •
cfredts

•Scae.  aod  resembles  a  small

no,  and  is

expel  wind.

!_■•   ---orders  of  the

it  forms

.W  be  dried

honey,


- nr.adis  made  use  ot
l!Tv-     Tt  is  of  -  warning


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  ,j,,

FEATHERFEW,

This  herb  is  stimulating  and  is  good  for  hysteric  complaint^
*nd  many  other  disorders  common  to  females.  It  promoted  the
passage  of  urine  and  removes  obstructions  in  those  parts.  It
should  be  taken  in  tea  alone,  or  may  be  added  with  chamomile,
and  used  to  advantage  in  all  cases  of  obstructions.

©livers,    .

This  is  a  sort  of  joint  grass  and  grows  in  mowing  land,  where
*he  ground  is  wet;  it  has  small  leaves  at  each  joint;  the  stalk
is  four  square  and  the  edges  are  rough  like  a  sickle.  This  hers
made  into  a  strong  tea  and  drank  freely  is  very  good  for  thb
stoppage  of  urine,  and  may  be  made  use  of  for  all  obstructionc
tn  those  parts  to  advantage.

BLACK    BIRCH    BARK.

A  tea  made  of  this  bark  is  useful  m  curing  all  complaints  oE
flie  bowels  and  to  remove  obstructions.  I  have  made  much  use
of  it  in  dysentery .  This  tea  with  peach-meats  or  cherry-stone
meats,  made  into  a  syrup,  is  an  excellent  article  to  restore
patients  after  having  been  reduced  by  that  disease,  and  to  pro-
mote the  digesture.  It  is  good  for  canker  and  all  complaints  of
the  bowels.

EVAN    ROOT.

This  is  called  by  some  people  chocolate  root,  on  account  x»f
its  resembling  that  article  in  taste,  and  is  made  use  of  by  some
for  a  common  drink  instead  of  tea  or  coffee.  It.  is  good  foT
canker,  and  may  be  used  in  No.  3,  as  a  substitute  for  otber  arti-
cles. It  jjrows  common  in  this  country  and  is  too  well  known
to  need  describing.

SLIPPERY   ELM   BARK..

The  inner  bark  of  this  tree  is  an  article  of  much  value,  and
may  be  used  to  advantage  in  many  different  ways.  There  arc
several  species  of  the  elm  that  grow  common  in  this  country;
and  there' are  two  kind?  of  the  slippery  elm,  one  the  bark  is
rather  hard  -nd  tough,  and  the  other  is  very  brittle;  the  latter  is
>est  for  medical  uses.     The  bark  should  be  peeled,  the  otft>


M-  NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH;

side  ross  shaved  off",  dried,  and  ground  or  pounded  to  a  line
powder.  If  used  internally,  put  a.  tea-spoonful  of  this  powder
into  a  tea-cup  with  as  much  sugar,  mix  them  well  together,  »
add  a  little  cold  witter  and  stir  it  till  perfectly  mixed  and
then  put  hot  water  to  it  and  stir  till  it  forms  a  jelly  thick
enough  to  be  eafen  with  a  spoon,  A  tea-spoonful  may  be  taken
at  a  time,  and  is  an  excellent  medicine  to  heal  soreness  in  the
■throat,  stomach  and  bowels,  caused  by  canker;  er  more  hot
W  t  may  be  put  to  it  and  made  into  a  drink,  and  freely  taken
for  die  same  purpose.  1  have  made  much  use  of  this  bark  fo|
poultices,  and  have  in  all  cases  found  it  a  most  excellent  article
for  that  purpose.  Mixed  with  pounded  cracker  and  ginger,  it
makes  the  best  poultice  I  have  ever  found;  for  burns,  scalds,
felons,  old  sores,  &c.  it  is  the  best  thing  I  have  met  with,  to  allay
the  inflammation;  case  the  pain  and  heal  them  in  a  short  time.

BALSAM    FIB.

This  balsam  is  obtained  from  a  tree  well  known  in  many  parts
of  this  country;  it  is  taken  from  small  blisters  which  form  in
the  bark.  It  is  of  a  very  healing  nature,  and  is  good  to  remove
internal  soreness.  It  forms  an  important  article  in  my  healing
Salve.     When  taken  it  may  be  dropped  on  loaf  sugar.

OENSANO.

This  root  grows  wild  inthis  country;  and  is  found  plentifully
:n  Vermont.  It  was  formerly  collected  for  exportation,  and
Urge  quantities  of  it  were  sent  to  China,  where  it  brought  a
great  price.  It  is  said  the  people  of  that  country  considered  it
of  great  value;  but  for  what  purpose  they  use  it,  is  I  believe,
only  known  to  themselves.  It  is  a  nervine  and  may  be  used  to
advantage  in  all  cases  of  nervous  affection,  either  alone  or  mixed
with  other  articles.  The  root  should  be  dug  in  the  fall,  dried
and  reduced  to  a  fine  powder;  from  half  to  a  tea-spoonlul  may
be  given  for  a  dose,  in  hot  water  sweetened.

SNAKEROOT.

This  is  a  well  known  article,  grows  wild  and  may  be  found  ia
most  parts  of  this  country.  It  is  of  a  hot  nature,  and  is  made.
rYiuch  use  of  in  tei,  for  meazlesand  other  eruptions,  to  keep  the
disorder  out,  for  which  it  is  considered  very  good ;  this  is  owing1


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  l»«

to  its  warming  qualities,  which  keeps  the  determining  powers

to   the  surface;  which  effect   may  le  produced  by  almost  any

strong  stimulant;  but  No.  2,  or  the  composition  powders,  is

much  the  lest  for  that  purpose.     A   tea   made  of  this   root

may  be  given  to  advantage  in  many  cases  of  disease;  it  has  a

tendency  to  promote  perspiration,  and  is  good  to  remove  pain

in  the  stomach  and  bowels,  and  expel  wind.     The  roots  reduced

to  powder  may  be  mixed  with  gensang  or  umbil  for  all  nervous

compiling.

MUSTARD.

The  seed  of  this  hero  is  principally  made  use  of  for  culinarj
purposes,  being  eaten  on  meat;  for  which  it  is  ground  to  a  fine
powder  and  mixed  with  warm  water.  It  is  very  pungent  and
of  a  hot  nature;  but  is  volatile  and  will  not  hold  the  heat  long
enough  to  do  much  good  in  retaining  the  internal  heat.  It  Is
good  to  create  an  appetite  ind  assist,  the  digeffure;  and  given
in  hot  water  sweetened,  will  remove  pain  in  the  bowels  and
stomach.  It.  is  frequently  used  for  rheumatism^  both  internally
and  externally;  but  Nos.  2  an  J  6,  are  much  better  fur  that
purpose.

HORSERADISH.

The  root  of  this  plant  is  mostly  used  for  culinary  purposes,
ml  it  his  some  nedical  properties.  It  is  of  a  hot  nature,  but
very  volatile;  its  warming  qualities  will  mostly  evaporate  before
it  gets  into  tire  stomach.  The  roots  may  he  given  to  promote
the  appetite  and -assist  th^digesture.  The  leives  sometimes
lpplied  to  remove  external  pain,  but  is  apt  to  raise  a  blister.

BAMI    OF    GILEAD.

This  tree  is  of  the  species  of  the  poplar  and  possesses  sonr
medical  virtues.     It  resembles  the  kin!  of  poplar  that  has  b
described,  having  similar  tags;  bat  tlie  buds  and  leaves     re
larger.     The  buds  bruised  and  tinctured  in  spirit,  prodnces
effect  something  like  the  tincture  of  myrrh;  and  is  good  '■■
inwardly  as  a   restorative,  and   for  bathing  sores.     The  bark
pedfram  the  twigs  md  steeped  in  ho?  water,  is  a  food  cor-
rector of  the  bile,  md  will  operate  both  as  an  emetic  and  c  i;  bar
tic;   it  is  more  harsh  than  the  other  kind  of  poplar,  but  ma-
used  to  advantage  in  many  cases  of  diseas?,.


ee  ivkv/  gutdk  to  health.

BUTTERNUT,

This  t;ee  grows  common,  in  this  country,  and  is  well  known
from  the  nut  which  it  bears  of  an  oblong  shape  and  nearly  as
large  as  an  egg,  in  which  is  a  meat  containing  much  oil,  and
very  good  1o  eat.  The  bark  of  this  tree  is  used  by  the  country
people  to  colour  with.  The  bark  taken  from  ihe  body  of  the
tree  of  roots  and  boiled  down  till  thick,  may  be  made  into  pills,
and  operaies  as  a  powerful  emetic  and  cathartic;  a  syrup  may
be  made  by  boiling  the  bark  and  adding  one  third  molasses  and
i*littie  spirit,  which  is  good  to  give  child i  en  for  worm  com-
plaints. The  buds  and  twigs  may  also  be  used  for  the  same
purpose,  and  ire  more  mill.  White  ash  bark  and  balm  of  gilead
m  V  be  idded,  equal  pans,  and  made  into  syrup  or  pills.  Those
ire  fond  of  drastic  purges  m-y  have  their  ends  sufficiec  ly
answered  by  these  preparations,  and  they  ?re  the  mosl  safe  >md
h  rnlessof  arty  that  I  know  of;  and  those  who  wish  to  be  tor-
i  with  blisters,  c  n  have  them  cheap,  by  bruising  the  green
shell  of  the  n:it,  or  the  bare,  and  applying  it  where  the  blister
is  .v  uitcd,  keeping  I  he  bandage  wet,  and  in  three  hours  they  will
V  completely  drawn,  and  the  skin  as  black  as  that  of  an  Afri-
C  n.  This  is  much  quid  er  an  1  s  for  than  if  done  with  flies  nd
will  not  cause  stranguary.  The  bark  of  the  butternut  I  is  die
principal  ingredient,  in  Dr.  Hawkes'  rheumatic  and  cancer  pills,
and  also  of  ChamberHfeCs  bilious  cordial,  which  hare  been  so
celebrated  for  many  complaints.  It  is  called  by  some  people
oilnut  and  lemon  walnut.

BLUE    AND    WHITE    VERY  INF.

This  is  a  well  known  herb,  growing  very  common;  it  ranks
nex'  to  the  emetic  herb,  for  a  puke;  and  my  be  used  for  that
•ose  either  lone  or  combined  with  thoroughwort.  It  is
gc> d  to  prevent  a  fever  in  its  first  stages.  This  herb  h  s  !  een
used  with  considerable  success  in  consumption,  having  c\  ed
several  cases  where  (he  doctors  l;-d  given  them  over.  It  may
be  used  in  a  tea  made  of  the  dry  herb,  or  prepared  in  powder
5ke  the  emetic  herb.

pfpsisway  or  rheumatic  weed.

This  herb  grows  on  mountainous  land,  anc<J   on  pine  plains
•     re  the  boxberry  or  checkerberry  is  found  plenty.     It  13  aij


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  6t

evergreen,  and  grows  from  three  to  six  inches  high,  has  a  num-
ber c  ■'n  leaves,  about  halt  in  inch  wide  and  from  one
to  two  inches  long,  with  a  scolloped  edge;  bears  several  brown
seeds  resembling  ail-spice.  The  tops  and  roots  are  used  for
medicine.  The  roots  when  chewed  ate  very  pungent,  which
will  be  felt  for  several  hours  on  the  tongue,  as  though  burnt. —
'A  strong  tea  rn  ide  of  *his  plant  is  good  for  cancers  and  all  scro-
fulous humours,  by  drinkirig  the  tea  and  bathing  with  it  the
parts  affect

Another  evergreen  plant,  called  wild  lettuce,  grows  on  the
same  kind  of  land,  which  possesses  same  medical  pro-

perties as  the  above.  It  has  round  ieayes,  from  the  size  of  a
cent  to  that  of  a  dollar,  resemblin  >•  the  common  lettuce.  The
roots  of  this  plant  and  of  the  pipsisway,  dried  and,  powdered
together,  equal  parts,  is  good  to  cure  all  had  humors.  Take  a
tea-spoonful  of  the  powder  in  a  glass  of  hot  water,  and  bathe
the  parts  affected  with  die  s  ime;-  it  is  also  good  to  restore  weak-
nerves.  \

GOLDENROD.

This  herb  may  be  found  common  on  pine  plai-ns  and  in
hedges;  it  grows  about  two  or  three  feet  high,  has  a  long  nar-
row leaf,  very  smooth  and  glossy,  and  a  largo  cluster  of  yellow
bloss  was;  it  has  a  sweet  spicy  taste  and  smell,  resembling  fen-
nel or  annise.  There  is  an  oil  obtained  from  this  herb  good  for
medicine;  and  also  prepared  in  essence,  is  good  for  pain  in  the
head,  to  be  taken,  or  the  outside  bathed  with  it.  The  oil  is
good  *  the  bayberry  and  bitter-root  snuff,  which  is  very

good  t0  be  taken  and  snuffed  up  the  nose.  There  are  several
herbs  that  resemble  this  in  appearance,  but  are  very  different  in
smell  and  taste.

MEADOW    FEHX.

This  is  a  shrub  and  grows  in  meadows  and  by  the  side  of
stag  rant  water,  sometimes  growing  in  the  water;  it  is  found  in
thick  bunches,  and  grows  from  two  to  three  feet.  high.  When
the  leaves  are  off  it  Ins  a  large  bud,  which  is  larger  on  some
bushes  'hm  others;  some  of  them  bear  a  small  bur  or  cluster
of  seeds,  which  when  rubbed  between  the  fingers  leaves  an  ody
cr  halsomy  substance,  having  a  fragrant  smell,  something  like
spin's  of  turpentine.

seburs  poun  led  fine  and  simmered  in  cream,  hogs  lard,
or  fresh  butter,  is  almost  a  sovereign  remedy  for  the  itch,  of  ex-


GO  NEW  GUIDE   TO  HEALTH*

ternal  poison,  and  all  bad  humor  sores.  When  the  burs  can-
not be  had  take  the  bush  and  bads  and  make  a  strong  decoc-
tion; drink  of  this  and  wish  with  the  same.  This  liqnor  may
be  prepared  in  syrup,  and  by  boiling,  it  down  maybe  made  into
ointment  as  has  been  described  for  the  burs;  the  syrup  should
be  taken  and  the  ointment  put  on  the  affected  parts.  This
ointment,  or  the  wash,  is  good  for  salt-rheum,  or  canker  sores,
and  may  be  used  freely.

YELLOW    P«5CK.

The  root  of  this  plant  is  well  known,  as  being  made  into
ointment  for  the  itch.  '  The  roots  should  be  bruised  fine  in  a
mortar  and  put  in  a  pewter  bason,  add  cream  enough  to  make
•in  ointment,  keep  if  warm  for  twelve  hours,  be  careful  nol  to
scald  it.  Ru,b  't  on  at  night  when  going  to  bed.  Three  tunes
using  it  will  generally  effect  a- cure.  The  foregoing  described
ointments,  together  with  No.  3,  and  the  rheumatic  drops  prepar-
ed with  the  spirits  of  turpentine,  will  be  sufficient  to  cure  any
erase  of  this  complaint.

PRICKLY    ASH.

This  is  a  shrub  or  bush  that  grows  in  the  western  country,
and  is  well  known  by  the  people  there.  It  grows  from  eight  to
twelve  feet  high,  ai*d  bears  a  berry  that  grows  close  to  the  limbs;
it  has  leaves  like  the  white  ash.  The  bark  and  the  berries  are
used  for  medical  purposes.  The  berries  are  very  pungent,  and
area  powerful  stimulant,  as  also  the  bark  of  the  top  .and  roots,
though  not  so  strong.  It  should  be  pounded  to  a  powder  and
steeped  in  hot  water,  then  put  into  wine  or  spirit  and  it  makes
a  very  food  hot  bitter.  Take  half  a  glass  two  or  three  times  a
day;  it  is  good  for  fever-and-ague,  for  which  it  is  much  used:
and  for  leth  rgy  or  sleepiness,  and  for  cold  feet  and  hands,  and
other  complaints  caused  by  cold.

BITTER    THISTLE.

This  herb  is  a  species  of  the  thistle,  and  is  cultivated  in  gat.
dens,     It  is  of  one  years  growth,  the  seed  bong  sown    in  the
Spring  and  it  comes  to  maturity  in  the  fall.     The  stalk  h
number  of  branches  md  a  great  quantity  of  leaves.     The  leaf
iS  some  larger  than  the  Canada  thistle*  with  prickles  like  it  >


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  fl|

it  bears  seeds  about  the  size  of  the  barley  corn,  with  a  beard  on
the  end  nearly  as  long  as  the  .seed.  The  leaves  are  used  for
medicine,  which  may  be  s'eeped  in  hot  water  and  drank  like  oth-
er herb  tea,  or  they  m::y  be  reduced  to  a  powder  and  taken  in
rrv  1,  sseo  or  warm  water,  or  in  wine  or  spirit.  It  is  an  excellent
corrector  of  the  bile,  and  may  be  safely  used  for  that  purpose?
The  Cirdis  Benedictus,  or  beloved  thistle,  is  cultivated  in  the
manner  and  may  be  used  for  the  same  purpose.

ARCHANGEL.

This  herb  grows  wild  in  wet  land,  and  may  be  often  found
among  the  grass,  and  at  the  edges  of  plough  fields.  It  grows
from  four  to  twelve  inches  high;  the  leaves  are  rather  smaller
than  mint  leaves;  it  bears  a  kind  of  bur  containing  seed,  which
grows  round  the  stalk  at  each  joint.  There  are  two  kinds  which
grow  near  each  other;  they  look  very  much  alike,  but  are  very
different  in  taste.  One  is  very  bitter" and  the  other  has  no  bitter
taste,  but  is  very  rough  and  of  a  balsamic  taste.  They  may  be
used  together  in  a  tea  or  syrup,  and  answer  two  important  pur-
poses ;  the  rough  removes  the  canker  and  the  bitter  is  a  corrector
of  the  bile.  By  adding  No.  2,  the  compound  contains  the  thre£
great  principles  of  the  healing  art,  viz:  hot,  rough  and  bitter.


F3R  PREPARING  AND  UBXHO

VEGETABLE  WimiOmib.


No.  1.— Emetic  Herb.

The  preparation  of  this  herb  has  been  sufficiently  described,
for  which  see  page  40.  It  is  prepared  and  used  in  three  differ-
ent ways,  viz:

!.  The  powdered  leaves  and  pods.  This  is  the  common  form
of  using  it;  and  from  half  to  a  tea-spoonful  may  be  taken  in
warm  water  sweetened;  or  the  same  quantity  may  be  put  into
feither  of  the  other  numbers  when  taken ;  to  cleanse  the  stomach,
Overpower  the  cold  and  promote  a  free  persp.ration.

2,  A  tincture  made  from  the  green  herb  in  spirit.  This  is
used  to  counteract  the  effects  of  poison;  to  be  either  internally
or  externally  used;  and  for  asthma  and  other  complaints  of  the
kings.  For  a  dose  tak?  a  tea-spoonful,  adding  about  the  same
quantity  of  No.  2,  in  half  a  tea-cup  full  of  warm  water  sweet-
ened, and  in  all  cases  of  nervous  affection  add  half  a  tea-spoon-
ful of  nerve  powder.  For  the  external  effects  of  poison,  take
Ihe  above  dose,  and  bathe  the  parts  affected  with  the  tincture,
jepeating  it  till  cured.

3.  The  seeds  reduced  to  a  fine  powder  and  mixed  with  No?.
2  and  6.  This  is  for  ihe  most  violent  attacks  of  spasms  and
other  complaints,  such  as  lock-jaw,  bite  of  mad  dog,  fit  -,  drown-
ed person1-',  and  all  cases  of  suspended  animation,  where  tlte
vital  spark  is  nearly  extinct.  For  a  dose  give  a  tea-spoonful,
and  repeat  it  fill  relief  is  obtained;  then  follow  with  a  tea  of
No.  3,  for  canker,

For  children  the  dose  must  bo  regulated   according  to  their
age.      [f  very  young,  steep  a  dose  of  the  powder  in  half  a  tea-
cup full  of  water,  or  tea  of  raspberry  leaves,  and   give  a  fea-
»'  tea,  strained  through  a  fine'  cloth  and


OK,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  VHY&CIAS.  "A

^sveetened,  repeating  Uie  dose  every  ten  minutes,  till  it  operates-;
and  give  pennyroyal  or  some  other  herb  tea  fur  drink.

No.  2. — Cayenne.

This  is  a  medicine  of  great  value  in  the  practice,  and  may  be
safely  used  in  all  cases  of  disease,  .to  raise  and  retain  the  inter-
na] vital  heat  of  the  system,  cause  a  free  perspiration,  and  keep
the  determining  powers  to  the  surface.  The  only  preparation
is  to  have  it  reduced  to  a  fine  powder.  For  a  dose  take  fiom
•half  to  a  tea-spoonful,  in  hot  water,  or  a  tea  of  No.  3,  sweeten-
ed; or  the  same  quantity  may  be  mixed  with  a  dose  of  either
the  other  numbers  when  taken.  The  dose  should  be  repeated
every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  till  the  desired  object  is  effectag},
and  continued  occasionally  till  health  is  restored.  When  this
number  is  given,  the  patient  should  be  kept  wnm,  by  sitting  by
the  fire,  covered  with  a  bbnkef.  or  in  a  warm  bed.

No.  3.^-For  Canker.

Take  Bayberry  root  bark,  white  Pond  Lily  root,  and  the  inner
bark  of  Hemlock,  equal  parts  of  (Bach  pounded  and  well  mixed
together;  steep  one  ounce  of  the  powder  in  ■>  pint  of  boiling
water,  and  give  for  a  dose  a  common  wine  glass  full,  sweetened.

If  the  above  cannot  be  had,  take  as  a  substitute  sumach  bark,
leaves  or  berries,  red-raspberry  or  witch-hizle  leaves,  marsh
rosemary,  or  either  of  the  other  articles  described  under  the
head  of  No.  3;  they  arc  all  good  for  canker,  and  may  be  used
together  or  separate.

When  the  violence  of  the  disease  requires  a  course  of  medi-
cine, steep  one  ounce  of  the  above  mentioned  powder,  No.  3,
in  a  pint  of  boiling  water,  strain  off  a  wine  glass  full  while  hot,
and  add  a  tea-spoonful  of  No.  2,  and  the  same  quantity  of  sugar;
when  cool  enough  to  take,  add  a  tea-spoonful  of  No.  1,  .n.nd
half  that  quantity  of  nerve  powder.  Let  this  dose  be  given
three  times,  at  intervals  of  fifteen  minutes;  and  let  the  same
compound  be  given  by  injection,  and  if  the  case  requires  it
again  repeated.  If  mortification  is  apprehended  a  tea-spoonfirl"
of  No.  6,  may  be  added  to  each  dose  and  to  the  injections.

After  the  patient  has  recovered  sufficientlv  from  the  opera-
tion of  the  medicine,  which  is  usually  in  two  or  three  hourp,
place  them  over  the  steam,  as  is  directed  in  page  19,


K  NEW  GUIDE  TO  HE4LTK;

This  operation  is  sufficient  for  one  time,  and  must  be  repeater]
each  d  v,  or  every  other  day,  as  the  circumstances- of  the  case
may  require,  till  the  disorder  is  removed.  Three  times  will
generally  be  sufficient,  and  sometimes  once  or  twice  v\  ill  answe*
the  purpose;  but  in  bad  chronic  cases  it  may  be  necessary  to
continue  to  carry  them  through  a  regular  course  two  or  three
times  a  week,  for  a  considerable  length  of  time.

Great  care  must  be  taken  to  keep  up  an  internal  bent,  so  as  to
produce  perspiration,  after  they  have  been  through  the  operation,
by  giving  occasionally  No.  2,  or  the  composition  powder;  for  tf
this  is  not  attended  to,  the  patient  may  have  a  re'apse,  in  which
>?ase  it  will  be  very  difficult  to  raise  it  again,  as  they  will  fall  as
much  below  a  natural  heat  as  they  have  been  raised  above  it  by
artificial  means.

During  the  operation  give  milk  porridge,  or  gruel,  well  sea-
soned, with  a  little  cayenne  in  it ;  and  after  it.  is  over,  the  patients
may  eat  any  kind  of  nourishing  food  that  the  appetite  may  crave,

A  tea-cup  full  of  the  tea  of  No.  3.  should  be  taken  night  and
morning  to  prevent  a  relapse  of  the  disease,  and  during  the  day
drink  frequently  of  a  tea  made  of  poplar  bark;  rrd  if  costive
juse  the  bitter  root.

As  soon  as  the  disorder  is  removed,  use  the  bitters.  (No.  4,)
to  correct  the  bile  and  restore  the  digesture;  and  half  a  vine
glass  full  of  the  syrup,  No.  5,)  may  be  laken  two  or  three  time?
:i  day,  which  will  strengthen  the  stomach  and  assist  in  regulat-
ing the  digestive  powers.

The  foreroing  directions  are  calculated  for  the  more  violent
attacks  of  disease,  and  such  as  have  become  settled;  but  those
of  a  less  violent  nature  must  be  treated  according  to  circi  m
stances.  In  the  first  stages  of  a  disease  it  may  be  mosl  gene-
rally thrown  off  by  a  dose. of  the  emetic  herb,  with  No.  2  to
raise  a  free  perspiration,  followed  by  a  ten  of  No.  3,  to  remeve
the  canker,  and  the  bitters  or  a  tea  of  poplar  bark  to  regulate
the  dijjesfure.  For  a  sudden  cold,  take  a  dose  of  the  composi-
tion powder  on  jjoing  to  bed,  and  put  a  hot  stone,  wrapped  in
wet  cloths,  at  the  feet,  which  will,  in  most  cases,  remove  the  com-
plaint; but  if  these  applications  do  not  answer  the  purpc  se,  the
patient  should  be  carried  through  a  regular  course  as  seen  as
possible.  Steaming  is  safe  and  will  always  do  good,  and  the
injections  must  not  be  neglected,  particularly  where  the  bowels
are  disordered.  In  consumption,  and  all  eld  lingering  com-
plaints, give  the  composition  powder  for  two  or  three  days  before
■ffoing  through  a  regular  course


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  f:<

No.  4. — Bitters.

Take  the  Bitter  Herh,  or  Balmony,  Barberry  and  Poplar
tterk,  equal  par! s,  pulverised,  one  ounce  of  thepowdi  r  loa  pint
of  hot  water  and  half  a  pint  of  spirit.  For  a  dose  take  halt'  a
y/i-e  glass  full.     For  list  bitters  add  a  tea-spoonful  of  No.  2.

This  preparation  is  calculated  to  correct  the  bile  and  create
an  appetite  by  restoring  the  digest  ive  powers ;  and  may  be  freely
Used  both  a-?  a  restorative  and  to  prevent  disease.

When  the  above  articles  cannot  be  had,  either  of  tho-
have  been  before  described  under  No.  4.  which  are  all  good  for
*he  same  purpose,  may  be  used  as  a  substitute.

No.    5. — Syrup.

Take  Poplar  bark  and  bark  of  the  root  of  Bayberry,  one  pound
each, and  boil  ih^m  in  .wo  gallons  of  water,  str.r:  off'  arid  :
seven  pounds  of  good  sugar;  then  scald  and  skim  it,  nd  add  half
a  pound  of  peach-meats;  or  the  s  une  quantity  of  cherry-stone
meats,  pounded  fine.  When  cool  add  a  gallon  of  good  br;ndy,-.
and  keep  it  in  bottles  for  use.  Take  half  a  wine  glass  full  two
or  three  times  a  day.

Any  other  qu  intity  may  be  prepared  by  observing  the  sanae
proportion  of  the  different  articles.

This  syrup  is  very  good  to  strengthen  the  stomach  and  bowels,.
and  to  restore  weak  patients;  and  is  particularly  useful  in  the
dysentery,  which  leaves  thesfomich  and  boWels  in  a  sore  state.
In  a  relax  or  the  first  sf  iges  of  the  dysentery,  by  -sing  a  tea  of
No.  3,  freely,  and  giving  this  syrup,  it  will  generally  cure  it,  and
jwill  also  prevent  those  exposed  from  taking  the  disease.

No.  6. — Rheumatic  Drops.

Take  one  gallon  of  good  fourth  proof  brandy,  or  any  kind  of
high  wines,  one  pound  of  gum  Myrrh  pounded  fine,  one  ounce
of"  No.  2,  and  pul  them  into  a  stone  jug  and  boil  it  a  few  min-
utes in  a  kettle  of  water,  leaving  the  jug  unstopped.  When
settled,  bottle  it  up  for  use.  It  may  be  prepared  without  boiling,
by  letting  it  stand  in  the  jug  for  five  or  six  days,  shaking  it  well
every  day,  when  it  will  befit  for  use.

These  drops  are  to  remove  pain  and  prevent  mortification,  to.
pe  taken,  oi  applied  esternally,  or  to  be  put  into  the  injection?

G


14  NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH-;

One  or  two  tea-spoonfuls  of  these  drops  may  be  given  alone,  ot
the  same  quantity  may  be  put  into  a  dose  of  either  of  the  medi-
cines before  mentioned;  end  may  be  also  used  to  bathe  with  in
all  cases  of  external  swellings  or  pains.  It  is  an  excellent
remedy  for  rheumatism,  by  taking  a  dose  and  bathing  the  parts
affected  with  it.  In  the  head-ach  by  taking  a  swallow,  and
bathing  the  head,  -and  snuffing  a  little  up  the  nose,  it  will  remove
the  pain.  It  is  good  for  bruises,  sprains,  swelled  joints,  and  old
seres;  as  it  will  allay  the  inflammation,  bring  down  swelling,
3ase  pain  and  produce  a  tendency  to  heal — in  fact  there  is  hardly
y  complaint,  in  which  this  useful  medicine  cannot  be  used  to
advantage.  It  is  the  best  preservative  against  mortification  of
any  thing  I  have  ever  found.

For  bathing,  in  rheumatism,  itch,  or  other  humors,  or  in  any
.■welling  or  external  pain,  r.dd  one  quarter  part  of  spirits  of  tur
pen  ine;  and  for  sprains  and  bruises,  a  little  gum  camphor  may
Be  added

Nerve  Powder.

This  is  the  American  Valerian,  orUmbil,  and  the  preparation
fris  been  sufficiently  described,  for  which  see  page  58.2  This
powder  is  a  valuable  and  safe  medicine  and  may  be  used  in  all
c  ses  without  danger;  and  when  there  are  nervous  symptoms,  it
must  never  be  dispensed  with.  For  a  dose  take  half  a  tea-
spponful  in  hot  water  sweetened;  or  the  s;  me  quantity  should
.be  put  into  a  dose  of  either  of  the  other  medicine,  and  also  into
the  injections,  in  all  nervous  cases.

Composition,  or  Vegetable  Powder.

Take  two  pounds  of  the  Bayberry  root  bark,  one  pound  of
the  inner  bark  of  Hemlock,  one  pound  of  ginger,  two  ounces  •
jf  Cayenne,  two  ounces  of  cloves,  all  pounded  fine,  sifed
through  a  fine  sieve,  and  well  mixed  together.  For  a  dose  take
i  tea-spoonful  of  this  powder,  wifh  an  equal  quantity  of  sugar,
and  put  to  it  half  a  tea-cupful  of  boiling  water;  to  be  taken  as
Boon  as  sufficiently  cool,  the  patient  being  in  bed,  or  by  the  fire
covered  with  a  blanket.

This  composition  is  calculated  for  the  first  stages  and  in  less
•iolent  attacks  of  disease.  It  is  a  medicine  of  much  value,  and
tnay  he  safely  used  in  all  complaints  of  male  or  female,  and  for
.^ildrefc.     It  is  good  for  relax,  dysentery,  pain  in  the  stomacS)


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  75

and  bowels,  and  to  remove  all  obstructions  caused  by  cold,  or
loss  of  inward  heat;  by  taking  a  dose  on  going  to  bed  and  put-
tin?  a  hot  stone  to  tbe  ieet^  wrapped  in  wet  cloths,  it  will  cure  a
bad  cold,  and  will  generally  throw  off  a  disease  in  its  first  stages
if  repeated  two  or  ftiree  thnes".  If  the  symptoms  are  violent,
with  much  pain,  add  to  <  ich  d<  se  a  tea-spoonful  of  No.  6,  and
h  'If  a  tea-spoonful  of  No.  1 ;  and  in  nervous  symptoms  add  half
a  tea-spoonful  of  nerve  powder;  at  the  same  time  give  an
injection  of  the  same.  If  these  should  not  answer  the  purpose,
the  patient  must  be  carried  through  a  regular  course  of  the
Ifcedicine,  as  has  been  before  described.

Cough  Powder.

Take  four  tea-spoonfuls  of  Skunk  Cabbage,  two  of  Hoair
Round,  one  of  Wake-robin,  one  of  No.  1,  one  of  No.  2,  one  of
Bayberry  bark,  one  of  Bitter  root,  and  one  of  nerve  powder,  all
made  fine  and  well  mixed  together.  When  taken,  to  be  mixed
with  molasses.  Take  half  a  tea-spoonful  of  the  powder  on  go-
ing to  Jbed ;  keep  warm  and  continue  taking  it  till  relief  is
obtained,  particularly  on  going  to  bed.

Where  the  couffh  has  been  of  long  standing,  it  will  be  best
while  t  iking  this  prescription,  to  jjo  through  a  regular  course  of
the  medicine,  and  repeat  it  if  necessary.

Cancer  Plaster.

Take  the  heads  of  red  clover  and  fill  a  brass  kettle,  and  boil
them  in  water  for  one  hour;  then  take  them  out  and  fill  the  ket-
tle acrain  with  fresh  ones  and  boil  them  as  before  in  the  same
liquor.  Strain  it  off  and  press  the  heads  toget  out  all  the  j  nice :
then  simmer  it  over  a  slow  fire  till  it  is  about  the  consistence  01
tar,  when  it  will  be  fit  for  use.  Be. careful  not  to  let  it  burn-
When  used  it  should  be  spread  on  a  piece  of  bladder,  split  ?  nd
made  soft.     It  is  good  to  cure  cancers,  sore  lips,  and  old  sores

Salve.

Take  one  pound  of  Bees  wax,  one  do.  of  salt  Butter,  om>

and  a  half  do.  of  Turpentine,  twelve  ounces  of  Balsom-fir;  melt

and  simmer  them  together;  then  strain  it  off  into  a  bason,  and

it  for  u.:e.     It  may  be  u.-ed  to  hca!  fresh  wound?,  burrnv


>6  NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH:

sc  Ids  and  all  bad  sores,  after  the  inflammation  is  allayed,  and
wound  cleansed.

Strengthening  Plaster.

Take  Burdock  leaves  and  Mullen  leaves,  bruise  them  and  pu<
them  in  a  kettle,  with  a  sufficient  quantity  of  water,  and  boil
them  well ;  then  strain  off'  the  liquor,  press,  or  squeeze  the leaves
and  boil  it  down  till  about  half  as  thick  as  molasses;  then  add
three  parts  of  Rosin  and  one  of  Turpentine,  ;  nd  simmer  well
together,  until  the  water  is  evaporated;  then  pour  it  off  into  cold
faater  ■  nd  work  it  with  ihe  hands  like  shoemaker's  wsx;  if  too
hard  put  in  more  turpentine,  when  it  will  be  fit  for  use.  It
should  be  spread  on  soft  leather  and  applied  to  the  part  affected;
and  it  is  good  to  strengthen  weakness  in  the  back  and  other
parts  of  the  body.

Volatile  Salts.

Take  crude  Sal  Amoniac  one  ounce,  Pearlash  two  ounces,
and  pound  each  by  itself,  mix  them  well  together,  and  keep  it
close  stopped  in  a  bottle  for  use.  By  damping  it  with  spirit  or
essence  will  increase  the  strength.  This  applied  to  the  nose  is
good  for  faintness  and  to  remove  pain  in  the  head;  and  is  much
better  than  what  is  generally  sold  by  the  apothecaries.

Nerve    Ointment.

Take  the  bark  of  the  root  of  Bitter-sweet  two  parts;  of  wonu-
wood  and  chamomile,  each  equal,  one  part,  when  green  or  if
dry  moiston  it  with  hot  water;  which  put  into  horse  or  porpoise
oil,  or  any  kind  of  soft  animal  oil,  and  simmer  them  over  a  slow
fire  for  twelve  houis;  then  str  'in  it  oft';  and  add  one  ounce  of
spirits  of  Turpentine  to  each  pound  of  ointment.  To  be  used
&r  a  bruise,  sprain,  callus,  swelling,  or  for  corns.

Poultice.

Make  a  strong  tea  of  Raspberry*  leaves,  or  of  No.  3-  take  t»
Cracker  pounded  She.  and  slippery  Elm  bark  pulverised,  with
Ginger  nd  ke  a  poultice  of  the  same  This  is  good  for  old
aoies,  whitlows,  felons,  and  for  bad  burns,  scalds,  and  parts


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  fj

tfozen.  Apply  this  poultice  and  renew  it,  at  least  as  often  as'
©very  twelve  or  twenty-four  hours,  and  wash  with  soap  suds  at
every  renewal ;  wetting  it  in  the  interim  with  cold  water,  or  a  tea
of  Raspberry  leaves,  till  it  discharges;  then  apply  the  salve  till
a  cure  is  effected,

Injections,  or  Clysters.

This  manner  of  administering  medicine  is  of  the  greatest
importance  to  the  sick;  i,t  will  frequently  give  relief  when  all
other  applications  fail.  iV  is  supposed  that  the  use  of  them  is
of  great  antiquity;  whether  this  be  true  or  not,  the  using  them  to
relieve  the  sick,  was  certainly  a  very  valuable  discovery;  and  no
doubt  thousands  of  lives  hive  been  saved  by  it.  The  doctors
have  long  been  in  the  practice  of  directing  injections  to  be  given
to  their  patients,  but  they  seem  to  have  no  oilier  object  in  admin-
istering them,  than  to  cause  a  movement  in  the  bowels;  there-
fore it  was  immaterial  what  they  were  made  of.

According  to  the  plan  which  I  have  adopted,  there  are  certain
important  objects  aimed  at  in  the  administration  of  medicine  to
remove  disease,  viz :  to  r  use  the  internal  heat,  promote  perspira-
tion, remove  the  canker,  guard  against  mortification,  and  restore
the  digestion.  To  accomplish  these  objects  the  medicine  n»~
cessary  to  remove  the  complaint,  must  be  applied  to  that  part
where  the  disease  is  seated ;  if  in  the  stomach  only,  by  taking
the  medicine  it  maybe  removed;  but  if  in  the  bowel?,  the  same
compound  must  be  administered  by  injection.  Whatever  is
good  to  cure  disease  when  taken  into  the  stomach,  is  likewise
good  for  the  same  purpose  if  given  by  injection,  as  the  grand
object  is  to  warm  the  bowels,  nd  remove  the  canker.  In  all
Cases  of  dysentery,  cholic,  piles,  md  other  complaints,  where
the  bowels  are  badly  affected-,  injections  should  never  be  dis-
pensed with.  They  are  perfectly  safe  in  all  cases,  and  better
th  '  they  be  used  ten  times  when  not  needed,  than  once  neglect*
«d  when  they  are.  In  rrnny  violent  cases,  particularly  where
there  is  danger  of  modification,  patien's  my  be  relieved  by
administering  medicine  in  this  way,  when  there  would  be  no
chauce  in  any  other.  1  do,  therefore,  mosf  seriously  advise  that
these  consider :' ions  be  always  borne  in  mind;  and  that  this
important  wy  of  piving  relief,  be  never  neglected,  where  th.  re
is  any  ch  nice  for  it  to  do  good.  Tn  many  complaints  peculiar
to  females,  *hey  are  of  the  (jreatest  importance  in  giving  relief}
-     a  nroDerl'  attended  to;  for  which  some  verbal  instruction

g  a


Id  NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH;

will  be  necessary,  which  will  readily  be  given  to  all  those  who
purchase  the  right.

The  common  preparation  for  an  Injection  or  Clyster,  is  t<5
take  a  tea-cupful  of  strong  tea  made  of  No.  3,  strain  it  oil  when
hot,  and  odd  ball  a  tea-spoonful  of  No.  2,  and  a  tea-spoonful  of
No.  6;  when  cool  enough  to  give,  add  half  a  tea-spoonful  of
No.  1,  and  die  same  quantity  of  nerve  powder.  Let  it  be  given
with  a  large  syringe  made  for  that  purpose,  or  where  this  cannet
be  hid,  a  bladder  and  pipe  may  be  used.  They  must  be  repeat-
ed   s  occasion  may  require  till  relief  is  obtained.

Many  other  articles  may  be  used  to  advantage  in  the  injec-
tions; a  tea  of  witch-hazle  and  red-raspberry  leaves,  either  or
both  together,  are  very  good  in  m;:ny  cases.  For  canker  a  tea
of  either  tiie  articles  described  under  the  head  of  No.  3,  will
answer  a  good  purpose.  When  the  canker  is  removed,  the
bowels  will  be  left  sore,  in  which  case,  give  injections  of  witch-
h::zle  or  raspberry  leaves  tea,  with  slippery-elm  bark.  When
the  injections  are  used  to  move  die  bowels  only,  No.  1,  should
be  left  out.  It  is  always  safe  to  add  the  nerve  powder,  and  if
there  is  nervous  symptoms  it  must  never  be  omitted.


Stock  of  Medicine  for  a   Family.

\  oz.  of  the  Emetic  Herb,

2  ozs.  of  Cayenne,

1-2  lb.  Bayberry  root  bark,  in  powder,

1   lb.  of  Poplar  bark,

1   lb.  of  Ginger,

1  pint  of  the  Rheumatic  Drops.

This  stock  will  be  sufficient  for  a  family  for  one  year,  and
with  such  articles  as  they  can  easily  procure  themselves  when
wanted,  will  en  ,ble  them  1o  cure  any  dise.se,  which  a  family  of
common  size  may  be  afflicted  with  during  that  time.  The
expense  will  '  esniM),  and  much  better  than  to  employ  a  doctor
and  have  his  extravagant  bill  to  pay..


GENERAL  DIRECTIONS!
In  Curing  or  Preventing  Disease.

1.  Be  careful  10  always  keep  the  determining  powers  to  the
surface,  by  keeping  the  inward  heat  above  the  outward,  or  i he
fountain  above  ihe  stream,  md  all  will  be  safe.

2.  It  must  be  recollected  that  heat  is  life,  and  cold  death ;  tha  i
fever  is  a  friend  'ind  cold  the  enemy;  it.  is  therefore  necessarv
to  aid  the  friend  and  oppose  the  enemy,  in  order  to  restore  he  lib

3.  That  fhe  construction  and  organization  of  the  human
frame,  is  in  all  men  essentially  the  same;  being  formed  of  the
four  elements.  Earth  and  water  constitute  the  solids  of  the
body,  which  is  made  active  by  fire  and  air.  Heat,  in  a  pec
manner,  gives  life  and  motion  to  the  whole;  and  when  en
overpowered  from  whatever  cause  by  the  other  eiements^deatk
ensues.

4.  A  perfect  stale  of  health  arises  from  a  due  balance  or  tem-
perature of  the  elements;  and  when  it  is  by  any  means  de-
stroyed, 'he  body  is  more  or  less  disordered.  When  this  is  the
case,  there  is  always  a  diminution  of  heat,  or  an  increase  of  the
power  of  cold,  which  is  its  opposite.

5.  All  disorders  are  caused  by  obstructed  perspiration,  which
may  he  produced  by  a  great  variety  of  means;  that  medicine.,
therefore,  must  be  administered,  that  is  best  calculated  to  re-
move obstructions  and  promote  perspiration.

6.  The  food  taken  into  the  stomach  and  being  well  digested,
nourishes  the  system  nd  keeps  up  (hat  beat  on  which  life  de-
pends; but  by  constantly  taking  food  into  the  stomach,  which  is
some'imes  not  suitable  for  nourishment,  it  becomes  foul,  so  that
the  food  is  not  we!!  digested;  this  causes  the  body  to  lose  its
he't,  and  disease  follows.

7.  Canker  is  caused  by  cold,  and  there  is  always  more  or  'ess
of  it  in  all  cases  of  disease;  continue  to  make  use  of  such
articles  as  are  calculated  to  remove  it,  as  long  as  there  is  tny
appearance  of  disorder.

8.  When  the  disease  is  removed,  make  free  use  of  those
things  that  are  good  to  restore  the  di  restive  powers,  not  forget-
ting to  keep  up  the  inward  heal  by  giving  occasionally  ISo.  %':


ftC  tfEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH;

9.  Keep  always  in  mind,  thai  "an  ounce  of  preventative  13
better  than  a  pouncl  of  cure;  and  give  medicine  on  the  first
appearance  of  disorder,  before  il  becomes  seated;  for  it  may  be
then  easily  thrown  off,  and  much  sickness  and  expense  prevented.

10.  In  case  of  a  fever,  increase  ihe  internal  heat  by  giving
hot  medicine  so  as  to  overpower  (he  tcid,  when  the  natural  heat
will  return  inwardly,  and  ihe  cold  will  pervade  the  whole  sur-
face of  the  body  as  the  heat  had  done  before;  this  is  what  is
called  the  turn  of  the  fever.

11.  If  No.  1  should  sicken  and  not  puke,  there  may  be  two
causes  for  it,  viz:  the  coldness  or  acidity  of  the  stomach;  for
the  first,  give  No.  2  more  freely,  and  for  the  latter,  dissolve  a
piece  of  pearlash  about  the  size  of  a  large  pea  in  a  wine  glass
of  w  .ter,  and  let  them  take  it,  which  will  counteract  the  acidity.
If  this  foils,  make  use  of  the  steam,  which  will  open  the  pores,
extra d  the  cold,  and  set  the  medicine  into  operation.

12.  In  giving  medicine  to  children,  give  about,  one  half,  a  lit-
tle more  or  less,  according  to  their  age,  of  the  quantity  directed
for  ^  crown  person.  Be  particular  fo  ofier  them  drink  often,
especially  young  children,  who  cannot  ask  for  it.

13.  Dysentery  is  caused  by  canker  on  the  bowels,  for  which
make  free  use  of  the  tea  of  No.  3,  with  No.  2,  and  give  the
same  by  injection,  in  the  first  of  the  disease,  and  afterwards  give
the  syrup,  (?To.  5.)  to  strengthen  the  stomach  and  bowels  and
?estore  ihe  digestive  powers.

14.  The  piles  is  c  inker  below  the  reach  of  medicine  given  in
the  usual  way,  and  must  be  cured  by  using  a  wash  of  No  9,
made  strong,  and  by  giving  injections  of  the  same,  with  No.  2.
What  is  called  bearing  down  pains  in  women,  is  from  the  same
cause";  and  must  be  relieved  by  injections  made  of  witch-h;  zle
or  red  raspberry  leaf  tea,  steeped  strong,  with  No.  2,  strained.
If  fhis  does  not  give  relief,  go  through  a  regular  course  of  me-
dicine.

■  15.  Women  in  a  state  of  pregnancy,  ought  to  be  carried
through  a  regular  course  of  the  medicine,  especially  when  near
the  lime  of  delivery.  When  in  trr.vai',  give  raspberry  leaf  tea,
with  n  te*  -spoonful  of  the  composition  powders,  or  No.  2,  and
keep  'hem  in  a  perspiration.  After  delivery  keep  up  the  inter-
n  I  he  ',  by  giving  the  composition  powder,  or  No.  2.  This  will
prevent  cold  and  after  p-ins;  if  there  should  be  symptoms  of
fever,  c-rry  them  through  a  regular  course  of  the  medicine.
which  will  guard  against  all  alarming*  complaints,  peculiar  in
6uch  cases'


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICJAN.  81

16.  In  all  cases  of  a  burn,  scald,  or  being  frozen,  wrap  up
the  part  in  cloths  wet  with  cold  water,  often  wetting  them  with
the  same  to  prevent  their  becoming  dry,  and  be  careful  to  give
hot  medicine,  such  as  No.  2,  or  the  composition  powders,  to  keep
up  the  inward  heat.  Pursue  this  plan  for  twelve  hours;  and
then.,  if  the  skin  is  off,  apply  the  poultice  or  salve,  li  there
should  be  convulsions  or  fever,  a  regular  course  of  the  medi-
cine must,  without  fail,  be  attended  to.

17.  When  a  scald  is  over  the  whole  or  greatest  part  of  the
body,  apply  cotton  cloth  of  severaj  thicknesses  to  the  whole
body,  wet  with  a  tea  of  raspberry  leaves,  thoroughly  wetting  it
with  the  same  to  prevent  it  from  becoming  dry;  and  give  the
hot  medicine.  When  the  scald  is  under  the  stocking,  or  any
other  tight  garment,  let  it  remain  on,  adding  more  cotton  cloths,
and  wet  the  whole  with  cold  water  as  often  as  die  smart  of  the
burn  returns.

1 8.  If  the  skin  is  off,  or  in  case  of  an  old  burn,  to  guard
against  canker,  apply  a  poultice  of  cracker  and  slippery  elm
bark,  made  with  a  tea  of  raspberry  leaves;  washing  it  with  soap
suds,  when  the  poultice  is  changed,  and  then  with  the  same  tea.
When  any  part  is  frozen,  the  same  method  must  he  taken  as  for-
a  burn.

19.  For  a  fresh  wound,  cut,  or  bruise,  wash  immediately
with  cold  water  and  bind  up  with  cloths  wet  with  the  same;  keep
a  hot  s,tone  at  the  feet,  and  take  medicine  to  raise  a  gentle  per-
spiration;  continue  this  till  the  inflammation  is  allayed  and  the
wound  perfectly  cleansed,  then  apply  the  poultice  or  salve  till
healed.  The  air  must  be  kepi  from  all  wounds  or  sores,  as  it
will  cause  pain  and  prevent  them  from  healing.

20.  In  sudden  and  deadly  attacks,  such  as  spotted  or  yellow
fever,  fits,  drowned  persons,  croup,  &c.  the  heat  and  activity  of
the  patient  is  so  much  diminished,  that  the  common  administra-
tion will  not  give  relief;  the  determining  power  to  the  surface
being  so  small,  through  the  loss  of  internal  heat,  that  it  will  not
give  the  medicine  operation,  as  its  effects  are  resisted  i;nd  coun-
terbalanced bv  the  pressure  of  the  external  air.  To  counteract
this  pressure,  keep  the  room,  by  aid  of  a  good  tire,  about  as
warm  as  a  summer  heat;  and  more  fully  to  rarify  and  lighten
the  air,  and  aid  the  operation  of  the  medicine,  m  I  e  a  free  use
of  the  steam  bath;  and  keep  the  patient  shielded  by  a  blanket,
at  the  s  ime  time  give  occasionally  Nos.  1  and  2.  Th
should  be  unremittingly  persevered  in  till  the  patient  is  relieved.

21.  If  the  glands  are  dry,  so  that  there  is  no  moisture  in  (lie
jnoutb,  or  if  the  patient  is  much  pressed  for  breath,  give  a  stfohg


•:;•  *7EW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH1.

tea  of  No.  2,  sweetened,  and  repeat  it  till  the  mouth  become^
moist.  No.  3,  should  not  be  used  while  the  moQth  is  dry;  if
any  is  used,  add  a  large  portion  of  No.  2,

22.  Be  careful  not  to  nave  the  outward  heat  too  high,  by  too
many  clothes  or  fire;  for  if  this  is  the  case,  it  will  cause  a  balance
of  the  outward  and  inward  heat,  and  will  prevent  the  medicine
from  operating,  by  stopping  the  circulation;  and  the  patient
Will  be  very  much  distressed.  When  this  happens,  throw  cold
vinegar  on  the  face  and  stomach,  and  ^ive  more  hot  medicine,
Which  will  let  down  the  outward  heat  and  raise  the  inward.

23.  If  the  patient  is  resiless,  wet  the  head  and  body  with  cold
vinegar;  and  if  there  ;ire  convulsions  or  spasms,  give  the  nerve
powder  with  No.  2.     Injections  must  :  Iso  be  used.

24.  Never  make  use  of  physic  in  cases  where  there  is  canker
inside,  for  it  will  draw  the  determining  powers  inward,  and
increase  the  disease.  I  have  seen  so  many  bad  effects  from
giving  physic,  that  "I  have  disapproved  the  use  of  it  altogether;
but  if  any  is  given,  after  the  operation,  be  careful  to  keep  up
the  imvar  3  s  to  cause  a  free  perspiration.

25.  Avoid  all  minerals  used  as  medicine,  such  as  mercury,
arsenic.  antimony,  calomel,  preparations  of  copper  or  lead;  and
also  nitre  and  opium.  They  are  all  poison  and  deadly  enemies
to  health,

£6.  Beware  of  bleeding  and  blisters,  as  they  can  never  do
any  good,  and  may  be  productive  of  run -oh  harm;  they  are  dontraif
to  nature,  and  strengthen  the  power  of  the  enemy,  to  health.
ns  and  issues  should  also  be  avoided,  as  they  only  tend  to
Waste  awi  y  the  strength  of  the  patient,  without  doing  any  good;
it  is  a  much  better  way  to  remove  the  cause  by  a  proper  admin-
istration of  medicine,  which  will  be  more  certain  and  safe  in  its
effects.

27.  Be  careful  not  to  make  use  of  salt  petre  in  any  way  what-
ever; it  is  the  greatest  cold  of  any  thing  that  can  be  taken  into  the
Stomach, and  was  never  intended  for  any  other  purpose  than  to'
destroy  life.  It  is  a  very  bad  practice  to  put  it  on  meat,  for  it
destroys  all  the  juices,  which  is  the  nourishing  part,  and  leaves
the  flesh  hard  and  difficult  to  digest.

28.  Never  eat  meat  that  is  tainted,  or  any  way  injure*

will  engender  disease;  for  one  ounce  in  the  stomach,  is  worse
than  the  effluvia  of  a  whole  carcase.  Eal  s:  It  provisions  in  ho*
weather  and  fresh  in  ecld.

29.  Be  c  reful  about  drinking-  cold  Water  in  very  hoi  weather
i  ■  u  will  tend  to  I  it  down  the  inward  heat  to  suddenly  as  to  eivd


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSIC!  iv-

ffill  power  to  the  cold,  li'  this  ghould  happen,  its  fatal  effects
may  be  prevented  by  giving  the  hot  medicine  to  raise  the  inward
Kc'it  above  the  outward.  Be  careful  also  not  to  cool  suddenlv,
after  being  very  warm  in  consequence  of  uncommon  exercise.

30.  Remember  that  regularity  in  diet,  is  very  important  to
©reserve  health;  and  that  if  more  food  is  taken  into  the  stomach
thin  is  vv^ll  digested,  it  clogs  the  system  and  causes  disease.
Therefore  be  cautious  not  to  eat  too'  much  at  a  time,  and  have
your  food  well  cooked.  This  is  very  important  to  those  who
haw  weakly  constitutions.

31.  Ardent  spirit  is  sioV  poison;  at  is  takep  to  stimulate, but
this  effect  is  soon  over,  and  much  use  of  it  destroys  the  tone  of
the  stomach,  injures  the  digestive  powers,  and  causes  disease.
It  is  therefore  much  better,  when  the  feelings  require  any  thing
of  the  kin;l,  to  make  use  of  stimulating  m  dicin?,  such  as  Nos.
.2  and  6,  for  these  will  answer  a  far  better  purpose,

■  By  a  strict  observance  of  the  foregoing  directions,  you  may
save  much  pain  and  expense,  and  enjoy  good  health  and  long-
life,  which  is  the  earnest  wish  of  the  writer.


To  make  Milk  Porridge.
Put  a  quart  of  waier  m  a  kettle,  with  a  proper  quantity  of
salt,  and  while  he  i  ting,  mix  a  gill  of  flour  in  a  bowl  with  water \
rn<ke  thick,  and  when  '.he  water  is  boiling  hot,  drop  this  into  it
with  a  spoon;  let  it  be  well  boiled,  then  add  half  a  pint  of  milk.
This  to  be  eaten  while  under  the  operation  of  the  medicine;
and  is  also  good  food  for  the  sick  at  any  other  time,  especially
while  the  stomach  is  weak.

To  make  Chicken  Broth.

Take  a  chicken  and  cut  it  in  pieces;  put  the  gizzard  in  with
it,  opened  and  cleaned,  but  not  peeled.  Boil  it  till  the  meat
drops  from  the  bone.  Begin  to  give  the  broth  as  soon  as  there
is  any  strength  in  it;  and  when  boiled,  eat  some  of  the  meat.
Let  it  be  well  scsoned.  This  may  be  given  instead  of  the
milk  porridge,  and  is  very  good  for  weak  patients,  particularly
in  cases  of  the  dysentery.

When  the  operation  of  medicine  is  gone  through,  I  have  said
that  the  patient  may  eat  any  kind  of  nourishing  food  his  appetite
should  crave;  but  the  best  thing  is  to  take  a  slice  of  salt  pork
broiled,  or  beef-steak,  well  dope,  and  eat  it  with  pepper-sauce;
tor  take  cayenne,  vinegar  and  salt,  mixed  together,  and  eat  with
it,  which  is  very  good  to  create  an  appetite  and  assist  the  ft*
gesture.


DESCRIPTION

pp  SfcyERAL  CASES  OF  DISEASE,   WITH  DIRECTION?
HOW  THEY  MAY  BE  CURED.

Felons.

This  sore  always  comes  on  a  joint,  and  is  often  caused  by
some  steain  cr  bruise,  which  makes  a  leak  in  the  joint  or  mus-
,£le,  and  the  sooner  it  h  s  vent,  the  better.  If  it  is  brought  to
a  head  by  poulticing,  the  skin  being  so  thick  that  if  will  often  be
caused  to  break  through  the  back  of  the  hand,  before  it  c;n  get
through  the  skin  on  the  inside.  The  best  way  to  give  it  vent,
that  I  h  \e  e.er  found,  is  <o  burn  a  small  piece  of  punk,  the
bigness  of  half  a  pea,  on  the  place  affected.  If  you  think  the
flesh  is  dead  down  to  the  matter,  you  may  prick  the  point
of  a  needle  into  the  dead  skin,  and  ri  ise  it  up,  and  cut  out  a
piece  under  the  needle  sufficient  to  let  out  the  matter;  then  ap-
ply poultice  ov  salve.  If  painful,  wrap  it  in  cloths  of  several
thicknesses,  wet  with  cold  water,  and  repeat  this  as  often  as  it
bee.  nies  hot  or  painful.  Take  the  composition  or  warm  medi-
cine, to  keep  up  an  inward  heat.

If  die  sore  has  been  several  days  coming,  and  appears  nearly
ripe,  apply  a  piece  of  unslacked  lime  to  the  part  affected,  wrap
it  up  and  wet  the  cloth  with  cold  water  till  the  lime  is  slacked:
and  repeat  this  till  the  skin  looks  of  a  purple  color;  then  open
it  as  before  directed.  This  method  is  more  safe  and  quick  in
causing  a  cure,  than  laying  it  open  with  a  knife,  as  is  the  prac-
tice of  some  doctors.  By  cutting  the  live  flesh,  forms  a  leak
and  often  spoils  the  joint;  but  by  searing  them  by  either  of  the
above  modes,  it  secures  and  prevents  the  leak,"  and  makes  a
epeedy  cure.


Freezes  and  Burns.

These  two  names  of  disorder  are  one  and  the  same  thing,  and

require   the  same  treatment.     Take  a  cloth  wet  in  cold  water,

and  wrap  several  thicknesses  round  or  laid  on  to  the  part   to  be

fcept  wet  as  often  a9  the  pain  increases.     Give  warm  methculf


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  £4.

inside.  If  the  scald  is  dangerous,  carry  them  through  a  regu-
lar course  of  medicine  as  (hough  they  had  a  fever,  or  any  other
acute  disorder;  keep  the  cloth  or  poultice  on  to  secure  it  from
tne  air,  from  12  to  14  hours,  till  the  soreness  or  pain  is  entirely
gone.  If  the  skin  is  off,  a  poultice  of  flour  bread  wet  with  any
of  the  articles  composing  No.  3,  and  keep  it  wet  with  this  tea
or  water  till  the  sore  discharges,  then  wash  with  soip  suds.;
whe.i  dressed  wash  with  the  tea  of  No.  3,  and  continue  the
poultice  or  salve  until  u  cure  is  effected.

A  freeze  is  direct  cold,  and  a  burn  is  attracted  cold;  for  as
much  as  the  heat  opens  the  pores  more  than  usual,  the  cold
follows  and  closes  them  as  much  more  than  they  were  before
the  operation  of  the  heat — this  stops  the  perspiration  from  going
through  the  surf  ice,  and  the  water  collects  under  the  gram  of
the  skin,  which  is  c  riled  blistering;  the  water  applied  in  the
cloth  on  the  outside,  opens  the  pores  and  lets  the  water  out  hy
perspiration,  and  the  grain  adheres  to  the  skin — the  pain  cease?
and  the  cure  is  completed,

Cure  of  my  Brothers  Son  of  a  Scald.
He  was  about  14  years  of  age,  and  was  taking  off  from  the
fire  a  kettle  of  boiling  cider,  the  leg  of  the  kettle  caught  bv  thc-
log,  tipped  it  forward  and  poured  the  cider  boiling  hot  into  a
large  bed  of  live  embers,  which  covered  his  bare  feet  with  thif
hot  mass;  he  was  obliged  to  hold  on  till -the  kettle  W"s  set  on
the  floor,  and  then  jumped  into  a  pail  of  cold  water,  and  stood
there  until  his  father  procured  some  cloihs,  which  he  immedi-
ately wrapt  his  feet  up  in;  his  father  laid  by  the  fire  to  attend  to
pour  on  water  to  keep  the  cloths  filled,  which  keeps  the  air  from
the  surface  and  eases  the  pain;  for  as  the  water  wastes  and  lets
the  air  to  the  barn,  the  pain  will  increase;  but  by  pursuing  'iris
course  for  about  two  hours,  the  pain  bated  and  the  hoy  fell
asleep.  Water  was  poured  on  the  cloth  but  two  or  three  times
during  the  rest  of  the  night,  and  in  the  morning,  prepare 'ion
was  made  to  dress  the  wound,  when  to  the  surprise  of  all  pre-
sent no  blister  had  arisen,  nor  a  particle  of  skin  broken.  He
put  on  his  sfockings  and  shoes  as  usual,  and  went  about  his
work,  perfectly  well.

Case  of  a  boy  who  was  badly  Scalded,
A  lady  took  off  from  the  fire  a   tea-kettle  filled  with  boiling
water,  when  her  little  son,  about  6  years  old,  siepped  on  trie  bail
-and  turned  the  contents  on  to  both  rus  feet,  and  falling,  on«

1


*)  $EW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH  j

hand  went  into  the  tea-kettle;  boh  feet  and  one  hand  weco
very  badly  scalded.  I  happened  to  be  present,  and  immediately
tore  up  cloth  sufficient  to  do  up  each  part,  wetting  them  with
cold  water.  I  then  put  him  in  bed  and  gave  him  some  warm
medicine,  put  a  warm  stone  at  his  feet,  and  wet  the  cloths  aa
often  as  he  complained  of  pain.  In  about  two  hours  he  fell
asleep,  afer  which  two  or  three  times  wetting  the  cloths,  kept
him  easy  through  the  night.  In  the  morning  on  taking  off'  the
cloths  there  was  no  appearance  of  blisters,  nor  any  skin  broken;
and  he  put  on  his  shoes  and  stockings,  and  appeared  as  well  as
before  the  accident  happened.  It  had  been  the  declared  opinion
of  the  family  the  night  before,  that  the  boy  would  not  be  able
to  go  to  school  for  a  fortnight;  but  on  finding  him  well  in  the
morning,  were  hardly  willing  to  believe  their  own  senses,  or  that
the  child  had  been  scalded.


General  Remarks  on  Burns.

Burns  are  the  most  easily  cured,  if  rightly  managed  and
understock  of  any  wounds  I  ever  attended;  and  are  the  most
difficult  and  dangerous,  when  not  understood,  and  wrongly
treated.  How  often  have  we  seen  these  sores  continue  all  win-
ter and  could  not  be  healed?  as  also,  burns  caused  by  blisters
made  with  Spanish  flies,  which  amount  to  the  same  thing.  By
not  being  Ire? ted  in  a  proper  manner  in  season,  the  canker  gets
*n  and  eats  out  the  flesh,  after  which  what  is  called  proud  flesh
fills  up  the  sore.  The  doctor  applies  his  sugar  of  lead,  vitriol
and  red  precipitate  to  eat  out  the  dead  flesh,  this  affects  the
iords  and  draws  them  out  of  shape,  and  many  times  makes  a
sore  that  they  cannot  cure,  which  terminates  in  a  mortifying
canker  sore.  My  friends,  if  you  wish  to  avoid  all  this  tiouble,
attend  to  what  belongs  to  your  peace  and  comfort,  before  it  is  hid-
den from  your  eyes;  that  is,  to  attend  to  the  canker,  which  always
awaits  such  cases,  and  where  the  skin  is  off,  in  all  cases  of  burns
or  blisters,  apply  a  poultice  of  cracker,  or  elm  bark  wet  with  a
tea  of  No.  3,  until  the  canker  is  gone.  Sometimes  add  ginger;
if  the  inflammation  is  high  add  a  little  of  No.  2,  with  theginger,
keeping  the  poultice  wet  with  cold  water;  when  the  sore  dis-
charges apply  salve  till  a  cure  is  effected.

I  hall  continue  my  remarks  on  burns,  by  showing  the  evil
consequences  arising  from  blistering.  Not  long  since  I  knew  a
:ase  where  a  doctor  drew  a.  blister  on  a  child's  breast  up  to  the
neck,  for  being  stuffed  at  the  lungs.  It  lingered  with  this  scald
n«ar  its  vitals,  about  a  week ;  I  was  then  called  to  vfsit  the  chi fd>


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  '£«>

tod  found  it  to  be  dying.  The  mother  asked  me  wha  1 1 1  nought
was  the  matter  with  it;  1  t6ok  off  the  dressing  and  showed  he:
the  mortified  flesh  all  over  the  blister,  and  told  her  thai  was  the
disorder.  She  seemed  much  surprised ;  and  i  then  asked  her
if  the  child  had  been  scalded  and  it  had  mortified  in  like  manner,
whether  she  would  have  had  any  doubt  of  its  being  the  cause  of
her  child's  death?  she  said  that  she  should  not.  I  gave  her  my
opinion,  that  it  was  exactly  a  similar  case,  and  that  the  child's
death  was  caused  as  much  by  the  blister  as  it  would  have  been
by  a  scald.  The  child  died  before  morning.  I  had  declined
doing  any  thing  for  it,  as  I  was  satisfied  that  I  could  do  it  no
good;  and  if  I  had  made  the  attempt,  it  would  have  been  said
that  I  killed  it.

I  have  seen  many  cases  where  I  was  perfectly  satisfied  that
the  pitients  died  in  consequence  of  blisters,  not  only  on  the,
stomach,  but  on  the  head.  In  many  that  I  have  witnessed,
whore  a  blister  was  drawn  on  the  head,  as  soon  as  it  began  to
draw,  their  senses  were  gone  and  did  not  return  till  they  died
raving,  or  stupified.  More  than  half  the  cases  where  the  head
was  shaved  and  blistered,  that  have  come  within  my  knowledge,
have  died.  I  never  could  see  any  reason  why  a  scald  on  the
head  or  body  done  on  purpose,  should  have  a  tendency  to  effect
a  cure,  when  the  person  is  sick,  and  the  sa.me  thing  happening
to  them  by  accident,  when  well,  should  destroy  their  health  01
cause  their  death.  If  a  person  should  have  their  head  or  sto-
mach so  badly  scalded  as  to  take  off  the  skin,  we  should  c<  n-
siderthem  in  the  most  dangerous  condition;  but  nothing  is  said
about  it  when  drawn  on  purpose.  I  shall  leave  it  to  the  reader
to  reconcile,  if  he  can,  this  inconsistency.  I  have  known  most
dangerous  stranguaries  caused  by  blisters  on  the  sides  and  limbs,
and  those  who  applied  them  did  not  know  the  cause,  and  I  have
been  applied  to  for  relief.

Mortification  of  the  Limbs.
I  was  called  on  to  go  on  board  a  vessel  at  Easlport,  to  see  ft
young  man.  who  had  a  block  fall  from  mast  head  on  his  foot,
weighing  13,  1-2  lbs.  which  bruised  all  his  toes  to  pieces  except
the  little  one.  The  accident  happpened  on  Friday  and  I  did  not
see  him  till  the  Tuesday  following;  during  which  he  had  neither
eat.  nor  slept.  His  nerves  were  much  affected,  and  had  spasms t
and  convulsions  through  the  whole  system.  I  took  off  the  dress*
in"  from  his  foot  and  found  it  black,  and  the  smell  very  offensive.
captain  of  the  vessel  appeared  to  hover*  anxious  abont


I


u3  tffcvv    GUIDE   TO   HEALTH

him,  asked  me  if  I  could  help  his  foot — I  told  him  that  J  mu  '
first  try  to  save  his  life,  for  his  whole  body  was  i  s  much  disor-
dered as  his  foot.  He  rcq  ested  me  to  do  what  J  thoughl  best.
I  put  a  poultice  of  meal  on  his  foot,  and  wet  the  cloth  with  told
water  to  allay  the  heat}  then  gave  him  medicine  ihe  same  ad
though  he  had  been  at)  eked  with  a  nervous  fever.  The  captain
attended  him  through  the  night,  and  I  went  Jo  see  him  the  next
morning,  and  found  him  much  better.  The  captain  said  he  was
astonished  at  the  operation  of  the  medicine,  for  that  his  vomiting
and  sweating  had  carried  off  all  the  pain  in  his  body  and  foot,
and  had  also  reconciled  the  nerves.

I  undid  his  foot  and  found  th-t  the  black  and  yellow  streaks
up  the  leg  had  dis  appeared,  and  on  the  foot  all  the  flesh  that  was
alive  seemed  to  receive  fresh  support  from  the  btdy;  and  the
living  and  dead  flesh  appeared  as  though  two  colors  were
painted  by  the  side  of  each  other.  I  then  made  a  ley  of  pearl-
ash  in  warm  water,  and  soaked  his  foot  in  it,  which  caused  a
slimy  glaze  all  over  his  foot;  this  took  away  all  the  offensive
smell;  and  I  washed  it  with  vinegar  to  kill  the  alkali  and  keep
it  from  irritating  the  skin.  The  acid  cleared  off  all  the  slimy
matter,  so  that  it  wiped  clean.  I  then  cut  off  the  great  toe  at
the  middle  joint,  and  the  two  next  at  the  upper  joint,  and  set
the  next,  which  was  broken.  I  cut  none  of  ihe  flesh  but  what
was  dead,  to  stop  in  part  the  putrefaction.  I  then  put  on  ano-
ther poultice  and  ordered  it  to  be  kept  wet  with  cold  water,  and
a  warm  stone  wr.pped  in  a  wet  cloth,  to  be  put  to  his  feet  to
keep  a  sfeam,  giving  him  warm  medicines  inside  to  keep  up  the
inward  heat;  and  by  wetting  the  foot  with  cold  water  it  kept
the  determining  power  to  the  surface;  thus  raising  the  fount;. in
and  lowering  tic  stream.  Ey  this  ireitment  it  becomes  impos-
sible that  mortification  can  go  from  the  limbs  to  the  body,  any
more  than  a  log  that  floats  over  the  dam,  can  go  back  again  into
the  pond,  when  the  fountain  is  kept  full.  The  next  day  I
dressed  his  foot  and  found  that  the  dead  flesh  h  d  digested  \ery
much;  I  again  soaked  it  in  peariash  and  then  washed  in  vinegar
as  before,  which  was  of  great  service  in  allaying  the  b;  d  smell,
1  then  caused  him  to  be  carried  through  a  regular  course  oi'  medi-
cine, which  completely  restored  his  bodily  health;  his  appetite
<:ood,  and  all  pain  and  soreness  abat  '.  so  that  he  took  food
segul  viy  and  lost  no  sleep  afterwards,  till  ho  got  entirely  well,
which  w  s  in  .bout  four  weeks.  The  captain  was  a  very  pood
nurse,  and  was  faithful  in  attendance  on  the  younr/  man  till  he
got  well;  and  expressed  the  highest  gratitude  for  mv  attenth  n


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  6i

Lna  success;  and  as  a  proof  of  his  confidence  in  the  medicine
he  purchased  a  right,  for  which  he  paid  ine  twenty  silver  dollars.
observing  at  the  same  time,  that  he  never  paid  for  any  thing  with
satisfaction.


Old  Canker  Sores  on  the  Legs.

When  I  was  a  young  man,  I  was  much  troubled  through  (he
winter,  for  many  years,  with  sores  on  my  legs.  At  the  conir
menceraent  of  cold  weather,  if  I  broke  the  grain  on  my  shin,  it
would  become  a  bad  sore  and  continue  through  the  winter,-  the
canker  would  get  into  it  and  cat  to  the  bone,  and  sometimes
spread  under  the  grain  like  a  burn,  and  feel  the  same,  being
extremely  sore,  with  stings  and  twinges  like  a  cancer.  These
s'c  res  were  so  troublesome,  that  it  led  me  to  invent  a  cure;  finding
the  cause  to  be  canker,  I  took  some  of  the  articles  eempo:  -
No.  3,  steeped  strong,  and  washed  the  parts  affected  with  it;  if
there  was  a  bad  smell,  I  first  washed  the  sore  with  strong  soap
suds,  taking  off  all  the  loose,  skin,  which  was  blistered  with
eankery  humor,  and  then  washed  with  a  tea  of  No.  3,  to  de
the  canker  and  harden  the  sore;  sometime;  wetting  it  with  the
drops.  W  the  iafjammation  run  high  and  the  sore  spread  f  se
I  put  into  it  a  pinch  of  fine  No.  2;  then  put  on  a  poultice  of
white  bread  and  ginger,  wet  with  the  above  tea,  wrapping  -',  up
With  several  thicknesses  of  cloths  wet  wish  cold  water;  wetting
them  as  often  as  dry,  so  as  to  be  painful;  and  not  let  the  sore
come  to  the  air  for  24  hours.  In  this  time,  if  kept  well  wet
and  warm,  it  will  discharge  ripe  matter,  and  the  inflammation
and  canker  will  abate.  When  next  ureter!,  wash  lirst  with
soap  suds  as  before,  then  with  the  tea;  if  the  soreness  is  '/one
you  may  apply  the  healing  salve,  with  the  wet  cloihs,  if  g<
to  be  J,  to  keep  out  the  air;  put  occasionally  a  ho;  stone  wrapped
in  wet  cloths,  to  the  feet  to  keep  up  a  steam,  and  wetting  the
sere  if  painful  with  coM  water.  Take  medicine  to  keep  ap
the  inward  heat;  such  as  composition  or  hot  bitters,  and  when
these  do  n6t  answer  the  purpose,  go  through  a  course  of  the
medicine,  and  repeat  as  occasion  may  require.  This  method,
if  persevered  in,  I  seldom  know  to  fail, of  success,

t  was  called  ,o  attend  a  case  of  this  kind,  not  long  -
where  the  inflammation  and  pun  was  very  great,  and  fast  spn
ing  under  the  grain  of  the  skin ;  there  had  been  an  elm  end
ginger   poultice,  made  with  tea  of  No.  3,  I  <  pen    I  and  only
added  a  pinch  of  No.  2,  and  laid  on  the  poultice  again,  putting
on  B  wet  cloth,  and  ordered  it  kept  wet  with  cold  water  lill  :.     :

H2


90  NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH  i

morning;  when  on  dressing  it  found  the  inflammation  abated,
the  sore  discharged  ripe  matter,  and  by  two  dressings  more  of
the  same,  the  cure  was  completed.


Case  of  the  Bite  of  a  Rat  supposed  to  be  mad,
Not  long  since  1  was  sent  for  to  attend  a  man  who  had  teen
bitten  on  one  of  his  eyebrows  by  a  rat,  supposed  to  be  mad.
The  wound  healed  in  a  few  dayf,  then  turned  purple  round  it,
as  though  the  blood  had  settled,  and  turned  more  black,  until
he  was  blind.  He  was  sick  at  the  stomi  eb,  ;  nd  had  a  high
fever.     I  carried  him  through  a  course  of  thi  ne,  1  ui  wi  li

little  advantage.     The  swelling  and  dark  c<  ;  I  ill

he  was  about  t iiQ  colour  of  a  blackberry  pie.  These  ppear-
ances  led  me  to  suspect  that  the  m_dness  of  the  rat  wr.s  c  .used
by  eating  ratsbane,  and  communic  led  this  poison  to  the  man
by  the  bite,  as  he  appeared  the  same  :s  a  person  I  had  once  seen,
who  had  been  killed  by  taking  that  poison.  I  (hen  washed  his
face  with  a  strong  tea  of  No.  1  and  2,  and  gave  the  same  inward
with  No.  3,  carried  him  through  another  course  of  medicmej
keepmg  a  cloth  on  his  fee  wet  with  the  tea  as  before,  to  keep
out  the  air  when  under  the  operation  of  'he  medicine,  to  sweat
his  free  and  throw  die  poison  out.  J  kept  him  in  a  sweat  for
sever  1  d>ys,  ocosionallv  with  his  face  secured  from  the  air,
which  method  had  the  desired  effect,  by  bringing  'he  poison  ou|.
By  continu;  lly  keeping  up  the  perspiration,  the  swelling  ab;  ted;
bul  whenever  this  was  not  well  attended  to,  so  as  to  keep  the
determining  powers  to  the  surface,  'he  spasms  would  inciepse
to  such  --  degree  that  his  life  was  frequently  desp  ired  of.  lie
was  carefully  attended  in  this  manner  :  bout  one  month,  before
I  could  determine  in  my  own  mind,  whether  the  dise.se  cr
nature,  would  gain  the  victory;  after  which  time  he  began  gra-
di'  lly  to  giin  his  he-  1th,  ;-nd  in  nbout  six  months  lie  -'.ppe  red
to  be  clear  of  the  poison.  The  man  w  s  sixty  years  oi  age;
and  the  accident  happening  in  the  fall  of  the  year,  it  was  much
more  difficult  to  conquer  this  cold  -r,\d  deadly  poison,  than  it
would  have  been  in  warm  Weather.  This  case  convinced  me
that  the  cause  of  nvd  rats  and  mad  cats,  's  owing  to  the  rats
hnvin.fr  been  poisoned  by  ratsbane,  1  he  cats  eat  them  and  become
affected  by  the  poison,  which  makes  thorn  mad,  -md  by  liiin"
the  people,  commufeicate  the  poison,  from  which  many  fatal
consequences  have  frequently  happened


OR,  BOfANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICTAIf.  fcl

Bad  woun  I  hi  the  eye  cured.
While  1  was  at  Eastport,  Mi  ine,  a  man  was  cutting  turf  about
twelve  piles  from  that  pi  ice,  and  accident  illy  had  a  pi  cl
stuck  into  one  of  his  eyes,  by  a  person  who  was  pitching  the
turf  near  him.     It  passed  by  the  eyeball  and  s
skull,  so   that  it  was  with  consider  tile  ex*  could

draw  1*  ;  out.     The  <  J  and  closld  up  immedii

the  people  were  mm  ■  me;  but  i  so

pened  that  I  could   not  go.     I  gav<  ns  to  the

came    I  >,  to  return  and  ca  course  of  me-

<3icin  of  cloth

wet  with  cold  water  on  his  eye,  ind  not  open  il  for  twelve  ho

eep  him  in  a  p<  -:  lime.     This   was

faith  nded  to;  and  on  opening     he   wound    A   sr  (he

a  ■    e  time,    he  swelling  was  nil  gone,  the  eye  w  is  open,
a  J  .rge  quantity  of  blood  w;i3  in  (he  wot  cloth,  which  had  b
dr.iwnfrorn  die  eye.     They  continued  the  wet  cloth,  and
him   warm   medicine   inside,  keeping"  him  in
tion  for  the  next  twenty-fbut  h>'irs,  which  cleared  the  eye  of'    11
the  bio  .i,  restored   the  sight,  and  amended  his  heahh,  thi  t  he
was  \veli  in  about  a  week,  to  the  astonishment  of  all  who  saw
him.


Cancer  Sores.
A  concise  and  general  treatise  on  this  violent  and  often  fatal
disc  se,  mi  y  convey  some  useful  ideas  on  the  subject.  The
c  use  of  this  sore  is  very  little  understood.  In  all  sores  of  an
eating  nature  there  is  more  or  less  canker  according  to  th<  iy
violence.  A  c  incer  is  the  highest  degree  of  canker,  beinrr  the
most  powerful  effects  of  cold,  and  consequently  the  greatest  de~
gree  of  inflammation,  therefore  the  remedies  ought  to  be  these
of  a  warming  nature,  as  the  greatest  preventatives  against  can*
ker.  Whenever  a  violent  infl  mmation  is  discovered,  it  is  sup-
posed that  heat  causes  the  difficulty;  but  the  fact  is,  ii.  is  only
evidence  of  a  w  r  between  heat  •  nd  cold;  for  there  is  no  in-
flammation  where  'here  is  perfect  held),  because  heat  then
be:  rs  complete  rule;  and  no  disease  en  t  ke  1 1  ce  until  the  cold
makes  an  attack  en  the  bodv,  which  causes  an  unnatural  heat
to  oppose  an  unnatural  cold;  wherever  the  cold  takes  possess-
ion 'he  inflammation  show?  itself,  by  stopping  the  circulation;
the  effect  is  swelling,  inflhme  *  c  lb-s,  rising  from  some  leak,
C-used  by  the  nitural  course  being  s'opped.  If  it  suppura  es
and  discharges,  it  is  called  ulcer,  bile,  and  the  like,  and  the


03  NEW  GUIDE  TO  1ILALTH';

canker  goes  off  with  the  putrefaction.  If  the  leak  is  so  si  .
as  to  callus  as  fast  as  they  discharge,  it  becomes  a  hard  dead
lump  of  flesh,  and  not  having  circulation  enough  to  support
it,  it  begins  to  rot;  here  the  canker  shows  its  eating  nature;
being  seated  in  the  dead  flesh,  and  eating  on  the  live  flesh,
which  is  intermixed  with  it,  causes  pain  and  distress,  in  pro-
portion as  the  body  is  filled  with  coldness  end  canker;  if  this  i
*■-,  ficient  to  keep  the  power  above  the  natural  circulation,  the
patient  will  continue  in  this  distressed  situation,  being  eatan  up
alive,  until  worn  out  with  the  pain,  death  comes  as  a  friend  to
relieve  them.  This  is  the  natural  termination  of  this  dreadful
makdy;  which  is  far  better  than  to  combine  with  it  the  com-
mon form  of  practice  in  using  arsenic,  which  only  helps  to  eat
up  and  distress  the  patient.

'in  order  to  give  a  more  correct  idea  of  the  dangerous  effect
of  malting  us*  of  arsenic  in  cancers,  I  shall  make  a  short  ex»
tract  from  Thacher's  Dispensatory,  on  the  subject : — « Arsenic
has  long  been  known  1o  he  the  basis  of  the  celebrated  cancer
powder.  It  has  been  sprinkled  in  substance  on  the  ulcer;  but
this  mode  of  using  it  is  excessively  painful  and  extremely  dan-
gerous: fatal  effects  hive  been  produced  from  its  absorption.
This  fact  I  have  known  in  several  instances,  where  Davidson's
its,  and  others,  have  undertaken  to  draw  out  cancers  when
fee  patient  would  absorb  enough  01  this  poison,  which  seating
on  the  lungs,  caused  them  to  die  with  the  consumption  in  the
course  of  one  year."  My  wish  in  exposing  this  nostrum,  is  to
benefit  those  who  may  be  ignorant  of  the  imposition^  for  it  may
be  relied  on  as  a  fjutb,  that  there  is  more  or  less  poison  in  all
those  burning  plasters  used  to  cure  cancers;  and  I  would  advisd
all  to  beware  of  them;  it  will  be  much  safer  to  risk  the  cancer
than  the  cancer  quack.

The  principal  object  aimed  at  is  to  take  out  the  bunch,  ant?
:n  doing  th  st  by  the  above  method,  a  worse  evil  is  inoculated,
which  is  more  fatr.l  than  ihe  cancer.  The  tumor  is  a  mixture
cf  live  and  dead  flesh,  and  is  often  under  a  live  skin;  if  it  is
necessary  to  make  an  incision  through  the  live  skin  in  order  to
dissolve  the  dead  flesh,  the  best  way  is  to  burn  a  piece  of  pui  k
on  the  place,  and  repeat  it  till  the  flesh  is  dead  enough  to  suppu-
rate. The  smart  will  be  but  two  or  three  minutes,  and  not  so
painful  as  the  arsenic  for  the  same  time,  which  will  last  for
twelve  hours.  Where  the  tumor  is  small,  the  eancer  balsam
will  be  found  sufficient,  by  repeating  the  plaster  for  two  or  three
greeks,  to  take  out  the  dead  flesh  and  remove  the  canker;  after


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  &

yv.s  is  done,  apply  a  ginecr  md  elm  poultice  wet  with  a  tea  of
No.  3.  If  the  system  appears  to  be  generally 'affected  with  the
cancer  humor,  carry  them  through  a  common  course  of  medi-
cine, and  rope  t  the  same  while  attending  to  the  sure.

I  hi  a  cmceron  my  foot   about   the  bigness  of  an  h
,  which  h  id  troubled  me  twice,  by  ^cute  d  ir  mg  p  ins  and
twinges.     I  cured  it   by  applying  a  pi  s  1-1
sam;  repeating  it  tvvxe  at  each   lime.     Where  iheie  is  dead
Hesh  under  the  skin,  it  is  best  to  burn  ;he  punk  first    nd  then
apply  the  poultice  or  balsam;  and  it  is  also recommem
ways  give  medicine  to  eradicate  the  canker  from  the  system,
both  before  and  after  the  operation  on  the  sore.

Three  cancers  en  rhe'l  reast  hi  ve<  ome  under  my  care,  that  I
could  not  cure.  One  of  them  was  as  l.rge  as  a  half  peck
measure,  and  grew  fist  to  the  breast  bone.  I  carried  the  wo-
man through  a  course  of  medicine  several  limes  and  applied  a
poultice  of  butternut  shucks,  to  dissolve  the  deed  flesh,  and  con-
tinued this  course  for  some  months,  until  the  bunch  ii:  d  mere
than  half  dissolved,  and  h  id  grown  off  from  the  bone,  so  that  it
was  quite  loose;  and  I  w;,s  in  hopes  to  have  effected  a  cure;
but  she  was  taken  with  a  fever  in  my  absence  and  died.  The
other  two  I  could  relieve  and  keep  them  free  from  pain,  making
them  comfortable  as  long  as  they  lived;  but  nature  we  s  too
fir  exhausted  to  complete  a  cure.  I  have  had  under  my  ore
other  cases  of  cancers  on  the  breast  and  other  parts  of  the
body,  which  I  had  no  difficulty  in  curing  in  the  manner  before
stated.

I  shall  conclude  this  subject  by  a  few  general  remarks,  viz:
Guard  fhoroughly  against  canker  and  coldness — "Attend  lo  the
canker  by  a  course  of  medicine,  and  repeat  it — Use  the  ginger
poultice  if  the  inflammation  is  great,  putting  seme  No.  2.  raw
in  the  sore,  then  apply  the  poultice  keeping  it  wet  with  cold
water — not  forgetting  the  composition  and  No.  2  inside,  al  the
same  time — -Let  all  poisonous  drugs,  btfrning  plasters,  and  c  us-
tics  alone — attend  faithfully  to  the  directions  here  given-
honor  your  own  judgment — keep  your  money — and  bid  clot'
to  doctors.


Piles — how  cured.
I  was  called  to  attend  an  elderly  mm  in  South  Reading,  who
had  been  confined   to  the   house,  rnd  much  of  the  time  to  his
.  for  seven  weeks,  with  the  piles.     Seven  doctors  attended
before  I  was  sent  for,  and  he  had  continued  to  grow  v


"U  NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEAL

The  doctor';  jh?d  operated  on  one  side,  and  said  they  must  on
the  other ;  it  v,„s  their  opinion  &s  well  as  his,  that  he  was  in  i
decline.  !; The  .side  (hat  they  Ind  operated  upon  was  much
worse  to  cii.ro  ihap -the  other.  I  Carried  him  through  a  regultf
course  of  medicine,  twice  in  three  days,  when  he  was  able  to  go
out  of  doors. '  The  injection  composed  of  No.  3,  steeped,  and
a  snr.l!  quantity  pf  No.  2,  was  used;  warm  tallow  was  applied
freely  several  times  in  a  day,  sometimes  washing  externally
with  the  same  tea.  He  had  been  dietted  very  low;  1  restore!
his  digestive  powers,  and  recovered  his  appetite;  his  sores  heal-
ed, his  general  health  amended  to  such  a  degree,  that  lie  was
no  more  confined  with  that  complaint.  A  little  tallow  used
when  going  to  bed,  prevents  piles  and  chafes  in  young  and  old.
Kerne: nber  this.


Sore  Heads  in  Children — (Scalt  Heads.)
This  sore  often  comes  after  hiving  had  the  itch ;  kernels  ford
in  the  neck;  it  is  contagious,  being  caused  by  canker  and  pu-
trefaction. The  most  effectual  way  to  cure  this  disease,  is  to
carry  them  through  a  course  of  medicine  several  times,  as  the
case  may  require,  previous  to  which,  the  head  should  be  oiled-
and  covered  with  cabbage  leaves:  or  draw  a  bladder  over  the
head  to  keep  out  the  cold  air.  The  head  should  be  covered  so
as  to  make  it  sweat  as  much  as  possible,  m  order  to  dissolve  the
hard  scabs.  After  laying  all  night  the  smell  will  be  offensive;
wash  the  head  in  s-oap  suds;  when  clean,  wash  it  also  with  a
tea  of  No.  3,  after  which  wash  with  a  tea  of  No  1.  Sometimes
anoint  it  with  the  Rheumatic  drops  and  nerve  ointment — let  it
come  to  the  air  by  degrens.  Be  careful  to  guard  the  stomach
by  giving  composition,  warm  bitters,  &c.  The  ointment,  drops.
and  No.  I,  in  powder  or  juice,  may  be  occasionally  used  to-
gether or  separate.  Continue  to  wash  \\  ith  soap-suds,  and  then
with  No.  3,  occasionally,  until  a  cure  is  effected.

Sore  Breasts.
Some  women  svlffervery  much  from  this  complaint,  which  is
caused  by  cold,  occasioning  obstructions  in  the  giands  of  the
breasts.  Whoa  they  are  swelled,  bathe  with  the  rheumatic
drops,  or  pepper  vinegar;  if  this  does  not  remove  the  swelling,
and  it  should  be  necessary  to  bring  it  to  a  head,  apply  a  poul-
tice of  lily  ro  >■  made  thick  with  ginger,  or  slippery  elm  bark:
at  ;he  samo  time  give  the  composition  powder  or  No.  2,  to  keep
'ir  ,!  I  heat.     If  the  wornar   is  sick  carry  her  throuah


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  <,.*

*  regular  course  of  the  medicine,  which  will  remove  the  com
plaint  and  restore  her  to  health  in  a  short  time.  I  have  cured
many  who  were  very  bad,  by  pursuing  the  above  plan,  and  never
met  with  difficulty.  I  attended  a  Woman  in  Portsmouth,  who
had  both  breasts  badly  swelled.  She  was  sitting  by  the  window
with  it  up,  and  could  hardly  get  her  breath;  she  could  not  bear
to  have  any  fire  in  the  room,  complaining  that  it  made  her  faint,
I  told  her  lhat  if  I  could  not  make  her  boar  heat,  I  could  do
her  no  good.  I  gave  her  some  No.  2,  to  raise  the  inward  heat,
and  caused  a  good  fire  to  be  made  in  the  room.  The  inward
heat  gained  as  fast  as  the  outward,  and  in  one  hour  she  could
hear  as  warm  a  fire  as  I  could.  I  carried  her  through  three
regular  courses  of  the  medicine  in  five  d:>ys,  and  at  the  same  time
applied  the  lily  poultice,  which  brought  them  to  a  head  with©u$
pain;  and  she  was  soon  well.

To  stop  Bleeding.

Internal  bleeding  is  from  the  stomach  or  lungs.,  and  is  caused
by  canker,  or  soreness  of  the  stomach;  it  often  takes  place  ve<ry
suddenly  and  creates  much  alarm.  The  patient  sometimes
trembles  with  fright  and  often  has  fits  of  the  ague,  which  is
caused  by  the  cold  increasing  in  proportion  to  the  loss  of  blood.
In  the  first  place  shield  them  from  the  air  with  a  blanket,  by  the
fire,  and  give  the  hottest  medicine  you  have;  if  nothing  better
can  be  had,  give  hot,  water  or  any  kind  of  hot  tea;  and  get  a
perspiration  as  soon  as  possible;  then  apply  the  steam  bath;
giving  ginger  tea  or  No.  2,  if  you  have  it,  if  not  biack  pepper.
As  soon  as  there  is  as  equilibrium  in  the  circulation,  there  wiH
be  no  moro  pressure  of  the  blood  to  the  stomach  or  lungs,  than
to  the  extremities,  and  the  bleeding  will  cease.  It  has  been  my
practice  in  c  >ses  of  this  kind,  to  give  some  of  the  rheumatic
drops,  shield  ihem  from  the  air  with  a  blanket,  placed  by  the
fire;  then  give  a  dose  of  the  composition  powders,  and  No.  2,
and  if  this  does  not  answer  the  purpose,  give  a  dose  of  No.  1,
which  with  the  steam,  I  never  knew  fail  of  stopping  the  blood ;
and  by  giving  medicine  to  remove  the  canker  and  restore  the
digestive  powers,  I  have  always  been  able  to  effect  a  cure.  The
same  applications  will  answer  for  other  weakening  and  alarming
complaints  in  women.

External  bleeding  caused  by  wounds  in  the  limbs,  may  be
stopped  by  placing  the  wound  higher  than  the  body.  One  of
mv  sons  cut  his  leg  very  bodly;  I  placed  him  on  the  floor  and
took  his  foot  in  my  lap;  as  390a  as*  the  wound  was  higher  than


NEW    GUIDE  TO  HEALTH;

the  body  the  bleeding  ceased.  I  then  poured  on  cold  water  till
<h3  round  w  chitle^  the  put  in.  a. few  drops  of  No.  6,  took
two  or  three  iches  to  bring  the  wound  together,  dressed  it
on  got  well  with  very  little  soreness.  All-
ot er  case  of  a  little  girl,  who  cut  oft'  the  main  artery  of  the
middle  finger,  and  it  bled  very  fast.  I  put  my  thumb  above
the  wound  and  stopped  the  bleed,  then  poured  on  cold  water
with  my. other  hand  and  washed  the  wound  well;  then  placed
he  hand  above  her  head,  which  prevented  ii  from  bleeding  ill  I
could  get  ready  to  dress  the  wound'.  It  bled  no  more  and  soon
got  well.

Rupture.

This  difficulty  is  caused  by  a  hurt  or  strain,  which  makes,  a
breach  in  the  lough  film,  or  membrane,  ths  t  supports  the  bowels
eir  plaCe,  and  nes  come  down  ii)  the  cavity  be-

tween this  membrane  and  the  skin ;  being  sometimes  very  painful
and  difficult  to  be  got.  back;  and  hue  to  be  kept  from  coining
down  by  a  truss.  When  the  bowels  come  down  and  remain
any  length  of  time,  they  become  swelled,  and  are  very  pair
.causing  great  distress  and  danger;  and  eometimes  have  proved
fatal,  as  they  cannot  be  got  up  again  till  the  swelling  is  remov-
ed. This  may  be  effected  by  a  course  of  the  medicine  without
danger.

A  Mr.  Woodbury  of  Durham,  vvr.s  troubled  .with  a  rupture;
his  bowels  came  down,  swelled  and  was  very  painful;  a  doctor
was  senl  forfrora  Portsmouth,  who  applied  a  bag  ot  snow,  which
drove  the  pain  to  the  stomach  and  caused  puking.  The  swell-
ing increased  and  bee  me  very  hard.  The  case  now  becoming
desperate,  and  the  family  being  alarmed,  I  was  sent  for,  and  on
hearing  the  circumstances,  sent  some  medicine,  and  gave  direc-
tions to  sweat  him  as  soon  as  possible.  My  directions  were
faithfully  attended  to,  and  as  soon  as  he  became  warm,  the  nerves
slackened,  the  swelling  abated,  all  appearance  of  mortification
^disappeared,  the  bowels  went  back,  and  in  twelve  hours  he  was
restored  from  a  dangerous  situation,  to  almost  his  usual  slate  of
health.  In  this  case  may  be  seen  the  difference  between  the
artificial  doctor,  and  nature's  physician,  which  is  the  same  as
jbetween  fire  and  snow.

Ague  in  the  Face.
This  is  caused  by  cold   in  the  glands  of  the  mouth,  wh'ch
^reeps  back  the  saliva  till  it  causes  swelling  and  .soreness ;  tho


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  97

qanker  becomes  prevalent  at  the  same  time,  which  causes  revere
paiu  in  the  fice  and  throat.  The  sooner  a  cure  is  attempted
the  better;  to  effect  this,  take  a  dose  of  the  tea  of  No.  3,  with
a  tea-spoonful  of  No.  6,  in  it,  for  the  canker;  then  tie  a  small
quantity  ot  No.  2,  in  a  fine  piece  of  cloth,  wet  with  No.  6,  -nd
put  it  between  the  teeth  and  cheek,  on  the  side  where  the  pain
is;  set  by  the  fire  covered  by  a  blanket,  and  breathe  the  warm
air  from  the  fire;  this  will  prick  the  glands  and  cause  the  saliwa
to  How  very  freely,  which  will  take  out  the  soreness  and  relieve
the  pain.  The  face  may  be  bathed  at  the  same  time  with  No.  6.
If  the  case  is  of  long  standing,  so  that  the  system  is  affected,
and  this  does  remove  the  complaint,  give  a  dose  of  No.  1.  If
:t  is  caused  by  decayed  teeth,  fill  the  hollow  with  cotton  wool,
wet  with  oil  of  Summersavory,  or  spirits  of  turpentine,  which
will  deaden  the  nerve,  and  stop  its  aching.  This  is  good  in  nil
oases  of  the  teeth  ache,  and  will  generally  effect  a  cure  without
extracting.


To  relax  the  muscles  in  setting  a  bone.

This  may  be  done  by  bathing  the  part  with  W3rm  water,  and
js  much  better  than  the  method  that  is  generally  practised,  of
extending  the  muscles  by  the  strength  of  several  persons,  which
weakens  the  part  so  much  that  the  bones  are  liable  to  get  out  of
place  again;  besides  the  operation  onuses  severe  pain  to  the
patient  and  much  trouble  to  the  operator,  which  is  all  obviated
by  my  method.  In  cases  where  a  joint  is  put  out,  or  a  bone
broken,  give  a  dose  of  No.  2,  or  the  composition  powder,  with
half  a  tea-spoonful  of  nerve  powder,  which  will  promote  a  per-
spiration, prevent  fainting,  and  quiet  the  nerves;  then  wrap  the
part  in  cloths  wet  with  water  as  hot  as  it  can  be  borne,  and  pour
en  the  warm  water,  (placing  a  pan  underneath  to  catch  it)  for  a
short  time,  when  the  muscles  will  become  relaxed,  so  that  the
bones  m-jy  be  put  in  their  place  with  little  trouble.

I  was  once  called  to  a  women  who  had  put  her  elbow  out  of
joint  by  a  fall  from  her  horse.  It  was  badly  out  being  twisted
about  one  quarter  of  the  way  round.  I  ordered  some  water  to
be  made  hot  immediately,  stripped  her  arm,  and  as  soon  aS  'he
water  was  hot,  put  a  towel  in  a  large  tin  pan  and  poured  the  hot
water  on  it  till  well  wet;  as  soon  as  cool  enough,  wrapped  it
round  her  arm  from  her  wrist  to  her  shoulder;  then  placed  the
pan  under  her  arm,  and  poured  on  the  water  from  a  pitcher,  as
hot  as  she  could  bear  it,  for  about  fifteen  minutes.  I  then  took
off  the  towel  and  directed  one  person  to  take  hold  of  the  arm

I


OS  NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH;

above  the  eibow  and  another  below,  to  steady  it ;  and  then  placed
my  fingers  against  the  end  of  the  bone  en  the  under  side,  and
ray  ihumb  against  that  gii  the  upper  side,  and  by  a  gentle
pressure  encli  way  set  the  joint  without  pain,  or  force  en  the
muscles,  to  the  astonishment  of  all  pre  sent,  who  calculated  that
it  would  require  the  strength  of  several  men.  I  then  wrapped
it  up  with  tho  same  towel,  which  had  become  cold ;  this  brought
the  muscles  to  their  proper  tone  and  kept  the  joint  firm  in  its
place;  put  her  arm  in  a  sling  and  she  walked  home  that  night
about  a  mile,  and  the  next  day  was  well  enough  to  knit  all  dav.
In  case  a  shoulder  is  out  of  joint,  I  relax  the  muscles  in  the
same  manner,  and  put  the  arm  over  my  shoulder  and  lift  up,
which  has  always  put  the  joint  in  its  place,  without  any  danger
and  with  very  little  pain  to  the  patient;  and  then  by  applying
sold  water,  the  muscles  will  become  braced,  so  that  there  will  be
no  danger  of  its  getting  out  again.  I  knew  of  a  ease  where  a
man  had  his  hip  turned  put,  and  several  doctors  had  exhausted
all  their  skill  in  vain  to  set  it ;  when  one  of  my  agents  being
present,  undertook  it  by  my  plan  of  treatment,  and  after  he  had
relaxed  the  muscles  sufficiently,  put  his  knee  against  the  hip
joint,  turned  the  leg  out  and  crowded  the  joint  into  its  place
without  any  difficulty.


Poison  by  Ivy  or  Dogwood.
Many  people  are  troubled  with  this  difficulty  every  season,
and  I  have  been  much  afflicted  with  it  myself  in  my  younger
days,  often  being  poisoned  in  such  manner  as  to  swell  and
break  out  very  badly,  and  knew  no  remedy  but  to  let  it  have  its
course,  which  was  almost  as  bad  as  the  small  pox.  Ore  cf  my
sons  was  often  afflicted  in  this  way,  and  one  season  was  poisoned
three  time:?  so  as  to  be  blind  for  several  days.  I  long  sought  a
remedy  without  success,  till  I  found  it  in  the  emetic  herb.  By
washing  with  a  tincture  of  the  green  plant  as  is  directed  in  the
second  preparation  of  the  emetic  herb,  on  the  first  appearance
of  the  disease,  is  a  certain  remedy.  If  the  oomph  int  has  been
for  any  length  of  time  and  has  become  bad,  it  will  be  necessary
to  take  a  dose  of  the  powdered  emetic,  (first  preparation)  to  clear
the  system  cf  the  poison,  at  the  same  lime  of  washing  with  'he
tincture.  A  tea  made  wf  the  powdered  leaves  and  reds,  will
do  to  wash  with,  when  the  tincture,  or  preer  plant  rannot  be
bad.  The  powdered  seeds,  with  Nns.  %  ~nd  6,  (third  prepara-
tion) may  also  be  used  for  the  same  purpose.


D%  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSIC  v

Measles.

This  disease  is  very  common,  especially  among  children,  cud
is  often  attended  with  bad  consequences,  when  not  properly
treated.  It  is  a  high  state  of  canker  and  putrefaction;  and  if
the  determining  powers  are  kept  to  the  surface,  it  will  make  its
appearance  on  the  outside,  and  go  oif  itself;  but  if  cold  over
powers  the  inward  heat,  so  as  so  turn  the  determining  powei  *
inward,  the  disease  will  not  make  its  apjpeavancej  and  the  p  ttront
will  become  much  distressed,  frequency  producing  fatal  coi
quences,  if  some  powerful  stimulant  is  not  administered  to  bring
the  disorder  out.  To  give  physic  in  cases  of  this  kind  is  very
dangerous,  as  it  strengthens  the  power  of  cold  and  keeps  the
canker  and  putrefaction  inside,  which  sometimes  seats  upon  the
lungs  and  causes  consumption;  or  turns  to  the  stomach  and
bowels,  when  they  die  suddenly,  as  has  been  the  case  with  hun-
dreds, for  a  few  years  past.  I  have  attended  a  great  many  cases
of  the  measles  in  the  course  of  my  practice,  and  never  lost  one;
and  never  h?ve  known  of  any  that  have  died  of  this  disorder;
who  were  attended  by  any  of  my  agents.  When  the  symtorns
make  their  appearance,  give  a  dose  of  the  composition  powder,
or  of  No.  2;  then  give  the  tea  of  No.  3,  to  gunrd  against  can-
ker, and  add  some  No.  2,  to  overpower  the  cold;  and  when  the
second  do^  ;  g-jgj  ttu«  No,  i,  to  clear  thr  stnrm-h  5a£^i
mote  Dsrspyration.  m  soon  as  this  takes  place,  the  disorder  will
^how  itself  on  the  outside.  By  continuing  to  keep  the  aeier-
mmTncr  power  to  thesurf.ee,  nature  will  take  its  regular ^course,
SoMhe  disease  will  go  off  without  injuring  the  constitution
If  the  bowels  appear  to  be  disordered,  give  an  injection ;  and  be

she  Hn4eJ  with  the  symptoms  four  or  -five  clay,,  and    hen
';.;,-,,  sick,  turned  of  a  dark  purple  color,  and  a  high
-  vC™  I  wascalted  to  attend  her.     I  gave  her  a  stfong  d-se

£ •  S.  I "  eeped,  and  put  in  it  a  spoonful  of  the  third  prepar*-
?L  of  No   1   which  caused  such  a  violent  struggle  I
!    ?  U  W  in  1-  W  but  it  was  soon  over,  for  m  abort
^niVhVvom^andap^spiration  took  place,  winch  was
Xwed  bv  the  measles  coming  out,  so  that  she  was  completely
Si  !  ion      She  was  Boon  well  and  about

■■:.-


NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH,

Small  Pox.

3  disease  is  the  highest  stale  of  canker  and  putrefaction,

the  human  body  is  capable  of  receiving,  and  is  the  most

Contagious,  being  taken  in  with  the  breath,  or  may  be  covnmuni-

by  ino'eulation,  in  which  case  it  is  not  so  violent  and  dan-
gerous as  when  taken  in  the  natural  way.  The  distressing  and
cf; en  fatal  consequences  that  have  happened  in  cases  of  the
small  pox,  are  more  owing  to  the  manner  in  which  it  has  been
treated  than  to  the  disease,.  The  fashionable  mode  of  treatment
in  this  dise  ise  has  been  to  give  physic,  and  reduce  the  strength,
by  starving  the  patient  and  keeping  them  cold.  This  is  contrary
to  common  sense,  as  it  weakens  the  friend  and  strengthens  the
enemy ;  and  the  same  cause  would  produce  similar  effects  in  any
other  disorder.  All  that  is  necessary  is  to  assist  nature  to  drive
out  the  canker  and  putrefaction,  which  is  the  cause  of  the  dis-
ease, by  keeping  the  determining  powers  to  the  surface,  in  which
case  there  will  be  no  danger.  The  same  manner  of  treatment
should  be  used  in  this  complaint  as  has  been  directed  for  the
measles.     The  canker-rash,  and  all  kinds  of  disease  that  a  pei-

iot  liable  to  have  but  once,  such  as  chicken  pox,  swine  pox,
&>c.  are  from  the  same  cause  and  must  be  treated  in  a  similai
manner.


P'Oueh.

The  general  opinion  is  that  cough  is  an  efiefivy  to  he*;.:..  ..;,„
ought  to  treated  as  such;  but  this  idea  I  hold  to  be  altogether
an  error,  for  it  is  the  effect  and  not  the  cause  of  disease.  When
the  lungs  are  diseased  there-  will  be  a  collection  of  matter,  which
must  be  thrown  off;  and  ;ho  cough  is  like  the  pump  of  a  ship,
which  discharges  the  water  and  prevents  her  from  sinking;  so
•!i  throws  off  what  collects  on  the  lungs,  which  if
red  (o  remain  there  would  soon  putnfy  and  cause  death
It  is  a  common  saying,  that  I  have  had  a  bad  cough  and  cs

img   to  stop  it;  and  the  doctor  often  savs,  if  I  could  stop
pour  cough,   I  should   have  hopes  of  a   cure;  but  this  is   as
unreasonable  as  it  would  be  to  stop  the  pumps  of  a  ship,  which
id   cause  her  to  sink   the  sooner.     Ask   a  sailor   what  he
would  do,  and  he  would  say,  keep  the  pump  going  till  you  car
s.op  the  leak,  and  when  that  is  stopped  the  pump  will  bee
iseleso,  as  there  will  be  nothing  to  throw  off     Su<  h   i  edi
in  as  will  promote  the  cough,  till  the  canteen
removed,  which  is  cold  and  canker  on  the  lungs;  after  this  il
no  more  cough      If  a  cough  is  caused  1


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  105

sudden  cold,  it  may  be  removed  by  taking  the  composition  pow
dcr  on  going  to  bed,  with  a  hot  stone  vvr  ipped  in  wet  cloths  put
to  the  feet  to  produce  a  perspiration,  and  at  the  same  time  taking
the  cough  powder,  which  will  make  the  patient  raise  easy,  and
also  help  to  remove  the  cause.  When  the  cough  has  becoftie
seated,  and  the  lungs  are  diseased,  they  must  be  carried  through
a  regular  course  of  the  medicine,  repeating  the  same  as  occasion
may  require  till  a  cure  is  effected,  ar  the  same  time  giving  ;ht
cough  powder,  especially  on  going  to  bed.

Whooping-  cough  must  be  treated  in  the  same  manner;  cor.
iinue  to  give  the  cough  powders  till  cured.


Jaundice.

Much  has  been  said  about  the  bile,  or  gall,  being  an  enem^
in  case  of  sickness;  but  this  is  a  mistake,  for  it  is  a  friend
should  be  tre  ited  as  such.     It  is  the  mainspring  to  lite,  and  t he
regulator  of  health,  as  without,  the  food  could  not  be  diges    d
When  people  have  whit  is  called  the  Jaundice,  it  in  the  pre    il
ing  opinion  th  it  they  have  too  much  bile,  and  it  is  si  id  lh<
bilious;  this   is  a  mistaken  notion,  for  there  is  no  such  thing  a:1.
beino  too  much  gall,  it  would  be  more  correct  to  say  there
not  enough.     The  difficulty  ;s  cruised  by  the  svom  oh  1  eing  c<  Id
and  foul,  so  that  the  food  is  not  properly  digested  ;  and  th«
no*  being  appropriated  to  its  natun  1  use,  :s  diffusi  d  througl  I  he
pores  of  the  skin,   which  becomes  of  a  yellow  colour,
symptoms  arc  want  of  appetite,  costiveness,  fainmefes,  and  ihe
patient  will  be  dull  and  sleepy ;  these  are  evidence  of  bad  d
ture  and  loss  of  inward  heat.     The  only  way  to  effeet
to  promote  perspiration,  cjeanse  the  stomach,  and  reston
digestive  powers,  which  will  cause  the  bile  to  be  used  for
purpose  nature  designed  it.

Nature  has  contrived  that  each  part  of  the  body  should  per-
form its  proper  duty  in  maintaining  health,    ad  if  ther    is   to
obstruction  there  would  never  be  disease.     'rhc  g  11  '  !•■
grows  on  the  liver  and  is  placed  between  that  and  the  stem
so  that  when  the  latter  is  filled  with  food,  the  bile  is  dii
into  the  stomach  to  digest  it.      The  bile   never  makes  disc
for  it  is  perfectly  innocent,  being  nature's  friend;  and  '
appearances  called  bilious,  show  the  effect  of  dise  se  and
the  cause.     The  gall  is  a  very  bitter  substance,  and   it  is
practice  of  t-hedoctors  to  order  bitter  medicare  to  cure  die  j  mn
dice,  and  this  seems  to  be  the  universal  opinion,  which  is
"cct-  but  it  certainly  contradicts  the  notion  that  there  is  toe

H  £


NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH;

much  bile,  for  if  there  is  loo  much,  why  give  medicine  to  make
•?  I  hive  attended  many  cases  of  this  kind  and  never  hi  d
an  f  difficulty  in  eracfinga  cure.  My  method  is  to  give  No.  2,
or  the  composition  powders,  to  raise  the  inward  heat,  and  No.  1,
to  ci  stomach  and  promote  perspiration;  then  give  the

bitters  (No.  4,)  to  regulate  the  bile  and  restore  the  digestive
powers.  If  the  complaint  has  been  of  long  standing  and  die
era  ismuch  disordered,  1  hey  must  be  carried  through  a  regu-
lar course  of  the  medicine,  and  repeat  it.  as  occasion  may
require,  at  the  same  time  give  the  bitters  two  or  three  times  a
cay  till  the  appetite  is  good  and  the  digesture  restored.  Any  of
irticles  described  under  the  heed  <  f  No.  4,  are  good,  and
:  iay  be  freely  used  foraH  bilious  complaints!

Worms.
eat  deal  is  said  about  worms  causing  sickness,  and  there
.   eh  a  disc  i  se  that  children  are  afflicted  with,  but  what  is
ibated  to  worms.     The  doctors  talk  about  worm  complaints,
ers,  worm  cholics,  &c.  and  give  medicine  to  destroy
the  worms:  by  so  doing  they  frequently  destroy  their  patients.
There  was  never  a  greater  absurdity  than  '.heir  practice,  ;  nd  the
opinion  i  bout  worms  causing   disease.     The  fi  ct  is,
ihey  .ire  created  an  I  exist  <n  the  stems  ch  and  bowels  for  a  u
ful  p  ;ud   are  friendly  to  health,  insie  d  oi  being  an

;i  my;  they  pre  bred  mid  supported  by  the  cold  phlegm  that
collects  in  die  stomach  and  bowels;  this  is  their  element;  and
the  mere  there  is  of  it,  the  mere  there  will  be  of  the  worms,-
they  never  cause  disease,  but  are  caused  by  it.  Those  who  are
in  health  are  never  troubled  with  worms,  because  ihey  are  then
quiet  and  exist  in  their  natural  element;  every  one  has  more  or
less  of  them;  and  the  reason  why  children  are  mere  troubled
with  what,  is  called  worm  complaints,  is  because  they  are  more
ect  to  be  disordered  in  their  stom  ch  and  bowels  thf  n  grown
persons.  When  children  are  sick  and  their  breath  smells  bad,
it  is  said  they  have  worms,  and  everything  is  laid  to  them;  but
this  is  owing  to  disease  caused  by  canker,  for  there  is  nothing
in  the  nature  of  worms  that  can  affect  the  breath.  In  cases  of
this  kind,  the  only  thing  necessary  is  to  cleanse  the  stomach  by
getting  rid  of  the  cold  phlegm,  and  restoring  t.he  digestive  pow-
ers, when  there  will  be  no  difficulty  with  the  worms.

The  common  practice  of  the  doctors  is  to  give  calomel  and
>ther  poisons  lo  kill  the  worms;  this  must  appear  te  any  one
who  examines  into  the  subject  to  be  very  wrong  R3  well  as  dan-


OR,  BOTANIC.    FAMILY   1*i  J  VSK

gefous;  for  the  worms  canriol  be  Killed  by  '.'•■,  v
the  whole  contents  oi'  the  stomach.     I  <'m\-  knew  a  case  i
child,  who,  after,  eating  a  breakfast  of  bro'flfl  and  milk-,  wa
ken  sick;  a  doctor  w

and  give  a  dose  of  calomel  ;     i  Lhem,  win.

the  child  vomited  and  thn

pened  to  be  in  the  room  child  threw  up;  h<

soon  taken  sick  and  died;
accident  of  the  child's  ,    .

taken,  pn

kill  a  dog,  it  must  have  killed  die  child.  ity  of  such

practice  is  like  die  story  rel  tted  by  Dr.     -  i    vho

was  troubled  With  a  we,  sel  in  his  I- to  gel

weasel  he  sat  fire  to  his  burn  and  burn;  it  up.
lowing  relation  from  the  doctor  who  attended  ihe   cast
children  hid  what  he  called  a  worm  fever;  and  he  ok  to

kill  the  worms.     One  of  them  died  and  he  requi  ty  to

open  it  to  see  what  would  destroy  worms,  in  order  to  knew  how
to  cure  the  others;  but  the  parents   would  not  consent.
md  died  and  the  parents  consented  fo  have  it  opei
■  searching  'he  stomach  and  bowels,  to   the  no

worms  could  be  (fund.  The  third  soon  after  died.  The  fact
,  their  death  was  caused  by  canker  on  the  stomach  and  bow-
els, and  the  medicine  given  increased  the  difficulty  by  drawing
the  determining  powers  inward,  which  aided  the  cold  to  {re-
mote the  canker.  Where  children  die  by  such  treatment,  the
blame  is  all  laid  to  the  worms,  and  the  doctor  escapes  censure
I  have  had  a  great  deal  of  experience  in  what  rre  called  worn*
complaints;  and  after  having  become  acquainted  with  die  real
cause,  have  had  no  difficulty  in  conns  all  that  I  have  under-
taken with.  I  began  With  my  own  children.  One  of  them  was
troubled  with  what  was  supposed  to  be  worms;  I  employed  a
doctor,  who  gave  pink  root,  .aid  the  physic  to  carry  it  off  with
the  worms.  It  would  shortly  after  have  another  turn,  which
would  be  worse;  he  went  on  in  this  way  and  the  worms  kept  in-
creasing, till  Tbecame  satisfied  that  he  was  working  on  the  ef-
fect and  neglected  the  cause,  when  I  dismissed  him  and  under
took  the  cure  myself.  I  firstly  gave  the  warmest  mid icine  I
then  knew  of  to  clear  off  the  cold  phlegm;  and  gave1  bitter me-
dicine,such  as  popl.r  b<rk,  wormwood,  tanzy,  pnd  physic  made
of  the  twigs  of  butternut,  to  cleanse  the  stomach  and  to  correct
the  bile.  By  pursuing  this  plan  the  child  soon  got  well  and
was  no  more  troubled  with  worms.     A  child  in  the  neigh      -


IP4  -NEW  GVlDt.  TO  HEALTH,

fiood  where  I  lived,  'about  six  years  eld,  was  '.ken  sick  in  the
morning  and  the  doctor  was  sent  for,  who  gave  medicine  for
worms;  soon  after  it  had  iits  and  continued  in  convulsions  dur-
ing the  day,  -.md  at  night  died.  I  was  satisfied  that  its  death
w«:s  hastened,  if  not  caused  by  what  was  given.  When  the
Stomach  is  diseased,  or  when  poison  is  taken  into  it,  the  worms
try  to  flee  from  their  danger,  which  causes  distress,  and  they
sometimes  get  into  knots  and  stop  the  p-.ssages  to  the  stomach,
Much  more  might  be  said  on  this  subject;  but  enough  has  been
bUted  to  put  those  who  attend  to  it  on  their  guard  against  the
dangerous  practice  of  giving  medicine  to  kill  worms.

My  practice  has  been  and  shall  reccommend  to  others  to  do,
in  case  of  what  is  called  worm  complaints,  to  give  the  compo-
sition powders,  or  No.  2,  to  warm  the  stomach,  a  tea  of  No.  3,
to  remove  the  c  inker,  and  the  bitters  or  either  of  the  articles  de-
scribed under  No.  4,  to  correct  (he  bile.  If  they  are  bud  carry
them  through  a  course  cf  the  medicine,  and  give  the  bitter?.
When  there  are  nervous  symptoms  give  die  nerve  powder.  In-
jections should  also  be  frequently  given.  The  butternut  syriip
is  very  good.  If  there  should  be  danger  of  mortification,  make
use  of  No  6,  both  in  the  medicine  given,  and  in  the  injections.

The  tape  worm  is  from  the  same  cause  as  other  worms,  and
may  be  cured  in  the  same  manner.  They  are,  when  single,
about  half  an  inch  long  and  one  third  as  wide;  they  join  to-
gether and  appear  like  tape,  and  often  come  away  in  long  pieces
of  several  yards.  I  was  once  troubled  with  them,  and  used  lo
be  faint  and  have  on  appetite;  I  cured  myself  by  taking  the  but-
ternut physic,  which  brought  away  several  yards  at  a  time;  ;:nd
by  taking  the  bitter  medicine  to  correct  the  bile,  was  never
troubled  with  it  again.

I  have  often  heard  about  people  having  a  greedy-worm;  but
this  is  a  mistaken  notion,  for  there  was  never  any  such  thing. —
The  difficulty  is  the  stomach  being  cold  and  disordered,  so  that
the  food  is  not  properly  digested,  passes  off  without  nourishing
the  system,  and  this  ere  ites  an  unnatural  appetite.  Remove  the
cause  by  warming  the  stomach  and  correcting  the  digestive  pow-
ers, and  there  will  be  no  farther  difficulty.  In  the  year  1805, 1
was  called  to  see  a  young  woman,  who  it  was  supposed  had  a
greedy  worm.  It  was  thought  to  be  very  large,  nd  would  fre-
quently get  into  her  throat  and  choak  her,  almost  stopping  her
breath.  Her  mother  told  me  that  the  day  before  one  of  the
neighbors  w  s  in  and  told  n  story  "bout  a  persons  having  a  mon-
ster in  their  stomach  which  was  taken  in  by  drinking  at  a  brook;


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILi  [Ajf.

>  ;  able  account  so  frightened  her  daughter,  that  the  worm
rose  into  ii?i-  throat  and  choaked  her  so  bad  that  she  3:  td
took  the  girl  home  with  me  and  gave  her  a  dose  of  hot  bitters;
■me  of  the  nerve  powder  that  night;  the  next  morning  1
I  her  through  a  course  of  the  medicine  as  well  as  I  knew
at  that  time,  which  cleared  the  stomach  and  bowels  and
strengthened  the  nervous  system,  {told  her  there  was  no  worm
that  'roubled  her,  and  she  hi  d  faith  in  what  I  said.  I  gave  her
medicine  to  correct  the  bile  and  restore  the  digesture  and  she
soon  got  well,  being  no  more  troubled  about  Iheworm.  The
difficulty  was  caused  by  .a  disordered  stomach  and  want  of  di-
gesture, which  produced    spasms  in  the  stomach  and  throat.


Consumption.

This  complaint  is  generally  caused  by  some  acute  disorder
not  being  removed,  and  the  patiei.,  being  run  down  by  the  £  ft_
ionable  practice,  until  nature  makes  a  compromised*^  disease
and  the  house  becomes  divided  against  itself.  There  is  a  con-
stant warfare  kept  up  between  the  inwar-J  fceat  ari({  coj,j  fag
flesh  wastes  away  in  consequence  o*  not  digesting  the  food,  the
canker  becomes  seated  on  the  yfibmbch  and  bowels,  and  then
takes  hold  of  the  lungs.  When  they  get  into  this  situation  it
is  called  a  seated  consumption,  and  is  pronounced  by  the  doc->

tors  to  be  incurable.     I  have  had  *   • —    '       .,,,  ro8Ac,»f  ih^
...,.         •  -  ■-  .^reat  lilaaj  ~:lbt:;ul   -'-'■ -»

rimu,  ana  have  in  all  of  them,  where  there  w  s  life  enough  left
to  build  upon,  been  able  to  effect  a  cure  by  my  system  of  prac-
tice.    The  most  important  thing  is  to  raise  the  inward  boat  and
get  a  perspiration,  clear  the  system    of  canker,  and    restore  the
digestive  powers,  so  that  food   will  nourish  the  body  and  keep
that  heal  on  which  life  depends.     This"  must  be  done  by  the
idar  course  of  medicine,  ■  3  bus  been  directed  jri  all  vi<
bks  of  disease,  and   persevering  in  it  till    the  c;ruse    is  re

id.
This  complaiat  is  called  by  the  doctors  a  hectic  fever,  1
they  are  subject  to  cold  chills  and  hot   flashes  on   the  surface;
but  this  is  an  error,  for  there  is  no  fever  about  if;  and  this  is  the
itest  difficulty — if  there  was  it  would   li  is  and  na-

,  !  be  able  to  drive  out  the  cold  and  effect  a  <
onlv  difficulty  is  to  raise  afever,  which  must  be   clone  by  i
icine  as  will  raise  and;  hold  the  inward  heat  till  nature  has
;ommand.     When  the   patient  is  very  weak  and
low   they  will  have  what  is  called  cold  sweats;  the  cau

stood;  the  water  that  collects  on  the  skin  d«


:     •  '  GUIDE  TO  UEiuni;

come  through  the  pores,  but  is  attracted  from  the  air  in  the
room,  which  is  warmer  than  the  body,  and  condenses  on  the  sur-
face; the  same  may  b$£een  on  the  outside  of  a  mug  or  tum-
bler on  ;i  hot  day,  when  filled  with  cold  water;  which  is  from
the  same  cause.  It  is  o'i  more  importance  to  attend  to  the  pre
venting  this  complaint,  than  to  cure  it.  If  people  would  make
^se  or"  those  means  which  I  have  recommended,  and  cure
themselves  of  disease  in  its  first  stages,  and  avoid  all  poisonous
drugs,  there  would  never  be  a  case  of  consumption  or  any  olhei
chronic  disorder.


Fits.

These  are  produced  by  the  same  cause  as  other  complaints.

that  is,  cold  and  obstructions,  and  may  bo  cured   by  a  regular

rse  of  the  medicine,  which  overpowers  the  cold,  promotes

'ion,  and  restores  the  digestive  power?,     Poison,  or  any

■■vhich  irives  the  cold  power  over  the  inward  heat,  will
trans  eise,             e  ,                .  \         c  .,  ,

cause  fits,  bewu^  ,hV  n^  tone  of  the  muscular  power  is
thereby  destroy,  whifcu  produces  violent  spasms  on  the  wncle
system  So  much  has  afedy  been  said  on  this  subject,  that  it
*  unnecessary  to  say  mere,  tb  .give  a  correct  idea  of  the  man-
aer  of  cure.

^iise  are  U  caused  by  Overheating  the  evstem  and  eooWg
too  suddenly,  which  leaves  the  pores  obstructed,  and  then  by
taking  more  cold  will  bring  on  the  warfare  between  cold  and
heat  when  they  break  out  and  itch  and  smart,  as  if  stung  by  an
insect  When  the  beat  gets  a  little  the  upper  hand,  so  as  to  pro-
duce perspiratien,  it  will  disappear  till  they  get  another  cold .-~
The  only  «ay  to  effect  a  cure  is  to  give  the  hot  medicine,  and
steam  till  they  are  brought  to  the  same  state^pf  heat  as  that
which  <irsf  causes  the  disease,  and  then  cool  by  degrees.  This
]  proved  in       end  instances,  and  never  had  any  difficulty

in  entirely  removing  the  cause  in  this  way,  Make  use  of  a  tea
of  No.  3,  for  canker,  and  the  bitters  to  correct  the  bile,  and  a
y  1 1]  iyder  to  quiet  the  nerves,  and  they  will  soon  be  ic-

J  to  perfect  health.

Sfranguary,  or  Grave!.
This  disorder  is  often  caused  by  hard  labor,  and   exposure  to
I    rl  of  life;  and  when    '.hey  grow  cold,  their
jmes  thick,  and  a  sediment  col!


OH,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  jO?

in  the  bladder,  winch  obstructs  the  passages ;  the  glands  through
whic!-  the  urine  passes,  are  clogged  and  become  diseased,  so
that  there  is  a  difficulty  in  voiding  the  water,  which  causes  great
pain.  It  is  seldom  that  there  is  a  cure  in  such  cases;  but  relief
.may  be  obtained  by  a  course  of  the  medicine,  aud  making  free
use  of  the  poplar  bark  tea.  A  tea  of  the  hemlock  bouglis  isj
very  good;  r  nd  also  f  have  known  great  relief  from  using  the
wild  lettuce  and  pipsisway,  the  tops  and  roots  bruised  and  steer>
ed  in  hot  water.  Many  other  articles  that  are  good  to  promote
the  urine  may  be  used  to  advantage.


Dropsy.

There  are  two  kinds  of  this  complaint,-  one  is  caused  by  los-
ing the  inward  heat  so  as  to  stop  Ihe  natural  perspiration,  which
causes  the  water  that  is  usually  thrown  off  in  this  way,  to  col-
lect in  the  body  and  limbs.  This  may  be  cured  by  rcising  the
internal  heat  and  cajsins  a  profuse  perspiration,  when  the  water
will  piss  off  in  a  natural  way;  then  make  use  of  such  medicine
as  will  remove  canker  and  restore  the  digestive  powers,  when
the  food  being  digrs  ed  will  keep  up  the  natural  heat  of  the
body  and  continue  the  perspiration.  The  other  kind  is  caused
by  cold  «nd  obstruction ;  but  instead  of  tie  water  collecting  and
remaining  in  the  body  and  limbs,  a  leak  forms  in  the  glands  and
lets  it  into  the  trunk  of  the  body,  where  there  is  no  vent  to  let
it  off  This  cannot  be  cured  without  tapping,  raid  is  very  sel-
dom completely  cured.  T  have  never  known  but  two  who  were
in  this  situation  to  be  perfectly  restored.  One  was  a  girl  who  I
•attended;  T  tapped  her  and  took  sway  seventeen  pounds  of  wa-
ter; then  swathed  her  up  close,  and  gave  medicine  to  keep  a
perspiration;  she  did  not  fill  agnin  md  was  completely  cured
The  other  wis  a  man — he  had  been  tapped  twice.  I  carried
him  through  the  course  of  medicine  several  times,  and  gave  the
juniper  ashes  with  molasses  and  gin,  which  carried  off  large
quantities  of  water,  and  he  entirely  recovered  from  the  disorder.
T  have  cured  a  number  who  had  the  first  mentioned  complaint,
by  the  common  course  of  medicine,  one  woman  was  cured  by
taking  the  wild  lettuce,  bruised  and  steeped  in  hot  water.  Men
tion  has  been  made  of  several  cases  nf  this  d.sease  in  my  nar>
rative,  which  were  cured;  aud  enough  has  been  said  to  give  s*
Idea  of  the  cause  and  manner  of  treatment.  ,         '


NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH,

Bilious  Cholic.
The  name  of  this  complaint  is  erroneous,  for  bilious  mean?
the  bile,  and  no  one  ever  heard  of  a  bile  cholic  or  pain  caused
\y  gall,  as  it  is  a  friend  to  health  and  never  caused  disei.se  or
death.  This  pain  is  caused  by  a  disordered  stomach  ;aid  want
of  digesture;  the  stomach  is  filled  with  canker,  which  gets  into
■',.'  narrow  passage  from  the  stomach,  when  the  action  oi  ths
bowels  cease;  after  the  pain  subsides,  those  parts  where  it  was,
are  very  sore.  To  cure  it,  raise  the  inward  heat  by  giving  the
hot  medicine,  remove  the  canker  with  No.  3,  and  give  the  bitters
Lo  correct  the  bile,  and  reper.t  it,  till  a  cure  is  effected.  If  the
case  is  b.d,  onrry  them  through  a  course  of  the  medicine,  and
often  give  injections


Pleurisy.
This  is  a  distressing  complaint  and  is  caused  by  cold,  or  want
of  inward  heat;  I  never  had  any  difficulty  in  curing  it  by  my
common  praetice.  The  only  remedy  m;de  use  of  by  the  doc-
tors is  to  bleed;  this  only  increases  the  disease,  ">y  reducing  the
strength  of  the  patient,  without  removing  the  cause.  I  was
once  called  to  a  soldier  at  E: 3  port,  who  had  a  violent  pain  in
his  side;  the  doctor  that  attended  him,  had  bled  him  five  times,
■without  removing  the  pain,  which  made  him  so  weak  that  it  was
with  difficulty  he  could  be  held  up  in  the  bed.  1  relieved  him  in
one  hour  by  a  common  course  of  medicine,  and  bathing  his  side
with  the  rheumatic  drops.  It  took  three  weeks  to  get  up  his
strength,  which  might  have  been  done  in  three  days  if  he  had
not  got  bled.  I  was  called  to  another  case  of  the  kind,  of  a
soldier  at  the  same  place.  He  had  been  bled  and  a  large  blister
put  on  his  side  to  remove  the  pain,  which  caused  a  siranguary
and  he  was  in  great  distress.  I  declined  doing  any  thing  for
him  without  the  consent  of  the  commanding  officer, who  was
not  present.  The  soldier  begged  of  me  to  tell  him  what  to  do
for  the  latter  complaint,  as  he  could  not  live  so.  I  told  him  to
take  off  the  blister,  which  was  immediately  done,  and  it  gave
instant  relief.  By  carrying  them  through  a  course  of  medicine,
as  has  been  directed  for  other  violent  attacks,  will  cure  all  cuses
of  this  complaint  without  danper;  and  is  nvich  better  than
bleeding  or  blisters,  which  increase  the  difficulty.

Relax.
This  complaint  is  caused  by  indigestion,  or  loss  of  the  powers
of  the  gall,  which  becomes  thick,  in  consequences  of  cold,  or


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  •  fjg

loss  of  inward  heal,  when  the  stomach  will  be  sour  The  best
remedy  is  to  give  No.  2,  which  will  thin  the  gall;  cleanse  he
stomach  with  No.  1,  and  give  the  bitters  to  correct  the  digesture
A  dose  of  tlie  composition  powders  with  a  tea-spoonful  of  No'
0,  in  if,  will  in  most  enses  effect  a  cure.  The'  bayberry  and
poplar  I/ark  is  good,  and  also  many  other  articles  that  have  been
described  as  good  to  restore  the  digestive  powers.

Dysentery.
_  This  is  a  distressing  complaint,  and  is  very  common,  espe-
gally  among  children;  although  much  has  already  been  said  on
flns  subject;  yet  its  importance  will  justify  some  further  (V-er
ttons.  It  is  caused  by  cold,  which  gets  the  ascendency  oxer  the
inward  heat  so  aa  to  draw  all  the  determining  powers  inward;
the  stomach  is  disordered,  the  digestive  powers  are  lest,  the
bowels  become  co-ted  with  canker,  the  food  is  not  digested  so
as  to  afford  any  nourishment  or  heat  to  the  system,  and  all  the
juices  flow  inward  and  pi  bs  off  by  the  common  passage.  The
Canker  makes  the  bowels  very  sore,  and  when  any  thing  passes
them  it  causes  excrutiating  pain.  The  host  plan  of  treatment
is  to  carry  the  patient  through  a  regular  course  of  medicine,
and  repeat  it,  if  occasion  should  require,  every  day  till  relief  is
Obt  lined.  During  the  operation  give  the  chicken  broth,  rncl
after  the  disease  is  checked,  give  occasionally  a  little  brandy
and  loaf  sugar  burned  together,  and  a  strong  tea  of  poplar  bark.
fGJive  the  syrup.  (No.  5.)  two  or  three  time  n  day  until  entirely
recovered,  and  the  bitters,  (No:  4.)  may  be  given  night  and
morning  to  restore  the  digesture.  Care  must  be  taken  to  keep
up  the  inward  heat  in  the  interim,  by  giving  occasionally  f<o.  9.
in.  a  tea  of  No.  3,  sweetened.  Steaming  is  very  important  is
this  complaint,  and  injections  must  often  be  administered".

Rheumatism.

This  complaint  is  caused  by  cold  obstructing  the  nature]
Circulation,  which  causes  pain  end  swelling.  It  often  affects
U  e  joints  so  that  they  grow  out  of  shape.  A  cure  is  easily
effected  if  timely  and  properly  attended  to,  which  musl  be  dene
•Jby  such  medicine  as  will  cause  perspiration  and  remove  obstruc-
tions. Tn  common  cases  by  taking  the  rheum-  tie  drops,  and
bathing  the  part  affected  with  the  same  will  remove  the  com-
plaint. When  the  case  is  bad,  carry  them  through  a  course  of
the  medicine  and  bathe  with  the  drops,  repeating  it  as  occrsion
»ay  require  till  cured.     At  the  same  time  give  a  tea  of  popla:


110  NEW  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH;

barfc  or  hemlock  boughs;  and  many  other  articles  which  have
been  described  as  good  for  this  complaint,  may  also  Le  madig
use  of  io  advantage.

The  gout  is  from  the  snrne  cause,  and  the  sionrch  being
greatly  disordered,  and  very  sour,  which  produces  a  burning
jf  nsition.  I  have  cured  several  cases  by  the  common  course  of
medicine,  and  giving  the  bitters  to  restore  the  digestive  powers,

Sore  Lips.

They  are  common  in  very  hot  or  cold  weather,  when  there  id

rly  a  h  Is  nee  of  the  power  of  outward  rnd  inward  heat,  or

outward  and  inward  cold,  which  produces  canker.     To  cure  it

take  a  strong  dose  of  a  tea  of  No.  3,  with  a  tea-spoonful  of  No,

2  in  it,  when  going  to  bed,  and  wash  them  with  the  same,  then

wipe  them  dry  to  take  oti  the  matter  collected;  then  wet  them

again  with  the  ted,  and  put  on  as  much  ginger  as" will   stick,

repeat  the  same  again  for  two  ov  three  times,  till  the  coat  is

lent  io  keep  out   the  air,  when  this  comes  off,  repeat  the

same  process  again,  until  the  soreness  is  gone,  then  wash  again

with  the  tea  and   wipe  them  dry,  and  apply  warm  tallow  till  a

cure  is  completed.

Sore  Eyes.
This  is  generally  caused  by  being  exposed  to  sudden  changes
if  heat  and  cold,  which  produces  canker,  and  where  this  is
there  will  be  inflammation.  There  -re  nrmy  things  good  for
this  complaint;  but  the  best  thai  I  have  found  is  white  pond
lily  root,  marshrosemary,  witch-hazle  end  re^  r  spWerry  leaves;
make  a  strong  te:  v  ith  all  or  either,  •  nd  nod  one  third  rs  much
of  No.  6,  with  a  lbtle.No.  2;  bribe  the  eyes  several  '.imes  in  a
day;  every  morning  put  your  nice  in  cold  w-  ter,  open  and  shut.
the  eyes  till  well  washed;'  repeat  'his  till  cure  is  effected.  At
t.he  seme  time  take  the  tea  to  clear  the  system  of  canker.

Head  Ache.
This  pain  proceeds  from  b  foul  stomach,  the  bile  loses  its
powers,  the  food  clogs  by  not  being  digested,  and  the  effect  is
felt  in  the  head,  which  is  the  fountain  of  se^se.  Sometimes
there  is  sickness  at  the  stomach;  when  this  happens  it  is  called
sick  head  ache  and  when  they  vomit  the  head  is  relieved.  This
proves  that  the  cause  is  Ufcthe  stomach.  V  must  be  cured  by
cleansing  the  stomach  and  restoring  the  digestive  powers.  A
dose  of  composition  powders,  sitting  by  the  fire  wrapped  in  a


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  lLi

blanket,  will  generally  give  relief;  but  if  it  should  not,  take  a
dose  of  No.  1  m  a  tea  of  No.  3,  and  take  the  bitters  to  correct
the  bile;  No.  2,  should  also  be  taken  to  warm  the  stomach,  rod
if  it  is  sour  take  the  pearlaab  water.  It  is  very  f  shionable  with
the  doo^s  to  tell  about  dropsy  in  the  head,  but  in  this  I  have
no  bellif  for  there  is  no  disease  in  the  head  but  what  proceeds
from  trie  stomach,  except  from  external  injury.  If  they  under-
stood vheoreal  cause  and  would  give,  the  proper  medicine  to
remove  it,' there  would  be  no  difficulty  in  the  head;  but  when  a
child  is  sick  they  give  calomel  and  other  poisons,  which  increases
the  disease;  and  if  they  die  it  is  laid  to  the  dropsy  in  the  head,
and  this  is  satisfactory  because  the  doctor  says  so.

Corns.
These  come  on  the  joints  of  the  toes  and  are  very  trouble-
some. They  may  be  cured  by  soaking  the  foot  in  warm  water
till  the  com  is  soft,  shave  it  thin;  take  a  strip  of  bladder  or  skin
of  suet,  eight  or  ten  inches  long,  and  half  .  n  inch  wide,  rub  it
till  soft;  then  soople  it  well  in  rattle-snake's  oil,  or  the  nerve
ointment;  wrap  it  round  the  toe  aid  keep  it  on  till  worn  out,
if  this  does  not  cure  repeat  the  same  till  the  corn  is  removed,
I  have  seldom  known  this  to  fail  of  a  cure.


Venereal.

The  disease  that  is  called  by  'bis  name  is  more  common  in.
seaports  than  m  the  country,  because  there  is  a  more  promis-
cuous and  illicit  intercourse  of  the  sexes,  than  in  other  places.
It  is  a  very  high  state  of  c  nkei  and  putrefaction,  which  takes
hold  of  the  glands  of  'hose  n~rts  that  pre  first  affected  with  it;
and  if  not  checked  the  whole  system  will  become  diseased  by
the  venereal  taint.  It  is  more  common  <mong  seafaring  men,
because  of  their  being  long  absent  at  sea,  and  on  coming  on
shore,  they  give  free  scope  to  their  passions,  without  being  very
scrupulous  about  the  manner  of  their  indulgence.  It  originates
probably  with  those  common  women,  who  have  connection  with-
in my  different  men,  and  going  beyond  (he  impulse  of  nature;
this  impure  connection  cruises  unclennness,  which  produces  the
disease,  and  when  seated  is  contagious.

The  reason  why  this  disease  causes  so  much  fright  and  alarm,

vin.'T  to  two  causes;  the  first  is  the  disgrace  that  is  attached

to  the  dishonesty  in  getting  if;  rind  the  other  is  the  manner  in

11  y  been  treated,  in  giving  mercury  to  cure  it;

ly  becomes  worse  than  the  disease.     That  this  disorder


m  JStw    OUIDE   TO   HEALTH

cannot  be  cured  by  any  other  means  is  altogether  an  error;  for
I  have  cured  a  number  of  cases  by  very  simple  me  ns.  The
first  symptoms  felt,  is  a  scalding  sensation  and  pain  when  void-
ing the  urine;  and  within  twenty-four  hours  after  this  is  exj  eri*
enced,  it  may  be  cured  in  that  time,  by  applying  cold  water  and
making  use  of  the  rheumatic  drops;  if  there  is  much  soreness
make  use  of  the  tea  of  No.  3,  with  the  drops  in  it;  wh
be  taken  as  well  as  applied  to  the  parts.  If  the  disease  has  been
of  long  standing,  and  the  whole  system  has  become  effected,
they  must  be  carried  through  a  course  cf  the  medicine.  Where
there  lias  been  mercury  made  use  of,  and  there  is  ell  the
attendant  consequences  of  such  treatment,  it  is  much  mere
difficult  to  effect  a  cure;  and  is  only  done  by  a  full  course  of  the
medicine,  and  repeating  it  for  a  /lumber  of  times;  raising  the
heat  by  steam  each  time  as  high  2S  they  can  bear,  to  throw  out
the  mercury  and  remove  the  canl.er,  at  the  same  time  applying
the  poultice;  then  give  the  bitters  to  correct  the  bile.

I  had  a  case  of  a  woman  who  was  brought  to  me  on  a  bed
fifteen  miles.  She  was  in  a  very  putrid  state  and  as  bad  as  she
could  well  be,  with  all  the  consequences  that  are  caused  by  being
filled  with  mercury.  Diifeient  doctors  had  attended  her  for
eleven  months  and  she  had  constantly  been  growing  worse.
She  had  been  kept  ignorant  of  her  disease  till  a  few  days  before
brought  to  me,  on  account  of  her  husband.  I  carried  her
through  five  courses  of  the  medicine  in  two  weeks  and  applied
a  poultice  of  white  bread  and  ginger  nnde  with  a  tea  of  No.  3.
This  completely  broke  up  the  disorder,  rnd  by  giving  medicine
to  correct  the  bile  and  restore  the  digesture,  she  was  cured  and
returned  home  in  three  weeks  after  coming  to  me.  By  taking
things  to  restore  her  strength  has  enjoyed  good  health  eve.-  since.
Another  woman  was  cured  In  the  same  manner,  who  had  been
an  this  way  for  six  years,  and  unable  to  do  any  business,  I
attended  her  three  weeks,  when  she  was  restored  to  health  and
returned  home.  In  less  than  a  year  after  she  had  two  children
at  a  birth,  and  has  enjoyed  good 'health  to  this  day.

This  disease  may  be  produced  by  other  meansthan  what  have
been  described.  It  may  be  taken  in  with  the  breath  by  being
much  exposed  in  attending  on  those  who  are  in  a  very  putrid
stage  of  the  complain: :  or  may  be  communicated  to  part's  where
the  skin  is  broken,  and  in  many  other  ways;  when  they  will
have  many  of  the  symptoms  the  same  as  when  taken  in  the
common  way.  Children  will  sometimes  be  affected  with  the
venereal  taint,  whose  parents  hare  had  the  disease      A  die


Oft,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN,  Of.

similar  in  appearance,  with  much  the  same  symptoms,  may  be
brought  on  by  overdoing  and  being  exposed  to  the  cold.  I
once  had  ihe  case  of  a  young  married  man,  who,  by  straininc1
himself  from  loading  mill  logs  and  being  exposed  to  wet  and
-:old  caused  a  we  ikness  in  the  back  and  loins,  and  he  had  what
is  called  a  gleet,  and  an  inflammation,  with  all  the  symptoms
common  in  the  venereal.  His  wife  became  affected  in  the  same
manner,  and  they  continued  in  this  situation  three  months,  when
I  was  called  to  attend  them;  and  by  making  use  of  such  things
as  I  l  hen  had  a  knowledge  of,  to  strengthen  the  loins  and
remove  the  canker,  was  able  to  cure  both  in  a  short  time.  The
m  n  had  11  the  symptoms  that  appear  in  the  venereal,  except
hard  bunches  in  the  groins,  called  buboes.  These  I  am  satis-
fied are  caused  by  mercury,  for  I  never  knew  any  to  have  them
except  they  had  taken  mercury.  By  syringing  with  mercury
and  sugar  of  lead,  dries  the  glands  and  contracts  the  passage,
and  stops  the  discharge,  when  the  putrid  matter  instead  of  going
off,  collects  in  the  groin  and  forms  hard  tumors,  which  remain
a  long  time  and  have  to  be  brought  to  ahead  to  let  off  the  putrid
matter.  Bunches  of  a  similar  kind  often  come  on  different  parts
of  the  body  caused  by  mercury.

M.ich  more  might  be  written  on  this  subject,  but  it  is  difficult
to  r:nd  proper  terms  to  convey  °  11  the  directions  that  may  be
necessary  in  all  cises.  Enough  has  been  said  to  give  to  those
who  re  so  unfoituna  te  as  to  have  the  disease,  ■:  general  know-
ledge of  the  nature  of  the  complaint  and  tne  best  manner  of
effecting  a  cure;  and  to  those  who  are  fortunate  enough  to  escape
it,  ny  thing  further  will  be  unnecessary.  Those  who  purchase
a  right,  or  who  m  ;y  apply  for  sssistanoe,  will  have  such  verbal
directions  as  will  enable  them  to  effect  a  cure  in  all  cases  of  the
venereal  by  a  safe  and  simple  method  of  treatment.


MIDWIFERY.

This  is  a  very  difficult  subject  to  write  upon,  as  I  know  of  nd
words,  that  would  be  proper  to  make  use  of,  to  convey  the  neces-
sary information  to  enable  a  person  to  attempt  the  practice  with
safjty.  The  gre  it  importance  of  the  subject,  however,  induces
me  not  to  be  silent;  and  I  shall  endeavor  to  make  known  to  the
public  such  thoughts  and  conclusions  as  long  experience  and
much  solicitude  has  enabled  me  to  form,  concerning  those  wfef

K


114  NEW   GUIDE  TO  HEALTH;

are  suffering  and  are  constantly  liable  (o  suffer  from  the  erroneous
and  most  unnatural  practice  of  the  present  day.  The  practice
of  midwifery  at  this  time,  appears  to  be  altogether  a  matter  of
speculation  with  the  medical  faculty,  by  their  exhorbitant  price
for  attendance.  The  tax  on  the  poor  class  is  very  heavy;  •:.(!
this  is  not  the  greatest  grievance  that  .hey  have  to  bear,  for  they
are  often  deprived  of  their  wives  and  children,  by  such  ignorant
and  unnatural  practice  as  is  very  common  in  all  parts  of  the  coun-
try.

Thirty  years  ago  the  practice  of  midwifery  was  principally  in
<      handsof  experienced  women,  who  had  no  difficulty;  and  there
was  scarce  an  i-  s.  nee  known  in  thosedaysof  a  womansdying
in  chtid-1  e  ]  and     was  veryuncommon  for  them  to  lose  thechild';
but  at  the  present  t  me  these  things  are  so  con  mon  thai  if  is
■  t  Iked  about.     There  must  be  si  me  <      se  for  this  dif-
tnd  I  cannot  account  for  it  in  no  otliei  .    y  than  theun-
experience  from  the  doctors,  who  have
now  got  naest  of  the  practice  into  their  own  hands.     Tn  the
country  where  I  was  bom,  and  where  1  brought  up  ;   f  mily  of
children,  there  was  n(  s'-c;;     thing  thought  of  as  c  Hi
sistanceof  adoetor;  am  was  thought  neces-

sary, and  the  instances  were  very  hey  were  not    si  c-

ful,  for  they  i  see!  no  arl,  I  •  n<  e  :  s  na-

ture required;  gave  here  e    to  keep  (hem  in  rati<  n  ;  nd

to  qi  Their  price  v  11  n    he  doc-

tors Vegan  to  prat  tice  mi  ■  ,  tin  ir  p  i<  <  was

three  dollars,  bu)  they  soon  after  raised  to  five;  end  now  iley
charge  frcm  twelve  to  twenty  dollars.  If  they  go  on  in  this
ratio,  it  will  :;  he  people  can  e  rn  to  pay  for  their

children.

All  the  valuable  instruction  I  ever  received,  was  from  ft  wo-
man in  the  'own  where  I  lived,  who  I  d  pr  cticed  as  a  midwife
for  twenty  years;  in  an  interview  of  about  twenty  minutes,  she
gave  me  more  useful  instruction    Inn  all  lev  I  from  ;;ny

other  source,  i  have  practiced  considerably  in  this  lint  nd
have  always  had  very  good  success.  It  is  very  :mpor  nt  to
keep  up  the  strength  of  women  in  a  state  of  pic  i

e  time  of  delivery,  (J  ey  n  v  be  in  possession  of  11  their
n  rural  powers;  they  should  be  carried  through  a  comse<  1'  the
medicine  several  times,  p;  nicularly  a  little  i  liv<  ry,    nd

keep  them  in  a  perspiration  during  and  after  delivery,  which  will
prevent  nftei  >•  ;i:s  and  other  complaints  common  in  f-vrli  <•  ises
Beware  of  bleeding,  opium,  and  cold  ixatbs;  invigorate  all  Ui


OR,  BOTANIC  FAMILY  fllYSTCrAS.  \&

faculties  of  the  body  and  mind,  to  exeat  the  most  laborious
efforts  that  nature  is  cabled  upon  to  perfonh,  instead  of  stupifying
an  I  substituting  art  for  nature.  I  will  relate  a  case  I  hat  I  was
knowing  to,  which  will  give  a  pretty  fair  view  of  the  practice  of
the  doctors.  A  woman  was  tub-n  in  travail  and  the  midwife
could  not  come,  a  doctor  was  set;!  tor;  when  he  came,  the i pros-
pect was  tint  she  would  be  delivered  in  two  hours:  lie  gave  her
some  medicine,  which  caused  vomiting  arid  turned  the  pains  to
the  s'omach — she  contini  ed  in  this  situation  for  twelve  hours,
when  her  strength  was  nearly  gone ;  he  then*  hied  her,  and  to
Stop  the  puking,  gave  so  much  opium,  ps  to  c  lose  such  a  stupor
that  it  required  all  the  exertions  oi  'he  women  to  keep  thei
breath  of  life  in  her  through  the  night;  in  the  morning  slvc
remained  >  ry  we  k,  and  continued  so  till  afternoon,  when  i  hi
w  s  delivered  with  insti  iments.  The  child  was  dead  end  the
worn  in  cai  le  very  near  dying,  and  it  w  is  ; is  months  befc  re  she
got  her  :'  gain.     Many  rribre-cases  might  be  given  of

the  bad  success  of  bleeding  tnd  giving  opium  to  stupify,  and
making  use  of  art,  instead  of  assisting  nature  to  do  her  cwn
work.

I  hive  given  instruction  to  several  who  have  bought  the  right,
and  their  practice  has  been  attended  with  complete  success.
Many  men  that  have  given  the  information  to,  have  since
attended  their  own  wives,  and  I  have  never  known  an  instance,
cf  any  bid  consequences;  and  if  young  married  men  would
adopt  the  same  course,  it  would  be  much  more  proper  and  safe,,
than  to  trust  their  wives  in  the  hands  of  young  inexperienced
doctors,  who  hive  little;  knowledge  except  what  they  get  from
hooks,  tnd  their  practice  is  to  try  experiments;  their  cruel  and
h  3h  treatment  in  many]  instances  would  induce  the  husband  to
throw  them  out.  of  the  window,  if  permitted  to  be  present;  but
this  is  not  allowed,  for  the  very  same  reason.

All  who  purchase  the  right  may  receive  the  necessary  verb*]
instruction  to  triable  them  to  do  ali  that  is  required  in  the  prac-
tice of  midwifery;  as  well  as  to  be  able  to  become  their  ovCn
physician  and  surgeon,  at  a  trifling  expense,


WWBOL.


A  .rue  in  the  face
American  Valerias
Archangel

Balm  of  Gilead
Balsam  Fir    -
Barberry.
Bayberry
Black  penper
Bitter  herb
Bitter  rout
Bitter-sweet
Birch  bark
Bitter  thistle
Bitters      -
Bleeding        •-
t  Bile,  (see  No.  4.)
Bilious  cholic  -
Burdock         »         »
Butternut

Bums  >,

Bones,  how  set,

Camphor  v

Cayenne        -
Cancers     -
Cancer  plaster
{ ':!nkor-sore3     -
Chamomile  -
Cherrystones    -
Clivers  ...

j  dtion  povs
Courh  -
CI  :   ken  b-oth  -
Consn  motion
Countef-^oison,  (sec  No.

of  biedicine
Corns        -

■tion  of  di
Directions  for  preparing  %
able  medicine

Drowned  persons  -


43


Page

93

-58

60

65

-  64
53
48
47
53
54
61
63

-    68
73

-  95

108

66
83
97

57
—71
91

-  75
91

-  61
55

•  63

74

100

83

105


Dropsy
Dysentery

}  Elecampane
?  Elm  bark
|  Emetic  herb
*,  Evan  root

j  Featherfew  -

\  Felons       -

5  Fevers

?  Fits

\  Fever  and  ague

i  Freezes

<  Gensang

5  General  directions

5  Gravel       -

>  Ging-er

i  Golden  seal

I  Gout     -

I  Golden  rod
<

i  Headache     -        »
\  Hemlock  bark
I  Hoarhound
1  Horseradish     -

t  Injections
\  Introduction

',  Inten;:tl  hr;'t,  (sec  No.
{ Itch         -         -         -

'  Jaundice     -


—71   \  Eadi#s'  flipper
111    I  Lock-jaw     -
J  Lily  root
84  j

it-  '    ^'TIVM

70  j  Marshrosemary
-  81   J  Mayweed     -


Page

-  107
10ft

-  60
63

34—70
63

-  63
84

-  11
106

13

-  84

64

-  71)

-  106

-  47

-  54
110

67

110

49

-  65

65


2.)
.  67—74

-  10,1

58

-  40
-    49

-  99
50


INDEX.


iylilk  porridge
Myrrh
Mullen      -
Mustard

Meadow  foam
Mortification  of  limbs
Muscles,  how  relaxed,
Mad  dog,  (see  No.  1.)
Midwifery


•Paget
83?

-  56  {
-  6!  \

65  \

-  67  £
07  f

L.  97 1

113  f


L06

76


Ncive  powder  58

Preparation  of  do.  -      74

Nervine,  (see  Nerve  powder.)

Nettle  spring

Nerve  ointment         -  -

No.  1.  Emetic  Herb,  descrip-
tion of,  -  34
Preparation  of  do.                   70

No.  2.  Cayenne,  description  of,  43
Preparation  of  do.  71

No.  3.  To  remove  canker,  de-
scription of  articles  for  that
purpose  -  -        48

Preparation  of  do.         -  71

No.  4.  Bitters  to  correct  the
bile,  description  of  articles
for  that  purpose,        -  53

Preparation  of  do.  73

No.  5.  Syrup  for  the  dysentery,
description  of  the  articles
used,
Preparation  of  do.

No.  6.  Rheumatic  drops,  de
scription  of  trtioles  used,
Preparation  of  dp.


55


Relax         ...
Red  peppers        ...

Red  raspberry
Rheumatism        -
Rheumatic  Drops
Rheumatic  weed

Ruptures  -

Salve      Ik-
Scalds  -
Scalt  heads
Small-pox
Sore  lips
Sore  eves
Sore  br<

Skunk  cabbage
Slij  i  crv  elm  bark
Snake  root
Steaming
Sumach  J

Squaw  weed
Spirits  of  turpentine     -
Spearmint

Summersavory  -

Syrup

Strengthening  plaster    *
Stock  of  medicine  «■

St.  Anthony's  fire
Stranguary
Surfeit  *

Tanzy         -         -
Thoroughwort

Umbil,  (see  Nerve  powder.)


Pagi
108
47
51

-  109
56
6C
96

7fi

-  85

-  94
100
110

ib.
94
62
63
64
18
56
52
57
59
60
73
76
7fc
106

-  ib.
ib.

61

-  62


Peach  meats

Peppermint

Pennyroyal

Pipsisw&y        «.

Pleurisy

Poisons

by  ivy,  Szc.

hark
Prickly  ash
Poultice  ~-

Piles


55  \  Venereal
59  5  Volatile  salts
59  J  Vec;etr ble  powder
66  <  Vervine — white  and  blue
108  I  Vegetable  medicine — descrip
23 1      tion  of  -  -


irt

76

74
06

'33


53  I  Witch  hazle
68  S  Wormwood
76  5  Wake  robin
93  \  Worms


51

-    00

6*

102


4.  [son  f'.vcff


11  S  Yellow  dock


68


MeJL.  Hist.
WZ

I?  317*


