================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: The Holy Bible, Containing the Old and New Covenant, Commonly Called the Old and New Testament: Translated from the Greek, Vol. 4 of 4
Creator: Charles Thomson (1729-1824)
Translator: Charles Thomson
Edition: Philadelphia: Jane Aitken, 1808, Vol. 4
Source: Internet Archive (holybiblecontain04thom), scan of the 1808 first edition
Public domain: Edition published 1808; public domain.
Artifact ID: thomson-bible-1808-vol-04
================================================================================

**The Holy Bible, containing the Old and New Covenant, commonly called the
**Old and New Testament: translated from the Greek. By Charles Thomson, late
‘* Secretary to the Congress of the United States.”

In conformity to the Act of the Congress of the United States, intituled, “ An
Act for the encouragement of Learning, by securing the Copies of Maps, Charts, and
Books, to the Authors and Proprietors of such Copies, during the times therein mentioned.” And also to the Act, entitled ‘‘An Act, supplementary to an Act, entitled,
** An Act for the encouragement of Learning, by securing the Copies of Maps, Charts, and Books, to the Authors and Proprietors of such Copies, during the times therein mentioned,” and extending the benefits thereof to the Arts of designing, engraving, and etching historical and other prints.”
BD. CALDWELL, Clerh of the
District of Pennsylvania.

THE

NEW COVENANT,

COMMONLY CALLED

THE NEW TESTAMENT:

TRANSLATED FROM

THE GREEK.

By CHARLES THOMSON,

Late Secretary to the Congress of the United States.

PHILADELPHIA:
PRINTED BY JANE AITKEN, No. 71,
NORTH THIRD STREET.

EE Oa νόον sis is me νυ; ae ἴω ἕν ΔΝ i ae ae Ce

at h's Rash .

THE GOSPEL

ACCORDING TO

MAT THEW.

The genealogy of Jrsus Curist, son of David, son of 
Abraham.

ABRAHAM begat Isaak, and Isaak begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Judas and his brethren, and Judas had Phares and
Zara by Thamar, and Phares begat Esrom, and Esrom begat Aram, and Aram begat Aminadab, and Aminadab begat
Naasson, and Naasson begat Salmon, and Salmon had Boaz
_ by Rahab, and Boaz had Obed by Ruth, and Obed begat
Jesse, and Jesse begat David the king, and David the king had Solomon by her who had been the wife of Urias, and Solomon begat Roboam, and Roboam begat Abia, and Abiabegat
Asa, and Asa begat Josaphat, and Josaphat begat Joram, and Joram begat Ozias, and Ozias begat Jotham, and Jotham begat
Achaz, and Achaz begat Hezekias, and Hezekias begat Manasses, and Manasses begat Amon, and Amon begat Josias, and
Josias begat Jechonias and those brothers of his at the removal to
Babylon, and after the removal to Babylon Jechonias begat Sa-
Jathiel, and Salathiel begat Zorobabel, and Zorobabel begat
Abiud, and Abiud begat Eliakim, and Eliakim begat Azor, and
Azor begat Sadok, and Sadok begat Achim, and Achim begat
Ehiud, and Eliud begat Eliazar, and Eliazar begat Matthan, and Matthan begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Joseph the hus.

MATTHEW? "1-H.

band of Mary, of whom was born Jesus who is called the
Curisrt: all the generations therefore from Abraham to David were fourteen generations, and from David to the removal to
Babylon there were fourteen generations, and from the removal to Babylon till the Christ fourteen generations, and the genealogy of Jesus Christ was thus; for his mother Mary having been espoused to Joseph was, before they came together, found to be with child by the holy Spirit, and Joseph her husband, being a just man and not willing to expose her, determined to divorce her privately; but while he was thinking of this, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said to him,
«( Joseph, son of David, fear not to take home Mary thy wife; for her pregnancy is from the Holy Spirit and she will bear a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins. All this was done, so that there was a fulfilment of what was spoken by. the prophet, saying, “‘ The virgin shall conceive and bear a son and thou shalt call his name
Emmanuel,*”’ the meaning of which is, God with us : so when
Joseph awoke from his sleep he did as the angel of the Lord commanded him, and took home his wife, but knew her not until she brought forth this her son, THE FIRST BoRN;} and he called his name Jesus.
Il. After the birth of Jesus at Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of Herod the king, behold there came magians from the east
2 to Jerusalem, saying, Where is he who is born to be king of the Jews? For we have seen his star at its rise, and are come
3 to pay him homage. Upon hearing this, Herod the king was
4 alarmed and all Jerusalem with him. And having assembled all the chief priests and the scribes of the people, he inquired of
5 them, where the Curis? should be born. And they told him,
At Bethlehem of Judea. For thus it is written by the prophet,
6 ‘“ And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judea art by no means the least among the leaders of Juda; for out of thee shall come
Ἢ a leader, who shall tend my people Israel.{”? Then Herod, having privately called the magians, got exact formation from them concerning the time of the star’s appearing; and

* Es. 7. 14. $ Micah 5. 2. £ Ps. 89. 27.

8

10

12

17

MATTHEW. II.

sending them to Bethlehem, he said, Go and make exact inquiry about the child. And when you have found him bring me word, that I also may go and pay him homage. So in obedience to the king they departed; and lo! the star which they had seen at its rise moved on before them, till it came and stood over the place where the child was, When they saw the star, they rejoiced exceedingly : and having entered the house they found the child with Mary his mother. Whereupon, prostrating themselves, they did him homage. Then opening their treasures they presented him gifts, gold and frankincense and myrrh. And being warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they went to their own country by another way. And when they were gone, behold an angel of the Lord appeareth to Jo. seph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the child and his mother and flee to Egypt, and stay there till I order thee; for He-

: rod will seek the child to destroy him. Accordingly he arose

and. took the child and his mother by night and went to Egypt, where he continued till the death of Herod, so that there was a fulfilment of what the Lord spoke by the prophet, saying, “Out of Egypt I called my son.*”? When Herod saw that he was treated with contempt by the magians, he was highly incensed, and he sent and slew all the male children in Bethlehem and all

‘the territory belonging thereto, from those who had entered the

second year and under, according to the time, of which he had got exact information from the magians. Then was fulfilled what was spoken by Jeremias the prophet, saying, “‘ A cry was heard at Rama—lamentation and weeping and great mourning;
Rachel weeping for her children refused to be comforted, because they are no more.t}”’

Now when Herod was dead, behold an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying, Arise and take the child and his mother and go to the land of Israel, for they who sought the child’s life, are dead. Accordingly he arose and took the child and his mother and came to the land

2 of Israel: but hearing that Archelaus reigned over Judea in the

room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither.. And be-

* Hos,11.1. + Jer. 31. 15.

23

IIL

awe)

10

11

12

13

14.
1.

16

MATTHEW. II. IIL.

ing warned ina dream, he withdrew to the district of Galilee, and went and dwelt in a city called Nazareth; so that what was spoken by the prophets was fulfilled: that he should be called a Nazarene.

In those days cometh John the baptist, proclaiming in the wilderness of Judea, and saying, ‘‘Reform; for the reign of the heavens is at hand.” For this is the person spoken of by the prophet Esaias, saying, ‘A voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord: make the roads for him straight.*”” Now John had his raiment made of camel’s hair, and a leathern girdle about his waist: and his food was locusts and wild honey: then went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea and all the country along the Jordan, and by him they were baptized in the Jordan, confessing their sins. And seeing ma- — ny of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them, ‘‘Brood of vipers! who hath prompted you to flee from the impending wrath. Produce therefore fruits worthy of this reformation, and presume not to say within yourselves,
We have Abraham for our father! For I say to you, God is able out of these stones to raise up children for Abraham.
Now the axe is at the root of the trees. Every tree therefore which doth not produce good fruit is to be cut down and cast into the fire. 1 indeed baptize you in water for a reformation; but he who is coming after me is mightier than I, whose sandals 1 am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you in a holy spirit and fire. His winnowing instrument is in his hand. He will thoroughly clean his floor, and gather his wheat for the granary; but the chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.”’

Then cometh Jesus from Galilee, along the Jordan, to John, to be baptized by him: but John earnestly opposed him, saying, “I have need to be baptized by thee. And thou comest to me!”’? And Jesus in reply said to him, ‘‘Permit this at present: for thus it becometh us to confirm all righteousness.” Then
John permitteth him; and Jesus} being baptized was just coming up from the water, when lo! the heavens were opened for

* Es. 40. 3, 4, δ. ἢ ;
+ I have for the sake of perspicuity written Fohn and Fesus: in the text it is he and him.

17

worm

MATTHEW. Ill. Iv.

him, and John saw the spirit of God descending like a dove and coming upon Jesus; and lo! a voice from heaven said,
““This is my son, the Beloved, in whom I am well pleased.”

Then-Jesus was led up by the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil. And having fasted forty days and forty nights, he was at last hungry. Whereupon the tempter coming to him, said, If thou art Son of God, command these stones to become loaves. In reply to which, Jesus said,
It is written, “‘“Man can live not by bread only, but by any thing which God is pleased to appoint.*”’ ‘Then the devil taketh him along to the holy city and placeth him on the battlement of the temple, and saith to him, If thou art Son of God, cast thyself down; for it is written, ‘He will give his angels a charge concerning thee, and with their hands they will bear thee up shouldst thou perchance strike thy foot against a stone.}’’? Jesus said to him, It is also written, ‘“Thou shalt not try the Lord thy God.{’? Again the devil taketh him along with him to a very high mountain and pointeth out to him all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them, and saith to him, All these I will give thee if thou wilt prostrate thyself and worship me. Whereupon Jesus said to him, Begone, Satan: for it is written, ‘Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God and serve him alone.§’? Then the devil leaveth him, and lo! angels came and ministered to him.

Now when Jesus heard that John was committed to prison he withdrew into Galilee; and having left Nazareth he went and dwelt at Capernaum, a sea port at the confines of Zabulon and Nephthaleim ; so that there was an accomplishment of what was spoken by the prophet [saias saying, ‘‘ The land of Zabulon and the land of Nephthaleim, the sea coast, the banks of the Jordan, Galilee of the nations—the people who sat in darkness saw a great light ; and to them who sat in the region and shadow of death, light is sprung up. ’? From that time Jesus began to make proclamation and say, ‘* Reform ; for the reign of the heavens is at hand.”

* Deut. 8.3. +Ps, 91. 11,12. +t Deut.6.16. § Deut. 6.13.
 Es. 9. 1.

18

10

11

12

MATTHEW. ἵν. ν΄

Νονν 85 Jesus was walking along the sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a drag net into the sea; for they were fishermen ; and he said to them, Follow me and I will make you fishers of men. Thereupon they immediately left their nets and followed him. And passing on he saw other two brothers, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in the vessel with their father Zebedee, mending their nets, and he called them. W hereupon they immediately left the vessel and their father, and followed him.

Then Jesus went through all Galilee teaching in their synagogues, and proclaiming the good news of the reign and curing every disease, and every malady among the people.
And the fame of him spread through all Syria; and they brought to him all their sick, seized and tormented with various distempers—-demoniacs, and lunatics and paralytics, and he cured them. And great multitudes followed him from Galilee, and Decapolis and Jerusalem and Judea, and from the banks of the Jordan.

On seeing these multitudes he went up to the mount and sat down, and his disciples came to him, and he opened his mouth and taught them, saying,

Happy the poor in spirit ; for the kingdom of the heavens is theirs.

Happy they who mourn ; for they shall be comforted.

Happy the meek ; for they shall inherit the land.

Happy they who hunger and thirst for righteousness; for they shall be satisfied.

Happy the merciful ; for they shall obtain mercy.

Happy the pure in heart ; for they shall see God. appy the peace makers; for they shall be called children of God.

Happy they who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake ; for the kingdom of the heavens is theirs.

Happy are ye when men will revile and persecute you, and accuse you falsely of every evil thing on my account.
Rejoice and exult triumphantly; for great, will be your reward in heaven: for thus they persecuted the prophets who were before you.

18

19

20

21

23

24

MATTHEW. ν.

You are the salt of the earth. Now if the salt become insipid, with what can it be made salt ? It is no longer fit for any thing, but to be thrown out of doors, and trampled under foot by men.

You are the light of the world. A city situate on a mountain cannot be hid. A lamp is not lighted and put under the corn measure, but on the stand, that it may give light to all

the family. Thus let your light shine before men, that they

may see your good works and glorify your father who is in heaven.

Do not imagine that I am come to annul the law and the prophets. Iam not come to annul, but to confirm them. For verily I say to you, Until that heaven and this earth shall have passed away, not one jot nor a tittle of the law shall be annulled till all be accomplished. Therefore whosoever shall weaken the force of one of the commandments, were it even the least, and teach men accordingly, he shall be the least esteemed in the reign of the heavens; but whoever shall practise and teach them, he shall be highly esteemed in the reign of the heavens. For I say to you, Unless your righteousness exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, you can in no wise enter the kingdom of the heavens.

You have heard that it was said to them of old, ‘‘ Thou shalt not commit murder.’”? And, ‘‘Whosoever shall commit murder shall be liable to the sentence of the judges.’ But I say to you, Whosoever is angry with his brother without cause, shall be lable to the sentence of the judges: and whoever shall say to his brother, aca, [ἃ contemptuous word] shall be liable to the sentence of the Sanhedrim; and whoever shall say, Moreh, [a reproachful word] shall be liable (to be sentenced) to the vale of fire.* If therefore thou bring thy gilt to the altar and recollect there that thy brother hath ground of complaint against thee; leave there thy gift before the altar and go away. First of all be reconciled with thy brother, and then

* Literally, to the Gehenna of fire. Gehenna, or the valley of Hinnom, was a place near Jerusalem, where children were formerly sacrificed by fire to Moloch, and where a fire was kept continual. lv burning to consume the filth of the city.

25

37

38

39

40

MATTHEW. V.

come and offer thy gift. Come speedily toa friendly agreement with thine adversary, whilst thou art on the road with him; lest the adversary deliver thee up to the judge; and the judge consign thee to the officer, and thou be thrown into prison.
Verily I say to thee, thou shalt not be released until thou hast discharged the last farthing. a

You have heard that it hath been said tothe ancients, ‘“Thou shaltnot commit adultery.”? But I say to you, whoever looketh on a married woman so as to lust after her, hath already committed adultery with her in his heart. Therefore if thy right eye cause thee to stumble, pluck it out and cast it from thee; for it is better for thee to lose one of thy members, than that thy whole body be cast into a vale of fire.*

And if thy right hand causeth thee to stumble, cut it off and cast it from thee; for it is better for thee to lose one of thy members, than that thy whole body be cast into a vale of fire. *

It hath also been said, Whosoever would put away his wife, let him give her a bill of divorce. But I say to you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except for whoredom, causeth her to commit adultery: and whoever shall marry her who is put away, committeth adultery.

Again you have heard that it hath been said to the ancients,
Thou shalt not forswear thyself; but shalt perform thine oaths to the Lord. But I say to you, Swear not at all: neither by heaven, for itis God’s throne: nor by the earth, for it is his footstool; nor by Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great king: neither shalt thou swear by thy head; for thou canst not make one hair white or black. But let your word yes, be yes; and your no, no; for whatever exceedeth these, proceedeth from that which is evil.

You have heard that it was said, ‘‘An eye for an eye: and a tooth for a tooth.”? But I say to you, Contend not with the injurious: but if one smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him thé other also. And if any determine to sue thee at law for thy vest, give it up to him, nay were it even thy mantle.
And if one press thee to go one mile, go with him two. Give

* Literally, into Gehenna.

42

43
44,

45

2

3

MATTHEW. V. VI.

to him who asketh thee. And from him who would borrow of thee, turn not thou away.

You have heard that it was said, “ Thou shalt love thy neighbour and hate thine enemy.”? But I say to you, Love your enemies. Bless them who curse you. Do good to them who hate you : and pray for them who spitefully use you and persecute you; that yo may be the children of your Father in heaven : for he causeth the sun to rise on bad and good, and sendeth the rain on just and unjust. For if you love them who love you, what reward have you? Do not even the publicans the same? And if you salute your brethren only, wherein do ye excel? Donot even the publicans do the same? You therefore are to be perfect, as your Father, who is in heaven, is perfect.

Take heed not to practise your righteousness before men in order to be observed by them; otherwise you have no reward from your father who is in heaven. Therefore when thou dost an act of charity, sound not a trumpet before thee as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets that they may be extolled by men. Verily I say to you, they have their reward. But when thou art doing an act of charity, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand is doing; that thine act of charity may be in secret; and thy father who seeth in secret will himself reward thee openly.

And when thou prayest, be not like the hypocrites. Be-

cause they love to pray standing im the synagogues and at the

corners of the streets that men may observe them; verily I say to you, They have their reward. But as for thee, when thou wouldst pray, retire to thy closet, and having shut the door pray to thy father who is in secret, and thy father who seeth in secret will reward thee openly. And when you pray, use not a vain multiplicity of words as the heathen do. Vor they think they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be not ye therefore like them; for your father knoweth what things you have ἢ need of, before you ask him. In this manner therefore pray yc,
“ Our Father, who art in the heavens, hallowed be thy name; thy reign come ; thy will be done on the earth, as it is in heaven; give us to day our daily bread; and forgive us our debts, as we do forgive our debtors; and bring us not into

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

MATTHEW. VI.

temptation, but deliver us from evil [for thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory for the ages, amen.* ] For if you forgive men their offences, your heavenly father will also forgive you; but if you do not forgive men their offences, neither will your father forgive your offences.

And when you fast, be not like the hypocrites, of a dismal countenance; for they disfigure their faces, that men may observe that they are fasting. Verily I say to you, They have their reward. But when thou keepest a fast, anoint thy head and wash thy face, that thy fasting may not appear to men, but to thy father who is in secret, and thy father who seeth in secret will reward thee openly.

Lay not up for yourselves treasures on the earth, where moth and rust consume, and where thieves break through and steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consumeth; and where thieves do not break through and steal. For where your treasure is, there

_ will your heart also be.

24

25

26

The eye is the lamp of the body. If therefore thine eye be sound thy whole body will be enlightened : but if thine eye be distempered, thy whole body will be dark. If then the light which is in thee be darkness, how great will ‘the darkness be!

No man can serve two masters : for he will either hate one and love the other; or he will attend to one and neglect the other. You cannot serve God and a worldly temper.t Therefore I say to you, Be not anxious about your life, what you shall eat or what you shall drink; nor about your body, what you shall wear. Is not life a greater gift than food; and the body, than raiment? Observe those birds of the air : they neither sow nor reap, nor lay up in granaries; yet your heavenly father feedeth them. Are not you much more valuable than they? Besides, which of you can by his anxiety prolong his life one hour? And withrespect to raiment, why are

*The words thus inclosed are not in many ancient manuscripts.

4A worldly temper, μαμ- μων a mind bent upon the things of this world and wholly engaged in forecasting how to obtain riches, honour or pleasurable enjoyment in this state of being.

29

30

31

34

MATTHEW. VI. VII.

you anxious? Consider those lilies of the field, how they grow. 
They neither toil nor spin: yet I affirm, that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. Now if God thus arrayeth the herbage which is to-day in the field, and to-morrow to be cast into a furnace, will he not much more clothe you, O ye mistrustful? Therefore be not anxious, saying,
What shall we eat; or, what shall we drink; or, with what shall we be clothed? For about all such things the nations are solicitous: for your heavenly father knoweth that you have need of all these things. But seek first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness required by him, and all those things will be superadded to you. Wherefore be not anxious about the morrow; for the morrow will be anxious about its own concerns. Sufficient for every day is its own trouble.

Vil. Judge not, that you may not be judged; for as you

4

5

12 judge, you shall be judged: and the measure which you mete, shall be measured to you again. Now why art thou observant of the mote in thy brother’s eye, and insensible to the splinter in thine own eye? Or, how canst thou say to thy brother, Hold ! let me take the mote out of thine eye, when lo ! there is a splinter in thine own eye? Hypocrite, first take the splinter out of thine own eye ; and then thou wilt see clearly to remove the mote out of thy brother’s eye.

Give not that which is holy to dogs ; nor cast your pearls before swine ; lest they trample them under foot, and turning tear you.

Ask, and ye shall obtain; seek and ye shall find; knock, and the door will be opened to you. For every one who asketh, obtaineth ; and he who seeketh, findeth; and to him who knocketh the door will be opened. Is there any man among you, who, when his son asketh bread, will give hima stone ; or if he ask for a fish will give him a serpent? If you therefore, bad as you are, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your father who is in heaven give good things to them who ask him ?

Whatsoever therefore you would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the law and the prophets.

13

14

MATTHEW. VII. VII.

Enter inat the strait gate. Because the gate is wide and the way broad which leadeth to destruction, therefore many there are who go in through it: because the gate is strait and the way narrow, which leadcth to life, therefore there are few who find it.

Now beware of false teachers, who come to you in sheep’s clothing, but are inwardly ravenous wolves. By their fruits you may know them. Are grapes gathered from thorns? Or figs from thistles? So every good tree beareth good. fruit ; ahd every bad tree beareth bad fruit. A good tree cannot bear bad fruit; nora bad tree, good fruit. Every tree which beareth not good fruit 15 cut down.and cast into the fire. So then by their fruits you will know them.

Not every one who saith to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he who doeth the will of my father who is in heaven. “Many will say to me on that day
Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name and in thy name cast out demons, and in thy name done many miracles, to whom I will then declare, I never acknowledged you ; Depart from me ye who work iniquity. Therefore whoever heareth these words of mine and putteth them in practice, him I will compareto a prudent man, who built his house upon the rock. When the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, it did not fall, because it was founded on the rock. But whoever heareth these words of mine, and doth not put them in practice, may be compared to a foolish man, who built his house on the sand. When the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house ; it fell, and great was the ruin thereof.

When Jesus finished this discourse, the crouds were astonished at his manner of teaching; for in teaching them he was

VIII. like one having authority, and not like the scribes. And

2

3 as he was going down from the mount great multitudes followed him. And lo! a leper came and prostrated himself before him, and said, Sir, if thou wilt, thou canst cleanse me.
Whereupon Jesus: stretched forth his hand and touched him, saying, wiill:-Be thou cleansed. And immediately he was cured of his leprosy. Then Jesus saith to him, See thou tell

co es)

10

11

14

15

16

17

- --- .. ee ee

MATTHEW. Vill.

no one; but go and shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift which Moses prescribed, for a testimony to them.

And as Jesus was entering Capernaum, ἃ centurion met him and intreated him, saying, Sir, my servant licth at home struck with a palsy, in great torture. Thereupon Jesus saith to him, I was coming; I will cure him. In reply to which the centurion said, Sir, am not worthy that thou shouldst come under my roof; but only speak a word and my servant will be cured. For even I, who am myself under command, having soldiers under me, say to one, Go; and he goeth: and to another, Come; and he cometh: and to my slave, Do this; and he doth it. Upon hearing this Jesus expressed admiration, saying to them who followed him, Verily I say to you, I have not found even in Israel such a belief. Now I say to you that many will come from the east and west, and will be placed at table with Abraham and Isaak and Jacob, in the kingdom of the heayens, and the children of the kingdom will be cast out into the outer darkness. Weeping and gnashing of teeth will be there. Then Jesus said to the centurion, Go thy way and be it done for thee as thou hast believed. And _ that very instant his servant was cured.

Jesus also having gone to Peter’s house, saw his wife’s mother confined to her bed and sick of a fever, and he touched her hand; thereupon the fever left her and she arose and entertained them. And in the evening there were brought to him many demoniacs. And he expelled the spirits with a word, and cured all that were sick, so that there was an accomplishment of that which was spoken by the prophet Esaias, saying,
‘‘He took our mfirmities and bore away our diseases.*”’

When Jesus saw great crowds around him, he gave orders to go over to the opposite shore; whereupon a certain scribe accosting him, said, ‘Teacher, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest. Jesus saith to him, the foxes have holes and the birds of the air have roosts; but the son of man hath not where to lay his head. Another of his disciples said to him, Master, permit me to go first and bury my father. And

ee ne ee)

MATTHEW. VIII. ΙΧ.

to him Jesus said, Follow me, and let the dead bury their own dead.

23 Then having gone aboard the vessel, his disciples followed

24 him. And behold there came on a mighty tempest in the sea, so that the vessel was covered with the waves, and he was

25 asleep. Thereupon his disciples came and awoke him, saying,

26 Master, save us! we are perishing. And he said to them, Why are you fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he arose, and re-

27 buked the winds and the sea, and a great calm ensued. And

_ the men in amaze, said, What sort ofa man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him?

28 And when he arrived at the opposite shore in the country of the Gergesenes, there met him two demoniacs coming out of the tombs, so furious that nobody durst pass that way.

29 And instantly they screamed, saying, What hast thou to do with us, Jesus son of God! Art thou come hither before the

30 time to torment us. Now there was at some distance from

31 them a herd of many swine, feeding: and the demons besought

him, saying, If thou cast us out, permit us to go into that

32 herd of swine. And he said to them, Go. Thereupon they went out and entered into the herd of swine. And instantly the whole herd ran violently down a precipice into the sea,

33. and perished in the waters. And they who fed them fled; and having gone to the city, they told all the circumstances, including the case of the demoniacs. And presently all the city came out to meet Jesus, and having seen him they intreated him to

IX. withdraw out of their territory. So having gone on board the vessel, he crossed over, and came to his own city.

2 And lo! they brought to him a paralytic laid on a bed: and
Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the paralytic, Take courage,
3 my son; thy sins are forgiven thee. Thereupon some of the
A Scribes said within themselves, This man blasphemeth. But
Jesus knowing their thoughts, said, Why do ye harbour evil
5 thoughts in your hearts? For which is easier? To say, Thy
6 sins are forgiven thee; or to say, Arise and walk? But that you may know that the son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, Arise (saith he then to the paralytic) take up thy bed and
7 go home. Accordingly he arose and departed to his house.
3 And when the multitude saw this they expressed their admi-

16

17

18

19

20

23

25

MATTHEW. IX.

ration and glorified God who had given such power to men.

When Jesus was going thence he saw a man, named Matthew, sitting at the custom-house; and he saith to him, Follow me. Whereupon he arose and followed him. And when he was at table in the house, behold many publicans and sinners came and placed themselves at the table with Jesus and his disciples. When the Pharisees saw this, they said to his disciples, Why doth your teacher eat with these publicans and sinners? And Jesus hearing this, said to them, They who are well have no need of a physician, but they who are sick. Go then and learn what this meaneth, “ I desire mercy rather than sacrifice; *’} for I did not come to call righteous men, but sinners to reformation.

Then John’s disciples, accosting him, said, Why do we andthe
Pharisees fast frequently, but thy disciples never fast? And to them Jesus said, Can bridemen mourn, while the bridegroom is with them? The days indeed will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them and then they will fast.
No one mendeth an old garment with a patch of undressed cloth; for such a patchteareth the garment and maketh a greater rent. Neither do men put new wine into old leathern bottles, otherwise the bottles burst, and the wine is spilled, and the bottles are lost. But new wine is put into new bottles, so both are preserved.

While he was thus speaking to them, behold a chief came and, making obeisance to him, said, My daughter is at the point of death, but come and lay thy hand on her and she will live. Thereupon Jesus arose and with his disciples followed him. And lo! a woman who had been twelve years afflicted with an efflux of blood, came behind and touched the tuft of his mantle. For she said within herself, If I can only touch his mantle, I shall be cured. And Jesus turned about and when he saw her, said, Daughter, take courage; thy faith hath cured thee. And from that instant the woman was cured. And when
Jesus came to the house of the chief and saw the minstrels and the crowd ina bustle, he saith to them, withdraw, for the damsel is not dead but asleep. Whereupon they derided him.

*Hosea 6. 6.

MATTHEW.'TX: X.

But when the crowd was turned out, he went in and took her by the hand, and the damsel arose. And the fame of this spread over all that country.

As Jesus was departing thence, two blind men followed him, with loud outcries, saying, Son of David, take pity on us.
And when he went into the house, the blind men came to him.
And Jesus saith to them, Do you believe that I can do this?
They say to him, Yes, master. ‘Then he touched their eyes, saying, According to your belief, be it to you. Whereupon their eyes were opened. Then Jesus restrained them, saying,
See that none know this. But when they went out, they spread his fame through all that country. ᾿

At their going out, behold a dumb man, a demoniac, was brought to him; and the demon being expelled, the dumb man spake, and the crowds expressed their amazement, saying, Nothing like this was ever scen in Israel. But the Pharisees said,
By the prince of the demons he expelleth the demons.

‘Then Jesus took a circuit through all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues and proclaiming the good news of the reign, and healing every disease and every malady among the people. And seeing the multitudes, he had compassion on them, because they were fainty and forlorn, like sheep without a shepherd. Then he saith to his disciples,
‘The harvest indeed is plentiful, but the labourers are few.
Supplicate therefore the Lord of the harvest to send forth labourers for his harvest.

Then having called to him his twelve disciples, he gave them power over unclean spirits, so as to cast them out; and to cure diseases and maladies of every kind. Now the names of the twelve disciples were these. First, Simon, called Peter, and Andrew his brother, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the publican, James the son of Alpheus and Lebbeus called
. "Phaddeus, Simon the Chananite and Judas Iscariot, even he who delivered him up. These twelve Jesus sent forth, having given them a charge, saying, Go not away to the Gentiles, nor enter a city of the Samaritans; but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel: and as you go proclaim, saying, ‘The reign of the heavens is-at hand. Heal the sick; cleanse lepers;

MATTHEW. X.

raise the dead; cast out demons; freely you have received;

9 give freely. Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass for

dll

14

15 your purses; nor a scrip for the journey; nor two coats; nor pairs of sandals; nor a staff: for the workman is worthy of his sustenance. Therefore-into whatever city or village you efter, inquire who in it is worthy, and continue there till you leave the place. And when you enter the house, salute the family.
And if the family be worthy, the peace you wish them will come upon them; but if they be not worthy, the peace you wish will rebound upon yourselves. And whosoever will not receive you, nor hear your words, when you leave that house or that city shake off the dust of your feet. Verily I say to you, it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorra in a day of judgment, than for that city.

Behold I send you forth like sheep in the midst of wolves; be ye therefore wise as the serpents and harmless as the doves.
And be upon your guard against these men, for they will deliver you up to councils and scourge you in their synagogues; and you will be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony to them and the nations. But when they deliver you up, be not anxious how or what you shall speak: for what you are to speak will be suggested to you at the very instant. For it is not you who speak, but the spirit of your father that speaketh in you. Now brother will deliver up brother to death; and a father, a son; and children will rise up against parents and cause them to be put to’death. And you will be hated by all men on the account of my name. But he who

' persevereth to the end shall be saved.

27

28

Now when they persecute you in one city, flee to another.
For, verily I say to you, before you shall have gone through all the cities of Israel, the son of man willcome. The scholar is not greater than the teacher; nor the servant, than the master.
It is enough for the scholar to be as his teacher; and the servant, as his master. If they have called the master of the family
Beelzebub, how much more, his domestics. Therefore be not afraid of them; for there is nothing hid, which shall not be revealed; nor any thing secret, which shall not be known. What
I say to you in darkness, speak ye in the light; and what is whispered in your ear, proclaim on the house tops. And be

32)

33

36

37

41

42

MATTHEW. X. XI.

not afraid of them who kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him, who can destroy both soul and body in hell. Are not two sparrows sold for an assar,* yet neither of them falleth to the ground without your father. Nay, the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not therefore; for you are of more value than many sparrows. Whosoever therefore will acknowledge me before men, him I will acknowledge before my father, who is in heaven: but whosoever shall disown me before men, him I will disown before my father who is in heaven.

Do not imagine that I am come to send peace on the earth.
I am not come to send peace, buta sword. For I am come to set a man at variance with his father; and a daughter with her mother; and a daughter in law with her mother in law. Even the man’s own domestics will be his enemies.

He who loveth father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me. And he who loveth son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. And he who doth not take up his cross and follow me, is not worthy of me. He who hath found his life shall lose it. But he, who shall lose his life for my sake, shall find it.

He who receiveth you, receiveth me; and he who receiveth me, receiveth him who sent me. He who receiveth a prophet on the account of his being a prophet, shall receive a prophet’s reward. And he who receiveth a righteous man on the account of his being a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man’s reward. And whoever shall give any one of these little ones, were it only a cup of cold water to drink, on the account of his being a disciple, verily I say to you, he shall not lose his reward,

And when Jesus had finished his instructions to these his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and make proclamation in their cities.

NowJohn, having heard in prison of the works of the Christ, sent two of his disciples with this message to him—Thou art

amen a a gh ne errr mers

* A copper coin, worth about a cent.

MATTHEW. XI.

4 the one coming.* May we expect another? In reply to which,

5

6

7

8

21

Jesus said to them, Go and tell John what you hear and see.
Blind men see, and lame walk. Lepers are cleansed and deaf hear. Dead are raised and poor have glad tidings proclaimed to them. And happy is he to whom I shall not prove a stumbling block. And as they were going away, Jesus began this discourse to the people concerning John, What did you go out to the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind? But what went ye out to see? A man clothed with soft raiment?
Behold they, who wear delicate apparel, frequent the palaces of kings. But what went ye out to see? A prophet? Yes I tell you, and something more than a prophet; for this is he of whom it is written, ‘“Behold I send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee.}”’ Verily I say to you, Among them who are born of women, there hath not arisen a greater than John the baptist: but the least in the kingdom of heaven is a greater than he. Now ever since the days of John the baptist, the kingdom of the heavens is invaded and invaders are forcibly taking possession of it. For till the appearance of John, all the prophets and the law were the public instructors. Indeed, if you will bear to be told it, he is Elias who was to come. Whoever hath ears to hear let him hear.

Now to what shall I compare this generation? It is like boys in the market place who call to their playfellows, saying, ““We have played to you on the pipe, but you have not danced; We have sung to you songs of woe, and you have not lamented.”
For John came, abstaining from meat and drink, and they say he hatha demon. ‘Theson of man came eating and drinking; and they say, Behold a gluttonous man and a wine drinker; a friend of publicans and sinners. But wisdom 1s justified by her children.

Then he began to upbraid the cities in which the most of his miracles had been done, because they had not reformed.
Alas for thee Chorazin! Alas for thee Bethsaida! For had the miracles, which have been performed in you, been done in

* Or the coming one, or he who is coming, ὁ ἐρχόμενος a phrase used to denote the Messiah. See Ps. 118. 26. Hab. 2. 3. Zach.
9. 9. + Malachi, 3. 1.

MATTHEW. XI. XII.

Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sack-
22. cloth and ashes. But I say to you, the condition of Tyre and
Sidon will, in a day of judgment, be more tolerable than

23 yours. And thou Capernaum, which hast been exalted to hea-

_ ven, shalt be brought down to the mansion of the dead; for if
_ the miracles, which have been done in thee, had been done in

24 Sodom, it would have remained to this day. But I say to you, that the condition of the land of Sodom will, ma day of judgment, be more tolerable than thine.

25. At that time Jesus took occasion to say, I thank thee, O father, Lord of heaven and earth; that thou having hid these things from the wise and prudent, hast revealed them to babes.

26 Yes, O father, because it thus seemed good in thy sight. All

27 things are delivered up to me by my father; and none but the father knoweth the son; nor doth any know the father, but only the son, and he to whom the son is pleased to reveal

28 him. Come to me all ye who labour and are heavily burden-

29 ed and I will give you rest. Take upon you my yoke and learn of me; for lam meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest for your souls. For my yoke is easy and my burden is light. .

XII. About this time, as Jesus was walking through corn fields on the sabbath days, his disciples were hungry and be-

2 gan to pluck some ears, and eat them. When the Pharisees saw this they said to him, See! Thy disciples are doing that
3 which it is not lawful to do on a sabbath. Whereupon he said to them, Have you not read, what David did when he was
4 hungry, and they who were with him? How he went to the house of God and ate the presence loaves, which it was not lawful for him or his company to eat, but only for the priests?
5 Or have you not read in the law, that on the sabbath days the priests in the temple break the sabbath and are blameless?
6 Now I say to you, There is one here greater than the
7 temple. And if you had known the meaning of this, “1 desire mercy rather than sacrifice,” you would not have condemned
8 the innocent. For the son of man is lord even of the sabbath.
9 Having departed thence, he went into their synagogue and
10 lo! there was a man there who had his hand withered. And

ν MATTHEW. ΧΙΪ,

they asked him with a design to accuse him; Is it lawful to

11 heal on the sabbath days? And he said to them, What man

is there among you, who having one sheep, if it fall into'a pit .

on the sabbath days, will not take hold of it and lift it up?

12 Of how much greater value then isa man than a sheep?

13 Therefore it is lawful to do good on the sabbaths. Then he

said to the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he stretched it

14 out. And his hand was restored sound as the other. There-

upon the Pharisees went out and conspired against him that

15 they might destroy him. But Jesus, knowing this, withdrew

' from that place; and great multitudes followed him, and he

16 healed them all ; and strictly charged them not to make him

17 known; so that there was a full confirmation of what was

18 spoken by the prophet [’saias saying, ‘‘ Behold my servant

whom I have chosen! My beloved in whom my soul is well

pleased! I will put my spirit upon him ; and he will publish

_19 judgment to the nations. He will not contend nor raise a cla-

20 mour; nor shall any one hear his voice in the streets. A bruis~

ed reed he will not break, nor extinguish a dimly burning ta-

21 per, until he render his judgment victorious. In his name therefore let the nations trust.*”’

22 Then there was brought to him a demoniac, blind and

dumb, and he healed him, so that he who was blind and dumb

23 both spake and saw. And all the people were astonished and

24 said, Is this the son of David? But the Pharisees, hearing them

said, This man expelleth the demons, only by Beelzebub, the

25 chiefof the demons. Thereupon Jesus, knowing their thoughts,

said to them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought

to desolation. And no city or family divided against itself can

26 subsist. Now if Satan expelleth Satan, he is at variance with

27 himself, how then can his kingdom subsist? Besides if I expel

demons by Beelzebub, by whom do your sons expel them ?

28 Let them therefore be your judges. But if I expel the demons

by the Spirit of God, then indeed the reign of God over you

29 is come. How can any one enter the house of the strong and

*Es. 42. 1. &c.—This quotation from Esaias is not from the
Septuagint, as we now have it. In substance, they agree, but are very different in phraseology.-—

32

44

MATTHEW. ΧΙ,

plunder his goods, unless he first bind the strong one, in which case he may then plunder his house. He who is not for me is against me; and he who gathereth not with me, scattereth.
Therefore I say to you, All manner of sin and slander may be forgiven men; but this slanderous speaking against the spirit is not tobe forgivenmen—Even though one speak against the son of man, it may be forgiven him; but whoever shall speak against the holy Spirit is not to be forgiven, either in the present age, or in that to come.* Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree bad, and its fruit bad. For the tree is known by its fruit. Brood of vipers! how can you who are evil speak good things? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. The good man out of the good treasure of his heart produceth good things ; and the bad man, out of his bad treasure produceth bad things. Now I assure you in respect to every idle word which men shall utter, they shall give an account thereof in a day of judgment. For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.

Then some of the Scribes and Pharisees interposed, saying, ‘Teacher, we desire to see a sign from thee. In reply to which he said to them, An evil, and an adulterous generation demand a sign, but no sign shall be given them, save the sign of the prophet Jonas. For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the belly of the great fish, so the son of man will be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. The men of Ninive will be raised up at the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it; because they repented at the proclamation of Jonas; and behold something greater than Jonas is here. The queen of the south will be raised up at the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it, because she came from the extremities of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon. And behold something greater than Solomon is here.

When the unclean spirit hath gone out of the man, it walketh through dry places seeking rest, but doth not find it. Then

*Neither in the present age (that is the age under the Mosaic law) nor in that to come (i. e. the age under the Messiah.)

45

46

MATTHEW. XII. XIII.

jt saith I will return to my habitation from which I came out.
And when it is come, it findeth it unoccupied, swept and furnished. Then it goeth and bringeth with it seven other spirits worse than itself, and they enter and dwell there. So the last state of that man is worse than the first. ‘Thus also will it be with this wicked generation.

Now, while he was speaking to the people, lo! his mother and his brethren were standing without, desiring to speak with him. And one said to him, lo! thy mother and thy brethren are standing without, desiring to speak with thee. In reply to which he said to him who told him, Who is my mother? And who are my brethren? Then, stretching out his hand towards his disciples, he said, Behold my mother, and my brethren! for whoever will do the will of my father who is in heaven, the same is my brother and sister and mother.

XIIL. And on the same day, Jesus having gone out of the

4

12

19 house, sat down by the sea side; but such great multitudes flocked to him that he went on board the vessel and sat down, and all the multitude stood.on the shore, and he spake many things to them in parables, saying, Behold the sower went out to sow; and as he was sowing, some grains fell on the highway and the birds came and devoured them. And others fell on rocky ground, where they had little earth; these sprang up immediately, because they had no depth of soil; but soon as the sun arose they were scorched; and for want of root withered away: and some fell among the thorns, and the thorns sprang up and choaked them. And some fell on good ground and yielded increase; some an hundred; some, sixty; and some, thirty fold. Whoever hath ears to hear, let him hear.
Then the disciples accosted him, saying, Why speakest thou to them in parables? And he in reply said to them, To

you it hath been granted to know the secrets of the reign of

the heavens; but to them it hath not been granted. For to him who improveth, more shall be given and he shall abound: but from him who improveth not, even that which he hath shall be taken, To them I speak in parables for this reason, because they overlook what they see, and are inattentive to what

14

15

MATTHEW. XIII.

they hear;* and they do not understand, and in them is fulfilled

this prophesy of Esaias, which saith, “Hearing you-shall hear,

though you may not understand, and seeing ,you shall see, though you may not perceive; for the heart of this people is callous, and their ears are dull of hearing, and they have shut their eyes, that for a while they may not see with their eyes and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and return that I may heal them.}+”’ But blessed are your eyes, because they see, and your ears, because they hear. For verily
I say to you, ‘‘Many prophets and righteous men have earnestly desired to see what you see, and have not seen them; and to hear what you hear and have not heard them. Hear then the parable of the sower. When any one heareth the doctrine of the kingdom and doth not mind it, the evil one cometh and snatcheth away what was sown in his heart. This is the meaning of that sown on the highway. And that sown on rocky ground denoteth him, who, upon hearing the word, re- Ὁ ceiveth it at first with joy, but not having it rooted in him, it is only temporary; and when tribulation and persecution cometh on account of the word, he is immediately stumbled.

And that sown among thorns denoteth him, who heareth the word, but worldly care and the delusion of riches choak the word and it becometh unfruitful. But that sown on good ground denoteth him who heareth and mindeth the word, and who beareth fruit and bringeth forth, one a hundred, and another sixty, and another thirty fold.

Another parable he stated to them, saying, The reign of the heavens may be compared to a man sowing good seed in his field. But when the men were asleep; his enemy came and sowed darnel among the wheat, and went away. And when the blade sprang up and put forth the ear, then the darnel appeared. Whereupon the servants of the householder came and said to him, Master, didst thou not sow good seed in thy field?
Whence then hath it darnel? And he said to them, An enemy hath done this. Then the servants said to him, Is it thy plea-

* Literally, because, seeing they see not; and, hearing, they hear not. + Es. 6. 9.

MATTHEW. XII.

29 sure then that we go and weed it out? And he said, No. Perhaps in weeding out the darnel you may pull up the wheat

30 with it. Let them both grow together till the harvest. And at

the season for reaping I will say to the reapers, Gather the

darnel first and bind it in bundles to be burned; then gather the wheat into my barn.

Another parable he stated to them, saying, The reign of the heavens is like a grain of mustard seed which a man took and sowed in his field, which is indeed the smallest of all seeds,
32 but which, when grown, is the largest of the herbs and be-

cometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and take

shelter among the branches.

39 Another parable he stated to them, saying, The reign of the heavens is like leaven which a woman took and covered up in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.

84 All these things Jesus spake to them in parables, and did

35 not speak to them without a parable, so that there was a full accomplishment of that which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I will open my mouth with parables, I will utter things kept hid from the foundation of the world.*

36 Then Jesus dismissed the multitude and went into the house, and his disciples came to him and said, Explain to us

37 the parable of the darnel in the field. And he answering, said

38 tothem, He who soweth the good seed is the son of man,
The field is the world. The good seed are the children of the

39 kingdom, and the darnel are the children of the evil one. The enemy who sowed it is the devil. The harvest is the conclusion

40 of the age, and angels are the reapers. As the darnel therefore is gathered and burned with fire, so shall it be at the conclusion

41 of this age. The son of man will send his angels, and they will gather out of his kingdom all the stumbling blocks, and the

 workers of iniquity, and cast them into the fiery furnace.

42 Weeping and gnashing of teeth will be there. Then shall the

43 righteous shine like the sun in the kingdom of their father.
Whoever hath ears to hear, let him hear.

4A Again the kingdom of the heavens is like treasure hid in

3

ἘΡ5, 78s 2.

56

57

MATTHEW. XIII. XIV.

the field, which, when a man found, he concealed, and for joy thereof goeth away and selleth all that he hath, and purchaseth that field.

Again the kingdom of the heavens is like a merchant in quest of fine pearls, who, having met with one of great value, went and sold all that he had and purchased it.

Again the kingdom of the heavens is like a sweep net cast into the sea, which enclosed fishes of every kind, which, when it was full, they dragged to the shore; and then sitting down, gathered the good into vessels and threw the bad away. So shall it be at the conclusion of this age. The angels will go forth and sever the wicked from among the righteous and cast them into the fiery furnace. Weeping and gnashing of teeth will be there.

Jesus saith to them, Have you understood all these? They

2 say to him, Yes, Master. Then he said to them, Every Scribe

then who is instructed for the kingdom of heaven is like a master of a family who bringeth out of his treasury things new and old.

Now when Jesus had finished these parables he departed thence; and being come into his own country, he taught them in their synagogues, so that they were astonished, and said,
Whence hath this man this wisdom and these miraculous powers? Is not this the carpenter’s son? Is not his mother called Mary, and his brethren, James and Joses and Simon and Judas? And his sisters, are they not all among us?
Whence then hath this man all these things? And they were stumbled at him. Thereupon Jesus said to them, A prophet is not without honour save in his own country and in his own family. So he did not perform many miracles there because. of their unbelief.

XIV. At that time Herod the tetrarch* hearing of the fame

of Jesus, said to his servants, This is John the Baptist. He is raised from the dead, and therefore miracles are performed by

*Tetrarch, the governor of a fourth part of a country. The kingdom of Herod the great being divided into four parts, this son, called Herod Antipas, had one of those parts.

6 «ἃ

MATTHEW. XIV.

him. (For Herod had apprehended John and bound him, and put him in prison on account of Herodias, the wife of his brother Philip : for John had said to him, It is not lawful for thee to have her. Upon which Herod would have put him to death, but he was afraid of the people, because they looked upon him as a prophet. But when Herod’s birth day was kept, the daughter of Herodias danced before the company and pleased
Herod. Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatever she would ask. And she at the instigation of her mother, said, Give me here ina basi the head of John the Baptist. Though the king was sorry, yet from a regard to the oath and the guests, he ordered it to be given her. So he sent and beheaded John in the prison. And his head was brought in a basin and given to the damsel, who carried it to her mother. And his disciples went and took up the body, and buried it, and came and told Jesus.) When Jesus. heard this he departed thence, in a vessel, privately, to a desert place; and the people, being informed, followed him by land out of the cities. And when Jesus landed he saw a great multitude, and had compassion on them, and healed their sick. And towards evening his disciples accosted him, saying, This is a desert place and the hour* is now past, dismiss the multitude that they may go to the villages and buy themselves victuals. And
Jesus said to them, They need not go. Give them, ye yourselves, something to eat. And they said, We have here only five loaves and two fishes. Whereupon he said, Bring them hither to me. Then he ordered the multitude to arrange themselves, as at table, on the grass. And having taken the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to heaven and _ pronounced a blessing. Then he brake and gave the loaves to the disciples and the disciples [distributed] them to the multitudes. And they all ate and were satisfied. And there were carried away twelve panniers full.of the fragments which remained. Now they who had eaten were about five thousand men, besides women and children.

* Meaning the ninth hour answering to our three o’clock in the afternoon, the time of offering the evening sacrifice.

MATTHEW. XIV. XV.

22 Then Jesus immediately constrained his disciples to em-

bark, and cross. over to the other side before him, while he

23 dismissed the multitudes. And when he had dismissed the

multitudes he went up, by himself, tothe mountain, to pray.

24 And in the course of the eve, he was there alone, and the ves-

sel was now in the midst of the sea tossed by the waves, for

25 the wind was contrary. And in the fourth watch* of the night,

26 Jesus went to them, walking on the sea. When the disciples

saw him walking on the sea, they were terrified, and said it

27 isan apparition, and cried out for fear. Thereupon Jesus im-

mediately spake to them, saying, Take courage: it is I: be

28 not afraid. In reply to which Peter said, Master, if it be thou,

29 bid me come to thee on the water. And Jesus said, Come.

So Peter having gone down from the vessel, walked on the

30 waves to goto Jesus. But perceiving the wind strong, he was

afraid, and, beginning to sink, he cried out, saying, Master, save

31 me. And Jesus immediately stretched forth his hand and took

hold of him, saying, Distrustful man, why didst thou doubt ὃ

32 And when they were come into the vessel the wind ceased.

33 And they who were in the vessel came and bowed down to

34 him, saying, Thou art indeed Son of God. And when they

had crossed over, they landed in the territory of Gennesaret.

35 And the men of that place, knowing him, sent to all the coun-

. try around, and they brought to ἘΝ all that were sick, and

intreated him that they might only touch the tuft of his mantle. And as many as touched were perfectly cured.

XV. Then some Scribes and Pharisees from Jerusalem ac-

2 costed Jesus, saying, Why do thy disciples transgress the doc-

trine of the elders? For they do not wash their hands when

3 they eat bread. In reply to which he said to them, Why do

you transgress the commandment of God, from a regard to

4 your doctrines? For God commanded saying, ‘‘ Honour thy

father ahd thy mother: and “whosoever revileth father or

5 mother let him be put to death:’’ but you say, “‘ Whoever shall say

to his father or to his mother, Let that by which thou mightest

be benefited by me, be dedicated,’ must not honour either his

* The day from sun rise to sun set, was diyided into twelve hours, and the night into four watches.

9

12.

20

MATTHEW. XV.

father or his mother. ‘‘ Thus you have annulled the command-

ment of God from a regard to your doctrines. Hypocrites!

well did Esaias prophesy concerning you, saying, This people draw near to me with their mouth; and with their lips they honour me, but their heart is far from me; and in yain do they worship me, teaching doctrines, the commands of men.*”

Then having called the multitude to him, he said to them,
Hear and understand; It is not that which goeth into the mouth which defileth the man; but it is that which cometh out of the mouth, which defileth the man.

Then his disciples coming to him said, Dost thou know that the Pharisees, when they heard that saying, were offended?
In reply to which he said, Every plant which my heavenly father hath not planted, is to be rooted up. Let them alone.
They are blind leaders of blind. Now if the blind lead the blind, they will both fall into a ditch.

Then Peter addressing him said, Explain to us this parable. Whereupon Jesus said, Are you also yet without understanding? Do you not yet perceive, that whatever entereth in at the mouth, goeth into the belly, and is thrown out into the simak ? And that what proceed from the mouth come from the heart, and that these defile the man? For out of the heart come malicious surmises, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies, calumnies. These -are the things which defile the man: but to eat with unwashen hands doth not defile the man.

Then Jesus having left that place, withdrew into the confines of ‘Tyre and Sidon. And lo! a Chananitish woman from those quarters came out and cried with a loud voice, saying to him, Have pity on me, O my lord, Son of David; my daughter is grievously afflicted by a demon. But he made her no answer. Then his disciples came near and intreated him, saying, Dismiss this woman, for she crieth after us. And he in reply said, My mission is only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. She nevertheless advanced, and prostrating herself before him, said, O my lord, help me. Whereupon he in reply said, It is not seemly to take the childrens’ bread and cast

* Es. 29. 13.

39

MATTHEW. XV. XVI.

it to the dogs. And she said, True, Sir. Yet even the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their master’s table. There. upon Jesus in reply said to her,O woman, great is thy faith ;
Be it to thee as thou desirest. And from that instant her daughter was healed.

When Jesus left that place he came nigh to the sea of
Galilee, and having ascended the mountain, he sat down there, and great multitudes flocked to him, bringing with them the lame, the blind, the dumb, the cripple and many others, whom they laid at the feet of Jesus, and he healed them ; insomuch that the people beheld with amaze the dumb speaking, the cripple sound, the lame walking, and the blind seeing, and they glorified the God of Israel.

Then Jesus called his disciples and said, I have compassion on the multitude, because they have attended me now three days, and have nothing to eat. I will not send them away fasting. Perhaps they may faint on the road. Thereupon his disciples say to him, Whence can we get loaves enough, in a wilderness, to satisfy so great a multitude? And Jesus saith to them, How many loaves have you? And they said, Seven, and a few small fishes. Then commanding the multitude to recline on the ground, he took the seven loaves and the fishes, and having given thanks, he broke and gave to his disciples; and the disciples [distributed] to the people. And when they had all eaten and were satisfied, there were carried off seven baskets full of the fragments left. Now they who had eaten were about four thousand men, besides women and children.

‘Then having dismissed the multitude, he embarked and

ΧΥ]. came to the coast of Magdala. And the Pharisees and the

Sadducees having come thither with a view to try him, desired that he would show them a sign from heaven. Whereupon he in reply said to them, When it is evening you say, It will be fair weather, for the sky is red: and in the morning, there will be a storm to day, for the sky is red and lowering. Hypocrites! you know how to distinguish the appearance of the sky, and can you not disvern the signs of the times? An evil and adulterous generation demand a sign, but no sign shall be given them, save that of the prophet Jonas. So leaving them he departed.

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

18

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

MATTHEW. XVI.

Now his disciples, going to the other side, had forgotten to bring with them loaves of bread. And Jesus said to them,
Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the
Sadducees. Whereupon they reasoned among themselves, saying, It is because we have not brought loaves with us. And
Jesus knowing this, said to them, Why do ye reason among yourselves, O ye of little faith, because you have not brought loaves? Have you yet no reflection? Or do ye not remember the five loaves among the five thousand, and how many panniers you carried off; nor the seven loaves among the four thousand, and how many baskets you carried off? How is it that you do not understand that I did not speak to you of bread, when I cautioned you to beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and the Sadducees? ‘Then they understood that he did not caution them against the leaven of the bread, but against the doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

When Jesus was going to Casarea-philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Who do men say that I, the son of man, am?
And they said, Some say, John the baptist; and some, Elias; and some Jeremias, or one of the prophets. He saith to them, .
And who do ye say that 1am? Upon this Peter, in reply, said,
Thou art rHz curisT, the son of the living God. And Jesus answering, said to him, Happy art thou, Simon Barjona; for flesh and blood hath not revealed this to thee, but my father who is in heaven. Now I say to thee, Thou art named Peter, ,
[a rock,*] and upon this very rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades{ shall not prevail against it. And I will give thee the kevs of the kingdom of the heavens; and whatsoever thou shalt bind on the earth, will be bound in the heavens; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on the earth, will be loosed in the heavens. Then he charged his disciples not to tell any one that he, Jesus, is the Christ.

From that time Jesus began to point out to his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the eiders, and chief priests and scribes, and be put to death, and raised again on the third day. Upon which Peter, taking him

* This is the meaning of his name translated from the Greek.
+ Hades, the place, mansion or habitation of departed spirits.

MATTHEW. XVI. XVII.

aside, began to check him, saying, Mercy on thee, O my

23 Lord! This cannot befal thee. But he, turning, said to Peter,

Get thee behind me, Satan. Thou art an obstacle in my way.

For thou hast not thy mind bent on the things of God; but on

24 the things of those men. Then Jesus said to his disciples, If

any one wisheth to follow me, let him deny himself, and take

25 up his cross, and follow me. For whoever wisheth to save his

life shall lose it; and whoever shall lose his life for my sake,

26 shall find it. For what will a man be profited, if he should gain

the whole world, and be punished with the forfeit of his life?

27 Or, what will not a man give as a ransom for his life? For the

son of man will come in the glory of his father, with his angels,

and will then render to every one according to his actions.

28 Verily I say to you, There are some of them standing here who

shall not taste death until they see the son of man coming in his kingdom.

XVII. And after six days, Jesus taketh Peter, and James, and

John, his brother, and bringeth them up privately to a high

2 mountain, and was transfigured before them. His face shone

3 like the sun: and his raiment became white as the light. And

behold there appeared to them Moses and Elias, conversing

4 with him. Whereupon Peter, addressing Jesus, said, Master,

it is well that we are here. If thou pleasest let us make here

5 three booths, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Eli-

as. While he was yet speaking, behold! a bright cloud over- ἡ

shadowed them; and lo! from the cloud, a voice, saying, This is

6 my Son, the Beloved, in whom I am well pleased. Hear ye him.

Upon hearing this the disciples fell on their face and were great-

7 ly affrighted. But Jesus came and touched them, and said,

8 Arise, Be not afraid. And having lifted up their eyes they saw

9 none but Jesus only. And as they were coming down from the

mountain, Jesus charged them, saying, Tell no one what you

have seen, until the son of man shall have risen from the dead.

10 Then his disciples asked him, saying, Why then do the Scribes

11 say, that Elias must come first? In reply to which, Jesus said

to them, Elias indeed cometh first and is to finish and begin all

12 anew. Now I say to you, Elias is already come and they did*not

know him, but have treated him as they pleased. In the same

13 manner also the son of man will soon suffer by them. Then

MATTHEW. XVIL.

the disciples understood that he spake to them of John the baptist.

And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a man, who falling on his knees, said, O sir, have pity on my son; for he is afflicted with an epilepsy, and suffereth grievously. For he often falleth into the fire and often into the water. I brought him to thy disciples, but they could not cure him. And Jesus answering, said, O faithless and perverse generation! How long shall I be with you? How long shall Iendure you? Bring him hither to me. Then Jesus rebuked the demon and it went out of him, and from that hour the child was cured.

Then the disciples came to Jesus in private, and said, Why could not we cast it out? And Jesus said to them, Because of your unbelief. For verily I say to you, If you have faith as a grain of mustard seed, you might say to that mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it would remove; and nothing would be impossible to you: but this kind [of power] goeth not forth, unless by prayer and fasting.

Now while they remained in Galilee Jesus said to them,
The son of man will soon be delivered into the hands of men, and they will put him to death; and on the third day he will be raised up. And they were exceedingly grieved.

And when they were come to Capernaum, the receivers of the assessments for the Temple came to Peter, and said, Doth

25 your teacher pay the didrachm?* He saith, Yes. And when he
26 came into the house, before he spake, Jesus said to him, What

thinkest thou Simon? Of whom do the kings of the earth receive assessments? Of their own sons or of others? Peter saith to him, Of others. Jesus saith to him, The sons then surely are free. However, that we may not offend them, go to the sea, and throw in a hook, and take the first fish that cometh

* That is two drachmas. The drachma was a piece of money, in value nearly equal to a quarter of a dollar; two drachmas make a didrachm, and two didrachms make a stater, nearly equal to a dollar: ‘this was, as Josephus tells us, assessed and collected or repairing the temple.

VOL, Iv. E

MATTHEW. XVIL XVIII

up; and having opened its mouth thou wilt find a stater: take that and give it to them for me and thee.
XVIII. At that time the disciples came to Jesus, saying,
2 Who is to be greatest in the kingdom of the heavens?
Whereupon Jesus, having called to him a little child, placed
3 it in the midst of them and said, Verily I say to you, Unless you be changed, and be like children you shall never enter
A the kingdom of the heavens. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, he is of higher dignity in the
5 kingdom of the heavens. And whoever shail receive one such
6 child in my name, receiveth me. But whoever shall occasion the stumbling of one of such little ones who believe in me, better were it for him that an upper millstone were hanged about his neck and that he were whelmed in the depth of the
7 sea. Alas for the world because of these stumbling blocks, for these stumbling blocks must needs come: but alas for the
8 man by whom the stumbling block cometh. If then thy hand or thy foot occasioneth thy stumbling, cut them off and cast them from thee. It is better for thee to enter lame or maimed. into life, than having two hands or two feet to be cast mto the
9 fire which is everlasting. And if thine eye occasioneth thy stumbling, pluck it out and cast it from thee; it is better for thee to enter into life with but one eye, than having two eyes
10 to be cast into the vale of that fire. Take heed that you despise not one of these little ones; for I say to you, Their angels in
11 heaven do continually behold the face of my father who is in heaven. For the son of man is come to save that which was lost.
12 What think you? If any man hath an hundred sheep, and one of them go astray, doth he not leave the ninety nine
13 onthe mountains, and go in quest of the stray? And if he happen to find it, verily I say to you, he rejoiceth over it more
14 than over the ninety nine which went not astray. Thus it is not the will of your father who is in heaven that one of these
15 little ones should be lost. Wherefore if thy brother trespass against thee, go and expostulate with him when thou and he are alone. Ifhe hearken to thee thou hast gained thy brother.
16 But ifhe will not hearken to thee, then take with thee one or two, that by the testimony of two or three witnesses every

17

18

MATTHEW. XVIII.

thing may be ascertained. And if he disregard them, tell the congregation; and if he disregard the congregation, let him be to thee as the heathen and the publican. Verily I say to you, © whatsoever ye shall bind on the earth will be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on the earth will be loosed in heaven. Again I say to you, If two of you agree on the earth touching any thing which they may ask, it will be done for them by my father who is in heaven. For where two or three are assembled for my name I am there in the midst of them.
Then Peter accosting him, said, Master, how often is my brother to trespass against me and I to forgive him? Till seven times? Jesus saith to him, I do not say to thee seven times, but seventy times seven. In this respect the reign of the heavens may be compared to a certain king who determined to settle accounts with his servants. And having begun to settle; there was one brought to him, who owed him ten thousand talents.* And as he had not wherewithal to pay; his lord ordered him and his wife and all that he had, to be sold and payment to be made. ‘he servant therefore falling prostrate before him, saith, Have patience with me, my lord, and I will pay thee all. And the lord of that servant, being moved with compassion, dismissed him and forgave him the debt. And as that servant was going out, he met one of his fellow servants who owed him a hundred deniars;+ and seizing him by the throat, he said, Pay me what thou owest. His fellow servant therefore falling at his feet, besought him, saying, Have patience with me and I will pay thee all. And he would not; but went and cast him into prison until he should pay the debt.
When his fellow servants saw this they were deeply affected and went and told their lord all that was done. Thereupon his lord having called him in, saith to him, Thou wicked slave, I forgave thee all that debt at thy entreaty; shouldst thou not then have had compassion on thy fellow servant as I had on thee? So his lord, being incensed, delivered him to the exe-

*A talent was equal to three thousand didrachms or fifteen hundred dollars.

tA deniar was a piece of money equal to about one eighth of a dollar. '

35

MATTHEW. XVIIL XIX.

cutioners of justice until he should pay all that was due to him. Thus also will my heavenly father deal with you, if you do not from your hearts forgive, every one the trespasses of his brother.

XIX. When Jesus had finished these discourses he departed

4

5

6

7

12

13

14 from Galilee and came to the borders of Judea, on the bank of the Jordan. And great multitudes followed him, and he healed them there. And the Pharisees came to him, and trying him said, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every fault ? In reply to which he said to them, ‘‘ Have you not read that the Creator at the beginning made them a male and a female?”? Moreover he said, “‘ For this cause a man is to leave his father and his mother, and cleave to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh; so that they are no longer two but one flesh. Therefore what God hath conjoined, let not man separate.”” They say to him, Why then did Moses command to give a bill of divorce and dismiss her? He saith to them, Because of your intractable disposition Moses permitted you to put away your wives; but it was not so from the beginning. Now I say to you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for whoredom and shall marry another, committeth adultery : and he who marricth her who was put away committeth adultery. His disciples say to him, If such be the case between the husband and wife, it is not expedient to marry. Whereupon he said to them, All men cannot admit this inference. But with respect to them to whom it is granted
(for there are some who have been eunuchs from their birth, and some have been made eunuchs by men, and there are some who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven) let him admit it, who can admit it.

Then children were brought to him that he might lay his hands on them and pray for them; and his disciples rebuked them. Whereupon Jesus said, Let the children alone, and do

~ not hinder them to come to me; for of such is the kingdom

15

16

17 of the heavens. And when he had laid his hands on them he departed thence.

And behold there came one who said to him, Good teacher, what good thing shall I do, that I may have an everlasting life? In reply to which Jesus said to him, Why callest thou

18

19

20

21

22

2 io)

24

25

26

27

2

29

MATTHEW. XIX, XX.

me good? There is none good but God only. But if thou desirest to enter into that hfe, keep the commandments. He saith to him, Which? And Jesus said, These—Thou shalt not commit murder—Thou shalt not commit adultery—Thou shalt not steal—Thou shalt not bear false witness—Honour thy father and thy mother—and, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. The youth said to him, All these I have kept from my childhood. What do I yet lack ? Jesus said to him,
If thou wishest to be perfect, go, sell thy estate, and give to the poor; and thou shalt have treasure in heaven. Then come and follow me. Upon hearing this word, the youth went away sorrowful; for he had great possessions. ‘Thereupon Jesus said to his disciples, Verily I say to you, With difficulty will a rich man enter the kingdom of heaven, Again I say to you,
It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God. When his disciples heard this they were greatly astonished and said, Who then can be saved? Thereupon Jesus looking earnestly at them said, With men this is impossible; but with God all things are possible. Then Peter addressing him said, Behold we have left all and. followed thee, what then shall we have ὃ
Thereupon Jesus said to him, Verily I say to you, With respect to you who have followed me, at the renovation, when the son of man shall siton the throne of his glory, you also shall sit on twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And every one who hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or fields for the sake of my name, shall receive an hundred fold compensation.—He shall

30 indeed inherit an everlasting life. But many will be first who
XX, are last; and last, who are first. For the reign of the

2

3 heavens is like a householder who went out early in the morning to hire labourers for his vineyard. And having agreed with some labourers for a deniar* a day, he sent them to his vineyard, And going out about the third hour} he saw some standing in the market place, unemployed, and said to them,

* A Roman silver coin. See ch. 18. 28.
ἡ The third hour about nine o’clock, A. M. The sixth noon.
The ninth three, and the eleventh about five, P. M.

4,

10 il
12

19

10

19

20

MATTHEW. XX.

Go ye also to the vineyard and I will give you what 15 reasonable—So they went. Again about the sixth and ninth hour he went out and did the same. And having gone out about the eleventh hour, he found others standing unemployed, and saith to them, Why have you stood here all the day unemployed ?
They say to him, Because no one hath hired us. He saith to them, Go ye also to the vineyard and you shall receive what is reasonable. And in the evening the owner of the vineyard said to his steward, Call the labourers and pay them their wages, beginning with the last and ending with the first. So they who had been hired at the eleventh hour, came and received every one a deniar. And when the first hired came, they expected to receive more; but they also received every one a-deniar. And when they received it, they murmured against the householder, saying, These last have worked but one hour, and thou hast made them equaltous, who have borne the burden, and the heat of the day. But he in reply said to one of them, Companion! I do thee no wrong. Didst thou not agree with me for a deniar: take what is thine and go thy way. It is my will to give this last as much as to thee. Is it not lawful for me to do what I please with mine own ? Is thine eye evil because Iam good? So the last shall be first, aid the first last. For there are many called, but few chosen.

As Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples apart on the road and said to them, Behold we are going up to Jerusalem, and the son of man will be delivered up to the chief priests and Scribes; and they will condemn him to death, and deliver him up tothe Gentiles to be mocked, and scourged, and crucified, and on the third day he will rise again.

Then the mother of Zebedee’s children came to him with her sons, and, prostrating herself, asked a favour of him.
Whereupon he said to her, What is thy desire?’ She said to him, Grant that these two sons of mine may sit, one on thy right hand and the other on thy left in thy kingdom. In reply to which Jesus said, You do not know what you ask. Can you drink the cup which I shall soon drink; and be baptized with the baptism, with which I am baptized? They say to hin,
We can. Then Jesus saith to them, You will indeed drink my cup and be baptized with the baptism with which I am

MATTHEW. XX. XXI.

baptized: butto sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give, unless to them for whom it is prepared by my father. When the ten heard, they were moved with indignation against the two brothers. Whereupon Jesus having called them to him, said, You know that the chiefs of the nations

’ exercise dominion over them; and they who are grandees ex-

ercise authority over them: but it shall not be so among you.
But whoever among you would wish to be great, let him be your attendant. And whoever among you would wish to be first, let him be your servant; even as the son of man came not to be waited on, but to wait, and to give his life a ransom for many.

Now when they were going from Jericho a great multitude followed him. And lo! two blind men who sat by the way side, hearing that Jesus was passing by, cried, saying,
Have pity on us, O master, son of David. And when the people reprimanded them that they might hold their peace, they cried the louder, saying, Have pity on us, O master, son of
David. Whereupon, Jesus, stopping, called them and said,
What do you desire me to do for you? They say to him,
Sir! that our eyes may be opened. And Jesus had compassion and touched their eyes; and instantly they received sight.
And they followed him.

XXL And when they approached Jerusalem and were come

2 to Bethphage, near to the mount of olives, then Jesus sent two disciples, saying to them, Go to that village which is over against you, and straightway you will find an ass tied and a colt with her. Loose her and bring them to me. And if any one say any thing to you; say, The Lord hath need of them and will quickly send them back. Now all this was done, so that there was an accomplishment of what was spoken by the prophet, saying, ‘‘ Say to the daughter of Sion, Behold thy king cometh to thee, meek and mounted on an ass; even on ἃ young colt the foal of an ass.*”’ So the disciples went, and haying done as Jesus commanded them, they brought the ass and the colt and threw their mantles on them, and set him thereon.

“- *Zach. 9, 9.

los)

20

21

22

MATTHEW. XXI.

And the greater part of the multitude threw their mantles on the way, and some cut branches from the trees and strewed them in the way. And the crowds that went before, and they who followed, shouted, saying, Hosannah to the son of David! Blessed he, who is coming in the name of the Lord!
Hosannah in the highest! And as he entered Jerusalem, all the city was in commotion, saying, Who is this? And the multitude said, This is Jesus the prophet, who is of Nazareth in Galilee. And Jesus went into the temple of God and drove out all those who were selling and buying in the temple, and overturned the tables of the money changers and the stalls of them who sold doves, and said to them, It is written, “* My house shall be called a house of prayer,*”’ but you have made it a den ofrobbers. Then the blind and the lame came to him in the temple and he healed them.

When the chief priests and the Scribes saw the wonders which he did, and the children shouting in the temple, and saying, Hosannah to the son of David, they were filled with indignation, and said to him, Hearest thou what these say? Jesus saith to them, Yes. Have you never read, ‘‘ From the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise?+” Then leaving them he went out of the city to Bethany and lodged there.

In the morning, when he was coming to the city, he was hungry, and seeing a fig tree near the way, he went to it and found nothing thereon but leaves. Whereupon he saith to it,
Henceforward let no fruit ever grow on thee. And immediately the fig tree withered. When the disciples saw this they expressed astonishment, saying, How suddenly the fig tree is withered! And Jesus answering, said to them, Verily I say to you, if you have faith, without wavering, you may do not only as much as is done to this fig tree; but if you should even say to that mountain, Be thou lifted up and thrown into the sea, it shall be done. And whatever you ask in prayer, with faith, you shall obtain.

_ And when he was come to the temple, the chief priests and

*Esaias 56. 7. 185. 8. 3.

24

25

92

96

MATTHEW. XXI.

the elders of the people came to him as he was teaching, and said, By what authority dost thou these things? And, Who gave thee this authority? In reply to which, Jesus saith to them,
Let me also ask you a question, which if you answer me, I will tell you by what authority I do these things. Whence was the baptism of John? From heaven, or of men? Upon this they reasoned among themselves, saying, if we say, From heaven, he will say, Why then did you not believe him: and if we say, Of men, we fear the people; for they all hold John as a prophet. So in answer to Jesus, they said, We cannot tell.
Thereupon Jesus said, Neither do I tell you by what authority
I do these things. But what think you? A man had two sons.
And coming to the first, he said, Son, go work to day in my vineyard. And he in reply said, I will not. But afterwards he repented and went. And coming to the second, he ordered him in like manner; and he in reply said, I will, sir; but did not go.
Which of the two did the will of his father? They say to him,
The first. Jesus saith to them, Verily Isay to you, ‘The publicans and the harlots lead the way for you to the kingdom of
God. For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and you believed him not: but the publicans and the harlots believed him. And though you saw this, you did not afterwards repent and believe him.

Hear another parable. There was a certain landlord who planted a vineyard and hedged it around, and dug therein a wine lake, and built a tower, and let it to tenants and went to a distant country. And when the fruit season approached, he sent his servants to the tenants to receive the fruits of it. But the tenants seizing his servants, beat one and killed another, and stoned another. Again he sent other servants in greater number than the first, and they treated them in the same manner. At last he sent to them his son, saying, They will reverence my son. But when the tenants saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir. Come let us kill him and keep possession of his inheritance. So, seizing him, they turned him out of the vineyard and slew him. Now when the lord of the vineyard shall come, what will he do to these tenants?
They say to him, ‘‘Wretches! he will put them to a wretched death: and his-vineyard he will let to others; who will rende:

MATTHEW. XXL ΧΧΠ.

42 him the fruits in theirseasons!”’ Jesus saith to them, Have you never read in the scriptures, “The stone which the builders rejected was the very one for the head of the corner. This
[salvation] was from the Lord, and it is wonderful in our

43 eyes.*” Therefore I say to you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you and given to a nation producing the fruits

44. thereof. And he who falleth on that stone will be bruised, but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

45 Now the chief priests and the Pharisees, when they heard his parables, knew that he spake of them: but when they sought to seize him, they were afraid of the multitude, because they

XXII. regarded him as a prophet. So Jesus, continuing his

2 discourse, addressed them again in parables, saying, The reign of the heavens may be compared to a temporal king, who
3 made a marriage feast for his son. And he sent his servants to call them who were invited to the wedding, but-they would
4 not come. Again he sent other servants, saying, Tell them who have been invited, Behold I have prepared my dinner.
My bullocks and my fatlings are killed and all things are ready.
5 Come to the wedding feast. But they turned away with indifference, one to his farm, and another to his merchandise;
6 and the rest seized his servants, insulted, and slew them.
7 When the king heard this he was incensed, and sent forth his armies, and destroyed the murderers, and burned their city.
8 Then he saith to his servants, The wedding is indeed ready,
9 but they who have been invited are unworthy; Go ye therefore to the highways, and invite to the wedding as many as you

10 meet with. Accordingly the servants went out to the highways and assembled all that they met, bad and good. And the wedding

11 was plentifully supplied with guests. And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man who had not on a wed-

12 ding garment, and saith to him, Companion, how camest

13 thou hither without having on a wedding garment. And he was struck speechless. Then the king said to the attendants,
Bind his hands and feet and carry him out and cast him into

* Ps.) 118. 22.

MATTHEW. XXII.

i4 the outer darkness. Weeping and gnashing of teeth will be there. For there are many called, but few chosen.
15 Then the Pharisees went out and consulted how they might
16 ensnare him by a discourse. So they send to him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, Teacher, We know that thou art true and teachest the way of God truly, and carest for no —
17 one. For thou respectest not the persons of men. Tell us therefore what thou thinkest. Is it lawful to pay tribute to Cesar,
18 or not? But Jesus, knowing their malice, said, Hypo-
19 crites! Why do ye try me? Shew me the tribute money. So
20 they brought him a deniar,* then he saith to them, Whose
21 image and inscription is this? They say to him, Czsuar’s.
Then he saith tothem, Render then to Czsar the things which ἡ
22 are Czsar’s; and to God, the things which are God’s. Upon hearing this they were struck with surprise, and left him and went away.
23 On the same day there came to him Sadducees, who say,
24 There is no future state. And they asked him, saying, ‘Teacher, Moses said, If ἃ man die, having no children, his brother
25 shall marry his wife, and raise up seed for his brother. Now there were with us seven brothers. And the first married a wife and died; and having no children, he left his wife for his brother.
26 In like manner also the second and the third, even to the
27 seventh. And last of all, the woman also died: in the future state
28 therefore, whose wife shall she be of the seven? For they all
29 married her. In reply to which, Jesus said to them, Ye err,
30 not knowing the scriptures nor the power of God. For in the
* future state, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but
31 are as the angels of God in heaven. But in respect to the revival of the dead. Have you not read what was spoken to you
2 by God, saying, “1 am the God of Abraham, and the God of
3 Isaak, and the God of Jacob.+’? God is not the God of the dead; but of the living. When the people heard this they were astonished at his manner of teaching.
34 Now when the Pharisees heard that he had silenced the

* See ch. 20. 2.
+ Ex. 3. 6.

A3

46

MATTHEW. XXII. XXIII.

Sadducees, they flocked about him for the same purpose.
And one of them, an expounder of the law, with a view to try him, asked him this question, Teacher, which is the great commandment in the law? Thereupon Jesus said to him,
‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang the whole law and the prophets.

Now while the Pharisees were together, Jesus asked slices saying, What think ye concerning the Curist ? Whose Son is he? They say to him, David’s. He saith to them, How then doth David by the spirit call him Lorn; saying, ‘‘ The
Lord said to my Lord, Sit at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.*’? If then David calleth him
Lord: how is he his son? And none could answer him a word. Nor did any one presume from that day forward to ask him any more questions.

XXIII. Then Jesus spake to the multitude and to his disci-

10

11 ples, saying, The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses’ chair. Observe then and do whatever they enjom you: but do not act as they do. For they say and do not practise. For they bind up heavy and insupportable burdens and lay them on men’s shoulders: but they themselves will not move them with their finger. But all their works they do to be seen by men. For this they make their phylacteriest broad, and enlarge the tufts{ of their mantles, and love the uppermost places at entertainments ; and the first seats in the synagogues ; and salutations in places of public resort; and to be called by men, Rabbi, Rabbi. But as for you, be ye not called Rabbi; for one is your teacher, namely the Christ. Now as for you all, ye are brethren, and should call no one on earth your father, for one is your father, namely, he who is in heaven. Neither be ye called leaders; for one is your leader, namely the Christ.
Let then the greatest among you be your attendant. For who-

* Ps. 110. 1. + Phylacteries, scrips of parchment containing sentences of the law. +See Numb, 15. 37. Deut.°22>° 72.

12

13

14

15

19

MATTHEW. XXIII.

soever exalteth himself, shall be humbled, but he who humbleth himself, shall be exalted.

Now alas for you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you shut up the kingdom of the heavens against men.
For you neither enter in yourselves, nor suffer them who are going in, to enter.

Alas for you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ! because you devour the houses of the widows; and for a pretext make long prayers. For this you shall be punished with greater severity.

Alas for you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you traverse sea and land to make one proselyte ; and when he is gained, you make him doubly more a child of hell, than yourselves.

Alas for you, blind guides, who say, To swear by the temple is not binding ; but to swear by the gold of the temple is binding. Foolish and blind! which is greater? The gold ὃ
Or the temple which halloweth the gold? And, to swear by the altar doth not bind; but to swear by the gift thereon is binding. Foolish and blind! which is greater? The gift?
Or the altar which halloweth the gift ? He therefore who sweareth by the altar, sweareth by it and by all on it. And he who sweareth by the temple, sweareth by it and by him who dwelleth therein. And he who sweareth by heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, and by him who sitteth upon it.

Alas for you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you pay tithe of mint, and dill and cummin, and have neglected the weightier matters of the law—justice, mercy and fide-

' lity. These you ought to have practised without omitting

those. Blind guides, you are skimming off the gnat, and swal. lowing the camel.

Alas for you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites !. because you cleanse the outside of the cup and the plate ; but on the inside they are full of rapine, and intemperance. Blind Pharisee, cleanse first what is within the cup, and the plate; so the outside will be clean.

Alas for you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ! because you are like whitened sepulchres. These indeed appear beautiful on the outside ; but within they are full of dead men’s

28

35

MATTHEW. XXIIil. XXIV.

bones, and of all corruption. In like manner you also appear outwardly to men to be righteous; but you are inwardly full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

Alas for you, Scribes and Pharisees; hypocrites! because you build the sepulchres of the prophets and adorn the monuments of the righteous, and say, If we had been in the days of our fathers we would not have been their accomplices in the blood of the prophets. So you testify against yourselves that you are the sons of them who killed the prophets. As for you then, fill up the measure of your fathers. Serpents! brood of vipers! how can you escape the punishment of hell? For this, behold Iam about to send you prophets, wise men and
Scribes: and some of them you will kill and crucify ; and some of them you will scourge in your synagogues, and persecute from city to city; that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth ; from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. Verily I say to you,
All these things will come upon this generation.

O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! thou that killest the prophets and stonest them who are sent to thee ! how often have I desired to gather thy children even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings; but you would not! behold this house of yours is left desolate for you. For I say to you, Henceforth you shall not see me until you say, Blessed is he who is coming in the name of the Lord.

AXIV. Then Jesus went out, and as he was going from the ,

2 temple, his disciples came to point out to him the buildings of the temple. Whereupon he said to them, See ye not all these?
Verily I say to you, There shall not be left here one stone upon another, which shall not be pulled down. And as he was sitting on the mount of olives, his disciples came to him privately and said, Tell us, when will these things happen; and what will be the sign of thy coming and of the conclusion of this age?
Thereupon Jesus answering; said to them, Take heed that no one seduce you. For many will come in my name, saying, I am the Christ and will seduce many. As you will soon hear of wars and rumours of wars, see that you be not troubled.
Yor all these things must happen, but the end is not yet. For

15

MATTHEW. XXIV.

nation will rise against nation; and kingdom against kingdom. And there will be famines and pestilences and earthquakes in divers places. Now all these are the beginning of sorrows. ‘Then they will deliver you up to affliction and put you to death; and you will be hated by all nations on the account of my name. And many will then be stumbled and will deliver up one another and hate one another. And many false prophets will rise up and deceive many. And because iniquity will abound, the love of many will grow cold. But he who persevereth to the end shall be saved. The good news of the kingdom shall indeed be proclaimed throughout the whole world for a testimony to all the nations. And then will come

_ theend. Therefore when you see the abomination of desola-

tion, which was spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing in a holy place, (reader attend!) then let them who are in Judea flee to the mountains : and let not him who is on the house top go down, to carry away any thing out of the house, nor: him who is in the field turn back to take up his clothes. But alas for the women with child and for them who give suck in those days.
Pray ye therefore that your flight may not be in the winter, nor on a sabbath day. For there will then be great affliction, such as hath not happened from the beginning of the world till now: no, nor ever shall be. Indeed if those days were not shortened, no flesh could escape. But for the sake of the chosen, those days will be shortened. At that time if any say to you, Lo! the Christ is here! or there ! believe it not. For false Christs and false prophets will rise up and give out* great signs and wonders, so as to deceive, if it were possible, even the chosen. Behold I have forewarned you. Therefore if they say to you, Behold he is in the desert, go not out. Or, behold he is in the secret apartments! do not believe them. For as the lightning, which breaketh forth from the east, shineth even to the west, so willthe coming of the son of man be. For wherever the carcass is, there will the eagles be assembled.
Now immediately after the tribulation of those days the sun

*That is promise or propose, if this sense the Greek word is used by the Sep. Deut. 13. 1.

MATTHEW. XXIV.

- will be darkened and the moon will not give her splendour; and

30

31

32

39

40
A2
A3

45

oil

the stars will fall from heaven, and the heavenly powers will be shaken. And then will appear the sign of the son of man in heaven. And then, all the tribes of the land will mourn: and they shall see the son of man coming on the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory. And he will send out his messengers with a loud sounding trumpet, and they will gather his chosen ones from the four winds—from one extremity of heaven to the other.

Now learn this parable from that fig tree. When its branches become tender and put forth leaves, you know that the summer is near. So when you see all these things, know assuredly that he is near—at the door. Verily I say to you, This generation shall not pass until all these things shall happen.
The heaven and the earth shall fail; but my words shail not fail. But with respect to the day and the season, that none knoweth, not even the angels of the heavens—none but my father only. Foras the days of Noe were, so also will thiscoming of the son of man be. For as in those days, before the deluge, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, till Noe entered the ark; and they did not know till the flood came and swept them all away; so will this coming of the son of man be. Two men will then be in the field; the one is taken and the other left. Two women will be grinding at the mill, the one is taken and the other left. Watch therefore, because you know not at what season your lord cometh. But this you know, that if the master of a family knew at what watch the thief would come, he would be upon guard and not suffer him to break into his house. Be ye therefore ready prepared, because the son of man cometh at an hour you least expect. Who is indeed the faithful and prudent servant, whom his lord hath set over his household to give them their food in due season. Happy that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find thus employed. Verily I say to you, he will set him over all his estate. But if that servant being wicked should say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; and begin to beat his fellow servants, and to eat and to drink with drunkards; the lord of that servant will come on a day he least expecteth, and at an hour of which he is not aware and will

51

MATTHEW. XXIV. XXV.

scourge him in the severest manner* and assign him his portion with the hypocrites. Weeping and gnashing of teeth will be there.

ΧΧν. Now with respect to this, the reign of the heavens may

13

16 be compared to ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. And five of them were prudent and five foolish. They who were foolish took their lamps, but did not take oil with them. But the prudent took oil in their vessels with their lamps. And while the bridegroom tarried they all became drowsy and fell asleep. And at midnight there was a cry, Behold the bridegroom is coming; Go out and meet him. Then all the virgins arose and trimmed their lamps.
And the foolish said to the prudent, Give us some of your oil, for our lamps are going out. In reply to which the prudent said, Perhaps there will not be enough for us and you. Therefore go rather to them who sell, and buy for yourselves. And while they were going to buy, the bridegroom came, and they who were ready went in with him to the wedding, and the door was shut. And after that the other virgins came, saying, Master, master, Open tous. But he in reply, said, Verily I say to you, Ido not know you. Watch therefore, because you do not know the day, nor the hour, when the son of man cometh.
For he is like a man who, intending to travel, called his servants and committed to them his effects, andto one gave five talents, + and to another two, and to another one—to every one according to his respective ability, and straightway set out on his

17 journey. Then he who had received the five talents went and

18

traded with them, and made five other talents; and in like manner he who had received the two gained also other two; but he who received the one went and digged a hole in the ground and hid his master’s money : and after a long time the master of these servants cometh and reckoneth with them : whereupon he who had received the five talents came and brought

*Scourge him in the severest manner: cut him as it were asupder by scourging. jSee Matt. 18. 24.

MATTHEW. XXV.

other five talents, saying, Sir, thou deliveredst to me five ta-

_ ents, here are besides them five other talents, which I have

22

23

24

29

50

37 gained: and his master said to him; “" Well done, good and faithful servant, thou hast been faithful in a small trust, I will give thee a much greater; enter into the joy of thy master: then he who had received the two talents came and said, Sir, thou deliveredst to me two talents, here are, besides them, two other talents, which I have gained: his master said to him,
Well done, good and faithful servant, thou hast been faithful in a small trust, I will give thee a much greater, enter thou into the joy of thy master; then he, who had received the one talent, came and said, Sir, I knew that thou art a hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou didst not scatter; so, being afraid, I went and hid thy talent in the earth. Here itis. Thou hast what is thine own. Thereupon his master said to him in reply, Malignant and slothful servant! Thou knowest that I reap where I did not sow, and gather where I did not scatter! Thou shouldst therefore have lodged my money with the bankers, that at my return I might have received mine own with interest. Take therefore the talent from him; and give it to him who hath the ten talents. For to every one who improveth more shall be given, and he shall abound; but from him who improveth not, even what he hath shall be taken away: and turn out this unprofitable servant into outer darkness; weeping and gnashing of teeth will be there. So when the son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him; he will then sit on the throne of his glory. And before him shall be assembled all the nations.
And he will separate them one from another, as a shepherd separateth the sheep from the goats. And he will place the sheep on the right hand and the goats on his left. ‘Then the king, will say. to them on his right, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom which hath been prepared for you from the formation of the world: for I was hungry, and you

gave me food; I was thirsty, and you gave me drink; I was ἃ

stranger, and you lodged me; naked, and you clothed me; sick, and you took care of me; I was in prison, and you visited me. Then the righteous will answer him, saying, Lord, when, did we see thee hungry, and feed thee; or thirsty, and give

MATTHEW. XXV. XXVI.

38 thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and lodged thee;
39 or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in
40 prison, and came to thee? And the king in reply will say to them, Verily I say to you, Inasmuch as you have done this to one of these my brethren, even the least, you have done it
41 tome. Then he will say to them on his left, Depart from me, ye cursed, into the fire which is everlasting—that prepared for
42 the devil and his angels! For I was hungry, and you gave me
43 no food; I was thirsty, and you gave me no drink; I was a stranger, and you did not lodge me; naked; and you did not
44 clothe me; sick, and in prison, and you did not visit me. Then they also will answer him, saying, Lord, when did we see thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in
45 prison, and did not minister to thee? And he will answer them, saying, Verily I say to you, Inasmuch as you have not done this to any, the least of these, you have not done it to me.
So these shall go to everlasting punishment and the righteous to an everlasting life.
XXVI. When Jesus had finished all these discourses, he said
2 to his disciples, You know that two days hence is the passover, when the son of man is to be delivered up to be crucified.
3 At that time the chief priests, and the Scribes, and the elders of the people, were convened to the court of the high
4 priest, whose name was Caiaphas, and were consulting how
5 they might take Jesus by surprise and kill him. And they said,
Not at the festival, that there may not be a tumult among the people.
6 Now when Jesus was at Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, there came to him a woman, having an alabaster
7 box of precious balsam, which she poured on his head while
8 he was at table. At seeing this, his disciples expressed indignation,
9 saying, Why this profusion! For this balsam might
10 have been sold for a great sum, and given to the poor. Jesus, knowing it, said to them, Why trouble ye the woman? For
11 she hath done a good office for me. For you have the poor always
12 with you; but me you have not always. For in pouring
13 this balsam on my body, she hath done it to embalm me. Verily I say to you, In what part soever of the world these glad

32

MATTHEW. XXVI.

tidings shall be proclaimed, mention will also be made of what she hath done, for a memorial of her.

Then one of the twelve, named Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests, and said, What will you give me, and I will deliver him upto you. And they weighed to him thirty shekels* of silver: And from that time he watched an opportunity to deliver him up.

Now, on the first day of unleavened bread, his disciples came to Jesus, and said to him, Where wilt thou have us make preparation for thee to eat the passover? And he said,
Go to the city, to such a person, and say to him, The teacher saith, My time is near. At thy house I am about to celebrate the passover with my disciples. Accordingly the disciples did as Jesus commanded them, and prepared the passover. And when the evening was come he placed himself at the table, with the twelve. And while they were eating, he said, Verily
I say to you, One of you 15 to deliver me up. And they being very sorrowful, began every one. of them to say to him, Master, am I? Whereupon he answering, said, One who hath dipped his hand in the dish with me is to deliver me up. The son of man

goeth indeed as it is written of him. But alas for that man by whom the son of man is delivered up. Good were it for that

man if he had never been born. Even Judas who was about to deliver him up, having taken occasion, said, Am I, Rabbi? He saith to him, As thou hast said. Now as they were eating, Jesus having taken the loaf and pronounced a blessing, broke and gave to the disciples, and said, Take, cat; This is_ my body. Then having taken the cup and given thanks, he gave it to them, saymg, Drink ye all of it. For this is my blood—that of the new covenant—that shed for many, for the remission of sins. Now I say to you, I will not henceforth drink of the product of the vine; until the day when I shall drink it new with you in my father’s kingdom. And after the hymn they went out to the mount of olives. Then Jesus saith to them, You will all be stumbled at me this night; for it is written, I will smite the shepherd and the sheep of the flock will be dispersed.t But after I am risen, I will go before you

*Shekel equal in weight nearly to halfa dollar. + Zach. 43. 7.

83

54

35

96

39

44

45

46

MATTHEW. XXVI.

to Galilee. Thereupon Peter addressing him, said, Though all should be stumbled at thee; as for me, I will never be stumbled. Jesus said to him, Verily I say to thee, This very night, before cock crowing, thou wilt three times deny me.
Peter saith to him, Though I should die with thee, I will not deny thee. And so said all the disciples.

Then Jesus goeth with them to a place called Gethsemane, and saith to the disciples, Stay here while I go yonder to pray.
And having taken with him Peter, and the two sons of Zebedee, he began to be in an agony of grief and distress. Whereupon he saith to them, My soul is overwhelmed with anguish even to death. Stay here and watch with me. Then, advancing a little further, he fell prostrate on his face, and prayed, saying, O my father, if it be possible, let this cup be removed from me. Nevertheless not as I would, but as thou willest.
Then he cometh to the disciples, and finding them asleep, he saith to Peter, So, could you not watch one hour with me ?
Watch and pray, that you may not come to a trial. The spirit indeed is willing ; but the flesh is weak. Again he went away the second time, and prayed, saying, O my father! If this cup cannot be removed from me, without my drinking it; thy will be done. Then coming, he findeth them again sleeping; for their eyes were weighed down. So, leaving them he withdrew again, and prayed a third time, to the same purpose. Then he cometh to these disciples of his, and saith to them, Are you still sleeping and taking repose ? Behold the hour is come, and the son of man is delivered up into the hands of sinners. Arise; let us go. Behold he who delivereth me up is at hand.

Aad while he was yet speaking, lo! Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with hima great multitude with swords and clubs, from the chief priests, and the elders of the people.
Now his betrayer had given them a sign, saying, The person I shall kiss is he; Secure him. So coming directly up to Jesus, he said, Hail, Rabbi! and kissed him. And Jesus said to him, Companion! for what purpose art thou come? Then others, advancing, laid hands on Jesus, and held him. Upon which one of them who were with Jesus, stretching forth his hand, drew

57

60

61

62

63

64

65

69%

MATTHEW. XXVI.

his sword, and smote the servant of the high priest, and cut ~ off his ear. Thereupon Jesus saith to him, Return thy sword to its place. For are all who have taken a sword to perish by a sword? Or dost thou think that I cannot now address my father, who can send to my assistance, more than twelve legions of angels? How then would the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? At that instant Jesus was saying to the multitudes, Are you come out as against a robber with swords and clubs, to take me? Day after day I sat before you teaching in the temple, and you did not lay hold on me. But all this is done that the writings of the prophets may be confirmed. Then all the disciples forsook him and fled. And they who had hold of Jesus led him away to Caiaphas, the high priest, where the Scribes and the elders of the people were

assembled.
Now Peter followed him at ἃ distance, even to the court of

the high priest. And having gone in, he sat down with the attendants, to see the issue. And the chief priests and the elders, even the whole Sanhedrim, sought false testimony against Jesus that they might put him to death, but found it not.
Though many false witnesses came forward, they did not find at. At last two false witnesses came, who said, This man said,
I can destroy the temple of God and in three days rebuild it.
Then the chief priest, standing up, said to him, Answerest thou mothing to what these testify against thee? But Jesus was si- -
‘lent. Then the chief priest addressing him, said, I adjure thee

-by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou art the Christ,

the son of God. Jesus saith to him, It is as thou hast spoken.
Moreover I say to you, Hereafter you shall see the son of man sitting at the right hand of that Power, and coming on the clouds of heaven. Upon this the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath blasphemed. What further need have we of witnesses? Behold you have now heard his blasphemy. What think ye? Thereupon they, answering, said, He is guilty of death. Then they spat in his face and struck him with their fists, and smote him with staves, saying, Prophesy to us
Christ. Who is he that smote thee?

Now when Peter was sitting without, in the court, a servant maid came up to him and said, Thou also wast with Jesus the Ga-

MATTHEW. XXVI. XXVII.

lilean. And he denied before them all, saying, I do not know what thou sayest. And as he was going out into the porch another maid saw him, and saith to them there, That man also was with Jesus the Nazarene. And he again denied, with an oath, I do not know the man. And a little after, some byestanders came up and said to Peter, Thou also art certainly one of them, for thy speech discovereth thee. Then he began to curse and to swear, I do not know the man. And immediately a cock crowed. Whereupon Peter recollected the word which Jesus said to him, ‘* Before cockcrowing thou wilt three times deny me;” and going out, he wept bitterly.

XXVIII. Now early in the morning, all the chief priests and

1ο

11

12
18.
[4

Pilate saith to him, Dost thou not hear what they testify against

the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to have him put to death. So, having bound him, they led him away and delivered him up to Pontius Pilate the governor. Then Judas, who had delivered him up, finding that he was condemned, repented and carried back the thirty shekels of silver to the chief priests and the elders, saying, I have sinned in having betrayed innocent blood. To which they replied, What is that to us? Look thou to that. Thereupon he threw down the money in the temple, and withdrew, and ‘went and strangled himself.
And the chief priests, taking the money, said; It is not lawful to put it into the holy treasury, seeing it is the price of blood.
So, having consulted together, they bought with it the potter’s field for the burial of strangers. Therefore that field is ever since called the field of blood. Then was fulfilled that, which was spoken by the prophet Jeremias,* saying, ‘‘So I took the thirty pieces of silver, as the Lord commanded me.}”? These being the price of him who was valued, whom some of the Israelites valued; these they gave for the potter’s field.

Now when Jesus stood before the governor, the governor asked him, saying, Thou art the king of the Jews? And Jesus said to him, as thou hast said, [1 am. ] But when he was accused by the chief priests and the elders, he made no reply. Then

* See the note on Zach. 9. 1. at the close of the preceding volume.
+ Zach. 14.°13.

MATTHEW. XXVII.

thee? But he made no reply to any charge; so that the pee nor was greatly surprised.

Now ata festival it was customary for the governor to release to the people any one prisoner whom they desired. And they had then a noted prisonernamed Barabbas. So when they were assembled, Pilate said to them, Whom do you desire me to release to you? Barabbas; or Jesus who is called Christ?
For he knew that out of envy they had delivered him up. And while he was sitting on the tribunal, his wife had sent to him, saying, Have nothing to do with that righteous person; for I have this day suffered much in a dream on his account. But the chief priests and the elders had prevailed on the people that they should demand Barabbas, and destroy Jesus. So when the governor, addressing them, said, Which of the two do you desire me to release to you? They said, Barabbas. Pilate saith to them, What then shall J do with Jesus who is called Christ?
They all say to him, Let him be crucified. Thereupon the governor said, Why, what evil hath he done? But they with more vehemence cried, Let him be crucified. When Pilate saw that he could not in the least prevail, but that a tumult rather was rising, he took water and washed his hands befare the multitude, saying, I am clear from the blood of this innocent person. Look ye to it. Upon which all the people, answering, said, His blood be upon us and upon our children. Then he released to them Barabbas, and having scourged Jesus, dehvered him up to be crucified.

Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus to the pretorium,* and assembled about him the whole cohort.+ And having stripped him, they threw around him a scarlet military robe: and having platted a crown of thorns, they put it on his head, and a reed in his right hand; and falling on their knees before him, they mocked him, saying, Hail king of the Jews.
Then, having spit in his Sitiisn they took the reed and struck him on the head. And when they had mocked him, they took

* Pretorium, the judgment hall, or hall of audience, where the
Roman magistrates used to sit for the dispatch of public business. t Cohort, a body of soldiers—ten Cohorts make a legion.

“MATTHEW. XXVII

off the robe, and put his own raiment on him, and led him out

32 to be crucified. And as they were going out, they met a man of

Cyrene, named Simon, and compelled him to carry the cross.
83 And having come toa place called Golgotha, (the meaning of

34 which is the place of a skull) they gave him to drink vinegar mingled with a bitter drug, which, when he tasted, he would not

35 drink. Then, having crucified him, they parted his garments by lot, thus verifying-what was spoken by the prophet, “They parted my garments among them; and for my vesture they

36 cast lots.*” And, sitting down, they guarded him there.

37 Now over his head they had placed this inscription, denoting the charge against him, This is Jesus the king of the
Jews. 

88 -. At the same time two robbers were crucified with him,

39 one on his right hand, and the other on his left. And they who

40 passed by reviled him, shaking their heads, and saying, Thou

_ the demolisher of the temple and the rebuilder of it in three

41 days, save thyself. If thou art the Son of God, come down from the cross. In like manner also the chief priests, and the
Scribes, and the elders, deriding him, said, He saved others;

42 cannot he save himself? If he be the king of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him.

43 He trusted in God; let him now deliver him, if he delighteth in

44 him:for, he said, I am the Son of God. Nay, even the robbers, who were crucified with him, upbraided him in the same manner.

45 Now from the sixth hourft there was darkness over the

46 whole land till the ninth hourt And about the ninth hour Jesus cried, with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, Lama, Sabachthani,

47 that is, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Whereupon some of them who stood there, hearing this, said, He

48 calleth Elias. And immediately one of them ran, and having taken a spunge, soaked it with vinegar, and having fixed it to

49 areed, gave him to drink. But the rest said, Forbear, let us

50 see, whether Elias will come to save him. And Jesus, having

51 cried again with aloud voice, expired. And lo! the veil of the

* Ps, 22.18. + Sixth hour, twelve o’clock. + Ninth hour, three inthe afternoon.

MATTHEW. XXVIL

temple was rent in two from top to bottom; and the earth quaked; and the rocks were rent; and the tombs were opened. And many bodies of saints, composed to rest, were awakened.
And, having come out of their tombs, Agere his resurrection, they went into the holy city and appeared to many.

When the centurion, and they who were with him guarding Jesus, observed the earthquake, and what had happened,

‘they were greatly terrified, and said, This was certainly a son

56

59

60

61

64

65 ofa God.

Now many women were there, looking on at a distance, who had accompanied Jesus from Galilee to wait upon him. Among whom were Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee. And in the

evening there came a rich man of Arimathea, whose name

was Joseph, and who himself was a disciple of Jesus. This man having gone to Pilate had begged the body of Jesus; and Pilate had ordered the body to be given to him. So Joseph, having taken the body, wrapped it up in a clean sindon* and laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn in the rock, And having rolled a great stone to the entrance of the tomb, he went away. But Mary Magdalene and the other Mary continued sitting there over against the tomb.

At the close of the day} succeeding the preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees went in a body to Pilate, and said, Sir, we have recollected that this impostor, when alive, said, After three days I shall be raised up. Give orders therefore that the sepulchre be secured till the third day. Perhaps his disciples may come by night, and steal him away, and tell the people, heis risen fromthe dead. So this last imposture will be worse than the first. Thereupon Pilate said to them, You have a guard. Go and secure it as you can. So they went and secured the sepulchre, sealing the stone and posting the cuard.

*Sindon, the name of a robe, supposed to come from India, and to resemble what we call a shawl.

+At the close of the day, that is after sun set on Saturday; at which time their sabbath ended and their first day began.

MATTHEW. XXVIII. :

XXVIII. Νον the sabbath being over, at the dawn of the first

2

day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to see the sepulchre; and behold there was a great earthquake.
For an angel of the Lord, having descended from heaven, came and rolled away the stone from the entrance, and sat upon it. His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow. And for fear of him the guards trembled, and became as dead men. And the angel accosting the women, said, Be not ye terrified. For I know that you are seeking
Jesus who was crucified. He is not here. For he is risen as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay. Then go quickly and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead.
And lo he goeth before you to Galilee. There you shall see him. Behold, I have told you. Accordingly, having come out quickly from the tomb, with fear and great joy they ran to tell his disciples. And as they were going to tell his disciples, lo! Jesus met them and said, Peace be to you. Whereupon, they coming near, took hold of his feet and worshipped him. Then Jesus saith to them, Be not afraid: go tell my brethren that they may go to Galilee; there they shall. see me.

Now while they were going, behold some of the guard, having come to the city, told the chief priests all that had happened. Whereupon they, with the elders, assembled and having held a council, they gave a large sum of money to the soldiers, with this injunction, Say, His disciples came by night and stole him while we were asleep. And if this come to the governor’s ears, we will appease him, and secure you. So they took the money, and did as they were taught. And this is the current report among the Jews even at this day.

Now the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain whither Jesus ordered them. And some seeing him prostrated themselves before him, and some doubted. Then Jesus came near and spoke to them, saying, All power in heaven and on earth is given to me. Go therefore and make all the nations disciples, baptizing them to the Name of the Father and the
Son and the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I commanded you. And lo! Iam with you all the days to the conclusion of this age. Amen.

1:

10

THE GOSPEL

MARK.

The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God:

AS it is written in the prophets, ‘‘ Behold I send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare the way before thee.*”? “A voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord; make the roads for him straight,}”? John came baptizing in the wilderness, and proclaiming a baptism of reformation, for a remission of sins. And all the country of
Judea and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, went out to him, and were all baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their ~ sins. :

Now John’s clothing was of camel’s hair and he had a leathern girdle about his waist. And his food was locusts and wild honey. And he proclaimed saying, There is one coming after me, who is mightier than J, the latchet of whose sandals
I am not worthy to stoop down and untie. I indeed have baptized you in water, but he will baptize you in a holy spirit.

And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from
Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized in the Jordan, by John, who immediately upon his coming up from the water, saw the heavens parted asunder, and the Spirit like a doye de-

* Mal. 8.1. +Es. 40. 7.

1}

22

MARK. I.

scending upon him. And there came a voice from the heavens, “ Thou art my Son, the Beloved, in whom I am well pleased.”

Presently after this the Spirit sendeth him forth into the wilderness, and he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted by Satan, and was with the wild beasts ; and the angels ministered to him.

And after John’s imprisonment, Jesus went to Galilee, proclaiming the glad tidings of the reign of God, and saying,
The time is accomplished, and the reign of God is at hand.
Reform and confide in this good news.

And as he was walking along the sea of Galilee, he saw
Simon, and Andrew his brother, casting a drag net, into the sea ; for they were fishermen ; and Jesus said to them, Come with me and I will make you fishers of men. Thereupon they straightway left their nets and followed him. And going thence a little further, he saw James, the son of Zebedee, and
John his brother, who were in the vessel, mending the nets.
And soon as he called them, they left their father Zebedee in the vessel, with the hired servants, and went after him. And they come to Capernaum ; and thenceforward on the sabbath days, he went to the synagogue and taught ; and they were astonished at his manner of teaching; for he taught as one having authority and not as the Scribes.

Now there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit, and he cried aloud, saying, Forbear! what hast thou to do with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us ? I know who thou art—the Holy One of God. Thereupon Jesus rebuked him, saying, Be silent and go out of him.
And the unclean spirit, having convulsed the man, and screamed with a loud voice, went out of him. At which all were so amazed, that they asked one another, saying, What is this ?
What new teaching is this ? For with authority he commandeth even the unclean spirits, and they obey him. And thenceforth his fame spread through all the region of Galilee.

Immediately on their going out of the synagogue they went to the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.
And as Simon’s mother in law was confined to her bed with a fever, they forthwith spake to him about her; whereupon

MARK. 1. I.

he went to her, and taking hold of her hand, raised her up, and instantly the fever left her, and she waited on them. And in the evening, when the sun was set, they brought to him all their sick, and those who were possessed by demons. And the whole city was assembled at the door. And he healed many who were sick of various diseases, and cast out many demons; and he permitted not the demons to say they knew him.*

And in the morning, when the night was far advanced, he arose and went out, and retired to a solitary place, and there prayed; and Simon, and they who were with him, went in quest of him, and having found him they say to him, They are all seeking thee. Whereupon he saith to them, Let us go to the neighbouring villages, that I may there also make proclamation, for 1am come forth for that purpose. Accordingly he proceeded, proclaiming the news in their synagogues, through all Galilee, and casting out demons. And there cometh to him a leper,

who on his knees intreated him, saying, If thou wilt, thou canst,

cleanse me. And Jesus had compassion, and stretched forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will: be thou cleansed. And while he was speaking, the leprosy instantly left the man, and he was cleansed. Then having restrained him, he sent him away immediately, saying to him, See thou say nothing to any one ; but go, shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy purification

; what Moses hath commanded, for a testimony to them. But

when he went out he began to proclaim freely and publish the matter abroad, so that Jesus could no more go openly into a city, but continued without in solitary places, where people resorted to him from all quarters.

After some days he again entered Capernaum, and the report spread that he was in a house, and such multitudes presently flocked thither, that even the courts before the door could not contain them. And while he was speaking the word to them, some come to him bringing a paralytic, carried by four men. And not being able to come near to him by reason of the crowd, they drew back the covering over the place where he was, and having opened a passage they lowered down

See Luke 4. 41.

* To talk or prate.

MARK. II.

_5 the couch on which the paralytic lay. Upon seeing their faith,
Jesus saith to the paralytic, Son, thy sins are forgiven thee.
6 Now there were some of the Scribes sitting there, and they were reasoning in their minds—‘*What! Doth this man thus
7 utter blasphemies! Who can forgive sins but God only.”
8 Thereupon Jesus, perceiving immediately by his spirit that they are thus reasoning in themselves, said to them, Why do
9 ye reason thus in your hearts? Which is easier, To say to the paralytic, Thy sins are forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, take up

10 thy couch, and walk? But that you may know that the son of man hath power on the earth to forgive sins, (he saith to the

11 paralytic) I say to thee, Arise, take up thy couch, and go to

12 thy house. Thereupon he arose immediately; and having taken up the couch, went out’in the presence of them all. So that they were all amazed, and glorified God, saying, We never saw any thing like this.

13 And he went out again to the sea side, and all the multi-

14 tude came to him, and he taught them. Now as he passed on he saw Levi, the son of Alpheus, sitting at the custom house, and saith to him, Follow me. Whereupon he arose and followed him. ;

15. ΑΑπμὰ it came to pass that when Jesus was at table, in this man’s house, many publicans and sinners were at table, with

16 Jesus and his disciples; for many of them followed him. When

the Scribes and the Pharisees saw him eating with these publicans and sinners, they said to his disciples, What! Doth he

17 eat and drink with these publicans and sinners! ‘This being in the hearing of Jesus, he saith to them, They who are in health have no need of a physician; but they who are sick. I did not come to call righteous men, but sinners, to a reformation.

18 Now it was customary for the disciples of John, and those of the Pharisees, to fast. Therefore they come and say to him,
Why do the disciples of John, and those of the Pharisees, fast;

19 but thy disciples do not fast? Thereupon Jesus said to them,
Can the bridemen fast, while the bridegroom is with them?
So long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot

20 fast. But the days will come, when the bridegroom will br

21 taken from them, and then they will fast in those days. No onc seweth a patch of undressed cloth on an old garment, else the

22

23

24

25

26

10

11

MARK. II. Ti.

new patch teareth the old cloth, and the rent is made worse.
And no one putteth new wine into old leathern bottles; else the new wine bursteth the bottles. Thus the wine is spilled and the bottles are rendered useless. But new wine is to be put into new bottles. ,

At another time, as he was passing through corn fields, on the sabbath days, it happened that his disciples, as they passed along, began to pluck the ears. Whereupon the Pharisees said to him, See! Why are they doing what is not lawful, on the sabbath days? And he said to them, Did you never read what David did when he was in a strait; and he and his company were hungry? How he went to the house of God in the days of Abiathar, the high priest, and ate the presence loaves, which it is not lawful for any but the priests to eat, and gave thereof to his attendants? Moreover he said to them, The sabbath was made for man, not man for the sabbath. So that the son of man is lord even of the sabbath.

And when he again went to the synagogue, there was a man there who had a withered hand; and they watched him to see whether he would heal on the sabbath, that they might accuse him. Thereupon he saith to the man who had the withered hand. Stand up in the midst. Then he saith to them. Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days, or to do evil? To save life, or to kill? But they were silent. Then looking round on them with indignation, being grieved for the blindness of their mind, he saith to the man, Stretch forth thy hand. Accordingly he stretched it out, and his hand was restored whole as the other. Upon this the Pharisees went out, and immediately held aconsultation with the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.

Again ‘Jesus withdrew with his disciples to the sea, and a great multitude followed him from Galilee, and from Judea, and from Jerusalem, and from Idumea, and from the banks of the Jordan. They also around Tyre and Sidon, having heard what he did, flocked to him in crowds. Then he gave orders to his disciples that a boat should attend him, because of the multitude, that they might not throng him. For he healed many; so that they who had maladies, pressed in upon him to touch him. And the unclean spirits; when they saw him, pros-

MAREK. III.

12 trated themselves before him, and cried out, saying, Thou art the Son of God; though he strictly charged them not to make him known.

13 Then he goeth up to the mountain, and calleth to him

14 whom he would, and they went up to him. And he appointed twelve, that they might be with him, and that he might send

15 them to make proclamation; and to have power to cure diseas-

16 es, and expel demons; namely, Simon, whom he surnamed Pe-

17 ter, and James, the son of Zebedee, and John, the brother of
James, (these he surnamed Boanerges, that is, sons of thun-

18 der) and Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew,

19 and Thomas, and James the son of Alpheus, and Thaddeus, and Simon the Chananite, and Judas Iscariot, who delivered him up.

20 Upon their going into a house, a crowd again assembled, so

21 that they could not so much as eat bread. And when they who

22 were just from it,* heard, and were going out to restrain it,
(for some said, He is distracted, and the Scribes who had come down from Jerusalem, said, He is possessed by Beelzebub, and by the prince of the demons he expelleth the demons;) Jesus

23 having called them to him, said to them in parables, How can

24 Satan expel Satan? If indeed a kingdom be divided against it-

25 self, that kingdom cannot stand; and if a family be divided

26 against itself, that family cannot subsist; and if Satan is risen up against himself, and divided, he cannot subsist; but hath

27 an end. No one can enter the house of the strong, and plun-

28 der his goeds, unless he first bind the strong one. Then indeed he may rifle his house. Verily I say to you, All transgressions may be forgiven the sons of men, and what slanderous speeches soever they may utter, but whoever shall utter slanders against the Holy Spirit, hath not forgiveness in this

29 age, but is liable to everlasting punishment.

30 Because it was said he hath an unclean spirit, therefore his

31 brethren, and his mother come, and having stood without,

32 sent for him, as the multitude sat around him. And when they said to him, Behold thy mother and thy brethren are

* Who had just come in from the crowd at the gate.

16

17

MARK. Til. IV.

without, inquiring for thee, he answered them, saying, Who is my mother? And who are my brethren? Then looking round on them who sat about him, he saith, Behold my mother and my brethren! For whosoever will do the will of God, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.

And when he began to teach again by the sea side, so great a multitude gathered about him, that he went on board the small vessel, and sat at sea, and all the multitude were on > the sea shore. And he taught them many things in parables, and in his manner of teaching, said to them, Hearken! Behold the sower went out to sow! And it happened that as he was sowing, some fell on the highway, and the birds of the air came and devoured it. And some fell on rocky ground, where it had not much depth of soil; and it sprang up immediately, because it had not depth of soil, but when the sun was up, it was scorched, and, for want of root, withered away: and some fell among thorns, and the thorns sprang up and choked it,-so that it yielded no fruit: and some fell on good eround, which sprang up and yielded fruit, growing and thriving and bringing forth, some thirty, and some sixty, and some an hundred fold. Then he said to them, Whoever hath ears to hear, let him hear.

And when he was in private they whe were about him, with the twelve, asked him the meaning of this parable.
Whereupon he said to them, To you it is granted to know the secrets of the reign of God; but to those without, all these things are delivered in parables, so that seeing they see, though they may not perceive ; and hearing they hear, though they may not understand. Perhaps they may turn, that their sins may be forgiven them. Then he saith to them, Do ye not comprehend this parable ? How then will you understand all the parables ? The sower soweth the word. Now these are they by the way side, where the word is sown, who have no sooner heard, than Satan cometh, and taketh away the word which was sown in their hearts. And in like manner the rocky eround denoteth those, who, when they hear the word, receive it immediately with joy; but not having it rooted in them, they are but temporary; so that when tribulation, or persecution cometh because of the word, they are instantly

MARK. IV.

18 stumbled. And these are they sown among thorns, who hear
19 the word, but the cares of this world, and the delusion of riches, and inordinate desires of other things, crowd in and choke
20 the word, so that it becometh unfruitful. And these are they sown on good ground, who hear the word and receive it, and bring forth fruit, some, thirty ; and some, sixty ; and some,
τ an hundred fold.
21 Then he said to them, Is a lamp brought to be put under the corn measure, or under the bed ? Is it not that it may be
22 set on a stand? For there is nothing hidden which shall not
_ be discovered, nor any thing laid up in secret, but that it may
23 be brought to light. If any one hath ears to hear, let him hear.
24 Moreover he said to them, Consider what you hear. With whatever measure you deal out, you shall receive; and to
25 you who are attentive, more shall be given. For to him who improveth, more shall be given ; but from him who improyeth not, even what he hath shall be taken away.
26 Again he said, The reign of God is as when a man soweth
27 seed on the ground. Whether he sleepeth or waketh, night and day, the seed groweth and increaseth, he knoweth not
28 how. For the earth of itself produceth first a blade, then an
29 ear, then full grains in the ear. And when the grain is ripe, he forthwith applicth the sickle, because the harvest is come.
30 Again he said, ‘lo what may we compare the reign of
31 God? Or by what similitude may we represent it ? It is like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is sown in the ground,
32 is one of the very smallest seeds there: but, being sown, it springeth up and becometh larger than all plants of the pulse kind, and shooteth out large branches, so that under its shade the birds of the air can find shelter.
33 And with many such parables he spake the word to them
34 as they were able to hear it: but without a parable he did not speak to them. And in private he explained all to his disciples.
35 And the same day, in the evening, he saith to them, Let
36 us cross over to the other side. So, leaving the multitude, they take him along with them as he was on board. And
37 there were some other small vessels with him. And there arose a violent storm of wind, and the waves beat into the

38

39

40
41]

14

15

MARK. IV. V.

vessel, so that it would soon be full. Now he was in the stern, asleep on a pillow. And they awake him, and say, Teacher, carest thou not that we perish? Thereupon he arose and rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, Peace, be still. And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm. Then he said to them,
Why are you so much afraid. How is it that you have not

faith? And they were exceedingly terrified, and said one to

another, Who in reality is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?

_ And when they arrived at the other side, in the country of the Gaderenes, just as he was stepping out of the vessel, there met him a man coming out from among the tombs, with an unclean spirit, who made his abode in the tombs, and whom no one could confine—no, not even with chains. For he had often been bound with fetters and chains; but he burst the chains and broke in pieces the fetters, so that none could tame him. And he was continually, night and day, on the mountains and in the tombs, screaming, and cutting himself with stones. But upon seeing Jesus at a distance, he ran, and prostrating himself, cried with a loud voice, saying, What hast thou to do with me, Jesus, son of the most high God?
I conjure thee by God not to torment me? For he had said to him, Go out of the man, thou unclean spirit. Then he asked him, What is thy name? And he answered, saying, My name is Legion; for we are many, and earnestly intreated him not to send them out of that country. Now there was there on the mountains, a great herd of swine feeding, and all the demons besought him, saying, Send us to the swine that we may enter into them. And Jesus immediately permitted them. Whereupon the unclean spirits, having gone out, entered into the swine, and the herd rushed down a precipice into the sea,
(now they were about two thousand) and were drowned in the sea. And they who fed the swine fled, and told the news in town and country. Andthe people came out tosee what had happened.
And when they came to Jesus and saw the demoniac—him who had the legion, sitting, and clothed, and in his right mind, they were terrified. And when the eye witnesses told them what was done to the demoniac, and respecting the swine,

18

MARK. V.

they began to intreat him to withdraw from their territories.
And as he was going on board the vessel the late demoniac be-

19 sought him that he might go with him. But Jesus did not

20

21

25

(34

35

36

37 permit him, but saith to him, Go home to thy friends, and tell them what the Lord hath done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee. So he departed, and began to proclaim in Decapolis all that Jesus had done for him. And they were all amazed.

And when Jesus had repassed in the vessel to the other side, a great multitude gathered about him, and he continued by the sea side. And behold there cometh to him one of the rulers of the synagogue, whose name was Jairus, who, upon seeing him, falleth at his feet and intreateth him earnestly, saying, My little daughter is at the point of death, pray come and lay thy hands on her that she may be cured, and she will live. So Jesus went with him, followed by a great multitude which pressed about him. And a certain woman, who had been twelve years afflicted with an issue of blood, and who had suffered much under many physicians, and spent all that she had, and instead of being any thing the better, rather grew worse, having heard of Jesus, came behind him, in the crowd, and touched his mantle. For she said, If I can but touch his clothes, I shall be cured. And instantly the source of her disorder was dried up, and she felt in her body that she was cured of that disorder. Thereupon Jesus conscious of the power which had gone forth from him, turning about immediately, in the crowd, said, Who touched my clothes? Upon which his disciples said to him, Thou seest how the crowd throng thee, and dost thou say, Who touched me? Still he looked round to see her who had done this, when the woman, knowing what had been done for her, came trembling with fear, and prostrating herself before him, told him the whole truth.
Whereupon he said to her, Daughter, thy faith hath cured thee.
Go in peace, and continue cured of that disorder of thine.
Now while he was speaking, messengers came from the ruler’s house, who said, Thy daughter is dead, why troublest thou the teacher any further? Upon hearing this message delivered, Jesus immediately saith to the ruler of the synagogue,
Benot afraid. Only believe. Then he permitted none to accom.

MARK. V. VI.

pany him, but Peter and James, and John the brother of James.
38 And coming to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and seeing a tumultuous crowd weeping and wailing immoderately,
39 he saith to them, as he was going in, Why make ye this
40 ado, and weep? The child is not dead, but asleep. Upon which they derided him. But he, having put them all out, taketh with him the father and mother of the child, and them who accompanied him, and goeth into the room where the child was laid.
41 And, taking hold of the child’s hand, he saith to her, “ Talithacumi,” the meaning of which is, damsel, I say to thee, Arise.
42 And immediately the damsel arose and walked about; for she was twelve years old. Upon which they were struck with great
43 astonishment. Then he strictly charged them that none should. know this, and ordered something to be given her to eat.
VI. Having left that place, he went to his own country,
2 and his disciples accompany him, and on the sabbath day he began to teach in the synagogue. And many. who heard were astonished, and said, Whence hath this man these things?
And, What wisdom is this which is given him,:that such miracles
3 are done by his hands? Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, and the brother of James, and Joses, and Judas, and Simon?And are not his sisters here with us? So they were
4 stumbled at him. Upon which Jesus said to them, A prophet is not without honour, save in his own country, and among
5 his kindred, and in his own family. So he could not perform any miracle there, save that he laid his hands on a few sick persons and healed them. And he expressed wonder at their unbelief.
6 When he was goinground the neighbouring villages, teaching,
7 he calleth to him the twelve, and began to send them
8 forth, by two and two, and gave them power over the unclean spirits; and ordered them to take nothing for the journey, but
9 only a stafl—no scrip, no bread, no money in their purse;
10 but to be shod with sandals; and not to put on two coats. And ᾿ he said to them, Wherever you enter a house, continue there
11 till you leave that place. And whosoever will not receive you, nor hearken to you, when you depart thence shake off the dirt which is under your feet, as a testimony against them. Verily I say to you, the condition of Sodom and Gomorra will

MARK. VI.

be more tolerable in a day of vengeance, than the condition of

"12 that city. So they went forth and proclaimed, that men should

13

14

15

16

17

20

22

23

29

30 reform. And they cast out many demons, and anointed with oil many who were sick, and healed them.

Now when king Herod heard of him, (for his name was become famous) he said, John the baptizer is risen from the dead, and therefore these miracles are performed by him.
Some said, It is Elias; and others said, It is a prophet, or a person like one of the prophets. But when Herod heard fof him, he said, This is John, whom I beheaded. He is risen from the dead. For Herod had sent and apprehended John, and confined him in prison, on account of Herodias, his brother Philip’s wife, whom he had married. For John had said to Herod,
It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother’s wife. Therefore
Herodias was enraged at him, and wished to kill him, but could not; for Herod revered John, knowing him to be a righteous and holy man; and he protected him, and did many things by his advice, and heard him with pleasure: At length a favourable opportunity occurred. When Herod, on his birth day, made an entertainment for the great officers of his court and army, and the chiefs of Galilee, and the daughter of this same Herodias came in and danced, and pleased Herod and his guests, the king said to the damsel, Ask of me what thou wilt, and I will give it thee: nay, he swore to her, Whatever thou shalt ask of me, I will give, even to the half of my kingdom.
Upon this she went out and said to her mother, What shall I ask? And she said, The head of John the baptist. So coming in immediately with all haste to the king, she made her request, saying, I desire thee to give me forthwith, in a basin, the head of John the baptist. Though the king was much grieved, yet from a regard to his oaths, and his guests, he would not refuse her. So the king immediately despatched a sentinel with orders to bring the head of the baptist. And he went and beheaded him in the prison, and brought his head in a basin, and gave it to the damsel: and the damsel gave it to her mother. And when his disciples heard this, they went and took up his body, and laid it in a sepulchre.

Now the apostles come together again to Jesus, and when they had given him a full account both of what they had done,

31

34

38

42

45

48

MARK. VI.

and what they had taught, he said to them, Come by yourselves privately, to a solitary place, and rest yourselves a little’ while. For there were so many coming and going that they had not leisure even to eat. So they went away by themselves, in the vessel, to a solitary place. And the multitudes saw them going, and many knew the place, and ran thither by land, in crowds, from all the cities, and got there before them, and assembled to meet him. When Jesus landed and saw a great multitude, he had compassion on them, because they were like sheep which have no shepherd; and he began to teach them many things. And the day being now far spent, his disciples came to him and said, This is a desert place, and the day is now far spent, Dismiss them, that they may go to the neighbouring farms and villages, and buy themselves bread, for they have nothing to eat. And he in reply, said to them, Supply them ye yourselves. Thereupon they say to him, Must we go and buy bread to the amount of two hundred deniars* for them to eat. He saith to them, How many loaves have you?
Go and see. And having examined, they say, Five, and two fishes. Then he ordered them to make all the people place themselves as at table on the grass, in several companies. Accordingly they arranged themselves in rows, by hundreds and by fifties. Then he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and having looked up to heaven, he pronounced a blessing.
‘Then he broke the loaves, and gave to his disciples to set before them, and distributed the two fishes among them all. And when they had all eaten, and were satisfied, there were carried away twelve panniers full of the fragments, and the remains of the fishes. Now they who had eaten of the loaves were about five thousand men.

Immediately after this, he constrained his disciples to embark, and go before him to the other side, to Bethsaida; while he dismissed the people. And when he had sent them away, he retired to the mountain to pray. And in the course of the evening the vessel was in the midst of the sea, and he all alone on the land. And he saw them toiling at the oar; for the wind

*See Matt. 20. 2.

MARK. VI. VII.

was contrary. And about the fourth watch of the night,* he goeth to them, walking on the sea, and seemed inclined to pass them. But they, seeing him walking on the sea, thought it was an apparition, and uttered a loud scream. For they all saw him, and were terrified. Whereupon he immediately spoke to them, saying, Take courage: it is I; be not afraid; and went on board to them. And the wind ceased. At which they were still more excessively astonished and expressed admiration. For they had not come to a right understanding by the loaves. For their understanding was callous.

And having crossed over, they came to the region of Ge-

“nesaret, and put into port. And on their going out of the ves-

sel the people knew him. And, running through the whole country around, they began to bring the sick on beds, to every place where they heard he was. And wherever he entered towns, or cities, or villages, they laid the sick in the streets, © and begged that they might but touch the tuft of his mantle.
And as many as touched were cured.

VIL. Then the Pharisees, and some of the Scribes who had

2

5

4

come from Jerusalem, resort to him ina body, and seeing some of his disciples eating bread with unclean, that is with unwashen hands, they found fault. For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, holding the doctrine of the elders, do not eat without-washing the hands with the doubled fist: and if they come from the market they do not eat without dipping them, And there are many other usages which they have adopted, such as the dipping of cups, and pots, and brass vessels, and couches. Therefore the Pharisees and the Scribes ask him, Why do not thy disciples walk according to the doctrines of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands ? In reply to wMich he said to them, Well did Esaias prophesy concerning you, hypocrites ; as it is written, “‘ This people honour me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. And in vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines, the commands of men.t}”’
Yor laying aside the commandment of God, you adhere to the doctrine of men—the dipping of cups, and drinking vessels,

*Between three and six o’clock in the morning. tEs. 29.13, 6.

9

10

11

12

13

14.

MARK. VII.

and many other things, of the like nature. Indeed said he to them, You fairly annul the commandment of God to make room for this doctrine of yours. For Moses said, ‘“‘ Honour thy father and thy mother;*” and, ‘‘ Let him who curseth father or mother be put to death.t’? But you say, “Jfa man say to his father, or to his mother, Let that be Corban, (that is to say dedicated,) by which thou mightest be benefitted by me;” do not then permit him any more to do any thing for his father or his mother ;” thus annulling the word of God, by this doctrine of yours, which you have handed down. And thus you act in many other instances.

Then having called to him the whole multitude he said to them, Hearken to me, all of you, and understand. There is nothing from without, which by entering into a man can defile him; but the things which proceed from within him, are those which defile a man. If any one hath ears to hear, let him hear.

And when he withdrew from the multitude into a house, his disciples asked him concerning this parable. Whereupon he saith to them, Are you also so void of understanding ? Do you not perceive that nothing which entereth into a man from without can defile him; because it doth not enter into the heart; but into the belly, and the offscouring of all meats passeth out into the sink ? But, said he, it is that which cometh out of aman, which defileth him. For from within, out of the heart of man, proceed those evil surmises, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, inordinate desires, malice, fraud, sensuality, envy, detraction, pride, foolishness. All these are the evil things which come from within, and defile the man.

Then he arose and went from that place to the confines of
Tyre and Sidon. And having entered the house he desired that none should know. But he could not be concealed. For a woman, whose little daughter had an unclean spirit, having heard of him, came and fell at his feet (now the woman was a
Greek, a native of Syro-pheenicia) and intreated him to expel the demon out of her daughter. But Jesus said to her, Let the

* Ex. 21.16. + Ley. 20. 9.

᾿ 97

MARK. VII. VIII.

children first be satisfied; for it is not seemly to take the children’s bread and cast it to the dogs. To which she, in reply, said to him, ‘True, sir; but sull the dogs under the table eat the children’s crumbs. Thereupon he said to her, For this saying, Go home. The demon is gone out of thy daughter.
So, going home, she found the demon was gone out, and her daughter lying on the bed.

Then, quitting the confines of ‘Tyre and Sidon, he came again to the sea of Galilee, along the borders of Decapolis.
And they bring to him a man who was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech, and beseech him to lay his hands on him. Whereupon he taketh him apart from the multitude, and put his fingers in his ears, and he spat, and touched his tongue; Then, looking up to heaven, he sighed, and said,
Ephpha-tha, that is, Be opened. And immediately his ears were opened, and his tongue loosed, and he spake distinctly.

Though he commanded them not to tell any one, yet the more he enjoined them the more abundantly they proclaimed his miracles. And being struck with inexpressible amazement, said, He hath done all things well, he maketh the deaf hear, and the dumb speak.

Vill. In those days the multitude being very great, and hay-

10 ing nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples to him, and saith to them, I have compassion on the multitude, because they have continued with me now three days and have nothing to eat; and if I send them home fasting, they will faint by the way, for some of them have come fromvafar. Thereupon. his disciples answered, Whence can they be supplied. with bread here in the wilderness? And he asked them, How many loaves have you? And they said, Seven. Then he ordered the multitude to place themselves on the ground. And having taken the seven loaves, and given thanks, he brake, and gave to his disciples to distribute, and they distributed to the multitude.
And they hada few small fishes. So, when he had pronounced a blessing, he ordered these also to be served up. And when they had eaten, and were satisfied, the fragments which remained were carried off in seven baskets. Now they who had eaten were about four thousand.

And when he had dismissed them he straightway embark-

MARK. VIIL.

ed with his disciples, and went to the district of Dalmanutha.
And the Pharisees came out and began to dispute with him; and, in order to try him, desired of him a sign from heaven.
Whereupon with a deep sigh, he saith, Why doth this generation demand a sign? Verily I say to you, There shall be no sign given to this generation. So, leaving them, he embarked again, and went to the other side. Now his disciples had forgotten to take in bread, and they had only one loaf with them in the vessel. And he gave them a charge, saying, Take heed; beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the leaven of Herod. Thereupon they reasoned among themselves, saying, It is because we have not bread. Jesus, perceiving this, saith to them, Why do you imagine that it is because you have not bread? Are you yet so void of sense and understanding? Have you hearts still callous? Having eyes do you not see? And having ears do you not hear? And have you no memory?
When I brake the five loaves for the five thousand, how many panniers full of fragments did you carry off? ‘They say to him,
Twelve. And when I brake the seven loaves for the four thousand, how many baskets full of fragments did you carry off?
They said, Seven. Then he said to them, How is it that you do not understand?

Then he cometh to Bethsaida, and they bring a blind man to him, and intreat him to touch him. Thereupon taking the blind man by the hand, he led him out of the village; and after spitting on his eyes, he laid his hands on him, and asked him if he seeth any thing?’ And he looking up, said, I see the men like trees; walking about. Then he laid his hands on his eyes again, and made him look up. And his sight was restored, and he saw them all clearly. Then he sent him to his house, saying, Neither go to the village, nor tell any one in the village.

Then Jesus went forth, with his disciples, to the villages of
Cesarea-philippi. And by the way he asked his disciples, saying, Who-do men say that I am? And they answered, John the
Baptist : but some say, Elias; and others say, One of the prophets. Then he saith to them, And who do you say that I am?
Peter answering, saith to him, Thou art the Christ. Then he charged them to tell no one this concerning him, and began

91

10

MARK. VIII. IX.

to inform them that the son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, and chief priests, and scribes, and put to death, and after three days rise again. And he spake this so plainly, that Peter, taking him aside, began to rebuke him. Whereupon, turning about and looking on his disciples, he rebuked Peter, saying, Get thee behind me, Satan! For thou hast thy mind bent, not on the things of God, but on the things of men. Then, having called to him the multitude, with his disciples, he said to them, Whosoever hath a mind to come under my guidance, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. For whosoever would save his life, shall lose it; but whoever shall lose his life for the sake of me, and the glad tidings, he shall save it. For what will it profit a man, if he should gain the whole world, and forfeit his life?
Or what will not a man give as a ransom for his life? For whoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him the son of man will be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his father, with his

holy angels. Then he said to them, Verily I say to you,
There are some of those standing here, who shall not taste death till they see the reign of God come with power.

Six days after this, Jesus taketh Peter, and James, and John, and leadeth them up, privately by themselves, to a high mountain, and was transfigured in their presence. And his raiment became glittering white like snow, to such a degree as no fuller on earth could whiten. And there appeared to them Elias with-Moses, who were conversing with Jesus. Whereupon Peter, addressing Jesus, said, Rabbi, It is well that we are here.
Let us make three booths, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. For he did not know what to say; for they were terrified. Then there came a cloud which overshadowed them, and from the cloud came a voice, saying, This is my Son, the
Beloved; hearken to him. And instantly looking about, they saw no one any more, but only Jesus with them. And as they were coming down from the mountain, he strictly charged them not to tell any one what they had seen, until the son of man is risen from the dead. This expression they laid hold on, questioning among themselves what this rising from the dead could

13

MARK. IX.

mean. Then they asked him, saying, Why do the Scribes say that Elias must first come? In reply to which, he said to them,
Elias indeed having come first, finisheth and beginneth all anew, in amanner conformable to what is written of the son of man, that he may suffer many things,and be treated with contempt. But
Isay to you, that Elias hath actually come; and they have done to him what they pleased, as it is written of him.

And as he was coming to his disciples, he sawa great crowd about them, and the Scribes disputing with them. And all the people when they saw him, were instantly struck with awe, and ran to salute him. Then he asked the Scribes, About what are you disputing with them? And one of the multitude answering, said, ΟἹ Teacher, I brought to thee this my son, who hath a dumb spirit. And whenever it seizeth him, it convulseth him; and he foameth, and grindeth his teeth, and is shrivelled up. I spoke indeed to thy disciples to cast it out, but they could not. Thereupon Jesus, in reply to him, saith,
O faithless generation! How long shall I be with you? Howlong am Itoendure you! Bringhim to me. So he was brought to him.
And soon as he saw Jesus, the spirit threw him into convulsions; and, falling on the ground, he rolled about and foamed.
And Jesus asked his father, How long since this befel him?
And he said, From his childhood. And oft times it hath cast him into fire, and into waters to destroy him. But if thou canst do any thing, have compassion on us and help us. Thereupon
Jesus said to him, With regard to this canst thou believe? All things are possible for him who believeth. Upon which the father of the child immediately cried out, and with tears said, I do believe: Help, O sir, my unbelief. And when Jesus saw that the people were crowding upon him, he rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it, Thou dumb and deaf spirit, 1 command thee; Go out of him; and enter no more into him; and the demon having screamed, and severely convulsed him, went out.
And he was like one dead. So that many said, He is dead. But
Jesus, taking him by the hand, raised him, and he stood up.
And when he went into a house, his disciples asked him privately, Why could not we cast it out? And he said to them,

30

MARK. IX.

This kind [οἵ power*] can go forth by nothing but by prayer and fasting.

Having left that place, they travelled through Galilee, and he did not desire that any should know; for he was teaching his disciples. And he said to them, The son of man is about to

32 be delivered up into the hands of men, and they will put him

33

34

35

38

A3

44.

to death. And being put to death, he will rise again on the third day. But they did not comprehend the meaning of this, and were afraid to ask him.

And when he came to Capernaum, and was in the house, he asked them. What was that, about which you were debating among yourselves on the road. And they were silent. For on the road they had debated among themselves, Who should be greatest. Then sitting down, he called the twelve, and saith to them, If any one desireth to be first, let him be last of all, and servant of all. Then having taken a child, he placed it in the midst of them; and taking it in his arms, he said to them,
Whosoever shall receive one of such children on my account, receiveth me; and whoever shall receive me, receiveth him who sent me.

Then John addressed him, saying, Teacher, we saw one who doth not accompany us, casting out demons inthy name, and we forbade him, because he doth not accompany us.
Whereupon Jesus said, Forbid him not, for there is no one who will doa miracle in my name, and be readily able to speak evil of me. For whoever is not against us is for us. For whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink on my account, because you belong to Christ, verily I say to you, He shall not lose his reward. And whoever shall cause one of these little ones, who believe in me, to stumble, better were it for him, that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea. Therefore, if thy hand cause thee to fall, cut it off.
It is better for thee to enter maimed into life, than having two hands, to go into hell, into the fire which is unextinguishable;
“Where their worm dicth not—and the fire is not extin-

* I have added the words [of power] for the sake of perspicuity.
See Matt. 17. 29. Luke 6. 19. +See ch. 5. 30.

46

49

50

MARK. FX. X.

guished! *”’ And if thy foot cause thee to fall, cut it off, it is better for thee to enter, lame into life, than, having two feet, to be cast into hell, intothe fire which is unextinguishable; ‘‘where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not extinguished.’’? And if thine eye causeth thee to fall, pluck it out; it is better for thee to enter one eyed into the kingdom of God, than having two eyes,'to be cast into the hell of that fire; “where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not extinguished.”’ For every one is to be salted for fire, as every sacrifice is to be salted with salt.
Salt is-good; but if the salt become saltless, with what can you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and maintain peace with

-one another.

Having departed thence, he cometh to the borders of Judea, through the plain of the Jordan. And multitudes again resort to him, and he, as usual, again taught them. And the Pharisees came, and with a view to try him, asked him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife. Whereupon he, in reply, said to them, What hath Moses commanded you? And they said, Moses permitted to write a bill of divorce and to put away. In answer to this, Jesus said to them, Because of your intractable disposition, Moses wrote this precept for you. But from the beginning of the creation God made them a male and a female. For this cause a man is to leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife. And they two shall be one flesh.
So that they are no longer two, but one flesh. ‘Therefore what
God hath conjoined, let not man separate. And when he was in the house, his disciples asked him again concerning this matter. Whereupon he saith to them, Whosoever shall put away

his wife, and marry another, committeth adultery against her.

And if a woman put away her husband, and marry another, she commutteth adultery.

Then children were brought to him, that he might touch them; and his disciples rebuked those who brought them. But
Jesus, observing this, expressed displeasure, and said to them,
Suffer the children to come to me, and do not hinder them, for of such is the kingdom of God. Verlily I say to you, Who-

Esaias 66. 24.

16

17

22

MARK. X.

soever will not, like a child, receive the kingdom of God, he shall in no wise enter it. Then, having taken them in his arms, he laid his hands on them, and blessed them.

And as he was setting out on his journey, one came running, and kneeling down before him, asked him, Good teacher, what shall I do that I may inherit an everlasting life?
Thereupon Jesus said to him, Why callest thou me good?
There is none good but God only. Thou knowest the commandments—thou shalt not commit adultery—thou shalt not commit murder—thou shalt not steal—thou shalt not bear false testimony—thou shalt not defraud—honour thy father and thy mother. He answering, said to him, Teacher, All these I have observed from my childhood. Then Jesus, looking stedfastly on him, loved him, and said to him, One thing is wanting to thee. Go sell what thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven. Then come, and having taken up the cross, follow me. At this word, he was grieved and went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions. Thereupon Jesus, looking round, saith to his disciples,
How difficult it is for them who have riches to enter into the kingdom of God! At these words of his, his disciples being astonished, Jesus, addressing them again, saith, Children,
How difficult a thing it is for them who trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God. It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God. At this they were still more astonished, and said among themselves, Who then can be saved? Whereupon Jesus, looking stedfastly on them, saith, With men it is impossible, but not with God. For with God all things are possible. Upon this Peter took occasion to say to him, Behold we have forsaken all and followed thee. In reply to this,
Jesus said, Verily I say to you, There is none who hath left house, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or fields, for the sake of me and the glad tidings, who shall not now, even in the present time, receive an hundred fold compensation for houses, and prouliens and sisters, and mothers, and children, and fields, as wellas for persecu-

31

33

34 ee

. MARK. X.

tions* and in the age to come, everlasting life. But many whe are first, shall be last, and the last, first.

When they were on the way up to Jerusalem, and Jesus was walking before them, they were seized with a horror, and followed him with fear. Whereupon Jesus, again taking the twelve aside, took occasion to tell them what would soon befal him. Behold, said he, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the son of man will be delivered up to the chief priests, and the Scribes; and they will condemn him to death, and deliver him up to the Gentiles, who will insult him, and scourge him, and spit upon him, and put him to death; and on the third day he will rise again.

When James and John, the sons of Zebedee, accosted him, saying, Teacher, we desire that thou wouldst do for us what we are going to ask; thereupon he said to them, What do you desire me to do for you? And they said to him, Grant us, that one of us may sit on thy right hand, and the other on thy left, in thy glory. Thereupon Jesus said to them, You do not know what you are asking. Can you drink the cup which I am aboutto drink, and be baptized withthe baptism with which
I amabout to be baptized? They said to him, We can. Then Jesus said to them, You shall indeed drink the cup which I am about to drink, and be baptized with the baptism, with which
I am about to be baptized; but to sit on my right hand and on my left, isnot mine to give, except to those for whom it is prepared. Now the ten, when they heard this, began to express indignation in respect to James and John; but Jesus, having called them to him, said to them, You know that the rulers of the nations exercise lordship over them; and their grandees exercise authority over them; but it shall not be so among you. But whoever would be great among you, let him be your attendant : and whoever of you would be first, let him be the servant of all. For the son of man did not come to be waited on, but to serve; and to give his life as a ransom for many.

Then they proceeded on to Jericho, and as he was going out of Jericho, with his disciples and a great multitude, blind »
Bartimeus, son of Timeus, was sitting by the way side, beg-

*See Luke 11. 7.

MARK. X. XI.

47 ging. And when he heard that it is Jesus, the Nazarene, he began to cry aloud, and say, Jesus, son of David, have pity on
48 me. And many rebuked him, that he should hold his peace;
49 but he cried the louder, Son of David, have pity on me. Thereupon
50 Jesus, stopping, ordered him to be called. So they call the blind man, Saying to him, Take courage; arise; he calleth
51 thee. Upon which, throwing aside his mantle, he sprang up and came to Jesus. And Jesus, addressing him, said, What dost thou desire me to do for thee. Aud the blind man said to him,
52 Rabboni, that I may again receive sight: ‘Thereupon Jesus said to him, Go thy way. ‘Thy faith hath cured thee. And instantly he recovered his sight, and followed Jesus in the way.
XI. And when they approach Jerusalem, being come as far as
Bethphage and Bethany, near the mount of olives, he sendeth
2 two of his disciples, and saith to them, Go to that village over against you, and just as you enter it, you will find a colt tied,
3 on which no man ever rode. Loose it, and bring it. And if any one say, Why do ye this? Say, ‘The master hath need of
4 it, and will quickly send it back hither. So they went, and
5 found the colt tied before the door, at a place where two ways met. Andas they were loosing it, some of the people standing there, said to them, What do you mean by untying the colt?
And they answered them as Jesus had ordered; upon which they let them go. So they brought the colt to Jesus; and when
8 they had laid their mantles thereon, he sat upon it. And many spread their mantles on the way; and others cut sprigs from
9 the trees, and strewed them in the way. And they who went before, and they who followed, cried, saying, Hosanna! Blessed
10 he who is coming in the name of the Lord! Blessed the approaching reign of our father David! that coming in the name ofthe Lord, Hosanna, in the highest!
11] So Jesus entered Jerusalem, and into the temple, and when he had taken a survey of all, as it was now evening, he
12 went out to Bethany with the twelve. And on the morrow, as they were coming out from Bethany, he was hungry, and
13 seeing a fig tree at a distance, full of leaves, he went to see if he could find any fruit on it (for the time to gather figs was
14 not come) but going to it he found nothing but leaves. Thereupon Jesus said to it, Henceforth let no one eyer eat fruit of ἢ thee. And his disciples heard.

15

16

17

MARK. ΧΙ,

Then they came to Jerusalem, and Jesus, having entered the temple, began with turning out them who were buying and selling in the temple. And he overturned the tables of the money changers, and the stalls of them who sold doves, and suffered no one to carry a vessel through the temple. And he taught, saying, Is it not written, ‘‘ My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations; κ᾽ but you have made it a den of robbers. When the Scribes, and the chief priests heard. this, they sought how to destroy him, for they were afraid of him, because all the people were astonished at his doctrine.

Now, when evening was come, he went out of the city.
And next morning, as they were passing by; they saw the fig tree dried up from the roots. Whereupon Peter, recollecting, saith to him, Rabbi, Behold the fig tree which thou cursedst, is quite dried up. In reply to which, Jesus saith to them, Have faith in God. For verily I say to you, If one should say to that mountain, Be thou lifted up and cast into the sea; and have no doubt in his mind, but believe that what he saith cometh to pass; whatever he may command shall be done for him.
Therefore I say to you, What things soever you ask when you pray, believe that you will receive, and you shall have them.
But when you stand praying, if you have any ground of complaint against any one, forgive him; that your father who is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses. For if you do not forgive, neither will your father, who is in heaven, forgive you your trespasses.

Then they come again to Jerusalem; and as he was walking in the temple, the chief priests, and the Scribes, and the elders, come to him, and say to him, By what authority doest thou these things? And, Who hath given thee authority that thou shouldst do such things? And Jesus, answering, said to them,
I also will ask you one question. Answer me; and I will tell you by what authority I do these things. Was the baptism of
John from heaven or of men? Answer me. Upon this they reasoned among themselves, saying, If we say, From heaven; he will

32 say, Why then did you not believe him? But if we say, From

* Fs. 56. γι

33

MARK, XI. XII.

men; they feared the people; for all held John to be really a prophet. So they in reply; say to Jesus, We cannot tell. Thereupon Jesus answering, saith to them, Neither do I tell youby what authority I do these things.

XII. Then he addressed them in parables, saying, A man

planted a vineyard, and hedged it about, and dug a wine lake, and built a tower, and let it to tenants, and went to a distant. country. And at the vintage season he sent a servant to the tenants, that he might receive from them some of the fruit of the vineyard. But they, having seized him, beat him, and sent him away empty. Again he sent to them another servant; and him they attacked with stones, and wounded on the head, and sent back with disgrace. Again he sent another, whom they killed; and many others, some of whom they beat, and some they killed. Therefore, at last, having an only son, his beloyed, he sent him also to them, saying, They will reverence my son. But the tenants said among themselves, This is the heir.
Come; let us kill him; and the inheritance will be our own. So having seized him, they killed him, and threw him out of the vineyard. What therefore will the owner of the vineyard do?
He will come and destroy these tenants, and give the vineyard to others. Have you never read this portion of scripture, ‘The stone which the builders rejected, was the very one for the head of the corner. This [salvation] was from the Lord, and is wonderful in our eyes.*”’

-Upon this they sought to lay hold of him, but were afraid of the people. For they knew that he had spoken the parable against them. So they left him and went away, and send to him some of the Pharisees, and the Herodians,+} to entrap him with a speech. And when they came, they say to him, Teacher, we know that thou art true, and carest for no man. For thou respectest not the person of men, but teachest the way of God with truth. Is it lawful to pay tribute to Cesar? Or is it not?
Should we give? Or should we not give? But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said to them, Why do ye try me? Bring me a deniar,{ that I may see it. So they brought him one. Then he saith

*Ps. 118.22. +Herodians, partizans of Herod. {See Matt. 18. 28.

17

26

MARK. ΧΗ.

to them, Whose image and inscription is this? And they said,
Cesar’s. Then Jesus, answering, said to them, Render to Cesar the things which are Czsar’s; and to God, the things which are God’s. And they expressed admiration at him.

Then came to him the Sadducees, who say there is no revival of the dead. And they asked him, saying, Teacher, Moses hath written for us, that if any one’s brother die, and leave a wife without leaving children, his brother should take his wife and raise up a seed for his brother. Now there were seven brothers, and the first took a wife, and died without leaving issue.
Thenthe second took her, and died, andhe left noissue. Andthe same was the case with the third. Indeed the seven married her, but left no issue. Last of all, the woman also died. At the revival of the dead, therefore, when they rise again, whose wife will she be? for she hath been wife to the seven. In reply to which, Jesus said to them, Are you not led into error because of your not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God?
For when the dead rise again, they neither marry nor are given in marriage; but are as the angels in heaven. Now with respect to the dead, that they are raised, have you not read in the book of Moses, how God spake in the bush to him, saymg, “lam the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaak, and

27 the God of Jacob.#”? He is not the God of the dead; but the

28

31

32

God of the living. You are therefore led much astray.

Then one of the Scribes who had heard them disputing, and knew that he had answered them properly, coming up, asked him, Which is the chief commandment of all? Whereupon Jesus answered, This is the chief of all the commandments—‘‘Hear, O Israel, The Lord is our God: the Lord is one: and thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thine understanding, and with all thy strength.+”’ This is the first commandment. And the second, resembling it, is this—‘Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.t”’? There is no other commandment greater than these. Upon this the Scribe said to him, right! Teacher! thou hast said truly that there is one God; and there is no other

* Ex. 3.6. { Deut.6.4,5. +Lev. 19, 18.

MARK, XII. XIII.

33 besides him: and to love him with the whole heart, and with the whole understanding, and with the whole soul, and with the whole strength; and to love one’s neighbour as himself, is

_ more than all the burnt offerings and the sacrifices. Whereupon

34 Jesus observing that he had answered discreetly, said to him,
Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. And, after that, no one ventured to ask him any questions.

35 Then Jesus, in the course of his teaching in the temple, said,
How do the Scribes say, That theChrist is the son of David? For

36 David himself, by the Holy Spirit, said, “The Lord said to my
Lord, Sit at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy

37 footstool.*” If David then calleth him Lord, how is he his son?

38 As the great multitude heard him with pleasure, he said to them in his manner of teaching, Beware of the Scribes, who are fond of walking in long robes, and of salutations in public

39 places of resort, and of the principal seats in the synagogues,

40 and the uppermost places at entertainments—who devour the families of widows, and make long prayers for a disguise.
Such shall receive greater condemnation.

Al As Jesus was sitting over against the treasury, he observed in what manner the multitude throw money into the treasu-

42 ry. And many being rich, threw in a great deal. At length a poor widow came, and threw in two mites, which make a farthing. ‘Thereupon Jesus, having called his disciples to him,

43 saith to them, Verily I say to you, This poor widow hath thrown in more than all those who have thrown into the trea-

44 sury. For they have all contributed out of their superfluous store; but she, out of what she wanted for herself, hath thrown in all that she had—her whole living.

XII. And as he was going out of the temple, one of his dis-

2 ciples saith to him, Teacher, see! what huge stones and stately buildings! Whereupon Jesus answering, saith to him, Thou seest these great buildings? There shall not be leftone stone on

3 another which shall not be demolished. And as he was sitting on the mount of olives, over against the temple, Peter, and

* Ps, 110. 1.

4,

5

7

MARK. XIII.

James, and John, and Andrew, asked him privately, Tell us, when will these things happen? And what will be the sign of the impending accomplishment of all these things. Thereupon
Jesus, in answer to them, took occasion to say, Take heed that none seduce you: for many will come in my name, saying, [am he; and will seduce many. Now when you shall hear of wars and rumours of wars, be not alarmed; for this must happen; but the end is not yet. For nation will rise against nation; and kingdom against kingdom. And there will be earthquakes in divers places. And there will be famines and commotions. These are the beginnings of sorrows. Now look to yourselves. For they will deliver you up to councils and synagogues. You will be scourged and brought before gover-. nors and kings, for my sake, to bear testimony to them. For the glad tidings must be first proclaimed to all the nations.
But when they bring you to deliver you up, be not solicitous beforehand what to say; nor premeditate; but whatever shall be suggested to you on the occasion, speak that: for it is not you, who speak; but the Holy Spirit. Now brother will deliver up brother to death: and a father, a son: and children‘ will rise up against parents, and cause them to be put to death: and you will be hated by all men on account of my name.
But he who persevereth to the end shall be saved.

Now when you see the abomination of desolation, which was spoken of by the prophet Daniel, erected where it ought not ( Reader attend!) then let them who are in Judea flee to the mountains; and let not him who is on the house top go down into the house, nor enter it to carry away any thing out of his house. And let not him who 15 in the field turn back to take up his mantle. But alas! for the women who are with child; and for them who give suck in those days. Pray therefore that your flight may not be in winter. For in those days there will be such distress as hath not happened from the beginning of the creation, which God created, till now; nor ever shall be. Andhad not the Lord shortened those days, no flesh could escape. But for the sake of the chosen, whom he hath made choice of, he hath shortened those days.

Now, if at that time, any one say to you, Lo! the Christ is here! or, Lo! he is there! believe it not. For false Christs and

25

28

31
» 32

35

36

MARK. XIII. XIV.

false prophets will rise up and give out* signs and wonders to seduce, if possible, even the chosen ones. But be upon your guard. Lo! Ihave foretold you all things. But in those days, after that distress, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will withhold her splendour, and the stars of heaven will continue falling, and the powers which are in the heavens will be shaken. And then they shall see the son of man coming in clouds with great power and glory. And then he will send his messengers and gather his chosen ones from the four winds— from the remotest part of the earth to the remotest Pisa of heaven.

Now learn this parable from that fig tree: when its branch becometh tender and putteth forth leaves, you know that the summer is near. So when you see these things happen, know that he is near, at the door. Verily I say to you, This generation shall not pass away until all these things. are accomplished. The heaven and the earth will fail, but my words shall not fail. But with respect to the day, and the season, that none knoweth—neither the angels who are in heaven, nor the son—_ none but the father. Look, watch and pray; for you do not: know when the time is. As when a man was going to travel, on leaving his family and assigning to his servants’ their charge, even to every one his work, he commanded the porter. to watch; watch ye therefore; for you do not, know when. the master of the family cometh; ‘whether in the evening, or. at midnight, or at cockcrowing, or in the morning, lest coming unexpectedly, he find you asleep. Now what " say to you, 4 say to.all, Watch.

XIV. Now after two days was ἐμὰ pelted, wil the festival

2

4,

of unleavened bread. And the chief priests, and the Scribes were contriving’ how they* might seize him by surprise; and put him to deathy And they said, Not at the festival; lest there
3 be a tumult among the people. And he being at Bethany in
τῆς house of Simiba the leper, while he was at table a woman
~¢ame with an: alabaster phial of balsam—of pure unadulterated spikenard; which is very costly, and shaking the phial, she

*See Matt. 24. 24.

co =I

MARK. XIV.

poured out of it on his head. At which some expressed indig- nation, saying, Why is this waste of the balsam? For it might — have been sold for more than three hundred deniars,* and given to the poor. And as they were restraining her, Jesus said, Let her alone. Why do ye trouble her? She hath done a good work for me. For you have the poor always with you, and can, when you please, do them good; but me you have

‘not always. She hath done what she could. She hath come

beforehand to anoint my body for its embalment. Verily I say to you, In whatever quarter of the world these glad tidings

_ are proclaimed, what this woman hath done will be mention-

“ρα to her honour.

Upon this, Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went to the chief priests, in order to deliver him up to them. And when they heard, they rejoiced exceedingly, and promised to give him money. So he sought a favourable opportunity to deliver him up.

And on the first day of the festival of unleavened bread, the day when the paschal lamb was to be killed, his disciples said to him, Where wouldst thou have us go and prepare for

thine eating the paschal lamb. Thereupon he despatched two

~ of his disciples, saying to them, Go to the city, and you will

meet a man carrying a pitcher of water; follow him. And

wherever he shall enter, say to the master of the house, The
. teacher saith, Where is the dining room in which I may eat

16"

19 the’ passover with my disciples?. And he will shew you a large upper room, ‘ready furnished... Make preparation for us there.

‘So the disciples went, and came to the city, and found as he had told them, and prepared the passover. And in the evening

he cometh with the twelve. And as they were at table, and

‘eating, Jesus said, Verily I say to you, One of you, who is

eating with me, is to deliver me-up. At this. they began to be sorrowful, and to say severally—one, Am I? And another,
Am I? And he answering, said. to them, ‘It is. one of the twelve who: is dipping with me in the dish. The son of man departeth indeed as it is written of him, but’alas for that man,

*See Matt. 18. 28,

MARK. XIV.

by whom the son of man is delivered up. Good were it for

22 that man, if he had neverbeen born, And, as they were eating, Je-
_ sus having taken a loaf and pronounced a blessing, broke and

gave to his disciples, and said, Take; eat; this is my body. »
Then having taken the cup, and given thanks, he gave to them and they all drank of it. Then he said to them, This is my blood—that of the new covenant—that shed for many. Verily I say to you, I will no more drink of the product of the vine, until the day when I shall drink it new in the kingdom of God.

And when they had sung a hymn, they went out to the mount of olives. And Jesus saith to them, This night you will all be stumbled at me. For it is written, ‘‘ I will smite the shepherd and the sheep will be scattered.*’’ But after I am risen, I will go before you to Galilee. Hereupon Peter said to him, Though all should be stumbled, I will not. Jesus saith to him, Verily I say to thee, This very night before a cock crow twice, thou wilt three times deny me. But he with more vehemence said, Though I should die with thee, I will not deny thee. And all the rest said the same.

Then they come toa place called Gethsemane, and he saith

to his disciples, Stay here, till I pray. Then he taketh with him

Peter, and James and John, and being seized with agonizing horror and distress of mind, he saith to them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful even to death. Stay here and watch. Then having advanced a little further, he prostrated himself on the ground, and prayed, that if it were possible this hour might pass from him. And he said, Abba, father, all things are possible to thee. Take away this cup from me. Nevertheless not my will, but thine be done. Then he cometh and findeth them asleep, and saith to Peter, Simon, art thou asleep? Couldst thou not watch one hour? Watch and pray, that you may not come to a trial. The spirit is indeed willing; but the flesh is weak,.Then going away again, he. prayed, using the same words. And on returning, he found them again asleep. For their eyes were weighed down, and they did not know what

*Zach. 13. 7.

45

60

MARK. XIV.

to answer him. Then he cometh the third time, and saith to them, Are you still asleep and taking rest? It is over. The hour is come. Behold the son of man is delivered into the hands, of sinners. Arise and let us go. Lo! he who delivereth me up is at hand. And immediately, while he was still speaking, Judas, one of the twelve, cometh, and with him a great multitude, with swords and clubs, from the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders.

Now he, who delivered him up, had given them a signal, saying, The person whom I will kiss, is he: seize him and carry him away securely. So, when he came, having advanced directly up to Jesus, he saith, Rabbi, Rabbi, and kissed him.
Whereupon they laid their hands on him and held him. Then one of them who stood by, having drawn his sword, smote the servant of the chief priest, and cut off his ear. And Jesus. addressing them, said, Are you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs, to take me? I was daily amongst you in the temple, teaching you, and you did not arrest me. But the scriptures must be fulfilled. Then all forsook him, and fled. But a certain youth followed him, having only a sindon wrapped about his naked body; and the young men laid hold on him. Nicrsesee an he let go the Sindon* and fled from them naked.

And when hae brought Jesus to the chief priest; all the chief priests, and the elders, and the Scribes, assembled with him. Now Peter had followed him, at a distance, quite into the

‘court of the chief priest, and sat there with the attendants,

warming himself at the fire. And the chief priests and the whole Sanhedrim sought for evidence against Jesus, to put him to death, but found it not. For many bore false witness against him, but their testimonies did not agree. ‘Then there arose some who falsely testified against bial saying, We heard him say, I will destroy this temple made with hands, and in three days build another not made with hands. But neither in this did their testimony agree.

Then the chief priest, standing up in the midst, asked Je-

*See Matt. 27. 59.

MARK. XIV. XV.

stis, saying, Answerest thou nothing? What sayest thou to

61 what these testify against thee? But Jesus was silent, and made no reply. ‘Then the chief priest interrogated him, and saith

62 to him, Art thou the Christ, the son of the Blessed ? ‘Thereupon Jesus said, lam. And you shall see the son of man seated on the right hand of that power, and coming with the

63 clouds of heaven. Upon this, the chief priest rent his clothes,

64 and said, What farther need have we of witnesses? You have

65 heard this blasphemy. Whatthink ye? And they all adjudged him to be liable to death. Then some began to spit upon him, and to cover his face, and buffet him, and say to him, Prophesy: when the attendants smote him on the cheek with their open hands.

66 Now, Peter being in the court below, one of the maid ser-

67 vants of the chief priest cometh, and seeing Peter warming himself, having viewed him narrowly, she saith, Thou also

68 wast with Jesus, the Nazarene. Whereupon he denied, saying, I do not know, nor do I understand what thou sayst.

69 Then he went out into the portico, and a cock crowed. And the girl, seeing him again, began to say to the bye-standers,

70 That man is one of them. Hereupon he denied again. And a little while after, they who stood by, said to Peter, Thou art certainly one of them; for thou art a Galilean, and thy speech

71 sheweth it. Upon this, he began with imprecations and oaths

72 to say, Ido not know the man of whom you speak. And a cock crowed a second time. Then Peter-recollected what Jesus said to him, Before a cock crow twice, thou wilt three times deny me; and covering his head, he wept.

XV. And early in the morning, the chief priests, with the elders, and the Scribes, even the whole Sanhedrim, having consulted together, bound Jesus, and led him away, and delivered

2 him up to Pilate. And Pilate asked him, Thou art the king of

3 the Jews? And he in reply, said to him, It is as thou sayst.
Then the chief priests accused him of many things; but he

4 made no answer. Then Pilate asked him again, saying, Answerest thou nothing? Observe how many things they testify

5 against thee. But Jesus still made no reply, so that Pilate was astonished.

6 Now at every festival he released to them any one prison-

7

MARK. XV.

er whom they desired. And there was one Barabbas confined: with his fellow insurgents, who in their insurrection had committed murder. So when the people with a loud clamour, began to demand what was usually granted to them, Pilate addressing them, said, Is it your pleasure that I release to you the king of the Jews? For he knew that out of envy the chief priests had delivered him up. But the chief priests instigated the populace to desire that he would rather release to them
Barabbas.. And when Pilate addressing them again, said,
What then do you wish me to do with him whom you call king of the Jews? They again cried, Crucify him. Then Pilate said to them, Why? What evil hath he done? But they

cried more vehemently, Crucify him. Thereupon Pilate wil-

ling to satisfy the populace, released Barabbas to them, and having scourged Jesus, delivered him up to be crucified.

_ Then the soldiers led him away to the court called the
Pretorium, and having assembled the whole cohort, they arrayed him in purple, and platting a crown of thorns, they put it on his head, and began with saluting him, “‘ Hail, king of the Jews.” ‘Then they smote him on the head with a reed; and spat upon him, and bowing their knees, made obeisance to him. And when they had mocked him they stripped him of the purple, and put his ownclothes on him, and led him out to crucify him. And they compel one Simon, a Cyrenian, who was coming from the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to carry his cross. So they bring him to Golgotha (the meaning of which is, The place of a scull) and offered him myrrhed wine to drink. But he did not take it. And when they had crucified him, they divided his garments into parcels, casting lots on them, to decide what each should take.

Now it was the third hour* when they nailed him to the cross: and the inscription of the charge against him, which was written over him, was, Zhe king of the Jews. And together with him they crucify two robbers, one on his right hand and the other on his left. Thus was the scripture fulfilled which saith, «And he was numbered with transgres-

*The third hour, nine o’clock in the morning.

29

$0

Α2

44.

45

MARK. XV.

sors.*”? And they who passed by kept reviling him, shaking their heads, and saying, Ah! thou destroyer of the temple; and rebuilder of it in three days, save thyself, and come down from the cross. And in like manner the chief priests, and the.
Scribes, jesting with one another, said, He saved others, Cannot he save himself? Let this Christ, this king of Israel, now come down from the cross that we may see and believe. Even they who were crucified with him, reviled him.

But when the sixth hourt was come, there was darkness over the whole land, until the ninth hour. And at the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, “Eloi, Elot, Lama sabachthani,”’ which is, being interpreted, My God, my God,
Why hast thou forsaken me? Which, when some of the bystanders heard, they said, Hark! he is calling Elias. Then one ran, and having filled a spunge with vinegar, and put it on a reed, offered him drink, saying, Let alone; let us see whether
Elias cometh to take him down. Then Jesus, having uttered a loud cry, expired. Upon which the veil of the temple was rent in two, from top to bottom. And when the centurion who stood opposite to him, saw that he cried thus, and expired, he said, This man was certainly a son of a God.

Now there were women looking on at a distance, among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the younger, and of Joses, and Salome; (these had attended. him when he was in Galilee, and ministered to him) and many others who had come up with him to Jerusalem. And in the course of the evening, during preparation time (that is, the cessation from labour which is usual before the sabbath,) came Joseph of Arimathea, an honourable senator, who himself also was expecting the reign of God—(he had taken courage, and gone into Pilate and begged the body of Jesus: upon which Pilate expressed wonder if he could be dead, and calling for the centurion, asked him, If he had been dead any time.
And being informed by the centurion, he had granted the body to Joseph) —and he, having bought a sindon, and taken Jesus down, wrapped him in the sindon and laid him in a sepulchre

* *Esaias 53. 12.
+The sixth hour, twelve o’clock, the ninth, three o’clock, P. M.

MARK. XV. XVI.

47 which was hewn out of a rock, and rolled a stone on the door

of the sepulchre. Now Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of Joses; saw where he was laid.

» XVI. So when the sabbath was over,* Mary Magdalene and

Mary the mother of James, and Salome, bought spices, that they might go and embalm him. And very early in the morning of the first day of the week, they come to the sepulchre.
When the sun was rising; and just as they were saying to one

‘ another, Who will roll away the stone for us from the door of

the sepulchre, (for it was very large) upon looking up, they see that the stone hath been rolled away. And going into the sepulchre, they saw a youth sitting on the right side, clothed with a white robe, and they were terrified. Whereupon he said to them, Be not terrified. You are seeking Jesus, the Nazarene, who was crucified. He is risen. He is not here. Behold the place where they laid him. But go, tell his disciples, Peter in particular, that he goeth before you to Galilee. There you shall see him, as he said to you. Thereupon, having come out in haste, they ran from the sepulchre; but they were seized with such terror and consternation that they said nothing to any one, they were so frightened.

Now Jesus, having risen very early in the morning of the first day of the week, appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven demons. She went and told his attendants who were mourning and weeping; but when they heard that he is alive, and was seen by her, they did not believe. After that, he appeared in another form, to two of them as they were walking into the country. Whereupon these came and told the rest; but they did not believe them. At length he appeared to the eleven, when they were at table, and upbraided them. for their incredulity and obstinacy, because they did not believe them who had seen him after his resurrection. Then he said to them, Go to all the world, and proclaim the glad tidings to all mankind. He who believeth, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he who disbelieveth shall be .

*That is, after the setting of the sun, at which’ time the Jewish. . sabbath ended.

MARK. XVI.

17 condemned. Now these signs shall accompany them who be-
_~ lieve—by my name they will expel demons; they will spéak
_ 18 with new tongues: they will take up serpents: though they

drink deadly poison, it shall not hurt them: upon sick persons they will lay their hands, and they shall recover.

19 85 after the Lord had spoken to them, he was taken up to heaven, and sat at the right hand of God; and they went forth and proclaimed the tidings every where, the Lord co-operating with them, and confirming the word with those concomitant

signs,

THE GOSPEL

ACCORDING TO

LUKE.

WHEREAS many have undertaken to compose ἃ history

2 of those things which have been accomplished among us, as

3 they who were from the beginning eye witnesses, and are ministers of the word, have delivered them to us; it seemed good to me also, when I had accurately traced every thing from the very first, immediately afterwards to write to thee, most excellent Theophilus, that thou mayst know the certainty of those doctrines in which thou hast been instructed.

In the days of Herod, the king of Judea, there was a certain priest named Zacharias, of the course of Abia;* and his: wife, whose name was Elizabeth, was of the race of Aaron.
They were both righteous in the sight of God, walking in all the commandments and precepts of the Lord, without blame.
Now they had no child, as Elizabeth was barren. And they were bothadvanced in years. And it came to pass that when he was performing the priest’s οτος before God, in the order ofhis course, it fellto his lot, according to the order of the priesthood, to go into the temple of the Lord, to burn incense, while the whole multitude of the people were praying without, at the time of the

*See 1. Chron. 23. 6. 24. 10.

LUKE. 1.

incense offermg. And an angel of the Lord appeared to him,

12 standing on the right side of the altar of incense, at the sight

13

of whom Zacharias was greatly discomposed and terrified.
Whereupon the angel said to him, Fear not, Zacharias; for thy prayer is heard : and thy wife, Elizabeth, will bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John. He will indeed be to thee matter of joy and exultation; and many will rejoice at his birth. For he will be great in the sight of the Lord. He must not drink wine, nor any fermented liquor. With a holy spirit he will be filled, even from his mother’s womb. And he will turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord their God. He will go before in his presence, with the spirit and power of
Elias, to turn the hearts of fathers to their children, and prepare disobedient persons, by adeep sense of righteousthings, to be for the Lord a well disposed people.

Thereupon Zacharias said to the angel, How can I know this? for 1 am an old man, and my wife is far advanced in years. In reply to which, the angel said to him, I am Gabriel, who attend in the presence of God: and I am sent to speak to thee, and to tell thee these glad tidings. Now, behold, thou shalt be dumb and unable to speak, until the day when these tidings shall be accomplished; because thou hast not believed my words, which shall be confirmed in their season.

Now the people were waiting for Zacharias, and wondered. at his tarrying so long in the temple. And when he came out, he could not speak to them. So they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple: for he made signs to them and continued deaf and dumb. And when the days of his ministration were accomplished, he departed to his own house.
And after these days, his wife Elizabeth conceived; and kept herself retired five months, saying, ‘The Lord hath dealt thus with me in the days in which he looked on me to take away my reproach among men.

And in the sixth month, God sent the angel Gabriel to a city of Galilee, named Nazareth, to a virgin contracted to a man, whose name was Joseph, of the house of David. And the virgin’s name was Mary. And when the angel entered, he said to her, Hail, favourite of heaven! The Lord is with thee! Blessed thou among women! Upon sceing him she was greatly

49

50

LUKE. 1.

discomposed at his speech, and revolved in her mind what sort of a salutation this might be. Whereupon the angel said to her, Fear not, Mary. For thou hast found favour with God.
Now behold thou shalt conceive, and bear a son, and shalt call his name Jesus. He will be great and will be called the son of the Most High. And the Lord God will give him the throne of his father David. And he will reign over the house © of Jacob forever. And of his kingdom there shall be no end.
Then Mary said to the angel, How can this be, since I know not man. And the angel answering, said to her, A holy spirit will come upon thee, and the power of the Most High will overshadow thee, therefore the holy offspring will be called the son of God. Now behold Elizabeth thy cousin, even she hath conceived a son in her oldage. And this is the sixth month with her, who hath been called barren. For with God nothing is impossible. Thereupon Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord. Be it to me according to thy word. And the angel left her.

And in those days Mary set out and travelled with speed to the hill country, to a city of Juda, and went to the house of Zacharias and saluted Elizabeth. And soon as Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the infant leaped in her womb: and Elizabeth was filled with a holy spirit, and with a loud acclamation said, Blessed thou among women! and blessed the fruit of thy womb. How have I this honour,* that the mother of my Lord should come to me! For behold! soon as the sound of thy salutation reached mine ear, the babe within me leaped for joy. Happy indeed is she who believed that there shall be an accomplishment of the things spoken to her from the Lord.
Then Mary said,

My soul doth magnify the Lord: and my spirit exulteth in God, my Saviour: because he hath regarded the low condition of his handmaid. For behold! henceforth all generations will call me happy. Because the Mighty One hath done great things for me; therefore hallowed be his name. Indeed his mer- _ cy on them who fear him, extendeth to generations of gene-

* Literally, How is this to me.

51

LUKE. I.

rations. With his arm he hath displayed strength. He hath scattered them who were elated with the imagination of their heart. From thrones he hath hurled potentates, and exalted them of low degree. He hath filled the hungry with good things; and sent away the rich empty. He hath supported his servant Israel, remembering (as he spoke to our fathers) mercy for Abraham and his seed forever.

And Mary abode with her about three months, and then returned home. ,

Now when the time for Elizabeth’s delivery was come, she brought forth a son. And her neighbours and her relations, hearing that the Lord had magnified his mercy to her, rejoiced with her. And on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child, and called him Zacharias, after the name of his father. But his mother interposing, said, No. He shall be called John. And they said to her, There is none among thy kindred who is called by that name. Then they made signs to his father to know what he would have him called. And he, having demanded a table book, wrote, saying, Zs name is John.
At which they were all surprised. And his mouth was immediately opened, and his tongue loosed, and he spake, praising
God. And all in the neighbourhood were struck with awe.
And the fame of all these things spread through the whole hill country of Judea. And all who heard laid them up in their mind, saying, What will this child be? And the hand of the
Lord was with him. And Zacharias his father was filled with a holy spirit, and he prophesied, saying, Blessed be the
Lord, the God of Israel; because he hath visited and delivered his people. He indeed hath raised up for us a horn of salvation in the ‘house of his servant David (as he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets of old)—a deliverance from our enemies, and out of the hand of all who hate us—in kindness to our fathers, and in remembrance of his holy covenant (as he sware to our father Abraham) that he would grant us, that we, being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, may serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life. Now as for thee, child, thou shalt be called a prophet of the Most High; for thou shalt go before in the presence of the Lord, to prepare his ways; to

7

3

LUKE. I. IL.

give his people a knowledge of salvation, by a remission of their sins, through the tender mercy of our God, by which the Anatole* [the day spring] from on high hath visited us, to give light to them who are sitting in darkness and the shadow of death, to guide our feet to the way of peace.” And the child grew, and became strong in spirit, and was in the deserts till the day of the manifestation of him to Israel.

Now it happened in those days, that an edict came forth from Cesar Augustus, that this whole inhabited land should be enrolled. This was the first enrolment;f it was made when
Cyrenius was a governor of Syria; and all went to be enrolled, every one to his own city, and accordingly Joseph went up from Galilee, from the city of Nazareth to Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and patriarchal family of David, to be enrolled with
Mary his espoused wife, who was then great with child. And — while they were there, the time came that she should be delivered; and she brou ght forth her son, the first born, and swathed him, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room for them in the house appropriate to lodging.

Now in that country there were shepherds in the open fields tending their flocks by turns, during the night watches.
And lo! an angel of the Lord stood by them; and a glory of the Lord shone around them; at which they were greatly affrighted. Whereupon the angel said to them, Be not afraid; for lo! I bring you glad tidings—matter of great joy, which it

* See Zach. 3. 8.

{ There were two enrolments, the first merely for. the purpose of numbering the inhabitants, and the second for assessing them. The first here spoken of, was in the reign of Herod the great, when Cyrenius was deputy governor of Syria. It was done according to the
Jewish custom, by communities and families, and all were obliged to repair to their respective cities or towns, to be enrolled in their several families, according to their genealogies. The second, which was after the death of Herod, was for assessment, and was made indiscriminately. This was the enrolment which offended the Jews, and excited tumults and insurrections, and brought on the war which terminated in the destruction of Jerusalem, and the utter as cs sion of
‘the Jews.

LUKE. IL

11 will be to all the people—That to you there is born this day,
12 in the city of David, a Saviour, who is Christ the Lord. And this will be the sign for you. You will find a babe swathed,
15 lying in the manger. Then suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, and saying,
14 Glory to God in the highest [heaven!] And on earth, peace!
15 good will among men! And as soon as the angels withdrew from them to heaven; the men—the shepherds said one to another, Come, let us go to Bethlehem and see this which is come
16 to pass, which the Lord hath made known to us. So they went with all speed, and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe
17 that lay inthe manger; and, having seen, they divulged what
18 had been told them concerning this child. And all that heard
19 were amazed at the things which were told them by the shepherds.
20 But Mary treasured up all these things, pondering them in her mind. And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all that they had heard and seen, agreeably

to what had been declared to them.
21 Now when eight days were accomplished, at circumcising the child, he was named Jesus, the name which the angel had
22 given him before he was conceived. And when the days of
_ her purification were accomplished according to the law of
Moses, they took him up to Jerusalem to present him to the
23 Lord; as it is written in the law of the Lord, that every male, who is the first born of his mother, is to be accounted consecrate
24 to the Lord;* and to offer a sacrifice according to what is prescribed in the law of.the Lord—a pair of turtle doves or
25 two young pigeons.t And behold there was at Jerusalem a man whose name was Simeon. ‘This man, being righteous and devout, was waiting for the consolation of Israel; and there
26 wasa holy spirit upon him. Now it had been revealed to him by the holy spirit, that he: should not see death until he had
27 seen the Christ of the Lord; and he had come by the spirit to the temple. And when the parents brought the child Jesus,
28 to do for him according to the custom of the law, he took him
29 in his arms, and blessed God, and said, Now, O Lord, thou

* Ex. 13.2. Num. 8. 17. + Lev. 12.8.

34

“7

98

A3

48

LUKE. II.

dismissest thy servant in peace according to thy word, since mine eyes have seen that salvation of thine, which thou hast prepared in the sight of all peoples, a light to illuminate the nations—the glory of thy people Israel. And while Joseph and the mother of the child were wondering at the things spoken concerning him, Simeon blessed them, and said to
Mary his mother, Behold this child is destined for the fall and the rising again of many in Israel, and for an object of calumny
—(yea, a sword will pass through thy soul also) so that the ill grounded reasoning of many hearts will be revealed.

There was also one Anna, a prophetess, a daughter of

Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser. She was faradvanced in years.

Having lived seven years with a husband from her virgin state, she was now a widow, about eighty four years old, who departed not from the temple, performing religious service, with fasting and prayers, night and day. She coming up at that instant, did, in a responsive strain, give thanks to the
Lord; and she spake of him to all those in Jerusalem who were expecting a deliverance.

And when they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their own city,
Nazareth. And the child grew and became strong in spirit, being filled with wisdom, and there was a divine gracefulness upon him.

Now his parents used to go up every year to Jerusalem at the festival of the passover. So when he was twelve years old, they having gone up to Jerusalem, according to the custom of the festival, and finished the days; when they set out on their return, the child Jesus staid behind at Jerusalem. And neither
Joseph nor his mother knew it; but supposing that he was in the company, they went a day’s journey. Then they sought him among their relations and acquaintance; but not finding him, they returned to Jerusalem, seeking him. And after three days, they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers, and hearing them, and asking them questions. And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding, ,and his answers; and they who saw him were amazed. And his mother said to him, Son, Why hast thou dealt thus with us?
Behold thy father and I have been seeking thee with sorrow.

52

Ill.

LUKE. II. III.

Whereupon he said to them, Why did you seek me? Did you not know that I must be at my father’s? But they did not comprehend the meaning of what he said to them. Then he went down with them and came to Nazareth, and continued ~ subject to them. And his mother kept all these things in her mind. And Jesus advanced in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and men.

Now in the fifteenth year of the government of ‘Tiberius
Cesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea; and Herod, tetrarch of Galilee; and his brother Philip, tetrarch of Iturea and the region of Trachonitis; and Lysanias, being tetrarch of
Abilene—in the pontificate of Annas and Caiaphas, a word of
God came to John, the son of Zacharias, in the wilderness, and he went into all the country along the Jordan, proclaiming a baptism of reformation for a forgiveness of sins. As it is written in the book of the words of Esaias the prophet, saying, “ἃ voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the
Lord: make the roads for him straight. Let every valley be filled up; and every mountain and hill levelled; and let the crooked be made a straight road, and the rough ways, smooth. And all flesh shall see the salvation of God.*” Therefore to the multitudes who came out to be baptized by him, he said, Offspring of vipers! who hath warned you to flee from the impending wrath? Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of this reformation : and begin not to say within yourselves, We have
Abraham for our. father; for I say to you, that out of these stones God can raise up children for Abraham. Now, indeed, the axe is at the root of the trees. Every tree therefore which doth not produce good fruit, is cut down and cast into the fire. And when the people asked him, saying, What then shall we do? He in reply, said to them, Let him who hath two coats impart to him who hath none : and let him who hath provisions, do the same. And when publicans came to be bap-

tized, and said to him, Teacher, what shall we do? He said to

them, Exact no more that what is enjoined you. And when soldiers asked him, saying, And what shall we do? He said

OG LC Lt .--«....β.-ὕ

15

16

LUKE. ΠΙ

to them, Injure no man, either by violence or false accusation, and be content with your wages.

And as the people were in suspense, and all were reason. ing in their minds concerning John, That he perhaps might be raz Cuerist, John addressed them all, saying, I, indeed,

_ baptize you in water; but there is one coming; who is mightier

17

‘18

than J; the latchet of whose sandal I am not worthy to untie.
He will baptize you in a holy spirit and fire. His winnowing instrument is in his hand; and he will thoroughly clean his threshing floor, and gather together the wheat for his granary; but the chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire. Thus, with many other exhortations, he published the glad tidings to the people. But Herod, the tetrarch, being reproved by him, for
Herodias his brother Philip’s wife, and for all the crimes which he had committed, added this to them ail, that he shut up John in prison.

Now, while all the people were receiving baptism, Jesus also being baptized, and praying; the heaven was opened, and the Holy Spirit, ina bodily form, came down like adove upon him, and there came a voice from heaven, saying, “ Zhou art my son, the Beloved; in thee I am well pleased.’ Now this very Jesus had been about thirty years under governance, being, as was supposed, a son of Joseph, son of Eli, son of Matthat, son of Levi, son of Melchi, son of Janna, son of Joseph, son of Mattathias, son of Amos, son of Naum, son of Esli, son of Naggai, son of Maath, son of Mattathias, son of Semei,

~ son of Joseph, son of Juda, son of Joanna, son of Rhesa, son

of Zorobabel, son of Salathiel, son of Neri, son of Melchi, son of Addi, son of Kosam, son of EKlmodam, son of Er, son of
Jose, son of Eliezer, son of Jorim, son of Matthat, son of
Levi, son of Symeon, son of Juda, son of Joseph, son of Jonan, son of Eliakim, son of Melea, son of Mainan, son of
Mattatha, son of Nathan, son of David, son of Jessai, son of
Obed, son of Boaz, son of Salmon, son of Naasson, son of
Aminadab, son of Aram, son of IXsrom, son of Phares, son of
Juda, son of Jacob, son of Isaac, son of Abraham, son of
Thara, son of Nachor, son of Saruch, son of Ragau, son of
Phalec, son of Eber, son of Sala, son of Kainan, son of Arphaxed, son of Sem, son of Noe, son of Lamech, son of Mathusa-

38

2 oo

LUKE, III. IV.

la, son of Enoch, son of Jared, son of Maleleel, son of Kainan, son of Enos, son of Seth, son of Adam, son of God.

Now Jesus being full of a holy spirit, returned from the
Jordan, and was led by the spirit into the wilderness; and_being forty days tempted by the devil, he ate nothing during those days. And when they were ended, he at length was hungry. Whereupon the deyil said to him, If thou art Son of God, command that stone to become a loaf of bread. And Jesus answered him, saying, It is written, that man can live, not by bread only, but by whatever God appointeth.* Now the devil having taken him up to ahigh mountain, had shewed him all the kingdoms of the inhabited land, in a moment of time, and the devil said to him, To thee I will give all this dominion and the glory of these; for to me it is delivered over, and I give it to whom I please. If thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine. Thereupon Jesus, answering him, said, Get thee behind me, Satan, for it is written, ‘“‘ Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only thou shalt serve.t’? He had also brought him to Jerusalem and placed him on the battlement of the temple, and said to him, If thou art the son of
God, throw thyself down from this; for it is written, that “‘ He will give his angels a charge concerning thee to preserve thee;” and that ‘ With their hands they will bear thee up, shouldst thou peradventure dash thy foot against a stone.{”’
In reply to which, Jesus said to him, It is said, “" Thou shalt not try the Lord thy God.}’”? And when the devil had ended every trial, he departed from him for a time.

And Jesus returned in the power of the spirit to Galilee, and a report went forth through all the neighbouring country, concerning him. He indeed taught in their synagogues with universal applause. And when he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, he went according to his custom to the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood upto read. And the book of the prophet Esaias was delivered to him. And having unrolled the volume, he found the place where it was written,
‘The spirit of the Lord is upon me, for the business for which

*Deut. 8.3. {Deut. 6.13. +tPs. 91.11. &c. §Deut. 6. 16.

34

35

LUKE. IV.

he anointed me. He hath sent me to publish glad tidings to the poor; to heal them who are broken hearted; to proclaim a deliverance to captives; and a recovery of sight, to the blind; to set at liberty the bruised; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.*”? And when he had rolled up the volume and given it to the attendant, he sat down. And the eyes of all in the synagogue being fixed on him, he began with saying to them, This day there 15 an accomplishment of this scripture, which you have just heard. And all bore testimony in his favour, and expressed admiration at the graceful words which proceeded from his mouth, and said, Is not this the son of Joseph? Upon which he said to them, You will doubtless apply to me this proverb—Physician heal thyself: what we have heard done in Capernaum, do here also in thine own country.
Then he said to them, Verily I say to you, No prophet is well received in his own country. And indeed I tell you, There were many widows in Israel in the days of Elias, when the heaven was shut up for three years and six months, so that there was a great famine over all the land; but Elias was sent to none of them, but to a widow woman at Sarepta, a city of
Sidon. And there were many lepers in Israel in the days of
Eliseus the prophet, but none of them was cleansed—none but Neeman the Syrian. At hearing this, all that were in the synagogue were filled with wrath, and rising up, they drove him out of the city, and brought him to the brow of the hill on which their city was built, in order to throw him down headlong. But he, having passed through the midst of them, went away. .

When he came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and was teaching them on the sabbath days, they were astonished at his manner of teaching, for his discourse was with authority. And there was in the synagogue a man, who had a spirit of an unclean demon. And he cried witha loud voice, saying, Hah! What hast thou to do with us, Jesus of Nazareth! Art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art.
The holy one of God. Thereupon Jesus rebuked him, saying,

* Ese61s 15°.

LUKE. IV. V.

Be silent and go out of him. And the demon having throwh the man in the midst, went out of him without hurting him.

36 And they were all amazed, and said to one another, What is the meaning of this, that with authority and power he com-

37 mandeth the unclean spirits, and they go out? And his fame spread through all the neighbouring country.

38 When he withdrew from the synagogue he went to the house of Simon. Now Simon’s mother in law was confined with a violent fever, and they besought him on her behalf.

39 Whereupon standing over her, he rebuked the fever and it left her; and she arose immediately and waited upon them.

40 And when the sun was set, all that had any sick of any kind of disease, brought them to him; and he, laying his hands on

41 every one of them, healed them. Now demons indeed used to go out of many, screaming and saying, Thou art the Christ the son of God; but he, rebuking them, did not suffer them to say that they knew him to be the Christ.

AQ Now, having gone out as day was coming on, he went to a solitary place; and the people sought him, and went out to

43 him, and pressed him not to leave them. But he said to them,
I must publish the glad tidings of the reign of God in other

44 cities also, because I am sent for this purpose. Accordingly he proceeded on, making proclamation in the synagogues of
Galilee.

V. And it came to pass when the people were pressing up-

on him to hear the word of God, as he was standing by the

lake of Gennesaret, he saw two boats by the edge of the lake, and the fishermen, having gone out of them, were washing their nets. So, going on board one of them, which belonged to Simon, he desired him to put off a little from the land.

4 And sitting down, he taught the people from the vessel. And

when he had done speaking, he said to Simon, Row into deep

5 water, and let down your nets for a draught. Upon which Si-

mon, answering, said to him, Master, we have been toiling all

6 night, and have caught nothing. However, at thy word, I will

let down the net. And, having done this, they enclosed such

7 a great multitude of fishes that their net began to break.

Whereupon they beckoned to their partners in the other vessel to come and help them. So they came, and they filled

8

9

10 ll

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

LUKE. V.

béth the vessels so that they began to sink. Upon seeing this,
Simon Peter prostrated himself at the knees of Jesus, and said, Depart from me, for I, O Lord, am a sinful man. For he, and all that were with him, were seized with amazement at the draught of fishes which they had taken. And so were
James and John, the sons of Zebedee, who were Simon’s partners. Then Jesus saith to Simon, Be not afraid; henceforth thou shalt be employed in catching men. And when they had brought their vessels to land, they left all and followed him.

And when he was in one of the cities, lo! a man full of leprosy fell on his face, when he saw Jesus, and besought him, saying, O sir, if thou wilt, thou canst cleanse me. Whereupon he stretched forth his hand and touched him, saying, I will; be thou cleansed. And immediately the leprosy departed from him. Then he charged him to tell no one; but go and shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy purification, as Moses commanded, for a testimony to them. So his fame spread more and more, and great multitudes flocked to hear him, and to be healed of their infirmities by him. And he constantly withdrew to places of solitude and prayed.

One day when he was teaching, and some Pharisees and teachers of the law, who had come from every town of Galilee and Judea and Jerusalem, were sitting by, and the power of the Lord was displayed in curing the sick; it happened that

lo! there came men carrying on a couch a man who was para-

19

25 lytic: and they tryed to bring him in and lay him before Jesus. But finding; it ΣΤΉΛΗΝ to bring him in, by reason of the crowd, they wentup upon the flat roof, and let him down from the roof, with the couch, into the court before Jesus; who, upon seeing their faith, said to him, Man, thy sins are forgiven thee. Atthis the Scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is this who speaketh blasphemy? Who can forgive sins, but God alone? Thereupon Jesus, knowing their surmises, addressed them, saying, Why reason ye in your hearts? Which is easier—to say, thy sins are forgiven thee? Or to say, Rise up and walk? Now that you may know that the son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (saith he to the paralytic) I say to thee, Arise, and having taken up thy couch, go to thy house. And instantly he arose in their

LUKE. V. VI.

presence, and having taken up that on which he was laid,

26 went to his house, glorifying God. And amazement seized all; and they glorified God, and were filled with awe, saying,
We have seen wonderful things to-day.

27 And after this he went out and sawa publican, named Le-
Vi, sitting at the receipt of custom, and said to him, Follow

28 me. Upon which, leaving all, he arose and followed him. And

29 Levi made a great entertainment for him at his house; and there was a great company of publicans and others at table with

380 him. Whereupon their Scribes and the Pharisees expressed’ their dissatisfaction to his disciples, saying, Why do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners? In reply to which, Jesus

31 said to them, They who are in health have no need of a phy-

32 sician; but they who are sick. I am not come to call righteous

33 men, but sinners to a reformation. Then they said to him,
Why do the disciples of John fast often and make supplications; and in like manner those of the Pharisees; but thine eat

34 and drink? And he said to them, Can you make the bridemen

35 fast, while the bridegroom is with them? The days indeed will come when the bridegroom shall be ‘taken from them, then

36 will they fast in those days. He then propounded to them a parable, that no one putteth a piece of a new mantle on an old man. tle; if he doth, he indeed rendeth the new, and the patch from the new doth not suit the old. Neither doth any one put new

37 wine into old leathern bottles: if any doth, the new wine will burst the bottles, and thus the wine will be spilled, and the

38 bottles rendered useless. But new wine must be put in new

39 bottles, so both will be preserved.. Furthermore, no one having drunk old wine calleth immediately for new: for he saith,
The old is better.

VI. It happened as he was walking through cornfields on a sabbath called, second prime,* that his disciples plucked the ears of corn, and having rubbed out the grains with their

2 hands, began to eat. Upon which some of the Pharisees said to them, Why do ye that which is not lawful on sabbath days?

*That is, I apprehend the day when the sheaf of first fruits was offered—the second day after the passover, and the first ef the fifty days to pentecost. See Ley. 23. 15, 16. &e.

LUKE. VI.

3 Thereupon Jesus addressing them, said, Have you never read what David did, when he and his attendants were hungry?
.4. How he went to the house of God, and took the presence loaves and ate thereof and gave to his attendants, which none
5 but the priests are allowed to eat. Then he told them that the son of man is Lord even of the sabbath.
6 It happened also on another sabbath, when he went to the synagogue and taught, that there was a man there, whose
7 right hand was withered. And the Scribes and the Pharisees watched him, to see whether he would perform a cure on the sabbath day, that they might find matter of accusation against
- 8 him. Now he knew their thoughts. Therefore when he had said to the man who had the withered hand, Rise and stand
9 in the midst; and he had risen, and was standing there; Jesus said to them, Let me ask you what is allowable on the sabbath
10 days?—to do good, or to do evil?—to save life, or to destroy?
Then having looked around on them all, he said to the man,
11 Stretch forth thy hand. And he did so. And his hand was restored sound as the other. Upon this they were filled with madness, and spoke one to another what they should do to
Jesus. 
12 Now about that time he went out to the mountain to pray,
_ and spent the whole night in a place set apart for prayer* to
13 God. And when it was day, he called together his disciples,
14 and out of them chose twelve, whom he named ArostLEs—
Simon, whom he surnamed Peter, and Andrew, his brother,
15 James and John, Philip and Bartholomew, Matthew and Thomas,
16 James, son of Alpheus, and Simon, surnamed Zelotes,
17 Judas the brother of James, and Judas Iscariot, even he who was a traitor. And having come down with them, he stopped in a plain, with a crowd of his disciples, and a great multitude of the people from all Judea and Jerusalem, and the coast of
Tyre and Sidon, who had come to hear him, and to be cured
18 of their diseases. Even they who were infested by unclean
19 spirits were also cured. And the whole multitude sought to
20 touch him, because power went forth from him, and healed all. ‘Then lifting up his eyes on his disciples, he said,

ee eee as

Aenea een

*Titerally in a Proseucha.

24,

33

94

35

96

37

LUKE. VI.

Happy ye who are poor, for the kingdom of God is yours!
Happy ye, who hunger now, for you shall be satisfied!
Happy ye, who weep now; for you will laugh!

Happy are you, when men will hate you; even when they will discard and reproach you, and expose your name as infamous on the account of the son of man; rejoice on that day and leap for joy; for behold your reward in heaven is great; for thus their fathers treated the prophets,

But alas! for you who are rich, for you are receiving your consolation.

Alas for you who are filled; for you shall hunger,

Alas for you who laugh now; for you shall mourn and weep.

Alas for you, when all men speak well of you; for thus their fathers did to the false prophets. But I charge you, my hearers, Love your enemies. Do good to them who hate you.
Bless them who curse you; and pray for them who spitefully abuse you. To him who smiteth thee on one cheek, present also the other. And from him who taketh thy mantle, withhold not thy coat. Give to every one who asketh thee. And from him who taketh away thy goods, do not demand them back,

And as you wish men to do to you, do ye even so to them, If you indeed love them who lovevyou, what thanks are you en-

titled to. For even sinners love those who love them. And if you do good to them who do good to you, what thanks are you entitled to? For even sinners do the same, And if you lend to them from whom you hope to receive; what thanks are you entitled to, For even sinners lend to sinners, that they may receive as much in return. But love your enemies; and do good; and lend without any mistrust, and your reward will be great. And you will be the children of the Most High. Because he is kind, even to the ungrateful and malignant; be ye therefore merciful, even as your Father is merciful.
Furthermore, judge not, that so you may not be judged.
Condemn not, that so you may not be condemned. Forgive; and you shall be forgiven, Give; and to you will be given— into your lap there shall be given good measure, pressed down and shaken and running over, For with the same measure

42

45

46

48

49

LUKE. VI. VII.

with which you mete to nian you shall have measure returned to you.

Then he spake a parable to ἤρα Con the blind lead the blind? Will they not both fall into a pit? A scholar is not above his teacher. But every one will be instructed as his teacher is.

Now why beholdest thou the mote which is in thy brether’s eye, and perceivest not the splinter which is in thine own eye? Or how canst thou say to thy brother, Hold, brother,
Let me take out the mote which is in thine eye, not considering that there is a splinter in thine own eye? Hypocrite, first take the splinter out of thine own eye, and then thou wilt see clearly to take out the mote which is in thy brother’s eye.

That indeed is not a good tree which beareth bad fruit; nor is that a bad tree which beareth good fruit. For every tree is known by its own fruit. For figs are not gathered from thorns; nor grapes from a bramble bush. The good man out, of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is good. And the bad man out of the bad treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is bad. For from the overflowing of the heart the mouth speaketh.

Now why do you call me, master, master, hats ye do not what I command? With regard to every one who cometh to me, and hearkeneth to my words, and doth them, I will tell you to whom he is like. He is like a man building a house, who digged deep and laid a foundation on the rock. And when a flood came, the current beat against that house, but could not shake it, because it was founded on the rock. But he who hath heard and hath not practised, is like a man who built'a house on the ground, without a foundation, against which the current beat impetuously, and presently it fell. And great was the ruin of that house.

Vil. Now when he had finished all these his sayings in the

2

3 hearing of the people, he went to Capernaum, where a certain centurion’s servant, who was dear to his master, was sick and at the point of death. And the centurion, having heard of
Jesus, had sent to him the elders of the Jews with a request

4. that he would come and cure his servant. And when they came

to Jesus, they pressed him earnestly, saying, He is worthy of
> Lk y; 5 oO? ΟῚ

22

LUKE. VI.

this favour; for he loveth our nation, and it was he who built the synagogue for us. So Jesus went with them. But when he was now at no great distance from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying, Sir, trouble not thyself; for 1 am not worthy that thou shouldst come under my roof: and for that reason I did not think myself worthy to come to thee.
Say but a word, and my servant will be healed. For even I, who am a man subject to authority, having soldiers under me, say to one, Go; and he goeth: and to another, Come ; and he cometh: and to my slave, Do this; and he doeth it. When
Jesus heard this, he admired him; and turning to the multitude that followed him, he said, I say to you, I have not found such an instance of faith even in Israel. And when they, who had been sent, returned to the house, they found the servant well who had been sick.

And on the day following, he went to a city called Nain, accompanied by many of his disciples, and a great crowd. And as he approached the gate of the city, behold the people were carrying out a dead man to be buried—the only son of his mother, and she was a widow. And there was a great multitude of the city with her. And when the Lord beheld her, he had compassion on her, and said to her, Weep not. Then he advanced and touched the bier, (now the bearers had stopped) and he said, Young man, I say to thee, Arise. Thereupon he who had been dead, sat up and began to speak. And he delivered him to his mother. Anda dread fell upon all; and they glorified God, saying, A great prophet is risen up among us, and God hath visited his people. And his fame spread through all Judea and through all the neighbouring country.

When John was informed by his disciples of all these things, he called two of them and sent them to Jesus, saying,
Thou art the one coming: may we expect another? And when the men came to him, they said, John the baptist hath sent us to thee, saying, Thou art the one coming: may we expect another? Now at that very time he was curing many of diseases, and maladies, and evil spirits, and graciously bestow. ing sight to many who were blind. And Jesus answering, said to them, Go and tell John what you have seen and heard; that the blind see; the lame walk; lepers are cleansed; deaf hear;

95

24

25

LUKE. VII.

dead are raised to life, and the poor have glad tidings pro-— claimed to them. And happy is he who shall not be whe 2 at me.

And when John’s messengers were gone, he took occasion to say to the people respecting John, What went ye out to the ἡ wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind? But what went ye out to see? A man clothed with soft raiment? Behold they who are splendidly dressed, and who live luxuriously, are to be found in royal palaces. But what went ye out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and something more than a prophet.
This is he, of whom it is written, ‘Behold I send my messenger before thee, who shall prepare thy way for thee.*” For I say to you, Among those who are born of women, there is not a greater prophet than John the baptist, but the least in the eres of God is a greater than he. Allthe people indeed, even - the publicans, when they heard, justified God by submitting to the baptism of John; but the Pharisees and the teachers of the law made null, with regard to themselves, the counsel of God, by not submitting to be baptized by him; therefore the Lord said, To what shall I compare the men of this generation, and to what are they like? ‘They are like children who sit in the market place and call to one another, and say, We have played on the pipe for you, and you have not danced: we have sung for you songs of woe, and you have not wept. For John the baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, He hath a demon. The son of man came eating and drinking; and you say, Behold a gluttonous man and a wine bibber; a friend of publicans and sinners. But wisdom is justified by all her children.

When one of the Pharisees asked him to eat with him, and he had gone to the Pharisee’s house’ and placed himself at table, behold a woman in the city who wasa sinner, when she knew that he was at table in the Pharisee’s house, took an alabaster bottle of myrrh, and standing behind, at his feet, weeping, she first bathed his feet with her tears, and wiped them with the tresses of her hair. Then she kissed his feet and

Mal. 3. 1.

LUKE. VII. VIII.

39 anointed them with the myrrh, ‘When the Pharisee who had invited him saw this, he said within himself, if this man were a prophet, he would know what sort of a woman this is, who_
40 toucheth him—that she is a sinner. Thereupon Jesus address-
τ ing him, said; Simon, I have something to say to thee. And
41 he saith, Teacher, say it. A certain creditor had two debtors.
The one owed him five hundred deniars;* and the other fifty.
42 t And as they had not wherewithal to pay, he forgave them
43 both. Which of them, therefore, said he, will love him most?
44 To which Simon replied, He, I suppose, to whom he forgave most. Jesus said to him, Thou hast judged rightly. Then
‘turning towards the woman, he said to Simon, Thou seest this woman? I came to thy house: Thou gavest me no water for my feet; but she with her tears hath washed my feet, and
_45 wiped them with the hairs of her head: Thou gavest me no
46 kiss: but she, since I came in, hath not ceased kissing my feet.
My head thou didst not anoint with oil: but she hath anointed
“AT my feet with myrrh. For what reason? I tell thee. Her sins which are many, are forgiven her;} therefore her love is great.

48 But he to whom little is forgiven, hath little love. Then he

49 said to her, Thy sins are forgiven. Upon this, they who were at table with him began to say within themselves, Who is this

50 that forgiveth sins? Thereupon he said to the woman, Thy faith hath saved thee, Go in peace.

Vil. Immediately after this he travelled through cities and villages, publishing and proclaiming the glad tidings of the reign of God, accompanied by the twelve, and by certain women who had been delivered from evil spirits and diseases, particularly Mary, called Magdalene, out of whom had gone

S seven demons; and Joanna the wife of Chusa, Herod’s steward, and Susanna, and many others, who ministered to him out of

4 their possessions. And asa great multitude were coming to-

gether, and those in every city were flocking to him, he said

eee .. .΄͵. .͵. ..... ..... ....

* About sixty dollars. + About six dollars.
Ἐ Literally, Her sins, which are many, must needs have been forgiven, since she hath loved much. In Chap. 23. 40. and Acts 1. 17.

the Greek particle or: is used in the same sense, and signifies since, or seeing that.

5

13

14

15

16

17

18

LUKE. VIII.

by way of parable, The sower went out to sow his seed. And

as he was sowing, some fell on the highway and was trampled

under foot, and the birds of the air devoured it. And some fell

on rocky ground, and having sprung up, it withered for want of moisture. And some fell among thorns, and the thorns spring-

ing up with it, choaked it. And some fell on good ground,

and sprang up and yielded increase an hundred fold. Having

said this, he cried with a loud voice, Whosoever hath ears to

hear, let him hear.

And when his disciples asked him, saying, What is the meaning of this parable, he said, To you itis granted to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God, which to others are couched under parables, so that they see anddo not see, and they hear and do not understand. Now this is the meaning of the parable. The seed is the word of God. By the highway, are meant those hearers out of whose hearts the devil coming, taketh away the word, that they may not believe and be saved.
By the rocky ground are meant those who, when they hear the word, receive it with joy; but not having it rooted in them, they are but temporary believers, and in time of trial apostatise. The ground overrun with thorns denoteth them who hear, and who going away are choaked with cares and riches and the pleasurable enjoyments of life, so that they do not bring fruit to perfection. But by the good ground are meant they, who with an honest and good heart, having heard the word, retain it, and perseveringly bring forth fruit.

Now no one having lighted a lamp covereth it with a vesvel or putteth it under a couch; but setteth it on a stand that they who come in may see the light. For there is nothing obscure which shall not be made clear; nor any thing concealed which shall not be made known and come to light. Take heed therefore how you hear; for to him who improveth, more shall be given; but from him who improveth not, even what he thinketh he hath, will be taken away.

When his mother and his brethren came to him, and could not get near him by reason of the crowd, and some informed him, saying, Thy mother and thy brethren are standing without, and desire to see thee; he in reply, said to them, My mother and my brethren are they who hear the word of God and do it.

LUKE. VIII.

22 One day Jesus having gone on board a vessel with his disciples, said to them, Let us cross over to the other side of
23 the lake. So they set sail. And as they were sailing he fell asleep; and a storm of wind came down on the lake, and they

24 were filled, and in danger; Whereupon they went near and awoke him, saying, Master, master, we are lost. Upon which he arose and rebuked the wind, and the raging of the water,
25 and they were still; and there was a-calm. And he said to them, Where is your faith? And they being terrified, express-
-ed admiration, saying one to another, Who in reality is this, that he commandeth even the winds and the water, and they

26 obey him! And when they arrived at the country of the Gadarenes, which is over against Galilee; just as he was landing he
27 was met by a man of the city who had been long possessed by demons, and who wore no clothes, nor abode in any house,
28 but in the tombs; who upon seeing Jesus, screamed and fell down before him, and said with a loud voice, What hast thou to do with me, Jesus son of the Most High God. I beseech
29 thee, torment me not. For he had commanded the unclean spirit to go out of the man. For it had often seized him. And when he was bound with chains and fastened with fetters, bursting the bonds, he was driven by the demon into the wilderness.
30 Then Jesus asked him, saying, What is thy name?
$1 And he said, Legion. (For many demons had entered into him;) and entreated him that he would not command them to go in-

32 to the abyss. Now there was a herd of many swine there, feeding on the mountain, so they besought him to permit them to

33 enter into the swine. And when he permitted them, the demons quitting the man, entered into the swine, and the herd

34 rushed down a precipice into the lake, and were drowned.
When the swine herds saw what had happened, they fled, and

35 running away, spread the news through the city and the country.
Upon which the people came out to see what was done. And when they came to Jesus and found the man, out of whom the demons were gone, sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed and in

36 his right senses, they were terrified. And upon being inform ed by the spectators how the demoniac had been cured, all the people of the neighbouring country of the Gadarenes entreat-

37 ed him to depart from them. Because they were struck with

38

39

40

42

43

44,

45

46

47

LUKE. VIII.

great terror, he therefore going on board the vessel, set out on his return. Now the man, out of whom the demons had — gone, begged to be with him. But Jesus dismissed him, saying, Return to thy house, and tell what God hath done for — thee. So he returned, and published through the whole city all that Jesus had done for him.

And when Jesus returned, the multitude welcomed him, for they were all waiting for him. And behold there came a man named. Jairus, who was a ruler of the synagogue, who prostrating himself at the feet of Jesus, besought him to go to his house; because he had a daughter, an only child, about twelve years of age, and she was dying. And as he was going, the people crowded him; and a woman, who had been twelve years afflicted with an issue of blood, and who had spent all her living on physicians, none of whom could cure her, came behind and touched the tuft of his mantle; and instantly her issue of blood was staunched. Thereupon Jesus said, Who touched me? And when all denied, Peter and they who were with him, said; Master, the crowds are thronging and pressing thee, and dost thou say, Who touched me? But
Jesus said, Some one hath touched me, for J perceived a power going forth from me. And when the woman saw that she had not escaped notice, she came trembling, and prostrating herself before him, told him in the presence of all the people, for what cause she had touched him, ar how she was cured instantly. Whereupon he said to her, Daughter, take courage; thy faith hath cured thee. Go in peace. And while he was yet speaking, there cometh one from. the ruler of the synagogue’s house, and. saith -to him, Thy daughter is dead.
Trouble not the teacher. Upon hearing this, Jesus addressed

_ him, saying, Be not afraid. Only believe; and she will reco-

ver. And when he entered the house, he permitted none to go in, but Peter and James and John, and the father and the mother of the child. Now all were weeping and lamenting her.
But he said, Weep not. She is not dead; but asleep. Upon which they derided him, knowing that she was dead. And when he had put them all out, and taken her by the hand, he called, saying, Maiden, arise. Whereupon her breath returned, and she arose immediately. And he ordered some food to

LUKE. VIII. IX.

be given her. And her parents were astonished. And he charged them to tell no one what was done.
IX. When he, having called together the twelve disciples,
2 gave them power and authority over all the demons, and to cure diseases; and was sending them to proclaim the reign of
3 God, and to heal the sick; he said to them, Take nothing for .
4 the journey—neither staves, nor scrip, nor bread, nor money, nor two coats apiece. And into whatever house you enter,
5 abide there till you leave the place. And wherever they will not receive you, when you are leaving that city, shake off the
.6 dust from your feet, for a testimony against them. Accordingly, they departed and went through the villages, proclaiming
_ the glad tidings, and performing cures every where.
7 When Herod, the tetrarch, heard of all that was done by him, he was perplexed; because it was said by some, that John was
8 raised from the dead; and by others, that Elias is plainly come; and by’others, that one of the ancient prophets is risen up.
9 And Herod said, John I beheaded: but who is this of whom
10 I hear such things? And he desired to see him. Therefore,
' - when the apostles returned, and told Jesus all that they had done, he took them apart, and withdrew to a solitary place,
» 11 belonging to a city called Bethsaida. And as the people knew it, they followed him, and he received them, and spoke to them concerning the kingdom of God, and healed them who
12 had need of healing. And when the day began to decline, the twelve came, and said to him, Dismiss the multitude, that they may go to the neighbouring towns and farms, for lodging
13 and provisions; for we are here in a desert place. But he said to them, Do you, yourselves, give them something to eat.
Thereupon they said to him, We have not more thin five
14 loaves and two fishes. Must we then go and buy food for all this people? For they were about five thousand men, Then he said to his disciples, Range them as at table, in companies,
15 fifty ina company. And tt did so. And when they were
16 all ranged, he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, pronounced a blessing, and broke them
17 and gave to the disciples to set before the multitude, And when they had all eaten, and were satisfied, there was taken up a surplusage of fragments which filled twelve panniers,
VOR. IV. Q

25

26

34

35

LUKE. IX.

After that, when he was praying in a retired place, his disciples were with him, and he asked them, saying, Who do the people say that !am? And they in reply, said, John the
Baptist; but others say, Elias; and others, that one of the ancient prophets is risen up. Then he said to them, And who do you say that 1 am? In answer to this, Peter said, The
Christ of God.* Thereupon he checked them, and ordered them to tell no one this; adding, that the son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, and chief priests, and Scribes, and be (put to death, and raised on the third day.

Moreover he said to all, if any one desireth to come under my guidance, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me. For whoever would save his life shall lose it.
But whosoever shall lose his life for my sake, he shall save it.
For what advantage is it to a man to have gained the whole world and destroyed himself, or be punished with the loss of life. For whoever shall be ashamed of me, or of my words, . of him the son of man will be ashamed when he shall come in his own glory, and in that of the father, and the holy angels.
Now I tell you of a truth, there are some of those standing here, who shall not taste death until they see the reign of God.

About eightdays after these discourses, he took Peter, and
John, and James, and went up to the mountain to pray. And while he was praying, the form of his countenance was changed, and his raiment was dazzling white. And behold two men conversed with him. These were Moses and Elias, who appeared in glory, and spoke of that departure of his which he was soon to accomplish at Jerusalem. Now Peter, and they who were with him, had been overpowered with sleep; but awaking thoroughly, they saw his glory, and the two men who were standing with him. And as they were withdrawing from him, Peter said to Jesus, Master, it is well that we are here. Let us make three booths, one for thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias, not knowing what he said. And while he was thus speaking, a cloud came and overshadowed them. And at entering the cloud, they were terrified. And

*The Messiah or the anointed.

LUKE. IX. ‘

there came a voice from the cloud, saying, This is my son,

36 the Beloved; hearken to him. Now atthe time of the voice,

37

Jesus was alone, And they were silent and told no one in those days aught of what they had seen.
And on the following day, when they were coming down

38 from the mountain, a great multitude met him. And behold

39

40

A2

A6
4,7
48

49

50

ἃ man from the crowd cried out, saying, ‘Teacher, I beseech thee, look upon my son; for he is mine only child. And behold a spirit seizeth him, and instantly he screameth—and it convulseth him with foam, and hardly departeth from him, when it hath bruised him. I indeed besought thy disciples to cast it out, but they could not. In reply to this, Jesus said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you! how long shall 1 endure you! Bring thy son hither. And as he was coming, the demon dashed him on the ground and threw him into convulsions. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and cured the child, and delivered him to his father.
And all were astonished at the mighty power of God. And while they were expressing admiration at all that Jesus had done, he said to his disciples, Give diligent attention to these words; for the son of man will soon be delivered up into the hands of men. But they did not know the meaning of this. It was hid from them so that they did not understand it; and they were afraid to ask him the meaning of that expression.

Now a surmise had crept in: among them, which of them. should be greatest. And as Jesus perceived the ill grounded reasoning of their heart, he took a child, and placed it by him, and said to them, Whoever will receive this child for my name, receiveth me; and whoever receiveth me, receiveth him who sent me. For he who is least among you all, even he shall be great. Then John addressing him, said, Master, we saw one Casting out the demons in thy name, and we forbade him because he doth not follow [thee] with us. Thereupon
Jesus said to him, Forbid not; for he who is not against us is for us.

Now when the days of his being received up were about to be completed, he resolutely set his face to go to Jerusalem, and sent messengers before him, who set out and came to a town of Samaritans to. make preparation for him. Rut they

54

55

56

IA ab Ww

» LUKE. IX kK,

would not receive him, because they perceived that he was going to Jerusalem. Upon seeing this, his disciples, James and
John, said, Master, Is it thy pleasure that we command fire to come down from heaven and consume them, as Elias did?
Whereupon, turning about, he rebuked them, and said, You do not know what spirit a are of. For the son of man did not come to destroy men’s lives, but to save them. So they went to another village.

It happened also in the course of their travels, that on the way one said to him, Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest. Whereupon Jesus said to him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have roosts; but the son of man hath not where to lay his head. And to another he said, Follow me. And when he said, Master, suffer me first to go and bury my father; Jesus said to him, Let the dead bury their own dead; but go thou, and proclaim the reign of God. And when another said, Master Twill follow thee; but let me first go and bid them farewell, who are at my house; Jesus said to him,
No man, who hath put his hand to the plough and looketh back, is fit for the kingdom of God.

After these things, the Lord appointed seventy others, and

‘sent them, two and two, before him, to every city and village

whither he himself was soon to go; ded he said to them, Fhe harvest indeed is plentiful, but the labourers are few. Entréat therefore the Lord of the harvest to send forth labourers for his harvest. Go ye. Behold I send you forth like lambs among wolves. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor sandals. And salute no one by the way. And into whatever house you enter, first say, Peace be to this house. And if the son of peace be there, your peace will rest upon it; but if not, it will return to you. And continue in the same family, eating and

᾿ drinking such things as they have. For the labourer is worthy

10

11 of his wages. Go not from one family to another. And into whatever city you enter, when they entertain you eat such things as are set before you. And heal the sick therein, and say to them, The reign of God is come near to you. But whatever city you enter, when they do not receive you, go out into the streets thereof and say, The very dust of this city of yours which cleaveth to us, we wipe off for you: nevertheless, know

12

13

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

LUKE. X.

this, that the reign of God hath come nigh unto you. Now I sav to you, the condition of Sodom will be more tolerable on that day than the condition of that city.

Alas for thee, Chorazin! Alas for thee, Bethsaida! for if the miracles which have been performed in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. But it will be more tolerable for
Tyre and Sidon at the judgment, than for you. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to the skies, shalt be thrust down to Hades.*

He who hearkeneth to you, hearkeneth to me: and he who

rejecteth you, rejecteth me; and he who rejecteth me, rejecteth him who sent me.

And when the seventy returned with joy, saying, Master, even the demons are subject to us through thy name; he said to them, I beheld Satan falling like lightning from heaven: behold I give you power to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and upon all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall in anywise hurt you. Nevertheless, rejoice not at this, that spirits are subject to you; but rather rejoice that your names are enrolled in heaven.

At that same time Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heavenand earth, that thou, having hid these things from the wise and learned, hast revealed them to babes—Yes, O father, that it thus seemed good in thy sight.
All things are delivered up to me by my Father; and none knoweth who the Son is, except the Father; nor who the Father is, except the Son, and he to whom the Son will please to reveal him.

Then turning to the disciples apart, he said, Happy the eyes, which see what you see! for I say to you, that many prophets and kings have desired to see what you see, and have not seen them; and to hear what you hear, and have not heard them.

Then a certain teacher of the law stood up, and witha view to try him, said, Teacher, what must I do to inherit everlasting life? Whereupon Jesus said to him, What is written in the

a πιλρεδισουυυυόδιυ.....00κ0..ιν

* The place of departed spirits.

27

35

96

97

98

99

40

LUKE. Σ,

law? How readest thou? And he in reply, said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, even with thy whole mind;

and thy neighbour as thyself. Upon this Jesus said to him,

Thou hast answered right. Do this and thou shalt live. But

he, wishing to justify himself, said, And who is my neighbour?

In answer to which Jesus said, A certain man from Jerusalem > was going down to Jericho, and fell among robbers, who having

stripped him, and wounded him, went off, leaving him half dead. And accidentally a certain priest went down that way,

who saw him and passed on over against him. And in like

manner, a Levite coming to the place, when he came and saw

him, passed him by. But a certain Samaritan, who was on a

journey, came where he was; and when he saw him, he had

compassion and went up to him, and bound up his wounds,

pouring thereon oil and wine. ‘Then having set him on his own

beast, he brought him to an inn, and took care of him. And

the next morning, when he was departing, he took out two

deniars,* and gave them tothe innkeeper, and said to him, Take

care of this man: and whatever thou expendest more, I will

pay thee when I return. Now, which of these three, thinkest

thou, was neighbour to him who fell among the robbers? The

expounder of the law said, He who did him the act of kind-

ness. Thereupon Jesus said to him, Go thou, and do in like

manner.

And as they were travelling, he came to a certain village, and a woman whose name was Martha, received him into her house. Now she had a sister called Mary, who sat down at the feet of Jesus and heard his discourse. But Martha was cumbered about dispensing amply for the entertainment. So coming in, she said, Master, Carest thou not that my sister hath left me to’ serve alone? Speak to her therefore that she may assist me. In reply to which, Jesus saith to her, Martha,
Martha, thou art anxious and troubling thyself about many things. But there is one thing necessary. As for Mary, she hath chosen that good portion which shall not be taken from her.

* See Matthew 20. 2.

LUKE. ΧΕ

XI. It came to pass also when he was ata certain place, pray-

2

3°

ing, that soon as he had done, one of his disciples said to him,
Master, teach us to pray, as John taught his disciples. Whereupon he said to them, When you pray, say, Our Father, who art in heaven; hallowed be thy name; thy reign come; thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven; give us day by day our

' 4 daily bread,* and forgive us our sins, for we indeed do forgive

5

6

18 every one who offendeth us: and bring us not into temptation; but deliver us from the evil one. Then he said to them, Should any of you have a friend, and go to him at midnight, and say to him, Friend, lend me three loaves of bread; for a friend of mine is come off his road to me, and I have nothing to set before him: and he from within should say in reply, Do not trouble me now: the door is shut, and my children as well as 1 are in bed: I cannot rise and give thee: I say to you, though he will not rise and give him on account of being his friend; yet on account of his importunity he will rise and give him what he wanteth. Now I say to you, Ask, and you shall obtain: seek, and you shall find: knock, and the door will be opened to you. For every one who asketh obtaineth: and he who seeketh, findeth: and to him who knocketh, the door will be opened. What father among you would give his son a stone, when he asketh for bread? Or, if he asketh for a fish, would, instead of a fish, give him a serpent? Or, if he asked for an egg, would give him a scorpion? If you, then, bad as you are, know how to give good gifts to your children; how much more will your heavenly father give a holy spirit to them who ask him?
Again, when he was expelling a demon, which was dumb, and as soon as the demon went out the dumb man spoke, and the people expressed admiration, but some of them said, By
Beelzebub, the prince of the demons, he expelleth the demons; and others, to try him, demanded of him a sign from _heaven; he, knowing their thoughts, said to them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation, and house after house falleth. Now if Satan be divided against himself,

19 how can his kingdom subsist? Because you say that I expel

* Or the bread sufficient for owr subsistence.

20

23

24

25

26

20

28

29

LUKE. ΧΙ.

the demons by Beelzebub; therefore if I expel the demons by
Beelzebub, by whom do your sons expel them? Let them therefore be your judges. But if I, with the finger of God, expel the demons, then indeed the kingdom of God hath reached you. While the strong one armed guardeth his court, his goods are safe. But when one stronger than he attacketh and overcometh him, he taketh from him his armour on which he relied. Then he divideth his spoils. He who is not with me is against me. And he who doth not gather with me scattereth.
When the unclean spirit hath gone out of the man; it walketh about through dry places, seeking rest: and finding none, it saith, I will return to my house from which I came out. And when it is come, it findeth the house swept and garnished.
Then it goeth and taketh along seven other spirits worse than itself; and they having entered in, dwell there. So the last state of that man is worse than the first.

As he was thus speaking, it happened that a woman among the crowd, raising her voice, said to him, Happy the womb which bore thee and the breasts which thou hast sucked! Whereupon he said, Nay, rather happy they who hear the word of God and keep it.

Now the crowds being collected in a body, he took occasion to say, This is a wicked generation. It seeketh a sign; but to itno sign shall be given, save the sign of the prophet Jonas.
For as Jonas was asign to the Ninevites, so will the son of man be to this generation. The queen ofthe south will be raised up at the jadgment with the men of this generation, and will condemn them; because she came from the extreme parts of the

earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold something ereater than Solomon is here. The men of Nineve will stand up at the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it, because they repented at the proclamation of Jonas, and behold something greater than Jonas is here. No one having lighted a lamp putteth it in a secret place, or under the corn measure, but on a stand, that they who come in may see the light. The eye is the lamp of the body; therefore when the eye is clear, the whole body is enlightened; but when it is distempered, the whole, body is dark. See therefore that the light which is in thee be not darkness. Is then thy whole body en-

44.

46

50

51

52

LUKE. XI.

lightened? To one who hath no part dark, the whole, being enlightened, will be as when a lamp with its blaze lighteth thee.

After he had spoken, a certain Pharisee invited him to dine with him, so he went and placed himself at table. And when the Pharisee who saw this expressed surprise that he had not first washed before dinner, the Lord said to him,
Now as for you Pharisees, you cleanse the outside of the cup and plate; but as to the inside, it is full of your rapacity and wickedness. Unthinking men! Did not he who made the outside make the inside also? But with respect to the things in it, give alms, and behold they are all clean to you.

But alas for you, Pharisees! because you pay tithe of mint, and rue, and of all kinds of pulse, and neglect justice and the love of God. These you ought to have practised, without, however, neglecting the other.

Alas for you, Pharisees! because you love the uppermost seats in the synagogues, and salutations in public places,

Alas for you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you are like concealed graves, over which men walk without perceiving them.

Upon this, one of the teachers of the law, interposing, saith to him, Teacher, by speaking thus dost thou reproach us also? ‘Thereupon he said,

Alas for you also, ye teachers of the law, because you load men with heavy burdens hard to be borne, and will not yourselves touch these burdens with one of your fingers. Alas for you; because you build the monuments of the prophets, and your fathers slew them. You therefore bear testimony, and approve the works of your fathers. Because they slew them, you, therefore, build their monuments; on this account indeed said the wisdom of God, I will send them prophets and apostles, some of whom they will kill, and others they will persecute, that the blood of all the prophets, which hath been shed from the foundation of the world, may be required of this generation—from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zacharias who was slain between the altar and the temple: Verily I say to you, it will be required of this very generation,

Alas for you, teachers of the law! because you have taken

LUKE. XI. XII.

away the key of knowledge. You entered not in yourselves ; and them who were entering you hindered.

53 Now while he was saying these things to them, the Scribes and the Pharisees took occasion to urge him vehemently, and provoke him to speak of many things, laying snares for him, and seeking to catch something from his mouth, that they might

XII. accuse him; by which myriads of the people being drawn together, so as to trample upon one another, he took occasion to say to his disciples,

Above all things beware of the leaven of the Pharisees,

2 which is hypocrisy ; for there is nothing concealed which shall

not be disclosed ; nor any thing hid, which shall not be known.

3 Because what you have said in the dark, will be heard in the

© light; and what you have whispered in closets will be pro-

claimed on the house tops; therefore I say to you, my friends;

4. Be not afraid of them who kill the body, and after that can do

5 no more: but I will point out to you whom you should fear—

Fear him, who after he hath killed, hath power to cast into

6 hell. I repeat it to you, Fear him. Are not five sparrows sold

for two assars?* Yet not one of them is forgotten before God.

7 Nay, the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not. therefore ; you are of more value than many sparrows.

8 Now I say to you, Whosoever will acknowledge me be-

9 fore men, him the son of man will acknowledge before the

angels of God: but he who hath denied me before men shall

10 be disowned before the angels of God. And with respect to

every one who shall speak a word against the son of man, it is to be forgiven him, but he who shall speak slanderously against the holy spirit shall not be forgiven.

11 Now when they bring you before their synagogues, and magistrates, and rulers, be not anxious how or what defence

12 you shall make, or what you shall say: for the holy spirit will teach you that very instant, what you ought to say.

13 When one in the crowd said to him, Teacher, order my

14 brother to divide the inheritance with me; thereupon he said to him, Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you?

15 Then he said to them, Take heed and be upon your guard

_ %* Ten assars make adeniar; two deniars, a drachma; two drachmas, a diadrachm or shekel, equal to about half a dollar.

16

17

54

LUKE. XII.

ugainst covetousness. For in what affluence soever a man may be, his life doth not depend on his possessions. Then he spoke a parable to them saying, There was a certain rich man, whose ground produced plenteously. Whereupon he reasoned within himself, saying, What shall I do; for I have not room to store my crops. Then he said, I will do this. I will pull down my store-houses and build larger, and there lay up all my produce and my good things. And I will say to my soul; Soul, thou hast many good things laid up in store for many years: take thine ease; eat; drink; and be joyful. Whereupon God said to him; Fool, this very night this soul of thine will be demanded of thee. Whose then will those things be which thou hast provided? Thus let every one [say] to himself who is heaping up treasure and is not rich for God.

Then he said to his disciples, For this cause I say to you, be not anxious about your life, what you shall eat; nor for your body, what you shall wear. Life is a greater gift than food, and the body than raiment. Observe those ravens! they neither sow nor reap; nor have they cellar or barn; yet God feedeth them. Of how much greater value are you than these birds? Now which of you can, with all his solicitude, add a moment to his life? If therefore, you cannot make the smallest addition to it, why are you anxious about the rest?
Observe those lilies how they grow! They neither toil nor spin; yet I say to you, Even Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of these. Now if God doth thus clothe the herbage, which is in the field to-day, and to-morrow is cast into a furnace, how much more will he clothe you, O distrustful men? As for you, therefore, be not inquisitive abaut what you shall eat, or what you shall drink, nor agitated with restless thoughts. For about all these things the nations of the world are inquisitive: but your Father knoweth that you have

‘need of all these things. But seek the kingdom of Gud, and

all these things will be superadded to you. Fear not, little flock. Because it hath pleased your Father to give you that kingdom, sell your possessiohs and give alms: provide for yourselves purses which do not wear out—a treasure in the heavens, which will never fail; where no thief; approacheth, nor moth spoileth: for where your treasure is, there will your heart

37

39

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

5]

52 oe

LUKE. XII.

be also. Let your loins be girded, and your lamps burning: and be like men who are waiting their master’s return from a wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may instantly open for him. Happy those servants, whom the master, when he cometh, shall find watching. Verily I say to you, he will gird himself, and having placed them at table, will come and wait upon them. And whether he come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and find them in such a state, happy are those servants. Now this you know, that if the master of a family knew at what hour a thief would come, he would watch, and not suffer him to break into his house. Be ye therefore also prepared, because at the hour of which you are not aware, the Son of man cometh.

Then Peter said to him, Master, dost thou speak this parable to us, or toall in general? Thereupon the Lord said, Who is indeed the faithful and prudent steward, whom his master shall have set over his family to dispense regularly the stated allowance of food? Happy is that servant, whom his master, when he cometh, shall find thus employed. Verily I say to you, he will appoint him overseer of all his estate. But should that servant say in his heart, My master delayeth his coming, and begin to beat the men servants, and maid servants, and to eat and drink and carouse; the master of that servant will come on a day when he doth not expect him, and in an hour he is not aware of, and will scourge him in the severest manner, and assign him his portion with the unfaithful. Now that servant who knew his master’s will, and did not keep himself ready, nor act agreeably to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes; but he who did not know it, and did things deserving chastisement, shall be beaten with few. For to whom much is given, of him much will be required. And the more a man is entrusted with, the more will be demanded from him. I came to put fire on the earth; and what wouid 1 but that it were now kindled! Ihave also a baptism to be baptized with, and how am
I straightened until it be accomplished. Do you imagine that
Iam come to give peace on the earth? I tell you, No; but rather division. For henceforth five in one house will be divided; three against two and two against three. Father will be divided against son, and son against father; mother against daugh-

LUKE. XII. XIII.

ter, and daughter against mother; mother in law against 9 ter in law, and daughter in law against mother in law.
54 Then addressing the multitudes, he said, When you see the cloud rising from the west, presently, say you, there is a
55 shower coming. And so it happeneth. And when the south
56 wind bloweth, you say, It will be hot. And so it happeneth.
Hypocrites! you have knowledge to discern the face of the
57 earth and the sky; how is it then that you do not discern
58 this time? And why do ye not, even for your own sakes, judge aright? For when thou art going with thine adversary to a magistrate, endeavour to come to an agreement* with him on the way, lest he bring thee before the judge; and the judge deliver thee up to the officer, and the ofhcer commit thee to
59 prison: I tell thee thou canst not get out of that, till thou hast paid the last farthing.
ΧΙΠΙ. Now there were some present who, on that occasion
2 told him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices: whereupon Jesus, in reply, said to them,
Do you imagine that those Galileans were the greatest sinners in all Galilee, because they suffered these things? I tell you,
3 No. But, unless you reform, you shall all perish in like man-
A ner. Or those eighteen men, upon whom the tower of Siloam fell, and killed them, do you think that they were the greatest offenders of all the men who dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you,
5 No; but unless you reform, you shall all perish in like manner.
6 Then he spake this parable. A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he went seeking fruit on it, but
7 found none. Whereupon he said to the vine dresser, Behold this is the third year that I have come, seeking fruit on this fig treee, without finding any. Cut it down. Why doth it
_ 8 cumber the ground? To which he replied, Master, let it alone
9 one year longer, until I dig about it and dung it. Perhaps it may bear fruit: if not; then cut it down.
10 When he was teaching in one of the synagogues on
11 the sabbath day, behold there was a woman there, who

* Literally, to be freed from him.

12

15

16

17

27

28

LUKE. XIIL

for eighteen years had a spirit of infirmity, and was so bowed down that she could in no wise look up. And when Jesus saw her he called her to him, and said to her, Woman, thou art loosed from this thine infirmity, and laid his hands on her.
And instantly she stood upright and glorified God. Upon which the ruler of the synagogue, to express his indignation because
Jesus cured on the sabbath day, addressed the people and said, There are six days on which work should be done: come therefore on those days and be cured, and not on the sabbath day. Thereupon the Lord answered him, and said,
Hypocrite! Doth not every one of you, on the sabbath day, loose his ox or his ass from the stall, and lead it to water? And ought not this woman, a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound, lo! these eighteen years, to be loosed irom this bond on the sabbath day? And upon his saying this, all his opposers were ashamed, and the whole multitude expressed joy for all the glorious things which were done by him.

Then he said, ‘To what is the kingdom of God like? and to what shall I compare it? It is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and threw in his garden, and it grew and became a great tree, and the birds of the air lodged among its branches.

Again he said, To what shall I compare the reign of God?
It is like leaven, which a woman took and mixed up with three measures of meal till the whole was leavened. )

When he was passing through cities and towns, teaching, and continuing his journey to Jerusalem, and one said to him,
Master, are there few who are saved? He said to them, Strive with all your might to enter in through the narrow gate; for many, L assure you, will seek to enter, who will not be able.
Whenthe master of the house is raised up, and shall have shut the door and you begin to stand without and knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us, he will answer and say to you, I do not know you, whence you are. Then you will begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets. But he will say, I tell you I do not know you whence you are. Departfrom me allyou workers ofiniquity. Weeping and gnashing of teeth willbe there, when you shall see Abraham, and Isaak, and Jacob, and

LUKE. XIII. XIV.

all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, and you yourselves
29 cast out. People indeed will come from the east and west,
30 and from the north and south, and be entertained in the kingdom of God. And behold there are last, who shall be first; and there are first, who shall be last.
31 On that same day, some Pharisees came and said to him,
Get away and depart hence; for Herod intendeth to kill thee.
32 Whereupon he said to them, Go and tell that fox, Behold I cast out demons, and perform cures to-day and to-morrow,
33 and onthe third day I am perfected. But I must continue my course to-day and to-morrow, and the day following; for it is not to be supposed that a prophet will be destroyed any where
34 but in Jerusalem. O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! thou that killest the prophets and stonest them who are sent to thee! How often would I have gathered thy children, as a hen doth her
35 brood under her wings; and ye would not. Behold your house is left for you a desolation. And verily I say to you, You shall not see me until the time come when you will say, Blessed he, who is coming in the name of the Lord!
XIV. It happened also on a sabbath day, when he went to eat at the house of one of the chiefs who were Pharisees, and they
2 were watching him, behold there was before him a man, who
3 had a dropsy; thereupon Jesus, addressing the teachers of the law, and the Pharisees, said, Is it lawful to healon the sabbath
4 day? But they were silent. Then taking the man by the hand,
5 he healed him. And having dismissed him, he continued his discourse to them, and said, Who amongst you, if his ass or
6 his ox fall into a pit, will not instantly pull it out on the sabbath day? And to this they could not make reply.
7 Then observing how eager the guests were for the first
8 places at table, he addressed them in a parable, and said,
When thou art invited by any one to a wedding, do not take the uppermost place, lest a person of greater distinction than
9 thou be invited by him. In which case he who invited thee and him will come and say to thee, Give place to this man.
10 Then thou, with confusion, must take the lower place. But when thou art invited, go and take the lowest place, that when he who invited thee cometh, he may say to thee, Friend, go up higher. Then thou wilt have honour in the sight of them

LUKE. XIV.

11 who are at table with thee. For whoever exalteth himself, shall — be humbled, and he who humbleth himself, shall be exalted.
12 Then he said to him who had invited him; When thou makest a dinner or a supper, invite not thy friends, nor thy brethren, nor thy relations, nor thy rich neighbours, lest they also invite thee in their turn, and a recompense be made thee.
13 But when thou makest an entertainment, invite the poor, the
14 maimed, the lame and the blind, and thou shalt be happy. For as they are not of ability to requite thee, a requital will be made to thee at the resurrection of the righteous.
15 Upon hearing this, one of the guests said to him, Happy
16 is he who eateth bread in the kingdom of God. Whereupon he said to him, A certain man made a great supper, and invited
17 many. But when he sent out his servants at supper
18 time, to say to them who were invited; Come, for all things are now ready; they all, from one [motive] began to make excuses. The first said to him, I have bought a field, and I must
19 go and see it. 1 pray thee make my excuse. And another said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and Iam going to try
20 them: I pray thee make my excuse. And another said, I have
21 married a wife, and therefore I cannot go. So the servant came and told his master these things. And the master of the family, being incensed, said to his servant, Go out quickly to the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor
22 and the maimed, and the lame, and the blind. And when the
23 servant said, Master, I have done as thou didst command, and still there is room; the master said to the servant, Go out to
24, the highways and hedges, and press people to come that my house may be full. For I say to you, None of the men who have been invited shall taste of my supper.
25 As great multitudes were travelling with him, he turned
26 to them and said, If any one cometh to me, and slighteth not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brothers, and sisters, nay, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple.
27 And whosoever doth not take up his cross and follow
28 me, he cannot be my disciple. Which of you, intending to build a tower, doth not first sit down and calculate the cost,
29 to know whether he hath sufficient to finish it? Lest, having
30 laid the foundation, and not being able to complete the work,

LUKE. XIV. XV.

he become the scoff of all who see it, who will say, This

31 man began to build, but was not able to finish. Or, what king

marching out to encounter another in battle, doth not first sit

down and consult, whether he with ten thousand men, is able

32 to meet him who is coming against him with twenty thousand?

And if not: doth he not, while the other is yet at a great dis-

33 tance, send an embassy, and sue for peace? In like manner,

therefore, let every one of you do. He who doth not give up

34 all his possessions, cannot be my disciple. Salt is good; but if

the salt become insipid, with what can it be recovered? It is

neither fit for the land, nor the dunghill. It is thrown away.

Whoever hath ears to hear, let him hear.

XV. As the publicans and sinners were all continually resort-

2 ing to him to hear him, when the Pharisees and the Scribes

3 murmured, saying, This man receiveth sinners and eateth

4 with them; he then spake this parable to them, saying, What

man among you having a hundred sheep, doth not, upon

losing one of them, leave the ninety nine in the wilderness and

5 goin search of that which is lost until he find it? And having

6 found it, doth he not joyfully lay it on his shoulders; and upon

coming home call together his friends and neighbours, saying

to them, Rejoice with me, because I have found the sheep

7 which was lost? Thus, I assure you, there will be greater joy

in heaven for one reforming sinner, than for ninety nine right-

8 cous persons who have no need of reformation, Or what wo-

man having ten drachmas* doth not, if she lose one of them,

light a lamp, and sweep the house, and search diligently until

9 she find it? And having found it, doth she not assemble her

female friends and neighbours, saying, Rejoice with me, be-

10 cause I have found the drachma which was lost? Thus, I as-

sure you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God for one reforming sinner,

11. He said also, A certain man had two sons. And the young-

12 er of them said to his father, Father, give me that portion of

the estate which falleth to my share. So he divided the

13 moveable estate between them, And not many days alter, the

Ἔθος Matt. 17. 27.

27

28

30

LUKE. XV.

younger son having gathered all together, took a journey to a distant country, and there wasted his substance with riotous living. And when he had spent all, there came a grievous famine over all that country, and he began to be in want. So he went and connected himself with one of the citizens of that country who sent him to his farm to feed swine, and he was fain to fill his belly with the carob pods* which the swine were eating, as nobody gave him any thing. At length, coming to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my father have bread enough and to spare, while I am perishing with hunger?
I will rise and go to my father, and say to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son : make me as one of thy hired servants.
Accordingly he arose and went to his father. But he kee ping yet at a distance, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him. Whereupon the son said to him, Father, I ΜΕ sinned against heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. But the father said to his servants, Bring out the best robe and put it on him; and put a ring on his finger and shoes on his feet.
And bring out the fatted calf and kill it. And let us eat and be joyful; because this my son was dead and is come to life. He was indeed lost and is now found. So they began to be merry.
Now his elder son was in the field. And as he was coming home and drew near the house, he heard the musick and dancing. Whereupon calling one of the servants, he enquired what might be the occasion of this. And he said to him, It is because thy brother is come: and thy father hath killed the fatted calf because he hath received him in good health. At this he was angry and would not go in. His father therefore went out and entreated him. But he answering, said to his father, Behold these many years that I have served thee without ever disobeying thy command, thou hast never given me a kid, that 1 might be merry with my friends: but soon as

*The carob tree, or bean bearing locust, grows wild in America; the pods containing the beans, are long, crooked and brown coloured; in Syria, where the tree is common, the swine feed mp them.

LUKE. XV. XVI.

this son of thine is come, who hath devoured thy substance

31 with harlots, thou hast killed for him the fatted calf. In reply

to which his father said to him, Son, thou art always with me;

$2 and all that I have is thine. But we ought to feast and rejoice

because this thy brother was dead and is come to life. He was indeed lost and is now found.

XVI. ‘Then he said to his disciples, There was a certain rich

5

6

11

12 man who had a steward. And this steward was accused of having wasted his substance. So having called him, he said to him, What is this that I hear of thee ? Give an account of thy stewardship ; for thou canst no longer be steward. ‘Thereupon the steward said within himself, What am I to do, since my lord taketh from me the stewardship; I am not able to dig: to beg Iam ashamed. I am resolved what to do, that when I am removed from the stewardship, I may be received into their houses. So having sent severally for every of his lord’s tenants, he said to the first, How much art thou to pay to my lord? And he said, A hundred baths* of oil, Thereupon he said to him, Take thy lease, and sit down quickly, and write Fifty. ‘Then he said to another, And how much art thou to pay ? And he said, a hundred corest of wheat. Whereupon he saith to him, ‘Take thy lease and write Eighty. And the master commended the unjust steward, because he had acted prudently.

Because the children of this world are more prudent for their generation, than the children of the light, are for theirs; therefore I say to you, From the worldly prudence} of this unrighteousness, make ye friends for yourselves, that when you fail, ye may be received into the everlasting abodes. He who is faithful in very little, is faithful also in much; and he who is unjust in very little, is unjust also in much. If you then were not faithful with this unjust worldly prudencet who will entrust to you the true? And if you were not faithful with that which is another’s, will any one give you that to be

* Bath, a liquid measure, supposed to contain seven and a half galions.

t Core, a dry measure supposed to contain eight and a half bushels.

i Literally μα-μωνᾶ, See Matthew 6. 24,

13

16

17

18

23

24

25

26

29

30

LUKE. XVI.

your own? No servant can serve two masters; for he will either hate one, and love the other; or he will attach himself to one, and despise the other: you cannot serve God and worldly prudence. Ss

When the Pharisees who loved money heard all these things they treated him with scorn. Whereupon he said to. them, You are they who justify yourselves before men ; but
God knoweth your hearts. Because that which is high among men, is an abomination in the sight of God, the law and the prophets were until John. From that time the kingdom of
God is proclaimed, and into it every one is pressing. But sooner shall the heaven and the earth perish, than one tittle of the law fail. Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery. And whoever marrieth her who hath been divorced committeth adultery.

There was a certain rich man who was clad with purple and cotton robes, and who feasted daily in a splendid manner. And there was a certain poor man, named Lazarus, who was laid at his gate, full of sores, desirous indeed to be fed with the crumbs which fell from his table: and moreover the dogs came and licked his sores. At length this poor man died, and was carried by angels to Abraham’s bosom. And the rich man died also, and was buried. And in the mansion of the dead having lifted up his eyes, being in torment, he seeth Abraham far off and Lazarus in his bosom. Whereupon he cried and said, Father, Abraham, have pity on me and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue; for I am tormented im this flame. And Abraham said, Son, remember that thou receivedst thy good things in thy life time; and Lazarus in like manner, his evil things.
But now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. But besides all this, there is betwixt us and you, a huge gulf fixed ; so that they, who would go hence to you, cannot. Neither can they. who are there, cross over to us. Then he said, 1 intreat thee therefore, Father, to send him to my father’s house; for I have five brothers, that he may testify to them, that they also may not come to this place of torment. To this Abraham replied, They have Moses and the prophets ; let them hearken to them. Whereupon he said, Nay, father Abraham, but if

91

-LUKE. XVI. XVII.

one go to them from the dead, they will reform. And Abraham said to him, If they will not hearken to Moses, and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one should rise from the dead.

XVII. Then he said to his disciples, It is not to be supposed

2 ios)

that offences will not come; but alas for him, by whom they come. It would be better for him to have a millstone hanged about his neck and to be thrown into the sea, than to cause one of these little ones to stumble. ‘Take heed to yourselves.
And if thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him: and if he repent, forgive him. And if he trespass against thee seven times a day, and seven times a day return to thee, saying, I repent; thou shalt forgive him.

Upon this the disciples said to the Lord, Increase our faith. Whereupon the Lord said to them, If you had faith like a grain of mustard seed, you might say to that sycamine tree,
Be thou rooted up and planted in the sea. And it would obey you.

Now would any of you, having a servant ploughing, or feeding cattle, say to him immediately on his coming from the field, Come in and sit down to table : would he not rather say to him, Get ready my supper, and gird thyself and wait upon me, until I have done eating and drinking; and afterwards thou mayst eat and drink ? Doth he think himself obliged to that servant for obeying his orders ? I think not. So when you have done all-that you are commanded to do, say, We are servants who have conferred no favour; for we have only done what we were bound to do.

Now as he was going to Jerusalem, he passed along the confines of Samaria and Galilee. And as he was entering a certain village, he was met by ten lepers, who stood at a distance and cried with a loud voice, saying, Jesus, master, have pity onus. And upon seeing them, he said to them, Go and show yourselves to the priests. And it came to pass that as they were going they were cleansed. Whereupon one of them perceiving that he was healed, returned glorifying God with a loud voice; and prostrating himself at the feet of Jesus, gave him thanks. Now he was a Samaritan. Upon this, Jesus addressing him, said, Were not the ten cleansed? Where then are the nine? Have none returned to give glory to God, but

19

LUKE, XVI. XVII.

only this alien? Then he said to him, Rise and go thy way.
Thy faith hath cured thee.

Being asked by the Pharisees when the reign of God would commence, he answered and said to them, The reign of God doth not commence with parade; nor shall they say, Lo, here! or Lo, there! For behold the reign of God is within you.
Then he said to his disciples, The days will come, when you will earnestly desire to see one of the days of the son of man, and will not see it. When they say to you, Lo, here! or Lo, yonder! Go not out, nor follow them. For as the lightning flasheth from one part of the sky to another, so will the son of man be in his day. But he must first suffer many things and be rejected by this generation. And as it was in the days of Noe, so will it be in the days of the son of man. They ate; they drank; they married, and were given in marriage, until the day that Noe entered the ark; and the flood came and destroyed them all. Just so it was also in the days of Lot. They ate; they drank; they bought; they sold; they planted; they built: but on the day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from heaven and destroyed them all. Even so will it be on the day when the son of man will be revealed.
On that day, whoever shall be on the house top, and his goods in the house, let him not come down to carry them away. And in like manner let not him who shall be in the field turn back to what is behind him. Remember Lot’s wife. One, though he may seek to save his life, shall lose it. And another, though

 he may expose his life, shall save it. On that night, I assure

you, there will be two on one couch, the one will be taken and the other left. Two women will be grinding together; the one will be taken and the other left. Two men will be in the field, the one will be taken and the other left. ‘Then some addressing him, said, Where, Master! And he said to them, Wherever the carcass is, there will the eagles assemble.

XVIII. ‘Then he addressed them with a parable, to shew them

2

9

that they ought to persevere in prayer, and not be discouraged; saying, There was in a certain city a judge, who neither feared God, nor regarded man. And there was in that city a widow, who.went to him, saying, Do me justice on mineadversary. And fora while he would not. But afterwards he said within

LUKE. XVII.

5 himself, Though I neither fear God, nor regard man, yet be-

8

12 cause this widow giveth me trouble, I will do her justice, that she may not, by coming perpetually, torment me. And the
Lord said, Hear what this unjust judge saith! And will not
God vindicate the cause of his chosen, who are crying to him day and night? Will he linger in their cause? He will, I assure you, vindicate their cause speedily. But will the son of man, when he cometh, find this belief in this land?

Then with a view to some who had a confidence in themselves that they were righteous, and who despised others, he spake this parable, two men went up to the temple to pray; the one, a Pharisee; and the other, a publican. The Pharisee, standing by himself, prayed thus, O God, I thank thee that I

-amnot as the rest of men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers; nor

even as that publican. I fast twice a week. I pay tithes of all that I possess. But the publican, who stood at a distance, did not presume so much as to lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying; God, be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this man went_ down to‘his house acquitted,

' and not the other. For whosoever exalteth himself shall be

23 humbled, but he who humbieth himself shall be exalted.

When they brought even little children to him that he might touch them, and his disciples observing it, rebuked them;
Jesus thereupon having called the children to him, said, Suffer the children to come to me, and do not hinder them, for of such is the kingdom of God. Verily Isay to you, Whosoever will not as a child receive the kingdom of God, he shall in no wise enter it.

When a certain chief asked him, saying, Good teacher,
What shall I do that I may obtain everlasting life? Jesus said to him, Why callest thou me good? None is good but God alone. Thou knowest the commandments—thou shalt not commit adultery—thou shalt not commit murder—thou shalt not steal—thou shalt not bear false witness—honour thy father and thy mother. And he said, all these I have kept from my youth. Upon hearing this, Jesus said to him, There is still one thing wanting to thee. Sell all that thou hast and distribute to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven.
Then come and follow me, At hearing this he was verv sor

24.

25

26

LUKE. XVIII. XIX.

rowful; for he was very rich. When Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful, he said, With what difficulty will men who have these things, enter into the kingdom of God! for it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God. And when they who

27 heard this said, Who then can be saved ? He said, Things,

28

29

30

31

32

37

43 which are impossible to men, are possible to God. Then

‘Peter said, Behold we have forsaken all and followed thee.

Whereupon Jesus said to them, Verily I say to you, There is none who hath left house or parents, or brothers, or wife, or children for the sake of the kingdom of God, who shall not receive manifold more in return in this present time, and in the age to come everlasting life.

Then having taken the twelve aside he said to them, Behold weare going up to Jerusalem, and all that the prophets have written concerning the son of man, will be accomplished. For he will be delivered up to the Gentiles, and will be mocked

and insulted, and spit upon. And when they have scourged

him, they will put him to death. And on the third day he will rise again. But they understood nothing of these things.
This matter indeed was hid from them, so that they did not comprehend the meaning of what was spoken.

And when he drew near to Jericho there happened to be a blind man sitting by the way side, begging, who having heard the crowd passing through it, inquired what might have been the matter. And when they told him, That Jesus the Nazarene is passing by, le cried, saying, Jesus, son of David, have pity on me. Upon this they who went before checked him that he might hold his peace; but he cried still the louder,
Son of David, have pity on me. Whereupon Jesus stopped and ordered the man to be brought to him. And when he came near, Jesus asked him, saying, What dost thou desire me to do for thee? And he said, O master! that I may have sight.
Then Jesus said to him, Have sight. Thy faith hath cured thee. And. instantly he received his sight, and followed him, praising God. And all the people, when they saw this, gave praise to God.

XIX. When Jesus had entered and was passing through Je-

2 richo, behold a man named Zaccheus who was chief publican

3

10 il

14

15

17

19

LUKE. XIX.

and a wealthy man sought to see Jesus, what sort of a person he was, but could not by reason of the crowd; for he was of a low stature. So running before, he climbed a sycamine tree that he might see him, for he*was to pass that way. And when
Jesus came to the place, he looked up, and saw him, and said to him, Zaccheus, make haste down, for I must stop to-day at thy house. Accordingly he hasted and came down, and received him joyfully. When the multitude saw this they murmured, saying, He is gone to be entertained by a sinner,
Whereupon Zaccheus, standing up, said to the Lord, Behold,
Sir, the half of my goods I give to the poor. And if I have wronged any man, I make him fourfold restitution: and Jesus said concerning him, To-day salvation is come to this house, as this man is indeed a son of Abraham; for the son of man came to seek and save what was lost. And as this engaged their attention, he continued his discourse and spake a parable. Because he was near Jerusalem and they thought that the reign of God would commence immediately ; therefore he said, A certain person of noble birth was going to a distant country, to receive for himself regal power, and return.
So having called ten servants of his, he delivered to them ten pounds weight of money, and said to them, Trade with this till I return. Now his citizens hated him, and sent an embassy after him, saying, We do not wish this man to reign over us, And when he had obtained the regal government and was come back, he ordered those servants, to whom he had given the money, to be called to him, that he might know what each had gained. And the first came and said, My lord, that pound of thine, hath gained ten pounds. Whereupon he said to him, Well done, good servant! because thou hast been faithful in a very small trust, be thou the governor of ten cities, Then the second came and said, My lord, that pound of thine hath gained five pounds, Whereupon he said to him, Be thou also governor of five cities, Then another came and said, My lord, here is that pound of thine, which
I have kept laid up in a napkin. For I was afraid of thee, because thou art an austere man, Thou takest up what thou laidst not down, and reapest what thou didst not sow. Whereupon he saith to him, Out of thine own mouth I will condemn

LUKE, XIX.

thee, thou malignant slave. Thou knewest that I am an austere man, taking up what I laid not down, and reaping what I did not sow! Why then didst'thou not put my money in -the bank, that at my return I might have received it with interest?
Then he said to his attendants, Take the pound from him, and give it to him who hath the ten pounds, (and upon their saying to him, My lord he hath ten pounds) for I tell you, said
ὯΝ that to every one who improveth more shall be given; but from him who improveth not, even what he hath shall be

taken away. And as for those enemies of mine who would not

have me to reign over them, bring them here and slay them in my presence.

Having spoken this, he proceeded on in his journey up to
Jerusalem. And when he was come nigh to Bethphage and

Bethany, to the mountain called The mount of olives, he sent

two of his disciples, saying, Go to yonder village, in which, as you enter, you will find a colt tied, on which no man ever rode.

Untie it, and bring it hither. And ifany one ask you why you untie it, answer him thus, Because the Lord hath occasion of it. Accordingly they who were despatched went and found it as he had told them. And as they were untying the colt, the owners of it said to them, Why do ye untie the colt? And they said, ‘The Lord hath occasion of it. So they brought it to Jesus. And having thrown their mantles on the colt, they set
Jesus thereon. Andas he went along, the people spread their mantles on the way. And as he was drawing near, just at the descent of the mount of olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to express their joy in loud acclamations, praising God for all the miracles which they had seen, saying, Blessed be the king who is coming in the name of the
Lord! Peace in heayen and glory in the highest! Upon this, some of the Pharisees who were in the crowd, said to hii,
Teacher, rebuke these disciples of thine. In reply to which, he said to them, I tell you, If these keep silence, those stones would exclaim. And as he drew near he viewed the city and

2 wept over it, saying, O that thou hadst known—even thou—

even in this very day of thine, the things which were for thy peace! But now they are hidden from thine eyes. For days will come upon thee, when thine enemies will surround thee

LUKE. XIX. XX.

44 with a rampire; and enclose thee; and shut thee up on every

45

46

47

48 side; and dash thee to the ground, and thy children within thee; and not leave one stone on another; because thou didst not know the time of this thy visitation.

‘Then he went into the temple and began driving out thence them who were selling and buying in it, saying to them, It is written, ‘‘ My house is a house of prayer :” but you have made it a den of robbers.

Now while he was daily in the temple teaching, the chief priests, and the Scribes, and the chiefs of the people were contriving his destruction; but could not find the means of eftect-

XX. ingit. For all the people were bent upon hearing him. So

2

3 on one of those days when he was teaching the people m_ the temple, and proclaiming the glad tidings, the chief priests, and the Scribes, and the elders, came up to him and accosted him,

‘saying, Tell us, by what authority thou dost these things?

Or who hath given thee this authority? In answer to which, he said to them, Let me also ask you one quéstion, and do you tell me. Was the baptism of John from heaven, or of men? Upon this they reasoned among themselves, saying, If we say from heaven, he will say, Why then did you not believe him? And if we say, Of men; all the people will stone us; for they are all firmly persuaded that John was a prophet.
So they answered that they did not know whence it was.
Whereupon Jesus said to them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things. Then he addressed to the people this parable. A certain man planted a vineyard and let it to husbandmen, and went abroad for many seasons. And at one season he sent a servant to the husbandmen that they might give him some of the product of the vineyard. But the husbandmen beat him and sent him away empty. Again he sent another servant; and him also they beat, and abused shamefully, and sent away empty. Again he sent a third, and this one they wounded and cast out. Then the owner of the vineyard said, What shall I do? I will send my son, the Beloved. Perhaps they will reverence him, when they sce him.

: But when the husbandmen saw him, they reasoned among

themselves, saying, This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, that the inheritance may be our own. So having cast him out

LUKE. XX.

of the vineyard they slew him. What then will the owner of .—
16 the-vineyard do to them? He will come and destroy those
17 husbandmen and give the vineyard to others.. Upon hearing this, they said, God forbid. But he looking earnestly at them, said, What then is the meaning of this passage of scripture,
18 The stone which the builders rejected was the very one for the head of the corner!* Whosoever falleth on this stone will be bruised; but on whomsoever it shall fall; it will grind him to powder. : Ἶ
1. Upon this the chief priests and the Scribes sought to lay hands on him that very hour, (but they were afraid of the people,) for they knew that he had spoken this parable with a view
20 to them. Therefore, having watched him diligently, they sent to him spies who should feign themselves to be righteous men, that they might lay hold of some word of his, in order to deliver him up to the jurisdiction and authority of the governor.
So they asked him, saying, Teacher, we know that thou speakest and teachest uprightly, and that thou art not a respecter of persons, but teachest the way of God with truth. Is it lawful for us to pay tribute to Cesar, or is it not? But he, knowing their craftiness, said to them, Why are you trying me? Shew me a deniar. Whose image and inscription hath it? When they in reply, said, Czesar’s; then he said to them, Render then to
Czesar the things which are Cesar’s; and to God, the things
26 which are God’s. So they were not able to take advantage of his decision before the people. Therefore, having expressed admiration at his answer, they held their peace.
27 Then some of the Sadducees, who deny a future state,
28 came and asked him, saying, ‘Teacher, Moses hath written for us, Ifa man’s brother, having a wife, die; when he dieth childless, his brother must take his wife and raise up a seed for his
29 brother.t Now there were seven brothers. And the first, haying
30 taken a wife, died childless. Then the second took the
31 wife, and he died childless: then the third took her, and so all
32 the seven, and died without issue. And last of all the woman
33 also died. In the future state, therefore, whose wife of

rt bo bd to
Ke ON

* Psalm 118.22. + Deut. 25. 5:

) 37

17

LUKE. XX. XXI.

them is she, as she hath been married to all the seven? In reply to this, Jesus said to them, The children of this world marry and are given in marriage; but they who shall be accounted worthy to obtain that state, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage, For they can die no more. For angel-like they are indeed children of God, being children of the resurrection. Now that the dead are raised up, even Moses hath plainly shewn; as at the bush he stileth the Lord, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaak, and the God of Jacob.* For he is not the God of the dead, but of the living. For to him they are all alive. Upon this, some of the scribes addressing him, said, Teacher, thou hast spoken well. And after that they did not presume to ask him another question,

Then he said to him, How do they say that the Christ is the son of David, when David himself saith in the book of
Psalms, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool.+ David therefore calleth him Lord, how then is he his son?

Then in the hearing of all the people he said to his disciples, Beware of the Scribes, who are fond of walking in robes, and love salutations in places of public resort, and the first seats in the synagogues, and the uppermost places at entertainments; who devour the families of widows, and for a disguise make long prayers. They shall receive a severer sentence of judgment.

XXI. And when he looked up and beheld the rich casting

5 their gifts into the treasury, and saw also a certain poor widow throwing into it two mites, he said, Verily I say to you, That poor widow hath thrown in more than they all: for all those cast in, for their homage gifts to God, part only of their superfluous stores; but she hath thrown in all the little she had for her subsistence.

Again as some were speaking of the temple, how it was

6 adorned with beautiful stones and dedications, he said, With

regard to all those things on which you are gazing, days will ste,

* Exod. 3. 6. + Ps. 110. 1, &c.

25 re a rt a rp

LUKE. XXII.

come in which there will not be one’ stone left on another, which shall not be thrown down. And when they asked him, saying, ‘Teacher, When will this happen? And what will be the sign, when these things are about to be accomplished, he said, ‘Take heed that ye be not led astray. For many will come in my name, saying, lam he: and the time ts at hand; therefore go not after them. And when you hear of wars and insurrections, be not terrified; for these things must first happen; but the end will not follow immediately. Then he said to them, nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. And there will be great earthquakes in divers places; and famines, and pestilences. And there will be awful sights and great signs from heaven. But before all these events they will lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to synagogues and prisons, to be led before kings and governors on account of my name. But this will give scope for your testimony. herefore settle it in your minds not to premeditate what defence you shall make. For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to contradict or withstand. You will indeed be delivered up by parents, and brothers, and kinsmen, and friends.
And some of you will be put to death. And on the account of my name you will be hated by all. But not a hair of your head shall be lost. By your perseverance preserve your lives; * and when you see Jerusalem encompassed by armies, then know that its desolation is near. Then let them who are in
Judea flee to the mountains, and let them who are in the midst of this [city] withdraw; and let not them who are in the regions enter it. Because these are days of vengeance that all which are written may be accomplished; alas therefore for the women with child and for them who give suck in those days; for there will be great distress in this land and wrath on this people. They shall fall by the edge of the sword, and be led captives to all nations: and Jerusalem shall be trampled down by nations until the times of nations shall be fulfilled. There will indeed be signs in sun and moon and stars, and on the

*See Matt. 10. 22. 24. 13.

LUKE. XXI. XXII.

26 earth, anguish of desponding nations, while the sea is roaring

and the billows thereof; and men are fainting with fear and apprehension of the things which are coming on the world.
For the powers of heaven will be shaken, and they shall then see the son of man coming in a cloud, with power and great glory. Now when these things begin to come to pass, look up and lift up your heads, for your deliverance is drawing near. ‘Then he said to them by way of parable, View that fig tree and all the trees. When they now begin to shoot forth; upon seeing them you know of yourselves that the summer is now near; so when you see these things coming to pass, know also that the reign of God is at hand. Verily I say to you, this generation shall not pass till they are all accomplished. The heaven and the earth will pass away, but my words shall not pass away. Take heed therefore to yourselves that your hearts be not overloaded with excess of meat, or drink, or worldly cares, and that day come upon you unawares. For. it will come as a net upon all who are settled on the face of the whole land.
Watch therefore, on every occasion, praying that you may be accounted worthy to escape all these things which will soon come to pass; and to stand before the son of man.

Now he spent the days teaching in the temple, and at night he went out and lodged on the mountain, called the mount of olives, and early in the morning, all the people resort-

XXII. ed to him in the temple to-hear him. But when the fes-

& OO bd

“1

tival of unleavened bread, which is called the Passover, drew near, while the chief priests and the Scribes were contriving how they might kill him, (for they were afraid of the people)
Satan entered into Judas, surnamed Iscariot, who was one of the twelve; and he went and conferred with the chief priests, and the chief officers of the temple guard, how he might deliver him up to them. And they were glad and covenanted with him to give him money. So he agreed, and sought an opportunity to deliver him up without tumult.

Now when the day of unleavened bread was come, on which the paschal lamb was to be killed, Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare the paschal lamb for us, that we may eat it. Upon which they said to him, Where dost thou wish us to prepare it? And he said to them, Behold

22

23 bo bo

LUKE. XXII.

as you enter the city you will meet a man carrying a pitcher

of water. Follow him to the house where he goeth in, and say to the master of that house, The teacher saith to thee,
Where is the guest chamber in which I may eat the passover with my disciples? And he will shew you a large upper room, furnished. There make ready. So they went and found as he told them, and made ready the passover. And when the hour was come, he placed himself at table with the twelve apostles, and said tothem, Much have I longed to eat this passover with you before I suffer. For I say to you, I will not eat of it any more, until it be accomplished in the reign of God.
Then having taken a cup, he gave thanks and said, Take this and share it among yourselves. For I say to you, I will not drink of the product of the vine until the reign of God come.
Then having taken a loaf, he gave thanks, and brake and gave to them, saying, This is my body, which is given for you. Do this for a remembrance of me. And in like manner also the cup after supper, saying, This cup is the new covenant by my blood, which is shed for you. But lo! the hand of him who delivereth me up, is with me on the table! The son of man goeth indeed as it hath been determined. But alas for that man by whom he is delivered up. ‘Thereupon they began to inquire among themselves, which of them it could be who would do this.

Now there had been a contest among them in respect to this, which of them should be the greatest-—-Therefore he said to them, The kings of the nations exercise. dominion over them. And they who tyrannise over them are stiled benefactors. But with you it must not be so. But let the elder among you be as the younger; and the leader as he who waiteth at table. For which is greater—he who is at table; or he who waiteth ? Is not he, who is at table ? But Iam among you as he who waiteth. Now you are they, who have continued steadily with me in my trials. Therefore I covenant with you as my Father covenanted with me for a kingdom, that you may eatand drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

Then the Lord said to Simon, Simon! behold Satan hath earnestly requested to have you in his power, that he may sift

32

33

94

35

45

46

47

LUKE. ΧΧΙΙ.

you as wheat: and I have prayed for thee that thy faith may not quite fail. When thou therefore hast recovered thyself, strengthen thou thy brethren. Upon this Peter said to him,
Master, Iam ready to go with thee to prison and to death. —
Whereupon he said, I tell thee, Peter, a cock will not crow this day before thou wilt thrice deny that thou knowest me.

Then he said to them, When I sent you without purse and scrip and sandals, did you want any thing? And when they said
No; then he said to them, But now let him who hath a purse take it, and likewise a scrip. And let him who hath not a sword sell his mantle and buy one. For I say to you, This portion of scripture ‘‘ And he was ranked with malefactors,*” must yet be accomplished i in me. For the things concerning me are coming to a close.

Then they said, Master, here are” two siesta And he said, It is enough.

Then he went out and retired as usual to the mount. of olives; and his disciples followed him. And when he came to the place, he said to them, Pray, that you may not come to trial.
Then having withdrawn about a stone’s throw from them, he kneeled down and prayed, saying, O Father, if thou wilt remove

this cup from me+—but not my will, but thine be done. Then

an angel from heaven appeared to him, strengthening him.
And being in an agony, he prayed daa earnestly. And his sweat was like great drops of blood falling on the ground. Then he arose from prayer, and went to his disciples, and found them asleep, oppressed with grief. And he said to them,

What! Are you asleep! Rise and pray that you may not come

to trial. And while he was yet speaking, Lo! a crowd! And he who is called Judas, one of the twelve, came on before them and went up to Jesus to kiss him, Whereupon Jesus said to him, Judas, dost thou deliver up the son of man with a kiss?
‘Then they who were about him seeing what would happen, said to him, Master, shall we smite with the sword? And one of them smote the servant of the high pr riest, and cut off his

*Es. 53. 12. fOr more literally, O Father, is it thy will to remove this cup from me.

5)
52

53

5A

57

58. another seeing him, said, Thou also art one of them. Where-

59

60

LUKE. XXII.

right ear. Thereupon Jesus interposing, said, Permit thus long; and having touched his ear, healed him. Then Jesus said to the chief priests, and the officers of the temple guard, and. the elders who were come against him, Are you come out as against a robber with aires and clubs? When I was daily with you in the temple, you did not stretch forth your hands against me. But this is your hour, and the power of darkness.

_ Then they who had seized him led him away. And when they were bringing him to the house of the chief priest, Peter followed at a Ce Ean And as they had kindled a fire in the middle of the court, and were sitting around it, Peter sat down in the midst of them. And a maid servant having seen him sitting opposite to the light, and viewed him attentively, said,
That man was also with him. Upon which Peter denied him, saying, Woman, I do not know him. And a little while after,

upon Peter said, Man, I am not. And about the space of an hour after, another confidently affirmed, saying, This man was certainly with him; for he is a Galilean. Thereupon Peter said,

Man, I do not know what thou sayest. And. instantly, while

61

62 he was yet speaking; the cock crowed. Upon which the Lord,

turning about, looked upon Peter. And Peter recollected the

word nf the Lord, how he said to him, Before cock-crowing thou wilt three times deny me. And Peter went out and wept bitterly.

Now the men, who had Jesus in custody, insulted him while they smote him. Having covered his eyes they struck him on the face, and asked firs, saying, Prophesy. Who is he who

‘smote thee? And_ uttered many other invectives against him.

And soon as_it.was’ day, the ‘national senate, with the chief priests, and the Scribes, convened. And having caused him to be brought up before their Sanhedrim, they said, Art thou the Christ? Tell us. Whereupon he said to them, If I tell you, you will not believe me. And if I ask you a question, you . will not answer me, nor dismiss me. From this-time the son of man will be seated on the right hand of the power of God.
Thereupon they all said, Thou then art the son of God? And he said to them, It is as you say. Then they said, What farther

LUKE. XXII. XX.

need have we of testimony? For we ourselves have heard
- from his own mouth.

XXIII. * Then the whole assembly arose and led him away to

10

11

Pilate, and began to accuse him, saying, We found this man perverting the nation, and forbidding to pay tribute to Cesar, saying that he himself is Christ, aking. Thereupon Pilate asked him, saying, Thou art the king of the Jews? And he, in re- — ply, said to him, It is as thou sayest. Then Pilate said to {πε΄ chief priests, and the people, I find nothing criminal in this man. But they were the more vehement, saying, He raiseth sedition among the people, teaching through all Judea, from
Galilee, where he began, even to this place. When Pilate heard them mention Galilee, he asked, Is the mana Galilean?
And finding that he was of Herod’s. jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was also at Jerusalem in those days, And when
Herod saw Jesus he was very glad; for he had long desired to see him. Because he had heard much of him, therefore he hoped to see some miracle done by him, and questioned him about many things. But Jesus made him no answer. So when the chief priests, and the Scribes had stood up, urging their — accusations against him with much vehemence; and Herod. with his soldiers had treated him with contempt'and mockery,

having arrayed him with a splendid robe, he sent him back to
Pilate. And on that day Pilate and Herod became friends; for

- they had been before at enmity one with the other.

Then’ Pilate, having called together the chief priests and

‘the rulers of the péople, said to thern, You have brought this
‘man to me as one who perverteth the people. And behold, on

; examining him before you, I have found nothing criminal in

this man, touching those things which you lay to his charge.

᾿ Neither indeed hath Herod : for I referred you to him. Wow

as it appears that nothing deserving death hath been done by him: shall I therefore, when I fidve- chastised him, let him go?
Now he was under a necessity of releasing one to ἡ at every festival, so they with one consent cried out, saying,
Away with this man and release to us Barabbas. This was a person who on account of an insurrection in the city, and for murder, had been committed to prison. Pilate therefore addressed them again, being desirous to release Jesus. But they

25

LUKE. XXIII.

exclaimed, saying, Crucify him; Crucify him. But he said to them a third time, Why, what evil hath he done? I have found

nothing in him deserving death. I will therefore chastise him and let him go. But they with loud clamours persisted in their demands that he should be crucified. So the clamours of them and of the chief priests prevailed, and Pilate pronounced sentence that what they requested should be done, and released to them the man who for sedition and murder had been thrown into

_ prison, whom they demanded, and gave up Jesus to their

26

27

2u

will.

And as they were leading him away, they laid hold on one
Simon, a Cyrenian, who was coming from the country, and laid the cross on him, that he might carry it after Jesus. And a great miultitude of the people followed him, among whom were many women, who beat their breasts, and bewailed him.
Whereupon, Jesus turning to them, said, Daughters of Jeru-

‘salem, weep not for me; but weep for yourselves and for your

children; for lo! days are coming in which they will say, Happy

- the barren, and the wombs which never bare, and the breasts

which never-gave suck.’ Then will they begin to say to the mountains, Fall upon us: and to the hills, Cover us. Por if such things i done ὙΠ green ec how must it be ti dry! ee , !

Now there were two other’ per sons, who. were malefactors, — led along with him ‘to be crucified. ‘And when they came to the place called Calvary, they there crucified him and the two malefactors, one on his right hand’ and the other on his left.
Whereupon Jesus said, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they are doing. Then dividing his garments in shares they cast lots. And the people stood looking on;_ and ‘both - they and the rulers mocked him, saying, He saved others; let: him save himself, if he be the Christ, the chosen of God.
And the soldiers also, coming and offering him’ vinegar, insulted him, saying, If thou art the king of the Jews, save thyself, For over him there was an inscription, Written in Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew. Tuis 1s rHE KING OF THE Jews.
Even one of the malefactors who were on crosses, reviled him, saying, If thou art the Christ, save thyself and us.. Upon which the other, in reply, rebuked him, saying, Hast thou no

1

50

LUKE. XXIII. XXIV.

fear of God even when thou art suffering the same punishment?
We indeed justly; for we are receiving the due reward of our crimes, But this man hath done nothing amiss. Then he said to Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou comest to thy kingdom. Whereupon Jesus said to him, Verily I say to thee, Today thou shalt be with me in paradise.

It was now about the sixth hour,* and there came darkness over the whole land until the ninth, when the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent down the middle; and
Jesus crying with a loud voice, said; Father, into thy hands I commit my spirit. And having said this he expired.

Now when the centurion saw what had happened, he glorified God, saying, Certainly this was a righteous man. And all the multitudes who had crowded to the spectacle, seeing what had happened, beat their breasts and returned home.

Now all his male. acquaintance had stood at a distance, while the women, who had accompanied him from Galilee, were viewing these things. And lo! a man named Joseph, who was a senator, a good and righteous man, and who had not concurred with the rest in their counsel and proceedings—he was of Arimathea, a city of the Jews, and was one who was

52 expecting the reign of God. This man went to Pilate and beg-

53

56.

ged the body of Jesus; and having taken it down, he wrapped it ina sindon, and laid it in a sepulchre which was hewn out of a.rock, and in which nobody, had ever been laid.

As it was now preparation time,t and the sabbatht was clearing up; When the women who had come with Jesus from
Galilee, had followed him down and seen the sepulchre, and how. the body was laid, they returned and provided spices and ointments of myrrh, and had rested the sabbath, according to

XXIV. the commandment, And on the first day of the week, they
_ went very early in the morning to the: sepulchre, carrying the

spices which they had Dipanicd And ict were some others with

* Our twelve. o’clock; the Oh our three in the afternoon.
+ From three to six, P. M. on Friday. 1 The sabbath was from six o’clock, or sunset, on Friday, to six o’clock, or sunset, on

"Saturday. ὁ That is, as I apprehend, the darkness was removed,

and the sun, before setting, shone out.

LUKE. XXIV.

them. And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre, but on going in did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
And while they were in perplexity on this account, lo! two men stood by them in glistening robes; at which they being terrified, and inclining their face to the ground, the men said to them, Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not

here; but is risen. Remember how he spake to you, while he

was yet in Galilee, saying, The son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and on the third day rise again. Then they remembered his words, and having returned from the sepulchre, they told all these things to the eleven, and to all the rest.

Now it was Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, and the rest with them, who told these things to the apostles. But their words appeared to them like an idle tale, and they did not believe them. Peter indeed, starting up, ran to the sepulchre, and having stooped down, saw nothing but the linens lying there. Upon which he went away home, musing with astonishment on what had happened. And behold, on that same day, two of them were travelling to a village called Emmaus, which was sixty furlongs from Jerusalem; and they conversed with each other on all these occurrences. And while they were conversing and reasoning together, Jesus himself drew near and travelled along with them. But their eyes were withheld from knowing him. And he said to them, What matters are these about which you are conferring with one another on the road, and.are sad? Thereupon one of them, whose

name was Cleopas, answering, said to him, Art thou such ἃ.

stranger in Jerusalem as not +6 know the things which have happened there in these days? And he said, ‘What ‘things? ~
They answered. him, Those respecting Jesus, the Nazarene, who was agreat prophet, mighty in miracles and doctrine before .
God and all the people—how our chief priests and our rulers delivered ‘hini-up to’ be condemned to death, and they have crucified him. Now-we were hoping that he is the person who would soon deliver Israel. But indeed with all this, it-is now” the third day since these things hear ΤΣ again some. women of our company e been at the sepulchre very early in’ thes morning, and not Baihbee his body,

24

25

LUKE. XXIV.

they came and told us that they had seen a vision of angels,

who say that he is alive. Whereupon some of the men who

were with us went to the sepulchre, and found matters just as the women said: but him they did not see. Then he said to them, O thoughtless, and slow of heart to believe all that

26 the prophets have spoken! Was it not necessary that the

27

Christ should suffer these things and enter into his glory?
Then beginning with Moses, and proceeding through all the prophets, he explained to them, by all those writings, the things concerning himself. And when they drew near to the village to which they were going, he seemed as intending to go farther. But they pressed him, saying, Stay with us; for it is towards evening. The day is far spent. So he went in to stay with them. And when he was at table with them, he took the loaf, and blessed, and brake, and distributed to them. Whereupon their eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he disap-

$2 peared from them. Then they said to one another, Did not our

hearts burn within us while he talked with us on the road, and while he expounded the scriptures to us? Then rising up immediately, they returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven and those with them in a throng, affirming that the Lord is indeed. risen and hath appeared to Simon. And they told the occurrences on the road, and how he became known to them. by his breaking the loaf. And while they were thus speaking, Je-

‘sus himself stood in the midst of them; and saith to them,

Peace be to you. At which they were affrighted, and, being in terror, thought they saw a spirit; he said to them, Why are you alarmed? And why do groundless surmises arise in your hearts? View my hands and my feet; that it is I myself; handle me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as you sce me have. While saying this, he shewed them his hands and his feet, And as they were still difident on account of their joy, and in.amaze, he said to them, Have you any food here?
Thereupon they gave him a piece. of broiled fish and part of a honey comb, which he took.and ate before them.

Then he said to them, This is what I told you while I was yet with you, That all the things written concerning me in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the Psalms, must needs be accomplished. Then he opened their minds that they

LUKE. XXIV.

might understand the scriptures, and he said to them, zh hus” it is written, and thus it behoved the Christ to suffer and rise from the dead on the third day; and that for his name reformation and remission of sins should be proclaimed to all the na. — tions, beginning at Jerusalem. Now you are witnesses of these things. And behold I will send upon you what my father pro- — mised, And as for you, reside ye in the city of Jerusalem un- — til you are indued with power from on high,

After that he led them out to Bethany, and having lifted ὁ up his hands, he blessed them; and while he was blessing them, he was parted from them and carried up into heaven; and they, having worshipped him, returned to Jerusalem with — great joy, and were continually in the temple, praismg and blessing God. Amen.

THE GOSPEL
ACCORDING TO

JOHN.

IN the beginning wasthe /Yord; and the Word was

2 with God ; and the Word was God. He was in the beginning

3 with God. By him all things were made, and without him

4 there was not made one single thing. What was in him was
5 life, and this life was the light of men, and this light shineth

6 in the darkness, and the darkness did not reach it.*
There was a man sent from God: his name was John. This

7 mancame as a witnessto bear witness concerning this light, that

13

14 by meansof himall might believe. He was not the light, but was to bear witness concerning the light. The light (the true light which enlighteneth every man) coming into the world was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world

1 knew him not. He came to his own peculiar territories, and

his own peculiar people did not receive him. But to as many as received him he granted the privilege of becoming children of God, even to them who believe in his name, who were born, not of bloods, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

Now the /VYord became incarnate,} and dwelt as in a tent among us, and we beheld his glory—a glory as of an only be-

* Or overtake.—See chapter 12. 35. t Literally fresh.

49

16

17

18

21

22

23

32

33

JOHN. I.

gotten from the father. He was full of grace and truth. Of him John testifieth when he cried, saying, “This is he of whom ~
I said, He who is coming after me is preferred before me, for he was before me.’’ And of his fulness we have all received even grace for grace.* Because the law was eet by Moses grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

No one hath ever seen God. This only begotten son, who is in the bosom of the father, even he hath made him known.
Now this is the testimony of John: when the Jews of Jerusalem sent priests and Levites to ask him, Who art thou? He frankly declared and did not deny, but frankly declared, I am not the Christ. Then they asked him, What then? Art thou
Elias? And he said, I am not: art thou the prophet ?+ And he answered, No. Then they said to him, Who art thou ?
That we may give an answer to them who sent us: What sayest thou of thyself? He said, I am “" The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord,” as the prophet Esaias said.t Now they who were sent were of the Pharisees. Then they asked him and said to him, Why then dost thou baptize, if thou art not the Christ, nor Elias, nor the prophet ? John answered them saying, I baptize in water; but there is one in the midst of you, whom you know not. He is the person who is coming after me—who is preferred to me, the latchet of whose sandal I am not worthy to untie. These things passed at Bethabara on the bank of aie
Jordan, where John was baptizing.

The next day John seeth Jesus coming towards him, and saith, Behold the lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world! this is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man who hath been before me; for he existed before me. As for me, I did not know him; but to the end that he might be made manifest to Israel—for this purpose I came baptizing in water. Moreover John testified saying, I beheld the Spirit descending like a dove from heaven, and it remained upon him. Now for my part I did not know him; but he who sent

* Or one favour instead of another, viz. the gospel instead of the law. + Deut. 18. 15, t+ Es. 40. 3,

JOHN. I.

me to baptize in water, even he said to me, On whomsoever thou shalt see the spirit descending and remaining on him,
34 the same is he who baptizeth ina holy spirit. Now I have seen and testified that this is rHE son oF Gop.
35 Again, on the next day, John was standing with two of his
36 disciples, and having fixed his eyes intently on Jesus as he
87 was walking, he saith, Behold the lamb of God! and the two
$8 disciples heard him speaking, and followed Jesus. When Jesus turned and saw them following him, he saith to them,
39 What seek ye? And they said to him, Rabbi, (the meaning of which, when interpreted, is Teacher) where dost thou make
40 thine abode? He saith to them, Come and see. They went and saw where he made his abode, and staid with him that day ; for it was about the tenth hour.* Andrew, the. brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who heard John and
.A1 followed Jesus. He first findeth his brother Simon, and saith to him, We have found the Messias, (the meaning of which
* 42 isthe Christ) [the anointed and brought him to Jesus. And
Jesus, having looked earnestly on him, said, Thou art Simon the son of Jonas. Thou shalt be called Cephas (the meaning of which is the same as that of Peter) [ἃ rock. ]
483 On the day following Jesus determined to set out for Galilee, and, finding Philip, he saith to him, Come with me.
44 Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.
45 Philip finding Nathaniel, saith to him; We have found him of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets have written, Jesus
46 of Nazareth, the son of Joseph. Upon which Nathaniel saith
A7 to him, Of Nazareth can there be any thing good! Philip saith to him, Come and see. Jesus saw Nathaniel coming to him and saith respecting him, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom
48 there is no guile! Nathaniel saith to him, Whence knowest thou me? Jesus in reply said to him, Before Philip called
49 thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee. In answer to this, Nathaniel said to him, Rabbi, thou art the son of God.
50 Thou art the king of Israel. Jesus answered and said to him,
Because I told thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, dost thou

* That is four o’clock in the afternoon.

51

10

11

12

19

JOHN. I. II.

believe ? Thou shalt see greater things than these. Then he saith to him, Verily, verily I say to you, Hereafter you shall ἡ see the heaven opened, and the angels of God οὐννωδίην and descending on the son of man.

Now on the third day there was a wedding at Cana of Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there; and Jesus and his disciples were invited to the wedding. And the wine having fallen short, the mother of Jesus saith to him, They have no wine. Jesus saith to her, Woman, what hast thou to do with me? My hour is not yet come. His mother saith to the waiters,
Do whatever he shall bid you. Now there were six water pots ᾿ of stone, containing two or three measures* apiece, placed there for the Jewish rites of purifying. Jesus saith to the waiters,
Fill those water pots with water. And when they had filled them to the brim, then he saith to them, Draw out now and carry some to the master of the feast. And when they had carried, and the master of the feast had tasted the water which was made wine (now he did not know whence it was, but the waiters who had drawn.off the water knew) the master of the feast calleth the bridegroom, and saith to him, Every man serveth up the good wine first, and when the guests have drunk plentifully, then that which is worse. Thou hast kept the good wine tillnow. This at Cana, in Galilee, Jesus made the beginning of his miracles and manifested his glory, and his disciples believed on him.

After this, he and his mother, and his brethren, and his disciples went down to Capernaum, but they did not stay there many days. For the passover of the Jews was nigh, and
Jesus went up to Jerusalem and found in the temple them who sold cattle, and sheep, and doves, and the changers of money seated; and having made a whip of bulrushes, he drove them all out of the temple, with the sheep and cattle, and poured out the money of the changers, and overturned their tables, and said to them who sold doves, Take. these things hence.
Make not the house of my father a house of merchandize.

*Supposed to be baths, each containing about seven and a halt lions.

JOHN. II. Il.

17 Then did his disciples remember that it was written, ““ My
18 zeal for thy house hath consumed me.*” Hereupon the Jews addressed him, and said, What sign dost thou shew us to justify
19 thy doing these things? In reply to which Jesus said to them, Destroy this temple, and im three days I will raise it
20 up. Thereupon the Jews said, This temple was forty six years
ΠΩ] a building, and wilt thou raise it up in three days? But he
22 spake of the temple of his body: therefore, when he was risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this to them; and they believed the re apt and the word which
Jesus had spoken.
23 Now while he was in Jerusalem at the passover, during the festival, many believed in his name when they saw the
24 miracles which he did. But Jesus did not trust himself to
25 them, because he knew all men. And because he had no need that any one should testify of man, for he himself knew what
ΠῚ. was in man; there being a man of the sect of the Pharisees,
2 named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews; when this man came to Jesus by night, and said to nm, Rabbi, We know that thou art a teacher come from God; for no one can do the miracles
3 which thou dost, unless God be with him, Jesus answered and said to him, Verily, verily I say to thee, unless a
4 man be born again, he cannot discern the reign of God. Nicodemus saith to him, How can a man be born, when he is old? Can he enter a second time into his mother’s womb and be born? Jesus answered, Verily, verily I say to thee, unless a man be born of water and spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God. ‘That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of the spirit, is spirit. Wonder not at my telling
8 thee, You must be born again. That blast of windt bloweth where it pleaseth, and thou hearest the sound of it, but dost not know whence it cometh and whither it goeth,
9 So is every one who is born of the spirit. Nicodemus answered,
10 and said to him, How can these things be? In reply to
11 which, Jesus said to him, Art thou the teacher of Israel, and knowest not these things? Verily, verily I say to thee, We

*Ps. 69.9. {Referring, I presume, to a sudden blast at that instant.

12

13

JOHN. IU.

speak what we know, and testify what we have seen; yet you. do not receive our testimony. If I have told you earthly things and you do not believe; how will you believe if I tell you heavenly things? No one indeed hath ascended up into heaven, but he who came down from heaven, namely, the son of man who is in heaven: But as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth in him may not perish; but have ever-
} lasting life. For God so loved the world that he gave his only
ΉΤΟ son, that whosoever believeth in him may not perish,

7 but have everlasting life. For God did not send his son into

the world to condemn the world; but that the world may be saved by him. He who believeth in him will not be condemned; but he who believeth not, is condemned already; because he hath not believed in the name of the only begotten son of
God. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the - world, and men loved darkness more than light, because their works were evil. or whosoever doeth evil hateth the lhght, and doth not come to the‘light, that his deeds may not be detected. But he who practiseth truth cometh to the light, that his works may be open to view, because they are the operations of God.*

After this, Jesus went with his disciples into the country of Judea, and spent some time with them there, and baptized.
And John also was baptizing at Enon, near Saleim, because there was much water there, and people used to come ‘there and be baptized; for John was not yet thrown into prison. —
There was therefore'a dispute between some of the disciples of John, and the Jews, respecting purification, and they went to John, and said to him, Rabbi, he who was with thee on the _ bank of the Jordan, to whom thou didst bear testimony, behold he is baptizing, and all are flocking to him. In reply to which, John said, A man can receive nothing from heaven, unless it be given him. You yourselves are witnesses for me, that I said, 1 am not the Christ; but that Iam sent before him.
He is the bridegroom, who hath the bride. But the friend of

*Or wrought by the agency of God. See Phil. 2

30

31

$2

9

10

JOHN. ΠΙ. IV.

the bridegroom, who standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth exceedingly on the account of the bridegroom’s voice. This joy of mine therefore, is complete. He must increase, but I must decrease. The one coming from above, is above all. He who is of the earth is earthly, and speaketh of the earth. The one coming from heaven is above all, and what he hath seen and heard, that he testifieth, yet none receiveth his testimony.
He who hath received his testimony, hath set his seal to this,
That God is true. For he whom God hath sent, speaketh the words of God; for God giveth him not the spirit by measure.
The father loveth the son, and hath given all things into his hand. He who believeth in the son, hath an everlasting life; but he who disbelieveth the son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God will abide on him.

When the Lord, therefore, knew that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus is making and baptizing more disciples than
John, (though it was not indeed Jesus himself, but his disciples who baptized) he left Judea and went again into Galilee : and as he must needs pass through Samaria, therefore he cometh to a city of Samaria, called Sichar, near the piece of ground which Jacob gave to his son Joseph. Now Jacob’s well was there. And as Jesus, wearied as he was with the journey, was sitting by the well, (it was about the sixth hour*) a woman of Samaria came out to draw water. Jesus saith to her, Give me to drink; (for his disciples were gone to the city to buy food;) thereupon the woman of Samaria saith to him,
How is it that thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me, who am a woman of Samaria? (For the Jews have no friendly intercourse with the Samaritans.) Jesus answered and said to her, If thou hadst known the bounty of God, and who it-is who saith to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldst have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water. The woman saith to him, Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and the well is deep; whence then hast thou this living water? Art thou greater than our father Jacob, who gave us this well, and drank thereof, himself, and his children, and his cattle? In re-

*Twelve o’clock at noon.

14

15

95

JOHN. IV.

ply to which, Jesus said to her, every one who drinketh of this water will thirst again; but whosoever shall drink of the water which I will give him, will never thirst. But the water which I will give him, will be in hima fountain of water springing up for an everlasting life. The woman saith to him,
O, sir, give me that water, that I may not thirst, nor come hither to draw. Jesus saith to her, Go, call thy husband and come hither. The woman in reply said, I have no husband.
Jesus saith to her, Thou art right in saying, I have no husband: for thou hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now hast, is not thy husband. In this thou hast spoken truth.
The woman saith to him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet. Our fathers have usually worshipped on this mountain; but you say, that at Jerusalem is the place where worship ought to be performed. Jesus saith to her, Woman, believe me, the hour is coming when you will worship the Father, neither on this mountain, nor at Jerusalem. You worship what you do not know. We worship what we do know: for salvation is of the Jews. But the hour is coming—indeed is now come, when the true worshippers will worship the Father in spirit and truth. For such worshippers of him the
Father seeketh. God is Spirit; and they who worship him ought to worship him in spirit and truth. The woman saith to him, I know that the Messias (he who is called the Christ) is coming. When he is come he will tell us all things. Jesus saith to her, I who am speaking to thee am he. (Now at that instant his disciples came and wondered at his talking with the woman, yet none of them said, What seekest thou? Or why talkest thou with her?) Thereupon the woman left her pitcher, and went to the city, and saith to the men, Come, see aman who told me all that I ever did. Is this the Christ ὃ
Therefore they of the city set out and were coming to him.
Now in the mean while his disciples entreated him, saying,
Rabbi, eat. But he said to them, Ihave meat to eat which you do not know. His disciples therefore said to one another,
Hath any one brought him food? Jesus saith to them, It is my food to do the will of him who sent me, and to finish his work. Do you not say, Yet four months, and the harvest

cometh. Behold I say to you, Lift up your eyes and view the.

36

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

JOHN. IV.

fields; for they are already white for harvest. And he who reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit for an everlasting life, that he who soweth, and he who reapeth, may rejoice together. For herein is that saying verified, that one soweth, and another reapeth. 1 have sent you to reap that on which you bestowed no labour. Others have laboured and you have entered on their labours.

Now many of the Samaritans of that city believed in him, on the testimony of the woman who said, He told me all that I ever did. Therefore, when these Samaritans came, they intreated him to tarry withthem. So he stayed there two days. And many more believed, because of what he himself spake, and they said to the woman, It is not now on account of thy talk that we believe; for we ourselves have heard and we know that he is indeed the Saviour of the world, the Christ.

Now after the two days he departed thence, and went to
Galilee,* [but not directly to Nazareth] for Jesus himself had testified that a prophet is not honoured in his native place.
Therefore when he came to Galilee, the Galileans received him, having seen all that he had done at Jerusalem, during the festival. For they also went up to the festival. Jesus therefore went again to Cana of Galilee, where he had made the water wine. And there was a certain officer of the king, whose son was sick at Capernaum. This person, upon hearing that Jesus was come from Judea to Galilee, went to him and intreated him to go down and cure his son; for he was at the point of death. Jesus therefore said to him, Unless you see signs and wonders, can you not believe? The officer saith to him, Sir,
Come down before my child die. Jesus saith to him, Go home: thy son liveth. And the man believed the word which Jesus spake to him, and went away. And as he was going down, his servants met him and told him, saying, Thy son liveth.
Whereupon he inquired of them at what hour he began to mend. And they told him, that yesterday, at seven o’clock, the

* Something seems to be wanting. From what follows, it appears that the words “πὲ not directly to Nazareth,” have been omitted in transcribing; [ have, therefore, inserted them in brackets.

53

54

JOHN. IV. V.

fever left him. So the father knew that it was the very time when Jesus said to him, Thy son liveth, and he and his whole family believed. This second miracle Jesus performed on his second coming* from Judea to Galilee.

After this there was a festival of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. Now there is in Jerusalem at the sheep gate, a pool, which is called in Hebrew Bethesda, having five porticos, in which lay a great multitude of infirm persons, blind, lame, and withered, waiting for the moving of the water. For from time to time an angel came down into the pool and moved the water, He therefore, who went in first after this movement of the water, was cured of whatever disease he had. Now there was acertain man there who had been in his infirmity thirty eight

6 years, Jesus seeing him lying there, and knowing that he had been

12

in that condition now a long time, saith to him, Hast thou a desire to be healed? The infirm man answered him, Sir, I have no one to put me in the pool when the water is moved. And while Iam going another steppeth down before me. Jesus saith to him, Rise; take up thy couch and walk about. Upon which the man was instantly well, and took up his couch and walked about. .

Now there was a sabbath on that day; therefore the Jews said to him who was cured, It is a sabbath: It is not lawful for thee to carry the couch. He answered them, He who made me well, even he said to me, Take up thy couch and walk about. ‘Thereupon they asked him, Who is the man who said to thee, take up thy couch and walk about? But he who was cured did not know who it was; for as there was a crowd in the place, Jesus had glided away. After this Jesus findeth him in the temple, and said to him, Behold thou art made well.
Sin no more, lest something worse befal thee. "The man went and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had cured him. And for this cause the Jews persecuted Jesus and sought to kill him, because he did these things on a sabbath. Thereupon Jesus

_ answered them, My Father worketh even now, and I also work.

13

19

For this therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because he not only broke the sabbath, but called God peculiarly his father, likening himself to God. Upon which Jesus ad-

* Literally, whem he again came.

JOHN. V.

dressed them, and said, Verily, verily I say to you, ‘The son can of himself do nothing, unless indeed he see the Father doing it; for whatever things He doth, these the Son doth likewise. For the Father loveth the Son, and shewetli him all that he himself doth. And he will shew him greater works than these, that you may wonder. For as the Father raiseth the dead and restoreth to life, so the Son restoreth to life, whom he pleaseth. For the Father judgeth no one, but hath committed

the whole act of judging to his Son, that all may honour the

“1

bo to

Son, as they honour the Father. He who honoureth not the
Son, doth not honour the Father, who sent him. Verily, verily I say to you, He who heareth my word, and believeth on him who sent me, hath an everlasting life, and doth not incur condemnation, but hath passed from death to that life. Verily, verily I say to you, a time is coming, nay is now come, when the dead will hearken to the voice of the son of God, and they who hearken shall live. For as the Father hath life in himself, so he hath granted to the son to have life also in himself, and hath also given him authority to execute judgment, because he is a son of man. Wonder not at this; for a time 15 coming when all that are in the graves shall hearken to his voice, and come forth; they who have done good, to a resurrection of life, and they who have done evil, to a resurrection of condemnation. I can do nothing of myself. As I hear, I judge. And my judgment is just; for I do not seek mine own will, but the will of the Father who sent me. »
“Tf I testify of myself my testimony is not true !*”

There is another who testifieth concerning me; and I know that the testimony which he giveth concerning me is true.
You sent to John, and he gave a testimony to the truth. But

“as for me, I do not receive human testimony, but mention

this that you may be saved. He was the lighted and shining lamp; and for a while you were disposed to exult with joy at his light. But I have a greater testimony than John’s. For the works which my father hath given me to perform—these very works, which I do, testify concerning me, that the father

* These I take to be repetitions of objections made by some of the audience, to which our Lord makes the following replies.

JOHN. V. VI.

37 hath sent me. Indeed the father who hath sent me hath himself given a testimony concerning me.
38 “You have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen a visible appearance of him!”
Indeed. you have not his word abiding in you, because you do not believe him whom he hath sent.
39 + “You search the scriptures because you think you have by means of them everlasting fe!”
40 Now these are the very writings which testify concern-
Al ing me; yet you will not come to me that you may have life.
42 Ido not receive glory from men. But 1 know you that you
43 have not the love of God in you. I have come in my father’s name and you do not receive me; if another come in his own
44, name, him you willreceive. How can you believe while you court honour one from another, and do not seek the glory
45. which is from God alone ? Do not imagine that I will accuse you to the father. There is one who is your accuser, namely,
46 Moses, in whom you have trusted. For if you had believed
Moses, you would believe me; for he hath written concerning me. Now if you have not believed his writings, how will you believe my words? After these things Jesus went away.
Vis On the. coast of the sea, that of Galilee, that of Tiberias,
2 he was also followed by a great multitude, because they saw
3 the miracles which he performed on the diseased. And Jesus
4. went up to the mountain, and sat. down there with his disciples. Now the passover, the festival of the Jews, was nigh.
5 Jesus therefore lifting up his eyes, and seeing a great multitude coming to him, saith to Philip, Whence can we buy
6 bread to feed these people. Now this he said to try him, for
7 he himself knew what he was going to do. Philip answered him, Two hundred deniars would not purchase bread enough
8 for every one of them to take a morsel. One of his disciples, namely Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, saith to him,
9 There is a lad here who hath five barley loaves, and two small
10 fishes ; but what are they among so many? Then Jesus said,
Cause the men to arrange themselves on the ground. Now there was much grass in the place. The men therefore, to the number of about five thousand, arranged themselves on the

12

13

14

15

JOHN. VI.

ground. ‘Then Jesus took the loaves and having given thanks, distributed to the disciples ; and the disciples distributed to them who were on the ground; and in like manner of the fishes, as much as they chose. And when they were satisfied, he saith to his disciples, Gather up the fragments which remain, that nothing may be lost. So they gathered, and with the fragments, which the people after eating had left of the five barley loaves, they filled twelve panniers. When these men saw the miracle which Jesus had done, they said, This is certainly the prophet*—He who is coming into the world.
Jesus therefore knowing that they were about to come and take him by force to make him king, withdrew again to the mountain himself alone. And as the evening was coming on, his disciples went down to the sea, and having gone on board the vessel, they coasted along towards Capernaum. Darkness had now come on and Jesus had not come to them, and the sea ran high by reason of the wind, which blew hard. So when they had rowed about twenty five or thirty furlongs, they saw
Jesus walking on the sea, and approaching the vessel; and they were terrified. Whereupon he said to them, It is I; be not afraid. They wished therefore to take him into the vessel; and immediately the vessel was at the land to which they were going.

On the day following the people who continued on the sea

side, having seen that there was no vessel there besides that

, 23

24 one in which his disciples had embarked, and that Jesus did not go on board the vessel with his disciples, but that his disciples had gone away alone.—Other vessels however came from ‘Tiberias, nigh to the place where they had eaten bread after the Lord gave thanks—when the people therefore saw that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there, they went on board these vessels and came to Capernaum, seeking Jesus; and having found him on that coast of the sea, they said to him,
Rabbi, when didst thou come hither. Jesus in reply said to them, Verily, verily I say to you, You seek me; not because you have seen miracles; but because you have eaten of the

* Deut. 18. 15.

27

38

JOHN. VI.

loaves and were satisfied. Labour not to procure the food which perisheth, but the food which endureth for an everlasting life, which the son of man will give you; for him the Father, namely God, hath sealed. Thereupon they said to him,
What must we do that we may work the works of God? Jesus answered and: said to them, This is the work of God that you believe in him whom he hath sent. Then they said to him,
What miracle dost thou perform that we may see and believe in thee? What workest thou? Our fathers ate manna in the wilderness, as it is written, “‘He gave them bread from heaven to eat.”? Upon this Jesus said to them, Verily, verily I say to you, Moses did not give you the bread from heaven; but my
Father giveth you the true bread of heaven: for the bread of God is that which cometh down from heaven and giveth life to the world. Thereupon they said to him, Master, give us evermore that bread. Then Jesus said to them, I am the bread of that life. He who cometh to me, shall never hunger; and he who believeth in me, shall never thirst. But I have told you that though you have seen me, you do not believe. All that the Father giveth me, will come to me. And him who cometh to me I will not reject. For I am come down from heaven not to do mine own will, but the will of him who sent me. And this is the will of the Father, who sent me that of all which he hath given me, I should lose nothing, but raise it up at the last — day. And this is the will of him who sent me, that every one who seeth the son, and believeth in him, may have an everlasting life, and that I raise him up at the last day. The Jews then murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which came down from heaven, and they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of
Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How then doth he say, I came down from heaven? Therefore Jesus answered and said to them, Murmur not among yourselves. No one can come to me, unless the Father, who hath sent me, draw him. And as

; for me, I will raise him up at the last day. It is written in the

prophets, They shall be all taught of God.* Every one therefore who hath heard and learned from the Father, cometh to

* Es. 54,13. see also Es. 28, 2, 5. Jer. 31.34. “Mich. 4,1, 4

63

65

JOHN. VI.

me. Not that any one hath seen the Father, save he only who is from God. He hath seen the Father.

Verily, verily, I say to you, He who believeth in me, hath an everlasting life. I am the bread of that life. Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, and died. Suchis the bread which cometh down from heaven, that whoever shall eat of it shall not die. I am that living bread which came down from heaven.
If any one eat of this bread he shall live forever. Now the bread which I will give is this flesh of mine, which I will give for the life of the world.

Upon this the Jews debated among sidney saying,
How can this man give us his flesh to eat! Therefore Jesus said to them, Verily, verily, I say to you, Unless you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. He who eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, hath an everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For this flesh of mine is food indeed; and this blood of mine is indeed drink. He who eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, abideth in me and I in him. As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father; so he who eateth me, even he will live by me. This is the bread which is come down from heaven. Not as your fathers ate the manna and died. He who eateth this bread shall live forever.

These things he said in a public assembly,* as he was teaching at Capernaum. Many of his disciples, therefore, when they heard them, said, This is harsh doctrine, who can hearken to it? Thereupon Jesus knowing in himself that his disciples were murmuring at this, he said to them, Doth this offend you? What if you see the son of man ascending up where he was before. It is the spirit which giveth life, the flesh profiteth nothing. The words which I speak to you are spirit, they are life. But there are some of you who do not believe; (for
Jesus knew from the beginning who they are who do not believe, and who it is that will deliver him up) and (said he) for this cause I said to you, that none can come to me unless it be given him by my Father.

---.-ΡΟῦΡὃ9οὃϑ9ϑ9ο-. . -. -- .-""-......-.-. ᾿ ..

* See verse 25.

JOHN. VI. VII.

66 From this time many of his disciples withdrew and walked

67 nomore with him, therefore Jesus said to the twelve, Have

68 you also a mind to go away? Whereupon Simon Peter answer-

ed him, Master, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the words

of an everlasting life, and we believe and know that thou art

69 the Christ, the Son of the living God. Jesus answered them,

70 Have I not chosen you twelve? Yet one of you is a spy. Now

71 he spake of Judas Iscariot, son of Simon; for he thought of delivering him up though he was one of the twelve. Ἢ

VII. After this Jesus travelled about in Galilee, for he did

2 not chuse to walk in Judea, because the Jews sought to kill

him. Now the Jews’ festival of tabernacles was near, there-

3 fore his brethren said to him, Depart hence and go to Judea

that thy disciples may see the works which thou dost. For no

4 one who seeketh to be known publicly, doth any thing in se-

cret. Since thou dost these things, shew thyself to the world.

(For even his brethren did not believe in him.) Thereupon Je-

6 sus saith to them, My time is not yet come; but your time is

7 always ready. The world cannot hate you: but it hateth me,

because I testify concerning it that its works are evil. Go ye.

8 up to this festival. Iam not yet going up to this festival, be-

9 cause my time is not yet fully come. And having said this,

10 he continued in Galilee. But when his brethren were gone up,

then he also went up to the festival, not publicly, but in a pri-

11 vate manner. The Jews therefore sought him at the festival,

.12 and said, Where is he? And there was much private dispute

concerning him, among the people; for some said he is a good

13 man; and others said, No; but he seduceth the people. No one,

however, spoke openly of him, for fear of the Jews. But about

14 the middle of the festival Jesus went up to the temple and

15 taught. And the Jews expressed astonishment, saying, How

came this man acquainted with letters, having never had an

16 education? Jesus addressing them, said, ‘This doctrine of mine

17 is not mine, but his who sent me. If any man is disposed to

do his will, he will know in respect to this doctrine, whether

18 itis of God, or whether I speak from myself. He who speak-

eth from himself, seeketh his own glory; but he who seeketh

the glory of him who sent him, is true, and in him there is no

19 falsehood. Did not Moses give you the law? Yet none of you

23

35

36

JOHN. VII.

observeth the lav. Why do you scek to kill me? The people answered and said, Thou art possessed by a demon; Who seeketh to kill thee? In reply to which Jesus said to them,
I did one work and you all express wonder at it. Moses gave you the law of circumcision (not that it is from Moses, but from the patriarchs,) and you circumcise a man on a sabbath. If a person receiveth circumcision on a sabbath, that the law of Moses may not be broken, are you angry with me because on a sabbath I cured a man whose whole body was diseased. Judge not according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment.

Upon this some of the inhabitants of Jerusalem said, Is not this he whom they seek to kill? Yet behold he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing to him. Perhaps the rulers know indeed that he is really the Christ! But we know whence this man is; but as for the Christ, when he cometh, no one knoweth whence he is. Hereupon, Jesus, as he was teaching in the temple, cried and said, Do you indeed both know me, and know whence I am? I have not come of myself. But he who hath sent me is true, Him you do not know; but I know him, because I am immediately from him, and he sent me.

Upon this they sought to seize him, but no one laid his hand on him, because his hour was not yet come. Many of the people, however, believed on him and said, Will the Christ, when he cometh, do greater miracles than those which this man hath done? ‘The Pharisees heard of the people’s whispering such things concerning him; and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers to apprehend him. Jesus therefore said to them, Yet a little while I am with you. When I go away to him who sent me, you will seek me but will not find me; and where 1am you cannot come. Upon this the Jews said among themselves, Whither is he going, that we shall not find him? Is he going to the dispersed among the Greeks, to teach the Greeks? What is the meaning of chis saying of his,
** You will seek me and will not find me, and where Iam going you cannot come?” It being now the last—the great day of the festival, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink. He who oi on me; as the scripture hath said, Out of his belly will flow streams of living

JOHN... VIL. VII. -

water.* Now this he said in reference to.the spirit which they who believed on him were to receive; for a holy spirit was not yet received, because Jesus was not yet glorified, Hereupon many of the people, when they heard this saying, said, This is eertainly the prophet.+ ‘Others said, This is the Christ. But others said, Doth the Christ come out of Galilee? Hath not the scripture said that the Christ cometh of the seed of David and from Bethlehem, the town whence David was? So there was a division among the people on his account. And some of them had a mind to seize him, but no one laid hands on him.
The officers therefore went to the chief priests and the Pharisees, who saidto them, Why have you not brought him? The officers replied, Never dida man speak like this man. Thereupon the Pharisees answered them, Are you also seduced? Hath any © of the chief priests believed in him, or any of the Pharisees? But

this muititude, which know not the law, are accursed. Nicode-

mus, he who came to Jesus by night, and who was one of them,

said to them, Doth our law condemn the man without hear-

ing him, and knowing what he hath done? In reply to which,

they said to him, Art thou also of Galilee? Search and see

that a prophet of Galilee hath not been raised up. : .

VIII. Then every one went to his own home. As for Jesus, he

went tothe mount of olives, and early in the morning he came again to the temple, and all the people came to him. And when
᾿ς had taken a seat, and was teaching them, the Scribes and the Pharisees bring to him a woman caught in adultery; and, having set her in the midst, they say to him, Teacher, this woman was caught in the very act of adultery. Now Moses in the law hath commanded us that such be stoned. What therefore dost thou say? This they said to try him, that they might . have matter for accusing him. Thereupon Jesus stooped down” and wrote with his finger on the ground. And as they continued asking him, he raised himself up, and said to them, Let him among you who is without sin throw the first stone at her. Then he stooped down again and wrote on the ground.
But they who heard, being convicted by their own conscience,

* See Esaias 58. 11. Joel 2. 28. { See Deut. 18. 15.

~ JOHN. VIII.

went out, one by one, the eldest first, even to'the last, and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst.
10 When Jesus raised himself up, and saw none but the woman, he said to her, Woman, where are thine accusers? Hath no
11 one passed sentence on thee? And she said, No one, Sir. Then
Jesus said to her, iNeicacs do AT sentence on thee. Go and sin no more. °
12 Then Jesus spake to them again, saying, I am the light of the world. He who followeth me will not walk in darkness, but
13 shall have the light of life. Hereupon the Pharisees said to him, Thou testifiest concerning thyself. This testimony of
14 thine is not to be regarded. Jesus answered and said to them,
Though I testify concerning myself, my testimony is to be
» regarded, because I know whence I came, and whither I am going. But as for you, you do not know whence I come, nor
15 whither I am going. You judge according to the flesh, I judge
16 no one. Yet if 1 judge, my judgment is true, because I am
17 not alone, but I and the Father’ who sent me. Now it is written
18 in your law, that the testimony of two men is true. I am one testifying concerning myself, and the Father who sent
19 me testifieth concerning me. Thereupon they said, Where is thy Father? Jesus replied, You neither know me nor my Father. If you had known me, you would have known my Father also. ᾿
20 These things Jesus spake in the treasury, as he was teaching in the temple; yet no one laid hands on him. Because his hour
21 was not yet come; therefore Jesus said to them again, I am going away, and you will seek me and die in your sins. Whither
22 I go you cannot come. Upon this, the Jews said, Will he kill himself, that he saith, Whither I go you cannot come?
23 ‘Then he said to them, You are from below; I am from above.
24 You are of this world; 1 am not of this world; therefore I said
* to you, You will die in your sins: for if you do not be.
25 lieve that I am, you will die in your sins. Upon this they said to him, Who art thou? And Jesus said to them, I am
26 what I told you at the beginning, and am now telling you. J have many things to speak and to judge respecting you. He

28

32

40

41

JOHN. ΜΠ.

indeed who sent’me is true, and I speak to the world what 1 have heard from him.

They did not know that he was speaking to them of the
Father; therefore Jesus said to them, When you have lifted up the son of man, then you will know who I am; and that I do nothing of myself; but speak these things as my Father taught me. He indeed who sent me is with me. The Father hath not left me alone, because I ἂν always the things which are pleasing to him. ἢ

While he was thus speaking many believed in him, therefore to the Jews’who believed in him Jesus said, If you continue steadily in this doctrine of mine, you are my disciples

3 indeed; and you will know the truth, and the truth will make

you free. Some answered him, We are the seed. of Abraham, and have never been in bondage to any one: how then dost thou say, Ye shall be made free. To them Jesus replied, Verily, verily, I say to you, Whosoever committeth sin is the slave of sin. Now the slave abideth not in the family forever; but the son abideth forever. If therefore the son shall make_ you free, you will be free indeed. I know that you are Abraham’s seed; but you seek to kill me, because my word continueth not in you. What I have seen with my Father, I speak; and what you have seen with your father you do. They answered and said to him, Abraham is our father. Jesus saith to them, If ye were the children of Abraham, you would do the works of Abraham. But now you seek to kill me, a man who told you the truth which I heard from God. Abraham did not do this. You do the works of your father. Hereupon they said to him, We were not born of fornication; we have one father, namely, God. Then Jesus said to them, If God were your father, you would love me; for I proceed and de come from
God. For I have not come of myself, but he sent me. Why do ye not understand what I say? It is because you cannot bear this doctrine of mine. You are of your father the devil, and bent upon executing the desires of your father. He was a manslayer from the beginning, and did not abide in the truth. Because there is no truth in him, when he speaketh falsehood he speaketh what is natural to him, for he is a liar, and the father

52

53

54

55

56

5 x

2

JOHN. VIII. ΙΧ.

of it.* But as for me, because I speak the truth, you do not believe me. Which of you convicteth me of sin? Now, if I speak truth, why do you not believe me? He who is of God doth, for this cause, hear the words of God: you do not hearken, because you are not of God. Thereupon the Jews answered, and said to him, Are we not right in saying, Thou art a Samaritan, and possessed by a demon? Jesus replied, I am not possessed by a demon, but I honour my Father,and you dishonour me. As for me, I seek not mine own glory. There is one who seeketh [it] and judgeth. Verily, verily, I say to you, If any one will keep this doctrine of mine, he shall never see death. Thereupon the Jews said to him, Now we know that thou art possessed by a demon. Abraham is dead—and the prophets; yet thou sayest, If any one keep this doctrine of mine, he shall never taste death. Art thou greater than our father Abraham who died? The prophets also died. Whom dost thou make thyself? Jesus answered, If glorify myself, this glory of mine is nothing. It is the Father who glorifieth me, of whom you say that he is your God. Now you do not know him, but I know him; and if I should say, I do not know him,
I would speak falsely like you. But I know him and keep his word. Your father Abraham was transported with a desire to see this day of mine, and he saw it, and was made glad. Upon this the Jews said to him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and. hast thou seen Abraham? Jesus said to them, Verily, verily, I say to you, Before Abraham was, I am. Upon this they took up stones to throw at him. But Jesus concealed himself and went out.of the temple, passing through the midst of them, and thus withdrew.

» And as he was passing along he saw a man who was blind from his birth, whereupon his disciples asked him, saying,
Rabbi, who sinned—this man, or his parents, that he should

3 be born blind ? Jesus answered, It was neither for any sin of

this man, nor of his parents: but that the works of God may

7

*Viz. Of lying, the antecedent being comprehended in the word liar which preceded, an, idiom of the Greek language, common among the most correct authors:

JOHN. IX.

4 be manifested in him; I must work the works of him who ©

18

19

sent me, while it is day. Night is coming, when no one can work. While I am in the world, I am the light of the world.
Having said this he spat on the ground, and made some clay with the spittle, and spread the clay on the blind man’s eyes, and said to him, Go, wash them at the pool of Siloam (the meaning of which is Sent.) So he went and washed them and returned seeing. Thereupon the neighbours, and they who had seen him before, when he was blind, said, Is not this he who used to sit begging? Some said, It is he: and others said it is like him. He said, I am [the man.] Then they said to him, How were thine eyes opened ? In reply to which he said, A man called Jesus made clay and anointed mine eyes, and said to me, Go to the pool of Siloam and wash them. So
I went and washed them and got sight. ‘Then they said to him,
Where is he? He saith, I do not know.

They brought to the Pharisees him who was formerly blind. Now it was a sabbath when Jesus made the clay and opened his eyes. Therefore the Pharisees asked him again, how he got sight. And he said to them, He put clay on mine eyes, and I washed them and see. Thereupon some of the
Pharisees said, That man is not from God, because he doth not keep the sabbath. Others said, How can a sinful man do such miracles ? So there was a dissention among them. They say to the blind man again, What sayest thou of him for opening thine eyes? He said, He is a prophet. The Jews there- _ fore did not believe in respect to him, that he had been blind and got sight, until they called the parents of him,who had obtained sight, and asked them saying, Is this your son who you say was born blind? How then doth he now see? Inanswer to which his parents said, We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind. But how he now seeth, we do not know : nor do we know who hath opened his eyes. He is of ~ age; ask him; let him speak for himself.

This. his parents said, because they were afraid of the Jews; for the Jews had now agreed that if any one acknowledged
Jesus to be the Christ, he should be excommunicated. For this cause his parents said, He is of age; ask him. Then they called a second time the man who had been blind, and

25

26 oo

JOHN. IX. X.

said to him, Give glory to God. We know that this man is a sinner. Upon this he answered and said, If he be a sinner, I know not. One thing I know, that I was blind, and now I see.

Then they said to him again, What did he do to thee? How

did he open thine eyes ? He answered them, I have told you already. Did you not hear? Why do you desire to hear it again ? Have you indeed a mind to be his disciples? Upon this they reviled him and said, Thou art a disciple of his; but as for us, we are disciples of Moses. We know that God spake to Moses; but as for this man, we know not whence he is.
In reply to this the man said to them, Why; in this there is something marvellous, that you do not know whence he is, though he hath opened mine eyes. Now we know that God hearkeneth not to sinners; but if any one be a worshipper of

God, and do his will, to him he hearkeneth. From the begin-

ning of the world it was never heard that any one opened the eyes of one born blind. If this man were not from God he could do nothing. They answered and saidto him, Thou wast altogether born in sin, and dost thou teach us? And they excommunicated him.

Jesus heard that they had excommunicated him; and having met with him he said to him, Dost thou believe in the son of God? He answered and said, Who is he, Sir, that I may believe in him. Jesus said to him, Thou indeed seest him, and it is he who is talking with thee. Whereupon he said, Lord, I believe, and worshipped him,

Then Jesus said, am come into this world for judgment that they. who do not see may see, and that they who see may become blind; and some of the Pharisees who were with him, when they heard this, said, Are we blind? Jesus said to them, If you were blind, you would not have had

sin; but now you say, We see; therefore your sin remaineth. Verily, verily, 1 say to you, He who entereth not by the door into the fold of the sheep, but climbeth over some other way, is a thief and a robber: but he who goeth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the doorkeeper openeth and the sheep hearken to his voice; and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he hath brought out his own sheep, he goeth before

JOHN. X.

them and his sheep follow him because they know his voice.
They will not follow a stranger, but will flee from him, because they do not know the voice of strangers.

This parable Jesus spake to them, but they did not comprehend the meaning of what he said to them, therefore Je- sus said to them again, Verily, verily I say to you, I am the door of the sheep. All that have come in my stead, are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hearken to them. I am the door. If any enter in by me, it shall be safe, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh only to steal and to killand to destroy. Iam come that the sheep may have life and that they may have it superabundantly. I am the good shepherd. ‘The good shepherd exposeth his life for the sheep.
But the hireling, who is not the shepherd, and to whom the sheep do not belong, whenhe seeth the wolf coming leaveth the sheep and fleeth ; and the wolf seizeth some and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth because he is a hireling and careth not for the sheep. Iam the good shepherd and I know mine own sheep, and am known by them who are mine, even as the father knoweth me, and I know the father; and
I lay down my life for the sheep. Now I have other sheep which are not of this fold. These also I must lead; they will hearken to my voice, and there shall be one flock and one shepherd. On this account the father loveth me, because I lay down my life so that I may take it again. No one forceth it frém me ; but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power te take it again. This commission I have received from my father.

Upon this there was another division among the Jews, on account of these sayings. And many of them said, He is possessed by a demon, and is mad, Why do you hearken to him?
Others said, These are not the words of a demoniac. Can a demon open the eyes of the blind ?

When they were celebrating the dedication festival at Jerusalem, and it was stormy weather; and Jesus was walking in the temple in Solomon’s portico; the Jews again came around him, and said to him, How long dost thou keep us in suspense ? If thou art the Christ, tell us plainly: Jesus an-

swered them, I told you but you do not believe. The works

JOHN. X. XL

which I do in my father’s name—these testify concerning
26 me. But you do not believe, for you are not of my sheep.
27 My sheep, as I told you, hearken to my voice and I know them, and they follow me: and I give them everlasting life ;
28 and they shall never perish, nor shall any one wrest them out
29 of my hand. My father who gave them to me, is greater than
30 all, and none is able to wrest them out of my father’s hand.
31 I and my father are one. Hereupon the Jews again took up
32 stones to stone him. Jesus addressed them, I have shewn you
33 many good works from my father, for which of those works would you stone me ὃ The Jews answered him saying, For a good work we are not about to stone thee, but for blasphemy, even because thou, being a man, makest thyself God.
34 Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law “I said
35 you are Gods.*”’ If it stileth them gods to whom the word of God was addressed, (now the scripture cannot be set aside)
36 do you say of me, whom the father hath consecrated and sent
37 into the world, ‘“Thou blasphemest,”’ because I said, I am the son of God ? If I do not the works of my father, believe me
38 not. But if ldo; though you do not believe me, believe the works ; that you may know and believe that the father is in
39 me, and I in him. Upon this they again sought to seize him.
40 But he withdrew out of their hands, and went again to the bank of the Jordan ; to the place where John baptized at first,
41 and abode there. And many resorted to him and said, John indeed wrought no miracle ; but all that John said respecting

42 this man is true. And many there believed in him,
XI. Now one Lazarus, an inhabitant of Bethany, the town of
2 Mary and her sister Martha, was sick. It was this Mary who anointed the Lord with balsam, after wiping his feet with her
3 hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick. ‘The sisters therefore
4 sent to Jesus,} saying, Sir, He whom thou lovest is sick. Upon hearing this, Jesus said, This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that by it the son of God may be glorified.
5 Therefore though Jesus loved Martha and her sister,
6 and Lazarus, yet when he heard that he was sick, he then

* Ps. 82. 6. + Jesus, text, Azm.

Pal

JOHN. XI. εν

5.

8 saith to his disciples, Let us go again to Judea. The disciples say tohim, Rabbi, very lately the Jews sought to stone thee,
9 and art thou going thither again ? Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours in the day? If any one walketh in the day he
10 stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this world: but
11 if any one walk in the night he stumbleth because there is no light in him.* Thus he spake, and after that he saith to them,
Our friend Lazarus is composed to rest; but Iam going to
12 wake him. Thereupon his disciples said, Master, if he is
13 composed to rest, he will recover. Now Jesus spoke of his
14 death; but they thought that he spoke of taking rest in sleep.
Therefore Jesus then told them plainly, Lazarus is dead. And
15 on your account—that you may believe, I am glad that I was ~
16 not there. But let us go to him. Upon this Thomas, who is
17 called Didymus, said to his fellow disciples, Let us also go that we may die with him. So when Jesus came, he found that he had now been four days in the tomb.
ἀν Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs
19 off. And many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary, to
20 comfort them on the death of their brother. Therefore soon as
Martha heard that Jesus is coming she went out to meet him;
21 but Mary remained inthe house. Martha therefore said to Jesus,
22 Master, if thou hadst been here my brother would not
23 have died; but still I know that whatever thou wilt ask of
God, God will grant thee. Jesus saith to her, Thy brother
24 shall rise again. Martha said to him, I know that he will rise
25 again at the resurrection, at the last day. Jesus said to her, I am the resurrection and the life; he who believeth in me,
26 though he may die, shall live. And none who liveth and believeth
27 in me shall ever die. Believest thou this? She saith to him, Yes, Lord, 1 believe that thou art the Christ, the
28 Son of God, the one coming into the world. And having said this, she went and called her sister Mary privately, saying,
29 The teacher is come and calleth for thee. Assoon as she heard, she riseth instantly and goeth to him.

stayed two days in the place where he was. And after that he

*Literally no light in it, (viz. in the world.)

40

 34

_ 37

4l

A2

JOHN. XI.

Now Jesus had not yet entered the village, but was at the place where Martha met him. When the Jews therefore who were in the house, and comforting her, saw that Mary arose
“hastily and went out, they followed her, saying, She is going to the tomb to weep there. When Mary then was come to the place where Jesus was, upon seeing him she fell at his feet, saying to him, Lord, if thou hadst been here my brother would not have died. Therefore when Jesus saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping who came with her, he restrained his spirit, and was troubled, and said, Where have you laid him? They say to him, Master, Come and see. Jesus wept. Upon this the Jews said, Behold! how he loved him!
And some of them said, Could not this man who opened the eyes of the blind have prevented his death? Then Jesus, again restraining himself, cometh to the tomb. Now it was a cave and a stone lay uponit. Jesus saith, Remove the stone. Martha, the sister of him who was dead, saith to him, Master, by this time the smell is offensive; for this is the fourth day. Jesus saith to her, Did I not tell thee, if thou wouldst believe

thou shouldst see the glory of God? ‘Then they removed the

stone from where the deceased lay. And Jesus lifted up his eyes and said, Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me.
Now I know that thou hearest me always; but I have said this for the sake of the people standing around, that they may believe that thou hast sent me. And having said this, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, Come forth. Whereupon he who had been dead came forth, bound hand and foot with graveclothes, and his face was wrapped in a napkin. Jesus saith to them, Loose him and let him go. Upon this many of the Jews who had come to Mary, when they saw what Jesus had done, believed in him, But some of them went to the Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done. Whereupon the chief priests and the Pharisees assembled the Sanhedrim, and said, What are we doing? Because this man doth many miracles, if we let him go on thus, all will believe in him, and the Romans will come and destroy both this place and this nation of ours. And one of them, namely, Caiaphas, being chief priest that year, said to them, Are you totally ignorant, and do you not consider that it is better for us that one man die for the people

JOHN. XI. ΧΙ].

51 than that the whole nation should perish. Now this he said not merely of himself, but being high priest that year, he prophesied
52 that Jesus was soon to die for that nation, and not for that nation only, but that he might gather into one body the
53 children of God who were scattered abroad. From that day therefore they consulted together that they might put him to
54 death. For this reason Jesus walked no more publicly among the Jews, but went thence to the country near the wilderness, to a city calied Ephraim, and continued there with his disciples.
55. Now the passover of the Jews was near, and many came
56 up to Jerusalem from the country, before the passover, to purify themselves. They therefore sought Jesus, and said to one another as they were standing in the temple, What think ye?
57 Will he not come to this festival? Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had issued an order, that if any one knew where he is, he should give information, that they might apprehend
XII. him. Jesus therefore, six days before the passover, went to Bethany were Lazarus was, who had been dead, and
2 whom he had raised from the dead. And a supper was made for him there; and Martha waited, and Lazarus was one of
3 them who were at table with him. Mary then having taken a pound of the balsam of spikenard, unadulterated, very costly, anointed the feet of Jesus when she had wiped his feet with
4 her hair. And the house was filled with the odour of the balsam. Upon which one of the disciples, namely Judas Iscariot, son of Simon, who was about to deliver him up, said, Why
5. was not this balsam sold for three hundred deniars, and given
6 to the poor? Now this he said, not because he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief and had the purse and carried
7 off what was put into it. Therefore Jesus said, Let her
8 alone. She hath kept this for the day of preparing my body for burial, for you haye the poor always with you; but me you

9 have not always.
Now a great number of the Jews knew that he was there, and
10 had come, not on the account of Jesus only; but to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead; the chief priests therefore
11 determined to put Lazarus also to death, because on his account many of the Jews withdrew and believed in Jesus. On
12 the next day a great multitude who had come to the festival,

JOHN. ΧΙ],

15 hearing that Jesus is coming to Jerusalem, took branches of

palm trees and went out to meet him, and cried, Hosanna!

᾿ς Blessed he, who is coming in the name of the Lord! The king

14 of Israel! Now Jesus having found a young ass, was riding

. thereon, agreeably to what is written, “Fear not, daughter of Si-

15 on! behold thy king cometh mounted on an ass’s colt.*”’ These

16 things his disciples did not understand at the time; but when

Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things

were written concerning him; and that they had done them for

17 him. Now because the multitude who were with him testifi-

ed that he had called Lazarus from the tomb, and raised him

18 from the dead; and on this account the multitude met him,

because they heard that he had done this miracle, therefore

19 the Pharisees said among themselves, You see that you gain no advantage. Behold the world is gone after him.

20 Now among them who came up to worship at the festival,

21 there were some Greeks. These therefore came to Philip,

who was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and asked him, saying, Sir,

22 Wewish to see Jesus. Philip cometh and telleth Andrew.

23 And Andrew and Philip tell Jesus. Whereupon Jesus answer-

24 ed them, saying, ‘he hour is come that the Son of man should

be glorified. Verily, verily Isay to you, If the grain of wheat

which falleth on the ground dieth not, it remaineth a single

25 grain. But if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit. He who

loveth his life, will lose it: but he who slighteth his life in this

world, shall keep it for an everlasting life. If any one would

26 wait upon me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall

this attendant of mine also be. And if any one wait upon me

27 my Father will reward him. Now is my soul troubled. What

then? Shall I say, Father save me from this hour? But for this

28 cause I came to this hour. Father, glorify thy name. There-

upon a voice came from heaven, “I have glorified it, and I

29 will glorify it again.”” ‘The multitude therefore who were stand-

30 ing by, when they heard it, said, it thundered. Others said,

An angel hath spoken to him, Jesus answered and said, This

31 voice hath not come for my sake, but for yours. Now is the

Zach. 9. 9.

JOHN. XII.

52 judgment of this world. Now will the chieftain of this world be cast out. As for me, when I am lifted up from the ground, I will
33 draw all men to me. (Now this he said, signifying the death.
34 he should soon die.) The multitude answered him, We have heard out of the law that “The Christ remaineth forever.”
How then dost thou say, That the son of man must be lifted
35 up? Who is this son of man? Jesus therefore said to them,
Yet a little while the light is with you. Walk while you have the light that the darkness may not overtake you; for he who
36 walketh in darkness knoweth not where he is going. While you have the light, believe in the light, that you may be chil-~ a of light. ,
37 Having said this, Jesus withdrew, and was concealed from them. Now though he had performed so many miracles before
38 them, they did not believe in him, so that the word of the prophet Esaias was confirmed, which he spoke, Lord who hath believed our report, and to whom hath the arm of the
89 Lord been revealed ?* It was because they were not enabled
40 to believe that in another place Esaias said, He hath blinded their eyes, and stupified their hearts, so that they saw not with their eyes, nor understood with their heart, nor turned that
41 I might heal them.t This Esaias said when he saw his glory
42, and spake concerning him. Nevertheless when several of the chiefs believed in him, but on account of the Pharisees did
43 not acknowledge it, that they might not be excommunicated,
44 (for they loved the praise of men, more than the praise of God) therefore Jesus raised his voice and. said, He who believeth in me, believeth not merely in me, but in him who sent me.
45 And he who beholdeth me, beholdeth him who sent me. I
46 being light am come into the world,}.that whoever believeth
47 in me may not remain in darkness. Now if any one hear my words and believe not; it is not 1 who condemn him; for I did not come to condemn the world, but to save the world.
4% He who slighteth me and receiveth not my words, hath that which condemneth him—the word which I have spoken—
49 that will condemn him at the last day. Because I have not

* Es, 53. 4. Εν 6 10. t See ch. 1. 9.

JOHN. XII. XII.

spoken from myself, but the father who sent me hath him-

self given me a command what I should enjoin, and what 1

50 should speak, and I know that his commandment is everlast-

‘ing life, therefore what I speak, I speak just as the father

directed me.

ΧΗ͂Ι. Now before this festival of the passover, as Jesus knew

that his time was come that he should remove from this world to the father, having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them to the last. When they were at supper (the devil having already put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot son of Simon to deliver him up,) Jesus knowing that the father hath given all things into his hands, and that he had come forth from God, and is going to God, riseth from the supper and layeth aside his upper garments, and having taken a towel and- girded himself, he then poureth water into the basin and began to wash the feet of the disciples and wipe them with the towel, with which he was girded. He cometh therefore to Simon Peter. Whereupon Peter saith to him, Master, thou wash my feet! Jesus answered and said to him, What I am doing thou dost not comprehend at present, but thou shalt know hereafter. Peter saith to him, Thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus answered him, Unless I wash thee thou hast no portion with me. Simon Peter saith to him; Master, not my feet only, but also the hands and the head. Jesus saith to him, He who hath bathed needeth only to wash the feet, the rest of the body being clean. Now yoware clean, but not all.
(For he knew him who was delivering him up, therefore he said, You are not all clean.) So when he had washed their feet and put on his garments, having again taken his place at table, he said to them, Consider what I have done to you.
You call me The teacher and the master ; and you say right,

: for so lam. If I then, the master and the teacher, have wash-

ed your feet, you ought to wash one another’s feet; for [have set you an example, that you may do as I have done to you.
Verily, verily I say to you, The servant is not greater than his master; nor is a missionary greater than he who sent him.
If you know these things, happy are you if you practise them.
I do not speak of you all. I know whom I have chosen. But that the scripture may be fulfilled, He who is eating bread

JOHN. XIII.

with me hath lifted up his heel against me.* This 1 tell you now before it happeneth, that when it cometh to pass you may believe me to be what Iam. Verily, verily Isay to you, He who receiveth whomsoever I shail send, receiveth me; and he who receiveth me receiveth him who sent me. Having said this, Jesus was troubled in spirit and testified and said, Verily, verily I say

to you, that one of you is to deliver me up. Upon this his dis-

ciples looked at one another, doubting of whom he spake. 
Now one of the disciples, whom Jesus loved, was reclined at table next to Jesus. Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him to ask who it might be of whom he spake. Thereupon he, bending back his head to Jesus breast, saith to him, Master, who is it? Jesus answereth, It is he to whom I will give this morsel after I have dipped it. Then, having dipped the morsel, he giveth it to Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon. And, after the morsel, Satan then entered into him. Therefore Jesus saith to him, What thou dost, do quickly. Now none of them at table knew for what purpose he said this to him. For some thought, as Judas had the purse, that Jesus is saying to him, Buy what we have need of for the festival, or that he should give something to the poor. He therefore, having received the morsel, went out immediately. Now it was night. When he therefore was gone, Jesus saith, Now is the son of man glorified; and God is glorified by him. If God be glorified by him, God will also glorify him in himself Indeed without delay he will glorify him.

Children, yet a little while I am with you. You will seek me, and as I said to the Jews, whither I am going you cannot come, so I now say to you. A new commandment I give you, that you love one another. As I have loved you, that you also love one another. By this all men will know that you are my disciples, if you exercise mutual love. Simon Peter saith to him, Master, whither art thou going? Jesus answered him,
Whither I am going thou canst not follow me now; but hereafter thou wilt follow me. Peter saith to him, Master, Why

cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my life for thee.

*Ps, AA . 9.

JOHN. XIII. XIV.

Jesus answered him, Thou wilt lay down thy life for me! Verily, verily, I say to thee, A cock will not crow 81 thou hast thrice denied me.
XIV. Let not your hearts be troubled. Trust in God : trust
2 also in me. In my Father’s house there are many mansions. If there were not, would I have said to you, I am going to prepare
3 a place for you? Now when I have gone and prepared a place for you, I will come again and take you to myself, that
_4 where Iam you may be also. Now you know whither I am
5 going and you know the way; Thomas saith to him, Master,
We do not’know whither thou art going, how then can we
6 know the way? Jesus saith to him, I am the way and the truth
7 and the life. No one cometh to the father but by me. Had you known me, you would have known my Father also. But henceforth
8 you know him and have seen him. Philip saith to him,
9 Master shew us the Father, and it sufficeth. Jesus saith to him, Am I so long atime with you, and hast thou not known me, Philip? He who hath seen me hath seen the Father: how
10 then sayest thou, Shew us the Father? Dost thou not believe that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The words which { speak to you, I do not speak from myself. And it is
11 the Father himself abiding in me who doth the works. Believe me that I am in the Father and that the Father is in me. At least
12 believe me on account of the works themselves. Verily, verily, I say to you, He who believeth in me, even he shall do the works which I do; nay, works greater than these he shall do, because I am going to my Father, and whatever you ask in
14 my name, that I will do. That the Father may be glorified in
15 the Son, if you ask any thing in my name, I will do it. If you
16 love me keep my commandments, and 1 will ask the Father
17 and he will give you another monitor, that he may continue with you forever, even the spirit of truth which the world cannot receive because it neither seeth him nor knoweth him.
18 But you know him, because he abideth with you and will be
19 in you. I will not leave you orphans. I am coming to you, Yet a little while and the world seeth me no more; but you see me,
20 Because I live therefore you shall live. In that day you will know that [amin my Father, and you in me, and 1 in you.
21 He who hath my commandments and keepeth them—he it is

22

23

JOHN. XIV. XV.

who loveth me. And he who loveth me will be loved by my
Father, and I will love him and manifest myself to him. Judas
(not the Iscariot) saith to him, Master, How is it that thou wilt manifest thyself to us, and not to the world? Jesus in reply, said to him, If any one love me, he will keep my word and my Father will love him; and we will come to him and make an abode with him. He who doth not love me, doth not . keep my words. Now the word which you hear is not mine: only, but the Father’s who sent me. These things I have spoken to you, while I remain with you. But the Monitor— the Holy Spirit which the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things and bring to your remembrance all that I have said to you. Peace I leave with you. This peace of mine
I give you. It is not as the world giveth that I give to you.
Let not your heart be troubled nor dismayed. You have heard me say to you, I am going away and 1 am coming to you. If you love me, you would rejoice because I said, I am going to the Father: for my Father is greater than I. Now. I have told you before it come to pass, that when it is come to pass you may believe. I will not discourse much more with you, for the chieftain of this world is coming, and hath nothing to do with me; save only that the world may know that I lees the Father and do as he commanded me. Arise; let us go hence.

SV. I am the true vine, and my Father is the vine-dresser.

7

8

Every branch in me which beareth not fruit, he loppeth off; and every branch which beareth fruit he cleaneth to make it more fruitful. Now you are clean through the word which I have spoken to you. Abide in me, and I [will abide] in you.
As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself unless it abide in the vine; so neither can you unless you continue in me. I am the vine; you are the branches. He who continueth in me and I in him—he it is who beareth much fruit. Because, separated from me, you can bear nothing: if any one continueth not in me he is thrown away as the branch is when it is withered. Such indeed are gathered and thrown into the fire and burned.
If you continue in me, and my words continue in you, ask what you will and it will be done for you: by this my Father is glorified. That you may bear much fruit, you must be my disciples.

16

19

20

21 to bt to

27

JOHN. XV.

As the Father hath loved me, so I have loved you. Continue ye in my love. If you keepmy commandments, you shall continue in my love; as I have kept my Father’s commandments and continue in his love. These things I have spoken to you that my joy may continue, and that your joy may be complete. This is my commandment, that you love one ano-

. ther as I have loved you. No one hath greater love than this,

that he would lay down his life for his friends. You are my friends, if you do what I command you. I no longer call you servants; because the servant doth not know what his master doth. But I have called you friends, because I have made known to you all that 1 heard from my Father. It was not you who chose me; but it was I who chose you, and placed you that you may go forth bearing fruit, and that your fruit may continue, that the Father may give you whatever you ask of him in my name. ‘These things I command you that you may love one another. Ifthe world hate you, consider that it hated me before you. If ye were of the world, the world would love its own. Now because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you.
Remember the word which I spake to you. The servant is not greater than his master. If they persecuted me, they will also persecute you. Ifthey have kept my word, they will also keep yours. But all these things they will do to you on account of my name, because they do not know him who sent me. If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have had sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin. He who hateth me, hateth my Father also. If I had not done among them works which no other did, they would not have had sin: but now, though they have seen, they have hated both me and my -
Father. But by this is fulfilled the word which is written in their law, They hated me without cause.* Now when the monitor whom I will send to you from the Father, is come— the spirit of truth who proceedeth from the Father, he will testify concerning me. And as for you, bear ye witness also, because you have been with me from the beginning.

* Ps. 35 19.

JOHN. XVI.

XVI. These things I have spoken to you that you may not

2

3

Or Or

be stumbled. ‘They will excommunicate you. Indeed a time is coming, when whosoever killeth you will think he doth an act of religious worship to God. And these things they will do to you because they know neither the Father nor me. But
I have spoken these things to you, that, when that time cometh, you may remember that I mentioned them to you. I did not tell you them from the beginning, because I was with you.
But now I am going to him who sent me, and none of you asketh me, Whither art thou going. But because I have told you these things, sorrow hath filled your hearts. But, I tell you this truth, it is to your advantage that I go away: for if I do not go, the monitor will not come to you; but when IgoI will send him to you. And when he is come, he will convince the

world in respect to sin, and in respect to righteousness, and in

16

17

18

19

20 respect to judgment—in respect to sin, because they do not believe in me; and in respect to righteousness, because I go to my Father and you see me no more; and in respect to judgment, because the prince of this world is judged. I have still many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now.
But when he—the spirit of truth, is come, he will lead you into all the truth; for he will not speak from himself, but will speak whatsoever he shall have heard, and will explain to you the train of events. He will glorify me, for he will receive of mine, and communicate to you. All that the Father hath is mine; therefore I said, He will receive of mine, and communicate to you. :

Yet a little while and you do not see me; and again a little while and you shall see me, because I am going to the Father.

Upon this some of his disciples said to one another, What is this which he saith to us, ‘‘A little while and you do not see me; and again a little while and you shall see me;”’ and, “‘because I am going to the Father.’’ They said therefore, What is this little while of which he speaketh? We do not comprehend what he saith. As Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him, therefore he said to them, Do ye inquire among yourselves concerning this, because I said, A little while, and you do not see me; and again a little while and you shall see me? Verily, verily, I say to you, You will weep and mourn;

JOHN. XVI. XVIL.

but the world will rejoice. You will be sorrowful; but your
21 sorrow will be turned into joy. A woman in travail hath sorrow, because her time is come; but when the child is born, she no more remembereth her anguish, for joy that a man is born into
22 the world. So you at present are in grief; but I will see you again and your heart will be made joyful; and that joy of yours no one shall take from you. Now in that day you will not ask
23 me any thing. Verily, verily, I say to you, whatever you shall ask of the Father in my name, he will give you. Hitherto you
24 have asked nothing in my name. Ask and ye shall receive,
25 that your joy may be complete. These things I have spoken to you inparables. But a time is coming when I will no more speak to you in parables, but with plainness of speech tell you respecting
26 the Father. In that day you will ask in my name, and I do not say to you that I will ask the Father for you; for
27 the Father himself loveth you, because you have loved me and
28 have believed that I came from God. I came forth from the Father and am come into the world. Again I leave the world and am going to the Father.
29 His disciples say to him, Behold now thou speakest plainly
30 and usest no parable. Now we know that thou knowest all things, and hast no need that any should ask thee questions.
By this we believe that thou camest forth from God. Jesus
31 answered them, Do you now believe? Behold the time is coming,
32 indeed is now come, when you will be scattered every one to his own, and vou will leave me alone; yet I am not alone,
33 because the Father is with me. These things I have spoken to you, that you may have peace in me. In this world you will have trouble; but take courage: I have overcome the world.
XVII. Having spoken this, Jesus raised his eyes to heaven, and said,

2 Father the hour is come. Glorify thy son, that thy son may glorify thee; that, as thou hast given him power over all flesh, he may, according to all that thou hast given him, give to these

3 everlasting life. Now this is the life everlasting that they may know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou

4 hast sent. I have glorified thee on the earth; I have finished

5 the work which thou gavest me to do. Now therefore, O Fa-

6

12

JOHN. XVI.

ther, glorify thou me, with thyself, with that glory which I had in thy presence before the world was. I have made known thy name to the men whom thou gavest me out of the world.
They were thine, and thou gavest them to me, and they have kept thy word. They now know that all those things which thou gavest me, come from thee. Because I have given them the doctrines which thou gavest me, therefore they have received them, and know certainly that I came forth from thee; and believe that thou didst send me. I pray for them. I am not praying for the world, but for them whom thou gavest me.
Because they are thine, and all things that are mine are thine, and thine are mine, and 1 am glorified by them, and am no longer in this world, but these are in this world, and I am coming to thee: Holy Father, keep in thy name them whom thou gavest me that they may be one as we are. While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name. Them whom thou gavest to me I have guarded, and none of them 15 lost, unless it be the son of perdition, so that the scripture is fulfilled; but lam now coming to thee, and I speak these things in this world, that they may have their joy in me completed in them. I have given them thy word, and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world as I am not of the world. Ido notask thee to remove them out of the world, but to preserve them from the evil one. They afe not of the world, as I am not of the world. Consecrate them for thy truth. The /Vord which is thine, is truth. As thou hast sent me into the world, so I have sent them into the world. And for them I consecrate myself, that they may be consecrated for truth. Now I do not pray for these only, but for those also who shall by means of their word believe in me, that all may - be one—as thou, Father, art in me and I in thee, that they also may be one in us—that the world may believe that thou hast sent me, and that I have given them the glory which thou gavest me, that they may be one as we are one—I in them and thou in me, that they may be taken into union, and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them as thou hast loved me. O Father, with respect to them whom thou hast given me, my desire is that where I am, they

25

26

JOHN. ΧΥΠ. XVII.

may be with me, that they may behold my glory which thou hast given me, because thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world. Righteous Father, though the world did not know thee, I knew thee, and these have known that thou didst send me. I have made known thy name to them, and I will make it known, that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them.

XVIII. When Jesus had thus spoken, he went out with his

(2

10

11

12

13

14

15

16 disciples to the bank of the brook Kedron, where there was a garden into which he went with his disciples. Now Judas who delivered him up knew the place, because Jesus had often resorted thither with his disciples. Jydas, therefore, having got the band of soldiers and under officers from the chief priests, and Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns and torches and

/ weapons. Thereupon Jesus, knowing all that were coming

upon him, went forth and said to them, Whom do ye seek?
They answered him, Jesus the Nazarene. Jesus saith to them,
I am he. Now Judas, who delivered him up, was with them.
As soon then as he said to them, I am he, they drew back and fell on the ground. He therefore asked them again; Whom do you seek? And when they answered, Jesus the Nazarene;
Jesus replied, [ have told you that Iam he. If therefore you seek me, let these go their way; that the word might be fulfilled which he spake, saying, ‘‘ Of them whom thou gavest me
I have lost none.” Upon this Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it and smote the servant of the chief priest, and cut off his right ear. Now the servant’s name was Malchus. Jhereupon Jesus said to Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath.
Must I not drink the cup which my Father hath given me?
Then the band of soldiers, and the commander and the under officers of the Jews, took Jesus and bound him, and led him away, first to Annas, for he was the father in law of Caiaphas, who was chief priest that year. Now it was Caiaphas who in council said to the Jews, It was expedient that one man die for the people.

Now Simon Peter, and another disciple, followed Jesus.
The other disciple was known to the chief priest, and went in with Jesus into the court of the chief priest, but Peter stood

‘JOHN. XVIII.

at the gate without. The other disciple, therefore, who was

. known to the chief priest, went out and spoke to the portress,

17

18

33 and brought in Peter. Whereupon the girl, the portress, saith to Peter, Art not thou one of the disciples of that man? He saith, I am not. Now the servants and the under officers stood by a fire which they had made, because it was cold, and were warming themselves; and Peter stood with them and was warming himself. Meanwhile the chief priest asked Jesus concerning his disciples, and concerning his doctrine. Jesus answered him, I spake openly to the world, I taught always in the synagogues and in the temple, to which the Jews always resort. And I have spoken nothing in secret. Why askest thou me? Ask them who heard what I spoke to them. Behold they know what I have said. Upon his saying this, one of the under officers who stood by, gave Jesus a slap on the cheek, saying, Answerest thou the high priest so? Jesus answered him, If I have spoken disrespectfully, testify concerning the disrespect: but if properly; why smitest thou me?
Now Annas had sent him bound to Caiaphas the chief priest.

Still Simon Peter was standing warming himself; they therefore said to him, Art not thou also one of He disciples? He denied and said, I am not. One of the servants of the chief priest, a kinsman of him whose ear Peter had cut off, said,
Did I not see thee in the garden with him? Thereupon Peter again denied, and immediately a cock crowed. 3

From Caiaphas they led Jesus away to the judgment hall of the Roman governor. Now it was early in the morning and they themselves did not go into the hall that they might not be polluted, but that they might eat the passover. Pilate therefore came out to them and said, What accusation do you bring against this man? They in reply, said to him, If he were not a malefactor we would not have delivered him over to thee.
Then Pilate said to them; Take him yourselves and judge him according to your law. Upon this the Jews said to him, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death, so that the word was fulfilled which Jesus had Spoken, signifying by what kind of death he was to die.

Then Pilate went again into the hall, and called Jesus and

JOHN. XVIII. XIX.

34 said to him, Thou art the king of the Jews? Jesus answered
35 him, Dost thou say this from thyself? Or have others told it

36 m

37

38

39 thee concerning me? Pilate answered him, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation, even the chief priests, have delivered thee up to

e. What hast thou done? Jesus answered, My kingdom is at of this world. If my kingdom were of this world, my attendants would have fought to prevent my being delivered up to the Jews. But now my kingdom is not of this world. There- » upon Pilate said to him, Thou art a king then? Jesus answered, It is as thou sayest, I am a king. For this I was born, and for this I came into the world, to bear testimony for the truth.
Every one who is of the truth hearkeneth to my voice. Pilate saith to him, What is truth? And having said this, he went out again to the Jews, and saith to them, I findno fault in him.
Now you have a custom that I should release one to you at the passover. Is it your will therefore that I release to you the king of the Jews? Upon this they all cried out again, saying,
Not this man, but Barabbas. Now this Barabbas was a robber.

XIX. Then Pilate took Jesus*and scourged him, and the sol-

3

6

10 ll

diers having platted a crown of thorns, put it on his head and threw around him a purple robe, and said, Hail! king of the
Jews! When they gave him slaps on the cheek. Then Pilate went out again and saith to them, Behold I bring him out to you that you may know that I find no fault in him. So Jesus came out wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe.
And Pilate saith to them, Behold the man. Upon which when the chief priests, and the officers saw him, they cried, saying,
Crucify him; crucify him. Pilate saith to them, Take him yourselves and crucify him; for I find no fault in him. The Jews answered, We have a law; and by that law of ours he ought to die, because he hath pretended to be the son of God. Now when Pilate heard this expression he was more alarmed and went again into the judgment hall, and saith to Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus made him no answer. Then Pilate saith to him, Dost thou not speak to me? Knowest thou not, that I haye power to crucify thee; and that I have power to release thee? Jesus answered, Thou couldst have no power at all

against me, if it were not given thee from above; therefore he

12

13

14

15

20 ai

22

23

24

25

26

᾿ JOHN. XIX.

who delivered me up to thee hath the greater sin. From this
[time] Pilate sought to release him ; but the Jews cried out, saying, If thou let this man go, thou art not Czsar’s friend.
Whoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Cesar.
When Pilate therefore heard this speech, he brought out Jesus and sat down on the tribunal in a place called the pavement (in Hebrew Gabbatha.) (It was now the paschal preparation day,* and the sixth hour was drawing on,) and he saith to the Jews, Behold your king! Whereupon they cried out, Away, away with him; crucify him. Pilate saith to them,
Shall I crucify your king? The chief priests answered, We have no king but Cesar. Then he delivered him up to them to be crucified. So they took Jesus and led him away, and he went out, carrying his cross, to the place called Sculls,
(in Hebrew, Golgotha,) where they crucified him, and two others with him; one on one side and the other on the other side, and Jesus inthe middle. Now Pilate had written a label and put it on the cross, and the writing was this, Jesus
THE NAZARENE, THE KING OF THE Jews. This label therefore many of the Jews read; for the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city; and the inscription was in Hebrew and Greek and Latin. Wherefore the chief priests of the
Jews said to Pilate, Write not The king of the Jews, but, that he said, I am the king of the Jews. Pilate answered, What I have written, I have written.

Now when the soldiers had nailed Jesus to the cross, they took his garments and divided them into four parts, to every soldier a part. But as for the vest, as it was without seam, being woven from the top throughout, they said to one another,
Let us not tear it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be, so that the scripture was fulfilled which saith, ‘‘ They parted my garments among them; and for my vesture they cast lots.’
These things the soldiers actually did.

Now there stood by the cross of Jesus, his mother, and his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary
Magdalene. Jesus therefore seeing his mother, and the disci-

*That is the day previous to the sabbath in the passover week, or during the festival of the passover. TPs. 22. 18.

JOHN. XIX.

ple whom he loved standing near, saith to his mother, Wo-

27 man, behold thy son! Then he saith to the disciple, Behold

thy mother! And from that hour the disciple took her to his own home.

After this, Jesus, knowing that all things were now accomplished, that the scripture might be fulfilled, saith, I thirst. Upon which, as there was a vessel set full of vinegar, some having filled a sponge with vinegar put it on a stalk of

30 hyssop and put it to his mouth.* When Jesus had received

51

38

40 the vinegar, he said, It is finished, and bowing his head, he expired.

Now that the bodies might not remain on the cross during the sabbath, therefore when it was preparation time (for that sabbath was a great day) the Jews besought Pilate that their legs might be broken and the bodies removed. The soldiers therefore came and broke the legs of the first and also of the other who had been crucified with him. But when they came to
Jesus, as they saw that he was already dead, they did not break his legs. But one of the soldiers with his spear pierced his side, and blood and water issued forth immediately. Now he who was an eye witness hath testified this. And his testimony is true, and [Jesus] himself knoweth that he speaketh the truth that you may believe. For these things were done that the scripture might be fulfilled, ‘‘ A bone of him shall not be broken.{”’
And again another scripture saith, ‘ They will look on him whom they have pierced.§”

After this, Joseph of Arimathea, who was a disciple of Jesus, but for fear of the Jews, a concealed one, asked leave of
Pilate to take away the body of Jesus, and Pilate granted it.
He therefore came and took away the body of Jesus. And
Nicodemus, he who formerly came to Jesus by night, came also with a mixture of myrrh and aloes, weighing about a hundred pounds. So they took the body of Jesus and wrapped it up in linen swathings with the spices, according to the

*Ps. 22.15. ‘Preparation time was from nine, or three o’clock
ἴῃ the afternoon, to sunset, when the sabbath commenced. tEx. 12. 46. Numb. 9. 12. §Zach. 12. 10.

42

JOHN. XIX. XX.

Jewish custom of embalming. Now at the place where he was crucified there was a garden, and in the garden a new tomb, in which no one had ever been laid. Therefore on account of the preparation of the Jews, they laid Jesus there, because the tomb was nigh at hand.

XX. Now on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene

cometh to the tomb early in the morning, while there was still darkness, and she seeth the stone was taken away from the tomb. Upon which she runneth and cometh to Simon Peter and the other disciple, whom Jesus loved, and saith to them,
They have taken the master out of the tomb and we do not. know where they have laid him. Thereupon Peter set out with the other disciple, and they went to the tomb. Now they both ran together, but the other disciple out ran Peter and came first to the tomb. And having stooped down he seeth the linen swathings laid by; but did not goin. Then cometh Simon
Peter following him, and he went into the tomb and seeth the linen swathings laid by, and the napkin, which was on his head, not laid with the linen swathings, but folded up ina place by itself. ‘Then the other disciple, who came first to the tomb, went in also and saw and believed. For they did not yet know the scripture, that he was to rise from the dead.
Therefore these disciples went their way home again. but
Mary stood without, before the tomb, weeping. And as she wept, she stooped down to look into the tomb, and seeth two angels robed in white, sitting one at the head and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain: and they say to her,
Woman why weepest thou? She saith to them, Because they have taken away my lord, and I know not where they have laid him. And, having said this, she turneth about and seeth
Jesus standing, but did not know that itis Jesus. Jesus saith to her, Woman, why weepest thou? Whom art thou seeking?
She, supposing him to be the gardener, saith to him, Sir, if thou hast taken him up, teil me where thou hast laid him, and
I will take him away. Jesus saith to her, Mary! She turning saith to him, Rabboni, that is to say, Teacher. Jesus saith to her, Cling not to me, for I have not yet ascended to my Father: But go to my brethren and tell them, I am about to ascend to my Vather and to your Father, and to my God and

JOHN. XX. XXI.

18 your God. Mary Magdalene cometh and telleth the disciples that she hath seen the Lord, and that he spoke these things to her.

19 In the evening, on that same day, the first day of the week, the doors where the disciples assembled being shut for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and saith to

20 them, Peace be to you. And having said this, he shewed them his hands and his side, and the disciples were rejoiced at see-

21 ing the Lord. Then Jesus said to them again, Peace be to you.

22 As the Father sent me soI send you. And having said this he breathed on them, and saith to them, Receive a holy spirit.

23 Whose sins soever you forgive, they are forgiven them, and whose sins soever you retain, they are retained.

24 Now Thomas, one of the twelve, he who is called Didy-

25 mus, was not with them when Jesus came. The other disciples therefore said to him, We have seen the Lord. But he said tothem, Unless I see in his hands the print of the nails; and put my finger into the print of the nails; and put this hand

26 of mine into his side, I will not believe. And after eight days, his disciples were again within, and Thomas with them. Jesus cometh, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst and said,

27 Peace be to you. Then he saith to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger and behold my hands! and reach thy hand and put it in-

28 to my side; and be not an unbeliever, but a believer. And Thomas answered and said to him, My Lord and my God. Jesus

29 saith to him, Thomas, Because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed? Happy they who have not seen me and yet believe.

30 Now Jesus performed many other miracles in the presence

31 of his disciples, which are not written in this book. But these are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing, you may have life by his name.

ΧΧΙ. After this Jesus shewed himself again to his disciples,

2 by the sea of Tiberias, and in this manner he shewed himself.
Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathaniel, who was of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two

3 other of his disciples, were together. Simon Peter saith to them,
[am going a fishing. They say to him, We will go with thee.
They went and presently got aboard the vessel, and that

JOHN. ΧΧΙ.

4 night caught nothing. And when it was morning Jesus stood

5

15

16

17

18

19 on the shore, but the disciples.did not know that it was Jesus.
Then Jesus saith to them, Lads, have you any thing to eat?
They answered him, No. Then he said to them, Cast the net on the right side of the vessel and you will find. So they cast, and now they were not able to draw it up, by reason of the multitude of fishes. Upon this that disciple whom Jesus loved saith to Peter, It is the Lord. Simon Peter therefore, upon. hearing that it is the Lord, girded on his vest, for he was ἡ stript, and threw himself into the sea. But the other disciples came in the boat, (for they were not far from land, only about two hundred cubits) dragging the net with the fishes. As soon then as they came ashore, they see a fire of coals ready and a little fish on it, and a loaf of bread. Jesus saith to them, Bring some of the fish you have now caught. Simon Peter went and drew the net ashore full of large fishes, a hundred and fifty three. And though they were so many, the net was not torn. Jesus saith to them, Come to breakfast. Now none of the disciples ventured to ask him, Who art thou? knowing that it was the Lord.
Then Jesus cometh and taketh the loaf and giveth to them, and the small fish likewise. This was now the third time that
Jesus appeared to these his disciples, after he was risen from the dead. . ὲ

So when they had breakfasted, Jesus saith to Simon Peter,
Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these? He saith to him, Yes, Lord, Thou knowest that I love. thee. Jesus saith to him, Feed my lambs. Again he saith to him a second time,
Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me? He saith to him, Yes,
Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus saith to him, Tend my sheep. He saith to him the third time, Simon, son of
Jonas, lovest thou me? Peter was grieved that he said to him, the third time, ‘ Lovest thou me,’ and he said to him, Lord thou knowest all things. Thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus saith to him, Feed my sheep. Verily, verily I say to thee, When thou wast young, thou didst gird thyself and walk where thou wouldst; but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another will gird thee and carry thee whither thou wouldst not. Now this he said to him, signifying by what sort of a death he should glorify

JOHN. XXI.

30 God. And having said this, Jesus saith to him, Follow me.
Now when Peter turned about and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following, (even him who at the supper reclined on his breast and said, Master, who is he that is about to deli-

21 ver thee up) Peter seeing him, saith to Jesus, Lord, and this

22 one, what in respect to him? Jesus saith to him, If I will that he stay till Icome, what is that tothee? Followthou me. This saying

23 therefore went abroad among the brethren, that this disciple should not die. But Jesus did not say to him, he should not

24 die; but, If I will that he stay till I come, what is that to thee?

This is the disciple who testifieth concerning these things and hath written these things. And we know that his testimony is true.

25 There are indeed many other things which Jesus did. With respect to them, if they were all committed to writing, one by one, even then I do not think that the world would cordially receive the books written. Amen.

THE ACTS

OF THE

APOSTLES.

I COMPOSED, O Theophilus, the former treatise con-

2 cerning all that Jesus took occasion both to do and teach till the day when he was taken up, after giving a charge by the
Holy Spirit to the apostles whom he had chosen, and to whom

3 he had, after his suffering, shewn himself to be alive, by many proofs, during forty days appearing to them, and speaking

4 of what concerned the kingdom of God. Then assembling them together, he ordered them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the Father, which you have heard

5 from me.* For John indeed baptized in water, but you shall be baptized ina Holy Spirit not many days hence. When they

6 therefore were come together they asked him, saying, Lord, art thou at this time about to restore the kingdom to Israel ?

7 Whereupon he said to them, It is not for you to know times and seasons which the Father hath reserved in his own dispo-

ἃ sal. But you shall receive power when the Holy Spirit is come upon you; and you shall be witnesses for me in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and Samaria, and to the remotest part of the earth.

9 And having said this, while they were beholding [him] he

Θεοῦ ὁ aaa aR TN Te en σιρτεινν ἀπε τ ἐπ᾿ προ υ στ, Rae eer

* See John 14. 26: 15.26: 16, 7. Luke 24. 49.

THE ACTS. I.

10 was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight.

11

12

18

14

15

16

21

22

And as they continued looking stedfastly up to heaven, while he was going, behold!. two men stood near them, robed in white, who addressed them, saying, Men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up to heaven? This same Jesus who is taken up from you into heaven, will come in the same manner as you have seen him going to heaven.

Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mount called
Olives, which is near Jerusalem, a sabbath day’s journey* from

‘it. And when they came in, they went up into the upper room,

where Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip and
Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James, son of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of James, usually made their abode. These all continued with one mind in prayer and supplication, with the women, particularly Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren.

And in those days Peter rising up in the midst of the disciples, (the number of persons assembled being about one hun- dred and twenty) said, Men, brethren, It was necessary that» this scripture should be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit predicted, -by the mouth of David, concerning Judas who was guide to them who laid hold on Jesus; because he was numbered with us, and had a part of this service allotted him—(Now this man indeed had purchased} a field with the reward of his iniquity, and, falling on his face, had burst asunder, and all his bowels gushed out; and this was so generally known to 47] the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that the field is called in their language, Akeldama, that is field of blood) “for it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his fold be desolate, and let there be na inhabitant therein.t’? And, Lis office let another take;\ Itis necessary therefore, that one of these men who have accompanied us, during all the time that the Lord Jesus came in and went out over us, beginning from the baptism of John to the day on which he was taken up from us, should be a witness

* About a mile. t That is, according to the Hebrew idiom, had occasioned a field to be purchased. t Ps. 69.25. §109. 8,

THE? ACTSHE Il.

with us of his resurrection.”’? So they set up two, Joseph called Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias. And having prayed, saying, ‘Thou, O Lord, who knowest the hearts of all men, shew which of these two thou hast chosen to,take the share of this ministration and apostleship which Judas abandoned to go to his own place,” they cast lots; and the lot fell on Matthias ; and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.

Now when the day of pentecost * was fully come, they were all with one accord in the same place. And suddenly there came from heaven a sound as ofa mighty rushing wind, which filled the whole house where they were sitting. And there appeared to them separate tongues, as of fire, and it settled on each of them. And they were all filled with a holy spirit and began to speak in different languages, as the spirit gave them to make solemn addresses. Now there were residing at
Jerusalem Jews, devout men from every nation under heaven.
So when this report spread, the multitude came together and were confounded. Because every one heard them speaking in his own peculiar dialect; therefore they were astonished and expressed their amazement, saying one to another, Behold! are not all these men who speak, Galileans ? How then do we hear, every one in his own native tongue! Parthians and Medes and Elamites and the inhabitants of Mesopotamia and Judea, and Capadocia, Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphilia,
Egypt and the parts of Lybia about Cyrene, the Roman strangers also both Jews and Proselytes, Cretans and Arabs, we hear them speaking, in our own tongues, the wonderful

12 dispensations of God. So they were all amazed and in sus-

13 pense, saying to one another, What can be the meaning of this ? But others scoflingly said, They are filled with sweet wine. .

Whereupon Peter, as he was standing with the eleven, raised his voice and thus solemnly addressed them, ‘ Men of
Judea and all ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, let this be made known to you; and listen attentively to my words: for these

* Pentecost the 50th day. See Lev. 28. 15, 16.

18

21

22

93

30

THE ACTS. II.

men are not drunk as you suppose; for it is but the third hour* of the day. But this is what was spoken by the prophet
Joel, “And it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, that I will pour out a portion of my spirit upon all flesh ; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy; and your young men shall see visions; and your old men shall dream dreams ; and upon my servants, and upon my handmaids, in those days
I will pour out a portion of my spirit, and they shall prophesy: and I will exhibit wonders in the heaven above, and signs on the earth beneath—blood and fire and smoky vapour. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the coming of the great and illustrious day of the Lord.
And it shall come to pass, that whoever will call on ἘΝ name of the Lord shall be saved.+”’

*‘Men of Israel hear these words—Jesus the Nazarene, a man from God, pointed out to you by miracles and wonders and signs, which God performed by him among you, as you yourselves know.—Him, being surrendered up by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, you have taken ; and by the hands of wicked men have crucified and slain.—
Him God hath raised up, having loosed the bonds¢{ of death, as it was not possible that he dent! be holden by it: for concerning him David saith, I saw the Lord continually before me: because he is at my right hand that I may not be moved; therefore my heart was gladdened, and my tongue exulted with joy ; and moreover my flesh also will dwell in hope, that thou wilt not leave my soul in the mansion of the dead, nor suffer thy Holy One to see corruption. Thou hast made known to me the ways of life. Thou with thy presence wilt fill me with joy. ”’

** Men, brethren, permit me to speak freely to you concerning tHe patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried; and his sepulchre is among us to this day. Being therefore a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn to him with an

* Nine o’clock, A. M. t Joel, 2 2. 28, &c. } Literally, pangs or pains, the cause being put for the effect. § Literally Hades, the place of departed spirits. Ps, 16..8, &c.

36 od
38

48

THE ACTS. Il.

oath, that from the fruit of his loins he would, as far as regardeth the flesh, raise up the Christ to sit on his throne, he spoke prophetically of the resurrection of the Christ, that his soul was not left inthe mansion of the dead, nor did his flesh see corruption. —This very Jesus God hath raised up, of which we all are witnesses. Being therefore exalted at the right hand of God, and having received the promise of the Holy Spirit from the Father, he hath poured out this which you now see and hear. For David did not ascend into the heavens; yet he saith, ‘‘ The Lord said to my lord, Sit at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.*’’? Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath made the same
Jesus whom ye have crucified, Lord and Christ.

Upon hearing this, they were pierced to the heart and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, Men, brethren, What shall we do? Thereupon Peter said to them, Repent and let every one of you be baptized to the remission of sins for the name of Jesus Christ, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. For the promise is to you and to your children, and to all them afar off, whomsoever the Lord our God may invite.” And with many other words he obtested and exhorted them, saying, ‘‘ Save yourselves from this depraved generation.”? Then they who gladly received his word were baptized, and about three thousand souls were that day added; and continued stedfast in the doctrine of the apostles and in the community, and in the breaking of the loaf, and in prayers, and there was fear on every soul; and many wonders and signs were done by the apostles.

Now all they who believed were together, and had all things in common; and they sold their possessions and goods and distributed them to all, as any had need. And continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at home, they partook of food with joy and singleness of heart, praising God and having favour with all the people. And the
Lord added daily to the congregation them who were cured.

* Ps. 410. 1.

THE ACTS. ΠΙ.

Now at the same time that Peter and John were going up

2 tothe temple at the hour of prayer, namely, at the ninth hour,*

3

6

7

8 there was a certain man carried up who had been lame from his birth, whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple, called Braury-caTe, to ask alms of them who were going into the temple; who seeing Peter and John just about to enter the temple, begged to receive an alms. Whereupon Peter and John having fixed their eyes on him, Peter said, Look on us. Upon which he looked earnestly at them, expecting to receive something from them. Then Peter said, Silver and gold I have none. But what I have, that I give thee. In the name of Jesus
Christ the Nazarene, rise up and walk. Then having taken him by the right hand he raised him up. And instantly his feet and ankle bones were strengthened ; and leaping up, he stood; then walked and entered the temple with them, walking and leaping and praising God.

When all the people saw him walking and praising God, and recollected that he was the man who used to sit begging at the Beauty-gate of the temple, they were filled with wonder and astonishment at what had happened to him. And while the lame man who was cured, kept hold of Peter and John, all the people in amaze crowded to them in the portico called Solomon’s. Now when Peter saw this he thus addressed the people.

*“* Men of Israel, why wonder ye at this? Or why do ye fix your eyes on us, as if we by our own power or piety had made

13 this man walk? The God of Abraham, and Isaak, and Jacob—

16

17 the God of our fathers hath glorified his servant Jesus whom ye delivered up. Yes, you renounced him in the presence of
Pilate, when he had determined to release him: you indeed renounced the Holy One and the Just, and desired a murderer to be granted to you. You indeed killed him who is the conductor to life, whom God hath raised from the dead, of which we are witnesses. Now for the belief in his name, his name hath strengthened this man whom you see and know. Yes, the belief which is by him hath given this man this perfect soundness in the presence of you all. And now brethren, I know that

*Three o’clock afternoon, the time of the evening sacrifice.

21

22

23

26

10

THE ἈΓΤΘ. ΤΠ IV,

it was through ignorance that both you and your rulers acted thus; and that what God foretold by the mouth of all his prophets—Tuar tHe CurisT sHouLD suFFreER, he hath thus accomplished. Repent therefore and return, that your sins may be blotted out, that seasons of refreshment may come from the presence of the Lord; and that he may send him who hath been before hand proclaimed to you—namely, Jesus Christ, whom the heaven must receive till the time of the consummation of all which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets of old: for Moses indeed said to the fathers, “ὙΠῸ
Lord your God will raise up for you from among your brethren a prophet like me. To him you must hearken according to all that he shall speak to you; and whoever the person be who will not hearken to that prophet, he shall be cut off from among the people.* All the prophets also from Samuel, even as many of the following ones as have spoken, have likewise foretold these days. You are the children of the prophets and of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying to
Abraham “ And by thy seed all the families of the earth shall be blessed.}”’ It is to you first that God, having raised up his son Jesus, hath sent him, blessing you, when you turn every one from his iniquities.

Now while they were speaking to the people; the priests, and the captain of the temple, and the Sadducees, displeased at their teaching the people and promulgating by Jesus the resurrection from the dead, came on them, and laid hands on them, and put them in prison till the next day. For it was now evening. But many of those who heard the word believed.
And the number of the men* became about five thousand.
And on the morrow their rulers, and elders, and Scribes at
Jerusalem assembled, with Annas the chief priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the pontifical family; and having set them in the midst, they asked by what power, or by what name, have you done this? ‘Then
Peter being filled with a holy spirit, said to them,

Rulers of the people and elders of Israel, if we are this day examined for a good deed done to an imfirm man, by what

*Deut. 18. 15, &e- +Gen. 18. 18.-and 22. 18.

THE ACTS. IV.

means he hath been healed, be it known to you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, whom ye crucified —whom God raised from the dead

11 —by him this man standeth before you, perfectly cured.
This is the stone that was rejected by you the builders, which

12 was for the head of the corner.* This cure indeed is by no
\other, nor is there any other name under heayen given among men by which we can be saved.”

13 Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and found that they were illiterate men, and in private stations of life, they wondered; and recollected their having been with

14 Jesus. And seeing the man who was cured standing with

15 them, they could make no reply. So, having ordered them to withdraw from the Sanhedrim, they conferred among them.

16 selves, saying, What can we do with these men? For that a signal miracle hath indeed been done by them, is manifest to

17 all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it. But that it may not spread farther among the people, let us severe. ly threaten them not to speak any more for this name to

18 any man. So having called them in, they gave them this general charge, not to make solemn addresses, nor teach, for the

19 name of that Jesus. But Peter and John in reply to them, said,
Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken to you ra-

20 ther than,.to God judge ye. For we cannot but speak the

21 things which we have seen and heard. So, having further threatened them, they dismissed them, not finding how to punish them, because of the people who all glorified God for

22 that which was done. For the man, upon whom this miracle of healing was performed, was above forty years old. So, be-

23 ing discharged, they went to their brethren and told them all that the chief priests and the elders had said to them; which when they heard, they with one accord raised their voice to

24 God and said, O Lord, thou art the God, who madest the heaven and the earth and the sea, and all that are therein, who

25 by the mouth of thy servant David hast said, ‘‘Why did πὰ.

26 tions rage, and tribes meditate vain things?”

————_—_———____ ae s..SssS.S————_————--- - -. Se eo

* Ps, 118. 22.

27

THE ACTS. IV. V.

“The kings of the earth combined, and the chiefs assembled together against the Lorp and against his Ano1nTED.*””

For indeed against thy holy Child Jesus whom thou hast anointed, both. Herod and Pontius Pilate, with nations and the tribes of Israel, were gathered together, to do what thy hand and thy council had determinately marked out beforehand to be brought to pass. Now with regard to present occurrences, look down, O Lord, on their threatening, and ena-

30. ble thy servants to speak thy word with all freedom when thou

31

32 stretchest forth thy hand for healing; and signs and wonders are done by the name of thy holy child, Jesus. And while they were praying, the place in which they were assembled was shaken. And they were all filled with a Holy Spirit and spoke the word of God with boldness.

Now the whole body of the believers were of one heart and one soul. And no one said that any of his goods were his own; but all things were common among them. And the apostles delivered with great power the testimony of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus. And there was great thankfulness among them all; for there was not one indigent person among them: for as many as were proprietors of lands or houses sold them and brought the prices of the things sold, which being laid at the apostles’ feet, distribution was made to every one according as any had need. In particular Joses, who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas, the signification of which 1s Son of Consolation, a Levite, and by birth a Cyprian, having an estate, sold it and brought the money and laid it at the apostles’ feet. But

there was a certain man named Ananias, who with his wife
Sapphira sold an estate and kept back a part of the price, his wife also being privy to it. And having brought a certain part he laid it at the feet of the apostles. Upon which Peter said,
Ananias, Why hath Satan filled thy heart that thou shouldst lie to the Holy Spirit, and keep back a part of the price of the land? While it remained, did it not remain thine? And when sold it was still at thine own disposal. Why then hast thou determined this thing in thy heart? Thou hast not lied to

Sy ee ee ee en

iit. Pig. [2.0 to Bees

12 bo

THE ACTS. V.

men, but to God. Upon hearing these words Ananias fell down and expired. And great fear came upon all who heard these things. Then the young men arose and having swathed him, they carried him out and buried him. And about the space of three hours after, his wife, not knowing what had happened, came in. And Peter said to her, ‘Tell me; did you sell the land for such a price? And she said, Yes, for so much. Thereupon Peter said to her, How is it that you have agreed to try the spirit of the Lord ? Behold the feet of them who have buried thy husband are at the door, and they will carry thee out. At that instant she fell at his feet and expired. And the young men coming in found her dead. So they carried her out and buried her by her husband. And great fear came upon all the congregation, and upon all that heard these things; and by the hands of the apostles many signs and wonders were done among the people :

Now they were all with one accord in Solomon’s porch, and of the rest no one presumed to join himself to them, but the people magnified them, and believers in the Lord, multitudes both of men and women were more and more added so that in every street they brought out the sick and laid them on beds and couches, that the shadow of Peter as he went along might overshadow some of them.

But when the raultitude also of the cities around flocked to Jerusalem, bringing the sick and those who were tormented with unclean spirits, who were all cured; the chief priest rising up, and all his party—the sect of the Sadducees, they were filled with zeal, and laid their hands on the apostles and put them in the common prison. But during the night an angel of the Lord opened the doors of the prison ; and having brought them out said, Go, and having taken your station in the temple, speak to the people all the words of this life.
Upon hearing this they went into the temple about break

of day, and taught. Now when the chief priest was come with

his party and had convened the Sanhedrim and all the elders

of the children of Israel, they sent to the prison to have them

brought up. But when the officers went and did not find

them in the prison ; they returned and made report, saying,

We found indeed the prison shut with all safety, and the

24

25

26

27

THE ACTS.°V.

guards without standing before the door; but on opening we found no one within. And while the priest and the captain of the temple and the chief priests, upon hearing these words, were doubting how this could be, there came one who told them, saying, Behold! the men whom you put in prison, are standing in the temple and teaching the people. Then the captain went with the under officers and brought them, but without violence ; for they were afraid of being stoned by the people. And when they had brought them, and set them before the Sanhedrim, the chief priest asked them, saying,
Did we not strictly charge you not to teach for this name ?
Yet behold you have filled Jerusalem with this doctrine of yours and wish to bring that man’s blood upon us. In reply to which Peter and the apostles said, We must obey God rather than men. The God of our fathers hath raised up
Jesus, whom ye slew, having caused him to be suspended on a cross—even him, a chief leader and a Saviour, God hath exalted at his right hand to give repentance to Israel and a remission of sins. And we are his witnesses of these things, as is also the Holy Spirit which God hath granted to them who obey him.

At hearing this they were cut to the heart, and consulted to put them to death. But there stood up a man in the Sanhedrim—a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a teacher of the law, in great esteem among all the people; and having moved that the apostles withdraw for a little while, he said to them, ‘“‘Men of Israel, take heed to yourselves how you proceed in regard to these men. For some time ago Theudas started up, saying that he was an extraordinary person, to whom a number of men, about four huiidred, joined themselves. He was destroyed, and all that put confidence in him were broken up and came to nothing. After him started up Judas, the Galilean, in the days of the enrolment, and drew a great many people after him. He also perished, and ali that put confidence in him were dispersed. Now therefore on this occasion I say to you, Forbear from meddling with these men, and let them alone: for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will moulder away. Butif it be of God you cannot annul it. Peradventure you may be found even fighting against God.” So

THE ACTS. V. VI.

to him they agreed: and having called in the apostles and scourged them, they charged them not to speak about the

41 name of Jesus and dismissed them. Thereupon they went

from the presence of the Sanhedrim, rejoicing that they were

42 counted worthy to suffer shame for his name. And every day,

both in the temple and at home, they ceased not to teach and publish the glad tidings, That Jesus is the Christ.

VI. Now in those days, the number of the disciples being

multiplied, there was a murmuring of the Hellenists* against the Hebrews that their widows were neglected in the daily

2 distribution. Wherefore the twelve having called together

2 the multitude of the disciples said, It is not proper that we should leave the word of God to attend tables: look out therefore, brethren, from among yourselves seven men of good re-

putation, full of a holy spirit and wisdom, whom we may ap.
4 point to this office. And as for us, we will continue in the

constant exercise of prayer, and in the ministration of the word. And this speech pleased the whole multitude. So they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and a holy spirit, and Philip and Prochorus and Nicanor and Timon and Parmenias

6 and Nicholas a proselyte of Antioch, whom they set before

the apostles, who having prayed, laid their hands on them.
So the word of God spread, and the number of disciples was greatly multiplied in Jerusalem, and a great multitude of the priests became obedient to the faith.

8 Now Stephen being full of faith and power performed miracles
9 and great signs among the people, and there arose some

of the synagogue of the Libertini, as it was called, and of the
Cyrenians and Alexandrians, and of those of Cilicia and Asia,

10 who disputed with Stephen; but not being able to withstand

11 the wisdom and spirit with which he spoke, they suborned men to say, We heard him speak blasphemous words against

12 Moses, and against God. And having stirred up the people

and the elders and the Scribes, they came upon him and seiz-

13 ed him, and brought him to the Sanhedrim, and set up false

witnesses, who said, This man is incessantly speaking blas-

* Jews who spoke the Greek language.

14

15

THE ACTS. VI. VII.

phemous words against this holy place and the law; for we heard him saying that Jesus the Nazarene will destroy this place and change’ the customs which Moses delivered to us. And all who sat in the Sanhedrim, looking stedfastly at him, beheld his countenance, like the countenance of an angel.

VIL Then the chief priest said, Are these things so? Upon

2

which he said,
Men, brethren and fathers hearken. The God of the glory appeared to our father Abraham, when he was im Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran, and said to him, Depart from this country of thine, and from thy kindred, and come to the land which I will shew thee. Thereupon he went from the land of the Chaldees, and dwelt in Charran; and thence after his father died, God removed him to this land in which you now dwell, but gave him no inheritance in it; not even a foot of land. He indeed promised that he would give it to him for a possession, even to his seed after him, though he then had no child. And God spake thus—That his seed should sojourn in a strange land and be enslaved and afflicted : four hundred years: and the nation which they shall serve I will judge, said God, and after that they shall come out and serve me inthis place. Then he gave him the covenant of circumcision. So Abraham begat Isaak, and circumcised: him on the eighth day, and Isaak begat Jacob; and Jacob, the twelve patriarchs. And the patriarchs, being moved with envy, sold
Joseph into Egypt. But God was with him, and delivered him out of all his afflictions, and gave him favour and wisdom in the sight of Pharao king of Egypt, who appointed him ruler over Egypt, and al] his household. And there cameafamine © over all the land of Egypt and Chanaan. It was indeed a great affliction and our fathers found no sustenance. So when Jacob heard that there was corn in Egypt, he sent our fathers the first time ; and en their second going down Joseph made himself known to his brothers; and Joseph’s kindred was made known to Pharao. Then Joseph sent for his father Jacob and all his kindred, amounting to threescore and fifteen souls. So

16 Jacob went down to Egypt and died, he and our fathers, and

were conveyed to Sychem, and deposited in the sepulchre

17

THE ACTS. VII.

which Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of
[Chet, and in the field bought of*] Emmer the Sychemite.
And as the time approached for accomplishing the promise which God had made with an oath to Abraham, the people in-

18ecreased and multiplied in Egypt, until another king arose,

19

22

who knewnot Joseph. This king, mischievously politic against our family, ill treated our fathers, causing their children to be exposed that they might not be preserved alive. At this time
Moses was born, who was exceeding beautiful, and was nursed up three months in his father’s house. Being then exposed,
Pharao’s daughter took him up and had him nursed for her own son. So Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, and became mighty in council and in actions. And when he was forty years old it came into his mind to visit his. brethren, the children of Israel. And seeing one of them injured, he defended: him and avenged the injury by killing the.
Egyptian. Now he supposed that his brethren would understand that by his hand God was about to give them deliverance. But they understood not, and on the next day when he shewed himself to them who were quarrelling and persuaded them to peace, saying, Men, you are brethren, Why do ye injure one another? He who was doing his neighbour the injury thrust him away, saying, Who made thee a chief and a judge over us? Dost thou mean to kill me as thou didst the
Egyptian yesterday? At this speech Moses fled and became

» a sojourner in the land of Madiam, where he became the father

εἰ 84

of two sons. And when forty years were completed, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in the wilderness at mount Sinai, in a flame of fire in a bush, which when Moses saw, he was astonished at the vision, And as he was going near to view it, there came a voice of the Lord to him, ‘‘ I am the God of thy fathers—the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaak, and the
God of Jacob.”” Upon which Moses trembled and durst not view it. Then the Lord said to him, Loose the sandals from thy feet, for the place where thou standest is holy ground.

* These words I have added to supply a line which appears to have been omitted. by ancient transcribers.

35

38

4]

42

44

45 ween

THEVACTS/V ih

I have indeed seen the affliction of my people in Egypt, and have heard their groaning and am come down to deliver them.
Now therefore come, I will send thee to Egypt. This Moses whom they rejected, saying, Who made thee a chief and a judge—this very person God sent as a chief and a deliverer by the hand of an angel who appeared to him in the bush—This person brought them out by performing wonders and signs in
Egypt and at the Red sea, and in the wilderness, forty years.

‘This is the very Moses who said to the children of Israel, The

Lord your God will raise up for you, from among your brethren, a prophet like me, to him you are to hearken. ‘This is the person who was in the congregation in the wilderness, with the angel who spake to him at mount Sinai, and with our fathers; who received living oracles to give to us; to whom our fathers would not be obedient, but rejected him, when with their hearts they turned towards Egypt, saying to Aaron,
Make gods for us to go before us; for as for this Moses who brought us out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what is become of him. So they made a calf in those days and brought a sacrifice for the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own hands. ‘Therefore God turned and gave them up to worship the host of heaven. As it is written in the book of the Prophets,
‘Have you, O house of Israel, offered to me burnt offerings and sacrifices, forty years in the wilderness? You have indeed taken up the tabernacle of Moloch and the star of your God
Remphan—those types which you have made to worship them; therefore I will transport you beyond Babylon.*

The tabernacle of the testimony was among our fathers in the wilderness, as he who spoke to Moses had ordered it to be made according to the pattern which he had seen. ‘This tabernacle, which our fathers with Joshua received and brought into the territory of the nations which God drove out from before our fathers, continued till the days of David; who found favour in the sight of God, and made it his petition to find a habitation for the God of Jacob. But it was Solomon who built a house for him. But the Most High dwelleth not in

* Amos 5. 25, &c.

THE ACTS. VII. VIII.

temples made with hands. As the prophet saith, ‘“The hea-

ven is my throne, and the earth, my footstool. What sort of a house will you build for me? saith the Lord. And of what sort

shall be the place of my rest? Did not my hands make all these things?*”

O stiff necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears! Ye do always resist the Holy Spirit. As your fathers did, so do γε.

- Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? In-

deed they have slain them who prophesied concerning the coming of that Righteous one, of whom you havenow become the betrayers and murderers—you who have received the law through ranks of angels, but have not kept it.

At hearing this they were cut to the heart and gnashed their teeth at him. But he being full of a holy spirit, having his eyes fixed towards heaven, beheld the glory of God and
Jesus standing at the right hand of God: whereupon he said,
Behold! I see the heavens opened and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God. At which they screamed aloud, and stopped ‘their ears and rushed upon him with one accord.
And having ‘driven him out of the city they stoned him. And the witnesses laid their mantles at the feet of a young man named Saul, and stoned Stephen, invoking and saying, Lord
Jesus, receive my spirit. Then he kneeled down and cried with a loud voice, O! Lord, charge not this sin to their account; and having said this he fell asleep.

VILL. Now Saul continued to express satisfaction at his death:

and there was at that time a great persecution against the congregation which was at Jerusalem; and all, except the apostles, were scattered through the regions of Judea and Samaria.
While devout men were carrying Stephen to the grave and making great lamentation for him, Saul was making havock of the congregation. Entering into houses and dragging out men and women, he committed them to prison.

They, however, who were dispersed, went about proclaiming the glad tidings of the word; and Philip having come to a city of Samaria, proclaimed to them the Christ. And the

* Es. 66. 1.

12

13

14

19

20

21

22

23

24,

25

THE ACTS. VII.

crowds with one»accord attended to what were spoken by
Philip, when they heard and saw the signal miracles which he performed. For unclean spirits, with which many were possessed, went out of them with loud outcries: and many paralytic and lame persons were cured. And there was great joy in that city.

Now there was a certain man, named Simon, who had heretofore practised magical arts in that city and astonished the nation of Samaria, pretending that he was an extraordinary person, to whom all paid regard, from the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the great power of God. To him mdeed

they paid regard because for a long time he had astonished

them with his magical arts. But when they believed Philip’s proclamation of the glad tidings concerning the kingdom of
God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women. And even Simon himself believed, and being baptized, he continued steadily with Philip. And ‘seeing signs and great miracles done, he was astonished.

Now when the apostles who were at Jerusalem heard that
Samaria had received the word of God, they sent to them Peter and John, who having gone down, prayed for them that they might receive a holy spirit. ΡΣ it had not yet fallen on any of them, and they were only baptized to the name of the
Lord Jesus. Then they laid their hands on them and they received a holy spirit. When Simon saw that by the laying on of the hands of the apostles the holy spirit was given, he offered them money, saying, Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay my hands he may receive a holy spirit.
Whereupon Peter said to him, let thy money with thee be for destruction! Because thou hast thought that this free gift of
God may be purchased with money, thou hast no portion nor share in this matter, for thy heart is not right in the sight of
God. Repent therefore of this wickedness of thine; and beseech
God, if indeed this thought of thy heart can be forgiven thee.
For I perceive that thou art for bitter gall and for a bond of iniquity. In reply to which Simon said, Pray ye to the Lord for me that none of these things which you have mentioned may come upon me.

Now when they had testified and spoken the word of the

26

33

40

THE ACTS. VIII.

Lord, they set out on their return to Jerusalem, and communicated the glad tidings to many villages of the Samaritans. In the mean while an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying,
Arise and go southward on the road which leadeth down from
Jerusalem to Gaza, namely, the desert road. So he arose and went. And lo! aman of Ethiopia, an eunuch, a grandee of
Candace, the queen of the Ethiopians, who was her high treasurer, who had come to Jerusalem to worship, and was on his return, was sitting in a chariot and reading the prophet Esaias,
And the Spirit said to Philip, Go near and keep close to that chariot. So Philip ran close up and heard him reading the prophet Esaias. Whereupon he said, Dost thou understand what thou art reading ? To which he replied, How can 1 unless some one guide me? Then he invited Philip to come up and take a seat with him. Now the passage of scripture which he was reading was this, “He was led as a sheep to slaughter; and as a lamb before its shearer is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth. In his humiliation his legal trial is taken away.
Who will declare his manner of life? Because his life is taken from the earth.*”—And the eunuch addressing Philip, said,
Of whom, I pray thee, doth the prophet say this? Of himself, or of some other person? Then Philip opened his mouth, and beginning with this scripture, told him the glad tidings of Jesus. And as they continued the journey, they came toa certain water. Whereupon the eunuch said, Behold! here is water. What hindereth my being baptized? And Philip said, If thou believest with thy whole heart, it may be done. ‘l’o which he replied, I believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God. Then he ordered the chariot to stop. And they both went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him.
And when they came up out of the water, the spirit of the
Lord conveyed Philip away. And the eunuch saw him no more. For he proceeded on in his journey rejoicing, and
Philip was found at Azotus. And passing on he proclaimed the glad tidings in all the cities, till he came to Czesarea.

* Esaias 53. 7, &c.

2

18

THE; ACTS(EX:

As for Saul he was still breathing out threatening and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord. Having gone to the chief priest, he asked letters from him to the synagogues at
Damascus, that ifhe should find any of this way, whether men or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem. But when he was on the road and drawing near to Damascus, suddenly a light from heaven shone around him. And having fallen on the ground, he heard a voice saying to him, “Saul,
Saul, Why persecutest thou me?” And he said, Who art thou,
Lord? Andthe Lord said, “1 am Jesus, whom thou art persecuting. It is hurting thyself to kick against sharp pointed goads.”
Whereupon he trembling and in amaze, said, Lord, What wouldst thou have me do? And the Lord said to him, Arise and go to the city and it will be told thee what thou must do.
Now the men who accompanied him were amazed, hearing indeed the sound, but seeing no one. Then Saul arose from the earth. But as upon opening his eyes he saw nobody, they led him by the hand and brought him to Damascus. And he was three days without sight, and neither ate nor drank.

Now there was in Damascus a certain disciple named Ananias. And to him the Lord said in a vision, Ananias! And he said, Lord, here lam. Then the Lord said to him, Arise and go to the street, which is called Straight-street, and inquire at the house of Judas for Saul of Tarsus; for behold he is praying, and hath seen in a vision a man named Ananias, coming in and laying a hand on him that he may recover sight. Upon which Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard from many concerning this man, how much evil he hath done to thy saints in
Jerusalem; and he is here with authority from the chief priests to bind all who invoke thy name. And the Lord said to him,
Go: for this person is a vessel which I have chosen to bear my name before nations and kings and the children of Israel. For
I will shew him what he must suffer for my name. So Ananias went and entered the house, and having laid his hands on him, said, Brother Saul, The Lord, even Jesus who appeared to thee on the road as thou camest, hath sent me that thou mayst recover sight and be filled witha holy spirit. Upon this there fell immediately from his eyes something like scales, and instantly he recovered sight. Then he arose and was baptized; and hay-

THE ACTS. IX.

19 ing taken some food, he was strengthened. And Saul was some
20 days with the brethren in Damascus, and forthwith, in the sy-

21 nagogues proclaimed Jesus,* that he is the son of God. At which all that heard were surprised, and said, Is not this he

_ who made havoc of them at Jerusalem, who invoked that name,

30

31

36 and came hither on purpose to carry such bound to the chief priests? But Saul was strengthened more and more, and confounded the Jews who dwelt at Damascus, proving that this person is the Curist.

Now when many days were fulfilled, the Jews conspired to kill him; and Saul was apprized of their plot. As they were watching the gates day and night to murder him, the disciples took him by night and let him down over the wall, lowering him in a basket. And when Saul came to Jerusalem and tried to associate with the disciples, they were all afraid of him, not believing that he was a disciple. But Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles, and told them, how he had on the road seen the Lord, who had spoken to him; and how he had spoken boldly in Damascus in the name of Jesus. So he was with them coming in and going out at Jerusalem, and speaking boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus. He spoke also and disputed with the Hellenists, and they attempted to kill him. But when the brethren knew this they brought him down to Czsarea, and sent him on to Tarsus.

Now then the congregations throughout all Judea and Galilee, and Samaria, were enjoying peace. Being built up and walking in the fear of the Lord, and the consolation of the holy spirit, they were multiplied. And it came to pass that as
Peter was passing through all; he came down also to the saints who dwelt at Lydda and found there a man, named /Eneas, who was paralytic, and had been confined to his bed eight years. And Peter said to him, ‘*/Eneas, Jesus, THE Onets T, cureth thee. Arise and make thy bed.’? And he arose immediately. And all the inhabitants of Lydda and Sarona saw him, and turned to the Lord,

Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named ‘Tabitha,

* I have adopted the reading ¥esws, instead of Christ.

40

THE ACTS. IX. X.

(the signification of which in Greek, is Dorcas [a Roe. ]) This woman abounded in good works and in acts of charity. And at this time she fell wick and died. And when they had washed her, they laid her out in an upper room. And as Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, hearing that Peter was there, sent two men to him, intreating him to come to them without delay. Accordingly Peter arose and went with them. And when he came they took him up to the upper room, And all the widows stood by him, weeping and shewing the tunicks and mantles which Dorcas had made while she was with them.
‘Then Peter, having put them all out, kneeled down and prayed, and turning to the body, he said, Tabitha, arise. Up. on which she opened her eyes, and seeing Peter, sat up. Then
Peter giving her his hand, helped her up, and having called the saints and the widows, presented her alive. And this was known throughout all Joppa, and many believed in the Lord.
‘And after this he continued many days at Joppa with one Simon, a tanner. 

Now there was at Czsarea a certain man named Corneli-

‘us, acenturion of that called the Ltalan cohort.* He was pious,

and feared God with all his household, and did many acts of benevolence to the people, and prayed to God continually.

-About the ninth hourt:of the day, he saw plainly in a vision,

an angel of God coming in to him and saying to him, Cornelius! (Upon which he having fixed his eyes on him, and being

‘terrified, said, Lord! what is. it? ‘Then the angel said to him,

Thy ‘prayers and thine acts of benevolence have ascended for

‘amemorial before God. Now therefore send men to J oppa and
-cail for ‘Simon who is surnamed Peter. He lodgeth with one

Simon, atanner, whose house is by the sea side. He will tell thee what thou must do. So when the angel who spoke to him was gone, Cornelius called two of his household servants and a devout soldier of them who waited on him continually, and having related to them the whole affair, he sent them to Joppa.
And on the next day while they were on their journey and approaching towards the city, Peter went up on the house top to

* See Matthew 27. 27. + That is, three in the afternoon,

10 or)

to 8 tS

THE ACTS. X.

pray, about the sixth hour.* Now he had become hungry and wished to take some refreshment; and while it was preparing he fell into a trance, and saw the heaven opened, and a kind of vessel coming down to him, like a great sheet tied by the four corners, and let down to the earth, in which were all sorts of four footed beasts of the earth, namely, the wild beasts and the reptiles, and the birds of the air. And there came a voice to him, Rise Perer; ΚΙΣΙ anD EAT. Whereupon Peter said,
By no means, Lord. For I have never eaten any thing common or unclean. And a voice said to him a second time, What
God hath cleansed call not thou that common. And this was done thrice, and then the vessel was again taken up into heaven. And while Peter was in great doubt, what this vision which he had seen could mean, behold the men who were sent by Cornelius, having inquired out Simon’s house, stood at the gate, and calling, asked, Doth Simon who is surnamed Peter, lodge here? And while Peter was pondering on the vision, the spirit said to him, Behold there are three men inquiring for thee.
Arise therefore, get thee down and go with them, without any cavilling, for I have sent them. So Peter went down to the men who were sent todiim from Cornelius, and said, Behold Iam he for whom you are inquiring. What is the cause of your coming? They said, Cornelius, a centurion, a righteous man, and one who feareth God, and is approved by the testimony of the whole Jewish nation, hath been divinely warned by a holy angel to send for thee to his house and receive instruction from thee. Peter therefore, having invited them in, entertained them hospitably, and on the morrow he set out with them.
And some of the brethren who were of Joppa accompanied him. And on the day following they arrived at Cesarea.
Now Cornelius was waiting for them, having called together his kinsmen and intimate friends. And as Peter was coming in, Cornelius met him, and prostrating himself at his feet, made obcisance. But Peter raised him up, saying, Rise up:
Iam but a man. Then conversing with him he went in, and finding many assembled he said to them, You know: how

See

* Noon, or twelve o’clock,

THE ACTS. X.

unlawful it is for a man who isa Jew, to associate with or θῸ to one of another nation: but God hath shewn me, that Iam not to call any man common or unclean. For this cause, when
I was sent for, I came without any hesitation. I ask therefore on what account you have sent for me ? Thereupon Cornelius said, Four days ago I was fasting till this hour, and at the ninth hour praying in my house. And lo! a man stood before me in splendid attire, and said, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thine acts of benevolence are remembered before God; send therefore to Joppa for Simon who is surnamed Peter. He lodgeth at the house of Simon, a tanner, by the sea side. He will come and speak to thee. Therefore I sent to thee immediately and thou hast done well in coming.
Now therefore we are all here in the presence of God, to hear all that God hath given thee in charge.

Then Peter opened his mouth and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is not ἃ respecter of persons; but im every nation he who feareth him and worketh righteousness is acceptable to him. According te the word which he sent to the children of Israel, when he published the glad tidings of peace by Jesus Christ, He is Lord of all. You know the affair which is spread through all Judea, taking its rise from Galilee after the baptism which John proclaimed respecting Jesus— him from Nazareth—how God anomted him with a holy spirit and power. Him who went about doing good, and healing all who were oppressed by the devil; for God was with him, and we are witnesses of all that he did both in the country of the Jews, and in Jerusalem.—Him, whom they slew, suspending him ona cross—even him God raised up the third day, and granted him to become manifest, not to all the people, but to witnesses who were pre-appointed by God—to

' us who have eaten, and drunk with him after he arose from

the dead. And he commanded us to proclaim to the people and testify that he is the one determinately pointed out by God to be the judge of the living and the dead. To him all the prophets. bear witness, that every one who believeth in him, shall receive remission of sins by his name.

While Peter was yet speaking these words the holy spirit fell on all them who heard this word. Whereupon all the cir-

THE ACTS. X. XI.

cumcised believers who had come with Peter were astonished

that the gift of the holy spirit was poured out upon the Gen-

46 tiles also. For they heard them speaking in divers languages

47 and magnifying God. Then Peter addressed them saying,

Can any one on any account forbid water, that these should

not be baptized who have received the holy spirit in the same

48 manner as even we did? So he ordered them to be bapti-

zed in the name of the Lord. ‘Then they intreated him to stay some days.

ΧΙ. Now the apostles and the brethren who were in Judea

heard that the Gentiles also had received the word of God.

2 So when Peter went up to Jerusalem, they of the circumci-

sion cavilled at him, saying, Thou hast gone to men who

are uncircumcised, and hast eaten with them. Thereupon

Peter stated to them the whole affair in order from the begin-

ning, saying, I was praying in the city Joppa, and in a trance

I saw a vision, a kind of vessel coming down, like a great

sheet let down by the four corners, out of heaven, and it

6 came close to me. On which when I fixed mine eyes, I ob-

served and saw the four footed beasts of the earth, namely

7 the wild beasts and the reptiles, and the birds of the air;

and I heard a voice saying to me, Rise, Peter; kill and eat.

8 But I said, By no means, Lord; For nothing common or

9 unclean hath ever entered my mouth. Thereupon a voice

from heaven addressed me a second time, saying, What God

10 hath cleansed, call not thou that common. Now this was done

11 three times, then all were drawn up again into heaven. And

lo! at that instant three men arrived at the house where I was,

12 who were sent to me from Cesarea. And the spirit com-

manded me to go with them without any scruple. Now there

13 went with me these six brethren. And when we came to the

house of the man, he told us how he had seen in his house,

the angel standing and saying to him, Send men to Joppa for

14 Sivan, surnamed Peter, who will dictate to thee matters by

15 which thou and all thy household shall be saved. And when

I had begun to speak, the holy spirit fell upon them as it did

16 upon us at the beginning. Then I remembered the word of

the Lord how he said, John indeed baptized in water, but ye

17 shall be baptized ina holy spirit. If then God granted the

18

19

20

21

THE ACTS. XI. XII.

same free gift to them as to us, who believed in the Lord
Jesus Christ, who was I, that I should obstruct God? Having heard this they acquiesced and glorified God, saying,
God hath then indeed granted to the Gentiles repentance unto life.

Now they who had been dispersed by reason of the distress which arose about Stephen, had travelled as far as Phoenicia and Cyprus and Antioch, speaking the word to none but
Jews only. But there were some of them, men of Cyprus and
Cyrene, who went into Antioch and spoke to the Greeks,* proclaiming the glad tidings of the Lord Jesus. And the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed and turned to the Lord.

When the report of this reached the ears of the congregation which was at Jerusalem, they sent forth Barnabas to go as far as Antioch. And when he came and saw the grace of God, he was filled with joy and exhorted them all to adhere to the Lord with a firm determination of heart. Because he was a good man and full of a holy spirit and faith, therefore a considerable multitude was added to the Lord. Upon which Barnabas went to Tarsus to seek Saul. And having found him he brought him to Antioch. And for a whole year they assembled with this congregation, and taught a considerable multitude. And the disciples at Antioch first got the name of
Christians.

And in those days there came down prophets from Jerusalem to Antioch. And one of them named Agabus rising up signified by the spirit that there would very soon be a great famine throughout the whole inhabited land, which accordingly came to pass in the days of Claudius Czsar. Whereupon the disciples determined, évery one according to his ability to send relief to the brethren who dwelt in Judea. And this they did, sending it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

XII. Now about that time Herod the king stretched forth his

* 1 adopt the reading of those manuscripts which have Greeks not Hellenists.

10

11

12

15

THE ACTS. XII.

hands to afflict some of the congregation, and slew with the sword James the brother of John. And as he saw that this pleased the Jews, he proceeded to apprehend Peter also. But as this was during the days of unleavened bread, when he had apprehended him he put him in prison, committing him to the custody of four quaternions of soldiers, intending to bring him out to the people after the passover. So Peter was kept

in prison; and there was earnest prayer to God made for him

by the congregation. And when Herod was about to bring him forth, on that very night, as Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, being bound with two chains; and the guards before the door were keeping watch, behold an angel of the
Lord suddenly appeared, and a light shone in the prison. And touching Peter’s side he roused him up, saying, Arise quickly.
Upon which his chains dropped from his hands. Then. the angel said to him, Gird thyself and put on thy sandals; and when he had done so, then he saith to him, Throw thy mantle around thee and follow me. So going out, he followed him, but did not know that what was done by the angel was real, but thought he saw a vision. And having passed the first and second guard, they came to the iron gate leading into the city, which opened to them of its own accord, So, going out, they proceeded on through one street, and suddenly the angel left him.
Then Peter coming to himself, said, Now I know certainly that the Lord hath sent his angel and delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of the Jews. Then, upon recollection, he went to the house of Mary the mother of John, surnamed Mark, where many were assembled and praying. And when Peter knocked at the door of the gateway, a servant maid named Rhoda, went to inquire who was there.
But knowing Peter’s voice, she, for joy, did not open the gate, but ran and told that Peter was at the gate. Upon which they said to her, Thou art mad. But she confidently affirmed that it was certainly so: then they said, It is his angel. As Peter continued knocking, they opened the gate, and upon seeing him, were extremely surprised. But he having beckoned to them with his hand to be silent, related to them how the Lord

had brought him out of prison, and said, Tell this to James

18

19

20

24,
25

THE ACTS. XII. XIII.

and the brethren. Then departing, he went to another place.

Now as soon as it was day there was no small disturbance among the soldiers, What was become of Peter.. And Herod having caused search to be made for him, and not finding him, after examining the guards, he ordered them to be led away to execution. Then departing from Judea, he went down to
Cesarea and resided there. Now Herod was meditating a war against the Tyrians and Sidonians; but they with one accord waited on him, and having made Blastus the king’s chamberlain their friend, they sued for peace, because their country was subsisted by that of the king. And ona set day Herod arrayed in robes of state and seated on the throne, made a speech to them, upon which the people shouted, It is the voice of a god and not of a man! And instantly an angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory. And being enawed by worms he died.

Still the word of God increased and was multiplied; and
Barnabas and Saul, having fully performed their service, had returned from Jerusalem, taking with them John who was

XIII.” surnamed Mark. Now there was in the congregation at

Antioch, certain prophets and teachers, namely, Barnabas and
Symeon called Niger, and Lucius the Cyrenian, and Manaem, who had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch, and
Saul. And whilst they were ministering to the Lord, and fasting, the holy spirit said, Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul, for the work to which I have called them. So having fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they dismissed them:
They then being sent forth by the holy spirit, went down to
Seleucia, and thence sailed to Cyprus. And arriving at Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews. And they had John for their attendant. And having traversed the island till they came to Paphos, they found there

ἃ magian, a false prophet, a Jew whose name was Barjesus.

He was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, a man of understanding, who had sent for Barnabas and Saul, and desired to hear the word of God. But Elymas the Magian, (for thus his name is translated) set himself against them, endeavouring to divert the: proconsul from the belief. Upon which Saul, who is also called Paul, being filled with a holy spirit, and having

10

11

12

18

14

15

16

22

25

THE ACTS. XIII.

his eyes fixed upon him, said, ΟἹ full of all deceit and of all wickedness, son of the devil, enemy of all righteousness; wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord! Now therefore behold the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shalt be blind and shalt not see the sun for a season. And instantly there fell upon him a mist and darkness. And groping about he sought some to lead him. by the hand. Then the proconsul, upon seeing what was done, believed, being struck with awe at the doctrine concerning the Lord.

Now Paul and his company, having taken their departure from Paphos, came to Perga in Pamphylia; but John having withdrawn from them, returned to Jerusalem. They, however, went on from Perga and came to Antioch, in Pisidia, and going into the synagogue on the sabbath day, they sat down.
And after the reading of the law and the prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent to them, saying, Men, brethren, if you have any word of consolation to the people, deliver it. Whereupon Paul stood up and beckoning with his hand for attention, said, Men of Israel and ye who fear God, hearken! The God of the people Israel chose our fathers and exalted the people when they sojourned in the land of Egypt, and with an uplifted arm brought them out of it; and forthe space of about forty years bore with their behaviour in the wilderness. And having destroyed seven nations in the land of Chanaan, he distributed their land among them. And after these things, which took up about four hundred and fifty years, he gave them judges till Samuel the prophet. But. from that time they desired a king, and God gave them Saul, the son of Kis, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, Forty years. Then having removed him, he raised up for them David to be king, to whom he gave this testimony, “1 have found David the son of Jesse, a man according to my heart, who will execute all my orders.*”? Of his seed God hath, according to promise, raised up for Israel a saviour, namely Jesus, before whose appearance John proclaimed a baptism of reformation to all the people of.Isracl.
And as John was fulfilling his course, he said, fam not he

a a ΄΄Ὸ΄΄Πἧἔ ἕὋ΄΄“΄“ἅ“΄--΄΄΄Π΄Π΄Π΄5΄ὉἝἷἝὃἕὃ .

* Sam. 13. 14. and Ps. 89. 20.

43

THE ACTS. ΧΠΙ.

whom you suppose me to be; but behold he is coming after me, the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to untie.

Men, brethren, children of the race of Abraham, and those among you, who fear God, to you the word of this salvation is sent. For the inhabitants of Jerusalem and their chiefs, not knowing him, have indeed by condemning him fulfilled the words of the prophets which are read every sabbath day.
Though they found no cause of death, they demanded of Pilate that he should be executed. And when they had accomplished all that was written concerning him, he was taken down from the cross and laid in a tomb. But God raised him from the dead; and for many days he appeared to them who came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem. ‘They are his witnesses to the people. And we proclaim to you the glad tidings with respect to the promise made to the fathers, That
God hath fulfilled it to us their children by raising up Jesus, even as it is written in the second psalm, ‘Thou art my son, this day I have begotten thee”—and that he hath raised him from the dead never more to return to corruption, as he said, “1 will give you the gracious promises to David which are faithful:* and therefore, in another place, he saith, ‘“Thou wilt not suffer thy holy one to see corruption.}’? For David indeed, having in his generation answered the purpose of God, went to rest and was laid with his fathers, and saw vibe cape but he whom God raised up did not see corruption.

Be it known therefore to you, Men, brethren, that by this person remission of sins is proclaimed to you; and that by him every one who believeth is acquitted from all those sins, from which-you could not be acquitted by the law of Moses. Take heed therefore that what is said in the prophets may not come u»on you—“*Behold ye despisers, and express your amaze and vanish. For I am working a work in your days, which you will not believe, though one tell you.”

And on their going out of the synagogue of the Jews, the
Gentiles intreated that these things might be spoken to them, in the interim, till the next sabbath. And when the syna-

* Es. ous 3s t Ps 16. 10. +Habak. 1: ws

46

47

52

THE ACTS. XII. XIV.

gogue broke up, many of the Jews and of the devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas, who spoke to them and exhorted them to persevere in the grace of God. And on the next sabbath almost the whole city was assembled to hear the word of God. But when the Jews saw the crowds they were filled with zeal and contradicted what was spoken by Paul; contradicting and reviling. Whereupon Paul and Barnabas with great freedom of speech said, It was necessary that the word of
God should be first spoken to you. But since you reject it, and judge yourselves unworthy of this everlasting life, behold we turn to the Gentiles; for thus the Lord hath commanded us, “Ihave set thee for the light of nations, that thou mayst be for salvation to the remotest parts of the earth.*”

Upon hearing this, the Gentiles rejoiced and glorified the word of the Lord; and as many as were fitly disposed for everlasting life, believed. And the word of the Lord spreadithrough that whole region. But the Jews stirred up the devout women, even such as were women of rank, and the leading men of the city, and raised a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their territories. Upon which they having shaken off the dust of their feet against them, went to Iconium.

Now the disciples were filled with joy and a holy spirit,

XIV. and at Iconium they went in the same manner to the

2

ῳ9

synagogue of the Jews, and spoke so that a great number both of Jews and Greeks believed. But the disbelieving Jews stirred up and disaffected the minds of the Gentiles against the brethren. They, however, staid there a considerable time, speaking boldly for the Lord who gave attestation to the word of his grace, and granted signs and miracles to be done by their hands. So the multitude of the city were divided, some siding with the Jews, and some with the apostles. But as a violent attempt was going to be made, both by the Gentiles and
Jews, with their chiefs, to assault and stone them, they haying intelligence of it, fled to the cities of Lycaonia—to Lystra aml Derbe, and the region around; and proclaimed the glad tidings there.

* Esaias 49. 6.

14

15

18

19

20

21

THE ACTS. XIV.

Now at Lystra there sata man who had no use of his feet, being a cripple from his birth, who had never walked. ‘This man was listening to Paul speaking, who fixing his eyes upon him, and perceiving that he had faith to be healed, said with a loud voice, Stand upright on thy feet. Upon which he leaped up and walked. When the people saw what Paul had done, they lifted up their voice, and, in the Lycaonian dialect, said,
“The Gods are come down to us in the likeness of men.”? And they called Barnabas, Jupiter: and Paul, Mercury; because he was the chief speaker. And the priests of Jupiter’s temple which was before their city, brought bulls with garlands to the gates, and together with the multitude, desired to offer a sacrifice. But the apostles Barnabas and Paul, hearing of this, rent their clothes and ran in among the crowd, crying out and saying, Men, why do ye these things? We are only frail mortals like yourselves, proclaiming to you to turn from these vanities to the living God, who made the heaven and the earth, and the sea, and all the things which are therein; who in the ages past suffered all the nations to walk in their own ways, though at the same time he did not fail to give an evidence of himself, by conferring favours, giving us rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. And with such speeches as these, they, with difhculty, restrained the people from offering them a sacrifice. But there came thither some Jews from Antioch and Iconium, who, having gained over the populace and stoned Paul, dragged him out of the city, supposing him dead. But while the disciples were around him, he arose and went into the city. And on the morrow he departed with Barnabas to Derbe. And when they had proclaimed the glad tidings in that city, and made a considerable number of disciples, they returned to Lystra, and Iconium, and Antioch, establishing and confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the faith. And because we must enter into the kingdom of God through many afflictions; they therefore appointed clders for them in every congregation, and having fasted and prayed, they recommended them to the Lord in whom they believed. ‘Then passing through Pisidia, they came to Pamphilia. And having spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia, and thence

27

28

THE ACTS, XIV. XV.

sailed to Antioch, from which place they had been delivered up to'the grace of God, for the work which they had now accomplished.

And on their arrival they sidembled the congregation and told them all that God had done with them; and that he had opened the door of faith for the Gentiles.

Now when they had continued there a considerable time

XV. with the disciples, there came down from Judea some

2 persons who taught the brethren, ‘‘Unless you be circumcised after the manner of Moses, you cannot be saved.”? Whereupon, as there arose a dissention, and Paul and Barnabas had no small debate with them, they determined that Paul and
Barnabas, and some from among themselves, should go up to the apostles and elders at Jerusalem, about this question.
They therefore, being forwarded on their journey by the congregation, passed through Pheenicia and Samaria; and by declaring fully the conversion of the Gentiles, they gave great

4. joy to all the brethren. And when they arrived at Jerusalem

they were well received by the congregation, particularly by the apostles and elders, and they gave an account of all that
God had done by them. Thereupon some of the sect of the

- Pharisees who believed, rose up and said, that it was neces-

fon)

sary to circumcise those, and order them to keep the law οὐ
Moses. And the apostles and elders were convened to deli-

berate on this matter. And after much debate, Peter arose, and said to them, Men, brethren, you know that a good while ago, God made choice among us that by my mouth the Gentiles should hear the word of these glad tidings and_ believe.
And God who knoweth the heart, bare witness for them, giving them the holy spirit in the same manner as he did to us ; aid made no distinction between us and them, purifying their hearts by belief. Now therefore why do ye try God, to put upon the neck of the disciples, a yoke which neither our fathers nor we are able to bear; but we trust that we shall be saved by the favour of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the same manner as they do. Upon this the multitude were silent and heard Barnabas and Paul, relating all the signs and wonders which God hath done among the Gentiles by them. And when they had done speaking, James answered and said, Men, bre:

17

21

22

23

24

28

29

WHE ACS: ἈΝ *

thren, hearken to me, Simeon hath related how God first 

looked down on the Gentiles, to take from among them a people for his name. And with this the words of the prophets agree, as it is written. ‘After this I will return and rebuild the tabernacle of David which hath fallen—I will rebuild those parts of it which have fallen to decay, and those parts of it which have been demolished, and raise it up again, that the rest of mankind may seek the Lord—even all the nations who are called by my name, saith the Lord who doth all these things,*”? "To God all his works are known from eternity ; therefore it is my judgment not to disquiet those of the Gentiles who turn to God; but to enjoin them to abstain from the pollutions of idols, and fornication, and what is strangled,

and blood, because from generations of old Moses hath in.

every city them who preach him, being read in the synagogue every sabbath.

It was then determined by the apostles and elders, when they with the whole congregation had chosen chief men from among them, to send with Paul and Barnabas to Antioch, Judas, who is surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, leading men among the brethren, by whom they wrote the following letter. ‘ The apostles and the elders and the brethren, to the brethren from among the Gentiles in Antioch, and Syria and Cilicia, greeting.

As we have heard that some who went out from among us have troubled you with discourses, unsettling your minds, saying,
‘You must be circumcised and keep the law, though we gave

them no such injunction, we being all of one mind determined that after making a choice, we would send men to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul, men who have hazarded their

‘lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ: we have there-
‘fore sent Judas and Silas, who by word of mouth will tell you

the same things. For it hath seemed good to the holy spirit and to us to lay upon you, over and above the things absolutely necessary, no more, burden than these.—To abstain

_ from things offered to idols, and blood, and what is strangled,
_ and fornication, from which you will do well to keep your-

selves. Farewell.’’

asa

*Amos 9. 11, &c.

THE ACTS. XV. XVI.

30 So they being despatched came to Antioch and assembling
31 the multitude, delivered the letter, and when they had
32 read it, they rejoiced for the consolation. And as Judas and

Silas were themselves also teachers, they with many dis-

33 courses exhorted the brethren, and established them. And having tarried some time they had leave to depart with peace

34 from the brethren to the apostles. But Silas thought proper

35 tocontinue there. Paulalso, and Barnabas, continued at Antioch, teaching and publishing with many others the glad tidings of the word of the Lord.

36 And after some days Paul said to asia Let us, I pray thee, return and visit our brethren in every city where we have published the word of the Lord, to see how they do.

37 And Barnabas advised to take along with them, John sur-

38 named Mark. But Paul did not think it proper to take along with them one who had quitted them in Pamphylia, and had

39 not gone with them to the work. There was therefore a sharp dispute, so that they separated one from the other. And Barnabas took Mark and sailed to Cyprus.

40 As for Paul, having chosen Silas and being commended. by the brethren to the favour of God, he set out and passed through Syria and Cilicia, establishing the congregations and

XVI. then went down to Derbe and Lystra. And behold

there was there a certain disciple, named Timothy, whose

mother was a believing Jewess, but his father was a Greek. He was well spoken of by the brethren in Lystra and Iconium. This man Paul wished to go with him. So he took and circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those places, for
4. they all knew that his father was a Greek. And as they passed through the cities they delivered to their keeping the determinations of the apostles and elders who were at Jerusalem.

5 So the congregations were established in the fh, and grew

daily more and more numerous.

6 Now when they had passed through Phrygia and Galatia,

(having been restrained by the holy spirit from speaking the

7 word in Asia proper) coming towards Mysia, they attempted

8 to go to Bithynia, but the spirit did not permit them. So pass-

ing by Mysia, they went down to Troas. And a vision ap-

9. peared to Paul in the night—it was a certatn man, a Macedo.

VOL. /1V. uh

oo ts

10

14

15

16

17

18

19

24,

THE; ACTS: XVE

nian, standing and intreating him, and saying, Cross over to
Macedonia and help us. Therefore as he saw this vision, we immediately endeavoured to go to Macedonia, concluding from it, that the Lord called us to publish the glad tidings to them. So, embarking at Troas, we sailed directly to Samothracia, and the next day to Neapolis, and thence to Philippi, which is a city of the first district of Macedonia, a Roman colony. And in this city we continued several days, and on the sabbath day we went out of the city to the river side, where there was an established place of prayer,* and sat down and spoke to the women who had assembled. And a certain wo-

man, named Lydia, a dealer in purple, of the city of Thyati-

ra, a worshipper of God, was listening. The Lord had opened her heart to attend to the things which were spoken by Paul.
And when she and her household were baptized, she intreated us saying, If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord come and lodge at my house. So she prevailed upon us, And it came to pass, as we were going to the oratory, we were met by a certain female slave who had a spirit of Python, and who brought her masters much gain by divining. This girl, following Paul and us, cried, saying, These men are the servants of the most high God. They are telling us the way of salvation. And this she did for many days. At length Paul, being troubled, turned and said to the spirit, I command thee, in the name of Jesus Christ, to go out of her. And at that instant it went out. When her masters saw that the hope of their gain was gone, they laid hold of Paul and Silas and dragged them to the forum, before the magistrates. And having set them before the generals of the army, they said, ‘These men, being Jews, trouble this city of ours exceedingly, and teach customs which it is not lawful for us, who are Romans to receive or practise. Upon this the populace rose up together against them; and the generals ordered: them to be stript and beaten with rods. And having inflicted on them many stripes, they committed them to prison, charging the jailor to keep them safely. He having received such a charge, thrust them

* Literally, a proseucha or oratory.

THE ACTS. XVI. XVI.

25 into the inner prison, and secured their feet in the stocks. And

about midnight Paul and Silas, having prayed, sung a hymn

26 to God; and the prisoners heard them. And suddenly there

was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison

were shaken, and all the doors were instantly opened, and the

27 fetters of all dropped off. Upon which the jailor awaking, and

seeing the doors of the prison open, drew his sword and was

just going to kill himself, thinking that the prisoners had es-

28 caped. But Paul cried with a loud voice, saving, Do thyself

29 no harm, for we are all here. Thereupon, calling for lights, he

ran in, and being in a tremour, prostrated himself before Paul

30 and Silas, and having brought them out, said, O sirs, What

31 must I do to be saved? And they said, Believe in the Lord

Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, thou and thy household.

32 Then they spoke the word of the Lord to him, and to all that

33 were in his house. And he taking them that very hour of the

night, washed their stripes; and he and all his family were im-

34 mediately baptized. Then conducting them up to his house,

he spread a table and rejoiced with all his family for having

35 believed in God. And in the course of the day the generals sent

36 the lictors, saying, Dismiss those men, When the jailor made

37 thisreport to Paul, The generals have sent that you may be dis-

charged; now, therefore, depart and go in peace; Paul said to

them, Having scourged us publicly without a trial, men who

are Roman citizens, they have cast us into prison, and now dis-

38 charge us privately! No. Let them come themselves and take

us out. When the lictors reported these words to the gene-

rals, they were terrified, hearing that they are Romans. So

39 they came and comforted them, and having taken them out, intreated them to leave the city.

40 Now when they came out of prison, they went to Lydia’s,

XVII. where seeing the brethren, they comforted them and

departed ; and passing through Amphipolis and Apollonia,

they came to Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of

2 the Jews. And according to his custom, Paul went in among

them; and for three sabbaths discoursed to them from the

3 scriptures, opening and stating that the Christ was to suffer

and rise from the dead, and that this Jesus whom I announce

A to you is THE Curist. And some of them were convinced,

6

THE ACTS. XVII.

and associated with Paul and Silas; and a great multitude of the devout Greeks; and of women of distinction not a few.
But the disbelieving Jews, affecting zeal, and collecting some ill disposed men of the lowest class, raised a mob and set the city In an uproar; and besetting Jason’s house, sought to bring them out to the people; but not finding them, they dragged
Jason and some brethren before the magistrates of the city, crying out, Those men who have turned the world upside

7 down, are come here also; and Jason hath harboured them,

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18 though they all act contrary to the decrees of Czesar, saying,
There is another king, one Jesus.. So they alarmed the multitude and the magistrates, who heard these things; and these having taken security of Jason and the rest, dismissed them.

Now the brethren had immediately sent away Paul and
Silas by night to Berea, where being arrived, they went into the synagogue of the Jews. Now these were of a more generous disposition than those of Thessalonica. They received the word with all readiness, daily examining the scriptures whether these things were so, and accordingly many of them beheved, and of the Grecian women of rank, and of the men not a few. But when the Jews of Thessalonica knew that the word of God was proclaimed by Paul at Berea, they came thither also and set the populace in a ferment; upon which the brethren immediately sent away Paul towards the sea. But Silas and
Timothy continued there. Now they who attended Paul conducted him to Athens, and having received his orders for
Silas and Timothy to come to him with all speed, they departed.

And while Paul was waiting for them at Athens, his spirit within him was greatly troubled, when he saw the city overspread with idols. Therefore he discoursed in the synagogue to the Jews and proselytes, and in the forum daily to them who met him. And while some of the epicurean and stoic philosophers* were conferring with him, some said, “‘What

* The Epicureans denied a divine Providence, and held the world to be merely the effect of chance, asserting pleasure to be man’s chiei good, and limiting his existence to the present state. The
Stoics maintained the doctrine of an universal necessity, and proudly exalted their wise men.

19

20
—2i

22

23

24.

THE ACTS. XVII.

would this retailer of scraps say?” And others, “He appeareth to be a proclaimer of strange deities.’?. Because he proclaimed the glad tidings of Jesus and the resurrection, therefore they

took hold of him and brought him to the Areopagus,* say-

ing, May we know what this new doctrine is which is spoken by thee. For thou bringest some strange things to our ears.
We wish therefore to know what these things mean. Now all the Athenians, and the foreigners who reside among them, spent their leisure time in nothing else but in telling and hearing news. Paul then being placed in the midst of the Areopagus, said,

Men of Athens, I perceive from every thing I see, that you are exceedingly addicted to the worship of demons. For as I passed along and beheld the objects and instruments of your devotion, I found an altar with this inscription, To tHe unxNown Gop. Him, therefore whom you worship without knowing him, I announce to you. He is the God who made the world and all the things which are therein. He is the Lord of

_ heaven and earth. He dwelleth not in temples made with hands;

29

30 nor is he served by the hands of men, as needing any thing.
He is the’ giver of life and breath, and of all things, to all, and hath made of one blood the whole nation of men to inhabit the whole face of the earth, having marked out times previously arranged in order, and the boundaries of their habitation, for them to seek the Lord if haply they might feel, and find him, though he indeed is not far from any one of us. For in him we live and are moved and exist—as some also of your own poets have said, “For we his offspring are.”” Being therefore the offspring of God, we ought not to imagine the Deity to be like gold, or silver, or stone, wrought by the art and contrivance of man. God indeed having overlooked the ages of this ignorance; now maketh proclamation to all men every where to re-

form, because he hath appointed a day in which he will judge

the world righteously, by a man whom he hath pointed out: of which he hath given assurance to all men, by raising him from the dead.

* The supreme court at Athens.

THE ACTS. XVI. XVIII.

When they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some made a jest of it; and some said we will hear thee again on this subject. On which Paul went out from among them.
But some men of rank adhered to him and believed, among whom was Dionysius, a member of the Areopagus; also a woman of rank, named Damaris, and others with them.

XVIII. After this Paul departed from Athens and went to

2 wy)

14

15

Corinth, where finding a certain Jew, named Aquilas, a native of Pontus, who had lately come from Italy with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had commanded all the Jews to depart out of Rome, he went to them; and being of the same trade, hved and wrought with them; for they were tentmakers.
And every sabbath day he discoursed in the synagogue, and

-conciliated the affections both of Jews and Greeks. But when

Silas and Timothy were arrived from Macedonia, Paul was enrapt by the spirit, testifying to the Jews that Jesus is rue
Currst. And upon their setting themselves against this, and using abusive language, he shook his garments, and said to them, Your blood is on your own head. I am clear. Henceforth I will go to the Gentiles. So having left them, he went to the house of a certain person named Justus, a worshipper of God, whose house was adjoining (to\the synagogue. Now Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, with all his household, believed in the Lord: and many of the Corinthians, when they heard, believed and were baptized. And in a vision by night, the
Lord said to Paul, Be not afraid, but speak, and keep not silence; for I am with thee; and no one shall set upon thee to hurt thee: for I have much people in this city. So he continued there a year and six months, teaching among them the word of God.

Now when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews with one accord rose against Paul and brought him to the tribunal, saying, ‘This person persuadeth men to worship God, contrary to the law. And when Paul was about to open his mouth, Gallio said to the Jews, If it were indeed some act of injustice or malicious villainy, 1 could with reason, O Jews, bear with you.
But if it is a question about a word, or names, or your law, you may look to it’yourselves; for I will not be a judge of such matters. So he drove them from the tribunal. ‘Then all the
Greeks took Sosthenes the ruler of the synagogue, and beat

18

26

27

THE ACTS. XVIII. XIX.

him before the tribunal. But Gallio did not concern himself in the affair.

After this Paul having continued there a considerable time

longer, took leave of the brethren and sailed to Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquilas, having shaved his head at
Cenchrea, for he had a vow: and touching at Ephesus he left them there. He indeed having gone to the synagogue discoursed to the Jews ; but though they requested him to tarry longer with them he would not consent, but took his leave of them, saying, I must by all means keep the ensuing festival at Jerusalem. But I will come back to you again, if God permit. So, sailing from Ephesus he arrived at Czsarea; and having gone up and saluted the congregation, he went down to Antioch where he spent some time, and then departed and passed successively through Galatia and Phrygia, establishing all the disciples.
In the mean while a certain Jew named Apollos, born at Alexandria, an eloquent man, had come to Ephesus. This man being well versed in the scriptures, had been instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent in spirit, he spoke and expounded accurately the passages concerning the Lord, being acquainted only with the baptism of John. And when he began to speak boldly in the synagogue, Aquilas and Priscilla, having heard him, took him home and explained to him more accurately the way of God. And as he was desirous to go to Achaia, the brethren encouraged him and wrote to the disciples to receive him. And being arrived there he by his gift greatly assisted them who had believed, for he strenuously confuted the Jews in public, shewing by the scriptures that
Jesus is THE CHRIST.

XIX. Now while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul having passed

9

through the upper provinces came to Ephesus, where finding certain disciples he said to them, Did you receive a holy spirit when you believed ? Upon which they said to him, We have not so much as heard that a holy spirit is [received.*] There-

* The answer is elliptical, and to be filled up with the word received.

10

13

14

15

10

17

18

19

20

THE ACTS. XIX.

upon he said to them, To what then were ye baptized ? And they said, To the baptism of John. Then Paul said, John indeed baptized the baptism of reformation, telling the people that they should believe in one coming after him, namely in
Jesus rHE curist. Upon hearing this they were baptized to the name of the Lord Jesus; and Paul having laid his hands on them, the holy spirit came upon them and they spoke with tongues and prophesied. Now they were in all about. twelve men.

Now having gone to the synagogue he spoke boldly for three months, reasoning and recommending the things concerning the kingdom of God. But as some were stubborn disbelievers and continued to revile the way before the multitude, he withdrew from them and separated the discipies, discoursing daily in the school of one Tyrannus. And this he continued to do for the space of two years, so that all the inhabitants of Asia, both Jews and Greeks, heard the word of the Lord Jesus. And God wrought extraordinary miracles by the hands of Paul, so that handkerchiefs and aprons were carried from his body to them who were sick, and the diseases were removed from them, and evil spirits went out of them.

Upon this some of the strolling Jewish exorcists attempted to name the name of the Lord Jesus, over them who had these evil spirits, sayigg, “7776 adjure you by that Jesus whom
Paul proclaimeth.” Now there were seven sons of one Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, who did this. Upon which the evil spirit in reply said, Jesus I know, and I have some knowledge of
Paul: but who are ye? Then the man, in whom was the evil spirit, springing upon them, and getting a mastery over them, prevailed against them so that they fled out of his house naked and wounded. And this was known to all, both Jews and Greeks, who dwelt at Ephesus; and fear fell upon them all. And the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. And many of them who believed came and confessed, and made a public acknowledgment of their deeds. And several of them having practised magical arts, brought their books and burned them publicly, the value of them by computation amounting to fifty thousand pieces of silver. So powerfully did the word of the Lord increase and prevail.

21

26

27

94

35

THE ACTS. XIX,

Now when these things were accomplished, Paul resolyed in his mind, after. passing through Macedonia and Achaia to go to Jerusalem, saying, after I have been there, I must also see Rome. So having sent forward two of them who attended him, namely Timothy and Erastus, into Macedonia, he himself tarried some time in Asia. And during that time there was a considerable disturbance ‘about this way. For one Demetrius, a silversmith, a maker of silver shrines of Diana, kept in employ a great number of artists ; and having assembled these and the workmen of like occupation, he said, “Men, you know that on this manufacture dependeth our maintenance. And you see and hear that not only in Ephesus, but almost throughout ail Asia, this Paul by his persuasion hath perverted a vast multitude, saying that they which are made with hands, are not gods. So that not only this occupation of ours 15 in danger of being brought into disrepute; but the temple also of the great goddess Diana, of being set at naught; and her majesty destroyed, whom all Asia and’ the world worshippeth.”’

Upon hearing this and being full of rage they shouted, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. And the whole city was filled with confusion, And they rushed with one accord into the theatre, dragging along with them Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul’s fellow travellers. Upon this Paul had a mind to go to the people, but the disciples did not permit him. And some of the chiefs of Asia also, who were his friends, sent to him and advised him not to venture into the theatre. Now some cried one thing; and some, another. For the congregation was in the utmost confusion, and the greater part did not know for what particular purpose they had convened. But when they had thrust Alexander out of the crowd, the Jews pushing him forward, and Alexander waving his hand wished to make a defence to the people, they knowing that he was a Jew, there was, for about two hours, one continued shout from all, crying out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. At length the recorder having stilled the crowd, said, Men of Ephesus, who is there who doth not know that the city of the Ephesians isa humble devotee of the great goddess Diana, and of the image which fell from Jupiter ?

THE ACTS. XTX. XX.

36 Since these things are incontestable you ought to be quiet, and
37 todo nothing rashly. For you have brought hither these men, who have neither violated things sacred, nor reviled your
38 goddess. If now Demetrius and his fellow craftsmen have an action against any one, the courts are open and there are proconsuls
39 to judge: let them bring their suits. And if you seek any thing in respect to other matters, let it be discussed in a
40 legal assembly of the people. For we indeed are in danger of being called in question for this day’s riot, there being no cause
-which we can assign for this tumultuous concourse. Having said this, he dismissed the assembly.
XX. Now this tumult being over, Paul sent for the disciples,
2 and having embraced them, he set out to go to Macedonia.
And when he had gone through those parts, and com‘orted
3 them with many a discourse, he came to Greece, where having spent three months, as an ambush was laid for him by the
Jews just as he was on the point of embarking for Syria, he
4 thought it advisable to return through Macedonia. And there accompanied him to Asia, Sopater the Berean; and of the
Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus; and Gaius, of Derbe; and Timothy; and the Asiatics, Tychicus, and Trophimus.
5 These having gone before, waited for us at Troas; and we, after
6 the days of unleavened bread, set sail from Philippi, and in five days came to them at Troas, where we staid seven days.
7 And on the first day of the week when the disciples assembled to break bread, Paul, being about to depart on the morrow, discoursed with them, and lengthened out the discourse till
8 midnight. Now in the upper room where they were assembled,
9 there were many lamps. And a certain young man named
Eutychus, who was sitting in an open window, bending backwards in a deep sleep, was, while Paul was continuing his discourse, bent quite back with the sleep, and fell from the
10 third story, and was taken up dead. But Paul going down, threw himself upon him, and taking him in his arms, said,
11 Be not troubled, for his life is in him. Then going up again, and having broken bread and eaten, he conversed with them a
_ considerable time, even till break of day, and so departed.
12 Now when they brought up the lad alive and were nota little comforted; we went before to the ship and sailed to Assos

THE ACTS. XX.

where we were to take in Paul. For so he had ordered, intending himself to go by land. And when he met us at Assos we took him in and came to Mitylene. And sailing thence we came the next day over against Chios, and on the day following reached Samos. And after stopping at Trogyllium, we came the next day to Miletus. For Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus, that he might not spend time in Asia, for he was earnestly desirous, if it were possible for him, to be at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost. So from Miletus he sent to
Ephesus, and called hither the elders of the congregation, And when they came to him, he said to them, Youknow how from my first coming into Asia, I have been with you all the time, serving

the Lord with all humility, and with many tears and trials which

befel me by the insidious practices of the Jews—how I have never shrunk from those things which are advantageous—from announcing to you and teaching you publicly and privately, attesting both to Jews and Greeks the turning of the mind to

2 God, and the belief in our Lord Jesus Christ. Now behold I

am going up to Jerusalem, bound by the spirit, not knowing the things which shall befal me there, save only that the Holy spirit testifieth in every city, saying, That bonds and afflictions await me. But I make no account of any of these, nor is this life of mine so much my concern as to finish with joy my course—even the office which I have received from the Lord
Jesus, to testify the glad tidings of the favour of God. And now behold 1 know that all you among whom I have gone proclaiming the reign of God, shall no more see my. face; therefore I testify to you this day that I am clear from the blood of all men. For I have not shrunk from declaring to you the whole counsel of God. Take heed therefore to yourselves and to the whole flock among which the holy spirit hath made you overseers to tend the congregation of God which he hath purchased with his own blood. For this I know, that after my departure there will enter in among you grievous wolves, not sparing the flock. Yes, even fromamong yourselves men will start up, speaking perverse things to draw the disciples after them. Watch therefore, remembering that for the space of three years I did not cease, night nor day, with tears to warn eyery one. And now with regard to these things I re-

34

38

THE ACTS. XX. XXL

commend you, brethren, to God and to the word of his grace, — who is able to build you up and to give you an inheritance ainong all who are sanctified. I have coveted no man’s silver or gold, or raiment. Even you yourselves know that these very hands have ministered to my wants, and to the supply of them who were with me. On all occasions I have suggested to you that you ought thus to labour and support the indigent, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he said,
“Tt is a greater happiness to give, than to receive.”

And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down with them all and prayed. And there was great weeping among them all; and they fell upon Paul’s neck and kissed him, being more particularly afflicted at his having said, that they should see his face no more.

Xe Then they conducted him to the ship; and soon as we

10 were parted from them and clear of the land, keeping a straight course we came to Coos, and the next day to Rhodes, and thence to Patara; where finding a vessel bound to Phenicia, we went aboard and set sail. And coming in sight of Cyprus, and leaving it on the left, we sailed for Syria and arrived at
Tyre; for the ship was to land her cargo there. And having by diligent inquiry found out the disciples, we staid there seven days. Some of these told Paul by the spirit not to go up to
Jerusalem. But when these days were ended, we set out on our departure, they, with women and children, all attending us out of the city, and kneeling down on the sea shore, we prayed; then haying saluted each other, we embarked, and they returned home. And when we had finished the voyage from
Tyre, we landed at Ptolemais, and having saluted the brethren, staid with them one day. And on the morrow we who were
Paul’s company, departed and came to Cesarea, and going to the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, we abode with him. Now he had four virgin daughters who were prophetesses.* And after we had been there several days

* The Greek word is προφητενουσαι, the meaning of which is simply to declare truths through the inspiration of God’s holy spirit, or to declare any truth, past or to come, not discoverable by the natural powers of man. See Matt 22. 68. 1 Cor. 14. 3, 4.

26

THE ACTS. XXI.

there came down from Judea a prophet named Agabus, whe coming to us and taking Paul’s girdle, bound his own hands and feet and said, Thus saith the holy spirit, So will the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man, whose girdle this is, and deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles. Upon hearing this both we and they of that place intreated him not to go up to Jerusalem. But Paul answered, Why make ye this ado, weeping and breaking my heart? As for me, I am ready, not only to be bound, but even to die at Jerusalem for the name of the
Lord Jesus. So, as he could not be prevailed on, we acquiesced, saying, The will of the Lord be done, And after those days we got ready and went up to Jerusalem. And some of the dicoipleck came with us from Cesarea and brought us to one Mnason, a Cyprian, an old disciple, with whom we were to lodge.

Now when we arrived at Jerusalem, the brethren received us with joy. And on the day following Paul went with us to
James. And when all the elders were come, he saluted them and gave them a particular account of all that God had done among the Gentiles. by his ministry; which when they heard, they glorified the Lord, and said to him, Thou seest, brother, how many myriads there are of believing Jews, and they are all zealous observers of the law. Now they have been informed concerning thee, that thou teachest all the Jews who are among the Gentiles to abandon Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children, nor walk in the established rites.
What then is to be done? At all events the multitude must needs assemble; for they will hear that thou art come. Do this then which we tell thee: there are four men with us who have a vow upon them. ‘Take these and purify thyself with them, and be at charges for them that they may shave their heads; and that all may know that there is nothing in those things of which they have been told cancerning thee; but that thou thyself walkest regularly, keeping the law. Now with respect to the Gentiles who have believed, we have sent them our decision; that they are not to observe such things, but only to abstain from what is offered to idols, and from blood, and from what is strangled, and from fornication.

So Paul took the men, and the next day being purified

27

29

30

9}

THE ACTS. XXI.

with them he went into the temple, announcing the full term of the days of the purification, even to the time when the offering for each of them was to be made; but as the seven days* were to be completed, the Jews from Asia, having seen him in the temple, threw all the multitude into confusion, and laid hands on him, crying out, Men of Israel help; This is the man who is continually teaching all men every where against the people and the law and this very place; and moreover he hath brought Greeks into the temple and defiled this holy place. (For they had before seen Trophimus, the Ephesian, in the city with him, and imagined that Paul had brought him into the temple.) Upon this the whole city was moved, and there was a concourse of the people; and laying hold on Paul they dragged him out of the temple, and immediately the gates were shut. And while they were seeking to kill him, a report came to the command-

er of the cohort that all Jerusalem was in commotion. Upon

32

34

40 which he instantly took soldiers and centurions and ran in among them. And when they saw the commander and the soldiers, they left off beating Paul. Then the commander drew near and arrested him, and ordered him to be bound with twa chains, and demanded who he was and what he had done. And as some in the crowd cried one thing, and some another, and he could not know the certainty by reason of the tumult, he ordered him to be brought into the castle. And when he was on the stairs it happened that Paul was carried up by the soldiers, on account of the violence of the crowd. For the multitude of the people followed, crying, Away with him. So, when
Paul was just about to enter the castle, he said to the commander, May I be favoured with a word to thee? Upon which he said, Canst thou speak Greek? Art thou not the Egyptian who some time ago raised an insurrection, and led out into the wilderness four thousand of the assassins? Thereupon Paul said, I am indeed a Jew of Tarsus, in Cilicia, a citizen of no inconsiderable city, I intreat thee therefore, permit me to speak to the people. And on his giving permission, Paul standing on the stairs waved his hand to the people; and a great silence taking place, he addressed them in the Hebrew dialect,

* See Numb. 6. 9, 10.

THE ACTS. XXII.

XXII. saying, Men, brethren and fathers, hear my defence

2

3

10

11 which I now make to you. (And when they heard that he spoke to them in the Hebrew dialect, they were the more silent, whereupon he said,)I indeed am a Jew, born at Tarsus, in Cilicia, but brought up in this city, instructed accurately at the feet of Gamaliel in the law of our fathers, being a zealous worshipper of God as you all are at this day; one who persecuted this sect to death, binding and delivering into custody both men and women, as even the chief priest and the whole
Sanhedrim can witness for me; from whom when I had received letters to the brethren at Damascus, I went with a design to bring those also who were there, in chains to Jerusalem, that they might be punished. But it came to pass that when
I was on the journey and drawing near to Damascus, about mid-day, a great light from heaven suddenly flashed around me. Upon which I fell to the ground, and 1 heard a voice saying to me, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? And I answered, Lord, who art thou? And he said to me, I am Jesus the Nazarene, whom thou art persecuting. Now they who were with me saw indeed the light and were terrified, but did not hear the voice of him who spake to me. Then I said, Lord, what am I to do? And the Lord said to me, Arise and go to Damascus, and there thou shalt be told of all that is appointed for thee to do. But as I could not see, by reason of the glory of that light, being led by them who were with me, I went to
Damascus, where one Ananias, a devout man according to the law, in high repute with all the Jewish inhabitants, came to me, and standing near me, said, Brother Saul, look up.
And that instant I looked up upon him. hen he said, The
God of our fathers hath prepared thee to know his will and to see the righteous one, and to hear a voice from his mouth, that thou mayst be a witness for him to all men of what thou hast seen and heard. Now therefore why delayest thou? Arise, baptize and wash thee from thy sins, calling upon the name of the Lord. And it came to pass when I returned to Jerusalem and was praying in the temple, that I fell into a trance and saw him saying to me, Make haste and depart speedily out of Jerusalem; for they will not receive thy testimony concerning me. Whereupon I said, Lord, they know that Iam one

20

29

30

2

3

THE ACTS. XXII. XXIII.

who imprisoned and scourged in the synagogues them who believed in thee; and when the blood of thy witness Stephen, was shed, I was standing by and gladly consenting to the slaughter of him, and watching the clothes of them who were killing him. And he said to me, Depart, for I will send thee to far distant nations.

Now till that word they had continued listening to him ; then they raised their voice saying, Away with such a one from the earth, for it is not fit that he should live. And as they continued to cry aloud and were casting off their mantles and throwing dust in the air, the commander ordered him to be brought into the castle and examined by scourging that he might know for what cause they raised such an outcry agamst him. But while they were straining him with thongs, Paul said to the centurion who stood by, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man who isa Roman, and hath not had a trial. Upon hearing this the centurion went to the commander and told him, saying, Consider what thou art about to do; for this man isa Roman. ‘Thereupon the commander came and said to him, Tell me. Art thou a Roman? And he said, Yes. ‘The commander replied, I bought that right of citizenship with a large sum. And Paul said, I had it by birth. They therefore who were going to put him to the question, departed from him immediately. And the commander was afraid, knowing that he was a Roman, and that he had been tying him up. And

-on the next morning, as he was desirous to know certainly

what it was of which he was accused by the Jews, he loosed him from the chains and ordered the chief priests and their whole Sanhedrim to meet; and having brought Paul down he set him before them.

XXIII. Then Paul having fixed his eyes on the Sanhedrim

said, Men, brethren, I have conducted myself with an entire good conscience as a subject of God even to this day. Upon which the chief priest Ananias ordered them who stood by him to smite him on the mouth. Whereupon Paul said to him, God is about to smite thee, thou whited wall! Dost thou sit to judge according to the law, and in defiance of the law order me to be smitten ? Upon this the bystanders said, Dost thou revile the chief priest of God? And Paul said, Brethren, I was

6

10

13

18

THE ACTS. XXIII,

not aware that he is chief priest: for it is written, Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy. people.*

Paul then perceiving that the one part were Sadducees ; and the other Pharisees, cried aloud in the Sanhedrim, Men, brethren, Iam a Pharisee, a son of a Pharisee. For a hope even of a resurrection of the dead I am now to be judged.

‘And on his saying this there arose a dissention between the

Pharisees and the Sadducees, and the multitude was divided.
For the Sadducees say, There is no resurrection nor any angel nor spirit; but the Pharisees acknowledge both. And there

‘was a great clamour. And the Scribes, siding with the Pha-

risees, arose and contended, saying, We find nothing amiss in this man. Ifa spirit or an angel hath spoken to him, let us not fight against God. And as the tumult increased, the commander, apprehensive that Paul might be torn in pieces by them, ordered the army to march down and take him from among them and bring him into the castle.

Now the night following, the Lord standing by him said,
“‘ Paul be of good courage ; for as thou hast testified concerning meat Jerusalem, so thou must bear witness at Rome also.”? And in the course of the day some of the Jews, having entered into a conspiracy, bound themselves by the solemn
Anathema, saying they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. And there were more than forty who took this oath, and who went to the chief priests and elders and said, We have bound ourselves by the solemn Anathema not to taste any thing till we have slain Paul. Now therefore do you with the Sanhedrim make application to the commander that he may bring him down to you to-morrow, as being about to examine his affair more minutely. And as for us, before he come near, we are prepared to kill him. But Paul’s sister’s son hearing of the plot, went to the castle and being admitted told Paul. Whereupon Paul called one of the centurions and said, Introduce this young man to the commander, for he hath something to tell him. He therefore took him along and conducting him to the commander said, Paul the prisoner called me to him, and desired me to introduce to thee

a neat oe neers ame

* Kx. 22. 28.

THE ACTS. XXIII. XXIV.

19 this young man who hath something to tell thee. Thereupon the commander took him by the hand, and retiring to a private
20 place asked, What is it that thou hast to tell me? And he said, The Jews have agreed to request thee to bring down
Paul to-morrow to the Sanhedrim, under a pretence of making
21 some more minute inquiry concerning him; but be not prevailed on by them ; for there are more than forty men of them in ambush, who have bound themselves by a solemn anathema
‘not to eat nor drink, till they have killed him, and they are
22 now ready, expecting this promise from thee. Upon this the commander dismissed the young man with this charge, Tell
23 no one that thou hast given me this information. Then calling two of the centurions he said, Get ready two hundred soldiers to go to Czsarea, and seventy horsemen, and two hundred
24 spearmen, by the third hour of the night and provide beasts that they may mount Paul and conduct him safe to Felix
25 the general. Then he wrote a letter of which this is a copy.

26 Claudius Lysias to his excellency general Felix, health and happiness. ay This man was seized by the Jews and just upon the point

of being slain by them, when I came with the army and rescued
28 him. Having learned that he is a Roman and being desirous to know the crime of which they accused him, I took
29 him down to their Sanhedrim, and found that he was accused of matters touching questions of their law, but had done nothing
30 that deserved death or imprisonment. But receiving intelligence of a plot against the man, which the Jews were in act to execute, I have sent him to thee and directed his accusers to lay before thee their charges against him. Farewell.
31 The soldiers therefore, pursuant to their orders, took Paul
82 and conducted him that night to Antipatris and on the morrow returned to the castle leaving the horse to go on with
33 him. These on their arrival at Czsarea delivered the letter to
34 the general and presented Paul to him. And when the general had read the letter, he asked him of what province he was.
35 And being informed that he was of Cilicia, I will hear thee, said he, when thy accusers are also come. And he ordered him to be kept in Herod’s preetorium.
XXIV. And after five days the chief priest, Ananias, came down with the elders. and one Tertullus, an orator, and laid.

THE ACTS. XXIV.

before the general an accusation against Paul. And he being called up, Tertullus began the accusation, saying,

As we enjoy great peace by thy means, and from thy prudent administration great benefits result to this nation, we on all occasions and every where acknowledge this, most ex-

- cellent Felix, with all gratitude. But that I may not further

trouble thee, I beseech ‘hes to hear us in brief with thy usual indulgence. For having found this man to be a pest and a mover of sedition, among all the Jews, through the whole empire, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes, and who attempted to profane even the temple, we apprehended him, and would have judged him according to our law; but
Lysias the commander coming with a strong force, took him out of our hands and ordered his accusers to come to thee.
By examining the man himself thou canst gain a full knowledge of all these things of which we accuse him.

And the Jews gave assent, affirming that these things were 50.

In answer to this, when the general beckoned to him to speak, Paul replied.

Knowing that thou hast been for many years a judge to this nation, I enter upon my defence with the more cheerfulness, as thou canst know that it is not more than twelve days since 1 went up to worship at Jerusalem. And they neither found me disputing with any man in the temple ; nor raising sedition among the people, either in the synagogues or in the city : nor can they prove any of the things which they now lay to my charge. But this I confess to thee, that after ‘the way which they call a sect, I worship the God of our fathers, believing all the institutes of the law and the writings of the prophets; having a confidence in God, which they themselves also entertain, that there will be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and the unjust; and with this I exercise myself to have a conscience void of offence before God and men continually. Now after many years I went to bring contributions for my nation and religious offerings; in which [services] some Jews from Asia found me purified in the temple, without crowd or tumult. Those ought to have been present before thee, and to bring their accusation, if they had any against

THE ACTS. XXIV. XXV.

20 me. Or let these men themselves say whether, when I stood before the Sanhedrim, they found any crime in me; unless

21 it be for this single expression which I uttered while standing among them, ‘‘ That for the resurrection of the dead I am this day to be judged by you.”

22 When Felix heard these things he put them off, saying,
Having gained a more accurate knowledge of the things respecting this way when Lysias the commander comes down, I

23 will inquire fully into your business. And he gave orders to the centurion that Paul be kept in custody, not closely confined ; and that none of his friends be hindered from assisting

24 him or coming to him. And after some days Felix came with his wife Drusilla, who was a Jewess, and sent for Paul and

25 heard him concerning the faith in Christ. And while Paul was discoursing concerning justice and temperance, and the judgment to come; Felix, being terrified, said, Go thy way for

26 the present, and when I find a convenient time I will send for thee : hoping withal that money would be given him by
Paul that he might discharge him, and for this cause he sent

27 for him the oftener, and conversed with him. After two years however Felix was succeeded by Portius Festus, and being desirous to ingratiate himself with the Jews, Felix left Paul bound.

ΧΧν. Therefore when Festus came to the government and

2 three days after went up from Czsarea to Jerusalem, the chief priests and the principal men of the Jews laid before him an
3 information against Paul and earnestly intreated him to favour them so far as to send for him to Jerusalem; (they having
A laid an ambush to kill him on the road.) Whereupon Festus replied, that Paul was in custody at Czsarea and that he himself
5 would shortly set out thither. Therefore, said he, Let the chief men among you go down with me ; and if there be any thing criminal in the man, let them accuse him.
6. So when he had tarried among them more than ten days he went down to Cesarea, and on the morrow taking his seat
7 on the tribunal he ordered Paul to be brought. And when he appeared, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around and brought many heavy accusations against Paul,
8 which they could not prove. To which when Paul replied,
Neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against Czsar, have I committed any offence, Festus wil-

9

10

11

12

THE ACTS. XXV.

ling to gratify the Jews addressed Paul saying, Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem, and be judged there before me concerning these things? Upon which Paul said, I stand at Czsar’s judgment seat, where I ought to be judged. To the Jews I have done no wrong, as thou thyself well knowest. If indeed
Iam guilty, or have committed any capital crime, I do not deprecate death: but if the charges which they bring against me be groundless, no man can give me up to gratify them. I appeal to Czsar. hen Festus, having conferred with his council, replied, Thou hast appealed to Czesar. ‘To Cesar thou shalt go.

Some days after, king Agrippa and Bernice came down to
Cesarea to pay their respects to Festus, and as they spent many days there Festus stated Paul’s case to the king, saying, ‘There is a man who was left a prisoner by Felix, concerning whom, when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews laid an information, soliciting judgment against him. ‘fo whom I made answer that it is not customary with the Romans to give up any man to destruction, till he who is accused is confronted with his accusers, and hath an opportunity to make a defence respecting the charge: therefore when they came hither, I without any delay ascended the tribunal the next day, and ordered the man to be brought up.
Against whom, when the accusers stood up, they advanced no charge of such things as I expected, but objected against him some disputed points relative to their peculiar mode of wor-

ship, and respecting one Jesus who had died, whom Paul af-

firmed to be alive. And as I was-at a loss how to decide in such acase, asked him, if he would goto Jerusalemand betried there respecting these matters. But Paul having appealed that his cause should be referred to the cognisance of the Emperor, I ordered him to be kept in custody, till I can send him to Cesar. Upon which Agrippa said to Festus, I could wish myself to hear the man. ‘To-morrow then, said he, thou shalt hear him.

On the morrow therefore, when Agrippa and Bernice were come with a numerous splendid retinue and had entered the hall of audience, with the commanders of cohorts and the principal men of the city, at the command of Festus, Paul was

25

26

27

THE ACTS. XXV. XXVI.

brought. And Festus said, King Agrippa, and all you who are here present with us, You see this man, about whom the whole body of the Jews have made application to me, both at
Jerusalem and inthis place, crying out that he ought not to live any longer. But as for me, finding that he had done nothing which deserved death, and he himself having appealed to the Emperor, I have determined to send him. Now as I have nothing certain to write to my master concerning him;
I have therefore brought him out before you and especially before thee, king Agrippa, that after this examination, I may have something to write. For to me it seemeth absurd to send a prisoner without specifying the charge against him.

XXVI. Then Agrippa said to Paul, Thou art permitted to

9

10

2,

12 speak for thyself. Upon which Paul stretched forth his hand and made this defence.

‘Touching all the things of which Iam accused by the
Jews, I think myself happy, O king Agrippa, that I am this day to make my defence before thee, especially skilled as thou art in all the Jewish customs and controversies; therefore I beseech thee to hear me patiently.

My course of life—that from my youth—that which from the beginning was led among my own nation at Jerusalem, is known to all the Jews. They have a prior knowledge of me from an early period, if they would testify, that neatdian to the strictest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee. And now
I stand arraigned for a hope of the promise which God made to our fathers, and which our twelve tribes, by their continual services night and day, hope to obtain: for which hope, O king Agrippa, I am accused by the Jews.

It is deemed among you somewhat incredible that God raiseth the dead; as for me I indeed myself thought that I ought to do many things in opposition to the name of Jesus the Nazarene. And this I did at Jerusalem: and many of the saints I shut up in prison, having received this authority from the chief priests. And when they were put to death, I gave assent. And in all the synagogues many a time did I, by torments, urge them to blaspheme. And being transported to madness against them, I pursued them even to foreign cities.
With which views when I was going to Damascus, with au-

13

14

15

16

22

24

25

THE ACTS. XXVI.

thority, and a commission which I had from the chief priests, in the middle of the day, on the road, I saw, O king, a light from heaven, exceeding the brightness of the sun, flashing around me and them who were accompanying me. And when we had all fallen to the ground, I heard a voice speaking to me and in the Hebrew dialect, saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is hurting thyself to kick against sharp pointed goads. And I said, Lord, whoart thou? And he said, I am Jesus, whom thou art persecuting. But arise, and stand on thy feet; for I have appeared to thee for this purpose, to appoint thee a minister and a witness of the things which thou hast seen, and of the things for which I will. appear to thee, delivering thee from the people and the nations to which I now send thee to open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of satan to God, that they may receive a remission of sins and an inheritance among them who are sanctified by the belief in me. From that time, O king Agrippa,
I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision, but made proclamation first to them at Damascus, then at Jerusalem and throughout all the country of Judea, and to the nations, to reform and turn to God, performing works worthy of the change of mind. For these things the Jews seized me in the temple, and attempted to kill me. Having therefore obtained help from
God, I have continued to this day, testifying both to small and great, saying nothing but what the prophets have said were to come to pass—particularly Moses, that the Christ should suffer, that he the first of a resurrection from the dead 15 to proclaim light to the people and the nations.

While Paul was thus making his defence, Festus said with aloud voice, Paul thou art distracted. ‘Those many writings whirl thee to madness. ‘To which he replied, I am not mad, most noble Festus; but am speaking the words of truth and so-

26 berness. For the king is acquainted with these things, to whom

therefore I speak with freedom. For I am persuaded that none of these things have escaped his notice. For this hath not been done in a corner. Thou, O king Agrippa, believest the prophets? I know that thou believest. Upon this Agrippa said to
Paul, ‘Thou almost persuadest me to become a christian. And
Paul said, I would to God, that not only thou, but also all whe

THE ACTS. XXVI. XXVII.

hear me this day, were both almost and altogether such as I am, except these chains.

30 And as he was saying this, the king rose up, and the general and Bernice and they who sat with them. And as they were withdrawing, they conferred with each other, saying, This man

31 hath done nothing that deserveth death or chains. And Agrippa said to Festus, This man might have been set at liberty if he had not appealed to Cesar.

XXVII. So, as it was determined that we should sail to Italy, they delivered Paul and some other prisoners, to a certain cen-

2 turion, named Julius, of the Augustan cohort. And having embarked in a vessel of Adr amyttium, we set sail, ἫΝ ΤΙ πιὰ to coast along the shores of Asia, Aristarchus a Macedonian of

3 Thessalonica being with us. Andon the next day we touched at Sidon, where Julius, who treated Paul with great humanity, suffered him to go to his friends and enjoy the benefit of their

4 care. Having taken our departure from this place we sailed

5 close under Cyprus, because the winds were contrary. And traversing the sea over against Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came

6 to Myra of Lycia, where the centurion met with a ship of

7 Alexandria, bound for Italy, and put us on board it. And sailing slowly for several days and having hardly got over against
Cnidus, the wind not favouring us, we sailed close under Crete

8 over against Salmone; and weathering this with much ado came to a place called Fair-haven, near to which is the city Lasea.

9 Much time being spent and the navigation now dangerous
(for it was now after the fast,*) Paul gave them warning, say-

10 ing tothem, Sirs, I perceive that this voyage will be attended with damage and no small risk, not only of the vessel and

11 cargo, but also of our lives. But the centurion paid greater regard to the pilot and the master of the vessel than to what Paul

12 said. And as the harbour was not convenient for a winter station, the greater part advised to depart thence and try to reach
Phenice, a port in Crete looking south west and north west, to

13 winter there. Soa gentle breeze springing up from the south,

About the 25th of September. See Levit. 14. 29. 23. 27. and
Num. 29. 7

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24.
25

28

29

30

31

THE ACTS. XXVII.

they, confident of gaining their point, weighed anchor and sailed close along Crete. But not long after there arose against it a tempestuous wind, which is called Euroclydon,* and the vessel being hurried away and not able to look up to the wind, we were forced to let her drive. And running close under a little island called Clauda, we had much ado to secure the boat:
Having hoisted this in they used helps, under-girding the ship.
And fearing lest they should run on the quicksands, they lowered the sail and so were driven. But as we were exceedingly tossed by the tempest, they on the next day threw overboard some of the cargo. And on the third day we with our own hands threw overboard the tackling of the ship.- Now as neither sun nor stars appeared for several days, and the tempest still bore hard upon us, all hopes of escaping were at last taken away. And there being then a great abstinence from food, Paul standing in the midst of them said, Sirs, you ought to have hearkened to me and not sailed from Crete and incurred this damage and risk. However, for the present, I exhort you to be of good courage, for there will be no loss of any life among you, but of the ship only. For an angel of God, whose Iam, and whom I serve, stood by me last night, and said, Fear not, Paul.
Thou must appear before Cesar; and lo! God hath given thee all them who are sailing with thee. Therefore take courage, sirs: for I have a confidence in God that the result will be just as it hath been told me. But we must be shipwrecked on some island. So when the fourteenth night was come, while we were driving about in the Adriatic sea, about midnight, the sailors suspected that they were approaching some land. And upon sounding they found twenty fathoms. And proceeding a little further they sounded again, and found fifteen fathoms. So fearing lest they should run ashore among rocks, they dropped four anchors from the stern and wished for day. But the sailors seeking to flee from the ship, and having hoisted out the boat under a pretence of carrying out anchors from the bow, Paul said to the centurion and the soldiers, Unless those continue

* Or as we would say, a tempestuous wind, called a hurricane, er a Levanter.

32

3

34

40

THE ACTS. XXVIL XXVIII.

in the ship, you cannot be saved. Upon this the soldiers cut the ropes of the boat and let it go adrift. And while day was coming on, Paul advised them all to take some refreshment, saying, Longing for this fourteenth day you continue fasting, having taken nothing. Therefore I intreat you to take refreshment, for this is conducive to your safety: for not a hair shall fall from the head of any of you. And having said this he took bread, and gave thanks to God in the presence of them all, and having broken it began to eat. And they all became cheerful and also took nourishment. Now we in the ship were in all two hundred and seventy six souls. And when they had satisfied themselves with food, they lightened the vessel, throwing out the corn into the sea. And when it was day they did not know the land; but they observed a creek convenient for landing, into which they determined, if possible, to force the ship. So having got rid of ‘the anchors, leaving them in the sea, and at the same time loosing the hands of the rudder and hoising the mainsail to the wind, they pressed towards the shore. And coming to a’place where two currents met, they ran the ship aground. And the prow stuck fast and remained immoveable ; but the stern was broken to pieces by the force of the waves. It was now the counsel of the soldiers to kill the prisoners, lest any should swim away and escape. But the centurion desirous to save Paul prevented their design and ordered those who could swim to throw themselves out first and get to land ; and che rest, some on planks, and some on pieces of the vessel : and so it came to pass that all got safe to land.

XXVUL And having escaped, they then knew that the island

vas called Melita.
Now the barbarians treated us with uncommon humanity ;

for having kindled a fire they took us all to it, because of the present rain, and because of the cold. And as Paul having gathered a bundle of sticks was laying them on the fire, a viper coming out from the heat, fastened on his hand. When the barbarians saw the venomous creature hanging to his hand they 5814 τὸ one another, This man is certainly a murderer whom vengeance suffereth not to live, though he hath escaped from the sea. He indeed shaked off the venomous creature into the fire, and suffered no harm; but they expected that

10

15

16

17

18

19

THE ACTS. XXVIII.

he would swell or fall dead suddenly. But when they had waited a considerable time and saw no mishap befal him, they changed their minds and said, He is a god.

Now in the neighbourhood of that place lay the estate of the chief man of the island, whose name was Publius, who took us to his house and entertained us kindly three days. And it happened that the father of Publius keing seized with a fever and a dysentery, was confined to his bed, to whom Paul went in and having prayed, laid his hands on him, and cured him. ‘This therefore being done, the rest in the island who had diseases came and were cured. Therefore they honoured us with many honours and at our departure put on board such things as were necessary. ; ὦ

Now after three months we embarked on board a ship of
Alexandria which had for its ensign Castor and Pollux, and which had wintered in that island. And being conveyed to Syracuse we staid there three days. Thence we came round and touched at Regium; and after one day, the south wind springing up, we on the second day arrived at Puteoli, where we met with brethren and were intreated to stay with them seven days and then set out for Rome, from which place the brethren, having heard of us, came, some to Appii-forum* and some to Tres-taberne* to meet us. And when Paul saw them he gave thanks to God and took courage. And when we arrived at
Rome the centurion delivered the prisoners to the prefect. But
Paul was permitted to be at a private lodging, with the soldier who guarded him.

And it came to pass after three days that Paul sent for them who were the chief men of the Jews, and when assembled he said to them, Men, brethren, though I have done nothing against the people, or the customs of our fathers, I was delivered up a prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans. These when they examined me, would have set me at liberty, because I had done nothing that deserved death. But the Jews opposing this, I was forced to appeal to

* Two towns on the road, the first about 50 miles from Rome, and the other about 30.

20

21

22

23

29

THE ACTS. XXVIII.

Cesar, not that I have any thing to lay to the charge of my nation. For this cause, therefore, I have sent for you that I might see you and speak with you. For on account of the hope of Israel, I am bound with this chain.

To this they replied, We have neither received any letters concerning thee from Judea, nor hath any of the brethren who have arrived, related or spoken any harm of thee. But we should be glad to hear what thou thinkest; for with respect to this sect we know that it is every where spoken against. So having set him a day, they came to him at his lodging, in greater numbers; to whom he explained the kingdom of God, testifying and endeavouring to reconcile them to the things concerning Jesus, from the law of Moses and the prophets, from morning till evening. And some indeed were reconciled by what were spoken, and some disbelieved. And being at variance among themselves they broke up, upon Paul’s saying one word, that the holy spirit had spoken well to our fathers by the prophet Esaias, saying, ‘“‘Go and say to the people,
Hearing you shall hear, though you may not understand; and seeing you shall see, though you may not perceive; for the heart of this people is callous, and their ears are dull of hearing, and they have shut their eyes, that for a while they may not see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and turn that I may heal them.*” Be it known therefore to you, that this salvation of God 15 sent to the Gentiles, and they will hearken to it.

And when he had said this the Jews departed, debating warmly among themselves. And Paul continued two whole years in his own hired house, and received all that came to him, proclaiming the reign of God, and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all freedom and without restraint.

* Esaias 6. 9, &c.

13

14

THE EPISTLE

OF THE

APOSTLE PAUL, TO THE ROMANS.

PAUL, a servant of Jesus Christ, a called apostle, set apart for the gospel of God, which he promised heretofore by his prophets in the holy scriptures concerning his son, (him who was of aseed of David with respect to flesh—him who was determinately marked out as son of God by a power, according to a spirit of holiness, of rising up from the dead,) [namely]
Jesus Christ, our Lord, by whom we have received favour and an apostolical mission, that for his name there may be an obedience of faith among all the nations, among which you indeed are called ones of Jesus Christ—to all who are at
Rome, beloved of God, called and consecrated; favour be to you, and peace from God our father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

In the first place, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your belief is celebrated throughout the whole world. For God, whom I serve with my spirit in the gospel of his son, is my witness how incessantly I make mention of you, intreating always in my prayers that by the will of God
I may at length have some how a favourable opportunity to come to you. For I long to see you that I may impart to you some spiritual gift for your establishment, that is, to partake of consolation among you by the faith which is mutually in us, both yours and my own.

Now, brethren, I would not have you ignorant that I have hitherto been hindered, though I have often heretofore purposed to come to you, that I might have some fruit among you even as among the other nations. I am a debtor both to Greeks and barbarians, to both the learned and the unlearned, so that as far

19

20

21

20

28

29

A a a ne ee a a

ROMANS. I.

as itrests with me, I am ready to publish the glad tidings to you also who are at Rome. For I am not ashamed of the gospel of the Christ; for it is the power of God for salvation to every one who believeth, to the Jew in the first place, and also to the Greek. For by it there is revealed a justification of God’s appointment because of belief, that we may believe. As it is written, “But the just shall live because of belief:*’?—for the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of the men, who by unrighteousness repress truth.

Because that which is to be known of God is manifest among them, for God hath manifested it to them; for his invisible attributes, both his eternal power and divine majesty, being thought upon, are from the creation of the world clearly discoyerable by the things made, so that they are without excuse—because when they knew God, they did not glorify him as God, nor give him thanks, but became vain by their illgrounded reasonings, and their foolish heart was darkened— pretending to be wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of the incorruptible God for an image representing corruptible man, and birds, and four footed beasts, and reptiles; therefore God delivered them up, by the desires of their own hearts, to impurity, that by themselves their own bodies might be dishonoured.

They changed the truth of God for a falsity, and worshipped and served the creature, and not the creator who is blessed forever, Amen: therefore God gave them up to infamous passions; for even their women perverted the instinct of

nature; and in like manner the males also leaving the sex,

were inflamed with desires towards each other, which they most shamefully indulged, men with men, and received in themselves the retribution which was justly due to their error.
And as they did not search out God to have constantly a due sense of him, God gave them up to an undiscerning mind to do things unseemly, filled as they were with all manner of injustice, lewdness, maliciousness, covetousness, mischief, be-

* Hab. 2. 4.

30

91

32

ROMANS. I. II.

ing full of envy, murder, contention, fraud, evil habits; being whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, insulters of men, insolent, boastful, inventors of evils, disobedient to parents, without understanding, covenant breakers, void of natural affection, implacable, unmerciful.

Some having recognised God’s law, That they who do such things deserve death, not only do the same things themselves, but have even a complacency in them who commit them ;

therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art, who judgest another: for in the act of judging another thou condemnest thyself. For thou the judger dost the same things. Now we know that the judgment of God is according to truth against them who commit such things. And dost thou imagine, O man, who judgest them who commit such things and dost the same thyself, that thou shalt escape the judgment
οἵ God ? Or dost thou contemn the riches of his gentleness and forbearance and long suffering, not considering that the gentleness of God is leading thee to a reformation? Indeed according to this obduracy, and impenitent heart of thine thou art treasuring up for thyself wrath against a day of the wrath and of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will render to every one according to his works—to them who by perseverance in well-doing, seek for glory and honour, and incorruption [he will grant] everlasting life; but for them who are contentious and disobedient to the truth and in subjection to unrighteousness, there will be indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man who doth evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Greek ; but glory and honour and peace, for every one who doth good—for the Jew first, and also for the Greek. For with God there is no respect of persons. For as many as have sinned without law, shall without law perish, and as many as have sinned, being under law shall be judged by law, on the day when, according to my gospel, God will judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ.
For it is not the hearers of the law who are righteous in the sight of God, but the doers of the law will be justified ; for when the Gentiles who have not law do by nature the duties required by the law, these not having law are a law to themselves. By the joint testimony of their conscience, and by

ROMANS. II. II.

their debates one with another, whether accusing or defending, they shew the matter of the law written in their hearts.
17 Behold thou art called a Jew, and thou restest on the law
18 and gloriest in God, and knowest his will, and triest things
19 which differ, being instructed out of the law, and hast a confidence that thou thyself art a guide of the blind, a light to them
20 who are in darkness, an instructor of the ignorant, a teacher of babes, having the form of the knowledge and of the truth
21 in the law. Thou therefore who teachest another, dost thou not teach thyself? Thou who proclaimest not to steal, dost
22 thou steal? Thou who sayest, Commit not adultery, dost thou commit adultery ? Thou who abominatest idols, dost thou
28 violate things sacred? Thou who gloriest in a law, dost thou
24 by the breach of that law dishonour God ? For as it is written,
“On your account the name of God is blasphemed among the
25 nations.*”? For circumcision is indeed profitable if thou performest the law. But if thou art a transgressor of the law thy
6 circumcision is become uncircumcision. If then the uncircumcision keep the moral precepts of the law, shall not such
7 a one’s uncircumcision be accounted circumcision ? And may not the uncircumcision which in a state of nature performeth the law, judge thee who being under a written law
8 and: circumcision art ἃ transgressor of law? For he is not a
Jew, who is one outwardly ; nor is that circumcision, which is barely in the flesh: but he, who is a Jew inwardly, whose. circumcision is that of the heart—spiritually not literally, whose praise is not from men, but from God.
III. (J) What then is the superior privilege of the Jew, or what the advantage of circumcision ?
2 (A) Much every way. First indeed that they were intrusted with the oracles of God.
3 (J) Well! what if some have been unfaithful ? Shall their unfaithfulness make void the faithfulness of God ?
4 (A) No, by no means, Yea, let God be true, though

*Es. 52.5. (J) A Jew’s objection. (A) The apostle’s

answer.

ROMANS. Ill.

every man be a liar, as it is written, “‘Sothat thou must be justified in thy acts and must overcome when thou art judged.*”

5 (J) If then our unrighteousness establisheth the righteousness of God, what shall we say, Is not God unjust who taketh vengeance? I speak as a man—

6 (A) No, by no means. In that case, how shall God judge the world?+

7 (J)—For if by my falsehood the sath of God hath abounded to his glory, why am I yet condemned as a sinner?

8 (A) And will you, (as we are calumniated and as some affirm that we) say, that we should do evil that good may come, you whose condemnation is just?

9 (J) What preference then have we?

(A) None at all. For we have before charged both Jews
10 and Greeks with being all under sin; as it is written,
*« There is none righteous, no, not one. 

Il There is none who hath understanding.
There is none who seeketh God.
12 They are all gone aside;

They are all together become vile;

There is none who doth good—no, not one.
13 Their throat is an open sepulchre.

With their tongues they practised deceit.

The poison of asps is under the lips of them,

14 Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.

15 Their feet are swift to shed blood.

16 - Destruction and misery are in their ways.

17 And the way of peace they did not know.

18 There is no fear of God before their eyes.’’£

19 Now we know that what things soever the law saith, it saith

to them who are under the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and the whole world stand convicted before God.
20 Because no flesh can be justified before him by works of
21 law; for by law there is a knowledge of sin, now therefore, in-

* Ps. 5& 6. t The apostle, as I conceive, repels the suggestion of God’s being unjust, without waiting for the conclusion ot the objection which is contained in verse 7. 1 Ps. 14.

26

3

ROMANS. III. IV.

dependently of law, there is made manifest a justification of
God’s appointment, attested by the law and the prophets— even a justification, of God’s appointment, by faith in Jesus
Christ, for all and upon all who believe; for there is no distinction; for all have sinned and come short of the glory of
God. They are justified freely by his grace through the redemption which is by Christ Jesus, whom God heretofore exhibited as a mercy seat by faith in his blood, that, on account of the remission of past sins, during the forbearance of God, it might be an indication of this justification of his, pointing to a display of this justification of his at this time, in order to shew this, That he is just and the justifier of him who is a believer in Jesus. Where then is this boasting? It is excluded.
By what law? By that of works? No; but by a law of belief.
We conclude therefore that man is justified by belief independent of works of law. Is God the God of Jews only? Is he not also [the God] of the Gentiles? Yes, of Gentiles also: since it is one and the same God who will justify circumcision because of belief and uncircumcision by the same belief. Do we then by this belief make law void? No, by no means: on the contrary we establish law.

What then shall we say that our father Abraham obtained in regard to the flesh? for if Abraham was justified because of works he hath matter of boasting. But he hath not before God.
For what saith the scripture, ‘And Abraham believed God and it

4 wasreckoned to him for righteousness.” * Now to him who work-

5

9 eth the reward is not reckoned a favour, but a debt. But to him who doth not work, but believeth in him who acquitteth the ungodly, his belief is placed to account for righteousness.
As David also saith in respect to the happiness of the man to whose account God placeth righteousness without works,

‘Happy they whose iniquities are forgiven;

And whose sins are covered:

Happy the man to whose account the Lord will not charge sin.’’+

Now with respect to this happiness, doth it come upon

* Gen. 15. 6. Ps, ΘΝ 1) ὅτ:

10

12

13

14

15

16

17

ROMANS. IV.

the circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision also? For we say that the believing was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness. How then was it reckoned to him? When he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not when in circumcision; but when in uncircumcision; and he received the sign of circumcision as a seal of the righteousness of that belief, which he had in uncircumcision, that he might be a father of all who believe when in a state of uncircumcision, in order that this righteousness may be reckoned to them also—and a father of circumcision to them who are not only circumcised, but who also walk in the footsteps of that belief of our father Abraham, which he had during uncircumcision. For the promise that he should be heir of the world was not made to Abraham or his seed, during law, but during the righteousness of belief. For if they who are under law are heirs, the believing is made void, and the promise rendered of no effect. For the law operateth to produce wrath; for where there is no law, there is no transgression. Therefore the promise is because of faith, that it may be matter of favour to this extent, that it may be firm to the whole seed—not only to that under the law, but to that of the faith of Abraham, who (as it is written, ‘‘ J have made thee a father of many nations*”’ ) is the father of us all in the sight of him in whom he believed—namely God who reanimateth the dead, and calleth up things not yet in existence as if actually existing. Against hope he believed with a hope that he should become father of many nations according to what was said,
“(80 shall thy seed bet’?—and far from being weak in faith, he did not consider his own body now become dead, he being then in his hundredth year; nor the deadness of Sarah’s womb.
He disputed not against the promise of God by unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God, and being fully persuaded that he was able to perform what he had promised,
Therefore it was reckoned to him for righteousness. Now it was not written merely for his sake, that it was reckoned to him, but for our sakes also to whom it will now be reckoned, namely to such as believe in him who hath raised from the

* Gen. 17. 6. + Gen. 15. 5-

25

6

15

16

17

18

ROMANS. IV. V.

dead Jesus our Lord, who was delivered up for our offences, and raised again for our justification.

Therefore being justified because of belief, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have, by this belief, obtained access to this favour in which we stand and. boast in a hope of the glory of God. And not only so, but we boast also-in our tribulations, as we know that tribulation operateth to produce patience; and patience, a proof; and proof, a hope; and this hope will not shame us, because the love of God is diffused through our hearts by a holy spirit, which is given us. For while we were yet without strength,
Christ in due time died for the ungodly: for scarcely will any one die for a just man; though perhaps for the good some one may even dare to die: but God confirmeth his love for us, because while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more therefore shall we, being now acquitted by his blood, be saved by him from the wrath. For if we, when enemies, were reconciled to God by the death of his son, much more shall we, being reconciled, be saved by his life. And not only so, but we also boast in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now obtained this reconciliation, on this account—as sin entered into this world by one man, and death by sin, and so death for which all sinned passed through unte all men: for there was sin in the world until the law: now sin is not placed to account where there is no law; but death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them who had not sinned after the likeness of the transgression of Adam, who is a type of him who was to come: but the free gift is not as the transeression; for if for the transgression of the one, the many died; much more hath the favour of God, and the free gift by the favour of the other man, Jesus Christ, superabounded to the many: nor is this free gift as in the case when one sinned— for the sentence was a condemnation for one offence, but the free gift is an acquittal from many transgressions. For if for the offence of the one, death reigned by that one; much more shall they who receive the superabundance of this favour and of the free gift of this acquittal, reign in life by the other, namely Jesus Christ. Therefore as by one transgression there was a sentence of condemnation for all men; so by one acquittal

ROMANS. V. VI.

19 there is an adjudication of life forall men. For as by the disobedience of the one man, the many were ranked as sinners, so also by the obedience of the other man, the many will be

20 ranked as righteous. Now the law came in a little way, so that transgression abounded, but where sin abounded, favour su-

21 perabounded, that as sin had reigned by death, so favour might reign by means of a justification for everlasting life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

VI. What shall we say then? Shall \ we continue in sin that favour may abound?
2 No, by no means. With respect to us who have died to sin,

3 how can we any more live therein? Do you not know that as many of us as have been baptized to Christ Jesus, have been
4 baptized to his death? We have therefore been buried with him by that baptism to his death, that as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also may walk
5 in newness of life. For if we are grafts, we are made so by the
6 similitude of his death, but by that of his resurrection we shall actually be so. This we know, that our old man was crucified with him that the body of sin may be stopped from operating, in order that we may no longer be slaves to sin. For he who
7 is dead, is delivered from sin. Now if we have died with Christ,
8 we believe that we shall live with him, as we know that Christ,
9 being raised .-om the dead, dieth no more. Death hath no
10 more a mastery over him. For inasmuch as he died for sin, he
11 died once for all; but as he liveth, he liveth for God. So likewise reckon ye yourselves to be dead to sin, but alive for God
12 in Christ Jesus our Lord. Therefore let not sin reign in your
13 mortal body, so as by the appetites thereof to’serve sin; nor deliver up your members to sin as instruments of unrighteousness; but deliver yourselves up to God, as brought to life from
_14 the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness for God. For sin is not to have dominion over you, as you are not under the law, but under favour.

15 What then: shall we sin because we are not under law, but under favour?
16 No, by no means. Do you not know that to whatsoever

you deliver yourselves up as servants at command, you are the slaves of that which you obey, whether it be of sin for death;

ROMANS. VI. VII.

17 or of obedience for righteousness. But thanks be to God, that though you were slaves of sin, yet from the heart you have conformed to the mould of doctrine in which you were cast,

18 and being freed from sin, have become servants of righteous-

19 ness. (I speak in the language of human affairs because of the weakness of your flesh,) for as you yielded up your members to iniquity, as slavish instruments of uncleanness and all manner of iniquity, so now yield up your members as servants to

20 righteousness for sanctification. For when you were servants of sin—when you were at a loose from righteousness, what

ΟἹ fruit therefore had you then from those things of which you are now ashamed? For the end of them is death. But being now

22 set free from sin and become servants of God, you have your fruit to holiness, and in the end, everlasting life. For the wa-

23 ges of sin is death; but the free gift of God is everlasting life by Christ Jesus our Lord.

VII. Or do not you, brethren, know (for I now speak to them who know law) that the law hath dominion over man as

2 long as it liveth? For the married woman is by law bound to her husband while he is alive. But if the husband die, a stop is put to the operation of the law of the husband. Therefore if

3 she marry another man while her husband is alive, she will get the name of an adulteress; but if her husband die, she is free from the law so as not to be an adulteress by becoming ano-

4 ther man’s wife. So you also, my brethren, are become dead

"to the law by means of the body of the Christ, that you may be for another, who is raised from the dead, that we may bring

5 forth fruit to God. For when we were in the flesh, the sinful passions, which subsisted under the law, exerted their energy in our members to bring forth fruit to death: but we are now

6 set free from the law by the death of that by which we were holden, so that we may serve with a new spirit, and not by the old letter.

7 (J) What shall we say then? Is the law sin?

(A) No, by no means. Indeed 1 should not have known sin, had it not been for the law. For I should not have known

8 covetousness, had not the law said, “" Zhou shalt not covet.”
But sin having got an advantage by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of desire. For without law sin is

11
12.

13

16

24

25

ROMANS. VII. VIII.

dead. Nowas for me, I fora while was alive without law, but when the commandment came, sin revived and I died. So I found the commandment which was for life, to be for death. For sin having got an advantage by the commandment, seduced me, and by it slew me. So that the law is indeed holy, and the commandment is holy, just and good.

(J) Hath that then which is good been death to me?

(A) No, by no means. But sin, so that it appeared to be sin, continued working death for me by that which is good, so that sin appeared to be sin in the highest degree by the commandment. For we know that the law is spiritual, but as for me, I being carnal, am sold to sin. For what I am doing I do not allow; for that which I approve, I do not perform; but what
I hate, that I do. Now if I do that which I do not approve, I assent to the law that it is good: and it is now not I myself, who do this, but sin which dwelleth in me. For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, good doth not dwell. For to will is present with me, but the performance of what is good, I do not find. For the good which I approve, I do not perform; but evil which I disapprove, this I do. Now if I do that which
I myself disapprove; itis no more I myself who do it; but sin which dwelleth in me. I find then this law for me, that when
I would do good, evil is close to me. For in the inner man ἢ am delighted with the law of God; but I perceive another law in my members warring against the law of my mind and making me a captive to the law of sin which is in my members.
Wretched man that I am! who will deliver me from this deathful body? I thank God that through Jesus Christ our Lord,
(do I then myself with the mind serve the law of God, but with

Vill. the flesh the law of sin?) there is then no condemnation

2

now to them who are in Christ Jesus and who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. For the law of the spirit of the life in Christ Jesus hath freed me from the law of sin and death; for as it was out of the power of the law to do this, inasmuch as it was weak through the flesh, God having sent his own son in a likeness of sinful flesh, and to be a sin offering, hath condemned this sin in the flesh, that the morality of the law might be confirmed by us who walk not after flesh, but after spirit: for they who are followers of flesh have their minds bent on the things

onan

10

11

15

ROMANS. VIII.

of the flesh; but the followers of spirit, on the things of the spirit. For the bent of the flesh is death; but the bent of the spirit is life and peace. Because the bent of the flesh is enmity to God, (for it is not in subjection to the law of God, nor indeed can be,) they therefore who are in a carnal state* can not please God. But you are not ina carnal state, but ina spiritual state,t if indeed the spirit of God dwelleth in you. But if any one hath not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his. But if
Christ be in you, the body indeed 15 dead because of sin, but the spirit is alive, because of a justification; and if the spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwelleth in you, he who hath raised up the Christ from the dead will quicken even those dead bodies of yours by his spirit which dwelleth in you.
Therefore we, brethren, are not debtors to the flesh, that we should live according to the flesh; for if-you live according to the flesh, you are dying; but if you by the spirit mortify the deeds of the body, you shall live. For as many as are led by the spirit of God, are sons of God. For you have not received a spirit of bondage again to fear; but you have received a spirit of adoption, by which we cry, Abba, Father. This very spirit beareth joint witness with our spirit that we are children of
God; and if children, then heirs; heirs indeed of God, and joint heirs with Christ if we suffer with him so that with him we may also be glorified. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be set against that glory which is about to be revealed for us. For the earnest expectation of mankindt is waiting for the manifestation of the children of
God. For to vanity this creation was subjected, not as a voluntary agent, but by him who-subjected it to a hope that this very creation shall be freed from the slavery of this corruption, that it may enjoy the glorious liberty of the children of God.
For we know that this whole creation are groaning together, and even till now are all in pain as a woman in travail. Nay, even they who have the first fruits of the spirit, even we our-

* Literally, zn jlesh. + Literally, in spirit. + Literally, the création. By comparing Mark 16. 15. where it occurs, with Matt.
28.19. I take it to mean mankind in general, Jews and Gentiles.

24,

25

26

27

28

29

30

39

36

37

ROMANS. VIII.

selves are groaning within ourselves, waiting for an adoption
—the redemption of this body of ours. For to this hope we have escaped. Now hope which is attained,* is not hope; for why should one hope for that which he enjoyeth. But if we hope for what we do not enjoy, we wait for it with paticnce, and in such a manner as the spirit joineth in helping our infirmities:

for we do not know what we should pray for as we ought,

but the spirit itself intercedeth for us with groans which cannot be expressed in words. And he who searcheth the hearts knoweth the bent of the spirit, that it pleadeth for saints according to the will of God. And we know that all things are working together for good to them who love God—to them who according to a previous purpose are now actually called.

For those whom he foreknew, even these he marked out beforehand to be of a form the same as that of the image of his son,t that he might be a first born among many brethren. And those whom he marked out beforehand he actually called, and’those whom he called, even these he acquitted, and those whom he acquitted even these he glorified.

What then shall we say to these things ? If God is for us, who can be against us ? He who spared not his own son but delivered him up for us all, how will he not also with him freely grant us all things? Who shall lodge an accusation against them whom God hath chosen ? God who acquitteth ὃ who is he who shall condemn? Christ who died? Rather indeed who is raised up, who is actually at the right hand of
God, and who maketh intercession for us? Who shall separate us from the love of the Christ ? Shall tribulation or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (As it is written,

“‘ For thy sake we are killed all the day long,

And accounted as sheep for slaughter, +”

We indeed in all these things are more than conquerors

* Literally seen, a figure used in scripture for having or enjoying,
See John 3. 36. tI apprehend that the apostle here alludes to the first creation, ef man, and particularly to Gen. 1. 26. t Ps. 44. 22,

38

» ROMANS. VIII. IX.

by means of him who hath loved us. For Iam persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor

powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,

nor depth, nor any other created being shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. F :

IX. I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience, with

10

1]

aholy spirit, bearing joint witness for me that I have great grief and incessant sorrow in my heart (for I even I myself wished the followers of Christ to be devoted to destruction,*) for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh, who are
Israelites, to whom belonged the adoption and the glory, and the covenants, and the civil government, and the religious service, and the promises ; whose ancestors were the patriarchs, and from whom, with regard to flesh, the Christ is [descended] who is over all, God blessed forever. Amen. It is not however to be supposed that the word of God hath failed.
For with regard to all the descendants of Israel, they are not
Israel ; nor are they all children, because they are of the race of Abraham; but in Isaak a seed shall be called for thee. That is to say, It is not the children,of the flesh who are the children of God; but the children of the promise are reckoned for seed. For this is the word of the promise. ‘‘About this time twelve month I will come and Sarah shall have a son.}”
And not only so but the same was the case with Rebecca, when she was with child of twins by one man, namely, our father Isaak.
For the children being not yet born, nor having done any thing good or evil that the purpose might rest on the choice of God, not in consideration of works, but of his call, it was

* Literally, [ even I myself wished thefoilowers of Christ to be an anathema. The word anathema means a person or thing devoted to destruction: and we find in the Septuagint, Lev. 27. 28, the very phrase used here viz. ἀνἄθεμια ἀπὸ denoting that the person or thing may be from among men or beasts, or part of one’s possessions. So the apostle says that he himseli wished some from the
Christ, that is, some of the followers of the Christ to be an anathema, that is, devoted to destruction, and therefore he persecuted them. 7 Geny1as 10) Be.

15

ROMANS. IX.

said to her, “‘ The elder shall serve the younger.” As it is written “Jacob I have loved and Esau I have slighted.*”

(J) What then shall we say? Is there injustice with
God ? ι

(A) No by no means. For to Moses he saith, “I will have mercy on whomsoever I please to have mercy; and I will have compassion on whomsoever I please to compassionate.t ‘Therefore it is not of him who willeth, nor of him who runneth, but of God, who sheweth mercy. For the scripture saith to Pharaoh, “1 have rgised thee up for this purpose that by thee I may display my power; and that my name may be celebrated throughout all the earth.”

Well then, he sheweth mercy to whom he pleaseth, and hardeneth whom he pleaseth, wilt thou then say to me, Why doth he yet find fault, for who hath resisted his will? But who art thou, O man, who enterest into a dispute with God ? Shall the thing formed say to him who formed it, Why hast thou made me thus? Hath not the potter power over the clay to make, out of the same lump, one vessel for honour, and another for dishonour ? What if God willing to manifest his wrath and make known his power, did with much long suffering, bear with the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, to the end that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy which he had previously prepared for glory — even us whom he hath called not only from among the Jews, but also from among the Gentiles. As he actually saith by
Hosea, ‘‘ I will call them my people who are not my people ; and I will call her beloved, who was not beloved. And it shall come to pass that in the place where it was said to them, You are not my people, they shall there be called children of the living God.§”? Esaias also crieth concerning Israel, ‘‘ Though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, this remnant shall be saved. ” lor he is closing an account and making a deduction with saving goodness. Because the Lord will make with the land a reckoning from which a deduction

ἜΝΙ Ἂς t Ex. 33. 19, t Ex. 9. 16. § Hosea, 1. 40,
 Es. 10. 22, &e.

29

30

31

ROMANS. IX. X.

is made, therefore as Esaias said. “δά not the Lord of hosts left us a seed, we must have been like Sodom and sci like Gomorrah.*”

(J) What then are we to infer?

(A) That the Gentiles who did not pursue righteousness, attained righteousness, but it was a righteousness because of belief; but Israel pursuing a law of righteousness did not come up to the law of righteousness.

(J) Why?

(A) Because they sought it not from belief; but as if attainable by works of law. For they stumbled at the stumbling stone. As it 1s written, “‘Behold I lay in Siona stone of stumbling and a rock of offence.”? And “whosoever believeth in him shall not be shamed.’

Brethren, the earnest desire of my heart and my supplication to God for Israel is, that they may be saved. For I bear them witness that they have a zeal for God, but not ac-

‘cording to knowledge. For being ignorant of the righteous-

ness of God’s appointment, and seeking to establish a righteousness of their own, they did not submit themselves to
God’s righteousness. For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one who believeth: For Moses describeth the righteousness which is from the law, thus—-‘“The man who doth these things shall live ther ΡΥ; but the righteousness because of believing speaketh in this nian Gay not in thy heart, Who will ascend up to heaven (that is to bring Christ down); or who will go down to the abyss (that is to bring up Christ from the dead) But what doth it say?
The matter is near thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart}—
That is, the matter of this belief, which we proclaim, That if thou wilt acknowledge with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe with thy heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the heart man believeth for righteousness, and with the mouth acknowledgment is made for salvation. For the scripture saith, “Whosoever believeth in him shall not be shamed.

* Esaias 1. 9. 1 Es. 8. 14. and 28. 16. + Lev. 18. ὅ.
§ Deut. 30. 11, &c. Es. 28. 16.

13

14

15

18

19

20

ROMANS X. XI.

tion of Jew and Greek; for he is Lord of all, abounding in riches for all who call upon him; ‘‘For whosoever will call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.”’*

(J) How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a pro-

claimer? and how shall they proclaim, unless they be sent?

As it is written, ““How beautiful are the feet of them who proclaim the joyful message of peace—who proclaim the glad tidings of good things.’’+

(A) But all have not duly hearkened to the good news, for Esaias saith, ‘‘Lord, who hath believed this report of ours.”’t
The believing is indeed because of hearing, and what they heard is by the order of God. But I say, Have they not heard?

(J) What! Is their sound then gone forth to every land; and their doctrines to the limits of the world?§

(A) But I say, Hath not Israel known? First Moses saith,

“ will provoke you by what is not a nation,

By a foolish nation I will vex you.” 

But Esaias is more explicit, and saith,

“*T was found by them who sought me not,

Tbecame manifest to them who inquired not for me.’

But concerning Isr ael he saith,

“T have stfetched out my hands all the day long

“Yo a disobedient and gainsaying people.” ἢ

(J) say then, Hath God utterly rejected his people?

(A) No, by no means. For even I myself am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. God hath not utterly rejected his people whom he heretofore acknowledged. Do you not know by Elias what the scripture saith? When he is pleading with God against Israel, saying,
“Lord, they have slain thy prophets and demolished thine altars; and 1 alone am left, and they seek my life.””, What doth the divine oracle say to him? “I have reserved for myself seven thousand men who have not bowed aknee to Baal.”** In

* Joel 2. 32. t Es. 52. 7, &e. ¢ Ee. 53.1. § Ps. 19. 4.
 Deut. 32. 21. q Es. 65. 1, &c. ** 1 κΚ, 19, 14, ἃς.

18

£9

22

ROMANS. XI.

like manner, therefore, at this present time there is a remnant according to a choice of favour. Now if it be by favour, it is no more in consideration of works, since im this case the favour is no favour: but if it be in consideration of works it is no more of favour, otherwise the work is no work.

(J) What is the inference? :

(A) ‘That which Isracl sought he did not obtain; but the chosen obtained it and the rest were blinded. As it is written,
“God hath given them a spirit of stupefaction, eyes not to see and ears not to hear even to this day.”’** And David saith,
“Let their table be for a snare and for a trap, and for a stumbling block, and for a retribution to them.

Let their eyes be darkened that they may not see,

And bow down their neck continually.’’+

(J) Tsay then, Did they stumble that they might fall?

(A) No, by no means. But on this lapse of theirs the’
Gentiles have this salvation to provoke them to emulation.
Now if this lapse of theirs is the riches of the world and the diminution of them is the riches of the Gentiles, how much more will their fulness be! (For I tell you, Gentiles, inasmuch as I am the apostle of the Gentiles, I honour my office, if I can any how excite to emulation them who are my flesh and save some of them). For if the casting of them off is the reconcilement of the world, what must the taking of them back be, but life from the dead? Now if that portion which is set apart from an offering is holy, so will the mass be. And if the root is holy, so are the branches: And if some of the branches are broken off, and thou being a wild olive art ingraffed among them and become a partaker of the root and fatness of the olive tree, boast not against the branches. But if thou boast [remember that] thou dost not support the root, but the root supporteth thee.

Thou wilt say then, The branches were broken off, that I might be ingrafled. Well! They were broken off for their disbelief, and thou standest for thy belief. Be not high minded; but fear. For if God spared not the natural branches,

* Es. 29.10. and 6. 10. + Ps. 69. 22) (ee.

23

24,

ROMANS. XI. XI.

perhaps he may not spare thee. Behold then the kindness and the severity of God—severity against them indeed who have fallen, and kindness to thee if thou continue in that kindness, otherwise thou also wilt be cut off. And with respect to them, if they continue not in their disbelief, they shall be ingraffed.
For God is able to ingraff them again. For if thou hast been

-eut from a natural wild olive tree, and contrary to nature

26 graffed on a good olive tree; how much more shall they that are natural branches be graffed on their own olive tree. For, that you, brethren, may not have too high an opinion of yourselves, I would not have you ignorant of this secret, That a partial blindness hath come upon Israel until the fulness of the
Gentiles shall have come in, and then at length all Israel shall be saved. As it is written

“For the sake of Sion the Deliverer will come

And turn away ungodliness from Jacob:

. And this shall be my covenant with them

When I take away their sins.

With respect to these glad tidings, they are enemies on your account; but with respect to the choice, they are beloved on account of the fathers. For the favours and choice of God are not reversed. For as you for a while rebelled against God, but have now obtained mercy at their rebellion; so they also have now rebelled at the mercy shewn to you, that they also may be objects of mercy. For God hath shut all up for disobedience that he may have mercy on all. O the depth of the riches, and of the wisdom, and of the knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways

34 not to be traced out! For who hath known the mind of the

3.5,

36

Lord? Or who hath been his counsellor? Or who hath first given to him, that in return he may receive a recompense?
Because of him, and by him, and for him are all things; to

XII. him be the glory for ever, Amen; therefore I exhort you,

2 brethren, by the mercies of God, to present your bodies a living, holy, acceptable sacrifice to God as your rational, religious service; and be not conformed to this world; but

th nn ns rt en

* Fis. 59. 20.

3

4

6 aq

ROMANS. ΧΠ.

transiormed by the renewal of your mind, that you may know experimentally what the will of God is, which is good and acceptable and perfect. For by virtue of the favour which is granted to me, I charge every one who is among you not to have an overweening opinion of himself, but to bend his thoughts to the attaining of a sober and modest demeanour, as
God hath distributed a portion of faith toevery one. For as we have many members in one body, and all the members have not the same office; so we being many are one body in
Christ, but individually members of one another, and employed in exercising free gifts, according to the favour conferred on us, different as they are, if prophesy, in conformity to that belief; if a ministerial office, in that office; and if one is a teacher, in teaching; and the exhorter in exhortation; let him who giveth [do it] with sincerity; him who superiitendeth, with assiduity; him who sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness.
Let love be unfeigned: abhor what is evil; adhere closely to what is good; in brotherly love be tenderly affectionate one to another: in honour prefer one another; in business be not

2 slothful: Be fervent in spirit; constant in serving the Lord;

joyful in hope; patient in tribulation; stedfastiy persevering in prayer; administering to the wants of the saints; cultivating hospitality: Bless them who persecute you—bless and curse not. Set your hearts on this with respect to each other—to rejoice with them who rejoice, and to weep with them who weep. Set not your minds on high things, but accommodate yourselves to things which are low. Be not wise in your own conceits. Render to none evil for evil. Be provident in regard to things good in the sight of all men. If possible, that is, as far as in your power, be at peace with all men. Beloved, avenge not yourselves, but give place to the wrath; for it is written, ‘Vengeance is mine; I will requite, saith the Lord.”’ Therefore if thine enemy hunger feed him; if he be thirsty, give him drink; for by doing so thou wilt use the means to melt him.t Be not overcome by evil; but

* Weut. 32. 32 + Prov. 25. 21. Literally, heap coals of fire on his head, a proverbial phrase taken from the melting of metals in a crucible,

ROMANS. XIII. XIV.

overcome evil with good. Let every soul be subject to the

XII. ruling powers; for there is no power but from God. The
2 powers in being are arranged by God; so that he who setteth

9

10 himself against the power resisteth the arrangement of God; and they who resist shall receive for themselves condemnation.
For the rulers are not a terror to good works but to evil. Dost thou then wish not to dread the power? Do that which is good and thou shalt have praise from it. For it is a minister of
God for good to thee. But if thou dost evil, be in dread; for it wieldeth not the sword in vain. For it is a minister of God, an avenger to execute wrath on him who doth evil. Therefore it is necessary to submit to government, not only on account of punishment, but also for conscience’s sake. Indeed on this account you pay taxes, because there are ministers of God continually employed for this very purpose. Render therefore to all their dues—tribute to whom tribute; custom to whom custom; reverence to whom reverence; honour to whom honour is due. Owe no one any thing, save this, to love one another: for he who loveth others hath fulfilled the law: for this—
Thou shalt not commit adultery—Thou shalt not murder—
Thou shalt not steal—Thou shalt not bear false witness—
Thou shalt not covet—and whatever other commandment there be, issummed up in this commandment, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. This love worketh no evil to one’s

‘neighbour: This love therefore is the fulfilling of the law.

11

12 ok

14

Furthermore, as we know the season, that it is now high time for us to rouse from sleep, for our deliverance is nearer now than when we first believed: The night is far spent; the day is drawing on; let us therefore put off the works of darkness, and put on the armour of light; and let us walk as in day light, in a becoming manner—not in revels and drunken debauches; not in dalliance and wantonness; not in strife and envy; but puton the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provi-

XIV. sion for the flesh to fulfil its desires. Receive into fel-

2

lowship him who is weak in the faith, without regard to differ-

ences of opinions. One indeed believeth that he may eat all

things; another who is weak eateth vegetables. Let not him

who eateth despise him who doth not eat. And let not him

4

ROMANS. XIV.

who doth not eat, judge him who eateth. For God hath taken him into his family, who art thou who judgest another’s servant. To his own master he standeth or falleth. But he shall stand, for God is able to establish him. One indeed judgeth one day above another; another esteemeth every day alike.
Let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind. He who regardeth the day, regardeth it for the Lord; and he who regardeth not the day, refraineth from regarding it, for the Lord.
He who eateth, eateth for the Lord, for he giveth God thanks; and he who eateth not, refraineth from eating, for the Lord, and he giveth God thanks. For none of us liveth to himself, nor doth any die to himself. For whether we live, we live to the Lord; and if we die, we die to the Lord; so that whether we live or die, we are the Lord’s. For to this end Christ died and rose and lived again, that he might be Lord both of the dead and the living. Why then judgest thou thy brother, or why despisest thou thy brother? For we shall all stand before the judgment seat of the Christ; For it is written, “‘As I live, saith the Lord, to me every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall give praise to God.* Since every one of us then shall give an account of himself to God, let us therefore no more

; judge one another, but rather come to this determination, not

to lay a stumbling block in the way ofa brother, nor give any occasion of offence. I know and am fully assured by the Lord
Jesus, that nothing is of itself unclean. But to him who thinketh any thing unclean, to him it is unclean. Now if on account of thy food thy brother is grieved, thou no longer walkest according to love. Destroy not by thy food him for whom
Christ died. Let not therefore the good which you enjoy. be ill spoken of. For the reign of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness and peace and joy in a holy spirit. For he who serveth the Christ in these things is acceptable to God and approved by men. Let us then pursue those things which tend to peace and mutual edification. Do not for the sake of food destroy the work of God. All things indeed are pure; but-they are an evil toa man who eateth for a stumbling block.

* Esaias 45. 23.

22

23

‘ROMANS. XIV. XV.

It is good not to eat flesh, nor drink wine, nor any thing by which thy brother falleth, or stumbleth, or is made weak.
Thou hast a belief; exercise it at home by thyself before God.
Happy he who upon a strict examination doth not condemn himself. Now he who maketh distinctions is condemned if he eateth, because he eateth not with belief; and every thing

XV. which is not according to belief is a sin. We then who

13

14

15 are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves. Let every one of us please his neighbour as far as is good for edification. For even the Christ did not consult his own gratification, but as it is written, “The reproaches of them who reproached thee fell upon me’’* For whatever was written heretofore, was written for our instruction, that we by patience and the consolation of the scripture may have hope. Now may the God of this patience and of this consolation grant you to have your minds mutually bent on this very thing after the example of Christ Jesus, that you may unanimously, with one voice, glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore receive one another into fellowship, even as the Christ received us into his family, for the glory of God.

Now I say that, for the truth of God, Jesus Christ became the minister of circumcision, to confirm the promises made to the fathers; and that the Gentiles are to glorify God for his mercy. As it is written, ‘“‘For this cause I will praise thee among the nations and sing to thy name.”’+ And again it is said, “Rejoice, O nations, with his people.” And again,
Praise the Lord, all ye nations: Praise him, all ye people, also,t And again Esaias saith, ‘There shall be the root of
Jesse, even he who riseth up to rule nations; in him nations will put their trust.) Now may the God of this trust fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that you may abound in this. trust by virtue of a holy spirit. ;

Now as for me, lam persuaded, my brethren, with respect to you, that you yourselves are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge and able to instruct one another; nevertheless I

* Ps. 69, 9. 165. 18.49. $5117. 1. § Es. 11. 10,

16

29

30

ROMANS. XV.

have written to you, brethren, with more boldness, partly as your remembrancer, because of the favour which God hath granted me, that I should be a ministering servant of
Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, and employed in the holy service of dispensing the glad tidings of God, that the offering of the Gentiles may be accepted, being hallowed by a holy spirit.

Therefore I have matter of boasting in Christ Jesus with re-

spect to the things pertaining to God. For 1 will not presume to mention any thing, save what Christ hath wrought by me for the obedience of the Gentiles, both in profession and practice, by virtue of signs and wonders, by the power of the spirit of God; so that from Jerusalem and the country around even to Illyricum, I have confirmed the glad tidings of the
Christ, (yet when thus ambitious to publish the glad tidings) not where Christ was named, that I might not build on another’s foundation; but as it is written,

“They to whom no publication was made concerning him, shall see,

And they who have not heard, will attentively consider. *”

‘Therefore, though I have been many times hindered from coming to you, yet having now no further scope in these parts, and having had, for many years, a strong desire to visit you,
I will, when I take a journey to Spain, come to you. For I hope to see you on my way, and to be forwarded thither by you, when I shall have first been in some degree satisfied with your company. But now I am going to Jerusalem as an almoner to the saints. For Macedonia and Achaia have been pleased to make a contribution for the poor saints in Jerusalem.
For they have been pleased! Indeed they are their debtors. Forif the Gentiles have partaken of their spiritual things, they ought to minister to them with temporal things. Having therefore performed this business, and secured to them this contribution, 1 will come to you in my way to Spain. And I know that when I come to you, I shall come with a fulness of the blessing of the glad tidings of the Christ.

Now I beseech you, brethren, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the spirit, to joim with me in earnest sup-

* Es. 52. 15.

32

ROMANS, XV. XVI.

plications to God, for me; that I may be delivered from the unbelievers in Judea; and that this service of mine, which carrieth me to Jerusalem, may be acceptable to the saints, that I may come to you with joy, by the will of God, and refresh myself with you. Now the God of peace be with you all.
Amen.

XVI. I recommend to you Phebe our sister, who is an almo-

2

O93

16

17

18

19 ner of the congregation at Cenchrea, that you may receive her in the Lord in a manner becoming the saints, and afford her such assistance as her business may require: for she indeed hath assisted many, particularly myself.

Salute Priscilla and Aquilas my fellow labourers in Christ
Jesus, who for my life exposed their own; to whom not only
I, but all the Gentile congregations also, owe thanks. Salute also the congregation at their house. Salute my beloved Epenetus, who is the first fruits of Achaia for Christ. Salute Mary, who hath taken a great deal of pains on our account. Salute Andronicus and Junias, my kinsmen and my fellow prisoners. They are in high repute among the apostles, and were in
Christ before me. Salute Amplias, who is my beloved in the
Lord. Salute Urbanus, our fellow labourer in Christ, and
Stachys, who is my beloved. Salute Appelles, who is approved in Christ. Salute those who are of the household of Aristobulus. Salute Herodian, my kinsman. Salute those of the household of Narcissus, who are in the Lord. Salute Tryphena and
Tryphosa, who have laboured in the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis, who hath laboured much in the Lord. Salute Rufus, the chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine. Salute
Asyncritus, Phlegon, Ermas, Patrobas, Herme, and the brethren with them. Salute Philologus, and Julias, and Nereus, and his sister, and Olympus, and all the saints with them. Salute one another witha holy kiss. The congregation of Christ salute you.

Now I exhort you, brethren, to mark them who make the divisions and the stumbling blocks contrary to the doctrine which you have learned; and avoid them, For such men do not serve our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly. And by their fawning speeches and flattering forms of address, they deceive the hearts of the innocent. For your obedience is come

27

ROMANS. XVI.

abroad to all; I therefore rejoice on your account, and wish you to be indeed wise for good, and without any mixture of evil. And the God of peace will soon bruise satan under your feet.
The favour of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
Timothy, my fellow labourer, and Lucius, and Jason, and
Sosipater, my kinsmen, salute you. I, Tertius, the writer of this letter, salute you in the Lord. Gaius, who entertaineth me and the whole congregation, saluteth you. Erastus, the chamberlain of the city, saluteth you: so doth Quartus the brother.
The favour of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
Now to him who is able to establish you according to my elad tidings and the proclamation of Jesus Christ—according to the disclosure of a seeret which was concealed in times a old, but which is now laid open, and by prophetic writings made known to all the nations, according to an order of the everlasting God, for the obedience of belief—to the only wise
God be the glory forever, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE FIRST EPISTLE
APOSTLE PAUL

TO THE

CORINTHIANS.

᾿ PAUL, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will
2 of God, and Sosthenes the brother, to the congregation of God which is at Corinth—to them who are hallowed by Christ Jesus—called to be holy, together with all those in every place who invoke the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both their
Lord and ours: favour be to you, and peace from God our father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
4 I thank my God always with respect to you, for the favour of God which is granted you by Christ Jesus, that in every
5 thing you have been enriched by him with all doctrine and
6 with all knowledge, in the same manner as the testimony of
Christ was confirmed among you; so that you are not deficient
7 in any gift during your waiting for the full manifestation of
8 our Lord Jesus Christ, who will confirm you to the end, exempt from accusation in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
9 God is faithful by whom you have been called to a fellowship in his son, Jesus Christ our Lord. And I intreat you, brethren,
10 by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but that you be perfectly united in the same mind and in the same sentiment.
11 For Iam informed respecting you, my brethren, by some of Chloe’s family, that there are contentions among you;
12 I mean this, that every one of you saith, I am for Paul; and 1
13 am for Apollos'; and I for Cephas; and I for Christ. Is the
Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were you

19

20

21

24,

31

baptized to the name of Paul? Ithank God that I baptized none of you, except Crispus and Gaius, that none might say that I baptized to my own name. I baptized also the household of Stephanas. I do not recollect that I baptized any other.
For Christ did not send me to baptize, but to proclaim the elad tidings, not with wisdom of speech, that the cross of the
Christ might not be rendered useless. For this doctrine (the doctrine of the cross) is foolishness to them who perish; but to us who are saved it is the power of God. For it is written,

“JT will destroy the wisdom of the wise, .

And abolish the understanding of the prudent.”*
Where is the wise? Where the scribe? Where the disputer of this age? Hath not God shewn the wisdom of this world to be folly? For when, amidst the wisdom of God, the world did not, by means of that wisdom, know God; it pleased God by the foolishness of this proclamation to save them who believe; so when the Jews demand a sign and the Greeks seek wisdom, as for us, we proclaim a crucified Christ—to the Jews indeed a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness; but to them who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of
God and the wisdom of God; because this foolish thing of
God is wiser than men, and this weak thing of God is stronger than men. For observe, brethren, this call of you, that there are not many wise after the flesh, not many mighty, not many of illustrious birth; but God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to put to shame the wise; and the weak things of the world God hath made choice of to put to shame the strong— and the ignoble of this world, and those of no account, God hath chosen—nay, the very nothings, to put a stop to the operation of the things which are, that no flesh might boast in his presence. And it is owing to him that you are in Christ
Jesus, who hath been made to us wisdom from God, namely, rightcousness, and sanctification, and redemption, so that as it is written, Let him who boasteth boast in the Lord.”

Now as for me, brethren, when I came to you, I did not come with a pomp of language or of wisdom, announcing to

* Es. 29. 14. 1 Jer. 9. 24.

8

10

11

you the testimony of God; for I determined to know nothing among you but Jesus Christ, even that crucified person; and with regard to myself, I was among you in weakness and in fear, and in great trembling; and my discourse and my proclamation was not with persuasive words of human wisdom, but with a demonstration of spirit and power, that your belief might not be by the wisdom of men, but by the power of God.
We, however, speak wisdom among them who are perfect, but a wisdom not of this age, nor ofthe chiefs of this age to whose operations a stop is put; but we speak a mysterious wisdom of God* that hidden (wisdom) which God determinately marks out for the benefit of the ages, to our glory— which none of the chiefs of this age knew (for had they known it they would not have crucified the Lord of the glory )—things indeed, which as it is written, “Hye Aath not seen, nor ear heard, nor the heart of man concewved;’’+ which God hath prepared for them who love him; and which God hath revealed to us by his spirit. For this spirit searcheth all things, even the depths of God. For who of mankind knoweth the things of

aman, but only the spirit of the man which is in him? So no

13

14

1 one knoweth the things of God, but the spirit of God only.
Now we have not received the spirit of this world, but the spirit which is from God, that we may know the things which
God hath freely granted to us; which things we indeed speak, not in set words of human wisdom, but in the dictated words of aholy spirit, explaining spiritual things by spiritual words.
Now an animal man receiveth not those dictates of the spirit of God; for they are foolishness to him, and he cannot know them, because they are to be spiritually examined; but the spiritual man examineth all things, and is himsclf examined by no man. For who hath known the mind of the Lord? Who can instruct him? As for us we have the mind of Christ.

Now with regard to myself, I could not, brethren, speak to you as spiritual, but as carnal men, as babes in Christ. I fed you with milk, and not with strong food, because you were not arrived at strength; nor are you indeed yet strong, even

* Literally, wisdom of God in a mystery. + Es. 64. 4.

I, CORINTHIANS. HI.

} now. For you are yet carnal; for ‘while there is among you

envy and strife and divisions, are you not carnal and walking in the ways of man? For when one saith, 1 am for Paul; and another, I am for Apollos, are you not carnal? Who then is
Paul? And who is Apollos? Are they any thing but mere dispensers of another’s bounty, by whose means you have be-’ lieved? Even asthe Lord hath given to each, I planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase. So that neither the planter nor the waterer is any thing; it is God only who giveth growth. Now he who planteth and he who watereth are all one; and each shall receive his peculiar reward according. to his peculiar labour.. For we are fellow labourers belonging to God; you are God’s field; you are his building. According to the favour of God granted to me, I, like a skilful architect, have laid a foundation, and another buildeth upon it. But let every one take heed how he buildeth thereon. For no one can lay any other foundation than that which is laid, which is Jesus tue Curist. Now if upon this foundation any one buiideth gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble; the work of every one will be made manifest; for the day will shew it: Because it is revealed with fire, therefore the fire will prove every one’s work of what sort it is. If any one’s work which he hath built upon it, shall stand the test, he will receive a reward. If any one’s work be consumed he will lose that; but he shall himself be saved but so as through fire.

Do you not know that you are a temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any one corrupt the temple of God, him God will destroy; for the temple of God isholy.

Whosoever you are, let no one deceive himself. If any one among you seemeth to be wise in this age, let’ him become a fool that he may become wise. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with Ged: for it is written, He entangleth the wise in their craft.”* And again, “The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise that they are vain.” So let
10 one boast in men; for all things are yours: whether Paul,
3 or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things

1 ῦῸ ὃ΄ὃὃΠΡὃὅΞὃὃΞὃὅἧΠὃὖὃὁΠὃ΄!ἷἝἷ- ς΄. -ςωι., ΄..

ἢ ΠΟ ὅν 19: + Ps. 94..11.

. present, or things to come, all are yours, and you are Christ’s and Christ 1s God’s.

IV. In this manner let a man reckon us, as servants of Christ
2 and stewards of divine mysteries. Now that, which is principally
3 required in a steward, is, that he be found faithful. To

me indeed it is a matter of very small concern, to be tried by
4 you or by human process; nay, I will not be my own judgc.
For though I am not conscious to myself of any thing amiss, yet even in that case I am not justified; but he who trieth me
5 is the Lord. So pass no judgment prematurely, until the Lord come, who will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and expose to view the counsels of the hearts, and then the praise for every one will be from God.
6 Now, brethren, I have transferred these things by a figure to myself and Apollos, for your sakes, that by us you may learn not to have your minds bent upon any thing above what is written—that you may not any of you be puffed up for one
 [teacher] against another. For who distinguisheth thee? Or what hast thou, which thou didst not receive? Now if thou hast received, why boastest thou as if thou hadst not received?
8 You are now full! you are now rich! you have now reigned
9 without us* I wish indeed that you did reign, that we also might reign with you. For it seems as if God had exhibited us, the apostles, last on the stage as devoted to death since we

10 are made a spectacle to the world, both to angels and men.

11 Weare fools on the account of Christ; but you are prudent in

Christ: We are weak; but you are strong: you are honourable; but we are despised:* ven at this very moment we are hungry and thirsty and naked and buffeted, and are wandering about

12 and weary, working with our own hands. Being reviled we

13 give good words; being persecuted we suffer patiently; being

defamed we exhort. We are become as it were the expiatory

14. sacrifices of the world—the refuse of all things until now. I

do not write these things to shame you, but am admonishing you as my beloved children. For though you may have ten

* What are in italics I take to be the boasts of those who set themselves up against Paul.

thousand guides in Christ, yet you have not many fathers; for by means of the glad tidings I am your father in Christ Jesus.
‘Therefore 1 intreat you to be imitators of me. For this cause
I have sent to you Timothy, who 15 my beloved son, and faith. ful in the Lord, who will remind you of my ways—those in
Christ, as lam every where teaching in every congregation.

‘Now some are puffed up as if I would not come to you; but I will cometo you quickly, if it be the Lord’s will, and I will know net the word, but the power of them who are puffed up. For the reign of God is not in word but in power.

What do you chuse?—that I should come to you with a

rod, or with love and a spirit of meekness? It is currently reported that there is among you an act of lewdness, and of such a sort as is not named among the nations, so that one ~ hath his father’s avife: And you are puffed up! Why did you not rather mourn, in order that he who hath done such a deed might be removed from among you? For I indeed, absent as I am in the body, but present in the spirit, have already determined as if I were present, with regard to him who hath done this, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when you and my spirit are assembled with the power of the Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver sucha one over to satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. This boasting of yours is unbecoming. Do you not know that a little leaven leaveneth the whole mixture? Purge out therefore the old leaven that you may be a new mass as you are unleavened. For Christ our Paschal lamb is indeed slain for us, so that we should keep the festival, not with old leaven, nor with the leaven of wickedness and malignity; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

I wrote to you in that* letter not to associate with fornicators, not including in general the fornicators of this world, nor those who are immoderate in their desires, or rapacious, or idolaters; since in that case you must needs have gone out of the world. But this is what I now write to you, that if any one named a brother, be a fornicator, or one who gratifieth

i a a -- τοὺ---

* Referring to a letter he had formerly written.

12

19

2 oo

4

10

12

13

immoderate desires, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, . you are not to associate; no, nor eat with such a one. For what have I to do with passing sentence on those who are without? Is not this the case? On those within you are to pass sentence, and God will pass sentence on those without. ‘Therefore remove the wicked person from among yourselves.
Dare any of you having a controversy with another sub-

mit it to a trial before the unrighteous, and not before the saints? Do you not know that the saints are to judge the world? If then the world is to be judged by you, are you unworthy to judge petty causes? Do you not know that we shall judge angels? Can we not then things which concern this life? If you therefore have controversies relating to aflairs of this life, do you appoint those to be judges who are held in no esteem by the congregation? To your shame I say, is it so that there is not among you a wise man—not so much as one who can determine a cause between brethren; but brother goeth to law with brother and that before unbelievers?
Now, then, it is indeed a disparagement to you that you have law suits among yourselves. Why do you not rather suffer wrong? Why do you not rather suffer loss? Instead of this you yourselves do wrong, and defraud even your brethren.
Do you not know that the unjust shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor the voluptuous, nor sodomites, nor thieves, nor such as indulge inordinate desires, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. Now such some of you were; but you have washed yourselves; but you are hallowed, but you are acquitted by the name of the Lord Jesus and by the spirit of our God.

(a) Are all things lawful for me!

(b) All things however are not expedient.

(a) Are all things lawful for me!

(Ὁ) LThowever will not be a slave to any thing.

(a) Meats are for the belly, and the belly for meats!

(a) Arguments used by the Corinthian backsliders to justify their conduct. (b) The apostle’s answer.

14

15

16

19

20

(b) But God will put a stop to the operation of both—
But as for the body, it is not for fornication, but for the Lord; and the Lord for the. body: And as God hath raised up the
Lord, he will by his power raise up you also. Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of the Christ, and make them ‘members of a harlot? Surely no. Do you not know that he who is joined to the harlot is one body with her? For the scripture saith,
“They two shall be one flesh.”* Now he who is joined to the
Lord is one spirit with him. Flee fornication. Every other sin, which a man committeth, is without the body; but he who committeth whoredom sinneth against his own body.
Do you not know that your body is a temple of a holy spirit in you, which you have from God? Indeed you are not your own; for you have been bought with a price. Therefore glorify God with your body and with your spirit which are his.

Vik Now with respect to those matters about which you

2 qQ

[9]

9

wrote to me, it is well for a man not to marry: but to avoid fornication let every man have his own wife; and every woman her own husband. Let the husband render due benevolence to the wife; and in like manner the wife to the husband.
The wife hath not the power over her own body; but the husband: And in like manner the husband hath not the power over his own body; but the wife. Withdraw not from each other, unless by mutual consent for a time, that you may devote yourselves to fasting and prayer. Then come together again that satan may not tempt you through your incontinence.

Now this I say by way of counsel, not of command; for I wish all men to be as I myself am. But every -one hath his peculiar gift from God, some of one kind; and some, of another. I say then to unmarried men and to widows, it is well for them if they continue as Ido. But if they have not the gift of continency, let them marry; for it is better to marry than to burn. And to them who are married I give this injunction—not I but the Lord: That a wife separate not herself

a a a es κὕ0

from her husband; but if she hath actually separated, let her continue unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband; and that a husband put not away a wife.
12 And to the rest I say, not the Lord; if any brother hath an unbelieving wife, and she is well satisfied to live with him,
13 let him not divorce her: and if any woman hath an unbelieving husband, and he is well satisfied to live with her, let her not
14 divorce him. For the unbelieving husband is hallowed by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is hallowed by the husband;
15 else your children would be unclean; whereas they are now holy. But if the unbelieving withdraw; let him or her withdraw,
16 the brother or the sister is not in such cases enslaved:
But God hath called us to peace. For how knowest thou, O wife, but thou mayst save thy husband? Or how knowest thou,
O husband, but thou mayst save thy wife?
17 ~~ Butas God hath distributed to every one—as the Lord hath called every one, so let him walk. And thus I enjoin in all the
18 congregations. Hath any one been called, being circumcised, let him not become uncircumcised. Hath any been called in
19 a state of uncircumcision, let him not be circumcised. The circumcision is nothing, and the uncircumcision is nothing,
20 in comparison with keeping the commandments of God. In
21 whatever state any one hath been called, in that let him abide.
Hast thou been called being a slave, let it not give thee concern.
22 But if thou canst be made free, chuse that rather. For he who is called by the Lord, being a slave, is the Lord’s freedman; and in like manner he who is called being free, is
23 the vassal of Christ. You have been bought with a price, become
24 not slaves of men. Brethren, in whatever state any one

hath been called, in that let him continue with God.
25 Now with respect to the virgins, I have no commandment

of the Lord; but I give an opinion as one who hath obtained

26 mercy of the Lord to be faithful. I think then this to be good on account of the impending distress; that it is well fora man

7 to beas he is. Art thou bound to a wife? seek not to be disengaged:
8 Art thou disengaged from a wife, seek not a wife.
But if thou shouldst actually marry, thou hast not sinned; and if the virgin marry she hath not sinned. But such will have affliction in the flesh: But I spare you and say this, brethren,

94

39

1. CORINTHIANS. VII. VIII.

that the time with regard to what remaineth, is shortened, so that-they who have wives should be as if they had them not; and they who weep, as if they wept not; and they who rejoice, as if they rejoiced not; and they who buy, as not possessing; and they who use this world, as not using it immoderately. For the scenery of this world is shifting; and I wish you to be free from anxious cares. He who is unmarried careth for the things of the Lord how he may please the Lord; but he who is married careth for the things of the world, how he may please his wife. There is the like difference between the wife and the virgin. The unmarried careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both m body and spirit; but she who is married careth for the things of the world, how she may please her husband. Now this I say for your own benefit, not with a view to lay a snare for you; but for that which is becoming and best adapted to a steady, uninterrupted adherence to the Lord. But if any man thinketh that he bringeth reproach* on his virgin; if she be past the prime, this then should bet the rule, VAat she willeth, let him do, he doth not sin; let them marry: but whoever hath come to a fixed determination in his heart, using no constraint, but hath power with respect to his own will and hath determined in his heart to keep his virgin, he doth well. So that he who giveth in marriage doth well, but he who giveth not in marriage doth better.

A wife is bound by law as long as her husband liveth; but if her husband die; she is at liberty to marry whom she will—only in the Lord. But she is happier, if she continue as she is. This is my opinion, and I think I have a spirit of God.

VII. Now with regard to the things offered to idols, we

2

3 know that we all have knowledge.” = (This knowledge pufteth up; but love edifieth. Ifthen any one thinketh that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know.

* See Esaias 4. 1. ; Literally, thus it ought to be.
+ What is here in italics I take to be the reasoning of those who set themselves up in opposition to the apostle.

for)

2

IO Ub wo

CORINTHIANS. VIII. ΙΧ.

But if any one loveth God by him he is acknowledged.)
Therefore in respect to the eating of things offered to idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world: and that there is no other
God but one. For though there are nominal gods both in heaven and on earth, as there are many gods and many lords; yet to us there is but one God, the father of all, of whom are all things and we for him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things and we by him.*” But all have not this knowledge; and some, with the consciousness of regard for the idol, even to this time eat meat as sacrificed to an idol; and their conscience being weak is defiled. Now food doth not recommend us to God.
For if we eat we are not the better; nor are we the worse if we do not eat. But take heed that this liberty of yours do not prove a stumbling block to the weak. For if one seeth thee who hast knowledge seated at table in an idol temple, will not the conscience of him who is weak be emboldened to eat the idol sacrifice? And shall the weak brother, for whom Christ died, be destroyed for thy knowledge? When you sin thus against the brethren and wound their weak conscience, you sin against Christ. Wherefore if meat cause my brother to stumble, I will never eat flesh that I may not cause my brother to stumble.

Am not I an apostle? Am not I free? Have not I seen
Jesus Christ our Lord? Are not you my work in the Lord?
If to others I am not an apostle, yet surely Iam to you. For your being in the Lord isthe seal of my apostleship. My answer to them who examine me is this—Have we not a power to eat and drink? Have we not a power to take along with us a sister-wife as well as the other apostles, and the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? Or are I only and Barnabas excluded from the privilege of not working? Who goeth to war any time at his own expenses? Who planteth a vineyard and eateth not of the fruit thereof? Who feedeth a flock and doth not eat of the milk of that flock? Do I say these things according to the custom of human affairs? Doth not the law say the same?
For in the law of Moses it is written, “Thou shalt not muz-

* What is in italics I take to be the apology made by seme Co rinthian teacher for eating things offered to idols. vo Le IV. Q 4

10

11

12

13

16

CORINTHIANS. ΙΧ.

zle an ox treading out corn.’’* Is God solicitous for oxen? Or doth he not unquestionably say this for our sake? For us indeed it was written, because he who plougheth ought to plough in hope; and he who thresheth in hope ought to. partake of his hope. If we have sown for you spiritual things is it a great matter if we reap your carnal things? If others exercise this power over you, may not we rather? But we have not made use of this power; but endure all things that we may not give any obstruction to the glad tidings of the Christ.
Do you not know that they who prepare the sacrifice eat of the sacrifice? They who attend on the altar partake with the altar. So also the Lord hath ordered for them who proclaim the glad tidings, that they should live by the glad tidings.
But as for me I have not made use of any of these privileges; nor have I written these things that they should be a rule for me. For it were better for me to die than that any should deprive me of what is my boast. For though I publish the glad tidings I have no cause of boasting; for Iam under an obligation and woe is for me if I do not publish the glad tidings; for if I do this willingly, I have a reward; but if against my will I have been intrusted with an office, what then is the reward for me? In this case, when proclaiming the glad tidings
I will make the glad tidings of the Christ so far unexpensive, as not to use to the utmost the privilege which I have by the glad tidings. For being free from all men, I have made myself aslave to allthat 1 may gain the more. To the Jews I became asa Jew that I might gain the Jews: to them under law, as if
I were under law, that I might gain those under law: to them without law, as if I were without law (not as without law to
God, but under a law to Christ) that I might gain those without law: To the weak I became as weak, that I might gain the weak—to all those I have become all this that I may save all.¢ And this I do in consequence of the glad tidings that I may be a joint sharer thereof.

Do you not know that they who run a race, all run; but

* Deut. 25. 4.
+ That I may save all is the reading of sundry ancient and approved manuscripts, and of the Syriac and vulgate translations.

25 one only receiveth the prize? In this manner run ye, that

17 you may obtain. Now, every one who is to contend in the public games is temperate in all things. They indeed do this that they may obtain a corruptible crown. But we, [to obtain] one that is incorruptible. For my part, therefore, I run in this manner, not as if I were running unseen: I fight, not as if I were beating the air; but I buffet my body and subdue it, lest having proclaimed the glad tidings to others I myself

should be disapproved. Moreover, I would not, brethren, have you ignorant thatour fathers were all under the cloud, and that they all passed through the sea, and were all baptized to
Moses in the cloud and in the sea; and did all eat the same spiritual food; and did all drink of the same spiritual drink, for they drank from a spiritual rock accompanying them; now that rock was the Christ. But with the greater part of them
God was not well pleased; for they were overthrown in the wilderness. Now these things were examples for us, that.we may not lust after evil things as they did. Be not ye then idolaters as some of them were; as it is written, ‘“The people sat down to eat and drink and rose up to play:’”* Nor let us commit fornication as some of them did, and there fell in one day twenty three thousand: nor let us try the Christ as some indeed of them did, and were destroyed by serpents: nor murmur ye, as some of them murmured and were destroyed by the destroyer. Now all these things came upon them for examples, and were written for the instruction of us on whom the ends of the ages have met. So let him who thinketh that he standeth, take heed that he do not fall.

No trial hath come upon you but such as is common to man; and God is faithful, and will not suffer you to be tried above your strength, but will with the trial make a way to escape, that you may be able to bear it. Therefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry. 1 speak to you as men of understanding; judge ye what I say—The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not a fellowship in the blood of the Christ? The loaf which we break, is it not a fellowship in the body of the Christ? Because

* Ex. oe 6. 19.

it is one loaf, we being many are one body, for we all partake of this one loaf. Consider Israel according to the flesh; are not they who eat the sacrifices, partakers in common of the altar.
What then, do I say that an idol is any thing? or that what is sacrificed to ani idol is any thing? No. I only say, that what the nations sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons and not to God.

Now, I would not have you to be partakers in the worship of the demons. You cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons. You cannot partake of the table of the Lord
2 and of the table of demons. Are we provoking the Lord to

23 jealousy? Are we stronger than he?

(a) ‘All things are lawful for ine.”

(b) All things however are not expedient.

(a) ‘AU things are lawful for me.”

(b) All things however do not edify. Let none seek barely his own interest, but every one that of his neighbour. Eat whatever is sold in the shambles, asking no questions for conscience sake; for the earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof.
And if any of the disbelievers invite you to an entertainment, and you chuse to go, eat whatever is set before you, asking no questions for conscience sake. But if any one say to you, This was sacrificed to «an idol, eat not of it for the sake of him who gave the information; and for conscience sake; for the earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof. When I say conscience I do not mean one’s own, but the conscience of the other.

(a) But why is my liberty to be judged by another's conscience? And if I partake with thankfulness, why am J ill spoken of for what I give thanks?

(b) Whether then you eat or drink, or whatever you do, do all to the glory of God. Conduct yourselves so as to give no offence to Jews or Greeks, or the congregation of God, even as I do. Inall things I please all men, not studying barely my own interest, but that of the many, that they may be saved.
Be ye imitators of me as I am of Christ.

Now, I praise you, brethren, that in all things you are
2 mindful of me and hold fast the doctrines as I delivered them

(a) Arguments used by the Corinthians. (b) The apostle’s

answer.

5

to you; and I wish you to know that the Christ is the head of every man; and that the head of woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God. Every man praying or prophesying* with his head covered dishonoureth his head; and every woman praying or propbesying* with the head uncovered dishonoureth her head; for it is the same as if she were shaven. For if a woman is not veiled, let her be shorn. But if it be shameful for a woman to be shorn or shaved, let her be veiled. For man indeed ought not to have his head covered, he being an image and a glory of God; but woman is a glory of man; for man was not made of woman; but woman of man. Nor was man created for the woman; but woman for the man. The woman, therefore, ought to have a covering on the head, because of the messengers.
Nevertheless, man is not without woman, nor woman without man in the Lord. For as the woman was of the man, so also the man is by the woman; and all things are of God.
Judge for yourselves. Is it becoming for a woman unveiled to pray to God? Doth not nature itself teach you that if a man hath long hair, it isa shame to him; but if a woman hath long hair it is a glory to her; because the hair is given her fora veil. If any one, however, is disposed to be contentious, neither we nor the congregations have any such custom.

But in regard to this which I am about to mention I do not commend you, because you meet together not for the better but for the worse. For in the first place, on your assembling together in the congregation, I hear that there are divisions among you; and I partly believe it: for there must be sects among you, that the approved among you may become manifest. When you therefore assemble together, it is not to eat the Lord’s supper; for every one at eating taketh first his own supper,f so one indeed is hungry and another is plentifully

* The Greek word προφητευω signifies to declare any truth, not discoverable by the natural powers of man. See Mat. 26. 68; or to declare truths through the inspiration of God’s holy spirit, whether by prediction or not; and means speaking or teaching by inspiration.
See 1 Cor. 14. 13, 14, &e.

{ In order to understand this it is necessary to observe, that among the Grecians it was customary for companies to meet and eat together, but every one brought his own provisions.

CORINTHIANS. XI. ΧΙ!

fed. What! have you not houses for eating and drinking? Or do you despise the congregation of God, and expose to shame them who have not? What must I say to you? Shall I com-

23 mend you for this? I do not commend you. For 1 received

C9

24

25 from the Lord this which I delivered to you, that the Lord
Jesus on the night in which he was delivered up, took a loaf, and having given thanks, broke it, and said, ‘Take, eat; this is my body which is broken for you. Do this in commemoration of me.” And in like manner, the cup also, after supper, saying, ““This cup is the new covenant by my blood. Do this, as often as you drink it, in commemoration of me. For as often as you eat this loaf, and drink this cup, you proclaim the death of the Lord, until he come.’’ So that whosoever shall eat this loaf or drink this cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner, he will be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
Now, let a man examine himself, and in this manner eat of that loaf and drink of that cup; for he who eateth and drinketh in an unworthy manner, eateth and drinketh a judgment for himself, not distinguishing the body of the Lord. For this cause many among you are weakly and sick, and many are falling asleep. For if we distinguish ourselves, should we not be judged? And being judged, we are corrected by the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world. Wherefore, my brethren, when you assemble to eat, wait for one another; and if any one is hungry let him eat at home, that you may not come together for judgment. And the rest I will set in order

when I come.

XII: Now, brethren, I would not have you ignorant with re-

spect to the spiritual gifts. You know that you were Gentiles carried away to dumb idols just as you were led. Therefore
I certify to you that none speaking by a spirit of God saith that Jesus is an Anathema;* and that none can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by a holy spirit. Now, there are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit; and there are diversities of offices, but the same Lord; and there are diversities of energies, but

* A solemn execration among the Jews; meaning, Let his name, or

memory, be blotted out.

10

15

24

it is the same God who by his inward operation worketh ail these effects in all. Now, this manifestation of the spirit is given to every one for that which is profitable. For to one is given, by the spirit, a word of wisdom; and to another, a word of knowledge according to the same spirit; and to another, faith, by the same spirit; and to another, gifts of healing, by the same spirit; and to another, mighty powers of working miracles; * and to another, the gift of prophecy;{ and to another, that of discerning spirits; and to another, divers languages; and to another, the interpretation of languages. Now, it is one and the same spirit who effecteth all these, distributing his own as he pleaseth, to every one. For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of that one body, being many, are one body; so also is the Christ. For by one spirit we are all baptized to one body, whether we were Jews or
Greeks, slaves, or freemen; and have all been made to drink to one spirit. For the body is not one member, but many. If the foot should say, ‘‘Because I am not a hand, I am not of the body,” is it therefore not of the body? And if the ear should say, ‘Because I am not an eye, I am not of the body,” is it therefore not of the body?” If the whole body were eye, where would be the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where would be the smelling? But now God hath placed the members, every one of them, in the body, as it hath pleased him. But if they were all one member, where would be the body? Now they indeed are many members, yet one body: and the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee: nor can the head say to the feet, I have no need of you. On the contrary, those members of the body which seem to be the weakest are more especially necessary; and on those which we think the more dishonourable parts of the body we bestow the more abundant honour: and the uncemely parts of us have more abundant finery, of which the comely parts have no need. God indeed hath formed the symmetry of the body, giving more abundant honour to the part which wanteth it, that there may be no schisms in the body, but that the mem-

* Literally, energies. + See before, ch. 11. 5.

26

1, CORINTHIANS. XII. ΧΗ].

bers may have mutual concern for one another; so that if one member suffereth, all the rest suffer with it; and if one member is honoured, all the rest rejoice with it.

Now with regard to you, ye are a body of Christ, even individual members, whom God hath placed in the congregation; first, apostles, secondly, prophets, thirdly, teachers, then miraculous powers, then gifts of healing, helps, governments, different languages. Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Arc all teachers? Have all miraculous powers? Have all the gifts of healing? Do all speak divers languages? Are all interpreters? But you are ambitious of those gifts which are of superior excellence.* Well, Iam going to point out to you a way still more excellent.

XIII. Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels,

2

if I have not love, Iam but a sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal; and though I havea gift of prophesy and understand all the mysteries and all this knowledge; and though I have all that faith, so as to remove mountains; if I have not love, I am nothing. And though I distribute all my substance to feed the poor, and deliver up my body to be burned, if I have not love, it profiteth me nothing. Love is long suffering; it abound-_ eth in kindness. Love is not envious. Love is not insolent: it is not puffed up. It doth not behave itself unbecomingly. It is not self interested. It is not easily provoked. It placeth not the evil to account. It rejoiceth not in iniquity, but shareth in the joys of truth. It beareth all things. It believeth all things. It hopeth all things. It endureth all things patiently.
Love never faileth. But as for prophecies, they will be out of use. As for languages, they will cease: As for science, it will be done away. For we now know in part and prophesy in part, but when perfection is come, there will a stop be put to that which is in part. When I was a child, I spake as a child, I thought as a child, I reasoned as a child; but when I became a man, put a stop to childish things. For we now by means of a murour see a representation of things; but we shall then

* See ch. 14. v. 12. This is an apology thrown in to which he answers, Well, &c.

13

see face to face. I now know in part; but I shall then know as Iam known. Now then these three, faith, hope and love,

XIV. will remain; but love is the greatest of the three. Be

2

ῷ9

10

11 zealous then in the pursuit of this love, and aspire after spiritual gifts, but chiefly that you may prophesy. For he who speaketh in a strange language, speaketh not to men but to
God: for none understandeth; and with a spirit he speaketh mysteries. But he who prophesieth, speaketh to men edification, and exhortation, and consolation. He who speaketh in an unknown tongue edifieth himself; but he who prophesieth, edifieth a congregation. Now I wish you all to speak with tongues; but much rather that you should prophesy: For he who prophesieth is greater than he who speaketh with tongues, unless some one interpret, that the congregation may be edified. For instance, should I, brethren, come to you, speaking with tongues, what shall I profit you, unless I explain to you what I say, be it either a revelation, or science, or a prophecy, or a doctrine.* In like manner with regard to inanimate things which give a sound, whether pipe or kithara, unless they produce distinct notes, how can it be known what that is, which is played on the pipe or kithara. For if even a trumpet give an undistinguishable sound who will prepare himself for battle? So also with regard to you, unless you utter with the tongue a discourse of a clear signification, how can that which is spoken be known? You will be indeed talking to the air.
Let there be ever so many kinds of sounds in the world, and none of them without signification, if Ido not know the meaning of the sound I shall be to the speaker a barbarian, and he who speaketh will be the same to me. Such also is the case with you. Since you then are ambitious of spiritual gifts, seek to abound in such as tend to the improvement of the congregation. Let him therefore who speaketh in an unknown tongue, pray that he may interpret. For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful. What then isto be done? I am to pray with

* Literally, if I should come to you speaking with tongues either by revelation or by knowledge, or by prophecy, or by doctrine, what should I profit you unless I spoke to you.

16

17

20
2]

22

20

25

26

27 oe)

5-69 Go hbo =

the spirit and to pray with the understanding also. I am to sing with the spirit, and to sing with the understanding also.
Otherwise if thou bless with the spirit, how can he who occupieth the place of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving thanks, when he knoweth not what thou sayest? Thou indeed givest thanks well, but the other is not edified.

I thank my God, I speak with tongues more than you all; but in a congregation I would rather speak five words with my understanding that I may instruct others, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. Brethren, be ποῖ children in’your understandings; but be infants in malice; and in your understandings full grown men. It is written in the law, “By men of strange tongues and with strange lips I will speak to this people; yet for all this they will not hearken to me, saith the Lord.”’* So that these strange tongues are for a sign, not for them who believe; but for unbelievers. But prophesying is not for unbelievers, but for them who believe.
If therefore the whole congregation assemble and all speak with unknown tongues, and there should come in any uninstructed persons or unbelievers, would they not say that you are raving? But if all prophesy, and any unbeliever or uninstructed person come in, he is convicted by all; examined by all; and thus the secrets of his heart are laid open, and so, falling onhis face, he will worship God, declaring that God is indeed among you.

What then, brethren, is to be done? When you-come together every one of you hath a psalm; hath a doctrine; hath a strange tongue; hath a revelation; hath an interpretation; let all be for edification; and if any one speak in an unknown tongue, let him speak as by two, or at the most three; and in parts, and let one interpret: but if there be no interpreter, let him be silent in a congregation, and speak to himself and to God. And let two or three prophets speak, and let the rest deliberate. And if a revelation be made to another who is sitting, let the first have become silent. For you can all prophesy, one by one, that all may learn, and all be comforted.
And the spirits of prophets are subject to prophets. For God is not a God of confusion, but of peace.

* Es. 28. 1: 4. Deut. 236 49, Jer. ing 15.

34 As in all the congregations of the saints let your women be silent in those congregations: for they are not permitted to
55. talk, but to be in subjection, as the law also saith: And if they wish to learn any thing let them ask their husbands at home.
For it is shameful for women to talk ina congregation.
36 Did the word of God go forth from you? or did it come
37 to you only? If any one be, in reality, a prophet, or a spiritual man, let him acknowledge that what I write to you are the
38 commandments of the Lord. But if any one doth not know this, let him continue ignorant.
39 So then, brethren, be ambitious of ἐξ alia and prohibit not the speaking with tongues. Let all things be done in a becoming and orderly manner.
XV. I now, brethren, remind you in what terms I proclaimed the gospel which I proclaimed to you, and which you received,
2 and in which you have continued, and by which also you are saved, if you strictly adhere to it, unless indeed you
3 believed in vain. For I delivered to you, as one of the princi- pal things, that which I actually received, that Christ died for
A our sins, according to the scriptures; and that he was buried;
_ 5 and that he was raised up the third day according to the scriptures;
6 and that he was seen by Cephas, then by the twelve; after that he was seen by above five hundred brethren at once, of whom the greater number are even now alive, but some indeed
7 are composed to rest; after that he was seen by James, then by
8 all the apostles; and, last of all, he was seen also by me, who
9 am as it were one born out of due time; for I am the very
10 least of the apostles, and am not worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the congregation of God. But by the favour of God Iam what I am; and this favour of his which reached me was not fruitless; but I have laboured more than they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me.
11 Whether therefore I or they laboured, thus do we proclaim, and thus you have believed.
12 Now, if Christ be proclaimed, that he hath been raised from the dead, how do some* among you say that there is

* These were of the sect of the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection of the dead, or future state.

18

32

I, CORINTHIANS. XV.

no resurrection of the dead? If there is indeed no resurrection of the dead, then Christ is not raised. And if Christ hath not been raised, our proclamation is vain, and your belief is also vain. And weare found to be actually false witnesses of God; because we have testified concerning God, that he hath raised the Christ, whom he hath not raised, if indeed the dead are not raised. For if the dead are not raised, then Christ was not raised. And if Christ hath not been raised, your belief is vain; you are still in your sins; and consequently they, who have been composed to rest in Christ, have perished. If we have hope in Christ in this life only, we, of all men, are most to be pitied. But nowChrist hath been raised from the dead. He was the first fruits of them who have been composed to rest. For since by man came death, by man also cometh a resurrection of the dead. For as by Adam all die, so by the
Christ all shall be brought to life: but every one in his proper order—Christ the first fruits; then they who belong to
Christ, at his coming: then the end, when he shall deliver up the kingdom to God the father, when he shall have put a stop to all empire and all authority, and all power. For he must reign until he hath put all the enemies under his feet. The last enemy, death, is to be destroyed: for he hath put all under his
Teet;

(a) “But when it issaid, That all are subjected; it isevident that there is an exception of him who subjected the a// to him; and when the αἰ are subjected to him, then will the Son himself also be subjected to him who subjected the αὐτο him that
God may be the a// in all. This being the case what will they do who are baptized for the dead? If they who are altogether dead are not raised up, why are they then baptized for the dead? and why are we every hour incurring danger—I dying daily? I swear by that boasting of yours’ (meaning that which
I have in Christ Jesus our Lord) ‘if I as a man had fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advantage is that to me if the dead are not raised up? Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.”

(a) From this to v. 33, all except the parenthesis, I take to be a repetition of the scoffs and reasonings of the aforementioned Sadducees: that it is not the language of the apostle appears evident

33

CORINTHIANS. XV. Ν

Be not led astray; “good morals are debauched by talk profane.”’* Be righteously sober and sin not. For some have not a knowledge of God. I say this to your shame. But a certain person will say, How are the dead raised, and with what sort of a body do they come? Simpleton! that which thou thyself sowest is not quickened unless it dieth. And as to what thou sowest, thou sowest not the body which is to be, but a bare grain, for instance, of wheat, or of any other seeds: and God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every of the seeds its own peculiar body. All fiesh is not of the same sort; but there is one sort of flesh peculiar to men; another to beasts, and another to fishes, and another to birds.
There are also celestial bodies, and terrestrial bodies. But the glory of the celestial is of one sort, and the glory of the terrestrial, of another. The glory of the sun is of one kind; and the glory of the moon, of another; and the glory of the stars is different: One star differeth from another in glory. Thus it is also with respect to the resurrection of the dead. That which is sown, is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonour; it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power: it is sown an animal body; it is raised a spiritual body. There is an animal body; and there is a spiritual body. Thus also it is written, ‘“The first man Adam was made a living soul.”+ The latter Adam is a quickening spirit. The spiritual was not first, but the animal; then the spiritual. The first man from the earth was earthy; the second man is the Lord from heaven. As the earthy was, such also are they who are earthy. And as the heavenly is, such shall they be who are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly. Now ἡ this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; nor can corruption inherit incorruption.
Behold I tell you a secret: We shall not all be composed to

—1. From the form of common swearing therein contained, which

the apostle explains in a parenthesis. 2. From the severe repre-

hension in his answer, charging it with profaneness; and, 3. From

his quoting another objection of, (I apprehend), the same scoffer.
* A quotation from a Greek poet. + Gen. 2. 7.

I, CORINTHIANS. XV. XVI.

52 rest; but we shall all be changed in a moment—in the twinkling of an eye, atthe last trumpet, for it will sound, and the
53 dead will be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.
For this corruptible must put on incorruptibility; and this
54 mortal must put on immortality. Now when this corruptible shall have put on incorruptibility; and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then will be brought to pass the word which is written,
55 “Death is completely swallowed up.”*
O death where is thy sting?
Where thy victory, O grave?
56 Sin is indeed the sting of death;
And the law is the strength of sin:
57 But thanks be to God who gives us the victory
’ Through our Lord Jesus Chrak
58 So then, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, immoveable, abounding always in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know that your labour in the Lord is not in vain.
AVE Now, with respect to the collection which is for the saints, as I have directed in the congregation of Galatia, so do
2 ye also. Every first day of the week, let every one of you lay by him, and put into a common treasury, what he can conveniently; that when I come there may be no collection then
3 made. And when I come, whomsoever you approve, them I
4 will despatch with letters to carry your bounty to Jerusalem.
And if it be thought proper that I myself should go, they
5 shall go with me. Now I will come to you when I have passed through Macedonia, (for Iam going through Macedonia
6 ) and perhaps I may continue with you some time, or even spend the winter, that you may forward me on in whatever
7 journey I may take. For I do not wish to see you now on my way, but hope to spend some time with you, if the
8 Lord permit. But I will stay at Ephesus until the pentecost,
9 for a great and effectual door is opened for me, though there
10 are many opposers. Now whenTimothy comes to you, see that he be with you without fear; for he worketh the work of the
11 Lord, as I myself do. Therefore let none despise him; but

* Es. 25. 8.

forward him on in peace, that he may come to me; for I wait for him with the brethren. Now with respect to Apollos the brother, I importuned him much to go to you with the brethren. Though upon the whole it was not his will to go now, yet he will go when there shall be a favourable opportunity.

Watch; stand firm in the faith; acquit yourselves like men; be strong; let all your affairs be transacted with love.
And 1 intreat you, brethren, (you know the household of Stephanas, that it is the first fruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves to the service of the saints;) that you submit yourselves to such, and to every fellow worker and labourer.

Now I rejoice at the coming of Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus, because they have supplied to the full what was wanting on your part. For they have quieted my spirit as well as yours. Have regard therefore to such as these.

The congregations of Asia salute you. Aquilas, and Priscilla; and the congregation at their house, salute you with much affection in the Lord. All the brethren salute you. Salute ye one another with a holy kiss.

The salutation of me Paul with my own hand—If any one loveth not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be an Anathema.
Maranatha.* The favour of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you. My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.

* The words Anathema, Maranatha, were terms used by the Jews when they excommunicated a person.

1.

10

THE SECOND EPISTLE

OF THE

APOSTLE PAUL,

TO THE

CORINTHIANS.

PAUL, an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and Timothy the brother, to the congregation of God which is at Corinth, together with all the saints who are in all
Achaia. Favour be to you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and the God of all consolation, who comforteth us in all our affliction, to the end that we may be able to comfort them who are in any affliction, with thé comfort with which we ourselves have been comforted by God.

Because in. proportion as the sufferings of the Christ abound towards us, so by means of Christ our consolation also aboundeth; and whether we are afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation, which is effectually wrought out by a patient enduring of the same sufferings which we suffer; or if we are comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation; therefore our hope of you is stedfast, as we know, that as you are partakers of the sufferings, so will you be also of the consolation. For we do not, brethren, wish you to be ignorant with respect to that affliction of ours which befel us in
Asia—that we were exceedingly pressed beyond our strength, so that we had indeed no hopes of life; but had in ourselves the sentence of death, that we might not trust in ourselves, but in God who raiseth the dead, who delivered us from so

Il. CORINTHIANS. I. I.

11 great a death, and doth deliver: in whom we trust that he will still deliver us, you joining the assistance of your prayers for us, that the favour granted to us for the sake of many may

12 be acknowledged by many with thanksgiving on our behalf. .
For this is the matter of our boasting—the testimony of our conscience, that with simplicity and godly sincerity, not with carnal wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have conducted

13 ourselves in the world, and more especially towards you. For

14 we write nothing to you but what you clearly understand or have acknowledged, and will, I hope, even to the end acknowledge, as some of you have acknowledged us, that we are

15 your boast, as you indeed will be ours, in the day of the Lord

16 Jesus. And in this confidence I purposed to come to you first, that you might have a second benefit; and through you to proceed on to Macedonia, and from Macedonia to come to you

17 again, and be by you forwarded on to Judea. Did I then, in purposing this, use fickleness? Or what I purpose do I pur-

18 pose according to the flesh, so that with me there may be the yes, yes; and the no, no? Now as God is faithful, our word to

19 you was not yes and no. For the Son of God, [namely] Jesus
Christ, who was proclaimed among you by us [namely] by me, and Silvanus, and Timothy, was not yes and no; but by

20 him hath been made yes. For all the promises of God are in him yes, and in him Amen, for glory to God through us.

21 Now, he who keepeth us together with you firm for Christ,

22 and anointed us, is God, who hath sealed us, and given us the

23 earnest of the spirit in our hearts; and I appeal to God, as a witness on my life, that with a view to spare you I have not

24 yct come to Corinth: not that we have dominion over your

IT. faith; but are joint promoters of your joy; for in this faith you have continued; but I determined this with myself, that

2 my coming again should not be the occasion of grief to you.

For if I grieve you, who is there to gladden me? None, but

he whom I have made sorrowful: and I wrote to you for this

very purpose, that, when I come, I may not have grief on ac. count of them for whom I ought to rejoice; as 1 have a confi-

4. dence in you all, that my joy is the joy of you all. For in

great affliction and anguish of heart I wrote to you, with many tears—not that you should be grieved, but that you might
VOL, IV. 5 5

I], CORINTHIANS. II. HI.

5 know that overflowing love which I have for you. Now if any one hath occasioned grief, he hath grieved me only as a partner in it; that I may not continue a burden on you all; sufficient for such a one is the censure which hath been passed by
7 the majority ; so that, on the contrary, I rather wish you to forgive and. comfort him, that such a one may not be over- - whelmed with an excess of sorrow. Therefore I intreat you
9 to authorise love for him. For this was one purpose of my writing, that I might have this proof of you, whether you are
10 obedient in all things. And to whomsoever you forgive any thing, I do so too. For with regard to myself, if I have forgiven any one whatever any thing, I have forgiven him for
11 your sakes, in the presence of Christ, that Satan may not get an advantage over us, for we are not ignorant of his devices.
12 Now when I came to Troas for the purpose of proclaiming the glad tidings of the Christ, though the Lord opened a
13 door for me, I had no rest in my spirit, because I did not find my brother Titus ; but taking leave of them, I set out for Macedonia.
14 But thanks be to God who causeth us always to triumph in the Christ, and who manifesteth by us, in every place,
15 the odour of the knowledge of him. Because we are for God a strong odour of the Christ among them who are saved, and
16 among them who perish (to these indeed an odour of death for death, but to those an odour of life for life) who therefore
17 is sufficient for this? For we do not like the many, adulterate the word of God, but as men of sincerity, but as men of God,

in the presence of God in Christ we speak.
Ill. “Are we beginning again to commend ourselves to you?
Do we only want, like certain persons, commendatory letters to
2 you, or letters of recommendation from you?*” You yourselves are our letter. It hath been written in our hearts ; it is
3 known and read by all men. You are shewn publickiy because you are the letter of Christ which we make use of. It is written, not with ink, but with the spirit of the living God; not on
4. tables of stone, but on fleshly tables of the heart. Such is the

* These, it is presumed, were reflections cast upon the apostle by his opposers.

2

3

H. CORINTHIANS. III. IV.

eonfidence which we have through Christ in ΤΈΣ to God ;

not that we are of ourselves sufficient to reckon any thing as proceeding from ourselves; but our sufficiency is from God,

who hath qualified us to be ministers of a new covenant; not of letter but of spirit; for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life. (Now if the ministration of death engraven in letters, on stones, was attended with such glory that the children of Israel could not look steadily on the face of Moses, because of the temporary glory of his countenance ; shall not the ministration of the spirit be much more attended with glory ? For if that ministration of condemnation was attended with glory, much more doth this ministration of justification abound in glory. For that indeed which was glorious, is in this respect not glorious because of this super-excellent glory. For if that which was temporary was with glory, much more -shall this which is permanent be attended with glory. Having therefore such a hope, we use great plainness of speech, and do not [act]

-as Moses. He puta veil on his face, that the children of Israel

might not look stedfastly to the end of that which is abolished.
Their minds were indeed blinded, for even to this day that very veil at the reading of the old covenant remaineth. That which is abolished by Christ is not unveiled, but evenat this day when Moses is read there is a veil upon their heart, but when ever it shall turn to the Lord that veil will be taken away.)
Now the Lord is the spirit? And where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty ; and we all with an unveiled face viewing, as in a mirrour, the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same image from glory to glory, as from the Lord of spirit.* .
Having therefore this ministration, as we have obtained mercy, we do not falter, but have renounced the secrets of shame, not walking in craftiness, nor dealing deceitfully with the word of God, but by the clear manifestation of the truth recommending ourselves to every man’s conscience in the sight of God. If then these glad tidings of ours are veiled,

ET ES eae Les My

*In order to understand this it is necessary to keep in mind what is said in verse 6, 7. that he was qualified to be a minister of a new covenant not of /etter, but of spirit.

4

4

15

16 ek

Il. CORINTHIANS. IV. V. they are veiled by those perishing things, with which the god of this world* hath blinded the minds of the disbelieving, that the splendour of the glad tidings of the glory of the Christ, who is an image of God, may not shine upon them. For we do not proclaim ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your servants for Jesus’ sake.

Because it is God, who commanded light to shine out of darkness, who hath shined in our hearts, to give a lustre of the knowledge of the glory of God in the person of Jesus
Christ ; and we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellence of the power may belong to God and not be from us; we are pressed on every side, but not utterly crushed ; perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not quite forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed; always carrying about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus may be manifested in this body of ours. For we, who are living, are continually delivered up to death on the account of
Jesus, that the life of Jesus may be manifested in this frail flesh of ours. So that death is operative in us, and life in you. But having the same spirit of belief as 15 mentioned in this portion of scripture, “1 beheved, therefore I spake,}”? we also believe and therefore we speak, knowing that he who raised the Lord
Jesus, will raise us also by Jesus and present us with you.
For all this is for your sakes that the superabounding favour may make thanksgiving by many redound the more to the glory of God.

For this cause. we do not faint: nay though this outer man of ours is wasted, yet the inner is renewed day by day. For this momentary and light affliction of ours is working out for us an eternal weight of glory, great beyond expression, while we are aiming not at things seen, but at things unseen; for the things seen are temporary, but the things unseen are eter-

nal. For we know that when the earthly house of this dwelling of ours is dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with hands, everlasting in the heavens. For in this we groan, wishing earnestly to clothe ourselves with

* This may be he who is called, Mammon. Ps: 416, δ

mm co

10

12

17

18

19

20

᾿ II]. CORINTHIANS. V.

that house of ours—that heavenly habitation; for having indeed that on, we shall not be found naked. For truly we who are in this dwelling do groan, being loaded with a burden, for which we do not wish to unclothe ourselves, but to clothe ourselves, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life. Now it is God who hath worked us up to this, and who hath indeed given us the earnest of the spirit. Therefore we are always undaunted, (as we know that while we are dwelling in this body we.are sojourning abroad from the
Lord; for we walk by faith and not by sight;) and go on undaunted (as we think it better for us to be abroad from the body and at home with the Lord;) and therefore make it the height of our ambition, whether staying or going, to be well pleasing to him. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of the Christ, that every one may receive according to what he hath done in this bodily state, whether good or evil.
Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men, and are open to the view of God, and I hope that we have been open also to your conscience. For we are not ‘‘com-

mending ourselves again to you,” but are giving you an occasion of boasting on our behalf, that you may make use of it before those who boast in outward. appearance and not in heart.
For if we have been transported beyond ourselves it is to God; and if we are sober, it is for you. For the love of the Christ urgeth us on, judging this, that if one died for αὐ then indeed were they all dying, and that he died for all to the end that they who live might no longer live for themselves, but for him who died and was raised up for them. So that henceforth we know no one after the flesh. Nay though we indeed knew
Christ after the flesh, yet we now know him so no more. So that if any one is in Christ, he is a new creation. The old things are passed away, behold! all those things are made new.
And all this is of God, who hath reconciled us to himself by
Jesus Christ, and hath given us the ministry of this reconciliation. So because God was in Christ reconciling a world to himself, not reckoning to them their transgressions, and hath committed to us the word of this reconciliation, we therefore as ambassadors for Christ ; as if God were exhorting by us,

II. CORINTHIANS. V. VI.

we, in behalf of Christ, intreat, ‘Be reconciled* to God; 707
21 he hath made him who knew no sin, a sin offering for us, that
ἜΣ by him we may be made the righteousness of God; and cooperating with him, we also exhort you that it may not be in vain
2 that you have recewed this favour of God. Lor he saith,
“In an aceeptable time 7 have hearkened to thee, ᾿
And ina day of salvation helped thee.?’+
3 “Behold now is an acceptable time ! Behold now is a day of salvation;’’ [and this we do] giving no offence in any thing
4, that the office may not be blamed; but approving ourselves in every respect as ministers of God, by great constancy in afflictions,
5 in distresses, in straits, in stripes, inimprisonments, in tu-
6 mults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings, in purity, in knowledge, in long suffering, in gentleness, in a holy spirit, in undissembled
7 love, in the word of truth, in the power of God, with the armour of righteousness on the right and left, in honour
8 and dishonour, im evil report and good report, as deceivers, though we are true; as unknown, though well known; as dying,
9 though behold we live; as chastened, yet not put to
10 death; as sorrowful, yet still rejoicing ; as poor, yet enriching many; as having nothing, yet possessing all things.
11 O Corinthians! Our mouth is opened to you; our heart is
12 enlarged. You are not straightened by us, but you are straightened
13 by your own affections. Now in return, I speak as to
14 children, Be ye also enlarged. Form no associations with unbelievers; for what fellowship is there between righteousness and unrighteousness? What communion hath light with darkness?
15 What concord hath Christ with Belial? or what portion
16 hath a believer with an unbeliever? And what agreement hath the templeof God with idols? For you are the temple of the living God. As God hath said, ‘‘ Because I will dwell among them and walk about among them, and will be their God,
17 and they shail be my people;{ therefore come out from among them and separate yourselves, saith the Lord, and touch no

* This seems to be a specimen of his preaching to the unconverted, Jews or Gentiles. t Es. 49. 8. ¢ Levit. 26. 12.

Il, CORINTHIANS. VI. VII.

18 unclean thing, and I will receive you, and be to you a father, and you shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.*”

Vil. Having therefore, beloved, these promises, let us purify ourselves from all defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

2 Receive us cordially. We have injured no one; we have
3 corrupted no one; we have defrauded no one. I do not speak to condemn you; for I have said before that you are in our
4. hearts, to die together, and to livetogether. [use great freedom of speech to you. I have great boasting with regard to you. I am filled with comfort. I superabound with joy in all our affliction.
5 For when we arrived in Macedonia our flesh had no
6 rest, but we were afflicted every way. Without were fightings; within, fears. But God who comforteth them who are cast
7 down, comforted us by the coming of Titus; not barely however by his coming, but by the consolation with which he was comforted on your account, when he informed us of your
8 longing desire, your bitter sorrow, your zeal for me; so that I was the more rejoiced; because if I grieved you by that letter,
I have no cause to regret, though I did regret; for I find that that letter, though suitable to the occasion, made you sorry.
9 Now I rejoice, not that you were made sorrowful, but that you were affected with a sorrow which led to a reformation.
For you were affected with a godly sorrow, that you might in

10 no wise receive damage from us. For godly sorrow operateth to produce a reformation for salvation, never to be repented

11 of; but the sorrow of this world worketh death. For behold! this very thing—your being affected with a godly sorrow, what solicitude it hath wrought in you! nay, what apologies! what indignation! what fear! what longing desire! what zeal!

» what avengement! By your whole conduct you have shewn
~12 yourselves to be clear in this matter. Now though I indeed wrote to you, it was not on the account of him who had done the injury, nor of him who was injured, but that our solicitude, which we have for you, might be made manifest to you in

* Jer. 31. 33, and ch. 32. 37, &c.2Sam 7. 8, and 14.

II. CORINTHIANS. VII. VIII.

13 the presence of God. We were therefore comforted for your

comfort, and rejoiced the more exceedingly at the joy of Ti-

14 tus; because his spirit was refreshed by you all; so that if I

boasted of you to him, I was not shamed; but as we spake

all things to you with truth, so also our boast which we made

15 to Titus hath been verified; and his affection for you increas-

eth more abundantly on recollecting the obedience of you

16 all, how you received him with fear and trembling. I rejoice therefore that I can wholly confide in you.

Vill. We now, brethren, make known to you, the bounty

of God which hath been granted by the congregations of Ma-

2 cedonia, that in a great trial of affliction, the abundance of

their joy, though their poverty was very great, abounded

3 for the richness of their liberality-—that to the utmost

of their ability, I bear them witness, nay, beyond their

A ability, they were of themselves forward, beseeching us with

much intreaty to receive this bounty, and take a share with

5 others in the office of distributing it to the saints, not indeed

as if we had expected this; but they gave themselves first to

6 the Lord, then to us by the will of God, so as to induce us

to exhort ‘Titus, as he had begun, to continue on and com-

7 plete this bounty among you; ΝΕ -as you abound in every

thing—in belief, and acbenie’ and knowledge, and in all ear-

8 nestness even in your love for us, you might abound also in

this bounty. I do not say this by way of command, but am,

9 during the exertion of others, proving the genuineness of

your love. For you know the bounty of our Lord Jesus Christ,

that rich as he was, he for your sakes became poor, that

10 through his poverty you might become rich. And I give you

my opinion on this occasion, for this is becoming of you

who took the lead, not only in doing, but even in forming the

11 design above a year ago. Now therefore compleat the doing,

that die performance with what you have, may be answera-

12 ble to the readiness with which you undertook it. For if there

be a willingness, a person is accepted according to what he

13 hath; not according to what he hath not. For it is not the

14. design that others should be eased, and you burdened; but

for the sake of equality your abundance at this, time should

supply their want; m order that their abundance may supply

II. CORINTHIANS. VIII. IX.

‘15 your want, so that there may be an equality. As it is written,
He who gathered much had nothing over, and he who gathered little did not fall short.””*

16 Now thanks be to God, who putteth the same earnestness

17 for you in the heart of Titus. For he indeed received an exhortation, but from an extraordinary earnestness he was going

18 to you of his own accord. Now with him we have sent the

19 brother whose praise is by the gospel throughout all the congregations. And not only so, but he hath been chosen by the congregations to accompany us with this bounty; the distribu-

20 tion of which we have undertaken for the glory of the Lord

21 and your readiness, using this precaution that none may blame us in the distribution of this large sum; being careful to conduct ourselves well, not only in the sight of the Lord,

22 but also in the sight of men. And with them we have sent that brother of ours whose diligence in many affairs we have many a time experienced, and who is now more than ordinarily intent on this from the great confidence which he hath in you.

23 Now with regard to Titus, he is my partner and fellow labourer for you; and as for our brethren, they are messengers

24 of congregations, a glory of Christ. Display therefore for them, and for the view of these congregations, the demonstration of

ΙΧ. your love, and of our boasting on your behalf. For with regard to the contribution itself, which is for the saints,

2 it is superfluous for me to write to you. For I know the forwardness of your minds, and boast of it on your behalf to the
Macedonians, that Achaia was ready a year ago. And this zeal

3 of yours hath been a spur to the multitude. Now I have sent these brethren, that this boast of ours on your behalf may not,

A in this instance, be vain—that, as I said, you may be ready prepared; lest if some Macedonians should come with me and

5 find you unprepared, we, not to say you, may be put to the blush for this confident boasting. Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort these brethren to go before to you, and to get your bounty, of which you had given previous notice, completed before’ hand, that so it may be ready as a

an pe A GA - -.-ς-.ς-.---. .κ͵ιὐὺ--.- .-..

* Ex. 10} 18:

10

12

13

..,........,. ee = ass

II. CORINTHIANS. IX. X.

bounty, not as an extorted gift. Now considering this, that he who soweth sparingly shall reap sparingly, and that he who soweth bountifully will reap bountifully, let every one give as he is predisposed in his heart, not with regret, nor reluctance; for God loveth a cheerful giver: and God is able to make every bounty redound to your advantage.

That you having always a sufficiency in every thing, may abound to every good work, (as it is written, ‘He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor, his righteousness shall endure forever;*” and may He .who furnisheth abundantly seed for the sower and bread for food, supply and multiply your seed, and increase the products of your righteousness!) you are enriched in every thing for every act of bounty, which operateth through us to produce thanksgiving to God.

Because the distribution of this religious offering not only supplieth the wants of the saints, but also superaboundeth with many thanksgivings to God—(by the experience of this distribution they glorify God for your avowed subjection to the glad tidings of the Christ;) therefore, for the liberality of this contribution for them and for all; and for the supplication which is made for you by them who love you on account of the supereminent favour of God for you, thanks be to God for this his unspeakable gift.

Now I Paul myself exhort you by the meckness and gentleness of the Christ, (1 “who when present am indeed lowly among you, but being absent am bold towards yowt’’) and I pray this, that I may not when I am present presume upon that confidence, with which I lay my account to act boldly against some who reckon us as walking after the flesh. For walking in flesh, not after the flesh, we are carrying on a war (the weapons of our warfare being indeed not carnal but mighty through God for the demolition of fortifications) demolishing surmises and every mount raised against the knowledge of
God, and bringing every sentiment captive to the obedience

* Ps. 112.9. This which I have marked as a quotation, I take to be a reflection thrown upon him by his opponents at Corinth, and inv. 10, a continuation of it.

iI], CORINTHIANS. X. XI.

ὃ of the Christ; and being in a state of readiness to punish every act of disobedience, when your obedience is complete.

7 Consider what is before you. If any one is confident in himself that he is Christ’s; let him again reckon this from himself, that as he himself is Christ’s, so we also belong to

8 Christ. 3For though I should boast even somewhat more of this power of ours, which the Lord hath given us for edification, and not for your destruction, I shall not be put to shame.

9 In order that I may not seem as if I would terrify you by

10 my letters, (‘For his letters, saith one, are indeed weighty and

11 strong; but his bodily presence is weak, and his words con-

temptible,’’) let such a one reckon upon this, that such as we are in word by letters when we are absent, such we will actually be in deed when we are present. For we do not presume

12 to rank or compare ourselves with some of them who com-

mend themselves, but are not aware that they are measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves with

13 themselves. As for us we will not boast of things not measur-

ed out to us; but according to the measure of the rule of measure which God measured out to us to have come even to

14 you; for we did not stretch ourselves out beyond bounds as

not reaching you; for even to you we came the first with the

15 glad tidings of the Christ; not into what were not measured

16 out to us, boasting in other men’s labours; but having a hope,

on your faith being increased, to be by you farther enlarged, according to our allotment to publish the good tidings in the

17 regions beyond you; not in another’s allotment—in places

ready prepared, for the sake of boasting. But let him who boasteth, boast in the Lord. For it is not he who commendethhimself, who is approved, but he whom the Lord commendeth.

XI. I wish you would bear with me a little in this folly. Do

2 but bear with me; for Iam jealous of you with a godly jealousy. For I fitted you for one husband only, that I might present
3 you as a chaste virgin to the Christ; but I am afraid lest by some means as the serpent by his subtilty deceived Eve,
4 so your affections should be corrupted from their singleness for the Christ. For if indeed he who cometh, proclaimeth another Jesus, whom we have not proclaimed; or if you receive

14

16

II. CORINTHIANS. XI.

another spirit which you. have not received, or other glad tidings than what you have accepted, you did well in bearing.
For I reckon that I am not a whit behind the chiefest apostles; and though I am but rune in speech, yet I am not in knowledge: but in every respect we have been manifested to you in all things.

Did I commit a fault in abasing myself that you might be exalted, because I proclaimed the glad tidings of God to you gratis? I took spoil of other congregations, having received wages for my attendance on you. Even when present with you, and in want, I was burthensome to no one; for the brethren who came from Macedonia supplied my want, so that I kept myself from being in any wise burthensome to you, and.
IT will continue to do so. It is a truth of Christ in me that this boasting shall not be stopped against me in the regions of
Achaia. Why? Because I do ποῖ ἴονε you? God knoweth that what I do and will do is that I may cut off the advantage of those who are wishing for an advantage—that in what they boast, they may be found acting as we do: For such as they are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into apostles of Christ. Nor is this to be wondered at; for Satan himself putteth on the appearance of an angel of light:
No wonder, then, if his ministers transform themselves to appear like ministers of righteousness. But their end will be according to their works.

Again, I say, let not a certain person think me a fool; but if he should, bear ye however with me 85 ἃ fool, that I also may boast a little. What Iam going to say, I do not say according to the Lord, but as with folly on the subject of this boasting.
Since many boast after the flesh, let me also boast. For wise as you are, you easily bear with fools; for you bear, if one enslaveth you; if one devoureth; if one receiveth; if one exalteth himself;-if one openly msulteth you.

In regard to reproach; as, ‘‘That we are weak’’—1 say that on. whatever any one can presume (I-speak foolishly) I can do the same. Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am J. Are they of the seed of Abraham? So am I.
Are they ministers of Christ? (1 speak with an excess of folly)
I am more so—more abundant in labours; far surpassing in

eC ee,

24

25

26

27

28

IJ, CORINTHIANS. XI. XII.

stripes; more frequent in imprisonments, often in deaths. Of the Jews I five times received forty stripes save one. Thrice i was beaten with rods. Once I was stoned. Thrice I have been shipwrecked. In the deep I spent a whole night and day. On journeys I have been frequently in dangers from rivers; 1 dangers from robbers; in dangers from my countrymen; in dangers from foreign nations; in dangers in cities; in dangers in a wilderness; in dangers at sea; in dangers among false brethren: In toil and fatigue, in watchings many a time, with hunger and thirst; in fastings many a time, with cold and nakedness. Beside these things from without, I have this disturbance daily crowding upon me—the anxious care of all the congregations. Who is weak and I not weak? Who is offended and I not inflamed? If I must boast, let me boast of things regarding my weakness. The God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ—-the self-existent, ever blessed being knoweth that I do not le. At Damascus the governor under king Aretas posted guards in the city of the Damascenes, with a design to seize me, whereupon I was let down in a basket, through a window in the wall, and escaped his hands.

ΧΗ; To me indeed it is of no advantage to boast; for I will

2 come to visions and revelations of the Lord. I know a man in Christ, that fourteen years ago such a one was suddenly conveyed to the third heaven, (whether in the body I do not know or out of the body I do not know, God knoweth) and I know that such a man was suddenly conveyed to paradise
(whether in the body or out of the body I do not know; God knoweth) and he heard unutterable things which it is out of the power of man to express. For bis a one I may boast, but for myself I will not boast, except of my infirmities.
Though should I indeed have a mind to boast, I shall not be a fool; for I will speak truth. But I forbear, lest any should ascribe to me beyond what he seeth me, or heareth of me.

‘Indeed that I might not be too much elated by the astonish-

ing greatness of these revelations, there was given me a thorn for the flesh, a messenger of satan to buffet me, that I might not be too much elated. For this I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. Whereupon he said to me, My grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is perfected in

10

11

12

14

15

21 iI. CORINTHIANS. XII. XIII.

weakness. Therefore I will with the greatest pleasure, rather boast of my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may shelter me. I feel therefore a complacency in weaknesses, in reproaches, in difficulties, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ; for when I am weak, then am I strong.

Tam become a foolish boaster! you have compelled me.
For I ought to have been commended by you. For I am not a whit behind the chiefest apostles, although I am nothing. The signs indeed of the apostle have been wrought among you with all patience, with signs and wonders and miracles. For what instance is there of your being inferior to other congregations, unless it be this; that I have not been burthensome to you? Forgive me this injury. Behold I am in preparation to come to you a third time, and I will not be burthensome to you. For I seek not your possessions, but yourselves. For children are not bound to lay up treasures for the parents, but the parents for the children. And as for me, I will, with the greatest pleasure, spend and be spent for your sakes, though the more I love you, the less I be beloved.

Now be it so that I did not burthen you, but being crafty I took you in by artifice. Did 1 take an undue advantage of you by any of them whom I sent to you? I entreated Titus to go, and with him I sent the brother. Did Titus take any undue advantage of you? Did we not walk in the same spirit? Did we not in the same steps? Do you think we are again making apologies to you? In the presence of God we speak as in Christ.
And all these things, beloved, are for your edification. For I am afraid lest when I come [I shall not find you such as I wish, and that you will not find me such as you wish—lest should there be debates, envyings, animosities, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings and tumults, my God humble me when I come to you again, and I cause many of those who have sinned, and have not begun a reformation, to grieve for the impurity, and fornication, and lasciviousness which they have committed.

XIII. This is the third time Iam coming to you. By the mouth
2 of two or three witnesses every thing is to be established. I

told you before, and I now again forewarn you, as if I were present— being indeed absent, I now write to them who have

II. CORINTHIANS. XIII.

3 heretofore sinned, and to all the rest, that when I come again,

I will not spare. Since you seek a proof of Christ speaking by

4 me, who is not weak towards you, but powerful among you:

10

11

12

19

For though from weakness he was crucified, yet by the power of God he is alive, therefore though we are weak in him, yet by the power of God we will be alive with him for you. Examine yourselves whether you be in the faith: prove yourselves.
Do you not know yourselves, that Jesus Christ is in you, unless you are somehow incapable of standing the test. Now I hope that you will know that we are not incapable of standing the test. And my prayer to God is, that you may commit no evil
—not that we may be shewn capable of standing the test, but that you may do what is right, and that we may be as if we could not stand the test: for we can do nothing against the truth but for the truth: for we rejoice when we are weak, and you are strong. And for this also we pray, namely the restoration of you to perfect order. For this cause I, being absent, write these things; that when I am present I may not use severity, according to the power which the Lord hath given me for edification, and not for destruction.

Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfectly in order. Be comforted. Have your minds bent on one and the same thing: 
Be at peace: and the God of love and peace be with you.

Salute one another with a holy kiss. All the saints salute you.

The favour of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the holy spirit be with you all. Amen.

THE EPISTLE
APOSTLE PUT

GALATIANS.

]. PAUL, an apostle, not from men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father who raised him from the dead; and all the brethren with me, to the congregations of
Galatia; favour be to you and peace from God the father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from the present evil age, according
5 to the will of our God and Father, to whom be the glory for the ages of the ages. Amen. 3
6 I am astonished that you are so soon carried away, to another message of peace, from him who by the favour of Christ
7 called you: which 15 owing to nothing but this, that there are some who trouble you, and wish to pervert the glad tidings of
8 the Christ. But if we, or an angel from heaven, proclaim to you as gladtidings any thing different from what we have proclaimed to you, let him be an anathema. As we said before,
9 sol now say again, If any one teach you as glad tidings any thing different from what you have received, let him be an
10 anathema. For do I now conciliate the favour of men rather than of God? Or do I seek to please men? For if I still pleased men, I would not be a servant of Christ.
ἯΙ Now I certify to you, brethren, that the message of glad
12 tidings which I proclaimed is not according to man; for I neither received it from man, nor was I taught it; but by a
13 revelation of Jesus Christ. For you have heard of my behaviour formerly in the Jewish religion; that I, in the most vio-

Fa Li GALATIANS. ¥ ‘tr,’

lent manner, persecuted 1 the congregation of God, and ravaged
14 it; and that I made a greater proficiency 1 in Judaism than
"many fellow students of my age, in my own nation, being
15 more abundantly a zealot for the doctrines of my fathers: but when it pleased God, who had set me apart from’ my birth,
16 and by his special favour called me, to reveal his son to’ me, that I might proclaim the good tidings of him among: the nations immediately; T did not consult flesh and blood, nor did
17 Igo up to Jerusalem ἴο them who were apostles before me, but went. away to Arabia, and returned again to po tee
18 Then, after three years, I went up to Jerusalem to visit Peter, 
19 and abode with him fifteen days. But I did not see any other
20 of the apostles, save James the brother* of the Lord. Now as
.to what I write to you, behold, God is witness that I do not
“21 lie. Then I went to the regions of Syria, and Cilicia, and was
22. personally unknown to the christian congregations of J udea,
23 who had only heard that he who formerly persecuted us is
_» now proclaiming -the glad tidings of that belief which he was
24 formerly destroying, and they glorified God on my account.
II.. About fourteen years after, I went up again to Jerusalem
_ with Barnabas, and took Titus with me. I went up indeed ac-
"ὦ cording το" ἃ revelation, and stated to them the glad tidings’ which “I proclaim among the ‘nations—privately indeed to
‘those in high repute, that the race, which I run, or had run,
3 might in’ no wise be frustrate. But neither ‘Titus who was
_ with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised, nor
4 did I, (on account of the false brethren who had slily introduc-. ed themselves, and crept in, to spy out that liberty of ours which we have by Christ Jesus, that they might enslave us)
‘5 yield for a moment any submission to them, that the truth of the glad tidings might. continue with you. And with regard to dtaged in high repute (what they were formerly doth not concern me: God accepteth not man’s person; for these men of repute added nothing to me;, but, on.the contrary, seeing that
7 I was intrusted with the message of glad tidings for the uncir-

“#* Vi iz. Cousin German. Among the Jews, sons of woes rs ΟΥ̓ 5}5ters were called 4rethers.
Oke ave Β΄ VU

10 it

19

14.

2

GALATIANS, II. ΠΙ.

cumcision, as Peter was with that for the circumcision; for he,

ΟΜ ΠΟ had communicated power to Peter forthe mission to the

circumcision, communicated power also to me for the nations) © even James, and Cephas, and John, those eminent pillars, knowing the favour granted to me, gave to me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, that we should be for the nations, and. they for the circumcision, recommending only that we would remember the poor, which very thing f had indeed been, forward to do. And when Peter came to Antioch I opposed him to his face, because he was reprehensible. For before certain’ persons came from James, he had eaten with the Gentiles; but when they came, he withdrew, and kept himself apart, being afraid of them who were of the circumcision. And the rest of the Jews also dissembled with him, insomuch that even
Barnabas was carried away’ with their ‘dissimulation. But when I saw that they were not walking: uprightly, according to the truth of the glad tidings, ‘I said to Peter before them

all, “If thou beiig a Jew mayst live after the manner of the

Gentiles, and not as the Jews do, why compellest thou the
Gentiles to conform to the rites of the Jews? We who are by

nature Jews, and not sinners of the Gentiles, knowing that a

man is not justified by works of law unless by means of a be.

jief in Jesus Christ, even we ourselves have believed in Christ .

Jesus, that we may be justified for a belief in Christ and not for works of law; because for works of law no flesh can be justified. But if we, seeking to be justified by Christ, have ourselves also been found sinners, is Chri ist then ἃ minister of sin? Let not this be supposed.” . ek ct mot be

Now if 1 build up again that which I pulled down I make. myself a transgressor. As for me, J by law died to law, that
I may live to God. I have been crucified with Christ, nevertheless I livenot I myself any more, but Christ liveth in me; and the life which I now live in flesh, I live by that belief — which’l have in the son of God, who loved me and delivered up himself for me. I do not set at naught the favour of God ; for if righteousness be by means of law, Christ hath indeed died to no purpose.

O inconsiderate Galatians! who hath bewitched you that

you should not obey the truth—you, before whose eyes Jesus
Christ crucified was evidently represented among you? I wish

GALATIANS. πιο.

‘to learn from you this’ oily —Did you receive the spirit for

4 selves with flesh? Have you suffered so many things in vain?
5 But if indeed in vain; doth he then, who ministereth the spirit to you abundantly, and worketh miracles among you, do-this
ὁ for works of law, or for the obedience of belief? As Abraham
7 believed God, and it was reckoned to him for righteousness, know therefore, that they who ‘are believ ers are children of Abraham. »
“8 The scr ipture indeed, foresecinet that God «would justify the nations for belief, predicted to Abraham the glad tidings
9 [in these words, *« By thee all the nations shall be blessed.*”’
So that they who are believers are blessed with the believing
10 Abraham. For as many as are of works of law are under a curse ; for it is written, “‘ Cursed is every one who will not persevere in all that are written in the book of the law to do
11 them.}+” And that none is justified by law in the sight of God
12 is evident, for “the just shall live because of belief. ΤΡ Now the law is not because of faith, but, “The man who doth these
13 things shall live by them.{”’. Fr om this curse of the law Christ hath redeemed us, being made a curse for us; (for it is written,
14 “‘Cursed is every one who is suspended on a cross, ”) that the blessing of Abraham might come. upon the nations by
Christ Jesus, that we might receive the promise of the spirit by means of this belief.
15 Brethren (I speak according to the practice of men) as ne one @eannulleth the covenant of a man, or superaddeth to it
16 when it is ratified; and the promises were made to Abraham and the seed of him (1 15 not said ‘‘and to the seeds” as if it
17 was a covenant for many, but as if for one, and to the seed of thee ; namely Christ) now this I say that the law which was four hundred and thirty years§ after, doth not disannul a covenant ratified by God for Christ, so as to put a stop to the

* Gen.. 12. 3: and 18. 18: and 22. 18 { Deut. 27. 26.
+ Habak. 2. 4. § Lev. 18. 5. Deut. 21. 23. q Exodus
12. 40.

3 works of law, or for the obedience of belief? Are you so un-~ wise? Having begun with spirit are you now perfecting: your- °

18

GALATIANS. Ill. ΤΥ.

promise.’ For if the inheritance be by law, it is no longer by 

‘ promise ; but.God granted it freely by promise.

19

20 ἢ

21

᾿ (4) To what purpose then was the law ?

(Ὁ). On-the account of transgressions it’ was superadded until the seed should come, to whom the promise was made ; and it was introduced through angels by the hand of a mediator ;. but this mediator was not of one party.

(a) But God-is one party ; is then the law against the promises of God?

(b) No by no means; for ifa ἘΞ had been given which

᾿ could have put into.a state of life, righteousness would as-

22

23 suredly have been by law. But the scripture hath shut all up under sin, that the promise for belief in Jesus Christ might be granted to them who believe. Now before this belief came,

‘we were under the custody of law, shut up together for the

24.
25 future belief to be revealed. So that the law was our tutor to guide us to Christ, that we might be justified for belief. But this belief being come, we are no longer under a tutor; for

26 you are all children of God by means of this belief in Christ

29

Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized to Christ, have put on Christ, There is in him no distinction of Jew and
Greek, no distinction of bondman and freeman, no distinction of male and female. For you are all one in Christ Jesus. And

‘if you are Christ’s, you are then the seed of Abraham and

heirs according to promise. w I say, as long as neir is a minor, he differeth no-
Now I say, as long as the] a minor, he differeth

thing from a bondman, though he be Jord of all; but is under. governors and guardians till the time prefixed by the Father.
So we also when minors Were in bondage, under the elements

of the world; but when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his son, born of a woman; born under law that he might redeem those under law—that we may receive the adoption of children. And because you are children, God hath sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, crying Abba,
Father. So that thou art no longer a slave, but a son; and ifa son; then an heir of God through Christ. At the time indeed

(a) An objection. (b) The answer.

9

GALATIANS. IV.

“when you knew not God, you as slaves served dhings which are in reality no gods; but now when you know God, or ra-

~ ther when God hath owned you, how turn ye again to those

10 u

12 a

22

weak and beggarly elements to which you degradingly desire again ‘to be in bondage as before. You observe days and months and seasons and years; Tam afraid for χρυ lest I have bestowed upon you labour in vain. ©

Brethren be, I beseech you, as I, for τ: ὉΠ as you were.
You have not injured me at all; and you know that when in a weakness of the flesh I proclaimed to you formerly the glad tidings; with respect to that trial of mine, which I had in my flesh, you did not despise, nor with scorn reject, but received me as a messenger of God—as Christ Jesus. What was then your felicitation! For I bear you witness, that if it had been possible you would have pulled out your very eyes and given them to me. Am I then become your enemy, because I tell you truth? They affect a zeal for you; not in an honourable way; but they wish to exclude us, that you may be zealous for them. Now it is honourable to be zealously affected towards a good man at all times, aud not nici when I am present with you.

My dear children, for whom: I again suffer pangs until
Christ be formed in you—but I wish I could this moment be with you and change the tone of my voice, for I am in doubt about you—tell me ye who desire to be under law, do ye not hear the law? For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, one by a bondwoman, and one by ἃ freewoman : but he indeed who was of the bondwoman, was born in the ordinary course of nature; and he who was of the freewoman, in virtue of the promise. These things have an allegorical meaning, for by these women are represented the two covenants—one from mount Sina, bringing forth for bondage; this is Hagar.
(for Hagar meaneth mount Sina in Arabia*) and answercth, to the present Jerusalem, who with her children is in a state of bondage: ‘but the Jerusalem above is free: this is the mother of us all; for it is written;

* Hagar, (which in Arabic signifies a rock) was and still is the name of Sina among the Arabians,

“30

4 a

GALATIANS. IV. V.

Rejoice thou barren, who bearest not;

Break forth with shouts of joy,

Thou who sufferest not the pangs of childbirth,

For many more are the children of the desolate

Than of her who hath a husband.*

Now we, brethren, are children of promise, as Isaak was.
But as then he who was born inthe ordinary course of nature persecuted him who was born in a spiritual manner, even so it is now. But what saith the scripture? ‘“‘ Send away this bondwoman and her son; for the son of this bondwoman shall not share the inheritance with the son of the freewoman.}”?, Now we, brethren, are not children of the bondwoman,

but of the free; therefore stand up for the liberty with which
Christ hath made us free, and be not again entangled with a yoke of bondage. Behold I Paul say to you, that if you be circumcised, Christ will avail you nothing. And I testify again to every man who is circumcised, that he is under an obligation to perform the whole law. You who are justified by law, have done with the Christ—you have fallen from that favour. As for us then, we by the spirit entertain a hope of

6 justification for faith. For in Christ Jesus neither circumci-

fend

sion nor uncircumcision availeth any thing; but a belief made operative by love.

You were running well. Whohath avs you from obeying the truth? This persuasion cometh not from him who called you.. A little leaven leaveneth the whole mass. I havea confidence in the Lord with respect to you, that you will keep your minds bent on nothing else, and that he who troubleth you, whoever he may be, will bear the blame. As for me, brethren, if I still preach circumcision, why am I still persecuted? In that case the offence of the cross is done away. I wish that they who are unsettling you would cut themselves off: for you, brethren, have been called to liberty; only let not that liberty be an advantage to the flesh; but be servants to one another by offices of love. For the whole law is summcd up in this one precept, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as

* Es, 54, 1. +Gen. 21. 10.

21

οἰ GALATIANS. V. VIL.
7 thyself. Now if you bite and devour one another, take heed that you. be not destroyed by one another. Thisthen I say, walk by the spirit and by no means fulfil the lust of the flesh. For the inclinations of the flesh are contrary to the spirit; and the inclinations of the spirit are contrary to the flesh; they are opposed to one another; so that you do not, what you wish; but if you are led by the spirit you are not under law. Now the works of the flesh are manifest—they are these—adultery, fornication,

uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, fascinations, enmities,

strifes, emulations, animosities, contentions, factions, sects,

envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and the like, of

which I forewarn you, as I have indeed before declared that Ὁ they who practise such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God: But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, forbearance, gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness, temperance—against such things there is no law. Now they who belong to Christ have crucified the flesh with its passions and

desires. If we live by spirit let us walk by spirit. Let us not

be vain glorious, provoking one another, envying one another.
Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, do you, who

~ are spiritual, set such a one right again, witha spirit of meek-

OIA οἱ m 2 bd

6

10

11 ness, keeping an eye on thyself, lest thou-also be tempted.

Bear one another’s burdens and so fulfil the law of the Christ.
For if any one thinketh himself to be something, when he is

nothing, he deceiveth himself, Now let every one prove his

own work, and then he will have his boasting for himself alone and not for another. For every oné shall bear his own ~ burthen. Let him who is taught the word-make him who — teacheth a partaker in all good things. Be:not deceived. God is not to be imposed on; for whatever a man soweth, that .he’

‘shall reap. Because he who.soweth for his flesh shall from the

flesh reap corruption; but he who soweth for the spirit shall from the spirit reap life everlasting; therefore let us not be weary in well doing, for in.due time we shall reap without being tired. As we therefore have an opportunity let us do good to all, but more especially to them who are of the household of faith.

You see in what large letters I have written to you with my ownhand. As many as are desirous of making a figure in

GALATIANS. VI.

flesh, these are constraining you to be circumcised, only that —

13 they may avoid being persecuted for the cross of the Christ;
For even they themselves, being circumcised, do not keep

14 the law; but they wish you to be circumcised that they may boast in your flesh. But far be it from me to boast, save in.

. thecross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which the world is crucifiedtome
15 and I tothe world. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision availeth any thing; but anew creation.
16 ‘And with regard to all who will walk by this rule, onthem there will be peace and mercy,.cyen upon the Israel of

God.

E77 For the future let no one trouble me, for on this body of

- mine I bear the marks of the Lord Jesus.
18 Brethren, the favour of the Lord Jesus Christ be with

your spirit, Amen:

1.

2

10

11

THE EPISTLE

OF THE

APOSTLE PAUL,

TO. THE

EPHESIANS.

PAUL, an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, to the saints—to them who are at Ephesus and faithful in

Christ Jesus: Favour be to you, and peace. from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with every spiritual blessing,—with the heavenly things in Christ; as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we might be holy and blameless before him in love; having before hand determinately pointed us out for an adoption into the number of children by Jesus
Christ for himself, according to the good pleasure of his will; for the praise of the glory of that favour of his with which he made us objects of favour in theBeloved; by whom we have this redemption by his blood—the forgiveness of our sins according to the richness of his grace in which he hath abounded for us—having with all wisdom and care made known to us this secret of his will, according to that good pleasure of his, which he previously purposed in himself, for the dispensation of the fulness of times, to bring all things again under one head in
Christ, both those in heaven and those on earth—even in him, by

whom we, (having been previously marked out in a determi-

nate manner, according to the purpose of him who eflecteth
᾽ Ξ purp

2 all things according to the counsel of his will) were made his
3 inheritance, to the end that we who first trusted in the Christ

14

19

20

21

8

EBHESIANS.: ΤῚΝ,

might be for the praise of Ais glory; and by whom you also, when you heard the word of this truth, the glad tidings of this salvation of yours—by whom you indeed, when you believed, were sealed with the spirit of the promise (that holy [spirit] which is an earnest of the mheritance of us—for the complete redemption of the purchase) for the praise of his glory.

For this cause, having heard of the faith which you have in the Lord Jesus, and of your love for all the saints, I do not cease to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of the glory, would give you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in the acknowledgment of him—that he would enlighten the eyes of your understanding, that you may see what the hope of this invitation of his is; and what the riches of the glory of this inheritance of his, in the saints; and what the exceeding greatness of this power of his for us who believe, corresponding to the energy of the strength of that power of his which he exerted in the Christ.—Having raised 1M from the dead, he set him at his right hand, in the heavenly kingdom, far above all principality and power, and might, and dominion, and every name which is named, not only in this age but in that to come ; and put all things under his feet, and constituted him head over all for the congregation, which is his body—the fulness of him who

filleth all.in all. And with respect to you, when you were dead in those trespasses, and those sins, in which you formerly walked according to the course of this world—according to the prince of the power of the air, that spirit which 1s now working powerfully in the children of disobedience ; among whom when we also were all formerly leading our lives in the desires of our flesh, executing the dictates of the flesh, and the imaginations, and were naturally children of wrath even as the rest; then God, who 15 rich in mercy, on the account of the great love with which he loved us, even when we were dead in those trespasses, did bring us to life with the Christ,
(by grace you are saved) and did raise us up, and place us with him in the heavenly kingdom in Christ Jesus, in order that he might, in the ages which are to come, display the immense riches of his favour by kindness to us in Christ Jesus.
For by grace you are saved by means of this belief. And

9 even this is not of yourselves; it is the gift of God. It is not because of works ; so that no one can boast. For we are his
10 workmanship, fitted by Christ Jesus for good works, for which
God had before prepared us that we might walk therein.
11 Wherefore remember that you were formerly the nations in flesh, those denominated uncircumcision by the nominal circumcision
12 made with hands, in flesh—that you were at that - time without Christ; aliens from the commonwealth of Isracl, and strangers to the covenants of the promise, having no hope,
“13 and being without God in the world: but now by Christ
Jesus, you, who were formerly far off, are brought near by
14 the blood of the Christ ; for he is our peace. He it is, who hath made both one, and who hath demolished the partition wall,
15 having by his flesh put a stop to the enmity—the law of the commandments [contained] in positive injunctions ; that he might frame the two anew, in himself, into one new man,
16 making peace; and reconcile them both in one body, to God by means of the cross, having by that slain the enmity. And
17 being come he hath proclaimed the glad tidings of peace to you who were far off, and to them who were near.
18 Because through him we both have access to the father by
19 one spirit, you therefore are no longer strangers, and pilgrims,
20 but fellow citizens of the saints, and of the household of God, built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus
21 Christ himself being the corner stone, by whom the whole building being united in symmetry is to grow up toa holy temple in the Lord; by whom you also are builded up together
: with them by the spirit, for an habitation of God.
Π . For this cause, with regard to me Paul the prisoner of the
2 Christ, Jesus, for you the nations; inasmuch as you have
_ 3 heard of the dispensation of the favour of God granted to me for you—that he hath by a revelation made known to me this secret (as I have briefly written above, by the bare read-
ΠΑ ing of which you may perceive my knowledge in this secret
5 ofthe Christ, which in former generations was not made known to the children of men as it hath now been revealed to his holy
_ 6 apostles and prophets by the spirit,) Zhat the nations are co-
: heirs, and a joint body, and joint partakers of that promise of
7 his in the Christ by means of the gospel, of which was made

 EPHESIANS. II. Il.

9

19

20

m 09 bO

EPHESIANS. Hf. IV.

a minister according to the free gift of God’s favour which was granted to me—according to the energy of his power.—
To me, who am less than the least of all the saints, this favour was granted to proclaim among the nations the unsearchable riches of the Christ, and to enlighten all men with respect to the dispensation* of this secret, which God who created all things by
Jesus Christ had hidden from the ages, in order that the manifold wisdom of God might now be made known to the principalities and the powers in the heavenly kingdom, by means of the congregation, according to the predisposition of the ages which he made by Christ Jesus our Lord ; by whom we have this freedom of speech, and this access with confidence, by this belief in him; therefore I pray you not to be dejected at these afflictions of mine for you. It is for your glory. For this cause I bend my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, of whom the whole family in heaven and on earth is named, that he would, according to the riches of his glory, grant you to be strengthened by his spirit for the imner man, that, by means of this belief, the Christ may dwell in your hearts; that you being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to.comprehend, with all the saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of the Christ which surpasseth that knowledge—that you may be filled with all the fulness of God. Now to him who is able to do infinitely above all that we can ask or conceive, according to that power which is operative in us—to him be the glory in the congregation, by Christ Jesus, through all the generations of the age of the ages. Amen.

I, therefore, the prisoner for the Lord, beseech you to walk worthy of the call with which you have been called, with all humility and meekness; with long suffering, bearing with one another im love; and endeavouring to preserve the unity of the spirit by the bond of peace; to be one body and one spirit: as you have indeed been called to one hope of your call. There is one Lord, one belief, one baptism, one
God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in you all; and to'every one of us there hath been granted in

* I adopt the reading of almost all the manuscripts which have

8

9

10 il

12

13

14

EPHESIANS. IV. -

due measure the favour of the free gift of the Christ. Therefore it is said, “Having ascended on high, he hath led captivity captive,;”* and ‘he hath given gifts to men.” Now this expression, ‘‘He ascended,’ what doth it infer, but that he had first descended into the lower parts of the earth? He who descended is the same who ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill all; and he hath given some to be apostles, and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some pastors, and teachers, for the fitting up of the saints; for the work of distribution; for the building up of the body of the Christ, until we all come up to the unity of the belief and of the knowledge of the son of God; to perfect manhood— to a measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ; that we may no longer be infants, tossed like waves, and whirled about by every wind of doctrine, by the cheating sleight of men, by a skill in the art of deceiving: but that maintaining truth with love, we may grow up in all respects for him, who is the head, the Christ; from whom the whole body being fitly framed together and cemented, provision is made by means of the supply of every joint, according to the proportionate operative power of every part, for an increase of the body— for building itself up in love.

This therefore I say and testify in the Lord, that you no more walk, as the rest of the nations do, in the vanity of their mind. They having their understandings darkened, being alienated from the life of God because of the ignorance which is in them, by reason of the blindness of their heart, have without remorse abandoned themselves to the commission of every uncleanness with inordinate desire. But you have not thus learned the Christ; inasmuch as you have heard him and been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus, with respect to your former course of life, to put off the old man, which is corrupted by deceitful desires, and to be renewed in the spirit of your mind; and to put on the new man, which in aconformity to God is created in righteousness and the holiness of truth. Wherefore, putting away all falsehood, speak truth,

* Ps. 68. 18.

14

EPHESIANS. IV. V.

every one to his neighbour. Because we are members one of another, are you excited to anger? Do not therefore sin.
Let not the sun go down on your wrath, nor give the devil an . opportunity. Let the stealer steal no more; but rather labour, and procure honestly with the work of his hands, that he may have wherewithal to relieve the needy. Let no corrupt discourse proceed. out of your mouth—nothing but what is good for edification—of such utility as to be a benefit to the hearers. And grieve not the holy spirit of God by which you have been sealed for the day of redemption. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and detraction, be banished from among you, with malice of every sort; and be kind to one another, tenderly compassionate, forgiving one another.

And as God hath in Christ forgiven you, be ye therefore imitators of God as beloved children. And walk in love, even as the Christ loved us, and delivered himself up for us, as an eflering and. a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour. Ὁ
And let not fornication, nor uncleanness of any sort, nor inordinate desire, be so much as named among you, as becom. eth saints; nor obscenity, nor foolish talking, nor jesting about things which are unbecoming; but rather thanksgiving. For this you know that no fornicator, nor unclean person, nor lewd libertine, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom of the Christ and God. Let no one deceive you with vain discourses; for on the account of these things the wrath of God is coming on these children of disobedience, be not ye therefore partakerswiththem. For you were formerly darkness, but being now a light in the Lord, walk as children of light (for the fruit of this light* consists of goodness and righteousness and truth of every sort) proving what is well pleasing to the
Lord. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them: for as to the things done

3 by them in secret, it is shameful even to mention them. But

all these reprehensible things are exposed to view by the light.
For it is light which exposeth every thing to view; therefore

* This is the reading in sundry Greek copies and ancient versions. I prefer it, because by continuing the use of the same metaphor it seems most agreeable to the context.

2

EPHESIANS. V. VI.

it is said, ‘“Awake thou who sleepest and arise from the dead and the Christ will shine upon thee.* ake heed therefore how circumspectly you walk, not as unwise, but as wise, redeeming the time. Because these are evil days, therefore be not without understanding, but intelligent with regard to what is the will of the Lord. And be not intoxicated with wine in which there is debauchery, but be filled with the spirit when you are speaking to one another, when with psalms and hymns and spiritual songs you are singing and making melody with your hearts to the Lord: and give thanks on all occasions for all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to the God and Father.

Be subject to one another in the fear of God. ?

Wives, be subject to your husbands as to the Lord; be-

3 cause the husband is the head of the wife, even as the Christ

is the head of the congregation. He indeed is the saviour of the body; but as the congregation is subject to the Christ, so let wives be to their husbands in every thing.

Husbands love your wives, even as the Christ loved the congregation, and gave himself up for it, that having purified it with the bath of the water, he might hallow it; indeed that he might present it to himself as the glorious congregation, having neither spot, nor wrinkle, nor any defect whatever; but that it may be holy and without blemish. In the same manner husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies. He who loveth his wife, loveth himself. Now no one ever hated his own flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord doth the congregation, because we are members of his body—of his flesh and of his bones. Instead of this,
“4 man will leave his father and mother and cleave to is wife, and they two will be one flesh,t’’ this is the great mystery, I mean in regard to Christ and the congregation. However with

} regard to you individually, let every one love his wife as him-

self, and let the wife reverence her husband.
Children, obey your parents in the Lord; for this is right.
Honour thy father and mother (this is the first commandment

* Es. 60. 1. + Gen. 2. 24.

3 a)

4

5

9

18

14

15

16

19

EPHESIANS. VI.

with a promise) that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayst live long on the earth.

And you, parents, exasperate not your children, but educate them with the discipline and admonition of the Lord.

Servants, obey them who are your masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in the sincerity of your hearts, as you do the Christ—not with eye-service as men pleasers, but as servants of the Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, performing service with good will, as to the Lord and not to men; knowing that whatever good any one doth, the
Lord will reward him for it, whether he be a bondman or a freeman.

And you, masters, observe the same conduct towards them, abating yaur threats, knowing that you yourselves have
ἃ master in heaven, and that with him there is no respect of persons.

Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might. Put on the complete armour of God, that you may be able to withstand the wiles of the devil. Because our conflict is not barely with flesh and blood, but against the principalities and the powers—against the rulers of this dark age, against the spiritual [assaults] of the wickedness in the heavenly dispensation; take up therefore the complete armour of God, that you may be able to make resistance in the evil day, and having put a stop to them all, to maintain your ground. Stand, therefore, having your loins girded with truth, and having on the breast plate of righte-

ousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of the glad tidings of peace, covering all with the shield of faith sith which you will be able to extinguish all the fiery darts of the

evil one. Take also the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, that is the word of God; in every prayer and supplication, always praying with the spirit (being for this purpose in a continual state of watchfulness and prayer) for all the saints—particularly for me, that to me a word may be given, that with the opening of my mouth, and with freedom and plainness of speech, I may make known the secret of the glad tidings, for which Iam performing the office of an ambassa-

EPHESIANS. VI.

dor in a chain, that in this situation I may speak boldly as 1 ought to speak.

21 Now that you may know the state of my affairs, and what

‘I am doing, Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful minis,

92 ter in the Lord, will give you a particular account, as I have sent him for this very purpose, that you may know the state of our affairs, and that he may comfort your hearts.

23 Peace to the brethren and love with faith, from God the

24 Father and the Lord Jesus Christ—this favour be with all them who love our Lord Jesus Christ without any mixture of corruption, Amen.

VOT. fl.Ve ¥¥

2

THE. EPHIPEE
OF THE

ἀκ bth μα ἃ

TO THE

PHILIPPIANS.

PAUL and Timothy, servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus—to them who are at Philippi, with overseers and deacons, favour be to you and peace from God our father, and ‘the Lord Jesus Christ.

I thank my God at every mention of you, always, in every prayer of mine for you all, making such supplication with joy for your contribution for the glad tidings; having from the first day till now the same confidence, that he who hath begun a good work in you will continue completing it until the day of
Jesus Christ; as it is just for me to be thus affected towards you all, because you have me in your heart; and in my bonds and in the defence and support of the glad tidings you all continue to be fellow sharers with me of this favour. For God is my witness how tenderly I love you all with the affection of
Jesus Christ; and this I pray that your love may abound still more and .more, in knowledge and all discernment, that you may prove the things which differ—that you may be sincere and inoffensive till the day of Christ, filled with fruits of righteousness, which are by means of Jesus Christ, for the glory and praise of God. t

Now I wish you, brethren, to know that what hath happened to me hath rather conduced to the furtherance of the gospel; so that in the whole imperial palace, and all other places, my bonds are well known to be for Christ; and a greater number of the brethren inthe Lord are emboldened by my bonds

19

20

26

27

30

PHILIPPIANS. I. IL.

to venture to speak the word with more freedom and intrepidity. Some indeed proclaim the Christ out of envy and contention, but others do it out of good will—the former for the sake of strife proclaim the Christ not in a pure manner, thinking to add affliction to my bonds; but the latter for love, knowing that I am set for the defence of the gospel. What then?
Still in every way, whether in pretence or in truth, Christ is proclaimed, At this therefore I rejoice and will rejoice. For I know that this will issue in my deliverance, through your supplications and a supply of the spirit of Jesus Christ, according to my earnest expectation and hope that I shall in no wise be ashamed ; but that in the most open manner, as always so now, Christ shall be magnified in my body, either by life or by death. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. But whether the living in flesh is for me a fruit of labour, and what
I should chuse, I do not know. For 1 am strained between the two, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ which is by far the best; but to abide in the flesh is more needful on your account. And being confident of this, I know that
I shall abide and continue some time with you all for your furtherance and joy in the faith; that by me your glorying in
Christ Jesus may abound, by means of my being present with you again. Only conduct yourselves ina manner becoming the glad tidings of the Christ, that whether I come and see you, or if absent I may hear this of you, that you are stedfast in one spirit, and that without being in the least daunted by your opposers, you contend unanimously for the belief of the gospel, which is to them indeed a manifestation of destruction, but to you, of salvation.

Now with respect to this from God—because this hath been granted to you for Christ, not only to believe in him but also to suffer for him—and you are engaged in the same conflict as that in which you saw me and now hear that I am en-

gaged, if therefore there be any consolation in Christ, if

_any comfort of love, if any participation of spirit, ifany com-

2

passion and tender mercies, complete my joy.
In order that you may be like minded, exercising the same love, having your souls knit together, your minds bent on the b] De ow) re

Ὁ Οοὦ -ἰ mor)

10
1Ὶ

12

20 to to

WwW τῷ or & 09

PHILIPPIANS. 11.

one thing—upon nothing out of a spirit of contention or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind esteeming one another better than yourselves, look not every one to his own interests, but every one of you to the interests also of others. For let this temper of mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God did not think it robbery to be like
God, but he emptied himself—having taken the form of a servant, being in the likeness of men, and found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient to death, even the death of across; wherefore God highly exalted him, and granted him a name which is above every name, that in the name of Jesus every knee should bend, of those mm heaven, and of those on earth, and of those beneath the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christis Lord to the glory of God the father.

Therefore, as you, my beloved, have always been obedient, not only when I was present, but now much more when I am absent, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling ; for itis God who is working in you both the will and the power to act. For this good pleasure do you all things without murmurings and surmises, that you may be blameless and sincere, spotless children of God in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, amongst whom shine ye forth as lights in the world, displaying the word of life, that I may have matter of boasting for the day of Christ, that I did not run in vain, nor labour in vain, but can if 1 am even poured out asa libation on the sacrifice and service of your belief, rejoice and congratulate with you all. For the same cause then rejoice ye also and coneratulate with me.

Now I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy very soon to you, that I may be refreshed by knowing the state of your affairs. For I have none of a like disposition who will sincerely interest himself in your concerns. For all are seeking ther own things, not the things of the Christ Jesus. But of him you know this proof, that as a son serveth a father, he hath served with me for the gospel. Him therefore I hope to send as soon as I see the issue of my affairs here. AndI have a confidence in the Lord that I myself shall come very soon:
But I have thought it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus

PHILIPPIANS. II. ΠῚ.

my brother, and fellow labourer, and fellow soldier, and your missionary and agent to supply my want; as he hath been

27 longing for you all, and is much distressed because you heard

that he was sick. For he was indeed sick, nigh to death; but
God had pity on him, and not on him only, but also on me;

28 that I might not have sorrow on sorrow. I have therefore sent

him with the greater despatch, that upon seeing him again you

29 may rejoice, and that I may be less sorrowful. Receive him

then in the Lord with all joy and hold such in high esteem

§0 because he was on the brink of death, for the work of the

Christ, having exposed his life that he might supply the want of your religious service for me.

Il. Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write to
2 you the same things is not troublesome to me; and to you it
3 is safe. Beware of the dogs; beware of the evil workers; be-

ware of the concision; for we are the circumcision, who serve
God in spirit, and glory in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
4 in flesh. Though, with regard to my having a confidence even in flesh, if any other thinketh that he hath a confidence
5 in flesh, I have greater pretensions—circumcision performed on the eighth day; a descent from Israel; of the tribe
6 of Benjamin; a Hebrew of Hebrews; with respect to the law, a
Pharisee; with respect to zeal, a persecutor of the congregation;
7 with respect to righteousness which is by law, blameless;
8 yet what were gain to me these I have counted refuse* on account of the Christ—nay more, I do therefore indeed count all things but refuse, on account of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have given up all
9 and account them but dregs, that I may gain Christ and be found in him, not having for my own righteousness, that which is of the. law, but that which is by a belief in Christ—that - which is of God—a righteousness for this belief.
10 That I may know hin, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, I have conformed myself to his death, that 1 may somehow arrive at the resurrection of

* The Greek word ζημία signifies any thing cast away or given up to save one’s life; and also many suffer ings, dangers, hardships or fatigues undergone to obtain a prize or re compense.

13

14

15

18

Rice

29

PHILIPPIANS. IIL. IV.

the dead—not that Ihave already received, or am yet made

perfect, but I continue the pursuit, that I may lay hold on that for which I have been laid hold on by the Christ Jesus.

Brethren, I do not reckon myself to have laid hold on it, but one thing [I do], forgetting the things which are behind, and intent on the things before, I press forward to the mark, for the prize of the call of God from: above by
Christ Jesus. Let as many of us therefore as are full grown, have our minds bent on this; and if any of you are otherwise minded, when God shall reveal this to you, (over and above the advance which we have made by walking by this rule,—by minding this itself) be ye, brethren, imitators of me, and keep your eyes fixed on those who ‘walk thus, as you have us for an example. For many walk of whom I have frequently told you, and now tell you with tears, that they are enemies of the cross of Christ. ‘Their end is destruction; their God is their belly; and their glory is their shame. Their minds are bent on earthly things. But we are citizens of heaven, from which we carnestly expect a saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, who will transform the body of this our humble state, that it may be made conformable to his glorious body, according to the

energy of his power to subject all to himself. Wherefore, my brethren, my beloved, and much longed for! my joy and my crown! stand thus stedfast in the Lord, my beloved!

I beseech Euodia, and I beseech Syntiche, to be of one mind in the Lord. And I intreat thee also, my faithful colleague, assist them; for they were fellow labourers of mine in the gospel, with Clement in particular, and the rest of my fellow labourers whose names are in the book of life.

Rejoice in the Lord always. Again, I say, rejoice. Let your meckness be known to all men. ‘The Lord is at hand: Be anxious about nothing; but on all occasions, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests

“be made known to God; and the peace of God, which sur-

8

9

σι, will keep your hearts and your minds safe in Christ Jesus. Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are venerable, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are friendly, whatsoever things are reputable, if there be any

passeth all understanding

1

93

14

1

5

9

PHILIPPIANS. IV.

virtue, and if there be any praise, think of these things, and practise what you have learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me; and the God of peace be with you.

Now I was greatly rejoiced in the Lord that now at length you revived your care for me, for whom you indeed were concerned, but had not an opportunity. Not that I speak with regard to want; for I have learned, in whatever circumstances
I am, to be contented. I know how to be brought low; and I know how to abound: in every respect, and in all things, I have been initiated into the mysteries of feeding plentifully, and suffering hunger—of abounding, and being in want. I can undergo all things through Christ who strengthencth me.
Notwithstanding this you did well in assisting me in my distress. !

Now you, Philippians, yourselves know, that at the beginning of the glad tidings when I was departing from Macedonia, No congregation communicated with me in respect to giving and receiving, but you only—that when I was at Thessalonica you sent once and again to supply my want. Not that I desire a gift, but I wish for the fruit which aboundeth to your account. Now I have all things and abound. I am fully supplied, having received your presents by Epaphroditus, a fragrant odour, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God. And my God will supply all your wants, according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus.

Now to our God and father be the glory for the ages of

- the ages. Amen.

Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren with me salute you.

All the saints salute you, they especially who are of Czsar’s household.

The favour of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all,
Amen.

2

oO si

10

1]

THE EPISTLE
OF THE

APOSTLE PAUL

TO THE

COLOSSIANS.

PAUL, an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and
Timothy the brother, to the holy and faithful brethren in
Christ at Colosse: favour be to you, and peace, from God our father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

We give thanks to the God and father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, ite praying for you, (having heard of your belief in Christ Jesus, and of your love for all the saints) on account of the hope laid up for you in the heavens, of which you heard before by the true word of the gospel, which is come to you, as it hath also to all the world, and is bringing forth fruit, as it dothamong you, from the day you heard and acknowledged the favour of ee in truth, as you learned it from Epaphras our dear fellow servant, who is for you a faithful minister of the
Christ, and the: person who informed us of your love in spi- - rit. For this cause, we indeed, from the day we heard of it, do not cease praying for you, and requesting, in order that you'may be filled, in respect to the acknowledgment of his will, with all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that you may walk worthy of the Lord, to all well pleasing.

By every good work we bear fruit, and grow up for the acknowledgment of God; being strengthened with all might according to the power of his glory for all patience and longsuffering we with joy give thanks to the Father who hath fitted

COLOSSIANS. I.

13. us for a portion of the inheritance of the saints in light; who

16

17

20

2

22

23

24

2 nr

26

27 hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and removed us into the kingdom of his beloved son, by whom we have this redemption, even the remission of our sins by the blood of him who is an image of the invisible God, a first born of the whole creation.

Because all the things which are in the heavens and which are on the earth were created by him—the visible and the invisible, whether thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers, they were all created by him, and for him; therefore he is before all, and they are all kept in consistence by him, and he is the head of the body, namely of the congregation. He who is the beginning is a first born from the dead that in all things he might be pre-eminent. Because all the plenitude was pleased* to dwell in him, and by him to reconcile all to himself, he having by the blood of his cross—by himself, brought them to be at peace, (whether they be the things on earth or the things in heaven,) hath now therefore brought you, who were for a time alienated, and enemies in your minds by wicked works, to a state of reconcilement by the body of his flesh— by his death, to present you holy and without blemish, and exempt from accusation in his sight, provided you continue in this belief, grounded and settled, and are not moved away from the hope of the glad tidings which you have heard, which have been proclaimed to this whole creation under heaven, of which
I Paul was made a minister.

Now I rejoice in these sufferings of mine for you, and am in my turn making up in my flesh the remainders of the sufferings of the Christ, for his body, namely, the congregation of which I was made a minister, according to the dispensation of God which was committed to me for you, to confirm the word of God—the mystery which was hidden from the ages and from the generations, but is now manifested to his saints; to whom God hath been pleased to make known the riches of the glory of this mystery among the nations—namely Christ

*See ch. 2. 9.

VOR. TV ZZ

28

29

10

10

COLOSSIANS. I. I.

mm you the hope of Glory, whom we proclaim, admonishing every man, and teaching every man with all wisdom; that we may present every one a full grown man in Christ Jesus; for which I indeed labour, and struggle with all my might, according to that energy of his which operateth in me with power. For I wish you to know what a great struggle 1 have for

you, and for them in Laodicea, and as. many as have not seen me in person, that, they being knit together in love, their hearts may be comforted, even to all the riches of the full assurance of this knowledge—to the acknowledgement of the mystery of the God and Father and the Christ, in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

Now I say this in order thet none may deceive you with enticing discourse; for though I am absent in person, yet in spirit I am present with you, rejoicing and beholding the regularity of your conduct and the’ stedfastness of your belief in,
Christ. As you therefore have received the Christ Jesus for your Lord, walk in him, rooted and built up in him, and firmly established in this belief, as you have been taught; abounding in it with thankfulness. Be on your guard, that none may make a prey of you by their philosophy and vain deceit, according to the tradition of men, according to the elements of the world, and not according to Christ. Because all the plenitude of the deity resideth substantially in him, therefore you are complete in him who is the head of all principality and power; in whom

also you have been circumcised with a circumcision made

without hands—with the putting off of the body of the sins of the flesh—with the circumcision of the Christ; having been buried with him in that baptism in which also you were raised with him by your belief in the mighty power of God, who raised him from the dead.

When you were dead in the trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh he raised you to life with him, Having freely forgiven you all those trespasses—having blotted out the hand-writing which was against us by the ordinances; that which was adverse to us he removed out of the way—having nailed this to the cross—having divested himself of the principalities and the powers, he exposed them. to public view when he triumphed over them on it. Let none therefore judge

COLOSSIANS. II. ΠΙ.

17 you in respect to eating or drinking, or in respect to a festival,

18

19

20

21

22

2

3 oO >

or a new moon, or sabbaths, which are a shadow of the things to come. And with respect to the body of the Christ, let no one deprive you of the prize; however delighted he may be with an affected humility and the religion of angels, prying into mat-. ters which he hath not seen, being vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind, and not adhering to the head, from which the whole body, being by means of joints and ligaments supplied and knit together, is to receive the divine increase.

If you, then, have died with the Christ from the elements of the world, why are you, as if you were living in the world, troubled with these dogmas, ‘‘Touch not; taste not; handle not;”’ which all tend to corruption by this improper use according to the injunctions and doctrines of those men. These indeed have a show of wisdom in will-worship and humility and self denial. Are they not in some estimation for the gratification of the flesh?

Since you then have been raised up with the Christ, seek the things which are above; where the Christ is seated at the right hand of God. Set your affections on the things above and not on the things of this earth. For you have died, and your life is hid with the Christ in God. When the Christ, our life, shall appear, then shall you also appear with him in glory. Mortify, therefore, with regard to your members which are on earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate passions, wicked desire, and that licentiousness, which is idolatry, on the account of which things the wrath of God is coming on the children of disobedience, and in which even you yourselves walked formerly when you lived among them. But now lay ye aside also all these things, anger, wrath, malice, detraction, obscene discourse out of your mouth. Lie not one to another.

Having put off the old man, with his deeds, and put on the new man, which is renewed for knowledge after the image of him who created it, where there is not Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, scythian, bondman, freeman, but the all, and in all, Christ; put on therefore as chosen of God, holy and beloved, bowels of tender mercies, gentleness, humility, meekness, long suflering, bearing with one another, and forgiving one another. If any one hath.a cause:

COLOSSIANS. III. IV.

14 of complaint against another; as the Christ hath freely forgiven

15 you, so do ye. And over all these put on love which is the band of this perfection; and let the peace of God, to which

16 you have been called in one body, rule in your hearts; and be ye grateful. Let the word of the Christ dwell richly in you with all wisdom, when you teach and admonish one another; when with psalms and hymns and spiritual songs you sing grate-

17 fully to the Lord with your heart, Indeed whatever you do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to the God and Father by him.

18 Wives, be submissive to your own husbands, as js fit in

19 the Lord: Husbands, love your wives and be not imbittered against them.

20 Children, obey your parents in all things, for this is well

21 pleasing to the Lord.

22 Fathers, exasperate not your children, lest they be discouraged.

Servants, obey in all respects them who are your masters

23 according to the flesh; not with eye-service as men pleasers, but with singleness of heart, fearing God; and whatever you

24 do, do it heartily as for the Lord, and not for men, knowing

25 that you will receive from the Lord the reward of the inheritance; for you are serving the Lord Christ, and he who doth wrong shall receive according to the wrong he hath done.
There is no respect of persons.

IV. Masters, render to your servants what is just and equitable; knowing that you have a master in heaven.
2 Continue in the constant exercise of prayer, watching there-

3 in with thanksgiving; praying at the same time for us also, that

A God would open for us the door of the word, that we may declare the mystery of the Christ (for which I indeed am in bonds) that I may publish it in the manner ought to do.

5 Walk in wisdom towards — who are ἄνομα, redeeming the time.
6 Let your conversation be always with courteousness, sea-

_ soned with salt, with a knowledge how you ought to answer

every one.
7 With regard to my affairs, you will receive full informa-

tion from Tychicus, the beloved brother, and faithful minis-

COLOSSIANS. IV.

8 ter, and fellow servant in the Lord, whom I have sent to you

for this very purpose, that he may know your situation and

9 comfort your hearts; together with Onesimus, the faithful and

10

11

12

17 beloved brother, who is one of you. They will inform you of the state of all things here.

Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner, saluteth you. So doth
Marcus the nephew of Barnabas, concerning whom you have received letters of recommendation, If he come to you, receive him. Jesus also, who is called Justus, saluteth you. These are the only persons of the circumcision who are my fellow labourers for the kingdom of God. ‘These have been a comfort to me. Epaphras who is one of you, a servant of Christ, saluteth you, always in his prayers making the most fervent supplications for you, that you may stand perfect and confirmed in all the will of God. For I bear him witness that he hath a great zeal for you, and for those of Laodicea and Hierapolis. Luke the physician, the beloved, saluteth you: so doth
Demas. 

Salute the brethren at Laodicea, particularly Nymphas and the congregation at his house. And when this letter hath been read among you, cause it to be read also in the congregation of the Laodiceans; and read ye that from Laodicea.
And say to Archippus, Be careful to discharge the ofice which thou hast received from the Lord.

The salutation of me Paul with my own hand. Remember my bonds.

The favour be with you. Amen.

1,

10

‘THE FIRST EPISTLE
OF THE

TO THE

THESSALONIANS.

PAUL, and Silvanus, and Timothy, to the congregation of the Thessalonians in God the father and the Lord Jesus
Christ: Favour be to you, and peace, from God our fatherand the Lord Jesus Christ.

We give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers, remembering incessantly the work of your belief, and the labour of your love, and the perseverance of your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of our God and Father; knowing, brethren beloved of God, the choice made of you—that our glad tidings did not come to you in word only, but with power, and with a holy spirit, and with much assurance.

As you knew what manner of persons we were among you for your sakes, you indeed became imitators of us, and of the
Lord, having embraced the word in much affliction, with the joy of a holy spirit; so that you became patterns for all the believers in Macedonia and Achaia. For from you the word of the Lord hath been sounded forth, not only in Macedonia and Achaia; but, in every place, your belief in God is spread to such a degree, as rendereth it unnecessary for us to say any thing. For they themselves relate concerning us what an entrance we had among you; and how you turned to God from the idols, to serve the living and true God, and to wait for his son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, namely
Jesus, who delivereth us from the wrath to come.

-2

9

10

11

12

19

14

15

16

For you, brethren, yourselves know that entrance of ours among you, that it was not in vain. Though we indeed had suffered before, and had been treated injuriously, as you know, at Philippi; we had the courage, by the help of our God, to declare to you the glad tidings of God with much earnestness.
For our exhortation did not proceed from error, nor from impurity; nor was it with deceit; but as we had been approved by God to be entrusted with the glad tidings, so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God who trieth our hearts. For never did we at any time use flattering words, as you know; nor a pretext for covetousness, God is witness; nor were we secking human glory either from you or from others. We might have appeared with weight as Christ’s apostles; but we were gentle among you. Our affectionate regard for you being such as that with which a nursing mother would cherish her own children, we were willing to impart to you not only the glad tidings of God, but even our own lives, because you were dear to us. For you, brethren, remember our labour and our toil: for working day and night that we might not be burthensome to any fe you, we proclaimed to you the glad tidings of
God. You are witnesses, and God is witness, how ie how just, how irreproachable our behaviour was to you who believed—how; as you know, we [exhorted] every one of you, asa father would his children, exhorting you, and comforting you, and testifying that you should walk worthy of God who inviteth you to his kingdom and glory. On this account also we give thanks to God continually, because, when you received from us this message of God, you embraced it, not as a word of men, but, as it really is, a word of God, which operateth with powerful effect in you who believe. For you, brethren, became imitators of the congregations of God which are in
Judea in Christ Jesus.

Because you suffered from your countrymen the same treatment as they did from the Jews (from those indeed who slew the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and persecuted us, and who please not God, and are in opposition to all men, hindering us from: speaking to the natiois that they may be saved ; thus filling up the measure of their sins continually : but the wrath is at last coming upon them,) therefore we bre

THESSALONIANS. II. If. IV.

thren, being torn from you for a short time—in person, not

in heart, did the more earnestly endeavour to see your face.

18 Having therefore a longing desire, we wished to come to you,

2

(particularly I Paul) once and again, but Satan obstructed us.
For what is our hope, or will be our joy, or crown of rejoicing? Will it not be you in the presence of our Lord Jesus

Christ at his coming? For you are our glory and our joy.
Wherefore not being able to bear any longer, we acquiesced in being left alone in Athens, and sent ‘Timothy our brother, and a minister of God, and our fellow labourer in the glad tidings of the Christ, to establish you and comfort you concerning your belief; that none of you might be staggered by those afflictions. For you yourselves know that we are destined for this. For when we were with you, we told you beforehand that we should soon be afflicted, as it hath actually come to pass, and you know; therefore not being able to bear any longer, I sent to know your faith, for fear the tempter might have tempted you, and our labour be in vain. But Timothy having now come to us from you, and brought us the good news of your belief and love, and that you have always

‘a good remembrance of us, earnestly desiring to see us, as

we do to see you; we therefore, brethren, under all our affliction and distress are comforted in respect to you, by your faith.

Now because we live if you continue stedfast in the Lord, what thanks then can we render to God respecting you, for all the joy with which we rejoice on your account, in the presence of our God; day and night supplicating in the most earnest manner to see your face and to complete the remainders of your belief! now may he himself, our God and father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way to you! and may the
Lord cause you to increase and abound in love for one another and for all men, (as we do for you) so as to establish your hearts unblameable in holiness, in the presence of our God and Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his holy ones.

TV. - Wherefore, as to what remaineth, we beseech you bre-

thren, and exhort you, by the Lord Jesus, that as you have:

received from us how you ought to walk and please God, you

8

12

19

14

15

16

would abound more and more. For you know what instruc. tions we gave you by the Lord Jesus: for this is the will of
God even your sanctification, that you abstain from fornication; that every one of you know how to use his own vessel in sanctification and honour—not in lustful indulgence, like the nations which know not God; not overreaching and injuring his brother in this matter; for the Lord is the avenger of all such things, as we told you before and testified. For
God hath not called us for uncleanness, but to sanctification.
He therefore who rejecteth [these instructions] rejecteth not man, but God, even him who hath given us his holy spirit.

In respect to brotherly love you have no need of our writing to you, for you yourselves are taught of God to love one another, and this indeed you practise to all the brethren, through all Macedonia; but we beseech you, brethren, to abound therein more and more; and to make it your ambition to live quietly, and to mind your own business, and work with your own hands, as we charged you; that your walk may appear orderly to the world, and that you may be in want of nothing.

Now I would not, brethren, have you ignorant in respect to them who are composed to rest, that you may not be afflicted with grief, like others who have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, so [should we] also, that God will, by the agency of Jesus, bring with him them who are composed to rest. For this we tell you by a word of the Lord, that we the living who are left till the coming of the Lord shall not anticipate them who are laid to rest—that the Lord himself, with an authoritative command, with the voice of an archangel, and with the trumpet of God, will descend from heaven, and the dead in Christ shall be raised first; afterwards we who are left alive shall, together with them, be conveyed in clouds to meet the Lord in the air. And so we shall be for ever with the Lord. Therefore comfort one another with these words.

Now, in respect to the times and the seasons, you, brethren, have no need of our writing to you; for you yourselves know very well that the day of the Lord cometh as a

thief at night. For whilst they are saying, there is peace and

Conn n

safety, sudden destruction is then upon them, like the pangs of a woman in travail, and they cannot escape. But you, brethren, are not in darkness, that this day should break upon you at unawares as a thief. You are all children of light and children ofthe day. We are not of night, nor of darkness. Therefore let us not sleep as others do; but let us watch and be sober. For they who sleep, sleep at night; and they who get drunk are drunk at night. But as we are of the day, let us be sober, arm-

_ Ing ourselves with the breastplate of faith and love, and for a

helmet with the hope of salvation. Because God hath not stationed us for wrath, but to obtain salvation through our Lord
Jesus Christ, who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep we may live with him; therefore comfort one another, and edify one another, as indeed you do.

Now we intreat you, brethren, to consider them biti labour among you, and preside over you in the Lord, and instruct you: and esteem them very highly in love on account of their work.
Be at peace among yourselves. And we exhort you, brethren; admonish the disorderly; comfort the desponding; support the weak; exercise forbearance towards all; see that none return evil for evil to any one; but on all occasions do all the good you can, both to one another and to all men. Be always cheerful. Pray without ceasing. Render thanks for every thing; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus for you. Quench not the spirit. Despise not prophesyings. Prove all things and adhere to what is good. Abstain from every appearance of evil. And may the God of this peace himself sanctify you entirely!
And may the whole of you—the spirit and the soul, and the body, be preserved blameless to the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

He who calleth you is faithful, and will do this.

Brethren, pray tor us. Salute all the brethren with a holy kiss.

I adjure you by the Lord that this letter be read to all the boly brethren.

The favour of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.

THE SECOND EPISTLE

APOSTLE PAUL
THESSALONIANS.

PAUL, and Silvanus, and Timothy, to the congregation of the Thessalonians in God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ: Favour be to you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. ;

We ought to give thanks to God always for you, brethren, as it is fit; because your faith increaseth exceedingly, and the love of every one of you all towards one another aboundeth:
So that we ourselves boast of you in the congregations of God,

Ὁ on account of your perseverance and belief, in all your perse-

10

11 cutions. Indeed by these afflictions which you endure there is a clear evidence of the righteous judgment of God that you are accounted worthy of the kingdom of God for which you actually suffer; since it is just with God to retribute affliction to them who afflict you; and to you who are afflicted, rest with us at the manifestation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with ἢ his mighty angels, executing, with flaming fire, vengeance on them who know not God, and on them who hearken not to the glad tidings of our Lord Jesus Christ. These shall suffer punishment, an everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his majesty, on the day when he shall come to be glorified by his saints, and to be admired by all those who believe that he was intrusted with this testimony of ours to you: for which purpose we are continually praying for you, that our God would make you worthy of this invitation,, and confirm all the good pleasure of his goodness

12

ΤΙ. THESSALONIANS. I. I.

and the work of faith, with power; that the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ may be glorified by you, and you by him, according to the favour of our God and Lord Jesus Christ.
Now, with respect to this coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the gathering of us together to him, we beseech you, brethren, not to be hastily shaken from your purpose; nor alarmed by any spirit, or by any word, or by any letter as from us, as if the day of the Christ was at hand. Let no one by any

_ means deceive you that it 15, until the apostacy hath first come,

10

15 and the man of sin hath been revealed—that son of perdition who setteth himself against, and exalteth himself above, all that is called God, or an object of worship; so as to seat himself as God in the temple of God, pointing himself out that he

is God. Do you not remember that while I was yet with you —
I told you these things? And you know what it is which now restraineth, to the end that he may be revealed in his own time. For the mystery of this iniquity is now in operation, but there is one who yet restraineth. When he is out of the way, then will be revealed that lawless one, whom the Lord will consume with the breath of his mouth. With the brightness of his coming he will indeed put a stop to the operations of him, whose coming is according to the energy of satan, with all the power, and signs, and wonders of falsehood, and with all the deceit of this unrighteousness among them who perish.

Because they did not embrace the love of the truth that they might be saved ; for this cause therefore God will send them the energy of delusion, that they may believe this falsehood; that all may be condemned who have not believed the truth, but have taken pleasure in unrighteousness.

Now we ought to give thanks to God always for you, brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God hath, from the beginning, chosen you for salvation by ἃ sanctification of spirit and a belief of the truth to which he hath called you by our glad tidings, to be an acquisition of glory to our Lord Jesus
Christ. Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and keep firm hold

of the doctrines* which you have been taught, whether by

an ne Ena

* The Greek word παραδόσεισ, means any instruction conveyed to others, either by word or by writing.

16

17

II. THESSALONIANS. II. 1Π.

word or by our letter. And may our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and our God and Father, who hath loved us and graciously given us everlasting comfort and good hope, comfort your hearts and establish you in every good word and work !

Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord

2 may run and be glorified, as it is among you; and that we

5 co si

12

may be delivered from unprincipled and malicious men : for all have not this belief. But the Lord is faithful, and will establish you, and guard you from the wicked one: and we have this hope in the Lord with regard to you, that you both do, and will do, what we tell you. And may the Lord direct your hearts to the love of God and to the perseverance of the
Christ.

Now we charge you, brethren, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ to withdraw yourselves from every brother who walketh disorderly and not according to the doctrine which he received from us. For you yourselves know how you ought to imitate us—that we did not behave ourselves irregularly among you, nor eat any man’s bread for nothing; but with

Jabour and toil worked night and day, that we might not be

burthensome to any of you; not because we are destitute of authority, but that we might exhibit ourselves as a pattern for you to imitate. For when we were with you we gave you this charge, that he who would not work should not eat. For wé hear that there are some among you who walk disorderly, doing no work, but busying themselves impertinently. Now we charge such, and intreat them by the Lord Jesus Christ, to work quietly, and eat their own bread. And as for you, brethren, be not weary in well doing. And if any one doth not obey this injunction of ours by this letter, mark that man, and have no intimate connection with him, that he may be ashamed.
Yet count him not an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.
And may the Lord of peace himself grant you peace continu. ally in every respect. The Lord be with you all. The salutation of me Paul, with my own hand, which is a mark in every letter. Thus I write—The favour of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

4,

5

ise)

10

THE FIRST EPISTLE

OF THE 

AIP OS DL Τὰ ὠρινά ἴα

TIMOTHY.

PAUL, an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the appointment of God our Saviour, and the Lord Jesus Christ our hope; to Timothy, my genuine son by belief, be favour, mercy, peace from God our father and Christ Jesus our Lord.

As I entreated thee, when I was going to Macedonia, to continue at Ephesus; that thou mightest charge certain persons not to teach a different doctrine, nor pay attention to fables and endless genealogies, which rather promote disputes than the godly edification, which is by faith : Now the end of that charge is love, from a pure heart, and good conscience, and an unfeigned belief; from which some having swerved, have turned aside to vain discourse, desiring to be teachers of the law, not understanding what they say, nor about what they are so positive. We know indeed that the law is good, if one use it as a law, considering this, that law is not enacted for a righteous man, but for the lawless and refractory ; for the impious and sinful; for the immoral and _ profane ; for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers; for homicides, fornicators, sodomites, enslavers of men, liars, perjured persons, and whatever else is contrary to the wholesome doctrine according to the glorious glad tidings of the blessed God with which I have been intrusted, and am thankful to Christ
Jesus our Lord who qualified me; for his counting me faith-

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

ful, putting into office me who was before a reviler, and a persecutor, and an outrageous offender: but I obtained mercy because I acted ignorantly, in unbelief. And this favour of our Lord superabounded with faith and love which is by
Christ Jesus. This is a faithful word and worthy of all acceptation, That Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners of whom I am a chief; but I obtained mercy for this purpose, that Jesus Christ might display the utmost forbearance in me, a chief, for an example to them who should afterwards trust in him for everlasting life. Now to the king of the ages—the incorruptible, invisible, only wise God, be honour and glory, for the ages of the ages. Amen.

This charge I commit to thee, son Timothy, according to the preceding gifts of prophesying conferred on thee, that by them thou mayst carry on this good warfare, having faith and a good conscience, which last some having discarded, they have, in respect to the faith, suffered shipwreck, of which number are Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered over to satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme.

I therefore exhort thee first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings, be made for all men—for kings and all who are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life with ail piety and honesty; for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our saviour, who willeth all men to be saved, and to come to an acknowledgment of truth.
For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself as a ransom for all—as the testimony for his own times; for which I have been appointed a herald and an apostle, (I speak the truth in Christ,
I do not lie) a teacher of nations in belief and truth. I therefore give it in charge that the men pray in every place, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and surmise: in like manner also, that the women adorn themselves in comely apparel, with bashful modesty—not with curls, or gold, or pearls, or costly array; but with good works, as it becometh women who profess a reverence for God. Let women learn in quietness with all submission. For I do not allow a woman to teach or to usurp authority over man, but te be in quietness. For

{. TIMOTHY. II. Π].

14. Adam was formed first, then Eve; and Adam was not deceived:
15 but the woman being deceived was in transgression, but to be saved by the child birth, if they continue in faith and
YT. love and sanctification, with a sober mind. This is a faithful word. 
If any one desireth the office of an overseer, he desireth a
2 good work. The overseer therefore ought to be blameless, the _
3 husband of one wife, sober, discreet, well behaved, hospitable, qualified to teach, not addicted to wine, no striker, not attach-
A edto sordid gain, but of a gentle disposition, not quarrelsome, not a lover of money, one who presideth well over his own household, having his children in due subordination, with all
5. gravity, (for if one doth not know how to preside over his
6 own household, how can he take care of the congregation of
God; ) not one newly converted, lest, being lifted up witlrpride,
7 he fall into the condemnation of the devil. He ought also to have a good character from those without, that he may not fall into reproach and the snare of the devil.
8 Almoners in like manner should be grave, not doubletongued,
9 not addicted to much wine, not attached to sordid
10 gain, holding the mystery of the faith with a pure conscience; and let even such be first tried, then, if found blameless, let
11 them exercise the office of almoners.* Women in like manner
12 should be grave, not addicted to slander, sober, faithful in all things. Let almoners be the husbands of one wife, presiding well over their children and their own households; for they
13 who discharge the office of an almoner well, acquire for themselves an honourable rank, and much freedom of speech in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.
14 These things I write to thee, hoping to come to thee in a
15 little time; but if I be delayed, that thou mayst know how thou oughtest to conduct thyself in the house of God, that is in the congregation of the living God.
16 The pillar and firm support of the truth is (and unques-

* From Romans 16. 1, it appears that women as well as men were employed as almoners, and from the customs and manners of the
Greeks it could not be otherwise.

TIMOTHY. Ill. IV. v.

tionably great is the mystery of this religion,) God hath been manifested in flesh, justified by spirit, hath appeared to messengers, been proclaimed among nations, believed on in the world,

IV. taken up in glory. But the spirit saith expressly that in

latter times some will apostatise from this belief, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines concerning demons, through the hypocrisy of liars, who have their own conscience seared, forbidding marriage, and enjoining an abstinence from meats which God hath created to be partaken of with thankfulness by the faithful, and by them who are convinced of this truth, that every thing which God created is good, and nothing to be rejected; for when taken with thankfulness it is sanctified by the permission* of God and prayer. By suggesting these things to the brethren thou wilt be a good minister of Jesus Christ, nourished by the words of this belief, and this good doctrine, which thou hast followed. But as for vain and groundless fables, reject them, and exercise thyself for godliness. For bodily exercise is of little service, but this godliness is profitable for all things, having a promise of the present life and of that tocome. This isa faithful word and worthy of all acceptation; for it is for this that we both labour and suffer reproach, because we have trusted in the living God, who is the saviour of all men, especially of the faithful,

Announce these things and teach them, Let none despise thy youth; but be thou a pattern to the faithful in doctrine, in behaviour, in love, in spirit, in fidelity, in purity. Until I come apply thyself to reading, to exhortation, to teaching.
Neglect not the gift which is in thee, which was given thee by prophesy with the laying on of the hands of the assembled elders. Meditate on these things; be intent upon them, That thy improvement in all things may be manifest, take heed to thyself and to thy doctrine; continue in them; for by doing this thou wilt save thyself and them who hearken to thee.

Rebuke not an aged man with sharpness; but admonish him as a father; young men, as brothers; aged women, as mo-

* Literally, word, alluding, I presume, to the liberty granted to
Noe and his offspring to eat flesh,

10

ALS TIMOFAYOIM:

thers; young women, as sisters, with all purity. Honour widows who are widows indeed. But if any widow hath children, or grand children; let these first learn to respect their own household, and to make suitable returns to their. parents; for this is good and acceptable-im the sight of the Lord.
Now she, who being really a widow and desolate, hath trusted in God, will continue in her supplications and prayers night and day; but she, who indulgeth herself in sensuality, is near, though she liveth. Atumetaee these things, that they may be irreprehensible. Now if any one doth not provide for his own, and especially for those of his family, he hath renounced his belief, and 1s worse than an infidel.

Let no widow under sixty years old be put on the list.
Having been the wife of one man, is she eminent for good works? Hath she brought up children? Hath she exercised hospitality? Hath she washed the feet of the saints? Hath she

- assisted the afflicted? Hath she been assiduous to perform every

19 good work? As for young widows, reject them; for when they become impatient of the restraints of the Christ, they will wish to marry, incurring blame for having violated their former eneagvement. Add to this, that, being idle, they learn to ramble from house to house, and are not only idle, but are indeed tatlers, and intermedlers, speaking things which are unbecoming. My decision therefore is, that the younger widows marry; bear children, govern their families, give no advantage, no occasion of reproach to the adversary. For some have already turned aside after satan,

If any believer of either sex hath widows, let him or her relieve them, and let not the congregation be burdened, that they may relieve them who are really widows.

Let the elders who preside well be accounted worthy of double honour, especially they who labour in word and doctrine; for the scripture saith, ‘Thou shalt not muzzle am ox treading out corn,*’? and, ‘“The labourer is — of his wages. f”’

“Receive not an accusation against an elder, but on die tes-

* Deut. 25. 24. + Luke 10. 7.

22

24."

onn

10 ll

timony of two or three witnesses. Them, who sin, rebuke before all, that others may fear.

I charge thee before the God and Lord Jesus Christ, angi

the chosen angels, to observe these things without prejudging, and to do nothing by partiality. Lay hands upon no one hastily; nor be a partaker in the sins of others. Keep thyself pure. Discontinue the drinking of water, and take a little wine on account of thy stomach, and thy fr he cami indisposition.
The sins of some are so notorious that they go before them to judgment. Some indeed they follow. In like manner also the good works of some are open and manifest; and such as are otherwise cannot be hid.

Let as many as are under a yoke of bondage account their masters worthy of all honour, that the name of God, and this doctrine, may not be reviled. And let not those who have believing masters disregard them because they are brethren, but serve them the more, because they who receive the good service are believers, and beloved. Teach these things, and enforce them by exhortation. If any one teacheth otherwise, and doth not attend to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine according to godliness, he is puffed up, knowing nothing, but raving upon questions and debates about words, from which proceed envy, contention, abusive language, evil suspicions, preposterous studies of men whose minds are corrupt and devoid of truth, who suppose this religion to be a matter of gain. From such withdraw thyself. Now this religion, with contentment, is a great gain.
For we brought nothing into this world; and it is evident that we can carry nothing out of it. Having then food and raiment let us be content with these. But they who determine to be rich, fall headlong into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful desires, which plunge men into ruin and destruction. For the love of money is the root of all evil; to eratify which, some have wandered from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. But thou, man of God, shun these things and pursue righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, gentleness. Maintain the good combat of faith.
Lay hold on the life everlasting to which thou hast been in-

17

18 i. TIMOTHY. VI.

vited, and of which thou hast made a good profession before man¥ witnesses. I charge thee in the presence of God, who giveth ‘life to all, and of Christ Jesus who witnessed before
Pontius Pilate the good confession, to keep thyself, in respect to this command, unspotted, irreprehensible, until the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ, which, in his own proper times will be displayed by him, who is the blessed and only potentate; the king of kings and the lord of lords, who alone hath immortality, who inhabiteth light inaccessible, whom no man hath seen, or can see, to whom be honour and everlasting dominion. Amen. .

Charge them who are rich in this present state not to be high minded; not to trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God who imparteth to us richly all things for enjoyment; to be beneficent; to be rich in good works, ready to distribute; willing to communicate, laying up for themselves a good deposit for the time to come, that they may obtain the life ever-

Jasting.

O Timothy keep this deposit, avoiding the profane empty declamations, and the antitheses of that falsely called science, which some making a profession of, have, in respect to this belief, wandered from the mark.

The favor be with thee. Amen.

10

THE SECOND EPISTLE

; APOSTLE PAUL,

‘TIMOTHY.

PAUL, an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, according to the promise of life which is by Christ Jesus; to T1mothy, a beloved son, be favour, mercy, peace from God our
Father, and Christ Jesus our Lord.

I thank God, whom I serve from my forefathers with a pure conscience, that I have so uninterruptedly the remembrance of thee in my prayers, night and day, earnestly desiring (when I call to mind thy tears) to see thee that I may be filled with joy, recollecting that unfeigned belief in thee, which dwelt first in thy grand mother Lois and thy mother Eunice, and I am persuaded is in thee also: for which cause I remind thee to kindle up that gift of God which is in thee by the laying on of my hands. For God hath not given us a spirit of cowardice, but of power, and love, and a sound mind. Be not therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me who am a prisoner on his account; but share with me in affliction for the glad tidings, according to the power of God, who hath saved us, and called us with a holy invitation, not

according to our works, but according to his own purpose,

and the favour which was granted to us in Christ Jesus, before the times composed of ages, and which hath now been manifested by the appearance of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who hath put a stop to the operations of death, and hath brought

11 life and incorruption to light by the glad tidings, for which I

12

ij. TIMOTHY. I. II.

have been appointed a herald, and an apostle, and a teacher of nations. For which cause also I suffer these things, but am not ashamed; for I know in’ whom Ihave’ trusted, and am persuaded, that he is able to <i fe which I have deposited with him till that day.

Use the form of sound Si which thou hast heard from me, with faith and the love in Christ Jesus. Keep that good

deposit by means of a holy spirit which dwellcth in us. Vhis—

thou knowest, that all the Asiatics have withdrawn from me, of whom are Phygellus and Her mogenes. ‘The Lord grant mercy to the household of Onesiphorus, because he often refreshed me and was not ashained of this chain of mine; but when he was at Rome, sought me out diligently and found me. The Lord grant him to find mercy from the Lord in that day! Indeed, on how many occasions he ministered to me at
Ephesus, thou thyself knowest very well. Do thou, therefore, my son, strengthen thyself with the favour which is in
Christ Jesus; and what thou hast heard from me, in the presence of many witnesses, commit thou to faithful men, who will be able to teach others. Do thou therefore endure hardships as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No one going to war entangleth himself with worldly affairs, that he may please him who hath inlisted him. And if a man combateth in the public games, he is not crowned, unless he combat according to the rules prescribed. The husbandman must labour before he partaketh of the fruits. Consider what I say, and may the
Lord grant thee understanding in all things. Remember J esus
Christ, of the seed of David, ΡΥ from the dead according to these elad tidings of mine for which J suffer even to bonds, as a malefactor; bit the word of God is not bound. For this cause I bear all things patiently for the sake of the chosen, that they also may obtain that salvation which is by Christ
Jesus, with everlasting glory. This is 4 faithful word. For if we have died with him, we shall also live with him. If we suffer, we shall indeed reign with him. If we deny him, he will deny us. If we are unfaithful, he will continue faithful; he cannot deny himself. Bring these things to remembrance, giving a solemn charge in the presence of the Lord not to dispute about words. Tt answereth no useful purpose. It tendeth to

_times. For the men will be selfish, avaricious, vain, haughty,

Il. TIMOTHY. If. If.

the subversion of the hearers. Study diligently to present thyself approved before God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed; handling rightly the word of truth. And repress those profane empty declamations; for they will proceed on to farther impiety; and like a gangrene the word of these mem will spread, of whom are Hymeneus and Philetus, who have swerved from the truth, saying that the resurrection is already past; and subvert the belief of some. Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth firm, haying this inscription—‘‘7hé
Lord knoweth them who are his; and “Let every one who nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity.”
Now, ina great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of w ood and potter’s clay; and some indeed for honourable uses and some for meaner purposes. If any-one therefore purify himself from these he will be a vessel for:honour, set apart and suitable for the master, ready prepared for every good work. Fly then the passions of youth and pursue righteousness, fidelity, love, peace with them who mvoke. the
Lord with a pure heart. And avoid foolish and ignorant debates, knowing that they generate strifes. Now, the servant of the Lord ought not to be at strife; but ought to be gentle towards all, ready to teach, patient of ilis, with meekness instructing opposers: perhaps God may grant them a change of mind so as to acknowledge the truth, and they who have been captivated by the devil for his pleasure, may rouse and renee from his snare.
But know this, that in thie last days there will be grievous

addicted to slander, disobedient to parents, ungrateful, unholy, void of natural affection, perfidious, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, destitute of love for goodness, betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with conceit, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God, hating a form of religion but denying the power of it. From such turn away; for of such sort are they who insinuate themselves into. families, and lead captive weak women laden with sin, led aside by various lusts, always learning, but never able to come to a knowledge of truth. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these men withstand the truth, having their minds corrupted,

10

Il. TIMOTHY. ‘Ill. IV.

being, with respect to this belief, such as cannot stand the test.
But they shall not advance much further; for the folly of these shall be exposed to the world, as that of those. was.

Now as for thee, thou hast traced accurately my doctrine, my manner of life, my purpose, my belief, my long suffering, my love, my patience, my persecutions, my sufferings, what befel me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I endured: but out of them all the Lord delivered me. Indeed all who wish to live holy in Christ Jesus will be persecuted, and wicked men and impostors, will grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. But as for thee, continue thou in what thou hast learned; and in the belief of which thou hast been confirmed, knowing from whom thou hast learned them; and that, from thy childhood, thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise for salvation by trusting in Christ Jesus. All scripture, given by divine inspiration, is indeed profitable for doctrine, for conviction, for reformation, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of
God may be complete, thoroughly fitted for every good work.

I therefore charge thee in the presence of the God, and the Lord* Jesus Christ, who is about to judge living and dead at his glorious appearance and reign, proclaim the word; be intent thereon, in season and out of season; convince, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine. For a time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine: But when they have an itch of hearing they will, according to their own desires, heap up for themselves teachers, who will turn their attention from the truth, and they will be turned aside to fables. Be thou therefore watchful on all occasions. Endure hardships: perform the work of a publisher of the glad tidings.
Discharge thy ministerial office completely. For I am now about to be poured out as a libation;} and the time of my departure is at hand. [have maintained the good combat, I have finished the course; I have kept the faith. As to what remaineth, there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will give me on that day, and

* Or as in many manuscripts—‘The God and Lord Jesus
Christ,” as in1.Tim. 5, 21. f See Phil. 2.17.

18

If. TIMOTHY. IV.

not only to me, but to all who have loved his glorious appearance.

Use all diligence to come to me quickly. For Demas, from a love for this world, hath forsaken me, and is gone to
Thessalonica; Crescens, to Galatia; Titus, to Dalmatia. Luke alone is with me. Take Mark and bring him with thee; for he is useful to me for attendance, as I have sent Tychicus to
Ephesus. When thou comest, bring the cloak which 1 left with Carpus at Troas, and the books, especially the parchments.

Alexander the coppersmith hath lodged many false accusations against me. Let the Lord reward him according to his works: Be thou on thy guard against him, for he greatly withstood our words.

At my first defence no one attended; but all forsook me,
May this not be charged to their account! But the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, that the proclamation might be made completely by me, and that all the nations might hear it.
And I was ‘delivered out of the mouth of a lion. And the
Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and save me for his heavenly kingdom. To him be the glory, for the ages of the ages. Amen.

Salute Priscas and Aquilas, and the household of Onesiphorus.

Erastus staid at Corinth; and I left Trophimus sick at Miletus.

Endeavour to come to me before winter. Eubulus, and
Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren, salute thee.

The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. The favour be with you. Amen,

8

12

13

THE EPISTLE

OF THE

APOSTLE PAUL

TITUS.

PAUL, a servant of God, and apostle of Jesus Christ, for the faith of God’s chosen people, and the acknowledgment of a truth which promoteth piety in hope of an everlasting life, which the God of truth promised before the times consisting of ages, and in his own times promulgated as his word, by a proclamation with which Iam entrusted, according to the appointment of the saviour our God; to Titus, a genuine son according to the common faith, be favour, mercy, peace from God our father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour.

I left thee in Crete for this purpose that thou mightest regulate what were wanting, and appoint elders in every city as
I ordered thee. If there be any one blameless, the husband of

one wife, having faithful children, who are not accused of riot,

nor ungovernable. For the overseer ought to be blameless as God’s steward, not self willed, not passionate, not addicted to wine, not quarrelsome, not greedy of sordid gain; but a lover of hospitality, a lover of goodness, sober, just, holy, temperate, adhering to the faithful word, as he hath been taught, that he may be able to exhort with sound doctrine, and convince them who oppose it. For there are many who are disorderly, vain talkers and deceivers, especially they of the circumcision, who ought to be curbed, who subvert whole houses teaching what they ought not, for the sake of sordid gain.
One of themselves, a prophet of their own hath said, “‘ False

retans! savage beasts! to gluttony and sloth devote!” This

16

o> bO

TITUS BT.

is a true testimony; on thisaccount rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, not giving heed to Jewish fables and commands of men who pervert* the truth. To the pure, all things are indeed pure ; but to the polluted and unbelieving, nothing is pure. Their mind-and conscience are polluted: they make a profession of knowing God, but with their works they deny him; being abominable, and disobedient, and lost to every good work.t

But as for thee speak thou what is consistent with sound doctrine—that aged men be sober, grave, discreet, sound in their belief, their love, their patience; that aged women, in like manner, be in behaviour as becometh saints, not addicted to slander, not enslaved to wine, good instructors, that they may teach the young women to be discreet, to love their husbands, to love their children, to be modest, chaste, attentive to domestic affairs, good, submissive to their husbands; that the word of God may not be ill spoken of.

In like manner exhort young men to be sober minded, shewing thyself in all things a pattern of good works ; in thy doctrine displaying integrity, gravity, incorruptness, sound discourse. which cannot be condemned, that he who is of an opposite party may be ashamed, having nothing bad to say of you.

Exhort servants to be obedient to their masters; to be in all things studious to please; not answering again, not embezzling, but shewing all good fidelity, that they may in all things adorn the doctrine of our saviour God. For the favour of God which is for salvation hath been brightly displayed for all men teaching us in order that we, renouncing impiety and worldly lusts, may live soberly and righteously and piously in this present world, waiting for the blessed hope and the bright display of the glory of the great God, and saviour of us Jesus

14 Curist, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us

from all iniquity and purify for himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

* Or forsake, or turn from.—See 2. Tim. 1. 15. { Literally, with respect to every good work, they are such as cannot stand the test. t Es. 40. 5.

15 il

2

3

4

5

6

14

15

TITUS. II. IL.

Speak these things, and exhort and rebuke with all authority. Let no one despise thee. ‘Put them in mind to be subject to governments and authorities; to pay prompt obedience ; to be ready for every good work ; to revile no one ; not to be quarrelsome ; to be gentle, shewing all meekness to all men. For we, even we ourselves were formerly foolish, disobedient, led astray, slaves to divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, objects of hatred, hating one another ; but when the kindness and love of God our saviour for man was brightly displayed, not for works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his own mercy; he saved us by a bath of regeneration, and a renewal of a holy spirit, which he poured out on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our saviour, in order that we, being pardoned by his favour, might become expectant heirs of everlasting life. This is a faithful word ; and in respect to these things I charge thee to exert thy utmost influence in order that they who believe in
God, may study to be foremost in good works. These are the things which are comely, and profitable for men. But discountenance foolish questions, and genealogies, and strifes, and debates about law: for they are unprofitable and vain. With regard to a factious man, after a first and second admonition, avoid him; knowing that such a one is wholly turned aside, and sinneth self condemned.

When I send Artemas to thee, or T'ychicus, come to me with all speed to Nicopolis ; for I have determined to winter there.

Forward on their journey Zenas the lawyer, and Apollos, with all diligence, so that nothing may be wanting to them.
And let our brethren learn to be foremost in good works on all needful occasions, that they may not be unfruitful.

All that are with me salute thee.

Salute them who love us in the faith.

The favour be with you all. Amen.

2

j1

THE EPISTLE

OF THE

A POS FE dvds Cl Loy

PHILEMON.

PAUL, a prisoner for the sake of Jesus Christ, and Timothy, the brother, to Philemon our beloved, and fellow labour- - er, and to Apphia the beloved, and to Archippus our fellow soldier, and to the congregation in thy house; favour be to you, and peace from God our father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

I thank my God, making mention of thee always in my prayers, hearing of the faith which thou hast in the Lord Jesus, of thy love for all the saints, so that every good man among you must acknowledge that thy participation of the faith is operative for Christ Jesus.* For we have great joy and comfort for this love of thine, because the bowels of the saints are refreshed by thee, brother. Wherefore though I have much boldness in Christ to enjoin thee what is fit; yet on account of this love I rather use entreaty. Being such as I am, Paul an old man, and now indeed a prisoner on account of Jesus Christ, I entreat thee in respect to this son of mine whom I have begotten in my bonds; namely, Onesimus, who was formerly unprofitable to thee; but is now profitable both to thee and me—whom I have sent back; do thou then receive him kindly, that is, as one whom I tenderly love, whom I was determining to keep with.me that for thee he might wait on

* Or literally, “that thy participation of the faith may, in the ac-

knowledgment of every good man among you, be operative for
Christ Jesus.”

PHILEMON. I.

14. me during my being in bonds for the glad tidings; but I would not do any thing without thy consent, that the benefit derived from thee might not be as it were forced, but of free will. For

15 perhaps he was separated from thee for a short time for this very purpose, that thou mightest have him ever after, not as a

16 slave, but above a slave, as a brother beloved ina special manner by me, (and how much more ought he to be by thee) both

17 in flesh, and in the Lord. If therefore thou esteemest me as a companion, receive him as thou wouldst myself. And if he

18 hath wronged thee, or oweth thee any thing, place it to my

19 account. I Paul myself have written with my own hand. I will make compensation. Not to mention to thee that thou owest

20 me even thine own self. I beseech thee, brother, let me have joy of thee in the Lord: gratify my tender affections inthe Lord.

21 I have written to thee in a confidence of thy compliance,

22 knowing that thou wilt doeven more than I express. In the mean while prepare a lodging for me, for I hope that, by means of your prayers, I shall be granted to you.

23 Epaphras my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, Marcus,

24 Aristarchus, Demas and Luke, my fellow labourers, salute thee.

26 The favour of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.

_ Amen.

THE EPISTLE

TO THE

HEBREWS.

L GOD, who in sundry parcels and in divers manners spake
2 in time past to the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken to us by a son whom he hath constituted heir of all things, by whom also he made the ages; who being an effulgence
3 of the glory, and an impress of his substance, and upholding all things by the word of his power, having by himself made a purification of our sins, sat down on the right
4. hand of the majesty on high, being made as much superior to the heavenly messengers as the name he hath inherited is
5 more excellent than theirs: for to which of those messengers did he ever say, ‘Thou art my son, this day I have begotten
6 thee.*”? And again, “I will be to hima father, and he shall be to me a son.{”? And again when he would bring the first born into the world, he saith, ‘‘And let all God’s messengers worship him.{’’? Now in respect to the messengers it is said,
“Who maketh winds his messengers, and flaming fire his ministers:§ but with respect to the son,
“« Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever:
The sceptre of thy kingdom is a sceptre of rectitude:
9 Thou didst love righteousness and hate iniquity,
Therefore God, thy God anointed thee
With the oil of joy above thy associates. ”’
10 Again, ‘“Thou, Lord, in the beginning didst lay the foundation of the earth,

12

13

14

9

HEBREWS. I. 1].

And the heavens are the work of thy hand.

They shall perish, but thou wilt endure.

They shall all wax old like a garment,

And like a mantle thou wilt fold them up and they shall be changed:

But as for thee, thou art the same

And thy years shall have no end.*”

And to which of these messengers did he ever say, ‘‘Sit at my right hand

Till I make thine enemies thy footstool.t”’

Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth on service on the account of them who are to be heirs of salvation?

Yor this cause we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest we, through negligence, let them slip. For if the word spoken by messengers was firm, and every transgression and disobedience received as its reward a correspondent requital, how shall we escape, if we neglect so great a salvation, which was: first published by the Lord, and confirmed for us by them who heard him,
God giving a joint testimony, by signs, and wonders, and divers miracles, and distributions of a holy spirit, according to his own will. For he did not subject to angels the dispensation to come, of which we are speaking; but one in a certain. place hath testified, saying,

*¢ What is man, that thou shouldst be mindful of him!

Or a son of man, that thou shouldst visit him!

Thou madest him a little lower than angels;

With glory and honour thou hast crowned him,

And set him over the works of thy hands.

Thou hast put all things under his feet.’’£

For when he put all things under his feet, he left_nothing which was not put in subjection to him.

(o) But now we do not yet see all things subjected to him.

(a) But we see him who was made a little lower ΓΝ

aes. 102, 25, 1 Ps. 0.1. 1 Ps. 8. 4, &e.
(o) An objection. (a) The answer,

10 ll

25

16

17

18

4,
5

6

HEBREWS. II. Ii.

angels [namely] Jesus, on account of suffering death crowned -with glory and honour, that so he by the favour of
God might taste death for every man. For it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, when bring. ing many sons to glory to make the leader of their salvation perfect by sufferings. For both he who sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren, saying,

“YT will declare thy name to my brethren,

In the midst of a congregation I will praise thee.””*

And, again: “I will trust in him;”’+ and, again: ‘“‘Here am
I and the children whom God hath given me.’’+

As the children therefore were partakers of flesh and blood, he himself likewise partook of the same in order that he might, by his death, put a stop to the operation of him who hath the power of death, that is the devil; and deliver from bondage them who were all their lives liable to the fear of death, For he indeed doth not take hold of angels, but taketh hold of the seed of Abraham, whence it behoved him to be made like his brethren in all things; that he might be a merciful and faithful chief priest in things pertaining to God, to make atonement for the sins of the people. For by what he himself suffered when he was tried he can help them who are tried.

Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of a heavenly invi-

tation, consider attentively this apostle and chief priest of our profession, [namely] Christ Jesus, who was faithful to him who appointed him, even as Moses was, in his whole house.
For he hath been counted worthy of as much greater honour than Moses, as he who hath builded a house hath more honour than the house. For every house hath some builder, but he who builded all things is God. Now Moses was faithful in this whole house of his as a servant for a testimony of those things to be spoken; but Christ as a son over his own house, whose house we are, if we stedfastly maintain this confidence,

7 and the boast of this hope, firm to the end. Wherefore as the

Holy Spirit saith,

nn i re ----- + eee eee

% Ps, 22. 22, + Esaias 8. 17.

.) 9

9

10

9

ΗΕ oe ee ee

HEBREWS. III. 1V.

‘*To-day since you have heard his voice,

Let not your hearts be refractory as at Bitterness—

As in the day of the temptation in the wilderness;

Where your fathers tried me;

They proved me, though they saw my works.

Forty years. For which cause I was incensed with that generation;

And said, They do always err with the heart,

And have not known my ways:

So in mine indignation I solemnly said,

They shall not enter into my rest.”’*

Take heed, brethren, that there be not in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God; but while this to-day is proclaimed, that none of you may be rendered obstinate by the deceitfulness of sin (for we are made associates of the Christ if we retain the beginning of this confidence firm to the end) exhort one another daily by its being said, ‘‘To-day since you have heard his voice let not your hearts be refractory as at Bitterness.’? For some hearers provoked him; but did they not all come out of Egypt by Moses?
Now, against whom was he incensed forty years? Was it not against them who sinned, whose carcasses fell in the wilderness? And to whom did he solemnly say that they should not enter into his rest, but tothem who were disobedient. So we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief. .

Let us therefore be afraid, lest having a promise left of entering into His REsT any of us should fall short of it. For we have had the glad tidings proclaimed to us, as they also had; but the word which they heard did not profit them; as it was not mixed up with belief by the hearers. For we who have believed enter into that rest spoken of in this passage, ‘‘So in my indignation I said they shall not enter into My REST;” namely, THatT from the works done at the foundation of the world. For where speaking of the seventh day the scripture said thus, ‘And on the seventh day God rested from all mrs works.t And again in this place: ‘They shall not enter into my rest.’ Therefore since it is left for some to enter into

* Ps, 95. 8, 9, '&c. 7 Gen. 2. 2s

HEBREWS. IV. V.

it, and they who had the glad tidings first proclaimed to them did not enter in because of unbelief, he again determinately pointeth out a day, namely ro-pay, saying by David after so long a time, as it hath been mentioned, ‘“T’o-pay since you
8 have heard his voice let not your hearts be refractory.”? For if
Joshua had given them rest, the scripture would not. after
9 that have spoken of another day. There is then a saBBATH
10 resr* left for the people of God. For he who entereth into
11] rHat REstT oF urs hath desisted from his works, as God did from his. Let us therefore use all diligence to enter into TH1s
12 rest, that none may fall short by a like example of disobedience. For the word of God is living, and active, and: sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrateth even to the sepa: ration of animal life and spirit, and of joints and marrow, and
13 is capable of discerning the desires and thoughts of the heart.
There is indeed no creature concealed from his sight. All things are naked and exposed to the eyes of him with whom we have

to do.
14 Having therefore a great chief priest who hath passed through the heavens, namely Jesus the son of God, let us hold
15 fast our proiéssion. For we have not a chief priest incapabie of sympathizing in our infirmities; but one who hath been tried in all respects like ourselves, but without sin. Let us
16 therefore come with confidence to the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find favour for seasonable assistance. for every chief priest, taken from among men, 15 constituted b for men over things. pertaining to.God, that he may offer
2 both gifts and sacrifices for sins, being able to: treat the ignorant and wandering with moderation and compassion, encompassed as he himself is. with infirmity; and for this reason it 1s
3 his duty to offer sacrifices. for sins, as well for himself as for
4 the people. Now no one assumeth to himself this honour, but he who is called of God as Aaron was. ‘Thus also the
5 Christ did not dignify himself with the office of chief priest, but was dignified with it by him who said to him, ‘Thou art
6 my son; this day I have begotten thee,t as he saith also in

“1

* That is a complete, holy, happy, everlasting rest, prefigured by the sabbath day. 7 Ps: 2. 7.

8

9

HEBREWS. V. VI.

another psalm, ‘Thou art a priest forever after the order of
Melchisedek.*”’

HE, (who in the days of his flesh, having, with a strong cry and tears, offered up prayers and supplications to him who was able to save him from death, and being hearkened to, did, from a reverential awe notwithstanding his being a son, learn obedience from what he suffered; and being consecrated became the author of everlasting salvatiqn to all who obey him,) was proclaimed by God a chief priest after the order of Melchisedek, concerning whom we have much to say, but not easy to be explained as you are slow of apprehension. For though by this time you ought to be teachers, you have need of some one to teach you over again the first elements of the oracles of God, and have need of milk and not strong food: for every one who useth milk is unskilled in the doctrine of justification, for he is a babe, and this strong food is for full grown men, who by long practice and exercise have their senses improved for the discernment

of both good and evil. Therefore dropping the discourse of the government of the Christ,} let us, without laying again a foundation of reformation from dead works,’and of faith in
God, of the doctrine concerning baptism, and the laying on of hands, and the resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment, proceed to the consecration. And this we will do if God permit: for with regard to them who have been once enlightened, and have tasted this free, this heavenly gift, and have been made partakers of a holy spirit, and tasted the good word of God; and the miraculous powers of the age about to come, and have fallen off; it is impossible to renew them again for areformation, since they are crucifying for themselves afresh the son of God and exposing him to open shame. For ground which drinketh up the rain that frequently falleth on it, and produceth plants fit for the use of them for whom it is cultivated, receiveth a blessing from God; but that which produceth briars and thorns is rejected, and near a curse, the end of which is for burning. But respecting you, beloved, we are persuaded better things, even things which accompany salva-

* Ps, 110. 4: 1 See Esaias 9. 6, 7.

10

HEBREWS. VI. VII.

tion; though we speak thus. For God is not unjust to forget

your work, and the labour of that love which you have shewn: for his name, by the assistance tact you have given and con-

tinue to give to the saints.

Now we earnestly desire that every one of you would shew the same diligent concern for the full assurance of this hope to the end: that you may not become languid, but imitators of them who through faith and long suffering inherit the promises. For when God made a promise to Abraham, as he had none greater to swear by, he swore by himself, saying, ‘‘Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee.*”” And so he, having waited with patience, obtained the promise. For men indeed swear by a greater, and an oath for confirmation being to them an end of strife, God, willing on this occasion to shew more fully to the heirs of this promise the immutability of his determination, interposed an oath, that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for
God to deceive, there might be strong consolation for us who have fled to take hold of this proffered hope, which we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast; and which entereth within the veil, whither a forerunner hath entered for us, namely Jesus, made a chief priest forever, after the order

Vil. of Mrexicurisepex. For this Metcuisepek, king of

Salem, priest of the most high God, who met Abraham on his return from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him, and to whom Abraham gave a tenth of all, was in the -first place, by the interpretation of his name, king of righteousness, and in the next place he was actually king of Salem, that is, king of peace; of whose father and mother there is no mention, noaccount of descent, nor of the beginning of his days, nor of the end of his life, but likened to the son of God he abideth a priest continually.

Now consider what a great personage he was to whom

even the patriarch Abraham gave a tenth of the spoils. The
Levites indeed who receive the priesthood have according to

law a commandment to tithe the people, that is their own

* Gen. 22. 16. t Literally, without a genealogy.

6

9

10 tl

HEBREWS. VII.

brethren descended: from the loins of Abraham; but he who was not of their pedigree received tithes of Abraham, and blessed him who had the promises. Now, beyond all dispute, the inferior is blessed by the superior. Again, here indeed men who die receive tithes; but there HE received them of whom it is testified that he liveth. Indeed, as one may say, even Levi who receiveth tithes, was tithed in the person of
Abraham; for he was yet in the loins of his father, when Melchisedek met him. ;

Again, if perfectness had been by the Levitical priesthood (for it was for this that the people received the law) what further need was there of saying that another priest should be raised up after the order of Melchisedek, and not after the order of Aaron? For the priesthood being changed there is of necessity a change of the law. For he in respect to whom these things are said belonged to another tribe, none of whom gave attendance at the altar. For it is evident that our
Lord ‘sprang from Jupau, in respect to which tribe Moses spake nothing of a priesthood. And this is still more clear, if after the likeness of Melchisedek another priest is raised up, who is made not according to the law of a commandment concerning flesh, but according to the power of an endless life.
For he testifieth, saying, “‘ Thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchisedek.”? Here then is a disannulment of a preceding commandment on account of its weakness and inutility,-(for the law made nothing perfect) and an introduction of a better hope by which we draw near to God. And inasmuchas this was not without an oath, (for with regard to them, they indeed were made priests without an oath, but he was made with an oath, by him who said to him, “ The Lord hath swornand will not change, thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchisedek,*” ) by so much Jesus is made the surety of a better covenant.

Again, with regard to them, many were made priests, because death prevented a continuance : but nz, because of his continuing forever, hath a priesthood which doth not pass from one to another. So that he is completely able to save them,

ἈΠ Psalm 110. 4.

26

HEBREWS. VII. VIII.

who come to God by him, as he is ever alive to intercede for them. For it suited us to have such a chief priest—one holy, innocent, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens, who is not under a daily necessity (as the chief priests are,) of offering sacrifices first for his own sins, and then for those of the people ; for this he did once for all when he offered up himself. For the law constituteth men chief priests who have infirmities ; but the word of the oath which succeedeth the law [constituted] the son, who is consecrated forever.

VI. Now the sum of what I have said is this, Such a chief

2 oo

9

10 priest we have who hath taken a seat at the right hand of the throne of the majesty in the heavens: he is a minister of the holies, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man. For every chief priest is appointed to offer gifts and sacrifices ; hence it is necessary that HE should have something to offer ; for if he were on earth he could not be a priest, as there are priests who offer the gifts according to the law.
These perform divine service for a sample and shadow of the heavenly things, as Moses was divinely admonished, when he was about to make the tabernacle, for it is said, ‘‘see that thou make all things according to the model shewa thee on this mountain.*” Now then re hath more noble services allotted to him, in as much as he is the mediator of a better covenant, which is established on better promises. For if the first covenant had been faultless there would have been no occasion for a second—for finding fault with them he saith,
“Behold days are coming, saith the Lord, when I will make

a new covenant with the house of Israel, and the house of Judah

—not such a covenant as I made with their fathers, on the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of Egypt; because they did not abide by that covenant of mine, therefore I took no care of them, saith the Lord. This is the covenant which
Iwill make with the house of Israel, After these days, saith the Lord, adapting my laws to their understanding I will write them on their hearts: and I will be their God, and they shal/

ee ee

HEBREWS. VIII. UX.

LL be my people. And they shall no more teach, every one his neigh-
_bour, and every one his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know me from the least to the greatest of them: for I

12 will be merciful to their iniquities, and no more remember their sins and their transgressions.*”? By calling this a new covenant

13 he hath antiquated the first. Now: that which is antiquated,

and grown old, is near being abolished.

IX. Now then the first covenant had the ordinances of divine
2 service and the worldly sanctuary ; for a tabernacle was prepared—the first compartment, in which are the candlestick, and the table, and the presentment of the loaves—this is called

3 the Holy. And beyond the second veil is a compartment which
4 is called, The Holy of Holies, containing a golden altar and the ark of the covenant, all overlaid with gold, in which wasthe gold-

en urn containing the manna, and the staff of Aaron which bud-

5 ded, and the tables of the covenant, and above it the cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercy-seat, concerning which we

6 are not at this time to speak particularly. These things being thus prepared, the priests, performing the divine services, go

7 onall occasions into the first compartment; but into the second the chief priest only, and but once a year, not without blood,

8 which he offereth for himself and for the errors of the people, the holy spirit plainly shewing this, that the way into the holies was not yet manifested while that tabernacle hath a

9 standing. This figurative representation was for the time being, according to which gifts and sacrifices were offered, which cannot make him who performeth service, perfect with regard

10 to the conscience, they being things imposed barely for meats, and drinks, and divers baptisms, and rules of conduct respect-

11 ing flesh, until the time of reformation: But Christ being come, a chief priest of the future good things, hath entered into the holies by the greater and more perfect tabernacle—not by one

12 made with hands, that is, not of this creation; nor with the blood of goats and young bulls, but with his own blood, once

13 for all, having procured everlasting redemption. Tor if the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of a heifer, sprinkling

14 the unclean sanctify, to the cleansing of the flesh; how much

ee ee is -

© Fer. Sivek. "occ.

15

23

24,

25

26

HEBREWS. IX. .

more will the blood of the Christ, who by an eternal spirit hath offered himself without blemish to God, purify your conscience from dead works that you may serve the living God.
Indeed on the account of this he is the mediator of a NEw
COVENANT, that (there having been death for a pardon of the transgressions under the first covenant) they who have been called may receive the promise of the everlasting inheritance.
For where there is a covenant it necessarily infers the death of that by which it is established. For a covenant is ratified over the dead, and it hath no validity at all while that by which itis established liveth.* Whence even the first covenant was not ratified without blood; for when every precept according to law was rehearsed by Moses to all the people, he took the blood of the calves and goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and the ΒΟΟΚ, and he sprinkled it on all the people saying, This is the blood of the covenant which God hath enjoined on you.* And in like manner he sprinkled the tabernacle and all the utensils for the holy service with blood. And according to the law almost all things are purified with blood.
Indeed without a shedding of blood there was no remission.
There was therefore a necessity that the things which were symbols of those in heaven, should be purified with these, but the heavenly things themselves, with sacrifices better than these. For the Christ did not enter into holies made with hands, the symbols of the true; but into heaven itself; now toappear in the presence of God on our behalf: not that he may many a time offer himself (as the chief priest goeth every year into the holies with blood not his own) else he then must have suffered many a time from the foundation of the world; but now once for all, at the end of the ages, he hath been manifested

* This alludes to the custom then in use among both Jews and
Gentiles, of ratifying treaties, leagues or covenants, by killing a victim.
For as with us in case of bonds, or written obligations, they are not binding until they are actually signed, sealed and delivered; so in that age a treaty or covenant was not binding until the victim, which was brought between the parties, was slain. For the mode of making and ratifying a covenant among the Jews. See Ex. 34.
3—9.

HEBREWS. IX. X.

for the purpose of abolishing sin offerings by the sacrifice of himself. And as it is appointed for men to die once, and after that there is a judgment; so also the Christ, being once offered up to bear the sins of many, will appear a second time, without a sin offering, for the salvation of them who wait for him.

For the law having a shadow of the good things to come and not the very image of those things, can by no means make them who present themselves, perfect for ever by those sacrifices which they offer year after year. Otherwise would they not have ceased to be offered? Since they who performed the service, being once purified, would no more have a consciousness of sins. But by these there is an annual remembrance of sins. For it is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins. Therefore when coming into the world he saith, ‘Sacrifices and offerings thou didst not desire, but preparedst for me a body. In whole burnt offerings and offerings for sin thou hadst no pleasure; then I said, Behold I come (in the volume of a book it is written of me) to perform, O God, thy will.’ * Having first said, ‘‘ Sacrifice and offering and whole burnt offerings, and offerings for sins thou didst not desire, nor take

9 pleasure in them,” (These were offered according to the law)

10 he then said, ‘‘Behold I'come to perform, O God, thy will” (he taketh away the first that he may establish the second) by which will we are sanctified by the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ once only.

Though every priest hath indeed stood performing daily service, and frequently offering the same sacrifices, these can by no means take away sins; but he having offered for sins one sacrifice, to last for ever, sat down at the right hand of

. God, thenceforth waiting till his enemies are made his foot-

stool. For by one offering he hath made perfect for ever them who are sanctified. And this indeed the holy spirit testifieth to us; for after saying, ‘“‘ This is the covenant which I will make withthem—After these days, saith the Lord, having adapted my laws to their understandings, I will write them on their minds, and their sins and iniquities I will remember no more.”+ Now,

* Ps. 40. 6, &c. [ gets O41. 91. τ:

24

36

HEBREWS. X.

where there is a remission of these, there is no more an offering for sin.

As we, therefore, brethren, have, by virtue of the blood of
Jesus, free access to the holies by a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is, his flesh; and a great high priest over the house of God, let us come with a true heart in the full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience and the body washed with pure water. Let us hold fast the profession of this. hope without wavering; for he who hath promised is faithful; and let us observe one another, in order to excite love and good works, not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as is the custom of some, but comforting one another; and so much the more as you see the day approaching. For if we sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more any sacrifice for sins, but a certain dreadful expectation of judgment, and fiery indignation which will devour the adversaries. Whoever hath set at naught the law of Moses dieth without mercy, on the evidence of two or three witnesses. Of how much greater punishment, think ye, will he be thought worthy, who hath trampled upon the. Son of God, and accounted the blood of the covenant, by which he was sanctified, a common thing, and treated contemptuously the spirit of grace? For we know him who said, ‘Vengeance is mine, I will requite, saith the Lord;” and, again, ‘The Lord will judge his people.”* It is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. But call to remembrance the former days, in which, after you were enlightened, you endured a great conflict of sufferings, being publicly exposed to reproaches and afflictions, and at the same time sympathizing with them who were thus treated: For you sympathized with me in my bonds, and waited with joy the seizure of your goods, knowing that you had in yourselves a better,—even an ever-during substance in heaven. Therefore cast not away that confidence of yours which hath a great recompense of reward. For you must persevere, that when you have performed the will of God, you may receive the promised re-

HEBREWS. X. XI.

37 ward. For yet alittle while, and he who is coming will come,

38 and will not delay; now the just shall live because of faith; but if he, through fear, draw back; my soul hath no pleasure in him.* But we are not of them who draw back for perdition; but of them who believe for the attainment of life.

XI. Now, faith is a confident expectation of things hoped for; a convincement of the mind with respect to the reality of

2 things not seen. By this therefore the ancients obtained reputation.

3 By faith we understand that the ages were arranged by a word of God, that the things seen should not at all be out of things which appear.

4 By faith Abel offered toGod a more excellent saerifice than

_ Cain; by means of which he received a testimonial of being righteous, God himself giving a testimony in favour of his gifts; and by it he, though dead, still speaketh.

5 By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and he was not found, because God translated him; for be-

6 fore his translation he received this testimonial that he was well pleasing to God. Now without faith it is impossible to be well pleasing; for he who cometh to God must believe that he existeth, and that he is the rewarder of them who diligently seek him.

7 By faith Noah, when warned of unforeseen events, with a religious concern prepared an ark for the saving of his house-. hold; by which he condemned the world, and became heir of that righteousness which is by faith.

8 By faith Abraham, when called, shewed obedience by going to the place which he was to receive for an inheritance,

9 and set out on his journey not knowing whither he was going.
By faith he sojourned in the land of promise as in a strange

10 land, and dwelt in tents with Isaak and Jacob, who were coheirs with him of the same promise. For he expected that city which hath foundations, whose architect and founder is
God.

11 By faith Sarah also received strength for conception, and was delivered of a son when she was past age, because she

12 judged him faithful who had promised. Therefore there

RE SaK habe WAREMAN a! SET ROIN LMA EELS ς΄

* Hab. 2

7,13

HEBREWS. XI.

sprang even from one, and him dead as to these things, a posterity like the stars of heaven for multitude, and like the sand on the sea shore which is innumerable.

These all died in faith without receiving the things pro-

mised, but they viewed them at a distance, and were persuaded

16

17

18
“19

26

27 of, and embraced them, and acknowledged that they were strangers and sojourners in the land. For they who speak thus shew plainly that they are seeking their father’s country: Now had these been mindful of that from which they came out, they might have had an opportunity of returning thither: but now they desire a better, that‘is a heavenly country; therefore God is not ashamed of them—to be invoked as their God: for he prepared a city for them.

By faith Abraham, when he was put to the trial, offered up Isaak. Though he had received the promises he offered up his only begotten son, in respect to whom it had been said, that ‘in ἽΝ a seed shall be called for thee,’”’* reckoning that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead, from which in a figurative sense, he had received him.

By faith respecting things to come Isaak blessed Jacob and Esau.

By faith Jacob, when a dying, blessed each of Joseph’s sons and worshipped, bowing upon the head of his staff.

By faith Joseph, at the close of his life, made mention of the departure of the Israelites, and gave a charge concerning his bones.

By faith Moses, when he was born was concealed three months by his parents, because they saw that he was a comely child, and they were not terrified by the king’s edict.

By faith Moses, when he was become great, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter, chusing rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; accounting the reproach of the Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; for he had an eye to the reward.

By faith he left Egypt in defiance of the king’s wrath ; for he persevered as seeing H1m who is invisible.

* Gen. 21. 12.

28

HEBREWS. ΧΙ. XII.

By faith he celebrated the passover, and the pouring out of the blood, that the destroyer of the first born might not touch them.

By faith they passed through the red sea as on dry ground, which the Egyptians attempting to do were swallowed up.

By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, when processions had been made around them, for seven days.

By faith Rahab the harlot did not perish with the unbelievers, she having received the spies with peace.

And what shall I say more ? For the time would fail me to speak of Gideon, and Barak, and Sampson, and Jephthae—, of David and Samuel, and the prophets, who by faith “subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained- promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, were strengthened from weakness, became mighty in battle, repelled armies of aliens. Women received their dead children, by a restoration of them to life. As for others, some were tortured, not expecting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection; and others received the trial of mockings, and scourgings, bestdes bonds and imprisonments. ‘They were stoned; they were sawn asunder; they were tempted; they were slain with the sword; they wandered about in sheep skins, in goats skins, destitute, afflicted, tormented, (of whom the world was not worthy) wandering in deserts, and mountains, and dens, and caves of the earth. Though these all received a testimonial by means of their belief, they did not obtain the promise, God having provided something better for us, that without us they should not be made perfect.

XII. As we therefore are encompassed with such a cloud of

2

3

4.

witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which easily entangleth us, and let us run without intermission the race set before us, looking forward to Jesus, the leader and_perfecter of this faith, who for the joy that was set before him endured a cross, despising shame, and hath taken a seat at the right hand of the throne of God. Consider him who bore such contradiction of sinners against himself, that you may not grow weary, nor faint in your minds. You have not yet in your

5

10

18

19

HEBREWS. XI.

contest with sin resisted to blood. And have you forgotten this exhortation which speaketh to us as to children—

“« My son slight not the correction of the Lord,

Nor faint when reproved by him ;

For whom the Lord loveth he reproveth,

And chastiseth every son whom he receiveth.*”

If you endure correction God dealeth with you as sons.
For what son is there whom a father doth not correct ? Now if you are without correction, of which all are partakers, you are indeed bastards and not sons. Well then: we have had fathers of our flesh who have corrected us, and we have reverenced them; shall we not much more submit ourselves to the father of our spirits, and live? For they indeed for a few days corrected us as they thought fit; but he for our advantage, that we may partake of his holiness. Now all correction seemeth, for the present, not to be matter of joy, but of grief; yet afterwards it produceth the peaceful fruit of righteousness to them who are exercised therewith. Therefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the knees which are feeble, and make straight tracks with your feet, that that which 15 lame may not be sprained, but rather healed. Follow peace with all men, and that holiness without which none shall see the Lord, watching diligently that none fall short of the favour of God—that no root of bitterness spring up and occasion trouble, and many be defiled by it—that there be no fornicator, nor profane person like Esau, who for a single meal sold his birth right ; for you know that afterwards when he wished to inherit the blessing, he was rejected; for he found no way to change his father’s mind,} though he earnestly sought it with tears. For you are not come to a mountain which might be touched, and to blazing fire, and to gloom, and darkness, and a turbid tempest, and to the sound of a trumpet, and a sound of words, the hearers of which entreated that the discourse

* Prov. 3. 11, 12. + The Greek word ysraviz properly signifies a change of mind and that it was his father’s mind is evident from what follows. It is frequently used to express a change of one’s own mind from evil to good, and then means reformation.

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

HEBREWS. XII. XIII.

might not be continued to them; for they could not bear this

threat, ‘And if even a beast touch the mountain, it shall be —

stoned or pierced through with a dart.”’* And so awful was the appearance, that Moses said, “1 am exceedingly terrified and tremble:”’+ but you are come to mount Sion, and to the city of the living God, to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to myriads of angels—to the general assembly and congregation of first born, enrolled in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of a new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling which

‘speaketh better things than that of Abel. See that you do not

reject him who speaketh. For if they did not escape who rejected him who gave forth oracles on earth, how much less shall we who reject him who is from heaven, whose voice then shook the earth, but he hath now announced, saying, “ Yet once more I shake not only the earth but the heaven also.”’t
Now this expression, ‘‘ Yet once more” signifieth the removal of the things shaken, as having been made, that the things which are immoveable may remain.

As we have therefore received a kingdom which cannot be shaken, let us have gratitude by which we may serve
God acceptably, with reverence and holy awe: for our God

XIII. is a consuming fire. Let brotherly love continue. Be

4 not unmindful of hospitality; for by this some have unknowingly entertained angels. Remember them who are in bonds, as if you were bound with them; them who suffer ill-treatment, as being yourselves in the body. Let marriage be held in esteem by all, and its bed be undefiled: for whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. Let your conduct be free

from avarice. Be content with what you have; for he hath

said, “1 will never leave thee, nor will I ever forsake thee.§’’
So that we may say with confidence, ‘“‘The Lord is my help-

er, I will'not fear what man can to do me.”? Remember your

leaders, who spake to you the word of God. Observing carefully the issue of their conduct, imitate their faith. Jesus

- Christ is the same yesterday, to-day, and forever. Be not led

% Exe 9.12,’ Src, tSee Deut. 9. 19. + Hag. 2. 6.
§ Josh. 1. 5.

HEBREWS. XII.

away by various and strange doctrines, for it is better to have

the heart strengthened with favour than with meats which have

17

18

24 not profited those versed in them. We have an altar from

which they who serve in the tabernacle have no right to eat.
For the bodies of those animals, the blood of which is carried by the chief priest into the holies for a sin offering, are burned without the camp. And therefore Jesus, that he might by his own blood sanctify the people, suffered without the gate.
Let us then go out to him, without the camp, bearing his reproach. For we have no abiding city here, but are seeking one to come. By him therefore let us offer up continually to
God a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of our lips, praising his name; and forget not beneficence and contribution: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Obey your leaders and yield to them, for they are watching over your souls, (as they who must give an account) that they may do it with joy and not with grief; for this would be unprofitable for you.

Pray for us; for we are confident that we have a good conscience, being desirous of conducting ourselves honourably in all things, and I exhort you to this with the more earnestness, that I may be restored to you the sooner.

Now may the God of this peace, who raised from the dead the shepherd of the flock, who is great by the blood of an everlasting covenant, namely, our Lord Jesus, perfect you in every good work, that you may do his will, working in you what is well pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ: to whom be the glory for the ages of the ages. Amen.

Now I beseech you, brethren, bear with this word of exhortation, for I have sent it to you in brief. You know that our brother Timothy is set at liberty, with whom, if he come soon, I will see you.

Salute all your leaders and all the saints. They of Italy salute you.

The favour be with you all. Amen.

THE CATHOLIC EPISTLE

OF THE

APOSTLE JAMES,

JAMES, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes who are dispersed abroad, Greeting.

Count it, my brethren, all joy when you fall into divers trials, knowing that the trial of your faith operateth to produce patience. Let patience then have a full effect, that you may be perfect and complete, deficient in nothing. And if any of you wanteth wisdom, let him ask it of God, who giveth to all liberally and upbraideth not; and it will be given him. But let him ask with faith, without wavering, for he who wavereth is like a wave of the sea, raised by the wind and tossed about.
Let not therefore such a man think that he shall receive any thing from the Lord. A man unsteady in his mind, is unstable
4n all his ways.

Let the brother who is in low circumstances glory in his exaltation; and him whois rich, in his humiliation, because he shall pass away like a flower of the grass. For the sun riseth with its scorching heat, and withereth the blade, and-the flower thereof falleth, and its beautiful appearance is gone.
Just so will the rich man be blasted in his pursuits.

Happy the man, who endureth a trial! because having stood the test, he will receive the crown of life, which the
Lord hath promised to them who love him. Let no one when tempted say, I am tempted of God. For God cannot be tempted by evil, neither doth he tempt any one. But every one is tempted by his own desire, when allured and ensnared.
In that case desire having conceived, bringeth forth sin, and

‘sin, when grown up, produceth death.

4

5

6

7

8

JAMES. I. II.

Be not led astray, my beloved brethren: Every good donation, and every perfect gift, is from above, and cometh down from the father of lights, with whom there is no change, nor shadow of turning. Of his own will he hath impregnated us with a word of truth, that we may be a kind of first fruits of his creatures. Therefore, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath: for the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God. Therefore having thrown off all the filth and scum of wickedness, receive with meekness the implanted word which is able to save your souls; and be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves. For if any one isa hearer of the word and not a doer, he is like a man viewing his natural face in a glass.
For having viewed himself, and gone away, he instantly forgot what manner of person he was. But whosoever hath looked carefully into the perfect law of this liberty, and continued therein; he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of work, - shall by his doing be happy. If any one among you thinketh to be religious without bridling his tongue, he is but deceiving his heart. Such a one’s religion is vain. Pure and undefiled religion in the sight of our God and father is this, to take the oversight and care of orphans and widows in their distress, and to keep one’s self unspotted from the world.

Do not, my brethren, exercise this belief of our glorious
Lord Jesus Christ in partial regards for persons. For if there should come into your assembly a man in splendid dress, having his fingers adorned with gold rings; and there should come in also a poor man in mean apparel; and you should pay respect to the man in the splendid dress, and say to him, sit thou here in an honourable place; and say to the poor man, stand thou there; or, sit here below my footstool: have you not actually made distinctions among yourselves, and become ill principled judges? Hearken, my beloved brethren, hath not God chosen the poor of this world to be rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which he hath promised to them who love him? But you have treated the poor with disdain. Do not the rich domineer over you? Do they not drag you to tribunals? Do they not revile that honourable name by which you are called? If you fulfil a law which, according to the

12

13

14

26

2

JAMES. 11. I.

scripture, is indeed a royal one, namely, ‘Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself,” you do well: but if you have respect of persons, you commit sin, and are by that law convicted as transgressors. For whosoever is to keep the whole law and shall fail in one point, is guilty of all. For it having said, ‘‘ Thou shalt not commit adultery,” hath also said, ‘‘Thou. shalt not murder.”? Now, if thou shalt not commit adultery, but shalt

commit murder, thou art become a transgressor of law. Thus -

speak and act thus, as you are to be judged by a law of liberty; for the sentence of judgment shall be without mercy for him who hath not exercised mercy, though mercy glorieth over a sentence of judgment.

What is the advantage, my brethren, though one should say he hath belief; when he hath not works? Can that belief save him? Suppose a brother or a sister be naked, or in want of daily food, and one of you should say to them, go in peace: be warmed, and fed to the full; and you do not give them the things necessary for the body, is this any advantage? Just so it is in respect to this belief, if it hath not works; being by itself it is dead. One indeed may say, thou hast belief, and I have works. Shew me thy belief by thy works. As for me,
I will shew thee my belief by my works. Thou believest that there is one God. Thou dost well. The demons also believe and tremble. But wouldst thou, vain man, know that behef without works is dead? Was not Abraham, our father, justified by works when he offered up his son Isaak on the altar? Thou seest that his belief co-operated with his works, and by his works his belief was perfected. And the scripture was fulfilled, which saith, ‘“Abraham believed God and it was reckoned to him for righteousness;’’? and he was called. the friend of God. You sce then that a man is justified by works, and not by belief only. In like manner also, was not Rahab the harlot justified by works, having secreted the messengers, and sent them out another way? For as the body without spirit is dead, so belief without works is dead also.

Be not, my brethren, many teachers; as you know that we shall receive a severer sentence; for in many instances we all offend. If any one offend not in disccurse he is a perfect man, and able to bridle in the whole body. Behold we put

JAMES. IIL. IV.

4, bits in the mouths of horses to make them obey us, and we

13

16

17

18

2

manage their whole body. Behold ships also, how large soever they be, though driven by hard gales are managed by a very small helm, and kept to the course which the pilot intendeth. So also the tongue is a very small member, yet it boasteth great things. See what a great pile οἵ wood a little fire kindleth to a flame! Now, the tongue is a fire, the leader of iniquity; the tongue is set among the members, staining the whole body, and setting the wheel of nature in a blaze, when it is itself set in a blaze by hell. For all kinds of beasts, and birds, and reptiles, and fishes, are subdued and have been subdued by man; But the tongue of man none can subdue. It is an ungovernable monster: it is full of deadly poison. With it we bless our God and father; and with it we curse men, who are made after the image of God. Out of the same mouth proceed blessing and cursing. These things, my brethren, ought not to be so. Doth the fountain send forth sweet water and bitter out of the same opening?
Can a fig-tree, my brethren, produce olives? Or the vine, figs? So no fountain can yield salt water and fresh.

Whoever among you isa man of wisdom and knowledge, let him, by a virtuous course of life, shew his works with the meekness of wisdom. But if you have bitter zeal, and strife in your heart, do not boast and lie against the truth. This is not the wisdom which cometh down from above; but that which is of an earthly, sensual, and devilish nature. For where there is a zeal with strife, there will be confusion, and every thing which is bad. Now the wisdom which cometh from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easily to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypo-: crisy. And the fruit of this righteousness is peaceably sown by them who cultivate peace.

Whence come wars and fightings among you? Is it not from this—from those sensual appetites of yours which are at war in your members? You covet and use not. You kill, and envy, and cannot enjoy. You fight, and wage war, and do not possess, because you do notask. You ask and do not receive, because you ask amiss, that you may lavish on your sensual appetites. Ye adulterers and adulteresses! do you not know

10

11

JAMES. IV. V

that the friendship of this world is enmity against God? Whoever therefore wisheth to be a friend of the world is adjudged anenemy of God. Do you think that the scripture speaketh in vain?—Doth the spirit which dwelt in us excite desire to envy? It granteth indeed a greater favour, therefore it saith,
“God resisteth the proud, and granteth favour to the humble. *”’
Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil and he will flee from you. Draw near to God and he will draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; and purify your hearts, ye double minded. Be afflicted and mourn and weep.
Let your laughter. be turned into grief; and your joy into confusion of face. Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord and he will exalt you.

Speak not, brethren, against one another. He who speaketh against a brother, and judgeth his brother, speaketh against

12 law, and judgeth law. Now if thou judgest law, thou art not a

doer of law, but a judge. There is but one [judge ]—the lawgiver, who is able to save and destroy; who art thou who judgest another?

Come, now, ye who say, To-day or to-morrow we will go to this or that city, and spend a year there, and traffic, and get gain, when you do not know what will be the result of to-morrow. For what is your life? For it is a vapour which appeareth for a little while and then vanisheth. Instead of your saying, If it be the Lord’s will, and we shall live, we will do this or that, you now boast of your arrogant projects. All such boasting is evil. Therefore to know what is good and not do it, is a sin.

Come, now, ye rich; weep, and raise a mournful cry for the miseries which are coming upon you. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are moth eaten. Your gold and your silver are covered with rust; and the rust of them will be a witness against you, andcorrode your flesh like fire. You have heaped up treasure in the last days. Behold the wages of the labourers who have reaped your fields, which you have withholden, raise a cry; and the outcries of these reapers have reached the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth. You have lived lux-

10

1

12

15

16

17

18

19
2(

JAMES. V.

uriously on the earth. You have indulged voluptuousness.
You have pampered your hearts, as on a day of public feasting.
You have condemned—you have murdered the justone. Is he not setting himself in array against you ? Wherefore be ye,

brethren, patient till the coming of the Lord. Behold the husbandman expecteth the precious fruits of the earth, waiting for them with patience, until it hath received the former and the latter rain. Wait ye also with patience. Strengthen your hearts, because the coming of the Lord is near. Repine not, brethren, against one another, that you may not be condemned. Behold the judge is at the door. For an example of enduring adversity, and of long suffering, take, my brethren, the prophets who have spoken in the name of the Lord. Behold we call those sufferers happy. You have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the Lord’s termination—that the Lord is full of compassion and tender mercy.

Now above all things, my brethren, swear not—either by heaven, or by the earth, or by any other oath; but let your yes, be yes; and your no, no; that you may not fall under condemnation.

Is any one among you afflicted, let him pray. Is any one cheerful, let him sing praises. Is any among you sick, let him send for the elders of the congregation, and let them pray over him, having anointed him with oil in the name of the
Lord. And the prayer of this faith will cure the sick, and the
Lord will raise him up. And though he may have committed sin, he will be forgiven. Confess your faults to one another, and pray for one another, that you may be healed. The prayer of a righteous man under the divine impulse is very powerful. Elias was a man frail and mortal like ourselves. In one prayer he prayed that it might not rain, and it did not rain on the land during three years and six months. And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the land bloomed with its productions.

Brethren, if any among you hath wandered from the truth and another hath brought ἄξω back, let him know that he who hath brought back a sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soil from death, and cover a multitude of sins.

THE FIRST EPISTLE

OF THE

APOSTLE PETER.

PETER, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the sojourners of the dispersion in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bi-
τ thynia, whom God the Father, according to his predetermination hath chosen, that by a sanctification of spirit they may obey, and be sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ; favour

be to you, and may peace be multiplied.
3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, according to his abundant mercy, hath regenerated us
4 to a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead—for an inheritance incorruptible, incapable of defilement or decay, reserved in heaven for us who are, during belief, kept ΄ safely by the power of God, for a deliverance prepared to be
5 revealed in the last time ; in whom you exult with joy though
6 you are now for a little while, if it be necessary, distressed with divers trials ; in order that your faith, which hath stood
7 the test and is much more precious than gold which is of a perishable nature though tried by fire, may be found praise worthy, and honourable, and glorious, at the manifestation of Jesus Christ, whom without knowing him personally you
8 love; in whom though you do not now see him, yet you believe, and rejoice with an inexpressible and glorified joy, -
9 receiving as the completion of your faith the salvation of
10 your souls: about which salvation the prophets, who prophesied concerning this favour for you, made diligent inquiry
11 and search, trying to find to what time, and what manner of time, the spirit of Christ within them pointed, when it testified before hand the sufferings which were for Christ, and

12

"48

PETER? ΤΣ Ii.

the glories which should succeed them: to whom it was revealed that it was not for themselves, but for us, that they dispensed those things which have now been announced to you by them who proclaimed to you the glad tidings with a holy spirit sent from heaven; into which things angels have an earnest desire to look narrowly.

Wherefore having girded up the loins of your understanding, being perfectly sober, keep your hope fixed on the favour to be conferred on you at the manifestation of Jesus Christ ; as obedient children, not fashioning yourselves in conformity to your former desires during your ignorance; but as he who hath called you is holy, be ye also holy in the whole course of your life; for it is written, “Be ye holy, because I am holy.*”? And since you invoke, as father, him who without respect of persons judgeth every one according to his work, pass the time of your sojourning in fear; knowing that from that vain course of life, handed down to you from your fa, thers, you have been redeemed not with perishable things such as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot, fore-ordained indeed before the foundation of the world, and manifested in these last times, for the sake of you who by him believe in
God, who hath raised him from the dead, and hath given him glory, so that you may have faith and hope in God.

Having, in obedience to the truth, purified your souls by the spirit for an unfeigned brotherly affection, love one another fervently with a pure heart, as you have been born again not of corruptible but of incorruptible seed, by the word of
God, which liveth and endureth forever.

‘* Because all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as a flower of grass—the grass withereth, and the flower thereof! falleth, but the decree of the Lord endureth forever,+’’ and. this is the decree which hath been proclaimed as glad tidings

for you; therefore laying aside all malice, and all deceit, and every kind of hypocrisy, envy and slander, like new-born

a en ee

* Lev. ΤΊ. 44.01.6, 1 Es, 40..6.

τ PETER. IP

babes desire the pure milk of the word that by it you may

thrive.

Since you have tasted that the Lord is gracious, to whom you are come as to a living stone, by men indeed rejected, but with God chosen and precious, and you yourselves as living stones are built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus
Christ ; on which account also there is in the scripture this. passage, “‘ Behold I lay in Sion a chosen, precious, chief corner stone, and he who confideth in it, shall not be ashamed,*”’ this honour then being for you who believe: but to the disbelieving, ‘the stone, which the builders rejected—that which was for the head of the corner,}’’ is indeed a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence. They disbelieving the word stumble at the thing for which they were laid: but you being a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people peculiarly set apart that you may publish the praises of him who . called you out of darkness into his marvellous light—you who formerly were not a people but are now the people of God— who were uncompassionated, but are now compassionated, beloved; I beseech you as strangers and sojourners to abstain from carnal lusts, which war against the soul: let your behaviour among the nations be virtuous, that when they speak against you as evil doers, they who have been eye-witnesses may from your good works glorify God in the day of yisitation. 4 ᾿

Be subject therefore to every human establishment for the
Lord’s sake, whether to a king as supreme, or to governors as persons sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them who do well. For it is the will of God that you should by such good behaviour curb the ignorance of foolish men. As freemen, but not like those who use their freedom as a cover for wickedness, but as servants of God, honour all men, love the brotherhood; fear God; honour the king. ‘

You who are servants, be subject to your masters with all reverence, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the mo-

* Es. 28. 16. - + Ps. 118. 22.

PETER@ a) ΤΙ.

rose. For this is pleasing, if from a conscientious regard to

#20 God one endureth grief suffering wrongfully. For what glory

is it, if when you commit a fault and are beaten, you suffer patiently? But if when acting well you meet with ill usage, and bear it, this is well-pleasing in the sight of God. For to this you have been called, because Christ himself suffered for you, leaving you an example that you should follow in his footsteps, who committed no sin, nor was guile found in his mouth—who when he was reviled, did not revile again, when he suffered, did not threaten; but committed himself to him

: who judgeth righteously; who himself offered up our sins in

his own body on the cross, that we, being freed from those sins, might live for righteousness; “ΟΥ̓ whose stripes you have been healed.*”’, For you were like sheep going astray, but. are now brought back to the shepherd and overseer of your

souls.

ΠῚ. In like manner ye wives, be subject to your own hus-

bands, that if any of them disbelieve the word they may by the deportment of their wives, without a word, be won over, when they sce your reverential, chaste behaviour. And let your adorning be, not that which is external by plaiting the hair with appendages of gold, nor finery of dress; but the hidden man of the heart, with the incorruptible ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is highly precious in the sight of God. For thus, in former times, the holy women who trusted in God adorned themselves, submitting to their husbands,
(as Sarah, whose daughters you are, obeyed Abraham, calling him lord) doing what was right, and alarmed by no terrors

Likewise ye husbands cohabit with your wives, paying respect to them as the weaker sex, and moreover as co-heirs with you of the grant of life, that there may be no impediment to your prayers.

Finally, be all of one mind, sympathising with one another, full of brotherly love, compassionate, courteous, not rendering evil for evil, revile for revile; but on the contrary, blessing; knowing that you have been called for this, that you may inherit a blessing.

For “whoever desireth life; and loveth to see good days;
Let him keep his tongue from evil,

And his lips from speaking guile;

Let him depart from evil and do good;

Let him seek peace and pursue it.

Because the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous,
And his ears are open to their prayers :

But the face of the Lord is against them who do evil.*”’
Who then will hurt you if you be imitators of him who is

14 good? But if you should even suffer on the account of righte-

ousness, youare happy. Be not terrified with the fear of them, nor dismayed; but sanctify the Lord in your hearts}’’ and be always prepared, in answer to every one who demandeth of you a reason for the hope which is in you, to make a defence with meekness and fear, having a good conscience, that when they speak against you as evil doers, they who calumniate your good conversation in Christ may be put to shame. For if it be the will of God that you should suffer, it is better that you should suffer as well doers than as evil doers.
Because_ Christ himself suffered once for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God: being indeed put to death in flesh, but brought to life by that spirit with which he went, and to the spirits which are [now] in prison made proclamation at the time they were disobedient—when the long suffering of God was waiting once for all in the days of Noe, while the ark was a building, in which a few, that is eight souls, made their escape during the flood; an antitype to which, namely baptism, (not a removal of the filth of the fiesh, but an earnest conscientious applicationt to God) doth now save us also, by means of the resurrection of Jesus Christ, who, having gone to heaven, is at the right hand of God, angels and authorities and powers being made subject to him.
Christ therefore having suffered im flesh for us, arm ye
2 yourselves with this reflection, that he who hath suffered in flesh hath been stopped from sin, to the end that he may no

©: Pas S40:11; Sc. + Esaias 8. 12.
+ Literally, a request or application of a good conscience.

3

4

17

18

longer live the rest of his time in flesh for the lusts of men; but for the will of God. For the past time of this life sufficeth* to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, walking in lasciviousness, inordinate desires, excess of wine, revels, carouses, and abominable idolatries; at this they are surprized; and when you do not run with them into the same sink of debauchery, they rail. They shall give an account to him who is prepared to judge living and dead. For to this end also the gospel was proclaimed to the dead, that judged as they might be according to men in flesh, they might live according to
God in spirit. J )

Now the end of all things is at hand, therefore be sober, and watch unto prayer, and above all things have fervent love for one another: for this love will cover a multitude of sins.
Be hospitable to one another: without grudging. According as every one hath received a free gift continue dispensing it to each other as good stewards of the manifold grace of God
—if any one speaketh, as speaking the oracles of God; if any one dispenseth, as dispensing out of a stock which God sup-

‘plieth; that in all things God may be gloried through Jesus

Christ, to whom belongeth the glory and the power, for the ages of the ages. Amen.

Beloved, be not surprized at the fiery trial among you, which is come upon you to try you, as if some strange thing had befallen you: but inasmuch as you partake of the sufferings of the Christ, rejoice; that at the manifestation of his glory you may indeed rejoice with exceeding great joy. If you are reproached for the name of Christ you are happy; because the spirit of the glory, even the spirit of God resteth on you. On their part indeed it is reviled, but on your part it is glorified.
For let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or a malefactor, or as a usurper of authority; and if as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but glorify God in this respect. For the time is come when judgment is to begin at the house of
God. And if it begin first with us, what must be the end of them who disregard the glad tidings of God? “If the right-

* Some copies have us, and some you, and some neither.

19

co I

10

PETER IVS Vi.

eous scarcely escapeth, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?”’* Let them therefore who suffer according to the will of God, commit their souls to him in well doing, as to a faithful creator.

With regard to the elders among you, being myself a fel. low elder, and a witness of the sufferings of the Christ, and a partaker of the glory about to be revealed, I give them this exhortation—Tend. the flock of God which is among you, watching over it, not by constraint, but willingly; not with a view to sordid gain, but with a ready mind; not as exercising dominion over the lots, but as being examples to the flock.
And when the chief shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive an unfading crown of glory.

1 iesing ye who are young, submit to those more advaneed in years. And being all submissive to one another; adorn yourselves with humility; because ‘‘God resisteth the proud and granteth favour to the humble;’’+ therefore humble yourselves under the mighty hand of God, that he may in due time exalt you. Having cast all your care upon him, for he careth for you, be sober, be watchful: because your adversary the devil is walking about, like a roaring lion, sceking whom he may devour, him you should resist, standing firm in the faith, knowing that the same kind of sufferings are undergone by your brotherhood in the world.

Now may the God of all favour, who hath invited us to his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, when we have suffered a little—-may he himself fit, support, strengthen and establish you! To him be the glory and the power, for the ages of the ages. Amen.

By Sylvanus the faithful brother I have, as I reckon, written briefly to you, exhorting, and testifying that this 1s the true favour of God for which you stand up.

The congregation at Babylon salute you. So doth Marcus my son. Salute one another with a-holy kiss.

Peace be with you all who are in Christ Jesus. Amen.

* Prov. 11. 31. + Prov. 3. 34.

“1m

9

THE SECOND EPISTLE

OF THE

A POS ΡΟ ἢ.

SIMON PETER, a servant and an apostle of Jesus Christ, to them who have obtained a like precious belief with us, in the saving goodness of our God and saviour Jesus Christ, favour be to you, and may peace be multiplied by an acknowledgment of God, and of Jesus our Lord.

As his divine power hath freely granted those things conducive to life and godliness, and all are ours by our acknowledging him who hath called us by glory and virtue, through which he hath freely made us very great and precious promises, that by them you may become partakers of a divine nature when you have fled from the corruption which is in the world by lust; therefore, having on your part used all diligence for the very same purpose, add to your faith fortitude ; and to fortitude, knowledge ; and to knowledge, temperance ; and to temperance, perseverance; and to perseverance, piety; and to piety, brotherly affection; and to brotherly affection, universal love; for these being in you, and abounding, dispose you to be neither idle nor unfruitful for the acknowledging of our Lord Jesus Christ: for he who is without these is blind, having closed his eyes, having contracted a forgetfulness of the purification of his past sins. Therefore, brethren, use the more diligence to make your call and election sure ; for if you practise these you will never fall; for thus there will further be administered to you, bounteously, the entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and saviour Jesus
Christ. For this purpose I will not neglect to put you always
ἴῃ mind of these things, though you already know them, and

15

16

17

I PETER. 1. IL

are established in the present truth, Indeed I think it right, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by admonition; as I know that I must soon lay aside this tabernacle of mine, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath plainly shewed me; and I will use all diligence that you may be able, every one of you, to recollect these things after my departure. For we indeed did not follow artfully contrived fables when we made known to you the power and the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ ; but were ourselves eye witnesses of his majesty. For he was receiving honour and glory from God the Father, when a voice was uttered to him, from the transcendent glory,
‘* This is my Son, the Beloved, in whom I am well pleased.”
This voice we ourselves actually heard uttered from heaven, when we were with him on the holy mountain. Therefore we have a more complete confirmation of the prophetic word, to which you do well in giving attention, as to a lamp shining
ἴῃ ἃ dark place until the day dawn, and the bringer of light rise in your hearts—knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture explaineth itself,* for prophecy was not uttered in former days at the will of man; but the holy men of God spoke by an impulse of the holy spirit.

Now there were also false prophets among the people, as there will be also among you false teachers, who will introduce destructive sects, denying even the Lord who bought them, bringing on themselves speedy destruction. And many will follow their pernicious courses, on the account of whom the way of the truth will be ill spoken of. Indeed, with insatiable covetousness, they will, with smooth words, make merchandize of you. But the judgment prepared of old for them is not idle, nor is their destruction slumbering. For if God spared not angels who sinned, but confining them in Tartarus,f in

* Literally for every prophecy &c. is not of its own solution.

{ Tartarus among the ancient Grecians, was considered as the place for the wicked after death. Their philosophers described it as a condensed, solid and immoveable darkness surrounding the material universe. But as the earth was commonly supposed to be a plain of immeasurable depth, the poets, accommodating their lan-

guage to the common opinion, describe it as a vast pit. or guiph,

5

6

7

8

9

10

12

13

14

15

I]. PETER. I.

chains of darkness, delivered them up to be kept for judgment—and if he spared not the old world, but preserved eight persons, including Noah, the proclaimer of righteousness, when he brought a deluge on the world of ungodly men— and when he condemned to destruction the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, reducing them to ashes, and making them a publick example to future impious men, delivered just Lot, who was troubled at the lascivious conduct of those licentious men, (for at the sight and report, that righteous man whe dwelt among them was daily tormented in soul by their unlawful deeds) the Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly from temptation, and to reserve the wicked to the day of judgment, to be punished; and more especially them who go after flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, and despise authority. Being audacious and self sufficient théy tremble not when they revile glories; whereas angels who are greater in might and power, do not bring against them a railing accusation before the Lord. But these, like irrational, brute beasts, made for capture and ‘destruction, railing at what they are ignorant of, shall perish with their own destruction. Receiving wages of iniquity, esteeming riot by day a pleasure; being spots and blemishes ; rioting by their deceits ; banquetting with you; having eyes full of adultery and unceasing sin; ensnaring unstable souls; having a heart practised in greediness; an execrable race ; having forsaken the right road they have gone quite astray, following the way of Balaam son of Bosor, who loved the wages of iniquity, and was convicted: of his transgression. (A dumb beast, speaking with a human voice, restrained the madness of the prophet.) They are wells without water ; clouds impelled by a whirlwind, for whom is reserved

in the bowels of the earth. Here then the apostle, rectifying the common mistake of Tartarus being in the bowels of the earth; and recurring to the true sense of the word, namely, the darkness, which bounds the created system, and which when applied to spirits must be interpreted spiritually, intimates by the word ταρταρώσασ that God cast the apostate angels out of his presence into that blackness of darkness (Jude, ver. 13) where they are excluded from the glerious light of his countenance,

3

18

19

20

21

Il. PETER. TAH.

the gloom of everlasting darkness. For uttering, with a solemn tone, swelling words of vanity, they by the lusts of the flesh, by acts of lasciviousness, ensnare them who are indeed flying from those conversant in error ; promising them liberty while they themselves are slaves to corruption ; for by whatever one is subdued, by that he is enslaved. For if after fleeing from the pollutions of the world by an acknowledgment of the
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, any are again entangled and overcome by them, the last state of such persons is worse than the first. For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after knowing it, to turn away from the holy commandment delivered to them. But it hath happened to them according to the true proverb, “ The dog is returned to his vomit, and the washed hog to its wallowing slough.”

Π . This, my beloved, is now the second letter which I am

5

10 writing, with which I stir up your sincere ‘hind by way of remembrance, that you may remember the predictions* of the holy prophets, and the injunction of us the apostles of the
Lord and Saviour; knowing this first, that m the last days scoffers will come, walking after their own desires, and saying, ‘‘Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation.’’ For this they wilfully forget, that by, the word of God there were heavens of old, and an earth consisting of water and in water, by which the world that then existed, being deluged, was destroyed; but the heavens and the earth which now exist are, by the same word, treasured up for fire, being kept for the day of judgment, and destruction of these impious men. Now let not this one thing, my beloved, escape you, That with the Lord one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. The Lord is not slack with, regard to his promise, as some reckon slackness. But he is long suffering towards us, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to areformation. Now the day of the
Lord will come, as a thief at night, when the heavens with a

4

* Literally, the things predicted by.

12

13

16

Il. PETER. ΠΙ.

crashing roar shall pass away, and the elements shall be dis-

solved by fire, and the earth, and all the works thereon, shall be burned up. Therefore as all these things are to be dissolved, what manner of persons ought you to be in holy conversation and godliness, expecting, and eagerly desiring, the coming of the day of God, in which the heavens, all on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with intense heat, and we, according to his promise, expect new heavens, and a new earth in which dwelleth righteousness!

As you therefore, beloved, expect these things, use all diligence to be found at peace with him, without spot and without blemish; and reckon the long suffering of our Lord to be salvation; as our beloved brother Paul, according to the wist dom given him, hath also written to you; as he hath also in all his letters, when speaking of these things; in which there are some things hard to be understood; which the unlearned and unstable torture, as they do the other scriptures, to their own destruction. As you therefore, beloved, know these things beforehand, be on your guard, that you may not be hurried away by the error of these lawless men, and fall from your stedfastness; but increase in the favour and knowledge of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To Hr be the glory both now and forever. Amen.

4

1.

THE FIRST CATHOLIC EPISTLE

OF THE

APOSTLE JOHN.

WHAT was from the beginning; what we have heard; what we have seen with our eyes; what we have viewed attentively, and our hands have handled—(with respect also to the word of the life even the life was manifested, and we have seen, and testify, and announce to you, that eternal life which was with the Father, and hath been clearly manifested to us) that which we have seen and heard, we announce to you, that you also may have communion with us. Now this communion of ours is with the Father, and with his son Jesus Christ.
And we write these things to you that your joy may be complete. This indeed is the message which we have heard from him, and announce to you, That God is light and in him there is no darkness at all. If we say that we have communion with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not practise truth. But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have communion with one another, and the blood of Jesus
Christ his son cleanseth us from all sin. If we say that we have not sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, He is faithful, and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a false speaker, and his word is not in us.

My children I write these things to you that you may not sin. But if any one sin, we have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is an atonement for our sins, and not for ours only, but for those of the whole world. Now by this we know that we have known him, if we keep his commandments. He who saith I know him, and doth not keep his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in

7

14

15

16

20

1. JOHN. 1].

him. But whosoever keepeth his’ word, in him indeed the love of God is perfected. By this we know that we are in him—he who saith he abideth in him, ought to walk as he walked.

Brethren, I am not writing to you a new commandment, but an old commandment, which you had from the begin« ning. This old commandment is the word which you heard from the beginning. Again I write to you a new commandment, a thing which is true in him, and in you. Because the darkness is past, and the light—the true light now shineth, he who saith that he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is still in darkness. He who loveth his brother, abideth in the light, and in it there is no stumbling block. But he who hateth his brother is in the darkness, and walketh in the darkness, and knoweth not whither he is going, because the darkness hath blinded his eyes.

I write to you, children, because your sins are forgiven you on account of his name. I write to you, fathers, because you have known him, who is from the beginning. I write to you, young men, because you have overcome the evil one. I write to you, children, because you have known the
Father. I have written to you, fathers, because you have known him who is from the beginning. I have written to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of
God abideth in you, and you have overcome the evil one.
Love not the world nor the things in the world. If any one loveth the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the desire of the eyes, and the pomp of this life are not of the Father, but are of the world. Now the world is passing away, and the desire thereof; but he who doth the will of God shall abide forever.

Children, the last period is come: and as you have heard that the Antichrist cometh, there are even now many Antichrists, by which we know that it is the last period. They went out from us; but they were not of us. For if they had been of us, they would have continued with us. But to the end that they might be made manifest (because all are not of us) even you yourselves have an unction from the holy one, and know every one. [have not written to you because you do not

23s

24

28

29

Hil.

10

JOHN. Il. Ii.

know the truth; but because you know it, and because no kind of falsehood is of thetruth. Who is the liar; but he who denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is the Antichrist who denieth the
Father and the Son: whosoever denieth the Son, hath not the
Father. “As for you, therefore, let that which you have heard from the beginning abide in you. If that which you have heard from the beginning abide in you, then you will abide in the Son, and in the Father. And this is the promise which he hath promised us, even the life which 15 everlasting. ‘These things I have written to you with a view to them who are seducing you. As for you, the unction which you have received from him abideth in you, and you have no need that any one should teach you. As then this unction itself teacheth you concerning all, and is true, and is not a falsity; abide ye in him as it hath taught you. And now, children, abide in him, that when he shall appear we may have confidence, and not be made ashamed by him at his coming. If you know that he is righteous, you know that every one who practiseth righteousness is born of him.

Behold what a love the Father hath shewn us, that we should be called children of God: on this account the world doth not know us, because it did not know him. Beloved, we are now children of God. Though it hath not yet been manifested what we. shall be, yet we know that when he shall appear we shall be like him: that we shall see him as he is.
Now, every one who hath this hope in him purifieth himself as he is pure. Whosoever committeth sin, committeth a violation of law ; for sin is a violation of law. Now, you know that he was manifested to take away our sins, and there is no sin in him. Whosoever abideth in him doth not sin: whosoever continueth to sin hath not seen him, nor known him. Children, let no one deceive you. He who practiseth right. eousness Is righteous, as he is righteous. He who practiseth sin is of the deyil, because the devil sinneth from the beginning; for this [purpose] the son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil. Whosoever is born of God doth not practise sin, because his seed abideth in him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God. By this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil. Who-

_ soever doth not practise righteousness is not of God, nor

JOHN. Ill. IV.

11 he who doth not love his brother. For this is the message
_ 12 which you have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another, and not be like Cain, who was of the evil one and slew his brother. And why did he slay him? Bggause his own works were evil, and his brother’s righteous.
13 Wonder not, my brethren, if the world hate you. We
14 know that we have passed from death to life, because we love
15 the brethren. He who loveth nat his brother abideth in death.
Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer; and you know
16 that no murderer hath everlasting life abiding in him. By this we know the love of God. Because he laid down his life for us, therefore we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.
17 Whosoever hath worldly substance, and seeth his brother in want, and shutteth up his compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him?
18 My children, let us not love in word, and with the
19 tongue, but indeed, and in truth. When we know by this that
20 we are of the truth, let us in his presence persuade our hearts, in respect to what things soever our heart condemneth us, that God is greater than our hearts, and that he knoweth
21 all things. Beloved, if our heart doth not condemn us, we
22 have confidence towards God, and whatever we ask we obtain from him, because we keep his commandments, and do the
23 things which are pleasing in his sight. Now this is his commandment, that we believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ,
24 and love one another, as he hath commanded us. And he who keepeth his commandments will abide in him, and he will abide in that man. And by this we know that he abideth in us, even by the spirit which he hath given us.
LY. Beloved, trust not every spirit, but try the spirits whe. ther they be of God; for many false teachers, are gone forth
2 into the world. By this you know the spirit of God—every spirit which acknowledgeth Jesus Christ come in flesh, 15. of
God. And every spirit which doth not acknowledge Jesus
Christ come in flesh, is not of God. This indeed is that of Antichrist which you have heard is coming, and is now already in the world: You, children, are of God, and have overcome them,
4. because he who is in you is greater than he who is in the world. They are of the world, therefore they speak suitahly

to the world, and the world hearkeneth to them. We are of
God. He who knoweth God, hearkeneth to us. He who is not of God doth not hearken to us. By this we know the spirit

of truth and the spirit of error.

Beloved, let us love one another; for love is of God, and every one who loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He who doth not love hath not known God, for God is love. By this the love of God was manifested among us, because God sent his only begotten son into the world, that we may live by him. In this is the love; not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son to be an atonement for our sins.
Beloved, if God so loved us; we surely ought to love one another. No one hath ever seen God. If we love one another,
God abideth in us, and his love is perfected in us. By this we know that we abide in him, and he im us, because he hath given us of his spirit; and we have seen, and do testify, that the Father hath sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world.

-Whosoever will confess that Jesus is the son of God, God

abideth in him, and he in God. Now we have known and believed this love which God hath for-us. God is love; and he who abideth in this love abideth in God, and God in him.
Love is by this perfected among us that we may have confidence in the day of judgment, because in this world we are as he is. There is no fear in this love. This perfect love excludeth fear. Because fear is accompanied with torment, therefore he who feareth is not perfect in love. As for us we love him because he first loved us. If any one saith, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar. For how can he who doth not love his brother whom he hath seen, love God, whom he hath not seen? Besides, we have this commandment from him, That he who loveth God, love his brother also: Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God; and every one who loveth him who begat, loveth him also who is begotten of him; by this we know that we love the children of God.
While we love God, we keep his commandments ;

for this is the love of God that we keep his commandments.
Now his commandments are not grievous, because whatever is born of God overcometh the world, and the victory - which overcometh the world is our faith. Who ts he that over-

cometh the world, but he who believeth that Jesus is the son of

Ὁ God? This Jesus is the Christ, whose coming was pointed

out by water and by blood,* not by the water only, but by the

7 water and the blood; and the spirit is testifying this. Because
8 the spirit is the truth, because there are three that bear wit-

ness, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood, and these three

9 are to one and the same thing, if we admit the testimony of

men the testimony of God is greater.t For this is the testi-

* Literally, he is the one who was to come by water and blood,
Jesus the Christ. 

t V.6,7, 8. Literally as in my copy. This Jesus is the Christ who was to come (or who was coming) by water and by blood, not by the water only but by the water and the blood, and the spirit is testifying this. Because the spirit is the truth—because there are three that bear witness [in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit, and these three are one: and there are three that bear witness on the . earth] the Spirit and the Water and the Blood; and these three are for one and the same thing.

The authenticity of the words inclosed in brackets has been a subject of great doubt and dispute.

As the sense is complete, and the connection with what goes before and what follows is more clear, and better preserved without them; and as the words in dispute, supposing them to be genuine, are not applicable to the doctrine of the trinity; for as Bezaon the passage justly remarks—“These three, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, are one in consent, as if they were only one witness; but concerning their unity in substance, that, as it appears to me, is not treated of in this place.” And to the same purpose Calvin says,
“The apostle in declaring these three are one does not refer to their essence, but to their consent, as if he should say, the Father, his eternal word, and the Spirit, with one consenting voice, do equally bear testimony to Christ; and there is no doubt but that the Father,
Word, and Spirit, are said to be one in the same sense in which it is afterwards said that the blood, water and spirit are one;” and. as, besides this, there are some internal and incidental marks, which render the words very much suspected; J cannot, therefore, but agree with Luther, Zuinglius, Bullinger and Erasmus, that the words in the brackets ought not to be admitted into the text, more especially as they are not found in any of the ancient Greek manuscripts, except only one which is of doubtful authority.

10

14

15

16

117

18

19

20

mony of God, which he hath testified concerning his son. He who believeth in the son of God hath this testimony in himself: he who doth not believe God, impeacheth his veracity, because he believeth not the testimony which God hath given concerning his son. Now this is the testimony, that God hath given us everlasting life, and this life is by his son: he who hath the son hath this life: he who hath not the son of God hath not this life.

These things I have written to you who believe in the name of the son of God, that you may know that you have everlasting life; and that you may believe in the name of the son of God: this also is the confidence which we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will he hearkeneth to us. Now, if we know that he hearkeneth to us in whatever we may ask; we know that we obtain from him the petitions _ which we have asked. If any one see his brother committing a sin not unto death, let him ask, and he will give him life for them who do not sin unto death: there is a sin unto death, with respect to this I do not say that he should make petition.
Every act of unrighteousness is a sin; and there is a sin not unto death, and we know that every one who is born of God doth not sin; he indeed who is born of God guardeth himself and the wicked one doth not cling to him. We know that we are of God and that the whole world is laid prostrate by the wicked one; and we know that the son of God is come, and hath given us understanding that we may know him who is true; and we are in him who is true, and in his son Jesus
Christ. He is the true God and the life eternal.

Dear children, keep yourselves from the idols. Amen.

2

3

10 ll

THE SECOND EPISTLE

OF ‘THE

APOSTLE JOHN.

_ THE elder to Electa Cyriaand her children whom in truth
I love (and not only I, but all who have known the truth) on account of the truth which abideth in us, and will be with us for ever: with you be favour, mercy, peace ‘from God the
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ the Son of the Father, in truth and love.

I was greatly rejoiced because I found some of thy chil. dren walking in truth, as we received a commandment from the Father. And I now intreat thee, Cyria, not as writing to thee a new. commandment; but that which we had from the beginning, that we love one another; and this love is, that we may walk according to his commandments. This is the commandment, as you have heard from the beginning, that you may walk therein. Because there are many deceivers come into the world, who do not acknowledge that Jesus Christ is come in flesh. (This is the deceiver, and the Antichrist,) look to yourselves, that we may not lose our labour, but that we may receive ample wages. Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of the Christ, hath not God.
He who abideth in the doctrine of the Christ hath both the Father and the Son. If any one cometh to you, and doth not bring this doctrine, receive him not into your family; nor wish him success; for he who wisheth him success is ἃ partaker with him in his evil works,

Having many things to write to you, I determined not to commit them to paper and ink; but I hope to come to you, and deliver them by word of mouth, that our joy may be com.

plete.
The children of thy sister Flecta salute thee. Amen.

10

11

15

THE THIRD EPISTLE

OF THE

A POST Liby JON.

THE elder to Gaius the beloved, whom in truth I love:

Beloved, I wish thee health and prosperity in all things, as thy soul prospereth. For I was greatly rejoiced at the coming of the brethren, who bear testimony to thy truth, as thou walkest in truth. I have no greater joy than to hear that my children are walking in truth. Beloved, thou actest as a believer, in what thou dost for the brethren, and for the strangers, who have borne testimony for thy love, in the presence of the congregation—whom thou wilt do well to forward on in their journey ina manner worthy of God; for they have gone forth for his name’s sake, taking nothing from the Gentiles. We therefore ought to entertain such, that we may be fellow helpers in the truth. I wrote to the congregation, but Diotrephes, who affecteth a pre-eminence among them, doth not regard us. For this cause, when I come I will take notice of his works whichhe doth, talking lightly of us with malicious words, and not content with this, he doth not entertain the brethren himself, and them who would, he hindereth, and casteth them out of the congregation.

Beloved, do not imitate what. is evil, but what is good.
He who doth good is of God. But he who doth evil, hath not seen God. Demetrius hath a good testimony from all, and from the truth; and even we ourselves bear testimony for him; and you know that our testimony is true.

I had many things to write, but I do not chuse to write to thee with ink and pen; but I hope to see thee soon, when we shall speak face to face. Peace be with thee. The friends salute thee. Salute the friends by name.

THE CATHOLIC EPISTLE

JUDE.

JUDE a servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James ; to the called, who are sanctified by God the father, and preserved by Jesus Christ: mercy be to you, and may peace and love be multiplied.

Beloved, when I was ial all diligence to write to you respecting the common salvation, I found a necessity to write to you, and exhort you to contend earnestly for the belief which was once for all delivered to the saints. For certain persons have slily crept in among us, who have been of old written of, and for this very crime—wicked men, who are turning the favour of our God into licentiousness, and denying our only sovereign
God,* and Lord Jesus Christ.

Now I desire once for all to remind you of this which you knew, That the Lord, having saved a people out of the land of Egypt, destroyed afterwards them who did not believe: and the angels who did not keep their own government, but left their proper abode, he hath reserved in perpetual bonds, under darkness, for the judgment of the great day. As Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities around them, which, in like manner with them, abandoned themselves to licentiousness, and went after strange flesh, were made an example of, suffering the vengeance of everlasting fire; so likewise shall these

8 dreamers. Γ hey indeed defile the flesh, and despise authority

9 and revile glories, whereas Michael the archangel, when he contended with the devil, and disputed about the body of

* In the Alexandrian manuscript as published by Woide, the word Θεὸν, God is not inserted, in that case the sentence may be rendered our only master and Lord Jesus Christ.

JUDE.

Moses, did not take the liberty to bring against him a railing

10 accusation, but said “the Lord rebuke thee:” but these rail

11

12

16 at what they do hot know; and what they do know in ἃ natural
Way as irrational animals, with these they corrupt themselves.
Alas for them! For they have gone in the way of Cain, and rambled in the error of Balaam’s reward and perished in the rebellion of Kore. They are hidden rocks in your love feasts.
When they feast with you, they feed themselves without restraint. They are clouds without water, impelled by winds; autumnal trees without fruit, twice dead, and to be rooted up; raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, for whom is reserved the gloom of everlasting darkness. Now to such as these Enoch, the seventh from
Adam, prophesied, saying, “‘Bchold the Lord is coming with his holy myriads to execute judgment on all, and to convict all the wicked among them of all their impious deeds, which they have impiously committed, and of all the bitter things . which impious sinners have uttered against him.” ‘They are discontented mumurers, walking after their own lusts. Though their mouth speaketh swelling words, they hold persons in admiration for the sake of gain.

But as for you, beloved, remember what the apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ foretold you. For they assured you that in the last time there would be scoffers, walking after their own wicked desires. These are they who separate themselves, being sensual, and not having the spirit. But as for you, beloved, building yourselves up in your most holy faith, praying with

a holy spirit, keep yourselves in the love of God, as you expect

the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ for everlasting life; and making a distinction, have compassion on some, and save others by fear, snatching them out of the fire; abhorring evena garment which is stained by flesh.

Now to him who is able to keep you from falling, and to present you, without blemish, before his glory ἍΤΕ great joy
-—to the only wise God, our Saviour, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and forever. Amen,

2

3

4

10.

11

THE REVELATION OF JOHN.

A REVELATION of Jesus Christ, which God gave him, to shew to his servants things which must shortly come to pass, and which he sent by his angel, and signified to his servant John, who hath testified the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus. Christ, and what he saw. Happy he who readeth, and they who hear the words of this prophecy; and keep the things that are written therein! For the time is at hand! tt

John to the seven congregations which are in Asia; favour be to you, and peace from him who is, and who was, and who is to come; and from the seven spirits which are before his throne; and from Jesus Christ who is the faithful witness, the first born from the dead, and the sovereign of the kings of the earth. To him who hath loved us, and washed us from our sins with his blood, and made us kings and priests to
God, even his father—to him be the glory and dominion for the ages of the ages. Amen.

Behold he is coming with clouds, and every eye shall see him, even they who pierced him; and for him all the tribes of the earth shall mourn.

Yes, be itso. Iam the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end, saith the Lord, who is, and who was, and who is to come, the Almighty.

I John, who am your brother, and a partaker in this af. fiction, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the island which is called Patmos, on the account of the word of God and of the testimony of Jesus Christ. I was in the spirit on the Lord’s day, and I heard behind me a loud voice, like the sound of a trumpet, saying, “I am the Alpha and the Omega; the first and the last,” and “‘what thou scest, write ina book, and send it to the seven congregations which are in Asia, to Ephesus and to Smyrna, and to Pergamus,

12

13

14

15

16

19

20

REVELATION. I. IL.

and to Thyatira, and to Sardis, and to Philadelphia, and to
Laodicea.”” Whereupon I turned to look towards the voice which spake to me; and upon turning about, I saw seven golden candlesticks, and in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks one like a son of man, clothed with a robe down to the feet, and girded about the breast with a golden girdle; and as for his head, the hairs like wool were glittering white as snow, and his eyes were like a flame of fire; and his feet were like fine brass, as if they were glowing in a furnace; and his voice was like the sound of many waters. And he had in his right hand seven stars; and out of his mouth went a sharp two edged sword. And his countenance was like the sun shining in its strength. And when I saw him I fell at his feet as one dead. Whereupon he laid his right hand on me, and said to me, Fear not. I am the first and the last, even he who liveth.
Though I was dead yet behold I am alive, and live for the ages of the ages, Amen. And I have the keys of the mansion of the dead, and of death. Write what thou hast seen, and the things which are, and the things which are about to be hereafter. With respect to the hidden meaning of the seven stars which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks; the seven stars are the angels of the seven congregations and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven congregations.

To the angel of the congregation at Ephesus write,

“Thus saith he who holdeth the seven stars in his right hand—who walketh in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks, I know thy works, and thy labour, and thy patience, and that thou canst not bear with them who are evil, and hast tried them who pretend to be apostles, and are not,;and hast found them liars, and hast borne and dost exercise patience, and hast

 laboured for my name’s sake, and hast not fainted. But I have

this against thee that thou hast lost thy first love. Remember therefore from what thou hast fallen, and reform, and do thy first works; else I will come to thee quickly, and remove thy candlestick out of its place, unless thou reform. But thou hast this, that thou hatest the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I αἱso hate. Whosoever hath an ear to hear let him hear what the spirit saith to the congregations. To him who oyercomcth I

10

11

12

14

17

18

19

REVELATION. 1].

will give to eat of the tree of life which is in the midst of the paradise of God.

And to the angel of the congregation at Smyrna write,

“Thus saith the first and, the last, who was dead and is alive, I know thy works, and thine affliction, and thy poverty,
(though thou art rich) and the slander of them who say they are Jews, and are not, but are a synagogue of satan. Be not terrified at what thou art about to suffer. Behold the devil will soon cast some of you into prison, that you may be tried; and ye will have tribulation ten days. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life. Let him who hath an ear hear what the spirit saith to the congregations. He

who overcometh shall not be hurt by the second death.

And to the angel of the congregation at Pergamus write,
“Thus saith he who hath the sharp two edged sword, I know thy works, and where thou dwellest, even where the throne of satan is; yet thou holdest fast my name, and hast not denied the belief of me, even in the days in which Antipas was my faithful witness, who was slain among you where satan dwelleth. Nevertheless I have a few things against thee, because thou hast there them who hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to idols, and to commit fornication. In like manner thou hast them who hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which I hate. Reform. If thou dost not, I am coming to thee quickly, and I will fight against them with the sword of my mouth. Let him who hath an ear hear what the spirit saith to the congregations. ΤῸ him whe overcometh I will grant to eat of the manna which was laid up; and I will give him a white stone, and on that stone a new name written, which no one knoweth but he who receiveth it.
And to the angel of the congregation at Thyatira write,
“Thus saith the son of God, whose eyes are likea flame of fire, and whose feet are like fine brass; I know thy works, and thy love, and thy service, and thy faith, and thy patience, and that thy last works exceed the first: but I have a few things against thee, because thou suflerest that woman
Jezabel, who calleth herself a prophetess, to teach and seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed
VoL, Iv. 3K

REVELATION II. III.

21 to idols. Though I gave her time to reform from her fornication,
22 yet she hath not reformed. Behold I am about to cast her into a bed, and them who commit adultery with her into great tribulation, unless they reform from their works; and I will
23 slay her children with death; and all the congregations shall know, that Iam the searcher of reins and hearts, and will give
24 to every one of you according to your works. But to you 1 say, even to the rest at Thyatira, to as many as do not hold this doctrine, and who have not known the depths (as they call
25 them) of satan; on you I will lay no other burthen, besides
26 what you have; hold it fast untill come. As for him who overcometh, and keepeth my works tothe end, to him I will give power over the nations, (and he shall rule them with a rod of
27 iron. Like vessels of potter’s clay they shall be broken in pieces,*) as I have received from my Father ; and I will give
28 him the morning star. Let him who hath an ear, hear what the spirit saith to the congregations.
Ill. And to the angel of the congregation at Sardis write,
“Thus saith he, who hath the seven spirits of God and the seven stars. I know thy works, that thou hast the name of being
2 alive, though thou art dead. Be watchful, and strengthen the remains which are likely to die. For I have not found thy works perfect in the sight of God. Remember therefore how thou hast received, and heard, and keep fast hold, and reform.
For if thou wilt not watch, I will come against thee, as a thief, so that thou shalt not know at what hour I shall come
A against thee. Thou hast a few names even in Sardis who have not defiled their garments. These shall walk with me in white robes because they are worthy. He who overcometh shall be clothed with white raiment, and I will not blot his name out of the book of life, but will acknowledge his name before my
6 Vather, and before his angels. Let him who hath an ear hear what the spirit saith to the congregations.”
And to the angel of the congregation at Philadelphia write,

* These two lines, and, &c. and Like vessels, &c. which are included in aparenthesis, I consider as a quotation from Ps. 2. 9. with a change of persons in the first, and of measure in the second.

REVELATION. III.

Thus saith the Holy one and the True, who hath the key—
[the Son] of David, who openeth and none shutteth, and who

8 shutteth and none openeth, I know thy works. Behold I have

set before thee an open door, and none can shut it. Because thou hast a little strength and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name, behold I give thee some of the synagogue of satan, who say they are Jews and are not; but do lie. Behold I will make them come, and worship at thy feet, and know that I have loved thee. Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I will keep thee from the hour of trial which is coming soon onthe whole world, to try the inhabitants of the earth.

1 Behold I am coming quickly. Hold fast what thou hast, that

none may take thy crown. Him who overcometh I will make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go out no more.
And I will write on him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, (the new Jerusalem which cometh down out of heaven from my God) and mine own new name. Let him who hath an ear hear what the spirit saith to the congregations.

And to theangel of the congregation of the Laodiceans write,

Thus saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God, I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot. I wish thou wert cold or hot. So then; because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I am about to spit thee out of my mouth, because thou sayest, I am rich and become wealthy, and have need of nothing, and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. I advise thee to purchase of me gold tried in the fire that thou mayst be rich, and white raiment that thou mayst be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness may not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eye-salve, that thou mayst see. Whomsoever 1 love, I rebuke and chastise. Be zealous therefore, and reform. Behold I stand at the door and knock. If any one will hearken to my voice and open the door,
I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me.
To him who overcometh I will grant to sit with me on my throne, as I have overcome, and sit with my Father on his throne. Let him who hath an ear hear what the spirit saith to the congregations.”

REVELATION. FV. V.

Iv. After this I looked and behold a door was opened in the

heaven, and the voice which I heard at first like that of a trumpet speaking to me said, Come up hither and I will shew thee

2 the things which must hereafter come to pass. Thereupon I

3

10 il

was immediately enrapt, and behold a throne was set in the heaven, and one was sitting on the throne. And he who was sitting was in appearance like a jasper and sardine stone, and there was a rainbow, in appearance like a smaragdine, around the throne. And around the throne there were four and twenty thrones; and on the thrones I saw the four and twenty elders sitting, clothed in white raiment And they had on their heads crowns of gold. And from the throne proceed lightnings and thunders and voices. And there were seven lamps of fire blazing before the throne: these are the seven spirits of God. And before the throne was a glassy sea resembling chrystal. And in the middle of the throne and around the throne were four animate beings full of eyes before and behind. And the first animate being was like a lion; and the second animate being was like a calf; and the third animate being had a face like a man; and the fourth animate being was like a flying eagle. And the four animate beings had, each of them six wings around and underneath they were full of eyes.
And they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord
God, the Almighty, who was and who is and who 15 to come!
And when the animate beings give glory and honour and thanks to him who 15 seated on the throne, to him who liveth for the ages of the ages, the four and twenty elders are to prostrate themselves before him who is seated on the throne, and to worship him who liveth for the ages of the ages, and to cast their crowns before the throne saying, Thou, O Lord, art worthy to receive the glory and the honour and the power, because thou hast created all things, and at thy will they exist and were created.

And I saw in the right hand of him who was sitting on the throne a volume written within and on the back sealed with seven seals. And I saw a mighty angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the volume, even to loosen the seals of it. And no one in the heaven, nor on the earth, nor beneath the earth was able to open the volume and

REVELATION. V. VI.

4, look into it. And when I was weeping much because no one

5

6

7

8

18

14

2

3 was found worthy to open and read the volume—even to look into it, one of the elders saith to me, weep not; behold! the lion who is of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, hath prevailed to open the volume and toloose the seven seals thereof. Then Iookedand behold in the midst of the throne and of the four animate beings and in the midst of the elders stood a lamb as if it had been slaughtered, having seven horns and seven eyes which are the seven spirits of God sent forth into all the earth. And he went and took the book out of the right hand of him who was sitting on the throne. And when he took the book, the four animate beings and the four and twenty elders fell down before the lamb, having, every of them, kitharas and golden cups full of incense which is the prayers of the saints. And they sang a new song, saying, Worthy art thou to take the book and to open the seals of it, because thou hast been slain and hast purchased us for God with thy blood, out of every tribe and tongue and people and nation; and hast made us kings and priests for our God, and we shall reign on the earth.
And I looked and heard the voice of many angels around the throne and the animate beings and the elders and the number of them was myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands, saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the lamb that was slain to receive power and riches and wisdom and strength and honour and glory and blessing. And I heard every created being which is in the heaven and on the earth and underneath the earth and those which are in the sea, even all in them, saying, To him who is sitting on the throne and to the lamb, be the blessing and the honour and the glory and the dominion for the ages of the ages. And the four animate beings said, Amen. And the four and twenty elders fell down and worshipped him who liveth for the ages of the ages.
And I looked when the lamb opened the first of the seals and I heard the first of the four animate beings say as with a voice of thunder, Come and see. And I looked and behold! a white horse, and he who was mounted on him had a bow and a crown was given him and he went forth conquering and to conquer.
And when he opened the second seal, I heard the second

REVELATION. VI.

4 animate being say, Come and see! And there went forth

5.

10

1 i2

13

14

15 another horse of a fiery colour, and to him mounted thereon it was given to take peace from the earth and that men might slay one another; and a great sword was given him.

And when he opened the third seal, I heard the third animate being say, Come and see! And I looked and behold! a black horse, and he who was mounted upon him had a balance in his hand. And J heard a voice in the midst of the four animate beings, saying, A chcenix* of wheat for a deniar

and three cheenices of barley for a dentian, but hurt not the oil

and the wine.

And when he opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth animate being say, Come and see. AndI looked and behold! a pale horse, and one mounted on him, whose name was Pestilence; and the mansion of the dead followed him, and to them power was given to slay on the fourth part of the earth with sword and with famine and with pestilence, and by the wild beasts of the earth.

And when he opened the fifth seal I saw under the altar the souls of them who had been slain for the word of God and for the testimony which they had borne. And they cried with aloud voice, saying, How long, O sovereign, the holy one and the true, dost thou defer judging and avenging our blood on the inhabitants of the earth? And to every of them were given white robes and they were told that they should rest yet a little while till their fellow servants and their brethren who were about to be slain as well as they were completed.

And I looked when he opened the sixth seal. And behold there was a great earthquake. And the sun became black as sackcloth made of hair; and the moon was like blood; and the stars of heaven fell on the earth as a fig tree sheddeth its unripe figs when it is shaken by a mighty wind; and the heaven recoiled like a scroll rolled up; and every mountain and island were moved from their places, and the kings of the

* Chenix was a Grecian measure equal to about a pint and a half, and was the daily allowance of corn to a man, and a deniar was his daily wages.

16

REVELATION. VI. VII.

earth and the nobles and the rich and the chief commanders and the under officers and every bondman and every freeman hid themselves in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains, saying to the mountains and the rocks, Fall upon us, and hide us from the face of him who is sitting on the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come and who is able to stand?

Vil. And after this I saw four angels standing at the four

10 corners of the earth holding fast the four winds of the earth that no wind might blow on the earth or on the sea or on any tree. And I saw another angel coming up from the rising of the sun, having a seal of the living God; and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels who were empowered* to hurt the earth and the sea, saying, Hurt not the earth nor the sea nor the trees until we seal the servants of our God on their foreheads. And 1 heard the number of them who were sealed
—a hundred and forty-four thousand were sealed of all the tribes of the children of Israel—Of the tribe of Judah ,were sealed twelve thousand; of the tribe of Reuben were sealed twelve thousand; of the tribe of Gad were sealed twelve thousand; of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand; of the tribe of Nephthaleim were sealed twelve thousand; of the tribe of Manasses were sealed twelve thousand; of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand; of the tribe of Levi were sealed twelve thousand; of the tribe of Issachar were sealed twelve thousand; of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve thousand; of the tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand; of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed twelve thousand. After this. I looked and behold! a great multitude, which no one could number, of every nation and of tribes and peoples and tongues standing before the throne and before the
Lamb, clad in white robes; and palm branches in their hands; and they cried with a loud voice, saying, To our God who is sitting on the throne and to the Lamb be ascribed this salvation! Whereupon all the angels who stood around the throne and the elders and the four animate beings prostrated themselves before the throne and worshipped God, saying, Amen! the blessing and the glory and the wisdom and the thanks and

+ Literally, to whom it was given.

13

14

15

16

17

REVELATION. VII. VIII.

the honour and the power and the majesty be to our God for

the ages of the ages! Amen. Then one of the elders addressed me, saying, Who are these who are clad in white robes? and whence came they? And I said to him, Sir, thou knowest.
Then he said to me, These are they who have come out of great affliction and have washed their robes and made them white by the blood of the Lamb. For this cause they are before the throne of God and serve him day and night in his temple. And he who sitteth on the throne will spread his tent over them. They shall no more hunger, nor shall they thirst any more; nor shall the sun dart upon them; nor any scorching heat: for the Lamb who is in the midst of the throne will tend them and guide them to living fountains of water; and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.

VU. And when he opened the seventh seal, there was a si-

2

3

10

1}

lence in the heaven for about halfan hour. And I saw theseven angels who were standing in the presence of God, and to them seven trumpets were given. And another angel came and stood by the altar, having a golden censer: and to him much incense was given, that he might offer it, for the prayers of all the saints, upon the golden altar which is before the throne.
And when the smoke of the incense for the prayers of the saints ascended from the hand of the angel before God, the angel took the censer and filled it with some of the fire of the altar and threw it on the earth. And there were noises and thunders and lightnings and an earthquake. And the seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to sound.

And the first angel sounded ; and there was hail and fire mingled with blood which were thrown on the earth and the third part of the trees was burned up, and all the green grass was burned up.

And the second angel sounded, and something like a great mountain blazing with fire was cast into the sea; and the

- third part of the sea became blood; and the third part of the

creatures, which were in the sea and which had life, died; and the third part of the ships was destroyed.

And the third angel sounded; and there fell from’ heaven a great star blazing like a torch; and it fell upon the third part of the rivers and on the fountains of the waters. (Now the name

13

REVELATION. VIII. IX.

of the star is called wormwood.) And the third part of the waters became wormwood; and many of the men died of the waters because they were made bitter.

And the fourth angel sounded ; and the third part of the sun, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the stars were smitten, so that the third part of them was darkened and the day did not shine the third part of it and in like manner the night.

Then I looked and heard an angel (as he was flying in

_ mid-heaven) saying with a loud voice, Alas! Alas! Alas! for

2

3

11

12 the inhabitants of the earth, because of the remaining sounds

of the three trumpets which are about to sound. And when the fifth angel sounded, I saw a star fallen from heaven on the earth. And to it was given the key of the pit of the bottomless gulf, and it opened the pit of the bottomless gulf; and a smoke ascended out of the pit like the smoke of a great furnace ; and the sun and the air were darkened by the smoke of the pit.
And out of the smoke there came forth locusts on the earth; and to them a power was given, as the scorpions of the earth have power; and a charge was given to them not to hurt the grass of the earth nor any thing green nor any tree, nothing but the men only who have not the seal of God on their foreheads; and they were enjoined not to kill these, but to torture them five months. And their torture was like the torture of a scorpion when it stingeth a man. And in those days the men will seek death and shall not find it; and they will earnestly desire to die and death will flee from them. Now the shapes of these locusts were like horses prepared for battle; and they had on their heads as it were crowns of gold; and their faces were like the faces of men; and they had hair like the hair of women, and their teeth were like the teeth of lions; and they had breast-plates like breast-plates of iron; and the sound of their wings was like the sound of chariots with horses rushing to battle, and they have tails like scorpions and there were stings in their tails; and their power was to hurt men five months; and they have a king over them—the angel of the bottomless gulf, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in
Greek heis called Apollyon. The first Woe is past and behold after these things there are two yet to come.

VOLs IV. oO 7,

16

18

19 an

REVELATION. ΙΧ. X.

And the sixth angel sounded ; and I heard a united voice from the four horns of the golden altar which is before God, saying to the sixth angel who had the trumpet, Loose the four angels who are bound at the great river Euphrates: and the four angels who were ready prepared were loosed for an hour, anda day, and a month, and a year, thatthey might slay the third part of men. And the number of the armies of the cavalry was two myriads of myriads: and I-heard the number of them; and thus I saw the horses in the vision and them who

were mounted on them having breast-plates of fire, hyacinth

and brimstone; and the heads of the horses were like the heads of lions; and out of their mouths issue fire and smoke and brimstone. By these three the third part of the men was slain
—-by the fire and by the smoke and by the brimstone which issue out of their mouths; for their powers are in their mosith and in their tails, for their tails having nea! are like caren and with these they do mischief.

And when the rest of the men who were not slain by these chastisements neither reformed from the works of their hands so as not to worship the demons and the idols of gold and silver and brass and stone and wood which can neither see nor hear nor walk; nor reformed from their murders nor from their magical incantations, nor from their forni-

cation nor from their thefts, I saw another mighty angel coming down out of heaven robed with a cloud, and there was a rainbow on his head; and his countenance was like the sun; and his feet were columns of fire, and he had in his hand a little book open. And he set his right foot on the sea and his left on the earth, and cried with a loud voice as a lion roareth.
And when he had cried, seven thunders uttered their voices.

. And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices I was

going to write. And I heard a voice from heaven saying to me,
Seal up those things which the seven thunders uttered and write them not. Then the angel whom I saw standing on the sea and on the land lifted up his hand to heaven and sware by him who liveth for the ages of the ages—who created the heaven and the things therein, and the earth and the things therein, and the sea and the things therein, that there should no longer be a delay, but that in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall have sounded, as he soon will, the myste-

10

11

REVELATION. X. XI.

ry of God shall be completed as he revealed the glad tidings to his servants the prophets.

Then the voice which I heard from heaven spake to me again and said, Go, take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel who 15 standing on the sea and on the land.
So I went to the angel and said to him, Give me that little book. And he said, Take it and eat it up; and it will make thy belly bitter, but in thy mouth it will be sweet as honey: so I took the little book out of the hand of the angel and ate it up; and it was in my mouth sweet as honey ; and when I had eaten it up my belly was bitter. Then he saith to me,
Thou must prophesy again for many peoples and nations and

tongues and kings. And a measuring reed like a staff was given me, and the angel stood saying, Rise and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them who are worshipping therein ; but leave out the court which is on the outside of the temple and measure it not; for it is given to the nations and they shall trample the holy city forty two months. And
I will give to my two witnesses and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and sixty days clothed in sackcloth.
These are the two olive trees and the two lamps which stand before the God of the earth. And if any one attempt to injure them a fire issueth out of their mouth, and utterly devoureth their enemies. If any one indeed attempt to wrong them in this manner he ought to be slain. These have power to shut the heaven that it may not rain in the days of their prophesy. ing; and they have power over the waters to turn them inta blood, and to smite the earth with every calamity as often as they please. And when they shall be performing their testimony the beast which ascendeth out of the bottomless gulf will come to battle with them, and overcome them, and: kill them, and their corpses will be in the broad street of the great city which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt where our
Lord was crucified ; and some of the peoples and tribes and tongues and nations will see their dead bodies three days and a half and will not permit their dead bodies to be put in craves.
And they who dwell on the earth will rejoice over them and be glad, and will send gifts to one another, because these two prophets tormented them who dwelt on the earth. And-after

12

19

14

15

16

17

18

REVELATION. ΧΙ. XII.

the three days and a half, a breath of life from God came upon them and they stood on their feet, and great fear fell upon them who beheld them; and they heard a loud voice from heaven saying to them, Come up hither; and they ascended up to heaven in the cloud and their enemies beheld them; and at that period there was a great earthquake and the tenth part of the city fell and seven thousand names of men were destroyed by the earthquake.* And the rest were terrified and gave glory to the God of heaven.

The second woe passed away ; and behold the third woe cometh quickly.

Then the seventh angel sounded and ‘there were loud voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of the world are become [the kingdom] of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for the ages of the ages. And the four and twenty elders who were seated on their thrones before God fell on their faces and worshipped God, saying, We thank thee O
Lord, the God, the Almighty who is and who was and who 15 to come, because thou hast assumed thy great power and commenced thy reign. The nations indeed were enraged and thy — wrath came and the time for the dead to be αὐεοίμδας and for giving the reward to thy servants the teachers and to the saints and to them who fear thy name, small and great, and for destroying them who destroy the earth. And the temple of God in heaven was opened ; and the ark of his covenant in

ΧΗ. his temple was seen. And there were lightnings and

noises and thunders and an earthquake and great hail. And a

great sign was seen in heaven, a woman clad with the sun,

4 and the moon was under her feet and on her head a crown of twelve stars; and being with child she crieth out being in labour and in the pangs of child birth. And another sign was seen in heaven and behold! a great red dragon having seven heads and ten horns and on his heads seven crowns; and his

tail dragged the third part of the stars of heaven and threw

them on the earth. And the dragon stood before the woman

* Literally, there were destroyed by the earthquake names of men seven thousand. Ἐ See ch. 6. 10, 11.

REVELATION. XII. XII.

who was in labour, that when she brought forth he might de-

5 vour her child. And she brought forth a masculine son who is

6

7

8 to rule all the nations with arod of iron. And this child of hers was suddenly conveyed away to God and his throne ; and the woman fled to the wilderness where she hath a place prepared of God that she may be nourished there a thousand two hundred and sixty days. And there was a war in heaven. Michael and his angels fought against the dragon ; and the dragon and his angels fought ; but did not prevail, nor was their place any

9 more found in heaven. And the great dragon was cast out—

10

14 that old serpent who is called THE DEVIL and saTaw who leadeth the whole world astray. He was thrown on the earth and his angels were thrown with him. And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven. Now is come salvation and the power and reign of our God and the authority of Christ himself; for the accuser of our brethren is cast down—he who accused them before our God day and night; and they have conquered him by the blood of the lamb and by the word of their testimony and have not spared to expose their life even to death.
Therefore rejoice ye heavens and ye who dwell in them. Alas! for the inhabitants of the earth and the sea! for the devil is gone down to you in great wrath knowing that he hath but a little time.’ And when the dragon saw that he was cast on the earth he persecuted the woman who had brought forth the masculine child; and to the woman were given two wings of the great eagle that she might fly to the wilderness to her place where she is nourished for a time and times and the half of a time from the face of the serpent. And the serpent spouted out of his mouth after the woman water like a river that she might be swept away by the stream; and the earth helped the woman; and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed up the torrent which the dragon spouted out of his mouth: and the dragon was enraged at the woman and went to make war against the rest of her seed—them who were keeping the com-

XIII. mandments of God and maintaining the testimony of

2

Jesus Christ. And I was placed on the sand of the sea, and I saw a beast coming up out of the sea having seven heads and ten horns, and on its horns ten crowns, and on its heads a name of blasphemy. And the beast which I saw was like a leopard,

ζ2

10

REVELATION. Xiii.

and its feet as of a bear, and its mouth as the mouth of 2 - lion. And the dragon gave it his power and his throne and great authority. And I saw one of its heads as if wounded to death; and this deadly wound of it was healed; and the whole earth followed this beast with admiration. And they worshipped the dragon who had given the beast authority; and they worshipped tie beast, saying, Who is like this beast? Who is able to fight with it? And to it was given a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies. And power was given it to make war forty-two months. And it opened its mouth for blasphemy against God, to slander his name and his tabernacle and them who dwell in heaven. And power was given it to make war against the saints and to conquer them; and authority was given it over every tribe and tongue and nation; and it is to be worshipped by all the inhabitants: of the earth whose names are not written from the foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb that was slain.

If any one hath an ear to hear let him hear. If any one gathereth [prisoners] for captivity; into captivity he goeth; if any one shall kill with the sword; with the sword he ought to be slain. Here is the perseverance and the faith of the saints.

And I saw another wild beast coming up out of the earth; and it had two horns like a lamb; and it spake like a dragon; and it executeth all the authority of the first beast in its presence and causeth the earth and its habitants to worship the first beast whose deadly wound was healed. And it performeth great signs so as to cause fire to come down out of heaven on the earth, in the sight of men; and it leadeth astray the dwellers on the earth by the signs which it had power to doin the presence of the beast; commanding the inhabitants of the earth to make an image of the beast which had the wound of a sword and lived. And power was granted to it to give breath to the image of the beast, so that the image of the beast might speak and cause all to be slain who would net worship the image of the beast. And it causeth all both little and great, both rich and poor, both freemen and slaves to receive a mark on their right hand or on their foreheads, and that none should buy or sell, but he who hath the mark, or the name of the beast or the number of its name. Here is wisdom. Let him who hath un-

REVELATION. XIII. XIV.

derstanding calculate the number of the beast; for its num-

XIV. ber is that of a man and its number is 666. And 1

6

looked and behold! a lamb was standing on the mountain Sion and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand having the name of his father written on their foreheads. And I heard a sound from heaven like the sound of many waters and like the soundofloudthunder. And Iheard the sound of musicians play - ing on their kitharas and singing as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four animate beings, and the elders; and no one could learn the song, but the hundred and forty four thousand who had been redeemed from the earth.
These are they who were not defiled with women, for they are pure as virgins. These are they who follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. These were redeemed from among men; first fruits for God and the Lamb. And in their mouth there was no guile, for they were without blemish before the throne οἵ God. And I saw another angel flying in mid-heaven having everlasting glad tidings to proclaim to the inhabitants of the earth even to every nation and tribe and tongue and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come; and worship him who made the heaven and the earth and the sea, and the fountains of waters. And another angel followed saying, It is fallen
—Babylon is fallen! that great city; because she made all the nations drink of the poisonous wine of her fornication. Anda third engel followed them saying with a loud voice, If any one worship the beast or its image and receive its mark on his forehead or on his hand, he shall drink the venomous wine of
God which is mixed up unadulterated in the cup of his indignation, and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels and in the presence of the Lamb.
And the smoke of their torment riseth up for ages of ages.
There is no rest day or night for them who worship the beast and its image, nor for any who receiveth the mark of its name.
Here is the patience of the saints! here they who keep the commandments of God and the belief of Jesus. Then I heard a voice from the heaven saying to me, Write, Happy the dead who die in the Lord henceforth! Yes, verily saith the spirit,

* 666 expressed by these three Greek numeral letters x ἕ ς

14

15

18

19

REVELATION. XIV. XV.

that they may rest from their labours and their works accompany them. And I looked and behold! a white cloud and on the cloud one sitting like a son of man having on his head a crown of gold and in his hand a sharp ss es And another angel came out of the temple crying with a loud voice to him who sat on the cloud, Put forth thy sickle and reap, for the time for thee to reap is come; for the harvest of the earth is ripe: and he who was sitting on the cloud put forth his sickle on the earth and the earth was reaped. And another angel came out ofthe temple in the heaven and he also had a sharp sickle. And another angel came out from the altar, having power over the fire and he cried with aloud voice to him who had the sharp sickle saying, Put forth that sharp sickle of thine and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth; for its grapes are ripe: and the angel put forth his sickle on the earth and gathered the erapes of the vine of the earth and cast them into the great wine press of the wrath of God; and the wine press was trodden without the city; and blood flowed out of the wine press

_ up to the bridles of the horses for a thousand and six hun-

dred furlongs.

XV. Then I saw another sign in heaven great and wonderful

2

—seven angels having the seven last plagues because by them the wrath of God was finished. And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire, and them who were victorious over the beast and over its image and over the number of its name, standing at the glassy sea having the musical instruments of
God; and they sing the song of Moses the servant of God and the song of the lamb, saying,

Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord, God, Almighty;

Just and true are thy ways O thou king of the saints;

Who would not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name?

For thou alone art perfect.

For all the nations will come and worship before thee,

For thy rules of rectitude are made manifest.

And after that I looked and behold! the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened. And the seven angels having the seven plagues came out of the temple, clad in clean white linen and having their breasts girded with colden girdles. And one of the four animate beings gave the

REVELATION. XV. XVI.

‘seven angels seven golden yials full of the wrath of God who

8 liveth for the ages of the ages. And the temple was filled with

smoke because of the glory of God and of his majesty, so that no one could enter the temple until the seven plagues of the

XVI. seven angels were finished. And I heard a loud voice

2

ies)

out of the temple saying to the seven angels, Go and pour out the vials of the wrath of God on the earth.

And the first angel went and poured out his vial on the earth; and there came a malignant and grievous ulcer upon the men, who had the mark of the beast, and on them who worshipped its image.

And the second angel poured out his vial on the sea, and it became as the blood of one dead; and every living creature in the sea died.

And the third angel poured out his vial on the rivers, and on the fountains of waters; and they became blood. And I heard the angel of the waters saying, Righteous art thou, O
Lord, who art and who wast and who art to come, because thou hast passed these judgments. Because they poured out the blood of thy saints and prophets, therefore thou hast given them blood to drink, for they deserve it. And I heard another from the altar, saying, Yes, Lord, God, Almighty, thy judgments are true and righteous.

And the fourth angel poured out his vial on the sun; and power was given to it to scorch men with fire. And the men were scorched with great heat; and they blasphemed the name of God who hath power over these plagues and did not reform to give glory to him.

And the fifth angel poured out his vial on the throne of the beast, and its kingdom was darkened ; and they gnawed their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pain, and because of their ulcers, and did not reform from their works.

And the sixth angel poured out his vial on the river— the great river Euphrates, and the water thereof was dried up that a way might be prepared for the kings from the rising of the sun. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs, coming out of the mouth of the dragon and out of the mouth of the

9

14

15

18

19

REVELATION. XVI. XVII.

beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. For these are spirits of demons making signs which go forth to the kings of the earth and the whole world, to gather them together to the battle of the great day of God the Almighty. (%ehold my coming is as a thief [cometh]: Happy he who watcheth and keepeth his garments that he may not walk naked and expose his shame.)

And when he had gathered them together to the place which is called in Hebrew Armaceppon then the seventh angel poured out his vial in the air: and there came a loud voice out of the temple in heaven from the throne saying, It is done. And there were noises and thunders and lightnings and there was a great earthquake, such, that there had not been since men were on the earth such an extensive, so great a shock. And the great city was divided into three parts; and the cities of the nations fell; and Babylon the great came into remembrance before God to give her the cup of the venemous wine of his indignation; and every island fled ; and mountains were not found; and great hail like talent weights pour down from heaven on the men; and the men blasphemed God, because of the plague of the hail; for the plague of the hail was very great. .

XVII. Then one of the seven angels-who had the seven vials

2

came to me and talked with me, saying to me, Come let me shew thee the judgment of the great harlot that sitteth on the many waters, with whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with. the wine of her fornication. And he carried me away in spirit to a wilderness ; and I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet beast full of blasphemous names, which had seven heads and ten horns. And the woman was clad in purple and scarlet and adorned with gold and precious stones and pearls; and she had in her hand a golden cup full of the abominations and impurity of her fornication; and on her forehead there was a name written, Mysrrery, Basyton THE GREAT, the mother of the harlots and the abominations of the earth.

And I saw the woman drunk with the blood of the saints and with the blood of the witnesses of Jesus; and when I saw her I expressed my astonishment with great amaze. And the an-

REVELATION. XVII XVIII.

gel said to me, Why art thou amazed? I will tell thee the mystery of this woman and of the beast which carrieth her, which
8 hath seven heads and ten horns. The beast which thou saw-
_est was and is not and is soon to ascend out of the bottomless gulf and go to destruction; and the inhabitants of the earth, whose names are not written in the book of life from the foundation of the world will wonder when they see the beast, because it was and is not although indeed it is.
9 Let the mind which hath wisdom attend.
_ The seven heads are seven mountains on which the wo-
10. man sitteth and they are seven kings. Five have fallen, and one is and the other is not yet come; and when he hath come
11 he must continue but a little while; and the beast, which was and is not, is itself the eighth and is of the seven and
12 goeth to destruction; and the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but are
13 about to take authority as kings one short period of time* with the beast. These have one mind and will transfer their
14 power and authority to the beast. These will make war against the lamb, and the lamb will overcome them; for he is Lord of lords and King of kings; and they who are with him are called
15 and chosen and faithful. Then he saith to me, The waters whichthou sawest where the harlot sitteth are peoples, and multitudes and nations and tongues: and with regard to the ten
16 horns which thou sawest on the beast, these will hate the harlot and will make her desolate and naked and devour her flesh,
17 and burn her with fire. For God hath put it into their hearts to execute his sentence and to execute one design and to give
18 their kingdom to the beast until the words of God are accomplished. Now the woman which thou sawest is that great city which hath sovereignty over the kings of the earth.
XVII. And after this I saw another angel coming down out
2 of heaven having great authority; and the earth was illumined
-with his glory; and he cried mightily, saying with a loud voice, It is fallen! Babylon the great is fallen, and is become

* Literally, one hour. See ch. 11. 13.

10

11

12

15

16

REVELATION. XVII.

the habitation of demons, and a hold of every unclean spirit; and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird, because all the nations have drunk of the poison of her fornication and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth have been enriched by the abundance of her luxury. And I heard another voice out of heaven saying, Come out of her, my people, that you may not partake of her sins and that you may not receive of her punishments. Because her sins have reached to heaven and God hath remembered her acts of injustice, render to her as she hath rendered to you and requite her double according to her works.
In the cup in which she mingled, mingle for her a double portion. In proportion to her ostentation and luxury inflict on her torment and grief. Because she saith in her heart, I am enthroned a queen and am not a widow, and shall not see sorrow; therefore in one day these calamities shall come upon her, pestilence and sorrow and famine; and she shail be consumed with fire; for the Lord God who judgeth her is mighty. And . the kings of the earth who have committed fornication and lived luxuriously with her will wail and beat their breasts for her, when they see the smoke of her burning—standing afar off for fear of her torment, saying, Alas! Alas! that great city
Babylon! that mighty city ! for in one hour thy judgment is come. The merchants of the earth also will weep and mourn for her; because no one any more buyeth their merchandize— the merchandize of gold and silver and precious stones and pearls; and of cotton and purple and silk and scarlet; and every sort of odoriferous wood and the various wares of ivory and of most precious wood and of brass and iron and marble, and cinnamon and frankincense and myrrh and incense and wine and oil and fine flour and wheat and cattle and sheep and horses and chariots and the bodies and souls of men. Even the autumnal fruits, thy soul’s desire are gone from thee; and all these delicious and all those splendid things are gone from thee and thou shalt find them no more. The venders of these things who have been enriched by her will stand far off for fear of her torment, weeping and wailing and saying, Alas! Alas! the ereat city! she that was clothed with cotton and purple and

REVELATION. XVIII. XIX.

scarlet and adorned with gold and precious stones and pearls!

17 for in one hour what a mass of wealth is laid waste! And every

20 one sailing to the place,* both mariners and traffickers by sea

‘stood afar off and screamed when they saw the smoke of her

burning, saying, What city was like this great city ! and they put dust on their heads and cried weeping and wailing and saying, Alas! alas! the great city by which all who have ships at sea were enriched by means of her wealth ; for in one hour she is desolated.

Rejoice over her, O! heaven! and ye holy apostles and

prophets ; for God hath avenged you on her.

Then a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone and cast it into the sea saying, Thus with violence shall Babylon that great city be dashed down and shall be found no more. And the sound of harpers and of musicians and of pipers and of trumpeters shall no more be heard in thee. And no artist of any kind shall ever be found in thee again. And the sound of a millstone shall never be heard in thee again; nor shall the light of a lamp ever shine in thee any more, nor the voice of a bridegroom and bride ever be heard in thee; for thy merchants were the nobles of the earth—for by thy

24 bewitching arts all the nations were led astray. And in her

was found the blood of prophets and saints and of all who were slain on the earth.

XIX. And after this I heard a loud voice of a great multitude

in heaven, saying, Alleluia! the salvation and the glory and the honour and the power be to the Lord our God; for true and righteous are his judgments ; for he hath passed sentence on the great harlot who corrupted the earth with her fornication; and hath avenged the blood of his servants, at her hand.
(And again they said, alleluia !) and the smoke of her goeth

. up for the ages of the ages. And the four and twenty elders

and the four animate beings fell down and worshipped God who sat on the throne, saying, AMEN. ALLELUIA. And there came out from the throne a voice, saying, Praise our God,

* IT here follow the Alexandrian and other ancient manuscripts.

9

10

11

19

REVELATION. XIX.

all ye his servants and ye who fear him, both small and great.
And I heard as it were a voice οἵ. ἃ great multitude and as a sound of many waters, and as it were a peal of mighty thunder saying, Alleluia. Because the Lord God the Omnipotent reigneth, let us rejoice and exult with joy and ascribe to him the glory ; for the marriage of the lamb is come and_ his spouse hath made herself ready and it hath been granted her, that she should be arrayed in a cotton [τ obe] clean and white for this cotton is the righteous acts of the saints.

Then [the angel] saith to me, Write, Happy cn who are invited to the marriage supper of the lamb! then he saith to me, These are the true words of God. Whereupon I fell down at his feet to worship him. And he saith to me, See thou do not. I am the fellow servant of thee and of thy brethren who have the testimony of Jesus. Worship God. For the spirit of this prophecy is the testimony of Jesus.

Then I saw the heaven opened and behold a white horse! and he who was mounted on him was called, Fairurunt anp
TRUE, and with righteousness he judgeth and maketh war.
His eyes are like a flame of fire; and on his head are many crowns and he hath a name written which no one but himself knoweth ; and he was clothed with a mantle dipped in blood ;’ and his name is THE worp or cop. And the armies in heaven clad in cotton robes white and clean followed him on white horses. And out of his mouth issueth a sharp sword that with it he may smite the nations. And he himself tendeth them with am iron crook; and he himself treadeth the press of the venemous and raging wine of God Almighty. And he hath on his mantle and on his thigh this name written Kine or KINGS
AND Lorp or torps. And I saw an angel standing in the sun and he cried with a loud voice to all the birds which fly in mid-heaven saying, Come and gather yourselves together to the supper of the great God ; that you may eat the fiesh of kings and the flesh of generals, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses and of them mouisted on them and the flesh of all both freemen and slaves, both small and great.
And I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies assembled to. come to a battle with him who was

REVELATION. XIX. XX.

20 mounted on the horse and with his army. And the beast was

21 taken and with him the false prophet who did these signs before him by which he led astray them who had received the mark of the beast, and them who worshipped his image. Both these were cast alive into the lake of fire burning with brimstone ; and the rest were slain with the sword of him who was mounted on the horse—with that which issueth out of his mouth; and all the birds were glutted with their flesh.

XX. Then I saw an angel coming down out of heaven, hav-

ing the key of the bottomless’ gulf anda great chain in his

hand; and he laid hold on the dragon, the old serpent which

10 is the Devil and Satan and bound himathousand years and cast him into the bottomless gulf and shut him up, and sealed it on him that he might not lead the nations astray any more until the thousand years were ended. And after that he must be loosed for a short time. And I saw thrones and to them who sat on them judgment was given, and [I saw] the souls of them who had been slain for the testimony of Jesus and for the word of God and who had not worshipped the beast nor its image, nor received the mark on their forehead or on their hand. And they lived and reigned with the Christ the thousand years; but the rest of the dead did not revive until the thousand years were completed.

This is the first resurrection. Happy and holy is he who hath a portion in this first resurrection. Over them the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of God and the
Christ and shall reign with him a thousand years. And when the thousand years are ended Satan will be let loose from his , prison and will go forth to seduce the nations which are in the four corners of the earth Gog and Magog to assemble them for battle; the number of whom will be as the sand of the sea. And they came up on the breadth of the earth and surrounded the camp of the saints and the beloved city, and fire came down from God out of heaven and devoured them. And the Devil who was seducing them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone where the beast and the false prophet are; and they shall be tormented day and night for the ages of the ages.

REVELATION. XX. XXI.

il Then I saw a great white throne and him who sat thereon from whose presence the earth and the heaven fled away and
42 there was no place found for them. And I saw the dead, small

and great, standing before God. And books were opened; and .

another book was opened namely that of tire. And the dead were judged by the writings in those books according to
13 their works. And the sea delivered up the dead in it; and death and the mansion of the dead delivered up the dead in them; and
14 they were judged, every one according to his works. And

death and the mansion of the dead were cast into the lake of © fire. ‘This is the second death. And whoever was not found —

written in the book of life was thrown into the lake of fire.
XXI. Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the

2 former heaven and the former earth were passed away and the

sea is no more. And I John saw the holy city, the new Je-

rusalem coming down from God out of heaven, prepared like

3 a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a loud voice

from heaven saying, Behold-the tabernacle of God with men!

and he will dwell with them; and they will be his people; and

4 God himself will be with them their God. And God will wipe

away every tear from their eyes. And there shall no more be

death; nor shall grief, nor screaming, nor pain be any more;

for the former things are gone. And he who sat on the throne

said, Behold I make all things new. Then he saith to me,

6 Write that these words are true and faithful; and he said to

me, It is done; Iam the Alpha and the Omega—the begin-

ning and the end; to him who thirsteth I will give without

7 cost from the fountain of the water of life. He who overcom-

_ eth shall inherit all things; and I will be his God and he shall

8 be my son: but the cowards and the unbelieving and abomi-

nable and murderers and prostitutes, and sorcerers and idola-

ters and all liars shall have their portion in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone. This is the second death.

9 ~'Then one of the angels who had the seven vials full of the

seven last plagues came to me and spoke to me saying, Come

10 let me shew thee the bride the Lamb’s wife. And he carried

me away in spirit to a great and high mountain and shewed

me the great city—the holy Jerusalem coming down out of

11 heaven from God, having the glory of God. And its lustre

REVELATION. XXI. XXII.

was like a most precious stone, like a jasper shining as chrystal; and it hada great and high wall with twelve gates and at the gates twelve angels and [on the gates] were graven the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel—On_ the east three gates; on the north three gates; on the south three gates; on the west three gates. And the wall of the city had twelve foundations on which were the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. And he who was talking with me had a golden reed to measure the city and its gates and its wall.
Now the city is a square and its length is as muchas its breadth.
And he measured the city with the rod twelve thousand furlongs; the length and the breadth and the height are equal.
And he measured its wall, a hundred and forty four cubits, the measure of a man which is that of an angel. And its wall was built of jasper and the city was pure gold, like clear glass.
And the foundations of the wall of the city were adorned with every precious stone. The first foundation was jasper; and the second, sapphire; the third, chalcedony; the fourth, emerald; the fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardus; the seventh, chrysolite; the eighth, beryl]; the ninth, topaz; the tenth, chrysoprasus; the eleventh, hyacinth; the twelfth, amethyst. And the twelve gates were twelve pearls. Every several gate was of one pearl. And the street of the city was pure gold, like transparent glass. And in it I saw no temple ; for the Lord God
Almighty and the Lamb is its temple. And the city had no need of the sun nor of the moon to enlighten it; for the glory of God enlightened it; and the lamb is its lamp: and the nations of the saved will walk in its light; and the kings of the earth will bring their glory and honour into it; and its gates shall not be shut by day; for there shall be no night there.
And the glory and the honour of the nations shall be brought to it. And there shall inno wise enter into it any thing which defileth or maketh an abomination or [uttereth] a lie—none but they who are enrolled in the Lamb’s book of life.

SXII. ‘Then he shewed me a pure river of the water of life,

2 clear as chrystal, issuing from the throne of God and the lamb; and in the middle of the broad street of the city on both sides

REVELATION. XXII.

of the river at proper distances there was a tree of life bearing twelve crops of fruit, yielding its fruit every month and the leaves of the tree are to heal the nations. And nothing subject to a curse shall ever be there; but the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him and

 see his face; and his name shall be on their foreheads. And

there shall be no night there; nor have they any need of a lamp or of the light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them light; and they shall reign for the ages of the ages.

Then he said to me, These words are faithful and true.
And the Lord the God of the holy prophets hath sent his angel to shew his servants what must shortly come to pass.

Behold I am coming quickly. Happy he who keepeth the words of the prophecy of this book.

Now I John saw and heard these things. And when
I had heard and seen 1 prostrated myself to worship at the feet of the angel who pointed them out to me; and he saith to me, See thou do not: Iam a fellow servant of thee and of thy brethren the prophets and of them who keep the words of this book: worship Ged.

Then he saith to me, seal not up the words of the prophecy of this book for the time is near. Let him who is unjust be unjust still and him who 15 polluted be polluted still; and let the just be still just and the holy still holy. Now behold I am coming quickly and my reward is with me to render to every one as his work shall be. Iam the Alpha and the Omega: the beginning and the end; the first and the last.

Happy they who perform his commandments that they may have access to the tree of life and enter by the gates into the city: but without are the dogs and the sorcerers and the prostitutes and the murderers and the idolaters and every one who loveth and practiseth falsehood.

I Jesus have sent my angel to testify these things to you for the congregations. I am the root and the offspring of David—the bright and the morning star. Now the spirit and the bride say, Come; and let him who heareth say Come. And let every one who thirsteth come; and let every one whois willing take of the water of life at free cost. Fer I testify to every one

REVELATION. XXII.

who heareth the words of the prophecy of this book, if any

one addeth to these things God will lay on him the plagues
19 written of in this book; and if any one taketh away from the

words of the book of this prophecy God will take away his

portion of the tree of life and of the holy city which are written
20 of in this book. He who testifieth these things saith, I am in-

deed coming quickly.

Amen, even so come, Lord Jesus.

21 The favour of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all!
Amen.

THE END.
