New Guide to Health; or, Botanic Family Physician
Samuel Thomson
New Guide to Health; or, Botanic Family Physician. Boston: 1822 (first edition).
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/newguidetohealth00thom).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

1


^^'^v


(IP/LXJ -l^tox^i^- j/p^jjj Aj/J7 f ^ -yXtnj* i^^ ^^


ct


r^  >rc


Co


r^i


(^s


'^ 9


f  f


NEW

€UIDE  TO  HEALTH;

OR,

BOT^JYIC  FAMILY  PHYSICMJir,

CONTAINING

-A  COMPLETE  SYSTEM  OF  PRACTICE,

UPON  A  PLAN ENTIRELY  NEW  ;

WITH

A  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  VEGETABLES  MADE  USE

OF,  a:^d directions  for  pueparing  and

ADMINISTERING  THEM  TO  CURE  DISEASE.

TO  WHICH  IS  PREFIXED
OF  THE

LIFE  AND  MEDICAL  DISCOVERIES

OF  THE  AUTHOR.

BY  SAMUEL  THOMSON.

BOSTOV;

PRINTED  FOR  THE  AUTHOR,  BY  K.  G.  HOUSE,

JVo. 18,  CornhilL


fi.


DISTRICT  OF  MASSACHUSETTS,  to  loit  :

District  Ckrk'^s  Office^

BEit  remembfred,  that  on  the  thirtieth  day  of  November,
A.  T).  18;2,  in  the  forty  seventh  year  of  the  Independence
of  the  United  States  of  America,  Stiniue!  Thomson,  of  the  said
District,  has  deposited  in  this  oiBce  the  title  of  a  book,  the  right
whereof  he  claims  as  author  and  proprietor,  in  the  words  follow-
ing-, to  wit;  New  Guide  to  Ha  1th  ;  or.  Botanic  Family  Phypi-
cian.  Containing  a  complete  System  of  Practice,  upon  a  plan
entirely  new  ;  with  a  description  of  the  vegetables  made  use  of,
av'd  directions  for  preparing  and  administering  them  to  ctire  dis-
ease. To  which  is  prefixed  a  narrative  of  .the  Life  and  Medical
Discoveries  of  the  author. Hy  Samuel  Thomson.

In  conformity  to  the  Act  of  Congress  of  the  United  States,  en-
titled "  An  Act  for  the  encouragement  of  Learning,  by  securing^
the  Copies  of  Maps,  <  harts,  and  Books,  to  the  Authors  and  Pro-
prietors of  such  C  pies,  during  the  time  therein  mentioned  ;"  and
also  to  an  Act  entitled  "  An  Act  supplementary  to  an  Act,  enti
tl^d  an  Act  for  the  Encouragement  of  Learning,  by  securuig  the
Copies  of  Mnps,  Charts,  and  Books,  to  the  Authors  and  Propric-'
tors  of  such  Copies  during  the  times  therein  mentioned  ;  and  ex-
tenJinif  thf-  Benefits  then  of  to  t;;p  Arts  of  Designing,  Engraving
and  Etching  Historica'  and  olh»-r  Prints.

JOHN  W.  DAVIS,  CUrkofMms.  District,


TO  THE  PUBLIC.

The  preparing  the  folloxving  work  for  the  press  has
been  a  task  of  much  difficulty  and  labour,  for  to  comprise
in  a  short  compass  and  to  convej  a  correct  understand-
ing of  the  subject,  from  such  a  mass  of  materials  as  I
have  been  enabled  to  collect  bj  thirty  years  practice,  is
a  business  of  no  small  magnitude.  The  plari  that  has
been  adopted  I  tiioug'htthe  best  to  giv^e  a  correct  knowl-
edge of  my  system  of  practice;  and  am  confident  that
the  descriptions  and  directions  are  sufficiently  explained
to  be  understood  by  all  tho-^e  who  talio  an  interest  in
this  important  suljjcct.  Much  more  mig'ht  have  b-^eii
written  ;  but  the  main  object  has  been  to  confine  it  to
the  practice,  and  nothing  more  is  stated -of  the  theory,
than  what  was  necessary  to  giv^e  a  general  knowledo'e
of  the  system.  If  any  errors  should  be  discovered  it  is
hoped  that  they  will  be  viewed  with  candour;  for  in
tirst  publishing  a  work,  such  things  are  to  be  expected  ;
but  much  care  has  been  taken  that  thcra  should  be  no
error,  which  wouJu  cause  any  mistake  in  the  practice,
or  })reparing  the  medicine.

Many  persons  are  practising  by  my  system,  who  are
in  the  habit  of  pretending  that  they  have  made  great  im-
provements, and  in  some  instances  it  is  well  known  that
poisonous  drugs  have  been  made  use  of  under  the  name
of  my  medicine,  which  has  counteracted  its  operation,
and  thereby  tended  to  destroy  the  confidence  of  the
public  in  my  system  of  practice,  this  has  never  becyi
authorized  by  me. The  public  arc  therefore  cautioned'


AGREEMENT-


against  such  conduct,  and  all  those  who  are  well  dis-
posed towards  my  system,  are  desired  to  lend  their
aid  in  exposing  all  such  dishonest  practices,  in  order
that  justice  may  be  done.  Those  who  possess  this
work,  may  by  examining  it  be  able  to  detect  any  im-
proper deviations  therefrom ;  and  they  are  assured
that  any  practice  which  is  not  conformable  to  the  di-
rections given,  and  does  not  agree  with  the  principles-
liPicin  laid  down,  is  unauthorised  by  me.


AGREEMENT.

Tiic  iiubrcriber,  wlio  is  the  discoverer  and  proprietor
oi  the  system  of  medical  practice  contained  in  this  work,
agrees  to  give,  whtncver  applied  to,  any  information,
that  shall  be  necessary  to  give  a  complete  understand-
ing of  the  obtaining,  preparing  and  using  all  such  veget-
ables as  are  made  use  of  in  said  r^ysiem,  to  all  those  who
purchase  the  right ;  and  the  purchasers,  in  considera-
tion oftha  above  information,  and  also  what  is  contained
in  this  book,  agree  in  the  spirit  of  mutual  interest  and
honour,  not  to  reveal  any  part  of  said  information  to  any
person,  except  those  who  pu^cha^ie  the  right,  to  the
injur}'  of  the  proprietor,  under  the  penalty  of  forfeiting
their  word  and  honour,  and  all  right  to  the  use  of  the
itie.  And  every  person  wIjo  purchases  the  right,
.  ._  e  considered  a  member  of  the  Friendly  Botanic
Medical  Society,  and  entitled  to  a  \\ec  intercourse  with
the  m^j^bers  for  information  and  friendly  assistance.
~" -^  S\MrKL  THOMSON.


I^'TR  0  D  UC  TlOX,


WRITTEN BY A FRIEND.


There  is  no  subject  in  which  the  great  family  of  man-
kind have  a  deeper  interest,  than  that  of  medicine  ;  to
lessen  the  sum  of  htiman  suffering  by  alleviating  pain
and  removing  those  diseases  that  all  are  subject  to,  is  a
duty  of  the  greatest  importance  of  any  undertaking  that
man  can  engage  in.  Health  is  the  greatest  blessing
that  can  be  enjoyed  in  this  life ;  and  to  be  deprived  of
it  takes  away  all  our  pleasures  and  comforts  and  makes
every  thing  in  this  world  appear  a  dreary  waste.  This
will  readily  be  admitted  by  every  one ;  but  in  what
manner  disorder  can  best  be  removed  or  prevented,  is  a
subject  that  has  engaged  the  attention  of  many  wise  men,
who  have  existed  in  different  ages,  from  the  ear-
liest times  to  the  present  day,  without,  as  we  humbly
conceive,  very  much  benefiting  mankind  by  their  labours.
Their  enquiries  it  would  seem  have  been  directed  to  the
investigation  of  visionary  theories,  of  the  form  and  curi-
ous construction  of  the  body  and  members,  upon  me-
chanical principles  ;  to  the  neglect  of  what  is  of  the
greatest  importance,  a  correct  and  useful  practice  by  a
direct  application  to  the  cause  of  disease.  This  is  like
pursuing  a  shadow  and  losing  sight  ot  the  substance  ;  for
there  are  certain  causes  and  effects  in  the  works  of  crea-
tion that  are  beyond  the  comprehension  of  man,  and  the
general  principles  of  animated  nature  are  as  correctly
known  by  the  whole  human  family  as  bv  the  most  wise
and  learned.

A  2


•>  IXTiiODtCTiON.

la  the  different  ap;es  of  the  world  the  rsedical  faculty
have  been  very  prolific  in  formins:  systems  of  the  theory
and  practice  of  medicine.  One  man  builds  »ip  a  system
for  another  that  comes  after  him  to  pull  down,  who
erects  one  of  his  own,  which  is  tollowed  for  a  time  and
is  then  -upplrnted  by  another.  They  have  gone  on  in
this  way,  almost  ever}'  age  producing-  a  newsjstem,  to
the  present  time  ;  each  one  pronounces  the  other  to  be
wrong",  they  certainly  cannot  all  be  right,  and  the  most
natural  conclusion  is  that,  they  are  all  wrong;  for  no
good  has  resulted  from  all  thi-y  h^ave  done,  but  on  the
contrary  it  has  tended  to  produce  much  confusion  and
'  tioubt,  in  the  minds  of  all  who  seek  to  gain  a  correct
knowledge  of  the  subject;  the  best  evidence  of  this  is
the  bad  success  that  has  attended  the  regular  faculty  la
all  their  practice,  for  they  do  not  pretend  to  a  knowl-
edge of  a  certain  remedy  tor  any  case  of  disease  ;  and  it
is  readily  admitted  by  the  most  distinguished  men  in  the
profession,  that  there  is  no  art  or  science  so  little  un-
derstood and  miserably  conducted  as  that  of  medicine.

The  way  to  become  a  fashionable  doctor  at  the  pres-
ent day  is  fo  f^pend  three  or  four  years  in  what  they  call
reading  pliysick,  when  they  receive  a  degree  and  a  di-
y)loraa  from  some  medical  society.  This  time  is  spent
in  learning  the  latin  names  of  the  different  preparations
of  medicine,  according  to  the  plan  adopted  by  the  facul-
ty, as  also  of  the  different  parts  of  the  human  body,  with
the  names,  colours  and  symptoms  of  all  kinds  of  disease,
divided  and  subdivided  into  as  many  classes  and  forms  as
language  can  be  found  to  express;  and  sufficient  knowl-
edge of  the  nature  of  medicine  to  know  how  much  poi-
son can  be  given  without  causing  immediate  death.  With
these  qualifications  and  a  little  self-importance  the}-^
commence  their  medical  career,  as  ignorant  of  what  is
really  useful  in  curing  disease,  as  thouj;,h  they  had  been
shut  up  in  a  cloister  all  the  time.  Their  heads  are  lillcd
with  the  theory,  but  all  that  is  most  important  in  the
removal  of  disorder,  ihey  have  to  learn  by  practice.,
which  can  never  be  learnt  in  any  other  w^y.  Those
patients  who  axe  so  unfortunate  as  to  come  under  theiv
care  become  subjects  for  them  to  learn  upon  and  hiive


INTRODUCTiON.  7

to  suffer  from  their  experiment-?  ARer  pursuing  this
course  for  many  years  they  begin  to  learn  that  their  prac-
tice has  been  wrong  ;  and  it  is  a  fact  well  known,  that
all  our  old  and  mo4  t'xperienced  physician^;,  w!>.o  h.iva
become  distinguished  in  the  profession,  nvike  me  of  but
very  little  medicine;  prescribing  principally  simpies,
with  directions  how  they  may  cure  themselves;  the
fiireaterpart  of  their  patients,,  are  such -as  hn.ve  been  run
do^vn  and  had  their  constitutions  des-lroyed  hy  the  im-
proper treatment  they  have  received  frcm  Ihe  young
and  inexperienced  part  of  the  flicnity.  .

This  picture may be considered  hy some- as  highly  "
coloured  ;  but  if  p-ejudice  is  laid  aside  and  viewed  with
candour,  it  will  be  Tcund rfot to  be far  from  the  truth,
'i  here are no  doubt  many  exceptions  among  the  prac-
tising physicians  ;  but  their  manner  of  treating disease
by  bleeding  and  blistering, and admin isti- ring  mercury,
arsenic,  nitre,  antimony, opium,. &c.  is  directly  opposed
to  nature,  and  cannot  be  justified  by  any  principles  iound-
ed  on  natural  causes  and  effects. Anoth-^r  serious dif-
ficulty exists,  which  is  that  the  people  arj  kept  ignorant
of  every  thing  of  importance  in medicine,  by  its  being
kept  in  a  dead  language,  for  which  tlierecanbe  no  good
reason  given. Dr.  Buchan has made  some  very  good
remarks on this subject,  to  show the impropriety 'i
such  a  practice,  and  gives it  as  his  opinion,  that  if  ph v-
sicians  would  write their  prescriptions in  the  language
of  our  own  country  and  laj^  medicine  more  open  to  the
people,  much good would result  from  it. InthGnovV
Pharmacopoeia  got  up  lately  by  the  medical  societies in
this  country,. an  entire  new  arrangement  is  made  and  new
names  adopted,  which  is  to  be  revised  every  ten  years  ;
this  will  completely  keep  the people in ignorance of
faculty. .

'I'bere  can  be  not  the  least  doubt  but  there  is  medi-
cine enough  grows  in  our  country  to  answer  all  the  pur-
poses necessary  in  curing  every  disease  incident  to  the
climate,  if  the  people  had  a  knowledge  of  it;  but  the
doctors  have  so  much  aifluence  in  society,  and  manage
their  affairs  with  so  much  art  for  thi-ir  own  profit  and
praise,  that  the  common  people  are  kept  back  from  a


8  IKTP.ODUCTiOX.

knowledge  of  what  is  of  the  utm'oM  importance  for  them
to  kn.o\v.  If  an;/ man  undertakes  to  pur.-ue  a  practice
diiTering'  from  what  is  sanctioned  by  the  regular  lliculty,
let  him  show  ever  so  much  ingenuity  in  his  discoveries,
or  be  ever  so  succc^^sfdl  in  curing  disease,  he  is  hunted
down  like  a  wild  beast ;  and  a  hue-and-cry  raised  against
him  from  one  end  of  the  country  to  the  other.  There
must  be  some  reason  for  all  this  more  than  an  aim  to  the
public  good;  for  the  people  are  certainly  capable  oi"
judging  for  themselves,  whether  what  is  done  for  them
removes  their  complaint  or  increases  it.  it  is  not  un-
reasonable, we  think  to  conclude,  that  it  arises  from  a
fear  that  the  craft  is  in  danger.

Nothing  could  more  fully  exemplify  the  above  opin-
ion than  the  treatment  which  Dr.  Thomson  has  received
from  the  medical  facult}',  during  the  whole  of  his  prac-
tice. He  lias  been  persecuted  and  pursued  with  all  the
malice  of  demons,  for  no  other  cause  that  can  be  imag-
ined than  because  of  his  extraordinary  success  in  curing
disease,  which  has  tended  to  enlighten  the  people,  and
do  away  their  blind  conlidence  in  the  infallibility  of  doc-
tors. This  opposition  has  not  been  from  the  people  at
large,  for  all  who  have  been  attended  by  him,  and  those
who  have  had  a  correct  knowledge  of  his  system  of  prac-
tice, are  not  only  well  satislied,  but  are  thoroughly  con-
vinced of  its  superioritj'  over  the  practice  of  the  doc-
tors; and  some  of  the  faculty  who  have  examined  the
subject,  allow  the  discovery  to  be  original  and  ingenius,
and  that  the  principles  uponuhich  it  is  founded  are  cor-
rect If  the  physicians  generally  had,  instead  of  trying
to  destroy  him  and  his  practice,  enqoired  into  and  made
theniselves  acquainted  with  his  improvements,  and  treat-
ed him  with  that  coiitesy  due  to  every  ingenius  man,
who  devotes  himself  to  the  advancement  of  the  arts  and
sciences,  they  would  have  received  much  useful  infor-
mation on  one  of  the  most  important  branches  of  the
medical  art,that  is  of  the  medicinal  virtues  of  the  vegeta-
bles of  this  country,  with  the  best  method  of  preparing
and  administering  them  to  cure  disease  ;  but  they  seem
to  consider  every  thing  relating  to  the  subject  as  a  sort


INTRODUCTION.  ^

of  holy  ground, on  which  no  one  has  a  right  to  tread
but  the  regularly  initiated.

Dr.  Thomson  began his  practice  as  it  were  from  ac-
cident, with  no  other  view  than  an  honest  endeavor  to
be  useful  to  his fellow  creatures  ; and  had  nothing;  to
guide  him  but  his  OAvn  experience. He  not  having  had
an  education,  has  received  no advantages  from  reading
books,  which  left  his  mind unshackled  by the  visionary
theories  and  opinions  of  others  ;  his  whole  studies  have
been  in  the  great  book  of  nature,  and  his  conclusions  have
all  been  drawn  from that unerring guide  ; by  this  he
was enabled  to  form  correct  opinions  of  the  fitness  ot
things. His first  enquiry  was  to  know  of  what  all  ani-
mal bodies  were  formed,  and  then  to  ascertain  what  caus-
ed disease,  after  being  satisfied  on  this  head,  the  next
thing  was  to  find  what  medicine  was  the  best  calculated
to  remove  disease  and  restore  health. For  this  he  look-
ed into  the  vegetable  kingdom,  where  he  found  a  large
field  for  contemplation  and  for  the  exercise  of  his  enquir-
ing , mind. Here  by  an  invention  of  his  own,  that  ot  as-
certaining the qualities and pnv/er  of  veggtablii  by
their  taste,  he  was  enabled  at  all  times  t©  fiad  lomithiag
to  ans^-'er  the  de^^ired  purpose ;  bis  apotbec&py*s  ihop
was  the  woods  and  the  fields.

In  his  practice  it  has  always  been  his  first  object  to-
learn  the  course  pointed  out  by  nature,  and  has  followed
by  administering  those  things  best  calculated  to  aid  her
in  restoring  health.  This  is  unquestionably  the  only
correct  course  that  can  be  pursued  with  any  chance  of
success,  for  all  the  good  that  can  be  expected  by  giving
medicine,  is  to  assist  nature  to  remove  the  disease.  The
success  with  which  his  practice  has  been  attended  has
astonished  all  who  witnessed  it,  and  has  led  the  people
to  wonder  how  a  man  without  learning  could  perform
what  could  not  be  done  by  the  learned  doctors  ;  this  is
not  strange,  fo  people  most  generally  form  their  opinions
by  what  is  fashionable,  without  examining-  into  the  na-
ture of  things.  A  man  can  be  great  without  the  advan-
tages of  an  education;  but  learning  can  never  make  a
wise  mnn  of  a  fool;  the  practice  of  physic  requires  a
knowledge that cannot be got  by reading books, it


10  INTRODUCTION.

must  be  obtained  by  actual  observation  and  experience.
It  is  very  common  with  the  doctors  to  call  all  thosft
who  practice  and  have  not  been  regularly  educated  to
the  profession,  quacks,  and  empirics.  The  deffinition  of
the  word  quack,  is  an  ignorant  pretender ;  and  those
who  are  entitled  to  this  appellation,  are  best  known  by
the  knowledge  they  possess  in  their  profession,  and  th6
success  with  which  they  pursue  it;  and  there  may  be
probably  more  ignorant  pretenders  found  among  those
who  have  received  a  diploma  than  in  any  other  class.
An  empiric  is  one  who  is  governed  in  his  practice  by  his
own  experimental  knowledge  ;  and  Dr;  Thomson  can
have  no  reasonable  objection  to  be  honoured  by  this
title,  for  there  is  nothing  valuable  in  the  whole  range  of
t!>e  medical  science,  but  what  has  been  derived  from
this  source.  In  ancient  times  the  man  who  could  dis-
cover any  thiuii-  thnt  proved  to  be  useful  in  Curing  dis^
ease,  was  entitled  to  Jionourable  notice  and  a  reward
for  his  ingenuity,  without  regarding  whether  he  was
learned  or  unlearned.  In  this  way  (he  faculty  have  cb-
tamed  all  their  knou'/dge  of  vegetable  medicine,  and  if
they  had  conFinefl  themselves  to  this  it  would  have  been

m-JGh  better  for  the  peopl?,  than  to  mn fee  use  of  those
poisonous  minerals,  tvhicli  have  been  the  production  of
the  learned,  and  is  the  only  addition  they  have  been  able
to  make  to  the  Materia  X'edica.

In  the  following  work  Dr.  Thomson  has  endeav-
oured to  embody  in  a  small  compass,  and  to  convey
to  the  public  in  as  plain  and  simple  terms  as  he  was
capable,  a  correct  knowledge  of  his  system  of  prac-
tice, with  his  manner  of  treating  disease,  together
with  a  description  of  all  the  vegetable  productions  of
our  own  country  that  he  has  tound  to  be  useful  in
curing  disv»rder,  and  the  be«;t  manner  of  preparing  and
^dinimslering  them.  It  will  be  found  to  contain'  a
great  deal  of  information,  upon  a  subject  of  the  greatest
importance  to  the  people  ;  beiiig  the  result  of  thirty
years  constant  practice,  in  attending  on  all  kinds  ef  dis-
ease common  in  this  country.  It  OiTers  to  the  public  an
opporlunity  to  make  themselves  sufficiently  acquainted
with  the  subject,  to  enable  every  one  who  a  .-ails  himself


iXTKODUCTlOK.  1  1

of  it,  to  become  hi^ own physician,  with  a-  trilling  ex-
pense.

To  introduce  a  new  sj^stem  of  medical  practice  and  to
rnake  an  entire  change of  the  public  opinion  on  so  im-
portant a  subject,  is  an  undertaking  of  too  great  magni-
tude to  be  effected  without  much  difficult}^,  let  its  supe-
riority over  all  others be ever  so  great ;  for  whoever
undertakes  it  must  expect  to  have  to  contend  against  the
interest  of  a  large  class  of  the  community,  and  the  pre-
judices of  the whole. That Dr. i  homsoa has been
able  to  effect  so  much,  is  more  surprising,  than  that  he
has  not  done  more,  for  he  has  laboured  under  many  diffi-
culties besides  being  opposed  by  a  powerful  combination
whose  interest  it  is  to  keep  the  people  back  from  adopt-
ing his  practice. He has been obliged  to satisfy  the
people  of  what  is  foi their  interest,  as  well  as  for  their
peace  and  happiness,  against  their  own  inclinations ;  and
has  pursued  his  plan  with  wonderful  perseverance,  and
with  an  honest  and  determined  zeal  to  do  what  he  thouoht
to  be  his  duty. He  seems  to  have  had  in  view  more  the
public  good  than  his  own  interest,  for  his  whole  plan  has
been  to  give  information  to  the  people,  as  well  as  to  re-
lieve them  from  disease  ;  and  to  put  it  in  their  power  to
cure themselves and  famihes  in  all cases  of  sickness,
without  deing  under  the  necessity  of  employing  a  doctor.
In  pursuing  this  object  he  has  spent  the  best  part  of  his
days,  and  has  received  but  a  very  sm.all  compensation  for
all  his  labours;  the  pecuniary  benelit  that  he has  real-
ized for  his  practice  and  rights  sold,  would  be  no  temp-
tation to  any  one  to  undergo  the  hundredth  part  of  what
he  has  suffered  from  persecution.

Notwithstanding  all  the  difficulties  Dr.  Thomson  has
met  with,  and  all  the  opposition  he  has  had  to  contend
against,  his  system  is  made  use  of  by  the  people  general-
ly in  many  places,  and  is  fast  spreading  in  all  parts  of  the
United  States.  Wherever  the  people  become  acquaint-
ed with  it  they  universally  adopt  it,  and  consider  it  of
the  greatest  value  ;  so  much  so,  that  there  are  hundreds
who  would  not  be  deprived  of  the  information  they  have
received  for  any  sum  of  money  whatever.  In  several
towns  large  societies  nave  oeen  lormed of  those  who


12  INTRODUCTION.

have  purchn.sed  the  rights,  and  who  obhgate  therjiselves
to  assist  each  other  Iq  cases  of  sickness  ;  where  this  has
been  the  case,  great  benefit  has  been  derived  and  the
success  of  the  jjractice  has  been  complete.  This  seems  to
be  the  best  plan  for  introducing  a  correct  knowledge  of
the  system  and  practice  among  the  people,  and  putting  it
in  their  power  to  derive  the  most  advantage  from' its  use  ;
and  if  a  few  of  those  men  who  have  the  most  influence
in  society,  would  examine  into  the  subject  with  impar-
tiality, they  would  readily  be  convinced  of  its  superior
usefulness,  and  by  taking  an  interest  in  diffusing  a  knowl-
edge of  the  practice  among  the  people,  they  would  con-
fer a  greater  benefit  on  mankind  than  by  any  charitable
act  they  could  perform.

There  has  been  one  great  obstacle  in  the  way  of  a  gen-
eral extension  of  a  knowledge  of  the  practice,  for  the
want  of  some  means  to  convey  correct  information  how
to  prepare  and  administer  the  medicine,  with  the  best
manner  of  treatment  in  curing  disease  ;  and  also  to  pre-
vent all  who  adopt  this  system  oi  practice,  from  being  im-
posed upon  by  those  who  pretend  to  make  use  of  it  with-
out a  proper  knowledge  of  the  subject;  for  there  are
quacks  under  this  system  as  well  as  others.  This  is  ob-
viated by  the  following  work,  in  which  it  is  thought  will
be  found  sufficient  explanations  and  directions  to  enable
any  one  who  pays  strict  attention  to  them,  to  mtke  use
of  the  practice  with  safety  and  success.


OF THE

LIFE,  &c.  OF  SAMUEL  THOMSON.


1  HERE  is  nothing,  perhaps,  more  unpleasant  than  t©
write  ones  own  life  ;  for  in  doing  it  we  are  obliged  to  pass
over  again,  as  it  were,  many  scenes,  which  we  might
wish  to  have  forgotten,  and  relate  many  particulars,
which,  though  they  may  seem  very  important  to  our-
selves, yet  would  be  very  uninteresting  to  the  reader.  It
is  act  my  intention  to  attempt  to  write  a  history  of  my  life,
nor  would  it  be  in  my  power  to  do  it  if  I  had  such  a  wish ;
but  as  I  have  been  the  greater  part  of  my  life  engaged
in  one  of  the  most  important  pursuits,  one  which  is  of
more  consequence  to  the  great  human  family,  than  any
other  that  could  be  undertaken  by  man ;  that  of  allevi-
ating human  misery  by  curing  the  disease  of  our  coun-
try, by  the  most  simple,  safe  and  certain  method  of  prac-
tice, I  think  the  public  will  be  interested  to  know
something  of  me,  and  the  cause  of  my  having  taken  up-
on myself  so  important  a  calling,  without  being  regular-
ly educated  to  the  profession,  which  is  thought  by  the
world  to  be  indispensably  necessary ;  but  I  shall  take  the
liberty  to  disagee  a  little  with  them  in  this  particular ;  for,
although  learning  may  be  a  great  advantage  in  acquiring
a  profession,  yet  that  alone  will  never  make  a  great
man,  where  there  is  no  natural  gift.

By  giving  ashort  sketch  of  the  early  part  of  my  exist-
ence, and  relating  those  accidental  circumstances  that
have  occurred  during  my  life,  and  which  were  princi-
pally the  cause  of  my  engaging  in  the  healing  art,  will
enable  the  public  to  judge  more  correctly,  whether  I

B


14  Narrative  of  the  Life^  ^c^

have  taken  that  course  in  fulfillmg  my  duty  in  this  life,
which  the  God  of  nature  hath  pointed  out  for  me .  In  do-
ing this  I  shall  endeavour  to  give  a  plain  and  simple  nar-
rative of  facts  as  they  took  place,  and  relate  only  those
particulars  of  my  life,  with  such  cases  of  disease  that
have  come  under  my  care,  as  will  best  convey  to  the
reader  the  most  correct  information  of  my  system  of
practice  in  curing  disease.

I  was  born  Feb.  9,  1769,  in  the  town  of  Alstead,  coun-
ty of  Cheshire,  and  State  of  New-Hampshire.  My  fa-
ther John  Thomson,  was  born  in  Northbridge,  county
of  Worcester,  and  State  of  Massachusetts  ;  he  was  twen-
ty-five years  old  when  I  was  born.  My  mother's  name
was  Hannah  Cobb  ;  she  was  born  in  Medway,  Mass.  and
was  four  years  older  than  my  father.  1  had  one  sister
older  than  myself,  and  three  brothers  and  one  sister
younger,  who  are  all  living  except  my  second  brother,
who  died  in  his  fourteenth  year.  My  oldest  sister  mar-
ried Samuel  Hills,  and  lives  in  Surry,  New  Hampshire,
and  my  two  brothers  live  in  Jericho,  Vermont.  My
youngest  sister,  married  Waters  Mather,  and  lives  in
the  State  of  Ohio.  *"

That  country  was  a  wilderness  when  I  was  born ;  my
father  had  began  there  about  a  year  before,  at  which
time  there  was  no  house  within  three  miles  one  waj'^,
and  about  one  the  other ;  there  were  no  roads,  and  they
had  to  go  by  marked  trees.  The  snow  was  very  deep
when  they  moved  there,  and  my  mother  had  to  travel
over  a  mile  on  snow  shoes  through  the  woods  to  get
to  their  habitation.  My  parents  were  poor,  having  no-
thing to  begin  the  world  with ;  but  had  to  depend  upon
their  labour  for  support.  My  father  had  bought  a  piece
of  wild  land  on  credit,  and  had  to  pay  for  it  by  his  labour
in  what  he  could  make  off  the  land,  which  caused  us
great  hardships  and  deprivations  for  a  long  time.

As  soon  as  I  began  to  form  any  correct  ideas  of  things,
my  mind  was  much  irritated  by  the  impressions  made  on
it  by  my  parents,  who,  no  doubt  with  very  good  inten-
tions, filled  my  young  head  with  all  kinds  hob-goblins
and  witch  stories,  which  made  a  very  deep  impression
on  my  mind,  and  which  were  not  entirely  irradicated  for
many  years. I  mention  this  as  a  caution  to  parents,  not


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  15

to  tell  their  children  any  thing  but  the  truth ;  for  young
children  naturally  believe  whatever  their  parents  tell
them,  and  when  they  frighten  them  with  such  stories,
for  the  purpose  of  making  them  behave  well,  it  will
most  generally  have  a  very  bad  effect;  for  when  they
arrive  at  years  of  discretion,  and  find  that  all  those  sto-
I'ies  are  falsehoods,  they  will  naturally  form  very  unfa-
vourable opinions  of  their  parents,  whose  duty  it  is  to  set
them  better  examples.

My  father  and  mother  were  of  the  baptist  persuasion,
and  were  very  strict  in  their  religious  duties.  They  at-
tended meeting  every  sabbath,  and  my  father  prayed
night  and  morning  in  his  family.  One  day  they  went  to
meeting  and  left  me  and  my  sister  at  home  alone,  and
told  us  that  if  we  were  wicked  they  should  send  the  bear
or  the  knocker  to  carry  us  off.  While  they  were  ab-
sent I  was  at  play,  when  ve  heard  a  hard  knocking  on
the  outside  of  the  house,  which  frightened  us  very  much,
and  when  they  came  home  I  told  them  what  had  hap-
pened ;  but  instead  of  letting  us  know  what  it  was,  they
told  us  it  was  the  knocker  they  had  told  us  of,  and  that
or  the  bear  would  always  come  if  we  were  wicked  and
did  not  mind  and  do  as  they  told  us.  It  was  several
years  after  that  my  reason  taught  me  that  this  knocker  as
they  called  it,  was  a  wood-pf^cker  that  came  on  the  end
of  the  house.  Parents  ought  to  be  careful  to  impress
on  the  minds  of  young  childre^i,  correct  ideas  of  things,
and  not  mislead  their  understani^gs  by  telling  them
falsehoods ;  for  it  will  be  of  the  greatest  importance  as
respects  their  future  conduct  and  pursuits  in  life.

When  I  was  betvv^een  three  and  four  years  old,  my
fathej"  took  me  out  with  him  to  work.  The  first  busi-
ness I  was  set  to  do  was  to  drive  the  cows  to  pasture
and  watch  the  geese,  with  other  small  chores,  which
occupation  kept  me  all  day  in  the  fields.  I  was  very
curious  to  know  the  names  of  all  the  herbs  which  I  saw
growing,  and  what  they  were  good  for ;  and  to  satisfy
my  curiosity  was  constantly  making  enquiries  of  those
persons  that  1  happened  to  be  with,  for  that  purpose.
All  the  information  I  thus  obtained,  or  by  my  ovm  ob-
servation, J  carefully  laid  up  in  my  memory  and  never
forgot. There  was  an  old  lady  by  the  name  of  Ben-


16  Narrative  of  the  lAfef  4»c.

ton  lived  near  us,  who  used  to  attend  our  family  when
there  was  any  sickness.  At  that  time,  there  was  no
such  thing  as  a  Doctor  known  among  us ;  there  not  be-
ing any  within  ten  miles.  The  whole  of  her  practice
was  with  roots  and  herbs,  applied  to  the  patient,  or
given  in  hot  drinks,  to  produce  sweating ;  which  always
answered  the  purpose.  When  one  thing  did  not  pro-
duce the  desired  effect,  she  would  try  something  else,
till  they  were  relieved.  By  her  attention  to  the  family,
and  the  benefits  they  received  from  her  skill,  we  be-
came very  much  attached  to  her ;  and  when  she  used
to  go  out  to  collect  roots  and  herbs,  she  would  take
me  with  her,  and  learn  me  their  names,  with  what  they
were  good  for ;  and  I  used  to  be  very  curious  in  my  en-
quiries, and  in  tasting  every  thing  that  I  found.  The
information  I  thus  obtained  at  this  early  age,  was  after-
wards of  great  use  to  me.

Sometime  in  the  summer,  after  I  was  four  years  old,
being  out  in  the  fields  in  search  of  the  cows,  I  disco-
vered a  plant  which  had  a  singular  branch  and  pods,
that  I  had  never  seen  before ;  and  I  had  the  curiosity  to
pick  some  of  the  pods  and  chew  them,  the  taste  and
operation  produced,  v/as  so  remarkable,  that  I  never
forgot  it.  I  afterwards  used  to  induce  other  boys  'to
chew  it,  merel^^  by  way  of  sport,  to  see  them  vomit.
I  tried  this  herb  in  this  way  for  nearly  twenty  years,
without  knowing  any  thing  of  its  medical  virtues.  This
plant  is  what  I  have  called  the  Emectic  Herb,  and  is
the  most  important  article  1  make  use  of  in  my  prac-
tice. It  is  very  common  in  most  parts  of  this  country,
and  may  be  prepared  and  used  in  almost  any  manner.
It  is  a  certain  counter-poison,  having  never,  been  known
to  fail  to  counteract  the  effects  of  the  most  deadly  poi-
son, even  when  taken  in  large  quantities  for  self  des-
truction. There  is  no  danger  to  be  apprehended  from
its  use,  as  it  is  perfectly  harmless  in  its  operation,  even
•when  a  large  quantity  is  taken — it  operates  as  an  eme-
tic, cleanses  the  stomach  from  all  improper  aUment,
promotes  an  internal  heat,  which  is  immediately  felt  at
the  extremities,  and  produces  perspiration.  The  ex-
clusive right  of  using  this  plant  for  medical  purposes  is
secured  to  me  by  patent,  and  my  right  to  the  discovery


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  -17

Mas  never  been  disputed;  though  the  Doctors  have
done  every  thing  they  could  to  destroy  the  credit  of  it,
by  false  statements,  representing  it  to  be  a  deadly  poi-
son, and  at  the  §ame  time  they  knew  to  the  contrary,
for  they  have  made  use  of  it  themselves  for  several
years,  and  have  tried  to  defraud  me  of  the  discovery,
by  giving  it  the  name  of  Lobelia,  which  is  well  known
to  be  a  poisonous  root,  no  way  resembling  this  plant.
Ifeel  perfectly  convinced  from  near  thirty  years  expe-
rience of  its  medical  properties,  that  the  discovery  is  of
incalculable  importance,  and  if  properly  understood  by
the  people,  will  be  more  usefal  in  curing  the  diseases
incident  to  this  climate,  than  the  drugs  and  medicines
sold  by  all  the  apothecaries  in  the  country.

At  five  3'^ears  of  age  my  father  put  me  to  hard  work,
and  was  very  strict,  using  the  greatest  severity  towards
me.  I  used  to  suffer  very  much  from  pains  in  my  hips
and  back,  being  lame  from  my  birth,  and  the  hard  work
made  me  so  stiff,  that  in  the  morning  it  was  with  diffi-
culty I  could  walk.  My  father's  severity  towards  me
made  me  very  unhappy,  for  I  was  constantly  in  fear
lest  he  should  call  and  I  should  not  hear  him,  in  which
case  he  used  to  punish  me  very  severely.  I  continued
in  this  situation  till  I  was  eight  jed.rs  old,  when  my  bro-
thers began  to  be  some  help,  which  took  part  of  the
burthen  off  from  me.  We  suffered  great  hardships  and
lived  very  poorly ;  but  we  always  had  something  to  eat,
and  were  contented,  for  we  knew  of  nothing  better ;  a
dish  of  bean  porridge  and  some  *potatoes,  were  our  con-
stant fare,  and  this  was  better  than  many  others  had.
The  greatest  part  of  this  winter  Vv^e  had  to  live  in  the
barn.  In  July  my  father  had  got  a  part  of  the  roof  of
a  new  house  covered,  and  we  moved  into  it ;  which  was
more  comfortable  than  the  barn.  About  this  time  my
mother  wa&  taken  sick  and  was  carried  to  Mrs.  Benton's
for  her  to  take  care  of,  where  she  remained  for  sever-
al weeks,  during  which  time,  by  using  such  means  as
had  never  been  to  school,  or  had  any  chance  whatever
to  learn  to  read.  My  father  kept  me  constantly  to
work  all  week  days,  and  on  Sunday  I  had  to  go  a  con-
derable  distance  on  foot  to  meeting, and  the  rest  of  the


48  Narrative  of  the  Life^  ^c.

day  was  kept  on  my  feet  in  hearing  iiim  read  the  cate-
chism, creed  and  prayers,  so  that  I  had  Uttle  time  to  rest
on  that  day.

The  winter  I  was  eight  years  old,  I  was  very  sick
with  the  canker-rash ;  but  was  attended  by  the  widow
Benton,  who  cured  me  by  making  use  of  such  medicine
as  our  country  afforded,  and  I  was  in  a  short  time  able
to  be  about.  After  I  had  got  well  my  mind  was  more
attentive  to  the  use  of  roots  and  herbs  as  medicine  than
ever.  I  had  at  that  time  a  very  good  knowledge  of  the
principal  roots  and  herbs  to  be  found  in  that  part  of  the
country,  with  their  names  and  medical  uses ;  and  the
neighbours  were  in  the  habit  of  getting  me  to  go  with
them  to  show  them  such  roots  and  herbs  as  the  doctors
ordered  to  be  made  use  of  in  sickness  for  syrups,  &c.
and  by  way  of  sport  they  used  to  call  me  doctor.  While
in  the  field  at  work  I  used  often  to  find  the  herb,  which
I  tasted  when  four  years  old,  and  gave  it  to  those  who
worked  with  me,  to  see  them  spit  and  often  vomit  ;  but
1  never  observed  any  bad  effect  produced  by  it,  which
simple  experiments  eventually  led  me  to  observe  the
value  of  it  in  disease.

When  I  was  about  ten  years  old,  there  was  a  school
a  little  more  than  a  mile  from  my  father's,  where  I  had
the  opportunity  of  attending  for  one  month.  The  wea-
ther was  cold  and  the  going  bad,  which  caused  me  to
make  very  slow  progress  in  my  learning  ;  but  the
chance  we  considered  a  great  privilege,  for  the  coun-
try was  new  and  people  poor,  and  the  opportunity  for
children  to  get  learning  very  small.  I  took  a  great  dis-
like to  working  on  a  farm,  and  never  could  be  recon-
ciled to  it ;  for  nothing  could  strike  me  with  greater
dread  than  to  hear  the  name  of  a  plough,  or  any  other
thing  used  on  a  farm  mentioned.  This  I  have  always
attributed  to  the  hardships  1  underwent,  and  the  severi-
ty which  my  father  used  constantly  to  exercise  towards
ine  from  the  time  I  was  five  to  ten  years  old.  At  that
time,  1  used  to  think  that  if  1  ever  had  any  land  I  would
not  plough  it ;  and  if  my  father's  treatment  of  me  was
the  effect  of  his  religion,  I  never  wished  to  have  any.
This  \vas  when  he  was  under  the  strongest  influence  of
the baptist  persuasion,  ajid  used  to  be  very  zealous  in


Of  Samuel  Tliomson.

his  religious  duties,  praying  night  and  morning,  and
sometimes  three  times  a  day.  He  was  a  man  of  violent
and  quick  temper,  and  when  in  his  fits  of  passion,  my
mother  used  frequently  to  remind  him  of  certain  parts
of  his  prayer  ;  &uch  as  this,  which  I  never  forgot :  '•  May
we  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly,  in  the  present
evil  world."  She  was  a  woman  much  respected  in  the
town  where  we  lived.

About  the  time  I  was  fourteen  years  old,  my  father
left  the  baptist  persuasion  and  embraced  that  of  univer-
sal salvation- — By  grace  are  ye  saved,  through  faith
not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God.  If  he  ever  ex-
perienced a  change  of  heart  for  the  better,  it  was  at  thi®
time ;  his  love  to  God  and  man  was  great,  and  I  had
great  reason  to  rejoice,  for  he  was  like  another  man  ia
his  house.  He  has  continued  to  enjoy  the  same  belief
with  much  comfort  to  this  time.  My  mother  remained
many  years  in  the  full  belief  of  the  salvation  of  all  men,
and  continued  so  till  her  death.

Sometime  during  the  year  that  I  was  sixteen  years
old,  r  heard  my  parents  say,  that  as  my  mind  was  so
much  taken  up  with  roots  and  herbs,  they  thought  it
best  to  send  me  to  live  with  a  Doctor  Fuller,  of  West-
moreland, who  was  called  a  root  doctor.  This  pleased
me  very  much,  and  in  some  measure  raised  my  ambi-
tion ;  but  I  was  soon  after  disappointed  in  my  hopes,  for
they  said  I  had  not  learning  enough,  and  they  did  not
know  how  to  spare  me  from  my  work,  which  depressed
my  spirits  and  was  very  discouraging  to  me.  I  now.
gave  up  all  hopes  of  going  to  any  other  business,  and
tried  to  reconcile  mj^self  to  spend  my  days  in  working
on  a  farm,  which  made  me  very  unhappy.  I  had  little
learning  and  was  awkward  and  ignomant  of  the  world,
as  my  father  had  never  given  me  any  chance  to  go  into
company,  to  learn  how  to  behave,  which  caused  me
great  uneasine«.s.

In  the  year  1788,  when  I  was  in  my  nineteenth  year,
my  father  purchased  a  piece  of  land  on  Onion  river,  in
the  State  of  Vemont,  and  on  the  12th  day  of  October
he  started  from  Alstead,.  and  took  me  with  him,  to  go
to  work  on  the  land  and  clear  up  some  of  it  to  build  a
house  on,  as  it  was  all  covered  with  wood. In  about


20  .  Narrative  of  the  Life^  ^c.

tour  days  afler  our  arrival,  we  were  enabled  to  clear  a
small  spot  and. to  build  us  a  camp  to  live  in ;  we  had  to
do  our  own  cooking  and  washing ;  our  fare  was  poor
and  we  had  to  work  very  hard;  but  we  got  along  toler-
ably well  till  the  2d  of  December,  when  I  had  the  mis-
fortune to  cut  my  ancle  very  badly,  which  accident  pre-
vented me  from  doing  any  labour  for  a  long  time  and  al-
most deprived  me  of  life. The  wound  was  a  very  bad
one,  as  it  split  the  joint  and  laid  the  bone  entirely  bare,
so  as  to  lose  the  juices  of  my  ancle  joint  to  such  a  de-
gree as  to  reduce  my  strength  very  much. My  father
sent  for  a  Doctor  Cole,  of  Jericho,  who  ordered  sweet
appletree  bark  to  be  boiled,  and  the  wound  to  be  wash-
ed with  it,  which  caused  great  pain,  and  made  it  much
worse,  so  that  in  eight  days  my  strength  was  almost  ex-
hausted ;  the  flesh  on  my  leg  and  thigh  was  mostly  gone,
and  my  life  was  dispaired  of;  the  Doctor  said  he  could
do  no  more  fbr  me  ;  my  father  was  greatly  alarmed
about  me,  and  said  that  if  Dr.  Kitteridge, of  Walpole,
could  be  sent  for,  he  thought  he  might  help  me ;  but  I
told  him  it  would  be  in  vain  to  send  for  himC  for  I  could
not  live  so  long  as  it  would  take  to  go  after  him,  with-
out some  immediate assistance. He said  he did  not
know  what  to  do — I  told  him  that  there  was  one  thing  I
had  thought  of,  which  I  wished  to  have  tried,  if  it  could
be  obtained, that  I  thought  would  help  me. He  anx-
iously enquired  what  it  was,  and  I  told  him  if  he  could
find  some  comfrey  root  I  would  try  a  plaister  made  of
that  and  turpentine. He  immediately  went  to  an  old
place  that was  settled  before the war, and had the
good  luck  to find  some  ;  a plaister was  prepared  by
my  directions and  applied  to  my  ancle  the side op-
posite to the wound, and had the desired effect ;
the  juices stopped running in  about  six hours,  and  1
was  very  much  relieved  ;  though  the pain continued
to  be  very  severe  and  the  inflammation  was  great  ;  the
juices  settled  between  the  sldn  and  bone  and  caused
a  suppuration,  which  broke in about three  weeks  ;
during  which  time  I  did  not  have  three  nights  sleep,
nor  did  I  eat  any  thing. This accidental  remedy  was
found  through necessity, and  was  the  first  time  the
mother  of  invention  held  forth  her  hand  to  me. The


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  21

success  which  attended  this  experiment,  and  the  na-
tural turn  of  my  mind  to  those  things,  I  think  was  a
principal  cause  of  of  my  continumg  to  practice  the  heal-
ing art  to  this  time.

Our  stock  of  provisions  heing  now  exhausted,  and  my
wound  somewhat  better,  my  father  was  very  finxious
to  return  to  Alstead.  He  asked  me  if  I  thought  1
could  bear  the  journey  if  he  should  place  me  on  a  bed
laid  in  a  sled.  I  answered  that  1  was  willing  to  try. —
He  immediately  went  to  work  and  fixed  a  sled,  and
put  me  in  it  on  a  straw  bed  ;  and  on  the  1st  day  of  Janu-
ary 1789  we  began  our  journey.  There  was  very  lit-
tle snow,  and  the  road  rough,  which  caused  the  sled  to
jolt  very  much  and  my  sufferings  were  great.  It  was
very  doubtful  with  my  father,  and  likewise  with  me,
whether  I  should  live  to  perform  the  journey  ;  but  we
proceeded  on  however,  without  any  thing  important
happening,  except  wearing  out  the  runners  of  our  sled
and  having  to  make  new  ones,  and  accomplished  twen-
ty miles  the  first  day.  At  a  place  where  we  stoped  all
night  there  was  a  woman  whose  situation  appeared  to
me  so  much  worse  than  jnv  own  that  I  felt  much  en-
couraged. She  had  been  %ick  with  a  lever,  and  the
doctor  had  given  so  much  poisonous  medicine,  to  break
the  fever,  as  he  called  it,  she  was  left  in  a  most  misera-
ble situation.  Her  side  and  shoulder  were  in  a  putrid
state,  and  in  full  as  bad  a  condition  as  my  ancle.  My
father  in  dressing  my  wound  had  drawn  a  string
through  between  the  heel-cord  and  bone,  and  another
between  that  and  the  skin  ;  so  that  tv,^o  thirds  of  the^
way  round  my  ancle  it  was  hollow.

At  a  place  where  we  stopped  on  the  third  night  a
circumstance  had  occured  which  from  its  novelty  I
think  worth  mentioning.  A  young  woman  who  lived
in  the  family  had  discovered  a  strong  inclination  to
sleep  more  than  what  is  common ;  and  had  expressed  a
wish  that  they  would  let  her  sleep  enough  once.  She
went  to  bed  on  Sunday  night  and  did  not  awake  again  till
Tuesday  morning,  having  slept  thirty  six  hours.  On
awaknigshe  had  no  idea  of  having  slept  more  than  one
night  ;  but  began  to  make  preparation  for  washing,  as
wag  the  custom  oq  Mondays,  till  she  was  informed  that


22  JVarrative  of  the  Life^  S,-c.

they  had  washed  the  day  before.  Her  health  was  good
and  she  never  after  that  required  more  sleep  thaa
other  persons.

When  we  got  onto  the  high  land  there  was  consider-
able snow,  and  w^e  got  along  much  m  ore  comfortably.
I  had  to  be  carried  in  on  the  bed  and  laid  by  the  fire,
everj'^  night,  during  the  journey.  The  people  general-
ly where  we  stopped  treated  me  with  kindness,  and
showed  much  pitty  for  me  in  my  di.:tres«ed  situation  ;
but  they  all  thought  that  I  should  not  live  to  get  through
the  journey.  The  doctors  had  advised  to  have  my  leg
cut  off,  as  the  only  means  of  saving  my  life,  and  all
those  who  saw  me  during  our  journey  expressed  the
same  opinion  ;  anil  I  think  it  would  have  been  done
had  I  given  my  consent  ;  but  I  positively  refused  to
agree  to  it,  so  the  plan  was  given  up.  I  prefered  to
take  my  chance  with  my  leg  on  to  having  it  taken  ofl* ;
which  resolution  I  have  never  repented  of  to  this
day.

On  arriving  in  Walpole,  my  father  proceeded  imme-
diately to  the  house  of  the  famous  Dr.  Kitteridge,  to
have  him  dress  my  wound,  and  get  his  opinion  of  my
situation  ;  he  iiot  being  at  home  and  it  btriiig  nearly
dark,  we  concluded  to  put  up  for  the  night,  and  I  was  car-
ried in  on  my  bed  and  laid  by  the  fire.  The  doctor
soon  came  home,  and  on  entering  the  room  where  I
was,  cried  out  in  a  very  rough  manner.  Who  have  you
here  ?  His  wife  answered,  a  sick  man.  The  devil,  repli-
ed he,  I  want  no  sick  man  here.  I  was  much  terrified
by  his  coarse  manner  of  speaking,  and  thought  if  he  was
so  ro%gh  in  his  conversation,  what  will  he  be  when  he
comes  to  dress  my  wound ;  but  I  was  happily  disappoint-
ed, for  he  took  off  the  dressing  with  great  care  and  han-
dled me  very  tenderly.  On  seeing  the  strings  that  were
in  the  wound,  he  exclaimed,  what  the  devil  are  these
halters  here  for  ?  My  father  told  him  they  were  put  in
to  keep  the  sore  open. — He  said  he  thought  the  sore
open  enough  now,  for  it  is  all  rotten. — Being  anxious  to
know  his  opinion  of  me,  my  father  asked  him  what  he
thought  of  my  situation.  What  do  I  think?  said  he.
Why  I  think  he  will  die — and  then  looking  very
pleasantly at me. said, though  I think young mar^


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  .'^3

you  will  ^et  well  first.  In  the  morning  he  dressed
my  ancle  again  and  gave  me  some  sahe  to  use  in
future ;  and  my  father  asked  him  for  his  bill,  which
was,  I  think,  for  our  keeping  and  his'  attending  me,
about  fifty  cents.  K  great  contrast  between  this  and
what  is  charged  at  the  present  time  by  our  regular
physicians  ;  for  they  will  hardly  look  at  a  person
without  making  them  pay  two  or  three  dollars.  I
have  been  more  particular  in  describing  this  interview
with  Dr.  Kittsridge,  on  account  of  his  extraordinary*
skill  in  surgery,  and  the  great  name  be  acquired,  and
justly  deserved,  among  the  people  throughout  the
country.  His  system  of  practice  was  peculiarly  his
-awn,  and  all  the  medicine  he  used  were  prepared  by  him  ^
self,  lrom"tire  roots  and  herbs  of  our  own  country.  He
was  a  vli'y  eccentric  character  and  uncouth  in  his  man-
ners ;  but  he  possessed  a  good  heart,  and  a  benevolent
disposition.  He  was  governed  in  his  practice  by  that
great  plan  which  is  dictated  by  nature  ;  and  the  uncom-
mon success  he  met  with  is  evidence  enousf-h  to  satisfy
any  reasonable  mind,  of  the  superiority  of  it  over  what
is  the  practice  of  those  who  become  doctors  by  reading-
only,  with  their  poisons  aod  their  instruments  of
torture.

We  left  Walpole  and  arrived  at  our  home  about  noon,
and  my  mother,  brothers  and  sisters,  were  much  rejoic-
ed to  see  me,  though  grieved  at  my  distressed  situation  ;
and  never  was  any  one  more  in  need  of  the  tender  care
of  friends  than  I  was  at  this  time.  My  mother  proved
to  me  the  old  saying,  that  a  friend  in  need  is  a  friend
indeed.  My  case  was  considered  doubtful  for  some
time.  I  was  from  the  first  of  December  to  the  first  of
March  unable  to  walk ;  but  by  good  nursing  and  con-
stant care,  I  was  enabled  in  the  spring  to  attend  to  the
business  at  home,  so  that  my  father  left  me  in  charge
of  the  farm  and  went  with  my  brother  to  Onion  river,
again  to  work  on  liis  land.

On  the  9th  of  February  1790,  I  was  twenty-one
years  of  age,  and  my  father  gave  me  a  deed  of  one  half
of  his  farm  iij  Alstead,  consisting  of  one  hundred  and
twenty-five  acres ;  and  I  carried  it  on  for  three  years,
and  he  had  the  liberty  to  tajte  such  stock  as  he  pleased.


^4  J^arrative  of  the  Life^  4'C.

He  then  made  preparations  and  removed  to  Onion  ri-
ver, and  left  my  mother  and  sister  in  my  care.  Soon
after  I  took  a  bad  coid,  which  threw  me  into  a  slow  fe-
ver. In  the  month  of  March  we  all  had  the  meazles,
and  my  mother  had  what  the  doctors  called  the  black
kind,  and  was  so  bad  that  her  life  was  despaired  of.  The
disease  turned  in  and  seated  on  her  lungs  and  she  nev-
er recovered  her  health.  Several  doctors  attended  her
without  doing"  her  any  good ;  her  cough  was  very  se-
vere and  her  mouth  was  sore,  and  she  was  greatly  dis-
tressed. I  attended  upon  her  under  the  direction  of
the  doctors,  and  took  the  cough  and  had  much  the  same
symptoms.  She  continued  to  grow  worse  daily ;  the
doctors  gave  her  over,  and  gave  her  disease  the  name
of  galloping  consumption,  which  I  thought  was  a  very
appropriate  name — for  they  are  the  riders,  and  their
whip  is  mercury,  opium  and  vitriol,  and  they  gallopped
her  out  of  the  world  in  about  nine  weeks.  She  died  on
the  13th  of  May,  1790.

I  was  at  this  time  very  low  with  the  same  disorder
that  my  mother  died  with,  and  the  doctor  often  impor-
tuned me  to  take  some  of  his  medicine  ;  but  I  dechned
it,  thinking  I  had  rather  die  a  natural  death.  He  tried
to  frighten  me  by  telling  me  it  was  the  last  chance  of
getting  help,  and  he  thought  he  could  cure  me  ;  but  1
told  him  I  had  observed  the  effect  his  medicine  had  on
my  mother,  for  she  constantly  grew  worse  under  the
operation  of  it ;  and  I  had  no  desire  to  risk  it  on  myself.
I  have  always  been  of  the  opinion,'  that  if  I  had  follow-
ed his  advice,  I  should  have  been  gallopped  out  of  the
world  the  same  as  my  mother  was ;  and  I  have  never
repented  of  my  refusal  to  this  day.

After  my  mother  died,  1  undertook  to  doctor  myself,
and  made  some  syrups  of  such  things  as  I  had  the  know-
ledge of,  which  relieved  my  cough ;  and  ^vith  the  warm
weather,  I  so  far  recovered  my  health,,  as  to  be  able
to  work  some  time  in  June.  Being  without  womens  help
I  was  obliged  to  hire  such  as  I  could  get,  which  proved
a  disadvantage  to  my  interest ;  and  I  thought  it  would
be  best  to  find  some  person  who  would  take  an  interest
in.saving  my  property.  On  the  7th  day  of  July,  1790,
I  was  married  to  Susan  Allen.  We  were  both  young
and  had  great  hardships  to  encounter,  but  we  got  along


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  25

very  well,  and  both  enjoyed  good  health  until  our  first
child  was  born,  which  was  on  the  4th  day  of  July  fol-
lowing. My  wife  was  taken  ill  on  Saturday,  and  sent
for  help  ;  she  lingered  along  till  Sunday  night,  when
she  became  very  bad ;  her  situation  was  dangerous,
and  she  was  in  hand  constantly  the  whole  night,  until
sunrise  the  next  morning,  when  she  was  delivered  ;  but
her  senses  were  gone.  During  the  whole  night  it  was
©ne  continued  struggle  of  forcing  nature,  which  pro-
duced so  great  an  injury  to  the  nervous  system,  as  to
cause  strong  convulsion  fits  in  about  an  hour  after  her
delivery.  The  witnessing  of  this  horrid  scene  of  hu-
man butchery,  was  one  great  cause  of  my  paying  atten-
tion to  midwifery,  and  my  practice  has  since  been  very
successful  in  it.

Her  fits  continued  and  grew  worse  ;  there  were  six
doctors  atteiided  her  that  day,  and  a  sevent  h  was  sen
for;  but  she  grew  worse  under  their  care  ;  for  one
would  give  her  medicine,  and  another  said  that  he  did
wrong — another  would  bleed  her,  and  the  other  would
say  he  had  done  wrong,  and  so  on  through  the  whole.
I  heard  one  of  them  say  that  his  experience  in  this
case  was  worth  fifty  dollars.  I  found  that  they  were
trymg  their  practice  by  experiments  ;  and  was  so  dis-
satisfied with  their  conduct  that  at  night  I  told  them
what  1  thought ;  and  that  I  had  heard  them  accusmg
each  other  of  doing  wrong ;  but  I  was  convinced  that
they  had  all  told  the  truth,  for  they  had  all  done
wrong.  They  all  gave  her  over  to  die,  and  I  dismiss-
ed them,  having  seen  enough  of  their  conduct  to  con-
vince me  that  they  were  domg  more  hurt  than  good.

After  they  were  gone,  I  sent  for  Dr.  Watts  an.i  Dr.
Fuller,  who  were  called  root  doctors.  They  attended
her  through  the  night  and  in  the  morning  about  the  same
hour  that  they  began  the  fits  leit  her.  She  had  in.tiie
whole  eighteen,  of  the  most  shocking  convulsion  fits  that
had  been  ever  seen  by  any  one  present.  The  spasms
were  so  violent  that  it  jarred  the  whole  house.  Alter
the  fits  had  left  her,  she  was  entirely  senseless,  and
was  raving  distracted  for  three  days ;  and  then  became
perfectly  stupid,  and  lay  in  that  situation  for  three  days  ;
she  then  laughed  three  days,  and  then  cried  three  days  '


26  J^arrativeof  the  Life^^c.

after  which  she  seemed  to  awake  hke  a  person  from
sleep,  and  had  no  knowledge  of  what  had  passed,  or
that  she  had  been  sick,  or  had  a  child.  These  two
doctors  continued  to  attend  her,  and  used  all  the  means
in  their  power  to  strengthen  the  nervous  system.  She
gained  very  slowly,  and  it  was  a  long  time  before  she
got  about ;  but  she  never  got  entirely  over  it.  This
sickness  put  me  back  in  my  business  very  much,  and
the  expense  was  above  two  hundred  dollars.

In  about  a  month  after  my  wife  had  recovered  from
her  sickness,  she  was  attacked  with  the  chohc,  which
required  all  my  attention  and  that  of  the  two  doctors
who  attended  her  before  ;  but  all  our  exertions  ap-
peared to  be  in  vain,  for  the  disease  had  its  regular
course  for  several  days  and  then  lei\  her.  These  at-
tacks continued  once  a  month,  or  oftener,  and  it  was  so
much  trouble  to  go  for  the  doctor  so  often,  as  I  had  to
during  these  turns,  that  I  let  a  young  man  who  studied
with  Dr.  Watts,  have  a  house  on  my  farm,  so  as  to
have  him  handy  ;  but  I  soon  found  that  by  having  a  doc-
tor so  near  there  was  plenty  of  business  for  him ;  for
there  was  not  a  month  in  the  year  but  what  1  had  some-
body sick  in  my  family.  If  a  child  was  attacked  with
any  trifling  complaint,  the  doctor  was  sent  for,  and  they
were  sure  to  have  a  long  sickness ;  so  he  paid  his  rent
and  keeping  very  easy.  This  doctor  lived  on  my  farm
seven  years,  during  which  time  I  had  a  very  good  know-
ledge of  all  the  medicine  he  made  use  of,  and  his  man-
ner of  curing  disease,  which  has  been  of  great  use  to
me.  Finding  that  I  had  a  natural  turn  for  medical  prac-
tice, he  spared  no  pains  to  give  me  all  the  information
in  his  power  ;  but  I  had  no  thought  at  that  time  of  ever
practising,  except  it  was  to  be  able  to  attend  my  own
family.  During  the  first  of  his  practice  he  used  chiefly
roots  and  herbs,  and  his  success  was  verj'^  great  in  cur-
ing canker  and  old  complaints  ;  but  he  afterwards  got  in-
to the  fashionable  mode  of  treating  his  patients,  by  giving
them  apothecary's  drugs,  which  made  him  more  popular
with  the  faculty,  but  less  useful  to  his  fellow  creatures.

My  mind  was  bent  on  learning  the  medical  proper
ties  of  such  vegetables  as  I  met  with,  and  was  constantly
in  the  habit  of  tasting  every  thing  of  the  kind  I  saw  ;


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  27

and  having  a  retentive  memory  I  have  always  recol-
lected the  taste  and  use  of  all  that  were  ever  shown  me
by  others,  and  likewise  of  all  that  I  discovered  myself.
This  practice  of  tasting  of  herbs  and  roots  has  been  of
great  advantage  to  me,  as  I  have  always  been  able  to
ascertain  what  is  ivsefal  for  any  particular  disease  by
that  means.  I  was  often  told  that  1  should  poison  my-
self by  tasting  every  thing  I  saw  ;  but  I  thought  I  ought
to  have  as  much  knowledge  as  a  beast,  for  the  Creator
had  given  them  an  instinct  to  discover  what  is  good  for
food,  and  what  is  necessary  for  medicine.  I  had  but
very  little  knowledge  of  disease  at  this  time  ;  but  had  a
great  inclination  to  learn  whatever  I  had  an  opportuni-
ty ;  and  my  own  experience,  which  is  the  best  school,
had  often  called  my  attention  to  the  subject.

The  herb  which  I  had  discovered  when  four  years
old,  I  had  often  met  with ;  but  it  had  never  occurred
to  me  that  it  was  of  any  value  as  medicine,  until  about
this  time,  when  mowing  in  the  field  with  a  number  of
men  one  day,  I  cut  a  sprig  of  it,  and  gave  to  the  man
next  to  me,  who  eat  it ;  when  we  had  got  to  the  end  of
the  piece,  which  was  about  six  rods,  he  said  that  he  be-
lieved what  1  had  given  him  would  kill  him,  for  he  ne-
ver felt  so  in  his  life.  I  looked  at  him  and  saw  that  he
was  in  a  most  profuse  perspiration,  being  as  wet  all  over
as  he  could  be  ;  he  trembled  very  much,  and  there  was
no  more  colour  in  him  than  a  corpse.  I  told  him  to  go
to  the  spring  and  drink  some  water ;  he  attempted  to
go,  and  got  as  far  as  the  wall,  but  was  unable  to  get
over  it,  and  laid  down  on  the  ground  and  vomitted  sever-
al times.  He  said  he  thought  he  threw  off  his  stomach
two  quarts.  I  then  helped  him  into  the  house,  and  in
abont  two  hours  he  eat  a  very  hearty  dinner,  and  in  the
afternoon  was  able  to  do  a  good  half  days  labour.  He
afterwards  told  me  that  he  never  had  any  thing  do  him
80  much  good  in  his  life  ;  his  appetite  was  remarkably
good,  and  he  felt  better  than  he  had  for  a  long  time,
This  circumstance  gave  me  the  first  idea  of  the  medical
virtues  of  this  valuable  plant,  which  I  have  since  found
by  twenty  years  experience,  in  which  time  I  have  made
use  of  it  in  every  disease  I  have  met  with,  to  great  ad-
vantage, that  it  is  a  discovery  of  the  greatest  importance.


28  JVarraihe  of  the  Life^  4'C.

In  March  1794,  my  second  daughter  was  born;  and
my  wife  had  no  medical  assistance  except  what  I  could
do  for  her,  with  the  advice  of  the  doctor  who  lived  on
my  farm.  After  this  she  was  never  again  afflicted  with
the  cholic.  In  the  course  of  this  year  the  lease  of  my
fathers  half  of  the  farm  expired,  and  we  made  a  division
of  the  stock.  My  half  was  five  yearlings  and  half  a
colt;  this  with  half  the  farm,  containing  about  one  hun-
dred and  twenty-five  acres,  was  all  the  property  I  pos-
sessed, and  I  was  mostly  clear  of  debt.  Soon  after,  I
purchased  of  my  father  the  other  half  of  the  farm,  for
which  I  gave  six  hundred  and  thirtj'-six  dollars,  payable
in  stock,  one  half  in  two  years  and  the  other  in  four.
In  order  to  meet  these  payments,  1  purchased  calves
and  colts ;  but  it  proved  hard  for  me,  as  they  brought
when  the  payment  became  due  but  little  more  than  the
first  cost,  after  having  to  keep  them  two  years ;  I  offer-
ed them  to  my  father  for  what  hay  they  eat  the  last
year  would  have  sold  for,  but  he  would  not  agree  to  it.
I  settled  with  him  however,  and  paid  him  according  to
contract.  I  afterwards  purchased  of  a  neighbour  a  small
piece  of  land,  which  incommoded  me  by  keeping  the
sun  from  my  house  part  of  the  forenoon;  for  which  I
agreed  to  pay  him  seventy-three  dollars  and  thirty-three
cents  in  three  years,  with  interest.  This  turned  out  a
troublesome  affair  for  me,  for  when  I  came  to  pay  the
interest  the  second  year,  the  note  was  more  than  when
first  given,  having  been  altered ;  and  1  refused  to  pay
any  thing.  When  the  note  became  due,  I  would  pay
no  more  than  what  it  was  given  for,  and  it  was  sued  and
my  cattle  and  horses  were  attached.  It  went  through
a  course  of  law  and  cost  us  both  a  great  deal  of  expense
and  trouble  ;  but  I  finally  beat  him  ;  he  lost  his  note
and  I  recovered  damage  for  his  taking  my  cattle  and
horses.  This  was  the  first  time  I  had  any  thing  to  do
with  the  law,  and  in  the  whole  it  cost  me  about  one
hundred  dollars ;  but  it  was  a  good  lesson  and  has  been
worth  tome  the  expense.

When  my  second  daughter  was  about  two  years  old
she  was  taken  sick,  and  had  what  was  called  the  canker-
rash.  Dr.  Bliss,  who  lived  on  my  farm  was  sent  for,
and  he  said  she  had  that  disorder  as  bad  as  any  one  he


Of  Samuel  llicmsoii.  29

ever  saw.  He  tried  his  utmost  skill  to  prevent  putrifac-
tion,  which  he  feared  would  take  place  ;  but  after  using
every  exertion  in  his  power  without  doing  her  any  good,
he  said  he  could  do  no  more,  she  must  die.  She^as
senseless  and  the  canker  was  to  be  seen  in  her  mouth,
nose  and  ears,  and  one  of  her  eyes  was  covered  with  it
and  closed  ;  the  other  began  to  swell  and  turn  purple
also.  I  asked  the  doctor  if  he  could  not  keep  the  can-
ker out  of  this  eye ;  but  he  said  it  would  be  of  no  use,
for  she  could  not  live.  I  told  him  that  .if  he  could  do
no  more,  I  would  try  what  I  could  do  myself.  I  found
that  if  the  canker  could  not  be  stopped  immediately  she
would  be  blind  with  both  eyes.  She  was  so  distressed
for  breath  that  she  would  spring  straight  up  on  end  in
struggling  to  breathe.  I  sat  myself  in  a  chair,  and  held
her  in  my  lap,  and  put  a  blanket  round  us  both ;  then,
my  wife  held  a  hot  spider  or  shovel  between  my  feeU
and  I  poured  on  vinegar  to  raise  a  steam,  and  kept  it  as
hot  as  I  found  she  could  bear,  changing  them  as  soon  as
they  became  cold  ;  and  by  following  this  plan  for  about
twenty  minutes,  she  became  comfortable  and  breathed
easy.  I  kept  a  cloth  wet  with  cold  water  on  her  eyes,
changing  it  often,  as  it  grew  warm.  I  followed  ibis  plan,
steaming  her  every  two  hours,  for  about  a  week,  when
she  began  to  gain.  Her  eyes  came  open,  and  the  one
that  was  the  worst,  was  completely  covered  with  can-
ker, and  was  as  white  as  paper.  I  used  a  wash  of  rose-
mary to  take  off  the  canker ;  and  when  the  scale  came
oiT,  the  sight  came  out  with  it ;  and  it  entirely  perished.
The  other  eye  was  saved,  to  the  astonishment  of  all
who  saw  her,  particularly  the  doctor,  who  used  fre-
quently to  call  in  to  see  how  she  did.  He  said  she  was
saved  entirely  by  the  plan  I  had  pursued,  and  the  great
care  and  attention  paid  to  her.  She  entirely  recovered
from  the  disease,  with  the  exception  of  the  loss  of  one
eye,  and  has  enjoyed  good  health  to  this  time.  This
was  the  first  of  my  finding  out  the  plan  of  steaming  and
using  cold  water.  After  this  I  found  by  experience
that  by  putting  a  hot  stone  into  a  thing  of  hot  water,
leaving  it  partly  out  of  the  water,  and  then  pouring
vinf^gar  on  the  stone,  was  an  improvement.  Care  should
be  taken  not  to  raise  the  heat  too  fast  5  and  I  used  to

C2


30  A^arrative  of  the  Life,  ^c,

put  a  cloth  wet  with  cold  water  on  the  stomach,  at  the
same  time  giving  hot  medicine  to  raise  the  heat  inside  ;
and  when  they  had  been  steamed  in  this  manner  as  long^
as  I  thought  the?y  could  bear  it,  then  rub  them  all  over
with  a  cloth  wet  with  spirit,  vinegar,  or  cold  water,
change  their  clothes  and  bed  clothes,  and  then  let  them
go  to  bed.

A  short  time  before  this  daughter  was  sick,  my  oldest
son  was  born,  and  was  very  weakly  in  consequence  of
his  mother's  having  previous  to  his  birth,  what  is  called
a  three  months  fever,  which  experience  gave  me  a
pretty  good  knowledge  of  the  practice  of  the  doctors  in
prolonging  a  disease;  fori  never  could  reconcile  myself
to  the  idea,  that  a  doctor  could  be  of  any  use  if  the  fe-
ver must  have  its  course,  and  nature  had  to  perform  the
cure,  at  *the  same  time  the  doctor  gets  his  pay  and  the
credit  of  it.  If  the  patient's  constitution  is  so  strong  as
to  enable  them  to  struggle  against  the  operation  of  the
medicine  and  the  disorder,  they  will  recover;  but  if  not
they  run  down  in  what  the  doctors  call  a  galloping  con-
sumption. The  doctor  proceeded  in  this  way  with  my
wife  until  I  was  satislied  of  his  plan,  when  i  interfered
and  dismissed  him.  As  soon  as  she  left  off  taking  his
medicine,  she  began  gradually  to  gain  her  health  and
soon  got  about.

When  this  son  was  about  six  weeks  old,  he  was  at-
tacked with  the  croup,  or  rattles.  He  was  taken  a  lit-
tle before  sunset  with  a  hoarseness,  was  very  much
clogged  with  phlegm,  and  breathed  with  so  much  dith-
culty,  that  he  could  be  heard  all  over  the  house.  I  sent
for  the  doctor,  aad  he  attended  him  till  about  ten
o'clock  at  night  without  doing  him  any  good,  and  then
went  away,  saying  that  he  would  not  live  till  morning.
After  he  was  gone,  1  was  again  obliged  to  call  on  llie
mother  of  invention,  and  try  what  I  could;  do  myself.
I  searched  the  house  for  some  rattlesnake ""s  oil,  and  was
so  fortunate  as  to  find  about  three  or  four  drops,  which  I
immediately  gave  him  and  it  loosened  the  phlegm,  and  eli
soon  began  to  breathe  easy  ;  by  close  attention  through
the  night,  the  child  was  quite  comfortable  in  the  morn-
ing. The  doctor  came  in  the  next  day  and  expressed
great  astonishment  on  finding  the  child  alive ;,  and  was


Of  Samuel  TJiomson.  fii

anxious  to  know  by  what  means  he  had  been  relieved
trom  so  desperate  a  situation.  On  my  informing  him,
he  seemed  well  pleased  with  the  information;  and  ob-
served that  he  was  willing  to  allcv/,  that  the  greatest
knowledge  that  doctors  ever  obtaired  was  either  hy  ac  ■
cident  or  through  necessity.  So  the  discovery  of  a  cure
for  this  desperate  disease  by  necessity,  was  of  great  use
both  to  me  and  the  doctor;  notwithstanding,  however,
the  information  he  gained  of  me,  instead  of  giving  me
credit  for  it,  he  charged  me  for  his  useless  visit.

I  was  in  the  habit  at  this  time  of  gathering  and  pre-
serving, in  the  proper  season,  all  kinds  of  medical  herbs
and  roots  that  I  was  acquainted  with,  in  order  to  be  able
at  all  times  to  prevent  as  well  as  to  cure  disease  ;  for
I  found  by  experience,  that  one  ounce  of  preventative
was  better  than  a  pound  of  cure.  Only  the  simple  arti-
cle of  mayweed,  when  a  person  has  taken  a  bad  cold,
by  taking  a  strong  cup  of  the  tea  when  going  to  bed,
will  prevent  more  disease  in  one  night,  with  one  cent's
expense,  than  would  be  cured  by  the  doctor  in  one
month,  and  one  hundred  dollars  expense  in  their  charges,
apothecaries  drugs  and  nurses.

1  had  not  the  most  dista&t  idea  at  this  time  of  ever  en-
gaging in  the  practice  of  medicine,  more  than  to  assist
my  own  family ;  and  little  did  I  think  what  those  severe
trials  and  sufferings  I  experienced  in  the  cases  that  have
been  mentioned,  and  which  I  was  drove  to  by  necessity,
were  to  bring  about.  It  seemed  as  a  judgment  upon
me,  that  either  myself  or  family,  or  some  one  livino-
with  me,  were  sick  most  of  the  time  the  doctor  lived  on
my  farm,  which  was  about  seven  years.  Since  I  Have
had  more  experience,  and  become  better  acquainted
with  the  subject,  1  am  satisfied  in  my  own  mind  of  the
cause.  Whenever  any  of  the  family  took  a  cold,  the
doctor  was  sent  for,  who  always  either  would  bleed  or
give  physick.  Taking  away  the  blood  reduces  the  heat,
and  gives  power  to  the  cold  they  had  taken,  which  in-
creases the  disorder,  and  the  coldness  of  the  stomach
causes  canker ;  the  physick  drives  all  the  determining
powers  from  the  surface  -inwardly,  and  scatters  the
canker  through  the  stomach  and  bowels,  wliich  holds
the  cold  inside  a«d  drives  the  heat on  the  outside


%^>


Narrative  of  the  L',fe^  4«c.


The  con^f^^qnence  is  that  perspiration  ceases,  because
iaternni  he-it  i??  the  sole  cause  of  this  important  evacu-
ation:  aikl  a  settled  fever  takes  place,  which  will  con-
tiaue  as  long  as  the  cold  keeps  the  upper  hand.  My
experience  has  taught  me  that  by  giving  hot  medicine,
the  internal  heat  was  increased,  and  by  applying  the
steam  externally,  the  natural  perspiration  was  restored ;
and  by  giving  medicine  to  clear  the  stomach  and
bowels  from  canker,  till  the  cold  is  driven  out  and  the
heat  returns,  which  is  the  turn  of  the  fever,  they  will
recover  the  digestive  powers,  so  that  food  will  keep  the
heat  where  it  naturally  belongs,  which  is  the  fuel  that
continues  the  fire  or  life  of  man.

After  the  doctor,  who  lived  on  my  farm,  moved
away,  I  had  very  little  sickness  in  my  familj^  On  the
birth  of  my  second  son,  which  was  about  two  years  from
the  birth  of  the  first  son,  we  had  no  occasion  for  a  doc-
tor ;  my  wife  did  well,  and  the  child  was  much  more
healthy  than  the  others  had  been ;  and  I  have  never
employed  a  doctor  since ;  for  1  had  found  from  sad  ex-
perience, that  they  made  much  more  sickness  than  they
cured.  Whenever  any  of  my  family  were  sick  I  had  no
difficulty  in  restoring  them  to  health  by  such  means  as
were  within  my  own  knowledge.  As  fast  as  my  chil-
dren arrived  at  years  of  discretion  I  inslracted  them
how  to  reheve  themselves,  and  they  have  ail  enjoyed
o-ood  health  ever  since.  If  parents  would  adopt  the
same  plan,  and  depend  more  upon  themselves,  and  less
upon  the  doctors,  they  would  avoid  much  sickness  in
their  famiUes,  as  well  as  save  the  expense  attending  the
employment  of  one  of  the  regular  physicians,  whenever
any  trifling  sickness  occurs,  whose  extravagant  charges
is  a  grievious  and  heavy  burthen  upon  the  people.  I
shall  endeavour  to  instruct  them  all  in  my  power,  by
giving  a  plain  and  clear  view  of  the  experience  I  have
had,  that  they  may  benefit  by  it.  If  they  do  not,  the
fault  will  not  be  mine,  for  I  shall  have  done  my  duty.  I
am  certain  of  the  fact,  that  there  is  medicine  enough  in
the  country  within  the  reach  of  every  one,  to  cure  all
the  disease  incident  to  it,  if  timely  and  properly  ad-
ministered.

At  the  birth  of  our  third  son  my  wife  was  again  given


Of  Sairmel  Tliomson.  33

over  by  the  midwife*  Soon  after  the  child  was  born,
she  was  taken  with  ague-lits  and  cramp  in  the  stomach  ;
she  was  in  great  pain,  and  we  were  much  alarmed  at
her  situation.  I  proposed  giving  her  some  medicines,
but  the  midwife  was  much  opposed  to  it ;  she  said  she
wished  to  have  a  doctor,  and  the  sooner  the  better.
1  immediately  sent  for  one,  and  tried  to  persuade  her  to
give  something  which  I  thought  would  relieve  my  wife
until  the  doctor  could  come  ;  but  she  objected  to  it,  say-
ing that  her  case  was  a  very  difficult  one,  and  would
not  allow  to  be  trifled  with ;  she  said  she  was  sensible
of  the  dangerous  situation  my  wife  was  in,  for  not  one
out  of  twenty  lived  through  it,  and  probably  she  would
not  be  alive  in  twenty-four  hours  from  that  time.  We
were  thus  kept  in  suspense  until  the  man  returned  and
the  doctor  could  not  be  found,  and  there  was  no  other
within  six  miles.  I  then  came  to  the  determination  of
hearing  to  no  ones  advice  any  longer,  but  to  pursue  my
own  plan.  I  told  my  wife,  that  as  the  midwife  said  she
could  not  live  more  than  twenty-fmir  hours,  her  life
could  not  be  cut  short  more  than  that  time,  therefore
there  would  be  no  hazard  in  trying  what  I  could  do  to
relieve  her.  I  gave  her  some  warm  medicine  to  raise
the  inward  heat,  and  then  applied  the  steam,  which  was
very  much  opposed  by  the  midwife ;  but  I  persisted  in
it  according  to  the  best  of  my  judgment  and  relieved  her
in  about  one  hour,  after  she  had  laid  in  that  situation
above  four  hours,  without  any  thing  being  done.  The
midwife  expressed  a  great  deal  of  astonishment  at  the
success  I  had  met  with,  and  said  that  I  had  saved  her
life,  for  she  was  certain  that  without  the  means  I  had
used  she  could  not  have  lived.  She  continued  to  do
well  and  soon  recovered.  This  makes  the  fifth  time  I
had  applied  to  the  mother  of  invention  for  assistance,
and  in  all  of  them  was  completely  successful.

These  things  began  to  be  taken  some  notice  of  about
this  time,  and  caused  much  conversation  in  the  neigh-
bourhood. My  assistance  was  called  for  by  some  of  the
neighbours,  and  I  attended  several  cases  with  good  suc-
cess. [  had  previous  to  this  time  paid  some  attention  to
the  farrier  business,  and  had  been  useful  in  that  line.
This,  howevcj-,  gave  occasion  for  the  ignorant  and  ere-


34  Narrative  of  the  Life^  »^c.

dulous  to  redicule  me  and  laugh  at  those  whom  I  attend-
ed ;  but  these  things  had  little  weight  with  me,  for  I  had
no  other  object  in  view  but  to  be  serviceable  to  my  fel-
low creatures,  and  I  was  too  firmly  fixed  in  my  deter-
mination to  pursue  that  course,  which  1  considered  was
pointed  out  as  my  duty,  b}^  the  experience  and  many
hard  trials  I  had  suffered,  to  be  deterred  by  the  foolish
remarks  of  the  envious  or  malicious  part  of  society.

The  last  sickness  of  my  wife,  I  think  took  place  in  the
year  1799,  and  about  two  years  after  she  had  another
son  and  did  well,  making  five  sons  that  she  had  in  suc-
cession ;  she  afterwards  had  another  daughter,  which
was  the  last,  making  eight  children  in  the  whole  that
she  was  the  mother  of:  five  sons  and  three  daughters.
I  mention  these  particulars  in  order  that  the  reader  may
the  better  understand  many  things  that  took  place  in  my
family,  which  will  give  some  idea  of  the  experience
and  trouble  I  had  to  encounter  in  bringing  up  so  large
a  family,  especially  through  the  many  trials  I  had  to  go
through  in  the  various  cases  of  sickness  and  troubles,
which  are  naturally  attendant  on  all  families,  and  of
which  {  had  a  very  large  share.  The  knowledge  and
experience,  however,  which  I  gained  by  these  trying
scenes,  I  have  reason  to  bless  God  for,  as  it  has  proved
to  be  a  blessing  not  only  to  me,  but  many  hundreds  who
have  been  relieved  from  sickness  and  distress,  through
my  means ;  and  I  hope  and  trust  that  it  will  eventually
be  the  cause  of  throwing  off  the  vail  of  ignorance  from
the  eyes  of  the  good  people  of  this  country,  and  do  away
the  blind  confidence  they  are  so  much-  in  the  habit  of
placing  in  those  who  call  themselves  physicians,  who
fare  sumptuously  every  day ;  living  in  splendour  and
magnificence,  supported  by  the  impositions  they  prac-
tice upon  a  deluded  and  credulous  people ;  for  they
have  much  more  regard  for  their  ow^n  interest  than
they  do  for  the  health  and  happiness  of  those  who  are
so  unfortunate  as  to  have  any  ttiing  to  do  with  them.
If  this  was  the  worst  side  of  the  picture,  it  might  be
borne  with  more  patience  j,i)ut  their  practice  is  altoge-
ther experimental,  to  try  the  effect  of  their  poisons  up-
on the  constitutions  of  their  patients,  and  it  they  happen
to  give  more  than  nature  can  bear,  they  either  die  or


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  35

become  miserable  invalids  the  rest  of  their  lives,  and
their  friends  console  themsel.es  with  the  idea  that  it
is  the  will  of  God,  and  it  is  their  duty  to  submit ;  the
doctor  gets  weii  paid  for  his  services,  and  that  is  an  end
of  the  tragedy.  It  maybe  thought  by  some  that  this  is
a  highly  coloured  picture,  and  that  I  am  uncharitable
to  apply  it  to  all  who  practice  as  physicians ;  but  the
truth  of  the  statements,  as  respects  what  are  called  re-
gular physicians,  or  those  who  get  diaplomas  from  the
medical  society,  will  not  be  doubted  by  any  who  are  ac-
quainted with  the  subject,  and  will  throw  adde  preju-
dice and  reflect  seriously  upon  it — those  whom  the  coat
suits  I  am  willing  should  wear  it.  There  are,  however,
many  physicians  within  my  knowledge,  who  do  not  fol-
low the  fashionable  mode  of  practice  of  the  day,  but
are  governed  by  their  own  judgments,  and  make  use  of
the  vegetable  medicine  of  our  own  countrj'-,  with  the
mode  of  treatment  most  consistant  with  nature  ;  and  what
is  the  conduct  of  those  who  have  undertaken  to  dictate
to  the  people  how  and  by  whom  they  shall  be  attended
when  sick,  towards  them  ?  Why,  means  that  would  dis-
grace the  lowest  dregs  of  society,  th^it  savages  would
not  be  guilty  of,  are  resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of  in-
juring them,  and  destroying  their  credit  with  the  public.
1  have  had  a  pretty  large  share  of  this  kind  of  treat-
ment from  the  faculty,  the  particulars  of  which,  and
the  sufferings  I  have  undergone,  will  be  given  in  detail
in  the  course  of  this  narrative.

Sometime  m  the  month  of  November,  1802,  my  chil-
dren had  the  me'azles,  and  some  of  them  had  them  very
bad.  The  want  of  knowing  how  to  treat  them  gave  me
a  great  deal  of  trouble,  much  more  than  it  would  at  the
present  time,  for  experience  has  taught  me  that  they
are  very  easy  to  manage.  One  of  the  children  took  the
disease  and  gave  it  to  the  rest,  and  I  think  we  had  four
down  with  them  at  the  same  time.  My  third  son  had
the  disorder  very  bad  ;  they  would  not  come  out,  but
tul-ned  in,  and  he  became  stupid.  The  canker  was
much  in  the  throat  and  mouth,  and  the  rosemary  would
have  no  effect.  Putrid  symptoms  made  their  appear-
ance, and  1  was  under  the  neces  ity  of  inventing  some-
thing for  that,  and  for  the  canker. I  used  the  steam  of


36  Narrative  of  the  Life^  ^^c.

vinegar  to  guard  against  putrifaction,  and  gold  thread
(or  yellow  root,)  with  red  oak  acorns  pounded  and
steeped  together,  for  the  canker.  These  had  the  de-
sired effect ;  and  by  close  attention  he  soon  got  better.
The  second  son  was  then  taken  down  pretty  much  in
the  same  manner,  and  I  pursued  the  same  mode  of  treat-
ment, with  similar  success  ;  but  the  disease  had  so  ef-
fected his  lungs,  that  I  feared  it  would  leave  him  in  a
consumption,  as  ivas  the  case  with  my  mother.  He
could  not  speak  loud  for  three  weeks.  I  could  get  no-
thing that  would  help  him  for  some  time,  till  at  last  I
gave  him  several  portions  of  the  emetic  herb,  which  re-
lieved him  and  he  soon  got  well.  During  this  sickness
we  suffered  much  from  fatigue  and  want  of  sleep  ;  for
neither  my  wife  nor  myself  had  our  clothes  off  for
twelve  nights.  This  was  a  good  fortnight's  school  to  me,
in  which  1  learned  the  nature  of  the  meazles ;  and  found
it  to  be  canli;er  and  putrifaction.  This  experience  en-
abled me  to  relieve  many  others  in  this  disease,  and  like-
wise in  the  canker-rash ;  in  these  two  disorders,  and  the
small  pox,  I  found  a  looking-glass,  in  which  we  may  see
the  nature  of  every  other  disease.  1  had  the  small  pox
in  the  year  1798,  and  examined  its  symptoms  with  all
the  skill  1  was  capable  of,  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  the
disease  ;  and  found  that  it  was  the  highest  stage  of  can-
ker and  putrifaction  that  the  human  system  was  capable
of  receiving — the  meazles  the  next,  and  the  canker-rash
the  third;  and  other  ^disorders  partake  more  or  less  of
the  same,  which  I  am  satisfied  is  a  key  to  the  whole  ;
for  by  knowing  how  to  cure  this,  is  a  general  rule  to
know  how  to  cure  all  other  cases ;  as  the  same  means
that  will  put  out  a  large  lire  will  put  out  a  candle. •

Soon  after  my  family  had  got  well  of  the  meazles,  I
was  sent  for  to  see  a  woman  by  the  name  of  Redding,
in  the  neighbourhood.  She  had  been  for  many  years
afflicted  with  the  cholic,  and  could  get  no  relief  from  the
doctors.  I  attended  her  and  found  the  disorder  was
caused  by  canker,  and  pursued  the  plan  that  my  former
experience  had  taught  me,  which  relieved  her  from  the
pain,  and  so  far  removed  the  cause  that  she  never  had
another  attack  of  the  disease.  In  this  case  the  cure
was  so  simply  and  easily  performed,  that  it  became  a


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  37

subject  of  ridicule,  for  whea  she  was  asked  about  it,
she  was  ashamed  to  say  that  1  cured  her ;  the  po-
pular practice  of  the  physicians  had  so  much  influence
on  the  minds  of  the  people,  that  they  thought  nothing
could  be  right  but  what  was  done  by  them.  I  attended
in  this  family  for  several  years,  and  always  answered  the
desired  purpose  ;  but  my  practice  was  so  simple,  that  it
was  not  worthy  of  notice,  and  being  dissatisfied  with  the
treatment  I  received,  refused  to  do  any  thing  more  for
them.  After  this  they  employed  the  more  fashionable
practitioners,  who  were  ready  enough  to  make  the  most
of  a  job,  and  they  had  sickness  and  expense  enough  to
satisfy  them,  for  one  of  the  sons  was  soon  after  taken
sick  and  was  given  over  by  the  doctor,  who  left  him  to
die  ;  but  after  he  left  off  giving  him  medicine  he  got
well  of  himself,  and  the  doctor  not  only  had  the  credit
of  it,  but  for  this  job  and  one  other  similar,  his  charges
amounted  to  over  one  hundred  dollars.  This  satisfied
me  of  the  foolishness  of  the  people,  "whose  prejudices
are  always  in  favour  of  any  thing  that  is  fashionable,  or
that  is  done  by  those  who  profess  great  learning ;  and
prefer  long  sickness  and  great  expense,  if  done  in  this
way,  to  a  simple  and  natural  relief,  with  a  tnflmg  ex-
pense.

Soon  after  this  I  was  called  on  to  attend  a  Mrs.  Wether-
by,  in  the  neighbourhood,  who  had  the  same  disorder.
She  had  been  afflicted  with  the  cholic  for  several  years,
having  periodical  turns  of  it  about  once  a  month ;  and
had  been  under  the  care  of  a  number  of  doctors,  who
had  used  all  their  skill  without  aflfording  her  any  re 'ief,
excepting  a  temporary  one  by  stupifyng  her  with  opii:.m
and  giving  physx,  which  kept  her  along  till  nature
could  wear  it  off,  when  she  would  get  a  little  better  for
a  few  days,  and  then  h'lve  another  turn.  After  hearing
of  my  curing  Mrs.  Redding,  they  sent  for  me  ;  I  gnve
her  my  medicine  to  remove  the  canker,  and  steamed
her,  which  gave  rehef  in  one  hour.  She  had  a  very
large  family  to  attend  to,  having  thirteen  children,  and
before  she  had  recovered  her  strength  she  exposed  her-
self nnd  had  another  t'.'.rn  ;  I  attended  again  and  relieved
her  in  the  same  manner  as  before ;  but  she  c-ouid  not
wait  till  she  gained  her  strength  and  exposed  herself

D


3.8  Narrative  of  the  Life^  SfC.

again  as  before,  took  cold,  and  had  another  turn.  Her
husband  said  I  only  relieved  her  for  the  time,  but  did
not  remove  the  cause,  and  being  dissatisfied  with  what
I  had  done,  he  sent  for  a  doctor  to  remove  the  cause  ;
who  carried  her  through  a  course  of  physic,  and  reduc-
ed her  so  low,  that  she  lingered  along  for  eight  weeks,
being  unable  to  do  any  thing  the  whole  time  ;  they  then
decided  that  she  had  the  consumption,  and  gave  her
over  to  die.  After  the  doctors  had  left  her  in  this  si-
tuation as  incurable,  she  applied  again  to  me  ;  but  I
declined  doing  any  thing  for  her,  as  I  knew  her  case
was  much  more  difficult  than  it  was  beforie  she  applied
to  the  doctor,  and  if  I  should  fail  in  curing  her,  the  blame
would  all  be  laid  to  me,  or  if  she  got  well  I  should  get
no  credit  by  it ;  for  which  reasons  I  felt  very  unwilling
to  do  any  thing  for  her.  After  finishing  my  forenoon's
work,  on  gomg  home  to  dinner  I  found  her  at  my  house
waiting  for  me,  and  she  insisted  so  much  upon  my  un-
dertakmg  to  cure  her,  and  seemed  to  have  so  much
faith  in  my  being  able  to  do  it,  that  I  at  last  told  her  if
she  would  come  to  my  house  and  stay  with  my  wife,
who  was  sick  at  the  time,  I  would  do  the  best  I  could  to
cure  her.  She  readily  consented  and  staid  but  three
diys  with  us ;  during  which  time  I  pursued  my  usual
plan  of  treatment,  giving  her  things  to  remove  the -can-
ker, and  stev.ming  to  produce  a  natural  perspiration ;  at
the  end  of  the  three  days  she  went  home,  taking  with
her  some  medicine,  with  directions  what  to  do  for  her-
self, and  in  a  short  time  entirely  recovered  her  health.
In  less  than  a  year  after  she  had  another  child,  which
was  a  conclusion  of  her  having  children  cr  the  cholic,
and  siie  e>er  after  enjoyed  as  good  health  as  any  wo-
man in  the  neighbourhood  ;  but  this  cure  was  done  in
so  unfashionable  a  way,  that  they  were  hardly  willing
to  acknowledge  it,  and  they  would  not  apply  to  me  for
relief  when  any  of  their  family  were  sick,  till  they  had
failed  in  getting  it  in  any  other  way.

In  about  a  year  after  the  above  case,  one  of  this  fami-
ly, a  young  man  about  sixteen  years  old,  was  attacked
with  a  fiever  ;  the  doctor  was  sent  for,  who  followed
the  fashionable  course  of  practice,  and  reduced  him  with
mercury  and  other  poisons,  so  that  he  lingered  along  for


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  39

three  or  four  months,  constantly  growing  worse,  till  the
doctor  said  it  was  a  rheumatic  fever,  and  afterwards  that
he  was  in  a  decline.  He  had  taken  so  much  mercury
that  it  had  settled  in  his  hack  and  hips,  and  was  so  stiff
that  he  cftild  not  bring  his  hands  lower  than  his  knees.
By  this  time  the  doctor  had  given  him  over  as  incurable,
and  he  was  considered  a  fit  subject  for  me  to  undertake
with.  They  applied  to  me  and  I  agreed  to  take  him
home  to  my  house,  and  do  the  best  I  could  to  cure  him.
It  was  a  difficult  task,  for  I  had  in  the  first  place  to  bring
him  back  to  the  same  situation  he  was  in  when  he  had
the  fever,  and  to  destroy  the  effects  of  the  poison  and
regulate  the  system  by  steaming,  to  produce  a  natural
perspiration ;  by  pursuing  this  plan,  and  giving  such
things  as  1  could  get  to  restore  the  digestive  powers,  in
two  months  he  was  completely  restored  to  health ;  for
which  1  received  but  five  dollars,  and  this  was  more
grudgingly  paid  than  if  they  had  given  a  doctor  fifty ,.
without  doing  any  good  at  all.

In  the  spring  of  the  year  1805,  I  was  sent  for  to  go  to
Woodstock,  in  Vermont,  to  attend  a  young  woman,  who
was  considered  in  a  decline,  and  the  doctors  could  not
help  her.  I  found  her  very  low,  not  being  able  to  set
up  but  very  little.  I  staid  and  attended  her  about  a
week,  and  then  left  her,  with  medicines  and  directions,
what  to  do,  and  returned  home.  In  about  a  month  I
went  again  to  see  her  and  found  her  much  better,  so
that  she  was  able  to  ride  to  her  father's,  which  was
above  twenty  miles.  All  this  time  I  had  not  formed  an
idea  that  I  possessed  any  knowledge  of  disorder  or  of
medicine,  more  than  what  I  had  learned  by  accident ;
and  all  the  cases  I  had  attended  were  from  necessity ;
but  the  success  1  had  met  with  and  the  extraordinary
cures  I  had  performed,  made  much  talk,  and  were  heard
of  for  fifty  miles  around.

I  began  to  be  sent  for  by  the  peopi.  of  this  part  of
the  couutry  so  much,  that  I  found  it  in  possible  to  at-
tend to  my  farm  and  family  as  I  ougl  1,  for  the  cases  I
had  attended,  1  had  received  very  Titiie  or  nothing,  not
enough  to  compensate  me  for  my  time  ;  and  1  found  it  to
be  my  duty  to  give  up  practice  altogether,  or  to  make
a  business  of  it. I consulted  with  my  wife  and  asked


40  JSarrative  of  the  Life,  ^^c.

the  adf  ice  of  m}^  friends,  what  was  hest  for  me.  to  do  ;
they  all  agreed,  that  as  it  seemed  to  be  the  natural  turn
of  my  mind,  if  I  thought  myself  capable  of  such  an  im-
portant undertaking,  it  would  be  best  to  let  my  own
judgment  govern  me,  and  to  do  as  I  thought  best.  1
maturely  weighed  the  matter  in  my  mind,  and  viewed
it  as  the  greatest  trust  that  any  one  could  engage  in.
I  considered  my  want  of  learning  and  my  ignorance  of
mankind,' which  almost  discouraged  me  from  the  under-
taking ;  yet  I  had  a  strong  inclination  for  the  practice,
which  seemed  impossible  to  divest  my  mind  of;  and  I
had  always  had  a  very  strong  aversion  to  working  on  a
farm,  as  every  thing  of  the  kind  appeared  to  me  to  be  a
burthen  ;  the  reason  of  which  I  could  not  account  for,  as
I  had  carried  on  the  business  to  good  advantage,  and  had
as  good  a  farm  as  any  in  the  neighbourhood.  I  finally
concluded  to  make  use  of  that  gift  which  I  thought  the
God  of  nature  had  implanted  in  me  ;  and  if  I  possessed
such  a  gift,  I  had  no  need  of  learning,  for  no  one  can
learn  that  gift.  I  thoug-ht  of  what  St.  Paul  says  in  his  epis-
tle to  the  Corinthians,  concerning  the  diiferent  gifts  by
the  same  spirit;  some  had  the  gift  of  prophecy,  another
the  gift  of  healing,  to  another  the  working  of  miracles.
I  am  satisfied  in  my  own  mind,  that  every  man  is  made
and  capacitated  for  some  particular  pursuit  in  life,  which
if  he  engages  in  he  will  be  more  useful  than  he  would
if  he  happens  to  be  so  unfortunate  as  to  follow  a  calling
or  profession,  that  was  not  allotted  to  him  by  his  maker.
This  is  a  very  important  consideration  for  parents,  not  to
make  their  sons  learn  trades  or  professions  which  are
contrary  to  their  inclinations  and  the  natural  turn  of  their
minds ;  for  it  is  certain  if  they  do,  they  never  can  be
useful  or  happy  in  following  them.

I  am  convinced  myself  that  1  possess  a  gift  in  healing
the  sick,  because  of  the  extraordinary  success  1  have
met  with,  and  the  protection  and  support  Providence
has  afforded  me  against  the  attacks  of  all  my  enemies.
Whether  I  should  have  been  more  useful  had  it  been
my  lot  to  have  had  an  education,  and  learned  the  profes-
sion in  the  fashidnable  way,  is  impossible  for  tne  to  say
with  certainty ;  probably  I  should  have  been  deemed
more  honourable  in  the  world ;  but  honour  obtained  bv


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  41

iiearning,  without  a  natural  gift,  can  never  in  my  opinion
make  a  man  very  useful  to  his  fellow  creatures. 1  wish
my  readers  to  understand  me,  that  I  do  not  mean  to  con-
vey the  idea,  that  learning  is  not  necessary  and  essential
in  obtaining  a  proper  knowledge  of  any  profession  or
art ;  but  that  going  to  (college  will  make  a  wise  man  of
a  fool,  is  what  [  am  ready  to  deny  ;  or  that  a  man  can-
not be  useful  and  even  great  in  a  profession,  or  in  the
arts  and  sciences,  without  a  classical  education,  is  what
I think  no  one  will  have the  hardihood  to  attempt  to
support,  as  it  is  contrary  to  reason  and  common  sense.
We  have  many  examples  of  some  of  the  greatest  philo-
sophers, physicians  and  divines  the  world  ever  knew,
who were  entirely self-taught  ; and  who  have done
more  honour  and  been  greater  ornaments  to  society,  than
a  million  of  those  who  have  nothing  to  recommend  them
but  having  their  heads  crammed  with  learning,  without
sense  enough  to  apply  it  to  any  great  or  useful  purpose.
Among  the  practising  physicians,  I  have  found,  and
1  believe  it  to  be  a  well  known  fact,  that  those  who  are
really  great  in  the  profession  and  have  had  the  most  ex-
perience, condemn  as  much  as  I  do, the  fashionable
mode  of  practice  of  the  present  day,  and  use  very  little
medical poisons, confining themselves  in  their  treat-
ment of  patients  to  simples  principally, and  the  use  of
such  things  as  will  prompte  digestion  and  aid  nature ;
and  many  of  them disapprove  of  bleeding  altogether.
Those  of  this  description,  with  whom  I  have  had  an
opportunity  to  converse,  have  treated  me with  all  due
attention  and  civility ; have  heard  me  with  pleasure,
and  been  ready  to  allow  me  credit  for  my  experience
and  the  discoveries]  have  made  in  curing,  disease.  The
opposition  and abuse  that  I have met  with,  has  been
uniformly,  from  those  to  whom  I  think  I  can  with  pro-
priety give  the  name  of  quacks,  or  ignorant  pretenders  ;
as all  their  merit  consists  in  their  self-importance  and
arrogant  behaviour  towards  all  those  who  have  not  had
the  advantages  of  learning, and a  degree  at  college.
This  class  compose  a  large  proportion  of  the  medical
faculty  throughout  our  country  ; they  have  learned  just,
enough  to  know  how  to  deceive  the  peojue,,  and  keep-
them,  in  ignorance,  by  covering  their  doings  under  ai

D  2


42  A^^.rrative  of  the  Life,  (|-c.

language  unknown  to  their  patients.  There  can  be  no
good  reason  given  why  all  the  medical  works  are  kept
in  a  dead  language,  except  it  be  to  deceive  and  keep  the
world  ignorant  of  their  doings,  that  they  may  the  better
impose  upon  the  credulity  of  the  people  ;  for  if  it  was  to
be  written  in  our  own  language  every  body  tvould  un
derstand  it,  and  judge  for  themselves ;  and  their  poi
sonous  drugs  would  be  thrown  into  the  fire  before  their
patients  would  take  them.  The  ill-treatment  that  1
have  received  from  them,  has  been  mostly  where  1
have  exposed  their  ignorance  by  curing  those  they  had
given  over  to  die ;  in  which  cases  they  have  shown
their  malice  by  circulating  all  kinds  of  false  and  ridicu-
lous reports  of  me  and  my  practice,  in  order  to  destroy
my  credit  with  the  people  ;  and  I  am  sorry  to  say  that
I  have  found  many  too  ready  to  join  with  them,  even
among  those  who  have  been  relieved  by  me  from  pain
and  sickness.  Such  ingratitude  I  can  account  for  in  no
other  way,  than  by  the  readiness  with  which  the  people
follow  what  ever  is  fashionable,  without  reflecting
whether  it  be  right  or  wrong.

After  I  had  come  to  the  determination  to  make  a
business  of  the  medical  practice,  I  found  it  necessary  to
fix  upon"  some  system,  or  plan  for  m}'^  fwture  govern-
ment in  the  treatment  of  disease  ;  for  what  I  had  done
had  been  as  it  were  from  accident,  and  the  necessity
arising  out  of  the  particular  cases  that  came  under  my
care,  without  any  fixed  plan  ;  in  which  I  had  been  go-
verned by  my  judgment  and  the  advantages  T  had  re-
ceived from  experience.  I  deemed  it  necessary  not  on-
ly  as  my  own  guide  ;  but  that  whatever  discoveries  I
should  make  in  my  practice,  they  might  be  so  adapted
to  my  plan,  as  that  my  whole  system  might  be  easily
taught  to  others,  and  preserved  for  the  benefit  of  the
world.  I  had  no  other  assistance  than  my  own  obser-
vations and  the  natural  reflections  of  my  own  mind,  un-
aided by  learning  or  the  opinions  of  others.  I  took  na-
ture for  my  guide,  and  experience  as  my  instructor  ;
and  after  seriously  considering  every  part  of  the  subject,
I  came  to  certain  conclusions  concerning  disease  and  the
whole  animal  economy,  which  thirty  years  experience
has  perfectly  satisfied  me  is  the  only  correct  theory.


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  43

My  practice  has  invariably  been  conformable  to  tlis
general  principles  upon  which  my  system  is.  founded^
and  in  no  instance  have  I  had  reason  to  doubt  the  cor-
rectness of  its  application  to  cure  all  cases  of  disease
when  properly  attended  to  ;  for  that  all  disease. is  the
effect  of  one  general  cause,  and  may  be  removed  by
one  general  remedy,  is  the  foundation  upon  which  i
have  erected  my  fabric,  and  which  1  shall  entleavour
to  explain  in  as  clear  and  concise  a*  manner  as  1  am  ca-
pable, with  a  hope  that  it  may  be  understood  L^y  r* v
readers,  and  that  they  may  be  convinced  of  its  correct-
ness.

I  found,  after  maturely  considering  the  subject,  that
all  animal  bodies  are  formed  of  the  four  elements,
earth,  air,  fire  and  water.  Earth  and  water  constitute
the  solids,  and  air  and  lire,  or  heat,  are  the  cause  of  life
and  motion.  That  cold,  or  lessening"  the  power  of
heat,  is  the  cause  of  all  disease — that  to  restore  heat
to  its  natural  state  was  the  only  way  by  which  health
could  be  produced  ;  and  that  after  restoring  the  natural
heat,  by  clearing  the  system  of  all  obstructions  a,nd  caus-
ing a  natural  perspiration,  the  stomach  would  di^-est  the
food  taken  into  it,  by  which  means  the  whole  body  is
nourished  and  invigorated,  and  heat,  or  nature  is  en-
abled to  hold  its  supremacy — that  the  constitutions  of
all  mankind  being  essentially  the  same,  ^nd  differino-
only  in  the  different  temperament  of  the  same  materials-
of  which  they  are  composed;  it  appeared  clear  to  uiy
mind,  that  all  disease  proceeded  from  one  general  cause
and  might  be  cured  by  one  general  remedj^— that  a
state  of  perfect  health  arises  from  a  due  balance  or  tem-
perature of  the  four  elements  ;  but  \i  it  is  by  any  means
destroyed,  the  body  is  more  or  less  disordered.  And
when  this  is  the  case,  there  is  always  an  actual  dimin-
ution or  absence  of  the  element  of  fire,  or  heat ;  and
in  proportion  to  this  diminution,  or  absence,  the  body  is
affected  by  its  opposite,  which  is  cold.  And  I  found
that  all  disorders  which  the  human  family  are  afflicted
with,  however  various  the  symptoms,  and  different  the
names  by  which  they  are  called,  arise  directly  from  ob-
structed perspiration,  which  is  always  caused  by  cold,
or  want  of  heat ; for  if  there  is  a  natural  heat,  it  is  im-


44  Narrative  &f  the  Lifey  ^'C:

possible  but  that  there  must  be  a  natural  perspiration- -
Having  fixed  upon  these  general  principles,  as  the
only  solid  foundation  upon  which  a  correct  and  true
understanding  of  the  subject  can  be  founded,  my  next
business  was  to  ascertain  what  kinds  of  medicine  and
treatment  would  best  answer  the  purposes  in  conformi-
ty to  this  universal  plan  of  curing  disease ;  for  it  must,
I  Ihink,  be  certain,  and  self-evident  to  every  one,  that
whatever  will  increase  the  internal  heat,  remove  all  ob-
structions of  the  system,  restore  the  digestive  powers  of
the  stomach,  and  produce  a  natural  perspiration,  is  uni-
versally applicable  in  all  cases  of  disease,  and  therefore
may  be  considered  as  a  general  remedy.

The  first  and  most  important  consideration^  was  to
find  a  medicine  that  would  establish  a  natural  internal
heat,  so  as  to  give  nature  its  proper  command.  My
emetic  herb,  (No.  1.)  I  found  would  effectually  cleanse
the  stomach,  and  would  very  essentially  aid  in  raising
the  heat  and  promoting  perspiration  ;  but  would  not
hold  it  long  enough  to  effect  the  desired  object,  so  but
that  the  cold  would  return  again  and  assume  its  power.-
It  was  hke  a  fire  made  of  sbavings ;  a  strong  heat  for
a  short  time,  and  then  all  go  out.  After  much  experi-
ence, and  trying  every  thing  within  my  knowledge  to
gain  this  important  point,  1  fixed  upon  the  medicine
which  I  have  called  No.  2,  in  my  patent,  for  that  pur-
pose ;  and  after  using  it  for  many  years,  1  am  perfectly
convinced  that  it  is  the  best  thing  that  can  be  made  use
of  to  hold  the  heat  in  the  stomach  until  the  system  can
be  cleared  of  obstructions,  so  as  to  produce  a  natural  di-
gestion of  the  f'  od,  which  will  nourish  the  body,  esta-
blish perspiraiion  nnd  restore  the  health  of  the  patient.
I  found  it  to  be  perfectly  safe  in  all  cases,  and  never
knew  any  bad  effects  from  administering  it.

My  next  grand  object  was  to  get  somethings  that
would  clear  the  stomach  and  bowels  from  canker,
which  are  more  or  less  affected  by  it  in^  all  cases  of
disease  to  which  the  human  family  are  subject.  Can-
ker and  putrefaction  arfe^  caused  by  cold,  or  want  of
heat ;  for  whenever  any  part  of  the  body  is  so  affected
by  cold  as  to  overpower  the  natural  heat,  putrefaction
commences,  and  if  not  cheeked  by  medicine,  or  the  na-


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  45

tural  constitution  is  not  strong  enough  to  overcome  its
progress,  it  will  communicate  to  the  blood,  when  death
will  end  the  contest  between  heat  and  cold,  by  decid-
ing in  favour  of  the  latter.  I  have  made  use  of  a  great
many  articles,  which  are  useful  in  removing  canker ;  but
my  preparation  called  No.  3,  is  the  best  for  that  purpose,
that  has  come  to  my  knowledge ;  though  many  other
things  may  be  made  use  of  to  good  effect,  all  of  which
I  shall  give  a  particular  description  of  in  my  general  di-
rections hereafter.

Having  endeavoured  to  convey  to  my  readers  in  a
brief  manner  a  correct  idea  of  the  general  principles
upon  which  I  formed  my  system  of  practice,  I  shall  now
give  some  account  of  the  success  I  met  with  in  the  va-
rious cases  that  came  under  my  care,  and  the  difficul-
ties and  opposition  that  I  have  had  to  encounter  in
maintaining  it  till  this  time,  against  all  my  enemies.

My  general  plan  of  treatment  has  been  in  all  cases  of
disease,  to  cleanse  the  stomach  by  giving  No.  1,  and
produce  as  great  an  internal  heat  as  1  could,  by  giving
No.  2,  and  when  necessary  made  use  of  steaming,  in
which  I  have  always  found  great  benefit,  especially  in
fevers;  after  this,  I  gave  No.  3,  to  clear  off  the  canker  ;
and  in  all  cases  where  the  patient  had  not  previously  be-
come so  far  reduced  as  to  have  nothing  to  build  upon,
I  have  been  successful  in  restoring  them  to  health.  I
found  that  fever  was  a  disturbed  state  of  the  heat,  or
more  properly,  that  it  was  caused  by  the  efforts  which
nature  makes  to  throw  off  disease,  and  therefore  ought  to
be  aided  in  its  cause,  and  treated  as  a  friend ;  and  not  as
an  enemy,  as  is  the  practice  of  the  physicians.  In  all
cases  of  disease  1  have  found  that  there  is  more  or  less
fever,  according  to  the  state  of  the  system ;  hut  that  all
fevers  proceed  from  the  same  cause,  differing  only  in
the  symptoms;  and  may  be  managed  and  brought  to  a
crisis  with  much  less  trouble  than  is  generally  consider-
ed practicable,  by  increasing  the  internal  heat,  till  the
cold  is  driven  out,  which  is  the  cause  of  it,  Thus  keep-
ing the  fountain  above  the  stream,  and  everything  will
take  its  natural  course.  *'

During  the  year  1805,  a  very  alarming  disease  pre-
vailed in  Alstead  and  Wajpolc,  which  was  considered  the


46  Narrative  of  the  Life^  ^c,

yellow  fever,  and  was  fatal  to  many  who  were  attacked
by  it.  I  was  called  on  and  attended  with  very  great
success,  not  losing  one  patient  that  I  attended ;  at  the
same  time  those  who  had  the  regular  physicians,  near-
ly one  half  of  them  died.  This  disease  prevailed  for
about  forty  days,  during  which  time  I  was  not  at  home
but  eight  nights.  I  was  obliged  to  be  nurse  as  well  as
doctor,  and  do  every  thing  myself,  for  the  people  had
no  knowledge  of  my  mode  of  practice,  and  I  could  not
depend  upon  what  any  person  did,  except  what  was  un-
der my  own  immediate  inspection.  I  pursued  the  same
general  plan  that  I  had  before  adopted  ;  but  the  expe*
rience  I  had  from  this  practice,  suggested  to  me  many
improvements,  which  I  had  not  before  thought  of,  as
respects  the  manner  of  treatment  of  patients  to  effect
the  objects  I  aimed  at  in  curing  the  disease,  which  was
to  produce  a  natural  perspiration.  I  found  great  bene-
fit in  steaming  in  the  manner  that  i  had  discovered  and
practised  with  my  little  daughter ;  but  I  found  by  ex-
perience, that  by  putting  a  hot  stone  into  a  spider  ar
iron  oason,  and  then  wetting  the  top  of  the  stone  with
vinegar,  was  an  important  improvement ;  and  with  this
simple  method,  with  a  little  medicine  of  my  own  pre-
paring, answered  a  much  better  purpose,  than  all  the
bleeding  and  poisonous  physick  of  the  doctors.  While
I  was  attending  those  who  were  sick,  and  they  found
that  my  mode  of  treatment  relieved  them  from  their
distress,  they  were  very  ready  to  flatter  and  give  great
credit  for  my  practice  ;  but  after  I  had  worn  myself  out
in  their  service,  they  began  to  think  that  it  was  not  done
in  a  fashionable  way  ;  and  the  doctors  made  use  of  every
means  in  their  power  to  ridicule  me  and  my  practice,
for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  their  own  credit  with
the  people.  This  kind  of  treatment  was  a  new  thing
to  me,  as  I  did  not  at  that  time  so  well  understand  the
craft,  as  I  have  since,  from  hard  earned  experience.
The  word  quackery,  when  used  by  the  doctor  against
me,  was  a  very  important  charm  to  prejudice  the  peo-
ple against  my  practice  ;  but  I  would  ask  all  the  candid
and  reflecting  part  of  the  people,  the  following  ques-
tion, and  I  will  leave  them  to  their  consciences  to  give
an  answer — Which  is  the  greatest  quack,  the  one  who


Of  Samiuel  Thomson.  4T

r^lieres  them  from  their  sickness  by  the  most  simple
and  safe  means,  ^without  any  pretentions  to  infallibility
or  skill,  more  than  what  nature  and  experience  has
taught  him ;  or  the  one  who,  instead  of  curing  the  dis-
ease, increases  it  by  administering  poisonous  medicines,
which  only  tend  to  prolong  the  distresses  of  the  patient,
till  either  the  strength  of  his  natural  constitution,  or
death  relieves  him.

I  was  called  upon  to  attend  a  man  by  the^ame  of
Fairbanks,  who  lived  in  Walpole ;  he  was  taken  with
bleeding  at  the  lungs.  I  found  him  in  a  very  bad  con-
dition ;  the  family  judged  that  he  had  lost  nearly  six
quarts  of  blood  in  twenty  four  hours.  He  was  in  dis-
pair,  and  had  taken  leave  of  his  family,  as  they  consider-
ed there  was  no  hopes  of  his  living.  The  doctor  was
with  him  when  I  first  entered  the  house ;  but  he  fled  at
my  approach.  Both  his  legs  were  corded  by  the  doctor,
and  the  first  thing  I  did  was  to  strip  off  the  cords  from
his  legs ;  and  then  gave  medicine  to  get  as  great  an  in-
ternal heat  as  I  possibly  could  produce ;  got  him  to
-sweat  profusely;  then  gave  him  medicine  to  clear  the
ranker;  and  in  four  days  he  was  so  well  as  to  be  able  to
go  out  and  attend  to  his  business.

Sometime  in  October,  1805,  I  attended  a  Mrs.  Good-
ell,  of  Walpole  ;  she  had  been  confined  and  had  taken
cold.  The  most  noted  doctors  in  the  town  had  attended
her  througii  what  they  called  a  fever,  and  she  was  then
pronounced  by  them  to  be  in  a  decline.  After  three
months  practice  upon  her,  they  had  got  her  into  so  des-
perate a  situation,  that  they  gave  her  over,  and  said  that
her  case  was  so  putrid  and  ulcerated  that  it  was  utterly
incurable.  She  had  in  addition  to  the  rest  of  her  difficul-
ties, a  cancer  on  her  back.  In  this  desperate  situation,
it  was  thought  by  her  friends  that  she  was  a  proper  sub-
ject for  me  to  undertake  with.  1  with  a  great  deal  of
reluctance  undertook  with  her  at  her  earnest  solicita-
tion and  that  of  her  husband  ;  but  met  with  much  grea-
ter success  than  I  expected.  In  four  weeks  she  was
able  to  be  about  the  house  and  do  some  work.

In the  same  year  I  was  sent  for  to  attend  a  womaa*
who  had  been  in  a  dropsical  way  for  a  number  of  years.
The  disease  had  of  late  gained  with  rapid  progress.  Her


48  Narrative  cftke  Life,  4-c.

husband  had  previously  conversed  with  me  upon  the
subject  and  said  chat  he  had  apphed  to  Dr.  Sparahawk,
and  ^  ihers,  and  they  had  agreed  to  make  a  trial  of  mer-
cury. I  told  him  that  it  wouid  not  answer  the  purpose  ;
he  said  he  was  afraid  of  it  himself;  but  the  doctors  said
there  was  no  other  possible  way.  The  doctor  tried
his  mercurial  treatment  for  several  days,  which  very
nearly  proved  fatal ;  for  I  was  sent  for  in  great  haste,
with  a  request  that  I  would  attend  as  soon  as  possible,
as  they  expected  she  would  not  live  throug-h  the  day.
1  found  her  situation  very  distressing;  she  said  it  appear-
ed to  her  that  she  was  full  of  scalding  water.  She  be-
gan to  turn  purple  in  spots,  and  it  was  expected  that
mortification  had  taken  place.  In  the  first  place  I  gave
her  about  a  gill  of  checkerberry  and  hemlock,  distilled,
which  allayed  the  heat  immediately.  This  answered
the  purpose,  till  I  could  clear  her  stomach,  and  by  the
greatest  exertions,  and  close  attention  through  the  day,
1  was  enabled  to  reheve  her.  I  attended  her  for  about
a  week,  and  she  was  so  far  recovered  as  to  enjoy  com-
fortable health  for  twelve  years.

Notwithstanding  this  desperate  cuse  was  cured,  to
the  astonishment  of  all  who  witnessed  it,  the  doctors
had  so  much  influence  over  the  people,  and  made  so
many  false  statements  about  it,  that  I  got  no  credit  for
the  cure.  This  woman's  brother  had  said  that  her  hus-
band wanted  to  kill  her  or  he  wouid  not  have  sent  for
me.  Such  kind  of  ingratitude  was  discouraging  to  me  ;
but  it  did  not  prevent  me  from  persevering  in  my  duty.

A  short  time  after  the  above  case  happened,  that  wo-
man's brother,  who  made  the  speech  about  me,  was  ta-
ken very  sick,  with  what  was  called  the  yellow  fever,
and  sent  for  me.  I  attended  him  and  asked  him  if  he
wanted  to  die.  He  said  no;  why  do  you  askthat?  I
told  him,  that  I  should  suppose  from  the  speech  he  made
about  my  being  sent  for  to  his  sister,  that  he  did,  or  he
woi^jid  not  have  sent  for  me,  if  he  believed  his  own
5^brds.  He  said  he  thought  differently  now.  1  attend-
ed him  through  the  day  with  my  new  practice.  To  sweat
him  I  took  hemlock  boughs,  and  put  a  hot  stone  in  the
middle  of  a  large  bunch  of  them,  vvrappingthe  whole  in
a  cloth  and  poured  on  hot  water  till  I  raised  a  lively


Of  Samuel  Tho7nson.  49

steum,  and  then  put  one  at  his  feet  and  another  near  his
body.  I  gave  him  medicine  to  raise  the  inward  heat,
and  for  the  canker;  after  attending  him  through  the
day,  I  went  home ;  and  on  calling  to  see  him  the  ne^t
morning,  found  his  fever  had  turned,  and  he  was  quite
comfortable,  so  that  he  was  soon  about  his  business.

I  was  about  this  time  sent  for  to  see  a  child  in  Surry,
a  neighbouring  town,  which  was  taken  very  sick,  and
was  entirely  stupid.  I  told  the  father  of  the  child  that
it  had  the  canker,  and  made  use  of  my  common  mode  of
practice  for  that  difficulty.  Being  sent  for  to  go  to
Walpole  to  see  two  young  men  who  had  been  taken  the
day  before  with  the  prevaihng  fever,  I  left  the  child,
with  directions  how  to  proceed  with  it.  I  then  started
for  Walpole,  and  found  the  two  young  men  violently  at-
tacked With  the  fever.  Tliey  had  a  brother  who  had
been  atte-nded  by  the  doctor  for  above  four  \vv  e.is  for
the  same  disease,  and  was  then  just  able  to  sit  up.  It
was  thought  by  all,  the  two  that  were  attacked  last,
were  as  violently  taken  as  the  other  was ;  and  they  ex-
pressed a  strong  wish,  that  they  might  be  cured  with-
out so  long  a  run  as  their  brother  had.  I  was  as  anx-
ious as  they  were  to  have  a  short  job,  and  exerted  all
my  power  to  relieve  them,  which  I  was  enabled  to  do
that  night,  and  left  them  in  the  morning  quite  comforta-
ble, so  that  they  were  soon  able  to  attend  to  their  work.
The  brother  wno  had  the  doctor,  was  unabied  to  do  any
thing  for  several  months.  The  doctor  was  paid  a  heavy
bill  for  his  visits ;  but  my  cure  was  done  so  quick,  that
it  was  thought  not  to  be  worthy  of  their  notice,  and  I
never  received  a  cent  from  them  for  my  troubie.  On
returning  to  the  child  that  1  had  left  the  day  before,  I
found  that  the  doctor  had  been  there  and  told  them
that  I  did  not  know  what  was  the  matter  with  the  child ;
and  had  persuaded  them  to  give  him  the  care  of  it.  He
filled  it  with  mercury  and  run  it  down;  after  having  gi-
ven as  much  mercury  inside  as  nature  could  move,  and
the  bowels  grew  silent,  he  then  rubbed  mercurial  oint-
ment on  the  bowels  as  long  as  it  had  any  effect ;  after
which  he  agreed  that  the  child  had  the  tanker  very
badly ;  but  he  still  persisted  in  the  same  course  till  the
child  wasted  away  and  died,  in  about  two  months  ali^rit


50  J^arrative  of  the  Life^  <^c.

was  first  taken  sick.  After  the  child  was  dead  its  pa-
rents were  willing  to  allow  that  I  understood  the  disor-
der best.  The  doctor  got  twenty-five  dollars  for  killing
the  child  by  inches,  and  I  got  nothing.

In  the  spring  of  1805,  a  Mrs.  Richardson  was  brought
to  my  house.  She  was  brought  in  her  bed  from  West-
ford,  Vermont,  about  130  miles ;  and  was  attended  by  a
son  and  daughter,  the  one  2  J  and  the  other  18  years  of
age.  The  mother  had  lain  in  her  bed  most  part  of  the
time  for  ten  years.  All  the  doctors  in  that  part  of  the
country  had  been  applied  to  without  any  advantage  ;
and  they  had  spent  nearly  all  their  property.  1  under-
took with  her  more  from  a  charitable  feeling  for  the
young  man  and  woman,  than  from  any  expectation  of  a
cure.  Their  conduct  towards  their  helpless  mother,
was  the  greatest  example  of  affection  of  children  to  a
parent  that  I  ever  witnessed.  The  young  man  stated
to  me  that  his  mother  had  been  a  year  together  without
opening  her  eyes  ;  that  when  she  could  open  her  eyes,
they  thought  her  almost  well.  She  was  perfectly  help-
less, not  being  able  to  do  the  least  thing ;  not  even  to
brush  off  a  fly,  any  more  than  an  infant.  She  had  lain
so  long  that  her  knee  joints  had  become  stiff.

I  began  with  her  by  cleansing  her  stomach,  and  pro-
moting perspiration  J  after  which,  I  used  to  try  to  give
her  some  exercise.  The  first  trial  f  made  was  to  put
her  bed  into  a  wheelbarrow  and  lay  her  on  it ;  when  I
would  run  her  out,  till  she  appeared  to  be  weary  j  some-
times I  would  make  a  mistep  and  fall,  pretending  that  I
had  hurt  me;  in  order  to  try  to  get  her  to  move  herself  by
frightening  her.  After  exercising  her  in  this  way  for
a  few  days,  I  put  her  in  a  waggon,  sitting  on  a  bed,  and
drove  her  about  in  that  manner ;  and  when  her  jomts
became  more  limber,  I  sat  her  on  the  seat  of  the  wag-
gon. She  insisted  that  she  should  fall  off,  for  she  said
she  could  not  use  her  feet ;  but  the  driver  would  some-
times drive  on  ground  that  was  sideling,  and  rather  than
turn  over,  she  would  start  her  foot  unexpectedly.  Af-
ter exercising  her  in  this  way  sometime,  I  put  her  on  a
horse  behind  her  son ;  she  at  first  insisted  that  she  shou  Id
fall  ofif;  but  when  1  told  her  she  was  at  liberty  to  fall,


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  51

If  she  chose,  she  would  not,  choosing  rather  to  exert
herself  to  hold  on.  When  she  had  rode  a  few  times  in
this  way,  I  put  her  on  the  horse  alone,  and  after  a  few
trials  she  would  ride  very  well,  so  that  in  the  course  of
two  months  she  would  ride  four  miles  out  and  back
every  day.  She  used  to  be  tired  after  her  ride,  and
would  lay  dowri  and  not  move  for  six  hours.

I  continued  to  give  her  medicine  to  keep  up  perspi-
ration, and  restore  the  digestive  powers,  and  to  strength-
en the  nervous  system.  I  attended  her  in  this  way  for
three  months  and  then  went  with  her,  and  her  son  and
daughter  to  Manchester ;  she  rode  upwards  of  thirty
miles  in  a  day,  and  stood  the  journey  very  well.  I  ne-
ver received  any  pay  for  all  my  trouble,  and  expense  of
keeping  them  for  three  months,  except  what  the  two
young  people  did  more  than  take  care  of  their  mother ;
but  1  accomphshed  what  1  undertook,  and  relieved
these  two  unfortunate  orphans  from  their  burthen  ;
which  was  more  satisfaction  to  me  than  to  have  received
a  large  sum  of  money,  without  doing  any  good.  I  saw
this  woman  three  years  after  at  the  wedding  of  her  son,
and  she  was  quite  comfortable,  and  has  enjoyed  a  toler-
able degree  of  health  to  this  time,  being  able  to  wait  on
herself

On  my  return  from  Manchester  I  stopped  at  Walpole,
and  it  being  on  the  Sabbath,  I  attended  meeting.  In
the  afternoon  during  service,  a  young  woman  was  taken
in  a  fit  and  carried  out  of  the  meeting  house.  I  went
out  to  see  her  and  found  that  she  had  been  subject  to
fits  for  sometime.  She  was  much  bloated,  and  very
large,  weighing  about  three  hundred.  A  ievf  days  af-
ter her  friends  brought  her  to  my  house,  and  were  very
urgent  that  1  should  undertake  to  help  her;  but  I  told
them  I  was  satisfied  that  it  would  be  a  very  difficult  un-
dertaking, and  I  did  not  feel  willing  to  engage  in  it ;
but  they  were  so  urgent  I  agreed  to  do  whatt  I  could
for  her.  Every  time  she  took  medicine,  when  I  first
began  with  her,  she  would  have  a  strong  convulsion
fit  ;  but  I  soon  got  her  to  sweat  freely,  and  her  fits  were
at  an  end.  By  persevering  in  my  usual  plan  of  treatment,
1  got  a  natural  perspiration,  and  her  other  evacuations
became  regular  j  she  was  considerably  reduced  in  size.


52:  Narrative  ef  the  Life^  Sfc.

and  I  haye  never  heapd  of  her  having  any  fits  since.
The  cause  of  her  fits  was  taking  sudden  cold,  and  all
perspiration  and  the  greater  part  of  other  evacuations
ceased,  leaving  the  water  in  her  body.

In  the  fall  of  1 805,  I  was  sent  for  to  go  to  Richmond,
to  see  the  family  of  Elder  Bowles,  who  were  all  sick
with  the  disentary ;  and  Mrs.  Bowles  had  a  cancer  on
her  breast.  I  relieved  them  of  the  disorder,  by  my  us-
ual mode  of  practice  ;  and  gave  the  woman  medicine  for
the  cancer,  which  relieved  her.  I  had  occasion  to  visit
her  again,  and  the  tumour  was  about  the  size  of  an  e^g  j
but  by  following  my  prescriptions,  it  was  dissolved  with-
out causing  any  pain,  and  she  has  been  well  for  twelve
years.  I  then  practiced  in  difierent  parts  of  Royalston
and  Warwick,  and  my  practicing  in  these  places  was  the
way  that  my  mode  of  sweating  for  the  spotted  fever,
came  to  be  known  and  practised  by  the  physicians  in
Petersham.  I  had  discovered  the  benefit  of  steaming^^
by  trying  it  upon  my  daughter  two  years  before,  and
had  been  constantly  practising  it  ever  since  ;  but  the
doctors,  though  they  condemned  me  and  my  practice,
were  willing  to  introduce  it  and  take  the  credit  to  them-
selves as  an  important  discovery.

After  returning  home  I  was  sent  for  to  attend  a  wo-
man in  the  neighbourhood,  who  had  been  under  the  care
of  a  celebrated  doctor,  for  a  cancer  in  her  breast.  He
had  tortured  her  with  his  caustics,  till  her  breast  was
burnt  through  to  the  bone ;  and  by  its  corrosive  nature
had  caused  the  cords  to  draw  up  into  knots  ;  he  had
likewise  burnt  her  leg  to  thfe  cords.  She  had  been  un-
der his  care  eleven  weeks ';  until  she  was  much  wasted
away,  and  her  strength  nearly  gone.  In  this  situation
the  doctor  was  willing  to  get  her  off  his  hands,  and  wish-
ed me  to  take  charge  of  her.  After  some  hesitation  I
consented,  and  attended  her  three  weeks,  in  which  time
I  healed  up  her  sores,  and  cleared  her  of  the  humour
so  effectually  that  she  has  ever  since  enjoyed  good
health.

While  attending  upon  this  case  another  woman  v/as
brought  to  me  from  Hillsborough,  who  had  a  cancer  on
the  back  of  her  neck.  I  dissolved  the  tumour,  and
cured  her  by  applying  my  cancer  balsam,  and  the  com-


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  53

mon  course  of  medicine,  in  three  weeks,  without  any
pain ;  and  she  has  ever  since  enjoyed  good  health.

Ahout  this  time  I  was  called  on  to  attend  a  woman  in
the  town  where  I  hved.  She  was  an  old  maid,  and  had
lately  been  married  to  a  widower,  who  was  very  fond  of
her.  She  had  been  much  disordered  for  many  years,
and  was  very  spleeny  ;  she  had  been  under  the  care  of
several  doctors,  without  receiving  any  benefit.  I  visited
her  several  times  and  gave  general  satisfaction  ;  so  much
so  that  she  allowed  that  I  had  done  her  more  good  than
all  the  others  that  had  attended  her.  A  short  time  af-
ter I  had  done  Visiting  her,  the  old  man  came  one  moTa
ing  to  my  house  at  sun-rise,  and  I  being  about  six  miles
from  home,  he  came  with  all  speed  where  I  was,  and
said  he  wished  me  to  come  to  his  house  as  soon  as  pos-
sible, for  his  wife  was  very  sick.  I  told  him  to  return
and  [  would  be  there  as  soon  as  he  could.  I  soon  after
sat  out  and  we  both  arrived  there  about  the  same  time ;
and  was  very  much  astonished  to  find  his  wife  about  her
work.  I  was  asked  into  another  room  by  the  old  man
and  his  wife,  and  he  said  she  had  something  to  say  to
me.  She  then  said  that  "  if  I  could  not  attend  her  with-
out giving  her  love  powder,  she  did  not  wish  me  to  at-
tend her  at  all.^'  I  was  very  much  astonished  at  her
speech,  and  asked  what  she  meant.  She  said  that  ever
since  she  had  taken  my  medicine  she  had  felt  siich  an
inclination  for  a  man,  that  sh-e  did  not  know  what  to
make  of  it.  The  old  man  affirmed  to  the  same,  and  that
he  thought  I  had  given  her  iove  powder,  and  did  not
know  what  the  event  might  be.

This  foolish  whim  of  the  old  man  and  his  wife  caused
a  great  bluster,  and  was  food  for  those  idle  minds  who
seem  to  take  delight  in  slandering  their  neighbours;  and
was  made  a  great  handle  of  by  the  doctors^  who  spread
all  kinds  of  ridiculous  stories  about  me  during  my  ab'
sence  in  the  summer  of  1806.  In  the  autumn,,  when  I
had  returned  home,  I  found  that  a  certain  doctor  of
Alstead,  had  circulated  some  very  foolish  and  slander-
ous reports  about  me  and  this  old  woman,  and  had  given
to  them  so  much  importance^  that  many  people  believ-
ed them,  i  found  that  1  could  prove  his  assertions,  and
sued  him  for  defamation ;  supposing  that  by  appealing


54  Narrative  of  the  Life^  4*c.

to  the  laws  of  my  country  I  could  get  redress ;  but  I  was
disappointed  in  my  expectations,  for  I  was  persuaded
to  leave  the  case  to  a  reference,  and  he  had  raised  such
3  strong  prejudice  in  the  minds  of  the  people  against
me,  that  they  were  more  ready  to  favour  a  man  whom
they  considered  great  and  learned,^  because  he  had  been
to  college,  than  to  do  justice  to  me ;  so  they  gave  the
case  against  me,  and  I  had  to  pay  the  cost.  After  this
I  refused  to  attend  those  people  who  had  assisted  in  in-
juring me,  and  gave  them  up  to  their  fashionable  doc-
tors. A  curse  seemed  to  follow  them  and  his  prac-
tice 5  for  the  spotted  fever  prevailed  in  this  place  soon
after,  and  the  doctor  took  charge  of  those  who  had  sid-
ed with  him  against  me,  and  if  he  had  been  a  butcher
and  used  the  knife,  there  would  not  have  been  more
destruction  among  them.  Two  men  who  swore  falsely
in  his  favour,  and  by  whose  means  he  got  his  cause,
were  among  the  first  victims ;  and  of  the  whole  that  he
attended  about  nine  tenths  died.  He  lost  upwards  of
sixty  patients  in  the  town  of  Alstead  in  a  short  time.

I  attended  the  funeral  of  a  young  man,  one  of  his  pa-
tients, who  was  sick  but  twenty-four  hours,  and  but
twelve  under  the  operation  of  his  medicine.  He  was  as
black  as  a  blackberry,  and  swelled  so  as  to  be  difficult  to
screw  down  the  lid  of  the  coffin ;  when  I  went  into  the
room  where  the  corpse  was,  the  doctor  followed  me,
and  gave  directions  to  have  the  coffin  secured  so  as  ta.
prevent  the  corpse  being  seen;  and  then  began  to  insult,
me  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  people.  He  said  to
me,  I  understand,  sir,  thatyou  have  a  patent  to  cure  such
disorders  as  that  (pointing  to  the  corpse.)  I  said  no,
and  at  the  same  time  intimated  what  1  thought  of  him.
He  put  on  an  air  of  great  importance,  and  said  to  me,
what  can  you  know  about  medicine  ?  you  have  no  learn-
ing ;  you  cannot  parse  one  sentence  of  grammar.  I  told
him,  I  never  knew  that  grammar  was  made  use  of  as
medicine ;  but  if  a  portion  of  grammar  is  so  much  like
the  operation  of  ratsbane,  as  appears  on  this  corpse,
I  should  never  wish  to  know  the  use  of  it.  This  unex-
pected application  of  the  meaning  of  what  he  said,  dis-
pleased this  medical  gentleman  very  much,  and  finding
that  many  of  the  people  present  had  the  same  opinioB


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  65

that  I  had,  it  irritated  him  so  much,  that  he  threatened
to  horsewhip  me  ;  but  I  told  him  that  he  might  do  what
he  pleased  to  me,  provided  he  did  not  poison  me  With
his  grammar.  He  did  not  attempt  to  carry  his  threat
into  execution,  so  I  have  escaped  his  whip  and  his  poi-
son ;  but  the  people  were  justly  punished  for  their  in-
gratitude and  folly,  in  prefering  death  and  misery,  be-
cause it  was  done  more  fashionably  ;  to  a  mode  of  prac-
tice by  which  they  might  relieve  themselves  in  asmiple
and  safe  manner.

I  have  been  more  particular  in  relating  these  circum-  '
stances,  in  order  to  show  my  reasons  for  refusing  to  prac-
tice so  near  home;  for  I  had  been  in  constant  practice
among  them  for  four  or  five  years,  and  had  been  very
successful,  not  having  lost  one  patient  during  the  whole
time.  My  house  had  been  constantly  filled  with  patients
from  all  parts  of  the  country,  for  which  I  had  received
very  little  pay  ;  myself  and  family  were  worn  out  with
nursing  and  attending  upon  them;  so  that  I  was  com-
pelled, in  a  measure,  to  leave  home  to  free  myself  and
family  from  so  heavy  a  burthen.  Besides  I  felt  it  more
a  duty  to  assist  the  people  in  those  parts  where  I  had
been  treated  with  more  friendship,  and  had  received
more  assistance  through  my  troubles,  than  what  I  had
experienced  from  those  whom  I  had  reasons  to  consider
as  under  the  greatest  obligations  to  me.

In  the  spring  of  the  year  1806,  I  came  to  a  deter-
mination to  go  to  New-York,  for  the  purpose  of  ascer-
taining the  nature  of  the  yellow  fever,  having  been  im-
pressed with  the  idea,  that  this  disease  was  similar  to
that  which  had  been  prevalant  in  different  parts  of  the
country,  only  differing,  in  causes  which  were  local.  I
made  arrangements  with  a  man  to  take  charge  of  my
farm,  and  on  the  26th  of  June  started  for  Boston,  where
I  took  passage  for  New- York,  and  sailed  on  the  3d  of
July.  In  passing  through  the  Sound^  I  was  very  sensi-
bly affected  by  the  cold  chills  I  experienced  in  conse-
quence of  the  sea  air  ;  having  never  been  on  the  salt
water  before,  this  was  new  to  me ;  although  the  wea-
ther WHS  very  hot  on  the  land  I  suffered  with  the  cold.
We  arrived  at  New-York  in  eight  days  ;  and  the  wea-
ther was  extremely  hot  when  I  landed ;  this-  sudden


&6  Narrative^oJ  the  Life^  ^c.

change  produced  a  powerful  effect  on  m}'  feelings ;  the
cause  of  which  I  was  satisfied  in  my  own  mind,  was  in
consequence  of  the  cold  I  had  experienced  on  the  water
having-  reduced  the  natural  heat  of  the  hody ;  thus  com-
ing- into  a  very  warm  atmosphere,  the  external  and  in-
ternal heat  were  nearly  upon  an  equal  scale,  and  when
thereis  an  exact  balance,  so  as  to  stop  the  determining
powers  to  the  surface,  mortification  immediately  takes
place,  and  death  follows.  This  is  the  cause  why  the
iever  is  so  fatal  to  those  who  go  from  the  northward  in-

'to  a  warm  climate.

On  my  arrival  I  looked  round  to  find  a  place  to  boards
and  took  up  my  lodgings  with  a  Mr.  Kavanagh,  an
Irishman,  and  a  Roman  Catholic.  After  spending  some
time  in  viewing  the  city,  1  applied  to  the  Mayor  of  the
city,  and  to  the  Boa.  d  of  Health,  to  ascertain  whether  [
could  have  an  opportunity  to  try  the  effect  of  my  medi-
cine and  system  of  practice  on  the  prevailing  fever.
They  told  me  that  I  could  ;  but  that  I  could  get  no  pay
for  it  by  law.  I  went  to  see  Dr  Miller,  who  was  then
President  of  the  Board  of  Health,  and  had  some  conver-
sation with  him  upon  the  subject.  He  told  me  the
same  as  the  Mayor  had,  and  enquired  of  me  in  what
manner  I  expected  to  give  rehef ;  I  told  him  my  plan
was  to  cause  perspiration.  He  said  that  if  1  could  cause
them  to  sweat,  he  thought  there  was  a  good  chance  to
effect  a  cure.

After  spending  several  days  in  New-York,  1  went  to
Westchester  Creek  to  procure  some  medicine.  1  thought
that  [  was  going  to  have  the  yellow  fever,  for  I  felt  all
the  symptoms,  as  1  thought^of  that  disease  ;  my  strength
was  nearly  gone,  my  eyes  were  yellow,  and  a  noise  in-
my  head ;  my  tongue  was  black,  and  what  passed  my
bowels  was  like  tar.  I  was  among  strangers,  and  had
little  money ; 1  went  to  the  house  of  a  quaker  woman,

^nd  asked  her  to  let  me  stay  with  her  that  day ;  she
gave  her  consent.  Had  but  little  medicine  with  me,
and  could  find  nothing  that  I  could  relish  but  salt  and
vinegar;  I  used  about  half  a  pmt  of  salt  and  double
that  quantity  of  vinegar,  which  gave  me  relief,  and  I
gained  so  much  strerxgth,  that  the  next  day  -  was  able
to  return  to  the  city  of  ]N[ew-York. On  my  arrival


Of  Samuel  Thomson,  57

there,  I  was  so  weak  that  it  was  with  the  greatest  diffi-
culty that  I  could  walk  to  my  boarding  house,  which
was  about  forty  rods  from  the  place  where  we  landed.  I
ir/imediately  took  some  No.  2  and  3,  steeped,  and  No.  4,
in  a  short  time  I  began  to  have  an  appetite  ;  the  first  food
that  1  took  was  a  piece  of  smoked  salmon,  and  some
ripe  peach  sauce.  Soon  recovered  my  strength  and  was
able  to  be  about.  This  satisfied  me  that  I  had  formed
a  correct  idea  of  this  fatal  disease ;  ihat  it  was  the  con-
sequence of  losing  the  inward,  heat  of  the  body,  and
bringing  it  to  a  balance  with  the  surrounding  air ;  and
the  only  method  by  which  a  cure  can  be  effected,  is  by
giving  such  medicine  as  will  increase  the  fever  or  in-
ward heat,  to  such  a  degree  as  to  get  the  determining
power  to  the  surface,  by  which  means  pe.ifpiration  will
take  place,  and  which  is  called  the  turn  of  the  fever;
if  this  is  not  accomplished  either  by  medicine,  or  by  na-
ture being  sufficient  to  overcome  the  disease,  mortifica-
tion will  be  as  certain  a  consequence  as  it  would  be  if
a  person  was  strangled.  The  reason  why  they  lose
their  strength  in  so  short  a  time,  is  because  it  depends
wholly  upon  the  power  of  inWard  heat ;  and  as  much  a&
they  lose  that,  so  much  they  lose  their  strength  and
activity.

i  had  a  good  opportunity  to  prove  these  facts  and  to
satisfy  myself,  by  attending  to  a  Mr.  McGowan,  who
had  the  yellow  fever.  He  was  the  teacher  of  the  Ro-
man Catholic  school,  and  an  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Ka-
vanagh,  with  whom  I  boarded,  and  who  recommended
iiim  to  my  care.  He  was  attacked  about  noon,  was
very  cold,  and  had  no  pain ;  his  eyes  were  half  closed,
and  appeared  like  a  person  half  way  between  sleeping
and  waking  ;  he  lost  so  much  strength  that  in  two  hours
he  was  unable  to  walk  across  the  room  without  stagger-
ing. I  began  with  him  by  giving  No.  2  and  3,  to  raise
the  inward  heat  and  clear  the  stomach,  and  in  an  hour
after  getting  him  warm,  he  was  in  very  extreme  pain,
so  much  so  that  his  friends  were  alarmed  about  him  ;
but  I  told  them  that  it  was  a  favourable  symptom.  Af-
ter being  in  this  situation  about  an  hour,  perspiration
began  and  he  grew  easy  ;  the  next  day  he  was  out
about  his  business. The  effect  in  these  cases  is  exact-


58  JSTarrative  cfthe  Life^  ^c.

ly  similar  to  a  person  being  recovered  after  having  been
drowned.  The  cold  having  overpowered  the  inward
heat,  all  sensation  or  feeling  ceases,  and  of  course  there
is  no  pain ;  but  as  soon  as  the  heat  begins  to  increase  so
as  to  contend  with  the  cold,  sensation  returns,  and  the
pain  will  be  very  great  till  the  victory  is  gained  by  heat
having  expelled  the  cold  from  the  body,  when  a  natur-
al perspiration  commences,  and  nature  is  restored  to
her  empire.

I  will  here  make  a  few  remarks  upon  the  food  taken
into  the  stomach,  which  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to
the  preservation  of  health.  While  I  was  in  New-York,
took  particular  notice  of  their  manner  of  living ;  and
observed  that  they  subsisted  principally  upon  fresh  pro-
visions, mor?  particularly  the  poorer  class  of  people ;
who  are  in  the  habit  in  warm  weather  of  going  to  mar-
ket at  a  late  hour  of  the  day,  and  purchasing  fresh  meat
that  is  almost  in  a  putrid  state,  having  frequently  been
killed  the  night  previous,  and  being  badly  cooked,  by
taking  it  into  the  stomach,  will  produce  certain  disease  ;
and  I  am  convinced  that  this  is  one  of  the  greatest
causes  that  those  fatal  epidemics  prevail  in  the  hot  sea-
son, in  our  large  seaports.  Mutton  and  lamb  is  often
drove  a  great  distance  from  the  country,  and  having
been  heat  and  fatigued,  then  are  cooled  suddenly,  which
causes  the  fat  to  turn  to  water ;  and  often  when  killed
are  in  almost  a  putrid  state,  and  the  meat  is  soft  and
flabby.  Such  meat  as  this,  when  brought  into  the  mar-
ket on  a  hot  day  will  turn  green  under  the  kidneys  in
two  or  three  hours,  and  taken  into  the  stomach  will  pu-
trify  before  it  digests,  and  will  communicate  the  same
to  the  stomach,  and  the  whole  body  will  be  so  affected
by  it,  as  to  cause  disorders  of  the  worst  kind.  If  people
would  get  into  the  practice  of  eating  salt  provisions  in
hot  weather  and  fresh  in  cold,  it  v/ould  be  a  very  great
preventative  to  disease.  One  ounce  of  putrid  desh  in
the  stomach  is  worse  than  the  effect  produced  by  a
whole  carcase  on  the  air  by  its  effluvia.  Much  more
might  be  said  upon  this  important  subject;  but  I  shall
deier  it  for  the  present,  and  shall  treat  more  upon  it  in
another  part  of  the  work.  It  is  a  subject  that  has  been
too  mach  neglected  by  our  health  ofScers  in  this  country.


Qf  Samuel  Thomson.  50

While  in  the  city  of  New-York,  I  attended  an  Irish-
man by  the  name  of  Doyle,  who  had  the  fever-and-ague.
This  disease  gives  a  complete  view  of  my  theory  of
heat  and  cold ;  for  it  is  about  an  equal  balance  between
the  two,  heat  keeping  a  little  the  uper  hand.  He  had
been  afflicted  with  this  distressing  disorder  about  four
months  ;  he  had  the  fits  most  of  the  time  every  day,  and
was  very  bad.  I  began  by  giving  him  such  medicine  as
I  usually  gave  to  increase  the  inward  heat  of  the, body,
which  subdued  the  cold,  and  gave  heat  the  victory  over
it ;  and  by  strictly  attending  him  in  this  way  four  days,
he  was  completely  cured.  Being  short  of  money  I  ask-
ed him  for  some  compensation  for  my  t  ^ouble  ;  but  he
refused,  and  never  paid  me  a  cent ;  observing  that  he
must  have  been  getting  well  before,  for  no  one  ever
heard  of  such  a  disorder  being  cured  in  four  days.

A  gentleman  whom  1  had  formed  an  acquaintance
with,  by  the  name  of  James  Quackenbush,  who  had
the  care  of  the  State  prison  warehouse,  finding  how  I
had  been  treated,  invited  me  to  go  to  his  house  and
live  with  him,  which  I  thankfully  accepted.  I  was  treat-
ed with  much  kindness  by  him,  for  which  he  has  my
most  sincere  thanks.

On  the  16th  of  September  I  started  for  home,  and
took  passage  on  board  a  packet  for  Boston,  where  I  ar-
rived in  five  days:  and  on  the  26th  reached  my  home,
after  an  absence  of  three  months,  and  found  my  family
well.  I  was  often  called  on  to  practice  in  the  neigh-
bourhood ;  but  declined  most  part  of  the  applications  in
consequence  of  the  treatment  I  had  received  from  them,
which  has  been  before  related.  In  November  I  went
to  Plum  Island  to  collect  medicine ;  on  my  way  1  call-
ed on  Joseph  Hale,  Esq.  of  Pepperell,  and  engaged  him
to  come  down  with  his  waggon  in  about  three  weeks,  to
bring  back  what  medicine  1  should  collect.  I  went  by
the  way  of  Newbury  port ;  and  after  being  on  the  is-
,land  three  or  four  days,  collected  such  roots  as  I  want-
ed, and  returned  to  that  place.  While  there,  being  in
a  store  in  conversation  with  some  persons,  there  came
in  a  man  from  Salisbury  mills,  by  the  name  of  Osgood,
who  stated  that  he  was  very  unwell,  and  that  his  wife
lay  at  the  point  of  death,  with  the  lung  fever;  that  she


CO  Narrative  of  the  LAfe^  SfC.

had  been  attended  by  Dr., French,  who  bad  given  her
over.  One  of  the  gentlemen  standing  by  told  him  that
I  was  a  doctor,  and  used  the  medicine  of  our  own  coun-
try. He  asked  me  if  I  would  go  home  with  him  and
see  his  wife  ;  as  1  was  waiting  for  Mr.  Hale,  and  no-
thing to  do,  1  told  him  I  would,  and  we  immediately
started  in  his  chaise  for  his  home,  which  was  about  six
miles.  On  our  arrival  he  introduced  me  to  his  wife  as
a  doctor  who  made  use  of  the  medicine  of  our  country;
and  asked  her  if  she  was  willing  that  1  should  undertake
to  cure  her.  She  said  if  I  thought  that  I  could  help  her,
she  had  no  objection.  I  gave  my  opinion  that  I  could,
and  undertook,  tiiough  with  some  reluctance,  as  I  was
in' a  strange  place  and  no  one  that  I  knew.  1  proceed-
ed with  her  in  my  usual  method  of  practice,  and  in
about  fourteen  hours  her  fever  turned,  and  the  next
day  she  was  comfortable,  and  soon  got  about.

This  cure  caused  considerable  talk  among  the  peo-
ple in  the  neighbourhood,  who  thought  very  favourably
of  me  and  my  practice  ;  but  it  soon  came  to  the  ears  of
Dr.  French,  who  was  very  much. enraged  to  think  one
of  his  patients,  that  he  had  given  over,  should  be  cured
by  one  whom  he  called  a  quack ;  and  attempted  to
counteract  the  public  impression  in  my  favour,  by  cir-
culating a  report  that  the  woman  was  getting  better
and  sat  up  the  greatest  part  of  the  day  before  I  saw  her  ;
but  this  was  denied  by  the  woman's  husband,  and  known
to  many  to  be  false.

While  I  remained  in  this  place,  waiting  for  Mr.  Hale
to  come  down  with  his  waggon  to  carry  home  my  medi-
cine, I  was  called  on  to  attend  several  cases,  in  all  of
which  I  was  very  successful ;  most  of  them  were  such
as  had  been  given  over  by  their  doctors.  One  of  them
was  a  case  of  a  young  man,  who  had  cut  three  of  his
fingers  very  badiy,  so  as  to  lay  open  the  joints.  Dr.
French  had  attended  him  three  weeks,  and  they  had
got  so  bad  that  he  advised  him  to  have  them  cut  off  as
the  only  alternative.  I  he  young  man  applied  to  me
for  advice.  I  told  him  that  if  1  w^as  in  his  situation,  I
should  not  be  wiUing  to  have  them  cut  off  till  1  had
made  some  further  trial  to  cure  them  without.  He  re-
quested  me to  undertake to cure  him, to  which  I


Of  Samuel  Thoma^n:  61

and  began  by  clearing  the  wound  of  mercury,  by  wash-
ing it  with  weak  lye ;  I  then  put  on  some  drops,  and  did
it  up  with  a  bandage  which  was  kept  wet  with  cold  wa-
ter. While  I  was  dressing  the  wound,  a  young  man
who  was  studying  with  Dr.  French,  came  in  and  made
a  great  fuss,  telling  the  young  man  that  he  was  going
to  spoil  his  hand.  I  told  him  that  I  was  accountable  for
what  was  doing,  and  that  if  he  had  any  adv^ice  to  offer
I  was  ready  to  hear  him ;  but  he  seemed  to  have  nothing
to  offer  except  to  find  fault,  and  went  off,  after  saying
that  Dr.  French's  bill  must  be  paid  very  soon.  I  con-
tinued to  dress  his  hand,  and  in  ten  days  he  was  well
enough  to  attend  to  his  work,  being  employed  in  a  nail
factory.  Soon  after  I  saw  him  there  at  work,  and  asked
him  bow  his  fingers  did,  he  said  they  were  perfectly  cur-
ed ;  he  wished  to  know  what  my  bill  was  for  attending
him.  I  asked  him  what  Dr.  French  had  charged,  and
he  said  he  had  sent  his  bill  to  his  mother  amounting  to
seventeen  dollars  ;  I  told  him  I  thought  that  enough  for
us  both,  and  I  should  charge  him  nothing.  His  mother
was  a  poor  widow,  depending  on  her  labour  and  that  of
her  son  for  a  living.  I  remained  in  this  place  about
two  weeks,  and  the  people  were  very  urgent  that  I
should  stay  longer  ;  but  Mr.  Hale  having  arrived,  F
left  them  with  a  promise  that  1  would  visit  them  again
in  the  spring.  We  arrived  at  Pepperell,  where  I  re-
mained several  days  with  Mr.  Hale,  who  was  an  ingeni-
ous blacksmith  and  a  chymist,  having  been  much  engag-
ed in  the  preparations  of  mineral  medicine.  He  had  an
enquiring  turn  of  mind  and  was  very  enthusiastic  in  his
undertakings ;  although  he  prepared  medicines  from
minerals,  he  acknowledged  that  he  was  afraid  to  use
them  on  account  of  his  knowing  their  poisonous  quali-
ties. 1  convinced  him  of  the  superiority  of  my  system
of  practice,  and  instructed  hiin  in  the  use  of  my  medi-
cine so  that  he  engaged  m  it  and  soon  had  as  much  prac-
tice as  he  could  attend  to ;  being  so  well  satisfied  of  its
general  application  to  the  cure  of  all  cases  of  disease,
that  he  looked  no  more  for  it  in  his  mineral  prepara-
tions.

In  the  winter  of  1807,  I  went  With  my  wife  to  Jeri-
cho, Vermont,  to  visit  my  father  and  friends,  who  lived

F


62  Narrative  of  the  Life^  4'C.

there. While  there I  was  called  on  to  see  a  number
who  were  sick,  among  whom  was  a  young  man  that  had
been  taken  in  what  was  called  cramp  convulsion  fits.
He  was  first  taken  on  Sunday  morning,  and  continued  in
fits  most  of  the  time  till  Tuesday ;  he  was  attended  dur-
ing this  time  by  the  best  doctors  that  couid  be  procured,
without  doing  him  any  good. They  could  not  get  their
medicine  to  have  any  effect  upon  him  ;  he  continued  in
convulsions  most  of  the  time,  every  part  of  him  was  as
stiff  as  a  wooden  image ;  after  trying  every  thmg  they
could,  they  gave  him  over. His  father  came  after  me,
and  just  as  we  entered  the  room  where  the  young  man
was, he was  taken  in  a  fit. His  feet  and  hands  were
drawn  in  towards  his  body,  his  jaws  were  set,  his  head
drawn  back,  and  every  part  of  him  as  completely  fixed
as  a  statue. The  first  ditliculty  was  to  get  him  to  take
any  thmg;  his  jaws  were  set  as  tight  together  as  a  tise.
I  took  a  solution  of  No.  1,  2,  and  6,  as  strong  as  it  could
be  made,  and  putting  my  finger  into  the  corner  of  his
mouth,  making  a  space  between  his  cheek  and  teeth,
poured  some  of  it  down ;  and  soon as  it  touched  the
glands  at  the  roots  of  his  tongue  his  jaws  came  open,
and  he  swallowed  some  of the  medicine ; which  had
such  an effect  upon  the  stomach, that  ail  the  spasms
immediately  ceased. I  left  him  some  medicine  with  di-
rections,  and  he  entirely  recovered  his  health  ;  I  saw
him  three  years  after,  and  he  told  me  that  he,  had  not
ed from  this  circumstance,  that  the  cause  of  all  cramps
or  spasms  of  this  kind,  is  seated  in  the  stomach,  and  that
all  apphcations  for  rehef  in  such  cases  should  be  made
there  ;  as  it  will  be  of  no  service  to  work  on  the  eftect  as
long  as  the  cause  remains.

Before  returning  home  I  was  called  on  by  Captain
Lyman,  of  Jericho,  to  advise  with  me  concerning  his
son,  who  had  a  fever  sore  on  his  thigh,  which  he  had
been  afflicted  with  for  seven  years.  He  had  been  at-
tended by  all  the  doctors  in  that  part  of  the  country  to
no  advantage.  They  had  decided  that  the  only  thing
which  could  be  done  to  help  him,  was  to  lay  open  his
thigh  and  -crape  the  bone.  I  toid  him  that  1  did  not
*t;e  how  they  could  do  that  without  cutting  the  great  ar-


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  63

tery,  which  lay  close  to  the  bone,  where  they  would
have  to  cut.  He  said  he  was  satisfied  that  it  would  not
do,  and  was  verj^  urgent  that  I  should  undertake  with
him.  I  told  him  that  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  stay
at  that  time  ;  but  if  his  son  would  go  home  with  me,  I
would  undertake  to  cure  him  ;  to  which  he  consented,
and  the  young  man  returned  with  me  ;  which  was  in  the
month  of  March.  I  began  with  him  by  giving  medicine
to  correct  and  strengthen  the  system  ;  bathed  the  wound
\Y'\i\\  my  rhumatic  drops,  or  No.  6,  sometime'?  bathing
with  cold  water  to  strengthen  it,  and  after  proceeding  in
this  manner  for  about  a  month,  he  was  well  enough  to
do  some  work ;  he  remained  with  me  till  August,  when
he  was  entirely  cured,  so  that  he  was  able  to  return  to
his  father's  on  foot,  a  distance  of  one  hundred  miles.

In  the  fall  of  this  year,  the  dysentary  or  camp  distem-
per, as  it  was  called,  was  very  prevalent  in  the  above
named  town  of  Jericho  ;  and  was  so  mortal  that  all  but
two  who  had  the  disease  and  were  attended  by  the  doc-
tors died,  having  lost  above  twenty  in  a  short  time.  The
inhabitants  were  much  alarmed,  and  held  a  consultation,
to  advise  what  to  do  ;  and  being  informed  by  the  young
man  above  npntioned,  that  I  was  at  home,  they  sent  an
express  for'ffte,  and  I  immediately  made  arrangements
to  comply  'with  their  request.  In  twenty-four  hours  I
started  and  arrived  there  on  the  third  day  after,  and
found  them  waiting  with  great  anxiety  for  me,  having  re-
fused to  take  any  thing  from  the  doctois.  I  had  an  in-
terview with  the  Selectmen  of  the  cown,  who  had  taken
upon  themselves  the  care  of  the  sick ;  they  informed
me  that  there  were  about  thirty  then  sick,  and  wished
me  to  undertake  the  care  of  them.  I  agreed  to  take
charge  of  them  on  condition  that  I  could  have  two  men
to  assist  me  ;  this  was  complied  with,  and  I  commenced
my  practice  upon  thirty  in  the  course  of  three  days.
The  disorder  was  the  most  distressing  of  any  that  I  had
ever  witnessed^  One  man  had  been  speechless  for  six
hours,  and  was  supposed  to  be  dying  ;  but  on  my  giving
him  some  medicine  to  warm  him,  he  seemed  to  revive
like  an  insect  that  was  warmed  by  the  sun  after  having
laid  in  a  torpid  state  through  the  winter.  I  had  but  ht-
Ue  medicine  with  me  and. had  to  use  such  as  1  could  pro-


64  Narrative  oj  the  Life^  S^c.

cure  at  this  place.  I  found  the  cause  of  the  disease  tdf
be  coldness  and  canker ;  the  digestive  powers  being
lost,  the  stomach  became  clogged  so  that  it  would  not.
hold  the  heat.  I  made  use  of  red  pepper  steeped  in  »
tea  of  sumac  leaves,  sweetened,  and  sometimes  the
bark  and  berries,  to  raise  the  heat  and  clear  off  the  can-
ker, which  had  the  desired  effect.  After  taking  this  tea,
those  who  were  strong  enough,  [  placed  over  a  steam,
as  long  as  they  could  bear  it,  and  then  put  them  in  bed-
Those  who  were  too  weak  to  stand  I  contrived  to  have
ait  over  a  steam ;  and  this  repeated  as  occasion  required.
To  restore  the  digestive  powers,  I  made  use  of  cherry
stones,  having  procured  a  large  quantity  of  them,  that
had  been  laid  up  and  the  worms  had  eaten  off  all  the
outside,  leaving  the  stones  clean.  I  pounded  them  fine,
then  made  a  tea  of  black  birch  bark,  and  after  cleaning
them,  by  putting  them  into  this  tea  hot  and  separating
the  meats  from  the  stone  part,  made  a  syrup  by  putting
from  2  to  3  ounces  of  sugar  to  one  quart  of  the  liquor;
this  was  given  freely  and  answered  a  good  purpose.  I
continued  to  attend  upon  my  patients,  aided  by  those
appointed  to  assist  me,  and  in  eight  days  I  had  com-
pletely subdued  the  disease.  They  all  recovered  ex-
cept two,  who  were  dying  when  I  first  saw  them.  I
gave  the  same  medicine  to  the  nurses,  and  those  ex-
posed to  the  disease,  as  to  them  that  were  sick,  which
prevented  their  having  the  disorder;  the  same  thing
will  prevent  disease  that  will  cure  it.

After  finishing  my  practice  at  this  place,  1  was  sent
for  and  went  to  the  town  of  Georgia,  about  thirty  miles
distance,  where  I  practised  with  general  success  for  one
week,  and  then  returned  to  Jericho.  Those  patients
who  1  had  attended,  were  comfortable,  and  soon  eptj-re*
ly  recovered.  The  doctors  were  not  very  well  pleased
with  my  success,  because  I  informed  the  people  how  to
cure  themselves,  and  they  have  had  no  need  of  their
assistance  in  that  disorder  since.  They  circulated  re-
ports for  twenty  miles  round,  that  I  killed  all  I  attended ;
but  the  people  were  all  perfectly  satisfied  with  my  prac-
tice, and  were  willing  to  give  me  all  credit  for  my  skill,
so  their  malice  towards  me  was  of  no  avail.

About  this  time  being  in  the  town  of  Bridgwater.  Vt.


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  66

i  was  called  on  to  see  a  young-  man  about  18  years  of
age,  who  had  lost  the  use  of  his  arm  by  a  strain  ;  it  had
been  in  -a  perishing  condition  for  six  months.  The
flesh  appeared  to  be  dead,  and  he  carried  it  in  a  sHng;
his  health  was  bad.  Being  unable  to  stop  to  do  any
thing  for  him  at  this  time,  he  was  sent  to  my  house.
I  began  with  him  in  my  usual  manner  by  giving  him
v/arm  medicine,  and  bathed  his  arm  with  the  oil  of  spear-
mint ;  in  about  ten  days  he  was  well  enough  to  use  his
arm  and  do  some  work  ;  in  about  two  months  he  was
entirely  cured  and  returned  home.

In  the  spring  of  the  year  1807,  I  went  to  Salisbury,
according  to  my  promise  Avhen  there  the  fall  before.
On  my  way  there  I  stopped  at  Pelham  ;  the  man  at
whose  house  I  staid,  insisted  on  my  going  to  see  his  fa-
iher-in-law,  who  had  the  rheumatism  very  bad,  having
been  confined  two  months.  I  attended  him  three  days,
when  he  was  able  to  walk  some,  by  the  assistance  of  a
rane  ;  he  soon  got  about  and  was  comfortable.  While
at  this  place  I  was  sent  for  to  a  young  woman,  sick  of  a
consumption ;  she  had  been  a  long  time  attended  by  a
doctor,  who  seemed  very  willing  for  my  advice  ;  1  car-
ried her  through  a  course  of  my  medicine,  and  the  doc-
tor staid  to  see  the  operation  of  it;  he  seemed  well
pleased  with  my  system  of  practice,  and  gave  me  much
credit,  saying  that  I  was  the  first  person  he  ever  knew
that  could  make  his  medicine  do  as  he  said  it  would.  I
was  sent  for  to  attend  several  cases  of  consumption  and
other  complaints  at  this  time,  in  all  of  which  I  met  with
success,  and  gave  general  satisfaction  to  the  people.

After  stopping  at  Pelham  three  weeks,  in  which  time
I  had  as  much  practice  as  I  could  attend,  I  went  to  Sa-
lisbury mills,  where  I  was  very  cordially  welcomed  by
all  those  who  had  been  attended  by  me  the  season  be-
fore. I  was  called  on  to  practice  in  this  place  and  New-
buryport,  and  my  success  was  so  great  that  it  caused
much  alarm  amongst  the  doctors,  and  a  class  of  the  peo
pie  who  were  their  friends,  they,  did  all  they  could  to
injure  me,  and  destroy  my  credit  with  the  people.  A.
considerable  part  of  the  patients  who  were  put  under
my  care,  were  such  as  the  doctors  had  given  over,  and
those  being  cured  by  me,  had  a  tendency  to  open  th»-

F  2


Q6  Narrative  c/the  Life^  <^c.

eyes  of  the  people,  and  give  them  a  correct  understanding"
of  the  nature  of  their  practice,  and  convince  them  that  a
simple  and  speedy  cure  was  more  for  their  interest  and
comfort,  than  long  sickness,  pain  and  distress,  besides
having  to  pay  exorbitant  doctors'  bills,  for  useless  visits
and  poisonous  drugs,  which  have  no  other  effect  than  to
prolong  disease,  and  destroy  the  natural  constitution  of
the  patient.

Among  those  doctors  who  seemed  so  much  enraged
against  me,  for  no  other  reason  that  I  could  learn,  than
because I  cured  people  whom  they  had given  over,
and instructed  them  to assist themselves  when  sick,
without  having  to  apply  to  them  ;  there  was  none  that
made  themseves  so  conspicuous  as  Dr.  French. 1  had
considerable  practice  in his neighbourhood, and  waa
very  successful  in  every  case ;  this  seemed  to  excite  his
malice  against  me  to  the  greatest  pitch ;  he  made  use
of  every  means  in  his  power,  and  took  every  opportuni-
ty to  insult  and  abuse  me  both  to  my  face  and  behind
my  back. A  few  of  the  inhabitants  who  were  his  friends
joined  with  him,  and  became  his  instruments  to  injure
me ;  but  a  large  proportion  of  the  people  were  friendly
to  me,  and  took  great  interest  in  my  safety  and  success.
The  doctor  and  his  adherents  spread  all  kinds  of  ridi-
culous  reports  concerning  me  and  my practice,  giving
me  the  name  of  the  old  wizzard ;  and  that  my  cures
were  done  under  the  power  of  witchcraft. This  fool-
ish whim  was too  ridiculous for  me  to  undertake  to
contradict,  and  I  therefore  rather  favoured  it  merely  for
sport ;  many  remarkable  circumstances  took  place  tend-
ing to  strengthen  this  belief,  and  some  of  the  silly  and
weak-mdnded  people  really  believed  that  I possessed
supernatural  powers. This  will  not  appear  so  strange
when  we  take  into  view,  that  the  people  generally  were
ignorant  of  my  system  of  practice,  and  when  they  found
that  I  could  cure  those  diseases  that  the  doctors,  in  whom
they  had  been  in  the  habit  of  putting  all  their  confidence,
pronounced  as  incurable  ;  and  that  I  could  turn  a  feter
in  two  days, which  would often  take  them  as  many
Uaonths,  they  were  led  to  beheve  that  there  must  be
something  supernatural  in  it.
A  mao,  who  was  one  of  the  friends  of  Dr.  French.


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  t)^

and  who  had  been  very  enemical  to  me,  doing  all  in  his
power  to  injure  and  redicule  me,  sent  v/ord  one  day  by
a  child,  that  his  calf  was  sick,  and  he  wanted  me  to  come
and  give  it  a  green  powder  and  a  sw^at.  Knovv  ing^
that  his  object  was  to  insult,  1  returned  for  answer,  that
he  must  send  for  Dr.  French,  and  if  he  could  not  cure
it  1  would  come,  for  that  was  the  way  that  I  had  to
practice  here.  It  so  happened  that  the  calf  died  soon
after,  and  his  youngest  child  was  taken  suddenly  and  very
dangerously  sick.  Not  long  after  he  found  another  cali^
dead  in  the  field,  and  about  the  same  time  his  oldest  son
was  taken  sick.  These  things  happening  in  such  an  ex-
traordinary manner,  caused  him  to  reflect  on  his  con-
duct towards  me,  and  his  conscience  condemned  him,
for  trying  to  injure  me  without  cause.  He  had  the  follj
to  believe,  or  the  wickedness  to  pretend  to  believe,  that
it  was  the  effect  of  witchcraft ;  and  wishing  to  make  his
peace  with  me,  sent  me  word,  that  if  I  would  let  hLs
family  alone,  he  would  never  do  or  say  any  thing  more
to  my  injury.  This  I  readily  assented  to  ;  and  his  chil-
dren soon  after  getting  well,  though  there  was  nothing
very  extraordinary  in  it,  as  it  might  all  be  easily  ac-
counted for  by  natural  causes ;  yet  it  afforded  much  con-
versation among  the  gossips,  and  idle  busybodies  in  the
nighbourhood ;  and  was  made  use  of  by  my  enemies  to
prejudice  the  people  against  me.  Bemg  in  company
with  a  young  woman  who  belonged  to  a  family  that  were
my  enemies,  she  to  insult  me,  asked  me  to  tell  her  for-
tune. 1  consented,  and  knowing  her  character  not  to
be  the  most  virtuous,  and  to  amuse  myself  at  her  ex-
pense, told  what  had  taken  place  between  her  and  a
certain  young  man  the  night  before.  She  seemed  struck
vyith  astonishment ;  and  said  that  she  was  convinced  that
1  was  a  wizzard^  for  it  was  impossible  that  I  could  hare
known  it  without  the  devil  had  told  me.  She  did  not
wish  me  tell  her  any  more,

I  practised  in  this  place  and 'vicinity  a  few  months'
and  returned  home  to  attend  to  my  farm  for  the  rest
of  the  season.  While  at  home  I  was  sent  for,  and  at-
tended in  different  parts  of  the  country,  and  was  very
successful  in  my  mode  of  practice,  particularly  in  places
where  the  dysentery  and  fevers  were  most  prevalent  j.


SB  J^ccrrative  of  the  Life-^  4'C.

never  failing  in  any  instance  of  giving  relief,  and  com-
pletel}^  putting  a  check  to  those  alarming  epidemics,
which  caused  so  much  terror  in  many  places  in  the  in-
terior of  the  country.

In  the  year  of  1808,  went  again  to  Salisbury,  and  on
my  way  there  stopped  at  Pelham  and  attended  and  gave
relief  in  several  cases  of  disease.  On  my  arrival  at
Salisbury  Mills,  where  I  made  it  my  home,  1  was  im-
mediately called  on  to  practice  in  that  place  and  the  ad-
jacent towns.  Many  came  to  me  from  different  parts,
w  hose  cases  were  desperate,  having  been  given  over
by  the  doctors,  such  as  humours,  dropsies,  mortifications,
fellons,  consumptions,  &.c.  Fevers  were  so  quickly  cur-
ed, and  with  so  little  trouble,  that  many  were  unwilling
to  believe  they  had  the  disease.  My  success  was  so
great  that  the  people  generally  were  satisfied  of  tlie
superiority  of  my  mode  of  practice  over  all  others.  This
created  considerable  alarm  with  the  doctors,  and  those
who  sided  with  them.  Dr.  French  seemed  to  be  much
enraged,  and  having  failed  to  destro}'^  my  credit  with
the  people  by  false  reports,  and  ridiculous  statements
of  witchcraft,  shifted  his  course  of  proceeding,  and  at-
tempted to  frighten  me  by  threats,  which  only  tended
to  show  the  malice  he  bore  me ;  for  no  other  reason,
that  1  could  conceive  of,  as  I  had  never  spoken  to  him,
than  because  of  my  success  in  relieving  those  he  had
given  over  to  die.  He  would  frequently  cause  me  to
be  sent  for  in  great  haste  to  attend  some  one,  in  his
neighbourhood,  who  was  stated  to  be  very  sick ;  but  1
saw  through  these  tricks,  and  avoided  all  their  snares.
It  seemed  to  be  his  determination,  if  he  failed  in  des-
troying my  practice,,  to  destroy  me.  Being  in  company
one  day  at  Salisbury  village,  with  Mr-  Jeremiah  Eatoi>,
of  Exeter,  whose  wife  was  under  my  care  for  a
dropsical  com-plamt,  1  was  sent  for  four  times,  to
visit  a  young  man  at  the  house  of  Dr.  French ;  the  last
time  a  man  came  on  horseback  in  the  greatest  haste,
and  insisted  that  1  should  go  and  see  him.  I  asked  why
Dr.  French  did  not  attend  him  ;  he  answered,  that  he-
had  rather  have  me ;  being  convinced  from  the  appear-
ances of  things,  that  it  was  an  attempt  to  put  some  trick
upon  me,  1  refused.to  go,  and  tlie  man  returned. In  a^


Of  Samuel  Thomson-  &9

short  time  after  Dr.  French  came  into  the  village,  and
Mr.  Eaton  who  was  present  when  thej  came  after  me,
asked  him  what  ailed  the  young  man  at  his  house  ;  he
said  nothing,  and  that  he  was  as  well  as  any  hody.  This
revealed  the  whole  secret.  Mr.  Eaton  then  asked  him
why  he  caused  me  to  be  sent  for  so  many  times,  under
a  false  pretence. — He  said  to  see  if  I  dared  to  come  if»-
to  his  neighbourhood— that  he  did  not  care  how  much  I
practiced  on  that  side  of  the  river  ;  but  if  i  come  on  his
he  would  blow  my  brains  out — that  I  was  a  murderer
and  he  could  prove  it.  Mr.  Katon  observed  that  it  was
a  heavy  accusation  to  make  against  a  man,  and  that  he
ought  to  be  made  to  prove  his  words,  or  to  suffer  the
consequence — that  his  wife  was  under  my  care,  and  if  I
was  a  murderer  he  ought  to  see  to  it.  Dr.  French  again
repeated  the  words,  with  many  threats  against  me,  and
showed  the  spite  and  malice  of  a  savage.

Mr.  Eaton  and  others  of  my  friends  considered  my  life
in  danger ;  and  came  immediately  to  me  and  related  what
had  been  said  by  the  doctor ;  and  advised  me  to  be  on
my  guard.  I  had  to  pass  his  house  every  day  to  visit
my  patients ;  but  did  not  consider  myself  safe  in  going
in  the  night,  nor  in  the  day  time  without  some  one  with
me.  I  continued  in  this  manner  for  several  days,  and
finding  his  malice  towards  me  to  be  as  great  as  ever,  and
still  continuing  his  threats ;  with  the  advice  of  my  friends,
1  was  induced  to  have  resort  to  the  law  for  protection.
I  went  to  Newburyport  and  entered  a  complaint  against
him  before  a  magistrate,  who  granted  a  warrant  and  he
was  brought  before  him  for  a  trial.  My  case  was  made
out,  by  fully  proving  his  words ;  he  asked  for  an  ad*
journment  for  three  hours  to  make  his  defence,  which
was  granted.  He  then  brought  forward  evidence  in
support  of  his  character,  and  proved  by  them  that  he  had
always  been  a  man  of  his  word.  The  justice  told  him
that  he  thought  he  proved  too  much,  and  to  his  disad-
vantage, for  it  had  been  fully  proved  that  he  had  made
the  threats  alledged  against  him,  and  to  prove  that  he
was  a  man  of  his  word,  went  to  satisfy  the  court  that
the  complaint  was  well  grounded.  He  was  laid  under
two  hundred  dollar  bonds  to  keep  the  peace  and  appear
at  the  next  court  of  comm*  pleas. He  appeared  at  the


70  '  Narrative  of  the  Life^  4'C.

next  court,  was  ordered  to  pay  all  the  costs,  and  was
discharged  from  his  bail.  This  was  an  end  of  our  con-
troversy for  that  time  ;  but  his  malice  continued  against
me  long  after ;  seeking  every  means  to  destroy  me  and
prevent  my  practising,  that  he  could  devise  ;  but  pro-
ceeded with  more  caution,  which  caused  me  a  great  deal
©f  trouble  and  much  suffering,  as  will  be  hereafter  re-
lated.

[  continued  to  practice  in  this  place,  and  had  as  many
patients  as  I  could  possibly  attend  upon,  notwithstanding
the  opposition  I  constantly  met  with  from  the  doctors
and  their  friends  ;  for  with  all  their  arts  and  falsehoods
they  were  not  able  to  prevent  those  labouring  under
complaints^  which  they  had  found  could  not  be  removed
by  the  fashionable  mode  of  treatment,  from  applying  to
\ne  for  relief  ^  none  of  whom  but  what  were  either  cur-
ed or  received  great  relief  by  my  practice.  Some  o^
the  most  extraordinary  cases  I  shall  give  a  particular
account  of  for  the  information  of  the  reader.

Mr.  Jabez  True,  the  minister  of  Salisbury,  was  afflict-
ed with  what  the  doctors  called  nettle-rash,  or  what  is
commonly  called  St.  Anthony's  fire.  He  stated  to  me
that  it  was  caused  by  fightmg  fire,  about  twenty-five
years  before,  and  that  he  had  been  subject  to  a  break-
ing out  ever  since  ;  which  at  certain  times  was  very
painful  and  troublesome,  as  it  felt  like  the  sting  of  bees,
and  would  swell  all  over  his  body.  He  had  applied  to
all  the  doctors  in  those  parts  for  their  advice,  but  got  no
assistance  from  them.  I  told  him  that  he  had  heated
himself  to  such  a  degree  by  violent  exercise  and  being
exposed  to  the  fire,  that  there  was  nearly  a  balance  be-
tween the  outward  and  inward  heat,  and  then  cooling
too  sudden,  the  inward  heat  had  fallen  as  much  below
the  natural  state  as  it  had  been  above  it  before,  and
the  only  way  to  effect  a  cure  was  to  bring  him  into  the
same  state  as  he  was  in  when  fighting  the  fire.  He
wished  me  to  undertake  his  case.  1  carried  him  through
a  course  of  my  medicine,  and  made  use  of  every  means
in  my  power  to  raise  the  inward  heat,  pursuing  my  plan
with  all  zeal  for  two  days ;  when  he  became  alarmed,
and  said  he  felt  as  though  he  should  die,  for  he  felt  the
sramie  a.^  he  did  when  h^^*  av<i|^  PijrIitJnir  the  fire. I  then


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  71

kept  him  in  that  situation  as  much  as  por^sible,  and  it  ^v}:nt
down  gradually  so  as  to  hold  a  natural  proportion-,  f
heat.  My  plan  succeeded  so  completely,  that  he  was
perfectly  cured  and  has  enjoyed  good  health  ever  since.
1  attended  upon  his  wife  at  the  same  time,  who  had  been
long  in  a  consumption,  and  had  been  given  over.  She
was  perfectly  cured  ;  and  they  are  now  living  in  good
health  and  are  ready  to  testify  to  the  truth  of  these  ,
statements.

Previously  to  my  difficulty  with  Dr.  French,  as  has
been  before  mentioned,  Mrs.  Eaton  and  another  woman
by  the  name  of  Lifford,  came  to  me  at  Salisbury  mills
from  Exeter. Their  complaint  was  dropsy  ; and  were
both  desperate  cases, having  been  given  over  by  the
doctor  who  had  attended  them. Mrs.  Eaton  was  swell-
ed to  such  a  degree,  that  she  could  not  see  her  knees
as  she  sat  in  a  chair,  and  her  limbs  in  proportion. 1  felt
■unwilling  to  undertake  with  them,  as  I  considered  there
would be  but  little chance  of  a  cure  ;  and  declined
doing  any  thing  for  them,  and  sent  them  away, stating
that  there  was  no  place  that  they  could  get  boarded.
They  went  away  as  I  supposed  to  go  home ;  but  they
soon  returned,  and  said  they  had  found  a  place  where
they  could  stay,  and  a  young  woman  had  agreed  to  nurse
them. I undertook  with  them  very  reluctantly  ; but
could  not  well  avoid  it. I  gave  them  some  medicine,
and  it  operated  favourably  on  both,  especially  on  Mrs.
Lifford ;  then  gave  strict  orders  to  the  nurse,  to  attend
them  attentively  through  the  night,  and  keep  up  a  per-
spiration; but  she  almost  totally  neglected  her  duty,
spending  her  time  with  the  young  people. On  visiting
them  in  the  morning, I  was  very  much  hurt  to  find
my  directions  neglected. Mrs.  Lifford  was  quite  poor-
ly ;  and  stated  to  me  that  the  nurse  had  neglected  her,  and
that  she  had  got  her  feet  out  of  bed  ;  her  pjerspiration
had  ceased  and  other  symptoms  appeared  unfavourable,
I attended  upon  her  through  the day  and  did  all  I
could  to  relieve  her,  but  could  not  raise  a  perspiration
again. She  continued  till the  next  night  about  mid-
night and  died. My  hopes  of  doing  her  any  good  were
small  ;  but  think  that  if  she  had  not  been  neglected  by
the  nurse,  there  might  hi^  been  some  small  chance


72  Narrative  of  the  Uj^i  4*^.

tor  bei\  as  the  first  operation  of  the  medicine  waa  so
favourable.  Her  ;  bowels  were  in  a  very  bad  state,
and  had  been  almost  in  a  niortrfied  condition  for  three
weeks,  and  what  passed  her  was  by  force,  and  very
black.

This  caused  great  triumph  among  my  enemies,  and
Dr.  French  tried  to  have  a  jury  on  the  body ;  but  he
could  not  prevail  ;  for  the  circumstances  were  well
known  to  many,  and  all  that  knew  any  thing-  about  it,
cleared  me  from  all  blame.  The  nur.^e  said  that  i  did  all
I  could,  and  if  there  was  any  blame  it  ought  to  fall  on
her  and  not  on  me.  So  they  failed  in  their  attempt  to
make  me  out  a  murderer;  but  this  case  was  laid  up  to
be  brought  agamst  me  at  another  time.  This  shows
what  may  be  done  by  the  folly  of  people,  and  the  ma-
lice and  wickedness  of  designing  men,  who  care  more
for  their  own  interested  ends,  than  for  the  health  and
happiness  of  a  whole  community.  The  fashionable  ed-
ucated doctor  may  lose  one  half  his  patients  without  be-
ing blamed :  but  if  1  lose  one  out  of  several  hundred  of
the  most  desperate  cases,  most  of  which  were  given
over  as  incurable,  it  is  called  murder.

Mrs.  Eaton  remained  under  my  care  about  three
weeks,  in  which  time  she  was  reduced  in  size  eight
inches,  she  then  returned  home  to  Exeter.  I  had  sev-
eral cases  of  dropsy  and  consumption  from  the  same
town,  about  this  time,  who  were  all  relieved  ;  all  of
them  were  very  solicitous  for^me  to  go  to  Exeter  and
practice.  As  soon  as  I  could  get  the  patients  under  my
care  in  a  situation  to  leave  them,  I  left  Salisbury  mills,
and  went  to  Exeter,  and  commenC^ed  practising  in  my
usual  way,  and  was  applied  to  froin  all  parts.  I  had
not  so  many  to  attend  as  I  had  in  soElie  places  ;  but  they
were  all  of  the  most  desperate  nature,  such  as  had  been
given  over  by  ^he  doctors,  in  ajl'l  of  which  I  met  with
great  success.  Many  of  the  cases  had  been  attended
by  Dr.  Shephard ;  he  had  attended  with  me  upon  his
patients  at  Salisbury  ;  was  a  very  plain,  candid  sort  of  a
man,  and  treated  me  with  much  civility.  I  well  re-
msmber  his  first  speech  to  me,  which  was  in  the  fol-
lowuig  words  : — "  Well,  what  are  you  doing  here,  are
you  kiiimg  or  curing  the^eople  ?" — I  replied, you


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  73

must  judge  about  that  for  yourself. — "  Well,  said  he,
"  I  will  watch  you,  not  for  fear  of  your  doing  harm,  but
for  my  own  information — 1  wish  you  well,  and  will  do
you  all  the  good  1  can."  I  always  found  him  candid
and  friendly,  without  any  hypocrasy.  He  once  called
on  me  to  visit  with  him  one  of  his  patients  in  the  town
where  he  lived,  who  had  the  rheumatism  in  his  back  and
hips.  The  doctor  had  attended  him  about  two  months,
and  said  he  had  killed  the  pain,  but  his  back  was  stiff,
so  that  he  could  not  brihg  his  hands  below  his  knees.
1  attended  him  about  forty-eight  hours,  and  then  went
with  him  to  see  the  doctor,  which  was  half  a  mile  ;
the  doctor  appeared  to  be  much  pleased  to  see  him  so
well,  and  have  the  use  of  his  limbs  ;  for  he  could
stoop  and  use  them  as  well  as  he  ever  could.  He  said
that  he  was  as  glad  for  the  young  man's  sake  as  though
he  had  cured  him  himself  He  frequently  came  to  see
Mrs.  Katon,  whom  I  was  attending  for  the  dropsy ;  and
expressed  much  astonishment  at  the  effect  the  medicine
I  gave  had  in  relieving  her  of  a  disease  which  he  had
considered  incurable.  At  one  time  when  conversing
with  her  upon  her  situation,  and  finding  her  so  much
better,  having  been  reduced  in  size  above  fifteen  inches ;
he  expressed  himself  with  some  warmth  on  the  occa-
sion, saying  that  it  was  what  he  had  never  seen  or  heard
of  being  done  before,  and  what  he  had  considered  im-
possible to  be  done  with  medicine.  Addressing  himself
to  me  with  much  earnestness,  enquired  how  it  was  that
I  did  it.  I  replied,  you  know  doctor  that  the  heat  had
gone  out  of  the  body,  and  the  water  had  filled  it  up  ;
and  all  I  had  to  do  was  to  build  fire  enough  in  the  body
to  boil  away  the  water.  He  burst  into  a  laugh,  and  said
that  it  was  a  system  very  short.

While  practising  in  Exeter,  I  had  many  desperate
cases  from  the  different  parts  of  the  country,  and  from
Portsmouth.  One  from  the  latter  place  I  shall  mention,
being  different  from  what  I  before  had  witnessed.  A
woman  applied  to  me  who  had  the  venerial,  in  conse-
quence, as  she  stated,  of  having  had  a  bad  husband ;
which  I  believed  to  be  true.  She  had  been  attended
by  the  doctors  in  Portsmouth  for  nearly  a  year,  who
had  filled  her  with  mercur^^  for  the  purpose  of  curlnsr

G


74  Narrative  of  the  Life^  4*c.

the  disorder  till  the  remedy  had  hecome  much  wors^
than  the  disease.  Her  case  was  alarming,  and  very  dif-
ficult ;  she  was  brought  on  a  bed,  being  unable  to  sit
up  ;  and  seemed  to  be  one  mass  of  putrefaction.  I  pro-
ceeded with  her  in  my  usual  way  of  treating  all  cases
where  the  system  is  greatly  disordered,  by  giving  medi-
cine to  promote  perspiration,  steaming  to  throw  out  the
mercury,  and  restore  the  digestive  powers ;  and  in  three
weeks  she  returned  home  entirely  cured.  Another
woman  came  to  me  from  the  same  place,  who  had  been
sick  five  years,  which  had  been  in  consequence  of  hav-
ing had  the  same  disease,  and  the  doctors  had  filled  her
with  mercury  to  kill  the  disorder  as  they  call  it,  then
left  her  to  linger  out  a  miserable  existence.  When  she
stated  her  case  to  me,  I  felt  very  unwilling  to  under-
take with  her,  apprehending  that  it  would  be  very  un-
certain whether  a  cure  could  be  eifected,  having  been
of  so  long  standing  ;  but  she  insisted  upon  it  so  strongly,
that  I  could  not  put  her  off.  After  attending  upon  her
three  weeks,  however,  her  health  was  restored,  and
she  returned  home  well ;  and  in  less  than  a  year  after
she  had  two  children  at  one  birth.  She  had  not  had  a
child  for  eight  years  before.  This  disease  is  very  easily
cured  in  the  first  stages  of  it,  by  a  common  course  of
n^edicine,  being  nothing  more  than  a  high  stage  of  can-
ker seated  in  the  glands  of  certain  parts  of  the  body,  and
if  not  cured  communicates  to  the  glands  of  the  throat
and  other  parts;  by  giving  mercury  the  whole  system
is  completely  disordered,  and  although  the  disease  may
disappear,  it  is  not  cured ;  and  there  is  more  difficulty
in  getting  the  mercury  out  of  the  body  of  one  in  this  si-
tuation, than  to  cure  a  dozen  of  the  disease  who  have
not  taken  this  dangerous  poison.

While  in  Exeter  I  had  a  case  of  a  young  man,  son  of
Col.  Nathaniel  Gilman,  who  was  in  a  decline.  He  was
about  fourteen  years  old,  and  had  been  troubled  with
bleeding  at  the  nose.  They  had  made  use  of  such  pow-
erful astringents,  with  corrosive  sublimate  snuffed  up  his
nose,  that  the  blood  vessels  in  that  part  seemed  to  be
shrunk  up,  and  his  flesh  much  wasted  away  ;  1  carried
him  through  a  course  of  medicine,  which  gave  an  equal
circulation  of  blood  through  the  body,  and  stopped  its


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  75


course  to  the  head ;  then  raised  a  natural  perspiration,
restored  the  digestive  powers,  and  regulated  the  sys-
tem, so  as  to  support  the  body  with  food  instead  of  me-
dicine. In  a  short  time  he  recovered  his  health  so  that
he  commanded  a  company  of  militia  at  the  alarm  at
Portsmouth,  during  the  late  war.

My  success  while  at  this  place  and  the  many  extra-
ordinary cures  I  performed,  gained  me  great  credit
among  the  people  ;  but  the  medical  faculty  became
much  alarmed,  and  made  use  of  every  artifice  to  preju-
dice them  against  me.  The  foolish  stories  about  witch-
craft, which  had  been  made  a  handle  of  at  Salisbury,
were  repeated  here,  with  a  thousand  other  ridiculous
statements  for  the  purpose  of  injuring  me  ;  but  I  treat-
ed them  wifch  contempt  as  not  worthy  my  notice,  except
in  some  instances,  to  amuse  myself  with  the  credulity
of  the  ignorant,  who  were  foolish  enough  to  believe
such  nonsense.  I  will  relate  one  circumstance,  for
the  purpose  of  showing  upon  what  grounds  they
founded  their  belief  of  my  possessing  supernatural  pow-
ers, and  which  caused  much  talk  among  the  people  at
the  time  it  happened.  Mrs.  Eaton,  where  i  boarded  ha<3
a  five  dollar  bill  stolen  out  of  her  pocket-book.  She
made  enquiry  of  all  the  family  who  denied  having  aay
knowle<3ge  of  it.  A  girl  who  lived  in  the  family  denied
it  so  strongly,  that  1  thought  she  discovered  guilt,  and
led  me  to  believe  that  she  had  taken  the  money.  1  pre-
tended that  I  could  certainly  discover  who  stole  the
money,  which  was  believed  by  many,  and  told  Mrs.
Eaton  in  presence  of  all  the  family  that  if  I  did  not  tell
who  took  it  by  the  next  day  at  twelve  o'clock,  [  would
pay  the  amount  lost  myself  In  the  evening  1  had  them
all  called  into  the  room,  and  took  the  bible  and  read
from  the  law  of  Moses  the  penalty  for  stealing,  then
took  the  purse  and  put  it  into  the  place  and  shut  the
book  and  gave  it  to  Mrs.  Eaton,  with  strict  injunction  to
put  it  under  her  pillow  and  let  no  one  touch  it;  and  that
the  person  who  stole  the  money  could  have  no  peace
Dor  rest  till  they  confessed  their  guilt.  They  then  all
retired  to  bed.  As  soon  as  it  was  daylight  in  the  morn-
ing, the  girl  came  down  stairs  crying,  and  went  to  the
tf»d  where  Mr*.  Eaton  lay,  and  confessed  that  she  took


76  Narrative  of  the  Life,  ^'e.

the  money ;  saying  that  she  had  not  slept  any  during  the
night,  as  (  had  said  would  be  the  case.  It  will  be  un-
necessary to  inform  the  reader,  that  this  wonderful  dis-
covery was  brought  about  by  the  effect  of  a  guilty  con-
science on  a  credulous  and  weak  mind.

While  I  was  at  Exeter,  a  woman  brought  her  son  to
me,  who  had  a  fever  sore,  (so  called)  on  his  hip  ;  hfe
had  been  in  this  situation  so  long,  without  any  assistance,
that  his  legs  had  perished,  and  he  was  so  much  wasted
away  by  the  continual  discharge  of  the  sore,  and  his  na-
ture had  become  so  far  spent,  that  I  felt  perfectly  sa-
tisfied that  a  cure  was  impracticable,  and  declined  un-
dertaking with  him.  This  honest  declaration  on  my
part  very  much  affronted  the  boy's  mother,  and  she
turned  against  me,  and  did  me  all  the  hurt  she  could,
because  1  would  not  undertake  to  do  what  I  knew  was
impossible  for  any  one  to  accomplish.  She  went  with
her  son  to  a  fashionable  doctor,  who  said  he  would  cure
him  out  of  spite  to  me.  They  continued  with  the  doc-
tor several  weeks,  till  the  expense  amounted  to  about
ifty  dollars ;  the  lad  continued  to  grow  worse  till  he  died.
This  woman  seemed  satisfied  with  having  her  son  die,
after  spending  fifty  dollars,  because  it  was  done  in  a
fashionable  manner;  but  my  refusing  to  undertake  to
cure  him,  was  sufficient  reason  for  her  to  circulate  all
kinds  of  false  and  ridiculous  reports  about  me.  How-
ever strange  this  may  appear,  it  is  no  more  strange  than
true,  for  this  is  but  one  out  of  many  hundred  similar
eases,  where  1  have  received  injury,  where  1  was  enti-
tled to  credit,  by  being  honest  and  sincere  in  my  endea-
vour, to  do  what  I  conceived  my  duty  towards  my  fellow
creatures.

About  this  time,  among  the  rest  of  my  troubles,  I  met
with  a  new  difficulty  with  an  apprentice  that  I  had
iaken,  by  the  name  of  William  Little  ;  who  I  had  taken
from  a  state  of  poverty  and  sickness,  cured  him  and  sup-
ported him  for  two  years,  until  he  had  gained  knowledge
enough  of  my  medicine  and  system  of  practice  to  be
useful  to  me,  he  then  proved  dishonest.  While  I  was
absent  at  home,  he  collected  all  the  money  he  could,
and  sold  all  my  medicine,  and  then  went  oflf.  On  my  re-
turn 1  found  my  debts  collected  and  my  medicine  gone,


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  ^T

so  that  I  was  obliged  to  go  back  immediately,  to  collect
more  before  I  could  attend  to  my  practice.  This  was
the  first  time  I  had  met  with  difficulty  by  employing
agents ;  but  since  then  I  have  had  experience  enough
to  satisfy  me  of  the  difficulty  of  trusting  to  other  people  ;
having  found  but  very  few  of  those  I  have  been  under
the  necessity  of  employing,  who  have  proved  trusty
and  honest.  I  have  suffered  much  pecuniary  loss  in
this  way,  besides  in  some  instances,  those  1  have  assist-
ed and  given  instruction  to,  so  as  to  be  useful  in  the
practice,  have  become  my  enemies,  and  been  made  in-
strumental to  destroy  me.

A  son  of  John  Underwood,  of  Portsmoutb,  was
brought  to  me  while  at  Exeter,  who  had  what  is  called-
a  scalt  head.  He  had  been  afflicted  with  it  for  nine
years.  The  doctors  had  been  applied  to,  to  no  purpose  ;
and  when  he  brought  him  to  me,  agreed  to  give  a  gen-
erous price  if  I  would  cure  him.  I  took  charge  of  him
and  after  pursuing  my  usual  plan  of  treatment  three
weeks  he  returned  home  entirely  cured,,  and  has  not
since  had  any  appearance  of  the  disease.  This  man
had  the  meanness,  in  order  to  get  clear  of  paying  any
thing  for  curing  his  son,  to  turn  against  me  and  my  prac-
tice, although  he  had  acknowledged  that  I  had  saved
his  life,  and  had  recommended  me  to  many  others,  whom
I  had  relieved';  yet  to  get  clear  of  paying  a  trifling  sum
according  to  his  agreement,  he  did  all  he  could  to  injure
me,  and  through  his  influence  many  were  kept  from  be-
ing cured.  He  was  afterwards  taken  sick,  and  notwith-
standing he  had  said  so  much  against  my  medicine,  he
applied  to  some  who  had  the  right  of  using  it,  and  wa§
relieved  thereby. "**

Sometime  towards  the  close  of  the  summer,  while  I
was  at  Exeter,  1  was  sent  for  to  go  to  Portsmouth  to  see
a  young  man  by  the  name  of  Lebell,  who  was  in  a  very
dangerous  situation,  supposed  by  his  friends  to  be  in  a
dying  state,  having  been  given  over  by  Drs.  Cutler  and
Pierpont,  at  ten  o'clock  that  morning.  I  arrived  about
two  in  the  afternoon.  He  had  been  attended  by  the
two  doctors  above  named  for  upwards  of  a  month  to
•  :ure  the  venereal;  they  had  filled  him  with  mercury,
<?o  that  he  had  swelled  all  over  with  the  poison. Tfco


78  JSlarrative  of  the  Life,  i^c.

doctors  pronounced  it  to  be  the  dropsy.  His  legs  had
been  scarafiedto  let  off  the  water;  the  disorder  and  the
mercury  had  gained  the  power,  and  nature  had  submit-
ted. I  at  once  pronounced  it  to  be  a  desperate  case,
and  told  the  French  Consul,  who  had  the  care  of  him,
that  I  could  give  no  encouragement  that  I  could  do  him
any  good ;  but  he  was  very  solicitous  for  me  to  do  some-
thing for  him.  I  told  him  the  only  chance  was  to  raise
perspiration,  and  that  twenty-four  hours  would  deter-
mine his  case ;  for  he  would  either  be  better  in  that
time,  or  be  dead.  The  idea  of  perspiration  caused  him  to
urge  me  to  try  ;  and  he  said  if  I  could  effect  it  he  would
give  me  one  hundred  dollars ;  the  doctors  had  tried  for
a  month  and  could  not  succeed.  I  gave  him  some  me-
dicine, then  put  on  the  clothes  by  degrees  until  he  was
shielded  from  the  air,  apd  he  sweat  freely  in  about  an
hour.  The  two  doctors  were  present  and  seemed  as-
tonished at  my  success ;  they  walked  the  room,  talked
low,  and  then  went  out.  1  staid  with  him  till  six  o'clock
and  the  symptoms  seemed  to  be  favourable  ;  he  sweat
profusely,  and  spit  much  blood.  I  told  the  nurse  to
Jkeep  him  in  the  same  situation  till  I  returned,  went  out
and  was  gone  about  an  hour  and  come  back  again  with
Mr.  Underwood.  When  we  came  into  the  room  found
that  the  doctors  had  taken  him  out  of  bed  and  sat  him  in
a  chair,  and  opened  the  window  against  him.  I  told
them  that  their  conduct  would  cause  his  death  and  I
^would  do  no  more  for  him ;  but  should  gi? e  him  up  a»
their  patient.

It  appeared  to  me  that  they  were  afraid  I  should  cure
him,  and  thus  prove  the  superiority  of  my  practice
over  theirs,  for  they  hadtryed  a  month  to  get  a  perspi-
ration without  success,  and  I  had  done  it  in  one  hour.
The  man  fainted  before  I  left  the  room.  I  went  home
with  Mr.  Underwood  and  staid  that  night,  and  left  them
to  peraue  their  own  course  ;  the  man  died  before  morn-
ing. Instead  of  getting  the  hundred  dollars  as  was
agreed,  1  never  got  a  cent  for  all  my  trouble  of  coming^
jfifteen  miles  and  returning  back  again  on  foot ;  and  be-
sides this  loss,  afterwards  when  I  came  to  be  persecuted
by  the  faculty,  the  above  two  doctors  gave  their  depo-
«1ions  against  me,  in  which  I  was  ipfoxined  they  swore


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  79

that  I  killed  this  man,  notwithstanding  they  had  given
him  over  to  die  the  morning  before  1  saw  him,  and  they
had  taken  him  out  of  my  hands,  as  above  stated.  On
being  informed  that  they  were  trying  to  support  a  com-
plaint against  me,  I  got  the  depositions  of  Mr.  Under-
wood and  others,  who  were  knowing  to  the  facts,  to
contradict  these  false  statements ;  on  finding  that  1  was
determined  to  oppose  them,  and  prove  what  they  had
sworn  to  be  all  false,  they  thought  proper  to  drop  the
matter ;  but  I  was  informed  they  had  sworn  that  my
medicine  was  of  a  poisonous  nature,  and  that  if  it  did  not
cause  the  patient  to  vomit  soon  .liter  being  taken,  they
would  certainly  die.  It  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  con-
tradict this,  for  its  incorrectness  and  absurdity  is  too  well
known  to  all  who  have  any  knowledge  of  the  medicine
I  use.

I  was  frequently  in  Portsmouth  to  visit  those  who  had
been  seat  to  me  to  be  attended  upon  ^t  Exeter.  Some-
time in  September  in  1808,  when  there,  I  was  i  illed
©n  to  visit  Mr.  Richard  Rice,  who  was  sick  with  the
yellow  fever,  as  it  was  called.  The  reason  for  his
sending  for  me  was  in  consequence  of  having  heard  the
reports  of  the  doctors,  that  I  sweat  my  patients  to  death.
He  conceived  an  idea  that  if  he  could  sweat  he  should
be  better ;  but  they  would  not  allow  him  to  be  kept
warm,  taking  the  clothes  off  of  him  and  keeping  the  win-
dows and  doors  open — no  fire  was  permitted  in  the  room,
while  he  was  shivering  with  the  cold.  The  plan  was
to  kill  the  fever,  and  to  effect  this  with  more  certainty,
the  doctor  had  bled  him,  and  told  his  sister  that  he  had
given  him  as  much  ratsbane  as  he  dared  to  give,  and  if
that  did  not  answer  he  did  not  know  what  would.

1  began  to  give  him  medicine  a  little  before  night,  and
in  one  hour  perspiration  took  place.  He  was  so  weak
that  he  was  unable  to  help  himself.  In  the  morning
the  doctor  proposed  to  bleed  him ;  but  he  was  dismiss-
ed. I  was  with  him  till  the  symptoms  were  favourable,
and  then  lelt  him  in  the  care  of  three  persons  who  I
could  confide  in.  After  I  was  gone,  Dr.  Brackett  came
into  the  room  where  the  patient  was,  in  a  great  rage,
saying  that  they  were  killing  him ;  for  the  mortification
would  soon  take  place  in  consequence  of  keeping  hiat


80  Narrative  of  the  Life^  4*c.

so  warm.  He  was  asked  by  one  of  those  present,  in
which  case  mortitication  was  most  likely  to  take  place,
when  the  blood  was  cold  and  thick,  or  warm  and  thin.
He  suspected  some  quibble  and  would  not  give  an  an-
swer ;  and  it  was  immaterial  which  way  he  answered ;
for  in  either  case  he  had  no  grounds  to  support  an  argu-
ment upon,  but  what  might  be  easily  refuted.  After  he
had  failed  in  his  interference  with  those  who  had  the
care  of  the  patient,  he  went  to  his  wife  and  other  rela-
tions, and  tried  to  frighten  them ;  but  he  did  not  suc-
ceed, for  they  were  well  satisfied  with  what  was  doing.

The  patient  was  niuch  out  by  spells,  sometimes  im-
agining himself  to  be  a  lump  of  ice  ;  but  my  directions
were  persued  by  the  person  I  left  in  charge  of  him  dur-
ing the  night,  keeping  up  a  perspiration,  in  the  morn-
ing he  was  much  relieved,  and  had  his  right  mind.  He
had  no  pain  except  in  the  lower  partof  the  bowels;  to
relieve  which  b*^  was  very  anxious  that  I  should  give
him  ««bme  physick ;  I  opposed  this,  being  confident  that
it  would  not  do  in  such  putrid  cases.  He  was  so  urgent,
however,  I  gave  him  some,  which  operated  very  soon ;
and  the  consequence  was,  that  it  reinforced  his  disorder,,
and  threw  him  into  the  greatest  distress.  He  asked  for
more  physick,  but  i  told  him  that  I  would  not  give  him
anymore,  for  I  was  satisfied  of  the  impropriety  of  giving
it  in  such  cases,  and  I  have  never  given  any  since.  It
checked  the  perspiration,  and  drew  the  determining
powers  from  the  surface  inward  ;  so  that  1  had  to  go
through  the  same  process  again  of  raising  perspiration,
and  vomiting,  which  was  much  more  difficult  than  at
first,  and  it  was  with  the  greatest  attention  that  1  was-
able  to  keep  off  the  mortification  for  twelve  hours  that
he  was  kept  back  by  taking  this  small  dose  of  physick.
I  kept  up  the  perspiration  through  Friday  and  Saturday,,
and  on  Sunday  morning  when  1  called  to  see  him  he
was  up  and  dressed  ;  on  asking  how  he  did,  he  said  as
strong  as  you  are,  and  took  me  under  his  arm  and  car-
ried me  accross  the  room.  On  Monday  he  was  down
on  the  wharf  attending  to  his  business.

This  cure  caused  considerable  talk  in  the  town,  and
because  it  was  done  so  quick,  the  doctors  said  that  there
was  but  little  ailed  him,  and  he  would  have  got  weO


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  81

himself  if  he  had  taken  the  physick  and  been  left  alone ;
but  those  who  saw  it  wcr^  convinced  to  the  contrary;
others  doubted,  and  said  among  themselves,  how  can  a
man  who  has  no  learning  and  never  studied  physick,
know  how  to  cure  disease.  Mr.  Rice,  however,  gave
me  credit  for  the  cure,  and  was  very  grateful  for  it,  and
I  made  his  house  my  home,  when  in  Portsmouth,  and
was  treated  with  much  respect.  He  introduced  me  to
his  uncle,  Alexander  Hice,  Ksq.  a  man  of  respectability,
and  high  standing  in  that  place  ;  who  at  first  could  not
believe  that  so  valuable  a  discovery  could  be  made  by
a  man  without  an  education.  I  conversed  with  him  up-
on the  subject,  and  explained  the  principles  upon  which
my  system  was  founded — how  every  thing  acted  under
the  nature  and  operation  of  the  four  elements,  and  by
one  acting  upon  another  caused  all  motion — how  the
element  of  fire  by  rarifing  water  and  air  keeps  the
whole  creation  in  motion — how  the  temperament  of  the
body,  by  adding  or  diminishing  heat  and  cold  would  pro-
mote either  life  or  death.  After  hearing  my  explana-
tion, he  became  satisfied  of  its  correctness,  and  confess-
ed that  my  natural  gift  was  of  more  value  than  learning.
H«  then  made  known  to  me  his  infirmities,  and  wished
me  to  take  the  care  of  his  family  and  give  him  and  his
wife  such  information  as  would  enable  them  to  attend
upon  themselves  and  tamiiy  in  case  of  sickness.  ^1-
f&adily  agreed  to  this,  and  soon  after  carried  some  of
the  family  through  with  the  medicine,  and  gave  them
all  the  information  in  my  power,  of  the  principle,  and
the  medicine  with  which  it  was  done.  Mrs.  Rice  under-
took the  management  of  the  business ;  she  was  a  kind
and  affectionate  woman,  possessing  a  sound  judgment
without  fear.  After  she  had  gained  the  information,
she  wished  me  to  attend  to  carrying  her  through  a  course
of  the  medicine,  for  a  bad  humour,  called  the  salt
rheum,  which  she  had  been  long  afflicted  with ;  she
was  attended  a  few  times,  which  effected  a  complete
cure.

Major  Rice,  had  been  for  many  years  subject  to  turns
of  the  gout  ;  and  had  been  in  some  instances  confined
by  it  for  six  months  at  a  time,  and  for  six  weeks  not
able  to  sit  up,  much  of  the  time  not  able  to  lift  his  h.uif'


82  JS'iirrative  cftht  Life^  6,-c.

to  his  head.  He  had  been  constantly  under  the  care  ol
the  most  skillful  doctors,  who  would  bleed  and  blister,
and  phj'^sick  him,  till  his  strength  was  exhausted;  after
attending  him  in  this  way  through  the  winter,  ihej  said
he  must  wait  till  warm  weather,  before  he  could  get
about.  When  the  warm  weather  come  he  would  crawl
out  in  the  sun  side  of  the  house,  and  in  this  way  he  gru
dualW  garined  his  strength ;  after  this  he  was  afflicted
with  a  violent  burning  in  his  stomach,  which  was  almost
as  troublesome  as  the  gout.

After  he  had  the  right  of  my  medicine,  he  had  fre-
quent turns  of  the  gout ;  but  no  attack  of  this  disease
has  continued  more  than  twenty-four  hours,  before  he
was  completely  relieved ;  and  he  has  been  but  little  trou-
bled with  the  burning  at  the  stomach  since.  He  has
told  me  since,  that  if  he  could  have  been  as  sure  of  re-
lief, when  he  was  first  subject  to  this  disease,  as  he  is
now  certain  of  it  in  twenty-four  hours,  he  would  have
been  willing  to  give  all  he  was  worth.  This  family  has
been  so  much  benefited  by  the  use  of  the  medicine,
that  no  sum  of  money  would  be  any  temptation  to  them
to  be  deprived  of  it.  This  man  has  never  been  lacking
to  prove  his  gratitude  to  me  ;  in  the  time  of  my  troubles
his  assistance  was  of  the  greatest  importance  to  me,  and
I  shall  ever  feel  grateful  to  him  and  his  family  for
thGif  goodness.

Soon  after  I  went  to  Portsmouth,  I  was  sent  for  to  go
to  l)eerfield,  where  the  dysentery  prevailed  and  had  be-
come very  alarming.  A  young  man  by  the  name  of
Fulsom  came  after  me,  and  said  that  the  doctor  had  lost
every  patient  he  had  attended,  that  seven  had  died,
and  many  were  sick — that  his  father  and  two  brothers
were  given  over  by  the  doctor  that  morning  to  die.

The  young  man  seemed  so  anxious,  and  was  so  much
frightened  that  I  concluded  to  go  with  him ;  the  distance
was  twenty-eight  miles.  We  started  a  little  before
night,  and  arrived  there  about  ten  o'clock.  I  found  the
father  and  the  two  sons,  as  bad  as  they  could  be  and  be
alive ;  they  were  stupid  and  cold.  I  told  the  mother
that  it  was  very  uncertain  whether  I  could  help  them.
She  begged  of  me  to  save  her  husband's  life  if  possible.
1  iold  her  that  I  could  not  tell  whether  they  were  dying,


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  83

or  whether  it  was  the  deadly  effect  of  opium. I  gave
them  all  medicine — the  two  children  died  in  about  three
hours,  but  Mr. Fulsom  soon  grew  better  by  taking  the
medicine. I  had  not  only  the  sick  to  attend  to,  and  do
every  thing  myself;  but  the  opposition  of  all  the  neigh-
bourhood ;  there  was  eight  of  the  family  sick,  and  if  1
went  out  of  the  house,  some person  would  open  the
doors  and  windows,  which  w^ould  cause  a  relapse;  while
perspiration  continued  they  were  easy,  but  as  soon  as
they  grew  cold  the  pain  would  return  and  be  very  vio-
lent. In  the  morning  I  was  preparing  to  come  away  ;
but  the  father  urged  me  so  hard  to  stay,  promising  that
I  should  be  treated  in  a  better  manner  than  I  had  been,
that  1  consented  and  remained  with  them  about  ten
days. I  caught  the  disorder  myself  and  was  very  bad  ;
on  taking  the  medicine  the  operation  was  so  violent  that
the neighbours were much  frightened  and left the
house,  and  were  afraid  to  come  nig?i  us,  leaving  us  to
die  altogether. I  soon  got  better  and  was  able  to  carry
Mr.  Fulsom  through  for  the  first  time  ; which  relieved
him  and  he  soon  got  better. In  the  mean  time  a  small
child  was  brought  home  sick,  that  had  been  carried  away
to  prevent  it  from  taking  the  disorder. It  was  so  far
gone  that  the  medicine would  have  no effect  upon  it,
and  it  soon  died. All  that  were  not  in  a  dying  situation
before  they  took  the  medicine  were  relieved  and  got
well. I  attended  some  that  had  the  disorder  in  other
families,  all  of  whom  got  well ;  fifteen  in  the  whole  re-
covered and  three  die:!. Two  years  after,  thedeathof
these  three  was  brought  against  me  on  a  charge  of  mur-
der.

All  that  I  ever  r«fceived  for  my  trouble  in  these
cases,  was  fifteen  dollars  ;  there  was  no  credit  given  me
for  curing  the  fifteen  out  of  eighteen,  when  the  doctor
had  lost  all  that  he  had  attended  ;  and  after  he  ha4  giv-
en over  three  to  die,  I  cured  one  of  them  twelve  hours
after.  When  1  left  this  place  the  doctor  adopted  my
mode  of  practice  as  far  as  he  knew  it,  particularly  in
sweating,  and  about  one  half  lived.  Notwithstanding
all  this,  the  doctor  as  I  was  informed  made  oath  that  thr
three  children  died  in  consequence  of  taking  my  medi-
'  ine  ;  and  the  good  minister  of  the  parish,  I  was  also  in-


84  JS'^mirrative  of  the  Life^  ^c.

formed,  testified  to  the  same  thing ;  though  I  am  confi-
dent that  neither  of  them  knew  any  thing  about  me  or
my  medicine.  A  judgment  seemed  to  follow  thi&clerg}'-
man,  for  a  short  time  after  he  had  lent  his  aid  in  proitiot-
ing  the  prosecution  against  me,  a  circumstance  took  place
in  his  family,  which  if  it  had  not  been  done  by  a  fash-
ionable doctor,  might  have  been  called  murder.  His
wife  was  at  times  troubled  with  a  pam  in  her  face,
something  like  a  cramp  ;  a  certain  doctor  said  that  he
could  help  her  by  cuttmg.  He  used  the  knife  and  other
instruments  of  torture  for  four  hours,  which  stopped
her  speech,  and  let  loose  the  juices  that  filled  the  flesh
from  her  breast,  so  that  the  blood  and  water  crowded
out  of  her  ears  in  striving  for  breath.  She  remained  in
this  distressed  situation  about  seven  days  and  died.  This
information  (  had  from  two  respectable  men,  who  were
present  at  the  time  of  her  sufierings  and  death.

I  continued  to  practice  in  Portsmouth  and  vicinity
during  this  autumn,  and  while-there  was.sent  for  to  go
to  Salisbury  to  see  a  child  that  had  been  attended  by  a
woman  who  I  had  given  informatian  to  for  several  days,
but  they  said  the  perspiration  would  not  hold ;  and  they
wished  for  further  information.  On  seeing  the  child,  J
at  once  found  that  they  had  kept  about  an  equal  balance
between  the  outward  and  inward  heat ;  when  they  gave
medicine  to  raise  the  inward  heat  and  start  the  deter-
mining power  to  the  surface,  they  at  the  same  time
kept  the  outward  heat  so  high  as  to  counteract  it.  Af-
ter explaining  to  them  the  difficulty,  I  raised  the  child
up  and  poured  on  to  it  a  pint  of  cold  vinegar,  and  it  im-
mediately revived.  Applied  no  more  outward  heat,  but
only  to  shield  it  from  the  air;  and  gave  the  warmest
medicine  inward,  en  the  operation  of  which  the  child
grew  cold  and  very  much  distressed.  As  soon  as  the
inward  heat  had  gained  the  full  power  and  drove  the
cold  out,  the  circulation  became  free,  and  the  child  was
relieved  from  pain  and  fiell  asleep ;  the  next  day  the
heat  was  as  much  higher  than  what  was  natural,  as  it
had  been  lower  the  day  before ;  and  when  heat  had
gained  the  victory  over  cold,  the  child  gained  its
strength  and  was  soon  about,  perfectly  recovered.

I  had  not  practiced  in  Salisbury  before,  since  I  went


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  85

to  Exeter,  which  was  in  June,  and  my  returning  there
seemed  to  give  Dr.  French  great  offence. He  had  been
to  see  the  child  mentioned  above,  and  tried  to  discour-
age the  people  from  using  my  medicine; and  threaten-
ed them  that  he  would  have  theni  indicted  by  the  grand
jury,  if  they  made  use  of  any  without  his  consent  ; his
threats  however  had  very  little  effect,  for  the  people
were  well  satisfied  of  the  superiority  of  my  practice  over
his. About  this  time  the  bonds  for  his  good  behaviour
were  out ;  1  did  not  appear  against  him,  and  when  the
case  was  called  the court  discharged  him  and  his  bail,
on  his  paying  the  cost. This  action  was  brought  on  a
complaint  in  behalf  of  the  commonwealth  ;  but  I  had
caused  another  action  of  damage  to  be  brought  against
him,  which  was  carried to  the  Supreme  Court, and
tried  at  Ipswich  the  spring  following. I  employed  two
lawyers  to  manage  my  case,  and  brought  forward  two
witnesses  to  prove  my  declaration,  who  swore  that  the
defendant  made  the  assertion,  that  I  was  guilty  of  murder
and  he  could  prove  it. His  lawyer  admitted  the  fact,
but plead  justification  on  the  part  of  his  client,  and
brought  witnesses  on  to  the  stand  to  prove  that  what  he
had  said  was  true. The  young  woman  who  nursed  Mrs.
Lifford,  and  by  whose  neglect  she  took  cold,  swore  to
some  of  the  most  ridiculous  occurrences  concerning  the
death  of  that  woman,  that  could  be  uttered,  which  were
perfectly contradictory  to  every  thing  she  had  before
confessed  to  be  the  truth. Another  young  woman,  the
daughter  of  a  doctor,  at  Deerfield,  made  a  statement  to
make  it  appear  that  I  was  the  cause  of  the  death  of  the
three  children,  who  died  as  has  been  before  related.  I  had
no  knowledge  of  ever  seeing  this  woman,  and  have  since
ascertained  that  she  was  not  at  the  house  but  once  dur-
ing the  sickness,  and  then  did  not  go  into  the  room  where
the  sick  were ;  and  her  exaggerated  account  must  have
been  made  up  of  what  she  had  heard  others  »tt»

These  things  were  a  complete  surprise  to'  me,  not
thinking  it  possible  that  people  could  be  induced  to  make
such  exaggerated  statements  under  the  solemnity  of  an
oath.  I  could  have  brought  forward  abundance  of  tes-
timony to  have  contradicted  the  whole  evidence  against

H


86  Narrative  of  the  Life^  4*c.

me  if  there  was  time,  but  not  expecting  that  the  cause
would  have  taken  the  course  it  did,  was  unprepared.
There  appeared  to  be  a  complete  combination  of  the
professional  craft  against  me,  of  both  the  doctors  and
lawyers,  and  a  determination  that  I  should  lose  the
cause,  let  the  evidence  be  what  it  might.  My  lawyers
gave  up  the  case,  without  making  a  plea ;  and  the  judge
gave  a  very  partial  charge  to  the  jury,  representing  me
in  the  worst  point  of  view  that  he  possibly  could,  saying
that  the  evidence  was  sufficient  to  prove  the  facts
against  me,  and  that  if  I  had  been  tried  for  my  life,  he
could  not  say  whether  it  would  hang  me  or  send  me  i()
the  states  prison  for  life.  The  jury  of  course  gave  their
verdict  against  me,  and  I  had  to  pay  the  cost  ot  the  court.

The  counsel  for  Dr.  French  asked  the  judge  whether
a  warrant  ought  not  to  be  issued  against  me,  and  be
compelled  to  recognized  to  appear  at  the  next  court,
to  which  he  answered  in  the  affirmative.  This  so  fright-*
ened  my  friends,  that  they  were  much  alarmed  for  my
•safety,  and  advised  me  to  go  out  of  the  way  of  my  ene-
mies, for  they  seemed  to  be  determined  to  destroy  me.
1  went  to  Andover,  to  the  house  of  a  friend,  whose  wife
I  had  cured  of  a  cancer,  where  I  was  very  cordially  re-
ceived, and  staid  that  night.  The  next  day  1  went  to
Salisbury-mills,  and  made  arrangements  to  pay  the  costs
of  my  unfortunate  law  suit.

In  the  tail  of  the  year  1808,  I  was  sent  for  to  go  to
Beverly,  to  see  the  wife  of  a  Mr.  Appleton,  who  was
the  daughter  of  Elder  Williams,  the  Baptist  Minister  in
that  town,  and  was  very  low  in  a  consumption.  She
had  formerly  been  afflicted  with  the  salt-rheum  on  her
hands,  and  had  applied  to  a  doctor  for  advise  ;  he  had
Sidvised  her  to  make  use  of  a  sugar  of  lead  wash,  which
Arove  the  disease  to  her  lungs,  and  she  had  been  in  that
situation  Ibr  along  time,  and  very  little  hopes  were  en-
tertained of  her  ever  being  any  better.  1  carried  her
through  a  course  of  the  medicine,  with  very  good  suc-
cess. 1  remained  in  Beverly  about  a  week ;  and  while
there  became  acquainted  with  Mr.  Williams,  and  also
Mr.  William  Raymond,  to  whom  I  afterwards  gave  in-
formation of  my  practice  and  he  assisted  me  to  attend  on
my  patients. 'J'hen  returned  to  Portsmouth,  where  I


Of  Samuel  Tkoimon.  87

was  constantly  called  on  to  practice,  and  had  all  the  most'
desperate  cases  put  under  my  care,  in  all  of  which  I  met
with  very  great  success^.

After  staying  here  about  two  weeks  I  returned  to
Beverly,  to  see  Mrs.  Appleton  and  other  patients  there,
and  found  them  all  doing  well ;  was  called  on  to  attend
many  desperate  case^;  in  all  of  which  1  effected  a  Cure,
exce^  one,  who  i^as  dyiag  before  I  was  called  on.
While  pra^iieiftg^  Beverly  was  called  on  by  a  Mr.  Lo-
vett,  to  atten^4iis  son,  who  was  sick,  as  they  supposed
with  a  bad  cold,  some  thought  it  a  typhus  fever.  I  was
very  much  engaged  in  attending  upon  the  sick  at  the
time,  and  could  not  go  with  him ;  he  came  after  me
three  times  before  I  could  go.  On  seeing  him,  found
that  he  complained  of  a  stiff  neck,  and  appeared  to  be
very  stupid,  but  had  no  pain.  His  aunt  who  took  care
of  him,  said  that  he  would  certainly  die,  for  he  had  the
same  symptoms  as  his  mother,  who  died  a  short  time  be-
fore. 1  gave  some  medicine  which  relieved  him  ;  the  next
day  carried  him  through  a  course  of  the  medicine,  and
he  appeared  to  be  doing  well.  Being  called  on  to  go  to
Salem,  I  left  him  in  the  care  of  Mr.  Raymond,  with
particular  directions  to  keep  in  the  house  and  not  ex-
pose himself  This  was  on  Wednesday,  and  I  heard  no°
thing  from  him,  and  knew  not  but  what  he  was  doing
well,  till  the  Sunday  afternoon  following,  when  1  was  in-
formed that  he  was  worse.  I  immediately  enquired  of
Mr.  Raymond,  and  learned  from  him  that  he  had  got  so
much  better,  he  had  been  down  on  the  side  of  the  was
ter,  and  returned  on  Friday  night;  that  the  weather
was  very  cold,  (being  in  the  month  of  December ;)  that
he  had  been  chilled  with  the  cold,  and  soon  after  his  re-
turn had  been  taken  very  ill ;  he  staid  with  him  on  Sa-
turday night,  and  that  he  was  raving  distracted  all  night;
that  he  had  not  given  any  medicine,  thinking  that  he
was  too  dangerously  sick  for  him  to  undertake  with.

I  told  the  young  man's  father,  that  it  was  very  doubt-
ful whether  I  could  do  any  thing  that  would  help  him;
but  that  1  would  try  and  do  all  I  could.  I  found  that
the  patient  was  so  far  gone  that  the  medicine  would
have  no  effect,  and  in  two  hours  told  him  that  I  could
not  help  his  son,  and  advised  him  to  call  some  other  ad-


88  Narrative  cfthe  Life^  ^^c.

vice ;  this  was  said  in  presence  of  Elder  Williams,  and
Mr.  Raymond.  Mr.  Lovett  made  answer  that  if  I  could
not  help  his  son  he  knew  of  none  who  could  ;  and  was
•very  desirous  for  me  to  stay  with  him  all  night,  which
I  did,  and  stood  by  his  bed  the  whole  time.  He  was
much  deranged  in  his  mind  till  morning,  when  he  came
to  himself,, and  was  quite  sensible.  I  then  again  request-
ed the  father  to  send  for  some  other  doctor,  as  I  was
sensible  that  I  could  do  nothing  for  him  that  would  be
any  benefit.  He  immediately  sent  for  two  doctors,  and
as  soon  as  they  arrived,  I  left  him  in  their  care.
The  two  doctors  attended  him  till  the  next  night  about
ten  o'clock,  when  he  died.  1  have  been  more  particu-
lar in  giving  the  history  of  this  case  because  two  years
after  it  was  brought  as  a  charge  against  me  for  murder-
ing this  young  man.  The  father  and  friends  expressed
no  dissatisfaction  at  the  time,  in  regard  to  my  conduct,
except  they  thought  I  ought  not  to  have  neglected  the
patient  so  long ;  but  it  was  a  well  known  fact,  that  I  at-
tended as  soon  as  I  knew  of  his  being  worse,  and  that
the  whole  cause  of  his  second  attack  was  owing  to  his
going  out  and  exposing  himself,  and  could  not  be  im-
puted as  any  fault  of  mine.

In  the  latter  part  of  December,  1808,  I  was  sent  for
to  attend  Elder  Bowles,  the  Baptist  minister  of  Salem.
i  was  introduced  to  him  by  Elder  Williams,  and  found
him  in  bed,  and  very  weak  and  low,  in  the  last  stage  of  a
consumption ;  all  hopes  of  a  recovery  were  at  an  end —
his  doctors  had  left  him  as  incurable.  He  asked  my
opinion  of  his  case  ;  I  told  him  that  I  could  not  tell
whether  there  was  a  possibility  of  a  cure  or  not  till  after
using  the  medicine  ;  being  doubtful  whether  there  was
mortification  or  not.  He  was  a  man  very  much  respect-
ed and  beloved  by  his  people,  and  the  public  anxiety
was  very  great  about  him.  He  expressed  a  strong  de-
sire that  I  should  undertake  with  him  ;  but  I  declined
doing  any  thing  until  he  consulted  his  deacons  and  other
members  of  his  ^hurch,  who  were  his  particular  friends,
and  their  advice  taken ;  which  being  done,  they  offered
no  objection,  but  wished  him  to  act  his  own  mind,  and
whatever  the  result  should  be  they  would  be  satisfied.
He  replied  that  he  was  convinced  he  could  not  live  in


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  89

his  present  situation  more  than  a  week,  and  therefore
his  hfe  could  not  be  shortened  more  than  that  time ;  and
it  was  his  wish  that  I  should  undertake  to  cure  him.
His  strength  was  so  far  exhausted  that  it  was  with  the
greatest  exertions  and  difficulty  that  they  could  get  him
to  sit  up  about  three  minutes  in  a  day,  to  have  his  bed
made.

I  gave  his  friends  as  correct  an  account  of  his  disorder
and  the  operation  of  the  medicine,  as  1  could ;  and  that
Tdid  not  wish  to  do  any  thing  which  might  cause  reflec-
tion hereafter  ;  but  they  promised  that  let  the  result  be
wha;t  it  might  they  should  be  satisfied  and  would  not
think  hard  of  me.  On  these  conditions  I  undertook,
and  told  them  that  twenty-four  hours  time  would  decide
whether  he  lived  or  died.  I  began  to  give  the  medicine
in  the  morning,  which  had  a  very  calm  and  easy  oper-
ation ;  the  emetic  herb  operated  very  kindly,  and  threw
off  his  stomach  a  large  quantity  of  cold  jelly,  like  the
white  of  an  e^^ ;  the  perspiration  moved  gently  on  and
was  free ;  the  internal  heat  produced  by  the  medicine
fixed  the  determining  power  to  the  surface,  and  threw
out  the  putrefaction  to  such  a  degree  that  the  smell  was
very  offensive.  Mr.  Bovdes  had  a  brother  present  who
was  a  doctor ;  he  observed  that  he  did  not  know  whether
the  medicine  made  the  putrifaction  or  whether  it  made
visible  what  was  secreted  in  the  body  ;  but  he  was  soon
convinced  on  that  head,  for  when  the  medicine  had
cleaned  him,  all  this  putrid  smell  ceased.  Whije  the
medicine  was  in  the  greatest  operation  the  perspiration
brought  out  the  putrifaction  to  such  a  degree,  that  the
nurse  in  making  his  bed  was  so  affected  with  it,  that  she
fainted  and  fell  on  the  floor.  I  attended  on  him  for
about  three  weeks,  in  which  time  he  was  able  to  set
up  two  or  three  hours  in  a  day;  his  food  nourished  his
body,  aad  his  strength  gained  very  fast,  considering  the
season  of  the  year  being  unfavourable.  I  gave  him  my
best  advice  and  left  directions  how  to  proceed,  and  re-
turned honre  to  my  family  ta  spend  the  rest  of  the  win-
ter with  them.  1  returned  in  the  spring  to  see  Mr.
Bowles,  and  found  him  so  far  recovered  as  to  be  able
to  ride  out,  and  in  good  spirits. He  soon  gained  his

H  2


90  Narrative  of  the  Life,  4re.

health,  and  is  now  well  and  ready  to  give  testimony  of
the  facts  as  T  have  related  them.

In  the  season  of  1809,  1  suffered  much.  In  the  first
part  of  the  summer,  attended  many  patients  of  old  com-
plaints ;  in  particular  one  case  that  I  shall  mention  of  a
young  woman,  in  Kittery,  in  a  consumption.  She  had
been  confined  to  her  house  four  months ;  her  flesh  was
exhausted,  and  had  a  violent  stricture  of  the  lungs,
which  she  said  seemed  as  though  there  was  a  string'
that  drawed  her  lungs  to  her  back ;  this  caused  a  dry.
hacking  couch,  which  was  very  distressing.  I  could  give
her  friends  no  encouragement  of  a  cure  :  but  the  young
woman  and  her  friends  were  so  urgent,  that  I  undertook
with  her.  Her  courage  was  very  great,  and  she  took
the  medicine  and  followed  all  my  directions  with  great
perseverance.  She  said  she  wished  that  it  might  either
kill  or  cure,  for  she  did  not  desire  to  live  in  the  situa-
tion she  was  then  in.  I  left  her  medicine  and  directions,
and  occasionally  visited  her.  My  plan  of  treatment  was
followed  With  much  attention  and  zeal  for  six  months,
before  1  could  raise  an  inward  heat  which  would  hold
more  than  six  hours.  She  then  had  what  was  called  a
settled  fever  y  and  I  gave  her  medicine  to  get  as  great
an  internal  heat  as  I  possibly  could  ;  this  caused  much
alarm  among  her  friends,  as  they  thought  she  would  cer-
tainly die.  I  told  them  that  the  heat  holding,  which
Tvas  the  cause  of  the  fever,  was  the  first  favourable
symptom  that  I  had  seen  in  her  favour.  She  soon  gain-
ed her  health,  to  the  astonishment  of  all  her  friends  and
acquaintances.  She  continued  to  enjoy  her  health  till
the  next  season,  when  she  had  another  turn  of  the  fever.
I  attended  her  in  my  usual  way,  and  raised  the  heat  till
it  completely  overpowered  the  cold,  when  she  was  en-
tirely cured,  and  has  ever  since  enjoyed  good  health.

During  this  summer  a  woman  applied  to  mo  from  a
neighbouring  town,  who  had  the  dropsy,  and  brought
with  her  a  little  girl,  that  had  the  rickets  very  bad,  so
that  she  was  grown  much  out  of  shape.  I  carried  them
both  thr©'  a  course  of  the  medicine,  attended  them  for
three  or  four  weeks,  and  then  gave  the  woman  infor-
mation how  to  relieve  herself  and  the  girl,  occasionally
visiting  them ;  they  both  recovered  of  their  complaints


Qf  Samuel  Thomson.  91

and'  have  enjoyed  perfect  health  since.  This  woman
paid  me  the  most  liberally  of  any  that  I  had  attendedj
and  has  on  all  occasions  manifested  her  gratitude  for  the
assistance  I  afforded  her.  Another  woman  from  the
same  town  applied  to  me,  who  had  a  cancer  on  her
breast.  She  had  been  under  the  care  of  several  doc-
tors, who  had  by  their  course  of  practice  made  her  worse.
I  undertook  with  her  and  by  giving  medicine  to  check
the  canker  and  promote  perspiration,  effectually  reliev-
ed her  from  the  disease.  Many  other  desperate  cases,
such  as  consumptions,  dropsies,  cancers,  &:c.  most  of
which  had  been  given  over  by  the  doctors,  were  attend-
ed by  me  about  this  time,  which  it  will  be  unnecessary
for  me  to  particularize ;  all  of  them  were  either  com-
pletely cured  or  essentially  relieved  and  made  comfort-
able by  my  system  of  practice.  One  case  I  shall  how-
ever state,  being  rather  of  an  extraordinary  nature,  to
show  the  absurdity  of  the  fashionable  manner  of  treat-
ing disease  by  the  doctors  of  the  present  day.

A  young  lady  applied  to  me  who  had  been  much
troubled  with  bleeding  at  the  stomach.  She  stated  to
me  that  she  had  been  bled  by  the  doctors  forty-two
times  in  two  years  ;  and  that  they  had  bled  her  seven
times  in  six  weeks.  So  much  blood  had  been  taken  from
her,  that  the  blood  vessels  had  contracted  in  such  man-
ner that  they  would  hold  very  little  blood ;  and  the  heat
being  thereb}'  so  much  diminished,  the  water  filled  the
flesh,  and  what  little  blood  there  was  rushed  to  her  face,
while  all  the  extremeties  were  cold ;  this  produced  a
deceptive  appearance  of  health,  and  caused  those  who
judg<:d  by  outward  appearances,  to  doubt  whether  there
was  any  disease  ;  so  that  she  had  not  only  to  bear  her
own  infirmities,  but  the  reproaches  of  her  acquaintances.
1  kindled  heat  enough  in  the  body  to  throw  off  the  use-
less water,  which  gave  the  blood  room  to  circulate
through  the  whole  system,  instead  of  circulating  as  it
had  done  before,  only  in  the  large  blood  vessels,  and
they  being  much  extended  by  not  having  heat  enough
to  give  it  motion,  leads  the  doctors  into  the  erroneous
idea,  that  there  is  two  much  blood,  and  resort  to  the
practice  of  bleeding,  which  reduces  the  strength  of  the
patient,  and  increases  the  disease. There  is  no  such


92  J^arratrce  of  the  Life^  ^c.

thing  as  a  person  having  too  much. blood,  no  more  thaa
there  is  of  having  too  much  bone,  or  too  much  muscle,
•or  sinews  ;  nature  contrives  all  thmgs  right.  The  blood
r.'i.r/  be  too  thick,  so  as  not  to  circulate,  and  is  liable  to
be  diseased  like  all  other  parts  of  thie  body ;  but  how
taking  part  of  it  away,  can  benefit  the  rest,  or  tend  in
any  way  to  remove  the  disease,  is  what  I  could  never
reconcile  with  common  sense.  After  I  had  carried  this^
woman  through  a  full  operation  of  the  medicine,  and
got  the  heat  to  hold,  so  as  to  produce  a  natural  perspi-
ration, she  at  once  exhibited  a  true  picture  of  her  situa-
tion ;  instead  of  appearing  to  be  so  fleshy  and  well  fts
she  had  done,  she  fell  away  and  became  quite  emaciat-
ed ;  but  as  soon  as  the  digestive  powers  were  restored,
so  that  food  could  nourish  the  body,  she  gained  her
strength  and  flesh,  and  in  a  sliort  time  was  completely
restored  to  health.

I  was  about  this  time  called  to  attend  a  woman  who
was  very  severely  attacked  with  the  spotted  fever.  'J'he
first  appearance  of  it  was  a  pain  in  her  heal,  which  soon
moved  up  to  her  hips  and  back,  from  thence  to  her
stomach  and  head ;  so  that  in  fifteen  minutes  her  sight
was  gone,  and  in  less  than  half  an  hour  she  was  sense-
less and  cold ;  about  this  time  I  saw  her,  and  examined
well  the  cause  of  the  disease  ;  1  was  well  satisfied  that
it  was  the  effect  of  cold  having  overpowered  the  inward
heat.  By  confining  her  from  the  air,  giving  ber  No.
1  and  2,  and  keeping  her  in  a  moderate  steam,  she  in  a
short  time  came  to  her  senses  ;  and  the  symptoms  were
exactly  similar  to  a  drowned  person  coming-to,  after
having  life  suspended  by  being  under  water*  As  sooq
as  the  perspiration  became  free  all  pjiin  ceased,  and  she
was  quite  comfortable  ;  in  twenty-four  hours  the  disease
was  completely  removed,  and  she  was  able  ta  attend  to
her  work.

The  same  day  I  had  another  case  of  a  child*  which
the  doctor  had  given  over.  When  I  came  to  this  child
it  was  senseless,  and  I  expected  in  a  mortified  state ;  I
gave  it  the  hotest  medicine  I  could  get,  with  the  emetic  ;
it  lay  about  six  hours  silent,  before  the  medicine  had
kmdled  heat  enough  to  cause  motion  in  the  stomach  and
bowels,  when  it  began  to  revive,  and  what  came  from  it;


0/ Samuel  Thomson.,  93

was  black  and  putrid ;  the  bowels  just  escaped  mortifi-
cation. The  child  was  soon  well.  These  two  cases
were  both  cured  in  twenty-four  hours  time.

When  the  spotted  fever  iirst  appeared  in  Portsmouth,
the  doctors  had  five  cases  and  all  of  them  died.  1  had
five  cases  similar  which  all  lived.  Because  my  patient*
did  not  die,  the  doctors  said  they  did  not  have  the  fe-
ver. In  this  they  had  much  the  advantage  of  me,  for
there  could  be  no  doubt  of  theirs  all  having  it,  as  death
was,  in  most  of  the  cases  under  their  care,  on  their  side
and  decided  the  question.  -I  have  had  a  great  number  of
cases  of  the  spotted  fever  under  my  care,  and  in  all  of
them  used  the  remains  of  heat  as  a  friend,  by  kindling
it  so  as  to  produce  heat  enough  in  the  body  to  overpow-
er and  drive  out  the  cold  ;  and  have  never  failed  of  suc-
cess, where  there  was  any  chance  of  a  cure.

Sometime  this  season  I  was  sent  for  to  attend  Captain
Trickej'^,  who  was  very  sick;  I  examined  him  and
was  confident  that  I  could  not  help  him,  and  took  my
hat  in  order  to  leave  the  house.  His  family  insisted  on
my  stopping  and  doing  something  for  him ;  but  I  told
them  that  I  thought  he  was  in  a  dying  state,  and  medi-
cine would  do  no  good.  1  told  his  son  that  in  all  pro-
bability, he  would  not  be  alive  over  twenty-four  hours,
and  that  he  had  better  go  for  some  other  help,  for  I
could  do  him  no  good.  I  told  the  wife  that  I  should  give
no  medicine  myself,  but  as  they  had  some  in  the  house
that  they  knew  the  nature  of,  she  might  give  some  of  it
to  her  husband,  which  she  did.  Two  doctors  were  sent
for — the  first  one  that  arrived  bled  him,  and  he  soon
breathed  very  short,  and  grew  worse  ;  the  other  doc-
sor  came,  and  said  that  his  breathing  short  was  in  con-
sequence of  the  medicine  I  had  given  him ;  but  by  this
he  did  not  gain  credit,  for  all  the  family  knew  to  the
contrary ;  and  the  woman  soon  after  told  me  of  his
speech.  The  patient  continued  till  the  next  day  about
ten  o'clock  and  died.  Soon  as  he  was  dead  the  doctors
and  their  friends  spared  no  pains  to  spread  the  report
in  every  direction,  that  I  had  killed  this  man  with  my
screw-auger,  a  cant  name  given  to  my  emetic  herb,  in
consequence  of  one  of  my  patients  when  under  the  oper-
ation of  it,  saying  that  it  twisted  in  him  like  a  screvv-au-


04  JVarrative  of  the  Life^  Src^

ger.  This  was  readily  seized  upon  by  the  doctors  and
made  use  of,  for  the  purpose  of  trying  to  destroy'  the  re-
putation of  this  medicine  by  ridicule — they  likewise
gave  similar  names  to  several  other  articles  of  my  me-
dicine for  the  satiie  purpose,  and  represented  them  as
the  names  by  which  I  called  them.  They  had  likewise
given  me  several  names^  and  titles,  by  way  of  reproach ;
such  as  the  sweating  and  steaming  doctor — the  Indian
doctor — the  old  wizzard — and  sometimes  the  quack.
Such  kind  of  management,  had  a  great  effect  on  the
minds  of  many  weak  minded  people  ;  they  were  so  afraid
of  ridicule,  that  those  who  1  had  cured  were  unwilling
to  own  it  for  fear  of  being  laughed  at  for  employing
we.

The  circumstance  of  the  death  of  the  above  mention-
ed Capt.  Trickey,  was  seized  upon  by  the  doctors  and
their  friends,  and  the  most  false  and  absurd  representa-
tions made  by  them  through  the  country,  with  the  inten-
tion of  stopping  my  practice,  by  getting  me  indicted  for
murder,  or  to  drive  me  off;  but  my  friends  made  out  a
correct  statement  of  the  facts,  and  had  them  publishQd,
which  put  a  stop  to  their  carreer  for  that  time.  1  con-
tinued my  practice,  and  had  a  great  number  of  the  most
desperate  cases,  in  most  of  which  I  was  successful.  The
extraordinary  cures  I  had  performed  had  the  tendency
to  make  many  people  believe,  that  I  could  cure  every
one  who  had  life  in  them,  let  their  disease  be  ever  so  bad ;
and  where  I  had  attended  on  those  who  were  given  over
as  incurable  and  they  died,  whether  I  gave  them  any
medicine  or  not,  the  report  was  immediately  circulated
that  they  were  killed  by  me,  at  the  same  time  the  regu-
lar doctors  would  lose  their  patients  every  day,  without
there  bemg  any  notice  taken  of  it.  When  their  patients
died,  if  appearances  were  ever  so  much  against  their
practice,  it  was  said  to  be  the  will  of  the  Lord,  and  sub-
mitted to  without  a  murmur;  but  if  one  happened  to  die
that  I  had  any  thing  to  do  with,  it  was  readily  reported
by  those  interested  in  destroying  my  credit  with  the  peo-
ple, that  I  killed  them.

1  could  mention  a  great  number  of  cases  of  the  cures
that  [  performed,  if  I  thought  it  necessary  ;  but  my  in-
tention is  to  give  the  particulars  of  such  only  as  will


Of  Samuel  Thomson,  So

have  the  greatest  tendency  to  convey  to  the  reader  the
most  correct  information  of  my  mode  of  practice,  with-
out repeating  any  that  were  treated  in  a  similar  manner
to  those  already  given.  I  shall  now  proceed  to  ^ive  the
particulars  of  one  of  the  most  important  circumstances
of  my  life,  in  as  correct  arid  impartial  a  mahneras  I  am
capable  to  do  from  memory ;  in  order  to  show  what  1
have  suffered  from  the  persecutions  of  some  of  the  me-
dical facultj^,  for  no  other  reason,  as  I  conceive,  than
that  they  feared  my  practice  would  open  the  eyes  of
the  people,  and  lessen  their  importance  with  them;  by
giving  such  imformation  as  would  enable  them  to  cure
themselves  of  disease  without  the  aid  of  a  d3ctor;  and
from  many  others,  vv^ho  were  governed  altogether  by  the
prejudices  they  had  formed  against  me  by  the  false  re-
ports that  had  been  circulated  about  my  practice,  with-
jout  having  any  other  knowledge  of  me.  Many  of  the
latter,  however,  have  since  been  convinced  of  their  er-
ror, have  a  very  favourable  opinion  of  my  system,  and
are  among  my  best  friends.

After  practicing  in  those  parts  through  the  season  of
1809,  I  went  home  to  Surry,  where  1  remained  a  few
weeks,  and  returned  back  to  Salisbury  ;  on  my  way
there  I  made  several  stops  in  dift'erent  places  where  I
had  before  practised,  to  see  my  friends  and  to  give  in-
formation to  those  who  made  use  of  my  medicine  and
practice.  On  my  arrival  at  Salisbury,  my  friends  in-
formed me  that  Dr.  French  had  been  very  busily  em-
ployed in  my  absence,  and  that  he  and  a  deacon  Pecker,
who  was  one  of  the  grand  jury,  had  been  to  Salem,  to
the  court,  and  on  their  return  had  said  that  there  had
been  a  bill  of  indictment  found  against  me  for  willful
murder.  They  advised  me  to  go  oif  and  keep  out  of
the  way;  but  I  told  Ihem  1  should  never  do  that — for  if
they  had  found  a  bill  against  me,  the  government  must
prove  the  charges,  or  1  must  be  honourably  acquitted.
About  ten  o'clock  at  night  Dr.  French  came  to  the
place  where  1  stopped,  with  a  constable,  and  made  me
a  prisoner  in  behalf  of  the  commonwealth.  I  asked  the
constable  to  read  the  warrant,  which  he  did  ;  by  this  I
found  that  Dr.  French  was  the  only  complainant,  and  the
justice  who  granted the warrant  ordered  me  before


96  JVarrative  of  the  Life,  <^c.

him  to  be  examined,  the  next  morning.  I  was  then
taken  by  the  constable  to  Dr.  French's  house,  and  keep-
ers were  placed  over  me  to  prevent  me  from  escaping.
While  at  his  house  and  a  prisoner,  Dr.  French  took  the
opportunity  to  abuse  and  insult  me  in  the  most  shameful
manner  that  can  be  conceived  of,  without  any  provoca
tion  on  my  part ;  he  continued  his  abuse  to  me  till  be-
tween two  and  three  o'clock,  when  he  took  his  horse
and  sat  out  for  Salem  to  get  the  indictment.  After  he
was  gone,  I  found  on  enquiry  of  the  constable,  that  af-
ter he  had  been  before  the  grand  jury  and  caused  me
to  be  indicted,  he  came  home  before  the  bill  was  made
out,  and  finding  that  I  was  in  Salisbury,  ffe.aring  I  might
be  gone,  and  he  should  miss  the  chance  of  gratifying  his
mahcious  revenge  against  me,  he  went  to  a  brother  doc-
tor, w^ho  was  jt  justice  of  the  peace,  befor^  whom  he
made  oath,  that  he  had  probable  ground  to  suspect,  and
did  suspect,  that  1  had  with  malice  aforethought,  mur-
dered sundry  persons  in  the  course  of  the  year  past,
whose  names  were  unknown  to  the  complainant  upon
which  a  warrant  was  issued  against  me,  and  I  was  ar-
rested, as  before  stated,  in  order  to  detain  and  keep  me
in  custody  till  the  indictment  could  be  obtained.

In  the  morning  I  was  brought  before  the  said  justice,
and  he  not  being  ready  to  proceed  in  my  examination,
the  court  was  adjourned  till  one  o'clock  ;  when  1  was
again  brought  before  him  and  he  said  he  could
not  try  me  until  the  complainant  was  present,  and  ad-
journed the  court  again  till  near  night.  The  constable
took  me  to  his  house  in  the  mean  time,  and  put  me  in  a
back  room  and  left  me  alone,  all  of  them  leaving  the
house.  When  they  came  back,  some  of  them  asked  me
why  I  did  not  make  my  escape,  which  I  might  very  ea-
sily have  done  out  of  a  back  window  ;  but  1  told  them
that  I  stood  in  ao  fear  of  the  consequence,  having  done
nothing  whereby  I  ought  to  be  punished  ;  that  I  was  tak-
en up  as  a  malefactor,  and  was  determined  to  be  con-
victed as  such  or  honourably  acquitted.  Just  before
night  Dr.  French  arrived  with  a  Sheriff,  and  ordered
me  to  be  delivered  up  by  the  constable  to  the  Sheriff;
and  after  Dr.  French  had  again  vented  his  spleen  upon
me  by  the  most  savage  abuse  that  language  could  ex-


Of  Samuel  Thomson -  97

press,  sajing  that  I  was  a  murderer,  and  that  I  had
murdered  fil'ty  and  he  cou.ld  prove  it — that  I  should  be
either  hung  or  sent  to  the  State  prison  lor  life  and  he
would  do  all  in  his  power  to  have  me  convicted.  I  was
then  put  in  irons  by  the  sheriff,  and  conve3'ed  to  the
jail  in  Newburjport,  and  confined  in  a  dungeon,  with  a
man  who  had  been  convicted  of  an  assault  on  a  girl
six  years  of  age,  and  sentenced  to  solitary  confinement
for  one  year.  He  seemed  to  be  glad  of  company ;  and
reminded  me  of  the  old  saying,  that  misery  loves  com-
pany. I  was  not  allowed  a  chair  or  table,  and  nothing
but  a  miserable  straw  bunk  on  the  floor,  with  one  poor
blanket  which  had  never  been  washed.  I  was  put  in-
to this  prison  on  the  10th  day  of  November,  1809;
the  weather  was  very  cold,  and  no  fire,  and  not  even
the  light  of  the  sun,  or  a  candle — and  to  complete  the
whole,  the  filth  ran  from  the  upper  rooms  into  our
cell,  and  was  so  offensive  that  I  was  almost  stiffled  with
the  smell.  I  tried  to  rest  myself  as  well  as  I  could,
but  got  no  sleep  that  night,  for  I  felt  something  crawl-
ing over  me,  which  caused  an  itching  and  not  knowing
what  the  cause  was,  enquired  of  my  fellow  sufferer  ;
he  said  that  it  was  the  lice,  and  that  there  was  enough
of  them  to  shingle  a  meeting-house

In  the  morning  ther^  was  just  light  enough  shone
through  the  iron  grates  to  show  the  horror  of  u\j  si-
tuation. My  spirits  and  the  justness  of  mycause  pre-
vented me  from  making  any  lamentation,  and  I  bore
my  sufferings  without  complaint.  At  breakfast  time  I
was  called  on  through  the  grates  to  take  our  miserable
breakfast ;  it  consisted  of  an  old  tin  pot  of  musty  cof-
fee, without  sweetening  or  milk,  and  was  so  bad  as  to
be  unwholesome  ;  with  a  tin  pan  containing  a  hard  piece
of  Indian  bread,  and  the  nape  of  a  fish,  which  was  so
hard  I  could  not  eat  it.  This  had  to  serve  us  till  three
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  when  we  had  about  an  equal
fare,  which  was  all  we  had  till  the  next  morning.  The
next  day  Mr.  Osgood  came  from  Salisbury  to  see  me,
and  on  witnessing  my  miserable  situation  he  was  so
much  affected  that  he  could  scarcely  speak.  He
brought  me  some  provisions,  which  I  was  very  glad

I


98  Narrative  of  the  Life^  4-c.

able  lodgings  and  the  horrid  place  I  was  in,  he  wept
like  a  child.  He  asked  liberty  of  the  jailer  to  furnish
me  with  a  bed,  which  was  granted,  and  bronght  me
one,  and  other  things  to  make  me  more  comfortable.
The  next  day  1  wrote  letters  to  my  family,  to  Dr.
Fuller,  and  to  Judge  Rice,  stating  to  them  my  situa-
tion.

The  bed  which  was  brought  me  I  put  on  the  old
one,  and  allowed  my  fellow  sufferer  a  part  of  it,  for
which  he  was  very  thankful.  I  had  provisions  enough
brought  me  by  my  friends  for  us  both,  and  I  gave  him
what  I  did  not  want  ;  the  crusts  and  scraps  that  were
left,  his  poor  wife  would  come  and  beg  to  carry  to  her
starving  children,  who  were  dependent  on  her.  Her
situation  and  that  of  her  husband  were  so  much  worse
than  mine,  that  it  made  me  feel  more  reconciled  to  my
fate ;  and  I  gave  her  all  I  could  spare,  besides  making
his  condition  much  more  comfortable,  for  which  they
expressed  a  great  deal  of  gratitude.

In  a  few  days  after  my  confinement  Judge  Rice  came
to  see  me  and  broughl;  with  him  a  lawyer.  On  con-
sulting upon  the  case,  they  advised  me  to  petition  to  the
Judges  of  the  Supreme  ('ourt  to  hold  a  special  court
to  try  my  cause,  as  there  would  be  no  court  held  by
law,  at  which  it  could  be  tried,  till  the  next  fall,  and
as  there  could  be  no  bail  for  an  indictment  for  murder,
I  should  have  to  lay  in  prison  nearly  a  year,  whether
there  was  any  thing  against  me  or  not.  'J'his  was  the
policy  of  my  enemies,  thinking  that  they  could  keep
me  in  prison  a  year,  and  in  all  probability  I  should  not
live  that  time,  and  their  ends  would  be  fully  answered.

I  sent  on  a  petition  agreeable  to  the  advice  of  my
friends,  and  Judge  Rice  undertook  to  attend  to  the  bu-
siness and  do  every  thing  to  get  the  prayer  of  the  pe-
tition granted.  He  followed  the  business  up  with  great
zeal  and  did  every  think  that  could  be  done  to  effect
the  object.  I  think  he  told  me  that  he  or  the  lawyer,
Mr.  Bartlett,  had  rode  from  Newburyport  to  Boston
fifteen  times  in  the  course  of  three  weeks,  on  the  bu-
siness. At  length  Judge  Parsons  ageed  to  hold  a
special  court  at  Salem,  on  the  10th  day  of  December,
10  try  the  cause,  which  was  one  month  from  the  day  I


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  99

was  committed.  My  friends  v/ere  very  attentive  and
zealous  in  my  cause,  and  every  preparation  was  made
for  tiie  trial.

During  this  time  the  weather  was  very  cold,  arid  I
suffered  greatly  from  that  cause,  and  hkewise  from  the
badness  of  the  air  in  ouif  miserable  cell,  so  that  I  had
not  much  life  or  ambition.  Many  of  my  friends  came
to  see  me,  and  some  of  them  were  permitted  to  come
into  the  cell ;  but  the  air  was  so  bad  and  the  smell  so
offensive,  that  they  could  not  stay  long.  My  friend
Dr.  Shephard  came  to  see  m€  and  was  admitted  into
our  dungeon.  He  staid  a  short  time,  but  said  it  was  so
offensive  he  must  leave  me  ;  that  he  would  not  stay  in
the  place  a  week  for  all  Newburyport.  On  thanksgiv-
ing day.  we  were  taken  out  of  our  cell  and  put  in  a
room  in  the  upper  story,  with  the  other  prisoners,  and
took  supper  together ;  they  consisted  of  murderers,
robbers,  thieves  and  poor  debtors.  All  of  us  tried  to
enjoy  our  supper  arad  be  in  as  good  spirits  as  our  con-
dition would  permit.  The  most  of  their  complaints
were  of  the  filthine»s  and  bad  condition  of  the  prison^
in  which  we  all  agreed.  Before  it  was  dark  I  and  my
companion  were  waited  upon  to  our  filthy  den  again.
There  was  nothing  in  the  room  to  sit  upon  higher  than
the  thickness  of  our  bed  ;  and  when  I  wrote  any  thing,
I  had  to  lay  on  my  belly,  in  which  situation  1  wrote
the  Medical  Circular,  and  several  other  pieces,  which
were  afterwards  printed.

After  I  had  been  in  prison  about  two  weeks,  my  son-
in-law  came  to-  see  me  ;  I  had  before  my  imprison-
ment sent  for  him  to  come  to  Portsmouth  on  some  bu-
siness, and  on  hearing  of  my  being  in  prison  he  im-
mediately came  to  Newburyport,  to  see  me.  He
seemed  much  more  troubled  about  my  situation  than
I  was  about  myself  I  felt  perfectly  conscious  of  my
innocence  and  was  satisfied  that  I  had  done  nothing  to
merit  such  cruel  treatment ;  therefore  my  mind  was
free  from  reproach ;  for  I  had  pursued  the  course  oi
duty  which  I  conceived  was  allotted  me  by  my  maker
and  done  every  thing  in  my  power  to  benefit  my  fel-
low creatures.  These  reflectiowas  peorted  me  in  my
troubles  and  persecutions,  and  was  perfectly  resigned


100  Narrative  of  the  Life^  4*c.

to  my  fate.  About  this  time  a  lawj^er  came  into  the
prison  and  read  to  me  the  indictment,  which  was  in  the
common  form,  that  I  with  malice  aforethought,  not
having  the  fear  of  God  before  my  eyes,  but  moved  by
the  instigation  of  the  devil^did  kill  and  murder  the  said
Ezra  Lovett.  with  lobelia,  a  deadly  poison,  &.c. ;  but
feeling  so  perfectly  innocent  of  the  charges,  which  the
bill  alledged  against  me,  it  had  very  little  effect  upon  my
feelings  ;  knowjng  them  to  be  false  and  that  the}^  had
been  brought  against  me  by  my  enemies,  without  any
provocation  on  my  part.

In  the  morning  of  the  day  that  was  appointed  for  me
to  be  removed  to  Salem  for  trial,  I  was  taken  out  of
my  loathsome  cell  by  the  jailor,  who  gave  nie  water
to  wash  myself  with,  and  1  was  permitted  to  take  my
breakfast  by  a  lire,  which  was  the  first  time  I  had  seen
any  for  thirty  days,  and  could  not  bear  to  sit  near  it  in
consequence  of  its  causing  me  to  feel  faint.  As  soon  as
I  had  eat  my  breakfast  the  iron  shackles  were  brought
and  put  on  my  hands,  which  I  was  obliged  to  wear  till
I  got  to  Salem.  The  weather  was  very  cold  and  the
going  bad  ;  \\  e  stopped  but  once  on  the  way,  the  dis-
tance was  about  iwenty-six  miles.  On  our  arrival  I
was  delivered  over  to  the  care  of  the  keeper  of  the
prison  in  Salem,  and  was  confined  in  a  room  in  the  se-
cond story,  which  w^as  more  comfortable  than  the  one
I  had  left.  I  was  soon  informed  that  Judge  Farsoi>s
was  sick,  and  had  put  off  my  trial  for  ten  days  ;  so  I  had
to  reconcile  myself  to  the  idea  of  being  confined  ten
days  more  without  fire.  However  I  was  not  without
friends;  Elder  Bowles  and  Capt.  Russell  came  to  see
me  the  first  night,  and  Mrs.  Russell  sent  her  servant
twice  every  day  with  warm  coffee,  and  other  things
for  my  comfort,  for  which  I  have  always  been  grateful  ]
and  Mrs.  Perkins  who  I  had  cured  of  a  dropsy,  sent  for
my  clothes  to  wash  against  the  day  of  my  trial.

Many  of  my  friends  came  to  Salem  to  attend  my  tri-
al ;  some  as  witnesses  and  others  to  afford  me  any  as-
sistance in  their  power.  A  few  days  before  my  trial,
Judge  Rice  and  Mr.  Bartlett,  who  I  had  employed  as
my  lawyer,  held  a  consultation  with  me,  as  to  the  ar-
rangements necessary  to  be  made;  when  it  was  docid-


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  101

eel  that  it  would  be  best  to  have  other  counsel  and
Mr.  Story  was  agreed  upon,  who  engaged  in  my
cause.  I  had  also  engaged  Mr.  Bannister,  of  Newbury-
port  to  assist  in  the  trial;  but  he  was  of  no  benefit  to
me,  and  afterwards  sued  me  for  fifty  dollars  at  fifty
miles  distance,  to  put  me  to  great  expense.  In  orde
to  be  prepared  for  the  trial  ^y  council  held  a  consulr
tation  tog^ether  and  examined  the  principal  witnesses
in  the  defence.  Mr.  Bowles,  Judge  Rice,  and  several
others  gave  great  satisfaction  as  to  the  value  and  use-
fulness of  the  medicine,  and  the  variety  of  cures  tha
had  been  performed  with  it  within  their  knowledge
Dr.  Fuller  of  Milford,  N.  H.  was  present  and  made
many  statements  in  my  favour  as  to  the  value  of  the
medicine,  and  advised  to  have  Dr.  Cutler  of  Hamilton,
summoned,  which  was  done.  Every  thing  was  done
by  my  friends  that  was  in  their  power  to  assist  me  and
give  me  a  chance  for  a  fair  trial,  for  which  I  shall  al-
w^ays  feel  vejy  grateful.

On  the  20th  day  of  December,  1809,  the  Supreme
Court  convened  to  hear  my  trial,  at  which  Judge  Par-
sons presided,  with  Judges  Sewell  and  Parker,  assist-
ant Judges.  The  case  was  called  about  ten  o'clock  in
the  jmorning,  and  the  chief  justice  ordered  me  to  be
brought  from  the  prison  and  arraigned  at  the  bar  for
trial.  I  was  waited  upon  by  two  constables,  one  on
my  right  and  the  other  on  my  left,  in  which  situation
I  was  brought  from  the  jail  to  the  court-house  and
placed  in  ^he  bar.  The  court-house  was  so  crowded
with  the  j^eople,  that  it  was  with  much  difficulty  we
could  get  in  After  I  was  placed  in  the  criminal  seal,
a  chair  was  handed  me  and  1  sat  down  to  wait  for  fur-
ther orders.  Here  I  was  the  object  for  this  great  con
course  of  people  to  look  at ;  some  with  pity,  others
with  scorn.  In  a  few  minutes  I  was  directed  to  rise
and  hold  up  my  right  hand,  to  hear  the  indictment
read,  which  the  grand  jury  had  upon  their  oaths  pre-
sented against  me.  It  was  in  common  form,  stating  that
I  had  with  malice  aforethought,  murdered  Ezra  Lovett,
with  lobelia,  a  deadly  poison.  1  was  then  directed  by
the  court  to  plead  to  the  indictment,  guilty  or  not  guil-
ty— 1  plead  not  guilty,  and  the  usual  forms  in  such

1  2


102  Narrative  of  the  Life^  ^c.

cases  were  passed  through,  the  jury  called  and  sworn,
and  the  trial  commenced.

The  solicitor  general  arose  and  opened  the  case  on
the  part  of  the  commonwealth,  and  made  many  hard
statements  against  me,  which  he  said  he  was  about  to
prove  ;  he  stated  that  I  had  at  sundry  times  killed  my
patients  with  the  same  poison.  The  first  witness  call-
ed to  the  stand  on  the  part  of  the  government,  was
Mr.  Lovett,  the  father  of  the'j^oung  man  that  I  was  ac-
cused of  killing.  He  made  a  tolerable  fair  statement
of  the  affair  in  general,  particularly  of  coming  after
m,e  several  times  before  1  could  attend  ;  though  I  think
he  exaggerated  many  things  against  me,  and  told  over
several  fictitious  and  ridiculous  names,  which  people
had  given  my  medicine,  by  way  of  ridicule,  such  as  bull
dog,  ram-cat,  screw-auger,  and  belly-my-grizzle  ;  all
which  had  a  tendency  to  prejudice  the  court  and  jury
against  me  ;  and  I  also  thought  that  he  omitted  to  tell
many  things  in  my  favour,  that  must  have  been  within
his  knowledge ;  but  there  was  nothing  in  his  evidence
that  in  the  least  criminated  me,  or  supported  the
charges  in  the  indictment.

The  next  witness  called  was  Dr.  Howe,  to  prove
that  1  had  administered  the  poison  alledged  in  the  in-
dictment. He  stated  that  1  gave  the  poison  to  the  said
Lovett,  and  produced  a  sample  of  it,  which  he  said
was  the  root  of  lobeha.  The  Judge  asked  him  if  he
was  positive  that  it  was  lobelia — he  said  he  was,  and
that  1  called  it  coffee.  The  sr.mple  was  handed  round
for  the  court  to  examine,  and  they  all  appeared  to  be
afraid  of  it,  and  after  they  had  all  satisfied  their  curi-
osity, Judge  Rice  took  it  in  his  hand  and  eat  it,  which
very  much  surprised  them.  The  solicitor  general
ask^u  him  if  he  meant  to  poison  himself  in  presence
©f  the  court.  He  said  it  would  not  hurt  him  to  eat  a
peck  of  it,  which  seemed  to  strike  the  court  with  as-
tonishment. JDr.  Howe  was  then  called  at  my  request
for  cross-examination,  and  Mr.  Story  asked  him  to  des-
cribe lobeha,  how  it  looked  when  growing,  as  he  had
sworn  to  it  by  the  taste  and  smell.  This  seemed  to  put
him  to  a  stand,  and  after  being  speechless  for  several
minutes,  he  said  he  had  not  seen  any  so  long,  he  should


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  103

not  know  it  if  he  should  see  it  at  this  time.  This  so
completely  contradicted  and  did  away  all  that  he  had
before  stated,  that  he  went  off  the  stand  quite  cast
down.

Dr.  Cutler  was  called  on  to  inform  the  court  what
the  medicine  was  that  Dr.  Howe  had  declared  so  posi-
tively to  be  lobelia,  and  after  examining  it,  he  said  that
it  appeared  to  him  to  be  marsh-rosemary,  (which  was
the  fact.)  So  far,  all  they  had  proved  against  me  was
that  I  had  given  the  young  man  some  marsh-rosemary,
which  Dr.  Cutler  had  declare^o  be  a  good  medicine.

Some  young  women  were  Ijrought  forward  as  wit-
nesses, who  I  had  no  knowledge  of  ever  seeing  before.
They  made  some  of  the  most  absurd  and  ridiculous
statements  about  the  mxedicinffe  that  they  said  I  gave  the
young  man,  that  were  probc^oly  ever  made  in  a  court
of  justice  before — some  of  which  were  too  indecent
lobe  here  repeated.  One  of  them  said  that  1  crowd-
ed my  pukes  down  his  throat  and  he  cried  murder  till
he  died.  This  was  well  known  to  be  a  falsehood,  and
that  the  story  was  wholly  made  up  by  my  enemies  as
well  as  what  had  been  before  stated  by  those  women,
for  the  purpose  of  trying  to  make  out  something
against  me.  I  had  two  unimpeachable  witnesses  in
court  ready  to  swear  that  I  never  saw  the  young  man
for  more  than  fourteen  hours  before  he  died,  during
all  which  time  he  was  in  the  care  of  Dr.  Howe ;  but
by  not  having  an  opportunity  to  make  my  defence,  in
consequence  of  the  government  not  making  out  their
case  against  me,  could  not  bring  them  forward.

John  Lemon  was  the  next  witness  brought  forward
on  the  part  of  the  Commonwealth,  and  was  directed  to
state  what  he  knew  about  the  prisoner  at  the  bar.
He  stated  that  he  had  been  out  of  health  for  two  years,
being  much  troubled  with  a  pain  in  his  breast,  and
was  so  bad  that  he  was  unable  to  work  ;  that  he  could
get  no  help  from  the  doctors;  that  he  applied  to  me
and  1  had  cured  him  in  one  week ;  and  that  was  all  he
knew  about  the  prisoner  at  the  bar,  By  this  time
Judge  I'yrsons  appeared  to  be  out  of  patience^,  and  said
he  wondered  whiit  they  had  for  a  grand  jury,  to  find
a  bill  on  such  evidence. The  soUcitor  general  said


104  JVarrativa  of  the  Life^  ^-c.

he  had  more  evideace  which  he  wished  to  bring  for-
ward.

Dr.  French  was  called,  and  as  he  had  been  the  most
busy  aetor  in  the  whole  business  of  getting  me  indict-
ed, and  had  been  the  principal  cause,  by  his  own  evi-
dence, (as  I  was  informed,)  of  the  grand  jury  finding
a  bill  against  me.  it  was  expected  that  his  evidence
now  would  be  sufficient  to  condemn  me  at  once  ;  but
it  turned  out  like  the  rest  to  amount  to  nothing.  He
was  asked  if  he  knew  the  prisoner  at  the  bar;  he  said
he  did.  He  was  then  directed  to  state  what  he  knew
about  him.  He  said  the  prisoner  had  practiced  in  the
part  of  the  country  whciie  he  lived  with  good  success ;
and  his  medicine  was  harmless  being  gathered  by  the
children  for  the  use  of  the  families.  The  judge,  was
about  to  charge  the  jury,  when  the  solicitor  general
arose  and  said,  that  if  it  was  not  proved  to  be  murder
it  might  be  found  for  manslaughter.  The  judge  said,
you  have  nothing  against  the  man,  and  again  repeat-
ed that  he  wondered  what  they  had  for  a  grand  jury.
The  charge  was  given  to  the  jury,  when  they  retired
for  about  five  minutes  and  returned  iato  court  and  gave
in  their  verdict  of  not  guilt}-.

I  was  then  honorably  acquitted,  v;ithout  having  had
an  opportunity  to  have  my  witnesses  examined,  by
whom  I  expected  to  have  proved  the  usefulness. and
importance  of  my  discovery  before  a  large  assembly
of  people,  by  the  testimony  of  about  twenty-five  credi-
table men,  who  were  present  at  the  trial  ;  besides
contradicting  all  the  evidence  produced  against  me.
After  tiie  trial  was  over  I  was  invited  to  the  Sun  ta-
vern to  supper,  where  we  enjoyed  ourselves  for  the
evening.  ,  When  we  sat  down  to  the  table  several
doctors  were  present,  who  were  so  offended  at  my  be-
ing acquitted  that  they  left  the  table,  which  made  me
think  of  what  the  scripture  says,  that  ''the  wicked  flee
vhenno  man  pursueth,  but  the  righteous  are  bold  as
a  lion."

During  the  evening  [  consulted  with  my  friends  up-
on the  subject  of  prosecuting  Dr.  French  and  making
him  pay  damages  for  his  abuse  to  me  when  a  prisoner
at  his  house,  in  saying  that  I  had  murdered  fifty  and


Of  Samuel Thomson.  105

he  could  prove  it ;  and  after  having  had  a  fair  chance
and  having  failed  to  prove  one,  it  was  thought  to  he  a
favourahle  opportunity  to  make  him  pay  something  for
his  conduct  towards  me,  in  causing  me  so  much  suffer-
ing, and  for  the  trouble  he  had  made  me  and  my  friends,
A  prosecution  was  agreed  upon,  and  to  bring  the  ac-
tion in  the  county  of  York.  Judge  Rice  agreed  to  be
my  bail,  and  likewise  he  undertook  to  pay  my  lawyers
and  witnesses  for  the  above  trial,  and  paid  Mr.  Bart-
lett  ftJrty  dollars  that  night.  Mr.  Story  was  paid
twenty  dollars  by  a  contribution  of  my  friends  in  Sa-
lem. 1  staid  at  Mrs.  Russell's  that  night;  1  had  but
little  sleep,  for  my  mind  was  so  much  agitated,  when
1  came  to  consider  what  I  had  gone  through,  and  the
risk  1  had  run  in  escapir'^'  the  snares  of  my  enemies ;
with  the  anxiety  of  my  family  till  they  got  the  news
of  my  acquitctl,  that  sleep  fled  from  my  eyelids,  and  I
was  more  confused  than  when  in  prison.

The  next  day  1  went  to  Salisbury,  and  stopped  with
Mr.  Osgood,  where  I  was  first  arrested.  Mrs.  Osgood
and  a  young  woman  who  had  been  employed  by  me
as  a  nurse,  assisted  to  clean  my  clothes,  and  clear  me  of
some  troublesome  companions  1  had  brought  with  me
from  the  prison  ;  and  when  I  had  paid  a  visit  to  all  my
old  friends,  who  were  very  glad  to  see  me,  1  went  to
Portsmouth,  to  recover  my  health,  which  was  very
much  impaired,  by  being  confined  forty  days  in  those
filthy  and  cold  prisons,  in  the  coldest  part  of  a  remark-
ably cold  winter.  My  friends  attended  upon  me,  and
carried  me  through  a  regular  course  of  medicine;  but
the  first  opperation  of  it  had  little  effect,  in  conse-
quence of  my  blood  being  so  much  chilled,  and  it  was  a
long  time  before  I  could  raise  a  perspiration  that  would
hold.  I  am  confident  that  1  should  not  have  lived
through  the  winter  in  prison,  and  believe  that  this  was
their  plan  ;  for  which  reason  they  managed  to  have
me  indicted  for  murder;  knowing  in  that  case  their
could  be  no  bail  taken,  and  there  would  be  no  court
at  which  I  could  be  tried  for  nearly  a  year,  I  should
have  to  lay  in  prison  that  time,  and  that  I  should  pro-
bably die  there,  or  in  any  case  they  would  get  rid  of
me  for  one  year  at  least,  whether  there  was  any  thin*


106  Narrative  of  ide  Life^  ^-c.

*
proved  ag-ainst  me  or  not ;  an;i  that  in  that  time  the
doctors  and  their  dupes  would  be  enabled  to  run
down  the  credU  of  my  m^^iicine  a^''-^-  put  my  practice
into  disrepute  among  the  people  ;  but  I  have  been  able
by  good  ibrtune  and  the  kmd  assistance  ofniy  friends,
to  deieat  ail  their  plans.  Most  of  those  that  have  been
instrumental  in  trying  to  destroy  me  and  my  practice,
have  had  some  judgment  befall  them  as  a  reward  for
their  unjust  persjC'itions  and  malicious  conduct  towards
me.  I  was  credibl}^  informed  that  deacon  Pecki|||J,  one
of  the  grand  jury  that  found  the  bill  against  me,  went
with  Dr.  French  to  hunt  up  evidence  to  come  before
himself,  in  order  to  have  me  indicted.  A  short  timxB
after  1  was  put  in  prison,  he  had  a  stroke  of  the  pal-
sey,  and  has  remamed  ever  since,  one  half  his  body
and  limbs  useless.  Dr.  French  one  year  after  I  was
acquitted,  was.  brought  to  ths  same  bar  in  which  I  was
placed,  and  convicted  for  robbing  a  grave  yard  of  a
dead  body,  which  it  was  reported  he  sold  for  sixty  dol-
lars. He  lost  all  his  credit,  and  was  obliged  to  quit
his  country.

In  the  month  of  January,  of  1810,  I  returned  home
to  my  family,  and  staid  till  1  had  in  some  measure  re-
covered my  loss  of  health  by  imprisonment.  In  March
I  returned  to  Portsmouth,  and  after  taking  the  advite
of  my  friends,  made  arrangements  for  my  prosecuting
Dr.  French.  The  prosecution  was  commenced  and
he  was  summoned  before  the  court  of  common  pleas
in  the  county  of  York.  Judge  Rice  undertook  the
principal  management  of  the  business,  and  became  my
bail.  The  action  was  called  and  carried  to  ths  Su-
preme Court  by  demurer,  which  was  to  set' at  Alfred,
in  October.  I  attended  with  my  witness^,  and  ex-
pected to  have  gone  to  trial ;  ajad  after  waiting  sever-
al days  to  know  what  the  defence  was  going  to  be,  the
counsel  for  the  defendant  made  their  plea  of  justifica-
tion. I  found  that  their  plan  was  to  prove  that  I  had
murdered  sundry  persons  whom  I  had  attended,  and
by  that  means  to  make  it  out  that  any  one  had  a  righc
to  call  me  a  murderer ;  and  that  for  this  purpose  Dr.
French  had  been  to  every  place  where  I  had  practis-
ed, collecting  every  case  of  the  deatl>  of  any  that  I  had


Of  the  Life,  &,^c.  107

attended  in  this  part  of  the  country,  and  had  made  out
eight  cases,  ail  of  which  have  been  before  mentioned
in  this  narrative,  most  of  whom  had  been  given  over
bj  the  doctors  as  past  cure,  and  the  others  known  to
be  desperate  cases.  He  had  obtained  the  depositions
of  all  that  were  prejudiced  against  me,  and  had  collect-
ed a  mass  of  evidence  to  support  his  defence.  After
finding  what  their  plan  was.  it  ^as  thought  necessary
for  me  to  go  to  all  the  places  where  they  had  been  and
get  evidence  to  contradict  these  highly  coloured  and
exaggerated  statements,  and  was  under  the  necessity
of  requesting  a  delay  of  the  trial  for  one  week,  which
was  granted.  I  proceeded  immediately  and  took  the
depositions  of  those  who  were  knowing  to  the  facts;  but
found  that  these  Vere  not  sufficient  and  went  again
to  Deerfield  and  summoned  two  men  to  appear  at  court
and  give  their  verbal  testimony.  When  I  had  got  rea-
dy to  come  to  trial,  the  defendant  was  not  ready  and
got  it  put  off  to  the  next  term,  which  would  be  hold-
en  at  York  the  next  year.  In  the  spring,  before  the
setting  of  the  court,  I  went  to  the  clerk's  office  to  find
what  the  depositions  were  that  were  filed  against  me  ;
and  the  whole  appeared  to  be  a  series  of  exaggerated
statements,  made  by  those  who  were  governed  by  their
prejudices,  without  having  very  little,  if  any  know-
ledge of  the  facts,  more  than  what  they  obtained  by
hearsay.  This  caused  me  to  redouble  my  diligence
and  get  witnesses  to  appear  on  the  stand  to  contradict
their  testimony,  on  each  case  they  had  alledged  against
me.

On  the  day  appointed  for  the  trial,  every  thing  was
prepared  on  my  part,  to  have  a  fair  hearing.  Judge
Parsons  was  on  the  bench,  and  seemed,  as  I  thought,
to  be  determined  to  have  the  case,  go  against  me  ;  for
he  appeared  to  know  every  thing  that  was  to  be  in  the
defence  before  hand.  I  made  out  my  case  by  proving
the  words  uttered  by  the  defendant,  which  were  in  my
declaration.  They  then  proceeded  in  the  defence,  to
make  out  the  eight  cases  of  murder,  which  were  al-
ledged against  me.  7'he  first  was  the  case  of  a  man
by  the  name  of  Hubbard,  of  Eliot,  who  had  been  dead
above  two  years,  the  particulars  of  which  I  have  be-


108  JVarrattveofthe  Life^  ^'C.

fore  stated.  The  witness  brought  to  support  this  case,
totd  a  very  lamentable  and  highly  coloured  story  ;  and
I  brought  on  to  th^  stand,  a  very  respectable  wit-
ness, who  completely  contradicted  the  whole  state-
ment.

The  next  cases  brought  up  were  the  three  children
of  Mr.  Fuisom,  of  Deerfieid,  the  particulars  of  which
have  been  before  stated.  A  number  of  depositions
were  read,  which  the  defendant  had  obtained  of  those
that  had  beea-my  enemies,  and  who  knew  nothing  of
the  matter  more  than  hearsay  reports  among  them-
selves. They  gave  a  very  highly  coloured  account  of
my  treatment  of  the  children  ;  so  much  so,  that  it  would
appear  by  their  stories,  that  I  had  taken  them  in  health
and  had  roasted  them  to  death ;  never  saying  a  word
about  the  fifteen  that  1  cured,  some  of  which  had  been
given  over  by  the  doctors.  To  rebut  the  evidence
that  was  produced  to  prove  that  I  had  killed  those
children,  I  brought  on  to  the  stand  two  respectable
witnesses,  who  were  knowing  to  all  the  circumstances,
being  present  at  the  time  of  my  attending  the  family.
They  gave  a  correct  and  particular  account  of  all  the
circumstances  as  they  took  place — of  the  situation  of
the  family  when  I  first  saw  them,  and  the  violence  of
the  disorder — how  the  doctors  had  lost  all  their  pa-
tients that  had  been  attacked  with  the  disorder  before
I  came — with  the  number  that  I  cured  by  my  mode  of
practice  ;  and  that  the  doctors  afterwards  adopted  my
plan  and  saved  the  lives  of  a  number  by  it.  The
judge  interrupted  tiiem  and  read  some  of  the  deposi-
tions over  again  ;  but  ihese  witnesses  stated,  that  they
were  not  true,  and  went  on  to  give  some  of  the  par-
ticulars of  the  opposition  I  met  with  in  my  practice
from  those  very  persons  whose  depositions  had  been
read,  when  the  judge  seemed  put  out,  and  attempted  to
stop  them,  saying  thc^y  had  said  enough.  They  said
that  having  sworn  to  tell  the  whole  truth,  they  felt  it
their  duty  to  do  it.

1  hey  next  brought  on  the  case  of  a  woman  who
had  died  at  Beverly,  that  I  had  attended,  and  with  it
the  case  of  Ezra  Lovett,  who  I  had  been  tried  for  mur-
dering. I  was  very  glad  to  have  this  case  brought  up


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  109

again,  as  1  wished  to  have  an  opportunity  to  prove  all
the  facts  relating  to  it,  which  i  had  been  prevented  from
doing  on  my  trial,  in  consequence  of  being  acquitted
without  making  my  defence.  The  evidence  brought
forward  to  support  this  case,  were  the  depositions  of
those  who  had  testified  against  me  on  my  trial  at  Salem^
they  were  pretty  nearly  the  same  as  then  given.  After
these  depositions  were  read,  I  had  called  on  to  the  stand
Elder  Williams  and  Mr.  Raymond,  who  gave  all  the  par-
ticulars of  my  attending  upon  the  young  man,  as  has
been  before  related,  which  completely  contradicted  all
the  depositions  they  had  read  in  the  case.  The  Judge
interrupted  these  witnesses  and  read  the  deposition  of
the  girl,  who  stated  that  I  crowded  my  pukes  down  the
patient's  throat  and  he  cried  murder  till  he  died.  They
Ijoth  positively  testified,  that  there  was  not  a  word  of  it
true ;  for  when  he  died,  and  for  twelve  hours  before,  he
was  under  the  care  of  Dr.  Howe,  during  which  time  I
did  not  see  him.  As  to  the  woman  in  Beverly,  who  they
tried  to  make  out  that  I  murdered,  it  was  proved  by
these  witnesses,  that  she  was  in  a  dying  condition  when
1  first  saw  her,  and  thnt  I  so  stated  it  as  my  opinion  at  the
time,  and  that  my  medicine  would  not  help  her.

The  next  case  was  that  of  Mrs.  Lyford,  who  died  at
Salisbury,  the  particulars-of^vhich  have  been  before  giv-
en. The  evidence  brought  to  prove  this  case  of  murder
was  the  deposition  of  the  woman  who  nursed  her,  and
by  whose  neglect  the  patient  took  cold,  after  the  medi-
cine had  a  very  favourable  operation,  and  appearances
were  much  in  hfe^'favour;  in  consequence  of  which  she
had  a  relapse,  arid  I  could  not  produce  any  effect  upon
her  by  the  medicine  afterwards.  This  woman  confess-
ed at  the  time,  that  she  was  the  only  one  to  blame,  and
that  no  fault  ought  to  be  attached  to  me  ;  but  she  after-
v/ards  was  intluenced  by  Dr.  French  to  turn  against  me,
and  made  threats  that  she  would  swear  to  any  thing  to  in-
jure me.  After  her  deposition  was  read,  1  brought
witnesses  on  to  the  stand,  who  completely  contradicted
every  thing  contained  in  it ;  butthe  Judge  read  her  depo-
sition to  the  jury,  and  directed  them  to  pay  attention  to
that  in  preference  to  the  witnesses  on  the  stand.

The  eighth  and  last  case  was  that  of  the  son  of  Thomas

K


110  Narrative  of  the  Life^  <^c.

Neal,  of  Portsmouth,  who  was  very  violently  attncked,
and  was  attended  by  Dr.  Cutter.  1  was  called  on  at
night  to  attend  him,  and  thought  there  was  a' possibility
of  helping  him;  but  the  man  who  he  lived  with  would*
not  consent  that  I  should  do  any  thing  for  him,  and  I
went  away,  after  telling  them  that  he  would  be  either
worse  or  better  before  morning,  and  if  he  was  worse  he
would  die.  I  was  called  to  visit  him  in  the  morning,  and
was  informed  that  he  was  worse,  and  that  his  master  had
consented  to  have  me  attend  upon  him.  I  told  his  father
that  it  was  undoubtedly  too  late  ;  but  he  insisted  upon  it
so  much  I  attended,  and  told  them  the  chance  was  very
small  for  doing  him  any  good,  as  1  considered  it  a  des-
perate case.  After  being  very  hardly  urged  by  his
friends,  1  gave  him  some  medicine,  but  it  had  no  eifect,
and  about  sundown  he  died.  The  doctor  who  attended
him  was  brought  forward  to  prove  that  I  murdered  the
patient.  If  I  recollect  rightly,  he  swore  that  the  patient
had  the  dropsy  in  the  brain,  and  that  the  disorder  had
turned  and  he  was  in  a  fair  way  to  recover;  but  I  came
and  gave  him  my  poison  pukes  and  killed  him.  1  brought
forward  evidence  who  swore  to  the  facts  as  1  have  above
related  them,  and  that  the  doctor  would  give  no  encour-
agement of  helping  the  patient.  The  father  of  the
young  man  gave  his  evidence,  and  stated  that  his  son  was
in  a  dying  situation  when  I  gave  him  medicine  ;  but  the
judge  interrupted  him,  and  asked  if  he  was  a  doctor,  to
which  he  answered  no.  He  then  said  the  doctor  has
stated  that  his  disorder  had  turned  and  he  was  getting
better — are  you  going  to  contradict  the  doctor — and  thus
managed  to  do  away  his  testimony.

1  have  thus  given  a  brief  sketch  of  the  evidence  in  the
eight  cases,  which  were  attempted  to  be  proved  as  mur-
der, in  order  to  make  out  justification  on  the  part  of  the
defendant,  with  my  defence  to  the  same,  in  as  correct  a
manner  as  I  am  able  from  memory  ;  and  am  confident-tbat
every  circumstance  as  I  have  related  it,  can  be  substan-
tially proved  by  living  witnesses.  After  the  evidence
was  gone  through,  the  lawyers  on  both  sides  made  their
pieas,  making  the  case  on  my  part  as  good  and  as  bad
as  they  could  '1  he  Judge  then  gave  his  charge  to  the
jury,  which  was  considered  by  those  who  heard  it  to  be


Of  Samuel  T7iomson.  Ill

the  most  prejudiced  and  partial  one  that  had  been  ever
heard  before.  He  made  use  of  every  means  to  raise
the  passions  of  the  jury  and  turn  them  against  me  ;  s,tating
that  the  defendant  was  completel}'^  justified  in  calling  me
a  murderer,  for  if  I  was  not  guilty  of  wilful  murder,  it
was  barberous  ignorant  murder ;  and  he  even  abused  my
lawyers  for  taking  up  for  me,  saying  that  they  ought  to
be  paid  in  screw-augers,  and  bull-dogs  The  people
that  were  present  were  very  much  disgusted  at  his  con-
duct, and  they  expressed  themselves  very  freely  upon
the  subject;  it  was  said  by  some  that  our  courts  instead
of  being  courts  of  justice  had  become  courts  of  prejudice.
One  man  said  that  he  hoped  Judge  Parsons  would  never
have  another  opportunity  to  set  on  a  cause  ;  which  pre-
diction turned  out  true,  for  he  soon  after  had  a  stroke  of
the  palsy,  and  as  I  am  informed  died  before  the  next
court  met.  The  jury  brought  in  their  verdict  of  justifi-
cation on  the  part  of  the  defendant,  and  throwed  the
whole  costs  on  me,  which  amounted  to  about  two  thou-
sand dollars.

When  I  found  how  the  case  was  going  to  turn,  I  went
to  Portsmouth,  and  soon  after  made  arrangements  to  pay
the  costs.  Judge  Rice  was  my  bail  and  undertook  to  pay
all  the  bills  that  I  had  not  paid  at  the  time.  On  my  set-
tlement with  him  I  owed  him  six  hundred  dollars  for
money  that  he  had  advanced  on  my  account  ;  for  which
I  had  no  way  to  secure  him  but  by  giving  him  a  mort-
gage of  my  farm ;  which  I  did,  and  it  was  put  on  record,
and  never  known  to  any  of  my  friends  till  I  paid  it  up.
He  charged  nothing  for  all  his  time  and  trouble,  through
the  whole  of  my  persecutions  and  trials,  for  which  and
for  his  kindness  and  friendship  on  all  occasions,  I  shall
ever  consider  myself  under  the  greatest  obligations.

Sometime  in  the  spring  of  the  year  previous  to  this
trial  at  York,  a  young  man  came  to  me  at  Portsmouth,
by  the  name  of  Alfred  Carpenter,  from  the  town  where
my  family  lived,  he  was  recommended  to  me  by  his
neighbours,  as  being  lame  and  poor,  and  wanted  my  as-
sistance. 1  took  him  out  of  pity  and  instructed  him  in
my  mode  of  practice,  under  the  expectation  that  it  would
be  a  benefit  to  him  and  thereby  he  would  be  able  to  as-
sist me  in  attending  the  sick.


112  Narrative  of  the  Life^  4^c.

About  the  first  of  June,  1811,  I  received  a  letter  from
Eastport,  where  I  had  been  the  fall  beforehand  shbwn
some  of  mj  mode  of  practice.  Some  of  the  people  in
that  place  were  so  well  satisfied  with  it,  that  seven  meh
tomethere  and  practice  in  the  fev&rs,  which  prevailed
in  those  parts.  (  left  the  care  of  my  business  at  Ports-
mouth with  Mr.  Carpenter,  my  apprentice,  and  imme-
diately took  passage  for  Eastport,  where  I  arrived  about
the  middle  of  June.  I  was  very  gladly  received  by
those  who  had  wrote  tome,  and  by  those  with  whom  I
had  become  acquainted  when  there  before.  I  agreed  to
practice  under  the  protection  of  those  who  had  sent  for
me,  until  i  had  convinced  them  of  its  utility,  ^o  which
they  consented,  and  promised  me  all  the  assistance  in
their  power.  1  was  soon  called  on  to  practice,  and  had
all  the  most  desperate  cases  that  could  be  found ;  in  all
of  which  I  met  with  very  great  success.  There  was,  I
think  at  that  time  five  practising  doctors  on  the  island,
among  whom  my  success  in  curing  the  sick  caused  great
alarm  ;  and  I  soon  experienced  the  same  determined  op-
position from  them,  with  all  the  arts  and  plans  to  destroy
me  and  my  practice,  that  I  had  experienced  from  the
same  class  of  men  in  other  places.  In  order  to  show
some  of  their  conduct  towards  me,  I  shall  relate  the  par-
ticulars of  some  of  the  cases  I  attended  ;  but  most  of  the
numerous  cases  which  1  had  under  my  care,  were  so
nearly  similar  to  those  that  have  been  already  given,
and  my  mode  of  treating  them  being  about  the  same,  that
it  will  be  unnecessary  to  repeat  them.

I  was  sent  for  to  visit  a  Mrs.  Lovett,  who  was  the
daughter  of  Mr.  Delisdernier,  at  whose  house  I  attend-
ed her.  She  had  the  dropsy  and  had  been  under  the
care  of  one  of  the  doctors,  till  he  had  given  her  over
as  incurable.  I  went  to  see  her  in  company  with  the
doctor  ;  but  we  could  not  agree  as  to  the  cause  and  rem-
edy. 1  asked  him  several  questions  concerning  the  pow-
er of  the  elements,  and  the  effect  of  heat  on  the  hu-
man system.  He  answered  that  the  elements  had  no
thing  to  do  with  the  case.  After  giving  him  my  ideas  on
the  subject,  which  all  appeared  to  be  new  to  him,  I  told
him  that  the  contending  powers  in  this  case  was  between


Of  Samuel  Thomson  ll  J

4he  fire  and  water;  and  if  I  could  ^ei  heat  enough  in
the  body  to  make  the  water  volatile,  it  could  not  stay  in
the  body.  He  said  that  any  thing  warm  would  not  an-
.  swer  for  her.  I  then  asked  him  how  he  thought  the
hotest  medicin«  would  do.  He  said  it  would  produce
immediate  death.  1  then  told  him  that  if  I  did  any  thing
for  her,  I  should  administer  the  hottest  medicine  I  could
give.  Finding  there  would  be  a  disadvantage  on  my
part  in  doing  any  thing  for  her,  as  the  doctor  and  I  could
not  agree,  I  left  the  house.  I  was  followed  by  the  father
and  mother  and  the  doctor,  who  all  insisted  on  my  return-^
ing  ;  but  I  told  them  that  notwithstanding  the  doctor  had
given  her  over,  if  I  was  to  attend  her  and  she  should  die,
they  would  say  that  I  killed  her.  They  promised  that
let  the  consequences  be  what  they  might  no  blame  shoal d
be  alledged  againsed  me.  Upon  which  I  agreed  that  I
would  stop  on  condition  that  two  of  my  friends  should
be  present  as  witnesses  to  what  is  said,  and  see  the  first
process  of  the  medicine,  which  was  agreed  to  and  they
were  sent  for,  and  heard  the  statement  of  the  doc-
tor and  family.  ACapt.  Mitchell,  from  NewrYork,  was
also  present,  and  heard  the  conversation  between  me  and
the  doctor  ;  and  being  pleased  with  the  principles  that  I
laid  down,  which  excited  his  curiosity  so  much  that  he
expressed  a  wish  to  be  present  and  see  the  operation  of
the  medicine,  and  staid  accordingly.

The  doctor  pretended  to  be  going  away  till  after  I  had
given  the  first  medicine,  and  appeared  to  be  very  busy
going  out  and  coming  in,  and  had  much  conversaMon  with
Mrs,  Lovett,  the  husband's  mother,  who  was  the  nurse.
After  the  first  medicine  had  done,  which  operated  very
favourably,  I  gave  directions  what  to  do,  and  particular-
ly to  keep  the  patient  in  a  perspiration  during  the
night,  and  left  medicine  for  the  purpose;  we  then  went
home.  In  the  morning  I  called  to  see  her  and  to  my
surprise  found  her  sitting  with  the  window  up,  and  ex-
posed to  the  air  as  much  as  possible ;  on  examination  I
found  that  no  medicine  had  been  used.  On  enquiry  I
found  that  the  doctor  had  been  in  frequently  to  see  her  ;
and  on  asking  why  they  had  not  followed  my  directions,
the  nurse  appeared  very  cross,  and  said  she  would  not
take  any  of  my  medicine. I  told  them  that  they  had  not

• 2  K.


''M4  Narrative  of  the  Life^  ^c.

killed  her,  but  I  did  not  thank  them  for  their  good  will
any  more  than  if  they  had  done  it.  I  was  about  leaving
the  house,  as  I  found  my  directions  would  not  be  attend-
ed to  by  the  nurse  ;  but  Capt.  Mitchell  was  very  urgent
for  me  to  continue.  I  told  him  that  if  he  would  attend
upon  her  and  see  the  medicine  given  and  every  thing
done  according  to  my  directions,  I  would  continue,  to
which  he  agreed.  I  left  the  patient  in  his  care  and  he
attended  her  faithfully  through  the  day  ;  at  night  I  visit-
ed her  and  found  the  swelling  began  to  abate.  He  con-
tinued his  care  of  her,  and  in  three  days  she  was  able  to
go  up  and  down  stairs,  and  in  one  week  she  was  well.
By  the  influence  of  the  doctor,  the  women  and  the  hus-
band all  turned  against  me,  and  I  never  received  any
thing  for  my  trouble  but  their  abuse  and  slander.  The
woman's  father  and  Capt.  Mitchell,  however,  gave  me
all  credit  for  the  cure,  and  they  both  purchased  a  right.

About  a  year  after  at  a  private  assembly  of  women,
this  Mrs.  Lovett  the  mother-in-law  of  the  sick  woman,
gave  an  account  of  the  whole  transaction,  and  stated  that
there  was  a  private  interview  between  her  and  the  doc-
tor, and  it  was  agreed  to  go  contrary  to  my  directions,
and  the  doctor  said  slie  would  die  in  the  course  of  the
night  ;  and  that  he  should  take  me  up  for  murder,  and
that  she  must  be  an  evidence.  This  appeared  to  be  al-
most incredible,  that  they  should  be  so  void  of  all  human
feelings,  as  to  be  willing  to  have  the  woman  die,  in  or-
der to  have  the  opportunity  to  take  me  up  for  murder  ;
but  tvvo  women  who  were  present  when  she  told  the
story,  gave  their  depositions  proving  the  facts  as  above
stated.

I  continued  my  practice  on  this  island,  at  Lubeck,  and
on  the  main,  paying  my  most  particular  attention  to  those
who  sent  for  me,  and  wasted  information.  I  practiced
\mder  their  inspection  about  five  weeks,  and  then  told
them  that  I  had  done  enough  for  a  trial,  to  prove  the  use
©f  the  medicine,  and  should  do  no  more  till  I  knew  whe-
ther a  society  could  be  formed.  They  expressed  their
entire  satisfaction,  and  wished  to  have  a  society  formed ;
a  meeting  was  called  for  that  purpose,  and  sixteen  sign-
ed the  articles  at  the  first  meeting.  After  this  a  ipeeting
was  held  every  week,  at  which  a  lecture  was  given  for


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  115

the  purpose  of  giving  information  and  the  admission  of
members,  and  eight  each  week  was  added  during  the
summer.  In  the  fall  I  went  back  to  Portsmouth  to  attend
to  my  business  there,  and  see  to  the  society  which  had
been  formed  at  that  place.

After  staying  in  Portsmouth  a  few  weeks  to  give  in-
forgiation  to  the  people,  and  procuring  a  stock  of  medi-
cine, I  made  arrangements  to  return  to  Eastport  ;  and
sometime  in  the  month  of  October,  I  set  sail  for  that
place,  taking  with  me  my  apprentice  and  Stephen  Sew-
ell.  On  our  arrival,  I  introduced  Mr.  Carpenter  as  my
apprentice,  and  got  Mr.  Sewell  into  a  school  as  an  as-
sistant ;  in  which  he  had  fifteen  dollars  a  month,  and  all
his  leisure  time  he  attended  to  gain  iaformation  of  the
praciic3.  1  took  a  small  shop  and  put  into  it  a  good  as-
sortment of  medicine,  and  attended  to  practice  till  I  had
got  Mr.  Carpenter  introduced  among  the  people.

While  practising  here  I  frequently  heard  of  the  abuse
and  scandal  towards  me  and  my  practice,  from  Mrs.  Lo-
vett  the  old  woman  before  mentioned,  as  the  nurse  oi
her  son's  wife,  who  I  cured  of  the  dropsy  This  old
woman  was  a  singular  character ;  and  was  called  a  witch
by  the  people  ;  I  have  no  faith  in  these  kind  of  things,
yet  her  conduct,  and  certain  circumstances,  that  took
place,  were  very  extraordinary,  and  puzzled  and  aston-
ished me  more  than  any  thing  I  had  ever  met  with,  and
which  I  have  never  been  able  to  account  for  to  this  day.
Mr.  Carpenter  was  attending  a  man,  where  this  woman
often  visited,  who  had  the  consumption,  and  his  child,
which  was  sick, '  and  had  fits.  He  came  to  me  and
said  that  the  medicine  he  gave  would  not  have
its  usual  effect ;  that  the  emetic  instead  of  causing  4hem
to  vomit  would  make  them  choak  and  almost  stratigie.
I  attended  them  myself,  and  on  giving  the  medicine  it
would  operate  on  the  man,  and  not  on  the  child  at  one
time,  and  the  next  time  on  the  child  and  not  on  him.
Sometimes  the  child  would  lay  in  fits,  for  a  v/hole  night,
and  nothing  would  have  any  effect  upon  it  ;  in  the  morn-
ing it  would  come  out  of  them  and  appear  to  be  quite
bright  and  lively.  I  had  never  known  the  medicine  to
fail  of  prpducing  some  effect  before,  where  the  patient
was  not  so  far  gone  as  not  to  have  life  enough  left  to


116  A^arrative  of  the  Life^  fyc.

build  upon.  [  can  give  no  reason  for  this  strange  cir-
cumstance, satisfactory  to  myself,  or  which  would  be
thought  reasonable  by  the  readers.  The  old  woman,
before  mentioned,  was  frequently  in  and  out  of  the  house
where  the  man  and  child  were,  and  seemed  to  be  very
much  interested  about  them  ;  when  she  was  gone  the
child  would  frequently  go  into  violent  fits,  and  wh^n  1
steamed  it,  it  was  said  the  old  woman  would  be  in  great
distress.  It  caused  much  conversation  among  the  neigh-
bours ;  they  believed  it  to  be  the  power  of  witchcraft;
and  that  the  oM  woman  had  a  controul  over  the  destinies
of  the  man  and  child,  and  was  determined  to  destroy  them
in  order  to  get  her  revenge  on  me.  I  have  no  belief  in
these  things  ;  but  must  confess  that  her  strange  conduct,
and  the  extraordinary  circumstances  attending  the  whole
ailiiir  baffled  me  more  than  an}^  thing  I  bad  ever  met
with  before.  I  was  unable  to  do  any  thing  for  these  two
patients,  except  sometimes  by  a  temporary  relief;  they
continued  to  grow  worse,  and  finding  it  not  in  my  power
to  do  them  any  good,  lefi  them  and  they  both  soon  after
died.

V7hether  the  extraordinary  circumstances  attending
the  two  cases  abovo  stated,  were  caused  by  a  stratagem
of  the  doctors,  in  which  the  old  woman  was  made  their
ao-ent,  to  injure  me  by  causing  in  some  way  or  other
poisonous  medicines  to  be  administered  to  them  in  order
to  prevent  my  medicine  from  having  any  salutary  effect,
is  what  I  do  not  feel  disposed  to  assert  as  a  fact ;  but  the
many  cases  in  which  I  have  been  certain  that  such  things^
have  been  dene  by  the  faculty,,  and  their  enmity  and
uniform  opposition  to  my  practice,  both  at  this  place  and
elsewhere,  as  well  as  the  confession  made  by  the  old
woman,  would  tend  strongly  to  confirm  such  a  belief.  I
could  mention  a  great  number  of  facts  in  addition  to
what  I  have  said  in  regard  to  this  affair  if  necessary,
which  appeared  very  extraordinary  to  me  and  all  who
witnessed  them  ;  but  think  that  enough  has  been  said  on
the  subject,  and  shall  leave  it  to  the  public  to  decide  be-
tween us.  There  were  five  doctors  at  Eastport  when  I
went  there,  who  had  a  plenty  of  business;  but  my  suc-
cess was  so  great  and  the  people  became  so  well  satis-
iied  of  the  superiority of  my  system  of  practice  over


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  Ill

theirs,  that  they  were  soon  relieved  from  most  of  their
labours  ;  and  in  a  short  time  after  three  of  them  had  to
leave"  the  place  for  want  of  employment.

I  made  arrangements  to  go  back  to  Portsmouth  to
spend  the  winter,  and  to  leave  Mr.  Carpenter  with  the
care  of  my  business  and  practice  at  Elastport,  under  the
protection  of  John  Burgin,  Esq.  a  man  who  has  been
particularly  friendly  to  me  on  all  occasions.  I  told  him
if  he  would  be  faithful  in  my  business  and  in  selling  me-
dicine that  he  should  have  half  the  profits  after  the  mo-
ney was  collected  ;  and  in  December  I  took  passage  for
Portsmouth,  We  had  a  long  and  tedious  passage  of
eighteen  days  ;  the  vessel  took  fire  and  our  lives  were
exposed  ;  but  we  were  fortunate  enough  to  extinguish
it  without  much  damage.  1  stopped  in  Portsmouth  and
practiced  some  time,  then  went  to  see  my  family,  where
I  remained  the  rest  of  the  winter,  in  which  time  1  was
employed  in  collecting  and  preparing  medicine.  I  re-
turned to  Portsmouth  in  the  spring  of  1812,  and  after
making  the  necessary  arrangements,  I  set  sail  for  Kast-
port,  where  I  arrived  about  the  first  of  May.  I  made  a
settlement  with  Mr.  Burgin,  and  paid  him  sixty-three  dol-
lars for  the  board  of  Mr.  Carpenter,  and  for  shop  rent.
Then  furnished  the  shop  with  a  complete  stock  of  me-
dicine, to  which  I  added  cordials  and  spirits,  the  whole
of  which  amounted  to  about  twelve  hundred  dollars.
There  was  a  great  call  for  medicine  this  spring,  and  also
for  practice.

After  arranging  my  business  I  concluded  to  return
to  Portsmouth  ;  a  short  time  before  I  came  away,  a  Mr.
Whitney  came  to  me  for  assistance,  and  purchased  a
right.  About  the  same  time  a  Mr.  McFadden  applied
also  for  assistance,  who  had  the  consumption.  1  left  them
both  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Carpenter,  and  immediately
sailed  for  Portsmouth,  where  I  arrived  in  safety.  Soon
after  my  arrival  there  I  found  there  was  going  to  be  a
war  with  Great  Britain ;  in  consequence  of  which  I  re-
turned immediately  back  to  Eastport  to  settle  my  affairs
in  that  place.  In  a  short  time  after  my  arrival  there,
the  declaration  of  war  came  on,  aad  I  made  the  best  ar-
rangements of  my  business  I  could,  leaving  Mr.  Carpen-
ter with  directions,  if  there  should  any  thing  happen  in


118  jXarratwe  of  the  Life^  ^-c

consequence  of  the  war,  so  as  to  be  necessary  for  him  to
leave  the  island,  to  come  to  Portsmouth.  Before  leaving
the  place  I  called  on  him  for  some  money,  and  all  he
could  pay  me  was  sixty-four  dollars,  which  was  but  one
dollar  more  than  I  had  paid  for  his  board  and  shop  rent.  *
The  people  v>'ere  in  such  confusion  it  was  impossible  to
get  a  settlement  with  any  one.  I  left  Mr.  Whitney  and
Mr.  McFadden  in  his  care,  and  left  the  island  about  the
middle  of  June,  and  arrived  in  Portsmouth  in  forty-eight
hours,  where  1  remained  the  greater  part  of  the  sum-
mer ;  during  which  time  I  had  constant  practice,  and
formed  some  regulations  for  the  society,  which  was  es-
tablished there,  for  the  purpose  of  greater  facility  in  com-
municating information  of  my  system  of  practice  to  the
people  who  wished  my  assistance.  In  the  fall  of  this
year  I  published  my  pamphlet  of  directions,  as  many
were  urgent  that  I  should  not  leave  the  place  destitute
of  the  knowledge  of  my  practice  and  medicine.  Many
persons  who  had  been  the  most  urgent  for  me  to  give
them  information,  now  became  the  most  backward,  and
complained  that  the  restrictions  were  too  hard  with  re-
gard to  their  giving  the  information  to  others ;  soiije  of
whom  had  never  done  the  least  thing  to  support  the
practice  or  me.  When  any  of  them  were  sick  they  were
ready  enough  to  call  on  me  for  assistance ;  and  if  I  re-
lieved them  quick,  they  thought  it  worth  nothing  and
they  run  out  against  my  practice,  saying  I  deserved  no
pay.  This  sort  of  treatment  I  have  met  with  from  a
certain  class  of  people  in  all  places  where  1  have  prac-
ticed. I  was  treated  with  much  attention  when  they
were  in  danger  from  sickness ;  but  when  I  had  cured
them  I  was  thought  no  more  of.  This  kind  of  ingrati-
tude I  have  experienced  a  pretty  large  share  of  during
my  practice.

In  the  month  of  October,  having  got  my  business  ar-
ranged, and  a  stock  of  medicine  prepared,  I  returned  to
Eastport.  On  my  arrival  there  I  went  to  my  shop,  and
found  that  Mr.  Carpenter  had  gone  home,  and  Mr.  Mc-
Fadden and  a  Mr.  Harvey  left  very  sick,  and  only  a  boy
to  take  care  of  them  and  the  shop.  Mr.  McFadden  was
very  low  with  a  consumption,  and  unable  to  lay  down.  I
found  there  wa€  no  regulations  of  the  business  in  the


Of  Samuel Thomson.  119

shop,  and  the  property  I  had  left  chiefly  gone.  I  was
obliged  to  pay  every  attention  to  the  sick  men  that  had
ijeen  left  in  this  manner  without  assistance  ;  I  attended
Mr.  Harvey,  and  got  him  well  enough  to  go  home  in  a
i'eiv  days  ;  and  Mr.  McFadden  was  so  put  to  it  ior  breath
and  was  so  distressed,  that  I  had  to  be  with  him  night
and  day  for  six  weeks  and  three  days,  when  Mr.  Car-
penter returned.  Previous  to  this  I  found  that  Mr.  Mc-
Fadden had  put  his  farm  into  the  hands  of  xVfr.  Carpen-
ter as  security  for  his  attending  him  in  his  sickness ;  and
?is  he  had  no  relatioLM  the  remainder  to  go  to  him  and  me.
On  enquiry  into  the  businefesi  found  that  he  had  taJipn  a
deed  in  his  own  name  and  that  all  the  bills  and  accounts
for  his  practice  and  medicine  in  my  absence  were  in  his
own  name,  I  asked  him  for  asetttement  and  he  refused  ;
1  then  asked  him  what  he  meant  by  his  conduct ;  he  said
he  owed  me  nothing,  and  bid  me  defiance,  saying  if  I
chose  I  might  take  the  steps  of  the  law.  1  could  not  con-
ceive what  he  meant  by  treating  me  in  this  manner,  till
after  making  further  enquiry  I  found  that  he  had  formed
a  connection  in  a  family — that  he  had  been  advised  to
take  the  course  he  did,  and  as  I  had  no  receipt  for  the
property,  nor  no  written  agreement  to  support  my  claim,
he  could  do  with  me  .'  »  he  pleased,  and  keep  every  thing
for  his  own  benefit.  The  night  after  he  returned  and
before  I  had  any  knowledge  of  his  intentions,  he  had
robbed  the  shop  of  all  the  accounts,  notes,  bills,  and  all
other  demands,  so  that  1  knew  no  more  about  the  busi-
ness than  a  stranger.

1  frequently  tried  to  get  a  settlement  with  Carpenter;
but  he  said  he  had  none  to  make  with  me.  Mr,  Mc-
Fadden died  shortly  after,  and  Carpenter  came  forward
and  claimed  all  his  property,  saying  that  it  was  all  will-
ed to  him.  I  asked  him  why  it  should  be  willed  him,
when  i  had  borne  the  e.xp«.'nse  and  done  the  principal
part  of  the  labour  in  taking  care  of  him  in  his  sickness,
lie  said  1  must  look  to  him  for  my  pay.  1  told  him  that
it  was  very  singular  that  my  apprentice  had  become  my
master  in  one  year  ;  he  denied  that  he  was  my  appren-
tice, and  said  that  he  was  a  partner;  but  I  told  him  in
order  to  encourage  bini  to  bo  faithful  and  do  well  by  me,
he  5ihould  have  half  the  profits  of  the  practice,  gtnd  that


120  JVarrative  of  the  Life^  <^c.

I  had  no  idea of  his  having  the  whole  of  my  property,
because I  made him  this  promise. All  I could  say  I
found  would  have  no  effect,  for  the  more  I  tried  to  rea-
son with  him  the  more  obstinate  and  impudent  he  was.
He  even  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  the  shop  and  all  that
was  in  it  was  his,  and  that  I  had  nothing  to  do  with  it ;
he  called  a  witness  and  forbid  my  having  any  concern  in
the  shop. I  found  there  was  no  other  way  for  me,  but
to  turn  him  out  and  get  rid  of  him  in  the  best  manner  I
could  ;  to  effect  which  I  applied  to  the  owner  of  the  shop
and  got  a  writing  to  prove  my  claim  to  the  possession,
and  immediately  took measures  to  get  rid  of  him. He
made  all  the  opposition,  and  gave  me  all  the  trouble  he
could  ;  he went  into  the shop  while  1  was  absent  and
.  began  to  throw  the  property  out  into  the  street ;  but  I
soon  put  a  stop  to  his  career,  and  secured  the  property
from  his  rtach. He  still  held  all  my  books  and  accounts,
which  put  my  business  into  such  confusion  that  I  was  fin-
able to  collect  any  af  the  demands  that  were  due  ; and
the  only  remedy  I  had  was  to  advertise him  as  my ap-
prentice and  forbid  all. persons  having  any  dealings  with
him  on  my  account,  or settling  with  him. My  loss  by
the  dishonest  conduct  of  this  man  was  very  considerable
besides  the  injury  to  my  feelings  i>.)m  his  base  ingrati-
tude to  me  ;  fur  I  had  taken  him  from  a  state  of  poverty
and  distress  ;  supported  him  for  a  long  time  when  he  was
very  little  benetit  to  me  ;  and  had  instructed  him  in  my
system  of  practice  and given  him  all  the  information  in
my  power  ;  had  introduced  him  into  practice,  and  given
him  every  encouragement  to  enable  him  not  only  to  as-
sist me  in  supporting  my  system  of  practice  but  to  benefit
himself;  and  after  all  this,  for  him  to  turn  against  me
and  treat  me  in  the  manner  he  did,  was  a  deeper  wound "
to  my  feelings  than  the  loss  of  my  property.

Alter  having  got  cfear  of  Carpenter,  \  hired  a  young
man  whom  I  had  cured  and  given  information  to,  and
put  him  into  the  shop,  and  agreed  to  pay  his  board  for
one  year,  and  then  returned  to  Portsmouth.  As  Car-
penter had  bid  me  defiance,  and  threatened  to  sell  my
rights  and  give  information  to  any  one  wh---  would  buy
of  him  j  and  likewise  I .  found  that  there  was  another
plot  got  up  to  destroy  me  ;  a  petition  had  been  sent  on


Of  Samuel  Thomson  121

to  the  Legislature  to  have  a  law  passed  against  quacke-
ry, in  which  1  was  named  ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt
but  what  the  whole  object  of  it  was  to  stop  my  prac-
tice ; — I  was  at  a  stand,  and  put  to  much  perplexity  to
know  what  course  it  was  best  to  stear.  I  found  I  had
enemies  on  every  hand,  and  was  in  danger  of  falling  by
some  one  of  them.  Every  thing  seemed  to  conspire
against  me  ;  but  I  had  some  friends  who  have  never  for-
saken me  :  my  courage  remained  good,  and  my  spirits
were  never  depressed ;  and  it  appeared  to  me  that  the
more  troubles  I  had  to  encounter  the  more  firmly  I  was
fixed  in  my  determination  to  persevere  unto  the  last.

When  I  had  maturely  considered  the  subject  in  all  its
bearings,  and  exersised  my  best  abilities  in  devising  some
plan  by  which  I  could  extricate  myself  from  the  dangers
which  threatened  me  on  every  hand  ;  and  to  prevent
those  rights,  which  twenty  years  labour,  with  much  suf-
fering and  great  expense,  had  given  me  a  just  claim  to,
from  being  wrested  from  me — I  finally  came  to  the  con-
clusion that  there  was  only  one  plan  for  me  to  pursue
with  any  chance  of  success;  and  that  was  to  go  on  to
Washington  and  obtain  a  patent  for  my  discoveries  ;  and
put  myself  and  medicine  under  the  protection  of  the
laws  of  my  country,  which  would  not  only  secure  to  me
the  exclusive  right  to  my  system  and  medicine,  but
would  put  me  above  the  reach  of  the  laws  of  any  state.

After  coming  to  the  conclusion  to  go  on  to  the  seat
^of  government  and  apply  for  a  patent,  made  all  necessa-
ry preparation  for  the  journey,  and  started  from  Ports*
mouth  on  the  7th  of  February  and  arrived  at  Washing-
ton on  the  23d.  The  next  day  after  my  arrival  I  waited
on  Capt.  Nicholas  Gilman  of  Exeter,  shewed  him  my
credentials  and  ask^ his  advice,  what  l  must  do  to  obtain
my  object.  He  said  that  he  thought  it  could  not  be
made  explicit  enough  to  combine  the  system  and  prac-
tice, without  being  too  long;  he  however  advised  me  to
carry  my  petition  to  the  patent  office  ;  which  was  then
under  the  control  of  Mr.  Monroe,  Secretary  of  State.  I
went  to  the  patent  office  and  found  that  Dr.  Thornton
was  the  Clerk,  and  presented  him  my  petition.  He
asked  me  many  questions,  and  then  said  I  must  call
again  ;  I  called  again  the  next  day,  and  he  said  the  peti-

L


122  Narrative  of  the  Life^  Si^c.

tion  was  not  right — that  I  must  specify  the  medicine,  and
what  disorder  it  must  be  used  in — he  said  tiiat  those  me-
dicine in  general  terms,  to  cure  every  tiling,  was  quack-
ery— that  I  must  particularly  designate  the  medicine,  and
state  how  it  must  be  used,  and  in  what  disease.  1  then
waited  on  Martin  Chittenden,  late  governor  of  Vermont,
who  was  at  Washington,  and  asked  his  assistance ;  he
was  from  the  same  town  where  my  father  lived,  and
readily  consented.  We  made  out  the  specifications  in
as  correct  a  manner  as  we  could,  and  the  next  day  I
carried  ftiem  to  the  patent  office,  and  gave  them  to  Dr.
Thornton  ;  he  complained  much  about  its  being  too
short  a  system,  and  put  me  off  once  more.  I  applied
again  and  asked  him  for  my  patent ;  but  he  said
1  had  not  got  the  botanic  names  for  the  articles,  and  re-
ferred me  to  Dr.  Mitchell  of  New  York,  who  was  in  the
House  of  Representatives.  1  applied  to  him,  and  re-
quested him  to  give  the  botanic  names  to  the  articles
mentioned  in  my  petition.  He  wrote  them  and  I  carri*
ed  them  to  Dr.  Thornton;  but  he  was  unable  to  read  some
of  the  names,  one  in  particular,  he  said  I  must  go  again  to
Dr.  Mitchell,  and  get  him  to  give  it  in  some  other  words,
and  not  tell  him  that  he  could  not  read  it.  I  went  and
the  doctor  wrote  the  same  word  again  and  then  wrote,
or  "  Snap-dragon"  ;  which  I  carried  to  Dr.  Thornton,
and  requested  him  to  put  in  the  patent  my  names,  and
record  it  for  himself  snap-dragon,  or  any  other  name  he
chose.  He  then  talked  about  sending  me  to  Philadel-
phia, to  Dr.  Barton,  to  get  his  names.

I  found  he  was  determined  to  give  me  all  the  trouble
he  could,  and  if  possible  to  defeat  my  getting  a  patent,
and  I  intimated  that  1  should  go  with  my  complaint  to
Mr.  Monroe,  upon  which  he  seemea  a  little  more  dis-
posed to  grant  my  request,  and  said  he  would  do  without
Dr.  Barton's  names.  He  then  went  to  work  to  make
out  the  patent,  and  when  he  came  to  the^  article  of
myrrh,  he  found  much  fault  about  that,  and  said  it  was
good  for  nothing.  I  told  him  that  I  paid  for  the  patent
■and  if  it  was  good  for  nothing  it  was  my  loss.  After
much  trouble  I  got  it  made  out  according  to  my  request,
and  the  medicine  to  be  used  in  fevers,  chohcks,  dyss^n-
teries,  and  rheumatisms  ;  he  then  asked  me  if  I  wanted


Of  Samuel Thomson.  123

any  additions,  and  I  told  him  to  add,  "  the  three  first
numbers  may  be  used  in  any  other  case  to  promote  pers-
piration or  as  an  emetic,"  which  he  did.  I  then  had  to
go  to  the  treasury  office  and  pay  my  money  and  bring
him  dupHcate  receipts.  After  all  this  trouble  I  at  length
succeeded  in  obtaining  my  patent  according  to  my  request,
which  was  completed  and  delivered  to  me  on  the  3d  day
of  March,  1813.

The  next  day  after  I  had  completed  my  busi-
ness, was  the  day  of  inauguration  of  the  President  of
the  United  States  ;  and  I  had  the  curiosity  to  stay  and
see  the  ceremonies  on  that  occasion.  After  the  cere-
monies were  over  I  went  to  the  stage  office  and  found
that  the  seats  w6re  all  engaged  for  a  fortnight ;  and  was
obliged  to  stay  till  the  13th  before  I  could  get  a  passage,
I  then  took  passage  in  the  stage  and  came  on  to  Phila-
delphia, where  I  remained  several  days  for  the  purpose
of  seeing  Drs.  Rush  and  Barton,  to  confer  with  them
upon  the  subject  of  introducing  my  system  of  practice
to  the  world.  1  spent  considerable  time  with  Dr.  Bar-
ton ;  but  Br.  Rush  was  so  much  engaged,  that  I  was  un-
able to  have  but  little  conversation  more  than  stating;
my  business.  He  trtiated  me  with  much  politeness  ;  and
said  that  whatever  Dr.  Barton  agreed  to  he  would  give
his  consent,  so  that  my  business  was  chiefly  with  the  lat-
ter gentleman.  I  asked  him  many  questions  concerning
my  system  and  patent,  and  requested  his  advice  of  the
best  mode  of  introducing  it.  He  advised  me  to  make
friends  of  some  celebrated  doctors  and  let  them  try  the
medicine  and  give  the  public  such  recommendation  of  it
as  they  should  deem  correct.  1  told  him  that  1  feared
that  if  I  should  do  so,  they  would  take  the  discovery  to
themselves  and  deprive  me  of  all  credit  or  benefit  from
my  labours  ;  and  asked  him  if  he  thought  that  would  not
be  the  case.  He  said  it  might  with  some,  but  he  thought
there  were  some  of  the  profession  honourable  enough
not  to  do  it.  I  asked  him  if  he  would  make  a  trial  of  it
himself,  and  give  it  such  credit  as  he  should  find  it  to  de-
serve. He  said  that  if  I  would  trust  it  in  his  hands,  he
should  be  pleased,  and  would  do  justice  to  me  and  the
cause.  I  accordingly  left  some  of  the  medicine,  with,
directions  how  to  use  it,  with  him ;  but  before  I  received


124  Narrative  of  the  Life^  ^c.

any  return  from  him  he  died  ;  and  Dr.  Rush  also  died
sometime  previous  ;  by  which  means  1  was  deprived  of
the  influence  of  these  two  men,  which  1  was  confident
would  otherwise  been  exerted  in  my  favour.

During  my  interviews  with  Dr.  Barton,  we  had  much
conversation  upon  the  subject  of  Ide  medical  skill,  and
he  being  quite  sociable  and  pleasant,  I  expressed  myself
very  freely  upon  the  fashionable  mode  of  practice,  used
by  the  physicians  of  the  present  day.  He  acknowledg-
ed there  was  no  art  or  science  so  uncultivated  as  that  of
medicine.  I  stated  to  him  pretty  fully  my  opinion  of  the
absurdity  of  bleeding  to  cure  disease;  and  pointed  out  its
inconsistency,  in  as  much  as  the  same  method  was  made
use  of  to  cure  a  sick  man  as  to  kill  a  well  beast.  He
laughed,  and  said  it  was  strange  logic  enough.

While  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  I  examined  into
their  mode  of  treating  the  yellow  fever ;  and  found  to
Rush,  was  to  bleed  twice  a  day  for  ten  days.  It  appear-
ed to  me  very  extraordinary  to  bleed  twenty  times  to
cure  the  most  fatal  disease  ever  known ;  and  am  conii-
dent  that  the  same  maimer  of  treatment  would  kill  one
half  of  those  in  health.  This  absurd  practice  being  fol-
lowed by  the  more  ignorant  class  of  the  faculty,  merely
because  it  has  been  recommended  in  some  particular
oases  by  a  great  man,  has,  I  have  not  the  least  doubt,
destroyed  more  lives,  than  has'ever  been  killed  by  pow-
der and  ball,  in  this  country,  in  the  same  time.  Those  I
met  in  the  streets  who  had  escaped  the  fatal  effects,  of
bleeding,  mercury,  and  other  poisons,  carried  death  in
their  countenance  ;  and  on  conversing  with  them,  they
said  they  had  never  been  well  since  they  had  the  fever —
that  they  took  so  much  mercury  and  opium,  they  were
afraid  that  they  were  in  a  decline.

After  remaining  in  Philadelphia  about  two  weeks,  I
went  in  the  stage  to  New  York,  where  I  obtained  a  pas-
sap"e  in  a  coaster,  and  arrived  in  Portsmouth  on  the  5th
day  of  April.  Immediately  after  my  arrival  at  Ports-
mouth, I  gave  public  notice  in  the  newspapers,  of  my
having  obtained  a  patent,  and  forbid  all  persons  tres-
passing upon  it  under  the  penalty  of  the  law  in  such  cas-
es provided ;  and prepared  and  published  a  handbill,  in


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  125

which  I  gave  a  description  of  the  nature  of  disease  on
the  constitution  of  man  ;  and  also  the  conditions  of  dispos-
ing of  the  right  of  using  my  system  of  practice  ;  and  tak-
ing a  number of  the handbills with  me, sat  out  for
Eastport,  where  I  arrived  about  the  first  of  May. Oa
my  arrival  the  handbills  were  circulated  among  the  peo-
ple, which  caused considerable  ^ir  among  them,  parti-
cularly with the  doctors,  who seemed  surprised  that  I
had  obtained  a  patent. I  again  called  on  Mr.  Carpenter
for  a  settlement,  but  could  obtain  none, for  his  friend"^
advised  against  it,  telling  him  that  he  could  still  pursue
the  practice  in  spite  of  my  patent,  by  caUing  the  medi-
cine by  different  names. I furnished my  shop  with  a
stock  of  medicine, and  made  an agreement  with Mr.
Mowe,  the  young  man  that  I had  employed  since  Car-
penter was  dismissed,,  to  continue  the  practice  for  me,
and  take  charge  of  my  bussiness  at  this  place. My  ex-
penses for  his  wages, board,  and  shop rent,  was about
one  dollar  per  day  ;  and  the  amount  of  the  practice,  and
sale  of  medicine,was  about  one  hundred  dollars  per  month.
While at  Easport  I  met  with a loss, which  I will
mention  to  show  the  hard  fortune  I  had  to  contend  with.
Wishing  to  send  one  hundred  dollars  to  my  friend  Judge
Rice,  in  part  payment fOr  what  I  owed  him,  took  two
i\hy  dollar  bills  and  went  to  the  post  office  and  gave  them
to  the  post  master,  with  a  letter directed  to  Alexander
Rice,  bisq.  Portsmouth,  requesting  him  to  secure  them  in
the  letter  in  a  proper  manner  and  send  it  on.  The  let-
ter was  never  received  at  Portsmouth,  and  no  traces  of  it
could  be  found. I  had  strong suspicions that  the post
master  at  Easport  destroyed  the  letter  and  kept  the  mo-
ney. I  made arrangements  to  enquire  further  into  his
conduct;  but  shortly after  he fell from a  precipice
and was  killed, which put  a stop to pursuing the
subject  any  further;  so  it  turned  out  a  total  loss  to  me.

After  settling  my  business  in  Easport,  1  returned  to
Portsmouth,  where  I  stopped  but  a  short  time  ;  and  tak-
ing Mr.  Sevvell  with  mn,  went  to  Portland  to  introduce
my  practice  in  that  place.  On  our  arrival  I  advertised-
my  patent  ia  the  newspapers,  and  had  handbills  printed'
and  circulated  among  the  people,  giving  the  conditions
on  which  Lshould  practice  and  the  manner  of  selling  fa-

L2


126  Narrative  of  the  Life^  ^c.

mily  rights,  to  those  who  wished  the  use  of  my  practice
and  medicine  ;  and  that  I  should  attend  to  no  cases  ex-
cept such  as  wished  to  purchase  the  rights,  to  give  them
information,  and  prove  the  utiUty  of  the  medicine.  I
gave  the  information  to  Mr.  Fickett,  where  we  boarded,
and  a  right  of  using  the  medicine  for  himself  and  fanily  ;
and  gave  information  to  several  of  his  workmen.  Soon
after  making  myself  known,  had  a  great  number  of  des-
perate cases  put  under  my  charge,  all  of  which  were
cured  or  essentially  relieved.  My  success  in  the  cases  I
attended,  most  of  which  were  such  as  had  been  given
over  by  the  doctors,  caused  great  alarm  among  those
professional  gentlemen  who  are  styled  regular  physici-
ans; and  I  experienced  the  same  opposition  from  them
that  1  had  met  with  in  other  places.  I  was  followed  by
them,  or  their  spies,  and  all  kind  of  false  and  ridiculous
reports  were  circulated  among  the  people  to  frighten
and  prejudice  them  against  me  and  my  medicine.

Soon  after  coming  to  this  place,  I  was  called  on  by
Capt.  John  Aide n  to  attend  his  wife,  who  was  in  a  very
alarming  situation.  She  was  in  a  state  of  pregnancy
and  had  the  dropsy,  and  was  then,  as  she  supposed,  se-
veral weeks  over  her  time.  She  had  been  in  the  same
situation  once  before  and  was  dehvered  by  force,  and
came  very  near  losing  her  hfe  ;  the  doctors  gave  it  as
their  opinion  that  if  she  should  ever  be  so  again  she
would  certainly  die.  I  told  him  that  I  did  not  attend  on
any  except  those  who  wished  to  purchase  the  right,
in  which  cases  I  would  give  them  the  information.  I
explained  to  him  the  principles  upon  which  my  system
was  founded,  and  he  purchased  a  right :  after  which  I  at-
tended upon  his  wife,  and  found  her  very  low  ;  she  had
not  lain  in  bed  for  three  weeks,  being  so  put  to
it  for  breath  when  she  lay  down,  was  obliged  to  get  im-
mediately up  again.  1  carried  her  through  a  course  of
the  medicine  every  day  fur  five  da}^^,  during  which  she
was  reduced  in  size  about  eight  inches ;  her  travail  then
came  on  natural,  and  in  about  two  hours  she  was  deli-
vered of  a  daughter,  and  they  both  did  well.  She  was
able  to  come  down  stairs  in  one  week,  and  in  two  weeks
was  well  en^-ugh  to  be  about  the  house.  This  cure  so
alarmed  the  doctors,  that  they  circulated  a  story  at  a


Of  Samuel  Thomson,  127

distance,  where  the  facts  were  not  known,  that  i
was  so  ignorant  of  this  woman's  situation,  that  1  killed
her  immediately ;  but  the  v/oman  and  her  husband  gave
me  all  credit  for  the  cure,  and  appeared  very  grateful
to  me  for  it.

During  the  summer  a  son  of  Capt.  Alden  was  vio-
lently seized  with  the  spotted  fever ;  he  was  taken  very
suddenly,  when  at  the  pump  after  water,  fell  and
was  brought  into  the  house  senseless — I  attended  him,
and  his  jaws  being  set,  administered  a  strong  solution  of
No.  1,  2,  and  6,  by  putting  my  finger  between  his  cheek
and  teeth,  and  pouring  in  the  medicine ;  squeezing  it
round  to  the  back  of  his  teeth,  and  as  soon  as  it  reached
the  roots  of  his  tongue  his  jaws  came  open  ,- 1  then  pour-
ed down  more  of  the  medicine,  and  soon  after  swallow-
ing it,  his  senses  came  to  him,  and  he  spoke ;  be  appear-
ed like  a  person  awaking  out  of  a  sleep.  As  soon  as  the
warm  effect  of  the  medicine  was  over,  he  relapsed,  and
life  seemed  to  go  down  with  the  heat.  1  found  that  I
.could  not  restore  him  till  I  could  rarify  or  lighten  the
air — I  laid  him  across  the  lap  of  three  persons,  shielding
him  from  external  air  with  a  blanket,  and  put  under  him
a  pan  with  a  hot  stone  in  it  about  half  immersed  in  hot
water ;  whilst  over  this  steam,  again  gave  the  medicine,
which  raised  a  perspiration  ;  and  as  the  heat  raised  inside
life  gained  in  proportion ;  and  when  the  perspi!ration  had
gained  so  as  to  be  equal  to  a  state  of  healthy,  the  natu-
ral vigour  of  life  and  action  was  restored.

I  was  called  on  to  attend  a  woman  who  had  a  relax,
and  in  a  few  visits  restored  her  to  health.  One  night
about  midnight  was  sent  for  to  visit  this  woman  in  con-
sequence of  their  being  alarmed  about  her,  the  cause  of
which  I  could  never  learn  ;  for  on  my  arrival  she  was  as
well  as  usual.  I  returned  immediately  home  and  was
soon  after  taken,  in  a  violent  manner  with  the  same  dis-
ease ;  and  was  so  bad  as  to  be  not  able  to  do  any  thing
for  myself  Mr.  Sewell  attended  upon  me  and  did  all
he  could,  which  had  no  effect.  I  was  persuaded  that  I
should  not  live  three  days  unless  I  could  get  some  re-
lief 1  had  no  pain  and  every  thing  1  took  passed
through  me  in  two  minutes  ;  nothing  seemed  to  warm
me. I  sent  and  obtained  some  butternut  bark,  boiled  it,


128  Karrativ^  oj  the  Life,  •^'C,

and  took  some  as  strong  as  it  could  be  made  ;  as  soon  a«
it  began  to  operate,  I  followed  it  with  brandy  and  loaf
sugar  burivt  together,  till  it  became  a  syrup,  this  soon
put  me  in  pain — I  then  followed  my  general  rule  1)f
treatment,  and  was  soon  relived.

While  at  Portland  was  sent  for  to  see  a  Mr.  Mason,
who  was  very  sick,and  it  was  expected  that  he  would  not
live  through  the  night.  He  had  been  attended  bj^  the  doc-
tors of  the  town  for  a  sore  on  his  nose,  which  was  much
inflamed  ;  they  had  given  him  so  m-uch  salt  petre  to  kill
the  heat,  that  they  almost  killed  him.  I  had  the  hardest
trial  to  save  his  life  of  any  one  that  I  had  ever  attended  ;
and  was  obliged  to  carry  him  through  a  course  of  medi-
cine two  or  three  times  a  week  for  three  months,  besides
visiting  him  every  day.  The  doctors  said  he  would  cer-
tainly die,  and  if  he  did  they  meant  to  take  me  up  for
murder  ;  and  every  means  were  resorted  to,  by  discour-
aging him  and  other  ways,  to  prevent  his  getting  well;
and  vvhen  he  got  so  as  to  be  about,  and  it  was  decided
that  he  was  going  to  recover  under  the  operation  of  the-
mxedlcine,  one  who  pretended  to  be  his  friend  gave  him  a
bottle  of  pepper  vinegar — 1  had  mride  a  free  use  of  this
article  in  his  case,  and  he  took  some  of  what  was  given
him  by  this  friend,  and  he  scon  grew  worse.  The  man
who  gave  hira  the  pepper  vinegar  often  inquired  how  he
dirl,  and  when  told  that  he  was  worse,  he  would  say  that
1  should  kill  him.  1  could  not  ascertain  the  reason  of
this  patient  being  affected  in  the  manner  he  was,  till
Mr.  Sewell  took  some  of  ihe  same,  and  was  immediately
taken  in  the  same  manner  as  the  sick  man.  He  took
medicine  and  got  over  it,  and  a  short  time  after  took
some  more,  and  was  attacked  in  a  similar  manner.  I  then
began  to  mistrust  that  there  was  something  in  the  pepper
vinegar,  and  on  examining  it  was  satisfied  that  it  had  been
poisoned  to  destroy  the  patient  in  order  to  take  advantage
of  me.  I  was  obliged  to  carry  them^  both  through  a
course  of  the  medicine,  and  they  afterwards  had  no  such
turns.

This  patient  after  about  three  months  close  attention
gained  so  as  to  enjoy  a  comfortable  state  of  health.  'J'he
undertaking  was  very  tedious  on  my  part  ;  I  should  be
kardly  willing  to  go  through  the  same  process  again^fot


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  129

any  sum  whatever.  The  destructive  effects  of  salt  petre
is  the  vs'orst  of  any  poison  I  ever  undertook  to  clear  the
systenrj  of.  The  only  method  I  have  found  successful,  is  to
give  No.  1  and  No.  2  and  throw  all  of  it  out  of  the  sto-
mach that  can  possibly  be  done  ;  and  by  steaming  keep  the
heat  of  the  body  above  it — ail  other  poisons  can  be  eradi-
cated by  the  common  course  of  medicine.  I  was  called
onto  attend  the  sick  from  all  quarters  ;  but  few  of  them
were  able  to  purchase  the  information,  and  many  who
had  it  have  never  paid  any  thing.  The  people  general-
ly were  well  satisfied  v/ith  its  utility  ;  my  friends  were
very  zealous  in  introducing  it  among  the  people  ;  but  my
opponent*  were  not  slack  in  doing  every  thing  in  their
power  to  prejudice  the  public  against  me  and  the  medi-
cine. The  doctors  seemed  much  troubled  at  the  success
of  the  prjictice,  many  having  been  cured  who  were  giv-
en over  by  them. — One  women,  who  had  been  unable  to
walk  for  about  nine  months  after  having  been  confined, and
the  doctors  could  not  help  her,  was  attended  by .  Mr.
Seweli  and  in  a  short  time  restored  to  a  c  omfortable  state
of  health  ;  which  gave  them  great  offence  ;  and  someof
them  published  in  the  newspapers  part  of  my  trial  for
murder,  in  order  to  prejudice  the  public  against  me.  I
prepared  an  answer,  but  they  had  so  much  influence
with  the  printers,  that  i  was  unable  to  get  it  inserted  ;
they  had  the  meanness  to  circulate  the  report  that  I  ac-
knowledged the  fact,  because  1  did  not  answer  their  state-
ment. Thus  have  the  faculty,  by  such  unprinci-
pled conduct,  managed  to  keep  the  people  blind  to  the
benefit  they  might  receive  from  the  use  of  the  medicine,
for  the  purpose  of  keeping  up  their  ov/n  credit  and  making-
them  tributary  to  themselves,  without  regard  to  the  pub-
lic good.

This  season  I  went  to  F.asport  and  collected  some  mo-
ney to  pay  my  friend  Rice  ;  and  thinking  to  make  some
profit,  laid  it  out  in  fish,  and  sent  it  to  Portland,  consigned
to  my  friend  Fickett.  When  I  went  there  myself  sold
the  fish  to  him.  I  afterwards  made  a  settlement  with
him  and  took  his  note  for  one  hundred  and  sixty  three  dol-
lars, which  he  agreed  to  pay  Judge  Rice  ;  as  he  was  go-
ing to  Boston  in  a  short  time,  and  he  would  call  on  him  at
Portsmouth  for  that  purpose. 1  then went home to


130  J^arrative  of  the  Life^  i'C.

see  my  family,  and  in  about  six  months  after  returned
to  Portsmouth,  and  on  calling  on  Judge  Rice  found  to
my  surprise  that  Mr.  Ficket  had  not  paid  the  money,
that  he  had  failed  and  there  was  no  chance  for
me  to  get  any  thing  of  him.  So  1  was  agam  disap-
pointed in  my  expectations  of  paying  this  demand,  and  it
appeared  to  me  that  all  my  hard  earnings  would  be
sacrificed  to  pay  the  expense  of  persecutions ;  but  my
friend  Rice  was  very  indulgent ;  and  instead  (yf  com-
plaining did  all  he  could  to  encourage  me  and  keep  up
my  spirits.

In  the  fall  of  the  year  1813, 1  started  from  Portland  to
go  to  Easport ;  and  took  Mr.  Sewell  with  me,  in  order  to
try  to  get  a  settlement  with  Mr.  Carpenter ;  as  he  knew
all  the  particulars  of  the  agreement  between  us.  After
suffering  many  hardships,  and  being  at  great  expense,
in  consequence  of  having  to  go  part  of  the  way  by  water
and  part  by  land,  owing  to  the  war  that  then  existed,  we
arrived  there  on  the  twelfth  day  of  November.  On
my  arrival  I  made  enquiry  concernmg  my  affair  with
Carpenter,  aad  af?certained  uhat  proof  I  could  obtain
to  support  an  action  against  him  for  the  property  he  had
wronged  me  out  of;  and  after,  making  an  imsuccessful
attempt  to  ^et  my  accoiint  books  out  of  his  hands,  brought
an  action  agaiiist  him  for  the  property  left  in  his  posession;
this  being  the  only  way  in  which  1  could  bring  him  to  an
account.  After  much  time  and  expense  I  at  last  obtain-
ed a  judgment  against  him,  got  out  an  execution,  which
was  levied  on  the  land,  he  had  unjustly  got  a  deed  of,
and  it  was  finally  appraised  to  me  ;  and  after  having  to
get  a  writ  of  ejectment  to  get  Mr.  Tuttle  out  of  posses-
sion of  it,  who  claimed  it  under  a  pretended  deed  from
Carpenter,  to  prevent  it  from  being  attached  ;  I  at  last  got
the  farm  which  had  cost  in  getting  it  more  than  it
w^as  worth ;  so  I  had  to  put  up  with  the  loss  of  all  my
earnings  at  Kastport  for  two  years,  with  the  loss  of  me-
dicine sold  by  Carpenter,  all  of  which  amounted  to  not
less  than  fifteen  hundred  dollars.

I  returned  to  Portland,  where  [  remained  to  attend  to
my  practice  and  the  society  that  had  been  formed  there,
for  considerable  time  ;  and  after  settling  and  arranging
wj  business  as  well  as  [  could,  left  Mr.  Sewell  in  charge


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  131

of  all  my  affairs  there,  and  in  Jamiary  1814,  returned  to
Portsmouth,  which  place  I  made  the  principal  depot  of
my  medicines  ;  having  previous  to  my  returning  from
the  eastward,  made  arrangements  with  my  agents  to  sup-
ply them,  and  all  others  who  had  purchased  the  rights,
with  such  medicine  as  they  might  want,  by  their  applying
to  me  for  them.  I  had  lain  in  a  large  stock,  the  value
of  which  I  estimated  to  be  about  one  thousand  dollars.  I
went  to  Boston  and  Salem  to  procure  some  articles  that
could  not  be  obtained  elsewhere,  in  order  to  complete
my  stock  ;  w^hen  absent  the  great  fire  took  place  at
Portsmouth,  and  all  my  stock  of  medicine  was  consumed.
This  was  a  very  serious  loss  to  me,  not  only  in  a  pecuni-
ary point  of  viev/,  but  it  disarranged  all  my  plans,  and
put  it  out  of  my  power  to  supply  those  who  I  knew  de-
pended upon  me  for  all  such  articles  as  v/ere  most
important  in  the  practice.  The  season  was  so  far
advanced  that  it  was  impossible  to  obtain  a  new  recruit
of  most  of  the  articles  ;  and  I  was  obliged  to  collect  a
part  of  what  had  been  sent  to  different  places,  in  order
to  be  able  to  supply  in  the  best  manner  I  could,  such  de-
mands for  medicine,  as  I  should  be  called  on  for.  in  do-
ing this  I  was  put  to  great  trouble  asd  expense,  and  in
order  to  make  myself  whole,  was  under  the  necessity  of
raising  the  price  of  the  medicine  fifty  per  cent;  this
caused  much  grumbling  and  complaint  from  the  mem-
bers of  the  societies  in  different  places,  .and  was  taken
advantgae  of  by  my  enemies  to  injure  me  all  they
could.

1  sent  in  the  estimate  of  my  loss,  to  the  Committee,
who  had  the  charge  of  the  money  contributed  by  the  peo-
ple in  different  parts,  for  the  relief  of  the  sufferers  by  the
fire,  and  afterwards  called  on  them,  with  an  expectation
of  receiving  my  share ;  but  they  said  my  loss  was  of  such
a  nature  tliat  the}'  could  not  give  me  any  thing,  as  I
should  be  able  to  collect  another  supply  the  next  season,
and  I  never  received  a  cent  from  them.  In  addition  to
my  loss  by  the  fire,  and  other  difficulties  I  had  to  encount-
er; and  while  I  was  at  Portsmouth  using  all  my  exertions
to  replenish  my  stock  of  medicine,  and  assist  those  who
were  suffering  from  disease  and  needed  the  benefit  of  my
practice,  I  received  information  from  Portland  that  the


132  Narrative  of  the  Lije^  ^c.

doctors  had  obtained  one  of  my  books  of  direction,  which
wa  s  published  expressly  for  the  information  of  those  who
purchased  th^  right  of  using  my  system  of  practice,  and
had  some  knowledge  of  it  by  verbal  and  other  instruction,
and  had  printed  an  editi6n  of  it  and  advertised  them  for
sale  at  37  l'-2. cents  a  Copy.  They  stated  in  their  adver-
tisements that'Hhis  invaluable  work  which  had  heretofore
been  selling  for  twenty  dollars,  may  now  be  bad  for  37  1-2
cents ;"  and  sent  them  to  all  places  where  my  societies  had
been  formed,  and  my  practice  had  been  introduced,  for
the  purpose  of  putting  me  down  and  preventing  the  use
of  my  medicine  ;  but  after  all  this  pitiful  attempt  to  do  me
the  great  injury  which  they  so  londly  anticipated,  they
gained  nothing  by  it,  except  it  was  the  contempt  of  all  the
honest  part  of  society,  who  were  knowing  to  the  circum-
stances. To  put  a  stop  to  these  practices  and  prevent  the
pubhc  from  being  imposed  upon,  I  caused  a  notice  to  be
published  in  the  Portsmouth  and  Portland  papers,  caution-
ing the  people  against  buj^ing  these  books,  or  making  use
of  the  medicine,  and  trespassing  on  my  patent,  under  the
penalty  of  the  law  in  such  cases  provided  ;  and  also  o/fered
a  reward  of  fift}^  dollars  to  any  one  who  would  give  infor-
mation of  any  doctor,  who  should  trespass  on  my  patent,
and  ten  dollars  for  any  one  who  should  be  found  guilty  of
selling  the  books.  This  put  a  stop  to  the  sale  of  the
books,  and  prevented  them  from  doing  me  any  injury  by
this  trick ;  for  those  concerned  in  this  disgraceful  man-
oeuvre, were  compelled  to  acknowledge  that  my  agents
could  sell  more  books  at  twenty  dollars,  than  they  could
at  37  1-2  cents.

I  continued  in  Portsmouth,  after  the  losis  I  met  with
from  the  fire,  informing  the  people  in  that  place  and  vi-
cinity, until  I  collected  another  assortment  of  medicine,
during  which  time  fifty  members  were  added  to  the  socie-
ty there.  I  appointed  Mr.  John  Locke  as  my  agent  in
Portsmouth  and  the  society  accepted  of  him  as  such,  to
take  the  management  of  the  practice  and  supply  them
with  medicine  ;  I  agreed  to  allow  him  twenty-five  per
cent  on  the  sale  of  rights,  and  in  eighteen  months  he
added  about  forty  members  to  the  society.  He  conduct-
ed himself  with  the  greatest  propriety  in  performance
ef  all  the  duties  assigned  him,  and  in  this,  as  well as in


,0f  Samuel  Thomson.  133

all  other  concerns  which  I  had  with  him,  has  given  me
the  highest  satisfaction.  I  mention  this  tribute  of  praise
to  his  fideUty,  the  more  readily,  as  he  is  one  of  the  very
iew  who  I  have  put  confidence  in,  that  I  have  found
honest  enough  to  do  justice  to  me  and  the  people.  It
has  generally  been  the  case,  with  those  I  have  appoint-
ed as  agents,  that  as  soon  as  they  have  been  sufficiently
instructed  to  attend  to  the  practice  with  success,  and
give  satisfaction  to  the  people,  that  they  have  made
it  a  matter  of  speculation  ;  and  have  by  all  the  means
that  they  could  devise  attempted  to  get  the  lead  of  the
practice  into  their  own  hands,  and  deprive  me  of  the  ere-'
dit  and  profits  of  my  own  discovery ;  and  when  1  have
found  out  their  designs,  and  put  a  stop  to  their  career
by  depriving  them  of  their  agency,  they  have  uniform-
ly turned  against  me  and  done  every  thing  in  their  pow-
er to  injure  me  and  destroy  the  credit  of  the  medicine.
This  kind  of  conduct  has  been  a  very  serious  evil,  and
has  caused  me  much  trouble  and  expense,  besides  des-
troying the  confidencje  of  the  people  of  the  beneficial  ef-
fects of  the  medicine  and  practice,  and  keeping  back  the
information  necessary  for  its  being  properly  understood
by  them.  This,  however,  has  not  been  the  case  with  all
that  1  have  entrusted  with  the  care  of  my  business  as
agents,  for  some  of  them  have  been  uniformly  honest
and  faithful,  both  to  me  and  to  those  to  whom  they  have
given  the  information.

While  Mr.  Locke  was  acting  as  my  agent  at  Ports-
mouth, he  gave  offence,  by  his  faithful  and  upright  con-
duct, to  some  members  of  the  society,  who  wanted  to
reap  all  the  advantages  and  profits  without  any  labour  or
expense.  They  made  complaint  to  lue  of  his  conduct,  and
wished  him  turned  out ;  but  on  asking  them  for  their
charges  against  him,  they  said  he  speculated  on  the  me-
dicine, and  sold  it  one  third  higher  than  I  did.  I  told
them  that  I  had  been  obhged  to  raise  the  price  in  con-
sequence of  my  loss  by  the  fire,  and  that  he  was  not  to
blame  for  it.  They  however,  persisted  in  their  com-
plaints and  after  finding  that  they  could  not  make  me
turn  against  him,  they  turned  againsl  me.  After  making
further  inquiries  into  th<^  subject,  I  satisfied  myself  of
their  reasons  for  wishing  Mr.  Locke  turned  out  of  the

M


134  Narrative  of  the  Life;^  ^-c.

agency.  A  man  by  the  name  of  Holman,  who  I  had  four
years  previous  cwed  of  a  consumption,  as  has  been  be-
fore related,  and  to  whom  I  had  given  the  informatiop
and  authorised  to  form  a  society  at  Hopkinton,  where
he  had  practiced  three  years  without  making  me  any  re-
turns, had  r^jtured  to  Portsmouth  and  practised  with  Mr.
Locke  as  a6  assistant.  'J'his  man  formed  a  plan  to  have
Mr.  Locke  turned  out  in  order  to  get  his  place  himself,
and  had  managed  so  as  to  gain  over  to  his  side  a  num-
ber of  the  society,  who  joined  with  him  in  effecting  this
object.  They  made  use  of  all  kinds  of  intrigue  to  get
the  controul  of  the  practice  out  of  my  hands,  by  offering
to  buy  the  right  for  the  county,  and  many  other  ways ;
but  I  understood  their  designs  and  refused  all  their
offers.

At  the  next  annual  meeting  of  the  society,  f  lolman  was
chosen  as  their  agent  without  my  consent,  and  I  re-
fused to  authorise  him  to  give  information  ;  for  he
had  deceived  me  before  by  saying  on  his  return  to  Ports-
mouth, that  he  could  not  form  a  society  at  Hopkinton,
which  I  had  found  out  to  be  false  ;  and  many  other
things  in  his  conduct  had  caused  me  to  be  much
dissatisfied  with  all  he  did,  that  I  declined  having  any^
thing  further  to  do  with  him.  He  persisted  in  practicing
and  in  eighteen  months,  by  his  treacherous  conduct,  run
down  the  credit  of  the  medicine  and  practice,  and  broke
up  the  society,  after  it  had,  the  eighteen  months  previ-
ous, got  under  good  way  by  Mr.  Locks'  agency,  and  was
in  a  very  prosperous  condition.  1  had  good  reason  to
believe,  that  Holman  was  employed  by  my  enemies  to
break  me  up  in  this  place  and  destroy  the  credit  of  the
medicine  ;  for  when  1  was  absent  I  ascertained  that  he
gave  salt-petre  and  other  poisons,  under  the  pretence
that  by  giving  it  the  night  before  it  would  prepare  ''the
stomach  for  my  medicine  to  be  taken  in  the  morning.
This  was  like  preparing  over  night  to  build  a  fire  in
the  morning,  by  filling  the  fire-place  with  snow  and  ice.
After  preparing  the  stomach  in  this  way,  the  medicine
would  have  no  beneficial  effect  ;  and  he  would
then  place  the  patient  over  a  steam,  which  caused  them
to  faint,  in  this  way  he  proved  to  the  members  of  the
moiety  thait  my  mode  of  practice was bad,  and thus


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  13^

used  his  influence  to  destroy  the  credit  of  my  medi-
cine in  their  minds,  and  make  them  believe  that  I  had
deceived  them.  His  practice  turned  oui  very  unsuccess-
ful, and  he  lost  many  of  his  patients^  He"had  lost  more
in  six  months,  than  I  had  lost  in  six  years,  which  I  imput-
ed entirely  to  his  bad  conduct

After  my  return, finding  now  things  were  situated  in
regard  to  the practice  ;  that  all  the  credit  I  had  gained
by  seven years  labour,  had  been  destroyed  in  eighteen
months,  led  m.e  to make  a  particular enquiry  into  the
Cause. On  visiting  his  patients  I  found  some  of  the  pills
made  of  salt-petre,  and  also  some  opium  pills,  which  he
had  been  in  the  habit  of  administering  secretly  to  his  pa-
tients under  the  name  of  my  medicine  ;  and  after  collect-
ing an  assortment  of  his  poison,  I  called  a  meeting  of  the
society,  and  proved  to  them  that  he had  made  use  of
these  poisons  under  the  pretence  of  giving  my  medicine;
and  also  that  he had  confessed  to  have  given  tobacco
when  called  on  to  administer  my  medicine  ;  all  of  which
satisfied  the society  so  well  ot  the  baseness  of  the  con-
duct of  their  agent,  that  they  immediately  passed  a  vote
dismissing  him  from  his  agency. A  committee was  ap-
pointed to  investigate  the  whole  of  his  conduct,  and  pub-
lish a  statement  of  the  same, in  order  to  do  away the
-false  impression  that  had  been  made  on  the  public  mind,
and  convince  them  that  the  bad  success of  this  man's
practice, had  been owing  to  his  own  wicked  conduct  j
4  and  not  to  any  fault  in  the  medicine. I  was  never  able,
however,  to  get  this  committee  to  meet  and  attend  to  the
duty  asigned  them  by  the  society,  although  they  confess-
ed  themselves satisfied  of  the  truth of my charges
against  Holman,  and  of  the  injury  1  had  sustained  by  his
conduct ;  and  after  waiting  six  months  and  finding  that
they  werti  more  willing  that  I  should suffer,  than that
the  blame  should  fall where it  justly  belonged,  I  left
them  to  their  more  fashionable  practice,  and  withdrew
all  my  medicine' from  the  place.

In  the  spring  of  the  year  of  1814,  I  wrote  to  Mr.
Mowe,  my  agent  at  Eastport,  to  leave  that  place  in  con-
sequence of  the  war  becoming  troublesome,  and  come  to
Portsmouth.  He  came  up  in  May.  1  took  him  with  me
and  went  to  Surry, where  we  continued  through  the


A-

U


136  Narrative  of  the  Life^  S^c.

summer,  and  he  assisted  me  in  carrying  on  my  farm  and
collecting  an  assortment  of  medicine.  In  August  we
went  to  Onion  River,  where  my  father  resided,  to  make
a  visit  and  collect  some  articles  of  medicine,  that  could
not  be  obtained  in  Surry.  After  our  return  Mr.  Mowe
went  to  Portsmouth,  and  I  remained  at  home  till  after
the  harvesting  was  over,  then  went  to  Portsmouth,  to
collect  medicine,  and  attended  to  some  practice.  Some
time  in  December,  1  returned  home  and  found  an  ex-
press had  been  there  for  me  to  go  to  Guildford,  sent  by
Mr.  Davis  who  I  had  attended  the  spring  before  at
Portsmouth.  I  went  with  all  speed, and  found  his  wife  sick
with  a  consumption.  1  attended  her  a  few  days  to  give
them  information,  and  sold  him  the  right  of  using  the
medicine  ;  and  also  sold  some  rights  to  others ;  I  then  re-
turned to  Portsmouth,  and  sent  Mr.  Mowe  to  Guildford  to
practice  and  give  information  to  those  who  had  purchas-
ed the  rights,  where  he  remained  till  spring.

During  the  time  Mr.  Mowe  was  at  Guildford,  he  was
very  successful  in  his  practice,  and  made  some  remark-
able cures.  Great  opposition  was  made  to  his  practice,
by  the  doctors,  and  all  the  false  representations  made
about  it  that  they  could  invent,  to  prejudice  the  minds
of  itie  people  against  the  medicine  and  stop  its  being  in-
troduced among  them.  After  this  another  plan  was  got
up  to  injure  me  ;  societies  were  formed  in  the  manner  I
had  formed  mine,  and  members  were  admitted  for  two
dollars  ;  the  only  information  given  them  was  to  furnish
^ach  member  with  one  of  the  pamphlets,  containing  my
directions,  which  had  been  stolen  from  a  woman  and  pub-
lished at  Portland,  without  my  knowledge.  In  this  man-
ner my  system  of  practice  in  the  hands  and  under  the
SLiperintendance  of  those  who  were  endeavouring  to  des-
troy me,  became  popular  in  Guildford  and  the  towns  ad-
jacent ;  and  had  become  so  important,*that  a  general  in-
vitation was  given  throughout  the  neighbouring  towns
for  the  people  to  come  and  join  them  in  the  great  im-
provement of  restoring  the  health  of  mankind.  Thus
did  these  professional  gentlemen  tamper  with  my  rights
and  the  credulity  of  the  people,  for  the  pitiful  purpose
of  injuring  me,  by  pretending  to  sell  all  my  information
for  two dollars, for  which  I  as-ked  t^venty  :  and  in  their


Of  Samuel Thomson.  1^7

hands  called  it  honourable  scientific  knowledge.  After
these  trespasses  had  become  open  and  general,  and  the
people  had  been  invited  to  join  in  it,  my  agent  at  Guild-
ford wrote  me  a  letter  giving  information  of  the  transac-r
tion,  and  I  went  there  to  see  to  it  ;  on  my  arrival  I  con-
versed with  those  who  had  purchased  their  rights  of  me
or  my  agent ;  they  informed  me  of  the  facts  as  above
related,  and  said  that  they  had  been  solicited  to  join  the
society,  that-  had  been  formed ;  and  they  wished  my  ad-
vice, .whether  they  should  attend  a  general  meeting
which'was  to  be  held  in  about  a  fortnight.  1  told  them  that
they  had  better  attend — they  then  asked  me  if  they
should  be  asked  for  information  what  they  should  do  about
giving  it — 1  told  them  that  I  thought  people  joined  so-
cieties to  get  information  and  not  to  give  it.  I  employ-
ed an  attorney  to  proceed  against  those  who  tresspassed
and  have  them  punished  according  to  law  in  such  cases
pri3vided,  and  leturned  to  Portsmouth.

In  the  month  of  February  1815,  I  had  an  application
to  go  to  Philadelphia  and  introduce  my  !^;cieties  and  sys-
tem of  practice  in  that  city.  Thinking  it  not  proper  to
go  alone,  I  made  an  agreement  with  Mr.  John  Locke  to
go  with  me ;  and  after  we  got  every  thing  prepared,  he
started  on  the  7th  in  the  morning  to  go  in  the  stage  and
I  chose  to  go  by  water,  and  sailed  the  same  day  in  a  ves-
sel for  JVew  York.  We  had  a  long  and  tedious  passage,
suffering  very  much  from  the  cold.  We  had  a  gale  of
wind  which  blew- us  oflf  into  the  Gulf  Stream,  and  we
Avere  two  hundred  miles  south  of  our  port ;  on  getting
into  a  warmer  latitude  the  weather  became  warmer,
when  we  were  enabled  to  get  clear  of  the  ice  with
which  the  vessel  was  much  burdened,  and  could  set
some  sail;  and  we  arrived  at  New  York  after  a  very,
rough  passage  of  seventeen  days.

During  the  passage  one  of  the  crew  had  frozen  his
hands  and  feet  very  badly,  and  when  we  had  got  where
the  weather  became  warmer  he  was  in  the  most  extreme
pain.  He  said  that  it  seemed  as  though  the  bones  of
his  hands  and  feet  were  coming  in  pieces  j  his  suffering,
was  so  great  that  the  tears  would  run  from  his  eyes,  and
the  sweat  down  his  cheeks  with  the  pain.  1  was  re-
quested by  the  captain  and  crew  to  do  something  to  re-  -

M  2


138  Narrative  of  the  Life^  ^c.

lieve  him.  I  agreed  to  do  the  best  I  could  for  him,  in  the
cold  and  comfortless  situation  we  were  in.  There  was
no  place  to  keep  a  fire  under  decks,  and  the  weather
was  so  rough  that  we  could  seldom  keep  any  in  the  ca-
boose on  deck.  I  was  obliged  to  administer  the  medi-
cine according  to  my  judgment  in  the  best  manner  I
could.  In  the  first  place  I  procured  handkerchiefs  and
cloths  enough  to  wrap  his  hands  and  feet  up  in  several
thicknesses,  then  wet  them  well  with  cold  water,  and
wrapped  hfs  hands  and  feet  as  well  as  I  could,  wetting
them  with  cold  water,  and  put  him  in  his  birth,  covered
well  with  blankets,  and  gave  him  the  warmest  me-
dicine I  had  with  me  to  take,  and  repeated  it  to  keep
the  inward  heat  sufficient  to  cause  a  free  circulation  in
the  hmbs;  and  if  his  hands  'and  feet  grew  painful  poured
cold  water  on  the  cloths ;  and  continued  this  course  of
treatment,  of  keeping  the  inward  heat  above  the  out-
ward, by  raising  the  one  and  letting  down  the  other,  till
I  got  the  fountain  above  the  stream  ;  and  in  about  two
hours  freed  him  from  all  pain,to  the  surprise  and  astonish-
ment of  all  the  hands  on  board.  When  I  come  td  take
oflf  the  cloths  the  blood  had  settled  under  the  nails  and
under  the  skin,  which  came  off  without  any  blister  being
raised,  and  before  we  arrived  at  New-York  he  was  able
to  attend  to  his  watch.

It  was  said  by  the  captain  and  crew  that  this  was  the
most  remarkable  cure  they  had  ever  known  ;  and  that  if
he  had  been  attended  in  the  common  form,he  would  have
lost  his  toes  if  not  his  feet,  besides  sufifering  much  pain
and  a  long  confineraent.  It  will  be  necessary  to  remark
that  the  greatness  of  this  cure  consisted  in  its  simplicity  ;
any  person  could  have  performed  the  same,  who  had
come  to  years  of  discretion,  by  adopting  the  same  plan,
and  many  times  be  the  means  of  saving  the  amputation
of  limbs.  There  j^  no  mystery  in  it,  the  whole  plan  con-
sists in  keeping  the  determining  power  to  the  surfa(-e,from
the  fountain  of  the  body,which  is  the  stomach;  from  which
all  the  limbs  receive  their  support  and  warmth,  and
when  you  cannot  raise  the  fountain  sufficient  to  give  na-
ture its  proper  course,  :you  must  lower  the  stream,  or
outward  heat,  by  keeping  the  heat  down  on  the  limbs,
and  raising  thie  inward  he,at.  when  there  can  no  mortifi-


Of  Samuel  Thomson  139

cation  ever  return  from  the  limbs  to  the  body,  any  more
than  a  log  can  tloat  against  the  stream.

In  the  case  above  stated,  before  I  began  to  do, any
thing  for  the  man,  I  duly  considered  hi&  situation-;  he  had
been  almost  chilled  to  death  by  the  extreme  cold  wea-
ther, so  that  his  limbs  had  very  little  warmth  from  the
body,  not  enough  to  bring  them  to  their  feeling,  until  the
warm  weather  raised  a  fever  on  the  limbs  faster  than  in
the  body,and  in  proportion  as  the  heat  in  the  extremities
is  raised  above  that  in  the  body,  by  applying  hot  poultices
©r  other  similar  applications,  so  much  will  the  whole  sys-
tem be  disordered,  and  the  parts  that  have  been  injured
will  be  extremely  painful,  and  by  a  continued  application  ,
of 'Such  means,  the  fever  or  outward  heat  will  increase  by
the  current  being  turned  inward,  till  mortification  takes
place,  when  the  limbs  have  to  be  taken  oif  to  save  life  ;
and  in  most  cases  the  body  has  become  so  much  disorder-
ed, that  they  die  after  all  This  may,  I  am  confident,  be
avoided  by  understanding  my  plan  of  treatment  and  pur-
suing it  with  zeal,  particularly  in  all  cases  of  burns  or
freezing.

On  my  arrival  at  New  York  I  found  Mr  Locke,  who
had  come  in  the  stage,  and  had  been  waiting  for  me  ten
days.  The  next  morning  we  started  in  the  stage  for
Philadelphia,  where  we  arrived  that  evening,  and  went
to  a  boarding'jhouse  and  put  up  for  the  night.  In  the
morning  we  went  in  search  of  Elder  Piummer,  .  with
whom  I  had  engaged  the  fall  before,  to  go  to  Philadel-
phia; we  found  him  in  the  course  of  the  forenoon,  and
he  expressed  much  joy  c-.t  our  arrival.  He  preached
a  lecture  that  evening  and  appointed  a  meeting  at  the
same  place  the  next  evening  for  me  ;  at  which  I  attended
aftd  gave  a  lecture  ;  there  was  a  large  collection  of  peo-
ple attendedjttis  meeting,  and  I  gave  a  full  and  explicit
explanation  of  the  principles  upon  which  my  system  is
founded.  There  were  two  medical  students  present,
and  while  I  was  endeavouring  to  give  a  view  of  the.  for-
mation of  the  animal  creation  out  of  the  four  elements  ;
that  iieat  was  life  and  cold  death;  and  that  the  blood  was
necessary  to.  life,  as  being  the  nourishment  of  the  flesh,
and  inasmuch  as  it  was  taken  away  so  much  was  Hfe  and
health  diminished,  one  of  then;k.  interrupted  me  and  said,


140  Kdrrativeof  the  Life^4''C.

.  that  cold  was  a  promotion  of  life,  and  that  bleeding  was
heneficial  to  preserve  life  also.  I  answered  him  by  stating,
that  admitting  his  doctrine  to  be  true,  an  animal  that  had
the  blood  taken  from  it  and  was  frozen,  would  be  the
liveliest  creature  in  the.  w^orld.  This  unexpected  retort
caused  a  laugh  and  the  two  medical  gentlemen  left  the
room.  1  then  went  on  and  concluded  the  explanations  \
■wished  to  make,  which  gave  general  satisfaction  to  the
people  present;  and  sixteen  signed  the  articles  of  agree-
ment that  night,  to  obtain  the  knowledge  of  the  medicine
and  practice,  to  whom  I  engaged  to  give  information  by-
lectures.  AVe  remained  there  about  a  week,  in  which
time  about  twenty  bought  the  right.

W'hen  we  had  completed  our  business  at  Philadelphia,;
we  went  on  to  Washington,  where  we  remained  several
days,  and  had  a  view  of  the  ruins  of  the  pubhc  buildings,
which  had  been  destroyed  by  the  British,  when  they
took  possession  of  that  city  about  six  months  previous  to
our  being  there.  While  at  the  capitol  I  had  an  inter-
view with  General  Varnum,  and  some  conversation  pass-
ed between  us  concerning  the  pipsisway.  which  had
been  found  useful  in  a  case  of  cancer  for  which  I  attend-
ed his  wife  when  practicing  at  Pelham  in  the  year  1807,
He  said  that  it  having,  been  found  so  useful  in  all  cancer-
ous cases,  he  thought  it  ought  to  be  published  in  the
newspapers  or  almanack,  for  the  benetit  of  those  who
were  afflicted  with  this  dangerous  disease,  and  expressed
a  wish  that  I  would  do  it.  I  told  him  that  1  thought  it
would  be  better  for  him  to  publish  it  than  for  me,  and  he
consented;  and  the  next  year  he  published  it  in  the  al-
manack, which  was  the  cause  of  much  speculation  in.
this  article,  and  of  which  I  shall  give  some  account  in
another  part  of  this  work.

After  staying  in  Washington  a  ie.\w  days  we  wfnt  to
Alexandria^  where  we  remEuned  about  a  week,  in  which
time  I  collected  some  Cyprus  bark,  which  is  known  thiire
by  the  name  of  poplar,  and  what  we  call  poplar,  is  by
them  called  quakingasp,  on  account  of  the  constant  shak-
hig  of  its  leaves.  While  at  this  place  1  fell  in.  company
with  Capt.  Davis,  of  Portsmouth,  and  agreed  to  take  pas-
sage with  him  and  return  to  that  place.  Arrangements
were  made for  Mr.  Locke  to  return  by  land; and I


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  141

directed  him  to  stop  at  Washington  and  get  a  copy  of  my
patent,  then  to  go  on  to  Philadelphia  and  remain  there
as  long  as  it  should  be  necessary  to  give  information  to
those  who  purchased  the  rights,  or  any  that  should  wish
to  purchase  them  in  that  city,  and  after  paying  proper
attention  to  them,  to  return  to  Portsmouth.  I  then  went
on  board  the  vessel  and  we  set  sail ;  and  after  a  long
passage  arrived  safe  at  Portsmouth  about  the  same  time
that  Mr.  Locke  got  there.

During  this  summer  I  visited  Eastport,  Portland,
Chalestown,  Jjiouth-Reading,  and  other  places  where  so-
cieties had  been  formed,  or  rights  sold  to  individuals,  to
give  information  to  the  people  ;  and  in  all  ^ilaces  where
I  went,  found  the  book  of  directions,  which  had  been
clandestinely  obtained  and  published  by  the  doctors  and
others,  to  injure  me  by  stopping  the  sale  of  rights,  selling
at  37  1-2  cents.  I  was  under  the  necessity  of  putting
an  advertisement  in  the  papers,  cautioning  the  people
against  this  imposition,  which  put  a  stop  to  their  sale  ;
but  great  pains  were  taken  by  my  enemies  to  circulate
them  among  the  people  ;  and  this  is  the  way  that  some
ol  my  articles  of  medicine  come  to  be  made  use  of
through  the  country  in  colds,  such  as  cayenne,  ginger,  &c
In  1815  I  published  another  edition  of  my  book  of  direc-
tions, and  secured  the  copy  right ;  but  this  was  reprint-
ed at  Taunton,  and  I  advertised  it  as  before  and  stopped
its  progress.

In  the  tall  of  the  year  1815,  I  went  to  Cape-Cod  to
procure  some  marshrosemary,  and  collected  a  quanti-
ty, carried  it  to  Portsmouth  and  prepared  it  for  use.  I  his
ii^  the  last  time  I  have  collected  any  of  this  article,  and
as  it  becomes  scarce,  think  I  shall  not  make  any  more  use
of  it.  It  is  too  cold  and  binding,  without  using  a  large
share  of  baberry  bark  and  cayenne  with  it,  to  keep  the
saliva  free.  1  have  found  other  articles  as  substitutes,
which  answer  a  better  purpose,  such  as  hemlock  bark,
which  1  have  of  late  made  much  use  of  and  found  very
good,  white  lily  roots,  witch-hazle  and  raspberry  leaves,
and  sumach  berries;  the  last  article  is  very  good  alone,
steeped  and  sweatened,  and  is  as  pleasant  as  wine  ;  it  is
good  for  children  in  cases  of  canker,  especially  in  long
cases  of  sickness  when  other  articles  become  disagreea-
ble to  them.


s


142  JVarrative  oj  the  Life.  ^-c.

In  the  spring  of  the  year  181G,  I  went  again  to  Cape
Cod,  for  medicine,  and  found  that  the  spotted  ^fever*  or.
what  was  called  the  cold  plague,  prevailed  there,  an(l
the  people  were  much  alarmed,  eis  they  could  get  no  helj*
from  the  doctors.  I  told  them  I  had  come  after  medi*
cine  where  they  were  dyhig  for  want  of  the  knowledge
how  to  use  it.  They  were  desirous  for  me  to  try  my  prac-
tice and  satisfy  them  of  its  utility.  A  young  man  in  the
next  house  to  where  I  w:^:-,  being  attacked  with  the  fever
the  day  before,  I  went  to  see  him,  and  the  famil}'^  express-
ed a  wish  to  have  me  try  my  medicine.  I  put  a  blanket
round  him  and  put  him  by  the  tire  ;  took  a  teaspoonful  of
compositiou  and  added  more  No.  2  and  as  much  sugar,
put  it  in  a  tea-cup,  and  poured  to  it  a  wme  glass  of  hot  wa-
ter, when  cool  enough  to  take,  added  a  tea  spoonful  of
the  rheumatic  drops  ;  he  took  it,  andm  tiiteen  minutes
•was  in  a  free  perspiyation — he  was  then  put  in  bed  and  a
hot  stone  wrapped  in  wet  cloths  put  to  his  feet  to  raise
a  steam.  1  then  leithim  in  the  care  ofjns  friends,  with
some  medicine  to  be  given  during  the  night ;  they  kept
the  perspiration  free  all  night,  and  in  the  morning  heat
had  gained  the  victory,  the  canker  was  destroyed,  and  he
was  comfortable,  and  soon  got  well.

I  attended  three  other  persons  in  one  house,  who  had
been  sick  a  l6nger  time,  and  had  taken  other  medicine,  so
that  it  was  more  difficult  to  cure  them.  I  steeped  No.  3
and  poured  offhaifa  tea  cup  full  and  sweetened  it,  and
added  half  a  tea  spoonful  of  No.  2.  when  cool  enough  to
take  put  in  one  tea  spoonful  of  No.  1,  and  gave  it  to  eacli
of  the  patients,  repeating  it  once  in  lifteea  minutes,  till
they  had  taken  it  three  times,  whether  the}'  puked  or  not
in  that  time — kept  a  hot  stone  wrapped  in  wet  clcths  at
their  feet,  to  keep  up  a  steam  ;  while  they  were  under
the  opperation  of  the  puking  and  sweating,  gave  them  as
mu(ih  cider  or  water  to  drmk  as  they  required — When
they  had  done  vomiting,  gavo^iilk  porri(!ge  freely.  As
soon  as  they  had  donie  sweating,  and  their  strength  had
returned,  got  them ,up  and  steamed  the,m  as  long  as  they
could  bear  it ;  then  rubbed  them  over  with  spirits,  water
or  vinegar,,  changed  their  clothes,  and  they  went  to  bed,
or  sat  up  as  their  strength  would  permit.  I  will  here
remark  for  the  informaticn  of  iti'  reader,, that  whien  tho


Of  Saikuel  Thomson.  \\\


■V


patient  is  so  bad  as  not  to  be  able  to  g-et  up,  thoy  must  be
'stearn<5d.  in  bed  as  h>>t  as  they  can  bear  it,  tht-n  Sft  tbem
tip  on  end,  and  rub  as  before  mentioned,  ,cbange  their
fclothes  and  bed  clothes.  This  last  direction  is -i.iportant
to  be  attended  to,  for  if  their  own  clothes  are  change/l
without  changing  the  bed  clothes,  they  will  absorb  a  part
of  the  f.lth  that  has  been  discharged  through  the  pores
and  add  to  what  remains  of  the  disorder.  This  precau-
tion is  a'l  important  in  every  ca-se  of  disease  and  should  be
j^aid  particular  attention  to,  in  order  to  guard  against  tak-
ing back  any  ptrt  of  what  has  been  thrown  off  by  the
operation  of  the  medicine.  The  nurse  or  those  who  at-
tend upon  the  sick,  are  also  in  danger  from  the  same
cause,  and  should  be  particularly  careful  to  guard  against
takin^g  V!iC  disorder  by  breathing  in  the  foul  yapour  from
the  bedclothes,  and  standing  over  the  patient  when  un-
6er  the  operation  of  the  medicine,  the  principal  effect  of
which  is  to  throw  off  by  perspiration  and  other  evacua-
tions, the  putrefaction  that  disease  has  engendered  in  the
body.  To  guard  against  this,  take  some^hot  bitters  and
keep  a  piece  of  ginger  root  in  the  mouth,  p-ccassionally
swallowing  some  of  it,  when  most  exposed ;  also
i?-ke  a  tea  spoonful  of  No.  2  and  3,  steeped ir  hot  -water.
when  going  to  bed  ;  one  ounce  of  preventative  in  this
way,  is  better  than  a  pound  of  cure  when  sick.

After  relieving  these  four  cases  I  was  sent  for  to  at-
tend a  woman,  who  had  been  sick  for  a  long  time  ;  I  de-
clined attending  any  more  unless  they  would  buy  the
Hght— -this  displeased  her  so  much,  because  I  was  not
willing  to  practice  and  cure  all  of  them  for  nothing,  that
she  abused  me  for  my  declining  to  attend  her.  Two
men  bought" the  right,  and  they  asked  me  how  much  I
would  take  for  the  right  of  the  v,/hole  town.  I  offered
it  to  them  for  the  price  of  twenty  rights  ;  but  they  said
that  !he  sickness  had  so  much  abated  that  the  alarm  was
nearly  over,  arid  declinedslny  offer.  This  disease  first
appeared  in  Kastham  the  forepart  of  February,  in  which
month  27  died,  in  March  14,  and  5  in  April,  making  in  the
<f..whole  46  in  three  months  lA  this  small,  place.  I  left
somr- medicine  with  those  who  had  purchased  the  rights
and  returned  to  Boston.

Within  a  week  after  my  return  from  Cape  Cod,  I  re-


14.4  Narrative  of  the  Life^  4'C.

ceived  a  letter  from  Eastham  to  come  there  as  soon  as
possible  ;  I  took  ^  stock  of  medicine  and  went  on  there  as
quick  as  I  could  ;  and  on  my  arrival  found  that  the  fever
had  as^ajn  made  its  appearance  among  the  people,  with
double  fatality.  I  soon  found  enough  ready  to  purchase
the  twenty  rights,  for  which  I  had  offered  to  sell  the  right
of  the  whole -town.  1  attended  on  many  of  those  who
had  the  disease,  in  company  with  the  two  men  who  had
purchased  the  right  of  me  when  here  before,  and  instruc-
ted them  how  to  carry  the  patients  through  a  course  of  the
medicine  ;  and  they  attended  and  gave  information  to
others;  whien  they  could  meet  together  I  gave  informa-
tion by  lectures  ;  those  who  got  the  information  attended
wherever  they  ^v^ere  wanted.  I  pursued  my  usual  mode
of  treatment,  by  administering  the  medicine  to  prrmote  a
fr.^e  perspiration,  and  when  necessary  steamed  and  gave
injections,  cleansed  the  stomach,  and  cleared  off  the  can-
ker ;  the  success  in  curing  this  alarming  disease  was  very
great.  I  staid  about  two  weeks,  during  which  time  there
were  attj^nded  with  my  medicine,  thirty  four  cases,  of
whom  only  one  died,  the  rest  got  well.  At  the  same
time,  of  those  who  were  attended  by  the  regular  doctors,
eleven  out  of  twelve  died,  making  in  the  whole  upwards
of  fifty  deaths  in  a  short  time  in  this  place,  which  was  a-
bout  one  twelfth  part  of  the  inhabitants  that  were  at  home.
The  truth  of  the  above  statements  is  authenticated  by  the
certificates  of  the  Selectmen  of  the  town  and  other  res-
pectable inhabitants,  which  will  be  ijiserted  in  another
part  of  this  work.

During  my  stay  this  time,  I  attended  the  husband  of  the
wcman  who  had  abused  me  w^hen  here  before,  at  the
house  of  his  sister;  she  came  there  while  I  was  attending
upon  her  husband,  and  treated  me  and  him  in  a  most
abusive  manner,  snying  that  she  would  die  sooner  than
take  any  of  my  medicine,  or  have  aiiy  thing  to  do  with
me.  Ai^ershe  had  vented  her  spite  to  her  own  satisfac-
tion, she  went  home,  was  taken  sick  on  the  way,  and  was
one  ot  the  last  who  died  with  the  fever  at  this  time.
The  people  generally  treated  me  with  kindness  and  res-
pect, and  took  great  interest  in  my  cause  ;  and  the  suc-
cess of  my  system  of  practice  in  relieving  them  Irom
this  alarming  diseae,  gave  universal  satisfaction.


Of  Sttmuel  Thomson.  145

I  formed  those  who  purchased  the  rights,  into  a  society;

■»  and  thej  chose  a  committee,  who  I  authorised  as  agents,
to  sell  rights  and  medicine ;  but  this  caused  a  jealousy
among  the  rest  of  the  members,  who  said  I  gave  privi-
leges to  some  more  than  to  others,

'■  I  have  formed  four  societies  and  given  them  certain
previleges,  by  allowing  them  part  of  the  profits  on  the
sale  of  rights  and  medicine  ;  but  as  soon  as  there  was  any
funds,  it  has  always  created  uneasiness  among  the  mem-
bers. Some  of  the  ignorant  and  selfish,  would  call  for
their  dividends,  as  though  it  was  bank  stock,  instead  of
feeling  grateful  for  the  advantages  they  injoy  by  having
their  diseases  cured  and  their  minds  relieved  from  the
alarming  consequences  of  a  disease,  with  a  trifling  ex-
pense. I  have  since  altered  my  plan,  and  now  have  but
one  society. Every  one  who  purchases  a  right  for  him-

"  self  and  family,  becomes  a  member  of  the  Friendly  Medi-
cal Bontanic  !?ociety,  and  is  intitled  to  all  the  previleges
of  a  free  intercourse  with  each  other,  and  to  converse
with  any  one  who  has  bought  a  right,  for  instruction  and
assistance  in  sickness,  as  each  one  is  bound  to  give  his
assistance,  by  advice  or  otherwise,  when  called  on  by  a
member.  In  this  way  much  more  good  can  be  done,  and
there  will  be  much  more  goodwill  towards  each  o-
ther,  than  where  there  is  any  money  depending.

1  had  now  been  in  practice,  canstantly  attending  upon
those  laboring  under  disease,  whenever  called  on,  for  a-
bout  thirty  years  ;  had  suffered  much  both  in  body  and
mind,  from  the*  persecutions  I  had  met  with^  and  my
unwearied  exertions  to  relieve  the  sick ;  and  to  estabhsh
my  system  of  practice  upon  a  permanent  basis,  that  the
people  might  become  satisfied  of  its  superiority  over
that  which  is  practised  by  those  styled  regular  physicians;
puting  it  in  their  powftr  to  become  their  own  physici-
ans, by  enabling  every  one  to  relieve  themselves  and
friends,  from  all  disease  incident  to  our  country,  by  mak-
ing use  of  those  vegetable  medicines,  the  produce  of  our
own  country,  which  are  perfectly  safe  and  easily  obtain-
ed ;  and  which,  if  propctly  understood,  are  fully  suffici-
ent in  all  cases  of  disease,  where  there  can  be  any
chance  of  cure,  without  any  danger  of  the  pernicious,  and
often  fatal  consenueaccs  attending;  the  administerinff  tho^is

N


1 46  Narrative  cf  the  Life^  4'C.

poisons  that  the  fashionable  doctors  are  in  the  habit  oT
giving  to  their  patients.

After  having  discovered  a  system,  and  by  much  la-
bour and  constant  perseverance  reduced  it  to  practice,
in  a  manner  that  had  given  general  satisfaction  to  ali
who  had  become  acquainted  with  it,  and  having  Si^^ured
the  same  by  patent,  in  order  that  I  might  reap  solhe  be-
nefit from  my  discovery,  to  support  me  in  my  old  age,
having  by  a  long  series  of  attendance  on  the  sick,  both  a9
physician  and  nurse,  become  almost  worn  out,  1  came  to
the  determination  to  appoint  some  suitable  person,  who
would  do  justice  to  me  and  the  cause,  as  a  general  agent,
to  take  the  lead  in  practice^  and  give  the  necessary
information  to  those  who  should  purchase  the  rights,
which  would  enable  me  to  retire  from  practice,  and  re-
ceive a  share  of  the  profits  as  a  reward  for  my  long  suf-
ferings. After  considerable  enquiry  I  became  acquaint-
ed with  Elias  Stnith,  who  was  recommended  as  a  man  ia
whom  I  could  confide,  and  who  was  every  way  qualified
as  a  suitable  person  to  engage  in  the  undertaking.  I  found
him  in  Boston,  and  in  very  poor  circumstances  ;  having
been  for  many  years  a  public  preacher,  but  in  conse-
quence of  his  often  changing  his  rehgious  principles  and
engaging  in  different  projects  in  which  he  had  been  un-
successful, he  was  now  without  a  society  or  any  visible
means  of  supporting  himself  and  family.  He  readily  en-
gaged with  me,  and  promised  to  do  every  thing  in  his
power,  to  promote  my  interest  and  extend  the  usefulness
of  my  system  of  practice.

I  5old  him  a  family  right  in  December,  1816,  and  was
in  his  family  during  the  winter,  for  the  purpose  of  in-
structing him  in  the  practice,  to  qualify  him  to  attend
upon  the  sick  and  give  information  to  others.  I  put  the
utmost  confidence  in  his  honour,  and  spared  no  pains  in
communicating  to  him,  without  any  reserve  whatever,  all
the  knowledge  I  had  gained  by  my  experience,  both  by
practice  and  verbal  instruction ;  under  the  expectation,
that  when  ho  became  sufficiently  acquainted  with  the
system  and  practice,  I  should  be  rewarded  for  my  trou-
ble, by  his  faithfully  performing  his  duty  towards  me,  ac-
cording to  his'  promise.  I  shall  make  no  remark  upon
fiij  being  disappointed  in  all  my  expectations  in  regard


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  14t

^  Mr.  Smith's  conduct,  and  the  treatment  I  received  from
Him  after  he  had  gained  a  knowledge  of  the  practice
from  me,  to  enable  him  to  set  up  for  himself;  hut  shall
jproceed  to  give  a  short  account  of  what  took  place  dur-
ing my  connection  with  him.

Tfil^first  case  1  attended  with  him  was  in  his  own  fa-
mily. ^  His  son  had  the  itch  very  badly,  so  that  he  was
nearly  one  half  of  him  one  raw  sore.  They  had  tried
the  usual  remedies  without  any  benefit.  I  shewed  him
.  the  use  of  No.  3,  to  wash  with  to  stop  the  smart  of  the
sores  ;  then  took  some  rheumatic  drops  and  added  about
one  fourth  part  of  spirits  of  turpentine  and  washed  him
with  it ;  this  is  very  pmnful  when  applied  w^here  the
skin  is  off;  to  prevent  which  mix  with  it  some  of  the
wash  made  of  No.  3  ;  at  the  same  time  of  applying  the
above,  give  some  of  the  composition,  especially  when
going  to  bed  ;  and  occassionally  give  about  fifteen  of  the
drops  shaken  together  on  loaf  sugar;  By  pursuing  this
treatment  one  week  this  boy  was  entirely  cured.

The  next  case,  which  was  the  first  we  attended  toge-
ther out  of  his  house,  was  a  young  woman  who  had  the
ague  in  her  face.  I  shewed  him  the  whole  process  of
curing  this  complaint ;  which  was  done  by  puting  a  small
quantity  of  No.  2  in  a  cloth,  and  placing  it  between  her
cheek  and  teeth;  at  the  same  time  giving  her  some  No.
2  and  3  to  take,  and  in  two  hours  she  was  cured.

I  was  constantly  with  him  in  practice  Irom  February
till  June  ;  during  which  time  we  attended  many  bad  cases
with  great  success.  A  Mrs.  Grover  came  to  his  house
to  be  attended,  who  had  the  dropsy.  She  had  been  giv-
en over  by  her  doctor  as  incurable,  and  was  so  much
swelled  as  to  be  blind,  and  her  body  and  limbs  in  propor-
tion. Mr.  Smith  undertook  her  case  under  my  direction,
and  carried  her  through  a  course  of  the  medicine  every
day  for  nine  days,  and  then  occassionlly  once  or  twice
a  week  till  she  was  cured.  She  was  thus  attended
under  my  inspection  for  three  weeks,  and  in  four  was
entirely  cured;  for  which  she  gave  Mr.  Smith  about  for-
ty dollars.  In  this  case  I  did  a  great  part  of  the  labour
and  he  had  the  pay.  About  the  third  time  of  car-
rying her  through  a  course  of  the  medicine,  I  was  ab-
sent; her  symptoms  appeared unfavourable,  and  he  got


1 48  JVarrutive  of  the  hife^  ^e.

frightened ;  a  nurse  woman,  to  whom  I  had  given  infor-
mation, and  who  had  more  experience  than  he  had,
came  to  his  assistance, and  by  using  injections  relieved  her,
and  prevented  mortification.  The  circumstance  of  this
woman  proving  that  she  was  foward  of  him  in  informa-
tion, seemed  to  fix  in  Mr.  Smith's  mind  a  dislike  to  her
ever  after,  as  his  subsequent  treatment  of  her  will  show,
the  particulars  of  which  will  be  hereafter  related.

Another  case  was  of  a  man  that  came  to  his  house  who
was  in  a  declining  way  and  had  taken  a  great  quantity  of
physic,  before  he  came,  which  would  not  operate.  On
taking  my  medicine,  as  soon  as  he  began  to  be  warm  so
as  to  cause  motion  in  his  bowels,  the  physic  he  had  be-
fore taken  operated  and  run  him  down  with  a  relax ;
then  the  dyssentary  set  in  and  he  suffered  much  with  paira
and  had  discharges  of  blood.  I  gave  Mr.  Smith  direc-
tions to  use  injections,  to  clear  his  bowels  of  canker  and
prevent  mortification  ;  but  he  neglected  it  until  I  had
told  him  three  days  in  succession.  He  then  got  alarmed
and  sent  for  me  ;  but  before  I  arrived  he  had  given  an
injection  which  had  relived  the  patient.  He  remained
and  was  attended  about  three  weeks,  and  went  home  in
a  comfortable  state  of  health.  This  man  paid  Mr.  Smith
about  thirty  dollars.

About  the  same  time  a  man  by  the  name  of  Jennings
appijcd  to  Mr.  Smith,  who  had  lost  the  use  of  one  of  his
arms  by  the  rheumatism.  He  had  been  attended  by  the
doctor  for  nine  months,  and  had  been  given  over  by  him
us  incurable.  His  arm  was  perished  and  was  in  poor
circumstances,  having  paid  all  he  had  to  the  doctor ;  he
\vanted  relief,  but  said  he  could  pay  nothing  for  it  unless
iie  was  cured,  so  that  he  could  earn  something  by  his  la-
bour. Mr.  Smith  as.ked  me  if  I  was  willing  to  assist  to
cure  him  on  these  terms,  to  which  1  agreed.  We  carri-
ed him  through  a  course  of  the  medicine  and  steaming
twice  or  three  times  a  week  for  four  weeks,-when  a
care  was  effected.  The  la«t  time  he  was  carried  through
was  on  election  day,  and  he  expressed  a  wish  to  go  on
the  common  in  the  afternoon,  to  which  I  gave  encourage-
ment. The  medicine  was  done  about  ten  o'clock ;  he
was  then  steamed  and  washed  all  over  with  pepper-sauce.
He  complained  bitterly  of  the  h^at  and  threw  h^niseif  an


Of  Samuel  Thomson  149

the  bed;  I  took  a  tea  spoonful  of  good  cayenne,  and  put
it  in  two  spoonfuls  of  pepper-sauce  and  gave  it  him  to
take.  This  raised  the  inward  heat  so  much  above  the
outward,  that  in  two  minutes  he  was  quite  comfortable  ;
and  in  the  afternoon  he  went  on  the  Common.  His  arm
was  restored  and  he  was  well  from  that  time  ;  he  after-
wards as  I  have  been  informed,  paid  Mr.  Smith  forty
dollars,  for  the  cure.

A  Mrs.  Burleigh  came  to  his  house  about  this  time,
ivho  had  the  rheumatism  very  badly,  so  that  ner  joints
were  grown  otjt  of  place ;  and  I  assisted  in  attending  her.
She  had  never  taken  much  medicine,  which  made  it  the
easier  to  cure  her;  as  we  had  nothing  to  do  but  remove
the  disease,  without  having  to  clear  the  system  of  poi-
sonous drugs,  as  is  the  case  in  most  of  those  who  apply
for  relief  in  complaints  of  long  standing.  She  was  carri-^
ed  through  the  medicine  several  times  and  steamed ;  the
last  time  I  attended  her,  and  gave  the  medicine  three
times  as  usual,  which  raised  a  lively  perspiration  and  a
fresh  colour,  shewing  an  equal  and  natural  circulation  ;
but  did  laot  sicken  or  cause  her  to  vomit,  as  is  the  case
most  generally.  I  mention  this  to  shew  that  the  emetic
qualities  of  the  medicine  will  not  operate  where  there  is
no  disease.  She  was  then  steamed  and  washed,  and  went
out  of  doors,  being  entirely  cured  of  her  complaint.

Sometime  the  last  of  April  or  first  of  May,  a  woman
that  was  a  relation  of  the  nurse,  who  assisted  Mr.  Smith,
and  of  whom  I  have  before  spoken,  hired  a  room  of  him
and  moved  into  his  house,  and  the  nurse  lived  with  }\er.
She  had  more  experience  than  he  had ;  I  had  put  the
utmost  confidence  in  her,  and  she  had  in  many  instances  -.
proved  her  superiority  in  a  knowledge  of  the  practice
over  him-  A  singular  circumstance  took  placfi^  the  par-
ticulars of  which  I  shall  relate  and  leave  the  reader  to
make  his  own  inferences. — Sometime  in  May,  while  I
boarded  with  Mr.  Smith,  I  lost  my  pocket-book,  which
contained  upwards  of  thirty  dollars  in  bank  bills  and  notes
to  the  amount  of  about  five  Jbundred  dollars.  I  made
strict  search  for  it,  and  advertised  m  the  papers,  but
have  never  gained  any  information  of  it  or  the  contents
to  this  day.  It  was  in  my  coat  pocket,  and  I  could  think
of  no  way  in  which  I  had  been  exposed,  or  ^ouldlos«  it,

N2


150  JYarrative  of  the  Life,  4rc.

except  in  his  hotise.  I  Ifst  it  between  Friday  night  and
Monday  morning,  during  which  time  I  attended  a  woman
in  his  chamber,  and  several  times  had  my  coat  off,  which
it  appeared  to  me  to  be  the  only  tirne  that  it  could  be
taken,  or  that  I  could  lose  it.  The  only  persons  present
in  the  room  were  Mr.  Smith  and  his  wife,  and  the  nurse;
I  had  no  suspicions  of  any  person  at  the  time.  About
ten  days  after,  being  alone  with  Mr.  Smith,  he  asked  me
if  I  ever  mistrusted  the  nurse  being  dishonest.  I  told
him  no,  for  if  I  had  I  should  not  have  introduced  her  as
a  nurse.  He  then  said  that  there  had  been  a  number  of
thefts  committed  since  she  had  been  in  the  house,  both
from  him  and  other  people,  and  named  the  articles  and
circumstances.  He  further  said  that  the  girl  who  lived
with  him  had  said  that  she  thought  the  nurse  was  as
likely  to  take  my  pocket-book  as  to  take  the  things  she
had  undoubtedly  stolen.  The  circumstances  which  he
related  and  the  interest  he  seemed  to  take  in  my  loss,
convinced  me  beyond  a  doubt  that  this  woman  had  tak-
en my  property.  During  this  conversation  with  him,  he
said,  that  if  she  did  not  move  out  of  the  house  he  would.
The  consequence  was  that  the  family  moved  out  of  his
house,  and  I  dismissed  the  nurse  from  having  any  more
to  do  with  my  practice.  Since  Mr.  Smith  has  taken  to
himself  the  lead  in  my  system  of  practice,  he  has  ack-
nowledged that  he  has  become  convinced  beyond  a  doubt,
that  this  woman  was  not  guilty  of  taking  the  things  that
-  she  had  been  accused  of ;  without  assigning  any  reason,
as  I  have  been  able  to  learn,  for  his  having  altered  his
opinion.

During  the  time  the  above  circumstance  happened,  his
son  Ira  came  home,  after  being  absent  about  four  years;
but  was  not  treated  with  that  affection  a  child  expects
to  receive  in  a  father's  house,  he  was  sent  off  to  seek
lodgings  wl»ere  he  could.  About  twelve  o'clock  he  re-
turned, not  being  able  to  obtain  lodgings,  and  called  up  a
young  man  who  boarded  with  Mr.  Smith,  made  a  bitter
complaint,  on  account  of  the  treatment  he  received  from
his  father,  which  he  attributed  to  be  owing  to  the  influ-
ence of  his  mother-in-law  ;  he  took  a  phial  and  drank
from  it,  and  soonr  itftej*  fell  on  the  floor.  The  young
man  being  alarmed,  awaked  his  father,  and  informed  him


Of  Samuel  Thomson,  151

of  the. circumstance  ;  before  he  *got  to  hk  son  he  was
senseless,  and  stiff  in every  joint. I  was  in  bed  in the
house,  and  Mr.  Smith  came  immediately to  me,  and  re-
quested my  assistance,  said  that  he  expei^ted  Ira  had  kill-
ed himself. He  shewed  me  the  phial  and  asjied  what  had
been  in  it — I  told  him  it  had  contained  laudanum. I  got
up  as  soon  as  possible  and  on  going  down,  met  Mr.  Smith
and  the  young man bringing Ira  up  stairs. I  directed
them  to  lay  him on the  hearth,  and  took  a  bottle  from
my  pocket,  which  contained  a  strong  preparation  of  No.
1,  2  and  6 — took  his  head  between  my  knees,  his  jaws
being  set,  and  put  my  finger  between  his cheek and
teeth,  and  poured  in  some  of  the  medicine  from  the  bot-
tle ;  as  soon  as it  reached  the  glands  of  his  throat,  his
iaws  became  loosened, and  he  swallowed  som6  of  it—
in  five  minutes he  vomited — in ten  he  spoke — in  one
hour  he  was  clear  of  the  effects  of  the  opium, and  the
next  day was  well. After  this  the  affection  of  the  fa-
ther seemed  in  some  measure  to  return  ;  he  clothed  him,
took  him to Taunton and  introduced  him into prac-
tice as  an assistant. He  did  very w^ell  till  his  mother
in-law  arrived  there, when  a  difficulty  took  place be-
tween them  and  he  went  off. His  father -advertised  him
forbidding  all  persons  from  trusting  him  on  his  account.
He  was  absent  lour  years,when  he  returned  again  to  his
father's  house,  and  was received  in  the  same  cold  and
unfeeling manner  as  before,  was  not  allowed  to  stay  in
the,  house,  but  was-  obliged  to  seek  an  assylum  among
strangers. He  staid  in  town  several  days,  became  de-
jected, in  consequence,  as  he  said,  of  the  treatment  he
had  met  with  at  his  father's  house,  went  over  to  Charles-
town,  took  a  quantity  of  laudanum,and  was  found  near  the
monument  senseless; was carried  to  the  alms-house,
where  he  died,  and  was  buried  ^Bifi  there.

1  continued  with  Mr.  Smith,  as  has  been  before  men-
tioned, giving  him  instruction,  tiU  the  first  of  June,-when
I  appointed  him  agent,  with  authority  to  sell  family
rights  and  medicine.  An  agreement  was  drawn  up  and
signed  by  both  parties,  in  which  it  was  stipulated,  that
1  was  to  furnish  him  wirh  medicine,  and  allow  him  25
per  cent,  for  selling;  and  he  was  .to  have  50.  per  cent,
for  all  the  rights he  sold ;  which  was ten  ^dollars for


162  Narrative  of  the  IAfe\  ^cz.

each  right,  for  giving  the  necessary  information  to  those
who  purchased,  and  collecting  the  pay.  His  principal
dependance  at  this  time  was  upon  me  and  the  practice,
for  his  support.  He  paid  me  one  half  of  what  he  receiv-
ed for  family  rights  as  he  sold  them.  The  first  of  July  I
contemplated  going  home  to  %^i  my  hay ;  but  Mrs.  Smith
expecting  to  be  confined  soon,  was  very  urgent  that  I
should  stay  till  after  she  was  sick,  which  detained  me
three  weeks.  I  staid  accordingly  and  attended  her
through  her  sickness,  for  which  they  gave  me  great  cre-
dit and  praise  at  the  time.  I  then  went  Some  to  attend
to  my  farm  and  get  my  haj' ;  after  which  1  returned  to
Boston,  and  in  the  fall  went  to  Cape-Cod,  to  attend  to
some  bussiness  there, .  and  on  my  return  to  Boston,  I
found  Mr.  Smith's  youngest  child  sick  with  the  quinsy,
or  rattles;  he  had  done  all  he  could  and  given  it  over  to
die.  The  women  had  taken  charge  of  the  child,  after
he  had  given  it  up,  and  had  given  it  some  physick.
When  1  saw  the  child  I  gave  some  encouragement  of  a
cure,  and  they  were  very  desirous  for  me  to  do  some-
thing for  it.  I  told  them  they  had  done  very  wrong  in
giving  physick,  for  it  was  strictly  against  my  orders  to
ever  give  any  physick,  in  cases  where  there  was  canker.
They  observed  that  there  was  no  appearance  of  canker.
I  told  them  it  would  never  appear  wJiere  they-  gave
physick,  for  it  would  remain  inside,  till  mortification  de-
cided the  contest.

I  began  with  the  child  by  giving  No.  2,  which  caused
violent  struggles  and  aroused  it  from  the  stupid  posture
in  which  it  had  lain,  until  the  moisture  appeared  in  the
mouth  ;  then  gave  some  No.  3,  steeped,  and  No.  1  and
2,  to  start  the  canker^  and  cause  it  to  vomit.  This  soon
gave  relief.  The  women  who  were  present  accused
me  of  the  greatest  ^cruelty,  because  I  brought  the
child  out  of  its  stupid  state,  and  restored  its  sense  of  feel-
ing, by  which  means  the  life  of  the  child  was  saved-
The  next  morning  its  mouth  vjias  as  white  as  paper  with
canker;  they  were  thea  all  satisfied  that  I  knew  the
child's  situation  best,  and  that  I  had  saved  its  hfe.  I  con-
sidered the  child  so  much  relieved,  that  the  father  and
mother  would  be  able  to  restore  it  to  perfect  health,  left
it  in  their  Crire  and  weot  out  of  town. I  returned  the


Of  Samuel  ThomsQU:  15S

next  day  about  noon,  and  found  that  they  had  again  given
it  up  to  die  ;  its  throat  was  so  filled  with  canker  that  it
had  not  swallowed  any  thing  for  four  hours.  I  was  in  sus-
pense whether  to  do  any  thing  for  the  child  or  not ;  but
told  the  father  and  mother  I  thought  if  it  was  mine  I
would  not  give  it  up  yet ;  they  wished  me  to  try.  I
took  some  small  quills  from  a  wing,  and  stripped  them,
except  about  three  quarters  of  an  inch  at  the  point,  tied
severally  of  them  together,  which  made  a  swab,  dipped
it  in  canker  tea,  and  began  by  washing  the  mouth  ;  then
rinsing  it  with  cold  water — then  washed  with  the  tea
again,  putting  the  swab  down  lower  in  the  throat
which  caused  it  to  gag,  and  while  the  throat  was
open,  put  it  down  below  the  swallow,  and  took  off  scales
of  canker,  then  rinsed  again  with  cold  water.  Soon  as  it
could  swallow,  gave  some  tea  of  No.  2,  a  tea  spoonful  at
a  time,  and  it  soon  began  to  struggle  for  breath,  and  ap-
peared to  be  in  great  distress,  similar  to  a  drowned  person
coming  to  life.  In  its  struggling  for  breath  discharged
considerable  phlegm  Qrom  its  nose  and  mouth;  i  th^n
gave  some  more  of  the  emetic  with  canker  tea,  which
operated  favourably  ;  in  two  hours  it  was  able  to  nurse
and  it  soon  got  well,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  father  and
mother,  who  said  that  the  life  of  the  child  was  saved  by
my  perseverance.

Soon  after  this  child  got  well,  which  was  in  the  fall  of
the  year  1817,  Mr.  Smith  moved  to  Taunton.  Previous  to
his  removal  a  man  from  that  place  by  the  name  of  Eddy
.  applied  to  him  to  be  cured  of  a  bad  humour,  caused  by
taking  mercury.  I  assisted  in  attending  upon  him  part
of  the  time.  Mr.  Smith  began  with  him,  and  on  the  turn
of  the  disorder,  the  man  and  he  got  frightened  and  sent
for  me.  He  had  been  kept  as  hot  as  he  could  bear,  with
the  m.edicine,  for  six  hours,  which  increased  the  heat  of
the  body  sufficient  to  overpower  the  cold,  the  heat  turned
inward  and  drove  the  cold  on  the  outside  ;  this  produces
such  a  sudden  change  in  the  whole  system,  that  a  person
unacquainted  with  the  practice  w(5jild  suppose  they  were
dying  ;  hut  there  is  no  danger  tO  be  apprehended,  if  pro-
per measures  are  taken  and  p^rsevfered  in  by  keeping  up
the  inward  heat.  In  such  cases  steaming  is  almost  indis-
j>onsable  ;  for  which  reason  I  haveijeen  obliged  to  steam


I5#  Narrative  of  the  hije^  4^.

the  patient  in  most  cases  where  the  complaint  has  beeE-
of  long  standing,especially  when  much  mercury  has  been
taken,  as  nothing  will  make  it  active  but  heat.  This-
man  soon  got  well  and  returned  home.

I  furnished  Mr.  Smith  with  a  stock  of  medicine,  and  in
the  winter  paid  him  a  visit,  found  him  in  full  practice  and
Mr.  Eddy  assisting  him.  I  carried  with  me  a  quantity  of
medicine,^  renewed  his  stock,  and  stored  the  remainder
with  him.  He  had  sold  several  rights,  and  was  very  suc-
cessful in  his  practice,  which  caused  great  alarm  among
the  doctors;  they  circulated  all  kinds  of  false  and  ridicu-
lous reports  about  his  practice,  to  break  him  up  ;  but  not
Succeeding,  they  raised  a  mob  and  twice  broke  open  Mr.
Smith's  house,  in  his  absence,  and  frightened  his  family.

In  the  spring  of  this  year  Mr.  Smith  moved  to  Scituate,
to  preach  there  and  attend  to  practice;  and  the  medicine
left  with  him,  I  consigned  to  Mr.  Eddy  by  his  recommen-
dation. The  amount  of  the  medicine  was  about  one  hun-
dred dollars,  and  I  sent  him  a  note  for  twenty  dollars,
which  he  collected,  and  afterwards  went  off,  and  1  lost
the  whole  amount.  During  this  season  I  went  to  Ply-
mouth to  visit  some  there  who  had  bought  family  rights,
and  returned  by  the  way  of  Scituate  in  order  to  visit  Mr.„
Smith,  look  over  his  books,  and  have  some  settlement
with  him.  I  had  let  him  have  medicine  as  he  wanted  it,
trusting  him  to  give  me  credit  for  what  he  sold  or  used.
I  think  he  had  given  me  credit,  so  that  the  balance  due
me  at  this  time,  for  what  he  had,  was  four  hundred  dol'
lars.  He  was  unable  to  pay  me  any  thing  and  1  returned
to  Boston.

Mr.  Smith  afterwards  removed  his  family  to  Boston,
and  in  the  fall  of  the  year  1818,  he  said  that  he  was  not
able  to  pay  me  any  money ;  but  he  would  let  me  have
such  things  as  he  could  spare.  I  was  disposed  to  be  aa
favourable  towards  him  as  I  could  and  took  what  he  chose
to  offer  at  his  own  price. — He  let  me  have  two  old  watch-
es at  one  hundred  dollars  and  an  old  mare  at  eighty,
which  was  for  medicine  at  cash  prices.  I  gave  him  all
the  chance  of  selling  rights  and  medi<iine,  in  hopes  that
he  would  be  able  to  do  better  by  me.  I  often  had  re-
quested him  to  deliver  lectures  on  my  system  of  practice,
as  this  had,  been  a  favourite  object  with  me  in  appointing


Of  Samuel  Thomsvn.  155

^lim  agent;  but  never  could  prevail  with  him  to  do  any
thing  in  that  way.  Another.important  arrangement  I  had
made  with  him  was,  that  he  was  to  assist  me  in  prepar-
ing for  the  press,  a  work  to  contain  a  narrative  ol  my
life,  and  a  complete  description  of  my  whole  system,  f
had  written  it  in  the  best  manner  I  could,  and  depended
on  him  to  copy  it  oflf  and  prepare  it  in  a  correct  manner
to  be  printed ;  but  he  put  me  off  from  time  to  time  and
was  never  ready  to  attend  to  it.  AU  this  time  1  never
hffd  any  suspicion  of  his  having  a  design  to  wrong  me,  by
usurping  the  whole  lead  of  the  bussiness,  and  turning
every  thing  to  his  own  advantage.

I  continued  to  keep  medicine  at  his  house,  which  he
had  free  access  to  and  took  it  when  he  pleased,  giving
me  credit  for  it  according  to  his  honesty.  There  was
two  or  three  thousand  dollars  worth  at  a  time,  in  the
house.  He  charged  me  three  dollars  per  week  for  board,
for  all  the  time  I  was  at  his  house,  after  he  returned
from  the  country ;  and  he  had  given  me  credit  for  only
eighty  dollars  for  medicine  the  year  past.  On  a
settlement  with  him  at  this  time^  (1819)  he  owed  me
about  four  hundred  dollars ;  I  asked  him  for  a  due  bill
.for  the  balance,  but  he  refused  to  give  one — and  said
that  Mr  Eddy  had  received  two  hundred  dollars  worth
of  the  medicine,  for  which  he  had  received  nothing,  and
he  ought  not  to  pay  for  it.  I  agreed  to  lose  one  half  of  it,
and  allowed  one  hundred  dollars  the  same  as  if  I  had
received  cash  of  him.  I  took  a  memorandum  from  his
book  of  what  was  due  me,  which  was  all  1  had  for  secu-
rity. In  the  fall  of  the  year  1820,  I  had  another  settle-
ment with  Mr.  Smith  and  he  owed  me  about  four  hun-
dred dollars,  having  received  no  money  of  him  the  year
past.  He  told  me  that  all  the  property  he  had  was  a
horse  and  chaise,  and  that  if  I  did  not  have  it  somebody
else  would.  I  took  the  horse  and  chaise  at  three  hun-
dred dollars,  and  the  hundred  dollars  I  agreed  to  allow
Qo  Mr.  Paddy's  account,  made  us,  according  to  his  ac-
counts, about  square,  as  to  the  medicine  he  had  given  me
credit  for.  He  made  put  a  statement  of  fifty-seven  fami-
ly rights  that  he  had  sold  at  twenty  dollars  each,  twenty-
three  of  which  he  had  never  paid  me  any  thing  for ;  his
plea  for  not  paying  me  for  them  was,  that  he  had not


1-56  JTarrative  of  the  Life^  ^-c.

received  his  pay  of  those  who  had  bought  them.  Hrsr
agTeement  with  me  was,  that  he  should  account  to  me
for  ten  dollars,  for  each  right  sold,  and  he  Was  to  have
ten  dollars.-each  for  collecting  the  money  and  giving  the
•eccessary  ^information  to^the  purchasers.

In  tli«  winter  of  1819,  I  went  to  Philadelphia,  and
previous  to  my  going  made  arrangments  with  Mr.  Smith
1o  publish  a  nrw  edition  of  my  book  of  directions  ;  we
revised  the  former  edition  and  made  such  additions-  as
we  thought  would  be  neccessary  to  give  a  complete  and
full  description  of  my  system,  and  the  manner  of  prepar-
ing apd  using  the  medicine ;  and  1  directed  him  to  se-
.cure  the  copy-right  according  to  law.  I  left  the  whole
care  with  him,  to  arrange  the  matter,  and  have  it  print-
■cd.  On  my  return  to  Boston  in  March,  he  had  g'^t  it
done  ;  but  in  a  manner  very  unsatisfactory  to  me,  for  he
had  left  out  twelve  pages  of  the  most  useful  part  of  the
remarks  and  directions,  and  it  was  otherwise  very  incor-
rectly and  badly  printed.  1  asked  him  the  reason  of  this,
and  he  said  a  part  of  the  copy  had  got  mislaid,  and  the
printer  had  not  done  his  work  well.  I  had  no  idea  at
the  time,  that  he  had  any  design  in  having  this  pamphlet
printed  in  the  manner  it  was  ;  but  his  subsequent  conduct
would  justify  the  belief,  that  he  had  previous  to  this  for-
med a  plan  to  usurp  the  whole  of  my  system  of  practice
and  turn  every  thing  to  his  own  advantage  ;  for  he  has
since  attempted  to  satisfy  tlie  public  that  my  system  was
no  system  ;  a-^d  has  brought  forward  this  very  book,
which  was  printed  under  his  own  inspection  and  arranged
by  him, as  a  part  of  his  proof  that  I  was  incapable  of  man-
aging my  owii  discoveries,  and  of  communicating  the  ne-
cessary information  in  an  inteligible  manner  to  make  my
system  of  practice  useful  to  those  who  purchase  the
rights.  It  is  a  vvoil  known  fact,  that  some  of  the  most  es-
sential part  of  the  directions,  was  to  be  verbal  ;  and  I
had  allowed  him  ten  dollars  each,  to  give  the  proper  in-
structions to  all  those  to  whom  he  sold  the  rights.

Another  circumstance  that  1  have  recenty  found  out,
goes  to  show  a  dishonesty  in  design,  to  say  the  least  of
it.  He  deposited  the  tit|&  page  of  the  above  mentioned
pamphlet  and  obtained  a  certiiicate  from  the  clerk,  in  the
oame  of  Elias  Smith  as  proprietor,  and  caused  it  to  be


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  157

printed  in  the  name  of  vSamuel  Thomson  as  author  and
proprietor.  What  his  intentions  were  in  thus  pubUshing  a
false  certificate,  1  shall  not  attempt  to  explain ;  but
leave  the  reader  to  judge  for  himself.  If  I  had  been
taken  away,  he  possibly  might  have  came  forward  and
claimed  under  it  a  right  to  all  my  discoveries,  and  even-
tually to  substitute  himself  in  my  place  ai  sole  proprietor.
From  that  time  he  neglected  the- sale  of  rights,  and  turn-
ed his  attention  mostly  to  practice  and  preparing  his  own
medicine.  During  the  summer  of  1820  he  employed
Mr.  Darling  to  assist  him  in  practice  and  prepare  medi-
cine, anB  while  with  him  he  prepared  38  bottles  of  the
rheumatic  drops,  which  by  agreement  he  was  to  have
of  me  ;  he  also  directed  him  to  take  the  meterials  from
my  stock,  which  was  in  his  house,  and  prepare  25  lbs,  of
composition,  and  this  was  kept  a  secret  from  me.  The
reason  he  gave  Mr.  Darling  for  not  having  medicine  of  me
according  to  his  agreement,  wr.s  that  he  owed  me  so  much
now  that  he  was  afraid  he  should  never  be  able  to  pay
me.  I  thought  his  taking  the  preparing  and  selling  my
medicme  to  himself,  was  a  very  singular  way  to  pay  an
old  debt.

In^  May  1820,  Mr.  Smith  collected  together  those
in-Boston  who  had  bought  rights  of  me  or  my  agents,  and
formed  them  into  a  society,  under  a  new  name  ;  he  wrote
a  constitution,  which  they  signed  ;  and  the  members  paid
one  dollar  entrance  and  were  to  pay  12  1-2  cents  per
month  assessment,  for  which  he  promised  them  important
instructions  and  cheap  medicine.  He  was  appointed
President  and  Treasurer,  and  after  he  had  obtained  their
money,  the  meetings  were  discontinued  and  the  society
was  broken  up  in  the  course  of  nine  months.  In  this  he
appears  to  have  taken  the  lead  of  all  those  who  had  pur-
chased the  right  of  me,  and  make  them  tributary  to
himself.

In  November  I  returned  from  the  country  an.d  found
that  he  had  advertised,  without  my  knowledge  or  con-
sent, in  the  Herald,  a  periodical  work  published  by  him
at  that  time,  "  proposals  for  publishing  by  subscription,
a  book  to  contain  the  whole  tof  the  system  and  practice
discovered  by  Samuel  Thomson,  and  secured  to  him  by

O


158  JVarrative  of  the  Life^  ^C.

Elias  Smith."  This  mostly  stopped  the  sale  of  rights,
for  no  one  would  purchase  a  right  of  me  or  my  agents
at  20  dollars,  whefi  they  had  the  pmmise  of  them  at  five.
I  went  to  him  to  know  "what  he  meant  by  his  conduct,  in
issuing  these  proposals ;  he  r>lead  innocence  and  said  he
had  no  improper  design  in  doing  it.

I  was -now  under  the  necessity  of  doing  something,  in
order  to  counteract  what  had  been  done  by  Mr.  Smith,
in  publishing  the  above  proposals ;  and  came  to  the  de-
termination to  issue  new  proposals  for  publishing  a  nar-
rative of  my  life  as  far  as  related  to  my  practice,  with  a
complete  description  of  my  system  of  practice  in  curing
disease,  and  the  manner  of  preparing  and  using  the  me-
to  be  ten  dollars,  including  the  right  to  each  of  using  the
same  for  himself  and  family.  Mr.  Smith  undertook  to
write  the  proposals  and  get  them  printed  ;  after  they
were  struck  off,  [  found  he  had  said  in  them,  by  Samuel
to  him.  I  asked  him  what  he  meant  by  putting  his  name
said  no  more  about  it  at  that  time,  and  let  them  be
distributed.

When  I  settled  with  him  the  last  time,  [  asked  him
what  he  would  charge  me  to  prepare  my  manuscript
for  the  press — he  said  he  thought  we  were  to  write  it
together — 1  asked  him  what  made  him  think  so — He  said
because  his  name  was  on  the  proposals  with  mine — I  ad-
mitted this ;  but  told  him  the  reasons  he  had  assigned
for  putting  his  name  to  it  without  my  consent  or  know-
ledge. He  then  intimated  that  he  thought  he  was  to  be
a  partner  with  me — I  asked  him  what  I  ever  had  of  him
to  entitle  him  to  an  equal  right  to  all  my  discoveries.
To  this  he  made  no  reply  ;  but  said  he  would  write  it,
and  we  would  agree  upon  the  price  afterwards. — 1  told
him  no — I  must  know  his  price  first.  He  said  he  could
not  tell  within  fifty  dollars.  I  then  told  him  we  would
say  no  more  about  it.  This  conversation,  together  with
his  conduct  in  regard  to  the  proposals,  Convinced  me  be-
yond all  doubt,  that  his  design  was  to  destroy  me  and
"take  the  whole  business  to  himself  I  felt  unwilling  to
trust  him  any  longer,  and  took  all  my  books  and  manu-


Of  Samuel  Thomson. "  159

■  scripts  from  his  house.  His  subsequent  conduct  towards
me  has  fully  justified  all  my  suspicions,  and  left  no  room
for  a  doubt,  that  his  intentions  were  to  take  every  ad-
vantage of  me  in  his  power,  and  usurp  my  whole  system
of  practice.  ,,

Mj/  system  of  practice  and  the  credit  of  my  medicine,
was  never  in  a  more  prosperous  condition,  than  when  T
began,  with  Mr.  Smith,  to  instruct  him  in  a  knowledge  of
all  my  discoveries  and  experience  in  curing  disease  ;  and
appointed  him  agent.  The  people  wherever  it  became
known,  were  every  day  becoming  convinced  of  its  utility,
cind  the  medicine  was  in  great  demand — family  rights
.sold  readily,  and  every  thing  seemed  to  promise  complete
success  in  diffusing  a  general  knowledge  of  the  practice
among  all  classes  of  the  people  ;  but  under  his  manage-
ment, the  whole  of  my  plans  have  been  counteracted,
,and  my  anticipations  in  a  great  measure  have  been  frus-
.tfated.  By  his  conduct  towards  me,  in  his  attempt  to
take  the  lead  of  the  practice  out  of  my  hands,  and  des-
troy my  credit  with  the  pubhc,  has  not  only  been  a  seri-
ous loss  to  me  in  a  pecuniary  point  of  view,  but  the  peo-
ple at  large  are  deprived  of  the  blessings  that  might  be
derived  by  a  correct  knowlege  of  my  discoveries ;  aiid
have  it  in  their  power  to  relieve  themselves  from  sick-
ness and  pain  with  a  trifling  expense,  and  generations  yet
unborn  be  benefitted  thereby.

I  tried  to  get  a  settlement  with  Mr.  Smith,  for  the  me-
dicine he  had  prepared  and  sold  and  also  for  the  rights
he  had  not  accounted  to  me  for,  with  the  affairs  that  re-
mained unadjusted  between  us;  but  could  not  get  him  to  do
any  thing  about  it — and  finding  there  was  no  chance  of  ob-
taining an  honorable  settlement  with  him.  about  the  first
of  February  1821,  I  took  all  my  medicine  from  his  house
and  discontinued  all  connection  or  concern  with  him.  I
was  then,  after  waiting  about  four  years  for  him  to  assist
me  in  writing,  which  was  one  of  my  greatest  objects  in
appointing  him  agent,  obliged  to  publish  a  pamphlet,  in
which  I  gave  some  of  the  principles  upon  which  my  sys-
tem was  founded,  with  explanations  and  directions  for  my
practice,  and  also  to  notify  the  public  that  I  had  appoint-
ed other  agents,  and  caution  all  persons  ageiinst  trespass-
ing on  my  patent.


IGO  JVafrative  of  the  Life^  ^c.

He  contiaued  to  practice  and  prepare  medicine,  bid-
ding me  defiance.  I  made  several  attempts  to  get  an
honourable  settlement  with  him,  without  success.  I  em-
ploj^ed  three  persons  to  go  to  him  and  offer  to  settle  all
our  difficulty  by  leaving  it  to  a  reference  ;  but  he  re-
fused to  do  any  thing  ;  continued  to  tresspass,  and  made
iise  of  every  means  to  destroy  my  character  by  abusive
and  false  reports  concerning  my  conduct,  both  in  regard
to  my  practice  and  private  character.  Finding  that  1
could  get  no  redress  from  him.  I  put  an  advertise-
ment in  the  pcrpers,  giving  notice  that  1  had  deprived  him
of  all  authority  as  my  agent ;  and  cautioning  the  public
against  receiving  any  medicine  or  information  from  him  un-
der an}'^  authority  of  mine.  He  redoubled  his  diligence  in
trespassing,  and  prepared  the  medicine  and  advertised  it
for  sale  under  different  names  from  what  I  had  called
it. — I  found  there  was  no  other  way  for  me  to  do,  but  to
appeal  to  the  laws  of  my  country  for  justice,  and  brought
an  action  against  him  for  a  trespass  on  my  patent,  to  be
tried  at  the  Circuit  Court,  at  the  October  term  1821.
The  action  was  continued  to  May  term,  when  it  was
called  up  and  the  judge  decided  that  the  specifications  in
the  patent  were  improperly  made  out,  not  being  suffi-
ciently explicit  to  found  my  action  upon.  In  conse-
quence of  which  I  had  to  become  non-suited,  and  stop  all
further  proceedings  against  him,  till  I  can  make  out  new
specifications  and  obtain  a  new  patent  from  the  govern-
ment.

Mr.  Smith  has  lately  publishe  d  a  book,  in  which  he
has  given  my  system  of  practice,  with  directions  for  pre-
paring and  using  the  vegetable  medicine  secured  to  me
by  patent,  and  my  plan  of  treatment  in  curing  disease  as
far  as  he  knew  it.  In  the  whole  of  this  work  there  is
not  one  principle  laid  down  or  one  idea  suggested,  except
what  is  taken  from  other  authors,  but  what  he  has  ob-
tained from  my  written  or  verbal  instructions  ;  and  still
be  hiiS  the  effrontary  to  publish  it  to  the  world  as  his  own
discovery,  without  giving  me  any  credit  whatever,  ex-
cept he  has  condescended  to  say,  that  "  Samuel  Thomson
has  made  some  imperfect  discoveries  of  disease  and  me-
dicine, but  has  not  reduced  any  thing  to  a  regular  sys-
tem " This  assertion  will  appear  so  perfectly  ridiculous


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  161

to  all  those  who  have  had  any  knowledge  of  my  practice,
that  I  shall  forbear  making  any  comment  upon  it.  It  is
true  that  he  has  made  alterations  in  the  names  of  some
of  the  preparations  of  medicine  ;  but  the  articles  used  and
the  manner  of  using  them  is  the  same  as  mine.  It  is
also  a  well  known  fact,  that  he  had  no  knowledge  of
medicine,  or  of  curing  disease,  until  I  instructed  him;  and
if  what  he  says  be  true,  the  effect  has  been  very  re-
markable, in  as  much  as  his  magnetical  attraction  has
drawn  all  the  skill  from  me  to  himself,  by  which  he  has
taken  upon  himself  the  title  of  Physician,  and  left  me
nothing  but  the  appellation  of  Mr.  Thomson,  the  imper-
fect projector.

I  have  been  more  particular  in  describing  Mr.
Smith's  conduct,  because  it  has  been  an  import-
ant crisis  in  the  grand  plan  for  which  1  have  spent  a
great  part  of  my  life,  and  suifered  much,  to  bring  about ;
that  of  establishing  a  system  of  medical  practice,  where-
by the  people  of  this  highly  favoured  country  may  have,
a  knowledge  of  the  means  by  which  they  can  at  all  times
relieve  themselves  from  the  diseases  incident  to  our
country,  by  a  perfectly  safe  and  simple  treatment,  and
thereby  relieve  themselves  from  a  heavy  expense,  as
well  as  the  often  dangerous  consequences  arising  from
the  employing  those  w^ho  make  use  of  poisonous  drugs
and  other  means,  by  whicji  they  cause  more  disease
than  they  cure  ;  and  in  which  I  consider  the  public  as
well  as,  myself  have  a  deep  interest.  I  have  endeavour-
ed to  make  a  correct  and  faithful  statement  of  his  con-
duct  and  the  treatment  I  have  received  from  him  ;  every
particular  of  which  can  be  substantiated  by  indisputable
testimony  if  necessary,  i  now  appeal  to  the  public,  and
more  particularly  to  ali  who  have  been  benefitted  by  my
discoveries,  for  their  aid  and  countenance,  in  supporting
my  just  rights  against  all  encroachments,  and  securing  to
me  my  claims  to  whatever  of  merit  or  distinction  I  am
honorably  and  justly  entitled.  While  I  assure  them  that
I  am  not  to  be  discourageid  or  diverted  from  my  grand
object  by  opposition,  or  the  dishonesty  of  those  who  deal.^
deceitfully  with  me  ;  but  shall  persevere  in  all  honora-
ble and  ffjiir  measures  to  accomplish  what  my  life  has
principally  been  spent  in  fulfilling.

0  2


162  JVarratii>€  of  the  Life^  ^c.

I  shall  now  bring  this  narrative,  of  those  events  an*!
circumstances,  that  have  taken  place  in  my  life,  in  which
the  public  are  interested,  to  a  close  ;  having  stated  eve-
ry  particular  that  I  thought  worthy  of  being  recorded,
in  as  concise  and  plain  a  manner  as  I  was  capable  ;  and
am  not  without  a  hope  that  my  endeavours  to  promote
the  public  good,  will  be  duly  appreciated.  Some  certi-
ficates and  statements  of  cases  that  have  been  attended
under  my  system  of  practice,  from  those  who  have  been
my  agents,  or  who  have  purchased  family  rights  and
have  had  long  experience  in  the  effects  produced  by  a
use  of  my  medicine,  are  subjoined.  They  furnish  much
useful  information  on  the  subject,  and  will  convey  a
more  correct  view  of  the  success  which  has  attended  the
administering  my  medicine,  and  following  the  mode  of
treatment  recommended  by  my  system  of  practice,  than
could  be  given  in  any  other  manner.  Reference  has
been  made  to  some  of  them  in  the  course  of  the  forego-
ing narrative,  and  their  publication  in  the  work  seemed
necessary,  to  convey  a  correct  knowledge  of  many  state-
ments therein  given,  to  show  the  safety  ond  success  with
which  various  diseases  have  been  cured  by  others,  who
have  had  no  other  knowledge  of  medicine  than  the  in-
struction received  from  me  ;  and  will,  1  trust,  be  suffici-
ent to  satisfy  every  reasonable  person  how  easy  it  would
be  for  every  one  to  become  possessed  with  the  means  of
curing  themselves  of  disease,  without  being  under  the
necessity  of  caUing  the  aid  of  a  physician.


Of  Samuel Thomson.  163


■ CERTIFICATES  AND  STATEMENTS,
Concerning  the  treatment  and  cure  of disease,  under

TflE SYSTEM OF PRACTICE DISCOVERED BY Dr. SaMUEL

* Thomson.


The  following  documents  have  been  voluntarily  com-
municated to  me  by  persons  of  respectable  steading  m
society,  as  evidence  of  their  zeal  in  promotin^a.cause  in
which  they  take  a  deep  interest ;  and  on  whom  the  most
implicit  reliance  may  be  placed,  for  veracity  and  a  tho-
rough knowledge  of  the  subject  upon  which  they  treat.
They  have  been  selected  from  a  mass  of  evidence  that
might  be  produced  in  support  of  the  utility  of  the  system  ;
in  fact,  certificates  of  the  cure  of  individual  cases  might
be  obtained  sufficient  to  fill  a  large  volume,  if  thought
necessary ;  but  the  following  being  accounts  of  the  vari-
ous kinds  of  disease  incident  to  our  country,  most  of
which  were  considered  desperate,  that  have-tbeen  cured
in  different  parts  of  the  country  and  at  different  times,
and  under  a  variety  of  circumstances,  w^ill  give  a  tolera-
ble fair  view  of  the  success  with  which  the  practice  has
been  attended.


^  remarkable  cure  of  Dysentary,^  in  Jericho  Vermont,  in
October,  1807.

In  September  of  the  year  1807,  this  disease  prevailed,
and  was  very  mortal,  so  that  but  two  out  of  twenty-two  liv-
ed that  were  under  the  care  of  the  regular  physicians.
The  disease  seemed  to  threaten  general  destruction  ;  so
that  there  were  not  enough  in  health  to  attend  the  sick.
I'he  inhabitants  of  the  town  held  a  consultation,  as  to  the
best  mode  of  proceedure,  and  agreed  to  send  for  Dr.
Samuel  Viomson,  of  Surrey,  N.  H.  130  miles  distance,
v/hich  was  accordingly  done.  In  five  days  he  arrived,  and
I  was  appointed  to  wait  on  him,  and  attended  through
the  whole.

In  three  days  thirty  were  committed  to  his  care,  and
in  eight  dnys,  by  the  use  of  his  medicine,  the  town was


164  Karmtive  of  the  Life^  ^c.

cleared of  the  disease,  with  the  loss  of  two  only,  who
were  past  cure-  before  he  saw  them.

JOHN  PORTER.


Hampshire  and  Massachusetts,  certify — That  we  have
for  four  years  been  personally  acquainted  with  Or;
Thomson,  his  medicine,  and  mode  of  practice,  and  do
saj',  that  we  have  experienced  the  most  safe  and  speedy
relief  from  complaints  common  to  the  inhabitants  of  this
climate  ; — such  as  Hemiplegy,  Consumptions,  Rheuma-
tism, Cholic,  Fevers,  Stranguary,  &.c.  And  that  we  are
well  satisfied  with  the  benefit  we  and  our  acquaintance
have  received  by  being  relieved  from  the  above
disorders.

ALEXANDER  RICE, STEPHEN  NEAL,
JOHN  RODGERS,  RICHARD RICE,

BENNING  HALL,  HUNKIN  LOUD,

JOSHUA  JONES,  THOMAS  CLAPHAM.


This  certifies — That  I  have  from  my  infancy  been  af-
flicted with  the  Salt  Rheum,  an  '•  for  thirty  years  have
had  it  very  bad,  which  from  year  to  year  has  been  grow-
ing worse.  But  by  the  use  of  Dr.  Thomson's  medicines
1  have  been  entirely  relieved,  and  I  beheve  radically
cured.

ELIZABETH  MARSHALL.

Portsmouth^  May^  1813.

Extract  of  a  certificate  from  Eastham^  county  of  Barnsia-<
ble^  Mass.  containing  an  account  of  Dr.  Thomson's
Medicine.  i'  7

In  February  1816,  the  spotted  fever  first  appeared  in
the  town  ;  eight  persons,  heads  of  families,  within  one
mile  of  each  other,  died  in  about  thirty  six  hours.  In
three  houses,  within  one  fourth  of  a  mile,  ten  persons  di-
ed. In  one  house  was  a  mother  and  four  children.  Six
Physicians  in  this  county  attended,  but  to  little  or  no
purpose.  Upwards  of  forty  had  died  by  the  first  of  May
and  but  few  lived  who  had  the  fever.  In  this  month,
Dr.  Thomson  was  called  on  for  assistance.  He  sold  the
right  of  usipg  his  medicine  to  several  individuals  of  the


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  165

town,  a-nd  gave  them  liberty  to  administer  the  same  to
the  sick.  In  the  course  of  the  month,  the  meji  who  us-
ed the  Medicine,  relieved  upwards  of  thirty  who  were
seized  with  this  violent  disease,  with  the  loss  of  but  one.
At  the  same  time  and  place  those  who  were  attended
by  the  regular  Physicians,  eleven  out  of  tv^^elve  died.

The  above  is  authenticated  by  the  names  of  the  fol-
lowing persons  :

PHILANDER  SHAW,  Minister  of  Eastham.

OBED  KNOWLES. one  of  the  .Selectmen.

SAMUEL  FRKEMAN,  Do.

HARDING  KNOWLES,  Justice  of  the  Peace.


Certificate  of  the  Post  Master  of  Eastham.
I  do  hereby  certify  that  the  above  statement  of  mor-
tality in this town, and  the success  of  Dr.  Thomson's
Medicine,  was taken  from  a  journal  kept  in  my  house,
and  is  correct.

JOSEPH  MAYO,
Agent  for  the  Society^  and  Post  Master.

This  certifies,  that  at  the  early  age  of  sixteen  I  had
a  severe  attack  of  the  Rheumatism,  which  so  confined
me  to  my  bed,  that  I  could  not  bear  to  be  touched  or
moved,  but  in  the  most  easy  and  gentle  manner,  being  in
exquisite  pain  at  times  and  extremely  sore  in  every  part
of  my  frame.  I  continued  in  this  situation  about  4
months,  and  though  I  had  the  best  medical  aid  the  coun-
try afforded  at  that  time,  I  received  little  or  no  benefit,
till  the  opening  of  the  season  with  its  warming  and  re-
freshing influences  ameliorated  my  distressing  malady,
and  it  gradually  wore  away.

1  continued  to  experienc€f  every  year,  similar  attacks,
though  less  severe,  of  shortser  ©r  longer  continuance,  till
in  the  year  1802  or  3,  it  returned  again  with  unusual  and
alarming  violence.  The  best  medical  aid  was  employed,
commenced.  I  was  bled,  and  the  bleeding  repeated  for
several  days  together;  blisters  were  applied;  strong
drastic  purges  often  administered  ;  and  my  regimen  very
low  and  spare.  Thus  one^intention  of  the  physicians,  to
wit,  d*^pletion,  was  accomplished,  for  1  w<a*  greatly  re-


166  Narrative  of  the  Life^  ^e.

duced  in  less  than  3  weeks,  and  my  strength  and  spirits
in  the  same  degree.  And  though  my  pains  were  re-
moved in  a  great  measure,  yet  my  weakness  and  debiUty,
which  were  excessive,  seemed  to  be  proportioned  to  my
freedom  therefrom. — So  that  I  was  very  far  from  a  state
of  health. — I  was  closely  confined  5  or  6  months,  and  it
was  about  two  years,  before  I  could  attend  to  my  usual
avocations.  But  all  that  had  been  hitherto  done  by  no
means  removed  the  cause  of  my  complaint,  for  I  continu-
ed to  be  assailed  in  the  same  manner  each  successive
year,  and  confined  for  weeks  together.  Till  in  the  year
1803,  1  became  acquainted  with  Dr.  Samuel  Thomson,
and  by  a  knowledge  of  his  medicine,  its  use,  and  the  ap-
plication thereof,  1  have  always  been  relieved  when  as-
sailed, in  twelve  or  twenty-four  hours  to  the  extent';
and  have  suffered  no  other  confinement  from  my  old  ma-
lady, or  any  other,  to  the  present  time.  My  family  like^
wise  have  experienced  the  most  beneficial  effects  from
the  same  medicine,  in  all  the  complaints  common  to  this
part  of  the  country.  I  find  it  to  answer  all  the  purpcses
that  medicine  can  answer,  and  were  it  generally  used,
and  its  real  value  known,  chronic  complaints  which  1  and
so  many  others  have  labored  under,  so  tedious  and  dis-
tressing would  be  banished  from  the  earth.

Many  in  the  vicinity  where  I  reside,  whose  cases
were  very  diflficult  and  complicated,  to  my  own  personal
knowlegde,  have  been  restored  to  perfect  health  by  this
medicine.  More  than  twelve  persons  of  a  consumption  I
could  particularly  name;  one  of  a  mortification,  one  of  a
dropsy,  and  one  of  numb  palsy,  and  others  of  divers  dis-
eases. The  cures  are  truly  extraordinary,  and  what  my
ears  never  heard  nor  my  eyes  never  witnessed  to  be
done  by  any  other  medicirkC.  As  health  is  the  greatest
earthly  blessing,  from  the  highest  goodwill  to  mankind,
and  for  the  cause  of  suffering  humanity,  I  wish  its  univer-
sal prevalence.

The  mode  of  treatment  is  according  to  the  case.  If  a
slight  head  ache  a  pinch  of  vegetable  snuff  at  once  re-
moves the  pain.  If  severe,  in  addition  to  the  snuff  we
bathe  the  head  with  the  rheumatic  drops.  If  it  is  ob-
stinate, and  the  above  applications  insufficient;  in  addi-
tion^ to  these,  we  admipister  a  portion  of  the  rheumatic


Of  Samuel  Thomson  16*7

drops,  with  No.  2,  and  seat  the  patient  by  the  fire,
shielded  from  the  air  by  a  proper  covering. — This  pro-
ceedure  rarely  fails  of  the  desired  intention  ;  but  should
it,the  case  is  serious  and  demands  a  partial,  or  full  process
of  the  medicine,  which  cleansing  the  stomach  and  bowels
removes  the  cause  of  pain,  and  these  produce  the  de-
sired effect.  In  case  of  pain  in  the  stomach,  side,  or
bowels,  we  give  sometimes  a  portion  of  the  composition
No.  3,  or  No.  2,  with  hot  water ;  or  from  a  tea  spoonful
to  a  great  spoonful  of  the  rheumatic  drops  and  bathe  the
part  with  the  sariie ;  in  cases  of  obstinacy,  and  where  it
is  requisite,  let  the  patient  go  to  bed  and  apply  a  hot
stone  to  the  part,wrapped  up  with  a  cloth  wet  with  vine-
gar, and  repeat  the  dose. — But  where  the  patient  chooses
and  is  able,  he  sets  by  the  fire  shielded  from  the  air  as
above  stated.  Where  in  any  case,  these  lesser  adminis-
trations fail,  and  in  violent  and  alarming  attacks,
we  commence  the  process  by  giving  No.  1,  2,  and  3,  one
after  another,  or  combining  the  whole  and  repeating  the
same  two  or  three  times,  or  more  as  the  case  demands,
till  a  thorough  operation  is  performed,  and  in  due- time
repeat  the  process,  till  the  patient  is  convalescent.  -

ALEXANDER  RICE.
Kittery^  Mv.  20th,  1821.


The  undersigned  having  experienced  the  benefit  of
the  medicine  of  our  own  country,  discovered  emd  used
by  Doctor  Samuel  Thomson,  submit  the  following  facts
to  the  public,  with  the  hope  that  those  who  are  suffer-
ing with  disease  may  be  induced  to  adopt  a  course  so  sim-
ple and  certain  to  effect  a  cure.  In  the  latter  part  of  the
year  1810,  many  persons  in  this  neighborhood  were  af-
flicted with  fevers  or  other  fatal  diseases,  which  baffled
the  skill  of  the  best  informed^^' physicians.  Alarmed  at
the  progress  which  disease  and  death  were  making  a-
mong  us,  some  of  us  with  our  friends,  made  an  arrange-
ment to  send  to  Portsmouth  N  H.  for  Doctor  Thomson,
of  whose  skill  and  success  we  had  heard  a  flattering  ac-
count. We  carried  our  plan  into  effect,  and  in  the  spring  of
1811,  Doct.  Thomson  came  among  us,  and  succeeded  in
demonstrating  the  superiority  of  his  system  of  practice  o-
ver  every  other. Five  cases  of  consumption,  supposed


168  Narraiive  of  the  Life^  <5'C.

to  be  desperate^  were  relieved  in  thevCourse  of  three
weeks,  and.  all  of  them restored  to  health,  which  they
continue  to  eqjoy  to  this  day. A  case  of  the  dropsy,  con-
sidered hopeless,  was  completely  cured  m  one  week. In
consequence  of  the success uniformily attending  him,
iaboGt  one  hundred  of  the  people  in  this  town  and  vicini-
ty  purchased  of  him  the right  to prepare  and use  his
medicine  ;  for  which  he  has  obtained  a  patent.  From  that
time  to  the  present  his  medicine  has  been  in  constant  use
with undiminished success, and  increasing  patronage.
In  the  time  of  the  late  war,  when  the  dysentery,  and  o-
ther  diseases  incident  to  the  camp,  raged  with  a  fatality
which  the  skill  of  the  faculty  could  not  arrest,  many  of
the  soldiers  applied  to  Dr.  1'homson  and  were  relieved
at  their  own  expense,  in  preference  to  having  the  army
surgeons. For  the  fever  and  ague  we  believe  it  to  be  an
unfailing  remedy. In  new  countries-  it  is  invaluable,  as
it  can  be  administered  by  any  one  in  the  smallest  degree
acquainted  with  its  use,  without danger  to  the patient.
We  are  acquainted  with many  of  the difficulties with
which  Dr. fhom^^on  has  had  to  contend — the  interest  of
some,  the  ignorance of  others,  and  the  prejudice  of  all,
tjave-continually  assailed  him. With  the  two  first  every
"jMjew discovery will htive to  contend ; experience of
the  good  effects  of  this  sj'stem  will  finally  overcome  them
all;  no  sick  person  within  our  knowledge,  who  has  given
it  a  fair  experiment,  has  ever  given  it  up  to  seek  other
remedies. We wish Doct.  Thomson remunerated  for
his  unwearied  labours  for  the  rehefof  the  diseased;  and
hope  the  United  States  will  purchase  the  right,  and  pro-
mulgate a  knowledge  of  the  system  for  the  benefit  of  the
whole  community.

JOHN  BURGIN.

JERRY  BURGIN.

SOLOMON  RICE.
Easiport,  July  20,  '1821.

Eastport^JVashington  County^  State  of  Main^  July  19, 1821.
John  Burgin,  Jerry  Burgin,  and  Solomon  Rice,  who
they  are  men  of  respectability  and  entitled  to  full  faith
and  credit  I.  R.  CHADBOURNK,  /.  Peace..


Of  Samuel Thomson.  160

Eastportyjuly  14,  1821.
Doct.  Samuel  Thomson,

Sir, — You  em^uire  of  me  relative  to  the  benefits  I  re-
ceived from  the  use  of  your  medicine.  I  reply,  that  in
February  1819,  I  was  attacked  with  a  violent  cold,  which
terminated  in  what  I  as  well  as  my  friends  considered  to
be  a  consumption — it  being  a  disease  which  has  been  fa-
tal to  many  of  our  family.  I  continued  to  grow  worse
until  the  following  June,  when  I  considered  my  situation
hopeless.  The  last  of  June  yop  administered  your  me*
dicine  to  me,  which  afforded  me  great  relief.  My
health  has  constantly  amendecli,  until  it  appears  to  be  ful-
your  medicine,  and  am  your  well  wisher  and  friend,

I.  R CHvDBOURNE.


Case  of  Seih  Afason^  Portland.
He  was  attended  by  Dr.  Coffin  of  that  place,  but  his
situation  becoming  desperate  (for  the  messenger  said  it
was  thought  he  could  not  live  two  hours)  Dr.  Thomson
Wvis  sent  for,  and  I  attended  with  him.  We  arrived  at  the
house  at  about  11  o'clock,  and  found  the  patient  in  the
most  anguishing  pain  and  distress.  Dr.  Thomson  admin-
istsred  a  portion  of  the  rheumatic  drops,  and  repeatefiL
the  dose.  In  about  three  hours  the  patient  was  reliev-
ed and  freed  from  pain.  After  this  i  attended  him,  and
carried  him  through  a  regular  process  of  the  medicine
several  times,  and  in  about  a  fortnight  he  went  out ;
but  he  soon  experienced  a  most  violent  relapse,  which
again  threatened  his  life.  1  again  applied  the  medicine
in  the  usual  form,  which  had  so  favourable  effect  as  to  en-
courage a  perseverance.  In  aboat  three  or  four  months
he  was  able  to  attend  to  his  business,  and  now  enjoys  as
tolerable  a  degree  of  health  as  could  be  expected,  con-
sidering the  large  quantities  of  nitre  he  took  previous  to
our  seeing  him.  His  head  was  much  affected,  and  so
sharp  and  acrimonious  the  matter  discharged  therefrom,
thU  small  bones  came  away  eaten  like  a  honey-comb.
To  relieve  the  distress  of  his  head  and  to  enable  him  to
breathe  through  his  nose,  which  was  greatly  swelled,  I
practiced  steaming  it  with  pepper  sauce,  covering  his  head
with  a  blanket,  ^nd pouring  it  on  a  hot  stone  placed  in

F


170  Narrative  of  the  Life^  4'C.

an  iron  bason  on  a  chair  by  the  bed  side.  This  caused
copious  discharges  of  matter,  some  of  Avhich  once  fell
into  his  eye.  which  1  apprehended  would  have  destroyed
it  as  quick  as  vitriol,  but  .for  a  counter  application.  He
likewise  discharged  a  great  quantity  of  putrid  blocd  and
corruption  from  his  stomach.  His  case  was  truly  a  des-
perate one,  and  his  recovery exceeded  all  expectation.

S.  SEW  ALL.
Scarborough^  J anuary  9,  1822.


Case  of  Mrs.  Sally  Keating.,  Portland.
Her  complaints  arose  from  taking  cold  before  or  after
lying  in.  She  had  been  doctered  a  whole  year  by  the
first  physician  in  Portland,  and  given  over  as  incurable
when  I  saw  her.  She  was  much  debilitated,  and  her
left  side,  if  I  rightly  remember,  was  in  a  wasting  perish-
ing state.  After  such  a  length  of  time,  her  disorder  be-
came chronic,  and  so  confirmed  as  not  easily  to  be  re-
moved. In  my  first  applications  i  administered  the
nerve  powder,  syrup,  rheumatic  drops,  and  No.  2,  3,
and  4.  Slie  took  3  or  4  portions  of  one  or  the  other  of
these  medicines  as  her  case  required  in  the  course  of
the  day.-  A  tea  spoonful  of  the  powder  to  half  a  cup  full
of  hot  water  sweetened,  was  the  quantity  taken  at  a
time,  and  an  equal  quantity  of  No.  2,  3,  and  4,  separately,
was  administered  in  the  same  manner,  and  about  a  great
spoonful  of  the  rheumatic  drops  to  a  portion.  The  in-
tention of  those  applications  was  to  quiet  and  strengthen
the  nerves,  and  to  restore  as  i'ar  as  possible  the  digestive
powers,  which  had  been  greatly  impaired  ;  and  the  suc-
cess exceeded  expectation.  'J  his  method  v/as  continued
jfor  some  time,  till  the  patient  at  last  felt  encouraged  to
try  a  regular  course  of  the  medicine.  When  some
warm  medicine  was  given  as  preparatory  ;  No.  3,  was
steeped  and  about  half  a  cupful  of  tlxe  decoction  made
strong  and  sweetened,  to  which  was  added  a  tea  spoonful
of  No.  1  and  2,  was  administered,  and  once  or  twice  re-
peated in  short  intervals.  After  the  operation  was  over
the  steam  bath  was  applied,  followed  with  the  cold
bath.  The  effect  was  highly  promising  and  salutaW,
and  the  whole  process  was  repeated  seven  or  eight
times  at  proper  intervals ;  her  decaying  side  was  surpris-


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  171

ingly  restored,  and  she was  recovered  to an excellent
state  of  health,  which  s^e  enjoys  to  this  day,

S. SEWALL.
Scarborough^  January  l5^,  1822,


This  certifies,  that  for  seventeen  years  past  I  have
heen  in  a  very  poor  state  of  health,  afflicted  with  a  varie-
ty of  complaints,  as  fevers,  cholic,  dysentary,  &c.  which
left  me  in  a  low,  lingering  condition ;  and  although  1
sought  relief  from  ever  quarter  I  could  hear  of,  and  em-
ployed ten  or  a  dozen  physicians  of  celebrity,  I  could
find  no  remedy,  till  in  the  year  1813,  I  had  recourse  to
Dr.  Samuel  Thomson's  system  and  medicine,  and  weiit
through  3  courses  thereof  under  the  administration  and
direction  of  Mr,  S.  Sewall,  and  was  from  that  time  able  to
go  to  work,  and  have  been  ever  since,  by  an  occasional
process  of  the  medicine.  I  became  a  purchaser  of  the
information  for  my  family's  use,  seven  in  number,  and
find  it  so  well  to  answer  the  purpose  in  all  cases  of  sick-
ness, that  I  have  not  since  that  time  been  at  a  shilling's
expence  from,  any  other  source.

THOMAS  SEAVEY.

Scarborough^  November  2,  1821.


This  certifies  that  my  daughter  Mary  from  her  infan-
cy to  the  age  of  sixteen  years,  had  been  afflicted  with
dispepsia,  or  indigestion,  to  such  a  degree  that  her  sto-
mach would  scarcely  bear  the  lightest  kind  of  food.  Ap-
plication was  made  to  medical  aid,  but  without  any  bene-
fit, till  in  September  in  the  year  1814,  she  was  first  un-
der the  care  of  Mr.  S.  Sewall,  and  was  carried  eight
times  through  the  common  process  of  Dr.  Sam-
uel Thomson's  medicine,  which  with  the  aid  of  his  other
remedies,  removed  her  malady,  and  restored  her  to  a
sound  state  of  health,  which  she  now  enjoys.  From  this
time  I  became  a  purchaser  of  the  information  for  the  use
of  my  family,  thirteen  in  number,  and  have  had  more  or
less  sickness ;  but  it  has  ever  answered  the  purpose,  nor
have  I  had  occasion  to  try  any  other  medicine.

ISAAC  PEERING.

Scarboroiy^h.,  November  2,  1821.


172  Narrative  of  the  Life^  SfC.

This  certifies  that  for  several  years  past  I  have  been
afflicted  with  the  chronic  rheumatism,  and  confined  from
my  business  eight  or  nine  weeks  together,  and  so  very  ill
as  to  need  watchers,  and  could  find  no  relief  from  the
faculty.  In  the  year  1813,1  became  acquainted  with
Dr.  S.  Thomson's  medicine  and  found  it  beneficial.  In
the  year  following  I  experienced  an  attack  of  m^  old
rheumatic  complaint,  and  was  fully  relieved  by  a  course
of  the  above  medicine.  Finding  it  so  valuable^  1  have
not  for  myself  or  family,  used  any  ether  remeJdy  from
that  time  to  the  present.

JOB  SEAVEY.

Scarborough^  Kovemher  6,  1821.


Case  of  an  infant  child  of  Lewis  Demott'^s^  Scarborough.
This  infant  had  not  been  born  but  about  36  hours,
when  it  was  taken  ^ery  ill,  with  difiBculty  of  breathing  ;
I  administered  a  preparation  of  JNTo.  1,  2,  and  3,  but  with
not  the  least  promising  eifect.  The  symptoms  became
in  the  high-est  degree  alarming,  and  threatened  a  sudden
dissolution.  The  room  being  an  open  one  and  quite  cold,
I  concluded  the  pressure  of  this  cold  air  might  counter-
act the  operation  of  the  medicine,  and  thus  defeat  my  de-
sign. To  remedy  this  difficulty,  1  had  the  child  put  to
bed,  and  covered  all  over,  and  steamed  with  a  large  hot
stone  wrapped  inWfet  cloths,  applied  to  it,  and  then  re-
peated No.  1,  2,  and  3.  I  soon  perceived  an  alteration
for  the  better,  the  child  breathed  more  free  and  easy  by
intervals  and  continued  to  do  so  till  towards  morning,
about  eight  hours  from  the  commencement  of  my  first
application,  when  a  most  thorough  operation  of  the  me-
dicine took  place,  and  the  child  was  entirely  relieved,
and  restored  to  perfect  health,  nor  is  there  at  the  pre-
sent time  a  heartier  child  in  the  whole  to^vn.

S.  SEW  ALL.
Scarborov<xh.  .\ov ember  20,  1821.


Case  of  Saiauel  Libbey's  infant  child^  Scarborough.

A  new  born  child  of  Samuel  Libbey's  was  so  far  given

over  by  the  attendant  physician,  that  he  said  it  was  not

worth  while even  to  dress  it,  for  it  could  not  live. I


Of  Samuel  Thomson.' -  173

name  of  Eliza  Seavey,  acquainted  with  the  medicine,,
and  with  nursing,  administered.  The  babe  was  carried
through  a  process  of  the  medicine  four  Hmes,  and  No.  1,
2,  and  3,  freely  given  at  each  operation,  and  though  the
state  of  the  child  rendered  it  a  very  hopeless  case,  ii  be-
ing' very  much  swelled  and  the  blood  so  stagnated  3is  to
turn  of  a  deep  purple  over  the  surface  of  the  whole  body,
and  altftiough  it  had  not  taken  the  least  thing  till  the  me-
dicine given,  yet  by  perseverance  it  was  recovered,  and
restored  t©  the  most  perfect  health,  which  it  is  in  the
full  enjoytfi-ent  of  at  the  present  time.  S,  SEWALL.
Scarborough^  December  1,  1821.

In  the  fall  of  the  year  1807,  Dr.  Samuel  Thomson  at-
tended Mrs.  Osgood  at  Salisbury  Mills,who  was  given  over
with  the  lung  fever ;  her  fever  was  turned  in  about  four-
teen hours  by  the  use  of  his  ■  medicine  and  she  wab  soon
restored  to  health  ;  and  ia  som.e  cases  of  sores  extraor-
dinary  cures  were  performed  at  that  time.  In  the
spring  of  1808,  Dr.  Thomson  returned  again  atBalisbu-
ry  and  attended  to  practice;  a  Mrs.  Sawyer,  wife  of  Capt.
George  Sawyer,  was  relieved  of  a  consumption  and  apr
peared  to  have  been  held  up  by  his  medicine  for  hve.
years  ;  two  other  w^omen  who  were  supposed  to  be  more
likely  to  recover  were  attended  by  the  regular  doctors
and  both  died  in  two  months.

Mrs.  Sawyer  used  to  express  the  highest  satisfaction  of
using  the  emetic  herb,  or  lobelia,  and  said  she  should
rather  be  deprived  of  her  bread  than  of  this  article  and
cayenne,  which  medicine  was  first  brought  into  use  in
these  parts  by  Dr.  Thomson.  The  emetic  he  used  to  give
tinctured  in  spirit,  or  in  powder,  which  was  useful  in
consumptive  and  asthmatic  complaints.

In  the  spring  of  1808,  I  was  relieved  of  a  complaint
called  the  nettlespring,  or  St.  Anthony's  lire,  caused  by
over  heating  myself  by  fighting  fire  about  twenty-five
years  before.  Several  times  in  a  year  i  used  to  have
turns  of  breaking  out  and  swelling  as  though  1  had  been
stung  with  bees,  almost  all  over,  especially  in  my  limbs.
The  doctor  carried  me  through  two  courses  of  his  me-
dicine, then  steamed  me  until  I  felt  the  same  as  when  I
fought  the  fire. 1  was  kept  with  a  hot  stone  at  my  feet

P  2


1 74  JVarrative  of  the  Life,  <^c.

through  the  night,  to  keep  from  cooling  two  sudden,  as
he  said  that  had  been  the  cause  of  my  disorder.  This
process  entirely  cured  me  of  this  disorder  to  this  day  ;
and  I  have  not  used  any  other  practice  since,  and  have
relieved  many  very  obstinate  cases  in  my  family  by  the
same  medicine.  JABEZ  TRUE,

Elder  of  the  Baptist  Church  in  Salisbury.
Salisbury  J  December  5,  1821.

In  the  fall  of  the  year  1809,  Dr.  Samuel  Thom-
son was  sent  for  in  this  town,  I  attended  with  him  and
was  knowing  to  all  that  transpired  with  Mr.  Lovett  in
his  sickness  until  he  died,  which  is  as  follows  :  viz.  Mr.
Ezra  Lovett  came  for  Dr.  Thomson  to  visit  his  son  Ezra,
who  was  sick  of  a  fever ;  the  doctor  could  not  attend
until  he  had  called  several  times.  He  gave  him  medi-
cine first  on  Monday  evening,  and  on  Wednesday  attend-
ed him  through  a  full  course,  and  also  a  cousin  of  his,  who
had  been  given  over  by  all  the  doctors  in  a  consumption
of  the  liver,  and  was  completely  cured  by  one  opera-
tion and  enjoys  his  health  to  this  day.  Mr.  Ezra  Lovett,  jr.
was  so  far  reheved  that  the  doctor  thought  he  would
not  need  any  more  medicine  and  was  called  to  see  elder
Bowies  of  Salem  ;  but  gave  Lovett  strict  charge  not  to  go
out  or  expose  himself.  On  the  Friday  following  he  was
so  well  that  he  ventured  out  and  went  down  the  shore
to  see  his  friend ;  the  wind  was  eastward  and  extremely
cold;  he* had  a  severe  relapse  and  was  much  out;  continu-
ed to  grow  worse,  and  on  Saturday  night  I  sat  up  with
him;  his  father  wished  me  to  administer  some  medicine,but
I  declined,  as  he  was  so  sick;  1  advised  to  send  to  Salem
for  Dr.  Thomson,  who  was  attending  elder  Bowles.  He
was  accordingly  sent  for,  and  on  Sunday  evening  he  ar-
rived, and  on  seeing  the  young  man,  he  expressed  great
doubts  of  his  recovery.  He  administered  his  medicine
and  gave  his  strict  attention  to  him  for  about  two  hours
and  gave  him  over,  as  out  of  the  reach  of  his  medicine,
and  requested  his  father  to  send  for  some  other  doctor  ;
but  he  declined,  saying  if  he  could  not  help  him  i»€  did
not  think  any  doctor  could ;  and  requested  him  to  stay
all  night,  to  which  he  agreed.  Elder  WiUiams  was  cal-
led in  to  pray  with  him. in  the  mormng  Dr.  Thomson


Of  Samuel  Thomson  175

renewed  his  requesl  to  Mr.  Lovett  to  have  ah'other  doc-
tor to  take  charge  of  his  son.  He  accordingly  calied  in
Dr.  How  and  Dr.  Fisher,  who  took  charge  of  him  about
sun  rise  in  tJie  morning.  Dr.  Thomson  then  left  him  ;
and  those  Doctors  attended  him  until  about  10  o'clock  the
next  night,  when  he  died.  Notwithstanding  Dr.  Thom-
son gave  him  over  in  two  hours  after  seeing  him,  and
the  doctors  administered  their  medicine  to  him  for
twelve  hours,  yet  about  one  year  after  Dr.  Thomson
was  taken  up  for  the  murder  of  said  Lovett  and  no  credit
given  him  for  the  wonderful  cure  of  his  cousin,  who  was
attended  with  him.

Elder  Bowles  was  attended  at  the  same  time,  who
was  in  the  last  stage  of  a  consumption  and  was  cured.
John  Lemmon  was  also  cured  of  consumption — Isaac  Per-
kins's wife  was  cured  of  a  dropsy  of  a  desperate  na-
ture ;  all  thesecures  1  was  well  knowing  to,  having  been
done  at  that  time.

WILLIAM  RAYMOND,

Beverly^  December  7,  1821.


A  few  statements  of  the  diseases  and  manner  of  treatment  by
Dr.  Thomson'^s  system  and  directions^  and  the  benefit  re-
ceived under  the  administration  of  his  medicine  ;  by  Sie-
phen  JVeal^  Esq.  of  Eliot^  Ale.  - .

1  am  now  wiUing  to  assert  with  all  the  boldness  that
truth  inspires,  that  I  have  made  use  of  the  medicine
aforesaid  for  the  space  of  ten  years  last  past,  in  my  own
family,  and  in  the  time  have  not  used  any  other  medi-
cine, or  called  on  any  other  physician  for  advice.  I  have
administered  the  medicine  to  a  great  number  of  my
friends  and  neighbours,  which  generally  produced  bene-
ficial effects.  1  shall  state  a  few  of  the  many  cases  and
the  treatment  and  advantage  received.

In  April  1810,  my  son  who  was  in  the  18th  year  of
his  age,  had  a  severe  attack  of  the  palsy  on  his  left  side,
his  hand  was  entirely  useless — we  attended  him  under
the  directions  of  two  respectable  physicians  until  some-
tiojjj^  in  the  month  of  November  following,  and  in  all
that  time  he  received  but  very  little  benefit  from  any
thing  done.  I  was  then  advised  U)  call  on  Dr  Samuel
Thomson  and  get  his  oppioion  and  advice,  which  1  did,


176  Narrative  of  the  Life^  4rc.

he  being"  at  that  time  an  utter  stranger  to  me ; — I  called
on  the  doctor  and  he  came  to  see  my  son  ;  and  after
some  conversation  had  passed  relative  to  his  situation
the  doctor  observed,  that  it  was  a  very  unfavourable
season  of  the  year,(the  beginning  of  winter)  to  undertake
to  reijiove  the  complaint ;  and  he  did  not  appear  willing
to  undertake  so  arduous  a  task  as  that  appeared  to  be  ;
(his  left  side  at  that  time  was  wholly  numb)  but  said,  if  bj
our  best  exertions  we  could  keep  him  where  he  then
was  until  the  return  of  vrarm  weather,  we  then  might
stand  some  chance  to  help  him ;  but  if  he  was  neglected
until  that  time,  he  might  not  live,  or  if  he  did  his  case
might  be  out  of  the  reach  of  medicine.  I  then  conclud-
ed fully  to  try  the  experiment;  and  received  medicine
with  directions  from  the  doctor,  who  shewed  me  how
to  apply  the  same  twice  or  three  times.  1  proceeded  to
follow  his  directions,  which  w-as  to  place  the  patient
over  a  steam  made  by  a  gallon  bason  with  one  quart  of
water  in  it,  and  a  hot  stone  put  into  the  bason,  covering
the  patient  at  the  same  time  with  blankets  sufficient  to
keep  him  from  the  air,  all  except  his  face,  and  while  in
.this  situation  gaV^.^him  a  compound  of  No.  2,  and  3,  or  the
composition  powder,  to  keep  up  the  inward  heat,
promote  perspiration  more  freely  and  prevent  faintness;
after  pursuing  this  course  as  long  as  the  circumstances
of  the  patient  could  comfortably  bear  and  necessity  re-
quired, put  him  into  a  warm  bed,  with  the  hot  blankets
about  him,  with  as  many  hot  stones  quenched  in  water,
wrapped  in  cloths  wet  with  vinegar,  as  was  sufficient  to
keep  up  a  good  degree  of  perspiration  ;  then  gave  a  por-
tion of  JSTo.  1,  and  when  that  had  its  operation  placed  the
patient  over  the  steam  again  a  few  minutes,  if  able  to
bear  it,  then  bathed  him  all  over  instantly  with  cold  vine-
gar, or  water ;  then  put  on  dry  clean  clothes,  gave  him
a  warm  bed,  put  a  hot  stone  at  his  feet,and  gave  a  portion
of  the  composition  powder,  to  keep  up  a  moderate  pers-
piration.

We  continued  this  process  during  the  winter  as  often
as  twice  or  three  times  a  week.  I  was  confident  of
some  gain  during  this  time,  but  in  the  spring  he  mended
much  faster,  so  that  by  the  next  fall  he  could  walk  and
use  his  hand. I  then  concluded  that  1. understood  some-


Of  Samuel  Tliomson.  177

thing-  of  the  use  and  virtue  of  the  medicine,  and  I  agreed
with  the  doctor  to  give  me  the  information.  My  son
continued  to  mend  under  the  administration  of  the  medi-
cine until  quite  reheved  of  that  complaint.

November  1813,  I  attended  to  a  man  who  had  taken
a  bad  cold  and  had  an  attack  of  the  Rheumatism  ;  so  vio-
lently was.  he  seized  that  he  was  utterly  helpless,  not
able  to  stand  on  his  feet,  or  put  his  hand  to  his  mouth.
I  put  him  in  bed  (as  he  could  not  stand  over  a  steam)
with  hot  stones  quenched  in  water  wrapped  up  in  cloths
wet  with  vinegar  at  his  feet,  and  on  each  side,  which
brought  him  into  a  free  perspiration,  gave  him  a  decoc-
tion of  No.  2  and  3,  which  prepared  him  for  the  emetic.
1  kept  him  in  that  situation  5  hours,  in  which  time  the
medicine  had  performed  its  operation.  I  then  chang-
ed his  clothes,  bathed  him  in  cold  vinegar,  and  he  was
then  able  to  dress  himself  and  walk  with  ease  and  com-
fort, and  has  been  free  from  that  complaint  ever  since.

About  the  same  time  1  attended  a  man  who  had  the
colic  extremely  bad — 1  gave  him  a  compound  of  No.  2
and  3,  which  brought  him  into  a  gGatlG^,-pejspiratioja^
then  gave  him  No.  1,  freely,  which  operated  in  about
25  minutes,  and  gave  him  such  relief  that  he  went  to
sleep;  the  next  evening  I  visited  him  again,  gave  him  a^
second  gentle  course  of  medicine,  which  entirely  reliev-
ed him,  and  he  has  enjoyed  a  good  state  of  health  ever
since,  although  before  he  had  been  subject  to  having  vio-
lent fits  of  the  same  disease.

In  November  1816,  my  daughter  appeared  to  be  lan-
guishing under  the  symptoms  of  the  dropsy,  as  it  prov-
ed to  be  ;  she  continued  to  grow  large  and  no  operation
of  medicine  appeared  to  have  the  desired  effect ;  she
not  being  attended  to  seasonably,  by  reason  of  her  not
being  willing  to  take  medicine  when  I  told  her  of  the
necessity  of  it.  On  the  2d  day  of  February,  1817,  Dr.
Thom.son  was  sent  for,  who  came  and  assisted  us  in  tap-
ing hef  and  took  away  17  lbs.  3  oz.  of  water,  and  by  the
constant  application  of  the  medicine  aforesaid,  aided  by
the  blessing  of  divine  providence,  she  is  restored  to
health. — One  other  case  of  a  young  woman  in  the  vicin-
ity, the  disease  had  been  apparent  not  more  than  15  or
i30  days  of  a  dropsical  habit ;  I attended  and  a  cure  was


178  JVarrative  of  the  Life,  ^c.

obtained  without  taping,  by  giving  her  No.  2  and  3,  car-
rying her  through  the  steam,  giving  the  enaetic  and  bath-
ing her  abdomen  with  the  rheumatic  drops,  and  taking
some  inwardly.  She  remaijis  well  as  to  that  complaint.
In  April  1819,  Nathan  Nason,  jun.  of  South  Berwick,
was  falling  a  tree,  when  a  boy  that  was  with  him  acci-
dentally cut  off  the  main  bone  of  Nason's  leg  just  above
the  ancle  joint;  a  doctor  came  and  placed  th-e  bones
together,  and  took  tw^o  or  three  stitches  to  k«^ep  the
ends  of  the  bones  in  tlieir  place,  which  gu&w  together
very  exact ;  but  while  the  leg  bone  was  healing  the  foot
became  very  numb,  and  diseased ;  had,  as  they  said,  the
appearance  of  mortification ;  the  doctor  then  made  sev-
eral incisions  on  the  bottom  of  the  foot,  and  lound  that
the  flesh  there  had  lost  all  sense  of  feehng.  The  doc-
tor then  concluded  that  the  wound  was  incurable  with-
out cutting  off  the  leg — accordingly  the  time  was  set  to
perform  the  operation  on  the  12th  of  August.  I  heard
of  it  the  evening  before  and  went  to  see  Nason  the  next
morning.  I  examined  his  foot  and  told  him  I  thought  I
could  cure  it.  "  He  was  much  pleased  -to  have  his  leg-
saved,  and  to  be  fxeed  from  the  pains  of  amputation.
The  doctors  came  at  1 1  o'clock  with  the  necessary  ap-
paratus; he  declined  having  the  operation  performed
and  the  doctors  went  off.  Nason  sent  for  me  the  next
morning,  I  attended  him,  and  began  my  operation  on  the
wound,  took  out  the  cotton  that  was  crowded  into  the
incision  in  the  bottom  of  the  foot,  and  washed  it  with
soap  and  water  until  it  was  clean,  and  then  applied  the
rheumatic  drops,  while  the  poultice  was  making  of  up-
land willow  root  bark  and  the  inner  rind  of  white  pine,
boiled  in  water.  I  applied  this  kind  of  poultice  several
days,  which,  with  the  application  of  the  drops,  the  wound
immediately  came  to  its  feeling  and  soon  began  to  heal ;
I  applied  the  rheumatic  drops  and  lint  and  salve,  and
gave  him  some  bitters  and  drops  to  tske  to  produce  a
due  circulation,  which  had  the  desired  effect ;  and  in  a-
bout  60  days  he  was  able  to  walk  across  the  floor  with-
out cane  or  crutch.  He  can  now  walk  on  his  foot  toler-
ably well  and  do  any  sort  of  farming  business — and  en-
joys good  health ;  often  expresses  his  thanks  to  his  mak-
er and  good  will  to  his  friends,


Of  Samuel  Thomson.  179

I  have  experienced  the  operation  of  the  medicine  a-
foresaid  in  one  case  of  the  lock  jaw,  so  called.  I  put
the  boj  into  a  free  perspiration  by  placing  him  in  bed,
after  giving  him  a  strong  solution  of  the  emetic  and
rheumatic  drops  to  still  his. nerves — and  kept  him  in  a
moderate  perspiration  under  the  operation  of  the  medi-
cine about  five  or  six  hours,  to  which  time  his  spasms
lefr  him,  and  he  immediately  recovered  so  as  to  return
to  his.:.business.  He  had  been  attended  four  days  by  one
of  the  regular  physicians,  previous  to  my  seeing  him,
who  s^aid,  or  signified,  that  he  could  do  no  more.

One  case  of  the  typhus  fever,among  many,  I  will  not  o-
mit  to  state;  a  young  man  was  taken  with  the  diease,  who
was  attend  by  a  physician  of  the  order  about  three  weeks,  -:
gradually  wasting  in  strength  and  flesh ;  his  physician  at(
last  disparing  of  his  recovery  I  was  called  to  attend  him.'
I  placed  him  over  the  steam,  gave  him  No.  2  and  3,  then
put  him  in  bed  with  hot  stones  around  him,  sufficient  to
keep  up perspiration, and gave  an  emetic ;  when  that
had  operated  I  changed  his  clothes,  bathed  him  in cold
vinegar,  put  him  in  bed,  clean  and  comfortable. I  car-
ried him  through  three  operations  as  above,  and  in  ten
da3's  he  recovered  so  far  as  to  ride  out  ,v  his  appetife  re-
turned and  his  general  health  amended,  and  he  iiow  en- ,
joys  a  good  state  of  health.

STEPHEN  NEAL.

Eliot,  January  18,  1822.

About  the  year  1809,  Dr.  Samuel  Thomson  visited
these  parts,  and  made  known  his  system  and  method  of
practice  in  this  town  (Eliot)  and  though  some  unfavour-
able reports  were  spread  by  his  enemies  we  were  con-
vinced of  their  falsity,  by  the  remarkable  cures  that
were  wrought  in  our  neighborhood  and  vicinity  ;  and
since  by  a  still  more  special  and  intimate  knowledge  of
the  medicine  in  our  own  family  ;  where  we  have  proved
to  our  entire  satisfaction  its  perfect  innocence  and  un-
failing beneficial  effects.  In  the  year  1810,  we  pur-
cbHScd  the  information,  and  have  used  no  other  remedy
since  that  time  to  the  present.  Our  family  is  large,  14
in  number,  and  the  different  members  of  it  have  often
been  assailed  with  disease  under  one  form  or  other,  such


1 80  Narrative  of  the  Life^  <^c.

as  fever,  cholic,  dysentery,  spitting  of  blood,  &c.  &c.  but
hy  the  timely  application  of  the  medicine,  the  malady
whatever  form  it  assumed,  has  been  immediately  remov-
ed, an  1  the  patient  restored  to  usual  health.

As  to  the  manner  af  treatment  we  vary  it  according
to  the  nature  of  the  attack,  whether  mild  or  violent.  In
the  first  instance  of  common  complaint  we  generally  give
some  warm  article,  to  wit :  a  little  cayenne  and  hot  wa-
ter or  composition  powd«.r  No.  3,  sometimes  No.  2  and
4. combined;  or  a  great  spoonful  of  rheumatic  drops,
with  No.  2.  When  these  applications  are  insufficient,
and  the  symptons  violent  and  alarming,  we  make  use
of  No.  1,  2  ^  3,  and  carry  the  patient  through  the  whole
process  of  the  medicine,  and  repeat  it,  as  occasion  re-
quires, till  the  patient  recovers.

JOHN  RAITT.

Eliot^  November  28,  1821. •


This  may  certify,  that  about  the  year  ISOSs,  t  was  sick
with  the  pulmonic  lever  and  was  attended  b}^  Dr.  Tilton.
I  was  braced  up  by  the  barks,  which  caused  a  stricture
in  breathing  and  »oon  '.'egrtii  to  swell,  which  progressed
for  about  five  years,  when  I  was  in  a  dropsical  habit  and
continued  to  grow  worse  until  a  jury  of  four  doctors
held  a  consultation  and  pronounced  my  case  hopeless,
giving  me  over.  1  continued  under  the  care  of  Dr.  Shep-
parJ,  who  visited  me  and  said  my  complaint  was  beyond
the  reach  of  medicine,  and  I  could  not  continue  over
three  weeks.  At  this  time,  in  May  1808,  I  was  advised
to  go  to  Salisbury  to  Dr.  Thomson.  I  went  to  see  him
although  with  but  little  faith,  as  my  case  was  so  despe-
rate; my  breathing  was  with  great  difficulty.  Alter  bsmg
attended  through  several  courses  of  his  medicine,  in  three
weeks  I  was  reduced  about  hfteen  inches  in  bigness.  I
returned  home  and  have  gai'.«ed  until  this  day  ;  and  am
now  enjoying  a  better  state  of  health  than  I  have  before
injoyed  for  sixteen  years.

MARY  EATON.

Exeier,  November  20y  1821.


Of  Samuel Thomwn,  ^81

. To  THE  Public.

ledge of  the  salutary  effects  of  the  medicine  of  our  na-
tive soil,  discovered  and  used  by  Dr.  Thomson,  can  say
with  all  the  calmness  that  truth  inspires,  that  diseases  of
the  most  alarming  nature  have  been  removed  in  a  short
time,  by  the  use  of  this  important  and  powerful  medicinal
friend  of  nature ;  its  action  is  powerful  in  removing  the
maladies  of  the  human  system,  and  innocently  safe  in  its
operation ;  that  within  the  term  of  ten  years  last  past,
have  had  a  personal  acquaintance  with  the  doctor,  and  at
diverse  times,  and  in  different  diseases,  have  experienced
the  superiority  of  his  medicine,  and  the  salutary  effects
that  have  been  produced  by  it,  on  persons  attacked  with
the  different  complaints  and  diseases  incident  to  the  in-
habitants of  this  ire e 'country,  such  as  the  Palsy,  Dropsy,
Stranguary,  Consumptions,  Rheumatisms  and  the  Typhus
Fever — Wounds,  Bruises  and  Putrified  Sores ;  and  can
safely  say,  from  the  use  of  it  in  our  own  families,  and  its
good  effects  as  adminstered  to  our  neighbours,  that  we  so
much  prefer  it  to  any  other  medicine  heretofore  made
US2  of,  that  in  case  it  fails,  we  have  no  encouragement  to
try  further ;  therefore  as  friends  to  the  whole  human
family,  we  feel  willing  and  can  with  safety  recommend
its  use  to  our  friends,  and  the  whole  world  of  mankiadat
large,

STEPHEN  NEAL, 1 ^ .
DANIEL  PEIRCE, j ■^^^"*^«*-

JOHN  ROGERS,  Town  Clerk.
Kittery,  JVov.  21,  1821.

This  may  certify,  that  Hannah  my  wife,  had  been  af-
flicted with  the  Asthma  for  the  space  of  ten  years.  I  ap-
plied to  the  most  eminent  physicians,  as  many  as  six  in
number,  who  used  their  utmost  skill  without  the  least  be-
neficial effects.  She  had  been  unable  to  lay  irt^'bed  for  six'
months  at  a  time,  in  each  year,  for  a  number  of  years,
tmtil  in  the  fall  of  the  year  1808,  I  sent  for  Dr.  Samuel
Thomson.  He  visited  her  and  went  with  me  into  the
field  and  gathered  some  of  the  emetic  plants,  bruised


1 82  Narrative  of  the  Life^  ^c.

and  tinctured  them  in  spirit,  which  was  his  mode  at  that
time  of  using  it.  He  gave  her  one  spoonful  of  the  tinc-
ture and  cayenne,  which  so  far  reheved  her  that  she  lay
in  bed  the  greater  part  of  the  first  night,  which  was  the
first  time  for  six  monthsy  that  she  had  lain  in  bed.  By
using  the  same  medicine  she  has  always  been  able  to  lay
it  under  God  to  the  use  of  this  medicine.

EPHRAIM  COLEMAN.
Newington^  Dec.  3,  1821.

A  young  man  in  Roxbury,  from  some  cause  unknown,
took  a  large  dose  of  ratsbane  with  the  intention  of  des-
troying himself  Dr.  P.  was  called,  and  on  examining  into
the  circumstances,  said  that  there  was  no  more  chance  for
him  to  hve  than  there  would  be  if  his  head  was  cut  off.
After  the  doctor  had  left  him,  I  being  present  from  curi-
osity, and  having  purchased  the  right  of  using  the  medi-
cine and  practice  secured  to  Dr.  Thomson  by  patent,
proposed  to  the  friends  of  the  young  man,  to  make  a  trial
of  the  same,  to  save  his  life.  The  friends  giving  their
consent,  I  administered  said  medicine,  which  had  such  a
very  favorable  effect,  that  the  next  morning  he  was
quite  comfortable.  After  he  was  relieved.  Dr.  P.  called
to  see  him,*  and  expressed  great  astonishment  that  he
was  alive,  saying  that  there  was  not  one  case  in  a  thous-
and that  a  man  could  live  under  similar  circumstances.
I  attended  him  three  or  four  days,  and  he  is  now  so  far
recovered  as  to  walk  about  the  room.

ELIJAH  SIMONDS.
Roxhwry,Feb.  23,  1821.


^w  @wa®®  s®  M^Ais^m


OR,


BOTJimC  FAMILY  PHYSICMM


INTRODUCTION

There  are  three  things  which  have  in  a^  greater  or
les^  degree,  called  the  attention  of  men,  viz :  Religipn,
Government,  and  Medicine.  In  ages  past,  these  things
were  thought  by  millions  to  belong  to  three  classes  of
men.  Priests,  Lawyers  and  Physicians.  The  Priests  held
the  things  of  religion  in 'their  own  hands,  and  brought
the  people  to  their  terms  ;  kept  the  Scriptures  in  the
iead  languages,  so  that  the  common  people  could  not
read  them.  Those  days  of  darkness  are  done  away  •  the
Scriptures  are  translated  into  our  own  language,  and  eack
one  is  taught  to  read  for  himself.  Government  was
once  considertid  as  belonging  to  a  few^  who  thought
themselves  »'  b6rn  only  to  rule."  The  common  people
have  now  become  acquainted  v.'ith  the  great  secret  of
government ;  and  know  that  "  all  men  are'born  free  and
equal,"  and  that  Magistrates  are  put  in  authority,  or  out,
by  the  voice  of  the  people,  who  choos^'them  for  their
public  servants.

While  these,  and  many  other  things  are  broug;ht  whei%
"  common  people,"  can  understand  them ;  the  knowledge
and  use  ol"  medicine,  is  in  a  great  measure  concealed  in  a
dead  language,  and  a  sick  man  is  often  obhged  to  risk
his  life,  where  he  would  not  risk  a  foliar  j  and  should
?hc» apothecary  or  his  apprentice  jjiEike  a  mistake,  the


184  J^ew  G-uide  to Health;

sick  man  cannot  correct  it,  and  thus  is  exposed  to  receive
an  instrument  of  death,  instead  of  that  which  would  re-
store him  to  health  had  he  known  good  medicine.

"It  may  he  alledged,  (said  Dr.  Buchan,)  that  laying
medicine  more  open  to  mankind,  would  lesson  their  faith
in  it.  This  indeed  would  he  the  case  with  regard  to
some  ;  hut  it  would  j^ave  a  quite  contrary  effect  upon
others.  I  know  many  people  who  have  the  utmost
cian, who  will  nevertheless,  very  readily  take  a  medicine
which  they  know,  and  whose  qualities  they  are  in  some
measure  acquainted  with.

"  Nothing  ever  can,  or  will  inspire  mankind  with  an
ahsolute  confidence  in  physicians  but  by  their  being  open,
frank,  and  undisguised  in  their  behaviour."

"Vhe  most  effectual  way  to  destroy  quackery  in  any
art  or  science,  is  to  diffuse  the  knovvled£:e  of  it  amonsr
mankind.  Did  physicians  write  their  prescriptions  in  the
common  language  of  the  country,  and  explain  their  in-
tentions to  the  patient,  as  far  as  he  could  understand
them,  it  would  enable  them  to  know  when  the  medicine
had  the  desired  effect ;  would  inspire  him  with  ahsolute
confidence  in  the  physician ;  and  would  make  him  dread
and  detest  every  man  who  pretended  to  cram  a  secre't
medicine  or  poison,  down  his  throat."

It  is  true  that  much  of  what  is  at  this  day  callei  medi-
cine, is  deadly  poison  ;  and  were  people  to  know  what
is  offered  them  of  this  kind,  they  would  absolutely  refuse
ever  to  receive  it  as  medicine.  This  I  have  long  seen
and  known  to  be  true ;  and  have  laboured  hard  for
many  years  to  convince  them  of  the  evils  that  attend
such  a  mode  of  proceedure  with  the  sick  ;  and  have  turn-
ed my  attention  to  those  medicines  that  grow  in  our
own  country,  which  the  God  of  nature  has  prepared  for
the  benefit  of  mankind.  Long  has  a  general  medicine
been  sought  for,  and  I  am  confident  I  have  found  such  as
are  universally  applicable  in  all  cases  of  disease,  and
which  may  be  used  with  safety  and  success,  in  the  hands
of  the  people.

After  thirty  years  study  and  repeated  successful  trials
of  the  medicinal  vegetables  of  our  own  country,  in  all
the  diseases  incident  to our  climate:  I  can  Tvit.h  v.-ell


or^  Botanic  Family  Physician.  185

gronnclecl  assurance,  recommend  my  system  of  practice
and  medicines  to  the public,  as  salutary  and  efficacious.

<3reat  discoveries  and  improvements  have  been  made
in  various  arts  and  sciences  since  the  first  settlement  of
our  country,  while  its  medicines  'have  been  very  much
neglected.  As  these  medicines,  suited  to  every  disease,
grow  spontaneously  upon  our  ov\m  soil;  as  they  are  bet-
ter adapted  to  our  constitution  ;  as  the  price  of  imported
drugs  is  very  high  ;  it  follows,  whether  vv€  consult  health
which  is  of  primary  importance,  or-expence,  a  decided
preference  should  be  given  to  the  former,  as  an  object
of  such  magnitude  as  no  longer  to  be  neglected.  Yet  in
the  introduction  of  those  medicines  I  have  been  violent-
ly opposed,  and  my  theory  and  practice  condemned,  not-
withstanding the  demonstrative  proofs  in  their  favor.
But  those  who  thus  condemn,  have-  taken  no  pains  to
throw  off  prejudice,  and  examine  the  subject  with  can.--
dor  and  impartiality. — Suchas  have,  are  thoroughly  satis-
fied of  therr  utilty,  and  superior  excellence.

From  those  who  measure  a  man's  understanding  and
ability  to  be  beneficial  to  his  fellow  men  only  from  the
acquisition  he  has  made  in  literature  from  books  ;  fron^
such  as  are  governed  by  outward  appearance,  and  who
will  not  stoop  to^  examine  a  system  on  the  ground  of  its
intrinsic  merit,  I  expect  not  encouragement,  but  opppsi-^
tion.  But  this  will  not  discourage  me.  I  consider  the
discovery  I  have  made,  of  inestimable  value  to  mankind,
and  intended  for  the  great  benefit  of  those  who  are  will-
ing to  receive  it.

Being  born  in  a  new  country,  at  that  time  almost  an-
bowling  wilderness,  my  advantages  for  an  education  were
very  small  f  but  possessing  a  natural  gift  for  examining
the  things  of  Nature,  my  mind  Was  left  entirely  free to-
follow  that  inclination,  by  enquiring  into  the  meaning  of
the  great  variety  of  objects  around  me.

Possessing  a  body  like  other  men,  I  was  led  to  inquire
into  the  nature  of  the  component  parts  of  what  man  is
made.  I  found  him  composed  of  the  four  elements —
Earth,  Water,  Air  and  Fire.  The  earth  and  water  I
found  were  the  solids  ;  the  air  and  fire  the  fluids.  The
two  first  I  found  to  be  the  component  parts ;  the  two
last  kep.t  him  in  motion. Heat,  I  found,  was  life  ; and

Q2


1 86  JVew  Guide,  to  Health  ;

Cold,  death.  Each  one  who  examines  into  it  will  find
fuel  which  continues  the  fire,  or  life  of  man.  This  is
contained  in  two  things — food  and  medicines ;  which  are
in  harmony  with  each  other  ;  often  grow  in  the  same
field,  to  be  used  by  the  saijie  people.  People  who  are
capable  of  raising  their  food,  and  preparing  the  same,
may  as  easily  learn  to  collect  and  prepare  all  their
medicines  and  administer  the  same,  when  it  is  needed.
Our  life  depends  onj^eat  ;  food  is  the  fuel  that  kindles
and  continues  that  h^td.  The  digestive  powers  being
correct,  causes  the  food  to  consume  ;  this  continues
the  warmth  of  the  body,  by  continually  supporting  the
fire.

The  stomach  is  the  deposit  from  which  the  whole  bo-
dy is  supported.  The  heat  is  maintained  in  the  stomach
by  consuming  the  food ;  and  all  the  body  and  limbs  re-
ceive their  proportion  of  nourishment  and  heat  from  that
source  ;  as  the  whole  room  is  warmed  by  the  fire  which,
is  consumed  in  the  fire-place.  The  greater  the  quanti-
ty of  wood  consumed  in  the  fire-place,  the  greater  the
heat  in  the  room.  So  in  the  body ;  the  more  food,  well
digested,  the  more  heat  and  support  through  the  whole
man.  By  constantly  receiving  food  into  the  stomach,
which  is  sometimes  not  suitable  for  the  best  nourishment,
the  stomach  becomes  foul,  so  that  the  food  is  not  well  di-
gested, i  his  causes  the  body  to  lose  its  heat — then  the
appetite  fails ;  the  bones  ache,  and  the  man  is  sick  in
every  part  of  the  whole  frame.

This  situation  of  the  body  shows  the  need  of  medicine,
and  the  kind  needed  ;  which  is  such  as  will  clear  the
stomach  and  bowels,  and  restore  the  digestive  powers.
When  this  is  done,  the  food  will  raise  the  heat  again,  and
nourish  the  whole  man.  All  the  art  required  to  do  this
is,  to  know  what  medicine  will  do  it,  and  how  to  admin-
ister it,  as  a  person  knows  how  to  clear  a  stove  and  the
pipe  when  clogged  with  soot,  that  the  fire  may  burn  free,
and  the  whole  room  be  warmed  as  before.

The  body,  after  being  cleared  of  whatever  clogs  it,
will  consume  double  the  food,  and  the  food  will  aiford
double  the  nourishment  and  heat,  that  it  did  before.  We
know  that  our  life  depends  on  food,  and  the  stomach  be*


or,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  187

ing  in  a  situation  to  receive  and  digest  it.  When  the
stomach  and  bowels  are  clogged,  all  needed  is,  the  most
suitable  medicine  to  remove  the  obstruction  in  the  sys-
tem. All  disease  is  caused  by  clogging  the  system;
and  all  disease  is  removed  by  restoring  the  digestive
powers,  so  that  food  may  keep  up  that  heat  on  which,
life  depends.

I  have  found  by  experience,  that  the  leaHied  doctors
are  wrong  in  considering  fever  a  disease  or  enemy  ;  the
fever  is  a  friend,  and  cold  the  enemy.  This  I  found  by
their  practice  in  my  family,  until  they  had  five  times  giv-
en them  over  to  die.  Exercising  my  own  judgment,  i
followed  after  them,  and  relieved  my  family  every  time.
After  finding  a  general  principle  respecting  fevers,
and  reducing  that  to  practice,  I  found  it  sure  in  all
disease,  where  there  was  any  nature  left  to  build  on,^
and  in  three  years  constant  practice,  \  never  lost  one
patient.

I  attended  in  all  the  fevers  peculiar  to  our  country,
and  always  used  it  as  a  friend,  and  that  returned  the  gra-
titude to  the  patient.  1  soon  began  to  give  this  informa-
tion to  the  people,  and  convinced  many  that  they  might
as  certainly  relieve  themselves  of  their  disease,  as  of
their  hunger.  The  expense  to  them,  to  be.  always  -a^
bie  to  relieve  themselves  and  families,  would  be  but
small;  and  the  medicine  they  may  procure  and  prepare
themselves.

This  greatly  disturbed  the  learned  doGtors,andsome  of
them  undertook  to  destroy  me,  by  reporting  that  I  used
poison  ;  though  they  made  no  mention  of  my  u&ing  their
instruments  of  death.  Mercury,  Opium,  Ratsbane,  Nitre,
and  the  Lancet.  I  considered  it  my  duty  to  withstand
them,  though  I  found  my  overthrow  was  what  thry  aimed
at.  A  plan  was  once  iaid  to  lake  me  in  the  night,  but  I
escaped.  Next  I  was  indicted  as  though  1  had  given
poison,  and  a  bill  brought  against  me  for  wilful  mur-
der. I  was  bound  in  irons,  and  thrust  into  prison,  to  be
kept  there  through  the  winter,  without  being  allowed
bail.  I  petitioned  for  and  obtained  a  special  court  to  try
the  cause,  and  was  honorably  acquitited,  after  forty  days
imprisonment.  I  maintamed  my  integrity  in  the  place
where  my  persecution  began, in  five  years,  while  vin-


1 88  A'eay  Guide  to  Health  :

dicating  this  new  and  useful  discovery,  I  lost  five  thoHS^
and  dollars,  besides  all  the  persecution,  trouble,  loss  of
health,  and  reproach  which  has  been  in  connection  with
the  losses.

It  has  been  acknowledged,  even  by  those  who  are  un-
friendly to  me  and  my  practice,  that  my  medicine  may
be  good  in  some  particular  cases,  but  not  in  all.  But
this  is  an  ^ror.  For  there  are  but  two  great  principles
in  the  constitution  of  things,  whether  applied  to  the  mind
or  body :  the  principle  of  life,  and  the  principle  of  death.
That  which  contains  the  principle  qf  life,  can  never  be
tortured  into  an  administration  of  death.  If,  then,  a  med-
icine is  good  in  any  case,  it  is  because  it  is  agreeable  to
nature,  or  this  principle  of  life,  the  very  opposite  of  dis-
ease. If  it  is  agreeable  in  one  case,  it  must  be  ab-
solutely so  in  all.  By  the  active  operation  of  nature,  the
whole  animal  economy  is  carried  on :  and  the  father  of
the  healing  art,  Hippocrates,  tells  us.  what  is  an  obvious
truth,  that  Nature  is  Heat.  'I'he  principle  is  the  same
in  all,  differing  only  in  degree  When  disease  invades
the  frame,  it  resists  in  proportion  to  its  force,  till  over-
powered into  submission,  and  when  extinguished,  death
follows,  and  it  ceases  to  operate  alike  in  all.  If  then,
heat  is  life,  and  its  extinction  death,  a  diminution  of  this
vital  flame  in  every  instance,  constitutes  disease,  and  is
an  approximation  to  death.  All  then,  that  medicine
can  do  in  the  expulsion  of  disorder,  is  to  kindle  up  tha
decaying  spark,  and  restore  its  energy,  till  it  glows  in  all
its  wonted  vigor.  If  a  direct  administration  can  be
made  to  produce  this  effect,  (and  it  can)  it  is  evidently
immaterial  what  is  the  name,  or  colour  of  the  disease,
whether  billious,  yellow,  scarlet  or  spotted  ;  whether  it
is  simple  or  complicated,  or:  whether  nature  has  one
enemy,  or  more.  Names  are  arbitrary  things,  the  know-
ledge of  a  name  is  but  the  cummin  and  annis,  but  in  the
knowledge  of  the  origin  of  a  malady,  and  its  antidote,..
lies  the  weightier  matters  of  this  science.  This  know-
ledge makes  the  genuine  Physician ;  all  without  it  is
mere  quackery.

It  has  been  a  general  opinion  tjiat  extensive  study  and
great  erudition,  are  necessary  to  form  the  eminent  phy-
sician. But  all  this  may  be  as  Paul  saith^ but  scienee^


or^  Botanic  Family  Phyncici^,  189

falsely  so  called.  A  man  may  have  a  scieatific  knowl-
eSge  of  the  human  frame,  he  may  know  the  names  in
every  language  of  every  medicine,  mineral  and  vegeta-
ble,-as  well  as  every  disease,  and  yet  be  a  miserable
physician.  But  there  have  been  men  without  this  to
boasf'of,  from  the  earliest  ages  of  the  world,  who  have
arisen,  blest  with  the  sublimer  powers  of  genius,  who
have  as  it  were,  with  one  look  pierced  creation,  and
with  one  comprehensive  view,  grasped  the  whole  circle
of  science  :  and  left  learning  itself  toiling  after  them  in
vain.  A  man  never  can  be  great  without  intellect,  and
he  never  can  more  than  fill  the  measure  of  his  capaci-
ty. There  is  a  power  beyond  the  reach  of  art,  and  there
are  gifts  that  study  and  learning  can  never  rival.

'j  he  practice  of  the  regular  physicians,  that  is  those
who  get  a  diaploma,  at  the  present  time  is  not  to  use
those  means  which  would  be  most  likely  to  cure  disease  ;
but  to  try  experiments  upon  what  they  have  read  in
books,  and  to  see  how  much  a  patient  can  bear  without
producing  death.  After  pursuing  this  plan  the  whole  of
their  lives,  they  know  just  about  as  much  as  they  did
when  they  began  to  practice,  of  what  is  really  useful  to
mankind.  If  a  patient  dies  under  their  hands,  why,  it  is
the  will  of  God,  and  they  are  sure  to  get  extravagantly
paid  for  their  trouble  and  nothing  more  said  about  it;  but
if  one  out  of  hundreds  of  my  patient  die,  and  where  the
doctors  have  given  them  over  as  incurable,  they  at  once
cry  out,  that  it  is  quackery,  that  I  gave  them  poison,  &c,
for  the  purpose  of  running  me  and  my  medicine  down,
and  to  prevent  its  being  used  by  the  people.  The  fact
is  well  known  to  thousands  who  have  used  my  medicine,
and  to  which  they  are  ready  to  attest,  that  it  is  perfectly
harmless,  and  I  defy  the  faculty  to  produce  one  instance
wherein  it  has  had  any  bad  effects.

It  is  true  that  the  study  of  anatomy,  or  structure  of  the
human  body,  and  of  the  whole  animal  economy  is  pleas-
ing and  useful ;  nor  is  there  any  objection  to  this  how-
ever minute  and  critical,  if  it  is  not  to  the  neglect  of  first
great  principles,  and  the  weightier  matters  of  knowledge.
But  it  is  no  more  necessary  to  mankind  at  large,  to  qualify
them  to  administer  relief  from  pain  in  sickness,  than  to  a
cook  in  preparing  food  to  satisfy  hunger  and  nourishin)?


390  ^Tew  Guide  to  Health  ;

the  body.  There  is  one  general  cause  of  hunger  and  one
general  supply  of  food ,-  one  general  cause  of  disease
and  one  general  remedy.  One  can  be  satisfied,  and  the
other  removed,  by  an  infinite  variety  of  articles,  best  ad-
apted  to  those  difierent  purposes  —That  medicine,  there-
iore,  that  will  open  obstruction,  promote  perspiration,
and  restore  digestion,  is  suited  to  every  patient,  whatever
iorm  the  disease  assumes,  and  is  universally  applicable.
And  acute  disorders,  such  as  fevers,  cholics,  and  disenta-
ry,  may  be  relieved  thereby,  in  twenty  four  or  forty  eight
hours,  at  most.

REMARKS  ON  FEVERS.

Much  has  been  said  and  written  upon  fevers  by  the
professedly  learned  Doctors  of  Medicine,  without  throw-
ing the  most  profitable  hght  on  the  subject,  or  greatly
benefiting  mankind.  They  have  been  abundantly  fruit-
ful in  inventing  names  for  disease,  and  with  great  ease
and  accuracy  distinguished  their  different  symptoms ;  but
they  appear  quite  barren  as  to  the  knowledge  of  their
origin  and  remedy.  To  the  hrst,  but  little  importance,
comparatively  speaking,  can  be  attached ;  the  latter  is  of
the  highest  importance  to  all  classes  of  people.

According  to  the  writings  of  learned  Physicians,  there
are  a  great  variety  of  fevers,  some  more  and  some  less
dangerous.  But  to  begin  with  a  definition  of  the  Name.
What  is  fever  ?  Heat,  undoubtedly,  though  a  disturbed
operation  of  it.  But  is  there,  in  the  human  frame,  more
than  one  kind  of  heat  ?  Yes,  says  the  physician,  (strange
as  it  may  appear.)  there  is  the  pleuretic  heat,  the  slow
nervous  heat,  the  putrid  heat,  the  hectic  heat,  the  yel-
low heat,  the  spotted  or  cold  heat,  the  typhus,  or  ignorant
heat,  and  many  other  heats  ;  and  sometimes,  (calamitious
to  tell)  one  poor  patient  has  the  most,  or  the  whole  of
these  fevers,  and  dies  at  last  for  want  of  heat !

Is  fever  or  heat  a  disease  ?  Hippocrates,  the  acknow-
ledged father  of  physicians,  maintained  that  nature  is
heat ;  ttnd  he  is  correct.  Is  nature  a  disease  ?  Surely
it  is  not.  What  is  commonly  called  fever,  is  the  effect,
and  not  the  cause  of  disease.  It  is  the  struggle  of
nature  to  throw  off  disease. The  cold  causes  an  obstruGv


or,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  191

tion,  and  fever  arises  in  consequence  of  that  obstruction
to  throw  it  oflf.  This  is  universally  the  case.  Remove
the  cause,  the  effect  will  cease.  No  person  ever  yet
died  of  a  fever !  for  as  death  approaches  the  patient
grows  cold,  until  in  death,  the  last  spark  of  heat  is  extin-
guished. This  the  learned  doctors  cannot  deny  ;  and  as
this  is  true,  they  ought,  in  justice,  to  acknowledge  that
their  whol^  train  of  depletive  remedies,-  such  as  bleeding,
blistering,  physicking,  starving,  with  all  their  refrigera-
tives ;  their  opium,  mercury,  arsenic,  antimony,  nitre,
&c.  are  so  many  deadly  engines,  combined  with  the  dis-
ease, against  the  constitution  and  life  of  the  patient.  If
cold,  which  is  the  commonly  received  opinion,  (and
which  is  true)  is  the  cause  of  fever,  to  repeatedly  bleed
the  patient,  and  administer  mercury,  opium,  nitre,  and
other  refrigerents  to  restore  him  to  health,  is  as  though
a  man  should,  to  increase  a  fire  in  his  room,  throvy  a
part  of  it  out  of  the  house,  and  to-  increase  the  remaind-
er, put  on  water,  snow  and  ice  !

As  it  is  a  fact,  that  cannot  be  denied,  that  fever  takes
its  rise  from  one  great  cause  or  origin,  it  follows  of
course,  that  one  method  of  removing  that  cause,  will  an-
swer in  all  cases  ;  and  the  great  prinpiciple  is  to  assist
nature,  which  is  heat.

At  the  commencement  of  a  fever,  by  direct  and  pro-
per application  of  suitable  medicine,  it  caa  be  easily  and
speedily  removed,  and  the  patient  need  not  be  confined
long.  Twenty  four  or  forty  eight  hours,  to  the  extent,
are  sulficient,  and  often  short  of  that  time,  the  fever  may
be  removed,  or  that  which  is  the  cause  of  it.  But
where  the  patient  is  left  unassisted,  to  struggle  with  the
disease,  until  his  strength  is  exhausted,  and  more  especi-
ally, when  the  most  unnatural,  and  injurious  administra-
tions are  made,  if  a  recovery  is  possible,  it  must  of  ne-
cessity, take  a  longer  time.  These  declarations  are  true
and  have  been  often  proved,  and  can  be  again,  to  the  sa-
tisfaction of  every  candid  person,  at  the  hazard  of  any
forfeiture  the  Faculty  may  challenge.

Notwithstanding  all  these  things,  how  true  are  the
words  of  the  intelligent  Dr.  Hervey,  who  says, "  By  what
unaccountable  perversity  in  our  frame  does  it  appear,
iii'dt  we  set  ourselves  so  much  against  any  thing  that  is


192  New  Guide  to  Health  j

new  ?  Can  any  one  behold,  without  scorn,  such  drones  of
physicians,  and  after  the  space  of  so  many  hundred  j'ears
experience  and  practice  of  their  predecessors,  not  one
single  medicine  has  been  detected,  that  has  the  least
force  directly  to  prevent,  to  oppose,  and  expel  a  continu-
ed fever?  Should  any,  by  a  more  sedulous  observation,
pretend  to  make  the  least  step  towards  the  discovery  oi
such  remedies,  their  hatred  and  envy  would  swell  against
him,  as  a  legion  of  devils  against  virtue  ;  the  whole  socie-
ty will  dart  their  malice  at  him,  and  torture  him  with  all
the  calumnies  imaginable,  without  sticking  at  any  thing
that  should  destroy  him  root  and  branch  For  he  who
professes  to  be  a  reformer  of  the  art  of  physic,  must  re-
solve to  run  the  hazard  of  the  martyrdom  of  his  reputa-
tion, life  and  estate."

The  treatment  which  the  writer  has  received  from
some  of  the  learned  physicians  since  his  discovery  of  the
remedy  for  the  fever,  and  various  other  diseases,  is  a
proof  of  the  truth  of  this  last  saying  of  Dr.  Hervey.
Thty  have  imprisoned  him,  and  charged  him  with  every
thing  cruel  and  unjust  j  though  upon  a  fair  trial,  their
violent  deaUngs  have  come  down  upon  their  heads ;
while  he  has  not  only  been  proved  innocent  before  the
court,  but  useful ;  having  relieved  many  which  the  other
physicians  had  given  over  to  die.

We  frequently  see  in  the  newspapers  accounts  of  peo-
ple dyitig  in  consequence  of  drinking  cold  water  when
very  warm,  i^ome  fall  dead  instantly,  and  others  linger
for  sevei  al  hours;  the  doctors  have  not  been  able  to  afford
any  relief  when  called.  The  principal  symptoms  are
chilis,  and  shivermg  with  cold,  which  is  viewed  with  as-
tonishment by  those  who  witness  it.  Proper  cautiOn
should  always  be  observed  by  persons  when  very  warm
and  thirsty,  who  go  to  a  pump  to  dnnk,  ]>y  swallowing
something  hot  before  drinking  the  water,  and  swallow-
ing a  little  at  a  time,  which  will  prevent  any  fatal  effects.

This  strange  circumstance  of  being  cold  of  a  hot  day,
and  which  has  never  been  accounted  for  in  a  satisfactory
nnanner  to  the  public,  I  shall  endeavour  to  explain
in  as  comprehensive  and  plain  langiaage  as  I  ain  capable.
The  component  parts  of  animal  bodies  are  earth  and
water,  and  life  and  motion  are  caused  by  fire  and  air.


or.  Botanic  Family  Physician.  193

The  inward  heat  is  the  fountain  of  life,  and  as  much  as
that  has  the  power  above  the  outward  heat,  so  much  we
have  life  and  strength,  and  when  we  lose  this  power  of
heat,  our  strength  and  faculties  decay  in  proportion  ;  and
it  is  immaterial  whether  we  lose  this  power  by  losing  the
inward  heat  or  raising  the  outward  heat  above  it,  as  the
effect  is  the  same.  If  you  raise  the  stream  level  with
the  fountain  it  stops  the  current  and  all  motion  will  cease,
and  the  same  effects  will  follow  by  lowering  the  foun-
tain to  a  level  with  the  stream.  When  the  outwar4
heat  becomes  equal  with  the  inward,  either  by  the  ones
being  raised  or  the  others  being  lowered,  cold  assumes
the  power  and  death  takes  place.

The  cause  of  the  fatal  effects  by  drinking  cold  water,
is  because  the  fountain  of  life  is  lost  by  the  stream  being
raised  above  the  fountain,  or  the  inward  heat  lowered  by
throwing  into  the  stomach  so  large  a  quantity  of  cold
water  as  to  give  the  outward  heat  the  power  of  balanc-
ing the  inward,  and  in  proportion  as  the  one  approaches
to  an  equality  with  the  other,  so  the  strength  is  diminish-
ed, and  when  equal  they  die.

I  shall  now  make  some  further  remarks  on  this  subject
with  a  hope  that  it  may  be  beneficial  to  mankind.  The
reason  why  these  extraordinary  cases  appear  so  wonder-
ful to  the  people,  is  because  they  are  unacquainted  with
the  cause.  Why  should  we  wonder  at  a  person  being
cold  on  a  hot  day  when  we  are  not,  any  more  than  we
should  wonder  at  another  being  hungry,  when  we  have
just  been  eating ;  or  that  others  can  be  in  pam,  when  w^e.'
are  enjoying  good  health  ?  The  one  is  as  plain  and
simple  as  the  other  when  understood.  The  want  of
inward  heat  is  the  cause  of  their  being  cold,  just  as
much  as  the  want  of  food  is  the  cause  of  hunger,  or
the  want  of  health  is  the  cause  of  pain.  One  person
may  have  lost  the  natural  power  of  heat,  by  an  effect
which  others  in  similar  situations  may  not  have  experi-
enced, and  will  suffer  the  consequences  of  cold  in
proportion  to  the  loss  of  inward  heat;  this  is  manifest
in  the  different  degrees  of  sickness.  If  the  inward
heat  loses  its  balance  of  power  suddenly,  death  is  im-
mediate ;  which  is  the  case  in  spotted  fever,  and  in
'rowned  persons. When  the  inward  and  outward  cold

R  .


194  J\''ew  Guide  to  Health  ;

is  balanced,  life  ceases,  and  the  blood  being-  stopped  in
its  motion,  settles  in  spots,  which  appearance  has  given
name  to  what  is  called  spotted  fever.  The  same  ap-
pearances take  place  on  drowned  persons,  and  from  the
same  cause,

I  will  here  take  notice  of  the  yellow  fever,  as  the
cause  of  this  fatal  disease  is  similar  to  the  spotted  fever.
The  cause  of  death  in  the  latter,  is  in  consequence  of
its  producing  a  balance  of  cold  outwardand  inward ;  and  in
the  former  there  is  a  balance  of  heat  outward  and  inward;
both  produce  the  same  thing,  that  is  a  total  cessation  of
motion,  which  is  death.  The  colour  of  the  skin  has  given
name  to  both  these  diseases.  The  yellow  is  caused  by
the  obstruction  of  the  gall ;  instead  of  being  discharged
through  its  proper  vessels,  it  is  forced  and  diffused  •
through  the  pores  of  the  skin.  The  same  effects  that
are  produced  by  these  two  fevers  may  be  observed  in  the
motion  of  the  sea ;  when  the  tide  is  done  running  up
there  is  what  is  called  slack  water  or  a  balance  of  poSv-
er ;  and  the  same  thing  takes  place  when  it  is  done  run-
ning down  ;  when  the  fountain  is  raised  the  water  runs
from  it ;  but  when  it  is  lowered  the  water  runs  towards
it.  The  same  cause  produces  the  same  effects  in  the
spotted  and  yellow  fevers  ;  for  when  a  balance  of  power
between  the  outward  and  inward  heat  takes  place  death
follows.

the  most  alarming  they  being  most  fatal,  I  shall  pass  o-
ver  those  of  a  less  alarming  nature,  and  merely  observe,
that  {here  is  no  other  difference  in  all  cases  of  fever,  than
what  is  caused  by  the  different  degrees  of  cold,  or  loss  of
inward  heat,  which  are  two  adverse  parties,  in  one  body
contending  for  power.  U  the  heat  gains  the  victory,  the
cold  will  be  disinherited.,  and  health  will  be  restored  :  but
en  the  other  hand,  if  cold  gains  the  ascendency,  heat
will  be  dispossessed  of  its  empire,  and  death  will  follow
of  course.  As  soon  as  life  ceases,  the  body  becomes
cold,  which  is  conclusive  evidence  that  its  gaining  the  vic-
tory is  the  cause  of  death.  When  the  power  of  cold  is
nearly  equal  to  that  of  heat,  the  fever,  or  strife  between
the  two  parties,  may  continue  for  a  longer  or  shorter
lime  according  to  circumstances  ;  this  is  what  is  called  a


or,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  195

long  fever,  or  fever  and  ag.ue.  The  battle  between
cold  and  heat  vi^ill  take  place  periodicially,  some  times
every  day,  at  other  times,  every  other  day,  and  they  will
leave  off  about  equal, heat  keeping  a  little  the  upper  hand.
In  attempting  to  cure  a  case  of  this  kind,  we  must  con-
sider whether  the  fever  is  a  friend  or  an  enemy;  if  it  is
a  friend,  which  I  hold  to  be  the  fact,  when  the  fever  fit
is  on,  increase  the  power  of  the  heat,  in  order  to  drive
off  the  cold,  and  life  will  bear  the  rule;  but,  on  the  contra-
ry, should  cold  be  considered  a  friend,  when  the  cold  fit
is  on,  by  increasing  its  power,  you  drive  off  the  heat,
and  death  must  ensue.  Thus  you  may  promote  life  or
death,  by  tempering  cold  and  heat.

Much  has  been  said  by  the  doctors  concerning  the  turn
of  a  fever, and how long  a time it  will  run. When
it  is  said  that  a  fever  will  turn  at  such  a  time,  I  presume
it  must  mean  that  it  has  been  gone  ;  this  is  true,  for  it  is
then  gone  on  the  outside,  and  is  trying  to  turn  again  and
go inside, where  it  belongs. Instead  of  following  the )
dictates  of  nature  and  aiding  it  to  subdue the cold, the
doctor  uses  all  his  skill  to  kill  the  fever. How,  would
I  ask  in  the name of  common sense,  can  any  thing
turn when killed? Support the fever  and it  "will
return  inside;  the  cold=^  which  is  the  cause of  disease, i
will  be driven  cut, and health  will  be restored, in
all  cases  called  fever,  the  cause  is  the  same  in  a  greater
or  less  degree,  and  may  be  reheved  by  one  general  re-
medy. 'J  he  cold  causes  canker,  and  before  the  canker
is  seated,  the  strife  will  take  place  between  cold  and  heat ;
and  while  the hot flashes and cold  chills  remain,  it  is
evidence  that  the  canker  is  not  settled,  and  the  hot  me-
dicine alone,  occasionally  assisted  by  steam,  will  throw
it  off;  but  as  the  contest  ceases  and  the  heat  is  steady  oh
the  outside^  then  canker  assumes  the  power  inside  ;  this  is
called  a  settled  fever. 1  he  truth  is  the  canker  is  fixed
on  the  inside  and  will  ripen  and  come  off  in  a  short  time,
it  the  fever  is  kept  up  so  as  to  over  power  the cold.
This  idea  is  new  and  never  was  known  till  my  discovery.
By  raising  the fever with  Nos. 1  and  2,  and  taking  oil*
the  canker  with  No.  3,  and  the  same  given  by  injections,
we  may  turn  a  fever  when  we  please;  but  if  this  is  not
r  ' tood,  the  canker  will  ripen  and  come  off  itself,  -a


196  Kew  Guide  to  Health  ;

when  the  fever  will  turn  and  go  inside  and  the  cold  will
be  driven  out ;  therefore  they  will  do  much  better  with-
out a  doctor  than  with.  The  higher  the  fever  runs  the
sooner  the  cold  will  be  subdued ;  and  if  you  contend  a-
gainst  the  heat,  the  longer  will  be  the  run  of  the  fever,
and  when  killed,  death  follows.

When  a  patient  is  bled  it  lessens  the  heat  and  gives
double  power  to  the  cold,  like  taking  out  of  one  side  of
the  scale  and  putting  it  in  the  other,  which  doubles  the
weight  and  turns  the  scale  in  favour  of  the  disease.  By
giving  opium  it  deadens  the  feelings ;  the  small  doses  of
nitre  and  calomel  tend  to  destroy  what  heat  remains
and  plants  new  crops  of  canker,  which  will  stand  in  dif-
ferent stages  in  the  body,  the  same  as  corn  planted  in  the
field  every  week*,  will  keep  some  in  all  stages;  so  is  the
different  degrees  in  canker.  This  is  the  reason  why
there  are  so  many  different  fevers  as  are  named ;  when
one  fever  turns  another  sets  in  and  so  continue  one  after
another  until  the  harvest  is  all  ripe,  if  the  season  is  long
enough  ;  if  not  the  cold  and  frost  takes  them  off — then  it
is  said  they  died  of  a  fever.  It  might  with  as  much  pro-
priety be  said  that  the  corn  killed  with  frost,  died  with
the  heat.  The  question,  whether  the  heat  or  cold  kill-
ed the  patient,  is  easily  decided,  for  that  power  which
bears  rule  in  the  body  after  death  is  what  killed  the  pa-
tient, which  is  cold — as  much  as  that  which  bears  rule
when  he  is  alive  is  heat.  When  a  person  is  taken  sick
it  is  common  to  say  I  have  got  a  cold,  and  am  afraid  I
am  going  to  have  a  fever;  but  no  fears  are  expressed  of
the  cold  he  has  taken ;  neither  is  it  mentioned  when  the
cold  left  him.  The  fashionable  practice  is  to  fight  the
remains  of  heat  till  the  patient  dies,  by  giving  cold  the
victory  ;  in  which  cas^  is  it  not  a  fact  that  the  doctor  as-
sists the  cold  to  kill  the  patient.  Would  it  not  have  been
more  reasonable,  or  hkely  to  have  cured  them,  when
the  fever  arose  to  td row  off  the  cold,  to  have  helped  the
fever  and  give  nature  the  victory  over  its  enemy,  when
the  health  would  be  restored  the  same  as  before  they
took  the  cold.


<5r,  Botanic  Family  Physician,  197

ON  STEAMING.

Steamiag  is  a,  very  important  brancli  of  my  system  of
practice,  wliich  would  in  many  cases  without  it  be  insuf-
ficient to  effect  a  cure.  It  is  of  great  importance  in
many  casses  considered  by  the  medical  faculty  as  despe-
rate ;  and  they  would  be  so  under  my  mode  of  treat-
ment, if  it  was  not  for  this  manner  of  applying  heat  to  the
body,  for  the  purpose  of  reanimating  the  system  and  aid-
ing nature  in  restoring  health.  I  had  but  little  know-
ledge of  medicine,  when  through  necessity  I  discovered
the  use  of  steaming,  to  add  heat  or  life  to  the  decaying
spark ;  and  with  it  1  was  enabled  by  administering  such
vegetable  preparations  as  1  then  had  a  knowledge  of,
to  effect  a  cure  in  cases  where  the  regular  practitioners
had  given  them  over.

In  all  cases  where  the  heat  of  the  body  is  so  far  ex-
hausted as  not  to  be  rekindled  by  using  the  medicine  and
being  shielded  from  the  surrounding  air  by  a  blanket,  or
being  in  bed,  and  chills  or  stupor  attend  the  patient,  then
applied  heat  by  steaming  becomes  iriGjspensably  nece«*-
sary ;  and  heat  caused  by  steam  ii  the  manner  that  I
use  it,  is  more  natural  in  producing  perspiration,  than  any
dry  heat  that  can  be  applied  to  the  body  in  any  other
manner,  which  will  only  serve  to  dry  the  air  and  prevent
perspiration  in  many  cases  of  disease,  where  a  steam  by
water  or  vinegar  would  promote  it  and  add  a  natural
warmth  to  the  body,  and  thereby  increase  the  life  and
motion,  which  has  lain  silent  in  consequence  of  the  cold.

Dr.  Jennings  has  contrived  a  plan  to  apply  heat  to  the
body  by  a  dry  vapour,  caused  by  burning  spirit,  which  he
calls  a  vapour  bath,  the  idea  of  which  was  I  have  no  doubt
taken  from  hearing  of  my  steaming  to  raise  the  heat  of
the  body.  It  may  answer  in  some  cases  and  stages  of
disease ;  but  in  a  settled  fever  and  other  ckses  where
there  is  a  dry  inflammation  on  the  surface  of  the  body,  it
will  not  answer  any  good  purpose,  and  I  think  would  be
dangerous,  without  the  use  of  my  medicine  to  first  raise
a  free  perspiration  ;  for  when  the  surface  of  the  body  is
dry  the  patient  cannot  bear  it,  as  it  will  crowd  to  the
head  and  cause  distress,  the  same  as  is  produced  by  burn-
ing char-coal,  or  from  hot  stoves  in  a  tight  room,  and

R2


298  Mew  Guide  to  Health;

will  bring  on  a  difficulty  in  breathing*,  which  is  not  the
case  in  steaming  in  my  way.  This  machine  can  only  fee
used  in  bed,  where  the  vapour  cannot  be  applied  to  the
body  equally  at  the  same  time,  therefore  is  no  better
than  a  hot  dry  stone  put  on  each  side  and  to  the  feet  of
the  patient,  for  he  can  turn  himself  and  get  heat  from
them  as  well  as  to  have  all  the  trouble  of  burning  spirit
and  turning  to  the  vapour  of  it,  to  get  warm  by  this  dry
heat.  When  the  patient  stands  over  a  steam  raised  by
putting  a  hot  stone  in  water,  which  gives  a  more  equal
heat  all  over  the  body  than  can  be  done  in  any  other
manner,  it  can  be  raised  higher,  and  may  be  tempered
at  pleasure  by  wetting  the  face  and  stomach  with  cold
water  as  occassion  requires.

The  method  adopted  by  me,  and  which  has  always
answered  the  desired  object,  is  as  follows — Take  several
stones  of  different  sizes  and  put  them  in  the  fire  till  red
hot,  then  take  the  smallest  first  and  put  one  of  them  into
a  pan  or  kettle  of  hot  water,  with  the  stone  about  half
immersed — the  patient  must  be  undressed  and  a  blanket
put  around  him  so  as  to  shield  his  whole  body  from  the
air,  and  then  place  him  over  the  steam.  Change  the
stones  as  often  as  they  grow  cool,  so  as  to  keep  up  a
lively  steam,  and  keep  them  over  it ;  if  they  are  faint,
throw  a  little  cold  water  on  the  face  and  stomach,  which
will  let  down  the  outward  heat  and  restore  the  strength
— after  they  have  been  over  the  steam  long  enough,
which  will  generally  be  about  15  or  20  minutes,  they
must  be  washed  all  over  with  cold  water  or  spirit  and  be
put  in  bed,  or  may  be  dressed,  as  the  circumstances  of
the  case  shall  permit.  Before  they  are  placed  over  the
steam,  give  a  dose  of  No.  2  and  3,  or  composition,  to
raise  the  inward  heat.  When  the  patient  is  too  weak  to
stand  over  the  steam,  it  may  be  done  in  bed,  by  heating
three  stones  aiSd  put  them  m  water  till  done  hissing,  then
wrap  them  in  a  number  of  thicknesses  of  cloths  wet
with  water,  and  put  one  on  each  side  and  one  at  the  feet,
occassionaily  wetting  the  face  and  stomach  ^ith  cold
water,  when  faint.

Many  other  plans  may  be  contrived  in  steaming  which
would  make  less  trouble  and  be  more  agreeable  to  the
patient,  especially  where  they  are  unable  to  stand  over
the  steam. An  open  worked  ch^r  can  be  made,  in


or^  Botanic  Family  Physician.  199

which  they  might  sit  and  be  steamed  very  conveniently  ;
OF  a  settee  might  be  made  in  the  same  manner,  in  which
they  might  be  laid  and  covered  with  blankets  so  as  to
shield  them  from  the  surrounding  air.  Such  contrivan-
ces as  these  would  be  very  covenient  in  cases  where  the
patient  would  have  to  be  carried  through  a- course  of
medicine  and  steamed  a  number  of  times,  as  is  frequently
necessary,  particularly  in  complaints  that  have  been  of
long  standing.

As  [  have  frequently  mentioned  a  regular  course  of
medicine,  I  will  here  state  what  is  meant  by  it  and  the
most  proper  way  in  which  it  is  performed,  firstly,  give
'No.  2  and  3,  or  compossition,  adding  a  tea  spoonful  of
jN'o.  6  ;  then  steam,  and  when  in  bed  repeat  it,  adding
iSTo.  1,  which,  will  cleanse  the  stomach  and  assist  in  keep-
ing up  a  perspiration  ;  when  this  has  done  operating  give
an  injection  made  with  the  same  articles.  Where  there
are  symptoms  of  nervous  affection,  or  spasms,  put  half  a
tea  spoonful  of  the  nerve  powder  into  each  dose  given,
and  into  the  injection.  In  violent  cases,  where  immedi-  '
ate  relief  is  needed,  Nos,  1,  2,  3  and  6,  may  be  given
together.  Injections  may  be  administered  at  ail  times
and  in  all  cases  of  disease  to  advantage  ;  it  can  never  do
harm,  and  in  many  cases,  they  are  indispensably  necessa-
ry, especially  where  there  is  canker  and  inflammation  in
the  bowels,  and  there  is  danger  of  mortification,  in  which
case  add  a  tea  spoonful  of  No.  6.  In  cases  of  this  kind
the  injection  should  be  given  first,  or  at  the  same  time  of
giving  the  composition,  or  No.  3.

The  use  of  steaming  is  good  in  preventing  sickness  as
well  as  curing  it.  When  a  person  has  been  exposed  to
the  cold  and  is  threatened  with  disease,  it  may  be  pre-
vented and  long  sickness  and  expense  saved  by  a  very
little  trouble,  by  standing  ovt^r  a  steam  and  following  the
directions  before  given,  till  the  cold  is  thoroughly
thrown  off  and  a  lively  perspiration  takes  place;  then  go  to
bed  taking  the  stone  from  the  kettle,  and  wrap  it  in  wet
cloths  and  put  it  to  the  feet.  This  may  be  done  without
the  medicine  when  it  cannot  be  had  ;  but  is  much  better
to  take  something  to  raise  the  inward  heat  at  the  same
time.  A  tea  made  of  ma3'weed  or  summer-savory,  or
ginger  and  hot  water  sweetened,  may  be  given,  or  any


200  JVew  Guide  to  Health  ;

thing  that  is  warming.  This  advice  is  for  the  poor  and
those  who  have  not  a  knowledge  of  the  medicine  ;  and
will  many  times  save  them  much  trouble  and  long  sickness.

Steammg  is  of  the  utmost  importance  in  cases  of  sus-
pended animation,  such  as  drowned  persons  ;  in  which
case  place  the  body  over  a  moderate  steam,  shielded  by
a  blanket  from  the  weight  of  the  external  air,  and  rari-
fying  the  air  immediately  around  them  with  the  steam.
Pour  into  the  mouth  some  of  the  tincture  of  Nos.  1,  2
and  6  ;  and  if  there  is  any  internal  heat  remains,  there
will  be  muscular  motion  about  the  eyes  and  in  the  extre-
mities. If  this  symptom  appears,  repeat  the  dose  seve-
ral times  and  renew  the  hot  stones,  raising  the  heat  by
degrees  ;  if  the  outward  heat  is  raised  too  sudden,  so  as
to  balance  the  inward,  you  will  fail  of  the  disired  object,
even  after  life  appears-.  This  is  the  only  danger  of  any
difficulty  taking  place — always  bear  in  mind  to  keep  the
fountain  above  the  stream,  or  the  inward  heat  above  the
o'ltward,  and  all  will  be  saxe.  After  life  is  restored,  put
them  in  bed  and  keep  the  perspiration  free  for  twelve
hours,  by  hot  stones  wrapped  in  cloths  wet  with  water,
and  occassionally  giving  the  tincture  as  before  mentioned,
when  the  coldness  and  obstructions  are  thrown  off,  and
the  patient  will  be  in  the  enjoyment  of  his  natural
strength.  Beware  of  bleeding  or  blowing  in  the  mouth
with  a  bellows,  as  either  will  generally  prove  fatal.

In  many  cases  of  spotted  fever  steaming  is  as  necessary
as  in  drowned  persons  ;  such  as  when  they  fall  apparent-
ly dead  ;  then  the  same  treatment  is  necessary  to  lighten
the  surrounding  air  till  you  can  raise  the  inward  heat  so
as  to  get  the  determining  power  to  the  surface.  Be-
gin with  a  small  stone  and  as  life  gains  increase
the  steam  as  the  patient  can  bear  it ;  if  the  distress  is
great,  give  more  hot  medicine  inside,  and  as  soon  as  an
equilibrium  takes  place  the  pain  will  cease.  In  all  cases
of  this  kind  the  difficulty  cannot  be  removed  without  ap-
plied heat  to  the  body,  and  is  more  natural  by  steam  than
by  any  other  means  that  can  be  made  use  of  Iri 'cases
of  long  standing,  where  the  patient  has  been  run  down
with  mercury  and  left  in  a  cold  and  obstructed  state,  lia-
ble to  rheumatism  and  other  similar  complaints,  they


t

or^  Botanic  Family  Phystc%an.  201

cannot  be  cured  with  medicine  without  applied  heat  by
steam,  as  nothing  will  remove  mercury  but  heat.

When  a  patient  is  carried  through  a  course  of  my  me-
dicine and  steamed,  who  has  been  long  under  mercurial
treatment ;  and  while  under  the  operation  of  the  steam,
when  the  heat  is  at  the  highest,  the  face  will  swell,  in
consequence  of  the  poisonous  vapour  being  condensed
by  the  air^  tibe  face  being  open  to  it.  To  relieve  this
put  them  in  bed,  and  take  a  hot  stone  wrapped  in  several
thicknesses  of  cloths  wet  with  water,  pouring  on  a  little
vinegar,  and  making  a  lively  steam  ;  put  it  in  the  bed  and
cover  the  head  with  the  clothes  and  let  them  breathe  the
steam  as  hot  as  can  be  borne,  until  the  sweat  covers  the
swelled  part.  This  will  in  about  fifteen  or  twenty  min-
utes throw  out  the  poison  and  the  sweUing  will  abate.
This  method  also  is  of  great  service  in  agues  and
teeth-ache  caused  by  cold  ;  and  many  other  cases  of  ob-
struction from  the  same  cause,  especiallal ly  young  chil-
dren stuffed  on  the  lungs.

To  steam  small  children,  the  best  way  is  to  let  them
sit  in  the  lap  of  a  person,  covering  both  with  a  blanket
and  set  over  the  steam,  pouring  a  little  vinegar  on  the
stone  ;  or  it  may  be  done  in  bed  with  a  hot  stone,  wrap-
ped in  cloths  wet  with  water,  putting  on  a  little  vinegar;
and  covering  them  with  the  bed  clothes  laid  loosely  over
them ;  but  in  this  way  you  cannot  exercise  so  good  judg-
ment in  tempering  the  steam  as  when  you  are  steamed
with  them.  If  the  child  appears  linguid  and  faint,  the
outward  heat  is  high  enough  ;  put  a  little  cold  water  on
the  face  or  breast,  which  will  restore  the  strength,  then
rub  them  with  a  cloth  wet  in  vinegar,  spirit  or  cold  wa-
ter, put  on  clean  clothes,  and  put  them  in  bed,  or  lot
them  set  up  as  their  strength  will  permit.  This  is  safe
in  all  cases  of  cold  and  obstructed  perspiration.  It  ought
always  to  be  borne  strongly  in  mind  to  give  a  child  drink
often,  when  under  the  operation  of  medicine,  or  while
teaming;  if  this  is  not  done  they  will  suffer  much,  as
the^caimot  ask  for  it.

In  all  cases  of  falls  or  bruizes,  steaming  is  almost
infalable  ;  and  is  much  better  than  bleeding,  as  is  the
common  practice,  which  only  tends  to  destroy  life  instead
C'f  promoting it. If  the  person is not  able to  slapd


202  New  Guide  io  Health  ;

over  the  steam,  it  must  be  done  in  bed,  as  has  been  des-
cribed. Give  the  hotest  medicine  inside  that  you  have,
and  keep  the  perspiration  free  till  the  pain  and  and  sore-
ness abates,  and  the  strength  will  soon  be  restored.  If
the  advantages  of  this  mode  of  treatment  was  generally
known,  bleeding  in  such  cases,  or  any  other  to  remove
disease,  would  never  be  resorted  to  by  the  wise  and
prudent.

The  use  of  steaming  is  to  apply  heat  to  the  body
where  it  is  deficient,  and  clear  off  obstructions  caused
b}'^  cold,  which  the  operation  of  the  medicine  will  not
raise  heat  enough  to  do ;  for  as  the  natural  heat  of  the
body  becomes  thereby  lower  than  the  natural  state  of
health,  it  must  by  art  be  raised  as  much  above  as  it  has
been  below  ;  and  this  must  be  repeated  until  the  diges-
tive powers  are  restored,  sufficient  to  hold  the  heat  by
digesting  the  food,  then  the  health  of  the  patient  will  be
restored  by  eating  and  drinking  such  things  as  the  appe-*
tite  shall  require.  In  this  way  the  medicine  removes
disease,  and  food,  by  being  properly  digested,  supports
nature  and  continues  that  heat  on  which  life  depends.

Some  who  practice  according  to  my  sy^f^m  boast  of
carrying  their  patients  through  in  a  shorter  time  without
the  trouble  of  steaming  ;  this  is  easily  accounted  for  ;,,
steaming  is  the  most  labourious  part  of  the  practice  for
those  who  attend  upon  the  sick,  and  the  most  useful  to
the  patient  ;  as  one  operation  of  steaming  will  be  more
effectual  in  removing  disease,  than  four  courses  without
it ;  and  to  omit  it  is  throwing  the  labour  upon  the  pa-
tient, with  the  expense  of  three  or  four  operations  more
of  the  medicine  than  would  be  needed  did  the  person  who.
attends'  do  his  duty  faithfully.


ON  GIVING  POISON  AS  MEDICINE.

The  practice  of  giving  poison  as  medicine,  which  is  so
common  among  the  medical  faculty  at  the  present  day,
is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the  public  ;  and  is  a  subject
that  \  wish  to  bring  home  to  the  serious  consideration  of
the  whole  body  of  the  people  of  this  country,  and  en-
force in  the  strongest  manner  on  their  minds  the  perni-
cious consequences  that  have  happened,  and  are daily


►  or^  Botanic  Family  Physician.  203

taking  place  by  reason  of  giving  mercury,  arsenic,  nitre,
opium,,  and  other  deadly  poisons  to  cure  disease.  It  is
admitted  by  those  who  make  use  of  these  things,  that  the
introducing  them  into  the  system  is  very  dangerous  and
that  they  often  prove  fatal.  During  thirty  years  practice
I  have  had  opportunity  to  gain  much  experience  on  this
subject,  and  am  ready  to  declare  that  I  am  perfectly  and
decidedly  convinced,  beyond  all  doubt,  that  there  can  be
no  possible  good  derived  from  using  in  any  manner  or
form  whatever,  those  poisons ;  but  on  the  other  hand,
there  is  a  great  deal  of  hurt  done.  More  than  nine-
tenths  of  the  chronic  cases  that  have  come  under  my
care,  have  been  such  as  had  been  run  down  with  some
one  or  the  whole  of  the  above  named  medical  poisons;
and  the  greatest  difficulty  I  have  had  to  encounter  in  re-
moving the  complaints  which  my  patients  laboured  under,
has  been  to  clear  the  system  of  mercur}^,  nitre,  or  opium,
and  bring  them  back  to  the  same  state  they  were  in  be-
fore taking  them.  It  is  a  very  easy  thing  to  get  them
into  the  system,  but  very  hard  to  get  them  out  again.

Those  who^make  use  of  these  things  as  medicine,
seem  to  clo»  the  administring  them  under  the  speci-
ous pretence  oT great  skill  and  art  in  preparing  and  using
them  ;  but  this  kind  of  covering  will  not  blind  the  people,
if  they  would  examine  it  and  think  for  themselves,  in-
stead of  believing  that  every  thing  said  or  done  by  a
learned  man  must  be  right ;  for  poison  given  to  the  sick
by  a  person  of  the  greatest  skill,  will  have  exactly  the
same  eil'ect  as  it  would  if  given  by  a  fool. — The  fact  is  the
operation  of  it  is  diametrically  opposed  ^o  nature,  and
every  particle  of  it,  that  is  taken  mto  the  system,  will
strengthen  the  power  of  the  enemy  to  health.

If  there  should  be  doubts  in  the  minds  of  any  one  of
the  truth  of  what  1  have  said  concerning  the  articles  I
have  named  being  poisonous  and  destructive  to  the  con-
stitution and  health  of  man,  I  will  refer  them  to  the
works  published  by  those  who  recommend  their  use  ;
where  they  will  find  evidence  enough  to  satisfy  the  most
credulous  of  the  dangerous  consequences  and  fatal  ef-
fects, of  giving  thpm  as  medicine.  To  remove  all  doubts
of  their  being  poison  I  will  make  a  few  extracts  from
standard  medical  works,  as  the  best  testimony  that  can


204  Aets)  Guide  to  Health  :

/

be  given  in  the  case. — "  Muriate  of  Mercury^  is  one  of
the  most  violent  poisons  with  which  we  are  acquainted.
Externally  it  acts  as  a  caustic ;  but  even  externally,  it
must  be  used  with  very  great  caution."

"  Oxyd  of  Arsenic^  is  one  of  the  most  sudden  and  vio-
lent poisons  we  are  acquainted  with." — ''When  the
quantity  is  so  very  small  as  n<3t  to  prove  tatal,  tremors,
paralysis  and  hngering  hectic^,  s^cce^^;" — "We  are,  on
the  combined  testimony  of  mjiny  s^redical  practitioners,
conspicuous  for  their  professional  zeal  and  integrity,  ir-
resistably  induced  to  declare  our  opinion,  at  least,  a-
gainst  the  internal  use  of  this  active  and  dangerous  med-
icine."

'^-Antimony,  is  a  medicine  of  the  greatest  power  of  any
known  substance  ;  a  quantity  too  minute  to  be  sensible  in
the  most  delicate  balance,  is  capable  of  producing  vio-
lent effects,  if  taken  dissolved,  or  in  a  soluble  state." —
"  All  the  metallic  preparations  are  uncertain,  as  it  en-
tirely depends  on  the  state  of  the  stomach,  wether  they
have  no  action  at  all,  or  operate  with  dangerous  vio-
lence."

"  Jsltre.  Salt  Petre. — This  powerful  salt,  when  inad-
vertantly taken  in  too  large  quantities,  is  one  of  the  most
iiital  poisons." — '•  For  some  interesting  observations  re-
lative to  the  deleteriousproperties  of  salt-petre,  the  rea-
der is  referred  to  Dr.  MitchelFs  letter  to  Dr.  Priestly."

"  Opium,  when  taken  into  the  stomach  to  such  an  ex-
tent as  to  have  any  sensible  effect,  gives  rise  to  a  pleas-
ant serenity  of  mind." — "  In  a  larger  dose,  gives  rise  to
confusion  of  the  head  and  virtigo." — "  In  still  larger
doses  it  acts  in  the  same  manner  as  the  narcotic  poisons."

'J'here  are  several  veg^etables  that  grow  common  in
this  country,  which  are  poisons  ;  and  in  order  that  the
public  may  be  on  their  guard  against  using  them  as  me-
dicine, I  will  here  give  a  list  of  those  within  my  know-
ledge, viz.  Garden  Hemlock,  Night  Shade,  Apple
Peru,  Poppy,  Henbane,  Poke-root,  Garget-root,  Wild
Parsnip,  indigo-weed.  Ivy.  Dogwood,  Tobacco,  and
Laurel.  Incase  either  of  these  articles,  or  any  other
poison,  should  be  tajten  through  accident,  or  otherwise,
a  strong  preparation  of  No.  1,  with  a  small  quantity  of
No,  2.  will  be  found  to  be  a  sovereign  remedy.


DESCRIPTION

OF THE

VEGETABLE  MEDICINE,  USED  IN  MY  SYSTEM
OF  PRACTICE.


IN  describing  those  vegetables  which  I  make  use  of
in  removing  disease  and  restoring  the  health  of  the  pa-
tient, agreeably  to  my  system  of  practice,  1  shall  men-
tion those  only  which  I  have  found  most  useful  by  a  long
series  of  practical  knowledge;  and  in  the  use  of  which
T  have  been  successful  in  effecting  the  desired  object.
A  great  number  of  articles  in  the  vegetable  kingdom,
medical  virtues  pointed  out,  if  I  thought  it  would  be
beneficial  ;  in  fact  I  am  confident  there  are  very  few
vegetable  productions  of  our  country,  that  I  have  not  a
tolerable  good  knowledge  of,  it  having  been  my  princi-
pal study  for  above  thirty  years ;  but  to  undertake  to
my  readers  and  could  lead  to  no  good  result.  The  plan
that  I  have  adopted  in  describing  such  articles  as  I  have
thought  necessary  to  mention,  and  giving  directions  how
to  prepare  and  administer  them,  is  to  class  them  under
the  six  numbers  which  forms  my  system  of  practice  ;  this
was  thought  to  be  the  best  way  to  give  a  correct  and
full  understanding  of  the  whole  subject.  Each  number
is  calculated  to  effect  a  certain  object,  which  is  stated
in  the  heading  to  each  as  they  are  introduced ;  every
article,  therefore,  that  is  useful  in  promoting  such  object,
which  it  is  classed.  The  three  first  are  used  to  remove
disease  and  the  others  as  restoratives.  There  are  a
number  of  preparations  and  compounds,  that  I  have  made
use  of  and  ibnnd  good  in  curing  various  complaints;  the
directions  for  making  them and  a  description  of  the  ar-

S


206  .  New Guide  to  Health  ;

tides  of  which  they  are  composed  are  given  as  far  as  was  ^
deemed  necessary,  'i  he  manner  of  applying  them  will
be  hereafter  more  particularly  stated,  when  I  come  to
give  an  account  of  the  manner  of  treating  some  of  tlpe
most  important  cases  of  disease  which  have  come  under
my  care.

No.  1. — To cleanse  the Stomach,  overpower
the  Cold,  and  promote  a  free  perspiration.

Emetic  Herb. Lobelia  ^nflata  of  Linnctu^.

In  giving  a  description  of  this  valuable  herb  I  shall  be
more  piarticular,  because  it  is  the  most  important  article
made  use  of  in  my  system  of  practice,  without  which  it
would  be  incomplete,  and  the  medical  virtues  of  which
and  the  administering  it  in  curing  disease,  I  claim  as  my
own  discovery.  The  first  knowidge  1  ever  had  of  it
was  obtained  by  accident  more  than  iorty  years  ago  ;  and
nevier  had  any  information  whatever  concerning  it,  ex-
cept what  I  have  gained  b}'  my  own  experience.  A
great  deal  has  been  said  of  late  about  this  plant,  both  in
favour  and  against  its  utility  as  a  medicine  ;  but  all  that
the  faculty  have  said  or  published  concerning  it,  only
shows  their  ignorance  of  the  subject ;  lor  there  is  very
little  truth  in  what  they  have  stated  concerning  its  med-
ical properties,  except  wherein  they  have  admitted  it  to
be  a  certain  cure  for  the  asthma,  one  of  the  most  distress-
ing complaints  that  human  nature  is  subject  to.  It  is  a
truth  which  cannot  be  disputed  by  any  one,  that  all  they
have  known  about  this  article,  and  the  experiments
that  have  been  made  to  ascertain  its  value,  originated  in
my  making  use  of  it  in  my  practice.

In  the  course  of  my  practice  a  number  of  the  doctors
discovered  that  the  medicine  J  made  use  of  produced
eft'ects  which  astonished  them,  and  which  they  could  not
account  for  ;  this  induced  them  to  conclude,  that  be-
cause it  was  so  powerful  in  removing  disease,  it  must  be
poison.  This  1  think  can  be  very  satisfactorily  account-
ed for ;  they  have  no  knowledge  of  any  thing  in  all
their  medical  science,  which  is  capable  of  producing a


or^  Botanic  Family  Physician,  207

.  powerful  effect  upon  the  human  system,  except  what  is
poisonous,  and  therefore  naturally  form  their  opinions
agreeably  to  this  erronecfus  theory.  There  is  a  power
to  produce  life  and  a  power  to  produce  death,  which
are  of  course  directly  opposed  to  each  other  ;  and  what-
ever tends  to  promote  life,  cannot  cause  death,  let  its
power  be  ever  so  great.  In  this  consists  all  the  difference
between  my  system  of  practice  and  that  of  the  learned
doctors.  In  consequence  of  their  thus  forming  an  er-
roneous opinion  of  this  herb,  whic.h  they  had  no  knowl-
edge of,  they  undertook  to  represent  it  as  a  deadly  poi-
son ;  and  in  order  to  destroy  my  practice,  they  raised  a
hue-and-cry  about  my  killing  my  patients  by  administer-
ing it  to  them.  Some  of  the  faculty  even  made  oath,
that  it  was  poison,  and  when  taken  into  the  stomach,  if  it
did  not  cause  immediate  vomiting  it  was  certain  death.
It  is  unnecessary  for  me  now  to  point  out  the  falsity  of
this,  for  the  fact  is  pretty  well  known,  that  there  is  ho
death  in  it ;  but  on  the  contrar}^,  that  there  is  no  vegeta-
ble that  the  earth  produces  more  harmless  in  its  effects
on  the  human  system,  and  none  more  powerful  in  re-
moving disease  and  promoting  health.

There  is  no  mention  made  of  this  herb,  by  any  author,
that  I  have  been  able  to  find,  previous  to  my  discover-
ing it,  excepting  by  Linnaeus,  who  has  given  a  correct
description  of  it  under  the  name  of  Lobelia  Inflata  ;  but
there  is  nothing  said  of  its  medical  properties,  it  is  there-
fore reasonable  to  conclude  that  they  /ere  not  known
till  I  discovered  it,  and  proved  it  to  be  useful.  When
the  faculty  first  made  the  discovery  that!  used  the  Em-
etic Herb  in  my  practice,  they  declared  it  to  be  a  deadly
poison  ;  and  while  persecuting  me  by  every  means  in
their  power,  and  representing  to  the  world  that  I  killed
my  patients  vv'ith  it,  they  were  very  ready  to  call  it  my
medicine  and  allow  it  to  be  my  own  discovery  ;  but
since  their  ignorance  of  it  has  been  exposed,  and  they
find  it  is  going  to  become  an  article  of  great  value,  an
attempt  seems  to  be  making  to  rob  me  of  all  the  credit
for.  causing  its  value  to  be  known  and  the  profits  which
belong  to  mc  for  the  discovery. In  which  some who


2G8  -New  Guide  to  Health  ;

have  been  instructed  by  me  are  ready  to  join,  for  the
purpose  of  promoting  their  own  interest  at  my  expense.
Dr.  Thacher in  his  Dispensatory has undertaken  to
give  an account  of  this herb ;  but  is  very erroneous,
except  in  the  description  of  it,  which  is  nearly  correct.
It  appears  that  all  the  knowledge  he  has  on  the  subject,
as  to  its  virtues  is  borrowed  from  others,  and  is  probably
<lerived  from  the  ridiculous  ideas  entertained  of  its  power
by  those doctors  who  knew  nothing about  it,  except
what  they  gained  by  my  making  use  of  it, as  has  been
before  stated. As  to  its  being  dangerous  to  administer
it,  and  that  if  it  does  not  puke  it  frequently  destroys  the
patient,  and  sometimes in  five  or  six  hours  ;  and that
even  horses  and  cattle  have  been  supposed  to  be  killed
by  '^ating  it  accidentally,  is  as  absurd  as  it  is  untrue,  and
only  proves  their  ignorance  of  the  article. He  tells  a
melancholy  story  about  the  Lobelia  Inilata  being  admin-
istered by  the  adventurous  hand  of  a  noted  empiric,  who
he says frequently administered  it  in a  dose  of  a  tea
spoonful  of  the  powdered  leaves, and  often  repeated ;
which  he  says  furnishes  alarming  examples  of  its  dele-
terious properties and fatal  effects.  This there is  no
douijt alludes  to me,  and  took its rise  from  the  false
statements  circulated  about  me at  the  time  of  my  trial,
to  prejudice the  public  against  my  practice. It  is  true
the  dose  that  1  usually  prescrib'^d  is  a  tea-spoonful  of  the
powder  ;  but  thnt  it  ever  produced  an}^  fatal  e fleets  is  al-
together incorri  ^J,  and  is  well known  to  be  so by all
who  have  any  correct  knowledge  on  the  subject.

What  is  quoted  in  the  Dispensatory  from  the  Rev.
Dr.  M.  Cutler,  concerning  this  herb,  is  in  general  cor-
rect, particularly  as  regards  its  being  a  specific  for  the
asthma ;  though  he  laboured  under  many  mistaken  no-
tions about  its  effects  when  taken  into  the  stomach  ;  he
says,  "  if  the  quantity  be  a  httle  increased,  it  operates
as  aa  emetic  and  then  as  a  cathartic,  its  effects  being
much  the  same  as  those  of  the  com/non  emetics  and
cathartics."  In  this  he  is  mistaken,  for  it  is.  entirely
different  from  any  other  emetic  known ;  and  as  to  its
operating  as  a  cathartic,  1  never  knew  it  to  have  such
an efi'tict  in  all  my  practice. And  I  certainly  ought  to


or^  Botanic  Family  Physician.  209

know  something'  about  it,  after  having  made  use  of  it  for
above  twenty  years,  and  administering  it  in  every  form
and  manner  that  it  can  be  given,  and  for  every  disease
that  has  come  within  my  knowledge.  It  appears  that
all  the  knowledge  he  and  other  doctors  have  got  of
this  herb  being  useful  in  curing  disease,  particularly  in
the  asthma,  was  obtained  from  me  ;  for  when  I  was
prosecuted,  I  was  obliged  to  expose  my  discoveries  to
shew  the  falsity  of  the  indictment.  Dr.  Cutler  was
brought  forward  as  a  witness  at  my  trial,  to  prove  the^
virtues  of  this  plant,  by  his  evidence  that  he  cured  him-
self of  the  asthma  with  it.  He  says  the  first  information
he  had  of  its  being  good  for  that  complaint  was  from
Dr.  Drury  of  Marblehead.  In  the  fall  of  the  year  1807
I  introduced  the  use  of  the  Emetic  Herb  tinctured  in
spirit,  for  the  asthma  and  other  complaints  of  the  lungs,
and  cured  several  of  the  consumption.  In  1-808  I. cured
a  woman  in  Newington,  of  the  asthma,  who  had  not
lain  in  her  bed  for  six  months.  I  gathered  some  of  the
young  plants  not  bigger  than  a  dollar,  bruised  them,
and  tinctured  them  in  spirits,  gave  her  the  tincture  and
she  lay  ill  bed  the  first  night.  I  shewed  her  what  it
was  and  how  to  prepare  and  use  it,  and  by  taking  this
and  other  things  according  to  my  direction,  she  has  en-
enjoyed  a  comtortable  state  of  health  for  twelve  years,
and  has  never  be'en  obliged  to  sit  up  one  night  since.
'1  he  same  fall  I  used  it  in  Beverly  and  Salem ;  and  there
can  be  no  doubt  but  all  the  mformation  concerning  the
value  of  this  article  was  obtained  from  my  practice.  ^

After  Dr.  Cutler  had  given  his  testimony  of  the  vir-
tues of  this  herb,  and  the  doctors  having  become  con-
vinced of  its  value,  they  come  forward  and  say  it  is
good  medicine  in  skilful  hands.  Who,  I  would  ask,  is
more  skilful  than  he  who  discovered  it,  and  taught
them  how  to  prepare  and  use  it  in  curing  one  of  the
most  distressing  complaints  known  ?  Ifitisa  good  medi-
cine it  is  mine  and  I  am  entitled  to  the  credit  of  intro-
ducing it  into  use,  and  have  paid  dear  for  it;  if  it
is  poison  the  doctors  do  not  need  it,  as  fhey  have
enough  of  that  now. Dr.  Thachcr  undertakes  to  make

S  2


210  J^ew  Guide  to Health;

it  appear  that  the  fatal  effects  \ie  tells  about  its  pro-
ducing, was  owing  to  the  quantity  given ;  and  says
I  administered  a  tea-spoonful  of  the  powder;  and  when
he  comes  to  give  directions  for  using  it,  says  that  from  10
to  20  grains  may  be  given  with  safety.  It  appears
strange  that  different  terms  should  produce  such  differ-
ent effects  in  the  operation  of  medicine.  If  a  tea-spoon-
ful is  given  by  an  empiric,  its  efiects  are  fatal ;  but  if
the  same  quantity  is  administered  by  a  learned  doctor
and  called  grains,  it  is  a  useful  medicine  !

under  the  names  of  Lobelia  Inflata,  Lobelia  Emetica,
Emetic  Weed,  and  Indian  Tobacco  ;  and  several  other
names  have  been  given  it,  some  by  way  of  ridicule  and
others  for  the  purpose  of  creating  a  prejudice  against
it ;  all  of  which  has  so  confounded  it  with  other  articles
that  there  is  a  difficulty  in  ascertaining  what  they  mean
root  grows  in  the  Southern  States,  called  Lobelia,  which
has  been  used  as  a  medicine  ;  the  calHng  this  herb  by
that  name,  has  probably  been  one  reason  of  its  being
thought  to  be  a  poison.  Why  it  has  had  the  name  of
Indian  Tobacco  given  it,  I  know  not :  there  is  a  plant
that  is  called  by  that  name,  which  grows  in  this  country,
but  is  entirely  different  from  this  herb  both  in  appear-
ance and  medical  virtues.  In  the  United  States  Phar-
macopeia there  is  directions  given  for  preparing  the
tincture  of  Indian  Tobacco  ;  whether  they  mean  this
herb  or  the  plant  that  has  been  always  called  by  that
name,  does  not  appear  ;  but  it  is  probable  they  mean
the  emetic  herb,  and  that  all  the  knowledge  they  have
of  it  is  from  Dr.  Cutler's  description.  It  is  said  by
Thaeher  that  it  was  employed  by  the  aborigines  and  by
those  who  deal  in  Indian  remedies  ;  and  others  who  are
attempting  to  rob  me  of  the  discovery  affect  to  believe
the  same  thing  ;  but  this  is  founded  altogether  on  con-
jecture, for  they  cannot  produce  a  single  instance  of  its
having  been  employed  as  a  medicine  till  I  made  use  of
it.  The  fact  is  it  is  a  new  article,  wholly  unknown  to
the  medical  faculty,  till  I  introduced  it  into  use,  and  the
best  evidence  of  this  is,  that  they  are  now  ignorant  o£"


or,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  211

its  powers  ;  and  all  the  knowledge  they  have  of  it  has
been  obtained  from  my  practice.  It  w^ould  be  folly  for
me  to  undertake  to  say  but  that  it  may  have  been  used
by  the  natives  of  this  country;  but  one  thing  I  am  cer-
tain of,  that  I  never  had  any  knowledge  of  their  using  it,
nor  ever  received  any  information  concerning  it  f^om
them  or  any  one  else.

1  he  Emetic  Herb  may  be  found  in  the  first  stages  of
its  growth  at  all  times  through  the  summer,  from  the
bigness  of  a  six  cent  piece  to  that  of  a  dollar  and  larger,
lying  flat  on  the  ground,  in  a  round  form  hke  «  rose
pressed  flat,  in  order  to  bear  the  weight  of  snow  which
lays  on  it  during  the  winter,,  and  is  subject  to  be  winter-
killed like  wheat.  In  the  spring  it  looks  yellow  and  pale,
like  other  things  suffering  from  wet  and  cold ;  but  when
the  returning  sun  spreads  forth  its  enlivening  rays  upon
it,  lifts  up  its  leaves  and  shoots  forth  a  stalk  to  the  bight
of  from  twelve  to  fifteen  inches,  with  a  number  of  branch-
es, carrying  up  its  leaves  with  its  growth.  In  July  it
puts  forth  small  pointed  pale  blue  blossoms,  which  is
followed  by  small  pods  about  the  size  of  a  white  hean,
containing  numerous  very  small  seeds.  This  pod  is  an
exact  resemblance  of  the  human  stomach,  having  an  in-
let and  outlet  higher  than  the  middle  ;  from  the  inlet  it
receives  nourishment  and  by  the  outlet  discharges  the
seeds.  It  comes  to  maturity  about  the  first  of  Septem-
ber, when  the  leaves  and  pods  turn  a  little  yellow  ;
this  is  the  best  time  to  gather  it.  It  is  what  is  called  by
botanists  a  bienneal  plant,  or  of  only  two  years  existence.

This  plant  is  common  in  all  parts  of  this  country.
Wherever  the  land  is  fertile  enough  to  yield  support  for
its  inhabitants  it  may  be  found.  It  i&  confined  to  no
soil  which  is  fit  for  cultivation,,  from  the  highest  moun-
tains to  the  lowest  vailie&.  In  hot  and  wet  seasons  it  is
most  plenty  on  dry  and  warm  lands — in  hot  and  dry
seasons  on  clayey  and  heavy  lands.  When  the  season
is  cold,  either  wet  or  dry,  it  rarely  makes  its  appear-
ance ;  and  if  the  summer  and  fall  is  very  dry  the  seed
does  not  come  up,  and  of  course  there  will  be  very  lit-
tle to  be  found  the  next  season.  I  have  been  in  search
of  this  herb  from  Boston  to  Canada,  and  was  not  able  to


212  JVe'jD  Guide  to  Health  ;

collect  more  than  two  pounds ;  and  in  some  seasons  I
have  not  been  able  to  collect  any.  I  mention  this  to
show  the  uncertaintjf  of  its  growth,  and  to  pat  the  peo-
ple on  their  guard  to  be  careful  and  lay  tip  a  g'ood  stock
of  it  when  plenty.  In  the  year  1807,  if  I  had  ofiered
a  reward  of  a  thousand  dollars  fora'pound  of  this  herb,
I  should  not  have  been  able  to  have  obtained  it.  1  have
seen  the  time  that  \  would  have  given  two  dollars  for
an  ounce  of  t'^e  powder,  but  there  was  none  to  be  had  ;
which  necessity  taught  me  to  lay  up  all  1  could  obtain
when  it  was  pienty.

In  seasons  when  this  herb  is  plenty  it  may  be  found
growing  in  highways  and  pastures,  by  the  side  of  old
turnpikes,  and  m  stubble  land,  particularly  where  it  has
been  laid  down  to  grass  the  year  before ;  when  grass  is
scarce  it  is  eaten  by  cattle,  and  is  hard  to  be  found  when
full  grown.  It  is  a  wild  plant  and  a  native  of  this  coun-
try; but  there  is  no  doubt  of  its  being  common  to  other
countries.  It  may  be  transplanted  afid  cultivated  in
gardens  and  will  be  muoh  larger  and  more  vigourous
than  when  growing  wild,  if  some  stalks  are  left  it  will
sow  itself,  and  probably  may  be  produced  from  the
seed  ;  but  how  long  the  seeds  remain  in  the  ground  be-
ibre  they  come  up,  I  do  not  know,  never  having  made-
any  experiments  lo  ascertain  the  tact.  It  is  certain  that
it  is  produced  trom  the  seed,  and  there  is  no  good  rea-
son to  suppose  that  it  may  not  be  cultivated  in  gardens
fvocn  the  seed  as  well  as  other  vegetables ;  I  think  it
most  probable,  however,  from  the  nature  of  the  plant,
that  it  vvill  not  come  up  till  thu  seeds  have  lain  at  least
one  winter  in  the  ground.

This  plant  is  dift'erent  in  one  very  important  particu-
lar, from  all  others  that  I  have  a  knowledge  of,  that  the
same  quantity  will  produce  the  same  effect  in  all  stages
of  its  growth,  from  its  first  appearance  till  it  comes  to
maturity  ;  but  the  best  time  for  gathering  it,  as  has  be-
fore besn  mentioned,  is  when  the  leaves  and  pods  be-
gin to  turn  yellow,  for  then  the  seed  is  ripe  and  you  have
all  there  can  be  of  tt.  It  should  then  be.  cut  and  kept
clean,  and  spread  in  a  large  chamber  or  loft,  to  dry,
where  it  is  open  to the  air  in  the  day  time and  to  be


©r,  Botanic  Family  Physician,  215

shnt'frora  the  damp  air  during"  the  night.  When  per-
fectly dry,  shake  cut  the  seed  and  sift  it  through  a  com-
mon meal  sieve,  and  preserve  it  hy  itself;  then  beat  off
the  leaves  and  pods  from  the  stalks  and  preserve  them
clean.  This  herb  may  be  prepared  for  use  in  three
different  ways: — viz.  1st.  The  powdered  leaves  and
pods.  2d.  A  tincture  made  from  the  green  herb  with
spirit.  3d.  The  seeds  reduced  to  a  fine  powder  and
compounded  with  Nos.  2  and  6.

1.  After  the  leaves  and  pods  are  separated  from  the
stalks,  pound  or  grind  them  in  a  mortar  to  fine  powder,
sift  it  through  a  fine  sieve,  and  preserve  it  from  the  air.
This  is  the  most  common  preparation,  and  may  be  given
in  many  different  ways,  either  by  itself  or  Compounded
with  other  articles.  For  a  common  dose  take  a  tea-
spoonful  of  this  powder  with  the  same  quantity  of  sugar
in  half  a  tea-cupful  of  warm  water,  or  a  tea  of  No.  3
may  be  used  instead  of  the  water  ;  this  dose  may  be  ta-
ken all  at  one  time,  or  at  three  times,  at  intervals  often
minutes.  For  a  young  child  strain  off  the  liquor  and
give  a  part  as  circumstances  shall  require.  There  is
but  one  way  in  which  this  herb  can  be  prepared  that  it
will  refuse  its  services,  and  that  is  when  boiled  or  scald-
ed ;  it  is  therefore  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  there
must  never  be  any  thing  put  to  it  warmer  than  a  blood
heat

2.  To  prepare  the  tincture,  take  the  green  herb  in
any  stage  of  its  grovv^th,  (if  the  small  plants  are  used  take
roots  and  all)  put  them  into  a  mortar  and  pound  them
fine,  then  add  the  same  quantity  of  good  spirit;  when
well  pounded  and  worked  together,  strain  it  through  a
fine  cloth  and  squeze  and  press  it  hard  to  get  out  all  the
juice  ;  save  the  liquor  in  bottles,  close  stopped,  for  use.
Good  vinegar,  or  pepper-sauce  may  be  used  instead  of
the  spirit.  Prepared  in  this  manner  it  is  an  effectual
counter-poison,  either  taken,  or  externally  applied.  It
is  also  an  excellent  medicine  for  the  asthma  and  all  com-
plaints of  the  lungs.  This  is  the  only  way  in  which  the
doctors  have  made  use  of  the  Emetic  Herb ;  and  they
acknowledge  it  to  be  one  of  the  best  remedies  in  many
complaints,  that  has  been  found,  though  they,  know  but


214  A^ew  Guide  to  Health -;

little  about  it.  For  a  dose  take  from  half  to  a  tea-spoon-
ful. Its  etlect  will  be  more  certain  if  about  the  same
quantity  of  No.  2,  is  added,  and  in  all  cases  where  there
are  nervous  symptoms  add  half  a  tea-spoonful  of  nerve
powder  (Umbil)  to  the  dose.

3.  Reduce  the  seeds  to  a  tine  powder  in  a  mortar,  and
take  half  an  ounce  of  this  powder,  or  about  a  large
spoonful,  with  the  same  quantity  of  No.  2,  made  fine,
and  put  them  in  a  gill  of  No.  6,  adding  a  tea-spoonful  of
Umbil ;  to  be  kept  close  stopped  in  a  bottle  for  use  ;  when
taken  to  be  well  shaken  together,  ihis  preparation  is
for  the  most  violent  attacks  of  disease,  such  as  lock-jaw,
bite  of  m;id  dog,  drowned  persons,  tits,  spasms,  and  in
all  cases  of  suspended  animation,  where  the  vital  spark
is  nearly  extinct.  It  will  go  through  the  system  like
electricity,  giving  heat  and  life  to  every  part.  In  cases
where  the  spasms  are  so  violent  that  they  are  stiff,  and
the  jaws  become  set,  by  pouring  some  of  this  liquid  into
the  mouth  between  the  cheek  and  teeth,  as  soon  as  it
touches  the  glands  at  the  roots  of  the  tongue  the  spasms
will  relax,  and  the  jaws  will  become  loosened  so  that  the
mouth  will  open  :  then  give  a  dose  of  it,  and  as  soon  as
the  spasms  have  abated,  repeat  it,  and  afterwards  give  a
tea  olNo.  3,  for  canker.  This  course  I  never  knew  fail
of  giving  relief.  It  is  good  in  less  violent  cases,  to
bring  out  the  meazles  and  small  pox;  and  if  applied  to
pimples,  warts,  S:c.  will  remove  them.  I  have  cured
three  dogs  with  this  preparation,  who  were  under  the
most  violent  symptoms  of  hydrophobia  ;  one  of  my  agents
cured  a  man  with  it  who  had  been  bitten  by  a  mad  dog;
and  I  have  not  the  least  doubt  of  its  being  a  specific
for  that  disease. For  a  dose  take  a  tea-spoonful.

Much  has  been  said  of  the  power  of  the  Emetic  Herb,
and  some  have  expressed  fears  of  it  on  that  account ;
but  1  can  assure  the  public,  that  there  is  not  the  least
danger  in  using  it ;  I  have  given  it  to  children  from  one
da}'  old  to  pei'sons  of  80  years.  It  is  most  powerful  in'
removing  disease, *-but  innocent  on  nature  Its  opera-
tion in  different  persons,  is  according  to  their  different
tempers,  moving  with  the  natural  current  of  the'&nimal
spirits. There is  two  cases  where this  medicine  will


''or^  Botanic  Family  Physician.  215

aot  operate,  viz.  when  the  patient  is  djing",  and  where
there  is  no  death.  There  can  be  no  war  where  there
is  no  enemy.  When  there  is  no  cold  in  the  body  there
is  nothing  to  cojitend  against,  and  when  there  is  no  heat
in  the  body  there  is  nothing  to  kindle  ;  in  either  case
therefore  this  medicine  is  silent  and  harmless.  It  is  cal-
culated to  remove  the  cause  and  no  more,  as  food  re-
moves hunger  and  drmk  thirst.  It  clears  ail  obstruc-
tions to  the  extremities,  without  regard  to  the  names  of
disease,  until  it  produces  an  equiiebnum  in  the  system,
and  will  be  felt  in  the  fingers  and  toes,  producing  a  prick-
ling feeling  like  that  caused  by  a  knock  of  the  elbow ;
this  symptom  is  alarming  to  those  unacquainted  with  its
operalion ;  'but  is  always  favourable,  being  a  certain
indication  of  the  turn  of  the  disorder,  and  the}^  general-
ly gain  from  that  time.

In  regard  lo  the  quantity  to  be  given  as  a  dose,  it  is
matter  of  less  consequence  than  is  generally  imagmed.
The  most  important  thing  is  to  give  enough  to  produce
the  desired  effect ; — If  too  little  is  given  it  will  w^orry  the
patient,  and  do  "little  good;  if  more  is  given  than  what
is  necessary  the  surplus  ivill  be  thrown  off,  and  is  a
waste  of  medicine.  1  have  given  directions  what  I
consider  as  a  proper  dose  in  common  cases,  of  the
different  preparations,  but  still  it  must  be  left  to  the  judg-
ment of  those  v>  ho  use  it,  how  much  to  give.  The
dose  first,  then  repeat  it  till  it  produce  the  wished  op-
peration.  In  cascs  where  the  stomach  is  cold  and  very
foul,  its  operation  will  be  slow  and  uncertain;  in  which
case  give  No.  2,  which  will assist  it  in  doing  its  work.

When  this  medicine  is  giv(n  to  patients  th^^  are  in
a  decline,  or  are  Jabouringundcr  a  disease  of  long  stand-
ing, the  symptoms  indicating  a  crisis  will  not  take  place,
till  they  have  been  carried  through  from,  three  to  eight
courses  of  the  medicine  ;  and  the-  lower  they  have  been,
the  more  alarming  v/ill  be  the  symptoms.  I  have  had
some  who  woulo'  lay  and  sob  like  a  jj^ild  that  had  been
punished,  for  two  hours,  not  able  to  speak  or  to  lift  their
hand  to  their  head ;  and  the  next  day  be.  about,  and
soon  get  well. In  cases  where  they  have  taken  coosid-


S16  J^tw  Cruide  to  Health  j

erable  opium,  and  this  msdiciiie  is  administered,  it  will
in  its  operation  produce  the  same  appearances  and  symp-
toms, that  is  produced  by  opium  when  first  given,  which
having  lain  dorment,  is  roused  into  actio'n  by  the
enlivening  qualities  of  this  medicine,  and  they  will  be
thrown  into  a  s'euseless  state  ;  the  whole  system  will  be
one  complete  mass  of  confusion,  tumbling  in  every  di-
rection ;  will  take  two  or  three  to  hold  them  on  the  bed ;
they  grovy  cold  as  though  dying;  remaining  in  this  way
from  tw.o  to  eight  hours,  and  then  awake,  like  one  from
sleep  after  a  good  nights  rest ;  be  entirely  calm  and  sen-
sible as  though  nothing  had  aiied  them,  ii  is  sel-
dom they  ever  have  more  than  one  of  these  turns;  as
it  is  the  last  struggle  of  the  disease,  and  they  generally
begin  to  recover  from  that  time,  i  have  been  more
particular  in  describing  these  efft'cis  of  the  medicine,  as
they  are  very  alarming  to  those  unacquainted  with  them,
in  order  to  show  that  there  is  no  d;inger  to  be  appre-
hended, as  it  is  certain  evidence  of  a  favourable!  turn  of
the  disease.

The  Emetic  Herb  is  of  great  valuein  preventing  sick-
ness as  well  as  curing  it;  by  taking  a  dose  when  first
attpxked  by  any  complaint  it  ^>iii  throw  it  off',  and  fre-
quently prevent  long  sickness.  It  not  only  acts  as  an
emetic,  and  throws  off  the  stomach  every  thing  that
nature  does  not  require  for  support  of  the  system  ;
but  extends  its  effects  to  all  parts  of  the  body.  It  is
searching,  enUvening,  quickening  and  has  great  power
in  removing  all  obstructions  ;  but  it  soon  exhausts  itself,
and  if  not  followed  by  some  other  medicine  to  hold  the
vital  heat  till  nature  is  able  to  support  itself  by  digesting
the  food,  it  will  not  be  sufficient  to  remove  a  disease
that  has  become  seated.  To  effect  this  important  object
put  me  to  much  trouble,  and  after  trying  many  experi-
ments to  get  something  that  would  answer  the  purpose,
and  only  medicine  I  have  a  knowledge  of,  that  would
hold  the  heat  in  the  stomach,  and  not  evaporate  ;  and  by
giving  No.  3  to  remove  the  canker,  which  is  the  great
cause  ol  disease  ;  and  then  following  with  Nos.  4  and  5  to
correct  the  bile,  restore  the  digestion,  and  strengthen
the  system,  I  have  had  little  trouble  in  effecting  a  cure.
Directions  for  preparing  these  will  be  hereafter  giveti.


or^  Botanic  Family  PhysicicCn.  217

No.  2.— To  retain  the  internal  vital  heat  of
the  system  and  cause  a  free  perspiration,

Cayenne. — Capsicum.

This  article  being  so  well  known  it  will  be  unneces-
sary to  be  very  particular  in  describing  it.  It  has  been
a  long  time  used  for  culinary  purposes,  and  comes  to  us
prepared  for  use  by  being  ground  to  a  powder  and  a  pro-
portion of  salt  mixed  with  it ;  this  destroys  in  some  de-
gree its  stimulating  effects  and  makes  it  less  pungent ;
but  it  is  not  so  good  for  medicine  xis  in  the  pure  state.
It  is  said  to  be  a  native  of  South  America  and  is  cultiva-
ted in  many  of  the  West-India  islands  ;  that  which  comes
to  this  country  is  brought  from  Demarara  and  Jamaica.
It  also  grows  in  other  parts  of  the  world  ;  I  once  bought
one  hundred  pounds  of  it  in  the  pod,  which  was  brought
from  the  coast  of  Guinea  ;  had  it  ground  at  Portsmouth,
and  it  was  as  good  as  any  I  ever  used.  There  are  sev-
sicum ;  all  of  which  are  about  the  same,  as  to  their
stimulating  qualities.  The  pods  only  are  used ;  they
are  long  and  pointed,  are  of  a  green  colour  till  ripe,
when  they  turn  of  a  bright  orange  red.  When  the  pods
are  green  they  are  gathered  and  preserved  in  salt  and
water  and  brought  to  this  country  in  bottles,  when  vine-
gar is  put  to  them,  which  is  sold  under  the  name  of
Pepper-Sauce.  The  ripe  pods  ground  to  a  powder  is
what  is  used  for  medicine  and  cooking  ;  but  the  Pepper-
Sauce,  is  very  good,  to  be  taken  as  medicine  and  ap-
plied externally ;  the  green  pods  hold  their  attracting
power  till  ripe,  and  therefore  keep  their  strength  much
longer,  when  put  in  vinegar,  as  the  bottle  may  be  filled
up  a  number  of  times  and  the  strength  seems  to  be  the
same ;  but  when  the  ripe  pods  are  put  in  vinegar,  the
first  time  will  take  nearly  all  the  strength.

I  shall  not  undertake  to  dispute  but  that  Cayenne  has
been  used  for  medical  purposes  long  before  1  had  any
knowledge  of  it;  and  that  it  is  one  of  the  safest  and  best
articles ever  discovered  to  remove  disease,  I  know  to

T


218  JVew  Guide  to  Health  ;

be  a  fact,  from  long  experience  ;  but  it  is  equally  true  1
that  the  medical  faculty  never  considered  it  of  much  1
value,  and  the  peaple  had  no  knowledge  of  it  as  a  me-
dicine, till  1  intFod"uced  it,  by  making  use  of  it  in  my
practice.  Mention  is  made  of  Cayenne  in  the  Edinburgh
Dispensatory,  as  chiefly  employed  for  culinary  purpo-
ses, but  that  of  late  it  has  been  employed  also  in  the
practice  of  medicine.  The  author  says  that  "  there  can
be  little  doubt  that  it  furnishes  one  of  the  purest  and
strongest  stimulants  which  can  be  introduced  into  the
stomach  ;  while  at  the  same  time  it  has  nothing  of  the
narcotic  effects  of  ardent  spirits.  It  is  said  to  have
been  used  with  success  in  curing  some  cases  of  disease,
that  had  resisted  all  other  remedies."  All  this  1  am  sat-
isfied is  true,  for  if  given  as  a  medicine  it  alwaj'S  will  be
found  useful ;  but  all  the  knowledge  they  had  of  it  seems
to  have  been  derived  from  a  few  experiments  that  had
been  made,  without  fixing  upon  any  particular  manner
of  preparing  or  administering  it,  or  in  what  disease,  as
is  the  case  with  all  other  articles  that  are  introduced  in-
to general  practice.  In  Thacher's  Dispensatory  the
same  account  is  given  of  Cayenne,  as  in  the  Edinburgh,
and  in  almost  the  same  words.

I  never  had  any  knowledge  of  Cayenne  being  useful
as  a  medicine,  or  that  it  had  ever  been  used  as  such,
till  I  discovered  it  by  accident,  as  has  been  the  case  with
most  other  articles  used  by  me.  After  I  had  fixed  upon
a  system  for  my  government  in  practice,  I  found  much
difficulty  in  getting  some  thing  that  would  not  only  pro-
duce a  strong  heat  in  the  body,  but  would  retain  it  till
the  canker  could  be  removed  and  the  digestive  powers
restored,  so  that  the  foi  d  by  being  properly  digested,
would  maintain  the  natural  heat.  I  tried  a  great  num-
ber of  articles  that  were  of  a  hot  nature  ;  but  could  find
nothing  that  would  hold  the  heat  any  length  of  time.
I  made  use  of  ginger,  mustard,  horseradish,  peppermint,
butternut  bark,  and  many  other  hot  things  ;  bul  they
were  all  more  or  less  volatile,  and  would  not  have  the
deoired  effect.  With  these  however,  and  the  Emitic
Herb,  together  with  the  aid  of  steam,  I  was  enabled  to
practice  with  pretty  general  success. In  the  fall  of  the


or^  Botanic  Family  Physician.  219

year  1805,  I  was  out  in  search  of  Umbil,  on  a  mountain,
in  Walpole,  N.  H.  I  went  into  a  house  at  the  foot  of
the  mountain,  to  inquire  for  some  rattlesnake  oil ;
while  in  the  house  I  saw  a  large  string"  of  red-peppers
hanging  in  the  room,  which  put  me  in  ftiind  of  what  1
had  been  a  long  time  in  search  of,  to  retain  the  internal
heat.  I  knew  them  to  be  very  hot;  but  did  not  know  of
what  nature.  1  obtained  these  peppers,  carried  them
home,  reduced  them  to  powder,  and  took  some  of  ilie
powder  myself  and  found  it  to  answer  the  purpose  bet-
ter than  any  thing  else  I  had  made  use  of.  I  put  it  in
spirit  with  the  Emetic  Herb,  and  gave  the  tincture  mix-
ed in  a  tea  of  witch-hazle  leaves,  and  found  that  it  would
retain  the  heat  in  the  stomach  after  puking  ;  and  pre-
serve the  strength  of  the  patient  in  proportion.  I  made
uise  of  it  in  different  ways  for  two  years,  and  always
with  good  success.

In  the  fall  of  1807  I  was  in  Newbury  port  and  saw  a
bottle  of  pepper-sauce,  being  the  first  1  had  ever  seen  :
-I  bought  it  and  carried  it  home  ;  got  some  of  the  same
^kind  of  pepper  that  was  dried,  which  I  put  into  the
bottle,  this  made  it  very  hot.  On  my  way  home  ^^as
taken  unwell,  and  was  quite  cold  ;  I  took  a  swallow  from
the  bottle,  which  caused  violent  pain  for  a  few  minutes.
when  it  produced  perspiration,  and  I  soon  grew  easy.  1
afterwards  tried  it  and  found  that  after  it  had  espellcd
the  cold  it  would  not  cause  pain.  From  these  experi-
ments I  became  convinced  that  this  kind  of  pepper  was
much  stronorer  and  would  be  better  for  medical  use  than
the  common  red-pepper.  Soon  after  this  1  was  again
in  Newburyport  and  made  enquiry  and  found  some
Cayenne  ;  but  it  was  prepared  with  salt  for  table  use.
which  injured  it  for  medical  purposes.  1  tried  it  by
fasting  and  selected  that  which  had  the  least  salt  in  it.
1  afterwards  made  use  of  this  article  and  found  it  to  an-
swer all  the  purposes  wished ;  and  was  the  very  thing
I  had  long  been  in  search  of.  The  next  year  1  went  to
Portsmouth  and  made  enquiries  concerning  Cayenne,
and  from  those  who  dealt  in  the  article  I  learned  that  it
was  brought  to  this  country  from  Demarara  and  Jamai-
'  a.  prepared only  for  table  use,  and that  salt  was  put


220  New  Guide  to  Health  ;

with  it  to  preserve  it  and  make  it  more  palatable.  I
became  acquainted  with  a  French  gentleman  who  had  a
brother  in  Demarara;  and  made  arrangements  with
him  to  send  to  his  brother  and  request  him  to  procure
some  and  have  it  prepared  without  salt.  He  did  so  and
sent  out  a  box  containing  about  eighty  pounds  in  a  pure
state.  I  sent  also  hy  many  others,  that  were  going  to
the  places  where  it  grows,  to  procure  all  they  could ;
in  consequence  of  which  large  quantities  were  imported
into  Portsmouth,  much  more  than  there  was  immediate
demand  for-  I  was  not  able  to  purchase  but  a  small
part  of  what  was  brought,  and  it  was  bought  up  by
others  on  speculation  and  sent  to  Boston  ;  the  conse-
quence was  that  the  price  was  so  much  reduced,
that  it  would  not  bring  the  first  cost,  which  put  a  stop
to  its  being  imported,  and  it  has  since  been  very  scarce.
Whea^  I  first  began  to  use  this  article  it  caused  much
talk  among  the  people  in  Portsmouth  and  the  adjoining
towns  ;  the  doctors  tried  to  frighten  them  by  telling
that  I  made  use  of  Cayenne  pepper  as  a  medicine,  and
that  it  would  burn  up  the  stomach  and  lungs  as  bad  as
vitriol.  The  people  generally  however  became  con-
vinced by  using  it,  that  all  the  doctor^  said  about  it  was
false,  and  it  only  proved  their  ignorance  of  its  medical
virtues  and  their  malignity  towards  me.  It  soon  came
into  general  use  and  the  knowledge  of  its  being  useful  in
curing  disease  was  spread  all  through  the  country.  I
made  use  of  it  in  curing  the  spotted  fever,  and  where  it
was  known,  was  the  only  thing  depended  on  for  that
disease.  1  have  made  use  of  Cayenne  in  all  kinds  of
disease,  and  have  given  it  to  patients  of  all  ages  and
under  every  circumstance  that  has  come  under  my  prac-
tice ;  and  can  assure  the  public  that  it  is  perfectly
harmless,  never  having  known  it  to  produce  any  bad
effects  whatever.  It  is  no  doubt  the  most  powerful
stimulant  known ;  its  power  is  entirely  congenial  to  na-
ture, being  powerful  only  in  raising  and  maintaining  that
heat  on  which  life  depends.  It  is  extremely  pungent
and  when  taken  sets  the  mouth  as  it  were  on  fire;  this
lasts  however  but  a  few  minutes,  and  I  consider  it  essen-
tially a  benefit,  for  its  effects  on  the glands  causes the


or.  Botanic  Family  Physician*  2^1

saliva  to  flow freely  and  leaves  the  mouth clean  and
moist.

The  only  preparation  necessary  is  to  have  it  ground
or  pounded  to  a  fine  powder.  For  a  dose  from  half  to  a
tea-spoonful  may  be  taken  in  hot  water  sweetened,  or  the
same  quantity  may  be  mixed  with  either  of  the  other
numbers,  when  taken.  It  will  produce  a  free  perspira-
tion, which  should  be  kept  up  by  repeating  the  dose,
until  the  disease  is  removed.  A  spoonful,  with  an  equal
quantity  of  common  salt,  put  into  a  gill  of  vinegar,  makes
a  very  good  sauce,  to  be  eaten  on  meat,  and  will  assist
the  appetite  and  strengthen  the  digeisture  ;  one  spoon-
ful of  this  preparation  may  be  taken  to  good  advantage,
and  will  remove  faint  sinking  feelings,  which  some  are
subject  to,  especially  in  the  spring  of  the  year.  Pepper
sauce  is  good  for  the  same  purpose.  A  tea-spooniul  of
Cayenne  may  be  tiken  in  a  tumbler  of  cider,  and  is
much  better  than  ardent  spirits.  There  is  scarce  any
preparation  of  medicine  that  I  make  use  of  in  which  I
do  not  put  some  of  this  article.  It  will  cure  the  ague  in
the  face,  by  taking  a  dose,  and  tying  a  small  quantity  in
fine  cloth  and  put  it  between  the  cheek  and  teeth  on
the  side  that  is  aifected,  seting  by  the  fire  covered  with  a
blanket. It  is  good  to  put  on  old  sores-

Red  Peppers.

These  are  very  plenty  in  this  country,  being  cultivat-
ed in  gardens,  and  are  principally  made  use  of  for  pick-
ling ;  for  which  purpose  the  pods  are  gathered  when
green  and  preserved  in  vinegar.  It  is  of  the  same  nature
as  Cayenne  pepper,  but  not  so  strong ;  and  is  the  best
substitute  for  that  article  of  any  thing  I  have  ever  found.
For  medical  use  they  should  not  be  gathered  till  ripe,
when  they  are  of  a  bright  red  colour ;  should  be  rer
duced  to  a  fine  powder,  and  may  be  used  in&tead  of  Cay-'
enne,  when  that  article  cannot  be  obtained.

"**  Ginger.

This  is  a  root  which  is  brought  from  foreign  coun-
tries, and  is  too  well  known  to  need  any  farther  descrip-

T  2


'f  •


222  Kew  Guide  to  Health  ;

tion.  It  is  a  very  good  article,  having  a  warming  and
agreeable  eflfect  on  the  stomach.  It  is  a  powerful  stim-
ulant and  is  not  volatile  like  many  other  hot  articles ;
and  is  the  next  best  thing  to  raise  the  inward  heat  and
promote  perspiration ;  and  may  be  used  with  good  suc-
cess for  that  purpose,  as  a  substitute  for  Cayenne,  when
that  or  the  red-peppers  cannot  be  had.  It  is  sold  in  the
shops  ground,  but  is  sometimes  mixed  with  other  ar-
ticles to  increase  the  quantity  and  is  not  so  strong.  The
best  way  is  to  get  the  roots  and  grind  or  pound  them  to
a  fine  powder.  The  dose  must  be  regulated  according
to  circumstances  ;  if  given  to  raise  the  internal  heat
and  cause  perspiration,  it  must  be  repeated  till  it  has  the
desired  effect.  It  makes  an  excellent  poultice  mixed
with  pounded  cracker,  or  slippery  elm  bark,  for  which
I  make  much  use  of  it.  To  keep  a  piece  of  the  root
in  the  mouth  and  chew  it  like  tobacco,  swallowing  the
juice,  is  very  good  for  a  cough  and  those  of  a  consump-
tive habit ;  and  this  should  be  also  done  by  all  who  are
exposed  to  any  contagion,,  or  are  attending  on  the  sick,.
as  it  will  guard  the  stomach  against  taking  the  disease.
It  may  be  taken  in  hot  water  sweetened,  or  in  a  tea  of
No.  3,

Black  Pp  per.
This  may  be  used  to  good  advantage  as  a  substitute
for  the  foregoing  articles,  when  they  are  not  to  be  had^.
and  may  be  prepared  and  administered  in  the  same  man-
ner. These  four  that  I  have  mentioned,  are  all  the
articles  I  have  been  able  to  find,  that  would  hold  the
heat  of  the  body  for  any  length  of  time  ;  all  the  others
that  I  have  tried  are  so  volatile  that  they  do  little  good.


No.  3. — Tb  scour  the  Stomach  ani  Bowel»
and  remove  the  Canker.  ^

ductions as  are.  good  for  Canker,  and  which  I  have
found  to  be  best  in  removing  the  thrush  from  the  throat.


«r,  Botanic  Family  Physician,  223

stomach  and  bowels,  caused  by  cold,  and  there  will  be
more  or  less  of  it  in  all  cases  of  disease  ;  for  when  cold
gets  the  power  over  the  inward  heat,  the  stomach  and
bowels  become  coated  with  canker,  which  prevents
those  numerous  little  vessels  calculated  to  nourish  the
system  from  performing  their  duty.  A  ^cure  therefore
cannot  be  effected  without  removing  this  difficulty,  which
must  be  done  by  such  things  as  are  beist  calculated  to
scour  off  the  canker  and  leave  the  juices  flowing  free.
There  are  many  articles  which  are  go©d  for  this,  but  I
shall  mention  such  only  as  1  have  found  to  be  the  best.
Several  things  that  are  used  for  canker  are  loo  bind-
ing, and  do  more  hurt  than  good,  as  they  cause  obstruc-
tions. I  have  adopted  a  rule  to  ascertain  what  is  good
for  canker,  which  I  have  found  very  useful ;  and  shall
here  give  it  as  a  guide  for  others  ;  that  is,  to  chew
some  of  the  article,  and  if  it  causes  the  saliva  to  flow
freely  and  leaves  the  mouth  clean  and  moist,  it  is  good ;
but  on  the  other  hand  if  it  drys  up  the  juices  and  leaves
the  mouth  rough  and  dry  it  is  bad  and  should  be  avoided.

Bayberry  ; or  Candleeerry.

This  is  a  species  of  the  myrtle  from  which  wax  is  ob-
tained from  the  berries,  and  grows  common  in  tnany
parts  of  this  country.  It  is  a  shrub  growing  from  two
to  four  feet  high,  and  is  easily  known  by  the  berries
which  it  produces  annually,  containing  wax  in  abund-
ance ;  these  grow  on  the  braches  close  to  them,  simi-
lar to  the  juniper ;  the  leaves  are  of  a  deep  green.
The  bark  of  the  roots  is  what  is  used  for  medicine,  and
should  be  collected  in  the  spring  before  it  puts  forth  its
leaves,  or  in  the  fall  after  done  growing  as  then  the  saj
is  in  the  roots  ;  this  should  be  attended  to  in  gathering
all  kinds  of  medical  roots ;  but  those  things  that  the
tops  are  used,,  should  be  collected  in  the  summer  when
nearly  full  grown,  as*  then  the  sap  is  in  the  top.  The
roots  should  be  dug  and  cleaned  from  the  dirt,  and  poun-
ded with  a  mallet  or  club,  when  the  bark  is  easily
separated  from  the  etalk,  and  may  be  obtained  with  lit-
tle trouWe.  It  should  be  dried  in  a"  chamber  or  loft,
where  it  is  not  exposed  to  the  weather ;  and  when  per-


224  -JVeit;  Guide  to Health  ;

fectly  dry  should  be  ground  or  pounded  to  a  fine  powder,
It  is  an  exceiient  medicine  either  taken  by  itself  or
compounded  with  other  articles  ;  and  is  the  best  thing
for  canker  of  any  article  I  have  ever  found.  ,  it  is  highly
stimulating  and  very  pungent,  pricking  the  glands  and
causing  the  saliva  and  other  juices  to  flow  freely.  Is
good  used  as  tooth-powder,  cleanses  the  teeth  and  gums
and  removes  the  scurvy;  taken  as  snuff  it  clears  the
head  and  relieves  the  head-ach.  It  may  be  given  to  ad-
vanlaffe  in  a  relax  and  all  disorders  of  the  bowels, —
When  the  stomach  is  very  foul  it  will  frequently  oper-
ate as  an  emetic.  For  a  dose  take  a  tea-spoonful  in  hot
water  sweetened." '

AVhite  Po^'D  Lily — The  Root.

This  is  well  known  from  the  beautiful  flower  which
li  bears,  opening  only  to  the  sun  and  closing  again  at
ni^ht.  It  grows  in  fresh  water  ponds,  and  is  common  ift
alF  parts  of  this  country  where  1  have  been.  The  best
time  to  gather  it  is  in  the  fall  of  the  year,  when  dry
and  the  water  in  the  ponds  is  low,  as  it  may  then  be  ob-
tained with  little  difficulty.  It  has  large  roots  which
should  be  dug,  washed  clean,  split  inta  strips,  and  dried
as  has  been  directed  for  the  Bayberr}*  root  bark  When
perfectly  dry  it  should  be  pounded  in  a  <nortar,  and
preserved  for  use.  This  article  is  a  very  good  medicine
for  canker  and  all  complaints  of  the  bowels,  given  in  a
tea  alone,  or  mixed  with  other  articles.

Hemlock — The  inner  Bark.

This  is  the  common  Hemlock  tree  and  grows  in  all
parts  of  New-England.  The  best  for  medicine  is  to  peel
the  bark  from  the  young  tree  and  shave  the  ross
from  the  outside  and  preserve  only  the  inner  rhine  ;
dry  it  carefully  and  pound  or  grind  it  to  a  powder.  A
tea  made  by  putting  boiling  water  to  this  bark,  is  a  good'
medicine  for  canker  and  many  other  complaints.  The
first  of  my  using  the  Hemlock  bark  as  medicine  was  in
1814;  being  in  want  of  Something  for  canker,  tried
some  of  it  by  chewing,  and  found  it  to  answer,  made  use


«r,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  225

of  it  to  good  advantage.  Since  then  have  been  in  constant
use  of  it  and  have  always  found  it  a  very  good  medicine^
both  for  canker  and  other  complaints  of  the  bowels  and
stomach.  A  tea  made  of  this  bark  is  very  good  and
may  be  used  freely  ;  it  is  good  to  give  the  emetic  and
No.  2  in,  and  may  be  used  for  drink  in  all  cases  of  sick-
ness, especially  when  going  through  a  course  of  medi-
cine and  steaming.  This  with  Bayberry  bark  and
the  Lily  root,  forms  No.  3,  or  what  has  commonly  been
called  coiTee,  though  many  other  things  may  be  added,
or  either  of  them  may  be  used  to  advantage  alone.  The
boughs  made  into  a  tea  are  very  good  for  gravel  and
other  obstructions  of  the  urinary  passages,  and  for
rheumatism.

Marsh  Rosemary — the  Root.
This  article  is  very  well  known  in  all  parts  of  this
country  and  has  been  made  use  of  for  canker  and  sore
mouth.  1  have  made  use  of  it  with  Bayberry  bark  as
No.  3,  in  my  practice,  for  many  years  with  ^ood  success  ;
but  after  finding  that  the  Lily  root  and  fiemlock  bark
were  better  have  mostly  laid  it  aside.  It  is  so  binding
in  its  nature  that  it  is  not  safe  to  use  it  without  a  large
proportion  of  the  Bayberry  bark.

Sumach — the  Bark.,  Leaves  and  Berries.

This  appears  to  be  a  new  article  in  medicine,  entirely
unknown  to  the  medical  faculty,  as  no  mention  is  made
of  it  by  any  author.  The  first  of  my  knowledge  that  it
was  good  for  canker  was  when  at  Onion  River  in  1807
attending  the  dysentery  ;  being  in  want  of  something  to
clear  the  stomach  and  bowels  in  that  complaint,  found
that  the  bark,  leaves  or  berries  answered  the  purpose
extremely  well,  and  have  made  much  use  of  it  ever
since.  1^  is  well  known,  and  is  found  in  all  parts  of  the
country;  some  of  It  grows  from  eight  to  twelve  feet
high  and  has  iaxye  spreading  branches  ;  the  berries  grow
in  large  bunches,  and  when  r:ptt  are  a  deep  red  colour,
of  a  pleasant  sour  taste;  and  are  used  by  the  country
people  to  dy^  with. The  leaves  and  young  sprouts  are


226  Mw  Guide  to  Health  ;

made  use  of  in  tanning  Morrocco  leather.  For  medi-
cine the  bark  should  be  peeled  when  full  of  sap,  the
leaves  when  full  grown  and  the  berries  when  ripe  ;
they  should  be  carefully  dried,  and  when  used  as  part
of  No.  3,  should  be  potind'gd  and  may  be  used  altogether
or  either  separate.  A  tea  made  of  either  or  altogether,
is  very  good  and  may  be  given  with  safety  in  almost  all
complaints,  or  put  into  the  injections.  It  will  scour  the
stomach  and  bowels,  and  is  good  for  stranguary  as  it
promotes  urine  and  relieves  difliculties  in  the  kidneys,
by  removing  obstructions  and  strengthening  those  parts.
1  have  been  in  the  habit  of  late  years  of  making  use  of
this  article  with  Bayberr}'^  bark  and  Lily  root,  or  Hem-
lock bark,  equal  parts,  for  No.  3,  or  coflee,  and  it  has
always  answered  a  good  purpose.

WiTCH-HAZLE — the  Leaves.
I  found  the  use  of  this  article  as  medicine,  wRen  I
was  quite  young;  and  have  made  much  use  of  it  in  all
my  practice.  It  is  too  well  known  in  the  country  to
need  any  description  ;  is  a  small  iree  or  bush  and  grows
verj'  common,  especially  in  new  land,  A  tea  made  off
the  leaves  is  an  excellent  medicine  in  many  complaints,
and  may  be  freely  used  to  advantage.  It  is  the  best
thing  for  bleeding  at  the  stomach  of  any  article  I  have
ever  found,  either  by  giving  a  tea  ma :le  of  the  dry
leaves,  or  chewing  them  when  green;  have  cured  seve-
ral with  it.  This  complaint  is  caused  by  canker  eating
off  the  small  blood-vessel*,  and  this  medicine  will  remove
the  canker  and  stop  the  bleeding  I  have  made  much
use  of  the  tea  made  strong  for  injecti'^'HS,  and  found  it  in
all  complaints  of  the  bowels  to  be  very  serviceable.  An
injection  made  of  this  tea  with  a  little  No  2,  is  good  for
the  piles  and  many  complaints  common  to  females;  and
in  bearing-down  pains  it  will  afford  immediate  relief,  if
properly  administered.  These  leaves  may  be  used  in
No.  3  to  good  adva»tage,  as  a  sjibstitute  for  either" of  tijte
other  articles,- or  alone  for  the  same  purpose. .


or^  Botanic  Family  Pliystciaii.  227


Rkb-Rastberry— -the  Leaves.

A-

This  is  an  excellent  article  and  I  believe  was  never
made  use  of  as  medicine  till  disco  v€i:ed  by  me.  When  at
Eastport  I  had  no  article  with  na^e  good  for  canker  and
resorted  to  my  old  rule  of  tasting  and  found  that  these
leaves  were  good  for  that  complaint  ;  made  into  a  strong
tea  it  answered  every  purpose  Avished.  1  gathered  a
large  quantity  of  the  leaves  and  dried  them  and  have
been  in  constant  use  of  it  as  medicine  ever  since,  and
have  found  it  an  excellent  article,  both  for  canker  and
many  other  complaints ;  for  relax  and  other  bowel
complaints  of  children  it  is  the  best  thing  that  I  have
found ;  by  giving  the  tea  and  using  it  in  the  injec-
tions it  affords  immediate  relief.  A  tea  made  of
the  leaves  sweetened,  with  milk  in  it,  is  very  pleasant,
and  ijaay  be  used  freely.  It  is  the  best  thing  for  women
in  travail'of  any  article  I  know  of  Give  a  strong  tea  of
it  with  a  little  No.  2,  sweetened,  and  it  will  regulate  every
thing  as  nature  requires,  if  the  pains  are  untimely  it
i^ill  make  all  quiet;  if  timely  and  lingering,  give  more
Ko.  2  and  Umbil  in  the  tea.  When  the  child  is  born
give  it  some  of  the  tea  with  sugar  and  milk  in  it ;  this
prevents  sore  mouth  ;  and  the  tea  is  good  to  wash  sore
nipples  with.  A  poultice  made  with  this  tea  and  cracker
or  slipper}'  elm  bark,  is  very  good  for  burns  or  scalds  ;
1/ the  skin  is  off  by  applying  this  poultice  or  washing
with  the  tea,  it  will  harden  and  stop  smarting.  It
may  be  used  in  "No.  3,  as  a  substitute  for  other  arti-
cles, or  alone,  to  good  effect.

Squaw-weed — Indian  name  Cocask.
This  is  known  in  the  country  by  the  name  of  frost-
weed,  or  meadow  scabish ;  it  is  a  wild  weed  and
grows  in  wet  land  by  the  side  of  brooks  ;  it  has  a  stalk
that  gi:^>ws  four  or  five  feet-high  which  is  rough  and
woolly  with  a  narrow  leaf;  and  bears  a  blue  blossom
late  in  the  fall,  which  remains  till  the  frost  kills  it.  The
root  Kves  through  the  winter  and  in  the  spring  puts
forth  a  new  stalk; the leaves  at the bottom rem^iin


228  New  Guide  to  Health  ;

green  through  the  winter.  The  roots  and  top  are  used
for  medicine  ;  it  has  a  fragrant  taste  and  smell  like  lov-
age.  It  was  the  first  thing  I  ever  knew  used  for  canker
and  was  given  to  me  when  I  had  the  canker-rash,  being
considered  then  the  best  article  known  for  canker ;  I
have  frequently  used  it  for  that  complaint  and  found  it
very  good.  Take  the  green  roots  and  leaves,  bruise
them  and  pour  on  hot  water  ;  give  this  tea  sweetened.
It  may  be  kept  by  adding  a  little  spirit  and  is  good  for
rheumatisni  and  nervous  aifections.  It  is  perfectly  harm-
less and  may  be  used  freely.  It  makes  a  very  good
bitter  tinctured  with  hot  water  and  spirit,  and  is  good
for  dizziness  and  cold  hands  and  feet.


No.  4. — Bitters^  to  correct  the  Bile  and  re-
store Digestion.

Bitter  Herb,  or  Balmony.
This  herb  grows  in  wet  mowing  land  and  by  the  side
of  brooks  ;  it  is  about  the  size  of  mint,  the  leaves  some
larger ;  the  stalk  is  four  square  ;  the  leaves  are  of  a
dark  green,  of  a  sweetish  bitter  taste.  It  bears  a  white
blossom  of  singular  form,  resembling  a  snake's  head  with
the  mouth  open.  This  herb  is  very  good  to  correct
the  bile  and  create  an  appetite.  A  tea  of  it  may  be
used  alone,  or  it  may  be  added  to  the  other  articles  de-
restore  the  digestive  powers.

Poplar  Bark.
There  are  several  species  of  the  poplar  tree  that
grow  common  in  this  country.  One  kind  is  called  the
white  poplar  and  another  stinking  poplar  ;  the  bark  of
both  these  kinds  are  good  for  medicine ;  but  the  latter
is  the  best,  being  the  most  bitter.  It  has  tags  hanging
on  the  limbs,  which  remain  on  till  it  leaves  out,  which
is  about  a  week  later  than  the  other  kind.  It  has  short
brittle  twigs, which  are extremely  bitter  to  the  taste.


®r,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  229

The  inner  bark  given  in  tea  is  one  of  the  best  articles  to
fegulate  the  bile  and  restore  the  digestive  powers,  of
any  thing  I  have  ever  used.  The  bark  may  be  taken
from  the  body  of  the  tree,  the  limbs,  or  the  roots,  and
the  outside  shaved  oft  and  preserve  the  inner  bark,
which  should  be  dried  and  carefully  preserved  for  use.
To  make  the  bitters  (No.  4)  it  should  be  pounded  or
ground  fine,  and  mixed  with  the  other  articles,  or  it
may  be  used  alone  for  the  same  purpose.  To  make  a
tea  take  a  handful  of  the  bark  pounded  or  cut  into  small
■strips  and  put  into  a  quart  mug,  and  fill  it  with  boiling
water,  which  if  taken  freely  will  relieve  a  relax,  head-
ach,  faintness  "at  the  stomach,  and  many  other  com-
plaints caused  by  bad  digestion.  Is  good  for  obstructions
of  the  urine  and  weakness  in  the  loins;  and  those  of  a
consumptive  habit  will  find  great  relief  in  using  this
tea  freely.

Barberry — the  Bark.

This  is  a  well  known  shrub,  producing  red  berries,  of
a  pleasant  sour  taste,  which  are  much  used  as  a  pickle,
and  are also  preserved  with  sugar  or  molasses. The

*bark  of  the  root  or  top  is  a  good  bitter  and  useful  to  cor-
rect the  bile  and  assist  the  digesture.  The  bark  should
be  collected  'at  the  proper  seeison,  carefully  dried  and
pounded  or  ground  to a  fine  powder;  and  is  used as  a

'part  of  the  bitters  (No.  4.)  A  tea  made  of  this  bark  is
very  good  for  all  cases  of  indigestion,  and  may  be  freely
used.  \

BiTTER-RooT,  or  Wandering  Milk- Weed.

This  valuable  vegetable  grows  in  meadows  and  in
hedges,  and  in  appearance  is  something  like  buckwheat,
having  similar  white  blossoms ;  when  the  stalk  is  broken
it  discharges  a'mllky  substance;  it  has  two  small  pode
about  the  size  of  the  cabbage  seed  pods,  with  a  silky
substance.  This  herU  is  wandering,  that  is,  the  roots
run  about  under  ground  to  a  considerable  distance  and
produces  many  stalks,  which  grow  up  from  different  parts
of  the  root  to  the  height  of  about  tw9  feet. The  kind

U


23©  Jsfew  Guide  to  Health  ;

that  is  commonly  known  by  the  name  of  wandering
milk-weed,  grows  only  on  upland ;  there  is  another
kind  which  grows  near  rivers  and  on  islands,  where  high
water  flows  over  it,  this  differs  some  from  the  other
in  appearance  ;  the  roots  run  deep  in  the  sand ;  it  has
leaves  and  pods  like  the  first,  and  both  are  good  for
medicine.  The  bark  of  the  root  is  used.  The  roots
should  be  dug  and  dried ;  and  when  perfectly  dry
may  be  pounded  in  a  mortar,  when  the  bark  is  easily
separated  from  the  woody  part.  This  root  is  very
bitter  and  is  one  of  the  greatest  correctors  of  the  bile  I
know  of;  and  is  an  excellent  medicine  to  remove  cos-
tivenc^ss,  as  it  will  cause  the  bowels  to  move  in  a  natural
manner.  A  strong  decoction  of  this  root,  made  by  steep-
ing it  in  hot  water,  if  drank  freely  will  operate  as  a  ca-
thartic, and  sometimes  as  an  emetic  ;  and  is  most  sure  to
throw  off  a  fever  in  its  first  stages.  It  should  be  used  in
all  cases  of  costiveness.

Golden  Seal,  or  Ohio  Kercuma — the  Root.

This  article  grows  only  in  the  Western  country  ;  I  am
not  well  enough  acquainted  with  the  herb  to  give  a  de-
scription of  it ;  but  of  the  medical  virtues  of  the  root  I
have  had  sufficient  experience  to  recommend  it  as  a
very  pleasant  bitter,  and  in  cases  where  the  food  in  the
stomach  of  weak  patients  causes  distress,  a  t«a  spoonful
of  the  powder  given  in  hot  water  sweetened,  will  give
immediate  relief.  It  is  an  excellent  corrector  of  the
bile  and  may  be  used  for  that  purpose  alone,  or  with
the  bitter  root,  or  may  be  compounded  with  either  or
digestive  powers.


this  head  are  used,  is  to  regulate  tlie  stomach,  so  that  the
food  taken  into  it  may  be  properly  digested ;  and  I
have  mentioned  enough  to  enable  those  who  make  use
of  the  practice  to  effect  that  object,  if  properly  attended
to.  This  is  a  very  important  part  of  the  system  of  prac-
tice, for  unless  the  tbod  is  digested  it  is  impossible  to
keep  up  that  heat  upon  which  life  depends.


or,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  231

No.  5. — Syru]pfor  the  Dysentery ^  to  strength'
en  the  Stomach  and  Bowels^  and  restore
weak  patients.

The  articles  used  in  this  preparation  are  the  bark  of
peach-meats,  or  meats  of  cherry-stones,  sugar  and  bran-

Peach-Meats.
The  meats  that  are  in  the  peach-stones  have  long
been  used  as  medicine,  and  need  but  little  to  be  said
about  them,  except  that  they  are  of  great  value  to
strengthen  the  stomach  and  bowels  and  restore  the  di-
gesture  ;  for  which  purpose  I  have  made  much  use  of
them,  and  always  to  good  advantage.  Made  into  a  cor-
dial, with  other  article?,  in  the  manner  as  will  be  here-
after directed,  forms  one  of  the  best  remedies  I  know  of,
to  recover  the  natural  tone  of  the  stomach  after  long
sickness^;  and  to  restore  weak  patients,  particularly  in
dysentefy.  A  tea  made  of  the  leaves  of  the  peach-tree
'*ii^  very  good  for  bowel  complaints  in  children  and  young
people,  and  will  remove  cholic.

Cherry-Stones.

The  meats  of  the  wild  cherry-stones  are  very  good*
and  may  be  used  instead  of  the  peach-meats,  when  they
cannot  be  had.  Get  these  stones  as  clean  as  possible,
when  well  dried  pound  them  in  a  mortar,  and  separate
the  meats  from  the  stones,  which  is  done  with  little
trouhll^  take  the  same  quantity  aa  is  directed  of  the
peach-meats,  and  it  will  answer  equally  as  well.  A  tea
miuleofthe  cherries  pounded  with  the  stones  and  steep-
ed in  hot  water,  sweetened  with  loaf  sugar,  to  which
add  a  little  brandy,  is  good  to  restore  the  digestive
powers  and  create  an  appetite.

Bitter  almonds  may  be  used  as  a  substitute  for  the
peach-meats  or  cherry-stones,  when  they  cannot  Ve  had.


232  Mew  Guide  to  Health;


No.  6. — -Bheumatio  Drops,  to  remove  pairiy
prevent  mortification^  and  promote  a  natur-
al heat.

The  principal  articles  used  in  this  peparation,  are
high  wines,  or  4th  proof  brandy,  gum  myrrh  and  Cay-
enne ;  for  external  application  spirits  of  turpentine  is
added,  and  sometimes  gum  camphor.  The  manner  of
preparing  will  be  hereafter  given.

Gum  Myrrh.

This  is  a  gum  obtained  from  a  tree  which  grows  in
the  East-Indies,  and  is  brought  to  this  country  and  sold
by  the  apothecaries  for  medical  uses :  there  is  nothing
sold  by  them  that  possesses  more  useful  and  medical  pro-
perties than  this  article  ;  though  the  doctors  seem  to
have  but  little  knowledge  of  its  virtues.  All  those  who
I  have  heard  express  an  opinion  upon  it,  consider  it  of
very  little  value.  When  I  obtained  my  patent.  Dr.
Thornton,  the  clerk  of  the  Patent  Office,  said  it  was
gbod  for  nothing  ;  all  this  however  does  not  lessen  its
value.  The  first  knowledge  I  had  of  it  was  when  I
was  laix3  up  with  my  lame  ancle  at  Onion  River,  as  has
been  before  related  in  my  narrative.  An  old  man  from
Canada  passing  that  way  and  hearing  of  my  case  called
to  see  me,  and  observing  the  putrid  state  I  was  in,
told  my  father  that  gum  myrrh  would  be  good  for  me,
as  it  was  an  excellent  article  to  prevent  mortification.
He  immediately  obtained  some  of  the  tincture,  and  not
having  a  syringe  he  took  some  in  his  mouth  and  squirted
it  through  a  quill  into  tl*e  wound ;  the  smarting  was
severe  for  ti  short  time.  By  tasting  it  himself  and  find-
ing it  a  pleasant  bitter,  he  gave  me  some  to  take  ;  by
using  it  there  was  a  favourable  alteration,  both  in  my
bodily  health  and  in  the  state  of  my  wound.  After  this
I  had  great  faith  in  this  article  and  was  seldom  without
it.  AVhen  I  came  to  have  a  family  1  made  much  use  of
myrrh;  it  was  one  of  the  principal  articles  used  in  re-
storing may  wife,  when  given  over  by  the  mid-wife,  as


©r,  Botanic  Family  Physician.


^Zoo


-related  in  my  narrative.  In  several  cases  of  bad  wounds
and  old  sores  it  afforded  great  relief;  and  in  what  the
doctors  call  worm  complaints  in  children,  by  giving  the
tincture  when  such  symptoms  appeared  it  removed
them.  I  used  it  at  this  time  by  making  a  tincture  with
spirit ;  but  after  having  a  knowledge  of  Cayenne  I  put
some  of  this  with  it,  which  made  it  much  better.  I
found  out  by  accident  that  boiling  it  would  prevent  the
fumes  of  the  spirit  from  rising  to  the  head,  which
would  otherwise,  in  some  cases,  produce  bad  effects,
particularly  in  such  as  were  subject  to  hysterical  affec-
tion. This  was  the  origin  of  my  rheumatic  drops,  a
preparation  which  has  proved  more  generally  useful
than  any  one  compound  1  make  us  of.  In  selecting
myrrh  for  use,  take  that  of  a  light  brown  colour,  some-
what transparent,  and  of  a  bitter  taste,  a  little  pungent.
It  should  be  reduced  to  a  fine  powder,  by  being  pounded
in  a  mortar,  before  used.

Spirit  of  Turpentine.
This  article  is  too  well  known  to  need  any  descrip-
tion, being  used  by  painters.  The  only  way  in  which
I  use  it  is  in  such  preparations  as  are  intended  for  ex-
ternal application,  in  which  I  have  found  it  useful.  A
proportion  of  it  should  be  added  to  the  rheumatic  drops,
when  used  for  the  itch  or  other  bad  humours.  It  is  a^
powerful  article  and  should  be  used  with  caution.

Gum  Camphor.

1  shall  say  but  little  about  this  article,  as  I  never
found  any  very  great  advantages  from  its  use,  though
I  never  knew  it  do  any  harm.  It  is  made  much  use  of;
and  I  think  there  is  more  ci%dit  given  to  it  than  what  it
deserves.  I  have  been  in  the  habit  of  adding  some  of  it
to  the  rheumatic  drops,  when  used  for  bad  sprams,  and
in  such  cases  have  found  it  useful  ;  and  I  have  no  doubt
but  that  it  may  be  sometimes  given  to  advantage  to
warm  the  stomach  and  relieve  pain  ;  but  there  are  other
articles  which  1  make  use  of  for  that  purpose,  that  are
much  better.

U2.


234  Aesy  Guide  to  Health  /


JVerve  Powder,


American Valerian, or Ladies' Slipper  ; sometimes
called  Umbil,  o?-  Male  and  Female  Nervine.

There  are  four  species  of  this  valuable  vegetable,  one
male  and  three  female  ;  the  male  is  called  yellow  um-
bil, and  grows  in  swamps  and  wet  land ;  has  a  large
cluster  of  fibrous  roots  matted  together,  joined  to  a  soHd
root,  which  puts  forth  several  stalks  that  grow  about
two  feet  high  ;  it  has  leaves  something  resembling  the
poke  leaf  The  female  kinds  are  distinguished  by  the
colour  of  the  blossoms,  which  are  red,  red  and  white,  and
white.  The  red  has  but" two  leaves,  which  grow  out  of
the  ground  and  lean  over  to  the  right  and  left,  between
which  a  single  stalk  shoots  up  to  the  height  of  from
eight  to  ten  inches,  bearing  on  its  top  a  red  blossom  of
a  very  singular  form,  that  gives  it  the  name  of  female
umbil.  This  kind  is  found  on  high  ledges  and  in  swamps.
The  red  and  white,  and  white  umbil,  grows  only  in
swamps,  and  is  in  larger  clusters  of  roots  than  the  yellow,
but  in  a  similar  form  ;  its  top  is  similaT  to  the  red,  ex-
cept the  colour  of  the  blossom.  The  yellow  and  red.
are  the  best  for  medicine ;  the  roots  should  be  dug  in
the  fall  when  done  growing,  or  in  the  spring  before  the
top  puts  forth.  If  dug  when  growing  the  roots  will
nearly  all  dry  up.  When  the  roots  are  dug  they  should
be  washed  clean,  carefully  dried,  and  pounded  or  ground
to  a  fine  powder,  sifted  through  a  fine  sieve  and  pre-
served from  the  air  for  use.

This  powder  is  the  best  nervine  known ;  I  have
made  great  use  of  it,  and  have  always  found  it  to  pro-
duce the  most  beneficial  effects,  in  all  cases  of  nervous
affection,  and  in  hysterical  symptoms;  in  fact  it  would
be  difficult  to  get  along  with  my  practice  in  many  cases
without  this  important  article.  It  is  perfectly  harmless
and  may  be  used  in  all  cases  of  disease  with  safety  ;  and
is  much  better  than  opium,  which  is  generally  given  in
cases  of  spasmodic  affection,  and  which  only  deadens  the
feelings  and  relieves  pain  only  by  destroying  sensibility,


or^  Botanic  Family  Physician.  235

without  doing  any  good.  It  has  been  supposed  by  the
doctors  to  be  of  a  narcotic  nature  ;  but  this  is  a  mistake.
They  have  drawn  this  conclusion  I  suppose,  from  its
tendency  to  promote  sleep;  but  this  is  altogether  owing
to  its  quieting  the  nerves  and  leaving  the  patient  at
ease,  when  nature  requires  sleep  to  recover  the  natural
tone  of  the  system.  Half  a  tea  spoonful  may  be  given
in  hot  water  sweetened,  and  the  dose  repeated  if  neces-
sary ;  or  the  same  quantity  may  be  mixed  with  a  dose
of  either  the  other  numbers,  when  given,  and  put  into
the  injections  ;  and  where  there  is  nervous  symptoms  it
should  never  be  dispensed  with,.


I  have  thus  far  given  a  description  of  all  the  import
tant  vegetables  made  use  of  in  my  system  of  practice,
with  the  manner  of  preparing  and  using  them.  I  shall
portance, all  of  which  I  have  used  and  found  good  in
various  complaints.  Some  of  them  form  a  part  of  my
medical  preparations,  and  many  others  may  be  used  as
substitutes  for  some  that  have  been  mentioned.  They
are  all  of  a  warming  nature  and  may  be  used  to  advan-
tage in  throwing  off  disease  in  its  first  stages.

Spearmint;

This  is  a  well  known  herb  and  makes  a  very  pleasant
tea,  which  may  be  freely  used  in  sickness.  Ihe  most
valuable  property  it  posseses  is  to  stop  vomiting.  If  the
Emetic  Herb,  or  any  other  cause  should  produce  vio-
lent vomiting,  by  giving  a  strong  tea  made  of  this  herb  it
will  stop  it,  and  sit  pleasantly  on  the  stomach.

Peppermint.
This  article  is  very  hot  in  its  nature  and  may  be  used
to  advantage  to  promote  perspiration  and  overpower
the  cold.  I  have  frequently  used  it  for  that  purpose
with  success  ;  but  it  is  volatile  and  will  not  retain  the
heat  long  in  the  stomach. In  colds  and  slight  attacks  of


236  J^ew  Gtiid^  to  EealtK  r

disease,  to  drink  freelj  of  a  tea  made  of  this  herb  o»
going  to  bed  will  throw  it  off.  The  essence  put  in
warm  water  is  good  to  give  children  and  will  relieve
pain  in  the  stomach  and  bowels.  A  few  drops  of  the
oil,  given  in  warm  water,  or  on  loaf  sugar,  is  good  for'
the  same  purpose.

Pennyroyal.

This  herb  grows  common  in  all  parts  of  this  country,
and  is  too  well  known  to  need  any  description.  It  is
an  article  of  great  value  in  medicine,  and  a  tea  of  it
may  be  freely  used  in  all  cases  of  sickness.  It  is  gooi3
for  the  stomach,  being  warming  and  cleansing  ;  if  drank
freely  will  produce  perspiration  and  remove  obstruc-
tions. In  colds  and  slight  attacks  of  disease  it  will  be
likely  to  throw  it  off  and  prevent  sickness.  It  is  very
good  for  children  and  will  remove  pain  in  the  bowels
and  wind.  In  going  through  a  course  of  medicine  a  tea
of  this  herb  may  be  given  for  drink,  and  will  cause  the
medicine  to  have  a  plea&ant  operation.

SUMMEKSAVORY,

This  herb  grows  in  gardens  and  is  made  use  of  to  sea-
son meats  in  cooking;  it  is  of  a  very  pleasant  flavour
and  of  a  hot  nature.  A  tea  of  it  is  good  for  colds  and
may  be  used  freely  in  case  of  sickness.  There  is  an  oil
made  from  this  herb,  which  m\\  cure  the  tooth-ach,  by
putting  a  little  on  cotton  wool-  and  applying  it  to  the  af-
fected tooth.

N

MOARKOUND.

This^  plant  grows  common  in  this  country  and  is  made
much  account  of  in  removing  cough.  An  infusion  made
of  the  leaves,  sweetened  with  honey,  is  good  for  the
asthma,  and  all  complaints  of  the  lungs.  The  syrup  of
this  plant  will  loosen  tough  phlem  and  remove  hoarse-
ness caused  by  a  bad  cold.  The  hoarhound  candy  is
very  useful  for  such  as  are  troubled  with  cough,  par-
ticularly old  people,  and  these  that  are  short  winded.


or,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  237

Elecampane.
The  root  of  this  plant  made  into  a  syrup  is  good  for
acL'h and 1  have  made ^se  of  it  for  that  purpose
;  th  ad^an^age  in  many  cases,  and  can  recommend  .t  as
a  safe  and  useful  remedy  in  complamts  of  that  kmd.

Mayweed^

A  ten  made  of  this  herb  te  be drank  hot  when  going

•10  ted  IS  very  good  for  a  cold  ;  and  in  slight  attacks  of  a

fever  if  used  freely  and  a  hot  stone  put  to  the  feet,  w  11

frmos"  cSes  throw it  off. It  gro«rs  common m old

aelds  and  by  the  side  of  roads.

Wormwood.

This  herb  is  a very wholesome  b»'f  ;„  ™/ "^^  „\!
taken  to  advantage  in  different  ways. I'^'f^J;"'"^
tare,  and  is  good  for  the  stomach,  '»  "ea  e  an  appet.te
and  assist the digesture. It  may  be  taken  m  tea,  or
the  green  herb  may  be  pounded  and  tinctured  m  spu-it,
which  is  good  to  apply  to  a  bruize  or  spram.

Tanzy.
This  is  a  hot  bitter  herb,  grows  common  |.n  ^igjj  J^^5^'
and  is  cultivated  in  gardens.  A  tea  made  of  this  herb  is
ffood  for  hysterics  and  other  female  complaints  ;  it  will
ftrengthen  those  that  have  weak  reins  and  kidneys,
and  is  o-ood  for  the  stranguary,  or  stoppage  of  urme --
The  ^reen  leaves  pounded  is  good  to  put  ^n  bruizes
and  sprains  and  will  allay  the  swelling.

Chamomile.
This  is  a  well  known  herb,  the  flowets^are  sold  by
•the  apothecaries  and  are  made  much  use  of  ma  tea  tor
man;^.omplaiats.  It  is  good  given  m  tea  for  bowel
!!^ni>laint3'and  externally  applied  wi  relieve  ^spram,
bruises,  and  swo,!U%s,  and  remove  callouses,  Curn.,  Lc.
and  rest'  i^'  -^  ''">^  ^iucws.


23a  J^ew  G-uide  to  Health  ;

Bitter-sweet.
This  herb has  long  been esteemed  as  a  medicine  of
considerable  value  for  many  complaints. It  grows  com-
mon  in  this  country,  in  hedges  where  the  ground  is  moist,
and  the  top  runs  along  the  ground  or  climbs on  bushe^^
Its  taste  when  chewed is  first bitter  and then sweet,
which  has  given  its  name. It  is  said  to  be  a  good  medi-
cine for  internal injuries  and  to  remove obstructions,
which  I  have  no  doubt  is  correct;  but  the  only way  1
make  use  of  it  is  for external  application  ;  the  bark  of
the  root  with  chamomile  and  wormwood  makes  an  oint-
ment of  great  value,  which  is  an excellent  thing  for  a
bruisQ,  sprain,  calice,  swelling,  or  for  corns.

MUT.LEN.

The  leaves  of  this  plant  are  very  good  to  briqg  down
swelling  and  to  restore  contracted  sinews,  by  pounding
them  and  applying  them  warm  to  the  part  affected.
For  external  use  they  are  an  excellent  article  in  many
complain1»3.  This  herb  is  too  well  known  to  weed  any
description.  It  is  an  important  article  in  my  strength-
ening piaster.

Burdock.
^  The  leaves  of  this  plant  wilted  by  the  fire  and  ap-
plied to  any  external  injury,  will  allay  the  inflammation
and  ease  pain ;  and  they  are  good  pounded  and  put  on  to
a  bruise  or  sprain,  as  it  will  give  immediate  relief  It
is  made  use  of  in  the  strengthening  plaster.

Skunk-Cabbage.
This  vegetable  grows  common in  all  parts  of  NeJ^-
England  ;  it.ha^large  leaves  something  resembling  cab-,
bnge, from  which  and  its  disagreeable  smell,  it  takes  its^
name;  it may- be  found in  the meadows  and  wet  land.
The  root  only  is  ufeed for  medicine  ;  Avhich shogld  be
dug  and  split  into  strips and  carefully  dried  ;  when dry
it  should be pounded  or ground to  a  powder. This
powder  may  be taken  in  tea  sweetened,  or  made  into  a


or,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  239

syrup,  or  half  a  tea  spoonful  may  be  mixed  in  honey
and  taken  in  the  morning,  or  at  night  when  going  to  bed.
It  is  good  for  asthma,  cough,  difficulty  of  breathing,  and
all  disorders  of  the  lungs,  and  with  other  articles  makes
one  of  the  best  preparations  for  those  complaints  I  have
€ver  found.

Wake-robin.
This  plant  grows  wild  in  this  country.  It  has  three
triangular  leaves,  from  between  them  it  puts  forth  a  na-
ked stalk,  on  the  top  of  which,  is  a  singular  stem  or
pistill  enclosed  in  a  sheath,  resembling  a  flower,  which  is
followed  by  a  bunch  of  radish  berries.  The  root  is  used
for  medicine,  and  resembles  a  small  turnip.  This  root
is  extremely  pungent  and  stimulating;  and  is  often  giv-
en for  cholic  and  pain  in  the  bowels,  and  to  expel  wind.
1  have  mostly  made  use  of  it  for  cough  and  disorders  of
the  lungs,  for  which  I  have  found  it  a  very  useful  article,
and  it  forms  part  of  my  composition  for  coughs.  The
root  should  be  dried  and  reduced  to  a  powder,  aad  may
be  given  mix^d  with  honey,  or  in  a  syrup.

Thoroughwort.

This  herb  is  well  known  in  the  country,  and  is  made
use  of  by  the  people  in  tea  for  many  complaints.  It  is  of
a  warming  nature,  and  is  good  for  cough  and  other  com-
plaints of  the  lungs.  It  is  used  in  my  compound  pre-
pared for  coughs.

Featherfew.

This  herb  is  stimulating  and  is  good  for  histeric  com-
plaints, and  in  many  other  disorders  common  to  females.
U  promotes  the  passage  of  urine  and  remaves  obstruc-
tions in  those  parts.  It  should  be  taken  in  tea  alone,
or  may  be  added  with  chamomile,  and.  wsed  to  advan-
is^ge  in  all  cases  of  obstruction.

Clivers.

This  is  a  sort  of  joint  grass  and  grows  in  mowing  land,
where  the  ground  is  wet ;  it  has  small  leaves  at  each
joint ;  the  stalk  is  four  square  and  the  edges  are  rougk


240  New  Guide  to  Health;

» ■  ♦•

like a  sickle. This herb  made  into  a  strong  tea  and

drank  freely  is  very  good  for  the  stoppage  of  urine,  and

may  be  made  use  of  for  all  obstructions  in  those  parts  to

advantage.

Black  Birch  Bakk.

A  tea  made  of  this  bark  is  useful  in  curing  all  ct)m-
plaints  of  the  bowels  and  to  remove  obstructions.  I
have  made  much  use  of  it  in  dysentery.  This  tea  with
peachmeats  or.  cherry  stone  meats,  made  into  a  sj^rup,
is  an  excellent  article  to  restore  patients  after  having
been  reduced  by  that  disease,  and  to  promote  the  diges-
ture.  It  is  good  for  canker  and  all  complaints  of  the
bowels.

Evan  Root.

This  is  called  by  some  people  chocolate  root,  on  iic-
count  of  its  resembling  that  article  in  taste,  and  is  made
use  of  by  some  for  a  common  drink  instead  of  tea  or
coffee.  It  is  good  for  canker,  and  may  be  used  fh  No.  3
as  a  substitute  for  other  articles.  It  grows  common  in
this  country  and  is  too  well  known  to  need  describing.

Slippery  Elm  Bark.

The  inner  bark  of  this  tree  is  an  article  of  much  value,
and  may  be  used  to  advantage  in  many  different  ways.
There  are  several  species  of  the  elm  that  grow  com-
mon in  this  country  ;  and  there  are  two  kinds  of  the
shppery  elm,  one  the  bark  is  rather  hard  and  tough,  and
the  other  is  very  brittle  ;  the  latter  is  the  best  for  med-
ical uses,  'i  he  bark  should  be  peeled,  the  outside  ross
shaved  off,  dried,  and  ground  or  pounded  to  a  fine  pow-
der. If  used  internally,  put  a  tea  spoonful  of  this  pow-
der into  a  teacup  with  as  much  sugar,  mix  them  well
together,  then  add  a  little  cold  water  and  stir  it  till  per-
fectly mixed,  and  then  put  hot  water  to  it  and  stir  till  it
forms  a  jelly  thick  enough  to  be  eaten  with  a  spoon.  A
tea  spoonful  may  be  taken  at  a  time,  and  is  an  excellent
medicine  to  heal  soreness  in  the  throat,  stomach  and
bowels,  caused  by  canker ;  or  more  hot  water  may  be


or^  Botanic  Family  Physician.  241

put  to  it  and  made  into  a  drink,  and  freely  taken  for  the
same  purpose.  I  have  mdde  much  use  of  this  bark  for
poultices,  and  have  in  all  cases  found  it  a  most  excellent
article  for  that  purpose.  Mixed  with  pounded  cracker
and  ginger  it  makes  the  best  poultice  I  have  ever  found,
for  burns,  scalds,  felons,  old  sores,  &c.  it  is  the  best
thing  I  have  met  with,  to  allay  the  inflammation,  ease
the  pain  and  heal  them  in  a  short  time.

Balsam  Fir.
This  balsom  is  obtained  from  a  tree  vrell  known  in
many  parts  of  this  country  ;  it  is  taken  from  small  blis-
ters which  form  in  the  bark.  It  is  of  a  very  healing  na-
ture, and  is  good  to  remove  internal  soreness.  It  forms
an  important  article  in  my  healing  salve.  When  taken
it  may  be  dropped  on  loaf  sugar.

Gensang.

This  root  grows  wild  in  this  country;  and  is  found
plentifully  in  Vermont.  It  was  formerly  collected  for
exportation,  and  large  quantities  of  it  was  sent  to  China,
where  it  brought  a  great  price.  It  is  said  the  people  of
that  country  considered  it  of  great  value  ;  but  for  what
purpose  they  use  it,  is  I  believe,  only  known  to  them-
selves. It  is  a  nervine  and  may  be  used  to  advantage
in  all  cases  of  nervous  affection,  either  alone  or  mixed
with  other  articles.  The  root  should  be  dug  in  the
fail,  dried  and  reduced  to  a  fine  powder ;  from  half  to  a
tea  spoonful  may  be  given  in  a  dose,  in  hot  water  sweet-
ened.

Snakeroot.

This  is  a  well  known  article,  grows  wild  and  may  be
found  in  most  parts  of  this  country.  It  is  of  a  hot  na-
ture, and  is  made  much  use  of  in  tea.  for  measles  and
othec  eruptions,  to  keep  the  disorder  out,  for  which  it
is  (onsiderod  very  good  ;  this  is  owing  to  its  warming
qualities,  which  keeps  the  determining  powers  to  the
surface ;  which  effect  may  be  pro<!uced  by  almost  any
strong stimulant ;  but  No.  2,  or the  composition  pow-

W


242  JVcw  Guide  to  Health  ;

ders,  is  much  the  hest  for  that  purpose.  A  tea'  made  of
this  root  may  be  given  to  advantage  in  many  cases  of
disease  ;  it  has  a  tendency  to  promote  perspiration,  and
is  good  to  remove  pain  in  the  stomach  and  bowels,  and
expel  wind.  The  roots  reduced  to  powder  may  be  mix-
ed with  gensang  or  umbil  for  all  nervous  complaints.

Mustard.

The  seed  of  this  herb  is  principally  made  use  of  for
culinary  purposes,  being  eaten  on  meat ;  for  which  it  is
ground  to  a  fine  powder  and  mixed  with  warm  water.
It  is  very  pungent  and  of  a  hot  nature  ;  but  is  volatile
and  will  not  hold  the  heat  long  enough  to  do  much  good
in  retaining  the  internal  heat.  It  is  good  to  create  an
appetite  and  assist  the  digesture ;  and  given  in  hot  wa-
ter sweetened,  will  remove  pain  in  the  bowels  and
stomach.  It  is  frequently  used  for  rheumatism,  both  in-
ternally and  externally ;  but  Nos.  2  and  6,  are  much
better  for  that  purpose.

Horseradish.

The  root  of  this  plant  is  mostly  used  for  culinary
purposes,  and  it  has  some  medical  properties.  It  is  of
a  hot  nature,  but  very  volatile  ;  its  warming  qualities
will  mostly  evaporate  before  it  gets  into  the  stomach.
The  roots  may  be  given  to  promote  the  appetite  and
assist  the  digesture.  The  leaves  are  sometimes  applied
to  remove  external  pain,  but  is  apt  to  raise  a  blister.

Balm  of  Gilead.

This  tree  is  of  the  species  of  the  poplar  and  possesses
some  medical  virtues.  It  resembles  the  kind  of  poplar
buds  and  leaves  are  larger.  The  buds  bruised  and
tinctured  in  spirit,  produces  an  effect  something  like  the
tincture  of  myrrh  ;  and  is  good  taken  inwardly  as  a  res-
torative, and  for  bathing  sores.  The  bark  scraped  from
the  twigs  and  steeped  in  hot  water,  is  a  good  corrector
of  the  bile,  and  will  operate  both  as  an  emetic  and  ca-
thartic ;  it  is  more  harsh  than  the  other  kind  of  poplar^
but  may  be  used  to  advantage  in  many  cases  of  disease.


or,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  243


Butternut.

This  tree  grows  common  in  this  country,  and  is  well
known  from  the  nut  which  it  bears,  of  an  oblong  shape
and  nearly  as  large  as  an  egg,  in  which  is  a  meat  con-
taining much  oil,  and  very  good  to  eat.  The  bark  of
this  tree  is  used  by  the  country  people  to  colour  with.
The  bark  taken  from  the  body  of  the  tree  or  roots  and
boiled  down  till  thick,  may  be  made  into  pills,  and  op-
erates as  a  powerful  emetic  and  cathartic :  a  syrup  may
be  made,  by  boiling  the  bark  and  adding  one  third  mo-
lasses and  a  little  spirit,  which  is  good  to  give  children
for  worm  complaints.  The  buds  and  twigs  may  also  he
used  for  the  same  purpose,  and  are  more  mild.  White
ash  bark  and  balm  of  gilead  may  be  added,  equal  parts,
and  made  into  syrup  or  pills.  Those  who  are  fond  of
drastic  purges  may  have  their  ends  sufficiently  answered
by  these  preparations,  and  they  are  the  most  safe  and
harmless  of  any  that  J  know  of;  and  those  who  wish  to
be  tortured  with  blisters  can  have  them  cheap,  by
bruising  the  green  shell  of  the  nut,  or  the  bark,  and
applying  it  where  the  blister  is  wanted,  keeping  the
bandage  wet,  and  in  three  hours  they  will  be  complete-
ly drawn,  and  the  skin  as  black  as  that  of  an  African.
i  This  is  much  quicker  and  safer  than  if  done  with  flies  and
will  not  cause  stranguary.  The  bark  of  the  butternut
is  the  principal  ingredient  in  Dr.  Hawkea's  rheumatic
and  cancer  pills,  and  also  of  Chamberlain's  billious  cor-
dial, which  have  been  so  celebrated  for  many  complaints.
It  is  called  by  some  people  oilnut  and  lemon  walnut.

Blue  and  white  Vert ihe.
This  is  a  well  known  herb,  growing  very  common  ;  it
ranks  next  to  the  emetic  herb,  for  a  puke  ;  and  may  be
used  for  that  purpose  either  alone  or  combined  with
thoroughwort.  It  is  good  to  prevent  a  fever  in  its
fjpst  stages.  This  herb  has  been  used  with  considerable
success  in  consumption,  having  cured  several  cases
where  the  doctors  had  given  them  over.  It  may  be
used  in  u  tea  made  of  the  dry  herb,  or  prepared  in  pow-
der like  the  emetic  herb.


244  Aew  Guide  to  Health  ;


PiPSiswAY,  or  Rheumatic  Weed.

This  herb  grows  on  mountainous  land  and  on  pine
plains,  where  the  boxberry  or  checkerberry  is  found
plenty.  It  is  an  ever-green,  arid  grows  f  ora  three  to
six  inches  high,  has  a  tiumbep  of  dark  green  leaves,
about  half  an  inch  wide  and  from-  one  to  two  inches  long,
with  a  scolloped  edge  ;  bears  several  brown  seeds  re-
sembling all-spicet  The  tops  and  roots  are  used  for
medicine ;  the  roots  when  chewed  are  very  pungent,
which  will  be  felt  for  several  hours  on  the  tongue,  as
though  burnt.  A  strong  tea  made  of  this  plant  is  good
for  cancers  and  all  scrofulous  humours,  by  drinking  the
tea  and  bathing  with  it  the  parts  aifected.

Another  evergreen  plant,  called  wild  lettuce,  grows
on  the  same  kind  of  land,  which  posseses  much  the  same
medical  properties  as  the  above.  It  has  round  leaves,
from  the  size  of  a  cent  to  that  of  a  dollar,  resembling
the  common  lettuce.  The  roots  of  this  plant  and  of  the
pipsisway,  dried  and  powdered  together,  equal  parts,  is
good  to  cure  all  bad  humours'  Take  a  tea-spoonful  of
the  powder  in  a  glass  of  hot  water,  and  bathe  the  parts
affected  with  the  same ;  it  is  also  good  to  restore  weak
nerves.

GOLDENROD.

This  herb  may  be  found  common  on  pine  plains  and
in  hedges ;  it  ^rows  about  two  or  three  feet  high,  has  a
long  narrow  leaf,  very  smooth  and  glossy,  and  a  large
cluster  of  yellow  blossoms  ;  it  has  a  sweet  spicy  taste
and  smell,  resembling  fennel  or  annise.  There  is  an
oil  obtained  from  this  herb  good  for  medicine ;  and  also
prepared  in  essence,  is  good  for  pain  in  the  head,  to  be
taken,  or  the  outside  bathed  with  it.  The  oil  is  good  to
scent  the  bayberry  and  bitter-root  snuff,  which  is  very
good  to  be  taken  andWuffed  up  the  nose.  There  are
several  herbs  that,  resemble  this  in  appearance,  but  are
verv  different  ija  smell  and  taste.


or.  Botanic  Family  Physician,  245


Meadow  Fern.

This  is  a  shrub  and  grows  in  meadows  and  by  the  side
of  stagnant  water,  sometimes  growing  in  the  water ;  it  is
found  in  thick  bunches,  and  grows  from  two  to  three
feet  high.  When  the  leaves  stre  off  it  has  a  large  bud,
which  is  larger  on  some  bushes  than  others ;  some  of
them  bear  a  small  bur  or  cluster  of  seeds,  which  when
rubbed  between  the  fingers  leaves  an  oily  or  balsamy
substance,  having  a  fragrant  smell  something  like  spirits
of  turpentine.

These  burs  pounded  fine  and  simmered  in  cream,
hogs  lard,  or  fresh  butter  is  almost  a  sovereign  remedy
for  the  itch  or  external  poison,  and  all  bad  humour
sores.  When  the  burs  cannot  be  had  take  the  bush  and
buds  and  make  a  strong  decoction  ;  drink  of  this  and  wash
with  the  same.  This  liquor  may  be  prepared  in  syrup,
and  by  boiling  it  down  may  be  made  into  ointment  as
taken  and  the  ointment  put  on  the  affected  parts.  This
ointment,  or  the  wash,  is  good  for  salt-rheum,  or  canker
sores,  and  may  be  used  freely.

Yellow  Dock.
The  root  of  this  plant  is  well  known,  as  being  made
into  ointment  for  the  itch.  The  roots  should  be  bruized
fine  in  a  mortar  and  put  in  a  pewter  bason,  add  cream
enough  to  make  an  ointment,  keep  it  warm  for  twelve
hours,  be  careful  not  to  scald  it.  Rub  it  on  at  night
when  going  to  bed.  Three  times  using  it  will  general-
together  with  No.  3,  and  the  rheumatic  drops  prepared
with  the  spirits  of  turpentine,  will  be  sufi&cient  to  cure
any  case  of  this  complaint.

Prickly.  Asa.
This  is  a  shrub  or  bush  that  grows  in  the  western  coun-
try, and  is  well  known  by  the  people  there.  It  grows  from
eight  to  twelve  feet  high,  and  bears  a  berry  that  grows
close  to the limbs  ;  it  has leaves  like the white-ash^

W2


246  J^ew  Guide  to  Health  ;

The  bark  and  the  berries  are  used  for  medical  purposes.
The  berries  are  very  pungent,  and  are  a  powerful  stim-
ulant, as  also  the  bark  of  the  top  and  roots,  though  not
iso  strong.  It  should  be  pounded  to  a  powder  and  steep-
ed in  hot  water,  then  put  into  wine  or  spirit  and  it
makes  a  very  good  hot  bitter.  Take  half  a  glass  two
or  three  times  a  day ;  it  is  good  for  fever-and-ague,  for
which  it  is  much  used  ;  and  for  lethergy,  or  sleepiness,
and  for  cold  feet  and  hands,  and  other  complaints  caused
by  cold.

Bitter  Thistle.

This  herb  is  a  species  of  the  thistle,  and  is  cultivated
in  gardens.  It  is  of  one  years  groth,  the  seed  being
sown  in  the  spring  and  it  comes  to  maturity  in  the  fall.
The  stalk  has  a  number  of  branches,  and  a  great  quan-
tity,of  leaves.  The  leaf  is  some  larger  than  the  Cana-
da thistle,  with  prickles  like  it ;  and  it  bears  seeds  about
the  size  of  a  barley  corn,  with  a  beard  on  the  end  nearly
as  long  as  the  seed.  The  leaves  are  used  for  medicine,
which  may  be  steeped  in  hot  water,  and  drank  like  oth-
er herb  tea,  or  they  may  be  reduced  to  a  powder  and
taken  in  molassel  or  warm  water,  or  in  wine  or  spirit.
It  is  an  excellent  corrector  of  the  bile,  and  may  be  safelj^
used  for  that  purpose.  The  Cardis  Benedictus,  or  be-
loved thistle,  is  cultivated  in  the  same  manner  and  may
be  used  for  the  same  purpose.

Archangel.

This  herb  grows  wild  in  wet  land,  and  may  be  often
found  among  Ihe  grass,  and  at  the  edges  of  plough  fields.
It  grows  from  four  to  twelve  inches  high ;  the  leaves
are  rather  smaller  than  mmt  leaves ;  it  bears  a  kind  of
bur  containing'seed,  which  grows  round  the  stalk  at  each
joint.  There  are  two  kinds  which  grow  near  each  oth-
er ;  they  look  very  much  aUke,  but  are  very  different
in  taste.  One  is  very  bitter  and  the  other  has  no  bitter
tasle,  but  is  very  rough  aiwi  of  a  balsamic  tast^.  They
may  be  used  to^e^ther  in  a  tea  or  syrup,  and  answer  two
important  purposes ;  the  rough  removes  the  canker  and
the  bitter  is  a  corrector  of  the  bile.  By  adding  No.  2,
the  compound  contaips'th*^  three  ^rr-at  pnncipiesof  the
healing  art,  viz.  hot,  rough  and  bitter.


DIRECTIONS
FOR  PREPARlNiG  AND  USING

VEGETABLE  MEDICINE.


No.  i. — JSmetic  Herb»

The  preparation  of  this  herb  has  heen  sufficiently  de-
used  in  three  different  ways,  viz  :

1.  The  pcvvdered  leaves  and  pods.  This  is  the  most
common  form  of  using-  it ;  and  from  half  to  a  tea  spoon-
ful may  be  taken  in  warm  water  s-weetened  ;  or  the
same  quantity  may  be  put  into  either  of  the  otlier  num-
bers when  taken  ;  to  cleanse  the  stomachy,  overpower
the  celd,  and  proQiote  a  free  perspiration* . ;.  , ^

g-,  A  tinctijie  made  from  the  green  herb  in  spirit.
This  is  usad 'to  counteract  the  effects  of  poison;  to  be
either  internally  or  externally  used;  and  for  asthma
and  other  complaints  of  the  lungs.  For  a  dose  take  a
tea  spoonful,  actding  about  the  same  quantity  of  No  2,
in  half-flLieacup  full  of  warm  water  sweetened,,  nnd  in
all  cases  of  nervous  affection  add  half  a  tea  spoonfrd  of
nerve  powder.  For  the  external  effects  of  poison,  ;
take  the  above  dose,  and  wash  the  parts  affected  with  ^
the  tincture,  repeating  it  iiil  cared.

3.  The  seeds  reduced  to  a  fine  powder  and  mixed
with  Nos.  2  and  6.  This  is  for  the  most  Molcni  attacks
of  -spasms  and  other  complaints,  such  as  lock-jaw,  bite  of
mad  dog,  fits,  drowned  person?;,  and  all' eases  of  suspen-
ded animation,  where  the  vitat.spp.rk  is  netrly  extinct.
For  a  dose  give  a  tea  spoon' ul,  and  rt;};cat  H  till  ralrei  is
obtained  ;  then  follow  with  kt;vc^of  No.  3,  for  cmker.

For  children  the  dose  must  ue  re^'i.'aled  according  to
their  age. If  very  young  steep  tf  dose  of  tlie  powder


248  vYew  Guide  to  Health  :

ia  half  a  tea-cup  full  of  warm  water,  or  tea  of  raspberry
leaves,  and  ^ive  a  tea-spoonful  at  a  time  of  the  tea,
strained  through  a  fine  cloth  and  sweetened,  repeating^
the  dose  every  ten  minutes,  till  it  operates;  and  give
pennyroyal,  or  some  other  herb  tea  for  drink.

No.  S. — Cayenne.

This  is  a  medicine  of  great  value  in  (he  practice,  and
-ma}' be  safely  used  in  all  cases  of  disease,  to  raise  and
retain  the  internal  vital  ht'at  of  the  system,  cause  a  free
perspiration,  and  keep  the  determining  powers  to  the
surface.  The  only  preparation  is  to  have  it  reduced  to
a  fine  powder.  For  a  dose  take  from  half  to  a  tea-
spoonful,  in  hot  water,  or  a  tea  of  No.  3,  sweetened  ;  or
the  same  quantity  <nay  be  mixed  with  a  dose  of  either
the  other  numbers  when  taken.  The  dose  should  be
repeated  every  ten  X)r  fifteen  minutes  till  the  desired  ob-
ject is  effected,  and  continued  occasionally  till  health  is
restored.  When  this  number  is  given  the  patient
should  be  kept  warm,  by  sitting  by  the  fire,  covered
with  a  blanket,  or  in  a  warm  bed.

No.  3. — For  Canker.

T'ake  Bayberry  root  bark,  white  pond  Lily  root,  and
the  inner  bark  of  Hemlock,  equal  parts  of  each,  pounded
and  well  mixed  together  ;  steep  one  ounce  of  the  powder
in  a  pint  of  boiling  water,  and  give  for  a  dose  a  common
wine  glass  full,  sweetened.

If  the  above  cannot  be  had,  take  as  a  substitute  sumach
bark,  leaves  or  berries,  red-raspberry  or  witch-hazle
leaves,  marsh-rosemary,  or  either  of  the  other  articles
for  canker  and  may  be  used  together  or  separate.

When  the  violence  of  the  disease  requires  a  course  of
medicine,  steep  one  ounce  of  the  above  mentioned  pow-
der. No.  3,  in  a  pint  of  boihng  water,  strain  off  a  wine
glass  full  while hot,  and add  a  tea-spoonful  of  No.  2,
and  the  same  quantity  of  sugar ;  when  cool  enough  to


or,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  249

take,  add  a  tea-spoonful  of  No.  1,  and  half  that  quantity
of  nerve  powder.  Let  this  dose  be  given  three  times,
at  intervals  of  fifteen  minutes  ;  and  let  the  same  com-
pound be  given  by  injection,  and  if  the  case  requires  it,
again  repeated.  If  mortification  is  apprehended  a  tea-
spoonful  of  No.  6,  may  be  added  to  each  dose  and  to
the  injections.

After  the  patient  has  recovered  sufficiently  from  the
operation  of  the  medicine,  which  is  usually  in  two  or
three  hours,  place  them  over  the  steam,  as  is  directed
in  page  108.

This  operation  is  sufficient  for  one  time,  and  must  be
repeated  each  day,  or  every  othei;  day,  as  the  circum-
stances of  the  case  may  require,  till  the  disorder  is  re-
moved. Three  times  will  generally  be  sufficient,  and
sometimes  once  or  twice  will  answer  the  purpose  ;  but
in  bad  chronic  cases  it  may  be  necessary  to  continue  to
carry  them  through  a  regular  course  two  or  three  times
a  week,  for  a  considerable  length- qf  "time.

Great  care  must  be  taken  to  keep  up  an  internal  heat,
so  «s  to  produce  perspiration,  after  they  have  been
through  the  operation,  by  giving  occasionally  No.  2,  or
the  composition  powder ;  for  if  this  is  not  attended  to
the  patient  may  have  a  relapse,  in  which  case  it  will  be
very  difficult  to  raise  it  again,  as  they  wiil  fall  as  much
below  a  natural  heat  as  they  have  been'-raised  above  it
by  artificial  means.

During  the  operation  give  milk  porric'ge,  or  gruel,
well  seasoned,  with  a  httle  cayenne  in  it  ;•  and  after  it  is
over  the  patient  may  eat  any  kind  of  nourishing  food  that
his  appetite  shall  crave.

A  tea-cup  full  of  the  tea  of  No.  3  should  be  taken
night  and  morning  to  prevent  a  relap*e  of  the  disease,
and  during  the  day  di^i  ff^quec.iiy  of  a  tea  made  of
poplar  bark;  and  if  costive  use  the  bitter  root.

As  soon  as  the  disorder' is  removed  use  the  bitters,
(No.  4)  to  correct  the  >>}le  and  restore  the  digesture  j
and  half  a  wine  gJass  full  of  the  syrup,  {ho.  5)  may  be'
taken  two  or  three  times  a 'day,  which  will  strengthen
the  stomach  and assist in  regulating  the  digestive  poW"


250  JVca?  Guide  to  Health  ;

The  foregoing  directions  are  calculated  for  the  morci
violent  attacks  of  disease,  and  such  as  have  become  set-
tled ;  but  those  of  a  less  violent  nature  must  be  treated
accordinsf  to  circumstances.  In  the  first  stages  of  a
disease  it  may  be  most  generally  thrown  off  by  a  dose
of  the  emetic  herb,  with  No.  2  to  raise  a  free  perspira-
tion, followed  by  a  tea  of  No.  3,  to  remove  the  canker,
and  the  bitters  or  a  tea  of  poplar  bark  to  regulate  the
dig-esture.  For  a  sudden  cold  take  a  dose  of  the  com-
position  powder  on  going  to  bed,  and  put  a  hot  stone,
wrapped  in  wet  cloths,  at  the  {e,et^  tvhich  will  in  most
cases  remove  the  complaint;  but  if  these  applications
do  not  answer  the  purpose,  the  patient  should  be  car-
ried through  a  regular  course  as  soon  as  possible. —
Steaming  is  sai'e  and  will  always  do  good,  and  the  injec-
tions must  not  be  neglected,  particularly  where  the  bow-
els are  disordered,  in  consumption,  and  ail  old  linger-
ing complaints,  give  the  composition  powder  for  two  or
three  days  before  going  through  a  regular  course.

No.  4?. — Bitters.

Take  the  Bitter  Herb,  or  Balmony,  Barberry  and
Poplar  bark,  equal  parts,  pulverised,  one  ounce  of  the
powder  to  a  pint  of  hot  water  and  half  a  pint  of  spiriti
For  a  dose  take  half  a  wine  glass  full.  For  hot  bitters
add  a  tea-spoonful  of  No.  2.

This  preparation  is  calculated  to  correct  the  bile  and
create  an  appetite  by  restoring  the  digestive  powers  ;
and  may  be  freely  used  both  as  a  restorative  and  to  pre-
vent disease.

When  the  above  articles  cannot  be  had,  either  of
which  are  all  good  for  the  sj^jie  purpose,  may  be  used
as  a  substitute.

No.  5. — Syrup, '

Take  Poplar  bark  and  bark  of  the  root  of  Bayberry,
one  pound  each,  and  boil  them  iptwo  gallens  of  water,


or^  Botanic  Farm^y  Physician.  251

fttraiQ  off  and  add  seven  pounds  of  good  sugar ;  then
scald  and  skim  it,  and  add  hall'a  pound  of  Peachmeals,  or
the  same  quantity  of  Cherry-stone  meats,  pounded  fine.
When  cool  add  a  gallon  of  good  Brandy  ;  and  keep  it  in
bottles  for  use.  Take  half  a  wine  glass  full  two  or  three
times  a  day.

Any  other  quantity  may  be  prepared  by  observing  the
same  proportion  of  the  different  articles.

This  syrup  is  very  good  to  strengthen  the  stomach
and  bowels,  and  to  restore  weak  patients  ;  and  is  par-
ticularly useful  in  the  dysentery,  which  leaves  the  stom-
ach and  bowels  in  a  sore  state.  In  a  relax  or  the  first
stages  of  the  dysentery,  by  using  a  tea  of  No.  3  freely,
and  giving  this  syrup,  it  will  generally  cure  it,  and  will
also  prevent  those  exposed  from  taking  the  disease.

No.  6. — Ilheumajtic  Drops,

Take  one  gallon  of  good  fourth  proof  Brandy,  or  any
.kind  of  high  wines,  one  pound  of  gum  Myrrh  pounded
fine,  one  ounce  of  No.  2,  and  put  them  into  a  stone  jug
and  boil  it  a  few  minutes  in  a  kettle  of  water,  leaving
the  ju^  unstopped.  When  settled,  bottle  it  up  for  use.
It  may  be  prepared  without  boiling,  bj'  letting  it  stand  in
the  jug  for  five  or  six  days,  shaking  it  well  every  difiy,
when  it  will  be  fit  for  use.

These  drops  are  to  remove  pain  and  prevent  morti-
fication, to  be  taken,  or  applied  externally,  or  to  be
put  into  the  injections  One  or  two  tea-spoonfuls  of
these  drops  may  be  given  alone,  or  the  same  quantity
may  be  put  into  a  dose  of  either  of  {he  medicines  before
mentioned;  and  may  be  also  used  t« 'bathe  with  in  all
cases  of  external  swellings  ol^ains.  It  is  an  excellent
remedy  for  rheumatism,  Jb5^  taking  a#)se#  and  bathing
the  parts  affected  with  it.  In  the  head-ach  by  takmg  a
swallow,  and  bathing  the  head,  and  snuffing  a  jittle  up
the  nose,  it  wiH  remove  flie  pain.  It  is  good  for  br^j^
f'S,  sprains,  swelled  joints,  and  old  sores  ;  as  it  will  allay
the  inflammation,  bring  down  swelling,  ease  pain,  and
produce  a  tendency  to  heal — in  fact  there  is  hardly  a
complaint,  in  which  this  useful  medicine  cannot  be  used


252  Kew  Guide  to  Health  ;

to  advantage. It  is  the  best  preservative  against mor-
tification of  any  thing  I  have  ever  found.

For  b-ithing,  in  rheumatism,  itch,  or  other  humours,
or  in  any  swelling  or  external  pain,  add  one  quarter
part  of  spirits  of  turpentine  ;  and  for  sprains  and  bruises,
a  little  gum  camphor  may  be  added.

JSTerve  Powder.

This  is  the  American  Valerian,  or  Umbil,  and  the
see  page  234.  This  powder  is  a  valuable  and  safe  me-
dicine and  may  be  used  in  all  cases  without  danger  ;  and
when  there  are  nervous  symptoms,  it  must  never  be  dis-
pensed with.  For  a  dose  take  half  a  tea-spoonful  in  hot
water  sweetened ;  or  the  same  quantity  should  be  put
into  a  dose  of  either^  of  the  other  medicine,  and  also  in-
to the  injections,  in  ajl  nervous  cases.

Composition^  or  Vegetable  Powder.

Take  two  pounds  of  the  Bayberr;,.  root  bark,  one  pound
of  the  inner  bark  of  Hemlock,  one  pound  of  Ginger,
two  ounces  ofCaypune,  two  ounces  of  Cloves,  all  pound-
ed fine,  sifted  ibrorigh  a  fitie  sieve,  and  well  mixed  to-
gether. For  a  dose  take  a  tt-a-spoonful  of  this  powder,
with  em  equd  quantity  of  sugar,  and  put  to  it  half  a  tea-
cupr'u)  of  boiling' water  ;  to  be  taken  as  soon  as.sufl;cient-
h'.coQi,  the  patient  being  in  bed,  or  by -the  fire  covered
with  a  blank^^.

This  composition  is  calculated  for  tie  first  stages  and
in  less  violent  attacks  of  disease.  It  is  a  medicine  of
much  Value,  and  may  be  safeiy  used  in  all  complaints  of
mai*.  or  female,  and  for  children.  It  is  gov6  (or  rei^,
dysentery,  pain  in  the  stor^acii  and  b4jwelSv.Ktid  to  ^^-
mo".  e  aiJ  obstructions  caust  d  by  (^id,  or  loss  of  iuwafd
he;^t  ;  by  taking  a  dose  on  going  to  bed  and  putting;  a  hiOt
stO;>-to  the  feet,  wrapped  in  \\(^t  cloth«j  it  will  cure  a
bad  ccld,  and  will  generally  throw  off  a  disease  m  its
first  stages,  if  repeated  two  or  three  times.  H  the  r:ymp-
toms  are"  violent,  with  much pain, add  to  each  dose  a


©r,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  2bZ

tea-spoonful: of  No.  6,  and  half  a  tea-spoonful  of  No.  1  ;
and  in  nervous  s^'mptoms  add  half  a  tea  spoonful  of  nerve
powder  ;  at  the  same  time  give  an  injection  of  the  same.
If  these  should  not  answer  the  purpose,  the  patient  must
be  carried  through  a  regular  course  of  the  medicine,  as

Cough  Powder,
.  Take  four  tea-spoonfuls  of  Skunk  Cabbage,  two  of
Hoarhound,  one  of  Wake-robin,  one  of  No.  1,  one  of  No.
2,  one  of  Bayberry  bark,  one  of  Bitter  root,  and  one  of
nerve  powder,  all  made  fine  and  well  mixed  together.
When  taken  to  be  mixed  with  molasses.  Take  half  a
tea-spoonful  of  the  powder  on  f  oing  to  bed  ;  keep  warm,
and  continue  taking  it  till  relief  is  obtained,  particularly
on  going  to  bed.

Where  the  cough  has  been  of  long  standing,  it  will  be*
best  while  takmg  this  prescription,  to  go  through  a  reg-
ular course  of  the  medicine,  and  repeat  it  if  necessary.

Cancer  Plaster.

Take  the  heads  of  red  clover  and  fill  a  brass  kettle,
and  boil  them  in  water  for  one  hour ;  then  take  them
out  and  fill  the  kettle  again  with  fresh  ones  and  boil
them  as  before  in  the  same  liquor.  Strain  it  off  and
press  the  heads  to  get  out  all  the  juice ;  then  simmer  it
over  a  slow  fire  till  it  is  about  the  consistency  of  tar,
when  it  will  be  fit  for  use.  Be  careful  not  to  let  it  burn.
When  used  it*  should  be  spread  on  a  piece  of  bladder,
split  and  made  soft.  It  is  good  to  cure  cancers,  fore
lips,  and  all  old  sores.  ,-^.-

Salve.

Take  one  pound  of  Bees-wax,  one  do.  of  salt  Butter,
one  and  a  half  do.  of  Turpentine,  twelve  ounces  of
Baiaam-fir ;  meit  and  simmer  them  together ;  then
strain  it  off  into  a  teison,  and  keep  it  for  use.  It  may
be  used  to  heal  fresh  wounds,  burns,  scalds  and  all  bad
sores,  after  the  inflammation  is  allayed,  and  the  ,wounfi
cleansed.  '


254  Mew  Guide  to  Health  ;

Stren^thenins;  Plaster.
Take  Burdock  leaves  and  Mullen  leaves,  bruise  them
and  put  them  in  a  kettle,  with  a  sufficient  quantity  of
water,  and  boil  them  well ;  then  strain  off  the  Hquor,
press  or  squeeze  the  leaves,  and  boil  it  down  till  about
half  as  thick  as  molasses ;  then  add  three  parts  of  Rosin
and  one  of  Turpentine,  and  simmer  well  together,  until
the  water  is  evaporated  ;  then  pour  it  off"  into  cold
water  and  work  it  with  the  hands  like  shoemakers'  wax,
if  too  ^ard  put  in  more  turpentine,  when  it  Will  be  fit
for  use.  It  should  be  spread  on  soft  leather  and  appli-
ed to  the  part  affected  ;  and  it  is  good  to  strengthen
weakness  in  the  back  and  other  parts  of  the  body.

Volatile  Salts.
Take  crude  Sal  Amoniac  one  ounce,  Pearlash  two
ounces,  and  pound  each  by  itself,  mix  them  well  togeth-
er, and  keep  it  close  stopped  in  a  bottle  for  use.  By
damping  it  with  spirit  or  essence  will  increase  the
strength.  This  applied  to  the  nose  is  good  for  faintness
and  to  remove  pain  in  the  head ;  and  is  much  better
than  what  is  generally  sold  by  the  apothecaries.

J\erve  Ointment.
Take  the  bark  of  the  root  of  Bitter-sweet  two  parts  ;
of  Wormwood  and  Chamomile,  each  equal,  one  part,
when  green,  or  if  dry  moisten  it  with  hot  water ;  which
put  into  horse  or  porpoise  oil,  or  any  kind  of  soft  animal
oil,  and  simmer  them  over  a  slow  fire  for  twelve  hours  ;
then  strain  it  off",  and  add  one  ounce  of  spirits  of  Tur-
pentine to  each  pound  of  ointment.  To  be  used  for  a
bruise,  sprain,  calice,  swelling  or  for  corns.

Poultice.

Make  a  strong  tea  of  Raspberry  leaves,  or  of  No.  3;
take  a  cracker  pounded  fine  and  slippery  Elm  bark  pul-
verised, with  Ginger,  and  make  a  poultice  of  the  same.
This  is  good  for  old  sores,  whitlows,  felons,  and  for  bad
burns,  scalds,  and  parts  frozen.  Apply  this  poultice  and
renew  it  at  least  as  often  as  every  twelve  or  twenty-four
hours,  and  wash  with  soap  suds  at  every  renewal ;  wet-


or,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  255

ting  it  in  the  interim  with  cold  water,  or  a  tea  of  Rasp-
berry leaves,  till  it  discharges ;  then  apply  the  salve
till  a  cure  is  effected.

Injections  or  Clysters,

This  manner  of  administering  medicine  is  of  the  great-
est importance, to  the  sick;  it  will  frequently  give  re-
lief when  all  other  applications  fail.  It  is  supposed
that  the  use  of  them  is  of  great  antiquity  ;  whether  this
be  true  or  not,  the  using  them  to  relieve  the  sick,  was
certainly  a  very  valuable  discovery ;  and  no  doubt
thousands  of  lives  have  been  saved  by  it.  The  doctors
have  long  been  in  the  practice  of  directing  injections  to
be  given  to  their  patients,  but  they  seem  to  have  no
other  object  in  administering  them,  than  to  cause  a  move-
ment in  the  bowels  ;  therefore  it  was  immaterial  what
they  were  made  of.

According  to  the  plan  which  I  have  adopted,  there
are  certain  important  objects  aimed  at  in  the  adminis-
tration of  medicine  to  remove  disease,  viz.  to  raise  the
internal  heat,  promote  perspiration,  remave  the  canker,
guard  against  mortification,  and  restore  the  digestion.
To  accomplish  these  objects  the  medicine  necessary  to
remove  the  complaint,  must  be  applied  to  that  part
where  the  disease  is  seated  ;  if  in  the  stomach  only,  by
taking  the  medicine  it  may  be  removed;  but  if  in  the
bowels,  the  same  compound  must  be  administered  by
injection.  Whatever  is  good  to  cure  disease  when  ta-
ken into  the  stomach,  is  likewise  good  for  the  same
purpose  if  given  by  injection,  as  the  grand  object  is  to
warm  the  bowels,  and  remove  the  canker.  Jn  all  cases
of  dysentery,  cholic,  piles,  and  other  complaints  where
the  bowels  are  badly  affected,  injections  should  never
be  dispensed  with.  They  are  perfectly  safe  in  all  cases,
and  better  that  they  be  used  ten  times  when  not  needed,
than  Once  neglected  when  they  are.  In  many  violent
cases,  particularly  where  there  is  danger  of  mortifica-
tion, ])Hrienlsmay  be  relieved  by  administering  medicine
in  ih,,'  'vay,  when  there  would  be  no  chance  in  any  oth-
er. 1  io,  therefore,  most  seriously  advise  that  these
consu'jrutionis  be  a'vvays  borne  in  mind;  and  that  this
ituport.'.ai way  of  giving  relief,  be  never neglected,


256  Acw  Gruide  to  Health  ;

where  there  is  any  chance  for  it  to  do  good.  In  raany
complaints  peculiar  to  females,  they  are  of  the  greatest
Importance  in  giving  relief,  when  properly  attended  to  ;
for  which  some  verbal  instructions  will  be  necessary,
which  will  readily  be  given  to  all  those  who  purchase
the  right.

The  common  preparation  for  an  Injection  or  Clyster,
is  to  take  a  tea-cupful  of  a  strong  tea  made  of  No.  3,
strain  it  off  when  hot,  and  add  half  a  tea-spoonful  of
No.  2,  and  a  tea-spoonful  of  No.  6 ;  when  cool
enough  tow  give,  add  half  a  tea-spoonful  of  No.  1,
and  the  same  quantity  of  nerve  powder.  Let  it  be  giv-
en'with  a  large  syringe  made  for  that  purpose,  or  where
this  cannot  be  had,  a  bladder  and  pipe  may  be  used.
They  must  be  repeated  as  occasion  may  require  till
relief  is  obtained.

Many  other  articles  may  be  used  to  advantage  in  the
injections ;  a  tek'  of  witch-hazle  and  red-raspberry
leaves,' either  or  both  together,  are  very  good  in  many
under  the  head- of  No.  3,  will  answer  a  good  purpose.
When  the  canker  is  removed  the  bowels  will  be  left
sore,  in  which  case,  give  injections  of  witch-hazle  or
raspberry  leaves  tea,  with  slippery-elm  bark.  When
injections  are  used  to  move  the  bowels  only,  No.  1
should  be  left  out.  It  is  always  safe  to  add  the  nerve
powder,  and  if  there  is  nervous  symptoms  it  must  never

be  omitted.  *

Sin c^f  Medicine  for  a  Family,

\  oz.  of  the  Emetic  Herb,

'i  oz.  of  Cayenne, '

1-2  lb.  of  Bay  berry  root  bark  in  powder,

1  lb.  of  Poplar  bark^'^

1  lb.  of  Ginger,

1  pint  of  the  Rheumaltic  Drops.
This  stock  will  be  sufficient  for  a  family  for  one  year,
and  with  such  articles  as  they  can  easily  procure  them-
selves when  wanted,  will  enable  them  to  cure  any  dis-
ease, which  a  family  of  common  size  may  be  afflicted
with  during  that  time.  The  expense  wili'be  small,  and
much  better  than  to  employ  a  doctor  and  have  his  ev
travagant  bill  to  pay.


or^  Botanic  Family  Physician.  25"^

GENERAL  DIRECTIONS/

IN  CURING OR PREVENTING DISEASE.

1.  Be  careful  to  always  keep  the  determining  powers
t0  the  surface,  by  keeping  the  inward  heat  above  the
outward,  or  the  fountain  above  the  stream,  and  all  will
be  safe.

2.  It  must  be  recollected  that  heat  is  life  and  cold
death  ;  that  fever  is  a  friend  and  cold  the  enemy  ;  it  is
therefore  necessary  to  aid  the  friend  and  oppose  the  en-
emy in  order  to  restore  health.

3.  That  the  construction  and  organization  of  the  hu-
man frame,  is  in  all  men  essentially  the  same ;  being
formed  of  the  four  elements.  Earth  and  water  constir
tute  the  solids  of  the  body,  which  is  made  active  by  fire
and  air.  Heat  in  a  peculiar  manner,  gives  life  and
motion  to  the  whole  ;  and  when  en^rely  overpowered
from  whatever  cause  by  the  other  elements,  death  en
sues-  '

4.  A  perfect  state  of  health  arises  from  a  due  balance
or  tenaperature  of  the  elements;  and  when  it  is  by  any
means  destroyed,  the  body  is  more  or  less  disordered.
When  this  is  the  case  there  is  always  a  diminution  of
heat,  or  an  increase  of  the  power  of  cold,  which  is
its  opposite.

5.  All  disorders  are  caused  by  obstructed  perspiration,
which  may  be  produced  by  a  great  variety  of  means ;
that  medicine,  therefore,  must  hiie  administered  that
is  best  calculated  to  remove  obstructions  and  promote
perspiration.

6.  The  food  taken  into^the  stomach  and  being  well
digested,  nourishes  the  ^stem  and  keeps  up'  that  heat  on
which  life  depends ;  but  by  constantly  taking  food  into
the  stomach,  which  is  sometimes  not  suitable  for  nour-
ishment, it  becomes  foul,  so  that  the  food  is  not  well
digested  ;  this  causes  the  body  to  lose  its  heat,  and  dis-
ease follows.

7.  Canker  is  caused  by  cold,  and  there  is  always  more
or  less  of  it  in  all  cases  of  disease  ;  continue  to  make  use

X  2


;^58  New  Guide  to  Health  ;

of  such  articles  as  are calculated  to  remove  it, as  long
as  there  is  any  appearance  of  disorder.

8.  When  the  disease  is  removed,  make  free  use  of
those  things  that  are  good  to  restore  the  digestive  pow-
ers, not  forgetting  to  keep  up  the  inward  heat  by  giving
occasionally  No.  2.

9.  Keep  always  in  mind  that  an  ounce  of  preventative
is  better  than  .a  pound  of  cure  ;  and  give  medicine  on
the  first  appearance  of  disorder,  before  it  becomes  seat-
ed; for  it  ^may  be  then  easily  thrown  off,  and  much
sickness  and  expense  prevented.

10.  In  case  of  a  fever  increase  the  internal  heat  by
giving  hot  medicine  so  as  to  overpower  the  cold,  when
the  natural  heat  will  return  inwardly,  and  the  cold  will
pervade  the  whole  surface  of  the  body  as  the  heat  had
done  before  ; this  is  what  is  called  the  turn  of  the  fever.

11.  If  No.  1  should  sicken  and  not  puke,  there  may
be  two  causes  for  it,  viz :  the  coldness  or  acidity  of
the  stomach;  for  the  first  give  No.  2  more  freely,  and
for  the  latter  disolve  a  piece  of  pearl-ash  about  the  size
of  a  large  pea  in  a  wine  glass  of  water  and  let  them
take  it,  which  will  counteract  the  acidity.  If  this  fails
make  use  of  the  steam,  which  will  open  the  pores,  ex-
tract the  cold,  and  set  the  medicine  into  operation.

12.  In  giving  medicine  to  children,  give  about  one
half,  a  little  more  or  less  according  to  their  age,  of  the
quantity  directed  for  a  grown  person.  Be  particular  to
oifer  them  drink  often,  especially  young  children  who
cannot  ask  for  it.

13.  Dysentery  is  Caused  by  canker  on  the  bowels,  fop-
which  make  free  use  of  the  tea  of  No.  3,  with  No.  %
and  give  the  same  by  injection,  in  the  first  of  the  disease^
and  afterwards  give  the  syrup  (No.  5,)  to  strengthen
the  stomach  and  bowels,  and  restore  the  digestive  pow-
ers.

14.  The  piles  is  canker  below  the  reach  of  medicine
given  in  the  usual  way,  and  must  be  cured  by  using  a
wash  of  No.  3,  made  strong  and  by  giving  injections  of
the  same,  with  No.  2.  What  is  called  bearing  down
pains  in  women,  is  from  the  same  cause  ;  and  must  be
felieved  by  injections  made  of  witch-hazle  or  red  rasp-


or^  Botanic  Family  Physician*  259

berry  leaf  tea,  steeped  strong,  with  No.  2.  strained^
If  this  does  not  give  relief,  go  through  a  regular  course
of  medicine.

15.  Women  in  a  state  of  pregnancy,  ought  to  be  car-
ried through  a  regular  course  of  the  medicine,  espe-
cially when  near  the  time  of  delivery.  When  in  tra-
vail, give  raspberry  leaf  tea,  with  a  tea  spoonful  of  the
composition  powders,  or  No.  2,  and  keep  them  in  a
perspiration.  After  delivery  keep  uplhe  internal  heat,,
by  giving  the  composition  povvder,  or  No.  2.  I'his  will
prevent  cold  and  after  pains ;  if  there  should^^e  symp-
toms of  fever,  carry  them  through  a  regular  course  of
the  medicine,  which  will  guard  against  all  alarming  com-
plaints, peculiar  in  such  cases.

16.  In  all  cases  of  a  burn,  scald,  or  being  frozen,  wrap
up  the  part  in  cloths  wet  with  cold  water,  often  wetin^
them  with  the  same,  to  prevent  their  becoming  dry,  and
be  careful  to  give  hot  medicine,  such  as  No.  2,  or  the
composition  powders,  to  keep  up  the  inward  heat. —
Pursue  this  plan  for  twelve  hours;  and  then,  if  the  skin
is  off,  apply  the  poultice,  or  salve.  If  there  should  be
convulsions,  or  fever,  a  regular  course  of  the  medicine
must  without  fail  be  attended  to.

17.  When  a  scald  is  over  the  whole  or  greatest  part
of  the  body,  applj'  cotton  cloth  of  several  thicknesses  to
th^  whole  body,  wet  with  a  tea  of  raspberry  leaves,
thoroughly  wetting  it  with  the  same  to  prevent  it  from
becoming  dry ;  and  give  the  hot  medicine.  When  the
scald  is  under  the  stocking,  or  any  other  tight  garment,
let  it  remain  en,  adding  more  cotto»cloths,  and  wet  the
whole  with  cold  water  as  often  as  the  smart  of  the  barn
returns.

18.  If  the  skin  is  off,  or  in  case  of  an  old  burn,  to
guard  against  canker,  apply  a  poultice  of  cracker  and
slippery  elm  bark,  made  with  a  tea  of  raspberry  leaves  ;
washing  it  with  soap  suds  when  the  poultice  is  changed,
and  then  with  the  same  tea.  When  any  part  is  frozen^
the  same  method  must  be  taken,  as  for  a  burn.

19.  For  a  fresh  wound,  cut,  or  bruise,  wash  immedi-
ately with  cold  water  and  bind  up  in  cloths  wet  with  the
same  ;  keep  a  hot  stone  at  the  feet,  and  take  medicine


?60  M'ew  Guide  to  Health  ;  '

to  raise  a  gentle  perspiration  ;  continue  this  till  the  in-  -
Jlammation  is  allayed  and  the  wound  perfectly  cleansed,
then  apply  the  poultice  or  salve till  healed. The air
must  be  kept  from  all  wounds  or sores,  as  it  will  cause
pain  and  prevt-nt  them  from  healing.

20.  In  sudden  and  deadly  attacks,  such  as  spotted  or
yellow  fever,  fits,  drowned  persons,  croup,  &c.  the  heat
and  activity  of  the  patient  is  so  much  diminished,  that
the  common  administration  will  not  give  relief;  the
determining  power  to  the  surface,  being  so  small,
through  the  loss  of  internal  heat,  that  it  will  not  give

-  the  medicine  operation,  as  its  effects  is  resisted  and  coun-
terbalanced by  the  pressiure  of  the  external  air.  To
counteract  this  pressure,  keep  the  room,  by  aid  of  a
good  fire,  about  as  warm  as  a  summer  heat  ;  and  more
fully  to  rarify  and  lighten  the  air,  andaid  the  operation
of  the  medicine,  make  a  free  use  of  the  steam  bath ;  .
and  keep  the  patient  shielded  by  a  blanket,  at  the  same
time  give  occasionally  Nos.  1  and  2.  This  course  '
should  be  unremittingly  persevered  in  till  the  patient  is
relieved.

21.  If  the  glands  are  dry,  so  that  there  is  no  moisture
in  the  mouth,  or  if  the  patient  is  much  pressed  for
breath,  give  a  strong  tea  of  No.2,  sweetened,  and  repeat
it  till  the  mouth  becomes  moist.  No,  3  should  not  be
used-while  the  mouth  is  dry;  if  any. is  used,  add  a  large
portion  of  No.  2.

22.  Be  careful  not  to  have  the  outward  heat  too  high,
by  too  many  clothes  or  fire  ;  for  if  this  is  the  case,  it  will
Cciuse  a  balance  of  the  outward  and  inward  heat,  and
will  prevent  the  medicine  from  operating,  by  stopping
the  circulation ;  and  the  patient  will  be  very  much  dis-
tressed. When  this  happens  throw  cold  vinegar  on  the
face  and  stomach,  and  give  more  hot  medicine,  which  ■
will  let  down  the  outward  heat  and  raise  the  inward.

23.  If  the  patient  is  restless,  wet  the  head,  and  body
with  cold  vinegar ;  and  if  there  are  convulsions  or
spasms,  give  the  nerve  powder  with  No.  2.  .^  Injections
must  also  be  used.

24.  Never  make  use  of  physick  in  cases  vt^here  there
is  canker  inside,  for  it  will  draw  the  determining  powers


©r,  Botanic  Famivy  Physicia/n.  261

mward,  and  increase  the  disease.  I  have  seen  so  many
bad  eflfects  from  giving  physick,  that  1  have  disapproved
the  use  of  it  altogether ;  but  if  any  is  given,  after  the
operation,  be  careful  to  keep  up  the  inward  heat,  so  as
to  cause  a  free  perspiration.

26.  Avoid  all  minerals  used  as  medicine,  such  as  /ner-
cury,  arsenic,  antimony,  calomel,  preparations  of  cop-
ber,  or  lead ;  and  also  nitre  and  opium.  They  are  all
poison  and  deadly  enemies  to  health.

26.  Beware  of  bleeding  and  blisters,  as  they  can  nev-
er do  any  good,  and  may  be  productive  of  much  harm  ;
they  are  contrary  to  nature,  and  strengthen  the  power
of  the  enemy  to  health.  Setons  and  issues  should  also
be  avoided,  as  they  only  tend  to  waste  away  the
strength  of  the  patient,  without  doing  any  good ;  it  is  a
much  better  way  to  remove  the  cause  by  a  proper  ad-
ministration of  medicine,  which  will  be  more  certain
and  safe  in  its  effects.

27.  Be  careful  not  to  make  use  of  salt-petre  in  any
way  whatever ;  it  is  the  greatest  cold  of  any  thing  that
can  be  taken  into  the  stomach,  and  was  never  intended
for  any  other  purpose  then  to  destroy  life.  It  is  a  very
bad  practice  to  put  it  on  meat,  for  it  destroys  all  the
juices,  which  is  the  nourishing  part,  and  leaves  the  flesh
hard  and  difficult  to  digest.

28.  Never  eat  meat  that  is  tainted,  or  any  way  injur-
ed, as  it  will  engender  disease ;  for  one  ounce  in  the
stomach,  is  worse  than  the  effluvia  of  a  whole  carcase.
Eat  salt  provisions  in  hot  weather  and  fresh  in  cold.

29.  Be  careful  about  drinking  cold  water  in  very  hot
weather,  as  it  will  tend  to  let  down  the  inward  heat  so
suddenly  as  to  give  full  power  to  the  cold.'  If  this
should  happen,  its  fatal  effects  may  be  prevented  by
giving  the  hot  medicine  to  raise  the  inward  heat  above
the  outward.  Be  careful  also  not  to  coolsudd^mly,  after
being  Very  warm  in  consequence  of  uncommon  exerci^-e.

30.  Remember  that  regularity  in  diet  is  very  irapor-
h\(\t  to  preserve  health;  and  that  if  more  food  is  taken
int'»  the  stomach  than  is  well  digested,  it  clogs  the  sys-
tem and  causes  disease.  Thprafore  be  cautious  not  to  eat
too  mucii  at  a  time,  and  have  your  food  well  cooked.


262  JS'ew  Guide  to  Health  ;

This  is  very  important  to  those  who  have  weakly  conr
stitutions.

31.  Ardent  spirit  is  slow  poison  ;  it  is  taken  to  stimu-
late, but  this  effect  is  soon  over,  and  much  use  of  it  de-
stroys the  tone  of  the  stomach,  injures  the  digestive
pow  rs,  and  causes  disease.  It  is  therefore  much  bettt-r,
when  the  feelings  require  any  thing  of  the  kind,  to  make
use  of  stimulating  medicine,  such  as  Nos.  2  and  6,  for
these  will  answer  a  far  better  purpose.

By  a  strict  observance  of  the  foregoing  directions,  you
may  save  much  pain  and  expense,  and  enjoy  good  health
and  long  life,  which  is  the  ea-nest  wish  of  the  writer.


To  make  Milk  Porridge,

Put  aquart  of  water  in  a  kettle,  with  a  proper  quantity
of  salt,  and  while  heating  mix  a  gill  of  flour  in  a  bowl
H'ith  water,  made  thick,  and  when  the  water  is  boiling
hot,  drop  this  into  it  with  a  spoon ;  let  it  be  well  boiled,
then  add  half  a  pint  of  milk.  This  to  be  eaten  while
under  the  operation  of  the  medicine  ;  and  is  also  good
food  for  the  sick  at  any  other  time,  especially  while  the
stomach  is  weak.


To  make  Chicken  Broth-

Take  a  chicken  and  cut  it  in  pieces ;  put  the  gizzard
in  with  it,  opened  and  cleaned,  but  not  peeled.  Boil  it
till  the  meat  drops  from  the  bone.  Begin  to  ^ive  the
broth  as  soon  as  there  is  any  strength  in  it ;  and  when
boiled  eat  some  of  the  meat.  Let  it  be  well  seasoned.
This  may  be  given  instead  of  the  milk  porridge,  and  is
very  good  for  weak  patients,  particularly  in  cases  of  the.
dysentery.

When  the  operation  of  medicine  is  gone  through,  I
have  said  that  the  patient  may  eat  any  kind  ofnourish-
inoj  food  his  appetite  should  crave  ;  but  the  best  thing
is  to  take  a  slice  of  salt  pork  broiled,  or  beaf  steak,  well
done,  and  eat  it  with  pepper  sauce  ;  or  take  cayenne,
vinegar  and  spit,  mixed  together,  and  eat  with  it,  which
15  very  good  to  create  un  appetite  an,d  assist  the  diges-
ture.


or,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  263


DESCRIPTION

OF  SEVERAL  CASES  OF DISEASE, WITH DIREC-
TIONS HOW  THEY  MAY  BE  CURED.

Felons,

This  sore  always  comes  on  a  joint,  and  is  often  caused
by  some  strain,  or  bruise,  which  makes  a  leak  in  the
joint  or  musch^,  and  the  sooner  it  has  vent  the  better.
If  it  is  brought  to  a  head  by  poulticing,  the  skin  being  so
thick  that  it  will  often  be  caused  to  break  through  the
back  of  the  hand,  before  it  can  get  through  the  skin  on
the  inside.  The  best  way  to  give  it  vent,  that  I  have
ever  found,  is  to  burn  a  small  piece  of  punk  the  bigness
of  half  a  pea,  on  the  place  affected,  if  you  think  the
flesh  is  dead  down  to  the  matter,  you  may  prick  the
point  of  a  needle  into  the  dead  skin,  and  raise  it  up  and
cut  out  a  piece  under  the  needle  sufficient  to  let  out  the
matter  ;  then  apply  poultice  or  salve — If  painful,  wrap
it  in  cloths  of  several  thicknesses,  wet  with  cold  water,
and  repeat  this  as  often  as  it  becomes  hot  or  painful.
Take  the  composition  or  warn*  medicine,  to  keep  up  an
inward  heat.

If  the  sore  has  been  several  days  coming,  and  appears
nearly  ripe,  apply  a  piece  of  unslacked  lime  to  the  part
affected,  wrap  it  up  and  wet  the  cloth  with  cold  water,
till  the  lime  is  slacked  ;  and  repeat  this  till  the  skin
looks  of  a  purple  colour;  then  open  it  as  before  direct-
ed. 'J'his  method  is  more  safe  and  quick  in  causing  a
cure,  than  laying  it  open  with  a  knife,  as  is  the  practice
of  some  doctors.  By  cutting  the  live  flesh,  forms  a  leak
and  often  spoils  the  joint;  but  by  searing  them  by  either
of  the  above  modes,  it  secures  and  prevents  the  leak,
and  makes  a  speedy  cure.


Freezes  and  Burns.

These  two  names  of  disorder  are  one  and  the  same
thing,  and  require  the  same  treatment.  Take  a  cloth
wet  in  cold  water,  and  wrap  several  thicknesses  rou»il


264  A'cw  Guide  io  Health  ,

or  laid  on  to  the  part,  to  be  kept  wet  as  often  as  the
pain  increases.  Give  warm  medicine  inside.  If  the
scald  is  dangerous,  carry  them  through  a  regular  course
of  medicine  as  though  they  had  a  fever,  or  any  other
acute  disorder  ;  keep  the  cloth  or  poultice  on  to  secure
it  from  the  air,  from  12  to  14  hours,  till  the  soreness  or
pain  is  entirely  gon*.  If  the  vskin  is  off,  a  poultice  of
flour  bread  wet  with  any  of  the  articles  composing  No.
3,  and  keep  it  wet  with  this  tea  or  water  till  the  sore
discharges,  then  wash  with  soap  suds  ; — when  dressed
wash  with  the  tea  of  No  3,  and  continue  the  poultice  or
salve  untill  a  cure  is  affected.

A  freeze  is  direct  cold,  and  a  burn  is  attracted  cold ;
for  as  much  as  the  heat  opens  the  pores  more  than  usu-
al, the  cold  follows  and  closes  them  as  much  more  than
they  were  before  the  operation  of  the  heat — this  stops
the  perspiration  from  going  through  the  surface,  and  the
water  collects  under  the  grain  of  the  skin,  which  is  call-
ed blistering  ;  the  water  applied  in  the  cloth  on  the  out-
side open  the  pores  and  lets  the  water  out  t)y  perspira-
tion, and  the  grain  adheres  to  the  skin — the  pain  ceases,
and  the  cure  is  completed.


Cure  of  my  Brother's  Son  of  a  Scald.
He  was  about  14  years  of  age,  and  was  taking  off
from  the  fire  a  kettle  of  boiling  cider,  the  leg  of  the
kettle  caught  by  the  log,  tipped  it  forward  and  poured
the  cider  boiling  hot  into  a  large  bed  of  live  embers,
which  covered  his  bare  feet  with  this  hot  mass;  he  was
obliged  to  hold  on  till  the  kettle  was  set  on  the  floor,
and  then  jumpped  into  a  pail  of  cold  water,  and  stood
there  until  his  father  procured  some  cloths,  which  he
immediately  wrapt  his  feet  up  in  ;  his  father  laid  by  the
fire  to  attend  to  pour  on  water  to  keep  the  cloths  filled,
which  keeps  the  air  from  the  surface  and  eases  the
pain ;  for  as  the  water  wastes  and  lets  the  air  to  the
burn,  the  pain  will  increase ;  but  by  persuing  this
course  for  about  two  hours,  the  pain  abated  and  the  boy
fell  asieep.  Water  was  poured  on  the  cloth  but  two  or
three  times  during  the  rest  of  the  night,  and  in  the
moroing  preparation  was  made to dress the  wound,


or,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  265

when  to  the  surprise  of  all  present  no  hhster  had  arisen,
nor  a  particle  of  skin  broken.  He  put  on  his  stockings
and  shoes  as  usual,  and  went  about  his  work,  perfectly
well.


Case  of  a  boy  who  was  badly  Scalded*
A  lady  took  off  from  the  fire  a  tea-kettle  filled  with
boiUng  water,  when  her  little  son,  about  6  years  old,
stepped  on  the  bail  and  turned  the  contents  on  to  both
his  feet,  and  falling,  one  hand  went  into  the  tea-kettle  ;
both  feet  and  one  hand  were  very  badly  scalded.  I  hap-
pened to  be  present,  and  immediately  tore  up  cloth
sufficient  to  do  up  each  part,  wetting  them  with  cold
water.  I  then  put  him  in  bed  and  gave  him  some
warm  medicine,  put  a  warm  stone  at  his  feet,  and  wet
the  cloths  as  often  as  he  complained  of  pain.  In  about
two  hours  he  fell  asleep,  after  which  two  or  three
times  wetting  the  cloths,  kept  him  easy  through  the
ni^ht.  In  the  morning  on  taking  off  the  cloths  there
was  no  appearance  of  blisters,  nor  any  skin  broken  ;  and
he  put  on  his  shoes  and  stockings,  and  appeared  as  well
as  before  the  accident  happened.  It  had  been  the  de-
clared opinion  of  the  family  the  night  before,  that  the
boy  would  not  be  able  to  go  to  school  for  a  fortnight;
but  on  finding  him  well  in  the  morning,  were  hardly
willing  to  believe  their  own  senses,  or  that  the  child  had
been  scalded.


General  Remarks  on  Burns,

Burns  are  the  most  easily  cured,  if  rightly  managed
and  understood^,  of  any  wounds  I  ever  attended  ;  and  are
the  most  difficuU.pnd  dangerous,  when  not  understood,
and  wrongly  treated.  How  often  have  w;"^  seen  these  sores
continue  ail  winter  and  coitld  not  be  healed?  as  also,
burns  caused  by  blisters  made  with  SpcUiish  flies,  which
amount  to  the-Hnrne  thing.  By  not  being  treated  in  a
prop(^r  manner  in  season-the  cinker  gets  in  and  cats  out
the  flesh,  aft^r  whichvvhat  is  called  proud  flesh  fills  up
the  sore.  The  doctor  applies  his  sugar  of  lead,  vitriol
and  red  precipitate  to  Cut  out  the  dead  flesh,  this  aliects

Y


266  JVew  Guide  to  Health  ;

the  cords  and  draws  them  out  of  shape,  and  many  times
makes  a  sore  that  they  cannot  cure,  which  terminates
in  a  mortifying  canker  sore. — My  friends,  if  you  wish  to
avoid  all  this  trouble,  attend  to  what  belong'S  to  your
peace  and  comfort,  before  it  is  hidden  from  your  eyes ;
that  is,  to  attend  to  the  canker,  which  always  awaits
such  cases,  and  where  the  skin  is  off  in  all  cases  of
burns  or  blisters,  apply  a  poultice  of  cracker,  or  elm
bark  wet  with  a  tea  of  No.  3,  until  the  canker  is  gone.
Sometimes  add  ginger;  if  the  inflammation  is  high  add  a
little  of  No.  2,  with  the  ginger,  keeping  the  poultice
wet  with  cold  water,  and  when  the  sore  discharges  ap-
ply salve  till  a  cure  is  effected

I  shall  continue  my  remarks  on  burns,  by  shewing  the
evil  consequences  arising  from  blistering.  Not  long
since  I  knew  a  case  where  a  doctor  drew  a  blister  on  a
child's  breast  up  to  the  neck,  for  being  stuffed  at  the
lungs.  It  lingered  with  this  scald  near  its  vitals,  about
a  week;  I  was  then  called  to  visit  the  child,  and  found
it  to  be  dying.  The  mother  asked  me  what  1  thought
was  the  matter  with  it ;  I  took  off  the  dressing  and
shewed  her  the  mortified  flesh  all  over  the  blister,  and
told  her  that  was  the  disorder.  She  seemed  much  sur-
prised ;  and  I  then  asked  her  if  the  child  had  beea
scalded  andil  had  mortified  in  like  manner,  whether  she
would  have  had  any  doubt  of  its  being  the  cause  of  her
child's  death  ?  she  said  that  she  should  not.  I  gave  her
my  opinion,  that  it  was  exactly  a  similar  case,  and  that
the  child's  death  was  caused  as  much  by  the  blister  as
it  would  have  been  by  a  scald.  The  child  died  before
morning.  I  had  dechned  doing  any  thing  for  it,  as  I  was
satisfied  that  1  could  do  it  no  good  ;  and  if  I  had  made  the
attempt,  it  would  have  been  said  that  1  killed  it.

I  have  seen  many  cases  where  I  was  perfectly  sat-
isfied that  the  patients  died  in  consequence  of  blisters,
not  only  on  the  stomach,  but  on  the  head.  In  many
that  I  have  witnessed,  where  a  blistep  was  drawn  on  the
head,  as  soon  as  it  began  to  draw  their  senses  were
gone  and  did  not  retura  till  they  died  raving,  or  stu-
pioed.  More  tha«  half  the  cases  where  the  head  was
shaved and blistered, that have come within my


or-^  Botanic  Family  Physician.  267

knowledge,  have  died.  I  never  could  see  any  reason  why
a  scald  on  the  head  or  body  done  on  purpose,  should
have  a  tendency  to  effect  a  care,  when  the  person  is
sick,  and  the  same  thing  happening  to  them  by  accident,
when  well,  should  destroy  their  health  or  cause  their
death.  If  a  person  should  have  their  head  or  stom-
ach so  badly  scalded  as  to  take  off  the  skin,  we  should
consider  them  in  the  most  dangerous  condition  ;  but  noth-
ing is  said  about  it  when  drawn  on  purpose.  I  shall
leave  it  to  the  reader  to  reconcile,  if  he  can,  this
inconsistency.  I  have  known  most  dangerous  strangu-
aries  caused  by  blisters  on  the  sides  and  hmbs,  and  those
who  applied  them  did  not  know,  the  cause,  and  I  have
been  applied  to  for  relief.


Mortification  of  the  Limbs.
I  was  called  on  to  go  on  board  a  vess-el  at  Eastport,
to  see  a  young  man,  who  had  a  block  fall  from  mast
head  on  his  foot,  weighing  13  1-2  lbs.  which  bruised
all  his  toes  to  pieces  except  the  little  one.  The  acci-
dent happened  on  Friday  and  I  did  not  see  him  till  the
Tuesday  following ;  during  which  he  had  neither  eat
lior  slept.  His  nerves  were  much  affected,  and  had
•spasms  and  convulsions  through  the  whole  system.  I
took  off  the  dressing  from  his  foot  and  found  it  black,
and  the  smell  very  oSensive.  The  captain  of  the  ves-
sel appeared  to  be  very  anxious  about  him,  a>ked  me  if
I  couid  help  his  foot — 1  told  him  that  1  must  first  try  to
save  his  life,  for  his  whole  body  was  as  much  disordered
as  his  foot.  He  requested  me  to^  do  what  I  thought
best.  I  put  a  pouUice  of  meal  on  his  foot,  and  wet
the  cloth  with  cold  water  to  allay  the  heat ;  then  gave
him  medicine  the  suaje  as  though  he  had  been  attacked
with  a  nervous  tevei:.  The  captain  attended  him  thro'
the  n-ghf,  and  I  wont  to  see  him  the  next  morning,  and
found  him  much  .better.  1'ho  captain  said  he  was  aston-
ished at  the  opf.ration  of  the  medicine,  for  that  his  vom-
iting and  H'veating  had  carried  off  all  the  pain  in  his
body  and  foot,  and  had  also  reconciled  the  nerves.

I  undid  his  foot  and  found  that  the  black and  yellow
streaka  up  the  leg  had  disappeared,  and  on the  foot  all


268  JVew  Guide  to  Health  ,

the  flesh  that  was  alive  seemed  to  receive  fresh  sup-
port from  the  bod}' ;  and  the  Hving  and  d^-ad  flesh  ap-
peared as  though  two  colours  were  painted  by  the  side
of  each  other.  I  then  made  a  ley  of  pearlash  in  warm
water,  and  soaked  his  foot  in  it,  which  caused  a  slimy
glaze  all  over  his  foot ;  this  took  away  all  the  offensive
smell ;  and  I  washed  it  with  vinegar  to  kill  the  alkali
and  keep  it  from  irritating  the  skin.  The  acid  cleared
off  all  the  slimy  matter,  so  that  it  wiped  clean.  I  then
cut  oif  the  great  toe  at  the  middle  joint,  and  the  two
next  at  the  upper  joint,  and  set  the  next  which  was  bro-
ken. I  cut  none  of  the  flesh  but  what  was  dead,  to  stop
in  part  the  putrifaction.  I  then  put  on  another  poul-
tice and  ordered  it  to  be  kept  wet  with  cold  water,  and
a  warm  stone  wrapped  in  a  wet  cloth,  to  be  put  to  his
feet,  to  keep  a  steam,  giving  him  warm  medicines  in-
side to  keep  up  the  inward  heat ;  and  by  wetting  the
foot  with  cold  water  it  kept  the  determining  power  to
the  surface  ;  thus  raising  the  fountain  and  lowing  the
stream.  By  this  treatment  it  becomes  impossible  that
mortification  can  go  from  the  limbs  to  the  body,  any  more
than  a  log  that  floats  over  the  dam,  can  go  back  again
into  the  pond,  when  the  fountmn  is  kept  full.  The  next
day  I  dressed  his  foot  and  found  that  the  dead  flesh  had
digested  very  much  ;  I  again  soaked  it  in  pearlash  and
then  washed  in  vinegar  as  before,  which  was  of  great
service  in  allaying  the  bad  smell.  I  then  caused  him  to
he  carried  through  a  regular  course  of  medicine,  which
completely  restored  his  bodily  health ;  his  appetite  was
good,  and  all  pain  and  soreness  abated,  so  that  he  took
food  regularly  and  lost  no  sleep  afterward,  till  he  got
entirely  well,  which  was  in  about  four  weeks.  The
«:aptain  was  a  very  good  nurse,  and  was  faithful  in  at-
tendance on  the  young  man  till  he  got  well ;  and  ex-
pressed the  highest  gratitude  for  my  attention  and  suc-
cess ;  and  as  a  proof  of  his  contidence  in  the  medicine,
he  purchased  a  right,  for  which  he  paid  me  twenty  silver
ilollars,  observing  at  the  same  time,  that  he  never  paid
i'oi'  nnv  thing  with  more  satisfaction.


Cf{  Botanic  Family  Physician.  269

Old  Canker  Sores  on  the  Legs.

When  I  was  a  young  man,  I  was  much  troubled  through  =
the  winter,  for  many  years,  with  sores  on  my  legs.  At
the  commencement  of  cold  weather,  it  I  broke  the
grain  on  my  sfiin,  it  would  become  a  bad  sore  and  con-
tinue through  the  winter  ;  the  ♦.inker  would  get  into  it  and
eat  to  the  bone,  and  sometimes  spread  under  the  grain
like  a  burn  and  feel  the  same,  being  extremely  sore,
with  stings  and  twinges  like  a  cancer.  These  sores
were  so  troublesome,  that  it  led  me  to  invent  a  cure  ;
finding  the  cause  to  be  canker,  I  took  some  of  the  ar-
ticles composing  No.  3*,  steeped  strong,  and  washed  the
part  affected,  with  it ;  if  there  was  a  bad  smell,  I  first
washed  the  sore  with  strong  soap  suds,  taking  off  ail  the
loose  skin,  which  was  blistered  with  cankery  humour,
and  then  washed  with  a  tea  of  No.  3,  to  destroy  the  can-
ker and  harden  the  sore  ;  sometimes  wetting  it  with  the
drops,  if  the  inflammation  run  high  and  the  sore  spread
fast,  I  put  into  it  a  pinch  of  fine  No.  2 ;  then  put  on  a
poultice  of  white  bread  and  ginger,  wet  with  the  above
tea,  wrapping  it  up,  with  several  thicknesses  of  cloths
wet  with  cold  water  ;  wetting  them  as  often  as  dry,  so  as
to  be  painful ;  and  not  let  the  sore  come  to  the  air  for
24  hours.  In  this  time,  if  kept  well  wet  and  warm,  it
will  discharge  ripe  matter,  and  the  inflammation  and
canker  will  abate.  When  next  dressed  wash  first  with
soap  suds  as  before,  then  with  the  tea ;  if  the  soreness
is. gone  you  may  apply  the  healing  salve,  with  the  wet
cloths,  if  going  to  bed,  to  keep  oat  the  air ;  put  occa-
sionally a  hot  sione  wrapped  in  wet  ciothi,  to  tho  feet
to  keep  up  a  st'am,  and  wetting  the  sore  if  painful  with'
cold  water.  J'ake  medicine  to  keep  up  the  inward  heat ;
such  as  composition,  or  hot  bitters,  and  when  these  do
not  answer  the  purpose,  go  through  a  course  of  the
medicine,  and  repeat  as  occasion  may  require.  1  his
meth'.;d,  if  persevered  in,  I  seldom  knew  to  fail  of  suc-
cess. , • ^

1  w;is  called  to  attend  a  case  of  this  kind,  not  long
since,  wher^.*  the  Inflammation  and  pain  was  ver)  great,
and  fast spreading under  the  grain  of  the  skm  ;  there

\ 2


i'TO  jYew  Cruide  to  Health  ;

had  been  applied  an  elm  and  ginger  poultice,  made
with  tea  of  No.  3,  I  opened  it  and  only  added  a  pinch  of
No.  2,  and  laid  on  the  poultice  again,  putting  on  a  wet
cloth,  and  ordered  it  kept  wet  with  cold  water  till  next
morning ;  when  on  dressing  it  found  the  inflammation  a-
bated,  the  sore  discharged  ripe  matter,  and  by  two
dressings  more  of  thesam^,  the  cure  was  completed.

C(sse  of  the,  bite  of  a  Rat,  supposed  to  be  mad.

Not  long  since  I  was  sent  for  to  attend  a  man  who
had  been  bitten  on  one  of  his  eyebrows  by  a  rat.  sup-
posed to  be  mad.  The  wound  healed  in  a  few  days,
then  turned  purple  round  it,  as  though  the  blood  had
settled,  and  turned  more  black,  until  he  was  blind.  He
was  sick  at  the  stomach,  and  had  a  high  fever.  I  carri-
ed him  through  a  course  of  the  medicine,  with  but  little
advantage.  The  swelling  and  dark  colour  progressed
till  he  was  about  the  colour  of  a  blackberry  pie.  These
appearances  led  me  to  suspect  that  the  madness  of  the
rat  was  caused  by  eating  ratsbane,  and  communicated
this  poison  to  the  man  by  the  bite,  as  he  appeared  the
same  as  a  person  1  had  once  seen,  who  had  been  killed
by  taking  that  poison.  I  then  washed  his  face  with  a
strong  tea  of  No.  1  and  2,  and  gave  the  same  inward
with  No.  3,  carried  him  through  another  course  of
medicine,  keeping  a  cloth  on  his  face  wet  with  the  tea
as  before,  to  keep  out  the  air  when  under  the  operation
of  the  medicine,  to  sweat  his  face  and  throw  the  poison
out.  1  kept  him  in  a  sweat  for  several  days,  occasion-
ally with  his  face  secured  from  the  air,  which  method
had  the  desired  effect  by  bringing  the  poison  out.  By
continually  keeping  up  the  perspiration,  the  swelling
abated ;  but  whenever  this  was  not  well  attended  to,  so
as  to  keep  the  determining  powers  to  the  surface,  the
spasms  would  increase  to  su^ch  a  degree  that  his  life  was
frequently  despaired  of  He  was  carefully  attended  in
this  manner  about  one  month,  before  I  could  determine
in  my  own  mind,  whether  the  disease  or  nature,  would
gain  the  victorv  ;  after  which  time  he  began  gradually
to  gain  his  health,  and  in  about  six  months  he  appeared
to  be  clear  of  the  poison. This  man  was  sixty  years  of


or^  Botanic  Family  Physician.  271

age  ;  and  the  accident  happening  in  the  fall  of  the  year,
it  was  much  more  difficult  to  conquer  this  cold  and
deadly  poison,  than  it  would  have  been  in  warm  weath-
er. This  case  convinced  me  that  the  cause  of  mad  rats
and  mad  cats,  is  owing  to  the  rats  having  been  poisoned
by  ratsbane,  the  cats  cat  them  and  become  affected  by
the  poison,  which  makes  them  mad,  and  by  biting  the
people  communicate  the  poison,  from  which  many  latal-
consequences  have  frequently  happened.


Bad  wound  in  the  eye  cured.

While  I  was  at  Eastport,  Maine,  a  man  was  cutting
turf  about  twelve  miles  from  that  place,  and  acciden-
tally had  a  pitchfork  stuck  into  one  of  his  eyes,  by  a
person  who  was  pitching  the  turf  near  him.  It  passed
by  the  eye  ball  and  stuck  fast  in  the  skull,  so  that  it  was
with  considerable  exertion  that  he  could  draw  it  out.
The  eye  swelled  and  closed  up  immediately,  and  the
people  were  much  frightened  and  sent  for  me  ;  but  it  so
happened  that  I  could  not  go.  I,  gave  directions  to  the
man  who  came  after  me,  to  return  and  carry  him  through
a  course  of  medicine  as  soon  as  possible,  keeping  seve-
ral thicknesses  of  cloth  wet  with  cold  water  on  his  eye,
and  not  open  it  for  twelve  hours ;  and  to  keep  him  in
a  perspiration  the  whole  time.  This  was  faithfully  at-
tended to  ;  and  on  opening  the  wound  after  the  above
time,  the  swelling  was  all  gone,  the  eye  was  open,  and
a  large  quantity  of  blood  was  in  the  wet  cloth,  which
had  been  drawn  from  the  eye.  They  continued  the  wet
cloth,  and' gave  him  vv^arm  medicine  inside,  keeping  him
in  a  gentle  perspiration  for  the  next  twenty  four  hours,
which  cleared  the  eye  of  all  the  blood,  restored  the
sight,  and  amended  his  health,  that  he  was  well  in  about
a  weak,  to  the  astonishment  of  all  who  saw  him.


Cancer  Sores.
A  concise  and  general  treatise  on  this  violent  and  of-
ten fatal  disease,  may  convey  some useful  ideas  on  the
subject. The  cause  of  this  sore  is  very  little  understood.
It  ;'!!  sores of  an eating nature there  is  more  or  Itss


272  Xew  Guide  to  Health  ,

canker  according  to  their  violence.  A  Cancer  is  the  -
highest  cierree  of  canker,  being  the  most  powerful  ef-
fects of  cold  and  consequently  the  greatest  degree  of  in-
flammation, therefore  the  remedies  ought  to  be  those  of
a  u  arming  nature,  as  the  greatest  preventatives  against
canker.  Whenever  a  violent  inflammation  is  discovered,
it  is  supposed  that  heat  causes  the  difficulty;  but  the
fact  is,  it  is  only  evidence  of  a  war  between  heat  and
cold  ;  for  tiiere  is  no  inflammation  where  there  is  perfect
health,  because  heat  then  bears  complete  rule;  and  no
disease  can  take  place  until  the  cold  makes  an  attack
on  the  body,  which  causes  an  unnatural  heat  to  oppose
an  unnatural  cold ;  wherever  the  cold  takes  possession
the  inflaminaiion  shows  itself,  by  stopping  the  circula-
tion;  the  eifectis  swelling,  inflamed  calous,  arising  from
some  leak,  causpd  by  the  natural  course  h'eing  stopped.
If  It  suppurates  and  discharges,  it  is  called  ulcer,  bile,
and  the  like,  and  the  canker  goes  ofl"  with  the  putrifac-
tion.  If  the  leak  is  so  slow  as  to  calousS  as  fast  as  they
discharge,  it  becomes  a.  hard,  dead  lump  of  flesh,  and
not  having  circulation  enough  to  support  it,  it  begins  to
rot ;  here  the  canker  shrvvs  its  eating  nature  ;  being
seatC'l  in  the  dead  flesh,  and  eating  on  the  live  flesti,
which  is  intermixed  uith  it,  causes  pain  and  distress,  in
proportion  ns  the  body  is  tilled  with  coldness  and  canker;
ir'this  is  su'hcient  to  keep  the  power  above  the  natural'
•'ii-culation,  the  patient  will  continue  in  this  distressed
-iiuation,  being  eaten  up  alive,  until  worn  out  with  the
p-iin,  death  comes  as  a  triend  to  relieve  them.  This  is
tlie  natural  termination  of  this  dreadful  malady ;  which
is  tar  better  than  to  combine  with  it  the  common  form
of  practice  in  using  arsenic,  which  only  helps  to  eat  up
and  distress  the  patient.

In  order  to  give  a  more  correct  idea  of  the  danjrer-
ous  eifect  of  making  use  of  arsenic  in  cnncers,  I  shall
make  a  short  extract  from  7'hatcher'*s  Dispensatory,  on
the  subject.—"  Arsenic  has  long  been  known  to  be  the
basis  of  the  celebrated  cancer  powder.  It  has  been
sprinkled  in  substance  oil  the  ulcer;  but  this  moJe  of
using  it  is  excessively  painful,  a)id  exiremely  dani^-erous  ;
\4atal  effects  have  been  prodaced  from  its  absorption.


or^  Botanic  Family  Physician.  273

This  fact  I  have  known  in  several  instances,  where
Davidson's  agents,  and  others,  have  undertaken  to  draw
out  cancers  when  the  patient  would  absorb  enough  of
this  poison,  which  seating-  on  the  lungs,  caused  them  to
die  with  the  consumption  in  the  course  of  one  year."
My  wish  in  exposing  this  nostrum,  is  to  benelit  those
who  may  be  ignorant  of  the  imposition;  for  it  may  be
relied  on  as  atiuth,  that  there  is  more  or  less  poison  in
all  those  burning  plasters,  used  to  cure  cancers  ;  and  I
would  advice  all  to  beware  of  them  ;  as  it  will  be  much
safer  to  risk  the  cancer  than  the  cancer  quack.

The  principal  object  aimed  at  is  to  take  out  the  bunch,
and  in  doing  that  by  the  above  method,  a  worse  evil  is
inoculated,  which  is  more  fatal  than  the  cancer.  The
tumour  is  a  mixture  of  live  and  dead  ilesh,  and  is  often
under  a  live  skin;  if  it  is  necessary  to  make  an  incission
through  the  live  skin  in  order  to  disolvs  the  dead  flesh,
the  best  way  is  to  burn  a  piece  of  punk  on  the  place,
and  repeat  it  till  the  tlesh  is  dead  enough  to  suppurate.
The  smart  will  be  but  two  or  ihree  mmutes,  and  not  so
painful  as  the  arsenic  for  the  same  time,  which  will  last
for  twelve  hours.  Where  the  tumour  is  small  the  can-
•€er  balsam,  will  be  found  sufScient,,  by  repeating  the
plaster  for  two  or  three  weeks,  to  take  out  the  dead
flesh  and  rem(>ve  the  canker  ;  after  this  is  done,  apply  a
ginger  and  elm  poultice  wet  with  a  tea  of  No.  3.  If  the
systi-m  appears  to  be  generally  affected  with  the  cancer
humour,  carry  them  through  a  common  course  of  me-
dicine, and  repeat  the  same  wnile  attendino;  to  the  sore.

I  had  a  cancer  on  my  foot,  about  the  bigness  of  an  In-
dian corn,  which  has  troubled  me  twice,  by  acute  dart-
ing pains  and  twmges.  I  cured  it  by  applying  a  plas-  i^
ter  of  the  cancer  balsam ;  repeating  it  twice  at  each  7
time.  Where  there  is  dead  flesh  under  the  skin,  it  is
best  to  burn  the  punk  first  and  then  apply  the  poultice
or  balsam  ;  and  it  is  also  recommended  lo  ai.vays  give
medicine  to  eradicate  the  canker  from  the  system,  both
before  and  after  the  operation  on  the  sore.

Three  cancers  on  the  breast  have  come  under  my
care,  that  I  could  not  cure.  One  of  them  was  as  large
as  a half  peck measure,  and  grew fast  to  the brea.sl


274  New  Guide  to  Health  ;

bone.  I  carried  the  woman  through  a  course  of  medi-
cine several  times  and  appUed  a  poultice  of  butternut
shucks,  to  dissolve  the  dead  flesh,  and  continued  this
course  for  some  months,  until  the  bunch  had  more  than
half  dissolved,  and  had  grown  off  from  the  bone,  so  that
it  was  quite  loose  ;  and  1  was  in  hopes  to  have  effected
a  cure  ;  but  she  was  taken  with  a  fever  in  my  absence,
and  died.  The  other  two  I  could  relieve  and  keep
them  free  from  pain,  making-  them  comfortable  as  long
as  they  lived  ;  but  nature  was  too  far  exhausted  to  com-
plete a  cure.  I  have  had  under  my  care,  many  other
cases  of  cancers  on  the  breast  and  other  parts  of  the
body,  which  I  had  no  dithculty  in  curing  in  the  manner
before  stated.

I  shall  conclude  this  subject  by  a  few  general  re-
marks, viz.  :  Guard  thoroughly  against  canker  and  cold-
ness— Attend  to  the  canker  by  a  course  of  medicine,
and  repeat  it — Use  the  ginger  poultice  if  the  inflamma-
tion is  great,  putting  some  No.  2,  raw  in  the  sore,  then
apply  the  poultice  keeping  it  wet  with  cold  water — not
forgetting  the  composition  and  No.  2  inside,  at  the.
same  time. — Let  all  poisonous  drugs,  burning  plasters,
and  caustics  alone — attend  faithfully  to  the  directions
here  given — honour  your  own  judgment — keep  your
money — and  bid  deliance  to  doctors.


Piles — how  cured'
I  was  called  to  attend  an  elderly  man  in  South  Read-
ing, who  had  been  confined  to  the  house,  and  much  of
the  time  to  his  bed,  for  seven  weeks,  with  the  Piles.
Seven  doctors  attended  him  before  I  was  sent  for,  and
he  had  continued  to  grow  worse.  The  doctors  had
operated  on  one  side,  and  said  they  must  on  the  other  ;
it  was  their  opinion,  as  well  as  his,  that  he  was  in  a  de-
cline. The  side  that  they  had  operated  upon  was  much
worse  to  cure  than  the  other.  I  carried  him  through  a
regular  course  of  medicine  twice  in  three  days,  when
he  was  able  to  go  out  of  doors.  The  injection  compos-
ed of  No.  3,  steeped,  and  a  small  quantity  of  No.  2,  was
6sed;  warm  tallow  v»'as  applied  freely  several  times  ia


or,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  275.

the  clay,  some  times  washing  externally  with  the  same
tea.  lie  had  been  dieted  very  low  ;  1  restored  his  di-
gestive powers,  and  recovered  his  appetite  ;  his  sores
healed,  his  general  health  amended  to  such  a  degree,
that  he  was  no  more  confined  with  that  complaint.  A
little  tallow  used  when  going  to  hed,  prevents  piles  and
chafes  m  yoim^*  and  old. Reim^mber  this.


Sore  Heads  in  Ckikhoi.,  (Scald  Hearls.)
Thi'  sore  often  comes  after  having  had  the  itch ;  ker-
nels form  in  the  neck ;  it  is  contagious,  being  caused
by  canker  arid  putntaction.  The  most  effectual  way
to  cure  this  disease,  is  to  carry  them  throagh  a  course
of  iiiediC: ■■•■='  s-?yej;i.l  limes,  as  the  case  may  require,-pre-
vious  to  which,  the  head  should  be  oiled,  and  covered
with  cabbage  leaves  ;  or  draw  a  bladder  over  the  head,
to  keep  out  ibe  cold  air.  The  head  should  be  covered
so  as  to  make  it  sweat  as  miich  as  po^sibie,  in  order  to
di"^solve  the  hard  scabs.  After  liaying  all  night  the  smell
Wiii  be  otfensive  5  vv^ash  the  h'?i.'  in  soap-suds,  when
cleaD  vVrtSu  it  a'l>o  vvi^l•  a  tea  ofNo  3,  after  which  wash
wiui  a  tea  of  N"  j.  1  r-lometimes  anooiut  it  with  the
Rheumatic  Drops  anl  iierve  omt^oenl — let  it  come  fo
the  a.r  by  degrt^es.  Be  careful  to  ga;ird  the  stomach
by  giving  composition,  warm  bitters,  &c.  The  oint-
ment, drops  and  No.  1,  in  powder  or  juice,  may  be  oc-
casionahy  used  together  or  separate.  I'ontiniie  to  wash
with  soap-suds,  and  then  with  So.  3,  occasionally,  until
a  cure  is  effected.


Sore  Breasts*
Some  women  suffer  very  much  from  this  complainL,
jwhich  is  caused  by  cold,  occasioning  ohstructicns  in  the
glands  of  the  breasts.  When  they  are  swelled,  bathe
with  the  rheumatic  drops,  or  pepper  vinegar;  if  this
doesr.'Ot  remove  the  swelling,  and  it  should  be  necessa-
ry to  bring  it  to  a  head,  apply  a  poultice  of  lily  root'
made  thick  with  ginger,  or  slippery  elm  bark  ;  at  the
same  time  give  the  composition  powder  or  No.  2,  to
keep  up the  inward  heat. If  the  woman  is  sick  carry


276  JVeu' Guide  io  Health  ;

her  through  a  regular  course  of  the  medicine,  which
will  remove  the  complaint  and  restore  her  to  health  in
a  short  time.  I  have  cured  many  who  were  very  bad,
by  pursuing  the  above  plan,  and  never  met  with  diflicul-
t}^  1  attended  a  woman  in  Portsmouth,  who  had  both
breasts  badly  swelled.  She  was  sitting  by  the  window
with  it  up,  and  could  hardly  get  her  breath  ;  she  could
not  bear  to  have  any  lire  in  the  room,  c  smplaining  that
it  made  her  faint.  I  told  her  that  if  1  could  not  make
her  bear  heat,  I  could  do  her  no  good.  I  gave  her
some  No.  2,  to  raise  the  inward  heat,  and  caused  a
good  fire  to  be  made  in  the  room.  The  inward  heat
gained  as  fast  as  the  outward,  and  in  one  hour  she  could
bear  as  warm  a  fire  as  1  could.  1  carried  her  thit)ugh
llirce  regular  courses  of  the  medicine  in  five  days,  and
at  ihe  same  time  a])plied  the  lily  poultice,  which  brought
them  to  a  head  Without  pain;  and  she  was  soon  well.


To  stop  Bleeding,

Interna]  bleeding  is  from  the  stomach  or  lungs,  and
js  caused  by  canker,  or  soreness  of  the  stomach;  it  of-
ten takes  place  very  suddenl^^,  and  creates  much  alarm.
/Ihe  patient  sometimes  trembles  with  fright  and  often
has  fits  of  the  ague,  which  is  caused  by  the  cold  increas-
iriji  in  proportion  to  the  loss  of  blood.  In  the  first  place
shield  them  from  the  air  with  a  blanket,  by  the  fire,  and
give  the  hotest  medicine  you  have  ;  if  nothing  better
can  be  had,  give  hot  water  or  any  kind  of  hot  tea;  and
I'-et  a  perspiration  as  soon  as  possible  ;  thtin  apply  the
siearn  bath  ;  givmg  ginger  lea,  or  No.  2,  if  you  have  it,
li'not  black  pepper.  As  soon  as  there  is  an  equilibrium
in  the  circulation,  there  will  be  no  more  pressure  of  the
blood  to  the  stomach  or  lungs  than  to  the  extremities,
and  liie  bleedin^r  will  cease.  It  has  been  my  practice  in
rn.-(  V  of  this  kind,  to  give  some  of  the  rheumatic  drops,
!  them  from  the  air  with  a  blanket,  placed  by  the
tire;  then  give  a  dose  of  the  composition  powders,  and
No.  2 ;  and  if  this  docs  not  answer  the  purpose,  give  a
dose  of  No.  1,  which  with  the  steam,  J  never  knew
Mr  of  stopping  the  blood  ;  and  by  gxvmg  medicine  to
remove  the  canker  and  resiore  the  digestive  powers,  I


or  Botanic  Famihj  Physician,  21^7

h^ve  always  been  able  to  effect  a  cure.  The  same
applications  will  answer  for  other  weakening  and  alarm-
ing complaints  in  women.

External  bleeding  caused  by  wounds  in  the  limbs,
may  be  stopped  by  placing  the  wound  higher  than  the
body.  One  of  my  sons  cut  his  leg  very  badly  ;  I  placed
him  on  the  floor  and  took  his  foot  in  my  lap  ;  as  soon  as
the  wound  was  higher  than  the  body  the  bleeding  ceas-
ed. 1  then  poured  on  cold  water  till  the  wound  was
white ;  then  put  in  a  few  drops  of  No,  6,  took  two  or
three  stitches  to  bring  the  wound  together,  dressed  it
with  salve,  and  it  soon  got  well  with  very  little  sore-
ness. Another  case  of  a  little  girl,  who  cut  off"  the  main
artery  of  the  middle  finger,  and  it  bled  very  fast.  I
put  my  thumb  above  the  wound  and  stopped  the  blood;
then  poured  on  cold  water  with  my  other  hand  and
washed  the  wound  well ;  t4ien  placed  her  hand  above
her  head,  which  prevented  it  from  bleeding,  till  I  could
get  ready  to  dress  the  wound.  It  bled  no  more  and
soon  got  well.


Hupture.

This  difficulty  is  caused  by  a  hurt  or  strain,  which
makes  a  breach  in  the  tough  film,  or  membrane,  that
supports  the  bowels  in  their  place,  and  the  intestines
come  down  into  the  cavity  between  this  membrane  and
the  skin ;  being  sometimes  very  painful  and  difficult  to
be  got  back  ;  and  have  to  be  kept  from  coming  down
by  a  truss.  When  the  bowels  comedown  and  remain
any  length  of  time,  they  become  swelled,  and  are  very
painful,  causing  great  distress  and  dna;i,er ;  and  some-
times have  proved  fatal,  .as  they  cannot  be  got  up  a-
gain  till  the  swelling  is  removed.  This  maybe^eff'ected
by  a  course  of  the  medicine  without  danger.*

A  Mr.  Woodbury  of  Durham,  was  troubled  with  a
rupture;  his  bowels  came  down,  swelled  and  was  v^ry.
painful ;  a  doctor  was  sent  for  from  Portsmoatii,  who
applied  a  bag  of  snow,  xvhich  drove  the  pain  to  ihe
stomach  and  caused  puking.  The  swelliair  increased
and  became  very  hard.  The  case  now  becomjng  des-
perate, and  the  famdy beuig  alarmed.  I  was  sent  for,

Z


278  JVew  Guide  to  Health  ;

and  on  hearing  the  circumstances,  sent  some  medicine,
and  gave  directions  to  sweat  him  as  soon  as  possible. —
My  directions  were  faithfully  attended  to,  and  as  soon  as
he  became  warm,  the  nerves  slackened,  the  swelling
abated,  all  appearance  of  mortification  disappeared,  the
bowels  went  back,  and  in  twelve  hours  he  was  restored
from  a  dangerous  situation,  to  almost  his  usual  state  of
health.  In  this  case  may  be  seen  the  difference  be-
tween the  artificial  doctor,  and  nature's  physician,  which
is  the  same  as  between  fire  and  snow.


Jlgue  in  the  Face,

This  is  caused  by  cold  in  the  glands  of  the  mouth,
which  keeps  back  the  saliva  till  it  causes  sweUing  and
soreness,  the  canker  becomes  prevalent  at  the  same
time,  which  causes  severe  pain  in  the  face  and  throat.
The  sooner  a  cure  is  attempted  the  better ;  to  effect
this,  take  a  dose  of  the  tea  of  No.  3,  with  a  tea  spoonful
of  No.  6  in  it,  for  the  canker;  then  tie  a  small  quantity
of  No.  2  in  a  fine  piece  of  cloth,  wet  with  No.  6,  and  put
it  between  the  teeth  and  cheek,  on  the  side  where  the
pain  is ;  set  by  the  fire  covered  by  a  blanket,  and  breathe
the  warm  air  from  the  fire ;  this  will  prick  the  glands
and  cause  the  saliva  to  flow  very  freely,  which  will  take
out  the  soreness  and  relieve  the  pain.  The  face  may
be  bathed  at  the  same  time  with  No.  6.  If  tlie  case  is
of  long  standing,  so  that  the  system  is  affected,  and  this
does  not  remove  the  complaint,  give  a  dose  of  No.  1.  If
it  is  caused  by  decayed  teeth,  fill  the  hollow  with  cotton
wool,  wet  with  oil  of  Summersavory,  or  spirits  of  tur-
pentine, which  will  deaden  the  nerve,  and  stop  its  ach-
ing. 'J  his  is  good  in  all  cases  of  the  teeth  ach,  and  will
generally  effect  a  cure  without  extracting.


To  relax  the  muscles  in  setting  u  hone.

This  may  be  done  by  bathing  the  part  with  warm
water,  and  is  much  better  than  the  method  that  is  gener-
ally practised,  by  extending  the  muscles  by  the  strength
of  several  persons,  which  weakens  the  part  so  much
that  the  bones  are  liable  to  get  out  of  place  again ;  be-


or^  Botanic  Famivy  Physician,  279

sides  the  operation  causes  severe  pain  to  t'he  patient  and
much  trouble  to  the  operator,  which  is  all  obviated  by
my  method.  In  cases  where  a  joint  is  pvit  out  or  a  bone
broken,  give  a  dose  of  No.  2,  or  the  composition  pow-
der, with  half  a  tea  spoonful  of  nerve-powder,  which
will  promote  a  perspiration,  prevent  fainting,  and  quiet
the  nerves ;  then  wrap  the  part  in  cloths  wet  with
water  as  hot  as  it  can 'be  borne,  and  pour  on  the  warm
water,  placing  a  pan  underneath  to  catch  it,  for  a  short
time,  when  the  muscles  will  become  relaxed,,  so  that
the  bones  may  be  put  in  their  place  with  little  trouble.

I  was  once  called  to  a  woman  who  had  put  her  elbow
out  of  joint  by  a  fall  from  her  horse.  It  was  badly  out,
being  twisted  about  one  quarter  of  the  way  round.  I
ordered  some  water  to  be  made  hot  immediately,  strip-
ped her  arm,  and  as  soon  as  the  water  was  hot,  put  a
towel  in  a  large  tin  pan  and  poured  the  hot  water  on  it
till  well  wet,  as  soon  as  cool  enough,  wrapped  it  round
her  arm  from  her  wrist  to  her  shoulder ;  then  placed
the  pan  under  her  arm,  and  poured  on  the  water  from  a
pitcher,  as  hot  as  she  could  bear  it,  for  about  fifteen
minutes.  I  then  took  off  the  towel,  and  directed  one
person  to  take  hold  of  the  arm  above  the  elbow  and  an-
other below,  to  steady  it;  and  then  placed  my  fingers
against  the  end  of  the  bone  on  the  under  side,  and  my
thumb  against  that  on  the  upper  side,  and  by  a  gentle
pressure  each  way  set  the  joint  without  pain,  or  force
on  the  muscles,  to  the  astonishment  of  all  present,  who
calculated  that  it  would  require  the  strength  of  several
men.  I  then  wrapped  it  up  with  the  same  towel,  which
had  become  cold ;  this  brought  the  muscles  to  their
proper  tone  and  kept  the  joint  firm  in  its  place  ;  put
her  arm  in  a  sling,  and  she  walked  home  that  night,
about  a  mile,  and  the  next  day  was  well  enough  to  knit
all.  day.

In  case  a  shoulder  is  out  of  joint,  I  relax  the  muscles  in
the  same  manner,  and  put  the  arm  over  my  shoulder
and  lift  up,  which  has  alwa^'S  put  the  joint  in  its  place,
without  iiny  danger  and  with  very  little  pain  to  the  pa-
"tipnt ;  and  then  by  applying  cold  water,  the  muscles
will  become  braced,  so  that  there  will  be  no  danger  of
iU  getting  out  again. I knew  of  a  case  where  a  man


280  Kew  Guide  to  Health


had  his  hip  turned  out,  and  several  doctors  had  exhaust-
ed all  their  skill  in  vain  to  set  it ;  when  one  of  my  agents
being  present,  Qndertook  it  by  my  plan  of  treatment,
and  alter  he  had  relaxed  the  muscles  sufficiently,  put
his  knee  against  the  hip  joint,  and  placing  his  hand  on
the  inside  of  the  knee,  turned  the  leg  out  and  crowded
the  joint  into  its  place  without  any  difficulty.

Poison  by  Ivy  or  Dogwood.

Many  people  are  troubled  with  this  difficulty  every
season,  and  1  have  been  much  afflicted  with  it  myself  in
my  younger  days,  often  being  poisoned  in  such  manner
as  to  swell  and  break  out  very  badly,  and  knew  no  rem-
edy but  to  let  it  have  its  course,  which  was  almost  as
bad  as  the  small  pox.  One  of  my  sons  was  often  affict-
ed  in  this  way,  and  one  season  was  poisoned  three  times,
so  as  to  be  blind  for  several  days.  I  long  sought  a
remedy  without  success,  till  I  found  it  in  the  emetic
herb.  By  washing  with  a  tincture  of  the  green  plant,
as  directed  in  the  second  preparation  of  the  emetic  herb,
on  the  first  appearance  of  the  disease,  is  a  certain  rem-
edy. If  the  complaint  has  been  for  any  length  of  time
and  has  become  bad,  it  will  be  necessary  to  take  a  dose
of  the  powdered  emetic,  (first  preparation)  to  clear  the
system  of  the  poison,  at  the  same  time  of  washing  with
the  tincture.  A  tea  made  of  the  powdered  leaves  and
pods,  will  do  to  wash  with,  when  the  tincture,  or  green
plant  cannot  be  had.  The  powdered  seeds,  with  Nos.
2  and  6,  (third  preparation)  may  also  be  used  for  the
same  purpose.

Mtaslei^
This  disease  is  very  common,  especially  among  chil-
dren, and  is  often  attended  with  bad  consequences,  when
not  properly  treated.  It  is  a  high  state  of  canker  and
putrifaction ;  and  if  the  determining  powers  are  kept
to  the  surface,  it  will  make  its  appearance  on  the  out-
side, and  go  off  of  itself;  but  if  cold  overpowers  the  in-
ward heat,  so  as  to  turn  the  determining  powers  inwards,
the  disease  will  not  make  its  appearance,  and  the  patient
will  become  much  distressed,  frequently  producing  fatal


BTy Botanic  Family  Physician.  2B1

consequences,  if  some  powerful  stimulant  is  not  admin-
istered to  bring  the  disorder  out.  To  give  physick  in
cases  of  this  kind  is  very  dangerous,  as  it  strengthens  the
power  of  cold  and  keeps  the  canker  and  pntrifaction  in-
side, which  sometimes  seats  upon  the  lungs  and  causes
consumption  ;  or  turns  to  the  stomach  and  bowels,  when
they  die  suddenly,  as  has  been  the  case  with  hundreds,
for  the  two  years  past.  I  have  attended  a  great  many
eases  of  the  measles  in  the  course  of  my  practice  and
never  lost  one  ;  and  never  have  known  of  any  that  have
died  of  this  disorder,  who  were  attended  by  any  of  my
agents.  When  the  symptoms  make  their  appearance,
give  a  dose  of  the  composition  powder,  or  of  No  2  ;
then  give  the  tea  of  No.  3  to  guard  against  canker,  and
add  some  No.  2  to  overpower  the  cold  ;  and  when  the
second  dose  is  given  add  No.  1,  to  clear  the  stomach
and  promote  perspiration ;  as  soon  as  this  takes  place
the  disorder  will  show  itself  on  the  outside.  By  con-
tinuing to  keep  the  determining  power  to  the  surface,
nature  will  take  its  regular  course,  and  the  disease  will
go  oif  without  injuring  the  constitution.  If  the  bowels
appear  to  b.e  disordered  give  an  injection  ;  and  be  care-
ful to  keep  the  patient  warm.

i  once  had  a  case  of  a  young  woman  who  had,  the
measles;  she  hngered  with  the  symptoms  four  or  five
days,  and  then  become  very  sick,  turned  of  a  dark  pur-
ple colour,  and  a  high  fever,  when  I  w^as  called  to  at-
tend her.  I  gave  her  a  strong  dose  of  No.  3  steeped,
and  put  in  it  a  spoonful  of  the  third  preparation  of  No.
1,  which  caused  such  a  violent  struggle  that  I  had  to
hold  her  in  the  bed ;  but  it  was  soon  over,  for  in  about
ten  minutes  she  vomitted  and  there  was  a  perspiration,
which  was  followed  by  the  measles  coming  out,  so  that
she  was  completely  Covered  with  the  erruption.  She
was  soon  well  and  about  her  work.


Small  Pox,

This  disease  is  the  highest  state  of  'canker  and  putri-

faction,  which  the  human  body  is  capable  of  receiving,

and  is  the most  contagious, being  taken  in with the

breath, or may  be  communicated  by  inoculation, in

Z  2


282  J^ew  Guide  to  Health  f

which  case  it  is  not  so  violent  and  dangerous  as  when
taken  the  natural  way.  The  distressing  and  often  fatal
consequences  that  have  happened  in  cases  of  the  small
pox,  are  more  owing  to  the  manner  in  which  it  has
been  treated  than  to  the  disease.  The  fashionable
mode  of  treatment  in  this  disease  has  been  to  give  phys-
ick  and  reduce  the  strength  by  starving  the  patient  and
keeping  them  cold.  This  is  contrary  to  common  sense,
as  it  weakens  the  friend  and  strengthens  the  enemy ;
and  the  same  cause  would  produce  similar  effects  in  any
other  disorder.  All  that  is  necessary  is  to  assist  nature
to  drive  out  the  canker  and  putrifaction,  which  is  the
cause  of  the  disease,  by  keeping  the  determining  powers
to  the  surface,  in  which  case  there  will  be  no  danger.
The  same  manner  of  treatment  should  be  used  in  this
complaint  as  has  been  directed  for  the  measles.  The
canker-rash,  and  all  kinds  of  disease  that  a  person  is  not
liable  to  have  but  once,  such  as  chicken-pox,  swine
pox,  &c.  are  from  the  same  cause  and  must  be  treated
iR  a  similar  manner.


Cough,

The  general  opinion  is  that  cough  is  an  enemy  to^
heahh,  and  ought  to  be  treated  as  such  ;  but  this  idea  I
hold  to  be  altogether  an  error,  for  it  is  the  effect  and
not  the  cause  of  disease.  When  the  lungs  are  diseased
there  will  be  a  collection  of  matter,  which  must  be
thrown  off,  and  the  cough  is  like  the  pump  of  a  ship,
which  discharges  the  water  and  prevents  her  from  sink-
ing ;  so  also  the  cough  throws  off  what  collects  on  the
lungs,  which  if  suffered  to  remain  there  would  soon  pu-
trify  and  cause  death.  It  is  a  comroon  saying,  that  I  have
a  bad  cough  and  can  get  nothing  to  stop  it  ,•  and  the
doctor  often  says,  if  I  could  stop  your  cough,  I  should
have  hopes  of  a  cure  ;  but  this  is  as  unreasonable  as  it
would  be  to  stop  the  pumps  of  a  ship,  which  would  cause
her  to  sink  the  sooner.  Ask  a  sailor  what  he  would  do  and
he  would  say,  keep  the  pump  going  till  you  can  stop  the
leak,  and  when  that  is  stopped  the  pump  will  become
useless,  as  there  will  be  nothing  to  throw  off.  Such
medicine  should  be  given  as  will  promote  the cough,.


or^  Botanic  Family  Physician.  283

till  the  cause  can  be  removed,  which  is  cold  and
canker  on  thelun^s;  after  this  is  done  there  will  be
no  more  cough.  If  a  cough  is  caused  by  a  sudden  cold,
it  may  be  removed  by  taking  the  composition  powder  on
going  to  bed,  with  a  hot  stone  wrapped  in  wet  cloths
put  to  the  feet  to  produce  a  perspiration,  and  at  the
same  time  taking  the  cough  powder,  which  will  make
the  patient  raise  easy,  and  also  help  to  remove  the  cause.
When  the  cough  has  become  seated  and  the  lunjj^s  are
diseased,  they  must  be  carried  through  a  regular  course
of  the  medicine,  repeating  the  same  as  occasion  may  re-
quire till  a  cure  is  effected,  at  the  same  time  giving  the
cough  powder,  especially  on  going  to  bed.

Whooping-cough  must  be  treated  in  the  same  manner  ;
continue  to  give  the  cough-powders  till  cured.


Jaundice,

Much  has  been  said  about  the  bile,  or  gall,  being  an
enemy  in  case  of  sickness ;  but  this  is  a  mistake,  for  it
is  a  friend  and  should  be  treated  as  such.  It  is  the  main-
spring to  life  and  the  regulator  of  health,  as  with-
out it  the  food  could  not  be  digested.  When,
people  have  what  is  called  the  jaundice  it  is  the  pre-
vailing opinion  that  they  have  too  much  bile,  and  it  is
said  they  are  billions ;  this  is  a  mistaken  notion,  for
there  is  no  such  thing  as  being  too  much  gall,  it  would
be  more  correct  to  say  there  was  not  enough.  The
difficulty  is  caused  by  the  stomach  being  cold  and  foul,,
so  that  the  food  is  not  properly  digested  ;  and  the  bile
not  being  appropriated  to  its  natural  use,  is  diffused'
through  the  pores  of  the  skin,  which  becomes  of  a  yel-
low colour.  The  symptoms  are  want  of  appetite,  cos-
tiveness,  faintness  and  the  patient  will  be  dull  and  sleepy  ;
these  are  evidence  of  bad  digesture  and  loss  of  inward
heat.  The  only  way  to  effect  a  cure  is  to  promote  per-
spiration, cleanse  the  stomach,  and  restore  the  digestive
powers,  which  will  cause  the  bile  to  be  used  for  the
purpose  nature  designed  it.

Nature  has  contrived  that  each  part  of  the  body
should  perform  its  proper  duty  in  maintaining  health,
and  if  there  i3  no  obstruction  there  would  never  be  dis-


284  JVcw  Guide  to  Health  ,

ease.  The  gall  bladder  grows  on  the  liver  and  is  plac-
ed between  that  and  the  stomach,  so  that  when  the  lat-
te  is  filled  with  food,  the  bile  is  discharged  into  the
stomach  to  digest  it.  The  bile  never  makes  disorder,
for  it  is  perfectly  innocent,  being  nature's  friend  ;  and
those  appearances  called  billions,  show  the  effect  of
disease  and  not  the  cause.  The  gall  is  a  very  bitter
substance,  and  it  is  the  practice  of  the  doctors  to  order
bitter  medicine  to  cure  the  jaundice,  and  this  seems  to
be  the  universal  opinion,  which  is  correct ;  but  it  cer-
tainly contradicts  the  notion  that  there  is  too  much  bile,
for  if  there  is  too  much,  why  give  medicine  to  make
more  ?  1  have  attended  many  cases  of  this  kind  and  never
had  any  difficulty  in  effecting  a  cure.  My  method  is  to
give  No.  2,  or  the  composition  powders,  to  raise  the  in-
ternal heat,  and  No.  I,  to  cleanse  the  stomach  and  pro-
mote perspiration;  then  give  the  bitters  (No.  4,)  to  reg-
ulate the  bile  and  restore  the  digestive  powers.  If  the
complaint  has  been  of  long  standing  and  the  system  is
much  disordered,  they  must  be  carried  through  a  reg-
ular course  of  the  medicine,  and  repeat  it  as  occasion
may  require,  at  the  same  time  give  the  bitters  two  or
three  times  a  day  till  the  appetite  is  good  and  the  di-
the  head  of  No.  4,  are  good,  and  may  be  freely  used  for
all  billious  complaints.


Worms,

A  great  deal  is  said  about  worms  causing  sickness,  and
there  is  scarcely  a  disease  that  children  are  afflicted
with,  but  what  is  attributed  to  worms.  The  doctors  talk
about  worm  complaints,  worm  fevers,  worm  cholics,  &c.
and  give  medicine  to  destroy  the  worms ;  by  so  doing
they  frequently  destroy  their  patients.  There  was  nev-
er a  greater  absurdity  than  their  practice,  and  the  uni-
versal opinion  about  worms  causing  disease.  The  fact
is  they  are  created  and  exist  in  the  stomach  and  bowels
for  a  useful  purpose,  and  are  friendly  to  healthy  instead
of  being  an  enemy ;  they  are  bred  and  supported  by  the
cold  phlegm  that  collects  in the  stomach  and  bowels,


or^  Botanic  Family  Physician.  285

this  is  their  element ;  and  the  more  there  is  of  it  the
more  there  will  be  of  the  worms  ;  they  never  cause  dis-
ease, but  are  caused  by  it.  Those  who  are  in  health
are  never  troubled  with  worms,  because  they  are  then
quiet  and  exist  in  their  natural  element;  every  one  has
more  or  less  of  them  ;  and  the  reason  why  children  are
more  troubled  with  what  is  called  worm  complaints,  is
because  they  are  more  subject  to  be  disordered  in  their
stomach  and  bowels  than  grown  persons.  When  chil-
dren are  sick  and  their  breath  smells  bad,  it  is  said  they
have  worms  and  every  thing  is  laid  to  them ;  but  this  is
owing  to  disease  caused  by  canker,  for  there  is  nothing
in  the  nature  of  worms  that  can  affect  the  breath.  In
cases  of  this  kind  the  only  thing  necessary  is  to  cleanse
the  stomach  by  getting  rid  of  the  cold  phlegm,  and  restor-
ing the  digestive  powers,  when  there  will  be  no  diliicul-
ty  with  the  worms.

The  common  practice  of  the  doctors  is  to  give  calo-
mel and  other  poisons  to  kill  the  worms ;  this  must  ap-
pear to  any  one  who  examines  into  the  subject  to  be
very  wrong  as  well  as  dangerous ;  for  the  worms  can-
not be  killed  by  it,  without  poisoning  the  whole  contents
of  the  stomach.  T  once  knew  of  a  case  of  a  child  who
after  eating  a  breakfast  of  bread  and  milk,  was  taken  sick;
a  doctor  was  sent  for,  who  said  it  was  caused  by  worms,
and  gave  a  dose  of  calomel  to  destoy  them,  which  caus-
ed fits  ;  the  child  vomitted  and  threw  up  its  breakfast;
a  dog  that  happened  to  be  in  the  room  eat  what  the  child
threw  up;  he  was  soon  taken  sick  and  died:  the  child
got  well.  The  fortunate  accident  of  the  child's  throw-
ing off  its  stomach  v/hat  it  had  taken,  probably  saved  its
life,  for  if  there  was  poison  enough  to  kill  a  dog,  it  must
have  killed  the  child.  The  absurdity  of  such  practice
is  like  the  stor^?  related  by  Dr.  Franklin,  of  a  man  who
vva3  troubled  with  a  weazle  in  his  barn,  and  to  get  rid  of
the  weazle  he  sat  fire  to  his  barn  and  burnt  it  up.  I  had
the  following  rclation'from  the  doctor  who  attended  th^e
cases;  three  children  had  what  he  called  a  worm  i\t\(ir\
and  he  undertook  to  kill  the  woims.  One  of  th«^m  died
and  he  requested  liberty  to  open  it  to  see  whtit  would
destroy  worms,  in  order  to  know  how  to  cure  the  others  ;


286  JVew  Guide  to  Health  ;

but  the  parpnts  would  not  consent.  The  second  died
and  the  parents  consented  to  have  it  opened;  but  after
searching  the  stomach  and  bowels,  to  their  surprise  no
worms  could  be  found.  The  third  soon  after  died.  The
fact  was  their  death  was  caused  by  canker  on  the  stom-
ach and  bowels,  and  the  medicine  given  increased  the
difficulty  by  drawing  the  determining  powers  inward,
which  aided  the  cold  to  promote  the  canker.  Where
children  die  b}^  such  treatment  the  blame  is  all  laid  to
the  worms,  and  the  doctor  escapes  censure.

1  hive  had  a  great  deal  of  experience  in  what  are
called  worm  complaints,  and  after  having  become  ac-
quainted with  the  real  cause,  have  had  no  difficulty  in
curing  all  that  I  have  undertakea^with.  I  began  with
my  own  children.  One  of  them  was  troubled  with
what  are  supposed  to  be  worms ;  1  employed  a  doctor,
who  gave  pink  root,  and  then  physick  to  carry  it  oif  with
the  worms.  It  would  shortly  after  have  another  turn,
which  would  be  worse  ;  he  went  on  in  this  way  and  the
worms  kept  increasing,  till  I  became  satisfied  that  he
was  working  on  the  effect,  and  neglected  the  cause  ;  when
1  dismissed  him  and  undertook  the  cure  myself  I  first-
ly gave  the  warmest  medicine  l.then  knew  of  to  clear
off  the  cold  phlegm ;  and  gave  bitter  medicine,  such  as
poplar  bark,  wormwood,  tanzy,  and  physick  made  of  the
twigs  of  butternut,  to  cleanse  the  stomach  and  to  cof*
rect  the  bile.  By  pursuing  this  plan  the  child  soon  got
well  and  was  no  more  troubled  with  worms.  A  child
in  the  neighbourhood  where  I  lived,  about  six  years  old,
was  taken  sick  in  the  morning,  and  the  doctor  was  sent
for,  who  gave  medicine  for  worms ;  soon  after  it
had  fits,  and  continued  in  convulsions  dunng  the
day,  and  at  night  died.  1  was  satisfied  that  its  death
was  hastened  if  not  caused  by  what  was  given.  When
rhe  stomach  is  diseased,  or  when  poison  is  taken  into  it,
ihe  worms  try  to  flee  from  their  danger,  which  causes
distress,  and  they  sometimes  get  into  knots  and  stop  the
passages  to  the  stomach.  Much  more  might  be  said  on
this  subject;  but  enough  has  been  stated  to  put  those
who  attend  to  it  on  their  guard  against  the  danger-
ous  practice  of  giving  medicine  to  kill  the  worms.


or^  Botanic  Family  Physician.  287

My  practice  has  been  and  *hall  recommend  to  others
to  do,  in  case  of  what  is  called  worm  complaints,  to  give
the  composition  powders,  or  No.  2,  to  warm  the  sto-
mach, a  tea  of  No.  3,  to  remove  the  canker,  and  the
to  correct  the  bile.  Ifthey  are  bad  carry  them  through
a  course  of  the  medicine,  and  *i;ive  the  bitters.  When
there  are  nervous  symptoms  give  the  nerve  powder.
Injections  should  also  be  frequently  given.  Th.e  but-
ternut syrup  is  very  good,  if  there  should  be  danger  of
mortification  make  use  of  No.  6,  both  in  the  medicine
given  and  in  the  injections.

The  tape-worm  is  from  the  same  cause  as  other
worms,  and  may  be  curad  in  the  same  manner.  They  are
when  single  about  half  an  inch  long  and  one  third  as  wide  ;
they  join  together  and  appear  like  tape,  and  often  come
away  in  long  pieces  of  several  yards.  I  was  once  troub-
led with  them,  and  used  to  be  faint  and  no  appetite  ;
I  cured  myself  by  taking  the  butternut  physick,  which
brought  away  several  yards  at  a  time  ;  and  by  taking  the
bitter  medicine  to  correct  the  bile,  was  never  troubled
with  it  again.

I  have  often  heard  about  people  having  a  greedy-
worm;  but  this  is  a  mistaken  notion,  for  there  was  nev-
er any  such  thing.  The  difficulty  is  the  stomach  being
cold  "and  disordered,  so  that  the  food  is  not  properly
digested,  passes  off  without  nourishing  the  system,  and
ttiis  creates  an  unnatural  appetite.  Remove  the  cause
by  warming  the  stomach  and  correcting  the  digestive
powers,  and  there  will  be  no  further  difficulty.  In  the?^
year  18U5  [  was  call(?d  to  see  a  young  woman  who  it
was  supposed  had  a  greedy-worm.  It  was  thought  to
be  very  large,  and  would  frequently  get  into  her  throat
and  choak  her,  almost  stopping  her  breath.  Her  moth-
er told  me  that  the  day  before  one  of  the  neighbours
was  in  and  told  a  story  about  a  person  having  a  monster
in  their  stomach,  which  was  taken  in  by  drinking  at  a
brook;  this  terrible  account  so  frightened  her  daughter,
that  the  worm  rose  into  her  throat  and  choaked  her  so
bad  that  she  had  fits.  I  took  the  girl  home  with  me
and  gave  her  a  dose of  hot bitters,  with  some  of  the


588  JVcoW  Guide  to  Health  ;

nerve  powder  that  night ;  the  next  morning  I  carried
her  through  a  course  of  the  medicine  as  well  as  I  knew
at  that  time,  which  cleared  the  stomach  and  bowels  and
strengthened  the  nervous  system.  I  told  her  there  was
no  worm  that  troubled  her,  and  she  had  faith  in  what  1
said.  1  gave  her  medicine  to  correct  the  bile  and  re-
store the  digesture  and  she  soon  got  well,  being  no
more  troubled  about  the  worm.  The  difficulty  was
caused  by  a  disordered  stomach  and  want  of  digesture,
which  produced  spasms  in  the  stomach  and  throat.


Consumplion*

'I  his  complaint  is  generally  caused  b}'  some  acute
disorder  not  being  removed,  and  the  patient  being  run
down  by  the  fashionable  practice,  until  nature  makes
a  compromise  with  disease,  and  the  house  becomes  di-
vided against  itself.  There  is  a  constant  warfare  kept
up  between  the  inward  heat  and  cold,  the  flesh  wastes
away  in  conse(pience  of  not  digesting  the  i'ood,  the  can-
ker "becomes  seated  on  the  stomach  and  bowels  and
then  takes  hold  of  the  lungs.  When  they  get  into  this
situation  it  is  called  a  seated  consumj)tion,  and  is  pro-
nounced by  the  doctors  to  be  incurable.  I  have  had  a
great  manv  cases  of  this  kind  and  have  in  all  of  them,
where  tiierc  was  life  enough  left  to  build  upon,  been
able  to  elVect  a  cure  by  my  system  of  practice.  I'he
most  important  thing  is  to  raise  the  inward  he^t  and  get
a  (Hrspiration,  cleUr  the  system  of  canker,  and  restore
the  digestive  powers,  so  that  food  will  nourish  the  body
and  keep  uj)  that  heat  on  which  life  depends.  This
must  be  done  by  the  regular  course  of  medicine,  as  has
been  directed  in  all  violent  attacks  of  disease,  and  per-
severing in  it  till  the  cause  is  removed.

This  complaint  is  called  by  the  doctors  a  hectic  fe-
ver, because  they  are  subject  to  cold  chills  and  hot  tlash-
e«  on  the  surfa:e  ;  but  this  is  an  error,  for  there  is  no
ftver  about  it ;  and  this  is  the  greatest  difficulty,  if
there  was  it  would  have  a  crisis  and  nature  would  be  able
to  drive  out  the  cold  and  effect  a  cure ;  the  only  >diflicuUjr
is  to  raise  a  fever,  which  must  be  done  by  such  medi-
cine as  will  raise  and  hold  the  iaward  heat,  till  nature


«r,  Botanic  Famtiy  Physician.  289

has  the  compete  command.  When  the  patient  is  very
weak  and  low  they  will  have  what  is  called  cold  sweats  ;
the  cause  of  this  is  not  understood;  the  water  that  col-
lects on  the  skin  does  not  come  through  the  pores,  but  is
attracted  «from  the  air  in  the  room,  which  is  warmer
than  the  body,  and  condences  on  the  surface  ;  the  same
mny  be  seen  on  the  outside  of  a  mu.o-  or  tumbler  on  a
hot  day,  when  filled  with  cold  water,  which  is  fi'om  the
same.cause.  It  is  of  more  importance  to  attend  to.  the
preventing  this  complaint  than  to  cure  it.  If  people
would  make  use  of  those  means  which  I  have  recom-
mended, and  cure  themselves  of  disease  in  its  fir-t  ila-
ges,  and  avoid  all  poisonous  drugs,  there  would  never
be  a  case  of  consumption  or  any  other  chronic  disorder.

FitS'

These  are  produced  by  the  same  cause  as  other  com-
plaints, that  is,  cold  and  obstructions  ;  and  may  be  cur-
ed by  a  regular  course  of  the  medicine,  which  over-
powers the  cold,  promotes  perspiration,  and  restores  the
digestive  powers.  Poison,  or  any  thing  else,  which
gives  the  cold  power  over  the  inward  heat,  will  cause
fits,  because  the  natural  tone  of  the  muscular  power  is
thereby  destroyed,  which  produces  violent  spasms  on
the  whole  sj'^stem.  So  much  has  already  been  said  on
this  subject,  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  say  more,  to  give
a  correct  idea  of  the  manner  of  cure.


SL  Anthony's  Fire,  Js^ellle  ^pring^  or  Surfeit*

These  are  all  caused  by  over  heating  the  system  and
cooling  too  suddenly,  which  leaves  the  pores  obstructed,
and  then  by  taking  more  coid  will  bring  on  the  warfare
between  cold  and  heat,  when  they  break  out  and  itch
and  smart,  as  if  stung  by  an  insect  When  the  heat  gets
a  little  the  upper  hand,  so  as  to  produce  perspiration,  it
will  disappear  till  they  get  another  coid.  The  only  way
to  effect  a  cure  is  to  give  the  hot  mcdicino,  and  steam
till  they  are  brought  to  the  same  state  of  heat  as  that
which  first  caused  the  disease,  and  then  cool  by  degrees.
Thi*j  1  have  proved  in  several  instances,  and  never  liad

Aa


i^


290  JVew  Guide  to  Health  ;

any  difficulty  in  entirely  removing  the  cause  in  this  way.
Make  use  of  a  tea  of  No.  3,  for  canker,  and  the  bitters
to  correct  the  bile,  and  a  little  nerve  powder  to  quiet
the  nerves,  and  they  will  soon  be  restored  to  perfect
health.


Slranguary^  or  Gravel.

This  disorder  is  often  caused  by  hard  labour,  and  ex-
posure to  cold,  in  the  early  part  of  liie  ;  and  when  they
grow  old  their  heat  diminishes,  the  bile  becomes  thick,
and  a  sediment  collects  in  the  bladder,  which  obstructs
the  passages  :  the  glands  through  which  the  urine
passes,  are  clogged  and  become  diseased,  so  that  there
is  a  diliiculty  in  voiding  the  water,  which  causes  great
pain.  It  is  seldom  that  there  is  a  cure  in  such  cases  ;
but  relief  may  be  obtained,  by  a  course  of  the  medicine,
and  making  free  use  of  the  poplar  bark  tea.  A  tea  of
the  hemlock  boughs  is  very  good ;  and  also  1  have
known  great  rehef  from  using  the  wild  lettuce  and  pip-
sisway,  the  tops  and  roots  bruised  and  steeped  in  hot
water.  Many  other  articles  that  are  good  to -promote
the  urijae^  may  be  used  to  advantage.


ft*
I


Dropsy*

There  are  two  kinds  of  this  complaint ;  one  is  caused
by  losing  the  inward  heat  so  as  to  stop  the  natural  per-
spiration, which  causes  the  water  that  is  usually  thrown
off  in  this  way,  to  collect  in  the  body  and  limbs.  This
may  be  cured  by  raising  the  internal  heat  and  causing
n  profuse  perspiration,  when  the  water  will  pass  off  in  a
natural  way  ;  then  make  use  of  such  medicine  a  will
remove  cii.nker  and  restore  the  digestive  powers,  when
the  food  being  digested  will  keep  up  the  natural  heat
of  the  body  and  continue  the  perspiration.  The  other
kind  is  caused  by  cold  and  obstruction ;  but  instead  of
the  water  collecting  and  remaining  in  the  body  and
limbs,  a  leak  forms  in  the  glands  and  lets  it  into  the
trunk  of  the  body,  where  there  is  no  vent  to  let  it  off.
This  cannot  be  cured  without  tapping,  and  it  is  very  sel-
dom completely cured. I  have  never  known  but  two


/.


>•  ar  Tstrcia,


or^  Botanic  Family  Physician,  291

who  were  in  this  situation  to  be  perfectly  restored.  One
was  a  girl  who  I  attended  ;  I  tapped  her  and  took  away
seventeen  pounds  of  water  ;  then  swathed  her  up  close,
and  gave  medicine  to  keep  a  perspiration,  she  did  not
fill  again  and  was  completely  cured.  The  other  was  a
man,  he  had  been  tapped  twice.  I  carried  him  through
the  course  of  medicine  several  times,  and  gav«  the  juni-
per ashes  with  molasses  and  gin,  which  carried  off  large
quantities  of  water,  and  he  entirely  recovered  from  the
disorder.  I  have  cured  a  number  who  had  the  first
mentioned  complaint,  by  the  common  course  of  medi-
cine ;  one  woman  was  cured  by  taking  the  wild  lettuce,
bruised  and  steeped  in  hot  water.  Men  tion  has  been
made  of  several  cases  of  this  disease  in  my:  narrative,
which  were  cured ;  and  enough  has  been  said  to  give
an  idea. of  the  cause  and  manner  of  treatment.


BilUous  Cliolico

The  name  given  this  complaint  is  erroneous,  for  bill-
ions means  the  bile,  and  no  one  ever  heard  of  a  bile
cholic,  or  pain  caused  by  gall,  as  it  is  a  friend  to  health
and  never  caused  disease  or  death.  This  pain  is  caused
by  a  disordered  stomach  and  want  of  digesture  ;  the  sto-
mach is  filled  with  canker,  which  gets  into  the  narrow
passage  from  the  stomach,  when  the  action  of  the  bowels
cease  ;  after  the  pain  subsides  those  parts  where  it  was
are  very  sore.  To  cure  it  raise  the  inward  heat  by
giving  the  hot  medicine,  remove  the  canker  with  No.  3,
and  give  the  bitters  to  correct  the  bile,  and  repeat  it
till  a  cure  is  effected.  If  the  case  is  bad  carry  them
through  a  course  of  the  medicine,  and  often  give  injec-
tions.


Fleuriny,

This  is  a  distressing  complaint  and  is  caused  by  cold,
or  want  of  inward  heat;  I  never  had  any  difficulty  in
curing  it  by  my  common  practice.  The  only  remedy
made  use  of  by  the  doctors  is  to  bleed  ;  this  only  increa-
ses the  disease,  by  reducing  the  strength  of  the  patient,
without removing  the cause. I  was  once  called  to  a


29S  •S^'ew  Guide  to  Health  /

soldier  at  Eastport,  who  had  a  violent  pain  in  his  side ;
the  doctor  that  attended  him,  had  bled  him  five  times,
without  removing  the  pain,  which  made  him  so  weak
that  it  was  with  difficulty  he  could  be  held  up  in  the
bed.  I  relieved  him  in  one  hour  by  a  common  course
of  medicine  and  bathing  his  side  with  the  rheumatic
drops.  It  took  three  weeks  to  get  up  his  strength,  which
might  have  been  done  in  three  days  if  he  had  not  been
bled.  I  was  called  to  another  case  of  the  kind,  of  a  sol-
dier at  the  same  place.  He  had  been  bled  and  a  large
blister  put  on  his  side  to  remove  the  pain,  which  caused
a  stranguary  and  he  was  in  great  distress.  I  declined
doing  any  thing  for  him  without  the  consent  of  the  com-
manding officer,  who  was  not  present.  The  soldier  beg-
ged of  me  to  tell  him  what  to  do  for  the  latter  complaint,
as  he  could  not  live  so.  I  told  him  to  take  off  the  blis-
ter, which  was  immediately  done,  and  it  gave  instant  re-
lief By  carrying  them  through  a  course  of  medicine,
as  has  been  directed  for  other  violent  attacks,  will  cure
all  cases  of  this  complaint,  without  danger ;  and  is  much
better  than  bleeding  or  blisters,  which  increase  the  dif-
ficulty.

Relax*

This  complaint  is  caused  by  indigestion,  or  loss  of  the
powers  of  the  gall,  which  becomes  thick,  in  conse-
quence of  cold,  or  loss  of  inward  heat,  when  the  stom-
ach will  be  sour.  The  best  remedy  is  to  give  No.  2,
which  will  thin  the  gall ;  cleanse  the  stomach  with  No.
1,  and  give  the  bitters  to  correct  the  digesture.  A  dose
of  the  composition  powders  with  a  tea-spoonful  of  No.  6,
in  it,  will  in  most  cases  effect  a  cure.  The  bayberry
and  poplar  bark  is  good,  and  also  many  other  articles
powers.

Di/seiitery,
This  is  a  distressing  complaint,  and  is  very  common,
especially  among  children ;  although  much  has  already
been  said  on  this  subject:  yet  its  importance  will  justify


0^,  Botanic  Family  Physician.  293

some  further directions. It  is caused by  cold, which
gets  the  ascendency  over  the  inward  heat  so  as  to  draw
all  the  determining  powers  inward  ;  the  stomach  is  dis-
ordered, the  digestive powers  are lost,  tlie  bowels  be-
come coated  with  canker,  the  food  is  not  digested  so  as
to  afford  any  nourishment  or  heat  to  the  system,  and  all
the  juices  flow  inward  and  pass  off  by the  common  pas-
sage. The  canker  makes the  bowels \ery  sore,  and
when  any  thing  passes  them  it  causes  excrutiating  pain.
The best plan  of  treatment is to carry  the patient
through  a  regular  course  of  medicine, and  repeat  it,  if
occasion  should  require,  every  day  till  relief  is  obtained.
During  the  operation  give  the  chicken  broth,  and  after
the  disease  is  checked,  give  occasionally  a  little  brandy
and  loaf  sugar  burned  together,  and a  strong  tea  of  pop-
lar bark. Give  the  syrup,  (No.  5) two  or  three  times
a  day  until  entirely  recovered  ;  and  the  bitters,  (No.  4)
may  be  given  night  and  morning  to  restore  the  digesture.
Care  must  be  taken  to  keep  up  the inward  heat  in  the
interim, by  giving  occasionally  No.  2  in  a  tea  of  No.  3,  .
sweetened. Steaming  is  very important  in  this  com-
plaint, and  injections  must  often  be  administered.


Rheumatism,  -

This  complaint  is  caused  by  cold  obstructing  the  nat-
ural circulation,  which  causes  pain  and  swelling.  It  of-
ten affects  the  joints  so  that  they  grow  out  of  shape.
A  cure  is  easily  effected  if  timely  and  properly  attended
ta^  which  must  be  done  by  such  medicine  as  will  cause
perspiration  and  remove  obstructions.  In  common  cases
by  taking  the  rheumatic  drops,  and  bathing  the  part  af-
fected with  the  same  will  remove  the  complaint.  When
the  case  is  bad,  carry  them  .through  a  course  of  the
medicine  and  bathe  with  the  drops,  repeating  it  as  oc-
casion may  require  till  cured.  At  the  same  time  give
a  tea  of  poplar  bark  or  hemlock  boughs  ;  and  many  other,
complaint,  may  also  be  made  use  of  to  advantage.

»  he  gout  is  from  the  same  cause,  and the stomach
being  greatly  disordered,  and  very  sour,  which  produces

A  a  2


294  A'Vtt'  Guide  to  Health  ,

a  burning  sensation.  I  have  cured  several  cases  by.  the
common  course  of  medicine,  and  giving  the  bitters  t©
restore  the  digestive  powers.


Sore  Lips.
They  are  common  in  very  hot  or  cold  weather,  when
there  is  nearly  a  balance  of  the  power  of  outward  and
inward  heat,  or  outward  and  inward  cold,  which  pro-
duces canker.  To  cure  it  take  a  strong  dose  of  a  tea  of
No.  3,  with  a  tea-spoonful  of  No.  2  in  it,  when  going  to
bed,  and  wash  them^  with  the  same,  then  wipe  them  dry
to  take  off  the  matter  collected;  then  wet  them  again
with  the  tea,  and  put  on  as  much  ginger  as  will  stick,
repeat  the  same  again  for  two  or  three  times,  till  the
coat  is  sufficient  to  keep  out  the  air,  when  this  comes
off,,  repeat  the  same  process  again,  until  the  soreness  is
gone,  then  wash  again  with  the  tea  and  wipe  them  dry,
and  apply  warm  tallow  till  a  cure  is  completed.

Sore  Eyes,
This  is  generally  caused  by  being  exposed  to  suddea
changes  of  heat  and  cold,  which  produces  canker,  and
where  this  is  there  will  be  inflammation.  There  are
many  things  good  for  this  complaint ;  but  the  best  that
I  have  found  is  white  pond  lily  root,  marshrosemary,
witch-hazle  and  red  raspberry  leaves ;  make  a  strong
tea  with  all  or  either,  and  add  one  third  as  much  of  No.
6,  with  a  little  No.  2;  bathe  the  eyes  several  times  in  a
day;  every  morning  put  your  face  in  cold  water,  open
and  shut  the  eyes  till  w^ll  washed  ;  repeat  this  till  a  cure
is  effected.  At  the  sartie  time  take  the  tea  td  clear
the  system  of  canke^

Head-Ach.
This  pain  proceeds  from  a  foul  stomach,  the  bile  loses
its  power,  the  food  clogs  by  not  being  digested,  and  the.
effect  is  felt  in  the  head,  which  is  the  fountain  of  sense.
Sometimes  there  is  sickness  at  the  stomach ;  when  this
happens  it  is  called  sick  head-ach  and  when  they  vomit
tke  head  is  relieved This  proves  that  the  cause  is 'in


or,  Botanic  Family  Physicia-n.  '  295

the  stomach  It  must  be  cured  by  cleansinc(  the  ."ilomach
and  restoring  the  digestive  powers.  A  dose  of  the  compo-
sition powders,  sitting  by  the  fire  wrapped  in  a  blanket,
will  generally  give  reUef ;  bat  if  it  should  not,  take  a  dose
of  No.  1  in  a  tea  of  N<>.  3,  and  take  the  biltoj-;::  to  correct
the  bile  ;  No.  2  should  also  be  taken  to  warm  the  stom-
ach, and  if  it  is  sour  take  the  pearlash  water.  it  is
very  fashionable  with  the  doctors  to  tell  about  dropsy. ia
the  head,  but  in  this  1  have  no  belief;  for.ihere  is  no
disease  in  the  head  but  what  proceeds  fronj  the  stomach,
except  from  external  injury.  U  they  understood  the
real  cause  and  would  give  the  proper  medicine  to  re-
move it,  there  would  be  no  difliculty  in  (he  head  ;  but
when  a  child  is  sick  they  give  calomel  and  other  poi-
sons, which  increases  the  disease;  and  if  they  die  it  is
laid  to  the  dropsy  in  the  head,  and  this  is  satisfactory
because  the  doctor  sajs.  so,  .


Corns w
These  come  on  the  joints  of  the  toes-  and  are  very
troublesome.  They  may  be.  cured  by  soakiug:  the  foot
in  warm  water  tilhthe  corn  is  soft,  shave  it  thin ;  take  a
strip  of  bladder  or  skin  of  suet,  eight  or  ten  inches  long,
and  half  an  inch  wide,  rub  it  ,  till  soft;  then  soople  it
•well  in  ratle-snake's  oil,  or  the  nerve  ointment ;  wrap  it
round  the  toe  and  keep  it  on  till  worn  out;  if  this  does
not  cure  repeat  the  same  till  the  corn  is  removed.  1
have  seldom  known  this  to  fail  of  a  cure.


Venereal.

The  disease  that  is  called  by  this  name  is  more  com^
mon  in  seaports  than  in  the  country,,  because  there  is
a, more  promiscous  and  ilhcit  intercourse  of  the  sexes,
than  in  other  places.  It  is  a  very  high  state  of  canker
and  putrifaction,  which  takes  hold  of  the  glands  of  those
parts  that  are  first  affected  with  it ;  and  if  not  checked
the  whole  system  will  become  diseased  by  the  venereal
tAiat. It  is  more common  among  seafaring  men,  be-


29c  jYexi}  Guide  to  Health  ; ^

cause  of  their  being  long  absent  at  sea,  and  on
coming"  on  shore,  they  give  free  scope  to  their  passions,
without  being  very  scrupulous  about  the  manner  of  their
iiululgeijce.  it  o.iginates  probabl}'^  with  those  common
women,  who  have  connection  with  many  ditferent  men,
and  going  beyond  the  impulse  of  •  nature  ;  this  impure
connection  causes  uncleanncss,  which  produces  the  dis-
exise,  and  when  seated  is  contagious.

The  reason  why this  disease causes  so much  fright
and  alarm,  is  owing  to  two causes  ;  the  first  is  the  dis-
grace that  is attached to  the  dishonesty in  getting  it ;
and  the  other  is  the  manner  in  which  it has  generally
been  treated,  in  giving  mercury  to  cure  it ;  the  remedy
becomes  woise  than  the disease. That this disorder
cannot  be  cured  by any other  means  is altogether  an
error;  for  1  have  cured  a  number  of  cases  by  very  sim-
ple means. The first  symptoms  felt  is  a  scalding  sen-
sation and pain when voiding the urine ;  and within
tvventy-four  hours  after  this  is experienced,  it  may be
cared  in  that  time,  by  applying .  cold  water  and  making
u«e  of  the  rheumatic  drops;  if  there  is much  soreness
make  use of  the tea  of  No.  3,  with  the  drops in  it;
which  must be  taken as well as  applied  to  the  parts.
If  the  disease  has  been  of  long standing and  the  whole
system  has  become  affected,  they  must  be  carried  through
a  course  of  the  medicine. Where  there  has  been mer-
cury made  nsp  of  and  there  is  all  the  attenda^tt  conse-
quences of  such  treatment,  it  is  much  more difficult  to
cHect  a  cure ;  and  is  only  d  ne  by  a  full course  of  the
medicine,  and  repeating it  for  a  number  of  times  ;  rais-
ing the  heat by steam  each time  as  high  as  they  can
bear,  to  throw  out  the  mercury  and  remove  the  canker,
at  the  same  time  applying  the poultice  ;  then  give  the
bitters  to  correct  the  bile.

I  had  a  case  of  a  woman  who  was  brought  to  me  on  a
bed  fifteen  miles.  She  was  in  a  very  putrid  state  and
as  bad  as  she  could  well  be,  with  all  the  consequences
that  are  caused  by  being  filled  with  mercury.  Different
doctors  had  attended  her  for  eleven  monihs  and  she  had
constantly  been  growing  worse.  She  had  been  kept
ignorant  of  her  disease  till  a  few  days  before  brought  to


t)r,  Botdriic  Family  Physician*  297

Itae,  on  account  of  her  husband.  I  carried  her  threugh
live  courses  of  the  medicine  in  two  weeks,  and  applied
a  poultice  of  white  bread  and  fi^inger  made  with  a  tea  of
No.  3.  This  completely  broke  up  the  disorder,  and  by
giving  medicine  to  correct  the  bile  and  restore  the  di-
gesture,  she  wa^  cured  and  returned  home  in  three
weeks  after  coming  to  me.  By  taking  things  to  restore
her  strength  has  enjoyed  good  health  ever  since.  Anoth-
er woman  was  cured  in  the  same  manner,  who  had  been
in  this  way  for  six  years,  and  unable  to  do  any  business.
1  attended  her  three  weeks,  when  she  was  restored  to
health  and  returned  home.  In  less  than  a  year  after
she  had  two  children  at  a  birth,  and  has  enjoyed  good
health  to  this  day.

This  disease  may  be  produced  by  other  means  than
breath  by  being  much  exposed  in  attending  on  those
who  are  in  a  very  putrid  stage  of  the  complaint ;  or  may
be  communicated  to  parts  where  the  skin  is  broken,  and
in  many  other  ways  ;  when  they  will  have  many  of  the
symptoms  the  same  as  when  taken  in  the  common  way.
Children  will  sometimes  be  affected  with  the  venereal
taint,  whose  parents  have  had  the  disease.  A  disease
similar  in  appearance,  with  much  the  same  sj'mptoms,
may  be  brought  on  by  overdoing  and  being  exposed  to
the  cold.  I  once  had  a  case  of  a  young  married  man,
who  by  straining  himself  in  loading  mill-logs  and  being
exposed  to  wet  and  cold,  caused  a  weakness  in  the  back
and  loins,  and  he  had  what  is  called  a  gleet,  and  an  in-
flammation, with  all  the  symtoms  common  in  the  venereal.
His  wife  became  affected  in  the  same  manner,  and  they
continued  in  this  situation  three  months,  when  I  was
called  to  attend  them  ;  and  by  making  use  of  such  things
as  I  then  had  a  knowledge  of,  to  strengthen  the  loins
and  remove  the  canker,  was  able  to  cure  both  in  a
short  time.  The  man  had  all  the  symptoms  that  appear
in  the  venereal  except  hard  bunches  in  the  groins,  called
buboes.  These  I  am  satisfied  are  caused  by  mercury,
for  I  never  knew  any  to  have  them  except  they  had
taken  mercury.  By  syringing  with  mercury  and  sugar
of  lead,  dries  the  glands  and  contracts  the  passage,  and


^98  JHeta  Guide  to  Health  ,

stops  the  discharge,  when  the  putrid  matter  instead  of
going  off,  collects  in  the  groin  and  forms  hard  tumours,
which  remain  a  long  time  and  have  to  be  brought  to  a
head  to  let  off  the  putrid  matter.  Bunches  of  a  similar
kind  often  come  on  different  parts  of  the  bod}?  caused
by  mercury.

jMuch  more  might  be  written  on  this  subject,  but  it  is
difficult  to  find  proper  terms  to  convey  all  the  direc-
tions that  may  be  necessary  in  all  cases.  Enough  has
been  said  to  give  to  those  who  are  so  unfortunate  as  to
have  the  disease,  a  general  knowledge  of  the  nature  of
the  complaint  and  the  best  manner  of  effecting  a  cure ;
and  to  those  who  are  fortunate  enough  to  escape  it  any
thing  further  will  be  unnecessary.  Those  who  purchase
a  right,  or  who  may  apply  for  assistance,  will  have  such
verbal  directions  as  will  enable  them  to  effect  a  cure  in
all  cases  of  the  venereal  by  a  safe  and  simple  method  or
treatment.


MIDWIFERY.

This  is  a  very  difficult  subject  to  write  upon,  as  1
know  of  no  words,  that  would  be  proper  to  make  use  of,
to  convey  the  necessary  information  to  enable  a  person
to  attempt  the  practice  with  safety.  The  great  impor-
tance of  the  subject,  however,  induces  me  not  to  be  si-
lent ;  and  I  shall  indeavour  to  make  known  to  the  pub-
lic such  thoughts  and  conclusions  as  long  experience
and  much  solicitude  has  enabled  me  to  form,  concerning^
those  who  are  suffering  and  are  constantly  liable  to  suf-
fer from  the  erroneous  and  most  unnatural  practice  of
the  pi'esent  day.  The  practice  of  midwifery  at  this
time  appears  to  be  altogether  a  matter  of  speculation
with  the  medical  faculty,  h-^  their  exorbitant  price  for
attendance.  The  tax  on  the  poor  classes  is  very  heavy ;
and  this  is  not  the  greatest  grievance  th<\J;  they  have  to
bear,  for  they  are  often  deprived  of  their  wives  and
children,  by  such  ignorant  an  1  unnatural  practice  as  is
very  common  in  all  parts  of  the  country.

Thirty  years  ago  the  practice  of  midwifery  was  pria-


or Botar.k  Famihj  Physician,  299

•cipally  in  the  h™ds  of  experienced  women,  who  had  no
.flSculy;  and there  was  scarce an  instance  known in
t.iose  days  ot a  woman  .dying  in chiid-bed, and  it  was
very  uncommon  for  them  to  lose the  child  ;  b„t  at  the
present  tmie  these  things  are  so  common  that  it  is  hardly
talked  ahont. 1  here  must  be  some  cause  for  this  difTer-
ence,  and  I  can  account  for  it  in  no  oih^r  -.vav  than  fbn
unskilful  treatment  they  experience from the doctors
w.o  have  now  got  most  of  the practice  into  their  own
hands In  tne  country  where  I  was  born and  where  I
hrou^h up  a  famiiy  of  chiidre.,  there  was  no  such  thh, '
thougnt  01  as  calling  the  assistance  of,  doctor •  n  n  d"
w.te  was  all  that  was  thought  necessary,  a^K the  instan-
ces were  very  rare that  they were  nit  s.cces'f  t W
they  used  no  art bat  afforded  such  assistance  as  natur'
recjuu-ed;  gave  herb  tea  to  keep  them  in  a  per^  rv"on
and  to  qu,et  the  nerves. Their  price  w,"/o„e'^^o  i^r
when  tne  docto,,s  began  to practice midwifery  i,r  he
country  the.r  price  was  three  dollars,  but  the/soon  af
er  raised  it  to  five ;  and  now  they  charge  from  twelve
to  twenty dollars. If  they  go on  in  this r-.i-V.tMl
.oon  take  all  the  people  cL'eariUoy;-fo;"th:ircL!,"

All  the  valuable  instruction  I  ever  received  was  from
a  woman  m  the  town  where  I  lived,  who  had  prac  iced
as  a  midwife  for  twenty  years;  in  an  interview  of  aC'
twenty  minutes  she  gave  me more useful instruc  ion
than  all ever  gained  from  any  other  source. 1  haX'
practiced  considerably  in  this  Ime  and  have  always  had

strength  of  women  m  a  state  of  pregnancy  so  that  it  the
time  0  delivery,  they  may  he  in  possesin  of  a  1  h  r
natural  powers;  they  should  be  carried  through  a  corse
of  the  mediane  severar  times,  particularly  a  ifttle  before

aft  rdi^ivf  ■'rP,'"*^.?;'"^  perspiration  during  and
al.er  delivery,  which  will  prevent  after  pains  and  other
complamts  common  msuch  cases.  Beware  of  bleedin.^
opium,  and  com  baths;  invigorate  all  the  faculties  Sf
the  body  and  mind,  to  exert  the  most  laborious  eiforU
that  nature  is  called  upon  to  perform,  instead  ofstupifv.
ing  and  substituting  art  for  nature. 1  will  relate  a  case


300  JVers}  Guide  to  Health  ;

that  I  Wiis  kriOwiug  to,  which  will  give  a  pretty  fair
ff  view  of  the  practice  of  the  doctors.  A  woman  was
taken  in  travail  r\h\  the  inithvife  could  not  come,  a  doc-
tor was  ppvitfor;  when  he  came  the  prospect  was  thit
she  would  l.'C  deli,  erf  din  two  hours;  he  gave  hersome
medicine,  which  caused  vomitting  and  turned  the  pains
to  the  stomach — she  continued  in  this  situation  for  twelve
hours,  when  her  strength  was  nearly  gone  ;  he  then
bled  her,  and  to  stop  ihe  puking  gave  so  much  opium,
as  to  cause  such  a  tiupur  that  it  required  all  the  exertions
of  the  women  to  keep  the  breath  of  hfe  in  her  through
the  night;  in  the  morning  she  remained  very  weak,
and  continued  so  till  afternoon,  when  she  was  delivered
with  instriHiieiits.  The  child  was  dead  and  the  woman
came  very  near  dyifig,  and  it  v.'as  six  months  before
Jibe  got  her  strenglh  again.  Many  more  cases  might  be
given  of  the  bad  success  of  bleeding  and  giving  opium  to
stupify,  and  making  use  of  art,  instead  of  assistin'j;  nature
to  do  her  own  work.

1  have  given  instruction  to  several  who  have  bought
the  right,  and  their  practice  has  been  attended  with
complete  succc'^s.  Many  men  that  I  have  given  the  in-
formation to  have  since  attended  their  own  wives,  and  I
have  ncA  er  known  an  instance  of  any  bad  consequences;
and  ifyoung  married  men  would  adopt  the  same  course,
it  would  be  much  more  proper  and  safe,  than  to  trust
tlieir  wives  in  the  hands  of  3'^oung  inexperienced  doctors,
who  have  little  knowledge  except  what  they  get  froin
books,  and  their  practice  is  to  try  experiments  ;  their
cruel  and  harsh  treatment  in  many  instances  would  in-
duce the  husband  to  throw  them  out  of  the  window  if
permitted  to  be  present ;  but  this  is  not  allowed,  for  the
very  same  reason.

All  who  purchase  the  right  may  receive  the  necessary
verbal  instruction  to  enable  them  to  do  all  that  is  requir-
ed in  the  practice  of  midwilery  ;  as  well  as  to  be  able  to
become  their  own  physician  and  surgeon,  at  a  trifling  ex-
pense.


INDEX 4h

To  THE  New  Guide  to  Health.

page

Elecampane,

237

Ague  in  the  face,

278

Elm  bar!:,

240

American  Valerian,

-. 234

Emetic  Heib, - 206-

-247

Archangel

- 246

Evan  root.

240

Balm  of  Gillead,

- 242

Featherfew,

239

Balsam  fir,

241

Felons, - - -

2§3

'Barberry,

22«1

Fevers, - - 187-

-190

Baj  berry,

225

Fits,

28r

Black  pepper,

222

Fever  and  ague.

195

Bitter  lierb.

2i8

PVeezes, . . -

263

Bitter  root.

229

"Bitterswet't,

238

Gensang,

241

Birch  bark,

240

General  directions,

257

^Bitter  thistle,

246

Gravel,

290

"Bitters,

250

Ginger, . - _

221

Bleeding,

27t)

U  olden  Seal,

230

Bile,  (see  No.  4.)

Gout,

293

Biiiious  Cholic,

291

Golden  rod,

244

Burdock,

238

Butternut.

243

Headach,

294

Burns,

2'^3

Herulock  bark,

224

Bones,  how  set,

278

HoofhoJUKi, - -  ■

236

Horseradish,

242

Camphor,

213

Cayenne,

217—228

Injections,

255

Cancers,

271

Introduction,

183

Cancer  plaster.

- 253

li.ternal  heat,  dte  No.  2.)

Canker  sores.
Chamomile,  •
Cherry  stones,
Clivers,


269;  Itch,

237  i

231 1  Jaundice,
2391


245—252
- 283


,Compo  ition  powders, 252

Ladies'  slipper,

-

334

Coiiirh, - - - 282

Lock-jaw,

,  -

214

Chicken  broth, - 262

Lily  root,

-

224

Consumption, - - 288

Counter-puison,  (see  No.  1.}

Measles,

-

280

Course  of  medicuie, 1^9—248

Marshroseraary,

-

225

Corns, - - - 29  J

Mayweed,

-

237

Milk  porridge.

-

262

Descri])tion  of  disea?'  s, 263

.--lyrrh.

-

232

Dirt^dinn- for pr»-piring

Mullen,

.

238

vfejjjfti.ble  n.edicine, £47

Mustavd,

-

242

Djownt  d  pt-ri-ons, - '.^60

^eadow  fern,

.

245

Dropsy, - - 2':i>;

Mortification  of

limbs.

267

Dyfecuteiy, - - 292

•Muscles,  how  relaxed.

278

Index*


Mad  dog,  (see  No.  1.)
Midwifery,


298


Nerve  powder,  , 234

Preparation  of  do.  252

Nervine,  aee  Nerve  powder,
Nettle  spring,  . 289

Nerve  Ointment, . 254
No.  1.  Emetic  Herb,  descrip-
tion of,  .  206
Preparation  of  do. 247
No. 2,  Cayenne,  descrip-
tion ofj • 217


Preparation  of  do.  248 '^SlippefJ  elm  bark,


No.  3,  To  remove  canker,
description  of  articles  for
that  purpose,  .  222

Prep  r.i'W'^"  ^f  ^O'  2^8

No.  4.  BiiU  I'i'  to  correct  the
bile,  description  of  arti-
cles for  that  purpose, 228
Preparation  of  do.  25U

No.  5.  S>rup  for  the  dys-
entery, description of
the  articles  used, . 231
Preparation  of  do.  2j0

No.  6.  Rheumatic  Drops,
description of articles


Rheumatism,
Rheumatic  drops.
Rheumatic  weed,
Ruptures,

Salve,
Scalds,
Scald  heads,
Small  pox, ,
Sore  lips, ♦
Sore  eves,
Sore  breasts,
Skunk  cabbage,


used,
Preparation  of  do,

I^each-meats,  <

Ptppernuint,

Pen»»jro}hl,

i*jp>isway,

Plenri:*y,

Poi^^ons,

Poison  by  Ivy,  &c.

Poplar  bark,

Pri  kly  ash.

Poultice,

Piles,

Remarks  on  fevers.

Relax,

Red  peppers,

Red-raspberry,


Snake  root,
Steaming,  ,

Sumach,  .  .

Squaw-weed,
Spirits  of  turpentine,
Spearmint,
Summersavory, ,
Syrup,

Strengtheniner  plaster.
Stock  of  medicine,
St.  Anthony's  fire,
Sfranguary,
Surfeit, . ,

Tansy,


231
235
2J6

244
291
202
280
228
245
254
274

190
292
221
227


232

2<^l !  Thorough  wort,

Umbil,  see  Nerve  powder.


Venereal, .  ,

V  latile  salts,
Vegetable  powder,
Vervine.  white  and  blue-
Vegetable medicine, des-
cription of,

Witch-hszle,
Wormw^pod,
Wakerobin,
Worms,


Yellow  dockf


29S
251
244
277

253

264
375
281
294
294
275
238
240
241
197
225
227
233
236
236
250
254
256
289
290
289

237
239


295

254
252

243

205

226
237
239

284

24&


M^or*Jirt€


U-i?-


f til


y^


yvv-,


•4A*-


►% '


i^porrayfr  p<*^^i  - ^/^ $


'  ^^P'S.  2  0/  en  sliai^unti  ^^  |^,  /  «  /


IJfCas  t  of  fotlf.Juu  cured


Vt^*  t  U-^"'"


i


if


tmf^


^m


c^"::


/N
