================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: The Holy Bible, Containing the Old and New Covenant, Commonly Called the Old and New Testament: Translated from the Greek, Vol. 2 of 4
Creator: Charles Thomson (1729-1824)
Translator: Charles Thomson
Edition: Philadelphia: Jane Aitken, 1808, Vol. 2
Source: Internet Archive (holybiblecontain02thom), scan of the 1808 first edition
Public domain: Edition published 1808; public domain.
Artifact ID: thomson-bible-1808-vol-02
================================================================================

HAAN

THE

HOLY BIBLE,

CONTAINING

THE OLD AND NEW COVENANT,
THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT:

FROM THE GREEK.

BY CHARLES THOMSON,
Late Secretary to the Congress of the United States.

PHILADELPHIA:
PRINTED BY JANE AITKEN, No. 71,
NORTH THIRD STREET.

1808,

DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA, TO WIT:
BE IT REMEMBERED, That on the twelfth day of September,

= * inthe thirty third year of the Independence of the United States of
%* SEAL. τὴ America, A. D. 1808. Charles Thomson and Ebenezer Hazard, of the
TRLKKKRE said District, have deposited in this Office, the Title of a Book, the

Right whereof they claim as Proprietors, in the words following, to wit:

**The Holy Bible, containing the Old and New Covenant, commonly called the
“ΟἹ and New Testament: translated from the Greek. By Charles Thomson, late
** Secretary to the Congress of the United. States.”

In conformity to the Act of the Congress of the United States, intituled, ‘* An
Act for the encouragement of Learning, by securing the Copies of Maps, Charts, and
Books, to the, Authors and. Proprietors of such Copies, during the times therein mentioned.” And also to the Act, entitled “An Act, supplementary to an Act, entitled,
** An Act for the encouragement of Learning, by securing the Copies of Maps, Charts, and Books, to the Authors and Proprietors of such Copies, during the times therein mentioned,” and extending the benefits thereof to the Arts of designing, engraving, and etching historical and other prints.”

D. CALDWELL, Clerk of the
District of Pennsylvania.

THE

OLD COVENANT,

COMMONLY CALLED

THE OLD TESTAMENT:

TRANSLATED FROM

THE SEPTUAGINT.

By CHARLES THOMSON,

Late Secretary to the Congress of the United States.

PHILADELPHIA:
PRINTED BY JANE AITKEN, No. 71,
+. NORTH THIRD STREET.

SARS

ν᾽ Ἂν" ᾿ bisa ἢ aM
THA ye rie ἡ

bey ἢ SHI: “i ΤᾺ

eae Κ II. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

2

11

12

NOW after the death of Saul when David returned from the slaughter of the Amelekites, and had been at Sekelak two days, behold there came a man, on the third day, from the camp—from the people of Saul with his clothes rent, and earth on his head, and when he came to David he fell on the ground, and made obeisance to him. And David said to him, Whence comest thou? And he replied, I have escaped from the camp of Israel. Thereupon David said to him, What is the news?
Tell me. And when he said, The people fled from the battle, and many of the people have fallen, and died; Saul also is dead, and his son Jonathan; David said to the young man who told him, How knowest thou that Saul and his son Jonathan are dead? And the young man who told him said, By accident I happened to be on mount Gelbua, and behold Saul was leaning on his spear; and lo! the chariots and horsemen were close upon him; and when he looked back and saw me, he called me: and I said, Here Iam. Then he said to me, Who art thou? and I said, lam an Amelekite. Then he said to me, Stand over me, I pray thee, and kill me; for I am seized with a gloomy horror, because all my life is in me. 80 1 went up to him and killed him, for I am sure he could not live after he fell; and I took the crown which was on his head, and the bracelet which was on his arm, and have brought them here to my lord. Then
David took hold of his garments, and rent them, and all the men who were with him rent their garments, and beat their breasts, and wept, and fasted till evening for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of Juda, and for the house of Israel, because they had been smitten with the sword. And
David said to the young man who told him, Whence art thou?
And he said, I am the son of a stranger—an Amelekite. And
David said to him, How couldst thou not be afraid to lift up thy hand to kill the Lord’s anointed. Then David called one of his young men and said, Go near and fall upon him. So he smote him that he died. And David said to him, ‘Thy blood be upon thy own head, for thy own mouth hath testified against thee, saying, I have slain the anointed of the Lord.

hen David sung this funereal Ode over Saul, and over Jonathan his son, and gave orders that the children of Juda should learn it. Behold it is written in the book Straight.

Ch: at Il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

19

20 pi |

22

23

24

27

Erect, O Israel, a monument for the dead—
‘For the slain on thy lofty mountains.
How are the mighty fallen!
Proclaim not ye the news in Geth—
Tell it not as good news in the streets of Ascalon;
Lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice—
Lest the daughters of the uncircumcised exult with joy.
On you, mountains of Gelbua, let not dew descend—
On you, let there be no rain, nor fields of first fruit offerings! / .
For there the shield of the mighty was battered—
The shield of Saul. Was he not anointed with oil?
From the blood of the wounded—
From the fat of the mighty,
The bow of Jonathan recoiled not empty—
The sword of Saul bended not in vain.
Saul and Jonathan were beloved—
They were lovely and inseparable ;
Comely in their life—
And in their death they were not divided.
Than eagles they were swifter—
And than lions more courageous.
O daughters of Israel, weep over Saul,
Who adorned your dress with scarlet-—
Who put ornaments of gold on your apparel.
How are the mighty fallen!
In the midst of the battle, Jonathan!
On thy lofty mountains slain!
I mourn for thee, my brother Jonathan,
To me thou wast very lovely.
Thy love for me was wonderful—
Far surpassing the love of women.
How are the mighty fallen!

And the weapons of war perished!

Now after these things David inquired of the Lord saying,
May I go up to one of the cities of Juda? And the Lord said to him, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I go? And he said, ‘6 Chebron. So David went up to Chebron, with his two wives, Achinaam the Jezraelitess, and Abigaia late the wife

Gn, Ii: Il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

3

4

10

12

16

1

18 of Nabal, the Carmelite, and the men who were with him, every one with his household, and they dwelt in the cities of Chebron. And the men of Judea came, and anointed David there, to be king over the house of Juda. And when they told David, saying, The men of Jabis Galaad have buried Saul, David sent messengers to the leaders of Jabis Galaad, and said unto them, Blessed are ye of the Lord, because you have shewn this kindness for your lord; for Saul, the anointed of the
Lord; and have buried him and his son Jonathan. Now therefore may the Lord deal mercifully and truly with you! As for me I will recompense you for this kindness, because you have done this thing. Now therefore let your hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant; for Saul your lord is dead, and the house of
Juda have anointed me to be king over them.

But Abenner, son of Ner, Saul’s captain general, took Jebosthe, the son of Saul, and brought him from the camp to
Manaem, and made him king over Galaaditis, and over Thasiri, and over Jezrael, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel. Jebosthe the son of Saul, was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel, and when he had reigned two years, (except over the house of Juda who followed David; now the time which David reigned at Chebron over the house of Juda was seven years and six months)
Abenner, son of Ner, and the servants of Jebosthe, son of Saul, came out from Manaem to Gabaon; and Joab, son of Saruia, and the servants of David went out from Chebron, and they met each other at the pool of Gabaon, and sat down one on one side of the pool, and the other on the other side of the pool. And Abenner said to Joab, let the young men, I pray. thee, arise and shew feats before us. And Joab said, let them arise. Then there arose, and went over by number, twelve
Benjaminites who were for Jebosthe, son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David; and they seized, every one with his. hand, the head of his fellow, and plunged each his sword into his adversary’s side, and fell together. So the name of that place was called, Portion of ill designs. It is near Gabaon. And the battle became very furious that day. And Abenner, with the men of Israel, retreated before the servants of David. Now there were there three sons of Saruia, Joab, and Abessa and Asael.

ΟΠ: Il. KINGS—I. SAMUEL.

19

25

26

And Asael was swift of foot asa wild roe. And Asael pursued Abenner, and turned not aside to the right, nor to the left from following him. And Abenner looked back and said, Art thou Asael? And he said, Iam. Then Abenner said to him,
Turn thee to the right, or to the left, and lay hold on one of the young men, and take his armour. But Asael would not turn aside from following him. And Abenner again said to Asael,
Desist from following me, that I may not smite thee to the ground. For how then could I hold up my face to Joab? And what do these things tend to? Return to thy brother Joab.
But he would not desist. So Abenner smote him with a back stroke of his spear, into the loin, and the spear passed quite through him, and he fell there and died under him. And every one who came to the place where Asael fell and died, stood still. But Joab and Abessa continued the pursuit after Abenner, and as the sun was setting they had got as far as the hill
Amman, which is in front of Gai, on the way to the wilderness of Gabaon. And the Benjaminites who followed Abenner crouded together, and having formed themselves into one body, they stood on the summit of a hill. Then Abenner called to Joab, and said, Must the sword devour to a complete victory ?.Knowest thou not that in the last extremity it willbe very bitter? How long shall it be ere thou command the people to return from pursuing our brethren? Whereupon Joab said, As the Lord liveth, but for thy speech the people might, from the morning, have gone up every one from the pursuit of his brother. Then Joab sounded a trumpet and the people halted, and did not pursue Israel, nor continue the battle longer. And
Abenner and his men bent their course homeward that whole night, and having crossed the Jordan and passed over the adjoining plain, they came to the camp. And when Joab returned from pursuing Abenner, and had assembled all the people, there were missing of David’s servantsnineteen men, including
Asael. But the servants of David had smitten of the children of Benjamin, even of Abenner’s men, three hundred and sixty.
Then they took up Asael, and buried him in his father’s tomb at Bethlehem. And Joab and the men who were with him, marched all night, and arrived at Chebron by break of day.
Though the war was lengthened out between the house

13

14

IT: 1. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

of Saul and the house of David, yet the house of David grew stronger and stronger, but the house of Saul grew weaker and weaker. For David had sons born to him in Chebron. His first born was Amnon, the son of Achinaam, the Jezraelitess ; and his second, Daluia, the son of Abigaia, the Carmelite, and his third, Abessalom, the son of Maacha, a daughter of Tholmi, king of Gessir, and his fourth, Ornia, the son of Aggith, and the fifth, Saphatia, the son of Abital, and the sixth Jetheraam, the son of Aigal, a wife of David. These were born to David at Chebron. But while the war continued between the house of Saul and the house of David, Abenner got a mastery over the house of Saul. Now Saul had a concubine named Respha, a daughter of Jol. And Jebosthe the son of
Saul, said to Abenner, Why hast thou gone in to my father’s concubine? For this Abenner was exceedingly enraged at
Jebosthe, and said to him, Am I a dog’s head? Have I now dealt kindly with the house of Saul, thy father, and with his brethren, and relations, and not gone over to the house of David, and dost thou question me now respecting an injury done to a woman? God do so to Abenner and more also, if, as the
Lord hath sworn to David, I do not do so to him, to take the kingdom from the house of Saul, and set up the throne of
David over Israel and over Juda, from Dan to Bersabee. So
Jebosthe could no more controul Abenner in any thing, because he was afraid of him. Then Abenner sent messengers to David at Thailam where he was, in all haste, saying, Make a covenant with me, and behold my hand shall be with thee, to bring over all the house of Israel to thee. On which David said, Well. I will make a covenant with thee. But one thing
I require of thee, and declare that thow shalt not see my face, unless thou bring Melchol the daughter of Saul, when thou comest to see me. Then David sent messengers to Jebosthe, son of Saul, saying, Restore me my wife Melchol, whom I espoused at the price of a hundred foreskins of the Philistines.
And Jebosthe sent, and took her from her husband, from Phaltiel son of Sella; .and her husband came with her, weeping behind her, till they came to Barakim, Then Abenner said to him,
Go, return. So he returned. And Abenner spoke to the elders of Israel, saying, Heretofore you sought to make David king

Che Ἧἁἣἁἃ 1. KINGS—IUL. SAMUEL.

18

19

20

21]

27

28

9"

over you; now therefore do it; for the Lord hath spoken concernng David, saymg, By the hand of my servant David I will save Israel out of the hand of the Philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies. Abenner spoke also in the ears of
Benjamin. And Abenner came to Chebron, to communicate to
David what seemed good in the sight of Israel, and in the sight of the house of Benjamin. And when Abenner came to David at Chebron, and twenty men with him, David made an entertainment for Abenner, and the men with him. Then Abenner said to David, Let me, I pray thee, arise and go, and I will assemble all Israel before my lord the king, and make a covenant with him, and thou shalt reign over all that thy heart desireth.
So David dismissed Abenner, and he departed in peace. Now behold David’s servants, and Joab, were returning from an expedition, and bringing with them a great spoil; and Abenner was ποῖ with David at Chebron, for David had sent him away, and he was gone in peace. So when Joab and all his army arrived, and they told Joab, saying, Abenner, son of Ner, came

 to David, and he hath sent him away, and he has gone in peace,

Joab went to the king, and said, What is this thou hast done?
Behold Abenner came to thee! Why then hast thou sent him away? And he is gone ἴῃ peace? Dost thou not know the wickedness of Abenner son of Ner—that he came to deceive thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming in—and to know all that thou art doing? Then Joab went out from David, and sent messengers after Abenner, and they brought him back from the well of Seeiram, but David knew it not. And when Abennerreturned to Chebron, Joab took him aside in the gate to speak to him, and watching an opportunity, smote him there in the groin, and he died, for the blood of Asael the brother of Joab. And when David afterward heard, he said, Guiltless am
Tand my kingdom, before the Lord for ever, from the blood of Abenner, son of Ner. Let it fall on the head of Joab, and on all his father’s house ! And may there never be wanting of the house of Joab, a person afflicted with a gonorrhea, or a leprosy, or one leaning on a staff, or falling by the sword, or lacking bread! Now Joab and his brother Abessa, bore a grudge against Abenner, because he had slain their brother Asael in the battle at Gabaon. Then David said to Joab, and to all the

Ch. IV. Il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

5 people who were with him, Rend your garments ‘and gird on sackcloth, and utter lamentations before Abenner. And king David walked after the bier, and they buried Abenner at Chebron.
And the king wept aloud over his grave, and all the people wept over Abenner. And the king chanted a funeral song over
Abenner, and said,

As dieth a criminal should Abenner die ?

Thy hands were not bound with chains;

Nor thy feet with fetters.

He did not bring thee forth as a criminal ;

Before sons of wickedness thou hast fallen—

Now all the people had been assembled to bewail him; and when allthe people came to induce David toeat the funeral bread while it was yet day, David swore, saying, God do so to me and more also, if I taste bread, or any thing else, till the sun is set. And when the people knew this, they were well pleased with all that the king did before the people. And all the people, and all Israel, that day perceived that the putting Abenner son of Ner to death, did not proceed from the king. For the king said to his servants, Do you not know that a great leader hath this day fallen in Israel; and that though I am a relation, and constituted a king, yet these sons of Saruia are too hard for me? The Lord retribute to the doer of evil according to his wickedness !

When Jebosthe son of Saul, heard that Abenner, son of Ner, was dead at Chebron, his hands were enfeebled, and. all the men of Israel were dismayed. Now Jebosthe, son of
Saul, had two captains of bands. The name of the one was
Baana, and the name of the other Rechab. ‘They were sons of
Remmon, the Berothite, of the children of Benjamin, for Beroth had been assigned to the Benjaminites, and the Berothites had fled to Gothaim, and have continued to sojourn there even to this day. And Jonathan, son of Saul, had a son, who was lame in both his feet. He was five years old when the news of
Saul and of his son Jonathan came from Jezrael, and his nurse took him up and fled, and as she waShasting to carry him off, he happened to fall, and became lame, so he was called Memphibosthe.

And the sons of Remmon, the Berothite, Rechab, and

Ch. V. “Il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

6

7

10

11

12

ῷ9

Baana, set out, and came in the heat of the day to the house of Jebosthe, while he was sleeping on his couch at noon.
Now behold the door keeper of his house had been cleaning wheat, and being drowsy, had. fallen asleep. So Rechab and
Baana, the brothers, escaped notice, and went into the house, while Jebosthe was asleep on his couch in his bed chamber,
And they smote him, and killed him, and cut off his head. And they took his head, and travelled all night, by the way leading westward, and brought the head of Jebosthe to David at Chebron, and said to the king, Behold here is the head of Jebosthe son of Saul thine enemy, who sought thy life; but the Lord hath executed vengeance for our lord the king on his enemies as at this day—on Saul thine enemy, and on his seed. Whereupon
David answered Rechab, and Baana his brother, the sons of
Remmon, the Berothite, and said to them, As the Lord liveth who hath redeemed my soul from all affliction, when one told me that Saul was dead, and thought himself a messenger of good news to me, I apprehended him, and slew him at Sekelak, though he thought himself entitled to a reward from me for his good news. But now wicked men have slain a righteous person, in his house, upon his bed. Now therefore
I will avenge his blood on you and cut you off from the earth. Then David gave orders to his servants, and they instantly slew them, and cut off their hands, and their feet, and hanged them up by the pool of Chebron. And they buried the head of Jebosthe in the grave of Abenner son of Ner.

Then all the tribes of Israel came to David to Chebron and said to him, Behold we are thy bone and thy flesh. Heretofore, while Saul was king over us, It was thou who didst lead out and bring in Israel; and the Lord said to thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be ruler over my people Israel. And when all the elders of Israel came to David to Chebron, king David made a covenant with them at
Chebron, before the Lord, and they anointed David to be king over all Israel.

David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years. Seven years and six months he reigned at Chebron over Juda, and he reigned thirty three years, over all Israel and Juda, at Jerusalem.

ἔων, II. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

6 When David and his men went to Jerusalem, to the Jebusites who inhabited that land, it was said to David, Thou shalt not come here; for the blind and the lame are opposed to it, saying,
David shall not come here. Sowhen David took the fortress, Zion, the same is the city of David, on that day David said,
Whoever smiteth the Jebusites, let him also dispatch witha dagger those lame and those blind, even them who hate the soul of David: for this cause they say, The blind and the lame shall
9 not come into the house of the Lord. And David made his abode in the fort, so it was called the city of David. And David
10 built the city, around the citadel and his own house. And
David advanced in prosperity, and grandeur, and the Lord
11 Almighty was with him. And Chiram, king of Tyre, sent messengers to David, with cedar timber, and carpenters, and masons, and they built a house for David.
12 When David perceived that the Lord had prepared him to be king over Israel, and that his kmgdom was exalted for
13 the sake of his people Israel, David took still more wives and concubines out of Jerusalem, after he came from Chebron.
-And David had still more sons and daughters born to him.
14 Now these are the names of those who were born to him in
Jerusalem. Sammus, and Sobab, and Nathan, and Solomon, and Ebear, and Elisue, and Naphek, and Jephies, and Elisama, and Elidae, and Eliphalath, Samae, Jesibath, Nathan,
Galamaan, Jebar, Theesus, Eliphalat, Naged, Naphek, Jonathan, Leasamus, Baalimath, Eliphaath.
17 When the Philistines heard that David was anointed king over Israel, all the Philistines came upto seek David; and when
18 David heard he went down to the fort. And the Philistines came, and made an ruption into the valley of the Titans.
19 Whereupon David inquired of the Lord saying, Shall I go up against the Philistines ? Wilt thou deliver them into my hands? And the Lord saidto David, Go up; for I will assuredly
20 deliver the Philistines into thy hands. So David went out through Upper breaks, and smote the Philistines there. Whereupon David said, The Lord broke through the Philistine enemies before me, as waters burst through mounds. For this
21 cause the name of that place, was called Upper breaks. And
WOW. ΕΝ B

eo mst

Ch. VL Il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

there they left their gods ; and David and the men who were with him took them.
22 Again the Philistines proceeded to come up, and made
23 another irruption into the valley of the Titans. And when David inquired of the Lord, the Lord said, Thou shalt not go up to meet them in front. Wheel about from them, and come
24 upon them near Wailing. And when thou hearest the sound of arustling in the grove of Wailing, then thou shalt go down against ihe ; for the Lord will hee go out before cs to
25 smite in the battle of the Philistines. And David did as the
Lord commanded him, and smote the Philistines from Gabaon to the land of Gazera.
VI. Again David assembled all the young men of Israel, about
2 seventy thousand. And David arose, and set out on his march, he and all the people with him, and some of the chiefs of Juda, to bring up thence the ark of God, which is called by the name of the Lord of hosts enthroned on the cherubims, which are on it. And having put the ark of the Lord inanew car, they brought it from the house of Aminadab, who dwelt on the mount.
And Oza, and his brothers the sons of Aminadab, led the
4. car with the ark. His brothers marched before the ark. And
5 David and the Israelites played on high toned instruments of music, accompanied with songs, and on kinyras and on nablas, and on tympanums, and on cymbals, and on harps.
6 But when they came to the threshing floor of Nachor, Oza stretched forth his hand upon the aE of God to stay it, and
7 took hold of it, because the young bull shook it. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Oza, and he smote him
8 there, by the ark of the Lord, in the presence of God. Now
David was. disheartened because the Lord had broke out
9 upon Oza, and that place is to this day called Breach of Oza; and David was afraid of the Lord that day, saying, How shall
10 the ark cf the Lord come to me? So David was not willing that the ark of the covenant of the Lord should turn aside to him, into the city of David, and David caused it to turn aside
11 tothe house of Abeddara, the Gethite. And the ark of the Lord abode in the house of Abeddara the Gethite three months, and the Lord blessed the whole house of Abeddara, and all belonging
12 to him. And when they told king David saying, ‘The Lord

Ch. VII. Il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

17

18

19

20

21

22

23 hath blessed the house of Abeddara, and all belonging to him, on account of the ark of God, David went and brought up the ark of the Lord out of the house of Abeddara, into the city of
David, with rejoicing. Now there were with him seven choirs carrying the ark, and for a sacrifice a young bull and lambs.
And David played on well tuned instruments of music before the Lord; and David having put on an unusual robe, he, and all the house of Israel, brought up the ark of the Lord, with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet. And as the ark was entering the city of David, Melchol the daughter of
Saul looked out at a window, and saw king David dancing, and playing before the Lord, and despised him in her heart. So they brought the ark of the Lord, and when they had set it in its place, in the middle of the tabernacle, which David had erected for it, David offered whole burnt offerings before the
Lord, and peace offerings. And when David had made an end of offering the whole burnt offerings, and the peace offetings, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord of hosts, and distributed to all the people through the whole host of Israel, from Dan to Bersabee, both to the men and women, to every one a piece of bread, and a piece of roasted meat, and a sweet cake baked in the pan. Then all the people departed, every one to his house, and David returned to salute his household. And Melchol the daughter of Saul came out to meet
David, and when she had saluted: him, she said, How was the king of Israel glorified to-day in the eyes of his maid servants, disrobed as he was like one of the dancers! Whereupon David said to Melchol, I will dance before the Lord.
Blessed be the Lord, who hath chosen me in preference to thy father, and in preference to all his house, to make me ruler over his people, over Israel. Wherefore I will play and dance before the Lord, and I will again disrobe myself in the same manner, though I should be despicable in thy sight, and with the maidens, by whom thou hast intimated that I am not honoured. Hence Melchol the daughter of Saul had no child to the day of her death.

VII. Now when the king was settled in his house, and the

2

Lord had given him rest on every side, from all his enemies round about, the king said to Nathan the prophet, Behold 1:

Ch. VII. Π. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of God dwelleth in the

3 midst of the tabernacle. Upon which Nathan said to the king,

6

10

11

12

Whatever may be in thy heart, go and do; for the Lord is with thee. But that night a word of the Lord came to
Nathan saying, Go and say to my servant David, Thus saith the Lord, Art not thou to build me a house to dwell in?
Because I did not dwell ina house from the day I brought the children of Israel out of Egypt even to this day, but continued walking about ina temporary abode and im a tabernacle in all the places through which I passed with all Israel, did I ever speak to any tribe of Israel whom I commanded to feed my people
Israel, and say, Why haveyou not built for me a house of cedar?
But now, thus shalt thou say to my servant David, Thus saith the Lord Almighty, I took thee from the sheepcot to be ruler over my people—over Israel; and I have been with thee whithersoever thou didst go, and have destroyed all thine enemies from before thee, and made thee renowned according to the renown of the great men on the earth; and I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and plant them, and they shall dwell by themselves, and shall no more be in trouble; nor shall a son of wickedness any more humble them as heretofore, from the days I appointed judges over my people Israel: and I will give thee rest from all thine enemies, and the Lord will tell thee that thou art to build a house for him. And it shall come to pass when thy days are fulfilled and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, that I will raise up after thee the seed of thee who shall spring from thy loins, and I will establish his kingdom.
He shall build a house for my name, and I will raise up again his throne for ever. I will be to hima father, and he shall be to meason. And when his iniquity shall come, I will correct him with a rod of men, and with scourges of the children of men, but I will not withdraw my mercy from him as I withdrew it from them whom I removed from my presence. His house and his kingdom shall be established for ever before me and his throne shall be raised up again for ever.
According to all these words and according to all this vision, so did Nathan speak to David. Whereupon king David went in and sat down before the Lord, and said, Whoam I,
O Lord, my Lord! and what is my house that thou hast loved

Ch. VIII. II. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

19 me to sucha degree! Though I was contemptibly little be-

27

28

2

fore thee, Ο Lord, my Lord! yet thou hast spoken respecting the house of thy servant for a great while to come. With regard to this law of the man, O Lord, my Lord! what more shall
David presume to say to thee? Now then, thou, O Lord, my
Lord! knowest thy servant, and on account of thy servant thou hast done, and according to thine own heart hast made all this greatness in order to make known to thy servant with respect to the magnifying of thee, O my Lord! that there is none like thee, and that there is not a god besides thee among all that we have heard of with our ears. Moreover what other nation is there on the earth like thy people Israel? How hath
God gone before them to redeem a people for himself—to make thyself a name—to display majesty and an appearance of deity—to drive out from before thy people, whom thou hadst redeemed for thyself out of Egypt, nations and wandering hordes! Thou indeed preparedst for thyself thy people Israel to be a people for ever, and thou, O Lord! wast their God. Now therefore, O my Lord, confirm the word which thou hast spoken concerning thy servant and his house, confirm it everlastingly, O Lord Almighty, O God of Israel. And now as thou hast spoken let thy name be magnified for ever.

O Lord Almighty, O God of Israel, thou hast made a revelation to thy servant, saying, I am to build a house for thee; therefore thy servant hath found this disposition of his heart to make this prayer to thee. And now, O Lord, my Lord,
Thou art God, and thy words will be true, and thou hast spoken these good things respecting thy servant, now then begin and bless the house of thy servant, that it may continue for ever before thee. Since thou O Lord, my Lord, hast spoken, therefore with thy blessing, letthe house of thy servant be blessed, that it may continue for ever.

VII. After this David smote the Philistines, and subdued

2

3 them, and took the country, appurtenant to the cities, out of the hand of the Philistines. David also smote Moab, and measured them with lines, having caused them to dwell in the country, and there were two lines to be put to death, and two lines to be saved alive. So Moab became servants to David, and brought him gifts. David also smote Adraazar, son of

Ch. VIII. II. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

10

11

12

14

15

16

17

18

Raab king of Suba. As he was going to establish his authority over the river Euphrates, David intercepted a thousand of his chariots, and seven thousand cavalry, and twenty thousand infantry ; and David destroyed all the chariots, except one hundred which he reserved for himself. And when Syria of Damascus came to assist Adraazar king of Suba, David smote of the Syrians twenty two thousand men, and David placed a garrison in Syria at Damascus, and the Syrians became servants to David and brought him gifts. So the Lord preserved
David withersoever he went. And David took the breastplates of gold, which were on the servants of Adraazar, king of Suba and brought them to Jerusalem. Now these were they which Susakim king of Egypt took when he came up against
Jerusalem, in the days of Roboam son of Solomon. And from
Metebak, and from the principal cities of Adraazar, king
David took brass in great abundance, of which Solomon made the brazen sea, and the pillars, and the lavers, and all the vessels of brass. And when Thoou, the king of Emath, heard that David had smitten all the army of Adraazar, Thoou sent his son Jedduram te king David to salute him courteously, and congratulate him for having fought Adraazar, and smitten him; for he was at enmity with Adraazar. And Jedduram brought with him vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass. And king David dedicated these to the Lord, with the silver and the gold which he had dedicated out of all the cities which he had subdued—Out of Idumea and
Moab, and the children of Ammon, and the Philistines, and
Amelek, and the spoils of Adraazar, son of Raab king of Suba. Thus David made himself renowned. And when he returned, he smote of the Idumeans at Gebelim, to the number of eighteen thousand, and placed garrisons in Idumea, throughout the whole extent of it. So all the Idumeans became servants to the king. And the Lord preserved David whithersoever he went. And David reigned over all Israel. And David executed judgment and justice over all his people. And Joab — son of Saruia was at the head of the army, and Josaphat son of Achilud was recorder, and Sadok, son of Achitob, and
Achimelech son of Abiathar, were pricsts; and Sasa was the scribe; and Banaias son of Jodae was counsellor; and the Che-

Ch. IX. I]. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

lethites, and the Phelethites, and David’s sons, were the palace guards.

IX. And David said, Isthereany yet left of the house of Saul, that

2

9

10

I may shew him kindness for Jonathan’s sake? Now there was a servant of the house of Saul, whose name was Siba. So they called him to David. And the king said to him, Art thou
Siba? And he said, I am thy servant. Then the king said to him, Is there any man yet left of the house of Saul, that I may treat him with all the kindness possible? And when Siba said to the king, There is still a son of Jonathan who is disabled in his feet, the king said to Siba, Where is he? And Siba said to the king, Behold at the house of Machir, son of Amiel of Lodabar. Thereupon king David sent for him from the house of Machir, son of Amiel of Lodabar. And when Memphibosthe son of Jonathan, son of Saul was brought. before king David, he fell on his face, and made obeisance to him.
And when David said to him, Memphibosthe! He said, Here am I thy servant. Then David said to him, Fear not; for
I will indeed deal kindly with thee, for Jonathan thy father’s sake, and restore thee all the fields of Saul thy grandfather, and thou shalt eat bread at my table continually. Upon which
Memphibosthe bowed down, and said, Who am I thy servant, that thou shouldst look on such a dead dog as I am ?
Then the king called Siba, the servant of Saul, and said to him, All that belong to Saul and his house Ihave given to thy master’s son. Therefore work thou the land for him; both

thou and thy sons, and thy servants; and thou shalt bring in

provisions for thy master’s son, that he may have bread to eat. And Memphibosthe, thy master’s son, shall eat bread continually at my table. Now Siba had fifteen sons, and twenty servants. And Siba said to the king, According to all that the king hath commanded his servant, so will thy servant do.
So Memphibosthe ate at David’s table, like one of the king’s sons; and Memphibosthe had a young son whose name was
Micha; and all the family of the house of Siba were servants of Memphibosthe. And Memphibosthe dwelt at Jerusalem, for he ate continually at the king’s table, and was lame in both his feet. —

ὥς. Il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

X. Now after this the king of the Ammonites died, and Annon
2 his son reigned in his stead. Whereupon David said, I

will shew kindness to Annon, son of Naas, as his father shewed kindness to me. So David sent his servants to comfort him for the death of his father. But when David’s servants came to the land of the Ammonites, the chiefs of the children of Ammon said to Annon their lord, Is it to honour thy father im thy presence, that David hath sent thee comforters? Is it not rather that they may examine the city and view it? It is indeed for the purpose of spying it, that David hath sent these servants ofhis to thee. Upon this Annon took David’s servants, and shaved their beards, and cut off one half of their upper garments, even up to the loins, and sent them away. And when
David was informed touching his men, he sent to meet them, for the men had been greatly dishonoured, and the king said,
Tarry at Jericho till your beards grow, and then return. Now

᾿ς when the children of Ammon saw that David’s people were

13

14 dishonoured, they sent, and hired the Syrians of Baithraam, and the Syrians of Suba and Roob, twenty thousand infantry, and of the king of Amelek, a thousand men, and of Istob twelve thousand men. And when David heard it, he sent out
Joab, and all the army, even all the mighty men. And the children of Ammon came out and drew up for battle before the gate of the city; and the Syrians of Suba, and Roob, with Istob, and Amelek, were by themselves in the fields. When Joab saw that there was a front of battle against him both before and behind, he made a draught from among all the youth of
Israel, and set them in array against the Syrians, and he com-. mitted the residue of the people to his brother Abessa; and they drew up in array against the children of Ammon. And
Joab said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, you must come to my assistance; and if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, we will come to save thee. Act manfully, and let us ἡ shew our courage for our people and for the cities of our God.
And the Lord will do what is good in his sight. Then Joab, and all his people with him, advanced to battle against the Syrians, and they fled before him. And when the Ammonites saw that the Syrians fled, they also fled before Abessa, and entered the city. Whereupon Joab returned from the chil-

Ch. ΧΙ. 1. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

15

16

17

18

19 dren of Ammon, and came to Jerusalem. Now when the Syrians saw that they had given way before Israel, they assembled together, and Adraazar sent and collected the Syrians from the banks of the river Chalamak, and they came to Ailam, with Sobak, the commander in chief of Adraazar’s army, at their head. When this was told David, he assembled all Israel, and crossed the Jordan, and came to Ailam; and the
Syrians drew up in array against David, and fought him. But the Syrians fled before Israel, and David destroyed of Syria seven hundred chariots, and forty thousand horsemen. He smote also Sobak the commander in chief of the army, so that he died there. And when all the kings who were vassals of
Adraazar saw that they were smitten before Israel, they re-

- volted, and joined Israel and served them. So Syria was inti-

“Im Ur

9

10 midated from aiding the Ammonites any more.

And when the season of the year returned for kings to go out to battle, David sent out Joab, and all his servants with him, and all Israel, and they destroyed the children of Ammon, and besieged Rabbath: but David abode at Jerusalem. And it happened, that one afternoon, David arose from his couch, and. walked onthe roof of the king’s house, and from the top of the house he saw a woman bathing, and she was very beautiful. So David sent and sought out the woman, and one said,
Is not this Bersabe, the daughter of Eliab, the wife of Ourias, the Chettite? Whereupon David sent messengers, and took her, and went in unto her, and lay with her. And when she had purified herself from her uncleanness, she returned to her house. And the woman conceived, and sent and told David, saying, lam with child. Whereupon David sent to Joab, saying, Send Ourias the Chettite to me. So Joab sent Ourias to
David. And on his arrival, Ourias went directly to him. And when David had inquired of the welfare of Joab, and the welfare of the people, and the success of the war, he said to Ourias,
Go down to thy house and wash thy feet. So Ourias departed from the king’s house, and there was sent after him a portion of meat from the king. But Ourias laid himself down to sleep at the king’s gate, with the servants of his lord, and: did not go down to his house. And when they told David, saying,
Ourias did not go down to his house, David said to Ourius,

VoL. II. 6

Ch. XI. II. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

12

13

14

17

20

21

22

Art thou not come from a journey, why then didst thou not go down to thy house? And Ourias said to David, The ark, and Israel, and Juda, dwell in tents, and my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord encamp on the ground, and shall I go down to my house to eat and drink, and he with my wife?
How can Ido it? As thy soul liveth, I will do no such thing.
Then David said to Ourias, Tarry here to-day also, and tomorrow I will dismiss thee. So Ourias tarried at Jerusalem that day and the morrow. And David invited him, and he ate and drank in his presence. But though he caused him to drink, and made him drunk, yet he went out in the evening, to sleep on his bed with the king’s servants, and did not go down to his house. And in the morning David wrote a letter to Joab, and sent it by the hand of Ourias, and in the letter he wrote, saying, Set Ourias in the front of the hottest battle, and retire from him, that he may be smitten and die. So πὶ disposing the guards against the city, Joab stationed Ourias in the place where he knew there were men of valour. And the men of the city sallied out, and fought with Joab, and some of the people of David’s servants fell, and Ourias the Chettite died also. Then Joab sentand told David all the circumstances of the battle, which were to be delivered verbally to the king. And he gave a charge to the messenger, saying, When thou hast finished telling the king all the circumstances of the battle, if it should happen that the king’s anger rise, and he should say to thee, Why did you approach so near to the city to fight?
Did you not know that they would shoot from the top of the wall? Who smote Abimelech son of Jerobaal, son of Ner?
Did not a woman throw a piece of a millstone on him from the top of the wall, so that he died at Thamasi? Why did you approach the wall? Then thou shalt say, Thy servant Ourias the
Chettite is also dead. So Joab’s messenger went to Jerusalem to the king, and when he arrived and told David all that Joab mentioned to him—all the circumstances of the battle, David was inflamed with wrath against Joab, and said to the messenger, Why did you approach so near the city to fight? Did you not know that you would be smitten from the wall ? Who smote Abimelech, son of Jerobaal? Did not a woman throw a millstone upon him from the wall, so that he died at Thamasi?

Ch. XII. II. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

23 Why did you approach so near the wall? Then the messenger said to David, The men took courage against us, and 58]-᾿ lied out upon us into the field, and when we continued our pursuit of them, even to the doors of the gate, the archers

24 from the wall shot at thy servants, so that some of the king’s servants were slain, and thy servant Ourias the Chettite is

25 dead also. Thereupon David said to the messenger, Thus shalt thou say to Joab, Let not this be grievous in thy sight; for the sword devoureth sometimes on one side, and sometimes on the other. Make thy battle strong against the city, and block it up, and enclose it with strong works.

26 Now when the wife of Ourias heard that Ourias her hus-

27 band was dead, she mourned for her husband. And when her mourning was over, David sent and brought her to his house,

_ and she became his wife, and bore him a son.

XII. But the deed which David had done appeared evil in the sight of the Lord; therefore the Lord sent Nathan the prophet to David. And when he came to David he said to him, There were two men in the same city. The one was rich, and the

2 other poor. The rich man had flocks and herds in great abundance,
3 but the poor man had only one little ewe lamb, which he bought, and nourished, and fed: And it had grown up with him and his children in the same house. It ate of his bread, and drank of his cup, and slept in his bosom, and was to him

A like a daughter. And there came a traveller to the rich man, and he spared to take of his own flocks, or of his own herds,

to entertain the stranger—the wayfaring man, who had come

to him; but took the poor man’s lamb, and dressed it for the

5 man who came to him. And David was inflamed with indignation against the man to a great degree, and said to Nathan,

6 As the Lord liveth, the man who hath done this is guilty of death, and shall make sevenfold restitution for the lamb, because he hath done such a deed and had no compassion. Whereupon

Nathan said to David, Thou art the man who hath done this.

Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel, I anointed thee to be king

over Israel, and it was I who delivered thee out of the hand of

Saul, and gave thee the house of thy master, and thy master’s

8 wives into thy bosom. I gave thee also the house of Israel and

Juda, and if this had not been enough, I would have added still

Ch. XII. II. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22 more. Why then hast thou despised the word of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? Thou hast slain Ourias the Chettite with the sword, and taken his wife to be thy wife. Thou hast indeed slain him with the sword of the Ammonites. Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thy house. Because thou hast despised me, and taken the wife of Ourias the Chettite to

be thy wife, therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold I will raise up evils against thee out of thy own house; and I will take thy wives before thy eyes, and give them to thy neighbour, and he will lie with thy wives in the face of the sun. Thou indeed didst act secretly; but I will do this thing in the sight of all Israel, and in the face of yonder sun.

Then David said to Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord.
And Nathan said to David, The Lord hath put away thy sin.
Thou shalt not die. But because thou hast by this deed given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, therefore thy son who 15 born to thee shall surely die. Then Nathan went to his house, and the Lord struck the child which the wife of Ourias the Chettite bore to David. And while it was sick
David besought God for the child, and fasted and went in and lay on the ground. And when the elders of his house came to raise him from the ground, he would not consent, nor would he eat bread with them. And on the seventh day the child died.
And David's servants were afraid to tell him that the child was dead; for they said, Behold while the child was still living we spoke to him, but he would not hearken to our voice, how then must it affect him when we tell him, The child is dead !
But when David perceived that his servants were whispering, he conjectured that the child was dead, therefore David said to his servants, Is the child dead? And when they said, He is dead, David arose, and washed, and anointed himself, and changed his clothes, and went into the house of God, and wor- Ὁ shipped him. Then he went to his own house, and called for bread to eat. And when they had set bread before him, and he had eaten, his servants said to him, What is this that thou hast done for the child? While it was still living, thou didst fast, and weep, and kept thyself awake; but soon as the child is dead, thou hast risen up, and eaten, and drank. And David said, While the child was still alive, I fasted and wept, because

23

24

30

31

Ch. XI. . Il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

I said, Who knoweth but the Lord may have compassion on me, and-the child may live? But now it is dead, why then should I fast? Can I bring it back again? I shall go to it; but it will never return to me.

Then David comforted his wife Bersabe, and went in unto her; and she conceived, and bore a son, and called his name
Solomon. And the Lord loved him, and sent by the ministry of Nathan the prophet, and called his name Jeddedi, For the sake of the Lord.

Now Joab had fought at Rabbath of the Ammonites, and taken the royal city. Wherefore Joab sent messengers to David, and said, I have had a battle at Rabbath, and have taken the city of waters; now therefore assemble the rest of the people, and encamp against the city, and take it, lest I take the city, and it be called after my name. So David assembled all the people, and went to Rabbath, and fought against it and took it. And he took the crown of Molchom their king from his head. Now the weight of it was a talent of gold, with precious stones, and it was set on David’s head. And he brought out the spoils of the city in great abundance, and he brought out the people who were in it, and put them to the saw, and to iron crows, and to pick axes of iron, and distributed them through brick yards. And when he had done the same to all the cities of the Ammonites, David, and all the people, returned to Jerusalem. d

XII. After this, Abessalom, a son of David, having a very

2 beautiful sister whose name was Themar, Amnon the son of
David fell im love with her. And Amnon was so distressed that he pined away on account of Themar his sister, for she was a virgin, and it appeared monstrous in the eyes of Amnon to have any thing to do with her. Now Amnon had a companion whose name was Jonadab. He was the son of Samaa the brother of David. And Jenadab was a man of great subtilty; and he said to him, What is the matter with thee, son of the king, that thou art so languishing for some time past ?
Why dost thou not tell me ? And Amnon said to him, Iam in love with Themar, the sister of my brother Abessalom.
Upon this Jonadab said to him, Take to thy bed, and feign thyself sick, and when thy father cometh to see thee say to

Ch, XIII. 1. KINGS—II SAMUEL.

him, I pray thee, let Themar my sister come to me, and feed me ; and let her prepare the victuals in my sight, that I may

6 see, and eat out of her hands. So Amnon went to bed, and feigned himself sick: and when the king came to see him,
Amnon said to the king, I pray thee let Themar my sister come to me, and make a couple of cakes in my sight, that I

7 may eat out of her hands. And David sent to the house to
Themar, and said, Go, I pray thee, to thy brother’s house,

8 and prepare something for him to eat. Accordingly Themar went to the house of Amnon, her brother, and he was a bed; and she took the dough, and kneaded it, and made it into

9 cakes before his eyes, and stewed them and she took the pan and poured them out before him, but he would not eat. Then

10 Amnon said, Go out every man from me. And when every one was gone out from him, Amnon said to Themar, Bring the victuals into the chamber that I may eat out of thy hand.
So’Themar took the cakes she had made and carried them to her

11 brother Amnon into the bed chamber. But when she brought them to him, that he might eat, he took hold of her and said

12 to her, Come, lie with me, my sister. And she said to him,
No, my brother, thou must not dishonour me; for such a thing ought not to be done in Israel. “Thou must not commit

13 such folly. As for me where could I hide my dishonour ?
And with regard to thyself, thou wouldst be like one of the fools in Israel. Now therefore, speak I pray thee to the king;

14 for he will not withhold me from thee. But Amnon would not hearken to her, but overpowered her by force, and dis-

15 honoured her. And when he had lain with her, Amnon hated her with an exceeding great hatred; so that the hatred with which he hated her, was greater than the love with which he had loved her, and his last wickedness was greater than the

16 first. And Amnon said to her, Arise and begone. Whereupon Themar said to him, To send-me thus away is adding

a still greater injury to that which thou hast already done me.

17 But Amnon would not hearken to her voice, but called his servant who superintended his house, and said to him, Send away, I pray thee, this one from me, out of doors, and shut

18 the door after her. Now she had on an embroidered robe; for such was the dress which the king’s daughters wore, who

Ch. XIII. Il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

were virgins. So when the servant led her out, and shut the
19 door after her, Themar took ashes, and put them on her head, and tore in pieces the embroidered robe which she had on,
20 and putting her hands on her head, she went on crying. And
Abessalom her brother said to her, Hath Amnon thy brother been with thee ? Now therefore, my sister, hold thy peace.
Because he is thy brother, thou must not mention this matter. So Themar abode as a widow in the house of her brother Abessalom.
21 Though king David heard all these things, and was very angry, yethe would not grieve the spirit of his son Amnon,
22 because he loved him as being his first born. As for Abessalom he spoke not a word to Amnon, good or bad, for he hated
Amnon for having dishonoured his sister Themar.
23 Now about two years after this Abessalom had sheep shearers at Belasor, in the borders of Ephraim; and Abessalom
24 invited all the king’s sons. And Abessalom went to the king, and said, Behold they are shearing thy servant’s sheep, let the
25 king I pray thee, and his servants, go with thy servant. But the king said to Abessalom, No, my son. We must not all go; for we must not overburthen thee. When he had pressed him, and he would not consent to go but blessed him; then
26 Abessalom said to him, If not; let my brother Amnon, I pray
27 thee, go with us. And the king said, Why should he go with thee ? But Abessalom pressed him, so he sent with him Amnon, and all the king’s sons. And Abessalom made a banquet like that of the king. And Abessalom gave a charge to his servants saying, Observe when the heart of Amnon is elated with wine, and I say to you, Smite Amnon; then put him to death. Be not afraid, for it is I who*command you. Acquit
29 yourselves like men, and be sons of valour. And when the servants of Abessalom had done to Amnon as Abessalom had commanded them, all the king’s sons arose, and mounted
30 every man his mule, and fled. And while they were on the road, the report came to David saying, Abessalom hath slain all the king’s sons—there is not one of them left. Thereupon the king arose, and rent his garments, and lay on the ground, and all his servants stood around him, with their clothes rent.
32 And Jonadab, son of Samaa, David’s brother. addressing him

2 co

3

Ch. XIV. II. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

33

38 said, Let not my lord the king suppose that he hath slain all the young men, the king’s sons, for Amnon only is dead— forhe hath been continually in the mouth of Abessalom from the day he dishonoured his sister Themar. Now therefore let not the king lay this to heart, saying, All the king’s sons are dead; for there is none dead but only Amnon; and Abessalom hath made his escape. Then the servant who stood centinel raised his eyes, and locked, and lo, many people were coming down the side of the mountain by the way behind him, whereupon the centinel came, and told the king, saying, I have seen many people coming by the way of Oronen, from the side of the mountain. And Jonadab said to the king, Behold the king’s sons are near at hand. It is as thy servant said. And just as he had finished speaking, behold the king’s sons came, and they raised their voice, and wept, and the king also, and all his servants, wept bitterly. And Abessalom fled, and went to Tholmi, son of Emiud, king of Gedsur, to the land of Chamaachad. And king David mourned for his son all that year.

Now when Abessalom, who had left his country, and gone to Gedsur, had been there three years, king David was mollified so as to long for Abessalom, for he was comforted with

XIV. respect to Amnon, seeing he was dead. So when Joab,

son of Saruia, perceived that the king’s heart was set upon
Abessalom, he sent to Thekoe, and brought thence a wise woman, and said to her, Feign thyself, I pray thee, to be a mourner, and put on mourning apparel, and anoint not thyself with oil, but be like a woman mourning for one who hath been long dead: and thou shalt go to the king, and speak to him in this manner—-So Joab put words in her mouth. And when the woman of Thekoe came to the king, she fell on her face on the ground, and made obeisance to him, and said,
Save, O king! save! And the king said to her, What is the matter with thee? To which she replied, I am a wretched woman, a widow. My husband died. And thy servant had two sons, and they quarrelled in the field, and there was none to part them, and one of them smote the other—his brother, and killed him. And behold the whole family is risen up against thy servant, and say, Deliver up him who smote his brother,

Ch. XIV. tl. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

10 kl

14

15

16

17 that we may put him to death, for the life of his brother whom he hath slain; for we will cut him off though he be your heir.
Thus will they quench my coal, which is left, so that there will not be left to my husband a remnant, or a name, on the face of the earth. Thereupon the king said to the woman, Go in peace to thy house, ‘and I will give orders concerning thee. And the woman of Thekoe said to the king, Upon me, O my lord the king, be the iniquity, and upon my father’s house; and let the king and his throne be guiltless! "Then the king said, Let who will speak to thee, bring him to me, and he shall no more touch him. And she said, Let the king, 1 pray thee, make mention of the Lord his God, that though avengers of blood be multiplied to destroy, they shall not destroy my son. Whereupon he said, As the Lord liveth, there shall not a hair of thy son’s head fall to the ground.

Then the woman said, Let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word to my lord the king, and he said, Speak. And the woman said, Why hast thou come to such a determination against the people of God? Or is that word, Lhat the king would not recal his own eacile, a kind of trespass from the mouth of the king? Because we must surely die, and be like water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again—and God can take away life when he is determined to remove an outcast from him; now therefore in respect to the matter about which
I came to speak to my lord the king, Because the people will see me, therefore thy servant will say, Pray speak to my lord the king; perhaps the king will grant the request of his servant. Because the king will hear, let him deliver his servant out of the hand of the man who seeketh to remove me and my son from the inheritance of the Lord. Then the woman said,
Let the word of my lord the king be, I pray, for a sacrifice ;

for since my lord the king is as an angel of God to discern

18

19 what is good and what is bad, surely the Lord thy God must be with thee.

‘Then the king answered and said to the woman, Conceal not from me I pray thee, the thing which I shall ask thee. And the woman said, Pray let my lord the king speak. And the king said, Is not the hand of Joab with thee in this whole bu-

siness? And the woman said to the king, As thy soul liveth,
Vou. 11: D

20

XIV. If. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

my lord the king, there is no turning to the right, nor to the left, from all that my lord the king hath spoken; for thy servant Joab commanded me, and he himself put all these words in the mouth of thy servant, that this case might wear the appearance of the thing which thy servant Joab wished to have done. But my lord is wise as an angel of God, to know all the things on the earth. Then the king said to Joab, Behold I have done for thee according to this thy state of the case; bring back the young man, Abessalom. Upon which Joab fell on his face to the ground, and made obeisance, and blessed the king. And Joab said, Now thy servant knoweth that I have found favour in thy sight, my lord the king, because my lord the king hath granted the suit of his servant. Then Joab arose and went to Gedsur, and brought Abessalom to Jerusalem. And the king said, Let him return to his house, and not see my face. So Abessalom returned to his house, and did not see the king’s face.

Now in all Israel there was not a man so very comely as
Abessalom. From the sole of his foot, to the crown of his head, there was not a blemish in him. When he polled his head, and at the beginning of every year he had it polled, because the hair was burthensome to him, and when he polled it he weighed the hair of his head, and it weighed two hundred shekels after the king’s shekel. And to Abessalom there were born three sons and one daughter. The name of his daughter was ‘Themar. She was a very beautiful woman, And when Abessalom had dwelt two years at Jerusalem, and saw not the king’s face, Abessalom sent for Joab that he might send him to the king, but he declined coming to him. And when he had sent a second time, and he declined coming,
Abessalom said to his servants, See, the portion of land in the field adjoming mine is Joab’s, and he hath barley there. Go and set iton fire. And when Abessalom’s servants set the field on fire, the servants of Joab came to him, with their clothes rent, and said, Abessalom’s servants have burned the field with fire. Thereupon Joab arose, and went to Abessalom, and said to him, Why have thy servants set my field on fire? And
Abessalom said to Joab, Behold I sent to thee, saying, Come here that Imay send thee to the king, saymg, Why have 1

Ch. XV. Il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

come from Gedsur? It was better for me to be there, as I have not yet seen the king’s face. If indeed there be wickedness in

33 me, put me to death. Then Joab went to the king, and deliy-

ered him this message, and he sent for Abessalom, and Abessalom went to the king, and made obeisance to him, and prostrated himself on the ground before him, and the king kissed

XV. him. And after this, Abessalom procured for himself
2 chariots, and horses, and fifty men to run before him. And

12

[13

Abessalom rose early in the morning, and took his stand at the place where the road turned off to the gate. And when any man who had a controversy came to the king for judgment, Abessalom called to him, and said, Of what city art thou ? And when he said, Thy servant is of sucha one of the tribes of Israel, Abessalom said to him, Behold thy cause is good, and easily determined, but there is none appointed by

the king to hear thee. Then would Abessalom say, O that

they would make me a judge in the land! In that case if any man had a defence to make, or a suit to prosecute, and would come to me, I would do him justice. And when any man came to make obeisance to him, he stretched forth his hand, and took him, and kissed him. In this manner Abessalom acted to all Israel who were coming to the king for judgment, so that
Abessalom won the hearts of the men of Israel. And at the end of four years Abessalom said to his father, Let me I pray thee go and pay my vows at Chebron, which I vowed to the
Lord. For when I dwelt at Gedsur, in Syria, thy servant vowed a vow, saying, If the Lord will bring me back to Jerusalem, I will serve the Lord. And the king said to him, Go in peace. So he arose and went to Chebron. Now Abessalom had sent spies through all the tribes of Israel, saying, When you hear the sound of the trumpet, then say, Abessalom is king in Chebron. And there went with Abessalom two hundred chosen men out of Jerusalem. They indeed went in their simplicity, for they knew nothing. And Abessalom sent for
Achitophel, the Thekonite, the counsellor of David, from his own city, namely, from Gola, while he was sacrificing. So the conspiracy became strong, and the people who came, and they were many, were with Abessalom. And there came a messenger to David, saying, The heart of the men of Israel is gone

Ch. ey. Ii. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21 ho

after Abessalom. Upon this David said to all his servants who were with him at Jerusalem, Arise and let us flee, for there is no safety for us on account of Abessalom. Make haste to depart, lest he overtake us suddenly, and throw the blame on us, when he shall smite the city with the edge of the sword. And the king’s servants said to the kmg, Whatever our lord the king chuseth, behold we thy servants are ready to do. So the king and all his household, set out on foot, and the king left ten ofhis concubines to keep the house. And when the king, with all his servants, on foot, had gone out, they halted at the farthest house, and all his servants passed on by him, namely, all the Chelethites, and all the Phelethites, and they halted near the olive yard, in the wilderness. And all the people passed by near him. Now all that were around him—all the nobles, and all the warriors, were six hundred men, and while these

‘stood by him, all the Chelethites, and all the Phelethites, and

all the Gethites—the six hundred men who had come on foot from Geth, marched on before the king. And the king said to
Ethi the Gethite, Why shouldst thou go with us? Return

and dwell with the king; for thou art a stranger, and hast

come as an exile from thy own place. As thou art come but yesterday, shall I to-day cause thee to move with us, and change thy abode? As for me, I will go where I can; but return thou and take back thy brethren with thee; and the Lord will deal mercifully and truly with thee. And Ethi answered the king, and said, As the Lord liveth, and as my lord the king liveth, whithersoever my lord goeth, whether to death or

‘to life, there shall thy servant be. Whereupon the king said to

Ethi, Come and march with me. So Ethi, the Gethite march-

ed on with the king, and all his servants, and all the multitude

who were with him. And all the country wept with a loud voice, while all the people were crossing the brook Kedron.
And when the king had crossed the brook Kedron, all the people, and the king, continued their march by the way to the wilderness. Now behold Sadok, and all the Levites, were with him, carrying the ark of the covenant of the Lord from Baithar. And they set down the ark of God, and Abiathar went up, until all the people had done coming out of the

city. Then the king said to Sadok, Carry back the ark of

Ch. XVI. If. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

26

27

28

29

32

35

36

37

God into the city. If I find favour in the sight of the Lord, he will bring me back, and shew me it and its comeliness. But if he should say, I have no pleasure in thee, behold here am I.
Let him do to me as seemeth good in his sight. Then the king said to Sadok the priest, See! thou returnest to the city in peace; and Achimaas, thy son, and Jonathan, the son of
Abiathar—your two sons are with you. See! I will encamp at
Araboth of the wilderness, until a message come from you to give me intelligence. So Sadok and Abiathar carried back the

. ark of God to Jerusalem, and it abode there. And David went

up by the ascent of the olive orchards, weeping as he went up, and having his head covered, and walking barefoot. And all the people who were with him covered, every one, his head, and went up weeping as they went. And when it was told
David that Achitophel was among the conspirators with Abessalom, David said, Confound, I beseech thee, O Lord my
God, the counsel of Achitophel. And David continued his march till he came to Ros, where he worshipped God. And behold Chousi, an old companion of David, met him there, with his clothes rent, and earth on his head. And David said to him, If thou go with me, thou wilt bea burden to me: but if thou return to the city, and wilt say to Abessalom, Thy brothers are gone, and the king thy father is gone, and hath left me behind, now therefore, I am thy servant, O king. Let me live. I have been thy father’s servant hitherto; but now I am, thy servant: thou mayst baffle for me the counsel of Achitophel. And behold there are there with thee, Sadok and
Abiathar, the priests, so that whatever thou mayst hear frona the king’s household thou wilt tell to Sadok and Abiathar, the priests. And behold they have there with them their two sons, Achimaas, son of Sadok, and Jonathan, son of Abiathar, so that by them you can send to me every thing you may hear.
Accordingly, Chousi, David’s companion, came to the city, just as Abessalom was enterig Jerusalem.

XVI. And when David had marched on a little way from Ros,

behold Siba, the servant of Memphibosthe, came out to meet him with a couple of asses saddled, and.on them two hundred loaves of bread, and a hundred clusters of dried grapes, and ἃ hundred bunches of dates, and a nebel of wine. And the king

Ch. XVI. Il, KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

10

said to Siba, What meanest thou by these? To which Siba replied, The asses are for the king’s family: to ride on, and the loaves and the dates for the young men to eat, and the wine for such as are fainty in the wilderness, to drink. Then the king said, But where is thy master’s son? And Siba said to the king,
Behold he abideth in Jerusalem; for he said, Now will the house of Israel restore me the kingdom of my father. There- upon the king said to Siba, Behold all that belong to Memphibosthe are thine. And Siba having bowed down said, Let me find favour in thy sight, O my lord the king. And when king David was going to Baurim, behold there came out thence a man of the family of the house of Saul, whose name was Semei, son of Gera. He came out, cursing David as he came, and throwing stonesat David, andat all the servants of king David. Now all the people, even all the mighty men, were on the right and left of the king. And in this manner Semei expressed himself when he cursed him, Out! Out! thou man of blood! thou miscreant! The Lord hath retorted om thee all the blood of the house of Saul. Because thou hast reigned in his stead, therefore the Lord hath delivered the kingdom into the hands of Abessalom thy son. And behold thou art in distress, because thou art a bloody man. Whereupon Abessa, son of Saruia said to the king, Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? Let me go over, and I will take off his head.
But the king said, What is it to me and you, O sons of Saruia? Let him alone, and let him curse on; for the Lord hath told him to curse David, and who shall say, Why hast thou done so? Then David said to Abessa, and to all his servants,
Behold my own son, who is descended from my loins, seeketh my life, and how much more then may this Jeminite do it! Let him curse, for the Lord hath bidden him. Perhaps the Lord may look on my affliction, and return me good for his cursing this day. So David and all his men proceeded on their march, and Semei went along the side of the mountain near him, cursing as he went, and throwing stones from the side of it,

. and casting up dust. And when the king arrived, and-all the

people withhim, being fatigued, they refreshed themselves there.
Now Abessalom and all Israel had come to Jerusalem, and
Achitophel with him. And when Chousi, the old companion of

XVII. Π. KINGS—H. SAMUEL.

David, came to Abessalom, Chousi said to Abessalom, God save the kmg! Whereupon Abessalom said to Chousi, Is this thy kindness for thy friend ? Why hast thou not gone with thy friend ? And Chousi said to Abessalom, shall I not follow him whom the Lord hath chosen, and this his people—even all
Israel? For him I will be; and with him I will abide. And in the next place whom should I serve? Must it not be before his son ? As [have served before thy father, sa will I be before thee. Then Abessalom said to Achitophel, Consult among yourselves what we shall do. Thereupon Achitophel said to
Abessalom, Go in unto thy father’s concubines, whom he hath left to keep his house; and all Israel will hear that thou hast dishonoured thy father, and the hands of all who are with thee will be strengthened. So they fixed up a tent for Abessalom on the top of the house, and Abessalom went in unto his father’s concubines, in the sight of all Israel. Now the advice which Achitophel gave in those first days, was as if one had consulted the oracle of God. Such was every advice of Achitophel both with David and with Abessalom.

XVI. Then Achitophel said to Abessalom, Let me, I pray

2 oy)

9 thee, chuse out for myself twelve thousand men; and I willarise and pursue David this very night. And I will come upon him while he is weary, and weak handed, and surprise him ; so that all the people who are with him will flee. And I will smite the king alone, and bring all the people back to thee, as a bride returneth to her husband. Thou seekest only the life of one man, therefore all the people may be at peace. Though this reasoning seemed good in the sight of Abessalom, and in the sight of all the elders of Israel, yet Abessalom said, Call, I pray you,
Chousi the Arachite, and let us hear also what he saith. And when Chousi came to Abessalom, Abessalom spoke to him saying, In this manner Achitophel has spoken; shall we do as he adviseth? If not, speak thou. Upon this Chousi said to Abessalom, The counsel which Achitophel hath given, is, for this once, not good. Thou thyself, said Chousi, knowest thy father and his men, that they are very brave, and chafed in their minds like a bear bereaved of her whelps in the fields; or like a wild boar in the plain. And thy father is a man of war, and will not let the people rest. For behold he is now hid in one of

Ch. XVII. Il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

10

11

12

19

14

15

16

17

18

19

20 the mountains, or in some secure place, and it shall be that when he shall sally out on them at the first, every one who heareth will say, There hath been a slaughter among them who follow Abessalom: in which case the son of valour himself, whose heart is like the heart of a lion, will assuredly be dismayed. For all Israel know that thy father 15 ἃ mighty man, and that they who are with him are sons of valour. This therefore isthe counsel which I would give; Let all Israel be gathered to thee, from Dan to Bersabee, like the sand which is on the sea shore for multitude: and let thy presence go forth in the midst of them. And when we shall come upon him in one of the places where we may find him, we will encamp around him as the dew falleth on the ground. And we will not leave with him or the men who are with him so much as one man. And if he be shut up in any city, all Israel will take ropes to that city, and we will drag it into the ditch, so that there shall not be left so much as a stone.

And Abessalom, and all Israel, said, The counsel of Chousi the Arachite is better than the counsel of Achitophel. For the Lord had determined to defeat the counsel of Achitophel, which was good, that the Lord might bring upon Abessalom all the consequent evils.

Then Chousi, the Arachite, said to Sadok, and Abiathar the priests, Thus and thus did Achitophel advise Abessalom and the elders of Israel; and thus and thus I have counselled.
Now therefore send speedily, and tell David and say, Lodge not to night at Araboth of the wilderness, but cross with all speed. Perhaps he may prevail with the king and all the people who are with him. Now Jonathan and Achimaas had taken their station at the fountain Rogel, and a girl went out, and gave them intelligence, and they went and told David, for they might not be seen entering the city. But a servant saw them and told Abessalom. Now they two had set out with speed, and got to the house of a man at Bakurim, who had a well in his court and they went down into it, and the woman took and spread a covering over the mouth of the well, and laid thereon balls of dough to.dry ; so that the thing was not known.
And when the servants of Abessalom came to the woman, into the house and said, Where are Achimaas and Jonathan ?

Ch. XVIII. II. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

21

29

The woman said, They went a little while ago over the water.
And when they had sought, but did not find them, they returned to Jerusalem. And when they were gone, Achimaas and
Jonathan came up out of the well, and went and told king
David, and said to him, Arise and cross the water with all speed: for thus hath Achitophel counselled concerning you.
Whereupon David arose, and the people who were with him, and they crossed the Jordan till the morning light, till there was not one left, who had not crossed the Jordan. Now when
Achitophel saw that his advice was not taken, he saddled his ass, and arose, and went to his house to his own city, and having given orders to his household he strangled himself, and died, and was buried in his father’s tomb.

And David continued his march to Manaim, and Abessalom crossed the Jordan, he and all Israel with him. Now
Abessalom had set Amessai over the army in the room of
Joab. Amessai was the son of aman whose name was Jether.
He was a Jezraelite, and had married Abigaia, a daughter of Naas, and a sister of Saruia the mother of Joab. And all
Israel with Abessalom encamped in the land of Galaad.

Now when David came to Manaim, Ovesbi, son of Naas, of Rabbath of the Ammonites, and Machir, son of Amiel of
Lodabar, and Berzelli, the Galaadite of Rogellim, brought ten beds of double tapestry, and ten kettles and vessels of earthen ware, and wheat, and barley, and fine flour, and meal, and beans, and lentils, and honey, and butter, and sheep, and curdled milk of kine, and presented them to David, and to the people who were with him, to eat. For they said, The people

XVIII. must be hungry and weary in the wilderness. And

when David had reviewed the people who were with him, and set over them captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds, he sent forth the people, one third under the command of
Joab; and one third under the command of Abessa, the son of
Saruia, and brother of Joab, and one third under the command of Ethi the Gethite. And David said to the people, I myself will go out with you. But they said, Thou must not go out. For if we should flee they will pay no regard to us; for if one half of us should die, they will not care for us: for thou art worth ten thousand of us. Now therefore it is best that thou shouldst be

Ch. XVIII. II. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

4

10

11

12

17

18 in the city to succour and help us. And the king said, Whatever seemeth best in your eyes I will do. So the king stood by the side of the gate, and when all the people were marching out by hundreds, and by thousands, the king gaveacharge to Joab, and to Abessa, and to Ethi saying, Spare, for my sake, the young man Abessalom. And all the people heard the king giving this charge to all the commanders respecting Abessalom. And all the people went out to the forest, in front of Israel, and the battle was fought in the forest of Ephraim, and Israel there gave way before the servants of David, and there was a great slaughter that day, to the amount of twenty thousand men. For the battle was there scattered overthe whole face of the ground, and the forest devoured more of the people than the sword destroyed that day. And as Abessalom was advancing to meet the servants of
David, being mounted on his mule, his mule entered the thickest copse of that great oak forest, and his head got entangled among the oaks so that he was suspended between heaven and earth, and the mule went from under him. And aman saw him, and told Joab,-and said, Behold I saw Abessalom hanging among the oaks. Whereupon Joab said to the man who told him, And behold thou sawest! Why didst thou not smite him there to the ground; and I would have given thee ten pieces of silver, and a girdle? And the man said, As I live, though I might have a thousand shekels of silver weighed into my hands,
I would not lay my hands on the king’s son. For in our hearing the king charged thee, and Abessa, and Ethi, saying, Spare, for my sake, the young man Abessalom; touch not his life.
Now nothing can be hid from the king. Even thou thyself wouldst stand aloof. And Joab said, I myself will in this case, set the example. I will not boggle-so in thy sight. Then Joab took three darts in his hand, and thrust them through Abessalom’s heart, while he was still alive in the heart of the forest.
And when the ten young men, who carried Joab’s arms, had surrounded and smitten Abessalom, and put him to death, Joab sounded the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing
Israel; for Joab had mercy on the people. And he took Abessalom, and threw him into a great chasm in the forest, into the ereat pit, and piled over him a great heap of stones. And all
Israel fled every man to his tent. Now Abessalom had, in his life

Ch. XVII. ——« IL’ KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

time, undertaken and erected for himself a monument in which

he was to have been buried. So he erected this monument to supply the place of that in the king’s dale, because, said he, he hath no son to keep up the remembrance of his name. And he called that monument, The hand of Abessalom, which name

19 it retaineth to this day. ‘Then Achimaas son of Sadok said, Let me, I pray thee, run and tell the king good news, That the Lord

20 hath delivered him out of the hand of his enemies. But Joab said to him, Thou wilt not be the messenger of good news today. At another time thou shalt carry good news. But this day thou canst not be the messenger of good news, because the

21 king’s son is dead. Then Joab said to Chousi, Run and tell the king what thou hast seen. Whereupon Chousi bowed to Joab

22 and set out. And Achimaas, son of Sadok, applied again, and said to Joab, Grant me leave that I also may run after Chousi.
And Joab said, Why art thou so earnest to run, my son? Come,

23 there is no good news worth thy going. And he said, But what if I can run? Then Joab said to him, Run. So Achimaas ran

24. by the way leading to Kechar, and passed Chousi. Now David was sitting between the two gates, and the watchman went up

to the top of the gate, to the wall, and raising his eyes he looked

25 and behold there was a man in his view running alone. So the watchman cried, and told the king. And the king said, If he

26 be alone, there is good news in his mouth. While he was ad-
-vancing, and coming near, the watchman saw another man running, whereupon the watchman cried to the gate, and said, Behold there is another man running alone. And the king said,

27 He also isa messenger of good news. And the watchman said,
Isee the running of the foremost is like the running of Achimaas son of Sadok. And the king said, He isa good man, and must

28 therefore come with good news. Then Achimaas cried aloud, and said to the king, Allis well. And when he had made obeisance to the king, with his face to the ground, he said, Blessed be

the Lordthy God, whohath delivered up the men who lifted their

29 hands against my lord the king. Then the king said, Is the young man Abessalom safe? And Achimaas said, I saw a great

“ crowd when Joab the king’s servant despatched thy servant, but
30 I did not know what was there. Then the king said, ‘Turn aside, and stand here. And when he turned aside, and took his sta-

Ch. XIX. Il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

31

32

33 tion, behold Chousi came, and said to the king, Good news to my lord the king; for the Lord hath this day delivered thee out of the hand of all who rose up against thee. And the king said to Chousi, Is the young man Abessalom safe? And Chousi said, May all the enemies of my lord the king, and all who have risen against him for evil, be as that young man. At this the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber, over the gate, and wept. And as he was going up he thus expressed himself, Oh, my son, Abessalom! Oh! my son! my son Abessalom! O that they had slain me instead of thee—that I had died in thy stead! Oh Abessalom! my son! my son!

XIX. When they told Joab the news, saying, Behold the king

is weeping, and mourning for Abessalom, so that the joy of the day is turned into sorrow to all the people, (For the people that day heard it said, that the king was in grief for his son, therefore the people were stealing into the city that day, as people do who are ashamed, when they flee in battle, and the king hid his face) therefore when the king cried with a loud voice saying, Oh! my son Abessalom! Oh! Abessalom my son!
Joab went to the king, into the house, and said, Thou hast this day put to shame the faces of all thy servants, who have this day delivered thee, and saved the lives of thy sons, and the lives of thy daughters, and the lives of thy wives, and thy concubines ; by thy loving those who hate thee, and hating those who love thee. Thou hast indeed this day declared, that thou regardest neither thy officers, nor thy servants; for I am now convinced, that if Abessalom were alive, and we were now all dead, then all would be right in thine eyes. Now therefore arise, and go out, and speak affectionately to thy servants; for I have sworn by the Lord, that if thou go not out immediately, there will ποῖ ἃ man lodge with thee this night.
And be assured that this will be worse for thee than all the evil that hath befallen thee, from thy youth even till now. Then the king arose, and sat in the gate. And when all the people proclaimed the news, saying, Behold the king is sitting in the gate, then all the people entered the gate, in the presence of the king.

Now when all Israel had fled, every man to his tent, all the people throughout all the tribes of Israel began to condemn themselves, saying, King David delivered us from all out

Gir XIX: II. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

10

11

12

14

15

16

17

18

19

21

22 enemies. Though he delivered us out of the hands of the Philistines, yet he hath now fled from the land, and from his kingdom, and from Abessalom. But Abessalom whom we anointed over us is dead in battle, now therefore, why are you silent about bringing the king back? When this saying of all Israel came tothe king, king David sent to Sadok, and to Abiathar the priests, saying, Speak to the elders of Juda, and say, Why are you the last to bring the king back to his house? The speech indeed of all Israel is come to the king, that he should return to his house. You are my brethren; you are my bones, and my flesh. Why are you the last to bring the king back to his house? And to Amessai you shall say, Art not ΨΩ my bone and my flesh? Now therefore, God do so to me and more also, if thou shalt not be captain general of the army before me continually, in the room of Joab. So when he had turned the heart of Juda, like that of one man, they sent to the king, saying, Return thou and all thy servants. So the king set out on his return, and came to the Jordan. And the men of Juda came to Galgala, to go and meet the king, and conduct him over the Jordan. And Semei, son of Gera the Jeminite, of
Baurim, hastened and came down with the men of Juda, to meet king David; and with him were a thousand men from
Benjamin, and Siba the servant of the house of Saul, with his fifteen sons, and his twenty servants, and they acted as guides across the Jordan, before the king, and performed the service of bringing the king over. And when the raft went over to bring the king’s household, and to do what was right in his sight, Semei son of Gera fell on his face before the king, while he was crossing the Jordan, and said to the king, Let not my lord, I pray thee, impute to me my transgression; nor call to remembrance what thy servant did perversely, on the day when my lord went out of Jerusalem, that the king should lay it to heart. Because thy servant was conscious that he had sinned, therefore behold I am come, the first of all Israel, and of the house of Joseph, in coming down to meet my lord the king. To this Abessa son of Saruia, answered and said, Shall not Semei be put to death, because he cursed the anointed of the Lord? But David said, What have you to do with me, ye sons of Saruia, that you are now laying snares for me ?

Ch. XIX. il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

23%

There shall ποῖ ἃ man of Israel be this day put to death. For
I do not yet know whether I am king over Israel. Then the

᾿ king said to Semei, Thou shalt not die. And the king swore

24.

5

26

27

2 jee)

. 380

to him. Memphibosthe also, the grandson of Saul, came down to meet the king. Now he had not dressed his feet, nor pared his nails, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes, from the day the king went away, to the day he returned, in peace.
And when he came to Jerusalem, and waited on the king, and the king said to him, Why didst thou not go with me, Memphibosthe? Memphibosthe said to the king, O my lord the king, my servant deceived me. For thy servant said to him,
Saddle me the ass, that I may mount thereon and go with the king. (For thy servant is lame.) But he acted deceitfully with thy servant, before my lord the king. But my lord the king is as an angel of God. Do therefore what is good in thy sight.
For all my father’s house were but dead men before my lord the king, yet thou didst set thy servant among them who eat at thy table. What right then have I to cry any more to the king? And the king said to him, What need of more words.
Ihave said, ‘Thou and Siba shall divide the fields. Whereupon
Memphibosthe said to the king, Nay, let him take all, seeing my lord the king is returned to his house in peace.

Berzelli, the Galaadite, also came down from Rogellim, and crossed the Jordan with the king, to convoy him over the
Jordan. Now Berzelli was a very old man, being then eighty years of age, and he had supplied the king and his household with provisions at Manaim, for he was a very wealthy man.
When the king said to Berzelli, Thou shalt come over with . me, that I may nourish thy old age with me at Jerusalem; Berzelli said to the king, How many can the days of the years of my life be, that I should go with the king to Jerusalem? Tam now eighty years of age. Can I distinguish between good and evil? Can thy servant any more relish what I eat or drink?
Or can I any more hear the voice of singing men or singing women? Why then should thy servant be a burthen to my lord the king? Thy servant will go a little way across the Jordan with the king; but why should the king make me sucha recompence? Let thy servant, I pray thee, stay, that I may die in my own city, near the tomb of my father and mother. And

Ch. XX. I. KINGS—IL SAMUEL.

38

39

40 behold thy servant Chamaam shall go over with my lord the king. Do to him what is good in thy sight. And the king said,
Let Chamaam come over with me, and I will do for him what is good in my sight, and whatever thou requirest of me, I will do for thee. Now all the people had crossed the Jordan, and when the king had crossed, he kissed Berzelli, and bade him farewell, and he returned to his place; and the king proceeded on to Galgala, and Chamaam went with him.

Now when all the tribe of Juda, and about half of the people of Israel, were advancing with the king, behold all Israel came to the king, and said to the king, Why have our brethren, the men of Juda, stolen thee away, and brought the king and his household over the Jordan? Are all the men of David indeed with him ? And all the men of Juda answered the men of Israel, and said, Because the king is near of kin to us, why

- should you be soangry at this matter? Have we eaten at the

43 king’s cost? Or hath he given us any gifts, or borne any burthen for us? And the men of Israel answered the men of Juda, and said, We have ten votes for the king, and we are elder than you, therefore we have more interest in David than you.
Why then have you affronted us, and why was not our opinion taken before that of Juda, to bring the king back? Then the words of the men of Juda were fiercer than the words of the .

XX. men of Israel; and there happened to be there a turbu-

ide

Jent man whose name was Sabee, son of Bochori, the chief of the Jeminites, and he sounded a trumpet, and said, We have no portion in David, nor inheritance in the son of Jessai. Every man to his tent, O Israel. Thereupon all Israel went up from following David, after Sabee, son of Bochori. But the men of
Juda kept close by their king, from the Jordan to Jerusalem.
And when David came to his house at Jerusalem, the king took the ten women, his concubines, whom he had left to keep the house, and sent them to a house of confinement, and fed them, but did not go in to them. So they were kept confined to the day of their death, living as widows.

‘Then the king said to Amessai, Assemble for me all the men of Juda, and be thou here in three days. So Amessai went to assemble the men of Juda, but he tarried beyond the time which Dayid set for him. Thereupon David said to Abessa,

Γι. ΧΧ. Il. KINGS—I. SAMUEL.

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

18

Now will Sabee, son of Bochori do us more harm than Abessalom. Now therefore take thou with thee the servants of thy lord, and pursue him, lest he secure for himself cities of defence, that he may escape our notice. So there went out after him, Abessa’s men, and Joab’s men, and the Cherethites, and the Phelethites, and all the mighty men. And when they had marched out of Jerusalem in pursuit of Sabee, son of Bochori, and were come to the great heap of stones at Gabaon, Amessai came in before them. Now Joab had a military robe girded on for his dress, and over it he was girt with a sword on his thigh in its sheath, and the sword dropped out. But as it dropped out and fell, therefore when Joab said to Amessai, art thou well my brother? and with his right hand took hold of
Amessai’s beard to kiss it, Amessai did not attend to the sword which was in Joab’s hand. So Joab smote him with it into the belly, and his bowels gushed out on the ground, so that he did not repeat the blow. And while he was dying, Joab and Abessa, his brother, pursued after Sabee, son of Bochori, and there stood by him one of the servants of Joab, who said,
Whoever is for Joab, and whoever is for David, let him follow
Joab. Now Amessai was weltering in his blood in the middle of the road. And when the man saw that all the people halted, he drew Amessai out of the road, into the field, and threw a mantle over him, because he saw that all the people who came

up stood still. And when he had removed him out of the road,

then all the men of Israel proceeded on after Joab, in pursuit of Sabee, son of Bochori. Now he had passed through all the tribes of Israel to Abel and Bethmacha, and all the men at
Charri had assembled and gone after him. And when they came up with him they formed a siege against him in Abel and Bethmacha. And when they had levelled the bank before the city, and were got within the out works, and all the people who were with Joab, were labouring to throw down the wall, a wise woman cried with a loud voice from the wall, and said,
Hear! Hear! Say, I pray you, to Joab, Come near hither that I may speak to him. And when he drew near to her, the woman said, Art thou Joab? And he said, fam. Then she said to him, Hear the words of thy servant. And when Joab said, I am hearkening, then she continued her speech, and said, They

Ch. XXI. II]. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

19

22

23 used heretofore to state an accusation, saying, He who is examined hath been examined bothin Abel and Dan. If the liege men of Israel have been guilty of what is laid to their charge, let the examiners in Abel inquire in like manner whether they have been guilty. For my part I am for obserying strictly the customs of Israel, which tend to peace; but thou art seeking to destroy a city—a mother city in Israel.
Why wouldst thou swallow up an inheritance of the Lord ?
In answer to which Joab said, Mercy on me! Mercy on me!
Am 1 for swallowing up? Am I for destroying? Is not this the case? There is a man of mount Ephraim—his name is
Sabee son of Bochori, who hath lifted up his hand against king David. Only deliver him up to me, and I will depart from the city. And the woman said, Behold his head shall be thrown to thee over the wall. So the woman went to all the people. And when she had spoken to the whole city in her wisdom, they cut off the head of Sabee son of Bochori.
And having cut it off, they threw it to Joab; whereupon Joab sounded a trumpet, and all the people withdrew from the city, and dispersed, every man to his tent, and Joab returned to Jerusalem to the king.

Now Joab was over all the host of Israel, and Banaias son of Jodae was over the Cherethites and the Phelethites, and
Adoniram was over the tribute, and Josaphat son of Achiluth was recorder, and Susa was scribe, and Sadok and Abiathar were priests, and Iras the son of Jarim was priest for David.

XXI. In the days of David there was a famine three years,

year after year successively ; whereupon David applied to the
Lord, and the Lord said, On Saul and on his house be the iniquity, by the death of his descendants, because he put to death the Gabaonites. Now the Gabaonites are not of the children of
Israel, but a remnant of the Amorites, and the children of Israel had sworn to them ; but Saul sought occasion to smite them, when he was courting popularity with the children of Israel and
Juda. So king David sent for the Gabaonites, and said to them, What shall I do for you; and by what means can I make atonement, that you may bless the inheritance of the Lord ?
And the Gabaonites said to him, We have no controversy with Saul and his household, about gold or silver, nor is it
VOU, τ. F

Ch. XXI. 1. KINGS—IL SAMUEL.

5 for)

10

1

12

13

14

15 for us to put to death a man im Israel. And the king said,
What do you say, I must do for you? And they said to the king, The man who set himself against us, and persecuted us, and who formed pretences to exterminate us, him let usdestroy, that he may not rise up in all the borders of Israel. Give us seven men of his sons, and let us crucify to the Lord at Gabaon those of Saul. who are the choice of the Lord. And the king said, I will give them. But the king had compassion on Memphibosthe, the son of Jonathan, Saul’s son, on account of the oath of the Lord between them—namely between David and
Jonathan, Saul’s son. So the king took the two sons of Respha, the daughter of Aia, whom she bore to Saul, namely Ermoni and Memphibosthe, and the five sons of Michol the daughter of Saul, whom she bore to Esdriel, the son of Berzelli, the
Mooulothite, and delivered them into the hands of the Gabaonites, and they crucified them on the mount before the

‘Lord. So these seven fell together. Now they were put to

death in the days of the harvest of first fruits, in the beginning of the barley harvest. And Respha, the daughter of Aja, took sackcloth, and fixed it up for herself, before the rock, in the beginning of the barley harvest, until water from heaven dropped upon them ; and she suffered not the birds of the air to rest upon them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night. When David was told what Respha the daughter of
Aia Saul’s concubine had done—-(now they were wasted away, and Dan son of Joa, of the race of the giants had taken them down.) David went, and took the bones of Saul, and the bones of Jonathan his son, from the men of Jabis Galaad, who had stolen them from the street of Baithsan, where the
Philistines had fixed them on the day when the Philistines smote Saul at Gelbua; and having brought thence the bones of
Saul, and the bones of Jonathan his son, he gathered up the bones of them who had been crucified. And they buried the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan, and the bones of them who were crucified, in the land of Benjamin, on the one side, in the tomb of his father Kis. And when they had done all that the king commanded, God, after that, hearkened to the land.
There was also another battle between the Philistines and Is-
τε]. David, and his servants with him, went down and fought

Ch. XXII. Il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

16 the Philistines. And as David was advancing, Jesbi, who was

17

18

19

20

of the race of Rapha, and the weight of whose spear was three hundred shekels, brass weight, and who was clad in armour, thought to have smitten David; but Abessa, son of Saruia, came to his assistance, and smote, the Philistine, and killed him. Then David’s men swore, saying, Thou shalt not go out with us any more to battle, lest thou extinguish the lamp of Israel.

And after this there was another battle, at Geth, with the
Philistines, in which Sobocha the Astatothite smote Seph, one of the descendants of Rapha.

There was also a battle with the Philistines at Rom, when
Eleanan son of Ariorgim the Bethlemite, smote Lachmi, the brother of Goliath the Gethite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver’s beam.

There was also another battle at Geth, and there was a smooth man who had six fingers on each hand, and six toes on each foot, twenty four in all, and he was a descendant of
Rapha, and defied Israel, but Jonathan son of Semei, David’s brother, smote him. These four descendants of the giants were born at Geth, and were of the house of Rapha, and they fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his. servants.

XXII. And David addressed the Lord in the words of this

2

9 ode: on the day the Lord delivered him out of the hands of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul, he said in a psalm ;
O Lord, Thou art my rock and my fortress.

It is he who delivereth me; he shall be my God.

He will be my guard, in him I will trust;

He is my defence, and the horn of my salvation—

My helper and my refuge for safety.

From an unrighteous man thou wilt save me.

On the Lord, who is praiseworthy, I will call,

And I shall be saved from mine enemies,

Because troubles of death have surrounded me—

Floods of iniquity have filled me with horror—

The pangs of death have compassed me about—

The bitterness of death hath invaded me. -

In my distress I will call on the Lord,

And to my God I will cry aloud.

Ch. XXIL ll. KINGS—IL SAMUEL.

From his holy temple he will hear my voice,
My cry will certainly reach his ears.
8 The earth indeed was shaken—it trembled—
The foundations of heaven were convulsed, and quivered,
Because the Lord was incensed.
9 At his indignation a smoke ascended,
A fire from his mouth devoureth,
By it coals are kindled to a glow.

10 He bowed the heavens and came down,
And darkness was under his feet.

11 He sat on the cherubim, and flew,
And appeared on the wings of wind.

12 But he made darkness his covering ;

His pavilion around him was darkness of waters ;
He condensed it with clouds of air.
13 From the flashing lightning before him
Flaming fires were kindled.
14 The Lord thundered from heaven,
The Most High uttered his voice.
15 He sent forth his bolts and scattered them :
He darted his lightning, and confounded them.
16 Then were seen the outlets of the sea ;
And the foundations of the earth were disclosed,
At the rebuke of the Lord—
At the blast of the breath of his anger.

17 He sent from on high and took me;
He drew me out of many waters :
18 He delivered me from mine enemies’ strength—

From them who hated me ;
Because they were stronger than I.

19 The days of my distress came on me unawares,
But the Lord was my firm support,
20 And brought me out to a roomy place,
And delivered me, because he delighted in me.
21 The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness ;

According to the cleanness of my hands he recompensed me;
22 Because I kept the ways of the Lord, 
And did not wickedly depart from my God—
23 Because all his judgments were before me,

Ch, XXII. Il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

And from his statutes I did not depart;

24, I therefore shall be blameless before him,
And J will guard myself from my iniquity ;

 25 And the Lord will reward me according to my riphitdus-

ness—

According to the cleanness of my hands in his sight.

26 With the beneficent thou wilt shew thyself beneficent,
With an upright man thou wilt deal uprightly.

27 With a warrior thou wilt be a warrior,
And with the wily thou wilt practise wiles.

28 Thou wilt save the people who are dejected,
But lofty countenances thou wilt bring down.

29 Because thou, O Lord, art my lamp,
Therefore the Lord will illume my darkness.
30 For by thee I can run like an honoured soldier,
And overleap walls by the help of my God.
31 He is mighty whose way is blameless.

The Word of the Lord is strong—is tried.
He is the defender of all them who trust in him.
$2 Who is mighty, besides the Lord ?
᾿ Who can build up, but our God ὃ
33 He who strengtheneth me is the Mighty One,
He hath cleared my way which is blameless.

34 Thou makest my feet like-the feet of hinds,
And steadiest me on the high places. a5 Thou instructest my hands for battle,
And hast by my arm broken the bow of steel.
36 Thou hast given me a guard for my safety ;
And thy attention hath enabled me
37 To enlarge my steps under me,
So that my feet have not slipped.
38 I shall pursue my enemies and destroy them,

- And will not turn back till I consume them.
39 I will break them so that they shall not rise,
When they shall have fallen under my feet.
40 For thou wilt gird me with strength for battle,
And bend under me my-antagonists.
Al . Thou hast given me the back of my enemies ;
And them who hate me thou hast put to death.

Ch. XXIII. II. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

A5

A8

51

They may cry aloud but there is no help—
To the Lord, but he will not answer them.
I beat them small as the dust of the earth ;
I trampled them like the dirt of highways.
From the tumult of tribes thou wilt save me ;
Thou wilt keep me to be the head of nations.
A people which I knew not shall be my slaves,
Strangers have yielded me feigned obedience.
Soon as they heard they became submissive.
Strange children shall be exposed to contempt ;
They shall tumble down from their places of defence.
Live the Lord! and blessed be he, my guard !
Let my God, my safeguard, be exalted—
The mighty Lord, who is my avenger.
Who chastiseth the people under me,
Who leadeth me out from my enemies.
From them who are stirred up against me
Thou wilt raise me up.
From the man of violence, thou wilt deliver me.
For this cause I will give thee thanks, O Lord, among the nations. .
I will sing melodiously to thy name.
He is magnifying the deliverances of his own king,
And shewing mercy to his anoited—
To David and his seed forever.

XXIII. Now these were the last words of David.

9

-Faithful is David the son of Jessai,

And faithful the man whom the Lord hath set
Over the anointed of the God of Jacob.
And sweet are the psalms of Israel.

The Spirit of the Lord hath spoken by me,
And his word was upon my tongue.
The God of Israel saith to me,
A watchman of Israel hath spoken a proverb.

I said as a man,

(d) How can you strengthen the fear of an anointed ?

A(p) With the light of the God of the morning.

a ES

{d) David. (p) Prophet.

Ch. XXIII. Π. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

1

1

5

6

7

8

9

cor)

(d) Let the Sun rise in the morning betimes.
(p) Is not the Lord gone forth with splendour ?
(d) Yes, like the spring of grass on the earth after rain;
For is not my house thus with the Almighty ?
For he hath made with me an everlasting covenant,
Kept ready for every occasion ;
Because this is all my safety, and all my desire,
That the transgressor may not flourish.
(p) All such are like rejected thorns.
Because they cannot be handled,
Nor can a man labour among them;
Therefore pure iron, and the staff of a spear,
Shall cause them to burn with fire,
And they shall be burned to their shame.

These are the names of David’s worthies.

Jebosthe, the Chananite, a chief of the third rank, who is also called Adinon the Asonite. This man drew his sword against eight hundred warriors at one time. And after him
Eleanon (the son of a man who married his brother’s wife to raise up seed for his brother) the son of Dudi, one of the three worthies with David. When he challenged the Philistines, and. they had assembled for battle, and the men of Israel had gone up, he arose and made a slaughter among the Philistines, till his hand was tired, and glued to his sword, and the Lord wrought a great deliverance that day, and the people went after him only to spoil. And next to him was Samaias, son of Asa the Aruchite. When the Philistines had assembled to forage, where there was a piece of ground full of lentils, and the people fled before the Philistines; he stood like a pillar in the middle of the field, and defended it, and smote the Philistines, and the Lord wrought a great deliverance. These three went down from the thirty, and came to David αἱ Kason, to the cave of
Odollam, when an army of the Philistines was encamped in the valley of Raphain. Now David was then in the fortress, and there was a garrison of the Philistines then at Bethlehem. And
David longed and said, Oh that I had some water to drink out of the well which is at Bethlehem—that by the gate! Upon which these three worthies, notwithstanding the garrison of the

Ch. XXIII. II. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

Philistines then at Bethlehem, broke through the camp of the
Philistines, and drew water out of the well at Bethlehem, by the gate. But when they got it, and came to David, he would

_not drink it, but poured it out as a libation to the Lord, and

17 said, Lord forbid that I should do this... Shall I drink the blood

of these men, who have gone at the risk of their lives? So he

18

19

20

21 would not drink it. These exploits were performed by these three men. Now Abessa, the brother of Joab, son of Saruia, was a chief among the three. He also lifted up his spear against three hundred men, though he was wounded. So he had a name among the three; and being higher in rank than any of the three, he became their chief, though he did not come up to those three. Banaias also, son of Jodae, of Kabeseel, was a man renowned for exploits. He smote the two sons of Ariel the
Moabite. He went down also, and smote a lion in the midst of the pit on a snowy day. He smote also an Egyptian, a man of great stature. Though the Egyptian had in his hand a spear like the side of a ladder, he went down to him with a staff, and wresting the spear out of the hand of the Egyptian, he killed him with his own spear. These exploits Banaias son of Jodae performed, and. had a name among the three worthies. He was higher in rank than any of the three, though he did not come up to the three. And David appointed him Auditor. These also were the names of king David’s worthies, Asael the brother of Joab, he was among the thirty, Eleanon son of Dudi, who married his brother’s wife at Bethlehem; Saima the Rudite; Selles the Kelothite; Iras of Iska, the Thekoite; Abiezer the Anothite, another of the sons of the Anothites; Ellon the
Aoite; Neere the Netophatite; E:sthai son of Riba of Gabaoth; son of Benjamin the Ephrathite; Asmoth the Bardiamite;
Emasu the Salabonite; son Asan; son Jonathan; Samnan the
Aradite; Amnan son of Arai the Saraourite; Aliphaleth son of
Asbites; son of the Machachite; Eliab son of Achitophel the
Gelonite; Asarai the Karmelite, of Ouraioerchi; Gaal son of
Nathana; Poludunameos son of Galaaddi; Elie the Ammonite;
Adroi of the brooks; Gadabiel son of the Arabothite; Gelore the Bethorite, the armour bearer of Joab, son of Saruia; Iras the Etherite; Gerab the Ethinite; Ourias the Chettite. They were thirty seven in all.

Ch. XXIV. II. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

XXIV. Again the anger of the Lord was kindled against Is-

2

[90

10 il

12

13

14.

rael, when one among them over persuaded David, saying,
Go number Israel and Juda.

When the king said to Joab, the captain general of his army, who was with him, Go, I pray thee through all the tribes of Israel and Juda, from Dan to Bersabee, and review the people, and let me know the number of them, Joab said to the king, The
Lord God add to the people, how many soever they be, a hundred fold; and may the eyes of my lord the king see it! But why doth my lord the king set his mind upon this? But the word. of the king prevailed against Joab, and the officers of the army.
So Joab and the chiefs of the army before the king, went out to review the people, Israel. And they crossed the Jordan, and encamped at Aroer on the right of the city, in the valley of
Gad and Eliezer. Then they went to Galaad, and to the land of Thabason, which is Adasai, and came to Danidan and Oudan; and having gone round Sidon, and come to Mapsar of
Tyre, and to all the cities of the Evites, and the Chananites, they came to the south of Juda to Bersabee. So when they had gone round through all the land, they came to Jerusalem, at the end of nine months and twenty days. And Joab laid before the king the amount of the review of the people. And that of Israel was eight hundred thousand fighting men; and the men of Juda were five hundred thousand warriors. And
David’s heart smote him after this numbering of the people : and David said to the Lord, I have sinned greatly in what I have done. Now therefore, O Lord, forgive, I beseech thee, the iniquity of thy servant, for I have acted very foolishly.
And when David arose in the morning, a word of the Lord came to the prophet Gad, the seer, saying, Go and speak to David, and say, Thus saith the Lord, Three things I am ready to bring upon thee, chuse therefore for thyself one of them, that I may do it to thee. So Gad went to David, and delivered the message, and said, Chuse what shall be done to thee.
Shall three years of famine come on all thy land? Or wilt thou flee three months before thine enemies while they pursue thee?
Or shall there be three days of pestilence in thy land? Now therefore consider ; and see what answer I shall make to him

who sent me. Thereupon rh eee said to Gad, I am in great

Chrx xiv. Il. KINGS—II. SAMUEL.

"straits on every side. Pray let me fall into the hands of the’

15

16

17

18

21

22

25

Lord ; for very many and great are his mercies. But let me not fall into the hands of men. Now when David chose for himself the pestilence, it was the time of the wheat harvest.
And the Lord sent a pestilence through Israel, from.the morning till the hour of dining. And the slaughter began among the people, and there died of the people from Dan to Bersabee, seventy thousand men. But when the angel of God stretched forth his hand against Jerusalem to destroy it, the
Lord was moved with compassion at the calamity, and said to the angel who was making havock among the people, It is enough. Stay thy hand. Now the angel of the Lord was by the threshing floor of Orna the Jebusite. And when David saw the angel who was smiting the people, he addressed the
Lord, and said, Behold here am I who have transgressed !
But as for this flock, what have they done? Let thy hand, I pray thee, be upon me, and upon my father’s house. Then
Gad came to David that day, and said to him, Go up and erect an altar for the Lord, on the threshing floor of Orna the Jebusite. So David went up according to the word of Gad, as the
Lord had commanded him. And when Orna looked out, and saw the king and his servants coming up to him, he went out and bowed down to the king, with his face to the ground, and said, Why is my lord the king come to his servant? And David said, To purchase of thee this threshing floor to build an altar to the Lord, that the slaughter among the people may be stayed. Then Orna said to David, Let my lord the king take,

and offer to the Lord what is agreeable to him. Behold here

are cattle fora whole burnt offering, and the carts and the yokes of the cattle for fuel. All these Orna hath given to the kine. And may the Lord thy God, said Orna addressing the king, bless thee. But the king said to Orna, No. Let me only purchase them of thee for their full value; for I cannot offer to the Lord my God a whole burnt offering which costeth me nothing. So David purchased the threshing floor, and the cattle, for fifty shekels of silver. And David built there an altar to the Lord, and offered whole burnt offerings and peace offerings. Now Solomon afterwards enlarged. this altar; for at first it was small. Thus the Lord was entreated for the

᾿ Jand, and the slaughter was stopped from Israel.

Loa 3

opi. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

When king David was old—far advanced in years, they covered him with clothes, but he was not warmed; therefore his servants said, Let a young virgin be sought out for the king, that she may attend him, and chafe him, and lie in his bosom, that my lord the king may be warmed. So they sought for a beautiful virgin, through all the borders of Israel, and having found Abisag, the Somanite, they brought her to the king. ‘The young woman was indeed very beautiful, and she chafed the king, and waited on him, but the king knew her not.

Then Adonias, son of Aggith, took upon him state, saying, I shall be king; and provided himself with chariots, and horsemen, and fifty men to run before him. And his father did not in the least restrain him nor say, Why hast thou done so? Now in person he was very comely, and by birth next after Abessalom. And his plans were concerted with Joab, son of Saruia, and with Abiathar, the priest, and they abetted him. But Sadok the priest, and Banaias, son of Jodae, and
Nathan the prophet, and Semei, and Resi, and the worthies of
David, were not of his party. So having slain sheep, and oxen, and lambs, at the fires of Zaelethi, which is near Rogel,
Adonias invited all his brothers, and all the nobles of Juda, the king’s servants; but did not invite Nathanthe prophet, nor
Banaias, nor the worthies, nor Solomon his brother. Thereupon Nathan spoke to Bersabe, the mother of Solomon, saying, Hast thou not heard that Adonias, son of Aggith, doth reign, and David our lord knoweth it not? Now therefore come, I pray thee, let me advise thee. Save thine own life, and the life of thy son Solomon. Go immediately to king David, and say to him, Didst thou not, O my lord the king, swear to thy servant saying, Thy son Solomon shall reign after me, and

. he shall sit on my throne? Why then doth Adonias reign?

And behold whilst thou art speaking with the king, I will come in after thee, and confirm thy words. So Bersabe went to the king, into the inner chamber. Now the king was very

old, and Abisag the Somanite was waiting on him. And when

Bersabe had bowed. down, and.made obeisance to the king, the king said to her, What is thy will? And she said, My lord, Thou didst swear to thy servant, by the Lord thy God, saying, ‘Thy son Solomon shall reign after me, and sit on my

Ch. 1. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

20

25

26

‘throne. But now behold Adonias reigneth, and thou my lord the king dost not know it. He hath sacrificed oxen, and lambs,
‘and sheep for the multitude, and invited all the king’s sons,

and Abiathar the priest, and Joab the captain general of the

army, but hath not invited thy servant Solomon. Now therefore my lord the king, the eyes of all Israel are upon thee, to

tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord the king after him; otherwise when my lord the king shall sleep with his fathers, I, and Solomon my son, shall be deemed offenders. And behold while she was yet speaking to the king, Nathan the prophet came, and was announced to the king, Here is Nathan the prophet. And when he came into the king’s presence, and had made obeisance to the king, with his face to the ground,
Nathan said, My lord the king, hast thou said, Adonias shall reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne? For he is gone down to-day, and hath sacrificed bullocks, and lambs, and sheep, for the multitude, and invited all the king’s sons, and the chiefs of the army, and Abiathar the priest, and behold they are eating and drinking in his presence, and have said, Long live king Adonias. But me thy servant, and Sadok the priest, and
Banaias, son of Jodae, and Solomon thy servant, he hath not invited. If this is done by order of my lord the king, why -hast thou not made known to thy servant who shall sit on the throne of my lord the king after him? And king David in reply said,
Call Bersabe to me. And when she came in before the king, and stood in his presence, the king swore, saying, As the
Lord liveth, who hath redeemed my soul out of all affliction, as I have sworn to thee by the Lord God of Israel, saying,
Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne in my stead, even so will I do this very day. Thereupon
Bersabe bowed down, with her face to the ground, and made obeisance to the king, and said, Let my lord king David live forever. Then king David said, Call to me Sadok the priest, and
Nathan the prophet, and Banaias, son of Jodae.. And when they came in before the king, he said to them, Take the servants of your lord the king with you, and mount my son Solomon on

34 my mule, and conduct him down to Gion, and let Sadok the

35 priest, and Nathan the prophet, anoint him to be king over Israel. Then sound the trumpet, and say, God save king Solo-

Toa

Ch. 1. ΠΙ. KINGS—I. KINGS,

mon. And let him sit on my throne, and reign in my stead, as

[246 I have appointed him to be ruler over Israel and Juda. There-

upon Banaias, son of Jodae, answered the king and said, Be it so! May the Lord the God of my lord the king confirm it!

37 Asthe Lord hath been with my lord the king, so may he be

with Solomon, and magnify his throne above the throne of my

38 lord king David ! Then Sadok the priest, and Nathan the pro-

phet, and Banaias, son of Jodae, went down with the Cherethites, and the Phelethites, and having mounted Solomon on

39 king David’s mule, they conducted him to Gion. And Sadok

the priest took the horn of oil out of the tabernacle, and having anointed Solomon, he blew the trumpet, and all the people shouted, Live king Solomon! Then all the people followed him up, and danced in choirs, and made great rejoicings, so that the earth was rent with their shouting. And Adonias, and all his guests, heard it just as they had done eating. And when
Joab heard the sound of the trumpet, he said, What is this sound of the city in an uproar? And while he was speaking, behold Jonathan, son of Abiathar the priest, entered. And Adonias said, Come in, for thou art a man of valour, and must have brought good news. ‘To which Jonathan replied, saying, Quite the reverse. Our lord king David hath made Solomon king.
The king sent with him Sadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, send Banaias son of Jodae, and the Cherethites and the
Phelethites, and they mounted himon the king’s mule. And
Sadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, anointed him at Gion, and all the people went up thence rejoicing, so that the city resounded. ‘This is the noise which you have heard. And while

Solomon sat on the throne of the kingdom, the king’s ser-

vants went in to congratulate our lord king David, saying, God make the name of Solomon better than thy name, and magnify his throne above thy throne! And the king bowed on his bed.
And the king said to this effect. Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, who hath this day set one of my seed onmy throne, and my eyes see it. Upon this all the guests of Adonias, were struck with consternation, and wentevery man his way. And Adonias, being afraid of Solomon, arose and went, and took hold of the horns of the altar. And when they told Solomon, saying, Behold Adonias is afraid of king Solomon, and hath hold of the horns of the altar, saying, Let Solomon this day swear to me that he

Ch. II. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

i Or

will not slay his servant with the sword, Solomon said, If he shew himself a virtuous man, there shall not a hair of him fall » to the ground; but if wickedness be found in him he shall be put todeath. Then king Solomon sent, and they brought him down from the altar; and when he came, and had done homage to king Solomon, Solomon said to him, Go to thy house.
Now when David’s days drew near that he should die, he spoke to his son Solomon, and said, [am going the way of all the earth, be thou therefore strong, and shew thyself a man, and keep the watch of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and keep his commandments, and his statutes, and his judgments, which are written in the law of Moses; that thou mayst know what thou art to do, according to all that I command thee— that the Lord may establish his word which he hath spoken, saying, If thy children take heed to their ways, to walk before me in truth, with their whole heart, thou shalt not, said he, have a‘man cut off from the throne of Israel. Now thou thyself

-knowest what Joab son of Saruia hath done to me—what he

did to the two chiefs of the armies of Israel, to Abenner son of
Ner, and to Amessai son of Jether. He indeed slew them, and shed the blood of war in peace, and stained, with guiltless blood, the girdle on his loins, and the shoes on his feet. Do thou therefore according to thy wisdom, so as not to let his grey hairs go down to the grave in peace. But shew kindness tothe sons of Berzelli, the Galaadite, and let them eat at thy table; for so they were near me, when 1 fled from the face of thy brother Abessalom.

Behold also thou hast with thee Semei, son of Gera, the
Jeminite of Baurim. Though he cursed me with a bitter curse on the day when I was marching to Camps, yet he came down to the Jordan to meet me, and I swore to him by the Lord, saying, I will not put thee to death with the sword. Now thou art not to hold him guiltless. As thou art a wise man, thou thyself therefore wilt know what to do to him, and wilt bring down his grey hairs to the grave with blood. \

Then David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David. Now all the days which David reigned over Israel were forty years. He reigned seven years at Chebron, and thirty three years at Jerusalem.

set

nh. Il. Il]. KINGS—I,. KINGS.

14

15

17

18

24.

’ When Solomon sat on the throne of his father David, and his kingdom was well established; Adonias, son of Aggith, went to Bersabe, the mother of Solomon, and bowed to her.
Whereupon she said to him, Is thy coming peaceable? And he satd, It is peaceable. I have something to say to thee. And she said to him, Say on. Then he said to her, Thou knowest that the kingdom belonged to me, and that all Israel looked on. me as king. But the kingdom is transferred, and become my brother’s, because it was his from the Lord. Now therefore 1 have a favour to ask of thee, do not refuse it. And Bersabe said to him, Proceed. Then he said to her, Speak, I pray thee to Solomon, for he will not refuse thee, that he may give me
Abisag, the Somanite, for a wife. Thereupon Bersabe said,
Well, I will speak to the king for thee. So Bersabe went to king Solomon, to speak to him concerning Adonias. And the king arose to meet her, and saluted her, and when he sat down on the throne, there was a throne set for the king’s mother, and she sat on his right hand, and said to him, Ihave a small favour to ask of thee, do not refuse me. And the king said to her,
Ask it, my mother, I will not reject thee. Then she said, I pray thee, let Abisag, the Somanite, be given to thy brother Ado-

2 nias for a wife. Whereupon king Solomon in reply to his mo-

ther, said, But why hast thou asked Abisag for Adonias? Ask for him the kingdom also; for he is my elder brother, and
Abiathar is his priest, and Joab, son of Saruia, his captain general, and his friend. ‘Then king Solomon swore by the Lord, saying, God do so to me and more also, if Adonias hath not spoken this against his own life. Now therefore as the Lord diveth, who hath prepared me, and set me on the throne of my father David, and hath made for me a house, as he hath spoken,
Adonias shall this day be put to death. So king Solomon sent by the hand of Banaias, son of Jodae, and he slew him. And when Adonias was dead, on the very same day, the king said to Abiathar, Begone speedily to thy fields at Anathoth, for thou art this day a condemned man, but I will not put thee to death, because thou didst carry the ark of the covenant of the Lord before my father, and hast shared in all the afflictions with which my father was afflicted. So Solomon expelled Abiathar from being the priest of the Lord, so that the word of the Lord

Ch. III. Ili. KINGS—I. KINGS.

28

29

30

31

$2

-was fulfilled, which he spoke against the house of Eli at
Selom. Now when the news came to Joab, son of Saruia, be- —

cause he had been of Adonias’ party, and nota follower of Solomon, therefore Joab fled to the tabernacle of the Lord, and

took hold of the horns of the altar. And when they told Solo- —

mon, saying, Joab hath fled to the tabernacle of the Lord, and behold he hath hold of the horns of the altar, king Solomon sent to Joab, saying, What is the matter with thee, that thou hast fled to the altar. Thereupon Joab said, Because I was afraid of thee, therefore I fled to the Lord. Then Solomon sent
Banaias, son of Jodae, saying, Go, and kill him, and bury him.
So Banaias, son of Jodae, went to Joab, to the tabernacle of the Lord, and said to him, Thus saith the king, Come out.
And Joab said, I will not go out, for I will die here. Upon which Banaias, son of Jodae, returned and told the king, saying, Thus did Joab say, and thus he answered me; and the king said to him, Go and do to him as he hath spoken. Kill him, and bury him, and take away this day, the blood which he shed without cause, from me and my father’s house. The
Lord indeed hath turned the blood of his iniquity on his head.
Because he fell upon two men more righteous, and better than himself, and slew them with the sword, and my father David knew not of their blood, namely Abenner, son of Ner, the captain general of Israel, and Amessai, son of Jether, the captain general of Juda; therefore their blood is returned on his own head, and on the head of his seed forever. But on David, and his seed, and on his hguse, and his throne, let there be peace from the Lord forever. So Banaias, son of Jodae, went up, and fell upon Joab; and when he had slain him, he buried hym, at his house in the wilderness ; and the king set Banaias, son of Jodae, over the army in his stead.

Now the regal government was established at Jerusalem, and the king made Sadok the priest, the first priest, m the

~ room of Abiathar. And Solomon, son of David, reigned over

Israel and Juda at Jerusalem. And the Lord gave Solomon understanding, and comprehensive wisdom, and an enlargement of heart, like the sand on the sea shore; so that the knowledge of Solomon was enlarged far above the knowledge of all the ancients, and above all the wise men of Egypt. And he took

C—O

ch: II. lil. KINGS—I. KINGS.

36

37

38

99 the daughter of Pharao, and brought her to the city of David, until he finished building his own house, and the house of the
Lord,, which he did first, and. also the wall of Jerusalem round about. These he began, and finished in seven years; for he had seyenty thousand men who carried burdens, and eighty thousand hewers of stone on the mountains. And Solomon made tlie'sea, and its supporters, and the great lavers, and the pillars, and the fountain in the court. And over the brazen sea he built the turreted shelter for it, and cut a canal through the city of David. And when Pharao’s daughter went up out of the city of David into her house, which he had built for her, he then built the citadel. And Solomon offered, every year, three whole burnt offerings, and peace offerings, on the altar which he built for the Lord, and he burned incense before the Lord, and finished the house. Now the chiefs who were set over the works of Solomon were three thousand six hundred. They superintended the people who performed the works. He built also Assour, and Magdo, and Gazer, and upper Baithoron, and
Ballath. But this was after he had built the house of the Lord, and the wall of Jerusalem round about. After finishing these he built the cities above mentioned.

Now while David was still alive he gave a charge to Solomon, saying, Behold thou hast with thee Semei, son of Gera, a descendant of the seed of Jemini of Chebron. He cursed me with a bitter curse when I was marching to Camps. But he

‘came down to the Jordan to meet me, therefore I swore to him

by the Lord saying, Thou shalt not be put to death with the sword. Now thou art not to hold him guiltless. As thou art a jwise man thou thyself therefore wilt know what to do to him, and wilt bring down his grey hairs to the grave with blood.
Therefore the king sent for Semei, and said to him, Build thyself a house in Jerusalem and dwell there, and thou shalt not go out thence any where. For be assured that on the day thou goest out, and crossest the brook Kedron, thou shalt be put to death. Thy blood shall be on thy own head. And the king caused him to take an oath that day. And Semei said. to the king, Good is the word which thou my lord the king hast spoken. Thy servant will do so. Accordingly Semei dwelt in Je-

rusalem three years. But it happened, that after the three years,

Chis Bf. 11. KINGS—I. KINGS.

43

44

46 two slaves of Semei ran away to Angchus son of Maacha king of Geth. And when Semei was told that his slaves were at

‘Geth, he arose, and saddled his ass, and went to Geth to Ang-

chus to seek them. And when he had gone, and brought them back from Geth, Solomon was informed that Semei had gone from Jerusalem to Geth, and brought back his slaves. Upon which the king sent for Semei, and said to him, Did I not adjure thee by the Lord, and protest to thee saying, Be assured that on the day thou goest out of Jerusalem to any place whatever thou shalt surely die? Why then hast thou not kept the

oath of the Lord, and the command which I enjoined thee?

Moreover the king said to Semel, Thou knowest all thy wickedness, and thy. heart is privy to all that thou didst to my father
David, therefore the Lord hath turned thy wickedness on thy own head; and king Solomon shall be blessed, and the throne of David shall be established before the Lord forever. Then king Solomon gave orders to Banaias, son of Jodae, and he went and slew him.

Now king Solomon was very prudent and wise; and Juda and Israel were exceedingly numerous, like the sand on the sea shore for multitude, eating, and drinking, and rejoicing.
And Solomon’ was chief among all the kmgdoms, and they brought him gifts, and served him all the days of his life. And
Solomon began opening the fastnesses of Libanus, and he built
Thermai in the wilderness. And this was Solomon’s allowance for dinner, thirty cores of fine flour, and sixty cores of barley meal; ten beeves stall fed, and twenty beeves from the pasture, and one hundred sheep, besides hinds, fallow deer, and choice fatted fowls; for he was supreme over all the country on this side the river, from Raphi to Gaza, over all the kings bordering on the river, and he was at peace with all around him; so that Juda and Israel dwelt securely, every one under his own vine and under his own fig tree, eating and drinking, and feasting, from Dan to Bersabee, all the days of Solomon. And these were Solomen’s principal officers, Azarias son of Sadok was priest, and Ornias son of Nathan was chief over the overseers; and Edramen was steward; and Suba scribe, and Basa son of
Achithalam, recorder, and Abi son of Joab, captain general of

‘the army; and Achire son of Edrai was at the head of the board

10

11

14

Ill.

Cie Il. 1Π. KINGS—I. KINGS.

of works; and Banaias son of Jodae was captain of the guards; and Kashur son of Nathan, counsellor. And Solomon had four thousand breeding mares for carriages, and twelve thousand horses. And he was supreme over all the kings from the river to the land of the Philistines, and even to the borders of Egypt.
~ Now Solomon son of David reigned over Israel, and Juda in Jerusalem; but the people were in the practice of burning incense on the high places, because till this time there was not a house built to the Lord. And Solomon loved.the Lord, to walk in the statutes of his father David; but he sacrificed and burned incense on the high places. So he arose and went to
Gabaon because it was the highest and greatest to sacrifice there. And when Solomon had offered there a whole burnt offering of a thousand victims upon the altar at Gabaon, the Lord appeared to him that night in a dream, and said to him, Ask for thyself any favour. ‘Thereupon Solomon said, Thou hast shewn great kindness to thy servant David my father. As he walked before thee in truth and righteousness and in uprightness of heart with thee, thou therefore hast kept for him this great kindness to set his son on his throne as at this day. Now therefore, O Lord my God, as thou hast appointed me thy servant in the room of my father David, and 1 am but a little child and know not how to go out and come in, and thy servant is in the midst of thy people whom thou hast chosen, an immense people which cannot be numbered, give therefore to thy servant a heart to hear and to judge thy people righteously, and to discern between good and evil; for who can judge this thy people, this great people which is so numerous? And it was well pleasing in the sight of the Lord that Solomon made this request; therefore the Lord said to him, Because thou hast asked this of me, and hast not asked for thyself many days, nor riches, nor the life of thine enemies, but hast asked for thyself understanding to discern judgment, behold I have granted thy request—behold I have given thee a wise and understanding heart, so that before thee there hath not been one like thee, nor after thee shall there arise one like thee. Moreover I have given thee what thou didst not ask, riches and glory; so that there hath not been among kings a man like thee. And if thou wilt

_ walk inmy ways to keep my commandments and my statutes,

15

21

22

27

28

IV. Ill. KINGS—L KINGS.

as thy father David did, I will also multiply thy days:.c And
Solomon awoke, and behold it wasa dream. Then he arose and came to Jerusalem, and stood before the altar which is in front of the ark of the covenant of the Lord in Sion, and offered whole burnt offerings; and having offered also offerings of thanksgiving, he made a great entertainment for himself and all his servants. ‘Then there appeared before the king two women who were harlots, and when they stood in his presence one of them said, Hear me, my lord, I and this woman dwell in one house, and we were delivered of children in the same house. And it happened that the third day after my delivery this woman was delivered: We were together. There is no body with us—none but we two in the house. And this woman’s son died in the night, as she overlaid it. And she arose in the middle of the night, and took my son out of my arms, and laid it in her bosom; and her own child which was dead, she laid in my bosom. So when I arose in the morning to give my son suck, behold it was dead. But when I examined it attentively in the morning, behold it was not my son whom I bore. And the other woman said, No: but the living is my son and the dead is thy son. And:when both had spoken before the king, he said to them, Thou sayst, This is my child which is alive, and that which is dead is that woman’s child. And thou sayst, No: but the living is my son, and the dead is thy son. Then the king said, Bring me a sword. And when they had laid the sword before the king, he said, Divide the living child—the infant, in two; and give one half to this woman and the other half to that woman. Upon this the woman whose son the living child really was, answered and said to the king—because her bowels yearned for her son, therefore she said, I beseech thee my lord, Give her the child. Do not killit. But the other said, Let it be neither mine nor hers. Divide it. Then the king answered and said, Give the child to her who said,
Give the child to her and do not kill it; For she 15 the mother.
And when all Israel heard the judgment which the king had given, they feared the king, for they saw that there was in him the wisdom of God to execute judgment.

Now when king Solomon reigned over Israel these were his principal officers. Azarias son of Sadok, Eliaph and Achia

Ch. IV. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

16

28

22

23

sons of ϑεθαυνογε scribes, and Josaphat son οἵ Achilud recorder; and Banaias son of Jodae captain general of the army, and Sadok and Abiathar chief priests; and Ornia son of Nathan superintendant of the overseers; and Zabuth son of Nathan the king’s companion, and Achisar was steward; and Eliak high steward; and Eliab son of Saph was over the household; and
Adoniram son of Audon was over the tribute. And Solomon had twelve officers over all Israel to supply the king and_ his household, each to furnish supplies one month in the year, and these were their names. Been son of Or on mount Ephraim, one.. Son Dakar, at Makis, and at Salabin, and at Baithsamys, and Elon even to. Bethanon, another. Son Esdi at Araboth; to him belonged Socho and all the land of Opher. And over all Nephador was son Aminadab, who had to wife Tephath, a daughter of Solomon, another. Bana son of Achiluth had
Ithanach and Mageddo and all the house of San, “oe is by
Sephanan below Esrae, and from Bethsan to Sabelmanla even to Maeberlukam, another. Son Naber at Raboth Galaad; he had the district of Ergab in Basan, containing sixty large cities with walls and brasen bars, another. Achinadab son of
Saddo at Maanaim. Achimaas, who married Basemmath a daughter of Solomon, was in Neplathaleim, another. Bana son of Chousi in Asser and in Baaloth, another. Semei son of Ela in Benjamin. Gaber son of Adai in the land of Gad, which belonged to Seon king of Esebon and Og king of Basan, and Naseph, one; in the land of Juda; Josaphat son of Phaasud in Issachar. ‘These officers thus stationed furnished supplies for king Solomon, and all things ordered for the king’s table, each his month, without the least variation from what was ordered. The barley and straw, for the horses and chariot mares, they carried to the place where the king happened to be, each in his course. Now these were the stated portions for Solomon every day, thirty cores of fine flour and sixty cores of barley meal; ten choice young beeves, and twenty beeves from the pasture, and one hundred sheep besides hinds and fallow deer, and fatted fowls; for he was supreme on this side the river, and was at peace with all around. And the Lord gave Solomon understanding and very comprehensive knowledge; and the effusions of his heart were like the sand on the

V. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

sea shore ; so that Solomon far excelled the wisdom of all the ancients and all the wise men of Egypt. He gave specimens

of wisdom beyond all men—far beyond Gaithan the Zarite,

32

33

34

(5 bo

8

9 and Ainan, and Chelkad and Darala, the sons of Mal. He

uttered three thousand parables, and-his odes were five thousand. He spoke of trees from the cedar whichis on Lebanon, . to the hyssop which springeth out of the wall. He spoke also of cattle, and of fowls, and of reptiles, and of fishes. And there came of all people-to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and from all the kings of the earth who heard the fame thereof.
And Solomon took towife the daughter of Pharao, and brought her to the city of David until he built the house of the Lord, and his own house, and: the wall of Jerusalem: and Pharao king of Egypt, came up and took Gazer, and burned it, and subdued the Chananites who dwelt in Mergab, and gave them as a pgxtion to his daughter, Solomon’s. wife, and Solomon rebuilt Gazer.

When Chiram king of Tyre sent his servaits to anoint Solomon in the room of his father David, because Chiram continued to love David all his days, therefore Solomon sent to
Chiram saying, Thou knowest that my father could not build a house to the name ofethe Lord my God, on account of the wars with those around him on every side, until the Lord put them under the soles of his feet."But now the Lord my God hath given me rest round about. Ihave no adversary, nor any evil occurrence. Therefore I purpose to build a house for the name of the Lord my God; as the Lord my God spoke to my father David, saying, Thy son, whom I will set on thy throne in thy stead, shall build the house to my name. Now therefore give orders, and let timber be cut for me from Libanus; and behold my servants shall be with thy servants, and I will pay thee such hire for the service as thou shalt appoint: for thou knowest that we have-none skilled in hewing timber like the Sidonians. And when Chiram heard the words of Solomon he was exceedingly glad, and said, Blessed be
God this day who hath given David a prudent son over this great people. Then he sent to Solomon saying, I have considered all that thou hast proposed to me, and I will execute all thy pleasure. With respect to the cedar, and fir timber, my

Ch. VI. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

servants shall bring it down from Libanus to the sea; and I

will send it in rafts to the place which thou shalt appoint, and

land it there that thou mayst take it away. And thou wilt

accomplish my pleasure in supplying my household with bread.

10 So Chiram furnished Solomon with cedar and fir timber to

11 his utmost wish. And Solomon gave Chiram, twenty thou-

sand cores of wheat for his household, and twenty thousand

12 baths of expressed oil. This Solomon gave to Chiram every

year. And the Lord gave Solomon wisdom as he said to him.

And there was peace between Chiram and Solomon and they

13 made a league between them. And the king made a levy out

14 of all Israel, and the levy was thirty thousand men. These

he sent to Libanus, ten thousand every month, by turns, so

that they were one month at Libanus, and two at home. And

15 Adoniram was over this levy. And Solomon had seventy

thousand men who carried burdens, and eighty _ hew-

16 ers of stone, in the mountains, exclusive of the officers who

superintended the works of Solomon, and who amounted to

17 three thousand six hundred. And these workmen were three years preparing the stones and the timber.

Now in the four hundred and fortieth year of the depar-

ture of the Israelites out of Egypt, in the fourth year and

17 second month of king Solomon’s reign over Israel, the king

having given orders for bringing great costly stones for the

18 foundation of the house, even hewn stones; and the men of

Solomon and those of Chiram having hewn them, they began

1 laymg them. In the fourth year he laid the foundation of the

38 house of the Lord, in the month of Ziu, which is the second

month, and in the eleventh year, in the month Baal, which

is the eighth month, the house with all its appendages was

completely finished. 

2 Now the house which the king built for the Lord, was

forty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and twen-

3 ty five cubits in height. And the Ailam in front of the temple

was twenty cubits in length commensurate with the breadth

A of the house. And when he had built the house, and finished

5 it he made windows for the house, wide within and narrow

without and placed against the wall of the house, galleries all

6 around the temple and the dabir. The lower gallery was five

Ch. VI. Ii]. KINGS—I. KINGS.

10

16

cubits broad, and the middle six, and the third seven cubits broad; for he made ledges to the house, all around on the outside of the house that the beams might not be fastened into the wallsiof the house. Now the house when building was built with white hewn stones, so that nota mallet nora hammer norany instrument of iron was heard inthe house while it was building. ‘The entrance into the lower gallery was under the right shoulder of the house; and there were winding stairs up to the middle and from the middle to the third gallery. And when he had compleated the building of the house he wainscotted it with cedar. And having built the binding walls through the whole house to the height of five cubits, he connected the binding wall with cedar beams. And having lined the walls of the house on the inside with planks of cedar, from the ground floor of the house up the walls and to the beams, and vaulted the ceiling on the inside with beams, he covered the floor of the house with planks of fir. And he built up the twenty cubits from the end wall as one compartment from the floor to the beams, and made of that the dabir—the holy of holies;
(the temple being forty cubits, the front of the dabir was in the middle of the house on the inside) to put there the ark of the covenant of the Lord. The length of this compartment was twenty cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits, and the height twenty cubits, and he covered it with plated gold. When he had made the altar in front of the dabir and overlaid it with gold, he covered all this compartment with gold at the complete finishing of the whole house. And in the dabir, he made two cherubim; ten cubits the exact magnitude, and five cubits the wing of one cherubim, and five cubits its other wing, making ten cubits from the tip of one wing, to the tip of the other wing. And so in respect to the other cherubim. In measure and workmanship, they were both alike. The height of the one cherubim was ten cubits, and that of the other cherubim was the same. And both the cherubim were in the middle of the innermost house, and they spread their wings so that a wing of one cherubim touched one wall, and a wing of the other cherubim touched the other wall, and their wings touched one another in the middle of the house. And he overlaid the cherubim with gold, and engraved all the wails of the

Ch. ὙΠ. “ΗΠ. KINGS—I. KINGS.

house round about. with engravings of cherubim and palm
30 trees, both in the inner and outer apartment. And he overlaid the floor both of the inner and outer apartment with gold.
31 And for the entrance into the dabir he made doors of juniper
34 wood. The four cheeks for both the doors were of fir, and each door consisted of two leaves which turned each on its
35 own hinges. And the doors were carved with cherubim and palm trees and open leaves, and covered with gold fitted to the
36 carving. He built also the inner court with three rows of hewn stone, and one row of cedar beams; and he made the curtain for the court of the porch of the house which was in the front of the temple.
Vil. Now king Solomon had sent and brought from Tyre a
14 widow’s son named Chiram. He was of the tribe of Nephthaleim, though his father was a Tyrian. He was a worker in brass, a complete artist, filled with understanding and knowledge to execute all kinds of brass work. So he was brought
15 to king Solomon, and executed all his works. He cast two pillars for the ailam [or porch] of the house: The height of each pillar was eighteen cubits, and the circumference thereof
16 fourteen cubits, and the flutings four fingers. And he cast two chapiters to be put on the tops of the pillars; the height
17 of each chapiter was five cubits. He made also two pieces of net work to cover the chapiters of the pillars; one piece of net
18 work for each chapiter. They were a pensile work, with two rows of brass pomegranates in the form of netting, a pensile work, row above row. And he set up the two pillars in the ailam of the temple. And when he set up the one pillar he called its name Jachum; and when he set up the other pillar
22 he called its name Boloz. And on the capitals of the pillars there was a lilly work of four cubits, towards the ailam, and a projected ledge over the two pillars, and this ledge by its
23 thickness was a covering above the sides. He made also the sea, ten cubits from brim to brim, uniformly round, all about.
It was five cubits high and thirty three cubits in circumference.
24 Under its brim, embossments surrounded it, ten to a cubit all around. And the brim of it was like the workmanship
25 of the brim of a cup, with lilly buds. And its thickness was

a hand breadth. And under the sea were twelve beeves, three

2

Ch. VII. 11. KINGS—I. KINGS.

27

28

looking to the north, and three looking to the west, and three looking to the south, and three looking to the east, and all their hinder parts were inward, and the sea was above upon them.
And he made ten mechonoths [cisterns] of brass, five cubits the length of one mechonoth, and four cubits the breadth, and six cubits the height. And the mechonoths had all the same kind of engraved borders, and there were engravings between the prominences; and on their engraved parts between the prominences were lions, and beeves, and cherubim; and on the embossments, above and below the lions and beeves, were fields in bass relief. And each mechonoth had four wheels of brass, and the naves were of brass, and at their four corners there were shoulders under the cisterns, for the axles of the wheels to each mechonoth. And the height of each wheel was a cubit and a half. And the workmanship of the wheels was like that of the wheels of a chariot; and their axles and their felloes and their spokes were all cast. As to the four shoulders at the four corners of each mechonoth, the shoulders were a part of the mechonoth itself. And on the top of the mechonoth there was a cylindrical border, of half a cubit broad, round about on the top of the mechonoth; and it was the beginning of its handles and its engravings; and there was a cock at the ends of its handles. And the sculptures thereon— the cherubim,-and the lions, and the palm trees, were in relievo, each being smooth on the inside all around. In the same manner he made all the ten mechonoths, they being all of the same form and measure. He made also ten large pots of brass, each pot containing forty baths, and measuring four cubits. A large pot for every one of the ten mechonoths. And he placed five mechonoths at the right corner of the house, and five at the left corner of the house, and the sea was at the right corner, southward, facing the east. Chiram made also the kettles and the cauldrons and the basons. Thus Chiram finished completely all these works which he made for king Solomon for the house of the Lord, namely, the two pillars, and the wreathed works of the pillars on the chapiters of the two pillars, and the two pieces of net work to cover the wreaths of ‘the coverings which were on the pillars, the four hundred ponttgranates on the two pieces of net work, there being two rows

Ci VIL Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

A3
45

A7

49

50

51

6 of pomegranates to each piece of net work for covering the wreaths of the chapiters on the two pillars; and the ten mechonoths, with the ten large pots for the mechonoths ; and the sea with the twelve beeves under the sea; and the kettles, and

the cauldrons, and the bowls, and all the utensils which he

made for king Solomon for the house of the Lord. Now the pillars for the house of the king, and for the house of the Lord, were in all forty eight. All these works of the king, Chiram made entirely of brass. There was no weighing the brass of which he made all these works. On account of the immense quantity there was no computation of the weight of the brass.
These he cast on the bank of the Jordan, in the clay ground, between Sokkoth and Seira. And Solomon the king took the utensils which he made for the house of the Lord, the golden altar, and the table of gold on which was to be laid the shew bread, and the five candlesticks on the left, and the five on their right in front of the dabir, which were of beaten gold, and the lamp-stands with the lamps, and the snuffers, which were also of gold, and the doors with the nails, and the cups, and the dishes, and the censers, which were of gold and embossed, and the leaves of the doors of the inner house—the holy of holies, and the doors of the temple which were overlaid with gold. And when all the work was finished which Solomon made for the house of the Lord, then Solomon brought the dedications of his father David, and his own dedications, the silver and the gold, and the utensils, and deposited them in the treasuries of the house of the Lord.

Then was Solomon thirteen years building a house for himself. He built it with timber from the forest of Libanus. The length of it was a hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty cubits, and the height thirty cubits. It had three rows of cedar pillars, and the shoulders of the pillars were of cedar, and he vaulted the house above on the sides of the pillars. The number of pillars were forty, and. five the row. And there were three galleries, story above story thrice. And all the doors and windows, with the spaces between, were squares arched, windows and doors being over one another in three ranges. And the ailam
‘of the pillars which was fifty cubits in length, and fifty cubits in breadth, was joined to another ailam of the same dimen-

Ch. VIII. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

12 sions in front of them, and the thickness of the pillars in front of it was for the ailamins. And the ailam of thrones, where he was to administer justice, was the ailam of judgment. And both were appurtenant to the house in which he was to dwell.
They had one court communicating with both. Of the same workmanship, and with such an ailam, he built a house for
Pharao’s daughter whom he had married. All these were of costly-stones engraved within from the base, and without towards the great court from the foundation to the copings, the foundation of the court being laid with large costly stones— with stones of ten cubits, and those of eight cubits; and above with unhewn costly stones, of the same dimensions, and cedar beams; for the great court round about was enclosed with three rows of unpolished stones, and one row of cedar. Thus
Solomon finished the whole house.

Vill. When Solomon had finished building the house of the

7

8 il

14

Lord, and his own house, at the end of twenty years Solomon the king assembled all the elders of Israel at Sion, in order to carry up the ark of the covenant of the Lord from the city of David, that is Sion, in the month Athanin. And the priests carried the ark and the tabernacle of the testimony and the holy utensils, which were in the tabernacle of the testimony. And the king and all Israel were before the ark, sacrificing sheep and beeves without number, while the priests were carrying the ark into its place—into the dabir of the house—into the Holy of Holies—under the wings of the cherubim; for the cherubim had their wings spread out over the place of the ark, and from above covered the ark and the hallowed things thereof, and were above these hallowed things.
Now the heads of these hallowed things were seen from the
Holies in front of the dabir, but were not seen from without.
There was nothing in the ark but the two tables of stone— the tables of the covenant which Moses made at Choreb— which the Lord established with the children of Israel on their coming out of the land of Egypt. And it came to pass that when the priests came out of the holy place, the cloud filled the house, so that the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud. Because the glory of the Lord filled the house, therefore the king turned away his face. And when.

Ch. VIII, Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS. .

15

17

2 ee

22 the king had blessed all Israel, and all the congregation of
Israel stood up, then he said,

Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel this day, who with his mouth spake concerning my father David, and hath with his hands fulfilled, as he said, From the day I brought my people Israel out of Egypt, I made no choice of a city in any tribe of Israel to build a house for my name to be there. Now I have made choice of Jerusalem for my name to be there, and have chosen David to be over my people Israel. But when it was in the heart of my father to build a house for the name of the Lord God of Israel, the Lord said to David my father,
Because it came into thy heart to build a house for my name, thou didst well that it was in thy heart; but as for thee, thou art not to build a house for me, but thy son only who hath sprung from thy lois—he shall build the house for my name.
Now the Lord hath brought to pass that word of his which he spake, and I am risen up instead of my father David, and have sat on the throne of Israel, as the Lord spake, and have built the house for the name of the Lord God of Israel, and established there a place for the ark, in which is the covenant of the Lord, which the Lord established with our fathers when he brought them out of the land of Egypt.

Then Solomon went up over against the altar of the Lord, in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands towards heaven and said,

O Lord the Gad of Israel, there is no god like thee in the heaven above and on the earth below, keeping covenant and mercy with thy servant who walketh before thee with his whole heart. "These thou hast kept with thy servant David, my father: for what thou didst speak with thy mouth, thou hast with thy hands fulfilled as at this very day. Now therefore, Ὁ
Lord God of Isracl, keep with thy servant David, my father, what thou hast spoken to him, saying, There shall not be ' taken from thee out of my presence a chief man sitting upon the throne of Israel, provided thy children take heed to their ways, to walk before me as thou hast walked before me. Now then, O Lord God of Israel, let I beseech thee, this word of

thine to my father David be confirmed, that it may be so.

27

Will God indeed dwell with men on the earth! If

28

29

35

. VII. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

the heaven and the heaven of heaven will not suffice thee, far less indeed this house which I have built for thy name.
Yet thou, O Lord, the God of Israel wilt look down on this supplication of mine to hearken to the prayer which thy servant this day in thy presence praycth to thee, that thine eyes may be open day and night on this house—on this place of which thou hast said, My name shall be there, that thou mayst hearken to the prayer which thy servant prayeth γέρου this place day and night.

Thou indeed wilt hearken to the supplication of thy servant and of thy people Israel.. Whatever they may address towards this place thou indeed wilt hearken to it in the place of thy habitation in heaven, and wilt do and be merciful.

Whatever trespass any one may commit against his neighbour, when he shall take upon him a curse to curse him, and come and plead before this altar of thine in this house; thou indeed wilt hearken from heaven and act and judge thy people Israel, by condemning the transgressor, and retributing his way upon his head, and by justifying the righteous and. giving him according to his righteousness.

When thy people Israel fall before enemies, because they have sinned against thee, and shall return and confess thy name, and pray and make supplication in this house; thou indeed wilt hear from heaven and pardon the sins of thy people
Israel, and bring them back to the land which thou gayest to their fathers.

When the heaven is shut up and there is no rain because of their sinning against thee; when they shall pray towards this place, and confess thy name and turn from their sins when thou hast humbled them; thou indeed wilt hearken from

_ heaven, and pardon the sins of thy servant and of thy people

37

Israel; for thou wilt shew them the good way, and give rain for the land which thou gavest to thy people for an inheritance.

If there be famine, if there be pestilence (for such things will be) if there be blasting, locust, mildew; or if their enemy afflict them in any of their cities, in every occurrence, in every distress, whatever prayer, whatever supplication any man shall make, when they know every one the plague of his own heart, and shall spread forth his hands toward this house ; thou in-

Ch. VII. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

40

44

45

46

47

48

51 deed wilt hearken from heaven—from thy settled habitation and be merciful, and do and give to every man as thou knowest his heart (for thou alone knowest the hearts of all the children of men) that they may fear thee all the days they live in the land which thou gavest to their fathers.

And with regard to the stranger who is not of thy people
Israel, when they shall come and pray toward this place; thou indeed wilt hearken from heaven—from thy settled habitation, and do according to all, for which the stranger may call upon thee, that all nations may know thy name and fear thee as thy people Israel do, and that they may know that this house which
I have built, is called by thy name.

Because thy people are to go out to battle against their enemies whithersoever thou shalt send them, when they shall pray in the name of the Lord toward this city, which thou hast chosen, and this house which I have built for thy name; thou indeed wilt hearken from heaven to their prayer and do them justice. .

Because they will sin against thee (for there is no man who will not sin ;) when thou shalt punish them, and deliver them up before their enemies; and they who have captivated them shall carry them away captive to a land far off or near; and they bethink themselves in the land to which they*have been carried captives, and in the land of their captivity repent and pray to thee, saying, We have sinned; we have transgressed ; we have committed iniquity; and turn to thee with their whole heart, and with their whole soul, in the land of their enemies, to which thou hast transported them ; and direct their prayers to thee, toward this land which thou gayest to their fathers, and this city which thou hast chosen, and this house which
1 have built for thy name; thou indeed wilt hearken from heaven, from thy settled habitation, and pardon the iniquities which they have committed against thee, and all the acts of disobedience of which they have been guilty; and make them objects of compassion in the sight of those who have captivated them, that they may have compassion on them.

Because we are thy people whom thou hast brought out of the land of Egypt—from the midst of the iron furnace, let thy eyes therefore be fixed on, and thy ears open to the prayer of thy servant, and to the supplication of thy people Israel, to

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

VIL. ΤΙ. KINGS—I. KINGS.

hearken to them in all for which they invoke thee, since thou hast set them apart for thyself for an heritage from among all the people of the earth, as thou spakest by the ministry of thy

servant Moses, when thou, O Lord, Lord, didst bring our fathers out of the land of Egypt.

Then Solomon spoke of the house as if “ had just finished building it,

The Sun he pointed out in heaven—

The Lord said, he would dwell in darkness.

Build thou my house—a house becoming thyself to dwell

in when new.
Behold this is written in the book of the Ode.

When Solomon had finished all this prayer and supplication to the Lord, he arose from before the altar of the Lord (for he had kneeled down on his knees and spread forth his hands towards heaven) and standing up he blessed all the congregation of Israel with a loud voice saying, Blessed be the Lord this day who hath given rest to his people Israel according to all that he hath spoken. Not one word hath failed of all the good words which he spoke by the ministry of his servant Moses. The
Lord our God be with us as he was with our fathers! May he never leave us nor forsake us! May he incline our hearts to him to walk in all his ways, and to keep all his commandments and his statutes which he gave in charge to our fathers! And may the words with which I have made supplication before the
Lord our God, be nigh to the Lord our God day and night, that the determination of every day in the year may establish the rights of thy servant and the rights of thy people Israel; that all the nations of the earth may know that the Lord our
God is very God, and that there is none εἶδε! And may our hearts be perfect with the Lord our God, that we may walk

‘piously in his statutes, and keep his commandments, as at this

64.

day.

Then the king and all the sons of Israel offered a sacrifice before the Lord. And king Solomon offered for the sacrifices of thanksgiving which he offered to, the Lord, twenty two thousand beeves, and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep.
And when the king and all the sons of Israel dedicated the house, the king on the same day consecrated the middle of the

Ch. IX. II. KINGS—I. KINGS.

court in front of the house of the Lord, for he offered there the whole burnt offerings with the sacrifiges and the suet of the thank offerings, because the brazen altar which was before the
Lord was too small for the whole burnt offerings and the sacrifices
65 of the thank offerings to be offered thereon. And on that day Solomon and all Israel with him—a great congregation from the bay οὗ Emath to the river of Egypt, celebrated the festival before the Lord our God at the house which he had built; eating and drinking and rejoicing before the Lord seven
66 days. And on the eighth day he dismissed the people and they blessed the king and went away every man to his house rejoicing and with a glad heart, for all the goodness which the Lord had shewn to his servant David and to his people Israel.
IX. And when king Solomon had finished building the house of the Lord, and the king’s house, and every design which it was
2 his pleasure to execute, the Lord appeared to Solomon a second
3 time as he appeared at Gabaon and said to him, I have heard thy prayer and thy supplication which thou hast made before me, and have done for thee according to all thy prayer.
I have hallowed this house which thou hast built to put my name there for ever, and my eyes and my heart shall be there
4 continually. And if thou wilt walk before me, as thy father
David did, with integrity of heart and with uprightness, and do according to all that I commanded him, and keep my statutes and my commandments, I will establish the throne of thy kingdom in Israel for this age, as I promised thy father David, saying,
6 There shall not fail thee a man ruling in Israel. But if you and your children turn aside from me, and do not keep my commandments and my statutes, which Moses hath laid before you,
7 but go and serve strange gods and worship them; I will assuredly remove Israel from the land which I gave them, and cast out of my sight this house which I have hallowed. for my name; and Israel shall be a desolation and a bye word among all peoples;
8 and this stately house shall be reduced to such a condition that every one who passeth by it will be astonished and will, with expressions of pity, say, Why hath the Lord dealt thus
9 with this land and with this house? ‘To which answer will be made, Because they forsook the Lord their God, who brought their fathers out of βενλένϑαι of the house of bondage; and
VOL. HI.

Choe. : ΤΙ. KINGS—I. KINGS.

10

11

12

13

14.

26 in his stead chose strange gods, and worshipped and served them, therefore the Lord hath brought upon them this calamity.

Then Solomon brought Pharao’s daughter up out of the city of David to the house which he had built for himself. In those days, during the twenty years in which Solomon was building the two houses, the house of the Lord and the king’s house, Chiram king of Tyre supplied Solomon with cedar tim-

ber and pine trees, and with gold and whatever he desired,

therefore the king then gave Chiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee. But when Chiram came from Tyre and went to Galileeto see the cities which Solomon gave him, they did not please him; therefore he said, What are these cities, my brother, which thou hast given me? And he called them Lzttle mount, which is now their name. Nevertheless Chiram brought Solomon a hundred and twenty talents of gold. For on board the fleet which king Solomon built at Esion-gaber, and which was then at Ai-

27 lath, on the border of the farther sea in the land of Edom—in

6

7 this fleet Chiram sent some of his servants who were seamen and skilled in the navigation of that sea, along with the servants of Solomon, and they went to Sophira and took thence a hundred and twenty talents of gold and brought it to king Solomon.

When the queen of Saba heard of the fame of Solomon and the name of the Lord, she came to try him with questions hard to be solved, and came to Jerusalem with a very great retinue, and with camels carrying spices, and gold in great abundance, and precious stones. And when she came to Solomon and had. propounded to him all that was in her mind, Solomon answered all her questions. There was not a question overlooked by the king which he did not explain to her. And when the queen of Saba saw all the wisdom of Solomon, and the house which he had built, and his provisions, and the order in which his servants sat at table, and in which the attendants stood; and his dress, and his cup bearers, and his whole burnt offerings which he offered in the house of the Lord, she was struck with surprise, and said to the king, It was a true report which I heard

_inmy own country concerning thy knowledge and thy under-

standing; but I did not believe them who told me till I came

Cia X. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS, :

10

1

12

and my own eyes have seen. Now behold what they told me was not one half. Thou surpassest in good qualities all the report which I heard of thee in my own country. Happy thy wives, and happy these servants of thine who stand continually in thy presence and hear all thy wisdom. Blessed be the Lord thy God who delighted in thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel. Because the Lord thy God loveth to establish Israel for ever, therefore he hath made thee king over them, to administer justice according to their righteousness and their demerits.
Then she gave Solomon a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and spices in great abundance, and precious stones. ‘There came no more such an abundance of spices as the queen of Saba gave Solomon.

The fleet of Chiram also which brought the gold from
Suphar brought a great quantity of hewn timber and precious stones. And of the hewn timber the king made the wainscottings of the house of the Lord and of the king’s house, and nablas and kinyras for the musicians. ‘There never had come such hewn timber into the country nor hath any such been any where seen to this day. And when king Solomon had given the queen of Saba all that she desired, even all that she asked, over and above all that he gave her out of his. royal bounty, she set out on her return and went to her own country, she and all her servants.

Now the weight of gold which came to Solomon in one year was six hundred and. sixty six talents of gold, besides the tribute of them who were subdued, and what he got from — merchants, and from all the bordering kings and lords of the country. And king Solomon made three hundred lances of beaten gold, three hundred shekels of gold to each lance ; and three hundred suits of armour of beaten gold, three mnas of gold to each suit of armour. These king Solomon deposited in the house of the forest of Libanus. The king made also a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with pure gold. There were six steps up to the throne, and behind the throne were busts of beeves, and on each side of the seat, arms; and two lions standing by the arms; and there were twelve lions standing on the steps, six on one side and six on the other. There was not the like in any kingdom. Moreover all the vessels for

Ch. X. ‘TI. KINGS—I. KINGS.

king Solomon’s service were made of gold. The lavers were of gold, and all the utensils of the house of the forest of Libanus were gilt with gold. None was of silver; for it was not held in estimation in the days of Solomon. For the king had at sea a Tharsian fleet with the fleets of Chiram. One came every three years to the king from Tharsis, with gold and silver and stones wrought in a latheor hewn with a chisel. This was an arrangement which king Solomon had made to provide for building the house of the Lord, and the king’s house, and the wall of Jerusalem, and the citadel; and to fortify the city of David and Assur and Magdol and Gazer and upper Baithoron and Jethermath and all the chariot cities and all the cities for the cavalry; and for all the works which he purposed to construct in Jerusalem and in all the country, in order to keep in subjection all the remains of the Chettites and the
Amorites and the Pherezites and the Chananites and the
Evites and the Jebusites and the Gergasites, who were not of the children of Israel.—The children of them who had been left with him in the land, whom the Israelites could not wholly extirpate, these Solomon subjected to a tribute which continueth to this day. But from the children of Israel he exacted nothing; because they were his Warriors and his servants, his chiefs and his nobles, his charioteers and his horsemen. So
Solomon was magnified above all the kings of the earth in

riches and understanding. And all the kings of the land sought

an interview with Solomon,’ to hear his wisdom which the
Lord put in his heart. And they brought, every one as gifts, vessels of gold and raiment and. stacte and spices and horses and mules and this every year. And Solomon had four thousand mares for chariots and twelve thousand-cavalry. ‘The mares he kept in the chariot cities and with the king at Jerusalem. And he was supreme over all the kings, from the river to the land of the Philistines and to.the borders of Egypt.
So the king made gold and silver to abound in Jerusalem like stones; and cedars like the sycamore trees in the plain. Now
Solomon’s horses came from Egypt and from Thekoua. The king’s merchants got them from Thekoua by barter, but from Egypt a chariot came up for a hundred shekels of silver

Ch. XI. 11, KINGS—I. KINGS.

10

1

and a horse for fifty, and at this rate they came by sea, for all the kings of the Chettites, and for the kings of Syria.

Now king Solomon was immoderately fond of women.
He had seven hundred wives, princesses; and three hundred concubines; and he took for wives strange women besides
Pharao’s daughter, women of Moab and Ammon, Syrians,
Idumeans, Chettites and Amorites. ‘To those of the nations concerning which the Lord had said to the Israelites, You shall not go in unto them nor shall they come in unto you, lest they turn your hearts after their idols—to these Solomon was attached by love: so that when he grew old his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God asthe heart of his father David had been. For when his strange wives had turned his heart after their gods, then Solomon built high places for Chamos the idol of Moab, and for their king the idol of the Ammonites, and for Astarte the abomination of the Sidonians: and thus he did for all his strange wives who burned incense and. sacrificed to their idols. So Solomon did evil in the sight of the Lord. He did not follow the Lord like his father David; therefore the Lord was angry with him, because he turned away his heart from the Lord God of Israel, who had appeared to him twice and had given him a charge touching this very thing, by no means to go after strange gods, but to be careful to do what the Lord God commanded him. His heart was not perfect with the Lord like the heart of his father David, therefore the Lord said to Solomon, Because these things have been done with thee, and thou hast not kept my commandments and my statutes which I enjoined thee, I will divide and rend thy kingdom out of thy hand and give it to thy servant. But I will not do these things in thy days for the sake of thy father David. Out of the hand of thy son will I take it; but I will not take the whole kingdom, I will give thy son one tribe for David my servant’s sake and for the sake of Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen. Then the Lord raised up adversaries to Solomon, namely, Ader the Idumean, and Esrom son of Eliadae of Raama. There had been an insurrection against Adadezer king of Suba his lord, and he was at the head of the conspiracy and had seized on Damascus. These were pests to Israel all the days of Solomon. Now Ader the

Ch. ΧΙ. ll. KINGS—I. KINGS.

Idumean was of the seed royal of Idumea, and in the general extirpation which David made of Edom, when Joab the captain general of the army went to bury the dead after the gene-

16 ral slaughter of the males in Idumea (for Joab and all Israel

continued there six months till they cut off all the males in

17 Idumea) Ader with all the principal Idumeans of the servants
18 of his father fled and went to Egypt. Ader was then but a

child; but the men of the city Madiam arose and came to
Pharan and taking the men with them went to Egypt. And when Ader came to Pharao he gave him a house and ordered

19 him a regular supply of provisions. And Ader was in high fa-

vour with Pharao so that Pharao gave him to wife his own

20 wife’s sister, an elder sister of 'Thekemina. And the sister of

Thekemina bore him a son named Ganebeth. And Thekemi-

21 na brought him up among the sons of Pharao. Though Gane-

beth was among the sons of Pharao, yet ‘when Ade: heard in
“gypt that David slept with his fathers and that Joab the captain general of the army was dead, Ader said to Pharao, Send

92: me away that I may return to my own land. Upon which Pha- .

bw bo

rao said to him, What hast thou been in want of with me that thou seckest to go to thy own land? But Ader said, Nevertheless thou must let me go. So Ader returned to his own country. And this was the mischief which Ader did, he was a bitter enemy to Israel and made himself king in the land of
Edom.

6 With regard to Jeroboam son of Nabat, the Ephrathite of
7 Sarira, a widow’s son, a servant of Solomon, this was the cause

why he hfted up his hand against king Solomon. When the king was building the citadel and enclosing with works the

28 city of his father David, this man Jeroboam was mighty in

power, and Solomon seeing that the youth was a man of bu-

9 siness sct him over the burdens of the house of Joseph. And

it happened that one time when Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, Achia the Selonite the prophet met him on the road and took him aside out of the way. Now Achia was clad with a

30 new mantle; and when they were both alone in the fields,

Achia took the new mantle which he had on and rent it into
‘-twelve pieces, and said to Jeroboam, Take for thyself ten

31 pieces. For thus saith the Lord the God of Israel, Behold I

32

40

A2

43

Ch. XII. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

will rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and give thee ten tribes. But he shall have two tribes for David, my servant’s sake, and for the sake of Jerusalem, the city which
I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel. Because he hath forsaken me and sacrificed to Astarte, the abomination of the
Sidonians, and to Chamos and the idols of Moab, and to their king the horror of the Ammonites, and hath not walked in my ways to do what is right in my sight like hjs father David ; though by raising up enemies against him as I certainly shall do all the days of his life, I will not take out of his hand the © kingdom, which shall-continue to him entire, for the sake of my servant David whom I chose; yet I will take it out of the hands of his son and give thee ten tribes. And to his son
I will give two tribes, that my servant David, may have a standing continually before me in Jerusalem, the city ‘which 1 have chosen for myself to put my name there. And I will take thee, and thou shalt reign over all that thy soul desireth, and thou shalt be king over Israel. And if thou wilt keep all that I will-give thee in charge and walk in my ways, and do what is right before me, keeping my statutes, and my commandments, as my servant David did, I will be with thee, and I will build for thee a sure house, as I did for David. So when Solomon sought to put Jeroboam to death, he arose and fled to Egypt to Susakim king of Egypt, and continued in
Egypt till the death of Solomon.

Now the rest of the acts of Solomon and all that he did, and all his wisdom, behold, are they not written in the book of the acts of Solomon? The time which Solomon reigned in
Jerusalem, over all Israel, was forty years. And Solomon slept. with his fathers and was buried in the city of his father David.
And when Jeroboam son of Nabat heard the news; for having fled from the presence of Solomon he had settled in Egypt and was still there, he set out immediately and came to his own city Sarira which is in mount Ephraim.

Now when king Solomon slept with his fathers, Roboam

XII. his son reigned in his stead. And king Roboam went to

Sikima because all Israel had come there, to make him king.
And the people spoke to king Roboam, saying, ‘Thy father madé our yoke heavy, now therefore lighten thou the hard

7

8

9

10

11

12

19
14.

15

18

ΧΗ. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

service of thy father and his grievous yoke which he imposed on us and we will serve thee. Whereupon he said to them,
Go away for three days and come to me again. So they went away. And the king laid the matter before the elders who stood before Solomon his father while he was alive, and said,
How do you advise me to answer this people? And they spoke to him saying, If thou wilt this day be a servant to the people and serve them and speak good words to them, they will then be thy servants, all thy days. But he slighted the counsel of the old men, which they gave him, and consulted with the young men who had been brought up with him, and who waited on him, and said to them, What do you advise ὁ And what answer should I make to them who speak to me saying, Lighten the yoke which thy father laid on us ?
And the young men who had been brought up with him, and waited on him spoke to him and said, Thus shalt thou say to this people, who have spoken to thee saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, now therefore, lighten it for us, thus thou shalt say to them, My little finger shall be heavier than my father’s loins. My father indeed loaded you with a heavy yoke; but I will add to your yoke. My father chastised you with whips; but I will chastise you with scorpions. So when all the people came to the king on the third day as he had appointed, saying, Come to me again on the third day, the king answered the people roughly. He slighted the counsel of the old men, which they had given him, and spoke to them, in the manner the young men advised, saying, My father made your yoke heavy but I will add to your yoke. My father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions. So the king hearkened not to the people. Because the revolution was from the Lord, that he might perform the word which he spoke, by the ministry of Achia the Selonite, concerning Jeroboam, son of Nabat, therefore when all Israel saw that the king hearkened not to them, they answered the king and said, What portion have we in David ? We indeed have no imheritance in the son of Jessai. To thy tents, O Israel! Now David, feed thy own house. So Israel departed to their habitations.

And when the king sent out Adoniram, who was over the tribute, they stoned him with stones, so that he died. Upon

Ch. XII. ᾿ς i. KINGS—I. KINGS.

19 which Roboam hasted to mount his chariot and flee to Jerusalem. So Israel renounced all ἘΝΕΙΝΗΝ to the house of David to this day.

Now when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was returned from Egypt they had sent and invited him to the assembly, and they made him king over Israel, so that there was none who followed -the house of David but only the tribes of Juda and
Benjamin. And when Roboam came to Jerusalem and assem-

_ bled the congregation of Juda and the tribe of Benjamin, a

23

24.

hundred and twenty thousand of the young men who were warriors, to fight against the house of Israel and to bring the kingdom again to Roboam son of Solomon, a word of the
Lord came to Samaias a man of God, saying, Speak to Roboam son of Solomon king of Juda, and to all the house of Juda and Benjamin, and to the residue of the people, saying, Thus saith the Lord, You shall not go up, nor fight with your brethren the children of Israel. Return every one to his house.
For this thing is from me. So they hearkened to the word of the Lord and desisted from going, as the Lord commanded them.

When king Solomon slept with his fathers and was buried. with his fathers in the city of David, Roboam his son reigned in his stead. He was sixteen years old when he began to reign

- andhe reigned twelve years in Jerusalem, and his mother’s name

was Naama a daughter of Ana son of Naasking of the Ammonites. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord and did not walk in the way of his grand father David. Now there was a man of Mount Ephraim, a servant of Solomon, whose name was Jeroboam and his mother’s name was Sarira. She was a harlot. And Solomon had made him overseer of the burdens of the house of Joseph, and he had built Sarira on Mount
Ephraim. And he had three hundred chariots of horses. He had built the citadel with the burdens of the house of Ephraim, and enclosed the city of David, and was aspiring to the kingdom.
Upon which Solomon sought to put him to death, and he was terrified and fled to Sousakim king of Egypt, and was with him till Solomon died. And when Jeroboam heard in Egypt that
Solomon was dead, he addressed Sousakim king of Egypt and said, Send me away, that I may go to my own land. Where-

Ch. XIV. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

upon Sousakim said, Ask what thou wilt and I will give it thee. For Sousakim had given Jeroboam for a wife Ano an elder sister of his own wife Thekamina. She was great among the king’s daughters and had born to Jeroboam his son Abia.
And Jeroboam said to Sousakim, Only send me away and let me go. So Jeroboam left Egypt and came to the land of Sarira which is on Mount Ephraim. And thither all the tribe of
Ephraim assembled and there Jeroboam built a fortress.
XIV. And when his son fell sick of a grievous sickness Jeroboam went to inquire about his son, and he said to his wife 
Ano, Arise, go and inquire of God concerning the child whether he will recover of his sickness. Now there was a man at.
Selom whose name was Achia. He was sixty years of age and the word of the Lord was with him. So when Jeroboam said to his wife, Arise and take in thy hand for the man of God some loaves and some cakes for his children, and grapes and a pot of honey, the woman arose and took in her hand loaves and two sweet cakes and grapes.and a pot of honey for Achia. Now the man was old and his eyes were dim so that he could not see.
So she departed from Sarira and proceeded on in her journey.
And when she came to the city, to Achia the Selonite, Achia said to his servant, Go and meet Ano the wife of Jeroboam and say to her, Come in and make no stop ; for thus saith the Lord,
I am sending bitter things against thee. And when Ano came in to the man of God, Achia said to her, Why hast thou brought me bread and grapes and sweet cakes and a pot of honey? Thus saith the Lord, Behold thou shalt depart from me and when thou shalt enter the city Sarira, thy maids will - come out to meet and tell thee, The child is dead, For thus saith the Lord, Behold I will cut off from Jeroboam every male. And them of Jeroboam who die in the city, the dogs shall devour; and him who dieth in the field, the birds of the air shall devour. But this child shall be bewailed with the lamentation, Alas! Lord: because in him there hath been found something good respecting the Lord. Upon hearing this the woman departed and just as she arrived at Sarira the child died, and the shout went forth to meet her. Now when
Jeroboam went to Sikima on Mount Ephraim and had assembled there the tribes of Israel, and Roboam son of Solomon

Ch. XIV. ΠΙ. KINGS—I. KINGS.

went up there, a word of the Lord came to Samaias the Enlamite, saying, Take thee a new mantle which hath never been dipt in water and rend it into twelve pieces and give them to Jeroboam and say to him, Thus: saith the Lord,
Take for thyself ten pieces that thou mayst put them—(and when Jeroboam took them, Samaias said, Thus saith the
Lord)—on the ten tribes of Israel. ‘Then the people said to
Roboam son of Solomon, Thy father made his yoke heavy on us, and loaded us with the meats for his table. Now therefore make them lighter on us and we will serve thee. And Roboam said to the people, Three days hence I will give you an answer. Then Roboam said, Bring to me the elders and I wil] consult with them what answer I shall give to the people on the third day. And when Roboam had stated to them the message which the people had sent to him, the elders of the people said, Do as the people have spoken to thee. But Roboam slighted their counsel. It was not pleasing in his sight. So he sent and convened them who were brought up with him and said to them, Such and such a message the people have sent to me. Thereupon these courtiers of his, said, In this manner thou shalt speak to the people saying, My little finger shall be thicker than my father’s thigh. My father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions. And this pleased Roboam, so he answered the people as these young courtiers of his advised him. Upon which all the people like one man said, every one to his neighbour—nay, they all shouted and said, We have no portion in David, nor inheritance im the son of Jessai. To your tents, O Israel! for this man is not fit to be chief or leader. So all the people dispersed from Sikima, and went away every man to his habitation. But Roboam persisted and went and mounted his chariot and returned to Jerusalem, and all the tribe of Juda and all the tribe of Benjamin followed him. And the same year when Roboam had assembled all the men of Juda and Benjamin, and was going up to war against Jeroboam at Sikima, a word of the Lord came to
Samaias thé man of God, saying, Speak to Roboam king of
Juda, and to all the house of Juda and Benjamin, and to all the remnant of the people and say, Thus saith the Lord, You shall not go up, nor fight with your brethren the children of Israel.

Ch. ΧΗ͂Ι. Ili. KINGS—I. KINGS.

Return every one to his house. For this thing is from me. So they hearkened to the word of the Lord, and desisted from going up, as the Lord commanded them.
25 Then Jeroboam rebuilt Sikima on mount cheat pe
26 dwelt there and he went out thence and built Phanuel. And
Jeroboam said in his heart, Behold now the kingdom will revert
27 to the house of David, if the people go up to Jerusalem to offer sacrifice in the house of the Lord ; for the heart of the people will turn to the Lord and to their lord Roboam king
28 of Juda and they will kill me. Therefore the king took counsel and went and made two calves of gold, and said to the people, Rest satisfied in respect to your goimg up to Jerusalem. Behold these are thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee
29 up out of the land of Egypt. And he placed one of them in
30. Baithel and the other he sent to Dan. And this became an occasion of sinning. For the people went before the one even
31 to Dan, and they forsook the house of the Lord. And he built houses on high, places, and made priests of any part
32 of the people who were not of the children of Levi. And Jeroboam instituted a festival in the eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the month, answering to the festival in the land . of Juda, and he went up to the altar which he made at Baithel to burn incense to the calves which he had made, and presented at Baithel the priests of the high places whom he had made.
33 But when he ascended the altar, which he had made, on the fifteenth day of the eight month, at the festival which he had devised cut of his own heart and made a festival for the children of Israel—when he ascended the altar to offer incense,
ΧΙ]. behold a man of God from Juda came by a word of the
2 Lord to Baithel while Jeroboam was standing on the altar to burn incense; and by a word of the Lord cried to the altar and said, O Altar! altar! Thus saith the Lord, Behold a son shall be born to the house of David; his name shall be Josias, and he will burn upon thee the priests of the high places, who burn incense on thee: and upon thee he will burn the bones of men. And on this very.day he will give a sign, for this, said he, is the word which the Lord hath spoken, saying, Behold’ the altar is rent, and the fat which is on it shall be poured out.
4. And when king Jeroboam heard the words of the man of God,

9

10

12

16

18

19

20

ΓΟ ΧΗ. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

who cried against the altar, he stretched forth his hand from the altar, saying, Seize him: and behold his hand, which he stretched forth against him withered so that he could not draw Ὁ it back to him. And the altar was rent, and. the fat was poured out from the altar, according to the sign which the man of
God gave by the word of the Lord. Then king Jeroboam said to the man of God, Entreat the favour of the Lord thy
God and let my hand be restored to me. So the man of God entreated the favour of the Lord, and he restored the king’s hand to him; and it was as it had been before. Then the king said to the man of God, Come. home with me and dine, and
I will give thee a reward. But the man of God said to the king, If thou wouldst give me the half of thy kingdom, I cannot go with thee to eat bread, nor drink water in this place ; 5 for thus hath the Lord commanded me by his word, saying,
Thou must not eat bread nor drink water, nor return the way that thou goest. So he went away by another road, and did . not return by the way he came to Baithel.

Now there dwelt at Baithel a certain old prophet, and his sons came, and told him all that the man of God had done that day at Baithel, and the words which he spoke to the king, and excited the attention of their father. Whereupon their father said to them, Which way went he ὃ And when his sons had pointed out to him, the way which the man of God who came from Juda was gone, he said to his sons, Saddle me the ass. And when they had saddled the ass, he mounted it, and went after the man of God and found him sitting under an oak, and said to him, Art thou the man of God who came from Juda? And he said, Iam. Then he said to him, Come with me and eat bread. And he replied I cannot go back with thee, nor can I eat bread, or drink water in this place ; for so the Lord hath expressly commanded me saying, Thou must not eat bread nor drink water, nor turn back there the way thou hast gone. And he said to him, I also am a prophet as thou art, and an angel hath spoken to me by the word of the
Lord, saying, Bring him back with thee to thy house and let him eat bread, and drink water. But he lied to him. And when he had brought him back ; and he had eaten bread and drank water at his house, a word of the Lord came to the pro-

Ch. XIV. IH. KINGS—I. KINGS.

21 phet, who had brought him back, while they were sitting at the table ; and he said to the man of God who had come from
Juda, Thus saith the Lord, Because thou hast disobeyed the command of the Lord, and hast not kept the commandment,

22 which the Lord thy God commanded thee, but hast turned back and eaten bread and drunk water, in the place which he spoke to thee saying, ‘Thou must not eat bread nor drink water, thy body shall not enter the sepulchre of thy fathers.

23 So after he had caten and drunk, he saddled for him an ass,

24 and he turned and went away. Anda lion met him on the road and killed him, and his body was cast in the highway and

25 the ass stood by it. The lion also stood by the body. And behold men who were passing by saw the corpse lying in the high way, and the lion standing near the corpse, and they came and spoke of it in the city where the old prophet dwelt.

26 And when he who had brought him back heard, he said, This

8 is the man of God, who disobeyed the word of the Lord. So he went and found the body cast in the highway, and the ass and the lion were standing by it. The lion had not eaten the

29 body of the man, nor hurt the ass. So the prophet took up the body of the man of God, and having laid it on the ass he

30 brought him back to the city to bury him in his own sepulchre, and they bewailed him with the lamentation, Alas bro-

31 ther! And after bewailing him he spoke to his sons, saying,
When I die, bury me in this grave, where the man of God is buried. Place me close by his bones, that my bones may

32 be preserved with his bones. For what he hath spoken by the word of the Lord against the altar at Baithel, and against the high places of Samaria will surely come to pass.

33 But after this affair Jeroboam did not turn from his wickedness, but again made from any part of the people, priests of the high places. Whoever pleased, consecrated himself and

34 became a priest of the high places. And this became a sin to the house of Jeroboam, and occasioned its destruction and utter removal from the face of the earth.

XIV. 21 Now Roboam son of Solomon reigned over Juda. He was forty one years old at the commencement of this reign, and hereigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the Lord had chosen out of all the tribes of Israelto puthisname there, and

On Xe Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

22 his mother’s name was Naama, the Ammonitess. Roboam did

23 what was evil in the sight of the Lord, and provoked him with , all those things which their fathers had done, with all the sins which they had committed. They built for themselves high places, and pillars, and arbours, on every high hill and under every shady tree, and sodomy was committed in the land. And they practised all the abominable acts of the nations which the Lord had removed from before the children of Israel.
Wherefore in the fifth year of Roboam’s reign, Sousakim king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and. took all the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the

᾿ king’s house, and the golden lances which David had taken

out of the hand of the servants of Adraazar king of Suba, and brought to Jerusalem. All these he took, together with the golden armour which Solomon had made, and carried them away to Egypt. And in their stead king Roboam made _brasen armour which were committed to the charge of the officers of the guards who kept the door of the king’s house. And because, when the king went to the house of the Lord, the guard carried them, therefore they were fixed up against the wall of the guard room. Now the rest of the acts of Roboam and all

that he did, behold, are they not written in the journal of the

kings of Juda? Now there was a war between Roboam and
Jeroboam all their days. And when Roboam went to rest with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of

XV. David, Abiou his son reigned in his stead. In the

2

2

eighteenth year of the reign of Jeroboam son of Nabat, Abiou, son of Roboam began to reign over Juda, and reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Maacha, a grand daughter of Abessalom. And he walked in the sins of his father which he had committed in his sight, and his heart, like the heart- of his father, was not perfect before the Lord. his
God. Nevertheless for the sake of David, the Lord gave him surviving issue that he might establish his children after him, and establish Jerusalem, as David had done what was right in the sight of the Lord, and had not deviated all the days of his life from all that he commanded him. Now the rest of the acts of Abiou and all that he did, behold are they not written in the journal of the kings of Juda? for the war continued between

Ch. XV. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

8

13

18

7

19

Abiou and Jeroboam. And Abiou went to rest with his fathers

in the twentieth year of the reign of Jeroboam, and was buried

with his fathers in the city of David, and Asa his sei vei in his stead.

In the twenty fourth year of the reign of J exis king of
Israel, Asa began to reign over Juda, and he reigned forty one years in J erudaleta. His mother’s name was Ana, a descendant of Abessalom.: And Asa did what was right in the sight of the
Lord, like his father David. He removed the prostitutes out of the land, and abolished all the devices which his father had instituted, and degraded his mother Ana from the rank of queen, as she had kept an assembly in her arbour. And Asa cut down her bowers and burned them with fire by the brook
Kedron. But he did not remove the high places. Nevertheless
Asa’s heart was perfect before the Lord all his days. And he brought in the pillars of his father. He brought in also his own pillars which were of gold or silver, together with vessels into the house of the Lord. Now there was a war between
Asa and Baasa, the king of Israel, all their days. And when
Baasa, king of Israel came up, and was building Rama, that none might go out or come in to Asa king of Juda, Asa took all the silver and gold which was found in the treasures of the house of the Lord, and in the treasures of the king’s house, aud delivered it into the hands of his servants; and Asa despatched them to Son Ader, son of Taberema the son of Azin king of Syria, who dwelt at Damascus, saying, Renew with me the league which was between my father and thy father.
Behold I have sent thee presents of gold and silver, come break thy league with Baasa king of Israel, that he may go up from me. Accordingly Son Ader hearkened to king Asa, and sent the generals of his armies against the cities of Israel, and they smote Ain and Dan and Abel, of the house of Macha, and all Chennereth, even to the land of Nephthaleim. And when Baasa heard this, he left off building Rama and went back to Thersa. Whereupon king Asa sounded to all Juda the alarm Against the Enakims. And they carried away the stones, and the timber, with which Baasa was building Rama. And with them king Asa built mount Benjamin and the watch tower.. Now the rest of the acts of Asa, and all the power he

Ch. XVI. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

30

91

94 exercised, and the cities which he built, behold are they not written in the book of the journal of the kings of Juda? In his old age he was afflicted with the gout. And when Asa went to rest with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David, Josaphat his son reigned in his stead.

Now Nabat son of Jeroboam began his reign in the second year of Asa king of Juda, and reigned two years in Israel. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of his father, and in his sins with which he caused Israel to sin.
And Baasa son of Achia beset him at the house of Belaan son of Achia and slew him at Gabathon of the Philistines: for Nabat and all Israel were besieging Gabathon. Baasa slew him in the third year of Asa son of Abiou king of Juda and reigned in his stead. And soonas he began to reign he smote the whole house of Jeroboam. He did not leave a living soul belonging to
Jeroboam until he had utterly extirpated him according to the word of the Lord which he spoke by the ministry of his servant Achia the Selonite, for the sins of Jeroboam who had caused Israel to sin, and for the provocation with which he had provoked the Lord God of Israel. Now the rest of the acts of
Nabat and all that he did, behold are they not written in the

‘book of the journal of the kings of Israel?
33.

In the third year of Asa king of Juda, Baasa son of Achia began his reign of twenty four years over Israel, at Thersa.
And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of Jeroboam son of Nabat, and in his sins, with which he caused

XVI. Israel to sin; therefore a word of the Lord came to Baasa

9

by the ministry of Iou son of Anani, Because, though I raised thee from the ground and made thee ruler over my people Israel, thou hast walked in the way of Jeroboam, and caused my people Israel to sm—to provoke me to wrath by their idols, behold I will rouse after Baasa and after his house, and I will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nabat—
Him of Baasa who dieth in the city the dogs shall deyour; and him who dieth in the fields the birds of the air shall devour.
Now the rest of the acts of Baasa and all that he did, and his exploits, behold are they not written in the book of the journal of the kings of Israel? And Baasa slept with his fathers and was

buried at Thersa, and Ela his son reigned in his stead.

Ch. XVI. 11. KINGS—I. KINGS.

7

18

19

21

22

Now by the ministry of Iou son of Anani, the Lord had spoken against Baasa, and against his house, on account of all the wickedness which he had committed in the sight of the
Lord to provoke him to wrath by the works of his hands, that he should be treated like the house of Jeroboam, and that he would smite him. So when Ela son of Baasa had reigned over
Israel two years at Thersa, Zambri the commander of one half of his cavalry, conspired against him; and when he was drinking to excess in the house of Osa his steward at Thersa, Zambri went in and smote him, and killed him, and reigned in his stead. And when he had made himself king, and seated himself on his throne, he smote all the house of Baasa according to the word which the Lord spoke to Iou the prophet, against the house of Baasa, for all the sins of Baasa and his son Ela, because they had caused Israel to sin, to provoke the Lord God of Israel by their idols. Now the rest of the acts of Ela and all that he did, behold are they not written in the journal of the kings of Israel?

And Zambri reigned at Thersa seven days, and Israel was encamped against Gabathon of the Philistines. But when the people in the camp heard the news that Zambri had conspired and slain the king, they made Ambri the general of the army of israel, king over Israel that very day in the camp. And Ambri with all Israel marched up from Gabathon and laid siege to Thersa. And when Zambri saw that the city was taken, he went into a cellar of the king’s house and set the house on fire over him. So he died for the sins which he had committed by doing evil in the sight of the Lord, and walking in the way of
Jeroboam son of Nabat, and in his sins so as to cause Israel to sin. Now the rest of the acts of Zambri and the conspiracies which he contrived; behold are they not written in the journal of the kings of Israel?

Then were the people of Israel divided. One half of the people followed Thamni son of Gonath to make him king; and the ather half of the people followed Ambri. But the people who followed Ambri prevailed over them who followed 'Thamni son of Gonath. So Thamniand his brother Joram died at the same time. And Ambri reigned after Thamni in the thirty first year of king Asa. And Ambri reigned twelve years over Israel.

CheX V1. {lI.. KINGS—I. KINGS.

24,

He reigned at Thersa six years. Then Ambri purchased mount
Semeron of Semer the lord of the mount, for two talents of silver, and having built on the mount, he called the name of the city which he had built, Semeron, after the name of Semer the owner of the mount. And Ambri did evil in the sight of the Lord. Nay, he exceeded in wickedness all that went before him, and walked in all the way of Jeroboam son of Nabat, and in the sins by which he caused Israel to sin, to provoke the Lord God of Israel with their idols. Now the rest of the acts of Ambri and all that he did; and all his power, behold are they not written in the journal of the kings of Israel? And
Ambri slept with his fathers and was buried in Samaria, and
Achab his son reigned in his stead.

Now in the eleventh year of Ambri, Josaphat son of Asa began to reign when he was thirty years of age, and reigned

five years in his father’s reign, and twenty five years in Jerusa-

lem; and his mother’s name was Gazuba a daughter of Seli.
He walked in the way of his father Asa and deviated not from it, doing what was right in the eyes of the Lord. But the high places were not removed. On these they sacrificed and burned incense. Now the agreements which Josaphat made with the king of Israel, and all the dominion which he exercised and the battles which he fought, behold are they not written in the journal of the kings of Juda? ‘The remains of prostitution which were set up in the days of his father Asa he remoyed out of the land. Though he was not king in Syria-Nasib, king Josaphat built a fleet for Tharsis to go to Sophir for gold.
But it did not go; for the fleet was wrecked at Gesion gaber.
Then the king of Israel said to Josaphat, let me send thy servants in the fleet with my servants: but Josaphat would not consent. And when Josaphat went to sleep with his fathers he was buried with his fathers in the city of David, and Joram his son reigned in his stead.

In the beubind year of Josaphat king of Juda, Achab son of
Ambri began his reign of twenty two years over Israel. And
Achab did evil in the sight of the Lord, and surpassed in wickedness all that went before him. It did not suffice him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam son of Nabat; but he took to wife Jezabel, a daughter of Jethebaal king of the Sidonians,

Ch. XVII. Il]. KINGS—I. KINGS.

34 and went and served Baal, and worshipped him. And he erected for Baal an altar in the house of his idols, which he had built in Samaria. Achab also made a bower, and proceeded on in adding to his provocations, to provoke the Lord God. of Israel and to destroy his own soul. He did evil above all the kings of Israel who were before him.

Now in his days Achiel the Baithelite, rebuilt Jericho.
With Abeiron, his first born, he laid the foundation thereof, and with Segub his youngest son, he set up its gates, according to the word of the Lord which he spoke by Joshua son of
Nave.

XVII. And the prophet Elias the Thesbite, who was of Thes-

10

18 bon in Galaad, said to Achab, As the Lord God of hosts, the
God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain for years but by the word of my mouth. Then a word of the Lord came to Elias, Go hence eastward and: hide thyself by the brook Chorrath which is before the Jordan ; and thou shalt have water from the brook to drink and I will command the ravens to feed thee there. So Elias did according to the word of the Lord, and took up his abode by the brook
Chorrath, fronting the Jordan. And the ravens brought him bread in the morning and flesh in the evening, and he drank water from the brook. And when he had been there a year, the brook dried up; for there was no rain in the land. Thereupon a word of the Lord came to Elias, Arise and go to Sarepta of Sidonia. Behold I have ordered a widow woman there to sustain thee. So he arose and went to Sarepta, and when he came to the gate of the city, behold there was there a widow woman gathering sticks. And Elias cried after her, and said to her, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water that I may drink.
And as she was going to fetch it, Elias called after her and said, Bring me I pray thee a morsel of bread in thy hand.
Whereupon the woman said, As the Lord thy God liveth, I havenot acake baked and only about a handful of barley meal in the jar and a little oil in the vessel; and behold I was picking up a few sticks, that I may go-in and prepare it for myself and my children, that we may eat and die. And Ehas said to her,
Take courage, go in and do as thou hast said, but make for

me a little cake of it, and bring it out first to me, and after-

* Ch. XVIII. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

“14

20

2

24,

wards thou shalt make for thyself and thy children. For thus saith the Lord, The jar of meal shall not fail, nor shall the vessel of oil diminish, until the Lord shall send rain on the land. So the woman went and did so. And though she and her children ate yet the jar of meal did not fail, nor was the oil in the vessel diminished, according to the word of the Lord which he spoke by Elias. And it happened that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and the disorder increased till there was no breath left in him. Upon which she

‘said to Elias, What hast thou to do with me, O man of God?

Art thou come to me to bring my sins into remembrance and cause my son to die? And Elias said to the woman, Give me thy son. So he took him out of her bosom and carried him up into the upper chamber where he lodged, and laid him on his bed. Then Elias cried and said, Wo is me! O Lord! Here is the witness of the widow with whom I dwell. Thou hast afflicted her m causing her.son to die. And when he had breathed on the child three times and called on the Lord, he said, O Lord, my God, I beseech thee let this child’s life be restored to him. And so it came to pass and the child cried.
Then Elias brought it down from the upper chamber, and delivering him to his mother, said, See, thy son liveth. Whereupon the woman said, Now I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of the Lord in thy mouth is true.

XVIII. And after many days, a word of the Lord came to Elias

2

3 a

in the third year, saying, Go and shew thyself to Achab and I will send rain on the face of the land. Now when Elias went to shew himself to Achab there was a grievous famine in Samaria.
And Achab had called his steward Abdiou. This Abdiou

: feared the Lord greatly ; so that when Jezabel smote the pro-

phets of the Lord, Abdiou took a hundred men who were prophets, and hid them by fifties in a cave, and fed them with bread and water. And Achab said to Abdiou, Come and let us go through the land to the fountains of water and to the brooks, perhaps we may find grass to save the horses and mules alive, that they may not be utterly destroyed from our habitations.
So they divided the way between them, that they might traverse the country. Achab went one way, and Abdiou went by himself another way. And as Abdiou was in the

Ch. XVIII. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

‘10

16

19 way by himself Elias came by himself to meet him. Whereupon Abdiou hasted and fell on his face and said, Art thou he, my lord Elias? And Elias said, Iam, Go and tell thy master, Behold Elias is here. And Abdiou said, In what have 1 sinned that thou shouldst deliver thy servant into the hand of Achab, that he may put me to death ? As the Lord thy
God liveth, there is not a nation or a kingdom-to which my master hath not sent to seek thee. And if they said, He is not here, he burned the kingdom or its borders, because he did not find thee. And now thou sayst, Go tell thy master, Behold Elias is here. But it may be, that when I am gone from thee, the Spirit of the Lord will carry thee away to a land which I know not. So that when I shall go and tell Achab, and he shall not find thee, he will kill me. Now thy servant is one who feareth the Lord from his youth. Hath it not been told thee, my lord, what I did when Jezabel slew the prophets of the Lord—how I hid a hundred men of the prophets of the
Lord by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water ὃ
Yet, now thou sayst, Go, tell thy master, Behold Elias is here, that he may kill me. And Elias said, As the Lord of hosts liveth, before whom I stand, I will this day shew myself to him.
Then Abdiou went to meet Achab, and when he told him,
Achab hasted and came to meet Elias. And when Achab saw
Elias, he said to him, Art thou he, the troubler of Israel? ‘To which Elias replied, Iam not the troubler of Israel; but thou and thy father’s house are, by your forsaking the Lord your
God and going after the Baalims. Now therefore send and eather to me all Israel to mount Carmel, and the prophets of shame, four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the bowers four hundred, who eat at Jezabel’s table. And when Achab had sent to all Israel, and had assembled all the prophets at mount Carmel, Elias came near before them all, and Elias said to them, How long will you halt between two opinions? Ifthe
Lord is God, follow him: but if Baal; follow him. But the people made no reply. Then Elias said to the people, I am left a prophet of the Lord myself alone. But the prophets of Baal are four hundred and fifty men, and the prophets of the Bower four hundred. Let there be given to us two young bulls, and let them chuse one for themselves, and cut him in pieces, and

Ch. XVIII. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

24

20

27

28

29

lay them on wood, but put no fire; and I will prepare the other and put no fire. And call ye on the name of your gods, and I will invoke the name of the Lord my God. And the God who shall answer by fire, let him be God. And all the people answered and said, The proposal thou hast made is fair. Then
Elias said to the prophets of shame, Chuse for yourselves one young bull, and prepare it first; for you are many; and call on the name of your god, but put no fire toit. So they took the young bull and prepared it, and called on the name of Baal from morning till noon, and said, Hearken to us, O Baal!
Hearken to us. But there was no voice. There was no answer; though they ran upon the altar which they had erected.
And when it was noon, Elias the Thesbite mocked them, and. said,-.Call louder; for he is a god; for he is engaged in meditatation, or perhaps he is busy, or perhaps he is asleep, and must be awaked. Then they called with a loud voice, and according to their custom cut themselves with knives and lancets till there was a gush of blood upon them, and prophesied till the approach of the evening. But when it was about the time when the sacrifice should ascend, Elias the Thesbite spoke to the prophets of the idols, and said, Desist now, and I will prepare my whole burnt offering. So they desisted, and went away. Then Elias said to the people, Draw near tome. And when all the people came near before him, Elias-took twelve stones according to the number of the tribes of Israel, to whom the Lord had spoken, saying, Thy name shall be Israel; and he built the stones in the name of the Lord, and repaired the altar which had been thrown down. Then he made a trench around the

3 altar sufficient to contain two measures of seed, and piled up

the split wood upon the altar which he had made. He then divided the whole burnt offering in quarters, and laid it on the split wood. And when he had laid it in order upon the altar, he said, Bring me four pots of water and pour it on the whole

: burnt offering and on the split wood. And when they had done

so, he said, Do the same again. And when they had done this a second time, he said, Do it a third time. So they did it a third time, and the water ran down about the altar and filled the trench with water. Then Elias raised his voice to heavea and said, O Lord, the God of Abraham and of Isaak and of

Ch. XIX. ill. KINGS—I. KINGS

A3

45

ἴϑγδοὶ, hearken to me! O Lord, hearken to me this day by fire.
And let all this people know, that thou art the Lord God of Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that by thee I have done these works. Hearken to me, O Lord! Hearken to me; and let this people know, that thou art the Lord God, and tha thou hast turned the heart of this people back again. Thereupon fire from the Lord fell down out of heaven and consumed. the whole burnt offering, with the split wood and the water in the trench and the stones, and licked up even the dust. Tiien all the people fell on their faces and said, Of a truth the Lord is
God. He is very God. Then Elias said to the people, Seize the prophets of Baal. Let none of them escape. So they seizd them and brought them to Elias, down to the brook Kisor! «1 slew them there. Then Elias said to Achab, Go up ané eat and drink, for there is a sound of coming rain. So when Achab went up to eat and drink, Elias went up to the top of Carmel, and having bowed down on the earth, he put his face between his knees and said to his servant, Go up and look towards the sea. And when the servant looked and said, There is nothing,
Elias said, Return thou again seven times. So the servant returned seven times, and at the seventh time he said, Behold there is a little cloud like a man’s foot drawing up water.
Whereupon he said, Go up and say to Achab, Prepare thy chariot and go down lest the rain overtake thee. In the mew while the heaven gradually darkened with clouds and win: and there came on a great rain. And while Achab wept ar! was travelling on to Jezrael the hand of the Lord was up
Elias and having girded up his loins, he ran before’ Achab-

XIX. to Jezrael. - And when Achab told his wife Jezabel

2

3

4 all that Elias had done, and how he had slain the prophets with the sword, Jezabel sent to Elias, and said, As sure as thou art Elias, and I Jezabel, God do so to me and more also, if by this time to-morrow I do not make thy life like the life of one of them. At this Elias was terrified, and arose and went where his inclination led him, and coming to Bersabee, in the land of Juda, he left his servant there, and he himself went a day’s journey into the wilderness ; and came and sat down under a juniper tree, and intreated that he might dic, and said, Let the present suffice. Take, I beseech thee, Ὁ

Ch. XIX. 1Π. KINGS—I. KINGS.

Lord, my life from me ; for I am not better than my fathers.
Then he lay down and fell fast asleep there under a bush. And behold one touched him and said to him, Rise and eat. And Elias looked up and behold at his head a cake of barley bread, and epitcher of water! So he arose and ate and drank, and again laid him self down to sleep. And the angel of the Lord returned the secund time and touched him and said to him, Rise and eat, for the journey may be too great for thee. So he arose and ate and diank, and in the strength of that meal travelled forty days and forty nights till he came to mount Choreb, and having there gone into the cave and taken.up his lodging there, behold a
~vord of the Lord came to him and said, Why art thou come iither Elias ὃ To which he replied, I have been very zealous

_ sor the Lord Almighty, because the children of Israel hath for-

11 oo

14

15

16

17

‘saken thee. They have demolished thy altars and slain thy

prophets with the sword. And I alone am left and they seek my life to take it. And it said, Thou shalt go out to-morrow and stand before the Lord on the mount. Behold the Lord

will pass by. Accordingly behold there wasa mighty strong ,

blast of wind rending mountains and breaking rocks in pieces before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind. And after the wind, there was an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake. And after the earthquake, a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire: And after the fire, there was a sound of a gentle breeze which when Elias heard, he covered his face with his mantle and went out and stood beneath the cave. And behold there came a voice to him and said,
Why art thou come hither, Elias? To which Elias replied,
I have been very zealous for the Lord Almighty, because the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant. They have demolished thy altars and slain thy prophets with the sword; and
Talone am left, and they seek my life to take it. And the
Lord said to him, Go, return on thy way ; and when thou art come to the way of the wilderness of Damascus, thou shalt go and anoint Azael to be king of Syria; and thou shalt anoint
Jehu son of Namessi to be king over Israel; and Elisha son of Saphat thou shalt anoint to be a prophet in thy stead. And it shall come to pass that him who escapeth from the sword of

Azael, Jehu will slay ; and him who escapeth from the sword

Ch. XXI. 11. KINGS—I. KINGS.

18

19

20

2h

of Jehu, Elisha will slay. But thou shalt leave in Israel seven thousand men, all the knees which have not bowed to Baal, and every mouth which hath not worshipped him. So when he departed thence he found Elisha son of Saphat. He was ploughing with cattle. ‘There were twelve yoke before him, and he was with the twelve. Andas he passed by him, he threw his mantle on him. Whereupon Elisha left the cattle and ran after Elias and said, Let me salute my father and I will follow thee. And Elias said, Return; for] have done with thee. So he returned from following him, and he took the cattle which were yoked, and slew them, and boiled them with the implements of the cattle, and gave them to the people, and when they had eaten, he arose and went after Elias and waited on him.

XXI. Now Nabuthi the Jezraclite had a vineyard near the

2

threshing floor of Achab king of Samaria. And Achab spoke to Nabuthi, saying, Give me this vineyard of thine, that I may have it fora garden of herbs, because it isnear my house; and I will give thee another vineyard better than it; or if it seem good in thy sight, I will give thee money in exchange for thy vineyard, that I may have it for a kitchen garden.
And Nabuthi said to Achab, God forbid that I should give thee the inheritance of my fathers: at which Achab’s spirit was so disturbed, that he laid himself down on his bed and covered his face and would not eat. Thereupon Jezabel his. wife, went to him and said to him, Why is thy spirit troubled so that thou art not at thy meal? And he said to her, Because I spoke to Nabuthi the Jesraelite, saying, Give me thy vineyard for money, or if thou please I will give thee another vineyard for it; buthe said, I will not give thee the mheritance of my fathers. And Jezabel his wife said to him, Is it thus thou now actest the king over Israel? Arise and eat, and be like thyself, and I will give thee the vineyard of Nabuthi the Jezraelite. Then she wrote a letter in Achab’s name, and sealed it with his seal, and sent it to the elders and freemen, who dwelt.with Nabuthi. This was the purport of the letter. Proclaim a fast and set Nabuthi at the head of the people, and suborn two wicked men and let them testify against him saying, He renounced God. and the king. Then let him be led

Ch XXL IL, KINGS—I. KINGS.

12

13

16

19

20

25 out and stoned to death. And the men of the city, the elders and freemen who dwelt in his city did as Jezabel had sent to them, even as it was written in the letter she sent them. So havitig proclaimed a fast, they set Nabuthi at the head of the people, and there came in two wicked men and sat over against him and testified against him saying, Thou hast renounced
God and the king. Upon which they led him out of the city, and stoned him with stones so that he died. Then they sent to
Jezabel saying, Nabuthi hath been stoned and is dead. When
Jezabel heard she said to Achab, Arise and take possession of the vineyard of Nabuthi the Jezraelite, who would not give it to thee for money, for he is not alive, for he is dead. But when Achab heard that Nabuthi the Jezraelite was dead, he rent his clothes and put on sackcloth ; yet after doing this, he arose and went down to the vineyard of Nabuthi the Jezraclite, to take possession of it. Whereupon the Lord spoke to Elias the Thesbite, saying, Arise and go down to meet Achab king of
Israel, who is at Samaria; for he is in the vmeyard of Nabuthi; for he is gone down there to take possession of it. And thou shalt speak to him, and say, Thus saith the Lord, As thou hast murdered and taken possession, therefore thus saith the
Lord, In every place where the swine and dogs have licked the blood of Nabuthi, there shall the dogs lick thy blood, and harlots shall bathe themselves in thy blood. And Achab said to
Elias, Hast thou found me, O my enemy? To which he replied, I have found thee. Because thou hast sold thyself to do evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to wrath, behold I

am going to bring evil upon thee, and I will kindle a flame after

thee and utterly destroy the whole race of Achab, both him who is attended and him who is neglected in Israel. And I will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam son of Nabat, and hike the house of Baasa son of Achia, for the provocations with which thou hast provoked me, and caused Israel to sin. And to
Jezabel the Lord hath spoken saying, The dogs shall devour her on the ramparts of Jezrael. Him of Achab who dieth in the city, the dogs shall devour, and him who dieth in the fields, the birds of the air shall devour.

But though Achab had acted foolishly in selling himself to do evil in the sight of the Lord, as Jezabel his wife incited him,

ΟΝ, Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

26 and though he had rendered himself very abominable, by following abominations with all the ceremonies practised by the
Amorites, whom the Lord had rooted out from before Israel;

27 yet as Achab was struck with compunction at this message on account of the Lord, and went away weeping; and as he had rent his clothes and girded sackcloth on his body and fasted; for he had put on sackcloth on the day he smote Nabuthi the

28 Jezraelite; therefore when he went away, a word of the Lord came by the hand of his servant Elias concerning Achab, and

29 the Lord said, Hast thou seen how Achab is struck with compunction on account of me? I will not bring on the calamity in his days; but in the days of his sons I will bring it on.

AX. Now when Son Ader had assembled all his army, he went up and sat down before Samaria. He had with him thirty two

2 kings and all his cavalry and chariots. And when they had gone up and laid siege to Samaria and fought against it, he sent to Achab king of Israel into the city, and said to him,

3 Thus saith Son Ader; Thy silver and thy gold are mine. And

4 thy wives and thy children are mine. In reply to which the king

of Israel said, As thou my lord, O king, hast spoken, I am thine and all that I have. Then the messengers returned and said,

Thus saith Son Ader, I have sent to thee saying, Thy silver

and thy gold and thy wives and thy children thou shalt give to

6 me. Therefore about this time to-morrow I will send my ser-

vants to thee, and they shall search thy house, and the houses

of thy servants, and take all that are desirable in their eyes, upon which they can lay their hands. Upon this the king of

Israel called all the elders of the land and said, Mark, I pray

you and see how this man seeketh mischief. For he hath sent

to me for my wives and for my children, even for my daugh-

8 ters. My gold and my silver I did not withhold from him.
Then the elders and all the people said to him, ‘Thou must not

9 hearken nor consent. Thereupon he-said to the messengers of
Son Ader, Tell your lord, All that thou didst send to thy servant at first I will do ; but this I cannot do. So the men went

10 away; and when they carried him back this answer, Son Ader sent to him saying, God do so to me and more also, if I do not

11 make Samaria a jakes for all the people of my infantry. “In reply to which the king of Israel said, Enough! let not him who

ch. XX. ——s II. KINGS—I. KINGS.

12 is crooked boast like him who is straight. When this answer was delivered him, it happened that he and all the kings with him were drinking in tents, thereupon he said to his servants,
Build up a mount. And when they had erected a mount

13 against the city, behold a certain prophet came to Achab king of Israel and said, Thus saith the Lord, Hast thou seen this great multitude? Behold I deliver them up this day into

14 thy hands, and thou shalt know that lam the Lord. And
Achab said, By whom? And he said, Thus saith the Lord, By the younger sons of the chiefs of the communities. Then Achab

15 said, Who shall begin the battle? And he said, Thou, Upon this Achab reviewed the younger sons of the chiefs of the com-

16 munities and they were two hundred and thirty. And after that he reviewed all the people of the army, seven thousand, and

17 marched out at noon day. Now Son Ader was revelling at Sokkoth, he and the kings, the thirty two kings his auxiliaries.

_ And when the younger sons of the chiefs of the communities first marched out, messengers were sent who told the king of

18 Syria and said, There are men coming out of Samaria. Whereupon he said to them, If they come out for peace, take them alive; or ifthey come out for battle take them alive and let them

19 not get away out of the city. The younger sons of the chiefs of the communities and the army that followed them had now

20 smitten every one his man. And when they repeated this, every one slaying his second man, Syria fled and Israel pursued them.
And Son Ader king of Syria escaped on the horse of a cava-

21 lier. And the king of Israel went out and took all the horses

22 and the chariots. And when he had smitten Syria with great slaughter the prophet came to the king of Israel and said,
Strengthen thyself and consider and see what thou art to do.
For at the return of the year Son Ader king of Syria will come up against thee.

23 As for the servants of the king of Syria they said, The God of Israel is a god of the mountains and not a god of the vallies; for this cause he prevailed over us. But if we fight them in the

24 plain we shall surely be ‘stronger than they. Therefore do this.

Send away the kings every one to his home and substitute, com-

5 manders in their stead. And let us raise for thee another army

equal to that which is fallen, horse for horse and chariot for

26

28

6 bo

33

2

Ye ny Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

chariot. And we will fight them in the plain and prevail over them. So he hearkened to their voice and did accordingly.
And at the return of the year Son Ader reviewed the Syrians and came up to Aphek to fight Israel. And the Israelites were mustered and went out to meet them. And when Israel had encamped over against them like two little flocks of kids, while Syria filled the country, the man of God came and said to the king of Israel, Thus saith the Lord, Because Syria hath said, The Lord God of Israel is a god of the mountains, but he is not a god of the vallies, therefore I will deliver this great army into thy hand, and thou shalt know that
Lam the Lord. So having encamped against each other se-_ ven days, they came to an engagement on the seventh day; and Israel smote of the Syrians a hundred thousand footmen in one day, and the residue fled to Aphek into the city, and the wall fell upon twenty seven thousand of the men who were left. And Son Ader fled, and when he got to the house of his abode into the inner chamber, he said to his servants, I know that the kings of Israel are merciful. Let us, I pray you, put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes on our heads, and go out to the king of Israel. Perhaps he will spare our lives. So when they had girded sackcloth on their loms, and put ropes on their heads, they βαιά το the king of Israel, ‘Thus saith thy servant
Son Ader, Let my life, I pray thee, be spared. To which he replied, Is he still alive? He is my brother. Whereupon the men catched up the omen, and using it as a libation, they repeated the word which dropped from his mouth, and said, Thy brother, Son Ader. Then he said, Go in and bring him. So he came out. And when they had helped him up to Achab into the chariot, he said to him, The cities which my father took from thy father 1 will restore to thee. And thou shalt make strects for thyself in Damascus, as my father did im Samaria.
On these terms, said Achab, I agree to let thee go. And when he had entered into covenant with him and let him go; a certain man of the sons of the prophets said to his neighbour by the word of the Lord, Smite me, I pray thee; but the man would not smite him. Whereupon he said to him, Because thou hast not hearkened to the word of the Lord, behold

7 when thou departest from me a lion will smite thee. Accord,

Ἃ 38. And the man smote him, and in smiting, wounded him. Then

Ch. XXII. ΠῚ. KINGS—I. KINGS.

ingly when he went from him, a lion met him and slew him.
Then he met another man and said, Smite me, I pray thee.

the prophet went and waited for the king of Israel by the way
‘39 side, with a bandage over his eyes. And as the king was passing by, he cried with a loud voice to the king, and said, Thy servant went out to the field of battle, and behold a man brought me a man, and said to me, Keep this man. If by any ameéans he escape, thy life shall answer for his life, or thou shalt
40 pay atalent of silver. Now it happened that while thy servant was looking about this way and that, he was gone. And the king of Israel said to him, Behold this is treachery. In my
41 opinion thou art liable to death. Thereupon he hasted and took the bandage from his eyes, and the king of Israel perceived
42 that he was one of the prophets. Then he said to him,
Thus saith the Lord, Because thou hast let go out of thy hand a destructive man, therefore thy life shall answer for his
A3 life; and thy people for his people. And the king of Israel went away confounded and sorrowful, and came to Samaria,
XXII. and remained quiet three years, and there was no war between Syria and Israel.
2 But in the third year, when J saphiat king of Juda, came
3 down to the king of Israel, the king of Israel said to his servants, Do you not know that Remmath Galaad belongeth to
A us, yet we do not talk of taking it out of the hand of the king of Syria. Then the king of Israel said to Josaphat, Wilt thou go up with us to Remmath Galaad to battle? ‘To which Josaphat replied, I am as thou art; my people as thy people; my horses as thy horses. Then Josaphat said to the king of Israel,
6 Inquire I pray thee of the Lord. Whereupon the king of Israelassembled all the prophets, about four hundred men, and said to them, Shall I go up to Remmath Galaad to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for the Lord will certainly deliver into the king’s hands. And Josaphat said to the king of
Israel, Is there not here a prophet of the Lord that we may inquire
8 of the Lord by him? And the king of Israel said to Josaphat, There is a certain man by whom we may inquire of the
Lord, but I hate him; for he never speaketh good of me; but evil—one Michaias, son of Jemblaa. And Josaphat king of

.1

Ch. XXII. lll. KINGS—I. KINGS.

1 a2)

14

15

16

19

21

22

23

Juda said, Let not the king speak so. Then the king of Israel called a chamberlain, and said, Bring here quickly Mi-. chaias son of Jemblaa. Now the king of Israel and Josaphat king of Juda were seated each on his throne, clad in armour, in the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets were prophesying before them. And Sedekias son of Chanaan made for himself horns of iron, and said, Thus saith the Lord, with these thou. shalt push Syria until he be utterly destroyed. And in like manner all the prophets prophesied, saying, Go up to Remmath Galaad, for the Lord will prosper the journey and deliver into thy hands the king of Syria. So the messenger who went to call Michaias, spoke to him saying, Behold all the prophets with one mouth speak good things concerning the king, conform, I pray thee, thy words to the words of every of them, and speak good things. To which Michaias replied, As the Lord liveth, whatever the Lord shall say to me, that will I speak. And whenhe came before the king, the king said to him, Michaias, shall I go up to Remmath Galaad to battle, or shall I forbear ὁ And he said, Go up, and the Lord will deliver into the king’s hand! Then the king said to him, How often must I adjure thee that thou shouldst speak truth to me m the ~ name of the Lord? Thereupon he said, Is not this the case? I saw all Israel dispersed on the mountains like a flock which hath no shepherd ; and the Lord said, Is not the Lord, their
God? Let every one return to his house in peace. Then the king of Israel said to Josaphat, Did I not ‘tell thee that he would not prophesy good to me, for he never speaketh any thing but evils? Whereupon Michaias said, It is not so. It is not I. Hear a word of the Lord. Is not this the case? I saw the God of Israel seated on his throne, and all the hosts of heaven stood around him, some on the right and some on the left. And the Lord said, Who will deceive Achab king of Israel that he may go up and fall at Remmath Galaad? And when one spoke in this manner and another in that, there came forth a spirit and stood before the Lord, and said, I will deceive him. And the Lord said to him, How? And he said, I will go out and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.
And he said, Thou shalt deceive him and actually prevail.
Go and do so. Now therefore behold the Lord hath put a ly-

Ch. XXII. ΠῚ. KINGS—I. KINGS.

ing spirit in the mouth of all these prophets of thine; but the

24 Lord hath spoken evils against thee. Thereupon Sedekias

95°

32

39 son of Chanaan went near and smote Michaias on the cheek, and said, What sort of a spirit of the Lord is that which hath spoken by thee? To which Michaias replied, Behold thou shalt see on that day when thou shalt go into thy inmost chamber to hide thyself there. Then the king of Israel said, Take
Michaias and carry him back to Semer, the ruler of the city, and tell Joas, the ruler’s son, to put him in ward and feed him with the bread of affliction, and water of affliction, till I return in peace. And Michaias said, Ifthou return in peace, the Lord hath not spoken by me.

Then the king of Israel went up, and Josaphat ἣῃ king of
Juda with him, to Remmath Galaad. And the king of Israel said to the king of Juda, I will disguise myself “ὦ enter into the battle, and thou shalt put on my raiment. So the king of
Israel disguised himself and went into the battle. Now the king of Syria had given a charge to the thirty two commanders of his chariots, saying, Fight not with small or great, but only with the king of Israel. Accordingly when the commanders of the chariots saw Josaphat, king of Juda, they said,
This appeareth to be the king of Israel, and wheeled about to fight him, and Josaphat uttered a loud cry. And when the commanders of the chariots saw that he was not the king of
Israel, they turned back from him. Then one drew a bow at a venture and smote the king of Israel between the lungs and the breast. Whereupon he said to his charioteer, Turn thy hand and carry me out of the battle, for lam wounded. As the battle was that day disastrous the king remained in his chariot over against the Syrians from morning till evening and the blood flowed from the wound into the body of the chariot. And at the going down of the sun the herald of the army stood and made proclamation, saying, Every man to his city and to his own land; for the king is dead. And when they came to Samaria they buried the king in Samaria, and washed off the blood at the fountain of Samaria, and the swine and the dogs licked the blood, and the prostitutes bathed themselves in the blood, according to the word of the Lord

which he spoke. Now the rest of the acts of Achab and all
ΟΕ. 11. ο

Ch. XXII. Ill. KINGS—I. KINGS.

40

43 aie)

that he did, and the ivory house which he built, and all the cities which he founded, behold are they not written in the book of the journal of the kings of Israel? And when Achab slept with his fathers, Ochozias his son reigned in his stead.

Now Josaphat son of Asa was king over Juda. In the fourth year of Achab, king of Israel, Josaphat began his reign.
He was thirty five years of age when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty five years in Jerusalem, and his mother’s - name was Azuba, a daughter of Salai. And he walked in all the way of his father Asa, and deviated not from it, doing what was right in the sight of the Lord. But he did not remove the high places. Still the people sacrificed and burned incense on the high places. And Josaphat was at peace with the king of Israel. Now the rest of the acts of Josaphat, and all the exploits which he did, behold are they not written in the book of the journal of the kings of Juda? And Josaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of
David his father, and Joram his son reigned in his stead.

Ochozias son of Achab, began his reign over Israel, in Samaria, in the seventeenth year of Josaphat king of Juda, and reigned over Israel in Samaria two years. He did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of his father Achab, and in the way of his mother Jezabel, and in the sins of the house of Jeroboam son of Nabat, who made Israel sin, and served the Baalims and worshipped them, and provoked the Lord God of Israel according to all that had been done before him.

IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

After the death of Achab, Moab broke covenant with
Israel. And Ochozias fell through the lattice in his upper chamber at Samaria, and was sick, whereupon he sent messengers, saying to them, Go and inquire of Baal the fly-god of Akkaron, whether I shall recover from this sickness of mine. And when they set out to inquire of him, the angel of the Lord called Elias the Thesbite, and said, Arise and go, meet the messengers of Ochozias king of Samaria, and say to them, Is it because there is not a God in Israel, that you are going to

4

5

6

10

11

13

14

IV. KINGS—II. KINGS..

inquire of Baal the fly-god of Akkaron? Now is not this the case, saith the Lord, From the bed to which thou art gone up thou shalt not come down, for thou shalt assuredly die? So
Elias went and spoke to them, and the messengers returned to the king. Thereupon he said to them, Why are you returned ?
To which they replied, There came up a man to meet us, and he said to us, Go, return to the king who sent you and say to him, Thus saith the Lord, Is it because there is not a God in
Israel, that thou goest to inquire of Baal, the fly-god of Akkaron? Now is not this the case; From the bed to which thou hast gone up thou shalt not come down, for thou shalt assu-

‘redly die? Now when they who returned told the king what

Elias had said, he said to them, What sort of a man was he who came up to meet you, and spoke these words to you ?
And they said to him, He was a hairy man, girt about the loins with a leathern girdle. Upon which he said, This is
Elias the Thesbite. Then he sent to him a captain of fifty with his fifty, who went up to him. Now behold Elias was sitting on the top of the mount. And when the captain spoke to him

‘and said, Man of God, the king hath sent for thee, come down.

Elias, in reply, said to the captain, If I be a man of God, let fire come down from heaven and consume thee and thy fifty. So there came down fire from heaven and consumed him and. his fifty. But the king persisted, and sent to him another captain of fifty with his fifty. And the captain spoke to him and said,
Man of God, thus saith the king, Come down quickly.
Whereupon Elias in reply, said to him, If I be a man of God, let fire come down from heaven and consume thee and thy fifty. Accordingly there came down fire from heaven and consumed him and his fifty. Still the king persisted, and sent another captain and his fifty. But when the third captain came he fell upon his knees before Elias, and with entreaties addressed him, saying, O man of God, let my life and the lives of thy servants, these fifty, be precious in thy sight. Behold, fire hath come down from heaven and consumed the two former captains of fifty; but now let my life, I beseech thee, be precious in thy sight. Then the angel of the Lord spoke to Elias, and said, Go down with him; be not afraid of them. So Elias arose and went down with him to the king, And Elias spoke

3

4,

Il. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

to him and said, Thus saith the Lord, Why didst thou send messengers to inquire of Baal the fly-god of Akkaron ? Is not this the case? From the bed to which thou hast gone up thou shalt not come down: for thou shalt assuredly die? So he died according to the word of the Lord, which Elias spake. Now the rest of the acts of Ochozias which he did, behold are they not written in the book of the journal of the kings of Israel ὃ
And Joram son of.Achab reigned over Israel in Samaria, twelve years, commencing in the eighteenth year of Josaphat king of
Juda. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, but not in the manner his brothers, nor as his mother had done. He indeed removed the pillars of Baal which his father had erected, and broke them to pieces. Nevertheless he adhered to the sins of the house of Jeroboam, who had caused Israel to sin, and did not depart from them. Therefore the Lord was provoked to wrath against the house of Achab.

* Now when the Lord was about to take up Elias as it were with a whirlwind into heaven, Elias went with Elisha from
Galgala. Now Elias had said to Elisha, Tarry here I pray thee, for God hath sent me to Baithel. But Elisha said, As the
Lord liveth and thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. So they went to Baithel. And the sons of the prophets who were at
Baithel, came to Elisha and said to him, Dost thou know that the Lord will take thy master to-day from over thy head ?
And he said, I know it. Hold your peace. Then Elias said to Elisha, Tarry here I pray thee ; for the Lord hath sent me to Jericho. But he said, As the Lord liveth, and thy soul liveth, I will not forsake thee. So they went to Jericho. And the sons of the prophets who were in Jericho, came to Elisha and said to him, Dost thou know that to-day the Lord will take away thy master from over thy head? And he said, I indeed know it; hold your peace. Then Elias said to him,
Tarry here I pray thee, for the Lord hath sent me to the Jordan. But Elisha replied, As the Lord liveth and thy soul liveth,
I will not leave thee. So they both proceeded on. And fifty men, sons of the prophets stood over against them at a distance when they two stopped at the Jordan. And Elias took his mantle and having rolled it up, he smote the water, and the water parted this way and that, so that they both crossed on dry

Che il. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

9

10 ll

14

15

16

2 17

18

19

22 ground. And when they had crossed, Elias said to Elisha,
Ask what I shall do for thee, before I am taken up from thee.

Whereupon Elisha said, Let tine be, I pray thee, a double portion of thy spirit on me. And Elias said, Thou hast put: me to a stand by this request. If thou seest me taken up from thee, it shall be so to thee ; but if not; it cannot be granted.
And as they proceeded on conversing as they went, behold a chariot of fire, with horses of fire, made a separation between them; and Elias was carried up with a whirlwind as it were into heaven. And Elisha saw and cried withaloud voice, My father! my father! The chariot of Israel and the driver thereof! And when he saw him no more, he took hold of his garment and rent it in two pieces. Then he took up the mantle of Elias which fell from on high, and on his return back, he stood on the bank of the Jordan, and took the mantle of Elias which had fallen from him, and smote the water and said, Where is the God of Elias now! And when he had smitten the waters they parted this way and that, so Elisha crossed over. And. when the sons of the prophets who were at Jericho over against him, saw him, they said, The spirit of Elias hath rested on
Elisha, so they went to meet him, and made obeisance to him by bowing to the ground. Then they said to him, Behold there are with thy servants fifty valiant men. Let them, we pray thee, go and seek thy master. Perhaps a blast of the
Lord hath lifted him up and cast him by the Jordan, either on one of the mountains, or one of the hills. And Elisha said,
You shall not send. But when they pressed him till he was ashamed, he said, Send. So they sent fifty men. And when they had searched three days, but did not find him, they returned to Elisha, who abode at Jericho.. And Elisha said to them, Did I not tell you, you should not go?

Then the men of the city said to Elisha, Behold the situation of the citys good as our lord seeth, but the water is bad and the ground barren. Thereupon Elisha said to them, Bring mea new pitcher and put salt therein. And when they had got one and brought it to him, Elisha went to the spring of the waters, and threw the salt in there and said, Thus saith the the Lord, I cure the waters. There shall no more be thence death or barren ground, So the waters were healed, and

Ch. HI. IV. KINGS—IE KINGS.

continue so to this day, according to the word which Elisha

_ spoke. :

Then he went up thence to Baithel, and as he was going up he met in the way, little boys who had come out of the city, and who mocked him saying, Ascend bald head! Ascend!

_ And looking back upon them, he beheld them, and denounced

10 id

a curse against them, in the name of the Lord. And behold there came two bears from the forest, and they tore forty two of the boys. Thence he went to mount Karmel, and thence returned to Samaria.

Now Joram son of Achab, began his reign in Israel in the eighteenth year of Josaphat king of Juda, and reigned twelve years, and did evil in the sight of the Lord, but not like his father nor his mother. He indeed removed the pillars of Baal

_which his father had erected; but he adhered to the sin of Je-

roboam son of Nabat, who had caused Israel to sin, and did

. not depart from that. Now Mosa king of Moab, was a Noked

[one who paid tribute in sheep] and rebelliously withheld from the king of Israel a hundred thousand lambs, and a hundred thousand rams with the wool. And it happened that after the death of Achab, when the king of Moab broke covenant with Israel, king Joram was at that time gone from Samaria and was reviewing Israel. So he proceeded on and sent to Josaphat — king of Juda, saying, The king of Moab hath broken covenant with me, wilt thou go with me to battle against Moab ?
To which he replied, I will go up. He 15 the same to me as he is to thee. My people is as thy people; my horses as thy horses. Then he said, Which way must I go up? ‘To which he answered, By the way to the wilderness of Edom. So the king of Israel and the king of Juda, and the king of Edom, went out and took a circuit of seven days, and there was no water for the army nor for the cattle which attended them.
And when the king of Israel said, Alas! for the Lord hath called the three kings who have come thus far, to deliver them into the hand of Moab; Josaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the Lord, that we may inquire of the Lord by him?
Whereupon one of the king of Israel’s servants in reply, said,
Elisha son of Saphat is here, who poured water on the hands of Elias. And Josaphat said, The word of the Lord is with

(Ch Til. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

him. So the king of Israel, with Josaphat king of Juda and

13 the king of Edom, went down to him. And Elisha said to the king of Israel, What hast thou to do with me ? Go to the prophets of thy father and the prophets of thy mother. And the king of Israel said to him, I am fearful that the Lord hath called these

14. three kings to deliver them into the hands of Moab. To which
Elisha replied, As the Lord of hosts liveth in whose presence
I stand, were it not that I respect the person of Josaphat king

15 of Juda, I would not look on thee nor see thee. But now bring

16 me amusician. And when the musician played, the hand of

17 the Lord came upon him, and. he said, Thus saith the Lord,
Make this valley full of ditches. For thus saith the Lord, You shall not see wind nor shall you see rain, nevertheless this valley shall be filled with water that you and your beasts and your

18 cattle may drink. And this is but a small matter in the eyes of

19 the Lord; for I willdeliver Moab into your hands, and you shall smite every fenced city, and cut down every goodly tree.

_ And all the wells of water you shall stop up, and every good

20 piece of ground you shall mar with stones. Accordingly im the morning when the sacrifice ascended, behold there came water by the way of Edom, and the land was filled with water.

21 Now all Moab upon hearing that the three kings were coming to fight against them, had sounded the alarm, Jo arms
JSrom every place all who weara girdle, and having repeated the

22 alarm Wo, were drawn up at their border. And when they arose in the morning and the sun shone on the waters, the Moabites saw the waters over against them red like blood, and

23 said, This is the blood of the sword. The kings have fought and every man hath slain his fellow, now therefore to the

24 spoils, Ὁ Moab! But when they came to the camp of Israel, the Israelites arose and smote Moab. And as the Moabites fled before them they entered the country advancing and smit-

25 ing Moab. The cities they demolished, and on every good piece of ground they threw, every man his stone. And when they had filled it and stopped up every fountain, and cut down - every goodly tree, until they left only the stones of the wall of
Katheremenus, then the slingers surrounded this and smote

26 it. And when the king of Moab saw that the battle was too strong for him, he took with him seyen hundred men who

Ch iv. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

drew the sword, to cut their way through to the king of Edom.

27 But when he could not, he took his son, his first born, whom

he had made king in his stead, and offered him up as a whole

burnt offering on the walls. Upon which great commiseration

came upon Israel, and they departed from him, and returned into their own land.

Ἂν When ἃ woman, ἃ widow, of one of the sons of the pro-

phets cried to Elisha, saying, Thy servant, my husband, is

᾿ dead, and thou knowest that thy servant was one who feared the

Lord, and the creditor is come to take my two sons to be his

2 slaves, Elisha said toher, What can I do for thee? Tell me; 

What hast thou in thy house? To which she replied, Thy ser-

vant hath nothing in the house, but only the oil with which I

8 anoint myself. Thereupon he said to her, Go and borrow of all

4 thy neighbours empty vessels. Spare not in borrowing. Then

go in and shut the door on thee and thy sons, and pour out into

5 these vessels, setting aside that which is full. So she went away

’ from him; and having shut the door on herself and her sons,

they brought to her and she poured out until the vessels were

6 filled. And when she said to her sons, Bring me another ves-

sel, and they replied, There is not a vessel more, the oil stop-

7 ped. Then she went and told the man of God, and Elisha said

to her, Go and sell the oil and pay thy debts, and live thou and thy children on the oil whichis left.

8 It happened also that one day when Elisha went to Soman,

a woman of rank there prevailed on him to eat bread. So as oft

9 as he went thither he called in to eat. Whereupon the woman

said to her husband, Behold I perceive that the man of God—

10 this holy man passeth by us on all occasions, let us I pray thee,

prepare for him a small room up stairs, and let us put there for

him a bed anda table and a chair and a lamp, so that when he

11 cometh to us he may turn in thither. So one day when he went

_there he turned aside into the chamber, and having slept there,

12 he said to his servant Giezi, Call me this Somanite. So he call-

13 ed her and she stood before him. (Now he had said to his ser-

vant, Say, I pray thee, to her, Behold as thou hast taken all

this trouble for us, what must I do for thee? Hast thou any

message to send to the king or to the general of the army?

And she had said to him, I indeed dwell in the midst of my

Gn. IV. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

17

25

26 a.

people. Upon which he said to Giezi, What can be done for her? And his servant Giezi replied, She indeed hath not a son and her husband is old.) So when he had called her and she stood at the door, Elisha said to her, This time twelve month, about this very hour thou alive and well hast embraced a son.
To which she replied, Nay, my lord, do not deceive thy handmaid. So the woman conceived and bore a son about that time twelve month, about the very hour, being alive and well as Elisha said to her. But when the child grew up, happening to go out to his father to the reapers, he said to his father, My head! my head! Whereupon he said to the servant, Carry him to his mother. So he carried him to his mother, and he lay on her lap till noon and died. And when she had carried him up and laid. him on the bed of the man of God, she shut the door on him and came out and called her husband and said, Send me, I pray thee, one of the servants and one of the asses that 1 may go speedily to the man of God and return. And he said to her,
Why wouldst thou go to him to-day? It is neither new moon

 nor sabbath. To which she replied, Peace. So when he had

saddled. the ass, she said to her servant, Come, drive on. Slack not-thy gait for me, unless I order thee. Come, press forward. and go to the man of God to mount Karmel. So she proceeded on and came to the man of God to the mount. Now Elisha saw her coming and said to his servant Giezi, Behold yonder is the
Somanite, run and meet her and say, Is it well with thee? Is it well with thy husband ? Is it well with the child? And she said,
It is well. But when she came to Elisha on the mount, she took hold of his feet, whereupon Giezi went near to push her back.
But Elisha said, Let her alone: for her soul is full of sorrow and the Lord hath hid the cause from me and hath not told me.
Then she said, Did I ask a son of my lord? Did I not say, Do not deceive me. Thereupon Elisha said to Giezi, Gird up thy loins and take my staff in thy hand and go. If thou meetest a man salute him not. And if any man salute thee, return him no answer. And lay my staff on the face of the child. But the mother of the child said, As the Lord liveth and thy soul liveth
I will not leave thee. So Elisha arose and followed her. Now
Giezi had gone before her and laid the staff on the child’s face; but there was no voice, nor attention. So when he came back
VOL, 11. P

Ch. V. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

42 to

and met him he said to him, The child is not awaked. And when Elisha came to the house, behold the child was dead and laid upea his bed. Then Elisha went into the house and shut the door upon them two; and having prayed to the Lord he went up and lay down upon the child and put his mouth on the - child’s mouth, and his eyes on its eyes, and his hands on its hands, and bent himself down upon it; and the flesh of the child was warmed. Then he withdrew, and when he had walked backward and forward in the house, he went up and bent himself upon the child seven times, and the child opened its eyes.
Whereupon Elisha called Giezi and said, Call the Somanite.
So he called her. And when she came to him, Elisha said,
Take up thy son. Thereupon she came and fell at his feet, and having made obeisance to him by bowing to the ground she took up her son and went out.

When Elisha returned to Galgala there was a famine in the land, and the sons of the prophets sat before him. And Elisha said to his servant, Put on the large kettle and boil some. pottage for the sons of the prophets. And one went out mto the fields to gather herbs, and having found a vine in the fields he gathered from it a lapful of wild berries and threw them into the kettle of soup; for they didnot knowthem. ‘Then they poured out for the men to eat: but when they had eaten of the pottage, behold they cried out and said, There is death in the kettle, O man of
God: for they could not eat. Whereupon he said, Take some meal and throw it into the kettle. Then Elisha said to his servant Giezi, Pour out for the people and let them eat. And there was no more any thing disagreeable in the kettle. After that there came a man from Baithariso and brought to the man of God, of the first fruits twenty loaves ef barley bread and some fig cakes. And he said, Give these to the people and let them eat. And when his servant said, Why should [ set this before a hundred men? he said, Give it to the people and let

 them eat; for thus saith the Lord, They shall eat and leaye. So

they ate and left according to the word of the Lord.

Naiman the captain general of the army of Syria, was a man. great in the sight of his master and highly honoured; because by him the Lord had given deliverance to Syria. But this man who was mighty in power, was leprous. Now the light armed

Ch. V. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

10

12

19

14.

15 bands had gone from Syria and brought away captive out of the land of Israel, a little girl and she waited on Naiman’s wife.
And she said to*+er mistress, O that my master were before the prophet of God who is in Samaria: Then would he cure him of his leprosy. And she went in and told her lord and said,
Thus and thus hath the little girl spoken, who is from the land of Israel. Upon this the king of Syria said to Naiman,
Come, go, and I will send a letter to the king of Israel. So he set out and took with him ten talents of silver and six thousand pieces of gold and ten suits of apparel and carried the letter to the king of Israel, the purport of which was, Now when this letter shall come to thee, behold I have sent to thee my servant Naiman that thou mayst cure him of his leprosy.
And when the king of Israel had read the letter he rent.his clothes and said, Am I God to kill or give life, that he sendeth to me to cure a man of his leprosy ? For only consider, I pray you, and see how he seeketh a pretence for quarreling with me. But when Elisha heard that the king of Israel had rent his clothes he sent to him saying, Why hast thou rent thy clothes? Let Naiman come to me and know that there is a prophet in Israel. So Naiman went with his horses and chariot and stopped at the doors of Elisha’s house. And Elisha sent a messenger to him saying, Go and wash thyself seven times in the Jordan, and thy flesh shall return to thee and thou shalt be cleansed. Thereupon Naiman was inflamed with indignation and went away saying, Behold I thought he would at least come out and stand and call on the name of his God, or lay his hand on the place, and cure the leprous part. Are not Abana and Pharphar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? Why may I not go and wash in them, and be cleansed? So he turned and went away ina rage. But his servants drew near and said to him, Had the prophet enjoined thee some great thing, wouldst thou not do it? And wilt thou not, because he said, Wash and be clean ?
Then Naiman went down, and when he had dipped himself seven times in the Jordan, according to the word of the prophet, his flesh became again like the flesh of a little child, and he was cleansed. Upon this he and all his retinue, returned to
Vlisha, and came and stood before him and said, Behold I

18

V. IV. KINGS—Il. KINGS.

now know that there is not a God in all the earth but only in Is-

rael. Now therefore accept this acknowledgment, from thy

servant. But Elisha said, As the Lord liveth in whose pre-

sence I stand, I will not receive it. And when he urged him

to take it and he refused, Naiman said, But if not; pray let there be given to thy servant a couple of mules burden of earth;

for thy servant will no more offer a whole burnt offering or a sacrifice to other gods, but only to the Lord. But in this thing may the Lord be gracious to thy servant. When my master goeth into the house of Remman to worship there,

should he Jean on my hand, and I bow down im the house of
Remman, when he boweth down there, may the Lord, I pray,

be gracious to thy servant in this respect. And Elisha said

to Naiman, Go in peace. Now when he had gone alittle way from him, Giezi the servant of Elisha said, Behold my master hath spared Naiman the Syrian, m not receiving at his hand

what he brought. As the Lord liveth, I will run after him,

and receive something from him. . So Giezi went after Nai-

man with all speed. And when Naiman saw him running after him, he turned about from his chariot to meet him. And he said, Peace! My master hath sent me saying, Behold there

are just come to me from mount Ephraim two young men of the sons of the prophets. Give, I pray thee for them a talent of silver and two suits of apparel. To which he replied, Take

two talents of silver. So he took two talents of silver, in two bags, and two suits of raiment and laid them on two of his

servants and they carried them before him. And when he came

to a dark place, he took them from the hands of his servants,

and laid them up in the house. And when he had dismissed

the men, he went in and stood before his master. And Elisha

said to him, Whence comest thou, Giezi? To which he re-

plied, Thy servant hath not gone any where. And Elisha said

to him, My heart indeed did not go with thee, when the man

turned about from his chariot to meet thee. Now thou hast

received silver; and thou hast now received the apparel and

olive yards and vine yards, and flocks and herds and men ser-

vants, and maid servants; but the leprosy of Naiman shall

cleave to thee, and thy seed forever. So he went out from his

presence, leprous like snow.

Ch. VI. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

2

3

5

10

When the sons of the prophets said τὸ Elisha, Behold the place where we dwell before thee is too confined for us ; let us we pray thee, go to the Jordan, and take thence every man a piece of timber, and build there for ourselves a dwelling, and he said, Go ; one of them intreated him saying, Come along with thy servants ; and he said I will go. So he went with them. And when they came to the Jordan and were cutting the timber, behold as one was felling the beam the ax dropped in the water. Upon which he cried out, O my lord!
Now it was quite hid. And the man of God said, Where did it fall? And when he had shewed him the place, he cut a chip of wood and threw it there, and the ax swam on the surface.
And he said, Take it up. So he stretched forth his hand and took it up. }

When the king of Syria was carrying on a war against Israel, and consulted with his servants saying, In such and such a place I will encamp in ambush, Elisha sent to the king of
Israel saying, Take care not to pass by such a place, for the
Syrians lie concealed there. And when the king of Israel sent to the place which Elisha mentioned, and avoided it more than once or twice, the heart of the king of Syria was moved at this. And he called his servants and said to them, Why will you not tell me, who it is that betrayeth meto the king of Israel?
Thereupon one of his servants. said, That is not the case, my lord, O king! For it is Elisha the prophet in Israel who telleth the king of Israel all the words which thou speakest in. thy bed chamber. Then he said, Go see where he is, and I will send and take him. And when they told him saying, Behold he is at Dothaim, he sent thither horses and chariots, even a strong detachment. And they came by night and surrounded the city. And when Elisha’s servant arose early in the morning and went out, behold an army with horses and chariots surrounded. the city, whereupon the servant said to him, O my lord, what shall we do? And Elisha said, Fear not; for there are more with us than with them. Then Elisha prayed and said, O. Lord I beseech thee, open his eyes that he may see. Accordingly the Lord opened his eyes and he looked and lo! the mountain was full of horses and chariots of

18 fire around Elisha. And as the Syrians were coming down up-

on him Elisha prayed to the Lord and said, Smite I pray thee,

Ch. VI. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

19

20

23 this people with dimness of sight. And when he had smitten them with dimness of sight, according to the word of Elisha,
Elisha said to them, This is not the city ; nor this the way.
Come, follow me, and I will lead you to the man whom you are seeking. So he led them away to Samaria; and when they had entered Samaria, Elisha.said, Open, O Lord, I beseech thee, their eyes, and let them see. So he opened their eyes and looked, and behold they were in the midst of Samaria.
Now when the king of Israel saw them, he said to Elisha,
My father, shall I smite them? To which he replied, Thou must not smite them. Dost thou smite any but those whom thou hast captivated with thy own sword, or thy own bow?
Set bread and water before them and let them eat and drink, and go to their lord, So he made a great entertainment for them. And when they had eaten and drunk he dismissed them, and they went to their master, and the predatory bands of Syria came no more into the land of Israel.

After this, Son Ader king of Syria, assembled his whole army and came up and sat down before Samaria, and there was a great famine in Samaria. For behold they besieged it until an ass’s head was sold for fifty shekels of silver, and a quarter of a kab of vetches for five shekels of silver. And as the king of Israel was passing by on the wall, a woman cried to him and said,
Save me, my lord, O king! And the king said to her, Unless the Lord save thee, whence can I save thee, from the threshing floor or from the press ? Then the king said to her, What is the matter with thee? And the woman said, This woman said to me, Give thy son that we may eat him to-day ; and we will eat my son to-morrow. So when we had boiled my son and eaten him, I said to her on the next day, Give thy son that we may eat him; but she hath hidden her son. When the king of Israel heard the words of the woman he rent his clothes, as he was passing along on the wall, so that all the people saw the sackcloth underneath on his flesh. And he said, God do so to me and more also, if the head of Elisha shall stand on him this day. Now Elisha was sitting in his house, and the elders were sitting with him. And when the king despatched a man before him ; before the messenger came to him he said to the elders,
Do you see that this son of a murderer hath sent to take off my

Ch. VII. IV: KINGS—II. KINGS.

33 head ? Look! when the messenger cometh, shut the door and stop him there. Is not the sound of his master’s feet behind him? And while he was speaking with them, behold the messenger came down to him. And when the king said, Behold this calamity is from the Lord ; why should I wait any longer

VII. for the Lord? Elisha replied, Hear a word of the Lord,

10

Thus saith the Lord, About this time to-morrow, a measure of fine four for a shekel, and two measures of barley fora shekel, in the gates of Samaria. Upon this a nobleman on whose hand the king leaned, in reply to Elisha said, Behold should the
Lord make flood gates in heaven, can such a thing be? And
Elisha replied, Behold thou shalt see it with thy eyes but shalt not eat thereof.

Now there were four lepers before the gate of the city, and one said to another, Why sit we here till we die? If we say, let us go into the city; there is a famine in the city and we must die there. And if we stay here we must die. Now therefore come, let us desert to the camp of Syria; if they take us alive we may live; and if they put us to death, we can but die.
So they arose when it was dark to go to the Syrian camp.
But when they came to a part of the camp of Syria; behold there was not a man there. For the Lord had caused the sound of chariots and the sound of horses, and the sound of a great army to be heard in the Syrian camp: whereupon they said one to another, Now hath the king of Israel hired against us the kings of the Chettites and the kings of Egypt to come upon us. Therefore they arose and fled while it was dark. They left their tents and their horses and their asses in the camp as it was, and fled for their lives. So when the lepers came to a part of the camp they went into a tent and ate and drank, and carried thence silver and gold and raiment, and went away.
And returning again they went into another tent and took things out of it and hid them. Then one said to another, We should not do so. This is a day of good news. Should we be silent and wait till the morning light, we shall incur guilt. Now therefore, come, let us go and inform the king’s household.
Accordingly they came and cried with aloud voice at the gate of the city and told them the news, saying, We have beet to

- the camp of Syria and behold there is not a man there, nor the.

Ch. VHT. IV. KINGS—IL KINGS.

14

15

16

19 sound ofa man. For there is nothing there but the horses and the asses tied, and the tents as they were. And when the watchmen atthe gates cried and told the king’s household within, the king arose and said to his servants, Let me tell you what Syria hath done to us. They know that we are famishing, therefore they have left their camp and hid themselves in the fields, saying, They will come out of the city and we shall take them alive and enter the city. To this one of his servants said in reply, Pray let them take five of the remaining horses which are left here, behold they are nearly all the multitude belonging to
Israel which are left ; and let us send thither and see. So they took two horsemen, and the king of Israel sent them after the king of Syria, saying, Go and see. And they went on after them as far as the Jordan. And behold all the way was full of clothes and vessels, which the Syrians had thrown away in their panick fright. And when the messengers returned and told the king, the people went out and plundered the camp of Syria.
Soa measure of fine flour was sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, according to the word of the Lord.
Now the king had stationed at the gate the nobleman on whose hand he had leaned, but the people trode him down so that he died, according to the saying of the man of God, who spoke to him when the messenger came down to him. For when Elisha spoke to the king, saying, Two measures of barley for a shekel and a measure of fine flour for a shekel, and this shall be about this time to-morrow in the gate of Samaria; this nobleman answered and said to Elisha, Behold should the Lord make flood gates in heaven, could this be? Thereupon Elisha said, Behold thou shalt see with thy eyes but shalt not eat thereof. And so it fell out: For the people trampled him down at the gate, so that he died.

Vill. Elisha having spoken to the woman whose son he

9

3 had restored to life, saying, Arise and go thou and thy family and sojourn where thou canst; for the Lord hath called for a famine against this land, and it ts come upon the land for seven years ; the woman arose and did according to the word of Elisha, and both she and her family sojourned in the land of the
Philistines seven years. And at the end of the seven years, the woman returned from the land of the Philistines to the citv,

Ch. VIII. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

4

13

14

15 and went to apply to the king about her house and her fields.
Now the king had spoken to Giezi, the servant of Elisha, the man of God, saying, Tell me, I pray thee, all the great things which Elisha hath done. And it happened that as he was relating how he had brought to life a son that was dead, behold the woman whose son Elisha had restored to life, applied to the king about her house and her fields. And Giezi said, My
Lord the king! This is the woman, and this is her son, whom
Elisha restored to life. Upon which the king inquired of the woman, and when she told him, the king appointed for her an officer, and said, Restore all that belonged to her, and all the produce of the fields from the day she left the land even to this day.

When Elisha went to Damascus, Son Ader king of Syria was sick. And when they told him, saying, The man of God is arrived here, the king said to Azael, Take in thy hand an offering, and go meet the man of God, and inquire of the Lord by him, saying, Shall I recover of this disease? So Azael went to meet him, and took with him ofall the good things of
Damascus, forty camels’ burden. And coming, he stood before
Elisha, and said to him, Thy son, Son Ader king of Syria, hath sent me to thee to inquire, saying, Shall Irecover of this disease of mine? And Elisha said, Go say, Thou shalt be in vigour of life as the Lord hath shewn-me, when thou by death shalt’ die. Then he stood with his eyes fixed on the countenance of Azael, and kept them fixed till he blushed. And the man of
God wept. Whereupon Azael said, Why doth my lord weep?
To which he replied, Because I know all the evils which thou wilt do to the children of Israel. Their fortresses thou wilt demolish with fire; their chosen men thou wilt slay with the sword. Thou wilt dash to pieces their infants, and rip up their women with child. At this Azael said, Who is thy servant! a dead dog! that I should do such a thing? And Elisha said,
To me the Lord hath pointed thee out reigning over Syria.
Then he departed from Elisha, and went to his master, who said to him, What did Elisha say to thee? To which he replied, He said thou shalt be in vigour of life. And on the next day he took a napkin, and having dipped it ἴῃ water, he spread. it over his face, so that he died. And Azael reigned in his stead;

Chix. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

21

24

2

3

In the fifth year of Joram, son of Achab, king of Israel, while Josaphat reigned over Juda, Joram son of Josaphat began to reign as king of Juda. He was thirty two years of age when he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem, and walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as the house of Achab did, for he had for his wife a daughter of Achab.
But though he did evil in the sight of the Lord, yet the Lord would not destroy Juda for David his servant’s sake; as he had. promised to give a lamp to him, and his children forever. In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Juda, and made a king over themselves. When Joram went up to Sior and all his chariots with him, though upon their rising he smote Edom, who had surrounded him and the captain of the chariots, yet the people fled to their habitations, and Edom revolted from under the hand of Juda even to this day. At the same time Lobna also revolted. Now the rest of the acts of
Joram and all that he did, behold are they not written in the book of the journal of the kings of Juda? And when Joram slept with his fathers and was buried with his fathers in the city of David, Ochozias his son reigned im his stead.

In the twelfth year of Joram, son of Achab, king of Israel,
Ochozias son of Joram reigned. He was in his twenty second year when he began to reign, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem, and his mother’s name was Gotholia, a grand daughter of Ambri king of Israel. And he walked in the way of Achab and did what was evil in the sight of the Lord, like the house of Achab. Now he went with Joram son of Achab to battle against Azael king of Syria, at Remmath Galaad, and the Syrians smote Joram, And when king Joram returned to Jezrael to be cured of the wounds with which the Syrians had smitten him, when he fought Azael king of Syria; and Ochozias son of Joram went down to see Joram son of Achab at Jezrael,

because he was sick; Elisha the prophet called one of the sons of the prophets, and said to him, Gird up thy loins and take this cruise of oil inthy hand and go to Remmath Galaad.
And when thou art come there, and shalt see Jehu, son of Josaphat, son of Namessi, thou shalt go in and cause him to rise fregm among his brethren, and having taken him into an imner chamber, thou shalt take the cruise of oil and pour it on his

Ch. ΙΧ. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

4

5

6

Salt

[59]

12

1 or)

head, and say, Thus saith the Lord, I have anointed thee to be king over Israel. Then thou shalt open the door and flee, and shalt not tarry. So the young man, the prophet went to
Remmath Galaad, and when he came, behold the chiefs of the army were seated, and he said, I have a message to thee, O chief. Whereupon Jehu said, ‘To which of us all? And he said,
To thee, the chief. And when he arose and went into the house, the prophet poured the oil on his head, and said to him, Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, I have anointed thee to be king over the people of the Lord—over Israel. And thou shalt utterly destroy the house of thy master Achab, from before me, and avenge the blood of my servants the prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the Lord at the hand of
Jezabel and at the hand of all the house of Achab. And thou shalt cut off from the house of Achab every male, both him who is attended and him who is neglected in Israel. For I will make the house of Achab like the house of Jeroboam son of
Nabat, and like the house of Baasa son of Achia. And the dogs shall devour Jezabel in the portion of Jezrael, and there shall be none to bury her. Then he opened the door and fled.
And when Jehu went out to the servants of his master, they said to him, Is all well? Why came this mad man to thee?
And he said to them, You know the man, and his idle discourse. And they said, Thou wrongest us. Pray tell us. Then
Jehu said, Thus and thus he spoke to me, saying. And when he said, Thus saith the Lord, Ihave anointed thee to be king over Israel, they who heard hasted, and every one taking his garment, they spread them under him on the top of the stairs, and sounding a trumpet, they said, Jehu is king. Thus Jehu son of Josaphat the son of Namessi conspired against Joram.
Now Joram and alk Israel kept garrison at Remmath Ga. laad because of Azael king of Syria, but king Joram had returned to Jezrael to be cured of the wounds which the Syrians had given him when he fought Azael king of Syria. Therefore
Jehu said, If your soul is with me let no deserter escape from _ the city to go and tell the news at Jezrael. Then Jehu drew out the cavalry and set out on the march and went down to Jezrael, because Joram king of Israel was there under cure, on account of the wounds from arrows with which the Aramins shot

Ch, IX. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS. —

17

18

19

26

27

28 him at Remmath Galaad in the battle with Azael king of Syria; for he was a valiant man and a warrior. And Ochozias the king of Juda had gone down there to see him. And whena watchman ascended the tower of Jezrael and saw the dust of
Jehu as he advanced, he said, I see a dust. Upon which Joram said, ‘Take a horseman and send to meet them, and let him say, Is all well; So the horseman went to meet them. And when he said, Thus saith the king, Is all well? Jehu replied,
What is it to thee? Fall in behind me. Then the watchman proclaimed saying, The messenger went up to them, but returneth not. ‘Thereupon the king despatched a second horseman; and when he came upto him and said, ‘Thus saith the king,
Is all well? Jehu replied, What is it to thee? Fall in behind me.
And when the watchman proclaimed saying, He went up to them but returneth not. And he who is the leader, leadeth on like Jehu the Namessite, for it is with great speed; Joram said,
Prepare a chariot. And when the chariot was ready Joram king of Israel and Ochozias king of Juda went out each in his own chariot, to meet Jehu, and met him at the field of Nabuthi the
Jezraelite. And when Joram saw Jehu he said, Is all well? To which Jehu replied, How can it be well, when the fornications of Jezabel thy mother and her sorceries are still so many ?
Thereupon Joram turned his hand and fled and said to Ochozias, Treason! Ochozias. Then Jehu grasping the bow shot
Joram between the shoulders, and the arrow passed through his heart and he fell on his knees. Then Jehu said to Badekar his principal officer, Throw him into that part of the field of
Nabuthi the Jezraelite. For I remember that when I and thou were riding together after Achab his father, the Lord pronounced this prophecy against him, Have I not seen the blood of Nabuthi and the blood of his sons yesterday ? saith the Lord.
Therefore I will retribute to him in this very plat of ground, saith the Lord. Now therefore take him up I pray thee and cast him into that plat of ground according to the word of the Lord.
And when Ochozias king of Juda saw this he fled by the way of Baithgan and Jehu pursued after him, for he said, And him also; and smote him im his chariot, as he was gomg down to
Gai which is Jeblaam. But he fled to Mageddo and died there.
And his servants took him up ‘in his chariot and brought him

Cex. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

29

30

31

32

33

94

35

36

37 oo

6 to Jerusalem and they buried him in his own sepulchre in the city of David, he having begun to reign over Juda in the eleventh year of Joram king of aca.

Now when Jehu came to Jezrael and Jezabel heard, she painted her eyes and dressed her head and looked out at a window. And as Jehu was entering the city she said, Was it well with Zambri who murdered his master ?. Whereupon he looked. up to the window, and when he saw her he said, Who art thou?
Come down to me. Then two chamberlains looked out at him and he said, Throw her down. So they threw her down and some of her blood was sprinkled on the wall and on the horses ; for they trampled upon her. And when he had gone in and had eaten and drunk he said, Look, I pray you, for that cursed woman and bury her, for she is a king’s daughter. But when they went out to bury her and found nothing of her but only the scull and the feet and the palms of the hands, they returned and told him, whereupon he said, This is the word of the Lord which he spoke by the ministry of Elias the Thesbite, In the field of Jezrael the dogs shall devour the flesh of Jezabel; and the carcase of Jezabel shali be like dung on the ground in the field of Jezrael, that they may not say, Here lieth Jezabel.

Now Achab had seventy sons in Samaria, therefore Jehu wrote a letter and sent it to Samaria to the chiefs of Samaria and to the elders and to them who had the charge of bringing up Achab’s sons, saying, Soon as this letter shall reach you, as you have with you your master’s sons and there are with you chariots and horses and strong cities and arms, look out the best and fittest of your master’s sons and set him on the throne of his father and fight for the house of your master. Upon which they were greatly terrified and said, Behold the two kings were not able to stand before him, and how can we? Therefore the officers of the household and the chiefs of the city and the elders and they who had the charge of bringing up the children sent to Jehu saying, We are thy servants and will do whatever thou shalt order us. We will not make any man king. We will do what is good in thy eyes. Thereupon Jehu wrote them a second letter saying, If you are for me and will hearken to my voice, take the heads of the men—the sons of your lord and bring them to me about this time to-

Ch. X. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

7

8

10

11

12

13

morrow to Jezrael. Now the king’s sons were seventy men and the nobles of that city brought them: up. So when this letter reached them, they took the king’s sons and slew them, the seventy men, and put their heads in baskets, and. sent them to him at Jezrael. And when a messenger came and told him saying, They have brought the heads of the king’s sons; he said, Pile them up in two heaps at the gate of the city till the morning. And in the morning he went out, and standing up, said to all the people, Ye righteous men ! behold
I conspired against my master and slew him: but who hath slain all these? You see now that there shall not fall to the ground any part of the word of the Lord which he spake against the house of Achab. For the lord hath executed all that he spoke by the ministry of his servant Elias. Then Jehu slew all that were left of the house of Achab in Jezrael, and all his nobles and his acquaintance, and his priests, so that there was not a remnant of him left. ‘Then he arose and set out on

-his march to Samaria; and coming to the shepherd’s pit on

the way, he met the brothers of Ochozias king of Juda, and said, Who are ye? And when they said, We are the brothers of Ochozias and are come down to salute the children of the king and the children of the queen, he said, Take them alive.
So they slew them at that pit. Of forty two men he did not leave a man of them. And going thence he met Jonadab son of Rechab, coming to meet him. And when he had saluted him, Jehu said to him, Is thy heart right with my heart, as my heart is with thine ὃ And when Jonadab said, It is: Jehu said to him, Give me thy hand. So he gave him his hand. Then he caused him to come up to him into the chariot, and said,
Come with me and see my zeal for the Lord. So he caused him to take a seat in the chariot. And when he arrived at
Samaria, he slew all that were left of Achab in Samaria until he had utterly destroyed him, according to the word of the
Lord which he spoke to Elias.

Then Jehu assembled all the people and said to them,
Achab served Baal a little, Jehu will serve him much. Now therefore all ye, the prophets of Baal, call before me all his servants and his priests. Let not a man be wanting; for I have a great sacrifice for Baal. Whoever is missing shall not

Ch. X. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

‘20

9

23

34

25

26

30 live. This Jehu did in subtilty, that he might destroy all the servants of Baal. Then Jehu said, Hallow a solemnity for Baal.
And when they had proclaimed it, Jehu sent to all Israel, saying, Now let all his servants and all his priests, and all his prophets attend. Let none be missing. For I am going to make a great sacrifice; whoever is missing shall not live. So all the servants of Baal came, with all his priests and all his prophets.
There was not a man left who did not attend. And when they came to the house of Baal the house was filled from door to door. Jehu said to the keeper of the wardrobe, Bring out vestments for all the servants of Baal. And when the keeper of

‘the wardrobe had brought them out, Jehu went with Jonadab

son of Rechab into the house of Baal, and said to the servants of Baal, Search and see whether there be with you any of the servants of the Lord; for there must be none but only the servants of Baal. Then he went in to offer incense and whole burnt offerings. Now Jehu had stationed for himself eighty men without, and said to them, If any of these men escape — whom I deliver into your hands, the life of him who letteth him escape shall answer for his life. So when he had finished offering the whole burnt offering, Jehu said to the guards and to the officers, Go in and smite them; let not a man of them get out. So the guards and the officers smote them with the edge of the sword; and having thrown them out, they went to the city of the house of Baal, and brought out the pillar of
Baal and burned it. And having pulled down the pillars of
Baal they made it a jakes even to this day. Thus Jehu de; stroyed Baal out of Israel. But he did not refrain from following the sins of Jeroboam son of Nabat, who had caused Israel to sin. The golden calves continued in Baithel and in Dan.
Though the Lord said to Jehu, Because thou hast taken a pleasure in doing what is right in my sight, and hast done to the house of Achab according to all that was in my heart, thy children of the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel; yet Jehu was not careful to walk in the law of the Lord
God of Israel with his whole heart. He did not refrain from following the sins of Jeroboam who had caused Israel to sin.

In those days the Lord began to lop Israel; and Azael

‘smote them all along the border of Israel, from the Jordan

Ch, XI. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

towards the rising of the sun—all the land of Galaad belonging to the Gadites and the Reubenites and the Manassites from
Aroer, which is on the bank of the brook Arnon, including
34 Galaad and Basan. Now the rest of the acts of Jehu and all that he did and all his power, and the connexions which he formed, are they not written in the journal of the kings of Israel?
35 When Jehu slept with his fathers, they buried him in
36 Samaria, and Joachas his son reigned in his stead. The time which Jehu reigned over Israel in Samaria was twenty eight years.
ΧΙ. Now when Gotholia the mother of Ochozias saw that her
2 son was dead, she destroyed all the royal seed. But Josabee king Joram’s daughter, the sister of Ochozias, took Joas her brother’s son—having stolen him from among the king’s sons who were slain, both him and his nurse, she hid him in the chamber of beds from Gotholia, so that he was not put to
3 death. And he was with her hidden in the house of the Lord
4 six years, while Gotholia reigned over the land. But in the seventh year Jodae sent for the centurions of the Chorrites and the Rasimites, and had them brought to him into the house of the Lord, and made a covenant of the Lord with them; and having exacted an oath of them he shewed them the king’s
5 son. Then he gave them a charge saying, This is the thing which you shall do. Let one third of you come in on the sabbath
6 and keep guard, over the king’s house at the gate; another third at the gate of the high way, and the other third at the
7 gate behind the guards. So you will guard the house. And two companies among you even all who go out on the sabbath shall keep guard in the house of the Lord before the king. And you shall encompass the king round about, every man with his weapon in his hand. And whoever cometh. within the saderoth, let him be put to death. And they shall be with
9 the king when he goeth out and when he cometh in. Accordingly the centurions did all that the prudent Jodae commanded them. And they took every man his men, both those who came in on duty on the sabbath and those who were to go off
10 on that day, and went to Jodae the priest. And the priest gave the centurions the spears and the shields of king David, which were in the house of the Lord. And the guards stood every

1

Ch. XII. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

12

13

14

15

16

17

1

20 man with his weapon in his hand, from the right corner of the house to the corner of the house which is on the left of the altar, and of the house near the king round about. Then he sent for the king’s son and put upon him the nezer and_ the testimony, and announcing him king, anointed him. Upon which they clapped with the hand, and said, Long live the king. When Gotholia heard the noise of the people’s guards, she came to the people into the house of the Lord and looked.
And behold the king was standing on the pillar as the manner was, and the musicians and the trumpeters were before the king, and all the people of the land were rejoicing and the trumpets sounding. Whereupon Gotholia rent her clothes and cried with a loud voice, Treason! Treason! Then Jodae the priest gave orders tothe centurions, the officers of thearmy, and said to them, Lead her out from within the saderoth and let one go after her and put her to death with the sword. Because the priest said, Let her not be killed in the house of the Lord, therefore they laid hands on her and went out into the street leading from the king’s house to the horse gate, and she was slain there. Then Jodae made a covenant between the Lord and the king and the people, that they would be the Lord’s people. And he made a covenant also between the king and the people. Then all the people of the land went into the house of Baal and tore him down and broke all to pieces, his altars and his images, and slew Mathan the priest of Baal before the altar. And when the priest had appointed overseers over the house of the Lord, he took the centurions with the Chorrites and the Rasimites and all the people of the land and they conducted the king out of the house of the Lord into the street leading from the king’s house to the gate of the guard house, and set him on the throne of the kings. And all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was at peace after they had slain.
Gotholia at the king’s house.

ΧΙ. Joas was seven years old when he began to reign. He

2 commenced his reign in the seventh year of Jehu and reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Sabia of
Bersabee. And Joas did what was right in the sight of the

Lord, all the time Jodae the priest, instructed him. But none

Ch. XII. IV. KINGS—IL KINGS.

3

4

10 il

13

14

15

16 of the high places were removed. There the people still sacrificed and burned incense on the high places.

Though Joas said to the priests, With regard to all the money arising from things consecrated, the income of the house of the Lord, the money of estimation at which every man is rated, and all the money which it may come into any man’s heart to bring into the house of the Lord, let the priests take for themselves; but they must bear, every one from what he selleth, the expence of the repairs of the house wherever a repair is found necessary; yet in the three and twentieth year of king Joas it was found that the priests had not made the repairs of the house. Wherefore Joas the king sent for Jodae the priest and the other priests, and said to them, Why have you

ποῦ made the repairs of the house? Now therefore you must

not take the money arising from your sales; for you shall give it for repairing the beanies So the priests agreed not to receive any money from the people, on condition that they should not bear the expence of the repairs of the house. Then Jodae the priest took a chest and bored a hole in the lid of x, and placed it before the Ammazeibi in the house of the superintendant of the house of the Lord; and the priests who kept the weights put therein all the money which was found in the house of the Lord. And when they saw that there was much money in the chest, the king’s secretary went with the chief priest, and tied up and numbered the money found in the house of the Lord, and delivered the money when ready into the hands of them who did the works, the overseers of the

house of the Lord; and they dealt it out to the carpenters and
12 masons who wrought in the house of the Lord; and to them who built the wall, and to stone cutters, to purchase wood and hewn stone sufficient for the repairs of the house; and to defray allthe expences of the house. But there were not to be made for the house of the Lord silver doors, nails, goblets, nor any vessels of gold or silver out of the money brought into the house of the Lord; for they were to give it to them who did the work; and with it they were to keep in repair the: house of the Lord. Now they did not call the men to account, into whose hands they delivered the money to deal it out to the workmen, for they acted faithfully. The money for sin offer-

Ch. XIII. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

ings, and the money for trespass offerings which was brought into the house of the Lord, was for the priests.

At that time Azael king of Syria went up and fought against Geth and took it. And when Azael set his face to come up against Jerusalem, Joas king of Juda, took all the dedicated things which Josaphat and Joram and Ochozias, his forefathers the kings of Juda had dedicated, together with his own dedications, and all the gold which was found in the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the king’s house, and sent them to Azael king of Syria, and he went up from Jerusalem. Now all the acts of Joas and all that he did, behold are they not written in the journal of the king’s of Juda?

When his servats arose and having formed a conspiracy smote Joas at the house of Mello which is in Sela, (Now Jezirchar son of Jemuath and Jezebuth son of Somer his servants smote him) so that he died, he was buried with his fathers in the city of David, and Amessias his son reigned in his stead.

XIII. In the twenty third year of Joas son of Ochozias king

2 or

of Juda, Joachaz son of Jehu reigned in Samaria, and reigned seventeen years. And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked after the sins of Jeroboam son of Nabat who had caused Israel to sin, and did not depart from them.
Therefore the Lord was angry with Israel, and delivered them into the hand of Azael king οἵ. Syria, and into the hands of
Son Ader son of Azael all those days. But Joachaz intreated the favour of the Lord, and the Lord hearkened to him ; for he

.saw the affliction of Israel because the king of Syria oppressed

them, and the Lord gave deliverance to Israel, so that they got from under the hand of Syria, and the Israelites dwelt in their habitations as in former times. Notwithstanding this they departed not from the sins of the house of Jeroboam who had caused Israel to sin; but walked therein. And the grove also at Samaria still remained, though there had not been left to
Joachaz any army, but only fifty horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten thousand infantry. For the king of Syria, had destroyed them and made them like dust to be trampled on. Now the rest of the acts of Joachaz, and all that he did and his exploits, are they not written in the journal of the kings of Israel? And Joachaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in Samaria, and Joas his son reigned in his stead.

Ch. XIII. IV. KINGS—IIL. KINGS. .

10

In the thirty seventh year of Joas, king of Juda, Joas son

11 of Joachaz king of Israel reigned over Israel in Samaria. His

12

1

1

1

20 !

2

7

8

9

1 reign was sixteen years, and he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord. He did not depart from all the sins of Jeroboam, son of Nabat, who had caused Israel to sin, but walked therein. Now the rest of the acts of Joas and all that he did and his exploits with Amessias king of Juda, are they not written in the journal of the kings of Israel? When Joas slept with his fathers, and Jeroboam sat on his throne, he was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel.

Now when Elisha was sick, with the sickness of which he died; Joas king of Israel went down to him, and wept over

him and said, My father! my father! The chariot of Israel

and the horseman thereof! And Elisha said to him, Take a bow and arrows. And when he had gotten himself a, bow and arrows, Elisha said to the king, Lay thy hand firm on the bow.
And when Joas had laid his hand firm on the bow, Elisha put his hand on the king’s hand and said, Open that window to the east. And when he had opened it, Elisha said, Shoot.
And when he shot Elisha said, The Lord. hath an arrow of deliverance—yes, an arrow of deliverance from Syria, and thou shalt smite Syria at Aphek to destruction. Then Elisha said to him, Take the quiver full of arrows.. And when he had taken it, he said to the king of Israel, Smite against the ground. And when the king had smitten thrice, he stopt. At which the man of God was grieved and said, Hadst thou smitten five or six times, then wouldst thou have smitten Syria to utter destruction, but now thou shalt smite Syria only thrice.
Now Elisha died, and they buried him. And the year following the predatory bands of Moab invaded the land. And it happened that while they were burying a man, behold they saw the band; upon which they threw the man into Elisha’s tomb, and when he sunk down and touched the bones of Elisha, he revived and stood on his feet.

Now Azael had oppressed Israel all the days of Joachaz, but the Lord pitied them and compassionated them, and looked upon them, because of his covenant with Abraham and Isaak and Jacob: and the Lord would not utterly destroy them

Ch. XIV. ΙΝ. KINGS—II. KINGS.

24

25 nor did he cast them out of his sight. So when’ Azael king of Syria was dead, and Son Ader his son reigned in his stead,
Joas son of Joachaz returned and took out of the hand of Son
Ader son of Azael, the cities which he had taken in war out of the hands of Joachaz, his father. Thrice Joas smote him and recovered the cities of Israel.

XIV. In the second year of Joas son of Joachaz king of Is-

9

8

9

10 rael, Amessias son of Joas king of Juda, began his reign. He was twenty five years old, when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty nine years in Jerusalem, and his mother’s name was Joadim of Jerusalem. And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not like his father David.
According to all that his father Joas had done, he did. But he did not remove the high places. Still the people sacrificed. and burned incense on the high places. And when the kingdom was confirmed in his hand, he smote his servants who had slain his father. But the children of the murderers he did not put to death. As it is written in the book of the laws of
Moses—as the Lord commanded saying, Fathers shall not be put to death for children; nor shall children be put to death for fathers ; for.every one shall die for his own sins.
He smote of Edom in Gemeled ten thousand and took
Petra by war and called its name Jethoel which it now hath.
Then Amessias sent messengers to Joas son of Joachaz son of Jehu king of Israel saying, Come, let us look one another in the face. Whereupon Joas king of Israel, sent to Amessias king of Juda, saying, The thistle which is on Libanus sent to the cedar on Libanus saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife; but the wild beasts of the field in traversing Libanus trampled down the thistle. Thou hast smitten Idumea; and thy heart is elated. Enjoy thy glory at home. Why seekest thou a quarrel to thy hurt, that thou shouldst fall and Juda with thee? But Amessias would not hearken. Therefore Joas king of Israel went up. And he and Amessias king of Juda met each other at Baithsamusin Juda. And Juda gave way

3 before Israel and fled every man to his tent. And Joas king

of Israel took Amessias son of Joas-son of Ochozias at Baithsamus, and came to Jerusalem, and demolished of the wall of
Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim, to the gate of the corner,

Ch. XIV. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

14 four hundred cubits. And he took the gold and silver and all the vessels which were found in the house of the Lord, and in the treasuries of the king’s house, and hostages for the per-

15 formance of their agreements, and returned to Samaria. Now the rest of the acts of Joas and all the exploits which he performed in his war with Amessias king of Juda, are they not

16 written in the journal of the kings of Israel? And Joas slept with his fathers and was buried in Samaria with the kings of
Israel, and Jeroboam his son reigned in his stead.

17 Amessias son of Joas king of Juda, lived after the death of

18 Joas son of Joachaz king of Israel, fifteen years. Now the rest

_ of the acts of Amessias and all that he did, are they not written
19 in the journal of the kings of Juda? A conspiracy being formed against him in Jerusalem he fled to Lachis, but they ©
20 sent after him to Lachis and there put him to death. But they brought him on horses and he was buried in Jerusalem with
21 his fathers in the city of David. Afterwards all the people of
Juda took Azarias when he was sixteen years old and made

22 him king in the room of his father Amessias. He rebuilt
Ailoth and recovered it for Juda after the king slept with his fathers.

23 In the fifteenth year of Amessias son of Joas king of Juda
Jeroboam son of Joas reigned over Israel in Samaria. His

24 reign was forty one years. And he did evil in the sight of the

‘Lord. He departed not from the sins of Jeroboam son of Na-

25 bat who had caused Israel to sin. He extended the border of
Israel from the bay of Aimath to the sea of Araba, according to the word of the Lord God of Israel, which he spoke by the ministry of his servant Jonas son of Amathi the prophet of

26 Gethchopher. For the Lord saw that the affliction of Israel was very bitter, that they were few in number, closely confined, reduced to penury and forsaken; and that there was no helper

27 for Israel; And the Lord had said that he would not blot out the seed of Israel from under heaven. Therefore he saved

28 them by the hand of Jeroboam son of Joas. Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam and all that he did, and his exploits, how he warred, and how he recovered Damascus and Aimath which belonged to Juda, for Israel; are they not.written in the journal

29 of the kings of Israel? And Jeroboam slept with his fathers—

Che XV. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

with the kings of Israel, and Zacharias his son reigned in his stead.

XV. In the twenty seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel,

2

6

7

15

16

Azarias son of Amessias king of Juda began to reign. He was sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty two years in Jerusalem, and his mother’s name was Jechelia of Jerusalem. He did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, according to all that his father Amessias had done. But the high places he did not remove.. Still the people sacrificed and burned incense on the high places. Though the Lord struck the king with a leprosy and. he was leprous to the day of his death, yet he reigned in the house, Apphusoth; and Joatham the king’s son was over the household and judged the people of the land. Now the rest of the acts of Azarias and all that he did, are they not written in the journal of the kings of
Juda? And when Azarias slept with his fathers, they buried him with his fathers in the city of David, and Joatham his son reigned in his stead.

In the thirty eighth year of Azarias king of Juda, Zacharias son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel in Samaria. His reign was six months. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord as his father had-done. He departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam son of Nabat who caused Israel to sin. And Sellum son of Jabis conspired against.him, and when they had smitten him at Keblaam and put him to death, he reigned in his stead.
Now the rest of the acts of Zacharias, behold they are written in the journal of the kings of Israel. This was the word of the
Lord which he spake to Jehu saying, Thy sons in the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel; and so it came to pass. >

Sellum son of Jabis began to reign in the thirty ninth year of Azarias king of Juda; and when he had reigned one month in Samaria, Manaem son of Gaddi went up from Tharsila and came to Samaria and smote Sellum son of Jabis in Samaria and put him to death. Now the rest of the acts of Sellum and his conspiracy, behold they are written in the journal of the kings of Israel. Then Manaem smote Thersa and all in it, and the suburbs adjoining Thersa. Because they opened not to him, therefore he smote it and ripped up the women with child.

Ch. XV. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

20

21

24

25

30

81

In the thirty ninth year of Azarias king of Juda, Manaem son of Gaddi began to reign over Israel in Samaria. His reign was ten years. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord. He departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam son of Nabat, who had caused Israel to sin. In his days Phua king of the Assyrians, came up against the land. And Manaem gave Phua a thousand talents of silver that he might aid him. This money

‘Manaem levied on Israel, fifty shekels a piece upon every

mighty man, to be given to the king of the Assyrians. So the king of the Assyrians returned and made no establishment in the land. Now the rest of the acts of Manaem and ali that he did, behold are they not written in the journal of the kings of

' Israel ? And when Manaem slept with his fathers his son Pha-

kesias reigned in his stead.

In the fiftieth year of Azarias king "ἢ Juda, Phakesias son of Manaem began to reign over anal in Samaria. His reign was two years. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord. He departed not from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nabat, who caused Israel to sin. And Phakee son of Romelias, his chief captaim, conspired against him. And being assisted by Argob and Aria and having with him fifty men of the guard of four hundred, he slew him at Samaria before the palace. And when he had slain him he reigned in his stead. Now the rest of the acts of Phakesias and all that he did, behold they are written in the journal of the kings of Israel.

In the fifty second year of Azarias king of Juda, Phakee son of Romelias began toreign over Israel in Samaria. His reign was twenty years. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord and did not depart from all the sins of Jeroboam son of Nabat, who had caused Israel to sin. In the days of Phakee king of Israel,
Thalgathphellasar king of the Assyrians came up and took
Ain and Abel, and Thamacha and Anioch, and Kenez and
Asor, and Galen and Galilee—all the land of Nephthaleim, and removed the inhabitants to Assyria. And Osea son of Ela formed a conspiracy against Phakee son of Romelias, and smote him, and having put him to death reigned in his stead in the twentieth year of Joatham son of Azarias. Now’the rest of the acts of Phakee and all that he did, behold they are written m the journal of the kings of Israel.

Ch. XVI. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

32

33

94.

38

In the second year of Phakee son of Romelias, king of Israel, Joatham son of Azarias, king of Juda, began to reign.
He was twenty five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem, and his mother’s name was
Jerusa, a daughter of Sadok. And he did what was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his father Azarias had done. But the high places he did not remove. Still the people sacrificed and burned incense on the high places. He built the upper gate of the house of the Lord. Now the rest of the acts of Joatham and all that he did, are they not written in the journal of the kings of Juda? In these days the Lord began to send against Juda Raasson king of Syria, and Phakee son of
Romelias. When Joatham slept with his fathers he was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father, and Achaz his son reigned in his stead.

XVI. In the seventeenth year of Phakee, son of Romelias,
-2 Achaz son of Joatham king of Juda, began to reign. Achaz

ῳ9

«3

was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem, but he did not do what was right in the sight of the Lord his God with fidelity hike David his fa. ther. He indeed walked in the way of the kings of Israel. He even made his'son pass through fire according to the abominable acts of the nations which the Lord had removed from before the Israelites. He’ sacrificed also and burned incense on the high places, and on the mounts and under every shady tree. Then came up Raasson, king of Syria, and Phakee son of Romelias king of Israel, against Jerusalem for war, and besieged Achaz but could not bring him to battle. At that time
Raasson, king of Syria, recovered Ailath for Syria; and when he had driven the Jews out of Ailath the Idumeans went to
Ailath, and have dwelt there to this day. Then Achaz sent messengers to Thalgathphellasar, king of the Assyrians, saying, I am thy servant and thy son. Come up: Save me out of the hand of the king of Syria, and out of the hand of the king of Israel, who are risen up against me. And Achaz took the silver and the gold which was found in the treasures of the house of the Lord and the king’s house, and sent gifts to the king. Whereupon the king of the Assyrians hearkened

to him and came up against Damascus and took it, and having
VOR EL. 5

Ch. XVII. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

10

14

15

18

19

20 removed the inhabitants thereof he put king Raasson to death.
Then Achaz went up to Damascus to meet Thalgathphellasar king of the Assyrians, at that place. And having: taken a view of the altar at Damascus, king Achaz sent a model of it with its proportions and workmanship to Ourias the priest.
And Ourias the priest built an altaraccording to all that king
Achaz sent from Damascus. And when the king saw the altar he went upto it and offered thereon his whole burnt offering, and his sacrifice and his libation, and. sprinkled the blood of his peace offering upon that altar. As for the brasen altar which was before the Lord he brought it forward towards the front of the house of the Lord, from between this altar and the house of the Lord and put it upon the north side of this altar. And king Achaz commanded Ourias the priest saying, Offer the morning and evening whole burnt offering with its sacrifice,

-and the whole burnt offering of the king with his sacrifice, and

the whole burnt offering of the whole people with their sacrifice and their libation on this great altar, and pour out on it all the blood of the whole burnt offering and all the blood of the sacrifice. And the brasen altar shall be for me for the morning.
So Ourias the priest did according to all that king Achaz commanded him. And king Achaz cut off the embossments of the mechonoths and took away from them the lavers, and took down the brasen sea from the oxen of brass that were under it, and set it on a base of stone. He built also the foundation of the seat in the house of the Lord, and altered the way of the king’s coming into the house of the Lord on account of the king ofthe Assyrians. Now the rest of the acts of Achaz and all that he did, are they not written in the journal of the kings of Juda? And when Achaz slept with his fathers he was buried in the city of David, and Ezekias his son reigned in his stead.

XVII. In the twelfth year of Achaz king of Juda, Osea son of

Ela, began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned nine years. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, but not like the kings of Israel who were before him. Against him Salmanassar king of the Assyrians came up. Now Osea was his

4 vassal and had withheld from him the customary homage gift,

and the king of the Assyrians had found infidelity in Osea ; for he had sent messengers to Segor king of Egypt, and had

Ch. XVII. IV. KINGS—IL KINGS.

1

1

1

not carried to the king of the Assyrians the customary homage gift that year. Therefore the king of the Assyrians besieged him and bound him in prison. When the king of Assyria had come up through all the land he went to Samaria and. besieged it three years. In the ninth year of Osea, the king of Assyria took Samaria and transplanted Israel among the Assyrians, and caused them to dwell on the Alae and the Abor,rivers of Gosan, and on the mountains of the Medes.

Now this came to pass, because the Israelites had sinned against the Lord their God, who brought them up out of the

land of Egypt, from under the hand of Pharao king of Egypt;

3

4

2)

.1

and had feared other gods, and walked in the ordinances of the nations which the Lord had removed from before the Israelites. Indeed with regard to the acts which the kings of Israel did. and which the Israelites adopted; were they not in direct opposition to the Lord thew God? They built for themselves high places in all their cities, from the watch tower to the fortified city; and erected for themselves pillars and bowers on every high hill, and under every shady tree; and there burned incense in all the high places, as the nations did which the
Lord had removed from before them. Nay, they unhallowed and marked themselves to provoke the Lord to wrath; and served the idols, concerning which the Lord said to them, You shall not do such a thing for the Lord. And though the Lord testified to Israel and to Juda by the ministry of all his prophets— of every seer, saying, Turn from your evil ways and keep my commandments and my statutes and all my law which I enjoined on your fathers, and which I sent them by the ministry of my servants the prophets; yet they hearkened not; but hardened their neck more than their fathers had done—His testimonies which he gave them in charge, they did not keep; but walked after vanities and became vain, and followed the nations around them in the very things which the Lord commanded them not to do. They forsook the commandments of the Lord their God, and made for themselves a molten image
—even two calves. And having made bowers, they worshipped the whole host of heaven, and served Baal. ‘They made their sons and their daughters to pass through fire, and used divination and practised augury. Indeed they sold themselves

Ch, XVII. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

18

19

20 to do evil inthe sight of the Lord to provoke him to wrath.
And though the Lord was very angry with Israel, and removed them from his presence, and there was none left but only the tribe of Juda, yeteven then Juda did not keep the commandments of the Lordtheir God; but walked in the ordinances which Israel had made, and rejected the Lord. Therefore the
Lord was angry with the whole race of Israel and shook them

. off, and delivered them into the hands of spoilers who. ran-

25

26 sacked them until he cast them out of his sight.

Because Israel, besides revolting from the house of David, made Jeroboam son of Nabat king; therefore Jeroboam drove
Israel from following the Lord, and caused them to commit a great sin; and the Israelites proceeded on in the sin of Jeroboam which he had caused them to commit; and departed not from it, until the Lord removed them from his presence, as he spoke by the ministry of all his servants the prophets.

Now when Israel was removed from their own land to Assyria, where they continue to this day ; the king of the Assyrians brought people from Babylon and from Chutha and from
Aja and from Aimath and Seppharuim, and planted them in the cities of Samaria, in stead of the children of Israel. And they took possession of Samaria and dwelt in the cities thereof.
But as they did not, at the beginning of their settlement, fear the Lord; therefore the Lord sent lions among them. And when they were making havock among them, some spoke to the king of Assyria saying, The nations which thou hast removed and placed in the cities of Samaria do not know the ritual of the God of that land; therefore he hath sent lons

among them, and behold they are killing them, because they ἢ

do not know the ritual of the God of that land. ‘Thereupon the king of Assyria gave orders, saying, ‘Take some who came from that country, and let them go and dwell there, that they may teach them the rites of the God of that land. So they brought one of the priests whom they had transported from
Samaria, and he settled at Baithel. And while he was instructing them how they should fear the Lord, they were making, every nation, their own gods, which they set up in the house of the high places which the Samaritans had erected—every nation in the cities where they dwelt. ‘Thus the men of Baby~

Ch. XVII. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

31

32

34

35

36 lon made Sokchoth-benith; and the men of Chuth made Ergal; and the men of Aimath made Asimath; and the Evites made Eblazer and Tharthak; and the Seppharuims made
Adramelech and Anemelech, because they of Seppharuim burned their children to these gods. Though they feared the
Lord, yet they set up their own abominations, in the houses of the high places which they had made in Samaria, every nation in the city where they dwelt. Though they feared the Lord, yet they made for themselves priests of the high places, and sacrificed for themselves in the house of the high places. They both feared the Lord and served their own gods, according to the ritual of the nations from which they had. been transplanted. Even to this day they have acted according to this ritual of theirs. They fear; and they do according to their own rites and their own institutions, and according to the law and the command which the Lord commanded the children of Jacob to whom he gave the name Israel. Though the Lord had made a covenant with them and commanded them, saying, You shall — not fear other gods nor worship them nor serve them, nor sacrifice to them, for these acts you must do to the Lord only, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt with great power and with an outstretched arm—Him you shall fear, and Him you shall worship, and to Him you shall offer sacrifice—These statutes and these judgments and this law and the commandments which he hath written for you to do, you shall keep continually ; and you shall not fear other gods—and this covenant which he hath made with you, you must not forget. You shall not fear other gods; but fear the Lord your God only, and he will deliver you from all your enemies; and you shall pay noregard to the rites which they practise. Yet these nations feared the Lord and at the same time served their graven images. And even to this day their children and their children’s children do as their fathers did.

XVII. Nowin the third year of Osea son of Ela king of Israel,

2

Ezekias son of Achaz king of Juda acted as king. He was twenty five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty nine years in Jerusalem, and his mother’s name was

3, Abu, a daughter of Zacharias. He did that which was right in

the sight of the Lord, according to all that David his father

Ch, XVIII. ΙΝ. KINGS—II. KINGS.

A had done. He removed the high places and broke in pieces the pillars and destroyed the bowers and the brasen serpent which
Moses made. Because in those days the Israelites were burn-

5 ing incense to it, therefore he called it Neesthan. He trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that there was not after him one like him among the kings of Juda, nor among those who were

6 before him. For he cleaved to the Lord and departed not from following him, and kept all his commandments which he had

7 given in charge to Moses. And the Lord was with him and

8 assisted him in all that he did: And he revolted from the king of Assyria and would not serve him. He smote the Philistines even to Gaza and the border thereof, from the watch tower to the fenced city.

9 Now in the fourth year of Ezekias which was the seventh year of Osea son of Ela king of Israel, Salamanasser king of
Assyria came up against Samaria and besieged it, and took it

10 at the end of three years. In the sixth year of Ezekias, which
11 was the ninth of Osea king of Israel, Samaria was taken. And the king of Assyria removed the Samaritans to Assyria, and placed them along the Alae and the Abor, a river of Gozan,
12 and on the mountains of the Medes, because they. had not hearkened to the voice of the Lord their God, but transgressed his covenant—and, with regard to all that Moses the servant of the Lord commanded, had neither hearkened to them nor
18 done them. And in the fourteenth of king Ezekias, Sennacherim the king of the Assyrians came up against the fortified cities of Juda, and when he had taken some of them, E:zckias king
14 of Juda sent messengers to the king of Assyria at Lachis, saying, I have done wrong. Depart from me. Whatever thou imposest onme I will bear. Thereupon the king of Assyriaimposed on E.zekias king of Juda, three hundred talents of silver and thir-
15° ty talents of gold. And Ezckias gave him all the silver which was found in the house of the Lord and in the treasury of the king’s
16 house. At that time Ezekias cut up the doors of the temple, and the braces which he, E.zekias king of Juda, had overlaid with
17 gold, and gave them to the king of Assyria. Nevertheless the king of Assyria sent Tharthan and Raphis, and Rapsakes of Lachis, to king Ezekias witha great army against Jerusalem. And when they had marched up and arrived at Jerusalem they, halt-

Ch. XVIII. IV. KINGS—Il. KINGS.

18

19 ed at the conduit of the upper pool, which is by the high way to the fuller’s field, and cried to Ezekias. And there went out to him Eliakim son of Chelkias, the steward, and Somnas the secretary, and Joas son of Saphat, the recorder, And Rapsakes said to them, Say, I pray you, to Ezekias, Thus saith the king,

20 the great king of the Assyrians, Of what avail is that confi-

21

23

24 dence on which thou hast relied? Thou saidst—but they were vain words—lI have counsel and strength for war. Now therefore on whom dost thou rely that thou shouldst rebel against me? Perhaps thou leanest on that staff—that broken reed—on Egypt; on which if any one lean, it will enter his hand and pierce it. Such is Pharao king of Egypt to all who trust inhim. As to thy telling me, We have relied on the Lord.
God; Isnotthis he, whose high places and whose altars Eizekias hath pulled down, saying to Juda and Jerusalem, You shall worship before this altar in Jerusalem? Though you were now in close connexion with my master the king of Assyria, and I were to give thee two thousand horses, couldst thou, I pray thee, mount for thyself riders on them ? How then canst thou turn back the face of a petty governor—one of the lowest servants of my lord, relying on Egypt for chariots and horsemen? And now are we come up without the Lord against this place to destroy it? The Lord hath said tome, Go up against that land and destroy it.

Then Eliakim son of Chelkias, and Somnas and Joas, said to Rapsakes, Speak, we pray thee, to thy servants in Syriac, for we understand it. ‘Therefore speak not to us in the Jewish language. Why shouldst thou speak to the ears of the people on the wall? Thereupon Rapsakes said to them, Did my master send me to thy master or to thee, to deliver this message ?
Was it not to those men who are set on that wall that they — may eat their own ordure and drink their own urme? Then
Rapsakes stood and cried with a loud voice in the Jewish language and said, Hear the words of the great king of the Assyrians. ‘Thus saith the king, Let not Ezekias deceive you; for he cannotdeliver you out of his hand. Neither let Ezekias cause you to trust in the Lord, saying, The Lord will deliver us— this city shall not be delivered into the hands of the king of

. the Assyrians. Hearken not ta Ezckias. For thus saith the

Ch. XIX. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

king of the Assyrians, Make peace with me and come out to me. And every one shall drink of his own vine, and every one shall eat of his own fig tree, and drink the water of his own cis-

32 tern; until I come and take you to a land like your own—a land of corn and wine, and bread and vineyards—a land of olive oil and honey, that you may live and not die. Hearken not to
Ezekias: for he deceiveth you, saying, ‘The Lord will deliver

$3 us. Have the gods of the nations delivered their respective

34. countries out of the hand of the king of the Assyrians ὃ Where is the God of Aimath and Arphad? Where the god of Seppharuaim, Ana and Aba? Have they delivered Samaria out of

35 my hand? Who is there among all the gods of these countries who have delivered their countries out of my hand, that the

36 Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of it? But they held their peace and answered him not a word, For this was the king’s command, Make him no answer.

37 Then came Eliakim son of Chelkias the vibe and Somnas the secretary, and Joas the son of Saphat the recorder to
Ezekias, with their clothes rent and told him the words of

XIX. Rapsakes. And when the king Ezekias heard them he rent his clothes and put on sackcloth and went into the house

2 of the Lord. Then he sent Eliakim the steward, and Somnas the secretary, and the elders of the priests clothed with sackcloth to Esaias the prophet the son of Amos, that they should

3 say to him, Thus saith Ezekias, This is a day of affliction and rebuke. This is indeed a day of fierce indignation ; for children

- are come to the birth and there is not strength to bring forth.

4 Perhaps the Lord thy God will attend to all the words of Rapsakes, whom the Assyrian king his master hath sent to reproach the living God and blaspheme, in the words which the Lord thy God hath heard. Therefore put up a prayer for the rem-

5 nant which is left. And when the servants of the king Ezekias came to Esaias he said to them, Thus shall you say to your

6 master, Thus saith the Lord, Be not terrified at the words which thou hast heard, with which the servants of the Assyrian

7 king have blasphemed. Behold I will put such a spirit in him and he shall hear such news, that he shall return to his own land. And I will destroy him with the sword in his own land.

8 So Rapsakes returned and found the king warring against Lob-

Ch. XIX. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

9 na; for he heard that he had removed from Lachis. But when he heard it reported of Tharaka king of the Ethiopians, saying,
10 Behold he is coming to fight thee, he retreated and sent messengers to Ezekias saying, Let not thy God on whom thou reliest lead thee astray, saying, Jerusalem shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of the Assyrians. Behold thou hast heard all that the kings of the Assyrians have done to all the
12 countries to destroy them utterly ; and shalt thou be delivered?
Did the gods of the nations, which my father destroyed, deliver them, namely Gosan and Charran and Raphis and the children
13 of Eden who were at Thaesthin? Where is the king of Aimath and the king of Arphad? And where is the king of Seppharuaim,
14 Ana and Aba? And when Ezekias received the letter from the hand of the messengers and had read it, he went up
15 to the house of the Lord, and spreading it before the Lord said,
O Lord the God of Israel, who art enthroned on the cherubim,
16 Thou alone art God in all the kingdoms of the earth. Thou hast made the heaven and the earth. Incline, O Lord, thine ear and hear! Open, O Lord, thine eyes and see and hear the words of Sennacherim, which he hath sent to reproach the living God.
17 Ofatruth, O Lord, the kings of Assyria have laid waste these
18 nations and committed to the flames their gods. Because they are not gods, but the works of men’s hands, wood and stone; therefore they destroyed them. But now, O Lord our God, save us out of his hand, and all the kingdoms of the earth will know that thou the Lord alone art God. Thereupon Esaias son of
Amos sent to Ezekias saying, Thus saith the Lord the God of hosts, the God of Israel, I have heard the prayer which thou hast made to me concerning Sennacherim king of Assyria.
21 This is the word which the Lord hath spoken against him, The virgin daughter of Zion hath despised thee and laughed thee to
22 scorn. At thee the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head.
Whom hast thou reproached? And whom hast thou blasphemed? And against whom hast thou exalted thy voice and lifted up thine eyes? Against the Holy One of Israel! By thy messengers thou hast reproached the Lord and said, ‘‘With the multitude of my chariots I will ascend the lofty mountains—the sides of Libanus. [have cut down its stately cedars, the choicest cypresses thereof, and entered into the midst of the forest of

1

1

2

2 oo

Ch. XX. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

24.

25

26

27

28

29

37

Karmel: Ihave refreshed myself and drunk strange waters, and with the soles of my feet dried up all the streams of the siege. ”
It was I who formed it—I who made it close so that it was effectual against strong cities, to carry into captivity captive warriors. So the inhabitants therein became weak handed—were dismayed and confounded—-became like the grass of the field or the green herb—like grass on the house top and that trodden under foot. I know indeed thy sitting down and thy going out and thy wrath against me. Because thy rage is again$t me and thy haughtiness hath come up to my ears, therefore I will put my hoek in thy nose and my bridle in thy lips, and turn thee back the way thou camest. e

Now this shall be the sign to thee, Eat this year what groweth spontaneously, and the next year what springeth up; but in the third year there shall be sowing and reaping and _ planting of vineyards, and you shall eat the fruit thereof. And the remnant of the house of Juda which are left, shall strike root downwards and bear fruit upwards. For out of Jerusalem shall eo forth a remnant, and out of mount Sion he who hath escaped.
The zeal of the Lord of hosts-will do this. ‘Therefore thus saith the Lord respecting the king of Assyria, He shall not come to this city; nor shall he shoot an arrow there. A shield shall not approach it, nor shall he raise a mount against it. By the way he came by the same he shall return; and to this city he shall not come, saith the Lord. For I will shield this city for my own sake and for the sake of my servant David.

Accordingly in the night an angel of the Lord went forth and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and eighty five thousand. And when they arose early in the morning, behold all these were dead corpses. ‘Thereupon Sennacherim king of the Assyrians struck his tent and began his march and returned and dwelt in Nineve. And as he was worshipping in the house of Meserach his god, Adramelech and Sarasar his sons slew him with the sword; and as they escaped to the land of Ararath, Asardan his son reigned in his stead.

XX. In those days Ezekias was sick unto death, and Esaias

2

[2

son of Amos the prophet went to him and said to him, Thus saith the Lord, Give a charge to thy household. Thou art at the point of death and shalt not live. Upon this E.zekias turned

Ch. XX, IV. KINGS—II. KINGS. —

10

11

12

13

14,

15

16 his face to the wall, and prayed to the Lord saying, O Lord,

remember I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and witha perfect heart, and haye done what is good in thy sight. And Ezekias wept sore. Now Esaias was in the middle court, and a word of the Lord came to him saying, Return and say to Ezekias the leader of my people, Thus saith the
Lord the God of thy father David, I have heard thy prayer.
I have seen thy tears. Behold I will heal thee. On the third day thou shalt go up to the house of the Lord. And I will add to thy days, fifteen years, and deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria, and I will defend this city, for my own sake, and for the sake of my servant
David.

And when he said, Let them take a fig cake and lay it on the boil, and he will recover, Ezekias said to Ksaias, What is the sign that the Lord will heal me, and that I shall go up to the house of the Lord on the third day ? To which Esaias replied, This is the sign from the Lord, that the Lord. will perform the word which he hath spoken, ‘The shadow shall advance ten steps, or go back ten steps. And Ezekias. said,
It is an easy matter for the shadow to decline ten steps. No.
Let the shadow -return upon the steps, ten steps backwards.
Then Esaias the prophet cried to the Lord, and the shadow returned on the steps, ten steps backward.

On that occasion Marodoch Baladan son of Baladan king - of Babylon, sent a letter and. presents to Ezekias, because he heard that Ezekias had been sick. At this Ezekias was rejoiced, and shewed the messengers all the house of Nechotha; the silver and the gold, the spices and the precious oil, and the house of the vessels, and all that was in his treasuries.
‘There was not a thing in his house, or within his power which he did not shew them. Whereupon Esaias the prophet went to king EXzekias, and said to him, What have these men said, and whence are they come to thee? To which Ezekias_ replied, ‘They are come to me from a far distant country—from
Babylon. Then he said, What have they seen in thy house ?
And he said, They have seen all that are in my house. There is not a thing in my house, or in my treasuries which I have not shewn them. Then Esaias said to Ezekias, Hear a word

Ch. XXI. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

17 of the Lord. Behold the days are coming, when all that are in» thy house, and all that thy fathers have been treasuring up

18 even to this day, shall be carried to Babylon. Not a word shall fail which the Lord hath spoken. And as for thy sons who shall spring from thee, whom thou shalt beget, he will take them and they shall be eunuchs in the house of the king of

19 Babylon. And Ezekias said to Esaias, Good is that word which the Lord spoke—There shall be peace in my days.

20 Now the rest of the acts of Ezekias and all his power and all that he did, the pool and the aqueduct to bring water into the city, are they not written in the book of the journal of the kings of Juda? And Ezekias slept with his fathers, and
Manasses his son reigned in his stead.

XXI. Manasses was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty five years in Jerusalem ; and his mother’s

2 name was Apsiba. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all the abominable acts of the nations which the

3 Lord had removed from before Israel. He restored and rebuilt the high places which his father Ezekias had demolished ; and erected an altar to Baal; and made bowers as Achab king of Israel had done; and worshipped the whole host of

A heaven and served them. He even built an altar in the house of the Lord. Though the Lord had said, In Jerusalem I will put my name; yet he built an altar to the whole host of heaven,

6 in the two courts of the house of the Lord; and made his

sons pass through fire, and consulted omens, and auguries, and built temples, and multiplied diviners, to do evil in the sight

7 of the Lord, to provoke him to anger. Nay, he placed the

graven image of the bower in the very house, concerning

which the Lord had said to David and to Solomon his son,

In this house and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of

all the tribes of Israel, I will place my name forever, and 1

will no more remove the foot of Israel, from the land which I

gave their fathers, provided they will keep all-that I have com-

manded, according to the command which my servant Moses

9 commanded them. Now when they kearkened not, and Ma-

nasses led them astray to do evil inthe sight of the Lord, more than those nations, which the Lord had destroyed from

Ch. XXL IV. KINGS—IL KINGS.

10 il

12

1 oe)

14

15

16

17

18 ao:

23
24.

25 es

before the Israelites; then by the ministry of his servants the prophets, the Lord spoke saying, Because Manasses the king of Judahath committed all these abominations—these evils surpassing all that the Amorites did before him, and hath caused
Juda also to sin by their idols; therefore thus saith the Lord the God of Israel, Behold I will bring evils upon Jerusalem and Juda, so that both the ears of every one who heareth them shall tingle. And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Achab ; and wipe Jerusalem as a vessel of alabaster is wiped and turned on its mouth. And I will cast off the remnant of my inheritance, and deliver them into the hand of their enemies, and they shall be fora spoil, and for a prey to all their enemies, because they have done evil in my sight and gone on provoking me from the day I brought them out of Egypt, even to this day.

Moreover Manasses shed innocent blood in great abundance till he filled Jerusalem, from one end to the other, in addition to the sins by which he caused Juda to sin, by doing evil in the sight of the Lord. Now the rest of the acts of Manasses and all that he did, and the sins which he committed are they not written in the journal of the kings of Juda?
When Manasses slept with his fathers, he was buried in the garden of his house in the Seat of Oza; and Amos his son reigned in his stead.
Amos was twenty two years old, when he began to reign and he reigned two years in Jerusalem, and his mother’s name was Mesollam. She was a daughter of Arus of Jeteba. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, as Manasses his father had done, and walked in all the way in which his father walked and served the idols, which his father served and worshipped them. He forsook the Lord God of his fathers and did not walk in the way of the Lord, therefore Amos’ servants conspired against him, and slew the king in his own house. But the people of the land, smote all those who conspired against king Amos. And the people of the land made his son Josias king in his stead. Now the rest of the acts of Amos and all that he did, behold are they not written in the journal of the kings of Juda?

Now when they had buried him in his sepulchre in: the

Ch. XXII. Ιν. KINGS—II. KINGS. 

XXII. garden of Oza, Josias his son reigned in his stead. Jo-

10

1]

14 sias was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reign-

ed thirty one years in Jerusalem, and his mother’s name was

Jedia. She was a daughter of Edeia of Basuroth. He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in all the ways of David his father, and turned not aside to the right nor to the left. Accordingly in the eighteenth year of king Josias in the eighth month, the king sent Sapphan son of Ezelias, son of Mesollam, the scribe of the house of the Lord, saying,
Go up to Chelkias the high priest and seal the money which is brought into the house of the Lord—which they who keep the weights have received from the people, and let it be delivered into the hand of the board of works in the house of the Lord.
And when he had given this to the board of works in the house of the Lord to defray the expence of the repairs of the house
—for the carpenters and the masons, and them who built the walls, and to purchase wood and hewn stone to repair the breaches of the house; (now they to whom the money was given were not to be called to account, for they acted in confidence) Chelkias the high priest said to Sapphan the scribe, I have found a book of the law in the house of the Lord. Sa
Chelkias gave the book to Sapphan; and when he had read it he went to the king in the house of the Lord, and having made report to the king, saying, Thy servants have melted the silver found in the house of the Lord, and have given it to the board of works which hath charge of the house; Sapphan the scribe spake to the king, saying, Chelkias the priest hath given me abook. And Sapphan read it before the kmg. And when the king heard the words of the book of the law he rent his clothes. Then the king gave orders to Chelkias the priest and Achikam son of Sapphan and Achobar son of Michaias, and to Sapphan the scribe and Asaias a servant of the king, saying, Go and inquire of the Lord-concerning me and concerning all this people and concerning all Juda, and_ concerning the words of this book which 15 found. For great must be the wrath of the Lord which is kindled against us; because our fathers have not hearkened to the words of this book to do according to all that is written for us. Accordingly Chelkias the priest went with Achikam and Achobar and Sapphan and

Ch. XXIII. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

15

16

17

18

19

Asaias to Olda the prophetess the mother of Sellem son of
Thekuan, son of Aras the keeper of the wardrobe. Now she dwelt at Jerusalem in the Masena. And when they had spoken to her, she said to them, Thus saith the Lord the God of Is- . rael, Say to the man who hath sent you to me, Thus saith the
Lord, Behold Iam bringing evils on this place and on the inhabitants thereof, even all the words of the book which the king of Juda hath read. Because they have forsaken me and burned incense to other gods, that they might provoke me by the works of their hands, therefore my wrath shall be kindled against this place and shall not be quenched. But to the king of Juda who hath sent you to inquire of the Lord, thus shall you say to him, Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel, With respect to the words which thou hast heard, because thy heart was softened and thou didst humble thyself on the account of them soon as thou didst hear what I had spoken against this place and the inhabitants thereof—that they should become a desolation and a curse ; and didst rend thy clothes and weep before me; for I heard, saith the Lord; therefore behold I will gather thee to thy fathers and thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace, and thy eyes shall not see all the evils which-I will bring on this place.

XXIII. When they brought back this answer to the king, the

2 king sent and assembled before him all the elders of Juda and
Jerusalem. And the king went up to the house of the Lord, accompanied by all the-chiefs of Juda and all the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, with the priests and the prophets and all the people small and great. And when he had read in their hearing all the words of the book of the covenant, which was found in the house of the Lerd, the king stood before the pillar and made a covenant in the presence of the Lord to follow the Lord—to keep his commandments and his testimonies and his statutes, with all his heart and with all his soul—to conform to the terms of the covenant, the things written in the book. And all the people joined in the covenant. Then the king ordered Chelkias the high priest and the priests of the second order and them who had the charge of the weights, to bring out of the

‘temple of the Lord all the utensils which were made for Baal

and far the bower and for all the host of heayen, and he burned

Ch. XXIII. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

10

11

12

14

15 them without Jerusalem at Sademoth Kedron, and sent the ashes thereof to Baithel. He burned also the Chomarims, whom the kings of Juda had appointed. These were they who burned incense on the high places and in the cities of Juda and in the places around Jerusalem. He burned them also, who offered incense to Baal and to the sun and the moon and the signs in the zodiack and to all the host of heaven, And he brought out the bower out of the house of the Lord without Jerusalem to the brook Kedron, and having burned it by the brook Kedron, he ground it to powder, and strewed the powder over the graves of the children of the people. He pulled down also the house of Kadesim in the house of the Lord, where the women wove hangings for the bower. Then he brought up all the priests out of the cities of Juda, and defiled the high places where the priests burned incense from Gaibal to Bersabee. He demolished also the house of the gates which was at the door of the gate of Jesus, the governor of the city, on the left of a man entering at the gate of the city. But the priests of the high places did not go up to the altar of the Lord at Jerusalem; for they only eat unleavened bread among their brethren. He defiled also Tapheth which was set apart in the valley of the son of Ennom, for a man to cause his son or his daughter to pass through fire to Moloch. And he burned the houses which the kings of Juda had dedicated to the sun at the entrance of the house of the Lord, at the treasury office of Nathan, the king’s chamberlain, at Pharurim. He burned also with fire the chariot of the sun, and the altars which were on the roof of Achaz’s chamber, which the king’s of Juda had erected? and he pulled down the altars which Manasses had. made in the two courts of the house of the Lord, and having dragged them out thence piece meal, he threw the rubbish of them into the brook Kedron. The king defiled also the house which was in front of Jerusalem—that which was on the right of mount Mosthath, which Solomonking of Israel had built for Astarte, the abomination of the Sidonians, and for Chamos, the abomination of Moab, and for Moloch the abomination of the Ammonites. And when he had broken in pieces the pil-
«lars, and utterly destroyed the bowers, and filled their places with human bones, he then tore clown also the altar which was

cri.

16

17

18

19

20

21

26

XXII. IV. KINGS—U. KINGS.

at Baithel, that high altar which was erected by Jeroboam, son of Nabat, who had caused Israel to sin. Even that high altar he tore down and broke the stones thereof to pieces and pounded them to dust, and burned the bower. Now when Josias turned and saw the graves which were there in the city, he sent and took the bones out of the graves and burned them on the altar, and polluted it according to the word of the Lord, which the man of God spoke when Jeroboam was standing on the altar at the festival. ‘Then turning he cast his eyes on the tomb of the man of God who spoke these words, and he said, What

monument is that which I see? And when the men of the city

said, It is the man of God who came from Juda to denounce, and who denounced these very things against this altar at
Baithel; he said, Let him alone, Let no man move his bones.
So his bones escaped with the bones of the prophet, who came from Samaria. All the houses also of the high places which were in the cities of Samaria—which the kings of Israel had built to provoke the Lord, Josias removed, and did to them all that he had done at Baithel. And when he had sacrificed all the priests of the high places who were there over the altars, and burned the bones of men upon them, he returned to Jerusalem.

Then the king issued orders to all the people, saying, Celebrate the passover to the Lord our God, as it is written in the book of this covenant. For from the days of the Judges who judged Israel, there had not been during all the deus, of the kings of Israel and the kings of Juda, such a passover as this which was kept to the Lord in Jerusalem in the eighteenth year of Josias. For Josias removed all the devotees and the diviners and the theraphins and the idols and all the abominations which were in the land of Juda and in Jerusalem, that: he might conform to the words of the law which were written in the book which Chelkias the priest had found in the house of the Lord. Like him there was no king before him who turned tothe Lord with all his heart and with all his soul and with all his strength, according to all the law of Moses; nor did there arise after him any one like him. Nevertheless the Lord turned not from the'fervency of his great wrath with which he was incensed against Juda at the provocations with which Manasses

VOL, Il. υ

Ch. XXIV. IV. NINGS—IL KINGS.

27 had provoked him. So the Lord said, I will remove Juda also from my presence as I have removed Israel; and I wall cast off this city Jerusalem which I chose, and this house of which I

28 said, My name shall be there. Now the rest of the acts of Josias and all that he did, are they not written in the journal of

29 the kings of Juda? In those days when Pharao Nechao king _ of Egypt was going up against the king of Assyria to the river
Euphrates, Josias went out to meet him. And Nechao slew

$0 him at Mageddo when he saw him. And his servants took him up mortally wounded at Mageddo and brought him to Jerusalem, and buried him in his own tomb. And the people of the land took Joachaz son of Josias and anointed him, and made him king mm his father’s stead.

91 Joachaz was twenty three years old when he began toreign, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem, and his mother’s name was Amital. She was adaughter of Jeremias of Lobna.

42 He did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord according

$33 toall that his forefathers had done. So when Pharao Nechao was at Rablaam in the land of Emath, he removed him from reigning in Jerusalem, and imposed as a fine on the land a hundred talents of silver and a hundred talents of gold; and

$4 having made Ehakim son of Josias, king of Juda, king over them in the room of his father Josias, Pharao Nechao changed his name to Joakim; and he took Joachaz and carried him to

$5 Egypt, and he died there. And Joakim gave the silver and the gold to Pharao: moreover he assessed the land to give. the money at the command of Pharao. Every man of rank according to his assessment gave with the people of the land sil- _ ver and gold to be given to Pharao Nechao.

356 Joakim was twenty five years old when he began toreign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Jeldath. She was a daughter of Phadail of Ruma.

37 And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that

XXIV. _ his forefathers had done. In his days Nabuchodonosar king of Babylon came up, and Joakim became his vassal.

2 Three years. Then he tumed and revolted from him, and the
Lord sent against him predatory bands of the Chaldeans, and predatory bands of Syria, and predatory bands of Moab, and the predatory bands of the Ammonites. These he let loase to

Ch. XXIV. ν΄ KINGS—IL. KINGs.

prevail in the land of Juda, according tothe word of the Lord

3 which he spoke by the ministry of his prophets. But to add to the wrath of the Lord against Juda, that he might remove them from his presence, for all the sins which Mamnasscs had committed, Joakim shed innocent blood, and filled Je-

4 rusalem with it. Therefore the Lord would not be pacified.

5 Now the rest of the acts of Joakim and all that he did, behold are they not written in the book of the journal of the kings of

6 Juda? And Joakim slept with his fathers, and Joachim his

7 son reigned in his stead. And the king of Egypt never came any more out of his land; for the king of Babylon took all that belonged to the king of Egypt, from the brook of Egypt to the river Euphrates.

8 Joachim was eighteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem, and his mother’s name was Nestha. She was a daughter of Elianastham of Je-

9 rusalem. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, according ἡ

10 to all that his father had done. At that time Nabuchodonosar king of Babylon, came up to Jerusalem, and the city was be-

11 steged. Now when Nabuchodonosar came to the city, and his servants laid siege to it, Joachim king of Juda, went out to

12 the king of Babylon, he and his servants and his mother and his chiefs and his officers; and the king of Babylon im the

13 eighth year of his reign, took him, and carried out thence all the treasures of the house of the Lord, and thetreasures of the king’s house, and cut im pieces all the vessels of gold which
Solomon king of Israel had made in the temple of the Lord,

14 according to the word of the Lord. And he carried away captive from Jerusalem all the chiefs and mighty men of valour, ten thousand captives, with all the carpenters and mechanics,

15 so that there were none left but the poor of the land. When he carried away Joachim to Babylon, he carried away also out of
Jerusalem im captivity to Babylon, the king’s mother and the king’s wives, and his officers, and the mighty men of the coun-

16 try, and all the men of the army, amounting to seven thousand, and the carpenters and mechanics amounting to a thousand. All these were valiant men fit for war. These the king of

17 Babylon carried away captives to Babylon. And the king of
Babylon made Batthainas king im his stead, and called his name Sedekias.

Ch. XXV. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS. 

19

Sedekias was twenty one years old when he began to reign and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Amital. She was a daughter of Jeremias. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord according to all that Joachim

20 had done. Because the anger of the Lord was against Jerusa-

lem and Juda until he cast them out from his presence ;_therefore when Sedekias rebelled against the king of Babylon,

XXV. Nabuchodonosar the king of Babylon came up with

10

13

14 his whole army against Jerusalem, in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, and encamped against it and built a circumvallation against it, and the city was besieged until the eleventh year of king Sedekias. On the ninth of that month when the famine prevailed in the city so that there was not bread for the people of the land, a breach was made into the city ; and all the men of the army went out by night by the way of the gate between the walls, namely the gate of the king’s garden, while the Chaldeans besieged the city round. about. And the king took the way to Araba. But the army of the Chaldeans pursued him and overtook him at Araboth of
Jericho. When all his army was dispersed from about him, they took the king and brought him to the king of Babylon at
Reblatha, and he pronounced sentence against him. And when he had slain his sons before his eyes, he put out the eyes of Sedekias and bound him with chains, and carried him to Babylon. And in the fifth month, on the seventh of the month, in the nineteenth year of Nabuchodonosar king of Babylon, Nabuzardan the marshal who attended the king of Babylon, came up to Jerusalem and burned the house of the Lord and the king’s house, and all the houses of Jerusalem. And while the marshal was burning all the houses, the army of the Chaldeans broke down the walls of Jerusalem round about. Then Nabuzardan the marshal, carried away the residue of the people who had been left in the city, and the deserters who had deserted to the king of Babylon, and what remained of the army.
But he left some of the poor of the land for vine dressers and. husbandmen. The pillars of brass in the house of the Lord and the mechonoths, and the brasen sea in the house of the
Lord, the Chaldeans broke to pieces and carried the brass thereof to Babylon. And the marshal took the kettles and the

Ch. XXV. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

15

16

17

18

19

22

23

25 bo jor)

goblets, and the dishes and the censers, and all the utensils of brass with which the priests ministered, together with the fire pans and the cups of gold and silver. Now with regard to the two pillars and the sea, and the mechonoths which Solomon made for the house of the Lord, there was no weighing the brass of all these utensils. ‘The height of one pillar was eighteen. cubits. And there was upon it a chapiter of brass, the height of the chapiter being three cubits, with a net work and pomegranates on the chapiter round about, all of brass. And such was the second pillar with its net work. And the marshal took Saraias the first priest, and Sophonias the priest of the second order and the three keepers of the weights; and out of the city he took one officer, who was chief commander of the warriors, and five principal men of them who attended in the king’s presence, who were found in the city, and the secretary of the general of the army—him who mustered the people of the land; and sixty chief men of the people of the country who were found in the city. These Nabuzardan the marshal took and carried them to the king of Babylon to Reblatha, and. the king of Babylon smote them and put them to death at
Reblatha in-the land of Aimath.

Thus was Juda carried from this land. And as for the people who were left in the land of Juda—whom Nabuchodonosar king of Babylon had left; over them he set Godolias son of
Achikam son of Sapphon. And when all the chiefs of the army, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Godolias, they came to him at Massephath, namely,
Ismael son of Nathanias, and Jona son of Kareth, and Saraias son of Thanamath, the Netophathite, and Jezonias son of Macha-

24. thi, they and their men. And Godolias swore to them and their

men, and said to them, Be not afraid of the coming of the Chaldeans. Dwell in the land and serve the king of Babylon, and it will be well with you. Nevertheless in the seventh month Ismael son of Nathanias, son of Elisama of the royal family, came accompanied with ten chiefs, and smote Godolias and killed him and the Jews and the Chaldeans who were with him at Massepha. Whereupon all the people smali and great, with the chiefs of the army arose and went to Egypt; for they were afraid of the Chaldeans.

Ch. XXV. IV. KINGS—II. KINGS.

27

28

29

17

28

In the thirty seventh year of the captivity of Joachim king of Juda, in the twelfth month and twentieth day of the month,
Evial Marodek king of Babylon, in, the first year of his reign raised up the head of Joachim king of Juda. And having taken him out of prison he spoke kindly to him, and set his seat above the seats of the kings who were with him in Babylon.
And having changed his prison garments he eat bread continually before him all the days of his life. And his allowance, a continual allowance, was duly sent to him every day all the days of his life. .

TI. CHRONICLES, OR PARALIPOMENON.

Adam, Seth, Enos and Kainan, Maleleel, Jared, Enoch,
Mathusala, Lamech, Noe. The sons of Noe, Sem, Cham,
Japheth.

The sons of Japheth Gamer, Magog, Madaim, Jovan,
Elisa, Thobel, Mosoch and Thiras.

And the sons of Gamer, Aschanaz and Riphath and Thorgama. And. the sons of Jovan, Elisa and Tharsis, the Kitians and the Rhodians.

And the sons of Cham, Chus and Mesraim, Phud and
Chanaan. And the sons of Chus; Saba and Evila and Sabatha»and Regma and Sebethacha: and the sons of Regma,
Saba and Dadan. Chus also begot Nebrod, who began to be a giant hunter on the earth.

The sons of Sem, Ailam and Assur and Arphaxad, Sala,
Eber, Phaleg, Ragan, Seruch, Nachor, Tharra, Abraham.

And the sons of Abraham ; Isaak and Ismael. And these are their genealogies. Ismael the first born: Nabaioth and
Kedar, Nabdeel, Massam, Masma, Iduma, Masse, Chondan,
Thaiman, Jettur, Naphes, Kedma. These were the sons of
Ismael. ' Ξ

With regard to the children οἵ Chettura the concubine of Abraham; she bore to him, Zembram, Jexan, Madiam,
Madam, Sobak, Soe. And the children of Jexan were Daidan and Sabai. And the children of Madiam were Gopher and Opher and. Enoch and Abida and Eldada. All these were children of Chettura.

Ch. IL Πα, CHRONICLEs.

3

39

51]

4

Moreover Abraham begot Isaak. And the sons of Isaak were Jacob and Esau. And the sons of Esau were, Eliphaz and Raguel and Jeul and Jeglom and Kore. And the sons of
Eliphaz were Thaiman and Omar, Sophar and Gotham and
Kenez and Thamna and Amelek. And the sons of Raguel, were Naches, Zare, Some and Mose. The sons of Seir, Lotan, Sobal, Sebegon, Ana, Deson, Osar and Dison. And the sons of Lotan were Chorri and Aiman and the sister of Lotan, Thamna. The sons of Sobal were Alon, Machanath,
Taibel, Sophiand Onan. And the sons of Sebegon were Aith and Sonan ; the sons of Scnan, Daison; and the sons of Daison, Emeron and Asebon and Jethram and Charran. And the sons of Osar, were Balaam and Zukam and Akan. The sons of Disan were Os and Aran. Now these were their kings:
Balak son of Beor, the name of whose city was Dennaba.
And when Balak died Jobab, son of Zara of Bosorra, reigned in his stead. And when Jobab died, Asom of the land of the
Thaimanites reigned in his stead. And when Asom died,
Adad son of Barad who smote Madiam in the plain of Moab reigned in his stead; and the name of his city was Gethaim.
And when Adad died, Sebla of Masekka reigned in his stead.
And when Sebla died, Saul of Roboth which is by.the river, reigned in his stead. And when Saul died, Balaennor son of
Achobar, reigned in his stead. And when Balaennor died,
Adad son of Barad reigned in his stead ; and the name of his city was Phogor. The emirs of Edom were, emir Thamna, emir Golada, emir Jether, emir Elibamas, emir Elas, emir
Phinon, emir Kenez, emir Thaiman, emir Babsar, emir Magediel, emir Zaphoin. These were the emirs of Edom.

These are the names of the sons Israel, Reuben, Symeon,
Levi, Juda, Issachar, Zabulon, Dan, Joseph, Benjamin, Meat thaleim, Gad, Aser.

The sons of Juda. Er, Aunan, Sefom. These three he had by a daughter of Sava, the Chananite. Now Er the first born of Juda was wicked in the sight of the Lord, and he slew him. Then Thamar his daughter in law bore to him Phares and Zara. All the sons of Juda were five. The sons of Phares, were Esrom and Jemuel. And the sons of Zara were
Zambri and Aitham and Amuan and Chalchal and Darad,

Ch. 11. Ι. CHRONICLES.

17 bo bd WW b9
Ὁ Οὦ “1 n

five ἴῃ 411. And the sons of Charmi, Achar {πὸ troubler of -
Israel, who transgressed so as to be anathematised. And the sons of Aitham, Azarias. And the sons of Esrom who were born to him were Jerameel and Aram and Chaleb. And Aram begot Aminadab, and Aminadab begot Naasson, the chief of the house of Juda; and Naasson begot Salmon and Salmon begot Boaz; and Boaz begot Obed; and Obed begot
Jessai, and Jessai begot Eliab his first born. Aminadab was his second son ; Samaa his third; Nathanial his fourth; Zebdai his fifth; Asam his sixth; David his seventh. And their sisters were Saruia and Abigaia. And the sons of Saruia were
Abisa and Joab and Asael, three. And Abigaia was the mother of Amessai; and the father of Amessai was Jothor, the
Ismaelite.

And Chaleb son of Esrom took to wife Gazuba, in addition to Jerioth, and these were her children, Jasar and Subab and
Ardon. And when Gazuba died Chaleb took to him Ephrath, who bore 'to him Or; and Or begot Ouri; and Ouri begot
Beseleel. Andafter that Esron went in tothe daughter of Machir the father of Galaad and took her when he was sixty five years of age; and she bore to him Seruch. And Seruch begot Jair.
He had twenty three cities in the land of Galaad, and he took
Gedsour and Aram, the villages of Jair which belonged to them, Kanath and the villages thereof, sixty cities. All these belonged to the children of Machir, the father of Galaad.
And after Esron died Chaleb went to Ephratha, and Esron’s wife Abia bore to him Escho, the father of Thekoe. Now these were the sons of Jerameel, the first born of Esron, Ram his first born, and Baana and Aram, and Asan his brother.
And Jerameel had another wife whose name was Atara. She was the mother of Ozom. And the sons of Ram, the first born of Jerameel were Maas and Jamin and Akor. And the sons of Ozom were Samai and Jadae. And the sons of Samai, Nadab and Abisur ; and the name of Abisur’s wife was Abichaia and she bore to him Achabar and Moel. And the sons of Nadab were Salad and Apphain; and Salad died without issue.
And the sons of Apphain were Isemiel ; and the sons of Isemiel, Sosan; and the sons of Sosan, Dadai; and the sons of
Dadai, Achisamas, Jether, Jonathan; and Jether died without

Ch. III. 1. CHRONICLES.

44.

Ill.

issue. And the sons of Jonathan were Phaleth and Osam.
These were the Jerameelites. Now Sosan had no sons, but daughters only. And Sosan had an Egyptian servant whose name was Jochal. To this Egyptian servant, Sosan gave his daughter for a wife and she bore to him Ethi. And Ethi begot Nathan; and Nathan begot Zabed; and Zabed begot
Aphamel; and Aphamel begot Obed ; and Obed begot Jehu ; and Jehu begot Azarias; and Azarias begot Chelles; and
Chelles begot Eleasa; and Eleasa begot Sosomai; and Sosomai begot Salum; and Salum begot Jechemias; and J canes begot Elisama; and Elisama begot Ismael.

And the sons of Chaleb the brother of Jeremeel were Marisa his first born who was the father of Ziph. And the children of father Marisa were Chebron. And the sons of Chebron were Kore and Thapphus and Rekom and Samaa. And Samaa begot Raem the father of Jeklan; and Jeklan begot Samai: And Maon was his son; and Maon was the father of
Baithsur. Moreover Gaipha the concubine of Chaleb bore
Aram and Mosa and Gesue, from whom descended the sons of
Addai, Ragem and Jotham and Sogar and Phalek and Gaipha and Sagae. And Mocha another concubine of Chaleb bore
Saber and Tharam. She bore also Sagae the father of Madmena, and Saou the father of Machabena and the father of Gaibel. And Chaleb’s daughter was Ascha. ‘These were children of Chaleb—the children of Or his first born by Ephratha, Sobal the father of Kariathiarim, Solomon the father of Baitha,
Lammon the father of Baithalaem, and Arim the father of Bethgedor. And Sobal the father of Kariathiarim had other sons namely Araa and Aisi and Ammanith and Oumasphae, Poleisjair, Aithalim, Miphithim and Hesamathim and Hemasaraim, from whom branched out the Sarathaites and the Esthamites.
And the children of Solomon were Bethalaim the Netophatite,
Ataroth of the house of Joab and the half of the Malathites, the
Esarites the families of the scribes who dwelt at Jabis; the
Thargathites and Samathites and Sochathites. ‘These comprehended under the name of Kinites were descended from A1math the father of the house of Rechab.

Now these are the sons of David who were born to him at Chebron, Amnon his first born by Achinaam the Jezraelitess;

Ch. IV. Πα CHRONICLES.

2

3

ΞΘΘἈἉ Ὁ ana

Damniel his second son by Abigaia the Karmelitess; Abessalom his third by Macha a daughter of Tholmai king of Gedsur; Adonia his fourth by Agegith; his fifth, Saphatia the son of Abital; his sixth, Jethraam by his wife Agla. These six sons were born to him in Chebron; for he reigned there seven years and six months. And in Jerusalem he reigned thirty three years. Now these were the.sons born to him in Jerusalem, Samaa, Sobab, Nathan and Solomon. (These four were by Bersabee the daughter of Amiel,) and Ebaar and Elisa and Eliphaleth and Nagai and Naphek and Japhie and Elisama and Eliada and Eliphala, nine. All sons of David besides the sons of the concubines and Themar their sister. The sons of Solomon,
Roboam; Abia his son, Asa his son, Josaphat his son, Joram his son, Ochosias his son, Joas his son, Amasias his son, Azarias his son; Joatham his son; Achaz his son; E.zekias his son;
Manasses his son; Amon his son; Josias his son; and the sons of Josias were Joanan his first born, his second Joakim, his third Sedekias, his fourth Salum; and the sons of Joakim were
Jechonias his son, Sedekias his son, and the sons of Jechonias were Asir, Salathiel his son; Melchiram and Phadaias and
Sanesar and Jekemia and Osamath and Nabadias: and the

sons of Phadaias were Zorobabel and Semei. And the sons of

Zorobabel were Mesollam and Anania and Salomethi their sister; and Asube and Ool and Barachia and Asadia and Asobed, five. And the sons-of Anania were Phalettia and Jesias his son; Raphal his son; Orna his son; Abdia his son; Sechenias his son; and the son of Sechenias was Samaia; and the sons of Samaia, Chattus and Joel and Berri and Noadia and
Saphath, six. And the sons of Noadia were Elithenan and
Ezekias and Ezrikam, three. And the sons of Elithenan were-
Odolia and Eliasebon and Phadaia and Akub and Joanan and
Dalaaia and Anan, seven.

Now the sons of Juda were Phares and Esrom, Charmi and Or, Soubal and Rada his son. And Soubal begot Jeth; and Jeth begot Achimas and Laad. These are the families of the Arathites. And these are the sons of Aitam—Jezrael and
Jesman and Jebdas, and the name of their sister was Eselebbon; and Phanuel the father of Geddor; and Jaser the father of Osan.. These were the sons of Or who was the first born of

10

Ephratha and the father of Baithalaem. Asur also the father of
Thekoe had two wives Aoda and Thoada; and Aoda bore to him Ochaia and Ephal and Thaiman and Aasther. All these were the children of Aoda. And the children of ‘Thoada were
Sereth and Saar and Esthanam. And Koe begot nob and Sabatha. And these are the families of brother Rechab son of
Jarin. Igabes indeed was the most honourable of his brethren.
Now his mother had called his name Igabes, saying, I have brought him forth Osgabes [with sorrow.] And Igabes called on the God of Israel, and said, If thou wilt bless me with blessings and enlarge my borders, let thy hand be with me, and give me knowledge that I may not debase myself. Accordingly God gave him all that he asked. And Chaleb the father of Ascha begot Machir. He was the father of Assathon and begot Bethraian and Bessea and Thaiman the father of Poleosnaas the brother of Eselom the Kenezite. These were men of Rechab. And the sons of Kenez were Gothoniel and Sa-

. raia. And the sons of Gothoniel, Athath. And Manathi begot

Gophera. And Saraia begot Jobab the father of the Ageaddairites, for they were carpenters. And the sons of Chaleb son of Jephonne were, Er, Ada and Noom. And the sons of Ada,
Kenez, and the sons of Aleel, Zib and Zepha and Thiria and
Eserel. And the sons of Esri, Jether, Morad and Apher and
Jamon. And Jether begot Maron and Semei and Jesba the father of Esthaimon. And his wife Adia bore Jared the father of Gedor and Aber the father of Sochon and Chetiel the father of Zamon, And these were the sons of Betthia a daughter of
Pharao whom Morad took, and the sons of his wife Iduia the sister of Nachaim the father of Keila, Garmi and Esthaimon,
Nochathi. And the sons of Semon were Amnon and Ana, son
Phana and Inon. And the sons of Sei were Zoan and the Zoabites. 

The sons of Selom son of Juda were Er, the father of
Lechab, and Laada father of Marisa. And the genealogies of the subordinate families of Ephrathabak, belonged to the house of IXsoba, namely Joakim and the men of Chozeba, and

5 Joas and Saraph who dwelt in Moab. Now Abederim Athu-

kiim led them away. These were potters who dwelt at Ataim and Gadira with the king, and having risen to eminence in his reign they settled there.

27

28

Ns I. CHRONICLES.

The sons of Symeon were Namuel and Jamin, Jarib, Zares,
Saul, Salem his son; Mabasam his son; Masma his son; Amuel his son; Zakehur his son; Semei his son. Semei had sixteen sons and six daughters; but their brethren had not many children; nor did all their families abound like the children of
Juda. Now they dwelt in Bersabee and Molada, and in Esersaul and in Balaa, and in Aisem and in Tholad, and in Bathuel and in Erma, and in Sikelag, and in Baithmarimoth and Hemisuseosin, and the house of Baruseorim. These were their cities till the reign of king David. And the folds for their cattle were Aitan and En, Remnon and Thokka, and Aisar, five cities with all their folding places around these cities even to
Baal. This was their possession and this their distribution into communities, including Mosabab and Jemoloch, and Josia son of Amassia, and Joel and Jehu, son Asabia, son Saran, son
Asiel; and Elionai and Jokaba, and Jasuia and Asaia, and Jediel and Ismael, and Banaias and Zuza son of Saphai, son of
Alon, son of Jedia, son of Semri, son of Samaias. These were they who having branched out under the names of chiefs in their families and in their patriarchal houses, were increased to a multitude and spread themselves in search of pastures for their cattle, till they came to Gerara to the east of Gai, where they found pastures, extensive and good, for the land before them was spacious and there was peace and tranquillity. Because they who dwelt there before them were of the children of Cham, therefore those above mentioned came in the days of Ezekias king of Juda, and smote their families, even the
Minaians whom they found there, and utterly destroyed them even to this day, and dwelt in their stead, because there were pastures there for their cattle. And from among these five hundred of the Symeonites with Phalaettia and Noadia, and Raphaia and Oziel sons of Jessi, their chiefs, went to Mount Seir and smote the remains of Amelek who had been left even to this time.

And the sons of Reuben the first born of Israel—for he was the first born, but when he went up to his father’s bed, his father gave his birth right to his son Joseph as the son of
Israel : yet in the genealogy he did not attain the right of primo-

geniture ; for Juda being mighty in power prevailed over his

Ch-V. I. CHRONICLES.

brethren to have the Ruler appointed out of him, though the

3 blessing was Joseph’s. Now the sons of Reuben, the first born
A of Israel, were Enoch and Phallus, Asrom and Charmi. The

14 sons of Joel, Semei and Bania, his son. And the sons of Goug son of Semei, Micha his son; Recha his son; Joel his son;

7 Beel his son, whom Thalgathphallasar, king of Assyria, carried

away captive. He was the chief of the Reubenites. And his brethren in his patriarchal family in their classes according to their'genealogies, were the chief Joel and Zacharias, and Balek,
Son Azouz, Son Sama, Son Joel. Now the Reubenites dwelt at
Aroer, and at Nabau and Beelmasson, and eastward to the edge of the wilderness which bordereth on the river Euphrates ; for they had many cattle in the land of Galaad. And in the days of Saul they made war on their neighbours; and all those who dwelt in tents on the east of Galaad fell by their hands.

The children of Gad dwelt along side of them in the land of Basan, even to Sela—Joel was the first born and Sapham the second, and Janin the muster master in Basan. And their - brethren according to the houses of their patriarchal families were, Michael, Mosollam and Sebe, and Joree and Joachan, and Zue and Obed, seven. These were the sons of Abichaia son of Ouri, son-of Idai, son of Galaad, son of Michael, son of
Jesai, son of Jeddai, son of Buz, brother’s son of Abdiel, son of Gouni. He was the chief of the patriarchal house. They dwelt in Galaad, in Basan and in their towns, and occupied all the borders of Saron to the outlet. Ofall these an account was taken in the days of Joatham king of Juda, and in the days of
Jeroboam king of Israel. ‘The Reubenites and the Gadites, and the half of the tribe of Manasses who were fit for war, men wielding shields and swords and bending the bow and disciplined for battle, were forty four thousand seven hundred and sixty who marched out in array. When they were at war with the Agarenians and the Itureans, and the Naphaisaians and the
Nadabeans, they prevailed over them. And the Agarenians with all their tents, were delivered into their hands. For in the battle they cried to God and he hearkened to them, because they trusted in him. So they took all their substance, five thousand camels, two hundred and fifty thousand sheep, two thousand asses, and a hundred thousand prisoners, and many were

‘Ch. VL I. CHRONICLES.

22

23

24,

25

4

16

19 slain; for the battle was from God. And they dwelt in their stead till the captivity.

Now the half of the tribe of Manasses inhabited, from Basan to Baal, Ermon and Sanir and Mount Aermon. And on
Libanus they were very numerous. And these were the leaders of the house of their families, Opher and Sei, and Eliel and Jeremia, and Oduia and Jediel, men mighty in power, men of renown, chiefs of the houses of their families. But when they revolted from the God of their fathers and went a whoring after the gods of the people of the land, whom God had removed from before them, the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Phaloch king of Assur, and the spirit of ‘Thaglaphalassar king of Assur, and he removed Reuben and Gad, and the half of the tribe of Manasses, and carried them to
Chaach and Chabor, and to the river of Gozan, where they are to this day.

The sons of Levi were Gerson, Kaath and Merari. And the sons of Kaath, Ambram and Issaar, Chebron and O2ziel.
And the children of Ambram were Aaron and Moses and
Mariam. And the sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abiud, Eleazar and Ithamar. Eleazar begot Phineas; and Phineas begot
Abisu; Abisu begot Bokki, and Bokki begot Ozi; Ozi begot
Zaraia; and Zaraia begot Mariel; Mariel begot Amaria; and
Amaria begot Achitob; Achitob begot Sadok; and Sadok begot Achimaas; Achimaas begot Azarias; and Azarias be- _ got Joanan; Joanan begot Azarias who officiated as priest in the house which Solomon built in Jerusalem. And Azarias begot Amaria, and Amaria begot Achitob; and Achitob begot
Sadok; and Sadok begot Achimaas; and Achimaas begot
Azarias; and Azarias begot Amarias ; and Amarias begot Sadok; and Sadok begot Salom; and Salom begot Chelkias ; and Chelkias begot Azarias; and Azarias begot Saraias; and
Saraias begot Josadak; and Josadak went into captivity with
Juda and Jerusalem by: the hand of Nabuchodonosar.

The sons of Levi were Gerson, Kaath and Merari. Now these are the names of the sons of Gerson, Lobeni and Semei.
The sons of Kaath were Ambram and Issaar, Chebron aiid
Oziel. The sons of Merari were Mooli and Musi. And these were the families of the Levites according to their families.

Ch. VIL I. CHRONICLES.

22

40

44

48

4.9

To Gerson by Lobeni belonged Jeth his son, Zammath his son, Joab his son, Addi his son, Zara his son, Jethri his son.
The sons of KXaath were Aminadab his son, Kore his son,
Aser his son, Elkana his son, Abisaph his son, Aser his son,
Thaath his son, Ouriel his son, Ozia his son, Saul his son.
And the sons of Elkana, Amessi and Achimoth, Elkana his son, Suphi his son, Kainaath his son, Eliab his son, Jeroboam his son, Elkana his son, the sons of Samuel—the first born
Sani and Abia. The sons of Merari were Mooli, Lobeni his son, Semei his son, Oza his son, Samaa his son, Aggia his son, Asaias his son.

Now these are they whom David set over the bands of singers in the house of the Lord, when the ark was at rest.
And they ministered before the tabernacle of the testimony with musical instruments, ‘until Solomon built the house of the Lord in Jerusalem, and they attended their service according to their order, and these are they who attended with their sons—Of the sons of Kaath, JAiman, who sung to the psaltery, the son of Joel, son of Samuel, son of Elkana, son of Jeroboam, son of Eliel, son of Thou, son of Suph, son of Elkana, son of Maath, son of Amathi, son of Elkana, son of Joel, son of Azarias, son of Saphanias, son of Thaath, son of Aser, son of Abiasaph, son of Kore, son of Issaar, son of Kaath, son of Levi, son of Israel; and his brother Asaph who stood on his right—Asaph was the son of Barachias son of Samaa, son of
Michael, son of Baasia, son of Melchia, son of Athani, son of
Zaaras, son of Adai, son of Aitham, son of Zammam, son of
Semei, son of Jeth, son of Gersom, son of Levi. And the sons of Merari, their brethren who were on their left, were Aitham son of Kisa, son of Abai, son of Maloch, son of Asebi, son of
Amessia, son of Bani, son of Semer, son of Mooli, son of Musi, son of Merari, son of Levi.

Now their brethren the Levites according to the houses of their families, were appointed to all the work of the service of the tabernacle of the house of God. And Aaron and his sons, who were to burn incense on the altar of whole burnt offerings and on the altar of incense offerings, were for all the service of the Holy of Holies, and to make atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses the servant of God com-

σι. ΥἹΙ. I. CHRONICLES.

50

54

56

60

62

63

64

71 manded. And these were the sons of Aaron, Eleazar his son,
Phineas his son, Abisu his son, Bokki his son, Ozi his son,
Saraia his son, Mariel his son, Amaria his son, Achitob his son, Sadok his son, Achimaas his son.

Now these were their dwelling places with their towns and their borders. To the sons of Aaron to their family as Kaath-

“ites, because the lot fell to them, therefore they gave them Che-

bron in the land of Juda with its suburbs round about. But the fields belonging to the city and the villages thereof had been given to Chaleb son of Jephonne—to the sons of Aaron they gave these cities—ofthe refuge cities, Chebron and Lobna with its suburbs, and Salna with its suburbs, and Esthamo with its suburbs, and Jethar, with its suburbs, and Dabir with its suburbs, and Asan with its suburbs, and Baithsamus with its suburbs ; and from the tribe of Benjamin, Gabai with its suburbs, and Galemath with its suburbs, and Anathoth with its suburbs. All their cities were thirteen according to their families. And to the rest of the Kaathites they gave by lot out of the tribe consisting of two communities, namely, out of
Ephraim and the half of the tribe of Manasses, ten cities. And to the Gersonites according to their families, they gave out of the tribe of Issachar, out of the tribe of Aser, out of the’ tribe of Nephthaleim, and out of the tribe of Manasses in Basan, thirteen cities. And to the Merarites according to their families, out of the tribe of Reuben, out of the tribe of Gad, out of the tribe of Zabulon, twelve cities by lot. Now when the Israelites gave the Levites the cities and their suburbs, and had given by lot out of the tribe of Juda and out of the tribe of Symeon and out of the tribe of Benjamin, the cities which are mentioned by name, then the families of the sons of Kaath got these cities also of their borders. Out of the tribe of Ephraim they gave them of the cities of refuge, Sychem and its suburbs on mount
Ephraim; and Gazer with its suburbs, and Jekman with its suburbs, and Baithoron with its suburbs, and Ailon with its suburbs, and Gethremmon with its suburbs; and out of the half tribe of Manasses, Anar with its suburbs, and Jemblaan with its suburbs for the rest of the Kaathites according to their families. And to the Gersonites they gave from the fam1-

ties of the halftribe of Manasses Golan of Basan withitssuburbs,

Ch Vil. I. CHRONICLES. 

and Asecroth with its suburbs; and out of the tribe of Issachar, Kedes with its suburbs, and Deberi with its suburbs, and.

-Dabor with its suburbs, and Ramoth with its suburbs, and _

Ainan with its suburbs; and out of the tribe of Aser, Maasal with its suburbs, and Abdou with its suburbs, and Akak with’ its suburbs, and Rohob with its suburbs. And out of the tribe of Nephthaleim, Kedes in Galilee with its suburbs, and
Chamoth with its suburbs, and Kariathaim with its suburbs.
And to the Merarites, the remaining Levites, they gave out of the tribe of Zabulon, Remmon with its suburbs, and Thabor with its suburbs, and on the western bank of the Jordan,
Jericho; and out of the tribe of Reuben, Bosor in the wilderness with its suburbs, and Jasa with its suburbs, and Kad- moth with its suburbs, and Maephla with its suburbs; and out of the tribe of Gad, Rammoth Galaad with its suburbs, and Manaim with its suburbs, and Esebon with its suburbs, and Jazer with its suburbs.

VIL. The sons of Jssachar were Thola and Phua and Jasub

and Semeron, four. And the sons of Thola were Ozi, Raphaia, and Jeriel and Jamai and Jemason and Samuel, chiefs of the houses of the families of Thola, mighty in power im their respective communities. Their number in the days of David was twenty two thousand six hundred. And the sons of Ozi,
Jezraia; and the sons of Jezraia, Michael, Abdiu and Joel and
Jesia, five, all chiefs. And under them in their respective communities according to the houses of their families, the able bodied men fit for array in battle, were thirty six thousand; for they had many wives and children. And their brethren, comprehending all the families of Issachar, the able bodied men fit for battle were eighty seven thousand. This was the number of them all. i

The sons of Benjamin were Bale and Bachir and Jediel, three. And the sons of Bale were Esebon and Ozi and Oziel and Jerimuth and Ouri, five, chiefs of houses of families mighty in power, and their number was twenty two thousand and thirty four. And the sons of Bachir were Zemira and Joas and
Eliezar and Elithenan and Amaria and Jerimuth and Abiud and Anathoth and Eleemeth, all these were sons of Bachir, and

their number according to their several communities, they be-
ν ο L . I I . ¥

Ch, ὙΠ. I. CHRONICLES.

10

11

15

18

20

23

24,

25

28

29 ing chiefs of the houses of their patriarchal families mighty in power, were twenty thousand two hundred. And the sons of
Jediel were Balaan, and the sons of Balaan, Jaus and Benjamin and Aoth and Chanana and Zaithan and Tharsi and Achisaar.
All these sons of Jediel being chiefs. of their families mighty in power, were seventeen thousand two hundred who went out in the army to war, including Sapphin and Apphin and the sons of Or, Asom, and his son Aor.

And the sons of Nephthaleim were Jasiel, Goni and Aser and Sellum his son and Balam his son.

And the sons of Manasses were Esriel whom his concubine
Syra bore to him. She bore to him also Machir the father of
Galaad. And Machir took to wife a sister of Apphin and a sister of Sapphin. The sister of the one was named Moocha, and the sister of the other Sapphaad. And to him by Sapphaad daughters only were born; but Moocha the wife of Machir bore a son and called his name Phares, and his brother’s name was Sourus. His sons were Oulam and Rokon. And the sons of Oulam, Badam. These were of the house of Galaad son of
Machir son of Manasses. And his sister Malecheth bore Isud and Abiezer and Maela. And the sons of Semira were Aim and Sychem and Lakim and Anian.

And the sons of Ephraim were Sothalath and Barad his son and Thaath his son, Elada his son, Saath his son, and Zabad his son, Sothole his son; and Aser and Elead whom the men of Geth who were born in this land slew, because they went down to take their cattle. Whereupon Ephraim their father mourned many days. But when his brethren came to comfort him, he went in unto his wife; and she conceived and bore hima son, and he called his name Beria, Because, said he, he was born during the calamities in my house. And his daughter was Saraa, who formed a family among them, who were left, and it built the upper and lower Baithoron. And the sons of Ozan were Seera and Raphe his son, Saraph and Thaleas his sons, Thaen his son and by his son Laadon, son Amiud, son Elisamai, son Nun, son Jesue were his sons. Now their possession and their dwelling was Baithel and its villages, eastward Nearan, and westward Gazer and its villages, and
Sychem with its villages even to Gaza, and the villages there-

Ch. VIN. I. CHRONICLES.

40 of, and in the borders of the children of Manasses, Bethsan and its villages, Thanach and its villages, Mageddo and its villages, Dor and its villages. In this dwelt the children of
Joseph son of Israel. 

The sons of ser were Jemna and Suia and 1 Tsai and Βε-. ria with Sore their sister. And the sons of Beria were Chaber and Melchiel who was the father of Berthaith. And Chaber be-
σοί Japhlet and Samer and Chothan and Sola their sister. And the sons of Japhlet were Phasek and Bamael and Asith. These were sons of Japhlet. And the sons of Semmer were Achir and Rooga and Jaba and Aram and Baneelam. His brother’s sons were Sopha and Imana and Selles and Amal. ‘The sons of Sopha were Sue and Arnaphar and Suda and Barin and Imram and Basan and Oa and Sama and Salisa and Jethra and
Becra, And the sons of Jether were Jephina and Phaspha and
Ara. And the sons of Ola, Orech, Aniel and Rasia. All these were sons of Aser, all chiefs of families, chosen men mighty in power, chief leaders. The number of them fit for the array of battle—their number was twenty six thousand men.

VIR Now Benjamin begot Bale his first born and Asbel Kis

second son and Ara his third, Noa his fourth and Rapha his fifth. And the sons of Bale were Adir and Gera and Abiud and
Abessue and Noamaand Achia and Gera and Sephupham and
Ouram. These are sons of Aod—these are the heads of the families who dwelt in Gabae, and who removed to Machanathi, namely Nooma and Achia and Gera who is called Jeglaam and. begot Aza and Jachicho. And Saarin begot in the plain of
Moab (after he had put away Osin and Baada his wife, he had by his wife Ada) Jolab and Sabia and Misa and Melchas and
Jebus and Zabia and Marma. These were chiefs of families.
Now by Osin he had Abitol and Alphaal. And the sons of Alphaal were Obed, Misaal, Semmer (who built Onan and Lod and the villages thereof) and Beria and Sama. These were the chiefs of the families who inhabited Ailam after they had driven out the inhabitants of Geth, namely his brother Sosek and Arimoth and Zabodia and Ored and Eder and Michael and Jespha and Joda sons of Beria; and Zabadia and Mosollam and
Azaki and Abar and Isamari and Jezlias and Jobab sons of
Elphaal; and Jakim and Zachri and Zabdi and Elionai and Sa-

Chi

2]

IX. I. CHRONICLES.

lathi and Eleeli and Adaia and Baraia and Samarath sons of
Samath; and Jesphan and Obed and Eleel and Abdon and
Zechri and Anan and Anania and Ambri and Ailam and Anas thoth and Jathin and Jephadias and Phanuel sons of Sosek.
And Samsari and Saarias and Gotholia and Jarasia and Eria and Zechri son of Iroam. These were chiefs of their respective families. These chiefs dwelt in Jerusalem. And in Gabaon dwelt father Gabaon, and his wife’s name was Maacha, and her first born son was Abdon, and Sur and Kis and Baal and Nadab and Ner and Gedur and his brother and Zakchur and Makeloth; and Makeloth begot Samaa. These also dwelt over against their brethren in Jerusalem, with their brethren.
And Ner begot Kis; and Kis begot Saul, and Saul begot
Jonathan and Melchisue and Aminadab and Asabal. And
Meribaal was a son of Jonathan, and Meribaal begot Micha; and the sons of Micha, were Phithon and Melach and Tharach

and Achaz. And Achaz begot Jada, and Jada begot Salai-

math and Asmoth and Zambri. And Zambri begot Maisa and Maisa begot Baana. Raphaia was his son, Elasa his son,
Essel his son. And Esel had six sons, and these are their names, E.zrikam the first born, and Ismael and Saraia and Abdia and Anan and Asa. All these were sons of Esel. And the sons of Asel his brother were Ailam his first born, and Jas his second, and Eliphalet, his third. And the sons of Ailam, mighty men for war; bending the bow, and abounding in sons and sons of sons, were a hundred and fifty. All these were of the sons of Benjamin.

With respect to all Israel, this is a brief account of them.
Now these are they who are enrolled in the book of the kings of Israel and Juda, with them who were carried away to Babylon, for their inquities, and who had formerly dwelt in their possessions in the cities of Israel, including the priests, the Levites and the persons given them, (for in Jerusalem there dwelt some of the children of Juda, and some of the children of Benjamin, and some of the children of Ephraim, and Manasses;) Gnothi son of Samiud, son of Amri, son of
Ambraim, son οἱ Bouni, son of the children of Phares, son of Juda; and of the Selonites, Asaia the first born and his sons; and of the sons of Zara, Jeel and their brethren, six

Ch. IX. 1. CHRONICLES.

9

17 hundred and ninety. And of the sons of Benjamin, Salom son of Mosollam, son of Oduia, son of Asinu ; and Jemnaa, son of Jeroboam, and Elo, who were sons of Osi, son of Machir; and Mosollam, son of Saphatia, son of Raguel, son of
Jemnai, with their brethren, according to their respective families, nine hundred and fifty six. All these were heads of families, according to the houses of their families. And of the priests, Jodae and Joarim and Jachin and Azaria son of
Chelkias, son of Mosollam, son of Sadok, son of Maraioth, son of Achitob, ruler of the house of God; and Adaia, son of Iraam, son of Phaschor, son of Melchia; and Maasia, son of Adiel, son of Ezira, son of Mosollam, son of Maselmoth, son of Emmer, and their brethren, chiefs of houses of their families, a thousand seven hundred and sixty, mighty in power for the work of the service of the house of God. And of the
Levites, Samaia son of Asob, son of Ezrikam, son of Asabia, of the sons of Merari; and Bakbachar and Ares and
Galaal and Matthanias, son of Micha, son of Zechri, son of
Asaph; and Abdia, son of Samia, son of Galaal son of Idithun ; and Barachia, son of Ossa, son of Elkana, who dwelt in the villages of Notephati; the keepers of the gates, Salom,
Akum, Telmon and Diman and their brethren, Salom being at this time, the chief at the king’s gate, namely the eastern gate, of the camp of the Levites; and Sellum son of Kore, son of Abiasaph, son of Kore. Now his brethren, for the house of his father, namely the Korites, were over the works of the service keeping the watches of the tabernacle, and their fathers were over the camp of the Lord guarding the entrance. And
Phineas son of Eleazar was the ruler over them, and these were his assistants— Zacharias son of Mosollomi, keeper of the door of the tabernacle of the testimony, all the chosen keepers of the gates, were two hundred and twelve. With respect to the distribution of these in their respective courts, David and
Samuel the seer appointed them to their office, and they and their sons had the charge of the gates in the house of the
Lord, and in the house of the tabernacle, to keep watch. The gates were according to the four winds, east, west, north, and south. And their brethren in the villages were to relieve them, every seven days from time to time. Because the four chiefs

σι. Χ, 1. CHRONICLES.

had the charge of the gates, and the Levites who were over the store houses, and over the treasures of the house of God,

7 encamp near—because the watch rested on them, therefore they

had the charge of the keys to open every morning, the doors of the sanctuary. Now some of the Levites were’ over the implements of the service, for they were to be brought in and carried out by tale. So some were over the implements, and over all the holy vessels, and over the fine flour, the wine and the oil, the frankincense and the spices. And of the sons of the priests, some were confectioners and prepared the spices.
And of the Levites, Matthathias, who was the first born of
Salom the Korite, he had the charge of the works of the sacrifice prepared in the pan of the high priest, and Banaias the Kaathite, who was of their brethren, was over the shew bread, to set it in order every sabbath; and the singers, the chiefs of those families of the Levites, who were distributed into daily classes ; because the chiefs of these families of the
Levites were employed in this service day and night, therefore

‘they dwelt in Jerusalem.

Now at Gabaon dwelt father Gabaon, Jeel, whose wife’s name was Mocha, and his son, the first born, Abdon; and
Sour and Kis and Baal and Ner and Nadab and Gedour and a brother, and Zakchur and Makeloth: and Makeloth begot
Samaa. And these among their brethren dwelt at Jerusalem, © among their brethren. And Ner begot Kis, and Kis begot
Saul, and Saul begot Jonathan, and Melchisue and Aminadab and Asabal; and the son of Jonathan, was Meribaal and Meribaal begot Micha, and the sons of Micha, Phithon and Malach and Tharach: and Achaz begot Jada, and Jada begot
Galemith and Gazmoth and Zambri, and Zambri begot Massa, and Massa begot Baana, and Raphaia was his son, and Elasa his son, and as for Esel his son, [256] had six sons, and their names were Erikam, his first born, and Ismael and Saraia and Abdia, and Anan and Asa. These were sons of Esel.

When the Philistines fought against Israel and the Israelites fled before them, and fell down slain on mount Gelbue, the Philistines pursued close after Saul and after his sons ; and when they had slain Jonathan and Aminadab and Melchisue, the sons of Saul, the weight of the battle was directed

Ch, XI. I. CHRONICLES.

12

18

14

2

3

4 against Saul. And the archers assailed him with bows, and darts, and wounded him with arrows. Whereupon Saul said to his armour bearer, Draw thy sword and run me through with it, lest the uncircumcised come and insult me. But his armour bearer would not; for he was greatly terrified. Thereupon Saul took the sword and fell on it, And when his armour bearer saw that he was dead, he also fell on his sword. , Thus
Saul died with his three sons that day. And all his house died together. And when the Israelites who dwelt in the plain, saw that Israel had fled and that Saul and his sons were dead they left their cities and fled, and the Philistines came and dwelt therein. Now on the next day when the Philistines came to strip the dead, they found Saul and his sons fallen, on mount Gelbue. And when they had stripped him, they took his head and his armour, and sent them to the land of the
Philistines round about, to proclaim the good news to their idols, and to the people. And having deposited his armour in the house of their god, they fixed up his head, in the house of Dagon. But when all the inhabitants of Galaad heard all that the Philistines had done to Saul and Israel, all the valiant men ‘of Galaad arose and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons, and carried them to Jabis and buried their bones under the oak at Jabis, and fasted seven days. Thus died Saul, for his transgressions, which he had committed against God, according to the word of the Lord. Because he did not keep watch—because Saul sought to consult by a belly speaker, therefore Samuel the prophet answered him, though he sought not the Lord, and the Lord slew him, and transferred the kingdom to David, son of Jessai.

Then all Israel came to David to Chebron, and said,
Behold we are thy bones and thy flesh. Even in time past when Saul was king, it was thou who didst lead out and bring in Israel, and the Lord said to thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be ruler over Israel. So when all the elders were come to the king at Chebron, king David made a covenant with them at Chebron before the Lord, and they anointed him to be king over Israel, according to the word of the Lord by thé ministry of Samuel.

When the king and his men went to Jerusalem, which is

Ch. ΧΙ, I. CHRONICLES,

10

11

12

13

14

45

16

18

19

Jebus, the inhabitants of the land, the Jebusites who were there said to David, Thou shalt not come here, yet he took the fortress Sion which is now the city of David. He indeed said, Whoever first smiteth the Jebusites, he shall be made chief and general of the army. Upon which Joab son of Saruia went up first and was made chief. And David made his abode in the fortress, for which cause he called it the city of David, and built the city around it. And David proceeded on advancing in greatness, for the Lord Almighty was with him.

Now these are the chiefs of the mighty men who were with
David, who with him prevailed with all Israel during his reign, that he should be, according to the word of the Lord, king over Israel. And this is the number of David’s worthies. Jesebada son of Achaman, the first of thirty. He drew his sword once against three hundred men who were slain at one time.
And after him Eleazar son of Dodai the Achochite, who was one of the three worthies. He was with David at Phasodamin when the Philistines were assembled there for battle. And there was a portion of a field full of barley. And when the people fled before the Philistines, he stood in the midst of the piece of ground and maintained it and smote the Philistines, and the
Lord gave a great victory. When three of the thirty chiefs went down to the rock to David, to the cave Odollam, at the time when the Philistines were encamped in the giant’s vale, and David was in the fortress and there was a garrison of the
Philistines at Bethlehem, David longed and said, O that some one would give me some water to drink out of the well of Bethlehem which is by the gate! Upon this the three broke through the camp of the Philistines, and having drawn some water out of the well of Bethlehem by the gate, they took it and came to
David. But David would not drink it, but poured it out as a libation to the Lord, and said, God forbid that I should do such a thing! Shall I drink the blood of these men who have jeoparded their lives? Because they had brought it at the hazard of their lives he would not drink it. These things were done by these three worthies. And Abisa brother of Joab, who was chief of the three—he drew his sword against three hundred who were slain at one time. He was renowned among the three.
Of the three he was higher in rank than two and was their

Ch. XII. I, CHRONICLES.

22

23 chief, but did not come up to the three. And Banaias son of
Jodae, son of a worthy, whose works for Kabasael were many
—he smote the two Ariels of Moab. He went down also and smote a lion in the pit in a snowy day. He smote also the

Egyptian, a noted man of five cubits high. Though the

Egyptian had in his hand a spear like a weaver’s beam, Banaias went against him with a staff, and wresting the spear out of the hand of the Egyptian, he slew him with his.own spear.
These things Banaias son of Jodae did, and had a name among the three worthies. He was higher in rank than the thirty but did not come up to the three, and David set him over his family. And the commanders of the armies were Asael a brother of Joab, Eleanan son of Dodoe of Bethlehem; Samaoth the
Arorite; Chelles the Phelonite; Or, a son of Ekkis the Thekoite; Abiezer the Anathothite; Sobochai the Ousathite ; Eli the Achonite; Maraithe Netophathite; Chthaod son of Nooza the Netophathite ; Airi son of Rebie of Mount Benjamin ; Banaias the Phrathonite ; Ouri of Nachaligaas; Abiel the Garabaithite; Azbon the Baromite; Eliaba the Salabonite; Son
Asam the Gisonite; Jonathan son of Sola the Ararite; Achim son of Achar the Ararite; Elphat son of Thurophar the Mechorathrite ; Achia the Phelonite; Esere the Charmadite;
Naarai son of Azobai; Joel son of Nathan; Mebaal son of
Agari; Sele the Ammonite; Nachor the Berothite the armour bearer of the son of Saruia; Ira the Jethrite; Gareb the Jethrite; Uria the Chettite; Zabet son of Achaia; Adina son of
Saiza the chief of Reuben, yet there were thirty above him;
Anan son of Moocha and Josaphat the Matthanite; Ozia the
Astarothite; Samatha and Jeiel sons of Chotham the Ararite;
Jediel son of Semeri, and Josae his brother the Thosite;
Eliel the Maoite; Jaribi and Josia his son; Ellaam and
Jethama the Moabite; Daliel and Obeth, and Jessiel the
Messobiate.

XII. Now these were they who came to David to Sekelag,

2

3 while he kept himself close because of Saul son of Kis; and these among the worthies assisted in battle, and used the bow, slung stones and hurled darts with both hands. Of the brethren of Saul—of Benjamin, the chief Achiezer and Joas son

4 of Asma the Gabathite, and Joel and Jophalet sons of Asmoth

VOE. JI. Z

18

and Berchia and Jeul the Anathothite, and Samaias the Gabaonite, acommander among the thirty and over the thirty ; Jeremia and Jeziel and Joanan and Joazabath the Gadarathiite,
Azai and Arimuth and Baalia and Samaraia and Saphatias the
Charaiphielite, Elkana and Jesuni and Ozriel and Jozara and
Sobokam, who were Korites, and Jelia and Zabadia sons of
Iroam and who were Gedorites. And from the Gadites there withdrew to David from the wilderness, valiant men fit to command an army in battle array, wielding shields and spears.
Their faces were the face of a lion, and they were swift as roes on the mountains—<Asa the chief, Abdia the second, Eliab the third, Masmana the fourth, Jeremias the fifth, Jethi the sixth, Eliab the seventh, Joanan the eighth, Eliazer the ninth,
Jeremia the tenth, Melchabanai the eleventh. These from among the sons of Gad were officers of the army, the least of them commanded a hundred, and the greatest a thousand.
These were they who crossed the Jordan in the first month, when it overflowed all its banks, and put to flight all the inhabitants of the plains, from east to west. There came also some from Benjamin and Juda to the assistance of David. And David went out to meet them, and said to them, If you are come to me with good intent, let my heart as it is disposed be knit to you: but if to betray me to my enemies, and not with sincerity, may the God of our fathers see and rebuke. Whereupon
Amasai, a chief of the thirty, became inspired, and said, Advance, Davidson of Jessai! for they are thy people—Peace! peace to thee! and peace to them who assist thee, because thy God hath helped thee. So David received them, and made them officers of the armies. There withdrew also to David some from Manasses, when the Philistines came against Saul to battle. He mdeed did not assist them, for in a council of war held by the generals of the Philistines, they said, With the - heads of these men he will return to his master Saul. As David was returning to Sekelag there came to him from Manasses,
Edna and Josabath and Rodiel and Michael and Josabaith and
Klimuth and Semathi. They were the leaders of the thousands of Manasses, and they assisted David in the battle against the roving horde; for they were all men of valour, and for their valour commanders in the army. For there came men daily to David to form a great army like the host of God.

Ch, XIII. I, CHRONICLES.

23

24,

29

30

Now these were the rolls of the chiefs of the army who came to David to Chebron, to transfer the kingdom of Saul to him, according to the word of the Lord. The children of
Juda armed with shields and spears, six thousand eight hundred, fit for the array of battle; of the Symeonites fit for the array of battle, seven thousand one hundred; of the Levites, four thousand six hundred, and Joadas the leader of the house of Aaron, and with him three thousand seven hundred, with
Sadok a young man of valour, and of his patriarchal family twenty two chiefs ; and of the Benjaminites, Saul’s brethren, three thousand; but still the greater part of them kept the watch of Saul’s house; of the Ephraimites, twenty thousand eight hundred valiant men, the most renowned in the houses of their respective families; and of the half of the tribe of
Manasses, eighteen thousand, who were enrolled for the ex-

‘press purpose of making David king; and of the children of

Issachar, men who had knowledge suitable for the times, who knew what Israel should do, two hundred chiefs, and all their brethren with them; and from Zabulon there came ready for battle, with all the implements of war with them, fifty thousand, to assist David effectually; and from Nephthaleim, a thousand chiefs, and with them thirty seven thousand, armed with shields and spears; and from the Danites, twenty eight thonsand eight hundred, marshalled for battle; and from Aser they who go forth for battle, forty thousand; and from beyond the
Jordan—from Reuben and Gad, and from the half of the tribe of Manasses, with all the implements of war, a hundred and twenty thousand. All these warriors were arrayed for battle, with a peaceable intention. They came to Chebron to make
David king over all Israel. And all the rest of Israel were of one mind that David should be king. And they were three days eating and drinking. For their brethren made provision for them. And they who were nearest, as far as Zabulon and

Assachar and Nephthaleim brought provisions for them on ca.

mels and asses and mules and oxen, namely, flour, fig cakes, dried grapes, wine and oil, with cattle and sheep in abundance; for there was joy in Israel.

XML. When David had consulted with the captains of thou-

sands and captains of hundreds, under every leader, he said to

8

10

1

14

XIV. I. CHRONICLES.

the whole congregation of Israel, If it seemeth good and be countenanced by the Lord our God, let us send to the rest of our brethren who are left in all the land of Israel, and with them let the priests, the Levites in the cities of their possession be assembled with us; and let us bring the ark of our God tous.
For they hadnot sought it from the days of Saul. Thereupon the whole congregation gave orders to do so; for the proposal was right in the eyes of all the people. Accordingly, David assembled all Israel from the border of Egypt to the bay of
Emath, to bring the ark of God from the city larim, and David brought it up.

Now when all Israel came to the city Iarim which belonged to Juda, to bring up thence the ark of God the Lord, enthroned on cherubim whose name was invoked, they put the ark of God on a new cart. And from the house of Aminadab,
Oza and his brothers guided the cart, while David and all Israel were playing with all their might before God, on psalteries and kinyras and nablas and tympanums and cymbals and trumpets. But when they came to the threshing floor, Oza stretched forth his hand to take hold of the ark, because the © bullock caused it to lean: whereupon the anger of the Lord was kindled against Oza, and he smote him there, because he stretched forth his hand upon the ark, and he died there before God. And David was disheartened because the Lord had made a breach on Oza, and called that place, Breach of Oza, which is still its name. And David was that day afraid of God and said, How can I bring the ark of God home to me? So David did not bring the ark of God home to himself, to the city of
David, but caused it to turn aside to the house of Abeddara, the Gethite. And the ark of God abode in the house of Abeddara three months, and God blessed Abeddara and all that belonged to him.

XIV. When Chiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David,

with cedar timber, and masons and carpenters to build him a

2 house, and David knew that the Lord had prepared him to be

3

4.

king over Israel; for his kingdom was highly exalted for the sake of his people Israel, David took still more wives in Jerusalem, and more sons and daughters were born to him.
Now these are the names of those who were born to him in

Ci XV. I. CHRONICLES.

15

16

17

Jerusalem, Samaa, Sobab, Nathan and Solomon, and ‘Baar and Elisa, and Eliphaleth and Nageth, and Naphath and Japhie, and Elisamae and Eliade, and Eliphala.

When the Philistines heard that David was dated king over all Israel, they all came up to seek David. And when
David heard it he went out to meet them. Now the Philistines had come and spread themselves in the giant’s vale. And
David inquired of God, saying, If I go up against the Philistines, wilt thou deliver them into my hands? And the Lord

‘said to him, Go up and I will deliver them into thy hands.

So he went up to Baal Pharasm. And when he had smitten them there David said, God broke through my enemies by

my hand, like the breaking out of water, therefore he called

the name of that place, Breach of Pharasin. And the Philis-

tines having left their gods there, David ordered them to be

burned.

Again the Philistines came up and spread themselves again in the giant’s vale. And when David again inquired of God,
God said to him, Thou shalt not go up-after them. Turn from them and come upon them near the pear trees. And when thou shalt hear a sound of rustling in the tops of the pear trees, then thou shalt come to battle, for God is gone out before thee to smite the camp of the Philistines. Accordingly he did as the Lord commanded him, and he smote the camp of the Philistines from Gabaon to Gazera. And the fame of Da-

vid spread through all the land, and the Lord brought the dread.

of him on all the nations.

XV. When David had built houses for himself in the city of

ON A wD &

David, and prepared the place for the ark of God, and made for it a tabernacle: then David said, None but the Levites ought to carry the ark of God; for the Lord hath chosen them to carry the ark of the Lord and to minister to him forever.

So when David assembled all Israel at Jerusalem, to bring the

ark of the Lord to the place which he had prepared for it, he assembled the sons of Aaron, the Levites; of the Kaathites, .
Uriel the chief and his brethren, a hundred and twenty ; of the
Merarites, Asaia the chief and his brethren, two hundred and twenty; of the Gersonites, Joel the chief and his brethren, a hundred and thirty ; of the sons of Elisaphat, Semei the chief

12

18

14

17

18

25 and his brethren, two hundred; of the sons of Chebron, Eliel the chief and his brethren, eighty; of the sons of Oziel, Aminadab the chief and his brethren, a hundred and twelve. And
David sent for Sadok and Abiathar the priests, and for the
Levites, Uriel, Asaia and Joel, and Semaia and Eliel, and
Aminadab, and said to them, You chiefs of the families of the
Levites, purify yourselves, both you and your brethren, that you may carry up the ark of the God of Israel to the place which I have prepared for it; for because you did not do this on the former occasion, our God made a breach among us, because we did not seek him with judgment. So when the priests and the Levites had purified themselves to carry the ark of the God of Israel, the Levites took up the ark of God, as
Moses had by the word of the Lord ordered in writing, with the staves on their shoulders. Now David had said to the chiefs of the Levites, Appoint your brethren, such as play on musical instruments, on nablas and kinyras, and cymbals, that they may make aloud sound with the voice of joy. And the Levites had appointed Aiman son of Joel and of his brethren, Asaph son of Barachia, and of the sons of Merari his brethren, Aithan the son of Kisias and with them their brethren of the second rank, Zacharias and Oziel, and Semiramoth and Jeiel, and
Elioel and Eliab, and Banaia and Maasaia, and Matthathia and Eliphena, and Makellia and Abdedom, and Jeiel and
Ozias, the keepers of the gates; and the musicians Aiman,
Asaph and Aithan, sung and played on brass cymbals in the highest key ; and Zacharias and Oziel, Semiramoth, Jeicl; Oni,
Eliab, Maasias, Banias, on nablas in e/aimoth ; and Mattathias and Eliphalu, and Makenia and Ahdedom, and Jeiel and Ozias, on kinyras in Amasenith to give a strong sound. And Chononias, a chief of the Levites, was master of the odes, for he was skilled therein. And Barachia and Elkana were door keepers of the ark. And Somnia and Josaphat, and Nathaniel and
Amasai, and Zacharia and Banaia, and Eliezer the priests, sounded the trumpets before the ark of God. And Abdedom and Jeia were door keepers of the ark of God. And David with the elders of Israel and the captains of thousands, march-_ ed before when they were bringing up the ark of the covenant from the house of Abdedom with joy. And because God

strengthened the Levites who carried the ark of the covenant of the Lord, therefore they sacrificed each seven bulls and seven rams. Now David was girded in a cotton stole, as were all the Levites who carried the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and the musicians and Chonenias the chief of the singers.
And when David in his cotton stole, and all Israel were bringing up the ark of the covenant of the Lord with shouting and the sound of clarions and trumpets, answered by nablas and kinyras, it happened that when the ark of the covenant of the
Lord came to the city of David, Melchol the daughter of Saul looking out at a window saw king David dancing and playing, and she despised him in her heart.

XVI. And when they had brought in the ark of God and set

[90]

“1m

10 i}

it in the midst of the tabernacle, which David had erected for it, they offered whole burnt offerings and offerings of thanksgiving before God. And when David had finished offer-

ing the whole burnt offerings and the offerings of thanksgiving,

he blessed the people in the name of the Lord, and distributed — to all Israel both men and women, to every one a loaf of baker’s bread, and a cake made with honey. Then he appointed some-of the Levites to minister before the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and in responsive strains to thank and praise the
Lord the God of Israel. Asaph was the leader, and to him responded Zacharias, Jeiel, Semiramoth and Jeiel, Matthathias,
Eliab and Banaias, Abdedom and Jeiel, with musical instruments, nablas and kinyras; but Asaph used the cymbal; and
Banaias and Oziel the priests, with trumpets, were to be continually before the ark of the covenant of God. On that day
David gave orders for beginning the praises of the Lord by the ministry of Asaph and his brethren, with this Ode :—

O give thanks to the Lord,

Invoke him by his name ;

Among peoples make known his designs.

Sing to him. Sing praises to him.

Proclaim to all the wonders which the Lord hath done.

Sing praises to his holy name.

Let the heart which seeketh his favour be glad.

Seek the Lord and persevere ;

Seek his face continually.

12 Remember the wonders which he hath done—. ©
The miracles and judgments of his mouth.
18 The seed of Israel are his servants—

The sons of Jacob, his chosen ones.
14 He is the Lord our God—
In all this land are his judgments.
15 Let us ever remember his covenant—
His word which he enjoined for a thousand generations.
16 The covenant which he made with Abraham—
And the oath which he sware to Isaak,
17 This he confirmed for a law to Jacob—
To Israel as an everlasting covenant,
18 Saying, To thee I will give the land of Chanaan,
To be the portion of your inheritance.

19 When they were very few in number ;
Of little account, and sojourned therein ;
20 When they were passing from nation to nation—
And from one kingdom to another people ;
2] ἨἮἯε suffered no man to oppress them—
He rebuked kings for their sake—
22 Touch not these my anointed ones,
And to these my prophets do no harm.
23 Sing to the Lord, all ye of this land,
From day to day proclaim his salvation.
24 Declare his glory among the nations—

Among all peoples his marvellous works ;

25 That the Lord is great and greatly to be praised ;
Above all the gods he is awful—

26 That all the gods of the nations are idols ;
But our God hath made the heavens.

27 Glory and honour are before him—
Majesty and gladness in his abode.
28 Ascribe to the Lord, ye families of nations,

Ascribe to the Lord glory and majesty —
29 Ascribe to the Lord, glory to his name.
' Take gifts and bring them before him,
And worship the Lord in his holy courts.
30 Let all the earth be awed at his presence,
Let the earth be renovated and not dismayed.

31

32

33

34

35

40

A2

48

Let heaven rejoice, and the earth exult with joy,

Let them say among the nations, The Lord is king.

Let the sea roar and the fulness thereof—

And the trees of the field and all therein ;

Let the trees of the forest also rejoice at the presence of

the Lord ; ι

Because he is come to judge the earth.

~ O praise the Lord ; for it is good,

For to everlasting his mercy endureth.

And say, Save us, O God of our salvation !

Gather us and deliver us from our enemies ;

That we may praise thy holy name,

And in thy praises make our boast.

Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel,

From everlasting to everlasting,

And let all the people say, Amen.

And when they had praised the Lord, they left there, before the ark of the covenant of the Lord, Asaph and his brethren, that they might minister before the ark continually as each day’s service required. And with regard to Abdedom and his brethren who were sixty eight, Abdedom son of Idithun and Osa were to be door keepers. And they left Sadok the priest, and his brethren the priests, before the tabernacle of the Lord at the high place at Gabaon, that they might offer whole burnt offerings to the Lord, on the altar of whole burnt offerings continually every morning and evening, according to all that is written in the law of the Lord, which he enjoined on the children of Israel by the ministry of Moses the servant of God: and with him were Aiman and Idithun, and the rest who were chosen by name to praise the Lord, because his mercy endureth forever. And they had with them trumpets and high sounding cymbals, and musical instruments, for the songs of God. And the sons of Idithun were to be keepers of the gate. Then all the people returned every one to his home, and David returned to bless his household.

XVII. When David was settled in his house, he said to Na-

2 than the prophet, Behold I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of the covenant of the Lord is beneath curtains of skin.

Thereupon Nathan said to David, Do whatever is in thy heart;

Ch. XVII. 1. CHRONICLES.

3

5

6

i0

11

14

15

16

1

18

for God is with thee. But that very night there came to Nathan a word of the Lord, Go, and say to David my servant,
Thus saith the Lord, Thoushaltnot build mea house to dwell in. Because I have not dwelt in a house fromthe day I brought up Israel even to this day, but have been in a tent and under a curtain in all the places, through which I passed among Israel, did I ever speak to any tribe of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my people, and say, Why have you not built for me a house of cedar? But now, Thus shalt thou say to my servant David, Thus saith the Lord Almighty, I took thee from the fold—from following the flocks, to be ruler over my people Israel, and have been with thee wherever thou hast gone, and have cut off all thy enemies from before thee, and. made thee a name like the name of the great men on the earth ; and
I will fix a place for my people Israel, and plant them, and they shall dwell by themselves and no more be in trouble, nor shall a son of iniquity any more humble them.as at the first, even from the time I appointed judges over my people Israel. 1 have indeed subdued all thy enemies, and I will increase thee and the Lord will build thee a house. And when thy days are fulfilled and thou shalt go to rest with thy fathers, I will raise up thy seed after thee who shall proceed from thy loins, and I will prepare his kingdom. He shall build.a house for me, and
I will establish his throne forever. I will be to him a father and he shall be to me a son; and I will not withdraw my mercy from him as 1 withdrew it from them who were before him; but will confirm him in my house and in his kingdom, and his throne shall be established forever.

According to all these words and according to all. this vision, so did Nathan speak to David. Whereupon king David went and sat down before the Lord, and said,

Whoam I, O Lord my God, and what is my house that thou shouldst love me forever! Though these were very small before thee, O my God, yet thou hast spoken of thy servant’s house for a great while to come, and hast looked upon me as with theeyes of a man, and exalted me. O Lord my God, what more can David address to thee to express thy praise? Thou knowest thy servant, and according to thy own heart thou hast made all this greatness. Ὁ Lord! there is none like thee, nor is

Ch. XVIII. I, CHRONICLES.

there a god besides thee according toall that we have heard with our ears ; nor is there another nation on the earth like thy people
21 Israel. How hath God led them to redeem a people for himself, to make himself a name great and glorious, by driving out
_ nations from before thy people whom thou didst redeem out
22 of Egypt! As thou hast made thy people Israel a people for ~
23 thyself forever, and thou the Lord art become their God; now therefore, O Lord, let the word which thou hast spoken to thy servant, and touching his house be established forever, and do
24 as thou’ hast spoken; and let thy name be established and magnified forever by men, saying, O Lord, Lord Almighty, thou art the God of Israel, and the house of thy servant
25 David is established before thee. Because thou, O Lord my
God, hast revealed to the ear of thy servant, that thou wilt build him a house; therefore thy servant hath found freedom
26 to make supplication before thee. And now, O Lord, thou art
God. As thou hast spoken these good things, respecting thy
27 servant; now therefore begin to bless the house of thy servant that 11 may be before thee forever. Because thou hast blessed, therefore bless it forever.
XVIII. Now after these things, David smote the Philistines and subdued them, and took out of their hands Geth and the villages
2 thereof. He smote Moab also, and they became vassals
3 to David and brought him gifts. David also smote Adraazar king of Suba Emath. As he was going to establish his domi-
A nion over the river Euphrates ; David intercepted a thousand of his chariots and seven thousand cavalry, and twenty thousand infantry. And David destroyed all the chariots, reserving only
5 a hundred of them. And when the Syrians of Damascus came to assist Adraazar king of Suba, David smote of the Syrians twenty two thousand men. And David garrisoned that part of
Syria which belonged to Damascus, and the inhabitants became
David’s vassals, and brought him gifts. And the Lord preserved David wherever he went. And David took the chains of gold which were on the servants of Adraazar, and brought
8 them to Jerusalem. And from Matabeth and from the chief. cities which belonged to Adraazar, David took brass in great abundance, of which Solomon made the brasen sea and the pillars
9 and the vessels of brass. Now when Thoa king of Emath,

10

11

14

17 heard that David had smitten all the army of Adraazar king of
Suba, he sent his son Aduram to king David, to sue for peace with him, and to congratulate him because he had fought

-Adraazar and defeated him; for Thoa was at war with Ad-

raazar. And all the vessels of gold and silver and brass, which he brought, these king David dedicated to the Lord, together with the silver and the gold which he took from all the nations from Idumea and Moab, and from the Ammonites and the Philistines and from Amelek.

When Abessa son of Saruia had smitten of the Idumeans in the valley of salt, eighteen thousand, he put garrisons in the vale; and the Idumeans became David’s vassals, and the
Lord preserved David wherever he went. And David reigned over all Israel, and continued to execute judgment and justice among all the people. And Joab son of Saruia was over the army; and Josaphat son of Achilud was recorder; and Sadok son of Achitob and Achimelech son of Abiathar, were the priests; and Sousa was secretary; and Banaias son of Jodae . was over the Cherethites and the Phelethites, and David’s sons were next in rank to the king.

XIX. Now after these things, when Naas king of the Ammon-

2

[95]

ites died and his son Anan reigned ἴῃ his stead, David said, I will shew kindness to Anan son of Naas as his father shewed kindness to me. So David sent messengers to comfort him for his father. But when David’s servants came to the country of the Ammonites to Anan to comfort him, the chiefs of the Ammonites said to Anan, Is it to honour thy father in thy presence that David hath sent comforters to thee? Is it not that they may examine the city and spy the country that his servants are come

to thee? Thereupon Anan took David’s servants and shaved

them, and having cut off the half of their military robe even to the under garment, he dismissed them. And when messengers came to inform David respecting his servants, David sent to meet them, because they had been greatly dishonoured; and the king said to them, Abide at Jericho till your beards grow and then return. Now when the Ammonites saw that David’s people were dishonoured, Anan and the children of Ammon

‘sent a thousand talents of silver to hire for themselves chariots

and cavalry from Syrian Mesopotamia, and from Syrian Maa-

7

10

1

12

18

14

15 cha and from Sobal. And they hired thirty two thousand of the chariot army, and the king of Maacha and his people. And when they arrived they encamped over against Medaba, and the Ammonites were drawn together out of their cities, and came to commence war. When David heard this he sent Joab with all the army of the worthies. And the Ammonites came out and drew up in array for battle before the gate of the city; but the kings who had come, encamped by themselves in the plain. When Joab saw that they were arrayed for battle against him both in front and rear, he madeadraught out of all the youth of Israel and drew them up in array against the Syrians. And the rest of the people he put under the command of Abesai his brother, and they were drawn up in array against the Ammonites. And Joab said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, thou must come to my assistance; and if the children of Ammon prove too strong for thee I will support thee. Be of good courage and let us act valiantly for our people and for the cities of our God, and the Lord will do what is good in his sight. And when Joab and the people with him drew up in array for battle over against the Syrians they fled from them. And soon as the
Ammonites saw that the Syrians fled they also fled before
Abesai and before Joab his brother, and entered the city.

- Upon which Joab returned to Jerusalem.

16

.1

1 oe)

19

When the Syrian saw that Israel had ΗΝ him, he des-
‘patched messengers and drew out the Syrians from beyond the river. And Sophath the general of Adraazar’s army was at their head. This being told David, he assembled all Israel and crossed the Jordan and came upon them, and drew up for battle against them. And while David was marshalling his army for battle against the Syrians, they attacked him; but the
Syrians fled before Israel, and David slew of the Syrians seven thousand of the chariot army, and forty thousand infantry.
He slew also Sophath the general of the army. And when the servants of Adraazar saw that they were defeated before Israel, they made peace with David and served him. And the

XX. Syrians would not help the Ammonites any more. And

at the return of the year when kings take the field, Joab led

out all the strength of the army, and having laid waste all the
-country of the Ammonites, he went and besieged Rabba

while David abode at Jerusalem. And when Joab had smitten
Rabba and demolished it, David took the crown of Molchom their king from his head, and the weight of it was found to be a talent of gold, and in it was a precious stone and it was on the head of David. And having brought out the spoils of the city Ὁ which were very great, he brought out the people who were in it, and put them to saws and iron mattocks and among quarry men. And when David had done in this manner to all the
Ammonites, he and all the people returned to Jerusalem.
And after these things there was another battleat Gazer with the Philistines, in which Sobochai-sosathai smote Saphut a descendant of the giants and subdued him. There was also another battle with the Philistines, when Eleanan son of Jair smote Lachmai a brother of Goliath the Gethite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver’s beam. There was also another battle at Geth, and there was a man of great stature there, who had six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot, in all twenty four, and he also was a descendant of the giants, and Ὁ he defied Israel; but Jonathan son of Samaa, a brother of

David, smote him. These were the descendants of Rapha at

Geth. They were all four giants, and they fell by the hand of
David and by the hand of his servants.

XXI. Now when an adversary stood up in Israel and wcll

69 bt

ed David to number Israel, and king David said to Joab and the chiefs of the army, Go, number Israel from Dan to Bersabee, and let me know the number of them, Joab replied, The

‘Lord add to his people a hundred times as many as there are,
‘and may the eyes of my lord the king see it. They are all

servants to my lord. Why doth my lord seek this? May it not be a cause of trespass to Israel ? But the king’s determination prevailed against Joab, so he went forth, and having passed through all Israel, and come to Jerusalem, he gave David an account of the review of the people, and the whole number of the men of Israel who drew a sword, was eleven hundred thousand, and the children of Juda were four hundred and seventy thousand men who drew a sword. But he did not number Levi and Benjamin among them. Because the king’s word prevailed over Joab, and the thing was evil in the sight of God, therefore he smote Israel.

Ch. XXI. 1, CHRONICLES. ;

8

9

13

16

17

1 co

1

20

When David said to God, I have sinned greatly in doing this, now therefore take away, I beseech thee, this wickedness of thy servant, for I have acted very foolishly, the Lord spoke to Gad, the seer, saying, Go, and speak to David, and say,
Thus saith the Lord, I offer thee three things, chuse for thyself one of them that I may do it to thee. So Gad went to David and said to him, Thus saith the Lord, Chuse for thyself either three years of famine; or three months to flee before thy enemies while the sword of thy enemies is destroying

‘thee; or the sword of the Lord and pestilence for three days throughout the land, while an angel of the Lord is making shavock in all the inheritance of Israel. Now therefore consider.

What answer shall I make to him who sent me? Thereupon

David said to Gad, Very hard indeed to me are all the three.

Let me however fall into the hands of the Lord, for his tender mercies are exceeding great. But let me not fall into the hands of men. So the Lord sent a pestilence through Israel, and

there fell of the Israelites seventy thousand men. And when
God sent an angel to Jerusalem to destroy it, and he was mak-

ing hayock, the Lord looked and relented at the calamity, and said to the destroying angel, Let this suffice thee. Stay thy hand. Now the angel of the Lord was standing at the threshing floor of Orna, the Jebusite. And when David raised _ his

eyes and saw the angel of the Lord standing between the earth

and heaven, with a drawn sword in his hand stretched out over
Jerusalem, he and all the elders being clad in sackcloth, fell on their faces, and David said to God, Was it not I who ordered the numbering of the people? I indeed am the sinner. It is I who committed the sin. Butas for this flock, what have they done? O Lord my God, Let thy hand be upon me, and on my father’s house, and not on this thy people, O Lord, to destruction. Thereupon the angel of the Lord ordered Gad to tell David to go up and erect, an altar to the Lord on the threshing floor of Orna the Jebusite. So David went up according to the word which Gad spoke in the name of the Lord.
And when Orna turned and saw the king and his four sons with him, with attendants (now Orna was threshing wheat) upon David’s approach to Orna, Orna came out of his threshing floor and made obeisance to David with his face to the ground. And

23

24.

30

David said to Orna, Grant me the place of this threshing floor of thine, that I may build thereon an altar to the Lord—grant it to me for its worth in money, that the plague may be stayed from the people. And Ornasaid to David, Take it for thyself; and let my Lord the king do what is good in his sight. Behold I have given these young bulls for a whole burnt offering, and that plough for wood, and this corn for a sacrifice. Of all these things I make a gift. And David said to Orna, By no means: for I must buy them: for their worth in money. For I cannot take what are thine for the Lord, to offer a whole burnt offering to the Lord at free cost. So David gave Orna for the place six hundred shekels of gold by weight. And having built there an altar to the Lord, he offered up the offerings of homage and thanksgiving, and cried to the Lord, and the Lord hearkened to him by fire from heaven upon the altar of the whole burnt offering, which consumed the whole burnt offering. Then the
Lord spoke tothe angel and he sheathed hissword. When David saw that the Lord hearkened to him at the threshing floor of
Orna the Jebusite, and that he had sacrificed there at that time, though the tabernacle of the Lord which Moses had made in the wilderness, and the altar for whole burnt offerings were at that time at the high place of Gabaon (now he could not go before it to inquire of God, for that would not have been answerable to the haste in which he was, on account of

XXII. the sword of the angel of the Lord,) David said, This

is the house of the Lord God, and this is the altar for whole burnt offerings for Israel.

Then David ordered the strangers in the land of Israel to be assembled, and appointed stone cutters to cut hewn stones to build the house for God. He provided also iron in abundance for nails, for the doors and gates, and for hinges; and brass in abundance, without weight, and cedar beams innumerable; forthe Sidonians and Tyrians, brought for David, cedar timber inabundance. And David said, My son Solomon is young and tender, and the house to be built for the Lord is for extraordinary grandeur, for renown and glory, through every land, I will make provision for it. So David provided materials in abundance before his death. And he called Solo-

mon his son, and gave hima charge, to build the house for

7

. 7 the Lord God of Israel. And David said to Solomon, My son,
8 it was inmy mindtobuildahouse for the name of the Lord God, when there came to me a word from the Lord saying, Thou
9 hast shed much blood, and fought many battles, ‘thou shalt not build a house for my name, because thou hast shed much blood on the earth before me. Behold a son shall be born to thee. He shall be a man of rest. I will give him rest from all his enemies round about. For his name shall be
Solomon ; and I will give Israel peace and rest in his days.
10 He shall build a house for my name. And he shall be to me ason; and I will be to him a father. And I will establish the
11 throne of his kingdom in Israel forever. Now therefore, my son, the Lord will be with thee, and will prosper thee, and thou shalt build a house for the Lord thy God, as he hath
12 spoken concerning thee. Let but the Lord grant thee wisdom, and understanding, and strengthen thee over Israel, that thou
13 mayst keep and perform the law of the Lord thy God; then will he prosper thee, if thou be watchful to execute the statutes, and judgments, which the Lord enjoined on Israel by
14 Moses. Quit thyself like a man, and be strong. Fear not nor be dismayed. Now behold according to my poor ability I have provided for the house of the Lord a hundred talents of gold, and ten hundred talents of silver, and brass and iron without
15 weight, because of their abundance. I have also provided timber and stones, but thou must add thereto. And thou must add to the number of workmen of whom there are with
16 thee artists, and masons and carpenters and men skilled in every kind of work, of gold and silver and brass and iron, an innumerable number. Up therefore; and fall to work. And
17 the Lord be with thee. David also gave a charge to all the
18 chiefs of Israel to assist his son Solomon, saying, Hath not the Lord been with you, and given you rest all around? For he hath delivered into your hands the inhabitants of this land, and the land is subdued before the Lord, and before his people.
19 Now therefore apply your hearts, and your souls to seek the Lord your God and arise and build a sanctuary for your
God, that you may carry the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and the holy vessels of God, into the house to be built for the name of the Lord.

XXIII. When David was old and full of days, and had made

Solomon his son king over Israel in his stead, then he assembled all the chiefs of Israel, and the priests and the Levites, and the Levites were numbered, from thirty years old. and

‘upwards ; and the number of them by their poll, amounted to

thirty eight thousand men. Of these, twenty four thousand were for the works for the house of the Lord ; and six thousand were scribes and judges; and four thousand were guards of the gates, and four thousand were to praise the Lord with musical instruments, which he had made for praising the Lord.
And David distributed them into daily classes, under the heads of Gerson, Kaath and Merari, the sons of Levi. Now to Gerson belonged Edan and Semei ; the sons of Edan, were chief Jeiel, and Zethan and Joel, three: the sons of Semei, were Salomith, Jeiel and Dan, three. Those “were the chiefs of the families of the ‘Edanites; but the Semeites, had also
Jeth and Ziza, and Joas and Beria; these four were sons of
Semei, and Jeth was the chief and Ziza the second, and Joas and Beria not having many children were comprehended in one muster, for a house of a family. And the sons of Kaath were Ambram, Issaar, Chebron, Oziel; four. The sons of
Ambram were Aaron and Moses. Now Aaron was set apart for the sanctification of the most holy things, he and ;his sons, to burn incense before the Lord, to minister in the priest’s office, and to bless in his name forever. But as for Moses the man of God, his sons were classed in the tribe of Levi. The sons of Moses, were Gersam and Eliezer. Of the Gersamites, Subael was chief, and of the Eliezerites, Rabia was chief.
Now Eliezer had no other sons; but the sons of Rabia were increased to a multitude. The sons of Jssaar, were Salomith the chief. The sons of Chebron, were Jeria the chief, Amaria the second, Jeziel the third, Jekemias the fourth. The sons of Oziel, were Micha the chief and Isia the second.

The sons of Merari were Mooli and Mousi. The sons of
Mooli were Eleazar and Kis. Now Eleazar died, and left no sons, but only daughters. So the sons of Kis, their brethren, took them. The sons of Mousi were Mouli and Eder and
Jerimoth, three. These are the sons of Levi, according to the houses of their patriarchal familics. The chiefs of these fami-

Ch. XXIV. 1. CHRONICLES.

29

32 lies, according to the review of them, according to the number of their names, were polled to perform the works of the service of the house of the Lord, from twenty years old and upwards. For David said, The Lord God of Israel hath given his people rest and fixed his abode in Jerusalem forever. So the Levites not having to carry the tabernacle and all the utensils thereof for its οὐδέ ; for this cause by these last orders of David, the Levites are numbered from twenty years old and upwards, for he set them under the superintendance of
Aaron to serve in the house of the Lord, over the courts and over the store houses and over the purification of all the holy things, and over the work of the service of the house of God, and for the shew bread, and for the fine flour of the sacrifice and for the unleavened cakes, and for the frying pan, and the mixed sacrifice, and for all kinds of measuring, and to stand every morning to sing praises, and give thanks to the Lord, and the same every evening: and to have charge of all the offerings of homage made to the Lord, on the sabbaths and at the new moons, and at the festivals according to the number, and according to the rule prescribed for them, continually for the Lord. “And they are to keep the watch of the tabernacle of the testimony, and to guard the sanctuary, and to guard the sons of Aaron, their δέδιε . that they may minister as priests, in the house of the Lord.

XXIV. = Now with regard to the sons of Aaron in the line of

2

Nadab and of Abiud, and of Eleazar and of Ithamar.—As
Nadab and Abiud died in the presence of their father and had no sons; and Eleazar and Ithamar had officiated as priests;
David classed Sadok at the head of the sons of Eleazar, and
Achimelech at the head of the sons of Ithamar, according to the review of them according to their service, according to the houses of their families. And as the Eleazarites were found to be more numerous for chiefs of mighty men than the sons of Ithamar, therefore he distributed them—for the sons of

" Eleazar sixteen chiefs for houses of families, and for the sons

of Ithamar chiefs for eight houses of families. These he distributed by lot, one with the other. Because there were chiefs of the holies, and chiefs of the Lord, among the sons of Eleazar and among the sons of Ithamar, therefore in the pressnce of the

Ch. ΧΧν. 1. CHRONICLES.

king and the chiefs, Samaias son of Nathaniel, the muster master of the Levites, wrote down Sadok the priest and Achimelech son of Abiathar, and the chiefs of the families of the priests and the Levites, a chief of a house of families alternately, one for Eleazar and one for Ithamar, and the first lot came out for Joarim; the second for Jedia; the third for Charib; the fourth for Seorim; the fifth for Melchias; the sixth for Meiamin ; the seventh for Kos; the eighth for Abia; the ninth for
Jesus ; the tenth for Sechenias ; the eleventh for Eliabi; the twelfth for Jakim ; the thirteenth for Oppha; the fourteenth for Jesbaal ; the fifteenth for Belga; the sixteenth for Emmer ; the seventeenth for Chesin; the eighteenth for Aphese ; the nineteenth for Phetaia ; the twentieth for Ezekel; the twenty first for Achim; the twenty second for Gamul; the twenty third for Adallai; the twenty fourth for Maasai. This was the review of them according to their service, to go into the house of the Lord according to the rule prescribed for them, under the inspection of Aaron their father, as the Lord God of Israel. commanded Moses.

And for the rest of the Levites—for the Ambramites, Sobael ; for the sons of Sobael, Jedia ; for the Rabiates, the chief.
For the Zsaarites Salomoth, for the sons of Salomoth, Jath ; the sons of Ekdiu ; Amadia the second ; Jaziel the third ; Jekmoam the fourth. For the Ozielites, Micha; for the sons of
Micha, Samer; the brother of Micha, Isia; the sons of Isia,
Sacharia ; the Merarites Mooli and Mousi—the sons of Ozia, to whom belonged the title Merarite; his sons Isoam; and
Sakchur, and Abai; for Mooli, Eleazar and Ithamar, now
Eleazar died and had no sons, for him Kis; the sons of Kis,
Jerameel; the sons of Mousi, Mooli and Eder and Jerimoth, these sons of the Levites according to the houses of their families—they also drew lots as their brethren the sons of Aaron did, in the presence of the king and of Sadok and Achimelech, the senior chiefs of the families both of the priests and the Levites submitting to the lot equally with their younger brethren.

XXV. Then David the king with the chiefs of this host, ap-

pointed to their services the sons of Asaph and Aiman and Idithun, who chanted with kinyras and with nablas and with cymbals, and an account was taken by poll of those employed in

2 these services. The sons of Asaph were Zakchur and Joseph, and Nathanias and Erael. The sons of Asaph were near the

3 king. With Idithun were the sons of Idithun, Godolias and
Suri, and Iseas and Asabias, and Matthathias, six after their father Idithun, chanting on kinyras thanksgiving and praise

4, to the Lord. With Aiman were the sons of Aiman, Bukias and Matthanias, and Oziel and Subael, and Jerimoth and
Ananias, and Anan and Eliatha, and Godollathi and Rometthiezer, and Jesbasaka and Melithi, and Otheri and Meazoth.

5 All these sons Aiman had with him when he commenced a psalm for the king in the words of God. To exalt the horn
God indeed had given Aiman fourteen sons and three daugh-

6 ters. Allthese with their father, sung in the house of God to cymbals and nablas and kinyras, for the service of the house of

7 Godnear the king, with Asaph and Idithun and Aiman. And the number of them, including younger brethren, who were instructed to sing to the Lord, even all who were skilled, was

8 two hundred and eighty eight. And they cast lots for their daily courses, as well the younger as the senior, both teachers and scholars. And the lot which came out the first of his sons and his brethren for Asaph was that of Joseph, namely Godolias;
10 the second Henia, his sons and brethren, twelve ; the third
Zakchur his sons and brethren, twelve ; the fourth Jesri, his sons and brethren, twelve; the fifth Nathan, his sons and brethren, twelve ; the sixth Bukias, his sons and brethren, twelve;

15 the seventh Iseriel, his sons and brethren, twelve ; the eighth
Josia, his sons and brethren, twelve; the ninth Matthanias, his. sons and brethren, twelve; the tenth Semeia, his sons and brethren, twelve ; the eleventh Asriel, his sons and brethren, twelve ; the twelfth Asabia, his sons and brethren, twelve ; the

20 thirteenth Subael, his sons and brethren twelve ; the fourteenth
Matthathias his sons and brethren, twelve; the fifteenth Jerimoth, his sons and brethren, twelve; the sixteenth Anania, his sons and brethren, twelve; the seventeenth Jesbasaka, his

25 sons and brethren, twelve; the eighteenth Ananias, his sons and brethren, twelve; the nineteenth Mellithi, his sons and brethren, twelve ; the twentieth Eliatha, his sons and brethren, twelve ; the twenty first Otheri, his sons and brethren, twelve; the twenty second Godollathi, his sons and brethren, twelve ;

Ch. XXVI. . I. CHRONICLES. -

30 the twenty third Meazoth, his sons and brethren, twelve ; the

twenty fourth Rometthiezer, his sons and brethren, twelve.

XXVI. And for the guards of the gates were the Korites,

Mosellamia of the sons of Asaph; and for Mosellamia were
Son Zacharias the first born, Jadiel the second, Zabadia the third, Jenuel the fourth, Jolam the fifth, Jonathan the sixth,

A Elionai the seventh, Abdedom the eighth; and the sons of

Abdedom were, Samaias the first born, Jozabath the second,
Joath the third, Sachar the fourth, Nathaniel the fifth, Amiel

6 the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Philathi the eighth; because

10

18

19

God had blessed him, therefore for Samia his son, there were born, sons of his first born, Rosai, to make his a patriarchal house, because the Samaites had heads of families, namely
Othni and Raphael, and Obed and Elzabeth, and Achiud, mighty sons, Eliuand Sabachia, and Isbakom, all descendants of the sons of Abdedom, they and their sons and their brethren, acting as heads of families in the service. All the sons of Abdedom were sixty two. And the sons of Mosellamia with their brethren, were eighteen heads of families. Osa, also of the children of Merari, had sons who kept up his chieftancy.
Because he was not first born, therefore his father made him chief of the second branch. Chelkias was the second, ‘Tablai the third, Zacharias the fourth. All the sons and brethren of
Osa were thirteen.

Among these the gates were distributed, the heads of families having daily courses like their brethren, to do service in the house of the Lord. And they cast lots, the junior as well as the senior, according to the houses of their families for their respective gates. And the lot for the eastern gate fell to
Selemia and Zacharias. The sons of Joaz having cast lots, the north gate fell to Melchia; and to Abdedom the south gate over against the house of Esephim ; to Osa that to the west, behind the gate of the chamber of ascent, guard being over against guard. Eastward there were six a day, northward four a day, southward four a day, and two for Esephim to relieve each other; and for Osa westward behind the gate of the chamber, three, a watch over against the watch of the ascent.
On the east six a day, and othe north four, and on the south four, and at Esephim two to relieve each other, and at the west

20

2

22

23

26

27

29

3 oO

3

32 four, and for the causeway two to relieveeach other. These dis-. tributions of the guards of the gates were among the Korites and the Merarites.

And with regard to the Levites their brethren, who were over the treasures of the house of the Lord and over the treasures of dedicated things, these were Ladanites, the sons of
Ladan the Gersonite—the heads of families belonging to Ladan. To Ladan the Gersonite belonged Jeiel, the sons of
Jeiel—Zethom and Joel. These brethren were over the treasures of the house of the Lord.

With respect to the Ambramites and Isaarites, Chebronites and Ozielites—-Subael son of Gersam, son of Moses, was over the treasures. And to his brother Eliezer belonged Rabias a son, and Josias and Joram, and Zechri and Salomoth. This
Salomoth and his brethren were over the treasures of the dedicated things, which were dedicated by David the king and by the chiefs of families, the captains of thousands and captains of hundreds, and generals of the army, which they had taken from the cities and from the spoils won in battle, and of.which they had dedicated a part, that the building of the house of God might not be delayed. They had the charge also of all the dedications made to God by Samuel the prophet, and by Saul son of Kis, and by Abenner son of Ner, and by Joab son of
Saruia. All that they dedicated was under the care of Salomoth and his brethren. Of the Jssaarites, Chonenia and sons had the charge of the business abroad over Israel, to act as scribes and judges. And of the Chebronites, Asabias and his brethren, heads of subordinate families, amounting to seventeen hundred, had the oversight of Israel on the western bank of the Jordan, for every service of the Lord and every work of the king. With regard to the Ozielites, Ourias was the chief of the Ozielites, according to their genealogies by families.
In the fortieth year of the king’s reign they were reviewed, and. the head man among them was found at Jazer of Galaaditis.
And his brethren, the heads of subordinate families, were two thousand seven hundred. And king David set them over the
Reubenites and the Gadites, and the half of the tribe of Manasses, for every ordinance of the Lord and every affair of the king.

Ch. XXVIL I. CHRONICLES.

XXVII. — With regard to the sons of Israel according to their

number, the chiefs of the families, the captains of thousands and the captains of hundreds, and the muster masters—these attended the king, and were ready at every call of the king in divisions, coming in and going out, month after month, each

2 division consisting of twenty four thousand. And over the

3

4

6

7

18

14

15

16 first division for the first month was Isboaz son of Zabdiel—

over his division of twenty four thousand. He being chief of the sons of Phares, was the chief of all the chiefs of the army of the first month. And over the division of the second month was Dodia the Elchochite, and over this division of his was also Makelloth the leader of this division of his, which consisted of twenty four thousand ; they were chiefs of the army.
The third for the third month was Banaias son of Jodae, who, though a priest, was the chief over this division of his which consisted of twenty four thousand. ‘This Banaias was higher in rank than the thirty, and over the thirty. And over this division of his was Zabad his son. The fourth for the fourth month was Asael the brother of Joab. And Zabadias his son, and his brothers, were over this division of his which consisted of twenty four thousand. The fifth for the fifth month was the leader Samaoth the Jesraite, he was over his division of twenty four thousand. The sixth for the sixth month was Oduias of Ekkes the Thekoite, he was over his division of twenty four thousand. The seventh for the seventh month was Chelles of Phallus, of the sons of Ephraim, he was over his division of twenty four thousand. The eighth for the eighth month was Sobochai the Ousathite, a house of the Zaraites ; he was over his division of twenty four thousand. The ninth for the ninth month was Abiezer of Anathoth, of the land of Benjamin, he was over his division of twenty four thousand. The tenth for the tenth month was Meera the Netophathite, a house of the Zaraites ; he was over his division of twenty four thousand. The eleventh for the eleventh month was Banaias the
Pharathonite, of the sons of Ephraim ; he was over his division of twenty four thousand. The twelfth for the twelfth month was Choldia the Netophathite, a house belonging to
Gothoniel ; he was over his division of twenty four thousand.

And over the tribes of Israel—Over Reuben, Eliezer the

Ch, XXVIII. I. CHRONICLES.

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33 son of Zechri was ruler ; over Symeon, Saphatias the son of
Maachi; over Levi, Asabias the son of Kamuel; over the
Aaronites, Sadok ; over Juda, Eliab, David’s eldest brother ; over Issachar, Ambri the son of Michael ; over Zabulon, Samaias the son of Abdiu ; over Nephthaleim, Jerimoth the son of
Oziel; over Ephraim, Ose the son of Oziu ; over the half of the tribe of Manasses, Joel the son of Phadaia; over the half of the tribe of Manasses in the land of Galaad, Jadai the son of Zadaiu ; over the Benjaminites, Jasiel the son of Abenner ; over Dan, Azariel the son of Iroab. These were the rulers of the tribes of Israel. But David did not take the number of them from twenty years old and under, because the Lord said, he would multiply Israel like the stars of heaven. When Joab the son of Saruia, began to number the people, though he did not finish it, there was wrath for it on Israel, so that the number was not set down.in the journal of king David.

And over the treasures of the king was Asmoth the son of Odiel. And over his stores in the country, and in the towns, and in the villages, and in the castles, was Jonathan the son of
QOziu; and over the husbandmen who tilled the ground was
Esdri the son of Chelub; and over the fields, Semei the
Raelite ; and over the stores of wine in the vineyards Sabdi the son of Sephni; and over the olive yards and sycamine orchards in the plains, Ballanan the Gedorite : and over the stores of oil,
Joas ; and over the herds which pastured at Sharon, Satrai the
Saronite ; and over the cattle in the vales, Sophat the son of
Adli; and over the camels, Abias the Ismaelite ; and over the asses, Jadias the Merathonite ; and over the flocks, Jaziz the Agarite. All these were overseers of David’s substance.

And Jonathan David’s uncle was a counsellor, a wise man, and Jeel and the son of Achami were with the king’s sons.
Achitophel was a counsellor of the king. Now Chusi the king’s friend was the first, and after him Achitophel, next Jodae the son of Banaias, then Abiathar and Joab the king’s captain general.

XXVIII. When David had assembled all the chiefs of Israel,

the chiefs of the judges, and all the chiefs of the divisions

which attended the king’s person in courses, and the chiefs

over the thousands, and the chiefs over the hundreds, and the
VOL. 11. δὶς

Ch. XXVIII. I. CHRONICLES. Ὁ μὰ .

- treasurers, and them who were entrusted with the care of the

king’s substance, and of all his possessions, and of his children,

“with the chamberlains and the worthies and the soldiers of the
: army at Jerusalem, he stood up in the midst of the assembly

and said, Hear me, my brethren and my people, I had it on my

‘mind to build a house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the

Lord, and a place for the feet of our Lord, and had provided what were suitable for the building; but God said, Thou shalt not build a house for me, to be called by my name. for thou art a warrior and hast shed much blood. Now the Lord
God of Israel chose me in preference to all my father’s house to be king over Israel forever. As he chose the royalty in Ju-

-da, and my father’s house out of the house of Juda and among

the sons of my father, it was his pleasure that I should be king

-over all Israel; so in preference to all my sons, for the Lord

hath given me many sons, he hath made choice of my son So-

lomon, to set him on the throne of the Lord’s kingdom, over
Israel. And God hath said to me, Thy son Solomon shall build

_-my house, and my court ; for I have chosen him to be my son,

and I will be to him a father ; and I will establish his kingdom forever, provided he exert his power to keep my commandments and my judgments as at this day. Now therefore, in the presence of all the congregation of the Lord, and in the audience of our God, 1 adjure you to keep and to seek all the comamandments of the Lord our God, that you may possess this good.land and leave it for an inheritance for your children after you forever.

And now, Solomon my son, ari thou the God of thy fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart and a willing mind ; for the Lord searcheth all hearts and knoweth every thought.
If thou seek him, he will be found by thee; but if thou forsake

10 him, he willat last forsake thee. Observe now, since the Lord

hath chosen thee to build a house for him for a sanctuary, be strong and do it.

Then David gave his son Solomon the model of the temple, and its houses and its treasuries, and of the upper. chambers and the inner depositories, and of the house for the propitiation ;

12 and the plan which he had in his mind of the courts of the

house of the Lord, and of all the chambers round about— those for store houses for the house of the Lord; and of the

Ch. XXIX. I, CHRONICLES.

13 depositories for the holy things, and the lodging rooms ; and of the daily courses of the priests and the Levites, for all the work of the service of the house of the Lord ; and of the depositories for the vessels used in the service of the house of the

14 Lord; and the exact weight of these vessels, whether made

15 of gold or of silver. He gave him the weight of the candle-

16 sticks and of the lamps. He gave him likewise the weight of the tables for the shew biead ot every table made ap gold,

17 and likewise of those to be made of silver; and of the flesh forks and the libation cups, and of the cups of gold—the weight both of those to be made of gold and of those to be made of silver; and of the censers, of each its several weight ;

18 and pointed out to him the weight of the utensils οἵ the altar of incense, which was to be of pure gold; and the model of the chariot of the cherubims with expanded wings, which overshadow the ark of the covenant of the Lord. All these David gave to Solomon in a drawing of the hand of the Lord, according to the knowledge given him of the workmanship of {πὸ
20 model. Then David said to his son Solomon, Be strong and of good courage and do the work. Fear not nor be dismayed; for the Lord my God is with thee. He will not leave thee nor forsake thee, till thou hast finished all the work for the service of the house of the Lord. And behold this is the model of the temple, and of his house and his treasury, and the upper rooms and the inner depositories, and the house of the propitiation— even the model of the house of the Lord. And these are the courses of the priests and the Levites, for all the service of the house of the Lord. And there will be with thee for the work, every artist skilled in every art, and all the chiefs and all the people to execute all thy commands.

XXIX. Then king David said to all the congregation, My son Solomon ennnty the Lord hath chosen, is young and tender, and the work is great; for it is not for man but for the Lord

2 God. According to my utmost ability I have provided for the house of my God, gold, silver, brass, iron, wood, stones of
Soam, and stones to be set, precious and variegated, every kind of precious stones, and Parian marble in abundance.

3 Moreover, because I have set my affection on the house of my
God, the gold and silver which I kept for myself, behold this

1

2

Ch. XXIX. 1. CHRONICLES.

have given for the house of my God, over and above what
4 I provided for the house of the Holies; three thousand talents

of the gold of Souphir, and seven thousand talents of pure silver, for overlaying therewith the walls of the sanctuary, the gold for that to be done with gold, and the silver for that to be done with silver, and for every work to be made by

5 the hand of artists. Now let every one who i is so inclined fill

his hands this day for the Lord.

Thereupon the chiefs of families, and the chiefs of the sons of Israel, and the captains of thousands, and the captains of hundreds, and the overseers of the king’s works and his builders,

7 were liberally disposed, and gave for the works of the house of

8

1

12

13

14

15

16

17 the Lord five thousand talents and ten thousand pieces of gold, and ten thousand talents of silver, and eighteen thousand talents of brass, and a hundred thousand talents of iron. And they who had precious stones gave them for the treasures of the house of the Lord which were under the care of Jeiel the Gersonite.
And the people were rejoiced at this readiness, for with a perfect heart they gave liberally tothe Lord. And David the king was exceedingly rejoiced, and blessed the Lord in the presence of the assembly, saying, Blessed art thou O Lord God of Israel, our Father, from everlasting to everlasting. To thee, O
Lord, be ascribed greatness, and power, and exultation, and victory, and majesty ; for thou hast dominion over all things in heaven and on earth. At thy presence every king and nation is struck with awe. From thee come riches and glory. Thou, O
Lord, rulest over all. Thou art the head of all dominion, and in thy hand is majesty and power. And by thy hand, O Al. mighty Sovereign, all things are made great and strong. Now therefore, O Lord, to thee we render thanks; and we praise thy elorious name. But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be enabled to shew such liberality to thee. For all things are thine and of thine own we have given thee. For we before thee are strangers and sojourners as all our fathers were. Our days on earth are like a shadow and there is no fixed abiding.
O Lord our God, all this store which I have provided for building a house to thy holy name is from thy bounty, and belongeth all to thee. As I know, O Lord, that thou triest hearts and lovest righteousness, I have with singleness of heart freely

Ch, XXIX. I, CHRONICLES.

18

19

20 Ὁ

21 offered all these things, and have now seen with joy all thy peo-

ple who are here present freely offering to thee. O Lord, the
God of Abraham and Isaak and Israel our fathers, keep these things forever in the thoughts of the hearts of thy people and direct their hearts to thee, and give to my son Solomon a good heart to execute all thy commandments, and thy testimonies, and thy statutes, and that he may finish completely the structure of thy house.

Then David said to all the wiles Bless ye the Lord our God. And all the congregation blessed the Lord the God of their fathers, and with bended knees made a reverence to the
Lord andtothe king. And on the morrow of the first day, when
David had offered up whole burnt offerings to God, he sacrificedas thank offerings to the Lord a thousand young bulls, a thousand rams, a thousand lambs with their libations, and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel. And having eaten and drunk that day with gladness before the Lord, they proclaimed Solomon son of David king a second time, and anointed him to be king for the Lord, and Sadok to-be priest. So Solomon sat on the throne of his father David and prospered, and all Israel obeyed him. The chiefs, and the men in authority, and all the sons of king David his father were subject to him, and the Lord mag- ~ nified Solomon over all Israel, and gave him royal glory, such as no king had before him.

’ When David son of Jessai had reigned over Israel forty years—seven years at Chebron and thirty three at Jerusalem, he died at ἃ good old age, full of days, riches and glory. And
Solomon his son reigned in his stead.

Now the rest of the acts of David, the first and the last, are written among the words of Samuel the seer, and in the words of Nathan the prophet, and in the words of Gad the seer, touching all his reign, and his mighty power, and the times which happened to him, and to Israel, and to all the kingdoms of the land.

II. CHRONICLES, OR PARALIPOMENON.

When the authority of Solomon son of David was firmly established over his kingdom, and the Lord his God, being with

2

5

10 ad

12

13

14

15 i. Il. CHRONICLES.

him, had magnified him exceedingly, Solomon spoke to all Israel, to the captains of thousands and the captains of hundreds and to the judges and to all the chiefs before Israel, namely the heads of the patriarchal families; and he and all the congregation went to the high place at Gabaon, at which place was the tabernacle of the testimony of God, which Moses the servant of the Lord had made in the wilderness. (But David had brought the ark of God from the city Kariathiarim, for he had. provided for it—for he had erected for it a tabernacle at Jerusalem.) The brasen altar also, which Beseleel son of Ourias son of Or had made, was there before the tabernacle of the
Lord. To this therefore Solomon and the congregation repaired. And he made an offering there on the brasen altar before the Lord, on that at the tabernacle. And when he had offered upon it a thousand, victims God appeared to Solomon that night and said to him, Ask what I shall give thee. Thereupon Solomon said to God, Thou hast shewn great kindness to my father David, and hast made me king in his stead, now therefore,
O Lord my God, let thy name I beseech thee be established on my father David. Seeing thou hast made me king over a people numerous as the dust of the earth, grant me now wisdom and understanding that I may go out and come in before this people; for who can judge this thy people which is so great?
And God said to Solomon, Because this hath been in thy heart; and thou hast not asked wealth nor glory nor the life of thy enemies; nor even asked long life; but hast asked for thyself wisdom and understanding that thou mayst judge my people over whom I have made thee king: Wisdom and understanding now give thee: And I will give thee riches and wealth » and glory, such as none of the kings who were before thee have — had; nor shall any after thee baie the like.

Then Solomon came to Jerusalem, from the high plane at
Gabaon, which is before the tabernacle οἵ the testimony ; and reigned over Israel. And Solomon collected chariots, and horsemen, and he had fourteen hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen. Those he left in the chariot cities ; but the people were with the king in Jerusalem. And the king made silver and gold as plenteous at Jerusalem as stones ; and cedars in Judea, like the sykamine trees in the plain for

Chex Π

16

17

7 ioe)

10

11

II. CHRONICLES.

abundance. Now Solomon’s horses came up out of Egypt : and this was the price allowed to the king’s merchants for going. They purchased, and came up, and brought out of
Egypt a chariot for six hundred shekels of silver, anda horse _ for a hundred and fifty. And at that rate they were brought for all the kings of the Chettites, and by their means for the kings of Syria.

Solomon having determined to build a house for the name of the Lord, and a house for his kingdom, collected seventy thousand men to carry burthens, and eighty thousand hewers

of stone on the mountains ; and the overseers over them, were

three thousand six hundred. And Solomon sent to Chiram, king of Tyre, saying, As thou hast dealt with my father Da-

vid and sent him cedar to build himself a house to dwell in ;

behold I his son am going to build a house for the name of the Lord my God, to be dedicated to him, that I may burn incense before him, and set bread continually in his presence, and that I may offer whole burnt offerings continually, morning and evening, and on the sabbaths, and at the new moons and festivals of the Lord our God ; this being an ordinance forever to Israel. And as the house which I am going to build is great; for great is the Lord our God above all gods, and who is able to build a house for him ? For the heaven and the heaven of heavens, cannot contain his glory ; who then am I, that I should build a house for him, save only to burn incense before him ? Now therefore send me a man wise and skilled in working up gold and silver, and brass and iron, and purple and scarlet and blue, and who can engrave skilfully with the skilful men who are with me in Jerusalem, those materials which my father hath provided. Send me also cedar and cypress and pine timber, from Libanus. As I know how expert thy servants are in cutting timber from Libanus, let thy servants therefore go with my servants, to provide me timber in plenty : for the house which I am going to. build, is to be great and glorious. Now behold, I have assigned provisions for the workmen who cut the timber, food for thy servants, twenty thousand cores of wheat, and twenty thousand cores of barley, and twenty thousand measures of wine, and twenty thousand measures of oil, To this Chiram king of Tyre replied

Ch. III. If. CHRONICLES.

in writing, and sent to Solomon, saying, Because the Lord

12 ‘loved his people, he hath made thee king over them. Moreover Chiram said, Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel, who made the heaven and the earth, who hath given king David, a wise son endued with knowledge and understanding, to

18 build a house for the Lord and a house for his kingdom. Now therefore I have sent thee a man of wisdom and understand-

14 ing, named after my father Chiram. His mother was one of the daughters of Dan, but his father was a 'Tyrian. He is skilled in working up gold and silver, and brass and iron, and stones and wood; and in weaving purple and biue yarn, and cotton, and with scarlet ; and engraving and executing every device to which thou shalt put him with thy artists, and the

15 artists of my lord David, thy father. And with regard to the

16 wheat and the barley and the oil and the wine, which my lord hath mentioned, let him send them to his servants, and we will cut timber from Libanus, as muchas thou shalt want, and send it in floats by water to Joppa, that thou mayst convey it to Jerusalem.

17 When Solomon assembled all the strangers who were in the land of Israel, after the numbering which his father David had made of them, they were found to amount to a hun-

18 dred and fifty three thousand six hundred. So of these he appointed seventy thousand to carry burdens, and eighty thousand to hew stones, and three thousand six hundred to be overseers, to keep the people to work.

ΤΙ. At length Solomon began building the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, on mount Amoria, where the Lord appeared to his father David; in the place which David had prepared

2 at the threshing floor of Orna, the Jebusite. He began building
3 in the second month, in the fourth year of his reign. And these were the mensurations, with which Solomon began to build the house of God. The first measurement was in length
4 sixty cubits, and inbreadth twenty cubits, including an ailam in front of the house of the same breadth, as that of the house, twenty cubits, and the height of which was a hundred and twenty cubits. And he overlaid the house on the inside, with
5 pure gold. When he had wainscotted this great house with planks of cedar, he overlaid them with pure gold, and en-

Ch. IV. ΤΠ. CHRONICLES.

8

10

17

4

5 graved upon it, palm trees and chains, and he adorned the house with precious stones for glory, and gilded it with the choicest gold from Pharuim ; and having gilded the house, both the walls and the gates, and the vaulted ceilings, and the doors, with gold, he engraved cherubims on the walls. And he made the house of the Holy of Holies. Its breadth was in front, the same as that of the house, twenty cubits and its length twenty cubits ; and he overlaid it for cherubims, with pure gold, to the amount of six hundred talents; and with .

regard to the weight of the nails, each nail weighed fifty she-

kels of gold. The upper chamber he overlaid with gold. And in this house, namely in the Holy of Holies, he made two cherubims, a workmanship of wood, and overlaid them with gold.
The extent of the wings of the cherubims was twenty cubits, one wing of five cubits touching the wall of the house, and the other wing of five cubits, touching the wing of the other cherubim reciprocally ; so that the wings of the cherubims, were expanded twenty cubits, and they stood upon their feet and their faces were towards the house. And he made the veil of blue and purple and scarlet and cotton yarn, and wove cherubims therein. And he made before the house two pillars thirty five cubits high, including the chapiters of five cubits. And he made net works and put them on the chapiters of the pillars, and he made a hundred pomegranates, and fixed them to the net works. And he reared up the pillars in front of the temple, one on the right, and one on the left, and he called the name of that on the right Rectitude, and the name of that on the left, Strength.

And he made an altar of brass, the length of it was twenty cubits and the breadth twenty cubits and the height ten cubits.
And he made the molten sea, ten cubits the diameter, with a border round about, and five cubits the height and thirty cubits the circumference. And under the border was the similitude of oxen which encompass it round about. Ten toa cubit encompass the laver all around. It stood upon twelve beeves.
In casting the beeves they were made of two kinds. Three faced the north and three faced the west and three faced the south and three faced the east. Upon these the sea stood. And their hinder parts were inwards. And the thickness of the sca

Ch. IV. Il. CHRONICLES.

12

17

was a hand breadth, and its brim like the brim of ἃ cup was engrayed with flowers of a lilly. And it contained three thousand measures. And when he had finished it he made ten lavers and set five on the right and five on the left for washing in them the things pertaining to the whole burnt offerings, and for rinsing in them. But the sea was for the priests to wash in. He made also the ten candlesticks of gold according to the pattern thereof and put them in the temple, five on the right and five on the left. And he made ten tables and set them in the temple, five on the right and five on the left. And he made a hundred golden cups. He made also the court of the priests, and the great court, and the gates for the court. And their doors were overlaid with brass. And he placed the sea at the corner of the house on the right so as to be over against the east. “Then
Chiram made the flesh forks, and the censers, and the grate of the altar, and all the utensils thereof. And when Chiram had finished all the work which he made for king Solomon for the house of God—the two pillars and the ornaments on the chapiters of the pillars, and the two pieces of net work to cover the ornaments which were on the chapiters of the pillars, and four hundred.little bells for the two pieces of net work, and the two kinds of pomegranates for each piece of net work which was to cover the ornaments upon the pillars, and had made the ten mechonoths, and the lavers for the mechonoths, and the sea with the twelve beeves under it, and the cauldrons with their pot hooks, and the kettles, and the flesh forks, and all the utensils belonging to them—when Chiram had made them he brought them to king Solomon to the house of the Lord. They were all of pure brass. The king had them cast on the border of the
Jordan, in the clay ground at the house of Sokchoth, and between that and Saredetha. And Solomon caused all the utensils to be made in great abundance, for there was no deficiency in the quantity of brass. But all the utensils for the house of the Lord, namely the golden altar and the tables upon which the presence loaves were to be laid, and the candlesticks and the lamps to give light according to the rule prescribed, namely those in front of the dabir, all these Solomon made of pure gold, with the snuffers and lamp dishes. The cups also and the censers and the fire pans were all of pure gold. And with re-

Ch. V. Il. CHRONICLES.

8

9

10

11

12

19 gard to the inner doors of the house into the Holy of Holies~ these doors of the house of the temple he covered with gold.
And when all the work was finished which Solomon made for the house of the Lord, he brought in the dedications of his father David, the silver and the gold and the vessels, and deposited them in the treasury of the house of the Lord. Then Solomon assembled at Jerusalem all the elders of Israel and alt the chiefs of the tribes, the leaders of the families of the sons of Israel to bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of the city of David, which is Sion. And when all Israel were assembled before the king at the festival which is in the seventh month, all the elders of Israel went, and all the Levites took up the ark and the tabernacle of the testimony and all the holy utensils which were in the tabernacle, and the priests and the
Levites carried it up. And while king Solomon and all the congregation of Israel, both the devout, and they who were assembled with them before the ark, were sacrificing beeves and sheep which could not be numbered nor reckoned by reason of their multitude, the priests carried the ark of the covenant of the Lord into its place—into the dabir of the house—into the
Holy of Holies under the wings of the cherubims; for the cherubims had their wings expanded over the place of the ark, and made a covering above, over the ark and over its staves. Now the staves projected, and their heads were seen from the Holics towards the front of the dabir, but were not seen from without, and there they have continued to this day. Now there was nothing in the ark, but the two tables which Moses put therein at Choreb, ccntaining the covenant which the Lord made with the Israelites, when they came out of the land of Egypt.
And when the priests were come out of the Holies, (for all the priests then present were hallowed and were not distributed into courses, ) and the Levites, who were singers—all the sons of Asaph, Aiman and Idithun, with their sons and brethren, arrayed in robes of cotton, had taken their stations with cymbals, and with nablas, and with kinyras, over against the altar, and with them a hundred and twenty priests, sounding trumpets, so as to join in harmonious concert both with those who ied the song and those who made responses to thank and praise

Ch. VI Ii. CHRONICLES.

the Lord ; soon as they raised their voice, with trumpets and cymbals and instruments of musick, and said,

O praise the Lord, for it is good,

For to everlasting his mercy endureth ;

14 immediately the house was filled with the cloud of the glory

9
4,

00’ 1m

10

11 ped

of the Lord, so that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud, for the glory of the Lord filled the house of
God. Then Solomon said, The Lord said he would dwell in

thick darkness. Now I have built a house for thy name, dedicated to thee, and furnished for thy everlasting habitation.
Then the king turned his face and blessed all the congregation. of Israel, and all the congregation of Israel stood. Then the king said, Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel! With his hand he hath compleated what with his mouth he spoke to my father David, saying, From the day I brought my people out of the land of Egypt, I did not make choice of any city among all the tribes of Israel for a house to be built, that my name might be there; nor did I chuse a man to be ruler over my people Israel. But now I have chosen Jerusalem that my name may be there, and I have made choice of David to be over my people Israel. Yet when it came into my father David’s heart to build a house to the name of the Lord God of Israel, the
Lord said to my father David, Forasmuch as it came into thy heart to build a house for my name, thou hast done well that it was in thy heart. But thou shalt not build the house. For thy son who shall spring from thy loins, even he shall build the house for my name. Now the Lord hath performed this word which he spoke. [have been raised up in the room of my father
David, and am seated on the throne of Israel, as the Lord hath spoken; and 1 have built the house for the name of the
Lord God of Israel, and placed therein the ark, in which is the covenant of the Lord which he made with Israel.

Then he took his station on one side over against the altar and facing all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands—For Solomon had made a brasen scaffold and placed it in the midst of the court of the sanctuary. The length of it was five cubits and its breadth five cubits, ἀπά 115 height three cubits. So he took his station on that, and kneeling down on

Ch. VI IL CHRONICLES.

14

15

25 his knees before all the congregation of Israel, he stretched forth his hands to heaven and said,

O Lord, the God of Israel, there is no God like thee in heaven or on earth, keeping covenant and shewing mercy to’ thy servants, who vals before thee with a perfect heart. Thou hast kept with thy servant David, my father, that which thou didst speak to him. What with thy mouth thou didst speak, thou with thy hand hast performed as at this day. Now therefore, O Lord God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my father that which thou hast spoken to him, saying, There shall not fail thee from before me a man sitting on the throne of Israel, provided thy sons take heed to their way to walk in my law as thou hast walked before me. Now, therefore, O Lord
God of Israel, let thy word, I beseech thee, which thou hast spoken to thy servant David, be confirmed, that it shall be so.

Will God indeed dwell with man on the earth! If the heaven, and the heaven of heaven, will not contain thee, what then. is this house which I have built ? Yet thou wilt look upon the prayer of thy servant, even this supplication of mine that thou,
O Lord God, mayst hearken to the supplication and the prayer which thy servant maketh before thee this day, that thine eyes may be open on this house day and night—on this place where thou hast ordered thy name to be invoked, that thou mayst hearken to the prayer which thy servant prayeth towards this place.

Thou indeed wilt hearken to the prayer of thy servant and of thy people Israel. Whatever they pray towards this place, thou indeed wilt listen in the place of thy habitation from heaven, and wilt hear and be merciful.

If any man sin against his neighbour, and take upon him a curse to be cursed, and come and swear before this altar in this house, thou indeed wilt hearken from heaven, and act and judge thy servants by retributing to the wicked and requiting his ways upon his head, by justifying the righteous, and recompensing him according to his righteousness.

And if thy people Israel be discomfited before the enemy, though they have sinned against thee, yet when they return and confess to thy name, and pray and make supplication before thee in this house; thou indeed wilt hear from heaven and

Ch. VI. II]. CHRONICLES.

pardon the sins of thy people Israel, and bring them back to the land which thou hast given to them and their fathers.

26 And when the heaven is shut up, and there is no rain because they have sinned against thee ; yet when they pray towards this place and praise thy name, and turn from their sins

27 because thou hast humbled them; thou indeed wilt hear from heaven and pardon the sins of thy servants and of thy people
Israel; for thou wilt shew them the good way in which they are to walk, and wilt send rain on this thy land which thou hast given to thy people for an inheritance.

28 — Ifthere be famine in the Jand, if there be pestilence, blasting or mildew; or if there be locusts of any kind; or if their enemy

29 before their gates afflict them ; whatever the stroke, whatever the affliction may be, and in consequence thereof, whatever may be the prayer and whatever the supplication which may be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel; when a man shall know his own sore, or his own affliction, and shall spread

30 forth his hands towards this house ; thou indeed wilt hear from heaven, from thy settled abode, and be merciful, and wilt render to every one according to his ways, as thou knowest his

31 heart; (for thou alone knowest the hearts of the children of men) that they may revere all thy ways, all the days which they may live in the land which thou hast given our fathers.

32 And with regard to every stranger who is not of thy people
Israel, but who may have come from a distant land, on account of thy great name, and thy mighty hand, and thy out stretched arm, when they come and pray towards this place ; thou indeed wilt hear from heaven—from thy settled abode, and wilt do according to all for which the stranger calleth on thee, that all the tribes of the earth may know thy name, and that they, like thy people Israel, may fear thee, and know that this house which I have built is called by thy name.

34 ° And when thy people shall go forth to war agaist their enemies in the way which thou shalt send them, and shall pray to thee towards this city which thou hast chosen, and towards

35 this house which I have built to thy name; thou indeed wilt hear from heaven their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause.

36 When they shall sin against thee (for there is no man who may not sin) and thou shalt smite them, and deliver them up

09
ω9

Ch. VIL Il. CHRONICLES.

37

39.

40.

before the face of their enemies, and they who captivate them shall carry them away captives to an enemy’s country, far off or near home; when they change their heart in the land to which they have been removed, and return and supplicate thee in the Jand of their captivity, saying, We have sinned, we have transgressed, we have done wickedly ; and turn to thee with their whole heart, and their whole soul, in the land of those who have captivated them, whithersoever they may have carried them captives; when they shall pray towards their land which thou gavest to their fathers, and towards this city which thou hast chosen, and this house which I have built for thy name: thou, from heaven, from thy settled abode, wilt hear their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause, and be reconciled to thy people who have sinned against thee.

And now, O Lord, let thine eyes, I beseech thee, be open and thine ears attentive to the prayer made in this place. And, now, arise, O Lord God, into thy rest, thou and the ark of thy strength. Let thy priests, O Lord God, be clothed with salvation, and thy children made glad with good things. Turn not away, O Lord God, the face of thine anointed. Remember the mercies of David thy servant.

VII. And soon as Solomon finished his prayer the fire from heaven descended and consumed the whole burnt offerings

with their sacrifices. Now the glory of the Lord filled the house so that the priests could not enter the house of the Lord at that time, because the glory of the Lord filled the house.
And when all the Israelites saw the fire descending and. the glory of the Lord on the house, they fell with their face to the ground on the pavement. And when they had worshipped, they sung to the Lord the hymn of praise, For it is goods for his mercy endureth forever, while the king and all the people were offering incense before the Lord. Then king Solomon offered. as a thank offering twenty two thousand beeves and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep.

Now when the king and all the people dedicated the house, while the priests were standing in their watches; and the Levites, with the musical instruments of the Lord, made by king
Dayid to praise the Lord, for his mercy endureth forever, were

10°

Vil. II. CHRONICLES.

performing with them in the hymns of David ; and the priests were sounding the trumpets before them ; and all the people were standing ; Solomon consecrated the middle of the court which belonged to the house of the Lord, that he might offer there the whole burnt offerings with the suet of the thank offermgs, because the brasen altar which Solomon had made was not capable of receiving the whole burnt offerimgs with the sacrifices of the suet.

So Solomon kept the festival at that time seven aya, he and all Israel with him, an exceeding great congregation from the bay of Aimath to the torrent of Egypt. And on the eighth day he made a finishing feast, for he had celebrated the dedication of the altar with a festival of seven days. And on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent away the people to their abodes, glad, and with cheerful hearts for all the goodness which the Lord had shewn to David, and to

_ Solomon, and to his people Israel.

14

17

48

19

Solomon having thus finished the house of the Lord, and the house of the king, and having been prospered in doing all that came into his heart for the house of the Lord, and his own house, the Lord appeared that night to Solomon and said to him, I have heard thy prayer and made choice of this place for myself to be a house of sacrifice. If I shut up heaven and there be no rain; or if I command the locust to devour the trees ; or send a pestilence among my people ; when my people who are called by my name humble themselves, and pray to me and seek my favour, and turn from their evil ways, 1 will hear from heaven and forgive their sins, and heal their land. And now mine eyes shall be open and my ears attentive to the prayer made in this place. For I have now chosen and hallowed this house, that my name may be there forever ; and mine eyes and my heart shall be there continually. And if thou wilt walk before me as thy father David did, and do according to all that I have commanded thee, and keep my statutes and my judgments, I will establish the throne of thy kingdom as I covenanted with thy father David, saying, The ruler over Israel shall not be taken from thee. But if you turn aside and forsake my statutes and my commandments which I have set before you ; and go and serve strange gods and worship them,

I will assuredly remove you from this land which I have given
_ 20 them. And I will remove out of my sight this house which I have hallowed to my name, and make it a proverb and a bye
21 word among all the nations. Yes, at this house which is so lofty, every one who passeth by it shall be astonished, and say, Why
22 hath the Lord dealt thus with this land and this house? ‘To which it will be answered, Because they forsook the Lord, the
God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land of
Egypt, and took other gods in his stead, and worshipped them and served them, therefore he brought upon them all this calamity.
Vill. Now after the twenty years in which Solomon built the
2 house of the Lord, and his own house, he rebuilt. those cities which Chiram returned to him, and caused the Israelites to
3 dwell there. Then he went to Baisoba and strengthened it,
4 And he built Thoedmor in the wilderness, and all those fortified
5 cities which he built in Emath. He rebuilt also the upper and the lower Baithoron, cities fortified with walls, gates and
6 bars; and Balath and all the strong cities which belonged to
Solomon; ‘and all the chariot cities, and the cities for the cavalry, and whatever he had an inclination to build at Jerusalem,
7 or on Libanus, or in all his kingdom. With regard to all the people who were left of the Chettites and the Amorites and the Pheresites and the Evites and the Jebusites who were not
8 Israelites, but descendants of the children of them who were left in the land, whom the children of Israel had not rooted out,
9 these Solomon laid under tribute as at this day. But of the children of Israel he made no servants for his kingdom. For behold they were warriors, and chiefs, and officers, and the
10 captains of chariots and horsemen. And there were two hundred and fifty of them who superintended king Solomon’s
11 overseers who kept the people to work. Moreover king Solomon brought Pharao’s daughter from the city of David, to the house which he had built for her; for he said, My wife shall not dwell in the city of David king of Israel; for the place to which the ark. of the Lord hath come is holy.
12, Then Solomon offered whole burnt offerings to the Lord on the altar which he had built to the Lord over against the
13 temple according to the daily rate for every day, which were

Chix. Il. CHRONICLES.

to be offered according to the commands of Moses, on the sabbaths and at the new moons; and at the festivals which were three in the year—the festival of unleavened bread, the festival

14. of weeks, and the festival of tabernacles. And according to the

— regulation of his father David, he appointed the courses of the
‘priests according to their services; and the Levites were. set to their charges to sing praises and to minister before the priests, as the duty of every day required ; and the keepers of

15 the gates were distributed into their classes for every gate.-For
‘so David, the man of God had commanded. ‘They transgressed not the commands of the king, respecting the priests or the

~ Levites who were appointed to every charge, or over the trea-

16 sures. Now allthis business had been prepared from the day
Solomon laid the foundation, but it was deferred until he had finished the house of the Lord.

17 Then Solomon went to Gesion-gaber and t to Ailath, which is on the sea shore in the land of Idumea; and Chiram sent him by the hand of his servants, ships and seamen, and they

“went with Solomon’s servants to Sopphira, and brought thence four hundred and fifty talents of gold, and came to Solomon.

IX, When the queen of Saba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to Jerusalem with a great retinue, to try him with hard questions, and brought with her camels carrying spices im abundance, and gold and precious stones. And when she came to Solomon and propounded to him all the questions which were in her mind, Solomon solved all her questions.

2 Not a question escaped Solomon, which he did. not solve for
3 her. And when the queen of Saba saw the wisdom of Solo-
A mon, and the house which he had built, and the provisions of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the order of his attendants and their apparel, and his butlers and their dress, and

the whole burnt offerings which he offered in the house of the

5 Lord, she was astonished, and said to the king, It was a true report which I heard in my own country concerning thine acts

6 and concerning thy wisdom; but I did not believe the reports until I came and saw with my own eyes. Now behold I was not told one half of the greatness of thy wisdom. ‘Thou hast surpassed the report which I heard. Happy are these men of thine ! happy these thy servants who wait upon thee continually and hear thy wisdom! blessed be the Lord thy God who

delighted in thee to set thee on his throne, to be a king for the
Lord thy God. Because the Lord thy God loved Israel, therefore, that he might establish them forever, he made thee king
9 over them to execute judgment and justice. Then she gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and spices in great abundance, and precious stones. There were: no such - spices as those which the queen of Saba gave to king Solomon.
10 The servants of Solomon also, and the servants of
Chiram, brought gold to Solomon from Souphir, and algum timber and precious stones. And of the algum timber the king made stairs for the house of the Lord, and for the king’s house ; and kitharas and nablas for the singers; for such had
12 never been seen before in the land of Juda. And when king
Solomon had given the queen of Saba all her desire—whatever she asked, exclusive of the return which he made for all
13 that she had brought to the king, she returned to her own country.

Now the quantity of gold which was brought to Solomon in one year, was six hundred and sixty six talents of gold, besides what was brought by subjects and merchants, by all the kings of Arabia and the lords of the country, who all brought

15 gold and silver to king Solomon. And king Solomon made two hundred bucklers of beaten gold ; six hundred shekels of pure gold were on each buckler; and three hundred shields of beaten gold ; each shield being plated with three hundred shekels of gold. And. the king deposited these in the house of the

17 forest of Libanus. The king made also a great throne of ivory and overlaid it with pure gold. There were six steps up to the throne, which was overlaid with gold; and arms on each side of the seat of the throne; andtwo lions standing at the two arms, and twelve lions standing on the six steps, on the one side and the

20 other. There was not the like in any kingdom. Moreover all the utensils of king Solomon were of gold. And all the utensils of the house of the forest of Libanus were plated with gold. Silver was not of estimation in the days of Solomon for any pur-

21 pose. For a fleet went for the king to Tharsis with the ser- ° vants of Chiram. And once every three years, ships came from
Tharsis for the king, faden with gold and silver and elephants?

22 teeth and apes. So that Solomon was magnified above all the ©

1

23

24

90 es

1 foe)

kings both in riches and wisdom. And all the kings of the land sought an interview with Solomon, to hear his wisdom which God had put in his heart. And they brought, every one his gifts, vessels. of silver and vessels of gold, with raiment, stacte, perfumes, horses and mules; and this every year. And
Solomon had four thousand breeding mares for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen; and these he placed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem. And he was ruler over all the kings, from the river to the land of the Philistines, and to the borders of Egypt. And the king made gold and silver in Jerusalem, plenteous as stones, and cedars as the sycamine trees in the plain for multitude. And Solomon had horses brought for him out of Egypt and from every land. Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, behold they are written in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the book of Achia the Selonite, and in the visions of Joel the seer concerning Jeroboam son of Nabat. And when Solo- Ὁ mon had reigned over all Israel forty years, he slept and was buried in the city of David his father, and Roboam his son reigned in his stead.

Now Jeroboam son of Nabat had fled from the presence of king Solomon, and taken up his abode in Egypt. But receiving intelligence in Egypt, and being sent for he had returned from Egypt. So when Roboam went to Sychem (for to
Sychem all Israel went to make him king) Jeroboam and all the congregation came to Roboam and said, ‘Thy father made our yoke heavy, now therefore abate something of the grieyous service of thy father, and of his heavy yoke, which he laid on us, and we will serve thee. Thereupon he said to them,
Go away for three days and then come to me. And when the people were gone, king Roboam assembled the elders who had stood before his father Solomon in his life time, and said to them, How do you advise me to answer this people ? And they spoke to him saying, If thou indulge the people this day, and soothe them, and speak kindly to them, they will be thy servants forever. But he slighted the counsel which the elders gave him, and consulted the young men, who had_ been brought up with him, and who waited on him, and said to them, What answer do you advise me to give to this people,

Ch. ΧΙ. τ ἢ CHRONICLEs.

10

1 a

12

15

16

who have spoken to me saying, Abate something of the yoke, which thy father laid upon us. And the young men, who had been brought up with him, spoke to him saying, Thus shalt thou speak to this people, who hath spoken to thee saying,
Thy father made our yoke heavy, do thou therefore lighten it for us—thus thou shalt say, My little finger shall be thicker than my father’s loms. Now therefore my father chastened you with a heavy yoke, but I will add to your yoke. My father chastised you with whips; but I will chastise you with scorpions. So when Jeroboam and all the people came to Roboam on the third day, as the king had spoken saying, Come again to me on the third day, the king answered them roughly.
King Roboam slighted the counsel of the elders, and spoke to them according to the advice of the young men, saying,
My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to it; my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions. So the king did not hearken to the people ; for the revolution was from God. And upon one’s saying, The Lord hath established his word which he spoke by the ministry of
Achia the Selonite concerning Jeroboam son of Nabat, and all
Israel; for the king hath not hearkened to them, the people answered the king, and said, What portion have we in David ?
And what inheritance in the son of Jessai? To your tents O
Israel! Now David, look thou to thine own house. So Israel went away to their habitations ; and when some men of Israel and they who dwelt in the cities of Juda, had made Roboam king over them, and Roboam the king sent to them Adoniram, who was over the tribute, the sons of Israel stoned him with stones, till he died. Upon which the king Roboam hastened to mount his chariot to flee to Jerusalem; and Israel revolted from the house of David to this day.

Now when Roboam came to Jerusalem and had assembled of Juda and Benjamin, a hundred and eighty thousand of the young men who were warriors, and was going to war with Israel, to restore the kingdom to Roboam; a word of the Lord came to Samaias, a man of God, saying, Speak to
Roboam son of Solomon, and to all Juda and Benjamin, and say, Thus saith the Lord, You shall not go up nor fight with your brethren. Return every man to his house, for this thing

Ch. ΧΙ. ll. CHRONICLES.

is done by me. So they hearkened to the word of the Lord, and did not go up against Jeroboam. And Roboam dwelt at
Jerusalem and built walled cities in Judea. He built Bethlehem and Aitan and Thekoe and Bathsura and Sokchoth and
Odollam and Geth and Marisa and Ziph and Adorai and
Lachis and Azeka and Saraa and Ailom and Chebron, walled cities of Juda and Benjamin. And when he had strengthened them with walls, he appointed governors in them, with stores of provisions, oil and wine. And in every city he put shields and spears, and made them very strong. Now there were with him Juda and Benjamin. And the priests and the Levites who were in all Israel, resorted to him, from all their borders. For the Levites left the habitations of their possession and went to Juda to Jerusalem; for Jeroboam and his sons cast them out from ministering to the Lord, and made for himself priests of the high places for the idols, and the vanities and the calves which Jeroboam made. He expelled also from among the tribes of Israel them who set their hearts to

_ seek the Lord God of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem to

23 sacrifice to the Lord God of their fathers, and strengthened the kingdom of Juda. So he strengthened Roboam son of Solomon three years, because for three years he walked in the ways of
David and Solomon. Now Roboam took for himself to wife
Moolath a daughter of Jerimouth a son of David, and Abigaia a daughter of Eliab the son of Jessai, who bore him sons, namely Jeus and Samoria and Zaam ; and after that he took to wife
Maachia a daughter of Abessalom, and she bore him Abia and
Jetthi and Zoza and Salemoth. And Roboam loved Maacha, daughter of Abessalom, more than all his wives and concubines,
(for he had eighteen wivesand sixty concubines, and by them he had twenty eight sons and sixty daughters;) so he appointed
Abia the son of Maacha to be chief and ruleramong his brothers.
Because he determined to make him king, therefore he was exalted above all his sons in all the borders of Juda and Benjamin, and in fortified cities. And he supplied these cities with provisions in abundance, and procured for him a multitude of wives.

XII. But when the kingdom of Roboam avas established, and

when he was become strong, he forsook the commandments of

Ch. XII. iI. CHRONICLES.

2 the Lord, and all Israel with him. And in the fifth year of the

ζ9

10

15 reign of Roboam, Sousakim king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had sinned in the sight of the Lord, with twelve hundred chariots and sixty thousand horsemen, but of the multitude who came with him out of Egypt, Lybians,
Trogodytes, and Ethiopeans there was no numbering them.
And when they had taken the fortified cities which were in Juda and were coming to Jerusalem, Samaias the prophet went to Roboam and to the chiefs of Juda who were assembled at
Jerusalem for fear of Sousakim, and said to them, Thus saith the Lord, You have left me, therefore I will leave you in the hands of Sousakim. Whereupon the chiefs of Israel and the king were ashamed and said, ‘The Lord is righteous. And when the Lord saw that they were ashamed, a word of the Lord came to Samaias saying, ‘They are ashamed. I will not destroy them utterly, but will in a little while grant them deliverance ; and my wrath shall not be poured out on Jerusalem. Nevertheless they shall be servants, that they may know my service and the service of the kings of the earth. So Sousakim the king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem and took the treasures in the house of the Lord and the treasures in the king’s house.
All these he took. He took also the golden shields which Solomon made; and king Roboam made shields of brass in their stead. Now Sousakim had set over him the chiefs of the guards, those who guarded the king’s gate. So when the king went to the house of the Lord, some of his keepers went in with the guards, and some who were to bring him back went to meet the guards. But when he became humble the wrath of the
Lord was turned from him; for it was not for utter destruction; for still there were good things in Juda.

Now when king Roboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem and began to reign, he was forty one years old atthis commencement of his reign and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, in the city which the Lord had chosen out of all the tribes of
Israel, to put his name there: And his mother’s name was
Noomma the Ammonitess, and he did evil, for he did not direct his heart to seek the Lord. Now the acts of Roboam, first and last, behold are they not written in the book of Samaias the prophet and of Addo the seer? Also his exploits, for there

16 was a war between him and Jeroboam continually... And when
Roboam died he was buried with his fathers in the city μὴ David, and Abia his son reigned in his stead. a
XIII. . In the eighteenth year of the reign of Jeroboam, “Abia ;
2 began to reign over Juda. He reigned three years in Jerusalem, and his sapiens name was Maacha, a daugter of Uriel of Ga-

3 baon. Now there was a war between Abia and Jeroboam. And, when Abia had drawn up in array his army consisting of forty thousand fighting men, and Jeroboam had drawn up in array
4 for battle against him with eighty thousand fighting men; Abia rose up from mount Somoron which is on mount Ephraim and said, Hearken Jeroboam and all Israel! Ought you not to know that the Lord God, the God of Israel, gave the office of king over Israel forever to David and his sons by a covenant of salt?

6 Yet Jeroboam the son of Nabat, the servant of Solomon son of

7 David, rose up and fled from his lord, and there were gathered

to him wicked factious men, so that he rose up against Roboam

the son of Solomon, when he was young and faint hearted and unable to withstand him; and now you think of rising up against the kingdom of the Lord administered by the sons of

David. You indeed are a great multitude, and you have with

you the calves of gold which Jeroboam hath made for you to

9 be your gods. Have you not expelled the priests of the Lord, the children of Aaron, and the Levites, and made for yourselves priests of the people of every land? Whoever came to consecrate himself with a young bull from the herd, and seven rams,

10 was made a priest to a thing which is no God. But as for us, we have not forsaken the Lord our God. His priests the sons of Aaron, and the Levites minister to the Lord in their courses.

11 They burn to the Lord, every morning and evening, the whole burnt offering with the sacrifice of compound incense. We have the presence loaves set in order on the pure table, and the golden candlestick with the lamps for light, to be ighted every evening; for we keep the watches of the Lord, the God of our

12 fathers, though you have forsaken him. Now behold with us; at our head, is the Lord and his priests, and the trumpets of alarm to sound a charge against you. O sons of Israel, fight not against the Lord God of your fathers, for it will not Ros per with you.

13 Now Jeroboam had detached an ambuscade to come upon his rear. He was before Juda and the ambuscade was behind
14 them. And when Juda looked back behold the battle was both in front and in the rear. Thereupon they cried to the Lord, and the priests sounded the trumpets, and the men of Juda
15 shouted. And when the men of Juda shouted, the Lord smote
16 Jeroboam and Israel before Abia and Juda. And the Israelites
17 fled before Juda, and the Lord delivered them into their hands, so that Abia and his people smote them witha great slaughter,
18 and there fell of Israel, slain,.fifty thousand warriors. And the
Israelites were humbled that day, and the sons of Juda pre: vailed because they trusted in the Lord God of their fathers.
19 And Abia continued the pursuit after Jeroboam and took from him the following cities, Baithel with the villages thereof, and Jesuna with the villages thereof, and Ephron with the villages
20 thereof. And Jeroboam did not again. recover strength all the days of Abia. And the Lord smote him and he died ;
21 but Abia became mighty. Having taken fourteen wives he
22 had twenty two Sons and sixteen daughters. Now the rest of the acts of Abia, his transactions and affairs, are written in the
XIV. — book of the prophet Addo. And when Abia died they buried him with his fathers, in the city of David, and Asa his son reigned in his stead.
2 Inthe daysof Asa the land of Juda was quiet ten years. yooh he
3 didthat which was good and right in the sight of the Lord his God.
He removed the altars of the strange gods, and the high places,
A and broke in pieces the pillars, and cut down the bowers, and ordered Juda to seek the Lord God of their fathers, and to perform
5 the law and the commandments. And having removed out of all the cities of Juda the altars and the idols, he gave
6 peace to the fortified cities m the land of Juda: because the country enjoyed peace, and he had no war during those years,
7 for the Lord gave him rest; therefore he said to Juda, let us rebuild the cities, and make walls and towers, and gates and bars, and secure dominion over the country before them. For as we have sought the Lord our God, he hath sought us, and
8 given us rest all around, and prospered us. Now Asa had in the land of Juda an army of three hundred thousand men bearing shields and spears, and in the land of Benjamin shield

» bearers and bowmen, two hundred and eighty six thousand.
9 All these were fighting men. And Zare the Ethiopean came out against them with an army of a million, with three hundred

10 chariots. And when he hadadvanced as far as Maresa, Asa went
~ out tomeet him, and drew up for battle, in the vale north of Maresa,
11 and Asa cried to the Lord his God, and said, O Lord, it is nothing with thee to save with many or with few. Strengthenus, Ὁ
Lord our God; for onthee is our reliance ; and in thy name we are come against this great multitude. O Lord our God, let not man prevail against thee. So the Lord smote the Exthiopeans

12 before Juda. And the Ethiopeans fled, and Asa and his people
13 pursued them as far as Gedor. And the Ethiopeans fell so that they could not recover themselves; for they were

14 trampled down before the Lord, and before his army. And when they had taken immense spoils, and smitten the towns about Gedor (for the terror of the Lord was upon them) and had rifled all their cities (for there was much plunder in them) and plundered their tents, and smitten the Alimazonians and taken many sheep and camels, and were returning to Jerusa-
XV. lem; the Spirit of the Lord came upon Azarias’son of
Oded, and he went out to meet Asa and all Juda and Benja-

2 min, and said, Hear me Asa, and all Juda and Benjamin. The
Lord is with you, while you are with him. And if you seek him, he will be found by you. But if you forsake him, he will

3 forsake you. And though for along time Israel may be without the true God, and without a teaching priest, and without

A law, yet when they shall turn to the Lord God of Israel, he

5 will be found by them. And though at that time there be no peace to him who goeth out, or to him who cometh in, because the terror of the Lord is on all the inhabitants οἵ these

6 countries—though nation may fight against nation, and city against city, because God hath confounded them with all

7 kinds of affliction; yet strengthen ye yourselves, and. let not your hands be weak ; for your work shall be rewarded.

8 Upon hearing these words and this prophecy of the prophet Adad, Asa took courage, and removed the abominations out of all the land of Juda and Benjamin, and from all the cities he held from Jeroboam, on mount Ephraim. And having dedicated anew the altar of the Lord, which is before the temple

© of the Lord, he assembled Juda and the strangers who wor-

‘shipped with him from Ephraim, and from Manasses, and ~ from Symeon, for many of the Israelites had joined him
10 ‘when they saw that the Lord his God was with him. And when they assembled at Jerusalem in the third month, in the
11 fifteenth year of the reign of Asa, he offered as a sacrifice to the
‘Lord on that day, of the prey which they had brought, seven
‘hundred beeves and seven thousand sheep, and entered into a
12 covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers, with all their
13 heart and with all their soul ; and that whoever would not seek
‘the Lord God of Israel should be put to death, whether young
14 -or old, whether man or woman. And when they had sworn to
‘the Lord with a loud voice, the trumpets and the cornets
15 ‘sounded, and all Juda rejoiced at the oath; for they swore with
‘their whole heart, and sought him with their whole desire, and
16 he was found by them. And the Lord gave them rest round about. Moreover he restramed Maacha his mother from performing religious service to Astarte. And he cut to pieces the
17 idol, and burned it by the brook Kedron. But the high places
18 avere not removed. They still remained in Israel. But Asa’s heart was perfect all his days. And he brought in the dedications of his father David, the holy things appertaining to the house of God, silver and gold and vessels.
19 » Now Asa was engaged in no war, till the thirty fifth year
XVI. of his reign. But in the thirty eighth year of the reign of Asa, the king of Israel came up against Juda, and. began building Rama, in order to stop all outlet and inlet to Asa
2 king of Juda; whereupon Asa took silver and gold, out of the treasuries of the house of the Lord, and the king’s house,
3 and sent to the son of Ader king of Syria, who dwelt at Da: mascus, saying, Make a covenant between me and thee, as there was between my father and thy father. Behold I have sent thee gold and. silver, come and remove from me Baasa
4. king of Israel and let him depart from me. Accordingly Son
Ader hearkened to king Asa and sent the generals of his army against the cities of Israel, and smote Aion and Dan and: Abel:
5 main, and all the territories adjacent to Nephthaleim. At the news of this Baasa quitted building, and puta stop to the
6 work. Whereupon king Asa‘ took all Juda, and carried away the stones of Rama and the timber thereof, with which Baasa

Ch. XVII. I]. CHRONICLES.

7 was building, and with them built Gabae and Maspha. At that time Anani the prophet, came to Asa king of Juda and said to him, Seeing thou hast put thy trust in the king of Syria, and hast not relied on the Lord thy God, therefore the army of the king of Syria hath escaped out of thy hand.

8 Were not the Ethiopeans and the Lybians to be dreaded for

their huge army ? For their prowess, for their horsemen, for Ὁ

their immense multitude? Yet because thou didst relyon

the Lord, he delivered them into thy hand. For the eyes of the Lord look throughout the whole earth, to strengthen them whose heart is perfect towards him. In this matter thou hast

10 acted foolishly. Henceforward thou shalt have war. Upon

this Asa was enraged at the prophet, and. committed him to ᾿

prison. Because this gave offence, Asa proceeded to outrage against the people at the same time. Now behold the acts of

Asa first and last, are written in the book of the knee of J ὯΝ

and Israel.

12 In the thirty ninth year of his reign, Asa was diseased in

his feet, till he became very sick ; but in his sickness he did

13 not apply to the Lord, but to physicians. And Asa slept with

his fathers. He died in the fortieth year of his reign, and they

14 buried him in the tomb which he had hewn out for himself,

in the city of David. And when they had composed him on the bed, they filled it with spices, and all kinds of perfumes prepared by apothecaries, and made a very great funeral procession for him, and Josaphat his son reigned in his stead.

XVII. And Josaphat strengthened himself against Israel, and

put garrisons in all the fortified cities of Juda, and appointed governors in all the cities of Juda, and in the cities of Ephraim, which his father Asa had taken, and the Lord was with Josaphat.
3 Because he walked in the first ways of his father and
4 consulted not the idols, but sought the Lord God of his father, and walked in the commands of -his father, and not according
5 to the works of Israel, therefore the Lord established the kingdom in his hand, and all Juda gave gifts to Josaphat,
6 so that he had riches and honour in abundance: and his heart being exalted in the way of the Lord, he removed the high
7 places and the bowers out of the land of Juda. And in the third year of his reign, he sent with the heads of families these

1

Ch. XVII. If. CHRONICLES. 

rulers of his, namely, Abdias and Zacharias and Natha-

8 niel and Michaias, to teach in the cities of Juda; and with

them were these Levites, namely Samaias and Nathanias and

Zabdias and Asiel and Semiramoth and Jonathan and Ado-

nias and Tobias:and Tobadonias who were Levites ; and with

them Elisama and Joram who were priests, and they taught

9 in Juda. Having with them the book of the law of the Lord,

they went through the cities of Juda, and taught the people.

10 And there was a dread of the Lord on all the kingdoms of the

land around Juda, so that they did not make war on Josaphat.

11 Nay from the Philistines they brought Josaphat silver for their

gifts. And the Arabs brought him for their gifts, seven thou-

12 sand seven hundred rams. And Josaphat advanced in great-

ness to a high degree, and built castles and strong cities in

13 Judea, and had many works done for him in Judea. And

with regard to the warriors, the mighty men, who strength-

14 ened him in Jerusalem, this was the number of them accord-

ing to the houses of their patriarchal families. The chiliarchs

for Juda were Edna the chief, and with him sons, mighties

15 of the army, three hundred chiliads; and after him Joanan

16 the leaderand with him two hundred and eighty chiliads ; and

after him Amasias the Zarite, who devoted himself to the

17 Lord, and with him two hundred chiliads, mighties of the ar-

my; and from Benjamina mighty of the army, namely Eliada,

and with him bow men, and those armed with shields, two

hundred chiliads ; and after him Jozabad, and with him eighty

chiliads, mighties of battle. All these waited on the king, ex-

cepting them whom the king placed in the fortified cities throughout all Judea.

XVUL. Now while Josaphat was still advancing in riches and

2 great glory, he allied himself by marriage with the house of

Achab, and after some years, went down to Samaria to Achab.

And Achab sacrificed sheep and bullocks in abundance for

him, and the people with him, and made court to him that he

3 might go with him to Ramoth of Galaaditis. And when Achab

king of Israel said to Josaphat king of Juda, Wilt thou go with

me to Ramoth of Galaaditis, he replied, I am as thou art. As

A is thy people, so is mine with thee for battle. Then Josaphat

5 said to the king of Israel, Inquire now I pray thee of the Lord.

1 co

Ch. XVHL il. CHRONICLES.

Thereupon the king of Israel assembled the prophets, four hundred men, and said to them, Shall I go to Ramoth Galaad to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up, forGod

6 will deliver into the king’s hands. Then Josaphat said, Is

7

10

11

12

15

16

17

18

19 there not here a prophet of the Lord, that we may inquire by | him ? And the king of Israel said to Josaphat, There 15. still a man, by whom we may inquire of the Lord, but I hate: him, for he never prophesieth good of me, but always evil—one
Michaias, son of Jembla. And Josaphat said, Let not the kmg ἢ speak so. Then the king called a chamberlain, and said, Bring here quickly Michaias, son of Jembla. Now the king of Israel . and Josaphat king of Juda, were seated each on his throne, arrayed in robes, and they sat in the open space at the entrance of the gate of Samaria, and all the prophets prophesied beforethem.
And Sedekias, son of Chanaan, made for himself horns of iron, and said, Thus saith the Lord, With these thou shalt push Syria until it be destroyed. And all the prophets prophesied in hike manner, saying, Go up to Ramoth Galaad, and thou shalt prosper; for the Lord will deliver into the king’s hands. Sothe messenger who went to call Michaias spoke to him, saying, Behold ἢ all the prophets have, with one mouth, spoken good things of the -

king, let thy words, I pray thee, be as one of them, and speak good things. ΤῸ whom Michaias replied, As the Lord liveth, whatever God shall say to me, that I will speak. And when he came to the king, the king said to him, Michaias, shall I go to Ramoth Galaad to battle, or shall I forbear? To which he replied, Go up that thou mayst prosper, and they be delivered into your hands! Then the king said to him, How often must
I adjure thee that thou speak nothing to me but truth, in the name of the Lord? Whereupon he said, I saw Israel scattered upon the mountains like sheep, which have no shepherd. And the Lord said, They have no leader, let them return every man to his house in peace. Then the king of Israel said to Josaphat,
Did I not tell thee, that he would not prophesy good of me, but evil? And Michaias said, Is not this the case ὃ Hear-a word of the Lord: I saw the Lord seated on his throne, and all the host of heaven stood, some on his right and some on his left. And the Lord said, Who will deceive Achab, king of
Israel, that he may go up and fall-at Ramoth Galaad. And

Ch. XVIII. Il, CHRONICLES.

20 when one spoke in this manner and. another in that, there came forth a spirit and stood before the Lord, and said, I will deceive
2) him. And the Lord said, By what means? To which he replied, I will go forth and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all
22 his prophets. And he said, Thou wilt deceive and prevail; go and do so. Now therefore behold, the Lord hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of these thy prophets. But the Lord hath
» spoken evil against thee.
23... Then Sedekias, son of Chanaan, came near and smote Mi-
»chaias ‘on the cheek, and said to him, Which way went the
24 spirit of the Lord from me to speak to thee? ‘To which Michaias replied, Behold thou shalt see on that day, when thou shalt go from one inner chamber to another to hide thyself.
25 Then the king of Israel said, Take Michaias and carry: him
‘back to Emer the governor of the city, and to Joas the chief,
26 the king’s son, and say, Thus saith the king, Put this fellow in prison, and let him be fed. with bread of affliction and water
27 of affliction, until I return in peace. And Michaias said, If thou return in peace, the Lord hath not spoken by me. And he said, Hear all people!
28 Then the king of Israel and Josaphat king of Juda, went
29 up to Ramoth Galaad, and the king of Israel said to Josaphat,
Let me disguise myself and I will go into the battle, and put
_ thou on my robes. So the king of Israel diguised himself and
30 went into the battle. Now the king of Syria had given a charge to the commanders of his chariots who were with him, saying,
Fight neither with small nor great, but only with the king of
$1 Israel. So when the commanders of the chariots saw Josaphat, they said, This is the king of Israel, and wheeled about in order to attack him, whereupon Josaphat cried aloud, and the
Lord saved him, and God caused them to turn back from him.
82 And when the commanders of the chariots saw that it was not. the king of Israel and turned from him, a man drew a bow at a’ venture and smote the king of Israel between the lungs and
33 the breast; whereupon he said to his charioteer, turn thy hand
34 and carry me out of the battle, for 1am wounded. But as the battle was that day disastrous, he was kept in his chariot over against the Syrians till the evening, and at the setting of the sun he died.

Ch. XIX. XX. If. CHRONICLES. as i

XTX. = Now when Josaphat, king of Juda, was returning to his
2 house to Jerusalem, Jehu the son of Anani the prophet, went out to meet him, and said to him, King Josaphat, dost thou aid -
3 a sinner, or form friendship with one hated by the Lord? On this account there would have been wrath against thee, but for the good works which have been found in thee, and for thy having removed the bowers out of the land of Juda, and direct-
4. ed thy heart to seek the Lord. So Josaphat dwelt at Jerusalem, and again went out to the people from Bersabee to Mount
Ephraim, and brought them back to the Lord God of their
5 fathers. And when he appointed the judges in all the fortified
6 cities of Juda, city by city, he said to the judges, ‘Take heed
_ what you do. For you judge not for man, but for the Lord,
7 and with you are the words of the judgment. Now therefore let the fear of the Lord be upon you. Keep watch and do your duty ; for with the Lord our God there is no injustice, nor respect
8 of persons, nor taking of bribes. In Jerusalem also Josaphat appointed some of the priests and Levites and patriarchs of Israel, for the judgment of the Lord, and to judge the inhabitants
9 of Jerusalem. And he gave them a charge, saying,
Thus shall you act, in the fear of the Lord, with truth and with an
10 upright heart—You must all conjointly determine every cause of your brethren who dwell im their cities, which shall come. before you for decision, between blood and blood, and between ordinance and command. And you shall explain to them the rules of rectitude and judgments, that they may not sin against the Lord, and that no wrath may come upon you, nor upon
11 your brethren. Thus you shall do and not sin. And behold —
Amarias the priest, is ruler over you for every word of the
Lord, and Zabdias son of Ismael, the ruler over the house of
Juda, for every matter touching the king ; and the scribes and the Levites are to attend you. Be firm and do your duty, and the Lord will be with the good.
XX. After these things the Moabites and the Ammonites, and with them some of the Minaians came against. Josaphat’ for
2 battle; and there came some who told Josaphat saying, There is a great multitude coming against thee from beyond the sea, bordering on Syria, and behold they are at Asasan-thamar,
3 which is Engaddi. Thereupon Josaphat was terrified, and set _

Ch. XX. - II. CHRONICLES.

~ his face to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast through all Juda.
4 And when Juda was assembled to seek the Lord—when
_ they were come out of all the cities of Juda to seek the Lord,
5 Josaphat stood up in the congregation of Juda, in Jerusalem, in the house of the Lord, in front of the new court, and said,
6 O Lord the God of my fathers, art not thou God in heaven above? Thou indeed rulest over all the kingdoms of the na-
‘tions; and in thy hand is the majesty of power; and there is
7 none who can withstand thee. Art not thou the Lord who destroyed the inhabitants of this land from before thy people
Israel? Thou indeed didst give it to the seed of Abraham
. 8. thy beloved, forever: and they have settled therein, and built
9 therein a sanctuary to thy name, saying, If evils come upon us, the sword, judgment, pestilence or famine, we will stand. before this house and before thee ; for thy name is on this house; and cry to thee, because of the affliction, and thou
10 wilt hear and save. And now behold the Ammonites and the
Moabites and mount Seir, through whose territories thou didst not permit Israel to pass, when they were coming out
11 of the land of Egypt, for they turned from them and did not
_ destroy them; yet now behold they are attempting to come out against us, to drive us from this inheritance of ours which
12 thou hast given us. O Lord our God, wilt thou not judge them ? Because we have not power to withstand this great multitude which is coming against us, and do not know what to do with them, we can only have our eyes on thee.
13 And while all the chiefs of Juda were standing before the
14 Lord, with their wives and children; upon Oziel the son of
Zacharias of the Banaites—the sons of Eliel, the son of Matthanias the Levite, one of the sons of Asaph—upon him came the spirit of the Lord in the midst of the congregation, and he
15 said; Hear all ye chiefs of Juda, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and thou king Josaphat! Thus saith the Lord to you,
Be not terrified nor dismayed because of this vast multitude,
16 for the battle is not yours, but God’s only. Go down against them to-morrow. Behold they are coming up by the ascent of
Asseis, and you will find them at the head of the river of the
17 wilderness of Jeriel. You have not to fight. Consider these things, and see the salvation of the Lord with you. O Juda

VOL. 11: Gg

18

22

23

24

25

2 n

29

XX. II. CHRONICLES. yb aise

and Jerusalem, be not terrified nor afraid to go out to-morrow to meet them ; for the Lord is with you.

Thereupon Josaphat bowed down on his face, and. abil all the chiefs of Juda and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. prostrated themselves before the Lord to worship him, the Levites of the sons of Kaath, and of the sons of Kore, stood up to praise the Lord God of Israel, in the loudest strains. And they

arose early in the morning, and went out to the wilderness of

Thekoe. And as they were marching out, Josaphat stood and cried with a loud voice, and said, Hear me, O Juda, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem. Trust in the Lord our God, and you shall be confirmed im your confidence. Confide in his prophet, and you shall prosper. ‘Then he consulted with the people, and appointed the musicians, and them who sing praises, to give thanks and to sing the holy songs of praise. So marching at the head of the army, they sung the hymn, O praise the
Lord, for his mercy endureth forever, And when they began the song of thanksgiving and praise, the Lord set a fighting the
Ammonites against Moab and Mount Seir, who were going out against Juda; And when they were repelled, the Ammonites and Moab rose upon the inhabitants of Seir to exterminate and destroy them. And when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, they rose up one against the other till they were utterly destroyed. So when Juda came to the watch tower of the wilderness, and looked and took a view of the multitude, behold they all lay dead on the ground. Not one had escaped.

And when Josaphat and his people went to gather the spoil, they found cattle in abundance, and furniture and spoils and precious utensils. And when they had gathered the spoils
(now they were three days collecting them, for they were many) on the fourth day they assembled in the valley of
Praise; for there they praised the Lord, and for that reason called the name of that place, Valley of Praise, which it retaineth to this day. Then all Juda with Josaphat their leader, set out on their return to Jerusalem, with great joy. Because the
Lord had caused them to rejoice over their enemies, therefore they made their entry into Jerusalem, with nablas and kinyras and trumpets, till they came to the house of the. Lord. And

Ch. XXI. II. CHRONICLES,

30 there was a dread of the Lord on all the kingdoms of the land, when they heard that the Lord fought against the enemies of
Israel. So the kingdom of Josaphat enjoyed peace, and God gave him rest on every side.

Now Josaphat began to reign over Juda when he was thirty five years of age, and he reigned twenty five years in Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Azuba. She was a daughter of Sali. And he walked in the ways of his father Asa, and turned not aside from doing what was right in the sight of the
Lord. But the high places still remained, and still the people did not direct their heart to the Lord the God of their fathers.
Now the rest of the acts of Josaphat, first and last, behold they are written among the words of Jehu, son of Anani, who wrote the book of the kings of Israel.

After the things above mentioned, Josaphat king of Juda entered into a partnership with Ochozias, king of Israel, and he offended in so doing, and in going to him to build vessels to sail to Tharsis. Therefore when he had built vessels at Gesiongaber, Eliezer the son of Dodia, from Marisa, prophesied against Josaphat, saving, Because thou hast contracted a friend-

ship with Ochozias, the Lord hath destroyed thy work, and

thy vessels are wrecked so that they could not go to Tharsis.

XXI. When Josaphat slept with his fathers, he was buried in

2 oo

the city of David, and his son Joram reigned in his stead. Now he had six brothers sons of Josaphat, namely, Azarias and
Jeiel, and Zacharias and Azarias, and Michael and Zaphatias.
All these were sons of Josaphat king of Juda. And their father gave them many gifts, silver and gold, and arms and walled cities in Judea, and he gave the kingdom to Joram, because he

‘ was his first born. And when Joram attained the kingdom,

and had strengthened himself, he slew all his brothers with the sword, and some of the chiefs of Israel. Joram was thirty two years old when he cameto the throne, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem. And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and as the house of Achab did; for his wife was a daughter of
Achab. But though he did evil in the sight of the Lord, the
Lord would not utterly destroy the house of David, because of the covenant which he had made with David, and because he had promised him, to give him and his sons a lamp continually.

In those days Edom revolted from Juda, and set up ἃ king over themselves. And though Joram went with the chiefs and all the cavalry with him; and though it happened that he arose by night and smote Edom who had surrounded him, and the

᾿ commanders of the chariots, and the people fled to their tents, 

10 yet Edom revolted from Juda, and have continued the revolt to this day. At that time also, Lomna revolted from his.autho-

αν, because he had forsaken the Lord the God of his fathers.

11

12

13

14

15

For he erected high places in the cities of Juda, and caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring, and led Juda astray. And there came to him in writing, a message from
Elias the prophet, saying, Thus saith the Lord God of David thy father, Because thou hast not walked in the way of thy father Josaphat, nor in the ways of Asa, king of Juda; but hast walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and caused Juda and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring, as the house of
Achab hath done, and hast slain thy brothers. the sons of thy father, better men than thyself, behold the Lord will smite thee with a great stroke in thy people, and in thy sons and in thy wives, and in all thy family ; and thou thyself shalt be afflicted with a grievous sickness and disorder in thy bowels, until thy bowels shall come out with the disorder, from year to year.
So the Lord stirred up against Joram, the Philistines and the
Arabians, and those who bordered on the Ethiopeans; and they came up against Juda and subdued them, and carried away all the family which they found in the king’s house, with his sons and his daughters, so that he had not a son left except
Ochozias the youngest of his sons. And after all this, the Lord smote him with an incurable disorder in his bowels, which. continued from year to year. And at the end of two years, his bowels came out with the disorder, and he died of a grievous sickness. And the people made no funeral procession for him, like the procession for his fathers. He was thirty two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem, and departed unlamented, and was buried in the city of

ΧΙ. David, but not in the tombs of the kings; and the inha-

bitants of Jerusalem made Ochozias, his youngest son, king in his stead. Because the plundering band of Arabians and Alimazonians, who had come against them, had slain all the eld-

Ch. XXII, II. CHRONICLES.

sest, therefore Ochozias, son of Joram king of Juda, was made

» king. .

2

Ochozias was twenty years old when he began to reign, and

- he reigned one year in Jerusalem, and his mother’s name was

3

4 o> |

Gothelia. She was a daughter of Ambri. And he walked in the way of the house of Achab. Because his mother was his counsellor to incite him to sin, therefore he did evil in the sight of the Lord, like the house of Achab. For after the death - of his father, they were his counsellors to his destruction, and he walked by their advice, and went with Joram the son of
Achab, king of Israel, to war against Azael, king of Syria, at
Ramoth Galaad. And when the archers had. smitten Joram, and he returned to Jezrael to be cured of the wounds which were given him by the Syrians, at Ramoth, when he fought
Azael, king of Syria; Ochozias, son of Joram, king of Juda, went down to see Joram, son of Achab, at Jezrael, because he was sick. Now by the determination of God, this coming to
Joram was the destruction of Ochozias; for when he came,
Joram went out with him to Jehu, son of Namessi, who was the anointed of the Lord, to destroy the house of Achab. And it happened, that while Jehu was executing vengeance on the house of Achab, he met with the chiefs of Juda and the bre- ᾿ thren of Ochozias who attended Ochozias; and having slain them, he ordered search to be made for Ochozias. And they

. found him under cure at Samaria and brought him to Jehu

and slew him, And they buried him; for they said he is a de-

~-scendant of Josaphat, who sought the Lord with his whole

- heart.

10 il

Now there was none of the house of Ochozias, capable of - asserting his claim to the kingdom; so when Gotholia, the mother of Ochozias, saw that her son was dead, she arose and slew all the royal seed in the house of Juda. But Josabeth the king’s daughter, took Joas son of Ochozias—having stolen him from among the:children of the king who were slain, she put him and his nurse in a chamber of beds and hid them.
Now Josabeth, who was a daughter of king Joram and sister of Ochozias, was the wife of Jodae the priest. So he hid him from the sight of Gotholia that she did not kill him; and he re-

Ch, ΧΧΠΙ. 1. CHRONICLES.

mained with him hid in the house of the Lord six years, and
Gotholia reigned over the land.

XXII. But in the eighth year Jodae strengthened himself,

and took the captains of hundreds, namely, Azarias son of
Joram, and Ismael son of Joanan, and Azarias son of Obed, - and Maasias son of Adia, and Elisaphan son of Zacharias, with

2 him into the house of the Lord. And when they had made a
_ eircuit round Juda, and had assembled the Levites out of all

the cities of Juda and the chiefs of the patriarchal families of

3 Israel; and they were come to Jerusalem, the whole congre-

10

1

12 gation of Juda, made a covenant with the king in the house of God. Now when he shewed them the king’s son he said to them, Behold the king’s son! Let him be king as the Lord hath spoken to the house of David. Now this is what you must do, Let the third of you, the priests and Levites, come in on the sabbath, to guard the outer gates; and a third of you be at the king’s house, and the other third at the middle gate; and all the people in the courts of the house of the
Lord ; and let none enter the house of the Lord, but the priests and. the Levites. Such of the Levites as are on duty may come in for they are holy. But let all the people keep the watches of the Lord. And let the Levites encompass the king

round about, every man with his weapon in his hand; and

whoever cometh into the house, let him be put to death. And they shall be with the king, when he cometh in and goeth out.
So the Levites and all the chiefs of Juda did according to all that Jodae the priest commanded them, and they took every man his men, who were to be on duty from the beginning to the end of the week ; for Jodae the priest did not break the courses; and Jodae gave them the swords, and shields, and arms which belonged to king David, and were in the house of God. And when he had stationed all the people every one with his arms from the right corner of the house, to the left corner of the altar, and the house all around about the king, he brought out the king’s son, and put upon him the ensign of royalty, and the testimonies. And Jodae the priest and his sons, proclaimed him king, and anointed him with oil and said, Live the king! .And when Gotholia heard the noise of the people running, and proclaiming, and praising the king, she

Ch. XXIV. Il. CHRONICLES.

1

14

15

16

17

18

19

2]

went to the king, to the house of the Lord, and looked, and lo! the king was on his platform, and at the entrance were the chiefs, with the trumpets. And the chiefs around the king, and all the people of the land, were full of joy ; and the trumpets were sounding, accompanied by musicians with their instruments of musick, and the smgers singing songs of praise.
Upon which she rent her robe and cried with a loud voice,
Treason! ‘Treason! Thereupon Jodae the priest went: out,

and gave orders to the captains of hundreds, and the chief

officers of the army, and said to them, Drive her out of the house, and go after her and put her to death with the sword.
Because the priest said, Let her not be put to death in the house of the Lord, therefore they opened a passage for her, and when she had gone out through the horse gate, of the king’s house, they put her to death there. Then Jodae made a cove-

nant between the Lord, and the people and the king, that they -

would be the Lord’s people. And all the people of the land, went to the house of Baal and demolished it, and his altars, and broke to pieces his idols, and slew Matthan the priest of
Baal before his altars. And Jodae the priest committed the works of the house of the Lord to the priests and the Levites, and re-established the courses of the priests, and the Levites, into which David had distributed them, And they offered whole burnt offerings to the Lord, as it was written in the law of Moses, with gladness and with hymns, composed by David. And the keepers of the gates attended at the gates of the house of the Lord, that none might enter who was in any respect unclean, Then he took the patriarchs and the mighties, and the chiefs of the people, and all the people of the land, and they brought up the king to the house of the Lord, thence he passed through the inner gate to the house of the king, and they seated him on the throne of the kingdom ; and all the people of the land rejoiced ; for the city was quiet, after they had slain
Gotholia. 

XXIV. — Joas was seven years old when he began to reign and

he reigned forty years in Jerusalem, and his mother’s name was
Sabia of Bersabee. And Joas did what was right in the sight of the Lord, all the days of Jodae the priest. And Jodae took for him, two wives who bore him sons and daughters.
And after this it came into Joas’s heart, to repair the house of

5 the Lord. Therefore he assembled the priests and the Levites

and said to them, Go out into the cities of Juda and collect

. money from all Israel to repair the house of the Lord from

6 year to year, and use diligence in speaking. And when the Le-

vites made no speed, king Joas called Jodae the chief, and said

tohim, Why hast thou not watched over the Levites, to oblige

them to bring in from Juda and Jerusalem, what is ordained

by Moses the man of God. And as he had assembled all Is-

7 rael to the tabernacle of the testimony, because Gotholia that

wicked woman and her sons had plundered the house of God,

and had applied the holy things of the house of the Lord to

8 the Baalims, therefore the king said, Let a chest be made, and

9 set at the gate of the house of the Lord on-the outside, and

let proclamation be made in Juda and Jerusalem, to bring in

for the Lord, as Moses the servant of God enjoined on Israel,

10 in the wilderness. Then all the chiefs and the people gave—

11 they brought, and cast into the chest, until it was full, and

then the chest was carried by the Levites to the king’s over-

seers. When they saw that there was much money in it, the

king’s secretary, and the high priest’s overseer, emptied the

42 chest, and set it again in its place. Thus they did from day to

day. And when they had collected much money, the king and

Jodae the priest, gave it to the workmen, for the service of the

house of the Lord: and they hired masons and carpenters, to re-

pair the house of the Lord, and manufacturers of iron and brass,

13 to furnish the house of the Lord with utensils. So the work-

men wrought, and the work advanced under their hands, and

they re-established the house of the Lord in its former state,

14 and strengthened it. And when they had finished, they brought

the remainder of the money, to the king and Jodae. And

when they had made utensils for the house of the Lord, im-

plements used in the service of burnt offerings, and censers

_of gold and silver, they offered whole burnt offerings in the house of the Lord continually, all the days of Jodae.

15 When Jodae was old, being full of days, he died at. the age

of a hundred and thirty years, and they buried him in the city

16 of David with the kings, because he had exercised goodness

with respect to Israel, and with respect to God and his house.

17 And after the death of Jodae the chiefs of Juda came and paid

18

19

homage to the king; and the king hearkened to them. And they forsook the house of the Lord God of their fathers, and served the Astartes and the idols, and there was wrath against Juda and against Jerusalem at that time. When he had sent prophets to them to turn them to the Lord, and they would not hearken—

_ when he had testified against them and they would not obey ;

20

21 then the Spirit of God came upon Azarias the priest, the son of Jodae, and he stood above the people and said, Thus saith the Lord, Why do you transgress the commandments of the
Lord? You cannot prosper. Because you have forsaken the
Lord, therefore he will forsake you. Upon this they fell upon

_ him and stoned him by the command of the king, in the court

22 of the house of the Lord. Thus Joas remembered not the kindness which Jodae his father had done him, but put to death his son, and when he was dying he said, May the Lord see and

23 judge. And it came to pass that at the end of the year, the ar-

24.

25

26 my of Syria came up against him. They came up against Juda and Jerusalem, and having destroyed all the chiefs of the people, among the people, they sent the spoils of them to the king of
Damascus. Though the army of Syria consisted of but few men, yet God delivered a very great army into their hands, because they had forsaken the Lord the God of their fathers. On Joasalso he executed judgment: for after they were gone from him, as he was left in great distress, his servants conspired against him, for the blood of the son of Jodae the priest, and put him to death

‘on his bed. And when he was dead, they buried him in the

city of David, but not in the tomb of the kings. Now they who conspired against him were Zabeb the son of Samaath the
Ammonite, and Jozabed the son of Samareth the Moabite, and.

27 all his sons, for the five were with him. Now as for the rest of

his acts, behold they are written in the book of the kings. And
Amasias his son reigned in his stead.

XXV. Amasias was twenty five years old when he began to

4,

reign, and he reigned twenty nine years in Jerusalem, and his

mother’s name was Joadaen of Jerusalem; and he did what was

right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart. Now

when the kingdom was established in his hand, he put to death

his servants who had slain the king his father. But, according

to the covenant of the law of the Lord, he did not put to death

Ch. XXV. Il. CHRONICLES.

their children, as it is written—as the Lord commanded saying,
Fathers shall not be put to death for children; nor shall children be put to death for fathers; but they shall die every one
5 for his own crime. Then Amasias assembled the house of Juda and appointed them according to the houses of their patriarchal - families, to be captains of thousands and captains of hundreds throughout all Juda and Jerusalem. And having numbered them from twenty years old and upwards, he found them to be three hundred thousand, able to go forth to war armed with spears and shields. Then he hired from Israel a hundred chiliads, men mighty in power, for a hundred talents of silver.
But there came to him a man of God and said, O king, the army of Israel must not go with thee, for the Lord is not with Israel.
For if thou thinkest to strengthen thyself with any of these
Ephraimites, the Lord will rout thee before the enemy ; for it
9 is in the power of the Lord to strengthen or to rout. And
Amasias said to the man of God, But what must I do in respect to the hundred talents which I have given to the army of
Israel? To which the man of God replied, It is in the power of
10 the Lord to give thee more than that. Then Amasias separated from the army which had come to him from Ephraim, that they might go to their place. Thereupon they were greatly incensed against Juda, and returned to their place in a rage.
11 And Amasias strengthened himself, and took his own people and went to the valley of salt, and there smote of the sons of
12 Seir ten thousand. And the children of Juda took ten thousand alive and carried them to the top of a precipice, and threw them down from the top of the precipice, so that they were all
13 dashed to pieces. Now the soldiers of the army which Amasias had sent back, that they should not go with him to battle, had fallen on the cities of Juda from Samaria to Baithoron and had smitten of them three thousand, and carried off much spoil.
14 And it happened that after Amasias:came from smiting Idumea, a person brought him the gods of the children of Seir, and he set them up to be his gods, and bowed down before them and sacrificed to them: therefore the wrath of the Lord was against Amasias, and he senta prophet to him and said to him,
Why hast thou sought the gods of this people, which could
16 not deliver their own people out of thy hand? But while the

“I fey]

1

Ch. XXVI. II]. CHRONICLES.

17

18

19

20

21 prophet was speaking to him he said to him, Have I made thee a counsellor of the king? Forbear, lest thou be scourged.
Thereupon the prophet held his peace, for I know, said he, that he hath determined to destroy thee, because thou hast done this, and hast not hearkened to my counsel. Then Amasias king of Juda took counsel and sent to Joas, son of Joachaz, son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come and let us look each other in the face. Upon which Joas king of Israel sent to Amasias king of Juda saying, The thistle on Libanus sent to the cedar on Libanus saying, Give thy daughter to my son for a wife. But lo! the wild beasts on Libanus will come—nay the wild beasts on Libanus did come and trample down the thistle. Thou hast said, Behold I have smitten Idumea, there-

fore thy stupid heart lifteth thee up. Abide now at home:

why dost thou take counsel to thy hurt, that thou mayst fall and Juda with thee ? But Amasias would not hearken, for the
Lord had determined to deliver him up, because he sought the gods of the Idumeans. So Joas king of Israel went up ; and he and Amasias king of Juda looked each other in the face at Baithsamys, which belongeth to Juda. And Juda was routed before Israel, and fled every man to his habitation. And
Joas king of Israel took Amasias king of Juda, son of Joas, son of Joachaz, at Baithsamys and brought him to Jerusalem, and

broke down of the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim

to the gate of the corner, four hundred cubits; and he took all the gold and silver, and all the vessels found in the house of the Lord, and in the custody of Abdedom; and the treasures of the king’s house, and hostages, and returned to Samaria.
And Amasias the son of Joas, king of Juda, lived after the death of Joas, the son of Joachaz, king of Israel, fifteen years.
Now the rest of the acts of Amasias, first and last, behold, are they not written in the book of the kings of Juda and Israel ?
And when Amasias departed wholly from the Lord, they formed a conspiracy against him ; whereupon he fled from Je-. rusalem to Lachis; but they sent after him to Lachis, and there put him to death, and they brought him up on horses, and buried him with his fathers in the city of David.

XXVI. And all the people of the country took Ozias when he

was sixteen years old, and made him king in the room of his

Ch. XXVI. Il. CHRONICLES.

2 father Amasias. He had rebuilt Ailath and restored it to Ju-

3

10 da, after the king slept with his fathers. Ozias was sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty two © years in Jerusalem, and his mother’s name was Jechelia, of
Jerusalem. And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his father Amasias had done; and he continued to seek the Lord all the days of Zacharias, who instructed him in the fear of the Lord. In his days indeed he sought the Lord, and the Lord prospered him. And he went out and warred against the Philistines, and demolished the walls of Geth, and the walls of Jabner, and the wails of
Azotus, and rebuilt the cities of Azotus, and among the Philistines. And the Lord strengthened him against the Philistines, and against the Arabs, who dwelt in Petra, and against the Minaians. So that the Minaians gave gifts to Ozias; for his fame reached even to the entrance of Egypt; for he was very powerful. And Ozias built towers in Jerusalem—that over the gate of the corner, and that over the gate of the valley, and those on the corners. And when he had fortified it, he

~ built towers in the wilderness, and dug many wells, forhe had

14

15

16

‘much cattle at Sephale, and in the plains, and vine dressers in

the hilly country, and on Karmel, for he was fond of husbandry. Moreover Ozias had an army of fighting men, which went out in array for battle, and came in, in array, to be numbered.
And they were numbered by Jeiel the scribe and Maasias the judge, under the direction of Ananias the king’s lieutenant.
The whole number of the chiefs, the officers of the army, was two thousand six hundred; and the army of fighting men with them was three hundred and seven thousand five hundred. These were trained for battle to assist the king against enemies. And Ozias provided for them—for all this army, shields and spears, and helmets, and breast plates, and bows, and slings to cast stones. And he made in Jerusalem machines, contrived with great art, to be placed in the towers

‘and at the corners, for shooting darts and throwing huge

stones. And the fame of his preparations was spread far and wide, for he was wonderfully assisted until he became exceeding strong. But when he became strong his heart was elated to his destruction; for he trespassed against the Lord his God

Ch, XXVII. II. CHRONICLES.

19

20

21

22

23 and went into the temple of the Lord to burn incense on the altar of incense. And Azarias the priest went in after him and with him eighty priests of the Lord, valiant men.. And they withstood king Ozias and said to him, it doth not belong to thee, Ozias, to burn incense to the Lord; but only to the priests the sons of Aaron who are consecrated to burn incense. Go out of the sanctuary, for thou hast revolted from the Lord, and this will not be for honour to thee from the Lord God. At this
QOzias was inflamed with wrath, and had in his hand the censer to burn incense in the temple. But when his anger kindled against the priests, the leprosy broke out on his forehead, be-

fore the priests, in the house of the Lord, at the altar of incense.
‘And when Azarias the chief priest, with the other priests,

turned towards him, behold he was leprous on the forehead, so they hurried him out thence. He indeed himself hasted to go out, because the Lord had convicted him. So Ozias the king was a leper to the day of his death, and as a leper, dwelt in the house Apphusoth; for he was cut off from the house of the Lord, and Joatham, his son, was over the kingdom, administering justice to the people of the land. Now the rest of the acts of Ozias, the first and the last, are written by
Jessias the prophet. And when QOzias slept with his fathers, they buried him in the field of the burying place of the kings; for they said he is a leper.. And Joatham his son, reigned in his stead.

XXVIL. Joatham was twenty ed years old when he began

to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Jerusa. She was a daughter of Sadok.
And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his father Ozias had done; but he did not go into the temple of the Lord. Though the people were still corrupt, he built the high gate of the house of the Lord; and on the wall Opel he built much. On Mount Juda and in the forest, he also built castles and towers. He fought the king of

_ the Ammonites and prevailed against him; so that the Am-

6 monites gave him yearly, a hundred talents of silver and ten thousand cores of wheat, and ten thousand of barley. These the king of the Ammonites brought him yearly, during the first, second and third year. Joatham prevailed because he

Ch. XXVIII. II, CHRONICLES.

7 prepared his ways before the Lord his God. Now the rest of

the acts of Joatham, and his wars and his doings, behold they

9 are written in the book of the kings of Juda and Israel. And »

Joatham slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
David, and Achaz his son reigned in his stead.

XXVIII. Achaz was twenty years old when he began to

reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem, and did not do what was right in the sight of the Lord, like his father Da-

2 vid, but walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and made

3

10

1

12 graven images; and for their idols in the land of Benennom he actually caused his children to pass through fire, according to the abominable acts of those nations which the Lord had rooted out from before the Israelites. He burned incense also on the high places, and on the tops of houses and under every shady tree. So the Lord his God delivered him into the hand of the king of Syria, who smote him, and took many of them captives, and carried them to Damascus. He delivered him also into the hands of the king of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter. Indeed Phakee, the son of Romelias, king of Israel, slew of Juda in one day, a hundred and. twenty chiliads of the men mighty in power, because they had forsaken the Lord, the God of their fathers. Zechri also, the chieftain of Ephraim, slew Maasias the king’s son, and Ezrikan, the leader of his house, and Elkana, the lieutenant of the king. And the Israelites carried away captive, of their brethren, three hundred chiliads, including married women, sons and daughters. And they took from them much spoil. But as they were carrying the spoils to Samaria, there was there a prophet of the Lord, whose name was Oded, who went out to meet the army coming to Samaria, and said to them, Behold the anger of the Lord
God of your fathers is against Juda, and he hath delivered them into your hands, and you have slain them with a rage which hath reached up to heaven. And now you purpose to keep the children of Juda and Jerusalem, for men slaves and women slaves! Behold am not I with you to testify to the Lord your God ? Now therefore hearken to me, and send back these captives whom you have taken of your brethren; for the anger of the Lord is on you. Upon this there arose certain chiefs of the Ephraimites, namely, Oudeias the son of Joanas, and Ba-

Ch. XXVIII. Il. CHRONICLES.

13

rachias the son of Mosolamoth, and Ezekias the son of Sellem, and Amasias the son of Eldai, against them who came from the war, and said to them, You shall not bring these captives here to us, for that would be to bring your guilt on us. Because you have sinned against the Lord, do you mean to lay it on us, to add to our sins and to heighten our folly, because our sins are many, and the fervent anger of the Lord is hanging over
Israel? Thereupon the warriors left the captives and the spoils before the chiefs and the whole congregation. And the chiefs above mentioned arose and took the captives, and out of the spoils cloathed all who were naked. And when they had cloath-

- ed them and shod them, and had given them something to eat

25 and to anoint themselves, they took up on asses all who were weak, and carried them to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to their brethren, and then returned to Samaria.

At that time king Achaz sent to the king of Assur for assistance, because the Idumeans had invaded and smitten Juda and carried off captives. The Philistines also had fallen upon the cities of the plain and in the southern border of Juda, and had taken Baithsamus. But after he had given the king the treasures in the house of the Lord, and the treasures in the house of the king, and the chiefs, they took Ailon and Galero, and Socho, and the villages thereof, and Thamna and the villages thereof, and Gamzo and the villages thereof, and settled there: Because the Lord humbled Juda on the account of
Achaz, king of Juda, because he had greatly apostatised from the Lord, therefore Thalgathphallasar came upon him and afflicted him. Though Achaz took the treasures in the house of the Lord, and the treasures in the house of the king, and the chiefs, and gave them to the king of Assur, yet he was of no service to him, but only added to his distress, and contributed to his apostacy from the Lord. For king Achaz said, I will seek the gods of Damascus who smite me. Because, said he, the gods of the king of Syria strengthen them, therefore I will sacrifice to them and they will help me. But they were the ruin of him and of all Israel. Now when Achaz had taken away the vessels of the house of the Lord, and chopped them to pieces, he shut up the doors of the house of the Lord, and made himself altars in every corner of Jerusalem, and erected

Ch. XXIX. If. CHRONICLES.

high places in every city of Juda, to burn incense to strange gods. So they provoked to wrath the Lord the God of their fa-

26 thers. Now the rest of his acts and his doings, first and last, be-

hold they are written in the book of the kings of Juda and Israel.

27 And when Achaz slept with his fathers, he was buried in the

city of David, .but they did not carry him to the tombs of the kings of Israel. And E:zekias his son, reigned in his stead.

XXIX. Ezekias was twenty five years old when he began to

10

1Ὶ

12 reign, and he reigned twenty nine years in Jerusalem; and. his mother’s name was Abia. She was a daughter of Zacharias.
He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his father David had done. Accordingly when he was settled in his kingdom, in the first month he opened the doors of the house of the Lord and repaired them. Then he brought in the priests and the Levites, and having placed them on the east side, he said to them, Hearken, ye Levites, sanctify now yourselves, and hallow the house of the Lord God of your fathers, and remove the uncleanness out of the Hollies.
Because our fathers apostatised, and did evil in the sight of the
Lord our God, and forsook him, and turned away their face from the tabernacle of the Lord, and hardened their neck, and shutthe doors of the temple and extinguished the lamps, and did not burn incense, nor offer whole burnt offerings in this holy place, to the God of Israel; therefore the Lord hath been provoked to wrath against Juda and Jerusalem, and hath made them an astonishment and a desolation, and an object of pity, as you see with your eyes. For behold your fathers have been smitten with the sword, and your sons and your daughters and your wives, are in captivity, in a strange land, as is now the case. In this situation of affairs, I have it now at heart to enter into a covenant with the Lord God of Israel, that he may turn away his fierce anger from us. Now therefore be not backward, seeing the
Lord hath made choice of you to stand before him, to minister, and to be continually employed in his service, and in offering incense. Thereupon these Levites arose, namely, Maath, the son of Amasi, and Joel, the son of Azarias of the Kaathites; and of the Merarites, Kis, the son of Abdi, and Azarias, the son of Ilaelel; and of the Gersonites, Jodad, the son of Zemmath, and Joadam, who were descendants of Joacha; and of

16

17

18

20

21

22

25

» the Elisaphanites, Zambri and Jeiel; and of the Asaphites, Za--

charias and Matthanias; and of the Aimonites, Jeiel and Semei; and of the Idithunites, Samaias and Oziel; and having assembled their brethren, they purified themselves according to the king’s command, in the manner prescribed by the Lord, that they might purify the house of the Lord. And the priests went into the inner part of the house of the Lord to purify it, and threw out all the filth, found in the house of the Lord, into the court of the Lord’s house; and the Levites took it

‘up and threw it out into the brook Kedron. On the first day

of the first month, at the new. moon, they began to purify. And on the eighth day of the month, they came to the temple of the Lord. And having purified the house of the Lord in eight days, and completely finished on the thirteenth of the first month, they went to king Ezekias, and said, We have purified all that are in the house. of the Lord, the altar of whole burnt offerings, with the utensils thereof, and the table for the presence loaves, with its utensils, and have prepared and_hallowed all the utensils which king Achaz polluted in his reign, during his apostasy. Behold they are before the altar of the
Lord. Thereupon king Ezekias arose early in the morning, and having assembled the chiefs of the city, he went up to the house of the Lord, and offered up seven young bulls, seven rams, seven lambs, seven kids of the goats, for a sin offering for the kingdom and for the holies, and for Israel. And he ordered the priests, the sons of Aaron, to offer them upon the altar of the Lord. So when they slew the young bulls, the priests received the blood and poured it against the altar; and when they slew the rams, they poured the blood against the altar; and when they slew the lambs they poured the blood around the altar. Then they brought forward the goats, for a sin offering, before the king and the congregation; and they laid their hands on them; and the priests slew them. And when they made atonement with their blood against the altar, they made it for all
Israel, because the king said, The whole burnt offerings, and the sin offerings are for all Israel.

Now he had stationed the Levites in the house of the Lord with cymbals and with nablas and kinyras, according to the

command of David the king, and of Gad the king’s seer, and
VOL. Τῷ: 11

26

27

91

99

34

36 of Nathan the prophet. For the institution was ordained at the command of the Lord, by the ministry of prophets. So the
Levites stood with the musical instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets. And when Ezekias gave orders to carry up the whole burnt offering on the altar, and they began to carry it up, the musicians began the song of praise to the
Lord, and the trumpets sounded in concert with the musical instruments of David king of Israel, and all the congregation worshipped. And the musicians continued singing, and the trumpets sounding until the whole burnt offering was finished.
And when they who-carried it up, had completely finished, the king, and all present, bowed down. And when they had worshipped, Ezekias the king, and the chiefs, ordered the
Levites to praise the Lord, in the words of David, and of
Asaph the prophet. And when they had sung praises with gladness, they fell on their faces and worshipped. Then Ezekias addressing the people, said, As you have now filled your hands for the Lord, present and bring the sacrifices of thankseiving for the household of the Lord. Thereupon the congregation brought up sacrifices and thank offerings for the household of the Lord, and every one liberally disposed brought whole burnt offerings. And the number for the whole burnt offerings, which the congregation offered, was seventy young bulls, a hundred rams, two hundred lambs. All these were for a whole burnt offering to the Lord. And there were hallowed six hundred young bulls and three thousand sheep. And as the priests were but few, and could not flay the whole burnt offerings, the Levites their brethren helped them, until the work was finished, and until the priests had purified themselves. For the Levites had purified themselves with more promptitude than the priests. So the whole burnt offering was abundant with the suet of the thank offerings and the libations of the burnt offerings. Thus was the service re-established in the house of the Lord; and Ezekias and all the people rejoiced, because God had made provision for the penpley For the thing was done suddenly.

XXX. Then Ezekias sent to all Israel and Juda, and wrote

letters to EXphraim and Manasses, to come to the house of the
Lord at Jerusalem, to celebrate the passover to the Lord God

1

1

1

1

1

1

2 of Israel. Now the king, and the chiefs, and all the congrega-

[9]

0

2

3

tion at Jerusalem, had come to a determination to keep the passover in the second month; for they could not keep it at that time, because a sufficient number of priests was not purified, nor were the people assembled at Jerusalem. And as this was agreed on by the king and the whole congregation, therefore they determined to make proclamation, throughout all Israel, from Bersabee to Dan, that they might come and keep the passover, to the Lord God of Israel, at Jerusalem, because a multitude had not done it according to the scripture. So the expresses went with letters from the king, and the chiefs, to all
Israel and Juda, according to the decree of the king, saying,
Children of Israel, return to the Lord God of Abraham and
Isaak and Israel, and bring back the remnant who have escaped from the hand of the king of Assur. And be not like your fathers and your brethren, who apostatised from the Lord God of their fathers, and whom he delivered up to desolation, as you yourselves see. Now therefore be not stubborn as your fathers were. Give glory to the Lord God, and come tochis sanctuary, which he hath hallowed forever, and serve the Lord your God, and he will turn away his fierce indignation from you. For by your turning to the Lord, your brethren and your children will find compassion in the sight of all ‘those who have captivated them; and he will bring them back to this land. For the Lord our God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face from us, if we return to him.
But while the expresses were passing from city to city, through mount Ephraim, and Manasses, till they came to Zabulon, they were treated as deriders and mockers. But the men of
Aser, and some of Manasses and Zabulon were humbled, and came to Jerusalem, and to Juda. Now to these the hand of the
Lord had given one heart to come and do what the king and the chiefs had commanded by a word of the Lord. So there assembled at Jerusalem much people ‘to keep the festival of unleavened bread in the second month—a very great congre-

gation. And after they had arisen, and demolished the altars

which were in Jerusalem, and torn to pieces all on which they had burned incense to vanities, and thrown them into the brook
Kedron, they killed the paschal lamb on the fourteenth of the

16

17

18

19

23

24 second month. And as the priests and the Levites were humbled, and had purified themselves, they offered whole burnt offerings in the house of the Lord, and stood in their station according to the disposition made of them by the command of Moses, the man of God; and the priests received the blood from the hands of the Levites. Because there were many of the congregation who were not purified, therefore the Levites had it in charge to kill the paschal lamb, ‘for. every one who had not been able to purify himself to the Lord. And because most of the people from E;jphraim, and Manasses, and Issachar, and Zabulon, had not purified themselves, but ate the passover contrary to the scripture, therefore Ezekias prayed for them on this account and said, The good Lord make atonement for every heart which hath directed its course to seek the Lord the
God of their fathers, although not according to the purification of the sanctuary. And the Lord hearkened to Ezekias, and healed the people. So the Israelites who were at Jerusalem, kept the festival of unleavened bread seven days, with great joy, joining in the hymns of praise to the Lord, which the priests and the Levites performed day by day to the Lord, on musical instruments.

And when Ezekias had spoken comfortably to the Levites, and them whose understanding was well disposed to the Lord, and they had finished the festival of unleavened bread, which lasted seven days, offering sacrifices of thanksgiving, and sing-

ing praises'to the Lord God of their fathers; the congregation

took counsel together to keep other seven days, and kept other seven days with gladness. For Ezekias, in behalf of Juda, set apart for the congregation; a thousand beeves, and seven thou-

-sand sheep; and the chiefs, in behalf of the people, set apart a

thousand beeves, and ten thousand sheep; and the dedications of the priests were abundant. So the whole congregation, the priests and the Levites, and all the congregation of Juda, and all who were in Jerusalem, and the proselytes who came from Israel, and the inhabitants of Judea were filled with joy. And the joy in
Jerusalem was great. From the days of Solomon son of David, king of Israel, there had not been such a festival in Jerusalem.

Then the priests, the Levites arose and blessed the people, and their voice was heard, and their prayer reached his holy

XXXI. habitation, even heaven. And when all this was finish-

ed, all Israel who were present went out through the cities of
Juda, and broke in pieces the pillars, and cut down the arbours, and demolished the high places, and the mounts, throughout all Judea and Benjamin, and out of all Ephraim and Manasses, till they were utterly destroyed. Then all Israel returned, every one to his possession and to their cities.

And Ezekias re-established the courses of the priests, and ofthe Levites, and the courses of each individual among the priests and the Levites, according to his particular service for the burnt offerings, and for the sacrifices of thanksgiving, and. to praise and give thanks, and to attend at the gates in the courts of the house of the Lord. And the king assigned a part of his substance for the morning and evening whole burnt offerings, and for the whole burnt offerings on the sabbaths, and at the new moons, and at the festivals prescribed in the law of the Lord. And the people who dwelt in Jerusalem were ordered to give the portion which belonged to the priests and the Levites, that they might be enabled to attend to the service of the house of the Lord. And soon as he published the order, Israel brought, in abundance, dedications of corn and wine, and oil and honey. Both the children of Israel and of
Juda, brought abundantly the productions of the field, and all the tythes. And they who dwelt in the cities of Juda brought the tythe of cattle and sheep, and the tythe of goats, and dedicated them to the Lord their God. And what they brought was stored up in heaps. The heaping was begun in the third month and finished in the seventh. And when Ezekias came with the chiefs, and saw the heaps, they blessed the Lord and his people Israel. Then Ezekias questioned the priests and the
Levites, touching the heaps ; and Azarias the priest, the head of the house of Sadok, answered him and said, From the time the dedications began to be brought to the house of the Lord, we have eaten and drunk, and left in great abundance. Because the Lord hath blessed his people, therefore we have this great superabundance left. ‘Thereupon Ezekias ordered them to prepare store houses for the house of the Lord. And when they had prepared them, they stored up therein the dedications and the tythes for a common stock. And over them Chonenias the Leyite, was overseer, and his brother Semei was his

13

14

15

16

19

20 deputy. And Jeiel and Ozias, and Naeth and Asuel, and
Jerimoth and Jozabad, and Eliel and Samachia, and Maath and Banaias, with his sons, were appointed store keepers, by
Chonenias and his brother Semei, as Ezekias the king and
Azarias the ruler of the house of the Lord commanded. And
Kore, the son of Jemna the Levite, the keeper of the eastern gate, was over the free will offerings, to distribute by the agency of Edom, the oblations to the Lord, and the most holy things.
And Benjamin and Jesus, and Semei and Amarias, and Sechonias, were, by the agency of trusty priests, to distribute to their brethren, according to their courses, both to great and small, excepting infants, to every male from three years old and upwards—to every one who went into the house of the
Lord, ἃ stated portion every day for the service in the courses of their appointment; this being the enrollment of the priests according to their genealogy: but to the Levites, who in their courses were enrolled from twenty years old and upwards, distribution was to be made to the whole multitude, including infants, both male and female, because they had faithfully purified the sanctuary. And of the Aaronites, who officiated as ᾿ priests, there were some men of their cities, expressly nominated in every city, to distribute a portion to every male among the priests, and to every one numbered among the Levites.
Thus did Ezekias through all Juda, and he did what was right in the sight of the Lord his God. And in every work which he undertook in the service of the house of the Lord, and in the law and in the statutes, he sought his God with his whole heart, and did it and prospered.

XXXIT- Now after these acts and this faithfulness Sennache-

qo to

rim king of the Assyrians came—He came against Juda and ᾿ encamped against the walled cities and ordered them to be taken first. And when Ezekias saw that Sennacherim was come and that it was his purpose to attack Jerusalem he consulted with his elders, and the mighty men, about stopping up the waters of the wells, which were without the city. And as they encouraged him he assembled much people, and stopped up the waters of the wells, and the brook which ran through the city with an intent that the king of Assyria, might not come and find much water, and be strengthened. Ezekias

also took courage and rebuilt all the wall which had been demolished, and the towers, and another outwork, and strengthened the fortifications, of the city of David, and provided many
6 arms, and appointed military officers over the people ; and having assembled them before him in the street of the valley
7 gate, he spoke affectionately to them, and said, ‘Take courage and behave like men, and be not terrified nor dismayed, because of the king of Assur, and because of all the multitude with him;
8 for there are more with us than with him. With him are arms of flesh ; but with us is the Lord our God to save, and to fight our battle. So the people were encouraged by the words of Ezekias
9 king of Juda. After this Sennacherim, king of the Assyrians, sent his servants against Jerusalem. While he himself with his main army lay before Lachis, he sent to Ezekias king of Ju-

10 da and to all the Jews in Jerusalem saying, Thus saith Senna-

1 cherim king of the Assyrians, On what do you rely, that you
1 standa siege in Jerusalem? Doth not Ezekias deceive you, that he may deliver you up to death, and to famine, and to thirst by saying, The Lord our God will save us out of the hand of

12 the king of Assur ? Hath not this same’ Ezekias demolished his

1 altars, and his high places, and given orders to Juda, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, You shall worship before

3 this altar, and upon it you shall burn incense ? Will you not consider what I and my fathers have done to all the tribes of
-these regions ὃ Have the gods of the nations of all this land,

14 been able to save their people out of my hand? Who is

this of yours among all the gods of these nations which my father destroyed, who were not able to save their people out of my hand, that he should be able to save you out of my

15 hand? Now therefore let not Ezekias deceive you, nor cause

1

1 you to trust inthis manner. Do not believe him. For as there is no god of any nation or kingdom who is able to save his people out of my hand, or hath been able to save out of the hand of my fathers, therefore your God cannot save you out of
6 my hand. And besides what his servants spoke against the
Lord God, and against his servant Ezekias, he wrote a letter to reproach the Lord God of Israel, and spoke of him saying,
As the gods of the nations of the earth have not delivered their peoples out of my hand, so neither can the God of Eze-

"1

Ch. XXXII. Il. CHRONICLES.

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

27

31 kias deliver his people out of my hand. Moreover he cried with a loud voice, in the Jewish language to the people of Jerusalem, who were on the walls that he would assist them, in order to induce them to seize the city. And he spoke against the God of Jerusalem, as against the gods of the peoples of the earth, which are the works of men’s hands. But when
Ezekias the king, and Esaias son of Amos the prophet addressed a prayer concerning these things, and cried to heaven, the Lord sent an angel who destroyed every mighty man, and warrior, including chief and general, in the camp of the king of Assur. So he returned with shame to his own land, and went to the house of his god, and some of them who sprang from his loins slew him with the sword. And when the Lord had saved Ezekias, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of the hands of Sennacherim, king of Assur, and out of the hand of all men, and had given them rest all around, many brought gifts for the Lord to Jerusalem, and presents to Ezekias king of Juda. And he was thenceforth magnified in the eyes of all the nations.

In those days Ezekias was sick unto death, and he prayed to the Lord, who hearkened to him and gave hima sign. But
Ezekias did not make a suitable return for the favour conferred on him, but his heart was lifted up, so there was wrath against him, and against Juda and Jerusalem. Thereupon
Ezekias humbled himself for the pride of his heart, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so the wrath of the Lord did not come upon them, during the days of Ezekias.

Now Ezekias had riches and exceeding great glory, and he amassed for himself treasures of silver and gold and precious stones; and he had store houses for spiceries, and places for depositing arms and costly utensils; and cities for storing corn, wine, and oil; and towns and stalls for all sorts of cattle; and cots for his flocks; and cities which he built for himself; and a vast multitude of flocks and herds; for the Lord gave him substance in great abundance. It was Ezekias who stop-

ped up the upper course of the waters of Geion, and directed

them under ground to the south west of the city of David.
And he was prospered in all his works. But in his transactions: with the ambassadors from the chiefs of Babylon, who were.

32

33 sent to him to make inquiry touching the miracle which had been done in the land, the Lord left him to himself in order to try him, to know all that were in his heart. Now the rest of the acts of Ezekias and his goodness, behold they are written in the prophesy of the prophet Esaias son of Amos, and in the book of the kings of Juda and Israel. When Ezekias slept with his fathers they buried him in the uppermost of the tombs of the sons of David, and all Juda and the inhabitants of Jerusalem paid him distinguished honours at his death: and Manasses his son reigned in his stead.

XXXII. Manasses was twelve years old when he began to

2

10 reign, and he reigned fifty five years in Jerusalem, and did evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all the abominable acts of the nations which the Lord had rooted out from before the children of Israel. He restored and rebuilt the high places which his father Ezekias had demolished, and erected pillars to the
Baalims, and made arbours, and worshipped the whole host of heaven and served them. Nay, he built altars in the house of the Lord, respecting which the Lord had said, In Jerusalem my name shall be forever—he built altars for the whole host of heaven, in the two courts of the house of the Lord. And he made his children pass through fire in the land of Benennom,
And he consulted omens and auguries, and used enchantments and encouraged belly speakers and sorcerers, and multiplied the ways of doing evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to wrath. He actually set up the graven and molten image which he had made, in the house of God, of which God had said to David, and to Solomon his son, In this house and in
Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel,
I wili put my name forever, and I will no more remove the foot of Israel from the land which I have given to their fathers, provided they be watchful to perform all that I have commanded. them, according to all the law and the statutes and the judgments, by the hand of Moses. Now when Manasses had caused
Juda and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go astray, and to do evil beyond all the nations which the Lord had destroyed from before the children of Israel; and the Lord had spoken against
Manasses and against his people, but they hearkened not, the
Lord brought against them the chiefs of the army of the king

Ch. XXXIV. Il. CHRONICLES.

of Asur, and they took Manasses, and having bound him with

12 chains and fetters they carried him to Babylon. And when he was afflicted he sought the favour of the Lord his God, and humbled himself exceedingly before the God of his fathers,

13 and prayed to him, and he hearkened to him and heard his cry, and brought him back to Jerusalem to his kingdom. So Manasses knew that the Lord himself is God.

14 Νὸον after these things he built a wall without the city of
David, from the south west, fronting the south in the valley and along the street leading from the fish gate round to Opel, and raised it very high, and appointed military officers in all

15 the walled cities of Juda. And he removed the strange gods and the graven image out of the house of the Lord, and all the altars which he had built on the mount of the house of the

16 Lord, and in Jerusalem, and without the city. And having repaired the altar of the Lord he offered thereon a sacrifice of thanksgiving and praise, and ordered Juda to serve the Lord

17 God of Israel. But still the people sacrificed on the high places,

18 but it was to the Lord their God. Now the rest of the acts of
Manasses, and his prayer to God, and the words of the seers

19 who spoke to him in the name of the God of Israel; and how
God hearkened to him at the words of his prayer; and all his sins and his apostasies; and the places on which he built mounts and erected bowers, and graven images before his conversion—

20 behold they are written among the words of the seers. And

-when Manasses slept with his fathers they buried him in the garden of his house, and Amon his son reigned in his stead.

21 Amon was twenty two years old when he began to reign,

22 and he reigned two years in Jerusalem, and did evil in the sight of the Lord as his’ father Manasses had done. For to all the

« idols which his father Manasses had made Amon burned in-

23 cense, and served them, and did not humble himself before the
Lord as Manasses his father had humbled himself. Because his

24 son Amon multiplied transgression, therefore his servants rose upon him, and smote him in his house. And when the people of the country had slain those who conspired against: king
Amon, the people of the country made Josias his son king in his stead.

AXXIV. Josias was eight years old when he began to reign, —

Ch. XXXIV. I]. CHRONICLES.

2 wo

9»

10

5

12

13 and he reigned thirty one years in Jerusalem, and did what was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the ways of David his father, without turning to the right or to the left.
In the eighth year of his reign, while he was still a youth, he began to seek the Lord the God of his father David. And in the twelfth year of his reign, he began to cleanse Juda and Jerusalem, from the high places and the bowers, and from their processions around altars, and from the molten images. And having caused to be torn down in his presence, the altars of the Baalims, and the high things which were on them, he cut down the bowers, and broke in pieces the graven and the molten images. And having beaten them to dust, he strewed _ it over the graves of them who had sacrificed to them, and burned the bones of the priests on the altars. And when he had cleansed Juda and Jerusalem, he proceeded on through the cities of Manasses, and Ephraim, and Symeon, and Nephthaleim, and the places around them, and tore down the altars, and the bowers, and chopped to pieces the idols. And having demolished all the high places in all the land of Israel, he returned to Jerusalem.

And in the eighteenth year of his reign, on purpose to cleanse the land and the house, he sent Saphan son of Eselia, and Maasa, the ruler of the city, and Juach son of Joachaz his recorder to repair the house of the Lord his God. So they went to Chelkias the high priest, and gave the money which had been brought into the house of God, which the Levites, the keepers of the gates had collected from Manasses and
Ephraim, and the chiefs, and from all the remnant of Israel, and from the children of Juda and Benjamin and the imhabitants of Jerusalem—they gave this to the board of works, who superintended the house of the Lord; and these gave it to the workmen who did the work in the house of the Lord, to furnish, and to strengthen the house, and they gave to the carpenters and the masons, to purchase square stones, and timber for planks to cover the houses, which the king of Juda had destroyed. Though these men were intrusted with the works, yet over them were overseers, namely Jehu and Abdias the
Levites of the house of Merari, and Zacharias, and Mosollam, of the house of Kaath. And with regard to all the chiefs

Ch. XXXIV. Il. CHRONICLES.

14

15

16

19,

20

21

(22

23

24

25

26 of Levi, every one skilled in instrumental musick was over the bearers of burdens, and over all the men who executed the works, one to every piece of work, and some of the Levites were scribes and judges and keepers of the gates. Now when they were carrying out the money, which had been brought imto the house of the Lord, Chelkias the priest found a book of the law of the Lord, by the hand of Moses. Whereupon Chelkias addressing Saphan the scribe said, I have found a book of the law in the house of the Lord. So Chelkias gave the book to Saphan, and Saphan carried it to the king. Now he had given him also for the king, an account intitled, All the money delivered to thy servants the workmen. For when they had melted the silver found in the house of the Lord, they gave it into the hand of the overseers and into the hand of them who executed the work. So when Saphan the scribe had explained the account to the king, he said, Chelkias the priest hath given me a book. And Saphan read it before the king. And when the king heard the words of the law, he rent his clothes. Then the king gave orders to Chelkias, and to
Achikam, son of Saphan, and to Abdom son of Michaias, and to Saphan the scribe, and Asaias the king’s servant, saying,
Go and inquire of the Lord for me, and for all the remnant of Israel and Juda, touching the words of this book which is found; for great must be the wrath of the Lord, which is kindled against us, because our fathers have not hearkened to these words of the Lord, to do according to all that are written in this book. Thereupon Chelkias, with those whom the king ordered, went to Olda the prophetess, the wife of Sellem son of Thekoe son of Aras. She kept the commandments and. dwelt at Jerusalem in the Masanai. And when they spoke to her to that effect she said to them, Thus saith the Lord the
God of Israel, Say to the man who sent you to me, Thus saith the Lord, Behold Iam going to bring upon this place evils—all the things which are written in the book read before the king of Juda. Because they have forsaken me, and burned incense to strange gods, to provoke me to wrath with all the works of their hands, therefore my anger is kindled against this place and cannot be quenched. But to the king of Juda, who hath sent you to inquire of the Lord, thus shall you say, Thus saith

27

28

29

30

31

32

33 the Lord the God οἵ Israel, With regard to the words which thou hast heard, as thy heart was affected, and thou didst humble thyself before me when thou heardst these words of mine against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof—
As thou hast humbled thyself before me, and hast rent thy garments and wept before me—TI have heard saith the Lord.
Behold I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be carried to thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evils which I am going to bring upon this place, and upon them who dwell therem. And when they brought back word. to the king, the king sent and assembled the elders of Juda and Jerusalem ; and went up to the house of the Lord, with all the chiefs of Juda and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and with the priests and the Levites, and all the people small and great, and read in their hearing all the words of the book of the covenant found in the house of the Lord. Then the king stood on the pillar, and made a covenant before the Lord to " walk before the Lord and to keep his commandments, and his testimonies, and his statutes, with his whole heart, and his whole soul, so as to perform all the terms of the covenant, written in that book; and he caused all who were in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. And when the inhabitants of Jerusalem, had made a covenant in the house of the Lord God of their fathers, Josias removed-all the abominations out of all the land, which belonged to the children of Israel, and caused all who were in Jerusalem, and in Israel, to serve the Lord their God. During all his days he turned not aside from following the Lord God of his fathers.

XXXV. When Josias celebrated the passover to the Lord

his God, he caused the paschal lamb to be slain, on the four-

2 teenth day of the first month. For having set the priests in

their watches and encouraged them to the works of the house of the Lord, he ordered all the Levites who were heads of families throughout all Israel to hallow themselves to the Lord.
And as they had placed the holy ark in the house which Solomon son of David king of Israel had built, the king said, You have nothing to carry on your shoulders ; now therefore attend to the service of the Lord your God, and of his people
Israel; and be ready according to the houses of your fami-

10

11

13

14

15 lies, and according to your courses, as prescribed by David, king of Israel, and by his son Solomon; and attend in the house, according to the divisions of the houses of your families, on your brethren the people; and a portion of a patriarchal house, on the Levites; and kill ye the paschal lambs and prepare them for your brethren, that they may do according to the word of the Lord by the ministry of Moses. Moreover
Josias dedicated for the people sheep and lambs and kids, all for the passover, even for all who were in Jerusalem, to the amount of thirty thousand. He dedicated also three thousand beeves, these were of the king’s own substance. His chiefs also made dedications for the people, and for the priests, and for the Levites. And Chelkias and Zacharias, and Jeiel, the chiefs, gave for the priests of the house of God—they gave for the passover two thousand six hundred sheep, lambs and kids, and three hundred beeves, and Chonenias and Banaias, and Samaias and Nathaniel, his brother, and Asabias, and Jeiel and
Jozabad, chiefs of the Levites, dedicated for the Levites five thousand sheep and five hundred beeves for the passover. So the service commenced, and the priests stood in their station, and the Levites in their divisions, according to the command of the king. And when these killed the paschal lambs, the priests received the blood at their hands and poured it out, and the Levites flayed them, and prepared the whole burnt offering, to be delivered according to the division by houses of families to the heads of the people, that they might offer it to the Lord as it is written in the book of Moses, and so till the morning. Then they roasted the paschal lambs with fire, according to the ordinance, and boiled the holy meats in the brasen cauldrons and kettles. And when all was ready, they ran with them to all the heads of the people. And after this preparation for them, they prepared also for the priests. Because the priests were employed in offering up the whole burnt offerings and the suet, continually till night, therefore the Levites prepared for themselves and for their brethren, the sons of
Aaron. And with regard to the musicians, the sons of Asaph, who were in their station, according to the commands of David, both Asaph and Aiman and Idithun the king’s prophets; and the chiefs and the keepers of the gates, they were not at liberty to moye from their holy services, for their brethren the

Ch. XXXV II. CHRONICLES.

16

17

18

19

Levites prepared for them. So all the service of the Lord being arranged and set in order on that day, to keep the passover, and to offer up the whole burnt offerings on the altar of the Lord according to the command of king Josias; all the Israelites who were present kept the passover, at that time, and the festival of unleavened bread, seven days. There had not been such a passover as this in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet.
‘They had not, under any king of Israel, kept such a passover as that kept by Josias and the priests, and the Levites, and all
Juda and Israel who were present, and. by all the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, to the Lord. This passover was kept in the eighteenth year of the reign of Josias.

After all these things which Josias did in the house, king
Josias burned with fire the belly speakers and the diviners, and the theraphins and the idols, and the karesims, which were in

the land of Juda and in Jerusalem, in order that he might esta-

20

22

23 blish the words of the law, which were written in the book which Chelkias the priest had found in the house of the Lord.
Before him there was none like him, who turned to the Lord with his whole heart, and with his whole soul, and with all his strength, according to all the law of Moses; nor after him did there arise his like. Nevertheless the Lord turned not away from his great wrath, with which he was incensed against
Juda, for all the provocations with which Manasses had provoked him, and the Lord said, I will remove Juda from my presence, as I have removed Israel—I have cast off Jerusalem, the city which I chose, and the house of which I said, My name shall. be there.

Now when Pharao Nechao was going up against the king of the Assyrians to the river Euphrates, king Josias went out to meet him. Whereupon he sent messengers to him, saying,
What hast thou, O king of Juda, to do with me? I am not now coming to war against thee; and God hath commanded me to make haste. Forbear meddling with God, who is with me, lest he destroy thee. But Josias would not turn his face from him, but strengthened himself to fight him. He hearkened not to the words of Nechao from the mouth of God, but came to an engagement in the plain of Mageddo. And the archers having discharged a volley at king Josias, the king said

Ch. XXXVI. Il. CHRONICLES.

24.

25

26 eat

to his servants, Carry me away, for I am badly wounded. So his servants took him out of his chariot and put him into his second chariot, which attended him, and brought him to Jerusalem, and he died and was buried with his fathers. And all
Juda and Jerusalem mourned for Josias. And Jeremias composed a song of lamentation for Josias, which all the heads of families, both men and women, sung over him, and which they continue to sing to this day; for they established it for an ordinance to Israel. And behold it is written among the funereal odes. Now the rest of the acts of Josias, and his faith in respect to what were written in the law of the Lord, and his acts, first and last, behold they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Juda.

XXXVI. Then the people of the land took Joachaz son of Jo-

2

5185 and anointed him, and made him king over Jerusalem in the room of his father. Joachaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem, and his mother’s name was Amital. She was a daughter of Jeremias of Lobna. And he did what was evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his fathers had done. And Pharao Nechao bound him at Deblatha in the land of Aimath, that he should not reign in Jerusalem. And the king carried him with him to
Egypt, and imposed on the country a tribute of a hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.. And Pharao Nechao, made
Eliakim son of Josias, king over Juda, in the room of his father, and changed his name to Joakim. And as Pharao Nechao took his brother Joachaz, who was carried to Egypt and died there, he paid the silver and the gold to Pharao. ‘Then the land began to be taxed to give the money at the command of Pharao.
And every one according to his rank, demanded silver and gold from the people of the land, to pay Pharao Nechao.
Joakim was twenty five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem, and his mother’s name was Zechora. She was a daughter of Nerias of Rama.
And he did what was evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his fathers had done. In his days Nabuchodonosar, the king of Babylon, came into the land, and he was his servant three years, and then revolted. Now after that, when they revolted, the Lord sent against them the Chaldeans, and predato-

Ch. XXXVI. - II. CHRONICLES.

1

1

0

1

12

1

1

1

1

3

4

fox)

ry bands of Syrians, and predatory bands of Moabites and
Ammonites, and of Samaria according to the word of the Lord by the ministry of his servants, the prophets. Moreover the anger of the Lord was against Juda, to remove them from his presence, because of the sins of Manasses—for all that he had committed and for the innocent blood which Joakim had shed.
He had indeed filled Jerusalem with innocent blood, yet the
Lord was not willing to destroy them utterly. So Nabuchodonosar, king of Babylon, came up against him, and bound him with fetters of brass, and sent him away to Babylon; and carried away to Babylon a part of the utensils belonging to the house of the Lord, and put them in his own temple at Babylon.
Now the rest of the acts of Joakim, and all that he did, behold they are written in the book of the journals of the kings of
Juda. When Joakim slept with his fathers, he was buried at
Ganozae, with his fathers, and Jechonias his son reigned in his stead. Jechonias was eighteen years old when he began to - reign, and he reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem, and did evil in the sight of the Lord, and at the return of the year, Nabuchodonosar sent and brought him to Babylon, together with the most precious utensils of the house of the Lord, and made Sedekias, his father’s brother, king over Juda and
Jerusalem. .

Sedekias was twenty one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem, and did what was evil in the sight of the Lord his God, and was not brought to a sense of shame by Jeremias, the prophet, speaking from the mouth of the Lord, when he violated his engagements with
Nabuchodonosar, to the performance of which he had caused him to swear by God; but hardened his neck, and strengthened his heart, not to return to the Lord God of Israel.
Now all the nobles of Juda, and the priests, and the people of the land abounded in the commission of the wicked abominations of the Gentiles, and had polluted the house of the
Lord in Jerusalem. And the Lord the God of their fathers, had sent to them by the ministry of his prophets, rising early, and sending his messengers, because he compassionated his people and his sanctuary. But they continued to deride his messengers, and to despise his words, and insult his prophets,

VOL. 11. LI

Ch. XXXVI. Π. CHRONICLES.

17

18

20

21

22

2 until the wrath of the Lord ascended against his people—until there was no remedy. Therefore he brought against them the king of the Chaldeans, who slew their young men with the sword in the house of his sanctuary, and had no compassion on Sedekias, nor pity for their virgins. And they carried away their elders. He delivered all into their hands—all the utensils of the house of God, great and small, and all the treasures of the house of the Lord and all the treasures of the king and of the nobles. All these he carried to Babylon.
And he burned the house of the Lerd, and demolished the wall of Jerusalem, and burned with fire the palaces thereof, and utterly destroyed every thing that was beautiful, and removed to Babylon the few who were left; and they continued to be servants to him and his sons, until the reign of the
Medes ; that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremias might be fulfilled, That until the land received its sabbaths which it ought to have rested, it should keep a sabbath all the days of its desolation, to the completion of seventy years.

In the first year of Cyrus king of the Persians, after the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremias was fulfilled, the
Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of the Persians; and he caused proclamation to be made throughout all his kingdom, in writing, saying, Thus saith Cyrus, king of the Persians, to all the kingdoms of the earth, The Lord God of heaven hath given me ; and he hath commanded me to build a house for him in Jerusalem, in Judea. Is there any among you of all his people? His God be with him, and let him go up.

EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

In the first year of Cyrus, king of the Persians, that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremias might be fulfilled, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of the Persians, and he caused proclamation to. be made by word of mouth, and in writing, throughout all his kingdom, saying,
Thus saith Cyrus king of the Persians, The Lord God of

"heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and hath

watched. over me, that I should build a house for him in Jerusa-
Jem, which is in Judea. Whoever is among you of all his people, his God be with him; and let him go up to Jerusalem which

Ch. II. EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

is in Judea, and build the house of the God of Israel. He

who is at Jerusalem is very God. Therefore in regard to every

4 one in eyery place, who is left, let the men of the place where he dwelleth assist him with silver and gold, and furniture and cattle, together with a free will offering for the house of God, which is at Jerusalem.

5 Thereupon the heads of the patriarchal families of Juda and
Benjamin arose with the priests and the Levites, even all whose spirit God stirred up, to go and rebuild the house of the Lord

6 in Jerusalem. And all who were around them strengthened their hands with vessels of silver, with gold, with furniture and with cattle, and with presents, exclusive of free will offer-

7 ings. Moreover Cyrus brought out the vessels of the house of the Lord, which Nabuchodonosar had taken from Jerusalem,

8 and deposited in the house of his God. These which were under the care of Mithridates the treasurer, Cyrus, king of the
Persians, caused to be brought out and counted to Sasabasar,

9 the chief of Juda; and this was the number of them; thirty goblets of gold, and a thousand goblets of silver, vessels of

10 an unusual form twenty nine, golden cups, thirty; and silver plated cups, four hundred and ten, and other vessels, a thousand.
11 All the vessels of gold and silver, all that came up with

Sasabasar from the captivity from Babylon to Jerusalem, were

five thousand four hundred.

II. Now these were the children of the province who came up from the captivity—from the distant abode to which Nabuchodonosar king of Babylon had sent them away to Babylon, and who returned to Jerusalem and Juda, every chief to his city.

The number of the people of Israel who came with Zorobabel, Jesus, Nehemias, Saraias, Reelias, Mordecai, Balasan, -
Masphar, Baguai, Reum, Baana, the head men.

3 The children of Phares, two thousand one hundred and seventy two.

4 The children of Saphatia, three hundred and seventy two.

5 The children of Ares, seven hundred and seventy five.

6 The children of Phaath Moab, descendants of Jesus and
Joab, two thousand eight hundred and twelve.

7 The children of Ailam, one thousand two hundred and fifty four.

Ch. IL EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

8 The children of Zatthua, nine hundred and forty five.
9 The children of Zakchu, seven hundred and sixty.

10 The children of Banni, six hundred and forty two,

11 The children of Babai, six hundred and twenty three.

1. The children of Asgad, a thousand two hundred dy twenre two.

18 The children of Adonikam, six hundred and sixty SIX.

14 The children of Bague, two thousand and fifty six.

15 The children of Addin, four hundred and fifty four.

16 The children of Ater, descendants of E:zekias, ninety eight.

17 The children of Bassou, three hundred and twenty three.

18 The children of Jora, a hundred and twelve.

19 The children of Asum, two hundred and twenty three.

20 The children of Gaber, ninety five.

21 The children of Bethlaem, a hundred and twenty three.

22 The children of Netopha, fifty six.

23 The children of Anathoth, a hundred and twenty eight.

24, The children of Azmoth, forty three.

25 The children of Kariathiarim, Chaphira and Beroth, seven hundred. and forty three.

26 The children of Rama and Gabaa, six hundred and twenty one.

27 The men of Machmas, a hundred and twenty two.

28 The men of Baithel and Aia, four hundred and twenty three.

29 The children of Nabu, fifty two.

30 The children of Magebes, a hundred and fifty six.

31 The children of Elamar, a thousand two hundred and fifty four.

32 The children of Elam, three hundred and twenty.

33 The children of Lodadi and Ono, seven hundred and twenty five.

34 The children of Jericho, three hundred and forty. five.

35 The children of Senaa, three thousand six hundred and thirty.

36 And of the Priests,
The children of Jedua of the house of sehcias nine hundred

and seventy three :
The children of Emmer, a thousand and fifty two;

Ch, I. EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

38 .

41

42

59

6

6 tbo

64.

The children of Phassur, a thousand two hundred and forty seven: . re
The children of Erem, a thousand and seven.

And of the Levites,

The children of Jesu and Kadmiel, descendants of Oduia, seventy four:

The musicians. The children of Asaph, a hundred and twenty eight:

The keepers of the Gates. The Sellumites, the Aterites, the
Telmonites, the Akubites, the Atitaites, the Sobaites, all these were a hundred and thirty nine:

The Nathinims, namely, the Southias’, the Asuphas’, the
Tabaoths’, the Kades’, the Siaas’, the Phadons’, the Labanos’, the Agabas’, the Akubs’, the Agabs’, the Selamis’, the Anans’, the Geddels’, the Gaars’, the Raias’, the, Rasons’, the Nekodas’, the Gasems’, the Asos’, the Phases’, the Basis’, the Asenas’, the Moounims’, the Nephusims’, the Bakbuks’, the Aku. phas’, the Arurs’, the Basaloths’, the Maoudas’, the Arsas’, the Barkos’, the Sisaras’, the TThemas’, the Nasthics’, the Ataphas’; The children of Solomon’s servants—the Sotais’, the
Sepheras’, the Phaduras’, the Jehelas’, the Darkons’, the Gedels’, the Saphatias’, the Atils’, the Phacheraths’, the Aseboeims’, the Hemeis’, all the Nathinims including the Abdeselmas’, were three hundred and ninety two.

And these were they who came up from Thelmelech,
Thelaresa, Cherub, Edan, Emmer, but could not shew the house of their family, nor their seed, whether they were of Israel—the children of Dalaia, the children of Bua, the children of ‘Tobiu, the children of Nekoda, six hundred and fifty two.

And of the children of the priests—the children of Labeia, the children of Akkus, the children of Berzellai, who took to wife one of the daughters of Berzellai the Galaadite, and was called by their name—These sought their register among the
Methoesim, but were not found. Though they were related ~ to the priesthood, yet the Athersastha ordered them not to eat of the most holy meats until there should arise a priest with the
Manifestation and the Truth.

The whole congregation, together, amounted to forty two thousand three hundred and sixty, exclusive of their men ser-

Ch. III. EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

66

68

69

70

vants and maid servants, amounting to seven thousand three hundred and thirty seven. And among them were two hundred choristers of -both sexes. Their horses were seven hundred and thirty six; their mules two hundred and forty five; their camels four hundred and thirty five; their asses six thousand seven hundred and twenty.

Now some of the chiefs of families when they came to the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, offered free will offerings for the house of God, to raise it on.its foundations. According to their ability they contributed to the treasure for the work, sixty one thousand mnas of pure gold, and five thousand mnas of silver, anda hundred garments for the priests. Though the priests and the Levites, and some of the people, and the musicians, and the keepers of the gates, and the Nathinims, settled in their cities, and all the chiefs of Israel in their cities, yet

when the seventh month was come, the Israelites who were in their cities, even the whole people, like one man, assembled at Jerusalem. And Jesus the son of Josedek with his brethren the priests, and Zorobabel the son of Salathiel with his brethren, arose and rebuilt the altar of the God of Israel, that they might offer thereon whole burnt offerings according to what is written in the law of Moses the man of God. And when they had erected the altar on its basis, because it was. done with a dread upon them, on account of the neighbouring people, the whole burnt offering for the morning, and also for the evening, was offered up thereon to the Lord. But when they had celebrated the festival of tabernaecles, according to what was written, and offered the whole burnt offering day by day in number as prescribed, the set number for every. day—after this they offered the continual burnt offerings in due course, and those for the new moons, and for all the festivals dedicated to the Lord, and for every one who offered a free will offering to the Lord. 3

On the first day of the seventh month they began to offer whole burnt offerings to the Lord, though the foundation of the house of the Lord was not laid; but they had given money to the stone cutters and carpenters, and meat and drink and oil to the Sidonians and Tyrians, to bring cedar timber from Libanus to the sea of Joppa, according to the permission granted

Ch. IV. EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

8 them by Cyrus king of the Persians. And in the second year of their coming to the house of God at Jerusalem, in the second
’ month, Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and Jesus the son of
Josedek with the rest of their brethren, the priests, and the
Leyites, and all who came from the captivity to Jerusalem, made a beginning.
Now they had appointed the Levites from twenty years old
9 and upwards over them, who did the works in the house of the Lord, so there were over the workmen employed at the house of the Lord, Jesus with his sons and brethren, Kadmiel with his sons, the sons of Juda, the sons of I{nadad, their sons and
10 their brethren the Levites. And while they were laying the foundations of the house of the Lord, the priests attended in their robes, with trumpets, and the Levites, the Asaphites, with cymbals,
11 to praise the Lord in the manner prescribed by David king of Israel, and they raised their responsive strains, in the song of praise and thanksgiving to the Lord For ἐξ is good; for to everlasting his mercy endureth for Israel. And all the people shouted with a great shout, to praise the Lord, at laying the foundation of the house of the Lord. But many of the priests and Levites, and the old chiefs of families, who with their eyes had seen the former house on its foundations, and now saw this, wept aloud, while the people were shouting for joy
13 to swell the song ; so that the people could not distinguish the shouts of joy frem the sound of the people’s wailing,
IV. Because the people shouted with a loud shout, therefore the noise was heard at a great distance ; and when they who afflicted Juda and Benjamin heard that the children of the captivity were building a house forthe Lord God of Israel, they came to Zorobabel and to the chiefs of the families, and said,
Let us build with you, for we, like you, seek our God, and we sacrifice to him, from the days of Asaradan, king of Assur, who brought us here. But Zorobabel and Jesus, and the other chiefs of the families of Israel, said to them, It is not allowable for us, and you, to build a house to our God, for we ourselves assembling together are to build for the Lord our God, as
Cyrus the king of the Persians hath commanded us. Upon this the people of the land began to weaken the hands of the
5 people of Juda, and they impeded their building, and coun-

1 bo

ies)

Ch. IV. EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

sellors were hired to frustrate their design, all the days of Cy-

6 rus king of the Persians, and even to the reign of Darius king

7

10

11

14

15

of Persia.

In the reign of Assuerus, even in the beginning of his reign, they wrote a letter against the inhabitants of Juda and Jerusalem. And in the days of Arthasastha, Tabeel in concert with
Mithridates, and the rest of his fellow servants, wrote to Arthasastha king of the Persians—the collector of the tribute drew up a writing in Syriack ; and Reum Baltam and Sampsa the secretary, wrote a translation of it, as their joint letter against Jerusalem, to Arthasastha the king saying, This hath been agreed on by Reum Baltam, and Sampsa the secretary, and the rest of our fellow servants, the Deinaians, Apharsathachaians, ‘Tarphalaians, Apharsaians, Archuaians, Babylonians, Susanachaians, Davaians, and the rest of the nations, whom the great and the honourable Assenaphar transplanted, and settled in the cities of Somoron, and the rest of the country on this side the river. This was the purport of the letter which they sent to him,

To Arthasastha the king, thy servants, the men beyond the river :

Be it known to the king, that the Jews who came up from thee to us, have come to Jerusalem, that rebellious and wicked city, and are rebuilding it. The walls of it are repaired, and they have reared up the foundations of it. Now therefore be it known to the king, that if this city be rebuilt, and the walls thereof completed, no tribute will be paid to thee, nor will they do homage. Now as this is injurious to kings, and it is not meet for us to see the king’s dishonour, we have therefore sent to inform the king, that he may examine the book of the records of thy fathers, by which thou wilt find, and know that this is a rebellious city, and hurtful to kings and countries, and that there are asylums for slaves in the midst of it, from time immemorial, for which cause this city was laid waste. We therefore certify the king, that if this city be rebuilt, and the wall thereof reared up, there will be no peace for thee. To which he replied.

The king, to Reum Baltam, and Sampsa the secretary, and to the rest of their fellow servants, who dwell in Samaria and

ch. Vv. EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

20

21

92

23

24

2

3

6

7 the rest beyond the river, greeting, and saith, The collector of the tribute, whom you sent to us, hath been called before me, and 1 gave orders and we have examined and found, that this city from time immemorial hath set itself up against kings and that there are seditions in it, and asylums for slaves; and that there have been mighty kings in Jerusalem, who have exercised dominion over the whole country beyond the river ; and that great tribute, and tolls have been paid tothem. Now therefore give orders to stop those men; for that city must not be built any more. See that you merit praise in executing this, lest peradventure the desolation be fitted up to the prejudice of kings. .

When king Arthasastha’s collector of tribute had read this in the presence of Reum Baltam, and Sampsa the secretary, and his fellow servants, they marched in haste to Jerusalem, and through Juda, and with horsemen and an army caused them to stop. So a stop was put to the work of the house of
God in Jerusalem, and it continued stopped till the second year of the reign of Darius, king of the Persians.

When Aggaius the prophet and Zacharias the son of
Addo prophesied against the Jews who were in Juda and Jerusalem—in the name of the God of Israel against them; then arose Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and Jesus son of Josedek, and began to build the house of God which is at Jerusalem; and with them were the prophets of God helping them. At that time Thanthani the chief governor on this side the river, and
Satharbouzani, and their fellow servants, came to them and spoke to them in terms to this effect, Who hath ordered you to build this house, and renew this theatrical entertainment?
And they said to them, What are the names of the men who are building this city ? Now the eyes of God were on the captivity of Juda, so that they did not cause them to stop until the matter was laid before Darius. So there was sent to the collector of the tribute, touching this affair, the substance of a letter, which Thanthani the chief governor on this bank of the ". river, and Satharbouzani, and their fellow servants the Apharsachaians who were on this bank of the river, should send to king Darius. They sent to him a verbal message, and by him the following letter was written:

Ch. VI. EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

8

10

11

15

16

17

To Darius the king, all peace. Be it known to the king, that we went to the province of Judea, to the house of the great
God, which they are building with choice stones. Timbers are actually laid in the walls, and the work is going on fast and prospereth in their hands; We then questioned the elders and said to them, Who hath given you orders to build this house, and renew this theatrical entertainment? We then asked. their names that we might acquaint thee, that we might transmit to thée in writing the names of their principal men. ‘Thereupon they answered us to this effect saying, We are the servants of the God of the heaven and the earth, and we are rebuilding his house which was built many years ago. A great king of Israel actually built it and fitted it up forthem; but when our fathers provoked to wrath the God of heaven, he delivered them into the hands of Nabuchodonosar king of Babylon the Chaldean, who destroyed this house and removed the people to Babylon.
But in the first year of Cyrus the king, Cyrus the king made a decree that this house of God should be rebuilt: and the vessels of gold and silver belonging to this house of God which
Nabuchodonosar had taken from this house in Jerusalem and put in the king’s temple, these Cyrus the king caused to be brought out of the king’s temple and gave them to Sabanasar the treasurer who was over the treasure, and said to him, Take all these vessels and go and deposit them in the house at Jerusalem, in their places. At that time Sabanasar himself came and laid the foundation of this house of God at Jerusalem; and from that time till now it hath been a building, and is not yet finished. Now therefore if it seemeth good to the king, let search be made in the treasury of the king of Babylon, that thou mayst know whether a decree hath been made by Cyrus the king, to rebuild this house of God at Jerusalem: and let the bine. when informed touching this matter, send to us.

Thereupon Darius the king passed a decree, He. hath caused search to be made in the libraries where the royal treasure is kept at Babylon, and there hath been found in the city, in the royal palace, a roll, in which 15 written this memoran-

3 dum, In the first year of king Cyrus, Cyrus the king made a

decree concerning the holy house of God at Jerusalem, Let the house be built, and the place where they offer sacrifices. More-

Ch. VI. EZRA, OR-ESDRAS.

10

1

12

14

15 over he hath fixed the dimensions, the length sixty cubits and the breadth sixty cubits. And there are to be three strong stories of stone and one of wood; and the expence is to be defrayed out of the king’s house: And let the vessels of the house of
God, both of silver and gold, which Nabuchodonosar took out of the house in Jerusalem, and brought to Babylon, be given, and go back to the temple at Jerusalem, to the place where they were deposited in the house of God. Now therefore you governors beyond the river, Satharbouzani, and you their fellow servants the Apharsachaians, who are beyond the river, keep at a distance from that place. Let the work of the house of God alone. Let the rulers of the Jews, and the elders of the Jews build the house of God in its place. Furthermore, by me a decree is made in regard to what you may do for the elders of the Jews, that the house of God may be built. Out of the king’s substance, the tributes beyond the river, let the expence be carefully paid to those men, that they may not be forced to stop; and whatever they may stand in need of, such as young bulls and rams and lambs for whole burnt offerings to the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine and oil, according to the order of the priests at Jerusalem—let whatever they ask be given them day by day, that they may offer continually to the God of heaven sweet smelling sacrifices, and pray for the life of the king and his sons. Moreover by mea decree is made, that if any man counteract this mandate, a beam be taken from his house, and that he being suspended, be executed thereon, and his house confiscated. And may the God whose name dwelleth there, destroy every king and people who shall stretch forth their hands to alter or destroy the house of God which is at Jerusalem. I
Darius have passed the decree. Let it be strictly observed.
Upon this Thanthani the chief governor on this side the river, and Satharbouzani and his fellow servants conformed strictly to what Darius the king sent. And the elders of the
Jews and the Levites went on with the building by the prophesying of Aggaius the prophet, and Zacharias the son of Addo, and they rebuilt and fitted it up again by the decree of the God of Israel, and by the decree of Cyrus and Darius, and Arthasastha, kings of Persia; and having finished the house on the third day of the month Adar, in the sixth year of the reign of

Ch Vit. EZRA, OR ESDRAS. .

16

19

22 king Darius, the children of Israel, the priests and the Levites, and the rest of the children of the captivity, kept the dedication ofthe house of God with joy, and offered for the dedication of the house of God, a hundred young bulls, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs, and twelve he goats, fora sin offering, for all
Israel, according to the number of the tribes of Israel. And they set the priests in their courses, and the Levites in their divisions over the service of God at Jerusalem, according to the writing of the book of Moses. And on the fourteenth day of the first month, the children of the captivity kept the passover. For the priests and the Levites had purified themselyes till all were pure. And the Levites killed the paschal lambs for all the children of the captivity, and for their brethren, the priests, and for themselves. Sothe children of Israel who were of the captivity, and every one who had separated himself from the impurity of the nations of the land and had come to them to seek the Lord God of Israel, ate the passover, and kept the festival.of unleavened bread seven days, with joy; for the Lord had made them joyful, and had turned the heart of the king of Assur to them, to strengthen their hands in the works of the house of the God of Israel.

VU. Now after these things in the reign of Arthasastha, king of

10 the Persians, came up Esdras, son of Saraias, son of Azaraias, son of Chelkias, son of Selum, son of Sadduk, son of Achitob, son of Samaria, son of Esria, son of Mareoth, son of Zaraia, son of Ozias, son of Bokki, son of Abisue, son of Phineas, son of Eleazar, son of Aaron, the first priest. This Esdras who came up from Babylon, was a ready scribe in the law of Moses, which the Lord the God of Israel had given to Israel. And when the king gave him leave, because the hand of the Lord his God was upon him in all that he sought, there came upto Jerusalem some of the children of Israel, and some of the priests, and some of the Levites, namely, the musicians and the keepers of the gates and the Nathinims in the seventh year of Arthasastha, the king; and they arrived at Jerusalem in the fifth month of the said. seventh year of the king. For on the first day of the first month he settled his journey up from Babylon, and on the first day of the fifth month they arrived at Jerusalem. For the good hand of his God was upon him, because Esdras had set his

Ch. ΝΗ. EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

12

14

15

16

Ι.18

19

20

21

22 heart to seek the law, and to do and to teach in Israel the statutes and the judgments,

Now this is the copy of ‘the decree which Arthasastha gave to Esdras the priest, the scribe of the book of the words of the commandments of the Lord, and of his statutes to Israel.

Arthasastha king of kings, to Esdras, scribe of the law of the Lord, the God of heaven. “1μεῖ thy requests be granted.
This ismy answer. By me a decree is made, That every one of the people of Israel in my kingdom, and of the priests, and
Levites, who is of his own free will minded to go to Jerusalem, is sent on behalf of the king, and the seven counsellors, to go with thee to guard to Judea, even to Jerusalem, by the law of their God, which is in thy hand, for the house of the
Lord, the silver and the gold, which the king and the counsellors have freely offered to the God of Israel, who dwelleth in Jerusalem, and:all the silver and the gold which thou canst procure in allthe country of Babylon, with the free will offerings of the people and the priests who make free will offerings to the house of God which is at Jerusalem; enroll thou therefore in this book every one who freely cometh to thee. The bulls, rams and lambs, with their sacrifices and their libations—these thou shalt offer on the altar of the house of your
God in Jerusalem. And if it seemeth good to thee: and thy brethren, to do any thing with the rest of the silver and the gold, do it as it shall please your God; but the vessels which are given thee for the service of the house of God, deliver up in the presence of Godin Jerusalem. And whatsoever more may be wanted for the house of thy God, which thou mayst think ought to be given, give that out of the king’s treasure houses and on my behalf. I Arthasastha the king, have given an order on all. the treasuries which are beyond the river, that whatever Esdras the priest and scribe of the God of heaven shall require of you, be done with all readiness to the amount of a hundred talents of silver, and to the amount of a hundred cores of wheat, and to the amount of a hundred bats οἵ wine, and a hundred bats of oil, and salt without limitation.
Whatever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be done. Take heed that no one offer any insult to the house of the God of heaven, lest there be wrath against the realm of

Ch. VII. EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

24

26

the king and his sons. Moreover, in respect to all the priests and the Levites, the musicians, the keepers of the gates, the
Nathinims, and those employed in the service of the house of God, this hath been notified to you, Take no toll of them.
Thou shalt have no authority to exercise dominion over them.
And thou Esdras! as the wisdom of God is in thy hand, appoint scribes and judges, that they may administer justice to all the people beyond the river, to all such as know the law of thy God, and to such as know it not you shall make it known. And whoever will not readily perform the law of God, and the law of the king, upon him let judgment be passed, whether it be to death or to correction, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.” ,

Blessed be the Lord the God of our fathers who thus put it in the king’s heart to glorify the house of the Lord which is at Jerusalem, and who gave me favour in the eyes of the king and his counsellors, and of all the officers of the king who were high in office. As for me, I strengthened myself, as the good hand of God was upon me, and assembled from among Israel chiefs to go up with me.

VIIl. Now these are the heads of families, the leaders

who came up with me in the reign of Arthasastha king of
Babylon. Of the children of Phineas, Gerson: of the children of Ithamar, Daniel: of the children of David, Attus : of the children of Sachania, even of the children of Phoros,
Zacharias, and with him a band of a hundred and fifty: and of the children of Phaath-moab, Eliana, son of Saraia, and with him two hundred males : and of the children of Zathoes,
Sechenias, son of Aziel, and with him three hundred males: and of the children of Adin, Obeth, son of Jonathan, and with him fifty males: and of the children of Elam, Isais, son of Athelia, and with him seventy males: and of the children of Saphatia, Zabadias, son of Michael, and with him eighty males: and of the children of Joab, Abadia, son of Jeiel, and with him two hundred and eighteen males: and of the children of Baani, Selimuth, son of Josephia, and with him a hundred and sixty males : and of the children of Babi, Zacharias son of Babi, and with him twenty eight males: and of the children of Asgad, Joanan son of Akkatan, and with him

Ch. VIII. EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

13

a hundred and ten males: and of the children of Adonikam, the under chiefs, and these were their names, Eliphalat, Jeel and
Samaia, and with them sixty males : and of the sons of Bagui,
Outhaiand Zabud, and withthem seventy males, And when I had assembled them attheriver which runnethto Evi, we encamped

_ there three days. And Linquired among the people and among the

18

19

20

21 priests, and not finding any of the sons of Levi there, I sent for
Eleazar, Ariel, Semeiaand Alonam and Jarib and Elnatham, and
Nathan and Zacharias and Messollam and Joarim and Elnathan, and despatched these men of understanding to the chiefs at Money of the place, and put words in their mouth to speak to the brethren of the Athinims at Money of the place, that they might bring us choristers for the house of our
God. So they came to us, as the. good hand of our God was over us, chief Sachon of the children of Mooli son of Levi, son of Israel. Indeed his sons and brethren, being eighteen, came instantly, and brought Asebias and Isaia of the sons of Merari: his brethren and his sons were twenty; and of the Nathanims, whom David and the chiefs gave for the service: of the Levites, two hundred and twenty Nathanims were all} assembled by names. Then I proclaimed a fast there at the river Avue, that we might humble ourselves in the presence of our God, and inquire of him the straight road for us, and our children, and all our substance; for I was ashamed to ask of the king a band of soldiers and horsemen, to protect us from enemies on the way; for we had spoken to the king, saying, The hand of our God is over all them for good, who seek him ; and his power and his wrath is against all them who forsake him.
So we fasted and besought our God for this, and he hearkened. to us. Then I set apart twelve of the chiefs of the priests, Saraia and Asabaia, and with them ten of their brethren, and I weighed out to them the silver and the gold, and the vessels which were dedicated to the house of our God, which the king and his counsellors, and his chiefs, and all the Israelites there, had dedicated—-I weighed into their hands six hundred and fifty talents of silver, and a hundred vessels of silver and a hundred talents of gold, and twenty gilt cups, worth about a thousand drachms, and vessels of fine burnished brass, precious as gold, and said to them, You are holy to the Lord, and these

GHitx. . EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

32

33

34

35

36

vessels are holy, and the silver and the gold are free will offerings to the Lord God of our fathers. Watch and keep them, until you weigh them before the chiefs of the priests and the
Levites, and the chiefs of the families:in Jerusalem, into the tabernacles of the house of the Lord. And when the priests and the Levites had taken the weight of the silver and the gold, and the vessels to carry them to Jerusalem, to the house of our
God, we removed from the river Avue, on the twelfth of the first month, to come to Jerusalem. And the hand of our God was with us, and delivered us from the hand of enemies, and of such as lay in wait on the way. And when we came to Jerusalem, and had rested three days, we, on the fourth day, delivered the silver and gold and vessels, in the house of our God, into the hand of Merimoth, son of Ouria the priest, when there was with him, Eleazar son of Phineas, and with them Jozabad, son of Jesus, and Noadia, son of Banaia, the Levites, all by number and by weight, and the whole weight was taken down in writing. At that time, they who came from the captivity, the children of them who had been carried away, offered as whole burnt offerings to the God of Israel, twelve. young bulls for all Israel, ninety six rams, seventy seven lambs, twelve goats, for a sin offering. All these were whole burnt offerings to the Lord. Then they gave the king’s decree to the king’s lieutenants and governors beyond the river, and they paid due respect to the people and to the house of God.

When these things were done, the chiefs came to me and said, The people of Israel, and the priests and the Levites, have not separated themselves from the neighbouring tribes.
In their abominations, the Ethites, the Pherezites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, and the Moserites, and the Amorites, are the same with the Chananites, For they have taken some of their daughters for themselves, and their sons; and the holy seed is mingled with the tribes of the neighbouring regions. And the hand of the chiefs is principally concerned in this transgression. And when I heard this Trent my garments, and started up and tore the hair of my head and my beard. Then I sat down mourning. And there assembled to me every one who, in the defection of the captivity, continued to follow the word of the God of Israel: but as for me, I con-

Ch. TX. EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

5 tinued sitting disconsolate, till the evening sacrifice. And at the evening sacrifice I arose from my humiliation—having rent my garments, I rose up, and fell upon my knees, and

6 spreading forth my hands to the Lord God, I said :—O Lord,
I blush, and am ashamed to lift up, O my God, my face to thee ; because our iniquities are multiplied over our head, and

7 our transgressions are heaped up to. heaven. From the days of our fathers we are in great transgression, even to this day.
And for our iniquities, we and our kings and our children, have been delivered into the hand of the kings of the nations,

to the sword and to captivity, and to spoiling, and to confusion

8 of face, as at this day. Now, though our God hath had compassion on us, so as to suffer a remnant of us to escape, and to give us a fixture in the place of his sanctuary, that he may enlighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving in our bondage ;—

9 Though we are slaves, the Lord our God hath not quite forsaken us, but hath extended mercy to us in the sight of the kings of
Persia, to give us a reviving, by their raising up the house of our God, and repairing the desolations thereof, and giving us

‘10 an enclosure in Juda and Jerusalem. What must we say, O our God? After this we have forsaken the commandments which thou gavest us by the ministry of thy servants, the pro-

11 phets, saying, The land which you are going to possess, is a land subject to change by the removal of the people of the nations for their abominations, with the filth of which they

12 have filled it from one end to the other; now therefore, give not your daughters to their sons, nor take any of their daughters for your sons; nor shall you seek their peace or their welfare for-

* ever, that you may be strong, and eat the good things of the land, and leave it for an inheritance to your children forever.

13 Nowafter all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for this our great transgression; though there 15 no God like our God; though thou hast blotted out our iniquities and given us deli-

14 verance; yet we have returned to break thy commandments, and to intermarry with the people of these regions. Be not provoked against us to our utter destruction, so that not a rem-

15 nant may escape. O Lord God of Israel, thou art gracious; for a remnant of us have escaped, as at this day. Behold we

VOBA 11. nn .

Ch. X. EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

are before thee in our transgressions, though there is no standing before thee for this.

xX. Now when Esdras had prayed and ae publick confession, weeping and praying before the house of God, there assembled to him a very great congregation, men, women and

2 youths. Because the people wept and made loud lamentation, therefore Sechenias, son of Jeel, of the children of Elam, addressing Esdras, said, We have broken covenant with our God and have taken strange wives of the people of the land; but still there is hope in Israel concerning this. Now therefore let us make a covenant with our God, to put away all these wives and those born of them as thou shalt advise. Arise, and cause them to tremble at the commandments of our God,,.and let

4 what the law requireth be done. Arise, for the matter resteth

with thee, and we are with thee. Take courage and proceed

5 to action. Upon this, Esdras arose and exacted an oath of the

chiefs, the priests and Levites, and all Israel, that they would

6 conform to this determination. And when they had taken the

oath, Esdras went from the house of God to the treasury office of Joanan, son of Elisab. Though he went there, he neither ate bread nor drank water, for he mourned for the transgression of

7 the captivity. And they issued a proclamation through Juda and

Jerusalem, to all the children of the captivity to assemble at Je-

8 rusalem, and that whoever did not come within three days, ac-

cording to the onder of the chiefs and the elders, all his substance

_ should be anathematised, and he himself should be excommuni-

9 cated from the congregation of the captivity. Accordingly all the men of Juda and Benjamin, assembled at Jerusalem within the three days. It was now the ninth month. On the twentieth of this month all the people sat in the street of the house of
God, because of their consternation at the decree, and because

10 of the weather. And. Esdras the priest arose, and said to them,
You have broken covenant and taken strange wives to add

11 to the transgression of Israel ; now therefore, give praise to the
Lord God of our fathers, and do what is well-pleasing in his sight, and separate yourselves from the people of the land, and

12 from your strange wives, In reply to which, all the congregation said, We take upon us the performance of this great thing

13 which thou hast spoken; but the people are numerous and. the

9

14

1 He

16

17

XK. EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

weather stormy, so that we cannot stand out of doors, and this is not a work of one or two’ days; for we have multiplied transeression in this respect. Let our chiefs, we pray thee, attend; and let all those in our cities who have taken strange wives come at appointed times, and with them the elders of each respective city, and the judges, that they may turn away from us the fiercé anger of our God for this matter.

Besides Jonathan son of Asael, and Josias son of Thekoe, there were with me in this business, Mesollam and Sabbathai the Levite who assisted them. And this was the manner in which the children of the captivity acted. There were set apart Esdras the priest, and head men of families for every house, and all who were named were to return on the first day of the tenth month, to make strict inquiry into this matter. And when they had finished with all the men who had taken strange

wives, having continued the examination to the first day of

the first month, there were found of the sons of the priests, who had taken strange wives—of the sons of Jesus son of Josedek these brethren of his, Maasia and Eliezer and Jarib and Gadalia, and they gave their hand to put away their wives, and offered a trespass ram of the flock, for their transgression: and of the sons of Emmer, Anani and Zabdia: and of ᾿ the sons of Eram; Masael and Elia and Samaia and Jeel and
Ozia: and of the sons of Phasur,; Elionai, Maasia and Ismael and Nathaniel and Josabad and Elasa. And of the Levites, Jozabad and Samu and Kolia, the same is Kolitas, and Phetheia and Juda and Eliezer: and of the musicians, Elisab: and of the keepers of the gates, Solmen and Telmen and Oduth. And of Israel—of the sons of Phoros, Ramia and Azia, and Melchia and Meamin, Eleazar and Asabia and Banaia: and of the sons of Elam; Matthania, and Zacharia and Jaiel and Abdia and Jarimoth and Elia: and of the sons of Zathua, Elionai, Elisub, Matthanai and Armoth and Zabad and Oziza: and of the sons of Babei; Joanan, Anania and Zabu and Thali; and of the sons of Banui; Mosollam, Melluch, Adaias, Jasub and Saluia and Remoth: and of the sons of Phaath Moab,
Edne and Chalel and Bania and Maasia, Matthania, Beseleel and Banui and Manasse: arid of the sons of Eram ; Eliezer,
Jesia, Melchia, Samaias, Semeon, Benjamin, Baluch, Sama-

Ch. X. EZRA, OR ESDRAS.

37

ζ9

1 ria: and of the sons of Asem; Metthania, Matthatha, Zadab,
Fliphalet, Jerami, Manasse, Semei: and of the sons of Bani;
Moodia, Amram, Ouel, Banaia, Badaia, Chelkia, Ovuania,
Marimoth, Eliasiph, Matthania, Matthanai: and the sons of
Banui, and the sons of Semei had done so, namely, Selemia and Nathan and Adia, Machadnabu, Sesei, Sariu, Ezriel and
Selemia and Samaria and Sellum, Amaria, Joseph: and of the sons of Nabu; Jael, Matthanias, Zabad, Zebennes, Jadai and
Joel and Banaia. All these had taken strange wives and had children by them. :

NEHEMIAS.

The words of Nehemias, son of Chelkia.

In the month Chaseleu of the twentieth year, when I was at Susanabira, Anani, one of my brethren, came with certain men of Juda, and I inquired of them concerning the remnant who were left of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem ; and they informed me that the remnant of the captivity who were left, were in that country in great affliction and reproach ; and that the walls of Jerusalem continued demolished, and that the gates thereof were burned with fire. Upon hearing this report, I sat down and wept and mourned some days, fasting and praying before the God of heaven, and I said, 1 beseech thee, O Lord, God of heaven, the Mighty, the Great and the
Awful, who keepest thy covenant and thy mercy with them who love thee and keep thy commandments, let thine ear, I beseech thee, be attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou mayst hear the prayer of thy servant which I now make before thee day and night, for the children of Israel thy servants, and plead for their sins which we have committed against thee.
Both I and my father’s house have sinned against thee. We have broken covenant with thee, and have not kept the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which thou gavest in charge to thy servant Moses. Remember, I beseech thee, the word which thou didst give in charge to Moses thy servant, saying, When you break covenant with me, and I scatter you among the nations; if you then return to me and keep my commandments and do them, though your disper-

10

11 oo

10 sion may be to the farthest part of heaven, thence I will gather them and bring them to the place which I have chosen for my name to dwell there. Now they are thy servants and thy people, whom thou hast redeemed with thy great power, and with thy strong hand. Turn not away, I beseech thee, O Lord.
But let thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy children, who desire to fear thy name: and prosper, I beseech thee, thy servant this day, and grant him favour in the sight of this man.

Now I was the king’s butler, and in the month Nisan of the twentieth year of king Arthasastha, the wine being before me, I took the wine, and when I had given it to the king (now there was none besides me in waiting) the king said to me, Why is thy countenance sad, and thou not at thine ease? this is nothing but grief of heart. At this I was greatly terrified and said to the king, Let the king live forever! Why should not my countenance be sad, seeing the city, the house of my father’s sepulchre, is in a state of desolation, and the gates thereof burned with fire? Thereupon the king said to me, For what dost thou make request ? And when I had prayed to the God of heaven,
I said to the king, If it seemeth good to the king, and if thy servant shall find favour in thy sight, that thou wouldst send me to Juda to the city of the sepulchres of my fathers, and let me rebuild it. Upon this the king said to me (now his concubine was sitting by him) For how long shall thy journey be, and when wilt thou return ? So the king being pleased to send me, I set him a time and said to the king, If it seemeth good to the king, let him give me letters to the governors beyond the river, that they may conduct meon in my journey till 1 come to Juda ; and aletter to Asaph, the keeper of the king’s forest, that he may supply me with timber to cover the gates and for the wall of the city, and for a house to which I may go. So the king gave me, as the hand of God was favourable, and I came to the governors beyond the river, and delivered them the king’s letters.

Now the king sent with me captains of the army and horsemen. But when Sanaballat the Aronite and Tobia the servant, the Ammonite, heard this, it grieved them that a manwas come to promote the welfare of the children of Israel.

Ch. 1Π, NEHEMIAS.

11 © NowwhenI came to Jerusalem and had been there three days, I arose by night, I and a few men with me, but I did not tell a man what God had put into my heart to do for Jerusalem;

13 and there was not a beast with me but that on which I rode ; and I went out at the gate Golela on to the mouth of the well. of fig trees, and on to the dung gate, tracing the wall of Jerusalem which had been demolished, and the gates of which

14 were burned with fire. Then I passed ‘on to the gate of Ain

15 and to the king’s pool. But there being no place for the beast under me to pass, I contmued going up by night along the wall of the valley. And having hastily traced the wall, and

16 come tothe valley gate, I returned. Now the watchmen did not know why I went nor what I was doing; for I had not yet told the Jews, nor the priests, nor the nobles, nor the officers of

17 the army, nor the rest who were to do the work. Then I said

‘tothem, You see the distress in which we are! How Jerusalem is a waste, and the gates thereof have been given to the flames. Come, let us build up the wall of Jerusalem that we

18 may no longer be a reproach. And when I told them of the good hand of God which was upon me, and the words which the king spoke to me, and said, Let us arise and build; their

19 hands were strengthened for this good work. But when Sanaballat the Aronite, and Tobia the servant the Ammonite and
Gesem the Arab heard, they laughed at us, and came to us and said, What is this which you are domg? Are you going to rebel against the king? In reply to which I said, The God of heaven will prosper us, as we his servants are pure and will go on with the building; but you ὌΝ no portion, nor right, nor memorial in Jerusalem.

HI. So Eliasub the high priest arose with his brethren the priests, and having built the sheep gate, they consecrated it and set up the gates thereof. They consecrated as far as the tower of the hundred, and to the tower of Anameel, even to

2 the work performed by the chiefs of the children of Jericho and to the work performed by the children of Zakchur son

3 of Amari. And the fish gate was built by the sons of Asana.
Having covered it, they covered also the doors thereof and

4. the locks and bars thereof. And next to them the chief of the children of Ramoth son of Ouria, son of Akkos, continued on

Ch. ΠΙ. _ NEHEMIAS.

1

1

1 ox) cr

the work. And next to them Mosollam son of Barachias, son of Mazebel continued it on. And next to them it was continued on by Sadok son of Baana. And next to them the Thekoites continued it, but their nobles did not put their neck to their work. And Joida son of Phasek and Mesulam son of Basodia repaired the gate Jasanai. They covered it and set up the doors thereof, and the locks and the bars thereof. And next to them Maltias the Gabaonite and Evaron the Meronothite, the chiefs of Gabaon and Maspha continued the repairs to the throne of the governor on this side the river. And next to him
QOziel son of Arachias with the gold smiths continued the repairs, and next to them Ananias a chief of the apothecaries fortified, and they left Jerusalem behind them to the broad wall.

9 And next to them the fortifications were carried on by Raphaia

1

2 oo

14

1

5

16

1

7 son of Sur, the chief of one half of the environs of Jerusalem.
And next to them Jedaia son of Eromaph fortified over against his house. And Attuth son of Asabania fortified next to him.
And the next who fortified was Melchias son of Eram, then
Asub son of Phaath-moab; and they continued on to the tower of Thanurim. And next to him the fortifications were continued by Sallum son of Alloes, the chief of the half of the environs of Jerusalem—by him and his daughters. The gate of the valley was secured by Anun and the inhabitants of Zano.
They built it and set up the doors thereof, and the locks and the bars thereof, and built a thousand cubits of the wall even to the dung gate. And the dung gate was secured by Melchia son of Rechab, chief of the Bethakcharim ward—by him and his sons. They covered it and set up the doors thereof, and the gates and the bars thereof. And the gate of the fountain was secured by Solomon son of Choleze, a chief of a part of Maspha. He rebuilded and covered it, and set up the doors and the bars thereof, and built the wall of the pool of poppies by the king’s garden, continuing it on to the stairs coming down from the city of David, And after him Nehemias son of Azabuch, chief of the half of Bethsur ward, continued the fortifications to the garden of David’s sepulchre and to the artificial pool and to Bethaggarim. And after him the fortifications were continued by the Levites, by Raum son of Bani, and next to

48 him by Asabia chief of the half of Keila ward, in his ward;

19

20

2]

22

31

32

and after him by their brethren, Benei son of Enadad, chief of the half of Keila ward; and next to him Azur son of Jesus, the chief of Masphai repaired one curtain of the tower of Ascent which united them at the corner; and after him Barach son of Zabu, repaired the other curtain from the corner to the door of Betheliasub which belonged to the chief priest; and after him Meramoth son of Ouria son of Akkos, another piece from the door of Betheliasub to the termination of that house. And after him the priests, the men of Ekkechar continued the repairs; After him Benjamin repaired, and Asub over against their house; And after him Azarias son of Maasias son of
Anania, repaired adjoining to his house. After him Bani son of Adad, repaired the next curtain from Bethazaria to the corner; but as far as the curve over against the corner, including the tower projecting from the king’s house above the court of

the guard house, was the work of Phalach son of Euzai; and

after him was Phadaia son of Phoros, and the Nathanims who

dwelt at Ophal, even to the garden of the water gate eastward,

and they had also the tower which projecteth outwards; and. after him the Thekoites had the curtain over against the great

projecting tower and onward to the wall of Ophla. Above the

horse gate the priests repaired every man over against his— house: and after them Sadduk son of Emmer repaired over

against his house; and after him repaired Samaia, son of Se-

chenia, the keeper of the eastern gate; and after him Anania,

son of Selemia, and Anom the sixth son of Seleph had the

next curtain; and after him Mesulam, son of Barachia had

over against his treasury office; and after him Melchia son of
Sarephi had as far as Bethan-nathanim; and the haberdashers

were over against the Maphekad and as far as the ascent of the

curve; and the brasiers and the haberdashers had between that

and the sheep gate.

Now when Sanaballat heard that we were bailing the wall it appeared evil to him and he was much incensed, and railed against the Jews, and said before his brethren, Is the army of Somoron reduced to this, that these Jews are building their city? They are indeed offering sacrifice; but can they prevail? Can they heal the stones after being burned to a heap of dust? Thereupon Tobias the Ammonite came near him and

said to them, Can they either sacrifice or eat in that place of theirs? Cannot a fox go up and demolish their stone walls?

4. Hear, O our God, how we are made a laughing stock, and turn

5 their reproach back on their own head, and make them an object of derision in a land of captivity, and cover not their iniquity. ,

7 But when Sanaballat and Tobias, and the Arabs and the
Ammonites, heard that the walls of Jerusalem advanced in height, and that the breaches began to be stopped, it appeared

8 tothem very vexatious, and they all assembled together to come

9 and attack Jerusalem, and lay it waste. Upon this we prayed to our God, and posted our guards against them day and night

10 for fear of them, though Juda said, Were the power of these enemies broken, there is so much rubbish that we cannot rebuild
11 the wall; and they who afflicted us said, They shall not know nor see till we are in the midst of them, and slay them,
12 and cause the work to cease. And when the Jews who dwelt
13 near them came and told us, They are coming against us from all quarters, I then posted, for the lowest parts of the place in the fortified posts behind the wall, the spear men and bow men; and stationed the people with their swords by communities;
14 and having taken a view, Larose and said to the nobles, and to the officers, and to the rest of the people, Be not afraid of them.
Remember our God who is great and terrible; and fight for your brethren, your sons, your daughters, your wives and your
15 houses. And when our enemies heard that we had got intelligence; and God had frustrated their designs, we all returned to
16 the wall, every man to his work. And from that day one half of them who had been drawn off carried on the work, and the other half was kept ready with spears and shields, and bows and breast plates; and the chiefs were behind all the house of
17 Juda who were building the wall. And they who were employ-
_ Θα in carrying burdens were armed. With one hand they did
18 their work, and with the other grasped a javelin. And the builders had every man his sword girded on his loins while they were building. And near every chief was a trumpeter ~vith
19 ahorn. And I said to the nobles and to the chiefs, and to the rest of the people, The work is extensive and large, and we are
20 scattered on the wall, one chief far-from another. In what place

Chi, NEHEMIAS,

21

22

23

10 ll

12 soever you hear the sound of the trumpet, thither you must assemble to us, and our God will fight for us. So while we were carrying on the work, one half of them held their spears from break of day till the stars appeared. And at that time
I said to the people, let every man with his youths, lodge in
Jerusalem, and let the night be devoted to watching and the day to work. Now I myself mounted guard, and the men on duty attended me, and not a man of us put off our clothes.
Now there was a great cry of the people and their wives, against their brethren the Jews. There were some who said,
We with our sons and our daughters are many, therefore we will take corn that we may eat and live. There were others who said, As for our fields and our vineyards and our houses, let us mortgage them that we may get cornand eat. There were others who said, We have borrowed money to pay the king’s tribute, and pledged our fields and our vineyards and our houses, and now ourfleshisthe same as that of our brethren, our sons the same as theirs, yet behold we are subjecting our sons and our daughters to be slaves, nay, some. of our daughters are already subjected to bondage, and we have no means to redeem them, for our nobles have got our fields and our vineyards. Upon hearing their cry and these speeches, I was exceedingly grieved. And haying consulted in my own mind, I chid the nobles and the chiefs, and said to them, Would any man exact of his brother what you exact? Then having assembled a great meeting against them, I said to them, We with our free will offerings have purchased our brethren the Jews who were sold to the nations; and are you going to sell your brethren that they — may be sold tous ? And when they held their peace and found no answer, I said, This thing which you do is not good. it is not in this manner that you are in the fear of our God toavoid the reproach of the nations, our enemies. My brethren and my acquaintances, and I myself, have lent them money and provisions. Letus I pray you relinquish our demands for this.
Restore to them, I beseech you, this very day their fields, and their vineyards, and their olive yards, and their houses; and abate the price at which you have sold to each other corn and wine and oil. Thereupon they said, We will restore, and require nothing of them. We will do as thou sayest. Then I called the priests and having caused them to swear that they would

Ci Vi, NEHEMIAS.

13 do according to this decree, I shook my lap and said, So may
God shake every man who will not perform this promise, out of his house and from his labour, and let them be shaken out and emptied. And all the congregation said, Amen; and praised the Lord, and the people executed the decree.

14 From the day I was appointed to be their governor in the land of Juda—from the twentieth to the thirty second year of
Arthasastha—for twelve years, I and my brethren did not

15 eat the daily allowance which was their due—those daily al: - lowances with which they who were before me had loaded them, and which they had exacted from them in bread and wine, to the amount at least of forty didrachms of silver. They indeed who had been displaced, tyrannised over the people ;

16 but as for me I did not do so; because I feared God. Even in the work of the wall, I did not domineer over them; nor did I purchase a field: and all who were employed with me

17 there in the work, even a hundred and fifty chief men of the
Jews, besides those who came to us, from the nations around

18 us, were at my table. And the daily provisions for my table, was one Ox, six choice sheep, and a kid for myself; and every ten days wine in plenty for all. Yet for all this I did not demand the daily allowance of bread, because the bondage was heavy

19 upon the people. Remember me, O my God, for good, for all
I have done for this people.

Vi; Now when Sanaballat and Tobias and Gesam the Arab, and the rest of our enemies heard that I had built the wall, and that there was no opening left therein; (at that time I had not fixed up the doors in the gates,) Sanaballat and Gesam

2 sent to me saying, Come let us havea meeting at the villages
3 in the plain of Ono, intending todo me some mischief. Upon which I sent messengers to them saying, I am engaged in a great work, and cannot go down, lest the work should stop.
4 Soon as I have completed it, I will go down to you. Again they sent tome to the same effect, and I returned them the same answer.
5. Then Sanaballat sent his servant to me with an open letter
6 in his hand, in which was written, ‘It is reported among the nations that thou and the Jews intend to rebel; that for this purpose thou art rebuilding the wall; and that thou art to be
7 their king: and besides this that thou hast set up prophets

13

14

17

18

19 for thyself that thou mayst make thyself king in Jerusalem over Juda. Now these reports will be told to the king, now therefore come and let us consult together.’’ In reply to which
I sent to him saying, There is no foundation for the reports as thou mentionest them, for thou thyself feignest them out of thine own heart.

Because all were trying to terrify us saying, Their hands must be weakened from this work, so that it may not be accomplished, therefore on this occasion I strengthened my hands.
So when I went to the house of Semei, son of Dalaia, son of
Metabaal, he became enrapt and said, ‘‘ Let us repair to the house of God—into the midst thereof—and shut the doors thereof—for they are coming by night to kill us.”’ But I said,
What sort of aman must he be who would go into the house of God to save his life! And upon inquiry I found that God had not sent him, and that his prophecy was a contrivance against me; and that Tobias and Sanaballat had hired a multitude against me, that I might be frightened, and act in this manner, and take a wrong step, and fall into disrepute, that they might reproach me. Remember, O God, Tobias and
Sanaballat, according to these doings of theirs; and Noadias the prophet, and the rest of the prophets, who tried to terrify me.

Now the wall was finished on the five and twentieth day of the month Elul, in fifty two days. And when all our enemies heard; all the nations around us were terrified, and great fear fell upon them ; for they saw plainly that the perfecting of this work was of our God. In those days many of the nobles of Juda sent letters to Tobias, and received letters from him. For many in Juda were affined to him, for he was the son in law of Sechenias, son of Erae, and his son Jonan had married a daughter of Mesulam, son of Barachias, and they kept on, telling me what he said and conveying to him what
I said. And Tobias-sent letters to frighten me. .

Vil. Now when the wall was built, and I had set up the doors,

2

3 and the keepers were reviewed and the musicians and the Le- | vites, I gave a charge to my brother Ananias, and to Ananias chief of Bira in Jerusalem; for he was a man of truth, and feared God above many; and I said to them, The gates of

Jerusalem must not be opened till sunrise. And when the watch is set, let the doors be shut and well bolted, and appoint guards of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every man in his ward, and every man over against his house. As the city was of large extent, and the people therein few, and the houses were not rebuilt, God put it into my heart, and I had collected the nobles and the chiefs, and the people into classes, having found a book of the enrollment of those who first came up, in which I found written : ‘‘ Now these are the children of the province who came up from the captivity—from the distant abode to which Nabuchodonosar the king of Babylon had sent them, and who returned, every man to his city, with Zorobabel and
Jesus, and Nehemias, Azarias and Reelma, Naemani, Mordecai, Balsan, Maspharath, Esdra, Baguia, Inaum, Baana, Masphar, head men of the people of Israel.

The children of Pharos, two thousand a hundred and seventy two;

The children of Saphatia, three hundred and seventy two ;

The children of Era, six hundred and fifty two ;

The children of Phaath-moab, descendants of Jesu and
Joab, two thousand six hundred and eighteen ;
The children of Ailam, a thousand two hundred and fifty four;

The children of Zathuia, eight hundred and forty five ;

The children of Zakchu, seven hundred and sixty ;

The children of Banui, six hundred and forty eight;

The children of Bebi, six hundred and twenty eight ;

The children of Esgad, two thousand three hundred and twenty two;

The children of Adonikam, six hundred and sixty seven;

The children of Bagoi, two thousand and sixty seven;

The children of Edin, six hundred and fifty five;

The children of Ater, descendants of Ezekias, ninety eight ;

The children of Esam, three hundred and twenty eight;

The children of Besei, three hundred and twenty four;

The children of Ariph, a hundred and twelve ;

The children of Asen, two hundred and twenty three;

The children of Gabaon, ninety five;

The children of Baithalem, a hundred and twenty three ;

The children of Atopha, fifty six ;

50

The children of Anathoth, a hundred and twenty eight;

The men of Bethasmoth, forty two;

The men of Kariathiarim, Kaphira and Beroth, seven hundred. and forty three ;

The men of Arama and Gabaa, six hundred and prunes;

_ The men of Machemas, a hundred and twenty two ;

The men of Baithel and Ai, a hundred and twenty three;

The men of Nabia, a hundred and fifty two.

The men of Elamaar, a thousand two sess and fifty two ;
The children of Eram, three hundred and twenty ; ;

The children of Jericho, three hundred and forty five;

The children of Lodadid and Ono, seven hundred and twenty one; .

The children of Sanana, three thousand nine hundred acid thirty ;

The Priests. The ehillditess of Jodae, for the house of Jesus, nine hundred and seventy three;

The children of Emmer, a thousand and. fifty two ;

The children of Phaseur, a thousand two hundred and forty seven ;

The children of Eram, a thousand and με μεμα

The Levites. The children of Jesus and Kadmiel, descendants of Ouduia, seventy four. »

The musicians, the children of Asaph, a hundred and eighty eight.

The keepers of the gates, the Salumites, the nynors the
Telmonites, the Akubites, the Atites, the Sabites, a hundred and thirty eight.

The Nathimims, The Seas’, the Asphas’, the 'Tabaoths’,. the Kiras’, the Asuias’, the Phadons’, the Labana’s, the Agabas’, the Selmeis’, the Anans’, the Gadels’, the Gaars’, the
Raaias’, the Rassons’, the Nekodas’, the Gersams’, the Ozis’, the Pheses’, the Besis’, the Meinons’, the Nephosasis’, the
Bakbuks’, the Achiphas’, the Aroers’, the Basaloths’, the Midas’, the Adasons’, the Barkoues’, the Sisaraths’, the Themas’, the Nisias’, the Atiphas’. The children of Solomon’s servants, the Suteis’, the Sapharats’, the Pheridas’, the Jelels’, the Dorkons’, the Gadaels’, the Saphatias’, the Ettels’, the Phakaraths’,

the Sabaims’, the Emims’, all these Nathinims and the child-

ren of Solomon’s servants, three hundred and ninety two.

61 These also came up from Thelmeleth, Thelaresa, Charub,

Eron, Jemer, but could not shew the houses of their families,

62 nor their seed, whether they are of Israel, namely, the child-

ren of Dalaia, the children of Tobia, the children of Ne-

63 koda, six hundred and forty two. And of the priests: the

children of Ebia, the children of Akos, the children of Ber-

zelli, (for they had married some of the daughters of Ber-

64 zelli, the Galaadite, and were called by their names)—these

sought the register of their genealogy, but it could not be found.

Though they were related to the priesthood, yet the Athersas-

tha ordered, that they should not eat of the most holy meats,

66 until a priest should arise with the Manifestation. The whole

congregation was about forty two thousand three hundred and

sixty, exclusive of their men servants and maid servants, the

number of whom was seven thousand three hundred and thirty

seven, and the choristers of both sexes, two hundred and forty five. Their asses were two thousand seven hundred.

70 Assome of the heads of the families had given for the

work—to Nehemias, for the treasury, a thousand pieces of

71 gold, fifty cups, and thirty vestures for the priests; the other

heads of the families gave for the treasures of the work, twen-

ty thousand pieces of gold, and two thousand three hundred

72 mnas of silver; and the rest of the people gave twenty thou-

sand pieces of gold, and two thousand two hundred mnas

73 of silver, and sixty seven vestures for the priests. Now the

priests and the Levites, and the keepers of the gates and the

musicians, and some of the people, and the Nathinims, and all

Vil. Israel, had taken up their abode in their cities; but

when the seventh month was come, the sons of Israel who

were in their cities, and all the people, assembled like one man,

in the street which is before the water gate, and spoke to Es-

dras the scribe to bring out the book of the law of Moses,

2 which the Lord had enjoined on Israel. So Esdras the priest,

brought out the law before the congregation, consisting of men

and women, evenall who had understanding, to hear it, on the

first day of the seventh month, and read therein from sun ris-

3 ing to mid day, before the men and the women, even all who

6

5

6

7

8

9

10

19

14

15 were capable of understanding. And the ears of all the people were attentive to the book of the law.

Now Esdras the scribe stood on a wooden scaffold, and there stood near him Matthathias and Samaias and Ananias and Ourias and Chelkia and Maasia on his right; and on his

left, Phadaias and Misael and Melchias and Asom and Asa-

badma and Zacharias and Mesollom. And Esdras opened the book in the presence of all the people, for he was above them.
And when he opened it all the prophets stood up. Then Esdras blessed the Lord the great God. And all the people answered and said, Amen, with uplifted hands. Then they bowed down and worshipped the Lord with their faces to the ground. And
Jesus and Banaias and Sarabias proceeded to instruct the people in the law, and the people kept their station. And when

they had read in the book of the law of God, Esdras taught,

and enforced it with a knowledge of the Lord, so that the people gained understanding by the reading. Then spake Nehcmias—when Esdras the priest and scribe and the Leyites and they who instructed the people, had said to all the people, This day is holy to the Lord our God, mourn not nor weep (for all the people wept when they heard the words of the law) then he said to them, Go, eat dainty meats, and drink sweet wine and send portions to them who have none, for this day 1s holy to the Lord; and do not despond; for the Lord is our strength.
And the Levites stilled all the people, saying, Hold your peace for this is a holy day and do not despond. So all the people went away to eat and drink, and send portions and make great joy, because they had gained knowledge by the words which were explained to them.

And on the second day, when the heads of the families with all the people and the priests and the Levites, were assembled before Esdras the scribe, to attend to all the words of the law, they found it written in the law which the Lord had given in charge to Moses, That the Israelites should dwell in booths at the festival in the seventh month, and thatthey should sound trumpets in all their cities and in Jerusalem. Whereupon Esdras said, Go out to the mountains and bring in olive branches, and branches of cypress trees and myrtle branches and palm branches, and the branches of every bushy tree to

16 make booths according to what is written. Accordingly the people went out and brought them, and made for themselves booths, every man on his house top, and in their court. yards, and in the courts of the house of God, and in the streets of the

17 city, even to the gate of Ephraim. And when all the congregation—all who had returned from captivity, had made themselves booths and sat therein, because the Israelites had not done so from the days of Joshua son of Nave even to that day,

18 the joy was great. So he read in the book of the law of God, day by day, from the first day to the last. And when they had kept the festival for seven days, on the eighth they kept the exod according to custom.

IX. And on the twenty fourth day of the same month, the children of Israel were assembled, fasting, and in sackcloth, and with earth on their heads, and having separated themselves from every stranger, they stood and confessed their sins and

3 the iniquities of their fathers. When they had stood in their
. place and had the book of the law of the Lord their God read to them, and had made cortffession to the Lord and worshipped

A the Lord their God; then Jesus stood on the step of the Levites with the sons of Kadmiel, Sechenia son of Sarabia, the sons of Choneni: and when they had cried with a loud voice

5 tothe Lord their God, and the Levites, Jesus and Kadmiel said,
Arise, bless ye the Lord our God; from everlasting to everlasting let them bless thy glorious name, and exalt it with all blessing and praise, then Esdras said, ‘‘ Thou art thyself the

6 only Lord. Thou hast made the heaven and the heaven of heaven with all their host, the earth and all the things therein, the seas and all which are in them; and thou quickenest them

7 all;and the armies of heaven worship thee. Thou art the Lord
God. Having made choice of Abram, thou didst lead him out from the country of the Chaldees and give him the name.

8 of Abraham. And finding his heart faithful before thee, thou madest a covenant with him, to give him the land of the
Chananites and the Chettites and the Amorites and the Phere-

- zites and the Jebusites and the Gergasites, even to his seed, and hast performed thy words, for thou art righteous.

9 «Thou didst see the affliction of our fathers in Egypt and

10 didst hear their cry at the Red sea; and haying shewn signs
VOL.: TI, Pp

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

29

ΙΧ. NEHEMIAS.

and wonders in Egypt on Pharao and on all his servants and on all his people, because thou knewest that they had behaved proudly against them, and made thyself a name as at this day, thou didst cleave the sea before them, and they passed through the midst of the sea on dry ground, but those who were pursuing thou didst cast into the deep like a stone in boisterous water. With a pillar of cloud thou didst guide them by day ; and by night with a pillar of fire, to illumine the way for them in which they should go: thou camest down also on mount
Sina and didst speak to them from heaven, and give them right judgments and laws of truth and statutes and good commandments. Thou madest known to them thy holy sabbaths and didst prescribe for them commandments and statutes and a law by the ministry of thy servant Moses.

“Ποῖ gavest them also bread from heaven for their food, and didst bring water for them out of a rock for their thirst, ordering them to go in and take possession of the land which thou hadst stretched forth thy hand to give them. But they, even our fathers, behaved proudly and hatdened their neck, and hearkened not to thy commandments.

“Though they refused to go in, and were unmindful of thy wonders which thou hadst done among them—though they hardened their neck, and set up a head to return to their bondage in Egypt, yet thou who art a God merciful and gracious, long suffering and of great kindness, didst not forsake them utterly. Even before this, though they made themselves a molten calf and said, These are the gods which brought us up out of Egypt, and committed great provocations; yet thou through thy manifold mercies didst not leave them in the wilderness. Thou didst not withdraw from them by day the pillar of a cloud which was to guide them in the way, nor the pillar of fire, at night, which was to illumine the way for them in which they should go; but gavest thy good spirit to instruct them; and not withholding thy manna from their mouth, thou gavest them water when they were athirst. Thus didst thou sustain them forty years in the wilderness, not suffering them to want any thing. Their clothes did not wear out, nor were their feet galled. Then thou gavest them kingdoms, and didst divide peoples among them; so they took possession of the

23

24

26

27

28

Ch. IX. NEHEMIAS. »

land of Seon king of Esebon, and of the land of Og king of
Basan. And having multiplied their children as the stars of heaven, thou broughtest them into the land which thou hadst promised their fathers; and they took possession of it. But when thou hadst subdued before them the inhabitants of the land of the Chananites, and delivered them into their hands— both the kings and the people of the land, to do with them as they thought fit; and they had taken lofty cities, and got possession of houses filled with all good things, of cisterns ready hewn out of stone, of vineyards and oliveyards, and all sorts of fruit trees in abundance, and had eaten and were filled, and be- — came fat, they rioted on thy great bounty, and turned and apostatised from thee, and cast thy law behind their backs:
Nay, they slew thy prophets who testified against them to turn them to thee; and committed great provocations. Therefore thou didst deliver them into the hand of their enemies, who afflicted them. But when, in the time of their distress they cried to thee, thou from heaven didst hear, and in thy tender mercies which are great, thou didst send them deliverers, and save them out of the hand of them who were afflicting them. Yet soon as they had rest, they returned to do evil in thy sight, therefore thou didst leave them in the hand of their enemies, who exercised dominion over them. But again when they cried to thee, thou from heaven didst hearken, and in the multitude of thy tender mercies didst deliver them, and admonish them to return to thy law. When they hearkened not, but transgressed thy commandments and thy judgments, (which if a man practise he shall live thereby) and turned back rebelliously, and hardened their neck, and would not hear, and thou hadst borne with them many years, and testified against them by ‘thy
Spirit—by the ministry of thy prophets; and they did not give ear, though thou didst deliver them into’the hands of the people of the land, yet in the multitude of thy tender mercies thou didst not give them up to utter destruction, nor quite forsake them.

“Seeing thou art mighty and merciful, and tenderly compassionate; now therefore, O our God, the Mighty, the Great, the Powerful and the Awful, who keepest thy covenant and thy mercy, let not all the trouble be accounted light in thy sight,

Chas: NEHEMIAS.

which hath come upon us, and our kings, and our chiefs, and our priests, and our prophets, and our fathers, and on all thy people from the days of the kings of Assur even to this day.
Thou indeed art righteous in all that have come upon us. For thou hast acted with truth; but we have sinned greatly. Our kings, and our chiefs, and our priests, and our fathers, have not kept thy law, nor hearkened to thy commandments and thy testimonies which thou hast testified against them. Even in thine own kingdom, and during that abundant bounty of thine which thou didst bestow on them, and in this extensive and rich country which thou gavest before them, they have not served thee, nor turned away from their wicked devices. Behold we are now slaves, and as for this land which thou gavest to our fathers to eat the fruits thereof, and the good things thereof, behold we are slaves in it; and its abundant fruits belong to those kings whom for our sins thou hast set over us, and who have dominion over our bodies, and who can do with our cattle what they please, so that we are in great affliction. In adue sense, therefore, of all these things we pledge our faith, we by writing, and our chiefs, our Levites, and our priests by seal-

ine-—(now they who sealed were Nehemias the Artasastha, son of Achelia, and Sedekias son of Araia, and Azaria and Jeremia,
Phasur, Amaria, Melchia, Attus, Sebani, Maluch, Iram, Meramoth, Abdia, Daniel, Gannathon, Baruch, Mosulam, Abia, 17). amin, Maasia, Belgai, Samaia: And these priests and Levites,
Jesus son of Azania, Banaiu, of the sons of Enadad, Kadmiel and his brethren, Sabania, Oduia, Kalitan, Phelia, Anan, Micha,
Rohob, Asebias, Zakchur, Saralia, Sebania, Odum, sons of Ba- - nuar; the chiefs of the people, Phoros, Phaath-moab, Elam, Zatthuia, sons of Bani, Asgad, Bebai, Adania, Bagoi, Edin, Ater,

zekia, Azur, Oduia, Esam, Besi, Ariph, Anathoth, Nobai,
Megaphes, Mesullam, Ezir, Mesozebel, Saduk, Jeddua, Phaltia, Anan, Anaia, Osee, Anania, Asub, Aloes, Phalai,; Sobek,
Reum, Essabana, Maasia and Aia, Ainan, Eram, Maluch, Eram,
Baana: and the rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the keepers of the gates, the musicians, the Nathinims, and every one who'came from among the people of the land to the law of God, their wives, their sons, their daughters, every one who had knowledge and understanding, were urgent with their brethren, and

Cis. XX. NEHEMIAS.

bound themselves with an oath, entering intoa curse and anoath—J)
29 that we will walk in the law of God, which was given by the ministry of Moses the servant of God, to keep and to do all the commandments of the Lord and his judgments and his statutes;
30 and that we will not give our daughters to the people of the land; nor will we take their daughters for our sons,
31 and that with regard to the people of the country who bring wares or any thing to sell on the sabbath day, we will not buy
$2 of them on the sabbath, or on a holy day: and that every seventh year we will remit every demand of what kind soever: and that we will confirm the commands upon us to give every year a third of a didrachm for the service of the house of our
33 God, for the presence loaves and the sacrifice of the daily oblation and for the whole burnt offering of every day, of the sabbaths, of the new moons, for the festivals and for the holy things, namely, the sin offerings to make atonement for Israel,
34 and for the works of the house of our God: and that we the priests and the Levites and the people who have cast lots touching the bringing of wood, will bring it for the house of our
God, for the house of our families, at the set times and seasons yearly, to be burned on the altar of the Lord our God, as it is
$5 written in the law: and that we will bring the first fruits of our land, and the first fruits of every fruit tree yearly to the house
36 of the Lord, and do, with regard to the first born of our sons and our cattle, as it is written in the law; that we will bring the firstlings of our herds and our flocks to the house of our
Ged for the priests, who minister in the house of our God:
37 and that we will bring the dedications of our corn including the fruit of trees, and of wine and oil to the stores of the house of God for the priests; and the tythe of our land for the Levites. But the Levites themselves shall receive the tythes
38 in all the cities of our bondage; and the priest, the son of
Aaron, shall share with the Levite in the Levite’s tythe; and the Levites shall carry the tythe of their tythe to the house of
39 our God—to the store houses for the house of our God—because the children of Israel including the children of Levi are to carry the dedications of their corn, their wine and their oil to these treasuries, and the holy vessels and the priests and the ministering servants and the keepers of the gates and the mu-

sicians are to be there, therefore we will not forsake the housé

of our God.”
XI. Now the chiefs of the people dwelt at Jerusalem, and the rest of the people cast lots to bring one of every ten to dwell
2 in Jerusalem, the holy city, and nine parts in their cities, And the people blessed all those men who were of their own accord willing to dwell in Jerusalem. Now these are chiefs of the country who dwelt in Jerusalem and the cities of Juda. There» dwelt every man in his possession in their cities, Israel, the priests and the Levites and the Nathmims and the children of -
4. Solomon’s servants : and there dwelt in Jerusalem some of the sons of Juda and some of the sons of Benjamin—of the sons of Juda, Athaia, son Azia, son Zacharia, son Samaria, son
5 Saphatia, son Maleleel; and of the sons of Phares also, Maasia, son. Baruch, son Chalaza, son Ozia, son Adaia, son Joarib,
6 the son of Zacharias, the son of the Selonite—all these sons of Phares who dwelt in Jerusalem were four hundred and
7 sixty eight men of array. And these were the sons of Benjamin, Selo, son Mesulom, son Joad, son Phadaia, son Choleia,
8 son Maasias, son Ethiel, son Jesia, and after him, Gebe, Sele,
9 nine hundred and twenty eight, and Joel son of Zechri was overseer over them, and Juda son of Asana for the city was
10 second. Of the priests, Jadia son of Joarid, Jachin, Saraia, son
Alchia, son Mesulam,-son Sadduk, son Marioth, son Aitoth
11 were over against the house of God, and their brethren who
12 did the work of the house were eight hundred and twenty two; and Adaia a son of Jeroam who wasthe son of Phalatia son of
13 Amasi, son Zacharias, son Phasur, son Melchia and his brethren, heads of families, two hundred and forty two; and
Amasia son of Esdriel who was the son of Mesarimith, son of
14 Emmer and his brethren fit to be mustered, a hundred and twenty eight, and their overseer was Badiel one of the nobles.
15 And of the Levites, Samaia son of Esrikam, Matthanias son of
16 Micha and Jobed, son of Samue, two hundred and eighty
19 four. And the keeper of the gates, Akub, Telamin and their
22 brethren, a hundred and seventy two. And the overseer of the Levites son Bani, son Ozi, son Asabia, son Micha of the
' sons of Asaph the musicians attended over against the work of the house of God, for it was the king’s command to them.

ἰ 0)

24 And Phathaia son of Baseza was the king’s minister for al!
25 matters with the people. And for their villages in the fields some of the sons of Juda dwelt at Kariatharbok and at Jesou

30 and at Bersabee. And their villages were Lachis and its fields,

‘and they encamped at Bersabee. And the sons of Benjamin

36 -were from Gabaa to Mackmas, and of the Levites, some were with Juda and some with Benjamin.

ΧΙ. Now these are the priests and the Levites who came up with Zorobabel son of Salathiel and Jesus, Saraia, Jeremia,

7 Esdra, Amaria, Maluch, Sechenia, these were the chiefs of the priests; and their brethren in the days of Jesus, namely, the
Levites, were Jesu, Banui, Kadmiel, Sarabaia, Jodae, Matthania. He was superintendant, and their brethren were for the courses. And Jesus begot Joakim and Joakim begot Eliasib and Eliasib begot Jodae, and Jodae begot Jonathan, and Jonathan begot Jadu. And in the days of Joakim his brethren the. priests, the chiefs of the families were for Saraia, Amaria; for
Jeremia, Anania; for Esdra, Mesulam ; for Amaria, Joanan; for Amaluch, Jonathan ; for Sechenia, Joseph; for Are, Mannas; for Marioth, Elkai; for Adadai, Zacharia; for Ganathoth, Mesolam ; for Abia, Zechri; for Miamin, Maadai; for Pheleti; for Balgas, Samue ; for Semia, Jonathan ; for Joarib, Matthanai ; for Edio, Ozi; for Salai, Kallai; for Amek,

22 Abed; for Elkia, Asabias ; for Jediu, Nathaniel. And in the

days of Eliasib, these Levites, Joada and Joa, and Joanan and

Idua were enrolled chiefs of the families, and they were the

priests in the reign of Darius the Persian. Now the Levites

enrolled as heads of the families in the book of Chronicles,

24. continued till the days of Joanan son of Elisue. And these were the chiefs of the Levites, Asabia and Sarabia and Jesu, and the sons of Kadmiel and their brethren, were over against them for the hymn, to sing praises according to the command of David the man of God course for course.

25 When [ had collected the keepers of the gates in the days of
Joakim, son of Jesus, son of Josedek, even in the days of Nehemias, when Esdras was the priest and scribe, at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem, they sought the Levites in all their places to bring them to Jerusalem, to make the dedication with joyful

28 thanksgivings and with songs, accompanied with cymbals and.

2 co

3]

48

4A

psalteries and kinyras; and the sons of the musicians were assembled at Jerusalem from the neighbourhood around, both from the villages and the fields. For the musicians at Jerusalem had built villages for themselves. And the priests and the
Levites having purified themselves, purified also the people, and the keepers of the gates and the wall. Then they brought up the chiefs of Juda upon the wall, and having appointed two great companies for the songs of praise, they proceeded on from the right upon the wall of the dung gate; and after them went Osaia and half of the chiefs of Juda, namely, Azarias and Esdras, and Mesolam and Juda, and Benjamin and
Samaias, and Jeremia and some of the sons of the priests, with trumpets, Zacharias, son Jonathan, son Samaia, son Matthania, son Michaia, son Zakchur, son Asaph and his brethren,
Samaia and Oziel, Gelol, Jama, Aia, Nathaniel and Juda,
Anani, to sing praises in the songs of David, the man of God.

And Esdras the scribe was before those at the gate, to sing praises over against these. And they went up the stairs of the city of David, by the ascent of the wall above the house of
David, and on to the water gate of Ephraim, and over the fish gate, and by the tower of Anameel, and on to the sheep gate. And the musicians were heard though they were hid from view. And on that day they offered great sacrifices, and rejoiced. Because God had given them great joy, therefore their wivesand their children rejoiced, and the joy of Jerusalem was heard at a great distance.

And on that day they appoimted chief men over the store houses for the treasures, the dedications, and the tythes, and what were collected therein for the chiefs of the cities, and assigned portions for the priests and the Levites. For Juda rejoiced at the attendance of the priests and the Levites, as they kept the watches of their God and the watches of purification ; and at the attendance of the musicians and the keepers of the gates, as they were instituted by the command of David and his son Solomon. Because in the days of David at the institution,
Asaph was the first of them who sung hymns and praises to
God, therefore in the days of Zorobabel and in the days of Nehemias, all Israel continued the giving daily portions to the musicians and to the keepers of the gates, dedicating them to

the Levites, and the Levites dedicating them to the sons of
» Aaron.

XIII. On reading that day in the book of Moses in the audi-

6

7 ence of the people, it was found written therein, that the Ammonites and the Moabites should not enter into the congregation of God forever ; because they did not meet the Israelites with bread and water; but hired Balaam against them to curse them; but our God turned the curse into a blessing. And when they heard the law, they separated from Israel all the mixed multitude. Now before this, Eliasib the priest, made his dwelling in a store house of the house of our God. Having an affinity with Tobias, he had fitted up for himself a large store house in which they formerly stored up the sacrifice and the frankincense, and the vessels, and the tythe of the corn, . and the wine and the oil, the allotment of the Levites and the musicians, and the keepers of the gates, and the oblations which belonged to the priest. But during all that time I was not at Jerusalem. For in the thirty second year of Arthasastha king of Babylon, I went to the king. And at the end of the year, having obtained the king’s leave, I came to Jerusalem.
When I was informed of the wickedness which Eliasib had committed for the sake of Tobias, in fitting up for him a treasure house in the court of the house of God, it grieved me exceedingly ; therefore I threw all the furniture of Tobias out of the treasure house. And when by my orders they had purified the rooms, I caused to be brought there again the utensils of the house of God, and the sacrifice and the incense. And when
I understood that the portions of the Levites had not been given them; and that the Levites and the musicians who were employed in the service had fled, every man to his field,
I quarrelled with the officers and said, Why is the house of

12 God forsaken? Then I brought them together and set them

13 in their station ; and all Juda brought in the tythe of the corn,

and the wine, and the oil into the treasuries, under the charge

of Selemia the priest, and Sadok the scribe, and Phadaia, one

of the Levites, who had for assistants Anan, son Zakchur, son

Mathanias, because they were accounted faithful. And it was

their business to make distribution among their brethren.

14

15

16

i9

26 bo

Remember me, O God, for this; and let not the observance I have paid to the house of the Lord God be blotted out.

In those days I saw in Juda some treading wine presses on the sabbath day, and some carrying sheaves, and loading their asses with wine and grapes and figs, and all kinds of burdens, and bringing them to Jerusalem on the sabbath day. Whereupon I testified against them, touching the day of their selling.
Some also dwelt there who brought fish, and sold all sorts of

wares on the sabbath, to the children of Juda, even in Jerusa-

lem. Upon this I chid the freemen of Juda, and said to them,
What evil is this which you do in profaning the sabbath? Did not your fathers do so, and did not our God bring upon them and upon us, and upon this city, all these evils? And are you bringing more wrath upon Israel by profaning the sabbath ?
And when the gates of Jerusalem were set up, I ordered them to be shut before the sabbath, and gave a charge that they should not be opened till after the sabbath; and I stationed some of my servants at the gates that no bardens might be brought in on the sabbath day. Upon this they all lodged and carried on their trafick without Jerusalem once or twice.
Then I testified against them and said to them, Why do you lodge before the walls ? If you do so any more I will lay hands on you. From that time they did not come on the sabbath.
Then I ordered the Levites who were sanctified and come to guard the gates, to keep holy the sabbath day. For these things remember me, O my God, and have compassion on me according to thy abundant mercy.

In those days also I saw the Jews who had married wives — of Azotus, of Ammon, and of Moab, and their children spoke half in the dialect of Azotus, and did not know how to speak the Jewish language; and I quarrelled with them, and reproached them, and smote some men among them, and caused some of them to be shaved, and adjured them by God, saying, You shall not give your daughters to their sons, nor take any of their daughters for your sons. Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by doing so? Though among many nations there was not a king like him? Though he was beloved by God, and God had made him king over all Israel, yet strange women led him astray. Let us not therefore hear of your committing

28

10 all this iniquity, breaking covenant with our God, and marrying strange women. And one of the sons of Joada the son of
Elisub the high priest, being the son in law of Sanaballat the
Ouranite, I drove him from me.

Put them in mind, O God, of their near relation to the priesthood, and of the covenant of the priesthood. As for the
Levites I purified them from all connexion with strangers, and appointed the courses of the priests and the Levites, every man according to his business, and the offering of the wood carriers at stated periods, and at the festivals.

Remember me O God, for good.

ESTHER.

After these things, in the days of Artaxerxes the same who reigned from India, over a hundred and twenty seven provinces, when Artaxerxes was settled on his throne in the city Susoi, in the third year of his reign, he made an entertainment for his friends, both for other nations, and for the nobles of the Persians and Medes, and for the governors. And having after this displayed to them the riches of his kingdom, and the transporting glory of his riches, for a hundred and eighty days, when the days of his marriage were fulfilled, the king made an entertainment for all the nations who were in the city, for six days, in the court of the royal palace, which was adorned with painted hangings of cotton, extended with cords of cotton, and purple yarn, to capitals of gold and silver, on pillars of parian marble and alabaster. The couches were of gold and silver, on a pavement of smaragdine, pinine, and pafian stone; and their covers were of gause, painted with a variety of flowers ; and roses were scattered all around. The goblets of gold and silver, with a small carbuncled cup to each, amounted in value to thirty thousand talents. There was wine in abundance and of a sweet quality, such as the king himself drank. Now this entertainment was not according to an established custom; but the king would have it so, and he commanded the stewards to comply with his pleasure, and that of the guests.
Astin the queen also made an entertainment for the women in the royal palace, where king Artaxerxes was. And on the

19

14

15

18

19

20

II. ESTHER.

seventh day, the king, in high good humour, ordered Aman and
Basan and Tharra and Barazi and Zatholtha and Abataza and
Tharaba, the seven chamberlains, who waited on king Artaxerxes, to bring the queen to him to proclaim her queen, and. crown her with a diadem, and shew her to the chiefs, and her beauty to the nations ; for she was beautiful. But queen Astin hearkened not to him to come with the chamberlain, at which the king was greatly offended and inflamed with anger and he said to his friends, Astin hath spoken so and so; do you therefore execute law and judgment, touching this matter.
Thereupon there came before him, Arkesaius and Sarsathaius and Malisear the chiefs of the Persians‘and Medes, who were near the king, and had the first seats next him; and told him according to the laws what ought to be done to queen Astin, because she had not done what the king had commanded by the chamberlains. And Muchaius said to the king and to the chiefs, Queen Astin hath wronged, not the king only, but also all the king’s chiefs and leaders; for he hath told them the queen’s conduct and how she hath contradicted the king.
Therefore as she hath contradicted the king Artaxerxes, so will the rest of the ladies now, the wives of the Persian and
Medean princes, upon hearing what she hath said to the king, presume in like manner to dishonour their husbands. If therefore it seemeth good to the king, let him pass a royal decree and let it be written according to the laws of the Medes and
Persians, and let him not alter it nor suffer the queen any more to approach him ; but let the king give her royalty to another woman, better than her. And let this edict of the king be proclaimed, which if he cause to be done throughout his kingdom, then will all the women both rich and poor, pay respect to their husbands. And the speech pleased the king and the princes; and the king did as Muchaius had spoken, and sent the decree throughout the whole kingdom, into every province in the language and writing thereof, that men might be feared by their own families.

After this when the king’s wrath was appeased and he no more remembered Astin, nor made any mention of what she had spoken, and how he had condemned her; the king’s servants said, Let there be sought for the king a virgin of un-

ΟἿΣ ΤΙ. - ESTHER.

3 blemished chastity, and beautiful ; and let the king appoint officers in all the provinces of his kingdom, and let them select and send to the city Susoi to the house of the women, virgins remarkable for beauty; and let them be delivered to the king’s chamberlain, the keeper of the women; and let the things ne-

A cessary for purification be given them. And let the woman who shall please the king be made queen in the room of Astin. And the proposal pleased the king, and he did so.

5 Now there was at the city of Susoi, a man, ἃ Jew, whose name was Mordecai. He was the son of Jairus, the son of Se-

6 meias, the son of Kisaius, of the tribe of Benjamin. He had been carried away captive from Jerusalem among them whom

7 Nabuchodonosar king of Babylon had captivated. And this man had a foster child, a daughter of Aminadab, his father’s brother; and her name was Esther. On the decease of her

8 parents he educated her to bea wife for himself. But as the’ girl was beautiful, when the decree of the king was published, and many young women were brought to the city Susoi and put under the care of Gai, Esther also was brought to Gai the

9 keeper of the women. And the young woman pleased him and found favour in his sight, so that he hastened to give her the things for purification and the allotted portion; and seven waiting maids were assigned to her out of the king’s house : and he treated her and her maids courteously in the house of

10 the women. Now Esther did not disclose her family, nor her

11 country ; for Mordecai had ‘charged her not to tell. But Mordecai walked every day before the court of the womens’ house to see what would happen to Esther.

12 Now the time for every young woman to go to the king was when she had compleated twelve months; for thus were the days of their purification fulfilled. Six months they were anointed with oil of myrrh, and six months with aromatics

15 and lotions used by women. Then she goeth into the king.
The keeper is to deliver her to whomsoever the king ordereth to go with her from the womens’ apartment to the king’s

14 house. In the evening she goeth in, and in the morning goeth with all speed to the second house of the women, which is under the care of Gai the king’s chamberlain, the keeper of the women, and no more cometh to the king unless called for by

15

16

17

name. So when the time was fulfilled for Esther the daughter of Aminadab, Mordecai’s uncle, to go to the king, she neglected nothing which the chamberlain the keeper of the women ordered her; for Esther found favour with all who saw her.
And Esther went in to Artaxerxes the king, in the twelfth month which is the month Adar in the seventh year of his reign. And the king was enamoured of Esther, and she found favour above all the virgins, so that he set the queen’s crown on her head and made an entertainment for all his friends and potentates for seven days, and to celebrate the marriage of
Esther he made a release to those under his government.

Now Mordecai performed service in the court, and Esther had not yet declared her family, for Mordecai having charged her in this manner to fear God and execute his commands as when she was with him, Esther did not alter her conduct.
And two of the king’s chamberlains, who were captains of his life guard, being displeased because Mordecai was promoted, sought to kill king Artaxerxes. But the matter bemg made known to Mordecai, he informed Esther and she disclosed the conspiracy to the king; whereupon the king having examined the chamberlains, caused them to be hanged, and ordered a record to be made in the royal library with an encomium on Mordecai’s fidelity.

After these things king Artaxerxes honoured Haman of
Amadathus the Bougaian, and promoted him, and seated him first of all his friends, so that all the court bowed down to him for so the king had commanded to be done. But Mordecai did not bow down to him; whereupon they who were in the king’s court said to him, Mordecai, Why transgressest thou the king’s commands. And when they spoke to him daily and he hearkened notto them, they told Haman, that Mordecai disobeyed the king’s commands. Now Mordecai had told them that he was a Jew. So when Haman understood that
Mordecai did not bow down to him, he was greatly inflamed with wrath, and determined to destroy all the Jews throughout the whole kingdom of Artaxerxes. And having drawn up a decree in the twelfth year of the reign of Artaxerxes, he cast lots for one day after another and for one month after another soas to destroy the whole race of Mordecai in one day. And

Ch. IV. so ESTHER.

13

14

15

5

7 the lot having fallen on the fourteenth day of the month Adar,

he spoke to king Artaxerxes, saying, There is a nation scattered among the nations throughout thy whole kingdom, whose laws differ from all the nations. And as they disobey the king’s laws and it is not expedient for the king to let them alone ; if it seemeth good to the king, let him pass a decree to destroy them and I will subscribe ten thousand talents of silver to the king’s treasury. Thereupon the king taking off his ring gave it to Haman to seal the writings against the Jews.
And the king said to Haman, Keep the money, and do with the nation what thou pleasest. So the king’s secretaries were convened on the thirteenth day of the first month, and they wrote as Haman directed to the generals and the governors in every province, from India to Ethiopia a hundred and twenty seven provinces, and to the chiefs of the nations according to

their dialect in the name of king Artaxerxes, and the decree

was despatched by posts throughout the whole kingdom of
Artaxerxes, to destroy the race of the Jews on a certain day of the twelfth month which is Adar, and to make spoil of their goods. And copies of the decree were to be sent through every province and all the nations were ordered to be ready against that day. And when the business was despatched at
Susoi, the king and Haman sat down to revel, but the city was struck with consternation.

Now when Mordecai knew what was done, he rent his clothes and put on sackcloth and strewed himself with ashes, and running through the street of the city, he cried with a loud voice, A nation is to be cut off, which hath committed no fault. But when he came to the king’s gate, he stopped; for it was not lawful for him to enter the court in sackcloth and ashes. And in every country where the writings were published there was a cry with lamentation and great grief among

, the Jews, and they put on sackcloth and ite When the

queen’s maids and chamberlains came in and told her, she was troubled at the news, and sent to clothe Mordecai and to take away his sackcloth from him; but he would not be persuaded. Then Esther called Achrathaius her chamberlain, who attended her, and sent him to learn from Mordecai an exact state of the matter. Whereupon Mordecai told him what

10

12

15 was done and the promise which Haman had made to the king of ten thousand talents to the royal treasury, that he might destroy the Jews; and he gave him a copy of the decree for their destruction, which was spublicuad among the Susians to shew it to Esther, and told him that he charged her to go in and supplicate the king and to entreat him for the people, calling to mind the days of thy humiliation when thou wast brought up by my bounty. Seeing Haman who is second to the king, hath spoken against us to destroy us, call thou upon the Lord and speak to the king for us, to deliver us from death. Accordingly Achrathaius went in and told her all these words. Thereupon Esther said to him, Goto Mordecai and tell him, that all the nations of the kingdom know, that no man or woman who shall go to the king into the inner court without being sent for, hath any security for life: he only can be saved to whom the king shall stretch forth the golden sceptre. Now I have not been called to go to the king these thirty days. When Achrathaius delivered this message of Esther to Mordecai, Mordecai said to him, Go say to her, Esther, do not flatter thyself that thou alone of all the Jews inthe kingdom shallescape. Be assured, that if thou neglectest the present opportunity, help and protection will come to the Jews from some other quarter; but thou and thy father’s house shall be destroyed. Who knoweth but that for this very occasion thou hast been made queen. Then
Esther sent back the messenger to Mordecai, saying, Go and assemble the Jews who are at Susoi and fast for me. You must neither eat nor drink for three days; night nor day; and as for me, I and my maids will fast likewise, and then I will go to the king contrary to law, though perhaps I must die.
So Mordecai went and did as Esther commanded him.
And on the third day Esther put on her royal apparel and stood in the inner court of the king’s palace over against the king’s house, when the king was sitting on his royal throne, in the royal house, over against the gate. And when the king saw
Esther standing in the court, she obtamed favour in his sight, and the king held out to Esther the golden sceptre which was in his hand, iat Esther drew near and touched the top of the sceptre. Andthe king said, What would queen Esther? And what is thy petition? To the half of my kingdom it shall. be granted

4

6

10 ll

VL. ESTHER.

thee. Thereupon Esther said, To-day is my set day, if there. fore it seemeth good to the king, let him come with Haman to the banquet which I will this day prepare. And the king said,
Call Haman quickly that we may do as Esther hath said. So they both went to the banquet which Esther had ordered.
And at the banquet the king said to Esther, What would queen
Esther? Whatever thou askest shall be granted. To which she replied, If I have found favour in the sight of the king, Let the king come again with Haman to-morrow to the banquet which I will prepare for them, and to-morrow I will make my request and my petition. Then Haman went out from the king overjoyed and gladdened, but upon seeing Mordecai the Jew in the court, he was inflamed with great indignation. So going home, he called his friends and his wife Zosara, and having displayed to them his riches and the honour which the king had conferred on him; how he had promoted him to the highest rank and made him ruler of the kingdom, the queen, said he, invited none to the banquet with the king, but only me : and to-morrow I am invited : but these things give me no pleasure, when I see Mordecai the Jew in the court. Thereupon Zosara his wife and his friends said to him, Let a gallows fifty cubits high be made for thee, and early in the morning speak to the king and let Mordecai be hanged thereon, then go to the banquet with the king and take thy fill of joy. And the thing pleased Haman. So the gallows was got ready.

Now on that night the Lord removed sleep from the king, therefore he ordered his attendant to bring the book of daily records, and read to him; and finding what was written concerning Mordecai, how he had informed the king of the king’s two chamberlains, when they commanded the guard, and sought to lay hands on Artaxerxes, the king said, What honour or favour did we confer on Mordecai? To which the king’s servants replied, ‘Thou hast conferred none. And while the king was making inquiry concerning Mordecai’s fidelity behold
Haman was in the court. And the king said, Who is in the court ? Now Haman had come to speak to the king, that he might order Mordecai to be hanged on the gallows which he had prepared. So the king’s servants said, Behold Haman is standing in the court, and the king said, Call him in. And the king said

10 il

12

13

14 to Haman, What shall I do to the man whom I wish to honour?
Upon this Haman said to himself, Whom doth the king wish to honour but me? So he said to the king, With regard to the man whom the:king wisheth to honour, Let the king’s servants bring out the royal robes with which the king 1s arrayed, and the horse on which the king rideth, and give them to one of the most honourable of the king’s friends, and let him array the man whom the king loveth, and mount him on the horse, and make proclamation through the street of the city saying,
Thus shall it be done to every man whom the king honoureth.
Then the king said to Haman, Thou hast spoken well, Do thou so to Mordecai the Jew, who is an attendant in the court. Let nothing be omitted of what thou hast spoken. So Haman took the robe and the horse, and having arrayed Mordecai he mounted him on the horse, and went through the street of the city and made proclamation saying, Thus shall it be done to every man whom the king wisheth to honour. Then Mordecai returned to the court, and Haman went home in grief with his head covered. And when Haman told his wife and his friends all that had happened to him; his friends and his wife said, If
Mordecai be of the race of the Jews thy humiliation before him is begun. Thou shalt continue falling and shalt not be able to — have thy revenge of him; for with him is the living God. And while they were speaking the chamberlains came to hasten
Haman to the banquet which Esther had prepared.

VIf. And when the king came with Haman to banquet with

2

the queen, the king said to Esther the second day at the banquet, What is it queen Esther? What is thy request, and what thy petition? to the half of my kingdom it shall be granted thee. Thereupon she in reply said, If I have found favour in the sight of the king, let my life be granted at my request, and my people at my petition; for I and my people are sold to be

. destroyed. Had it been to be plundered and reduced to sla-

very—that we and our children should be bondmen and bondwomen, I would have dissembled hearing it, for the accuser is not worthy of the king’s court. And the king said, Who is he who hath dared to do such a thing? To which Esther replied, The adversary is Haman, this bad man. At this Haman was struck with consternation for fear of the king and the queen.

7 Then the king rising from the banquet went into the garden,

and Haman supplicated the queen, for he saw himself in a des-

8 perate situation. And on therking’s returning out of the gar-

den as Haman had prostrated himself on the sopha to supplicate the queen, the king said, What! would he offer violence to my wife in my house ? Upon hearing this Haman was con-

9 founded. Then Bugathan one of the chamberlains said to the

king, Behold Haman hath prepared a gallows for Mordecai who spoke for the king. There is at Haman’s house a gallows actually erected fifty cubits high. Thereupon the king said, Let

10 him be hanged thereon. So Haman was hanged on the gallows

which he had prepared for Mordecai, and the king’s anger was

VII. appeased. And on that same day the king made a pre-

.1

sent to Esther of all that belonged to Haman the accuser. And the king sent for Mordecai; (for Esther told him that he was her kinsman ;) and the king took the ring which he had taken back from Haman and gave it to Mordecai, and Esther set him over all that belonged to Haman. Then she spoke tothe king again and fell at his feet and besought him to avert the mischief of Haman, and what he had devised against the Jews.
And when the king stretched forth the golden sceptre to Esther, she arose and stood near the king and said, If it seemeth good to thee, and I have found favour, let despatches be sent to reverse the letters sent by Haman, which were written to destroy the Jews who are in thy kingdom. For how can I see the calamity of my people ? or how can I survive the destruction of my kindred? Thereupon the king said to Esther, If I have given thee all the substance of Haman ; and to gratify thee have caused him to be hanged on a gallows, because he laid his hands on the Jews, what more dost thou desire? Write ye yourselves what you please in my name, and seal it with my ring. For what is written by the king’s order, and sealed with my ring cannot be reversed.

So the secretaries were convened in the first month which is Nisan, on the three and twentieth day thereof in the same year, and a letter was written to the Jews reciting all that had been given in charge to the lieutenants and to the chief governors of the provinces from India to Ethiopia, a hundred and twenty seven provinces, to every province as they could read

Ch. TX. ESTHER.

10 it, then it was written by the king’s command and sealed with his ring, (and these letters were sent by posts) that he ordered.

11 them to use their own laws in-every city, and to assist each

12 other, and to use their adversaries, and them who assaulted them as they pleased, on a certain day, the thirteenth of the twelfth month Adar, throughout the whole kingdom of

13 Artaxerxes—that these subsequent writings were to counterbalance the former letter; and that these counterbalancing writings should be exposed to publick view throughout the whole kingdom, that the Jews might be ready against

14 that day to combat their adversaries. So the horsemen set out

15 in all haste to execute the king’s orders. And when the decree was published at Susoi, Mordecai went forth, arrayed in a royal robe, wearing a crown of gold and a turban of purple

16 cotton. And upon seeing him the inhabitants of Susoi rejoiced.

17 And among the Jews, there was light and joy in every city and province where the decree was published. Wherever proclamation was made, there was joy and gladness among the Jews, feasting and mirth; so that many of the nations were circum-

IX. cised and became Jews, for fear of the Jews. For in the

twelfth month, on the thirteenth of the month Adar, the letters of the king having arrived, they who assaulted the Jews on that day were destroyed. For none withstood them and the terror of them continued; for the great lords and petty princes, and the king’s secretaries, honoured the Jews; for the dread of

A Mordecai fell upon them; for the decree of the king had caused his name to be known throughout the whole kingdom.

6 Now in the city Susoi, the Jews slew five hundred men, including Pharsanes and Delphon, and Phasga and Pharadatha, and Barea and Sarbaka, and Marmasima and Ruphaias, and
Arsaius and Zabuthaias, the ten sons of Haman of Amadathu

11 the Bugaian, the enemy of the Jews, and rifled them. On that very day, when a return was made to the king of the number

12 slain at Susoi, the king said to Esther, The Jews have slain in the city Susoi five hundred men, how then, thinkest thou, have they behaved in the rest of the kingdom! What therefore dost thou request farther, and it shall be granted thee ?

13 Thereupon Esther said to the king, Let the Jews be allowed to use to-morrow in like manner, that they may hang up the

14 ten sons of Haman. Accordingly he granted them leave to do

09

15

16

18

19

21

22

24.

26

IX. ESTHER. ’

so, and ordered the bodies of the ten sons of Haman, to be thrown out to the Jews to be hanged up. So the Jews at Susoi assembled on the fourteenth day of the month Adar, and slew three hundred men, but took no spoil.

Now the rest of the Jews who were in the kingdom, assembled and assisted each other, and had rest from their enemies, for they slew fifteen thousand of them on the thirteenth of the month Adar, but took no spoil. And having rested on the fourteenth of the month, they kept it as a day of rest with joy and gladness. But the Jews of Susoi having assembled on the fourteenth and then rested, kept the fifteenth with joy and gladness. Therefore because the Jews, who were scattered through all the distant provinces, keep the fourteenth of the month
Adar, as a holy day, with joy, sending portions to one another,
Mordecai wrote an account of these matters in a book, and sent it to all the Jews who were in the kingdom of Artaxerxes far and near, to set apart as holy days and to keep both the fourteenth and the fifteenth of the month Adar, for in those days the Jews had rest from their enemies: And with regard to the month Adar, in which they had a change from grief to joy and from sorrow to gladness, to keep the whole month as good days of weddings and joy, sending portions to their friends and to the poor. And the Jews took this upon them.
As Mordecai wrote to them how Haman of Amadathu, the
Macedonian, warred against them—as he made calculations and cast lots to destroy them, and ashe went tothe king with an intention to hang Mordecai, but all the evils he endeavoured to bring on the Jews, fell upon himself, and he and his sons were hanged; therefore these days were called Phrouri, because of the lots, which in their language are called Phrouri. On the account of the things contained in that letter and of all that they suffered in consequence thereof, and all that happened to

Γ them, as he instituted, so the Jews took upon themselves and

their posterity, and upon all that joined them, never to use them in any other manner. Therefore let these days be a lasting memorial from generation to generation, in every city, country and province; and let these days of Phrouri be kept forever; and let the memorial of them never perish from among their generations.

29 Then Esther the queen, the daughter of Aminadab, and
Mordecai the Jew, wrote all that they did, and a confirmation
30 of the letter respecting the Phrouri, which Mordecai and
Esther the queen enjoined on themselves, to their own prejudice, having at that time established their counsel against
31 their health. Thus did Esther actually establish it, and it was written to be kept in remembrance.
X. Then the king laid a tribute upon the dominion both of the
2 land and the sea. But with regard to his power and his valour and the riches and the glory of his kingdom, behold they are written in the book of the kings of the Persians and the Medes
3 to be kept in remembrance. Now Mordecai was viceroy of king Artaxerxes, and was great in the kingdom, and being honoured by the Jews and beloved, he enforced the observance of their religion on all his nation.

JOB.

There was man in the country of Ausitis whose name was
Job. He was a man of truth and integrity, just, pious, and

2 who abstained from every thing that was evil. He had seven

sons and three daughters ; and his cattle were seven thousand sheep, three thousand camels, five hundred yoke of oxen, five hundred breeding asses. His attendants were numerous, and his works great in the country. He was also a man of illustrious birth, among the people of the east.

4 Now his sons had a custom of meeting at each others houses, and making an entertainment, each on his day, taking along with them their three sisters to eat and drink with them.

5 And soonas the days of the entertainment were over, Job sent for, and purified them early the next morning, and offered sacrifices for them according to their numbers ; a young bull fora sin offering for each of them ; for Job said, Perhaps my children have in their mind conceived evil before God. In this manner therefore Job acted after every of those days.

6 And it came to pass that on the same day, when lo! the angels of God came to present themselves before the Lord,

_ Satan also came with them; and the Lord said to Satan,

7 Whence comest thou? And Satan in reply said to the Lord,

ies)

σε JOB.

8

10

14.

16

17

18

19

22

Having gone round the earth, and roved the whole of it under heaven, Iam come here. And the Lord said to him, Hast thou. harboured in thy mind any thing against my servant Job ? For there is not like him on the earth, a man unblameable, true, pious, abstaining from every thing evil. And Satan in reply said before the Lord, Doth Job worship the Lord for nothing ? Hast thou not made a hedge about all that he hath, abroad and at home, and about all that belong to him round about, and blessed the works of his hands, and multiplied his cattle on the earth? But put forth thine hand and touch all that he hath, he will indeed openly renounce thee. Then the
Lord said to Satan, Behold all that he hath I deliver into thine hand ; but himself thou must not touch.

So Satan went out from the Lord, and after that, on the same day, when the sons and daughters of Job were drinking wine at their elder brother’s house, lo! a messenger came to Job, and said to him, The oxen were ploughing and the asses feeding near them, and the plunderers came and carried them off. Thy servants also they slew with the sword, ~ and I alone having escaped, am come to tell thee. While he was yet speaking, another messenger came, and said to
Job ; Fire hath fallen from heaven and burned up the sheep, and devoured the shepherds likewise; and I, alone having escaped, am come to tell thee. While this one was still speaking, another messenger came and said to Job, The horsemen, having formed three bands against us, surrounded the camels and have carried them off, and slain thy servants with the sword; and I, alone having escaped, am come to tell thee. While he was still speaking, another messenger came, and said to Job, While thy daughters were eating and drinking at their eldest brother’s, a great blast of wind came up suddenly from the wilderness, and took the four corners of the house, so that the house fell upon thy children, and they are

dead, and I, alone having escaped, am come to tell thee.
Upon this Job rising up rent his clothes, and shaved his

head, and falling on the ground he worshipped and said, Naked I came from my mother’s womb, and naked I shall depart hence. The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away. As it pleased the Lord so hath it come to pass. Blessed be the

Ch, IL. JOB.

10

11 name of the Lord. In all these things which befel him, Job trans- . gressed not against the Lord, nor imputed indiscretion to his God.

Again on the day when the angels of God came to present themselves before the Lord, Satan also came among them to present himself before the Lord. And the Lord said to Satan,
Whence comest thou ? And Satan said before the Lord, Having traversed that under heaven, and roved through the whole of it, lam come here. And the Lord said to Satan, Thou hast therefore attended to my servant Job; that there is not of those on the earth a man like him, guiltless, true, unblameable, abstaining from all evil. Still he retaineth his innocence ; so that thou hast ordered the destruction of his property, without

 accomplishing thy purpose. In reply to which Satan said to

the Lord, Skin for skin. All that a man hath he will give for his life. Only put forth thy hand, and touch his bones and his flesh, he will indeed openly renounce thee. Then the Lord said to Satan, Behold I deliver him up to thee, only preserve his life. Thereupon Satan withdrew from the presence of the
Lord, and smote Job with foul ulcers from head to foot, so that he took a shell to scrape away the ichor, and sat down in an unclean place without the city.

And much time having elapsed, his wife said to him, How long wilt thou persist saying, Behold I will wait yet a little longer, in hope and expectation of my deliverance ? For behold the memorial of thee—those sons and daughters, whom
I brought forth with pangs and sorrow, and for whom I toiled in vain, are vanished from the earth; and thou thyself sittest among the putrefaction of worms, all night long in the open air, while I am wandering about, or working for wages, from place to place and from house to house, wishing for the setting of the sun, that I may rest from the labours and sorrows I endure. Do but say something for the Lord and die.
Whereupon he looking stedfastly at her said, Like one of the women without understanding hast thou spoken ?. If we have received good things at the hand of the Lord, shall we not bear up under afflictions? In all these things which befel him, Job transgressed not with his lips against God.

Now when his three friends heard of all the calamities which were come upon him, they came to him each from his

Ch. TI. JOB.

12

13

4

5

“1

own country, namely, Eliphaz the king of the Thaimanites,
Baldad the sovereign of the Saucheans, and Sophar the king of the Minaians. Having made an appointment they came to him to comfort and take care of him, but seeing him at a distance they did not know him. Then raising their voices they wept aloud, and having rent each his robe and sprinkled themselves with dust, they sat down by him seven days and seven nights. And none of them spoke. For they saw that the stroke was grievous and very great. After this Job opened his mouth and cursed his day, saying,

Perish the day in which I was born—and the night in which they said, It is a male! Let that night be darkness: let not the Lord from above regard it, nor splendour come upon it: but let darkness and the shadow of death cover it : upon it let there come a thick darkness. May the day be execrated !
And as for that night, may a pitchy darkness sweep it away !
May that never come into the days of the year; nor be numbered among the days of months. But as for that night, may it be sorrow, and may there never come upon it gladness or mirth!
But let him curse it who curseth the day—him who is to attack the great sea monster. May the stars of that night be obscured in darkness: may it long for light but never reach it; nor see the rising of the morning star: because it shut not up the door of my mother’s womb : for that would have removed. sorrow from mine eyes: for why did I not end my days in the womb? Or when I came forth from the belly why did I not instantly perish? Why was I dandled upon the knees? And why have I sucked the breasts? I might now have lain still and been quiet; I might have gone to sleep and been at rest; with despots of the earth who gloried in their swords: or with chiefs who abounded in gold—who filled their houses with silver; or like an untimely birth sent forth from its mother’s womb : or like infants which never saw the light. There the wicked have ceased to be a terror: there the weary have got rest for their body : and they of old who are assembled there together; have never heard the exactor’s voice. Small and great are there on a level—the servant, with his dreaded lord. For why is light given to them in misery; or life to souls distressed with

sorrow, who long for death but find it not; though they dig for
VOL, Il. $s

IV. JOB.

it as for treasures; and would rejoice exceedingly if they should - chance to find it. For God hath shut up death from a man; to whom it would have been a repose. For my groaning cometh

- before my meat; aad I pour forth tears, begirt with sorrow.

16

20

For the terror, which I dreaded, is come upon me; and that, of which I was afraid, hath befallen me. Did I not cultivate peace? was I not quiet? was I not at rest? Yet wrath is come upon me—
Here Eliphaz the Thaimanite interrupting him, said,

Should frequent replies be made to thee in distress? But who can bear the vehemence of thy words? For if thou hast instructed many; and strengthened hands which were weak; and raised up with words them who were fainting; and given courage to knees which were strengthless: but now, when trouble hath come upon thee and touched thee, thou art impatient : is not either thy fear grounded on folly—or thy hope?
And this calamity the effect of thy conduct? Recollect therefore. Who ever perished, being mnocent? Or when were the righteous utterly destroyed? As I have seen men ploughing improper grounds: they who sow such places shall reap sorrows. By the decree of the Lord they shall perish; and by the blast of his ire -be utterly consumed. The strength of a lion and the roaring of a lioness and the boastful pride of dragons have been extinguished. The myrmekoleon hath perished for want of food: and young lions have forsaken each other. But had there been any truth in thy words; none of these evils would have happened to thee.

Should not my ear receive unusual things coming from him? At a dreadful sound by night, when terror appalleth men, I was seized with a horror and trembling, which gave a violent shog to my bones. A wind indeed blew full in my face, and my hair stood erect and my flesh quivered. I started up, but could perceive nothing: I looked, but there was no form before my eyes. I only heard a sound and a voice, saying: “ What! can a mortal be pure before the Lord, or a man by his works be blameless? If in his servants he placeth not confidence, and in his angels perceiveth some blemish: how should he treat them who dwell in houses of clay, (of which clay we indeed are) but as worms? but from morning till noon and they are no more, Because they could not help themselves

σαν. JOB.

21 they were destroyed. For he blowed on them and they wither-
V. ed: they perished because they had not wisdom. Appeal now, will any one answer. Or shalt thou see any of the holy
2 angels? Passion indeed transporteth the foolish, and envy
3 killeth the wanderer. Now I have seen the foolish taking root,
4 but their sustenance was quickly consumed. Let their children be but far from safety, and insulted at the gates of minors,
5 there will then be none to deliver them. For what they have collected the righteous shall eat. Nor will they themselves be
6 exempt from wrongs, should their power be exhausted. For trouble cannot come forth out of the earth; nor will affliction spring up from mountains.
7 (a) But man is born for trouble, as the young of the val
8 turesoar aloft.(b) No, indeed; but notwithstanding this, let me supplicate the Lord. And call upon the Lord, the master of all,
9 who doth great and unsearchable things—things glorious and
10 wonderful, not to be numbered. Who giveth rain on the earth
11 and sendeth water on all under heaven. Who setteth on high them who are low, and raiseth up them who have been ruined.
12 Who changeth the counsels of the crafty, so that their hands
13 can perform no enterprise. Who entangleth the wise in their
14 wisdom, and defeateth the counsel of the artful. In the day time, darkness shall meet them, that they may grope at noon
15 day as at night, and that they may perish in battle, and the
16 weak escape from the hand of the mighty. And that the feeble may have hope, and the mouth of the wicked be stopped.
17 But happy the man whom the Lord correcteth. Therefore despise not thou the correction of the Almighty. For he causeth
18 pain and again removeth it: and him whom he smote, his
19 hands have healed. From six distresses he will deliver thee,
20 and in the seventh evil shall not touch thee. In famine he will deliver thee from death, and in battle save thee from the edge
21 of the sword. He will hide thee from the scourge of the tongue: and thou need’st not be afraid of impending ills. At
22 the wicked and unrighteous thou shalt laugh: and of savage
23 beasts need’st not be afraid; for the beasts of the field shall be
24. at peace with thee. Thou shalt know that thy family is at peace,

(a) An gbjection. (Ὁ) The answer.

Ch. VL JOB.

25 and that the provision for thy household shall not fail. "Thou shalt know also that thy seed shall be great: thy ¢hildren shall

26 be like the grass of the field. And thou shalt come to the grave like ripe grain cut in due season; or like a heap from ἃ threshing floor, carried home in time.

27 .. Behold these are the things which, by investigation, we have found to be so. These are things which we have heard : apply them to thyself, if thou hast done any thing.

VI. To this, Job in reply said, O that some person would
2 weigh my passion: and poise in a balance against it, my calamities.
3 But these would outweigh the sand of the sea, though
4 you seem to think my words too vehement: for the arrows of

the Lord are in my body, the fury of which drinketh up my blood: when I attempt to speak they pierce me.
5 What! will a wild ass bray without cause? Will it do so, except when in search of food? Or will an ox low having fodder
6 in his stall? Can bread be eaten without salt, or is there any
7 relish in vain words? For my temper cannot be calm, while
8 my meat is horrible as the smell of a lion. O that he would grant!—that my request might be complied with!—that the
9 Lord would grant me what I long for! Let the Lord, having

10 begun, wound me, but not utterly destroy me. Let but the grave be my city, having got on its walls I will not be slack to enter, for I have not disputed the holy commands of my God.

11 For what is my strength that I should bear up ! what my time

12 that my life is prolonged? Is my strength the strength of

13 stones, or is this flesh of mine made of brass? Or have I not

14 confided in him ? But help is far from me.—Mercy hath bidden me adieu. When the superintending care of the Lord over-

15 looked me, my nearest friends did not regard me: like a failing

16 brook, or like a wave of the sea, they passed me by. They who had assiduously paid me court, now made me a slight visit, like

17 snow or hoar frost, which melting at the approach of heat, the

18 place where it was is not known. Thus was I forsaken by all, and being undone, I became an outcast.

19 Take a view of the ways of the Thaimanites, ye who mark out the Sabean tracks! and they who trust in cities and wealth

20 must blush. But now when you have come to me, it is without

22 compassion—just to see my wound and be terrified. But

why? Have I asked any thing of you, or do I crave any help from you?—to save me from mine enemies—or deliver me out of the hand of the mighty ?

Teach me and I will hold my tongue. If I have erred, tell me plainly. But my words, it seems, are devoid of truth, because I do not beg assistance from you.

Your reproof can neither stop my speaking, nor can I bear the tone of your oration: because, you not only fall upon the orphan, but also insult your friend. But now having looked you in the face I will not lie. Sit down I pray you, and let there be no more reproaches. Indeed you again meet a righteous man. For there are no reproaches on my tongue, and as for my palate, doth it not relish wisdom ?

VIL. Is not the life of man onthe earth a state of trial, and his

2

days like the days of ἃ hireling ὁ Is he not like a servant, who in a shade is afraid of his lord? Or like a hireling waiting for his hire? Just so have I waited months in vain, and wearisome nights have beendoled out to me. When I lay me down to rest,
Isay, When will it be day? And soon as I rise; I again say,
When will it be evening? I am full of pains from evening till morning; and my body swarms with the putrefaction of worms: and I moisten the clods of earth with the ichor of ulcers.
Though my life is swifter than a word; yet it is destroyed with vain hope. Remember therefore that my life is but a breath; and that mine eyes shall never return again to see good. The eye of him who seeth me now shall not see me again. Thine eyes are upon me and I am gone. I am like a cloud swept clean away from the sky. For when a man goeth down to the mansion of the dead; he can never reascend again—he can never return again to his own house; nor shall his place know him any more. For this cause then J will not refrain my mouth:

I will speak though Iam im anguish: though distressed, I will unfold the bitterness of my soul. Am Iasea or a dragon, that thou hast set a guard over me? Did I say my bed will comfort me—I will converse with myself privately on my bed? Thou terrifiest me with dreams and affrightest me with visions. Wilt thou drive away my life from my spirit; and yet keep my bones from death? For Iam not to live forever, that I should bear patiently. Withdraw from me; for my life is vanity. For

20

21

22 what is man, that thou hast magnified him; or that thou payest attention to him? Wilt thou keep a watch upon him till the morning. And judge him to the time of going to rest? How long wilt thou not let me alone: nor let me go, that 1 may swallow my spittle? If I have sinned what can I do? O thou who knowest the hearts of men; why hast thou set me up as

‘thy mark to shoot at? Am I indeed a burden to thee? Why

hast thou not made an oblivion of my transgression; or a purification for my sin? Now therefore let me depart into the earth: and when thou risest in the morning, I am no more.

VIII. Here Baldad the Sauchean interposing said, How long

wilt thou speak such things? The breath of thy mouth is profuse of words. Will the Lord in judging pass an unrighteous judgment? Or will he who made all things pervert justice ? If thy children have sinned in his sight, he hath dismissed them for their transgression: But rise thou betimes and supplicate the Lord Almighty. If thou art pure and upright, he will hear thy prayer; and render to thee the reward of righteousness.
Let thy beginning therefore be ever so small, thy end will be unspeakably great. For inquire of the former generation; and search diligently among the race of fathers; (for we are but of yesterday and know nothing—for our life on the earth is but a shadow) will not they teach thee, and declare; and from the heart utter these maxims—‘‘Can the papyrus grow without water? Or can grass grow rank without drink ? While grass is low it should not be mown. Before drinking doth not every

3 herb wither?’’ Such therefore shall be the end of all who forget

the Lord: for the hope of the ungodly shall perish. For his house shall be uninhabited : and his tent shall flie away like a spider’s web. Though he prop up his house, it cannot stand :
Though he take hold of it, it will not abide, for is he somewhat green underneath the sun ? Though a tender branch may start

7 up from his rottenness; his bed 15 on-a heap of stones: and
8 can he live among flint stones? Should he wish to drink, the

place will disappoint him.

Hast thou not seen such things—that such is the catastrophe of the wicked ? But out of the ground he will cause another to spring up: for the Lord will not cast off the innocent, nor from the ungodly accept a gift: but he will fill the mouth

Ci. IX. JOB.

22

3

25 of the upright with laughter, and their lips with songs of thanksgiving: and their enemies shall be clothed with shame: and the dwelling of the wicked shall come to naught.

To this Job replied, Of a truth I know that it is so. For how can a mortal be righteous with the Lord? For were it his pleasure to come to trial with him; he could not join issue to answer one charge of his in athousand. For he is wise in heart and strong and great. Who is hardy enough to stand up against him who maketh mountains old insensibly—who Gyqrtumneth them in his anger—who shaketh the earth to its foundations, so that the pillars thereof totter—-who commandeth the sun and it riseth not; and who sealeth up against the stars—who alone hath outspread the heaven; and who walketh on the sea as on a pavement—who is the maker of the Pleiads and Hesperus, and of Arcturus and the chambers of Notus—who doth things great and unsearchable; things glorious and wonderful not to be numbered ? When he passed over me 1 did not see him.
When he passed by me, I did not know how. If he dismiss who shall bring back? Or who shall ‘say to him, What hast thou done ? For he himself slighted anger—by him the monsters under heaven were bowed down. But if he will come to a trial with me, or will take cognisance of my affairs; (for if I be righteous will he not hearken to me—shall I not supplicate his decision? And if I call and he will not answer, I do not

believe that he hath hearkened to my voice ?) Let him not break

me with a tempest.

But he hath multiplied my wounds without cause. For he suffereth me not to take breath, and hath filled me with bitterness. For because he is strong, he prevaileth. Who then can withstand his decrees? For if I am righteous shall my mouth be wicked ? And if Iam blameless, shall I go away crouching?
For if I have acted wickedly, I am not conscious to myself:
Nevertheless my life is taken away.

Say then, wrath destroyeth the great and powerful : that the wicked fall by an untimely death. But the righteous are laughed to scorn: for they have been delivered into the hands of the wicked. He covereth the faces of the judges of that wrath. If it is not he, who is it ὃ

Now my days are swifter than a courier. They are gone

Chita. JOB.

35

2

. 16

17 without being perceived. Is there any track left by ships im their passage ? Or of an eagle flying in pursuit of its prey? Now if I say, Let me forget speaking, let me bow down my face and eroan: I shudder in all my limbs; for I know that thou wilt not let me alone though innocent. Now since I am wicked, why have I not died? For though I have washed myself with snow, and purified myself with clean hands: thou hast so thoroughly plunged me in filth that my very robes abhor me. For thou art nota man as I am, with whom I can contend; that we may come together to a trial. O that there were a mediator betwixt us—one to determine between and hear us both. Let him remove his rod from me; and let not the dread of him terrify me—Let me not be terrified, but speak, (for in that case

I am not master of myself) weary of my life I would pour forth with groans my words before him: oppressed as Iam I would speak in the bitterness of my soul, and say to the Lord,
Teach me not to be impious. Now, for what cause hast thou thus condemned me? Is it agreeable to thee that I should commit iniquity ; seeing thou hast rejected the works of thy hands; and favoured the counsel of the wicked? As a mortal looketh dost thou look down? Or asa man looketh wilt thou behold ?
Are thy days as the days of a mortal; or thy years, the years of a man; that thou hast sought out mine iniquity, and diligently traced my sins? For thou knewest that Iam not impious: but who can deliver out of thy hands? Thy hands have fashioned me and made me. After that thou hast.changed thy mind and smitten me. Remember that thou hast made me of clay, and art turning me again into mould. Hast thou not churned me as milk, and curdled me as cheese; and clothed me with skin and flesh; and fenced me with bones and sinews, and granted me life and favour, and by thy visitation preserved my spirit ὃ
As thou hast these things in thyself; I know that thou canst do all things, and that with thee nothing is impossible.

If 1 indeed have sinned inadvertently, thou hast me in custody, and hast not acquitted me of transgression. If I indeed am impious, wo is me. And if I be righteous, I ὧν δ hold up my head, for I am full of ignominy. For Iam hunted as a lion for slaughter. For turning again furiously thou destroyest me. .Renewing the examination against me, thou hast

exercised against me great wrath; and hast brought against

18 me tortures. Why then didst thou bring me forth from the womb? And why did I not die without an eye seeing me;

19 and become as if I never had existed ὁ Why was I not carried

20 from the womb to the grave ? Is not the term of my life of

21 short duration? permit me to enjoy a little repose : before I go, whence I shall not return; toa land dark and gloomy—to

22 a land of everlasting darkness ; where there is no light—no seeing the life of mortals.

XI. Here Sophar the Minaian answering said, He who speaketh much should be answered : else the fine speaker thinketh himself just; and the short lived offspring of woman is blessed.

3 Be not profuse of words, because there is none to answer thee:
4. nor say I am pure in works and irreprehensible before him.
5 But how would the Lord speak to thee ; were he to open his
6 lips against thee? Indeed were he to unfold to thee the power of wisdom ; because it must needs be double to what are with thee: then thou wouldst know that what have come upon thee from the Lord are answerable to the sins which thou hast committed.
7 Canst thou trace the footsteps of the Lord ? Or hast thou
8 reached the extent of what the Almighty hath done ? The heaven is high, what then canst thou do? And there are things deeper than the mansion of the dead ; what dost thou know ὃ
9 Of greater extent than the measure of the earth or the breadth

10 of the sea. Now were he to overturn all these, who could say

11 to him what hast thou done? For he knoweth the works of the wicked, and on seeing wickedness will not overlook it.

12 But man vainly floateth about in words—but a mortal born

13 οἵ woman is like a wild ass. For if thou hast made thy heart —

14 pure, and lift thy hands to him: if there be any iniquity in thy hand, put it far from thee ; and let not injustice lodge in thy

15 dwelling. For thus will thy countenance brighten like pure water: thou wilt disrobe thyself of filth, and no more be ter-

16 rified: thou shalt forget thy trouble like a wave that is past and not be afraid: and thy wish will spring up like the morn-

17 ing star; and life will arise for thee from noon day: and thou

18 shalt be in a state of security because thou hast hope. And

19 out of sorrow and care, peace will shine upon thee. For thou

VOL. 11. ἘΠ

shalt rest at ease, and none shall be at war with thee: and

20 many,changing their conduct, will intreat thy favour. But safety shall forsake them: for their hope shall be their destruction ; and the eyes of the wicked shall melt away.

ΧΙ]. To this Job replied, You, forsooth, are men, and wisdom
3 will die with you. But I indeed have understanding as
4 well as you. Fora just man and one irreprehensible hath been
5 made a mocking stock. For it hath been ordered that for a

time he shall fall beneath others : and that his houses shall be
_wasted by transgressors. Nevertheless let no wicked man indulge
6 a confidence that he shall escape condemnation. Whoever provoke the Lord to anger shall not they also undergo a trial?
7 But ask, I pray thee, the beasts of the field, if they could speak to thee—and the birds of the air, if they could tell thee—
8 speak to the earth, if it could converse with thee—even the
9 fishes of the sea can tell thee. Who then among all these doth not know that the hand of the Lord hath done these things?

10 Is not the life of all living beings in his hand—and the breath

of every man?

11 The ear indeed discerneth words and the palate tasteth

12 meats. By length of time wisdom 15 acquired, and by long life,

13 experience. With him is wisdom and power—with him coun-

14 sel and understanding. If he demolish who can rebuild? If he

15 shut against men, who can open? If he withhold water he

drieth the earth. And when he let it loose, he overthrew and

16 destroyed it. With him is strength and power—with him

17 knowledge and understanding. He hath led counsellors away

18 captive. And confounded the judges of the earth. It is he who.

settleth kings on thrones and girded their loins with a girdle—

19 who sendeth priests into captivity and overthrew the sove-

20 reigns of the earth—who changeth the lips of liege men and

21 knoweth the wisdom of elders—who poureth contempt on

22 princes and hath healed them who were low—who revealeth

deep things from darkness; and hath brought to light the shades

23 of death—who leadeth nations into error and destroyeth them—

24 who prostrateth nations and conducteth them—who changeth

the hearts of the rulers of a land and hath caused them to wan-

25 der in a way which they knew not: That they might grope in

darkness without light; and that they might stagger like a drunken man.

XIII. Behold these things mine eye hath seen and mine ear

wo bo

heard: for I know all that you know and am not inferior to you in knowledge. Nevertheless I would speak to the Lord; and argue before him, were it his pleasure. Now you are all bad physicians and curers of maladies. Could you hold your peace, it would be your wisdom.

Hear now the argument of my mouth and the pleading of my lips. Are you not speaking in the presence of the Lord? And do you in his presence utter deceit in a solemn manner? Or will you keep back any thing? Judge for yourselves. For will it be well for you, ifhe mark your steps? For though feigning all these things you apply them for him : he will, notwithstanding this, reprove you. And if you secretly respect persons; will not his awful majesty confound you; and the terror of him fall upon you? And your boasting be dissipated like ashes ; and your bodies be reduced to clay.

Keep silence that I may speak, and have some respite from wrath. Taking my flesh in my teeth I will put my life in my hand. Though the Almighty, as he hath begun, may subdue me: yet I will speak and plead before him. And this will contribute to my deliverance : for no deceit shall come before him.

Hear, hear my words: for I will proclaim them in your hearing. Behold I am near my trial. 1 know that I shall appear just. For who is there who will emplead me? For now I will be silent and expire.

Now two things thou art to grant me : then I will not hide myself from thy presence—withdraw thy hand from me : and let not the dread of thee overwhelm me with terror. Then call and I will answer thee: or speak and I will make thee a reply.
How many are my sins and mine iniquities? Teach me what they are. Why dost thou hide thyself from me and hast accounted me thine adversary? Canst thou be afraid of one who is like a leaf moved with a breath of wind? Or as against dried grass carried away with a blast, dost thou set thyself against me? For thou hast written evil things against me; and laid to my charge the inadvertencies of youth; and put my feet ina

Ch.) ΧΙΝ. JOB..

clog and watched all my doings; and hast tracked the soles of my feet. .

XIV. He who is born of a woman waxeth old like a leathern

3

13

14 bag: or like a garment which is moth, eaten; for he is mortal, short lived and full of disquiet : or like a flower which fell when in bloom. He glideth away indeed like a shadow and can make no stay. And is it not such a one thou hast called to account; and caused sucha one to come to trial before

thee? For who can be free from stain? Surely none. Whe-

ther the course of his life on earth be one day ; or months be

numbered out for him, he cometh to the term thou hast set,

but cannot pass it. Turn away from him, that he may take

rest, and comfort his life like a hireling. For there is hope for

atree; for if lopped, it may sprout again, and the tender branch

may not fail. And if its root become old in the earth, or die

on arock: its stem by the scent of water may blossom ; and

produce.a crop like a tree lately planted. But when a man dieth

he is gone: when a mortal falleth, he is no more. For ina

course of time a sea is spent; and a river when unsupplied is

dried up: and man when composed in the grave cannot rise again—until the heaven be folded up; they shall not be awak-

ened from their sleep.

O! that thou hadst kept me in the mansion of the dead ; and hid me till thine indignation should cease: and that thou wouldst set me atime when thou wouldst remember me ;
(for though a man die he may be revived, after finishing the days of this life of his,) I would wait patiently, until I come again into existence. Then call and I will answer. But reject not the works of thy hands. Now thou hast numbered up my devices, and not one of my inadvertencies could escape thee. Thou hast sealed up mine iniquities in a bag ; and set a mark on every. transgression, which I inadvertently committed. But not to mention that a falling mountain will continue its fall; even a rock may by force be removed from its place. Waters have worn stones smooth; and waters have washed away mounds of earth; and thou hast destroyed the patience of man. Thou hast brought him to an end, and he is gone: thou hast set-thy

face against him and dismissed him. And though his children

be multiplied, he knoweth it not: and if they become few in

22

. XV, JOB.

number, he doth not perceive it. His flesh hath been for nothing but to suffer pain; and his soul only to suffer grief.

XV. Hére Eliphaz the Thaimanite taking up the argument

2

said, Will a wise man give the wind of knowledge for an answer; though he hath therewith filled his labouring belly ὃ
Or in pleading use arguments which he ought not; and words in which there is no profit? Hast thou not cast off fear, and used such arguments before the Lord ? By the arguments of thine own mouth thou art guilty ; and hast not discerned the arguments of the mighty. Let thine own mouth and not me convict thee : thine own lips indeed will testify against thee.

What! wast thou born before men ? Or wast thou brought into being before the hills ? Or hast thou heard the established system of the Lord ? Or hath God used thee as his counsellor 2? Or hath wisdom made application to thee ? For what knowest thou, which we do not know? Or what dost thou understand, which we do not? Among us indeed are elders and aged men, more venerable for years than thy father. Thou hast been chastised less than thy sins deserve. Thou hast spoken with excessive haughtiness. ‘To what a pitch of boldness is thy heart raised ; or at what have thine eyes taken aim; that thou shouldst vent wrath before the Lord, and utter such words from thy mouth? For who being mortal can be irreprehensible ? Or can the offspring of woman be righteous ?
If in his holy ones he placeth not confidence ; and the heaven is not pure in his sight ; how abominable and filthy must man be; who drinketh iniquity in, like water !

But let me tell thee—hear what I have seen—let me tell thee what the wise say, and their fathers have not concealed —
They, to whom alone the earth was given; and no stranger came among them. ‘‘The whole life of the wicked is spent in anxiety. Though a certain number of years is given to the oppressor: yet the sound of terror is in his ears. When he seemeth to. be at peace his destruction shall come. Let him not hope to return out of darkness; for he is already doomed to the edge of the sword; and destined to be food for vultures. He knoweth within himself that he waiteth for a fall ; and a dark day will torture him. Distress and anguish will overwhelm him ; like a general at the head of troops falling

Ch. XVI JOB.

99 upon him. Because he lifted up his hands against the Lord ; and hardened his neck against the Lord Almighty : therefore he ran upon him contemptuously, with the thick boss of his buckler. Because he covered his face with fatness; and made collops of fat upon his thighs: let him therefore lodge in deserted cities; and go into uninhabited houses : and what they had got ready, let others carry off. Let him neither be enriched, nor what he hath continue. Let him never cast a shadow on the ground, nor escape out of darkness. Let the wind blast his bud, and his blossom fall prematurely. Let him not hope to continue, for vanity shall be his portion. Let his branch lopped unseasonably, die ; and let not his young shoot flourish.
Let him be gathered like unripe grapes before his time, and. fall like the olive blossom.” For death is the testimonial of a wicked man: and a fire shall consume the tents of bribery.
He shall conceive sorrows and bring forth vanity, and his belly shall produce an illusion.

XVI. To this Job replied, I have heard many such things,

4

ye miserable comforters all! what! have words of wind ἃ recular succession ? Or can they give thee offence, considering thine answer ? I indeed could speak as you do. But were your soul in my soul’s stead, would I insult you with words and shake my head at you? And should there be strength in my mouth ; would I not spare moving my lips? For if I speak shall I not bemoan the wound ? And if I hold my peace, shall
I be any the less wounded ὃ But now when he hath made me a poor rotten fool; thou indeed hast fallen upon me. My lie is become a witness, and hath risen up against me—it hath answered me to my face. When in his wrath he threw me down and gnashed his teeth at me; the darts of his executioners fell upon me. When with the darts of his eyes he had transfixed me—with his spear had brought me on my knees: they with one consent rushed upon me. ‘The Lord hath indeed delivered me up to the unrighteous ; and turned me over to the ungodly. When I was at peace he broke me up—taking me by the hair he shook me—he set me up asa mark. ‘They

3 surrounded me with javelins, darting them into my reins—

without mercy they poured my gall on the ground. They shot me, one deadly wound on another—they ran against τι.

15 with all their might. They sewed sackcloth on my skin: and
16 my strength was extinguished in the dust. My belly was burned up with wailing ; and on mine eyelids were the shades
17 of death: yet there was no iniquity in my hands. And my prayer was pure.
18 O earth, cover not the blood of my flesh, nor let there be
19 a place for this cry of mine. Even now, behold my witness is in heaven; and he who hatha perfect knowledge of me is on
20 high, O that my suit could come before the Lord, and that
21 before him mine eye could drop a tear! That a man could plead
22 before the Lord, as a son of man may with his neighbour! But my numbered days are come, and I must go the way, by which
XVII. I cannot return. 1 am dying with a tortured spirit, and
2 wishing for a burial, but do not obtain it. I am supplicating in distress, yet what have I done? Strangers have stolen my
3 substance—who is the man? Let him be brought to trial with
4. me. Because thou hast hid their heart from understanding, thou
5 shouldst not for this cause exalt them. Shall he reckon misfortunes for his portion—and were his eyes melted for his children?
6 But thou hast made me a by-word among nations, and
7 Lam become a subject of laughter for them. For mine eyes are
8 dim with sorrow, and I am closely besieged by all. At this the upright are astonished. “‘ Now the righteous should prevail
9 over the wicked: and he who is faithful should hold on his
10. way: and he who hath clean hands should take courage.” On these maxims you all rely. But come now; for I do not find il truth among you: my days have passed in groans, and my very
12 heart strings are broken. I have put night for day. Is light
13 near on account of darkness? For though I have waited patiently, the mansion of the dead is to be my house, and my bed.
14 is made in darkness. I have called on death to be my father—
15 and on corruption to be my sister and mother. Where then have 1 any ground of hope? Or shall I see those good things
16 of mine? Shall they go down with me to the mansion of the dead? Or shall we go together beneath the mound ὃ
XVIII. Here Baldad the Sauchean interrupting him said, How long will it be e’re thou wilt stop? Forbear that we may speak.
3 Why should we like beasts be silent before thee? Passion hath
4 taken possession of thee. What! If thou die, shall the earth be

21 uninhabited ὁ Or the mountains overturned from their foundations ?

The hght of the wicked shall indeed be extinguished ; and from them a spark shall not ascend. The light in his dwelling shall be darkness, and the lamp for him shall be extinguished.
** Let the weakest plunder his substance, and his own counsel subvert him. His foot is caught in a trap; in a net let him be entangled, and let snares come upon him.” He will strengthen the thirsty against him. ‘A gin is hid for him in the ground, and the trap for him by the way side. May surrounding sorrows destroy him, and many come round his foot in sore famine.”

For him indeed a direful destruction is prepared. ‘‘ May the toes of his feet be eaten up, and death devour his comeliness.
May health be expelled from his dwelling, and distress lay hold on him with the authority of a king.’’ It will make its abode in his tent; in his night all his finery will be strewed with sulphur.
Underneath his roots will be dried up; and above, his product will fall. ‘‘ May the memorial of him be destroyed from the earth. When his name shall be published abroad, may, they drive him from light to darkness.’’ He will not be acknowledged among his people, nor will his household be safe under the cope of heaven.. But in his possessions others shall live secure. They who came after groaned for him, but horror seized them who were before. Such are the houses of the unrighteous, and such the place of them who know not the Lord,

XIX. To this Job replied, How long will you make my soul

3

4

“1

sorrowful? You are indeed destroying me with words. Know at least—because the Lord hath dealt thus with me; you speak against me——without shame you fall upon me. Take it for granted that 1 have erred (though my error remaineth with myself) in speaking words which I ought not: and that my words are erroneous and unseasonable: but grant also, That you magnify yourselves against me, and insult me with reproach. Know then, That it is the Lord who hath terrified me, and raised his bulwark against me. Behold I laugh at reproach—I will not speak—lI will cry aloud, There is no judgment. Iam fenced about and cannot get out. Before me he hath placed darkness.
He hath stripped me of my glory, and hath taken the crown

13

29 from my head. He broke me on every side and I fled: and he hath cut down my hope like a tree. When he exercised great wrath against me, and counted me as an enemy: With one consent his troops fell upon me—they who were in ambush beset my ways. My brethren stood aloof from me, they acknowledged strangers rather than me ; and my friends were not compassionate. My nearest relations paid me no attention: and they who knew my name forgot me. As for my domesticks and maid servants, in their view I was a stranger. When I called my servant, he did not answer me. When with my mouth
I entreated and supplicated my wife, and called affectionately the children of my concubines: they renounced me forever.
When I insist, they speak against me. They who saw me, abhorred me: and they whom I loved rose up against me. The flesh next my skin became rotten, and my bones begin to be corroded. Pity me, pity me, O my friends, for the hand of the
Lord hath touched me. Why do you persecute me as the Lord doth, and are not satisfied with my flesh ?

O that my words were written and recorded in a book forever! That they were engraven with a graver of iron on lead, or on rocks! For I know that he is eternal, who is about to dissolve me on earth, to raise again this skin of mine which draweth up these things. For from the Lord those things have been done to me, of which I alone am conscious—which mine eyes have seen, and no other; and which have all been done to me in my bosom. Now if you willsay, What shall we say against him ? And what ground of accusation shall we find in him ὃ
Stand in awe, I beseech you, of the developing scene; for wrath will come upon the unrighteous, and it shall then be known, where their filthiness is.

XX. Then answered Sophar the Minaian and said,

7

I did not suppose that thou wouldst return such an answer, but do not you feel it more than 1? Am 1 to hear my modesty corrected? And is ἃ spirit from its consciousness to answer me? Thou hast never known such things heretofore, from the time man was placed on the earth! “‘ But the mirth of the wicked is sudden ruin, and the joy of transgressors, destruction, though his gifts mount up to heaven, and his sacrifice reach the clouds.
For when he thinketh that he is now firmly established, then

XXI. JOB.

shall he be utterly destroyed ; and they who have seen him will say, Where is he? Like a dream which is gone, he cannot be found. He is vanished, like a spectre in the night. The eye which saw him, shall see him no more; and his place shall no more observe him. Let minors destroy his children, and his own hands light up the signals of distress. His bones were full of his youth, but with hirn it shall go to rest beneath the mound. If wickedness be sweet in his mouth, he will hide it under his tongue. He will not be sparing of it, nor forsake it, but will gather it together in his mouth ; therefore let him not be able to help himself. The poison of an asp is in.his belly.
Riches collected unrighteously shall be vomited up. Out of his house let an angel drag him. May he suck the venom of dragons! and may the tongue of the viper slay him! may he never see the milking of his kine, nor the distribution of his honey and butter! He hath wearied himself for emptiness and vanity—for riches, of which he shall not have a taste, which are like a bur, neither to be chewed nor drunk. Because he broke up the families of princes ; and plundered dwellings and suffered them not to stand. There is no security for his possessions ; nor shall he be saved by what he valueth highly. Not a scrap of his provisions is left. His good things shall not, on this account, be renewed. In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be afflicted, and all manner of distress shall come upon him.
If by any means he be permitted to fill his belly ; may he send against him fiery indignation, and pour upon him sorrows!
Let him not escape from the edge of the sword ! May the brasen bow wound him, and the dart pass through his body, and

} stars light on his dwellings! May terrors stalk around him

and. total darkness await him! An unkindled fire devoureth him. May his guest also afflict his family! may the heaven disclose his miquities, and the earth rise up against him! May destruction bring his house to an end! Upon him may there come a day of wrath !”” This is the portion of a wicked man from the Lord, and this his possession, from the superintending Being.

XXI. — To this Job replied, hear, hear my words. Can I not have

this consolation from you? Bear with me, and when I speak do not deride me. What! Is my pleading with man? Or, why shall

odo oman’ Ger)

I not be inflamed with indignation ? Look on me and be amazed, having laid your hand on your cheek. For at the bare recollection I shudder: and tortures rack my flesh. Why do the wicked live and grow old, abounding in wealth? Their crops are to their wish, and their children before their eyes. Their houses flourish and they have no dread; and a scourge from the Lord is not upon them. Their kine bring not forth untimely births, but go their time safely, and cast not their calves. They abide continually like a flock, and their little ones frolick about them. They take up the psaltery and kithara, and are charmed with the sound of the song; and having spent their life in festivity, they are composed to rest in the peaceful grave. Yet he saith to the Lord, “‘ Depart from me, I desire not to know thy ways. What is the Almighty, that we should serve him: and what the advantage, that we should wait on him ?”’. For their prosperity was by their own hands.

Now doth not he observe the works of the wicked? and should not the lamp, at least of wicked men, be extinguished, and destruction come upon them? And pangs seize them, on account of anger: and they be like chaff driven by the wind, or like dust swept away by a whirlwind? His substance should fail from among his children. He should retribute to him. And-he should kitcal it. His eyes should see his own destruction: and he should not escape from the Lord. Because his desire is in his family with him; therefore the number of their months should be cut short.

Is it not the Lord who teacheth wisdom and understanding, and doth he discriminate murderers? One is to die in his full strength, all his life being successful and prosperous; his entrails are cloathed with fat, and his bones abound with marrow.
Another dieth with bitterness of soul, having never tasted any thing good. But they are both composed alike under ground, and putrefaction hath covered them.

I know you charge me with presumption, that you will say,
Where is the house of the chief, and where is the covering of the tents of the wicked?

Ask them who travel the high ways, or their monuments, you cannot miss them. Because the wicked is reserved for a day of destruction: let them be carried to prison for the day

33

34 of his indignation. Who shall tell him his way to his face, and who shall retribute to him what he hath done? Even when he should be carried to the burying place, he had caused a watch to be kept over his tomb. The flints of the torrent have been sweetened for him, and every man shall go after him, as innumerable have gone before him. How then do ye comfort me with vanity? There is nothing from you to give me consolation.

ΧΧΊΙ. Upon this, Eliphaz the Thaimanite answered, and said, -

WAM

10

14

15

1

18

10

20

21

Is it not the Lord who teacheth wisdom and understanding?
What! Is it any advantage to the Lord, if thou, in works, art irreprehensible ? or any profit, that thou shouldst keep a straight course ? Or will he, instituting a suit against thee, argue and come toa trial with thee? Is not thy wickedness great, and thy sins innumerable? Thou hast taken pledges of thy brethren for nought, and hast stripped the naked of their cloathing. Thou hast not given drink to the thirsty: but hast robbed the hungry of their morsel. Thou hast respected the persons of some and settled them in the land; but hast sent widows away empty, and done injustice to orphans. ‘Therefore snares have beset thee, and an unexpected war hath made thee shudder. The light hath become darkness to thee, and water hath overwhelmed thee when asleep. ‘‘ Doth not he who dwelleth on high, observe; but hath he humbled the haughty ?”’ Yes, thou hast said, How can the Almighty know? Can he judge in darkness ? :

A cloud is his covering, so that he cannot be seen, though he traverse the circuit of heaven. Thou wilt not keep the ancient way, which righteous men trod, who were borne aloft, and whose foundations were the surgy stream. As for them who said, What can the Lord do to us, or what can the Almighty bring upon us? (He, who had indeed filled their houses with good things, though the counsel of the wicked is far from him.) When the righteous saw them, they smiled, and he who was blameless laughed them to scorn. Had not the whole of them disappeared, a fire would have consumed the residue.

Become hardened now, if thou remainest; and shalt thou be rewarded with good things ?

29 δ

23

25

26

27

29 t

30

Receive, I pray thee, from his mouth, the terms of deliverance, and lay up his words in thy heart. If thou wilt return and humble thyself before the Lord, having removed iniquity. far from thy dwelling, thou shalt be placed on a mount, founded on a rock, and be like the rock of the torrent Sophir. Then will the Almighty be thy defence from enemies; and he will make thee pure as silver tried by fire. Then indeed thou shalt have confidence before the Lord ; and mayst look up to heaven with cheerfulness. And when thou prayest to him, he will hearken to thee, and will enable thee to pay thy vows ; and he will assign thee an habitation of righteousness, and light shall shine upon thy ways.

Because thou hast humbled thyself, thou wilt say, Such a one was insolent—but he will save him whose eyes are lowly.
He indeed will save the innocent. Save thyself therefore, with clean hands.

XXIII. In reply to this, Job said, I know very well, this trial

5 isnot in my disposal. And that his hand is made heavy by my groaning. But O that some person would let me know, that I might find him, and come to an issue; that I might order the trial of myself, and that he would stop my mouth with arguments. That I might know what remedies he will prescribe for me, and understand what he will announce to me ! Though he may come against me with great majesty, he will not employ it in threatening me. For truth and argument proceed from him ; and he would bring my cause to an issue. For if I am to go first and am no more, how do f know what will be at the last? When he wrought on my left, 1 comprehended not; he may encompass my right and I not see. For he already knoweth my way and hath tried me like gold. And I will come out at his commands; for I have kept his ways, and will not turn aside from his commands, nor transgress in my bosom: indeed

9.1 have hid his words. But if he hath judged thus, who can

gainsay him? For he hath done what was his pleasure. For this cause my shuddering is at him; and on being chastened,
I thought of him. For this cause I am to be awed at his presence—TI am to meditate on and be in dread of him. It is the
Lord indeed who hath softened my heart. It is the Almighty who hath made me shudder. For I had no knowledge of dark-

ness coming upon me; and he had hid from my view thick darkness before me.

XXIV. ΒΒυῖ why have set times escaped the notice of the

6

jam

18

Lord; and the wicked transgressed all bounds; and ravaged both the flock and the shepherd? They have driven away the ass of the fatherless; and taken the widow’s cow for a pledge.
They have turned the weak out of the right way; and with one consent the meek of the land are hidden and are gone away like asses in a field. They are sprung up above τ me in their own order.

To one, bread is sweetened for his children: others iisiie reaped before dawn a field not their own—exhausted of strength have worked the vineyards of the wicked without wages and without food.

They have caused many to sleep naked without covering— they have stripped them of clothing necessary for life. These are wet with the dew ofthe mountains: and having no shelter they cling to a rock.

They have torn the orphan from the breast : and him who

had fallen they have pressed down.

They have by injustice caused some to be naked; and robbed the hungry of their morsel.

They have entrapped some unjustly in straits, and the path of justice they did not know.

Some are expelled from the city and their own houses : and the soul of babes heave heavy groans.

Now why hath he not called these to account while on earth? Though they did not acknowledge—though they did not know the way of justice; did they not still go on in their courses? And hath he who knew their works delivered them up to darkness? And will he be asa thief in the night?

When the eye of the adulterer watched for darkness; saying, No eye shall discover me—when he having put a mask on his face digged through houses in the dark : (during the day they had shut themselves up—they had no acquaintance

7 with light) because the morning is to all these as the shadow

of death—because the terror of the shadow of death should acknowledge them; is it swift on the face of the water?
The portion of these on the earth should be cursed and

Ch XXV. XXVI...--. -— «JOR

2)

24

25 their plants exposed dry on the ground : for they plundered the sheaf of orphans. Now was such a one’s sin brought to remembrance?

Though he was dark as the darkness of night; retribution should be made for what he hath done: and every wicked man should be broken; like a tree which cannot be healed.

Because he did not treat the barren with tenderness; and had no compassion fora poor weak woman. But overthrew the helpless with wrath : therefore when he riseth he should have no security for his own life: when sick, he should have no hopes of recovery : but should perish by his disorder.

As his exaltation afflicted many: he should wither like mallows by heat : or like an ear of corn which fell of itself from the stalk.

Now if this is not the case; who can say I have spoken falsehoods : and set my words at naught?

XXV. Hereupon Baldad the Sauchean answered and said,

3

5

6

What! Is there any apology, or fear with him; who made the universe and is supreme? For let none suppose, because robbers have a respite; that snares shall not come from him on any. For how can a mortal be just before the Lord or any offspring of woman make himself clean? If he setteth the moon beside him, it shineth not: and the stars are not pure in his sight. Grant then that man is rottenness and that the son of man is a worm.

XXVI. To this Job replied,

2

3 bee |

Whom dost thou assist, or whom art thou going to help ?
Is it not him, who hath mighty power and whose arm is strong? For whom hast thou been acting as counsellor? Is it not for him. who hath all wisdom? Whom art thou about to follow? Is it not him, whose army is beyond compare? For whom hast thou announced dictates? And whose breath is it which proceeded from thee? Are giants going to rise up from beneath the water and the places in its neighbourhood? The mansion of the dead is naked before him: and destruction hath no covering.

He it is, who stretcheth out Boreas over empty space— who suspendeth the earth upon nothing—who bindeth up water in his clouds; and the cloud under it is not rent—who

Ch. XX VIL. JOB.

taketh possession of the front of his throne and over it spread-

10 eth his cloud. His decree hath drawn a circle on the face of

11 the water; at the confines of light and darkness. The pillars of heaven flutter and are struck with consternation at his rebuke.

12 By his power he calmed the sea; and by his knowledge the

13 monster was overthrown. The bars of heaven were terrified at him; and by a decree he doomed to death the apostate’ dragon. tamer

14 Behold these are parts of his ways. But let us hear the least breath of reason for him. As for the strength of his thunder; who knoweth when he shall employ it?

XXVII. Furthermore Job proceeded and by way of preface said,

2 As God liveth, who hath thus condemned me; even the
Almighty who hath made my life bitter: while I have the power of breathing and the breath of God is in my nostrils; my lips shall not speak wickedness, nor shall my soul contrive mischief.

5 Far be it from me to acknowledge you to be right; for till
I die, I will not give up mine innocence. And for asserting my righteousness I make no apology; for I am not conscious to myself of having done amiss.

7 Should not mine enemies then be as the overthrow of the wicked? And they who rise up against me as the destruction of transgressors?

8 Now whatever hope a wicked man hath, that he persisteth ; shall he who hath trusted in the Lord be mdeed safe? Or will
God hear his prayer? Or when trouble cometh upon him, hath he any assurance before him? Or upon his calling, will he hearken to him? hei

il But now let me tell you what is by the hand of the: Lord.

12 What are from the Almighty I will not falsify. Behold you all know that you heap vanity on vanities, saying,

*¢ This is the portion of a wicked man from the Lord: and

the possession of oppressors, which-shall come to them from

14 the Almighty. If their children be many they shall be: for

slaughter; and if they grow up to men, they shall be beggars.

15 Those who are about him shall die by pestilence: and their

16 widows none shall compassionate. Though he heap up silver

as dust; and store up gold as clay: the righteous shall take

18 charge of all these; and men of truth shall enjoy his wealth. His

19 house is gone like moths or like a cobweb. He shall lie down rich but shall not continue so. He hath opened his eyes, and
20 allis gone. Sorrows flowed in upon him like water. In a night
21 a tempest swept him away. A burning wind shall take him up
22 and go he must. It shall blow him away out of his place. He will dash upon him and will not spare. Should he by flight flee from his hand, he will cause them to clap their hands at him and will hiss him out of his place.”
XXVIII. There is indeed a place, from which silver is got ;
2 and a place from which gold is strained. Iron indeed is made out of the earth, and brass is hewn froma quarry like stones.
3 He hath assigned a station for darkness: but every boundary he assigned is diligently explored—stones, darkness and the shadow of death; the channels of brooks choked up with sand: where to such as know not the right way; strength is unavailing and they are removed from among men. As for the earth out of which bread cometh; from underneath it something like fire hath been turned up. The stones thereof is the place of the sapphire. And the dust thereof supplieth man with gold. A path is explored which no bird knew; and which the vulture’s eye hath not seen—which the race of boasters have not travelled; and over which the lion hath not stalked. One hath stretched forth his hand with a pick and hath overturned mountains from theroots. Another hath broken through the whirlpools of rivers: and mine eye hath seen every precious thing. Another hath laid bare the bottoms of rivers and
12 given manifest proofs of his power. But where is wisdom to
13 be found? And where is the place of understanding? A mortal knoweth not the way thereof; nor hath it indeed been found
14 out by men. The abyss said, It is not in me: and the sea said,
15 It is not inme. Would not one give for it all he hath got?
But silver cannot be weighed as its price; nor can it be purchased with the gold of Sophir—with the precious onyx or the sapphire. Gold and chrystal cannot equal it in value; nor can jewels of gold be a barter for it. Things above need not be
18 mentioned : but prize thou wisdom above all things below.
19 The topaz of Ethiopia cannot equal it in value : nor is it to be
20 rated by pure gold. But where can wisdom be found? And
21 where is the place of understanding? It hath escaped the know-

«1

24,

25

Ch. XXIX: JOB.

ledge of every man; and is hid from the birds of the air, Destruction and death said, We have heard the fame of it. God. is perfectly acquainted with its way and knoweth its place. For he surveyeth the whole world; and knoweth all on the earth— all that he hath made—the weight of winds and the measures of water.

When he had made and seen and numbered them ; and also a way for the pealing thunder: then did he see it and declare it: and having prepared and traced it, he said to man,
“Behold the worshipping of God is wisdom: and to abstain from evil is understanding.”

XXIX. Job still further continued his speech, with this exor-

2

09

dium, O! that I were reinstated as in times past! As in the days of the months when God preserved me—when his lamp shined over my head—when by his light I walked through darkness—when I was making my ways conspicuous—when
God watched over my family—when I was thick set with branches, and my servants were around me—when my ways abounded in butter, and my mountains flowed with milk— when I walked early through the city; and a seat was set for me in the streets!

The young when they saw me hid themselves ; and all the aged stood up. The nobles forbore talking and put their finger on their mouth. And while they who heard me were blessing me, their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth. When the ear heard me it blessed me ; and the eye when it saw me, turned aside: for I saved the poor from the hand of the mighty ; and assisted the orphan who had no helper. The blessing of him who was perishing came upon me: and the mouth of the widow blessed me. I put on righteousness and cloathed myself with justice as with a mantle. I was eyes to the blind and feet to the lame. I was a father to those in distress; and the cause which I knew not I searched out. And I broke the

_ jaws of the unrighteous; and plucked the prey from betwixt

their teeth.

Therefore I said, My youth shall advance to old age. Like the stock of a palm, I shall live long. My root is spread out

_ by the water; and the dew will abide on my produce. This

vain glory of mine shall attend me: my bow is directed by

21 his hand. They who heard me paid close attention ; and at my

22’ counsel they were silent. ‘To my decree they added nothing,

23 But were overjoyed when I spoke to them. As the thirsty

24 earth receiveth rain, so did they my speech. If I smiled on them they could scarce believe it. And the light of my coun-

25 tenance was not lost. I chose their way and sat as chief, and

-dwelt as a king among warriors—as one who comforteth the afflicted.

XXX. But now the meanest have me in derision: now, those undertake to admonish me ; whose fathers I held in contempt:

2 whom I did not think worthy the dogs of my flocks. What in-

deed was the strength of their hands to me? Destruction would

have been lost upon them. By reason of want and famine it was useless. Already they were fleeing ineffectually from distress and misery—they were crouding round the samphire on the sounding shore ; and feeding on sea weeds as their food ; despicable and contemned and in want of every thing good, they through extreme want were chewing even the roots of trees.

Against me thieves have risen up, whose habitations were

7 the clefts of rocks. Amidst this tuneful choir, are to be heard

- the brawls of them who lived under hedges. A race of fools and despicable wretches, whose name and honour are extinguished from the earth.

9 But now I am become their song: and they have me for their by-word: and have abhorred me and stood at a distance: and have not spared to spit in my face.

il Because he opened his quiver and afflicted me: therefore they have cast off the restraint, which they were under at my

12 presence. At the right of their brood they have taken their stand: they have stretched out their foot ; and vindicated

13 against me their destructive ways. My ways are destroyed ; for I am stript of my robe.

14 With his darts he hath pierced me—he hath used me at his pleasure. I am become loathsome by sorrows. My sorrows roll back upon me. My hope is gone like a breath,

16 and lke a cloud, my safety. And now my soul is melting within me,

18

20

22

24

Days of sorrow take hold of me ; aun at night my bones are melted and my sinews are quite dissolved.

With great force he took hold of my garment; and cinch me about like the collar of my vest. Thou hast accounted me. as dirt: and my portion is in dust and ashes. Though I have. cried to thee, thou hearest me not: but they stood up and observed me; and came upon me without mercy.

Thou hast chastised me with a heavy hand; and placed me among sorrows; and cast me away far from safety. For I know that death will destroy me: for earth is the house for every mortal. For O! how I wish that I might lay violent hands on myself; or beseech another to do this for me.

As for me I indeed wept for every one in trouble ; and sighed, when I saw a man in distress. But when I expected prosperity: behold days of affliction came upon me. My bowels have boiled and could not rest: days of misery have prevented me. I have gone mourning without restraint ; and have stood in the congregation and cried. Ihave been madea brother to jackals, and a companion to ostriches. My skin is become very black; and my bones are burning with heat. My kithara is turned into mourning, and my song to wailing for myself.

XXXI. I made a covenant with mine eyes, that I would not

2

“IO Oo ἃ.

gaze on ἃ virgin: yet what portion hath God dealt out from above ? And what, alas! the lasting portion on high? “ Destruction is for the wicked and banishment for transgressors.”’
Why will he not behold my way and number all my steps?
Have I walked with scoffers or hath my foot hasted to deceit?
For I have been weighed in a just balance; and the Lord knoweth mine integrity. If my foot hath deviated from the way or my heart gone astray after mine eyes; or if with my hands I have touched bribes: may I sow and others eat ; and let me have no root in the land. )

If my heart hath gone after another man’s wife, or if I have lain in wait at her gates; let my wife gratify another, and mine infant children be dishonoured. For the defiling of another man’s wife exciteth a fury of wrath not to be restrained. For it is a fire burning in all the limbs; which will not go out, till it hath utterly consumed.

Chg XXXT.’ JOB.

1 If I have slighted the cause of my man servant or maid servant when they had a controversy with me, what shall I do when the Lord maketh inquest ? And when he visiteth, what answer shall J make ? Was not I formed in the womb as they

16 were? And were we not alike fashioned in the belly? Far

from depriving the poor of what they had, or causing the heart

of a widow to fail; if I have eaten my morsel alone, and have not shared it with the orphan; (for from my youth I as a father nourished them, and was their guide from my mother’s womb)

If I have seen the naked perishing and have not clothed them;

and if the poor have not blessed me, and their shoulders been

21 warmed with the fleece of my lambs; If I have raised a hand against the fatherless, because I had around me greater support: may my shoulder bone be dislocated, and my arm broken at the elbow. For the fear of the Lord restrained me, and the burden of that I could not endure.

24 If I have made gold my measure, or placed my confidence in precious stones: or if I have exulted because my wealth was great, or laid my hand on what was not counted out to

26 me: or, (do we not see the refulgent sun sometimes eclipsed, and the moon continually changing? for it is not in them:) if then my heart hath been secretly enticed, and I have laid my hand on my mouth and kissed it; let this be reckoned to me as the greatest transgression, that I have lied in the presence of the Lord, the Most High.

29 If I have rejoiced at the downfal of mine enemies, and my heart hath said, Aha! Let mine ear hear myself cursed, and let me be a by-word among the people, when I am afflicted.

91. If my maid servants have often said, O that we had some

of his flesh meat to eat! while I was living luxuriously: (indeed

the ‘stranger lodged not in the street, and my door was open to every comer:) If when I sinned inadvertently, I concealed my sin; for I was not so awed by the multitude as not to mention it before them—(Now if I had suffered a poor man to go from my door with an empty lap, who could have heard me with patience?) And if I had not feared the hand of the Lord

I would have put on my shoulders the writing which I had

37 against any one, and have acknowledged it as a crown: But if
I did not tear it in pieces and give it up, without taking any

1

98

40 thing from the debtor: if ever my ground hath cried out against me, and the furrows thereof joined in the complaint: if I have eaten alone the strength thereof without money, and by rapine caused the heart of the owner of the soil to grieve: let nettles spring up for me instead of wheat, and bramble bushes instead of barley.

XXXII. Here Job closed his speech, and his three friends

4.

ceased from making further reply to him; for he was righteous in their sight. Then was kindled the wrath of Elius the son of
Barachiel the Buzite, of the family of Ram, of the country of
Ausitis. His wrath was kindled against Job to a high degree, because he had declared himself just before the Lord: And with the three friends he was very angry, because they were not able to answer Job’s defence: though they had charged him with being wicked.

Now Elius had waited to answer Job, because they were older than he. But when he saw that there was no answer in the mouth of the three men, he was fired with indignation ; therefore Elius the son of Barachiel the Buzite taking up the argument, said,

I indeed am young and you are old; therefore I kept silence and was afraid to give my opinion. For I said, Is it not age which speaketh? And by many years they have gained wisdom.

But there is a spirit in mortals ; and it is the inspiration of the Almighty which teacheth. They who live longest are not the wisest, nor is the knowledge of judgment confined to the aged. Wherefore I said, Hear me, and I will tell you what I know. Listen attentive to my words, for I will speak im your hearing that you may examine them. Even now I could wish to attend to you: but behold there is none who convicteth Job— noné of you who refuteth his arguments: that you might not say, We the Lord’s advocates have found wisdom. And you have left a man at liberty to use hereafter the same arguments.

They were daunted. They answered not again. They have antiquated their own speeches. 1 waited patiently: for I had not spoken. Because they stopped and made no reply, therefore Elius interposing, saith, I will speak again, for lam full of words—for I am pained with a spirit within me—for I

Ch. XXXII. , JOB.

20

22 am like a vessel full of new wine, in fermentation, without vent; or like the labouring bellows of a smith. I will speak that I may have ease, by opening my lips. For I should not be awed by man: nor put to the blush because of a mortal. For I am not apt to admire persons. Will not worms devour them as well as me.

XXXIIL. Mow therefore, Job, hear thou my words, and listen

attentively to my speech; for lo! I have opened my mouth, and my tongue hath begun to speak. My words shall proceed from a pure heart; and the sentiments of my lips shall be pure.
It is the divine spirit, which made me, even the inspiration of the Almighty, which teacheth me. If thou art able, give me an answer; come to trial, and let us stand face to face. Thou art formed out of clay, and soam I: we are both made of the same material. By the dread of me thou wilt not be terrified ; nor will this hand of mine be heavy on thee. Now thou hast said in my hearing—lI heard the sound of thy words: for thou saidst, “1 am pure, I have not sinned ; I am irreprehensible, for I have not transgressed. But he hath invented an accusation against me, and hath accounted me asan enemy. He hath

‘put my foot in a clog, and watched all my ways.”’ For how,

dost thou say, Iam righteous, yet he hath not hearkened to me. For He, who is over mortals, is eternal.

And dost thou say, Why in my trial, hath he not hearkened to me on every matter? For the Lord may have spoken once, and again.—In a dream, for instance, or in a nightly vision: As when a dread horror falleth on men, during their slumbers on a bed; then doth he open the understanding of men. With such appearances of terror he frighted them, to turn man away from iniquity. ,

Again he hath saved his body from a fall, and hath rescued his soul from death; and hath not suffered him to fall in battle.

Again he hath rebuked him with sickness on a bed, and benumbed all his bones; so that he cannot take any nourishment, (though his soul longeth for food) until his flesh become rotten, and he can show his bones bare. When his soul hath come near to death, and his life near to the mansion of the dead, though there may bea thousand messengers of death,

24

26

not one of them can mortally wound him. If he determine in his heart to turn to the Lord, when he shall have shewn man his charge against him, and pointed out to him his folly, he will support him, that he may not fall to death, and renew his body like the plaistering on a wall, and will fill his bones with marrow ; and make his flesh soft like that of an infant, and restore him to full strength among men. And when he hath prayed to the Lord, and shall enjoy acceptable things, he will come with a cheerful countenance and with thanks: and render justice to men. Then will such a man blame himself, and say, What I have done! He hath not chastened me, as my sins deserve! Save my soul, that it may not go to destruction, and let my life see light.

Behold in these three ways the Almighty doth all these things with man. He hath indeed delivered my soul from death; that in light my life may praise him.

Listen attentively, Job, and hear me: keep silence that I may speak. If thou hast any thing to say, answer me: speak; for I wish thee to be justified. If not : hearken to me: keep silence and I will teach thee.

XXXIV. Then Elius proceeded and said,

6.

9

10

11

12

Hearken to me, ye wise men, and ye who have knowledge listen attentively. For the ear trieth words and the palate tasteth meats. Let us take upon us the right of judging: Let us know among ourselves what is good. For Job hath said, “ I am righteous: the Lord hath removed from me the trial; and hath disappointed me of my trial. My wound is grievous without transgression.” What man is there like
Job, who drinketh up scorning like water—who hath neither sinned, nor been guilty of impiety—nor associated with the workers of iniquity to walk with impious men? For thou shouldst not say, There shall be no visitation of man. He shall indeed have a visitation from the Lord. Therefore hearken to me, ye who are wise in heart. Far be it from me to be profane before the Lord ; or’ before the Almighty to disturb the course of justice.

‘‘ But he should render to every man according to each one’s work; so that in his own paths every man may find him.” But dost thou think that the Lord will do improper

- things? Or will the Almighty who made the earth, pervert
13 judgment? Now who is this maker of the world and of all the
14 things therein? For were it his pleasure to confine, and keep

to himself, the wind, all flesh would expire together; and every mortal would return to earth, of which they were formed.

16. See that thou be not chastened. Hear these things; listen

17 attentively to the sound of words. Consider that he who hateth iniquity; and that he who destroyeth the wicked, being eternal, is just.

18 He is irreverent, who saith to aking, Thou transgressest :

19 to princes, you are acting impiously. Who hath no respect for the person of an honourable man; nor knoweth how to honour

20 nobles by respecting their persons. “Βαϊ it should be in vain for them to cry or to entreat a man, for they behaved wicked-

21 ly in turning aside the weak. For he is the observer of mens’ actions, and nothing that they do can escape his notice : nor can there be a place, where the workers of iniquity can be concealed.” (a)

23 (Ὁ) That he will not yet set himself against a man; is because the Lord superintendeth all in ways unsearchable; glorious and wonderful, not to be numbered.

25 (a) ‘As he knoweth their works: he should bring on night

26 and they should be humbled. But hath he extinguished the wicked though they are visible before him? Because they turned aside from the law of God and did not acknowledge his judgments, when they cause the cry of the poor to ascend

29 to him, he should hearken to the cry of the poor.” (b) But when he giveth rest, who shall call him to account? When he hideth his face, who can see him? Both against a nation, and against a

30 man at the same time, he maketh a hypocritick man king; because of the perverseness of a people.

31 Because one saith to the Almighty, ‘“‘ Ihave taken, I will

32 not again take a pledge: I will look beyond myself; do thou shew me: If I have done iniquity, I will do so no more.”

33 Will he for thee punish that iniquity? Because thou must deny—because thou must draw the conclusion, not I: therefore speak what thou knowest. For they who are wise in heart will say the same : and a wise man hath heard this word of mine.

36 Job indeed hath not spoken with wisdom: his words are
VOL. 11. Y-y

not with understanding. Therefore let Job learn and no more make reply like the foolish; that we may not add to our transgressions. For iniquity will be charged to our account; if we multiply speeches before the Lord.

XXXV. Then Elius proceeded and said,

3

4

6

16

What thinkest thou of this in thy pleading? Who art thou that thou shouldst say,

“ T am righteous before the Lord? Or wilt thou say,
« What can Ido if I sin?”

I will answer thee and these three friends of thine. Look up to yonder heaven and see; and observe the clouds, how high above thee they are. If thou hast sinned, what canst thou do? And if thou hast multiplied transgressions, what canst thou effect? If thou art righteous, what canst thou give him? Or will he receive any thing at thy hands? Thy wickedness may ἡ affect a man like thyself: and thy righteousness, ason of man.
On the account of a multitude, they who are falsely accused will scream: They will call aloud because of the arm of many, but none said, Where is the God who made me; who reeulateth the watches of the night; who distinguisheth me from the beasts of the earth and from the birds of the air? There let them scream. He indeed may not hearken even at the abuse of bad men. j
(a) ‘‘ Since it is not the Lord’s desire to see improper things— since he, the Almighty, is the observer of them who do injustice; he should save me :” (b) but be judged before him. Can’st thou praise him as things are? Because he doth not regard Job’s anger; and hath not severely animadverted on some offence : therefore Job vainly openeth his mouth; he loadeth his speeches with folly.

XXXVI. Then Elius proceeded further and said,

9

7

Bear with me a little longer that I may teach thee : for I have still something further to say: taking my knowledge from abroad and from my own works, I will speak righteous things with truth, without considering in an unjust manner things which are unjust. Know then that the Lord, who is mighty in power and wisdom; will not reject the innocent, nor save the wicked : and that he will administer justice to the oppressed.
He will not withdraw his eyes from the righteous, but will seat

12

26

XXXVI. JOB.

them at last with kings on a throne and they shall be exalted.
When they shall be bound with fetters or held with cords of affliction, he will shew them their works and their transgressions, that they bear.—But he will hearken to what is just, and hath ordered them to turn from iniquity. If they hearken and serve; they shall end their days in prosperity and their years in the enjoyment of things convenient. But the impious he saveth not : because they would not know the Lord, and because, when they were admonished, they were disobedient, the hypocrites in heart shall incur wrath: they will not cry because he bound them: Let their soul therefore perish in youth and their life be wounded by angels. Because they afflicted the weak and feeble, he will support the cause of the meek.

Though the abyss from the mouth of an enemy—the overflow of that from underneath hath deceived thee; and thy table which was full of fatness hath fallen: yet the cause of the righteous shall not fail. But there shall be wrath against the ungodly, on account of the wicked bribes which they received for injustice.

Let not the earnest entreaty of the weak in distress turn aside thee and all those in the exercise of authority. Do not spin out the night that crowds may come to their assistance.
But be careful not to do improper things: for by sucha con- . duct thou wilt extricate thyself from distress.

Behold the Almighty will strengthen with his strength: for who is powerful as he? Or who can examine his works?
Or who can say, He hath done unjust things?

Remember that his works are greater than what men have attempted. Every man hath seen by himself how many mortals are wounded.

Behold the Almighty is multifarious in operations beyond our comprehension.

The number of his years are indeed infinite and by him the particles of rain can be counted.

When they are collected into a cloud for rain, the heavens will pour down. But when the clouds cast a shade over the dumb creation he impressed a care on beasts, and they know the order for going to bed. At all these things is not thine un-

derstanding confounded ? And is not thy heart women from the body?

29 Now though the outspread διϑαὰ be rushing together, to the whole extent of his pavilion, behold ! with a clap of thunder he will expand it over him. He hath indeed covered the out branchings of the sea! For with what he judgeth nations he can give food in abundance.

32 When with his hands he hath covered the light, and hath given provisional orders concerning food; the Lord will warn his friend that there is a portion also for injustice. Therefore

XXXVII. on the account of this my heart was troubled, and

moved violently out of its place.

Hear the report made by the fierce anger of the Lord!
3 when a threat shall proceed from his mouth; as his dominion extendeth over all under heaven, and his light over the wings
A of the earth; after it he will thunder with a voice—he will thunder with the voice of his indignation. (And should it not make a change in those men when he shall cause his voice to
5 be heard?) With his voice the Almighty will thunder to our astonishment ; for he hath done great things which we cannot comprehend ; issuing a command. to snow, be thou on the earth—
6 When the tempest and storms of rain, under his pret
7 seal up against the hand of every man, that every man may
8 know his own weakness—when the beasts have entered their coverts, and have gone to rest on their beds ; sorrows issue
9 forth from their chambers, and cold from its lofty summits ;

10 which by the blast of the Almighty produce frost, and governeth the water as he pleaseth.

11 But when ἃ cloud covereth a man of his choice, his light

12 can disperse the cloud : and he at his sovereign pleasure, can cause the revolving agents to return to their works. What

13 things soever he ive them in charge’: these are ordered by him on the earth; and whether they be for correction, or fog the benefit of the earth; or for mercy, he is to be found in them.

i4 Hearken, Job, to these things and stand instructed with regard to the power of the Lord. We know that God hath disposed his works—that he hath made light out of darkness—
That he knoweth the different purposes of clouds, and the

Ch. XXXVIIL JOB.

17 miraculous fall of wicked men. Now thy cloathing is warm and there is peace in the land. With him are powerful cordials for inveterate disorders: what an apnearance of an infusion !
19 Therefore teach me what we shall say to him. And let us refrain
20 from much speaking. Have I had a book or a scribe by me, that by stopping the man I could be silent ?
21 Though the light is not visible to all, there is a brightening in the heavens, like that which cometh in clouds from
22 him. From the north the clouds brighten like fulgent gold.
_ For these things great is the glory and honour of the Almighty. As we cannot find another equal to him in majesty ; dost thou not think that he who judgeth righteously will hear ?
24. Men therefore ought to fear him. They indeed who are wise
- in heart, will fear him.
XXXVIII. After Elius had finished his speech, the Lord from a whirlwind and clouds,’said to Job,
2 Who is this who is concealing counsel from me, and who hiding words in his heart thinketh to hide them from τὴς
3 Gird up thy loins like a man and I will question thee and answer
4 thou me. Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations of the earth? And tell me, if thou hast understanding, who settled the measures of it? Dost thou know ὃ Or who stretched
6 the line upon it? To what are the hooks of it fastened ?
- 7 And who laid the corner stone thereof? When the stars were
8 made, all my angels praised me with a loud voice. It was I who shut up the sea with gates, when it rushed eagerly from its mother’s womb. It was I who made a cloud its cloathing;
10 and thick darkness its swaddling bands. It was I who set
11 bounds to it; surrounded it with bars and gates ; and said to it, Thus far thou shalt come and no farther: but in thyself
12 thy waves shall be spent. Was it in concert with thee that I ordered the morning light; and that the day spring knew its
13 appointed time to tinge the wings of the earth—to scare the
14 wicked from it? Didst thou take clay of the earth and form an animal and place on the earth a creature endowed with
15 speech? Hast thou withdrawn the light from the wicked, and
16 broken in pieces the arms of the haughty ? Hast thou gone to the head spring of the sea; and walked in the footsteps of
17 the abyss? Are the gates of Hades opened to thee through

Ch. XX XIX. JOB.

fear, and are the porters of Hades struck with awe at seeing thee ? Hast thou informed thyself of the breadth of that under heaven? Tell me then what is the extent of it. In what country doth light make its abode, and of what sort is the place of darkness? If thou wouldst lead me to their borders, and if thou knewest their paths ; 1 would know that thou wast then born, and that the number of thy years is great. Hast thou gone to the treasuries of snow, or hast thou seen the treasuries of hail? Are they stored up for thee, for a time of enemies— for a day of battles and combat? From what place doth hoar frost issue, or whence is the south wind scattered over the earth?
Who hath prepared a course for the tempest, and a way for 1mpetuous storms to water the ground, where there isnot a man— the desart where no man dwelleth—to saturate an untrodden, uninhabited land and cause the bud of the tender herb to spring?
Who is the father of rain, and who hath begotten the drops of dew ὃ From whose womb doth ice proceed, and who in the sky hath brought forth hail which descendeth like a shower ?
Who hath struck with terror the face of the wicked? Dost thou know the band of Pleias, or hast thou opened the hedge of
Orion? Canst thou cause Mazouroth to come forth in his season, or drag out Hesperus by his hair? Dost thou know the revolutions of heaven, or the things on earth corresponding to them? Canst thou summon a cloud with thy voice, and will it, with the trembling of a water spout, answer thee? Canst thou despatch thunders, that they may go, and will they say to thee, Here we are? Who hath given woman a-skill in weaving, anda knowledge of the art of embroidering ὃ. Who is it who numbereth the clouds with wisdom, and hath caused the heaven to incline to the earth, when the earth was poured out like dust, and when I have glued the very clod as for a stone? Wilt thou hunt the prey for lions, or satisfy the appetites of dragons? For they are trembling for fear in their dens, and lying in ambush in their coverts. Who hath provided food for the raven? For his young have cried to the Lord, wandering about in search of provisions.

AXXIX. Hast thou known the time of the rock-goat’s del-

2 very, and watched the pangs of hinds in travail? Hast thou numbered the months they go with young, and hast thou dis- —

missed their pangs ? Hast thou brought up their young, devoid of fear, and wilt thou dismiss their pangs also? Shall

- they cast off their young, and be encreased with a new progeny,

15

18

19

24

26

and shall they go forth and no more return to them ?

Who hath sent forth the wild ass free, and who hath loosed his bands? As I made the desart his habitation, and the saltish soil his place of encampment; he scorneth the crowds of a city, and regardeth not the clamours of a driver. The range of mountains he will consider as his pasture, and he searcheth after every thing green.

Will the unicorn condescend to serve thee, or to go to rest at thy stall? Canst thou bind his yoke with thongs, or will he draw thy furrows in the field? Hast thou relied on him. because his strength is great? Wilt thou leave thy labours to him, and trust that he will carry out thy seed, and bring home thy threshed grain ? .

Why is the wing of the ostrich that of the sportive ? For though it comprehendeth that of the stork and falcon, yet she will commit her eggs to the ground, and hatch them in the dust; not remembering that the foot may crush, and wid beasts trample them. She hardened herself against her young, as if not her’s; she laboured in vain without fear; because
God had silenced wisdom in her. But did he not impart to her some understanding ? At a suitable occasion she will rear herself aloft ; she will laugh to scorn the horse and his rider.

Hast thou invested the horse with strength, and clothed his neck with terror? When thou arrayedst him with armour didst thou inspire his dauntless breast with courage? Pawing in the plain he swelleth with pride, and rusheth impetuous to the field.
Meeting a king he meeteth him with scorn, and turneth not back for fear of the sword. On him the bow and the sword swell with pride; and his rage will cause the ground to vanish, nor will he believe till the trumpet sounds: but at the sound of the trumpet he saith, Aha, and snuffeth the battle from afar, with a bound and neighing.

Hath the hawk by thy wisdom poised herself aloft with wings expanded, unmoved, surveying the regions of the south?

At thy command doth the eagle soar, and the vulture abide seated on its nest, on the high crag of a rock, and in secret,

29 and continuing there seek its food? Its eyes take an extensive survey, and its young are besmeared with blood. Wherever carcasses are, there are they suddenly found.

XL. 15 But behold now the wild beasts around thee, which feed

16 upon grass like cattle—behold that one in particular whose ἡ strength is in his loms, and whose power is in the navel of his

17 belly. He hath raised his tail like a cypress, and his sinews are

18 plaited together. His ribs are ribs of brass, and his back bone

19 is molten iron; he is a chief of the Lord’s fashioning, made to

20 be insulted by his angels only. When he went up to the cragey mountain, he gave joy to the four footed beasts in the vale.

21 They go to rest under trees of every sort, by the papyrus, the

22 reed and the bulrush: But by him large trees with branches,

23 and the bushes of the field are overshadowed. Should there come.a flood he would not regard it; he is confident the Jor-

24 dan can roll mto his mouth. Can one look steadily at him, can one craftily bore his nose ?

XLI. Canst thou draw out Dragon with a hook, or puta bandage
2 round his nostrils? Or canst thou fasten a ring in his snout,
3 or bore his lip for a jewel? Will he speak to thee with entreaties
4 —with soothing supplications? Will he make a covenant

with thee? And wilt thou take him for a perpetual servant ?

Wilt thou play with him as with a bird, or bind him as a sparrow
6 for a child? Do the nations feed upon him, or the Pheni-
7 cians divide him among them? With their whole fleet they

could not carry the first skin of his tail, nor his head in their
8 fishing barks. Wilt thou lay thine hand on him, recollecting
9 the battle made by his mouth ? Do not so again. Hast thon not — seen him? Hast thou not been amazed at whatis said of him? Hast

10 thou not been afraid that he was prepared against me? But who

11 is there, who hath risen up against me—or who can rise upagainst

12 meand stand to it? If the whole world is mine, I cannot be put o silence by him. On the account of his power one may pity

13 his equal. Who can strip off his outer robe, or who can come

14 within the folds of his breast plate? Who can open the doors

15 of his mouth? His teeth are encompassed with terror. His scales are shields of brass; and his ligature, like a smyrite

16 stone. They are glued one to another, so that no air may pass

17 through to him, They are to adhere close to each other ; they

Ch.. XLII XL. JOB.

18 stick so close that they cannot be torn asunder. At his sneez-

ing lightnings flash: and his»eyes have the lustre of the morn-

19 ing star. Out of his mouth issue as it were burning lamps ;
20 and flaky flames, in appearance, are belched out. From his

 nostrils issueth the smoke of a furnace, flaming with a fire of

21 burning coals. His animal life is glowing coals; and a flame

22 proceedeth out of his mouth. In his neck, strength maketh

23 itsabode; and destruction runneth before him. The flesh of

his body is glued together; it is so abundant that he cannot

24 be shaken. His heart is hard as a stone, and firm as an im-

25 moveable anvil. When he turneth himself about, all the four

26 footed beasts on the earth shrink with fear. Though spears

oppose him, they effect nothing ; for with regard to the lance

27 and the breast plate, he considereth iron as straw, and brass

28 as rotten wood. The bow of steel cannot wound him; and

29 stones from a sling he considerethas grass. Battering rams are
- accounted as stubble ; and he laugheth at the shock of eruptive

30 fire. His bed is sharp pointed obelisks; and all the gold in

31 the sea under him, is but as dirt. He causeth the deep to boil

like a cauldron ; and considereth the sea as a pot of ointment.

32 The deepest gulf of the sea he accounteth his captive; and

33 reckoneth the abyss itself as his parade. Upon the earth there

is not his fellow; made to be insulted only by my angels.

34 He beholdeth every thing that is high ; and he is king over all

that are in the waters.

XLII. Then Job in reply, said to the Lord, I know that thou

canst do all things, and that with thee nothing is impossible.
2 Who indeed can conceal counsel from thee? Though he forbeareth
3 to speak, can he think to hide it from thee ὃ. But who
4 will tell me those things which I did not know—those great and wonderful things which I did not understand. Hear me,
O Lord, that I may speak. And let me ask, and do thou teach

XL. 6 Whereupon the Lord further said to Job from the
7 cloud, No: but gird up thy loins like a man, and let me question
8 thee; and do thou answer me. Decline not the trial with

me. Dost thou think that I have spoken to thee for any other

9 purpose, but that thou mayst appear justified ? Hast thou an

arm to contend against the Lord, or dost thou thunder with a
VoL. 11. ZZ

Che Xb. XLT. JOB.

10 voice against him ? Assume then majesty and power, and array
11 thyself with glory and excellence; and send forth angels in
12 wrath, and humble every one who is insolent, Extinguish also

the haughty, and turn the wicked into instant corruption.

13 Hide them in the earth together, and cover their faces with dishonour.
14 Then will I confess that thine own right hand can save
1 thee. Then the Lord God addressing Job, said, Doth he decline
2 a trial with the Almighty ὃ Surely he who commenceth
XL. 3 a suit against God, should support it. Whereupon Job, in
4 reply, said to the Lord, Why should I continue the debate

any further ? I stand corrected for commencing a suit against the Lord. On hearmg such things, what answer can I, who

5 am nothing, make to thee? I will lay my hand on my mouth.

Once I have spoken, but I will not proceed a second time.
I heard of thee before, with the hearing of the ear; but now mine eye hath seen thee, therefore I abhor myself, and amready to drop into dissolution, and account myself as dust and ashes.

XLII. 7 Now after the Lord had spoken all these things to Job,

10

1]

the Lord said to Eliphaz, the Thaimanite, Thou hast sinned and thy two friends. For you have not spoken any thing true before me, as my servant Job hath. Now therefore take seven young bulls and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and he will make an offering for you ; and my servant Job will pray for you. Tor him only I will accept; for were it not for his sake, 1 would destroy you, because you have not spoken what is true against my servant Job.

So Eliphaz the Thaimanite, and Baldad the Sauchean, and
Sophar the Minaian, went and did as the Lord commanded them, and he forgave them their sin for Job’s sake. And the
Lord increased Job. Upon his making supplication for his friends, the Lord forgave them their sins, and the Lord gave
Job twice as much as he had before. When all his brethren and his sisters heard what had befallen him, they came to him, together with all those who were formerly acquainted with him, and having eaten and drank at his house, they comforted him, and expressed their amazement at all that the Lord had brought upon him. And eyery one presented him a lamb, and a quarter of a drachm of gold bullion. And the Lord. blessed the latter days of Job more than the former ; so that his stock

Ch. XLII. ; JOB.

70

16

1η

was fourteen thousand sheep, ‘six thousand earhels, a thousand > yoke of oxen, a thousand breeding asses. And he had seven sons born to him, and three daughters, the eldest of whom he called Hemera, and the second Kasia, and the third Amalthaiakeres. And inall the land there were no women found so fair as the daughters of Job. And their father gave them an inheritance among their brothers. And Job lived after this affliction a hundred and seventy years. So that all the years which he lived were two hundred and forty. And Job saw his children and his childrens’ children, to the fourth generation, and died an old man and full of days. And it is written that he will rise again with them whom the Lord raiseth up.
This is translated out of a book in the Syrian language :
For he dwelt in the land of Ausitis, on the confines of Idumea and Arabia. His first name was Jobab, and having married an Arabian woman, he had by her a son whose name was
Einnon. Now he himself was a son of father Zare, one of the sons of Esau, and his mother’s name was Bosorra: so that he was the fifth in descent from Abraham. Now these were the kings who reigned in Edom, over which country he also bore rule. The first was Balak, the son of Beor, and the name of his city was Dannaba. And after Balak, Jobab, who is called Job ; and after him, Asom, who was general
JSrom the region of Thaimanitis ; and after him, Adad, son of
Barad, who smote Madiam in the plain of Moab ; and the name of his city was Gethaim. And the friends who came to
Job were Eliphaz, of the sons of Esau, the king of the
Thaimanites ; Baldad, the sovereign of the Saucheans, and
Sophar, the king of the Minaians.

PSALMS.

HAPPY the man, who hath not walked by the counsel of the wicked; nor stood in the way of sinners; nor sat in the seat of the scornful. His delight will be in the law of the Lord only.
And on his law he will meditate day and night. And he will be like the tree planted by the streams of water, which will vield its fruit in due season, and its fruit shall not fall un-

PSALMS.

4 timely. In all that he doth he shall be prospered. Not so the wicked; not so. They are like the chaff, which the wind dri-

5 veth from the face of the earth. Therefore the wicked shall not stand in judgment, nor sinners in the counsel of the right-

6 eous. For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous: and the way of the ungodly shall perish.

WHY did nations rage? And tribes meditate vain things?
The kings of the earth combined; and the chiefs assembled together, against the Lord and against his Anointed. [saying]

3 “Let us break their bands asunder and throw off from us their yoke.”
4 He who dwelleth in heaven will laugh them to scorn—the

5 Lord will treat them with derision. Then will he speak to them
6 inhis wrath and trouble them with his sore displeasure. But as for me, by him I am appointed king on Sion his holy mountain.
7 I proclaim the decree of the Lord; to me the Lord said,
8 ‘¢ Thou art my Son, this day I have begotten thee, Ask of me, and I will give thee nations for thine inheritance, and the
9 utmost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou shalt rule _ them with a rod of iron. Thou shalt break them to pieces like a potter’s vessel.”
10 Now therefore, O kings, be wise: Be instructed, all ye, who judge the earth. :
11 Serve the Lord with fear: and rejoice for him with trembling.
12 Keep fast hold of instruction; the Lord may be angry and you may perish out of the right way. When his anger suddenly blazeth forth, happy are all they who have trusted in him.

itl.

A Psalm by David, when he fled from the presence of his son

Abessalom. :

1 O LORD! why have they who afflicted me multiplied?
2 Many are risen up against me. Many say respecting my life,
In this God of his he hath-no safety.

3

6 ;

7

8 bo μοι

PSALMS.

But thou, O Lord, art my protector; my glory, and the lifter up of my head. With my voice I cried to the Lord, and from his holy mount he heard me.

I laid me downto rest and slept—I awoke. Because the
Lord will protect me, I will not be afraid of myriads of people—of them who are besetting me round about.

Arise, O Lord; save me, O my God! Because thou hast smitten all them, who foolishly were mine enemies—hast broken the teeth of sinners : this deliverance is the Lord’s : let thy blessing be upon thy people also.

For the conclusion with psalms. An Ode by David.

WHEN I made my supplication; my righteous God heard me: thou hast enlarged me in distress: be gracious to me and hear my prayer.

Sons of men! how long will you be stubborn! why love ye vanity and seek falsehood? Know that the Lord hath made his holy one wonderful. The Lord will hearken to me when I cry to him. Are you provoked to wrath? Donot therefore commit sin.
What you say in your hearts be sorry for, on your beds. Offer a sacrifice of righteousness and trust in the Lord. Many say,
Who will shew us good things? On us, Lord, is marked the light of thy countenance : thou hast put gladness in my heart.
Because of the increase of their corn and wine and oil they are filled; while I will lay me down in peace and sleep because thou, O Lord, hast only caused me to dwell in hope.

Lor the conelusion, concerning her who obtaineth the inheritance. A Psalm by David.

O LORD, hear my words—attend to my cry. Listen to the sound of my prayer, my king and my God! For to thee,
O Lord, I will pray.

In the morning thou shalt hear my voice : in the morning
I will wait on thee and look up.

5

10

11 fans

PSALMS.

Because thou art not a God pleased with iniquity; therefore he who is wicked cannot dwell near thee : nor shall trans. eressors continue in thy presence.

Thou O Lord, hatest all the workers of iniquity: thou wilt destroy all them who speak lies—a bloody and deceitful man the Lord abhorreth. As for me, I through thine abundant mercy, will go to thy house: I will worship before thy holy temple, in thy fear.

Lead me, O Lord, m thy saving goodness: direct my way before thee, because of mine enemies—because there is no truth in their mouth. Their heart is false; their throat, an open sepulchre : with their tongue they practised deceit.

Judge them, O God; let them fall for their devices: according to the multitude of their crimes cast them out; be-

cause they have provoked thee, O Lord.

But let all, whose hope is in thee, rejoice. They shall exult forever, and thou wilt dwell among them : and all who love thy name will glory in thee; because thou wilt bless the righteous. Thou, O Lord, hast covered us as with armour of fayour,

For the conclusion, among Hymns for the eighth day. A
Psalm by David.

O LORD, rebuke me not in thy wrath; nor chasten me in thine anger.

Pity me, O Lord, for Iam weak. Heal me, O Lord, for my bones are troubled.

My soul is troubled exceedingly : but O Lord, for how _ long?

Return, O Lord; deliver my soul: save me for thy mercy’s sake.

For in death none can make mention of aed! In the man- ἡ sion of the dead, who can give thee thanks?

Tam weary with my groaning. Am I every night to bedew my bed and water my couch with my tears?

7

10

6

PSALMS.

Mine eye is troubled with indignation: I am grown old among all mine enemies.

Away from me, all ye workers of iniquity. For the Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping—the Lord hath heard my supplication : the Lord hath received my petition.

Let all mine enemies be shamed and greatly troubled. eet them be turned back and instantly put to shame.

re on: 
A Psalm by David which he sung to the Lord respecting the words of Chousi the Jeminite.

O LORD, my God, in thee I have put my trust : save me from all my persecutors and deliver me: perhaps he like a lion may tear my. soul; if there be none to redeem—none to deliver.

O Lord, my God, if 1 have done this—-if there be iniquity in my hands: if I have requited them evil who did me wrong; let me fall by mine enemies as a worthless man : let mine enemy pursue my soul and take it—let him tread down my life to the earth and lay my honour in the dust.

Arise, O Lord, in thine indignation: exalt thyself in the borders of mine enemies. Awake, O Lord my God, in the

7 judgment thou hast enjoined. And when the congregation of

8

9

10 the tribes encompass thee; ascend thou on high above them:
The Lord is the judge of the tribes: judge me, O Lord, according to my righteousness : and according to: mine innocence be for me. Let the wickedness of sinners be brought to an end.

Thou wilt indeed direct the righteous : thou art the God who searcheth hearts and reins. Rightful is my help las that
God who saveth the upright i in heart.

God, who is a judge just and powerful; (though he is long suffering and doth not execute vengeance every day) will, unless you turn back, sharpert his sword. He hath bent his bow and made it ready: and hath fitted to it the instruments of death—those flaming bolts of his which he hath forged.

Behold this man hath travailed with injustice. He conceived mischief and brought forth iniquity : he hath digged a pit and covered it: into the pit which he made he will fall: his mis-

PSALMS.

chief will return on his own head—on his own head his injustice will come down. I shall praise the Lord for his loving kindness. I shall sing to the name of the Lord Most High.

For the conclusion. For the wine presses. A Psalm by David.

1 O LORD, our Lord, how thy name ought to be admired in all the earth, since thine excellence is exalted above the heavens!
2 From the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise, on account of thine enemies—[on account] of destroying an enemy and a revenger.
3 When I behold the heavens, the work of thy fingers—the
4. moon and stars which thou hast established, what is man that thou shouldst be mindful of him, or a son of man that thou
5 shouldst visit him! Thou madest him a little lower than angels,
6 with glory and honour thou hast crowned him, and set him over the works of thy hands. Thou hast put all things under his
7 feet—flocks and herds of all sorts—also the beasts of the field—
8 the birds of the air, and fishes of the sea—whatever travel the
9 paths of the seas. O Lord, our Lord, how thy name ought te be admired in all the earth!

For the conclusion. On the mysteries of the Son. A Psalm by
David.

1 I WILL praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, I will

2 relate all thy wondrous works. Let me be gladdened and rejoice in thee; to thy name I will sing, O thou Most High.

3 When this enemy of mine is turned back, at thy presence they

4 shall faint and perish; because thou hast maintained my ae and my cause.

5 Thou the righteous judge hast sat on the throne; thou ee rebuked nations, and the wicked one is destroyed. Thou hast

6 blotted out their Mame forever and ever. The enemy’s swords have utterly failed, and thou hast completely destroyed. cities, the memorial of them with their din is gone. _

13

14

15

16

20

- PSALMS.

But the Lord will endure forever: he hath prepared his throne for judgment; he will judge the world with righteousness—with rectitude he will judge tribes. The Lord was a refuge for the distressed, a seasonable helper in adversity. Let them who know thy name confide in thee; For thou, O Lord, hast not forsaken them who seek thee.

Sing to the Lord who dwelleth in Sion; among the nations proclaim his designs, for in making inquisition for blood, he had them in remembrance—he forgot not the prayer of the distressed.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord! Behold my affliction, because of mine enemies, O thou who raisest me up from the gates of death, that I may proclaim all thy praises in the gates of the daughter of Sion. Let me exult with joy for thy salvation.

The nations were completely entrapped by the destruction which they contrived; in the gin which they hid, their foot is caught. The Lord is known by executing judgments : by the works of his own hands the sinner is taken.

A responsive Ode.

LET the sinners be turned back to the mansion of the dead—all the nations who forget God.

For the poor shall not be quite forgotten—the expectation of the needy shall never perish.

Arise, O Lord, let not man prevail—let nations be judged in thy presence.

Appoint, O Lord, a legislator over them—let nations know

that they are men.

4

WHY, OLord, hast thou stood at a distance—dost thou overlook at proper occasions—in adversity ?

When the wicked exulteth with pride, the poor is set on fire—they are caught by the counsels which they devise.

Because the sinner is praised for the desires of his soul ;
—therefore he who committeth injustice is blessed.

The sinner hath greatly provoked the Lord—according to his great anger will he not make inquisition ?

18

PSALMS.

God is not before his eyes—his ways are polluted on every

occasion.
Thy judgments are removed from his sight—shall he have

a mastery over all his enemies ?

For he said in his heart, I shall not be moved and I shall never be in adversity.

Is not his mouth full of cursing, and bitterness and deceit?
—Under his tongue there is mischief and sorrow.

He sat in secret places with the rich to slay the innocent—
His eyes are on the watch for the distressed.

He lurketh in secret like a lion in his den—He lurketh to make a prey of the poor.

To make a prey of the poor when he hath drawn him n— in his net he will humble him.—

He will stoop and crouch at his tyrannising over the poor—
For he said in his heart God hath forgotten—He hath turned his face from ever seeing.

Arise, O Lord God, let thy hand be lifted up—Forget not the oppressed.

Why hath the wicked provoked God ?—For he said in his heart, He will not make inquisition.

Thou seest (for thou observest mischief and αἰ Tht they have delivered themselves into thy hands.

To thee the poor hath committed himself—Thou art the helper of the fatherless.

Break the arm of the sinful and malicious man.—Let his sin be sought out till no more can be found.

Let the Lord reign for ever and ever!

Perish ye nations out of his land! The Lord hath heark-

ened to the desire of the oppressed.—
Thine ear hath attended to the preparation of their heart ; to administer justice to the fatherless and the weak—

That man may no longer continue his insolence in the ~

land.

For the conclusion. A Psalm by David.

IN the Lord I have placed my confidence, how say ye to:

my soul, “away to the mountains as an ostrich.

_— he eed ὧν σοὶ

PSALMS.

2. For behold the sinners have bent a bow: they have provided arrows fora quiver; to shoot privily the upright in heart,

3 For what thou didst build up, they have pulled down.”

4 Now what hath the righteous done ? The Lord is in his holy temple. The Lord, whose throne is in heaven; whose eyes look down on the needy ; whose eye lids examine the

5 sons of men—the Lord examineth both the righteous and the wicked. He then who loveth iniquity hateth his own soul.

6 Upon the wicked he will rain snares. Fire and brimstone and a tempestuous wind, shall be the portion of their cup.

a Because the Lord is righteous, therefore he loved righteousness ; his countenance beheld uprightness.

For the conclusion, for the eighth [day] A Psalm by David.

1 SAVE me, O Lord! fora holy one hath ceased; for truths

2 are scarce among the sons of men. They spoke vanities, one to another: their lips are deceitful, they spoke with a double Ὁ heart.—

3 May the Lord destroy all deceitful lips; and the tongue

4 which speaketh swelling words—them who say, ‘“‘ We will magnify our tongue: our lips are our own: who is Lord over us 2?” }

5 Because of the oppression of the poor; because of the groans of the needy ; now will I arise, saith the Lord; I will set in safety and speak boldly.

6 The oracles of the Lord are pure oracles—tried silver, clear _

of dross, seven times purified. Thou, O Lord, wilt keep us

and preserve us, from this generation, and forever.
The wicked are walking about; thou, in thy sublimity, hast carefully observed the sons of men.

For the conclusion. A Psalm by David.

HOW long, O Lord, wilt thou forget me? For ever ?
How long wilt thou turn away thy face from me ?

aus

[90]

.1

PSALMS.

How long shall I revolve counsels in my mind, ‘and sorrows in my heart? For years? How long shall mine enemy

be exalted over me?

Look down, hearken to me, O Lord, my God. Enlighten mine eyes, that I may not sleep unto death—lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed over him. They who afflict me will rejoice, if I be moved.

As for me, I have trusted in thy mercy : let my heart rejoice in thy salvation: I will sing to the Lord my benefactor; and hymn to the name of the Lord Most High.

For the conclusion. A Psalm by David.

THE fool said in his heart, There is no God. They are corrupt and by their works abominable : there is none who doeth good. No not one.

The Lord looked down from heaven on the children of men; to see if any had understanding or were seeking God.
They had all gone aside, they were altogether become vile: there is none who doeth good—no not one. Their throat is an open sepulchre : with their tongues they practised deceit : the poison ofasps is under the lips of them whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness : their feet are swift to shed blood : destruction and misery are in their ways: and the way of peace they did not know : there is no fear of God before their
Cyese Ν: .
Will they all continue senseless? They are going on in a course of iniquity : they are eating up my people as.they do bread: they have not called on the Lord. They were seized with terror, where there was no fear; because God was among a righteous generation.

Have you despised the counsel of the poor; because his trust is in the Lord? Ν

O that he would for Sion’s sake send deliverance to Israel!
When the Lord hath brought back the captives of his people:
Let Jacob rejoice and let Israel be glad.

ow bo

“1

10 ll

PSALMS.
A Psalm by David.

O LORD! who shall sojourn at thy tabernacle? And whe shall dwell on thy holy mountairi?

He who walketh blameless and worketh righteousness :
And who speaketh truth from his heart. Who hath not deceived with his tongue; nor done evil to his neighbour; nor taken up a reproach against his neighbours. In whose sight an evil doer is contemned; but who honoureth them who’ fear the
Lord : who sweareth to his neighbour; and doth not violate his engagements: who hath not lent his money on usury; nor taken bribes against the innocent. He whose practise is such, shall never be moved.

An inscription for a pillar. By David.

_ PRESERVE me, O Lord: for in thee 1 have trusted. I said to the Lord, Thou art my Lord : thou hast no need of my goods. By the hallowed things in this land of his he had marvellously displayed all his designs. Their infirmities were multiplied : after these hallowed things they hastened.

I will no more assemble their congregations for blood, nor make mention of their names with my lips. ‘The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup : thouart he who restoreth me mine inheritance. The lines have fallen to me in the best places: for this inheritance of mine is the best for me.

I will bless the Lord who hath given me understanding : even now at night my reins have instructed me. I saw the
Lord continually before me. Because he is at my right hand that I may not be moved; therefore my heart was gladdened; and my tongue exulted with joy : moreover my flesh also will dwellin hope; that thou wilt not leave my soul in the mansion of the dead nor suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.

Thou hast made known to me the ways of life : thou with thy presence wilt fill me-with joy. At thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.

2

3

4

5

15

PSALMS.

A Prayer of David.

HEARKEN, O Lord, to my justification; attend to my supplication : give ear to my prayer which is not made with feigned lips.

Let my sentence come forth from thy ebay Let mine eyes behold righteous decisions.

Thou hast proved my heart: thou hast gated me by night : thou hast tried me: and in me there was found no injustice.

That my mouth might not speak the works of these men;
I, because of the words of thy lips, kept rugged ways.

Establish my footsteps in thy paths; that my footsteps may not be moved.

Ihave cried, because thou, O God, didst hear me: incline thine ear tome and hear my words. Display marvellously thy mercies, O thou, who, with thy right hand, savest from adversaries them who trust in thee. Keep me as the apple of an eye: with the cover of thy wings thou wilt shelter me from the face of the wicked who afflict me. These enemies of mine beset my soul: they shut up their fat; their mouth spoke proudly. Haying driven me out they now enclosed me. They set their eyes inclining to the ground. They observed me, like a lion eager for prey, and like a young lion lurking in coverts.

Arise, O Lord, prevent them and cause them to stumble.
Deliver my soul from the wicked : wrest thy sword from thine enemies hand. Dismiss them, O Lord, from the land: disperse them in their life time. Though their belly was filled with thy stores ; they glutted themselves with swine’s flesh, and left the relicks for their children.

But as for me, let me appear righteous before thee; let me be satisfied with a display of thy glory.

For the conelusion. By David the servant of the Lord ; who spake to the Lord the words of this Ode on the day when

PSALMS.

the Lord delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul; and he said,

I WILL love thee, O Lord, my strength! The Lord is my support, my refuge and my deliverer. My God is my helper, in him I will trust; my protector, the horn of my salvation. and my defender.

In songs of praise I will call on the Lord, and I shall be saved from mine enemies.

The pangs of death encompassed me; and floods of iniquity -

startled me. The pangs of Hades surrounded me, and the snares of death were before me. In my distress I called on the
Lord, and to my God I raised my ery. From his holy temple he heard my voice ; and my cry before him reached his ears.

Then was the earth shaken: it trembled; and the founda- . tions of the hills were convulsed and shaken ; because at mine enemies God was incensed. A smoke ascended in his ire, and at his presence a fire flamed, by which coals were kindled to a glow. And he bowed the heaven and came down, and darkness was under his feet. He mounted on cherubs and flew—he flew on the wings of winds. But he made darkness his covering,
His tent around him was dark water in clouds of air. At the flash of the lightning before him, the clouds burst. Hail stones

3 and coals of fire! Then the Lord thundered from heaven, the

Most High uttered his voice : He sent forth his bolts and scattered them; he multiplied his lightnings and confounded them.
Then were seen the head springs of waters, and the foundations of the world were disclosed, at thy rebuke, O Lord—at the blowing of the blast of thine anger. He sent from on high and took me—he took me to himself from many waters. He will deliver me from my potent enemies ; and from them who hate me; because they are stronger than I. They surprised. me in the day of my distress; but the Lord was my firm support ; and brought me out to a large place. He will deliver me because he delighted in me. The Lord will reward me according to my righteousness, and recompense me according to the cleanness of my hands. Because I have kept the ways of the
Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God—because all his judgments were before me, and his rules of rectitude

2 or

41

42

48

44

45

PSALMS.

were not far from me; therefore with him I shall be unble. mished, and I will guard myself from mine iniquity ; and the
Lord will reward me according to my righteousness, and according to the cleanness of my hands in his sight. With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful, and with a harmless man thou wilt be harmless ; with a warrior thou wilt be a warrior, and with the wily, thou wilt practise wiles. Because thou wilt save a dejected people; therefore the eyes of the lofty thou wilt humble. Because thou, O Lord, wilt light my lamp
—thou, O my God, wilt enlighten my darkness—by thee therefore I shall be delivered from a roving band; and by my
God I shall overleap a wall. As for my God, his way is spotless—the oracles of the Lord are tried, he is the protector of all who trust in him. For who is God, besides the Lord?) And . who is God, save our God? It is thou, O God, who girdest me with strength, and hast made my way spotless—who makest my feet like those of a hind, and who steadiest me on high places ; who instructest my hands for battle, and hast made my arms like a bow of steel, and given me a defence for my safety; and thy right hand hath helped me, and thy discipline hath upheld me to the last: this discipline of thine will still teach me. Thou hast enlarged my steps under me, and my tread was not unsteady. I shall pursue mine enemies and overtake them, and not turn back till they are destroyed. I shall harass them that they may not be able to stand ; they shall fall down under my feet. For thou hast:girded me with strength for battle, and subdued under me all that rose up against me. Thou hast given me the backs of mine enemies, and utterly destroyed them who hate me. They cried aloud, but there was no saviour—to the Lord, but he hearkened not to them. So that I shall beat them small as dust before the wind, and trample them down like dirt in the street.

Deliver me from the contentions of the people. Thou wilt set me at the head of nations.

A people whom I knew not, have served me. Soon as they heard, they obeyed me.

Strange children have paid me feigned obedience. Strange children became old and limped from their paths.

46

47

50

9

10

PSALMS.

Live the Lord! and blessed be my God! and let the God of my salvation be exalted—

The God who hath executed vengeance for me: and subjected peoples under me—my deliverer from outrageous enemies.

_ From them who rise up against me, thou wilt lift me up; from the man of violence thou wilt deliver me.

For this cause I will praise thee, O Lord, among the nations: And sing melodiously to thy name.

He is magnifying the deliverances of his king, and shewing mercy to his anointed—to David and his seed forever.

For the conclusion. A Psalm by David.

THE heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work of his hands,

Day to day pronounceth a decree ; and night to night proclaimeth knowledge.

Are they not speeches and are they not words, of which is not their utterance heard?

To every land their sound is gone forth: and their doctrines to the limits of the world.

In the sun he placed his tabernacle. And he is like a bridegroom coming forth from his chamber. He will rejoice as a giant to run his course.

His going forth is from the summit of heaven; amd his course is to the summit thereof, and from his heat none can be hid.

The law of the Lord is perfect, it restoreth souls: The testimony of the Lord is faithful, it maketh infants wise.

The statutes of the Lord are right, they rejoice the heart.
The commandment of the Lord is clear, it enlighteneth the eyes.

The fear of the Lord is pure, it endureth forever. The judgments of the Lord are true, they are justified for being so.

They are more to be desired than gold, or many precious

stones ; and sweeter than honey or the honey comb.

11

14

PSALMS.

These indeed thy servant keepeth ; for keeping them there is a great reward.

Who can understand his errors? Cleanse thou me from those of mine which are hid; and for those of others, spare thy servant. If they gain not a dominion over me: then shall I be spotless, and clean from great transgression. And the word# of my mouth and the meditations of my heart, will. be continually acceptable in thy sight—O Lord, my helper and my redeemer.

For the conclusion. A Psalm by David.

THE Lord hearken to thee in a day of distress !
The name of the God of Jacob defend thee !

May he send thee help from the Sanctuary :
And assist thee out of Sion.

May he remember all thy sacrifice ;

And make thy whole burnt offerings fat.
May he grant thee thy hearts desire :
And fulfil all thy counsel.

We will rejoice in thy salvation, and triumph in the name of our God. May the Lord fulfil all thy petitions !

Now I know that the Lord hath saved his anointed. From his holy heaven he will hearken to him. The salvation of his right hand is with power. .

Some boast of chariots and some of horses; but by {πὸ name of the Lord our God we shall be magnified.

They were entangled and fell; but we arose and were kept upright. '

O Lord, save the king, and hearken to us, when we invoke thee.

For the conclusion. A Psalm by David.

O LORD, in thy strength, the ἄς will rejoice ; and exult greatly in thy saly avon,

2

3

4

5

6 f:

1

PSALMS.

Thou hast granted him the desire of his soul, and hast not denied him the request of his lips.

For thou hast pre-engaged him with kind blessings. Thou hast set on his head a crown of precious stones.

He asked of thee life; and thou hast given him length of days forever.

By thy salvation his glory is great. Thou bite confer on him honour and majesty.

For thou wilt give him everlasting blessing ; and with the joy of thy countenance make him glad.

Because the king trusteth in the Lord: therefore, through the mercy of the Most High, he cannot be shaken.

Let thine enemies feel thy hand: and thy right hand find out all that hate thee.

Thou wilt make them like an oven of fire, at the time of thy presence. The Lord with his wrath will confound them, and a fire shall devour them.

Thou wilt destroy their fruit from the earth, and their seed from among the sons of men.

Because on thee they were turning evils. Were devising a counsel which they could not accomplish—because thou wilt set them behind those thou hast left—wilt prepare others to be before them.

Be thou, O Lord, exalted ae thy power: let us sing and extol thy acts of government.

For the conclusion. On the help of the morning. A Psalm by David.

O GOD, my God ! attend tome! why hast thou forsaken me? have the acts of my transgressions [removed thee ] far from saving me? O my God, shall I cry to thee by day, and thou not listen, and by night, and thou not hear me ὃ Thou indeed dwellest in a holy place ; thou art the praise of Israel. In thee our fathers placed their trust—they trusted and thou didst deliver them. To thee they cried and they were saved; in thee they trusted and were not put to shame.

As for me, I am a worm, and no man-—the scorn of men

PSALMS.

and the people’s contempt. All that see me have laughed: me to scorn ; they said with their lips while they shaked their head,
‘“¢ He trusted in the Lord, let him deliver him; let him save him, since he delighteth m him.” Because thou art he, who drew me forth from the womb: my hope, when at the breasts of my mother—I was cast on thy care from my very birth—from my mother’s womb thou art my God; O stand not at a distance from me; for trouble is near—for there is no helper. Many bulls have encompassed me—fat bulls have beset me around.
Against me they have opened their mouth, like a ravening and roaring lion. 1 am poured out like water, and all my bones are torn asunder: my heart within me is melted like wax.
My strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue cleaveth to my palate—thou hast indeed brought me to the dust of death. Because many dogs have encompassed me, an assembly of wicked men have beset me—have pierced my hands and my feet—have counted all my bones, and have stared and looked at me; they have parted my garments among them, and for my vesture have cast lots; Therefore, O Lord, delay not thou my help, draw near to my assistance; rescue my soul from the sword—this only begotten of mine from the paw of a dog. Save me from the mouth of a lion, and this

2 lowliness of mine from the unicorn’s horns. I will declare thy

name to my brethren: in the midst of a congregation I will sing praise to thee.

Praise him, ye who fear the Lord praise him, all ye seed of Jacob. Let all the seed of Israel fear him; for he hath not slighted, nor abhorred the prayer of the distressed ; nor turned away his face from me: but hearkened to me when I cried

to him. My praise shall be of thee in a great congregation :

I will pay my vows before them who fear him.

The needy shall eat and be satisfied : and they who seek the Lord will praise him. Their heart shall be forever alive.
All the ends of the earth shall remember and turn to the Lord ; and all the families of the nations shall worship before him : for the kingdom is the Lord’s and he ruleth the nations. All the fat ones of the earth have eaten and worshipped: before him shall bow all that go down to the dust. Let my soul therefore live for him.—

31 pet

[99]

QD Or m © bh =

co xsl

9

PSALMS.

My seed indeed will serve him: a generation which is coming shall be announced for the Lord: and they will proclaim his saving mercy toa people tbat shall be born, whom

the Lord MEH Ss

A Psalm by David.

THE Lord is my shepherd, I shall want nothing. In a verdant pasture he hath fixed my abode. He hath fed me by gently flowing water and restored my soul. He hath led me in paths of righteousness for his name’s sake. For though I walk amidst the shades of death: I will fear no ills, because thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff have been my comfort. ‘Thou hast spread a table before me; in the presence of them who afflict me. With oil thou hast anointed my head ; and thine exhilarating cup is the very best. Thy mercy will surely follow me all the days of my life; and my dwelling shall be in the house of the Lord to length of days.

A Psalm by David, on the first day of the week.

THE earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof, the world and. all its inhabitants. Upon the seas he laid its foundations ; and established it upon the floods. Who shall ascend to the hill of God, and who shall stand in his holy place ? He whose hands are clean and whose heart is pure. Who hath not devoted his soul to vanity ; nor sworn deceitfully to his neighbour. Such shall receive a blessing from the Lord; and bounteous supplies from God his saviour. Such is the generation of them who seek him; who seek the face of the God of Jacob.
Open wide your gates, ye chiefs! and be opened wide, ye everlasting doors ; that the glorious king may enter. Who is the glorious king? The Lord strong and mighty : the Lord mighty in battle. Open wide your gates, ye chiefs; and be opened wide ye everlasting doors; that the glorious king may

Ἧ PSALMS.

enter. Who is this glorious king? The Lord of Hosts. He is the king of glory.

A Psalm by David.

TO thee, O Lord, I have lifted up my soul : O my God, in thee I have put my trust: let me not be shamed, nor let mine enemies deride me ; for none who wait on thee should be put to shame. Let them be shamed who vainly transgress.
O Lord, shew me thy ways and teach me thy paths. Lead me to thy truth, and teach me: for thou, O God, art my saviour, and for thee I have waited all the day long. O Lord, remember thy compassion and thy tender mercies ; for they
/ are from everlasting. Remember not the sins and follies of my youth: according to thy mercy remember me, O Lord, for thy goodness’ sake. ‘The Lord is gracious and righteous: therefore he will instruct sinners m the way: he will guide the meek in judgment: he will teach the meek his ways. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth; to them who seek his covenant and his testimonies. For the sake of thy name therefore, O Lord, pardon this sin of mine, for it is manifold—

What man soever habitually feareth the Lord; him He will instruct in the way he hath chosen : his life shall be spent in the enjoyment of good things and his offspring shall inherit ἢ the land. The Lord is the strength of them who fear him; and it is his covenant to display it for them. Mine eyes are continually towards the Lord; because he can extricate my feet from the snare. Look down upon me and compassionate me; for I am an only begotten, though distressed: the troubles of my heart are multiplied : O deliver me from these my distresses. Look on my humiliation and my trouble and forgive all my sins. View mine enemies, for they are multiplied; and have hated me with unjust hatred. O preserve my soul and deliver mé : let me not be shamed, because I have trusted in thee. To me the innocent and the upright cleaved; because
I waited for thee, O Lord. God redeem Israel from all their afflictions !

PSALMS.
By David.

JUDGE me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine integrity : and trusting in the Lord I should not be shaken. Examine me, Ὁ Lord, and prove me: try my reins and my heart. Because thy mercy is before mine eyes; and I have delighted in thy truth : I did not sit with the council of vanity; nor can I go with them who transgress: I hated the assembly of evil doers; and with the ungodly I cannot sit. I will wash my hands in innocence and go round thine altar, O Lord : that I may hear the voice of praise; and tell all thy wonderous acts. O Lord, [have loved the beauty ofthy house; and the place of the mansion of thy glory. Destroy not my soul with the wicked nor my life with blood thirsty men; in whose hands are iniquities; and whose right hand is full of bribes. As for me, I have walked in mine integrity : Redeem me, and be merciful to me. My foot hath been stedfast in rectitude : in assemblies, I will bless thee, O
Lord.

«1 Psalm of David before he was anointed.

THE Lord is my light and my saviour. Whom shall I fear?
The Lord is the defender of my life. Of whom shall I be afraid?
When evil doers approached me, to devour my flesh; they, who afflicted me, even mine enemies fainted and fell. Though a host be drawn up against me, my heart will not be dismayed; though war rise up against me, still I exercise hope.
One favour I have asked of the Lord; and this I will earnest-_ ly seek; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of my life—that I may contemplate the delight of the
Lord; and visit his temple. Because in his pavilion he hid me, in the day of my calamities—in the secret of his tabernacle he covered me; he set me upon a rock; and now, behold! he hath raised up my head against mine enemies: I have gone round and offered at his tent a sacrifice of thanksgiving : with musick vocal and instrumental I will praise the Lord. Hear, O Lord, my voice when I cry; have mercy on me and hearken to me.

10 il
12

ζ9

60

PSALMS.

To thee my heart said, I have sought thy face; thy face, O
Lord, I will seek. Turn not away thy face from me; withdraw not in anger from thy servant. Be thou my helper: leave me not, nor forsake me, O God, my saviour. Since my father and my mother have left me; and the Lord hath taken me to himself : instruct me in thy way and lead me in the right path, because of mine enemies. Deliver me not up to the will of them who are afflicting me. Because false witnesses have risen up against me and injustice hath belied itself; Iam confident of seeing the goodness of the Lord, in the land of the living. Wait for the Lord and be of good courage; let thy heart be strengthened and wait for the Lord.

A Psalm of David.

TO thee, O Lord, I have cried : O my God, pass me not by in silence. Shouldst thou pass me by in silence : I shall be like them who go down to the pit. Hear the sound of my supplication, when I pray to thee—when I lift up my hands to thy holy temple. Draw not my soul in with sinners; nor destroy me with the workers of iniquity—with them who speak peace to their neighbours and harbour mischief in their hearts.
Give them according to their deeds; and according to the wickedness of their devices. According to the works of their hands give them—retribute to them their deserts. Because they did not regard the works of the Lord; nor the operations of his hands: thou wilt utterly destroy them and not build them up again. Blessed be the Lord, because he hath heard the voice of my prayer: The Lord is my helper and my protector : on him my heart relied, and I 4m helped. My flesh also is reviyed, that with cheerfulness I may praise him. The Lord is the strength of his people; and the safeguard of his anointed. O save thy people and bless thine inheritance; feed them also and lift them up forever

PSALMS.

A Psalm of David, at the exod of the tabernacle.

OFFER to the Lord, ye children of God—offer to the Lord the offspring of rams. Offer to the Lord glory and honour:

2 offer tothe Lord, glory to his name. Worship the Lord in his
3 holy court. The voice of the Lord on the waters! The God
4 of the glory thundered! The Lord is over many waters. The

voice of the Lord is with power: the voice of the Lord is with

5 majesty. The voice of the Lord rending the cedars! The Lord
6 will rend the cedars of Lebanon, and shatter them to pieces :

as a young unicorn would a calf; so will the beloved [shatter]

7 Lebanon itself. The voice of the Lord bursting through a

8 flame of fire! The voice of the Lord shaking the wilderness.
The Lord will shake the wilderness of Kades. The voice of

9 the Lord collecting the hinds; when he shall lay the forests
10 bare. When in his temple every one uttereth praise; the Lord

11 will cause that which was deluged to be inhabited: and the
Lord will sit enthroned king forever. The Lord will give strength to his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace.—

For the conclusion. The Psalm of an Ode at the dedication of
© David’s house.

I WILL extol thee, O Lord, because thou hast upheld me, and hast not suffered mine enemies to rejoice over me. O Lord my God, to thee I cried and thou didst heal me. Thou, O
Lord, hast brought my soul up out of Hades; and saved me from among them who go down to the pit. O sing to the Lord, ye his saints; and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness. Because at his wrath there is vexation; but in his favour, life; in the evening weeping may pitch its tent ; and in the morning, joy. As for me, I, in my prosperity, said, I can never be moved: (To my comeliness, thou, Lord, in thy good pleasure hadst added strength) but thou didst turn away thy

8 face, and I was involyed in trouble. To thee, O Lord, I cried

VOL. ‘TY. 3 ¢

12 co ἢ

14

PSALMS.

and tomy God made supplication—what profit is there in my blood—by my going down to corruption? Can dust celebrate thy praise; or can it proclaim thy truth? The Lord heard. and compassionated me: the Lord became my helper. Thou didst turn my mourning into joy; thou didst rend in pieces my sackcloth and gird me with gladness, that my glory might sound thy praise; and that I might not be absorpt in grief.
O Lord, my God, to thee I will give thanks for evermore.

For the conclusion. A Psalm by David, on a surprise.

IN thee, O Lord, I have trusted. Let me never be put to shame. In thy saving mercy rescue me and deliver me—Incline thine ear to me! haste to deliver me. Be thou to me a protecting God—a house of refuge to save me. Because thou art my strength and my refuge; thou therefore, for thy name’s sake, wilt. guide and nourish me: thou wilt extricate me from this snare; which they have privily laid for me. Because thou,
O Lord, art my protector; into thy hands I will commit my spirit. Thou, O Lord the God of truth hast redeemed me.
Thou hatedst them who fruitlessly regard vanities; but I have trusted in the Lord. I will exult with joy and rejoice in thy mercy: because thou hast looked on my humilation—hast delivered my soul from these distresses—hast not shut me up into an enemy’s hand—hast set my feet in a roomy place.

Pity me, O Lord, for Iam afflicted: with indignation mine eye was troubled—my soul and all within me. Because my life was spent with grief, and my years with sighing—with affliction my strength was exhausted and my bones were troubled; among all mine enemies I became a reproach; and to my neighbours especially, and to my acquaintance, a terror.
They who saw me abroad fled from me; like a dead man out of mind I was quite forgotten: I became like a broken vessel.
Because 1 heard the whispers of many who dwell around me ; when they assembled together against me they consulted how to take my life; but as for me, I put my trust in thee O Lord;
I said, Thou art my God; in thy hands are my lots; deliver

16

PSALMS.

me from the hand of mine enemies, and from them who are persecuting me. Let thy face shine upon thy servant: save me

17 for thy mercy’s sake. O Lord, let me not be shamed, because

18

19

20 wo ho =

-[ have invoked thee. Let the wicked be shamed and driven

down to the mansion of the dead. Let those deceitful lips become speechless, which speak injustice against the righteous with pride and contempt. How great, O Lord, is the abundance of thy kindness, which thou hast laid up in store for them who fear thee—hast provided for them who trust in thee before the sons of men. In the secret of thy presence thou wilt hide them from the trouble of men ; thou wilt shelter them in a pavilion from the strife of tongues. Blessed be the Lord, because he hath marvellously displayed his mercy in a city besieged.
As for me, on my surprisal I said, I am cast far from thy presence ; therefore thou, O Lord, didst hear the voice of my supplication when I cried to thee. O love the Lord, all ye his saints, for the Lord searcheth out truth, and retributeth largely to the insolent. ‘Take courage and let your hearts be strong, all ye whose trust is in the Lord.

On understanding. By David.

HAPPY they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Happy the man, to whose account the Lord will not charge sin, and in whose mouth there is no guile. Because I kept silence, my bones were consumed; by reason of my crying all the live long day. Because day and night thy hand was heavy on me, I was reduced to misery by apiercing thorn. I acknowledged my sin and did not conceal mine iniquity: I said,
Against myself I will confess mine iniquity to the Lord, thereupon thou didst forgive the wickedness of my heart. For this every pious man should pray to thee in due time. Moreover in a flood of many waters, are they not to draw near to him? Thou art my refuge from affliction, which surroundeth me—my jubilee to redeem me from them who encompass me.

Let me instruct thee and teach thee the way thou shouldst go, I will fix steadily mine eyes upon thee. Be not like a horse or

10 ll

PSALMS.

a mule, which have no understanding, the mouths of which, when they come not to thee, thou must strain with a bridle or a cavesson. Many are the chastisements of the sinner; but mercy will encompass him who trusteth in the Lord. Rejoice in the Lord and exult ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye who are upright in heart.

By David.

REJOICE ye righteous in the Lord: praise becometh the upright. Praise the Lord with the kithara—with the ten stringed psaltery sing praises to him. Sing to him a new song; sing in harmonious and triumphant strains. For the word of the Lord is right, and all his works are true. He loveth mercy and judgment; the earth is full of the mercy of the Lord. By the word of the Lord the heavens were established, and all their host by the breath of his mouth. He gathered as in a vessel the waters of the sea; he laid up the deeps in store houses. Let all the earth fear the Lord; and all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him; for he spake and they were brought into being— he commanded and they were created. The Lord dissipateth the counsels of nations, and disannulleth the devices of peoples. He disannulleth also the counsels of chiefs. But the counsel of the .
Lord shall endure forever, the thoughts of his heart from generations to generations. Happy is the nation, whose God is the
Lord—the people, whom he hath chosen for his heritage. Out of heaven the Lord looked down; he took a view of all the children of men. He looked down from his fixed habitation on all the inhabitants of the earth. It is he alone who formed their hearts: he knoweth completely all their works. A king is not saved because of a numerous army : nor cana giant be saved by his abundant strength. A horse is a false thing for safety; - nor can he with all his power save himself. Behold the eyes of the Lord are on them who fear him—on them who confide in his mercy; to deliver their souls from death; and to nourish them in a famine. Let our soul wait for the Lord; because he is our helper and our protector. Because by him our heart can

PSALMS.

be made glad, therefore in his holy name we have trusted.
22 Let thy mercy, O Lord, be ρον us as we have put our trust in thee.

By David, when he had changed his behaviour before Abimelech, and, being dismissed by him, had gone away.

I WILL bless the Lord at all times; his praise shall be continually in my mouth. Let my soul glory in the Lord : let the meek hear and be gladdened. O magnify the Lord with me; and let us extol his name together. I sought the Lord and he heard me; and brought me safe out of all my sojourns. Come to him and be enlightened and your faces shall never be sha.

6 med. This afflicted man cried; and the Lord heard, him; and
7 saved him out of all his afflictions. The angel of the Lord will
8 encamp round them that fear him, and deliver them. O taste and see that the Lord is good! happy is the man, who trust-

9 ethin him. O fear the Lord all ye his saints! for they who fear
10 him have no want. Rich men have become poor and hungry :

But they who seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.

11 Come, ye children, hearken to me: and I will teach you the
12 fear of the Lord. What man soever desireth life and loveth to
13 see good days: keep thy tongue from evil; and thy lips from
14 speaking guile: depart from evil and do good; seek peace and
15 pursue it. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous : and
16 his ears are open to their prayer. But the face of the Lord is against them that do evil; to destroy the remembrance of them
17 from the earth. The righteous cried and the Lord heard them;
18 and delivered them out of all their afflictions. The Lord is near to those of a contrite heart; and will save them who are
9 lowly in spirit. Many are the afflictions of the righteous; but
O out of them all the Lord will deliver them. He keepeth all their
1 bones, not one of them shall be broken. Wretched is the death
2 of sinners; yet they who hate what is just will transgress. The
Lord will redeem the souls of his servants: and none will transgress who trust in him.

Ὄ OO WD μα

14

15

16

19

20

PSALMS.

By David.

JUDGE them, O Lord, who do me wrong. Fight against them who are at war with me. Take hold of the shield and buckler; and stand up in my defence. Unsheath the sword and stop my pursuers : say to my soul, I am thy safety. Let them who seek my life be shamed and confounded: let them be turned back and putto shame; whoare devising evils against me.
Let them be like dust before the wind, when the angel of the
Lord is afflicting them. Let their way be dark and slippery, when the angel of the Lord is pursuing them. Seeing they have without cause, hid for me their destructive snare—have, without reason, reproached my soul ; let a snare, which they know not, come upon them, and the gin catch them, which they have hidden ; and by that very snare let them fall.

But let my soul rejoice in the Lord, and be delighted with his salvation. Let all my bones say, O Lord, who is like thee, who deliverest the afflicted from the hand of them who are stronger than he—the afflicted and needy from them who spoil him ? False witnesses having risen up against me, laid to my charge things which I knewnot; they returned me evil for good, even bereavement to my soul. As for me, while they were raising troubles against me I cloathed myself with sackcloth, and humbled my soul with fasting. Though my prayer is to return into mine own bosom, as I would a friend, as I would an own brother, so did I endeavour to conciliate. I humbled myself as one in mourning and deep sorrow. But against me they rejoiced and gathered together ; for me, scourges were collected and I did not know: they were split—and they had no compunction. They tortured me—with scoffs they derided me; they gnashed their teeth at me.

Ὃ Lord, when wilt thou look down—rescue my soul from their malice. This only begotten of mine, from lions. I will render thee thanks in a great congregation; among a mighty people I will praise thee. Over me, let not these, my bitter enemies, vainly rejoice ; who hate me without cause, and give assent with their eyes. For to me indeed they spoke words of

21

27

28 bS »

ζ9

PSALMS.

peace, while with wrath they were contriving plots. Then they opened their mouth wide agamst me; they said, Aha! aha} our eyes have seen.

Thou, O Lord, hast seen; keep silence no longer. O Lord, stand not at a distance from me. Arise, O Lord, and attend to my trial, O my God and my Lord, for my justification.
Judge me, O Lord, according to thy righteousness, O Lord my God! and let them not rejoice over me. Let them not say in their hearts, ‘‘ Aha! aha! itis to our mind;”’ nor let them say, We have swallowed him up. Let them who rejoice at my calamities be shamed, and confounded together ; let them be cloathed with shame and confusion, who magnify themselves against me. Let them who desire my justification, exult with joy and be gladdened. Let them who wish the peace of thy servant, say continually, The Lord be magnified. So shall my tongue speak of thy righteousness—of thy praise all the day long.

For the conclusion. By David the servant of the Lord.

THE transgressor, in order that he may sin, saith within himself, “‘ He hath, before his eyes, no fear of God’s finding out and hating his iniquity :’’ because, before him, he hath acted with deceit. The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit.
He would not be wise to do good. He contrived mischief on his bed ; he persisted in every course which was not good, and did not abhor wickedness.

O Lord, thy mercy is in the heavens, and thy truth reacheth to the clouds. Thy saving goodness is like-the mountains of God, and thy judgments like the vasty deep. Thou, O
Lord, preservest men and beasts. As thou, O Lord, hast multiplied thy mercy: let the sons of men therefore trust in the shelter of thy wings. With the fatness of thy house they shall be plentifully fed; and thou wilt give them for drink, the full flowing stream of thy pleasures : for with thee there is a fountain of life, and by thy light we shall see light. Extend thy mercy to them that know thee, and thy goodness to them who

12

21

PSALMS.

are upright in heart. Let not the foot of pride come against me, nor the hand of sinners shake me. There all the workers of iniquity are fallen! they were thrust out and could not stand.

By David.

FRET not because of evil doers : nor envy them who commit iniquity. For like grass, they shall quickly wither: and like the tender herb, they shall quickly fall. Trust in the Lord and exercise kindness ; dwell in the land and thou shalt be fed with the riches thereof. Indulge thyself with delight in the
Lord, and he will give thee the desires of thy heart. Lay open thy way before the Lord, and trust in him ; and he will accomplish—he will indeed bring forth thy righteousness like light, and thy judgment, as the noon day. Submit thyself to the Lord, and supplicate him; fret not at the man who prospereth in his way—at the man who committeth iniquity. Cease from anger and forsake wrath—be not fretted so as to do evil; for they who do evil shall be cut off: but they who wait for the Lord shall inherit the land. Yet a little while, and the sinner shall be no more ; though thou mayst seek his place, thou shalt not find it. But the meek shall inherit the land, and delight themselves in the abundance of peace. The sinner may watch the righteous, and enash his teeth at him; but the Lord will laugh him to scorn, for he foreseeth that his day willcome. The sinners drew the sword—they bent their bow, to overthrow the afflict- _ ed and needy—to slay the upright in heart. Let their sword pierce their own heart; and their bows be broken to shivers.
Better is the little which a righteous man hath, than the abundant wealth of sinners. For the arms of sinners shall be broken; but the Lord supporteth the righteous. The Lord knoweth the ways of the spotless ; and their inheritance shall last forever.
In time of troubles they shall not be shamed, and in days of famine they shall be plentifully fed. Because the sinners shall perish. Therefore when the enemies of the Lord were exalted and glorified—they were flitting away like smoke, and vanishing. The sinner borroweth and will not repay ; but the right-

PSALMS.

eous sheweth mercy and giveth. Hence they who bless him shall inherit the land; but they who curse him shall be rooted out. The steps of a man will be directed by the Lord, when he taketh delight in his way. When he happeneth to fall, he shall not fall with violence ; for the Lord is a stay to his hand.
Ihave been young and am now old, yet I have never seen the righteous utterly forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. All the day long he is merciful and lendeth, and his seed shall be entitled to a blessing. Depart from evil and do good and dwell for evermore. Because the-Lord loveth judgment and will not

forsake his saints; they shall be preserved forever. ‘The spot-

less shall be avenged, when the seed of the wicked shall be utterly cut off; the righteous shall inherit the land, and dwell therein forever. The mouth of the righteous will speak wisdom, and his tongue will talk of justice. ‘The law of his God is in his heart, and his footsteps shall not slide. The sinner watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to kill him ; but the Lord

will not leave him im his hand, nor suffer him to condemn him

when he is judged. Wait on the Lord and keep his way: and he will exalt thee to inherit the land. When sinners are cut off, thou shalt see it. I have seen the wicked highly exalted, towering aloft like the cedars of Lebanon. Again I passed by, and lo! he was gone. Though I sought him, his place could not be found. Preserve innocence and eye rectitude; for there is a remnant for the man of peace. But transgressors shall be cut off together—the remnants of the wicked shall be rooted out. The safety of the righteous is from the Lord; and he is their. protector in time of trouble. The Lord will help them and deliver them ; he will rescue them from sinners, and saye them : because in him they have put their trust.

X XXVIII.
A Psalm for remembrance, respecting rest.

O LORD, rebuke me not in thy wrath; nor chasten me in thine anger. For in me thy shafts are deeply fixed—and on me thou hast heavily laid thy hand. There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger—no rest to my bones, because

1TH oh

bast

‘PSALMS.

of my sins. Because mine iniquities mounted above my ‘head; like a heavy burden they were heavy on me. The wounds, on account of my folly putrefied and became corrupt. Iwas in misery and wholly bent down: all the longsome day I went mourning.. For my soul was filled with illusions; and there was no soundness in my flesh. I was afflicted and exceedingly depressed : I roared because of the groans of my heart. Now

all my desire was before thee, and my groans were not

hid from thee. My heart panted, my strength failed me: and the light of mine eyes is no more with me. My. friends and my neighbours stood overagainst me: they drew near and stopt— even my near relations stood aloof. But they who seek my life pressed forward : and they who seek my ruin spake vanities. All the day long they studied deceits. As for me, I, as if deaf, did not hear: and like one dumb 1 opened not my mouth.
I became indeed like a man who heareth not; and in whose mouth there are no reproofs; for in thee, O Lord, I put my trust. (Thou Ὁ Lord my God wilt hearken—) for I said, Perhaps mine enemies may rejoice over me: (Indeed when my feet slipped, they used swelling words against me) for I was prepared for stripes, and my sorrowful situation was continually before me; that I might declare mine iniquity, and express my sorrow for my sin. But as for mine enemies they live and are stronger than I: and they who hate me wrongfully are multiplied. They who reward me evil for good, traduced me: because I followed righteousness. Forsake me not utterly, O Lord, my God: stand not at a distance from me.
Draw near to my assistance, O Lord. of my salvation.

XXXKIX.
For the conclusion. For Idithun. An Ode by David.

I SAID, Let me watch my ways; that I may not sin with my tongue. I set a guard on my mouth; when the sinner stood before me. I was dumb and humbled and silent from good things; and my grief was renewed. My heart was warmed within me. That by. my meditation a fire might be kindled;

. I spake with my tongue—Make known to me, O Lord mine

end; and the number of my days, what it is. That I may know

PSALMS.

what I lack of it. Behold thou hast made my days old: and mine existence is as nothing before thee. ‘The universe—every man living is vanity. Man indeed walketh about as an image;

still he troubleth himself in vain. He heapeth up treasures —

and knoweth not for whom he is to gather them. Now then what is my expectation ? Is it not the Lord? In thee 15. my hope. Deliver me from all my transgressions. Thou hast made me the reproach of a fool: I was dumb and opened not my mouth : because thou art he who didst make me. O! Remove thy scourges from me: by the blow of thy hand I fainted.
With rebukes thou hast corrected man for iniquity; and caused his life to waste like a spider. Still every man troub- Ὁ leth himself in vain. Hearken, O Lord, to my prayer: give ear to my supplication : hold not thy peace at my tears: since
I am asojourner in the land; and a stranger as all my fathers were; O spare me that I may recover strength; before I go hence and be no more. ;

For the conclusion. A Psalm by David.

I WAITED patiently for the Lord and he attended to me and heard my prayer: and brought me up from a horrible pit and from miry clay; and set my feet on a rock and directed my steps, and put in my mouth a new song—a hymn to our ~
God. Many will see and be struck with awe, and trust in the
Lord. Happy the man, whose hope is the name of the Lord, and who hath not looked to vanities and lying fooleries. Many are thy wonders which thou, O Lord my God, hast wrought ; and for thy thoughts there is none to be compared to thee.
I have declared and spoken. They are multiplied beyond computation. Sacrifice and offerings thou didst not desire, but preparedst for me a body ; whole burnt offerings and offerings for sin thou didst not require. Then I said, Behold I come;
(in the volume of a book it is written respecting me) to. perform, O my God, thy will, I was determined, even that law of thine, within my heart. I have published the good news of thy righteousness, in a great congregation. Behold I will not refrain my lips ; thou, O Lord, knowest my righteousness. I have

1

12

17 bo =

10

ῬΘΑΙΜ5.:

not hid thy truth in my heart, but have mentioned thy salvation—I have not concealed thy mercy and thy truth from a great congregation. Withhold not thou then, O Lord, thy tender mercies from me. Thy mercy and thy truth have continually upheld me. Because evils without number encompassed me—amine iniquities had overtaken me, therefore I was notable to look up; they were multiplied above the hairs of my head, therefore my heart failed me.

Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me. O Lord, draw near to my assistance. Let them who seek my life to destroy it, be shamed and confounded together. Let them be turned back and shamed who wish me evil; let those quickly bear their shame who say to me, Ha! ha! Let all who seek thee, O
Lord, rejoice and be glad for thee; let them who love thy salvation say continually, The Lord be magnified! As for me, I am distressed and needy, the Lord will care for me. Thou art my helper and my protector, O my God, make no delay.

ΧΙ,1.
For the conclusion. A Psalm by David.

HAPPY he who is considerate with regard to the distressed and needy ; in time of trouble the Lord will deliver him. May the Lerd preserve him and keep him alive, and make him happy in the land, and may he never deliver him into the hands of his enemy ! May the Lord support him on his bed of languishing! thou hast made all his bed in this sickness of his. I said,
‘‘Lord.be merciful to me: heal my soul, for 1 have sinned against thee.”? Mine enemies said wickedly of me, ‘‘ When will he die and his name perish ?”” And if one came to see me, his heart spoke vainly. He collected iniquity for himself; he went abroad and spoke for that purpose. All mine enemies spread whispers against me; against me, they devised things hurtful tome. They came to-a wicked determination against me.
‘“ Now he is confined to his bed, let him never rise again.”
Nay, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted—who ate of my bread, lifted up his heel against. me. But thou, O Lord,

PSALMS. 

have compassion on me, and raise me up, that I may requite
11 them. By this, I know that thou hast delighted in me, because
12 mine enemy hath not triumphed over me. And for mine innocence thou hast upheld me; and established me before thee forever.
13 Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, from everlasting to everlasting. Amen. Amen.

For the conclusion. On understanding. For the sons of Kore.

1 AS the hart panteth for fountains of water, so panteth my
2 soul for thee, Ὁ God. My soul hath thirsted for the living God ;
3 When shall I come and appear before God? My tears were my food day and night, when they said to me continually,
Where is thy God? Onrecollecting these things, I have poured out my soul by myself.
4 Since I am to pass on, at the place of an awful tabernacle, to the house of God, with a voice of joy and praise—with the
5 acclamations of.them who celebrate a festival: why art thou,
O my soul, cast down; and why disquietest thou me? Trust in
God, for I shall praise him: he is the health of my countenance.
6 O my God, my soul within me was troubled ; therefore I will remember thee, from the land of Jordan and Ermoneim, bordering
7 on the little mountain. Deep calleth on deep to form thy roaring cataracts; all thy meteors and thy billows passed
8 over me. By day the Lord will command his kindness, and in the night he will make it manifest. Let there be with me a
9 prayer to the God of my life. Let me say to God, Thou art my helper. Why hast thou forgotten me—why go I pensive
10 because of mine enemy’s oppression ? When my bones were bruised, mine enemies reproached me, by their saying to me
11 every day, Where is thy God. Why art thou, O my soul, cast down—and why disquietest thou me? Trust in God, for I shall praise him; he is the health of my countenance and my
God.

10

PSALMS.

A Psalm by David.

JUDGE me, O God, and plead my cause against an ungodly nation: deliver me from an unjust and deceitful man. Since thou, O God, art my strength, why hast thou cast me off? and why go I mourning, because of mine enemy’s oppression ?
O send forth thy light and thy truth; these have conducted me, and. led me to thy holy mountain, and to thy tabernacles. Let me go to the altar of God—to God, the joy of my youth:
With a kithara, I will praise thee, O God, my God. Why art thou, O my soul, cast down—and why disquietest thou me? Trust in God, for I shall praise him. My God is the health of my countenance.

‘ely.

For the conclusion. For the sons of Kore. A Psalm for ve. Understanding. ,

O GOD, we have heard with our ears—our fathers have told us the work which thou didst in the days of old. When thy hand had extirpated nations, thou didst plant them: thou didst afflict nations and drive them out. For they took not possession of the land with their own sword : nor was it their own arm that-saved them : but thy right hand and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou tookest pleasure in them. Thou, who didst command the deliverances of Jacob; even thou art my king and my God. By thee we can push down our enemies, and through thy name, scorn them who rise. up against us. For m mine own bow I will not put trust, nor is it mine own sword that can save me. For thou hast saved us from our enemies, and hast put to shame them who hated us.
In God let us boast, all the day long: and to thy. name give thanks forever..

And hast thou now cast us off and put us to shame, and wilt not go forth with our armies! Thou hast turned us back before our enemies ; and they who hate us have spoiled for

. 42

bo bo to bo

PSALMS.

themselves. Thou hast delivered us up as sheep, to be devoured, and hast scattered us among the nations. Thou hast sold thy people for nought; the shouts of victory gave no abundance. Thou hast made us a reproach to our neighbours—a scoff and derision to those around us. Thou hast made us a

by-word among the nations—a shaking of the head among

the tribes. All the day long, my confusion is before me, and the shame of my face hath covered me, because of a reproacher’s and a defamer’s voice; and by reason of an enemy and an avenger. All these things have come upon us, though we have not forgotten thee—nor dealt: falsely in thy covenant.
Though our heart hath not turned back, yet thou hast turned our steps from thy way. Because thou hast humbled us in the place of affliction, and covered us with the shadow of death;
Have we forgotten the name of our God—or have we stretched out our hands to a strange god? Will not God search out these things, for he knoweth the secrets of the heart? Since for thy sake we are killed all the day long, and accounted as sheep for slaughter: awake: why sleepest thou, O Lord? Arise and cast us not off forever. Why turnest thou away thy face forgetting our distress and our affliction? Because our soul is humbled to the dust, and our belly cleaveth to the ground; arise O Lord; come to our assistance and deliver us for the sake of thy name.

XLY.

Jor the conclusion. Respecting them who are to be changed. For

the sons of Kore. An Ode for understanding. Concerning the
Beloved.

MY heart hath indited a good word, I recite my performances to the king. My tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
Thou art fairer than the sons of men: grace is poured out by thy lips; for this cause God hath blessed thee forever. Gird thy sword on thy thigh, O thou Mighty! To thy comeliness and thy beauty give energy, and prosper and reign, for truth, meekness and justice’s sake; and let thine own right hand marvellously conduct thee. Thine arrows are sharpened, O Mighty one, nations shall fall wnder thee; they are im the heart of the

8

9

10

12

13

14

17

. PSALMS.

king’s enemies. Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever; the

sceptre of thy kingdom is a sceptre of rectitude. Thou didst love righteousness and hate iniquity, therefore God, thy God anointed thee with the oil of joy above thy associates. There is myrrh and stacte and casia for thy garments—for the ivory state rooms from which kings’ daughters gladdened thee. In honour of thee the queen stood on thy right hand, arrayed in robes of gold and embroidery. Hear, O daughter, and behold, and incline thine ear, and forget thy people and thy father’s house. Because the king is enamoured of thy beauty—because he is thy Lord; when the daughters of Tyre bow down to him with gifts, the richest people of the land will supplicate thy favour. All this honour is for the daughter of the king of Hesebon herself, she is surrounded with chain works of gold, and embroidery. The virgins in her train shall be introduced to the king. They who are related to her shall be troduced to thee.
They shall be introduced with gladness and rejoicmg—They shall be brought to the temple of the king. Instead of thy fathers, sons are born to thee; these thou shalt make princes over all the land. ‘They shall cause thy name to be remembered in all ages, therefore nations shall praise thee forever.

XLVI. ,

At the conclusion. For the sons of Kore. A Psalm concerning hid-

1

2 den things.

GOD is our refuge and strength; our helper in the troubles which often befal us. Therefore we will not be dismayed, though the earth be shaken, and mountains be hurled to the

8 midst of seas. Their waters roared and were troubled. By his
4 power the mountains were convulsed. The swelling streams

of this river gladden the city of God: the Most High hath hallowed his own dwelling: God is in the midst of it; 1t cannot

6 be shaken; God by his presence will support it. The nations

were troubled, kingdoms tottered; he uttered his voice, the

7 earth was shaken. The Lord of armies is with us; our helper

is the God of Jacob. Come and see the works of the Lord—
The wonders which he hath done on the earth: he 15 making

PSALMS.

wars to cease to the ends of the earth. He will break the bow and shiver the lance, and shields he will utterly consume with
10 fire. Be still and know that Iam God: let me be exalted among
11 the nations, let me be exalted in the earth. The Lord of armies is with us, our helper is the God of Jacob.

- For the conclusion. A Psalm for the sons of Kore.

Ὁ CLAP your hands, all ye nations; shout to God witha triumphant voice: for the Lord Most High is awful—a great king over all the earth. He hath subjected tribes to us, nations also under our feet. He hath chosen for us his inheritance the excellency of Jacob which he loved. God ascended at the triumphant shout—the Lord, at the trumpet’s sounding. O sing praises to our God; sing praises, Sing praises to our king;
7 sing praises. Since God is king of the whole earth; O sing
8 praises with understanding. God hath commenced his reign
9 over the nations; God is seated on his holy throne. The heads of families assembled with the God of Abraham. Because the mighties of the land belong to God, hey have been exceedingly exalted.

The Psalm of an Ode for the sons of Kore, on the second day of the week.

1 THE Lord is great and greatly to be praised; in the city
2 of our God—on his holy mountain. To the great joy of the whole earth, he is establishing firmly Sion’s mountains. On
3 the sides to the north is the city of the great king. God is
4 known in its palaces, when he undertaketh its defence. For lo!
5 the kings of the land assembled—they came together. Having taken a view they were so astonished ; they were frightened,
6 they were shaken: a trembling seized them: pangs were there
7 as of a woman in travail. With a tempestuous blast thou wilt dash to pieces the ships of Tarsish. As we have heard, so
8 have we seen; at the city of the Lord of armies—at the city
VOL. 11. 3 E

14

15

PSALMS.

of our God. God hath established it forever. We waited, O
God, for thy mercy, in the midst of thy people. According to thy name, O God; so be thy praise to the ends of the earth.
Thy right hand is full of righteousness. Let mount Sion be gladdened : and let the daughters of Judea exult for joy ; because of thy judgments, O Lord. Go round Sion, and encompass it: make proclamation in the towers thereof; mark with attention its strength ; and take a distinct view of its palaces : that you may tell another generation, that he is our God forever and ever. He will tend us as a shepherd for evermore.

For the conclusion. A Psalm for the sons of Kore.

HEAR these things, all ye nations; listen attentively, all ye inhabitants of the world! both ye of lowest rank, and heads of families; both rich and poor together. My mouth shall speak wisdom; and the meditation of my heart understanding. J will incline mine ear toa parable : with a psaltery I will unfold my problem. Why am I terrified in an evil day? The iniquity at my heel will surround me. Some put confidence in their power: and some boast of the abundance of their wealth.
A brother is not redeemed. Isa man to redeem himself? He cannot give to God an atonement for himself; and the price for the roseniptice of his life: Though he laboured for the age that he may live to the end. Shall he therefore not see corruption? When he seeth the wise dying; together the foolish and senseless shall perish. And they shall leave their wealth to others. (a) But their graves shall be their houses forever— their dwelling places to all generations. On these parcels of earth, they have put their names. (b) When a man, who is in honour, hath not understanding: he hath been compared te

the brute beasts and is like them—-this very way of theirs was —

to them a stumbling block; and after this shall it with their mouth, be praised ? They are pent up like sheep in the mansion of the dead: death shall feed them and the early watches will rule over them: and that help of theirs from their glory, shall in the mansion of the dead become obsolete. But God

PSALMS.

will redeem my soul from the power of that mansion when it receiveth me. Fear not when a man groweth rich, nor when the glory of his house is increased. For when he dieth he can carry nothing away: nor will this glory of his descend with him,
Because during this life his soul shall be blessed ; let him praise thee when thou doest him a benefit. He shall go to the generation of his fathers; he shall never see light. A man who is in honour and hath not understanding, hath been compared to the brute beasts, and is like them.

A Psalm, for Asaph.

THE God of gods, the Lord hath spoken, and summoned the earth from the rising to the setting of the sun. Out of Sion the perfection of his comeliness—God in full manifestation, even our God will come and will not keep silence. Before him a fire shall blaze; and around him shall be a mighty tempest. He will call to the heaven above and to the earth, to judge his people. Gather his saints together to him—them who are in covenant with him touching sacrifices; and let the heavens declare his righteousness. ‘‘ Because God is judge, hear, O my people and I will speak to thee—O Israel and I will testify to thee!
I am God, thy God I AM. I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices. And as for thy whole burnt offerings which are continually before me, I will not take young bulls from thy house, nor he-goats from thy folds. For all the beasts of the forests are mine, the cattle on the mountains, and the beeves. I claim all the birds of the air; and to me belong the ripe fruits of the field. If I were hungry, I would not tell thee; for the world is mine and the fulness thereof. Do I eat the flesh of bulls? Or do I drink the blood of goats? Sacrifice to God a sacrifice of praise, and pay thy vows tothe Most High. Then call on me in the day of trouble; and I will deliver thee and thou shalt praise me.”’ But to the sinner God said, ‘‘Why dost thou mention my judgments, or take my covenant in thy mouth? As for thee, thou hast hated instruction, and cast my words behind thy back. When thou sawest a thief, thou didst run with him-—

19

PSALMS. and hast been a partaker with adulterers. Thy mouth’ hath

_ abounded in wickedness, and thy tongue hath framed deceits.
20 Sitting down thou hast spoken against thy brother, and against

thy mother’s son, propagated falsehood. These things thou hast done and I was silent. Thou unjustly didst suppose that
I would be like thyself. I will reprove thee and set things in order before thee. Now then, consider this, ye who forget God; lest he tear you in pieces and there be none to deliver. The sacrifice of praise will glorify me; and this is the way in which
I will shew him the salvation of God.”

For the conclusion. A Psalm by David, when Nathan the prophet

1

came to him after he had gone to Bersabe.

HAVE mercy upon me, O God, according to thy great compassion: and according to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out this my crime, wash me thoroughly from this iniquity of mine; and purify me from this my sin. For I acknowledge my transgression; and my sin is continually before me.
Against thee especially I have sinned; and in thy sight done this evil. So that thou must be justified in thine acts, and must overcome, when thou art judged. For behold I was born in iniquity; in sins my mother conceived me: for behold thou lovedst truth; to me thou hadst manifested the obscure and hidden things of thy wisdom. Sprinkle me with hyssop and I shall be purified; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
Cause me to hear joy and gladness; let the bones, which have been humbled, rejoice. O Turn away thy face from my sins; and blot out all mine iniquities. Create in me, O God, a pure heart; and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me. Restore to me the joy of thy salvation; and support me with a becoming spirit, that I may teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners may turn to thee. Deliver me from blood guiltiness,
O God, the God of my salvation! That my tongue may with joy proclaim thy forgiving mercy. O Lord, open my lips, that my mouth may proclaim thy praise. Hadst thou desired sacrifice, I would have given it. In whole burnt offerings thou wilt

PSALMS.

17 not take delight. The sacrifice for God is a contrite spirit. A broken and an humble heart, thou, O God, wilt not despise.
18 Deal favourably, O Lord, in thy good pleasure, with Sion.
19 And let the walls of Jerusalem be builded. Then wilt thou be pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness as an offering, and on thine altar young bulls shall then be offered up as whole burnt

. offerings.

For the conclusion. On understanding. By David, when Doek the
Idumean came and told Saul and said to him, David went to Abimelech’s house.

1 WHY boastest thou in mischief, O mighty man of iniquity?
2 All the day long he devised injustice. Thy tongue is like a
3 sharp razor: thou hast practised deceit. Thou hast loved evil
4 more than good—lying more than speaking truth. Thou hast loved all the decrees of destruction—a tongue practised in deceit.
5 For this cause God will utterly destroythee—tear thee up and hurl thee from thy dwelling; even thy rooted stock out of the land of the living. The righteous will see indeed and be afraid. And they will laugh at him and say, Behold the man who made not God his strength; and trusted in the abundance
8 of his wealth; and strengthened himself in his vanity! As for me, I shall be like a fruitful olive tree in the house of God. I have trusted in the mercy of God for this age and for the age
9 of the ages. I will praise thee for this age because thou hast made it; and wait for thy name, because it is good in the sight of thy saints.

1m

For the conclusion. Upon Maelath. Of understanding. By David.

1 THE fool said in his heart, There is no God. They have corrupted themselves and are become abominable by iniquities,

2 there is none who doeth good. God looked down from heaven on the children of men to see if any had understanding or were

3 seeking God. They had all turned aside : they are all together
4, become vile. There is none doing good: no not one. They will

PSALMS.

not bethink themselves, they are all working iniquity, they are eating up my people as they do bread? They have not called upon God. They were seized with terror on the spot where there was no fear; because God had scattered the bones of men pleasers. They were put to shame because God despised them. O that he would for Sion’s sake grant safety to Israel !
When the Lord hath brought back the captivity of his people
Jacob will rejoice and Israel will be glad.

For the conclusion. Among the Hymns on understanding. By
David, when the Ziphites came and said to Saul, Behold is not
David hid among us.

SAVE me, O God, by thy name; and judge me by thy power. O God, hearken to my prayer. Give ear to the words of my mouth. For strangers have risen up against me; and men of power have sought my life. They have not set God before them. Behold God is my helper. The Lord is the protector of my life. He will turn these evils on mine enemies.
Destroy thou them in thy truth. With free will offerings I will sacrifice to thee: I will praise thy name, O Lord; for it is good : because thou hast delivered me from all affliction; and among mine enemies mine eye hath looked on.

For the conclusion. Among the Hymns on understanding.
By David.

GIVE ear, O God, to my prayer; and overlook not my supplication. Attend to me and hear me. I have mourned in my meditation and am troubled: because of the voice of an enemy and because of the oppression of a sinner. Because upon me they cast iniquity and boiled with malice against me ; my heart within me was troubled; and the terror of death fell upon me. Fear and trembling came against me; and a dark gloom overwhelmed me. So that I said, O that I had

10

PSALMS.

wings like those of a dove; that I might fly away and be at rest. Behold I had removed far away, as a fugitive, and taken up my lodging in the wilderness. I waited for him who delivereth me from distress and a furious tempest. Confound, O
Lord, and divide their tongues, Kor I saw iniquity and contradietion in the city. Day and night shall transgression go round it on its walls and trouble be in the midst of it, and in-

11 justice? Usury and fraud have not departed from its streets.

12

15

1

Had an enemy reproached me I could have borne it. And had the man who hated me magnified himself against me, I could have hid myself from him. But thou, O man, my second self, my guide, mine intimate friend! Who being with me didst sweeten my repasts! In the house of God, we walked in unanimity—Let death come upon them; Let them go down alive to the mansion of the dead : because there was wickedness in their dwellings—in the midst of them. As for me, I cried to
God, and the Lord heard me. Evening and morning and at noon I will declare and proclaim; and he will hearken to my voice. He will deliver my soul in peace from them who come near me. Because they among many were with me; God who existeth before the ages will ἔπι and afflict them. For there is no redemption for them. They indeed did not fear God: he hath stretched forth his hand with retribution. They profaned and broke his covenant: they were scattered by the indignation of his countenance. When his heart was near, his words were smoother than oil. Now they are daggers. Cast thy care on the Lord, and he will sustain thee. He will never suffer the righteous to be shaken, But thou, O God, wilt drag them down to the pit of destruction. Bloody and deceitful men shall not live half their days. But as for me I will trust in thee, O
Lord.

for the conclusion. For people far removed from the Holies.
By David for a monumental inscription, when the Philis-

tines had him in their power at Geth.

PITY me, O God, for a man hath trodden me down. Fight-

2 ing all the day long he hath afflicted me. Mine enemies have

& 9

[-.5]

7

PSALMS.

trodden me down the whole day, with the day in their favour.
Because they who fight against me are many, let them be confounded. But let me trust in thee: to God let me commend

my words. In God I have trusted all the day long: I will not

fear what flesh can do to me. All the day long they spurned my words: all their thoughts were against me for mischief.
Some are to dwell near and hide themselves: some are to watch my footsteps. As I have suffered this for my life, thou wilt on no account save them. In thine indignation thou wilt cast down peoples. O God, to thee I have unfolded my life : thou hast placed my tears before thee. According to thy promise mine enemies shall turn back ; on the day when I invoke thee. Behold I know that thou art my God. For God let me approve the decree: for the Lord let me approve the word.
In God I have put my trust; I will not fear what man can do to me. On me, O God, are the vows of thy praise, which
I will pay: because thou hast delivered my soul from death; and my feet from falling: that I may worship acceptably before God; in the light of the living.—

For the conclusion. Destroy not. By David for a monumental inscription, when he fled to the cave from the presence of Saul.

BE merciful to me, O God; be merciful to me. For in thee my soul hath trusted : and in the ‘shadow of thy wings I will put my trust, until this iniquity pass away. I will cry to
God the Most high ; to God who. to me hath been kind. He sent from heaven and saved me. He delivered up to reproach them who were treading me down. God sent forth his mercy and his truth; and delivered my soul from the midst of lions.
I laid me down to sleep, troubled as I was. As for the sons of men, their teeth are weapons and darts; and their tongue is a sharp sword. Be thou, O God, exalted above the heavens ; and thy glory over all the earth. They had prepared snares for my feet; and had caused my soul to bow down. They dug a pit before me: but into it they themselves have fallen.
My heart is prepared, O God; my heart is prepared I will

PSALMS.

8 sing and to vocal join instrumental musick. Awake my glory

—awake psaltery and kithara: -I myself will awake early, I

9 will praise thee, O Lord, among peoples: among nations I

10 will hymn thy praise. For thy mercy is magnified up to hea-

11 ven and thy truth up to the clouds. Be thou, O God, exalted above the heavens, and thy glory over all the earth.

For the conclusion. Destroy not... By David, for a monumentat inscription.

DO you indeed speak righteousness? Do you judge uprightly, O sons of men ? In heart, indeed, you are working iniquity in the land: your hands are weaving injustice. From the womb the wicked are in a state of alienation, they have

4 gone astray from their birth—they spoke lies. They have a venom like that of a serpent—like that of a deaf adder which
5 stoppeth its ears; which will not hearken to the voice of charmers;
6 nor to the charm administered by the wise. God hath broken their teeth in their mouth: the Lord hath broken the
7 lion’s grinders. They shall be despised like water passing by.
8 He will bend his bow till they be weakened. Like melting wax they shall be dissolved. A fire fell and they saw not the
9 sun. Before your bramble bush can make its prickles felt ; it
10 will devour you as it were alive, as with wrath. The righteous will rejoice when he seeth the punishment of the wicked ; he will wash his hands in the blood of the sinner. And man will say, Since there is indeed a reward for the righteous, there is a God who judgeth those on the earth.

For the conclusion. Destroy not. By David, for a monumental inscription, when Saul sent and watched his house in order to put him to death.

1 DELIVER me, O God, from mine enemies: and redeem
2 me from them who rise up against me. Deliver me from them
VOL. 11. ; 3F

ies)

8

9

10

11

12

13

16

17

For the conclusion. For those who are still to be changed. For a

Noo

PSALMS.

who work iniquity; and save me from blood thirsty men.
For behold they have hunted my life: the mighty are set against me: though there is no transgression—no sin, O Lord, in me. Without transgression I ran and kept a straight course: awake to meet me and behold. Do thou, O Lord, the God of hosts, the God of Israel! attend to visit all the nations: shew no mercy to any workers of iniquity. They are to return at evening; and suffer hunger like a dog, and go round the city. Behold they are to speak oraculously with their mouth; and have a sword in their lips; For who heard? But thou, O Lord, wilt laugh them to scorn. Thou canst set at nought all the nations.
My strength is with thee: I will keep watch: for thou, O God, art my supporter. My God will cause his mercy to go before me: my God will display it to me among mine enemies. Slay them not. Perhaps they may have forgotten thy law. Scatter them with thy power; and bring them back, O Lord, my defender.
Let them be but arrested in their pride; the destructions attendant on their cath and falsehood, will shew the sin of their mouth, the word of their lips. Under destructive wrath they cannot subsist. Let them know that the God of Jacob ruleth over the ends of the earth. They are to return at evening and suffer hunger like a dog and. go round the city. Let them disperse, that they may eat; and if they are not satisfied, let them murmur. But I will sing of thy power; and in the morning exult in thy mercy: because thou wast my supporter, and my refuge in the day of my affliction. Thou art my helper; te thee, O my God, I will sing; thou art my supporter, my God, my comfort.
Lik.

monumental inscription. By David, for instruction, when he had ὦ

burned Syrian Mesopotamia, and Syrian Sobal; and Joab had returned, when he smote in the valley of Salt, twelve thousand.

O GOD, thou didst cast us off and destroy us ; thou wast angry, but hast had compassion on us. Thou hast shaken the land and troubled it. Heal the breaches of it ; for it hath been

shaken. Thou hast shewn thy people hard things; thou hast —

4

5 cor)

«ὦ σ᾽ iw Ὁ. 09

jee)

PSALMS.

made us drink the wine of astonishment. Thou hast given to them who fear thee, a signal to flee from the face of the bow— that thy beloved may be delivered, save with thy right hand and hearken to me. God hath spoken in his sanctuary. I shall rejoice and divide Sikima, and mete out the valley of tents.
Galaad is mine; and mine is Manasses: E;phraim is the strength of my head; Juda, my king; Moab is the cauldron of my hope. Over Idumea I willextend my march: to me the Philistines are subjected. Who will lead me to the fortified city : who will guide me to Idumea? Wilt not thou, O God, who didst cast us off—wilt not thou, O God, go out with our armies ? Grant us help, because of affliction ; safety from man is indeed vain. Through God we can exert power, he can bring to nothing them who afflict us.

- For the conclusion. Among the Hymns. By David.

HEAR, O God, my supplication : attend to this prayer of mine. From the extremity of the land, I cried to thee, when my heart began to despond : at Petra thou didst raise me up, and conduct me. Because thou hast been my hope—a strong tower from the face of a foe; I shall dwell at thy tabernacle forever—I shall be sheltered in the covert of thy wings. Because thou, O God, hast heard my prayer—hast given a possession to them who fear thy name ; thou wilt add days to the days of a king, and prolong his years to endless ages; he will continue forever in the presence of God. O that every of them may find out his mercy and truth! So will I sing to thy name forever, that I may, day by day, perform my vows.

Lor the conclusion. For Idithun. A Psalm. By David.
SHALL not my soul be subjected to God? For from him is

my salyation. For my God and my Saviour himself, is my supporter—I shall never any more be shaken. How long will you

4

5

PSALMS.

set yourselves against a man? You are all committing murder, as witha bended wall and a rampart pushed down. But they had determined to pull down my honour. I was fleeing in thirst; with their mouth they blessed, but with their heart they imprecated curses. But be thou, O my soul, subjected to God :

6 for from him is mine expectation. Because my God and my

Saviour himself, is my support; I shall no more wander as an.

7 exile. In God is my safety and my glory ; he is the God of my

8 help, and on God is my reliance. ‘Trust in him all ye congregated people: pour out your hearts before him ; for God is our

9 helper. But as for the vain sons of men—the lying sons of men;
10 Even in an unfair balance they are altogether vanity. Trust

11

7

9

not in oppression—nor eagerly covet plunder; if riches flow in, set not your heart on them. Once God hath spoken; these two things I have heard: That strength belongeth to God, and that mercy, O Lord, is thine: that thou wilt render to every one according to his works.

A Psalm by David, when he was in the wilderness of Idumea.

O GOD, my God! to approach thee, I rise early. My soul thirsted for thee. For thee [J thirst] with all the vehement desire with which my flesh pines ina land, desert, trackless and without water. Thus have I appeared to thee in the sanctuary; that I might see thy power and thy glory. Because thy kindness is better than life; my lips shall continually praise thee. Thus will I bless thee while I live: and in thy name I will lift up my hands. Let my soul be filled as with marrow. and fatness: that my joyful lips may praise thy name. If I recollected thee on my bed: in the morning watches I meditated on thee. Because thou hast been my helper : therefore in the shadow of thy wings I will rejoice. My soul hath kept close to thee: thy right hand hath supported me. But as for these who sought my life in vain; they shall go to the lowest parts of the earth. They shall be delivered up to the edge of the sword: they shall be portions for jackals. But the joy of the king will be in God. Every one who sweareth by him

2

PSALMS,

shall glory; because the mouth of them who speak lies is

stopped.
_ LXIV.

For the conclusion. A Psalm by David.

HEAR, O God, my prayer when I invoke thee. From the fear of an enemy deliver my soul. Thou hast sheltered me from the conspiracy of wicked men—from the multitude of them who are working iniquity. They sharpened their tongues like a sword: they bent a bow, a bitter thing, to shoot secretly a blameless man: They are to shoot him suddenly and not be afraid. They strengthened for themselves an evil matter : they talked of hiding snares, saying, Who can see us? They searched for iniquity : they failed in the search. A man is to come witha deep heart; and God is to be exalted. Their wounds became the dart of infants : when their tongues vilified him. All that saw them were troubled: Then every man was afraid. Then they rehearsed the works of God; then they understood his doings. Let the righteous rejoice in the Lord and trust in him: and let all the upright in heart be praised.

For the conclusion. A Psalm by David. An Ode.

TO thee, O God, a hymn in Sion is seemly : and to thee a vow should be paid. Hearken to my prayer, To thee all flesh should come. The acts of transgressors prevailed over us: but thou canst pardon our sins. Happy he, whom thou hast chosen and taken to thyself! He shall dwell in thy courts. Let us be satisfied with the good things of thy house : thy temple is holy.
Thou art wonderful for righteousness : hear us O God, our
Saviour. Thou art the hope of all the ends of the earth : and of them at sea far off. Thou establishest the mountains by thy power: thou art begirt with majesty. Thou causest the cavity of the sea to rage; the billows thereof to roar. When nations are troubled and the inhabitants on its borders terrified at thy signs; thou canst make the outgoings of the morn-

PSALMS.

9 ing and evening joyous. Thou hast visited the earth and wa-

10

m to bo κὸ

tered it: thou hast multiplied the means of enriching it. The — river of God is full of water: thou hast provided the supply for it. Because such is thy provision, O! water its furrows ~ plenteously : multiply its productions. By these showers on it, it will be gladdened; and will give a spring to vegetation.
Bless the crown of the year with thy goodness: and let the fields be filled with fatness—let the mountains of the wilderness be made fertile; and the hills be girt with joy. The rams of the flocks have clothed themselves: and the valleys abound with corn. Let them shout and hymn thy praise.

For the conclusion. An Ode of a Psalm. On the resurrection.

SHOUT for God in triumphant strains, all ye lands. Sing harmoniously to his name, ascribe glory to his praise. Say to
God, How awful are thy works! For the greatness of thy power, let thine enemies submit to thee. Let all the earth worship thee. With music vocal and instrumental let them sing to thee—let them sing harmoniously to thy name.

Come and see the works of God! He is awful in counsels touching the sons of men. He it is who turned the sea into dry land; that they might march on foot through a flood.
There let us rejoice in him who ruleth by his everlasting power. His eyes look down on the nations. Let not the rebellious exalt themselves.

O! Bless our God, ye nations; and cause the sound of his praise to be heard. He it is who hath kept my soul alive; and hath not given my feet to the briny deep. For thou, O
God, didst prove us, thou hast tried us as silver is tried. Thou didst bring us into the net: thou didst lay affliction on our back : thou didst mount men over our heads; we have passed through fire and water. But thou hast brought us to a place of rest. I will go to thy house with whole burnt offermgs: To

 thee I will perform my vows; which my lips have enjoined;

and which my mouth spoke in my affliction. To thee I will offer whole burnt offerings; full of marrow, with frankincense and rams. To thee I will sacrifice bullocks and goats.

6

1 w

lez)

PSALMS.

Come, hearken, all ye who fear God, and I will tell you what he hath done for my soul. To him I uttered a cry with my mouth; and with my tongue repeated this aloud.

If I have regarded iniquity in my heart; let not the Lord hearken. For this cause God hearkened to me : he attended to the sound of my prayer. Blessed be God who hath not rejected my prayer; nor turned away his mneney from me.

For the conclusion. Among the Hymns. A Psalm by David.

GOD be merciful to us, and bless us; and may he cause his face to shine on us. Because of knowing thy way on the earth, thy salvation among all nations; let peoples praise thee,
O God, let all peoples praise thee. Let nations be glad and rejoice, because thou judgest peoples righteously, and wilt guide nations on the earth. Let peoples praise thee, O God, let all peoples praise thee. The earth hath yielded its increase: may
God, our God, bless us! May God bless us! And let all the ends of the earth fear him.

For the conclusion. By David. A Psalm of an Ode.
LET God arise and his enemies be scattered; and let them

who hate him flee before him. As smoke vanisheth, let them disappear: as wax melteth before fire, so let sinners perish at

the presence of God. But let them who are righteous rejoice—

let them shout for joy at the presence of God—let them be transported with gladness.

2. Sing to God; celebrate his name in songs: make way for him who is riding westward. His name is the Lord, rejoice before him. Let them be awed at the presence of him, who is the father of the fatherless, and the judge of them who are widows. God is in a place consecrated to him: God settleth the lonely in a family, having brought out with strength them who had been bound; in like manner them who were rebellious-—— them, whose habitation is now in tombs,

PSALMS.

7 8. When thou, O God, wentest forth before thy people ; g when thou wast marching through the wilderness; the earth shook and the heavens dissolved in showers at the presence of
9 the God of Sina—at the presence of the God of Israel. Thou,
O God, canst assign to thy heritage rain, at pleasure; when
10 they were fainty thou didst refresh them. Thine animals dwell among them: in thy oo thou didst provide for the distressed.
11 4. God the Lord wiil issue an order to them, who publish
12 good news to the mighty host—the king of the armies of the
Beloved (to the army 7 of the Beloved, to divide spoils for beautifying
13 the house. Though you may have slept in kitchens; the wings of a dove covered with silver, while its back is spangled
14 with yellow gold, shall, when the Almighty scattereth kings before it, be white as the snow on Selmon.
15 5. The mountain of God! a fertile mountain! Is a curdled
16 mountain a fertile mountain? But why do you suppose curdled
- mountains? This is the mount on which God is pleased to dwell, for the Lord will at length dwell there.
17 6. The chariots of God are innumerable: there are thousands of happy attendants. The Lord was among them at Sina.
18 In this holy place having ascended on high thou hast led captivity captive; and received gifts in the manner of man in token
19 (for some were incredulous) of thy dwelling there. Blessed. be the Lord God! Blessed be the Lord. Day by day let the
God of our salvation prosper us!
20 7. Our God is the God to save; and to the Lord iid
21 the out goings of death. But God will crush the heads of his enemies—the hairy head of them who persist in their trespasses.
22 The Lord said, I will bring back from Basan; I will bring
23 back through the depths of asea; that thy foot may be dipped in blood—the tongue of thy dogs, in that of his enemies.
94 8. Thy marches, O God, have been seen—the marches of
25 my God, my king, in this holy place. The chiefs went before next to the band of musick, in the midst of damsels playing
26 on timbrels, “ bless ye God in assemblies—the Lord, ye from
27 the fountains of Israel.” There was young Benjamin in a rapture; there the chiefs of Juda, the leaders; the chiefs of Zabulon,
28 the chiefs of Nephthaleim. Command, O God, thine army;

*~PSALMS.

.. strengthen this, O God, which thou hast established. among us.
29 Because of thy temple at Jerusalem, let kings bring thee gifts.
30 Rebuke the wild beasts of the reed, that the silvery shoals may not be intercepted. Is there an assembly of bulls among the heifers of the people? Scatter the nations which delight in war.
31 9. Ambassadors shall come from Egypt; Ethiopia shall
32 stretch out her hands to God. O ye kingdoms of the earth,
33 sing to God—sing to the Lord in harmonious strains; in harmonious strains sing to God, who rode on the eastern heaven of heaven. Behold with his voice he will utter a voice of power.
34 Ascribe ye glory to God. His excellency is over Israel; and
35 his power is in the clouds. God is awful among his saints: he is the God of Israel. He will give power and strength to his people. Blessed be our God!

For the conclusion. Respecting them who are to be changed.
By David.

1 SAVE me, O God; for waters have broken in on my soul.
2 I am sunk down into deep mire, and there is no support be-

neath. I am come into the depth of the sea, and a tempest hath
3 overwhelmed me. I am weary with crying; my throat is hoarse;
4 and mine eyes fail while I wait for my God. They who hate

me without cause are more than the hairs of my head. Mine

enemies who persecute me wrongfully are become strong. I

have made compensation on the spot for what I did not take by
5 violence. Thou, O God, knowest my folly—and my trespasses
6 are not hid from thee. Let notthem who wait for thee, O
Lord of hosts, be put to shame on my account. Let not them be put to confusion for my sake, who are seeking thee, O God of Israel. Because for thy sake I have borne reproach, confusion hath covered my face. To my brethren I am become an alien, and a stranger to the children of my mother. For my zeal for thy house hath consumed me; and on me have fallen

10 the reproaches of them, who reproached thee. When I bowed down my soul with fasting; it furnished occasion for reproaching
11 me. When I clothed myself with sackcloth, I became to

VOL. 11. 9.9

own

14

PSALMS.

them a proverb—they who sat in the gate spoke against me ; and they who drank wine, made me their song. But to thee,
O Lord, I, in my prayer, applied: it was a time of favour. Ὁ
God, in the multitude of thy mercy—in the truth of thy salvation, hearken to me. Save me from mire that I may not sink down. Let me be delivered from them who hate me and out of this depth of waters. Let not a flood of water overwhelm me, nor a whirlpool swallow me up, nor a pit shut its mouth upon me. Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is good ; according to thine abundant mercy, look down upon me.
Turn not away thy face from thy servant; because I am in

‘distress, hear me speedily. Draw near to my soul and redeem

it ; deliver me, because of mine enemies. For thou knowest my reproach, and my shame and my confusion ; all mine adversaries are before thee. My soul expected reproach and misery.
I waited for a condoler, but there was none—for a comforter, but none could I find. They indeed have given me gall for my food, and for my thirst, have made me drink vinegar. Let their table before them become a snare and a recompence and a stumbling block. Let their eyes be darkened that they may not see, and bow down their neck continually. Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful ire take hold of them. Let their fold be desolate, and in their dwellings no inhabitant. Because him, whom thou smotest, they persecuted, and have added to the pains of my wounds ; add thou iniquity to their iniquity, and let them not come into thy righteousness.
Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be enrolled with the righteous. I am afflicted—I am full of pain; but the salvation of thy countenance hath upheld me.
I will praise the name of my God with an Ode : I will magnify him with thanksgiving ; this indeed will be more pleasing to God than a young bull with horns and hoofs. Let the afflicted behold and rejoice: seek God diligently and you shall live.
For the Lord hath hearkened to the needy, and hath not despised his prisoners. Let the heavens and the earth praise him— the sea and all that move therein. For God will save Sion, and the cities of Judea shall be rebuilded, and the seed of ‘his servants shall dwell there. They shall mbherit it and possess it ; and they who love his name shall dwell therein.

1

PSALMS. .
LXxX,.

For the conclusion, By David. For a memorial, that the Lord

hath saved me.

O GOD, draw near to my assistance: O Lord, make haste to help me. Let them who seek my life be shamed and confounded ; let them be turned back and put to shame who wish me evils. Let them who say to me, Ha! ha! be turned back suddenly, covered with shame. Let all who seek thee exult, and rejoice for thee. Let them who love thy salvation, say continually, Let God be magnified. As for me, I am afflicted and needy ; O God, assist me. Thou art my help and my deliver-., er: O Lord, make no delay.

By David. Sung by the children of Jonadab, and the first captives.

14

IN thee, O Lord, I have put my trust: let me never be put to confusion. In thy saving mercy deliver me and rescue me: incline thine ear to me and save me. Be thou to me a protecting God, and a place of strength to save me: for thou art my fortress and my refuge. O my God, deliver me out of a sinner’s hand—out of the hand of an unrighteous and cruel man. For thou, O Lord, art mine expectation—thou, Lord, art my hope, from my youth; upon thee .
[have leaned from the womb : from my birth thou art my protector ; thou art the constant subject of my song. To many I became a wonder; but thou wast my powerful assistant. Let my mouth be filled with praise, that I may celebrate thy glory
——thy majesty, all the day long. Cast me not off in the time of old age: forsake me not when my strength faileth. Because mine enemies have said to me—nay, my life guards have consulted together, saying, ‘‘ God hath forsaken him ; pursue and take him, for he hath no deliverer.’? Ὁ God, be not far from - me ; draw near, O my God, to my assistance. Let them who plot against my life be confounded, and. perish ;—let them, who seek to do me hurt, be cloathed with shame and confusion. But as for me, I will hope continually ; and I will yet

15

18 cw hb =

PSALMS.

praise thee more and more. My mouth shall proclaim thy saving mercy—thy salvation all the day long. Because Iam unpractised in studies I will go in the strength of the Lord; I will mention the saving mercy of thee, O Lord, alone. Thou, O
God, hast taught me from my youth: and thus far I can declare thy wonders—even to old age and grey hairs. O God,

forsake me not, till I declare thine arm to the rising genera-—

tion—thy power and thy righteousness, O God most High— the great things which thou hast done. Who is like thee; O
God? O what afflictions many and sore hast thou shewn me!
But thou hast returned and quickened me; and brought me up again from the depths of the earth. Thou hast multiplied thy saving mercy: thou hast returned and comforted me; and hast brought me up again from the depths of the earth. Therefore with a musical instrument I will praise thee—thy truth,
O God: I will sing and play ona kithara to thee, the holy one of Israel. My lips shall rejoice, when I play to thee; my soul also which thou hast redeemed. My tongue shall still talk of thy saving mercy all the day long, when iat who seek my hurt are shamed and confounded.

For Solomon.

O GOD give the king thy judgment; and thy righteousness to the king’s son. That he may judge thy people with righteousness; and thy distressed ones with judgment. Let the mountains and the hills resume peace for thy people :
Let him judge righteously such of the people as are distressed; and save the children of the needy: and humble oppressors : and continue, as long as the sun and moon, through all generations. Let him descend like rain on a fleece; and. like showers gently falling on the ground. In his days let righteousness spring up, with abundance of peace, till the moon is no more. And let him rule from sea to sea; and from the river to the limits of the world. Let the Ethiopeans bow down before him; and let his enemies lick the dust. Let the kings of

2 j

PSALMS. 

Tharsis and the isles bring gifts; the kings of the Arabs and
Saba offer presents. Let all the kings pay him homage—-all the nations serve as vassals. Because he delivered the poor from the oppressor, and the needy who had no helper: he will

~ spare the afflicted and needy; and save the lives of those in

16

17

distress—from usury and injustice he will redeem their lives; and their name will be precious in his sight: and he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of Arabia; and prayer shall be made for him continually : and he will be blessed all the day long. Let there be in the land a settlement on the tops of the mountains; the fruit thereof will overtop Libanus : and they of a city shall flourish like the grass of the earth. Let his name be blessed for ever! His name shall endure longer than the sun: and by him all the tribes of the earth shall be blessed.
All the nations shall hail him happy. Blessed be the Lord the .
God of Israel; who alone doth wonderful things. And blessed be his glorious name for ever and ever : and let all the earth be filled with his glory. Amen. Amen.

An intermission of the Hymns of David son of Jessai.
A Psalm by Asaph.

HOW good is God to Israel! To suchas are upright in heart! But as for me, my feet were almost gone: my steps had well nigh slipped: for I envied the unrighteous; when I saw the prosperity of sinners. For there is no lifting up of eyes in their death: and in their affliction they have support. They are not in trouble like other men; nor with other men to be scourged. Therefore haughtiness hath got a mastery over them—they have clothed themselves with their iniquity and impiety. Their iniquity springeth up as it were out of fatness; they passed on to the purpose of their heart. hey thought and spoke wickedly—they spoke injustice with a lofty air.
They set their mouth against heaven; and their tongue passed on over the earth. Shall my people therefore turn to this; and»

23 bo μ'ὶ

PSALMS. 

will full days be found by them? They indeed said, How doth God know? and, Is there any knowledge in the Most
High? Behold these who are sinful men; are always prosperous and have gotten wealth. Nay, I myself said, Have I then in vain kept my heart just; and washed my hands in innocency. All the day long [have been scourged; and the accusation against me is renewed every morning. Had I said, I will make such a declaration openly : I should have been treacherous. to the generation of thy children. I therefore supposed, the trouble of knowing this is before me. When I go to the sanctuary of God; I may understand the final issue. It is but for their frauds thou hast dealt thus with them. Thou hast overthrown them by their exaltation. O! how they were for destruction! They are gone in a moment! They perished for their iniquity ! As a dream of one awaked out of sleep. Thou,
O Lord, in thy city wilt spurn their ghost; therefore my heart

2 was cheered and my reins were changed. I indeed was despi-.

cable for my want of knowledge: I was brutish as a beast before thee. As for me I shall be with thee continually : thou hast held me by my right hand : with thy counsel thou hast guided me, and taken me to thyself with glory. For what is there in heaven for me; or what on earth have 1 desired, besides thee? Hath my heart and my flesh failed? God is the strength of my heart—God is my portion forever. Seeing they who withdrew themselves from thee, shall perish—thou hast cut offevery one who goeth a whoring from thee : It is therefore good for me to cleave to God—to place my hope upon the
Lord : that I may publish all thy praises in the gates of the daughter of Sion.

Of understanding. By Asaph.

O GOD, why hast thou utterly cast off? Why is thy wrath extreme against the sheep of thy pasture? Remember thy congregation which thou hast purchased of old; this portion of thine inheritance which thou hast redeemed ; this mount
Sion on which thou hast dwelt. Lift up thy hands against their

PSALMS. perpetual haughtiness ; for all that the enemy hath wickedly

4. done inthy Holies. They who hate thee have indeed triumph-

14 ed’: in the midst of thy festival they set up their own signs :
The signs pointing to the entrance above they did not know.
As if in a forest of trees, they cut down with axes the doors

of that entrance. Then with hatchets and mattocks'they broke it down. They burned thy sanctuary to the ground with fire:

they profaned the habitation of thy name. They said, The whole brood of them are in their heart set upon this : come, let us cause to cease from the land the festivals of the Lord.
The signs peculiarly ours we do not see: there is no more a prophet ; nor will he any more acknowledge us. How long
O God, shall the enemy reproach? Shall the adversary blaspheme thy name forever? Why dost thou withdraw thy hand 9
Let thy right hand be ever out of thy bosom.

God was indeed our king of old. He wrought deliverance in the midst of this land. ‘Thou by thy power didst exercise dominion over the sea: thou didst crush the heads of the dragons in the water. Thou didst crush the heads of the dragon : thou gavest him to be meat for the Ethiopean tribes. Thou didst cause springs and torrents to burst forth. Thou didst dry up the rivers of Etham. Thine is the day and the night is thine: it is thou who preparedst the sun and moon. Thou hast made all the borders of the earth: summer; and spring were made by thee. Remember this creation of thine. An enemy hath reproached the Lord ; a foolish people hath blasphemed thy name. Deliver not up to the wild beasts a soul which praiseth thee. Forget not forever the souls of thy afflicted people. Have respect to thy covenant, because the dark places of this land have been filled with habitations of iniquity ; let not him who hath been humbled and shamed be utterly scorned: let the afflicted and. needy praise thy name.
Arise, O God, plead thine own cause: remember the reproaches cast on thee, all day long, by a fool. Forget not the voice of thy suppliants: let the pride of them, who hate thee, ascend continually before thee.

PSALMS.

For the conclusion. Destroy not. A Psalm of an Ode by Asaph.

1 (p) LET us praise thee, O God ; let us praise and invoke thy
2 name. Let me proclaim all thy wonderous works. (J)When I find
3 asuitable time, lexecute righteous judgment. (p)Theland, with allits inhabitants, is wasted. (J)It was I who strengthened the pillars thereof. ordered the transgressors not to transgress, and said to smners, Exalt not a horn. Lift not up your-horn on high; speak not iniquity against God. For it is neither from east nor from west, nor is it from desart mountains ; for God is judge ;—he humbleth one and he exalteth another. For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, filled with mixed wine of horror ; and out of this he hath poured into that : but the dregs of it are not emptied out ; all the sinners of the land shall drink
9 it. (p) Let me then exult with joy forever, and tune my lyre for the God of Jacob. (J) I will break all the horns of sinners, but the horn of the righteous shall be exalted.

oOonrnn ἃ

For the conclusion with hymns. A Psalm by ἀν An Ode on the Assyrians.

} IN Judea, God is known ; his name is great in Israel. His
2 place was in irene ; and his dwelling is on Sion. There he
3 broke the strong bows, armour, and sword and battle.
4 From everlasting mountains, thou shinest marvellously ;
5 all the foolish hearted, were struck with consternation. All those mighty men have slept their sleep, and found nothing
6 of their wealth fortheir hands. At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob,
7 they who had mounted their horses fell fast asleep. Thou art — terrible ; who therefore can withstand thee, on the account of
8 thine indignation: From heaven thou didst cause thesentence ἴθ
9 be heard; the earth was terrified and was still : when God arose

(p) The Prophet. (J) Jehovah.

10

11

12

PSALMS.

for judgment, to save all the meek in heart. Since the secret purpose of man can contribute to thy praise, let the remainder of it cause a festival to be celebrated for thee. Vow and pay your vows to the Lord our God: let all around him bring gifts to him who is awful—to him who taketh away the spirits

οὗ chiefs—to him who is terrible to the kings of the earth.

For the conclusion. For Idithun. A Psalm by Asaph.

WITH my voice I cried to the Lord, and my voice was to
God, and he hearkened to me. In the day of my affliction I sought God with my hands in the night before him ; and I was not disappointed. My soul had refused to be comforted ; I remembered God and was made glad—I meditated, though my spirit was in despondency. All mine enemies had previously mounted guard ; I was troubled and did not speak. I considered the days of old: I recollected the years of ancient times ;
I meditated at night—I conversed with my heart—I searched my spirit diligently. Will the Lord cast off forever, and will he no more be favourable ? Will he entirely cut off mercy, from generation to generation? Will God forget to be gracious ?
Will he in his anger restrain his compassion ?

Then I said, I have now made a beginning; this is the change of the right hand of the Most High. I called to remembrance the works of the Lord. Seeing I can remember thy wonders of old: let me therefore meditate on all thy works, and muse on thine institutions. O God, thy way is in that which is holy ; what God is great as our God? Thou art the
God who worketh miracles : thou hast made thy power known among the tribes. With thine arm thou didst redeem this people of thine—the children of Jacob and Joseph. The waters saw thee, O God!—the waters saw thee and were terrified, and the deep guiphs were troubled. Great was the roaring of the waters ; the clouds uttered a sound’: for thy bolts were passing through them. The sound of thy thunder was in the round expanse: thy lightnings illumed the world; the earth shook and trembled. Thy way was through the sea, and thy

VOL. 11. 3.4

PSALMS.

paths through many waters; but thy footsteps could not be known. Thou leddest thy people like a flock: by the ministry of Moses and. Aaron.

LXXVIII.
On understanding. By Asaph.

ATTEND, my people, to my law; incline your ears to the words of my mouth. I will open my mouth with parables—I will utter dark sayings of old ;—such as we have heard and known, which our fathers have related to us. They were not hid from their children: one generation told another the praises of the Lord, his acts of power, and the wonders which he hath done. ‘Thus he raised up atestimony in Jacob, and establisheda law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers to make known to their children: that the succeeding generation—the children to be born, might know it, and rise and tell the same to their children: that they might put their trust in God, and. not forget the works of God, but seek diligently his commandments—that they might not be like their fathers—a perverse and rebellious generation—a generation which set not their hearts aright, and whose spirit was not stedfast with God.

The sons of Ephraim, who bend and shoot the bow, were turned back in the day of battle. They did not keep the covenant of God, and would not walk in his law. They indeed forgot his acts of kindness—those wonders of his which he had shewn them—wonders which he did in the sight of their fathers : in the land of Egypt, in the plain of Tanis. He had —

- cleft the sea and led them through it ; he had stayed the waters

as ina bottle. He had led them with a cloud by day, and all the — night long with a light of fire; he had cleft a rock in the wil- — derness, and given them drink as from a great abyss; he had brought water out of a rock, and caused streams to flow down like rivers: But still they proceeded to sin against him—they — provoked the Most High in a desert. Still they made trial of
God in their hearts, by asking for’ meats to their appetites. —
Nay, they spoke against God and said, ‘‘ Can God provide a table in a desert ? When he smote a rock, waters gushed out, — and streams swelled to an overflowing flood. But can He alse give bread, or provide a table for his people 2?” Therefore the —

PSALMS.

Lord heard and was provoked ; and a fire was kindled among
Jacob; and wrath came up against Israel. Because they believed not in God, nor trusted in his salvaticn.

Though he had commanded the clouds above, and had opened the doors of heaven, and had rained down manna for them to eat, and had given them the bread of heaven, (Man was eating the bread of angels) he sent meat for them to satiety. He removed the south east wind out of heaven, and by his power brought on the south west : and rained upon them flesh, like dust: and feathered fowls as the sand of the sea ; they fell inthe midst of their encampment, and all around their habitation. Though they ate and were filled abundantly, and he had given them their desire; their longing desire was πόϊ stayed; therefore while the meat was still in their mouth, the anger of God came up against them, and slew them amidst their fat viands, and fettered the chosen men of Israel.

Notwithstanding all these things they still sinned, and did not believe his wonderous works; therefore their days glided away in vanity, and their years were attended with impatience.
When he smote them and they sought him, and returned and inquired early after God, and remembered that God was their helper, and that God the Most High was their redeemer; though they expressed love for him with their mouth, they lied to him with their tongue, and their heart was not right with him, nor were they stedfast in his covenant. But he being merciful forgave their sins, and would not utterly destroy them. Yea, many a time did he turn away his wrath, and would not suffer all his wrath to’blaze forth: for he remembered that they were flesh— a breath going out and not again returning.

How often did they provoke him in the wilderness, and excite him to anger in the desert? They actually turned back and tempted God, and provoked to wrath the holy One of Israel. “They remembered not his hand, on the day when he rescued them out of the hand of an oppressor; how he had displayed his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the plain of Tanis; and had turned their rivers into blood, and their cisterns so that they could not drink—had sent against them the dog fly which devoured them, and swarms of frogs which destroyed them; and had given their crops to the canker worm, and their

PSALMS.

labours to the locust—had smitten their vmeyards with hail, and their sycamine trees with frost; and delivered up their cattle to hail, and their substance to the fire—having sent out against them his fierce anger, wrath and indignation and affliction—a mission executed by evil angels: he paved a way for his vengeance—he spared not their lives from death: he delivered up their cattle to pestilence, and smote every first born in the land of Egypt—the first fruits of their labours in the tents of Cham; and brought out his people like sheep, and led them like a flock in the desert, and guided them safely, so that they

were not afraid, though the sea overwhelmed their enemies;

and brought them to the mount of his holiness—to this mountain which his right hand purchased; and drove out nations from before them, and gave them by lot their several portions,

᾿ς and settled in their dwellings the tribes of Israel.

Still they tempted and provoked God the Most High, and did not keep his testimonies; but turned back and broke covenant like their fathers. They turned aside like a deceitful bow. They provoked him with their mounts, and with their eraven images moved him to jealousy. God heard and despised them and greatly contemned Israel, and he abandoned the tabernacle of Selom—the tent in which he had dwelt among men; and delivered up their strength to captivity, and their glory into an enemy’s hand; and gave up his people to the sword, and slighted his inheritance. A fire consumed their young men, and their virgins made no lamentation. Their priests fell by the sword and their widows are not to bewail them.

At length the Lord awaked as one out of sleep, as a mighty man recovered from wine; and he smote his enemies in the hinder parts, and cast an everlasting reproach on them. But he rejected the habitation of Joseph, and did not chuse the tribe of Ephraim; but made choice of the tribe of Juda—of this mount Sion which he loved, and built his sanctuary like that of unicorns; in this land he founded it for this age, and he chose David his servant and took him from the flocks of sheep
—he took him from tending the ewes with young to feed his servant Jacob and Israel his mheritance. And he fed them in the integrity of his heart, and guided them by the skill of his hands.

1.

7

PSALMS.

A Psalm by Asaph.

oO GOD, nations are come into thine inheritance: they have polluted thy holy temple. They have made Jerusalem a de-

pository for summer fruits. They have given the carcasses of

thy servants to be meat for the birds of the air—the flesh of thy saints, to the wild beasts of the earth. They have poured out their blood like water round Jerusalem ; and there was none to bury them. We are become a reproach to our neighbours—
A scoff and a derision to them around us. How long, O Lord, wilt thou be angry ? Shall thy jealousy burn like fire forever?
Pour out thy wrath on the nations that have not acknowledged thee ; and on kingdoms which have not invoked thy name.
For they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste this place of

8 his. Remember not our former iniquities: let thy tender mer-

9

10

1

12

13 to

cies overtake us speedily : as we are greatly distressed; help us, Ὁ God, our saviour: for the glory of thy name deliver us; and pardon. our sins for thy name’s sake. Perhaps they may say among the nations, Where is their God ? Let therefore the avengement of the blood of thy servants, which hath been shed ; be known among the. nations in our sight. Let the groans of the prisoners come before thee. According to the mighty power of thine arm ; protect the children of them who are slain. Retribute to these neighbours of ours—into their bosom seven fold; their reproach, with which they have reproached thee, O Lord. For we are thy people and the sheep of thy pasture: to thee we will render thanks forever: we will proclaim thy praise to all generations.

For the conclusion. Respecting them who are to be changed. A testimony. By Asaph. A Psalm respecting the Assyrian.

GIVE ear, O shepherd of Israel! Who leadest Joseph like a flock—thou who art enthroned on the cherubim ; shine forth before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasses: stir up thy

2

+5

PSALMS.

strength and come for our salvation. Turn us, O God; and

let thy face shine ; and we shall be saved. O Lord, the God

of hosts! How long wilt thou continue thine anger, against the prayer of this servant of thine ? How long wilt thou feed us with bread of tears; and give us tears to drink by measure ? ©
Thou hast made us a mocking stock to our neighbours : and our enemies have derided us. O Lord, the God of hosts, bring us back ; and let thy face shine and we shall be saved.
Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt: thou hast cast out nations and planted it. Thou didst prepare the way before it; and plant its roots and the land was filled: and its shade obscured mountains: and its branchy shoots, the cedars of
God. It extended its branches quite to the sea ; and its spreading boughs quite to the river. Why hast thou broken down its hedge ; that all who pass by the way, may pluck it? The boar from the forest hath laid it waste; and a savage beast hath devoured it. O God of hosts, return we beseech thee ; look down from heaven and see and visit this vine: and repair that which thy right hand hath planted—even for the son of man, whom thou madest strong for thyself. It 1s burned up with fire and rooted up. At the rebuke of thy countenance are they to perish? O let thy hand be on the man of thy right hand—on the son of man whom thou hast made strong for thyself: and let us not-depart from thee. Thou canst quicken us that we may invoke thy name. O Lord, the God of hosts, bring us back : and let thy face shine and we shall be saved.

For the conclusion. On the wine presses. A Psalm by Asaph.
EXULT with joy for God our helper! Shout triumphant-

ly for the God of Jacob! Take a psalm and bring ἃ tympanum—the sweet sounding psaltery with a kithara. Sound the

. trumpet at the new moon—at the set day of your festival. For

it is a statute for Israel—a rite established by the God of Jacob—as a testimony for Joseph; it pointed him out at the time of his coming out of the land of Egypt; he caused him to hear a tongue which he knew not: he removed his back from burdens. His hands served at the basket.

7

14,

oO B © Ὁ γα

PSALMS.

(J) “ In affliction thou didst call upon me, and I delivered thee. I heard thee in the secret of a tempest. 1 proved thee at the water of strife. Hear O my people and I will speak to thee. O Israel, and I will testify to thee. If thou wilt hearken to me, with thee there must be no new fangled god: nor shalt thou worship a strange god, for 1 am the Lord thy God; who brought thee up from the land of Egypt. Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it. But my people did not hearken to my voice; nor did Israel attend to me. Therefore I gave them up to the devices of their own hearts. Let them walk in their own devices. Had my people hearkened to me—had Israel walked in my ways: I would have effectually humbled their enemies; and laid my hand on those who afflicted them. The enemies of the Lord should have submitted to him; and their time would have been forever : and he would have fed them with the finest wheat; and satisfied them with honey from a rock.”’

A Psalm by Asaph.

GOD standeth in the assembly of gods and in the midst he judgeth gods. (J) How long will you judge unjustly; and respect the persons of sinners? Do justice to the fatherless and the afflicted: Justify the lowly and the needy. Rescue the needy and deliver the afflicted out of the sinner’s hand. They did not know; nor did they understand. They walked on in darkness. All the foundations of the land shall be shaken. I said you are gods; and all sons of the Most High: but you
8 shall die like men; and fall like one of the chiefs. (p) Arise,
O God, judge the land thyself: for thou shalt inherit all the nations.

LXXXIII.
An Ode of a Psalm by Asaph.

O GOD, who can be compared to thee? Keep not silence nor be still, God. For lo! thine enemies are become noisy; and they who hate thee have raised their heads. Against thy people they have taken crafty counsel. And consulted against

rn en ee

(J) Jehovah (p) the prophet or psalmist.

PSALMS.

4 thy holies. Come, said they, let us cut them off from being a nation: and let the name of Israel be no more remembered.

5 For with this intent they consulted in concert. Against thee
6 have entered into conspiracy the hordes of the Idumeans and
7 the Ismaelites, Moab and the Agarenians; Gebal and Ammon and Amalek, and the Philistines with the inhabitants of Tyre.

8 Assur also is joined with them: they are come to the assistance
9 of the children of Lot. Do thou to them as to Madiam and
10 Sisara: as to Jabin at the brook of Kison. They were utterly cut off at Aendor: they became as dung for the ground;

11 make their chiefs like Oreb and Zeb—all their chiefs like Zebee
12 and Salmana. They said, Let us possess ourselves of the
13 altar of God. O my God make them like a whirl—like stub-
14. ble opposed to wind. As fire blazeth through a forest—as a
15 spark can set mountains on fire: so thou with thy tempest
16 wilt pursue them, and trouble them with thy wrath. Fill their faces with dishonour: that they may seek thy name, O Lord.

17 Let them be shamed and troubled: forever : let them be, put
18 to confusion and perish : and let them know that thy name is the Lord—that thou alone art the Most High over all the

earth.

For the conclusion. A Psalm for the wine presses. For the sons of
Kore.

1 OLORD of hosts, how lovely are thine abodes! my soul
2 longeth, it panteth for the courts of the Lord. My heart and
3 my flesh exulted for the living God. For a sparrow hath found for itself a house : and a ring-dove a nest for itself, where to place its young—[Even I] these altars of thine, O Lord of
4 hosts. ‘O my king and my God, happy they who dwell in thy
5 house; they shall forever praise thee. Happy the man, whose support is from thee, O Lord! he hath laid up in his heart
6 steps for this mournful vale, to the place on which he hath
7 fixed; for the lawgiver will indeed give blessings. They shall go on from strength to strength : the God of Gods will be seen
8 in Sion. O Lord, the God of hosts, hear my prayer ; hearken
9 to it, O God of Jacob. O God, our shield behold : look down

10

1

12

PSALMS.

on the face of thine Anointed. Because one day in thy courts is better than a thousand; I had rather be in an abject state in the house of God, than dwell in the tents of sinners. Because the Lord loveth mercy and truth ; God will give grace and glory: the Lord will not withhold good things from them who walk in innocence. O Lord of hosts! happy is the man whose trust is in thee.

For the conclusion. A Psalm for the sons of Kore.

O LORD, thou hast favoured this land of thine: thou hast brought back the captivity of Jacob. Thou hast forgiven thy people their iniquities: thou hast covered all their sins.
Thou hast caused all thine anger to cease: thou hast turned away from thy fierce wrath. Turn us, O God of our salvation, and turn away thy wrath from us. Be not angry with us forever.
Wilt thou extend thy wrath to all generations ὃ O God, thou wilt turn and quicken us, that thy people may rejoice for thee.
Shew us, Ὁ Lord, thy loving kindness: And shouldst thou grant us thy salvation, I will hear what the Lord God will say by me: for he will speak peaceto his people—to hissaints: even to them who turn their hearts to him; moreover his salvation will be near them who fear him ; that glory may dwell in our land.

Mercy and truth have met each other; righteousness and peace have mutually embraced. Truth hath sprung up out of the earth, and righteousness hath looked down from heaven.
For the Lord will exercise benignity, and our land shall yield her increase. Righteousness shall go before him, and he will imprint his footsteps for a path.

A Prayer. By David.
INCLINE, O Lord, thine ear, and hear me: for 1 am dis-

tressed and needy. Preserve my life, for Iam holy : save thy

servant, O God, who trusteth in thee. Be merciful to me, O
Ὁ, Ite OT

4,

PSALMS.

Lord, ‘for to thee I will cry all the day long. Comfort the soul of thy servant; for to thee, O Lord, I have lifted up my soul : for thou, Lord, art kind and gentle, and plenteous in mercy to all who invoke thee. Listen, O Lord, to my prayer, and attend to the voice of my supplication. In the day of my affliction, I cried to thee, because thou didst hear me. There 15 none among gods like thee, O Lord : nor are any works to be compared to thine. Let all the nations which thou hast made, come and worship before thee, O Lord, and praise thy name ; for thou art great and doest wonders—thou art the Only, the
Great God. Conduct me, O Lord, in thy way; and I will walk in thy truth. Let my heart be gladdened, that thy name may be feared. I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with my whole heart, and glorify thy name forever. For thy mercy to me hath been great ; thou hast delivered my soul from the deepest mansion of the dead. Ὁ God, transgressors rose up against me, and an assembly of violent men sought my life; they indeed did not set thee before them. But thou, Lord God, who art merciful and gracious, long suffering and abundant in goodness and truth, look down upon me and pity me; give thy strength to thy servant and save the son of thy handmaid.
Vouchsafe to me a token for good, and. let them who hate me, see it and be ashamed, because thou, O Lord, hast helped me and given me comfort.

LXXXVII.
A Psalm of an Ode for the sons of Kore.

ON the holy mountains are his foundations! The Lord loveth the gates of Sion more than all the dwellings of Jacob. Glorious things have been said of thee, O city of God. Shall 1 mention Rahab or Babylon to those gaining a knowledge of me ?
Behold the Philistines and Tyrians, and the tribe of the Ethiopians say, Such and such were born there. Man will say,
‘Sion is my mother;’? and, ‘In it such a man was born.”
“The Most High himself founded it” this will be the account which the Lord will give in the enrollment of peoples and of

PSALMS. .

those chiefs who were born in it. How delighted must all be, whose habitation is in thee!

LXXXVIIL. 

An Ode of a Psalm for the sons of Kore. For the conclusion. On. the responsive Maeleth. On understanding. By Aiman the Israelite.

O LORD God of my salvation, before thee I have cried day and night. Let my prayer come before thee, incline, O
Lord, thine ear to my supplication; for my soul is full of trouble, and my life draweth near to the mansion of the dead. I was counted with them who are going down to the pit; I became
5 like a man who is past recovery—like one set free among

the dead—like the prostrate slain, asleep in the grave, whom thou hast no more remembered.

6 Though they were cast off out of thy hand, they laid me in

the lowest pit— in dark places and in the shade of death. On

me thy wrath was pressed hard, and all thy billows thou didst

8 bring upon me. Thou hast removed far from me my acquaint-

ance, they accounted me an abomination to them. I was deli-

9 vered up and did not go abroad;. mine eyes were weakened by

affiiction. To thee, O Lord, I cried all the day long: to thee

10 I stretched forth my hands. Wilt thou work wonders among

11 the dead? Or can physicians raise them up to praise thee ? Can

_ any in the grave declare thy kindness ?—Or thy faithfulness,

12 in destruction ? Can thy wonders be known in darkness—Or

13 thy saving mercy, in the land of forgetfulness? As for me, I

haye cried to thee, O Lord, and in the morning my prayers

14 shall be before thee. O Lord, why rejectest thou my prayer—

15 why turnest thou away thy face from me? I am afflicted and

mm troubles from my youth: though raised high I have been
16 humbled and distressed. Thy resentments have come upon
17 me; and thy terrors have quite confounded me: they have en-

compassed me like water: all the day long they begirt me at
18 once, Thou hast removed a friend far from me, my acquaintance also, because of misery.

m Oo LO Re

"1

PSALMS.

On understanding. By Aitham the Israelite.

O LORD, I will sing of thy mercies forever; I will proclaim thy truth with my mouth to all generations. Since thou hast said, ‘* Mercy shall be built up forever. My truth shall be established in the heavens. I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn to my servant David, I will establish thy seed forever; I will build up thy throne to all generations.”
O Lord, let the heavens praise thy wonders and thy truth in the congregation of the saints. For who in heaven can be compared to the Lord? Or who among the sons of God, likened to the Lord? God is glorified in the counsel of the holy—great and awful among all around him. O Lord, the God of hosts, who 15 like thee? Thou, Lord, art mighty and thy truth is around thee. Thou rulest the raging of the sea, and stillest the rolling billows thereof. Thou hast humbled the proud like one slain—with thy mighty arm thou hast scattered thy foes. Thine are the heavens, and the earth is thine, thou hast founded the world and its fulness. Thou hast created the north and the west; let Thabor and Hermon rejoice at thy name. Thine arm is endowed with power; let thy hand be strong—thy right hand exalted. Justice and judgment are the preparation of thy throne; mercy and truth shall march before thee. Happy the people who know the joyful sound! They will walk, O Lord, in the light of thy presence, and rejoice in thy name all the day long, and be exalted by thy righteousness. For thou art the glory of their strength; and by thy favour our horn shall be exalted.
For thou art the help of our Lord even of the Holy One of Israel, our king. At that time thou didst speak in vision to thy children and say, “1 have laid help on one who is Mighty: I have exalted a chosen one of my people; I have found David my servant;
I have anointed him with holy oil. My hand will indeed support
2 him. And him mine arm will strengthen. Over him an enemy shall not gain advantage ; nor shall ason of wickedness any more afflict him. For before him I will hew down his enemies : and them who hate him I will put to flight. And my truth and my mercy shall be with him; and by my name

Ono =

ooo ὦ ὦ 09D

50

51

PSALMS.

his horn shall be exalted. And I will put his hand on the sea; and his right hand on the rivers: and he will invoke me saying, Thou art my father; my God and the support of my salvation; and I will set him as a first born; high above all the kings of the earth. My mercy I will keep for him evermore.
And my covenant with him shall be firm. And I will establish his seed forever, and his throne as the days of heaven. If his children forsake my law, and do not walk in my judgments—
If they profane my statutes ; and do not keep my commandments: I will visit their transgressions with a rod; and their iniquities with scourges. But from him I will not withdraw my mercy ; nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. I will not violate my covenant; nor annul what have passed my lips. Once for all I have sworn by my holiness ; that I will not be false to David. His seed shall endure forever, and his throne as the sun before me; and as the moon forever fixed : and the witness in heaven is faithful.”

Hast thou then cast off and set at naught—hast thou given up this thine anointed? Hast thou made void the covenant with thy servant: and profaned his sanctuary to the ground ?
Thou hast broken down all his hedges, and made his strong holds a ruin. All that pass by have plundered him : he is become a subject of reproach to his neighbours. Thou hast raised up the right hand of his foes, thou hast made all his enemies glad. Thou hast turned back the edge of his sword ; and hast not assisted him in battle. ‘Thou hast caused his purification to cease : thou hast dashed down his throne to the ground. ‘Thou hast shortened the days of his throne, and poured contempt upon him. How long, O Lord, wilt thou turn away ? Shall thy wrath burn like fire forever? Remember what my being is. Hast thou created all the sons of men in vain ? Is there any man who can live and not see death? Can he deliver his soul from the mansion of the dead? O Lord, where are thy mercies of old ; which thou didst solemnly promise David by thy truth? Remember, O Lord, the reproach of thy servants—that of many nations, which I retain in my bosom—that with which thine enemies, O Lord, have reproached—with which they have reproached the redemption

PSALMS.

52 of thine anointed one. Blessed be the Lord forever. Amen..

Amen.

A prayer of Moses the man of God.

O LORD, thou hast been a refuge for us, from one generation to another. Before the mountains were brought forth; or the earth or the world was formed: even from everlasting to everlasting thou existest. Wilt thou turn man away to despondency ; when thou hast said, Return ye sons of men?
Since in thy sight a thousand years are but as yesterday which is past; or as a watch in the night: shall these triflimg years of theirs be as if in the morning, a green herb passed away ?
Should it in the morning bloom and pass away? In the evening it would have fallen, withered and become dry. Because we have fallen short by thine anger, and by thine indignation have been troubled—thou hast placed our iniquities before thee: let this age of ours be for the light of thy countenance.
Because all our days have fallen short ; and we have failed by thine indignation; our years have exercised themselves like a spider. The days of these years of ours are seventy years : and if by reason of strength they be eighty years; still the surplus of them is labour and sorrow. Because gentleness hath come upon us: let us, therefore, whoever knoweth the power of thine anger, be taught, on the account of the terror of thy wrath, so to number them. Thus make known thy right hand; and them whose hearts are instructed in wisdom.
Return, O Lord. How long shall it first be ? And be pacified with thy servants. In the morning we were filled with thy mercy. We indeed rejoiced and were made glad. During all these days of ours may we be gladdened ; in lieu of the days wherein thou hast humbled us; and of the years in which we have seen evils. And look upon these thy servants and on thy works: and be thou the guide of their children. And let the splendor of the Lord our God be over us: and do thou direct for us the works of our hands.— 7

or & 90

PSALMS.
The praise of an Ode. By David.

HE who dwelleth under the protection of the Most High shall lodge in the shelter of the God of heaven. He will say to the Lord, ‘‘Thou art my helper: my God is my refuge,
I will trust in him.”’ Because he will deliver thee from the snare of hunters; and tumultuous accusation—with his breast will overshadow thee: therefore under his wings thou shalt rest secure. His truth will encompass thee with armour. Thou shalt not be afraid of the terror by night; nor of the arrow which flieth by day—of the thing which walketh in darkness; nor of mischance and the demon of noon day. A thousand may fall atthy side; and ten thousand at thy right hand: but it shall not approach thee. But thou with thine eyes shalt observe, and see the reward of the wicked. Because thou, O
Lord, my hope; hast made the Most High thy refuge ; no evils shall come upon thee, nor shall a scourge approach thy dwelling. For he will give his angels a charge concerning thee; to keep thee in all thy ways ; with their hands they shall bear thee up; shouldst thou chance to strike thy foot against a stone. Uponan asp and a basilisk thou shalt tread: and trample down a lion and a dragon. (J) Because he trusted in me, I will deliver him: I will protect him because he knew my name. He will call on me, and I will answer him: I am with him in affliction : I will deliver him and honour him. With length of days I will satisfy him ; and I will shew him my salvation.

A Psalm of an Ode for the Sabbath day.

IT is good to give thanks to the Lord; and with instrumental musick sing to thy name, O Most High—to proclaim thy loving kindness every morning; and thy faithfulness every night; with a ten stringed psaltery; with an ode on the kithara.
Because thou, Lord, with thy work hast made me glad: therefore in the works of thy hands I will triumph. How great

14

® oo bo

wo bh =

PSALMS.

are thy works, O Lord! How very deep are thy designs! A senseless man cannot know; nor can the foolish comprehend. them. When the wicked sprang up like grass; all the workers of iniquity had a glimpse that they should be destroyed forever. As for thee, thou, O Lord, art Most High forever.
For lo! thine enemies shall perish: and all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered. But my horn shall be exalted like that of the Oryx; and mine old age invigorated with fresh oil. Mine eye hath looked on among mine enemies: and among the wicked who rise against me, mine ear will hear. The righteous. shall bloom like a palm tree; and be multiplied like a cedar on
Lebanon. Being planted by the house of the Lord they shall flourish in the courts of our God. In a vigorous old age: they shall still multiply; and continue prosperous; that they may declare that the Lord my God is righteous; and that in him there is no injustice.
XCITl.

For the day preceding the Sabbath when the world was stocked with inhabitants. The praise of an Ode by David.

THE Lord hath commended his reign—hath robed himself with majesty. The Lord hath robed himself with power and girded it on. For he hath established the world, which cannot be shaken. From that time thy throne was prepared : thou thyself art from everlasting. The rivers, O Lord, lifted up—the rivers lifted up their voices. By reason of the roaring of many waters; the ‘mountainous billows of the sea are wonderful. The Lord on high is wonderful; thy testimonies are firmly established. Holiness becometh thy house, O Lord; to the utmost extent of days.

A Psalm by David for the fourth day of the weeks
THE Lord is a God of vengeance, the God of vengeance

hath given solemn warning. Exalt thyself, O thou judge of the earth; render a retribution to the proud. How long shall

PSALMS.

sinners, O Lord—how long shall sinners boast? Shall they declaim and utter injustice? Shall all the workers of iniquity speak? They have oppressed thy people, O Lord : and affiicted thine inheritance. They have slain the widow and orphan : they have murdered the stranger, and said, The Lord cannot see, nor can the God of Jacob discern. Consider I beseech you, ye brutish among the people. And ye fools, at length be wise. Doth not he, who hath planted the ear, hear? And doth not he who formed the eye, see? Will not he, who chastiseth nations, reprove?—He who teacheth man knowledge? The
Lord knoweth the thoughts of these men, that they are vain.
Happy the man, whom thou, O Lord wilt instruct; and whom thou wilt teach out of thy law; in order to set him at ease from evil days; untila pit be dug for the sinner. For the Lord will not cast off his people; nor will he forsake his inheritance ; till justice return to judgment; and all the upright in heart be in her train.

Who will stand up for me against evil doers? Or who will assist me against the workers of iniquity? Had not the Lord indeed come to mine assistance; my soul would soon have sojourned in the mansion of the dead. Did I say, My foot hath slipped? Thy mercy, O Lord, assisted me. O Lord, according to the multitude of the sorrows of my heart; thy comforts delighted my soul. Shall a throne of iniquity—shall he who frameth mischief for law, have fellowship with thee? Shall they hunt for the soul of the righteous? And shall they condemn innocent blood? The Lord indeed was my refuge: my God was the support of my hope. He will make them retribution for their iniquity and their wickedness: the Lord our God will utterly destroy them.

The praise of an Ode, by David.

O COME, let us sing with joy to the Lord; let us shout triumphantly to God our Saviour: let us approach his presence with a song of praise, and shout with joy to him in psalms,

that the Lord is a great God and a great king over all the Gods;
VOL. 11, 3K

PSALMS.

ον 4 and that the Lord will not cast off his people : that in his hand
5 are the limits of the earth—and the lofty mountains are his: that the sea is his—he made it; and his hands formed the

6 dryland. O come, let us worshipand bow down before him, and
7 let us weep before the Lord, our maker. Because he is our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the flock of his hand :

8 To-day, since you have heard his voice, let not your hearts be refractory as at the great provocation—as in the day of the

9 temptation in the desert, (J) where your father’s tried me—
10 they proyed me, though they had seen my works. Forty years.
I was incensed with that generation, and said, They do always

11 err with the heart—and have not known my ways; so in mine indignation, I solemnly said, They shall not enter into my rest.

When the house was built after the captivity. An Ode by David.

1 O SING to the Lord a new song—sing to the Lord, all
2 ye of this land. Sing to the Lord and bless his name ;—-publish
3. daily the good news of his salvation : proclaim his glory among
4 the nations—his wonderous works amongall the tribes—That the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised ; he is to be feared above all the gods; That all the gods of the nations are demons;
But as for the Lord, he made the heavens. Honour and comeliness are before him, holiness and majesty in his temple. Ascribe to the Lord, ye families of nations—ascribe to the Lord
8 glory and honour—ascribe to the Lord glory to his name. Take ~
9 sacrifices and come to his courts: worship the Lord in his holy
10 court: Let all the earth be moved at his presence. Say among the nations, The Lord is King, for he hath renovated this world, which shall no more be shaken ; he wili judge peoples with righteousness.
11 Let the heavens rejoice and the corth exult : let the sea be ©
12 moved and the fulness thereof. Let the plains and all therein be gladdened—and let all the trees of the forest exult before the
13 Lord; for he is coming—for he is coming to judge the earth. he will judge the swank with righieonsneasrine the several tribes with his truth.

IH NX

A or

oo bo

5

PSALMS.
By David, when his land was at peace.

THE Lord is king ; let the earth reyjoice—let the multitude of isles be glad. A cloud and darkness are around him : justice and judgment are the basis of his throne. Before him a fire

shall march, and burn up his enemies all around. His light-

nings shot a glare through the world: the earth saw and trem- bled. The mountains melted like wax, at the presence of the
Lord—at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth. The heavens declared his saving goodness : and all the peoples saw his glory. Let all the worshippers of graven images, who boast. of their idols, be confounded. Worship him all ye his angels.

Sion heard, and was glad, and the daughters of Judea rejoiced, because of thy judgments, O Lord. For thou art the
Lord Most High, over all the earth ; thou art far exalted ace all the gods.

Hate iniquity, ye who love the Lord: the Lord preserveth the lives of his saints. Out of the hand of sinners he will save them. A light is sprung up for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous, and give thanks at the mention of his holiness.

A Psalm by David.

O SING to the Lord, a new song, that the Lord hath done wonderful things. His own right hand and his holy arm hath saved him. The Lord hath made known his salvation: he hath displayed his forgiving mercy before the nations. He remembered his mercy for Jacob—and his truth to the house of
Israel. All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our
God. Raise a shout of triumph to God, all ye of the earth!
Sing and exult and sing in harmonious strains. Sing to the
Lord with a kithara—with a kithara and a tuneful psalm.

6 With spiral trumpets and the sounding cornet, raise a shout of
7 triumph for the Lord, before the king. Let the sea roar and

m 09 μα

oo to

PSALMS.

the fulness thereof—the world and they who dwell therein.
Let the rivers unite in applauses; let the mountains exult with joy; that he is come to judge the earth. He will judge the world with righteousness, and the several tribes with equity.

A Psalm by David.

THE Lord hath commenced his reign : let peoples rage.
He is enthroned on the cherubim; let the earth be shaken. The
Lord is great in Sion and high over all the tribes. Let them praise thy great name, for it is awful and holy. As the honour of a king loveth judgment; thou hast provided rules of rectitude; and executed judgment and justice in Israel. Extoi the
Lord our God; and bow at his footstool; for he is holy. Moses and Aaron among his priests; and Samuel among them, who invoke his name; called on the Lord, and he hearkened to them. To them he spoke in a pillar of cloud. They kept his testimonies and the statutes which he gave them. O Lord, our
God, thou didst hearken to them—To them thou wast a God propitious; though executing vengeance on all the people’s devices. E:xtol the Lord our God and worship on his holy hill: for the Lord our God is holy.

A Psalm of praise.

SHOUT triumphantly for the Lord, all ye of the land.
Serve the Lord with gladness. Come before him with the shout of joy. Know that the Lord is very God: he made us and not we ourselves : we are his people and the sheep of his pasture. O enter his gates with thanksgiving—his courts with song's of praise: give thanks to him and praise his name : for the Lord is good; his mercy endureth forever—and his truth to all generations.

3

4

Irn

ioe)

9

PSALMS.
A Psalm by David.

I WILL sing of mercy and judgment: to thee, O Lord,
I will tune my lyre. I will conduct myself wisely in a perfect way; O when wilt thou come to me? I have walked in the integrity of my heart in the midst of my household. I have not set any wicked thing before mine eyes: them who commit transgressions I detested. A perverse heart hath not cleaved to me. When the wicked withdrew from me; I no more acknowledged him. Him, who privily slandered his neighbour, I expelled. With one of a haughty eye and unsatiable heart I would not eat. Mine eyes have been on the faithful of the land; that they might dwell with me. He who walked in a perfect way, hath been employed in my service. He who practised haughtiness found no abode in my family. He who spoke unjustly was not right in mine eyes. I took the earliest occasion to destroy all the sinners of the land—to root out of the city of the Lord all the workers of iniquity.

A Prayer for the afflicted when he is oppressed with grief, and would pour out his supplication before the Lord.

HEARKEN, O Lord! to my prayer; and let my cry come to thee. Turn not away thy face from me: on the day of my distress incline thine ear to me: onthe day I call on thee, answer me speedily. For my days have vanished like smoke : and my bones are parched like dry wood. I am cut down like grass : my heart is withered : because I have forgotten to eat my bread. By reason of the voice of my groaning my bones have cleaved to my flesh. I am become like a pelican of the desert: I am like a night hawk ona ruined building. I have passed sleepless nights; and been like a solitary bird on a house top. All the day mine enemies reproached me : and they who praise me swore against me. Because I have eaten ashes as

10 bread and have mingled my drink with tears, on account of

nN WHO καὶ

PSALMS.

thine indignation and wrath: (for having lifted me up thou hast dashed me down.) My days have flitted away like ἃ shadow; and I am withered like mown grass. But thou, O Lord, endurest forever : and the memorial of thee to all generations.
Thou wilt arise and have mercy on Sion: for the time to favour her—the set time is come. Because thy servants had an affection for the stones thereof; therefore they will commiserate her rubbish. And the nations shall fear thy name, O Lord; and all the kings of the earth, thy glory. For the Lord will rebuild Sion and appear in his glory. He hath regarded the prayer of the lowly, and hath.not despised their supplication. Let. her be enrolled. for the generation to come: and the people to © be born will praise the Lord: because he hath looked out from the height οὐ his sanctuary. Out of heaven the Lord looked down on the earth ; to hear the groaning of the prisoners; to set free the sons of them who were slain; to proclaim the name of the Lord in Sion; and his praise in Jerusalem. When tribes were assembled together; and kings, to serve the Lord;he addressed him inthe way of his strength—
Shew me the fewness of my days; call me not away in the midst of them; thy years are throughout all generations. Thou
Lord, in the beginning didst lay the foundations of the earth; and the heavens are the work of thy hands. They shall perish; but thou wilt endure: they shall all wax old like a garment; and like a mantle thou wilt fold them up and they shall be changed : but as for thee, thou art the same; and. thy years shall have no end. Let the children of thy servants pitch their tents and their seed be established forever. ἡ

CTH.
By David.

BLESS the Lord, O my soul ; and all within me, his holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul; and forget not all the praises of him; who pardoneth all thine iniquities ; who healeth all thy diseases ; who redeemeth thy life from destruction: who crowneth thee with mercy and kindness; who satisfieth thy desire with good things that thy youth may be renewed like an

bee

PSALMS.

eagle’s. It is the Lord, who exerciseth mercy and judgment for all who were oppressed. He made known his ways to Moses—his pleasure to the children of Israel, He is the Lord gracious and merciful; slow to anger and abundant in kindness; he will not be angry to utter ruin, nor continue his wrath forever. He hath not dealt with us according to our sins; nor retributed to us according to our iniquities. For high as the heaven is from the earth; the Lord hath enlarged his mercy for them who fear him. Far as the east is distant from the west, he hath removed from us our transgressions. Asa father pitieth his children; the Lord hath pitied them who fear him, because he knew our formation. O remember that we are dust. As for man, his days are like grass ; like a flower of the field, so he may bloom. Because a blast of wind passed over it, it is gone. It shall no more know its place. But the mercy of the
Lord is from age to age over them who fear him: and his saving goodness over children’s children, for them who keep his covenant, and remember his commands to do them. The
Lord hath established his throne in heaven, and his dominion is exercised over all. Bless the Lord, all ye his angels—ye

mighty powers, who execute his word, on hearing the voice of his commands. Bless the Lord, all ye his armics—ye ministers of his, who perform his will. Bless the Lord all ye his works, in every place of his dominion. O my soul, biess thou the Lord.

By David.

BLESS the Lord O my soul. O Lord my God, thou art very great. Thou hast robed thyself with honour and majesty; clothing thyself with light as with a mantle; stretching out the heayen asa tent. Thou art he who covereth his chambers with waters who maketh clouds his chariot—who walketh on the wings of winds—Who maketh winds his messengers, and flaming fire his ministers—Who founded the earth on its firm basis, that it may not be moved forever. Is the abyss like a garment to be its covering—~are waters to stand above the mountains Ὁ At thy rebuke they shall flee—at the peal of thy

26

31

PSALMS.

thunder they will tremble. They ascend mountains, they go down vallies ; to the place which thou hast founded for them.
Thou hast set a bound which they shall not pass; nor shall they return to cover the earth.

Thou art he who sendeth forth springs in vallies. Waters shall flow down between the mountains; and give drink to all the beasts of the field. Wild asses will expect them to quench their thirst. By them the birds of the air will abide: from among the rocks they will utter asound. ‘Thou art he who watereth mountains from his chambers. With the fruit of thy works the earth will be satisfied. Thou art he who causeth erass to grow for cattle; even verdant grass for the service of man. That he may bring food out of the earth: wine cheereth the heart of man: that he may.exhilarate his countenance with oil; the heart of man is strengthened with bread, The trees of the plain shall be fully satisfied —the cedars of Lebanon, which he hath planted. There the birds will build their nests. The family of the stork account them their own. The lofty mountains are for the hinds; a rock is the refuge of the choirogryllus. He hath appointed the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth his time for going down. Thou hast stationed darkness and there was night: in it all the beasts of the forest will come forth—Lions. roaring for prey, seeking their food from God. When the sun is risen, they will assemble and lay themselves down in their dens; Man will go forth to his labour ; and continue at it till evening.

How manifold are thy works, O Lord, with wisdom thou hast done them all. The earth is filled with thy creatures; So is the great and spacious sea : in this are moving things innumerable—living creatures small and great. There ships sail : there is that dragon, which thou hast formed to sport therein.
All wait on thee to give them food in due season. When thou givest them, they gather; by opening thy hand all are bounttfully supplied. Butwhen thou deniest, they are troubled. Withdraw their breath, they die and return to their dust: send forth thy breath and they are created: thou indeed canst renew the face of the earth. Let the glory of the Lord endure forever ;

32 let the Lord rejoice over his works. When he looketh at the

. PSALMS.

earth, he causeth it to tremble; when he toucheth the mountains, they smoke.

I will sing to the Lord as long as I live, I will praise my
God while I have a being, Let my meditation be acceptable to him, and I will rejoice in the Lord. Let sinners be consumed from the earth, and the wicked so as to be no more; O my soul, bless thou the Lord.

An Alleluia, or alternate Song of Praise to the Lord.

O GIVE thanks to the Lord and invoke his name: pro-’ claim his works among the nations. Sing to him and sing with instrumental musick; relate all his wonderous works. Sing praises to his holy name. Let the heart of them, who seek the
Lord, be glad. Seek the Lord and be confirmed in strength; seek his face continually. Remember his wonders which he hath done; his miracles and the judgments of his mouth. O ye seed of Abraham, his servants—ye children of Jacob, his chosen ones; he is the Lord, our God, in all this land are his judgments. He remembered forever his covenant—a word which he gave in charge for a thousand, generations; the covenant which he made with Abraham, and that oath of his to Isaak, which he confirmed to Jacob for alaw, and to Israel for an everlasting covenant—saying, ‘l’o thee I will give the land of
Chanaan to be the lot of your inheritance. When they were few in number—of little account and sojourners therein; when they passed through from nation to nation—from one kingdom to another people; he suffered no man to injure them—he reproved kings for their sake, ‘‘touch not mine anointed ones, and to my prophets do no harm.’’ When he called for a famine on the land—broke all the stay of bread, he had sent before them a man, Joseph was sold for a servant. They had humbled his feet with fetters, his life was spent in irons; until his word came to pass—till the oracle of the Lord tried him. The king had sent and loosed him—the chief of peoples had set him at liberty—had appointed him lord of his house, and ruler of all his possessions; that he like himself might instruct prin-

G3 > vo oo WO to

m 0 bm CO ὦ Οὐ

9 wo ὦ »»

PSALMS.

ces, and teach his senators wisdom: then Israel went down to
Egypt, and Jacob sojourned in the land of Cham. When he had encreased his people to a great degree, and made them stronger than their enemies; and had turned their hearts to hate his people, to deal deceitfully with his servants; he sent forth.
Moses his servant—Aaron whom he had chosen: to them he committed the words of his signs—of his wonders in the land of Cham. He sent forth darkness and it was dark. When they made his words bitter, he turned their waters into blood, and made a slaughter of their fishes; their land swarmed with frogs, in the inmost chambers of their kings. He spake and the dog fly came and stinging gnats in all their borders; he made his showers, hail, flaming fire in all their land; he smote their vines and their fig trees, and broke every tree of their border. He spake, and the grasshopper came, and the brouchus locust in swarms innumerable, and devoured every herb in their country, and ate up the fruit of their land. Then he smote every first born of their land—the first fruits of all their labour; and brought out his people with silver and gold, and there was not a feeble person among their tribes. Egypt rejoiced at their going out, for the dread of these had fallen on them. He spread out a cloud to shelter them, and a fire to ilumimate the night

for them. They asked, and flocks of quails came; and he sa-

tisfied them with the bread of heaven. He split a rock and waters gushed out, and rivers ran in dry places. Because he remembered his holy promise—that which he made to Abraham his servant; therefore he brought out his people with joy— even his chosen ones with gladness; and gave them the countries of nations, and they inherited the labours of peoples ; that they might keep his rules of rectitude, and that they με, ἡ diligently seek his law.

An Alleluia.
O GIVE thanks to the Lord, for he is good; for to ever-

lasting his mercy endureth. Who can express the mighty acts of the Lord? Who can publish all his praises ? Happy they.

PSALMS."

4 who keep mdgment, and who do justice at all ames. Remem-

ber us, Ὁ Lord, affectionately 2s thy people, visit us with thy 
5 pe SEES νσμ αρονδαν ἡδε
6 sing praises with thy heritage. We with our fathers have sin-

‘up they were refractory at the Red sea, yet he saved them for ὦ his name’s sake. that he might make known his mighty power.
9 He rebuked the Red sea and it was dried up; and he led them
10 through the deep as through a wildemess; and saved them from the hand of those who hated them, and delivered them
11 -out of anenemy’s hand. The water covered those who afflicted ©
12 them, ‘not an individual of them was left. Though they be-
15 ‘heved his words, though they sang his praise; they soon forgot _
14 his works, they waited not for his counsel. They indulged a jonping desire in the desert, and tried God in a place without ©
15 water. Though he granted them their requést, and sent satiety ὁ.
16 to their soul;. yet they provoked Moses in the camp and Aaron
17 the consecrated of the Lord. The earth opened and swallowed >»
18 ap Dathan, and covered the company of Abciron; and a fire was kindled in ther assembly, and a fiame bummed up the wicked.
19 Even at Choreb they made a calf, and worshipped the τ᾿
20 graven image ; and exchanged their glory for the image of an
21 ox which eateth grass. They forgot God their saviour, “who
22 -had:done creat things in Egypt—wonderful thines in the land
23 of Cham, and terrible things at the Red sca: whereupon he spake of destroying them, had not his chosen Moses stood before him m the breach, to turn hum from his fierce indignation, that he might not utterly destroy.
24 When they despised the pleasant land and did not con
25 fide in his word : Mie carina tisha tte, «οιδἡδυύδιλν
26 notto the voice of the Lord: he lifted up his hand against
27 them; to overthrow them im the desert; and cast back their seed among the mations ; and disperse them im the countries.
When they consecrated themselves to Belphezor; and ate the’
29 sacrifices offered to dead men; and provoked him with thar’
50 devices; and the plague was ragmg among them: Phineas

43 wo &

o3

PSALMS.

stood up and made atonement; and the plague was stayed: and it was counted to him for righteousness to all generations forever. When they provoked him at the water of strife it went ill with Moses on their account. For they provoked his spirit and he spake unadvisedly with his lips. They did not root out the nations which the Lord had mentioned to them: but mingled with those nations; and learned their works. And served their graven images which became to them a stumbling block.
They actually sacrificed their sons and their daughters to demons: and shed innocent blood—the blood of their sons and daughters, whom they sacrificed to the graven idols of Chanaan. And the land was polluted with blood and defiled by their works: and they went a whoring with their devices.
Therefore the Lord was incensed against his people, and ab-

-horred his inheritance. And he delivered them into the hands

of enemies; and they who hated them ruled over them. When their enemies afflicted them; and they were humbled under their hands: many a time did he deliver them. But they pro-

 voked him with their counsel. When they were humbled for

their iniquities; the Lord beheld when they were afllicted.
When he heard their supplication, he remembered his covenant and according to the multitude of his mercies; he relented and excited compassion for them among all those who had captivated them. Save us, O Lord, our God; and gatherus from among the nations; that we may give thanks to thy holy name
—that we may triumph in thy praise. Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting : and let all the people say, Amen, Amen.

An Alleluia. —

O GIVE thanks to the Lord, for he is good: for to everlasting his mercy endureth. Let this be said by them whom the Lord hath redeemed—whom he hath redeemed from an enemy’s hand—whom he hath gathered out of the countries; from the east and west and north and sea. They had wandered in the desert in a land without water: they found no way

IO Go

30

PSALMS. 

to a city of habitation. They were hungry and’ thirsty. Their soul within them fainted: then they cried to the Lord in their affliction; and he delivered them from their distresses: and. conducted them toa straight road ; that they might go to a city

of habitation.
O let them. praise the Lord for his mercies; and for his

wonderful dealings with the sons of men : because he hath satisfied the longing soul; and filled the hungry with good things.

As for them who sat in darkness and the shadow of death; bound with affliction and irons; because they rebelled against the oracles of God; and contemned the counsel of the Most High : when their heart was brought low by troubles
—when they were weak and there was no helper: then they cried to the Lord in their affliction; and he saved them from their distresses; and brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death; and burst their chains asunder.

O let them praise the Lord for his mercies, and for his wonderful dealings with the sons of men; for he hath dashed to shivers the gates of brass, and broken asunder the bars of iron.

He helped them out of the way of their transgression : for on account of their iniquities they were brought low. Their soul abhorred all manner of food, and they drew near to the gates of death. Then they cried to the Lord in their affliction, and he saved them from their distresses. He sent forth his word and healed them : and delivered them from their destructions.

O let them praise the Lord for his mercies, and for his wonderful dealings with the sons of men; and let them offer him a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and publish his works with joy.

As for them who goto seain ships, and traffick on the mighty waters—they see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. He spake, and up rose a tempestuous wind: and its waves are lifted high; they mount up to the heavens: then down they descend into the depths; with perils, their souls are melted ;—they reel and stagger like one drunk, and all their skill is swallowed up. Then they cried to the Lord in their affliction, and he-brought them out of their distresses. He rebuked the tempest, and it stopt in a still calm; and its waves were lulled to silence, And they were glad, because they

6

PSALMS.’

were at rest. And he conducted them to their desired port.
O let them praise the Lord for his mercies, and for his wonderful dealings with the sons of men. Let them extol him in the congregation of the i: and praise him in the assembly of Elders.

He hath turned rivers into a wilderness: and outlets οἵ waters into ἃ thirsty land—a fruitful country into barrenness: for the wickedness of them who dwell therein. He hath turned a desert into pools of water, and a thirsty soil into water springs: and caused the hungry to dwell there. And they have erected abiding cities: and have sown fields and planted vineyards, which have yielded them the fruits of increase. And he hath blessed them and they have multiplied ereatly, and their cattle have not decreased. Again they have been diminished, and brought low by oppressions, afilictions, and sorrow. Contempt hath been poured on their princes and. he hath caused them to wander in a trackless desert. Then out ' of affliction he hath helped the needy, and hath made families like a flock.

Let the righteous see and rejoice, and let all iniquity stop its mouth. Whosoever is wise and will observe these things, he will understand the mercies of the Lord.

CVIUI.
An Ode of a Psalm, by David.

MY heart is prepared, O God, my heart is prepared ; I will sing and play on what is my glory. Awake psaltery and kithara, I myself will awake early. I will give thanks to thee,
O Lord, among peoples—among nations [I will resound thy praise; for thy mercy is great above the heavens, and thy truth reacheth to the clouds. Be thou, O God, exalted above the heavens ; and over all the earth thy glory.

That thy beloved may be delivered, save with thy right

7 hand and answer me. God hath spoken in his sanctuary, I shall

be exalted, and divide Sikima, and measure out the valley of tents. Galaad is mine and mine is Manasses; and Ephraim is the support of my head: Juda is my king. Moab, the cauldron of my hope. Over Idumea I shall extend my march: to me

10

16

PSALMS.

the Philistines are subjected. Who will’ conduct me to the strong city—who will guide me to Idumea? Wilt not thou, O
God; who didst cast us off—Wilt not thou, O God, go out with our armies? Grant us help because οἵ affliction ; safety from man is indeed vain. Through God we can exert power : he can make our enemies contemptible.

For the conclusion. A Psalm by David.

O GOD, pass not by my praise in silence : for against me the mouth of a sinner ; and the mouth of the deceitful 15 opened. They have spoken against me with a deceitful tongue.—
With words of hatred they encompassed me about; and fought against me without provocation. They traduced me formy love; but I prayed, when they were rendering me evil for good, and hatred for my love. ‘‘ Set a sinner over him; and let an accuser stand at his right hand. When he is judged let him be condemned ; and let his supplication be deemed an offence.
Let his days be few; and let another take his office. Let his children be fatherless and his wife a widow. Let his sons be vagabonds and beg: let them be cast out from their dwellings.
Let an extortioner seize all that he hath ; and strangers make spoil of his labours. Let there be none to help him; nor any to compassionate his orphan children. Let his children be for destruction—In one generation let his name be blotted out.
Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered before the Lord; and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out. Let them be continually before the Lord. And let the memorial of them be eut off from the earth : because he did not remember to shew mercy ; but persecuted a man needy and afflicted : to put to death one who was broken hearted. As he loved cursing, let it come on him: as he delighted not in blessing let it be far from him. As he clothed himself with cursing as with a mantle ; and it came like water in his bowels; and like oil into his bones ; let it be to him as the mantle which covereth him: and as the girdle with which he is continually girded.”

From the Lord is this work of them who traduce me: and of them who speak evil against my soul. Do thou, O Lord, Lord,

ho ta

PSALMS.

deal with me for thy name’s sake: for thy mercy is good.
Deliver me, for lam afflicted and needy; and my heart is troubled within me. Like a declining shadow I have glided away ;—I have been shaken off like locusts. My knees are weakened by fasting; and my flesh is changed for want of oil.
As for me, I became their scoff; they beheld me—they shaked their heads. Help me, O Lord, my God: and save me according to thy mercy. .Let them know that this is thy hand ; and that thou; O Lord hast done this. Let them curse, thou indeed wilt bless. Let them who rise up against me be put to shame: but let thy servant be made glad. Let them who traduce me, be clothed with shame: let them be covered with their shame as with a mantle. With my mouth I will greatly thank the Lord ; and praise him in the midst of many: because he stood at the right of the needy ; to save from them who seek my life.

A Psalm. By David.

THE Lord said to my Lord; sit at my night hand ; till I make thine enemies thy footstool. Out of Sion the Lord will
‘send thee a rod of power: rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. With thee shall be the government ; in the day of thy power—in the splendours of thy holies from the womb : before the morning star I begot thee. The Lord hath sworn and. will not change; thou art a priest forever, after the order of
Melchisedek. The Lord at thy right hand hath crushed kings in the day of his wrath. He will judge among the nations: he will multiply slaughters: he will crush the heads of many on

the earth. He will drink of the brook in the way: therefore he will lift up the head. :
An Alleluia.

I WILL praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart ; in the counsel of the upright and the congregation. The works of the Lord are great; exquisitely contrived for all his purpo-

PSALMS.

5. ses. Thanksgiving and majesty, his work and_ his righteousness
4 shall endure forever. He hath made a memorial of his
5 wonders: merciful and gracious is the Lord. He hath given food to them that fear him: he will remember his covenant
-6 forever. He hath shewn his people the power of his works ;
1. by giving them possession of nations. The works of his hands
ες are truth and judgment : all his commandments are faithful.
,8, They are firmly established forever: they are done with truth
9 and uprightness. He hath sent redemption for his people;
ἐν he hath, enjoined his covenant forever: holy and awful is his
10 name. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom;
» and all who practise it have good understanding. Let the
οὐ praise of him endure forever.—

An Alleluia.

1 HAPPY the man who feareth the Lord! in his commandments
2 he will greatly delight. His seed shall be mighty in
3, the land: the generation of the upright shall be blessed. Glory and riches are in his house; and his righteousness shall endure forever. To the upright light sprang up in darkness. He is merciful, compassionate and just; a beneficent man who commiserateth and lendeth. He will manage his affairs with
6 judgment; because he is never to be shaken: the righteous
7 shall be in everlasting remembrance: at bad news he will not be terrified: his heart is prepared to trust in the Lord.
8 His heart is established, he could not be terrified; even when he beheld his enemies. He hath dispersed, he hath given to
10 the needy ; his righteousness shall endure forever. His horn
_ shall be gloriously exalted ; the wicked shall see and be enraged. Let him gnash his teeth and pine away ; the desire of the wicked shall perish.—

VO be κι; ; 3M

oO 0

Amt ὦ ἴ μα

oo hwo —

PSALMS.

An Alleluia.

O PRAISE the Lord, ye his servants! praise the name of the Lord. Let the name of the Lord be blessed; henceforth and forever. From the rising of the sun to its going down; let the name of the Lord be praised. The Lord is high over all the nations: his glory is above the heavens. Who is like the Lord our God who dwelleth on high, and superintendeth the things below him in heaven and on the earth ὃ Who raiseth the distressed from the ground, and lifteth the needy from a dunghill: to seat him with princes; with the chiefs of his people. Who settleth the barren woman in a family making her a joyful mother of children.

An Alleluia.

AT the departure of Israel from Egypt; of the house of
Jacob from a barbarous people; Judea became his sanctuary;
Israel his dominion. The sea saw and fled: Jordan was turned back. The mountains skipped like rams: the hills, like lambs of the flock. What ailed thee, sea, that thou fleddest? And thee,
Jordan, that thou turnedst back? You, mountains, that you skipped like rams? And- you, hills, like lambs of the flock ?
The earth was moved at the presence of the Lord; at the pre-_ sence of the God of Jacob : who turned the rock into pools of water : and into fountains of water, the flinty rock.

NOT unto us, O Lord; not unto us. But to thy name only give the glory: for thy mercy and for thy truth. Perhaps the nations may say, Where is their God? Our God is in heaven and onearth: all that he willed, he hath done.

The idols of the nations are silver and gold; the workmanship of men’s hands. They haye a mouth but cannot speak :

PSALMS.

6 though they have eyes, they cannot see. Ears they have, but
7 they cannot hear: having nostrils they cannot smell. They

17

18

have hands but they cannot feel: They have feet, but they cannot walk : nor can they utter a sound with their throat.
Let them who make them be like them; and all who

have trusted in them. The house of Israel have trusted in the

Lord: he is their helper and protector. The house of Aaron have trusted in the Lord: he is their helper and protector.
They who fear the Lord have trusted in him : he is their helper and protector.

The Lord hath remembered us and blessed us: he hath blessed the house of Israel: he hath blessed the house of
Aaron : he hath blessed them, who fear the Lord, both small and great. May the Lord add to you more and more—to you and to your children. May you be blessed by the Lord: who made the heaven and the earth.

To the Lord belongeth the heaven of heavens : and he hath given the earth to the sons of men. ‘The dead cannot praise thee, O Lord; nor any who go down to the mansion of the dead : but we who are alive will bless the Lord; from this time

forth and forever.

An Alleluia.

I AM full of love, because the Lord will hear the voice of my supplication. Because to me he inclined his ear : therefore in my days I will invoke him. The pangs of death encompassed me; the perils of Hades found me: I met with distress and sorrow : thereupon I invoked the name of the Lord; O Lord deliver my soul. The Lord is gracious and righteous: merciful indeed is our God. The Lord preserveth the sincere :
I was brought low but he saved me. Return, O my soul, to thy rest : for the Lord hath dealt kindly with thee. Because he hath delivered my soul from death; mine eyes from tears and my feet from falling : I will worship before the Lord in the Jand of the living. Alleluia !

I believed therefore I spake ; for I was brought very low: and in my perturbation I said, Every man is a liar.

PSALMS.

13 ‘What shall I render to the Lord; for all that he hath done 

for me? I will take the cup of thanksgiving; and imvyoke
14 the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows to the Lord; in the
15 presence ofall his people. At a high rate; in the sight of the
16 Lord; is estimated the death of his saints, O Lord I am thy ser-

vant—I am thy servant and the son of thy handmaid. Thou
17 hast burst my bonds asunder: to thee I will offer a sacrifice of
18 praise and call on the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows to
19 the Lord; in the presence of all his people—in the courts of the ᾿

house of the Lord—in the midst of thee, Jerusalem.

An Alleluia.

O PRAISE the Lord, all ye nations !
__ Praise him all ye peoples!
For his kindness 15 exerted for us,
And the truth of the Lord will endure forever.

CXVITI.
An Alleluia.

1 O GIVE thanks to the Lord, for he is good: for to everlasting
2 his mercy endureth. O! let the house of Israel say,
3 For he is good. For to everlasting his mercy endureth. O! let the house of Aaron say, For he is good. For to everlasting

A his mercy endureth. Let all who fear the Lord say, For he is
5 good. For to everlasting his mercy endureth. Because of affiction I called on the Lord, and he heard me for enlargement.

6 Having the Lord for my helper, I will not fear what man can do
7 to me. Having the Lord for my helper, I shall look down on
8 mine enemies, It is better to confide in the Lord than to confide
9 in man; it is better to trust the Lord than put confidence in
0 princes. All the nations compassed me about : but by the name
1 of the Lord I was avenged of them. Compassing me about they beset me, but by the name of the Lord I wasavenged of them, _
12 ‘They encompassed me as bees do a honey comb : and blazed furiously like fire among thorns;—but by the name of the

PSALMS: 

13 Lord I was avenged of them. Being hard pressed, Iwas on the ὦ

14 point of falling: but the Lord himself supported me, The
Lord is my strength and my song of praise—he indeed was

15 my-salvation.—A sound of joy and deliverance in the tents \:

of the righteous! The right hand of the Lord hath exerted : power! The right hand of the Lord hath exalted me; the right

hand of the Lord hath exerted power. I shall not die: but live

and proclaim the works of the Lord. With correction, the Lord

19 corrected me: but did not deliver me up to death. Open for

28

29

Sa 2 2 > κ'

‘me the gates of righteousness, and I will go in at them and

give thanks to the Lord. This is the gate of the Lord, at it the righteous are to enter. I will praise thee becausethou didst hear me, and hast been unto me salvation. The stone which the builders rejected, was the very one for the head of the corner.
This [salvation] was from the Lord, and it is wonderful in our eyes. This is the day which the Lord made: on it let us rejoice and be glad. O Lord save, I beseech thee: O Lord, I beseech thee, prosper. Blessed be he who is coming in the name of the
Lord; we have blessed you of the house ofthe Lord. God is
Lord, and he hath shined upon us. Solemnize a festival with thick boughs, even to the horns of the altar. Thou art my God and I will praise thee ; thou art my God and I will exalt thee:
I will praise thee, because thou hast heard me ; and hast been . unto me salvation. O give thanks to the Lord, for he is good; for to everlasting his mercy endureth.

An jdediiie

ALEPH.

HAPPY the undefiled. in the way! who walk in the. is of the Lord. Happy they who search his testimonies, and seek him with their whole heart : for they are not workers of iniqui-

ty—they have walked in his ways. Thou hast enjoined the strict observance of thy precepts. O that my ways may be directed, that I may keep thy rules of rectitude. Then I cannot °° be put to shame, when I have respect to all thy commandments. I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I

8

PSALMS.

have learned thy righteous judgments. I will keep thy judgments, O forsake me not utterly.
BETH.

By what can a youth make his way prosperous? By keeping thy words. I have sought thee with my whole heart; let me not be driven from thy commandments. I have hid thine oracles in my heart, that I may not sin against thee. O Lord, thou art blessed, teach me thy rules of rectitude. With my lips
I have declared all the judgments of thy mouth. I have been delighted with the way of thy testimonies, as for all manner of riches. I will talk continually of thy commandments, and be attentive to thy ways. I will meditate on thy judgments and not forget thy words.

GIMEL.

Make retribution to thy servant ; that I may live and keep thy words. Open mine eyes,’ that I may discern the wonderous things of thy law. I am a sojourner in this land, hide not thy commandments from me. My soul is engaged ina continual longing for thy judgments. Thou hast rebuked the haughty; cursed are they who turn aside from thy commands. Remove from me reproach and contempt, since I have earnestly sought thy testimonies. For chiefs sat and spoke against me, but thy servant meditated on thy statutes; for thy testimonies are my study, thy statutes, my counsellors.

DALETH.

My soul cleaveth to the ground; keep me alive according to thy word. I have declared thy ways and thou hast heard me; teach me thy rules of rectitude. Instruct me in the way of thy statutes, and I will meditate on thy wonders; my soul drooped with heaviness; strengthen me with thy words. Remove from me the way of injustice, and graciously favour me with thy law. I have chosen the way of truth, and have not forgotten

thy judgments; Ihave cleaved, O Lord, to thy testimonies ;

O let me not be put toshame. I ran in the way of thy commandments, when thou didst enlarge my heart.

Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and in every occurrence I will seek it. Give me understanding that I may

‘search thy law, and keep it with my whole heart. Lead me in

PSALMS.

the path of thy commandments; for I have delighted therein.
Incline my heart to thy testimonies and not to covetousness.
Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity—keep me alive in thy way. Confirm thine oracle to thy servant that thou mayst

be feared. Take away my reproach which I dreaded, because

thy judgments are good. Behold I have longed for thy precepts; quicken me by thy saving goodness.
VAU
O Lord, let thy mercy come upon me—thy salvation according to thy word; and to them who reproach me I will make answer, that I have trusted in thy words. And take not the word of truth entirely from my mouth, for I have trusted in thy judgments ; and I will keep thy law continually forever and ever. I indeed have walked in a roomy place, because I diligently sought thy precepts ; and I have spoken of thy testimonies before kings, and was not ashamed: and have meditated on thy commandments, in which I took great delight ; and have held up my hands for thy precepts which I loved, and meditated on thy rules of rectitude.
ZAIN.
Binieekber thy words to thy servant, for which thou hast caused me to hope: this hath comforted me in mine affliction, for thine oracle kept me alive. ‘The haughty transgressed to a

2 great degree, but from thy law I turned not aside. O Lord, I

remembered thy judgments of old and was comforted. Horror seized me on the account of sinners—of them who utterly forsake thy law. Thy statutes were the subject of my songs, in the place of my pilgrimage. I remembered thy name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy law. ‘This was my condition, because I diligently sought thy statutes.

CHETH.

Thou, O Lord, art my portion; I have determined to keep thy law. With my whole heart I have entreated thy favour, be gracious to me according to thy word. I revolved thy ways in my mind, and turned my feet to thy testimonies. I prepared myself and was not troubled, to keep thy commandments.
The cords of sinners entangled me; but I did not forget thy law. At midnight I arose to give thee thanks; because of thy righteous judgments. I am a companion of all them who fear

64

67.

79

80 earth is full of thy mercy, teach me thy statutes..

PSALMS.

thee; and of them who keep thy commandments. O Lord the
 TETH.

 O Lord, thou hast dealt kindly with thy servant;. eth

ing to thy word. Teach me kindness and discipline and: know:

ledge; because I have believed thy commandments, Before E

was afflicted, I transgressed: for this cause I have kept thy

word. Thou, O Lord, art good; in thy goodness teach me thy

statutes. The iniquity of the proud was multiplied against me:

but I with my whole heart will search thy precepts. Their. heart was curdled like milk: but I meditated on thy law.. It is good for me that thou hast humbled me: that I might learn

‘thy rules of rectitude. The law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and silver.

JOD. 

Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: instruct me that I may learn thy commandments. They who fear thee will be glad when they. see me; because I have trusted in thy. words. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are just : and that thou with truth hast humbled me. O! let thy mercy be my comfort, according to thy word to thy servant. Let thy tender mercies come to me that I may live; for thy law is my delight.

‘Let the proud. be ashamed, because they have, unjustly in-

jured me. But let me meditate on thy precepts. Let them who fear thee turn to me—and them who know thy testimonies.
Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, that I may not, ὃς shamed.

CAPH.

My soul fainteth for thy salvation ; I trusted in thy ba νηφὶ 
Mine eyes failed for thy promise, saying, When wilt thou — comfort me? Though I became like a leathern bag in frost; I did not forget thy statutes. How many are the days of thy servant? When wilt thou avenge me of my persecutors? —
Transgressors told me idle tales: but thy law O Lord, taught me otherwise. All thy commandments are truth, ‘They persecuted me without cause, do thou assist me. They have almost finished me on the earth; but I did not forsake thy precepts.
According to thy mercy quicken me; that I may keep the'testimonies of thy mouth.

PSALMS. ‘<

. LAMED.
89 ο Lord, thy word will endure in heaven Raemensediy
90 truth to all generations. Thou hast established the earth and it
91 shall continue. By thy arrangement day shall continue : for all
92 things are in subjection to thee. Had not thy law been my
93 study, I should have perished in my affliction. Let me never forget thy rules of rectitude: for by them thou hast kept me
94 alive. I am thine, O save me: for I have diligently sought thy
95 statutes. Sinners lay in wait for me to destroy me: I understood
96 thy testimonies. Of all perfection I saw a limit; thy command is very broad.
MEM.
97 O ! how I have loved thy law, O Lord! It-is my meditation
98 all the day. Thou hast given me a knowledge of thy law
99 above mine enemies; because it is mine forever. I had more understanding than all my teachers : because thy testimonies
100 are my study. I understood more than elders: because I diligently
101 sought thy commandments. From every evil way
102 I restrained my feet; that I might keep thy words. I have not turned aside from thy judgments: because thou didst
103 instruct me. How sweet are thine oracles to my taste! ‘They
104 are sweeter than honey to my mouth. From thy precepts I
- got understanding : Therefore I hated every wicked way.
NUN.
105 Thy law is a lamp to my feet; and a light to my paths.
106 I have sworn and determined to keep thy righteous judgments.
107 I have been exceedingly afflicted: quicken me, O
108 Lord, according to thy word. Accept, O Lord, I beseech thee, the freewill offerings of my mouth: and teach me thy
109 judgments. My life is continually in thy hands; and I have
110 not forgotten thy law. The wicked laid a snare for me : but
111 I erred not from thy precepts. I have taken thy testimonies for an everlasting inheritance: for they are the joy of my
112 heart. I inclined my heart to perform thy statutes; for the sake of an everlasting reward.
SAMECH.
113 I have hated transgressors and loved thy law. Thou art
114 my helper and my protector: I have hoped for thy words.

115 Away from me ye evil doers, for I will diligently seek the
VOL. 11. 3.N

* PSALMS.

116 commandments of my God. Uphold me according to thy

word and keep me alive; and let me not be shamed for mine expectation. Help me and [ shall be saved; and I will medi-

118 tate continually on thy statutes. Thou hast set at naught all
_ who apostatize from thy statutes ; because their inward

-126

129.

thought is wicked. All the sinners of the land I accounted transgressors; therefore I loved thy testimonies. Penetrate my flesh with the dread of thee; for I am terrified at thy judgments.

AIN.

I have done what is right and just; Ὁ deliver me not up to mine oppressors. Be surety for thy servant for good—let not the proud oppress me. Mine eyes have failed looking for thy salvation, and for the promise of thy saving goodness.
Deal with thy servant according to thy mercy, and teach me thy statutes. Iam thy servant, give me understanding, that
I may know thy testimonies. It is time to act for the Lord; they have made void thy law. For this cause I loved thy commandments more than gold or the topaz. For this cause I directed my course to all thy commandments: I hated every evil way.

Thy testimonies are wonderful; therefore my soul sought them diligently. The manifestation of thy words will enlighten, and make the simple wise. I opened my mouth and panted, because I longed for thy commandments. Look down upon me, and be gracious to me, as thou art to them who love thy name. Order my steps according to thy word, and let no iniquity have dominion over me. Deliver me from the oppression of men, and I will keep thy precepts. Let thy countenance

shine on thy servant; and teach me thy statutes. Mine eyes poured down streams of water, because Idid not oe thy law.
TSADDI.

Thou, O Lord, art righteous; and thy judgments are right.
Thou hast strictly enjoined as thy testimonies, righteousness and truth. My zeal for thee hath consumed me; because mine enemies forgot thy words. Thy word is very pure; and thy servant hath loved it. Young and despised as 1 am, I have not

forgot thy precepts. Thy righteousness is an everlasting

PSALMS. — «

righteousness, and thy law is truth. When affliction and dis- - tress found me, thy commandments were my study; thy tes- "

timonies are everlasting righteousness; give me understand-

ing and I shall live.

I have cried with my whole heart, O Lord, hear me; I will diligently seek thy statutes. I have cried to thee, O save me; and I will keep thy testimonies, I awoke before the dawn of the morning, and cried ; on thy words I placed my hope.
Mine eyes were awake before the morning dawn, that I might meditate on thine oracles. Hear my voice, O Lord, according to thy mercy—according to thy judgment keep me alive.
They, who persecute me unjustly, drew near; but they were far removed from thy law. Thou, O Lord, art near, and all thy ways are truth. I knew of old from thy testimonies, that thou hast founded them forever.

RESH.

Behold my affliction, and deliver me; for I have not forgotten thy law. Plead my cause and deliver me; on account of thy word keep me alive. Salvation is far from sinners, because they did not seek thy statutes. Thy tender mercies, O
Lord, are many ; quicken me according to thy judgment,
Many are my persecutors and mine enemies; yet from thy testimonies I have not declined. I beheld transgressors and

was grieved; because they did not keep thy words. Consider, Ὁ

O Lord, that I have loved thy commandments: in thy mercy keep me alive. The beginning of thy words was truth, and all thy righteous judgments endure forever.

SCHIN.

Chiefs persecuted me undeservedly : but my heart stood in awe of thy words. Let me exult with joy for thine oracles; as one who findeth great spoils. I have hated and abominated iniquity : but thy law I have loved. Seven times a day have
I praised thee, for thy righteous judgments. Great peace have they who love thy law: and for them there is no stumbling block. I have waited, O Lord, for thy salvation ; and have loved thy commandments. My soul hath kept thy testimonies and hath loved them exceedingly. I have kept thy commandments and thy testimonies: for all my ways, O
Lord, are before thee.

’ PSALMS.

 TAU. γον
169 OLord, let my prayer come before thee: give me under.
170 standing according to thy word. Let my supplication come before thee,,O Lord. According to thy word deliver me.
171 Let my lips solemnly utter a hymn; when thou hast taught
172 me thy statutes. Let my tongue resound thine oracles; for all
173 thy commandments are righteous. Let thy hand be near to
174 save me: because I have chosen thy statutes. O Lord, I Πᾶνε. longed earnestly for thy salvation: and thy law is my study.
175 Let my soul live and praise thee ; and thy judgments be my
176 support. Like a lost sheep I have gone astray: O seek thy servant ; since I have not forgotten thy commandments.

A Song of the steps.

1 ῚΙΝ my distress I cried to the Lord; and he hearkened to
2 me. O Lord, deliver my soul from false lips, and from'a deceitful
3 tongue. What should be given thee ? Or what return
4 made thee for a deceitful tongue? Arrows of the mighty sharp-_
5 ened with devouring coals. Ah woe is me that my sojourn is so long protracted—That I have dwelt with the tents of
6 Kedar—That my soul hath so long dwelt with them, who
7 hate peace. I was for peace; but when I spoke they attacked me without provocation.—

A Song of the steps.

i I HAVE lifted up mine eyes to the mountains, from which
2 my help istocome. My help is from the Lord, who made the
3 heaven and the earth. O let him not suffer my feet to stumble:
4 nor let him, who keepeth me, slumber. Lo! he who
5 keepeth Israel, will neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord will

keep thee! The Lord at thy right hand will be thy shelter:
6 the sun by day shall not scorch thee ; nor shall the moon hurt
7 thee by night. May the Lord preserve thee from all evil! the

PSALMS. ἣν

8 Lord will keep thy soul. The Lord will guard wh coming in and going out henceforth and forever.

A Song of the steps.

1 I WAS rejoiced when they said to me; “Let us go to
2 the house of the Lord.” Our feet have been standing in thy
3. courts, O Jerusalem. Jerusalem is built like a city ; with regard to which, the participation of itis for this very purpose:
4 for thither the tribes have come up—the tribes of the Lord, a testimony to Israel; that they may give thanks to the name
5 of the Lord: because there the thrones for judgment are set—-
6 thrones for the house of David. Pray, I beseech you, for the
_ peace of Jerusalem ; and for prosperity to them who love thee.
7 O let there be peace in thine army and prosperity in thy palaces!
8 For the sake of my brethren and neighbours, I have
9 expressed a wish of peace for thee—For the sake of the house of the Lord our God, I have earnestly sought thy good.

A Song of the steps.

1 TO thee who dwellest in heaven, I have raised mine eyes.
2 Behold! as the eyes of servants are on the hands of their masters—as the eyes of a maid are on the hands of her mistress, so are our eyes on the Lord our God, till he be gracious to us.
3 Have mercy on us, O Lord; have mercy on us; for we are
4 exceedingly filled with contempt. Our soul is filled exceedingly—we are the scoff of the aera and the contempt of the haughty.

A Song of the steps.

1 HAD not the Lord been on our side (let Israel now say)
2 had not the Lord been on our side, when men rose up against

᾿ PSALMS.

8. us; they might have swallowed us up alive—»when their wrath

4 was kindled against us, the water might have overwhelmed us.

5 Our soul hath passed through a torrent. Hath our soul then

6 passed through impetuous water? Blessed be the Lord, who

7 hath not given us as a prey to their teeth! Our soul hath escaped as a bird from the fowler’s snare. The snare was bro-

8 ken and we have escaped. Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made the heaven and the earth.

A Song of the steps.

1 THEY who trust in the Lord shall be like mount Sion; he

2 who inhabiteth Jerusalem shall never be shaken. Around her are mountains; and the Lord is around his people, from this

8 time forth and forever; for the Lord will not suffer the rod of the wicked to be over the mheritance of the righteous; that the righteous may not stretch forth their hands to iniquities.

4 Do good, O Lord, to the good, and to them who are upright

5 in heart. But them who turn aside into crooked ways, the Lord will drive away with the workers of iniquity. Peace be upon
Israel !

A Song of the steps.

1 WHEN the Lord brought back the captivity of Sion; we

2 were like them who are comforted. Then was our mouth filled with joy, and our tongue with exultation—then did they say among the nations, ‘“‘ The Lord hath done great things for

3 them,” The Lord hath done great things for us; we are trans-

A ported with rapturous joy. Bring back, O Lord, our captivity,

5 like torrents in the south. Let them who sow with tears reap

6 with rapture. They went step by step and wept sowing their seed; but let them come tripping with joy, carrying their sheaves.

1

ῬΒΑΙΜ5.

A Song of the steps.

UNLESS the Lord build the house, the builders have laboured in vain. Unless the Lord guard the city, in vain hath the watchman watched—in vain is your early rising.

Ye who eat the bread of care, rise when you have rested— when he hath given his beloved sleep. Behold sons are an heritage of the Lord—a reward of the fruit of the womb. Like shafts in the hands of a mighty man, so are the sons of them who were shaken off. Happy he who shall satisfy his desire with these. They shall not be put to shame, when they speak to their enemies in the gates.

CXXVIIL.
A Song of the steps.
HAPPY are all they who fear the Lord, who walk continually in his ways. Thou shalt eat the labours of thy hands;

thou art happy and it shall be well with thee. Thy wife shall be in the sides of thy house, like a fruitful vine; thy children

 round thy table, like olive plants. Behold thus shall the man

be blessed, who habitually feareth the Lord. May the Lord bless thee for the sake of Sion; and mayst thou see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life! And mayst thou see children’s children! Peace be upon Israel.

A Song of the steps.

Many atime have they warred against me from my youtk, let Israel now say—-Many a time they warred against me from my youth; they did not however prevail over me. Upon my back the wicked hammered, they prolonged their iniquity: the righteous Lord hath broken the necks of the wicked. Let
6 all who hate Sion be confounded and turned back. Let thena

PSALMS.

be like a blade on the house tops, which withereth before it is
7 pulled up, with which the reaper hath not filled his hand, nor
8 he who gathereth the sheaves, his bosom; so that they who

passed by did not say, ‘‘The blessing of the Lord is upon
- you.”” We have blessed you in the name of the Lord.

A Song of the steps.

1 OUT of depths to thee, O Lord, I cried ; O Lord, hearken
2 to my voice: let thine ears be attentive to the sound of my
3 prayer. Shouldst thou, O Lord, mark iniquities; O Lord,
4 who can subsist ? Because there is forgiveness with thee, for
5 thy name’s sake, I have waited for thee, O Lord: my soul
6 hath waited for thy word—my soul hath hoped for the Lord,
7 from the morning watch till night. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him plenteous redemption.
8 And he himself will redeem Israel from all their iniquities.

A Song of the steps.

1. OLORD, my heart is not exalted, nor are mine eyes lofty;
Nor have I exercised myself in great things: nor in things too 
2 wonderful for me. Had I not been humble, but exalted myself — as a weaned child doth against its mother; how thou wouldst
3 have retributed to my soul! Let Israel hope in the Lord — henceforth and. forever.

A Song of the steps.
O LORD, remember David, and all his meek humility;

1
2 how he sware to the Lord, and made his vow to the God of
3 Jacob: “1 will not enter the lodging of my house, nor go up

6

1

PSALMS.

“4, tomy bed of rest: nor give sleep to mine eyes or slumber to

mine eyclids; nor rest to my temples; until I find a place for the Lord—a habitation for the God of Jacob.” Behold we had heard of this [ark] at Ephrata ; we found it in the fields of the forest. Let us go to his habitations ; let us worship at the place where his feet stood. Arise, O Lord, and go up to thy rest, thou and the ark of thy holiness. Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness, and thy saints shout for joy.

For the sake of thy servant David, turn not away the face of thine anointed. The Lord hath sworn a truth to David, and will not annul it; of the fruit of thy body I will set on thy throne ; if thy children keep my covenant, and these my testimonies, which I will teach them, their children also shall sit on thy throne forever. For the Lord hath chosen Sion, and made choice of it for his habitation. This ‘shall be my rest forever.
Here I will dwell, for I have chosen it. With blessings I will bless her provision; and satisfy her poor with bread. Her priests I will clothe with salvation; and her saints shall shout for joy. I will cause a horn for David to spring up there; I have prepared a lamp for mine anointed. His enemies 1 will clothe with shame: but on him my crown shall flourish.

CXXXIII.

A Song of the steps.

BEHOLD! what I pray you, so beautiful, or is there any thing so pleasant, as brethren dwelling in unity ? This is like precious ointment on the head, which floweth down to the beard—on the beard of Aaron, down to the hem of his robe.
It is like the dew of Hermon, which descendeth on the mountains of Sion: for there the Lord commanded the blessing,
Life for evermore.

A Song of the steps.

ATTEND! bless the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord,

WOL.. 11: ὧν ὃ

m ὦ bP =

PSALMS.

who stand in the house of the Lord—in the courts of the house of our God. At night, lift up your hands to the holies and bless the Lord. May the Lord out of Sion bless thee :—he who made the heaven and the earth.

An Alleluia.

PRAISE the name of the Lord—praise the Lord, ye his servants, who wait in the house of the Lord—in the courts of the house of our God. Praise the Lord; for the Lord is good; with instruments of musick praise his name : for it is good. For the Lord hath made choice of Jacob for himself—of Israel for his peculiar treasure. For I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is above all the Gods. All that the Lord pleased he hath done in heaven and on earth: in the seas and in all the deeps. When he brought clouds from the end of the earth ; he made lightnings for the purpose of rain. He it is who bringeth winds out of his treasuries: who smote the first born of
Egypt—the first born both of man and beast. Amidst thee,
Egypt, he sent his signs and wonders, on Pharao and on all his servants. It was he who smote many nations; and slew kings of mighty power—Seon king of the Amorites, and Og, the king of Basan, and all the kingdoms of Chanaan : and gave their land for an inheritance—for an inheritance for his people
Israel. O Lord, thy name is forever, and the memorial of thee — to all generations; for the Lord will judge his people, and take comfort inhis servants. The idols of the nations are gold and silver—the workmanship of men’s hands. They have a mouth, but cannot speak : eyes they have, but they cannot see; they

_have ears, but they cannot hear: nor is there any breath in their

mouth. May they who make them be like them; and all they who have trusted in them. O house of Israel, bless ye the
Lord: bless the Lord ye of the house of Aaron. O house of
Levi, bless ye the Lord; bless him, ye who fear the Lord.
Blessed be the Lord in Sion—he who. inhabiteth Jerusalem.

PSALMS.
CXXXVL
An Alleluia.

O GIVE thanks to the Lord for he is good; for his mercy endureth forever. O, give thanks to the God of Gods, for his mercy endureth forever. Give thanks to the Lord of Lords; for his mercy endureth forever. ‘To him who alone hath done great wonders : for his mercy endureth forever—to him who made the heavens with wisdom: for his mercy endureth forever— to him who established the earth on the waters : for his mercy endureth forever—to him who alone made the great lights : for his mercy endureth forever—the sun to rule the day : for his mercy endureth forever—the moon and the stars to rule the night; for his mercy endureth forever—to him who smote
Egypt with their first born; for his mercy endureth forever— and brought out Israel from among them; for his mercy endureth forever : with a strong hand and an outstretched arm; for his mercy endureth forever—to him who divided the Red sea into parts; for his mercy endureth forever. And led Israel through the midst thereof: for his mercy endureth forever : but. shook off Pharao and his hosts into the Red sea; for his mercy endureth forever :—to him, who led his people through the desert; for his mercy endureth forever—to him who smote great kings; for his mercy endureth forever: and slew kings of mighty power: for his mercy endureth forever.—Seon king of the Amorites ; for his mercy endurcth forever ; And
Og the king of Basan; for his mercy ‘endureth forever: and gave their land for an inheritance ; for his mercy endureth forever: an inheritance for Israel his servant; for his mercy endureth forever: because in our affliction the Lord remembered us; for his mercy endureth forever : and redeemed us from our enemies; for his mercy endureth forever. He it is who giv. eth food to all flesh: for his mercy endureth forever. O give thanks to the God of heaven : for to everlasting his. mercy endureth,

CXXXYIL.

For David, a Psalm of Jeremias.

BY the rivers of Babylon there we sat down and wept,

wo bo

PSALMS.

when we remembered Sion. Upon the willows in the midst of it we hung up our harps: for there they who had captivated us, asked of us the words of a song: and they who had led us away asked for a hymn, saying, Sing for us some of the odes of
Sion. How can we sing the song of the Lord in a strange country? O Jerusalem, if I forget thee, let my right hand be forgotten. Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I do not remember thee—if I set not Jerusalem foremost, as the chief object of my joy.

Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom ; who in the day of Jerusalem said, Rase! Rase! down to its foundations! O daughter of Babylon the miserable ! Happy he who shall render thee thy recompense; for what thou hast done to us ! Happy he who shall seize and dash thy infants against stones !

CXXXVIII.
A Psalm by David, used by Aggaius and Zacharias.

I WILL adore thee, O Lord, with my whole heart. And with instrumental musick sing to thee before angels: because thou hast heard all the words of my mouth. I will worship before thy holy temple; and adore thy name for thy mercy and thy truth: because thou hast magnified above all thy holy name. On the day when I invoke thee, O answer me speedily : thou canst strengthen me in my soul with thy strength; let all the kings of this land adore thee, O Lord, because they have heard all the words of thy mouth. And let them sing in the ways of the Lord: because the glory of the Lord is great. For the Lord is high and looketh down on the things which are low : ‘and from afar he knoweth the things which are high.
Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou canst keep me alive. Against the rage of enemies thou hast stretched forth thy hand : and thy right hand hath saved me. Thou, O Lord wilt retribute for me. O Lord, thy mercy endureth forever; overlook not the works of thy hands.

PSALMS.
For the conclusion. A Psalm by David.

O LORD, thou hast proved me and known me. Thou knowest my sitting down and. my rising up. Thou from afar understandest my thoughts. Thou hast tracked my path and my line: and hast seen distinctly all my ways—that there is not an evil word on my tongue. Behold thou, O Lord, knowest all things—the last and the things of earliest date. Thou hast formed me and laid thy hand on me. This knowledge of thine is too wonderful for me. It is great beyond my comprehension. Whither can I go from thy spirit? And from thy presence whither can I flee? If 1 ascend up to heaven, thou art there. If I go down to the mansion of the dead, there thou art.
If I wing my flight towards the morning; or dwell at the extremes of this sea; even there thy hand will guide me; and thy right hand will restrain me. When I said, Darkness will surely trample me down : then to my great joy, night was luminous.
For darkness cannot darken from thee; even night can be made light as day : the darkness of that, as the light of this.
Because thou, O Lord, hast possessed my reins—hast supported me from my mother’s womb; I will adore thee, for thou art awfully wonderful. Thy works are wonderful; as my soul well knoweth. From thee was not concealed this bone of mine; which thou in secret didst fashion. When my substance was in the lowest parts of the earth; thine eyes beheld the unwrought part of me. When on thy book all shall be enrolled; they will day by day be fashioned. When none among these were yet in being; for me these friends of thine, O God, were highly prized: their principalities were made very strong.
Were I to number them, they would surpass the sand. I have been raised up and am still with thee. Since thou, O God, slayest sinners : begone from me ye bloody men. For in answer to their reasoning thou wilt say, In vain shall they take these cities of thine. Have I not, O Lord, hated them who hate thee; and been melted for them who are thine enemies! With perfect hatred I have hated them—I have accounted them mine enemies. Try me, O God, and know my heart: examine me

PSALMS.

24 and know my ways; and see if there be in me any trace of ini-

pms

2 to ν»-

pen

quity; and lead me in an everlasting way.
For the conclusion. A Psalm. By David.

DELIVER me, O Lord, from a wicked commoner: from an unjust man of rank, preserve me; who hath contrived mischief in their heart. All the day long they prepared battles : they sharpened their tongue like that of a serpent : the poison of asps was under their lips. Keep me, O Lord, from the hand of a sinner: deliver me from unjust men; who have formed contrivances to supplant my steps. The haughty hid a snare for me—they spread out nets for my feet—close by the way they laid for mea stumbling block. I said to the Lord, Thou art my God. Hear O Lord, the voice of my supplication. O
Lord, Lord, the strength of my salvation! Thou hast covered my head in the day of battle. Deliver me not up to the wicked from my desire. Against me they have formed devices: Forsake me not, lest they be exalted. Let the amount of their compassings—the labour of their lips cover them.
On them shall fall coals of fire in the land ; and thou wilt overthrow them with miseries; that they may not rise up again.
A tattling chief cannot prosper in the land: evils will hunt to destruction a man of violence. I know that the Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted and the right of the needy : moreover, that the righteous will adore thy name—that the upright shall dwell in thy presence.

A Psalm by David.

TO thee, O Lord, I have cried, hearken to me—attend

to the sound of my supplication. When I cry to thee; let my 

prayer come before thee as incense—and the lifting up of my hands as an evening sacrifice. Set a watch, Ὁ Lord, on my

" mouth; and guard the door of my lips. Let not my heart

for)

PSALMS.

turn aside to wicked deeds—to form excuses for sins with men who work iniquity: nor let me associate with their chosen bands. Let a righteous man correct me with mercy ; and he will work conviction in me; but let not the oil of a sinner
(for this shall stillbe my prayer) anoint my head at their pleasure.
Their strong men were swallowed up near a rock: let them hear my words for they were sweet. As if a lump of earth was broken on the ground; our bones were scattered at the grave’s mouth. Since mine eyes are to thee, O Lord, Lord—in thee
I have placed my confidence: deliver not my soul to destruction. Keep me from the snare they have laid for me: and from the stumbling blocks of the workers of iniquity. ‘The wicked shall fall by their own net, I am in private till I can escape.

On understanding. By David when he was in the cave. A
Prayer.

WITH my voice I cried to the Lord—to the Lord I made supplication with my voice. Before him I pour out my prayer: before him I will declare my affliction. When my spirit fainted thou knewest my paths. In the way I was going they hid a snare for me. I looked to the right; and observed that none was there, who knew me. Flight was cut off from me; and is he not earnestly seeking my life? To thee, O Lord, I cried and said, Thou art my hope—my portion in the land of the living. Attend to my supplication ; for I am brought very low: deliver me from my persecutors ; for they are stronger than I. Bring my soul out of prison, that I may adore thy name, O Lord. Let the righteous wait for me, till thou shalt reward me.

CXLIIF.
A Psalm by David, when his son was pursuing him.

O LORD, hearken to my prayer! Listen to my supplication in thy truth; answer me in thy saving goodness; and enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy sight no man living can be justified.

PSALMS.
8. Because the enemy hath earnestly sought my life—hath humbled my life to the ground—hath caused me to sit in dark

4. places, like them who have been long dead; therefore my spirit was overwhelmed with grief; my heart within me was trou-

5. bled and I remembered the days of old. I meditated on all thy

6 works—I mused on the works of thy hands. I spread forth my hands to thee; for thee my soul thirsted like land without

7 water. Hear me speedily, O Lord; my spirit hath failed. Turn not away thy face from me; nor let me be like them who go down to the pit.

8 Cause me to hear thy kindness in the morning; for in thee
IT have placed my confidence. O Lord, let me know which way I shall go; for to thee 1 have lifted up my soul.

9 Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies; for to thee I have

10 fled for refuge. ‘Teach me to do thy will; for thou art my God.
Let thy good spirit lead me in the right way.

ll For the sake of thy name, thou, O Lord, wilt keep me alive—in thy saving goodness thou wilt bring my soul out of

12 trouble, and in thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them that afflict my soul; for 1 am thy servant.

By David. On Goliath.

BLESSED be the Lord my God, who teacheth my hands te

my support and my deliverer, my protector in whom I trusted, who subdueth the people under me.
3 O Lord, what is man that thou shouldst acknowledge him,
A ora son of man that thou shouldst regard him! Man is like vanity, his days glide away like a shadow.
5 O Lord, bow thy heaven and come down: touch the mountains
6 and let them smoke. Flash lightnings and thou wilt scat-
7 ter them; dart thy bolts and thou wilt discomfit them; stretch forth thy hand from on high; rescue me and deliver me from

many waters—out of the hand of the children of strangers, —

8 whose mouth hath uttered wp i οὐ and whose right hand i 1S a right hand of deceit.

war and my fingers to fight. He is my mercy and my refuge—

12

15

16

PSALMS.

O God, to thee I will sing a new song—to thee I will play on a ten stringed psaltery, to him who giveth salvation to kings, who hath redeemed his servant David from the hurtful sword.
Rescue me and deliver me out of the hand of the children of strangers, whose mouth hath uttered falschood, and whose right hand is a right hand of deceit—whose sons are like trees well

planted when young; their daughters beauteous, adorned. like

shrines; their store houses full and overflowing; their flocks prolific, abounding in their outwalks ; their herds fat. There is no destruction of enclosures—no breaking out—no screaming in their folds. The people who had such things were hailed happy ; but happy is the people, whose God is the Lord.

A Psalm of praise. By David.

I WILL extol thee, O my God, my king: and bless thy name for ever and ever. Day by day I will bless thee, and praise thy name for ever and ever. The Lord is great and greatly to be praised ; and of his greatness there is no end.
Let generation after generation praise thy works, and proclaim thy mighty power: Let them speak of the transcendant glory of thy majesty, and relate thy wonderous works. Let them express the might of thine awful dealings, and rehearse thy greatness. Let them make mention of thine abundant goodness, and exult with joy in thy saving mercy. The Lord is gracious and merciful : long suffering and abundant in kindness. The Lord is kind to them who wait, and his mercies are over all his works. Let all thy works,,O Lord, praise thee, and let thy saints bless thee ; let them speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy government: to make known thy government to the sons of men, and the transcendant glory of thy kingdom.
Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion, throughout all generations. The Lord is faithful in his words, and bountiful in all his works. The Lord upholdeth all that are falling, and raiseth up all who are broken down. The eyes of all wait upon thee: and thou givest them their food in due season; thou openest thy hands, and satisfiest the desire of every

VOL. 11. oF

14 m © td =

PSALMS.

made a decree and it shail not pass away. Praise the Lord ye of the earth! dragons and all deeps! Fire, hail; snow, ice, tempestuous wind, which execute his commands! Mountains, and all hills! fruit trees and all cedars! wild beasts and all cattle! creeping things and winged fowls! Kings of the earth, and all peoples! chiefs and all judges of the earth! . youths and virgins! elders with them of younger years! let them praise the name of the Lord; for his name alone is exalted. To him belongeth thanksgiving, on earth and in heaven. When he shall exalt the horn of his people, let there be a song of praise among all his saints—among the children - of Israel—a people who draw near to him.

An Alleluia.
SING to the Lord a new song.- Praise is his due in the - congregation of saints. Let Israel rejoice in his maker—and

the children of Sion exult in their king. Let them praise his name in choirs—on the tympanum and_ psaltery sing praises

‘to him: for the Lord taketh pleasure in his people; and with

salvation he will exalt the meek. Let the saints triumph in glory ; and exult with joy on their beds. Let the high praises

‘of God be in their mouth; and in their hands two edged

swords; to execute vengeance on the nations—rebukes among peoples. To bind their kings’ with fetters; and their nobles with chains of iron: to execute on them the judgments written. Such is the honour which all his saints have.

Cli;
An Alleluia,
PRAISE God in his holies; praise him in the firmament 

of his power. Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him/ac- © cording to his abundant majesty : praise him with the sound- -

. ing trumpet: praise him with the psaltery and kithara: praise

him with the tympanum and chorus: praise him with stringed

were

PSALMS. “"

5 instruments and organs ; praise him with soft sounding cymbals:
6 praise him with the cymbals of triumph: let every breath praise the Lord.

N. B. There is in the Septuagint another Psalm, with this title: —This Psalm on David was written by himself in prose, when he fought in single combat with Goliath.

I was little among my brethren, and the youngest of my father’s family. I fed my father’s flocks. My hands had made an organ; and my fingers had tuned a psaltery. But who will tell my Lord. My Lord himself heareth. He sent his messenger and took me from my father’s flocks and anointed me with anointing oil. My brothers were comely and great; but the Lord did not delight in them. I went out to meet the Philistine, and he cursed me by his idols. But I drew his own sword and cut off his head, and took away reproach from the children of Israel.

END OF VOL. II.
