==============================================================================
The Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia, Vol. II: Fever Sickness, Headache, etc. (Asakki Marsuti and related series)
R. Campbell Thompson (1876-1941) (1904)
Edition staged: London: Luzac (Semitic Text and Translation Series, Vol. XV), 1904. University of Toronto scan via Internet Archive (devilsevilspirit02thomuoft).
Source: Internet Archive — https://archive.org/details/devilsevilspirit02thomuoft
Rights: Public Domain. Published 1904, before 1930; author died 1941.
Language: English (with Akkadian transliteration)
Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library (antarctic-labs.com).
Volume 2 of 2 (Asakki Marsuti, Ti'i, Luh-ka series and miscellaneous incantations). Note: Thompson's volumes cover related anti-witchcraft series; the Maqlû series itself is staged separately via Tallqvist 1895 (German).
==============================================================================

LDZAC'S  SEMITIC  TEXT


AND  TRANSLATION  SERIES


IVIicrosoft  Corporation


Xusac's
Semitic  Zcxt  an&  translation  Series.

©Ol.   XV.


Xu3ac*3  Semitic  TLc^t  anb  Xlranslation  Series.


VOL.  I :  The  Laughable  Stories  collected  by  Bar-HebRvCus.
Syriac  Text  and  Translation,  with  Notes,  Introduction,  etc.
By  E.  A.  Wallis  Budge.     21s.  net.

VOL.  II  :  The  Letters  and  Inscriptions  of  Hammurabi,
King  of  Babylon,  about  b.c.  220a;  to  which  is  added
a  series  of  letters  of  other  kings  of  the  First  Dynasty  of
Babylon.  Vol.  I  :  Introduction  and  Babylonian  Texts.
By  L.  W.  King.     21s.  net.

VOL.  Ill  :  The  Letters  and  Inscriptions  of  Hammurabi,
King  of  Babylon,  about  b.c.  2200;  to  which  is  added
a  series  of  letters  of  other  kings  of  the  First  Dynasty  of
Babylon.  Vol.  II  :  Babylonian  Texts,  continued.  By
L.  W.  King.     iSs.  net.

VOL.  IV  :  The  History  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  the
History  of  the  Likeness  of  Christ.  Vol.  I  :  Syriac
Texts.     By  E.  A.  Wallis  Budge.     1 2s.  6d.  net.

VOL.  V :  The  History  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  the
History  of  the  Likeness  of  Christ.  Vol.  II :  English
Translations.     By  E.  A.  Wallis  Budge.     10s.  6d.  net.

VOL.  VI :  The  Reports  of  the  Magicians  and  Astrologers
OF  Nineveh  and  Babylon.  Vol.  I :  Cuneiform  Texts.  By
R.  C.  Thompson.     12s.  6d.  net.

VOL.  VII :  The  Reports  of  the  Magicians  and  Astrologers
OF  Nineveh  and  Babylon.  Vol.  II :  English  Translation
and  Transliteration.     By  R.  C.  Thompson.     12s.  dd.  net.

VOL.  VIII :  The  Letters  and  Inscriptions  of  Hammurabi,
King  of  Babylon,  about  b.c.  2200  ;  to  which  is  added
a  series  of  letters  of  other  kings  of  the  First  Dynasty  of
Babylon.  Vol.  Ill :  English  Translations,  with  Translitera-
tions, Commentary,  Vocabularies,  Introduction,  etc.  By
L.  W.  King.     i8j.  nQt.

VOL.  IX:  The  Histories  of  Rabban  Hormizd  the  Persian
AND  Rabban  Bar-'Idta.  Vol.  I :  Syriac  Texts.  By  E.  A.
Wallis  Budge.     12^.  bd.  net.


VOL.  X :  The  Histories  of  Rabban  Hormizd  the  Persian
AND  Rabban  Bar-*Idta.  Vol.  II :  English  Translations.
By  E.  A.  Wallis  Budge.     12^.  6^.  net.

VOL.  XI :  The  Histories  of  Rabban  Hormizd  the  Persian
AND  Rabban  Bar-'Idta.  Vol.  Ill:  English  Translation
of  the  Metrical  Life  of  Rabban  Hormizd  by  Sergius  of
Adhorbaijan.     By  E.  A.  Wallis  Budge.     10s.  6d.  net.

VOL.  XII :  The  Seven  Tablets  of  Creation.  Vol.  I :  English
Translations,  Transliterations,  Glossary,  Introduction,  etc.
ByL.  W.King,     i8j.net.

VOL.  XIII :  The  Seven  Tablets  of  Creation.  Vol.  II  :
Supplementary  [Babylonian  and  Assyrian]  Texts.  By  L.  W.
King.     15^-.  net.

VOL.  XIV:  The  Devils  and  Evil  Spirits  of  Babylonia,
transliterated  and  translated,  with  Introduction.  Vol.  I.
By  R.  C.  Thompson,     i^s.  net.

VOL.  XV  :  The  Devils  and  Evil  Spirits  of  Babylonia,
transliterated  and  translated,  with  Vocabulary,  Indexes,
and  an  Introduction.     Vol.  II.     By  R.  C.  Thompson.

VOL.  XVI :  The  History  of  Baralam  and  Yewasef.  The
Ethiopic  Version,  translated  from  the  Arabic  by  Enbakom,
for  the  Ethiopian  king  Galawdewas,  a.d.  1553.  Vol.  I,
Part  I  :  the  Ethiopic  Text.  By  E.  A.  Wallis  Budge.  {In
the  Press.)

VOL.  XVII :  The  History  of  Baralam  and  Yewas£f.  The
Ethiopic  Version,  translated  from  the  Arabic  by  Enbakom,
for  the  Ethiopian  king  Galawdewas,  a.d.  1553.  Vol.  I,
Part  2  :  the  Ethiopic  Text,  continued.  By  E.  A.  Wallis
Budge.     {In  the  Press.)

VOL.  XVIII:  The  History  of  Baralam  and  Yewasef.  The
Ethiopic  Version,  translated  from  the  Arabic  by  Enbakom,
for  the  Ethiopic  king  Galawdewas,  a.d.  1553.  Vol.  II:
English  Translation,  Introduction,  etc.  By  E.  A.  Wallis
Budge.     {In  the  Press.)

VOL.  XIX :  A  Contribution  to  Babylonian  History,  being
a  series  of  Babylonian  Historical  Texts  with  English  Trans-
lations.    By  L.  W.  King.     {In  the  Press.)


THE   DEVILS   AND   EVIL   SPIRITS
OF  BABYLONIA.


Bronze  animal-headed  figure  of  one  of  the  Babylonian  Powers  of  Evil.  The
inscription  upon  it  reads  :  (l)  Mu-kil pi  {})  (2)  -tik  limuttim{tim)  {3)  tir-ru-hic
(4)  la-pit  pagrdniP^  (5)  mu-sar-bu  (6)  ia-si-mtt  (7)  la  viu-ki-ia  (8)  sa
ahiP^  (9)  "sepdii  limuttim  {tim)  (10)  iprus{us).  "He  that  raiseth  an  evil
.  .  .  ,  rushing  headlong,  upheaving  the  dead,  exalting,  galloping,  never
stopping,  whose  brothers  stretch  forth  (?)  feet  for  evil."     (No.  93,078.)


{Frontispiece.)


THE


DEVILS  AND  EVIL  SPIRITS


OF


BABYLONIA,


BEING  BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  INCANTATIONS  AGAINST  THE

DEMONS,    GHOULS,    VAMPIRES,    HOBGOBLINS,    GHOSTS,    AND

KINDRED    EVIL    SPIRITS,    WHICH    ATTACK    MANKIND.


TRANSLATED     FROM     THE     ORIGINAL     CUNEIFORM    TEXTS     IN     THE

BRITISH    MUSEUM,    WITH    TRANSLITERATIONS,

VOCABULARY,    NOTES,    ETC.

Rp^'^CAMPBELL    THOMPSON,    M.A.

ASSISTANT    IN   THE    DEPARTMENT   OF    EGYPTIAN    AND   ASSYRIAN   ANTIQUITIES,    BRITISH    MUSEUM.


WITH  TWO   PLATES.

VOL.     II.
"FEVER    SICKNESS"   AND  ''HEADACHE,"  ETC


Xonbon :

LUZAC     AND     CO.

1904.

[^//  I^ig/i^s  Reserved.'\


Hertford:
printed  by  stephen  austin  and  sons,


TO   MY  FATHER,
REGINALD    E.    THOMPSON,   M.D.


(preface.


The  Series  of  Cuneiform  Texts  which  are  trans-
literated and  translated  in  this,  the  second  volume  of
my  work  on  the  Devils  and  Evil  Spirits  of  Babylonia,
are  of  a  magical  character,  except  for  the  interesting
descriptions  which,  are  given  of  supernatural  beings
which  form  the  concluding  portion  of  the  book.  In
contents,  construction,  and  phraseology  they  closely
resemble  the  documents  relating  to  Evil  Spirits,  which
will  be  found  in  the  preceding  volume.

A  careful  examination  of  the  documents  makes  it
almost  certain  that  they  were  originally  written  in
the  ancient  non  -  Semitic  or  Sumerian  language  of
Mesopotamia,  and  we  shall  probably  be  not  far  wrong
if  we  assign  to  them  an  antiquity  of  not  less  than
six  thousand  years.  It  will,  of  course,  be  understood
that  the  versions  which  are  rendered  into  English  in
the  following  pages  do  not  belong  to  this  early  date,
but  it  is  more  than  probable  that  they  represent
substantially  an  extremely  ancient  recension.  Since
they  were  drawn  up  for  the  Royal  Library  at  Nineveh
by  the  command  of  Ashurbanipal  about  the  first  half
of  the  seventh  century  before  Christ,  we  are  fully
justified  in  assuming  that  due  care  was  shown  by  the
court  scribes  in  the  choice  of  their  materials.


XII  PREFACE.


The  various  groups  of  texts  translated  herein  may-
be briefly  described  as  follows  : —

(i)  The  AsAKKi  MARSUTi,  i.e.,  a  Series  of  tablets
which  were  composed  with  the  view  of  curing  the
"  Fever-sickness."  The  number  of  tablets  in  the
Series  was  not  less  than  twelve,  and  the  material
consisted  of  exorcisms  and  spells,  which  were  directed
against  the  disease  Asakku.  I  have  here  translated
this  word  by  ''fever,"  because  the  symptoms  exhibited
by  a  man  suffering  from  the  AsaMu-disease  closely
resemble  those  of  one  smitten  by  intermittent  fever,
or  by  malaria.  It  must,  however,  be  remembered
that  the  translation  of  Asakku  by  "  fever  "  is  tentative.

(2)  The  Ti'i,  i.e.,  a  Series  of  tablets  which  were
composed  with  the  view  of  curing  headache  ;  the
number  of  tablets  in  the  Series  consisted  of  nine,  and
their  contents  are  charms  and  incantations  which  were
used  to  drive  away  pains  of  all  kinds  In  the  head.
In  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  It  Is  Impossible
to  say  whether  the  early  Sumerlans  distinguished
between  the  various  forms  of  headache  which  are
accompanied  by  nausea,  vomiting,  etc.

(3)  A  series  of  miscellaneous  texts  containing
charms,  spells,  and  Incantations,  similar  in  character
to  that  of  the  texts  described  In  paragraphs  (i)  and  (2).
It  is  perfectly  clear  that  they  were  written  for  the
purpose  of  driving  diseases  of  various  kinds  out  of
the  body,  but  It  is  unfortunately  impossible  In  all  cases
in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  to  say  what


PREFACE.  XIII


those  infirmities  were.  We  are,  however,  certain  from
the  contents  of  the  Tablet  which  I  have  called  "  U,"
that  this  document  was  composed  with  the  express
purpose  of  affording  relief  to  those  unfortunate  wights
who  had  been  so  unlucky  as  to  have  come  under  the
influence  of  the  Evil  Eye.

(4)  The  next  group  of  tablets  is  called  luh-ka,
a  title  for  which  the  meaning  ''  Cleansing  of  the
Mouth  "  may  be  suggested  tentatively.  Whether  this
be  its  exact  rendering  or  not  matters  comparatively
little,  but  we  are  certain  that  the  texts  were  written
for  the  purpose  of  restoring  to  ceremonial  purity
a  man  who  had  wittingly  or  unwittingly  become
contaminated  or  impure  through  touching  or  even
beholding  some  unclean  thing.  The  compositions  of
this  group  were,  in  short,  intended  to  destroy  one
of  the  many  forms  of  tapu  to  which,  according  to
ancient  Sumerian  tradition,  mankind  was  peculiarly
liable.

(5)  A  group  of  tablets  which  contain  descriptions
of  a  number  of  supernatural  beings,  which  corresponded
roughly  to  the  modern  Arabic  Jinn  and  Jann,  The
identification  of  the  greater  number  of  these  is  difficult ;
among  those  worthy  of  special  note  is  the  goddess
NiN-TU,  who  is  said  to  wear  an  elaborate  tiara  and  veil,
and  to  be  girt  about  the  loins  with  a  zone  or  garment,
her  breast  being  uncovered.  The  upper  part  of  her
body  is  that  of  a  naked  woman,  and  the  lower  part  is
said  to  be  scaly  like  the  skin  of  a  snake.     It  is  important


XIV  PREFACE.


from  many  points  of  view  to  observe  that  she  is
represented  suckHng  her  babe  at  the  left  breast.  In
the  course  of  the  excavations  which  have  been  made
in  Assyria  during  the  last  fifty  years,  numbers  of  clay
figures  possessing  the  characteristics  described  above
have  been  found,  and  we  are  probably  right  in  con-
sidering that  they  are  intended  to  be  votive  figures
of  the  goddess  nin-tu,  which  have  been  offered  to  her
by  devout  but  barren  women  who  desired  offspring.
(For  specimens  of  these  figures  see  the  Babylonian  and
Assyrian  Room  in  the  British  Museum,  Nos.  91,853-
91,854.)  There  is  Httle  doubt  that  nin-tu  occupied
among  the  peoples  of  Mesopotamia  the  position  which
Hathor  held  among  the  Egyptians  and  the  Virgin
Mary  among  Oriental  Christian  peoples.  She  was,
in  fact,  a  form  of  the  World-Mother,  or  Chief  Mother-
Goddess,  who  plays  such  an  important  part  in  many
mythologies.

(6)  A  text  which  supplies  us  with  a  unique  version
of  the  Legend  of  the  Worm,  i.e.,  with  a  copy  of  a  very
ancient  prescription  for  curing  the  toothache.  One  of
the  most  interesting  characteristics  of  the  legend  is
the  manner  in  which  the  genesis  of  the  Worm  is
traced  by  a  series  of  steps  from  Anu,  the  Sky-god,
and  we  see  how  even  an  evil  thing  may  be  derived
from  a  divine  source.  Similarly,  we  may  note  the  fact
that  the  magician  would  sometimes  assert  that  the
evil  which  he. was  about  to  combat  was  so  powerful
that  it  had  at  some  remote  period  vanquished  even


PREFACE.  XV


the  gods  themselves.     Thus,  in  Col.  Ill  of  K.  191  we

are  told  that  the  sum  libbi,  i.e.,  "  Heart-plant,"  on  one

occasion  overcame  the  heart  of  Shamash,  the  Sun-god,

and  of  Sin,  the  Moon-god,  and  that  it  also  had  power

over  the  hearts  of  men  and  animals ;  and  it  is  perfectly

clear  that  the   **  Heart-plant "    must   have   possessed

some  intoxicating  and  narcotic  effect.     We  may  note

in  passing  that  this  text  states  that  the  plant  grew  in

Matan,   which  is  usually  identified  with  the  Sinaitic

Peninsula,  and  I  venture  to  suggest  the  identification

of  the  sam  libbi  with  xh^Jjfyoscyamus  muticus,  which  (jsV{^t\[^^

I  have  seen  growing  in  the  Peninsula,  and  the  natives

told  me  that  this  plant  possessed  highly  intoxicating

properties,  in  fact  they  call  it  saykardn,  i.e.,  that  which

intoxicates.^

One  of  the  most  important  results  obtained  from
the  study  of  the  above-mentioned  texts  is  the  discovery
of  the  existence  of  the  tapu  among  the  Sumerians
and  their  successors,  the  Babylonians  and  Assyrians.
It  seems  that  it  was  almost  impossible  for  man  to
avoid  falling  under  some  tapu  or  ban,  and  it  is  clear
that  the  Semitic  inhabitants  of  Western  Asia  must
have  derived  their  knowledge  of  this  remarkable
superstition  from  the  earlier  non-Semitic  inhabitants
of  the  country.  With  the  existence  of  the  tapu  among
the  Sumerians  I  have  been  acquainted  for  some  time


^  For  the   text   and   a   German    rendering   see   Dr.    Kuchler's
Beiirdge^  Leipzig,   1904,  p.  9  ff.


/..


XVI  PREFACE.


past,  but  to  M.  Fossey  belongs  the  credit  of  being  the
first  to  publish  an  account  of  it,  and  to  give  the  texts
on  v^hich  his  deductions  were  based.  For  his  views
on  the  subject  the  reader  is  referred  to  his  careful
work  La  Magie  Assyrienne,  which  appeared  in  1902.
Finally,  mention  must  be  made  of  another  important
discovery  of  the  existence  among  the  Sumerians  of
ceremonies  which  prove  that  this  people  had  developed
the  idea  of  the  ''Atonement"  several  hundreds  of
years  before  the  Hebrews.  The  verb  used  is  kuppurUy
which,  as  Dr.  Zimmern  has  pointed  out,  is  identical
with  the  Hebrew  word  *133.

The  ideas  and  beliefs  which  actually  underlie  the
Levitical  ceremonies  of  the  "Atonement  "  are  still  but
imperfectly  understood,  but  I  believe  that  the  study
of  the  texts  in  which  the  "Atonement"  of  the
Sumerians  is  mentioned  and  described  will  do  much
to  indicate  the  method  to  be  followed  in  dealing  with
this  important  subject.

In  conclusion,  my  thanks  are  due  to  Dr.  E.  A.
Wallis  Budge  and  Mr.  L.  W.  King  for  much  help  in
writing  this  book.

R.  Campbell  Thompson.

London,  January  ist,  1904.


CONTENTS.


SERIES     ASAKKI     MARSUTI.

Tablet  I.— S.  187  +  1,902  (Part  XVII,  Plate  2).

Tablet  III.— K.  3,280  +  4,824.  :  K.  9,273  (Part  XVII,  Plate  1).

Tablet  IX.— Km.  266  (Part  XVII,  Plate  2).

Tablet  "  L."— K.  2,503  +  7,819  (Part  XVII,  Plate  2).

Tablet  "M."— No.  46,288  :  K.  4,663  (Part  XVII,  Plate  3).

Tablet  "N"  (of  a  similar  series). — K.  2,375  :  K.  2,859  +  6,090  :
K.4,859  :  K.  4,996  +  5,182  :  K.  5,139  :  K.  5,317  :  S.  217  +
Km.  210  +  214  :  79-7-8,  295  (Part  XVII,  Plates  4-8,  37).

Tablet  XL— K.  2,770  :  K.  3,118  :  K.  5,210  :  K.  9,406  :  S.  1,061
+  1,208  +  1,943  :  S.  1,140  :  80-7-19,  128  (Part  XVII,
Plates  9-1 1 ).

Tablet  XII.— S.  704  :  Km.  ii,  156  +  264(Part  XVII,  Plates  27-28).

SERIES    TIT.

Tablet  III.  — No.  46,291+46,358  :  No.  91,011  (Part  XVII,
Plates  12-13).

Tablet  VI.— K.  3,128  +  Rm.  244  (Part  XVII,  Plate  14).

Tablet  "  O."— K.  8,386  :  No.  42,350  (Part  XVII,  Plate  14).

Tablet  VIIL— No.  34,223  (Part  XVII,  Plates  15-18).

Tablet  IX.— K.  3,169  +  7,848  :  K.  5,141  +  5,206  and  K.  5,287
and  K.  12,000  **CC"  (probably  parts  of  the  same  tablet)  :
K.  4,865  +  S.  1,145  •  K.  5,213  (Part  XVII,  Plates  19-24)-

Tablet  "P."  — K.  2,869  +  5-025  '  K.  4,840  :  K.  9,303  :
No.  46,301  (Part  XVII,  Plates  25-26).


X\Iir  CONTENTS.


MISCELLANEOUS     INCANTATIONS.

Tablet  *' R."— K.  1,284  '  K.  4,901  (Part  XVII,  Plates  29-30).

Tablet  -  S."— K.  3,518  (Part  XVII,  Plate  30).

Tablet  ''T."— K.  1,283  (Part  XVII,  Plates  31-32).

Tablet  '*  U."— No.  33,534  :  No.  93,081  (obverse)  (Part  XVII,
Plate  33),

Tablet  "  V."  —  K.  3,586  :  K.  4,667  :  D.T.  38  :  S.  892  and
Rm.  87  (parts  of  the  same  tablet)  :  No.  93,082  (i-io)  :
No.  93,083  (1-9)  (Part  XVII,  Plates  34-36).

Tablet  "  W."— K.  6,316  (Part  XVII,  Plate  36).

Tablet  *'X."— K.  9,272  (Part  XVII,  Plate  36).

Tablet  "  Y."— K.  3,372  +  5,241  (Part  XVII,  Plate  37).

Tablet  *'  Z."— (Part  of  Tablet  "  N,"  Part  XVII,  Plate  37.)

S.  291  (Part  XVII,  Plate  37).

Tablet  "AA."— (Part  of  Tablet  VIII  of  Series  luh-ka,  Part  XVII,
Plates  38-40.)

Tablet  "  BB."— Rm.  125  (Part  XVII,  Plate  40).

Tablet  *'CC."— K.  2,873  (Part  XVII,  Plate  41).

SERIES     LUH-KA.

Tablet  VII.— K.  6,031  (Part  XVII,  Plate  40).

Tablet  VIII.  —  K.  4,813  +  11,629  +  79-7-8,  65  :  K.  4,900  +
4,949  +  5,331  +  5,367  :  K.  6,029  +  6,627  +  9,364  :  S.  924
+  81-2-4,  215  (Part  XVII,  Plate  41,  and  Tablet  *'AA").

DESCRIPTIONS    OF    GODS,    ETC.

Tablet  **  DD."  —  K.  2,148  and  K.  8,337  and  K.  13,843  and
Rm.  279  and  Rm.  422  (probably  parts  of  the  same  tablet)  :
K.  7,918  and  81-7-27,  109  (probably  parts  of  the  same
tablet)  (Part  XVII,  Plates  42-45).

LEGEND    OF    THE    WORM.
No.  55,547  (Part  XVII.  Plate  50).


Jn^robuc^ion.


3ntrobucfion.


In  the  first  volume  of  this  work  the  texts  treated  of
belonged  chiefly  to  the  Series  entitled  *'  The  Evil
Spirits,"  and  dealt  with  the  relations  which  existed
between  men  and  demons,  and  provided  the  spells
whereby  the  evil  which  had  attacked  a  sick  man  might
be  removed.  The  incantations  of  the  two  Series
''  Fever  Sickness  "  and  **  Headaches  "  which  are
translated  in  the  present  volume  are  of  a  similar
character,  but  the  formulae  prescribed  must  be  classed
under  the  head  of  sympathetic  magic  to  an  even
greater  extent  than  those  of  the  preceding  Series,  and
the  exorcisms  go  far  to  show  that  the  tapii  (more
commonly  known  as  taboo)  was  as  real  a  terror  to  the
Assyrians  as  it  was  to  the  other  Semitic  tribes.  The
more  this  class  of  texts  is  examined,  the  more  closely
are  their  contents  found  to  resemble  the  magic  of
other  nations.  This  is  proved  by  the  following  con-
siderations : —

(i)  Words  of  Power.

In  attacking  the  powers  of  evil  it  was  of  no  avail
for  the  magician  to  rely  solely  on  his  own  strength  ;
it  was  necessary  for  him  to  call  to  his  aid  some
divine  authority  to  support  him  in  his  combat.     This


XXII  INTRODUCTION.


aid  is  generally  known  as  the  ''Word  of  Power,"  and
in  its  simplest  form  is  the  name  of  some  divine  being
or  thing.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  so  many  of  the
Assyrian  incantations  end  with  the  words

''By  Heaven  be  ye  exorcised!     By  Earth  be  ye
exorcised !  "

at  which  adjuration  the  evil  spirits  are  supposed  to
be  overcome.  It  is  also  common  to  find  long  lists
of  gods  invoked  in  the  same  way  and  for  the  same
purpose.

But  in  addition  to  this  simple  form  there  are  many
elaborations  which  can  all  be  traced  back  to  the
same  fountain-head.  For  instance,  in  many  exorcisms
against  diseases  which  were  supposed  to  be  caused
by  the  agency  of  spirits,  we  find  the  sorcerer  repeating
the  legend  which  tells  how  Marduk  went  to  Ea,  his
father,  to  ask  his  advice  against  the  sickness  which
possesses  the  sick  man  for  whom  he  is  reciting  the
incantation  : —

"  Marduk  hath  seen  him  (the  sick  man)  and

"  Unto  the  house  of  his  father  Ea  hath  entered  and

spoken  :
"  '  Father'  .^

"  Twice  he  hath  said  unto  him,
"  '  What  this  man  shall  do  he  knoweth  not,
"  '  Whereby  he  may  be  assuaged.'

^  Here  Marduk  repeats  the  first  line  of  the  tablet.


WORDS  OF   POWER.  XXIII


Ea  hath  answered  his  son  Marduk  :
'  O  my  son,  what  dost  thou  not  know,
'  What  more  can  I  give  thee  ?
'  O  Marduk,  what  dost  thou  not  know,

*  How  can  I  add  unto  thy  knowledge  ?

*  What  I  know  thou  knowest  also.
'  Go,  my  son  Marduk  '  "  ^

Then  follow  the  advice  of  Ea  and  his  instructions
for  healing  the  patient.  This  legend  is  constantly
repeated  in  the  incantations,  and  it  was  so  well
known  that  it  is  generally  quoted  on  the  tablets
in  an  abbreviated  form  in  one  line  in  the  following
way  :  "  Marduk  hath  seen  him  :  '  What  I  '  ;  '  Go,  my
son  '  "  ;  the  priest  or  magician  supplying  the  remainder
and  reciting  it  in  full.

Now,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  the  mention  of
this  episode  is  based  on  a  fundamental  principle  of
all  magic,  viz.,  the  use  of  Words  of  Power,  for  rites
and  ceremonies  have  no  Inherent  authority  of  their
own,  and  are  only  of  avail  when  used  in  conjunction
with  supernatural  aid.  By  bringing  in  the  story  of
Ea  and  Marduk,  the  magician  at  once  invokes  divine
help,  and,  in  so  far  as  he  carries  out  the  directions
which  Ea  gives  to  his  son,  it  is  as  though  Marduk
were  himself  performing  the  incantation,  the  exorcist
becoming   the    servant    of    the    god,    endowed   with


See  note  d,  p.  1 17  of  Vol.  I.


XXIV  INTRODUCTION.

corresponding  power  against  spirits.  Indeed,  magic,
be  it  worked  by  spell  or  amulet,  depends  largely  on
these  Words  of  Power  written  or  recited,  and  a  similar
use  of  magical  words  is  to  be  found  among  other
ancient  nations.  For  instance,  we  find  in  the  Egyptian
Pyramid  Texts  of  Unas  (c.  3500  B.C.)  that  it  is  stated
that  "a  book  with  words  of  magical  power"  was
buried  with  him.^  No  demon  could  withstand  the
authority  of  these  mystic  words  if  only  they  were
rightly  employed,  particularly  if  used  in  the  proper
place,  and  with  the  proper  intonation,  and  by  a
properly  qualified  priest.

We  have  seen,  then,  that  Ea  and  Marduk,  two
of  the  most  powerful  gods  of  Assyria,  especially  in  all
matters  relating  to  sorcery,  were  supposed  to  help
magicians,  should  they  be  invoked  to  aid  them  in
their  spells.  The  use  of  mighty  names  in  exorcisms,
and  the  invocations  to  the  gods  to  lay  the  evil  under
a  ban,  had  each  its  special  significance.  The  human
sorcerer  with  all  his  ceremonies  and  abracadabra
was  powerless  against  supernatural  evil  unless  he
could  depend  on  the  aid  of  some  more  powerful
spirit,  and  since  the  gods  were  vested  with  authority
over  all  evil,  it  was  the  gods  to  whom  he  turned  in
his  hour  of  need.  The  system  is  a  universal  one,  and
lies  at  the  base  of  all  magic,  whether  it  be  the  spells
of  the   Sumerian  priest  who  exorcised  a  demon  two

^  See  Budge,  Egyptian  Magic,  p.  28..


WORDS  OF   POWER.  XXV


or  three  thousand  years  before  Christ,  or  a  Syrian
monk  casting  out  devils,  or  a  mediaeval  wizard
summoning  a  familiar  spirit.  The  only  difference
lies  in  the  actual  divine  word  which  was  used  ;  the
Babylonian  priest  adjures  the  evil  spirit  by  one  of
the  gods,  or  by  heaven  and  earth,  while  the  later
wizards  invoke  the  name  of  Christ.  Each  trusts  to
the  god  in  whom  he  believes  to  lay  the  devil  under
a  ban.

It  is  also  plain  from  these  texts  that  the  Assyrian
sorcerer  considers  himself  in  direct  communication
with  the  gods,  being  merely  the  mouthpiece  through
which  the  divine  will  acts.  Indeed,  he  claims  to  be
sent  by  the  gods  when  he  is  expelling  a  demon  : —

"  The  man  of  Ea  am  I !

''  The  man  of  Damkina  am  I !

"  The  messenger  of  Marduk  am  I  !

*'  To  revive  the  (         )  sick  man,

''  The  great  lord  Ea  hath  sent  me  ;

''He  hath  added  his  pure  spell  to  mine,    •

*'  He  hath  added  his  pure  voice  to  mine,

''He  hath  added  his  pure  spittle  to  mine,

"He  hath' added  his  pure  prayer  to  mine."  ^

And  at  the  end  of  his  exorcism  he  prays  to  Ea  - : —
"  O  Ea,  King  of  the  Deep,  to  see     .     .     .
"I,  the  magician,  am  thy  slave.

'  Devils  and  Evil  Spirits,  Vol.  I,  Tablet  III,  1.  65  ff.
-  Ibid.,  1.  260.


XXVI  INTRODUCTION.


"  March  thou  on  my  right  hand,

"  Be  present  on  my  left ;

"  Add  thy  pure  spell  unto  mine,

"  Add  thy  pure  voice  unto  mine,

"  Vouchsafe  (to  me)  pure  words,

"  Make  fortunate  the  utterances  of  my  mouth,

"  Ordain  that  my  decisions  be  happy,

"  Let  me  be  blessed  where'er  I  tread,

''  Let  the  man  whom  I  (now)  touch  be  blessed.

''  Before  me  may  lucky  thoughts  be  spoken,

"  After  me  may  a  lucky  finger  be  pointed.

''  Oh  that  thou  wert  my  guardian  Genius,

"  And  my  guardian  Spirit !  "

Now  the  idea  that  the  sorcerer  was  the  direct  agent
of  the  divine  will  continued  down  to  the  Middle  Ages,
when  the  wizard  in  uttering  his  spells  describes  himself
as  *'  the  servant  of  the  Most  High."  ^

The  intention  of  the  magician  when  combating  these
evil  spirits  is  to  bind  them  in  such  a  way,  with  the
help  of  the  Mighty  Names,  that  they  can  do  no  more
harm.  In  all  Assyrian  magical  texts  great  stress  is
laid  on  the  banning  or  tabooing  of  the  demons  by  the
divine  powers  which  the  priest  invokes,  i.e.,  either  the
names  of  gods  or,  far  more  frequently,  the  powers  of
heaven  and  earth.  The  phrase  "  By  Heaven  be  ye
exorcised  !     By  Earth  be  ye  exorcised  ! "  calls  in  all


^  See  p.  XXX.


WORDS  OF   POWER.  XXVII

celestial  and  earthly  powers  against  the  invisible  foes,
who  will  thus  be  spellbound.  In  the  same  way,  some
thousands  of  years  later  in  the  same  country  the
descendants  of  these  people,  the  holy  Nestorian
monks,  were  credited  with  the  ability  to  exorcise
devils  and  lay  them  under  a  ban  in  the  name  of
Christ.  It  is  related  of  Rabban  Hormizd,  the  Persian,
that  he  once  overcame  certain  devils  in  this  way  : —

"  Straightway  the   devils  of  the    impure    Ignatius

[began]  to  buzz  in  the  air,
**  And  they  took  the  miserable  man  up  and  held

him  suspended  in  the  air  ;
**  Suddenly   our  father  fixed  a  sharp  arrow  in  his

bow,
*'  And  shot  it  at  the  miserable  man  and  his  legions

and  pierced  his  heart ;
"He   made   the   deceiving   devils    to   hear   [these

words]  : — *  It  is  not  meet  for  you
"  '  To  fulfil   in   him   your  will   with   the  fulness   of

impurity  :
''  *  By    Jesus    Christ    I  bind  you,   O  ye  trembling

horde,
"  *  So  that  ye  may  abide  in  the  air  as  ye  are  in  hot

agitation,
*'  '  And  ye  shall  continue  to   abide   in   terror  until

I  loose  you  from  the  bond.' "  ^


'  E.  A.  Wallis  Budge,  T/ie  Histories  of  Rabban  Hormizd,  p.  474.


XXVIII  INTRODUCTION.


(2)  Knowledge  of  the  Supernatural  Enemy.

Words  of  power,  therefore,  plainly  constitute  one
of  the  first  principles  of  magic.  The  next  principle,
and  one  no  less  important,  consists  in  the  knowledge
of  the  name  or  characteristics  of  the  unseen  influence
which  afflicts  the  sick  man.  It  is,  however,  not
necessary  that  the  diagnosis  should  be  exact,  for  it
cannot  be  expected  that  a  magician  should  be  able
to  define  the  exact  form  of  the  invisible  demon  or
tapu  which  has  assailed  his  patient.  Devils  are
legion,  and  tapus  may  arise  from  countless  unknown
or  forgotten  causes,  and  neither  can  be  distinctly
specified  ;  yet  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the
spirit  or  evil  influence  shall  be  mentioned  by  name
in  order  that,  by  whatsoever  power  it  be  that  it
is  removed,  there  shall  be  no  doubt  as  to  what  is
meant.  To  this  end,  therefore,  the  priest  repeats
long  lists  of  ghosts,  devils,  or  tapus,  any  one  of  which
may  be  the  cause  of  the  sickness,  and  by  so  doing
he  impresses  the  demon  that  he  is  in  possession  of
his  name  or  description.  The  idea  underlying  this
custom  is  that  when  once  he  possesses  the  name  of  his
£nemy  he  has  gained  the  mastery  over  some  portion  of
him,  and  just  as  he  is  able  to  cast  spells  upon  living
people  if  he  has  some  of  their  nail-parings,  or  hair,  or
even  wax  figures  in  their  likeness,  so  is  he  able  to
conjure  the  hostile  spirit  because  he  knows  its  name.
This  is  exemplified  in  the  customs  of  the  natives  of


I


KNOWLEDGE   OF  THE   SUPERNATURAL   ENEMY.        XXIX

many  savage  tribes,  who  are  afraid  to  disclose  their
names  lest  some  enemy  should  hear  it  and  thereby
be  able  to  work  magic  against  them.^  Thus,  "an
"  Australian  black  is  always  very  unwilling  to  tell  his
"  real  name,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  this  reluctance
"  is  due  to  the  fear  that  through  his  name  he  may  be
"  injured  by  sorcerers."  ^  Among  the  ancient  Egyptians
the  monster  Apep  could  be  destroyed  by  making  a
wax  figure  of  him,  and  after  writing  his  name  upon  it
by  casting  it  into  the  fire  ;  ^  and  it  is  evident  that  the
writing  of  the  name  is  considered  as  good  as  moulding
nail-parings  into  the  wax,  the  difference  being  that
Apep  is  a  demon  and  nothing  tangible  can  be  obtained
of  him.  In  Palestinian  Demonology  the  same  thing
is  apparent  in  the  words  of  the  Unclean  Spirit
(Luke  iv,  34),  "  Art  thou  come  to  destroy  us  ?  I  know
"  thee  who  thou  art  ;   the  Holy  One  of  God."

In  the  magic  of  the  Middle  Ages,  if  a  demon  was
slow  to  appear  at  the  command  of  the  wizard,  he
rendered  himself  liable  to  be  cursed  and  buried  in
oblivion,  because  his  master  knew  his  name  and  "  seal."
In  one  of  the  Grimoires,  or  books  on  magic,  the
student  of  sorcery  is  recommended  to  write  the  seal
of  the  demon  on  a  piece  of  parchment  and  put  it  into
a  box  "with  brimstone,  assafoetida,  and  other  stinking


'  On  this  see  Frazer,  Go/den  Bough  (2nd  ed.),  i,  404.

^  R.  Broiigh  Smith,  Adorigines  of  Victoria,  i,  469  (quoted  ibid.).

^  Budge,  Egyptian  Magic,  p.  171.


XXX  INTRODUCTION,


perfumes  "  ;    he   must   then   exorcise  the   demon    and
threaten  to  destroy  him.

*'  .  .  .  I,  who  am  the  servant  of  the  Most  High
"...  will  excommunicate  thee,  will  destroy  thy
"  name  and  seal  which  I  have  in  this  box,  will  burn
"  them  with  unquenchable  fire,  and  bury  them  in  un-
bending oblivion     .     .     ."^

Consequently,  when  we  find  long  repetitions  of  the
names  of  ghosts  and  all  the  possible  forms  of  death
which  may  have  overtaken  them  when  alive  on  earth,
or  lists  of  demons  with  their  peculiar  characteristics,
it  is  plain  that  the  magician  expects  to  vanquish  the
spirit  as  soon  as  he  shows  that  he  knows  its  name.
It  is  immaterial  that  he  himself  should  know  exactly
which  one  it  is  out  of  the  long  categories  which  he
reels  off ;  it  is  only  necessary  for  him  to  make  the  list
of  possible  demons  sufficiently  inclusive  to  contain  the
description  or  name  of  the  particular  demon  which  he
wishes  to  exorcise,  and  it  is  enough  that  he  should
repeat  its  name  in  some  form  or  other,  that  it  should
cease  from  troubling  his  patient.  Indeed,  this  is  the
idea  of  what  may  be  termed  the  poetical  part  of  the
Assyrian  spells,  which  all  begin  with  long  descriptions
of  the  particular  demon  which  it  is  intended  to
drive  out.


^  Arthur  Edward  Waite,  The  Book  of  Black  Magic,  p.  199.


RITUAL   AND   CEREMONIES.  XXXI


(3)  Ritual  and  Ceremonies.

There  is  still  a  third  component  to  these  texts,  and
this  is  the  ritual  and  magic  symbolism,  especially  in
conjunction  with  certain  stones,  plants,  hair,  animals,
etc.,  without  which  the  ceremony,  particularly  in
sympathetic  magic,  is  incomplete.  In  the  cases  where
Marduk  is  supposed  to  ask  his  father  Ea  for  advice,
the  god  returns  with  directions  for  purely  magical
ceremonies  with  loaves  of  bread,  reeds,  water,  wax
figures,  and  all  kinds  of  objects  which  had  magical
powers  if  properly  used.  Many  of  these  charms  in
early  use  in  Mesopotamia  are  still  employed  among
the  modern  Semitic  descendants,  and  the  methods  of
using  them  are  just  the  same  as  they  were  three  or
four  thousand  years  ago.

Animals  and  their  hair  were  largely  used  in  these
ceremonies,  and  great  stress  was  laid  on  their  being
undefiled.  A  young  pig,  a  virgin  kid,  or  its  hair,
are  frequently  mentioned,  and  this  condition  of  cere-
monial purity  was  imposed  on  the  use  of  such  beasts
even  as  late  as  the  Middle  Ages,  when  the  "  virgin
kid "  was  largely  used  by  wizards  in  the  making  of
parchment  which  was  to  be  inscribed  with  magical
spells.^  In  these  incantations  it  becomes  purely
a  question  of  sympathetic  magic,  and  the  animal,  be
it  pig  or  kid,    when  killed,   is  placed  near  the  body

^  Waite,  Book  of  Black  Magic,  p.  209.


XXXIT  INTRODUCTION,


of  the  patient  as  a  substitute  for  him  In  which  the
demoniacal  influence  may  be  absorbed.  Thus  It  Is
advised  in  certain  cases  of  sickness  to  take  a  ''  white
kid  of  the  god  Tammuz,"  and,  after  taking  out  its
heart  and  giving  it  to  the  sufferer  to  hold,  the  magician
must  lay  the  carcase  down  close  to  him  and  utter
various  chants  over  them.  The  baneful  power  will
then  pass  from  the  man  into  the  carcase,  which  must
forthwith  be  cast  forth  from  the  house.  This  killing
of  the  kid  is  elaborated  in  another  recipe  for  the
same  disease,  which  tells  how  Ea  gave  advice  to  his
son  Marduk  for  the  benefit  of  the  sufferer  : —

"  The  kid  is  the  substitute  for  mankind,

''He  hath  given  the  kid  for  his  life,

"He  hath  given  the  head  of  the  kid  for  the  head

of  the  man,
''He  hath  given  the  neck  of  the  kid  for  the  neck

of  the  man,
"He  hath  given  the  breast  of  the  kid  for  the  breast

of  the  man."  ^

That  Is  to  say,  the  body  of  the  kid  will  receive  the
sickness  which  at  present  annoys  the  man.  A
tradition  very  similar  to  this  is  found  in  Morocco,
and  a  man  who  has  a  headache  will  sometimes  take


^  See  Tablet  N.  This  is  the  text  which  Professor  Sayce  quoted
as  proving  that  the  idea  of  vicarious  punishment  was  already
conceived  of,  and  that  the  sacrifice  of  children  was  a  Babylonian
institution.     Hihbert  Lectures^  P-  7^-


RITUAL  AND  CEREMONIES.  XXXIII

a  lamb  or  goat  and  beat  it  until  it  falls  down,  believing
that  the  headache  will  thus  be  transferred  to  the
animal.^

Instead  of  the  kid  a  sucking-pig  might  be  taken,
and  after  its  heart  had  been  removed  its  bristles  were
to  be  put  on  the  head  of  the  man,  of  course  symbolical
of  his  hair,  its  blood  sprinkled  on  the  sides  of  the  bed,
and  the  carcase  opened  and  spread  out  on  his  limbs.

"  Give  the  pig  in  his  stead,

"  And  give  the  flesh  as  his  flesh,

"  The  blood  as  his  blood,

''  And  let  him  take  it  ;

"Its  heart  (which  thou  hast  set  on  his  heart)

*'  Give  as  his  heart,

*'  And  let  him  take  it."

Now  the  most  remarkable  parallel  to  this  spell  is
contained  in  the  New  Testament  story  of  the
Gadarene  swine.  The  devils  which  possess  the  two
men  beseech  Jesus  Christ,  if  He  cast  them  out,  to  send
them  into  the  herd  of  swine  which  is  feeding  close
at  hand,  and  when  the  devils  leave  the  men  they  at
once  take  up  their  abode  in  the  swine,  which,  according
to  the  story,  go  mad  and  rush  down  the  hill  into  the
water,  where  they  are  drowned.  Undoubtedly  here
is  some  reminiscence  of  the  Assyrian  or  some  similar
tradition  ;  in  the  cuneiform  text  we  find  the  disease-


^  Dopper,    Descr.    de   VAfrique^    quoted    Frazer,    Golden    Bough
(ist  ed.),  ii,  p.  169.


XXXIV  INTRODUCTION.


devil  leaving  the  possessed  man  at  the  sorcerer's
invocation  and  entering  the  body  of  the  pig.  In  the
New  Testament  story,  the  swine  are  represented  as
alive  when  the  demons  enter  them,  but  as  soon  as
this  happens  they  are  immediately  made  to  destroy
themselves.  If  the  body  of  the  pig  in  the  Assyrian
incantation  is  to  be  thrown  away  or  destroyed,  as  in
the  cases  both  of  the  kid  and  the  vegetables,  it  is
easy  to  see  in  this  ending  a  distinct  connection
between  the  two.  From  the  Assyrian  incantation
another  and  entirely  different  inference  may  be  drawn,
and  this  is  that  neither  the  Sumerians  nor  the
Assyrians  considered  the  pig  an  unclean  animal.  As
a  rule,  no  good  Hebrew  or  Mohammedan  would
consent  to  touch  a  pig  in  this  way,  much  less  to  have
its  blood  sprinkled  on  his  bed,  or  its  heart  laid  upon
him,  although  even  among  the  Mohammedans  swine's
flesh  is  resorted  to  as  a  medicine  in  extremities.
Zwemer  ^  relates  that  Arab  patients  would  come  to
him  for  a  small  piece  of  the  flesh  (which  they  suppose
all  Christians  eat)  to  cure  one  in  desperate  straits.

A  further  development  is  the  ceremony  whereby
the  evil  demons  are  transferred  to  a  pot  of  water,
which  is  then  broken  : —

"  The  evil   Spirit  (and)  Ghost  that  appear  in  the

desert,
''  O  Pestilence  that  has  touched  the  man  for  harm.


^  Arabia,  p.  281.


RITUAL  AND  CEREMONIES.  XXXV

"  The  Tongue  that  is  banefully  fastened  on  the  man,
"  May  they  be  broken  in  pieces  like  a  goblet,^
**  May  they  be  poured  forth  like  water."  ^

The  intention  of  the  magician  is  that  the  demons,
which  have  presumably  been  transferred  to  the  water
in  the  vessel  with  which  he  has  been  working  the
spell,  will  be  dissipated  when  the  pot  is  broken  and
the  water  poured  forth  on  the  ground.  There  would
be  no  meaning  in  it  otherwise.

To  pass  on  to  a  different  method  which  the
Babylonian  sorcerers  used,  it  is  curious  to  see  an
unusual  development  of  the  common  wax-figure  hocus-
pocus.  The  system  of  making  a  magical  wax  figure
of  one's  enemy  in  order  to  bring  him  into  one's  power
was  as  common  in  Mesopotamia  as  elsewhere,  and
need  not  be  discussed  here,  but  there  is  an  inverse,
process  which  Babylonian  doctors  used  in  order  to
rid  their  patients  of  malignant  devils.  This  was  by
fashioning  an  image  of  the  sufferer  in  some  plastic
material  and  by  properly  recited  charms,  to  induce
the  demon  to  leave  the  human  body  and  enter  its
waxen  counterpart.  For  instance,^  one  tablet  directs
that  a  piece  of  Sea-Clay  should  be  taken  and  moulded
into  the  likeness  of  the  patient  and  placed  on  his
loins  at  night  in  order  that  the  Plague-god  might  be


^  Cf.  Ps.  xxxi,  12,  and  Revelation  ii,  27.
»  Tabled"  C,"  1.  156,  Vol.  I,  p.  15'.
^  Tablet  "R."


XXXVI  INTRODUCTION.


expelled.  Further,  at  dawn,  the  "atonement  for  his
body  "  was  to  be  made,  the  ''  Incantation  of  Eridu  "  to
be  performed,  and  the  man's  face  to  be  turned  to  the
west.  The  symbolic  use  of  Sea-Clay  here  is  probably
due  to  its  connection  with  Ea,  the  god  of  the  Ocean,
who  is  so  constantly  invoked  in  charms  and  spells.
There  is  a  similar  text  ^  wherein  the  magician  makes
a  figure  of  the  man  in  dough,  and  after  bringing
water  to  the  man  he  pours  out  the  water  of  the
Incantation  :- —

Bring  forth  a  censer  and  a  torch  ;

As  the  water  trickleth  away  from  his  body,

"  So  may  the  pestilence  in  his  body  trickle  away  ;

"  Return  these  waters  into  a  cup  and

'  Pour  them  forth  in  the  broad  places."
The  demon  will  then  depart  from  the  man's  body  like
the  water,  and  will  enter  the  figure.

An  interesting  parallel  to  this  example  of  the  use
of  a  magical  figure  with  a  good  object  in  view  is
afforded  by  a  Legend  of  the  Virgin  Mary  which  is
preserved  in  Ethiopic.  It  seems  that  a  certain
merchant  was  shot  in  the  eye  by  a  pirate  at  sea,
and  that  his  friends  were  unable  to  pull  out  the  dart ;
in  these  straits  he  begged  his  friends  to  take  him  to
the  church  of  the  Virgin,  who  was  in  the  habit  of
working  cures  by  means  of  wax  figures.  The  people
of  the  island  on  which  her  shrine  stood  used  to  make


'  Tablet  **  T.'


RITUAL  AND  CEREMONIES.  XXXVII

models  of  their  wounded  friends,  with  representations
of  the  wounds  on  them,  and  take  them  to  her,  and
when  offerings  had  been  made  by  those  who  brought
them,  both  for  the  poor  and  for  the  church,  the  Virgin
Mary  caused  the  marks  of  the  wounds  to  disappear
from  the  wax  figures,  and  as  they  went  the  men
whom  the  figures  represented  were  made  whole.
This  being  so,  the  friends  of  the  merchant  made
a  wax  figure  of  him,  with  a  dart  sticking  in  one  of
its  eyes,  and  when  they  had  taken  it  to  the  church
of  the  Virgin,  and  had  made  suitable  gifts  to  the
shrine,  Mary  had  compassion  upon  the  man  and
pulled  the  dart  out  of  the  eye  of  the  wax  figure,  and
as  soon  as  she  had  done  this  the  dart  fell  out  of  the
merchants  eye  and  he  was  healed  at  once.*

The  tying  and  loosing  of  magical  knots,  symbolic
of  spells  bound  or  loosed  from  a  person,  was  a  form
of  magic  as  common  in  Assyria  as  it  was  and  still  is  in
other  lands.  By  tying  knots  and  at  the  same  time
chanting  some  magic  words  a  wizard  or  witch  could
cast  a  tapu  on  an  enemy,  as  is  clear  from  the
Maklu  tablet,  which  ends  one  incantation  against
such  malevolent  beings  with  these  words  : —

**  Her  knot  is  loosed, her  sorcery  is  brought  to  nought,
*'  And  all  her  charms  fill  the  desert."  ^


^  See  Budge,   The  Miracles  of  the  Blessed   Virgin  Mary  and  the
Life  of  Flanna  {Saint  Anne),  etc.,  London,  1900,  pp.  48-49.
'   W.A.L,  iv,  49,  34a.


XXXVIII  INTRODUCTION.


In  driving  away  a  headache  the  following  spell  was
used  by  the  priest  : —

"  Take  the  hair  of  a  virgin  kid,

"  Let  a  wise  woman  spin  (it)  on  the  right  side

"  And  double  it  on  the  left,

*'  Bind  twice  seven  knots

*'  And  perform  the  Incantation  of  Eridu,

''  And  bind  the  head  of  the  sick  man,

''  And  bind  the  neck  of  the  sick  man,

"  And  bind  his  life,'

"  And  bind  up  his  limbs  ;

**  And  surround^  his  couch,

*'  And  cast  the  water  of  the  Incantation  over  him,

"  That  the  Headache  may  ascend  to  heaven

**  Like  the  smoke  of  a  peaceful  homestead,

**  That  like  the  lees  of  water  poured  out

**  It  may  go  down  into  the  earth."  ^

A  further  use  of  the  cord  in  headache  cures  is  found
in  the  same  tablet.^  Unfortunately  the  beginning  is
lost,  but  at  the  end  directions  are  given  for  spinning
a  threefold  cord  and  tying  twice  seven  knots  in  it,  and
after  performing  the  Incantation  of  Eridu  this  is  to  be
tied  on  the  head  of  the  sick  man.  The  headache  will
then  go.


'  Or  "soul."
^  Or  ''stand  round."
3  See  Tablet  IX,  1.  74.
'  Ibid.,  1.  233.


TAPU   (TABOO)  XXXIX


O'Donovan    tells  the    story  of  a  curiously   similar

method   among    the    modern    Persians   for   removing

fever.     A  woman  whose  daughter  was  sick  of  a  fever

came  to  him  with  a  handful  of  camel's  hair  that  he

might    make    it  into  a  charm   for  her.      He  himself,

being  ignorarrt  of  the  method  by  which  this  should  be

done,  handed  it  over  to  a  Khan  who  was  with  him.

'  By   means  of  a  spindle   the  camel   hair  was  spun

'  to  a  stout  thread,  the   Khan  all   the  time  droning

'  some  verses  from  the   Koran  or  some  necromantic

'  chant.     When   the   thread  was   finished    it   was   of

*  considerable  length,  and  folding  it  three  times  upon
'  itself  he  respun  it.  Then  he  proceeded  to  tie  seven
'  knots  upon  the  string.  Before  drawing  each  knot
'  hard  he  blew  upon  it.  This,  tied  in  the  form  of
'  a  bracelet,  was  to  be  worn  on  the  wrist  of  the
'  patient.     Each   day   one   of  the   knots  was   to   be

*  untied  and  blown  upon,  and  when  the  seventh  knot

*  had  been  undone  the  whole  of  the  thread  was  to  be
'  made  into  a  ball  and  thrown  into  the  river,  carrying,

*  as  was  supposed,  the  illness  with  it."  ^

(4)  Tapu.^

In  primitive  communities  certain  social  restrictions
arise  from  the  fear  of  the  supernatural,  that  is  to  say,


^  Aferv  Oasis,  ii,  319.

^  On   this  subject   see   M.   Fossey's  chapter   in   his  La  Magie
Assyrienne  (1902),  p.  52.


XL  INTRODUCTION.


a  ban  or  tapu  Is  laid  on  certain  elements  which  from
their  nature  are  either  holy  or  unclean.  The  totem
of  a  tribe  from  Its  nature  Is  tapu,  and,  If  It  be  an
animal,  Its  flesh  Is  prohibited  as  food  to  the  members
of  that  tribe  ;  If  a  man  has  rendered  himself  unclean
by  his  actions  or  condition  he  Is  set  apart  from  the
rest  of  his  fellows  lest  he  should  communicate  his
dangerous  state  to  the  others,  and  so  bring  down
the  divine  anger  upon  them  as  well.  To  the  primitive
man  certain  natural  states  or  functions  are  dangerous
from  the  fear  of  something  supernatural,  and  all  who
are  affected  by  them  are  temporarily  placed  under
a  ban.

In  the  Babylonian  legends  of  the  relations  between
gods  and  men,  Instances  of  anything  which  might
be  referred  to  the  Idea  of  tapu  are  not  common.
Possibly  we  may  see  this  Influence  in  one  of  the
incidents  related  In  the  Gllgamlsh  Eplc.^  The
goddess  Ishtar,  enraged  at  the  refusal  of  her  advances
by  the  hero  Gllgamlsh,  creates  a  divine  bull  to  destroy
him,  but  he  and  his  comrade  Ea-bani  slay  it  after
a  fierce  encounter.  At  this  Ishtar  utters  a  curse
against  these  two  who  have  dared  thus  to  challenge
her  power,  and  probably  as  a  consequence  Ea-bani  ^'^^'^
dies  and  Gllgamlsh  Is  smitten  with  a  sore  sickness.
Here  the  goddess  does  not  curse  them  until  they  have
killed    the    divine   bull,   and   the  fundamental   idea  is


^  See  King,  Babylonian  Religion,  p.  i6i.


TAPU   (TABOO).  XLI


therefore  very  much  the  same  as  that  of  many  tapus
concerning  holy  things.  But  there  are  many  circum-
stances connected  with  this  incident  which  it  is
impossible  in  our  present  state  of  knowledge  to  explain
adequately,  and  it  must  therefore  be  understood  that
the  suggested  explanation  is  merely  tentative.

In  the  magical  texts,  on  the  other  hand,  the
principle  of  the  ban  and  tapu  underlies  everything,
both  the  affection  of  the  sick  man  and  the  method
of  exorcising  the  devil  which  possesses  him.  For
demons  as  well  as  mankind  are  subject  to  the  divine
tapic,  and  it  is  on  this  principle  that  the  magic  of  the
incantations  depends,  since  the  priest  invokes  the  help
of  the  gods  to  drive  away  the  evil  spirit,  and  to  lay  it
under  a  ban  and  bind  it.  In  the  Assyrian  exorcisms,
when  the  prayers  end  with  the  line

''  By   Heaven  be   thou   exorcised  !     By  Earth   be
thou  exorcised  !  "

it  is  intended  that  the  powers  of  Heaven  and  Earth
shall  lay  the  demon  under  a  tapu.

The  divine  tapu  against  spirits  is  described  in  one
of  the  exorcisms  in  the  following  words  : —

**  Ban  !  Ban  !   Tapu  ^  that  none  can  pass,

"  Tapu  of  the  gods  that  none  may  break,

**  Tapu  of  heaven  and  earth  that  none  can  change,


*  The  word  used  here  is  usuriu,  which  is  derived  from  a  root
akin  to  the  Piebrevv  '^^fy


XLII  INTRODUCTION.


''  Which  no  god  may  annul,
"  Nor  god  nor  man  can  loose,
''  A  snare  without  escape,  set  for  evil,
''  A  net  whence  none  can  issue  forth,  spread  for
evil."i

This  principle  of  banning  evil  spirits  is  common  to  all
systems  of  magic.

The  influence  of  the  i(a/>u  on  human  beings  as  a  con-
sequence of  certain  deeds  or  conditions  was  as  prevalent
among  the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians  as  among  other
primitive  tribes.  A  great  part  of  the  series  Shurpu
is  devoted  to  the  removal  of  the  mamit  (''ban"  or
'' tapu'')  which  the  man  has  wittingly  or  unwittingly
incurred,  and  this  mamit  falls  into  classes,  the  one
incurred  by  what  at  first  sight  appear  to  be  breaches
of  ordinary  social  morality,  such  as  murder,  adultery,
and  theft,^  and  the  second  by  distinct  ceremonial
uncleanness,  such  as  touching  the  bed  or  chair  of
a  person  under  a  tapu,^  or  through  the  hostility  of
some  enemy  who  has  the  power  of  bewitching  him.
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  tapu  of  uncleanness  was
as  widely  recognized  among  the  Babylonians  as  among
other  nations  ;  indeed,  one  incantation  is  entirely
given  up  to  the  methods  of  purifying  a  certain  person  *
who  has   in  some  way  become   unclean    either    from

^  See  Tablet  "V,"  1.  i.

2  Shurpu,  Tablet  II,  47  ff.

«  Ibid.,  100  ff.

*  In  this  case  it  is  the  masmasu,  or  magician,  who  is  to  be  cleansed.


TAPU   (TABOO).  XLIII


touching  dirty  water  or  even  merely  casting  his  eye
upon  someone  unclean  : —

"  While  he  walked  in  the  street,

"...     while  he  walked  in  the  street,

*'  While  he  made  his  way  through  the  broad  places,

"  While  he  walked  along  the  streets  and  ways,

"He  trod  in  some  libation  that  had  been  poured

forth,  or
"He  put  his  foot  in  some  unclean  water,
"  Or  cast  his  eye  on  the  water  of  unwashen  hands,
"  Or   came    in    contact   with   a  woman  of  unclean

hands,
"  Or  glanced  at  a  maid  with  unwashen  hands,
"  Or  his  hand  touched  a  bewitched  woman,
"Or  he  came  in  contact  with  a  man   of  unclean

hands,
"  Or  saw  one  with  unwashen  hands,
"  Or  his  hand  touched  one  of  unclean  body."  ^
Marduk  then  repeats  this  to  Ea  and  asks  how  the
man   shall  be  purified,    and   in   the  ceremony  which
follows,   sacred  lavers  play  a  large   part.     Here   we
undoubtedly  have  a  most  elementary  form  of  ban  ;  the
man  has  become  tapu  because  he  has  inadvertently
come  into  contact  with  something  or  someone  unclean.
According  to  the  explanatory  text  K.  156  (1.  68  ff.),^
a  man  might  be   contaminated  by  the  lees  of  water
which    were    thrown    away    undrunk,    or    by    spittle

^  See  Series  Luh-ka,  p.  137.

^  Haupt,  Akkad.  u.  Sumer.  Keilschr.y  No.  1 1


XLIV  INTRODUCTION.


*'  which  the  dust  covereth  not  "  ;  at  least,  this  is  what
is  to  be  assumed  from  the  exorcism  which  is  to  be
recited  in  order  to  expel  the  evil  resulting  from  some
connection  with  them.  Again,  as  was  mentioned
above,  if  a  man  ran  up  against  another  who  was  under
a  tapu,  slept  on  his  bed,  sat  on  his  chair,  ate  out  of  his
plate,  or  drank  from  his  cup,  he  was  liable  to  the
action  of  tapic,  and  it  was  necessary  to  remove  such
a  ban  with  the  help  of  the  priest.^  Naturally,  however,
the  particular  tapu  which  had  affected  the  man  was  not
easily  discovered,  and  it  behoved  the  exorcist  who
drove  away  the  divine  curse  which  afflicted  his  patient
to  include  in  his  chant  long  categories  of  possible
eventualities,  just  as  he  did  in  expelling  demoniac
influences.  The  third  tablet  of  the  Shurpu  series  is
entirely  devoted  to  this,  and  gives  a  list  of  one
hundred  and  sixty -three  tapits.  It  begins  in  the
following  way  : —

**  Marduk,  the  priest  of  the  gods,  can  loose

"  The  tapu  of  every  sort  which  seizeth  on

*'  The  man,  the  son  of  his  god."
And  the  lines  which  follow  are  all  on  one  model —

"He  looseth  the  ban  of  father  or  mother    which
hath  seized  on  the  man,

*'  He  looseth  the  ban  of  a  grandfather,  the  ban  of
a  grandmother,

*'  He  looseth  the  ban  of  brother  or  sister."

^  Zimmern,  Shurpu,  Tablet  ii,  1.  99.


TAPU  (taboo).  XLV


The  taptis  include  those  which  come  from  the  family,
old  or  young,  friend  or  neighbour,  rich  or  poor  ;  oven,
bellows,  pots  and  cups,  bed  or  couch,  chariot  or
weapons.  To  drink  out  of  an  unclean  vessel,  to  sit
in  the  sun,  to  root  up  plants  in  the  desert,  to  cut  reeds
in  a  thicket,  to  slay  the  young  of  beasts,  to  pray  with
unclean  hands,  and  a  host  of  other  common  actions,
might  under  certain  conditions  bring  a  tapu  on  the  man.

Now  it  is  plain  that  if  dangerous  results  were  not
supposed  to  ensue  on  unclean  acts  there  would  be
no  point  in  banning  them.  Again,  it  is  absurd  to
suppose  that  all  this  lengthy  list  of  tapus  in  the
Shurpu  tablet  was  for  the  benefit  of  such  as  had
omitted  to  wash  their  hands  or  vessels  on  all  occasions,
unless  they  gave  some  physical  evidence  that  they
were  suffering  from  the  effects  of  some  supernatural
hostility.  Indeed,  the  5th  and  6th  tablets  of  Shurpu
begin  with  the  words,  "An  evil  curse  hath  fallen  on
the  man  like  a  devil,"  and  the  frequently  recurring
story  of  Marduk  asking  Ea  for  advice  is  repeated,  Ea
advisinof  him  as  follows  : —

**  Go,  O  my  son  Marduk,

"  Take  him  to  a  holy  house  of  cleansing,

"  Release  his  tapu,  free  his  tapti !

*'  The  perturbing  evil  in  his  body,

*'  Be  it  the  curse  of  his  father,

**  Or  the  curse  of  his  mother,

*'  Or  the  curse  of  his  elder  brother,

**  Or  the  curse  of  some  wicked  woman

**  Whom  the  man  knoweth  not."


XLVI  INTRODUCTION.


It  is  therefore  evident  that,  in  early  times  at  least,
if  a  Babylonian  fell  sick  he  might  be  considered  tapu,
such  an  infliction  arising  out  of  his  own  agency  or
that  of  others.  So  that  if  a  man  were  attacked  by
sickness  it  might  be  either  ascribed  to  divine  punish-
ment for  his  acts  against  the  gods,  to  the  attacks  of
spirits,  or  to  a  closely  allied  theme,  the  curses  or  spells
of  some  enemy,  and  for  any  of  these  cases  he  naturally
became  tapit  until  the  spell  or  ban  was  lifted  from  him.
This  was  effected  through  the  aid  of  a  priest,  who
was  able  by  his  knowledge  of  magical  words,  prayers,
and  ceremonies  to  invoke  the  gods  to  help  him.  By
the  help  of  what  is  known  as  "  sympathetic  magic  "
he  was  able  to  transfer  the  disease  to  somethingr
animate  or  inanimate,  this  being  described  in  many
cases  as  "  making  an  atonement  "  for  him,  the  word
in  Assyrian  being  kuppuru,  exactly  the. equivalent  of
the  Hebrew  kipper  of  the  Priestly  Code,  as  was
pointed  out  by  Zimmern.^

To  return  to  the  tapu  among  the  Babylonians.
We  have  seen  that  in  this  respect  they  are,  as  was
to  be  expected,  very  similar  to  other  nations,  but  in
several  things  they  show  what  may  be  an  earlier
conception  of  certain  of  the  taptis,  especially  those
concerning  animals.      For  instance,    the  flesh  of  the


^  Ritualtafeln,  p.  92.  As  he  points  out,  the  word  in  a  technical
sense  was  probably  borrowed  from  the  Babylonians  by  the
Hebrews,  and  cannot  be  referred  to  a  primitive  common  stock.


TAPU   (taboo).  XLVII


pig  was  tapu  only  on  certain  days,  and  not  at  all  times
as  among  the  later  Hebrews  and  Mohammedans.
In  one  of  the  *' hemerology "  texts  these  days  are
specified  : —

''  If  a  man  eats  swine's  flesh  on  the  thirtieth  of  Ab/

boils  will  break  out  upon  him.
'*  If  a  man  eats  the  flesh  of  swine  or  oxen  on  the

twenty-seventh  of  Tisri  (such  and  such  things

will  happen  to  him)."^

Originally  there  seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  animals
were  sacred  from  their  holy  nature,  and  not  from  any
**  uncleanness."  ^  The  dog,  again,  although  the  pariahs
may  have  been  held  in  a  natural  contempt,  does  not
seem  to  have  held  any  place  among  the  ''  unclean  "
animals,  judging  from  the  personal  names  Kalba,
Kalbi  ("  my  dog ").  It  is,  however,  true  that  it  is
not  uncommon  for  scribes  in  writing  to  the  king  to
describe  themselves  as  "dogs,"^  but  this  may  be
ascribed  to  their  wish  to  call  attention  to  their  loyalty
and  fidelity,  and  not  necessarily  that  they  are  base
serfs.     Fish,  again,  were  tapu  on  the  ninth  of  lyyar,


*  July-August.  It  must  be  admitted  that  this  is  an  obvious
sanitary  regulation.  Compare  also  the  views  which  the  Egyptians
held  about  the  pig  in  chapter  cxii  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead{^A.  Budge,
p.  176).

2   W.A.I.,  V,  48-49.

^  See  Robertson  Smith,  Religion  of  the  Semites^  P«  i53-

*  The  people  of  Kisik  do  so  (Harper,  Assyrian  Letters,  No.  210,
rev.  8).


XLVIII  INTRODUCTION.


under  pain  of  sickness  ;  in  Syria,  where  fish  were
sacred  to  Atargatis,  if  a  man  ate  of  them  he  was  liable
to  be  visited  by  a  sickness  of  ulcers,  swellings,  or
wasting  disease.^  Even  dates  eaten  on  a  forbidden
day  might  produce  ophthalmia.  It  must  be  admitted,
however,  that  the  element  of  hygiene  probably  enters
largely  into  these  restrictions,  and  that  in  many  cases
tapu  has  nothing  to  do  with  them  at  all.

Certain  days  were  tapu  for  uttering  a  ban  ;  "  On
the  nineteenth  of  lyyar  he  who  utters  a  ban — a  god
will  seize  upon  him."^  If  a  man  hire  a  slave  on  the
sixth  of  Siwan  he  will  not  be  pleased  with  him,  or  if
he  marry  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  lyyar  it  will  turn  out
unlucky.  Sickness  will  befall  the  man  who  crosses
a  river  on  the  twentieth  of  Ab.

We  find  among  the  Assyrians  traces  of  the  Royal
Tapu,  that  is  to  say,  the  abstention  by  the  king  from
certain  acts.  These,  however,  are  only  tapu  to  him
on  the  seventh,  fourteenth,  nineteenth,  twenty-first,
and  twenty-eighth  day  of  the  month,  that  is  to  say,
every  seventh  day  and  the  forty-ninth  (seven  x  seven)
day  from  the  first  of  the  preceding  month.  These
acts  are  detailed  in  the  "  hemerology "  tablets,  and
we  may  take  a  specimen.^

''  The  seventh  day  [of  the  second  Elul]  is  the
''  festival     day    of     Marduk    and     Sarpanitum.       A

^  See  Robertson  Smith,  Religion  of  the  Semites,  p.  449.
^  For  the  Assyrian,  see  W.A.I.,  v,  pi.  48.
3   W.A.I.,  iv,  32  J  i,  28.


TAPU   (TADOO).  XLIX


**  happy  (?)  day.  An  evil  day.  The  shepherd  of  the
"  wide-spreading  peoples  must  not  eat  flesh  that  has
'*  been  cooked  over  coals,  nor  bread  (cooked)  in  ashes.
"  He  must  not  change 'the  clothes  of  his  body,  nor
"  put  on  white  garments.  He  must  not  offer  sacrifices.
**  The  King  must  not  ride  out  in  his  chariot,  and  must
**  not  raise  his  voice  in  command.  The  priest  must
*'  not  utter  decisions  in  a  secret  place.  The  physician
"  must  not  lay  his  hand  on  the  sick.  It  is  unfitted
"  for  making  a  curse.  In  the  evening  the  King  should
**  make  offerings  and  offer  sacrifices  to  Marduk  and
"  Ishtar  ;  his  prayer  will  be  pleasing  unto  the  god."

One  important  point  to  notice  in  this  hemerology,
before  going  further  into  the  matter  of  Royal  tapus,
is  the  distinction  drawn  between  the  king  and  some
person  who  is  called  ''  the  shepherd  of  the  wide-
spreading  peoples."  If  this  last  is  merely  an
equivalent  for  "king,"  as  seems  quite  probable,  it  is
not  unlikely  that  we  have  here  a  text  that  is  a  recension
based  upon  two  different  versions.

In  these  Royal  and  Priestly  tapus^  are  the  relics
of  ancient  days  when  priest-kings  were  accredited
with  a  divine  or  supernatural  nature.  The  prosperity
of  the  king  will  result  in  a  like  happiness  for  the
nation,  and  these  seventh  days  or  ''  sabbaths  "  being
evil  days,  it  was  not  fitting  that  the  ruler  of  the  people


*  For  a  full  account  of  the  Royal  tapu  among  other  nations,  see
Frazer,  Golden  Bough  (1900),  vol.  i,  p.  233.


INTRODUCTION.


should  render  himself  liable  to  any  ban.  When  the
Hebrews  borrowed  their  Sabbath  from  Babylonia,
they  altered  the  conception  of  it  and  wove  their  own
myths  Into  the  Idea  until  It  lost  Its  original  significance.
From  the  Instances  quoted  above,  It  seems  quite
plain  that  tapu  was  a  recognized  Idea  among  the
dwellers  in  Mesopotamia,  and  doubtless  as  the  texts
are  more  and  more  examined  the  examples  will  be
multiplied.

(5)  The  Atonement.
From  the  various  passages  from  the  cuneiform  texts
quoted  above  It  will  be  seen  that  the  Assyrians  were
in  the  habit  of  performing  some  ceremony  akin  to  the
"  Atonement  "  of  the  Hebrews.  The  most  striking
coincidence,  at  first  sight,  is  the  parallel  use  of  the
words  kuppuru  and  ^33,  as  has  been  already  noted.
In  the  distinctively  priestly  phraseology  (Ezeklel
and  **  P  ")  the  subject  of  1S2  Is  the  priest  or  sometimes
the  offering  ^  ;  In  the  cuneiform  texts,  as  far  as  it
Is  at  present  known,  the  verb  kuppuru  is  used  in
incantations  only,  also  with  the  priest  as  subject.^  As
these  Sumerlan  Incantations  are  undoubtedly  older
than  the  Priestly  Code  of  the  Hebrews  in  Its  present
form,  the  most  probable,  if  not  the  only  possible,
assumption    is    that    the     Hebrews     took    over    the


*  Driver,  Deuteronomy,   p.  426;   and  see  also  Robertson   Smith,
Old  Testament  in  the  Jewish  Church,  p.  438.
"^  See  Delitzsch,  H.  W.B.,  sub  voce.


ATONEMENT.  LI


Babylonian  idea  during  the  Captivity,  which  thus  left
its  mark  on  certain  of  their  religious  observances.

Now  In  the  following  cases  of  the  Hebrew  laws,
for  which  an  **  atonement "  Is  presented,  it  seems
reasonably  clear  that  the  idea  of  tapu,  just  as  In
modern  savage  tribes,  underlies  the  whole  of  them,
and  that  this  tapu  will  be  removed  by  the  priest's
action  : —

(i)  A  woman  after  childbirth  (Lev.  xii,  2  ff ).

(2)  A  person  touching  anything  unclean  (Lev.v,  2  ff.).

(3)  A   man   or    woman    with    an    issue,    or    similar

uncleanness  (Lev.  xv,  2  ff.).

(4)  A   Nazarite   defiled  by  touching  a  dead  body

(Numb.  vi).

(5)  Leprosy,  and  the  house  wherein  leprosy  breaks

out  (Numb,  xiv,  18,  53).

In  the  Assyrian  exorcisms  it  is  plain  that  the  Idea
of  the  atonement  Is  the  same  ;  the  man  has  incurred
some  tapu,  and  the  priest  must  remove  It  by  some
ceremony  which  is  described  by  the  word  kuppuru.
Consequently  we  may  define  the  "  atonement  "  as
the  means  by  which  the  supernatural  danger  which
threatens  the  person  lying  under  the  tapu  is  removed
from  him,  and  thereby  allows  him  to  return  to  his
place  in  society.

So  much  for  the  origin  of  the  ceremony.  With
regard  to  the  actual  ceremonies  themselves,  there  is
no  doubt  that  the  principle  of  sympathetic  magic  Is
at  the  base  of  them.     In  the  Assyrian  cases  this  is  at


LII  INTRODUCTION.


once  obvious.  For  instance,  in  a  certain  disease  of
the  head  the  priest  is  to  lay  a  white  kid  of  Tammuz
alongside  the  sick  man,  take  out  its  heart  and  put  it  in
his  hand,  and  the  kid  is  therefore  the  material  with
which  an  "  atonement "  is  to  be  made  for  the  man,  and
it  is  afterwards  to  be  thrown  away.^  For  a  similar
complaint  a  headdress  (?)  is  to  be  made  of  a  clean  reed,
and  after  the  Incantation  of  Eridu  the  priest  ''  makes
the  atonement "  therewith,  breaking  it  over  the  patient
symbolically  that  it  may  be  a  substitute  for  him.^  In
the  case  of  a  certain  sickness  an  image  of  the  patient
is  made  of  clay  and  placed  on  his  loins  at  night,  the
''  atonement  "  being  made  at  dawn,  or  in  another  case
a  pot  is  to  be  filled  with  water  and  various  vegetables,
and  after  sprinkling  the  patient  the  "  atonement"  is  to
be  made  for  him  by  the  priest.^

Two  of  the  Hebrew  cases  give  the  distinct  im-
pression that  the  origin  of  the  Hebrew  ''atonement"
is  to  be  sought  in  sympathetic  magic.  The  first  one
is  contained  in  the  directions  for  cleansing  the  house
in  which  leprosy  appears,^  where  the  priest  is  to  take
two  birds,  cedar,  scarlet,  and  hyssop,  and  after  killing
one  of  the  birds  in  an  earthen  vessel  over  running
water,  he  is  to  dip  the  remainder  in  the  blood  of  the
dead  bird  and  in  running  water,  and  to  sprinkle  the


^  See  Tablet  XI,  p.  ^^.

2  Ibid.,  Tablet  VIII,  p.  57.

'  Ibid.,  Tablet  '' R,"  p.  99.

*  Lev.  xiv,  49.


ATONEMENT.  LIII


house  seven  times  ;  but  he  shall  let  go  the  living  bird
out  of  the  city  into  the  open  fields.  The  second  is
the  case  of  the  scapegoat  on  whose  head  Aaron  was
to  lay  the  sins  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  send  him
away  by  the  hand  of  a  *'fit  man"  into  the  desert  to
bear  their  iniquities.^  Now  there  is  no  doubt  as  to
the  original  signification  of  this,  for  the  cases  are
entirely  analogous  to  many  of  the  sympathetic  charms
which  have  been  already  described.

There  does  not  seem  to  have  been  any  such  cere-
mony as  that  of  the  living  ''  Scapegoat  "  among  the
Assyrians.  M.  Fossey  i^La  Magie  Assyrienne,  p.  85)
satisfactorily  refutes  Mr.  Prince's  theory,  which  he
put  forward  in  the  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental
Society  (1900,  xxi,  pp.  1-22),  basing  it  on  the  Sumerian
text  published  by  Haupt  (^Akkad,  u,  Sumer.  Keil-
schrifttexte,  p.  105).  Since  then,  however,  Mr.  Prince
has  put  forward  another  article  {Journal  Asiatique,
July-August,  1903,  p.  133)  maintaining  his  previous
proposition  from  the  same  text,  which  he  translates
as  follows:  —  "  Prends  le  bouquetin  qui  allege  la
douleur  ;  place  sa  tete  sur  la  tete  du  malade  ;  du  cote
du  roi,  fils  de  son  dieu  (c'est-a-dire  le  patient),  chasse-
le  ;  que  sa  salive  dans  sa  bouche  coule  librement  (soit
lachee) ;  que  le  roi  soit  pur  ;  qu'il  soit  sain."  M.  Fossey
has  answered  it  in  footnotes  to  the  same  paper,  and,
as  he  properly  points  out,   "chasse-le"  is  not  the  right

-  Lev.  xvi,  21.


LIV  INTRODUCTION.


translation  for  u-me-te-gur-gur,  which  should  be
rendered  by  the  Assyrian  equivalent  kuppir,  "'  make
the  atonement  for."  Consequently  there  is  nothing  to
show  that  the  goat  was  alive,  and  from  a  comparison
of  similar  texts  in  which  the  animal  has  obviously  been
sacrificed  (see  pp.  17,  29,  etc.)  it  is  plain  that  M.  Fossey
is  correct  when  he  says  that  the  goat  was  killed  i^La
Magie  Assyrienne,  p.  86).

We  may  briefly  recapitulate,  therefore,  the  important
points  which  the  Assyrian  magical  texts  seem  to
indicate.  First,  the  threefold  method  of  the  magician
which  demanded  the  ''  Word  of  Power "  by  the
invocation  of  some  divine  power,  the  ostentatious
knowledge  concerning  the  hostile  demon,  and  the  correct
use  of  spells  and  prescriptions.  Secondly,  that  under-
neath all  the  paraphernalia  of  ritual  and  ceremonies
lies  the  root-idea  of  the  tapu,  which  will  probably  be
found  to  be  of  still  greater  importance  as  new  material
is  published.  Lastly,  the  existence  of  an  ''  atonement  "
ceremony  in  Assyria  which  so  curiously  parallels
certain  parts  of  the  Levitical  Law,  even  down  to  the
use  of  the  same  word  to  express  this  idea.  In  this
last  case,  as  in  many  others,  everything  at  present
points  to  the  Jewish  ceremony,  as  we  should  expect,
having  been  borrowed  from  Babylonia.  With  every
new  publication  of  magical  texts  it  becomes  plainer
how  the  natives  of  Chaldea  left  behind  them  a
reputation  for-all  forms  of  magic  and  sorcery,  and  how
greatly  they  influenced  the  beliefs  of  their  successors.


^txm  ^bMx  (maxmiu


(Plate  I.)

uzu

GAR       SAG  -  GA  -  NA        U  -  ME

GAR  SU-A-NA       U-ME-TE-SU-UB-SU-UB    :  a-ka-la  .   .   .   .

SU-  *  UR-  *  UR-RU-DA-NI  E-SIR-KA-  *  TATTAB-MA-KU

U-ME      ....

5.  tak-pir-ta-su      a-na      su-uk       ir-bit-ii

GAR-SAG-IL-LA-NI    PU-SAG'    KALAM-MA-KU    U-NE  .   .   .   .
pu-uh-su     a-na     kur-pi    sa    nia-a-ti    iz-ba-am-\md\

A      NAM-SIB-BA       EGIR-BI       U-ME-NI-SU     :    me-e      sip-ti
ar-ki-is     zi-ri~i\k-ma\

ZID       DINGIR-SE-TIR       AZAG-GA        KA-DINGIR-AS-A-AN
U-ME-NI      .      .      .

10.  ki-im    as-na-an   elliti{ti)   bdba   ka-ma-a  pi-rik\ma'\


*  Of  Tablet  I  of  this  series  only  the  remains  of  the  colophon
and  the  first  line  of  Tablet  II  ("Incantation: — The  evil  Spirit
sick  Fever  .  .  .  .")  are  at  present  known.     (See  Plate  II.)

^  Pahu.  From  the  parallelism  of  S.  747,  r.  4  (Martin,  Textes
ReligieuXy  p.  20),   "May   Ea  puhua  sa  ukinnu     .     .     .     my  puhu


^tvm  '' ^tHx  ^ic^YitseJ


(Plate  I.)*


Flesh


*  [Set]  food  at  his  head,


"  Satisfy  his  body  with  food


5.   *'  [Cast]  his  'atonement'  to  the  crossways,

*'  Leave  his  '  substitute '  ^  to   the  dungheaps  (?)
of  the  land,

'*  Sprinkle  the  water  of  the  incantation  after  it,*^

10.   **  Block  up  the  closed  door  with  pure  wheaten  flour,


which  hath  been  prepared  .  .  .  May  Marduk  dinanua  sa  ibbanu
li-sam-^tr  ?]  (thus,  and  not  li-pa~\_as-sir])  accept  (?)  my  dinanu
which  hath  been  made."  The  preceding  lines  refer  to  the  mamit
or**  ban"  which  has  fallen  upon  the  man.  From  Tablet  "  N,"
col.  iii,  11.  45-46  {urisu  dinanu  sa  ame/u/i\  **  the  kid  is  the  substitute
for  mankind  "),  it  is  evident  that  dinanu  has  the  meaning  of  **  sub-
stitute" here  also,  and  if  so,  its  parallel  puju  will  have  a  similar
meaning,  which  will  exactly  fit  the  context  above,
c  Or  "  afterwards."


(


DEVILS   AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

[h]uL-IK   IGI-BI   BA-RA-AN-DA-NIGIN   :  lim-nu  pa-ni-siL
la     u-sah-ha-\ru-ind\

[GIG-BAR-A-AN  ?]      E      SIG-GA-RA       A-BA     :    i7ia      mil-si
ma-si-il    biti    ina     su-ka-niu-\ini  .  .  .  ]

....   GAR-NI-DE-A   BUR-TA    U-ME-NI-LU  :  ka-ma-na
mi-ri-is     sam-ni    inu-ru-us-\ina]

GAR-NI-DE-A  BIL-LAL  U-ME-NI-LU   :  mi-ri-is  ta-ba-a-ti
inu-ru-\us-md\

15.  SILA-A-KU     U-ME  ...[:]     cina     su-ki    su\kun  (?)-ma\

UB  -  DA  -  *  TATTAB  -  BA  -  KU  U-ME  -  [NI  -  SUM  (?)]

ina        tu  -  bu  -  kat        ir  -  bit  -  ti        i  -  [di  (?)  -  ma']


UB       E  -  A  -  GE       DA       E  -  A  -  GE      .      .      .
ina     tu  -  bu  -  kat     biti    sa  -  hat     biti


20.  [gis]-gal  E-A-GE  GIS-SAGIL  e-a-ge  gis-sak-kul  .  .  .  .
da-lat    bi-ti    me-dil    bi-ti    \sik-kur     bi-tt]   .   .   .    .

7A       DINGIR  -  GAL  -  GAL  -  E  -  NE  -  GE       [U  -  ME  -  NI  -  PA]
nis  ildni^'  rabHiti^^  \tuin   -    me   -   md\

UTUG-HUL        A-LA-HUL         GIDIM-HUL         MUL[LA-HUL
DINGIR-HUL      MASKIM-HUL]

25.  LIL  -  LA       SIR  -  SIR  -  E  -  NE       KAN

u-tuk-ku    lim-nu    a-lu-u    lim-nu   e-\kim-inu   lim-rui
gal-lu-u     lim-nu     tlu     lim-nu]
ra-bi-su       lim-nu       su-nu       zi-ki-ku       \iiiut-tas-
rab-bi-tu     .     .     .     .     ]


/


ASAKKI   MARSCjTI,  TABLET   III.


"  (That)  nothing  evil  may  turn  its  face  (hither  and)

*'  When  [he]  waketh  in  the  house  at  midnight

''  Mash  up  a  bread-cake*  with  a  mash  of  oil,

**  Mash  up  a  mash  of  wine,

15.   ''  Put  it(?)  in  the  street  and

'*  Place  it  at  the  Four  Points  and

"  In  the  precincts  of  the  house,  the  vicinity  of
the  house     ....

20.   "  The  house-door,  the  bolt  of  the  house,  [the  bar
of  the  house]     ....

*'  [Invoke]  the  Great  Gods

25.   ''  That  the  evil  Spirit,  the  evil  Demon,  the  evil
Ghost,
"  [The  evil  Devil,  the  evil  God],  the  evil  Fiend,
''  The  roaming  windblast     ....


*  On  kamanu  see  Jensen,  My  then  und  Epen  (K.B.  VI),  p.  511,
and  Zimmern,  Babylonische  Religion  {Riiualta/eln)^  p.  144,  note  2.
On  mirsu  see  Zimmern,  ibid.,  p.  99.


DEVILS  AND   EVIL  SPIRITS  OF   BABYLONIA.

[nam  (?)]  -  TAR  -  HUL  -  A      SU  -  A  -  NA      GAL      ....
[nam-^ar  i?)]   liin-nu  sa   ina   zu-\iini-ri-hi    ba-su-u\


30 dingir(?)

.     .     .      amelu     sa     a


MULU-GISGAL-LU-BI    DINGIR-EN-KI    DINGIR-[lD    HE-I-l]
amelu      su-u     ''" E  -  a     ''''Id     [lit (?)]  -  ta  -  '  -  [zd]

1       DINGIR  -  EN   -   KI   -   GE       PA    -   HE    -   E  -  A  -   [GE]
35.  a   -   mat  ""^   -   a  lis   -   te   - p\i\

DINGIR  -  DAM  -  GAL  -  NUN  -  NA        HE  -  EN  -  SI  -  DI  -  [e]
*'"Dam-         ki  -         na  lis-         te  -         sir

DINGIR-SILIG-ELIM-NUN-NA       DU  -  SAG       ZU  -  AB  -  GE
*  SAG  -  GA      TAG  -  TAG  -  LI  -  BI      ZA  -  [A  -  KAN]
*'^  Marduk     mdru     ris-tu-u    sa    ap-si-i    bu-un-nu-u
du-um-mu-ku     ku-\um-md\

40.   INIM-INIM-MA      SIGIsSe-SIGISSE      GAB-RI      SAH-TUR-RA

EN        UTUG  -  HUL       E  -  SIR  -  RA       GIL  -  GIL     ....
Duppi     in^"^^  EN  AZAG  -  GIG  -  [GA  -  MEs]

\E\kal    "*"''" A S6ur-bani-apli  sar   kis-[sa]-ti    sarru  .  .  .  .
[Etc.]


ASAKKI   MARStJTI.  TABLET  III.


"  The  evil  Plague  (?)  which  [resteth  (

Dn]  his

body

30.

*'  .  .  .   the  man    ....    [they  may  1

remove  and]

"  Let  that  man  [glorify]  Ea  (and)  Id,

35.

**  May  the  Word  of  Ea  make  clear,

**  May  Damkina  guide  aright ;

''  O  Marduk  !     Eldest  son  of  the  Deep,

**  Thine  is  the  power  to  brighten  and  bless !  "


40.  Prayer  for   Sacrificing  the   Substituted  (?)

SuCKING-PlG.


Incantation  : — **  The  evil   Spirit  destroyeth  in  the
street."

Third    Tablet   of   the    Series    **  Fever
Sickness."

*  From  a  comparison  of  similar  texts,  it  is  evident  that  this  is
the  advice  which  Ea  gives  to  his  son  Marduk.


Reverse.
(Plate  II.)


.     .     .     -  pal     biti     e      ta  -

UTUG  -  HUL  BAR  -  KU  HE  -  IM  -  [TA  -  GUB]

A  -  LA  -  HUL  BAR  -  KU  [  „  ]

5.   ALAD  -  HUL  BAR  -  KU  [  „  ]

GIDIM  -  HUL  BAR  -  KU  [  „  ]

MULLA  -  HUL  BAR  -  KU  [  „  ]

DINGIR-UTUG-  *  SIG-GA  HE-EN-DA-LAH-[LAH-GI-ES]

LAMMA   -    *  §IG    -    GA  HE  -  [  „  ]

10.   ALAD    -    *SIG    -    GA  HE-  [„]

KAGAR   -   *  §IG   -   GA  HE  -  [  „  ]

MULU  -  GISGAL  -  BI  PIE  -  EN  -  AZAG         HE  -  EN  -  EL

HE  -  EN  -  LAH  -  [LAH  -  GA]

SU  -  *  SAG- GA         DINGIR-RA-NA-KU  MULU-GISGAL-BI

GE      .      .      .      .

INIM-INIM-MA  SIGISSE-SIGISSE  GAB-RI  SAH-TUR-RA  .  .  .


15.   EN      UTUG-HUL       SILA       LIL-LA       SIG-GA      ....
EN      AZAG-GIG-GA      SU       MULU       KA-MU-UN      .      .      .

\duppi  .  .   ]  ^^^-^^       EN      AZAG-GIG-GA
Ekal  '"^  Assur-bani-apli    sar    kissati    sar    ^'^^*' Assuri
[Etc.]


Reverse.


(Plate  II.)


May  the  evil  Spirit  [stand]  aside,
May  the  evil  Demon  [stand]  aside,
5.   May  the  evil  Genius  [stand]  aside,
May  the  evil  Ghost  [stand]  aside.
May  the  evil  Devil  [stand]  aside  ;
May  a  kindly  Spirit  be  present,
10.   May  a  kindly  Genius  be  present,
May  a  kindly  Guardian  be  present,
May  a  kindly  Thought  be  present,
That  this  man  may  become  pure,  become  clean,

become  bright !
Into  the  favouring  hands  of  his  god  may  this

man  [be  commended  !].

Prayer   for   Sacrificing   the   Substituted  (?)

SuCKING-PiG      .      .      .

15.   Incantation: — ''The    evil    Spirit   which    in    the

street  creates  a  storm  wind "

Incantation: — "The  evil  Fever  the  body  of  the
man "

— TH  Tablet  of  the  Series  "  Fever  Sickness."


»  All  that  is  at  present  known  of  Tablet  IX  is  published  on
Plate  II.  It  apparently  ended  very  much  in  the  same  way  as
Tablet  ''  L,"  and  it  gives  the  beginning  of  the  Tenth  Tablet  of  the
Series  as  "  Incantation  : — Fever  destructive     .     .     ."


(Plate  III.)
21.  EN     AZAG-HUL-IK    :    a-sak-ku      liin-nu     ki'^     a-bu-bu'^
te-bi-ina  :  A-MA-TU-GIM     ZI-[ga]

IM-GAL      KU-KU    :    nam-ri-ir-ri      la-bis      irsitiin{tiiii)
ra-pa-as-ti^     ma-la  :  KUR-DAGAL-LA-A  .  .  .

[me]lam    DUL-LA    :    ine-lain-mu^   ka-tim    ra-sub-ba-ti^
ra-mi  :  IM-HUS     RI-a(?)

[e]-SIR-RA    gin   :  siiki^   it-ta-na-al-lak    ina   su-ul-la-a'^
it-ta-na-at-bak  :  E-SIR-RA     SU-[SU]

25.  .     .     .     GUB-BA    :    z'-dt     a-me-lii     iz-za-az-zu     man-ma
ul    ip-\J)al-la\as-su  :  MULU     IGI     .     .  1  .

:  z-di      a-me-lu      us-\sa\-ba-ma      ma7t-ma

ul     .      .      .      -SU   :    MULU      NA      .      .      .

.     .     .     .     :  ]  ana     bid    ina     e-[ri]-bi-su     it-ta-su      ul
\u\-ta-ad-du  :  SI     .     .     .     .

ina      a-si-su      ul     ih-ha-as-\sa\-as  :

IZ-KU-PI      ....

in-na-as-sah     „     „     is-sak-kan  :  A  .  .  .    .

30 TA    .    .    A-NI-KU     MULU    NA     ME  (.?)    .    .    .

man  -  ma      ul


.     .     IM  -  MI  -  IN     .     .
im  (?)     .     .     ri     u     sa


(Plate  III.)

Incantation  : —

The  evil  Fever  hath  come  like  a  deluge,  and
Girt   with   dread   brilliance    it    filleth    the    broad

earth,
Enveloped  in  terror  it  casteth  fear  abroad  ;
It  roameth  through  the  street,  it  is  let  loose  in
the  road  ;
25.    It  standeth  beside  a  man,  yet  none  can  see  it.
It  sitteth  beside  a  man,  yet  none  can  [see  it].
When  it   entereth   the  house  its   appearance   is

unknown,
When  it  goeth  forth  [from  the  house]  it  is  not

perceived,
.     .     .     .     is  removed     ,,     ,,     is  set
30 none  [knoweth  ?~\


^~''  From  K.  4,663.
'  Adds  ma.  ^  hi.

^  irsitu{tu)  rapaUuiJu)  for  irsilivi{tim)  ra-pa-as-ti.
*  me.  ^  turn.

^  sii-ki.  '  su-li-e{})  {ox  su-ul-Ia-a.


e<i6fet  "  Ql."

Obvp:rse.
Col.  I  (Plate  IV).

TA  KALAM  -  MA  -  TA  BA  -  RA  -  E

[KALAM(?)]       KALAM-MA      ANA-TA      KI-TA      LU-LU

[e-kimlYiuu    la    ta-a-bu    ana    ina-a-ti   u-sa-am-ma

ni  -  is        nidti        e  -  lis       u        sap  -  lis        id  -  luh

5.   DINGIR-LUGAL        NAM-EN-NA        DUGUD-DA         KUR-RA

LA      BA  -  AN  -  GAR       U  -  SU  -  US  -  TA      GAR  -  GAR  -  RA

be  -  en  -  nu        mi  -  ik  -  tu       sa       ana       ma  -  a  -  ti

la     i-nu-uh-  hu     da  -  urn  -  ma  -  tu     i  -  sak  -  ka-  nu

ALAD        UTUG        MASKIM        GAL-GAL-LA        NAM-MULU-

GISGAL-LU

10.  SILA   -    DAGAL   -    LA        AL   -   KAS   -   KAS   -    NE   -    NE

se-e-du    u-tuk-ku    ra-bi-su    rab-bu-ti    sa   ana   nisi^'^

ri  -  ba  -  a  -  ti  it  -  ta  -  na  -  as  -  rab  -  bi  -  tu

U  -  HUS       GAL       UD GAB  -  BI

NU-UN      ....      [EGIR-BI         IGI-MU]-UN-BAR-RA

15.  '^inu     izzu    gai-lu-tu    .    .   .    i(})-da(})-gil     i-rat-su

la     ut -  tar-  ru    ana     arki  -  su     la     ip  -pal-  [la  -  as]

DINGIR-UGUR       NAM-EN-NA       E-SIR-[RA  (?)]      .      .      .      .

....      GLM        AZAG  (?)  -  GA

[Remainder  of  the  column  lost.  ]

Col.  IL

SU    -    AZAG    -    GA

a  -  na      ka  -  ti       \elliti]

*GIR        UDUN        EL

5.  ana     ki  -  i  -  ri     u     u  -  [tu]  -  un


Obverse.

Col.  I  (Plate  1V).»

An  evil  ghost  (?)  hath  assailed  the  land,

And  perturbeth  the  people  of  the  land  above  and
below  :

5.  A  pestilence,  a  plague  that  giveth  the  land  no  rest,

Hath  cast  a  desolation  upon  it ;
10.  The  great  Demon,  Spirit,  and  Fiend,

Which  roam  the  broad  places  for  men,
15.  The  angry,  quaking  storm  [which  if  one]  seeth.

He  turneth  not  nor  looketh  back  again.

A  pestilence  in  the  street  Nergal  [hath  brought]

Col.  II.

Upon  clean  hands

5.  On  pitch  (.'^)^  and  coalpan


*  It  is  not  known  to  which  Series  this  tablet  belongs.
^  Ktru  is  variously  translated  as  **  outer  wall "  or  **  pitch  "  (see
Muss-Arnolt,  Dictionary^  sub  voce).


14  DEVILS   AND    EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

GAR  -  NAM       GAR  -  GAL  -  LA         KALAM       HI      ...      .

mimma  sum-su  ines-ri-  .  .  mdti  ..  .  .  -su
DINGIR  -  BIL  -  GI        ZAGIN  -  NA GE

'^"     „      el  -  lu       nu  -  u  -  [rz] mm

lO.    URUDU  -  GAR  -  LIG  -  GA       SE  -  IR

-  ^

SUR       U        ZI  -  G[a]

ma  -  na  -  ha  -  ti  -  su         na  -  pis  -  tu     .     .     .     .

.      ME        LA        KIN         GUD         MA

15 rz       si  -  ris       ra  -  bis       a  -  na       si     .     .     .

.     ti  in  -         ni  -         ip  -        pu  -         us

[DINGIR-NUZKU]  LUH-MAH  NUN-GAL  DINGIR-EN-KI-GE

['^"AFiizku]   sukkallu   si-ru  sa   ru-bi-e   rabe{e)   ^^"E-a

.      .      .      .      [AZAG]  GA  ES-MAH  IM-ME-IN-GAB-GAB

20 el  -  li         bzti        si  -  ri         u  -  sa  -  in  -  su

(Plate  V.)'

DINGIR  -  RI  -  E  -  NE  -  GE  GIN  -  MA

.     .     .     .     -  a  -  ti         sir         ildni^^         u  -  sa  -  lik  -  su
MA  DINGIR  -  EN  -  KI  -  GA  -  GE

.........  e-ti  sa  ''''E  -  a

25.    [DINGIR-SILIG-MULU  (?)]-SAR        NAM-SUB        BA-AN-SUM

['^^  Marduk  (?)]  -         sip  -       turn  id  -       di

[nam  -  sub]  ZU  -  AB  -  A  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  SUM

\si  -    pat^  ap  -     si  -     i  i  -     di  -     ma

[NAM  -  sub]  nun  -  KI  -  GA  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  SUM

30.  \si  -      p^t^  ""^''Eridi  i  -       di  -       ma

[URUDU  -  GAR  -  LIG]  -  GA         UR  -  SAG         AN  -  NA  -  GE

[ZA- PA-RAM-ME]  -  NE  -  A  -  NI       UTUG      UR  -  UR  -  RI

[  „  -u  kar-ra-du  '^'''\A-nim  sa  ina  7'i-gim  me-lam-me-su


TABLET  OF  A   SIMILAR  SERIES,  "  N."  1 5

Whatever  its  name,  the  limbs     ....

The  Fire-god  undefiled  [whose]  light  (?)     .     .     .
10.  A  meteorite  [whose]  flash  (?)

.     .     .     his  resting-place  life     ....
15.  .     .     .     in  power  and  might  for     .     .     .

hath  been  made.

[Nuzku],  supreme  minister  of  the  great  prince  Ea,
20.  With  pure     .     .     .     hath  filled  the  lofty  house,

(Plate  V.)

Hath  brought     ...     the  flesh  of  gods    .    .    .

of  Ea,

25.  [Marduk(.^)]  hath  performed  the  incantation  ;

Perform  [the  Incantation]  of  the  Deep,  and
30.   Perform  [the  Incantation]  of  Eridu  and

Take  the  potent  meteorite  of  Heaven


l6  DEVILS   AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

[utuMt]  i   -  ar   -  ra  -  ru

35 GIDIM        AB  -  SI  -  IL  -  LA

\se\  -  e  -  du        ud  -  da  -  pa  -  ru

[Hiatus.]

RA

40.    LA    -    RA      .      .      .'

pU    -    US    '   ku

DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR       [IGI    :    GAR-GA-E     :     GIN-NA

DU-MU]
SAH   -   TUR    -    RA

»       -  ^

45.   SAG  -  MULU  -  TUR  -  RA  -  GE

kak  -  kad        mar  -si ■.     .     .

LIKIR  -  BI    :    lib  -  ba  -  su       u  -  su  -  uh

MULU  -  TUR  -  RA       SAG       SA  -  GA  -  NA ,

sa     mar  -  si     in  a     ri  -  \es      lib  -  bi  -  su]     .     .     .     .

50.   MUD  -  BI       DA       GIS  -  NAD  -  DA  -  NA  -  GE

da  -  mi  -  su      i  -  da  -  at      ir  -  si

SAH- TUR -RA      ID  -  RIG  -  NE  -  NE      [u]  -  ME  -  NI  -  RI  -  RI
„     -a     a  -  na      mes  -  ri  -  ti  -  su     pur  -  ri  -  is  -  ma
MUH  MULU-TUR-RA-GE   [         :]   el  mar-si  mu-us-si-ma
Col.  IIL

MULU-GISGAL-LU-BI         A-GUB-BA         ZU-AB         AZAG-GA

U  -  ME  -  NI  -  EL  -  LA  1        U  -  ME  -  NI  -  LAH  -  LAH  -  GA  ^

amelu     su  -  a-  tu'^     ina     „   -  ^     el-  li    sa     ap  -  si  -  i

ul  -      HI  -      su  ub  -      bi  -      lb  -      su  -      ma

5.   GAR  -        NA  GIBILLA  U  -        ME  -        NI  -       E

„         -   <2  SU   -   bi  -   '   -   SU   -   ma


TABLET  OF  A  SIMILAR  SERIES,   "  N.  1/

At  whose  awful  roar  the  spirits  quake
35 a  Demon  hath  removed

[Hiatus.]

40.   Misery

Marduk  [hath  seen;   ''What  I";   "Go,  my  son
(Marduk)"]

''  [Take]  a  sucking-pig  [and]     ....
45.   "  [At]  the  head  of  the  sick  man  [put  it  (?)  and]

*'  Take  out  its  heart  and

*'  Above  the  heart  of  the  sick  man  [put  it],
50.   "  [Sprinkle]  its  blood  on  the  sides  of  the  bed  [and]

*'  Divide  the  pig  over  his  limbs  and

''  Spread  it  on  the  sick  man  ;  then

Col.  IIL

''  Cleanse  thou  that  man  with  pure  water  from

the  Deep
''  And  wash  him  clean  and
5.   '*  Bring  near  him  a  censer  (and)  a  torch


'  S.  217  omits.

^  S.  217  and  79-/-8,  295,  /um  for  lu-um.


\


1 8  DEVILS   AND   EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

(Plate  VI.)

GAR-NE   GAR^-HAR-RA    V/I- A-BU -II- A- A'N    KA   AS-A-AN

U-ME-NI-PA-PA

a  -  kal      tu  -  tun  ^  -  ri       si  -  bit       a  -  di       si  -  na

bdb  ka  -  Die  -  e^  i  -  ta  -  as  -  suk  -  ma

10.   SAH-TUR-RA         KI-BI-IN-GAR-RA-BI-KU         U-ME-NI-SUM

„     -  ^  a  -  na  pu  -  hi  -  su  i  -  din  -  ma

UZU        UZU-BI-KU        MUD        MUD-BI-KU        U-ME-NI-SUM

SU    -  HA   -  BA   -  AB   -  TI  ^   -  GA

se'^ -7'a    kinia^    se^ -ri-su    da-me"^    kima^    da-me-sii

i-din-ma     lil-ku-u

15.   LIKIR  SAG  SA-GA-NA-GE  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  GAR

SA-GA-GIM         U-ME-NI-SUM         SU-HA-BA-AB-TI*-GA

lib  -  ba        sa        ina       ris       lib  -  bi  -  su       tas  -  ku  -  na

ki  -  ma  lib  -  bi^  -  su  i  -  din-  ma  HI  -ku-u

HUL      GAL-LA      RA-AH      .      .

20 SAR      .      .

-  nu

-  su

^  5,217  and  79-7-8,  295  omit.

^  S.  217  and  79-7-8,  295,  turn  for  tu-wn.

^  S.  217,  mi-i  iox  me-e.  *  S.  217,  fe.

^  S.  217,  SI.  *  S.  217,  ki-?}ia.

'  S.  217,  ma.  ^  S.  217  omits.

*  Akal  tumri.  Jensen  sugg^ests  the  meaning  "  Salz  "  for  tumri
as  a  synonym  of  tdhtu  and  idranu  {Mylhen  und  Epen,  p.  447).
However,  a  wider  comparison  of  the  texts  in  which  it  occurs  will
probably  suggest  a  different  meaning  :

taramima  "^^r^u  tabula,  sa  kainamma  tumri  ispukakki'.  **Thou
didst  love  the  shepherd  Tabula  (.?),  who  perpetually  heaped  up  tumri
for  thee."     (Gilgamish,  Tablet  VI,  58-59.)

....  imma  nigittu  ihteli  isatu,   ....  imtakkutu  ittir  ana  tumri'.


TABLET  OF  A  SIMILAR  SERIES,  "  N."  IQ


(Plate  VI.)

"  Twice  seven  loaves  cooked  in  the  ashes  *  against
the  shut  door  place  and
lo.   "  Give  the  pig  in  his  stead  and

**  Let  the  flesh  be  as  his  flesh,

**  And  the  blood  as  his  blood,

"  And  let  him  hold  it  ;
15.   **  Let  the  heart  be  as  his  heart

'*  (Which  thou  hast  placed  upon  his  heart)

''  And  let  him  hold  it  ;


20.


"  The  light  [died  away  ?],  the  fire  went  out,  the  ....  [which]
had  fallen  turned  to  tumrir  (Gilgamish,  S.  1,040,  11.  19-20;
Jensen,  Myihen,  p.  164.)

ina  naphar  matati-ki  isatu  iddi-ma  kima  tumri  ispuk  :  '*  On  all  thy
lands  he  hath  cast  fire  and  like  iumri\i2X\i  heaped  up."  {W.A.I.y
iv,  19,  No.  3,  40.)

si'ru  sa  ilia  pe7iti  basin  akal  tumri ul  ikkal :  "  Flesh  which  hath  been
cooked  on  the  coals,  bread  of  tumri  shall  he  not  eat."    ( W.A.L,  iv,

32.  ii,  15  )

kaman  tumri {Crciig,  Religious  Texts,  15,  20,  K.  2,001) :  "a  cake  of
tumri^

Akal  tumri  sibit  adisifia  bab  kame  itassuk  ma  :  **  Twice  seven  loaves
of  tu??iri  place  against  the  closed  door."     (This  passage.)

A  vocabulary  gives  a  group  tu-um-[^ru'],  ki-nu-nu  ("oven"),  and
ku-tu-ru  (connected  with  kutru,  "smoke"),  (K.  13,690).  From
these  it  seems  fairly  clear  that  tumru  means  "ashes,"  the  "bread
of  ashes"  being  the  ordinary  flat  cake  such  as  is  cooked  in  the
ashes  by  the  Arabs  of  the  present  day.


20  DEVILS   AND   EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

.      .      .      KI  -  BI  -  IN  -  [GAR  -  RA  -  BI  -  KU]      .....
.     .     .     lu  -     u  pu  -     [//  -     hi  -     m'\     ....

[SAH  -  TUR]  -  RA     GAR  -  SAG  -  IL  -  LA  -  BI

25.  [„]  -     «      lu  -  u      di  -  iia  -  \iii  -  su\

UTUG-HUL  A-LA-HUL  BAR-KU  HE-IM-TA-[GUB]

utug-  *  sig-ga     alad-  *  sig-ga    he-en-da-lah-lah-
[gi-es]

inim  -  inim  -  ma  sah  -  tur  -  ra    .    .    .    .

EN^      AZAG-GIG-GA       SU        MULU       KA-MU-UN-GAL-[LA]

30.  a-sak-ku      7nar-su      ina      zu-niur     arneli     it-tab-si

MULU-GISGAL-LU       PAP-HAL-LA       TU-GIM      BA-AN-DUL

amelu     mut-tal-li-ka'^      ki-ma     su-ba-ti     ik-ta-tam

SU-BI  GIR-BI  NU -MU-UN -SI- IN-GA-GA

ka  -  as^ -  SU  u  se  -  ip  -  su  i  -  na  -  as  -  si

35.   ID  -  SU  -  GIR  -  BI  [MU  -  UN  -  si  -  IN]  -  GE  -  GE

ines  -         ri  -         //  -         su  u  -         ta  -         ra

NUN  -  GAL      DINGIR  -  EN  -  KI  -  GE      EN  -  ZU     .      .      .      .

ru  -  bu  -  u        ra  ~  bu  -  u        '^"^  -  a       bit      sip  -  ti

DINGIR  -  EN  -  KI  -  E  -  NE  -  KU

40.  sa  [  ]

*  BIR  SAG  GAB  -  RI  -  [BI  -  KU  BA  -  AN  -  SUM]

u-ri\sa     ina     risi-sii\  ana     mi-Jm^-ti-su      it-ta-din

NUN    -      ME   -      E            GU    -  NA[M    -      M]I   -      IN    -      DE

ana             ab  -         kal  -  li             is  -     si  -        ma

*  BIR            GAR-SAG-IL-LA  NAM-MULU-GISGAL-LU-GE
(15).          u  -  ri  -  su            „  -  ?^  ^^            (I  -  ^-'^^  -  lu  -  ti


TABLET  OF  A  SIMILAR  SERIES,  ^^  N."  21


[That  the]     .     .     .     may  be  in  his  stead     .    .     .

25.  [That  the]  pig  may  be  a  substitute  for  him    .    .    .

May  the  evil  Spirit,  the  evil  Demon  stand  aside !

May  a  kindly  Spirit,  a  kindly  Genius  be  present !

Prayer  of  the  Sucking-Pig.

Incantation  : —
30.  An  evil  Fever  rests  upon  the  body  of  the  man,

It  hath  covered  the  wanderer  as  with  a  garment,
It  holdeth  his  hands  and  feet,
35.   It  racketh  his  limbs.

The  great  Prince  Ea,  lord  of  magic,

40.  OfEa(?)

(11).  Laid  a  kid  at  his  head  in  front  of  him
Unto  the  Chieftain  he  spake  (saying) :
(15).  "  The  kid  is  the  substitute  for  mankind.


^  The  restorations  are  from  Tablet  "  Z,"  Curt.  Texts^  part  xvii,
pi.  xxxvii.

2  K.  2,375,  ku.

'  K.  2,375,  kat,  K.  4,996,  ka  for  ka-as.


22  DEVILS   AND    EVIL   SPIRITS   OF  BABYLONIA.

*BIR  ZI  -      A-      NI  -      KU  BA  -      AN-      SUM

u  -  ri  -  sa  ana  na  -  pis  -  ti  -  su  it  -  ta  -  din
SAG  *  BIR  SAG  -  MULU  -  KU  BA  -  AN  -  SUM

kak-kad  u-ri-si  ana  kak-kad  ameli  it-ta-din
(20).  GU  *  BIR  GU  -  MULU  -  KU  BA  -  AN  -  SUM

ki'Sad  u-ri-si  ana  ki-sad  ameli  it-ta-din
GABA       *  BIR        GABA   -   MULU    -    KU        BA   -   AN   -   SUM

ir  -  ti     u  -  ri  -  si     ana     ir  -  ti    ameli     it  -  ta  -  din

[MULU    -   KU]  BA   -    AN    -   SUM

(25) \ana     ....     ameli]         it  -     ta  -     din

[tu-KA-GA  I  DINGIR-EN-KI-GA-GE:  ina  „]-e  a-mat  '"* E-a
[TU-TU   ZU-AB  NUN-KI-GA  NAM]-MU-UN-DA-AN-BUR-RA

[//  -  pat     ap  -  si  -  i     ''^"  Eridi   a-  a    ip]-  pa  -  si  -  ir

[Hiatus.]

Col.  IV  (Plate  VII).

UTUG   -   HUL  -   IK  MULU   -    RA

u-tuk-ku         lim-nu        sa        ameli

A-LA-HUL-IK  NIM-GIR-GIM  MU-UN-[GIR-GIR-RI]

a-lu-u      lim-nu      sa     ki-ma     bir-ki    it-ta-nab-\rik\
5.  gidim-hul-ik      mulu-ra      su

e  -  kim  -  mu  lim  -  nu  sa  ameli  im  -  \has  ?]
MULLA        HUL-IK        MULU-RA        MU  (?)    .      .      .      .      .      .

gal-lu-u     lim-nu     sa     ameli    im-tu

E-NE-NE-NE  MULU -kin- GA- a

10.  su  -  nu        mar       sip  -  ri      lim  -  nu  -  [ti       su  -  nu]

DINGIR-EN-LIL-LA   NU-*SUG-GA   NAM-BI-KU-NE    .      .      .

*'"     „     la     se-ma-a     a-na     sim-[ti-su]

IGI-BI-KU  UR-NU-TUK  SU

ana  pa-ni-su-nu  la  a-da-ru  ina  [zumrii^)]       .     .     .


TABLET  OF  A   SIMILAR   SERIES,   "  N."  23


"  The  kid  for  his  life  he  giveth,

'*  The  head  of  the  kid  for  the  head  of  the  man
he  giveth,

(20).  "  The  neck  of  the  kid  for  the  neck  of  the  man
he  giveth,

*'  The  breast  of  the  kid  for  the  breast  of  the  man
he  giveth,

(25).  ''  The     ...     [of  the  kid  for  the     ...     of
the  man]  he  giveth,*

**  By  the  magic  of  the  Word  of  Ea

''  [Let    the    Incantation  of  the   Deep  of   Eridu
never]  be  unloosed  !  "

[Hiatus.]
Col.  IV  (Plate  Vll).

The  evil  Spirit  which  [hath  seized  upon]  the  man.
The  evil  Demon  which  flasheth  like  lightning,
5.  The  evil  Ghost  which  hath  smitten  the  man,

The  evil  Devil  which     .     .     .     the  man,
10.   Fell  harbingers  are  they  !

Bel,    [who    destroyeth  ?^   the  senseless  with   his

decree,
Feareth  them  not


*  It    is    uncertain    how   many   more    of  the    lines    ending  "  he
givelh  "  were  originally  in  the  text.


24  DEVILS  AND   EVIL  SPIRITS  OF   BABYLONIA.


15.   ES-E  -  KUR-TA  E-A-NE-NE-GE

is-tu     bit     Ekurri    ina     a-si-su-nu

HU  (?)   -      SAB  (?)  -      ZI  -      GA  -      GIM      .

ki  -  ma     ti  -  bu  -  iu     e  -  ri  -  bi

GAR  -  HUL  -  IK  -  E         MULU  -  RA        BA

20.  niimma        lini-nu        [ana       aineli]

a  -  sak  -   ku     e  -

MULU  -  GISGAL  -  LU  -  BI

a  -  me  -  lu  su  -\a  -  tu\     .     .     .


[Col.  V  entirely  lost.]


Col.  VI.


.  .  .  DIR  DIR  .  .
.  GUB-BA-GIM  AN  .
UD-DA         KUD-DA-GIM


INIM   -      INIM   -      MA  GAR   -      KIL


5.   EN          U  -  GAL         DINGIR        EDIN  -  NA
ID  -      BI  -      E  -      NE

MULU(?)        EN-NUN-E-NE       IN      .      .      .
KA  -       BI  -       E  -       NE  IK  -       KID

KA  -      SA  -      AN  DA  -      SA  -      A     .

10.   .      .      .      NAM  NU  -      KID  -      KID


TABLET  OF  A  SIMILAR  SERIES,  "  N.  2$

15.  When  they  issued  forth  from  the  Underworld  .  .

Like  a  swarm  of  locusts

20.  All  evil  against  man

Fever

That  man

[Col.  V  entirely  lost.]


26  DEVILS   AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF  BABYLONIA.

Col.  VII  (Plate  VIII).

NE      SUM(?)

MU  -  UN  -  T[AK]

MU  -  UN  -  TAK

5 EL  -  LA        MU  -  UN  -  TAK

DINGIR  -         RA  -         NA

TAK

SU  -  NA

MU   -   UN   -   EL   -   LA

10.   EME  -  HUL  -  IK  BAR  -  [KU  HE  -  IM  -  TA  -  GUB]

INIM   -   INIM   -   MA  A  -   SIG  -   GA  (?)      .      .      .

EN  -        UTUG  -        HUL  EDIN  -        NA  -        ZU  -  KU

u  -             tuk  -  ku                          lint  -  nit

a  -             na  si  -             ri  -  ka

15.   A-         LA-          HUL  EDIN-          NA  -         ZU  -  KU

a  -             lu  -  u                               liin  -  nu

a  -             na  si  -             ri  -  ka

GIDIM  -          HUL  EDIN  -          NA  -          ZU  -  KU

e  -             kirn  -  mu                         lim  -  nu

20.          a  '             na  si  -             ri  -  ka

MULLA  -           PJUL  EDIN  -           NA  -           ZU  -  KU

gal  -  lu  -  u          lim  -  nu  a  -  na          si  -  ri  -  [ka]


[Eleven  lines  of  colophon  remain  in  Col.  VIII.]


TABLET  OF  A   SIMILAR  SERIES,  "  N."  27

Col.  VII  (Plate  VIII).
12.   Incantation  : —

O  evil  Spirit !     To  thy  desert !
15.  O  evil  Demon  !     To  thy  desert !
20.  O  evil  Ghost !    To  thy  desert !

O  evil  Devil  !     To  thy  desert !

[Remainder  lost.]


e^e  (Bfepent^  tamt


(Plate  IX.)

EN         AZAG         MULU-RA  SAG-BI  MU-UN-NA-[TE]

a-sak-ku     a-na     aineli    a-iia     kak-ka-di-su    it-te-hi

NAM  -  TAR        MULU-RA        ZI  -  BI         MU-UN-NA-TE

7iain-ta-ru    a-na  ^    anieli    a-na    na-pis-ti-su    it-te-hi

5.    UTUG  -      HUL  GU  -      BI  MU  -      UN  -      NA  -      TE

u-tuk-ku      lint-nu       a-na  ^       ki-\sa-di\su       it-te-hi

A   -    LA   -   HUL         GABA   -    BI  [MU]    -    UN    -    NA    -    TE

a  -  lu  -  u     liui  •  nil     a  -  na'^      ir  -  ti  -  su     it  -  te  -  hi

GIDIM    -    HUL  IB    -    BI  MU    -    UN    -    NA    -    TE

10.  e-kini-niu         lini-nii         a-na        kab-li-su        it-te-hi

MULLA    -    HUL  SU    -    BI  MU    -    UN    -    NA    -    TE

gal  -  III  -  u     lint  -  nu     a  -  na     ka  -  ti  -  su     it  -  te-  hi

DINGIR  -   HUL  GIR   -   BI  MU   -   UN   -   NA  -   TE

ilu        Urn  -  nu        a  -  na       se  -  pi  -  su         it  -  te  -  hi

15.     F//-BI-E-NE  UR-BI-A  BA  -  AN  -  DIB  -  BI  -  ES

si  -  bit  -  ti  -  su  -  nu       2stenis(nis)      is  -  sab  -  tu  -  us

BAR-BI-TA^  BIL-BIL-LA-GIM  BA-AB      ...      US

zu-mur-su  kiuia  i-sa-ti  huin-mu-du  us -t ant  (?)...  -u

GAR-SA-A        GAR-HUL-GIM-MA       BA- -US

20.  ki  -  nta      e  -  pis      Itntuttint^tim) -  su

TU  -  GIM        BA  -  AN  -  DUL BARA

DINGIR  -  SILIG  -  MULU  -  SAR         IGI  -  LM  -  MA  -  AN  -  [SUM  :
GAR  -  GA  -  E    :   GIN  -  NA      D]U  -  MU

*  BIR  -  GIG  -  IB       GABA  -  BI E

//  -  ri  -  sa       sal  -  ma      sa      kab  -  la     [na  -  as]  -  hit


(Pr  ATE    IX.)

Incantation  : —

Fever    unto    the    man,   against    his   head,    hath

drawn  nigh.
Disease    unto    the   man,  against    his    life,    hath
drawn  nigh,
5.  An  evil  Spirit  against  his  neck  hath  drawn  nigh,
An  evil  Demon  against  his  breast  hath  drawn  nigh,
10.  An  evil  Ghost  against  his  belly  hath  drawn  nigh,
An  evil  Devil  against  his  hand  hath  drawn  nigh,
An  evil  God  against  his  foot  hath  drawn  nigh,
15.  These  seven  together  have  seized  upon  him.

His  body  like  a  consuming  fire  they  devour  (?),
20.  As  one  that  worketh  evil  they  have    .     .     .    him,
As  with  a  garment  they  envelop  him     .     .     .
Marduk  hath  seen  him  :  (etc.),
''  What  I  "  :  (etc.),
"  Go,  my  son,

"  [Take]    a    dark-coloured    kid    whose  .stomach
[hath  been  taken  away],


'  K.  9,406,  ana  for  a-na.
-  K  5,210  omits.


30  DEVILS   AND   EVIL   SPIRITS  OF   BABYLONIA.


25.    LU  ID  -  DAR  -  A         GIR  -  BI      .      , E

irn  -  mir       at  -  ri  -  e -ha

SU         U  -  ME  -  NI [U  -  ME]  -  NX  -  E

mas  -  ka        ta  - [//^]  -  sah  -  hat

SU     GIR    *SIG-ALAM     .     .     .     [u]  -  ME  -  NI  -  GAR  -  GAR

30.  , ta  -  sa  -  kan

MULU  -  TUR  -  [RA]1 [U]  -  ME  -  NI  -  GUB

,    .      .      .      U  -  ME  -  NI  -  E

-a     zi  -  mi  -  su      tu  -  hal  -  lap

U  -  ME  -  NI-E

35 da      mi     ta      su      ma

NA       RIG-LI       RIG-ZUN       U-ME-NI-BIL-BIL

su-ru-up-ma

SI  -  IM  -  E  -  NE

(Plate  X.)

su  -  si  -  in  -  su  -  ma

BA  -  AB  -  SIR  -  RI

40 i  -  na  -  as  -  sa  -  hu

HA  -  BA  -  RA  -  GUB  -  BA

[UTUG-HUL         A-LA-HUL         BAR-KU  HE]-IM-TA-GUB

[UTUG-*SIG-GA    ALAD-*SIG-GA    HE-EN]-LAH-LAH-GI-ES

A  -  GE

45.   [en         AZ]AG        MULU  -  RA         IMI  -  GIM         BA  -  AN  -  Rl

\a-sak\ku      a-na      aineli    ki-ma     sa-a-ri     i-zik-ma

[MULU  -  Bl]    .    .    NE-IN-RA     sa-ti-bi     ba-an-tu

\amelu  su  Q)'\-a-tuift  im-ha-as-ma  ba-ma-as-su  im-si-id

[IGI  -  Bl]      BA  -  AN  -  GAZ      SA  -  GU  -  BI      BA  -  AN  -  RA  -  API

50.  \pa  (?)]  -  iii  -  su  im  -  has  -  ma  la-  ba  -an-  su  i  -  //  -  ik


ASAKKI   MARSOtI,  TABLET  XI.  3 1

25.   ''A  fat"  Iamb  whose  leg  [hath  been  taken  away]
"  [Thou  shalt  flay  off]  the  skin,  thou  shalt  tear
away  the     ....

30.   **  Hand  and  foot(.'*)  an  ima^e  .  .  .  thou  shalt  set
•*  The  sick  man     ....     thou  shalt  place
" thou  shalt  cover  his  face

35-   ''

"burn cypress  and  herbs  (.'*)

(Plate  X.)

" fill  it

40.   *'  [That  the  great  gods]  may  remove  [the  evil  i*],
**  [That  the  evil  Spirit]  may  stand  aside,
''  [May  the  evil   Spirit,   the  evil   Demon]  stand

aside,
'*  [May   a   kindly    Spirit,    a   kindly   Genius]   be
present."

[Prayer     ]

45.  [Incantation  : — ]

Fever  hath   blown  upon  the  man  as  the  wind-
blast.
It  hath  smitten  this  man,  and  humbled  his  pride,
50.    It  hath  smitten   his     .     .     .     and  hath  brought
him  low,


'  K.  S.210  translates  \_a-me~\-hi     .     .     .
•^  A/ru  usually  means  "  abundant."


32  DEVILS  AND    EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

[  ]  GIM  SA  -  BI  BA  -  AN  -  SUR  -  SUR

[  kiina  pd\  -  ti  -  in  -  ni  bu  -a-  ni  -su  u-te  -  en-  ?tis
[KA-BI]  SI-KU  BA-AN-TU  a  MUn-BI  NU-UN-DUG
[        pi{J)\-i-su  a-na  inar-ti  it-tur  mu-ii  eli-su  ul  ta-a-bu

55.    .      .      .      [id   -    su]    -    GIR   -    BI  NU    -    UN    -    DA   -   GI

\ines  -  ri  -  ti  -  su\  ul  u  -  tar

-UN-DA  -  SA  -  A

Hi  -        su

/  -       li  -      '

60 -  hi   -         ip

-         GUB   -        BU

-         za    -         az

[Hiatus.]

-         ras  -        su

65 -         TAR    -         KI

-         ri   -         su

MULU-GIS(iAL-LU    U    [NU-UN-DA-AB-KU-E     A     NU-UN]-

DA-AB-NAK-E

U  -  NU  -  MU  -  UN  -  KU  -  KU         [  .  ]  -  ZI  -  ZI

ul  i  -  sal  -  lal  ull]  u  -  sap  -  si/i

70.    DINGIR  -  RA  -  A  -  NI      ZI  -  MU  -  UN  -  SI  -  [IN]  -  IR  -  IR  -  RI

tli  -         su  u  -         ta  '         as  -         si  -         is

DINGIR  -  SILIG  -  MULU  -  SAR  IGI    :    GAR  -  GA  -  E    :

GIN  -  NA      DU  -  MU

*BIR         BABBAR        DINGIR-EN-MIR-SI-GE         SU-U-ME-TI

„        pisu{u)  sa         '^"Dumu  -  zi         li  -  ki  -  ma

(Plate  XI.)

75.   TE  MULU  -  TUR  -  RA  -  GE  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  [NA]

ina  ti  -  ih  mar  -  si  su  -  ni  -  il  -  ma


A§AKKI    MARSUTI,  TABLET   XL  33

It  hath  rotted  his  thews  like  a  girdle,*

His  mouth  it  hath  turned  to  gall

So  that  the  moisture  therein  hath  no  sweetness,
55 so  that  he  cannot  move  his  limbs,

his  god  (?)

he  hath  [no]  power,

60 destroying  (?)

standeth

[Hiatus.]

67.  The  man  [can  eat  no]  food,  [no  water  can  he]
drink,

He  cannot  sleep,  he  hath  no  rest,

70.   His  god  hath  let  him  be  brought  low.

Marduk  hath  seen  him  :  (etc.),

''  What  I  "  :  (etc.),

''  Go,  my  son  (Marduk),

"  Take  a  white  kid  of  Tammuz,

(Plate  XL)
75.   *'  Lay  it  down  facing  the  sick  man  and

*  Cf.  Jer.,  xiii,  i  ff.


34  DEVILS  AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF  RABYLONIA.


LIKIR  -

A  -         NI                    U  -

ME

NI  -

[SIR]

lib^

ba  -         su

U  -

suk  -

ma

SU

MULU   -   BA  -  GE

U   -

ME   -    NI

-   GAR

80.  ana       ka  -  ti       ameli       su  -  a  -  ti        su  -  kun  -  7na

NAM  -  SUB  NUN  -  KI  -  GA  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  SUM

*BIR       NI       §A-BI       U-MUS-TA-E-ZI       GAR-GAR-LAG-GA

MULU-BA-GE  U  -  MU  -  UN  -  TE  -  GUR  -  GUR

u  -  ri  -  sa         sa  libbi  -  su  ta  -  as  -  su  -  hu

85.  a-ka-la     li-i     sa     amelu     su-a-tu     kup-pir-ma

GAR  -       NA  GIBILLA  U  -       ME  -        NI  -        E

SILA  -      KU  U  -      ME  -      NI  -      DUB  -      DUB  -      BU

MULU  -  GISGAL  -  LU  -  BI      KU-SUR-RA       U  -  ME  -  HAR

amelu       su  -  a  -  ti      ku  -  sur  -  ra  -  a       e  -  sir  -  ma

90.   NAM-SUB        NUN-KI-GA       U-ME-NI-SUM  :       ZI      DINGIR-
GAL-GAL-E-NE-GE      U-ME-NI-PA

UTUG   -   HUL  A  -    LA   -   HUL  GIDIM   -   HUL

DINGIR  -  RAB  -  KAN  -  ME  DINGIR  -  RAB  -  KAN  -  ME  -  A

AZAG     NAM-TAR    DUGUD     SU    MULU-GISGAL   NI-GAL-LI

HU- MU -RA- AB-ZI-ZI     E-TA      HA-BA-RA-E

95.  li-  in  -na  -  si  -  ih       is  -  tu       biti       lit  -  ta-  si

UTUG-*SIG-GA      ALAD-*SlG-GA     HE  -  EN  -  DA-LAH-

LAH-GI-ES
UTUG-      HUL  A  -      LA  -      HUL  GIDIM-      HUL


aSakki  marsCti,  tablet  XI.  35

"  Take  out  its  heart  and

80.   *'  Place  it  in  the  hand  of  that  man  ;

*'  Perform  the  Incantation  of  Eridu,

"  The  kid  whose  heart  thou  hast  taken  out

85.   "  Is  //V*-food  with  which   thou  shalt   make   an
*  atonement '  for  the  man,

"  Bring  forth  a  censer  (and)  a  torch,

''  Scatter  it  in  the  street,

"  Bind  a  bandage  on  that  man,
90.   "  Perform  the  Incantation  of  Eridu,

"  Invoke  the  great  gods

''  That  the  evil  Spirit,  the  evil  Demon,  evilOhost,

''  Hag-demon,  Ghoul,

"  Fever,  or  heavy  Sickness

"  Which  is  in  the  body  of  the  man,

95.   ''  May  be  removed  and  go  forth  from  the  house  !

"  May   a    kindly    Spirit,    a    kindly    Genius    be
present !  "

O  evil  Spirit !     O  evil  Demon  !     O  evil  Ghost !


*  Zf /,  at  present  quite  unknown.  It  occurs  elsewhere  in  the
line  GAR-GAR-LIG-GA  SAG-GA-NA  U-ME-NI-GAR  (i.e.  akala  It  ina
kakkadt-iu  sukun-ma),  Tablet  "  T,"  I.  38,  and  lila  ina  zumri kuppuru^
W.A.I.,  ii,  17,65.


36  DEVILS  AND  EVIL   SPIRITS   OF  BABYLONIA.

DINGIR  -  RAB  -  KAN  -  ME  DINGIR  -  RAB  -  KAN  -  ME  -  A

SA  -  GIG  LIKIR  -  GIG  SAG  -  GIG  KA  - -GIG

100.  mu-ru-2is    lib-bi    ki-is   lib-bi  inu-ru-us   kak-ka-di  „

sin-ni

AZAG  NAM   -  TAR  DUGUD

7iam  '     ta  -     ru  a  -     sak  -     ku  kab  -     tu7n

ZI  AN  -  NA  -  KI  -  BI  -  RA  -  GE  U  -  UN  -  NE  -  PA

INIM-INIM-MA  *  BIR  -  HUL-DUB  -  BA-GE

105.   EN       AZAG       EN-TE-NA-GIM        KALAM-MA        MU-UN-ZI
DuppU  XI ^"^^  EN  AZAG  -  GIG  -  GA  -  MES

[Colophon.]


aSakki  marsCti,  tablet  XI.  37

O  Hag-demon  !     O  Ghoul !
lOO.  O  Sickness  of  the  heart !     O  Heartache  !
O  Headache  !     O  Toothache  !
O  Pestilence  !     O  grievous  Fever  !
By  Heaven  and  Earth  may  ye  be  exorcised  !

Prayer  of  the  Kid  as  Substitute  (?).

105.   Incantation  : — ''  Fever  like  frost  hath  come  upon
the  land."

Eleventh  Tablet  of  the  Series  ''  Sick
Fever."


Obverse.

(Plate  XXVII.)

[en     azag     en-te-na]-gim     kalam-ma     mu-un-zi
[a-sak-ku    kima    kti\-us-si    a-na    ma-a-ti    it-te-ba-a

[GIM]  KI  -  a  IM  -  mi  -  IN  -  A  -  AN

\kima  7td\-al-si  ina  irsitim{tiin)  ina-al-lu-us

5 NE  -  IN  -  DUL

kinia      za-ina-nu      i-kat-tam

NE  -  IN  -  UL

kima     al  -  pi        i  -  na  -  kap

IN  -     GUL  -     LA

10 //         i  -  ab  -  bat

GIR  -      GIR  -      RI

bir  -  ki        it  -  ta-  nab  -  ri  -  hi

GAR       NU  -  TUK  -  A

-  7na  -  ra         ul     i  -  si

15 GIN  -  GIN  -  A  -  NI  -  TA

ina        a  -  la  -  ki  -  su  -  nu

KI  -  A      IN  -  TUDKI  -  E  -  NE

-gi-me     irsitini{tint)     u-na-as-su

GAN  -  KU        AB  -  SA  -  SA  -  E

20 i  -  hab  -  bi  -  In

*  SIG-GA        BA-AN-GAR-RI-ES

sa-ku-um-ma-tu     is-ku-nu

GIM        MU-UN-DIB-DIB-BI-ES

ki-nia     ine^^    ntit-ri    u-sab-bi-tuni


tH  tmm^  tdSfef.


Obverse.


(Plate  XXVII.)
[Incantation]  : —

[Fever]  like  frost  hath  come  upon  the  land,


5-


lO.


15-


20.


ke  a  rainstorm  hath  rained  upon  the  earth,
Hke  an  enemy  (?)  covereth,
like  a  bull  rusheth  loose,
.     .     .     .     destroyeth
[like]  lightning  flasheth
.     .     hath  no     .     .     .
.     .     in  their  path,
they  make  the  earth  to  quake,
they  bring  to  destruction,
.     .     they  cause  woe,
like  rain  (?)-waters  they  have  seized


40  DEVILS  AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

25.   ...      ; RA-GIM       MU-UN-DIB-DIB-BI-E§

.     .      [kz-7na'\     nu-un     ap-si-i    i-bar-ru

MU-UN-DIB-DIB-BI-ES

-tak-ka-ni     i-kam-mu-u

MU  -  UN  -  DIB  -  DIB  -  BI  -  ES

30.  \id  -  lu       ina  (?)       md\  -  ha  -  zi       i  -  kani  -  viu  -  u

MU  -  UN  -  DIB  -  DIB  -  BI  -  E§

\ar  -  da-  tu  ina  (?)]  inas-  ta  -  ki  -  sa  i  -  kam  -  mu  -  u
.  .  .  .  DI  dingir-ninni(ni)-ta  mu-un-dib-dib-bi-e§
a  -  sar     ^ne  -  lul  -  ti     i  -  kam  -  mu  -  u

35 RA      GAB  -  IM  -  MA  -  AN  -  RI  -  E§

bel       ildni^^       im  -  tah  -  ru  -  ma

[A  -  LA]  -  GIM  IM  -  MI  -  IN  -  DUL

{ki']  -  ma      a  -  li  -  e      ik  -  ta  -  tarn  -  su

(Plate  XXVIII.)

GIM      IM  -  MI  -  IN  -  su

40 ri      i  -  sa  -  hap  -  lu

RA      NE  -  IN  -  RA

ti      it  -  tar  -  su

NE    -    IN    -    DE

e      it  -  ta  -  ki

45 GUB  -  BU  -  US

[Hiatus.]

\ina  ua  times  am]  us   -   ta   -   bar   -    ri

[DINGIR  -  SILIG  -  MULU  -  SAR   :   GAR  -  GA  -  E  :  ]     GIN  -  NA

50 U  -  ME  -  NI  -  SIR

u  -  suh  -  ma

TA  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  GAR

su         SU    -   kiin    -    ma


ASAKKI  MAR§OtI,  TABLET  XII.  4I

25 like  a  fish  of  the  Ocean  they  chase,

they  seize  upon,

30.  [The  hero  in  ?]  the  fortress  they  seize  upon,
[The  maid  in  ?]  her  chamber  they  seize  upon,
a  place  of  delight  they  seize  upon.

35.  They  come  before  .   .  .   the  lord  of  the  gods  and
.     .     .     covereth  him  like  a  demon

(Plate  XXVIII.)
40 like     ...     it  overwhelmeth  him

it  turneth  him

it  slayeth  him

[Hiatus.]

[With  cries  of  woe  daily]  is  he  sated.

[Marduk  hath  seen,  etc.  ;]

[''What  I,"etc.  ;]
1^;^  "  Go,  my  son  (Marduk),

^H   50.   ''  Take  out  the and

^B  "  Lay  it  on  his  and

L


42  DEVILS   AND   EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

DUB-BA         KI-NA-A-NI-TA        U-ME-NI-DUL

55-  •     •     •     ^^     ifiii     ^^^'^  -  a  -  a  -  li  -  su     kut  -  tim  -  su  -  ma

GAR-NA         EL-LA        GAR-NA        RI-GA

.      .      .      SIR    KISAL-ERIN-NA    LAL    NI-NUN-NA    MUH-BI

U-ME-NI-DE

.     .     .     .     sa  -  man     ru  -  us''  -  ti    sa  -  man    '^"  e  -  ri  -  ni

\dis  -  pu\      hi  -  me  -  tu      eli  -  su      su  -  ru  -  up  -  ma

60.   [NAM  -  SUB  NUN  -  KI  -  G]A  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  SUM

\si  -      pat  "^''^Eridi  i  -       di  -       ma

.    .    .    BA    SU    MULU-GISGAL-LU    PAP-HAL-LA-TA   tum-a

.     .     .     .     \ina    zumur]    ameli    mut-tal-li-ki    ta-bal-ma

....     \ultu(^)'\      biti(})      su-si-ma  :  E-DA-A-NI-TA

65.   [UTUG-HUL         ALAD]-HUL         BAR-KU         HE-IM-TA-GUB

[UTUG  -  *  SIG  -  GA        ALAD]  -  *  SIG  -  GA        HE  -  EN  -  DA  -

LAH  -  LAH  -  GI  -  ES

[inim-inim-ma]     .     .     .     su      BIR-HUL-DUB-BA

MULU-TUR-RA      DUL-LA

A      KIN  -  GA  -  A      AS  -  GE  -  GE

[Duppi        X//^^^-^^        EN       AZAG]    -   GIG    -   GA    -    MES
[Colophon.]


ASAKKI   MARSDtI,  TABLET  XII.  43


55.   '*  With     ...     on  his  bed  cover  him  and

"  .     .     .     .     with  a  censer  cleanse,  with  a  censer
purify.

"  And  burn  thereon  oil  of  balsam  (?Y  oil  of  cedar,
"  Honey  and  butter,  and
60.   "  Perform  [the  Incantation]  of  Eridu,

"  Remove  the     .     .     .     from  the  body  of  the

wanderer  and
*'  Put  it  outside  the  house
65.   *'  [May  the   evil   Spirit,  the   evil   Genius]   stand

aside,
"  [May  a  kindly  Spirit],  a  kindly  [Guardian]  be

present ! "

[Prayer  of]  Covering  the  Sick  Man  with  the
Body  (.'^)  of  the  Kid  as  Substitute  (?).

messenger     .     .     .  (?)


[Twelfth  Tablet]  of  the  Series  "  [Fever]
Sickness."

[Colophon.]


*  Rustu  (also  in  L  42  of  Tablet  VIII  of  the  series  Luh  hi)
possibly  to  be  connected  with  the  Chaldee  rihus  (Levy,  Chald,
Worferb.,  p.  420,  a).


Obverse.

(Plate  XII.)

EN        SAG-GIG        GU-SA-A-AN         [  :  ti-hi\i       mii-tum
a-hi    da-da-nu  :  GU-SA     .     .    •.

SAG-GIG       IGI-BI-TA  :  ti-hi-i'^      ina     pa-ni-su       im-tu
i-sa-ri  :  UH(?)     IM-TA     .     .     .

SAG-GIG    E-KUR-TA  :  ti-hi-i^    is-tu    ekurri    it-ta-sa-a  :
nam-[ta-e]

E     DINGIR-EN-LIL-LA-TA  :   ?/-/«    dil   '^"Be/  it-ta-sa-a  :
NAM-[TA-E]

$.  KUR-RA       KUR-SA-TA  :  zs-tu       ki-rib       sa-di-i'^       ana
via-a-tum^     ur-du^  :  NAM-TA-[gibis-NE]
GIL-HAR-SAG-GA-TA  :  is-tu        kip-pat       sa-di-t^       ana
ma-a-tum  ^  ur-du  * :  KUR-RA  NAM-TA-GIBIS-[ne]

AGAR  NU-GA-GA-A-TA  :  is-tu  u-ga-ri  ana  la^  -ta-a^-ri
ur-du^    :   NAM-TA-GIBIS-NE

SIKKA^-KI     TUR-TA  :  it-ti^     sap-pa-ri     ana     tar-ba-su
tir-du^   :   NAM-TA-GIBIS-NE

DARA        SI-HAL-HAL- LA-TA  :  it-ti  ^        tu-ra-hu  ^       ana
kar-nu^^ pi'ta-a-tu^^  ur-du^  :  NAM-TA-GIBIS-NE


^ttm  ''geabac^e."


»


I


Obverse.

(Plate  XII.)

Incantation  : —
Headache  *

Headache — in  its  face  venom  putrefieth.^
Headache  hath  come  forth  from  the  Underworld,
It  hath  come  forth  from  the  Dwelling  of  Bel,
5.   From  amid  the  mountains  it  hath  descended  upon

the  land,
From  the  ends  of  the  mountains  it  hath  descended

upon  the  land,
From  the  fields  not  to  return  it  hath  descended  ;
With  the  mountain-goat  unto  the  fold    it   hath

descended.
With  the  ibex  unto  the  Open-horned  (flocks)  it

hath  descended,

^  qi,oii,  ^«  for  hi'-t.  2  91,011,  sddt.

^  91,011,  mdii  {ox  ma-a-tum.  *  91,011,  da.

*  91,011  adds  a.  ^  91,011  omits.
'  91,011  inserts  bar.  ®  91,011,  is-tu.
^  91,011,  ^*.  *®  91,01 1,  «/.

"  91,01 1,  ta.

*  The  sense  of  this  line  is  not  clear,  and  the  word  dadanu  is  of
unknown  meaning.  It  may,  however,  be  referred  to  the  root
dddu,  Syraic  dawwed,  "  to  disturb  "  (Payne  Smith,  823).

^  isari,  Syriac  s'ri,  Brockelmann,  Lexicon,  p.  2  39<z.


46


DEVILS  AND   EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.


ID.   SI-BAR-RA

is  -  tu


SI-GUL-GUL-LA-TA


NAM-TA-GIBIS-NE


'mr  -  nu^     pi  -  ta  -  a  -  tu'^     ana    kar


nu


rab  -  ba  -  a  -  [tu]  ^     ur  -  [du]  ^
IGI-BI-TA      GIN-GIN-NI  :  ina      ina-har      tal-\lak\ti-su
sa-ku-Ti-ti  :  U-IL-LA

[gud]-NA-a  :  al-pi  sa  rab-sa  al-pi  u^ -kas-si  :
GUD-E      BA-LAL

UD  :  ku-um-init  u-ma-al-la^  :  IM-*DIRIG-GA
15.   .      .      .      LA      MU-UN-NA-AN-TE-ES      U-GIM     MU      .      .      .

.     .     .     it-hi-e-ma     ki-ma      ^cmi{ini)     ....

.       E      .      .       A

.      GE  -  GE        DINGIR  -  EN  -  KI

a7t  -  mi  -  u     te  -  e  -  \inu     *^"]Ea

20.  .     .     .     RA  :  a-7za   a-bi-su    .    .    .    a-niat  sti-a-\tii\    .    .    .

AB  -  GE  -  GE  -  E

////  -  S2i  -  hi  -  ka     ia  -  a  -  tu

[a-NA]  IB-BA  SA-A-I  (?)  :  mi-na-a  i-[pa]-su-u  ia-a-tu  .  .  .
[dingir-en]-ki         DU-NI        DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR  :

^^""Ea         ma  -  ri  -  su        '^''Marduk        ip  -  [pal

MU  -  UN  -  NA  -  NI  -  IB  -  GE  -  GE]

25.  [du-MU    A-n]a    NU-NI-ZU   :  ma-ri    mi-na-a    la    ti-i-di
jui-na-a     \lu-us-sip-ka  :  A-NA    ra-AB-DAH-a]

[DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR  A-NA]  NU-NI-ZU  :  '^"Mardiik
mi-na-a  la  ti-i-di  \ini-na-a  lu-rad-di-ka  :  A-NA
RA-AB-DAH-A]

[GAR-GA-E-Ni]      ZU-A-MU   :  sa     a-na-ku     i-du-u     at-ta

ti-i-di  :  [ZA-E     IN-GA-E-ZU]
[GIN-NA]     du-MU   :  a-lik     ma-ri    '^" Mardtik  :  DINGIR-

[silig-mulu-sar]


Tl'l,  TABLET   III.  47


10.  With  the  open-horned  unto  the   Big-horned  it

hath  descended.

Before  its  overbearing  course
An  ox  seizeth  upon  its  fellow  which  coucheth.*
It  filleth  the  dwelling-place,
15.   It  hath  drawn  nigh  ....  and  like  a  storm  .  .  .

[Marduk]  this  as  a  report  [unto  his  father]  Ea
related,

20.   Unto  his  father  [he  brought]  this  word  :

"  By  thine  assuaging

*'  What  I  am  to  do  [I  know  not]."

Ea  made  answer  unto  his  son  Marduk  :
25.   "  O  my  son,  what  dost  thou  not  know?

"  What  [more  can  I  give  thee]  ?

"  O  Marduk,  what  dost  thou  not  know  ?

"  [What  can  I  add  unto  thy  knowledge?]

**  What  I  know,  thou  knowest  also.

"  Go,  my  son  Marduk,


^  91,011,  /a.
^  gi,oii,  da.  *  91,011,  /.

*  91,01 1,  //.

*  Doubtful  line  :  ukassi  apparently  has  the  sense  of  ''catching,"
tnd  is  used  of  oxen  elsewhere:  cf.  the  Story  of  Etana  (Zimmern,
dythen  und  Epen,  104,  1.  17),  ukiassika  n'[_ma  mttu].


48  DEVILS   AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

.     .     .     .     ZU  :  'mu-di-e     al-ka-ka-a-te     a-lik     mu-di-e
al-ka-ka-a-\te  :  GIN-NA     ....     ZU]

30.  [ni  LID-AZAG-GA  GA]-LID-TUR-MA  :  sam-ni  ar-hi  el-li-ti
sa   si-zib   la-a-tu   li-ki-e-\ina  :  SU-U-ME-Tl]

.     .     .     NAM-SUB    NUN-KI-GA    NA-RI-GA    U-ME-[NI-SUM]

.  .  .  -i  si-pat  "^"^ Eridi  sip-tum  ellitimitiin)  i-di-sum-\md\
.    .    .    SU]-*UR-RA-A-NI     BAR-RA-A-NI     SU-SED-DA    .    .
.     .     .     .     -  //  te  -'  -  su  pn  -  us  -  su  -  uh  -  \ind\

Reverse.
(Plate  XIII.)

....  iz-zu  sa  ildni^^  :  SUR-RA  DINGIR-RI-E-[ne]
.  .  .  hus'gal-la  sa  '^"Bel  e-ti-ru  :  IN-DA  .  .  .
.  .  .  sa  *^"Gu-la  u  ^'^Nin-ni  si(})-in  .  .  .
.  .  .  ik-ku-lii  ba-nu-u  is-tu  indti-su  ib-bab-la  :  KUR  .  .  .
5 RI  -  E       HAR  -  TA      BA

sabij)  -  hi{>)    i

ar    .     .     a      u  -  kas  -  su     .     .     .     .

.     .     .     .     mes  -  ri  -  ti  -  su      sa  -  as  -  sa  -  tu     .     .     .     .

NA  -  GE      IM  -  TE  -  NA

10 A  -  NI        HE

ba-'  -

.     .     .     ....      -  a  -  tu      .     .     .     li

[  F//-NA-MES        si-bit-t\i        su-nu        si-bit-ti        su-nu

F//-NA-[MES]
IDIM-ZU-AB-[ta     ^]-;^d^     na-kab     ap-si-i    si-bit-ti    su-nu

K//-na-[mes]


I


Tl'l,  TABLET  III.  49

"  O  thou  cunning  in  device,
"  Go,  O  thou  cunning  in  device,
30.   **  Take  the  fat  of  an  undefiled  cow,
"  And  the  milk  of  kine,

''  Perform  for  him     ....     the   Incantation
of  Eridu,  the  pure  Incantation,

"  Assuage  his  pain  (?)  and

Reverse.
(Plate  XIII.)

**  The  angry     ....     of  the  gods,

**  The     .     .     .     which  Bel  preserved

*'....     of  Gula  and  Ninni     ....

**  .     .     .     a   pure     .     .     .     hath    been   brought
from  his  mountain,

5-  "

''  .     .     .      his  limbs

10

Seven  are  they,  seven  are  they,

In  the  depth  of  Ocean  seven  are  they,

4


50  DEVILS   AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

15.    NUN-KI-GA        F7/-NA-MES      SU-LAL      DINGIR-EN-KI-GE
F//-NA-MES
ina    '"'"Eridz    si-bit-ti  su-mi   mu-kas-su-u   sa   *^"E-a
si-bit-ti    su-nu
E  -  NE  -  NE  -  NE  ZU  -  AB  -  TA  E  -  [a]  -  MES

su  -  nu     is  -  tu     ap  -  si  -  i     it  -  ta  -  su  ~  ni    su  -  nu
U-MU-UN-HUL^      UB  -  TA    .    .    .    LAH  -  LAH  -  GI  -  ES
20.  su-u-lu'^  lim-nu-tu'^  sa  tub-ki  it-ta-7iam-za-zii  su-nu

ZI      AN-NA       KAN-PA-NE-ES       ZI      KI-A      KAN-PA-NE-ES
nis     same{e)     lu  -  u  -  ta  -  mu  -  u     nis     irsitim(iim)
lu  -  u  '  ta  -  7nu  -  u


INIM  -  INIM  -  MA  SAG  -  GIG


EN  DINGlR  SAR(?)  SAG-KAL  ID-KAB-BU  BA(?)  .  .  DA  PA


*  91,011  inserts  AMES.  ^  gi, on,  su-nu.

^  91,01 1,  /um.


Til,  TABLET   III.  5  I


15.   In  Eridu  seven  are  they,

Seven  are  they,  catching  Ea  in  their  toils,
From  the  Ocean  they  have  come  forth,
20.  They    are    the    evil     cough  (?)  *    which     stands
close  by.
By  Heaven  may  they  be  exorcised !     By  Earth
may  they  be  exorcised !

Prayer  of  the  Sick  Head.^


*  Sulu  occurs  in  the  list  of  diseases,  W.A.l.,  ii,  17,  25.  Cf.  the
Syriac  s"ai  "  to  cough,"  s^'u/a  **  a  cough."  The  variant  gives  su?iu,
"  they."

^  No.  46,291,  according  to  its  colophon,  was  copied  in  the  tenth
year  of  Alexander,  and  No.  91,011  in  the  fourty-fourth  year  of  .  .  .


I


(Plate  XIV.)


.      .      US         GIS  -  LIKIR

.     .     [/li  -  ka  -  ru       lib  -  bi  -  slu]

....      NIM       ERIN

.     .     .     .     ik        HI  -  li

5.   [SU]-SAR  ///-A  -[an]      .      .      .      [U-ME-NI-NU-NU]

\^pi\-kur  -  tu     su  -  us  -  \lii  -  us'\    .     .     .     [ti-me-ma\

[ka]-sar         F//-a-du-[//-a-an  u-me-ni-kesda]

\^ki  -  si'\r       si  -  bit        a  -  di        [si-na       ku-sur-uui]

[nam  -  SU]B  NUN  -  KI  -  [GA  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  SUM]

10.  [//-    p^at  "^"[Eridi  i-      di  -      ma\

[sag]        MULU  -  TUR  -  RA  -  GE        [U  -  ME  -  NI  -  KESDA]
[kak-ka]  -  da  mar  -  si  \ii^  -  ku  -  us  -  ina^

[utug-h]ul      a-la-hul      bar-[ku      he-im-ta  gub]        ^
[ti-ti^kyku  lini'iiu  a-lu-u  liui-nu  ina  a-\]ia-ti  li-iz-ziz\        .♦


Til,  TABLET  VI.  53


15.   [UTUG]  -  *SIG-GA  ALAD  -  •  §IG-GA  HE  -  EN  -  DA  -

[LAH  -  LAH  -  GI  -  ES]

[se-e-^u]      dum-ki      la-nias-si      diim-ki      i-da-a-su
[/u-u-ka-a-a-an]

[INIM]  -  INIM  -  MA  SAG  -  GIG  -  [GA  -  ME§]

[en]      ...      a     nam     DI     EN     DA     RI     DA     .      .      .      .

Du/fp'     VI'''-'''''''    SAG  -  GIG  -  MES     Ekalii    "^""Assur-
\bani  -  apli^^     .     .     }

[Etc.]


^  Lines  5-15  have  been  restored  from  Tablet  IX  of  this  series
(11.  230  ff.,  PI.  24).  They  are  exactly  the  same,  and  the  reader  is
referred  to  Tablet  IX  (p.  64  ff.)  for  the  translation  and  explanation.


Obverse.

(Plate  XIV.)

EN     SAG-GIG     MUL-ANA-GIM     AN-EDIN-NA     NUN-KI-DA
NU-UB-ZU

mu-ru-us   kak-ka-di'^    ki-iiia   kak-kab   sa-ma-mi  ina
si'^ -ri     na-di-ma     ul    na-a-di

SUR-AS-SUB  IM-*SIG-*SIG-GA-GIM         MULU-DIM-MA

BA-AN-DU-DU

li--u^    sur-bu-u^    ki-ma   ir-pi-te  miik-kal-pi-te  ana^
bu'Un-na-  ^  ni  e     aineli  ^     it-tas-kan

5.   AZAG     TUR-RA    NU-DUG-GA    MULU     IGI-NU-UN-BAR-RA

a-sak-ku  mur-su  la  ta-a-bii  sa  la  7iap-lu-si
MULU      DINGIR      NU-TUK-RA      SILA  A-AN      DU-A-NI-TA

la        be-ili        ildni^^     su-u-kn       a-na       a-la-ki-sn

SAG  -  GIG  TU  -  GIM  BA  -  AN  -  DUL  -  DUL  -  LA

10.  uni-m-us    kak-ka-di    ki-ma    sii-ba-ti   ik\ta-tam-hi\

SUR-AS-SUB      SA-PAR-GIM

ti--u  su-rii-ub-b2L  [u  ki-ina  s:x-pa-ri\  ....
AZAG      TUR-RA

a-sak-ku     \j}iui--su'\

[Reverse  contains  the  remains  of  seven  lines  of  the  colophon.]


tMcf  "<D."

Obverse.
(Plate  XIV.)
Incantation  : —

Headache  lieth  like  the  stars  of  heaven  In  the

desert  and  hath  no  praise  *
Pain  in  the  head  and  shivering  Hke  a  scudding
cloud  turn  unto  the  form  of  a  man,
5.  Fever,  the  evil  disease  which  none  can  see  ;
He  that  hath  no  gods — when  he  walketh  in  the
street
10.   Headache  like  a  garment  will  envelop  him,

The  pain  and  shivering  like  a  net  will   [entrap

him]
Fever


^  42,350,  du.  2  42,350  inserts  e.

^  42,350  omits.  *  42,350,  su-ru-ub-bu-u.

*  42,350,  a-na.  ^  42j350  inserts  afi.
'  42,350*  a-me-[li].

*  Nadi-rna  ul  nddi,  probably  intended  as  a  play  on  words.     The
Sumerian  may  be  translated  "  is  not  known."


I


Obverse.
Col.  I  (Plate  XV).

NI  (?)  -  BAR  -  BAR  -  RA

mul  -  tap  -  ri  -  ir  -  ru

MU  -  UN  -  LAH  -  LAH  -  GI  -  ES

5.  .     .     .     \ina      lib  ?]  -bi       a-  lu       it  -ta-na-  al-  la  -  ku

GAB  -  IM  -  MA  -  AN  -  RI  -  ES

.     .     .     zu  (?)  -  inn  -  ur  ildni  ^^        iin  -  tah  -  ha  -  rii  -  u

[ID-Bl]-TA  BA-AN AN-BU-I-ES

a-na   i-di-su \is-du-du-u-ina\

10.   SU-NA   IM-MM[N-  ] RI

zu-niur-su     iui-ha-[s?i\ -ta

E  -  A  -  NI  -  KU  IM  -  MA US

a-na  bi  -  ti  -  su  ir  -  [ru  -  bn]  -  su

GIS  -  GI  -  EN  -  GIN  -  NA  -  BI      BA-AN  -  BIR  -  BIR  -  [RI]  -  ES

1 5.  bi  -      na  -      ti  -      su  ti  -      sap  -     pi  -     \}\h

DIMMU-BI      BA-AN-KUR      SU-NA      BA-AN-DA-HA     .      .      .

\te\  -  en  -  su  us  -  tan  -  nu-u  si  -  r/  -  su  us  -  tain  -su-  u

[mulu]-GISGAL-LU-BI  :  a-tne-lu  su-u  mar-si-is  i-na-kas  :

A-GIG-GA     I     .     .     .     .

DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR  IGI  :  GAR-GA-E  :  GIN-NA  DU-MU
20.  GIN-AZAG-GA   :  ka-nu-u    el-lu    li-ki-e-iua   :   SU-U-ME-TI

MULU-GISGAL-LU-BI  :  a-nie-iu  U\]-a-ti}n  su/n-di-id-nia  :

U-ME-NI-DU-DU
GI-SAG-DU-SA-A      :      ,,-u      bi-ni-via      :      U-ME-NI-DIM


Obverse.


Col.  I  (Plate  XV).


that  dasheth  in  pieces,

5.  They  roam  through  the  city

.     .     .       unto    the    body(?)   of   the    gods    they
approach,

Unto  his  side  [they  have  drawn]     .     .     .     and
10.  They  have  smitten  his  body

They  have  entered  his  house,
1 5.  They  have  wasted  his  limbs,

They  have  driven  him  mad,

They  have  made  him  forget  his  flesh  ;

This  man  hath  been  grievously  cut  down.

Marduk  hath  seen  him  (etc.),

''  What  I  "  (etc.),

''  Go,  my  son  (Marduk),
20.   *'  Take  a  clean  reed  and

**  Measure  that  man  and

"  Make  a  reed  hat(.^) "  and


*  GISAG-DU-SA-A  (or  in  1.  29  Gi-SAG-DA-SA-u),  of  which  we  do
not  know  the  Assyrian  equivalent.  The  meaning  "hat"  is
suggested  by  the  following  three  points  :  (i)  the  measuring  of  the
man  in  1.  21,  (2)  the  use  of  the  character  sag,  "head,"  in  the
ideogram,  (3)  the  incantation  being  for  a  headache.


58  DEVILS   AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

NAM-SUB       NUN-KI-GA    :   si-pat       ''^'' Eridi      i-di-ma    :
U-ME-NI-SUM

MULU-GISGAL-LU    DU    DINGIR-RA-NA    :    a-me-lu    ma-ri

ili-su     ku-tip-pir-ma  :  U-ME-TE-GUR-GUR

25.    MUH-BI  U-ME-NI-HAS  GAR-GA-SAG-IL-LA-BI-HE-A

e  -  li  -  su       si  -  bir  -  ma       lu  -  u      di  -  na  -  nu  -  su

UTUG-HUL  A-LA-HUL  BAR-KU  HE-IM-TA-GUB

UTUG-  *  SIG-GA    ALAD-  *  SIG-GA     HE-EN-LAH-LAH-GI-ES

INIM-INIM-MA    GI-SAG-DA-SA-U    GAR-GA-SAG-GIL-LA-GE

30.   EN  UTUG-HUL -IK  SAG  -  GIL  (?)         GUB  -  BA  -  BA

A-LA-HUL-IK   SAG-GIL  (?)  GUB-BA-BA  :    GIDIM-HUL-IK   „
MULLA-HUL  IK       KI       „       :      DINGIR-HUL-IK      KI      „

MASKIM-HUL-IK    KI   „     :    UTUG-DINGIR-LUGAL-KAN-ME

IjUL-IK     KI      „
MULU-GISGAL-LU  PAP-HAL-LA  SAG-GIG-GA-A-AN  :

MULU-GISGAL-LU-BI       AZAG-GIG-GA-A-AN  :
35.    GIS   -   NAD   -   DA   -   A   -    NI  BAR  (?)   -   GA   -   A   -   AN

GIS-NA      NAM-MULU-GISGAL-LU-GE     §U     NAM-TAR    KA-

A-NI      SIB-BA      NE-IN-SIG-GA :
[DINGIR-SILIG-MULU]-SAR  IGI  :GAR-GA-E  :GIN-NA  DU-MU

AZAG-GA     NI-GIS-GIM     ni-dug-ga-ge

dingir-se-*nag-ge

40 [k]a-ka-si-ge

na-en  id-da-ge

, RAGE

GE


59


"  Perform  the  Incantation  of  Eridu  and

'*  Make  an  'atonement'  for  the  man  the  son  of

his  god  and
25.   "  Upon     him     break    (it)    and    let    it    be    his

substitute."
**  That    the   evil    Spirit,    the   evil    Demon    may

stand  aside,
''  And   a    kindly    Spirit,    a  kindly  Guardian  be

present."

Prayer  of  the  Reed  Hat(.'*)  as  Substitute.


30.   Incantation  : —

The  evil  Spirit  hath  set  a  net,

The  evil  Demon  hath  set  a  net,

The  evil  Ghost  hath  set  a  net.

The  evil  Devil  hath  set  a  net,

The  evil  God  hath  set  a  net,

The  evil  Fiend  hath  set  a  net.

The  evil  Hag-demon  hath  set  a  net,

So  that  the  wanderer  hath  fallen  sick  of  headache.

So  that  this  man  hath  fallen  sick  of  fever,
35.   His  couch (?)

On  the  couch  of  the  man  the  Hand  of  Pestilence
hath  smitten  his  mouth.

Marduk  hath  seen  (etc.),

''  What  I  "  (etc.),

*'  Go,  my  son  (Marduk),

''  [Take]     ....     a  pure    .    .    of  oil,  a    .    .
of  goodly  oil,

** of  Nisaba

40.   '^ ,.

" of  the  river


[Of  Cols.  II  and  V  only  the  left  halves  remain  ;  Cols.  Ill  and  IV  are  entirely  lost]


60  DEVILS   AND    EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

Col.  II  (Plate  XVI).

(l)   .   .   .   .   BA-U  (?) (2) SAG-GA

(3)  ZI  DINGIR-GIR-AN-NA-GE  [KAN-PA],  (4)  ZI  DINGIR-
A-NUN-NA  DINGIR-GAL-GAL-E-NE  [KAN-PA],  (5)  MULU-
GISGAL-LU-BI  HE-EN-EL-LA  [hE-EN-AZAG-GA  HE-EN-
LAH-LAH-Ga],   (6)   SU-*  SIG-GA    DINGIR-RA-NA-KU     IjE-

e[n-smn-ge-ge]

(7)   INIM   -   INIM    -    ma


(8)   EN    UTUG-HUL-IK    MULU-RA    IN (9)  A-LA

HUL-IK   SU-IN-DIB (lO)   MULLA-HUL-IK

MULU-RA   KA (ll)  .   .   .   .   GIM    IM-TA-SUM-

MA: (12)   .   .    .    BIL    SAG-GIG-GA  ....   (13)  .   .   .

HUL-DE-NA (14)    MULU    .   .    NA   SUB-BA-A   .   .   .   .

(15)   MULU    GAR(?)   KU[e] (16)   MULU   A   NAK-E

(17)    MULU    GIS-SA-KA-NA-GE   .   .    .    .   (18)    MULU

GIN     SIL-A-TA (19)   MULU   DINGIR-GUD   IR-TA

.    .   .   .   (20)   MULU-ID-GUD   ZI-GA-TA (21)     MULU

KI-TUS-BI-TA (22)  MULU   KI-NA-BI-TA

(23)    GUD-TUR-RA (24)   LU   AMAS

(25)   SUK-RA   HA   HU-NA  .   .   .   {26)    *  BIR-ANSU    GAR    UR

*TATTAB-BA    EDIN-NA (27)   UTUG   EDIN-NA

UTUG  HAR-SAG   .   .   .  (28)  UTUG  A-RI-A  UTUG  ID-DA  .   .   .

(29)   UTUG  GIS-SAR   UTUG   SILA-A (30)  MASKIM

EDIN-NA  UTUG-HUL-IK-E  .  .  .  (31)  MULU-MULU  GAN  (?)
KA-GA   .   .   .   (32)   MULU     NAM-NE-SUB-BA    KUD-DA    .    .    .

(33)  MULU-GISGAL-LU    DU    DINGIR-RA-NA    SAG-GA  .  .    .

(34)  UTUG-HUL  IK-E  SU-JS'I  ....  (35)  ALAD  *  §IG-GA
AN-NA  ....  (36)  ALAD  ALAD  E-A-ZU  ....  (37)  TU-
*SIG-GA  NAM-TIL-LA  .  .  .  (38)  ID-ZI-DA  ID-KAB-BU  .  .  .
(39)   .   .   .    SI    LA   .   .   .    (40)   [k]U-SUR-RA.

[Cols.  Ill  and  IV  are  entirely  broken  away.]


TI'I,  TABLET  VIIL  6l


Revf.ksk.
Col.  V  (Plate  XVII).

(0 (2)    KU    .   .    .   (3)   DINGIR   ...   (4)

(5)  .   .   .   •    NK  .   .   .   .   (6)  .   .   .   .    U    NA  .   .   .   .   (7)  GLS-HAR
GIS-MA-NU    ...   (8)   1JI(?)  GAR  ...  A   ...   (9)   NAM-SUB

NUN-Kl-GA (10)   MULU  GI^GAL-LU    I)U   DINGIR-

RA-[NA] (11)   MUH-NA    NIGIN(?)-NA

(12)  UTUG-HUL  A-LA-HUL  BAR-KU  [HE-IM-TA-GUB]  (13)
UTUG-*SIG-GA  ALAD-*SIG-GA  [HE-EN-LAH-LAH-GI-E§]

(14)   INIM  -  INIM  -  MA      DUG

(15)  EN  ..GIS-§AR-TA  GA  TA...(i6).  .  DINGIR-EN-KI-GE
GIL(?)  GIS-SAR-TA  .  .  .  (17)  GIS-SAR  MA-DA  (?)  BI  .  .  .
UN  .  .  .  (18)  GA  IL-LA-A-AN  .  .  .  (19)  SI-TA  ...  LA  A
.  .  .  (20)  DU-NI  DINGIR-SILIG-[MULU-SAR]  .  .  .  MU-UN
.  .  .  (2i)GIN-NADU-MU  DINGIR-SILIG-[MULU-SAR]  .  .  .
(22)  GI§  .  .  .  SAR  .  .  .  NE  .  .  .  (23)  KA-LUM-MA-NI
GIS-GISIMMAR  .  .  .  (24)  MULU-GISGAL-LU  DU  DINGIR-
RA-NA  nam  ....  (25)  F//-A-DU  //-NA  SU-SAR  .  .
(26)  KA-SAR  [U-ME-NI-KESDA]  (27)  NAM-NE-SUB  TAR-
RU-DA-BI  .  .  .  (28)  NAM-NE-§UB  MU  (?)  DINGIR-RA  .  .  .
(29)  NAM-NE-SUB  KA-LUM-MA  ....  (30)  SU-SAR-GIM
HE-EN-BUR  ....  (31)  EME-HUL-LU-IK  BAR-KU  [ijE-
IM-TA-GUB]

(32)   INIM  -  INIM  -  MA  GIS

EN      NA      NE      KUR  -  TA       A  -  RI

KA(?)


L


62  DEVILS   AND   EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

?

Col.  VI  (P;.ATE  XVIII).

Zl     DA

da  -'  -  i  '  ku

GU  -  MU  -  UN  -  NA  -  AN  -  DE  -  E

5 beli     al  -  si

.      .      .       GA        .      .      .      GU  -  MU  -  UN  -  NA  -  AN  -  DE  -  E

-  lu7n       ^^"Ea       sa al  -  si

[gis]-ma-nu      gls-ku-mah      an-na-ge     §u-u-me-ti

e-ra(})      kak-ku      sii-ri      sa      '^"  A-7iijn      li-ki-nia

lO.    UR  -        PA  -        BI  BIL  U  -        NE  -       TAG.

ap  -  pi     u     is-  di     i  -  sa-  a-  turn     hi  -  up  -  \_pit\  -  ma

NAM  -  SUB  NUN  -  KI  -  GA  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  SUM

si  -      pat  ''^"  Eridi  i  -       di  -       ma

SAG    MULU  -  TUR  -  RA  -  GE    U  -  ME  -  NI  -  GAR

15.  ina  ri  -  es  mar  -  sa  su    -   kun   -    ma

UTUG-HUL      A-LA-HUL      BAR  -  KU     HE-IM-TA-GUB
UTUG-*SIG-GA     ALAD-*SIG-GA     HE-EN-LAH-LAH-GI-ES

ENSAG-GIGAN-EDIN-NA  NI-DU-DU  IMI-GIM  MU-UN-RI-RI

IM  -  DUB        XXIV       SAR  NAM  NAR  KU  -  KAR

UTUG  -  PIUL  -  MES       NU  -  AL  -  BAD


TI'I,  TABLET  VIII.  63


Col.  VI  (Plate  XVIII).

slaying.

I  call,

.     .     .     .      of  Ea      ....     I  call,

**  Take  the  tamarisk,  the  potent  weapon  of  Anu,
10.   **  Set  it  alight  in  front  and  behind,

'*  Perform  the  Incantation  of  Eridu  and
15.   **  Put  it  on  the  head  of  the  sick  man,

"  That  the  evil  Spirit,  the  evil  Devil  may  stand
aside,

**  And   a  kindly  Spirit,   a   kindly    Guardian   be
present."

Incantation:  ''Headache  roameth  in  the  desert,
blowing  like  the  wind."

Twenty-fourth  Tablet  written    ...(?)  Series
"  Evil  Spirits  "  incomplete.^


a  The  colophon  states  that  the  tablet  was  written  in  the  129th
year  (of  the  Seleucid  era),  i.e.  183  b.c.


||A


e^c  (Uinf^  tABkt

Obverse.

Col.  I  (Plate  XIX).

EN        SAG-GIG       AN-NA-EDIN-NA       NI-DU-DU       IMI-GIM
MU-UN-RI-RI

inu-ru-us     kak-ka-di    ina    si-e-ri    it-tak-kip    ki-ma
sa-a-ri    i-zak  ^  -ka

NIM-GIR-GIM    MU-UN-GIR-GIR-RI    SIG-NIM   NE-IN-SU-SU

ki-ma       bir-ki       it-ia-nab-rik       e-lis       u       sap-lis
it-ta-na-at-bak

5.   IM-NU-TEMEN-NA       DINGIR-RA-NA       GI-GIM       IN-SA-SA
la    pa-li-ih     ili-su     ki-ma      ka-ni-e      ih-ta-as-si-is'^
SA  -  BI  GI  -  HA  -  AN  -  GIM  AN  -  SIL  -  SIL  -  LA

bu  -  a  -  ni  "  su      ki  -  ma       ^"'"^  hi  -  ni       u  -  sal  -  lit
AMA-DINGIR-NINNI  LI-TAR  NU-TUK-A  UZU-BI

IN-SIG-SIG-GA
10.  sa  *^'*ls-tar  pa-ki-da  la  i-su-u  siri^^  -su  ii-sah-ha-ah

MUL-ANA-GIM    SUR-SUR-RA    A-GIM     GIG-A    AL-GIN-GIN
ki-ma    kak-kab    sa-ma-me    i-sarru-ur    ki-ma    me^^
mu-si     il-lak
MULU-GISGAL-LU   PAP-HAL-LA  GAB-RI-A-NI   BA-AN-GAR
U-GIM      MU-UN-DA-RU-US

ana     a-me-li     miit-tal-li-ki     me-ih-ri     is-sa-kin-ma
ki-ma     Hmeiine)     ih-me-su

15.    MULU   -   GISGAL  -   LU    -   BI  BA   -   AN   -   GAZ   -    E§

a   -    me   -    li  su    -   a    -    tu  i   -    duk    -   ma


i


I


Obverse.

Col.  I  (Plate  XIX).
Incantation  : —

Headache  roameth  over  the  desert,  blowlnof  like
the  wind,

Flashing  like  lightning,   it  is  loosed  above  and
below  ;

5.   It  cutteth  off  him  who  feareth  not  his  god  like
a  reed,

Like  a  stalk  of  henna*  it  slitteth  his  thews.

10.   It  wasteth  the  flesh  of  him  who  hath  no  pro-
tecting goddess,

Flashing   like  a  heavenly   star,    it   cometh   like
the  dew  ;

It  standeth  hostile  against  the  wayfarer,  scorching
him  like  the  day,

1 5.  This  man  it  hath  struck  and


^  K.  5,287,  za.
'  K.  5,287,  St.
»  B'l'm/,  also  written  Ai'nnu  (Tablet  **  P,"  1.  31),  is  probably  to  be
referred  to  the  Arabic  word  ^liilr^,  "henna."  It  occurs  also  in
both  forms  without  the  determinative  Gi  in  the  late  Babylonian
contracts,  which  would  point  to  the  produce  of  the  henna- plant
being  used  in  Babylonia  as  a  marketable  commodity.  (Strassmaier,
Nabotiidus^  234,  12,  etc.)

5


66  DEVILS  AND    EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

MULU-GISGAL-LU-BI  SA-DIB-BA-GIM  SU-TA-TA-

GUR-GUR-RA
a-me-lu   su-u   ki-ina   sa   ki-is   lib-bi  it-ta-nak-ra-ru
SA    -    ZI    -    GA    -    GIM  IN     -     BAL     -     BAL     -     E

20.  ki-ma  ^     sa     lib-ba-su      na-as-hu      it-ta-nab-lak-kat

BIL  SUB  -  BU  -  DA  -  GIM  IN  -  TAB  -  TAB  -  E

ki-ma      sa       ina       i-sa-ti       na-du-u       ih- tain-mat
ANSU-EDIN-NA   KAS-KAS-DA-GIM   IGI-NA   IM-DIR    AN-SI
ki-ma    pu-ri-me'^     sa     ha-am-ra     ini"^^-su     u-pi-e
ma-la-a
25.   ZI-NI-TA      UR^-IN -DA-AN -KU -KU     KI  -  NAM  -  BAD
BA  -  AN  -  KESDA
it-ti     na-pisti-su     i-tak-kal     it-ti     mu-u-ti     ra-kis
SAG-GIG  IM-DUGUD-DUGUD-DA-GIM  A-GUB-BI

MULU-NA-ME      NU-UN-ZU
ti--u  ^     sa      ki-ma      im-ba-ri      kab-tu      a-lak-ta-su
man-ma     ul    i-di
SI  +  UM^-TIL-LA-BI  KA-SAR-BI  MULU-NA-ME  NU-UN-ZU
30.  it-ta-su    ga-mir-tu    viar-ka-as-su    man-ma    ul    i-di

DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR  IGI  :  GAR-GA-E  :  GIN-NA  DU-MU
U-HUL-TI-GIL-LA       DINGIR-EDIN-NA        AS-NA        SAR-A
„  -  ^     sa     ina      si  -  e  -  ri     e  -  dis  -  si-  su      a-  su-  u

DINGIR-BABBAR        E-A-NA^       TUR-RA-NA-KU        SAG-ZU

U-ME-NI-DUL

35.  ki-ma     ^'"^  Sa-mas     a-na     bi-ti-su     e-ri-bi     su-ba-ta

kak-kad-ka     kut-tim-ina

U-HUL-TI-GIL-LA       U-ME-NI-DUL       ZID       U-ME-NI-HAR

„  -  rt:  kut  '  tim  -  ma  ki  -  ma  e  -  sir  -  ma

ID-TIG-ZI-GA-TA  DINGIR-BABBAR  NAM-TA-E

ina        se  -  e  -  ri       la  -  am        ''" Samsi        a-si-e


Tl'l,  TABLET  JX.  67


I


Like  one  with  heart  disease  he  staggereth,

20.   Like  one  bereft  of  reason  he  is  broken,

Like  that  which  hath  been  cast  into  the  fire  he  is

shrivelled,
Like  a  wild  ass  ....    his  eyes  are  full  of  cloud,
25.  On  himself  he  feedeth,  bound  in  death  ;

Headache  whose  course  like  the  dread  windstorm
none  knoweth,
30.  None  knoweth  its  full  time  or  its  bond.
Marduk  hath  seen  him  :  (etc.),
"  What  I";  (etc.),
•'  Go,  my  son  (Marduk),

"  The  wild  cucumber  (.'^)  which  springeth  up  by
itself  in  the  desert,
35.   **  When  the  Sun  entereth  his  dwelling
''  Cover  thy  head  with  a  cloth  and
"  Cover  the  cucumber  (?)  and  surround  it  with

meal  and
''  In  the  morning  before  the  Sun  riseth.


K.  4,865,  /.  2  K.  4,865,  mi.

K.  4,865  omits.  *  K.  4,865  inserts  bi.

K.  4,865,  AN.


6S  DEVILS  AND   EVIL  SPIRITS  OF   BABYLONIA.

40.  KI-GUB-BA^ -A-NI-TA  :  ina  man-za-zi-[su  u\-suh-su-tna  :

U-ME-NI-SIR

?  -  BI    :   su^  -ru-  us-  [su   li  -  ki  -e\-  ma   :   SU  -  U  -  ME  -  TI

SIG  -  RIK  -  KAR  US  -  NU  -  ZU  SU  -  U  -  ME  -  TI

sa  -  rat      u  -  ni  -  ki    la     [pi]  -  ti  -  ti     li  -  ki  -  e-  ma

(Plate  XX.)

SAG  MULU  -  TUR  -  RA  -  GE  ^  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  KESDA

45.  kak  -  ka  -  di  mar  -  si^  ru  -  kii  -  us  -  ma

TIG    MULU-TUR-RA-GE    :  ki-sad    mar-[si]    ru-kus-ma  :

U-ME-NI-KESDA
SAG-GIG        SU         MULU-GISGAL-LU-GE      .      .      .      A-GIM  ^
HE-IM-MA-RA-AN-ZI-ZI
mii-ru-us      kak-ka-di     sa      ina     zumur     \a\-me-li^
ba-su-u     li-in-na-si-ih
IN-NU-RI  IM-RI-A-GIM  KI-BI-KU         NA-AN-GA-GA

50.  ki-ma  il-ti  sa  sa-a-rti  ub-lu-si  ana  as-ri-su  a-a  i-tiir

7A  AN  -  NA  KAN  -  PA  ZI  KI  -  A      KAN  -  PA


EN        SAG-GIG       HAR-SAG-GIM       BUL-DA       NU-UB-ZU-A
mu-\ru\us     kak-ka-di     sa     ki-ma      sade{e)  ^     ana
nu'-us-su^     la     na-tu-u
[sag-gig]        im-dir        *  dirig-ga-gim        mulu-ra
mu-un-na-te
55.          [mu-ru-us]   kak-ka-di  ki-ma   ir-pi-ti   muk-kal-pi-ti^
ana     ameli     it-hi
[SUR-AS-SUB  ?]         IMI-GIM         E-NE-RA       MU      .      .      .      .
\ttu  ?  su\-ru'ub-bu-u  ki-ma  sa-a-ri  ana  su-a-ti  .  .  .
....     id-su-gir-bi    sa    ad    nim    in(?)    .    .    .
.     .     .     .     .     .    mes-ri-ti-su     sa-as-sa-tu

[Hiatus  of  about  three  lines.]  '


TI'I,  TABLET   IX.  69


40.   **  Tear  it  up  from  its  place
''  And  take  its  root ;
"  Take  the  hair  of  a  virgin  kid
(Plate  XX.)
45.  "  And  bind  it  on  the  head  of  the  sick  man,
"  And  bind  it  on  the  neck  of  the  sick  man,
"  That  the  Headache  which  is  in  the  body  of  this
man  may  be  carried  away
50.   '*  And  may  not  return  to  its  place,

"  Like  the  straw  which  the  wind  whirleth  away !  "
By  Heaven  be  thou  exorcised !      By  Earth    be
thou  exorcised !

Incantation  : —

Headache,    which   Hke   a    mountain    cannot    be
moved,
55.   Headache  like  a  scudding  cloud  hath  attacked
the  man,
[Pain  in  the  head],  shivering,  like  a  wind  [hath
rushed  on]  this  man
60 his  limbs  sores  (?)

[Hiatus  of  about  three  lines.]


'  K.  5,141  omits.  *  K.  5,141,  j«.

^   K.  5,141,  GIG-GA-NA-GE  fOF  MULU-TUR-RA-GE.

*  K.  s,i^i,  kak-kad    ....     {or  ka^-ka-di  mar-sj.

'K.  5,141       .      .      .      NI-IK  for  A-GIM.

*  K.  5,141,  ameli.  '  K.  5,141,  i  {ox  e,
^  K.  5,141,  jV.  »  K.  3,169,  U.


70  DEVILS   AND   EVIL   SPIRITS   OF  BABYLONIA.

ul      i  -  sat  (?)  -  ti

.      .      .      DUG  -  GA DA  -  KU  -  KU

65.  {sufiYta      ta-ab-\ta uP^      i-sal-lal

[ID-SU]-GIR-BI :       ines-ri-ti-\su      ul      u-tir    :     MU]-UN-

DA-AN-GE-GE
[ID-SU]-GIR-BI    NU-MU-UN-DA-AN-[IL-LA  :    mes-ri-tt\-su
ul    i-na-as-H

[GI§]-GI-EN-GI-BI Rl(?)

bi-na-ti-su     a-hi -an

70.   [U]-GUG-GIM      BA-AN-NA      ...        KU        HE      ...      .
\ki\-fna     ur-bati    ni-il     .     .     .     ,     su     ik     .     .     .
Col.  II.

'U-A      A- A  :      iyia      „      „     iime{me)-sam      us-ta-bar-ri  \

U-ME-NI-IB  ^  -ZAL-ZAL-E
DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR    :   GAR-GA-E   :    GIN-NA   DU-MU
SIG-RIK-KAR  US-NU-ZU  :  sa-rat  u-tii-kilapi-ti-tili-ki-ma  :
Su-U-ME-TI
75.   SAL  MUD-DA-GA-A  ID-ZI-DA-KU  U-ME-NI-SAR

ID-KAB-BU-KU      U-ME-NI-TAB
sin-nis-tu  pa-ris-tu  im-na  lit-me-ma  su-me-Ia  li-sip
KA-SAR         VII       A-DU-//-A-AN         U-ME-NI-SAR
ki  -  sir       si  -  bit       a  -  di      si  -  na       ku  -  sur  -  ma
NAM-SUB      ERI-DUG-GA^:      si-pat     "^"  Eridi      i-di-ma:
U-ME-NI-SUM
80.  SAG    MULU-TUR-RA-GE :    kak-kad    mar-si    ru-kus-ma :
U-ME-NI-KESDA
(Plate  XXI.)

TIG      MULU-TUR-RA-GE :     ki-sad    mar-si    ru-kus-ma :

U-ME-NI-KESDA
ZI- PA  -  RAM  -  NA  -  GE    :    na-pis-ta-su     ru-kus-ma:

U  -  ME  -  NI  -  KESDA
ID  -  SU  -  GIR  -  BI       :         mes-  ri  -  ti  -  su       ruk  -  kis  -  ma  :
U  -  ME  -  NI  -  KESDA  -  KESDA


TI'I,  TABLET   IX.  /I


he  cannot  drink,

65.   With  pleasant  dreams  (?)  he  sleepeth  not,

His  limbs  he  cannot  move,

His  limbs  he  cannot  raise,

His  limbs  [appear?]  strange  (?)
70.   Like  a  reed  *  he  bendeth     ....
Col.  II.

Each  day  with  cries  of  woe  he  is  sated.

Marduk  hath  seen  him  :  (etc.),

''  What  I  "  ;  (etc.),

'*  Go,  my  son  (Marduk),

"  Take  the  hair  of  a  virgin  kid,
75.   ''  Let  a  wise  woman  spin  (it)  on  the  right  side

*'  And  double  it  on  the  left,**

**  Bind  knots  twice  seven  times,

"  And  perform  the  Incantation  of  Eridu,
80.   "  And  bind  the  head  of  the  sick  man,
(Plate  XXI.)

''  And  bind  the  neck  of  the  sick  man,

**  And  bind  the  soul ""  of  the  sick  man,

*'  And  bind  up  his  limbs.


^    K.  5,141,  UU-MI-NI-IB      .       .      .      for  U-ME-NI-IB-ZAL-ZAL-E.

*  K.  5,141,  NUN-KI-GA  for  ERI-DUG-GA.

*  Urhalu,  cf.  Syr.  arhhdnd,  Brockelmann,  Lexicon,  p.  25^.

^  Among  certain  savage  tribes  it  is  often  the  custom  to  spin
a  thread  by  rolling  the  strands  sharply  along  the  right  thigh  with
the  hand,  and  it  seems  that  some  such  process  is  suggested  here.
(See  Tylor,  Anthropology,  p.  246.)

^  Fossey,  La  Magie  Assynenne  (Paris,  1902),  p.  466,  suggests
"■  peut-eire  .  .  .  un  euphemisme  pour  designer  le  membre  viril."
On  the  other  hand,  "  to  bind  the  soul "  would  be  quite  intelligible  in
modern  savage  witchcraft.    (See  Fraser,  Golden  Bought  vol.  i,  p.  247.),


72  DEVILS   AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

CIS  -  *  NAD  -  DA  -  NA  -  GE  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  NIGIN  -  E

85.  ir  -  sa   -  sii  li  -  me   -         ma

A  NAM  -  SUB  MUH  -  NA  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  SUM

me  ^^         sip  -     ti        e  -     li  -     sii         i  -     di  -     ma

SAG-GIG     I-NE-IM-GUB-BA-GIM    AN-NA    HA-BA-GIBIS-NE

mu-ru-u^    kak-ka-di   ki-ma  kut-ri  ma-zal-ti  ni-ih-ti

ana  same{e)  li-til-la

90.   A -TAK-BAL- E-NE  KI  -  KU  HA-BA-GIBIS-NE

ki-nia  \ine\e  ri-[ki-ti]  tab-ku-ti  anairsttim{tiin)  li-rid

I  DINGIR  -  EN  -  KI  -  GE  PA  -  HE  ^  -  E  -  A  -  GE

a  -         mat  '^"  E  -         a  lis  -       te  -      pi

DINGIR  -  DAM  -  GAL  -  NUN  -  NA     SI  -  HE  -  EN  -  SI  -  DI  -  E

95.  *^"  Dam  -         ki  -         na  lis-         te  -         sir

DINGIR-SILIG-?  NUN-NA     DU-SAG      ZU-AB-GE      *SAG-GA

TAG-TAG-LI-BI      ZA-A-KAN  ^

*'"  Mardtik    mar    ris-tu-u    sa    ap-si-i   bu-un-\iiii\   u

du-mn-mu'kii     ku-um-ma^

EN        SAG  -  GIG       MULU  -  RA       .      .      MU  -  UN  -  GA  -  GA

mu-ru-us    kak-ka-di    a-na     a-\ine\li    ts-sa-kin-ma

100.   SAG-GIG     GU-SA-A     GIG      MULU      .      .      .      MU-UN-GA-GA

ii--u    mu-ru-us   da-ad-da-\ni  a\me-lu    is-sa-kin-ma

SAG  -  GIG  A  -  MI  -  A  -  GIM  IN  -  DU  -  DU  -  NE

mu-ru-us     kak-ka-di      ki-ma      {oYgi-e      it-tak-kip

SAG-GIG      DINGIR-BABBAR-E-TA      .      .      KU  (?)       DINGIR-

BABBAR-SU-A-KU

105.  mu-ru-us    kak-ka-di   is-tu    si-\it    ''"]  Samsi{si)    ana

e-rib    '^"  Samsi{si)

SAG  -  GIG        HAR  -  GUB        GU  -  MU  -  UN  -  NA  -  AN  -  DE  -  E

mu-ru-us         kak-ha-di         i-ra-mu-um         i-sa-as-si


Tl'l,   TABLET   IX.  7$


85.   '*  And  surround  his  couch,

"  And  cast  the  water  of  the  Incantation  over  him,

**  That  the  Headache  may  ascend  to  heaven  like
the  smoke  from  a  peaceful  homestead,

90.   "  That   like    water-lees   poured    out  it   may   go
down  into  the  earth.

•*  May  the  Word  of  Ea  make  clear,

95.   *'  May  Damkina  direct  aright.

"  O  Marduk,  eldest  son  of  the  Deep  !     Thine  is
the  power  to  brighten  and  bless  ! "

Incantation  : —

Headache  hath  settled  upon  the  man  and

100.   Sickness  of  the  head,  the  disease  of  woe  (?)  hath
settled  upon  the  man.

Headache  like  a  flood  roameth  loose,

105.   Headache  from  Sunrise  to  Sunset,

Headache  shrieketh  and  crieth.


*  K.  5,213  apparently  omits.

*  K.  5,213,  GE.

^  K.  5,213,  -mu  TU-EN  after  um.


74  DEVILS  AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

A-AB-BA     :      ina      tamtim{tiin)       ir-si-ti       rapasti{ti)  :

KI-GAR-DAGAL-LA-A-KU

A  -  MI  -  A  DU  -  DU  -  LA  A  -  MI  -  A  IN  -  GUB

no.  a-gi-  i         si  -  th  -  hi  -  ru-  ti  a-gi-e         il  -  lak

A-MI-A  GAL-GAL- LA  :  a-gu-ii  rab-bu-ti  a-gu-su  :  A-MI-A-BI

AN   BUR-NUN-SI-A  :    rap-sa   uz-ni  7ndr  "^"  Eridi   :    DU

NUN-KI-GA-GE

SAG  -  GIG  GUD  -  GIM  IN  -  DU  -  DU  -  E  -  NE

mu-ru-us        kak-kad        kinia        al-pi         it-tak-kip

115.    SAG  -  GIG  LIKIR  -  GA  -  GIM  IN  -  DU  -  DU  -  NE

mu-ru-us     kak-ka-di    ki-nia     ki-is     lib-bi     it-ia-kip

A-A-NI-IR  BA-AN-TE  LI-TAR  BA-NI-IB-GE-GE

a-na     a-bi  -  su     it  -  hi  -  e  -  ma    \ip  -  ]ta  -  na  -  al-  su

(Plate  XXIL)

A-A-MU      SAG -GIG       MULU  -  RA       SA-MU -UN -GA- GA

120.  a-bi  m[u-ru-u]s  kak-ka-di  ana  a-ine-li  is-sa-kin-jna

INGAR-[GIM     .     .     .      J-AN-BU-ES      MUH-NA      BA-AN-SUB

kt-ma  [igari  sa  li\bit-ta-su  sal-pat  e-li-su  it-ta-\di\

GIS SUB       TUR-RA-BI        MU-UN-SIG

.     .     . mu-ru-us-su        lu-uk-kis

125 MU-UN-NA-NI-IB-GE-GE

*'"  E    -a  si   -    tul  '    ta  ip    -  pal  -   su

[gin]-na  du-mu  gar-me-gar  sag-gig  hu-lah-ha-bi

a-lik  ma-a-ri  ku-u-lu  mu-ru-us  kak-ka-\di'\  sug-lit-ma

.     .     .     SE-SIS    :   ar-su-up-pu       se-gu-su        in-nin-7iu    :

SE-IN-NU-HA

130.   [AB]    -   SIN     -    BI  U  DI    -    DUG    -    GA    -    BI

sa     i  -  na     si  -  ir  -'  -  i  -  sa     {im{um)  -  sa     has-  da  -  at

UM  -  MA        §U  -  EL  -  TA        U  -  ME  -  NI  -  IB  -  HAR  -  HAR

pur-sum-tu      ina      katd'^^^-sa      elldti^'     li-te-en-ma


Tl'l,  TABLET   IX.  75


Through  the  Sea — the  Broad  Earth —
1 10.  The  Little  Floods — (its)  flood  goeth,

Its  flood  is  (as)  the  Mighty  Floods.

O  thou  Wise  Son  of  Eridu  !

Headache  steer-like  roameth  loose,
115.   Headache  like  heart  disease  roameth  loose  !

Unto  his  father  he  drew  nigh  and  answered  him  :

(Plate  XXII.)

120.   **  O  father,  Headache  hath  settled  upon  the  man,

*'  It  hath  fallen  upon  him  like  a  house  wall

"  Whereof  the  bricks  have  broken  out ;

"...     that  I  may  cut  off  his  disease."

125.   Ea  his  decision  gave  in  answer  to  him  :

'*  Go,     O    my    son !       Frighten    the    snare    of

Headache.
"  The  parsnip  (?),^  segusu-covxi,  inninnu'covn^^
130.   "  Which  in  its  growth  hath  reached  its  day,
**  Let  an  old  woman  bray  it  with  clean  hands  ;


*  Arsuppu,   possibly   the    Syriac    hursphd  {v.  hurpKsa)^  Raucus
frz/(9/a  (Brockelmann,  1243).

^  On  inninnu  see  Zimmern,  Bab.  RJ.,  41-42,  I,  26.


^6  DEVILS   AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

UR-BI       U-ME-NI-SAR-SAR       GAR-LAG-GA       U-ME-NI-SID
135.  istenis{nis)  bu    -   lul  -   ma  [/u?]  -   us  -  ma

SAG-GA-NA     U-ME-NI-GAR    :   z'ua     kak-ka-di-su     su-kun
ul-lil-SU-ma   :   NA      U-ME-NI-DAL

UB  -  BI       EGIR  -  BI       U  -  ME  -  NI  -  SUB

sa    ina     iz  {})-zu  (jytu     hu  .  .  .  ar-ki-su     u-suk-ma

SAG    -    GIG  TU    -    HU    -    [GIM]  AB    -    LAL    -    KU

140.  inu-rii-us  kak-ka-di  \ki-ma  su\-um-ma-ti  ana   ap-ti

NAM    -    SAB    -    HU    -    GIM  [ANA]    -    BAL    -    KU

ki  -  ma       a  -  ri  -  bi        \a  -  na]     ....     same{e)

Col.  III.

HU-GIM       KI-DAGAL-LA-KU        HA-BA-NI-IB-DAL     .      .      .

ki  -  ma     is  -  su-  ri    as  -  ri     rap  -  si    lit  -  tap  -  ra  -  as

145.   SU-*SAG-GA        DINGIR-RA-NA-KU        HE-EN-SI-IN-GE-GE

a  -  na     katd"    damkati^^    sa     ili-su     lip -pa -kid

EN       SAG-GIG       ANA-TA-NA      MU-UN-SAR-KI-A      PA-HE-
MU-UN-DA-AB-ZI
ti--u       ina       same{e)      ra-kis      ina      irsitim{tiin)'^
in-7ia-as-sa-ah
SUL  ID  -  TUK  ID  -  NA  MU  -  UN  -  DA  ^  -  TIL

150.  sa      id-li     be-el     e-mu-ki      e-mii-ki-su      uk-ta-at-ti

KI-EL  *SIG-GA  ID-NA  NU-MU-UN-SI-IN-GE-GE

sa        ar-da-ti        da-me-ik-ti       is-sa       ul      u-ta-ra
MULU  -  TUR  -  RA  SU  -  NA        MI  -  NI  -  IN  -  GAR  -  RI  -  ES

sa        ina       zu  -  um  -  ri       mar  -  si       is  -  sak  -  nu
155.    DINGIR-NINNI     E-HI-LI-A-TA     NAM-A-A-TA   NAM-AN-NA
MULU-NU-TIL-LA-KU
KUR  -  TA  IM  -  TA  -  E

*'^"  Is-tar      sa      ina     nu-uh-hi     ul-si     ul-la-nu-us-sa
ma-ani-man  la  i-ba-su-u  is-tu  sadi{i)  ^  u-se-ri-da


TI'I,  TABLET   IX.  JJ


135.  "  Then  mix  it  together  and  knead  it,
"  And  put  it  on  his  head ;  wash  him
"  And  place  that  which     .     .     .     behind  him,

140.   "  That  the  Headache,  like  the  dove  to  the  cote,
*'  Like  the  raven  to  heaven.

Col.  III.

**  Like    the    bird  of  the  open  steppes,   may  fly
away.

145.   "  Into  the  favouring  hands  of  his  god  may  he  be
commended."

Incantation  : —

Headache,  though  bound  in  heaven,  hath  escaped
on  earth  ;
150.   It  bringeth  to  nought  the  strength  of  the  hero,
mighty  in  power,
It  giveth  not  back  the  strength  of  the  fair  maid,
It  hath  settled  on  the  body  of  the  sick  man  ;
155.   Ishtar,  besides  whom  there  is  none  to  give  rest
and  happiness.
Hath  let  it  come  down  from  the  mountains,


*  K.  12,000,  cc  inserts  U,

^  K.  12,000,  cc  inserts  ab.

^  K.  12,000,  cc     .     .     .     .     a-/i.


yS  DEVILS    AND   EVIL   SPIRITS  OF   BABYLONIA.

(Plate  XXIII.)

GIS-GI-EN-GIN-NA  MULU-GISGAL-LU  PAP-HAL-LA

MU-UN-NA-TE-ES

1 60.  a-na      bi-na-at      a-ine-li      mut-tal-li-ki     it-hi-e-ma

SAG-GA     'U-A  :      a-me-lu     u-a     e-te-mid  :  BA-NI-IN-US

A-BA     ZI-ZI  :     man-nu     i-na-as-sah    man-nu    u-sat-ba  :

A-BA-ZI-GI-ES
DINGIR      NANNa(na)  :  '^"  Is -tar     via-rat      ''"Sin  :  DU

DINGIR-EN-ZU-NA-GE
DINGIR-EN-KUR-*SIG-NUN-ME-UBARA  :  ''"  „  mnr  ''''Bill  \
DU   DINGIR-EN-LIL-LA-GE
165.  DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR  :     ''"  Mardiik     mar    "'"  Eridi  :
DU      NUN-KI-[GA]
SU    MULU-GISGAL-LU  PAP-HAL-LA-GE  HE-IB-TA-AN-ZI-ZI
zu-uni-ri         a-me-li         mut-tal-li-ki        li-sat-bu-u
DINGIR      .      .      .      .      TE      BAR-RA       U- ?      .      .      .      [SAG]-
GA-NA     BA-AN-KE§DA

//(?)     a-bi     sa    par-sa     ri-sa-tum

\ind\     kak-kad-su     ir-ku-us
170.  ni-[nun-na]        tur-azag-ga-ta        mu-un-tum-ma
hi-me-ta       sa       is-tu       tar-ba-si      el-lu       ub-lu-ni
GA  AMAS  -  AZAG  -  GA  -  TA  MU  -  UN  -  TUM  -  MA

si-iZ'bti       sa       is-tu       su-pu-ri       el-lu      ub-lu-ii-ni
NX-NUN  AZAG-GA  TUR-EL-TA  INIM-INIM-MA

U-ME-NI-SUM
175.  ana    hi-nie-ti    ellitim{tim)   sa   tar-ba-si  el-hi   sip-ta

i-di-ma
MULU-GISGAL-LU     DU    DINGIR-RA-NA    MU-UN-TAG-TAG
a  -  me  -  lu  mar         Hi  -  su         lu  -  np  -  pit  -  ma

MULU-GISGAL-LU-BI     NI-NUN-NA-GLM     HE-EN-AZAG-GA
a  -  me  -  lu      su  -  u      ki  -  ma      hi  -  me  -  ti      li  -  HI


79

(Plate  XXIII.)

1 60.   Unto  the  limbs  of  the  wayfarer  It  hath  drawn
nigh,  and

The  man  standeth  in  woe.

Who  will  remove  it,  who  will  drive  it  away  ?

Ishtar,  daughter  of  Sin

Sin  (?),  son  of  Bel

165.   Marduk,  son  of  Eridu


From  the  body  of  the  wayfarer  they  shall  drive
it  away.

hath  bound  his  head

170.   Butter  which  they  have  brought    from   a  clean
fold,

Milk    which    they    have    brought    from    a    clean
stall  ;

175.  With  the  pure  butter  from  the  clean  fold  perform
the  incantation,

And  rub  (it)  on  the  man,  the  son  of  his  god,

That  that  man  may  be  pure  like  the  butter,


8o  DEVILS   AND    EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

1 80.   GA    -        BI    -       GIM  HE    -       EN    -        EL    -       LA

ki  -  ma       si  -  iz  -  bi      su  -  a  -  tu       li  -  tab  -  bi  -  ib

KUBABBAR- *SIG-GIM  MU-SIR-BI  TJU-UM-TA-LAH

ki-ina     sar-pi      sur-ru-pi       ru-us-su-su      lit-tan-bit

ZABAR  -  GIM      IM-SU-UB-TA      HE  -  EN  -  TA  -  SU  -  UB

185.  ki  -    ma       ki  -   e       mas    -   si       lim   -   ma   -   sis

DINGIR-BABBAR     SAG-KAL     DINGIR-RI-E-NE-GE     SU-NA

U-ME-NI-SUM

a-na       *^'' Samsi      a-sa-rid      ildni^^      pi-kid-su-ma

DINGIR-BABBAR  SAG-[KAL]  DINGIR-RI-E-NE-GE

SILIM-MA-NA    SU    *  SAG-GA     DINGIR-RA-NA-KU

HE  -  EN  -         SI  -         IN  -         GE  -         GE

190.  '^"  Samsu    a-sa-rid    ilani^^    sal-mu-su     ana     katd"

damkdti^^    sa     ili-su

lip     -  kid    -  SU  EN

EN      SAG-KI       DIB-BA       HAR-SAG-GA       MULU-NU-UB-DA

NU-UB-ZU
SUR-AS-SUB      MULU-GISGAL     LU-GIM       BA-AN-DUL-DUL
MULU-DINGIR-NU-TUK-RA         SILA-A  GIN  SI-DI-E

195.   ALAM       SILA-A      SU      UL       KESDA(DA)       NU-KESDA(DA)

SIR-A-GIM      SIR-A-GLM      SIR     SAG       SAR      A§  -  A  -  AN

U  NU    -    KU    -    KU  GIG  NU    -    KU    -    KU

DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR   IGI-IM-MA-AN-SUM  :  GAR-GA-E

SA-A-MU    :  GIN-NA      DU-MU

(Plate  XXIV.)

U  -  TAR  -  SIR      U  -  SI  -  SI      U  -  SI  -  MAN     U  -  A  -  RIG  (?)

*  The  ■"'"'"'"TAR-SIR  (?  "  snake-bane")  is  mentioned  on  K.  4, 152
{^Cun.  Texts,  xiv,  pi.  44,  I-II,  11),  ina  ,,  {=  ni-sih-tu)  bir-^'  ,,
(=  sa  tar-hul-lu)  ;  the  •^«'«'«« si-si  is  explained  by  ^'''"*^"  a-h-i  (ibid.,
pL  29,  K.  4,566,  I-II,  6),  and  there  is  a  ^'"«'««  si-si  sa  ikli,  as  well
as   a  •"""'""' SI-MAN  sa   ikli  (ibid.,    pi.    43,    K.   4,419,   II,    8,    9).


TI'I,  TABLET   IX.  8l


1 80.  That  he  may  be  clean  like  the  milk,

That  his  skin  (?)  may  shine  like  silver  refined,
185.  That  he  may  be  bright  like  shining  copper.

Unto  Shamash,  Chieftain  of  the  gods,  commend
him,
190.  That    Shamash,    Chieftain    of    the    gods,     may
commend
His  welfare  unto  the  kindly  hands  of  his  god.

Incantation.

Incantation  : —

Disease   of  the    temples  (?)  hath    fallen   on    the

man  unknown  in  the  mountains,
Shivering  hath  covered  the  man  like  a  garment,
The  man  that  hath  no  god  when  he  walketh  in

the  street
195.   It  taketh  his  shape  in  the  street  and  none  can

bind  it.
Like  a  snake,  like  a  snake,  a  snake  it  bindeth

the  head,
So  that  he  cannot  rest  by  day  or  night.
Marduk    hath    seen,    (etc.):    ''What   I"   (etc.):

"  Go,  my  son  (Marduk))
(Plate  XXIV.)

'*  The  plants  tar-sir,  si-si,  si-man,  a     ...  *

sommu  HAR-HAR  =  '""'""'  haUappdtiu  (pi.  20,  II-III,  7)  and  """*^''  karan
seiibt,"''  fox'-grape  "  (pK  22,  VII-VIII,  52).  '"*"*»" gvr-vs  =  Asar-
ma  du  (pi.  22,  VII-VIII,  49).  The  si-si  (?)  plant  is  described  as
one  of  nine '"'"""' SA-GIG  (.? plants  with  "dark  hearts"),  pi.  48,
Km.  328,  rev.  II,  6  ff.  """'""  kur-kur  =  ^'""'""  mas-tab-ba-ri-ri
(a  plant  with  a  double  .  .  .),  pi.  29,  K.  4,566,  I-II,  31.

6


82


DEVILS  AND   EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.


200.   U  -  MULU  -  GISGAL  -  LU        U  -  HAR  -  HAR       U-KUR-KUR

KUL       U  -  *  GURU  -  U§       RIG       AN  -  BAR       KA  -  A  -  NI

UH  DINGIR-ID-MULU-SUB-TIG  KI-A         DINGIR-ID

-MULU-SUB-TIG

SA  -  GAR  LIG  -  GA  -  BI

UR-BI  U-ME-NI-SAR-§AR  BUR-TA  U-ME-NI-LU

205.   SU    -    EL    -    LA    -    ZU    -    TA  U   -   ME   -   NI   -   LU    -   LU

Col.  IV

[SAG]  -  KI  ID  -  KAB  -  BU

.      .      .      [sag]  -  KI  -  BI  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  KESDA

SAG     NI     SA-A    SIG(?)   ...   DA   U-ME-NI-NU-NU
SAG-KI         ID-ZI-DA        ///  SAG-KI         ID-KAB-BU

210.   .      .      .      DINGIR-MU-BI  SAG-KI-BI         U-ME-NI-KESDA

.      .      HE-EN-TIL-LA       KI-BI-KU       NA-AN-GE-GE
[§U-*SAG]-GA      DINGIR-RA-NA-KU     HE-EN-SI-IN-GE-GE


NAM   -   TA  -   E

it  '  ta  -  sa  -  a

215 ,      „      NAM  -  TA  -  E

[nam]  -  TA  -  E

\it  -  td\'  sa  -  a

[nam] - TA - E

\it  -  td\  -  sa  -  a

220 [nam]  -  TA  -  E

6U  (?)      it  -  hu  -  u

MU  -  UN  -  NA  -  TE

it  '  hu   -  u

[im]  -  ma  -  an  -  sum

225. [2^]  -  pa  -  lis  -  ma


TI'I,  TABLET  IX.  83


200.


205.    *
Col.  IV


MULU-GISGAL-LU,  HAR-HAR,  KUR-KUR,

The  seeds  of  the  plant  *guru  us  rig  an-bar

KA-A-NI,

The  foam  of  the  Goddess  Id,  the  earth  of  the
Goddess  Id,
When  he  is  very  hungry  (?),
Mix  up  together,  mash  up  in  oil,
With  thy  clean  hand  mash  it  up


the  left  temple  (.^)

bind  his  temples  (?)

.     .     .    the  hair  of  a    .    .     .    do  thou  plait  and
[Three  on]  his  right  temple  (?),  three  on  his  left

bind  his  temples  (?)

[That  that  man]  may  live,  and  unto  his  place  it
may  not  return,
*'  Into  the  kindly  hands  of  his  god  may  he  be
commended."
[Incantation  : — ]

[An  evil ]  hath  gone  forth,

215 hath  gone  forth,

hath  gone  forth,

hath  gone  forth,

220 hath  approached,

hath  approached,

225.  [Marduk]  hath  seen  (him)  and


84  DEVILS  AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

SU  -  U  -  ME  -  TI

li  -  ki  -  ma

ERIN [SU]  -  U  -  ME  -  TI

e  -  rin li  -  ki  -  ma

230.   SU  -  SAR       ///-A  -[an]      ....      [U-ME-NI-NU]-NU

pi  -  kur  -  ti  SU  -  us  -lu-  \us  .  .  .  ti'\  -  me  -  ma
KA-SAR         VII-NA        A-DU-//-[A-AN]       U-ME-NI-KE§DA

ki  -  sir      si  -  bit       a  -  di      si  -  na        ku  -  sur  -  ma

NAM  -  SUB  NUN  -  KI  -  GA  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  SUM

235.  //  -      pat  "^"Eridi  i  -       di   -       ma

SAG   -   MULU   -   TUR   -    RA  -   GE  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  KE§DA

kak  '  ka  -  di  mar  -  si  ru  -  [ku]  -  us  -  ma
UTUG  -  HUL  A-LA-HUL  BAR  -  KU  HE-IM-TA-GUB
UTUG-*SIG-GA    ALAD-*SIG-GA     HE-EN-LAH-LAH-GI-ES

240.   DuppU    JX^^^^^     SAG-GIG-GA-MES     ZAG-TIL-LA-BI-KU

Ekal  '""'^"Assur-baJti-apli  sar  kissati  sar  """''*'''* Assuri^^
(Etc.)


*  Pikurtu,  according  to  Jensen  {ZK.,  i,  321  ;  cf.  ii,  25),  means
bluthenrispe,  but  this  seems  doubtful.  He  draws  his  conclusions
principally  from  the  Sixth  Tablet  of  the  Series  Shurpu  {W.A.I.y

iv,  ?)•

**  As  \ki\%  pikurtu  is  shredded  and  is  cast  into  the  fire,

*•  And  the  Fire-god  devoureth  it ;

*'  Its  are  will  not  return  to  its  palm-tree,

**  Nor  will  it  be  used  in  the  process  of  dyeing."
As  Jensen  says,  pikurlu  is  to  be  referred  to  the  Aram,  root  fkar.


Tl'l,  TABLET   IX.  85


*'  Take and

"  Take  cedar and

230.  •"  Plait  a  triple  cord*     .     .     .     and

**  Tie  twice  seven  knots  and
235.   **  Perform  the  Incantation  of  Eridu  and

**  Bind  the  head  of  the  sick  man,

"  That   the   evil    Spirit,    the    evil    Demon    may-
stand  aside,

**  And    a    kindly    Spirit,    a   kindly    Genius    be
present."

240.  Tablet   IX  of  the  Series  **  Headache"

COMPLETE.


[Colophon.]


"to  bind."  In  the  Fifth  Tablet  of  the  Series  Maqlu  (1.  54),  a
pikurtu  sa  kadisdti  is  mentioned.     In  the  present  text  the  magician

is  directed  to  "  take  cedar and  weave  a  triple  pikurtu,

tying  twice  seven  knots  in  it."  Now,  taking  into  consideration
that  the  Aram. /)'^^r  means  "to  bind,"  it  seems  most  probable  that
pikurtu  is  a  cord  of  fibre.  The  Shurpu  text  must  then  be  translated,
"As  this  cord  is  unravelled  .  .  .  .  ,  its  fibres  will  not  return  to  its
palm-tree,"  and  in  the  Maqlu  tablet  it  is  certainly  plausible  that  the
pikurti  of  the  sacred  temple-women  are  the  cords  mentioned  in
Baruch  vi,  43.  The  palm  fibre  is  a  material  still  used  in  the  making
of  ropes  in  Assyria.


€(^B{d"(p."

Obverse.

(Plate  XXV.)

[EN  SAG]  -  GIG  E  -  KUR  -  TA  NAM  -  TA  -  [e]

[(I  -  ']  -  u  mI  '  iu         e  -  kur         it  -  ta  -  sa  -  \a'\

[E  -  DINGIR  -  en]  -  LIL  -  LA  -  TA  NAM  -  TA  -  [e]

\ul'\    -    tu         bit        ^^'^  Bill       it    -    ta    -    sa    -    a

5.  [dingir-rab]-kan-me    :        la-bar-tum       pa-rit-tum    :
KA-SIRi-NI-KU      .      .      .

[U]    -    NU    -    KU    -    KU  U    -    NU    -  SAR    -    SAR    -   DA

ul     u  -  sa  -  as  -  lal     sit  -  ta^      ul     us  -  ta  -  a^  -  bi

[tur]-RA  (?)  GIG-U-NA  :  mu-ru-us  mu-si  u  ur-ra  su-u  :
e^-ne-bi-da-ge

[sag]  -  BI        GISGAL  -  LU         ALAM  -  BI         URU  -  A  -  AN
10.  kak-ka^-su        a-lu-u        la-an-su      a-bu-bu-inn-ina

[SUH]-BI  ANA  ^U-SU^-RU  :  zi-mu-su  saf?m{u)  up-pu-ti'^

[IGI  -  Bl]  GIS  -  TIR  GIS  -  GIG  NI  -  LAL  -  E

[/«]  -  nu  -  su       sil  -  li^       kis  -  te^        ha  -  as  -  bu  ^^

[SU-BI       GIS]-ES-SA-AD        GIR-BI      GIS-RAB-MAH      .      .      .
15.  \kat\su     na  ah-ba-lu^^    se-ip-su     lub-lu-bu^ -um-ina

.      .      .      SA    -    NE  IjE    -    EN    -    SI   -    IN    -    IL    -    [LA]

.     .     .     bu-  a-  nu  ^^      mu  -  ha  -  am  -  me  -  tu      na  -  [su  -  ?/]


Obverse.

(Plate  XXV.)
Incantation  : —

Headache  from  the  Underworld  hath  gone  forth,
Issuing  from  the  Abode  of  Bel.
5.  A  rushing*  hag-demon,

Granting  no  rest,  nor  giving  kindly  sleep.
It  is  the  sickness  of  night  and  day,
I  o.  Whose  head  is  that  of  a  demon,
Whose  shape  is  as  the  Whirlwind  ;
Its  appearance  is  as  the  darkening  heavens.
And  its  face  as  the  deep  shadow  of  the  forest.
15.   Its  hand  is  a  snare,  its  foot  is  a  trap(?),
a  burning  muscle  raiseth.


^  46,301  apparently  omits  ka-sir.

^  46,301,  /um.  ^  46,301  omits.

*  46,301,  UD.  ^  46,301  inserts  ad.

'  46,301  inserts  us.  '  46,301,  [/«]-/;/«-«  up-pu-tu,

»  46,301,  lu,  «  46,301,  ti.

^"  46,301,  hi.  ''  46,301,  lum.
"  46,301,  ni,

*  Parittum  (  =  paridlum  or    paritturn).      Cf.    Syr.    frad,    fugit
(Brockelmann,  p.  2%ia).


88  DEVILS   AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

[GIS-GI-EN-GI-na]    :         bi-na-a-ti^         u-ha-am-mat'^    :
IN-BIL-BIL      .      .      .


20.


.      .      .      BUL  -  E       SU        MU  -  UN  -  da  -  AB  -  ZI  -  [Zl]
.     .     ri     u  -  na  -  as^      zu  -  mur      u  -  sah  -  ha  -  ah


GIM       ?  MU  -  UN  -  DA  -  AB  -  GE  -  GE

.  ti--i  sa  ki-ina  kar-pa-ti  sa-har-ra-ti^    u-sa-as-ga-mu

.     .     \u\-kan-na-an   bu-a-nu  i-sa-ar  :  SA   SI-IN     .     .  ^

.     .     [a-7ney/u     ki-ma    i-bi-hi^    i-sa-ar  :  AL-SUR-RA

25.  .     .     .  ^     «/(?)  -  ni    u  -  kan  -  na  -  an   :  AN  -  HUM  -  MU

•    •  /^(?)-^  ap-pa  kima  it-ti-e  i-sik^ -kir  \  k.'^^ -xy^-^K

.  .  KU  ?  GIM  :  up'pa'^^  a-hi  kima  pu-uk-li^^  i-tar-rak  :
SI-IN-KU-KU-E

.      .      [IM]-GISGAL-LU  ^2  (^?)-GU-GIM      SI-IN-TAR     .     .     .
\rit\  ^^  -  ta  ki  -  ma   ki  -  e   me  -  hi  -  e   i  -  par  -  ra  -'

30.  MURGU-GIM    Kl-A    :   pti-u-da  kima  kib-ri    'u-ab-bat  :
SI-IN     .     .     .     E

GABA      GI-HA-AN-GIM    :    ir-tum      kima       ^'''' hi-in-nu
i-sal-lat  :  AN-SIL-SIL  .  .  .  E

TIL-TIL        GIS-MA-SUN-GIM        IN-DAK-DAK^*      .      .      .      .
si-la-ni        kima        e-lip-pi        la-bir-ti        i-na-kar

SA-MAH        SA-SIG-GA^5        §U-MU-UN-DIB-DIB      .      .      .      .
35.  sa  -  \ntaK\  -  hu     kima     ir  -  ri     kat  -  ni     i  -  sab  -  tu


TI'I,  TABLET  "  P."  89


Scorching  the  members,

20.  Shaking  the  limbs  (?),  wasting  the  body,

A  sickness  which  shatters  (?)  [the  members]  like

an  earthen  pot,
Minishing  [the  muscles],  weakening  the  sinews,
Weakening  the  whole  man  (?)  like     .     .     .  (?)

25.  Minishing  the

Choking  the  nostrils  as  with  pitch.
Bursting  through  the  ribs  (?)  like  tow,*
Breaking  the  fingers  as  a  rope  of  wind.

30.   It  destroy eth  the  flanks  like  a  river-bank(?).

It  splitteth  the  breast  in  twain  like  a  stalk    of

henna.
It  crusheth  the  sides  like  an  old  ship,

35.   It  seizeth  on  the  stout-hearted  like  little     .     .     .^


^  46,301,  iu.  ^  46,301     .    ,     ,    iu,

^  46,301,  a-su.  *  46,301,  kar-pai  sa-har-rai,

^  46,301,  Ru(?)-E.  "  46,301,  e-bi-hu.

'  46,301,  via     ...  ,                  ®  46,301,  sak.

^  46,301  inserts  WW.  ^°  46,301, /«.

"  46,301,  Iu.  '^  46,301  omits.

"  From  46,301,  which  has  rit-tu.

^*  46,301  ends  the  line  with  this  character.

^'  46,301,  GIM.

*  Puklu  is  the  Chaldee  pukld  (Levy,  Chald.  Worterh.^  ii,  p.  284).
Uppa  ahi^  "  the  uppa  of  the  side,"  is  of  uncertain  meaning.
^  ^  Irri  is  some  part  of  the  body  (see  Jensen,  My  then,  p.  456).
Samahhu  is  doubtful.


90  DEVILS  AND   EVIL   SPIRITS  OF   BABYLONIA.

KU-DA    U-GUG-GIM   :  si-i-hu    kima^    ur-ba-ti  us-na-al  :
ba-[an-na]-a

MU      GUD-GIM    :    ra-ba-a      kima^      al-pi      i-pal-lik    :
tig-ni-ra-ra

GUD      NI-RA  :  al-pa^      im-has-7na      al-pi     ul     ip-di  :
GUD-NA      NU-IL-LA

AM    NI-RA  :    ri-i-mi    im-has-rna     ri-mi    ul    u-pa-sih  :
AM-NA^      NU-SED-DE

40.   DARA      NI-RA      SI  -  BI      NU  -  MU  -  UN  -  SU  -  UB  -  SU  -  UB
\tu\-ra-hu     ini-has^ -ma     kar-ni^ -su     ul     u-sak-lil

(Plate  XXVI.)

SIKKA       SIKKA-BAR-RA       NI-RA       ZUR-BI       NU-MU-UN-
ZUR-ZUR-RI
a-tu-du       sap-\^pa-ru'\        im-has-ma       bu-ur-su-nu
ul      U'kan-ni  ^

GAR-UR-*TATTAB-MA     EDIN-NA     NI-RA     GIS-SAR-AMAS
-*DIRIG-GA-[GIM]      UR-BI      MU-UN-DU-DU
45.  bu-ul   si-ri    im-has-ma    ki-ma    ki-ri-e    sa    ha-ru-u

na-as-hu     istemsinis)     it- 1 a- kip

GIS-SUB-GIR-GIM  GAR-NAM  MU-UN-SI-IN-LAL-E

ki  -  ma      mit  -  pa  -  a^  -  nu     ba  -  as  -  me ^     mimma
sum  -  SU     i  -  sak  -  kir

DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-§AR  :  '^""Marduk  ip-pa^ -lis'SU-ma  :
IGI-IM-MA-AN-SUM


Tl'l,   TABLET  "  P."  9I


It  bendeth  low  the  lofty  like  a  reed,
It  cutteth  off  the  mighty  like  an  ox.
Smiting  oxen,  it  spareth  not  the  herds,
Smiting  wild  bulls,  it  giveth  them  no  rest,
40.  Smiting  the  mountain-goat  so  that  it  completeth
not  its  horn,*

(Plate  XXVI.)

Smiting  ibex  and  goat  so  that  they  guard  not

their  offspring,
45.  Smiting  the  beasts  of  the  desert   so  that  they

run  wild,
Like   a   garden    whereof    the   ditch   hath    been

removed.
As  with  the  fangs  [?)  of  a  viper  it  shutteth  up

everything.^  ^

Marduk  hath  seen  him,  and


^  46,301,  ki-[ma].  *  46,301,  ki-ma.

^  46,301, />/.  *  46,301  omits.

^  46,301,  \^h(i\-as.  ^  46,301,  naa.

'  46,301,  na.  ®  46,301,  mu.
"  46,301, /a/.

*  I.e.,  because  the  growth  of  the  ibex,  up  to  about  five  years,
can  be  reckoned  by  the  nodules  which  project  along  the  front  of
the  horns.

^  The  meaning  of  this  line  is  obscure,  firstly  because  we  do  not
know  what  is  meant  by  the  expression  "the  bow  of  the  viper,"  and
secondly  I'sakkir  is  doubtful.  The  sense  may  be  that  nothing
can  be  produced  by  reason  of  the  disease,  and  if  so  isakkir  is  to  be
compared  in  sense  to  the  Hebrew  ^^D  in  i  Sam.  i,  5,  "the  Lord
had  shut  up  her  womb."


92  DEVILS   AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

A-A-NI      DINGIR-EN-KI -RA      E-A       BA  -  §1  -  IN  -  TU
GU  -  MU  -  UN  -  NA  -  AN  -  DA  -  A  1
50.  a-na    a-bi-su    *''' E-a   a-na   biti  i-ru-um-ma    i-sis-si

A  -  A  -  MU        SAG  -  GIG        E  -  KUR  -  TA       NAM  -  TA  -  E
a  -  bi        ti  -'       ul  -  tu       e  -  kur        it  -  ta  -  sa  -  a

A-DU  II-KAN  :  a-di  si-na  ik'^  -bi-sutn-ma  :  AS-U-UB-DA^

A-NA*       IB^-SA-A       NA-BI      NU-UN^-ZU^       A-NA
NI-IB-GE-GE^

55.  mi-na-a    e^ -pu-us    amelu^^    su-a-tu^^    ul    i-di    ina

mi-ni-i^^     i-pa-as-sah

Reverse.

DINGIR-EN-KI  DU-NI  DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR

MU-UN-NA-NI-IB-GE-GE
*"'E  -  a  mdri  ^^  -  su  '^"Marduk  ip  -  pal

DU-MU         A-NA         NU-NI-ZU        A-NA        RA-AB-DAH-A  ^*
ma-a^-ri  mi-na-a  la  ti^ -di  mi-na-a  lu-rad-di^^ -ka

60.   DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR         A-NA         NU-NI-ZU         A-NA
RA-AB-DAH-A  ^^

*''' Marduk    mi-na-a  la   ti-di    mi-na-a    lu-rad-di-ka

GAR-GA-E     NI-ZU-A-MU     :     sa     ana-ku     i-du-u     at-ta
ti-i-di    :    ^^ZA-E      IN-GA-E-ZU

GIN  -  NA       DU-MU    :   a  -  hk       ma  -  ri      '^"  Marduk  :
DINGIR  -  SILIG  -  MULU  -  SAR


TI'I,  TABLET  "P."


93


50.   Into  the  house  of  Ea  his   father  hath    entered
and  spoken,
"  Father,   the    Headache  from   the   Underworld

hath  gone  forth."
Twice  he  hath  said  unto  him,
55.   **  What    this    man    shall    do    he    knoweth    not
whereby  he  may  be  relieved."

Reverse.
Ea  hath  answered  his  son  Marduk,
"  O  my  son,  what  dost    thou    not   know,    what
more  can  I  give  thee  ?
60.   ''  O  Marduk,  what  dost  thou  not  know,  what  can
I  add  unto  thy  knowledge  }
*'  What  I  know,  thou  knowest  also.
"  Go,  my  son  Marduk,


2  46,301,  ki.

*  46,301  inserts  ni.

•  46,301  omits.


^  46,301  and  K.  4,840,  de-e.

^  46,301,  KA.

^  46,301  inserts  ba.

'  46,301  inserts  na.

^  46,301  apparently  ba-ge-ge  ;  K.  4,840,  ba-ni-ib-ge-ge.

^  46,301,  t.  '°  46,301,  a-me-lu.

"  46,301,  M\5-a-tim.  ^'  ^6, -^o I, mi -nar a  (or  t'namt'-ni'i.

"  46,301,  via-ra.  ^*  46,301  and  K.  4,840,  e.

'^  46,301  and  K.  4,840,  t4s-sip.        ^^  46,301,  E.
'^  46,301  inserts  u.


94  DEVILS   AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

[GIS?]-BA-AN-GAB-GAB1-LAL-E  GIS-GAM-MA     :     „2.^

"'"kip-pa-ti    li-ki-ma  :  SU-U-ME-TI

65.   ID  -  KA  -  A  -  NA  -  TA  a  -  SU  -  BA  3  E  -  Rl  *  -  Tl

ina    pi-i     na-ra-a-ti^     ki-lal-li-e    me^^^    li-ki-e-ma

A-BI    TU-AZAG-ZA-NA  :  ana    me^^^-su-nu-W^    si-pat-ka
ellitiiti)^     i-di-ma  :  U-ME-NI-SUM

TU-AZAG-ZA-NA    :    zna        te-e-ka        el-lP       ul-lil-ma   :
U-ME-NI-RI

[A-BI  MULU]-GISGAL-LU  DU-DINGIR-RA-NA  U-ME-NI-SU
70.  me-e  su-nu-tV   a-me-hi  mar  ili-su   zu^^ -lu-uh^^ -ma

.      .      .      .      ZU  -  NA      SAG  -  GA  -  NA      U  -  ME  -  Nl  -  KESDA
zna       si-ti-ik    .    .    li       kak-ka  ^^  -su       ru-ku-us-ma

U  -  I  -  KAM    :    Hmuiinu)        ak  -  kal        lis  -  tab  -  ri  ^^    :
KAN  -  Nl  -  IB  -  ZAL  -  ZAL  -  E  ^^

AN-MUNSUB-AN-NA-TA  :  ina    h-me^^-tan    pu-ru--ma  :
U-ME-NI-TAR

75.  SILA-DAGAL-LA-KU  :  i?ia   ri-bi-ti  i-di-ma  :  U-ME-NI-§UB

SAG -GIG       SAG-GA-NA       HE  -  IM  -  MA  -  AN  -  SED  -  [DE]
ti  -^  -  u  ^^       sa       kakkadi  ^^  -  su        lip  -  ta  -  [sak]  ^^


^  46,301  inserts  id.

^  46,301    reads   for   this   line     .     .     e   a-lal-li-e  is-si  kip-pa- turn
li-ki-e-[nia].

3  46,301,  RI.  *  46,301,  Ri-E  for  E-RI.


TI'I,  TABLET  "P.  95


"  Take  a  bundle  of  twigs  (?),"  and
65.   '*  At  the  confluence  of  two   streams   take  thou
water  and
"  Perform  thy  pure  incantation  over  this  water,

and
"  With  thy  pure  exorcism  cleanse  and
70.   "  With  this  water  sprinkle  the  man,  son  of  his
god  and
"  Bind  it  upon  his  head  with     ....
"  When  he  eats^  let  him  be  sated  :
*'  At  eventide  cut  it  off  and
75.   "  Cast  it  into  the  broad  places

**  That     the    sickness    of    his     head     may    be


assuaged,  and


46,301,  ndrdli^^.  ^  46,301,  me-e.

46,301,  tu.  "  46,301,  tim.


"  46,301,  lu.  '"  46,301,  su.

''  46,301,  luh.  *^  46,301  inserts  tz(/.

''  46,301,  ru.  ^*  46,301  omits.

»*  46,301,  mi.  ''  46, 30 1  >  i-

^^  46,301,  kak-ka-di,  ^^  46,301,  lis-tap-sih.

*  The  variant  gives  alalli  issi  kippatum.  Kippatu  occurs  in  the
phrase  kippat  huhari  {W.A.I.y  v,  26,  59),  "the  kippatu  of  a  bird-
trap,"  and  therefore  kippatu  cannot  be  the  name  for  a  certain  kind
of  wood  or  tree.  It  is  probably  the  same  word  as  the  Hebrew
kippd^  a  branch  or  twig,  and  if  so,  the  kippat  huhari  will  be  the
small  piece  of  wood  which  props  up  the  door  or  lid  of  the  trap.  In
the  case  of  alalli  kippati  or  alalli  issi  kippatum,  "  an  alallu  of
twigs,"  alallu  is  to  be  referred  to  the  root  aldlu^  "to  bind,"  i.e.,  a
bundle.     See  also  Tablet  "A A,"  1.  63.

^  The  same  phrase  occurs  in  Tablet  '*  D,"  1.  29.  The  translation
is,  however,  doubtful.


96  DEVILS   AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

SAG-GIG       A-AN-GIG-GAB-BA-GIM       HA-BA-RA-AN-ZI    .    .
mu-ru-us    kak-ka-di'^    sa    ki-ma     zu-un-ni'^    mu-si
kii-mu-ru     li~in-\7ia-sih'\

80.    I         DINGIR  -  EN  -  KI  -  GE  PA  -  E  -  HE  -  [A  -  GE  ^]

a-      mat  ''"  E  -      a*  lis-      te  -      pi

DINGIR  -  DAM  -  GAL  -  NUN  -  NA      SI  -  HE  -  EN  ^  -  SI  -  DI  -  E
''"Dain  -       ki^ '       na  lis  -       te  -      sir

dingir-silig- p-nun-na  du-sag-zu-ab-ge   *  sag  ^ -ga
tag-bi-za-a-[kan]
85.  *^"  Marduk      mar     ris-tu-u     sa     ap-si-i     bu-un-nu

u     dn-um  ^  -mu-ku  ^    ku-um-mu


SAG  -  GIG  -  GA      A


ANA-GIM   I   EDIN-NA    NUN-KI   DA-NU-UB


Tl'l,  TABLET  "  P."  97


"  That  the  Headache  which  like  the  dew   hath
fallen,  may  be  removed.
80.   "  May  the  Word  of  Ea  make  clear,

'*  May  Damkina  direct  aright.
85.   '*  O  Marduk,  eldest  son  of  the  Deep  !

**  Thine  is  the  power  to  brighten  and  bless  !  "


[Prayer]  of  the  Sick  Head     .


*  46,301,  du.  '  46,301,  nu.
'  46,301,  PA-HE-E-A  .     .               *  46,301,  Ea.

*  46,301,  AN.  ^  46,301  inserts  an.

'  46,301,  *siG.  *  46,301,  dum  for  du-um.


46,301,  ka.


int-tna-^e.


Obverse.

(Plate  XXIX.)

EN    NAM-TAR    HUL-IK     KALAM-MA     BIL-GIM     MU-[MU]

sa    ma  -  a  -  tu    ki  -  ma    i  -  sa  -  tu     i-  kam  -  mu  -u

NAM  -  TAR  AZAG  -  GIM  MULU  -  RA  TE  -  A

sa      ki-ma     a-sak-ku      ana      aineli      i-ti-ih-hu-\u\

5.    NAM-TAR       DINGIR       EDIN-NA       LIL-GIM        NI-SIR-SIR

sa   ina   si-rim    ki-ma    za-ki-ki    it-ta-na-as-rab-bi-tu

NAM-TAR         HUL-LU-GIM         MULU-RA         BA-AN-UR-UR

sa        ki  -  ma         Urn  -  ni         ameli         ih  -  ha  -  zu

NAM  -  TAR       DUB  -  ME  -  GIM        MULU  -  RA        BA  -  DUB

10.  sa      ki  -  ma       li  -  i  -  bu       ameli      i  -  li  -^  -  i  -  bu

NAM-TAR       SU        NU-TUK         GIR        NU-TUK       MULU-A

GIG-A      GIN-GIN

sa  ga-ta   la  i-su-u  se-ip  la  i-su-u  mut-tal-lik  mu-si

NAM-TAR    MULU-TUR-RA    GA-RAS-SIR-GIM     BA-AN-GAM

mar  -  sa       ki  -  ma       ka  -  ra  -  si       ih  -  ia  -  ra  -  as

15.   GIS    -    GI    -    EN    -    GI    -    NA  BA   -    NI    -    IN    -    SIR

bi  -      na  '      [a  -      ti  -     su]  uk  -     tas  -     si

GUD  -  DA       U BA  -  NI  -  IN  -  NA

mi  -  la  -  su us  -  ni  -  il


(prater  of  (^t  S^^^^^  *^f  ^^^  (^o^if^


Obverse.
(Plate  XXIX.)
Incantation  : —

O  Plague-god  that  devoureth  the  land  like  fire,

Plague-god  that  attacketh  a  man  like  a  fever,

5.   Plague-god  that  roameth  like  the  wind  over  the
desert,

Plague-god  that  seizeth  on  a  man  like  an  evil
thing,

10.  Plague-god  that  tormenteth  the  man  like  a  plague.

Plague-god   that   hath    no  hands  nor  feet,    that

wandereth  by  night,
Plague-god  that  teareth  the  sick  man  in  shreds

like  a  leek,

1 5.  That  hath  bound  his  members.

That  hath  brought   low  his  full    strength    [like
a  plant  (?)],


lOO  DEVILS  AND  EVIL  SPIRITS   OF  BABYLONIA.

[GIS]-NA  GIG-U-[NA-GE  NU-MU]-UN-DA-KU-KU

20.  [ina]     jna-a-a-[lz-su     ina     sat     inu-si    ul]    i-sal-lal

...      ALAM  (?)  *  SIG-GA      .....      NE-IN-LAL

.     .     .     .     la  (?)  -  an  -  su     .     .     .     .     .     .     u  -  kan  -  nis

PAP    -    HAL    -    LA    -    KU  NE     -     IN     -     DIB

pu  -      ri  -      di  -      su  is  -      sa  -      bat

25.   DINGIR    -    BI  ID    -    BI  BA    -    NI    -    IN     -    BAD

ilu  -      SU  it  -      ti  -      su  it  -      te  -      si

AMA-DINGIR-NINNI-A-NI        SU-NI-TA        BA-NI-IN-SU-SU

*'"//  -  tar  -  su      ina      zu  -  uin  -  ri  -  su       ir  -  te  -  ik

DINGIR  -  SILIG  -  MULU  -  SAR  IGI    :    GAR  -  GA  -  E    :

GIN  -  NA      DU  -  MU

30.   IM     -     ZU     -     AB     -     TA  U     -     ME     -     NI     -     KID

ki  -       ri  '       is  -       ma

Reverse.
(Plate  XXX.)

ALAM      GAR  -  SAG  -  IL  -  LA  -  A  -  NI       U  -  ME  -  NI  -  DIM

sa  -  lam         an         du  -  na  -  ni  -  su  bi  -  ni  -  ma

UR  MULU-TUR-RA-GE  GIG-U-NA  U-ME-NI-NA

35.   IT-TIG-ZI-GA-TA  SU-NI-TA  U-ME-TE-GUR-GUR

ina  se  -  ri  zu  -  mur  -  su  kup  -  pir  -  ma

NAM  -  SUB  NUN   -   KI   -   GA  U   -   ME   -    NI   -   SUM

SI  DINGIR-BABBAR-KU  IGI-NI  U-ME-NI-GAR

ana   ma-har  e-rib   ^^" Sainsi{st)  pa-ni-su    su-kun-rna

40.    NAM -TAR       HUL-IK       DIB  -  BA  -  A  -  NI  -  TA       BAR  -  KU
_        HE  -IM  -  TA  -  GUB

ka  -  mu  -  su         ina        a  -  ha  -  a  -  ti        li  -  iz  -  ziz


TABLET  "  R."  lOI


20.  [At  night]  on  his  bed  he  cannot  sleep,

It  hath  subjected

It  hath  seized  on  his  loins,*
25.   His  god  is  far  distant  from  him,

His  goddess  from  his  body  is  afar.

Marduk  hath  seen  him  (etc.),

'^  What  I  "  (etc.),

*'  Go,  my  son  (Marduk),

*'  Pull  off  a  piece  of  clay  from  the  deep,

Reverse.
(Plate  XXX.)

''  Fashion  a  figure  of  his  bodily  form  (therefrom)

and
"  Place  it  on  the  loins  of  the  sick  man  by  night,
35.   '*  At  dawn  make  the  *  atonement '  for  his  body,
"  Perform  the  Incantation  of  Eridu,
**  Turn  his  face  to  the  west,

40.   **  That  the  evil  Plague-demon  which  hath  seized
upon  him
**  May  vanish  away  from  him."

»  Puridu^  see  Jensen,  Myihen  und  Epcn,  p.  508.


102  DEVILS  AND  EVIL  SPIRITS  OF  BABYLONIA.


[INIMJ-INIM-MA    ALAM-GAR-SAG-IL-LA    IM-MA-GE  ^


[en] HUS

NA


[Colophon.]


1  Tablet -S"(K.  3,518).

Reverse.

.      .      ZU  -  AB  -  TA

ALAM  -  A  -  NI

sa  -  lam  -  su  sal  -  ma

5.    SIG  -  UZ  -  BABBAR        SIG  -  UZ  -  GIG        SAG  -  GA

ina         kak  -  ka  -  di  -\su\     .     .     .

su.     MULU  -  TUR  -  RA      GE      U  -  ME

NAM  -  SUB  DINGIR  -  EN  -  KI  -  GE  U  -  ME  -  [nI  -  SUM]

SI        DINGIR  -  BABBAR  -  SU-A  IGI  -  NI  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  [gAr]

10.    UTUG  -  U  -  DIB  -  BA  -  A  -  NI     BAR  -  KU     HE  -  [iM  -  TA  -  GUb]

sa     ut  '  tu  '  SU      \ina       a  -  ha  -  a  -  ti      It  -  I'z  -  ziz']

NAM  -  TAR        HUL  -  DIB  -  BA  -  NI        BAR  -  KU        NI      .      .      .      .

ka  -  mu  -  su        ana        a  -  ha  -  a  -  iu        li  ~  \iz  -  zt'z^

INIM  -  INIM  -  MA  ALAM  -  GAR  -  SAG  -  IL  -  LA      .      .      .


15.    EN      UTUG-HUL-EDIN-NA      BAR-NE      NA      BAR     MULU

ana         mul  -       te  -      pis  -       u  -      ii         za  -      mar


[Colophon.]


TABLET  "  R."  IO3


Prayer    of    the    Figure    of    his    Bodily
Form  in  Clay.*


[Colophoa.]


*  Tablet  "  S"  begins  in  the  same  way  as  Tablet  "  R,"  but  the
ending  is  different : —

Reverse.

"  [Pull  off  a  piece]  of  [clay  ?]  from  the  deep,
*'  [Fashion]  a  black  figure  [of  his  bodily  form],
5.  "  [Bind]  on  his  head  the  hair  of  a  white  goat,
**  And  the  hair  of  a  black  goat,
"  Place  it  on  the  body  of  the  sick  man,
"  Perform  the  Incantation  of  Ea,
"  [Turn]  his  face  to  the  west,
10.  "  That  the  Spirit  which  hath  glanced  at  him  [may  stand]  aside,
*'  And  the  evil  Plague-demon  which  hath  seized  upon  him
"  May  vanish  away  from  him."

Prayer  of  the  Image  of  his  Bodily  Form  [in  Clay  ?].

15.  Incantation: — "The  evil  Spirit  hath  lain  in  wait  in  the  desert
*'  Unto  the  side  of  the  mart  [hath  drawn  nigh]."


^nint-inim-ina  afam-^ar^ag-if-fa


Obverse.

(Plate  XXXI.)

[en]  utug-hul  edin-na  bar-ne  na  bar  mulu  .  .  .
u-tuk'ku       lim-nu       ina       si-ri       ir-bi-is    .     .     .
alad-hul   sag-US   sag-ba-an-kil-ba   mulu    .    .    .
\se]'id-  du      lim-nu      ka-a-a-na      ip-rik-ma
ma  -  am  -  ma     ....
5.  [gidim]-hul        edin-na        mu-un-sa-sa        mulu
sa-ku-[gu-ga]    .    .    .
e-kim-mu  lim-nu  ina  si-rim  i-ku-us-ma  sa-ga-sa  .  .
MULLA-HUL        ERI-A        MU-UN-GUB-GUB        KALAM-MA
GAZ       §A-A     ....
gal-lu-u     livt-nu     tna     ali    i-da-al    ana     sa-ga-as
ni-si    ul    i-ga-     .     .     .
GURUS-RA         MU-UN-GE-GE-NE      :     id-lu         i-sab-bi-tu
10.  [ki-EL-RA]  MU-UN-DUB-DUB-BU-NE      :      ar-da-tum

i-nap-pa-su
[tur-tur-ra       g]a  1  -RAS-SIR-GIM       MU-UN-  ?  -  ?  -E-NE
\si-ih-hi-ru'\  ^  -ti    ki-ma     ka-ra-su     ....    -su-u

LIKIR         MU-UN  -  [SIR  -  SIR]  -E-NE

lib  -  ba        i  -  [na  -  as]  "  sa  -  hu


(ptager  of  t^t  J'igure  of  ^te  (^obi%
J'otni  in  ©oug^.


tdrnt "  t."

Obverse.

(Plate  XXXI.)
Incantation  : —

The  evil  Spirit  hath  lain  in  wait  in  the  desert

unto  the  side  of  the  man  [hath  drawn  nigh],
The  evil  Genius  for  ever  is  rampant
And  none  can  [resist  him],
5.  The  evil  Ghost  goeth  furtively  in  the  desert  and
[Causeth]  slaughter  [among  men].
The  evil  Devil  prowleth  in  the  city,
[It  hath  no  rest?]  from  slaughtering  men.
They  smite  the  hero,
10.  They  lay  low  the  maiden,

The  little  ones  like  a  leek  they  tear  in  pieces.
They  tear  out  the  heart     ....

*  Inserted  from  the  copy  in  W.A./.,  iv,  16.


io6


DEVILS   AND   EVIL   SPIRITS   OF  BABYLONIA.


15.


23,


.  .  .  [a-la]-gim  im-[ma-an]-dul-e-ne
.     .     .     [^ima]       a  -  li  -  e       i  -  kat  -  ta  -  mu

gaba  -  im  -  ma  -  an  -  ri  -  es

la  (?)-gim  pa-kad-du  mu-ni-in-ag-gi-es
it-ta-na-as-sib  \kimd\  ka-mi-i  i-ta-ru-su
NA     E-A-NI-KU     IM-MA-AN-US  ES     :    ir-du-SU

.    [im]-ma-an-da-kur     su-gir-ra     ba-na

.     it  -  te  -  kir      ina       ru  -  sum  -  ti      na  -  di

.    .    .    zi  -  zi         id         NU  -  UN  -  ge  -  ge

.     ul    ina  -  as  -  si     a  -  hi  -  su     ul    u  -  [tar]

25.  u     [nu-un-da]-an-ku-e     a     nu-un-da-an-nak-[e]

a-ka-[/i]  a-ka-la  ul  i-li--i  me-e  sa-ta-a  ul  i-li-['-i]

gis-gi-en-gi-na-bi    ba-bir-bir-ri-es     su-bi     sar-si

da-ba-an-[sum]

bi-na-ti-su      us-sap-pi-hu     zuniur-su     da-uin-uia-lu

um-tal-li

dingir-silig-mulu-sar     igi    :    gar-ga-e    :  gin-na

DU-MU

30.  DUG-SAR-RA       A       U-ME-NI-SUM    :    me-e       Mul-li-ma

SINIG     U-IN-NU-US     GI§IMMAR-DU     GI-SUL-SAR    RIG-LI

ERIN  -  BABBAR  -  RA        SA  -  BI        U  -  ME  -  NI  -  SUM

NAM  -  SUB  NUN  -  KI  -  GA  U  -  MU  -  E  -  NI  -  SID

A  -  BI        NAM  -  SUB         SU  -  GAL        U  -  MU  -  E  -  NI  -  DU

me  -  e  sip  -  ti  ra  -  bis  suk  -  lil  -  ma

MU    -   AZAG   -   ZA   -   NA  U    -   MU    -   E   -    NI   -   DU

A-BI         MULU-GISGAL-LU         U-MU-E-NI-SUM     :     a-me-lu
su-hih-ma


35


TABLET  "T."  10/


15.   Like  a  demon  they  envelop     ....

They  draw  near

[Where  ?]   he   sitteth  they   turn   him    back  like
a  shut  gate  (.-*),*
20.  Unto  his  house  they  drive  him    ....

.     .     .     is  estranged  (?),  he  falleth  in  the  marsh.

He  cannot  lift  [his  limbs],  nor  turn  his  side.
25.   He  hath  no  desire  to  eat  food,

Nor  drink  water,

His  members  are  dissolved,  and  his  body  is  filled
with  pain.

Marduk  hath  seen  him  (etc.),
-  What  I  "  (etc.),
"  Go,  my  son  (Marduk),
30.   *'  Fill  a  pot  with  water  and

*'  Binu  the  ;;^^//^y^^/-plant,   suhussu,  a  stalk    of
salalu^  cypress,

*'  And  white  cedar  put  therein  and
"  Perform  the  Incantation  of  Eridu  and
35.   *'  Make  perfect  the  water  of  the  Incantation  and
'*  Make  perfect  thy  pure  exorcism,
"  Sprinkle  the  man  with  the  water  and


3  The  translation  of  this  line  is  doubtful.

^  Salalu  is  possibly  to  be  compared  to  the  Syriac  ^  (Payne
^mi\\i,  Thtsaufus,  4,163),  an  Indian  drug  something  like  ginger:
radix  nyniphcccc  loti.


I08  DEVILS   AND   EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

GAR-GAR-LAG-GA   SAG-GA-NA   U-ME-NI-GAR  :   SU-kuil-ma

MULU-GISGAL-LU        PAP-HAL-LA       DU        DINGIR-RA-NA
U-ME-TE-GUR-GUR
40.  klip  -  pir  -  ma

Reverse.
(Plate  XXXIL)

ALAM-BI     ZAG     GIS      .      .      .      .      KU-SE      U-ME-[NI-HAR]

sa-lam-su     i-da-at-sa     \_sd\     tap-pi-m-ni    e-\sir-md\

MULU  -  BI  MUH  -  NA         A         U  -  ME  -  NI      .      .      .      .

ana     eli     ameli     su  -  a-  iu      me  -  e     su  -  bi  -'  -  ma

5.   A  NAM    -    SIB    -    BA  U    -    ME    -    NI    -   SU    -    NAG

GAR    -  NA  GIBILLA  U    -    ME    -    NI    -    E

A    -    SU     -    NA  AN    -    TA    -    SUR    -    RA    -    TA

NAM-TAR     SU-NI-TA    A-GIM    HE-IM-MA-AN-SUR-SUR-RA

A  -  BI  DUK  -  KU  U  -  MU  -  E  -  NI  -  SI  -  IN  -  GE

10.  me-e-su-nu-ti  a-na  kar-pa-ti  tir-ma

SILA-DAGAL-LA-KU      U-MU-UN-DUB      :      ana        ri-bi-ti
tu-bu-uk-ma

GAR  -  GIG  -  GA  ID  -  BA  -  BA  -  GE  SILA  -  DAGAL  -  LA

HA  -  BA  -  AN  -  TUM

ma-ru-us-tu  sa  e-mu-ki  i-na-as-sa-ru  ri-bi-tu  lit-bal

*UH      GU-GU-GA-KAN     A-GIM      HE  -  IM  -  TA  -  BAL  -  E

15.  ru--tum     na-di-tum     si-i    ki-ma     me-e    lit-ta-bi-ik

*UIJ-GU-GA       *UH-A-DE-A        BA-DA-AN-SAR       A-GA-KU
HE-EN-SI-IN-GE-GE

kis-pic     sa     ina     ru--ti     na-di-ti     bul-lu-lu     ana
ar-ka-ti      li-iu-ru


TABLET  "T."  109


**  Set  Iti-iood  at  his  head  and

40.  '*  Make  the  'atonement'  for  the  wanderer,   the

son  of  his  god,  and  ^

Reverse.
(Plate  XXXII.)

*'  Fashion  a  figure  of  him  in  dough,*

''  Put  water  upon  the  man  and

5.   **  Pour  forth  the  water  of  the  Incantation  ;

**  Bring  forth  a  censer  (and)  a  torch,

"  As  the  water  trickleth  away  from  his  body

*'  So  may  the  pestilence  in  his  body  trickle  away.

10.   "  Return  these  waters  into  a  cup  and
"■  Pour  them  forth  in  the  broad  places,
"  That  the  evil  influence  which  hath  brought  low

(his)  strength
**  May  be  carried  away  into  the  broad  places,

15.   *'  That  the  spittle  which  hath  been  spat
'*  May  be  poured  forth  like  the  water,
"  That    the    magic    which    mingleth    with    the

spat-forth  spittle
'*  May  be  turned  back,

*  Tapptnnu,  written  ideographically  ku  -  se,  and  therefore
evidently  connected  with  corn.  It  occurs  in  another  incantation
(K.  5,266  and  Bu.  89-4-26,  16)  in  the  line  sibit  akal  tappinni  elli
liki-\rna\  "Take  seven  loaves  of  pure  iappinnuy  Now  since  it
can  be  moulded  into  figures,  as  in  the  text  above,  it  is  a  plastic
material,  and,  as  we  have  shown,  it  is  connected  with  corn,  and
loaves  are  made  of  it ;  consequently  dough  is  the  obvious  meaning.
Although  a  common  material  among  savage  tribes  for  making
magical  figures,  it  has  not  been  otherwise  met  with  in  the  Assyrian
texts.  On  the  use  of  seven  loaves  of  bread  in  Semitic  magic,  see
Introduction.


no  DEVILS   AND   EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

MU    -   GU    -    GA  I    -   DINGIR    -    EN    -    KI    -    GA    -   GE

SU- *  UH-GIR-GE       GU-DE       KA-SAR-BI       HE-EN-GABA-A
20.  sap-tan    mu-us-sab-ra-tum  sa  i-ta-ma-a  ri-kis-si-na

lip-pa-tir
MULU-GISGAL-LU-BI  HE-EN- EL  HE-EN-LAH-LAH

SU-*SAG-GA       DINGIR-RA-NA-KU        HE-EN-§I-IN-GE-GE

INIM-INIM-MA    ALAM     GAR-SAG-IL-LA     KU-SE-KAN

EN      UTUG-HUL      A-LA-HUL      GIDIM-HUL      MULLA-HUL
SAG      ITI      NU-TIL-LA-HUL
kima         labiri  -  su  sa  -  tir  -  ma  ba  -  a  -  ri


TABLET  "T."  Ill


*  By  the  magic  of  the  Word  of  Ea,
20.   "  The  chanting  h'ps  which  have  uttered  the  ban, —
May  their  bond  be  loosened  !
That  this  man  may  be  pure,  be  clean !
Into  the  kindly  hands  of  his  god  may  he  be
commended."

Prayer   of   the   Figure  of   his   Bodily
Form  in  Dough.*

Incantation  : — '*  Evil  Spirit,  evil  Demon,  evil  Ghost,
evil  Devil,  that  bring  evil  at  the  beginning  of
an  incomplete  month."  ^


*  Tablet  '*  W  "  on  pi.  36  is  the  remains  of  a  similar  text,  but
hardly  anything  is  left.

^  On  the  meaning  of  this,  compare  my  Reports,  vol.  ii,  p.  xix.


QUi0ceffaneou0  ^ncuntatxonB*


tMci  of  i^t.  (Bvif  (Sge.

Obverse.
(Plate  XXXIII.)

.     .     .     LAL-LAL     .     .     .     'turn  ka-sa-a-tu  ^  a-a-lu-u  sa

ameli  i-kat-tam  :  GISGAL-LU   MULU   BA(?)-DUL

.     .     .     .     dal-ha-a-tum       ka-sa-\a\-tu  :  GAR-LAI.- A- AN

ka-ba-a-ti      sa      ma-a-tu  :  KALAM-MA-GE

....  GIG-GA  [:]  mu-sam-ri-sa  a-tu  ^  sa  ni-si  :
NAM-MULU-GISGAL-LU-GE

5.  [IGI  -  GAR  -  HU]L  -  GIM  -  MA    [:]    z  -  ni      li  -  mut  -  turn
mut  -  tal  -  lik  -  turn  :  PAP  -  HAL  -  LA  -  GE
[UB-KU    AB]-SI-IN-BAR  [:]  a-na    tub-ka    ip-pal'^ -lis-ma
tub-ki     u-ri-ik  :  UB     IM-SU

[da-KU  AB]-SI-IN-BAR  [:]  ana  sa-hat  ip-paP -lis-ma
^  sa-hat     u-ri-ik  :  DA     IM-SU

[dagal  KALAM-MA]  AB-SI-IN-BAR  :  ana^  mas-tak
ma-a-tu^  ip-pal-lis^ -ma  mas-tak  ma-a-tu  u-ri-ik  :
DAGAL      KALAM-MA      IM-SU

[MULU-GISGAL-LU]-PAP-HAL-LA-KU  AB-SI-IN-BAR
GIS-KUD-KUD-DA-GIM    TIG-KI-A    IM-MI-IN-GAM

10.  ana  a-me-lu  mut-tal-li-ku  ip-pal^-lis-ma  ki-ma  is-si

nak-su     se-ib-ri    ki-sad-su     ur-da-du-ud

DINGIR-EN-KI  MULU-BI  :  '^'^ Ea  ameli  M\J^-a-tim
i-mur-ma  :  SI-U-NE-IN-GAB


\(^


Q)lt0ceffaneou0  '^wii(xxd(xi\<i\K^,


to.lhi  of  i%(,  (Boif  (Bge.
e(i6fet"(U."

Obverse.
(Plate  XXXIII.)

The     .     .     .     which  bindeth,
A  demon  which  envelopeth  the  man,
The     .     .     .     bringing  trouble,  which  bindeth,
The     .     .     .     heavy  {^)  upon  the  land.
Bringing  sickness  upon  men,
5.  The  roving  Evil  Eye

Hath  looked   on    the    neighbourhood  and    hath

vanished  far  away,
Hath  looked  on  the  vicinity  and  hath  vanished

far  away,
Hath  looked  on  the  chamber  of  the  land  and
hath  vanished  far  away,
10.   It  hath  looked  on  the  wanderer

And  like  wood  cut  off  for  poles  *  it  hath  bent  his

neck.
Ea  hath  seen  this  man  and


•  Sebru,  probably  the  same  word  as  lebiru,  part  of  a  machine  (the
pole  of  a  shadu/?).  According  to  Cuneiform  Texts,  part  xii,  pi.  44,
1.  35,  is-HAS  =  isu  sebiruniy  the  Sumerian  meaning  **  cut  wood."

•  93,081,  //.  2  93,081, /tz.

'  93,081  inserts  <2««.  *  93,081,  «-«^.

•  93,081,  su-ma.

8


114  DEVILS   AND   EVIL   SPIRITS  OF    BABYLONIA.

GAR     SAG-GA-NA  :  a-ka-lu    ina     kak-ka-di-su    is-kuii  :

MU-NI-IN-GAR
GAR     SU-NA    :   a-ka-lu       ana      zumri-su       u-tah-hi   :

MU-NI-IN-TE
?  NE  NAM  -  TIL  -  LA  -  GE  MU  -  UN  -  NA  -  AN  ?

1 5.  ik  -  ri  -  bi  ba  -  la  -  tu  i  -  kar  -  rab  -  su

[mulu]-GISGAL-LU     DU     DINGIR-RA-NA  :  amelu     mar

ili-su     at-ta  :  ZA-E-ME-EN
[gar        SAG]-DU    :   a-ka-lu       sa        ina       kak-ka-di-ka

u-tah-hu-u  :  [mu-NI]-IN-TE-A-TA
[gar     SU]-ZU  :  a-ka-lu     sa     zu-mur-ka     u-kap-pi-ru  :

.      .      .      SUB-BA     ,     .     .      .

[  .  .  ]-ZU    HE-EN-IB-SIG-GA   ZA-E-ME-EN    nam-til-[la]

20.  [mu]-ru  (?yus-ka       lip-sah-ma       at-ta        bu-lu-[ut]

[KI  -  NAM]  -  TIL  -  LA  -  GE         GIR  -  ZU        GUB  -  BU  -  NE

[zna        kak]-ka-ru        ba-la-tu        se-ip-ka       li-iz-ziz

[MULU]-GISGAL-LU       DU.      DINGIR-RA-NA      ZA-E-ME-EN

[rt:]  '  me  '  lu  ma  -  ri         Hi  -  su  at  -  ta

25.  [IGI]       GAR-GIG-GA  :  i-ni       sa       ana        ma-ru-us-tum

ip-pal-su-ka  :  MU-UN-isMN-BAR-RA     .     .     .

[IGI]     GAR-HUL-GIM-MA  :  i-ni    sa     ana    limuttim{tini)

ip-pal-su-ka  :  MU-UN-SI-IN-BAR-RA     .     .     .
.     .     .     RA  -  GE  :  sa      ina      a  -

Reverse.

....      GE

.     .     .     .       -  a  -  lu

30 BAD  -  GA

.     .     .     .     la     ka  -  ni  -  e

[dingir]-da-mu  URUDU-SUN-TAB-BA  hu-mu-un-sig-ga
^^"Bau        ina       pa  -  as  -  tiiin        li -  im  -  ha-  as    ,     ,


TABLET  OF  THE  EVIL  EYE.  II5


Hath  placed  food  at  his  head,

Hath  brought  food  nigh  to  his  body,

15.   Hath  shown  favour  for  his  life —

Thou  man,  son  of  his  god.

May  the  food  which  I  have  brought  to  thy  head —

May    the    food    with    which    I    have    made    an
*'  atonement  "  for  thy  body

20.  Assuage  thy  sickness,  and  thou  be  restored,
That  thy  foot  may  stand  in  the  land  of  life  ;  *
Thou  man,  son  of  his  god,

25.  The  Eye  which  hath  looked  on  thee  for  harm.
The  Eye  which  hath  looked  on  thee  for  evil,
Which  in

Reverse.
May  Ba'u  smite  [it]  with  flax,


*  Kakkar    balati    occurs    elsewhere    in    incantation    fragments
(K.  5,! 25,  etc.).     Cf.  Jer.  xi,  19.


Il6  DEVILS  AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

[DIN]GIR-GU-NU-RA  TARGUL-GAL-BI  HU-MU-UN-DAR   .   .

35.  '''^  „     ina      tar-gul-li-i      ra-bi-tum     lil-te-    .     .     .     .

A-AN-AN-NA-US-SA-GIM   KI-A   MU-UN-SI-IN-BAR-RA  .   .   .

ki-ma     zu-un-nu     sa     is-tu     saine{e)    sur-du-u   ana

irsitim{tini)     us-su-\ru\

SU-BAR-RA-ZU-TA      DINGIR-EN-KI      lugal     zu-ab-ge

HE-IM-MA-RA-AN-ZI-[Zl]

itia    zu-um'\ri\-ka    *'''  Ea     sar    ap-si-i    li-is-suh-su

TE     EN

40.   EN       SU-SAG(?)       ....      NAM-MULU-GISGAL-LU-GE

.     .     .     ri     is     .     .     .     nu      amelu      tam-tini      lini-nu
kima  labiri-su  satir-ma  bari  u  up-pu-iis  dtippi  "^  Iddina-

'"'  Bel  aplu  sa
.  .  .  -ztri  mar  "*  Mu-se-zib  .  .  katd  "  '" ''" Nergal .  .  .  aplil-sa
-  u  -  a


TABLET  OF  THE  EVIL  EYE.  II7

35.  May  Gunura  [strike  (?)  it]  with  a  great  oar(?).
Like  rain  which  is  let  fall  from  heaven
Directed  unto  earth,

So  may  Ea,  King  of  the  Deep,  remove  it  from
thy  body.

Exorcism,  incantation.


40.  Incantation  of  the  Prayer  (?)    ....
OF  Mankind.

[Incantation  :]     .     .     .     evil  man  of  the  sea(?)

[Colophon.  1


t^mi  of  t^e  (f  cin.

Obverse.
(Plate  XXXIV.)

EN  SAG-BA  SAG-BA  GIS-HAR-RA  NU-BAL-E

7na  -  mit     ma  -nut     u  -  sur  -  tu     sa     la     e  -  te  -  ki

GIS  -  HAR  DINGIR  -  RI  -  E  -  NE  -  GE  NU  -  BAL  -  E

u  -  su  -  rat        ildni^^       sa       la       na  -  bal  -  ku  -  ti

5.  GIS  -  HAR  ANA  -  KI  -  A  NU  -  KUR  -  RU  -  DA

u-su-rat   saine{e)    u    ii'sitiin{tini)  sa  la  ut-tak-ka-ru

DINGIR  I  -         A  -         AN  NU  -  BAL  -        E

ilu  is  -  ta  -  a  -  nu  la  nius  -  pi  -  lu

DINGIR-MULU-BA-GE  NAM-MU-UN-DA-AN-BUR-RA

10.  ilu  u  anielu  la  ip  -  pa  -  as  -  sa  -  ru

GI§  -  PAR  NU  -  DIB  -  BA         HUL  -  IK  -  KU  DA  -  A

gis-par-ru      la     eti-kii      sa      ana      lim-ni    ri-tu-u

SA  -  PAR  NU  -  E  -  A  HUL  -  IK  -  KU  LAL  -  E

sa-pa-YM       la       a-si-e      sa       ana      lim-ni      tar-su

15.   UTUG-HUL-HE-A        A-LA-HUL-HE-A        GIDIM-HUL-HE-A

MULLA-HUL-HE-A  DINGIR-HUL-HE-A  MASKIM-

HUL-HE-A

lu-u    u-tiik-ku     lirn-nu     lu-u     a-lu-u     lim-nu     lu-u

e-kitn-mu  lim-nu  lu-u  gal-lu-u  limnu   lu-u  tlu

lim-nu  lu-u  ra-bi-su  lim-nu

DINGIR-RAB-KAN-ME-HE-ADINGIR-RAB-KAN-ME-A-HE-A

DINGIR-RAB-KAN-ME-KIL-HE-A

lu-u     la-bar-tum     lu-u      la-ba-su     lu-u     ah-ha-\zu'\

MULU-LILLA-HE-A       KI-EL-LILLA-HE-A       KI-EL-UD-DA-

KAR-RA-HE-A

20.  lu-u     li-hi-u    lu-u    li-li-tum    lu-u    ar-da-at    li-[li-i]


tMd  of  f^e  QSan.

Obverse.

(Plate  XXXIV.)
Incantation  : —

Ban  !  Ban  !  Barrier  that  none  can  pass,

Barrier  of  the  gods,  that  none  may  break,

5.   Barrier  of  heaven  and  earth  that  none  can  change,

Which  no  god  may  annul,

10.  Nor  god  nor  man  can  loose,

A  snare  without  escape,  set  for  evil,

A  net  whence  none  can  issue  forth,  spread  for
evil,

15.  Whether  it  be  evil  Spirit,  or  evil  Demon,  or  evil
Ghost,

Or  evil  Devil,  or  evil  God,  or  evil  Fiend,

Or  Hag-demon,  or  Ghoul,  or  Robber-sprite,

20.  Or  Phantom,  or  Night-wraith,  or  Handmaid  of
the  Phantom,


sa

'^"  Ni  -  sa  -  ba          lik  -  su  ■

■  su

RA

NI  -           BAL  -

E

I

zb  -     ba  -     lak  -     ki  -

tu

1 20  DEVILS  AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

NAM  -  TAR  -  HUL  -  IK  -  HE  -  A       [AZAG]  -  GIG  -  GA  -  HE  -  A
TUR  -  RA  -  NU  -  DUG  -  GA  -  HE  -  [a]

lu-u    nam-ta-ru   lim-nu    lu-u    a-sak-ku  mar-su  lu-u
niur-su  la  ta-\a-bu\

A-SUR-RA        DINGIR-EN-KI-GE        SAG-BI       IN-GA-GA-[e]

sa       a-na       me-e      sar-ru-ti      sa     '''*  E-a     '-ir-[ru']

25.   GIS-PAR         DINGIR-EN-KI-GE         KAN-NI-IB-DIB-[DIB-BI]

gis  -par  -  ru  sa  '■'^"  E  -  a  li  -  bar  -  [ru]

KU-SUR-RA    DINGIR-NIDABU-GE    SAG-BI   IB-TA-AN-BU-I

sa     a-na     ku-sur-ri-e    sa     ^'"  Ni-sa-ba     i-sar-ru-ru

[sa]-par    dingir-nidabu-ge    kan-ni-ib-sar-ri-e-ne

30.  sa  -  pa  -  ru

[GIS]  -  HAR  -

u  -     sur  -     turn
GIS-HAR-RA     GIS-HAR     ANA-KI-A  ^     SU-NAM-BA-BAR-RA

u-sur-ti   ildni^''   u-su-ral  same{e)  u  irsztim{tiin)  a-a

u-mas-sir-su

35.   ZI        DINGIR-GAL-GAL-E-NE-GE       IM-BA^ -RA-NU-TUK-A

sa      nis       ildni^'       rabilti^'^       la       i  -  pal  -  la  -  hu

ZI  DINGIR-GAL-GAL-E-NE-GE  SA^  -  HE-EN-DA  *

nis  Hani  ^^  rab^iti  ^^  li  -  tk  -  su  -  su  ^

DINGIR-GAL-GAL-E-NE-GE  NAM-HA-BA-RA  ^  -TAR-RU-DA^

40.  ild7ii  ^^  rabiiti  ^^  li  -       ru  -       ru  -       su

(Plate  XXXV.)

E-  A-  AN  8  GE  -  GE  -  E^-  A

sa  a-na  bi  -  ti  ^^  it  -  ta  -  7iu  -  ur  -  ru

E  -  SAG  -  GA  -  NA^l  KaN  -  NI  -  IB  -  TU  -  TU   -    NE

a  -  na^'^      bi  -  ii     pi  -  hi  -  e  ^^      //  -  se  -  ri  -  bu  -  su

45.  BAR-RA^*  NIGIN-E  :  sa  ina  a-ha-a-ti^^  is-sa  ^^  -7ta-ah-hu-ru

BAR-RA        KI-BA  1^ -RA  1^ -LAL-E        KAN-NI-IB-DU-MU-NE

ina^^      a-ha-a-ti^^      a-sar      la      a'^^ -ri      li-ru-su


TABLET  OF  THE   BAN.  121

Or  evil  Plague,  or  Fever  sickness,   or   unclean
Disease,

Which  hath  attacked  the  shining  waters  of  Ea.
25.   May  the  snare  of  Ea  catch  it ;

Or  which  hath  assailed  the  bonds  of  Nisaba,
30.   May  the  net  of  Nisaba  entrap  it  ;

Or  which  hath  broken  the  barrier,

Let  not  the  barrier  of  the  gods,

The  barrier  of  heaven  and  earth,  let  it  go  free !
35.  Or  which  reverenceth  not  the  great  gods,

May  the  great  gods  entrap  it  ;
40.   May  the  great  gods  curse  it.
(Plate  XXXV.)

Or  which  attacketh  the  house,

Into  a  closed  dwelling  may  they  cause  it  to  enter  ;
45.  Or  which  circleth  round  about.

Into  a  place  without  escape  may  they  bring  it.


*  93,082,  GE.  ^   93.082,   BAR.
'    D.T.  38,  DI  (=  SA)  ;    93,082,  Dl-DI  (=  SA-SA).

*  D.T.  38,  ka;  93,082,  DE.

^  D.T.  38,  ytk]-su-us-su  ;    93,082,  lik-ku-ut-su.

«  D.T.  38  and  93,082,  da-an.  '  D.T.  38,  de.

8  93,082,  Ni.  '  D.T.  38  omits.

»"  D.T.  38,  ana  hiti.  "  D.T.  38,  ga-a-ta  for  ga-na.

^2  D.T.  38,  ana,  '^  D.T.  38,  t.

1*  D.T.  38  inserts  a-an.  ''  D.T.  38,  /u.

'«  D.T.  38,  sa.  ''  D.T.  38,  BAR.

^^'  93.083  inserts  ni.  ^"  D.T.  38,  a-na.

-"  D.T.  38  and  93,083  insert  ma.


122  DEVILS   AND    EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

KA  -         E  -         A  ^  AN  -         GE  -         GE  ^  -         E  -       A

sa  ina  ba-ab  ^  bi-ti  ^  it-ta-nak-lu-u

50.    E  -  KI  -  NU  ^  -  TA  -  E  KAN  -  NI  -  IB  -  TU  -  TU  -  NE

a-na       bi-ti  ^       a-sar       la       a-si-e"^      li-se-ri-bu-su

GIS-GAL  GIS-SAK-KUL-TA  MU-UN-DA-AN-  *  GIR-

*GIR-RI-E-A

sa        ina       dal-ti       u       sik-ku-ri^       i-hal-lu-pu^

GIS-GAL        GIS-SAK-KUL-TA        SA  -  NU  -  GAB  -  U  -  DA

KAN-NI-IB-SAR-RI-E-NE

55.  dal-tu^^    u    sik-ku-ru    mar-kas  la  pa-ta-ri  lik-lu-su

I-LU-GIS-ZA-RA-TA     MU  -  UN  -  ZA  -  LA  -  AH  ^^  -  E  -  NE

sa       ina       as-kup-pa-ti       u       sir  ^^  -ri      i-zik-ku  ^^

GI§-KA-NA  GI§-NU-SUR-U-TA^^  MU-UN^^-SUR-

SUR-E-NE^^

sa      ina      *'"*  ka-nak-ki  ^^      nu-ku-se-e     i-sar-ru-ru  ^^

60.  A-GIM       HE-EN-BAL-E :       ki-ma       me-e       lit-bu-ku-su

DUG-GIM    HE-EN-GAZ-E-NE  :  ki-ma  kar-pa-ti  li-ih-pu-su

LA   -   GIM  HE   -    EN    -   SU   -   US   -   RI   -   E   -   [NE]

ki  -  ma  ha  -  as  -  bi  li  -  par  -  ri  -  ru  -  su

*UR-RA       NI-BAL-E       :       sa       u-ru       ib-ba-lak-\ki-tu\

65.    PA  -  BI  KAN  -  NI  -  IB  -  TAR  -  RU

gap  -      pi  -       su  li  -      gaz  -       zi  -       \zu\

AB-TA    TIG-BA-RA-LAL-E   :     sa    ina    ap-ti    \tt-te-ni- -lu\

TIG-BI     KAN-NI-IB-SUM-MU-NE     :     ki-sad-su     lit  bu-hu

AB  -  TI  -  TA  IGI  -  MU  -  UN  -  IN  -  BAR  -  RI  -  E  -  NE

70.  sa  ina  ap  -  ti  si  -  li         ip  -  pa  -  la  -  sa

IGI   -     BI  HE   -     EN   -     SIG   -      GA  -      E    -      NE

pa  -  ni  -  su  Urn  -  ha  -         su

AB  -  SI  -  LA  -  TA  GU  -  MU  -  UN  -  NA  -  AN  -  DE  -  E

sa  ina  ap  -     ti         [         ]         i  -      sis  -     si


TABLET  OF   THE   BAN.  1 23

Or  which  is  shut  in  by  the  house-door,
50.   Into  a  house  without  exit  may  they  cause  it  to
enter  ;

Or  that  which  passeth  door  and  boh,
55.  With  door  and  bolt,  a  bar  immoveable,  may  they
withhold  it.

Or  which  bloweth  in  at  the  threshold  and  hinge,

Or  which  forceth  a  way  through  bar  and  latch.*
60.   Like  water  may  they  pour  it  out,

Like  a  goblet  may  they  dash  it  in  pieces  ;

Like  a  tile  may  they  break  it,

Or  which  passeth  over  the  wall,
65.   Its  wing  may  they  cut  off  ;

Or  which  [lieth]  in  a  chamber,

Its  throat  may  they  cut  ;
70.  Or  which  looketh  in  at  a  side  chamber,

Its  face  may  they  smite  ;

Or  which  muttereth  in  a     .     .     .     chamber,


^  D.T.  38  reads  ka-na-a  {sa  ina  hahi-lu\  i.e.  *Moor"  simply;

93,083,  KA-DE-A.

2  D.T.  38,  MAL-MAL  (i.e.  ga-ga).    3  D.T.  38,  hi.

^  D.T.  38,  i^«  ;  93,083,  hill,  ^  D.T.  38  inserts  um.

^  93,083  and  D.T.  38,  ana  hiti.  '  93,083,  i.

«  93.083,  r«.  ^  D.T.  38,/^.

"  D.T.  38,  ^(2-^/-/«;;/,  omitting  «.  ^^  D.T.  38  inserts  hi.     ■

'2  D.T.  38,  sar.  ''  D.T.  j^M.

'^  D.T.  38  adds  a-an.  '^  D.T.  38  omits  mu-un.

''  D.T.  38,  A.  ^'  D.T.  38  inserts  u.

''  D.T.  38,  ra.    .

a  "■'*  kanakku  and  '^"  nukum  are  both  parts  of  a  door,   but  what
exactly  is  uncertain.


124  DEVILS   AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

75.   KA  -  BI        HE  -  EN  -  TAB  ^  -  E  -  NE  :     pa-a-SU     li  -  di  -  lu

AB  -  SAG  -  GA  -  TA  MU  -  UN  -  DA  -  AB  -  SU  -  SU  -  NE

sa         ina         ap-ti         niuh-hi         it-ta-na-at-ba-ku

GAKKUL  -  NU  -  BAD  -  DA  -  TA   KAN  -  NI  -  IB  -  SU  -  SU  -  NE

kak  -  kul  -  ti  la         pa  -  te-  e         li  -  ik  -  turn  -  su

80.   LAH  -    TA2  MU  -    UN  -    SI  -    IB  -    GIG  -    GIG  -    GA

sa         ina         na  -  ma  -  ri        i  -  te  -  ni  -  ik  -  ki  -  la

(Plate  XXXVI.)

LAH-TA       KI       DINGIR-BABBAR-E       KAN-NI-IB-ZI-ZI-NE

ina    na-ma-ri  a-sar  si-it  '^"  Sainsi(Jt)  li-is-su-hu-su

GUL  -       GUL      ....      GIR  -       GIR  -       RI  -       E  -      NE

85.  sa     .     .     .     .     bir  -     ki    it  -     ta  -     nab  -     ri  -     ka

GUL-GUI KAN-NI-IB-SAR-RI-E-NE

Ilk  -  lu  -  SU

MU-UN-SI-IB-KU-DU-NE

[KAN]-NI-IB-SUB-BU-NE

90. DA  -  *GIR-*GIR-  RI-E-A

[KAN -NI]-IB-SUB-BU -NE

DA-AB-SA-SA-NE


^    K.  4,667,  NI-IB      ....      for  EN-TAB.

""  D.T.  38,  GA.


TABLET  OF  THE   BAN.  1 25

75.   Its  mouth  may  they  shut ;

Or  which  roameth  loose  in  an  upper  chamber,
With    a    bason*    without     opening    may    they
cover  it  ;

80.  Or  which  at  dawn  is  darkened,

(Plate  XXXVI.)

At  dawn  to  a  place  of  sunrise  may  they  take  it ;
85.  Or  which     ...     with  the  lightning  flasheth,

may  they  enclose  it ;

[Or  which] chirpeth,

may  they  smite  it ;

90.  [Or  which] passeth  through,

may  they  smite  it,


*  KakkultUy  the  equivalent  of  the  same  ideogram  as  narnzitti^
a  metal  vessel  quoted  in  lists  of  spoil  and  in  contract-tablets.  The
Syriac  kdkoltd  means  **a  cake"  (Brockelmann,  Lexicon^  p.  1570),
and  if  the  two  words  are  to  be  connected  kakkultu  will  probably
mean  a  flattish  vessel  of  some  kind.  Here  it  is  evidently  meant
to  be  turned  upside  down  to  enclose  the  evil  influence.


ZaBM  of  dn  (Bptf  Spirit.


[Obverse  wanting.

Reverse.


(Plate  XXXVI.)


5-


[UTUG-HUL-IK]      .      .      .      KUR-RA-NI         KAS-KAS  :

„     e-ki7n     .     .     .     \inut-tas-rab-bi-tu     mctti\
[utug-hul-ik]  kalam-ma  tu-gim  ku-ku  :  „  sa

ma-a-tu     ki-ma     [su-ba-ti    u-lab-bi-is^
[utug-hul-ik]      mulu-ra      ka-hus    .    .    .    :

„    sa  eli  ameli  iz-z\i\     .     .     .
[UTUG-HU]l-IK  MULLA  GIS-NU-TUK  :    „    gal-lu-u

la     \se-mu-ii\
[UTUG]-HUL-IK   MULLA   UR-NU-TUK    :     „    gal-lu-U

[sa   bul-ta   la   i-su-u\
[UTUG]-HUL-IK   MULLA   SU-TJUL  SA-A   :  „  gal-lu-U

sa  lim-nis  i-ri-ih-hu-u
[UTUG]-HUL-IK     KALAM-MA     ZI-IR-ZI-IR     :      „     sa

nia-a-tu     i-as-sa-a-su
[UTUG-HU]l-IK  kalam-ma    NIGIN-E    :    „    sa    ina

ina-a-ti     is-sa-nun-du
[utug-hul]-ik   KALAM-ZI-IK    DIB-DIB  BI    :    „   sa

ni-si    sik-na-at    na-pis-ti    ib-ta-na- -rum
[utug-hul-ik]  NAM-TAR  SU  SUR-RA   :

„     nam-ta-ru     sa     ka-ta     al-pu
[UTUG-HUL-IK     kalam-ma]     HUL-A     NIGIN-NA    :

„  sa  ina  ma-a-ti  mit-ha-ris  is-sa-nu7i-du
[UTUG-HUL-IK      KALAM-MA       H]UL-A      LU-LU-A    :

„  sa  ina  ma-a-ti  mit-ha-ris  id-dal-la-hu


t(xBkt  of  <xn  (Bptf  ^pitii.

Reverse.
(Plate  XXXVI.)

The  evil  Spirit  robbeth     .     .     .     and  roameth
over  the  land,

The  evil  Spirit  which  shroudeth  the  land  as  with
a  garment,

The  evil  Spirit  which  against  the  man  angrily  .  .  .

5.  The  evil  Spirit  is  a  devil  which  heareth  not,

The  evil  Spirit  is  a  devil  which  hath  no  shame,

The  evil  Spirit  is  a  devil  which  spawneth  evilly,

•  The  evil  Spirit  which  bringeth  woe  on  the  land.

The  evil  Spirit  which  hunteth  over  the  land,

10.  The  evil  Spirit  which  chaseth  living  beings,

The  evil  Spirit  is  a  Pestilence  which     .     .     .  (?)
the  hand,

The  evil  Spirit  which  fiercely  hunteth  the  land.

The  evil  Spirit  which  fiercely  raiseth  trouble  in
the  land,


128  DEVILS  AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

.      .      [UTUG-HUL-IK]      .      .      .      NU-BU-I   :    „     i^      .      .      .

la     i-mah-ha-ru
15.   .      .      [UTUG-HUL-IK  TUR-TUR-RA  HA-GIM]A  BA-AN-SU  :

„     sa     si-ih-hi-rU'ti    ki-7na     nu-ni     ina     me-e

i-sah-ha-lum
.      .      [UTUG-HUL-IK   GAL-GAL-LA]    .     .    .    RU-RU  :    „    sa

rab-bu-tim     ma-ag-ra-nis     it-ta-nam-du-u
.     .     [UTUG-HUL-IK]     .     .     .     TUN-TUN    :    „    sa   si-ba

u    sip-ta    i-hat-tu-u

.     .     [UTUG-HUL-IK  SILA]  .  .   :    „   sa  su-ka  in-     .     .     .
.     .     [UTUG-HUL-IK     ....:„]'    /<^


TABLET  OF  AN   EVIL  SPIRIT.  129

The  evil  Spirit  which  receiveth  not     ....
15.  The  evil  Spirit  which  draweth  up  the  little  ones
like  fish  from  the  water,
The  evil  Spirit  which  casteth  down  the  elders  .  .
The  evil   Spirit  which  striketh   greyhaired    old
men  and  women.

The  evil  Spirit  which the  street,

[The  evil  Spirit]  which


Obverse.

(Plate  XXXVII.)'

EN  DINGIR-DIE-DIB-BI-E-NE  URUGAL-LA-[TA]

IM   -  TA   -  E   -  A   -  [MES]

ildni^^       ka-mu-ti       is-tn        kab-rim        it-ta-su-ni

MULLA  -  E  -  NE  -  HUL  -  A  -  MES  URUGAL  -  LA  -  TA

5.  IM   -  TA   -  E   -  A   -  MES

za-ki-kti      lim-nu-ti       is-tu       kab-rim       it-ta-su-ni

KI  -  *  SIG  -  GA  -  A  -  DE  -  A  -  AN  URUGAL  -  LA  -  TA

IM    -  TA   -  E   -  A   -  MES

a-na         ka-sa-ap        ki-is-pi        11        na-ak         ini-e

10.  is  -  tu  kab  -  rim  „

GAR    -    HUL    -    IK    -    E       .      .       VII    -    NA    -    NE    -    NE
A  -  MA  -  RU  -  GIM  MU  -  UN  -  ZI  -  ZI

inimma      Itm   -   nu      \ind\      kis   -  sat  -   su   -   nu

ki  -  via         a  -  [bu]  -  ba  it  -  te  -  bu  -  ni

15.   IB-BA-A-NI  MI-NI-[lN-Z]l-ZI      .      .      .      SU-HA-BA-AB

NU  -  MU  -  UN

ag  -  gis      te  -  bu  -  \ii  -  ni]

ZI  -  GA  -  BI


^  Col.  V,  Reverse,  contains  the  following  beginnings  of  lines  : —
(0  ZI  .  .  .  (2)  .  .  .  (3)  nis*^"  ...  (4)  mu-du  ...  (5)  zi  dingir-
sis-[ki]  .  .  .  (6)  en-m[ir]  .  .  .  {-])  nis '^'^  Sin  ta  .  ,  ,  {%)  be-el
a-\_gi.e-\  .  .  .  (9)«/i'^"  .  .  .


0(


Obverse.

(Plate  XXXVII.)

The  gods  which  seize  upon  man

Have  gone  forth  from  the  grave,
5.  The  evil  windblasts

Have  gone  forth  from  the  grave,
To  demand  the  paying  of  rites  and  the  pouring
of  libations
10.           They  have  gone  forth  from  the  grave,
All  that  is  evil  in  their  hosts  like  a  whirlwind
Hath  gone  forth  from  the  grave,
15.   Angrily  they  come


taitd  ''(g(gr


(Plate  XL.)

EN         AZAG      .      .      .      BI         MULU-RA         MU-UN-NA-SUR

EME-NI    EME    NIM-GIR-A-AN    MULU-RA    MU-UN-NA-SUR

TUR  -  RA      SAG  -  GIG      SA  -  GIG      LIKIR  -  GIG  -  GA  -  A  -  AN

UH  PU  LAL  TAR-RI  SIR  UG  PA-AG

5.  MU  -       UN  -        DA  -        AB  -        ZA

UH  (?)        BAR  -  BAR  -  RA  -  BI        A  -  GIM         LUH  -  LUH  -  HA

SI       LAM       TIG       UN       RI       IDIM      A-AB-BA      §AR  -  SAR

TIG        GAR  -  GAR  -  RA  -  BI        IM  -  MA  -  NI  -  IN  -  SAR  -  SAR

GIS  -      GIG  -      GIM         IM  -      TA  -      U  -      TU  -      UD  -      DA

10.    ID- SA- PAR -GIM         MULU        MU  -  UN  -  SI  -  IN  -  TE  -  MAL

GIS  -      ES  -      SUR  -      RA  -      BI  SU  -      LU  -      UG

MU  -       UN  -        [da]  -       AB  -       ZA

GIS  -  GAR  -  LAL  KUD  -  DA  BI

SI

15.   .      .      .      MULU  SAR


(Plate  XL.)

Incantation  : —

Fever  which     .     .     .     against  the  man  flasheth,
Its  tongue  flasheth  against  the  man  as  a  tongue


of  Hehtni


*&'


ng,


Sickness,  Headache,  Heart  disease,  Heartache.

5

Venom  like  water  foameth  at  his  jaws,

in  the  bed  of  Ocean  hath  mingled,

.     ....     his     ..     .     hath  mingled,
Like  a  shadow  it  is  born
lo.   Like  a  net  it  hath  drawn  nigh  unto  the  man.


Obverse.

(Plate  XLI.)

EN      UTUG-HUL      A-LA-HUL      GIDIM-HUL     MULLA-HUL

E-KI-KUR-TA      TI      A      .      .      .      .

u-tuk-ku    lim-nu    a-lu-u    liin-nu    e-kim-mu   lim-nu

gal-lu-u  lim-nu  ul-tu  ir-si-tii  it-ta-su-nu  su-nu

SU  KUR   -   TI   -   TA   -   SA   -   BI  IM   -   TI   -  A   -   MES

is-tu         KU-AZAG         ana         ki-rib  indtun{tini)

it-ta-su-nu         su-nu

5.   ANA  NU    -   ZU    -    MES  KI   -   A  NU    -   ZU    -    MES

ina  same{e)  ul  it-ta-du-u  ina  irsitzm{tini)  id  il-la-mad

GUB-BA      NU-UN-NU-ZU-MES      TUS      NU-UN-NU-ZU-MES

u  -  SU  -  uz '  ZU    ul    i  -  du-u    a-  sab  -ba    ul    i-du-u

U         NU  -  UN  -  DA  -  AB  -  KU         A        NI  -  DE  -  AB  -  NAK

10.  a  -  kal        ul       ik  -  kal       me^^  ~       ul        i  -  sat  -  tu

The  Reverse  bears  the  following  inscription  : —

A  -     na  '^"  Nabu  sukkalli  si  -     i  -     ri

sa  nap  -     har        par  -     si        ha  -     am  -     mu

a  -     sa  -     rid     .     .     .     da  -     a

sa         e  -     In


tMd   "CC"

Obverse.

(Plate  XLI.)

Incantation  : —

The  evil  Spirit,  the  evil  Demon,  the  evil  Ghost,
the  evil  Devil,

From  the  earth  have  come  forth  ;

From  the  Underworld  (?)  unto  the  land  they  have
come  forth,

5.   In  heaven  they  are  unknown,

On  earth  they  are  not  understood,

They  know  not  how  to  stand,

They  know  not  how  to  sit,

10.   No  food  they  eat,

No  water  they  drink.

The  Reverse  states  that  the  tablet  was  a
votive  offering  to  Nabu,  and  it  was  doubdess
intended  to  be  placed  in  the  Library  in  the
Temple  of  that  god  in  Nineveh.


^mtB  BM^4a*


Obverse.

(Plate  XLI.)  '

[en    E-SIR-RA    DU]-A-NI-TA   :   sti-ga-am    ina   a-la-ki-su

sar(?)         E-SIR-RA        du-a-ni-ta

su  -  ga  -  am  ina  a  -  la  -  ki  -  su

[SILA-DAGAL]-LA  DIB-BA-A-NI-TA  :  ri-bi-tu  ina  ba--i-su

5.  [e-SIR-RA]  SILA-A  GIN-NA-A-NI-TA  :  su-u-ka  su-la-a  ina

a-la-ki-su

[su]  -  *  NAG  -  A  -  BAL  -  E  -  DA  MU  -  UN  -  DA  -  GUG  -  MA

ri  -  im  -  ka  tab  -  ka  ik  -  bu  -  us  -  ma

A  -  SI  -  NU  -  SA  -  A  GIR  -  NI  BA  -  NI  -  IN  -  GAR

ina       me-e       la       i-sa-ru-ti      se-ip-su      is-ta-ka-an

10.  A-SU-NU-LUH-HA    IGI-IM-MA-AN-SUM    :   me-e    ka-ti    la

im-sa-a-ti     i-ta-mar

SAL  SU  -  NU  -  *  SIG  -  GA  GAB  -  IM  -  MA  -  AN  -  RI

sin-nis-tu      sa     ka-ta-sa     la     dam-ka     us-tam-hi-ir

KI  -  EL        SU  -  NU  -  LUH  -  HA       IGI  -  IM  -  MA  -  AN  -  SUM

ar-da-tu      sa      ka-ta-sa      la      mi-sa-a     it-tap-la-as


^ctm  Bin^4a*


Obverse.

(Plate  XLI.)

*  [Incantation  : — ]

While  he  walked  in  the  street,
.     .     .     while  he  walked  in  the  street,
While  he  made  his  way  through  the  broad  places,
5.  While  he  walked  along  the  streets  and  ways,
He  trod  in  some  libation  that  had  been  poured

forth,  or
He  put  his  foot  in  some  unclean  water,
10.  Or  cast  his  eye  on  the  water  of  unwashen  hands,
Or  came  in  contact  with  a   woman  of  unclean

hands.
Or  glanced  at  a  maid  with  unwashen  hands.


'  Of  Tablet  VII  of  this   series  only  the  last  line  is   left  (see
Plate  XL)  :—

It  -sa-nu      li  -mut-tu      ina      a-ha-\a-  ii      li-  iz  -  ziz\


INIM  -  INIM  -  MA  ERI  -  A  AZAG


EN  E  -         SIR  -         RA  DU  -        A  -       [nI  -       TA]

Duppi  VW^^-^^  LUH-  KA

*  Tablet  "  AA  "  is  a  continuation  of  Tablet  VIII  of  this  series.


138  DEVILS   AND    EVIL   SPIRITS   OF    BABYLONIA.

15.  [sal]     UH(?)-RI-A    §U     MU-NI-IN-TAG  :     sin-iiis-tu     sa
ru-hi-e     kat-su     il-tapat
[mulu    su]- ni  -  nu -*sig -ga    gab  -  im  -  ma  -  an  -  RI
\sa       kd\  -  ta  -  su       la       dam  -  ku      us  -  tain  -  hi  -  ir

Tablet  *'AA."

(Plate  XXXVIIL)

[mulu        su-ni-nu-luh-ha]         igi-[im-ma-an-sum]

sa     ka  -  \ta  -  su]     la     mi  -  \sa  -  a  -  ti    i  -  ta  -  mar]

MULU  SU-NA  SI-NU-[SA-A]         SU-MU-NI-[IN-TAG]

sa      zii-inur-su      la      i-sa-ru      kat-su      tl-ta\pat]

5.    DINGIR  -  SILTG  -  MULU  -  SAR  [iGI  -  IM  -  MA]  -  AN  -  SUM

''"Marduk         ip    -    pal    -    li    -    is    -    su    -    {ma]

A  -  A  -  Nl  DINGIR  -  EN  -  KI  -  RA  ID  -  RA  -  GE

SU  -  A  -  BA  -  AN  -  NA  -  GI      .      .      .

a-na      *^'' E-a       a-bi-su       ina      ap-si-i      u-sa-an-na

A-A-MU  MAS-MAS  A  SU-*  ELTEG-A-BAL-E-NE  ^

10.  MU-UN  -  DA-GUG- MA  MU  -  UN  -  DA  -  GUG  -  MA

a-bi       mas-mas-su        ri-im-ka       tab-ka        ik-bu-us

ik-bu-us-ma

A  -  SI  -  NU  -  SA  2  -  A  GIR  -  NI  BA  -  NI  -  IN  -  GAR

ina       me-e       la      i-sa-ru-ti      se-ip-su       is-ta-ka-an

A  -  SU  NU  -  LUH  -  HA  IGI  -  IM  -  MA  -  AN  -  SUM

15.   3  SAL         SU  -  NU  -  *SIG  -  GA         GAB  -  IM  -  MA  -  AN  -  Rl

KI  -  EL     SU  -  NU  -  LUH  -  HA      IGI  -  IM  -  MA  -  AN  -  SUM

SAL  *UH   -    RI   -   A  SU    -   MU    -    NI    -    IN    -    TAG

MULU       SU-NI^- NU  -*SIG -GA       GAB  -  IM  -  MA  -  AN  -  RI

MULU  SU-NI^-NU-LUH-HA  IGI-IM-MA-AN-SUM


LUIJ-KA,  TABLET   VIII   AND  TABLET  "  AA."  I39

15.  Or  his  hand  touched  a  bewitched  woman,

Or  he  came  in  contact  with  a  man  of  unclean
hands,

Tablet  "  AA."
(Plate  XXXVIII.)

Or  saw  one  with  unwashen  hands,
Or  his  hand  touched  one  of  unclean  body.
5.  Marduk  hath  seen  him,  and

Unto  Ea  his  father  in  the  Deep  told  it :
10.   "  Father,    his    magician    in    some    poured    out
libation  hath  trodden,  hath  trodden,  or
*'  He  hath  put  his  foot  in  some  unclean  water,
*'  Or   he    hath   cast   his    eye   on    the    water   of
unwashen  hands,
15.   "  Or  he  hath  come  in  contact  with  a  woman  of
unclean  hands,

''  Or  he  hath  glanced  at  a  maid  with  unwashen

hands,
"  Or  his  hand  hath  touched  a  bewitched  woman,
**  Or  he  hath  come   in  contact  with   a   man   of

unclean  hands,
*'  Or  he  hath  seen  one  with  unwashen  hands.


^    K.  4,900,  DA.  ^   S.  924,  SI.

^  K.  4,900  and  K.  6,029  translate  ffie-e  ka-ti  la  mi-sa-a-ti  i-ta-mar.
*  S.  924  omits.  *  S.  924  and  K.  6,029  omit.


140  DEVILS   AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

20.    MULU  SU-NI  1  SI-NU-SA-A  SU-MU-NI-IN-TAG

sa      zii  -  mur  -  su      la       i  -  sa  -  ru       il  -  ta  -  \^pat\

A-NA      IB-BA-SA-A^- EN3      GA  -  E      BA*-DA-LAL-E

ini-nam        te-ib-bi-es'^        ia-a^ -sP        kul-li-man-ni

DINGIR-EN-KI-GE*    DU-A^-NI     DINGIR-SILIG-MULU-SAR

MU-UN-NA-NI-IB-GE-GE

25.  ''''E  -  a  nidri  -  su  '''' Marduk  ip  -  [pa/]

DU-MU         A-NA         NU-E^O-ZU         A-NA-A         RA-AB-DAH

[DINGIR-SILIG]- MULU -SAR       A-NA       NU  -  NI  -  ZU      A

-  NA  -  A      RA - AB - DAH
GAR-GA-E         NI-ZU-A-MU-U         ZA  -  E         IN  -  GA  -  E
GIN  -  NA         DU  -  xMU  DINGIR  -  SILIG  -  MULU  -  [SAR]

30.  [DUG]-SAR-RA  GAR(.?)  UDUN-GAL-TA  GIN-A

su-u-me-[ti]

sa    kar-pa-tu    sa-har-ra-tu   sa  ul-tu  ii-tu-ni  ra-bi-tic

\il-         la-         ku]  li-         ki  -         e-         [ma]

ID      KA  -  //  -  NA  -  TA      A  -  SU       A       U  -  ME  -  NI  -      .      .

zna     pi-i     na-[7'a-a-ti     ki]-lal-li     me-e     sa-am-ina

35.    GIS-SINIG        U-IN-NU-US        GISIMMAR-DU        GI-SUL-SAR

[*ELTEG      SI     MUN     KA-BAR-RA?]     DINGIR-RI-E-NE-GE

bi-i-nu      [inas-ta]-kal     sii-hiis-sa      ka-an      sa-la-la

u-hu-la     kar-na-nu     [ta\-ab-Ui     pi-ta-a-at  pi-i    i-li

....    BA-LAM     GIS-KU     RIG-ZUN      RIG-LI      RIG-LU-LU

GIS-ERIN-BABBAR-RA

40 S2i-pa-lii    ur-ka-rin-na   ri-ki    bu-ra-si   kiL-dur-rii

li-ia-7'u


^  S.  924,  NA  ;  K.  4,900  and  K.  6,029,  i^i-

^   S.  924,  GE  for  SA-A.

^  K.  4,900,  K.  6,029,  and  S.  924  omit.

*  S.  924  and  K.  4,900  insert  an.  ^  S.  924,  pu-us  for  bi-es.


LUH-KA,  TABLET  VIII  AND  TABLET  "  AA."  14I

20.   "  Or  his  hand  hath  touched  one  of  unclean  body  ;

"  Show  unto  me  what  thou  wouldst  do."
25.   Ea  hath  answered  his  son  Marduk  :

*'  O  my  son,  what  dost  thou  not  know  ?

*'  What  more  can  I  give  thee  ?

"  O  Marduk,  what  dost  thou  not  know  ?

"  What  can  I  add  unto  thy  knowledge  ?

"  What  I  know  thou  knowest  also.

*'  Go,  my  son  Marduk,
30.   "  Take  an  earthen  vessel

''  Which  hath  come  from  a  great  kiln,  and

"  At   the  confluence  of  two   streams    bale   up*
water  and

35.   "  Binu,  the  mastakal-pXdint,   sukussu,  a  stalk  of
salalu^

The  '*  horned  alkali,*' "  salt  that  openeth  the  mouth
of  the  gods,

40.  ^     .     .     supalu,  urkarinnu,  (?),  cypress,  kudurrUy
liaru,


*  S.  Q24  omits.  '  K.  4,900,  //.

"  K.  6,029  omits.  •  S.  924  and  K.  6,029  omit.

10


K.  4,900  and  K.  6,029,  ni.

*  Samma  (=  sab-ma  ?),  meaning  uncertain.

^  On  salalu  see  p.  107.

c  Uhulu,  according  to  Delitzsch,  H.W.B.,  p.  43^,  means  alkali,
the  same  word  as  the  Syriac  ahld.  It  is  described  in  Payne  Smith,
125,  as  '*  *  herha  quae  detergendae  ciiti  teritur  in  pulvere^     Ferr."


142  DEVILS   AND    EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

(Plate  XXXIX.)

.  .  .  [gis-erin]  bur  ni  sag  ni  rig  dingir  nin-ib

....      *  LAL  UD      .      .      .      .      DU  -      a

.    .    [e]-ri-n?i  [saninu  ^  eY-lcL  ^  samnu  ^  ru-us-tu  ^  samnu  ^

ni-kib-ti
.     .     .     .     ana  sadi  -     su  ib  -     bab  -     la

45 NI        LID       SILAM-AZAG-GA-TA      SAR      .      .      .

•     .     .     .     el  -     li  -     ti  sa  -     man  ar  -     hi

sa        ina        tar  -  ba  -  si       el  -  [//]  ^       ib  -  ba  -  nu  -  \ii\
.      .      .      GE       TAK-GAB-SI-A        TAK-NINI-SI        TAK-NINI-
MUS-GIR      TAK      .      .      .

GUG  TAK  -  ZAGIN  -  NA

50.  .     .     .     sa-ri-ri  du-sa-a   mus-gar-ru   hu-la-la  sa-an-tii^
uk-na-a

Reverse.

SA  -    A  -    GUB  -    BA  -    KU  U  -

ana  lib  a  -  gub  -  bi  -  e

.    [e]l-la        nun-ki-ga-ge

e/ -     la  sa    '        '''"  Eridi

.      .      ZU  -      AB  -      TA  U  -

.     .     ap  -     si  -     i  e  -

-  SUB  -  DUG]  -  GA  -  ZU  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  SUB  ^

si  -  pat  -  ka  ta  -  ab  -  [la]  i  -  di  -  jna

[a  -  NE  NAM  -  SIB  -  BA  -  TA]  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  DU

60.  7ne  -  e  -  su  -  nu  -  ti      ina     i  -  sip  -  pu  -  ti    suk  -  HI  -  ma

[NAM  -  SUB  -  EL  -  LA  -  ZU  -  TA]  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  RI

ina         si  -  ip  -  ti  -  ka         el  -  li  -  ti         ul  -  HI  -  ma

[gis  (?)  -ba-an-gab]-gab-id-lal-e  gis-gam-ma

SU-U-ME-TI
[       „       -  e  ""  kip  -  pa  -  ti]  li  -  ki  -  ma


55. .  .

[nam


ME  -

NI  -

SUB

^■5

-    di

-  ma

U-

ME-NI-GUB

ki-

in  -

ma

ME  -

NI  -

SA

pu-

US  -

ma

LUH-KA,  TABLET   VIII   AND   TABLET   "  AA."  I43

(Plate  XXXIX.)

.     .     .     cedar,  pure  oil,  oil  of  balsam  (?),'  oil  of
nikibti.

honey     ....     (which)    hath    been   brought
down  from  the  hills,

45.   Pure     ....     (and)  the  fat  of  a  cow

Which  hath  been  made  in  a  clean  sheepfold.

50.  .    .    .    sarirU'XTi^X.dX,  dusu-stone,  mus£-arru-stone,
Au/a/u-stone,  san^u-stone,  uknu-sion^y

Reverse.
Place  in  a  laver  and

Arrange  the  pure     ...     of  Eridu  and

55.   Make  the     ...     of  the  Deep  and

Perform  thy  goodly  Incantation  and

60.   Make  perfect  the  waters  thereof  with  priestcraft
and

With  thy  pure  Incantation  do  thou  cleanse  (him)

and
Take  a  bundle  of  twigs  (?),


'  K.  4.900,  yaw-««.  *  K.  4,900,  f//«.

^  K.  4,900,  //'.  *  K.  4,900,  du.

^  K.  4,900,  id.  ^  K.  4,900,  SUM.

*  Rusiu^  perhaps  the  Chaldce  rthus  (Levy,  420,  a).


144  DEVILS   AND    EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

65 BA  -        A  U  -        ME  -        NI  -        DE

[me]  -  e  -  su  -  nu  -  ti     ana      lib  -  bi      su  -  puk  -  ma

[a-gub]-ba      e-dingir-ri- e-ne      azag-gi-ne

a  -glib  -  ba  7mc  -  ul'^  -  HI  bit  i  -  It

[a  -  GU]B  -  ba        E  -  DINGIR  -  Rl  -  E  -  NE        EL  -  E  -  NE

70.  a  - gub  -  bu  -  u  7ftu  -  ub^  -  bi  -  ib         [  „  ]

A-GUB-BA  E-DINGIR-RI-E-NE  LAH-LAH-GI-[NE]

\a  -  gub  -  bu  -  u]  niu  -  nam  -  mir  ^  [  „  ]

A  -  GUB  -  BA  GU  -  LAH  -  HA       DINGIR  -  RI  -  E  -  NE

a  -  gub  '  ba  -  a        mi  -  is       pi  -  e^        sa        ildni^^

75.   A    -    GUB   -    BA  ERI    -   A  AZAG    -    GI  *   -    E    -    NE

A    -    GUB    -    BA  ERI    -    A  EL    -    LA    -    E    -    NE

(Plate  XL.)

A  -  GUB  -  BA  ERI  SUN  -  SUN  -  NA^  -E-NE

SU    -    U    -   ME   -   TI  ERI    -    A  U    -    ME   -    NI    -    [e]

li   -   ki  -   e   -    ma  alu  su    -    bi   -    '    -    [su]

80.   SILA  -  DAGAL  -  LA  ERI  -  A  U  -  ME  -  NI  -  [e]

ri  -      bit  ali  su  -      bi  -      '  -     [su]

DINGIR  -  AS  -  A  -  AN    .    .    .    SIG  -  GA  -  BI       U  -  ME  -  NI  -  [e]

ka   -   ka   -   a  su    -    bi   -    '    -    [su]

BI    -    KU  U    -    ME    -    NI    -    [e]

85. .     .     ru            su  -  bi  -     '  -  [su]

a(?)  GU     .  .     .

sa  -  a  mas     .  .     .

:  a


*  K.  4,900  omits.  ^  K.  4,8 1 3  .  .  .  .  if.

^  K.  4,813,  i.  *  S.  924,  GA.

^  S.  924  omits.


LUH-KA,  TABLET  VIII   AND  TABLET  "  AA."  145

65.   Pour  the  waters  thereof  on  it  and

The  laver  which  cleanseth  the  Temple  of  the
Gods,
70.  The  laver  which  purifieth   the   Temple   of   the
Gods,
The  laver  which  maketh  bright  the  Temple  of

the  Gods,
The  laver  which  washeth  the  mouth  of  the  Gods,
75.  The  laver  which  cleanseth  the  city,
The  laver  which  purifieth  the  city,

(Plate  XL.)

The  laver"  which  maketh  bright  the  city,

Take  thou  and  bring  to  the  city,
80.   Bring  to  the  broad  place  of  the  city.

Bring

85.  Bring


*  It  is  possible  that  agubbu  has  the  meaning  of  "pure  water
all  through  this  incantation.


©eemp^ionar  of  <E>ob0,  dc*


Obverse.


Col.  II  (Plate  XLII).


kakkadu      \ku  -  u\b  -  su      u      karnu     ....     -  turn
bur  -  sa  -  sa       \saknat\af)       lam  -  sa  -  ti       saknatiat)
ap  -  pa  -  ri  -  tu        saknat{ai)        rit  -  ta        sa        ameli
5.  sip  -        pu  '         ra  rak  -         sa  -         at

irat  -         sa  pi  -         ta  -         a  -        at

i7ia     sumeli-sa      se-ir-ra     na-sat-ma      sirti-sa     ik-kal
ina  imitti  -      sa  i  -     kar  -      rah

is  -  tu  kakkadi  -  sa  ana  sip  -  pu  -  ri  -  sa

10.  pa  -      ag '      ru  sinnistu  me  -      ri  -      nu


•  Bursam  is  the  Chaldee  barsus,  part  of  the  headdress  worn  by
the  priests  (Exod.  xxxix,  28),  Levy,  Chald.  Worterb.y  117,  a,
Bezold  reads  -gar {})-za-za  {Z.A.  ix,  118)  and  pur-za-za  (?),  1.  76
i^Z.A.  ix,  407).

**  Lamsatu  has  the  meaning  of  a  kind  of  fly,  but  whether  this
holds  good  here  it  is  difficult  to  say.

^  Apparritu  is  to  be  connected  with  the  Heb.  */^^r,  a  headdress
with  which  a  prophet  (i  Kings  xx,  38,  41)  disguises  himself.  He  is
able  to  reveal  himself  by  removing  it  from  his  face.  In  1.  20  the
apparritu  is  worn  ina  liii,  i.e.  in  (or  on)  the  litu^  which  is  also
probably  a  headdress  (see  11.  76,  92)  and  is  to  be  compared  to  the


^tectipiionB  of  (Bob0,  dc,


Obverse.


Col.  II  (Plate  XLII).


The  head  (has)  a  fillet  and  a  horn     .     .     .
She  wears  a  head-ornament,*  she  wears  a  fly  (?).^
She  wears  a  veil  '^ ;  the  fist  of  a  man  ;
5.  She  is  girt  about  the  loins  ^  ;
Her  breast  is  open,
In  her  left  arm  she  holds  a  babe   sucking  her

breast.
Inclining  towards  her  right  arm  ;
From  her  head  to  her  loins
10.  The  body  is  that  of  a  naked  woman  ^ ;


Hebrew  liwydh^  "  crown"  or  "  wreath"  (Prov.  i,  9  ;  iv,  9).  As  is
sometimes  to  be  seen  in  the  terra-cotta  figures  of  the  goddess,  who
is  represented  holding  a  babe  in  her  left  arm,  a  long  veil  covers  the
back  part  of  the  headdress  and  falls  down  the  back.

^  Sippuru  from  this  line  and  1.  9  (*'from  her  head  to  her
sippuri'^)  evidently  means  "loins"  or  something  similar,  as  Bezold
has  pointed  out.

«  Sinnistu  mertnUf  from  the  root  eru^  "to  be  naked."


148


DEVILS  AND   EVIL   SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.


is  -  tu      sip  -  pu  -  ri  -  sa      ana      ka  -  an       tap  -  pi  -  sa
ku  -  li  -  ip  -  tu  kima  siri  a  -  ta  -  at

pa  -  pa  '  an         libbi  -  sa        a  -  gi  -  i         i  -  ta  -  ad  -  du
sum    -    SU  ''"NIN    -    TU  SU    -    Ut  ''"MAH


15.  kakkadu  kakkad  siri

ina  ap  -  //  -  su  hi  -  in  -  zu  uz  -  zu  -  ru

ina  pi  -  su  mu  -  u  su  -  gal  -  lu  -  lu  -  ni

\uzna\"^^  ki  -  ma  ba  -  as  -  mi  sa  -  kin

[karnd"Y^-su     a-na     III-su     un-ka-a-ti     i-ta-ad-da-a

20.  [a'lp  -  par  -  ri  -  tu  ina  li  -  ti  -  su  sa  -  kin

[P]ag  -  ru  SUH  -  HA  kakkabdni*^  ma  -  li

[libit]  sepi  ^^  -  su  zu  -  up  -  ra  si  -  na


Reverse.
Col.  III.

ka  -  an  tap  -  pu  -  sa

sum   -   su         Sa   -   as   -   su
25.  la  -  ah  -  mi  tamti


ik  -  ba  la  isi

u    -    ri(?)   -    in    -    nu

su  -  [ut]  *''"E  -  a


*  A'an  tappi,  from  the  expression  in  this  line  ''from  the  loins  to
her  kan  tappt,''  evidently  signifies  some  part  of  the  feet,  and  hence
tappii.  must  undoubtedly  be  referred  to  the  Hebrew  tephah,  '*  the
palm  of  the  hand,"  i.e.,  the  sole  of  the  foot.  Kannu  is  the  same
as  the  Hebrew  Mn^  the  Syriac  kanna  (Brockelmann,  p.  160,  b),
**  basis."

^  Kuliptu  from  its  connection  is  probably  the  same  as  the  Syriac
k'lapKtha,  squama  (Brockelmann,  p.  324,  «),  in  spite  of  the  change
from  k  to  k.

^  Papan  libbi  is  uncertain,  but  **  navel "  seems  a  probable
translation.  Bezold,  ''das  Pochen  (.?)  ihres  Herzens  bewegt(.?)  die
Meeresflut"  {Z.A.  ix,  116).


DESCRIPTION   OF  GODS,  ETC.  I49

From  the  loins  to  the  sole  of  the  foot  *

Scales  **  like  those  of  a  snake  are  visible.

Her  navel  "^  is  composed  of  a  circlet ;

Her  name  is  Nin-tu,  a  form  of  the  Goddess  Mah.**

1 5.  The  head  is  the  head  of  a  serpent ; .
From  his  nostrils  mucus  trickles,®
His  mouth  is  beslavered  with  water  ;
The  ears  are  like  those  of  a  basilisk,
His  horns  are  twisted  into  three  curls,

20.   He  wears  a  veil  in  his  headband,^
The  body  is  a  5^^-fish  ^  full  of  stars.
The  base  of  his  feet  are  claws.

Reverse.
Col.  III.

The  sole  of  his  foot  has  no  heel  ^  ;

His  name  is  Sassu-urinnu  {^\

25.  A  sea-monster,  a  form  of  Ea.


**  Nin-tu  and  Mah  are  both  forms  of  the  goddess  Belit-ili.

®  Uzzuru  probably  to  be  referred  to  the  Syriac  *z/r,  involutus
(Brockelmann,  p.  247,  b).     Hinzu  is  doubtful.

*  Litu,  see  note  to  1.  4.

8  Bezold,  pir-ha.  The  6'w^-fish  occurs,  however,  in  the  omeur
texts  (Boissier,  Documents  Relatives^  p.  173,  1.  29).

^  Ikbay  Hebrew  'dkebh.


r


150  DEVILS   AND  EVIL   SPIRITS   OF  BABYLONIA.

kakkadu  ku-ub-su  hup-di — iin-tnu  .  .  .  -gu-u
karnu  sabiti(^)  istat{af)  ana  ku-tal-li-sa  ki-ra-at
karnu  sabitiij)  istatiaf)  ana  pa-ni-sa  id-da-at
uz  -         nu  immeri  rit  -         tu7n  ameli

30.  ina     ki-la-te-sa     a-ka-la     na-sat-ma     ana    pi-sa    u-rib
pa  -  gar  -  sa      ndni      ana      ku  -  tal  -  li  -  sa      kap  -  pat

kan  tap  -     pa  -      sa

sar  -  tu  is  -  tu  bi  -  rit  karndti^^  -  sa

ana  sa   -   sal  -   /i  -   sa  na   -   da    -   [at]

35.  it  -  ti         kan         tap  -pi  -  sa         il  -  ta  -  ma  -     .     .     .
(Plate  XLIII.)

is  '  tu  kabli  -  sa  a  -  di  kan  tap  -  pi  -  sa  ka  -  .  .
man  -  za  -  az  ina  lib  -  bi  it  -  ta     .     .     .     .

a  -        gi '         i  i  -         \ta  -        ad  -         du\

hi  -     lip  -     ta  kima  [siri  a  -     ta  -     at]

40.  sum     -     su

u-  tu  -  ti  *'"NIN  -  KI  -  GAL

ku   -   bu   -   us  kakkadi  -  \su\

karan     alpi    sakin{in)    sar -turn    \is-tu    karndti^^  -  su]

ana  sa  -  sal  -  li  -  su  na  -  di

45.  /<2   -   nu  ameli  li  -   tum  [sakin]

*  Bezold  reads  it-ra-at ;  but  both  kirat  and  iddat  are  used  of  the
shape  of  the  moon's  horns  (see  my  Reports^  Nos.  26,  30).

^  Kilate  has  been  compared  to  the  Hebrew  kiVaim  and  translated
"both  (hands)."     (See  Muss-Arnolt,  Dictionary,  p.  390,  h.)

^  Bezold  reads  {Z.A.  ix,  ii8)  pa-gar-m  ha-dis  ku-pi-li-sa  kap-pat,
translating  "  ihren  Korper  schlagt  sie  lustig  {hadis)  mit  ihrem
Schwanze."


DESCRIPTION  OF  GODS,  ETC.  151

The  head  (has)  a  fillet ;

One  horn,  that  of  a  gazelle,  bent  over  her  back.

The  other  horn,  that  of  a  gazelle,  straight  *  over
her  face.

The  ear  of  a  sheep,  the  fist  of  a  man,
30.   In  her  two  hands  (?)''  she  holds  food  which  she
puts  into  her  mouth.

Her  body  is  that  of  a  fish  ""  bent  backwards,

The  sole  of  her  foot  is     ...     .

Hair  lies  from  between  her  horns

As  far  as  her  shoulders  {?),^
35.   It     .     .     .     .     with  the  sole  of  her  foot.
(Plate  XLIII.)

From  her  middle  to  the  sole  of  her  foot  is    .    .    .

The  position  therein

[Is  made  of]  a  circlet ;

Scales  like  those  of  [a  snake  are  visible],
40.   Her  name  is

The  chosen  of  Ereshkigal.

The  fillet  of  his  head

He    has    the   horn  of  an   ox ;    hair   lies   [from

between  the  horns]
As  far  as  his  shoulders     .     '.     .     .
45.  The  face  of  a  man  ;  [he  has]  a  headband  ;

^  Sasalli  is  evidently  some  part  of  the  back.     A  veil,  as  well  as
hair,  falls  down  to  it  (1.  1 14).


152  DEVILS  AND   EVIL   SPIRITS  OF  BABYLONIA.

kap  -  pi        sakin{in)        sepd "  -  su        mah  -  ra     .     .     .

pag  -  ru         nesi         ina         IV  sepd"

sum   -  su  *''"

kakkadu  kakkad  ki  -  is  -  [su  -  gi'\
50.  ku  -  ma  -  ar  -  su        sa        imitti        sa

si  -     si  -     it  rit  -     ti  sa

ri  -      it  -      ta  -      su  sa

ina  ki  -   la   -   te   -   su  same{e)  [nasi]

sip  '  pu  -  ra  [ra  -  kis]

55.  ina      sepi  -  su      sa      imitti      ir  -  si  -  ta       [sa  -pi  -  is]

libit      sepi  -  su       sa       imitti       supur       issuri    .     .     .

sepi  -     su  sa  sumeli         tar  -     [sa  -     at  -     ma]

kin  -     za         sa         tap  -    pi  -     e  -     su

pag  -     ru  me  -     ri  -     nu

60.  sM7n  -         su  A  -

lah  -         mu  su  -        ut

Lower  Part  of  Col.  III.

.     .     .      su

65.  .     .     .     sa  ■-    pi  -     is  sip  -    pu  -     ra         [ra  -     kis]

[ina  sepi  -  su]  sa  sumeli  ir  -  si  -  ta  sa  -  pi  -  is
[sepi  -  su]  sa  imitti  su  -  te  -  gu  -  rat  -  ma
[kin  -     za]         sa  tap  -    pi  -     su  sa  -    pi  -     is


DESCRIPTION  OF  GODS,  ETC.  153

He  has  wings  ;  his  feet  are  advancing    .     .     .
The  body  of  a  lion  with  four  legs     .     .     .
His  name  is  the  god


The  head  is  the  head  of  a  kissugu  (?),
50.   He  wears  an  armlet  (?)  *  on  his  right  arm.     .     .

The  fingers  (.'*)  of  the  hand  are  those  of    .     .     .

The  fist  is  that  of  a

In  his  two  hands  (?)  [he  holds  (?)]  the  Jheavens,

[He  is  girt  about]  the  loins,
55.  With  his  right  foot  [he  touches  (?)]  the  earth.

The  base  of  his  right  foot  is  a  bird's  claw     .     .

His  left  foot  is  stretched  out

The  flat  (?)  of  his  footsole

The  body  is  a  naked

60.   His  name  is  A

A  monster,  a  form  of

Lower  Part  of  Col.  III.

65.   He  touches  (.^)   .    .    .   [he  is  girt  about]  the  waist.
With  his  left  foot  he  touches  (?)  the  earth.

His  right  foot

With  the  flat  (?)  of  his  sole  he  touches  (?)


*  Kumar  may  be  connected  with  the  Syriac  kamra,  cingulum,  and
kumra,  vinculum  (.?),  (Brockelmann,  p.  ^id,  a-b).


154  DEVILS  AND   EVIL  SPIRITS  OF   BABYLONIA.

{libit       sepi-su\       sa       imitti-su       zu-pur       issuri-ma
70.  \kin\  -  za         sa        tap  -  pi  -  su  -  ma         sa  -  pi  -  is

(Plate  XLIV.)

.     .     .     nesi    sakiniin)    pag-ru    me-ri-in-nu    ki-is-su-gu
[sum]  -      su  La  -      ah  -      mu  ip  -     pi  -      ru

.     .     .    -nu-tum     la-ah-mu    sa    same{e)    u    irsitim{tim^
\lah  -       mu]  apsi  su  -       ut  ''"£"  -        a


75.  kakkadu  karnu  u  su  -  ku  -  su  pa  -  nu  ameli
\li\-ta  sakin{in)  uzun  alpi  bur-sa-sa  sakin{in)
\rit\ta-su  ameli  a-gu-uh-ha  ina  ir-ti-su  la-bis
[katu]  -     su  sa  imitti         tar  -     sa  -     at  -     ma

[GIS   -   BA   -   an?]   -   GAB    -    GAB    -    A  ga     .      .      .      .

80.  [ina      kati-su]      sa      sumeli      *^**  ku-up-pa-la-a     [na-si]

sip  '    pu  -     ra  ra  -     [ki  -     is]

ka  -       turn  su

Col.  IV.

ka  pi     ...     .     ii

[rit-ti]-su         ameli        ina  imitti-[su  i]-kar-rab

85.  [ina]  sumeli  -  su  "** passuri (})  na  -  si

[kap]  -  pi        sakin(in)  sip  •  pu  ~  [ra]  ra  -  ki  -  is


DESCRIPTION   OF  GODS,   ETC.  1 55

The  base  of  his  right  foot  is  a  bird's  claw.
70.  With  the  flat(?)  of  this  sole  also  he  touches  (?).

(Plate  XLIV.)

The     ...     is  that  of  a  lion,  the  body  a  naked

kisstcgUy
His  name  is  Lahmu  ippiru,

nutum  3.  monster  of  heaven  and  earth,
A  sea-[monster],  a  form  of  Ea.

75.   His  head  (has)  a  horn  and    .    .    .    (?)*  :    the  face

of  a  man  ;
He  wears  a  headband  ;    the  ear  of  an  ox  ;    he

wears  a  head-ornament  ;
His  fist  is  that  of  a  man  ;    he  is  clothed  with

a  doublet  ^  on  his  breast.
His  right  [hand]  is  stretched  out  and
[holds  .^  a  bundle  (?);
80.   In  his  left  [hand  he  holds]  a     ....     (?)
he  is  girt  about  the  loins  ;

Col.  IV.

His  [fist]  is  that  of  a  man,  inclining  to  the  right,
85.   In  his  left  hand  he  holds  a  dish  ;

He  has  wings  ;  he  is  girt  about  the  loins  ;


*  Sukusu  or  lutussUf  meaning  unknown.

^  Aguhhuy  cf.  Jensen,  Mythen  und  Epen,  p.  448.


156  DEVILS  AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.

//  -  tu         ti  -  kt  -  hi         ana         sip  -  pu  -  ra         amelu

is  -  tu       sip  -  pu  -  ri  -  su       ana       sepa  "  -  \su\       kalbu

.     .     in  -  dur     issuri    sakin{in)     .     .     .     ka     sakiniin^

90.  sum  -  su  Lah  -  mii  su  -  \ut\  ""^  Gu  -  la

kakkadu  karnu  u  su  -  ku  -  \su'\  pa  -  nu  ameli
li  -  ta  sakin(in)  [dur  -  sa]  -  sa  sakin(in)
ri  -  it  -  ta  -  su  ameli

ina  imitti  -  su  hup  -  pa  -  [la  -  a  ?]  na  -  si

95.  ina       sumeli  -  su       ^^**  mitpani       u       [izziij)       na]  -  si

sip  -  pu  -  ra  ra  -  ki  -  [is]

.     .     .     su         ntlni  ra  -  ki  -  [is]


100 ra      .     .

kakkadu


sip  -  pu  -  ri  -  su


(Plate  XLV.)

[sum]  -  su         Su  -  lu  -  id


[kakka]du         ku  -  ub  -  su

105.  usun      alpi      sakin{iit)      sar -[tu       is  -  tu]     .     .     .     u
[ana  sa]   -   sal  -    li   -   su  [na   -    da]    -   at

-  tum

ta  -  su  ameli

sakin    -    ma  rit   -    ta   -   sa

ka  kap   -  pi  -   sa  tar   -   sa

me  -  ri  -  nu       sinnistum{tutn)      sepa  "  -  su

hu  -  up  -  pa       izzaza{za)

sum  -        su  Ni  -         zi  -         ik  -         tum


[pa]   -

nu

[rti]  -

[kap]   .

■  pi

no.

.         .         .

.         .

[f'^£-]  -

ru

DESCRIPTION  OF  GODS,   ETC.  1 57

From  the  waist  *  to  the  loins  he  is  a  man,
From  the  loins  to  the  feet  he  is  a  dog  ;
He  has  the    .     .     .    (?)  of  a  bird  ;  he  has    .     .    .
90.   His  name  is  Lahmu,  a  form  of  Gula

The  head  (has)  a  horn  and     .     .     .     .     (?)  :  the
face  of  a  man  ;

He    wears    a    headband ;     he    wears    a    head-
ornament  (?)

His  fist  is  that  of  a  man.

In  his  right  hand  he  holds  a     .     .     .     .     (?),
95.   In  his  left  hand  he  holds  a  bow  and  [arrows  ?]  ;

He  is  girt  about  the  loins     ....

His     ...     is  that  of  a  fish,  girt     .     .     .

(Plate  XLV.)

His  [name]  is  Sulul


104.  The  head  (has)  a  fillet

He  has  the  ear  of  an  ox  ;  hair  lies  [from]     .    .     .

As  far  as  his  shoulders  (?)

The  face  is  that  of  a

His  fist  is  that  of  a  man,

He  has  wings  and  the  fist(.'*)     .
110 of  the  wing  is  spread  out.

The  body  is  a  naked  woman  ;    his  legs  stand
hent{?y

His  name  is  Niziktum.


*  Ttkt\  cf.  the  Hebrew  fawek,  cstr.  /ok  (Gesenius,  ed.  Miihlan  und
Volck,  892,  b).

^  Huppa  =  **  broken."  It  is  possible  that  this  is  in  antithesis  to
*'  his  left  foot  is  stretched  out "  (1.  57).


158


DEVILS   AND   EVIL  SPIRITS   OF   BABYLONIA.


[kakka'ldu         kakkad        issuri        ap  -    par  -     ra  -     tu
[ul]  -  tu       kakkadi  -  sa       ana      sa  -  sal-  li-sa      nadat
115.  \rit\-  ta  -  sa  ameli

\ina  ki  -  ld\  -  te  -  sa  GAR  -  NA  na  -  sa  -  at

.     .     .     -  su       imitti       u       sumeli      saknat{at)  -       ma
[^tl]  -         ta  -         nu  su  -        gal  -        lu  -        lu


\p<^g\  -f

ru

sinnistum  -

(tum)

50.   .      .      .      -

ka-

turn

KAT  -

MAH

su

sa

issuri

[sepd^'  -

sa]

hu  -      up

-     pa

izzaza{zd)

[sum  -

su]

ilu

K.  13,843.

a.  [ma]

ki'     la

-     te  -     su

[na-     si]

b.  sum  -

su

''"  Ti    .

.     .     .     .

c.  kakkadu  ^akkad  ki  -        is  -

d.  ina  ri  -         it  -         ti  -         su     .

e.  [ina]  imitti  -  su  i  -


su


[^^1


81-7-27,  109.


g.  .     .      tu       .
h.  sum  -        su


i.  kakkadu


na


ku  -     ub  -     su
eli    ....


KIS  -


TIR


RA


J-  ^'
k.   '■'"  NIN  -

1.  pa  -         nu  ameli    ....

m.  bur  -  sa  -  sa

n.  ri  -  it  -  ta  -  su

o.  ina         ki  -      la  -      te  -      su     .     .
p \.^^P]  "  /^  -  ^^


[sakin]


DESCRIPTION   OF  GODS,  ETC.  1 59

The  head  is  the  head  of  a  bird  ;    a  veil  hangs
from  her  head  to  her  shoulders  (?)
1 15.   Her  fist  is  that  of  a  man,

In  her  two  hands  (?)  she  holds  a  torch,

She  has  a  right  and  left     ....

Beslavered  with  drops  of  water,  '

The  body  is  that  of  a  woman,
1 20.  The     ...     is  that  of  a         (?)

The     ....     is  that  of  a  bird.

Her  legs  stand  bent  (?)

[Her  name]  is  the  goddess     ....


Be^enb  of  i^t  T}7ornt*


(Plate  L.)


Obverse.


ul  -     tu  ''"  A  '     nu  -     um

samuiu)  ib  -     nu  -     u  \ir  -     si  -

ir  -       si  -       turn  ib  -       nu  -       u  ndrdti^'

ndrdti^^  ib  -     na  -      a  a  -     tap  -     pa  -      ti

^.  a  -     tap  -    pa  -     ti       ib  -     na  -     a        ru  -     sum  -     ta
ru  -     sum  -     ta  ib  -     nu  -     u  tu  -     ul  -     tu

il-lik  tu-ul-tu  ana  pan  '^"  Samsi  i-bak-ki
ana  pan  ''''  E  -  a  il  -  la  -  ka  di  -  ma  -  a  -  sa
mi  -  na  -  a     ta  -  at  -  ta  -  an  -  na     a  -  na    a  -  ka  -  li  -  ia

10.  mi -na-a      ta  -  at  -  ta  -  an  -  na      a  -  na     mun  -  zu-  ki -  ia

at  -  tan  -  nak  -  ki  is  -  ma  ba  -  si  -  il  -  ta

ar  -         ma  -        na  -        a  '•"  uddi  (?)

ana  -  ku     am  -  mi  -  na     an  -na-  a     is  -  ma    ba  -  si  -  il  -  ta

u  ar  '     ma  -na-a  '^"  uddi  (?)

15.  su  -  uk  -  ka  -  an  -  ni  -  ma       ina       bi  -  rit      si  -  in  -  ni


.~r,,.^y»ljk^^j::ir::f.-ws^.


*V/

I  .:

I  "  -  ^

4--

p^^^m

\

'M:-  -


''1^


k  ■      r


Tablet  inscribed  with  the  Legend  of  the  Worm  (B.>T.  No.  55'547)-


{To  face  p.  i6o.)


Btc^tni)  of  (^t  13)otm.


Obverse.
(Plate  L.)


After  Anu  [had  created  the  Heavens],

The  Heavens  created  [the  Earth],

The  Earth  created  the  Rivers,

The  Rivers  created  the  Canals,
5.  The  Canals  created  the  Marshes,

The  Marshes  created  the  Worm.
-     Came  the  Worm  (and)  wept  before  Shamash,

Before  Ea  came  her  tears  : —

*'  What  wilt  thou  give  me  for  my  food,
10.   '*  What  wilt  thou  give  me  for  my  devouring.'*  ""^

"  I  will  give  thee  dried  bones,

*'  (And)  scented     .     .     .     -wood."

•'  What  are  these  dried  bones  to  me,

"  And  scented     .     .     .     -wood!"
15.   '*  Let  me  drink  among  the  teeth,

•  Munzuku  and  lunzuka  (1.  16),  lit.  **  damage."


l62  DEVILS   AND   EVIL   SPIRITS   OF  BABYLONIA.

u       la  -  as  -  hi       su  -  si  -  da  -  an  -  ni
sa       St  -  in  -  ni  -  7na        lu  -  un  -  zu  -  ka       da  -  mi  -  su

Reverse.

u         sa         la  -  as  -  hi  -  si  -  im       lu  -  uk  -  su  -  us

ku  -     sa  -  si  -     e  -     su

20.  sik  -     ka  '     ta       dal  -     ie  -     ma       as  -  sa  -     ba  -    at

as   -  sum        an  -  na  -  a       tak  -  bi  -  i  tu  -  ul  -  tu

Urn  -  ha  -  as  -  ki     '^"  E  -  a       i  -  na  dan  -  na  -  ti

ri  -         it  -  ti  -         su

INIM    -   INIM   -   MA  KA   -   GIG   -   GA  -   KAN

25.  tippus        suati      sikari      ^'""'^'' SA-KIL-BIR      u      samni
istenis{nis)     tuballal
sipti  III-su   ana   eli  tamannu{nu)    i-na    eli    si-in-ni-su
tasakkan(an)

GAB-RI  IM-GID-DA  sa  a-na  pi  sa-tar  sar-pa  la-bi-ri-im
sa         *"  *^" Marduk-nadin-ahi         "^^^""Nabu-na-din-ib-ri-a
nu     IN-SAR


LEGEND  OF  THE   WORM.  163

**  And  set  me  on  the  gums  * ;
**  That  I  may  devour  the  blood  of  the  teeth
*'  And  of  their  gums  destroy  the  strength  ;
20    '*  Then  shall  I  hold  the  bolt  of  the  door."
So  must  thou  say  this  :  "  O  Worm  !
**  May  Ea  smite  thee  with  the  might  of  his  fist."

Incantation  of  the  Sick  Mouth.

25.  Thou  shouldst  do  the  following  :

Mix  beer,  the  plant  sa-kil-bir,  and  oil  together,
Repeat  thereon  the  incantation  thrice
(And)  put  it  on  his  tooth.

^  Lasht,  meaning  doubtful.


(PocaBufarg  of  ^dtck^  T}7orb0*


[Note.— Tablets  3,  4,  5,  10,  15,  16,  and  '' A"-"K"  are  in  Vol.  I ;
Tablets  "As.  3"  (i.e.  A^akku  III),  "  L,"  "  M,"  "  N,"  11,  12,
"Mu.  3"  (i.e.  Murus  kakkadi  or  TVi  III),  6,  "  O,"  8,  9,
"P"-"Z,"  "Lu.  8"  (i.e.  Luh-ka  VIII),  "AA"-"DD,"  and
"Worm"  (i.e.  Legend  of  the  Worm),  are  in  Vol.  II.]


i,  -'not":  G,  7,  19,  13.

e,  "not":  4,  v,  62,  [66,  68],  vi,  2  ;  5,  ii,  8  ;  C,  67-91.

Iru,  "to  start":  I,  i,  '-ram-ma,  K,  77;  i-ir-ru,  5,  ii,   35;  ''-ir-ru^

V,  24;  a-{a)-n,  K,  69  ;  ^-n,  V,  47  ;  II,   i,  li-ru-su,  V,  47;

I,  2  (.?),  i-ta-ru-us,  5,  vi,  2.
abbu,  " serpent (.?)"  :  cf.  Arabic  ^-^^>  16,  22.
ibihu,  ?:  P,  24.
abru,  "nest" :  4,  i,  35.
ubbutu,  see  upputu.
agubbu,  "water,  laver":    3,  256;   16,  208;  N,  iii,  3;  AA,  52,  68,

70.  74.  75»  76,  77-
aguhhu,  "doublet":  DD,  77.
igiru  (?) :  III,  2,  m-te-gu-rat,  DD,  67.
egirtum,  egirru,  "thought"  :  3,  281.
iddu,  "  bitumen  "  :   16,305.
ittu,  "appearance":  M,  27.
ididu,  **be  straight":  I,  i,  id-da-at,  DD,  28.
edelu,  "to  shut"  :  I,  i,  li-di-lu,  V,  75.
iziru,  "to  trickle":  II,  i,  uz-zu-ru,  DD,  16.
ahhazQ,  "a  demon,  robber  sprite":   3,   196;    4,  v,  20;   5,  i,  50;

C,  83,  98;  D,  iii,  37  ;  K,  261  ;  V,  18.


1 66  VOCABULARY


uhulu,  ** alkali":  AA,  38.

A-HA-AN-TUM,  ?  3,    1 99.

[ih-tag]-ga-a-mu-ne,  **in  my  soreness"  :  4,  v,  50.

IH-TUK-A-MU-NE,  variant  of  above :    5,  ii,  i.

etu,  "to  be  dark"  :  II,  i,  ut-iu-u,  K,  35  ;  II,  2,  u-ta-at-tu-u^  C,  140.

etutu,  *' gloom":   16,  37.

makalu,  "food":  A,  iv,  18.

ikilu,  "to  be  dark"  :  IV,  3,  i-te-m-ik-ki-la,  V,  81.

ikimu,  "  to  rob  "  :  I,  i,  e-kim,  B,  21  ;  X,  2.

ekimmu,  "ghost":  3,  12,  33,  100,  112,  154,  162,  195;  4,  iv,  43,  v,  6,
8,  10,  12,  14 ;  5,  iii,  27,  45,  iv,  15,  16  ;  10,  10  ;  16,  211,  262,
283,  309  ;  A,  i,  5,  35,  45,  ii,  30,  iii,  31,  iv,  18,  20 ;  C,  71,  97'
122,  157,  174;  D,  iii,  36,  38;  E,  52;  G,  4;  K,  217,  260;
As.  3,  26  ;  L,  6  ;  N,  iv,  6,  vii,  8  ;  8,  31  ;  11,  10,  91,  97  ;
T,  6,  r.  23;  V,  16;  CC,  2.

akasu,  "to  go  furtively,"  a  synonym  of  aldku,  Cun.  Texts,  pt.  xviii,
pi.  6,  obv.  53,  followed  by  ddlu:  I,  i,  i-ku-us,  T,  6;
[  .  .  -ku^^us-ma,  9,  135.

alu,  "devil":  3,  12,  31,  100,  112,  154,  162,  195;  5,  iii,  27,  45  ;
10,  8;  16,  210,  262,  281,  309;  A,  9,  34,  43,  ii,  29,  iii,  29;
B,  3  ff-»  55,  79»  81,  95  ;  C,  60,  97,  188  ;  D,  iii,  36  ;  E,  52  ;
G,  4;  K,  13,  217,  260;  L,  4 ;  N,  iii,  26,  iv,  4,  6,  16;
8,  27,  31  ;  11,91,97;  12,38,  [65];  9,8,238;  P,  10;  T,  16;
U,  I  ;  V,  16;  CC,  2.

elu,  "to  go  up"  :  I,  2,  H-til-la,  9,  89.

alluhappu,  "sack"  :  B,  41.

alaku,  "to  go":  III,  i,  u-sa-lik,  N,  ii,  22.

alallu,  "  bundle"  :  P,  64;  cf.  AA,  63,  and  DD,  79.

ulinnu,  "  cord,"  probably  Syriac  ll^CTI :   16,  181  ;  D,  iii,  17.

alapu,  ?  :  I,  i,  al-pu,  X,  11.

iltu,  "  straw"  :  9,  50.

emedu,  "to  stand":  II,  i,  um-mu-di-ia,  3, 152  ;  IV,  i,  \in\-nim-mi-dti,

E,  28.
umunnu,  'disease":  3,  45.
inninnu,  kind  of  corn  :  9,  129.
unkati,  "rings":  DD,  19.
usuzzu,  "standing":  CC,  8.


VOCABULARY.  167


asammA,  kind  of  vessel :  A,  19.

aspasti  (?),  Medkago  sativa  :  B,  27  (?).

asurril,  *' chamber":  C,  216.

npA,  *•  cloud  "  :  9,  24.

uppu,  "cloudy":  5,  ii,  66  (read  thus  instead  oi uhhutum)\  P,  11,  27.

apparu,  **  cane-brake  "  :   16,  296a.

apparratu,  "headband,"  Hebrew  I^X:  DD,  113.

apparritu,  variant  of  above:  DD,  4,  20.

upisu,  "enchantment":  3,  58;  C,  182;  E,  9.

ikbu,  "heel,"  Hebrew  :ip!J:  DD,  23.

ismu,  "  bone,"  Heb.  D^y  (cf.  issimtu,  King,   The  Seven  Tablets  of

V   V

Creation,  vol.  i,  p.  86):  Worm,  11,  13.
esenu,  "to  stink":  H,  i,  us-sa-nu,  C,  216.
aru,  "  date-spathe  "  :  3,213.
irru,  ?:  P,  35.

eru,  "tamarisk,"  Syriac  f'r^ :  3,  87,  211  ;  16,  249;  K,  140.
em,  "meteorite":   16,  247;  A,  27,  32;  N,  ii,  11.
erebu,  "to  enter":  I,  2,  mu-tir-ru-{y .  rt)-buy  C,  104.

urbatu,  perhaps  to  be  connected  with  the  Syriac  P-2)),  "a  reed,"
but  more  probably  with  (A^;!)  "a  willow"  :    9,  71  ;   P,  36.

ardatu,  "maiden,  woman":  3,  197;  4,  i,  27,  iv,  45;  C,  89,  99;
9,  152;  T,  10;  V,  20;  Lu.  8,  14;  AA,  16.

arhu,  "cow":  S,  3,  30;  AA,  46.

arnianu,  "scent":  Worm,  12,  14.

arinnu,  "  cloud"  :  K,  35  ;  DD,  24  (?).

erinu,  "cedar":  12,  58;  9,  229;  AA,  43.

arsuppu,  "  parsnip  (?),"  Syriac  ^SiflDJ (!**(?) :  9,  129.

urisu,  "kid":  E,  38;  F,  iii,  2,  iv,  3,  6,  8  ;  11,  24,  74,  84;  N,  iii,
46,  48,  50,  52,  54;  8,  ii,  26.

arasn,  "to  meet,  march,"  Syriac  ^>1  :  I,  i,  ia-ru-us,  3,  265.

araru,  "to  tremble":  I,  i,  tar-ruy  G,  9;   IV,  3,  li-ia-na-ar-ra-ru,

16,  103;  itia-nu-ur-ru,  V,  42.
urtu,  "explanation,"  K,  iii.
esu,  "to  set":  I,  i,  e-sa-a^  16,  336.


l68  VOCABULARY.


esitum,  15,  13.

asabu,  "to  sit"  :  II,  i,  u-sub-sum-ma,  A,  30.

asakku,  "fever":   3,  41,  117,  156,  164,  179,  198;  5,  ii,  4,  6,  8,  10,

iii,  40;  A,  ii,  15  ;   C,  96,  100  ;   I,  i,  2  ;  J,  5  ;   L,  16 ;   M,  i  ;

II,  2,  46,  93,  102,  105;   12,  2;  O,  6,  12;  9,  3  ;  R,  4;  S,  4;

V,  22;  BB,  I.
nsultu,  "vein"  :  5,  iv,  27.
usumgallum,  "dragon":   16,  15.
asamsutum,  "  tempest "  :   16,32.
isipputu,  "  priestcraft  "  :  A  A,  60.
essepu,  "owl,"  Heb.  t]^^y  (Delitzsch):  5,  i,  21.

asasu,  "to  oppress"  :  I,  i,  i-as-sa-su,  5,  iii,  42  ;  t'-as-sa-a-su,  10,  8  ;
tas-sa-as-su,  A,  47;  II,  2,  u-ta-as-si-is,  ir,  71.

atu,  "to  see":  I,  i,  a-ta-\_a\,  3,  261;  a-ta-at,  DD,  12;  II,  i,
ut-tu-su,  S,  r.  II.

ututu,  "chosen"  :  DD,  41.

ittu,  ?  :  B,  75.

ittu,  "pitch":  P,  26.

Utukku,  "spirit":  3,  29,  100,  112,  153,  154,  162,  194,  195;  4,  i,
41,  V,  29,  vi,  45  ;  5,  i,  4,  35,  iii,  27,  45,  vi,  2,  21,  24 ;  10,  6  ;
16,  no,  262,  281,  308,  309  ;  A,  34,  43,  ii,  29,  iii,  18,  21,  27,
43,  44,  46;  B,  79,  93  ;  C,  c,  e,  41,  58,  67,  97,  118,  157,  168,
174,  180,  187,  195  ;  p,  iii,  38  ;  E,  15,  52  ;  H,  r.  7  ;  J,  9  ;
K,  221,  260,  265  ;  As.  3,  28  ;  L,  3,  8,  15  ;  N,  ii,  11,  iii,  26,
27,  iv,  2,  vii,  13  ;   11,91;  W,  3  ;  and  passim  in  inim-inim-ma

UTUG-HUL-A-KAN.

ntlu,."  embrace  " :  4,  ii,  25,  v,  52  ;  5,  i,  37,  ii,  41  ;  R,  34.

atappatu,  "  canal  "  :  Worm,  4,  5.

atru,  "abundant,  fat(?)":   11,  26.

ba'u,    **to   come":    I,    i,  i-ba--u,   16,   145;    III,    i,  su-bi--su-may

N,  iii,  6;  su-bi-i--ma,  T,  r.  4 ;  su-bi-    .  .  .  ;  AA,  79,  81-83,

85  ;  u-ME-Ni-E,  A,  i,  22  ;   11,86;  T,  r.  6.
buanu,  "muscle":  3,  182;   11,  52;  9,  8  ;  P,  17,  23  ;  AA,  37.
ba'aru,  "to  hunt":  I,  3,  ib-ia-na--rum,  X,  10.
babalu,    '  to  bring"  :  IV,  i,  ib-bab-la,  E,  40  ;  AA,  44.
buhattu,  "lamb":   16,  182.
baltu,  "  caper  (?),"  Syriac  lo  :  B,  75.


VOCABULARY.  1 69

banu,  "  be  bright":  11,  i,  [3«-«]»-««-tt,  D,  iv,  42.

bennu,  "  pestilence  "  :  N,  7.

bursasu,  Chaldee  V^IV^^:  DD,  3,  76  ;  81-7-27,  109,  m.

bararu,  "to  howl":  IV,  2,  it-ta-ah-ra-ru,  K,  31.

buraSu,  "cypress"  :  A  A,  40.

basiltu,  "dried":  Worm,  11,  13.

GI-BIL-LA,  "torch":   A,  i,  22,  ii,  23;   K,  279;  N,  iii,  5;   11,  86;

T,  r.  6.
gallu,  "devil":    3,    100,   112,   154,   162,  195;  5,  iii,  27,  45,  iv,  15,

i7>  Zl\    10,  12 ;   16,  263,  283,  310  ;  A,  35,  45,  ii,  30,  iii,  33  ;

C,  73,  97»  122;  D,  iii,  36;  E,  52;  G,  4;  K,  217,  260;  L,  7  ;

N,  iv,  8,  vii,  22;  Mu.  3,  33;  8,  32,  ii,  10,  11,  12;  T,  r.  8,

24;  V,  16;  X,  S,  6,  7;  CC,  2.
galalu,  "to  be  beslavered"  :  III,  i  ;  su-gal-lu-lu,  DD,  18  ;  ^u-gal-

lu-lu-ni,  DD,  17.
galatu,  "to  frighten":   II,   i;  gul-lu-ti-ia,  3,  188;  III,  i,  sug-lii-

ma,  9,  128.
galtu,  "terrible"  :   16,  20,  248  ;  A,  26.
gallutu,  "quaking"  :  N,  15.
giltanu,  "  drop  of  water  "  :  DD,  118.
Gi-SAG-DA-Di-w,  "  reed  hat  (?)"  :  8,  29.
Gi-SAG-DU-Di-A,  "  reed  hat  (?)"  :  8,22.
giparu,  "field":  5,  vi,  14.
GAR-NA,  "censer":   A,  i,  22,  ii,  23;    11,  86;   N,  iii,  5;   T,  r.  6  ;

DD,  116.
gurgurru,  "coppersmith":  F,  iii,  11.

U-*GURU-US-RIG-AN-BAR-KA-A-Nl(?)  :    9,201.

gisparru,  "snare":  V,  12,  26.

dalu,  "to  move  furtively,"  cf.  Syr.  ^y  :  I,  i,  i-dul  (v.  i-dul-lu,
V.  /-</«-[«/]),  B,  45  ;  i-da-al,  T,  8 ;  II,  i,  mu-dal-la,  B,  67.

da(d)danii :  see  Mu.  3,  i  ;  9,  loi.

dinanu,  "substitute" :  8,  29  ;  W,  2 ;  see  Vol.  II,  p.  2,  note  b.

daparu,  "to  remove";  II,  i,  dup-pir^  3,  158;  10,  r.  2  ;  E,  50 ;
?  3,  202;  II,  I,  {J)ud-da-pa-ru,  N,  ii,  36.

dusu,  a  stone  :  AA,  50.

dispu,  "honey":  As.  12,  57.


170  VOCABULARY.


zu'uhu,  "battening,"  Heb.  ^T :  5?  v,  ^}.

zamanu,  **  enemy  (?)"  :   12,6.

zarabu,  "to  restrain":  II,  i,  u-zar-ri-[^ib  ?'],  B,  77.

zaraku,  **  to  sprinkle"  :  zi-n-i'lk-ma'],  3,  8.

hilu,  ''to  tremble"  :  I,  i,  ta-hal,  G,  7.

hapu,  "to  wash/'  Syr.  .^Lm  :  I,  i  (?),  im-*dar-ra,  D,  23.

nahbalu,  /*  snare  "  :  P,  15.

hasbu,  "pot"  :  C,  171.

hulu,  "  fleabane  (?),"  Syr.  "^Lm  :  B,  73.

hulduppii:    see  note,  Vol.  I,  p.   160;    D,  iii,  32,  34;    F,  iii,   13;

K,  140 ;   II,  104  ;  12,  61.
halalu,  "to  creep  "  :  IV,  3,  it-ta-na-ah-lal-Iu,  K,  103.
hulalu,  a  stone  :  AA,  50.

halasu,  "to  tear"  :  IV,  i,  ih-hi-il-sa-a,  4,  v,  2.
•^''''''""  HUL-Ti-GIL-LA,  "  wild  cucumber  (.?)  "  :  9,  37.

hamu,   "to  scorch,"   Syr.  ]iDx» :    I,  i,  ih-mu-'su,  A,   1 1  ;   ih-me-su,

9,  14.
hamatu,  "to  burn":   I,  i,  i-ha-am-ma-tu^  K,  288;  II,  i,  u-ha-am-

mat,  P,    18;     mu-ha-am-me-lu,   P,    17;     hum-mu-duy  11,  18;

II,  2,  uh-tam-mat^  9,  22.
hamru,  .?:  9,  24.

hinnu,  "henna,"  Arabic*!^  :  ^'^''"  hi-ni,  9,  8;  ^"'''^ hi-in-nu,  P,  31.
hinzu,  "  mucus  (.^)":  DD,  16.
'^"huppalu,  {}) :  DD,  80,  94.
hupdi  ...,(.?):  DD,  26.
huppu,  "bent  (.?)":  DD,  119,  122.
hasbu,  "potsherd,  pot":  P,  13;  V,  63.
hasasu,  "to  slit"  :  II,  2,  uh-ta-as-sj-is  (v.  si),  9,  6.
ham,  "ditch":  P,  45.
harbu,  "  desolate  "  :  B,  99.

harbasu,  "rain,"  "  terror (.?)" :   3,  199;  4,  vi,  44;  5,  i,  3.
•''''"'^'' HAR-HAR,  a  plant:  9,  200.
harasu,  "to  split"  :  I,  2,  ih-ta-ra-as,  R,  14.
hasu,  "to  hasten":  I,  i,  ht-sam-ma,  K,  124.
hittu,  "lintel":  B,  73.


VOCABULAKY.  I7I


ti'u,  "headache":   3,  199;  A,  i,  9,  iii,  36;  O,  4,  12;  9,  28,  101,

148,  193;  P,  2,  22,  52,  77;  BB,  3.
titu,  ''clay":  K,  30,  42.

timil,  '*  weave":  I,  i,  time,  16,  182;  [6,  6];  \_ti\me,  9,  231.
tappu,  "sole,  palm,"  Heb.   HSD :  DD.  11.  3^  36,  38,  58,  68,  70.

T       •/

kipu,  "to  bend"  :  I,  i,  kap-pat,  DD,  31.

kuru,  "pain":  5,  i,  43.

kiru,  "  pitch  (?)":  N,  ii,  5.

kubsu,  "fillet":  DD,  2,  26,  42,  104;  81-7-27,  109,  /.

kabati,  "  heavy  (?)":  U,  3.

kudurra :  AA,  40.

kakkultu,  "  bason"  :  V,  79.

kilate,    "both    (hands)  (?)":    DD,    30,    53,     116;     K.    13,843^;

81-7-27,  109,  0.
kilalli,  "  both  "  :  P,  66  ;  AA,  34.
kilallan,  "both":  K,  198.

kalapu,  "to  move":  IV,  i,  muk-kal-pi-te,  O,  4;  9,  55.
kuliptu,  "scales,"  Syr.  I'AaLo :  DD,  12,  39.
kultu,  "canopy,"  Chald.  ^rb'^'-  K,  117.
kamanu,  "cake":  As.  3,  13.
kamaru,  "  to  fall "  :  I,  2,  kit-mu-ru,  P,  79.
kanakku,  some  part  of  a  door  :  V,  59.
kanu,  "base,"  Heb.  ?3 :  DD,  11,  23,  32,  35,  36.

kanu,  "to  guard":  II,  i,  u-kan-ni,  P,  43  ;  u-kan-na,  P,  43.

kinzu,  "flat  of  the  footsole(?)":  DD,  58.

kissugu,  (?):  DD,  49,  71  ;  K,  i3,843<:.

kiskibirru  (?) :  A,  ii,  28.

kasasu,  "to  destroy":  I,  i,  lu-uk-su-us^  Worm,  18.

kusasii,  "destruction":  Worm,  19.

kasapu,  "to  pay  rites"  :  I,  i,  ka-sa-ap,  Y,  9.

kusurru,  "  bandage (?)"  :  A,  ii,  25;  D,  iii,  22,  23  ;   ii,  89;  V,  28.

kisu  in  kis  libbi,  "  heartache  (?)" :    A,  9,  37  ;    C,  95  ;    D,  iii,  41  ;

1 1,  100 ;  9,  18,  116  ;  BB,  3.
kippatu,  "twig,"  Heb.  ri33  :  P,  64;  AA,  63.

T      •

kippatu,  "  end,  corner"  :  Mu.  3,  6.


172  VOCABULARY.


kapadu,  'Uo  found"  :  I,  i,  i-kap-pu-ud,  i6,  80.

kaparu,  ''  to  atone"  :  II,  i,  kup-pir,  11,  85  ;  R,  36  ;  T,  40  ;  ku-up-

ptr,  8,  24;  u-kap-pi-ruy  U,  18.
takpirtu,  "atonement"  :  As.  3,  5.
kissnru,  *'girt  about"  :  A,  49.
karu,  "to  bend"  :  I,  i,  ki-ra-at,  DD,  27.
sammu  kur-kur,  e  plant :  9,  200.
kurpu,  "  dungheap  (?)  "  :  As.  3,  7.
karasu,  "  to  pull  off"  :  I,  i,  ki-ri-is-ma,  R,  31.
karru,  "  destruction  "  :   5,  i,  11.
kararu,  "to  turn":  I,  i,  ka-ra-ri-e,  K,  150;  IV,  3,  it-ta-nak-ra-ru,

9,  18.
karasu,  "leek":  R,  14;  S,  14;  T,  12.
kiskanii,  Astragalus,  Tragacanth  (?) :  K,  184,  201.
katimtu,  "coverlet":  B,  39.
H'u,  ?:  II,  85;  9,  134;  T,  38.
la-a-tu,  "cow" :  Mu.  3,  30.
lu-'-a-ti,  "unclean":  B,  23.
lit,u,  "strength":   3,  190.
litu,  "  headband,"  Heb.  H^l^  :  DD,  20,  45,  92.

T :  •

liaru,  a  tree :  AA,  40.
lublubu,  "trap  (.?)":  P,  15.
labnu:  see  11,  50.

labasu,  "ghoul":  3,  35,  196;  4,  v,  18;  5,1,49,  iii,  24;  A,  i,  7,  36;
C,  81,  98;  D,  iii,  37;  K,  261  ;   11,  92,  98;  V,  18.

labartu,  "hag-demon":  3,  35,  196;  4,  v,  16;  5,  i,  48,  iii,  22,  24;

A,  i,  36 ;    C,  79,  98  ;    D,  iii,  37 ;    K,  261,  282  ;    11,  92,  98 ;

8,  33;  P,  5;  V,  18.
labuttu,  "chief"  :  4,  iv,  3.
lahmu,  "monster":  DD,  25,  61,  73,  74,  90.
lahru,  "shoots(.?)"  :  5,  iv,  31.
lilii,  "phantom":    3,  37,  156,  164,  197;    C,  85,  89,  99;   K,  262;

V,  20.
lilitu,  feminine  of  above  :    3,  156,  164,  197;    C,  87,  99;    K,  262;

V,  20.
lamadu,  "to  learn" :  I,  i,  la-mit-tu,  4,  iv,  45.


VOCABULARY.  1 73


lamassn,  "guardian  spirit":  3,  9,  94,  153,  194,  287;  16,  289,  308,
346;  K,  206,  225  ;  L,  9 ;  As.  12,  66;  6,14;  8,  28,  vi,  17,
35.  36;  9.  7»  239-

lamsati,  "fly(?)":  DD,  3.

lanu,  ** shape"  :  P,  10.

lipitum  (?) :  4,  iv,  35.

lashu,  "gum  of  the  teeth  (?)":  Worm,  17,  18.

mitru,  "rain(?),"  Heb.  K^J^'  12,  24.

milu,  '*  full  strength  (?)  "  :  R,  18  ;  S,  18.

MwwK j^ULU-GisGAL-LU,  a  plant:  9,  200.

malalu,  "to  cry,"  Syr.  ^\SSsD :  IV,  i,  I'm-ma  (v.  meyit'l-lu,  K,  loi.
mamitu,  **  ban,  fapu  " :  3,  43  ;  5,  ii,  2,  6,  iv,  37  ;  A,  ii,  32  ;  C,  182  ;

D,  iii,  28.
mass^,  "guide":  16,  58,  125.
masu,  "be  broad"  :  II,  i,  mu-us-st-ma^  N,  ii,  54.
merin(n)u,  "naked (.?)":  DD,  59,  71,  iii,  '"^ merinUy  DD,  10.
marasu,  "to  mash  up"  :  I,  i,  mu-ru-us.  As.  3,  13,  14.
mirsu,  "a  mash":  As.  3,  13,  14.

marustu,  "pain":  3,  117 ;  16,  7,  344;  T,  r.  13 ;  U,  25.
masu,  "  to  rob  "  :  I,  i,  im-^u--u,  K,  53  ;  II,  i,  mus-su-u,  Mu.  3,  r.  26.
masu,  "to  forget":  III,  2,  us-/am-su-u,  Mu.  8,  17.
massiu,  "robber":  5,  iii,  17;  9,  185.
musgarru,  a  stone:  AA,  50.
masadu,  "to  bring  low"  :  I,  i,  ma-sa-di-ta,  3,  190.

mashati  (?),  "libations  of  oil  (?),"  Syr.  l»»aV>:  K,  47.

maslu,  "middle":  K,  154;  As.  3,  12.

masatu,  "to  humble"  :  I,  i,  im-si-it,  11,  48.

mastakal,  a  plant :  A,  i,  20;  T,  31  ;  AA,  37.

ni'u,  "to  turn":  I,  i,  ni--i,  B,  55  ;  G,  13.

ni'u,  "  restraint  (?) "  :   16,  22.

naru,  "to  smite"  :  I,  i,  i-nar-ru,  3,  29  ;  4,  i,  43  ;  na-a-n,  16,  11.

nirtu,  "destruction":  16,  11,  47.

nasu,    "to   quake":    II,    i,  u-na-as   (v.   -a'^u),   P,   20:    nu-ussu

(v.  si\  9,  53.
nigissu,  "cavern"  :  B,  35  ;  K,  89,  103.


174  VOCABULARY


nagiru,  '*  patron  "  :  3,  90  ;  5,  v,  22  ;  K,  288.

nidutu,  ''desolate  place"  :  K,  91,  105  ;  N,  iii,  18.

nadaru,   **to  rage":    I,   i,   na-ad-ru^   5,  iv,   25;    na-ad-ru  (v.  n),

16,  22.
mazaltu,  "homestead":  9,  89.
nazaku,  ''to  destroy":  I,  i,  lu-un-zu-ha,  Worm,  17.
munzuku,  "destruction":  Worm,  10.
niziktum,  name  of  a  demon  or  god  :  DD,  112.
natii,  "to  be  fit"  :  na-tu-u,  9>  53'
nitlu,  "brightness":  B,  43.
nikibtu,  ?:  AA,  43.
nakalu,  "to  be  cunning":   I,   i,  naklat  (v.  la-at),  B,  53  ;  nik-la-

ma,  4,  vi,  2 ;  ba-gub-ba,  5,  ii,  62.
nukusu,  part  of  a  door :  V,  59.
nalasu,  "to  rain"  :  I,  i,  ina-al-lu-us,  As.  12,  4.
nalsu,  "  rain"  :  As.  12,  4.
namii,  "ruins":  B,  57,  95.

namasu,  "to  circle" :  I,  i,  ta-nam-mis  (v.  »2z-[w]),  A,  iv,  28.
namtaru,  "pestilence":    3,  46,  117,  156,  164,  179;   5,  i,  7,  ii,  50,

iii,  8,  40 ;  A,  24,  iii,  35,  42  ;  C,  100,  158,  176 ;    J,  7 ;    1 1,  4,

93,  102  ;  R,  40  ;  T,  r.  8  ;  V,  22  ;  W,  4.
nasaku,  "  to  put,  place"  :  I,  i,  u-suk-ma,  9,  38  ;  I,  2,  i-ta-as-suk-ma^

N,  iii,  9.
napasu,  "to  lay  low"  :  I,  i,  i-nap-pa-su,  T,  10.
niku,  "to  slay":    I,   i,   ni-ka-a,  B,  27;    i-nak-ki,  K,  49;    I,    i,

it-ta-ki^  12,  44.
naku,  "libation"  :  4,  v,  12;  Y,  9.
nakaru,  "to  destroy"  :  I,  i,  i-na-kar.
narabu,  "to  break":  IV,  i,  mun-nar-hi,  B,  77.
narukku,  "girdle":  cf.  Syr.  \^'^\  A,  iv,  12.
nararu,  "to  help"  :  I,  i,  na-ri-ru^  B,  65.
nasaku,  "to  bite"  :  I,  i,  is-mk  (v.  su-uk),  16,  131.
nasaru,  "to  bring  low  "  :  I,  i,  i-na-as-sa-ru,  T,  r.  13  ;  II,  i,  mu-na-

as-h'r,  5,  i,  3,  iv,  9,  1 1  ;  ba-nigin-na-ba-e,  4,  vi,  44.
natanu,  rare  bye-form  of  naddnu,  "to  give"  :    I,  i,  at-tan-nak-ki^

Worm,  II  ;  ta-at-ta-an-na^  Worm,  9,  10.


VOCABULARY.  175


sabu,  **  to  bale  up(?)'* :    I,  i,  sa-am-ma,  AA,  34.

samu,  **  brown  (?)":  B,  69,  71  ;  AA,  50.

suntu,  "  side,  loins"  :  K,  57.

sapu,  "  to  perish,"  Syr.  %2iCD:  II,  i,  u-sip-pu,  K,  63.

sibu,  ''  seven"  :  16,  26.

sibburu,  DD,  5,  9,   u,  54,  65,  81,  86,  87,  88,  96,  102;  81-7-27,

109,  A
SAG-Ki,  "  temples  (?)"  :  9,  192,  209,  210.
suddinnu,  **bat(?)"  :  B,  35.
SUH-HA,  a  fish  :  DD,  21.
suhussu,  ?  :  T,  31  ;  AA,  37.
sahapu,   "to  spread  over":    I,   i,  i-sa-hap,   12,  40;    i-sah-ha-pUy

B,  41  ;  sah-pu,  K,  41.
sahputum,  **  widespreading"  :  K,  35.
SAH-TUR-RA,  'Mittle  pig":    3,  40;    L,  14;    N,  ii,  44,  53,  iii,   10,

II,  28.
^'*'"'^" SA-KiL-BiR,  a  plant:  Worm,  25.

sakaru,  "to  clog":  I,  i,  i-stk  (v.  sak)-ktr,  P,  26;  i-sak-kir^  P,  47.
sikkuru,  **bolt":  V,  53,  55.
samanu,  "  poison  (?)":  C,  96.
sanaku,  "to  reach":    I,  i,  sa-nik  .  .  .  F,  iv,  21;  is-nik,  K,  121  ;

tasani^^  5,  v,  24.
Sassu-urinnu,  name  of  a  monster :  DD,  24.
sisit,  "fingers (.?)":  DD,  51.

sapii,  "  to  gather  together,"  Syr.  ]aDD  :  I,  i,  i-sa-ap-pu-\  A,  14.

supalu,  } :  A  A,  40.

sapanu,  "to  cover"  :  I,  i,  t'-sap-pa-nu,  K,  29.

saparu,  "net";  K,  148;  O,  12;  V,  14,  30;  BB,  10.

saru,  "  to  putrefy,"  Syr.  ^\ai :  I,  i,  t'-sa-n,  Mu.  3,  2.

saraku,  "to  pour":  I,  2,  t's-sar-rak,  K,  47.

pudu,  "flanks":  P,  30.

p-iihu,  "stead,  substitute":  As.  3,  7  ;  N,  iii,  11  [23].

piru,  "  young,  offspring  "  :   16,18.

pain,  "axe"  :  F,  iii,  14.

puzru,  "  secret"  :  G,  7  ;  K,  41.


176  VOCABULARY.


puzurtu,  "secret":  K,  121.

paharu,  "potter":  C,  171.

pikurtu,  "cord"  :  6,  6  ;  9,  231.

palaku,  "to  cut  off":   I,  i,  t-pal-lik,  P,  37.

palalu,  "to  scatter,"  Syr.  ^Si :  I,  i,  i-pa-al-li-lu,  C,  126.

papanu,  "  navel "  {?) :  DD,  13.

pisu,  "white":   11,  74;  S,  r.  5.

paku  (?),  ?:   16,  232.

puklu,  "tow,"  Chald.  xSplfi  :  P,  27.

para'u,  "to  cut  off"  :  I,  i,pu-ru--ma,  P,  74;  i-par-ra-\  P,  29.

piri'u,  cf.  Syr.  y^'^,  hypericum :  B,  75.

puridu,  "therefore"  :   16,  123  ;  R,  24.

parittum,  cf.  Syr.  v^a,  fugit:  P,  5.

paraku,  "to  block  up"  :  I,  i,  pi-nk-[ma],  As.  3,  10.

paraku,  "  to  have  power  over  "  :  I,  1,  par-ku^  A,  43,  45  ;  ip-rik,  T,  4.

purimu,  "  wild  ass  "  :  9,  24.

pursitu,  "separated":  C,  171.

paristu,  "  wise  woman"  :  9,  76.

pursumtu,  "old  woman":  K,  271  (.?);  9,  133.

pusku,  "misery":  N,  ii,  41.

pastu,  "flax,"  Heb.  T\W^:   16,  299;  U,  ^z-

pitiktu,  "mud-wall":  C,  186.

patinnu,  "  girdle  "  :  11,52.

sa'adu,   "to  hunt":    I,    i,  sa-i-du,  4,  i,  41;   sa-i-du-H,  4,  i,  41;

IV,   3,  is-sa-nun-du,    5,   iii,    12;    16,   32;    C,    16,   22,   124;

X,  9,  12.
sa'anu,  "to  fill":    I,  i,  si-in-su-ma,  11,  38;   I,  2,  {}) is-sa-nu-us ,

A,  11;    ts-sa-an,  K,  278,  280,  282,  284,  [286];    II,  i,  u-sa-

z'n-su,  N,  ii,  20.
saru,  "to  weaken"  :  I,  i,  z-sa-ar,  P,  23,  24;  sa-'-i'-raf,  16,  340.

sabaru,  "to  chirp,"  Syr.  'r^t'   I,   i,  i-sab-hu-ru,  5,  i,   15;   II,  2,

mu-us-sab-ra-tum,  T,  r.  20.
silu,  "  side  "  :  P,  33  ;  V,  70.
sariru,  a  metal:  AA,  50.
sirru,  "hinge,"  Syr.  IA'h^  :  4,  ii,  23  ;  5,  i,  35  ;   16,  258  ;  V,  57.


VOCABULARY.  1 77


ku,  "cord":   16,  178,  336;  9,  185;  P,  29.

kulu,  "snare,"  Chald.  X71p :  4.  ".  19.

kulu,  "burning":  5,  i,  43;  9,  128.

kapu,  "to  fall":  I,  i,  i-kup-pu,  B,  5  ;  ka-bi {})y  15,  r.  6.

kabru,  "grave"  :  4,  i,  10;  E,  23  ;  Y,  3,  6,  10  ;  Sm.  291,  i,  11.

kadistu,  "prostitute"  :  4,  iv,  -^-^-^  5,  i,  51.

katnu,  "little";  P,  35.

kim^,  "flour":  5,  iv,  21  ;  As.  3,  10;  9,  37.

Q  7

kumaru,  "armlet,"  Syr.  i;iQ£3:  DD,  50.

kinnu,  "  nest"  :  4,  i,  37.

kinazu,  "halter":  B,  77.

karnanu,  "  horned"  :  A,  38.

kaku,  }'.  A  A,  83.

katA,  "to  end"  :  II,  2,  uk-ta-at-ti^  9,  150.

kutrinnu,  "  smoke-offering"  :  D,  iii,  19;  E,  40.

ritu,  "  pasture  "  :  5,  i,  45.

rxlsn,  "to  help":    I,  i,  lu-ri-su-ka.  A,  30;    hu-mu-ra-ab-tah-e,

A,  32.

riku,  "  to  be  distant  "  :  I,  i,  ir-te-ik,  R,  28  ;  II,  i,  u-ri-ik,  U,  6,  7,  8.
rabisu,  a  demon :   3,  24  100,  112,  114,  154,  162,  195  ;  5,  iii,  27,  45  ;

16,  211,  [263]  ;  A,  i,  35  ;  C,  77,  97,  120;  D,  iii,  36;  G,  4 ;

K,  217,  260;  N,  II  ;  8,  33,  ii,  30;  V,  16.
rid^,  "to  seize,  hold":  I,  i,  ar{w.  ir)-di-su,  B,  67;  te-rid-dUsu,  4,

iv,  15  ;  I,  2,  ir-te-di^  5,  vi,  4,  6;  mur-te-id-du-u,  5,  iv,  41.
ruhil,  "witchcraft":  3,  53^;  C,  107^;  K,  263;  Lu.  8,15;  AA,  17.
rihu,  "  to  spawn  "  :   I,  i,  ri-hu-u,  3,  240  ;    5,  i,  4,  23  ;    i-ri-ih-f^u-u,

B,  19  ;  X,  7  ;  A-Ri-A-MES,  3,  299  ;  a-ri-a,  4,  vi,  45.
rihutu,  "  spawning  " :  4,  i,  2,  vi,  45  ;  5,  i,  4,  23,  iv,  41,  v,  2.
rihitu,  "  dregs":  9,  91.

ruk  .  .  . :  D,  iii,  8.

ramamu,  "to  shriek"  :  I,  i,  i-ra-mu-um,  9,  107.

rusu,  "sorcery":  3,  53a;  C,  ioia{))\  K,  263.

mssu,  ? :  3,  69,  107A.

risatum,  }  \  9,  169.

riku,  }  :  AA,  40.


178  VOCABULARY.


rusumtu,  ''marsh":  T,  22  ;  Worm,  5,  6.

russu,  "  skin  (?)  "  :  9,  183.

rustu,  ''balsam  (?),"  Chald.  ^^nn  :   12,  58  ;  AA,  43.

ritii,  "to  set":  I,  i,  ri-tu-u,  V,  12.

rittu,   "fist,   hand":    DD,  4,  29,  51,  52,  77,  93,   108,   109,   115;

K.  13,843^?;  81-7-27,  io9«;  Worm,  23.
sedu,  "genius":  3,  92,  153,  285  ;  5,  iv,  9,  11  ;  16,  4,  346^;  G,  15;

K,  206,  223,  282  ;  L,  5,  10 ;  N,  1 1,  ii,  36,  iii,  27 ;  6,  16 ;  11,

96  ;  T,  4.
sihu,  "lofty":  P,  36.

sulu,  "cough,"  Syr.  1Sq1»  :  Mu.  3,  r.  20.

sartu,  "hair":    16,  171,   182,  316;  9,  43,  74;  S,  r.  5  ;   DD,  33,

43.  105-
sertu,  "wickedness":  3,  50,  50^.
sutu,  "form"  :  DD,  14,  25,  61,  74,  90.
sibbu,  "  serpent "  :   16,20.

sabatu,  "  to  smite  "  :  I,  i,  i-sab-bi-iu,  4,  i,  39  ;  T,  9.
sabaru,  "to  break"  :  III,  i,  u-sa-as-[bir }\  P,  22.
sibru,  "wood(?)":  U,  10.
sagamu,  "to  howl"  :  I,  i,  i-mg-gu-mu,  5,  i,  15,  21  ;  {ta-sag-gum}\

C,  52.
sagasu,  "to  rend  in  pieces":   I,  i,  i-Ug-gi-su^  C,  134;   sa-ga-as,

T,  8  ;  sa-ga-^a,  T,  6.
signsu,  a  wood:  9,  129.

sahahu,  "to  waste"  :  II,  i,  u-sah-ha-ah,  9,  10;  P,  20.
sahalu,  "to  draw  forth,"  Chald.  ^HtJ^  :    I,   i,  i-sa}i'ha-lu,  C,   136  ;

' i-sah-ha-lum,  X,  15.
saharru,  "pot"  :  3,  56.
saharratu,  "vessel"  :  P,  22 ;  A  A,  31.
sikku,  "mouse":  C,  216.
Gis-SA-KA-NA,  "  door "  :    1 6,  305  ;  8,  ii,  17.
sil(l)ibu,  "fox":  B,  45.

salatu,  "to  slit":  I,  i,  i-ml-lat,  P,  31  ;  II,  r,  u-sal-ltt,  9,  8.
salalu,  Syr.  ^i^  {}):  radix  nymphcBCB  loti^  T,  31  ;  AA,  37.
sulul,     .     .     .     name  of  a  monster :  DD,  103.


VOCABULARY.  1 79


ialapu,  "  to  break  out"  :  I,  i,  sal-pat,  9,  122.

ialasu,  "  to  triple  "  :  III,  i,  m-us-\lu-us\,  6,  6  :  sU'Us-lU'{us\  9,  231.

iia[maW^u,  "  stout-hearted  (?)"  :  P,  35.

"""'"'' SI-MAN,  a  plant:  9,  199.

8al^(?),  **to  sink"  :  II,  i  (?),  nam- ba-im-[im-e-ne],  16,  258.

sapitum,  "dense":  16,  34.

sapaku,  **  to  pour  out  "  :  I,  i,  su-pu-uk.  A,  19  ;  su-puky  AA,  66.

sapasu  (?),  *'  to  touch  (?) "  :  I,  i,  sa-pi-is,  DD,  65,  66,  68,  70.

Sapparu,  "wild  goat":  S,  3,  8 ;  P,  43.

sarbatu,    "to  roam":    IV,  3, //-/a-[««-aj-ra<5-^z-/«?],  C,  44;    itta-

na-as-rab-bi'iu,  3,  37  ;  N,  12  ;  R,  6  ;  mut-tas-ra-hi-tu-ti  (v.  tu\

5,  V,  5  ;  mut-tas-rab-bi-tu-ti  (v.  /«),  5,  v,  40  ;  cf.  As.  3,  27,

and  X,  2.
sitku,  ?:  P,  72.

tenu,  "to  bray"  :  I,  i,  It-te-en-ma,  9,  133.
tabalu,  "to  carry  off":  I,  i,  ta-ba-li,  B,  21  ;  ta-bal-ma.  As.  12,  63  ;

Itt-bal,  T,  r.  13.
tizkaru,  "loud":  F,  iv,  10.
tiku,  "waist,"  Heb.  *njr) :  DD,  87.

tultu,  "worm"  :  Worm,  6,  7,  22.

tamahu,  "to  hold"  :  I,  i,  at-mu-uh,  B,  65  ;  tu-mu-{uh\  G,  11.

tumru,  "ashes":  N,  iii,  8.

tappi  .  .  .  ,  16,  176.

tappinnu,  "  dough  "  :  T,  r.  2,  23.

targuUu,  U,  35.

turahu,  "ibex":  S,  3,  9;  P,  41.

taraku,  "to  burst":  I,  i,  i-tar-rak,  P,  27.

tarasu,  "to  stretch  out  straight"  :  I,  i,  tar-sa,  DD,  no;  tar-sa-atj

DD  [57],  78;    tar-su,    16,    337;    V,    14;    IV,    i,   lil-ta-ri-is,

3,  283.
•"""'^'' TAR-SIR,  a  plant :  9,  199.
tesu,  "destroyer":   16,  41.
tasiltu,  "joy":  D,  iv,  i.


5


>>


CQ


9

•H

^

fH

p4

*H

Oh
GQ

CI

tH

d

H

>

c«S

(D

«

•H

tJ

g^

s

B^

m

•i

H

C!

•d

O

>

cO

0)

pt|

TJ

^

o

0)

^

^

u

Q

x:

(l>

UNIVERSITY


Acme   Library   Card   Pocket

Under  Pat.  "  Ref.  Index  File."
Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU

:      ■■ -^ !-_ : V—
