Winter: From the Journal of Henry D. Thoreau (Henry David Thoreau (H. G. O. Blake, ed.), 1888)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1888 Houghton Mifflin edition, ed. H. G. O. Blake (https://archive.org/details/winterjournal00thorrich). A winter volume of Thoreau's journal — Concord's ponds, woods and weather, distilled from the great 14-volume journal.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

WALDEN  ;  or,  Life  in  the  Woods.     i2mo,  gilt  top,  $1.50. 

A  WEEK  ON  THE  CONCORD  AND  MERRIMACK  RIV 
ERS,  izmo,  gilt  top,  $1.50. 

EXCURSIONS  IN  FIELD  AND  FOREST.  With  a  Bio 
graphical  Sketch  by  R.  W.  EMERSON.  i2mo,  gilt  top, 
$1.50. 

THE    MAINE   WOODS.     i2mo,  gilt  top,  $1.50. 

CAPE    COD.     i2mo,  gilt  top,  $1.50. 

LETTERS  TO  VARIOUS  PERSONS,  to  which  are  added 
a  few  Poems.  lamo,  gilt  top,  $1.50. 

A  YANKEE  IN  CANADA.  With  Antislavery  and  Reform 
Papers.  i2mo,  gilt  top,  $1.50. 

EARLY  SPRING  IN  MASSACHUSETTS.  Fromthejour- 
nal  of  HENRY  D.  THOREAU.  i2mo,  gilt  top,  $1.50. 

SUMMER.  Selections  descriptive  of  Summer  from  the  Jour 
nal  of  HENRY  D.  THOREAU.  i2mo,  gilt  top,  $1.50. 

WINTER.  Selections  from  the  Journal  of  HENRY  D.  THO 
REAU.  1 2mo,  gilt  top,  $1.50. 

The  above  ten  volumes,  $15.00 ;  half  calf,  $27.50. 

HOUGHTON,  MIFFLIN  &  CO. 

BOSTON  AND  NEW  YORK. 


WINTER:   FEOM  THE  JOURNAL 
OF  HENRY  D.  THOREAU 


EDITED  BY  H.  G.  O.  BLAKE 


Knowledge  means 
Ever-renewed  assurance  by  defeat 
That  victory  is  somehow  still  to  reach ; 
But  love  is  victory,  the  prize  itself. 
BROWNINQ 


BOSTON  AND  NEW  YORK 
HOUGHTON,  MIFFLIN  AND   COMPANY 


1888 


Copyright,  1887, 
BY  HOUGHTON,  MIFFLIN  &  CO. 

All  rights  reserved. 


The  Riverside  Press,  Cambridge  : 
Electrotyped  and  Printed  by  H.  0.  Houghton  &  Co. 


INTRODUCTORY. 

To  those  who  are  not  specially  interested  in 
the  character  of  Thoreau,  who  regard  him 
merely  as  a  writer  who  has  sometimes  expressed 
original  thoughts  in  a  happy  way,  who  has 
made  some  interesting  observations  of  natural 
phenomena,  and  at  times  written  beautifully 
about  nature,  it  may  seem  hardly  worth  while 
to  publish  more  of  his  journal.  But  from  time 
to  time  I  meet  with  or  receive  letters  from 
persons  who  feel  the  same  deep  interest  in  him 
as  an  individual,  in  his  thoughts  and  views  of 
life,  that  I  do,  and  who,  I  am  sure,  will  eagerly 
welcome  any  additional  expression  of  that  indi 
viduality.  Of  course  there  are  many  such  per 
sons  of  whom  I  do  not  hear. 

Thoreau  himself  regarded  literature  as  alto 
gether  secondary  to  life,  strange  as  this  may 
seem  to  those  who  think  of  him  as  a  hermit 
or  dreamer,  shunning  what  are  commonly  con 
sidered  as  among  the  most  important  practical 
realities,  trade,  politics,  the  church,  the  institu 
tions  of  society  generally.  He  took  little  part  in 


M773716 


IV  INTRODUCTORY. 

these  things  because  he  believed  they  would 
stand  in  the  way  of  his  truest  life,  and  to  attain 
that,  as  far  as  possible,  he  knew  to  be  his  first 
business  in  the  world.  Even  in  a  philanthropic 
point  of  view,  any  superficial  benefit  he  might 
confer  by  throwing  himself  into  the  current  of 
society  would  be  as  nothing  compared  with  the 
loss  of  real  power  and  influence  which  would 
result  from  disobedience  to  his  highest  instincts. 
"  Ice  that  merely  performs  the  office  of  a  burning 
glass  does  not  do  its  duty."  It  was  not  sufficient 
for  him  to  entertain  and  express  as  an  author 
"  subtle  thoughts,"  but  he  aspired  rather  "  so  to 
love  wisdom  as  to  live,  according  to  its  dictates, 
a  life  of  simplicity,  independence,  magnanimity, 
and  trust,"  "  to  solve  some  of  the  problems  of 
life  not  only  theoretically,  but  practically."  It  is 
the  clear  insight  early  creating  a  deep,  persistent 
determination  so  to  live,  rather  than  his  genius, 
which  gives  value  to  Thoreau's  work,  though 
this  insight  itself  may  well  be  regarded  as  the 
highest  form  of  genius.  It  is  the  attitude  one 
takes  toward  the  world,  far  more  than  any  abili 
ties  he  may  possess,  which  gives  significance  to 
his  life.  It  has  been  well  said  by  Brownlee 
Brown  that  "  courage,  piety,  wit,  zeal,  learning, 
eloquence,  avail  nothing,  unless  the  man  is 
right." 


INTRODUCTORY.  V 

As  the  young  pass  out  of  childhood,  that  fore 
taste  or  symbol  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  the 
expression  of  serene  innocence  is  too  apt  to  fade 
from  their  faces  and  the  clouds  to  gather  there, 
while  it  is  considered  a  matter  of  course  that 
each  one  should  attach  himself  to  the  social 
machine.  One  becomes  a  lawyer,  another  a 
clergyman,  another  a  physician,  another  a 
merchant,  and  the  treasure  which  the  childlike 
soul  has  lost  is  sought  to  be  regained  in  some 
general  and  far-off  way  by  society  at  large. 
But  the  burden  which  men  thus  readily  take 
upon  themselves  in  the  common  race  for  comfort, 
luxury,  and  social  position  is  out  of  all  proportion 
to  their  spiritual  vitality,  and  so  the  truest  life 
of  individuals  is  being  continually  sacrificed  to 
the  Juggernaut  of  society.  Men  associate  al 
most  universally  in  the  shallower  and  falser 
part  of  their  natures,  so  that  while  institutions 
may  seem  to  flourish,  corruption  is  also  gaining 
ground  through  the  spiritual  failure  of  individ 
uals  ;  finally  the  fabric  falls,  and  a  new  form 
rises  to  go  through  the  same  round.  The 
highest  form  of  civilization  at  the  present  day 
seems  to  be  an  advance  upon  all  that  have  pre 
ceded  it,  though  in  some  particulars  it  plainly 
falls  behind.  Perhaps  only  by  this  alternate 
rising  and  falling  can  the  human  race  advance. 


vi  INTRODUCTORY. 

But  the  progress  of  individuals  is  the  essential 
thing ;  only  so  far  as  that  takes  place  will  the 
real  progress  of  the  race  follow,  and  those  per 
sons  contribute  most  to  this  real  progress  who, 
stepping  aside  from  the  ordinary  routine,  give 
us  by  their  lives  and  thoughts  a  new  sense  of 
the  reality  of  what  is  best,  of  the  ideal  towards 
which  all  civilization  must  aim ;  who  are  so  in 
love  with  truth,  rectitude,  and  the  beauty  of  the 
world,  including  in  this,  first  of  all,  the  original, 
unimpaired  beauty  of  the  human  soul,  that  they 
have  little  care  for  material  prosperity,  social 
position,  or  public  opinion.  It  was  not  merely 
nature  in  the  ordinary  sense,  plants,  animals,  the 
landscape,  etc.,  which  attracted  Thoreau.  He 
is  continually  manifesting  a  human  interest  in 
natural  objects,  and  thoughts  of  an  ideal  friend 
ship  are  forever  haunting  him.  Touching  the 
highest  and  fairest  relation  of  one  human  soul 
to  another,  I  do  not  believe  there  can  be  found 
in  literature,  ancient  or  modern,  anything  finer, 
anything  which  comes  closer  home  to  our  best 
experience,  than  what  appears  in  Thoreau's 
writings  generally,  and  especially  in  "  Wednes 
day"  of  the  "  Week  on  the  Concord  and  Merri- 
mack  Rivers." 

THE  EDITOR. 


WINTER. 


December  21,  1851.  My  difficulties  with  my 
friends  are  such  as  no  frankness  will  settle. 
There  is  no  precept  in  the  New  Testament  that 
will  assist  me.  .  .  .  Others  can  confess  and  ex 
plain,  I  cannot.  It  is  not  that  I  am  too  proud. 
But  explanation  is  not  what  is  wanted.  Friend 
ship  is  the  unspeakable  joy  and  blessing  that 
result  to  two  or  more  individuals  who  from  con 
stitution  sympathize.  Such  natures  are  liable  to 
no  mistakes,  but  will  know  each  other  through 
thick  and  thin.  Between  two  by  nature  alike  and 
fitted  to  sympathize  there  is  no  veil,  and  there 
can  be  no  obstacle.  Who  are  the  estranged  ? 
Two  friends  explaining. 

I  feel  sometimes  as  if  I  could  say.  to  my 
friends,  "  My  friends,  I  am  aware  how  I  have 
outraged  you,  how  I  have  seemingly  preferred 
hate  to  love,  seemingly  treated  others  kindly 
and  you  unkindly,  sedulously  concealed  my  love, 
and  sooner  or  later  expressed  all  and  more  than 
all  my  hate."  I  can  imagine  how  I  might  utter 


2        .  WINTER. 

something  like  this,  in  some  moment  never  to 
be  realized,  but,  at  the  same  time,  let  me  say 
frankly  that  I  feel  I  might  say  it  with  too  little 
regret,  that  I  am  under  an  awful  necessity  to  be 
what  I  am.  If  the  truth  were  known,  which  I 
do  not  know,  I  have  no  concern  with  those 
friends  whom  I  misunderstand  or  who  misunder 
stand  me.  The  fates  only  are  unkind  that  keep 
us  asunder ;  but  my  friend  is  ever  kind.  I  am 
of  the  nature  of  stone.  It  takes  the  summer's 
sun  to  warm  it.  —  My  acquaintances  sometimes 
imply  that  I  am  too  cold,  but  each  thing  is  warm 
enough  for  its  kind.  Is  the  stone  too  cold 
which  absorbs  the  heat  of  the  summer  sun, 
and  does  not  part  with  it  during  the  night? 
Crystals,  though  they  be  of  ice,  are  not  too  cold 
to  melt ;  it  was  in  melting  that  they  were 
formed.  Cold  !  I  am  most  sensible  of  warmth 
in  winter  days.  It  is  not  the  warmth  of  fire 
that  you  would  have ;  everything  is  warm  or 
cold  according  to  its  nature.  It  is  not  that  I 
am  too  cold,  but  that  our  warmth  and  coldness 
are  not  of  the  same  nature.  Hence  when  I  am 
absolutely  warmest,  I  may  be  coldest  to  you. 
Crystal  does  not  complain  of  crystal  any  more 
than  the  dove  of  its  mate.  You  who  complain 
that  I  am  cold,  find  Nature  cold.  To  me  she 
is  warm.  My  heat  is  latent  to  you.  Fire  itself 
is  cold  to  whatever  is  not  of  a  nature  to  be 


WINTER.  3 

warmed  by  it.  ...  That  I  am  cold  means  that  I 
am  of  another  nature.  ... 

How  swiftly  the  earth  appears  to  revolve  at 
sunset,  —  which  at  midday  appears  to  rest  on  its 
axis. 

Dec.  21,  1853.  We  are  tempted  to  call  these 
the  finest  days  of  the  year.  Take  Fair  Haven 
Pond,  for  instance,  a  perfectly  level  plain  of 
snow,  untrodden  as  yet  by  any  fisherman,  sur 
rounded  by  snow-clad  hills,  dark,  evergreen 
woods,  and  reddish  oak  leaves,  so  pure  and  still. 
The  last  rays  of  the  sun  falling  on  Baker  Farm 
reflect  a  clear  pink  color.  —  I  see  the  feathers 
of  a  partridge  strewn  along  on  the  snow  for  a 
long  distance,  the  work  of  some  hawk,  perhaps, 
for  there  is  no  track. 

What  a  groveling  appetite  for  profitless  jest 
and  amusement  our  countrymen  have  !  Next  to 
a  good  dinner,  at  least,  they  love  a  good  joke, 
to  have  their  sides  tickled,  to  laugh  sociably,  as 
in  the  East  they  bathe  and  are  shampooed.  Cu 
rators  of  Lyceums  write  to  me, 

DEAR  SIR,  —  I  hear  that  you  have  a  lecture 
of  some  humor.  Will  you  do  us  the  favor  to 
read  it  before  the  Bungtown  Institute  ? 

Dec.  22,  1851.  If  I  am  thus  seemingly  cold 
compared  with  my  companion's  warm,  who 
knows  but  mine  is  a  less  transient  glow,  a  stead 
ier  and  more  equable  heat,  like  that  of  the 


4  WINTER. 

earth  in  spring,  in  which  the  flowers  spring  and 
expand.  It  is  not  words  that  I  wish  to  hear  or 
to  utter,  but  relations  that  I  wish  to  stand  in, 
and  it  oftener  happens,  methinks,  I  go  away 
unmet,  unrecognized,  ungreeted  in  my  offered 
relation,  than  that  you  are  disappointed  of 
words. 

I  have  seen  in  the  form,  in  the  expression  of 
face,  of  a  child  three  years  old  the  tried  magna 
nimity  and  grave  nobility  of  ancient  and  departed 
worthies.  I  saw  a  little  Irish  boy,  come  from  the 
distant  shanty  in  the  woods  over  the  bleak  rail 
road  to  school  this  morning,  take  his  last  step 
from  the  last  snow-drift  on  to  the  school- 
house  door-step,  floundering  still,  saw  not  his 
face  nor  his  profile,  only  his  mien ;  I  imagined, 
saw  clearly  in  imagination,  his  old  worthy  face 
behind  the  sober  visor  of  his  cap.  Ah !  this 
little  Irish  boy,  I  know  not  why,  revives  to  my 
mind  the  worthies  of  antiquity.  He  is  not 
drawn,  he  never  was  drawn,  in  a  willow  wagon. 
He  progresses  by  his  own  brave  steps.  Has  not 
the  world  waited  for  such  a  generation.  Here 
he  condescends  to  his  a  b  c,  without  one  smile, 
who  has  the  lore  of  worlds  uncounted  in  his 
brain.  He  speaks  not  of  the  adventures  of  the 
causeway.  What  was  the  bravery  of  Leonidas 
and  his  three  hundred  boys  at  the  Pass  of  Ther 
mopylae  to  this  infant's  !  They  but  dared  to  die, 


WINTER.  5 

he  dares  to  live,  and  take  his  "  reward  of  merit," 
perchance  (without  relaxing  his  face  into  a 
smile),  that  overlooks  his  unseen  and  unregard- 
able  merits.  Little  Johnny  Riorden,  who  faces 
cold  and  routs  it  like  a  Persian  army.  While 
the  charitable  waddle  about  cased  in  furs,  he, 
lively  as  a  cricket,  passes  them  on  his  way  to 
school. 

Dec.  22,  1853.  Surveying  the  Hunt  farm. 
A  rambling,  rocky,  wild,  moorish  pasture  this 
of  Hunt's,  with  two  or  three  great  white  oaks 
to  shade  the  cattle,  which  the  farmer  would  not 
take  fifty  dollars  apiece  for,  though  the  ship 
builder  wanted  them. 

It  is  pleasant,  as  you  are  cutting  a  path 
through  a  swamp,  to  see  the  color  of  the  differ 
ent  woods,  the  yellowish  dogwood,  the  green 
prinos  (?),  and  on  the  upland,  the  splendid  yel 
low  barberry.  .  .  .  You  cannot  go  out  so  early 
but  you  will  find  the  track  of  some  wild  crea 
ture. 

Returning  home  just  after  the  sun  had  sunk 
below  the  horizon,  I  saw  from  N.  Barrett's  a 
fire  made  by  boys  on  the  ice  near  the  Red 
bridge  which  looked  like  the  bright  reflection 
of  the  setting  sun  from  the  water  under  the 
bridge,  so  clear,  so  little  lurid  in  this  winter 
evening. 

Dec.  22,  1858.  P.  M.     To  Walden.     I  see  in 


6  WINTER. 

the  cut  near  the  shanty  site  quite  a  flock  of 
Fringilla  hyemalis  and  goldfinches  together  on 
the  snow  and  weeds  and  ground.  Hear  the 
well-known  mew  and  watery  twitter  of  the  last, 
and  the  drier  "  chill  chill "  of  the  former.  These 
burning  yellow  birds,  with  a  little  black  and 
white  in  their  coat  flaps,  look  warm  above  the 
snow.  There  may  be  thirty  goldfinches,  very 
"brisk  and  pretty  tame.  They  hang,  head  down 
wards,  on  the  weeds.  I  hear  of  their  coming  to 
pick  sunflower  seeds  in  Melvin's  garden  these 
days. 

Dec.  22,  1859.  Another  fine  winter  day. 
—  p.  M.  To  Flint's  Pond.  .  .  .  We  pause  and 
gaze  into  the  Mill  brook  on  the  Turnpike  bridge. 
I  see  a  good  deal  of  cress  there  on  the  bottom 
for  a  rod  or  two,  the  only  green  thing  to  be 
seen.  ...  Is  not  this  the  plant  which  most,  or 
most  conspicuously,  preserves  its  greenness  in  the 
winter?  ...  It  is  as  green  as  ever,  and  waving 
in  the  stream  as  in  summer. 

How  nicely  is  Nature  adjusted.  The  least 
disturbance  of  her  equilibrium  is  betrayed  and 
corrects  itself.  As  I  looked  down  on  the  sur 
face  of  the  brook,  I  was  surprised  to  see  a  leaf 
floating,  as  I  thought,  up  stream,  but  I  was  mis 
taken.  The  motion  of  a  particle  of  dust  on  the 
surface  of  any  brook  far  inland  shows  which 
way  the  earth  declines  toward  the  sea,  which 


WINTER.  1 

way  lies  the  constantly  descending  route,  and 
the  only  one. 

I  see  in  the  chestnut  woods  near  Flint's  Pond 
where  squirrels  have  collected  the  small  chestnut 
burs  left  on  the  trees,  and  opened  them  gener 
ally  at  the  base  of  the  trunks  on  the  snow. 
These  are,  I  think,  all  small  and  imperfect  burs, 
which  do  not  so  much  as  open  in  the  fall,  and 
are  rejected  then,  but  hanging  on  the  tree,  they 
have  this  use,  at  least,  as  the  squirrels'  winter 
food.  .  .  . 

The  fisherman  stands  still  and  erect  on  the 
ice,  awaiting  our  approach,  as  usual  forward  to 
say  that  he  has  had  no  luck.  He  has  been  here 
since  early  morning,  and  for  some  reason  or 
other  he  has  had  no  luck ;  the  fishes  won't  bite, 
you  won't  catch  him  here  again  in  a  hurry. 
They  all  tell  the  same  story.  The  amount  of  it 
is,  he  has  had  "  fisherman's  luck,"  and  if  you 
walk  that  way,  you  may  find  him  at  his  old  post 
to-morrow.  It  is  hard,  to  be  sure  ;  four  little 
fishes  to  be  divided  between  three  men,  and  two 
and  a  half  miles  to  walk  ;  and  you  have  only 
got  a  more  ravenous  appetite  for  the  supper 
which  you  have  not  earned.  However,  the  pond 
floor  is  not  a  bad  place  whereon  to  spend  a  win 
ter  day. 

Dec.  23,  1837.  Crossed  the  river  to-day  on 
the  ice.  Though  the  weather  is  raw  and  win- 


8  WINTER. 

try,  and  the  ground  covered  with  snow,  I  noticed 
a  solitary  robin.  .  .  . 

In  the  side  of  the  high  bank  by  the  leaning 
hemlock  there  were  some  curious  crystalliza 
tions.  Wherever  the  water  or  other  cause  had 
formed  a  hole  in  the  bank,  its  throat  and  outer 
edge,  like  the  entrance  to  a  citadel  of  the  olden 
time,  bristled  with  a  glistening  ice  armor.  In 
one  place  you  might  see  minute  ostrich  feathers 
which  seemed  the  waving  plumes  of  the  war 
riors  filing  into  the  fortress,  in  another,  the 
glancing  fan-shaped  banners  of  the  Liliputian 
host,  and  in  another,  the  needle-shaped  particles 
collected  into  bundles  resembling  the  plumes  of 
the  pine,  might  pass  for  a  phalanx  of  spears. 
The  whole  hill  was  like  an  immense  quartz  rock 
with  minute  crystals  sparkling  from  innumer 
able  crannies. 

Dec.  23,  1841.  The  best  man's  spirit  makes 
a  fearful  sprite  to  haunt  his  tomb.  The  ghost 
of  a  priest  is  no  better  than  that  of  a  highway 
man.  It  is  pleasant  to  hear  of  one  who  has 
blest  whole  regions  after  his  death  by  having 
frequented  them  while  alive,  who  has  profaned 
or  tabooed  no  place  by  being  buried  in  it.  It 
adds  not  a  little  to  the  fame  of  Little  John  that 
his  grave  was  long  "  celebrous  for  the  yielding  of 
excellent  whetstones." 

A  forest  is  in  all  mythologies  a  sacred  place  ; 


WINTER.  9 

as  the  oaks  among  the  Druids,  and  the  grove  of 
Egeria,  and  even  in  more  familiar  and  common 
life,  as  "  Barnsdale  wood  "  and  "  Sherwood. " 
Had  Robin  Hood  no  Sherwood  to  resort  to,  it 
would  be  difficult  to  invest  his  story  with  the 
charms  it  has  got.  It  is  always  the  tale  that  is 
untold,  the  deeds  done,  and  the  life  lived  in  the 
unexplored  scenery  of  the  wood,  that  charm  us 
and  make  us  children  again,  to  read  his  ballads 
and  hear  of  the  greenwood  tree. 

Dec.  23, 1851.  .  .  .  It  is  a  record  of  the  mel 
low  and  ripe  moments  that  I  would  keep.  I 
would  not  preserve  the  husk  of  life,  but  the  ker 
nel.  When  the  cup  of  life  is  full  and  flowing 
over,  preserve  some  drops  as  a  specimen  sample ; 
when  the  intellect  enlightens  the  heart  and  the 
heart  warms  the  intellect. — Thoughts  sometimes 
possess  our  heads  when  we  are  up  and  about  our 
business  which  are  the  exact  counterpart  of  the 
bad  dreams  we  sometimes  have  by  night,  and  I 
think  the  intellect  is  equally  inert  in  both  cases. 
Very  frequently,  no  doubt,  the  thoughts  men 
have  are  the  consequence  of  something  they 
have  eaten  or  done.  Our  waking  moods  and 
humors  are  our  dreams,  but  whenever  we  are 
truly  awake  and  serene  and  healthy  in  all  our 
senses,  we  have  memorable  visions.  Who  that 
takes  up  a  book  wishes  for  the  report  of  the 
clogged  bowels  or  the  impure  blood  ? 


10  WINTER. 

Dec.  23,  1855.  P.  M.  To  Conantum  End.  A 
very  bright  and  pleasant  day  with  a  remarkably 
soft  wind  from  a  little  N.  of  W.  The  frost  has 
come  out  so  in  the  rain  of  yesterday,  that  I  avoid 
the  muddy  plowed  fields,  and  keep  on  the  green 
ground  which  shines  with  moisture.  .  .  . 

I  admire  those  old  root  fences  which  have  al 
most  disappeared  from  tidy  fields,  white  pine 
roots  got  out  when  the  neighboring  meadow  was 
a  swamp,  the  monuments  of  many  a  revolution. 
These  roots  have  not  penetrated  into  the  ground, 
but  spread  over  the  surface,  and  having  been  cut 
off  four  or  five  feet  from  the  stump  were  hauled 
off  and  set  up  on  their  edges  for  a  fence.  The 
roots  were  not  merely  interwoven,  but  grown  to 
gether  into  solid  frames,  full  of  loop-holes  like 
Gothic  windows  of  various  sizes  and  all  shapes, 
triangular,  and  oval,  and  harp-like,  and  the  slen 
derer  parts  are  dry  and  resonant  like  harp  strings. 
They  are  rough  and  unapproachable,  with  a  hun 
dred  snags  and  horns,  which  bewilder  and  balk 
the  calculation  of  the  walker  who  would  sur 
mount  them.  The  part  of  the  trees  above 
ground  present  no  such  fantastic  forms.  Here 
is  one  seven  paces  or  more  than  a  rod  long,  six 
feet  high  in  the  middle,  and  yet  only  one  foot 
thick,  and  two  men  could  turn  it  up.  In  this 
case  the  roots  were  six  or  nine  inches  thick  at 
the  extremities.  The  roots  of  pines  in  swamps 


WINTER.  11 

grow  thus  in  the  form  of  solid  frames  or  rack 
ets,  and  those  of  different  trees  are  interwoven 
withal  so  that  they  stand  on  a  very  broad  foot, 
and  stand  or  fall  together  to  some  extent  be 
fore  the  blasts  as  herds  meet  the  assaults  of 
beasts  of  prey  with  serried  front.  You  have 
thus  only  to  dig  into  the  swamp  a  little  way  to 
find  your  fence,  post,  rails,  and  slats  already 
solidly  grown  together,  and  of  material  more 
durable  than  any  timber.  How  pleasing  a 
thought  that  a  field  should  be  fenced  with  the 
roots  of  the  trees  got  out  in  clearing  the  land  a 
century  before.  I  regret  them  as  mementos  of 
the  primitive  forest.  The  tops  of  the  same  trees 
made  into  fencing  stuff  would  have  decayed  gen 
erations  ago.  These  roots  are  singularly  unob- 
noxious  to  the  effects  of  moisture.  .  .  . 

Think  of  the  life  of  a  kitten,  ours,  for  in 
stance.  Last  night  her  eyes  set  in  a  fit ;  it  is 
doubtful  if  she  will  ever  come  out  of  it,  and  she 
is  set  away  in  a  basket  and  submitted  to  the  re 
cuperative  powers  of  nature ;  this  morning  run 
ning  up  the  clothes'  pole,  and  erecting  her  back 
in  frisky  sport  to  every  passer. 

Dec.  23,  1856.  Some  savage  tribes  must 
share  the  experience  of  the  lower  animals  in 
their  relation  to  man.  With  what  thoughts 
must  the  Esquimau  manufacture  his  knife  from 
the  rusty  hoop  of  a  cask  drifted  to  his  shores,  not 


12  WINTER. 

a  natural,  but  an  artificial  product,  the  work  of 
man's  hands,  the  waste  of  the  commerce  of  a 
superior  race  whom  perhaps  he  never  saw  I 

The  cracking  of  the  ground  is  a  phenomenon 
of  the  coldest  nights.  After  being  waked  by 
the  loud  cracks  of  the  18th  at  Amherst,  a  man 
told  me  in  the  morning  that  he  had  seen  a  crack 
running  across  the  plain  (I  saw  it)  almost 
broad  enough  to  put  his  hand  into.  This  was 
an  exaggeration.  It  was  not  one  fourth  of  an 
inch  wide.  I  saw  a  great  many  the  same  fore 
noon  running  across  the  road  in  Nashua,  every 
few  rods,  and  also  by  our  house  in  Concord  the 
same  day  when  I  got  home.  So  it  seems  the 
ground  was  cracking  all  the  country  over.  Part 
ly,  no  doubt,  because  there  was  so  little  snow, 
or  none.  None  at  Concord. 

If  the  writer  would  interest  readers,  he  must 
report  so  much  life,  using  a  certain  satisfaction 
always  as  a  point  cTappui.  However  mean  and 
limited,  it  must  be  a  genuine  and  contented  life 
that  he  speaks  out  of.  His  readers  must  have 
the  essence  or  oil  of  himself,  tried  out  of  the  fat 
of  his  experience  and  joy. 

Dec.  23,  1860.  .  .  .  Larks  were  about  our 
house  the  middle  of  this  month. 

Dec.  24,  1840.  The  same  sun  has  not  yet 
shone  on  me  and  my  friend.  He  would  hardly 
have  to  look  at  me  to  recognize  me,  but  glimmer 


WINTER.  13 

with  half-shut  eye  like  some  friendly  distant 
taper  when  we  are  benighted.  —  I  do  not  talk 
to  any  intellect  in  nature,  but  am  presuming  an 
infinite  heart  somewhere  into  which  I  play. 

Dec.  24,  1841.  I  want  to  go  soon  and  live 
away  by  the  pond  where  I  shall  hear  only  the 
wind  whispering  among  the  reeds.  It  will  be 
success  if  I  shall  have  left  myself  behind.  But 
my  friends  ask  what  I  will  do  when  I  get  there ! 
Will  it  not  be  employment  enough  to  watch  the 
progress  of  the  seasons  ? 

Dec.  24,  1850.  Saw  a  shrike  pecking  to 
pieces  a  small  bird,  apparently  a  snowbird.  At 
length  he  took  him  up  in  his  bill,  almost  half  as 
big  as  himself,  and  flew  slowly  off  with  his  prey 
dangling  from  his  beak.  I  find  that  I  had  not 
associated  such  actions  with  my  idea  of  birds. 
It  was  not  bird-like. 

It  is  never  so  cold  but  it  melts  somewhere. 
Our  mason  well  remarked  that  he  had  some 
times  known  it  to  be  melting  and  freezing  at  the 
same  time  on  a  particular  side  of  a  house  ;  while 
it  was  melting  on  the  roof,  icicles  were  forming 
under  the  eaves.  It  is  always  melting  and  freez 
ing  at  the  same  time  where  icicles  are  formed. 

Our  thoughts  are  with  those  among  the  dead 
into  whose  sphere  we  are  rising,  or  who  are  now 
rising  into  our  own.  Others  we  inevitably  for 
get,  though  they  be  brothers  and  sisters.  Thus 


14  WINTER. 

the  departed  may  be  nearer  to  us  than  when 
they  were  present.  At  death,  our  friends  and 
relatives  either  draw  nearer  to  us,  and  are  found 
out,  or  depart  farther  from  us,  and  are  forgot 
ten.  Friends  are  as  often  brought  nearer  to 
gether  as  separated  by  death. 

Dec.  24,  1853.  .  .  .  Walden  almost  entirely 
open  again.  Skated  across  Flint's  Pond,  for  the 
most  part  smooth,  but  with  rough  spots  where 
the  rain  had  not  melted  the  snow.  From  the  hill 
beyond  I  get  an  arctic  view  N.  W.  The  moun 
tains  are  of  a  cold  slate  color.  It  is  as  if  they 
bounded  the  continent  toward  Behring's  Straits. 

In  Weston's  field  in  springy  land  on  the  edge 
of  a  swamp  I  counted  thirty-three  or  four  of 
those  large  silvery  brown  cocoons  within  a  rod 
or  two,  and  probably  there  are  many  more ; 
about  a  foot  from  the  ground,  commonly  on 
the  main  stem,  though  sometimes  on  a  branch 
close  to  the  stem,  of  the  alder,  sweet  fern,  brake, 
etc.  The  largest  are  four  inches  long  by  two 
and  one  half  wide,  bag-shaped  and  wrinkled,  and 
partly  concealed  by  dry  leaves,  alder,  fern,  etc., 
attached,  as  if  sprinkled  over  them.  This  evi 
dence  of  cunning  in  so  humble  a  creature  is 
affecting,  for  I  am  not  ready  to  refer  it  to  an 
intelligence  which  the  creature  does  not  share, 
as  much  as  we  do  the  prerogative  of  reason. 
This  radiation  of  the  brain !  The  bare  silvery 


WINTER.  15 

cocoon  would  otherwise  be  too  obvious.  The 
worm  has  evidently  said  to  itself,  man  or  some 
other  creature  may  come  by  and  see  my  casket. 
I  will  disguise  it,  will  hang  a  screen  before  it. 
Brake,  and  sweet  fern,  and  alder  leaves  are  not 
only  loosely  sprinkled  over  it  and  dangling  from 
it,  but  often,  as  it  were,  pasted  close  upon  and 
almost  incorporated  into  it. 

Dec.  24,  1854.  Some  three  inches  of  snow 
fell  last  night  and  this  morning,  concluding 
with  a  fine  rain,  which  produced  a  slight  glaze, 
the  first  of  the  winter.  This  gives  the  woods 
a  hoary  aspect,  and  increases  the  stillness  by 
making  the  leaves  immovable  even  in  a  consid 
erable  wind. 

Dec.  24,  1856.  .  .  .  Noticed  at  E.  end  of 
the  westernmost  Andromeda  Pond  the  slender 
spikes  of  Lycopus  with  half-a-dozen  little  spher 
ical  dark  brown  whorls  of  pungently  fragrant 
or  spicy  seeds,  somewhat  nutmeg-like  or  even 
like  flagroot  (?)  when  bruised.  I  am  not  sure 
that  the  seeds  of  any  other  mint  are  thus  fra 
grant  now.  It  scents  your  handkerchief  or 
pocket-book  finely  when  the  crumbled  whorls 
are  sprinkled  over  them.  —  It  was  very  pleas 
ant  walking  thus  before  the  storm  was  over,  in 
the  soft,  subdued  light.  We  are  more  domes 
ticated  in  nature  when  our  vision  is  confined  to 
near  and  familiar  objects.  Did  not  see  a  track 


16  WINTER. 

of  any  animal  till  returning,  near  Well-Meadow 
Field,  where  many  foxes  (?),  one  of  whom  I 
had  a  glimpse  of,  had  been  coursing  back  and 
forth  in  the  path  and  near  it  for  three  quarters 
of  a  mile.  They  had  made  quite  a  path. 

I  do  not  take  snuff.  In  my  winter  walks 
I  stoop  and  bruise  between  my  thumb  and  fin 
ger  the  dry  whorls  of  the  Lycopus  or  water 
horehound,  just  rising  above  the  snow,  stripping 
them  off,  and  smell  that.  That  is  as  near  as  I 
come  to  the  Spice  Islands. 

Dec.  24,  1859.  ...  I  measure  the  blueberry 
bush  on  Fairhaven  Pond  Island.  The  five 
stems  are  united  at  the  ground  so  as  to  make 
one  round  and  solid  trunk  thirty-one  inches  in 
circumference,  but  probably  they  have  grown 
together  there,  for  they  become  separate  at 
about  six  inches  above.  They  may  have  sprung 
from  different  seeds  of  one  berry.  At  three  feet 
from  the  ground  they  measure  eleven,  eleven, 
eleven  and  one  half,  eight,  and  six  and  one  half 
or  on  an  average  nine  and  one  half  inches.  I 
climbed  up  and  found  a  comfortable  seat,  with 
my  feet  four  feet  from  the  ground.  There  was 
room  for  three  or  four  more  there,  but  unfortu 
nately  this  was  not  the  season  for  berries. 
There  were  several  other  clumps  of  large  ones 
in  the  neighborhood.  One  clump  close  by  the 
former  contained  twenty-three  stems  within  a 


WINTER.  17 

diameter  of  three  feet,  arid  their  average  diame 
ter  at  three  feet  from  the  ground  was  about  two 
inches  These  had  not  been  cut  because  they 
stood  on  this  small  island  which  has  little  wood 
beside,  and  therefore  had  grown  thus  large.  .  .  . 

The  stems  rise  up  in  a  winding  and  zigzag 
manner,  one  sometimes  resting  in  the  forks  of 
its  neighbor.  Judging  from  those  whose  rings 
I  have  counted,  the  largest  of  those  stems  must 
be  about  sixty  years  old. 

Dec.  25,  1840.  The  character  of  Washing 
ton  has,  after  all,  been  undervalued,  because  not 
valued  correctly.  He  was  a  proper  Puritan 
hero.  It  is  his  erectness  and  persistency  which 
attract  me.  A  few  simple  deeds  with  a  digni 
fied  silence  for  background,  and  that  is  all.  He 
never  fluctuated,  nor  lingered,  nor  stooped,  nor 
swerved,  but  was  nobly  silent  and  assured. 
He  was  not  the  darling  of  the  people,  as  no  man 
of  integrity  can  ever  be,  but  was  as  much  re 
spected  as  loved.  His  instructions  to  his  stew 
ard,  his  refusal  of  a  crown,  his  interview  with 
his  officers  at  the  termination  of  the  war,  his 
thoughts  after  his  retirement,  as  expressed  in  a 
letter  to  La  Fayette,  his  remarks  to  another  cor 
respondent  on  his  being  chosen  president,  his 
last  words  to  Congress,  and  the  unparalleled  re 
spect  which  his  most  distinguished  contempora 
ries,  as  Fox  and  Erskine,  expressed  for  him,  are 


18  WINTER. 

refreshing  to  read  in  these  unheroic  days.  His 
behavior  in  the  field  and  in  council  and  his  dig 
nified  and  contented  withdrawal  to  private  life 
were  great.  He  could  advance  and  he  could 
withdraw. 

Dec.  25,  1841.  It  seems  as  if  Nature  did  for 
a  long  time  gently  overlook  the  profanity  of 
man.  The  wood  still  kindly  echoes  the  strokes 
of  the  axe,  and  when  the  strokes  are  few  and 
seldom,  they  add  a  new  charm  to  a  walk.  All 
the  elements  strive  to  naturalize  the  sound.  .  .  . 

It  is  not  a  true  apology  for  any  coarseness  to 
say  that  it  is  natural.  The  grim  woods  can 
afford  to  be  very  delicate  and  perfect  in  the 
details. 

I  don't  want  to  feel  as  if  my  life  were  a  so 
journ  any  longer.  That  philosophy  cannot  be 
true  which  so  paints  it.  It  is  time  now  that  I 
begin  to  live. 

Dec.  25,  1851.  ...  I  go  forth  to  see  the  sun 
set.  Who  knows  how  it  will  set  even  half  an 
hour  beforehand  ?  Whether  it  will  go  down  in 
clouds  or  a  clear  sky  ?  .  .  .  I  witness  a  beauty 
in  the  form  or  coloring  of  the  clouds  which 
addresses  itself  to  my  imagination.  It  is  what 
it  suggests  and  is  the  symbol  of  that  I  care 
for,  and  if,  by  any  trick  of  science,  you  rob  it 
of  this,  you  do  me  no  service  and  explain  noth 
ing.  I,  standing  twenty  miles  off,  see  a  crim- 


WINTER.  19 

son  cloud  in  the  horizon.  You  tell  me  it  is  a 
mass  of  vapor  which  absorbs  all  other  rays  and 
reflects  the  red;  but  that  is  nothing  to  the  pur 
pose,  for  this  red  vision  excites  me,  stirs  my 
blood,  makes  my  thoughts  flow.  I  have  new  and 
indescribable  fancies,  and  you  have  not  touched 
the  secret  of  that  influence.  If  there  is  not 
something  mystical  in  your  explanation,  ...  it  is 
quite  insufficient.  .  .  .  What  sort  of  science  is 
that  which  enriches  the  understanding,  but  robs 
the  imagination  ?  Not  merely  robs  Peter  to  pay 
Paul,  but  takes  from  Peter  more  than  it  ever 
gives  to  Paul.  That  is  simply  the  way  in  which 
it  speaks  to  the  understanding,  .  .  .  but  that  is 
not  the  way  it  speaks  to  the  imagination.  .  .  . 
Just  as  inadequate  to  a  mere  mechanic  would  be 
a  poet's  account  of  a  steam-engine.  If  we  knew 
all  things  thus  mechanically  merely,  should  we 
know  anything  really  ?  —  It  would  be  a  true  dis 
cipline  for  the  writer  to  take  the  least  film  of 
thought  that  floats  in  the  twilight  sky  of  his 
mind  for  his  theme,  about  which  he  has  scarcely 
one  idea  (that  would  be  teaching  his  ideas  how 
to  shoot),  make  a  lecture  on  this,  by  assiduity 
and  attention  get  perchance  two  views  of  the 
same,  increase  a  little  the  stock  of  knowledge, 
clear  a  new  field  instead  of  manuring  the  old.  .  .  . 
We  seek  too  soon  to  ally  the  perceptions  of  the 
mind  to  the  experience  of  the  hand,  to  prove 


20  WINTER. 

our  gossamer  truths  practical,  to  show  their  con 
nection  with  every-day  life  (better  show  their 
distance  from  every-day  life),  to  relate  them  to 
the  cider  mill  and  the  banking  institution.  .  .  . 
That  way  of  viewing  things  you  know  of,  least 
insisted  on  by  you  however,  least  remembered, 
take  that  view,  adhere  to  that,  insist  on  that ;  see 
all  things  from  that  point  of  view.  Will  you 
let  these  intimations  go  unattended  to,  and  watch 
the  door  bell  or  knocker  ?  .  .  .  Do  not  speak  for 
other  men ;  think  for  yourself.  You  are  shown 
as  in  a  vision  the  kingdoms  of  this  world,  and  of 
all  the  worlds,  but  you  prefer  to  look  in  upon  a 
puppet  show.  Though  you  should  speak  but  to 
one  kindred  mind  in  all  time,  though  you  should 
not  speak  to  one,  but  only  utter  aloud,  that  you 
may  the  more  completely  realize  and  live  in, 
the  idea  which  contains  the  reason  of  your  life, 
that  you  may  build  yourself  up  to  the  height  of 
your  conceptions,  that  you  may  remember  your 
creator  in  the  days  of  your  youth,  and  justify 
his  ways  to  man,  that  the  end  of  life  may  not 
be  its  amusement. 

Dec.  25,  1853.  P.  M.  Skated  to  Fair  Haven 
and  above.  .  .  .  About  4  p.  M.  the  sun  sank  be 
hind  a  cloud  and  the  pond  began  to  whoop  or 
boom.  I  noticed  the  same  yesterday  at  the  same 
hour  on  Flint's.  It  was  perfectly  silent  before. 
The  weather  in  both  cases  clear,  cold,  and  windy. 


WINTER.  21 

It  is  a  sort  of  belching,  and  as  C.  said,  somewhat 
frog-like.  I  suspect  it  did  not  continue  to  whoop 
long  either  night.  It  is  a  very  pleasing  phenom 
enon,  so  dependent  on  the  attitude  of  the  sun. 

When  I  go  to  Boston,  I  go  naturally  straight 
through  the  city  down  to  the  end  of  Long 
Wharf  and  look  off,  for  I  have  no  cousins  in  the 
back  alleys.  The  water  and  the  vessels  are 
novel  and  interesting.  What  are  our  maritime 
cities  but  the  shops  and  dwellings  of  merchants 
about  a  wharf  projecting  into  the  sea  where 
there  is  a  convenient  harbor,  on  which  to  land 
the  produce  of  other  climes,  and  at  which  to  load 
the  exports  of  your  own.  Next  in  interest  to  me 
is  the  market  where  the  produce  of  our  own 
country  is  collected.  Boston,  New  York,  Phila 
delphia,  Charleston,  New  Orleans,  and  many 
others  are  the  names  of  wharves  projecting  into 
the  sea.  They  are  good  places  to  take  in  or 
to  discharge  a  cargo.  I  see  a  great  many  bar 
rels  and  fig  drums,  and  piles  of  wood  for  um 
brella  sticks,  and  blocks  of  granite  and  ice,  etc., 
and  that  is  Boston.  Great  piles  of  goods,  and 
the  means  of  packing  and  conveying  them,  much 
wrapping  paper  and  twine,  many  crates  and 
hogsheads  and  trucks,  that  is  Boston.  The  more 
barrels,  the  more  Boston.  The  museums  and 
scientific  societies  and  libraries  are  accidental. 
They  gather  around  the  barrels  to  save  carting. 


22  WINTER. 

Apparently  the  ice  is  held  down  on  the  sides 
of  the  river  by  being  frozen  to  the  shore  and  the 
weeds,  and  so  is  overflowed  there ;  but  in  the 
middle  it  is  lifted  up  and  makes  room  for  the 
tide. 

I  saw  just  above  Fair  Haven  Pond  two  or 
three  places  where  just  before  the  last  freezing, 
when  the  ice  was  softened  and  partly  covered 
with  sleet,  there  had  been  a  narrow  canal  about 
eight  inches  wide  quite  across  the  river  from 
meadow  to  meadow.  I  am  constrained  to  be 
lieve,  from  the  peculiar  character  of  it  on  the 
meadow  end,  where  in  one  case  it  divided  and 
crossed  itself,  that  it  was  made  either  by  musk- 
rats  or  otters  or  minks  repeatedly  crossing  there. 
One  end  was,  for  some  distance,  like  an  otter 
trail  in  the  soft  upper  part  of  the  ice,  not  worn 
through. 

Dec.  25,  1856.  p.  M.  To  Lee's  Cliff.  A 
strong  wind  from  the  N.  W.  is  gathering  the 
snow  into  picturesque  drifts  behind  the  walls. 
As  usual,  they  resemble  shells  more  than  any 
thing  else,  sometimes  the  prows  of  vessels,  also 
the  folds  of  a  white  napkin  or  counterpane 
dropped  over  a  bonneted  head.  There  are  no 
such  picturesque  snowdrifts  as  are  formed  be 
hind  loose  and  open  stone  walls.  .  .  . 

Take  long  walks  in  stormy  weather,  or  through 
deep  snows  in  the  fields  and  woods,  if  you  would 


WINTER.  23 

keep  your  spirits  up.  Deal  with  brute  nature. 
Be  cold  and  hungry  and  weary. 

Dec.  25,  1858.  .  .  .  Now  that  the  sun  is  set 
ting,  all  its  light  seems  to  glance  over  the  snow- 
clad  pond  [Walden],  and  strike  the  rocky  shore 
under  the  pitch  pines  at  the  N.  E.  end.  Though 
the  bare,  rocky  shore  there  is  only  a  foot  or  a 
foot  and  a  half  high,  as  I  look,  it  reflects  so 
much  light  that  the  rocks  are  singularly  distinct, 
as  if  the  pond  showed  its  teeth.  .  .  .  How  full 
of  soft,  pure  light  the  western  sky  now,  after 
sunset !  I  love  to  see  the  outlines  of  the  pines 
against  it.  Unless  you  watch,  you  do  not  know 
when  the  sun  goes  down.  It  is  like  a  candle  ex 
tinguished  without  smoke.  A  moment  ago  you 
saw  that  glittering  orb  amid  the  dry  oak  leaves 
in  the  horizon  and  now  you  can  detect  no  trace 
of  it.  ... 

But  for  all  voice  in  that  serene  hour,  I  hear 
an  owl  hoot.  How  glad  I  am  to  hear  him 
rather  than  the  most  eloquent  man  of  the  age. 

Dec.  25,  1859.  How  different  are  men  and 
women,  e.  g.9  in  respect  to  the  adornment  of 
their  heads.  Do  you  ever  see  an  old  or  jammed 
bonnet  on  the  head  of  a  woman  at  a  public  meet 
ing?  But  look  at  any  assembly  of  men  with 
their  hats  on;  how  large  a  proportion  of  the 
hats  will  be  old,  weather-beaten,  and  indented; 
but,  I  think,  so  much  more  picturesque  and  in- 


24  WINTER. 

teresting.  One  farmer  rides  by  my  door  in  a 
hat  which  it  does  me  good  to  see,  there  is  so  much 
character  in  it,  so  much  independence,  to  begin 
with,  and  then  affection  for  his  old  friends,  etc., 
etc.  I  should  not  wonder  if  there  were  lichens 
on  it.  Think  of  painting  a  hero  in  a  brand-new 
hat !  The  chief  recommendation  of  the  Kossuth 
hat  is  that  it  looks  old  to  start  with,  and  almost 
as  good  as  new  to  end  with.  Indeed,  it  is  gen 
erally  conceded  that  a  man  does  not  look  the 
worse  for  a  somewhat  dilapidated  hat.  But  go 
to  a  lyceum  and  look  at  the  bonnets  and  various 
other  head  gear  of  the  women  and  girls  (who, 
by  the  way,  keep  their  hats  on,  it  being  too  dan 
gerous  and  expensive  to  take  them  off),  why, 
every  one  looks  as  fragile  as  a  butterfly's  wings, 
having  just  come  out  of  a  bandbox,  as  it  will  go 
into  a  bandbox  again  when  the  lyceum  is  over. 
Men  wear  their  hats  for  use,  women  theirs  for 
ornament.  I  have  seen  the  greatest  philosopher 
in  the  town  with  what  the  traders  would  call  a 
"shocking  bad  hat"  on,  but  the  woman  whose 
bonnet  does  not  come  up  to  the  mark  is  at  best 
a  blue-stocking.  The  man  is  not  particularly 
proud  of  his  beaver  and  musquash,  but  the 
woman  flaunts  her  ostrich  and  sable  in  your  face. 
Ladies  are  in  haste  to  dress  as  if  it  were  cold  or 
as  if  it  were  warm,  though  it  may  not  yet  be  so, 
merely  to  display  a  new  dress. 


WINTER.  25 

Dec.  26, 1840.  .  .  .  When  the  pond  is  frozen 
I  do  not  suspect  the  wealth  under  my  feet.  How 
many  pickerel  are  poised  on  easy  fin  fathoms 
below  the  loaded  wain.  The  revolution  of  the 
seasons  must  be  a  curious  phenomenon  to  them. 
Now  the  sun  and  wind  brush  aside  their  curtain, 
and  they  see  the  heavens  again. 

Sunday,  Dec.  26,  1841.  .  .  .  When  I  hear 
this  bell  ring,  I  am  carried  back  to  years  and 
Sabbaths  when  I  was  newer  and  more  innocent, 
I  fear,  than  now,  and  it  seems  to  me  as  if  there 
were  a  world  within  a  world.  Sin,  I  am  sure,  is 
not  in  overt  acts,  or  indeed  in  acts  of  any  kind, 
but  is  in  proportion  to  the  time  which  has  come 
behind  us,  and  displaced  eternity,  to  the  degree 
in  which  our  elements  are  mixed  with  the  ele 
ments  of  the  world.  The  whole  duty  of  life  is 
implied  in  the  question,  how  to  respire  and  as 
pire  both  at  once. 

Dec.  26, 1850.  The  pine  woods  seen  from  the 
hill-tops,  now  that  the  ground  is  covered  with 
snow,  are  not  green,  but  a  dark  brown,  greenish 
brown,  perhaps.  You  see  dark  patches  of  wood. 

Dec.  26, 1851.  I  observed  this  afternoon  that 

when  E H came  home  from  sledding 

wood  and  unyoked  his  oxen,  they  made  a  busi 
ness  of  stretching  and  scratching  themselves 
with  their  horns,  rubbing  themselves  against 
the  posts,  and  licking  themselves  in  those  parts 


26  WINTER. 

which  the  yoke  had  prevented  their  reaching  all 
day.  The  human  way  in  which  they  behaved  af 
fected  me  even  pathetically.  They  were  too  se 
rious  to  be  glad  that  their  day's  work  was  done ; 
they  had  not  spirits  enough  left  for  that.  They 
behaved  as  a  tired  wood-chopper  might.  This 
was  to  me  a  new  phase  in  the  life  of  the  laboring 
ox.  It  is  painful  to  think  how  they  may  some 
times  be  overworked. 

Dec.  26, 1853.  This  forenoon  it  snowed  pretty 
hard  for  some  hours,  the  first  snow  of  any  conse 
quence  thus  far.  It  is  about  three  inches  deep. 
I  go  out  at  2£  P.  M.  just  as  it  ceases.  Now  is 
the  time  before  the  wind  rises,  or  the  sun  has 
shone,  to  go  forth  and  see  the  snow  on  the  trees. 
The  clouds  have  lifted  somewhat,  but  are  still 
spitting  snow  a  little.  The  vapor  of  the  steam- 
engiiie  does  not  rise  high  in  the  misty  air.  .  .  . 
The  snow  has  fallen  so  gently  that  it  forms  an 
upright  wall  on  the  slenderest  twig.  The  agree 
able  maze  which  the  branches  make  is  more  ob 
vious  than  ever,  and  every  twig  thus  laden  is  as 
still  as  the  hillside  itself.  The  pitch  pines  are 
covered  with  soft  globular  masses.  The  effect 
of  the  snow  is  to  press  down  the  forest,  con 
found  it  with  the  grasses,  and  create  a  new  sur 
face  to  the  earth  above,  shutting  us  in  with  it, 
and  we  go  along  somewhat  like  moles  through 
our  galleries.  The  sight  of  the  pure  and  track- 


WINTER.  27 

less  road  up  Blister's  Hill,  with  branches  and 
trees  supporting  snowy  burdens  bending  over  it 
on  each  side,  would  tempt  us  to  begin  life  again. 
The  ice  is  covered  up  and  skating  gone.  The 
bare  hills  are  so  white  that  I  cannot  see  their 
outlines  against  the  misty  sky.  The  snow  lies 
handsomely  on  the  shrub-oaks,  like  a  coarse 
braiding  in  the  air.  They  have  so  many  small 
and  zigzag  twigs  that  it  comes  near  to  filling  up 
with  a  light  snow  to  that  depth.  The  hunters 
are  already  out  with  dogs  to  follow  the  first 
beast  that  makes  a  track.  —  Saw  a  small  flock 
of  tree  sparrows  in  the  sproutlands  under  Bart- 
lett's  Cliff.  Their  metallic  chip  is  much  like  the 
lisp  of  the  chickadee.  —  All  weeds  with  their 
seeds  rising  dark  above  the  snow  are  now  re 
markably  conspicuous,  which  before  were  not  ob 
served  against  the  dark  earth.  —  I  passed  by 
the  pitch  pine  that  was  struck  by  lightning,  and 
was  impressed  with  awe  on  looking  up  and  seeing 
that  broad,  distinct,  spiral  mark,  more  distinct 
even  than  when  made  eight  years  ago,  as  one 
might  groove  a  walking  stick,  .  .  .  mark  where 
a  terrific  and  resistless  bolt  came  down  from 
heaven,  out  of  the  harmless  sky,  eight  years  ago. 
It  seemed  a  sacred  spot.  I  felt  that  we  had  not 
learned  much  since  the  days  of  Tullus  Hostilius. 
The  tree  at  length  shows  the  effect  of  the  shock, 
and  the  woodpeckers  have  begun  to  bore  it  on 
one  side. 


28  WINTER. 

Walden  still  open.  Saw  in  it  a  small  diver, 
probably  a  grebe  or  dobchick,  dipper  or  what 
not,  with  the  markings,  so  far  as  I  saw,  of  the 
crested  grebe,  but  smaller.  It  had  a  black  head, 
a  white  ring  about  its  neck,  a  white  breast,  black 
back,  and  apparently  no  tail.  It  dived  and 
swam  a  few  rods  under  water,  and  when  on  the 
surface  kept  turning  round  and  round  warily, 
nodding  its  head  the  while.  This  is  the  only 
pond  hereabouts  that  is  open. 

Was  overtaken  by  an  Irishman  seeking  work. 
I  asked  him  if  he  could  chop  wood.  He  said  he 
was  not  long  in  this  country,  that  he  could  cut 
one  side  of  a  tree  well  enough,  but  he  had  not 
learned  to  change  hands  and  cut  the  other,  with 
out  going  round  it,  what  we  call  crossing  the  calf. 
They  get  very  small  wages  at  this  season  of  the 
year,  almost  give  up  the  ghost  in  the  effort  to 
keep  soul  and  body  together.  He  left  me  on 
the  run  to  find  a  new  master. 

Dec.  26,  1854.  At  R 's  [New  Bedford]. 

I  do  not  remember  to  have  ever  seen  such  a  day 
as  this  in  Concord.  There  is  no  snow  here 
(though  there  has  been  excellent  sleighing  at 
Concord  since  the  5th),  but  it  is  very  muddy, 
the  frost  coming  out  of  the  ground  as  in  spring 
with  us. 

I  went  to  walk  in  the  woods  with  R.  It  was 
wonderfully  warm  and  pleasant.  The  cockerels 


WINTER.  29 

crowed  just  as  in  a  spring  day  at  home.  I  felt 
the  winter  breaking1  up  in  me,  and  if  I  had  been 
at  home,  I  should  have  tried  to  write  poetry. 
They  told  me  that  this  was  not  a  rare  day  there, 
that  they  had  little  or  no  winter  such  as  we  have, 
and  it  was  owing  to  the  influence  of  the  Gulf 
Stream  which  was  only  sixty  miles  from  Nan- 
tucket  at  the  nearest,  or  one  hundred  and  twenty 
miles  from  them.  In  mid- winter  when  the  wind 
was  S.  E.  or  even  S.  W.,  they  frequently  had  days 
as  warm  and  debilitating  as  in  summer.  There  is 
a  difference  of  about  a  degree  in  latitude  between 
Concord  and  New  Bedford,  but  far  more  in  cli 
mate.  The  American  holly  is  quite  common 
there,  with  its  red  berries  still  holding  on,  and  is 
now  their  Christinas  evergreen.  I  heard  the 
larks  sing  strong  and  sweet,  and  saw  robins.  .  .  . 
R.  said  that  pheasants  from  England  (where 
they  are  not  indigenous)  had  been  imported  into 
Naushon  and  are  now  killed  there. 

Dec.  26,  1855.  After  snow,  rain,  and  hail 
yesterday  and  last  night,  we  have  this  morning 
quite  a  glaze,  there  being  at  least  an  inch  or  two 
of  crusted  snow  on  the  ground ;  the  most  we 
have  had.  The  sun  comes  out  at  9  A.  M.  and 
lights  up  the  ice-incrusted  trees.  ...  I  go  to 
Walden  via  the  almshouse  and  up  the  railroad. 
Trees  seen  in  the  west  against  the  dark  cloud, 
the  sun  shining  on  them,  are  perfectly  white  as 


30  WINTER. 

frost  work,  and  their  outlines  very  perfectly  and 
distinctly  revealed,  great  wisps  that  they  are  and 
ghosts  of  trees,  with  recurved  twigs.  The  walls 
and  fences  are  incased,  and  the  fields  bristle 
with  a  myriad  of  crystal  spears.  Already  the 
wind  is  rising  and  a  brattling  is  heard  overhead 
in  the  street.  The  sun  shining  down  a  gorge 
over  the  woods  at  Brister's  Hill  reveals  a  won 
derfully  brilliant,  as  well  as  seemingly  solid  and 
diversified  region  in  the  air.  The  ice  is  from  an 
eighth  to  a  quarter  of  an  inch  thick  about  the 
twigs  and  pine  needles,  only  one  half  as  thick 
commonly  on  one  side.  The  heads  of  the  trees 
are  bowed,  and  their  plumes  and  needles  stiff  as 
if  preserved  tinder  glass  for  the  inspection  of 
posterity.  .  .  .  The  pines  thus  weighed  down 
are  sharp-pointed  at  top,  and  remind  me  of  firs 
and  even  hemlocks,  their  drooping  boughs  being 
wrapped  about  them  like  the  folds  of  a  cloak  or 
a  shawl.  The  crust  is  already  strewn  with  bits 
of  the  green  needles  which  have  been  broken  off. 
Frequently  the  whole  top  stands  up  bare,  while 
the  middle  and  lower  branches  are  drooping  and 
massed  together,  resting  on  one  another.  —  But 
the  low  and  spreading  weeds  in  the  fields  and 
the  woodpaths  are  the  most  interesting.  Here 
are  asters  (savory-leaved),  whose  flat,  imbricated 
calyxes,  three  quarters  of  an  inch  over,  are  sur 
mounted  and  inclosed  in  a  perfectly  transparent 


WINTER.  31 

ice  button,  like  a  glass  knob,  through  which  you 
see  the  reflections  of  the  brown  calyx.  These  are 
very  common.  —  Each  little  blue  curl  calyx  has  a 
spherical  button,  like  those  over  a  little  boy's 
jacket,  little  sprigs  of  them,  and  the  pennyroyal 
has  still  smaller  spheres  more  regularly  arranged 
about  its  stem,  chandelier-wise,  and  still  smells 
through  the  ice.  The  finest  grasses  support  the 
most  wonderful  burdens  of  ice  and  most  bunched 
on  their  minute  threads.  These  weeds  are  spread 
and  arched  over  into  the  snow  again,  countless 
little  arches  a  few  inches  high,  each  cased  in  ice, 
which  you  break  with  a  tinkling  crash  at  each 
step.  —  The  scarlet  fruit  of  the  cockspur  lichen, 
seen  glowing  through  the  more  opaque  whitish 
or  snowy  crust  of  a  stump,  is,  on  close  inspection, 
the  richest  sight  of  all,  for  the  scarlet  is  in 
creased  and  multiplied  by  reflection  through  the 
bubbles  and  hemispherical  surfaces  of  the  crust, 
as  if  it  covered  some  vermilion  grain  thickly 
strewn.  The  brown  cup  lichens  stand  in  their 
midst.  The  whole  rough  bark,  too,  is  incased. 

Already  a  squirrel  has  perforated  the  crust 
above  the  mouth  of  his  burrow  here  and  there, 
by  the  side  of  the  path,  and  left  some  empty 
acorn  shells  on  the  snow.  He  has  shoveled  out 
this  morning  before  the  snow  has  frozen  on  his 
doorstep.  .  .  . 

Particularly  are  we  attracted  in  the  winter  by 


32  WINTER. 

greenness  and  signs  of  growth,  as  the  green  and 
white  shoots  of  grass  and  weeds  pulled,  or  float 
ing  on  the  water,  and  also  by  color,  as  the  cock- 
spur  lichens,  crimson  birds,  etc. 

4  P.  M.  Up  railroad.  Since  the  sun  has  risen 
higher  and  fairly  triumphed  over  the  clouds,  the 
ice  has  glistened  with  all  the  prismatic  hues.  .  .  . 
The  whole  top  of  the  pine  forest,  as  seen  miles 
off  in  the  horizon,  is  of  sharp  points,  the  leading 
shoots  with  a  few  plumes. 

In  a  true  history  or  biography,  of  how  little 
consequence  those  events  of  which  so  much  is 
commonly  made.  ...  I  find  in  my  journal  that 
the  most  important  events  in  my  life,  if  recorded 
at  all,  are  not  dated. 

Dec.  26,  1858.  P.  M.  To  Jenny  Dugan's. 
.  .  .  Call  at  a  farmer's  this  Sunday  p.  M.,  where 
I  surprise  the  well-to-do  masters  of  the  house, 
lounging  in  very  ragged  clothes,  for  which  they 
think  it  necessary  to  apologize,  and  one  of  them 
is  busy  laying  the  supper  table  (at  which  he 
invites  me  to  sit  down  at  last),  bringing  up  cold 
meat  from  the  cellar  and  a  lump  of  butter  on 
the  end  of  his  knife,  and  making  the  tea  by  the 
time  his  mother  gets  home  from  church.  Thus 
sincere  and  homely,  as  I  am  glad  to  know,  is  the 
actual  life  of  these  New  England  men,  wearing 
rags  indoors  there  which  would  disgrace  a  beg 
gar  (and  are  not  beggars  and  paupers  they  who 


WINTER.  33 

could  be  disgraced  so),  and  doing  the  indispen 
sable  work,  however  humble.  How  much  better 
and  more  humane  it  was  than  if  they  had  im 
ported  and  set  up  among  their  penates  a  headless 
torso  from  the  ruins  of  Ireland !  I  am  glad  to 
find  that  our  New  England  life  has  a  genuine, 
humane  core  to  it ;  that  inside,  after  all,  there 
is  so  little  pretense  and  brag.  .  .  .  The  middle- 
aged  son  sits  there  in  the  old  unpainted  house 
in  a  ragged  coat,  and  helps  his  old  mother  about 
her  work  when  the  field  does  not  require  him. 

Dec.  26,  1859.  P.  M.  Skate  to  Lee's  Bridge. 
...  I  see  a  brute  with  a  gun  in  his  hand  stand 
ing  motionless  over  a  muskrat's  house  which  he 
has  destroyed.  I  find  that  he  has  visited  every  one 
in  the  neighborhood  of  Fair  Haven  Pond,  above 
and  below,  and  broken  them  all  down,  laying  open 
the  interior  to  the  water,  and  then  stood  watchful 
close  by  for  the  poor  creature  to  show  its  head 
for  a  breath  of  air.  There  lies  the  red  carcass 
of  one  whose  pelt  he  has  taken  on  the  spot, 
.  .  .  and  for  his  afternoon's  cruelty  that  fellow 
will  be  rewarded  with  ninepence,  perchance. 
When  I  consider  the  opportunities  of  the  civil 
ized  man  for  getting  ninepences  and  getting 
light,  this  seems  to  me  more  savage  than  savages 
are.  Depend  on  it  that  whoever  thus  treats  the 
muskrat's  house,  his  refuge  when  the  water  is 
frozen  thick,  he  and  his  family  will  not  come  to 


34  WINTER. 

a  good  end.  So  many  of  these  houses  being 
broken  open,  twenty  or  thirty  I  see,  I  look  into 
the  open  hole,  and  find  in  it,  in  almost  every  in 
stance,  many  pieces  of  the  white  root,  with  the 
little  leaf  bud  curled  up,  which  I  take  to  be  the 
yellow  lily  root.  The  leaf  bud  unrolled  has  the 
same  scent  as  the  yellow  lily.  There  will  be 
a  half  dozen  of  these  pointed  buds,  more  or 
less  green,  coming  to  a  point  at  the  end  of  the 
root.  Also  I  see  a  little  coarser,  what  I  take  to 
be  the  green  leaf  stalk  of  the  .pontederia,  for  I 
see  a  little  of  the  stipule  sheathing  the  stalk  from 
within  it  (?)  ...  In  one  hole  there  was  a  large 
quantity  of  the  root  I  have  mentioned,  its  leaf 
buds  attached  or  bitten  off.  The  root  was  gen 
erally  five  or  six  eighths  of  an  inch  in  diameter. 
It  must,  I  think,  be  the  principal  food  of  the 
muskrat  at  this  time.  If  you  open  twenty  cab 
ins  you  will  find  it  in  at  least  three  quarters  of 
them,  and  nothing  else  unless  a  very  little  pon- 
tederia  leaf  stem  (?).  By  eating,  or  killing  at 
least,  so  many  lily  buds,  they  must  thin  out  the 
plant  considerably.  —  I  saw  no  fresh  c]am  shells 
in  the  holes  and  scarcely  any  on  the  ice  anywhere 
on  the  edge  of  open  places,  nor  are  they  proba 
bly  deposited  in  a  heap  under  the  ice.  It  may 
be,  however,  that  the  shells  are  opened  in  the 
hole,  and  then  dropped  in  the  water  near  by. 
Twice  this  winter  I  have  noticed  a  muskrat 


WINTER.  35 

floating  in  a  placid,  smooth,  open  place  in  the 
river,  when  it  was  frozen  for  a  mile  each  side, 
looking  at  first  like  a  bit  of  stump  or  frozen 
meadow,  but  showing  its  whole  upper  outline 
from  nose  to  end  of  tail,  perfectly  still  till  he  ob 
served  me,  then  suddenly  diving  and  steering 
under  the  ice  toward  some  cabin's  entrance  or 
other  retreat  half-a-dozen  or  more  rods  off. 

As  some  of  the  tales  of  our  childhood,  the  in 
ventions  of  some  Mother  Goose,  will  haunt  us 
when  we  are  grown  up,  so  the  race  itself  still 
believes  in  some  of  the  fables  with  which  its  in 
fancy  has  amused  and  imposed  on  it,  e.  g.,  the 
fable  of  the  Cranes  and  Pygmies  which  learned 
men  endeavored  to  believe  or  explain  in  the  last 
century. 

Aristotle  being  almost,  if  not  quite,  the  first 
to  write  systematically  on  animals,  gives  them 
of  course  only  popular  names,  such  as  were  com 
mon  with  the  hunters,  fowlers,  fishers,  and  farm 
ers  of  his  day.  He  used  no  scientific  terms. 
But  he  having  the  priority,  and  having,  as  it 
were,  created  science,  and  given  it  its  laws,  those 
popular  Greek  names,  even  when  the  animal  to 
which  they  were  applied  cannot  be  identified, 
have  been  in  great  part  preserved,  and  make  the 
learned,  far-fetched,  and  commonly  unintelligi 
ble  names  of  genera  to-day,  e.  g.,  oXoOovpiov,  etc. 
His  "  History  of  Animals  "  has  thus  become  a 
very  storehouse  of  scientific  nomenclature. 


36  WINTER. 

Dec.  26,  1860.  M sent  to  me  yesterday 

a  perfect  Strix  Asio,  or  red  owl  of  Wilson,  not 
at  all  gray.  This  is  now  generally  made  the 
same  with  the  Ncevia,  but  while  some  consider 
the  red  the  old,  others  consider  it  the  young. 
This  is,  as  Wilson  says,  a  bright  "nut-brown." 
...  It  is  twenty-three  inches  alar  extent  by 
about  eleven  long.  Feet  extend  one  inch  be 
yond  tail.  Cabot  makes  the  old  bird  red,  Au- 
dubon,  the  young. 

To  such  an  excess  have  our  civilization  and 
division  of  labor  come  that  A.,  a  professional 
huckleberry  picker,  has  hired  B.'s  field,  and  we 
will  suppose  is  now  gathering  the  crop,  perhaps 
with  the  aid  of  a  patented  machine.  C.,  a  pro 
fessed  cook,  is  superintending  the  cooking  of 
a  pudding  made  of  some  of  the  berries,  while 
Professor  D.,  for  whom  the  pudding  is  intended, 
sits  in  his  library  writing  a  book,  a  work  on  the 
Vacciniese,  of  course.  And  now  the  result  of 
this  downward  course  will  be  seen  in  that  book, 
which  should  be  the  ultimate  fruit  of  the  huckle 
berry  field,  and  account  for  the  existence  of  the 
two  professors  who  come  between  D.  and  A.  It 
will  be  worthless.  There  will  be  none  of  the 
spirit  of  the  huckleberry  in  it.  The  reading  of 
it  will  be  a  weariness  to  the  flesh.  To  use  a 
homely  illustration,  it  is  to  save  at  the  spile,  and 
waste  at  the  bung.  I  believe  in  a  different  kind 


WINTER.  37 

of  division  of  labor,  and  that  Professor  D.  should 
divide  himself  between  the  library  and  the 
huckleberry  field. 

Dec.  27,  1837.  .  .  .  The  real  heroes  of  min 
strelsy  have  been  ideal,  even  when  the  names  of 
actual  heroes  have  been  perpetuated.  The  real 
Arthur,  who  "  not  only  excelled  the  experienced 
past,  but  also  the  possible  future,"  of  whom  it 
was  affirmed,  after  many  centuries,  that  he  was 
not  dead,  but  "  had  withdrawn  from  the  world 
into  some  magical  region  from  which  at  a  future 
crisis  he  was  to  reappear,  and  lead  the  Cymri 
in  triumph  through  the  island,"  whose  character 
and  actions  were  the  theme  of  the  bards  of  Bre- 
tagne,  and  the  foundation  of  their  interminable 
romances,  was  only  an  ideal  impersonation.  — 
Men  claim  for  the  ideal  an  actual  existence  also, 
but  do  not  often  expand  the  actual  into  the 
ideal.  "  If  you  do  not  believe  me,  go  into  Bre- 
tagne,  and  mention  in  the  streets  and  villages 
that  Arthur  is  really  dead  like  other  men. 
You  will  not  escape  with  impunity.  You  will 
be  either  hooted  with  the  curses  of  your  hearers, 
or  stoned  to  death." 

The  most  remarkable  instance  of  home-sick 
ness  is  that  of  the  colony  of  Franks  transplanted 
by  the  Romans  from  the  German  Ocean  to  the 
Euxine,  who,  at  length  resolving  to  a  man  to 
abandon  the  country,  seized  the  vessels  which 


38  WINTER. 

carried  them  out,  and  reached  at  last  their 
native  shores,  after  innumerable  difficulties  and 
dangers  upon  the  Mediterranean  and  the  At 
lantic. 

Dec.  27,  1851.  Sunset  from  Fair  Haven 
Hill.  This  evening  there  are  many  clouds  in 
the  west  into  which  the  sun  goes  down,  so  that 
we  have  our  visible  or  apparent  sunset  and  red 
evening  sky  as  much  as  fifteen  minutes  before 
the  real  sunset.  You  must  be  early  on  the  hills 
to  witness  such  a  sunset,  —  by  half -past  four  at 
least.  Then  all  the  vales,  even  to  the  horizon, 
are  full  of  a  purple  vapor  which  half  veils  the 
distant  mountains,  and  the  windows  of  undiscov- 
erable  farm-houses  shine  like  an  early  candle  or 
a  fire.  After  the  sun  has  gone  behind  a  cloud, 
there  appears  to  be  a  gathering  of  clouds  around 
his  setting,  and  for  a  few  moments  his  light  in 
the  amber  sky  seems  more  intense,  brighter,  and 
purer  than  at  noonday,  .  .  .  like  the  ecstasy  which 
we  are  told  sometimes  lights  up  the  face  of  a 
dying  man.  That  is  a  serene  or  evening  death, 
like  the  end  of  the  day.  Then  at  last  through 
all  the  grossness  which  has  accumulated  in  the 
atmosphere  of  day  is  seen  a  patch  of  serene  sky, 
fairer  by  contrast  with  the  surrounding  dark  than 
midday,  and  even  the  gross  atmosphere  of  the 
day  is  gilded  and  made  pure  as  amber  by  the 
setting  sun,  as  if  the  day's  sins  were  forgiven  it. 


WINTER.  39 

The  man  is  blessed  who  every  day  is  permitted 
to  behold  anything  so  pure  and  serene  as  the 
western  sky  at  sunset,  while  revolutions  vex  the 
world. 

There  is  no  winter  necessarily  in  the  sky, 
though  snow  covers  the  earth.  The  sky  is  al 
ways  ready  to  answer  our  moods.  We  can  see 
summer  there  or  winter. 

Dec.  27,  1852.  Not  a  particle  of  ice  in  Wai- 
den  to-day.  Paddled  across  it,  and  took  my  new 
boat  out.  A  black  and  white  duck  on  it. 
Flint's  and  Fair  Haven  frozen  up.  Ground 
bare.  River  open. 

Dec.  27,  1853.  High  wind  with  more  snow 
in  the  night.  .  .  .  Snowy  ridges  cross  the  vil 
lage  street,  and  make  it  look  as  wild  and  bleak 
as  a  pass  of  the  Rocky  Mountains,  or  the  Sierra 
Nevada. 

p.  M.  To  Fair  Haven  Pond,  up  meadows 
and  river.  The  snow  blows  like  spray  fifteen 
feet  high  across  the  fields,  while  the  wind  roars 
in  the  trees  as  in  the  rigging  of  a  vessel.  It  is 
altogether  like  the  ocean  in  a  storm.  .  .  . 

It  is  surprising  what  things  the  snow  betrays. 
I  had  not  seen  a  meadow -mouse  all  summer, 
but  no  sooner  does  the  snow  come  and  spread  its 
mantle  over  the  earth  than  it  is  printed  with 
the  tracks  of  countless  mice  and  larger  animals. 
I  see  where  the  mouse  has  dived  into  a  little 


40  WINTER. 

hole  in  the  snow  not  larger  than  my  thumb  by 
the  side  of  a  weed,  and  a  yard  farther  reap 
peared,  and  so  on  alternately  above  and  beneath. 
A  snug  life  it  lives.  —  The  crows  come  nearer 
to  the  houses,  alight  on  trees  by  the  roadside,  ap 
parently  being  put  to  it  for  food.  .  .  . 

It  is  a  true  winter  sunset,  almost  cloudless, 
clear,  cold,  indigo-like,  along  the  horizon.  The 
evening  (?)  star  is  seen  shining  brightly  before 
the  twilight  has  begun.  A  rosy  tint  suffuses 
the  eastern  horizon.  The  outline  of  the  moun 
tains  is  wonderfully  distinct  and  hard.  They 
are  a  dark  blue  and  very  near.  "Wachusett  looks 
like  a  right-whale  over  our  bow,  plowing  the 
continent,  with  his  flukes  well  down.  He  has  a 
vicious  look,  as  if  he  had  a  harpoon  in  him. 

I  wish  I  could  buy  at  the  shops  some  kind  of 
India  rubber  that  would  rub  out  at  once  all 
that  in  my  writing  which  it  costs  me  so  many 
perusals,  so  many  months,  if  not  years,  and  so 
much  reluctance,  to  erase. 

Dec.  27,  1857.  .  .  .  Walden  is  almost  en 
tirely  skimmed  over.  It  will  probably  be  com 
pletely  frozen  over  to-night. 

I  frequently  hear  a  dog  bark  at  some  distance 
in  the  night,  which,  strange  as  it  may  seem, 
reminds  me  of  the  cooing  or  crowing  of  a  ring 
dove  which  I  heard  every  night  a  year  ago  at 
Perth  Amboy.  It  was  sure  to  coo  on  the  slightest 


WINTER.  41 

noise  in  the  house,  as  good  as  a  watch-dog.  The 
crowing  of  cocks  too  reminds  me  of  it,  and  now 
I  think  of  it,  it  had  precisely  the  intonation  and 
accent  of  the  cat-owl's  ho6  hoo-hoo-o-o,  in  each 
case,  a  sonorous  dwelling  on  the  last  syllable. 

They  get  the  pitch  and  break  ground  with  the 
first  note,  and  then  prolong  and  swell  it  in  the 
last. 

The  commonest  and  cheapest  sounds,  as  the 
barking  of  a  dog,  produce  the  same  effect  on 
fresh  and  healthy  ears  that  the  rarest  music  does. 
It  depends  on  your  appetite  for  sound.  Just  as 
a  crust  is  sweeter  to  a  healthy  appetite  than 
confectionery  to  a  pampered  or  diseased  one. 
It  is  better  that  these  cheap  sounds  be  music  to 
us  than  that  we  have  the  rarest  ears  for  music 
in  any  other  sense.  I  have  lain  awake  at  night 
many  a  time  to  think  of  the  barking  of  a  dog 
which  I  had  heard  long  before,  bathing  my 
being  again  in  those  waves  of  sound,  as  a  fre 
quenter  of  the  opera  might  lie  awake  remember 
ing  the  music  he  had  heard. 

As  my  mother  made  my  pockets  once  of  fa 
ther's  old  fire  bags,  with  the  date  of  the  forma 
tion  of  the  society  on  them,  1794  (though  they 
made  but  rotten  pockets),  so  we  put  our  mean 
ing  into  those  old  mythologies.  I  am  sure  that 
the  Greeks  were  commonly  innocent  of  any  such 
double  entendre  as  we  attribute  to  them. 


42  WINTER. 

One  while  we  do  not  wonder  that  so  many 
commit  suicide,  life  is  so  barren  and  worthless. 
We  only  live  on  by  an  effort  of  the  will.  Sud 
denly  our  condition  is  ameliorated,  and  even  the 
barking  of  a  dog  is  a  pleasure  to  us.  So  closely 
is  our  happiness  bound  up  with  our  physical 
condition,  and  one  reacts  on  the  other. 

Do  not  despair  of  your  life.  You  have  no 
doubt  force  enough  to  overcome  your  obstacles. 
Think  of  the  fox  prowling  through  wood  and 
field  in  a  winter  night  for  something  to  satisfy 
his  hunger.  Notwithstanding  cold  and  the 
hounds  and  traps,  his  race  survives.  I  do  not 
believe  any  of  them  ever  committed  suicide.  I 
saw  this  afternoon  where  probably  a  fox  had 
rolled  some  small  carcass  in  the  snow. 

I  am  disappointed  by  most  essays  and  lec 
tures.  I  find  that  I  had  expected  the  authors 
would  have  some  life,  some  very  private  expe 
rience  to  report,  which  would  make  it  compara 
tively  unimportant  in  what  style  they  expressed 
themselves,  but  commonly  they  have  only  a 
talent  to  exhibit.  The  new  magazines  which  all 
had  been  expecting  may  contain  only  another 
love  story,  as  naturally  told  as  the  last,  per 
chance,  but  without  the  slightest  novelty  in  it. 
It  may  be  a  mere  vehicle  for  Yankee  phrases. 

What  interesting  contrasts  our  climate  affords» 
In  July  you  rush  panting  into  the  pond  to  cool 


WINTER.  43 

yourself  in  the  tepid  water,  when  the  stones  on 
the  bank  are  so  heated  that  you  cannot  hold  one 
tightly  in  your  hand,  and  horses  are  melting  on 
the  road.  —  Now  you  walk  on  the  same  pond 
frozen,  amid  the  snow,  with  numbed  fingers  and 
feet,  and  see  the  water  target  bleached  and  stiff 
in  the  ice. 

Dec.  27,  1858.  Talk  of  Fate!  How  little 
one  can  know  what  is  fated  to  another  !  What 
he  can  do  and  what  he  cannot  do.  I  doubt 
whether  one  can  give  or  receive  any  very  perti 
nent  advice.  In  all  important  crises,  one  can 
only  consult  his  genius.  Though  he  were  the 
most  shiftless  and  craziest  of  mortals,  if  he  still 
recognizes  that  he  has  any  genius  to  consult, 
none  may  presume  to  go  between  him  and  her. 
They,  methinks,  are  poor  stuff  and  creatures  of 
a  miserable  fate  who  can  be  advised  and  per 
suaded  in  very  important  steps.  Show  me  a 
man  who  consults  his  genius,  and  you  have 
shown  me  a  man  who  cannot  be  advised.  You 
may  know  what  a  thing  costs  or  is  worth  to  you, 
you  can  never  know  what  it  costs  or  is  worth  to 
me.  All  the  community  may  scream  because 
one  man  is  born  who  will  not  conform,  because 
conformity  to  him  is  death.  He  is  so  consti 
tuted.  They  know  nothing  about  his  case,  they 
are  fools  when  they  presume  to  advise  him.  The 
man  of  genius  knows  what  he  is  aiming  at. 


44  WINTER. 

Nobody  else  knows,  and  he  alone  knows  when 
something  comes  between  him  and  his  object. 
In  the  course  of  generations,  however,  men  will 
excuse  you  for  not  doing  as  they  do,  if  you  will 
bring  enough  to  pass  in  your  own  way. 

Dec.  28,  1840.  The  snow  hangs  on  the  trees 
as  the  fruit  of  the  season.  In  those  twigs 
which  the  wind  has  preserved  naked  there  is  a 
warmer  green  for  the  contrast.  The  whole  tree 
exhibits  a  kind  of  interior  and  household  com 
fort,  a  sheltered  and  covert  aspect.  It  has  the 
snug  inviting  look  of  a  cottage  on  the  moors, 
buried  in  snow. — Our  voices  ring  hollowly 
through  the  woods  as  through  a  chamber,  the 
twigs  crackle  under  foot  with  private  and  house 
hold  echoes.  I  have  observed  on  a  clear  winter's 
morning  that  the  woods  have  their  southern  win 
dow  as  well  as  the  house,  through  which  the 
first  beams  of  the  sun  stream  along  their  aisles 
and  corridors.  The  sun  goes  up  swiftly  behind 
the  limbs  of  the  white  pine,  as  the  sashes  of  a 
window. 

Dec.  28,  1852.  .  .  .  Both  for  bodily  and 
mental  health  court  the  present.  Embrace 
health  wherever  you  find  her.  .  .  . 

It  is  worth  while  to  apply  what  wisdom  one 
has  to  the  conduct  of  his  life,  surely.  I  find  my 
self  oftenest  wise  in  little  things  and  foolish  in 
great  ones.  That  I  may  accomplish  some  petty, 


WINTER.  45 

particular  affair  well,  I  live  my  whole  life 
coarsely.  A  broad  margin  of  leisure  is  as  beau 
tiful  in  a  man's  life  as  in  a  book.  Haste  makes 
waste  no  less  in  life  than  in  housekeeping. 
Keep  the  time,  observe  the  hours  of  the  universe, 
not  of  the  cars.  What  are  threescore  years  and 
ten  hurriedly  and  coarsely  lived  to  moments  of 
divine  leisure,  in  which  your  life  is  coincident 
with  the  life  of  the  universe.  We  live  too  fast 
and  coarsely,  just  as  we  eat  too  fast,  and  do  not 
know  the  true  savor  of  our  food.  We  consult 
our  will  and  our  understanding  and  the  expecta 
tion  of  men,  not  our  genius.  „  I  can  impose  upon 
myself  tasks  which  will  crush  me  for  life  and  pre 
vent  all  expansion,  and  this  I  am  but  too  inclined 
to  do.  Our  moment  of  life  costs  many  hours, 
hours  not  of  business,  but  of  preparation  and 
invitation.  Yet  the  man  who  does  not  betake 
himself  at  once  and  desperately  to  sawing  is 
called  a  loafer,  though  he  may  be  knocking  at 
the  doors  of  heaven  all  the  while,  which  shall 
surely  be  opened  to  him.  That  aim  in  life  is 
highest  which  requires  the  highest  and  finest 
discipline.  How  much,  what  infinite  leisure  it 
requires,  as  of  a  life-time,  to  appreciate  a  single 
phenomenon !  You  must  camp  down  beside  it 
as  for  life,  having  reached  your  land  of  promise, 
and  give  yourself  wholly  to  it.  It  must  stand 
for  the  whole  world  to  you,  symbolical  of  all 


46  WINTER. 

things.  The  least  partialness  is  your  own  defect 
of  sight,  and  cheapens  the  experience  fatally. 
Unless  the  humming  of  a  gnat  is  as  the  music 
of  the  spheres,  and  the  music  of  the  spheres  is  as 
the  humming  of  a  gnat,  they  are  naught  to  me. 
It  is  not  communications  to  serve  for  a  history 
(which  are  science),  but  the  great  story  itself, 
that  cheers  and  satisfies  us. 

Dec.  28,  1853.  ...  I  hear  and  see  tree  spar 
rows  about  the  weeds  in  the  garden.  They 
seem  to  visit  the  gardens  with  the  earliest  snow, 
or  is  it  that  they  are  more  obvious  against  the 
white  ground.  By  their  sharp,  silvery  chip,  per 
chance,  they  inform  each  other  of  their  where 
abouts  and  keep  together. 

Dec.  28,  1854.  [Nan tucket.]  A  misty  rain 
as  yesterday.  Captain  Gardiner  carried  me  to 
Siasconset  in  his  carriage.  .  .  .  He  is  exten 
sively  engaged  in  raising  pines  on  the  island. 
There  is  not  a  tree  to  be  seen  except  such  as  are 
set  out  about  houses.  .  .  .  He  showed  me  sev 
eral  lots  of  his  of  different  sizes,  one  tract  of 
three  hundred  acres  sown  in  rows  with  a  planter, 
where  the  young  trees,  two  years  old,  were 
just  beginning  to  green  the  ground,  and  I  saw 
one  of  Norway  pine  and  our  pitch,  mixed,  eight 
years  old,  which  looked  quite  like  a  forest  at  a 
distance.  The  Norway  pines  had  grown  the 
faster,  with  a  longer  shoot,  and  had  a  bluer  look 


WINTER.  47 

at  a  distance,  more  like  the  white  pine  The 
common  pitch  pines  have  a  reddish  crisped  look 
at  top.  Some  are  sown  in  rows,  some  broad 
cast.  At  first  Captain  Gardiner  was  alarmed 
to  find  that  the  ground  moles  had  gone  along  in 
the  furrows  directly  under  the  plants  and  so  in 
jured  the  roots  as  to  kill  many  of  the  trees,  and 
he  sowed  over  again.  He  was  also  discouraged 
to  find  that  a  sort  of  spindle  worm  had  killed 
the  leading  shoot  of  a  great  part  of  his  neigh 
bor's  older  trees.  These  plantations  must  very 
soon  change  the  aspect  of  the  island.  His  com 
mon  pitch  pine  seed  obtained  from  the  Cape 
cost  him  about  twenty  dollars  a  bushel ;  at  least 
about  a  dollar  a  quart  with  the  wings  ;  and  they 
told  him  it  took  about  eighty  bushels  of  cones  to 
make  one  such  bushel  of  seeds.  I  was  surprised 
to  find  that  the  Norway  pine  seed  without  the 
wings  imported  from  France  had  cost  not  quite 
two  dollars  a  bushel  delivered  at  New  York  or 
Philadelphia.  He  has  ordered  eight  hogsheads 
of  the  best,  clear  wingless  seeds,  at  this  rate.  I 
think  he  said  it  took  about  a  gallon  to  sow  an 
acre.  He  had  tried  to  get  white  pine  seed,  but 
in  vain.  The  cones  had  not  contained  any  of 
late.  (?)  This  looks  as  if  he  meant  to  sow  a  good 
part  of  the  island,  though  he  said  he  might  sell 
some  of  the  seed.  It  is  an  interesting  enterprise. 
.  .  .  This  island  must  look  exactly  like  a  prairie, 


48  WINTER. 

except  that  the  view  in  clear  weather  is  bounded 
by  the  sea.  —  Saw  crows  and  robins,  also  saw  and 
heard  larks  frequently,  but  most  abundant  run 
ning  along  the  ruts  or  circling  about  just  over 
the  ground  in  small  flocks,  what  the  inhabitants 
call  snow-birds,  a  gray,  bunting-like  bird  about 
the  size  of  the  snow-bunting.  Can  it  be  the  sea 
side  finch,  or  the  savannah  sparrow,  or  the 
shore  lark  ?  .  .  .  A  few  years  ago  some  one  im 
ported  a  dozen  partridges  from  the  main-land, 
but  though  some  were  seen  for  a  year  or  two, 
not  one  had  been  seen  for  some  time,  and  they 
were  thought  to  be  extinct.  Captain  Gardiner 
thought  the  raccoons,  which  had  been  very  nu 
merous,  might  have  caught  them.  In  Harrison 
days  some  coons  were  imported  and  turned  loose. 
They  multiplied  very  fast,  and  became  quite  a 
pest,  killing  hens,  etc.,  and  were  killed  in  turn. 
Finally,  people  turned  out  and  hunted  them 
with  hounds,  and  killed  seventy-five  at  one  time, 
since  which  he  had  not  heard  of  any.  There 
were  foxes  once,  but  none  now,  and  no  indige- 
ous  animal  bigger  than  a  ground  mole.  .  .  . 

The  last  Indian,  not  of  pure  blood,  died  this 
very  month,  and  I  saw  his  picture  with  a  basket 
of  huckleberries  in  his  hand. 

Dec.  28,  1856.  I  am  surprised  to  see  the 
Fringilla  hyemalis  here.  [Walden.]  .  .  .  The 
fishermen  sit  by  their  damp  fire  of  rotten  pine 


WINTER.  49 

wood,  so  wet  and  chilly  that  even  smoke  in  their 
eyes  is  a  kind  of  comfort.  There  they  sit,  ever 
and  anon  scanning  their  reels  to  see  if  any  have 
fallen,  and  if  not  catching  many  fish,  still  getting 
what  they  went  for,  though  they  may  not  be 
aware  of  it,  i.  e.,  a  wilder  experience  than  the 
town  affords.  .  .  . 

I  thrive  best  on  solitude.  If  I  have  had  a 
companion  only  one  day  in  a  week,  unless  it 
were  one  or  two  I  could  name,  I  find  that  the 
value  of  the  week  to  me  has  been  seriously 
affected.  It  dissipates  my  days,  and  often  it 
takes  me  another  week  to  get  over  it.  As  the 
Esquimaux  of  Smith's  Strait  in  North  Green 
land  laughed  when  Kane  warned  them  of  their 
utter  extermination,  cut  off  as  they  were  by  ice 
on  all  sides  from  the  race,  unless  they  attempted 
in  season  to  cross  the  glacier  southward,  so  do  I 
laugh  when  you  tell  me  of  the  danger  of  impov 
erishing  myself  by  isolation.  It  is  here  that  the 
walrus  and  the  seal,  and  the  white  bear,  and  the 
eider  ducks  and  auks  on  which  I  batten,  most 
abound. 

Dec.  28,  1858.  p.  M.  To  Walden.  The 
earth  is  bare.  I  walk  about  the  pond  looking  at 
the  shores,  since  I  have  not  paddled  about  it 
much  of  late  years.  What  a  grand  place  for  a 
promenade  !  .  .  .  That  rocky  shore  under  the 
pitch  pines,  which  so  reflects  the  light,  is  only 


50  WINTER. 

three  feet  wide  by  one  foot  high,  yet  there 
even  to-day  the  ice  is  melted  close  to  the  edge, 
and  just  off  this  shore  the  pickerel  are  most 
abundant.  This  is  the  warm  and  sunny  side  to 
which  any  one,  man,  bird,  or  quadruped,  would 
soonest  resort  in  cool  weather.  I  noticed  a  few 
chickadees  there  in  the  edge  of  the  pines  in  the 
sun,  lisping  and  twittering  cheerfully  to  one 
another  with  a  reference  to  me,  I  think,  the 
cunning  and  innocent  little  birds.  One  a  little 
farther  off  utters  the  phoebe  note.  There  is  a 
foot,  more  or  less,  of  clear,  open  water  at  the 
edge  here,  and  seeing  this,  one  of  these  birds 
hops  down,  as  if  glad  to  find  any  open  water  at 
this  season,  and  after  prinking,  it  stands  in  the 
water  on  a  stone,  up  to  its  belly,  and  dips  its 
head,  and  flirts  the  water  about  vigorously, 
giving  itself  a  good  washing.  I  had  not  ex 
pected  this  at  this  season.  No  fear  that  it  will 
catch  cold.  —  The  ice  cracks  suddenly  with  a 
shivering  jar,  like  crockery  or  the  brittlest  mate 
rial,  such  as  it  is,  and  I  notice,  as  I  sit  here  at 
this  open  edge,  that  each  time  the  ice  cracks, 
though  it  may  be  a  good  distance  off  toward  the 
middle,  the  water  here  is  very  much  agitated. 
The  ice  is  about  six  inches  thick. 

Dec.  29,  1840.  As  echo  makes  me  enunci 
ate  distinctly,  so  the  sympathy  of  a  friend 
gives  plainness  and  point  to  my  speech.  This 
is  the  advantage  of  letter-writing. 


WINTER.  51 

Dec.  29,  1841.  .  .  .  Whole  weeks  or  months 
of  my  summer  life  slide  away  in  thin  volumes 
like  mists  or  smoke,  till  at  length  some  warm 
morning,  perchance,  I  see  a  sheet  of  mist  blown 
down  the  brook  to  the  swamp,  its  shadow  flitting 
across  the  fields  which  have  caught  a  new  signifi 
cance  from  that  accident,  and  as  that  vapor  is 
raised  above  the  earth,  so  shall  the  next  weeks 
be  elevated  above  the  plane  of  the  actual ;  or  a 
like  experience  may  come  when  the  setting  sun 
slants  across  the  pastures,  and  the  cows  low  to  my 
inward  ear,  and  only  enhance  the  stillness,  and 
the  eve  is  as  the  dawn,  a  beginning  hour  and  not 
a  final  one,  as  if  it  would  never  have  done,  with 
its  clear,  western  amber,  inciting  men  to  lives  of 
limpid  purity.  At  evening,  other  parts  of  my 
work  shine  than  I  had  thought  at  noon,  and  I 
discover  the  real  purport  of  my  toil  as  when  the 
husbandman  has  reached  the  end  of  the  furrow 
and  looks  back,  he  can  best  tell  where  the 
pressed  earth  shines  most.  .  .  . 

A  man  should  go  out  of  Nature  with  the  chirp 
of  the  cricket  or  the  trill  of  the  veery  singing 
in  his  ear.  These  earthly  sounds  should  only 
die  away  for  a  season,  as  the  strains  of  the  harp 
rise  and  fall.  Death  is  that  expressive  pause  in 
the  music  of  the  blast.  I  would  be  as  clean  as 
ye,  O  Woods.  I  shall  not  rest  till  I  am  as  inno 
cent  as  you.  I  know  that  I  shall  sooner  or  later 


52  WINTER. 

attain  to  an  unspotted  innocence,  for  when  I 
consider  that  state  even  now  I  am  thrilled. 

If  we  were  wise  enough,  we  should  see  to 
what  virtue  we  were  indebted  for  any  happier 
moment  we  might  have.  No  doubt  we  had 
earned  this  at  some  time. 

These  motions  everywhere  in  Nature  must 
surely  be  the  circulations  of  God ;  .  .  .  the  run 
ning  stream,  the  waving  tree,  the  roving  wind, 
whence  else  their  infinite  health  and  freedom. 
I  can  see  nothing  so  holy  as  unrelaxed  play  and 
frolic  in  this  bower  God  has  built  for  us.  The 
suspicion  of  sin  never  comes  to  this  experience. 
If  men  felt  this  they  would  never  build  temples 
even  of  marble  or  diamond  (it  would  be  sacri 
lege  and  profane),  but  disport  them  forever  in 
this  paradise.  .  .  . 

It  seems  as  if  only  one  trait,  one  little  inci 
dent  in  human  biography  need  to  be  said  or 
written  in  some  era,  that  all  readers  may  go 
mad  after  it,  and  the  man  who  did  the  miracle 
is  made  a  demigod  henceforth.  — What  we  all 
do,  not  one  can  tell,  and  when  some  lucky 
speaker  utters  a  truth  of  our  experience  and  not 
of  our  speculation,  we  think  he  must  have  had 
the  nine  Muses  and  the  three  Graces  to  help 
him. 

Dec.  29,  1851.  The  sun  just  risen.  The 
ground  is  almost  entirely  bare.  ...  It  is  warm  as 


WINTER.  53 

an  April  morning.  There  is  a  sound  of  blue 
birds  in  the  air,  and  the  cocks  crow  as  in  the 
spring.  The  steam  curls  up  from  the  roofs  and 
the  ground.  You  walk  with  open  cloak.  It  is 
exciting  to  behold  the  smooth,  glassy  surface  of 
water  where  the  melted  snow  has  formed  large 
puddles  and  ponds,  and  to  see  it  running  in  the 
sluices.  ...  In  the  afternoon  to  Saw  mill  brook 
with  W.  E.  C.  .  .  .  It  feels  as  warm  as  in  sum 
mer.  You  sit  on  any  fence  rail  and  vegetate  in 
the  sun,  and  realize  that  the  earth  may  produce 
peas  again.  Yet  they  say  that  this  open  and 
mild  weather  is  unhealthy.  That  is  always  the 
way  with  them.  How  admirable  it  is  that  we 
can  never  foresee  the  weather,  that  it  is  always 
novel.  Yesterday  nobody  dreamed  of  to-day. 
Nobody  dreams  of  to-morrow.  Hence  the 
weather  is  ever  the  news.  .  .  .  This  day  yester 
day  was  as  incredible  as  any  other  miracle. 
Now  all  creatures  feel  it,  even  the  cattle  chew 
ing  stalks  in  the  barn-yards,  and  perchance  it 
has  even  penetrated  to  the  lurking  places  of  the 
crickets  under  the  rocks. 

Dec.  29,  1853.  ...  A  driving  snow-storm 
all  day,  imprisoning  most,  stopping  the  cars, 
blocking  up  the  roads.  .  .  .  The  snow  pene 
trates  through  the  smallest  crevices  about  doors 
and  windows.  ...  It  is  the  worst  snow-storm 
to  bear  that  I  remember.  A  strong  wind  from 


54  WINTER. 

the  north  blows  the  snow  almost  horizontally, 
and  beside  freezing  you,  almost  takes  your 
breath  away.  The  driving  snow  blinds  you, 
and  when  you  are  protected,  you  can  see  but  a 
little  way,  it  is  so  thick.  Yet  in  spite  of  or  on 
account  of  it  all,  I  see  the  first  flock  of  arctic 
snow-birds,  Emberiza  nivalis,  near  the  depot, 
white  and  black,  with  a  sharp  whistle-like  note. 
What  a  contrast  between  the  village  street 
now  and  as  it  was  last  summer  ;  the  leafy  elms 
then  resounding  with  the  warbling  vireo,  robins, 
bluebirds,  the  fiery  hangbird,  etc.,  to  which  the 
villagers,  kept  in  doors  by  the  heat,  listened 
through  open  lattices.  Now  it  is  like  a  street  in 
Nova  Zembla,  if  they  were  to  have  any  there. 
I  wade  to  the  post  office  as  solitary  a  traveler  as 
ordinarily  in  a  wood-path  in  winter.  The  snow 
is  mid-leg  deep,  while  drifts  as  high  as  one's 
head  are  heaped  against  the  houses  and  fences, 
and  here  and  there  range  across  the  street  like 
snowy  mountains.  .  .  .  There  is  not  a  track 
leading  from  any  door  to  indicate  that  the  in 
habitants  have  been  forth  to-day,  any  more  than 
there  is  the  track  of  any  quadruped  by  the  wood- 
paths.  It  is  all  pure,  untrodden  snow,  banked 
up  against  the  houses  now  at  4  p.  M.  ...  In 
one  place  the  drift  covers  the  front  yard  fence, 
and  stretches  thence  upward  to  the  top  of  the 
front  door,  shutting  all  in.  .  .  .  Frequently  the 


WINTER.  55 

snow  lies  banked  up  three  or  four  feet  high 
against  the  front  doors,  .  .  .  there  is  a  drift  over 
each  window,  and  the  clapboards  are  all  hoary 
with  it.  It  is  as  if  the  inhabitants  were  all 
frozen  to  death,  and  now  you  threaded  the  deso 
late  streets,  weeks  after  that  calamity.  There 
is  not  a  sleigh  or  vehicle  of  any  kind  on  the 
Milldam ;  but  one  saddled  horse  on  which  a 
farmer  has  come  into  town.  .  .  .  Yet  they  are 
warmer,  merrier  than  ever  there  within.  At 
the  post  office  they  ask  each  traveler  news  of 
the  cars,  is  there  any  train  up  or  down,  how 
deep  the  snow  is  on  a  level. 

Of  the  snow  bunting,  Wilson  says  that  they 
appear  in  the  northern  parts  of  the  United 
States  "early  in  December,  or  with  the  first 
heavy  snow,  particularly  if  drifted  by  high 
winds."  This  day  answers  to  that  description 
exactly.  The  wind  is  northerly.  He  adds  that, 
"  they  are  universally  considered  as  the  harbin 
gers  of  severe  cold  weather."  They  come  down 
from  the  extreme  north,  and  are  common  to  the 
two  continents.  He  quotes  Pennant  as  saying 
that  they  "  inhabit  not  only  Greenland,  but  even 
the  dreadful  climate  of  Spitzbergen  where  veg 
etation  is  nearly  extinct,  and  scarcely  any  but 
cryptogamous  plants  are  found.  It  therefore 
excites  wonder  how  birds  which  are  graminivor 
ous  in  every  other  than  those  frost-bound  regions 


56  WINTER. 

subsist ;  yet  are  there  found  in  great  flocks,  both 
on  the  land  and  ice  of  Spitzbergen."  Pennant 
also  says  that  they  inhabit  in  summer  "  the  most 
naked  Lapland  Alps,"  and  "  descend  in  rigor 
ous  seasons  into  Sweden,  and  fill  the  roads 
and  fields,"  on  which  account  the  uplanders  call 
them  "  liardwarsfogel"  hard  weather-birds  ;  he 
also  -says,  "  they  overflow  [in  winter]  the  more 
southern  counties  in  amazing  multitudes."  Wil 
son  says  their  colors  are  very  variable,  "and 
the  whiteness  of  their  plumage  is  observed  to  be 
greatest  toward  the  depth  of  winter."  He  also 
says  truly  that  they  seldom  sit  long,  "  being  a 
roving,  restless  bird."  Peabody  says  that  in 
summer  they  are  "  pure  white  and  black,"  but 
are  not  seen  of  that  color  here.  Those  I  saw 
to-day  were  of  that  color.  .  .  .  Pie  says  they 
are  white  and  rusty  brown  here.  These  are  the 
true  winter  birds  for  you,  these  winged  snow 
balls.  I  could  hardly  see  them,  the  air  was  so 
full  of  driving  snow.  What  hardy  creatures  ! 
Where  do  they  spend  the  night  ?  .  .  . 

The  farmer  considers  how  much  pork  he  has 
in  his  barrel,  how  much  meal  in  his  bin,  how 
much  wood  in  his  shed.  Each  family,  perchance, 
sends  forth  one  representative  before  night,  who 
makes  his  way  with  difficulty  to  the  grocery  or 
the  post  office  to  learn  the  news,  i.  e.,  to  hear 
what  others  say  to  it,  who  can  give  the  best  ac- 


WINTER.  57 

count  of  it,  best  can  name  it,  has  waded  farthest 
in  it,  has  been  farthest  out,  and  can  tell  the  big 
gest  and  most  adequate  story,  and  hastens  back 
with  the  news.  .  .  . 

The  thoughts  and  associations  of  summer  and 
autumn  are  now  as  completely  departed  from  our 
minds  as  the  leaves  are  blown  from  the  trees. 
Some  withered  deciduous  ones  are  left  to  rus 
tle,  and  our  cold  immortal  evergreens.  Some 
lichenous  thoughts  still  adhere  to  us. 

Dec.  29,  1855.  Down  railroad  to  Androme- 
don  Ponds.  ...  I  see  a  shrike  flying  low  be 
neath  the  level  of  the  railroad,  which  rises  and 
alights  on  the  topmost  twig  of  an  elm  within 
four  or  five  rods.  All  ash  or  bluish  slate  above, 
down  to  mid-wings,  dirty  white  breast,  and  a 
broad  black  mark  through  eyes  on  side  of  head ; 
primaries  (?)  black,  and  some  white  appears 
when  it  flies.  Most  distinctive  its  small  hooked 
bill  (upper  mandible).  It  makes  no  sound,  but 
flits  to  the  top  of  an  oak  farther  off.  Probably 
a  male. 

Dec.  29,  1856.  P.  M.  To  Warren  Miles's 
Mill.  We  must  go  out  and  re-ally  ourselves  to 
Nature  every  day.  We  must  make  root,  send  out 
some  little  fibre  at  least,  even  every  winter  day. 
I  am  sensible  that  I  am  imbibing  health  when  I 
open  my  mouth  to  the  wind.  Staying  in  the 
house  breeds  a  sort  of  insanity  always.  Every 


58  WINTER. 

house  is,  in  this  sense,  a  sort  of  hospital.  A 
night  and  a  forenoon  is  as  much  confinement  to 
those  wards  as  I  can  stand.  I  am  aware  that  I 
recover  some  sanity,  which  I  had  lost,  almost  the 
instant  that  I  come  abroad. 

Dec.  29,  1858.  P.  M.  Skate  to  Israel  Kice's. 
I  think  more  of  skates  than  of  the  horse  or  loco 
motive  as  annihilators  of  distance,  for  while  I 
am  getting  along  with  the  speed  of  the  horse,  I 
have  at  the  same  time  the  satisfactions  of  the 
horse  and  his  rider,  and  far  more  adventure  and 
variety  than  if  I  were  riding.  We  never  cease 
to  be  surprised  when  we  see  how  swiftly  the 
skater  glides  along.  Just  compare  him  with  one 
walking  or  running.  The  walker  is  but  a  snail 
in  comparison,  and  the  runner  gives  up  the  con 
test  after  a  few  rods.  The  skater  can  afford  to 
follow  all  the  windings  of  a  stream,  and  yet  soon 
leaves  far  behind  and  out  of  sight  the  walker 
who  cuts  across.  Distance  is  hardly  an  obstacle 
to  him.  .  .  .  The  skater  has  wings,  talaria  to 
his  feet.  Moreover,  you  have  such  perfect  con 
trol  of  your  feet  that  you  can  take  advantage  of 
the  narrowest  and  most  winding  and  sloping 
bridge  of  ice  in  order  to  pass  between  the  but 
ton  bushes  and  the  open  stream,  or  under  a 
bridge  on  a  narrow  shelf  where  the  walker  can 
not  go  at  all.  You  can  glide  securely  within  an 
inch  of  destruction  on  this,  the  most  slippery  of 


WINTER.  59 

surfaces,  more  securely  than  you  could  walk  there 
perhaps  on  any  other  material.  You  can  pursue 
swiftly  the  most  intricate  and  winding  path, 
even  leaping  obstacles  that  suddenly  present 
themselves.  .  .  . 

H H was  fishing  a  quarter  of  a  mile 

this  side  of  Hubbard's  Bridge.  He  had  caught 
a  pickerel  .  .  .  twenty-six  inches  long,  ...  a 
very  handsome  fish.  Dark  brown  above,  yel 
low  and  brown  on  the  side,  becoming  at  length 
almost  a  clear  golden  yellow  low  down,  with 
a  white  abdomen  and  reddish  fins.  They  are 
handsome  fellows,  both  the  pikes  in  the  water 
and  the  tigers  in  the  jungle.  What  tragedies 
are  enacted  under  this  dumb,  icy  platform  in 
the  fields  !  What  an  anxious  and  adventurous 
life  the  small  fishes  must  live,  liable  at  any 
moment  to  be  swallowed  by  the  larger.  No  fish 
of  moderate  size  can  go  stealing  along  safely  in 
any  part  of  the  stream  but  suddenly  there  may 
come  rushing  out  from  this  jungle  or  that,  some 
greedy  monster  and  gulp  him  down.  Parent 
fishes,  if  they  care  for  their  offspring,  how  can 
they  trust  them  abroad  out  of  their  sight. 

It  takes  so  many  fishes  a  week  to  fill  the 
maw  of  this  large  one.  And  the  large  ones! 

H H and  company  are  lying  in  wait 

for  them. 

Dec.  29,  1859.     Very  cold  morning.     About 


60  WINTER. 

15° —  at  8  A.  M.  at  our  door.  I  went  to  the  river 
immediately  after  sunrise ;  could  see  a  little 
greenness  in  the  ice,  and  also  a  little  rose  color 
from  the  snow,  but  far  less  than  before  sunset. 
Do  both  these  phenomena  then  require  a  gross 
atmosphere?  Apparently  the  ice  is  greenest 
when  the  sun  is  twenty  or  thirty  minutes  above 
the  horizon. 

From  [a]  smooth  open  place  ...  a  great  deal 
of  vapor  was  rising,  to  the  height  of  a  dozen  feet 
or  more,  as  from  a  boiling  kettle.  This,  then,  is 
a  phenomenon  of  quite  cold  weather.  I  did  not 
notice  it  yesterday  P.  M.  These  open  places  are 
a  sort  of  breathing  holes  of  the  river.  .  .  .  Just 
as  cold  weather  reveals  the  breath  of  a  man,  still 
greater  cold  reveals  the  breath  of,  i.  e.,  warm, 
moist  air  over  the  river.  ...  p.  M.  ...  When 
I  went  to  walk  it  was  about  10°  above  zero,  and 
when  I  returned  1°+.  I  did  not  notice  any 
vapor  rising  from  the  open  places  as  I  did  in  the 
morning  when  it  was  16° —  and  also  when  it  was 
6° — .  .  .  .  When  the  air  is,  say  4°  or  5°  below 
zero,  the  water  being  32°-f-,  then  there  is  a  visi 
ble  evaporation.  Is  there  the  same  difference,  or 
some  40°  between  the  heat  of  the  human  breath 
and  that  of  the  air  in  which  the  moisture  in  the 
breath  becomes  visible  in  vapor.  This  has  to  do 
with  the  dew  point.  —  Next,  what  makes  the 
water  of  those  open  places  thus  warm  ?  and  is  it 


WINTER.  61 

any  warmer  than  elsewhere  ?  There  is  consider 
able  heat  reflected  from  a  sandy  bottom  where  the 
water  is  shallow,  and  at  these  places  it  is  always 
sandy  and  shallow,  but  I  doubt  if  this  actually 
makes  the  water  warmer,  though  it  may  melt  the 
more  opaque  ice  which  absorbs  it.  The  fact  that 
Holt  bend,  which  is  deep,  is  late  to  freeze,  being 
narrow,  seems  to  prove  it  to  be  the  swiftness  of 
the  water,  and  not  reflected  heat  that  prevents 
freezing.  The  water  is  apparently  kept  warm 
under  the  ice  and  down  next  to  the  unfrozen 
earth,  and  by  a  myriad  springs  from  within 
the  bowels  of  the  earth. 

Dec.  30,  1840.  .  .  .  Our  Golden  Age  must 
after  all  be  a  pastoral  one ;  we  would  be  simple 
men  in  ignorance,  and  not  accomplished  in  wis 
dom.  We  want  great  peasants  more  than  great 
heroes.  The  sun  would  shine  along  the  high 
way  to  some  purpose,  if  we  would  unlearn  our 
wisdom  and  practice  illiterate  truth  henceforth. 
.  .  .  Let  us  grow  to  the  full  stature  of  our  hum 
bleness  ere  we  aspire  to  be  greater.  —  It  is  great 
praise  in  the  poet  [Virgil]  to  have  made  hus 
bandry  famous. 

"  In  the    cool   spring,  when   cool  moisture   from   the   hoary 

mountains  flows, 

And  the  mouldering  clod  is  dissolved  by  the  zephyr, 
Then  straightway  let  the  bull  with  deep-pressed  plow  begin 
To  groan,  and  the  share,  worn  by  the  furrow,  to  shine." 

Georg.  i.  43. 


62  WINTER. 

And  again  when  the  husbandman  conducts 
water  down  the  slope  to  restore  his  thirsty  crops, 

"  That,  falling,  makes  a  hoarse  murmur  among  the  smooth 
rocks,  and  tempers  the  parching  fields  with  its  bubbling 
streams. "—  Ibid.  109. 

Describing  the  end  of  the  Golden  Age  and  the 
commencement  of  the  reign  of  Jupiter,  he  says : 

' '  He  shook  honey  from  the  leaves,  and  removed  fire, 

And  stayed  the  wine  everywhere  flowing  in  rivers 

That  experience,  by  meditating,  might  invent  various  arts 

By  degrees,  and  seek  the  blade  of  corn  in  furrows, 

And  strike  out  hidden  fire  from  the  veins  of  the  flint." 

Ibid.  131. 

Dec.  30,  1841.  .  .  . 

Within  the  circuit  of  this  plodding  life 

There  are  moments  of  an  azure  hue, 

...  as  unpolluted,  fair,  as  is  the  violet 

Or  anemone,  when  the  spring  strews  them 

By  some  south  wood  side  ;  which  make 

The  best  philosophy  .  .  .  untrue. 

...  to  console  man  for  his  grievance  here, 

I  have  remembered,  when  the  winter  came, 

High  in  my  chamber,  in  the  frosty  nights, 

How,  in  the  summer  past,  some 

Unrecorded  beam,  slanted  across 

.  .  .   [an]  upland  pasture  where  the  Johnswort  grew, 

Or  heard,  amidst  the  verdure  of  my  mind, 

The  bee's  long  smothered  hum  ; 

So,  by  the  cheap  economy  of  God, 

Made  rich  to  go  upon  my  wintry  work  again. 

When  the  snow  is  falling  thick  and  fast,  the 
flakes  nearest  you  seem  to  be  driving  straight 
to  the  ground,  while  the  more  distant  seem  to 


WINTER.  63 

float  in  the  air  in  a  quivering  bank,  like  feathers, 
or  like  birds  at  play,  and  not  as  if  sent  on  any 
errand.  So,  at  a  little  distance,  all  the  works 
of  nature  proceed  with  sport  and  frolic.  They 
are  more  in  the  eye,  and  less  in  the  deed. 

Dec.  30,  1851.  .  .  .  This  afternoon,  being 
on  Fair  Haven  Hill,  I  heard  the  sound  of  a 
saw,  and  soon  after  from  the  cliff  saw  two  men 
sawing  down  a  noble  pine  beneath,  about  forty 
rods  off,  .  .  .  the  last  of  a  dozen  or  more  which 
were  left  when  the  forest  was  cut,  and  for  fifteen 
years  have  waved  in  solitary  majesty  over  the 
sproutland.  I  saw  them  like  beavers  or  insects 
gnawing  at  the  trunk  of  this  noble  tree,  the 
diminutive  manikins  with  their  cross-cut  saw 
which  could  scarcely  span  it.  It  towered  up  a 
hundred  feet,  as  I  afterwards  found  by  measure 
ment,  one  of  the  tallest  probably  in  the  town 
ship,  and  straight  as  an  arrow,  but  slanting  a 
little  toward  the  hillside,  its  top  seen  against 
the  frozen  river  and  the  hill  of  Conantum.  I 
watch  closely  to  see  when  it  begins  to  move.  Now 
the  sawers  stop,  and  with  an  axe  open  it  a  little 
on  the  side  toward  which  it  leans,  that  it  may 
break  the  faster,  and  now  their  saw  goes  again. 
Now  surely  it  is  going ;  it  is  inclined  one  quar 
ter  of  the  quadrant,  and  breathless  I  expect  its 
crashing  fall.  But  no,  I  was  mistaken.  It  has 
not  moved  an  inch.  It  stands  at  the  same 


64  WINTER. 

angle  as  at  first.  It  is  fifteen  minutes  yet  to  its 
fall.  Still  its  branches  wave  in  the  wind  as  if 
it  were  destined  to  stand  for  a  century,  and  the 
wind  soughs  through  its  needles  as  of  yore  ;  it 
is  still  a  forest  tree,  the  most  majestic  tree  that 
waves  over  Musketaquid.  The  silvery  sheen 
of  the  sunlight  is  reflected  from  its  needles,  it 
still  affords  an  inaccessible  crotch  for  the  squir 
rel's  nest,  not  a  lichen  has  forsaken  its  mast-like 
stem,  its  raking  mast ;  the  hill  is  the  hulk.  Now, 
now  is  the  moment,  the  manikins  at  its  base 
are  fleeing  from  their  crime.  They  have 
dropped  the  guilty  saw  and  axe.  How  slowly 
and  majestically  it  starts,  as  if  it  were  only 
swayed  by  a  summer  breeze,  and  would  return 
without  a  sigh  to  its  location  in  the  air,  and 
now  it  fans  the  hillside  with  its  fall,  and  lies 
down  to  its  bed  in  the  valley  from  which  it  is 
never  to  rise,  as  softly  as  a  feather,  folding  its 
green  mantle  about  it  like  a  warrior,  as  if,  tired 
of  standing,  it  embraced  the  earth  with  silent 
joy,  returning  its  elements  to  the  dust  again. 
But,  hark  !  .  .  .  you  only  saw,  you  did  not 
hear.  There  now  comes  up  a  deafening  crash 
to  these  rocks,  advertising  you  that  even  trees 
do  not  die  without  a  groan.  .  .  .  I  went  down 
and  measured  it.  It  was  four  feet  in  diameter 
where  it  was  sawed,  and  about  a  hundred  feet 
long.  Before  I  had  reached  it,  the  axemen  had 


WINTER.  65 

already  half  divested  it  of  its  branches.  Its 
gracefully  spreading  top  was  a  perfect  wreck  on 
the  hillside,  as  if  it  had  been  made  of  glass,  and 
the  tender  cones  of  one  year's  growth  upon  its 
summit  appealed  in  vain  and  too  late  to  the 
mercy  of  the  chopper.  Already  he  has  meas 
ured  it  with  his  axe,  and  marked  off  the  small 
logs  it  will  make.  It  is  lumber.  .  .  .  When  the 
fish  hawk  in  the  spring  revisits  the  banks  of  the 
Musketaquid,  he  will  circle  in  vain  to  find  his 
accustomed  perch,  and  the  hen  hawk  will  mourn 
for  the  pines  lofty  enough  to  protect  his  brood. 
...  I  hear  no  knell  tolled,  I  see  no  procession 
of  mourners  in  the  streets  or  the  woodland 
aisles.  The  squirrel  has  leaped  to  another  tree, 
the  hawk  has  circled  farther  off,  and  has  now 
settled  upon  a  new  eyrie,  but  the  woodman  is 
preparing  to  lay  his  axe  at  the  root  of  that  also. 
Dec.  30,  1853.  In  winter  every  man  is,  to 
a  slight  extent,  dormant,  just  as  some  animals 
are  but  partially  awake,  though  not  commonly 
classed  with  those  that  hibernate.  The  summer 
circulations  are  to  some  extent  stopped,  the 
range  of  his  afternoon  walk  is  somewhat  nar 
rower,  he  is  more  or  less  confined  to  the  high 
way  and  woodpath ;  the  weather  oftener  shuts 
him  up  in  his  burrow,  he  begins  to  feel  the 
access  of  dormancy,  and  to  assume  the  spherical 
form  of  the  marmot,  the  nights  are  longest,  he 


66  WINTER. 

is  often  satisfied  if  he  only  gets  to  the  post  office 
in  the  course  of  the  day.  The  arctic  voyagers 
are  obliged  to  invent  and  willfully  engage  in 
active  amusements  to  keep  themselves  awake 
and  alive.  .  .  .  Even  our  experience  is  some 
thing  like  wintering  in  the  pack. 

Dec.  30,  1856.  What  an  evidence  it  is, 
after  all,  of  civilization,  or  of  a  capacity  for  im 
provement,  that  savages  like  our  Indians,  who,  in 
their  protracted  wars,  stealthily  slay  men,  women, 
and  children  without  mercy,  with  intense  pleas 
ure,  who  delight  to  burn,  torture,  and  devour 
one  another,  proving  themselves  more  inhuman 
in  these  respects  even  than  beasts,  what  a  won 
derful  evidence  it  is,  I  say,  of  their  capacity  for 
improvement,  that  even  they  can  enter  into  the 
most  formal  compact  or  treaty  of  peace,  burying 
the  hatchet,  etc.,  and  treating  with  each  other 
with  as  much  consideration  as  the  most  enlight 
ened  states.  You  would  say  that  they  had  a 
genius  for  diplomacy  as  well  as  for  war.  —  Con 
sider  that  Iroquois,  torturing  his  captive,  roast 
ing  him  before  a  slow  fire,  biting  off  the  fingers 
of  him  alive,  and  finally  eating  the  heart  of  him 
dead,  betraying  not  the  slightest  evidence  of 
humanity,  and  now  behold  him  in  the  council 
chamber  where  he  meets  the  representatives  of 
the  hostile  nation  to  treat  of  peace,  conducting 
with  such  perfect  dignity  and  decorum,  betraying 


WINTER.  67 

such  a  sense  of  justice.  These  savages  are  equal 
to  us  civilized  men  in  their  treaties,  and  I  fear 
not  essentially  worse  in  their  wars. 

Dec.  30,  1859.  .  .  .  p.  M.  Going  by  D 's 

I  see  a  shrike  perched  on  the  tip  top  of  the  top 
most,  upright  twig  of  an  English  cherry-tree  be 
fore  his  house,  standing  square  on  the  topmost 
bud,  balancing  himself  by  a  slight  motion  of  his 
tail  from  time  to  time.  I  have  noticed  this  habit 
of  the  bird  before.  You  would  suppose  it  incon 
venient  for  so  large  a  bird  to  maintain  its  foot 
ing  there.  Scared  by  my  passing  in  the  road 
he  flew  off,  and  I  thought  I  would  see  if  he 
alighted  in  a  similar  place.  He  flew  toward  a 
young  elm,  whose  higher  twigs  were  much  more 
slender,  though  not  quite  so  upright  as  those  of 
the  cherry,  and  I  thought  he  might  be  excused 
if  he  alighted  on  the  side  of  one ;  but  no,  to  my 
surprise,  he  alighted  without  any  trouble  upon 
the  very  top  of  one  of  the  highest  of  all,  and 
looked  around  as  before.  .  .  . 

What  a  different  phenomenon  a  muskrat  now 
from  what  it  is  in  summer.  Now,  if  one  floats 
or  swims,  its  whole  back  out,  or  crawls  out  upon 
the  ice  at  one  of  those  narrow  oval  water  spaces, 
some  twenty  rods  long  (in  calm  weather,  smooth 
mirrors),  in  a  broad  frame  of  white  ice  or  yet 
whiter  snow,  it  is  seen  at  once,  as  conspicuous 
(or  more  so)  as  a  fly  on  a  window-pane  or  a 


68  WINTER. 

mirror.  But  in  summer,  how  many  hundreds 
crawl  along  the  weedy  shore,  or  plunge  in  the 
long  river  unsuspected  by  the  boatman  I 

Dec.  30,  1860.  ...  It  is  remarkable  how 
universally,  as  respects  soil  and  exposure,  the 
whortleberry  family  is  distributed  with  us.  One 
kind  or  another  flourishes  in  every  soil  and 
locality.  The  Pennsylvania  and  Canada  blue 
berries  especially  in  elevated,  cool,  and  airy 
places,  on  hills  and  mountains,  in  openings  in 
the  woods  and  in  sproutlands,  the  high  blueberry 
in  swamps,  and  the  low  blueberry  in  intermedi 
ate  places,  or  almost  anywhere  but  in  swamps 
hereabouts.  The  family  thus  ranges  from  the 
highest  mountain  tops  to  the  lowest  swamps,  and 
forms  the  prevailing  shrub  of  a  great  part  of 
New  England.  Not  only  is  this  true  of  the 
family,  but  hereabouts  of  the  genus,  Gaylus- 
sacia,  or  the  huckleberry  proper,  alone.  I  do  not 
know  of  a  spot  where  any  shrub  grows  in  this 
neighborhood,  but  one  or  another  species  or 
variety  of  the  Gaylussacia  may  also  grow  there. 
.  .  .  Such  care  has  nature  taken  to  furnish  to 
birds  and  quadrupeds,  and  to  men,  a  palatable 
berry  of  this  kind,  slightly  modified  by  soil  and 
climate,  wherever  the  consumer  may  chance  to 
be.  Corn  and  potatoes,  apples  and  pears  have 
comparatively  a  narrow  range,  but  we  can  fill 
our  basket  with  whortleberries  on  the  summit 


WINTER.  69 

of  Mt.  Washington,  above  almost  all  the  shrubs 
with  which  we  are  familiar,  the  same  kind  which 
they  have  in  Greenland,  and  again,  when  we 
get  home,  in  the  lowest  swamps,  with  a  kind 
which  the  Greenlander  never  found.  —  First, 
there  is  the  early,  dwarf  blueberry,  the  smallest 
of  the  whortleberry  shrubs,  the  first  to  ripen  its 
fruit,  not  commonly  erect,  but  more  or  less 
reclined,  often  covering  the  earth  with  a  sort  of 
dense  matting.  The  twigs  are  green,  the  flowers 
commonly  white.  Both  the  shrub  and  its  fruit 
are  the  most  tender  and  delicate  of  any  that  we 
have.  The  Vaccinium  Canadense  may  be  consid 
ered  a  more  northern  form  of  the  same.  — Some 
ten  days  later  comes  the  high  blueberry,  or 
swamp  blueberry,  the  commonest  stout  shrub  of 
our  swamps,  of  which  I  have  been  obliged  to 
cut  down  not  a  few,  when  running  lines  in  sur 
veying  through  the  low  woods.  They  are  a 
pretty  sure  indication  of  water,  and  when  I  see 
their  dense  curving  tops  ahead,  I  prepare  to 
wade  or  for  a  wet  foot.  The  flowers  have  an 
agreeable,  sweet,  and  very  promising  fragrance, 
and  a  handful  of  them  plucked  and  eaten  have 
a  subacid  taste  agreeable  to  some  palates.  —  At 
the  same  time  with  the  last,  the  common  low 
blueberry  is  ripe.  This  is  an  upright  slender 
shrub,  with  a  few  long,  wand-like  branches, 
with  green  bark  and  glaucous  green  leaves,  its 


70  WINTER. 

recent  shoots  crimson-colored.  The  flowers  have 
a  considerably  rosy  tinge,  a  delicate  tint.  The 
last  two  kinds  are  more  densely  flowered  than 
the  others.  —  The  huckleberry  is  an  upright 
shrub,  more  or  less  stout  according  to  its  expo 
sure  to  the  sun  and  air,  with  a  spreading,  bushy 
top,  a  dark  brown  bark  and  thick  leaves,  the 
recent  shoots  red.  The  flowers  are  much  more 
red  than  those  of  the  others. 

As  in  old  times  they  who  dwelt  on  the  heath, 
remote  from  towns,  were  backward  to  adopt  the 
doctrines  which  prevailed  there,  and  were  there 
fore  called  heathen,  so  we  dwellers  in  the  huckle 
berry  pastures,  which  are  our  heathlands,  are  slow 
to  adopt  the  notions  of  large  towns  and  cities, 
and  may  perchance  be  nicknamed  huckleberry 
people.  But  the  worst  of  it  is  that  the  emis 
saries  of  the  towns  care  more  for  our  berries 
than  we  for  their  doctrines.  In  those  days  the 
very  race  had  got  a  bad  name,  and  ethnicus  was 
only  another  name  for  heathen. 

All  our  hills  are  or  have  been  huckleberry 
hills,  —  the  three  hills  of  Boston,  and  no  doubt 
Bunker  Hill  among  the  rest. 

In  May  and  June  all  our  hills  and  fields  are 
adorned  with  a  profusion  of  the  pretty  little, 
more  or  less  bell-shaped  flowers  of  this  family, 
commonly  turned  toward  the  earth,  and  more  or 
less  tinged  with  red  or  pink,  and  resounding 


WINTER.  71 

with  the  hum  of  insects,  each  one  the  forerun 
ner  of  a  berry  the  most  natural,  wholesome,  and 
palatable  that  the  soil  can  produce.  —  The  early 
low  blueberry,  which  I  will  call  "  bluet,"  adopt 
ing  the  name  from  the  Canadians,  is  probably 
the  prevailing  kind  of  whortleberry  in  New 
England,  for  the  high  blueberry  and  huckle 
berry  are  unknown  in  many  sections. 

In  many  New  Hampshire  towns,  a  neighboring 
mountain  top  is  the  common  berry  field  of  many 
villages,  and  in  the  season  such  a  summit  will 
be  swarming  with  pickers.  A  hundred  at  once 
will  rush  thither  from  the  surrounding  villages, 

O  O         " 

with  pails  and  buckets  of  all  descriptions,  espe 
cially  on  a  Sunday,  which  is  their  leisure  day. 
When  camping  on  such  ground,  thinking  my 
self  out  of  the  world,  I  have  had  my  solitude 
very  unexpectedly  interrupted  by  such  a  com 
pany,  and  found  that  week  days  were  the  only 
Sabbath  days  there.  .  .  .  The  mountain  tops 
of  New  Hampshire,  often  lifted  above  the 
clouds,  are  thus  covered  with  this  beautiful  blue 
fruit  in  greater  profusion  than  any  garden. 

What  though  the  woods  be  cut  down.  This 
emergency  was  long  ago  foreseen  and  provided 
for  by  nature,  and  the  interregnum  is  not  allowed 
to  be  a  barren  one.  She  is  full  of  resources, 
and  not  only  begins  instantly  to  heal  that  scar, 
but  she  consoles  and  refreshes  us  with  fruits 


72  WINTER. 

such  as  the  forest  did  not  produce.  ...  As  the 
sandal  wood  is  said  to  diffuse  its  perfume  around 
the  woodman  who  cuts  it,  so,  in  this  case,  Nature 
rewards  with  unexpected  fruits  the  hand  that 
lays  her  waste. 

Dec.  31,  1837.  As  the  least  drop  of  wine 
tinges  the  whole  goblet,  so  the  least  particle  of 
truth  colors  our  whole  life.  It  is  never  isolated, 
or  simply  added  as  treasure  to  our  stock.  When 
any  real  progress  is  made,  we  unlearn  and  learn 
anew  what  we  thought  we  knew  before. 

Dec.  31,  1840.  .  .  .  There  must  be  respira 
tion  as  well  as  aspiration.  We  should  not  walk 
on  tiptoe,  but  healthily  expand  to  our  full  cir 
cumference  on  the  soles  of  our  feet.  ...  If 
aspiration  be  repeated  long  without  respiration, 
it  will  be  no  better  than  expiration,  or  simply 
losing  one's  breath.  In  the  healthy,  for  every 
aspiration  there  will  be  a  respiration  which  is 
to  make  his  idea  take  shape,  and  give  its  tone  to 
the  character.  Every  time  he  steps  buoyantly 
up,  he  steps  solidly  down  again,  and  stands  the 
firmer  on  the  ground  for  his  independence  of 
it.  We  should  fetch  the  whole  heel,  sole,  and 
toe  horizontally  down  to  earth.  Let  not  ours 
be  a  wiped  virtue,  as  men  go  about  with  an 
array  of  clean  linen,  but  unwashed  as  a  fresh 
flower,  not  a  clean  Sunday  garment,  but  better 
as  a  soiled  week-day  one. 


WINTER.  73 

Dec.  31,  1850.  .  .  .  The  blue  jays  evidently 
notify  each  other  of  the  presence  of  an  intruder, 
and  will  sometimes  make  a  great  chattering 
about  it,  and  so  communicate  the  alarm  to  other 
birds,  and  to  beasts. 

Dec.  31,  1851.  The  third  warm  day ;  now 
overcast  and  beginning  to  drizzle.  Still  it  is 
inspiriting  as  the  brightest  weather,  though  the 
sun  surely  is  not  going  to  shine.  There  is 
a  latent  light  in  the  mist,  as  if  there  were  more 
electricity  than  usual  in  the  air.  There  are 
warm,  foggy  days  in  winter  which  excite  us.  — 
It  reminds  me,  this  thick,  spring-like  weather, 
that  I  have  not  enough  valued  and  attended  to 
the  pure  clarity  and  brilliancy  of  the  winter 
skies.  .  .  .  Shall  I  ever  in  summer  evenings 
see  so  celestial  a  reach  of  blue  sky  contrasting 
with  amber  as  I  saw  a  few  days  since.  The 
day  sky  in  winter  corresponds  for  clarity  to  the 
night  sky  in  which  the  stars  shine  and  twinkle 
so  brightly  in  this  latitude. 

I  am  too  late,  perhaps,  to  see  the  sand  foliage 
in  the  deep  cut ;  should  have  been  there  day 
before  yesterday.  It  is  now  too  wet  and  soft. 
Yet  in  some  places  it  is  perfect.  I  see  some 
perfect  leopard's  paws.  These  things  suggest 
that  there  is  motion  in  the  earth  as  well  as  on 
the  surface;  it  lives  and  grows.  ...  I  seem 
to  see  some  of  the  life  that  is  in  the  spring  bud 


74  WINTER. 

and  blossom,  more  intimately,  nearer  its  foun 
tain  head,  the  fancy  sketches  and  designs  of  the 
artist.  It  is  more  simple  and  primitive  growth  ; 
as  if  for  ages  sand  and  clay  might  have  thus 
flowed  into  the  forms  of  foliage,  before  plants 
were  produced  to  clothe  the  earth.  .  .  . 

I  observed  this  afternoon  the  old  Irish  woman 
at  the  shanty  in  the  woods,  sitting  out  on  the 
hillside  bare-headed  in  the  rain,  and  on  the  icy, 
though  thawing  ground,  knitting.  She  comes 
out  like  the  ground  squirrel,  at  the  least  intima 
tion  of  warmer  weather,  while  I  walk  still  in  a 
great  coat,  and  under  an  umbrella.  She  will 
not  have  to  go  far  to  be  buried,  so  close  she  lives 
to  the  earth.  Such  Irish  as  these  are  natural 
izing  themselves  at  a  rapid  rate,  and  threaten  at 
last  to  displace  the  Yankees,  as  the  latter  have 
the  Indians.  The  process  of  acclimation  is 
rapid  with  them.  They  draw  long  breaths  in 
the  American  sick-room.  .  .  .  There  is  a  low 
mist  in  the  woods.  It  is  a  good  day  to  study 
lichens.  The  view  so  confined,  it  compels  your 
attention  to  near  objects,  and  the  white  back 
ground  reveals  the  disks  of  the  lichens  dis 
tinctly.  They  appear  more  loose,  flowing,  ex 
panded,  flattened  out,  the  colors  brighter  for  the 
damp.  The  round,  greenish-yellow  lichens  on 
the  white  pines  loom  through  the  mist  (or  are 
seen  dimly)  like  shields  whose  devices  you 


WINTER.  75 

would  fain  read.  The  trees  appear  all  at  once 
covered  with  the  crop  of  lichens  and  mosses  of 
all  kinds.  .  .  .  This  is  their  solstice,  and  your 
eyes  run  swiftly  through  the  mist  to  these  things 
only.  On  every  fallen  twig  even,  that  has  lain 
under  the  snows,  as  well  as  on  the  trees,  they 
appear  erect,  and  now  first  to  have  attained 
their  full  expansion.  Nature  has  a  day  for 
each  of  her  creations.  To-day  it  is  an  exhi 
bition  of  lichens  at  Forest  Hall.  The  livid 
green  of  some,  the  fruit  of  others,  they  eclipse 
the  trees  they  cover ;  the  red,  club-shaped 
(baobab  tree-like),  on  the  stumps,  the  erythrean 
stumps  ;  ah,  beautiful  is  decay.  True,  as  Thales 
said,  the  world  was  made  out  of  water.  That 
is  the  principle  of  all  things. 

I  do  not  lay  myself  open  to  my  friends  ?  The 
owner  of  the  casket  locks  it  and  unlocks  it. — 
Treat  your  friends  for  what  you  know  them  to 
be.  Regard  no  surfaces.  Consider  not  what  they 
did  but  what  they  intended.  Be  sure,  as  you 
know  them,  you  are  known  of  them  again.  Last 
night  I  treated  my  dearest  friend  ill.  Though 
I  could  find  some  excuse  for  myself,  it  is  not 
such  excuse  as  under  the  circumstances  could  be 
pleaded  in  so  many  words.  Instantly,  I  blamed 
myself,  and  sought  an  opportunity  to  make 
atonement,  but  the  friend  avoided  me,  and  with 
kinder  feelings  even  than  before  I  was  obliged 


76  WINTER. 

to  depart.  And  now  this  morning  I  feel  that 
it  is  too  late  to  speak  of  the  trifle,  and  besides  I 
doubt  now,  in  the  cool  morning,  if  I  have  a 
right  to  suppose  such  intimate  and  serious  rela 
tions  as  afford  a  basis  for  the  apology  I  had  con 
ceived,  for  even  magnanimity  must  ask  this  poor 
earth  for  a  field.  The  virtues  even  wait  for  in 
vitation.  Yet  I  am  resolved  to  know  that  one 
centrally,  through  thick  and  thin,  and  though 
we  should  be  cold  to  one  another,  though  we 
should  never  speak  to  one  another,  I  will  know 
that  inward  and  essential  love  may  exist  under 
a  superficial  coldness,  and  that  the  laws  of  at 
traction  speak  louder  than  words.  My  true  re 
lation  this  instant  shall  be  my  apology  for  my 
false  relation  the  last  instant.  I  made  haste  to 
cast  off  my  injustice  as  scurf.  I  own  it  less 
than  another.  I  have  absolutely  done  with  it. 
Let  the  idle  and  wavering  and  apologizing  friend 
appropriate  it.  Methinks  our  estrangement  is 
only  like  the  divergence  of  the  branches  which 
unite  in  the  stem. 

To-night  I  heard  Mrs. lecture  on  woman 
hood.  The  most  important  fact  about  the  lec 
ture  was  that  a  woman  gave  it,  and  in  that  re 
spect  it  was  suggestive.  Went  to  see  her  after 
ward.  But  the  interview  added  nothing  to  the 
impression,  rather  subtracted  from  it.  She  was 
a  woman  in  the  too  common  sense,  after  all. 


WINTER.  11 

You  had  to  fire  small  charges.  I  did  not  have 
a  finger  in  once,  for  fear  of  blowing  away  all 
her  works,  and  so  ending  the  game.  You  had 
to  substitute  courtesy  for  sense  and  argument. 
It  requires  nothing  less  than  a  chivalric  feeling 
to  sustain  a  conversation  with  a  lady.  I  carried 
her  lecture  for  her  in  my  pocket  wrapped  in  her 
handkerchief.  My  pocket  exhales  cologne  to 
this  moment.  The  championess  of  woman's 
rights  still  asks  you  to  be  a  ladies'  man.  I  can't 
fire  a  salute  for  fear  some  of  the  guns  may  be 
shotted.  I  had  to  unshot  all  the  guns  in  truth's 
battery,  and  fire  powder  and  wadding  only. 
Certainly  the  heart  is  only  for  rare  occasions ; 
the  intellect  affords  the  most  unfailing  entertain 
ment.  It  would  only  do  to  let  her  feel  the  wind 
of  the  ball.  I  fear  that  to  the  last,  women's  lec 
tures  will  demand  mainly  courtesy  from  men.  .  .  . 

Denuded  pines  stand  in  the  clearings  with 
no  old  cloak  to  wrap  about  them,  only  the 
apexes  of  their  cones  entire,  telling  a  pathetic 
story  of  the  companions  that  clothed  them.  So 
stands  a  man.  His  clearing  around  him,  he  has 
no  companions  on  the  hills.  The  lonely  trav 
eler,  looking  up,  wonders  why  he  was  left  when 
his  companions  were  taken. 

Dec.  31,  1853.  ...  It  is  a  remarkable  sight, 
this  snow-clad  landscape,  the  fences  and  bushes 
half-buried,  and  the  warm  sun  on  it.  ...  The 


78  WINTER. 

town  and  country  is  now  so  still,  no  rattle  of 
wagons  nor  even  jingle  of  sleigh  bells,  every 
tread  being  as  with  woolen  feet.  ...  In  such  a 
day  as  this,  the  crowing  of  a  cock  is  heard  very 
far  and  distinctly.  .  .  .  There  are  a  few  sounds 
still  which  never  fail  to  affect  me,  the  notes  of  a 
wood  thrush  and  the  sound  of  a  vibrating  chord. 
These  affect  me  as  many  sounds  once  did  often, 
and  as  almost  all  should.  The  .strain  of  the 
a3olian  harp  and  of  the  wood  thrush  are  the 
truest  and  loftiest  preachers  that  I  know  now 
left  on  this  earth.  I  know  of  no  missionaries 
to  us  heathen  comparable  to  them.  They,  as  it 
were,  lift  us  up  in  spite  of  ourselves.  They  in 
toxicate  and  charm  us.  Where  was  that  strain 
mixed,  into  which  this  world  was  dropped,  but 
as  a  lump  of  sugar,  to  sweeten  the  draught  ?  I 
would  be  drunk,  drunk,  drunk,  dead  drunk  to 
this  world  with  it  forever.  He  that  hath  ears, 
let  him  hear.  The  contact  of  sound  with  a  hu 
man  ear  whose  hearing  is  pure  and  unimpaired 
is  coincident  with  an  ecstasy.  Sugar  is  not  so 
sweet  to  the  palate  as  sound  to  a  healthy  ear. 
The  hearing  of  it  makes  men  brave.  .  .  .  These 
things  alone  remind  me  of  my  immortality, 
which  is  else  a  fable.  As  I  hear,  I  realize  and 
see  clearly  what  at  other  times  I  only  dimly 
remember.  I  get  the  value  of  the  earth's  ex 
tent  and  the  sky's  depth.  It  ...  gives  me  the 


WINTER.  79 

freedom  of  all  bodies,  of  all  nature.  I  leave 
my  body  in  a  trance,  and  accompany  the  zephyr 
and  the  fragrance. 

Walden  froze  completely  over  last  night.  It  is, 
however,  all  snow-ice,  as  it  froze  while  it  was 
snowing  hard.  It  looks  like  frozen  yeast  some 
what.  I  waded  about  in  the  woods  through  the 
snow,  which  certainly  averaged  considerably 
more  than  two  feet  deep  where  I  went.  .  .  . 
Saw  probably  an  otter's  track,  very  broad  and 
deep,  as  if  a  log  had  been  drawn  along.  It  was 
nearly  as  obvious  as  a  man's  track  ;  made  be 
fore  last  night's  snow  fell.  The  creature  from 
time  to  time  went  beneath  the  snow  for  a  few 
feet  to  the  leaves.  This  animal  I  should  prob 
ably  never  see  the  least  trace  of  were  it  not  for 
the  snow,  the  great  revealer. 

I  saw  some  squirrels'  nests  of  oak  leaves  high 
in  the  trees,  and  directly  after  a  gray  squirrel 
tripping  along  the  branches  of  an  oak  and  shak 
ing  down  the  snow.  He  ran  down  the  oak  on 
the  side  opposite  from  me  over  the  snow  and  up 
another  tall  and  slender  oak,  also  on  the  side 
opposite  from  me  which  was  bare,  and  leaped 
down  about  four  feet  into  a  white  pine,  and 
then  ran  up  still  higher  into  its  thick  green  top 
and  clung  behind  the  main  stem,  perfectly  still. 
.  .  .  This  he  did  to  conceal  himself,  though 
obliged  to  corne  nearer  to  me  to  accomplish  it. 


80  WINTER. 

His  fore  feet  make  but  one  track  in  the  snow, 
about  three  inches  broad,  and  his  hind  feet  an 
other  similar  one,  a  foot  or  more  distant,  and 
there  are  two  sharp  furrows  forward,  and  two 
slighter  ones  backward  from  each  track.  This 
track  he  makes  when  running,  but  I  am  not 
absolutely  certain  that  all  the  four  feet  do  not 
come  together.  There  were  many  holes  in  the 
snow  where  he  had  gone  down  to  the  leaves  and 
brought  up  acorns,  which  he  had  eaten  on  the 
nearest  twig,  dropping  fine  bits  of  shell  about  on 
the  snow,  and  also  bits  of  lichen  and  bark.  I 
noticed  the  bits  of  acorn  shells,  etc.,  by  the  holes 
in  many  places.  At  times  he  made  a  continu 
ous  narrow  trail  in  the  snow,  somewhat  like  a 
small  muskrat,  where  he  had  walked  or  gone 
several  times,  and  he  would  go  under  a  few  feet 
and  come  out  again. 

Dec.  31,  1854.  p.  M.  On  river  to  Fair 
Haven  Pond.  A  beautiful,  clear,  not  very  cold 
day.  The  shadows  on  the  snow  are  indigo  blue. 
The  pines  look  very  dark.  The  white-oak  leaves 
are  a  cinnamon  color,  the  black  and  red  (?)  oak 
leaves  a  reddish-brown  or  leather  color.  ...  A 
partridge  rises  from  the  alders  and  skims  across 
the  river  at  its  widest  part,  just  before  me  ;  a 
fine  sight.  .  .  .  How  glorious  the  perfect  still 
ness  and  peace  of  the  winter  landscape. 

Dec.    31,   1859.   .   .   .   How   vain   to    try   to 


WINTER.  81 

teach  youth  or  anybody  truths.  They  can 
only  learn  them  after  their  own  fashion,  and 
when  they  get  ready.  I  do  not  mean  by  this  to 
condemn  our  system  of  education,  but  to  show 
what  it  amounts  to.  A  hundred  boys  at  college 
are  drilled  in  physics,  metaphysics,  languages, 
etc.  There  may  be  one  or  two  in  each  hundred, 
prematurely  old,  perchance,  who  approach  the 
subject  from  a  similar  point  of  view  to  their 
teachers',  but  as  for  the  rest  and  the  most  prom 
ising,  it  is  like  agricultural  chemistry  to  so  many 
Indians.  They  get  a  valuable  drilling,  it  may 
be,  but  they  do  not  learn  what  you  profess  to 
teach.  They  at  most  only  learn  where  the 
arsenal  is,  in  case  they  should  ever  want  to  use 
any  of  its  weapons.  The  young  men,  being 
young,  necessarily  listen  to  the  lecturer  on  his 
tory,  just  as  they  do  to  the  singing  of  a  bird. 
They  expect  to  be  affected  by  something  he  may 
say.  It  is  a  kind  of  poetic  pabulum  and  imagery 
that  they  get.  Nothing  comes  quite  amiss  to 
their  mill. 

Jan.  1,  1841.     All,  men  and  women,  woo  one. 
There  is  a  fragrance  in  their  breath. 

"  Nosque  — equis  oriens  afflavit  anhelis." 

And  if  now  they  hate,  I  muse  as  in  sombre, 
cloudy  weather,  not  despairing  of  the  absent  ray. 

"  Illic  sera  rubens  accendit  lumina  vesper." 


82  WINTER. 

Jan.  1,  1842.  .  .  .  The  virtuous  soul  pos 
sesses  a  fortitude  and  hardihood  which  not  the 
grenadier  nor  pioneer  can  match.  It  never 
shrinks.  It  goes  singing  to  its  work.  Effort  is 
its  relaxation.  The  rude  pioneer  work  of  the 
world  has  been  done  by  the  most  devoted  wor 
shipers  of  beauty.  ...  In  winter  is  their  cam 
paign.  They  never  go  into  quarters.  They  are 
elastic  under  the  heaviest  burden,  under  the 
extremest  physical  suffering. 

Jan.  1,  1852.  .  .  .  I  have  observed  that  one 
mood  is  the  natural  critic  of  another.  When 
possessed  with  a  strong  feeling  on  any  subject 
foreign  to  the  one  I  may  be  writing  on,  I  know 
very  well  what  of  good  and  what  of  bad  I  have 
written  on  the  latter.  It  looks  to  me  now  as  it 
will  ten  years  hence.  My  life  is  then  earnest, 
and  will  tolerate  no  makeshifts  nor  nonsense. 
What  is  tinsel,  or  euphuism,  or  irrelevant  is  re 
vealed  to  such  a  touchstone.  In  the  light  of  a 
strong  feeling  all  things  take  their  places,  and 
truth  of  every  kind  is  seen  as  such.  Now  let  me 
read  my  verses,  and  I  will  tell  you  if  the  god 
has  had  a  hand  in  them.  I  wish  to  survey  my 
composition  for  a  moment  from  the  least  favor 
able  point  of  view.  I  wish  to  be  translated  to 
the  future,  and  look  at  my  work  as  it  were  at  a 
structure  on  the  plain,  to  observe  what  portions 
have  crumbled  under  the  influence  of  the  ele 
ments. 


WINTER.  83 

9.30  P.  M.  To  Fair  Haven.  Moon  little 
more  than  half  full.  Not  a  cloud  in  the  sky.  It 
is  a  remarkably  warm  night  for  the  season, 
the  ground  almost  entirely  bare.  The  stars  are 
dazzlingly  bright.  The  fault  may  be  in  my  own 
barrenness,  but  methinks  there  is  a  certain  pov 
erty  about  the  winter  night's  sky.  The  stars  of 
higher  magnitude  are  more  bright  and  dazzling, 
and  therefore  appear  more  near  and  numerable ; 
while  those  that  appear  indistinct  and  infinitely 
remote  in  the  summer,  giving  the  impression  of 
unfathomableness  in  the  sky,  are  scarcely  seen 
at  all.  The  front  halls  of  heaven  are  so  bril 
liantly  lighted  that  they  quite  eclipse  the  more 
remote.  The  sky  has  fallen  many  degrees. 

The  worst  kind  of  tick  to  get  under  your 
skin  is  yourself  in  an  irritable  mood.  .  .  . 
These  are  some  of  the  differences  between  this 
and  the  autumn  or  summer  night :  the  stiffened 
glebe  under  my  feet,  the  dazzle  and  seeming 
nearness  of  the  stars,  the  duller  gleam  from 
ice  on  rivers  and  ponds,  the  white  spots  in  the 
fields  and  streaks  by  the  wall  sides  where  are 
the  remains  of  drifts  yet  unmelted.  Perhaps 
the  only  thing  that  spoke  to  me  in  this  walk 
was  the  bare,  lichen-covered,  gray  rock  at  the 
cliff,  in  the  moonlight,  naked  and  almost  warm 
as  in  summer. 

I  have  so  much  faith  in  the  power  of  truth  to 


84  WINTER.  v 

communicate  itself  that  I  should  not  believe  a 
friend,  if  he  should  tell  me  that  he  had  given 
credit  to  an  unjust  rumor  concerning  me.  Sus 
pect!  Ah,  yes,  you  may  suspect  a  thousand 
things,  but  I  well  know  that  what  you  suspect 
most  confidently  of  all  is  just  the  truth.  Your 
other  doubts  but  flavor  this  your  main  suspi 
cion.  They  are  the  condiments  which,  taken 
alone,  do  simply  bite  the  tongue.  .  .  . 

Jan.  1,  1853.  This  morning  we  have  some 
thing  between  ice  and  frost  on  the  trees,  etc. 
The  rocks  cased  in  ice  look  like  alum  rocks. 
This,  not  frozen  mist  or  frost,  but  frozen  drizzle, 
collected  around  the  slightest  cores,  gives  promi 
nence  to  the  least  withered  herbs  and  grasses. 
Where  yesterday  was  a  plain,  smooth  field  ap 
pears  now  a  teeming  crop  of  fat,  icy  herbage. 
The  stems  of  the  herbs  on  the  north  side  are 
enlarged  from  ten  to  one  hundred  times.  The 
addition  is  so  universally  on  the  north  side  that 
a  traveler  could  not  lose  the  points  of  the  com 
pass  to-day,  though  it  should  be  never  so  dark ; 
for  every  blade  of  grass  would  serve  to  guide 
him,  telling  from  which  side  the  storm  came  yes 
terday.  These  straight  stems  of  grasses  stand  up 
like  white  batons,  or  sceptres,  and  make  a  con 
spicuous  foreground  to  the  landscape,  from  six 
inches  to  three  feet  high.  C.  thought  that  these 
fat,  icy  branches  on  the  withered  grass  and 


WINTER.  85 

herbs  had  no  nucleus,  but  looking  closer  I 
showed  him  the  fine,  black,  wiry  threads  on 
which  they  impinged,  which  made  him  laugh  with 
surprise.  .  .  .  The  clover  and  sorrel  send  up  a 
dull,  green  gleam  through  this  icy  coat,  like 
strange  plants.  .  .  .  Some  weeds  bear  the  ice 
in  masses ;  some,  like  the  trumpet  weed  and 
tansy,  in  balls  for  each  dried  flower.  What  a 
crash  of  jewels  as  you  walk  !  The  most  careless 
walker,  who  never  deigned  to  look  at  these 
humble  weeds  before,  cannot  help  observing 
them  now.  This  is  why  the  herbage  is  left  to 
stand  dry  in  the  fields  all  winter.  Upon  a  solid 
foundation  of  ice  stand  out,  pointing  in  all  di 
rections  between  N.  W.  and  N.  E.,  or  within 
the  limits  of  90°,  little  spicula,  or  crystallized 
points,  half  an  inch,  or  more,  in  length.  Upon 
the  dark,  glazed,  plowed  ground,  where  a  mere 
wiry  stem  rises,  its  north  side  is  thickly  clad 
with  these  snow-white  spears,  like  some  Indian 
head-dress,  as  if  it  had  attracted  all  the  frost.  I 
saw  a  prinos  bush  full  of  large  berries  by  the 
wall  in  Hubbard's  field.  Standing  on  the  west 
side,  the  contrast  of  the  red  berries  with  their 
white  incrustation  or  prolongation  on  the  north 
was  admirable.  I  thought  I  had  never  seen 
the  berries  so  dazzlingly  bright.  The  whole 
north  side  of  the  bush,  berries  and  stock,  was 
beautifully  incrusted,  and  when  I  went  round  to 


86  WINTER. 

the  north  side  the  redness  of  the  berries  came 
softened  through,  and  tingeing  the  allied  snow- 
white  bush,  like  an  evening  sky  beyond.  These 
adjoined  snow  or  ice  berries,  being  beset  within 
the  limits  of  90°  on  the  N.  with  those  icy  par 
ticles  or  spicula,  between  which  the  red  glow, 
and  sometimes  the  clear  red  itself,  was  some 
times  visible,  produced  the  appearance  of  a 
raspberry  bush  full  of  over-ripe  fruit. 

Standing  on  the  north  side  of  a  bush  or  tree, 
looking  against  the  sky,  you  see  only  the  white 
ghost  of  a  tree,  without  a  mote  of  earthiness; 
but  as  you  go  round  it,  the  dark  core  comes  into 
view.  It  makes  all  the  odds  imaginable  whether 
you  are  traveling  N.  or  S.  The  drooping  birches 
along  the  edges  of  woods  are  the  most  feathery, 
fairy-like  ostrich  plumes,  and  the  color  of  their 
trunks  increases  the  delusion.  The  weight  of 
the  ice  gives  to  the  pines  the  forms  which  north 
ern  trees,  like  the  firs,  constantly  wear,  bending 
and  twisting  the  branches  ;  for  the  twigs  and 
plumes  of  the  pines,  being  frozen,  remain  as  the 
wind  held  them,  and  new  portions  of  the  trunk 
are  exposed.  Seen  from  the  N.  there  is  no 
greenness  in  the  pines,  and  the  character  of  the 
tree  is  changed.  The  willows  along  the  edge  of 
the  river  look  like  sedge  in  the  meadows.  The 
sky  is  overcast,  and  a  fine  snowy  hail  and  rain 
is  falling,  and  these  ghost-like  trees  make  a  seen- 


WINTER.  87 

ery  which  reminds  you  of  Spitzbergen.  I  see 
now  the  beauty  of  the  causeway  by  the  bridge, 
alders  below  swelling  into  the  road,  overtopped 
by  willows  and  maples.  The  fine  grasses  and 
shrubs  in  the  meadow  rise  to  meet  and  mingle 
with  the  drooping  willows,  and  the  whole  makes 
an  indistinct  impression  like  a  mist.  Through 
all  this,  the  road  runs  toward  those  white,  ice- 
clad,  ghostly  or  fairy  trees  in  the  distance,  to 
ward  spirit-land.  The  pines  are  as  white  as  a 
counterpane,  with  raised  embroidery  and  white 
tassels  and  fringes.  Each  fascicle  of  leaves  or 
needles  is  held  apart  by  an  icy  club  surmounted 
by  a  little  snowy  or  icy  ball.  Finer  than  the 
Saxon  arch  is  this  path  running  under  the 
pines,  roofed  not  with  crossing  boughs,  but 
drooping,  ice-covered,  irregular  twigs.  In  the 
midst  of  this  stately  pine,  towering  like  the  sol 
emn  ghost  of  a  tree,  I  see  the  white,  ice-clad 
boughs  of  other  trees  appearing,  of  a  different 
character  ;  sometimes  oaks  with  leaves  incrusted, 
or  fine-sprayed  maples  or  walnuts.  But  finer 
than  all,  this  red  oak,  its  leaves  incrusted  like 
shields  a  quarter  of  an  inch  thick,  and  a  thousand 
fine  spicula  like  long  serrations  at  right  angles 
with  their  planes  upon  the  edges.  It  produces 
an  indescribably  rich  effect,  the  color  of  the  leaf 
coming  softened  through  the  ice,  a  delicate  fawn 
of  many  shades.  Where  the  plumes  of  the  pitch 


88  WINTER. 

pine  are  short  and  spreading  close  to  the  trunk, 
sometimes  perfect  cups  or  rays  are  formed. 
Pitch  pines  present  rough,  massy  grenadier 
plumes,  each  having  a  darker  spot  or  cavity  in 
the  end  where  you  look  in  to  the  bud.  I  listen 
to  the  booming  of  the  pond  as  if  it  were  a  rea 
sonable  creature.  I  return  at  last  in  the  rain, 
and  am  coated  with  a  glaze,  like  the  fields.  .  .  . 

After  talking  with  uncle  Charles,  the  other 
night,  about  the  worthies  of  this  country,  Web 
ster  and  the  rest,  as  usual,  considering  who  were 
geniuses  and  who  not,  I  showed  him  up  to 
bed ;  and  when  I  had  got  into  bed  myself  I 
heard  the  chamber  door  opened,  after  eleven 
o'clock,  and  he  called  out  in  an  earnest,  stento 
rian  voice,  loud  enough  to  wake  the  whole  house, 
"  Henry !  was  John  Quincy  Adams  a  genius  ?  " 
"  No,  I  think  not,"  was  my  reply.  "  Well,  I 
did  n't  think  he  was,"  answered  he. 

Jan.  1,  1854.  Le  Jeune,  referring  to  the 
death  of  a  young  Frenchwoman  who  had  de 
voted  her  life  to  the  savages  of  Canada,  uses  this 
expression :  "  Finally  this  beautiful  soul  de 
tached  itself  from  its  body  the  15th  of  March, " 
etc. 

The  drifts  mark  the  standstill  or  equilibrium 
between  the  currents  of  air  or  particular  winds. 
In  our  greatest  snow-storms,  the  wind  being 
northerly,  the  greatest  drifts  are  on  the  south 


WINTER.  89 

side  of  houses  and  fences.  ...  I  notice  that  in 
the  angle  made  by  our  house  and  shed,  a  S.  W. 
exposure,  the  snow-drift  does  not  lie  close  about 
the  pump,  but  is  a  foot  off,  forming  a  circular 
bowl,  showing  that  there  was  an  eddy  about  it. 
The  snow  is  like  a  mould,  showing  the  form  of 
the  eddying  currents  of  air  which  have  been  im 
pressed  on  it,  while  the  drift  and  all  the  rest  is 
that  which  fell  between  the  currents  or  where 
they  counterbalanced  each  other.  These  bound 
ary  lines  are  mountain  barriers. 

The  white-in-tails,  or  grass  finches,  linger 
pretty  late,  flitting  in  flocks.  They  come  only 
so  near  winter  as  the  white  in  their  tails  indi 
cates.  .  .  . 

The  snow  buntings  and  the  tree  sparrows  are 
the  true  spirits  of  the  snow-storm.  They  are  the 
animated  beings  that  ride  upon  it  and  have  their 
life  in  it. 

The  snow  is  the  great  betrayer.  It  not  only 
shows  the  track  of  mice,  otters,  etc.,  etc.,  which 
else  we  should  rarely,  if  ever,  see,  but  the  tree 
sparrows  are  more  plainly  seen  against  its  white 
ground,  and  they  in  turn  are  attracted  by  the 
dark  weeds  it  reveals.  It  also  drives  the  crows 
and  other  birds  out  of  the  woods  to  the  villages 
for  food.  We  might  expect  to  find  in  the  snow 
the  footprint  of  a  life  superior  to  our  own,  of 
which  no  zoology  takes  cognizance.  Is  there  no 


90  WINTER. 

trace  of  a  nobler  life  than  that  of  an  otter  or  an 
escaped  convict  to  be  looked  for  in  it  ?  Shall  we 
suppose  that  is  the  only  life  that  has  been  abroad 
in  the  night  ?  It  is  only  the  savage  that  can  see 
the  track  of  no  higher  life  than  an  otter's. 
Why  do  the  vast  snow  plains  give  us  pleasure, 
the  twilight  of  the  bent  and  half-buried  woods? 
Is  not  all  there  consonant  with  virtue,  justice, 
purity,  courage,  magnanimity  ;  and  does  not  all 
this  amount  to  the  track  of  a  higher  life  than  the 
otter's,  —  a  life  which  has  not  gone  by  and  left 
a  footprint  merely,  but  is  there  with  its  beauty, 
its  music,  its  perfume,  its  sweetness,  to  exhilarate 
and  recreate  us?  All  that  we  perceive  is  the 
impress  of  its  spirit.  If  there  is  a  perfect  gov 
ernment  of  the  world  according  to  the  highest 
laws,  do  we  find  no  trace  of  intelligence  there, 
whether  in  the  snow,  or  the  earth,  or  in  our 
selves, —  no  other  trail  but  such  as  a  dog  can 
scent  ?  Is  there  none  which  an  angel  can  detect 
and  follow,  —  none  to  guide  a  man  in  his  pil 
grimage,  which  water  will  not  conceal  ?  Is  there 
no  odor  of  sanctity  to  be  perceived  ?  Is  its  trail 
too  old?  Have  mortals  lost  the  scent?  .  .  . 
Are  there  not  hunters  who  seek  for  something 
higher  than  foxes,  with  judgment  more  discrim 
inating  than  the  senses  of  fox-hounds,  who  rally 
to  a  nobler  music  than  that  of  the  hunting-horn  ? 
As  there  is  contention  among  the  fishermen  who 


WINTER.  91 

shall  be  the  first  to  reach  the  pond  as  soon  as  the 
ice  will  bear,  in  spite  of  the  cold  ;  as  the  hunters 
are  forward  to  take  the  field  as  soon  as  the  first 
snow  has  fallen,  so  he  who  would  make  the  most 
of  his  life  for  discipline  must  be  abroad  early 
and  late,  in  spite  of  cold  and  wet,  in  pursuit  of 
nobler  game,  whose  traces  are  there  most  dis 
tinct,  —  a  life  which  we  seek  not  to  destroy,  but 
to  make  our  own ;  which  when  pursued  does  not 
earth  itself,  does  not  burrow  downward,  but  up 
ward,  takes  not  to  the  trees,  but  to  the  heavens, 
as  its  home ;  which  the  hunter  pursues  with 
winged  thoughts  and  aspirations  (these  the  dogs 
that  tree  it),  rallying  his  pack  with  the  bugle 
notes  of  undying  faith.  .  .  .  Do  the  Indian  and 
hunter  only  need  snow-shoes,  while  the  saint  sits 
indoors  in  embroidered  slippers? 

Jan.  1,  1856.  .  .  .  p.  M.  To  Walden.  .  .  . 
On  the  ice  at  Walden  are  very  beautiful  large 
leaf  crystals  in  great  profusion.  The  ice  is  fre 
quently  thickly  covered  with  them  for  many 
rods.  They  seem  to  be  connected  with  the  ro 
settes,  a  running  together  of  them,  look  like  a 
loose  bunch  of  small  white  feathers  springing 
from  a  tuft  of  down,  for  their  shafts  are  lost  in  a 
tuft  of  fine  snow  like  the  down  about  the  shaft 
of  a  feather,  as  if  a  feather  bed  had  been  shaken 
over  the  ice.  They  are,  on  a  close  examination, 
surprisingly  perfect  leaves,  like  ferns,  only  very 


92  WINTER. 

broad  for  their  length,  and  commonly  more  on 
one  side  the  midrib  than  the  other.  They  are 
from  an  inch  to  an  inch  and  a  half  long,  and 
three  fourths  of  an  inch  wide,  and  slanted, 
where  I  look,  from  the  S.  W.  They  have  first  a 
very  distinct  midrib,  though  so  thin  that  they 
cannot  be  taken  up  ;  then  distinct  ribs  branch 
ing  from  this,  commonly  opposite  ;  and  minute 
ribs  springing  again  from  these  last,  as  in  many 
ferns,  the  last  running  to  each  crenation  in  the 
border.  How  much  farther  they  are  subdivided 
the  naked  eye  cannot  discern.  They  are  so  thin 
and  fragile  that  they  melt  under  your  breath 
while  you  are  looking  closely  at  them.  A  fisher 
man  says  they  were  much  finer  in  the  morning. 
In  other  places  the  ice  is  strewn  with  a  different 
kind  of  frost-work,  in  little  patches,  as  if  oats 
had  been  spilled,  like  fibres  of  asbestos  rolled, 
one  half  or  three  fourths  of  an  inch  long  and  one 
eighth  or  more  wide.  Here  and  there  patches 
of  them  a  foot  or  two  over,  like  some  boreal 
grain  spilled. 

Jan.  1,  1858.  ...  I  have  lately  been  survey 
ing  the  Walden  woods  so  extensively  and  mi 
nutely  that  I  can  see  it  mapped  in  my  mind's 
eye  as  so  many  men's  wood-lots,  and  am  aware 
when  I  walk  there  that  I  am  at  a  given  moment 
passing  from  such  a  one's  wood-lot  to  such  an 
other's.  I  fear  this  particular  dry  knowledge 


WINTER.  93 

may  affect  my  imagination  and  fancy,  that  it 
will  not  be  easy  to  see  so  much  wildiiess  and 
native  vigor  there  as  formerly.  No  thicket  will 
seem  so  unexplored  now  that  I  know  a  stake 
and  stones  may  be  found  in  it. 

In  these  respects  those  Maine  woods  differ 
essentially  from  ours.  There  you  are  never  re 
minded  that  the  wilderness  you  are  treading  is 
after  all  some  villager's  familiar  wood-lot,  from 
which  his  ancestors  have  sledded  their  fuel  for 
a  generation  or  two,  or  some  widow's  thirds,  mi 
nutely  described  in  some  old  deed  which  is 
recorded,  of  which  the  owner  has  got  a  plan  too, 
and  of  which  the  old  boundmarks  may  be  found 
every  forty  rods,  if  you  will  search. 

What  a  history  this  Concord  wilderness,  which 
I  affect  so  much,  may  have  had !  How  many  old 
deeds  describe  it,  some  particular  wild  spot,  how 
it  passed  from  Cole  to  Robinson,  and  Robinson 
to  Jones,  and  from  Jones  finally  to  Smith  in 
course  of  years.  Some  had  cut  it  over  three 
times  during  their  lives,  built  walls  and  made 
a  pasture  of  it  perchance,  and  some  burned  it 
and  sowed  it  with  rye.  .  .  . 

In  the  Maine  woods  you  are  not  reminded  of 
these  things.  'Tis  true  the  map  informs  you 
that  you  stand  on  land  granted  by  the  State  to 
such  an  academy,  or  on  Bingham's  purchase ; 
but  these  names  do  not  impose  on  you,  for  you 


94  WINTER. 

see  nothing  to  remind  you  of  the  academy  or  of 
Bingham. 

Jan.  2, 1841.  .  .  .  Every  needle  of  the  white 
pine  trembles  distinctly  in  the  breeze,  which  on 
the  sunny  side  gives  the  whole  tree  a  shimmer 
ing,  seething  aspect.  .  .  . 

I  stopped  short  in  the  path  to-day  to  admire 
how  the  trees  grow  up  without  forethought,  re 
gardless  of  the  time  and  circumstances.  They 
do  not  wait,  as  men  do.  Now  is  the  golden  age 
of  the  sapling;  earth,  air,  sun,  and  rain  are 
occasion  enough. 

They  were  no  better  in  primeval  centuries. 
"The  winter  of"  their  "discontent"  never 
comes.  Witness  the  buds  of  the  native  poplar, 
standing  gayly  out  to  the  frost,  on  the  sides  of 
its  bare  switches.  They  express  a  naked  confi 
dence. 

With  cheerful  heart  I  could  be  a  sojourner  in 
the  wilderness.  I  should  be  sure  to  find  there 
the  catkins  of  the  alder.  When  I  read  of  them 
in  the  accounts  of  northern  adventurers  by 
Baffin's  Bay  or  Mackenzie's  River,  I  see  how 
even  there  too  I  could  dwell.  They  are  my 
little  vegetable  redeemers.  Methinks  my  virtue 
will  not  flag  ere  they  come  again.  They  are 
worthy  to  have  had  a  greater  than  Neptune  or 
Ceres  for  their  donor.  Who  was  the  benignant 
goddess  that  bestowed  them  on  mankind  ? 


WINTER.  95 

I  saw  a  fox  run  across  the  pond  to-day  with 
the  carelessness  of  freedom.  As  at  intervals  I 
traced  his  course  in  the  sunshine,  as  he  trotted 
along  the  ridge  of  a  hill  on  the  crust,  it  seemed 
as  if  the  sun  never  shone  so  proudly,  sheer  down 
on  the  hillside,  and  the  winds  and  woods  were 
hushed  in  sympathy.  I  gave  up  to  him  sun  and 
earth  as  to  their  true  proprietor.  He  did  not  go 
in  the  sunshine,  but  the  sunshine  seemed  to  fol 
low  him.  There  was  a  visible  sympathy  between 
him  and  it. 

Jan.  2,  1842.  The  ringing  of  the  church 
bell  is  a  much  more  melodious  sound  than  any 
that  is  heard  within  the  church.  All  great 
values  are  thus  public,  and  undulate  like  sound 
through  the  atmosphere.  Wealth  cannot  pur 
chase  any  great  private  solace  or  convenience. 
Riches  are  only  the  means  of  sociality.  I  will 
depend  on  the  extravagance  of  my  neighbors 
for  my  luxuries ;  they  will  take  care  to  pamper 
me,  if  I  will  be  overfed.  The  poor  man,  who 
sacrificed  nothing  for  the  gratification,  seems  to 
derive  a  safer  and  more  natural  enjoyment  from 
his  neighbor's  extravagance  than  he  does  him 
self.  It  is  a  new  natural  product,  from  the  con 
templation  of  which  he  derives  new  vigor  and 
solace  as  from  a  natural  phenomenon. 

In  moments  of  quiet  and  leisure  my  thoughts 
are  more  apt  to  revert  to  some  natural  than  to 
any  human  relation. 


96  WINTER. 

Chaucer's  sincere  sorrow  in  his  latter  days  for 
the  grossness  of  his  earlier  works,  and  that  he 
"  cannot  recall  and  annul  "  what  he  had  "  writ 
ten  of  the  base  and  filthy  love  of  men  towards 
women,  but  alas,  they  are  now  continued  from 
man  to  man,"  says  he,  "  and  I  cannot  do  what  I 
desire,"  is  all  very  creditable  to  his  character. 

Jan.  2, 1853.  9  A.  M.  Down  railroad  to  Cliffs. 
A  clear  day,  a  pure  sky  with  cirrhi.  In  this  clear 
air  and  bright  sunlight,  the  ice-covered  trees 
have  a  new  beauty,  especially  the  birches  along 
under  the  edge  of  Warren's  wood  on  each  side 
of  the  railroad,  bent  quite  to  the  ground  in  every 
kind  of  curve.  At  a  distance,  as  you  are  ap 
proaching  them  endwise,  they  look  like  the  white 
tents  of  Indians  under  the  edge  of  the  wood. 
The  birch  is  thus  remarkable,  perhaps,  from  the 
feathery  form  of  the  tree,  whose  numerous  small 
branches  sustain  so  great  weight,  bending  it  to 
the  ground  ;  and,  moreover,  because,  from  the 
color  of  the  bark,  the  core  is  less  observable. 
The  oaks  not  only  are  less  pliant  in  the  trunk, 
but  have  fewer  and  stiff er  twigs  and  branches. 
The  birches  droop  over  in  all  directions,  like 
ostrich  feathers.  Most  wood  paths  are  impass 
able  now  to  a  carriage,  almost  to  a  foot  traveler, 
from  the  number  of  saplings  and  boughs  bent 
over  even  to  the  ground  in  them.  Both  sides  of 
the  deep  cut  shine  in  the  sun  as  if  silver-plated, 


WINTER.  97 

and  the  fine  spray  of  a  myriad  bushes  on  the 
edge  of  the  bank  sparkle  like  silver.  The  tele 
graph  wire  is  coated  to  ten  times  its  size,  and 
looks  like  a  slight  fence  scalloping  along  at  a 
distance.  .  .  .  When  we  climb  the  bank  at 
Stow's  wood-lot  and  come  upon  the  piles  of 
freshly  split  white  pine  wood  (for  he  is  ruth 
lessly  laying  it  waste),  the  transparent  ice,  like 
a  thick  varnish,  beautifully  exhibits  the  color 
of  the  clear,  tender,  yellowish  wood,  pumpkin 
pine  (?),  and  its  grain.  We  pick  our  way  over 
a  bed  of  pine  boughs  a  foot  or  two  deep,  cover 
ing  the  ground,  each  twig  and  needle  thickly  in- 
crusted  with  ice,  one  vast  gelid  mass,  which  our 
feet  crunch,  as  if  we  were  walking  through  the 
cellar  of  some  confectioner  to  the  gods.  The 
invigorating  scent  of  the  recently  cut  pines 
refreshes  us,  if  that  is  any  atonement  for  this 
devastation.  .  .  .  Especially  now  do  I  notice  the 
hips,  barberries,  and  winter-berries  for  their  red. 
The  red  or  purplish  catkins  of  the  alders  are  in 
teresting  as  a  winter  fruit,  and  also  of  the  birch. 
But  few  birds  about.  Apparently  their  gran 
aries  are  locked  up  in  ice,  with  which  the  grasses 
and  buds  are  coated.  Even  far  in  the  horizon 
the  pine  tops  are  turned  to  fir  or  spruce  by  the 
weight  of  the  ice  bending  them  down,  so  that 
they  look  like  a  spruce  swamp.  No  two  trees 
wear  the  ice  alike.  The  short  plumes  and  needles 


98  WINTER. 

of  the  spruce  make  a  very  pretty  and  peculiar 
figure.  I  see  some  oaks  in  the  distance,  which, 
from  their  branches  being  curved  and  arched 
downward  and  massed,  are  turned  into  perfect 
elms,  which  suggests  that  this  is  the  peculiarity 
of  the  elm.  Few,  if  any,  other  trees  are  thus 
wisp-like,  the  branches  gracefully  drooping.  I 
mean  some  slender  red  and  white  oaks  which 
have  been  recently  left  in  a  clearing.  Just 
apply  a  weight  to  the  end  of  the  boughs  which 
will  cause  them  to  droop,  and  to  each  particular 
twig  which  will  mass  them  together,  and  you 
have  perfect  elms.  Seen  at  the  right  angle,  each 
ice-incrusted  blade  of  stubble  shines  like  a  prism 
with  some  color  of  the  rainbow,  intense  blue,  or 
violet,  and  red.  The  smooth  field,  clad  the  other 
day  with  a  low  wiry  grass,  is  now  converted  into 
rough  stubble  land,  where  you  walk  with  crunch 
ing  feet.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  trees  can 
ever  recover  from  the  burden  which  bends  them 
to  the  ground.  I  should  like  to  weigh  a  limb 
of  this  pitch  pine.  The  character  of  the  tree  is 
changed.  I  have  now  passed  the  bars,  and  am 
approaching  the  Cliffs.  The  forms  and  variety 
of  the  ice  are  particularly  rich  here,  there  are 
so  many  low  bushes  and  weeds  before  me  as  I 
ascend  toward  the  sun,  especially  very  small 
white  pines  almost  merged  in  the  ice-incrusted 
ground.  All  objects  are  to  the  eye  polished 


WINTER.  99 

silver.  It  is  a  perfect  land  of  faery.  Le  Jeune 
describes  the  same  in  Canada  in  1636 :  "  Nos 
grands  bois  ne  paroissoient  qu'une  forest  de 
cristal."  .  .  .  The  bells  are  particularly  sweet 
this  morning.  I  hear  more,  methinks,  than  ever 
before.  .  .  .  Men  obey  their  call  and  go  to  the 
stove-warmed  church,  though  God  exhibits  him 
self  to  the  walker  in  a  frosted  bush  to-day  as 
much  as  he  did  in  a  burning  one  to  Moses  of 
old.  We  build  a  fire  on  the  Cliffs.  When 
kicking  to  pieces  a  pine  stump  for  the  fat  knots 
which  alone  would  burn  this  icy  day,  at  the  risk 
of  spoiling  my  boots,  having  looked  in  vain  for 
a  stone,  I  thought  how  convenient  would  be  an 
Indian  stone  axe  to  batter  it  with.  The  bark  of 
white  birch,  though  covered  with  ice,  burned 
well.  We  soon  had  a  roaring  fire  of  fat  pine  on 
a  shelf  of  rock  from  which  we  overlooked  the 
icy  landscape.  The  sun,  too,  was  melting  the 
ice  on  the  rocks,  and  the  water  was  purling 
downwards  in  dark  bubbles  exactly  like  polly- 
wogs.  What  a  good  word  is  flame,  expressing 
the  form  and  soul  of  fire,  lambent,  with  forked 
tongue !  We  lit  a  fire  to  see  it,  rather  than  to 
feel  it,  it  is  so  rare  a  sight  these  days.  It  seems 
good  to  have  our  eyes  ache  once  more  with 
smoke.  What  a  peculiar,  indescribable  color 
has  this  flame  !  —  a  reddish  or  lurid  yellow,  not 
so  splendid  or  full  of  light  as  of  life  and  heat. 


100  WINTER. 

These  fat  roots  made  much  flame  and  a  very 
black  smoke,  commencing  where  the  flame  left 
off,  which  cast  fine  flickering  shadows  on  the 
rocks.  There  was  some  bluish-white  smoke  from 
the  rotten  part  of  the  wood.  Then  there  was 
the  fine  white  ashes  which  farmers'  wives  some 
times  use  for  pearlash. 

Jan.  2,  1854.  ...  The  tints  of  the  sunset 
sky  are  never  purer  and  more  ethereal  than  in 
the  coldest  winter  days.  This  evening,  though 
the  colors  are  not  brilliant,  the  sky  is  crystal 
line,  and  the  pale  fawn-tinged  clouds  are  very 
beautiful.  I  wish  to  get  on  to  a  hill  to  look 
down  on  the  winter  landscape.  We  go  about 
these  days  as  if  we  were  in  fetters ;  we  walk  in 
the  stocks,  stepping  into  the  holes  made  by  our 
predecessors.  .  .  .  The  team  and  driver  have 
long  since  gone  by,  but  I  see  the  marks  of  his 
whiplash  on  the  snow,  its  recoil ;  but,  alas ! 
these  are  not  a  complete  tally  of  the  strokes 
which  fell  upon  the  oxen's  back.  The  unmerci 
ful  driver  thought,  perhaps,  that  no  one  saw  him, 
but  unwittingly  he  recorded  each  blow  on  the 
unspotted  snow  behind  his  back  as  in  a  book  of 
life.  To  more  searching  eyes  the  marks  of  his 
lash  are  in  the  air.  I  paced  partly  through  the 
pitch-pine  wood,  and  partly  the  open  field  from 
the  turnpike  by  the  Lee  place  to  the  railroad  from 
N.  to  S.,  more  than  one  fourth  of  a  mile,  meas- 


WINTER.  101 

uring  at  every  ten  paces.  The  average  of  sixty- 
five  measurements  up  hill  and  down  was  nine 
teen  inches.  This,  after  increasing  those  in  the 
woods  by  one  inch  (little  enough),  on  account 
of  the  snow  on  the  pines.  ...  I  think  one 
would  have  to  pace  a  mile  on  a  N.  and  S.  line, 
up  and  down  hill,  through  woods  and  fields,  to 
get  a  quite  reliable  result.  The  snow  will  drift 
sometimes  the  whole  width  of  a  field,  and  fill  a 
road  or  valley  beyond,  so  that  it  would  be  well 
your  measuring  included  several  such  driftings. 
Very  little  reliance  is  to  be  put  on  the  usual 
estimates  of  the  depth  of  snow.  I  have  heard 
different  men  set  this  snow  at  six,  fifteen,  eight 
een,  twenty-four,  thirty -six,  and  forty -eight 
inches.  My  snow-shoes  sank  about  four  inches 
into  the  snow  this  morning,  but  more  than  twice 
as  much  the  29th. 

On  the  N.  side  of  the  railroad,  above  the  Red 
House  crossing,  the  train  has  cut  through  a 
drift  about  one  fourth  of  a  mile  long,  and  two 
to  nine  feet  high,  straight  up  and  down.  It  re 
minds  me  of  the  Highlands,  the  Pictured  Eocks, 
the  side  of  an  iceberg,  etc.  Now  that  the  sun 
has  just  sunk  below  the  horizon,  it  is  wonderful 
what  an  amount  of  soft  light  it  appears  to  be 
absorbing.  There  appears  to  be  more  day  just 
here  by  its  side  than  anywhere  else.  I  can  al 
most  see  to  a  depth  of  six  inches  into  it.  It  is 
made  translucent,  it  is  so  saturated  with  light. 


102  WINTER. 

I  have  heard  of  one  precious  stone  found  in 
Concord,  the  cinnamon  stone.  A  geologist  has 
spoken  of  it  as  found  in  this  town,  antl  a  farmer 
described  to  me  one  he  once  found,  perhaps  the 
same  referred  to  by  the  other.  He  said  it  was 
as  large  as  a  brick,  and  as  thick,  and  yet  you 
could  distinguish  a  pin  through  it,  it  was  so 
transparent. 

Jan.  2,  1855.  .  .  .  Yesterday  [skating]  we 
saw  the  pink  light  on  the  snow  within  a  rod  of 
us.  The  shadows  of  the  bridges,  etc.,  on  the 
snow  were  a  dark  indigo  blue. 

Jan.  2, 1859.  .  .  .  Going  up  the  hill  through 
Stow's  young  oak  wood-land,  I  listen  to  the 
sharp,  dry  rustle  of  the  withered  oak  leaves. 
This  is  the  voice  of  the  wood  now.  It  would  be 
comparatively  still  and  more  dreary  here  in 
other  respects,  if  it  were  not  for  these  leaves 
that  hold  on.  It  sounds  like  the  roar  of  the 
sea,  and  is  inspiriting  like  that,  suggesting  how 
all  the  land  is  sea-coast  to  the  aerial  ocean.  It 
is  the  sound  of  the  surf,  the  rut,  of  an  unseen 
ocean,  —  billows  of  air  breaking  on  the  forest, 
like  water  on  itself  or  on  sand  and  rocks.  It 
rises  and  falls,  swells  and  dies  away,  with  agree 
able  alternation,  as  the  sea  surf  does.  Perhaps 
the  landsmen  can  foretell  a  storm  by  it.  It  is 
remarkable  how  universal  these  grand  murmurs 
are,  these  backgrounds  of  sound,  —  the  surf, 


WINTER.  103 

the  wind  in  the  forest,  waterfalls,  etc.,  — which 
yet  to  the  ear  and  in  their  origin  are  essentially 
one  voice,  the  earth  voice,  the  breathing  or 
snoring  of  the  creature.  The  earth  is  our  ship, 
and  this  is  the  sound  of  the  wind  in  her  rigging 
as  we  sail.  Just  as  the  inhabitant  of  Cape  Cod 
hears  the  surf  ever  breaking  on  its  shores,  so  we 
countrymen  hear  this  kindred  surf  on  the  leaves 
of  the  forest.  Regarded  as  a  voice,  though  it 
is  not  articulate,  as  our  articulate  sounds  are 
divided  into  vowels  (though  this  is  nearer  a 
consonant  sound),  labials,  dentals,  palatals,  sibi 
lants,  mutes,  aspirates,  etc.,  so  this  may  be 
called  folial  or  frondal,  produced  by  air  driven 
against  the  leaves,  and  comes  nearest  to  our 
sibilants  or  aspirates. 

Michaux  said  that  white  oaks  might  be  dis 
tinguished  by  retaining  their  leaves  in  the  win 
ter,  but  as  far  as  my  observation  goes  they 
cannot  be  so  distinguished.  All  our  large  oaks 
may  retain  a  few  leaves  at  the  base  of  the  lower 
limbs  and  about  the  trunk,  though  only  a  few, 
and  the  white  oak  scarcely  more  than  the  others ; 
while  the  same  trees,  when  young,  are  all  alike 
thickly  clothed  in  the  winter,  but  the  leaves  of 
the  white  oak  are  the  most  withered  and  shriv 
eled  of  them  all. 

There  being  some  snow  on  the  ground,  I  can 
easily  distinguish  the  forest  on  the  mountains 


104  WINTER. 

(the  Peterboro  Hills,  etc.),  and  tell  which  are 
forested,  those  parts  and  those  mountains  being 
dark,  like  a  shadow.  I  cannot  distinguish  the 
forest  thus  far  in  summer. 

When  I  hear  the  hypercritical  quarreling 
about  grammar  and  style,  the  position  of  the 
particles,  etc.,  etc.,  stretching  or  contracting 
every  speaker  to  certain  rules,  —  Mr.  Webster, 
perhaps,  not  having  spoken  according  to  Mr. 
Kirkham's  rule,  —  I  see  they  forget  that  the 
first  requisite  and  rule  is  that  expression  shall 
be  vital  and  natural,  as  much  as  the  voice  of  a 
brute,  or  an  interjection :  first  of  all,  mother 
tongue ;  and  last  of  all,  artificial  or  father 
tongue.  Essentially,  your  truest  poetic  sentence 
is  as  free  and  lawless  as  a  lamb's  bleat.  The 
grammarian  is  often  one  who  can  neither  cry 
nor  laugh,  yet  thinks  he  can  express  human  emo 
tions.  So  the  posture-masters  tell  you  how  you 
shall  walk,  turning  your  toes  out  excessively, 
perhaps;  but  so  the  beautiful  walkers  are  not 
made.  .  .  . 

Minott  says  that  a  fox  will  lead  a  dog  on  to 
the  ice  in  order  that  he  may  get  in.  Tells  of 
Jake  Lakin  losing  a  hound  so,  which  went  under 
the  ice  and  was  drowned  below  the  Holt.  .  .  . 
They  used  to  cross  the  river  there  on  the  ice, 
going  to  market  formerly. 

Jan.  3,  1842.     It  is  pleasant  when  one  can 


WINTER.  105 

relieve  the  grossness  of  the  kitchen  and  the  table 
by  the  simple  beauty  of  his  repast,  so  that  there 
may  be  anything  in  it  to  attract  the  eye  of  the 
artist,  even.  I  have  been  popping  corn  to-night, 
which  is  only  a  more  rapid  blossoming  of  the 
seed  under  a  greater  than  July  heat.  The 
popped  corn  is  a  perfect  winter  flower,  hinting 
of  anemones  and  houstonias.  .  .  .  Here  has 
bloomed  for  my  repast  such  a  delicate  flower  as 
will  soon  spring  by  the  wall  sides,  and  this  is 
as  it  should  be.  Why  should  not  Nature  revel 
sometimes,  and  genially  relax,  and  make  herself 
familiar  at  my  board  ?  I  would  have  my  house 
a  bower  fit  to  entertain  her.  It  is  a  feast  of 
such  innocence  as  might  have  snowed  down  ;  on 
my  warm  hearth  sprang  these  cerealian  blos 
soms  ;  here  was  the  bank  where  they  grew.  Me- 
thinks  some  such  visible  token  of  approval 
would  always  accompany  the  simple  and  healthy 
repast,  —  some  such  smiling  or  blessing  upon  it. 
Our  appetite  should  always  be  so  related  to  our 
taste,  and  our  board  be  an  epitome  of  the  pri 
meval  table  which  Nature  sets  by  hill  and  wood 
arid  stream  for  her  dumb  pensioners. 
/  Jan.  3,  1852.  ...  A  spirit  sweeps  the  string 
of  the  telegraph  harp,  and  strains  of  music  are 
drawn  out  suddenly,  like  the  wire  itself.  .  .  . 
What  becomes  of  the  story  of  a  tortoise  shell  on 
the  seashore  now?  The  world  is  young,  and 


106  WINTER. 

music  is  its  infant  voice.  I  do  not  despair  of  a 
world  where  you  have  only  to  stretch  an  ordi 
nary  wire  from  tree  to  tree  to  hear  such  strains 
drawn  from  it  by  New  England  breezes  as  make 
Greece  and  all  antiquity  seem  poor  in  melody. 
Why  was  man  so  made  as  to  be  thrilled  to  his 
inmost  being  by  the  vibrating  of  a  wire  ?  Are 
not  inspiration  and  ecstasy  a  more  rapid  vibra 
tion  of  the  nerves  swept  by  the  inrushing  ex 
cited  spirit,  whether  zephyral  or  boreal  in  its 
character  ? 

Jan.  3,  1853.  ...  I  love  Nature  partly  be 
cause  she  is  not  man,  but  a  retreat  from  him. 
None  of  his  institutions  control  or  pervade  her. 
Here  a  different  kind  of  right  prevails.  In  her 
midst  I  can  be  glad  with  an  entire  gladness.  If 
this  world  were  all  man,  I  could  not  stretch  my 
self.  I  should  lose  all  hope.  He  is  constraint ; 
she  is  freedom  to  me.  He  makes  me  wish  for 
another  world  ;  she  makes  me  content  with  this. 
None  of  the  joys  she  supplies  is  subject  to  his 
rules  and  definitions.  What  he  touches  he 
taints.  In  thought  he  moralizes.  One  would 
think  that  no  free,  joyful  labor  was  possible  to 
him.  How  infinite  and  pure  the  least  pleasure 
of  which  nature  is  basis  compared  with  the  con 
gratulation  of  mankind !  The  joy  which  nature 
yields  is  like  that  afforded  by  the  frank  words  of 
one  we  love. 


WINTER.  107 

Man,  man  is  the  devil, 
The  source  of  all  evil. 

Methinks  these  prosers,  with  their  saws  and 
their  laws,  do  not  know  how  glad  a  man  can 
be.  What  wisdom,  what  warning,  can  prevail 
against  gladness?  There  is  no  law  so  strong 
which  a  little  gladness  may  not  transgress.  I 
have  a  room  all  to  myself.  It  is  nature.  It  is 
a  place  beyond  the  jurisdiction  of  human  govern 
ments.  Pile  up  your  books,  the  records  of  sad 
ness,  your  saws  and  your  laws,  Nature  is  glad 
outside,  and  her  many  worms  within  will  ere 
long  topple  them  down.  .  .  .  Nature  is  a  prairie 
for  outlaws.  There  are  two  worlds,  —  the  post- 
office  and  nature.  I  know  them  both.  I  con 
tinually  forget  mankind  and  their  institutions, 
as  I  do  a  bank. 

Jan.  3,  1856.  It  is  astonishing  how  far  a 
merely  well-dressed  and  good  looking  man  may 
go  without  being  challenged  by  a  sentinel.  What 
is  called  good  society  will  bid  high  for  such. 

The  man  whom  the  state  has  raised  to  high 
office,  like  that  of  governor,  for  instance,  from 
some,  it  may  be,  honest  but  less  respected  call 
ing,  cannot  return  to  his  former  humble  but 
profitable  pursuits,  his  old  customers  will  be  so 
shy  of  him.  His  ex-honorableness  stands  seri 
ously  in  his  way,  whether  he  be  a  lawyer  or  a 
shopkeeper.  He  can't  get  ex-honorated.  So  he 


108  WINTER. 

becomes  a  sort  of  state  pauper,  an  object  of 
charity  on  its  hands,  which  the  state  is  bound  in 
honor  to  see  through  and  provide  with  offices  of 
similar  respectability,  that  he  may  not  come  to 
want.  The  man  who  has  been  president  be 
comes  the  ex-president,  and  can't  travel  or  stay 
at  home  anywhere,  but  men  will  persist  in  pay 
ing  respect  to  his  ex-ship.  It  is  cruel  to  remem 
ber  his  deeds  so  long.  When  his  time  is  out, 
why  can't  they  let  the  poor  fellow  go  ? 

Jan.  3,  1861.  Why  should  the  ornamental 
tree  society  confine  its  labors  to  the  highway 
only?  An  Englishman  laying  out  his  ground 
does  not  regard  simply  the  avenues  and  walks. 
Does  not  the  landscape  deserve  attention  ? 
What  are  the  natural  features  which  make  a 
township  handsome?  A  river,  with  its  water 
falls  and  meadows,  a  lake,  a  hill,  a  cliff  or  indi 
vidual  rocks,  a  forest,  and  ancient  trees  standing 
singly.  Such  things  are  beautiful ;  they  have  a 
high  use  which  dollars  and  cents  never  repre 
sent.  If  the  inhabitants  of  a  town  were  wise, 
they  would  seek  to  preserve  these  things,  though 
at  a  considerable  expense  ;  for  such  things  edu 
cate  far  more  than  any  hired  teachers,  preach 
ers,  or  any  system  of  school  education  at  present 
organized.  Far  the  handsomest  thing  I  saw  in 
Boxboro  was  its  noble  oak  wood.  I  doubt  if 
there  is  a  finer  one  in  Massachusetts.  Let  the 


WINTER.  109 

town  keep  it  a  century  longer,  and  men  will 
make  pilgrimages  to  it  from  all  parts  of  the 
country.  And.  yet  it  would  be  very  like  the  rest 
of  New  England  if  Boxboro  were  ashamed  of 
that  wood-land.  I  have  since  learned,  however, 
that  she  is  contented  to  let  that  forest  stand,  in 
stead  of  the  houses  and  farms  that  might  sup 
plant  it,  because  the  land  pays  a  much  larger 
tax  to  the  town  now  than  it  would  then.  I  said 
to  myself,  if  the  history  of  the  town  is  written, 
the  chief  stress  is  probably  laid  on  its  parish, 
and  there  is  not  one  word  about  the  forest  in  it. 
It  would  be  worth  while  if  in  each  town  a  com 
mittee  were  appointed  to  see  that  the  beauty  of 
the  town  received  no  detriment.  If  we  have  the 
biggest  bowlder  in  the  country,  then  it  should 
not  belong  to  an  individual,  nor  be  made  into 
a  door- step.  As  in  many  countries  precious 
metals  belong  to  the  crown,  so  here  more  pre 
cious  natural  objects  of  rare  beauty  should  be 
long  to  the  public.  Not  only  the  channel,  but 
both  banks  of  every  river  should  be  a  public 
highway.  It  is  not  the  only  use  of  a  river,  to 
float  on  it.  Think  of  a  mountain  top  in  the 
township,  even  to  the  minds  of  the  Indians  a 
sacred  place,  only  accessible  through  private 
grounds,  —  a  temple,  as  it  were,  which  you  can 
not  enter  except  at  the  risk  of  letting  out  or  let 
ting  in  somebody's  cattle,  —  in  fact  the  temple 


WINTER. 

itself  in  this  case  private  property,  and  standing 
in  a  man's  cow-yard.  New  Hampshire  courts 
have  lately  been  deciding,  as  if  it  were  for 
them  to  decide,  whether  the  top  of  Mt.  Washing 
ton  belonged  to  A.  or  to  B.,  and  it  being  decided 
in  favor  of  B.,  as  I  hear,  he  went  up  one  winter 
with  the  proper  officers  and  took  formal  posses 
sion.  But  I  think  that  the  top  of  Mt.  Wash 
ington  should  not  be  private  property ;  it  should 
be  but  an  opportunity  for  modesty  and  rever 
ence,  or  if  only  to  suggest  that  earth  has  higher 
uses  than  we  commonly  put  her  to.  ... 

Thus  we  behave  like  oxen  in  a  flower  garden. 
The  true  fruit  of  nature  can  only  be  plucked 
with  a  delicate  hand  not  bribed  by  any  earthly 
reward,  and  a  fluttering  heart.  No  hired  man 
can  help  us  to  gather  this  crop.  How  few  ever 
get  beyond  feeding,  clothing,  sheltering,  and 
warming  themselves  in  this  world,  and  begin  to 
treat  themselves  as  intellectual  and  moral  beings. 
.  .  .  Most  men,  it  seems  to  me,  do  not  care  for 
Nature,  and  would  sell  their  share  in  all  her 
beauty,  as  long  as  they  may  live,  for  a  stated 
sum.  Thank  God,  men  cannot  as  yet  fly,  and 
lay  waste  the  sky  as  well  as  the  earth.  We  are 
safe  on  that  side  for  the  present.  We  cut  down 
the  few  old  oaks  which  witnessed  the  transfer  of 
the  township  from  the  Indian  to  the  white  man, 
and  commence  our  museum  with  a  cartridge-box 
taken  from  a  British  soldier  in  1775. 


WINTER.  Ill 

Jan.  4,  1841.  I  know  a  woman  who  is  as 
true  to  me,  and  as  incessant  with  her  mild  re 
buke  as  the  blue  sky.  When  I  stand  under  her 
cope,  instantly  all  pretension  drops  off,  and  I  am 
swept  by  an  influence  as  by  a  wind  and  rain 
which  remove  all  taint,  I  am  fortunate  that  I 
can  pass  and  repass  before  her  each  day,  and 
prove  my  strength  in  her  glances.  She  is  far 
truer  to  me  than  to  herself.  Her  eyes  are  like 
the  windows  of  nature,  through  which  I  catch 
glimpses  of  the  native  land  of  the  soul.  From 
them  comes  a  light  which  is  not  of  the  sun.  His 
rays  are  in  eclipse  when  they  shine  on  me. 

Jan.  4,  1850.  The  longest  silence  is  the  most 
pertinent  question  most  pertinently  put.  Em 
phatically  silent.  The  most  important  ques 
tions,  whose  answers  concern  us  more  than  any 
others,  are  never  put  in  any  other  way. 

It  is  difficult  for  two  strangers,  mutually  well 
disposed,  so  truly  to  bear  themselves  toward  each 
other  that  a  feeling  of  falseness  and  hollowness 
shall  not  soon  spring  up  between  them.  The 
least  anxiety  to  behave  truly,  vitiates  the  rela 
tion. 

Jan.  4,  1853.  To  what  I  will  call  Yellow 
Birch  Swamp,  E.  Hubbard's,  in  the  north  part 
of  the  town,  .  .  .  west  of  the  Hunt  pasture. 
There  are  more  of  these  trees  in  it  than  any 
where  else  in  the  town  that  I  know.  How  pleas- 


112  WINTER. 

ing  to  stand  near  a  new  or  rare  tree ;  and  few 
are  so  handsome  as  this;  singularly  allied  to 
the  black  birch  in  its  sweet  checkerberry  scent 
and  its  form,  and  to  the  canoe  birch  in  its  peel 
ing  or  fringed  and  tasseled  bark.  The  top  is 
brush-like  as  in  the  black  birch.  The  bark  an 
exquisite  .  .  .  delicate  gold  color,  curled  off  partly 
from  the  trunk  with  vertical  clear  or  smooth 
spaces,  as  if  a  plane  had  been  passed  up  the 
tree.  The  sight  of  these  trees  affects  me  more 
than  California  gold.  I  measured  one  five  and 
two  twelfths  feet  in  circumference  at  six  feet 
from  the  ground.  We  have  the  silver  and  the 
golden  birch.  This  is  like  a  fair,  flaxen-haired 
sister  of  the  dark-complexioned  black  birch,  with 
golden  ringlets.  How  lustily  it  takes  hold  of 
the  swampy  soil  and  braces  itself.  And  here 
flows  a  dark  cherry-wood  or  wine-colored  brook 
over  the  iron-red  sands  in  the  sombre  swamp, 
swampy  wine.  In  an  undress,  this  tree.  Ah, 
the  time  will  come  when  these  will  be  all  gone. 
Among  the  primitive  trees.  What  sort  of  dryads 
haunt  these  ?  Blonde  nymphs.  Near  by,  the 
great  pasture  oaks  with  horizontal  boughs.  At 
Pratt's,  the  stupendous  boughy  branching  elm, 
like  vast  thunderbolts  stereotyped  upon  the  sky, 
heaven-defying,  sending  back  dark,  vegetable 
bolts,  as  if  flowing  back  in  the  channel  of  the 
lightning.  —  The  white  oaks  have  a  few  leaves 


WINTER.  113 

about  the  crown  of  the  trunk,  in  the  lower  part 
of  the  tree,  like  a  tree  within  a  tree.  The  tree 
is  thus  less  wracked  by  the  wind  and  ice.  —  In 
the  twilight  I  went  through  the  swamp,  and  the 
yellow  birches  sent  forth  a  yellow  gleam  which 
each  time  made  my  heart  beat  faster.  Occasion 
ally  you  come  to  a  dead  and  leaning  white  birch, 
beset  with  large  fungi  like  ears  or  little  shelves, 
with  a  rounded  edge  above.  I  walked  with  the 
yellow  birch.  The  prinos  is  green  within.  If 
there  were  Druids  whose  temples  were  the  oak 
groves,  my  temple  is  the  swamp.  Sometimes  I 
was  in  doubt  about  a  birch  whose  vest  was  but 
toned,  smooth  and  dark,  till  I  came  nearer  and 
saw  the  yellow  gleaming  through,  or  where  a 
button  was  off. 

Jan.  4,  1857.  .  .  .  After  spending  four  or 
five  days  surveying  and  drawing  a  plan,  inces 
santly,  I  especially  feel  the  need  of  putting  my 
self  in  communication  with  nature  again  to  re 
cover  my  tone,  to  withdraw  out  of  the  wearying 
and  unprofitable  world  of  affairs.  The  things  I 
have  been  doing  have  but  a  fleeting  and  acci 
dental  importance,  however  much  men  are  im 
mersed  in  them,  and  yield  very  little  valuable 
fruit.  I  would  fain  have  been  wading  through 
the  woods  and  fields,  and  conversing  with  the 
sane  snow.  Having  waded  in  the  very  shallowest 
stream  of  time,  I  would  now  bathe  my  temples 


114  WINTER. 

in  eternity.  I  wish  again  to  participate  in  the 
serenity  of  nature,  to  share  the  happiness  of  the 
river  and  the  woods.  I  thus  from  time  to  time 
break  off  my  connection  with  eternal  truths,  and 
go  with  the  shallow  stream  of  human  affairs, 
grinding  at  the  mill  of  the  Philistines.  But 
when  my  task  is  done,  with  never  -  failing  confi 
dence,  I  devote  myself  to  the  infinite  again.  It 
would  be  sweet  to  deal  with  men  more,  I  can 
imagine,  but  where  dwell  they?  Not  in  the 
fields  which  I  traverse. 

Jan.  4,  1858.  .  .  .  That  bright  and  warm  re 
flection  of  sunlight  from  the  insignificant  edging 
of  stubble  was  remarkable.  I  was  coming  down 
stream  over  the  meadow  on  the  ice,  within  four 
or  five  rods  of  the  eastern  shore,  the  sun  on  my 
left  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  above  the  hori 
zon.  The  ice  was  soft  and  sodden,  of  a  dull 
lead  color,  quite  dark  and  reflecting  no  light,  as 
I  looked  eastward,  but  my  eyes  caught,  by  acci 
dent,  a  singular,  sunny  brightness,  reflected  from 
the  narrow  border  of  stubble  only  three  or  four 
inches  high,  and  as  many  feet  wide  perhaps, 
which  rose  along  the  edge  of  the  ice  at  the  foot 
of  the  hill.  It  was  not  a  mere  brightening  of 
the  bleached  stubble,  but  the  warm  and  yellow 
light  of  the  sun,  which,  as  appeared,  it  was  pecul 
iarly  fitted  to  reflect.  It  was  that  amber  light 
from  the  west  which  we  sometimes  witness  after 


WINTER.  115 

a  storm,  concentrated  on  the  stubble,  for  the 
hill  beyond  was  merely  a  dark  russet,  spotted 
with  snow.  All  the  yellow  rays  seemed  to  be 
reflected  by  this  insignificant  stubble  alone,  and 
when  I  looked  more  generally  a  little  above  it,  see 
ing  it  with  the  under  part  of  my  eye,  .  .  .  the 
reflected  light  made  its  due  impression  .  .  .  sep 
arated  from  the  proper  color  of  the  stubble,  and 
it  glowed  almost  like  a  low,  steady,  and  serene 
fire.  It  was  precisely  as  if  the  sunlight  had 
mechanically  slid  over  the  ice,  and  lodged 
against  the  stubble.  It  will  be  enough  to  say  of 
something  warmly  and  sunnily  bright,  that  it 
glowed  like  lit  stubble.  It  was  remarkable  that 
looking  eastward  this  was  the  only  evidence  of 
the  light  in  the  west. 

Jan.  5,  1841.  I  grudge  to  the  record  that 
lavish  expenditure  of  love  and  grace  which  are 
due  rather  to  the  spoken  thought.  A  man 
writes  because  he  has  no  opportunity  to  speak. 
Why  should  he  be  the  only  mute  creature,  and 
his  speech  no  part  of  the  melody  of  the  grove  ? 
He  never  gladdens  the  ear  of  nature,  and  ushers 
in  no  spring  with  his  lays.  —  We  are  more  anx 
ious  to  speak  than  to  be  heard. 

Jan.  5, 1842.  I  find  that,  whatever  hindrances 
occur,  I  write  just  about  the  same  amount  of 
truth  in  my  journal,  for  the  record  is  more  con 
centrated,  and  usually  it  is  some  very  real  and 


116  .      WINTER. 

earnest  life  that  interrupts.  All  flourishes  are 
omitted.  If  I  saw  wood  from  morning  to  night, 
though  I  grieve  that  I  could  not  observe  the 
train  of  my  thoughts  during  that  time,  yet  in  the 
evening,  the  few  scrawled  lines  which  describe 
my  day's  occupation  will  make  the  creaking  of 
the  saw  more  musical  than  my  freest  fancies 
could  have  been.  .  .  . 

I  discover  in  Raleigh's  verses  the  vices  of  the 
courtier.  They  are  not  equally  sustained,  as  if 
his  noble  genius  were  warped  by  the  frivolous 
society  of  the  court.  He  was  capable  of  rising 
to  a  remarkable  elevation.  His  poetry  has  for 
the  most  part  a  heroic  tone  and  vigor,  as  of  a 
knight  errant.  But  again  there  seems  to  have 
been  somewhat  unkindly  in  his  education,  as  if 
he  had  by  no  means  grown  up  to  be  the  man  he 
promised.  He  was  apparently  too  genial  and 
loyal  a  soul,  or  rather  he  was  incapable  of  resist 
ing  temptation  from  that  quarter.  If  to  his 
genius  and  culture  he  could  have  added  the  tem 
perament  of  Fox  or  Cromwell,  the  world  would 
have  had  cause  longer  to  remember  him.  .  .  . 
One  would  have  said  it  was  by  some  lucky  fate 
that  he  and  Shakespeare  flourished  at  the 
same  time  in  England,  and  yet  what  do  we  know 
of  their  acquaintanceship  ? 

Jan.  5,  1852.  To-day  the  trees  are  white 
with  snow,  —  I  mean  their  stems  and  branches,  — 


WINTER.  117 

and  have  the  true  wintry  look  on  the  storm  side. 
Not  till  this  has  winter  come  to  the  forest.  It 
looks  like  the  small  frost-work  in  the  path  and 
on  the  windows  now,  especially  the  oak  woods  at 
a  distance,  and  you  see  better  the  form  which 
the  branches  take.  That  is  a  picture  of  winter; 
and  now  you  may  put  a  cottage  under  the  trees 
and  roof  it  with  snow-drifts,  and  let  the  smoke 
curl  up  amid  the  boughs  in  the  morning. 

It  was  a  dark  day,  the  heavens  shut  out  with 
dense  snow  clouds,  and  the  trees  wetting  me 
with  the  melting  snow,  when  going  through 

B 's  wood  on  Fair  Haven,  which  they  are 

cutting  off,  and  suddenly  looking  between  the 
stems  of  the  trees,  I  thought  I  saw  an  extensive 
fire  in  the  western  horizon.  It  was  a  bright, 
coppery  yellow  fair  weather  cloud  along  the  edge 
of  the  horizon,  gold  with  some  alloy  of  copper, 
in  such  contrast  with  the  remaining  clouds  as  to 
suggest  nothing;  less  than  fire.  On  that  side, 
the  clouds  which  covered  our  day,  low  in  the 
horizon,  with  a  dim  and  smoke-like  edge,  were 
rolled  up  like  a  curtain  with  heavy  folds,  reveal 
ing  this  further  bright  curtain  beyond. 

Jan.  5,  1854.  .  .  .  This  afternoon,  as  prob 
ably  yesterday,  it  being  warm  and  thawing, 
though  fair,  the  snow  is  covered  with  snow  fleas. 
Especially  they  are  sprinkled  like  pepper  for 
half  a  mile  in  the  tracks  of  a  wood -chopper  in 


118  WINTER. 

deep  snow.  With  the  first  thawing-  weather 
they  come.  —  There  is  also  some  blueness  now 
in  the  snow,  the  heavens  being  toward  night 
overcast.  The  blueness  is  more  distinct  after 
sunset. 

Jan.  5,  1855.  [Worcester.]  A.  M.  Walked 
to  southerly  end  of  Quinsigamond  Pond  via 
Quinsigamond  Village,  and  returned  by  floating 
bridge.  Saw  the  straw-built  wigwam  of  an  In 
dian  from  St.  Louis  (Rapids?),  Canada,  appar 
ently  a  half-breed.  Not  being  able  to  buy 
straw,  he  had  made  it  chiefly  of  dry  grass  which 
he  had  cut  in  a  meadow  with  his  knife.  It  was 
against  a  bank,  and  partly  of  earth  all  round. 
The  straw  or  grass  laid  on  horizontal  poles,  and 
kept  down  by  similar  ones  outside,  like  our 
thatching.  Makes  them  of  straw  often  in  Can 
ada,  can  make  one,  if  he  has  the  straw,  in  one 
day.  The  door,  on  hinges,  was  of  straw  also, 
put  on  perpendicularly,  pointed  at  top  to  fit  the 
roof.  The  roof  steep,  six  or  eight  inches  thick. 
He  was  making  baskets,  wholly  of  sugar  maple ; 
could  find  no  black  ash.  Sewed  or  bound  the 
edge  with  maple  also.  Did  not  look  up  once 
while  we  were  there.  There  was  a  fire-place  of 
stone  running  out  on  one  side,  and  covered  with 
earth.  It  was  the  nest  of  a  large  meadow 
mouse.  Had  he  ever  hunted  moose  ?  When  he 
was  down  at  Green  Island.  Where  was  that  ? 


WINTER.  119 

Oh,  far  down,  very  far  ;  caught  seals  there.  No 
books  down  that  way.  .  .  . 

R.  W.  E.  told  of  Mr.  Hill,  his  classmate,  of 
Bangor,  who  was  much  interested  in  my  "  Wai- 
den,"  but  relished  it  merely  as  a  capital  satire 
and  joke,  and  even  thought  that  the  survey  and 
map  of  the  pond  were  not  real,  but  a  caricature 
of  the  Coast  Survey. 

Jan.  5,  1856.  .  .  .  The  thin  snow  now  driv 
ing  from  the  north  and  lodging  on  my  coat  con 
sists  of  those  beautiful  star  crystals,  not  cottony 
and  chubby  spokes  as  on  the  13th  of  December, 
but  thin  and  partly  transparent  crystals.  They 
are  about  one  tenth  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  per 
fect  little  wheels  with  six  spokes,  without  a  tire, 
or  rather  with  six  perfect  little  leaflets,  fern-like, 
with  a  distinct,  straight,  slender,  midrib,  raying 
from  the  centre.  On  each  side  of  each  midrib 
there  is  a  transparent,  thin  blade  with  a  crenate 
edge.  How  full  of  the  creative  genius  is  the  air 
in  which  these  are  generated  !  I  should  hardly 
admire  more,  if  real  stars  fell  and  lodged  on  my 
coat.  Nature  is  full  of  genius,  full  of  the  divin 
ity,  so  that  not  a  snow-flake  escapes  its  fashion 
ing  hand.  Nothing  is  cheap  and  coarse,  neither 
dew-drops  nor  snow-flakes.  Soon  the  storm  in 
creases  (it  was  already  very  severe  to  face),  and 
the  snow  comes  finer,  more  white  and  powdery. 
—  Who  knows  but  this  is  the  original  form  of 


120  WINTER. 

all  snow-flakes,  but  that,  when  I  observe  these 
crystal  stars  falling  around  me,  they  are  only 
just  generated  in  the  low  mist  next  the  earth. 
I  am  nearer  to  the  source  of  the  snow,  its  primal, 
auroral,  and  golden  hour  or  infancy  ;  commonly 
the  flakes  reach  us  travel-worn  and  agglomer 
ated,  comparatively  without  order  or  beauty,  far 
down  in  their  fall,  like  men  in  their  advanced 
age.  As  for  the  circumstances  under  which 
this  phenomenon  occurs,  it  is  quite  cold,  and  the 
driving  storm  is  bitter  to  face,  though  very  little 
snow  is  falling.  It  comes  almost  horizontally 
from  the  north.  ...  A  divinity  must  have  stirred 
within  them,  before  the  crystals  did  thus  shoot 
and  set.  Wheels  of  the  storm  chariots.  The 
same  law  that  shapes  the  earth  and  the  stars 
shapes  the  snow-flake.  Call  it  rather  snow  star. 
As  surely  as  the  petals  of  a  flower  are  numbered, 
each  of  these  countless  snow  stars  comes  whirl 
ing  to  earth,  pronouncing  thus  with  emphasis 
the  number  six,  order,  KOO-//.O?.  This  was  the  be 
ginning  of  a  storm  which  reached  far  and  wide, 
and  elsewhere  was  more  severe  than  here.  On 
the  Saskatchewan,  where  no  man  of  science  is 
present  to  behold,  still  down  they  come,  and  not 
the  less  fulfill  their  destiny,  perchance  melt  at 
once  on  the  Indian's  face.  What  a  world  we 
live  in,  where  myriads  of  these  little  disks,  so 
beautiful  to  the  most  prying  eye,  are  whirled 


WINTER.  121 

down  on  every  traveler's  coat,  the  observant  and 
the  unobservant,  on  the  restless  squirrel's  fur, 
on  the  far-stretching  fields  and  forests,  the 
wooded  dells  and  the  mountain  tops.  Far,  far 
away  from  the  haunts  of  men,  they  roll  down 
some  little  slope,  fall  over  and  come  to  their 
bearings,  and  melt  or  lose  their  beauty  in  the 
mass,  ready  anon  to  swell  some  little  rill  with 
their  contribution,  and  so,  at  last,  the  universal 
ocean  from  which  they  came.  There  they  lie, 
like  the  wreck  of  chariot  wheels  after  a  battle  in 
the  skies.  Meanwhile  the  meadow  mouse  shoves 
them  aside  in  his  gallery,  the  school -boy  casts 
them  in  his  snow-ball,  or  the  woodman's  sled 
glides  smoothly  over  them,  these  glorious  span 
gles,  the  sweepings  of  heaven's  floor.  And 
they  all  sing,  melting  as  they  sing,  of  the  myster 
ies  of  the  number  six;  six,  six,  six.  He  takes 
up  the  waters  of  the  sea  in  his  hand,  leaving  the 
salt ;  he  disperses  it  in  mist  through  the  skies  ; 
he  re-collects  and  sprinkles  it  like  grain  in  six- 
rayed  snowy  stars  over  the  earth,  there  to  lie  till 
he  dissolves  its  bonds  again. 

Jan.  5,  1859.  As  I  go  over  the  causeway 
near  the  railroad  bridge,  I  hear  a  fine,  busy 
twitter,  and  looking  up,  see  a  nuthatch  hopping 
along  and  about  a  swamp  white  oak  branch,  in 
specting  every  side  of  it,  as  readily  hanging 
head  downwards  as  standing  upright,  and  then 


122  WINTER. 

it  utters  a  distinct  quah,  as  if  to  attract  a  com 
panion.  Indeed,  that  other  finer  twitter  seemed 
designed  to  keep  some  companion  in  tow,  or  else 
it  was  like  a  very  busy  man  talking  to  himself. 
The  companion  was  a  single  chickadee,  which 
lisped  six  or  eight  feet  off.  There  were  perhaps 
no  other  birds  than  these  within  a  quarter  of 
a  mile.  When  the  nuthatch  flitted  to  another 
tree  two  rods  off,  the  chickadee  unfailingly  fol 
lowed. 

Jan.  5,  1860.  ...  A  man  receives  only  what 
he  is  ready  to  receive,  whether  physically,  or  in 
tellectually,  or  morally,  as  animals  conceive  their 
kind  at  certain  seasons  only.  We  hear  and  ap 
prehend  only  what  we  already  half  know.  If 
there  is  something  which  does  not  concern  me, 
which  is  out  of  my  line,  which  by  experience  or 
by  genius  my  attention  is  not  drawn  to,  however 
novel  and  remarkable  it  may  be,  if  it  is  spoken, 
I  hear  it  not,  if  it  is  written,  I  read  it  not,  or  if 
I  read  it,  it  does  not  detain  me.  Every  man 
thus  tracks  himself  through  life,  in  all  his  hear 
ing  and  reading  and  observation  and  travel 
ing.  His  observations  make  a  chain.  The 
phenomenon  or  fact  that  cannot  in  any  wise  be 
linked  with  the  rest  which  he  has  observed,  he 
does  not  observe.  By  and  by  we  may  be  ready 
to  receive  what  we  cannot  receive  now.  I  find, 
for  example,  in  Aristotle  something  about  the 


WINTER.  123 

spawning,  etc.,  of  the  pout  and  perch,  because  I 
know  something  about  it  already,  and  have  my 
attention  aroused,  but  I  do  not  discover  till  very 
late  that  he  has  made  other  equally  important 
observations  on  the  spawning  of  other  fishes, 
because  I  am  not  interested  in  those  fishes. 

Jan.  6, 1838.  As  a  child  looks  forward  to  the 
coming  of  the  summer,  so  could  we  contemplate 
with  quiet  joy  the  circle  of  the  seasons  return 
ing  without  fail  eternally.  As  the  spring  came 
round  during  so  many  years  of  the  gods,  we 
could  go  out  to  admire  and  adorn  anew  our 
Eden,  and  yet  never  tire. 

Jan.  6,  1841.  We  are  apt  to  imagine  that 
this  hubbub  of  Philosophy,  Literature,  and  Re 
ligion,  which  is  heard  in  pulpits,  lyceums,  and 
parlors,  vibrates  through  the  universe,  and  is  as 
catholic  a  sound  as  the  creaking  of  the  earth's 
axle.  But  if  a  man  sleeps  soundly,  he  will 
forget  it  all  between  sunset  and  dawn.  It  is 
the  three-inch  swing  of  some  pendulum  in  a 
cupboard,  which  the  great  pulse  of  Nature 
vibrates  clearly  through  each  instant.  When 
we  lift  our  lids  and  open  our  ears,  it  disappears 
with  smoke  and  rattle,  like  the  cars  on  the  rail 
road. 

Jan.  6,  1857.  ...  A  man  asked  me  the 
other  night  whether  such  and  such  persons  were 
not  as  happy  as  anybody,  being  conscious,  as  I 


124        „  WINTER. 

perceived,  of  much  unhappiness  himself  and  not 
aspiring  to  much  more  than  an  animal  content. 
Why,  said  I,  speaking  to  his  condition,  the 
stones  are  happy,  Concord  River  is  happy,  and  I 
am  happy  too.  When  I  took  up  a  fragment  of 
a  walnut  shell  this  morning,  I  saw  by  its  grain 
and  composition,  its  form  and  color,  etc.,  that  it 
was  made  for  happiness.  The  most  brutish  and 
inanimate  objects  that  are  made  suggest  an 
everlasting  and  thorough  satisfaction.  They 
are  the  homes  of  content.  Wood,  earth,  mould, 
etc.,  exist  for  joy.  Do  you  think  that  Concord 
River  would  have  continued  to  flow  these  mil 
lions  of  years  by  Clamshell  Hill,  and  round 
Hunt's  Island,  if  it  had  not  been  happy,  if  it 
had  been  miserable  in  its  channel,  tired  of  exist 
ence,  and  cursing  its  maker  and  the  hour  when 
it  sprang. 

Jan.  6,  1858.  ...  I  derive  a  certain  excite 
ment  not  to  be  refused  even  from  going  through 
Dennis's  swamp  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
railroad,  where  the  poison  dogwood  abounds. 
This  simple-stemmed  bush  is  very  full  of  fruit, 
hanging  in  loose,  dry,  pale  green,  drooping 
panicles.  Some  of  them  are  a  foot  long.  It 
impresses  me  as  the  most  fruitful  shrub  there 
abouts.  I  cannot  refrain  from  plucking  it,  and 
bringing  home  some  fruitful  sprigs.  Other 
fruits  are  there  which  belong  to  the  hard  season, 


WINTER.  125 

the  enduring  panicled  andromeda,  and  a  few 
partly  decayed  prinos  berries.  I  walk  amid  the 
bare  midribs  of  cinnamon  ferns,  with  at  most  a 
terminal  leafet,  and  here  and  there  I  see  a  little 
dark  water  at  the  bottom  of  a  dimple  in  the 
snow  over  which  the  snow  has  not  yet  been  able 
to  prevail.  —  I  was  feeling  very  cheap,  never 
theless,  reduced  to  make  the  most  of  my  dog 
wood  berries.  Very  little  evidence  of  the  di 
vine  did  I  see  just  then,  and  life  was  not  as  rich 
and  inviting  an  enterprise  as  it  should  be,  when 
my  attention  was  caught  by  a  snow-flake  on  my 
coat  sleeve.  It  was  one  of  those  perfect,  crys 
talline,  star-shaped  ones,  six  rayed,  like  a  flat 
wheel  with  six  spokes,  only  the  spokes  were  per 
fect  little  pine  trees  in  shape,  arranged  around 
a  central  spangle.  This  little  object  which,  with 
many  of  its  fellows,  rested  unmelting  on  my 
coat,  so  perfect  and  beautiful,  reminded  me  that 
virtue  had  not  lost  her  pristine  vigor  yet,  and 
why  should  man  lose  heart?  Sometimes  the 
pines  were  worn,  and  had  lost  their  branches, 
and  again  it  appeared  as  if  several  stars  had 
impinged  on  one  another  at  various  angles,  mak 
ing  a  somewhat  spherical  mass.  .  .  .  There  were 
mingled  with  these  starry  flakes  small  downy 
pellets  also.  .  .  .  We  are  rained  and  snowed  on 
with  gems.  I  confess  that  I  was  a  little  en 
couraged,  for  I  was  beginning  to  believe  that 


126  WINTER. 

Nature  was  poor  and  mean,  and  I  was  now  con 
vinced  that  she  turned  off  as  good  work  as  ever. 
What  a  world  we  live  in !  Where  are  the  jewel 
ers'  shops  ?  There  is  nothing  handsomer  than  a 
snow-flake  and  a  dew-drop.  I  may  say  that  the 
maker  of  the  world  exhausts  his  skill  with  each 
snow-flake  and  dew-drop  that  he  sends  down. 
We  think  that  the  one  mechanically  coheres, 
and  that  the  other  simply  flows  together  and 
falls,  but  in  truth  they  are  the  product  of  enthu 
siasm,  the  children  of  an  ecstasy,  finished  with 
the  artist's  utmost  skill. 

Jan.  6,  1859.  p.  M.  To  Martial  Miles's.  .  .  . 
Miles  had  hanging  in  his  barn  a  little  owl,  Strix 
Acadica,  which  he  caught  alive  with  his  hands 
about  a  week  ago.  He  had  induced  it  to  eat, 
but  it  died.  It  was  a  funny  little  brown  bird, 
spotted  with  white,  seven  and  one  half  inches  long 
to  the  end  of  the  tail,  or  eight  to  the  end  of  the 
claws,  and  nineteen  in  alar  extent,  not  so  long 
by  a  considerable  as  a  robin,  though  much 
stouter.  This  one  had  three  (not  two,  and 
Nuttall  says  three)  white  bars  on  its  tail,  but 
no  noticeable  white  at  the  tip.  Its  cunning  feet 
were  feathered  quite  to  the  extremity  of  the 
toes,  looking  like  whitish  mice,  or  as  when  one 
pulls  stockings  over  his  boots.  As  usual,  the 
white  spots  on  the  upper  sides  of  the  wings  are 
smaller  and  a  more  distinct  white,  while  those 


WINTER.  127 

beneath  are  much  larger,  but  a  subdued,  satiny 
white.  Even  a  bird's  wing  has  an  upper  and 
an  under  side,  and  the  last  admits  only  of  more 
subdued  and  tender  colors. 

Jan.  7,  1851.  .  .  .  The  knowledge  of  an  un 
learned  man  is  living  and  luxuriant  like  a  forest, 
but  covered  with  mosses  and  lichens,  and  for  the 
most  part  inaccessible  and  going  to  waste  ;  the 
knowledge  of  the  man  of  science  is  like  timber 
collected  in  yards  for  public  works,  which  still 
supports  a  green  sprout  here  and  there,  but  even 
this  is  liable  to  dry  rot. 

I  felt  my  spirits  rise  when  I  had  got  out  of 
the  road  into  the  open  fields,  and  the  sky  had  a 
new  appearance.  I  stepped  along  more  buoy 
antly.  There  was  a  warm  sunset  in  the  wooded 
valleys,  a  yellowish  tinge  on  the  pines.  Red 
dish  dun-colored  clouds,  like  dusky  flames,  stood 
over  it,  and  then  streaks  of  blue  sky  were  seen 
here  and  there.  The  life,  the  joy  that  is  in  blue 
sky  after  a  storm.  There  is  no  account  of  the 
blue  sky  in  history.  Before,  I  walked  in  the 
ruts  of  travel,  now  I  adventured.  .  .  . 

If  I  have  any  conversation  with  a  scamp  in 
my  walk,  my  afternoon  is  wont  to  be  spoiled. 

Jan.  7,  1852.  .  .  .  Now  ...  I  see  the  sun 
descending  into  the  west.  There  is  something 
new,  a  snoic  bow  in  the  east,  on  the  snow  clouds, 
merely  a  white  bow,  hardly  any  color  distin- 


128  WINTER. 

guishable.  But  in  the  west  what  inconceivable 
crystalline  purity  of  blue  sky,  .  .  .  and  I  see 
feathery  clouds  on  this  ground,  some  traveling 
north,  others  directly  in  the  opposite  direction, 
though  apparently  close  together.  Some  of 
these  cloudlets  are  waifs  and  droppings  from 
rainbows,  clear  rainbow  through  and  through, 
spun  out  of  the  fibre  of  the  rainbow,  or  rather 
as  if  the  children  of  the  west  had  been  pulling 
rainbow  (instead  of  tow),  that  had  done  ser 
vice,  old  junk  of  rainbow,  and  cast  it  into  flocks. 
And  then  such  fantastic,  feathery  scrawls  of 
gauze-like  vapor  on  this  elysian  ground  !  We 
never  tire  of  the  drama  of  sunset.  I  go  forth 
each  afternoon  and  look  into  the  west  a  quarter 
of  an  hour  before  sunset  with  fresh  curiosity  to 
see  what  new  picture  will  be  painted  there, 
what  new  phenomenon  exhibited,  what  new  dis 
solving  views.  .  .  .  Every  day  a  new  picture  is 
painted  and  framed,  held  up  for  half  an  hour  in 
such  lights  as  the  great  artist  chooses,  and  then 
withdrawn  and  the  curtain  falls.  The  sun  goes 
down,  long  the  after-glow  gives  light,  the  dam 
ask  curtains  glow  along  the  western  window,  the 
first  star  is  lit,  and  I  go  home. 

Jan.  7,  1853.  To  Nawshawtuck.  This  is  one 
of  those  pleasant  winter  mornings  when  you 
find  the  river  firmly  frozen  in  the  night,  but  still 
the  air  is  serene  and  the  sun  feels  gratefully 


WINTER.  129 

warm  an  hour  after  sunrise.  Though  so  fair, 
...  a  whitish  vapor  fills  the  lower  stratum  of 
the  air  concealing  the  mountains.  The  smokes 
go  up  from  the  village,  you  hear  the  cocks  with 
immortal  vigor,  the  children  shout  on  their  way 
to  school,  and  the  sound  made  by  the  railroad 
men  hammering  a  rail  is  uncommonly  musical. 
This  promises  a  perfect  winter  day.  In  the 
heavens,  except  the  altitude  of  the  sun,  you  have, 
as  it  were,  the  conditions  of  summer,  perfect 
serenity  and  clarity,  and  sonorousness  in  the 
earth.  All  nature  is  but  braced  by  the  cold. 
It  gives  tension  to  both  body  and  mind.  .  .  . 

About  ten  minutes  before  10  A.  M.  I  heard 
a  very  loud  sound,  and  felt  a  violent  jar  which 
made  the  house  rock  and  the  loose  articles  on 
my  table  rattle.  I  knew  it  must  be  either  a 
powder  mill  blown  up  or  an  earthquake.  Not 
knowing  but  another  and  more  violent  shock 
might  take  place,  I  immediately  ran  down-stairs. 
I  saw  from  the  door  a  vast  expanding  column  of 
whitish  smoke  rising  in  the  west  directly  over 
the  powder  mills  four  miles  distant.  It  was 
unfolding  its  volumes  above,  which  made  it 
wider  there.  In  three  or  four  minutes  it  had 
all  risen  and  spread  itself  into  a  lengthening, 
somewhat  copper-colored  cloud,  parallel  with  the 
horizon  from  N.  to  S.,  and  in  about  ten  min 
utes  after  the  explosion,  it  passed  over  my  head, 


130  WINTER. 

being  several  miles  long  from  N.  to  S.,  and 
distinctly  dark  and  smoky  toward  the  N.,  not 
nearly  so  high  as  the  few  cirrhi  in  the  sky. 
Jumped  into  a  man's  wagon  and  rode  toward 
the  mills.  In  a  few  moments  more,  I  saw 
behind  me,  far  in  the  E.,  a  faint,  salmon-col 
ored  cloud  carrying  the  news  of  the  explosion 
to  the  sea,  and  perchance  over  the  head  of  the 
absent  proprietor.  Arrived  probably  before 
half-past  ten.  There  were  perhaps  thirty  or 
forty  wagons  there.  The  kernel  mill  had  blown 
up  first,  and  killed  three  men  who  were  in  it, 
said  to  be  turning  a  roller  with  a  chisel.  In 
three  seconds  after,  one  of  the  mixing  houses 
exploded.  The  kernel  house  was  swept  away, 
and  fragments,  mostly  but  a  foot  or  two  in 
length,  were  strewn  over  the  hills  and  meadows 
for  thirty  rods.  The  slight  snow  on  the  ground 
was  for  the  most  part  melted  around.  The 
mixing  house  about  ten  rods  W.  was  not  so 
completely  dispersed,  for  most  of  the  machinery 
remained  a  total  wreck.  The  press  house  about 
twelve  rods  E.  had  two  thirds  of  its  boards  off, 
and  a  mixing  house  next  westward  from  that 
which  blew  up  had  lost  some  boards  on  the  E. 
side.  The  boards  fell  out  (i.  6.,  of  those  build 
ings  which  did  not  blow  up),  the  air  within 
apparently  rushing  out  to  fill  up  the  vacuum 
occasioned  by  the  explosions.  So  the  powder 


WINTER.  131 

being  bared  to  the  fiery  particles  in  the  air,  the 
building  explodes.  The  powder  on  the  floor  of 
the  bared  press  house  was  six  inches  deep  in  some 
places,  and  the  crowd  were  thoughtlessly  going 
into  it.  A  few  windows  were  broken  thirty  or 
forty  rods  off.  Timber  six  inches  square  and 
eighteen  feet  long  was  thrown  a  dozen  rods  over 
a  hill  eighty  feet  high  at  least.  Thirty  rods  was 
about  the  limit  of  fragments.  The  drying  house, 
in  which  was  a  fire,  was  perhaps  twenty-five  rods 
distant  and  escaped.  .  .  .  Some  of  the  clothes 
of  the  men  were  in  the  tops  of  the  trees  where 
undoubtedly  their  bodies  had  been  and  left 
them.  .  .  .  Put  the  different  buildings  thirty 
rods  apart,  and  then  but  one  will  blow  up  at  a 
time. 

Jan.  7,  1854.  p.  M.  To  Ministerial  Swamp. 
...  I  went  to  these  woods  partly  to  hear  an 
owl,  but  did  not.  Now  that  I  have  left  them 
nearly  a  mile  behind,  I  hear  one  distinctly, 
hoorer  Jioo.  Strange  that  we  should  hear  this 
sound  so  often,  yet  so  rarely  see  the  bird,  often- 
est  at  twilight.  It  has  a  singular  prominence 
as  a  sound.  ...  It  is  a  sound  which  the  wood 
or  the  horizon  makes. 

Jan.  7,  1855.  .  .  .  Cloudy  and  misty.  On 
opening  the  door  I  feel  a  very  warm  southwest 
erly  wind  contrasting  with  the  cooler  air  of  the 
house,  and  find  it  unexpectedly  wet  in  the  street. 


132  WINTER. 

It  is  in  fact  a  January  thaw.  The  channel  of 
the  river  is  quite  open  in  many  places,  and  in 
others  I  remark  that  the  ice  and  water  alter 
nate  like  waves  and  the  hollow  between  them. 
There  are  long  reaches  of  open  water  where  I 
look  for  muskrats  and  ducks  as  I  go  along  to 
Clamshell  Hill.  I  hear  the  pleasant  sound  of 
running  water.  .  .  .  The  delicious,  soft,  spring- 
suggesting  air,  how  it  fills  my  veins  with  life. 
Life  becomes  again  credible  to  me.  A  certain 
dormant  life  awakes  in  me,  and  I  begin  to  love 
nature  again.  Here  is  my  Italy,  my  heaven, 
my  New  England.  I  understand  why  the  In 
dians  hereabouts  placed  heaven  in  the  S.  W. 
The  soft  south.  On  the  slopes,  the  ground  is 
laid  bare,  and  radical  leaves  revealed,  crowfoot, 
shepherd's  purse,  clover,  etc.,  a  fresh  green,  and, 
in  the  meadow,  the  skunk-cabbage  buds  with  a 
bluish  bloom,  and  the  red  leaves  of  the  meadow 
saxifrage.  These  and  the  many  withered  plants 
laid  bare  remind  me  of  spring  and  of  botany. 
—  On  the  same  bare  sand  is  revealed  a  new  crop 
of  arrow  heads.  I  pick  up  two  perfect  ones  of 
quartz,  sharp  as  if  just  from  the  hand  of  the 
maker.  Still,  birds  are  very  rare.  Here  comes 
a  little  flock  of  titmice  plainly  to  keep  me  com 
pany,  with  their  black  caps  and  throats  making 
them  look  top-heavy,  restlessly  hopping  along 
the  alders  with  a  sharp,  clear,  lisping  note. 


WINTER.  133 

.  .  .  The  bank  is  tinged  with  a  most  delicate 
pink  or  bright  flesh  color  where  the  beomyces 
rosaceus  grows.  It  is  a  lichen  day.  .  .  .  The 
sky  seen  here  and  there  through  the  wrack, 
bluish  and  greenish,  and  perchance  with  a  vein 
of  red  in  the  W.,  seems  like  the  inside  of  a 
shell,  deserted  of  its  tenant,  into  which  I  have 
crawled.  The  willow  catkins  began  to  peep 
from  under  their  scales  as  early  as  the  26th 
of  last  month.  Many  buds  have  lost  their 
scales. 

Jan.  7,  185T.  P.  M.  To  Walden.  ...  It  is 
bitter  cold,  with  a  cutting  N.  W.  wind.  The  pond 
is  now  a  plain  snow  field,  but  there  are  no  tracks 
of  fishers  on  it.  It  is  too  cold  for  them.  .  .  . 
All  animate  things  are  reduced  to  their  lowest 
terms.  This  is  the  fifth  day  of  cold,  blowing 
weather.  All  tracks  are  concealed  in  an  hour 
or  two.  Some  have  to  make  their  paths  two  or 
three  times  a  day.  The  fisherman  is  not  here, 
for  his  lines  would  freeze  in.  I  go  through  the 
woods  toward  the  cliffs  along  the  side  of  the 
Well  Meadow  field.  There  is  nothing  so  sana 
tive,  so  poetic,  as  a  walk  in  the  woods  and  fields 
even  now,  when  I  meet  none  abroad  for  pleas 
ure.  Nothing  so  inspires  me,  and  excites  such 
serene  and  profitable  thought.  The  objects  are 
elevating.  In  the  street  and  in  society  I  am 
almost  invariably  cheap  and  dissipated,  my  life 


134  WINTER. 

is  unspeakably  mean.  No  amount  of  gold  or 
respectability  could  in  the  least  redeem  it,  dining 
with  the  governor  or  a  member  of  Congress ! ! 
But  alone  in  distant  woods  or  fields,  in  unpre 
tending  sproutlands  or  pastures  tracked  by  rab 
bits,  even  in  a  bleak  and,  to  most,  cheerless  day 
like  this,  when  a  villager  would  be  thinking  of 
his  inn,  I  come  to  myself,  I  once  more  feel  my 
self  grandly  related.  This  cold  and  solitude 
are  friends  of  mine.  I  suppose  that  this  value, 
in  my  case,  is  equivalent  to  what  others  get  by 
church  -  going  and  prayer.  I  come  to  my  soli 
tary  woodland  walk  as  the  homesick  go  home. 
I  thus  dispose  of  the  superfluous,  and  see  things 
as  they  are,  grand  and  beautiful.  I  have  told 
many  that  I  walk  every  day  about  half  the  day 
light,  but  I  think  they  do  not  believe  it.  I  wish 
to  get  the  Concord,  the  Massachusetts,  the  Amer 
ican,  out  of  my  head  and  be  sane  a  part  of 
every  day.  I  wish  to  forget  a  considerable  part 
of  every  day,  all  mean,  narrow,  trivial  men  (and 
this  requires  usually  to  forego  and  forget  all 
personal  relations  so  long),  and  therefore  I  come 
out  to  these  solitudes  where  the  problem  of  ex 
istence  is  simplified.  I  get  away  a  mile  or  two 
from  the  town,  into  the  stillness  and  solitude  of 
nature,  with  rocks,  trees,  weeds,  snow  about  me. 
I  enter  some  glade  in  the  woods,  perchance, 
where  a  few  weeds  and  dry  leaves  alone  lift 


WINTER.  135 

themselves  above  the  surface  of  the  snow,  and  it 
is  as  if  I  had  come  to  an  open  window.  I  see 
out  and  around  myself.  Our  sky-lights  are  thus 
far  away  from  the  ordinary  resorts  of  men.  I 
am  not  satisfied  with  ordinary  windows.  I  must 
have  a  true  sky-light,  and  that  is  outside  the  vil 
lage.  I  am  not  thus  expanded,  recreated,  en 
lightened  when  I  meet  a  company  of  men.  It 
chances  that  the  sociable,  the  town  and  country 
club,  the  farmers'  club  does  not  prove  a  sky-light 
to  me.  .  .  .  The  man  I  meet  with  is  not  often  so 
instructive  as  the  silence  he  breaks.  This  still 
ness,  solitude,  wildness  of  nature  is  a  kind  of 
thoroughwort  or  boneset  to  my  intellect.  This 
is  what  I  go  out  to  seek.  It  is  as  if  I  always 
met  in  those  places  some  grand,  serene,  immor 
tal,  infinitely  encouraging,  though  invisible  com 
panion,  and  walked  with  him.  There  at  last  my 
nerves  are  steadied,  my  senses  and  my  mind  do 
their  office.  I  am  aware  that  most  of  my  neigh 
bors  would  think  it  a  hardship  to  be  compelled 
to  linger  here  one  hour,  especially  this  bleak 
day,  and  yet  I  receive  this  sweet  and  ineffable 
compensation  for  it.  It  is  the  most  agreeable 
thing  I  do.  I  love  and  celebrate  nature  even  in 
detail,  because  I  love  the  scenery  of  these  inter 
views  and  translations.  I  love  to  remember 
every  creature  that  was  at  this  club.  I  thus  get 
off  a  certain  social  scurf.  ...  I  do  not  consider 


136  WINTER. 

the  other  animals  brutes  in  the  common  sense. 
I  am  attracted  toward  them  undoubtedly  be 
cause  I  never  heard  any  nonsense  from  them.  I 
have  not  convicted  them  of  folly,  or  vanity,  or 
pomposity,  or  stupidity  in  dealing  with  me. 
•Their  vices,  at  any  rate,  do  not  interfere  with 
me.  My  fairies  invariably  take  to  flight  when 
a  man  appears  upon  the  scene.  In  a  caucus,  a 
meeting-house,  a  lyceum,  a  club-room  there  is 
nothing  like  this  fine  experience  for  me.  But 
away  out  of  the  town,  on  Brown's  scrub  oak  lot, 
which  was  sold  the  other  day  for  six  dollars  an 
acre,  I  have  company  such  as  England  cannot 
buy  nor  afford.  This  society  is  what  I  live, 
what  I  survey  for.  I  subscribe  generously  to 
this  all  that  I  have  and  am.  There  in  that 
Well  Meadow  field,  perhaps,  I  feel  in  my  ele 
ment  again,  as  when  a  fish  is  put  back  into  the 
water.  I  wash  off  all  my  chagrins.  All  things 
go  smoothly  as  the  axle  of  the  universe. 

I  can  remember  that  when  I  was  very  young  I 
used  to  have  a  dream  night  after  night,  over  and 
over  again,  which  might  have  been  named  Rough 
and  Smooth.  All  existence,  all  satisfaction  and 
dissatisfaction,  all  event,  was  symbolized  in 
this  way.  Now  I  seemed  to  be  lying  and  toss 
ing,  perchance,  on  a  horrible,  a  fatal  rough  sur 
face,  which  must  soon  indeed  put  an  end  to  my 
existence  (though  even  in  my  dream  I  knew  it 


WINTER.  137 

to  be  the  symbol  merely  of  my  misery),  and 
then  again,  suddenly,  I  was  lying  on  a  delicious 
smooth  surface,  as  of  a  summer  sea,  as  of  gossa 
mer  or  down,  or  softest  plush,  and  it  was  a  lux 
ury  to  live.  My  waking  experience  always  has 
been  and  is  an  alternate  Hough  and  Smooth.  In 
other  words  it  is  Insanity  and  Sanity. 

Might  I  aspire  to  praise  the  moderate  nymph 
Nature,  I  must  be  like  her,  moderate. 

Jan.  7,  1858.  The  storm  is  over,  and  it  is 
one  of  those  beautiful  winter  mornings  when  a 
vapor  is  seen  hanging  in  the  air  between  the 
village  and  the  woods.  Though  the  snow  is 
only  six  inches  deep,  the  yards  appear  full  of 
those  beautiful  crystals,  star  or  wheel  shaped 
flakes,  as  a  measure  is  full  of  grain.  ...  By  ten 
o'clock  I  notice  a  very  long,  level  stratum  of 
cloud  not  very  high  in  the  S.  E.  sky  (all  the  rest 
being  clear),  which  I  suspect  to  be  the  vapor 
from  the  sea.  This  lasts  for  several  hours. 

These  are  true  mornings  of  creation,  original 
and  poetic  days,  not  mere  repetitions  of  the 
past.  There  is  no  lingering  of  yesterday's  fogs, 
only  such  a  mist  as  might  have  adorned  the  first 
morning. 

p.  M.  I  see  some  tree  sparrows  feeding  on 
the  fine  grass  seed  above  the  snow.  They  are 
flitting  along  one  at  a  time,  commonly  sunk  in 
the  snow,  uttering  occasionally  a  low,  sweet  war- 


138  WINTER. 

ble,  and  seemingly  as  happy  there,  and  with  this 
wintry  prospect  before  them  for  the  night  and 
several  months  to  come,  as  any  man  by  his  fire 
side.  One  occasionally  hops  or  flies  toward  an 
other,  and  the  latter  suddenly  jerks  away  from 
him.  They  are  searching  or  hopping  up  to  the 
fine  grass,  or  oftener  picking  the  seeds  from  the 
snow.  At  length  the  whole  ten  have  collected 
within  a  space  a  dozen  feet  square,  but  soon  after, 
being  alarmed,  they  utter  a  different  and  less 
musical  chirp,  and  flit  away  into  an  apple-tree. 

Jan.  8,  1842.  When,  as  now,  in  January  a 
south  wind  melts  the  snow,  and  the  bare  ground 
appears  covered  with  sere  grass  and  occasionally 
wilted  green  leaves,  which  seem  in  doubt  whether 
to  let  go  their  greenness  quite  or  absorb  new 
juices  against  the  coming  year,  in  such  a  season 
a  perfume  seems  to  exhale  from  the  earth  itself, 
and  the  south  wind  melts  my  integuments  also. 
Then  is  she  my  mother  earth.  I  derive  a  real 
vigor  from  the  scent  of  the  gale  wafted  over  the 
naked  ground,  as  from  strong  meats,  and  realize 
again  how  man  is  the  pensioner  of  nature.  We 
are  always  conciliated  and  cheered  when  we  are 
fed  by  an  influence,  and  our  needs  are  felt  to  be 
part  of  the  domestic  economy  of  nature. 

What  offends  me  most  in  my  compositions  is 
the  moral  element  in  them.  The  repentant  say 
never  a  brave  word.  Their  resolves  should  be 


WINTER.  139 

mumbled  in  silence.  Strictly  speaking,  moral 
ity  is  not  healthy.  The  undeserved  joys  which 
come  uncalled,  and  make  us  more  pleased  than 
grateful,  are  they  that  sing. 

In  the  steadiness  and  equanimity  of  music 
lies  its  divinity.  It  is  the  only  assured  tone. 
When  men  attain  to  speak  with  as  settled  a 
faith,  and  as  firm  assurance,  their  voices  will 
ring  and  their  feet  march  as  do  the  feet  of  a 
soldier.  The  very  dogs  howl  if  time  is  disre 
garded.  Because  of  the  perfect  time  of  this 
music-box,  its  harmony  with  itself,  is  its  greater 
dignity  and  stateliness.  This  music  is  more 
nobly  related  for  its  more  exact  measure.  So 
simple  a  difference  as  this  more  even  pace  raises 
it  to  the  higher  dignity.  .  .  .  What  are  ears, 
what  is  time,  that  this  particular  series  of  sounds 
called  a  strain  of  music  can  be  wafted  down 
through  the  centuries  from  Homer  to  me,  and 
Homer  have  been  conversant  with  that  same 
wandering  and  mysterious  charm  which  never 
had  a  local  habitation  in  space.  ...  I  feel  a  sad 
cheer  when  I  hear  these  lofty  strains,  because 
there  must  be  something  in  me  as  lofty  that 
hears.  Ah,  I  hear  them  but  rarely.  .  .  .  They 
tell  me  the  secrets  of  futurity.  Where  are  its 
secrets  wound  up  but  in  this  box?  So  much 
hope  had  slumbered.  —  There  are  in  music  such 
strains  as  far  surpass  any  faith  which  man  ever 


140  WINTER. 

had  in  the  loftiness  of  his  destiny.  He  must  be 
very  sad  before  he  can  comprehend  them.  The 
clear  liquid  notes  from  the  morning  fields  beyond 
seem  to  come  through  a  vale  of  sadness  to  man 
which  gives  to  all  music  a  plaintive  air.  The 
sadness  is  in  the  echo  which  our  lives  make  and 
which  alone  we  hear.  Music  hath  caught  a 
higher  pace  than  any  virtue  that  I  know.  It  is 
the  arch  reformer.  It  hastens  the  sun  to  his 
setting.  It  invites  him  to  his  rising.  It  is  the 
sweetest  reproach,  a  measured  satire.  I  know 
there  is  somewhere  a  people  where  this  heroism 
has  place.  Things  are  to  be  learned  which  it 
will  be  sweet  to  learn.  This  cannot  be  all 
rumor.  When  I  hear  this,  I  think  of  that  ever 
lasting  something  which  is  not  mere  sound,  but 
is  to  be  a  thrilling  reality,  and  I  can  consent  to 
go  about  the  meanest  work  for  as  many  years  of 
time  as  it  pleases  the  Hindoo  penance,  for  a  year 
of  the  gods  were  as  nothing  to  that  which  shall 
come  after.  /  What,  then,  can  I  do  to  hasten  that 
other  time,  or  that  space  where  there  shall  be  no 
time,  and  where  these  things  shall  be  a  more 
living  part  of  my  life,  where  there  will  be  no 
discords  in  my  life  ? 

Jan.  8,  1851.  .  .  .  The  light  of  the  setting 
sun  falling  on  the  snow  banks  to-day  made  them 
glow  almost  yellow.  —  The  hills  seen  from  Fair 
Haven  Pond  make  a  wholly  new  landscape. 


WINTER.  141 

Covered  with  snow  and  yellowish  green  or  brown 
pines,  and  shrub  oaks,  they  look  higher  and 
more  massive.  Their  white  mantle  relates  them 
to  the  clouds  in  the  horizon  and  to  the  sky. 
Perhaps  what  is  light-colored  looks  loftier  than 
what  is  dark. 

Jan.  8,  1852.  .  .  .  Even  as  early  as  3  o'clock 
these  winter  afternoons  the  axes  in  the  woods 
sound  like  night -fall,  as  if  it  were  the  sound 
of  a  twilight  labor. 

Heading  from  my  MSS.  to  Miss  Emerson  this 
evening  and  using  the  word  god,  in  one  instance, 
in  perchance  a  merely  heathenish  sense,  she  in 
quired  hastily  in  a  tone  of  dignified  anxiety, 
"Is  that  god  spelt  with  a  little  g?"  Fortu 
nately  it  was.  (I  had  brought  in  the  word  god 
without  any  solemnity  of  voice  or  connection.) 
So  I  went  on  as  if  nothing  had  happened. 

Jan.  8,  1854.  .  .  .  Stood  within  a  rod  of  a 
downy  woodpecker  on  an  apple  -  tree.  How 
curious  and  exciting  the  blood-red  spot  on  its 
hind  head!  I  ask  why  it  is  there,  but  no 
answer  is  rendered  by  these  snow-clad  fields.  It 
is  so  close  to  the  bark  I  do  not  see  its  feet.  It 
looks  behind  as  it  had  a  black  cassock  open 
behind  and  showing  a  white  under-garment  be 
tween  the  shoulders  and  down  the  back.  It  is 
briskly  and  incessantly  tapping  all  round  the 
dead  limbs,  but  hardly  twice  in  a  place,  as  if  to 


142  WINTER. 

sound  the  tree,  and  so  see  if  it  has  any  worm  in 
it,  or  perchance  to  start  them.  How  much  he 
deals  with  the  bark  of  trees,  all  his  life  long  tap 
ping  and  inspecting  it.  He  it  is  that  scatters 
these  fragments  of  bark  and  lichens  about  on  the 
snow  at  the  base  of  trees.  What  a  lichenest  he 
must  be !  or  rather  perhaps  it  is  fungi  make  his 
favorite  study,  for  he  deals  most  with  dead  limbs. 
How  briskly  he  glides  up  or  drops  himself  down 
a  limb,  creeping  round  and  round,  and  hopping 
from  limb  to  limb,  and  now  flitting  with  a  rip 
pling  sound  of  his  wings  to  another  tree. 

Jan.  8,  1857.  ...  I  picked  up  on  the  bare 
ice  of  the  river  ...  a  furry  caterpillar,  black 
at  the  two  ends  and  red-brown  in  the  middle, 
rolled  into  a  ball  or  close  ring,  like  a  woodchuck. 
I  pressed  it  hard  between  my  fingers  and  found 
it  frozen,  put  it  into  my  hat,  and  when  I  took  it 
out  in  the  evening,  it  soon  began  to  stir,  and  at 
length  crawled  about,  though  a  portion  of  it 
seemed  not  quite  flexible.  It  took  some  time 
for  it  to  thaw.  This  is  the  fifth  cold  day,  and 
it  must  have  been  frozen  so  long. 

Jan.  8,  1860.  .  .  .  To-day  it  is  very  warm 
and  pleasant.  2  P.  M.  Walk  to  Walden.  .  .  . 
After  December  all  weather  that  is  not  wintry 
is  spring-like.  How  changed  are  our  feelings 
and  thoughts  by  this  more  genial  sky  !  When  I 
get  to  the  railroad,  I  listen  from  time  to  time  to 


WINTER.  143 

hear  some  sound  out  of  the  distance  which  will 
express  the  mood  of  nature.  The  cock  and  the 
hen,  that  pheasant  which  we  have  domesticated, 
are  perhaps  the  most  sensitive  among  domestic 
animals  to  atmospheric  changes.  You  cannot 
listen  a  moment  such  a  day  as  this,  but  you  will 
hear  from  far  or  near  the  clarion  of  the  cock 
celebrating  this  new  season,  yielding  to  the  in 
fluence  of  the  south  wind,  or  the  drawling  note 
of  the  hen  dreaming  of  eggs  that  are  to  be. 
These  are  the  sounds  that  fill  the  air,  and  no 
hum  of  insects.  They  are  affected  like  voyagers 
approaching  the  land.  We  discover  a  new 
world  every  time  we  see  the  earth  again,  after  it 
has  been  covered  for  a  season  with  snow. 

Jan.  8,  1861.  .  .  .  The  Indians  taught  us  not 
only  the  use  of  corn  and  how  to  plant  it,  but 
also  of  whortleberries  and  how  to  dry  them  for 
winter,  and  made  us  baskets  to  put  them  in. 
We  should  have  hesitated  long  to  eat  some  kinds 
of  berries,  if  they  had  not  set  us  the'  example, 
having  learned  by  long  experience  that  they 
were  not  only  harmless,  but  salutary.  I  have 
added  a  few  to  my  number  of  edible  ones  by 
walking  behind  an  Indian  in  Maine  who  ate 
such  as  I  never  thought  of  eating  before.  Of 
course  they  made  a  much  greater  account  of  wild 
fruits  than  we  do.  What  we  call  huckleberry 
cake  made  of  Indian  meal  and  huckleberries  was 


144  WINTER. 

evidently  the  principal  cake  of  the  aborigines, 
and  was  generally  known  and  used  by  them  all 
over  this  part  of  North  America,  as  much  as  or 
more  than  plum  cake  by  us.  They  enjoyed  it 
ages  before  our  ancestors  heard  of  Indian  meal 
or  huckleberries.  If  you  had  traveled  here  one 
thousand  years  ago,  it  would  probably  have  been 
offered  you  alike  on  the  Connecticut,  the  Poto 
mac,  the  Niagara,  the  Ottawa,  and  the  Missis 
sippi.  It  appears  .  .  .  that  the  Indian  used 
the  dried  berries  commonly  in  the  form  of 
huckleberry  cake,  and  also  of  huckleberry  por 
ridge  or  pudding.  We  have  no  national  cake  so 
universal  and  well  known  as  this  was  in  all  parts 
of  the  country  where  corn  and  huckleberries 
grew. 

Jan.  9,  1841.  Each  hearty  stroke  we  deal 
with  these  outward  hands  slays  an  inward  foe. 

Jan.  9, 1842.  One  cannot  too  soon  forget  his 
errors  and  misdemeanors.  To  dwell  long  upon 
them  is  to  add  to  the  offense.  Repentance  and 
sorrow  can  only  be  displaced  by  something  better, 
which  is  as  free  and  original  as  if  they  had  not 
been.  Not  to  grieve  long  for  any  action,  but  to 
go  immediately  and  do  freshly  and  otherwise, 
subtracts  so  much  from  the  wrong ;  else  we  may 
make  the  delay  of  repentance  the  punishment  of 
the  sin.  A  great  soul  will  not  consider  its  sins  as 
its  own,  but  be  more  absorbed  in  the  prospect  of 


WINTER.  145 

that  valor  and  virtue  for  the  future  which  is 
more  properly  itself,  than  in  these  improper 
actions  which  by  being  sins  discover  themselves 
to  be  not  itself. 

Sir  Walter  Kaleigh's  faults  are  those  of  a 
courtier  and  a  soldier.  In  his  counsels  and 
aphorisms  we  see  not  unfrequently  the  haste  and 
rashness  of  a  boy.  His  philosophy  was  not 
wide  nor  deep,  but  continually  giving  way  to 
the  generosity  of  his  nature.  What  he  touches 
he  adorns  by  his  greater  humanity  and  native 
nobleness,  but  he  touches  not  the  true  and  origi 
nal.  .  .  .  He  seems  to  have  been  fitted  by  his 
genius  for  short  flights  of  impulsive  poetry,  but 
not  for  the  sustained  loftiness  of  Shakespeare 
or  Milton.  He  was  not  wise  nor  a  seer  in  any 
sense,  but  rather  one  of  nature's  nobility,  the 
most  generous  nature  which  can  be  found  to 
linger  in  the  purlieus  of  a  court.  —  His  was  a 
singularly  perverted  genius,  with  a  great  incli 
nation  to  originality  and  freedom,  and  yet  who 
never  steered  his  own  course.  Of  so  fair  and 
susceptible  a  nature,  rather  than  broad  or  deep, 
that  he  lingered  to  slake  his  thirst  at  the 
nearest  and  even  somewhat  turbid  wells  of  truth 
and  beauty.  His  homage  to  the  less  fair  or 
noble  left  no  space  for  homage  to  the  all  fair. 
The  misfortune  of  his  circumstances  or  rather  of  t 
the  man  appears  in  the  fact  that  he  was  the 


146  WINTER. 

author  of  "  Maxims  of  State,"  "  The  Cabinet 
Council,"  and  "  The  Soul's  Errand." 

Jan.  9,  1852.  .  .  .  Where  a  path  has  been 
shoveled  through  drifts  in  the  road,  I  see  ... 
little  heavens  in  the  crannies  and  crevices.  The 
deeper  they  are,  and  the  larger  masses  they  are 
surrounded  by,  the  darker  blue  they  are.  Some 
are  a  very  light  blue  with  a  tinge  of  green. 
Methinks  I  oftenest  see  this  when  it  is  snowing. 
At  any  rate,  the  atmosphere  must  be  in  a  pecul 
iar  state.  Apparently  the  snow  absorbs  the 
other  rays,  and  reflects  the  blue.  It  has  strained 
the  air,  and  only  the  blue  rays  have  passed 
through  the  sieve.  .  .  .  Into  every  track  which 
the  teamster  makes  this  elysian,  empyrean  at 
mosphere  rushes. 

Jan.  9,  1853.  3  p.  M.  To  Walden  and 
Cliffs.  The  telegraph  harp  again.  Always  the 
same  unrememberable  revelation  it  is  to  me. 
I  never  hear  it  without  thinking  of  Greece. 
How  the  Greeks  harped  upon  the  words,  immor 
tal,  ambrosial.  They  are  what  it  says.  It 
stings  my  ear  with  everlasting  truth.  It  allies 
Concord  to  Athens,  and  both  to  Elysium.  It 
always  .  .  .  makes  me  sane,  reverses  my  views 
of  things.  I  get  down  the  railroad  till  I  hear 
that  which  makes  all  the  world  a  lie.  When 
the  .  .  .  west  wind  sweeps  this  wire,  I  rise  to 
the  height  of  my  being.  .  .  .  This  wire  is  my 


WINTER.  147 

redeemer.  It  always  brings  a  special  and  a  gen 
eral  message  to  me  from  the  highest.  Day 
before  yesterday  I  looked  at  the  mangled  and 
blackened  bodies  of  men  which  had  been  blown 
up  by  powder,  and  felt  that  the  lives  of  men  are 
not  innocent,  and  that  there  was  an  avenging 
power  in  nature.  To-day  I  hear  this  immortal 
melody  while  the  west  wind  is  blowing  balmily 
on  my  cheek  and  a  roseate  sunset  seems  to  be 
preparing.  .  .  . 

\  As  I  climbed  the  cliff,  I  paused  in  the  sun 
and  sat  on  a  dry  rock,  dreaming.  I  thought  of 
those  summery  hours,  when  time  is  tinged  with 
eternity,  runs  into  it,  and  becomes  of  one  stuff 
with  it,  how  much,  how  perhaps  all  that  is  best 
in  our  experience  in  middle  life,  may  be  resolved 
into  the  memory  of  our  youth  !  Pulling  up  the 
Johnswort  on  the  face  of  the  cliff,  I  am  sur 
prised  to  see  the  signs  of  unceasing  growth 
about  the  roots,  fresh  shoots  two  inches  long, 
white  with  red  leafets,  and  all  the  radical  part 
quite  green.  The  leaves  of  the  crowfoot  also 
are  quite  green,  and  carry  me  forward  to  spring. 
I  dig  one  up  with  a  stick,  and  pulling  it  to 
pieces,  I  find  deep  in  the  centre  of  the  plant, 
just  beneath  the  ground,  surrounded  by  all-  the 
tender  leaves  that  are  to  precede  it,  the  blossom 
bud  about  half  as  big  as  the  head  of  a  pin,  per 
fectly  white.  (?)  (I  open  one  next  day,  and  it  is 


148  WINTER. 

yellow.)  There  it  patiently  sits  and  slumbers, 
how  full  of  faith,  informed  of  a  spring  which  the 
world  has  never  seen,  the  promise  and  prophecy 
of  it,  shaped  somewhat  like  some  Eastern  tem 
ples  in  which  a  bud-shaped  dome  o'ertops  the 
whole.  It  affected  me  this  tender  dome-like 
bud  within  the  bosom  of  the  earth,  like  a  temple 
upon  its  surface  resounding  with  the  worship  of 
votaries.  Methought  I  saw  the  priests  with 
yellow  robes  within  it.  ...  It  will  go  forth  in 
April,  this  vestal,  now  cherishing  here  her  fire, 
to  be  married  to  the  sun.  How  innocent  are 
nature's  purposes !  How  unambitious ! 

I  saw  to-day  the  reflected  sunset  sky  in  the 
river,  but  the  colors  in  the  reflection  were  differ 
ent  from  those  in  the  sky.  In  the  latter  were 
dark  clouds  with  coppery  or  dun-colored  under 
sides  ;  in  the  water  were  dun-colored  clouds 
with  bluish-green  patches  or  bars. 

Jan.  9,  1855.  What  a  strong  and  hearty, 
but  reckless,  hit-or-miss  style  had  some  of  the 
early  writers  of  New  England,  like  Josselyn  and 
William  Wood,  and  others  elsewhere  in  those 
days ;  as  if  they  spoke  with  a  relish,  smacking 
their  lips  like  a  coach  whip,  caring  more  to 
speak  heartily  than  scientifically  true.  They 
are  not  to  be  caught  napping  by  the  wonders  of 
nature  in  a  new  country,  and  perhaps  are  often 
more  ready  to  appreciate  them  than  she  is  to 


WINTER.  149 

exhibit  them.  They  give  you  one  piece*  of 
nature  at  any  rate,  and  that  is  themselves.  .  .  . 
The  strong  new  soil  speaks  through  them.  I 
have  just  been  reading  somewhat  in  Wood's 
"  New  England's  Prospect."  He  speaks  a  good 
word  for  New  England,  indeed  will  come  very 
near  lying  for  her,  and  when  he  doubts  the  just 
ness  of  his  praise,  he  brings  it  out  not  the  less 
soundly ;  as  who  cares  if  it  is  not  so,  we  love  her 
not  the  less  for  all  that.  Certainly  that  genera 
tion  stood  nearer  to  nature,  nearer  to  the  facts 
than  this,  and  hence  their  books  have  more  life 
in  them. 

Jan.  9,  1858.  Snows  again.  .  .  .  The  snow 
is  very  moist,  with  large  flakes.  Looking  to 
ward  Trillium  wood,  the  nearer  flakes  appear  to 
move  quite  swiftly,  often  making  the  impression 
of  a  continuous  white  line.  They  are  also  seen 
to  move  directly,  and  nearly  horizontally.  But 
the  more  distant  flakes  appear  to  loiter  in  the 
air,  as  if  uncertain  how  they  will  approach  the 
earth,  or  even  to  cross  the  course  of  the  former, 
and  are  always  seen  as  simple  and  distinct 
flakes.  I  think  that  this  difference  is  simply 
owing  to  the  fact  that  the  former  pass  quickly 
over  the  field  of  view,  while  the  latter  are  much 
longer  in  it. 

Jan.  9,  1860.  ...  I  hear  that  ,  a  rich 

old  farmer,  who  lives  in  a  large  house,  with  a 


150  WINTER. 

male  housekeeper,  and  no  other  family,  gets  up 
at  three  or  four  o'clock  these  winter  mornings, 
and  milks  seventeen  cows  regularly.  When 
asked  why  he  works  so  hard,  he  answers  that 
the  poor  are  obliged  to  work  hard.  Only 
think  what  a  creature  of  fate  he  is,  this  old 
Jotun,  milking  his  seventeen  cows,  though  the 
thermometer  goes  down  to  —  25°,  and  not  know 
ing  why  he  does  it.  ...  Think  how  helpless, 
a  rich  man  who  can  only  do  as  he  has  done 
and  as  his  neighbors  do,  one  or  all  of  them. 
What  an  account  he  will  have  to  give  of  him 
self  !  He  spent  some  time  in  a  world,  alternately 
cold  and  warm,  and  every  winter  morning  with 
lantern  in  hand,  when  the  first  goblins  were 
playing  their  tricks,  he  resolutely  accomplished 
his  task,  milked  his  seventeen  cows,  while  the 
man-housekeeper  prepared  his  breakfast.  .  .  . 
Think  how  tenaciously  every  man  does  his  deed 
of  some  kind  or  other,  though  it  be  idleness  ! 
He  is  rich,  dependent  on  nobody,  and  nobody  is 
dependent  on  him,  has  as  good  health  as  the 
average,  at  least,  can  do  as  he  pleases,  as  we 
say,  yet  he  gravely  rises  every  morning  by  can 
dle-light,  dons  his  cowhide  boots  and  his  frock, 
takes  his  lantern,  and  wends  his  way  to  the  barn 
and  milks  his  seventeen  cows,  milking  with  one 
hand,  while  he  warms  the  other  against  the  cow 
or  his  person.  This  is  but  the  beginning  of  his 


WINTER.  151 

day,  and  his  Augean  stable  work,  so  serious  is 
the  life  he  lives. 

Jan.  10,  1856.  The  weather  has  considera 
bly  moderated,  —  2°  at  breakfast  time.  It  was 
—  8°  at  seven  last  evening,  but  this  has  been  the 
coldest  night  probably.  You  lie  with  your  feet 
or  legs  curled  up,  waiting  for  the  morning,  the 
sheets  shining  with  frost  about  your  mouth. 
Water  left  by  the  stove  is  frozen  thick,  and 
what  you  sprinkle  in  bathing  falls  on  the  floor, 
ice.  The  house  plants  are  all  frozen,  and  soon 
droop  and  turn  black.  I  look  out  on  the  roof 
of  a  cottage  covered  a  foot  deep  with  snow, 
wondering  how  the  poor  children  in  its  garret, 
with  their  few  rags,  contrive  to  keep  their  toes 
warm.  I  mark  the  white  smoke  from  its  chimney 
whose  contracted  wreaths  are  soon  dissipated  in 
this  stinging  air,  and  think  of  the  size  of  their 
wood  pile.  And  again  I  try  to  realize  how  they 
panted  for  a  breath  of  cool  air  those  sultry 
nights  last  summer.  Recall,  realize  now,  if 
you  can,  the  hum  of  the  mosquito. 

It  seems  that  the  snow-storm  of  Saturday 
night  was  a  remarkable  one,  reaching  many 
hundred  miles  along  the  coast.  It  is  said  that 
some  thousands  passed  the  night  in  the  cars.  — 
The  kitchen  windows  were  magnificent  last 
night  with  their  frost  sheaves,  surpassing  any 
cut  or  ground  glass. 


152  WINTER. 

I  love  to  wade  and  flounder  through  the 
swamp  now,  these  bitter  cold  days,  when  the 
snow  lies  deep  on  the  ground,  and  I  need  travel 
but  little  way  from  the  town  to  get  to  a  Nova 
Zembla  solitude,  to  wade  through  the  swamps, 
all  snowed  up,  untracked  by  man,  into  which  the 
fine  dry  snow  is  still  drifting  till  it  is  even  with 
the  tops  of  the  water  andromeda,  and  half  way 
up  the  high  blueberry  bushes.  I  penetrate  to 
islets  inaccessible  in  summer,  my  feet  slumping 
to  the  sphagnum  far  out  of  sight  beneath,  where 
the  alderberry  glows  yet,  .  .  .  and  perchance 
a  single  tree  sparrow  lisps  by  my  side ;  where 
there  are  few  tracks  even  of  wild  animals.  Per 
haps  only  a  mouse  or  two  have  burrowed  up  by 
the  side  of  some  twig,  and  hopped  away  in 
straight  lines  on  the  surface  of  the  light,  deep 
snow,  as  if  too  timid  to  delay,  to  another  hole 
by  the  side  of  another  bush,  and  a  few  rabbits 
have  run  in  a  path  amid  the  blueberries  and 
alders  about  the  edge  of  the  swamp.  This  is 
instead  of  a  Polar  Expedition,  and  going  after 
Franklin.  There  is  but  little  life  and  the  ob 
jects  are  few,  it  is  true.  We  are  reduced  to 
admire  buds,  even  like  the  partridges,  and  bark, 
like  the  rabbits  and  mice,  the  great  red  and 
forward  looking  buds  of  the  azalea,  the  plump 
red  ones  of  the  blueberry,  and  the  fine,  sharp  red 
ones  of  the  panicled  andromeda  sleeping  along 


WINTER.  153 

its  stem,  the  speckled  black  alder,  the  rapid 
growing  dogwood,  the  pale  brown  and  cracked 
blueberry,  etc.  Even  a  little  shining  bud  which 
lies  sleeping  behind  its  twig,  perhaps  half  con 
cealed  by  ice,  is  object  enough.  I  feel  myself 
upborne  on  the  andromeda  bushes  beneath  the 
snow  as  on  a  springy  basket-work.  Then  down 
I  go,  up  to  my  middle  in  the  deep  but  silent 
snow,  which  has  no  sympathy  with  my  mishap. 
Beneath  its  level,  how  many  sweet  berries  will  be 
hanging  next  August !  —  This  freezing  weather 
I  see  the  pumps  dressed  in  mats  and  old  clothes, 
or  bundled  up  in  straw.  Fortunate  he  who  has 
placed  his  cottage  on  the  south  side  of  some 
high  hill  or  some  dense  wood,  and  not  in  the 
middle  of  the  Great  Fields  where  there  is  no  hill 
nor  tree  to  shelter  it.  There  the  winds  have 
full  sweep,  and  such  a  day  as  yesterday,  the 
house  is  but  a  fence  to  stay  the  drifting  snow. 
Such  is  the  piercing  wind,  no  man  loiters  be 
tween  his  house  and  barn.  The  road  track  is 
soon  obliterated,  and  the  path  which  leads  round 
to  the  back  of  the  house,  dug  this  morning,  is 
filled  up  again,  and  you  can  no  longer  see  the 
tracks  of  the  master  of  the  house  who  only  an 
hour  ago  took  refuge  in  some  half -subterranean 
apartment  there.  You  know  only  by  some  white 
wreath  of  smoke  from  his  chimney,  which  is  at 
once  snapped  up  by  the  hungry  air,  that  he  sits 


154  WINTER. 

warming  his  wits  there  within,  studying  the 
almanac  to  learn  how  long  it  is  before  spring. 
But  his  neighbor,  who,  only  half  a  mile  off,  has 
placed  his  house  in  the  shelter  of  a  wood,  is  dig 
ging  out  of  a  drift  his  pile  of  roots  and  stumps, 
hauled  from  the  swamp,  at  which  he  regularly 
dulls  his  axe  and  saw,  reducing  them  to  billets 
that  will  fit  into  his  stove.  With  comparative 
safety  and  even  comfort  he  labors  at  this  mine. 
As  for  the  other,  the  windows  give  no  sign  of 
inhabitants,  for  they  are  frosted  over  as  if  they 
were  ground  glass,  and  the  curtains  are  down 
beside.  ...  No  sound  arrives  from  within.  It 
remains  only  to  examine  the  chimney's  nostrils. 
I  look  very  sharp,  and  fancy  that  I  see  some 
smoke  against  the  sky  there,  but  this  is  decep 
tive,  for  as  we  are  accustomed  to  walk  up  to  an 
empty  fire-place  and  imagine  that  we  feel  some 
heat  from  it,  so  I  have  convinced  myself  that  I 
saw  smoke  issuing  from  the  chimney  of  a  house 
which  had  not  been  inhabited  for  twenty  years. 
I  had  so  vivid  an  idea  of  smoke  that  no  painter 
could  have  matched  my  imagination.  It  was  as 
if  the  spirits  of  the  former  inhabitants  revisiting 
their  old  haunts  were  once  more  boiling  a  spirit 
ual  kettle  below. 

Jan.  10,  1858.  The  N.  side  of  Walden  is  a 
warm  walk  in  sunny  weather.  If  you  are  sick 
and  despairing,  go  forth  in  winter  and  see  the 


WINTER.  155 

red  alder  catkins  dangling  at  the  extremity  of 
the  twigs  all  in  the  wintry  air,  like  long,  hard 
mulberries,  promising  a  new  spring  and  the  ful 
fillment  of  all  our  hopes.  We  prize  any  ten 
derness,  any  softening  in  the  winter,  catkins, 
birds'  nests,  insect  life,  etc.  The  most  I  get, 
perchance,  is  the  sight  of  a  mulberry-like  red 
catkin,  which  I  know  has  a  dormant  life  in  it 
seemingly  greater  than  my  own. 

Jan.  10,  1859.  .  .  .  The  alder  is  one  of  the 
prettiest  trees  and  shrubs  in  the  winter.  It  is 
evidently  so  full  of  life  with  its  conspicuously 
pretty  red  catkins  dangling  from  it  on  all  sides. 
It  seems  to  dread  the  winter  less  than  other 
plants.  It  has  a  certain  heyday  and  cheery 
look,  less  stiff  than  most,  with  more  of  the  flex 
ible  grace  of  summer.  With  those  dangling 
clusters  of  red  catkins  which  it  switches  in  the 
face  of  winter,  it  brags  for  all  vegetation.  It  is 
not  daunted  by  the  cold,  but  still  hangs  grace 
fully  over  the  frozen  stream. 

Jan.  10,  1859.  ...  I  come  across  to  the  road 
S.  of  the  hill,  to  see  the  pink  on  the  snow- 
clad  hill  at  sunset.  ...  I  walk  back  and  forth 
in  the  road  waiting  for  its  appearance.  The 
windows  on  the  skirts  of  the  village  reflect  the 
setting  sun  with  intense  brilliancy,  a  dazzling 
glitter,  it  is  so  cold.  Standing  thus  on  one  side 
of  the  hill,  I  begin  to  see  a  pink  light  reflected 


156  WINTER. 

from  the  snow  there  about  fifteen  minutes  be 
fore  the  sun  sets.  This  gradually  deepens  to 
purple  and  violet  in  some  places,  and  the  pink  is 
very  distinct,  especially  when,  after  looking  at 
the  simply  white  snow  on  other  sides,  you  turn 
your  eyes  to  the  hill.  Even  after  all  direct  sun 
light  is  withdrawn  from  the  hill-top,  as  well  as 
from  the  valley  in  which  you  stand,  you  see,  if 
you  are  prepared  to  discern  it,  a  faint  and  deli 
cate  tinge  of  purple  and  violet  there.  This  was 
on  a  very  clear  and  cold  evening  when  the  ther 
mometer  was  — 6°. 

This  is  one  of  the  phenomena  of  the  winter 
sunset,  this  distinct  pink  light  reflected  from  the 
brows  of  snow-clad  hills  on  one  side  of  you,  as 
you  are  facing  the  sun. 

The  cold  rapidly  increases,  and  it  is  — 14°  in 
the  evening.  I  hear  the  ground  crack  with  a 
very  loud  sound,  and  a  great  jar  in  the  evening 
and  in  the  course  of  the  night  several  times.  It 
is  once  as  loud  and  heavy  as  the  explosion  of  the 
Acton  powder  mills. 

Jan.  11,  1839. 

THE  THAW. 

I  saw  the  civil  sun  drying  earth's  tears, 
Her  tears  of  joy  that  only  faster  flowed. 

Fain  would  I  stretch  me  by  the  highway  side 
To  thaw  and  trickle  with  the  melting-  snow, 
That  mingled,  soul  and  body,  with  the  tide, 
I  too  may  through  the  pores  of  nature  flow. 


WINTER.  157 

Jan.  11,  1852.  .  .  .  The  glory  of  these  after 
noons,  though  the  sky  may  be  mostly  overcast, 
is  in  the  ineffably  clear  blue,  or  else  pale  green 
ish-yellow  patches  of  sky  in  the  west  just  before 
sunset.  t  The  whole  cope  of  heaven  seen  at  once 
is  never  so  elysian;  windows  to  heaven,  the 
heavenward  windows  of  the  earth.  The  end  of 
the  day  is  truly  Hesperian.  ... 

We  sometimes  find  ourselves  living  fast,  un- 
profitably,  and  coarsely  even,  as  we  catch  our 
selves  eating  our  meals  in  unaccountable  haste. 
But  in  one  sen.se  we  cannot  live  too  leisurely. 
Let  me  not  live  as  if  time  was  short.  Catch  the 
pace  of  the  seasons,  have  leisure  to  attend  to 
every  phenomenon  of  nature,  and  to  entertain 
every  thought  that  comes  to  you.  Let  your  life 
be  a  leisurely  progress  through  the  realms  of 
nature,  even  in  guest-quarters.  .  .  . 

The  question  is  not  where  did  the  traveler  go  ? 
What  places  did  he  see  ?  It  would  be  difficult 
to  choose  between  places.  But  who  was  the 
traveler  ?  How  did  he  travel  ?  How  genuine 
an  experience  did  he  get  ?  For  traveling  is,  in 
the  main,  like  as  if  you  stayed  at  home,  and  then 
the  question  is,  How  do  you  live  and  conduct 
yourself  at  home  ?  What  I  mean  is  that  it 
might  be  hard  to  decide  whether  I  would  travel 
to  Lake  Superior  or  Labrador  or  Florida.  Per 
haps  none  would  be  worth  the  while  if  I  went 


158  WINTER. 

by  the  usual  mode.  But  if  I  travel  in  a  simple, 
primitive,  original  manner,  standing  in  a  truer 
relation  to  men  and  nature,  travel  away  from 
the  old  and  commonplace,  get  some  honest  ex 
perience  of  life,  if  only  out  of  my  feet  and  home 
sickness,  then  it  becomes  less  important  whither 
I  go  or  how  far.  I  so  see  the  world  from  a  new 
and  more  commanding  point  of  view.  Perhaps 
it  is  easier  to  live  a  true  and  natural  life  while 
traveling,  as  one  can  move  about  less  awkwardly 
than  he  can  stand  still. 

Jan.  11,  1857.  .  .  .  For  some  years  past  I 
have  partially  offered  myself  as  a  lecturer,  have 
been  advertised  as  such  several  years.  Yet  I 
had  but  two  or  three  invitations  to  lecture  in 
a  year,  and  some  years  none  at  all.  I  congratu 
late  myself  on  having  been  permitted  to  stay  at 
home  thus.  I  am  so  much  richer  for  it.  I  do 
not  see  what  I  should  have  got  of  much  value, 
except  money,  by  going  about.  But  I  do  see 
what  I  should  have  lost.  It  seems  to  me  that  I 
have  a  longer  and  more  liberal  lease  of  life  thus. 
I  cannot  afford  to  be  telling  my  experience,  es 
pecially  to  those  who  perhaps  will  take  no  inter 
est  in  it.  I  wish  to  be  getting  experience.  You 
might  as  well  recommend  to  a  bear  to  leave  his 
hollow  tree  and  run  about  all  winter  scratch 
ing  at  all  the  hollow  trees  in  the  woods.  He 
would  be  leaner  in  the  spring  than  if  he  had 


WINTER.  159 

stayed  at  home  and  sucked  his  claws.  As  for 
the  lecture-goers,  it  is  none  of  their  business 
what  I  think.  I  perceive  that  most  make  a  great 
account  of  their  relations,  more  or  less  personal 
or  direct,  to  many  men,  coining  before  them  as 
lecturers,  writers,  or  public  men.  But  all  this  is 
impertinent  and  unprofitable  to  me.  I  never  get 
recognized,  nor  was  recognized  by  a  crowd  of 
men.  I  was  never  assured  of  their  existence, 
nor  they  of  mine. 

There  was  wit  and  even  poetry  in  the  negro's 
answer  to  the  man  who  tried  to  persuade  him 
that  the  slaves  would  not  be  obliged  to  work  in 
heaven,  —  "  Oh,  you  g'  way,  Massa,  I  know 
better.  If  dere  's  no  work  for  cullered  folks  up 
dar,  dey  '11  make  some  fur  'em,  and  if  dere  's 
nuffin  better  to  do,  dey  '11  make  'em  shub  de 
clouds  along.  You  can't  fool  dis  chile,  Massa." 

I  was  describing,  the  other  day,  my  success  in 
solitary  and  distant  woodland  walking  outside 
the  town.  I  do  not  go  there  to  get  my  dinner, 
but  to  get  that  sustenance  which  dinners  only 
preserve  me  to  enjoy,  without  which  dinners  are 
a  vain  repetition.  But  how  little  men  can  help 
me  in  this,  only  by  having  a  kindred  experience. 
Of  what  use  to  tell  them  of  my  happiness. 
Thus,  if  ever  we  have  anything  important  to 
say,  it  might  be  introduced  with  the  remark,  it 
is  nothing  to  you,  in  particular.  It  is  none  of 


160  WINTER. 

your  business,  I  know.  That  is  what  might  be 
called  going  into  good  society.  I  never  chanced 
to  meet  with  any  man  so  cheering  and  elevating 
and  encouraging,  so  infinitely  suggestive  as  the 
stillness  and  solitude  of  the  Well  Meadow  field. 
Men  even  think  me  odd  and  perverse  because  I 
do  not  prefer  their  society  to  this  Nymph  or 
Wood  God  rather.  But  I  have  tried  them.  I 
have  sat  down  with  a  dozen  of  them  together  in 
a  club.  .  .  . 

They  did  not  inspire  me.  One  or  another 
abused  our  ears  with  many  words  and  a  few 
thoughts  which  were  not  theirs.  There  was 
very  little  genuine  goodness  apparent.  We  are 
such  hollow  pretenders.  I  lost  my  time.  But 
out  there  !  Who  shall  criticise  that  companion  ? 
It  is  like  the  hone  to  the  knife.  I  bathe  in  that 
element,  and  am  cleansed  of  all  social  impurities. 
I  become  a  witness  with  unprejudiced  senses  to 
the  order  of  the  universe.  There  is  nothing 
petty  or  impertinent,  none  to  say,  "  See  what  a 
great  man  I  am  !  "  There,  chiefly,  and  not  in 
the  society  of  wits,  am  I  cognizant  of  wit.  Shall 
I  prefer  a  part,  an  infinitely  small  fraction  to 
the  whole.  There  I  get  my  underpinnings  laid 
and  repaired,  cemented,  leveled.  There  is  my 
country  club.  We  dine  at  the  sign  of  the 
Shrub  Oak,  the  new  Albion  House. 

I  demand  of  my  companion   some   evidence 


WINTER.  161 

that  he  has  traveled  farther  than  to  the  sources 
of  the  Nile,  that  he  has  been  out  of  town,  out 
of  the  house,  not  that  he  can  tell  a  good  story, 
but  that  he  can  keep  a  good  silence.  Has  he 
attended  to  a  silence  more  significant  than  any 
story  ?  Did  he  ever  get  out  of  the  road  which 
all  men  and  fools  travel  ?  You  call  yourself  a 
great  traveler,  perhaps,  but  can  you  get  beyond 
the  influence  of  a  certain  class  of  ideas  ? 

Jan.  11,  1859.  At  6  A.  M.  —22°,  and  how 
much  lower  I  know  not,  the  mercury  [?]  in  our 
thermometer  having  gone  into  the  bulb,  but 
that  is  said  to  be  the  lowest.  Going  to  Boston 
to-day,  I  find  that  the  cracking  of  the  ground 
last  night  is  the  subject  of  conversation  in  the 
cars,  and  that  it  was  quite  general.  I  see  many 
cracks  in  Cambridge  and  Concord.  It  would 
appear,  then,  that  the  ground  cracks  on  the  ad 
vent  of  very  severe  cold  weather.  I  had  not 
heard  it  before  this  winter.  It  was  so  when  I 
went  to  Amherst  a  winter  or  two  ago. 

Jan.  11,  1861.  H M brings  me  the 

contents  of  a  crow's  stomach  in  alcohol.  It  was 
killed  in  the  village  within  a  day  or  two.  It  is 
quite  a  mass  of  frozen-thawed  apple  pulp  and 
skin,  with  a  good  many  pieces  of  skunk-cabbage 
berries,  a  quarter  of  an  inch  or  less  in  diameter, 
and  commonly  showing  the  pale  brown  or  black 
ish  outside,  interspersed,  looking  like  bits  of 


162  WINTER. 

acorns,  never  a  whole  or  even  half  a  berry,  and 
two  little  bones  as  of  frogs,  or  mice,  or  tadpoles. 
Also  a  street  pebble,  a  quarter  of  an  inch  in 
diameter,  hard  to  be  distinguished  in  appearance 
from  the  cabbage  seeds. 

Jan.  12,  1852.  ...  I  sometimes  think  that  I 
may  go  forth  and  walk  hard  and  earnestly,  and 
live  a  more  substantial  life,  get  a  glorious  ex 
perience,  be  much  abroad  in  heat  and  cold,  day 
and  night,  live  more,  expend  more  atmospheres, 
be  weary  often,  etc.,  etc.  But  then  swiftly  the 
thought  comes  to  me,  Go  not  so  far  out  of  your 
way  for  a  truer  life,  keep  strictly  onward  in  that 
path  alone  which  your  genius  points  out,  do  the 
things  which  lie  nearest  to  you,  but  which  are 
difficult  to  do,  live  a  purer,  a  more  thoughtful 
and  laborious  life,  more  true  to  your  friends  and 
neighbors,  more  noble  and  magnanimous,  and 
that  will  be  better  than  a  wild  walk.  To  live  in 
relations  of  truth  and  sincerity  with  men  is  to 
dwell  in  a  frontier  country.  What  a  wild  and 
unfrequented  wilderness  that  would  be !  What 
Saguenays  of  magnanimity  that  might  be  ex 
plored  !  —  Then  talk  about  traveling  this  way 
and  that,  as  if  seeing  were  all  in  the  eyes,  and 
a  man  could  sufficiently  report  what  he  stood 
bodily  before,  when  the  seeing  depends  ever  on 
the  being.  All  report  of  travel  is  the  report  of 
victory  or  defeat,  of  a  contest  with  every  event 


WINTER.  163 

and  phenomenon,  and  how  you  come  out  of  it. 
A  blind  man  who  possesses  inward  truth  and 
consistency  will  see  more  than  one  who  has 
faultless  eyes,  but  no  serious  and  laborious,  or 
strenuous  soul  to  look  through  them.  As  if  the 
eyes  were  the  only  part  of  the  man  that  traveled. 
Men  convert  their  property  into  cash,  ministers 
fall  sick  to  obtain  the  assistance  of  their  par 
ishes,  all  chaffer  with  sea-captains,  etc.,  as  if 
the  whole  object  were  to  get  conveyed  to  some 
part  of  the  world,  a  pair  of  eyes  merely.  A 
telescope  conveyed  to  and  set  up  at  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope  at  great  expense,  and  only  a 
Bushman  to  look  through  it.  Nothing  like  a 
little  activity,  called  life,  if  it  were  only  walking 
much  in  a  day,  to  keep  the  eye  in  good  order, 
no  such  collyrium. 

Jan.  12,  1855.  p.  M.  To  Flint's  Pond  via 
Minott's  meadow.  After  a  spitting  of  snow  in 
the  forenoon,  I  see  the  blue  sky  here  and  there. 
The  sun  is  coming  out.  It  is  still  and  warm. 
The  earth  is  two  thirds  bare.  I  walk  along  the 
Mill  Brook  below  Emerson's,  looking  into  it 
for  some  life.  Perhaps  what  most  moves  us  in 
winter  is  some  reminiscence  of  far-off  summer. 
.  .  .  What  beauty  in  the  running  brooks  !  what 
life  !  what  society  !  The  cold  is  merely  super 
ficial.  It  is  summer  still  at  the  core.  Far, 
far  within,  it  is  in  the  cawing  of  the  crow,  the 


164  WINTER. 

crowing  of  the  cock,  the  warmth  of  the  sun  on 
our  backs.  I  hear  faintly  the  cawing  of  a 
crow  far,  far  away,  echoing  from  some  unseen 
wood  side,  as  if  deadened  by  the  spring-like 
vapor  which  the  sun  is  drawing  from  the 
ground.  It  mingles  with  the  slight  murmur  of 
the  village,  the  sound  of  children  at  play,  as 
one  stream  empties  gently  into  another,  and  the 
wild  and  tame  are  one.  What  a  delicious 
sound  !  It  is  not  merely  crow  calling  to  crow, 
for  it  speaks  to  me  too.  I  am  part  of  one  great 
creature  with  him.  If  he  has  voice,  I  have  ears. 
I  can  hear  when  he  calls,  and  have  engaged  not 
to  shoot  or  stone  him,  if  he  will  caw  to  me 
each  spring.  On  the  one  hand,  it  may  be,  is 
the  sound  of  children  at  school  saying  their  a, 
b,  abs ;  on  the  other,  far  in  the  wood-fringed 
horizon,  the  cawing  of  crows  from  their  blessed 
eternal  vacation,  out  at  their  long  recess,  chil 
dren  who  have  got  dismissed,  while  the  vapor,  as 
incense,  goes  up  from  all  the  fields  of  the  spring 
(if  it  were  spring).  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my 
soul,  bless  Him  for  wildness,  for  crows  that  will 
not  alight  within  gunshot,  and  bless  Him  for 
hens,  too,  that  croak  and  cackle  in  the  yard. 

Jan.  12,  1859.  Mr.  Farmer  brings  me  a 
hawk  which  he  thinks  has  caught  thirty  or  forty 
of  his  chickens  since  summer,  for  he  has  lost  so 
many,  and  he  has  seen  a  hawk  like  this  catch 


WINTER.  165 

some  of  them.  Thinks  he  has  seen  this  same 
one  sitting  a  long  time  upright  on  a  tree,  high 
or  low,  about  his  premises,  and  when  at  length  a 
hen  or  this  year's  chicken  had  strayed  far  from 
the  rest,  he  skimmed  along  and  picked  it  up 
without  pausing,  and  bore  it  off,  the  chicken  not 
having  seen  him  approaching.  He  found  the 
hawk  caught  by  one  leg  and  frozen  to  death  in  a 
trap  which  he  had  set  for  mink  by  a  spring  and 
baited  with  fish.  —  This  one  measures  nineteen 
by  forty-two  inches,  and  is,  according  to  Wilson 
and  Nuttall,  a  young  Falco  lineatus,  or  red- 
shouldered  hawk.  It  might  as  well  be  called  the 
red  or  rusty-breasted  hawk.  According  to  the 
"Birds  of  Long  Island,"  mine  is  the  old  bird.(?) 
Nuttall  says  it  lives  on  frogs,  crayfish,  etc.,  and 
does  not  go  far  north,  not  even  to  Massachusetts, 
he  thought.  Its  note,  Kee-oo.  He  never  saw 
one  soar,  at  least  in  winter.  .  .  . 

Farmer  says  that  he  saw  what  he  calls  the 
common  hen  hawk,  soaring  high,  with  appar 
ently  a  chicken  in  its  claws,  while  a  young  hawk 
circled  beneath,  when  the  former  suddenly  let 
drop  the  chicken.  But  the  young  one  failing  to 
catch  it,  he  shot  down  like  lightning,  and  caught 
and  bore  off  the  falling  chicken  before  it  reached 
the  earth. 

Jan.  12,  1860.  ...  I  go  forth  to  walk  on 
the  Hill  at  3  P.  M.  Thermometer  about  +30°. 


166  WINTER. 

It  is  a  very  beautiful  and  spotless  snow  now,  it 
having  just  ceased  falling.  You  are  struck  by 
its  peculiar  tracklessness,  as  if  it  were  a  thick, 
white  blanket  just  spread.  As  it  were,  each 
snow-flake  lies  as  it  first  fell,  or  there  is  a  regu 
lar  gradation  from  the  denser  bottom  up  to  the 
surface  which  is  perfectly  light,  and  as  it  were 
fringed  with  the  last  flakes  that  fell.  This  was 
a  star  snow,  dry,  but  the  stars  of  considerable 
size.  It  lies  up  light  as  down.  When  I  look 
closely,  it  seems  to  be  chiefly  composed  of  crys 
tals  in  which  the  six  rays  or  leaflets  are  more  or 
less  perfect,  with  a  cottony  powder  intermixed. 
It  is  not  yet  in  the  least  melted  by  the  sun. 
The  sun  is  out  very  bright  and  pretty  warm, 
and  going  from  it,  I  see  a  myriad  sparkling 
points  scattered  over  the  surface  of  the  snow, 
little  mirror-like  facets,  which  on  examination  I 
find  to  be,  each,  one  of  those  star  wheels,  more 
or  less  entire,  from  one  eighth  to  one  third  of  an 
inch  in  diameter,  which  has  fallen  in  the  proper 
position,  reflecting  an  intensely  bright  little  sun, 
as  if  it  were  a  thin  and  uninterrupted  scale  of 
mica.  Such  is  the  glitter  or  sparkle  on  the  sur 
face  of  such  a  snow  freshly  fallen  when  the  sun 
comes  out,  and  you  walk  from  it,  the  points  of 
light  constantly  changing.  I  suspect  that  these 
are  good  evidence  of  the  freshness  of  the  snow. 
The  sun  and  wind  have  not  yet  destroyed  these 
delicate  reflectors.  , 


WINTER.  167 

As  I  stand  by  the  hemlocks,  I  am  greeted  by 
the  lively  and  unusually  prolonged  tche -de -de 
de-de-de  of  a  little  flock  of  chickadees.  The 
snow  has  ceased  falling,  the  sun  comes  out,  and 
it  is  warm  and  still,  and  this  flock  of  chickadees, 
feeling  the  influences  of  this  genial  season,  have 
begun  to  flit  amid  the  snow-covered  fans  of  the 
hemlocks,  jarring  down  the  snow,  for  there  are 
hardly  bare  twigs  enough  for  them  to  rest  on,  or 
they  plume  themselves  in  some  sunny  recess  on 
the  sunny  side  of  the  tree,  only  pausing  to  utter 
their  tche-de-de-de. 

Jan.  13,  1841.  We  should  offer  up  our  per 
fect  (rcAeta)  thoughts  to  the  gods  daily.  Our 
writing  should  be  hymns  and  psalms.  Who 
keeps  a  journal  is  purveyor  to  the  gods.  There 
are  two  sides  to  every  sentence.  The  one  is 
contiguous  to  me,  but  the  other  faces  the  gods, 
and  no  man  ever  fronted  it.  When  I  utter  a 
thought,  I  launch  a  vessel  which  never  sails  in 
my  harbor  more,  but  goes  sheer  off  into  the 
deep.  Consequently  it  demands  a  godlike  in 
sight,  a  fronting  view,  to  read  what  was  greatly 
written. 

Jan.  13,  1852.  told  me  this  afternoon 

of  a  white  pine  in  Carlisle  which  the  owner  was 
offered  thirty  dollars  for  and  refused.  He  had 
bought  the  lot  for  the  sake  of  the  tree  which  he 
left  standing. 


168  WINTER. 

Here  I  am  on  the  Cliffs  at  half-past  three  or 
four  o'clock.  The  snow  more  than  a  foot  deep 
over  all  the  land.  Few,  if  any,  leave  the  beaten 
paths.  A  few  clouds  are  floating  overhead, 
downy  and  dark.  Clear  sky  and  bright  sun,  yet 
no  redness.  Remarkable,  yet  admirable,  moder 
ation  that  this  should  be  confined  to  the  morning 
and  evening.  Greeks  were  they  who  did  it.  A 
mother-o'-pearl  tint  at  the  utmost  they  will  give 
you  at  mid-day,  and  this  but  rarely.  Singular 
enough  !  twenty  minutes  later,  looking  up,  I  saw 
a  long,  light-textured  cloud,  stretching  from  N. 
to  S.  with  a  dunnish  mass  and  an  enlightened 
border,  with  its  under  edge  toward  the  west  all 
beautiful  mother-o'-pearl,  as  remarkable  as  a 
rainbow,  stretching  over  half  the  heavens,  and 
underneath  it  in  the  W.  were  flitting  mother- 
o'-pearl  clouds  which  change  their  loose-tex 
tured  form,  and  melt  rapidly  away,  never  any  so 
fast,  even  while  I  write.  Before  I  can  complete 
this  sentence,  I  look  up  and  they  are  gone,  like 
smoke  or  rather  the  steam  from  the  engine  in 
the  winter  air.  Even  a  considerable  cloud,  like 
a  fabulous  Atlantis  or  unfortunate  Isle  in  the 
Hesperian  sea,  is  dissolved  and  dispersed  in  a 
minute  or  two,  and  nothing  is  left  but  the  pure 
ether.  Then  another  comes  by  magic,  is  born 
out  of  the  pure  blue,  empyrean  with  beautiful 
mother-o'-pearl  tints,  where  not  a  shred  of  vapor 


WINTER.  169 

was  to  be  seeu  before,  not  enough  to  stain  a 
glass,  or  polished  steel  blade.  It  grows  more 
light  and  porous,  the  blue  deeps  are  seen 
through  it  here  and  there,  only  a  few  flocks  are 
left,  and  now  these,  too,  have  disappeared,  and 
no  one  knows  whither  it  is  gone.  You  are  com 
pelled  to  look  at  the  sky,  for  the  earth  is  in 
visible.  .  .  . 

Why  can't  I  go  to  his  office  and  talk  with 
,  and  learn  his  facts  ?  But  I  should  im 
pose  a  certain  restraint  on  him.  We  are  strictly 
confined  to  our  men,  to  whom  we  give  liberty.  . . . 

We  forget  to  strive  and  aspire,  to  do  better 
even  than  is  expected  of  us.  I  cannot  stay  to 
be  congratulated.  I  would  leave  the  world 
behind  me.  We  must  withdraw  from  our  flat 
terers,  even  from  our  friends.  They  drag  us 
down.  It  is  rare  that  we  use  our  thinking 
faculty  as  resolutely  as  an  Irishman  his  spade. 
To  please  our  friends  and  relatives  we  turn  out 
our  silver  ore  in  cart-loads,  while  we  neglect  to 
work  our  mines  of  gold  known  only  to  ourselves, 
far  up  in  the  Sierras,  where  we  pulled  up  a  bush 
in  our  mountain  walk,  and  saw  the  glittering 
treasure.  Let  us  return  thither.  Let  it  be  the 
price  of  our  freedom  to  make  that  known. 

Jan.  13, 1854.  .  .  .  In  the  deep  hollow  this  side 
of  Brittan's  Camp,  I  heard  a  singular  buzzing 
sound  from  the  ground  exactly  like  that  of  a  large 


170  WINTER. 

fly  or  bee  in  a  spider's  web.  I  kneeled  down 
and  with  pains  traced  it  to  a  small  bare  spot  as 
big  as  my  hand  amid  the  snow,  and  searched 
there  amid  the  grass  and  stubble  for  several 
minutes,  putting  the  grass  aside  with  my  fingers, 
till,  when  I  got  nearest  to  the  spot,  not  know 
ing  but  I  might  be  stung,  I  used  a  stick.  The 
sound  was  incessant,  like  that  of  a  large  fly  in 
agony.  But  though  it  made  my  ears  ache,  and 
I  had  my  stick  directly  on  the  spot,  I  could  find 
neither  prey  nor  oppression.  At  length  I  found 
that  I  interrupted  or  changed  the  tone  with  my 
stick,  and  so  traced  it  to  a  few  spires  of  dead 
grass,  occupying  about  one  quarter  of  an  inch  in 
diameter,  and  standing  in  the  melted  snow  water. 
When  I  bent  these  one  side,  it  produced  a  duller 
and  baser  tone.  It  was  a  sound  issuing  from 
the  earth,  and  as  I  stooped  over  it,  the  thought 
came  over  me  that  it  might  be  the  first  puling, 
infantine  cry  of  an  earthquake,  which  would  ere 
long  ingulf  me.  Perhaps  it  was  air  confined 
under  the  frozen  ground,  now  expanded  by  the 
thaw,  and  escaping  upward  through  the  water 
by  a  hollow  grass  stem.  I  left  it  after  ten  min 
utes  buzzing  as  loudly  as  at  first.  Could  hear  it 
more  than  a  rod  away. 

Schoolcraft  says  [of  Ehode  Island],  "The 
present  name  is  derived  from  the  Dutch,  who 
called  it  Roode  Eylant  (Red  Island)  from  the 


WINTER.  171 

autumnal  color  of  its  foliage."    (Coll.  R.  I.  Hist. 
Soc.  vol.  iii.) 

Jan.  13,  1856.  .  .  .  Took  to  pieces  a  pensile 
nest  which  I  found  .  .  .  probably  a  vireo's, 
may  be  a  red-eye's.  In  our  workshops  we 
pride  ourselves  on  discovering  a  use  for  what 
had  been  previously  regarded  as  waste,  but  how 
partial  and  accidental  our  economy  compared 
with  nature's.  In  nature  nothing  is  wasted. 
Every  decayed  leaf  and  twig  and  fibre  is  only 
the  better  fitted  to  serve  in  some  other  depart 
ment,  and  all  at  last  are  gathered  in  her  com 
post  heap.  What  a  wonderful  genius  it  is  that 
leads  the  vireo  to  select  the  tough  fibre  of  the 
inner  bark,  instead  of  the  more  brittle  grasses, 
for  its  basket,  the  elastic  pine  needles  and  the 
twigs  curved  as  they  dried  to  give  it  form,  and, 
as  I  suppose,  the  silk  of  cocoons,  etc.,  to  bind  it 
together  with.  I  suspect  that  extensive  use  is 
made  of  these  abandoned  cocoons  by  the  birds, 
and  they,  if  anybody,  know  where  to  find  them. 
There  were  at  least  seven  materials  used  in  con 
structing  this  nest,  and  the  bird  visited  as  many 
distinct  localities  many  times,  always  with  the 
purpose  or  design  of  finding  some  particular  one 
of  these  materials,  as  much  as  if  it  had  said  to 
itself,  "  Now  I  will  go  and  get  some  old  hor 
net's  nest  from  one  of  those  that  I  saw  last  fall, 
down  in  the  maple  swamp,  perhaps  thrust  my 


172  WINTER. 

bill  into  them,  or  some  silk  from  those  cocoons  I 
saw  this  morning." 

Jan.  13, 1857.  I  hear  one  thrumming  a  guitar 
below  stairs.  It  reminds  me  of  moments  that  I 
have  lived.  What  a  comment  on  our  life  is  the 
least  strain  of  music !  It  lifts  me  above  all  the 
dust  and  mire  of  the  universe.  I  soar  or  hover 
with  clean  skirts  over  the  field  of  my  life.  It 
is  ever  life  within  life  in  concentric  spheres. 
The  field  wherein  I  toil  or  rust  at  any  time  is  at 
the  same  time  the  field  for  such  different  kinds 
of  life  !  The  farmer's  boy  or  hired  man  has  an 
instinct  which  tells  him  as  much  indistinctly; 
hence  his  dreams  and  his  restlessness,  hence 
even  it  is  that  he  wants  money  to  realize  his 
dream  with.  The  identical  field  where  I  am 
leading  my  humdrum  life,  let  but  a  strain  of 
music  be  heard  there,  is  seen  to  be  the  field  of 
some  unrecorded  crusade  or  tournament,  the 
thought  of  which  excites  in  us  an  ecstasy  of  joy. 
The  way  in  which  I  am  affected  by  this  faint 
thrumming  advertises  me  that  there  is  still 
some  health  and  immortality  in  the  springs  of 
me.  What  an  elixir  is  this  sound  !  I  who  but 
lately  came  and  went  and  lived  under  —  a  dish 
cover  —  live  now  under  the  heavens.  It  releases 
me,  bursts  my  bonds.  Almost  all,  perhaps  all, 
our  life  is,  speaking  comparatively,  a  stereo 
typed  despair,  i.  e.,  we  never  at  any  time  realize 


WINTER.  173 

the  full  grandeur  of  our  destiny.  We  habit 
ually,  forever  and  ever,  underrate  our  fate. 
Talk  of  infidels,  why,  all  of  the  race  of  man, 
except  in  the  rarest  moments  when  they  are 
lifted  above  themselves  by  an  ecstasy,  are  infi 
dels.  With  the  very  best  disposition,  what  does 
my  belief  amount  to  ?  This  poor,  timid,  unen 
lightened,  thick  -  skinned  creature,  what  can  it 
believe?  I  am,  of  course,  hopelessly  ignorant 
and  unbelieving  until  some  divinity  stirs  within 
me.  Ninety-nine  one  hundredths  of  our  lives 
we  are  mere  hedgers  and  ditchers,  but  from  time 
to  time  we  meet  with  reminders  of  our  destiny. 
—  We  hear  the  kindred  vibrations,  music !  and 
we  put  out  our  dormant  feelers  into  the  limits 
of  the  universe.  We  attain  to  wisdom  that 
passeth  understanding.  The  stable  continents 
undulate.  The  hard  and  fixed  becomes  fluid. 

"  Unless  above  himself  he  can 
Erect  himself,  how  poor  a  thing  is  man." 

When  I  hear  music,  I  fear  no  danger.  I  am 
invulnerable.  I  see  no  foe.  I  am  related  to  the 
earliest  times,  and  to  the  latest. 

There  are  infinite  degrees  of  life,  from  that 
which  is  next  to  sleep  and  death  to  that  which 
is  forever  awake  and  immortal.  We  must  not 
confound  man  with  man.  We  cannot  conceive 
of  a  greater  difference  than  that  between  the 
life  of  one  man  and  that  of  another.  I  am  con- 


174  WINTER. 

strained  to  believe  that  the  mass  of  men  are 
never  so  lifted  above  themselves  that  their  des 
tiny  is  seen  to  be  transcendently  beautiful  and 
grand. 

Jan.  13,  1858.  ...  At  Jonathan  Buffum's, 
Lynn.  Lecture  in  John  B.  Alley's  parlor.  Mr. 
J.  Buffum  describes  to  me  ancient  wolf  traps, 
made  probably  by  the  early  settlers  in  Lynn, 
perhaps  after  an  Indian  model;  one  some  two 
miles  from  the  shore  near  Saugus,  another, 
more  northerly,  holes  say  seven  feet  deep,  about 
as  long,  and  some  three  feet  wide,  stoned  up 
very  smoothly  and  perhaps  converging  a  little, 
so  that  the  wolf  could  not  get  out.  —  Tradition 
says  that  a  wolf  and  a  squaw  were  one  morning 
found  in  the  same  hole,  staring  at  each  other. 

Jan.  13, 1860.  .  .  .  Farmer  says  that  he  remem 
bers  his  father  saying  that  as  he  stood  in  a  field 
once,  he  saw  a  hawk  soaring  above  and  eying 
something  on  the  ground.  Looking  round,  he 
saw  a  weasel  there  eying  the  hawk.  Just  then 
the  hawk  stooped,  and  the  weasel  at  the  same 
instant  sprang  upon  him.  Up  went  the  hawk  with 
the  weasel,  but  by  and  by  began  to  come  down 
as  fast  as  he  went  up,  rolling  over  and  over,  till 
he  struck  the  ground.  His  father  going  to  him, 
raised  him  up,  when  out  hopped  the  weasel 
from  under  his  wing,  and  ran  off,  none  the 
worse  for  his  fall. 


WINTER.  175 

Jan.  14,  1852.  ...  I  love  to  see  now  a  cock 
of  deep,  reddish  meadow  hay  full  of  ferns  and 
other  meadow  plants  of  the  coarsest  kind.  My 
imagination  supplies  the  green  and  the  hum  of 
bees.  What  a  memento  of  summer  such  a  hay 
cock  !  To  stand  beside  one  covered  with  snow 
in  winter  through  which  the  dry  meadow  plants 
peep  out !  And  yet  our  hopes  survive.  .  .  . 

As  usual,  there  was  no  blueness  in  the  ruts 
and  crevices  of  the  snow  to-day.  What  kind  of 
atmosphere  does  this  require?  When  I  ob 
served  it  the  other  day,  it  was  a  rather  moist 
air,  some  snow  falling,  the  sky  completely  over 
cast,  and  the  weather  not  very  cold.  It  is 
one  of  the  most  interesting  phenomena  of  the 
winter. 

Jan.  14,  1854.  If  the  writers  of  the  brazen 
age  are  most  suggestive  to  thee,  confine  thyself 
to  them,  and  leave  those  of  the  Augustan  age 
to  dust  and  the  bookworms.  .  .  . 

Cato  makes  the  vineyard  of  first  importance 
to  a  farm ;  second,  a  well-watered  garden ;  third, 
a  willow  plantation  (salictum)  ;  fourth,  an  olive 
yard  (oletum)  ;  fifth,  a  meadow,  or  grass  ground 
(pratum)  ;  sixth,  a  grain  field  or  tillage  (campus 
frumentarius)  ;  seventh,  a  wood  for  fuel  (?) 
(silva  ccedua)  ;  Varro  speaks  of  planting  and 
cultivating  this ;  eighth,  an  arbustum ;  Colu- 
mella  says  it  is  a  plantation  of  elms,  and  for 


176  WINTER. 

vines  to  rest  on  ;  ninth,  a  wood  that  yields  mast 
(jglandaria  silva).  He  says  elsewhere  the  ar- 
bustum  yields  llgna  et  virgce. 

He  says,  "  In  early  manhood,  the  master  of  a 
family  must  study  to  plant  his  ground.  As  for 
building,  he  must  think  a  long  time  about  it 
(diu  cogitare).  He  must  not  think  about  plant 
ing,  but  do  it.  When  he  gets  to  be  thirty-six 
years  old,  then  let  him  build,  if  he  has  his 
ground  planted.  So  build  that  the  villa  may 
not  have  to  seek  the  farm,  nor  the  farm  the 
villa."  This  contains  sound  advice,  as  pertinent 
now  as  ever.  ..."  If  you  have  done  one  thing 
late,  you  will  do  all  your  work  late,"  says  Cato 
to  the  farmer.  —  They  raised  a  sallow  (safo'cem), 
to  tie  vines  with.  Ground  subject  to  fogs  is 
called  nebulosus.  .  .  .  Oxen  "  must  have  muz 
zles  (or  little  baskets,  fiscellas)  that  they  may 
not  go  in  quest  of  grass  (ne  herbam  sectentur), 
when  they  plow." 

Jan.  14,  1855.  Skated  to  Baker  Farm  with 
a  rapidity  which  astonished  myself,  before  the 
wind,  feeling  the  rise  and  fall  (the  water  having 
settled  in  the  suddenly  cold  night)  which  I  had 
not  time  to  see.  ...  A  man  feels  like  a  new 
creature,  a  deer  perhaps,  moving  at  this  rate. 
He  takes  new  possession  of  nature  in  the  name 
of  his  own  majesty.  There  was  I,  and  there, 
and  there,  as  Mercury  went  down  the  Idaean 


WINTER.  177 

mountains.  I  judged  that  in  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  I  was  three  and  one  half  miles  from  home 
without  having  made  any  particular  exertion. 

Jan.  14,  1857.  Up  Assabet  on  ice.  ...  I 
notice  on  the  black  willows,  and  also  on 
the  alders  and  white  maples  overhanging  the 
stream,  numerous  dirty-white  cocoons,  about  an 
inch  long,  attached  by  their  sides  to  the  base  of 
the  recent  twigs,  and  disguised  by  dry  leaves 
curled  about  them,  a  sort  of  fruit  which  these 
trees  bear  now.  The  leaves  are  not  attached  to 
the  twigs,  but  artfully  arranged  about,  and 
fastened  to  the  cocoons.  Almost  every  little 
cluster  of  leaves  contains  a  cocoon,  apparently 
of  one  species,  so  that  often  when  you  would 
think  the  trees  were  retaining  their  leaves,  it  is 
not  the  trees,  but  the  caterpillars  that  have  re 
tained  them.  I  do  not  see  a  cluster  of  leaves 
on  a  maple,  unless  on  a  dead  twig,  but  it  con 
ceals  a  cocoon.  Yet  I  cannot  find  one  alive. 
They  are  all  crumbled  within.  The  black  wil 
lows  retain  very  few  of  their  narrow  curled 
leaves  here  and  there,  like  the  terminal  leaflet 
of  a  fern.  The  maples  and  alders  scarcely  any 
ever.  Yet  these  few  are  just  enough  to  with 
draw  attention  from  those  which  surround  the 
cocoons.  What  kind  of  understanding  was 
there  between  the  mind  that  determined  that 
these  leaves  should  hang  on  during  the  winter 


178  WINTER. 

and  that  of  the  worm  that  fastened  a  few  of 
these  leaves  to  its  cocoon  in  order  to  disguise 
it  ?  I  thus  walk  along  the  edge  of  the  trees  and 
bushes  which  overharg  the  stream,  gathering 
the  cocoons  which  probably  were  thought  to  be 
doubly  secure  here.  These  cocoons,  of  course, 
were  attached  before  the  leaves  had  fallen.  Al 
most  every  one  is  already  empty,  or  contains  only 
the  relics  of  a  nymph.  It  has  been  attacked  and 
devoured  by  some  foe.  These  numerous  cocoons 
attached  to  the  twigs  overhanging  the  stream  in 
the  still  and  biting  winter  day  suggest  a  certain 
fertility  in  the  river  borders,  impart  a  kind  of 
life  to  them,  and  so  are  company  to  me.  There 
is  so  much  more  life  than  is  suspected  in  the 
most  solitary  and  dreary  scene.  They  are  as 
much  as  the  lisping  of  a  chickadee. 

Jan.  14,  1858.  Mr.  Buffum  says  that  in 
1817—1819  he  saw  the  sea-serpent  at  Swamp- 
scott,  and  so  did  several  hundred  others.  He 
was  to  be  seen  off  and  on  for  some  time.  There 
were  many  people  on  the  beach  the  first  time  in 
carriages  partly  in  the  water,  and  the  serpent 
came  so  near  that  they,  thinking  he  might  come 
ashore,  involuntarily  turned  their  horses  to  the 
shore,  as  with  a  general  consent,  and  this  move 
ment  caused  him  to  sheer  off  also.  The  road 
from  Boston  was  lined  with  people  directly, 
coming  to  see  the  monster.  Prince  came  with 


WINTER.  179 

his  spy-glass,  saw,  and  printed  his  account  of 
him.  Buffum  says  he  has  seen  him  twenty 
times ;  once  alone  from  the  rocks  at  Little 
Nahant,  where  he  passed  along  close  to  the  shore 
just  beneath  the  surface,  and  within  fifty  or 
sixty  feet  of  him,  so  that  he  could  have  touched 
him  with  a  very  long  pole,  if  he  had  dared  to. 
Buffum  is  about  sixty,  and  it  should  be  said,  as 
affecting  the  value  of  his  evidence,  that  he  is  a 
firm  believer  in  Spiritualism. 

Jan.  14,  1860.  ...  It  is  a  mild  day,  and  I 
notice,  what  I  have  not  observed  for  some 
time,  that  blueness  of  the  air  only  to  be  per 
ceived  in  a  mild  day.  I  see  it  between  me  and 
woods  half  a  mile  distant.  The  softening  of  the 
air  amounts  to  this.  The  mountains  are  quite 
invisible.  You  come  forth  to  see  this  great 
blue  presence  lurking  about  the  woods  and  the 
horizon. 

Jan.  15,  1838.  After  all  that  has  been  said 
in  praise  of  the  Saxon  race,  we  must  allow  that 
our  blue-eyed  and  fair-haired  ancestors  were 
originally  an  ungodly  and  reckless  crew. 

Jan.  15,  1852.  ...  I  do  not  know  but  the 
poet  is  he  who  generates  poems.  By  continence 
he  rises  to  creation  on  a  higher  level,  a  super 
natural  level.  .  .  . 

For  the  first  time  this  winter  I  notice  snow 
fleas  this  afternoon  in  Walden  wood.  Wher- 


180  WINTER. 

ever  I  go,  they  are  to  be  seen,  especially  in  the 
deepest  ruts  and  foot-tracks.  Their  number  is 
almost  infinite.  It  is  a  rather  warm  and  moist 
afternoon,  and  feels  like  rain.  I  suppose  that 
some  peculiarity  in  the  weather  has  called  them 
forth  from  the  bark  of  the  trees. 

It  is  good  to  see  Minott's  hens  pecking  and 
scratching  the  ground.  What  never-failing 
health  they  suggest !  Even  the  sick  hen  is  so 
naturally  sick,  like  a  green  leaf  turning  to 
brown.  No  wonder  men  love  to  have  hens  about 
them,  and  hear  their  creaking  note.  They  are 
even  laying  eggs  from  time  to  time  still,  the 
undespairing  race  ! 

Jan.  15,  1853.  .  .  .  Mrs.  Ripley  told  me  this 
p.  M.  that  Russell  had  decided  that  that  green 
(and  sometimes  yellow)  dust  on  the  underside 
of  stones  in  walls  was  a  decaying  state  of  Lepra- 
ria  chlorina,  a  lichen  ;  the  yellow  another  spe 
cies  of  Lepraria.  I  have  long  known  this  dust, 
but  as  I  did  not  know  the  name  of  it,  i.  e.,  what 
others  called  it,  and  therefore  could  not  conven 
iently  speak  of  it,  it  has  suggested  less  to  me, 
and  I  have  made  less  use  of  it.  I  now  first  feel 
as  if  I  had  got  hold  of  it. 

Jan.  15, 1857.  ...  As  I  passed  the  south  shed 
at  the  depot,  observed  what  I  thought  at  first  a 
tree  sparrow  on  the  wood  in  the  shed,  a  mere 
roof  open  at  the  sides,  under  which  several  men 


WINTER.  181 

were  at  that  time  employed  sawing  wood  with  a 
horse-power.  Looking  closer,  I  saw,  to  my  sur 
prise,  that  it  must  be  a  song  sparrow,  it  having 
the  usual  marks  on  its  breast,  and  no  bright 
chestnut  crown.  The  snow  is  nine  or  ten  inches 
deep,  and  it  appeared  to  have  taken  refuge  in 
this  shed  where  was  much  bare  ground  exposed 
by  removing  the  wood.  When  I  advanced,  in 
stead  of  flying  away,  it  concealed  itself  in  the 
wood,  just  as  it  often  dodges  behind  a  wall. 

What  is  there  in  music  that  it  should  so  stir 
our  deeps  ?  We  are  all  ordinarily  in  a  state  of 
desperation.  Such  is  our  life,  it  ofttimes  drives 
us  to  suicide.  To  how  many,  perhaps  to  most, 
life  is  barely  tolerable,  and  if  it  were  not  for  the 
fear  of  death  or  of  dying,  what  a  multitude 
would  immediately  commit  suicide.  But  let  us 
hear  a  strain  of  music,  and  we  are  at  once  ad 
vertised  of  a  life  which  no  man  had  told  us  of, 
which  no  preacher  preaches.  Suppose  I  try  to 
describe  faithfully  the  prospect  which  a  strain 
of  music  exhibits  to  me.  The  field  of  my  life 
becomes  a  boundless  plain,  glorious  to  tread, 
with  no  death  nor  disappointment  at  the  end  of 
it.  All  meanness  and  trivialness  disappear.  I 
become  adequate  to  my  deed.  No  particulars 
survive  this  expansion.  Persons  do  not  survive 
it.  In  the  light  of  this  strain  there  is  no  thou 
nor  I.  We  are  actually  lifted  above  ourselves. 


182  WINTER. 

The  tracks  of  the  mice  near  the  head  of  Well 
Meadow  were  particularly  interesting.  There 
was  a  level  of  pure  snow  there,  unbroken  by 
bushes  or  grass,  about  four  rods  across,  and 
here  were  the  tracks  of  mice  running  across  it, 
from  the  bushes  on  this  side  to  those  on  the 
other,  the  tracks  quite  near  together,  but  re 
peatedly  crossing  each  other  at  very  acute  angles, 
though  each  particular  course  was  generally 
quite  direct.  The  snow  was  so  light  that  only 
one  distinct  track  was  made  by  all  four  of  the 
feet,  .  .  .  but  the  tail  left  a  very  distinct  mark. 
A  single  track  stretching  away  almost  straight, 
sometimes  half  a  dozen  rods  over  the  unspotted 
snow,  is  very  handsome,  like  a  chain  of  a  new 
pattern,  and  suggests  an  airy  lightness  in  the 
body  that  impressed  it.  Though  there  may 
have  been  but  one  or  two  here,  the  tracks  sug 
gest  quite  a  little  company  that  had  gone  gad 
ding  over  to  their  neighbors  under  the  opposite 
bush.  Such  is  the  delicacy  of  the  impression 
on  the  surface  of  the  lightest  snow,  where  other 
creatures  sink,  and  night,  too,  being  the  season 
when  these  tracks  are  made,  they  remind  me  of  a 
fairy  revel.  It  is  almost  as  good  as  if  the  actors 
were  here.  I  can  easily  imagine  all  the  rest. 
Hopping  is  expressed  by  the  tracks  themselves. 
Yet  I  should  like  much  to  see,  by  broad  day 
light,  a  company  of  these  revelers  hopping 


WINTER.  183 

over  the  snow.  There  is  a  still  life  in  America 
that  is  little  observed  or  dreamed  of.  ...  How 
snug  they  are  somewhere  under  the  snow  now, 
not  to  be  thought  of,  if  it  were  not  for  these 
pretty  tracks.  For  a  week,  or  fortnight  even,  of 
pretty  still  weather,  the  tracks  will  remain  to  tell 
of  the  nocturnal  adventures  of  a  tiny  mouse.  .  . . 
So  it  was  so  many  thousands  of  years  before 
Gutenberg  invented  printing  with  his  types,  and 
so  it  will  be  so  many  thousands  of  years  after 
his  types  are  forgotten  perchance.  The  deer- 
mouse  will  be  printing  in  the  snow  of  Well 
Meadow  to  be  read  by  a  new  race  of  men. 

Jan.  16,  1838.  Man  is  like  a  cork  which  no 
tempest  can  sink,  but  it  will  float  securely  to  its 
haven  at  last. 

The  world  is  never  the  less  beautiful,  though 
viewed  through  a  chink  or  knot-hole. 

Jan.  16,  1852.  I  see  that  to  some  men  their 
relation  to  mankind  is  all  important.  It  is  fatal 
in  their  eyes  to  outrage  the  opinions  and  cus 
toms  of  their  fellow-men.  Failure  and  success 
are  therefore  never  proved  by  them  by  absolute 
and  universal  tests.  I  feel  myself  not  so  vitally 
related  to  my  fellow-men.  I  impinge  on  them 
but  by  a  point  on  one  side.  It  is  not  a  Siamese- 
twin  ligature  that  binds  me  to  them.  It  is  un 
safe  to  defer  so  much  to  mankind  and  the  opin 
ions  of  society,  for  these  are  always,  and  without 


184  WINTER. 

exception,  heathenish  and  barbarous,  seen  from 
the  heights  of  philosophy.  A  wise  man  sees  as 
clearly  the  heathenism  and  barbarity  of  his  own 
countrymen  as  those  of  the  nations  to  whom  his 
countrymen  send  missionaries.  The  English 
man  and  American  are  subject  equally  to  many 
national  superstitions  with  the  Hindoos  and 
Chinese.  My  countrymen  are  to  me  foreigners. 
I  have  but  little  more  sympathy  with  them  than 
with  the  mob  of  India  or  of  China.  All  nations 
are  remiss  in  their  duties,  and  fall  short  of  their 
standards.  Madame  Pfeiffer  says  of  the  Par- 
sees  or  Fire-worshipers  in  Bombay,  who  should 
all  have  been  on  hand  on  the  esplanade  to  greet 
the  first  rays  of  the  sun,  that  she  found  only  a 
few  here  and  there,  and  some  did  not  make 
their  appearance  till  nine  o'clock.  —  I  see  no  im 
portant  difference  between  the  assumed  gravity 
and  bought  funeral  sermon  of  the  parish  clergy 
man  and  the  howlings  and  strikings  of  the 
breast  of  the  hired  mourning  women  of  the 
East. 

Bill  Wheeler  had  two  clumps  for  feet,  and 
progressed  slowly  by  short  steps,  having  frozen 
his  feet  once,  as  I  understood.  Him  I  have 
been  sure  to  meet  once  in  five  years,  progressing 
into  the  town  on  his  stubs,  holding  the  middle 
of  the  road,  as  if  he  drove  the  invisible  herd  of 
the  world  before  him,  especially  on  a  military 


WINTER.  185 

day ;  out  of  what  confines,  whose  hired  man 
having  been,  in  what  remote  barn  having  quar 
tered  all  these  years,  I  never  knew.  He  seemed 
to  belong  to  a  different  caste  from  other  men, 
and  reminded  me  both  of  the  Indian  pariah  and 
martyr.  I  understood  that  somebody  was  found 
to  give  him  his  drink  for  the  few  chores  he 
could  do.  His  meat  was  never  referred  to,  he 
had  so  sublimed  his  life.  One  day  since  this, 
not  long  ago,  I  saw  in  my  walk  a  kind  of  shelter, 
such  as  woodmen  might  use,  in  the  woods  by  the 
Great  Meadows,  made  of  meadow  hay  cast  over 
a  rude  frame.  Thrusting  my  head  in  at  a  hole, 
as  I  am  wont  to  do  in  such  cases,  I  found  Bill 
Wheeler  there  curled  up  asleep  on  the  hay,  who, 
being  suddenly  wakened  from  a  sound  sleep, 
rubbed  his  eyes,  and  inquired  if  I  found  any 
game,  thinking  I  was  sporting.  I  came  away 
reflecting  much  on  that  man's  life,  how  he  com 
municated  with  none,  how  now,  perchance,  he 
did  chores  for  none,  how  he  lived  perhaps  from 
a  deep  principle,  that  he  might  be  some  mighty 
philosopher,  greater  than  Socrates  or  Diogenes, 
simplifying  life,  returning  to  nature,  having 
turned  his  back  on  towns,  how  many  things  he 
had  put  off,  luxuries,  comforts,  human  society, 
even  his  feet,  wrestling  with  his  thoughts.  I 
felt  even  as  Diogenes  when  he  saw  the  boy  drink 
ing  out  of  his  hands,  and  threw  away  his  cup. 


186  WINTER. 

Here  was  one  who  went  alone,  did  no  work,  and 
had  no  relatives  that  I  knew  of,  was  not  ambitious 
that  I  could  see,  did  not  depend  on  the  good  opin 
ions  of  men.  Must  he  not  see  things  with  an 
impartial  eye,  disinterested,  as  the  toad  observes 
the  gardener.  Perchance  here  is  one  of  a  sect 
of  philosophers,  the  only  one,  so  simple,  so  ab 
stracted  in  thought  and  life  from  his  contempo 
raries,  that  his  wisdom  is  indeed  foolishness  to 
them.  Who  knows  but  in  his  solitary  meadow 
hay  bunk  he  indulges  in  thought  only  in  trium 
phant  satires  on  men.  Who  knows  but  here  is 
a  superiority  to  literature,  etc.,  unexpressed  and 
inexpressible,  one  who  has  resolved  to  humble 
and  mortify  himself  as  never  man  was  humbled 
and  mortified,  whose  very  vividness  of  percep 
tion,  clear  knowledge,  and  insight  have  made 
him  dumb,  leaving  no  common  consciousness  and 
ground  of  parlance  with  his  kind,  or  rather  his 
unlike  kindred !  whose  news  plainly  is  not  my 
news  nor  yours.  I  was  not  sure  for  a  moment 
but  here  was  a  philosopher  who  had  left  far  be 
hind  him  the  philosophers  of  Greece  and  India, 
and  I  envied  him  his  advantageous  point  of 
view.  I  was  not  to  be  deceived  by  a  few  stupid 
words,  of  course,  and  apparent  besottedness.  It 
was  his  position  and  career  that  I  contemplated. 

C has  a  great  respect  for  McKean,  he 

stands  on  so  low  a  level;  says  he  is  great  for 


WINTER.  187 

conversation.  He  never  says  anything,  hardly 
answers  a  question,  but  keeps  at  work,  never 
exaggerates,  nor  uses  an  exclamation,  and  does 
as  he  agrees  to.  He  appears  to  have  got  his 
shoulder  to  the  wheel  of  the  universe.  But  the 
other  day  he  went  greater  lengths  with  me,  as 
he  and  Barry  were  sawing  down  a  pine,  both 
kneeling  of  necessity.  I  said  it  was  wet  work 
for  the  knees  in  the  snow.  He  observed,  looking 
up  at  me,  "  We  pray  without  ceasing." 

But  to  return  to  Bill.  I  would  have  liked  to 
know  what  view  he  took  of  life.  —  A  month  or 
two  after  this,  as  I  heard,  he  was  found  dead 
among  the  brush  over  back  of  the  hill,  so  far 
decomposed  that  his  coffin  was  carried  to  his 
body,  which  was  put  into  it  with  pitch-forks.  — 
I  have  my  misgivings  still  that  he  may  have  died 
a  Brahmin's  death,  dwelling  at  the  roots  of  trees 
at  last,  though  I  have  since  been  assured  that  he 
suffered  from  disappointed  love  (was  what  is 
called  love-cracked),  than  which  can  there  be  any 
nobler  suffering,  any  fairer  death  for  a  human 
creature  ?  That  this  made  him  drink,  froze  his 
feet,  and  did  all  the  rest  for  him.  Why  have 
not  the  world  the  benefit  of  his  long  trial? 

Jan.  16, 1853.  .  .  .  Trench  says  that  "  Eivals, 
in  the  primary  sense  of  the  word,  are  those  who 
dwell  on  the  banks  of  the  same  stream,"  or  "  on 
opposite  banks,"  but  (as  he  says  in  the  case  of 


188  WINTER. 

many  words)  since  the  use  of  water  rights  is  a 
fruitful  source  of  contention  between  such  neigh 
bors,  the  word  has  acquired  this  secondary  sense. 
My  friends  are  my  rivals  on  the  Concord  in  the 
primitive  sense  of  the  word.  There  is  no  strife 
between  us  respecting  the  use  of  the  stream. 
The  Concord  offers  many  privileges,  but  none 
to  quarrel  about.  It  is  a  peaceful,  not  a  brawl 
ing  stream.  .  .  .  Bailey,  I  find,  has  it,  "  Rival 
[Rivalis  L.  .  .  .  qui  juxta  eundem  rivum  pas- 
cit]." 

Jan.  16, 1859.  P.  M.  To  Walden,  and  thence 
via  Cassandra  ponds  to  Fair  Haven,  and  down 
river.  .  .  .  As  we  go  south  west  ward  through  the 
Cassandra  hollows  toward  the  declining  sun, 
they  look  successively,  both  by  their  form  and 
color,  like  burnished  silver  shields  in  the  midst 
of  which  we  walked,  looking  toward  the  sun. 
The  whole  surface  of  the  snow,  the  country  over, 
and  of  the  ice,  as  yesterday,  is  rough,  as  if  com 
posed  of  hailstones  half  melted  together.  .  .  . 

The  snow  which  three  quarters  conceals  the 
Cassandra  in  these  ponds,  and  every  twig  and 
trunk  and  blade  of  withered  sedge,  is  ...  cased 
with  ice,  and  accordingly,  as  I  have  said,  when 
you  go  facing  the  sun,  the  hollows  look  like  glitter 
ing  shields  set  round  with  brilliants.  That  bent 
sedge  in  the  midst  of  the  shield,  each  particular 
blade  of  it,  being  married  to  an  icy  wire,  twenty 


WINTER.  189 

times  its  size  at  least,  shines  like  polished  silver 
rings  or  semicircles.  It  must  have  been  far 
more  splendid  yesterday  before  any  of  the  ice 
fell  off.  No  wonder  my  English  companion 
says  that  our  scenery  is  more  spirited  than  that 
of  England.  The  snow  crust  is  rough  with  the 
wrecks  of  brilliants  under  the  trees,  an  inch  or 
two  thick  with  them  under  many  trees  where 
they  last  several  days. 

Jan.  16,  1860.  ...  I  see  a  flock  of  tree 
sparrows  picking  something  from  the  surface  of 
the  snow  amid  some  bushes.  Watching  one 
attentively,  I  find  that  it  is  feeding  on  the  very 
fine  brown  chaffy- looking  seed  of  the  panicled 
andromeda.  It  understands  how  to  get  its  din 
ner,  to  make  the  plant  give  down,  perfectly. 
It  flies  up  and  alights  on  one  of  the  dense 
brown  panicles  of  the  hard  berries,  and  gives  it 
a  vigorous  shaking  and  beating  with  its  claws 
and  bill,  sending  down  a  shower  of  seed  to  the 
snow  beneath.  It  lies  very  distinct,  though  fine 
almost  as  dust,  on  the  spotless  snow.  It  then 
hops  down  and  briskly  picks  up  from  the 
snow  what  it  wants.  How  very  clean  and  agree 
able  to  the  imagination,  and  withal  abundant,  is 
this  kind  of  food !  How  delicately  they  fare ! 
These  dry  persistent  seed  vessels  hold  their 
crusts  of  bread  until  shaken.  The  snow  is  the 
white  table-cloth  on  which  they  fall.  .  .  /  It 


190  WINTER. 

shakes  down  a  hundred  times  as  much  as  it 
wants,  and  shakes  the  same  or  another  cluster 
after  each  successive  snow.  How  bountifully 
nature  feeds  them.  No  wonder  they  come  to 
spend  the  winter  with  us,  and  are  at  ease  with 
regard  to  their  food.  .  .  .  How  neatly  and  sim 
ply  they  feed !  This  shrub  grows  unobserved 
by  most,  only  known  to  botanists,  and  at  length 
matures  its  hard,  dry  seed  vessels,  which,  if  no 
ticed,  are  hardly  supposed  to  contain  seed  ;  but 
there  is  no  shrub  or  weed  which  is  not  known 
to  some  bird.  Though  you  may  have  never 
noticed  it,  the  tree  sparrow  comes  from  the 
north  in  the  winter  straight  to  this  shrub,  and 
confidently  shakes  its  panicles,  and  then  feasts 
on  the  fine  shower  of  seeds  that  falls  from  it. 

Jan.  17,  1841.  A  true  happiness  never  hap 
pened,  but  rather  is  proof  against  all  hope.  I 
would  not  be  a  happy,  that  is,  a  lucky  man,  but 
rather  a,  necessitated  and  doomed  one. 

After  so  many  years  of  study,  I  have  not 
learned  my  duty  for  one  hour.  I  am  stranded 
at  each  reflux  of  the  tide,  and  I,  who  sailed  as 
buoyantly  on  the  middle  deep  as  a  ship,  am  as 
helpless  as  a  muscle  on  the  rock.  I  cannot 
account  to  myself  for  the  hour  I  live.  Here 
time  has  given  me  a  dull  prosaic  evening,  not  of 
kin  to  vesper  or  Cynthia,  a  dead  lapse,  where 
Time's  stream  seems  settling  into  a  pool,  a  still- 


WINTER.  191 

ness  not  as  if  Nature's  breath  were  held,  but 
expired.  Let  me  know  that  such  hours  as  this 
are  the  wealthiest  in  Time's  gift.  It  is  the  in 
sufficiency  of  the  hour  which,  if  we  but  feel  and 
understand,  we  shall  reassert  our  independence 
then. 

Jan.  17,  1852.  .  .  .  The  other  day  as  I  was 

passing  the house  .  .  .  with  my  pantaloons 

as  usual  tucked  into  my  boots  (there  was  no 

path  beyond    H 's),  I  heard  some   persons 

in 's  shed,  but  did  not  look  round,  and  when 

I  had  got  a  rod  or  two  beyond,  I  heard  some  one 
call  out  impudently  from  the  shed,  something 
like,  "  Holloa,  Mister,  what  do  you  think  of  the 
walking  ?  "  I  turned  round  directly,  and  saw 
three  men  standing  in  the  shed.  I  was  resolved 
to  discomfit  them,  that  they  should  prove  their 
manhood,  if  they  had  any,  and  find  something 
to  say,  though  they  had  nothing  before,  that 
they  should  make  amends  to  the  universe  by 
feeling  cheap.  They  should  either  say  to  my 
face  and  eye  what  they  had  said  to  my  back,  or 
they  should  feel  the  meanness  of  having  to 
change  their  tone.  So  I  called  out,  looking  at 
one,  "  Do  you  wish  to  speak  to  me,  sir  ?  "  No 
answer.  So  I  stepped  a  little  nearer  and  re 
peated  the  question,  when  one  replied,  "  Yes, 
sir."  So  I  advanced  with  alacrity  up  the  path 
they  had  shoveled.  In  the  mean  while  one  ran 


192  WINTER. 

into  the  house.  I  thought  I  had  seen  the  near 
est  one.  He  called  me  by  name  faintly  and 
with  hesitation,  and  held  out  his  hand  half  un 
consciously,  which  I  did  not  decline.  I  inquired 
gravely  if  he  wished  to  say  anything  to  me.  He 
could  only  wave  to  the  other,  and  mutter,  "  My 
brother."  I  approached  him  and  repeated  the 
question.  He  looked  as  if  he  were  shrinking 
into  a  nutshell,  a  pitiable  object  he  was,  and 
looked  away  from  me  while  he  began  to  frame 
some  business,  some  surveying  that  he  might 
wish  to  have  done.  I  saw  that  he  was  drunk, 
that  his  brother  was  ashamed  of  him,  and  I 
turned  my  back  on  him  in  the  outset  of  this 
indirect  and  drunken  apology.  .  .  . 

In  proportion  as  I  have  celestial  thoughts  is 
the  necessity  for  me  to  be  out  and  behold  the 
western  sky  before  sunset  these  winter  days. 
That  is  the  symbol  of  the  unclouded  mind  that 
knows  neither  winter  nor  summer.  What  is 
your  thought  like  ?  That  is  the  hue,  that  the 
purity  and  transparency  and  distance  from 
earthly  taint  of  my  inmost  mind  ;  for  whatever 
we  see  without  is  a  symbol  of  something  within, 
and  that  which  is  farthest  off  is  the  symbol  of 
what  is  deepest  within.  The  lover  of  contem 
plation,  accordingly,  will  gaze  much  into  the  sky. 
Fair  thoughts  and  a  serene  mind  make  fair 
days. 


WINTER.  193 

Here,  also,  is  the  symbol  of  the  triumph  which 
succeeds  to  a  grief  that  has  tried  us  to  our  ad 
vantage,  so  that  at  last  we  can  smile  through  our 
tears.  It  is  the  aspect  with  which  we  come  out 
of  the  house  of  mourning.  We  have  found  our 
relief  in  tears.  —  As  the  skies  appear  to  a  man, 
so  is  his  mind.  Some  see  only  clouds  there,  some 
prodigies  and  portents ;  some  scarce  look  up  at 
all,  their  heads,  like  those  of  the  brutes,  are 
directed  towards  earth.  Some  behold  there 
serenity,  purity,  beauty  ineffable.  —  The  world 
run  to  see  the  panorama,  while  there  is  a  pano 
rama  in  the  sky  which  few  go  out  to  see. 

.  .  .  There  might  be  a  chapter,  when  I  speak 
of  hens  in  the  thawy  days  and  spring  weather 
on  the  chips,  called  Chickweed  or  Plantain. 

Those  western  .  .  .  vistas  through  clouds  to 
the  sky  show  the  clearest  heavens,  clearer  and 
more  elysian  than  when  the  whole  sky  is  compar 
atively  free  from  clouds,  for  then  there  is  wont 
to  be  a  vapor  more  generally  diffused,  especially 
near  the  horizon,  which  in  cloudy  days  is  ab 
sorbed,  as  it  were,  or  collected  into  masses,  and 
the  vistas  are  clearer  than  the  unobstructed 
cope  of  heaven. 

What  endless  variety  in  the  form  and  texture 
of  the  clouds,  some  fine,  some  coarse-grained! 
I  saw  to-night  what  looked  like  the  back  bone 
with  portions  of  the  ribs  of  a  fossil  monster. 


194  WINTER. 

Every  form  and  creature  is  thus  shadowed  forth 
in  vapor  in  the  heavens.  .  .  . 

It  appears  to  me  that  at  a  very  early  age  the 
mind  of  man,  perhaps  at  the  same  time  with  his 
body,  ceases  to  be  elastic.  His  intellectual 
power  becomes  something  defined  and  limited. 
He  does  not  think  expansively,  as  he  was  wont 
to  stretch  himself  in  his  growing  days.  What 
was  flexible  sap  hardens  into  heart  wood,  and 
there  is  no  further  change.  In  -the  season  of 
youth  man  seems  to  me  capable  of  intellectual 
effort  and  performance  which  surpass  all  rules 
and  bounds  as  the  youth  lays  out  his  whole 
strength  without  fear  or  prudence,  and  does  not 
feel  his  limits.  It  is  the  transition  from  poetry 
to  prose.  The  young  man  can  run  and  leap, 
he  has  not  learned  exactly  how  far.  .  .  .  The 
grown  man  does  not  exceed  his  daily  labor.  He 
has  no  strength  to  waste. 

Jan.  17,  1853.  .  .  .  Cato,  prescribing  a  med- 
icamentum  for  oxen,  says,  "  When  you  see  a 
snake's  slough,  take  it  and  lay  it  up,  that  you 
may  not  have  to  seek  it  when  it  is  wanted." 
This  was  mixed  with  bread,  corn,  etc. 

He  tells  how  to  make  bread  and  different 
kinds  of  cakes,  viz.,  a  libum,  a  placenta,  a  spira 
(so  called  because  twisted  like  a  rope,  perhaps 
like  doughnuts),  scriblita  (because  ornamented 
with  characters  like  writing),  globi  (globes), 


WINTER.  195 

etc. ;  tells  how  to  make  vows  for  your  oxeu  with 
an  offering  to  Mars,  and  Sylvanus  in  a  wood, 
no  woman  to  be  present,  or  to  know  how  it  is 
done. 

...  If  you  wish  to  remove  an  ill  savor  from 
wine,  he  recommends  to  heat  a  brick,  pitch  it, 
and  let  it  down  by  a  string  to  the  bottom  of  the 
cask,  and  let  it  remain  there  two  days,  the  cask 
being  stopped.  "  If  you  wish  to  know  if  water 
has  been  added  to  wine,  make  a  little  vessel  of 
ivy  wood  (materia  ederaced).  Put  into  it  the  wine 
which  you  think  has  water  in  it.  If  it  has  water, 
the  wine  will  run  out  (efflue£}\  the  water  will 
remain,  for  a  vessel  of  ivy  wood  does  not  hold 
wine." 

"  Make  a  sacrificial  feast  for  the  oxen  when 
the  pear  is  in  blossom.  Afterward  begin  to 
plow  in  the  spring."  —  "  That  day  is  to  be  holy 
(feriai)  to  the  oxen,  and  herdsmen,  and  those 
who  make  the  feast."  They  offer  wine  and  mut 
ton  to  Jupiter  Dap  alls,  also  to  Vesta  if  they 
choose.  .  .  . 

When  they  thinned  a  consecrated  grove  (lu- 
cum  conlucare,  as  if  to  let  in  the  light  to  a 
shady  place)  they  were  to  offer  a  hog  by  way  of 
expiation,  and  pray  the  god  or  goddess  to  whom 
it  was  sacred  to  be  propitious  to  them,  their 
house,  and  family,  and  children.  Should  not 
every  grove  be  regarded  as  a  lucus  or  conse- 


196  WINTER. 

crated  grove  in  this  sense.  I  wish  that  our  farm 
ers  felt  some  such  awe  when  they  cut  down  our 
consecrated  groves. 

He  gives  several  charms  to  cure  diseases, 
mere  magician's  words. 

Jan.  17,  1860.  .  .  .  Alcott  said  well  the 
other  day  that  this  was  his  definition  of  heaven, 
"A  place  where  you  can  have  a  little  conver 
sation." 

Jan.  18,  1841.  We  must  expect  no  income 
beside  our  outgoes.  We  must  succeed  now,  and 
we  shall  not  fail  hereafter.  So  soon  as  we  be 
gin  to  count  the  cost,  the  cost  begins. 

If/bur  scheme  is  well  built  within,  any  mis- 
h#p  to  the  outbuilding  will  not  be  fatal. 
/  The  capital  wanted  is  an  entire  independence 
/    of  all  capital  but  a  clear  conscience  and  a  reso 
lute  will,/ 

When  we  are  so  poor  that  the  howling  of  the 
wind  shall  have  a  music  in  it,  and  not  declare 
war  against  our  property,  the  proprietors  may 
well  envy  us.  —  We  have  been  seeking  riches 
not  by  a  true  industry  or  building  within,  but 
by  mere  accumulation,  putting  together  what 
was  without  till  it  rose  a  heap  beside  us.  We 
should  rather  acquire  them  by  the  utter  renun 
ciation  of  them.  If  I  hold  a  house  and  land 
as  property,  am  I  not  disinherited  of  sun,  wind, 
rain,  and  all  good  beside?  The  richest  are 


WINTER.  197 

only  some  degrees  poorer  than  nature.  It  is 
impossible  to  have  more  property  than  we  dis 
pense.  Genius  is  only  as  rich  as  it  is  generous. 
If  it  hoards,  it  impoverishes  itself.  What  the 
banker  sighs  for,  the  meanest  clown  may  have, 
leisure  and  a  quiet  mind. 

Jan.  18,  1852.  ...  I  still  remember  those 
wonderful  sparkles  at  Pelham  Pond.  The  very 
sportsmen  in  the  distance  with  their  dogs  and 
guns  presented  some  surfaces  on  which  a  sparkle 
could  impinge,  such  was  the  transparent,  flash 
ing  air.  It  was  a  most  exhilarating,  intoxicating 
air,  as  when  poets  sing  of  the  sparkling  wine.  .  .  . 

What  is  like  the  peep  or  whistle  of  a  bird  in 
the  midst  of  a  winter  storm  ? 

The  pines,  some  of  them,  seen  through  this 
fine  driving  snow,  have  a  bluish  hue. 

Jan.  18,  1856.  .  .  .  p.  M.  To  Walden,  to 
learn  the  temperature  of  the  water.  .  .  .  This  is 
a  very  mild,  melting  winter  day,  but  clear  and 
bright.  Yet  I  see  the  blue  shadows  on  the  snow 
at  Walden.  The  snow  lies  very  level  there, 
about  ten  inches  deep,  and,  for  the  most  part, 
bears  me  as  I  go  across  with  my  hatchet.  I  think 
I  never  saw  a  more  elysian  blue  than  my  shadow. 
I  am  turned  into  a  tall  blue  Persian  from  my 
cap  to  my  boots,  such  as  no  mortal  dye  can  pro 
duce,  with  an  amethystine  hatchet  in  my  hand. 
I  am  in  raptures  with  my  own  shadow.  Our 


198  WINTER. 

very  shadows  are  no  longer  black,  but  a  celestial 
blue.  This  has  nothing  to  do  with  cold  I  think, 
but  the  sun  must  not  be  too  low. 

I  cleared  a  little  space  in  the  snow,  which  was 
nine  or  ten  inches  deep,  over  the  deepest  part  of 
the  pond,  and  cut  through  the  ice,  which  was 
about  seven  inches  thick.  .  .  .  The  moment  I 
reached  the  water,  it  gushed  up  and  overflowed 
the  ice,  driving  me  out  of  this  yard  in  the  snow, 
where  it  stood  at  least  two  and  one  half  inches 
deep  above  the  ice.  The  thermometer  indicated 
33^°  at  top,  and  34f°  when  drawn  up  rapidly 
from  thirty  feet  beneath  ;  so,  apparently,  it  is 
not  much  warmer  beneath. 

Jan.  18,  1859.  That  wonderful  frostwork 
of  the  13th  and  14th  was  too  rare  to  be  neg 
lected,  succeeded  as  it  was  also  by  two  days 
of  glaze,  but  having  company,  I  lost  half  the 
advantage  of  it.  ... 

We  did  not  have  an  opportunity  to  see  how  it 
would  look  in  the  sun,  but  seen  against  the  mist 
or  fog,  it  was  too  fair  to  be  remembered.  The 
trees  were  the  ghosts  of  trees  appearing  in  their 
winding  sheets,  an  intenser  white  against  the 
comparatively  dusky  ground  of  the  fog.  I  rode 
to  Acton  in  the  afternoon  of  the  13th,  and  I 
remember  the  wonderful  avenue  of  these  faery 
trees  which  everywhere  overarched  my  road. 
The  elms,  from  their  form  and  size,  were  partio- 


WINTER.  199 

ularly  beautiful.  As  far  as  I  observed,  the 
frostwork  was  deepest  in  the  low  grounds, 
especially  on  the  Salix  alba  there.  I  learn 
from  the  papers  that  this  phenomenon  prevailed 
all  over  this  part  of  the  country,  and  attracted 
the  admiration  of  all.  The  trees  on  Boston  Com 
mon  were  clad  in  the  same  snow-white  livery 
with  our  Mnsketaquid  trees.  .  .  . 

Every  one,  no  doubt,  has  looked  with  delight, 
holding  his  face  low,  at  that  beautiful  frostwork 
which  so  frequently  in  winter  mornings  is  seen 
bristling  about  the  throat  of  every  breathing 
hole  in  the  earth's  surface.  In  this  case,  the 
fog,  the  earth's  breath  made  visible,  was  in  such 
abundance  that  it  invested  all  our  vales  and 
hills,  and  the  frostwork,  instead  of  being  con 
fined  to  the  chinks  and  crannies  of  the  earth, 
covered  the  mightiest  trees,  so  that  we,  walking 
beneath  them,  had  the  same  wonderful  prospect 
and  environment  that  an  insect  would  have  .  .  . 
making  its  way  through  a  chink  in  the  earth 
which  was  bristling  with  hoar  frost.  That  glaze ! 
I  know  what  it  was  by  my  own  experience ;  it 
was  the  frozen  breath  of  the  earth  upon  its 
beard.  .  .  . 

Take  the  most  rigid  tree,  the  whole  effect  is 
peculiarly  soft  and  spirit-like,  for  there  is  no 
marked  edge  or  outline.  How  could  you  draw 
the  outline  of  these  snowy  fingers  seen  against 
the  fog,  without  exaggeration.  .  .  . 


200  WINTER. 

Hardly  could  the  New  England  farmer  drive 
to  market  under  these  trees  without  feeling 
that  his  sense  of  beauty  was  addressed.  ...  A 
farmer  told  me  in  all  sincerity  that,  having  occa 
sion  to  go  into  Walden  woods  in  his  sleigh,  he 
thought  he  never  saw  anything  so  beautiful  in  all 
his  life,  and  if  there  had  been  men  there  who 
knew  how  to  write  about  it,  it  would  have  been 
a  great  occasion  for  them.  Many  times  I 
thought  that  if  the  particular  tree,  commonly  an 
elm,  under  which  I  was  walking  or  riding  were 
the  only  one  like  it  in  the  country,  it  would  be 
worth  a  journey  across  the  continent  to  see  it. 
Indeed,  I  have  no  doubt  that  such  journeys 
would  be  undertaken  on  hearing  a  true  account 
of  it.  But  instead  of  being  confined  to  a  single 
tree,  this  wonder  was  as  cheap  and  common  as 
the  air  itself.  Every  man's  wood-lot  was  a  mir 
acle  and  surprise  to  him,  and  for  those  who 
could  not  go  far  there  were  the  trees  in  the 
street  and  the  weeds  in  the  yard.  .  .  .  The 
weeping  willow  with  its  thickened  twigs  seemed 
more  precise  and  regularly  curved  than  ever, 
and  was  as  still  as  if  carved  from  alabaster.  .  .  . 

It  was  remarkable  that  when  the  fog  was  a 
little  thinner,  so  that  you  could  see  the  pine 
woods  a  mile  or  more  off,  they  were  a  distinct 
dark  blue.  —  If  any  tree  is  set  and  stiff,  it  was 
now  more  stiff ;  if  any  airy  and  graceful,  it  was 


WINTER.  201 

now  more  graceful.  The  birches,  especially,  were 
a  great  ornament. 

Jan.  18,  1860.  ...  As  I  stood  under  Lee's 
Cliff,  several  chickadees,  uttering  their  faint 
notes,  came  flitting  near  to  me  as  usual.  They  are 
busily  prying  under  the  bark  of  the  pitch  pines, 
occasionally  knocking  off  a  piece,  while  they 
cling  with  their  claws  on  any  side  of  the  limb. 
Of  course  they  are  in  search  of  animal  food,  but 
I  see  one  suddenly  dart  down  to  a  seedless  pine- 
seed  wing  on  the  snow,  and  then  up  again. 

C says  that  he  saw  them  busy  about  these 

wings  on  the  snow  the  other  day,  so  I  have  no 
doubt  that  they  eat  this  seed. 

The  sky  in  the  reflection  at  the  open  reach  at 
Hubbard's  Bath  is  more  green  than  in  reality, 
and  also  darker  blue.  The  clouds  are  blacker, 
and  the  purple  more  distinct. 

Jan.  19,  1841.  .  .  .  Coleridge,  speaking  of 
the  love  of  God,  says,  "  He  that  loves,  may  be 
sure  he  was  loved  first."  The  love  wherewith 
we  are  loved  is  already  declared,  and  afloat  in 
the  atmosphere,  and  our  love  is  only  the  inlet 
to  it.  It  is  an  inexhaustible  harvest,  always 
ripe  and  ready  for  the  sickle.  It  grows  on 
every  bush,  and  let  not  those  complain  of  their 
fates  who  will  not  pluck  it.  We  need  make  no 
beggarly  demand  for  it,  but  pay  the  price,  and 
depart.  No  transaction  can  be  simpler.  Love's 


202  WINTER. 

accounts  are  kept  by  single  entry.  When  we 
are  amiable,  then  is  love  in  the  gale,  and  in  sun 
and  shade,  and  day  and  night;  and  to  sigh  under 
the  cold,  cold  moon  for  a  love  unrequited  is  to 
put  a  slight  upon  nature  ;  the  natural  remedy 
would  be  to  fall  in  love  with  the  moon  and  the 
night,  and  find  our  love  requited. 

I  anticipate  a  more  thorough  sympathy  with 
nature  when  my  thigh  bones  shall  strew  the 
ground  like  the  boughs  which  the  wind  has  scat 
tered.  These  troublesome  humors  will  flower 
into  early  anemones,  and  perhaps  in  the  very 
lachrymal  sinus,  nourished  by  its  juices,  some 
young  pine  or  oak  will  strike  root. 

What  I  call  pain,  when  I  speak  in  the  spirit 
of  a  partisan,  and  not  as  a  citizen  of  the  body, 
would  be  serene  being,  if  our  interests  were  one. 
Sickness  is  civil  war.  We  have  no  external 
foes.  Even  death  will  take  place  when  I  make 
peace  with  my  body,  and  set  my  seal  to  that 
treaty  which  transcendent  justice  has  so  long  re 
quired.  I  shall  at  length  join  interest  with  it. 

The  mind  never  makes  a  great  effort  without 
a  corresponding  energy  of  the  body.  When 
great  resolves  are  entertained,  its  nerves  are  not 
relaxed,  nor  its  limbs  reclined. 

Jan.  19,  1854.  ...  In  Josselyn's  account  of 
his  voyage  from  London  to  Boston  in  1638,  he 
says,  "  June,  the  first  day  in  the  afternoon,  very 


WINTER.  203 

thick,  foggie  weather,  we  sailed  by  an  enchanted 
island,"  etc.  This  kind  of  remark,  to  be  found 
in  so  many  accounts  of  voyages,  appears  to  be  a 
fragment  of  tradition  come  down  from  the  ear 
liest  account  of  Atlantis  and  its  disappearance. 

Varro,  having  enumerated  certain  writers  on 
agriculture,  says  accidentally  that  they  wrote 
"  soluta  ratione,"  i.  e.,  in  prose.  This  suggests 
the  difference  between  the  looseness  of  prose 
and  the  precision  of  poetry.  A  perfect  expres 
sion  requires  a  particular  rhythm  or  measure  for 
which  no  other  can  be  substituted.  The  prosaic 
is  always  a  loose  expression. 

Jan.  19,  1856.  Another  bright  winter  day. 
p.  M.  To  river  to  get  some  water-asclepias,  to  see 
what  birds'  nests  are  made  of.  ... 

As  I  came  home  through  the  village  at  8.15 
P.M.,  by  a  bright  moonlight,  the  moon  nearly  full 
and  not  more  than  18°  from  the  zenith,  the  wind 
N.  W.  but  not  strong,  and  the  air  pretty  cold, 
I  saw  the  melon-rind  arrangement  of  the  clouds 
on  a  larger  scale  and  more  distinct  than  ever 
before.  There  were  eight  or  ten  courses  of 
clouds,  so  broad  that  with  equal  intervals  of 
blue  sky  they  occupied  the  whole  width  of 
the  heavens,  broad  white  cirro-stratus,  in  per 
fectly  regular  curves  from  W.  to  E.  across  the 
whole  sky.  The  four  middle  ones,  occupying 
the  greater  part  of  the  visible  cope,  were  par- 


204  WINTER. 

ticularly  distinct.  They  were  all  as  regularly 
arranged  as  the  lines  on  a  melon,  arid  with  much 
straighter  sides,  as  if  cut  with  a  knife.  I  hear 
that  it  attracted  the  attention  of  those  who  were 
abroad  at  7  P.  M.,  and  now  at  9  p.  M.  it  is  scarcely 
less  remarkable.  On  one  side  of  the  heavens, 
N.  or  S.,  the  intervals  of  blue  look  almost  black 
by  contrast.  There  is  now,  at  nine,  a  strong  wind 
from  the  N.  W.  Why  do  these  bars  extend 
east  and  west  ?  Is  it  the  influence  of  the  sun 
which  set  so  long  ago  ?  or  of  the  rotation  of  the 
earth  ?  The  bars  which  I  notice  so  often  morn 
ing  and  evening  are  apparently  connected  with 
the  sun  at  those  periods. 

Jan.  20,  1841.  Disappointment  will  make  us 
conversant  with  the  nobler  part  of  our  nature. 
It  will  chasten  us  and  prepare  us  to  meet  acci 
dent  on  higher  ground  the  next  time.  As  Han 
nibal  taught  the  Romans  the  art  of  war,  so  is 
all  misfortune  only  a  stepping-stone  to  fortune. 
The  desultory  moments  which  are  the  grimmest 
feature  of  misfortune  are  a  step  before  me  on 
which  I  should  set  foot,  and  not  stumbling- 
blocks  in  the  path.  To  extract  its  whole  good, 
I  must  be  disappointed  with  the  best  fortune, 
and  not  be  bribed  by  sunshine  or  health. 

O  Happiness,  what  is  the  stuff  thou  art 
made  of  ?  —  Is  it  not  gossamer  and  floating 
spider's  webs  ?  a  crumpled  sunbeam  —  a  coiled 


WINTER.  205 

dew-line  settling  on  some  flower?  What  mo 
ments  will  not  supply  the  reel  from  which  thou 
mayst  be  wound  off  ?  Thou  art  as  subtle  as 
the  pollen  of  flowers  and  the  sporules  of  the 
fungi. 

When  I  meet  a  person  unlike  me,  I  find  my 
self  wholly  in  the  unlikeness.  In  what  I  am 
unlike  others,  in  that  I  am. 

When  we  ask  for  society,  we  do  not  want  the 
double  of  ourselves,  but  the  complement  rather. 
Society  should  be  additive  and  helpful.  We 
would  be  reinforced  by  its  alliance.  True  friends 
will  know  how  to  use  each  other  in  this  respect, 
and  never  barter  or  exchange  their  common 
wealth,  just  as  barter  is  unknown  in  families. 
They  will  not  dabble  in  the  general  coffers,  but 
each  will  put  his  finger  into  the  private  coffer  of 
the  other.  They  will  be  most  familiar,  they  will 
be  most  unfamiliar,  for  they  will  be  so  one  and 
single  that  common  themes  and  things  will  have 
to  be  bandied  between  them,  but  in  silence  they 
will  digest  them  as  one  mind  ;  they  will  at  the 
same  time  be  so  true  and  double  that  each  will 
be  to  the  other  as  admirable  and  as  inaccessible 
as  a  star.  When  my  friend  comes,  I  view  his 
orb  "  through  optic  glass  "  "  at  evening  from 
the  top  of  Fesole."  After  the  longest  earthly 
period,  he  will  still  be  in  apogee  to  me.  —  But 
we  should  so  meet  ourselves  as  we  meet  our 


206  WINTER. 

friends,  and  still  ever  seek  for  ourselves  in  that 
which  is  above  us  and  unlike  us.  So  only  shall 
we  see  what  has  been  well  called  the  light  of  our 
own  countenances. 

Jan.  20, 1853.  .  .  .  Ah,  our  indescribable  win 
ter  sky,  between  emerald  (?)  and  amber  (?),  such 
as  summer  never  sees.  What  more  beautiful  or 
soothing  to  the  eye  than  those  finely  divided  .  .  . 
clouds,  like  down  or  loose-spread  cotton  batting, 
now  reaching  up  from  the  west  above  my  head ! 
Beneath  this  a  different  stratum,  all  whose  ends 
are  curved  like  spray  or  wisps.  All  kinds  of 
figures  are  drawn  on  the  blue  ground  with  this 
fibrous  white  paint. 

Jan.  20,  1855.  ...  In  certain  places,  stand 
ing  on  their  snowiest  side,  the  woods  were  incred 
ibly  fair,  white  as  alabaster.  Indeed,  the  young 
pines  reminded  you  of  the  purest  statuary,  and 
the  stately,  full-grown  ones,  towering  around, 
affected  you  as  if  you  stood  in  a  Titanic  sculp 
tor's  studio,  so  purely  and  delicately  white,  trans 
mitting  the  light,  their  dark  trunks  all  concealed ; 
and  in  many  places  where  the  snow  lay  on  with 
ered  oak  leaves  between  you  and  the  light,  va 
rious  delicate,  fawn-colored  tints  blending  with 
the  white  enhanced  the  beauty. 

.  .  .  How  new  all  things  seem!  Here  is  a 
broad,  shallow  pool  in  the  fields  which  yesterday 
was  slush,  now  converted  into  a  soft,  white, 


WINTER.  207 

fleecy  snow  ice.  ...  It  is  like  the  beginning  of  the 
world.  There  is  nothing  hackneyed  where  a  new 
snow  can  come  and  cover  all  the  landscape.  .  .  . 
The  world  is  not  only  new  to  the  eye,  but  is  still 
as  at  creation.  Every  blade  and  leaf  is  hushed, 
not  a  bird  or  insect  is  heard,  only,  perchance,  a 
faint  tinkling  sleigh-bell  in  the  distance.  .  .  .  The 
snow  still  adheres  conspicuously  to  the  N.  W. 
sides  of  the  stems  of  the  trees,  quite  up  to  their 
summits,  with  a  remarkably  sharp  edge  in  that 
direction.  ...  It  would  be  about  as  good  as 
a  compass  to  steer  by  in  a  cloudy  day  or  by 
night.  .  .  . 

We  come  upon  the  tracks  of  a  man  and  dog, 
which  I  guessed  to  be  C.'s.  Further  still,  .  .  . 
as  I  was  showing  to  T.  under  a  bank  the  single 
flesh-colored  or  pink  apothecium  of  a  Beomyces 
which  was  not  covered  by  the  snow,  I  saw  the 
print  of  C.'s  foot  by  its  side,  and  knew  that  his 
eyes  had  rested  on  it  that  afternoon.  It  was 
about  the  size  of  a  pin's  head.  Saw  also  where 
he  had  examined  the  lichens  on  the  rails.  .  .  . 

Very  musical  and  sweet  now,  like  a  horn,  is 
the  hounding  of  a  fox-hound  heard  in  some  dis 
tant  wood,  while  I  stand  listening  in  some  far 
solitary  and  silent  field. 

I  doubt  if  I  can  convey  an  idea  of  the  appear 
ance  of  the  woods  yesterday.  As  you  stood  in 
their  midst,  and  looked  round  on  their  boughs 


208  WINTER. 

and  twigs  laden  with  snow,  it  seemed  as  if  there 
could  be  none  left  to  reach  the  ground.  These 
countless  zigzag  white  arms  crossing  each  other 
at  every  possible  angle  completely  closed  up  the 
view  like  a  light  drift  within  three  or  four  rods 
on  every  side,  the  wintriest  prospect  imaginable. 
That  snow  which  sifted  down  into  the  wood 
paths  was  much  drier  and  lighter  than  else 
where. 

Jan.  20,  1856.  In  my  experience  I  have 
found  nothing  so  truly  impoverishing  as  what  is 
called  wealth,  i.  e.,  the  command  of  greater 
means  than  you  had  before  possessed,  however 
few  and  slight  still,  for  you  thus  inevitably  ac 
quire  a  more  expensive  habit  of  living,  and  even 
the  very  same  necessaries  and  comforts  cost  you 
more  than  they  once  did.  Instead  of  gaining, 
you  have  lost  some  independence,  and  if  your 
income  should  be  suddenly  lessened,  you  would 
find  yourself  poor,  though  possessed  of  the  same 
means  which  once  made  you  rich.  Within  the 
last  five  years  I  have  had  the  command  of  a  lit 
tle  more  money  than  in  the  previous  five  years, 
for  I  have  sold  some  books  and  some  lectures, 
yet  I  have  not  been  a  whit  better  fed  or  clothed 
or  warmed  or  sheltered,  not  a  whit  richer,  except 
that  I  have  been  less  concerned  about  my  living  ; 
but  perhaps  my  life  has  been  the  less  serious 
for  it,  and  to  balance  it,  I  feel  now  that  there  is 


WINTER.  209 

a  possibility  of  failure.  Who  knows  but  I  may 
come  upon  the  town,  if,  as  is  likely,  the  pub 
lic  want  no  more  of  my  books  or  lectures,  as, 
with  regard  to  the  last,  is  already  the  case.  Be 
fore,  I  was  much  likelier  to  take  the  town  upon 
my  shoulders.  That  is,  I  have  lost  some  of  my 
independence  on  them,  when  they  would  say  that 
I  had  gained  an  independence.  If  you  wish  to 
give  a  man  a  sense  of  poverty,  give  him  a  thou 
sand  dollars.  The  next  hundred  dollars  he  gets 
will  not  be  worth  more  than  ten  that  he  used  to 
get.  Have  pity  on  him.  Withhold  your  gift. 

p.  M.  Up  river.  ...  It  is  now  good  walking 
on  the  river,  for  though  there  has  been  no  thaw 
since  the  snow  came,  a  great  part  of  it  has  been 
converted  into  snow-ice  by  sinking  the  old  ice 
beneath  the  water.  The  crust  of  the  rest  is 
stronger  than  in  the  fields,  because  the  snow  is 
so  shallow  and  has  been  so  moist.  The  river 
is  thus  an  advantage  as  a  highway,  not  only  in 
summer,  and  when  the  ice  is  bare  in  winter,  but 
even  when  the  snow  lies  very  deep  m  the  fields. 
It  is  invaluable  to  the  walker,  being  now,  not 
only  the  most  interesting,  but,  excepting  the 
narrow  and  unpleasant  track  in  the  highway, 
the  only  practicable  route.  The  snow  never  lies 
so  deep  over  it  as  elsewhere,  and,  if  deep,  it  sinks 
the  ice  and  is  soon  converted  into  snow-ice  to  a 
great  extent,  beside  being  blown  out  of  the  river 


210  WINTER. 

valley.  Neither  is  it  drifted  here.  Here,  where 
you  cannot  walk  at  all  in  the  summer,  is  better 
walking  than  elsewhere  in  the  winter.  But  what 
a  different  aspect  has  the  river's  brim  from  what 
it  wears  in  summer  !  I  do  not  at  this  moment 
hear  an  insect's  hum,  nor  see  a  bird  or  a  flower. 
That  museum  of  animal  and  vegetable  life,  a 
meadow,  is  now  reduced  to  a  uniform  level  of 
white  snow,  with  only  half  a  dozen  kinds  of 
shrubs  and  weeds  rising  here  and  there  above  it. 
Jan.  20,  1857.  ...  I  hear  that  Boston  har 
bor  froze  over  on  the  18th  down  to  Fort  Inde 
pendence. 

The  river  has  been  frozen  everywhere  except 
at  the  very  few  swiftest  places  since  about  De 
cember  18th,  and  everywhere  since  about  January 
1st. 

At  R.  W.  E.'s  this  evening  at  about  6  P.  M., 
I  was  called  out  to  see  E.'s  cave  in  the  snow.  It 
was  a  hole  about  two  and  a  half  feet  wide  and 
six  feet  long  into  a  drift,  a  little  winding,  and 
he  had  got  a  lamp  at  the  inner  extremity.  I 
observed  as  I  approached  in  a  course  at  right 
angles  with  the  length  of  the  cave,  that  its  mouth 
was  lit  as  if  the  light  were  close  to  it,  so  that  I 
did  not  suspect  its  depth.  Indeed,  the  light  of 
this  lamp  was  remarkably  reflected  and  distrib 
uted.  The  snowy  walls  were  one  universal  re 
flector  with  countless  facets.  I  think  that  one 


WINTER.  211 

lamp  would  light  sufficiently  a  hall  built  of  this 
material.  The  snow  about  the  mouth  of  the 
cave  within  had  the  yellow  color  of  the  flame  to 
me  approaching,  as  if  the  lamp  were  close  to  it. 
We  afterward  buried  the  lamp  in  a  little  crypt 
in  this  snow-drift,  and  walled  it  in,  and  found 
that  its  light  was  visible  even  in  this  twilight 
through  fifteen  inches  thickness  of  snow.  The 
snow  was  all  aglow  with  it.  If  it  had  been 
darker,  probably  it  would  have  been  visible 
through  a  much  greater  thickness.  —  But  what 
was  most  surprising  to  me,  when  E.  crawled  into 
the  extremity  of  his  cave,  and  shouted  at  the  top 
of  his  voice,  it  sounded  ridiculously  faint,  as  if 
he  were  a  quarter  of  a  mile  off.  At  first  I  could 
not  believe  that  he  spoke  loud,  but  we  all  of  us 
crawled  in  by  turns,  and  though  our  heads  were 
only  six  feet  from  those  outside,  our  loudest 
shouting  only  amused  and  surprised  them.  Ap 
parently  the  porous  snow  drank  up  all  the  sound. 
The  voice  was  in  fact  muffled  by  the  surround 
ing  snow  walls,  and  I  saw  that  we  might  lie  in 
that  hole  screaming  for  assistance  in  vain  while 
travelers  were  passing  along  twenty  feet  distant. 
It  had  the  effect  of  ventriloquism.  So  you  need 
only  make  a  snow  house  in  your  yard  and  pass 
an  hour  in  it,  to  realize  a  good  deal  of  Esqui 
maux  life. 

Jan.  20,  1859.  .   .  .  Among  four  or  five  pick- 


212  WINTER. 

erel  in  a  "  well "  on  the  river,  I  see  one  with 
distinct  transverse  bars,  as  I  look  down  on  its 
back,  not  quite  across  the  back,  but  plain  as 
they  spring  from  the  side  of  the  back,  while  all 
the  others  are  uniformly  dark  above.  Is  not  the 
former  Esox  fasciatus  ?  .  .  . 

The  green  of  the  ice  and  water  begins  to  be 
visible  about  half  an  hour  before  sunset.  Is  it 
produced  by  the  reflected  blue  of  the  sky  min 
gling  with  the  yellow  or  pink  of  the  setting  sun  ? 

Jan.  21, 1838.  Man  is  the  artificer  of  his  own 
happiness.  Let  him  beware  how  he  complains 
of  the  disposition  of  circumstances,  for  it  is  his 
own  disposition  he  blames.  If  this  is  sour,  or 
that  rough,  or  the  other  steep,  let  him  think  if 
it  be  not  his  work.  If  his  look  curdles  all 
hearts,  let  him  not  complain  of  a  sour  reception ; 
if  he  hobble  in  his  gait,  let  him  not  grumble  at 
the  roughness  of  the  way ;  if  he  is  weak  in  the 
knees,  let  him  not  call  the  hill  steep.  This  was 
the  pith  of  the  inscription  on  the  wall  of  the 
Swedish  inn,  "  You  will  find  at  Trolhate  excel 
lent  bread,  meat,  and  wine,  provided  you  bring 
them  with  you !  " 

Every  leaf  and  twig  was  this  morning  cov 
ered  with  a  sparkling  ice  armor.  Even  the 
grasses  in  exposed  fields  were  hung  with  innu 
merable  diamond  pendants  which  jingled  mer 
rily  when  brushed  by  the  foot  of  the  traveler. 


WINTER.  213 

...  It  was  as  if  some  superincumbent  stratum 
of  the  earth  had  been  removed  in  the  night, 
exposing  to  light  a  bed  of  untarnished  crystals. 
The  scene  changed  at  every  step,  or  as  the  head 
was  inclined  to  the  right  or  to  the  left.  There 
were  the  opal,  and  sapphire,  and  emerald,  and 
jasper,  and  beryl,  and  topaz,  and  ruby. 

Such  is  beauty  ever,  neither  here  nor  there, 
now  nor  then,  neither  in  Home  nor  in  Athens, 
but  wherever  there  is  a  soul  to  admire.  If  I 
seek  her  elsewhere  because  I  do  not  find  her  at 
home,  my  search  will  be  a  fruitless  one. 

Jan.  ,21,  1841.  We  can  render  men  the  best 
assistance  by  letting  them  see  how  rare  a  thing 
it  is  to  need  any  assistance.  I  am  not  in  haste 
to  help  men  more  than  God  is.  If  they  will  not 
help  themselves,  shall  I  become  their  abettor  ? 

If  I  have  unintentionally  injured  the  feelings 
of  any,  or  profaned  their  sacred  character,  we 
shall  be  necessitated  to  know  each  other  better 
than  before.  I  have  gained  a  glorious  vantage- 
ground  then,  and  to  the  other  the  shaft  which 
carried  the  wound  will  bear  its  own  remedy  with 
it,  for  we  cannot  be  profaned  without  the  con 
sciousness  that  we  have  a  holy  fane  for  our  asy 
lum  somewhere.  Would  that  sincere  words 
might  always  drive  men  thus  to  earth  them 
selves  ! 

Jan.  21,  1852.  ...  To  record  truths  which 


214  WINTER. 

have  the  same  relation  and  value  to  the  next 
world,  i.  e.,  the  world  of  thought  and  of  the  soul, 
that  political  news  have  to  this.  .  .  . 

Heard  lecture  to-night.  .  .  .  Why  did 

I  not  like  it  better  ?  Can  I  deny  that  it  was 
good?  Perhaps  I  am  bound  to  account  to  my 
self  at  least  for  any  lurking  dislike  for  what 
others  admire,  and  I  am  not  prepared  to  find 
fault  with.  Well,  I  did  not  like  it  then  because 
it  did  not  make  me  like  it,  it  did  not  carry 
me  away  captive.  The  lecturer  was  not  simple 
enough.  For  the  most  part,  the  manner  over 
bore,  choked  off,  stifled,  put  out  of  sight  the 
matter.  I  was  inclined  to  forget  that  he  was 
speaking,  conveying  ideas,  thought  there  had 
been  an  intermission.  Never  endeavor  to  sup 
ply  the  tone  which  you  think  proper  for  certain 
sentences.  It  is  as  if  a  man  whose  mind  was  at 
ease  should  supply  the  tones  and  gestures  for  a 
man  in  distress  who  found  only  the  words.  One 
makes  a  speech  and  another  behind  him  makes 
the  gestures.  —  Then  he  reminded  me  of  Emer 
son,  and  I  could  not  afford  to  be  reminded  of 
Christ  himself.  Yet  who  can  deny  that  it  was 
good  ?  But  it  was  that  intelligence,  that  way 
of  viewing  things  (combined  with  much  pecul 
iar  talent),  which  is  the  common  property  of 
this  generation.  A  man  does  best  when  he  is 
most  himself. 


WINTER.  215 

I  never  realized  so  distinctly  as  at  this  mo 
ment  that  I  am  peacefully  parting  company  with 
the  best  friend  I  ever  had,  from  the  fact  that 
each  is  pursuing  his  proper  path.  I  perceive 
that  it  is  possible  we  may  have  a  better  under 
standing  now  than  when  we  were  more  at  one, 
not  expecting  such  essential  agreement  as  before. 
Simply  our  paths  diverge. 

Jan.  21,  1853.  A  fine,  still,  warm  moonlight 
evening.  .  .  .  Moon  not  yet  full.  To  the  woods 
by  the  Deep  Cut  at  nine  o'clock.  The  blueness 
of  the  sky  at  night  is  an  everlasting  surprise  to 
me,  suggesting  the  constant  presence  and  preva 
lence  of  light  in  the  firmament,  the  color  it  wears 
by  day,  that  we  see  through  the  veil  of  night  to 
the  constant  blue.  The  night  is  not  black  when 
the  air  is  clear,  but  blue  still,  as  by  day.  The 
great  ocean  of  light  and  ether  is  unaffected  by 
our  partial  night.  .  .  .  At  midnight  I  see  into 
the  universal  day. 

I  am  somewhat  oppressed  and  saddened  by 
the  sameness  and  apparent  poverty  of  the  heav 
ens,  that  these  irregular  and  few  geometrical 
figures  which  the  constellations  make  are  no 
other  than  those  seen  by  the  Chaldean  shep 
herds.  I  pine  for  a  new  world  in  the  heavens 
as  well  as  on  the  earth,  and  though  it  is  some 
consolation  to  hear  of  the  wilderness  of  stars 
and  systems  invisible  to  the  naked  eye,  yet  the 


216  WINTER. 

sky  does  not  make  that  impression  of  variety 
and  wildness  that  even  the  forest  does,  as  it 
ought  to  do.  It  makes  an  impression  rather  of 
simplicity  and  unchangeableness,  as  of  eternal 
laws.  ...  I  seem  to  see  it  pierced  with  visual 
rays  from  a  thousand  observatories.  It  is  more 
the  domain  of  science  than  of  poetry.  It  is 
the  stars  as  not  known  to  science  that  I  would 
know,  the  stars  which  the  lonely  traveler 
knows.  The  Chaldaean  shepherds  saw  not  the 
same  stars  which  I  see,  and  if  I  am  elevated  in 
the  least  toward  the  heavens,  I  do  not  accept 
their  classification  of  them.  I  am  not  to  be  dis 
tracted  by  the  names  which  they  have  imposed. 
The  sun  which  I  know  is  not  Apollo,  nor  is  the 
evening1  star  Venus.  The  heaven  should  be  as 
new,  at  least,  as  the  world  is  new.  The  clas 
sification  of  the  stars  is  old  and  musty.  It  is  as 
if  a  mildew  had  taken  place  in  the  heavens, 
as  if  the  stars,  so  closely  packed,  had  heated 
and  moulded  there.  If  they  appear  fixed,  it  is 
because  men  have  been  thus  necessitated  to  see 
them.  ...  A  few  good  anecdotes  is  our  science, 
with  a  few  imposing  statements  respecting  dis 
tance  and  size,  and  little  or  nothing  about  the 
stars  as  they  concern  man.  It  teaches  how  he 
may  survey  a  country  or  sail  a  ship,  and  not 
how  he  may  steer  his  life.  Astrology  contained 
the  germ  of  a  higher  truth  than  this.  It  may 


WINTER.  217 

happen  that  the  stars  are  more  significant  and 
truly  celestial  to  the  teamster  than  to  the  astron 
omer.  .  .  .  Children  study  astronomy  at  the 
district  school,  and  learn  that  the  sun  is  ninety- 
five  millions  of  miles  distant  and  the  like,  a 
statement  which  never  made  any  impression  on 
me,  because  I  never  walked  it,  and  which  I  can 
not  be  said  to  believe.  But  the  sun  shines  nev 
ertheless.  Though  observatories  are  multiplied, 
the  heavens  receive  very  little  attention.  The 
naked  eye  may  easily  see  farther  than  the 
armed.  It  depends  on  who  looks  through  it. 
Man's  eye  is  the  true  star-finder,  the  comet- 
seeker.  No  superior  telescope  to  this  has  been 
invented.  In  those  big  ones,  the  recoil  is  equal 
to  the  force  of  the  discharge.  "  The  poet's  eye 
in  a  fine  frenzy  rolling  "  ranges  from  earth  to 
heaven,  which  the  astronomer's  eye  not  often 
does.  It  does  not  see  far  beyond  the  dome  of 
the  observatory.  .  .  . 

As  I  walk  the  railroad  causeway,  I  am  dis 
turbed  by  the  sound  of  my  steps  on  the  frozen 
ground.  I  wish  to  hear  the  silence  of  the  night. 
I  cannot  walk  with  my  ears  covered,  for  the 
silence  is  something  positive  and  to  be  heard.  I 
must  stand  still  and  listen  with  open  ear,  far 
from  the  noises  of  the  village,  that  the  night 
may  make  its  impression  on  me,  a  fertile  and 
eloquent  silence.  Sometimes  the  silence  is 


218  WINTER. 

merely  negative,  an  arid  and  barren  waste  in 
which  I  shudder,  where  no  ambrosia  grows.  I 
must  hear  the  whispering  of  a  myriad  voices. 
Silence  alone  is  worthy  to  be  heard.  It  is  of 
various  depths  and  fertility  like  soil.  Now  it 
is  a  mere  Sahara  where  men  perish  of  hunger 
and  thirst,  now  a  fertile  bottom  and  prairie  of 
the  West.  As  I  leave  the  village,  drawing 
nearer  to  the  woods,  I  listen  from  time  to 
time  to  hear  the  hounds  of  silence  baying  the 
moon,  to  know  if  they  are  on  the  track  of  any 
game.  If  there  is  no  Diana  in  the  night,  what 
is  it  worth?  .  .  .  The  silence  sings.  It  is  mu 
sical.  I  remember  a  night  when  it  was  audible. 
I  heard  the  unspeakable.  .  .  . 

If  night  is  the  mere  negation  of  day,  I  hear 
nothing  but  my  own  steps  in  it.  Death  is  with 
me,  and  life  far  away.  If  the  elements  are  not 
human,  if  the  winds  do  not  sing  or  sigh,  as  the 
stars  twinkle,  my  life  runs  shallow.  I  measure 
the  depth  of  my  own  being.  .  .  . 

When  I  enter  the  woods,  I  am  fed  by  the 
variety,  the  forms  of  the  trees  above  against  the 
blue,  with  the  stars  seen  through  the  pines,  like 
the  lamps  hung  on  them  in  an  illumination,  the 
somewhat  indistinct  and  misty  fineness  of  the 
pine  tops,  the  finely  divided  spray  of  the  oaks, 
etc.,  and  the  shadow  of  all  these  on  the  snow. 
The  first  shadow  I  came  to,  I  thought  was  a  black 


WINTER.  219 

place  where  the  woodchoppers  had  had  a  fire. 
These  myriad  shadows  checker  the  white  ground 
and  enhance  the  brightness  of  the  enlightened 
portions.  See  the  shadows  of  these  young  oaks 
which  have  lost  half  their  leaves,  more  beau 
tiful  than  the  trees  themselves,  like  the  shadow 
of  a  chandelier,  and  motionless  as  fallen  leaves 
on  the  snow ;  but  shake  the  tree,  and  all  is  in 
motion. 

In  this  stillness  and  at  this  distance  I  hear 
the  nine  o'clock  bell  in  Bedford,  five  miles  off, 
which  I  might  never  hear  in  the  village ;  but 
here  its  music  surmounts  the  village  din  and 
has  something  very  sweet  and  noble  and  in 
spiring  in  it,  associated  in  fact  with  the  hooting 
of  owls. 

Returning,  I  thought  I  heard  the  creaking  of 
a  wagon,  just  starting  from  Hubbard's  door,  and 
rarely  musical  it  sounded.  It  was  the  Telegraph 
harp.  It  began  to  sound  at  one  spot  only.  It 
is  very  fitful,  and  only  sounds  when  it  is  in  the 
mood.  You  may  go  by  twenty  times  both  when 
the  wind  is  high  and  when  it  is  low,  and  let  it  blow 
which  way  it  will,  and  yet  hear  no  strain  from  it. 
But  at  another  time,  at  a  particular  spot,  you 
may  hear  a  strain  rising  and  swelling  on  the 
string,  which  may  at  last  ripen  to  something 
glorious.  The  wire  will  perhaps  labor  long  with 
it  before  it  attains  to  melody. 


220  WINTER. 

Even  the  creaking  of  a  wagon  in  a  frosty 
night  has  music  in  it  which  allies  it  to  the  highest 
and  purest  strains  of  the  muse.  .  .  . 

Minott  says  his  mother  told  him  she  had  seen 
a  deer  come  down  the  hill  behind  her  house, 
where  J.  Moore's  now  is,  and  cross  the  road  and 
the  meadow  in  front.  Thinks  it  may  have  been 
eighty  years  ago. 

Jan.  21,  1857.  ...  It  is  remarkable  how 
many  tracks  of  foxes  you  will  see  quite  near  the 
village,  where  they  have  been  in  the  night,  and 
yet  a  regular  walker  will  not  glimpse  one  oftener 
than  once  in  eight  or  ten  years.  .  .  . 

As  I  flounder  along  the  Corner  road  against 
the  root  fence,  a  very  large  flock  of  snow  bun 
tings  alight  with  a  wheeling  flight  amid  the  weeds 
rising  above  the  snow  ...  a  hundred  or  two  of 
them.  They  run  restlessly  amid  the  weeds,  so 
that  I  can  hardly  get  sight  of  them  through  my 
glass.  Then  suddenly  all  arise  and  fly  only  two 
or  three  rods,  alighting  within  three  rods  of  me. 
They  keep  up  a  constant  twittering.  It  is  as  if 
they  were  ready  any  instant  for  a  longer  flight, 
but  their  leader  had  not  so  ordered  it.  Sud 
denly  away  they  sweep  again,  and  I  see  them 
alight  in  a  distant  field  where  the  weeds  rise 
above  the  snow,  but  in  a  few  minutes  they  have 
left  that  also,  and  gone  farther  north.  Beside 
their  rippling  note,  they  have  a  vibratory  twitter, 


WINTER.  221 

and  from  the  loiterers  you  have  a  quite  tender 
peep,  as  they  fly  after  the  vanishing  flock. 
What  independent  creatures !  They  go  seeking 
their  food  from  north  to  south.  If  New  Hamp 
shire  and  Maine  are  covered  deeply  with  snow, 
they  scale  down  to  Massachusetts  for  their 
breakfast.  Not  liking  the  grains  in  this  field, 
away  they  dash  to  another  distant  one,  attracted 
by  the  weeds  rising  above  the  snow.  Who  can 
guess  in  what  field,  by  what  river  or  mountain, 
they  breakfasted  this  morning.  They  did  not 
seem  to  regard  me  so  near,  but  as  they  went  off, 
their  wave  actually  broke  over  me  as  a  rock. 
They  have  the  pleasure  of  society  at  their  feasts, 
a  hundred  dining  at  once,  busily  talking  while 
eating,  remembering  what  occurred  in  Grinnell 
Land.  As  they  flew  past  me,  they  presented  a 
pretty  appearance,  somewhat  like  broad  bars  of 
white  alternating  with  bars  of  black. 

Jan.  22,  1852.  Having  occasion  to  get  up 
and  light  a  lamp  in  the  middle  of  a  sultry  night, 
perhaps  to  exterminate  mosquitoes,  I  observed  a 
stream  of  large  black  ants  passing  up  and  down 
one  of  the  bare  corner  posts,  those  descending 
having  their  large  white  eggs  or  Iarva3  in  their 
mouths,  the  others  making  haste  up  for  another 
load.  I  supposed  that  they  had  found  the  heat 
so  great  just  under  the  roof  as  to  compel  them 
to  remove  their  progeny  to  a  cooler  place. 


222  WINTER. 

They  had  evidently  taken  and  communicated  the 
resolution  to  improve  the  coolness  of  the  night 
to  remove  their  young  to  a  cooler  and  safer 
locality,  one  stream  running  up,  and  another 
down,  with  great  industry. 

But  why  did  I  change  ?  Why  did  I  leave  the 
woods  ?  I  do  not  think  that  I  can  tell.  I  have 
often  wished  myself  back.  I  do  not  know  any 
better  how  I  came  to  go  there.  Perhaps  it  is 
none  of  my  business,  even  if  it  is  yours.  Per 
haps  I  wanted  change.  There  was  a  little  stag 
nation,  it  may  be,  about  two  o'clock  in  the  after 
noon.  The  world's  axle  creaked,  as  if  it  wanted 
greasing,  as  if  the  oxen  labored  with  the  wain, 
and  could  hardly  get  their  load  over  the  ridge  of 
the  day.  Perhaps  if  I  lived  there  much  longer, 
1  might  live  there  forever.  One  would  think 
twice  before  he  accepted  heaven  on  such  terms. 
A  ticket  to  heaven  must  include  a  ticket  to 
Limbo,  Purgatory,  and  Hell.  Your  ticket  to 
the  Boxes  admits  you  to  the  Pit  also. 

How  much  botany  is  indebted  to  the  Ara 
bians.  A  great  part^of  our  common  names  of 
plants  appear  to  be  Arabic.  .  .  . 

The  pleasures  of  the  intellect  are  permanent, 
the  pleasures  of  the  heart  are  transitory.  — 
My  friend  invites  me  to  read  my  papers  to  him. 
Gladly  would  I  read,  if  he  would  hear.  He 
must  not  hear  coarsely,  but  finely,  suffering  not 


WINTER.  223 

the  least  to  pass  through  the  sieve  of  hearing. 
—  To  associate  with  one  for  years  with  joy  who 
never  met  you  thought  with  thought !  An  over 
flowing  sympathy,  while  yet  there  is  no  intellect 
ual  communion.  Could  we  not  meet  on  higher 
ground  with  the  same  heartiness?  It  is  dull 
work  reading  to  one  who  does  not  apprehend 
you.  How  can  it  go  on  ?  I  will  still  abide  by 
the  truth  in  my  converse  and  intercourse  with 
my  friends,  whether  I  am  so  brought  nearer  to 
or  removed  farther  from  them.  I  shall  not  be 
less  your  friend  for  answering  you  truly,  though 
coldly.  Even  the  estrangement  of  friends  is 
a  fact  to  be  serenely  contemplated,  as  in  the 
course  of  Nature.  It  is  of  no  use  to  lie  either 
by  word  or  action.  Is  not  the  everlasting  truth 
agreeable  to  you? 

To  set  down  such  choice  experiences  that  my 
own  writings  may  inspire  me,  and  at  last  I  may 
make  wholes  of  parts.  Certainly  it  is  a  distinct 
profession  to  rescue  from  oblivion  and  to  fix 
the  sentiments  and  thoughts  which  visit  all  men 
more  or  less  generally.  That  the  contemplation 
of  the  unfinished  picture  may  suggest  its  har 
monious  completion.  Associate  reverently  and 
as  much  as  you  can  with  your  loftiest  thoughts. 
Each  thought  that  is  welcomed  and  recorded  is 
a  nest-egg  by  the  side  of  which  more  will  be 
laid.  .  .  .  Perhaps  this  is  the  main  value  of  a 


224  WINTER. 

habit  of  writing,  of  keeping  a  journal,  that  so 
we  remember  our  best  hours,  and  stimulate  our 
selves.  My  thoughts  are  my  company.  They 
have  a  certain  individuality  and  separate  exist 
ence,  age,  personality.  Having  by  chance  re 
corded  a  few  disconnected  thoughts,  and  then 
brought  them  into  juxta  position,  they  suggest  a 
whole  new  field  in  which  it  was  possible  to  labor 
and  think.  Thought  begat  thought.  .  .  . 

When  a  man  asks  me  a  question,  I  look  him 
in  the  face.  If  I  do  not  see  any  inquiry  there, 
I  cannot  answer  it.  A  man  asked  me  about  the 
coldness  of  this  winter  compared  with  others, 
last  night.  I  looked  at  him.  His  face  expressed 
no  more  curiosity  or  relationship  to  me  than  a 
custard  pudding.  I  made  him  a  random  an 
swer.  I  put  him  off  till  he  was  in  earnest.  He 
wanted  to  make  conversation.  .  .  . 

That  in  the  preaching  or  mission  of  the  Jes 
uits  in  Canada  which  converted  the  Indians  was 
their  sincerity.  They  could  not  be  suspected  of 
sinister  motives.  The  savages  were  not  poor 
observers  or  reasoners.  The  priests  were  there 
fore  sure  of  success,  for  they  had  paid  the  price 
of  it. 

We  resist  no  true  invitations.  They  are  irre 
sistible.  When  my  friend  asks  me  to  stay,  and 
I  do  not,  unless  I  have  another  engagement,  it 
is  because  I  do  not  find  myself  invited.  It  is 


WINTER.  225 

not  in  his  will  to  invite  me.  We  should  deal 
with  the  real  mood  of  our  friends.  I  visited 
my  friend  constantly  for  many  years,  and  he 
postponed  our  friendship  to  trivial  engagements, 
so  that  I  saw  him  not  at  all.  When  in  after 
years  he  had  leisure  to  meet  me,  I  did  not  find 
myself  invited  to  go  to  him. 

Jan.  22,  1854.  .  .  .  Once  or  twice  of  late  I 
have  seen  the  mother-of-pearl  tints  and  rainbow 
flecks  in  the  western  sky.  The  usual  time  is 
when  the  air  is  clear  and  pretty  cool,  about  an 
hour  before  sunset.  Yesterday  I  saw  a  very 
permanent  specimen,  like  a  long  knife  handle  of 
mother-of-pearl,  very  pale,  with  an  interior  blue, 
and  rosaceous  tinges.  I  think  the  summer  sky 
never  exhibits  this  so  finely. 

No  second  snow-storm  in  the  winter  can  be  so 
fair  and  interesting  as  the  first. 

Jan.  22,  1855.  Heavy  rain  in  the  night  and 
half  of  to-day,  with  very  high  wind  from  the 
southward  washing  off  the  snow,  and  filling  the 
road  with  water.  ...  It  is  very  exciting  to  see 
where  was  so  lately  only  ice  and  snow  dark, 
wavy  lakes  dashing  in  furious  torrents  through 
the  commonly  dry  channels  under  the  cause 
ways,  to  hear  only  the  rush  and  roar  of  waters, 
and  look  down  on  mad  billows  where  in  summer 
are  commonly  only  dry  pebbles.  .  .  .  The  musk- 
rats  driven  out  of  their  holes  by  the  water  are 


226  WINTER. 

exceedingly  numerous.  Yet  many  of  their 
cabins  are  above  water  on  the  S.  branch.  Here 
there  are  none.  We  saw  fifteen  or  twenty  of 
these  creatures  at  least  between  Derby's  bridge 
and  the  Tarbel  spring,  either  swimming  with 
surprising  swiftness  up  or  down  or  across  the 
stream,  to  avoid  us,  or  sitting  at  the  water's 
edge,  or  resting  on  the  edge  of  the  ice,  or  on 
some  alder  bough  just  on  the  surface.  One  re 
freshed  himself  after  his  cold  swim  regardless  of 
us,  probed  his  fur  with  his  nose,  and  scratched 
his  ear  like  a  dog.  They  frequently  swam  to 
ward  an  apple-tree  in  the  midst  of  the  water, 
in  the  vain  hope  of  finding  a  resting  place  and 
refuge  there.  I  saw  one  looking  quite  a  red 
dish  brown,  busily  feeding  on  some  plant  just  at 
the  water's  edge,  thrusting  his  head  under  for  it. 

But  I  hear  the  sound  of  G 's  gun  up  stream, 

and  see  his  bag  stuffed  out  with  their  dead 
bodies. 

Jan.  22,  1857.  ...  I  asked  Minott  a,bout  the 
cold  Friday.  He  said  "  it  was  plaguey  cold.  It 
stung  like  a  wasp."  He  remembers  seeing  them 
toss  up  water  in  a  shoemaker's  shop,  usually  a 
very  warm  place,  and  when  it  struck  the  floor 
it  was  frozen,  and  rattled  like  so  many  shot. 

Jan.  22,  1859.  .  .  .  The  muskrat  hunter  last 
night  with  his  increased  supply  of  powder  and 
shot,  and  boat  turned  up  somewhere  on  the 


WINTER.  227 

bank,   now   that   the    river    is   rapidly   rising, 
dreaming   of    his   exploits   to-day    in    shooting 
muskrats,   of   the  great  pile   of  dead  rats  that 
will  weigh  down  his  boat  before  night  when  he 
will  return  wet  and  weary  and  weather-beaten 
to  his  hut  with  an  appetite  for  his  supper,  and 
for  much  sluggish  .  .  .  social  intercourse  with 
his  fellows,  even  he,  dark,  dull,  much  battered 
flint  as  he  is,  is  an  inspired  man  to  his  extent 
now,  perhaps  the  most  inspired  by  this  freshet 
of  any,  and  the  Musketaquid  meadows  cannot 
spare  him.     There  are  poets  of  all  kinds  and 
degrees,  little  known  to  each  other.     The  Lake 
School  is  not  the    only   or   the   principal    one. 
They  love  various  things  ;  some  love  beauty  and 
some  love  rum.     Some  go  to  Rome,  and  some 
go  a-fishing,  and  are  sent  to  the  house  of  correc 
tion  once  a  month.     They  keep  up  their  fires  by 
means  unknown  to  me.     I  know  not  their  com 
ings  and  goings.     How  can  I  tell  what  violets 
they  watch  for  ?    I  know  them  wild,  and  ready 
to  risk  all  when  their  muse  invites.     The  most 
sluggish  will  be  up  early  enough  then,  and  face 
any  amount   of  wet    and  cold.      I   meet   these 
gods   of  the   river    and    woods    with   sparkling 
faces   (like  Apollo's),  late  from   the   house  of 
correction,  it  may  be,  carrying  whatever  mystic 
and  forbidden  bottles  or  other  vessels  concealed, 
while  the  dull,  regular  priests  are  steering  their 


228  WINTER. 

parish  rafts  in  a  prose  mood.  What  care  I 
to  see  galleries  full  of  representations  of  heathen 
gods,  when  I  can  see  actual  living  ones,  by  an 
infinitely  superior  artist.  ...  If  you  read  the 
Rig  Veda,  oldest  of  books,  as  it  were,  describing 
a  very  primitive  people  and  condition  of  things, 
you  hear  in  their  prayers  of  a  still  older,  more 
primitive  and  aboriginal  race  in  their  midst  and 
roundabout,  warring  on  them,  arid  seizing  their 
flocks  and  herds,  infesting  their  pastures.  Thus 
is  it  in  another  sense  in  all  communities,  and 
hence  the  prisons  and  police.  I  hear  these  guns 
going  to-day,  and  I  must  confess  they  are  to  me 
a  springlike  and  exhilarating  sound,  like  the 
cock-crowing,  though  each  one  may  report  the 
death  of  a  muskrat.  This,  methinks,  or  the 
like  of  this,  with  whatever  mixture  of  dross,  is 
the  real  morning  or  evening  hymn  that  goes  up 
from  these  vales  to-day,  and  which  the  stars 
echo.  This  is  the  best  sort  of  glorifying  God 
and  enjoying  Him  that  at  all  prevails  here  to-day. 
...  As  a  mother  loves  to  see  her  children  take 
nourishment  and  expand,  so  God  loves  to  see 
his  children  thrive  on  the  nutriment  He  has  fur 
nished  them.  .  .  .  These  aboriginal  men  cannot 
be  repressed,  but  under  some  guise  or  other  they 
survive  and  reappear  continually.  Just  as  sim 
ply  as  the  crow  picks  up  the  worms  which  are 
over  the  fields,  having  been  washed  out  by  the 


WINTER.  229 

thaw,  these  men  pick  up  the  muskrats  that  have 
been  washed  out  of  the  banks.  And  to  some 
such  ends  men  plow  and  sail,  and  powder  and 
shot  are  made,  and  the  grocer  exists  to  retail 
them,  though  he  may  think  himself  much  more 
the  deacon  of  some  church. 

Jan.  22,  1860.  Up  river  to  Fair  Haven 
Pond.  .  .  .  Where  the  sedge  grows  rankly  and 
is  uncut,  as  along  the  edge  of  the  river  and 
meadows,  what  fine  coverts  are  made  for  mice, 
etc.,  at  this  season.  It  is  arched  over,  and  the 
snow  rests  chiefly  on  its  ends,  while  the  middle 
part  is  elevated  from  six  inches  to  a  foot,  and 
forms  a  thick  thatch,  as  it  were,  even  when  all 
is  covered  with  snow,  under  which  the  mice,  etc., 
can  run  freely,  out  of  the  way  of  the  wind  and 
of  foxes.  After  a  pretty  deep  snow  has  just 
partially  melted,  you  are  surprised  to  find,  as 
you  walk  through  such  a  meadow,  how  high  and 
lightly  the  sedge  lies  up,  as  if  there  had  been 
no  pressure  upon  it.  It  grows,  perhaps,  in 
dense  tufts  or  tussocks,  and  when  it  falls  over, 
it  forms  a  thickly  thatched  roof. 

Nature  provides  shelter  for  her  creatures  in 
various  ways.  If  the  muskrat  has  no  longer 
extensive  fields  of  weeds  and  grass  to  crawl  in, 
what  an  extensive  range  it  has  under  the  ice  of 
the  meadows  and  river  sides;  for  the  water 
settling  directly  after  freezing,  an  icy  roof  of 


230  WINTER. 

indefinite  extent  is  thus  provided  for  it,  and  it 
passes  almost  its  whole  winter  under  shelter,  out 
of  the  wind,  and  invisible  to  men. 

Jan.  23,  1841.  A  day  is  lapsing.  I  hear 
cockerels  crowing  in  the  yard,  and  see  them 
stalking  among  the  chips  in  the  sun.  I  hear  busy 
feet  on  the  floors,  and  the  whole  house  jars  with 
industry.  Surely  the  day  is  well  spent,  and  the 
time  is  full  to  overflowing.  Mankind  is  as  busy 
as  the  flowers  in  summer,  which  make  haste  to 
unfold  themselves  in  the  forenoon,  and  close 
their  petals  in  the  afternoon.  The  momentous 
topics  of  human  life  are  always  of  secondary 
importance  to  the  business  in  hand,  just  as  car 
penters  discuss  politics  between  the  strokes  of 
the  hammer,  while  they  are  shingling  a  roof. 
The  squeaking  of  the  pump  sounds  as  necessary 
as  the  music  of  the  spheres.  The  solidity  and 
apparent  necessity  of  this  routine  insensibly 
recommend  it  to  me.  It  is  like  a  cane  or  a 
cushion  for  the  infirm,  and  in  view  of  it  all  are 
infirm.  If  there  were  but  one  erect  and  solid- 
standing  tree  in  the  woods,  all  creatures  would 
go  to  rub  themselves  against  it,  and  make  sure 
of  their  footing.  Eoutine  is  a  ground  to  stand 
on,  a  wall  to  retreat  to.  We  cannot  draw  on 
our  boots  without  bracing  ourselves  against  it. 
Our  health  requires  that  we  should  recline  on  it 
from  time  to  time.  When  we  are  in  it,  the 


WINTER.  231 

hand  stands  still  on  the  face  of  the  clock,  and 
we  grow  like  corn  in  the  genial  darkness  and 
silence  of  the  night.  Our  weakness  wants  it, 
but  our  strength  uses  it.  Good  for  the  body 
is  the  work  of  the  body,  and  good  for  the  soul, 
the  work  of  the  soul,  and  good  for  either,  the 
work  of  the  other.  Let  them  not  call  hard 
names,  nor  know  a  divided  interest. 

When  I  detect  a  beauty  in  any  of  the  recesses 
of  nature,  I  am  reminded  by  the  serene  and 
retired  spirit  in  which  it  requires  to  be  contem 
plated  of  the  inexpressible  privacy  of  a  life. 
How  silent  and  unambitious  it  is !  The  beauty 
there  is  in  mosses  will  have  to  be  considered 
from  the  holiest,  quietest  nook.  —  The  gods 
delight  in  stillness.  .  .  .  My  truest,  serenest 
moments  are  too  still  for  emotion.  They  have 
woolen  feet.  In  all  our  lives,  we  live  under  the 
hill,  and  if  we  are  not  gone,  we  live  there  still. 

Jan.  23,  1852.  .  .  .  Deep  Cut  going  to  Fair 
Haven  Hill.  No  music  from  the  telegraph  harp 
on  the  causeway  where  the  wind  is  strong,  but 
in  the  Cut  this  cold  day  I  hear  memorable  strains. 
What  must  the  birds  and  beasts  think  where 
it  passes  through  woods,  who  heard  only  the 
squeaking  of  the  trees  before  ?  I  should  think 
that  these  strains  would  get  into  their  music  at 
last.  Will  not  the  mocking-bird  be  heard  one 
day  inserting  this  strain  in  his  medley  ?  It  in- 


232  WINTER. 

toxicates  me.  Orpheus  is  still  alive.  All  poetry 
and  mythology  revive.  The  spirits  of  all  bards 
sweep  the  strings.  I  hear  the  clearest  silver 
lyre-like  tones,  Tyrtaean  tones.  ...  It  is  the 
most  glorious  music  I  ever  heard.  All  those 
bards  revive  and  flourish  again  in  those  five  min 
utes  in  the  Deep  Cut.  The  breeze  came  through 
an  oak  still  waving  its  dry  leaves.  The  very 
fine,  clear  tones  seemed  to  come  from  the  very 
core  and  pith  of  the  telegraph  pole.  I  know 
not  but  it  is  my  own  chords  that  tremble  so 
divinely.  There  are  barytones  and  high,  sharp 
tones,  and  some  come  sweeping  *  seemingly  from 
farther  along  the  wire.  The  latent  music  of 
the  earth  had  found  here  a  vent,  music  ^Eolian. 
There  were  two  strings  in  fact,  one  each  side. 
.  .  .  Thus,  as  ever,  the  finest  uses  of  things  are 
the  accidental.  Mr.  Morse  did  not  invent  this 
music.  .  .  . 

There  are  some  whose  ears  help  me  so  that 
my  things  have  a  rare  significance  when  I  read 
to  them.  It  is  almost  too  good  a  hearing,  so 
that,  for  the  time,  I  regard  my  own  writing 
bom  too  favorable  a  point  of  view. 

Jan.  23,  1854.  Love  tends  to  purify  and 
sublime  itself.  It  mortifies  and  triumphs  over 
the  flesh,  and  the  bond  of  its  union  is  holiness.. 

The   increased   length   of   the   days   is 
observable   of   late.     What  is  a  winter  unless 


WINTER.  233 

you  have  risen  and  gone  abroad  frequently 
before  sunrise  and  by  starlight.  —  Varro  speaks 
of  what  he  calls,  I  believe,  before-light  (antelu- 
cana)  occupations  in  winter,  011  the  farm.  Such 
is  especially  milking  in  this  neighborhood. 
Speaking  of  the  rustic  villa,  he  says,  You  must 
see  that  the  kitchen  is  convenient,  "  because  some 
things  are  to  be  done  there  in  the  winter  before 
daylight  (antelucanis  temporibus),  food  is  to  be 
prepared  and  taken."  In  the  study,  are  not 
some  things  to  be  done  before  daylight,  and  a 
certain  food  to  be  prepared  there  ? 

Jan.  23,  1857.  The  coldest  day  that  I  re 
member  recording,  clear  and  bright,  but  very 
high  wind,  blowing  the  snow.  Ink  froze  ;  had 
to  break  the  ice  in  my  pail  with  a  hammer. 
Thermometer  at  6|  A.  M.,  —18°,  at  10£,  —14°, 
at  12|,  —9°,  at  4  p.  M.,  — 5^°;  at  7£  P.  M.,  —8°. 
I  may  safely  say  that  — 5°  has  been  the  highest 
temperature  to-day  by  our  thermometer.  Walk 
ing  this  P.  M.,  I  notice  that  the  face  inclines  to 
stiffen.  .  .  .  On  first  coming  out  in  very  cold 
weather,  I  find  that  I  breathe  fast,  though  with 
out  walking  faster  or  exerting  myself  more  than 
usual. 

Jan.  24, 1857.  About  6J  A.  M.  [mercury  (?)] 
in  the  bulb  of  thermometer,  Smith's  on  the  same 
nail,  —30°.  At  9¥  A.  M.,  ours  —18°,  Smith's 
— 22°,  which  indicates  that  ours  would  have 


234  WINTER. 

stood  at  26°  at  6£  A.  M.,  if  the  thermometer  had 
been  long  enough.  At  11^  A.  M.,  ours  was  — 1°, 
at  4  P.  M.,  +12°. 

Jan.  25,  1857.  Still  another  very  cold  morn 
ing.  Smith's  thermometer  over  ours,  at  — 29°, 
[mercury  ?]  in  bulb  of  ours.  But  about  7  ours 
was  18°,  and  Smith's  at  24°.  Ours,  therefore, 
at  first,  about  —23°. 

Jan.  26, 1857.  Another  cold  morning.  None 
looked  early,  but  about  8,  it  was  — 14°.  Saw  Bos 
ton  Harbor  frozen  over,  as  it  had  been  for  some 
time.  It  reminded  me  of,  I  think,  Parry's  Win 
ter  Harbor,  with  vessels  frozen  in.  Saw  thou 
sands  on  the  ice,  a  stream  of  men  where  they 
were  cutting  a  channel  toward  the  city.  Ice  said 
to  reach  fourteen  miles.  Snow  untracked  on 
many  decks. 

Ice  did  not  finally  go  out  till  about  February 
15th. 

Jan.  23,  1858.  The  wonderfully  mild  and 
pleasant  weather  continues.  The  ground  has 
been  bare  since  the  llth.  This  morning  was 
colder  than  before.  I  have  not  been  able  to 
walk  up  the  North  Branch  this  winter,  nor  along 
the  channel  of  the  South  Branch  at  any  time. 

P.  M.  To  Saw  Mill  Brook.  A  fine  afternoon. 
There  has  been  but  little  use  for  gloves  this  win 
ter,  though  I  have  been  surveying  a  great  deal 
for  three  months.  The  sun  and  cock-crowing, 
bare  ground,  etc.,  remind  me  of  spring. 


WINTER.  235 

Standing  on  the  bridge  over  the  Mill  Brook, 
on  the  Turnpike,  there  being  but  little  ice  on 
the  S.  side,  I  see  several  small  water  -  bugs 
(gyrans)  swimming  about,  as  in  the  spring.  .  .  . 

At  Ditch  Pond,  I  hear  what  I  suppose  to  be 
a  fox  barking,  an  exceedingly  husky,  hoarse, 
and  ragged  note,  prolonged  perhaps  by  the  echo, 
like  a  feeble  puppy,  or  even  a  child  endeavoring 
to  scream,  but  checked  by  fear.  Yet  it  is  on 
a  high  key.  It  sounds  so  through  the  wood, 
while  I  am  in  the  hollow,  that  I  cannot  tell  from 
which  side  it  comes.  I  hear  it  bark  forty  or 
fifty  times,  at  least.  It  is  a  peculiar  sound, 
quite  unlike  any  other  woodland  sound  that  I 
know.  .  .  . 

Who  can  doubt  that  men  are  by  a  certain  fate 
what  they  are,  contending  with  unseen  and  un- 
imagined  difficulties,  or  encouraged  and  aided 
by  equally  mysterious,  auspicious  circumstances  ? 
Who  can  doubt  this  essential  and  innate  dif 
ference  between  man  and  man,  when  he  con 
siders  a  whole  race,  like  the  Indian,  inevitably 
and  resignedly  passing  away  in  spite  of  our 
efforts  to  Christianize  and  educate  them  ?  Indi 
viduals  accept  their  fate  and  live  according  to  it 
as  the  Indian  does.  Everybody  notices  that  the 
Indian  retains  his  habits  wonderfully,  is  still 
the  same  man  that  the  discoverers  found.  The 
fact  is,  the  history  of  the  white  man  is  a  history 


236  WINTER. 

of  improvement,  that  of  the  red  man,  a  history 
of  fixed  habits  or  stagnation. 

To  insure  health,  a  man's  relation  to  nature 
must  come  very  near  to  a  personal  one.  He 
must  be  conscious  of  a  friendliness  in  her. 
When  human  friends  fail  or  die,  she  must  stand 
in  the  gap  to  him.  I  cannot  conceive  of  any  life 
which  deserves  the  name,  unless  there  is  in  it  a 
certain  tender  relation  to  nature.  This  it  is 
which  makes  winter  warm,  and  supplies  society 
in  the  desert  and  wilderness.  Unless  nature 
sympathizes  with  and  speaks  to  us,  as  it  were, 
the  most  fertile  and  blooming  regions  are  bar 
ren  and  dreary.  .  .  .  I  do  not  see  that  I  can  live 
tolerably  without  affection  for  nature.  If  I  feel 
no  softening  toward  the  rocks,  what  do  they 
signify.  .  .  . 

The  dog  is  to  the  fox  as  the  white  man  to  the 
red.  The  former  has  attained  to  more  clear 
ness  in  his  bark  ;  it  is  more  ringing  and  musical, 
more  developed;  he  explodes  the  vowels  of  his 
alphabet  better,  and  besides  he  has  made  his 
place  so  good  in  the  world  that  he  can  run  with 
out  skulking  in  the  open  field.  What  a  smoth 
ered,  ragged,  feeble,  and  unmusical  sound  is  the 
bark  of  the  fox !  It  seems  as  if  he  scarcely 
dared  raise  his  voice  lest  he  should  catch  the  ear 
of  his  tame  cousin  and  inveterate  foe.  .  .  . 

I  do  not  think  much  of  that  chemistry  that 


WINTER.  237 

can  extract  corn  and  potatoes  out  of  a  barren 
soil,  compared  with  that  which  can  extract 
thought  and  sentiment  out  of  the  life  of  a  man 
on  any  soil. 

It  is  in  vain  to  write  of  the  seasons  unless  you 
have  the  seasons  in  you. 

Jan.  23, 1859 There  is  a  cold  N.  W.  wind, 

and  I  notice  that  the  snow  fleas,  which  were  so 
abundant  over  this  water  yesterday,  have  hopped 
to  some  lee,  i.  e.,  are  collected  like  powder  under 
the  S.  E.  side  of  posts  or  trees,  sticks  or  ridges 
in  the  ice.  You  are  surprised  to  see  that  they 
manage  to  get  out  of  the  wind.  On  the  S.  E. 
side  of  every  such  barrier  along  the  shore  there 
is  a  dark  line  or  heap  of  them. 

Jan.  24,  1841.  I  almost  shrink  from  the 
x^rduousness  of  meeting  men  erectly  day  by  day. 

Be  resolutely  and  faithfully  what  you  are,  be 
humbly  what  you  aspire  to  be.  Be  sure  you 
give  men  the  best  of  your  wares,  though  they  be 
poor  enough,  and  the  gods  will  h$}p  you  to  lay 
up  a  better  store  for  the  f uturer  Man's  noblest 
gift  to  man  is  his  sincerity,  for  it  embraces  his 
integrity  also7'  Let  him  not  dole  out  of  himself 
anxiously  to  suit  their  weaker  or  stronger  stom 
achs,  but  make  a  clear  gift  of  himself,  and 
empty  his  coffers  at  once.  I  would  be  in  society 
as  in  the  landscape ;  in  the  presence  of  nature 
there  is  no  reserve  nor  effrontery. 


238  WINTER. 

Coleridge  says  of  the  "  ideas  spoken  out  every 
where  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,"  that 
they  "  resemble  the  fixed  stars  which  appear  of 
the  same  size  to  the  naked  or  the  armed  eye,  the 
magnitude  of  which  the  telescope  may  rather 
seem  to  diminish  than  to  increase." 

It  is  more  proper  for  a  spiritual  fact  to  have 
suggested  an  analogous  natural  one  than  for  the 
natural  fact  to  have  preceded  the  spiritual  in 
our  minds. 

By  spells  seriousness  will  be  forced  to  cut 
capers,  and  drink  a  deep  and  refreshing  draught 
of  silliness,  to  turn  this  sedate  day  of  Lucifer's 
and  Apollo's  into  an  all  fools'  day  for  Harlequin 
and  Cornwallis.  The  sun  does  not  grudge  his 
rays  to  either,  but  they  are  alike  patronized  by 
the  gods.  Like  overtasked  school-boys,  all  my 
members  and  nerves  and  sinews  petition  thought 
for  a  recess,  and  my  very  thigh  bones  itch  to 
slip  away  from  under  me,  and  run  and  join  in 
the  mele'e.  I  exult  in  stark  inanity.  —  We  think 
the  gods  reveal  themselves  only  to  sedate  and 
musing  gentlemen,  but  not  so  ;  the  buffoon  in 
the  midst  of  his  antics  catches  unobserved 
glimpses  which  he  treasures  for  the  lonely  hour. 
When  I  have  been  playing  torn  fool,  I  have  been 
driven  to  exchange  the  old  for  a  more  liberal 
and  catholic  philosophy. 

Jan.  24,  1852.     If  thou  art  a  writer,  write  as 


WINTER.  239 

if  thy  time  were  short,  for  it  is  indeed  short,  at 
the  longest.  Improve  each  occasion  when  the 
soul  is  reached.  Drain  the  cup  of  inspiration 
to  its  last  dregs.  Fear  no  intemperance  in  that, 
for  the  years  will  come  when  otherwise  thou 
wilt  regret  opportunities  unimproved.  The 
spring  will  not  last  forever.  These  fertile  and 
expanding  seasons  of  thy  life,  when  the  rain 
reaches  thy  root,  when  thy  vigor  shoots,  when 
thy  flower  is  budding,  shall  be  fewer  and  farther 
between.  Again  I  say,  remember  thy  creator  in 
the  days  of  thy  youth.  Use  and  commit  to  life 
what  you  cannot  commit  to  memory.  I  hear  the 
tones  of  my  sister's  piano  below.  It  reminds  me 
of  strains  which  once  I  heard  more  frequently, 
when  possessed  with  the  inaudible  rhythm  I 
sought  my  chamber  in  the  cold,  and  communed 
with  my  own  thoughts.  I  feel  as  if  I  then  re 
ceived  the  gifts  of  the  gods  with  too  much  indif 
ference.  Why  did  I  not  cultivate  those  fields 
they  introduced  me  to?  Does  nothing  with 
stand  the  inevitable  march  of  time?  Why  did  I 
not  use  my  eyes  when  I  stood  on  Pisgah  ?  Now 
I  hear  those  strains  but  seldom.  My  rhythmical 
niood  does  not  endure.  I  cannot  draw  from  it 
and  return  to  it  in  my  thought  as  to  a  well,  all 
the  evening  or  the  morning.  I  cannot  dip  my  pen 
in  it.  I  cannot  work  the  vein,  it  is  so  fine  and 
volatile.  Ah,  sweet,  ineffable  reminiscences. 


240  WINTER. 

In  thy  journal  let  there  never  be  a  jest.  To 
the  earnest,  there  is  nothing  ludicrous.  .  .  . 

When  the  telegraph  harp  trembles  and  wavers, 
I  am  most  affected,  as  if  it  were  approaching  to 
articulation.  It  sports  so  with  my  heart  strings. 
When  the  harp  dies  away  a  little,  then  I  revive 
for  it.  It  cannot  be  too  faint.  I  almost  envy 
the  Irish  whose  shanty  in  the  Cut  is  so  near  that 
they  can  hear  this  music  daily,  standing  at  their 
door.  How  strange  to  think  that  a  sound  so 
soothing,  elevating,  educating  .  .  .  might  have 
been  heard  sweeping  other  strings  when  only  the 
red  man  ranged  these  fields,  might,  perchance,  in 
course  of  time  have  civilized  him  ! 

Jan.  24,  1856.  A  journal  is  a  record  of  ex 
periences  and  growth,  not  a  preserve  of  things 
well  done  or  said.  I  am  occasionally  reminded 
of  a  statement  which  I  have  made  in  conversa 
tion  and  immediately  forgotten,  which  would 
read  much  better  than  what  I  put  in  my  jour 
nal.  It  is  a  ripe,  dry  fruit  of  long  past  experi 
ence  which  falls  from  me  easily  without  giving 
pain  or  pleasure.  The  charm  of  the  journal  must 
consist  in  a  certain  greenness,  though  freshness, 
and  not  in  maturity.  Here  I  cannot  afford  to 
be  remembering  what  I  said  or  did,  my  scurf 
cast  off,  but  what  I  am  and  aspire  to  become. 

Reading  the  hymns  of  the  Rig  Yeda,  trans 
lated  by  Wilson,  which  consist,  in  a  great 


WINTER.  241 

measure,  of  simple  epithets  addressed  to  the  fir 
mament,  or  the  dawn,  or  the  winds,  which  mean 
more  or  less  as  the  reader  is  more  or  less  alert 
and  imaginative,  and  seeing  how  widely  the  va 
rious  translators  have  differed,  they  regarding 
not  the  poetry,  but  the  history  and  philology, 
dealing  with  very  concise  Sanskrit  which  must 
almost  always  be  amplified  to  be  understood,  I 
am  sometimes  inclined  to  doubt  if  the  translator 
has  not  made  something  out  of  nothing,  whether 
a  real  idea  or  sentiment  has  been  thus  trans 
mitted  to  us  from  so  primitive  a  period.  I  doubt 
if  learned  Germans  might  not  thus  edit  pebbles 
from  the  sea-shore  into  hymns  of  the  Rig  Veda, 
and  translators  translate  them  accordingly,  ex 
tracting  the  meaning  which  the  sea  has  imparted 
to  them  in  very  primitive  times.  While  the 
commentators  and  translators  are  disputing  about 
the  meaning  of  this  word  or  that,  I  hear  only 
the  resounding  of  the  ancient  sea,  and  put  into 
it  the  deepest  meaning  I  am  possessed  of,  for 
I  do  not  the  least  care  where  I  get  my  ideas,  or 
what  suggests  them.  .  .  . 

I  have  seen  many  a  collection  of  stately  elms 
which  better  deserved  to  be  represented  at  the 
General  Court  than  the  manikins  beneath, 
than  the  bar-room,  the  victualing  cellar,  and 
groceries  they  overshadowed.  When  I  see  their 
magnificent  domes  miles  away  in  the  horizon, 


242  WINTER. 

over  intervening  valleys  and  forests,  they  sug 
gest  a  village,  a  community  there.  But,  after 
all,  it  is  a  secondary  consideration  whether  there 
are  human  dwellings  beneath  them.  These  may 
have  long  since  passed  away.  I  find  that  into 
my  idea  of  the  village  has  entered  more  of  the 
elm  than  of  the  human  being.  They  are  worth 
many  a  political  borough.  They  constitute  a 
borough.  The  poor  human  representative  of 
his  party  sent  out  from  beneath  their  shade  will 
not  suggest  a  tithe  of  the  dignity,  the  true  noble 
ness  and  comprehensiveness  of  view,  the  sturdi- 
ness  and  independence,  and  serene  beneficence 
that  they  do.  They  look  from  township  to 
township.  .  .  .  They  battle  with  the  tempests 
of  a  century.  See  what  scars  they  bear,  what 
limbs  they  lost  before  we  were  born.  Yet  they 
never  adjourn,  they  steadily  vote  for  their  prin 
ciples,  and  send  their  roots  farther  and  wider 
from  the  same  centre.  They  die  at  their  posts, 
and  they  leave  a  tough  butt  for  the  choppers  to 
exercise  themselves  about,  and  a  stump  which 
serves  for  their  monument.  They  attend  no 
caucus,  they  make  no  compromise,  they  use  no 
policy.  Their  one  principle  is  growth.  They 
combine  a  true  radicalism  with  a  true  conserva 
tism.  Their  radicalism  is  not  a  cutting  away  of 
roots,  but  a  multiplication  and  extension  of  them 
under  all  surrounding  institutions.  They  take 


WINTER.  243 

a  firmer  hold  on  the  earth  that  they  may  rise 
higher  into  the  heavens.  .  .  .  Their  conserva 
tism  is  a  dead  but  solid  heart-wood  which  is 
the  pivot  and  firm  column  of  support  to  all  their 
growth,  appropriating  nothing  to  itself,  but 
forever,  by  its  support,  assisting  to  extend  the 
area  of  their  radicalism.  Half  a  century  after 
they  are  dead  at  the  core,  they  are  preserved  by 
radical  reforms.  They  do  not,  like  men,  from 
radicals  turn  conservatives.  Their  conservative 
part  dies  out  first,  their  radical  and  growing 
part  survives.  They  acquire  new  states  and 
territories  while  the  old  dominions  decay  and 
become  the  habitation  of  bears  and  owls  and 
coons. 

Jan.  24,  1858.  p.  M.  Nut  Meadow  Brook. 
The  river  is  broadly  open  as  usual  this  winter. 
You  can  hardly  say  that  we  have  had  any  sleigh 
ing  at  all  ...  though  five  or  six  inches  of  snow 
lay  on  the  ground  five  days  after  January  6th. 
But  I  do  not  quite  like  this  warm  weather  and 
bare  ground  at  this  season.  What  is  a  winter 
without  snow  and  ice  in  this  latitude  ?  The 
bare  earth  is  unsightly.  This  winter  is  but  un- 
buried  summer.  .  .  . 

At  Nut  Meadow  Brook  the  small  sized  water- 
bugs  are  as  abundant  and  active  as  in  sum 
mer.  I  see  forty  or  fifty  circling  together 
in  the  smooth  and  sunny  bays  all  along  the 


244  WINTER. 

brook.  This  is  something  new  to  me.  What 
must  they  think  of  this  winter  ?  It  is  like  a 
child  waked  up  and  set  to  playing  at  midnight. 
They  seem  more  ready  than  usual  to  dive  to  the 
bottom  when  disturbed.  At  night,  of  course, 
they  dive  to  the  bottom  and  bury  themselves, 
and  if  in  the  morning  they  perceive  no  curtain 
of  ice  drawn  over  their  sky  and  the  pleasant 
weather  continues,  they  gladly  rise  again  and 
resume  their  gyrations  in  some  sunny  bay  amid 
the  alders  and  the  stubble.  I  think  I  never 
noticed  them  more  numerous,  but  I  never  looked 
for  them  so  particularly.  .  .  .  The  sun  falling 
thus  warmly,  for  so  long,  on  the  open  surface  of 
the  brook  tempts  them  upward  gradually.  .  .  . 
What  a  funny  way  they  have  of  going  to  bed. 
They  do  not  take  a  light  and  retire  up-stairs, 
they  go  below.  Suddenly  it  is  heels  up  and 
heads  down,  and  they  go  down  to  their  muddy 
bed,  and  let  the  unresting  stream  flow  over  them 
in  their  dreams.  They  go  to  bed  in  another 
element.  What  a  deep  slumber  must  be  theirs, 
and  what  dreams  down  in  the  mud  there !  So 
the  insect  life  is  not  withdrawn  far  off,  but  a 
warm  sun  would  soon  entice  it  forth.  Some 
times  they  seem  to  have  a*  little  difficulty  in 
making  the  plunge.  May  be  they  are  too  dry 
to  slip  under.  I  saw  one  floating  on  its  back, 
and  it  struggled  a  little  while  before  it  righted 


WINTER.  245 

itself.  Suppose  you  were  to  plot  the  course  of 
one  for  a  day.  What  kind  of  a  figure  would  it 
make  ?  Probably  this  feat,  too,  will  one  day  be 
performed  by  science,  that  maid  of  all  work.  I 
see  one  chasing  a  mote,  and  the  wave  the  crea 
ture  makes  always  causes  the  mote  to  float  away 
from  it.  I  would  like  to  know  what  it  is  they 
communicate  to  one  another,  they  who  appear 
to  value  each  other's  society  so  much.  How 
many  water-bugs  make  a  quorum  ?  How  many 
hundreds  does  their  Fourier  think  it  takes  to 
make  a  complete  bug?  Where  did  they  get 
their  backs  polished  so?  They  will  have  oc 
casion  to  remember  this  year,  that  winter  when 
we  were  waked  out  of  our  annual  sleep.  What 
is  their  precise  hour  for  retiring  ? 

I  see  stretching  from  side  to  side  of  this 
smooth  brook  where  it  is  three  or  four  feet  wide 
what  seems  to  indicate  an  invisible  waving  line, 
like  a  cobweb,  against  which  the  water  is  heaped 
up  a  very  little.  This  line  is  constantly  swayed 
to  and  fro,  as  by  the  current  or.  wind,  bellying 
forward  here  and  there.  I  try  repeatedly  to 
catch  and  break  it  with  my  hand  and  let  the 
water  run  free,  but  still  to  my  surprise  I  clutch 
nothing  but  fluid,  and  the  imaginary  line  keeps 
its  place.  Is  it  the  fluctuating  edge  of  a  lighter, 
perhaps  more  oily,  fluid,  overflowing  a  heavier  ? 
I  see  several  such  lines.  It  is  somewhat  like  the 


246  WINTER. 

slightest  conceivable  smooth  fall  over  a  dam.  I 
must  ask  the  water-bug  that  glides  across  it. 
Ah,  if  I  had  no  more  sins  to  answer  for  than 
a  water-bug  !  They  are  only  the  small  water- 
bugs  that  I  see.  They  are  earlier  in  the  spring 
and  apparently  hardier  than  the  others.  .  .  . 

Between  winter  and  summer  there  is  to  my 
mind  an  immeasurable  interval.  When  I  pry 
into  the  old  bank  swallow  holes  to-day,  see  the 
marks  of  their  bills,  and  even  whole  eggs  left  at 
the  bottom.,  these  things  affect  me  as  the  phe 
nomena  of  a  former  geological  period.  Yet  per 
chance  the  very  swallow  which  laid  those  eggs 
will  revisit  this  hole  next  spring.  The  upper 
side  of  her  gallery  is  a  low  arch  quite  firm  and 
durable. 

Jan.  24,  1859.  ...  I  see  an  abundance  of 
caterpillars  of  various  kinds  on  the  ice  of  the 
meadows,  many  of  them  large,  dark,  hairy,  with 
longitudinal  light  stripes,  somewhat  like  the  com 
mon  apple  one.  Many  of  them  are  frozen  in 
still,  some  for  two  thirds  their  length,  though 
all  are  alive.  Yet  it  has  been  so  cold  since  the 
rise  that  you  can  now  cross  the  channel  almost 
anywhere.  —  I  also  see  a  great  many  of  those  lit 
tle  brown  grasshoppers,  and  one  perfectly  green, 
some  of  them  frozen  in,  but  generally  on  the 
surface,  showing  no  sign  of  life,  yet  when  I 
brought  them  home  to  experiment  on,  I  found 


WINTER.  247 

them  all  alive  and  kicking  in  my  pocket.  There 
were  also  a  small  kind  of  reddish  wasp  quite 
lively  on  the  ice,  and  other  insects.  There  were 
naked  or  smooth  worms  or  caterpillars.  This 
shows  what  insects  have  their  winter  quarters  in 
the  meadow  grass.  This  ice  is  a  good  field  for 
the  entomologist.  .  .  .  The  larger  spiders  gen 
erally  rest  on  the  ice  with  all  their  bags  spread, 
but  on  being  touched  they  gather  them  up. 

Monday,  Jan.  25,  1841.  On  the  morning 
when  the  wild  geese  go  over  I,  too,  feel  the  mi 
gratory  instinct  strong  within  me,  and  anticipate 
the  breaking-lip  of  winter.  If  I  yielded  to  this 
impulse^  At  would  surely  guide  me  to  summer 
haunts.  This  indefinite  restlessness  and  flut- 
teling  on  the  perch  no  doubt  prophesy  the  final 
migration  of  souls  out  of  nature  to  a  serener 
summer,  in  long  harrows  and  waving  lines,  in 
the  spring  weather,  over  what  fair  uplands  and 
fertile  elysian  meadows,  winging  their  way  at 
evening,  and  seeking  a  resting  place  with  loud 
cackling  and  uproar.  .  .  . 

We  should  strengthen  and  beautify  and  in 
dustriously  mould  our  bodies  to  be  fit  compan 
ions  of  the  soul,  assist  them  to  grow  up  like 
trees,  and  be  agreeable  and  wholesome  objects 
in  nature.  I  think  if  I  had  had  the  disposal 
of  this  soul  of  man,  I  should  have  bestowed  it 
sooner  on  some  antelope  of  the  plains  than  upon 
this  sickly  and  sluggish  body. 


248  WINTER. 

Jan.  25,  1852.  .  .  .  The  cold  for  some  weeks 
has  been  intense,  ...  a  Canadian  winter.  .  .  . 
But  last  night  and  to-day  the  weather  has  mod 
erated.  It  is  glorious  to  be  abroad  this  after 
noon,  the  snow  melts  on  the  surface  ;  the  warmth 
of  the  sun  reminds  me  of  summer.  The  dog 
runs  before  us  on  the  railroad  causeway,  and  ap 
pears  to  enjoy  it  as  much  as  ourselves.  .  .  .  The 
clay  in  the  deep  Cut  is  melting  and  streaming 
down,  glistening  in  the  sun.  It  is  I  that  melts, 
while  the  harp  sounds  on  high.  The  snow-drifts 
on  the  west  side  look  like  clouds.  —  We  turned 
down  the  brook  at  Heywood's  meadow.  It  was 
worth  while  to  see  how  the  water  even  in  the 
marsh,  where  the  brook  is  almost  stagnant, 
sparkled  in  this  atmosphere,  for,  though  warm, 
it  is  remarkably  clear.  Water,  which  in  sum 
mer  would  look  dark,  and  perhaps  turbid,  now 
sparkles  like  the  lakes  in  November.  The 
water  is  the  more  attractive,  since  all  around  is 
deep  snow.  The  brook  here  is  full  of  cat-tails, 
Typha  latifolia,  reed-mace.  I  found  on  pulling 
open,  or  breaking  in  my  hand  as  one  would 
break  bread,  the  still  perfect  spikes  of  this  fine 
reed,  that  the  flowers  were  red  or  crimson  at 
their  base  where  united  to  the  stem.  When  I 
rubbed  off  what  was  at  first  but  a  thimble  full  of 
these  dry  flowerets,  they  suddenly  took  in  air  and 
flashed  up  like  powder,  expanding  like  feathers 


WINTER.  249 

or  foam,  filling  and  overflowing  my  hand  to 
which  they  imparted  a  sensation  of  warmth 
quite  remarkable.  ...  I  could  not  tire  of  re 
peating  the  experiment.  I  think  a  single  one 
would  more  than  fill  a  half  peck  measure,  if 
they  lay  as  light  as  at  first  in  the  air.  It  is 
something  magical  to  one  who  tries  it  for  the 
first  time.  .  .  .  You  do  not  know  at  first  where 
it  all  comes  from.  It  is  the  conjurer's  trick  in 
nature,  equal  to  taking  feathers  enough  to  fill  a 
bed  out  of  a  hat.  When  you  had  done,  but  yet 
scraped  the  almost  bare  stem,  they  still  over 
flowed  your  hand  as  before.  ...  As  the  flow 
erets  are  opening  and  liberating  themselves, 
showing  their  red  extremities,  it  has  the  effect 
of  a  changeable  color. 

Ah,  then,  the  brook  beyond,  its  rippling  wa- 
waters  and  its  sunny  sands.  They  made  me  for 
get  that  it  was  winter.  Where  springs  oozed 
out  of  the  soft  bank  over  the  dead  leaves  and 
the  green  sphagnum,  they  had  melted  the  snow, 
or  the  snow  had  melte.d  as  it  fell  perchance,  and 
the  rabbits  had  sprinkled  the  mud  about  on  the 
snow.  The  sun  reflected  from  the  sandy,  grav 
elly  bottom,  sometimes  a  bright  sunny  streak 
no  bigger  than  your  finger  reflected  from  a  rip 
ple  as  from  a  prism,  and  the  sunlight  reflected 
from  a  hundred  points  of  the  surface  of  the  rip 
pling  brook,  enabled  me  to  realize  summer.  .  .  . 


250  WINTER. 

Having  gone  a  quarter  of  a  mile  beyond  the 
bridge  where  C.  calls  this  his  Spanish  Brook,  I 
looked  back  from  the  top  of  the  hill  into  this 
deep  dell,  where  the  white  pines  stood  thick, 
rising  one  above  another,  reflecting  the  sunlight, 
so  soft  and  warm  by  contrast  with  the  snow,  as 
never  in  summer,  for  the  idea  of  warmth  pre 
vailed  over  the  cold  which  the  snow  suggested, 
though  I  saw  through  and  between  them  to  a 
distant  snow-clad  hill,  and  also  to  oaks  red  with 
their  dry  leaves,  and  maple  limbs  were  mingled 
with  the  pines.  I  was  on  the  verge  of  seeing 
something,  but  I  did  not.  If  I  had  been  alone, 
and  had  had  more  leisure,  I  might  have  seen 
something  to  report. 

Now  we  are  on  Fair  Haven,  still  but  a  snow 
plain.  Far  down  the  river  the  shadows  on  Co- 
nantum  are  bluish.  .  .  .  The  sun  is  half  an  hour 
high,  perhaps.  Standing  near  the  outlet  of  the 
pond,  I  look  up  and  down  the  river  with  delight, 
it  is  so  warm,  and  the  air  is  notwithstanding  so 
clear.  When  I  invert  my  head  and  look  at  the 
woods  half  a  mile  down  the  stream,  they  sud 
denly  sink  lower  in  the  horizon,  and  are  re 
moved  full  two  miles  off.  Yet  the  air  is  so  clear 
that  I  seem  to  see  every  stem  and  twig  with 
beautiful  distinctness.  The  fine  tops  of  the 
trees  are  so  relieved  against  the  sky,  that  I  never 
cease  to  admire  the  minute  subdivisions.  It  is 


WINTER.  251 

the  same  when  I  look  up  the  stream.  A  bare 
hickory  under  Lee's  Cliff  seen  against  the  sky 
becomes  an  interesting,  even  beautiful  object  to 
behold.  I  think,  where  have  I  been  staying  all 
these  days  ?  I  will  surely  come  here  again. 

Jan.  25,  1853.  ...  I  have  noticed  that 
leaves  are  green  and  violets  bloom  later  where  a 
bank  has  been  burnt  over  in  the  fall,  as  if  the 
fire  warmed  it.  Saw  to-day  where  a  creeping 
juniper  had  been  burnt,  radical  leaves  of  Johns- 
wort,  thistle,  clover,  a  dandelion,  etc.,  as  well  as 
so>rel  and  veronica. 

Jan.  25,  1856.  ...  A  closed  pitch  pine  cone, 
gathered  January  22d,  opened  last  night  in  my 
chamber.  If  you  would  be  convinced  how  differ 
ently  armed  the  squirrel  is  naturally  for  dealing 
with  pitch  pine  cones,  just  try  to  get  one  open 
with  your  teeth.  He  who  extracts  the  seeds 
from  a  single  closed  cone,  with  the  aid  of  a 
knife,  will  be  constrained  to  confess  that  the 
squirrel  earns  his  dinner.  He  has  the  key  to 
this  conical  and  spiny  chest  of  many  apart 
ments.  He  sits  on  a  post  vibrating  his  tail, 
and  twirls  it  as  a  plaything.  So  is  a  man  com 
monly  a  locked-up  chest  to  us,  to  open  whom, 
unless  we  have  the  key  of  sympathy,  will  make 
our  hearts  bleed.x 

Jan.  25,  1858.  .  .  .  What  a  rich  book  might 
be  made  about  buds,  including,  perhaps,  sprouts. 


252  WINTER. 

The  impregnable,  vivacious  willow  catkins,  but 
half  asleep  along  the  twigs,  under  the  armor  of 
their  black  scales,  the  birch  and  oak  sprouts, 
the  rank  and  lusty  dogwood  sprouts,  the  sound, 
red  buds  of  the  blueberry,  the  small  pointed  red 
buds,  close  to  the  twig,  of  the  panicled  androm- 
eda,  the  large  yellowish  buds  of  the  swamp  pink, 
etc.  How  healthy  and  vivacious  must  he  be 
who  would  treat  of  these  things. 

You  must  love  the  crust  of  the  earth  on  which 
you  dwell  more  than  the  sweet  crust  of  any 
bread,  or  cake  ;  you  must  be  able  to  extract 
nutriment  out  of  a  sand  heap.  .  .  . 

The  creditor  is  servant  to  his  debtor,  espe-  / 
cially  if  the  latter  is  about  paying  any  his  djje. 
I  am  amused  to  see  what  airs  men  take  upon 
themselves  when  they  have  money  to  pay  me, 
no  matter  how  long  they  have  deferred  it.  They 
imagine  that  they  are  my  benefactors  or  patrons, 
and  send  me  word  graciously  that,  if  I  will  come 
to  their  houses,  they  will  pay  me,  when  it  is 
their  business  to  come  to  me. 

Jan.  25,  1860.  .  .  .  When  the  river  begins 
to  break  up,  it  becomes  clouded  like  a  mackerel 
sky,  but  in  this  case,  the  blue  portions  are  where 
the  current  clearing  away  the  ice  beneath  begins 
to  show  dark.  The  current  of  the  water  strik 
ing  the  ice  breaks  it  up  at  last  into  portions  of 
the  same  form  with  those  which  the  wind  gives 
to  vapor. 


WINTER.  253 

Jan.  26, 1840.  Constantly,  as  it  were,  through 
a  remote  skylight,  I  have  glimpses  of  a  serene 
friendship-land,  and  know  the  better  why  brooks 
murmur  and  violets  grow./ 

Jan.  26,  1841.  I  have  as  much  property  as 
I  can  command  and  use.  If  by  a  fault  in  my 
character  I  do  not  derive  my  just  revenues,  there 
is  virtually  a  mortgage  on  nay  inheritance.  A 
man's  wealth  is  never  entered  in  the  regis 
trar's  office.  Wealth  does  not  come  in  along 
the  great  thoroughfares,  it  does  not  float  on  the 
Erie  or  Pennsylvania  canal,  but  is  imported  by 
a  solitary  track  without  bustle  or  competition 
from  a  brave  industry  to  a  quiet  mind. 

I  had  a  dream  last  night  which  had  reference 
to  an  act  in  my  life,  in  which  I  had  been  most 
disinterested,  and  true  to  my  highest  instinct, 
but  completely  failed  in  realizing  my  hopes  ; 
and  now,  after  so  many  months,  in  the  stillness 
of  sleep,  complete  justice  was  rendered  me.  It 
was  a  divine  remuneration.  In  my  waking 
hours,  I  could  not  have  conceived  of  such  retri 
bution  ;  the  presumption  of  desert  would  have 
damned  the  whole.  But  now  I  was  permitted 
to  be  not  so  much  a  subject  as  a  partner  to  that 
retribution.  It  was  the  award  of  divine  justice 
which  will  at  length  be,  and  is  even  now,  accom 
plished. 

Good  writing  as  well  as  good  acting  will  be 


254  WINTER. 

obedience  to  conscience.  There  must  not  be  a 
particle  of  will  or  whim  mixed  with  it.  If  we 
can  listen  we  shall  hear.  By  reverently  listen 
ing  to  the  inner  voice,  we  may  reinstate  our 
selves  on  the  pinnacle  of  humanity. 

Jan.  27,  1841.  In  the  compensation  of  the 
dream,  there  was  no  implied  loss  to  any,  but 
immeasurable  advantage  to  all. 

The  punishment  of  sin  is  not  positive  as  is 
the  reward  of  virtue. 

For  a  flower,  I  like  the  name  pansy  or  pensee 
best  of  any. 

Jan.  26,  1852.  Whatever  has  been  produced 
on  the  spur  of  the  moment  will  bear  to  be  re 
considered  and  reformed  with  phlegm.  The 
arrow  had  best  not  be  loosely  shot.  The  most 
transient  and  passing  remark  must  be  recon 
sidered  by  the  writer,  made  sure  and  warranted, 
as  if  the  earth  had  rested  on  its  axle  to  back  it, 
and  all  the  natural  forces  lay  behind  it.  The 
writer  must  direct  his  sentence  as  carefully  and 
leisurely  as  the  marksman  his  rifle,  who  is  sit 
ting  and  with  a  rest,  with  patent  sights  and  con 
ical  balls  beside.  He  must  not  merely  seem  to 
speak  the  truth.  He  must  really  speak  it.  If 
you  foresee  that  a  part  of  your  essay  will  topple 
down  after  the  lapse  of  time,  throw  it  down 
now  yourself. 

A  tree  seen  against   other   trees   is  a  mere 


WINTER,  255 

dark  mass,  but  against  the  sky  it  has  parts,  has 
symmetry  and  expansion.  .  .  .  The  thousand 
fine  points  and  tops  of  the  trees  delight  me. 
They  are  the  plumes  and  standards  and  bayonets 
of  a  host  that  march  to  victory  over  the  earth. 
The  trees  are  handsome  toward  the  heavens,  as 
well  as  up  their  boles.  They  are  good  for  other 
things  than  boards  and  shingles. 

Obey  the  spur  of  the  moment.  These  ac 
cumulated  it  is  that  make  the  "impulse  and  the 
impetus  of  the  life  of  genius.  These  are  the 
spongioles  and  rootlets  by  which  its  trunk  is 
fed.  If  you  neglect  the  moments,  if  you  cut  off 
your  fibrous  roots,  what  but  a  languishing  life 
is  to  be  expected.  Let  the  spurs  of  countless 
moments  goad  us  incessantly  into  life.  I  feel 
the  spur  of  the  moment  thrust  deep  into  my  side. 
The  present  is  an  inexorable  rider.  The  mo 
ment  always  spurs  either  with  a  sharp  or  a  blunt 
spur.  Are  my  sides  calloused?  Let  us  trust 
the  rider  that  he  knows  the  way,  that  he  knows 
when  speed  and  effort  are  required.  What 
other  impulse  do  we  wait  for  ? 

Let  us  preserve  religiously,  secure,  protect 
the  coincidence  of  our  life  with  the  life  of 
nature.  Else  what  are  heat  and  cold,  day  and 
night,  sun,  moon,  and  stars  to  us  ?  Was  it  not 
from  sympathy  with  the  present  life  of  nature 
that  we  were  born  at  this  epoch  rather  than  at 


256  WINTER. 

another  ?  .  .  .  My  life  as  essentially  belongs  to 
the  present  as  that  of  a  willow  tree  in  the 
spring.  Now,  now,  its  catkins  expand,  its  yel 
low  bark  shines,  its  sap  flows,  now  or  never 
must  you  make  whistles  of  it.  Get  the  day  to 
back  you.  Let  it  back  you,  and  the  night. 

The  truest  account  of  heaven  is  the  fairest, 
and  I  will  accept  none  which  disappoints  ex 
pectation.  It  is  more  glorious  to  expect  a  better, 
than  to  enjoy  a  worse. 

When  the  thermometer  is  down  to  20°,  the 
streams  of  thought  tinkle  underneath  like  the 
rivers  under  the  ice.  .Thought,  like  the  ocean, 
is  nearly  of  one  temperature.  .  .  . 

In  winter  we  will  think  brave,  hardy,  and 
most  native  thoughts.  Then  the  tender  summer 
birds  are  flown. 

In  few  countries  do  they  enjoy  so  fine  a  con 
trast  of  summer  and  winter.  We  really  have  four 
seasons,  each  incredible  to  the  other.  Winter 
cannot  be  mistaken  for  summer  here.  Though 
I  see  the  boat  turned  up  on  the  shore,  and 
half  buried  under  snow,  as  I  walk  over  the  invis 
ible  river,  summer  is  far  away  with  its  rustling 
reeds.  It  only  suggests  the  want  of  thrift,  the 
carelessness  of  its  owner. 

Poetry  implies  the  whole  truth,  philosophy 
expresses  a  particle  of  it. 

Would  you  see  your  mind,  look  into  the  sky. 


WINTER.  257 

Would  you  know  your  own  moods,  be  weather- 
wise.  He  whom  the  weather  disappoints,  dis 
appoints  himself. 

Let  all  things  give  way  to  the  impulse  of  ex 
pression.  It  is  the  bud  unfolding,  the  perennial 
spring.  As  well  stay  the  spring.  Who  shall 
resist  the  thaw  ?  .  .  . 

The  word  is  well  naturalized  or  rooted  that 
can  be  traced  back  to  a  Celtic  original.  It  is 
like  getting  out  stumps  and  fat  pine  roots.  .  .  . 

Nature  never  indulges  in  exclamations,  never 
says  ah  !  or  alas  !  She  is  not  French.  She  is 
a  plain  writer,  uses  few  gestures,  does  not  add 
to  her  verbs,  uses  few  adverbs,  no  expletives.  I 
find  that  I  use  many  words  for  the  sake  of  em 
phasis,  which  really  add  nothing  to  the  force  of 
my  sentences,  and  they  look  relieved  the  mo 
ment  I  have  canceled  these,  words  which  ex 
press  my  mood,  my  conviction,  rather  than  the 
simple  truth. 

Youth  supplies  us  with  colors,  age  with  can 
vas.  .  .  .  Paint  is  costly.  ...  I  think  the  heavens 
have  had  but  one  coat  of  paint  since  I  was  a 
boy,  and  their  blue  is  paled  and  dingy  and 
worn  off  in  many  places.  I  cannot  afford  to 
give  them  another  coat.  Where  is  the  man  so 
rich  that  he  can  give  the  earth  a  second  coat  of 
green  in  his  manhood,  or  the  heavens  a  second 
coat  of  blue.  Our  paints  are  all  mixed  when 


258  WINTER. 

we  are  young.  .  .  .  You  would  not  suspect  that 
some  men's  heavens  had  ever  been  azure  or 
celestial,  but  that  their  painter  had  cheated 
them.  .  .  . 

It  is  good  to  break  and  smell  the  black  birch 
twigs  now.  —  The  lichens  look  rather  bright  to 
day.  .  .  .  When  they  are  bright  and  expanded, 
is  it  not  a  sign  of  a  thaw  or  of  rain  ?  The  beauty 
of  lichens  with  their  scalloped  leaves,  the  small  at 
tractive  fields,  the  crinkled  edge  !  I  could  study 
a  single  piece  of  bark  for  hours.  How  they 
flourish  !  I  sympathize  with  their  growth.  .  .  . 

From  these  cliffs  at  this  moment,  the  clouds 
in  the  west  have  a  singular  brassy  color,  and 
they  are  arranged  in  an  unusual  manner.  A 
new  disposition  of  the  clouds  will  make  the  most 
familiar  country  appear  foreign,  like  Tartary  or 
Arabia  Felix.  .  .  . 

Jan.  26,  1853.  Up  river  on  ice,  9  A.  M., 
above  Pantry.  A  sharp  cutting  air.  This  is  a 
pretty  good  winter  morning,  however.  Not  one 
of  the  rarer.  There  are  from  time  to  time 
mornings,  both  in  summer  and  winter,  when  es 
pecially  the  world  seems  to  begin  anew,  beyond 
which  memory  need  not  go,  for  not  behind  them 
is  yesterday  and  our  past  life,  when  as  in  the 
morning  of  a  hoar  frost  there  are  visible  the 
effects  as  of  a  certain  creative  energy.  The 
world  has  visibly  been  recreated  in  the  night. 


WINTER.  259 

Mornings  of  creation  I  call  them.  In  the  midst 
of  these  marks  of  a  creative  energy  recently 
active,  while  the  sun  is  rising  with  more  than 
usual  splendor,  I  look  back  for  the  era  of  this 
creation  not  into  the  night,  but  to  a  dawn  for 
which  no  man  ever  rose  early  enough  —  a  morn 
ing  which  carries  us  back  beyond  the  Mosaic 
creation,  where  crystallizations  are  fresh  and 
unmelted.  It  is  the  poet's  hour.  Mornings 
when  men  are  new  born,  men  who  have  the 
seeds  of  life  in  them.  It  should  be  a  part  of 
my  religion  to  be  abroad  then.  This  is  not  one 
of  those  mornings,  but  a  clear,  cold,  airy  winter 
day. 

It  is  surprising  how  much  room  there  is  in 
nature  if  a  man  will  follow  his  proper  path.  In 
these  broad  fields,  in  these  extensive  woods,  on 
this  stretching  river,  I  never  meet  a  walker. 
Passing  behind  the  farm-houses,  I  see  no  man 
out.  Perhaps  I  do  not  meet  so  many  men  as  I 
should  have  met  three  centuries  ago  when  the 
Indian  hunter  roamed  these  woods.  I  enjoy  the 
retirement  and  solitude  of  an  early  settler.  Men 
have  cleared  some  of  the  earth,  which  is  no 
doubt  an  advantage  to  the  walker.  I  see  a  man 
sometimes  chopping  in  the  woods,  or  planting  or 
hoeing  in  a  field  at  a  distance,  and  yet  there 
may  be  a  lyceum  meeting  in  the  evening,  and 
there  is  a  book  shop  and  library  in  the  village, 


260  WINTER. 

and  five  times  a  day  I  can  be  whirled  to  Boston 
in  an  hour.  .  .  . 

A  slight  fine  snow  has  fallen  in  the  night  and 
drifted  before  the  wind.  I  observe  that  it  is  so 
distributed  over  the  ice  as  to  show  equal  spaces 
of  bare  ice  and  of  snow  at  pretty  regular  dis 
tances.  I  have  seen  the  same  phenomenon  on 
the  surface  of  snow  in  fields  as  if  the  little 
drifts  disposed  themselves  according  to  the  same 
law  that  makes  waves  of  water.  There  is  now 
a  fine  steam-like  snow  blowing  over  the  ice, 
which  continually  lodges  here  and  there,  and 
forthwith  a  little  drift  accumulates.  But  why 
does  it  lodge  at  such  regular  intervals  ?  I  see 
this  fine  drifting  snow  in  the  air,  ten  or  twelve 
feet  high  at  a  distance.  Perhaps  it  may  have 
to  do  with  the  manner  in,  or  the  angle  at,  which 
the  wind  strikes  the  earth. 

Jan.  26,  1855  .  .  .  P.  M.  A  thick  driving 
snow,  something  like,  but  less  than,  that  of  the 
19th.  There  is  a  strong  easterly  wind.  ...  I 
am  afraid  I  have  not  described  vividly  enough 
the  aspect  of  that  lodging  snow  of  the  19th  and 
to-day  partly.  Imagine  the  innumerable  twigs 
and  boughs  of  the  forest,  as  you  stand  in  its 
midst,  crossing  each  other  at  every  conceivable 
angle  on  every  side,  from  the  ground  to  thirty 
feet  in  height,  with  each  its  zigzag  wall  of  snow 
four  or  five  inches  high,  so  innumerable  at  dif- 


WINTER.  261 

ferent  distances,  one  behind  another,  that  they 
completely  close  up  the  view  like  a  loose  woven 
and  downy  screen  into  which,  however,  stooping 
and  winding,  you  ceaselessly  advance.  The  win 
triest  scene,  which  perhaps  can  only  be  seen  in 
perfection  while  the  snow  is  yet  falling  before 
wind  and  thaw  begin.  Else  you  miss  the  deli 
cate  touch  of  the  Master.  A  coarse  woof  and 
warp  of  snowy  batting,  leaving  no  space  for  a 
bird  to  perch.  I  see  where  a  partridge  has 
waddled  through  the  snow  still  falling,  mak 
ing  a  continuous  track.  I  look  in  the  direc 
tion  to  which  it  points,  and  see  the  bird  just 
skimming  over  the  bushes  fifteen  rods  off.  The 
plumes  of  pitch  pines  are  first  filled  up  solid, 
and  then  they  begin  to  make  great  snowy  casse- 
tetes  or  pestles.  In  the  fields  the  air  is  thick 
with  driving  snow.  You  see  only  a  dozen  rods 
into  its  warp  and  woof.  It  fills  either  this  ear 
or  that  and  your  eyes  with  hard,  cutting,  blind 
ing  scales,  if  you  face  it.  It  is  forming  shelly 
drifts  behind  the  walls,  and  stretches  in  folds 
across  the  roads.  But  in  deep,  withdrawn  hol 
lows  in  the  woods  the  flakes  at  last  come  gently 
and  deviously  down,  lodging  on  every  twig  and 
leaf,  forming  deep,  downy,  level  beds  between, 
and  on  the  ice  of  the  pools. 

Jan.  26,  1856.  .  .  .  As   I  was  talking   with 
Miss  Mary  Emerson  this  evening,  she  said,  "  It 


262  WINTER. 

was  not  the  fashion  to  be  so  original  when  I  was 
young."  She  is  readier  to  take  my  view,  to  look 
through  my  eyes  for  the  time  being,  than  any 
young  woman  that  I  know  in  the  town. 

Jan.  26,  1858.  .  .  .  One  may  eat  and  drink 
and  sleep  and  digest,  and  do  the  ordinary  duties 
of  a  man,  and  have  no  excuse  for  sending  for  a 
doctor,  and  yet  he  may  have  reason  to  doubt  if 
his  life  is  as  valuable  and  divine  as  that  of  an 
oyster.  He  may  be  the  very  best  citizen  in  the 
town,  and  yet  it  shall  occur  to  him  to  prick  him 
self  with  a  pin  to  see  if  he  is  alive.  It  is  won 
derful  how  quiet,  harmless,  and  ineffective  a  liv 
ing  creature  may  be.  No  more  energy  may  it 
have  than  a  fungus  that  lifts  the  bark  of  a 
decaying  tree.  I  raised  last  summer  a  squash 
which  weighed  123^  Ibs.  If  it  had  fallen  on  me 
it  would  have  made  as  deep  and  lasting  an  im 
pression  as  most  men  do.  I  would  just  as  lief 
know  what  it  thinks  about  God  as  what  most 
men  think,  or  are  said  to  think.  In  such  a 
squash  you  have  already  got  the  bulk  of  a  man. 
Many  a  man,  perchance,  when  I  have  put  such 
a  question  to  him,  opens  his  eyes  for  a  moment, 
essays  to  think  like  a  rusty  firelock  out  of  order, 
then  calls  for  a  plate  of  that  same  squash  to  eat, 
and  goes  to  sleep,  as  it  is  called,  and  that  is  no 
great  distance  to  go,  surely. 

Some  men  have  a  peculiar  taste  for  bad  words, 


WINTER.  263 

mouthing  and  licking  them  into  lumpish  shapes, 
as  the  bear  treats  her  cubs,  words  like  tribal 
and  ornamentation  which  drag  a  dead  tail  after 
them.  They  will  pick  you  out  of  a  thousand  the 
still-born  words,  the  falsettoes,  the  wing-clipt  and 
lame  words,  as  if  only  the  false  notes  caught 
their  ears.  They  cry  encore  to  all  the  discords. 

The  cocks  crow  in  the  yard,  and  the  hens 
cackle  and  scratch  all  this  winter.  Eggs  must 
be  plenty. 

Jan.  1840.  You  might  as  well  think  to  go 
in  pursuit  of  the  rainbow,  and  embrace  it  on  the 
next  hill  as  to  embrace  the  complete  idea  of  poetry 
even  in  thought,  The  best  book  is  only  an  ad 
vertisement  of  it,  such  as  is  sometimes  sewed  in 
with  its  cover.  It  has  a  logic  more  severe  than 
the  logician's. 

Jan.  27,  1840.  What  a  tame  life  we  are 
living  !  How  little  heroic  it  is !  Let  us  devise 
never  so  perfect  a  system  of  living,  and  straight 
way  the  soul  leaves  it  to  shuffle  along  its  own 
way  alone.  It  is  easy  enough  to  establish  a  dur 
able  and  harmonious  routine.  Immediately  all 
parts  of  nature  consent  to  it.  The  sun-dial  still 
points  to  the  noon  mark,  and  the  sun  rises  and 
sets  for  it.  The  neighbors  are  never  fatally  ob 
stinate  when  such  a  scheme  is  to  be  instituted, 
but  forthwith  all  lend  a  hand,  ring  the  bell, 
bring  fuel  and  lights,  put  by  work,  and  don  their 


264  WINTER. 

best  garments,  with  an  earnest  conformity  which 
matches  the  operations  of  nature.  There  is  al 
ways  a  present  and  extant  life  which  men  com 
bine  to  uphold,  though  its  insufficiency  is  mani 
fest  enough.  Still  the  sing-song  goes  on.  Only 
make  something  take  the  place  of  something, 
and  men  will  behave  as  if  it  were  the  thing  they 
wanted.  They  must  behave  at  any  rate,  and 
will  work  up  any  material. 

Jan.  27,  1852.  The  peculiarity  of  a  work  of 
genius  is  the  absence  of  the  speaker  from  his 
speech.  He  is  but  the  medium.  You  behold  a 
perfect  work,  but  you  do  not  behold  the  worker. 
I  read  its  page,  but  it  is  as  free  from  any  man 
that  can  be  remembered  as  an  impassable  desert. 
—  I  think  that  the  one  word  which  will  explain 
the  Shakespeare  miracle  is  unconsciousness.  If 
he  had  known  his  own  comparative  eminence,  he 
would  not  have  failed  to  publish  it  incessantly, 
though  Bacon  did  not.  There  probably  has  been 
no  more  conscious  age  than  the  present.  .  .  . 

I  do  not  know  but  thoughts  written  down 
thus  in  a  journal  might  be  printed  in  the  same 
form  with  greater  advantage  than  if  the  related 
ones  were  brought  together  into  separate  essays. 
They  are  now  allied  to  life,  and  are  seen  by  the 
reader  not  to  be  far-fetched.  It  is  ...  less 
artificial.  I  feel  that  in  the  other  case  I  should 
have  no  proper  frame  for  my  sketches.  Mere 


WINTER.  265 

facts  and  names  and  dates  communicate  more 
than  we  suspect.  Whether  the  flower  looks 
better  in  the  nosegay  than  in  the  meadow  where 
it  grew,  and  we  had  to  wet  our  feet  to  get  it !  Is 
the  scholastic  air  any  advantage  ? 

Jan.  28,  1852.  Perhaps  I  can  never  find  so 
good  a  setting  for  my  thoughts  as  I  shall  thus 
have  taken  them  out  of.  The  crystal  never 
sparkles  more  brightly  than  in  the  cavern.  The 
world  has  always  loved  best  the  fable  with  the 
moral.  The  children  could  read  the  fable  alone 
—  the  grown  up  read  both.  The  truth  so  told 
has  the  best  advantage  of  the  most  abstract  state 
ment,  for  it  is  not  the  less  universally  applicable. 
Where  else  will  you  ever  find  the  cement  for 
your  thoughts  ?  How  will  you  ever  rivet  them 
together  without  leaving  the  marks  of  the  file  ? 
Yet  Plutarch  did  not  so.  Montaigne  did  not  so. 
Men  have  written  travels  in  this  form,  but  per 
haps  no  man's  daily  life  has  been  rich  enough 
to  be  journalized.  Our  life  should  be  so  active 
and  progressive  as  to  be  a  journey.  Our  meals 
should  all  be  of  journey  cake  and  hasty  pudding. 
We  should  be  more  alert,  see  the  sun  rise,  not 
keep  fashionable  hours,  enter  a  house,  our  own 
house  as  a  khan  or  caravansary.  At  noon  I  did 
not  dine,  I  ate  my  journey  cake,  I  quenched  my 
thirst  at  a  spring  or  a  brook.  As  I  sat  at  the 
table,  the  hospitality  was  so  perfect  and  the  re- 


266  WINTER. 

past  so  sumptuous  that  I  seemed  to  be  breaking 
my  fast  upon  a  bank  in  the  midst  of  an  arduous 
journey,  that  the  water  seemed  to  be  a  living 
spring,  the  napkins  grass,  the  conversation  free 
as  the  winds,  and  the  servants  that  waited  on  us 
were  our  simple  desires.  Cut  off  from  Pilpay 
and  ^Esop  the  moral  alone  at  the  bottom,  would 
that  content  you  ? 

Jan.  27,  1853.  Trench  says  a  wild  man  is  a 
willed  man ;  well,  then,  a  man  of  will  who  does 
what  he  wills  or  wishes,  a  man  of  hope  and  of 
the  future  tense,  for  not  only  the  obstinate  is 
willed,  but,  far  more,  the  constant  and  persever 
ing.  The  obstinate  man,  properly  speaking,  is 
one  who  wills  not.  The  perseverance  of  the 
saints  is  positive  willedness,  not  a  mere  passive 
willingness.  The  fates  are  wild,  for  they  will, 
and  the  Almighty  is  wild  above  all,  as  fate  is. 

What  are  our  fields  but  felds  or  felled  woods. 
They  bear  a  more  recent  name  than  the  woods, 
suggesting  that  previously  the  earth  was  covered 
with  woods.  Always  in  a  new  country  a  field  is 
a  clearing. 

Jan.  27,  1854.  I  have  an  old  account  book 
found  in  Dea.  R.  Brown's  garret  since  his  death. 
The  first  leaf  or  two  is  gone.  Its  cover  is 
brown  paper,  on  which,  amid  many  marks  and 
scribblings,  I  find  written  :  — 


WINTER.  267 

"MR.  EPHRAIM  JONES 
His  WAST  BOOK 
ANNO  DOMINI 
1742." 

It  extends  from  November  8,  1742,  to  June  20, 
1743,  inclusive.  It  appears  without  doubt  from 
the  contents  of  this  book  that  [this  Jones]  is  the 
one  of  whom  Shattuck  writes  in  his  history  that 
he  "married  Mary  Hayward,  1728,  and  died 
Nov.  29,  1756,  aged  51,  having  been  captain, 
town- clerk,  and  otherwise  distinguished."  His 
father's  name  was  Ephraim,  and  he  had  a  son 
Ephraim.  .  .  .  The  book  is  filled  with  familiar 
Concord  names,  the  grandfathers  and  great 
grandfathers  of  the  present  generation.  Dr. 
Hartshorn,  who  lived  to  be  ninety-two,  and  Dr. 
Temple  send  to  the  store  once  or  twice.  It  is 
more  important  now  what  was  bought  than  who 
bought  it.  The  articles  most  commonly  bought 
are  mohair  (a  kind  of  twist  to  sew  on  buttons 
with),  usually  with  buttons,  rum,  ofteft  only  a 
gill  to  drink  at  the  store  (more  of  these  than 
anything  else),  salt,  molasses,  shalloon,  fish, 
calico,  some  sugar,  a  castor  hat,  almanac,  psal 
ter,  and  sometimes  primer  and  testament,  paper, 
knee  -  buckles  and  shoe  -  buckles,  garters  and 
spurs,  .  .  .  deer  skins,  a  fan,  a  cart -whip, 
various  kinds  of  cloth  and  trimmings,  .  .  . 
gloves,  a  spring  knife,  an  ink-horn,  a  gun  cap, 


268  WINTER. 

spice,  .  .  .  timber,  iron,  earthenware,  etc.,  no 
tea  (I  am  in  doubt  about  one  or  two  entries), 
nor  coffee,  nor  meal,  nor  flour.  Of  the  last  two 
they  probably  raised  all  they  wanted.  Credit  is 
frequently  given  for  timber,  and  once  for  cloth 
brought  to  the  store. 

On  the  whole,  it  is  remarkable  how  little  pro 
vision  was  sold  at  the  store.  The  inhabitants 
raised  almost  everything  for  themselves.  Choc 
olate  is  sold  once.  Rum,  salt,  molasses,  fish,  a 
biscuit  with  their  drink,  a  little  spice  and  the 
like,  are  all  that  commonly  come  under  this  head 
that  I  remember.  On  a  loose  piece  of  paper 
...  is  Jonathan  D wight's  (innholder's  (?)) 
bill  against  the  estate  of  Captain  Ephraim  Jones 
for  entertainment,  etc.  (apparently  he  treated  his 
company),  at  divers  times  for  half  a  dozen  years, 
amounting  to  over  X146.  —  The  people  appar 
ently  made  their  own  cloth  and  even  thread,  and 
hence  for  the  most  part  bought  only  buttons  and 
mohair  and  a  few  trimmings.  .  .  . 

Jan.  18th  '42  (3)  "  John  Melvin  Cr.  by  1 
Grey  fox  0-2-3." 

Feb.  14  '42  (3)  "Aaron  Parker  Cr.  by 
100  squirell  skins  0-6-3."  Deer  skins  were 
sold  at  from  ten  to  seventeen  shillings.  Some 
times  it  is  written  "  old "  or  "  new  tenor." 
Many  of  the  customers  came  from  as  far  as  Har 
vard  or  much  farther.  . 


WINTER.  269 

No  butter,  nor  rice,  nor  oil,  nor  candles  are 
sold.  They  must  have  used  candles,  made  their 
own  butter,  and  done  without  rice.  There  is  no 
more  authentic  history  of  those  days  than  this 
"Wast  Book"  contains,  and  relating  to  money 
matters,  it  is  more  explicit  than  almost  any 
other  statement.  Something  must  be  said. 
Each  line  contains  and  states  explicitly  a  fact. 
It  is  the  best  of  evidence  of  several  facts.  It 
tells  distinctly  and  authoritatively  who  sold,  who 
bought,  the  article,  amount,  and  value,  and  the 
date.  You  could  not  easily  crowd  more  facts 
into  one  line.  You  are  informed  when  the  doc 
tor  or  deacon  had  a  new  suit  of  clothes  by  the 
charge  for  mohair,  buttons  and  trimmings,  or  a 
castor  hat,  and  here  also  is  entered  the  rum 
which  ran  down  their  very  throats.  .  .  . 

We  begin  to  die  not  in  our  senses  and  extrem 
ities,  but  in  our  divine  faculties.  Our  members 
may  be  sound,  our  sight  and  hearing  perfect, 
but  our  genius  and  imagination  betray  signs  of 
decay.  You  tell  me  that  you  are  growing  old, 
and  are  troubled  to  see  without  glasses,  but  this 
is  unimportant  if  the  divine  faculty  of  the  seer 
shows  no  signs  of  decay. 

Jan.  27,  1857.  .  .  .  The  most  poetic  and 
truest  account  of  objects  is  generally  given  by 
those  who  first  observe  them,  or  the  discoverers 
of  them,  whether  a  sharper  perception  and 


270  WINTER. 

curiosity  in  them  led  to  the  discovery  or  the 
greater  novelty  more  inspired  their  report.  Ac 
cordingly,  I  love  most  to  read  the  accounts  of  a 
country,  its  natural  productions  and  curiosities, 
by  those  who  first  settled  it,  and  also  the  earliest, 
though  often  unscientific  writers  on  natural  sci 
ence. 

Jan.  27,  1858.  p.  M.  To  Hill  and  beyond. 
It  is  so  mild  and  moist  as  I  saunter  along  by 
the  wall  and  east  of  the  hill  that  I  remember  or 
anticipate  one  of  those  warm  rain  storms  in  the 
spring  when  the  earth  is  just  laid  bare,  the  wind 
is  south,  and  the  Cladonia  lichens  are  swollen 
and  lusty  with  moisture,  your  foot  sinking  into 
them,  and  pressing  the  water  out  as  from  a 
sponge,  and  the  sandy  places  also  are  drinking 
it  in.  You  wander  indefinitely  in  a  beaded  coat, 
wet  to  the  skin  of  your  legs,  sit  on  moss-clad 
rocks  and  stumps,  and  hear  the  lisping  of  mi 
grating  sparrows  flitting  amid  the  shrub  oaks,  sit 
long  at  a  time,  still,  and  have  your  thoughts.  A 
rain  which  is  as  serene  as  fair  weather,  suggest 
ing  fairer  weather  than  was  ever  seen.  You 
could  hug  the  clods  that  defile  you.  You  feel 
the  fertilizing  influence  of  the  rain  in  your 
mind.  The  part  of  you  that  is  wettest  is  fullest 
of  life,  like  the  lichens.  You  discover  evidences 
of  immortality  not  known  to  divines.  You 
cease  to  die.  You  detect  some  buds  and  sprouts 


WINTER.  271 

of  life.  Every  step  in  the  old  rye  field  is  on 
virgin  soil.  —  And  then  the  rain  comes  thicker 
and  faster  than  before,  thawing  the  remaining 
part  of  the  ground,  detaining  the  migrating 
bird,  and  you  turn  your  back  to  it,  full  of  se 
rene,  contented  thoughts,  soothed  by  the  steady 
dropping  on  the  withered  leaves,  more  at  home 
for  being  abroad,  sinking  at  each  step  deep  into 
the  thawing  earth,  gladly  breaking  through  the 
gray  rotting  ice.  The  dullest  sounds  seem 
sweetly  modulated  by  the  air.  You  leave  your 
tracks  in  fields  of  spring  rye,  scaring  the  fox- 
colored  sparrows  along  the  woodsides,  .  .  .  full 
of  joy  and  expectation,  seeing  nothing  but 
beauty,  hearing  nothing  but  music,  as  free  as 
the  fox-colored  sparrow,  .  .  .  not  indebted  to 
any  academy  or  college  for  this  expansion,  but 
chiefly  to  the  April  sun  which  shineth  on  all 
alike,  not  encouraged  by  men  in  your  walks,  not 
by  the  divines  or  the  professors,  and  to  the  law 
giver  an  outlaw.  .  .  .  Steadily  the  eternal  rain 
falls,  drip,  drip,  drip,  the  mist  drives  and  clears 
your  sight,  the  wind  blows  and  warms  your  sit 
ting  on  that  sanely  upland  that  April  day. 

Jan.  27,  1859.  I  see  some  of  those  little 
cells,  perhaps  of  a  wasp  or  bee,  made  of  clay  or 
clayey  mud.  It  suggests  that  those  insects  were 
the  first  potters.  They  look  somewhat  like 
small  stone  jugs. 


272  WINTER. 

Jan.  27,  1860.  .  .  .  When  you  think  your 
walk  is  profitless  and  a  failure,  and  you  can 
hardly  persuade  yourself  not  to  return,  it  is  on 
the  point  of  being  a  success,  for  then  you  are 
in  that  subdued  and  knocking  mood  to  which 
nature  never  fails  to  open. 

Jan.  28,  1841.  No  innocence  can  quite  stand 
up  under  suspicion,  if  it  is  conscious  of  being 
suspected.  In  the  company  of  one  who  puts  a 
mean  construction  upon  your  actions,  they  are 
apt  really  to  deserve  such  a  construction.  While 
in  that  society  I  can  never  retrieve  myself.  At 
tribute  to  me  a  great  motive  and  I  shall  not  fail 
to  have  one,  but  a  mean  one,  and  the  fountain  of 
virtue  will  be  poisoned  by  the  suspicion.  Show 
men  unlimited  faith  as  the  coin  with  which  you 
will  deal  with  them,  and  they  will  invariably 
exhibit  the  best  wares  they  have.  I  would 
meet  men  as  the  friend  of  all  their  virtue,  and 
the  foe  of  all  their  vice,  for  no  man  is  the  part 
ner  of  his  guilt. 

If  you  suspect  me,  you  will  never  see  me,  but 
all  our  intercourse  will  be  the  politest  leave-tak 
ing.  I  shall  constantly  defer  and  apologize,  and 
postpone  myself  in  your  presence.  The  self- 
defender  is  accursed  in  the  sight  of  gods  and 
men ;  he  is  a  superfluous  knight  who  serves  no 
lady  in  the  land.  He  will  find  in  the  end  that 
he  has  been  fighting  windmills,  and  has  battered 


WINTER.  273 

his  mace  to  no  purpose.  The  injured  man 
resisting  his  fate  is  like  a  tree  struck  fTy  light 
ning  which  rustles  its  sere  leaves  the  winter 
through,  not  having  vigor  enough  to  cast  them 
off.  ... 

Eesistance  is  a  very  wholesome  and  delicious 
morsel  at  times.  When  Venus  advanced  against 
the  Greeks  with  resistless  valor,  it  was  by  far 
the  most  natural  attitude  into  which  the  poet 
could  throw  his  hero,  to  make  him  resist  hero 
ically.  To  a  devil  one  might  yield  gracefully, 
but  a  god  would  be  a  worthy  foe,  and  would  par 
don  the  affront.  .  .  . 

Let  your  mood  determine  ihe  form  of  saluta 
tion,  and  approach  the  creature  with  a  natural 
nonchalance,  as  though  he  were  anything  but 
what  he  is,  and  you  were  anything  but  what  you 
are,  —  as  though  he  were  he,  and  you  were  you 
—  in  short,  as  though  he  were  so  insignificant 
that  it  did  not  signify  —  and  so  important  that 
it  did  not  import./ 

Jan.  28,  18£>2.  .  .  .  They  showed  me  Johnny 
Riorden  to-day,  with  one  thickness  of  ragged 
cloth  over  his  little  shirt  for  all  this  cold  weather, 
with  shoes  having  large  holes  in  the  toes  into 
which  the  snow  got,  as  he  said,  without  an  outer 
garment,  walking  a  mile  to  school  every  day 
over  the  bleakest  of  causeways  where  I  know, 
by  my  own  experience,  a  grown  man  could  not 


274  WINTER. 

walk  at  times  without  freezing  his  ears,  if  they 
were  exposed,  but  infant  blood  circulates  faster. 
The  clothes  with  countless  patches  which  claimed 
descent  from  pantaloons  of  mine  set  as  if  his 
mother  had  fitted  them  to  a  tea-kettle  first. 
This  little  specimen  of  humanity,  this  tender 
gobbet  of  the  fates  cast  into  a  cold  world  with 
a  torn  lichen  leaf  wrapped  about  him ;  is  man 
so  cheap  that  he  cannot  be  clothed  but  with  a 
mat  or  rag?  that  we  should  bestow  on  him  our 
cold  victuals  ?  .  .  .  Let  the  mature  rich  wear 
the  rags  and  insufficient  clothing,  let  the  infant 
poor  wear  the  purple  and  fine  linen.  I  shudder 
when  I  think  of  the  fate  of  innocency.  ...  A 
charity  which  dispenses  the  crumbs  which  fall 
from  its  overloaded  tables,  which  are  left  after 
its  feasts,  whose  waste  and  whose  example  pro 
duced  that  poverty  ! 

3  P.  M.  Went  round  by  Tuttle's  road  and 
so  out  on  to  the  Walden  road.  These  warmer 
days  the  wood -chopper  finds  that  the  wood 
cuts  easier  than  when  it  had  the  frost  in  its  sap- 
wood,  though  it  does  not  split  so  readily.  Thus 
every  change  in  the  weather  has  its  influence  on 
him,  and  is  appreciated  by  him  in  a  peculiar 
way.  The  wood-cutter  and  his  practices  and  ex 
periences  are  more  to  be  attended  to.  His  ac 
cidents,  perhaps  more  than  any  others,  should 
mark  the  epochs  in  the  winter  day.  Now  that 


WINTER.  275 

the  Indian  is  gone,  he  stands  nearest  to  nature. 
Who  has  written  the  history  of  his  day  ?  How 
far  still  is  the  writer  of  books  from  the  man, 
his  old  playmate  it  may  be,  who  chops  in  the 
woods  ?  There  are  ages  between  them.  Homer 
refers  to  the  progress  of  the  woodcutter's  work 
to  mark  the  time  of  day  on  the  plains  of  Troy, 
and  the  inference  commonly  is  that  he  lived  in  a 
more  primitive  state  of  society  than  the  present. 
But  I  think  this  is  a  mistake.  Like  proves  like 
in  all  ages,  and  the  fact  that  I  myself  should 
take  pleasure  in  referring  to  just  such  simple 
and  peaceful  labors  which  are  always  proceed 
ing,  that  the  contrast  itself  always  attracts  the 
civilized  poet  to  what  is  rudest  and  most  primi 
tive  in  his  contemporaries,  all  this  rather  proves 
a  certain  interval  between  the  poet  and  the  chop 
per  whose  labor  he  refers  to,  than  an  unusual 
nearness  to  him,  on  the  principle  that  familiar 
ity  breeds  contempt.  Homer  is  to  be  subjected 
to  a  very  different  kind  of  criticism  from  any 
he  has  received.  That  reader  who  most  fully 
appreciates  the  poet,  and  derives  the  greatest 
pleasure  from  his  work,  himself  lives  in  circum 
stances  most  like  those  of  the  poet  himself. 

About  Brister's  spring  the  ferns  which  have 
been  covered  with  snow  are  still  quite  green. 
The  skunk  -  cabbage  in  the  water  is  already 
pushed  up,  and  I  find  the  pinkish  head  of  flowers 
within  its  spathe  is  bigger  than  a  pea. 


276  WINTER. 

Jan.  28,  1853.  Saw  three  ducks  sailing  in 
the  river  .  .  .  this  afternoon,  black  with  white 
on  wings,  though  these  two  or  three  have  been 
the  coldest  days  of  the  winter,  and  the  river  is 
generally  closed. 

Jan.  28,  1857.  Am  again  surprised  to  see  a 
song  sparrow  sitting  for  hours  on  our  wood-pile 
...  in  the  midst  of  snow  in  the  yard.  It  is  un 
willing  to  move.  People  go  to  the  pump,  and 
the  cat  and  dog  walk  round  the  wood-pile  with 
out  starting  it.  I  examine  it  at  my  leisure 
through  a  glass.  Remarkable  that  this  coldest 
of  all  winters  this  bird  should  remain.  Perhaps 
it  is  no  more  comfortable  this  season  farther 
south  where  they  are  accustomed  to  abide.  In 
the  afternoon  this  sparrow  joined  a  flock  of  tree 
sparrows  on  the  bare  ground  west  of  the  house. 
It  was  amusing  to  see  the  tree  sparrows  wash 
themselves,  standing  in  the  puddles  and  tossing 
the  water  over  themselves.  They  have  had  no 
opportunity  to  wash  for  a  month  perhaps,  there 
having  been  no  thaw.  The  song  sparrow  did 
not  go  off  with  them. 

Jan.  28,  1858.  Minott  has  a  sharp  ear  for 
the  note  of  any  migratory  bird.  Though  confined 
to  his  dooryard  by  rheumatism,  he  commonly 
hears  them  sooner  than  the  widest  rambler. 
May  be  he  listens  all  day  for  them,  or  they  come 
and  sing  over  his  house,  report  themselves  to 


WINTER.  277 

him,  and  receive  their  season  ticket.  He  is  never 
at  fault.  If  he  says  he  heard  such  a  bird, 
though  sitting  by  his  chimney  side,  you  may  de 
pend  on  it.  He  can  swear  through  glass.  He 
has  not  spoiled  his  ears  by  attending  lectures  and 
caucuses.  The  other  day  the  rumor  went  that  a 
flock  of  geese  had  been  seen  flying  over  Con 
cord,  mid-winter  as  it  was  by  the  almanac.  I 
traced  it  to  Minott,  and  yet  I  was  compelled  to 
doubt.  I  had  it  directly  that  he  had  heard  them 
within  a  week.  I  made  haste  to  him,  his  repu 
tation  was  at  stake.  He  said  that  he  stood  in 
his  shed  one  of  the  late  muggy,  April-like  morn 
ings,  when  he  heard  one  short,  but  distinct  honk 
of  a  goose.  He  went  into  the  house,  took  his 
cane,  exerted  himself,  or  that  sound  imparted 
strength  to  him,  lame  as  he  was,  went  up  on  to 
the  hill,  a  thing  he  had  not  done  for  a  year,  that 
he  might  hear  all  around.  He  saw  nothing,  but 
heard  the  note  again.  It  came  from  over  the 
brook.  It  was  a  wild  goose.  He  was  sure  of  it. 
He  thought  that  the  back  of  the  winter  was 
broken,  if  it  had  any  this  year,  but  he  feared 
such  a  winter  would  kill  him  too.  Hence  the 
rumor  spread  and  grew.  I  was  silent,  pondered, 
and  abandoned  myself  to  unseen  guides.  I 
drew  into  my  mind  all  its  members  like  the  tor 
toise.  Suddenly  the  truth  flashed  on  me,  and  I 
remembered  that  within  a  week  I  had  heard  of 


278  WINTER. 

a  box  at  the  tavern  which  had  come  by  railroad 
express  containing  three  wild  geese,  and  directed 
to  his  neighbor  over  the  brook.  The  April-like 
morning  had  excited  one  so  that  he  honked,  and 
Minott's  reputation  acquired  new  lustre.  .  .  . 

As  I  come  through  the  village  at  11  p.  M.,  the 
sky  is  completely  overcast,  and  the  perhaps  thin 
clouds  are  very  distinctly  pink  or  reddish,  some 
what  as  if  reflecting  a  distant  fire,  but  this  phe 
nomenon  is  universal,  all  round  and  overhead. 
I  suspect  there  is  a  red  aurora  borealis  behind. 

Jan.  29,  1840.  A  friend  in  history  looks  like 
some  premature  soul.  The  nearest  approach  to 
a  community  of  love  in  these  days  is  like  the 
distant  breaking  of  waves  on  the  sea-shore.  An 
ocean  there  must  be,  for  it  washes  our  beach. 
This  alone  do  all  men  sail  for,  trade  for,  plow 
for,  preach  for,  fight  for. 

The  Greeks,  like  those  of  the  south  generally, 
expressed  themselves  with  more  facility  than  we, 
in  distinct  and  lively  images,  and  so  far  as  re 
lates  to  the  grace  and  completeness  with  which 
they  treated  the  subjects  suited  to  their  genius, 
they  must  be  allowed  to  retain  their  ancient  su 
premacy.  But  a  rugged  and  uncouth  array  of 
thought,  though  never  so  modern,  may  rout  them 
at  any  moment.  It  remains  for  other  than 
Greeks  to  write  the  literature  of  the  next  cen 
tury. 


WINTER.  279 

.^Eschylus  had  a  clear  eye  for  the  commonest 
things.  His  genius  was  only  an  enlarged  com 
mon  sense.  He  adverts  with  chaste  severity  to 
all  natural  facts.  His  sublimity  is  Greek  sin 
cerity  and  simpleness,  naked  wonder  at  what 
mythology  had  not  helped  to  explain.  He  is 
competent  to  express  any  of  the  common  manly 
feelings.  If  his  hero  is  to  make  a  boast,  it  does 
not  lack  fullness,  it  is  as  boastful  as  could  be 
desired.  He  has  a  flexible  mouth  and  can  fill 
it  readily  with  strong,  sound  words,  so  that  you 
will  say  the  man's  speech  wants  nothing.  He 
has  left  nothing  unsaid,  but  has  actually  wiped 
his  lips  of  it.  Whatever  the  common  eye  sees 
at  all  and  expresses  as  best  it  may,  he  sees  un 
commonly,  and  expresses  with  rare  complete 
ness.  The  multitude  that  thronged  the  theatre 
could  no  doubt  go  along  with  him  to  the  end.  — 
The  Greeks  had  no  transcendent  geniuses  like 
Milton  and  Shakespeare,  whose  merit  only  pos 
terity  could  fully  appreciate. 

The  social  condition  is  the  same  in  all  ages. 
.ZEschylus  was  undoubtedly  alone  and  without 
sympathy  in  his  simple  reverence  for  the  mystery 
of  the  universe. 

Jan.  29,  1841.  There  is  something  proudly 
thrilling  in  the  thought  that  this  obedience  to 
conscience  and  trust  in  God,  which  is  so  sol 
emnly  preached  in  extremities  and  arduous  cir- 


280  WINTER. 

cumstances,  is  only  a  retreat  to  one's  self  and 
reliance  on  one's  own  strength.  In  trivial  cir 
cumstances  I  find  myself  sufficient  to  myself, 
and  in  the  most  momentous,  I  have  no  ally  but 
myself,  and  must  silently  put  by  their  harm 
by  my  own  strength,  as  I  did  with  the  former. 
As  my  own  hand  bent  aside  the  willow  in  my 
path,  so  must  my  single  arm  put  to  flight  the 
devil  and  his  angels.  God  is  not  our  ally  when 
we  shrink,  and  neuter  when  we  are  bold.  •  .  • 
When  you  trust,  do  not  lay  aside  your  armor,  but 
put  it  on  and  buckle  it  tighter.  If  by  reliance 
on  the  gods  I  have  disbanded  one  of  my  forces, 
then  was  it  poor  policy.  .  .  .  There  is  more  of 
God  and  divine  help  in  a  man's  little  finger 
than  in  idle  prayer  and  trust. 

The  best  and  bravest  deed  is  that  which  the 
whole  man,  heart,  lungs,  hands,  fingers,  and  toes 
at  any  time  prompt.  Each  hanger-on  in  the 
purlieus  of  the  camp  .  .  .  must  fall  into  the  line 
of  march.  If  a  single  sutler  delay  to  make  up 
his  pack,  then  suspect  the  fates  and  consult  the 
oracles  again.  This  is  the  meaning  of  integrity ; 
this  it  is  to  be  an  integer,  and  not  a  fraction. 
Be  even  for  all  virtuous  ends,  but  odd  for  all 
vice.  .  .  . 

Friends  will  have  to  be  introduced  each  time 
they  meet.  They  will  be  eternally  strange  to 
one  another,  and  when  they  have  mutually  ap- 


WINTER.  281 

propriated  the  last  hour,  they  will  go  and  gather 
a  new  measure  of  strangeness  for  the  next.  They 
are  like  two  boughs  crossed  in  the  wood,  which 
play  backwards  and  forwards  upon  one  another 
in  the  wind,  and  only  wear  into  each  other,  but 
never  does  the  sap  of  the  one  flow  into  the  pores 
of  the  other,  for  then  the  wind  would  no  more 
draw  from  them  those  strains  which  enchanted 
the  wood.  They  are  not  two  united,  but  rather 
one  divided. 

Of  all  strange  and  unaccountable  things  this 
journalizing  is  the  strangest.  It  will  allow  noth 
ing  to  be  predicated  of  it.  Its  good  is  not  good, 
nor  its  bad,  bad.  If  I  make  a  huge  effort  to 
expose  my  innermost  and  richest  wares  to  light, 
my  counter  seems  cluttered  with  the  meanest 
home-made  stuff,  but  after  months  or  years,  I 
may  discover  the  wealth  of  India,  and  whatever 
rarity  is  brought  overland  from  Cathay,  in  that 
confused  heap,  and  what  seemed  perhaps  a  fes 
toon  of  dried  apple  or  pumpkin  will  prove  a 
string  of  Brazilian  diamonds,  or  pearls  from  Co- 
romandel. 

Men  lie  behind  the  barrier  of  a  relation  as 
effectually  concealed  as  the  landscape  by  a  mist ; 
and  when  at  length  some  unforeseen  accident 
throws  me  into  a  new  attitude  toward  them,  I 
am  astounded  as  if  for  the  first  time  I  saw  the 
sun  on  the  hillside.  They  lie  out  before  me  like 


282  WINTER. 

a  new  order  of  things,  as  when  the  master  meets 
his  pupil  as  a  man.  Then  first  do  we  stand  un 
der  the  same  heavens,  and  master  and  pupil  alike 
go  down  the  resistless  ocean  stream  together. 

Jan.  29,  1852.  We  must  be  very  active,  if 
we  would  be  clean,  live  our  own  life  and  not  a 
languishing  and  scurvy  one.  The  trees  which 
are  stationary  are  covered  with  parasites,  espe 
cially  those  which  have  grown  slowly.  The  air 
is  filled  with  the  fine  sporules  of  countless 
mosses,  algae,  lichens,  fungi,  which  settle  and 
plant  themselves  on  all  quiet  surfaces.  Under 
the  nails  and  between  the  joints  of  the  fingers 
of  the  idle  flourish  crops  of  mildew,  algae, 
fungi,  and  other  vegetable  sloths,  though  they 
may  be  invisible,  the  lichens  where  life  still 
exists,  the  fungi  where  decomposition  has  begun 
to  take  place,  and  the  sluggard  is  soon  covered 
with  sphagnum.  Algae  take  root  in  the  corners 
of  his  eyes,  and  lichens  cover  the  bulbs  of  his 
fingers  and  his  head.  .  .  .  This  is  the  definition 
of  dirt.  We  fall  a  prey  to  others  of  nature's 
tenants  who  take  possession  of  the  unoccupied 
house.  With  the  utmost  inward  alacrity  we 
have  to  wash  and  comb  ourselves  ...  to  get  rid 
of  the  adhering  seeds.  Cleanliness  is  by  activ 
ity  not  to  give  any  quiet  shelf  for  the  seeds  of 
parasitic  plants  to  take  root  on.  ... 

The  forcible  writer  does  not  go  far  for  his 


WINTER.  283 

themes.  His  ideas  are  not  far-fetched.  He  de 
rives  inspiration  from  his  chagrins  and  his  satis 
factions.  His  theme  being  ever  an  instant  one, 
his  own  gravity  assists  him,  gives  impetus  to 
what  he  says.  He  does  not  speculate  while 
others  drudge  for  him. 

I  am  often  reminded  that  if  I  had  bestowed 
on  me  the  wealth  of  Croasus,  my  aims  must 
still  be  the  same,  and  my  means  essentially  the 
same.  .  .  . 

Few  are  the  days  when  the  telegraph  harp 
rises  into  a  pure,  clear  melody.  The  wind  may 
blow  strong  or  soft  in  this  or  that  direction, 
naught  will  you  hear  but  a  low  hum  or  murmur, 
or  even  a  buzzing  sound,  but  at  length  when  some 
un distinguishable  zephyr  blows,  when  the  con 
ditions,  not  easy  to  be  detected,  arrive,  it  sud 
denly  and  unexpectedly  rises  into  melody,  as  if  a 
god  had  touched  it,  and  fortunate  is  the  walker 
who  chances  to  be  within  hearing.  So  is  it  with 
the  lyres  of  bards.  For  the  most  part  it  is 
only  a  feeble  and  ineffectual  hum  that  comes 
from  them,  which  leads  you  to  expect  the  mel 
ody  you  do  not  hear.  When  the  gale  is  modi 
fied,  when  the  favorable  conditions  occur  and 
the  indescribable  coincidence  takes  place,  then 
there  is  music.  Of  a  thousand  buzzing  strings, 
only  one  yields  music.  It  is  like  the  hum  of 
the  shaft  or  other  machinery  of  a  steamboat, 


284  WINTER. 

which  at  length  might  become  music  in  a  divine 
hand.  .  .  . 

Heard  C.  lecture  to-night.  It  was  a  bushel 
of  nuts,  perhaps  the  most  original  lecture  I  ever 
heard ;  ever  so  unexpected,  not  to  be  foretold, 
and  so  sententious  that  you  could  not  look  at 
him,  and  take  his  thought  at  the  same  time. 
You  had  to  give  your  undivided  attention  to  the 
thoughts,  for  you  were  not  assisted  by  set 
phrases  or  modes  of  speech  intervening.  There 
was  no  sloping  up  or  down  to  or  from  his  points. 
It  was  all  genius,  no  talent.  It  required  more 
close  attention,  more  abstraction  from  surround 
ing  circumstances  than  any  lecture  I  have  heard, 
for  well  as  I  know  C.,  he  more  than  any  man 
disappoints  my  expectation.  When  I  meet  him 
in  the  dark,  hear  him,  I  cannot  realize  that  I 
ever  saw  him  before.  He  will  be  strange,  un 
expected  to  his  best  acquaintance.  I  cannot  as 
sociate  the  lecturer  with  the  companion  of  my 
walks.  The  lecture  was  from  so  original  and 
peculiar  a  point  of  view,  yet  just  to  himself  in 
the  main,  that  I  doubt  if  three  in  the  audience 
apprehended  a  tithe  of  what  he  said.  It  was  so 
hard  to  hear  that  doubtless  few  made  the  exer 
tion,  a  thick  succession  of  mountain  passes,  and 
no  intermediate  slopes  and  plains.  Other  lec 
tures,  even  the  best,  in  which  so  much  space  is 
given  to  the  elaborate  development  of  a  few 


WINTER.  285 

ideas,  seemed  somewhat  meagre  in  comparison. 
Yet  it  would  be  how  much  more  glorious  if  tal 
ent  were  added  to  genius,  if  there  were  a  just 
arrangement  and  development  of  the  thoughts, 
if  each  step  were  not  a  leap,  but  he  ran  a  space 
to  take  a  yet  higher  leap.  Most  of  the  specta 
tors  sat  in  front  of  the  performer,  but  here  was 
one  who,  by  accident,  sat  all  the  while  on  one 
side,  and  his  report  was  peculiar  and  startling. 

Jan.  30,  1852.  Channing's  lecture  was  full 
of  wise,  acute,  and  witty  observations,  yet  most 
of  the  audience  did  not  know  but  it  was  mere 
incoherent  and  reckless  verbiage  and  nonsense. 
I  lose  my  respect  for  people  who  do  not  know 
what  is  good  and  true.  I  know  full  well  that 
readers  and  hearers,  with  the  fewest  exceptions, 
ask  me  for  my  second  best. 

Jan.  29,  1854.  A  very  cold  morning.  Mer 
cury  18°  below  zero.  —  Varro  says  arista,  the 
beard  of  grain,  is  so  called  because  it  dries  first 
(quod  arescit  prima),  the  grain,  granum,  is  a 
gerendo,  for  the  object  of  planting  is  that  this 
may  be  borne.  "But  the  spica  or  ear  which 
the  rustics  call  speca,  as  they  have  received  it 
from  their  forefathers,  seems  to  be  named  from 
spe  (hope),  earn  enim  quod  sperant  fore,  be 
cause  they  hope  that  this  will  be  hereafter." 

Jan.  29,  1856.  ...  It  is  observable  that  not 
only  the  moose  and  the  wolf  disappear  before 


286  .  WINTER. 

the  civilized  man,  but  even  many  species  of  in 
sects,  such  as  the  black  fly  and  the  almost  mi 
croscopic  "  No-see-em."  How  imperfect  a  no 
tion  have  we  commonly  of  what  was  the  actual 
condition  of  the  place  where  we  dwell,  three 
centuries  ago. 

Jan.  29,  1858.  P.  M.  To  Great  Meadows  at 
Copan.  .  .  .  Found  some  splendid  fungi  on  old 
aspens  used  for  a  fence ;  quite  firm,  reddish 
white  above,  and  bright  vermilion  beneath,  or 
perhaps  more  scarlet,  reflecting  various  shades 
as  it  is  turned.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  upper 
side  of  the  fungus,  which  must,  as  here,  com 
monly  be  low  on  decaying  wood,  so  that  we  look 
down  on  it,  is  not  bright  colored  nor  handsome, 
and  it  was  only  when  I  had  broken  it  off  and 
turned  it  over  that  I  was  surprised  by  its 
brilliant  color.  This  intense  vermilion  (?)  face, 
which  would  be  known  to  every  boy  in  the  town 
if  it  were  turned  upward,  faces  the  earth,  and 
is  discerned  only  by  the  curious  naturalist.  Its 
ear  is  turned  down  listening  to  the  honest 
praises  of  the  earth.  It  is  like  a  light  red  vel 
vet  or  damask.  These  silent  and  motionless 
fungi  with  their  ears  turned  ever  downward  to 
the  earth,  revealing  their  bright  color  perchance 
only  to  the  prying  naturalist  who  turns  them 
upward,  remind  me  of  the  "  Hear-all "  of  the 
story. 


WINTER.  287 

Jan.  29,  1860.  ...  As  usual,  I  now  see,  as 
I  walk  on  the  river  and  river  meadow  ice,  thinly 
covered  with  the  fresh  snow,  that  conical  rain 
bow,  or  parabola  of  rainbow-colored  reflections 
from  the  myriad  reflecting  crystals  of  the  snow, 
i.  e.,  as  I  walk  toward  the  sun,  always  a  little 
in  advance  of  me,  of  course,  the  angle  of  re 
flection  being  equal  to  that  of  incidence. 

Jan.  30, 1841.  ...  The  fashions  of  the  wood 
are  more  fluctuating  than  those  of  Paris.  Snow, 
rime,  ice,  green  and  dry  leaves  incessantly  make 
new  patterns.  There  are  all  the  shapes  and 
hues  of  the  kaleidoscope,  and  the  designs  and 
ciphers  of  books  of  heraldry,  in  the  outlines  of 
the  trees.  Every  time  I  see  a  nodding  pine  top, 
it  seems  as  if  a  new  fashion  of  wearing  plumes 
had  come  into  vogue.  .  .  . 

You  glance  up  these  paths,  closely  embraced 
by  bent  trees,  as  through  the  side  aisles  of  a 
cathedral,  and  expect  to  hear  a  choir  chanting 
from  their  depths.  You  are  never  so  far  in 
them  as  they  are  far  before  you.  Their  secret 
is  where  you  are  not,  and  where  your  feet  can 
never  carry  you.  .  .  . 

Here  is  the  distinct  trail  of  a  fox  stretching 
a  quarter  of  a  mile  across  the  pond.  ...  I  am 
curious  to  know  what  has  determined  its  grace 
ful  curvatures,  its  greater  or  less  spaces  and  dis 
tinctness,  and  how  surely  they  were  coincident 


288  WINTER. 

with  the  fluctuations  of  some  inind,  why  they 
now  lead  me  two  steps  to  the  right,  and  then 
three  to  the  left.  If  these  things  are  not  to  be 
called  up  and  accounted  for  in  the  Lamb's  Book 
of  Life,  I  shall  set  them  down  for  careless  ac 
countants.  Here  was  the  expression  of  the 
divine  mind  this  morning.  The  pond  was  his 
journal,  and  last  night's  snow  made  a  tabula 
rasa  for  him.  I  know  which  way  a  mind  wended 
this  morning,  what  horizon  it  faced,  by  the  set 
ting  of  these  tracks,  whether  it  moved  slowly  or 
rapidly,  by  the  greater  or  less  intervals  and  dis 
tinctness,  for  the  swiftest  step  leaves  yet  a  last 
ing  trace.  .  .  .  Fair  Haven  pond  is  scored  with 
the  trails  of  foxes,  and  you  may  see  where  they 
have  gamboled  and  gone  through  a  hundred 
evolutions,  which  testify  to  a  singular  listless- 
ness  and  leisure  in  nature. 

Suddenly  looking  down  the  river,  I  saw  a  fox 
some  sixty  rods  off  making  across  the  hills  on 
my  left.  As  the  snow  lay  five  inches  deep,  he 
made  but  slow  progress,  but  it  was  no  impedi 
ment  to  me.  So  yielding  to  the  instinct  of  the 
chase,  I  tossed  my  head  aloft,  and  bounded 
away,  snuffing  the  air  like  a  fox-hound,  and 
spurning  the  world  and  human  society  at  each 
bound.  It  seemed  the  woods  rang  with  the  hun 
ter's  horn,  and  Diana  and  all  the  satyrs  joined 
in  the  chase  and  cheered  me  on.  Olympian  and 


WINTER.  289 

Elean  youths  were  waving  palms  on  the  hills.  In 
the  meanwhile,  I  gained  rapidly  on  the  fox,  but 
he  showed  a  remarkable  presence  of  mind,  for  in 
stead  of  keeping  up  the  face  of  the  hill,  which  was 
steep  and  unwooded  in  that  part,  he  kept  along 
the  slope  in  the  direction  of  the  forest,  though 
he  lost  ground  by  it.  Notwithstanding  his 
fright,  he  took  no  step  which  was  not  beautiful. 
The  course  on  his  part  was  a  series  of  most 
graceful  curves.  It  was  a  sort  of  leopard  can 
ter,  I  should  say,  as  if  he  were  nowise  impeded 
by  the  snow,  but  were  husbanding  his  strength 
all  the  while.  When  he  doubled,  I  wheeled  and 
cut  him  off,  bounding  with  fresh  vigor,  Antaeus- 
like  recovering  my  strength  each  time  I  touched 
the  snow.  Having  got  near  enough  for  a  fair 
view,  just  as  he  was  slipping  into  the  wood,  I 
gracefully  yielded  him  the  palm.  He  ran  as  if 
there  were  not  a  bone  in  his  back,  occasionally 
dropping  his  muzzle  to  the  snow  for  a  rod  or  two, 
and  then  tossing  his  head  aloft,  when  satisfied  of 
his  course.  When  he  came  to  a  declivity,  he 
put  his  fore  feet  together,  and  slid  down  it  like 
a  cat.  He  trod  so  softly  that  you  could  not 
have  heard  from  any  nearness,  and  yet  with 
such  expression  that  it  would  not  have  been 
quite  inaudible  from  any  distance.  So  hoping 
this  experience  would  prove  a  useful  lesson  to 
him,  I  returned  to  the  village  by  the  highway 
of  the  river. 


290  WINTER. 

Jan.  30,  1852.  I  feel  as  if  I  were  gradually 
parting  company  with  certain  friends,  just  as 
I  perceive  familiar  objects  successively  disap 
pear  when  I  am  leaving  my  native  town  in  the 
cars.  .  .  . 

After  all,  where  is  the  flower  lore?  for  the 
first  book,  not  the  last,  should  contain  the  poetry 
of  flowers.  The  natural  system  may  tell  us  the 
value  of  a  plant  in  medicine  or  the  arts,  or  for 
food,  but  neither  it  nor  the  Linnsean,  to  any 
great  extent,  tells  us  its  chief  value  and  signifi 
cance  to  man,  what  in  any  measure  accounts  for 
its  beauty,  its  flower-like  properties.  There  will 
be  pages  about  some  fair  flower's  qualities  as 
food  or  medicine,  but  perhaps  not  a  sentence 
about  its  significance  to  the  eye  (as  if  the  cow 
slip  were  better  for  greens  than  for  yellows), 
about  what  children  and  all  flower-lovers  gather 
flowers  for.  [The  book  I  refer  to  should  be] 
not  addressed  to  the  cook,  or  the  physician,  or 
the  dyer  merely,  but  to  the  lovers  of  flowers 
young  and  old,  the  most  poetical  of  books  in 
which  is  breathed  man's  love  of  flowers. 

Do  nothing  merely  out  of  good  resolutions. 
Discipline  yourself  only  to  yield  to  love.  Suffer 
yourself  to  be  attracted.  It  is  in  vain  to  write 
on  chosen  themes.  We  must  wait  till  they  have 
kindled  a  flame  in  our  minds.  There  must  be 
the  .  .  .  generating  force  of  love  behind  every 


WINTER.  291 

effort  destined  to  be  successful.  The  cold  re 
solve  gives  birth  to,  begets  nothing.  The  theme 
that  seeks  me,  not  I,  it.  The  poet's  relation  to 
his  theme  is  the  relation  A  of  lovers.  It  is  no 
more  to  be  courted.  Obey,  report. 

Though  they  are  cutting  off  the  wood  at  Wai- 
den,  it  is  not  all  loss.  It  makes  some  new  and 
unexpected  prospects.  .  .  .  As  I  stood  on  the 
partially  cleared  bank  at  the  E.  end  of  the 
pond,  I  looked  S.  over  the  side  of  the  hill 
into  a  deep  dell,  still  wooded,  and  saw  not  more 
than  thirty  rods  off  a  chopper  at  his  work.  I  was 
half  a  dozen  rods  distant  from  the  standing 
wood,  and  I  saw  him  through  a  vista  between 
two  trees.  He  appeared  to  me  charmingly  dis 
tinct  as  in  a  picture,  of  which  the  two  trees  were 
the  frame.  He  was  seen  against  the  snow  on 
the  hillside  beyond.  I  could  distinguish  each 
part  of  his  dress  perfectly,  and  the  axe  with  dis 
tinct  outline,  as  he  raised  it  above  his  head,  the 
black  iron  against  the  snow.  I  could  hear  every 
stroke  distinctly.  Yet  I  should  have  deemed  it 
ridiculous  to  call  to  him,  he  appeared  so  distant. 
He  appeared  with  the  same  distinctness  as  ob 
jects  seen  through  a  pin  hole  in  a  card.  This 
was  the  effect  rather  than  what  would  have  been 
by  comparison  of  him,  his  size  with  the  nearer 
trees  between  which  I  saw  him,  and  which  made 
the  canopied  roof  of  the  grove  far  above  his 


292  WINTER. 

head.  It  was,  perhaps,  one  of  those  coincidences 
and  effects  which  have  made  men  painters.  I 
could  not  behold  him  as  an  actual  man.  He 
was  more  ideal  than  in  any  picture  I  have  seen. 
He  refused  to  be  seen  as  actual ;  far  in  the  hol 
low,  yet  somewhat  enlightened  aisles  of  this 
wooded  dell.  Some  scenes  will  thus  present 
themselves  as  picture,  .  .  .  subjects  for  the  pen 
cil,  .  .  .  distinctly  marked.  They  do  not  re 
quire  the  aid  of  genius  to  idealize  them.  They 
must  be  seen  as  ideal.  .  .  . 

I  am  afraid  to  travel  much,  or  to  famous 
places,  lest  it  might  completely  dissipate  the 
mind.  Then  I  am  sure  that  what  we  observe 
at  home,  if  we  observe  anything,  is  of  more  im 
portance  than  what  we  observe  abroad.  The 
far-fetched  is  of  the  least  value.  What  we  ob 
serve  in  traveling  are,  to  some  extent,  the  acci 
dents  of  the  body ;  what  we  observe  when  sitting 
at  home  are,  in  the  same  proportion,  phenomena 
of  the  mind  itself.  A  wakeful  night  will  yield 
as  much  thought  as  a  long  journey.  If  we  try 
thoughts  by  their  quality,  not  their  quantity,  I 
may  find  that  a  restless  night  will  yield  more 
than  the  longest  journey.  .  .  . 

It  is  remarkable  that  there  is  no  man  so 
coarse  and  insensible  but  he  can  be  profane,  can 
pronounce  the  word  "  God  "  with  emphasis  in 
the  woods  when  anything  happens  to  disturb 


WINTER.  293 

him,  as  a  spoiled  child  loves  to  see  what  liberties 
he  can  presume  to  take.  I  am  only  astonished 

that  B should  think  it  any  daring,  that  he 

should  believe  in  God  so  much,  look  round  to 
see  if  his  auditors  appreciated  his  boldness. 

Jan.  30,  1854.  Another  cold  morning.  13° 
below  zero.  .  .  .  This  morning,  though  not  so 
cold  by  a  degree  or  two  as  yesterday  morning, 
the  cold  has  got  more  into  the  house.  .  .  .  The 
sheets  are  frozen  about  the  sleeper's  face.  The 
teamster's  beard  is  white  with  ice.  Last  night 
I  felt  it  stinging  cold  as  I  came  up  the  street  at 
nine  o'clock.  It  bit  my  ears  and  face,  but  the 
stars  shone  all  the  brighter.  The  windows  are  all 
closed  up  with  frost,  as  if  they  were  of  ground 
glass.  .  .  .  The  snow  is  dry  and  squeaks  under 
the  feet,  and  the  teams  creak,  as  if  they  needed 
greasing,  sounds  associated  with  extremely  cold 
weather. 

p.  M.  Up  river  on  ice  and  snow  to  Fair  Ha 
ven  Pond.  .  .  .  We  look  at  every  track  in  the 
snow.  Every  little  while  there  is  the  track  of  a 
fox,  may  be  the  same  one,  across  the  river,  turn 
ing  aside  sometimes  to  a  muskrat's  cabin  or  a 
point  of  ice  where  he  has  left  some  traces,  and 
frequently  the  larger  track  of  a  hound  which  has 
followed  his  trail.  .  .  .  This  road  is  so  wide 
that  you  do  not  feel  confined  in  it,  and  you  never 
meet  travelers  with  whom  you  have  no  sym- 


294  WINTER. 

pathy.  The  winter,  cold  and  bound  out,  as  it  is, 
is  thrown  to  us  like  a  bone  to  a  famishing  dog, 
and  we  are  expected  to  get  the  marrow  out  of  it. 
While  the  milkmen  in  the  outskirts  are  milking 
so  many  scores  of  cows  before  sunrise  these  win 
ter  mornings,  it  is  our  task  to  milk  the  winter 
itself.  It  is  true  it  is  like  a  cow  that  is  dry,  and 
our  fingers  are  numb,  and  there  is  none  to  wake 
us  up.  Some  desert  the  fields,  and  go  into  win 
ter  quarters  in  the  city.  They  attend  the  ora 
torios,  while  the  only  music  we  countrymen  hear 
is  the  squeaking  of  the  snow  under  our  boots. 
But  the  winter  was  not  given  us  for  no  purpose. 
We  must  thaw  its  cold  with  our  genialness. 
We  are  tasked  to  find  out  and  appropriate  all 
the  nutriment  it  yields.  If  it  is  a  cold  and  hard 
season,  its  fruit  no  doubt  is  the  more  concen 
trated  and  nutty.  It  took  the  cold  and  bleak 
ness  of  November  to  ripen  the  walnut,  but  the 
human  brain  is  the  kernel  which  the  winter  it 
self  matures.  Not  till  then  does  its  shell  come 
off.  .  .  .  Because  the  fruits  of  the  earth  are  al 
ready  ripe,  we  are  not  to  suppose  there  is  no 
fruit  left  for  winter  to  ripen.  .  .  .  Then  is  the 
great  harvest  of  the  year,  the  harvest  of  thought. 
All  previous  harvests  are  stubble  to  this,  mere 
fodder  and  green  crop.  Our  oil  is  winter-strained. 
Now  we  burn  with  a  purer  flame  like  the  stars. 
—  Shall  we  take  refuge  in  cities  in  November  ? 


WINTER.  295 

Shall  the  nut  fall  green  from  the  tree  ?  Let  not 
the  year  be  disappointed  of  its  crop.  I  knew  a 
crazy  man  who  walked  into  an  empty  pulpit  one 
Sunday,  and  taking  up  a  hymn  book,  remarked, 
"  We  have  had  a  good  fall  for  getting  in  corn 
and  potatoes,  let  us  sing  Winter."  So  I  say,  "  Let 
us  sing  winter."  What  else  can  we  sing,  and 
our  voices  be  in  harmony  with  the  season.  .  .  . 

As  we  walked  up  the  river,  a  little  flock  of 
chickadees  apparently  flew  to  us  from  a  wood- 
side  fifteen  rods  off,  and  uttered  their  lively  day 
day  day,  and  followed  us  along  a  considerable 
distance,  flitting  by  our  side  on  the  button- 
bushes  and  willows.  It  is  the  most,  if  not  the 
only,  sociable  bird  we  have. 

Jan.  30,  1856.  .  .  .  What  a  difference  be 
tween  life  in  the  city  and  life  in  the  country  at 
present !  between  walking  in  Washington  Street, 
threading  your  way  between  countless  sledges 
and  travelers  over  the  discolored  snow,  and 
crossing  Walden  Pond,  a  spotless  field  of  snow 
surrounded  by  woods,  whose  intensely  blue 
shadows  and  your  own  are  the  only  objects. 
What  a  solemn  silence  reigns  here  ! 

Jan.  30,  1859.  How  peculiar  is  the  hooting 
of  an  owl ;  not  shrill  and  sharp  like  the  scream 
of  a  hawk,  but  full,  round,  and  sonorous,  wak 
ing  the  echoes  of  the  wood. 

Jan.  30,  1860.     2   P.  M.     To  Nut  Meadow 


296  ^WINTER. 

and  White  Pond  road.  Thermometer  +45°. 
Fair,  with  a  few  cumuli  of  indefinite  outline  in 
the  N.  and  S.,  and  dusky  under  sides.  A  gentle 
west  wind  and  a  blue  haze.  Thaws.  .  .  .  The 
ice  has  so  melted  on  the  meadows  that  I  see 
where  the  muskrat  has  left  his  clamshells  in  a 
heap  near  the  river  side  where  there  was  a  hol 
low  in  the  bank.  —  The  small  water-bugs  are 
gyrating  abundantly  in  Nut  Meadow  Brook.  It 
is  pleasant  also  to  see  the  very  distinct  ripple 
marks  in  the  sand  at  the  bottom,  of  late  so  rare 
a  sight.  I  go  through  the  piny  field  N.  W.  of 
Martial  Miles's.  There  are  no  more  beautiful 
natural  parks  than  these  pastures  in  which  the 
white  pines  have  sprung  up  spontaneously, 
standing  at  handsome  intervals,  where  the  wind 
chanced  to  let  the  seed  lie  at  last,  and  the  grass 
and  blackberry  vines  have  not  yet  been  killed 
by  them. 

There  are  certain  sounds  invariably  heard  in 
warm  and  thawing  days  in  winter,  such  as  the 
crowing  of  cocks,  the  cawing  of  crows,  and  some 
times  the  gobbling  of  turkeys.  The  crow,  flying 
high,  touches  the  tympanum  of  the  sky  for  us, 
and  reveals  the  tone  of  it.  What  does  it  avail 
to  look  at  a  thermometer  or  barometer  compared 
with  listening  to  his  note !  He  informs  me  that 
nature  is  in  the  tenderest  mood  possible,  and  I 
hear  the  very  flutterings  of  her  heart.  —  Crows 


WINTER.  297 

have  singularly  wild  and  suspicious  ways.  You 
will  see  a  couple  flying  high,  as  if  about  their 
business,  but,  lo,  they  turn  and  circle  over  your 
head  again  and  again  for  a  mile,  and  this  is 
their  business,  as  if  a  mile  and  an  afternoon  were 
nothing  for  them  to  throw  away ;  this  even  in 
winter  when  they  have  no  nests  to  be  anxious 
about.  But  it  is  affecting  to  hear  them  cawing 
about  their  ancient  seat  .  .  .  which  the  choppers 
are  laying  low.  .  .  . 

The  snow  flea  seems  to  be  a  creature  whose 
summer  and  prime  of  life  is  a  thaw  in  the  win 
ter.  It  seems  not  merely  to  enjoy  this  interval 
like  other  animals,  but  then  chiefly  to  exist. 
It  is  the  creature  of  the  thaw.  Moist  snow  is 
its  element.  That  thaw  which  merely  excites 
the  cock  to  sound  his  clarion,  as  it  were,  calls  to 
life  the  snow  flea. 

Jan.  31,  1852.  ...  I  am  repeatedly  aston 
ished  by  the  coolness  and  obtuse  bigotry  with 
which  some  will  appropriate  the  New  Testament 
in  conversation  with  you.  It  is  as  if  they  were 
to  appropriate  the  sun,  and  stand  between  you 
and  it,  because  they  understood  you  had  walked 
once  by  moonlight,  though  that  was  in  the  re 
flected  light  of  the  sun  which  you  could  not  get 
directly.  I  have  seen  two  persons  conversing  at 
a  tea-table,  both  lovers  of  the  New  Testament, 
each  in  his  own  way,  the  one  a  lover  of  all 


298  WINTER. 

kindred  expression  of  truth  also,  and  yet  the 
other  appropriated  the  book  wholly  to  herself, 
and  took  it  for  granted  with  singular  or  rather 
lamentable  blindness  and  obtuseness  that  the 
former  neither  knew  nor  cared  anything  about 
it.  Horace  Greeley  found  some  fault  with  me 
to  the  world,  because  I  presumed  to  speak  of 
the  New  Testament,  using  my  own  words  and 
thoughts,  and  challenged  me  to  a  controversy. 
The  one  thought  I  had  was  that  it  would  give 
me  real  pleasure  to  know  that  he  loved  it  as  sin 
cerely  and  intelligently  as  I  did.  .  .  . 

That  work  of  man's  must  be  vast  indeed 
which,  like  the  pyramids,  looks  blue  in  the  hori 
zon,  as  mountains.  Few  works  of  man  rise  high 
enough,  and  with  breadth  enough  to  be  blued  by 
the  air  between  them  and  the  spectator. 

I  hear  my  friend  say,  "  I  have  lost  my  faith 
in  men,  there  are  none  true,  magnanimous,  holy, 
etc.,  etc.,  meaning  all  the  while  that  I  do  not 
possess  those  unattainable  virtues.  But,  worm 
as  I  am,  this  is  not  wise  in  my  friend,  and  I  feel 
simply  discouraged,  so  far  as  my  relation  to  him 
is  concerned.  We  must  have  infinite  faith  in 
each  other.  .  .  .  He  erects  his  want  of  faith  as 
a  barrier  between  us.  When  I  hear  a  grown 
man  or  woman  say,  "  Once  I  had  faith  in  men, 
now  I  have  not,"  I  am  inclined  to  ask,  "  Who 
are  you  whom  the  world  has  disappointed? 


WINTER.  299 

Have  not  you  rather  disappointed  the  world  ? 
There  is  the  same  ground  for  faith  now  that 
ever  there  was.  It  needs  only  a  little  love  in 
you  who  complain  so,  to  ground  it  on."  For 
my  own  part,  I  am  thankf uJ  there  are  those  who 
come  so  near  being  my  friends  that  they  can  be 
estranged  from  me.  I  had  faith  before  ;  they 
would  destroy  the  little  I  have.  The  mason  asks 
but  a  narrow  shelf  to  spring  his  brick  from ; 
man  requires  only  an  infinitely  narrower  one  to 
spring  the  arch  of  faith  from.  .  .  . 

I  am  not  sure  that  I  have  any  right  to  address 
to  you  the  words  I  am  about  to  write.  The 
reason  I  have  not  visited  you  oftener  and  more 
earnestly  is  that  I  am  offended  by  your  pride, 
your  sometime  assumption  of  dignity,  your  man 
ners  which  come  over  me  like  waves  of  Lethe.  I 
know  that  if  I  stood  in  that  relation  to  you  which 
you  seem  to  ask,  I  should  not  be  met.  Per 
haps  I  am  wiser  than  you  think.  Do  you  never 
for  an  instant  treat  me  as  a  thing,  flatter  me  ? 
You  treat  me  with  politeness  and  I  make  myself 
scarce.  We  have  not  sympathy  enough,  do  not 
always  apprehend  each  other.  You  talk  too,  too 
often,  as  if  I  were  Mr.  Tompkins  of  the  firm 

of  ,  a  retired  merchant.  If  I  had  never 

thought  of  you  as  a  friend,  I  could  make  much 
use  of  you  as  an  acquaintance.  .  .  . 

The  value  of  the  pitch  pine  in  winter  is  that 


300  WINTER. 

it  holds  the  snow  so  finely.  I  see  it  now  afar  on 
the  hillsides  decking  itself  with  it,  its  whited 
towers  forming  coverts  where  the  rabbit  and  the 
gray  squirrel  lurk.  It  makes  the  most  cheerful 
winter  scenery,  beheld  from  the  window,  you 
know  so  well  the  nature  of  the  coverts  and  the 
sombre  light  it  makes.  The  young  oaks  with 
their  red  leaves,  covering  so  many  acres,  are  also 
an  indispensable  feature  of  the  winter  landscape, 
and  the  limbs  of  oak  woods  where  some  of  the 
trees  have  been  cut  off. 

Jan.  31,  1854.  p.  M.  To  Great  Meadows 
and  Beck  Stow's.  The  wind  is  more  southerly, 
and  now  the  warmth  of  the  sun  prevails  and  is 
felt  on  the  back.  The  snow  softens  and  melts. 
It  is  a  beautiful,  clear,  and  mild  winter  day.  .  .  . 
But  I  do  not  melt.  There  is  no  thaw  in  me.  I 
am  bound  out  still.  —  I  see  the  tree  sparrows 
one  or  two  at  a  time  now  and  then  all  winter 
uttering  a  faint  note,  with  their  bright  chestnut 
crown,  and  spot  on  breast,  and  barred  wings. 
They  represent  the  sparrows  in  winter.  .  .  . 

In  winter  when  there  are  no  flowers,  and  leaves 
are  rare,  even  large  buds  are  interesting  and 
somewhat  exciting.  I  go  a  budding  like  a  part 
ridge.  I  am  always  attracted  at  this  season  by 
the  buds  of  the  swamp  pink,  the  poplars,  and 
the  sweet  gale.  .  .  . 

We  too  have  our  thaws.     They  come  to  our 


WINTER.  301 

January  moods,  when  our  ice  cracks,  and  our 
sluices  break  loose.  Thought  that  was  frozen 
up  under  stern  experience  gushes  forth  in  feel 
ing  and  expression,  This  is  a  freshet  which 
carries  away  dams  of  accumulated  ice.  Our 
thoughts  hide  unexpressed  like  the  buds  under 
the  downy  or  resinous  scales.  They  would 
hardly  keep  a  partridge  from  starving.  If  you 
would  know  what  are  my  winter  thoughts  look 
in  the  partridge's  crop.  They  are  like  the 
laurel  buds,  some  leaf,  some  blossom  buds,  which, 
though  food  for  such  indigenous  creatures,  will 
not  expand  into  leaves  and  flowers  until  summer 
comes. 

Jan.  31,  1855.  A  clear,  cool,  beautiful  day; 
fine  skating ;  an  unprecedented  expanse  of  ice. 
At  10  A.  M.  skated  up  the  river  to  explore  far 
ther  than  I  had  been.  .  .  .  The  country  almost 
completely  bare  of  snow,  only  some  ice  in  the 
roads  and  fields,  and  the  frozen  freshet  at  this 
remarkable  height.  I  skated  up  as  far  as  the 
boundary  between  Wayland  and  Sudbury,  just 
above  Pelham's  Pond,  about  twelve  miles,  be 
tween  10  A.  M.  and  1,  quite  leisurely.  There  I 
found  the  river  open  unexpectedly,  as  if  there 
were  a  rapid  there,  and  as  I  walked  three 
quarters  of  a  mile  farther,  it  was  still  open  be 
fore  me.  .  .  .  All  the  way  I  skated  there  was  a 
chain  of  meadows,  with  the  muskrat  houses  still 


302  WINTER. 

rising  above  the  ice,  commonly  on  the  bank  of 
the  river,  and  marking  it  like  smaller  haycocks 
amid  the  large  ones  still  left.  —  As  I  skated 
near  the  shore  under  Lee's  Cliff,  I  saw  what  I 
took  to  be  some  scrags  or  knotty  stubs  of  a 
dead  limb,  lying  on  the  bank  beneath  a  white 
oak,  close  by  me.  Yet  while  I  looked  closely  at 
them,  I  could  not  but  admire  their  close  resem 
blance  to  partridges.  I  had  come  along  with  a 
rapid  whir,  and  suddenly  halted  right  against 
them,  only  two  rods  distant,  and  as  my  eyes 
watered  a  little  from  skating  against  the  wind, 
I  was  not  convinced  they  were  birds,  till  I  had 
pulled  out  my  glass  and  deliberately  examined 
them.  They  sat  and  stood,  three  of  them,  per 
fectly  still,  with  their  heads  erect,  some  darker 
feathers,  like  ears  methinks,  increasing  their  re 
semblance  to  scrags,  as  where  a  small  limb  is 
broken  off.  I  was  much  surprised  at  the  re 
markable  stillness  they  preserved,  instinctively 
relying  on  their  resemblance  to  the  ground  for 
their  protection,  i.  e.,  withered  grass,  dry  oak 
leaves,  dead  scrags,  and  broken  twigs.  .  .  .  For 
some  time  after  I  had  noted  their  resemblance 
to  birds,  standing  only  two  rods  off,  I  could  not 
be  sure  of  their  character  on  account  of  their 
perfect  motionlessness,  and  it  was  not  till  I 
brought  my  glass  to  bear  on  them,  and  distinctly 
saw  their  eyes  steadily  glaring  on  me  and  their 


WINTER.  303 

necks  and  every  muscle  tense  with  anxiety,  that  I 
was  convinced.  At  length,  on  some  signal  which 
I  did  ^not  perceive,  they  went  with  a  whir,  as  if 
off,  over  the  bushes. 

Feb.  1,  1852.  When  I  hear  that  a  friend 
on  whom  I  relied  has  spoken  of  me,  not  with 
cold  words,  perhaps,  but  even  with  a  cold  and 
indifferent  tone,  to  another,  ah  !  what  treachery 
I  feel  it  to  be  !  the  crime  of  all  crimes  against 
humanity.  My  friend  may  cherish  a  thousand 
suspicions  against  me,  and  they  may  but  repre 
sent  his  faith  and  expectation,  till  he  cherishes 
them  so  heartlessly  that  he  can  speak  of  thern^ 

If  I  have  not  succeeded  in  my  friendshipgfit 
was  because  I  demanded  more  of  them,  and 
did  not  put  up  with  what  I  could  get ;  and  I 
got  no  more,  partly  because  I  gave  so  little.  I 
be  dumb  to  those  who  do  not,  as  I  believe, 

preciate  my  actions,  not  knowing  the  springs 
of  them. 

While  we  preach  obedience  to  human  laws, 
and  to  that  portion  of  the  divine  laws  set  forth 
in  the  New  Testament,  the  natural  laws  of 
genius,  of  love  and  friendship,  we  do  not  preach 
nor  insist  upon.  How  many  a  seeming  heart- 
lessness  is  to  be  explained  by  the  very  abun 
dance  of  the  heart.  How  much  of  seeming 
recklessness,  even  selfishness,  is  to  be  explained 
by  obedience  to  this  code  of  the  divine  laws. 


304  WINTER. 

It  is  evident  that  as  buyers  and  sellers  we  obey 
a  very  different  law  from  what  we  do  as  lovers 
and  friends.  The  Hindoo  is  not  to  be  tried  in 
all  things  by  the  Christian  standard,  nor  the 
Christian  by  the  Hindoo.  How  much  fidelity 
to  law  of  a  kind  not  commonly  recognized,  how 
much  magnanimity  even  may  be  thrown  away 
on  mankind,  is  like  pearls  cast  before  swine ! 
The  hero  obeys  his  own  law,  the  Christian,  his, 
the  lover  and  friend,  theirs:  they  are  to  some 
extent  different  codes.  What  incessant  tragedy 
between  men  when  one  silently  obeys  the  code 
of  friendship,  the  other,  the  code  of  philan 
thropy,  in  their  dealings  with  one  another.  As 
our  constitutions  and  geniuses  are  different,  so 
are  our  standards,  and  we  are  amenable  to  dif 
ferent  codes.  My  neighbor  asks  me  in  vain  to 
be  good  as  he  is  good;'  I  must  be  good  as  I  am 
made  to  be  good,  whether  I  am  heathen  or 
Christian.  Every  man's  laws  are  hard  enough 
to  obey.  The  Christian  falls  as  far  short  of 
obeying  the  heathen  moral  law  as  the  heathen 
does.  One  of  little  faith  looks  for  his  rewards 
and  punishments  to  the  next  world,  and,  de 
spairing  of  this  world,  behaves  accordingly  in  it ; 
another  thinks  the  present  a  worthy  occasion 
and  arena,  sacrifices  to  it,  and  expects  to  hear 
sympathizing  voices.  The  man  who  believes  in 
another  world  and  not  in  this  is  wont  to  put  me 


WINTER.  305 

off  with  Christianity.  The  present  world  in 
which  we  talk  is  of  a  little  less  value  to  him 
than  the  next  world.  So  we  are  said  to  hope  in 
proportion  as  we  do  not  realize.  It  is  all  hope 
deferred.  But  one  grain  of  realization,  of  in 
stant  life  on  which  we  stand,  is  equivalent  to 
acres  of  the  leaf  of  hope  hammered  out  to  gild 
our  prospect.  The  former  so  qualifies  the  vis 
ion  that  it  gilds  all  we  look  upon  with  the  splen 
dor  of  truth.  We  must  meet  the  hero  on 
heroic  grounds.  Some  tribes  inhabit  the  moun 
tains.  Some  dwell  on  the  plains.  We  discour 
age  one  another.  We  obey  different  laws. 

My  friends  !  my  friends  !  It  does  not  cheer 
me  to  see  them.  They  but  express  their  want 
of  faith  in  me  or  in  mankind.  Their  coldest, 
cruellest  thought  comes  clothed  in  polite  and 
easy  spoken  words  at  last.  I  am  silent  to  their 
in  citations,  because  I  do  not  feel  invited,  and  we 
have  no  reasons  to  give  for  what  we  do  not  do. 
One  says,  "  Love  me  out  of  this  mire."  The 
other  says,  "  Come  out  of  it  and  be  lovely." 

Feb.  1,  1855.  As  I  skated  up  the  river  yes 
terday,  now  here,  now  there,  past  the  old  king 
doms  of  my  fancy,  I  was  reminded  of  Lan- 
dor's  Richard  the  First.  "  I  sailed  along  the 
realms  of  my  family ;  on  the  right  was  England, 
on  the  left  was  France  [on  the  right  was  Sud- 
bury,  on  the  left  was  Wayland  ]  ;  little  else 


306  WINTER. 

could  I  discover  than  sterile  eminences  and  ex 
tensive  shoals.  They  fled  behind  me ;  so  pass 
away  generations;  so  shift  and  sink,  and  die 
away  affections."  "  I  debark  in  Sicily."  [That 
was  Tail's  Island.]  "  I  sail  again,  and  within  a 
day  or  two  [hour  or  two]  I  behold,  as  the  sun  is 
setting,  the  solitary  majesty  of  Crete  [that  was 
Nobscot  surely],  mother  of  a  religion,  it  is  said, 
that  lived  two  thousand  years.  Onward,  and 
many  specks  bubble  up  along  the  blue  ^Egean." 
These  must  have  been  the  muskrat  houses  in 
the  meadows.  "  Every  one,"  I  have  no  doubt, 
"  the  monument  of  a  greater  man  [being  ?]  than 
I  am."  The  swelling  river  was  belching  on  a 
high  key  from  ten  to  eleven,  quite  a  musical 
cracking,  running  like  chain  lightning  of  sound 
athwart  my  course.  ...  As  I  passed,  the  ice 
forced  up  by  the  water  on  one  side  suddenly 
settled  on  another  with  a  crash,  and  quite  a  lake 
was  formed  above  the  ice  behind  me,  so  that  my 
successor  two  hours  after,  to  his  wonder  and 
alarm,  saw  my  tracks  disappear  on  one  side  of 
it  and  come  out  on  the  other.  My  seat  from 
time  to  time  is  the  springy  horizontal  bough  of 
some  fallen  tree  which  is  frozen  into  the  ice,  some 
old  maple  that  was  blown  over  and  retained  some 
life  a  year  after,  in  the  water,  covered  with  the 
great  shaggy  perforate  parmelia.  Lying  flat 
I  quench  my  thirst  where  the  ice  is  melted 


WINTER.  307 

about  it,  blowing  aside  the  snow  fleas.  The 
great  arundo  in  the  Sudbury  meadows  was  all 
level  with  the  ice.  There  was  a  great  bay  of  ice 
stretching  up  the  Pantry,  and  up  Larned  Brook. 
I  looked  up  a  broad,  glaring  bay  of  ice  at  the 
last  place  which  seemed  to  reach  to  the  base  of 
Nobscot  and  almost  to  the  horizon.  Some  dead 
maple  or  oak  saplings  laid  side  by  side  made  my 
bridges,  by  which  I  got  on  to  the  ice  along  the 
watery  shore.  It  was  a  problem  to  get  off,  and 
another  to  get  on,  dry  shod. 

Feb.  1,  1857.  3  P.  M.  Down  railroad.  Ther 
mometer  at-j-42°.  Warm  as  it  is,  I  see  a  large 
flock  of  snow  buntings  on  the  railroad  cause 
way.  Their  wings  are  white  above,  next  the 
body,  but  black  or  dark  beyond,  and  on  the 
back.  This  produces  that  regular  black  and 
white  effect  when  they  fly  past  you. 

Feb.  1,  1858.  Measured  Gowing's  swamp 
two  and  one  half  rods  N.  E.  of  the  middle  of 
the  hole,  *.  e.,  in  the  andromeda  and  sphagnum 
near  its  edge,  where  I  stand  in  the  summer ; 
also  five  rods  N.  E.  of  the  middle  of  the  open 
hole,  or  in  the  midst  of  the  andromeda.  In 
both  these  places  the  pole  went  hard  at  first, 
but  broke  through  a  crust  of  roots  and  sphag 
num  at  about  three  feet  beneath  the  surface, 
and  I  then  easily  pushed  it  down  just  twenty 
feet.  This  being  a  small  pole,  I  could  not  push 


308  WINTER. 

it  any  farther,  holding  it  by  the  small  end.  It 
bent  then.  With  a  longer  and  stiffer  pole,  I 
could  probably  have  fathomed  thirty  feet.  It 
seems  then  that  there  is  over  this  andromeda 
swamp  a  crust  about  three  feet  thick  of  sphag 
num,  andromeda  calyculata  and  polifolia,  and 
kalinia  glauca,  beneath  which  there  is  almost 
clear  water,  and  under  that  an  exceedingly  thin 
mud.  There  can  be  no  soil  above  the  mud,  and 
yet  there  are  three  or  four  larch  trees  three  feet 
high  or  more  between  these  holes,  or  over  ex 
actly  the  same  water,  and  small  spruce  trees 
near  by.  For  aught  that  appears,  the  swamp  is 
as  deep  under  the  andromedas  as  in  the  middle. 
The  two  andromedas  and  the  kalmia  glauca  may 
be  more  truly  said  to  grow  in  water  than  in  soil 
there.  When  the  surface  of  a  swamp  shakes  for 
a  rod  around  you,  you  may  conclude  that  it  is  a 
network  of  roots  two  or  three  feet  thick  resting 
on  water  or  very  thin  mud.  The  surface  of  that 
swamp,  composed  in  great  part  of  sphagnum,  is 
really  floating.  It  evidently  begins  with  sphag 
num  which  floats  on  the  surface  of  clear  water, 
and  accumulating,  at  length  affords  a  basis  for 
that  large-seeded  sedge (?),  andromeda,  etc.  The 
filling  up  of  a  swamp  then,  in  this  case  at  least, 
is  not  the  result  of  a  deposition  of  vegetable 
matter  washed  into  it,  settling  to  the  bottom, 
and  leaving  the  surface  clear,  so  filling  it  up  from 


WINTER.  30& 

the  bottom  to  the  top.  But  the  vegetation  first 
extends  itself  over  it  in  a  film  which  gradually 
thickens  till  it  supports  shrubs,  and  completely 
conceals  the  water.  The  under  part  of  this 
crust  drops  to  the  bottom,  so  that  it  is  filled  up 
first  at  the  top  and  bottom,  and  the  middle  part 
is  the  last  to  be  reclaimed  from  the  water.  Per 
haps  this  swamp  is  in  the  process  of  becoming 
peat.  It  has  been  partially  drained  by  a  ditch. 
—  I  fathomed  also  two  rods  within  the  edge  of 
the  blueberry  bushes,  in  the  path,  but  I  could 
not  force  a  pole  down  more  than  eight  feet  five 
inches,  so  it  is  much  more  solid  there,  and  the 
blueberry  bushes  require  a  firmer  soil  than  the 
water  andromeda.  —  This  is  a  regular  quag  OP 
shaking  surface,  and  in  this  way  evidently  float 
ing  islands  are  formed.  I  am  not  sure  but  that 
meadow,  with  all  its  bushes  in  it,  would  float  a 
man-of-war. 

Feb.  2,  1841.  It  is  easy  to  repeat,  but  hard 
to  originate.  Nature  is  readily  made  to  repeat 
herself  in  a  thousand  forms,  and,  in  the  daguerre 
otype,  her  own  light  is  amanuensis.  The  pic 
ture,  too,  has  more  than  a  surface  significance, 
a  depth  equal  to  the  prospect,  so  that  the  micro 
scope  may  be  applied  to  the  one,  as  the  spy 
glass  to  the  other.  Thus  we  may  easily  multi 
ply  the  forms  of  the  outward,  but  to  give  the 
within  outwardness,  that  is  not  easy. 


310  WINTER. 

That  an  impression  may  be  taken,  perfect 
stillness,  though  but  for  an  instant,  is  necessary. 
There  is  something  analogous  in  the  birth  of  all 
rhymes. 

Our  sympathy  is  a  gift  whose  value  we  can 
never  know,  nor  when  we  impart  it.  The  in 
stant  of  communion  is  when,  for  the  least  point 
of  time,  we  cease  to  oscillate  and  coincide  in  rest, 
by  as  fine  a  point  as  a  star  pierces  the  firma 
ment.  .  .  . 

There  is  always  a  single  ear  in  the  audience 
to  which  we  address  ourselves. 

How  much  does  it  concern  you,  the  good 
opinion  of  your  friend!  Therein  is  the  meas 
ure  of  fame.  For  the  herd  of  men  multiplied 
many  times  will  never  come  up  to  the  value  of 
one  friend.  In  this  society  there  is  no  fame  but 
love,  for  as  our  name  may  be  on  the  lips  of  men, 
so  are  we  in  each  other's  hearts.  There  is  no 
ambition  but  virtue,  for  why  should  we  go  round 
about  who  may  go  direct  ?/<  •  • 

For  our  aspirations  there  is  no  expression  as 
yet,  but  if  we  obey  steadily,  by  another  year  we 
shall  have  learned  the  language  of  last  year's 
aspirations.  .  .  . 

/    Weight  has   something  very  imposing  in  it, 

/    for  we  cannot  get  rid  of  it.     Once  in  the  scales 

we  must  weigh.     And  are  we  not  always  in  the 

scales,  and  weighing  just  our  due,  though  we 


WINTER.  311 

kick  the  beam,  and  do  all  ^e'can  to  make  our 
selves  heavier  or  lighter^ 

Feb.  2,  1853.  Th&SBtellaria  media  [common 
chickweed]  is  full  of  frost-bitten  blossoms  con 
taining  stamens,  etc.,  still,  and  half -grown  buds. 
Apparently  it  never  rests. 

Feb.  2,  1854.  Up  river  on  ice  to  Clematis 
Brook.  Another  warm,  melting  day,  like  yester 
day.  You  can  see  some  softening  and  relenting 
in  the  sky.  Apparently  the  vapor  in  the  air 
makes  a  grosser  atmosphere  more  like  that  of  a 
summer  eve.  We  go  up  the  Corner  road  and 
take  the  ice  at  Potter's  meadow.  The  Cliff 
Hill  is  nearly  bare  on  the  west  side,  and  you 
hear  the  rush  of  melted  snow  down  its  side  in 
one  place.  Here  and  there  are  regular  round 
holes  in  the  ice  over  the  meadow  two  or  three 
feet  in  diameter  where  the  water  appears  to 
be  warmer,  and  where  are  springs,  perchance. 
Therein  in  shallow  water  is  seen  the  cress  and 
one  or  two  other  plants  still  quite  fresh.  The 
shade  of  pines  on  the  snow  is  in  some  lights 
quite  blue.  We  stopped  a  while  under  Bittern 
Cliff,  the  south  side,  where  it  is  very  warm. 
There  are  a  few  greenish  radical  leaves  to  be 
seen,  primrose,  Johnswort,  strawberry,  etc.,  and 
spleen  wort  still  green  in  the  clefts.  These 
sunny  old  gray  rocks  completely  covered  with 
white  and  gray  lichens,  and  overrun  with  ivy, 


312  WINTER. 

are  a  very  cozy  place.  You  hardly  detect  the 
melted  snow  swiftly  trickling  down  them,  until 
you  feel  the  drops  on  your  cheek.  The  winter 
gnat  is  seen  in  the  air  before  the  rocks.  In 
their  clefts  are  the  latebrae  of  many  insects, 
spiders,  etc.  .  .  . 

The  ice  is  eighteen  inches  thick  on  Fair 
Haven.  Saw  some  pickerel  just  caught  there 
with  a  fine  lustre  on  them.  —  Went  to  the  pond 
in  the  woods  which  has  an  old  ditch  dug  from  it 
near  Clematis  Brook.  The  red  twigs  of  the 
cornel  and  the  yellow  ones  of  the  sallows  sur 
rounding  it  are  interesting  at  this  season.  We 
prize  the  least  color  now.  As  it  is  a  melting 
day,  the  snow  is  everywhere  peppered  with  snow 
fleas,  even  twenty  rods  from  the  woods,  on  the 
pond  and  meadows. 

The  scream  of  the  jay  is  a  true  winter  sound. 
It  is  wholly  without  sentiment,  and  in  harmony 
with  winter.  —  I  stole  up  within  five  or  six  rods 
of  a  pitch  pine  behind  which  a  downy  wood 
pecker  was  pecking.  From  time  to  time  he 
hopped  round  to  the  side  towards  me,  and  ob 
served  me  without  fear.  They  are  very  confident 
birds,  not  easily  scared,  but  incline  to  keep  the 
other  side  of  the  bough  from  you,  perhaps. 

Already  we  begin  to  anticipate  spring,  to  say 
that  the  day  is  spring-like.  This  is  an  important 
difference  between  this  time  and  a  month  ago. 


WINTER.  313 

Is  not  January  the  hardest  month  to  get 
through?  When  you  have  weathered  that,  you 
get  into  the  gulf  stream  of  winter,  nearer  the 
shores  of  spring. 

Feb.  2,  1855.  .  .  .  This  last  half  inch  of 
snow  which  fell  in  the  night  is  just  enough  to 
track  animals  on  the  ice  by.  All  about  the 
Hill  and  Rock  I  see  the  tracks  of  rabbits  which 
have  run  back  and  forth  close  to  the  shore  re 
peatedly  since  the  night.  In  the  case  of  the 
rabbit,  the  fore  feet  are  farther  apart  than  the 
hind  ones,  the  first,  four  or  five  inches  to  the 
stride,  the  last,  two  or  three.  They  are  gener 
ally  not  quite  regular,  but  one  of  the  fore  feet  a 
little  in  advance  of  the  other,  and  so  with  the 
hind  feet.  There  is  an  interval  of  about  sixteen 
inches  between  each  four  tracks.  Sometimes 
they  are  in  a  curve  or  crescent,  all  touching. 

I  saw  what  must  have  been  a  muskrat's  or 
mink's  track,  I  think,  since  it  came  out  of  the 
water ;  the  tracks  roundish,  and  toes  much  rayed 
four  or  five  inches  apart  on  the  trail,  with  only 
a  trifle  more  between  the  fore  and  hind  legs, 
and  the  mark  of  the  tail  in  successive  curves  as 
it  struck  the  ice.  —  Another  track  puzzled  me, 
as  if  a  hare  had  been  running  like  a  dog 
( —  •  .  —  *  .  —  •  .  eighteen  inches  apart),  and 
touched  its  tail,  if  it  had  one.  This  in  several 
places. 


314  WINTER. 

Feb.  2,  1858.  ...  As  I  return  from  the  post- 
office  I  hear  the  hoarse,  robin-like  chirp  of  a  song 
sparrow,  ...  and  see  him  perched  011  the  top 
most  twig  of  a  heap  of  brush,  looking  forlorn, 
and  drabbled,  and  solitary  in  the  rain. 

Feb.  2,  1860.  6°  at  about  8  A.  M.  .  .  .  2  p.  M. 
to  Fair  Haven  Pond.  The  river,  which  was 
breaking  up,  is  frozen  over  again.  The  new  ice 
over  the  channel  is  of  a  yellow  tinge,  and  is  cov 
ered  with  handsome  rosettes  two  or  three  inches 
in  diameter  where  the  vapor  which  rose  through 
froze  and  crystallized.  This  new  ice  for  forty 
rods  together  is  thickly  covered  with  these 
rosettes,  often  as  thick  as  snow,  an  inch  deep. 
.  .  .  The  frozen  breath  of  the  river  at  a  myriad 
breathing  holes.  .  .  . 

It  is  remarkable  that  the  straw-colored  sedge 
of  the  meadows,  which  in  the  fall  is  one  of  the 
least  noticeable  colors,  should  now,  that  the  land 
scape  is  mostly  covered  with  snow,  be  perhaps 
the  most  noticeable  of  all  objects  in  it  for 
its  color,  and  an  agreeable  contrast  to  the 
snow.  .  .  . 

I  see  where  some  meadow  mouse  (if  not  mole) 
just  came  to  the  surface  of  the  snow,  enough 
to  break  it  with  his  back  for  three  or  four 
inches,  then  put  his  head  out,  and  at  once 
withdrew  it. 

We  walked  as  usual  in  the  fresh  track  of  a 


WINTER.  315 

fox,  peculiarly  pointed,  and  sometimes  the  mark 
of  two  toe-nails  in  front  separate  from  the  track 
of  the  foot  in  very  thin  snow.  As  we  were  kin 
dling  a  fire  on  the  pond  by  the  side  of  the 
island,  we  saw  the  fox  himself  at  the  inlet  of  the 
river.  He  was  busily  examining  along  the  sides 
of  the  pond  by  the  button  -  bushes  and  wil 
lows,  smelling  in  the  snow.  Not  appearing  to 
regard  us  much,  he  slowly  explored  along  the 
shore  of  the  pond  thus  half  way  round  it ;  at 
Pleasant  Meadow  evidently  looking  for  mice  (or 
moles  ?)  in  the  grass  of  the  bank,  smelling  in 
the  shallow  snow  there,  amid  the  stubble,  often 
retracing  his  steps,  and  pausing  at  particular 
spots.  He  was  eagerly  searching  for  food,  intent 
on  finding  some  mouse  to  help  fill  his  empty 
stomach.  He  had  a  blackish  tail  and  blackish 
feet,  looked  lean,  and  stood  high.  The  tail 
peculiarly  large  for  any  creature  to  carry  round. 
He  stepped  daintily  about,  softly,  and  is  more 
to  the  manor  born  than  a  dog.  It  was  a  very 
arctic  scene  this  cold  day,  and  I  suppose  he 
would  hardly  have  ventured  out  in  a  warm  one. 
—  The  fox  seems  to  get  his  living  by  industry 
and  perseverance.  He  runs  smelling  for  miles 
along  the  most  favorable  routes,  especially  the 
edge  of  rivers  and  ponds,  till  he  smells  the  track 
of  a  mouse  beneath  the  snow,  or  the  fresh  track 
of  a  partridge,  and  then  follows  it  till  he  comes 


316  WINTER. 

upon  his  game.  .  .  .  There  may  be  a  dozen 
partridges  resting  in  the  snow  within  a  square 
mile,  and  his  work  is  simply  to  find  them  with 
the  end  of  his  nose.  Compared  with  the  dog 
he  affects  me  as  high-bred,  unmixed.  There  is 
nothing  of  the  mongrel  in  him.  He  belongs  to 
a  noble  family  which  has  seen  its  best  days,  a 
younger  son.  Now  and  then  he  starts,  and 
turns,  and  doubles  on  his  track,  as  if  he  heard 
or  scented  danger.  (I  watch  him  through  my 
glass.)  He  does  not  mind  us  at  the  distance  of 
only  sixty  rods.  I  have  myself  seen  to-day  one 
place  where  a  mouse  came  to  the  surface  in  the 
snow.  Probably  he  has  smelled  out  many  such 
galleries.  Perhaps  he  seizes  them  through  the 
snow.  —  I  had  a  transient  vision  of  one  mouse 
this  winter,  and  that  the  first  for  a  number  of 
years. 

Feb.  3, 1841.  The  present  seems  never  to  get 
its  due.  It  is  the  least  obvious,  neither  before 
nor  behind,  but  within  us.  All  the  past  plays 
into  this  moment,  and  we  are  what  we  are.  My 
aspiration  is  one  thing,  my  reflection,  another ; 
but,  over  all,  myself  and  condition  —  is  and 
does.  To  men  and  nature  I  am  each  moment 
a  finished  tool,  —  a  spade,  a  barrow,  a  pickaxe. 
This  immense  promise  is  no  efficient  quality. 
For  all  practical  purposes  I  am  done.  .  .  . 

We  are  constantly  invited  to  be  what  we  are, 


WINTER.  317 

as  to  something  worthy  and  noble.  I  never 
waited  but  for  myself  to  come  round  ;  none  ever 
detained  me,  but  I  lagged  or  staggered  after 
myself. 

It  steads  us  to  be  as  true  to  children  and 
boors,  as  to  God  himself.  It  is  the  only  atti 
tude  which  will  meet  all  occasions.  It  only  will 
make  the  earth  yield  her  increase,  —  and  by  it 
do  we  effectually  expostulate  with  the  wind. 
If  I  run  against  a  post,  this  is  the  remedy. 

I  would  meet  the  morning  and  evening  on 
very  sincere  ground.  When  the  sun  introduces 
me  to  a  new  day,  I  silently  say  to  myself,  "Let 
us  be  faithful  all  round.  We  will  do  justice 
and  receive  it."  Something  like  this  is  the 
secret  charm  of  Nature's  demeanor  towards  us, 
strict  conscientiousness,  and  disregard  of  us 
when  we  have  ceased  to  have  regard  for  our 
selves.  So  she  can  never  offend  us.  How  true 
she  is,  and  never  swerves.  In  her  most  genial 
moment,  her  laws  are  as  steadfastly  and  relent 
lessly  fulfilled  (though  the  decalogue  is  rhymed 
and  set  to  sweetest  music),  as  in  her  sternest. 

Any  exhibition  of  affection,  as  an  inadvertent 
word,  or  act,  or  look,  seems  premature,  as  if  the 
time  were  not  ripe  for  it,  like  the  buds  which 
the  warm  days  near  the  end  of  winter  cause  to 
push  out  and  unfold  before  the  frosts  are  yet 
gone. 


318  WINTER. 

My  life  must  seem  as  if  it  were  passing  on  a 
higher  level  than  that  which  I  occupy.  It  must 
possess  a  dignity  which  will  not  allow  me  to  be 
familiar. 

Feb.  3,  1852.  When  I  review  the  list  of  my 
acquaintances  from  the  most  impartial  point  of 
view,  and  consider  each  one's  excesses  and  de 
fects  of  character  which  are  the  subject  of 
mutual  ridicule  and  astonishment  and  pity  (and 
I  class  myself  among  them),  I  cannot  help  ask 
ing  myself,  "  If  this  is  the  sane  world,  what 
must  a  mad-house  be  ?  "  It  is  only  by  a  certain 
flattery,  and  an  ignoring  of  their  faults,  that 
even  the  best  are  made  available  for  society. 

I  have  been  to  the  libraries  (yesterday)  at 
Cambridge  and  Boston.  It  would  seem  as  if 
all  things  compelled  us  to  originality.  How 
happens  it  that  I  find  not  in  the  country,  in  the 
fields  and  woods,  the  works  even  of  like-minded 
naturalists  and  poets.  Those  who  have  ex 
pressed  the  purest  and  deepest  love  of  nature 
have  not  recorded  it  on  the  bark  of  the  trees 
with  the  lichens,  they  have  left  no  memento  of 
it  there  ;  but  if  I  would  read  their  books,  I  must 
go  to  the  city,  so  strange  and  repulsive  both  to 
them  and  to  me,  and  deal  with  men  and  institu 
tions  with  whom  I  have  no  sympathy.  When  I 
have  just  been  there  on  this  errand,  it  seems  too 
great  a  price  to  pay  even  for  access  to  the  works 


WINTER.  319 

of  Homer  or  Chaucer  or  Linnaeus.  Greece  and 
Asia  Minor  should  henceforth  bear  Iliads  and 
Odysseys,  as  their  trees  lichens.  But,  no;  if 
the  works  of  nature  are,  to  any  extent,  collected 
in  the  forest,  the  works  of  men  are,  to  a  still 
greater  extent,  collected  in  the  city.  I  have 
sometimes  imagined  a  library,  i.  e.,  a  collection 
of  the  works  of  true  poets,  philosophers,  natu 
ralists,  etc.,  deposited  not  in  a  brick  or  marble 
edifice  in  a  crowded  and  dusty  city,  guarded  by 
cold-blooded  and  methodical  officials,  and  preyed 
on  by  bookworms,  in  which  you  own  no  share, 
and  are  not  likely  to,  but  rather  far  away  in  the 
depths  of  a  primitive  forest,  like  the  ruins  of 
Central  America,  where  you  could  trace  a  series 
of  crumbling  alcoves,  the  older  books  protecting 
the  more  modern  from  the  elements,  partially 
buried  by  the  luxuriance  of  nature,  which  the 
heroic  student  could  only  reach  after  adventures 
in  the  wilderness  amid  wild  beasts  and  wild 
men.  That,  to  my  imagination,  seems  a  fitter 
place  for  these  interesting  relics  which  owe  no 
small  part  of  their  interest  to  their  antiquity, 
and  whose  occasion  is  nature,  than  the  well-pre 
served  edifice,  with  its  well-preserved  officials,  on 
the  side  of  a  city's  square.  More  terrible  than 
lions  and  tigers,  these  libraries.  Access  to  na 
ture  for  original  observation  is  secured  by  one 
ticket,  by  one  kind  of  expense ;  but  access  to  the 


320  WINTER. 

works  of  your  predecessors,  by  a  very  different 
kind  of  expense.  All  things  tend  to  cherish  the 
originality  of  the  original.  Nature,  at  least, 
takes  no  pains  to  introduce  him  to  the  works  of 
his  predecessors,  but  only  presents  him  with  her 
own  opera  omnia.  Is  it  the  lover  of  nature  who 
has  access  to  all  that  has  been  written  on  the 
subject  of  his  favorite  studies  ?  No ;  he  lives 
far  away  from  this.  It  is  the  lover  of  books 
and  systems  who  knows  nature  chiefly  at  second 
hand.  .  .  . 

About  6  P.  M.  walked  to  Cliffs  via  railroad. 
Snow  quite  deep.  The  sun  had  set  without  a 
cloud  in  the  sky  ;  a  rare  occurrence,  but  I  missed 
the  clouds  which  make  the  glory  of  evening.  The 
sky  must  have  a  few  clouds,  as  the  mind  a  few 
moods ;  nor  is  the  evening  less  serene  for  them. 
There  is  only  a  tinge  of  red  along  the  horizon. 
The  moon  is  nearly  full  to-night,  and  the  moment 
is  passed  when  the  light  in  the  east  (i.  e.,  of  the 
moon)  balances  the  light  in  the  west.  .  .  .  It  is 
perfectly  still,  and  not  very  cold.  The  shadows 
of  the  trees  on  the  snow  are  more  minutely  dis 
tinct  than  at  any  other  season,  not  dark  masses 
merely,  but  finely  reticulated,  each  limb  and  twig 
represented,  as  cannot  be  in  summer  both  from 
the  leaves  and  the  inequality  and  darkness  of 
the  ground.  ...  I  hear  my  old  acquaintance, 
the  owl,  from  the  causeway.  The  reflector  of 


WINTER.  321 

the  cars,  as  I  stand  over  the  Deep  Cut,  makes  a 
large  and  dazzling  light  in  this  air,  .  .  .  and 
now  whizzes  the  boiling,  sizzling  kettle  by  me, 
in  which  the  passengers  make  me  think  of  pota 
toes  which  a  fork  would  show  to  be  done  by  this 
time.  The  steam  is  denser  for  the  cold,  and 
more  white  ;  like  the  purest  downy  clouds  in  the 
summer  sky  its  volumes  roll  up  between  me  and 
the  moon,  and  far  behind,  when  the  cars  are  a 
mile  off,  it  still  goes  shading  the  fields  with  its 
wreaths,  the  breath  of  the  panting  traveler.  I 
now  cross  from  the  railroad  to  the  road.  This 
snow,  the  last  of  which  fell  day  before  yesterday, 
is  two  feet  deep,  pure  and  powdery.  .  .  .  From 
a  myriad  little  crystal  mirrors  the  moon  is  re 
flected,  which  is  the  untarnished  sparkle  of  its 
surface.  I  hear  a  gentle  rustling  of  the  oak 
leaves  as  I  go  through  the  woods,  but  this  snow 
has  yet  no  troops  of  leaves  on  its  surface  The 
snow  evidently  by  its  smooth  crust  assists  in  the 
more  equal  dispersion  and  distribution  of  the 
leaves  which  course  over  it,  blown  by  the  wind. 
Perchance,  for  this  reason,  the  oak  leaves  and 
some  others  hang  on.  ... 

[On  Fair  Haven  Hill.]  Instead  of  the  sound 
of  his  [the  chopper's]  axe,  I  hear  the  hooting  of 
an  owl,  nocturnus  ululatus,  whose  haunts  he  is 
laying  waste.  The  ground  is  all  pure  white, 
powdery  snow,  which  his  sled,  etc.,  has  stirred 


322  WINTER. 

up,  except  the  scattered  twigs  and  pine  plumes. 
I  can  see  every  track  distinctly  where  the  team 
ster  drove  his  oxen  and  loaded  his  sled,  and 
even  the  tracks  of  his  dog,  in  the  moonlight,  and 
plainly  to  write  this.  —  The  moonlight  now  is 
very  splendid  in  the  untouched  pine  woods  above 
the  Cliffs,  alternate  patches  of  shade  and  light. 
The  light  has  almost  the  brightness  of  sunlight, 
the  fulgor.  The  stems  of  the  trees  are  more 
obvious  than  by  day,  being  simple  black  against 
the  moonlight  and  the  snow.  The  sough  of  the 
breeze  in  the  pine  tops  sounds  far  away  like  the 
surf  on  a  distant  shore,  and  for  all  sound  be 
side,  there  is  only  the  rattling  or  chafing  of  little 
dry  twigs,  perchance  a  little  snow  falling  on 
them,  or  they  are  so  brittle  that  they  break  and 
fall  with  the  motion  of  the  trees.  —  My  owl 
sounds  hoo-hoo-hoo  —  hoo. 

The  landscape  covered  with  snow  seen  from 
these  Cliffs,  encased  in  snowy  armor  two  feet 
thick,  gleaming  in  the  moonlight  and  of  spotless 
white,  who  can  believe  that  this  is  the  habitable 
globe.  The  scenery  is  wholly  arctic.  Fair  Ha 
ven  Pond  is  a  Baffin's  Bay.  Man  must  have 
ascertained  the  limits  of  the  winter  before  he 
ventured  to  withstand  it,  and  not  migrate  with 
the  birds.  No  cultivated  field,  no  house,  no 
candle.  All  is  as  dreary  as  the  shores  of  the 
frozen  ocean.  I  can  tell  where  there  is  wood 


WINTER.  323 

and  where  open  land  for  many  miles  in  the  hori 
zon  by  the  darkness  of  the  former  and  whiteness 
of  the  latter.  ...  It  looks  as  if  the  snow  and 
ice  of  the  arctic  world,  traveling  like  a  glacier, 
had  crept  down  southward  and  overwhelmed 
New  England.  See  if  a  man  can  think  his  sum 
mer  thoughts  now.  —  But  the  evening  star  is 
preparing  to  set,  and  I  will  return,  floundering 
through  snow,  sometimes  up  to  my  middle.  .  .  . 

The  forcible  writer  stands  bodily  behind  his 
words  with  his  experience.  He  does  not  make 
books  out  of  books,  but  he  has  been  there  in 
person.  .  .  . 

That  is  a  good  mythological  incident  told  of 
the  wounded  farmer  who,  his  foot  being  lacer 
ated  and  held  fast  between  his  plow  and  a 
fallen  tree  in  a  forest  clearing,  drew  his  oxen  to 
him  with  difficulty,  smeared  their  horns  with 
blood  which  the  mosquitoes  had  drawn  from  his 
bare  arms,  and  cutting  the  reins,  sent  them  home 
as  an  advertisement  to  his  family. 

Feb.  3,  1854.  .  .  .  Varro  speaks  of  two 
kinds  of  pigeons,  one  of  which  was  wont  to 
alight  on  the  (  Columinibus  villce)  columns  of  a 
villa  (a  quo  appellatoa  columbce),  from  which 
they  were  called  "  Columbce-"  These,  on  ac 
count  of  their  natural  timidity  (summa  loca  in 
tectis  captant),  delight  in  the  highest  places  on 
the  roofs  (or  under  cover)  ? 


324  WINTER. 

Feb.  3,  1855.  .  .  .  Skated  up  the  river  with 

T n    in    spite    of  the   snow  and  wind.  .  .  . 

We  went  up  the  Pantry  meadow  .  .  .  and  came 
down  .  .  .  again  with  the  wind  and  snow  dust, 
spreading  our  coat  tails,  like  birds,  though  some 
what  at  the  risk  of  our  necks,  if  we  had  struck 
a  foul  place.  I  found  that  I  could  sail  on  a 
tack  pretty  well,  trimming  with  my  skirts. 
Sometimes  we  had  to  jump  suddenly  over  some 
obstacle,  which  the  snow  had  concealed,  to  save 
our  necks.  It  was  worth  the  while  for  one  to 
look  back  against  the  sun  and  wind,  and  see  the 
other  sixty  rods  off,  .  .  .  floating  down  like  a 
graceful  demon  in  the  midst  of  the  broad 
meadow,  all  covered  and  lit  with  the  curling 
snow  steam,  between  which  you  saw  the  ice  in 
dark,  waving  streaks,  like  a  mighty  river 
Orellana  braided  of  a  myriad  steaming  cur 
rents  ;  like  the  demon  of  the  storm  driving  his 
flocks  and  herds  before  him.  In  the  midst  of 
this  tide  of  curling  snow  steam,  he  sweeps  and 
surges  this  way  and  that,  and  comes  on  like  the 
spirit  of  the  whirlwind.  At  Lee's  Cliff  we  made 
a  fire,  kindling  with  white  pine  cones,  after  oak 
leaves  and  twigs,  else  we  had  lost  it.  The  cones 
saved  us,  for  there  is  a  resinous  drop  at  the 
point  of  each  scale.  There  we  forgot  that  we 
were  out  doors  in  a  blustering  winter  day.  Flash 
go  your  dry  leaves  like  powder,  and  leave  a  few 


WINTER.  325 

bare  and  smoking  twigs.  Then  you  sedulously 
feed  a  little  flame  until  the  fire  takes  hold  of 
the  solid  wood  and  establishes  itself.  What  an 
uncertain  and  negative  thing  is  fire  when  it 
finds  nothing  to  suit  its  appetite  after  the  first 
flash.  What  a  positive  and  inexpugnable  thing, 
when  it  begins  to  devour  the  solid  wood  with  a 
relish,  burning  with  its  own  wind.  You  must 
think  as  long  at  last  how  to  put  it  out  as  you 
did  how  to  kindle  it.  Close  up  under  some 
upright  rock  where  you  scorch  the  yellow  sul 
phur  lichens.  Then  cast  on  some  creeping  juni 
per  wreaths  or  hemlock  boughs  to  hear  them 
crackle,  realizing  scripture. 

Some  little  boys  ten  years  old  are  as  hand 
some  skaters  as  I  know.  They  sweep  along 
with  a  graceful,  floating  motion,  leaning  now  to 
this  side,  then  to  that,  like  a  marsh  hawk  beat 
ing  the  bush.  .  .  . 

I  still  recur  in  my  mind  to  that  skating  tour 
of  the  31st.  I  was  thus,  enabled  to  get  a  bird's- 
eye  view  of  the  river,  to  survey  its  length  and 
breadth  within  a  few  hours,  connect  one  part 
or  shore  with  another  in  my  mind,  and  realize 
what  was  going  on  upon  it  from  end  to  end,  to 
know  the  whole,  as  I  ordinarily  knew  a  few 
miles  of  it  only.  I  connected  the  chestnut-tree 
house  near  the  shore  in  Wrayland  with  the  chim 
ney  house  in  Billerica,  Pelham's  Pond  with 


326  WINTER. 

Nutting's  Pond  in  Billerica.  There  is  good 
skating  from  the  mouth  to  Saxon ville,  measure- 
ing  in  a  straight  line  some  twenty -two  miles,,  by 
the  river  say  thirty  now.  It  is  all  the  way  of 
one  character,  a  meadow  river,  or  dead  stream. 
Musketicook,  the  abode  of  muskrats,  pickerel, 
etc.,  crossed  within  these  dozen  miles  each  way, 
or  thirty  in  all,  by  some  twenty  low  wooden 
bridges,  sublicii  ponies,  connected  with  the 
mainland  by  willowy  causeways.  Thus  the 
long  shallow  lakes  are  divided  into  reaches. 
These  long  causeways  all  under  water  and  ice 
now,  only  the  bridges  peeping  out  from  time  to 
time,  like  a  dry  eyelid.  You  must  look  close  to 
find  them  in  many  cases,  mere  islands  are  they 
to  the  traveler  in  this  waste  of  water  and  ice. 
Only  two  villages  lying  near  the  river,  Concord 
and  Way  land,  and  one  at  each  end  of  this  thirty 
miles.  ...  I  used  some  bits  of  wood  with  a 
groove  in  them  for  crossing  the  causeways  and 
gravelly  places,  that  I  might  not  scratch  my 
skate  irons. 

Feb.  3,  1856.  ...  p.  M.  Up  North  Branch. 
A  strong  N.  W.  wind  (and  thermometer  11°) 
driving  the  snow  like  steam.  About  five  inches 
of  soft  snow  now  on  ice.  .  .  .  Returning,  saw 
near  the  Island  a  shrike  glide  by,  cold  and  blus 
tering  as  it  was,  with  a  remarkably  even  and 
steady  sail  or  gliding  motion,  like  a  hawk,  eight 


WINTER.  327 

or  ten  feet  above  the  ground,  and  alight  on  a 
tree  from  which,  at  the  same  instant,  a  small 
bird,  perhaps  a  creeper  or  nuthatch,  flitted  tim 
idly  away.  The  shrike  was  apparently  in  pur 
suit. 

We  go  wading  through  snow  now  up  the 
bleak  river,  in  the  face  of  a  cutting  N.  W.  wind 
and  driving  snow-storm,  turning  now  this  ear, 
now  that,  to  the  wind,  our  gloved  hands  in  our 
bosoms  or  our  pockets.  How  different  this  from 
sailing  or  paddling  up  the  stream  here  in  July, 
or  poling  amid  the  rocks !  Yet  still,  in  one 
square  rod  where  they  have  got  out  ice  and  a 
thin  transparent  covering  has  formed,  I  can 
see  the  pebbly  bottom  as  in  summer. 

There  comes  a  deep  snow  in  midwinter  cover 
ing  up  the  ordinary  food  of  many  birds  and 
quadrupeds,  but  anon  a  high  wind  scatters  the 
seeds  of  pines,  hemlocks,  birches,  alders,  etc.,  far 
and  wide  over  the  surface  of  the  snow,  for  them. 

You  may  now  observe  plainly  the  habit  of  the 
rabbits  to  run  in  paths  about  the  swamps. 

Mr.  Emerson,  who  returned  last  week  from 
lecturing,  on  the  Mississippi,  having  been  gone 
but  a  month,  tells  me  that  he  saw  boys  skating 
on  the  Mississippi,  and  on  Lake  Erie,  and  on 
the  Hudson,  and  has  no  doubt  they  are  skating 
on  Lake  Superior.  Probably  at  Boston  he  might 
have  seen  them  skating  on  the  Atlantic. 


328  WINTER. 

In  Barber's  u  Historical  Collections,"  p.  476, 
there  is  a  letter  by  Cotton  Mather  dated  "  Bos 
ton,  10th  Dec.,  1717,"  describing  the  great  snow 
of  the  preceding  February,  from  which  I  quote : 
"  On  the  twentieth  of  the  last  February  there 
came  on  a  snow,  which  being  added  unto  what 
had  covered  the  ground  a  few  days  before,  made 
a  thicker  mantle  for  our  mother  than  what  was 
usual.  And  the  storm  with  it  was,  for  the  fol 
lowing  day,  so  violent  as  to  make  all  communi 
cation  between  the  neighbors  everywhere  to 
cease.  People,  foi  some  hours,  could  not  pass 
from  one  side  of  a  street  to  another." 

"  On  the  twenty-fourth  day  of  the  month 
came  Pelion  upon  Ossa.  Another  snow  came 
on,  which  almost  buried  the  memory  of  the  for 
mer,  with  a  storm  so  famous  that  Heaven  laid 
an  interdict  on  the  religious  assemblies  through 
out  the  country  on  the  Lord's  day,  the  like 
whereunto  had  never  been  seen  before.  The 
Indians  near  an  hundred  years  old  affirm  that 
their  fathers  never  told  them  of  anything  that 
equaled  it.  Vast  numbers  of  cattle  were  de 
stroyed  in  this  calamity,  whereof  some  there 
were  of  the  stranger  [stronger  ?]  sort,  were 
found  standing  dead  on  their  legs,  as  if  they 
had  been  alive,  many  weeks  after  when  the 
snow  melted  away.  And  others  had  their  eyes 
glazed  over  with  ice  at  such  a  rate,  that  being 


WINTER.  329 

not  far  from  the  sea,  their  mistake  of  their  way 
drowned  them  there.  One  gentleman  on  whose 
farms  were  lost  above  eleven  hundred  sheep, 
which  with  other  cattle,  were  interred  (shall  I 
say)  or  innived  in  the  snow,  writes  me  word 
that  there  were  two  sheep  very  singularly  cir 
cumstanced.  For,  no  less  than  eight  and  twenty 
days  after  the  storm,  the  people  pulling  out  the 
ruins  of  above  ah  hundred  sheep  out  of  a  snow 
bank  which  lay  sixteen  foot  high  drifted  over 
them,  there  was  two  found  alive  which  had  been 
there  all  this  time,  and  kept  themselves  alive  by 
eating  the  wool  of  their  dead  companions.  When 
they  were  taken  out,  they  shed  their  own  fleeces, 
but  soon  got  into  good  case  again." 

"  A  man  had  a  couple  of  young  hogs  which 
he  gave  over  for  dead,  but  on  the  twenty-seventh 
day  after  their  burial,  they  made  their  way  out 
of  a  snow  bank,  at  the  bottom  of  which  they 
had  found  a  little  tansy  to  feed  upon."  "  Hens 
were  found  alive  after  seven  days ;  turkeys 
were  found  alive  after  five  and  twenty  days, 
buried  in  the  snow,  and  at  a  distance  from  the 
ground,  and  altogether  destitute  of  anything  to 
feed  them."  —  "  The  wild  creatures  of  the  woods, 
[at]  the  outgoing  of  the  evening,  made  their 
descent  as  well  as  they  could  in  this  time  of 
scarcity  for  them,  towards  the  sea-side.  A  vast 
multitude  of  deer,  for  the  same  cause,  taking 


330  WINTER. 

the  same  course,  and  the  deep  snow  spoiling 
them  of  their  only  defense,  which  is  to  run,  they 
became  such  a  prey  to  these  devourers  that  it  is 
thought  not  one  in  twenty  escaped."  —  "  It 
is  incredible  how  much  damage  is  done  to  the  or 
chards,  for  the  snow  freezing  to  a  crust  as  high  as 
the  bows  of  the  trees,  anon  split  them  to  pieces. 
The  cattle,  also,  walking  on  the  crusted  snow 
a  dozen  feet  from  the  ground,  so  fed  upon  the 
trees  as  very  much  to  damnify  them."  "  Cot 
tages  were  totally  covered  with  the  snow,  and 
not  the  very  tops  of  their  chimneys  to  be  seen." 
These  "  odd  accidents,"  he  says,  "  would  afford 
a  story.  But  there  not  being  any  relation  to 
Philosophy  in  them,  I  forbear  them."  He  little 
thought  that  his  simple  testimony  to  such  facts 
as  the  above  would  be  worth  all  the  philosophy 
he  might  dream  of. 

Feb.  3,  1857.  To  Fitchburg  to  lecture.  — 
Though  the  snow  was  not  deep,  I  noticed  that 
an  unbroken  snow  crust  stretched  around  Fitch- 
burg  ;  and  its  several  thousand  inhabitants  had 
been  confined  so  long  to  the  narrow  streets,  some 
of  them  a  track  only  six  feet  wide.  Hardly  one 
individual  had  anywhere  departed  from  this  nar 
row  walk,  and  struck  out  into  the  surrounding 
fields  and  hills.  If  I  had  had  my  cowhide 
boots,  I  should  not  have  confined  myself  to  those 
narrow  limits,  but  have  climbed  some  of  the  hills. 


WINTER.  331 

It  is  surprising  to  go  into  a  N.  E.  town  in  mid 
winter  and  find  its  five  thousand  inhabitants  all 
living  thus  on  the  limits,  confined  at  most  to 
their  narrow  moose-yard  in  the  snow.  Scarcely 
here  and  there  has  a  citizen  stepped  aside  one 
foot  to  let  a  sled  pass.  And  about  as  circum 
scribed  is  their  summer  life,  going  out  from  house 
to  shop,  and  back  to  house  again.  If,  Indian- 
like,  one  examined  the  dew  or  beaded  grass,  he 
would  be  surprised  to  discover  how  little  trod 
den  or  frequented  the  surrounding  fields  were. 
...  It  is  as  if  some  vigilance  committee  had 
given  notice  that  if  any  should  transgress  these 
narrow  limits,  he  should  be  outlawed  and  his 
blood  should  be  upon  his  own  head. 

Feb.  3, 1858.  ...  I  do  not  see  this  year,  and 
I  do  not  know  that  I  ever  have  seen,  any  un 
seasonable  swelling  of  the  buds  of  indigenous 
plants  in  mild  winters. 

Feb.  3,  1859.  Five  minutes  before  3  P.  M. 
father  died.  ...  I  have  touched  a  body  which 
was  flexible  and  warm,  yet  tenantless  —  warmed 
by  what  fire  ?  When  the  spirit  that  animated 
some  matter  has  left  it,  who  else,  what  else,  can 
animate  it? 

How  enduring  are  our  bodies  after  all !  The 
forms  of  our  brothers  and  sisters,  our  parents 
and  children  and  wives,  lie  still  in  the  hills  and 
fields  round  about  us,  not  to  mention  those  of 


332  WINTER. 

our  remoter  ancestors,  and  the  matter  which 
composed  the  body  of  our  first  human  father 
still  exists  under  another  name. 

When  in  sickness  the  body  is  emaciated,  and 
the  expression  of  the  face  in  various  ways  is 
changed,  you  perceive  unexpected  resemblances 
to  other  members  of  the  same  family,  as  if  within 
the  same  family  there  was  a  greater  general 
similarity  in  the  framework  of  the  face  than  in 
its  filling  up  and  clothing.  .  .  . 

Some  have  spoken  slightingly  of  the  Indians, 
as  a  race  possessing  so  little  skill  and  wit,  so 
low  in  the  scale  of  humanity,  and  so  brutish 
that  they  hardly  deserved  to  be  remembered, 
using  only  the  terms,  miserable,  wretched,  piti 
ful,  and  the  like.  In  writing  their  histories  of 
this  country,  they  have  so  hastily  disposed  of 
this  refuse  of  humanity  (as  they  might  have 
called  it),  which  littered  and  defiled  the  shore 
and  the  interior.  But  even  the  indigenous  ani 
mals  are  inexhaustibly  interesting  to  us.  How 
much  more  then  the  indigenous  men  of  Amer 
ica  !  If  wild  men,  so  much  more  like  ourselves 
than  they  are  unlike,  have  inhabited  these  shores 
before  us,  we  wish  to  know  particularly  what 
manner  of  men  they  were,  how  they  lived  here, 
their  relation  to  nature,  their  arts  and  their  cus 
toms,  their  fancies  and  superstitions.  They 
paddled  over  these  waters,  they  wandered  in 


WINTER.  333 

these  woods,  and  they  had  their  fancies  and  be 
liefs  connected  with  the  sea  and  the  forest, 
which  concern  us  quite  as  much  as  the  fables  of 
Oriental  nations  do.  It  frequently  happens  that 
the  historian,  though  he  professes  more  human 
ity  than  the  trapper,  the  mountain  man,  or  gold 
digger,  who  shoots  one  as  a  wild  beast,  in  reality 
exhibits  and  practices  a  similar  inhumanity  to 
his,  wielding  a  pen  instead  of  a  rifle.  —  One 
tells  you  with  more  contempt  than  pity  that  the 
Indian  has  no  religion,  holding  up  both  hands, 
and  this  to  all  the  shallow-brained  and  bigoted 
seems  to  mean  something  important.  But  it  is 
a  distinction  without  a  difference.  Pray  how 

much  more  religion  has  the  historian  ?     If 

knows  so  much  more  about  God  than  another,  if 
he  has  made  some  discovery  of  truth  in  this  di 
rection,  I  would  thank  him  to  publish  it  in  "  Silli- 
man's  Journal,"  with  as  few  flourishes  as  possi 
ble.  It  is  the  spirit  of  humanity,  that  which 
animates  both  so-called  savages  and  civilized 
nations,  working  through  a  man,  and  not  the 
man  expressing  himself,  that  interests  us  most. 
The  thought  of  a  so-called  savage  tribe  is  gen 
erally  far  more  just  than  that  of  a  single  civil- 
i^ed  man. 

I   perceive   that  we   partially  die   ourselves, 
through  sympathy,  at  the  death  of  each  of  our 
friends  or  near  relatives.     Each  such  experience 
/ 


334  WINTER. 

is  an  assault  on  our  vital  force.  It  becomes  a 
source  of  wonder  that  they  who  have  lost  many 
friends  still  live.  After  long  watching  around 
the  sick-bed  of  a  friend,  we  too  partially  give  up 
the  ghost  with  him,  and  are  the  less  to  be  iden 
tified  with  this  state  of  things. 

The  writer  must,  to  some  extent,  inspire  him 
self.  Most  of  the  sentences  may  at  first  be  dead 
in  his  essay,  but  when  all  are  arranged,  some 
life  and  color  will  be  reflected  on  them  from  the 
mature  and  successful  lines.  They  will  appear 
to  pulsate  with  past  life,  and  he  will  be  enabled 
to  eke  out  their  slumbering  sense,  and  make 
them  worthy  of  their  neighborhood.  In  his  first 
essay  on  a  given  theme,  he  produces  scarcely 
more  than  a  frame  and  ground-work  for  his  sen 
timent  and  poetry.  Each  clear  thought  that  he 
attains  to,  draws  in  its  train  many  kindred 
thoughts  or  perceptions.  The  writer  has  much 
to  do  even  to  create  a  theme  for  himself.  Most 
that  is  first  written  on  any  subject  is  a  mere 
groping  after  it,  mere  rubble-stone  and  foun 
dation.  It  is  only  when  many  observations  of 
different  periods  have  been  brought  together 
that  he  begins  to  grasp  his  subject,  and  can 
make  one  pertinent  and  just  observation. 

Feb.  3,  1860.  .  .  .  When  I  read  some  of  the 
rules  for  speaking  and  writing  the  English  lan 
guage  correctly,  as  that  a  sentence  must  never 


WINTER.  335 

end  with  a  particle,  and  perceive  how  implicitly 
even  the  learned  obey  it,  I  think 

Any  fool  can  make  a  rule, 
And  every  fool  will  mind  it. 

Feb.  4,  1841.  .  .  .  Music  can  make  the  most 
nervous  chord  vibrate  healthily.  .  .  . 

Wait  till  you  can  be  genuinely  polite,  though 
it  be  till  doomsday,  and  not  lose  your  chance 
everlastingly  by  a  cowardly  yielding  to  young 
etiquette.  .  .  . 

Not  only  by  his  cunning  hand  and  brain,  but 
when  he  speaks,  too,  does  man  assert  his  superi 
ority.  He  conquers  the  spaces  with  his  voice  as 
well  as  the  lion.  The  voice  of  a  strong  man 
modulated  to  the  cadence  of  some  tune  is  more 
imposing  than  any  natural  sound.  The  keeper's 
is  the  most  commanding  voice  in  the  menag 
erie,  and  is  heard  over  all  its  din.  A  strong, 
musical  voice  imposes  a  new  order  and  harmony 
upon  nature.  From  it  as  a  centre,  a  law  is 
promulgated  to  the  universe.  What  it  lacks  in 
volume  and  loudness  may  always  be  made  up  in 
musical  expression  and  distinctness.  The  brute 
growls  to  secure  obedience,  he  threatens ;  the  man 
speaks  as  if  obedience  were  already  secured. 

Feb.  4,  1852.  A  mild,  thawy  day.  The- 
needles  of  the  pine  are  the  touchstone  for  the  air. 
Any  change  in  that  element  is  revealed  to  the 
practiced  eye  by  their  livelier  green  or  increased 


336  WINTER. 

motion.  They  are  the  tell-tales.  Now  they  are 
(the  white  pine)  a  cadaverous,  misty  blue,  anon  a 
lively  .  .  .  light  plays  on  them,  and  they  seein  to 
erect  themselves  unusually,  while  the  pitch  pines 
are  a  brighter  yellowish  green  than  usual.  The 
sun  loves  to  nestle  in  the  boughs  of  the  pine  and 
pass  rays  through  them.  —  The  scent  of  bruised 
pine  leaves  where  a  sled  has  passed  is  a  little 
exciting  to  me  now. 

I  saw  this  afternoon  such  lively,  blood-red 
colors  on  a  white  pine  stump  recently  cut,  that 
at  first  I  thought  the  chopper  had  cut  himself. 
The  heart  of  the  tree  was  partly  decayed,  and 
here  and  there  the  sounder  parts  were  of  this 
vermilion  (?)  color  alternating  with  the  ordinary 
white  of  the  wood  where  it  was  apparently  in 
the  earlier  stages  of  decay.  The  color  was  live 
lier  for  being  wet  with  the  melting  snow. 

Feb.  4,  1854.  .  .  .  We  have  not  much  that  is 
poetic  in  the  accompaniments  of  the  farmer's 
life.  Varro  speaks  of  the  swineherd  as  accus 
toming  the  swine  or  boars  to  come  at  the  sound 
of  a  horn  when  he  fed  them  with  acorns.  I  re 
member  that  my  grandmother  used  to  call  her 
cow  home  at  evening  from  a  near  pasture  to  be 
•  milked  by  thumping  on  the  mortar  which  held 
her  salt.  The  tinkling  cow-bell  cannot  be  spared. 
Even  what  most  attracts  us  in  the  farmer's  life 
is  not  its  profitableness.  We  love  to  go  after  the 


WINTER.  337 

cow  not  for  the  sake  of  her  milk  or  her  beef,  or 
the  money  they  yield,  but  perchance  to  hear  the 
tinkling  of  the  cow -bell.  .  .  .  We  would  keep 
hens  not  for  eggs,  but  to  hear  the  cocks  crow  and 
the  hens  cackle. 

As  for  the  locality  of  bee-hives,  Varro  says 
they  must  be  placed  near  the  villa,  "  potissimum 
ubi  non  resonent  imagines,  hie  enim  sonus  harum 
fugse  causa  existimatur  esse,"  especially  where 
there  are  no  echoes,  "  for  this  sound  is  thought 
to  be  the  cause  of  their  flight." 

Feb.  4,  1855.  .  .  .  Saw  this  p.  M.  a  very  dis 
tinct  otter  track  by  the  Rock,  at  the  junction  of 
the  two  rivers.  The  separate  foot  tracks  were 
quite  round,  more  than  two  inches  in  diameter, 
showing  the  five  toes  distinctly  in  the  snow, 
which  was  about  half  an  inch  deep.  In  one  place 
where  it  had  crossed  last  night  to  Merrick's  pas 
ture,  its  trail  about  six  inches  wide  and  of  fur 
rows  in  the  snow  was  on  one  side  of  its  foot 
tracks,  and  there  were  about  nine  inches  between 
its  fore  and  hind  feet.  Close  by  the  great  aspen 
I  saw  where  it  had  entered  or  come  out  of  the 
water  under  a  shelf  of  ice  left  adhering  to  a 
maple.  There  it  apparently  played  or  slid  on  the 
level  ice,  making  a  broad  trail,  as  if  a  shovel  had 
been  shoved  along,  just  eight  inches  wide,  without 
a  foot  track  in  it  for  four  feet  or  more.  And 
again  the  trail  was  only  two  inches  wide  and 


338  WINTER. 

between  the  foot  tracks,  which  were  side  by  side 
and  twenty-two  inches  apart.  .  .  .  About  the 
edge  of  the  hole,  where  the  snow  was  all  rubbed 
off,  was  something  white  which  looked  and  smelt 
exactly  like  bits  of  the  skin  of  pouts  or  eels. 
Minott  tells  of  one  shot  once  while  eating  an  eel. 

V saw  one  this  winter  in  this  town  eating 

fish  by  a  brook.  .  .  . 

I  sometimes  hear  a  prominent,  but  dull-witted 
worthy  man  say,  or  hear  that  he  has  said  rarely, 
that  if  it  were  not  for  his  firm  belief  in  uan 
overruling  power,"  or  "  a  perfect  Being,"  etc. 
But  such  poverty-stricken  expressions  only  con 
vince  me  of  his  habitual  doubt,  and  that  he 
is  surprised  into  a  transient  belief.  Such  a 
man's  expression  of  faith,  moving  solemnly  in 
the  traditional  furrow,  and  casting  out  all  free- 
thinking  and  living  souls  with  the  rusty  mould- 
board  of  his  compassion  or  contempt,  thinking 
that  he  has  Moses  and  all  the  prophets  in  his 
wake,  discourages  and  saddens  me  as  an  ex 
pression  of  his  narrow  and  barren  want  of  faith. 
I  see  that  the  infidels  and  skeptics  have  formed 
themselves  into  churches,  and  weekly  gather  to 
gether  at  the  ringing  of  a  bell.  Sometimes 
when  in  conversation  or  a  lecture,  I  have  been 
grasping  at,  or  even  standing  and  reclining  upon 
the  serene  and  everlasting  truths  that  underlie 
and  support  our  vacillating  life,  I  have  seen 


WINTER.  339 

my  auditors  standing  on  their  terra  firma,  a 
quaking  earth,  crowded  together  on  their  Lisbon 
Quay,  and  compassionately  or  timidly  watching 
my  motions  as  if  they  were  the  antics  of  a  rope- 
dancer  or  mountebank  intending  to  walk  on  air. 

Feb.  4, 1858.  p.  M.  To  C.  Miles  swamp. 
Discover  the  ledum  latifolium  quite  abundant 
on  a  space  about  six  rods  in  diameter  just  E.  of 
the  small  pond-hole,  growing  with  the  androm- 
eda  calyculata,  polifolia,  kalmia  glauca,  etc. 
.  .  .  The  ledum  bears  a  general  resemblance  to 
the  water  andromeda,  with  its  dark-reddish,  pur 
plish,  or  rather  mulberry  leaves,  reflexed  ;  but 
nearer,  it  is  distinguished  by  its  coarseness,  the 
perfect  tent  form  of  its  upper  leaves,  and  the 
large,  conspicuous,  terminal,  roundish  (strictly 
oval)  red  buds,  nearly  as  big  as  the  swamp 
pink's,  but  rounded.  The  woolly  stem  for  a 
couple  of  inches  beneath  the  bud  is  frequently 
bare,  and  conspicuously  club-shaped.  The  rust 
on  the  under  sides  of  the  leaves  is  of  a  lighter 
color  than  that  of  Maine.  The  seed  vessels, 
which  open  at  the  base  first,  still  hold  on.  The 
plant  might  be  easily  confounded  with  the  water 
andromeda  by  a  careless  observer.  .  .  . 

I  brought  some  home,  and  had  a  cup  of  tea 
made  of  it,  which,  in  spite  of  a  slight  piny  or  tur 
pentine  flavor,  seemed  unexpectedly  good.  .  .  . 
As  usual  with  the  finding  of  new  plants,  I  had  a 


340  WINTER. 

presentiment  that  I  should  find  the  ledum  in 
Concord.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  in  the 
case  of  the  most  interesting  plants  which  I  have 
discovered  in  this  vicinity,  I  have  anticipated 
finding  them  perhaps  a  year  before  the  dis 
covery. 

Feb.  5,  1841.  .  .  .  Music  is  the  crystalliza 
tion  of  sound.  There  is  something  in  the  effect 
of  a  harmonious  voice  upon  the  disposition  of  its 
neighborhood  analogous  to  the  law  of  crystals. 
It  centralizes  itself,  and  sounds  like  the  pub 
lished  law  of  things.  If  the  law  of  the  universe 
were  to  be  audibly  promulgated,  no  mortal  law 
giver  would  suspect  it,  for  it  would  be  a  finer 
melody  than  his  ears  ever  attended  to.  It  would 
be  sphere  music.  .  .  . 

In  all  emergencies  there  is  always  one  step 
which  you  may  take  on  firm  ground,  where 
gravity  will  assure  your  footing.  So  you  hold 
a  draft  on  Fate  payable  at  sight. 

Feb.  5,  1852.  .  .  .  Men  do  believe  in  sym 
bols  yet  and  can  understand  some.  When  Sir 
Francis  Head  left  his  government  in  Upper  Can 
ada,  and  the  usual  farewell  had  been  said,  as 
the  vessel  moved  off,  he,  standing  on  the  deck, 
pointed,  for  all  reply,  to  the  British  flag  floating 
over  his  head,  and  a  shriek  rather  than  a  cheer 
went  up  from  the  crowd  on  the  piers  who  had 
observed  his  gesture.  .  .  . 


WINTER.  341 

Time  never  passes  so  rapidly  and  unaccount 
ably  as  when  I  am  engaged  in  recording  my 
thoughts.  The  world  may  perchance  reach  its 
end  for  us  in  a  profounder  thought,  and  time 
itself  run  down.  • 

Feb.  5,  1853.  .  .  .  The  frost  is  out  of  the 
ground  in  many  places.  A  stellaria  media 
[common  chick  weed]  in  blossom  in  the  garden, 
as  was  the  case,  of  course,  last  month. 

Feb.  5,  1854.  .  .  .  Shall  we  not  have  sym 
pathy  with  the  muskrat,  which  gnaws  its  third 
leg  off,  not  as  pitying  its  suffering,  but,  through 
our  kindred  mortality,  appreciating  its  majestic 
pains  and  its  heroic  virtue  ?  Are  we  not  made 
its  brothers  by  fate  ?  For  whom  are  psalms  sung 
and  mass  said,  if  not  for  such  worthies  as  these  ? 
When  I  hear  the  church  organ  peal,  or  feel  the 
trembling  tones  of  the  bass-viol,  I  see  in  imag 
ination  the  muskrat  gnawing  off  his  leg.  I  offer 
up  a  note  that  his  affliction  may  be  sanctified  to 
each  and  all  of  us.  .  .  .  When  I  think  of  the 
tragedies  which  are  constantly  permitted  in  the 
course  of  all  animal  life,  they  make  the  plaintive 
strain  of  the  universal  harp  which  elevates  us 
above  the  trivial.  .  .  .  Even  as  the  worthies  of 
mankind  are  said  to  recommend  human  life  by 
having  lived  it,  so  I  could  not  spare  the  example 
of  the  muskrat. 

Feb.  5,  1859.     When   we   have   experienced 


342  WINTER. 

many  disappointments,  such  as  the  loss  of  friends, 
the  notes  of  birds  cease  to  affect  us  as  they  did. 

Feb.  6,  1841.  One  may  discover  a  new  side 
to  his  most  intimate  friend  when  for  the  first 
time  he  hears  him  *speak  in  public.  He  will  be 
strange  to  him  as  he  is  more  familiar  to  the  au 
dience.  The  longest  intimacy  could  not  foretell 
how  he  would  behave  then.  When  I  observe 
my  friend's  conduct  toward  others,  then  chiefly 
I  learn  the  traits  in  his  character,  and  in  each 
case  I  am  unprepared  for  the  issue.  .  .  .  How 
little  do  we  know  each  other.  Who  can  tell  how 
his  friend  would  behave  on  any  occasion.  .  .  . 

What  I  am  must  make  you  forget  what  I 
wear.  The  fashionable  world  is  content  to  be 
eclipsed  by  its  dress,  and  never  will  bear  the 
contrast.  .  .  . 

Lu  ral  lu  ral  lu  —  may  be  more  impressively 
sung  than  very  respectable  wisdom  talked.  It  is 
well  timed,  as  wisdom  is  not  always. 

Feb.  6,  1852.  .  .  .  The  artificial  system  has 
been  very  properly  called  the  dictionary,  and 
the  natural  method,  the  grammar  of  the  science 
of  botany,  by  botanists  themselves.  But  are  we 
to  have  nothing  but  grammars  and  dictionaries 
of  this  literature  ?  Are  there  no  works  written 
in  the  language  of  flowers  ?  I  asked  a  learned 
and  accurate  naturalist,  who  is  at  the  same  time 
the  courteous  guardian  of  a  public  library,  to 


WINTER.  343 

direct  me  to  those  works  which  contained  the 
more  .  .  .  popular  account  or  biography  of  par 
ticular  flowers  from  which  the  botanies  I  had 
met  with  appeared  to  draw  sparingly,  for  I 
trusted  that  each  flower  had  had  many  lovers 
and  faithful  describers  in  past  times.  But  he  in 
formed  me  that  I  had  read  all,  that  no  one  was 
acquainted  with  them,  they  were  only  catalogued 
like  his  books.  .  .  . 

Who  will  not  confess  that  the  necessity  to  get 
money  has  helped  to  ripen  some  of  his  schemes  ? 

Feb.  6,  1853.  Observed  some  buds  on  a  young 
apple-tree  partially  unfolded  at  the  extremity 
and  apparently  swollen.  Probably  blossom  buds. 

Feb.  6,  1855.  The  coldest  morning  this  win 
ter.  Our  thermometer  stands  at  — 14°  at  9  A.  M. 
Others,  we  hear,  at  6  A.  M.  stood  at  — 18°. 
There  are  no  loiterers  in  the  street,  and  the 
wheels  of  wagons  squeak  as  they  have  not  for  a 
long  time,  actually  shriek.  Frostwork  keeps  its 
place  on  the  window  within  three  feet  of  the 
stove  all  day  in  my  chamber.  At  4  P.  M.,  the 
thermometer  is  at  — 10°.  At  six  it  is  at  — 14°. 
I  was  walking  at  five,  and  found  it  stinging  cold. 
.  .  .  When  I  look  out  at  the  chimneys,  I  see 
that  the  cold  and  hungry  air  snaps  up  the  smoke 
at  once.  The  smoke  is  clear  and  light  colored, 
and  does  not  get  far  into  the  air  before  it  is  dis 
sipated  (?),  condensed.  The  setting  sun  no 


344  WINTER. 

sooner  leaves  our  west  windows  than  a  solid,  but 
beautiful  crystallization  coats  them,  except,  it 
may  be,  a  triangularish  bare  spot  at  one  corner 
which,  perhaps,  the  sun  lias  warmed  and  dried. 
...  A  solid,  sparkling  field  in  the  midst  of 
each  pane,  with  broad,  flowing  sheaves  surround 
ing  it.  It  has  been  a  very  mild  as  well  as  open 
winter  up  to  this.  At  9  o'clock  p.  M.,  thermom 
eter  at  — 16°.  They  say  it  did  not  rise  above 
— 6°  to-day. 

Feb.  7,  1853.  The  coldest  night  for  a  long, 
long  time.  Sheets  froze  stiff  about  the  face. 
.  .  .  People  dreaded  to  go  to  bed.  The  ground 
cracked  in  the  night  as  if  a  powder-mill  had 
blown  up,  and  the  timbers  of  the  house  also. 
My  pail  of  water  was  frozen  in  the  morning  so 
that  I  could  not  break  it.  ...  Iron  was  like 
fire  in  the  hands.  [Mercury  ?]  at  about  7.30 
A.  M.  gone  into  the  bulb  of  the  thermometer 
— 19°  at  least.  .  .  .  Bread,  meat,  milk,  cheese, 
etc.,  all  frozen.  .  .  .  The  inside  of  your  cellar 
door  all  covered  and  sparkling  with  frost  like 
Golconda.  The  latches  are  white  with  frost,  and 
every  nail-head  in  entries,  etc.,  has  a  white  head. 
.  .  .  Neighbor  Smith's  thermometer  stood  at 
— 26°  early  this  morning.  But  the  day  is  at 
length  more  moderate  than  yesterday.  .  .  .  This 
will  be  remembered  as  the  cold  Tuesday.  The 
old  folks  still  refer  to  the  cold  Friday,  when  they 


WINTER.  345 

sat  before  great  fires  of  wood  four  feet  long,  with 
a  fence  of  blankets  behind  them,  and  water  froze 
on  the  mantel-piece. 

Feb.  7,  1838.  Zeno,  the  Stoic,  stood  in  pre 
cisely  the  same  relation  to  the  world  that  I  do 
now.  He  is  forsooth  bred  a  merchant,  as  how 
many  still,  and  can  trade,  and  barter,  and  perhaps 
higgle,  and  moreover  he  can  be  shipwrecked  and 
cast  ashore  at  the  Piraeus,  like  one  of  your 
Johns  or  Thomases.  He  strolls  into  a  shop, 
and  is  charmed  by  a  book,  by  Xenophon,  and 
straightway  he  becomes  a  philosopher.  The 
sun  of  a  new  life's  day  rises  to  him  serene  and 
unclouded,  which  looks  over  o-roa.  And  still  the 
fleshly  Zeno  sails  on,  shipwrecked,  buffeted, 
tempest-tossed,  but  the  true  Zeno  sails  over  a 
placid  sea.  Play  high,  play  low,  rain,  sleet,  or 
snow,  it 's  all  the  same  with  the  stoic.  .  .  .  When 
evening  comes,  he  sits  down  unwearied  to  the 
review  of  his  day,  what  's  done  that 's  to  be  un 
done,  what  not  done  at  all  still  to  be  done  ; 
himself  Truth's  unconcerned  helpmate.  An 
other  system  of  book-keeping  this,  then,  that  the 
Cyprian  trader  to  Phoenicia  practiced. 

This  was  he  who  said  to  a  certain  garrulous 
young  man,  "  On  this  account  have  we  two  ears 
and  but  one  mouth,  that  we  may  hear  more,  and 
speak  less."  .  .  .  The  wisest  may  apologize  that 
he  only  said  so  to  hear  himself  talk,  for  if  he 


346  WINTER. 

heard  not,  as  well  for  him  had  he  never  spoken. 
What  is  all  this  gabble  to  the  gabbler  ?  Only 
the  silent  reap  the  profit  of  it. 

Feb.  7,  1841.  .  .  .  There  would  be  a  new 
year's  gift,  indeed,  if  we  would  bestow  on  each 
other  our  sincerity.  We  should  communicate 
our  wealth,  and  not  purchase  that  which  does 
not  belong  to  us,  for  a  sign.  Why  give  each 
other  a  sign  to  keep  ?  If  we  gave  the  thing 
itself,  there  would  be  no  need  of  a  sign.  ... 

The  eaves  are  running  on  the  south  side  of 
the  house,  the  titmouse  lisps  in  ;fche  poplar,  the 
bells  are  ringing  for  church,  while  the  sun  pre 
sides  over  all  and  makes  his  simple  warmth 
more  obvious  than  all  else.  What  shall  I  do 
with  the  hour  so  like  time  and  yet  so  fit  for 
eternity?/  Where  in  me  are  these  russet  patches 
of  ground,  and  scattered  logs  and  chips  in  the 
yard  ?  I  do  not  feel  cluttered.  —  I  have  some 
notion  what  the  Johns  wort  and  life-everlasting 
may  be  thinking  about  when  the  sun  shines  on 
me  as  on  them,  and  turns  my  prompt  thought 
into  just  such  a  seething  shimmer.  J  lie  out  as 
indistinct  as  a  heath  at  noonday.  I  am  evapo 
rating  and  ascending  into  the  sun.  .  .  . 

The  most  I  can  do  for  my  friend  is  simply  to 
be  his  friend.  I  have  no  wealth  to  bestow  on 
him.  If  he  knows  that  I  am  happy  in  loving 
him,  he  will  want  no  other  reward.  Is  not 
Friendship  divine  in  this  ? 


WINTER.  347 

I  have  myself  to  respect,  but  to  myself  I  am 
not  amiable  ;  but  my  friend  is  my  amiableness 
personified.  .  .  . 

The  world  has  never  learned  what  men   can 
build  each  other  up  to  be,  when  both  master  and 
work  in  love.   .   .   . 

Wait  not  till  I  invite  thee,  but  observe  .that 
I  am  glad  to  see  thee  when  thou  comesj^ 

The  most  ardent  lover  holds  yet  a  private 
court,  and  his  love  can  never  be  so  strong  and 
ethereal  that  there  will  not  be  danger  that 
judgment  be  rendered  against  the  beloved.  .  .  . 

So  far  as  we  respond  to  our  ideal  estimate  of 
each  other,  do  we  have  profitable  intercourse. 

Feb.  7,  1857.  Hayden,  the  elder,  tells  me 
that  the  quails  have  come  to  his  yard  every  day 
for  about  a  month,  and  are  just  as  tame  as 
chickens.  They  come  about  his  wood  shed,  he 
supposes,  to  pick  up  the  worms  that  have  dropped 
out  of  the  wood,  and  when  it  storms  hard,  gather 
together  in  a  corner  of  the  shed.  He  walks 
within  about  three  or  four  feet  of  them  without 
disturbing  them.  .  .  .  They  will  be  about  his 
yard  the  greater  part  of  the  day;  were  there 
yesterday,  though  it  was  so  warm,  but  now  prob 
ably  can  get  food  enough  elsewhere.  They  go 
just  the  same  to  Poland's  across  the  road. 
About  ten  years  ago  there  was  a  bevy  of  fifteen 
that  used  to  come  from  the  same  woods,  and  one 


348  WINTER. 

day  they  being  in  the  barn  and  scared  by  the 
cat,  four  ran  into  the  hay  and  died  there.  .  .  . 
Thus  it  seems  in  severe  winters  the  quails  ven 
ture  out  of  the  woods,  and  join  the  poultry  of 
the  farmer's  yard,  if  it  be  near  the  edge  of  the 
wood.  It  is  remarkable  that  this  bird,  which 
thus  half  domesticates  itself,  should  not  be  found 
wholly  domesticated  before  this. 

Feb.  7,  1858.  ...  If  possible,  come  upon 
the  top  of  a  hill  unexpectedly,  perhaps  through 
woods,  and  then  look  off  from  it  to  the  distant 
earth  which  lies  behind  a  bluer  veil,  before  you 
can  see  directly  down  it,  i.  e.,  bringing  its  own 
near  top  against  the  distant  landscape. 

Feb.  7,  1859.  Evidently  the  distant  woods 
are  more  blue  in  a  warm  and  moist  or  misty  day 
in  winter,  and  is  not  this  connected  with  the 
blue  in  snow  in  similar  days  ? 

Going  along  the  Nut  Meadow  on  Jimmy  Miles's 
road,  when  I  see  the  sulphur  lichens  on  the  rails, 
brightening  with  the  moisture,  I  feel  like  study 
ing  them  again  as  a  relisher  and  tonic,  to  make 
life  go  down  and  digest  well,  as  we  use  pepper 
and  vinegar  and  salads.  They  are  a  sort  of 
winter  green  which  we  gather  and  assimilate 
with  our  eyes.  That 's  the  true  use  of  the  study 
of  lichens.  I  expect  thus  the  lichenist  will 
have  the  keenest  relish  for  Nature  in  her  every 
day  mood  and  dress.  He  will  have  the  appetite 
of  the  worm  that  never  dies,  of  the  grub.  To 


WINTER.  849 

study  lichens  is  to  get  a  taste  of  earth  and 
health,  to  go  gnawing  the  rails  and  rocks.  This 
product  of  the  bark  is  the  essence  of  all  tonics. 
The  lichenist  extracts  nutriment  from  the  very 
crust  of  the  earth.  A  taste  for  this  study  is  an 
evidence  of  titanic  health,  a  rare  earthiness.  It 
makes  not  so  much  blood  as  soil  of  life.  It  fits 
a  man  to  deal  with  the  barrenest  and  rockiest 
experience.  A  little  moisture,  a  fog,  or  rain,  or 
melted  snow  makes  his  wilderness  to  blossom 
like  the  rose.  As  some  strong  animal  appetites, 
not  satisfied  with  starch  and  muscle  and  fat,  are 
fain  to  eat  that  which  eats  and  digests  the  con 
tents  of  the  crop,  the  stomach  and  entrails 
themselves,  so  the  lichenist  loves  the  tripe  of  the 
rock,  that  which  eats  and  digests  the  rocks.  He 
eats  the  eater.  Eat-all  may  be  his  name.  A 
lichenist  fattens  where  others  starve.  His  prov 
ender  never  fails.  .  .  .  There  is  no  such  colly- 
rium  or  salve  for  sore  eyes  as  these  brightening 
lichens  on  a  moist  day.  Go  bathe  and  screen  your 
eyes  with  them  in  the  softened  light  of  the  woods. 

Feb.  8,  1839.  When  the  poetic  frenzy  seizes 
us,  we  run  and  scratch  with  our  pen,  delighting, 
like  the  cock,  in  the  dust  we  make,  but  do  not 
detect  where  the  jewel  lies  which  we  have  in  the 
mean  time  cast  to  a  distance,  or  quite  covered 
up  again. 

Feb.  8,  1841.  All  we  have  experienced  is  so 
much  gone  within  us,  and  there  lies.  It  is  the 


350  WINTER. 

company  we  keep.  One  day,  in  health  or  sick 
ness,  it  will  come  out  and  be  remembered. 
Neither  body  nor  soul  forgets  anything.  The" 
twig  always  remembers  the  wind  that  shook  it, 
and  the  stone  the  cuff  it  received.  Ask  the  old 
tree  and  the  sand.  .  .  . 

Are  we  not  always  in  youth  so  long  as  we 
face  heaven  ?  We  may  always  live  in  the  morn 
ing  of  our  days.  To  him  who  seeks  early,  the 
sun  never  gets  over  the  edge  of  the  horizon,  but 
his  rays  fall  slanting  forever.  .  .  . 

My  journal  is  that  of  me  which  would  else 
spill  over  and  run  to  waste,  gleanings  from  the 
field  which  in  action  I  reap.  I  must  not  live 
for  it,  but,  in  it,  for  the  gods.  They  are  my 
correspondent  to  whom  daily  I  send  off  this 
sheet,  post-paid.  I  am  clerk  in  their  counting- 
room,  and  at  evening  transfer  the  account  from 
day-book  to  ledger.  It  is  a  leaf  which  hangs 
over  my  head  in  the  path.  I  bend  the  twig, 
and  write  my  prayers  on  it ;  then,  letting  it  go, 
the  bough  springs  up  and  shows  the  scrawl  to 
heaven  ;  as  if  it  were  not  kept  shut  in  my  desk, 
but  were  as  public  a  leaf  as  any  in  nature.  It 
is  papyrus  by  the  river  side,  it  is  vellum  in  the 
pastures,  it  is  parchment  on  the  hills.  .  .  .  Like 
the  sere  leaves  in  yonder  vase,  these  have  been 
gathered  far  and  wide.  Upland  and  lowland, 
forest  and  field,  have  been  ransacked. 


WINTER.  351 

In  our  holiest  moment,  our  devil  with  a  leer 
stands  close  at  hand.  He  is  a  very  busy  devil. 
.  .  .  When  I  go  forth  with  zeal  to  some  good 
work,  my  devil  is  sure  to  get  his  robe  tucked 
up  the  first,  and  arrives  there  as  soon  as  T,  with 
a  look  of  sincere  earnestness,  which  puts  to 
shame  my  best  intent.  .  .  .  He  has  a  winning 
way  of  recommending  himself  by  making  him 
self  useful.  How  readily  he  comes  into  my  best 
project,  and  does  his  work  with  a  quiet  and 
steady  cheerfulness  which  even  virtue  may  take 
pattern  from.  ...  I  never  did  a  charitable 
thing,  but  there  he  stood,  scarce  in  the  rear,  hat 
in  hand,  partner  in  the  same  errand,  ready  to 
share  the  smile  of  gratitude.  Though  I  shut 
the  door  never  so  quick,  and  tell  him  to  stay 
home  like  a  good  dog,  he  will  out  with  me,  for  I 
shut  in  my  own  legs  so,  and  he  escapes  in  the 
mean  while,  and  is  ready  to  back  and  reinforce 
me  in  most  virtuous  deeds.  If  I  turn  and  say, 
"  Get  thee  behind  me,"  he  then  indeed  turns 
too,  and  takes  the  lead,  though  he  seems  to  re 
tire  with  a  pensive  and  compassionate  lool^as 
much  as  to  say,  "  Ye  know  not  what  ye  d<v 

Feb.  8,  1852.  .  .  .  Tuckerman  sjfcjfs  cunning 
ly,  "  If  the  rapt  admirer  of  the  wonders  and 
beauties  of  life  and  being  might  well  come  to 
learn  of  our  knowledge  the  laws  and  the  history 
of  what  he  loves,  let  us  remember  that  we  have 


352  VSINTER. 

the  best  right  to  all  the  pleasure  that  he  has  dis 
covered,  and  that  we  are  not  complete  if  we  do 
not  possess  it  all.  Linnaeus  was  as  hearty  a 
lover  and  admirer  of  nature,  as  if  he  had  been 
nothing  more."  .  .  . 

Carried  a  new  cloak  to  Johnny  Riorden.  I 
found  that  the  shanty  was  warmed  by  the  simple 
social  relations  of  the  Irish.  On  Sunday  they 
come  from  the  town  and  stand  in  the  doorway, 
and  so  keep  out  the  cold.  One  is  not  cold 
among  his  brothers  and  sisters.  What  if  there 
is  less  fire  on  the  hearth,  if  there  is  more  in  the 
heart.  These  Irish  are  not  succeeding  so  ill 
after  all.  The  little  boy  goes  to  the  primary 
school,  and  proves  a  foremost  boy  there,  and  the 
mother's  brother,  who  has  let  himself  in  the  vil 
lage,  tells  me  that  he  takes  "  The  Flag  of  Our 
Union,"  if  that  is  the  paper  edited  by  an  Irishman. 
It  is  musical  news  that  Johnny  does  not  love  to 
be  kept  at  home  from  school  in  deep  snows. 

Feb.  8, 1854.  .  .  .  Josselyn,  speaking  of  crick 
ets,  says,  "The  Italian  who  hath  them  cryed 
up  and  down  the  streets  (Gfritti  che  cantano), 
and  buyeth  them  to  put  into  his  gardens,  if  he 
were  in  New  England  would  gladly  be  rid  of 
them,  they  make  such  a  din  in  the  evening."  I 
am  more  charmed  by  the  Italian's  taste  than  by 
Josselyn' s  impatience. 

Feb.    8,    1857.      Debauched    and    worn    out 


WINTER.  353 

senses  require  the  violent  vibrations  of  an  in 
strument  to  excite  them,  but  sound  and  still 
youthful  senses,  not  enervated  by  luxury,  hear 
music  in  the  wind  and  rain  and  running  water. 
One  would  think,  from  reading  the  critics,  that 
music  was  intermittent,  as  a  spring  in  the  desert, 
dependent  on  some  Paganini  or  Mozart,  or 
heard  only  when  the  Pierians  or  Euterpeans 
drive  through  the  villages,  but  music  is  perpet 
ual,  and  only  hearing  is  intermittent.  I  hear  it 
in  the  softened  air  of  these  warm  February  days 
which  have  broken  the  back  of  the  winter.  .  .  . 
Again  and  again  I  congratulate  myself  on  my 
so-called  poverty.  I  was  almost  disappointed 
yesterday  to  find  thirty  dollars  in  my  desk  which 
I  did  not  know  that  I  possessed,  though  now  I 
should  be  sorry  to  lose  them.  The  week  that 
I  go  away  to  lecture  is  unspeakably  cheapened. 
The  preceding  and  succeeding  days  are  a  mere 
sloping  down  to  and  up  from  it.  In  the  society 
of  many  men,  or  in  the  midst  of  what  is  called 
success,  I  find  my  life  of  no  account,  and  my 
spirits  rapidly  fall.  I  would  rather  be  the  bar- 
renest  pasture  lying  fallow  than  cursed  with  the 
compliments  of  kings,  than  be  the  sulphurous 
and  accursed  desert  where  Babylon  once  stood. 
But  when  I  hear  only  the  rustling  oak  leaf,  or 
the  faint  metallic  cheep  of  the  tree  sparrow, 
for  variety  in  my  winter  walk,  my  life  becomes 


354  WINTER. 

continent,  and  sweet  as  the  kernel  of  a  nut. 
I  would  rather  hear  a  single  shrub  oak  leaf 
at  the  end  of  a  wintry  glade  rustle  of  its  own 
accord  at  my  approach  than  receive  a  ship-load 
of  stars  and  garters  from  the  strange  kings  and 
peoples  of  the  earth.  By  poverty,  i.  e.,  sim 
plicity  of  life  and  fewness  of  incidents,  I  am 
solidified  and  crystallized  as  a  vapor  or  liquid  by 
cold.  It  is  a  singular  concentration  of  strength 
and  energy  and  flavor.  Chastity  is  perpetual 
acquaintance  with  the  All.  My  diffuse  and  va 
porous  life  becomes  as  the  frost  leaves  and 
spiculae  radiant  as  gems  on  the  weeds  and  stub 
ble  in  a  winter  morning.  You  think  I  am  im 
poverishing  myself  by  withdrawing  from  men, 
but  in  my  solitude  I  have  woven  for  myself  a 
silken  web  or  chrysalis,  and  nymph-like  shall 
erelong  burst  forth  a  more  perfect  creature,  fitted 
for  a  higher  society.  .  .  . 

And  now  another  friendship  is  ended.  I  do 
not  know  what  has  made  my  friend  doubt  me, 
but  I  know  that  in  love  there  is  110  mistake,  and 
that  any  estrangement  is  well-founded.  But  my 
destiny  is  not  narrowed,  rather,  if  possible,  the 
broader  for  it.  The  heavens  withdraw,  and  arch 
themselves  higher.  I  am  sensible  not  only  of 
a  moral,  but  even  of  a  grand  physical  pain,  such 
as  gods  may  feel,  about  my  head  and  breast,  a 
certain  ache  and  fullness.  This  rending  of  a 


WINTER.  355 

tie,  it  is  not  my  work  nor  thine.  It  is  no  acci 
dent  that  we  may  avoid,  it  is  only  the  award  of 
fate  that  is  affecting  us.  I  know  of  no  a3ons 
or  periods,  no  life  and  death,  but  these  meetings 
and  separations.  My  life  is  like  a  stream  that 
is  suddenly  dammed  and  has  no  outlet.  But  it 
rises  higher  up  the  hills  that  shut  it  in,  and  will 
become  a  deep  and  silent  lake.  Certainly  there 
is  no  event  comparable  for  grandeur  with  the 
eternal  separation,  if  we  may  conceive  it  so, 
from  a  being  that  we  have  known.  I  become  in 
a  degree  sensible  of  the  meaning  of  finite  and 
infinite.  What  a  grand  significance  the  word 
"  never  "  acquires !  With  one  with  whom  we  have 
walked  on  high  ground,  we  cannot  deal  on  any 
lower  ground  ever  after.  We  have  tried  so  many 
years  to  put  each  other  to  this  immortal  use, 
and  have  failed.  Undoubtedly  our  good  genii 
have  mutually  found  the  material  unsuitable. 
We  have  hitherto  paid  each  other  the  highest 
possible  compliment,  we  have  recognized  each 
other  constantly  as  divine,  have  afforded  each 
other  that  opportunity  to  live  that  no  other 
wealth  or  kindness  can  afford.  And  now  for 
some  reason  inappreciable  by  us,  it  has  become 
necessary  for  us  to  withhold  this  mutual  aid. 
Perchance  there  is  none  beside  who  knows  us 
for  a  god,  and  none  whom  we  know  for  such. 
Each  man  and  woman  is  a  veritable  god  or  god- 


356  WINTER. 

dess,  but  to  the  mass  of  their  fellows  disguised. 
There  is  only  one  in  each  case  who  sees  through 
the  disguise.  That  one  who  does  not  stand  so 
near  to  any  man  as  to  see  the  divinity  in  him  is 
truly  alone.  I  am  perfectly  sad  at  parting  from 
you.  I  could  better  have  the  earth  taken  away 
from  under  my  feet,  than  the  thought  of  you 
from  my  mind.  One  while  I  think  that  some 
great  injury  has  been  done,  with  which  you  are 
implicated  ;  again,  that  you  are  no  party  to  it. 
I  fear  that  there  may  be  incessant  tragedies,  that 
one  may  treat  his  fellow  as  a  god,  but  receive 
somewhat  less  regard  from  him.  I  now  almost 
for  the  first  time  fear  this.  Yet  I  believe  that 
in  the  long  run  there  is  no  such  inequality. 

Feb.  8,  1860.  2  P.  M.  Up  river  to  Fair  Haven 
Hill.  Thermometer  43°.  .  .  .  There  is  a  pe 
culiarity  in  the  air  when  the  temperature  is  thus 
high,  and  the  weather  fair  at  this  season,  which 
makes  sounds  more  clear  and  pervading,  as  if 
they  trusted  themselves  abroad  farther  in  this 
genial  state  of  the  air.  A  different  sound  comes 
to  my  ear  now  from  iron  rails  which  are  struck, 
from  the  cawing  of  crows,  etc.  Sound  is  not 
abrupt,  piercing,  or  rending,  but  softly  sweet 
and  musical.  There  must  be  a  still  more  genial 
and  milder  air  before  the  bluebird's  warble  can 
be  heard. 

Feb.  8,  1861.      Coldest   day   yet.      —22°    at 


WINTER.  357 

least  (all  we  can  read),  at  8  A.  M.,  and  so  far 
as  I  can  learn,  not  above  — 6°  all  day. 

Feb.  9, 1838.  It  is  wholesome  advice  "  to  be  a 
man  amongst  folks."  —  Go  into  society,  if  you 
will,  or  if  you  are  unwilling,  and  take  a  human 
interest  in  its  affairs.  If  you  mistake  these 
Messieurs  and  Mesdames  for  so  many  men  and 
women,  it  is  but  erring  on  the  safe  side,  or 
rather  it  is  their  error  and  not  yours.  Armed 
with  a  manly  sincerity,  you  shall  not  be  trifled 
with,  but  drive  this  business  of  life.  To  manage 
the  small  talk  of  a  party  is  to  make  an  effort  to 
do  what  was  at  first  done  admirably,  because 
naturally,  at  your  own  fireside. 

Feb.  9,  1841.  .  .  . 

"  Whoe'er  is  raised 
For  wealth  he  has  not,  he  is  taxed,  not  praised," 

says  Jonson.  If  you  mind  the  flatterer,  you  rob 
yourself,  and  still  cheat  him.  The  fates  never 
exaggerate.  Men  pass  for  what  they  are.  The 
state  never  fails  to  get  a  revenue  out  of  you 
without  a  direct  tax.  What  I  am  praised  for 
which  I  have  not,  I  put  to  the  account  of  the 
gods.  It  needs  a  skillful  eye  to  distinguish 
between  their  coin  and  my  own.  However,  there 
can  be  no  loss  either  way.  For  what  meed  I 
have  earned  is  equally  theirs.  Let  neither  fame 
nor  infamy  hit  you,  but  one  go  as  far  beyond 
as  the  other  falls  behind.  Let  the  one  glance 


358  WINTER. 

past  you  to  the  gods,  and  the  other  wallow  where 
it  was  engendered.  The  home  thrusts  are  at  hel- 

O 

mets  upon  blocks,  and  my  worst  foes  but  stab  an 
armor  through. 

My  life  at  this  moment  is  like  a  summer  morn 
ing  when  birds  are  singing.  Yet  that  is  false, 
for  nature's  is  an  idle  pleasure  in  comparison. 
My  hour  has  a  more  solid  serenity. 

I  have  been  breaking  silence  these  twenty- 
three  years,  and  have  hardly  made  a  rent  in  it. 
Silence  has  no  end.  Speech  is  but  the  begin 
ning  of  it.  My  friend  thinks  I  keep  silence 
who  am  only  choked  with  letting  it  out  so  fast. 
Does  he  forget  that  new  mines  of  secrecy  are 
constantly  opening  in  me  ?  ... 

When  your  host  shuts  his  door  on  you,  he 
incloses  you  in  the  dwelling  of  nature.  He 
thrusts  you  over  the  threshold  of  the  world.  My 
foes  restore  me  to  my  friends.  —  I  might  say 
friendship  had  no  ears,  as  love  has  no  eyes,  for 
no  word  is  evidence  in  its  court.  The  least  act 
fulfills  more  than  all  words  profess.  The  most 
gracious  speech  is  but  partial  kindness,  but  the 
smallest  genuine  deed  takes  the  whole  man.  If 
we  had  waited  till  doomsday,  it  could  never 
have  been  uttered. 

Feb.  9,  1852.  I  am  interested  to  see  the 
seeds  of  the  poke,  about  a  dozen,  shiny,  black, 
with  a  white  spot,  somewhat  like  a  saba  bean  in 
shape,  the  still  full  granary  of  the  birds. 


WINTER.  359 

9  A.  M.  Up  river  to  Fair  Haven  Pond.  .  .  . 

Met on  the  river,  .  .  .  fishing,  wearing  an 

old  coat  much  patched  with  many  colors.  He 
represents  the  Indian  still.  The  very  patches 
on  his  coat  and  his  improvident  life  do  so.  I 
feel  that  he  is  as  essential  a  part,  nevertheless, 
of  our  community  as  the  lawyer  in  the  village. 
He  tells  me  that  he  caught  three  pickerel  here 
the  other  day  that  weighed  seven  pounds  all  to 
gether.  It  is  the  old  story.  The  fisherman  is  a 
natural  story-teller.  No  man's  imagination  plays 
more  pranks  than  his,  while  he  is  tending  his 
reels,  and  trotting  from  one  to  another,  or  watch 
ing  his  cork  in  summer.  He  is  ever  waiting  for 
the  sky  to  fall.  He  has  sent  out  a  venture.  He 
has  a  ticket  in  the  lottery  of  fate,  and  who 
knows  what  it  may  draw.  He  ever  expects  to 
catch  a  bigger  fish  yet.  He  is  the  most  patient 
and  believing  of  men.  Who  else  will  stand  so 
long  in  wet  places  ?  When  the  hay-maker  runs 
to  shelter,  he  takes  down  his  pole,  and  bends 
his  steps  to  the  river,  glad  to  have  a  leisure  day. 
.  .  .  He  is  more  like  an  inhabitant  of  nature.  .  .  . 

Men  tell  about  the  mirage  to  be  seen  in  cer 
tain  deserts,  and  in  peculiar  states  of  the  atmos 
phere.  The  mirage  is  constant.  The  state  of 
the  atmosphere  is  continually  varying,  and  to 
a  keen  observer  objects  do  not  twice  present  ex 
actly  the  same  appearance.  If  I  invert  my  head 


360  WINTER. 

this  morning  and  look  at  the  woods  in  the 
horizon,  they  do  not  look  so  far  off  and  elysian- 
like  as  in  the  afternoon.  If  I  mistake  not,  it  is 
late  in  the  afternoon  when  the  atmosphere  is  in 
such  a  state  that  we  derive  the  most  pleasure 
from  and  are  most  surprised  by  this  experiment. 
The  prospect  is  thus  a  constantly  varying  mirage 
answering  to  the  condition  of  our  perceptive  fac 
ulties  and  our  fluctuating  imagination.  If  we 
incline  our  heads  never  so  little,  the  most  famil 
iar  things  begin  to  put  on  some  new  aspect.  If 
we  invert  our  heads  completely,  our  desecrated 
wood-lot  appears  far  off,  incredible,  elysian,  un- 
profaned  by  us.  As  you  cannot  swear  through 
glass,  no  more  can  you  swear  through  air,  the 
thinnest  section  of  it.  ...  When  was  not  the 
air  as  elastic  as  our  spirits.  ...  It  is  a  new 
glass  placed  over  the  picture  every  hour.  .  .  . 

When  I  break  off  a  twig  of  green-barked 
sassafras,  as  I  am  going  through  the  woods  now, 
and  smell  it,  I  am  startled  to  find  it  fragrant 
as  in  summer.  It  is  an  importation  of  all  the 
spices  of  Oriental  summers  into  our  New  England 
winter,  very  foreign  to  the  snow  and  the  oak 
leaves. 

Feb.  9, 1853.  .  .  .  Saw  the  grisly  bear  near  the 
Haymarket  [Boston]  to-day,  said  (?)  to  weigh 
nineteen  hundred  pounds  ;  apparently  too  much. 
He  looked  four  feet  and  a  few  inches  in  height 


WINTER.  361 

by  as  much  in  length,  not  including  his  great 
head  and  his  tail,  which  was  invisible.  He 
looked  gentle,  and  continually  sucked  his  claws, 
and  cleaned  between  them  with  his  tongue. 
Small  eyes  and  funny  little  ears.  Perfectly  bear 
ish,  with  a  strong  wild  beast  scent ;  fed  on  Indian 
meal  and  water.  Hind  paws  a  foot  long.  Ly 
ing  down  with  his  feet  up  against  the  bars ;  often 
sitting  up  in  the  corner  on  his  hind  quarters. 

Feb.  9,  1855.  Snowed  harder  in  the  night, 
and  blew  considerably.  ...  I  was  so  sure  this 
storm  would  bring  snowbirds  that  I  went  to  the 
window  at  ten  to  look  for  them,  and  there  they 
were.  Also,  a  downy  woodpecker  (perhaps  a 
hairy)  flitted  high  across  the  street  to  an  elm 
in  front  of  the  house,  and  commenced  assidu 
ously  tapping,  his  head  going  like  a  hammer. 

Feb.  9,  1858.  .  .  .  Saw,  at  Simon  Brown's,  a 
sketch,  apparently  made  with  a  pen,  on  which 
was  written,  "  Concord  Jail,  near  Boston,  Amer 
ica,"  and  on  a  fresher  piece  of  paper,  on  which 
the  above  was  pasted,  was  written,  "  The  jail  in 

which  General  Sir  Arch1**  Campbell  and 

Wilson  were  confined  when  taken  off  Boston  in 
America  by  a  French  Privateer."  A  letter  on 
the  back  side  from  Mr.  Lewis  of  Framingham 
to  Mr.  Brown  stated  that  Mr.  Lewis  had  re 
ceived  the  sketch  from  a  grandson  of  Wilson 
who  drew  it.  —  You  are  supposed  to  be  in  the 


362  WINTER. 

jail  yard,  or  close  to  it  westward,  and  see  the  old 
jail,  garnbrel-roofed,  the  old  Hurd  house  (partly) 
west  of  the  grave-yard,  the  grave-yard  and  Dr. 
Hurd  house,  and  over  the  last,  and  to  the  north 
of  it,  a  wooded  hill,  apparently  Windmill  Hill. 
Just  north  of  the  Hurd  house,  beyond  it,  appar 
ently  the  Court-house  and  School-house,  both 
with  belfries,  also  the  road  to  the  battle  ground, 
and  a  distant  farmhouse  on  a  hill,  French's  or 
Buttrick's,  perhaps. 

Feb.  10, 1841.  .  .  .  Our  thoughts  and  actions 
may  be  very  private  for  a  long  time,  for  they 
demand  a  more  catholic  publicity  to  be  dis 
played  in  than  the  world  can  afford.  Our  best 
deeds  shun  the  narrow  walks  of  men,  and  are 
not  ambitious  of  the  faint  light  the  world  can 
shed  on  them,  but  delight  to  unfold  themselves 
in  that  public  ground  between  God  and  con 
science.  .  .  .  Within,  where  I  resolve  and  deal 
with  principles,  there  is  more  space  and  room 
than  anywhere  without  where  my  hands  execute. 
Men  should  hear  of  your  virtue  only  as  they 
hear  the  creaking  of  the  earth's  axle  and  the 
music  of  the  spheres.  It  will  fall  into  the 
course  of  nature,  and  be  effectually  concealed  by 
publicness. 

Feb.  10,  1852.  Now  if  there  are  any  who 
think  I  am  vainglorious,  that  I  set  myself  up 
above  others,  and  crow  over  their  low  estate, 


WINTER.  363 

let  me  say  that  I  could  tell  a  pitiful  story  re 
specting  myself  as  well  as  them,  if  my  spirits 
held  out  to  do  it.  I  could  encourage  them  with 
a  sufficient  list  of  failures,  and  could  flow  as 
humbly  as  the  very  gutters  themselves.  ...  I 
think  worse  of  myself  than  they  can  possibly 
think  of  me,  being  better  acquainted  with  the 
man.  I  put  the  best  face  on  the  matter.  I  will 
tell  them  this  secret,  if  they  will  not  tell  it  to 
anybody  else. 

Write  while  the  heat  is  in  you.  When  the 
farmer  burns  a  hole  in  his  yoke,  he  carries  the 
iron  quickly  from  the  fire  to  the  wood,  for  every 
moment  it  is  less  effectual  to  penetrate  it.  ... 
The  writer  who  postpones  the  recording  of  his 
thoughts,  uses  an  iron  which  has  cooled  to  burn 
a  hole  with.  He  cannot  inflame  the  minds  of 
his  audience.  .  .  . 

I  saw  yesterday  in  the  snow  on  the  ice  on  the 
S.  side  of  Fair  Haven  Pond  some  hundreds  of 
honey  bees  dead  and  sunk  half  an  inch  be 
low  the  crust.  They  had  evidently  come  forth 
from  their  hive,  perhaps  in  a  large  hemlock  on 
the  bank  close  by,  and  had  fallen  on  the  snow, 
chilled  to  death.  Their  bodies  extended  about 
three  rods  from  the  tree  toward  the  pond. 

Feb.  10,  1854.  ...  I  observe  the  great,  well- 
protected  buds  of  the  balm  of  Gilead,  spear 
head-like.  There  is  no  shine  upon  them  now, 


364  WINTER. 

and  their  viscidness  is  not  very  apparent.  A 
great  many  willow  catkins  show  a  little  down 
peeping  from  under  the  points  of  the  scales,  but 
I  have  no  doubt  that  all  this  was  done  last  fall. 
I  noticed  it  then. 

Feb.  10,  1855.  ...  I  hear  the  faint  metallic 
chirp  of  a  tree  sparrow  in  the  yard  from  time  to 
time,  or  perchance  the  mew  of  a  linaria.  It  is 
worth  while  to  let  some  pigweed  grow  in  your 
garden,  if  only  to  attract  these  winter  visitors. 
It  would  be  a  pity  to  have  these  weeds  burned 
in  the  fall.  Of  the  former,  I  see  in  the  winter 
but  three  or  four  commonly  at  a  time ;  of  the 
latter,  large  flocks.  This  is  in  or  after  consider 
able  snow-storms. 

Feb.  10,  1856.  .  .  .  p.  M.  To  Walden.  Ke- 
turning  I  saw  a  fox  on  the  railroad,  .  .  .  eight 
or  nine  rods  from  me.  He  looked  of  a  dirty 
yellow,  and  lean.  I  did  not  notice  the  white  tip 
to  his  tail.  Seeing  me,  he  pricked  up  his  ears, 
and  at  first  ran  up  and  along  the  E.  bank  on  the 
crust,  then  changed  his  mind,  and  came  down 
the  steep  bank,  crossed  the  railroad  before  me, 
and  gliding  up  the  west  bank,  disappeared  in 
the  woods.  He  coursed  or  glided  along  easily, 
appearing  not  to  lift  his  feet  high,  leaping  over 
obstacles  with  his  tail  extended  straight  behind. 
He  leaped  over  the  ridge  of  snow  about  two 
feet  high  and  three  wide  between  the  tracks, 


WINTER.  365 

very  gracefully.  I  followed  examining  his 
tracks.  There  was  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch 
of  recent  snow  above  the  crust,  but  for  the  most 
part  he  broke  in  two  or  three  inches.  I  slumped 
from  one  to  three  feet.  .  .  .  He  went  off  at  an 
easy  gliding  pace  such  as  he  might  keep  up  for 
a  long  time,  pretty  direct  after  his  first  turn 
ing. 

Feb.  10, 1857.  .  .  .  Burton,  the  traveler,  quotes 
an  Arab  saying,  "  Voyaging  is  a  victory,"  which 
he  refers  to  the  feeling  of  independence  on  over 
coming  the  difficulties  and  dangers  of  the  des 
ert.  But  I  think  that  commonly  voyaging  is  a 
defeat,  a  rout  to  which  the  traveler  is  compelled 
by  want  of  valor.  The  traveler's  peculiar  valor 
is  commonly  a  bill  of  exchange.  He  is  at  home 
anywhere  but  where  he  was  born  and  bred, 
petitioning  some  Sir  Joseph  Banks  or  other  rep 
resentative  of  a  Geographical  Society  to  avail 
himself  of  his  restlessness,  and  if  not  receiving 
a  favorable  answer,  necessarily  going  off  some 
where  next  morning.  It  is  a  prevalent  disease 
which  attacks  Americans  especially,  both  men 
and  women,  the  opposite  to  nostalgia.  Yet  it 
does  not  differ  much  from  nostalgia.  I  read 
the  story  of  one  voyager  round  the  world,  who 
it  seemed  to  me,  having  started,  had  no  other 
object  but  to  get  home  again,  only  she  took  the 
longest  way  round.  The  traveler,  fitted  out  by 


366  WINTER. 

some  Sir  Joseph  Banks,  snatches  at  a  fact  or 
two  in  behalf  of  science,  as  he  goes,  just  as  a 
panther  in  his  leap  will  take  off  a  man's  sleeve, 
and  land  twenty  feet  beyond  him,  when  travel 
ing  down  hill. 

Feb.  10,  1860.  .  .  .  The  river  where  open  is 
very  black,  as  usual,  when  the  waves  run  high, 
for  each  wave  casts  a  shadow.  Theophrastus 
notices  that  the  roughened  water  is  black,  and 
says  it  is  because  fewer  rays  fall  on  it,  and  the 
light  is  dissipated.  .  .  . 

I  do  not  know  of  any  more  exhilarating  walk 
ing  than  up  or  down  a  broad  field  of  smooth  ice 
like  this  in  a  cold,  glittering,  winter  day,  when 
your  rubbers  give  you  a  firm  hold  on  the  ice. 

Feb.  11,  1841.  True  help,  for  the  most  part, 
implies  a  greatness  in  him  who  is  to  be  helped  as 
well  as  in  the  helper.  It  takes  a  god  to  be  helped 
even.  A  great  person,  though  unconsciously, 
will  constantly  give  you  great  opportunities  to 
serve  him,  but  a  mean  one  will  quite  preclude 
all  active  benevolence.  It  needs  but  simply  and 
greatly  to  want  it  for  once,  that  all  true  men 
may  contend  who  shall  be  foremost  to  render 
aid.  My  neighbor's  state  must  pray  to  heaven 
so  devoutly,  yet  disinterestedly,  as  he  never 
prayed  in  words,  before  my  ears  can  hear.  It 
must  ask  divinely.  But  men  so  cobble  and 
botch  their  request  that  you  must  stoop  as  low 


WINTER.  367 

as  they  to  give  them  aid.  Their  meanness  would 
drag  down  your  deed  to  be  a  compromise  with 
conscience,  and  not  leave  it  to  be  done  on  the 
high  table-land  of  the  benevolent  soul.  .  .  .  But 
if  I  am  to  serve  them,  I  must  not  serve  the 
devil.  .  .  .  We  go  about  mending  the  times 
when  we  should  be  building  the  eternity. 

Feb.  11,  1852.  ...  I  have  lived  some  thirty 
odd  years  on  this  planet,  and  I  have  yet  to  hear 
the  first  syllable  of  valuable  or  even  earnest  ad 
vice  from  my  seniors.  They  have  told  me  noth 
ing,  and  probably  can  tell  me  nothing,  to  the 
purpose.  There  is  life,  an  experiment  untried 
by  me,  and  it  does  not  avail  me  that  you  have 
tried  it.  If  I  have  any  valuable  experience  I 
am  sure  to  reflect  that  this  my  mentors  said 
nothing  about.  What  were  mysteries  to  the 
child  remain  mysteries  to  the  old  man. 

It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  in  a  country 
where  railroads  and  steamboats  and  the  print 
ing  press  and  the  church,  where  the  usual  evi 
dences  of  civilization  exist,  the  condition  of  a 
very  large  body  of  the  inhabitants  may  not  be 
as  degraded  as  that  of  savages.  ...  To  know 
this,  I  should  not  need  to  look  farther  than  to 
the  shanties  which  everywhere  line  our  railroads, 
that  last  improvement  in  civilization.  But  I 
will  refer  you  to  Ireland,  which  is  marked  as  one 
of  the  white,  or  enlightened  spots  on  the  map. 


368  WINTER. 

Yet  I  have  no  doubt  that  that  nation's  rulers  are 
as  wise  as  the  average  of  civilized  rulers. 

Feb.  12.  Living  all  winter  with  an  open  door 
for  light,  and  no  visible  wood -pile,  the  forms 
of  old  and  young  are  permanently  contracted 
through  long  shrinking  from  cold,  and  their 
faces  pinched  by  want.  I  have  seen  an  old 
crone  sitting  bare-headed  on  the  hillside  in  the 
middle  of  January,  while  it  was  raining,  and  the 
ground  was  slowly  thawing  under  her,  knitting 
there.  .  .  .  There  is  no  greater  squalidness  in 
any  part  of  the  world.  Contrast  the  condition 
of  these  Irish  with  that  of  the  North  American 
Indian,  or  the  South  Sea  Islander,  or  any  other 
savage  race  before  they  are  degraded  by  contact 
with  civilized  man. 

Feb.  11,  1853.  .  .  .  While  surveying  on  the 
Hunt  farm  the  other  day,  behind  Simon  Brown's 
house,  I  heard  a  remarkable  echo.  In  the 
course  of  surveying,  being  obliged  to  call  aloud 
to  my  assistant  from  every  side  and  almost  every 
part  of  a  farm  in  succession  and  at  various 
hours  of  a  day,  I  am  pretty  sure  to  discover  an 
echo,  if  any  exists.  That  day  it  was  encouraging 
and  soothing  to  hear  one.  After  so  many  days 
of  comparatively  insignificant  drudgery  with 
stupid  companions,  this  leisure,  this  sportiveness, 
this  generosity  in  nature,  sympathizing  with  the 
better  part  of  me,  somebody  I  could  talk  with, 


WINTER.  369 

one  degree  at  least  better  than  talking  with  one's 
self.  Ah,  Simon  Brown's  premises  harbor  a 
hired  man  and  a  hired  maid  he  wots  not  of ; 
some  voice  of  somebody  I  pined  to  hear,  with 
whom  I  could  form  a  community.  I  did  wish 
rather  to  linger  there  and  call  all  day  to  the  air, 
and  hear  my  words  repeated,  but  a  vulgar  neces 
sity  dragged  me  along  round  the  bounds  of  the 
farm  to  hear  only  the  stale  answers  of  my  chain- 
man  shouted  back  to  me.  .  .  .  Has  it  to  do  with 
the  season  of  the  year  ?  I  have  since  heard  an 
echo  on  Moore's  farm. 

It  was  the  memorable  event  of  the  day,  that 
echo  I  heard,  not  anything  my  companions 
said,  or  the  travelers  I  met,  or  my  thoughts,  for 
they  were  all  mere  repetitions  or  echoes  in  the 
worst  sense  of  what  I  had  heard  and  thought 
before  many  times,  but  this  echo  was  accompa 
nied  with  novelty,  and  by  its  repetition  of  my 
voice  it  did  more  than  double  that.  It  was 
a  profounder  Socratic  method  of  suggesting 
thoughts  unutterable  to  me  the  speaker.  Here 
was  one  I  heartily  love  to  talk  with.  Under 
such  favorable  auspices,  I  could  converse  with 
myself,  could  reflect.  The  hour,  the  atmosphere, 
and  the  conformation  of  the  ground  permitted  it. 

Feb.  11,  1854.  7.30  A.  M.  Snow  fleas  lie  in 
black  patches  like  some  of  those  dark,  rough 
lichens  on  rocks,  or  like  ink  spots  three  or  four 


370  WINTER. 

inches  in  diameter,  about  the  grass  stems  or 
willows,  on  the  ice  which  froze  last  night. 
When  I  breathe  on  them,  I  find  them  all  alive 
and  ready  to  skip.  Also  the  water,  when  I 
break  the  ice,  arouses  them. 

I  saw  yesterday  in  a  muddy  spring  in  Tarbell's 
meadow  many  cockle  shells  on  the  bottom,  with 
their  feet  out,  and  marks  as  if  they  had  been 
moving. 

When  I  read  of  the  catkins  of  the  alder  and 
the  willow,  etc.,  scattering  their  yellow  pollen, 
they  impress  me  as  a  vegetation  which  belongs 
to  the  earliest  and  most  innocent  dawn  of  nature, 
as  if  they  must  have  preceded  other  trees  in  the 
order  of  creation,  as  they  precede  them  annually 
in  their  blossoming  and  leafing.  .  .  .  For  how 
many  aeons  did  the  willow  shed  its  yellow  pollen 
annually  before  man  was  created  ! 

In  the  winter  we  so  value  the  semblance  of 
fruit  that  even  the  dry,  black  female  catkins  of 
the  alder  are  an  interesting  sight,  not  to  men 
tion,  on  shoots  rising  a  foot  or  two  above  these, 
the  red  or  mulberry  male  catkins  in  little  par 
cels  dangling  at  a  less  than  right  angle  with  the 
stems,  and  the  short  female  ones  at  their  bases. 

Apparently  I  read  Cato  and  Yarro  from  the 
same  motives  that  Virgil  did,  and  as  I  read  the 
almanac,  the  "  N.  E.  Farmer,"  or  "  Cultivator," 
or  Howitt's  "  Seasons." 


WINTER.  371 

Feb.  11,  1856.  .  .  .  Saw  a  partridge  by  the 
river  side  .  .  .  which  at  first  I  mistook  for  the 
top  of  a  fence  post  above  the  snow  amid  some 
alders.  I  shouted  and  waved  my  hand  four 
rods  off  to  see  if  it  was  one,  but  there  was  no 
motion,  and  I  thought  surely  it  must  be  a  post. 
Nevertheless  I  resolved  to  investigate.  Within 
three  rods  I  saw  to  my  surprise  that  it  was  in 
deed  a  partridge,  standing  perfectly  still,  with  its 
head  erect  and  neck  stretched  upward.  It  was 
as  complete  a  deception  as  if  it  had  designedly 
placed  itself  on  the  line  of  the  fence  and  in  the 
proper  place  for  a  post.  It  finally  stepped  off 
daintily  with  a  teetering  gait  and  head  up,  and 
took  to  wing. 

Feb.  11,  1859.  .  .  .  Now,  as  after  a  freshet 
in  cold  weather,  the  ice  which  had  formed 
around  and  frozen  to  the  trees  and  bushes  along 
the  shore,  settling,  draws  them  down  to  the 
ground  or  water,  after  breaking  them  exten 
sively.  It  reminds  you  of  an  alligator  or  other 
evil  genius  of  the  river  pulling  the  trees  and 
bushes,  which  had  come  to  drink,  into  the  water. 
If  a  maple  or  alder  is  unfortunate  enough  to 
slip  its  lower  limbs  into  the  freshet,  dallying 
with  it,  their  fate  is  sealed,  for  the  water  freez 
ing  that  night  takes  fast  hold  of  them  like  a 
vise,  and  when  the  water  runs  out  from  beneath, 
an  irresistible  weight  brings  them  down  to  the 


372  WINTER, 

ground  and  holds  them  there.  Only  the  spring 
sun  will  soften  the  heart  of  this  relentless  mon 
ster  when  commonly  it  is  too  late. 

Feb.  12,  1840.  .  .  .  Knavery  is  more  foolish 
than  folly,  since,  half  knowing  its  own  foolish 
ness,  it  still  persists.  The  knave  has  reduced 
folly  to  a  system,  is  the  prudent,  common-sense 
fool. 

Feb.  12,  1851.  ...  I  find  that  it  is  an  ex 
cellent  walk  for  variety  and  novelty  and  wild- 
ness  to  keep  round  the  edge  of  the  meadow. 
The  ice  not  being  strong  enough  to  bear,  and 
transparent  as  water,  on  the  bare  ground  or  snow 
just  between  the  highest  water  mark  and  the  pres 
ent  water  line  is  a  narrow,  meandering  walk  rich 
in  unexpected  views  and  objects.  The  line  of 
rubbish  which  marks  the  higher  tides,  withered 
flags  and  seeds  and  twigs  and  cranberries,  is  to 
my  eyes  a  very  agreeable  and  significant  line 
which  nature  traces  along  the  edge  of  the  mead 
ows.  It  is  a  strongly  marked,  enduring,  natural 
line  which  in  summer  reminds  me  that  the  water 
has  once  stood  over  where  I  walk.  Sometimes 
the  grooved  trees  tell  the  same  tale.  The  wrecks 
of  the  meadow  fill  a  thousand  coves,  and  tell 
a  thousand  tales  to  those  who  can  read  them ; 
our  prairial,  mediterranean  shore.  ...  If  you 
cannot  go  on  the  ice,  you  are  then  gently  com 
pelled  to  take  this  course,  which  is,  on  the  whole, 


WINTER.  373 

more  beautiful,  to  follow  the  sinuosities  of  the 
meadow. 

Feb.  12,  1854.  .  .  .  p.  M.  Skate  to  Pantry 
Brook.  .  .  .  One  accustomed  to  glide  over  a 
boundless  and  variegated  ice  floor  like  this  can 
not  be  much  attracted  by  tessellated  floors  and 
mosaic  work.  I  skate  over  a  thin  ice  all  tessel 
lated,  so  to  speak,  or  on  which  you  see  the  forms 
of  the  crystals  as  they  shoot.  .  .  .  To  make  a 
perfect  winter  day  like  this,  you  must  have  a 
clear,  sparkling  air,  with  a  sheen  from  the  snow, 
sufficient  cold,  no  wind,  and  the  warmth  must 
come  directly  from  the  sun.  It  must  not  be  a 
thawing  warmth.  The  tension  of  nature  must 

O 

not  be  relaxed.  The  earth  must  be  resonant,  if 
bare.  You  hear  the  lisping  music  of  chickadees 
from  time  to  time,  and  the  unrelenting  steel-cold 
scream  of  a  jay,  unmelted,  that  never  flows  into 
a  song,  a  sort  of  wintry  trumpet,  screaming 
cold,  hard,  tense,  frozen  music  like  the  winter 
sky  itself.  .  .  .  There  is  no  hint  of  incubation 
in  the  jay's  scream.  There  is  no  cushion  for 
sound  now.  It  tears  our  ears. 

I  frequently  see  three  or  four  old  white 
birches  standing  together  on  the  edge  of  a  pond 
or  meadow,  and  am  struck  by  the  pleasing  man 
ner  in  which  they  will  commonly  be  grouped, 
how  they  spread  so  as  to  make  room  for  each 
other,  and  make  an  agreeable  impression  upon 


374  WINTER. 

the  eye.  Methinks  I  have  seen  groups  of  three 
in  different  places  arranged  almost  exactly 
alike. 

Returning  I  overhauled  a  muskrat's  house  by 
Bidens  Brook.  For  want  of  other  material  it 
was  composed  of  grass  flags,  and  in  a  great 
measure  (one  half )  of  twigs  and  sticks,  mostly 
sweet-gale,  both  dead  and  alive,  and  roots,  from 
six  inches  to  two  feet  in  length.  These  were  in 
fact  the  principal  material  of  it,  and  it  was  a 
large  one,  two  feet  above  the  ice.  I  was  sur 
prised  to  find  that  these  sticks,  both  green  and 
dead,  had  the  greater  part  of  them  been  gnawed 
off  by  the  rat,  and  some  were  nearly  half  an  inch 
in  diameter.  They  were  cut  off  not  at  a  right 
angle,  with  a  smooth  cut,  but  by  successive  cuts, 
smooth  as  with  a  knife,  the  twig  being  at  the 
same  time  bent  down,  which  produced  a  sloping, 
and,  so  to  speak,  terraced  surface.  I  did  not 
know  before  that  the  muskrat  resembled  the 
beaver  in  this  respect  also.  It  was  chiefly  the 
sweet-gale  thus  cut,  commonly  the  top  left  on 
two  feet  long,  but  sometimes  cut  off  six  inches 
long. 

I  see,  as  I  skate,  reflected  from  the  surface 
of  the  ice,  flakes  of  rainbow,  somewhat  like 
cobwebs,  where  the  great  slopes  of  the  crystalliz 
ation  fall  at  the  right  angle,  six  inches  or  a  foot 
across,  but  at  so  small  an  angle  with  the  horizon 


WINTER.  375 

that  they  had  seemed  absolutely  flat  and  level 
before.  Think  of  this  kind  of  mosaic  and 
tessellation  for  your  floor,  composed  of  crystals 
variously  set,  made  up  of  surfaces  not  absolutely 
level,  though  level  to  the  touch  of  the  feet  and 
to  the  noonday  eye,  but  just  enough  inclined  to 
reflect  the  colors  of  the  rainbow  when  the  sun 
gets  low. 

Feb.  12,  1857.  7.30  A.  M.  The  caterpillar 
which  I  placed  last  night  on  the  snow  beneath 
the  thermometer  is  frozen  stiff  again,  this  time 
not  being  curled  up,  the  temperature  being  — 6° 
now.  Yet  being  placed  on  the  mantel-piece,  it 
thaws  and  begins  to  crawl  in  five  or  ten  minutes, 
before  the  rear  part  of  its  body  is  limber.  Per 
haps  they  were  revived  last  week  when  the  ther 
mometer  stood  at  52°  and  53°. 

Feb.  12,  1860.  2  p.  M.  22°.  Walk  up  river 
to  Fair  Haven  Pond.  Clear  and  windy.  .  .  . 
In  this  cold,  clear,  rough  air  from  the  N.  W.  we 
walk  amid  what  simple  surroundings,  surrounded 
by  our  thoughts  or  imaginary  objects.  .  .  . 
Above  me  is  a  cloudless  blue  sky,  beneath  is  the 
sky  blue,  i.  e.,  sky-reflecting  ice,  with  patches  of 
snow  scattered  over  it  like  mackerel  clouds. 
At  a  distance  in  several  directions  I  see  the 
tawny  earth  streaked  or  spotted  with  white, 
where  the  bank,  or  hills  and  fields  appear,  or 
the  green-black,  evergreen  forests,  or  the  brown, 


376  WINTER. 

or  russet,  or  tawny  deciduous  woods,  and  here 
and  there,  where  the  agitated  surface  of  the  river 
is  exposed,  the  blue-black  water.  That  dark- 
eyed  water,  especially  where  I  see  it  at  right 
angles  with  the  direction  of  the  sun,  is  it  not  the 
first  sign  of  spring  ?  How  its  darkness  contrasts 
with  the  general  lightness  of  the  winter !  It 
has  more  life  in  it  than  any  part  of  the  earth's 
surface.  It  is  where  one  of  the  arteries  of  the 
earth  is  palpable,  visible.  In  winter  not  only 
some  creatures,  but  the  very  earth  is  partially 
dormant.  Vegetation  ceases,  and  rivers,  to  some 
extent,  cease  to  flow.  Therefore  when  I  see  the 
water  exposed  in  mid -winter,  it  is  as  if  I  saw  a 
skunk  or  even  a  striped  squirrel  out.  It  is  as  if 
the  woodchuck  consoled  himself,  and  snuffed  the 
air  to  see  if  it  were  warm  enough  to  be  trusted. 
It  excites  me  to  see  early  in  the  spring  that 
black  artery  leaping  once  more  through  the  snow- 
clad  town.  All  is  tumult  and  life  there.  .  .  . 
Where  this  artery  is  shallowest,  i.  e.,  comes  near 
est  to  the  surface  and  runs  swiftest,  there  it 
shows  itself  soonest,  and  you  may  see  its  pulse 
beat.  There  are  the  wrists,  temples  of  the  earth 
where  I  feel  its  pulse  with  my  eye.  The  living 
waters,  not  the  dead  earth.  .  .  .  Returning  just 
before  sunset,  I  see  the  ice  beginning  to  be 
green,  and  a  rose  color  to  be  reflected  from  the 
low  snow  patches.  I  see  the  color  from  the 


WINTER.  377 

snow  first  where  there  is  some  shade,  as  where 
the  shadow  of  a  maple  falls  afar  over  the  ice 
and  snow.  From  this  is  reflected  a  purple  tinge 
when  I  see  none  elsewhere.  Some  shadow  or 
twilight  then  is  necessary,  umbra  mixed  with 
the  reflected  sun.  Off  Holden  wood  where  the 
low  rays  fall  on  the  river  through  the  fringe  of 
the  wood,  the  patches  are  not  rose  color,  but  a 
very  dark  purple,  like  a  grape,  and  thus  there 
are  all  degrees  from  pure  white  to  black.  As  I 
cross  Hubbard's  broad  meadow,  the  snow  patches 
are  a  most  beautiful  crystalline  purple,  like  the 
petals  of  some  flowers,  or  as  if  tinged  with  cran 
berry  juice.  .  .  . 

I  walk  over  a  smooth  green  sea  or  sequor, 
the  sun  just  disappearing  in  the  cloudless  hori 
zon,  amid  thousands  of  these  flat  isles  as  purple 
as  the  petals  of  a  flower.  It  would  not  be  more 
enchanting  to  walk  amid  the  purple  clouds  of 
the  sunset  sky.  And,  by  the  way,  this  is  but  a 
sunset  sky  under  our  feet,  produced  by  the  same 
law,  the  same  slanting  rays  and  twilight.  Here 
the  clouds  are  these  patches  of  snow  or  frozen 
vapor,  and  the  ice  is  the  greenish  sky  between 
them.  Thus  all  of  heaven  is  realized  on  earth. 
You  have  seen  those  purple,  fortunate  isles  in 
the  sunset  heavens,  and  that  green  and  amber 
sky  between  them.  Would  you  believe  that  you 
could  ever  walk  amid  those  isles  ?  You  can  on 


378  WINTER. 

many  a  winter  evening.  I  have  done  so  a  hun 
dred  times. 

Thus  the  sky  and  the  earth  sympathize,  and 
are  subject  to  the  same  laws,  and  in  the  horizon 
they,  as  it  were,  meei  and  are  seen  to  be 
one.  .  .  . 

We  have  such  a  habit  of  looking  away  that 
we  see  not  what  is  around  us.  How  few  are 
aware  that  in  winter,  when  the  earth  is  covered 
with  snow  and  ice,  the  phenomenon  of  the  sunset 
sky  is  double.  The  one  is  on  the  earth  around 
us,  the  other  in  the  horizon. 

Feb.  13, 1838.  It  is  hard  to  subject  ourselves 
to  an  influence.  It  must  steal  upon  us  when  we 
expect  it  not,  and  its  work  be  all  done  ere  we 
are  aware  of  it.  If  we  make  advances,  it  is  shy ; 
if,  when  we  feel  its  presence,  we  presume  to  pry 
into  its  freemasonry,  it  vanishes,  and  leaves  us 
alone  in  our  folly. 

All  fear  of  the  world  or  consequences  is 
swallowed  up  in  a  manly  anxiety  to  do  truth 
justice. 

Feb.  13, 1840.  An  act  of  integrity  is  to  an  act 
of  duty  what  the  French  verb  etre  is  to  devoir. 
Duty  is  that  which  devrait  etre.  Duty  belongs 
to  the  understanding,  but  genius  is  not  dutiful. 
.  .  .  The  perfect  man  has  both  genius  and 
talent ;  the  one  is  his  head,  the  other,  his  foot. 
By  one,  he  is ;  by  the  other,  he  lives. 


WINTER.  379 

The  consciousness  of  man  is  the  consciousness 
of  God,  the  end  of  the  world. 

The  very  thrills  of  genius  are  disorganizing. 
The  body  is  never  quite  acclimated  to  its  atmos 
phere,  but  how  often  succumbs,  and  goes  into  a 
decline. 

Feb.  13,  1841.  By  the  truthfulness  of  our 
story  to-day,  we  help  explain  ourselves  for  all 
our  life  henceforth.  How  we  hamper  and  belay 
ourselves  by  the  least  exaggeration.  The  truth 
is  God's  concern  ;  he  will  sustain  it.  But  who 
can  afford  to  maintain  a  lie  ?  We  have  taken 
away  one  of  the  pillars  of  Hercules,  and  must 
support  the  world  on  our  shoulders,  who  might 
have  walked  freely  upon  it. 

Feb.  13, 1851.  Skated  to  Sudbury.  A  beau 
tiful  summer-like  day.  The  meadows  were 
frozen  just  enough  to  bear.  Examined  now  the 
fleets  of  ice  flakes  close  at  hand.  They  are  a 
very  singular  and  interesting  phenomenon  which 
I  do  not  remember  to  have  seen.  I  should  say 
that  when  the  water  was  frozen  about  as  thick 
as  pasteboard,  a  violent  gust  had  here  and  there 
broken  it  up,  and  while  the  wind  and  waves  held 
it  on  its  edge,  the  increasing  cold  froze  it  in 
firmly.  So  it  seemed,  for  the  flakes  were,  for 
the  most  part,  turned  one  way,  i.  e.,  standing  on 
one  side,  you  saw  only  their  edges,  on  another, 
the  N.  E.  or  S.  W.,  their  sides.  They  were  com- 


880  WINTER. 

monly  of  a  triangular  form,  like  a  shoulder-of- 
mutton  (?)  sail,  slightly  scalloped,  like  shells. 
They  looked  like  a  fleet  of  a  thousand  mackerel 
fishers  under  a  press  of  sail,  careering  before  a 
smacking  breeze.  Sometimes  the  sun  and  wind 
had  reduced  them  to  the  thinness  of  writing 
paper,  and  they  fluttered  and  rustled  and  tin 
kled  merrily.  I  skated  through  them  and  scat 
tered  their  wrecks  around.  Every  half  mile  or 
mile,  as  you  skate  up  the  river,  you  see  these 
crystal  fleets.  .  .  . 

Again  I  saw  to-day  half  a  mile  off  in  Sud- 
bury  a  sandy  spot  on  the  top  of  a  hill,  where  I 
prophesied  that  I  should  find  traces  of  the  In 
dians.  When  within  a  dozen  rods,  I  distin 
guished  the  foundation  of  a  lodge,  and  merely 
passing  over  it,  I  saw  many  fragments  of  the 
arrowhead  stone.  I  have  frequently  distinguished 
these  localities  half  a  mile  off,  gone  forward,  and 
picked  up  arrowheads. 

Saw  in  a  warm,  muddy  brook  in  Sudbury, 
quite  open  and  exposed,  the  skunk  -  cabbage 
spathes  above  water.  The  tops  of  the  spathes 
were  frost-bitten,  but  the  fruit  sound.  There 
was  one  partly  expanded,  the  first  flower  of  the 
season,  for  it  is  a  flower.  I  doubt  if  there  is  a 
month  without  its  flower.  .... 

In  society,  in  the  best  institutions  of  men,  I 
remark  a  certain  precocity.  When  we  should 


WINTER.  381 

be  growing  children,  we  are  already  little  men. 
Infants  as  we  are,  we  make  haste  to  be  weaned 
from  our  great  mother's  breast,  and  cultivate  our 
parts  by  intercourse  with  one  another.  ...  I 
would  not  have  every  man,  nor  every  part  of  a 
man,  cultivated  any  more  than  I  would  have 
every  acre  of  earth  cultivated.  Some  must  be 
preparing  a  mould  by  the  annual  decay  of  the 
forests  which  they  sustain. 

Feb.  13,  1852.  Color,  which  is  the  poet's 
wealth,  is  so  expensive,  that  most  take  to  mere 
outline  or  pencil  sketches,  and  become  men  of 
science. 

Feb.  13,  1855.  ...  The  tracks  of  partridges 
are  more  remarkable  in  this  snow  than  usual, 
it  is  so  light,  being,  at  the  same  time,  a  foot 
deep.  ...  I  see  where  many  have  dived  into 
the  snow,  apparently  last  night,  on  the  side  of  a 
shrub  oak  hollow.  In  four  places  they  have 
passed  quite  underneath  it  for  more  than  a 
foot ;  in  one  place,  eighteen  inches.  They  ap 
pear  to  have  dived  or  burrowed  into  it,  then 
passed  along  a  foot  or  more  underneath,  and 
squatted  there,  perhaps  with  their  heads  out. 
...  I  scared  one  from  its  hole  only  half  a  rod 
in  front  of  me,  now  at  11  A.  M.  ...  It  is  evi 
dently  a  hardy  bird,  and  in  the  above  respects, 
too,  is  like  the  rabbit,  which  squats  under  a  brake 
or  bush  in  the  snow.  I  see  the  traces  of  the 


382  WINTER. 

latter  in  hollows  in  the  snow  in  such  places,  their 
forms.  .  .  . 

One  of  these  pigweeds  in  the  yard  lasts  the 
snowbirds  all  winter.  After  every  snow-storm, 
they  revisit  it.  How  inexhaustible  their  granary. 

To  resume  the  subject  of  partridges,  looking 
farther  in  an  open  place  .  .  .  amid  the  shrub 
oaks  and  low  pitch  pines,  I  found  as  many  as 
twenty  or  thirty  places  where  partridges  had 
lodged  in  the  snow  apparently  the  last  night  or 
the  night  before.  You  could  see  commonly 
where  their  bodies  had  first  struck  the  snow,  and 
furrowed  it  for  a  foot  or  two,  twenty-six  inches 
wide,  then  entered  and  gone  underneath  two 
feet,  and  rested  at  the  farther  end.  ...  Is  it 
not  likely  that  they  remain  quite  under  the 
snow  there,  and  do  not  put  their  heads  out  till 
ready  to  start?  They  do  not  go  under  deep, 
and  the  gallery  they  make  is  mostly  filled  up 
behind  them,  leaving  only  a  thin  crust  above. 
Then  invariably  just  beyond  this  resting  place, 
you  could  see  the  marks  made  by  their  wings 
when  they  took  their  departure.  These  distinct 
impressions  made  by  their  wings  on  the  pure 
snow,  so  common  on  all  hands,  though  the  bird 
that  made  it  is  gone,  and  there  is  no  trace 
beyond,  affect  me  like  some  mystic  Oriental  sym 
bol,  the  winged  globe  or  what  not,  as  if  made  by 
a  spirit.  In  some  places  you  would  see  a  furrow 


WINTER.  383 

and  hollow  in  the  snow  where  there  was  no 
track  for  rods  around,  as  if  a  large  snow-ball  or 
cannon-ball  had  struck  it,  where  apparently  the 
birds  had  not  paused  in  their  flight.  It  is  evi 
dently  a  regular  thing  with  them  thus  to  lodge 
in  the  snow. 

Feb.  13,  1859.  p.  M.  On  ice  to  Fair  Haven 
Pond.  .  .  .  The  yellowish  ice  which  froze  yes 
terday  and  last  night  is  thickly  and  evenly 
strewn  with  fibrous  frost  crystals  very  much  like 
bits  of  asbestos,  an  inch  or  more  long,  sometimes 
arranged  like  a  star  or  rosette,  one  for  every 
inch  or  two.  ...  I  think  this  is  the  vapor  from 
the  water  which  found  its  way  up  through  the 
ice,  and  froze  in  the  night.  It  is  sprinkled  like 
some  kind  of  grain,  and  is  in  certain  places 
much  more  thickly  strewn,  as  where  a  little  snow 
shows  itself  above  the  ice.  —  The  old  ice  is  cov 
ered  with  a  dry,  powdery  snow  about  one  inch 
deep,  from  which  as  I  walk  toward  the  sun,  this 
perfectly  clear,  bright  afternoon  at  half -past 
three  o'clock,  the  colors  of  the  rainbow  are  re 
flected  from  a  myriad  fine  facets.  It  is  as  if 
the  dust  of  diamonds  and  other  precious  stones 
were  spread  all  around.  The  blue  and  red  pre 
dominate.  Though  I  distinguish  these  colors 
everywhere  toward  the  sun,  they  are  so  much 
more  abundantly  reflected  to  me  from  two  direc 
tions  that  I  see  two  distinct  rays  or  arms,  so  to 


884  WINTER. 

call  them,  of  this  rainbow-like  dust  stretching 
away  from  me  and  about  half  a  dozen  feet  wide, 
the  two  arms  including  an  angle  of  about  60°. 
When  I  look  from  the  sun,  I  see  merely  daz 
zling  white  points.  I  can  easily  see  some  of  these 
dazzling  grains  fifteen  or  twenty  rods  distant  on 
any  side,  though  the  facet  which  reflects  the 
light  cannot  be  more  than  a  tenth  or  twelfth  of 
an  inch  at  most.  Yet  I  might  easily,  and  com 
monly  do,  overlook  all  this. 

Winter  comes  to  make  walking  possible  where 
there  was  no  walking  in  summer.  Not  till  win 
ter  can  we  take  possession  of  the  whole  of  our 
territory.  I  have  three  great  highways  raying 
out  from  one  centre  which  is  near  my  door.  I 
may  walk  down  the  main  river,  or  up  either  of 
its  two  branches.  Could  any  avenues  be  con 
trived  more  convenient  ?  With  the  river  I  am 
not  compelled  to  walk  in  the  tracks  of  horses. 

Never  is  there  so  much  light  in  the  air  as  in 
one  of  these  bright  winter  afternoons  when  all 
the  earth  is  covered  with  new-fallen  snow,  and 
there  is  not  a  cloud  in  the  sky.  The  sky  is 
much  the  darkest  side,  like  the  bluish  lining  of 
an  egg  -  shell.  With  this  white  earth  beneath, 
and  that  spotless,  skimmed-milk  sky  above  him, 
man  is  but  a  black  speck  inclosed  in  a  white 
egg-shell. 

Sometimes,  in  our  prosaic  moods,  life  appears 


WINTER.  385 

to  us  but  a  certain  number  more  of  days  like 
those  we  have  lived,  to  be  cheered  not  by  more 
friends  and  friendship,  but  probably  fewer  and 
less,  as  perchance  we  anticipate  the  end  of  this 
day  before  it  is  done,  close  the  shutters,  and, 
with  a  cheerless  resignation,  commence  the  bar 
ren  evening  whose  fruitless  end  we  clearly  see. 
"We  despondingly  think  that  all  of  life  which  is 
left  is  only  this  experience  repeated  a  certain 
number  of  times,  and  so  it  would  be,  if  it  were 
not  for  the  faculty  of  imagination. 

The  wonderful  stillness  of  a  winter  day !  the 
sources  of  sound  are,  as  it  were,  frozen  up. 
Scarcely  a  tinkling  rill  of  it  is  to^e  heard. 
When  we  listen,  we  hear  only  tha>^ound  of  the 
surf  of  our  internal  sea  rismg'ancLxwelling  in 
our  ears  as  in  two  sea-sheltsT  Ijrfs  the  sabbath 
of  the  year,  stillness  audible^or  at  most  we  hear 
the  ice  belching  and  craeiuing,  as  if  struggling 
for  utterance. 

A  transient  acquaintance  with  any  phenom 
enon  is  not  sufficient  to  make  it  completely  the 
subject  of  your  muse.  You  must  be  so  conver 
sant  with  it  as  to  remember  it,  and  be  reminded 
of  it  long  afterward,  while  it  lies  remotely  fair 
and  elysian  in  the  horizon,  approachable  only  by 
the  imagination. 

Feb.  13,  1860.  ...  It  is  surprising  what  a 
variety  of  distinct  colors  the  winter  can  show  us, 


386  WINTER. 

using  but  few  pigments.  The  principal  charm 
of  a  winter  walk  over  ice  is  perhaps  the  pecul 
iar  and  pure  colors  exhibited.  There  is  the  red 
of  the  sunset  sky  and  of  the  snow  at  evening, 
and  in  rainbow  flocks  during  the  day,  and  in 
sun-dogs. 

The  blue  of  the  sky,  and  of  the  ice  and  water 
reflected,  and  of  shadows  on  snow. 

The  yellow  of  the  sun,  and  the  morning  and 
evening  sky,  and  of  the  sedge  (or  straw  color, 
bright  when  lit  on  the  edge  of  ice  at  even 
ing),  and  all  these  three  colors  in  hoar  frost 
crystals. 

Then  there  is  the  purple  of  the  snow  in  drifts 
or  on  hills,  of  the  mountains,  and  the  clouds  at 
evening. 

The  green  of  evergreen  woods,  of  the  ice  and 
water,  and  of  the  sky  toward  evening. 

The  orange  of  the  sky  at  evening. 

The  white  of  snow  and  clouds,  and  the  black 
of  clouds,  of  water  agitated,  and  water  saturat 
ing  thin  snow  or  ice. 

The  russet,  and  brown,  gray,  etc.,  of  decid 
uous  woods. 

The  tawny  of  the  bare  earth. 

I  suspect  that  the  green  and  rose  (or  purple) 
are  not  noticed  on  ice  and  snow  unless  it  is 
pretty  cold,  and  perhaps  there  is  less  greenness 
of  the  ice  now  than  in  December  when  the  days 


WINTER.  387 

were  shorter.  The  ice  now  may  be  too  old  and 
white.  .  .  .  The  sun  being  in  a  cloud,  partly  ob 
scured,  I  see  a  very  dark  purple  tinge  on  the  flat 
drifts  on  the  ice,  earlier  than  usual,  and  when 
afterward  the  sun  comes  out  below  the  cloud,  I 
see  no  purple  nor  rose.  Hence  it  seems  that  the 
twilight  has  as  much  or  more  to  do  with  this 
phenomenon,  supposing  the  sun  to  be  low,  than 
the  slight  angle  of  its  rays  with  the  horizon. 

Always  you  have  to  contend  with  the  stupidity 
of  men.  It  is  like  a  stiff  soil,  a  hard  pan.  If 
you  go  deeper  than  usual,  you  are  sure  to  meet 
with  a  pan  made  harder  even  by  the  super 
ficial  cultivation.  The  stupid  you  have  always 
with  you.  Men  are  more  obedient  at  first  to 
words  than  to  ideas.  They  mind  names  more 
than  things.  Read  them  a  lecture  on  "  Educa 
tion,"  naming  the  subject,  and  they  will  think 
they  have  heard  something  important,  but  call 
it  "  Transcendentalism,"  and  they  will  think  it 
moonshine.  Or  halve  your  lecture,  and  put  a 
psalm  at  the  beginning  and  a  prayer  at  the 
end  of  it,  and  they  will  pronounce  it  good  with 
out  thinking. 

The  Scripture  rule,  "  Unto  him  that  hath, 
shall  be  given,"  is  true  of  composition.  The 
more  you  have  thought  and  written  on  a  given 
theme,  the  more  you  can  still  write.  Thought 
breeds  thought.  It  'grows  under  your  hands. 


388  WINTER. 

Feb.  14,  1840.  ...  A  very  meagre  natural 
history  suffices  to  make  me  a  child.  Qnly  their 
names  and  genealogy  make  me  love  fishes.  I 
would  know  even  the  number  of  their  fin  rays, 
and  how  many  scales  compose  the  lateral  line. 
I  fancy  I  am  amphibious  and  swim  in  all  the 
brooks  and  pools  in  the  neighborhood,  with  the 
perch  and  bream,  or  doze  under  the  pads  of  our 
river  amid  the  winding  aisles  and  corridors 
formed  by  their  stems,  with  the  stately  pick 
erel. 

Feb.  14,  1841.  I  am  confined  to  the  house 
by  bronchitis,  and  so  seek  to  content  myself  with 
that  quiet  and  serene  .life  there  is  in  a  warm 
corner  by  the  fireside,  and  see  the  sky  through 
the  chimney -top.  Sickness  should  not  be  al 
lowed  to  extend  farther  than  the  body.  We 
need  only  to  retreat  farther  within  us,  to  pre 
serve  uninterrupted  the  continuity  of  serene 
hours  to  the  end  of  our  lives.  As  soon  as  I  find 
my  chest  is  not  of  tempered  steel,  and  heart  of 
adamant,  I  bid  good-by  to  them  and  look  out 
for  a  new  nature.  I  will  be  liable  to  no  acci 
dents. 

I  shall  never  be  poor  while  I  can  command  a 
still  hour  in  which  to  take  leave  of  my  sin. 

Feb.  14,  1851.  Consider  the  farmer  who  is 
commonly  regarded  as  the  healthiest  man.  He 
may  be  the  toughest,  but  he  is  not  the  healthiest. 


WINTER.  389 

He  has  lost  his  elasticity.  He  can  neither  run 
nor  jump.  Health  is  the  free  use  and  command 
of  all  our  faculties,  and  equal  development. 
His  is  the  health  of  the  ox,  an  overworked  buf 
falo.  His  joints  are  stiff.  The  resemblance  is 
true  even  in  particulars.  He  is  cast  away  in  a 
pair  of  cowhide  boots,  and  travels  at  an  ox's 
pace.  ...  It  would  do  him  good  to  be  thoroughly 
shampooed  to  make  him  supple.  His  health  is 
an  insensibility  to  all  influence.  But  only  the 
healthiest  man  in  the  world  is  sensible  to  the 
finest  influence  ;  he  who  is  affected  by  more  or 
less  electricity  in  the  air. 

We  shall  see  but  a  little  way,  if  we  require 
to  understand  what  we  see.  How  few  things 
can  a  man  measure  with  the  tape  of  his  under 
standing  !  How  many  greater  things  might  he 
be  seeing  in  the  mean  while  !  One  afternoon  in 
the  fall,  November  21st,  I  saw  Fair  Haven  Pond 
with  its  island  a<nd  meadow ;  between  the  island 
and  the  shore,  a  strip  of  perfectly  smooth  water 
in  the  lee  of  the  island  and  two  ducks  sailing 
on  it,  and  something  more  I  saw  which  cannot 
easily  be  described,  which  made  me  say  to  my 
self  that  the  landscape  could  not  be  improved. 
I  did  not  see  how  it  could  be  improved.  Yet  I 
do  not  know  what  these  things  can  be.  I  be 
gin  to  see  such  objects  only  when  I  leave  off 
understanding  them,  and  afterwards  remember 


390  WINTER. 

them.  I  did  not  appreciate  them  before.  But 
I  get  no  farther  than  this.  How  adapted  these 
forms  and  colors  to  onr  eyes,-  a  meadow  and  its 
islands.  What  are  these  things?  Yet  the 
hawks  and  the  ducks  keep  so  aloof,  and  nature  is 
so  reserved.  We  are  made  to  love  the  river  and 
the  meadow,  as  the  wind  to  ripple  the  water. 

Feb.  14,  1852.  ...  I  hate  that  my  motive 
for  visiting  a  friend  should  be  that  I  want  so 
ciety,  that  it  should  lie  in  my  poverty  and  weak 
ness,  and  not  in  his  and  my  riches  and  strength. 
His  friendship  should  make  me  strong  enough 
to  do  without  him. 

Feb.  14, 1854.  p.  M.  Down  railroad.  A  moist, 
thawing,  cloudy  afternoon,  preparing  to  rain. 
The  telegraph  resounds  at  every  post.  The  finest 
strain  from  the  American  lyre.  In  Stow's  wood 
by  the  deep  Cut,  hear  the  quah  quah  of  the 
white-breasted,  black-capped  nuthatch.  I  went 
up  the  bank  and  stood  by  the,  fence.  A  little 
family  of  titmice  gathered  about  me  searching 
for  their  food  both  on  the  ground  and  on  the 
trees  with  great  industry  and  intentness,  now 
and  then  pursuing  each  other.  There  were  two 
nuthatches  at  least  talking  to  each  other.  One 
hung  with  his  head  down  on  a  large  pitch  pine 
pecking  the  bark  for  a  long  time,  leaden  blue 
above,  with  a  black  cap  and  white  breast.  It 
uttered  almost  constantly  a  faint  but  sharp  .  .  . 


WINTER.  391 

creak,  difficult  to  trace  home,  which  appeared  to 
be  answered  by  a  baser  and  louder  quah  quah 
from  the  other.  A  downy  woodpecker  with  the 
red  spot  on  his  hind  head  and  his  cassock  open 
behind,  showing  his  white  robe,  kept  up  an  in 
cessant  loud  tapping  on  another  pitch  pine. 
All  at  once,  an  active  little  brown  creeper  makes 
its  appearance,  a  small,  rather  slender  bird  with 
a  long  tail  and  sparrow-colored  back,  and  white 
beneath.  It  commences  at  the  bottom  of  a  tree 
and  glides  up  very  rapidly,  then  suddenly  darts 
to  the  bottom  of  a  new  tree,  and  repeats  the 
same  movement,  not  resting  long  in  one  place, 
or  on  one  tree.  These  birds  are  all  feeding  and 
flitting  along  together,  but  the  chickadees  are 
the  most  numerous  and  the  most  confiding.  I 
notice  that  three  of  the  four  kinds  thus  associ 
ated,  viz.,  the  chickadee,  nuthatch,  and  wood 
pecker,  have  black  crowns,  at  least  the  first  two, 
very  conspicuous  black  caps.  I  cannot  but 
think  that  this  sprightly  association  and  readi 
ness  to  burst  into  song  have  to  do  with  the  pros 
pect  of  spring,  more  light,  and  warmth,  and 
thawing  weather.  The  titmice  keep  up  an  in 
cessant,  faint,  tinkling  tchip ;  now  and  then 
one  utters  a  brief  day-day-day,  and  once  or  twice 
one  commenced  a  gurgling  strain  quite  novel, 
startling,  and  spring-like.  Beside  this  I  heard 
the  distant  crowing  of  cocks,  and  the  divine 


392  WINTER. 

humming  of  the  telegraph,  all  spring-promising 
sounds.  The  chickadee  has  quite  a  variety  of 
notes.  The  phcebe  one  I  did  not  hear  to-day. 

Feb.  14,  1856.  .  .  .  How  impatient,  how  ram 
pant,  how  precocious  these  osiers  !  They  have 
hardly  made  two  shoots  from  the  sand  in  as 
many  springs,  when  silvery  catkins  burst  out 
along  them,  and  anon,  golden  blossoms  and 
downy  seeds,  spreading  their  race  with  incredi 
ble  rapidity.  Thus  they  multiply  and  clan  to 
gether.  Thus  they  take  advantage  even  of  the 
railroad,  which  elsewhere  disturbs  and  invades 
their  domains.  May  I  ever  be  in  as  good  spirits 
as  a  willow.  They  never  despair.  Is  there 
no  moisture  longer  in  Nature  which  they  can 
transmute  into  sap  ?  They  are  emblems  of 
youth,  joy,  and  everlasting  life.  Scarcely  is 
their  growth  restrained  by  winter,  but  their 
silvery  down  peeps  forth  in  the  warmest  days  in 
January  (?). 

Feb.  14,  1857.  ...  It  is  a  fine,  somewhat 
spring-like  day.  The  ice  is  softening  so  that 
skates  begin  to  cut  in,  and  numerous  caterpillars 
are  now  crawling  about  on  the  ice  and  snow,  the 
thermometer  in  the  shade  N.  of  house  standing 
at  42°.  So  it  appears  that  they  must  often 
thaw  in  the  course  of  the  winter  and  find  noth 
ing  to  eat. 

Feb.  15,  1840.     The   good   seem   to  inhale  a 


WINTER.  393 

generous  atmosphere,  and  to  be  bathed  in  a  more 
precious  light  than  other  men.  Accordingly, 
Virgil  describes  the  sedes  beatas  thus, 

Largior  hie  campos  aether  et  lumine  vestit 
Purpureo :   Solemque  suum,  sua  sidera  norunt. 

Feb.  15,  1851.  Alas  !  alas  !  when  my  friend 
begins  to  deal  in  confessions,  breaks  silence, 
makes  a  theme  of  friendship  (which  then  is  al 
ways  something  past),  and  descends  to  merely 
human  relations.  As  long  as  there  is  a  spark  of 
love  remaining,  cherish  that  alone.  Only  that 
can  be  kindled  into  a  flame.  —  I  thought  that 
friendship,  that  love  was  possible  between  us. 
I  thought  that  we  had  not  withdrawn  very  far 
asunder.  But  now  that  my  friend  rashly, 
thoughtlessly,  profanely  speaks,  recognizing  the 
distance  between  us,  that  distance  seems  in 
finitely  increased.  Of  our  friends  we  do  not 
incline  to  speak,  to  complain  to  others ;  we 
would  not  disturb  the  foundations  of  confidence 
that  may  still  be. 

Why  should  we  not  still  continue  to  live  with 
the  intensity  and  rapidity  of  infants?  Is  not 
the  world,  are  not  the  heavens,  as  unfathomed 
as  ever  ?  Have  we  exhausted  any  joy,  any  sen 
timent  ? 

Feb.  15, 1852.  Perhaps  I  am  descended  from 
the  Northman  named  "  Thorer,  the  Dog- footed." 
Thorer  Hund,  to  judge  from  his  name,  belonged 


394  WINTER. 

to  the  same  family.  "  He  was  one  of  the  most 
powerful  men  in  the  north."  Thorer  is  one  of 
the  most  common  names  in  the  chronicles  of  the 
Northmen,  if  not  the  most  so. 

Feb.  15, 1855.  .  .  .  All  day  a  steady,  warm, 
imprisoning  rain,  carrying  off  the  snow,  not  un 
musical  on  my  roof.  It  is  a  rare  time  for  the 
student  and  reader  who  cannot  go  abroad  in  the 
p.  M.,  provided  he  can  keep  awake,  for  we  are 
wont  to  be  as  drowsy  as  cats  in  such  weather. 
Without,  it  is  not  walking,  but  wading.  It  is  so 
long  since  I  have  heard  it,  that  the  steady  rush 
ing,  soaking  sound  of  the  rain  on  the  shingles  is 
musical.  The  fire  needs  no  replenishing,  and 
we  save  our  fuel.  It  seems  like  a  distant  fore 
runner  of  spring.  It  is  because  I  am  allied  to 
the  elements  that  the  sound  of  the  rain  is  thus 
soothing  to  me.  This  sound  sinks  into  my 
spirit,  as  the  water  into  the  earth,  reminding  me 
of  the  season  when  snow  an'd  ice  will  be  no 
more,  when  the  earth  will  be  thawed,  and  drink 
up  the  rain  as  fast  as  it  falls. 

Feb.  15,  1858.  To  Cambridge  and  Boston. 
Saw  at  a  menagerie  a  Canada  lynx,  said  to  have 
been  taken  at  the  White  Mountains.  It  looked 
much  like  a  monstrous  gray  cat  standing  on  stilts, 
with  its  tail  cut  to  five  inches,  a  tuft  of  hair  on 
each  ear,  and  a  ruff  under  the  throat. 

Feb.  15,  1861.  ...  A  kitten  is  so  flexible 


WINTER.  395 

that  she  is  almost  double.  The  hind  parts  are 
equivalent  to  another  kitten  with  which  the  fore 
part  plays.  She  does  not  discover  that  her  tail 
belongs  to  her  till  you  tread  upon  it.  How  elo 
quent  she  can  be  with  her  tail.  She  jumps  into 
a  chair  and  then  stands  on  her  hind  legs  to  look 
out  the  window,  looks  steadily  at  objects  far 
and  near,  first  gazing  this  side,  then  that,  for 
she  loves  to  look  out  a  window  as  much  as  any 
gossip.  Ever  and  anon  she  bends  back  her  ears 
to  hear  what  is  going  on  within  the  room,  and  all 
the  while  her  eloquent  tail  is  reporting  the  prog 
ress  and  success  of  her  survey  by  speaking  ges 
tures.  .  .  .  Then  what  a  delicate  'hint  she  can 
give  with  her  tail,  passing  perhaps  underneath 
as  you  sit  at  table,  and  letting  the  tip  of  her 
tail  just  touch  your  legs,  as  much  as  to  say  I  am 
here  and  ready  for  that  milk  or  meat,  though 
she  may  not  be  so  forward  as  to  look  round  at 
you  when  she  emerges.  —  Only  skin  deep  lies 
the  feral  nature  of  the  cat  unchanged  still.  I 
just  had  the  misfortune  to  rock  on  to  our  cat's 
legs,  as  she  was  lying  playfully  spread  out  under 
my  chair.  Imagine  the  sound  that  arose,  and 
which  was  excusable,  but  what  will  you  say  to 
the  fierce  growls  and  flashing  eyes  with  which 
she  met  me  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  there 
after.  No  tiger  in  its  jungle  could  have  been 
savager. 


396  WINTER. 

Feb.  16,  1841.  For  how  slight  an  accident 
shall  two  noble  souls  wait  to  bring  them  to 
gether. 

Feb.  16,  1852.  It  is  interesting  to  meet  an 
ox  with  handsomely  spreading  horns.  There  is 
a  great  variety  of  sizes  and  forms,  though  one 
horn  commonly  matches  the  other.  I  am  willing 
to  turn  out  for  those  that  spread  their  branches 
wide.  Large  and  spreading  horns,  I  fancy,  in 
dicate  a  certain  vegetable  force  and  naturaliza 
tion  in  the  wearer ;  they  soften  and  ease  off  the 
distinction  between  the  animal  and  the  vegeta 
ble,  the  unhorned  animals  and  the  trees.  .  .  . 
The  deer  that  run  in  the  woods,  as  the  moose, 
for  instance,  carry  perfect  trees  on  their  heads. 
The  French  call  them  "  bois."  No  wonder  there 
are  fables  of  centaurs  and  the  like.  No  wonder 
there  is  a  story  of  a  hunter  who  when  his  bullets 
failed  fired  cherry  stones  into  the  heads  of  his 
game  and  so  trees  sprouted  out  of  them,  and  the 
hunter  refreshed  himself  with  the  cherries.  It 
is  a  perfect  piece  of  mythology  which  belongs  to 
these  days.  Oxen,  which  are  deanimalized,  to 
some  extent,  approach  nearer  to  the  vegetable, 
perchance,  than  bulls  and  cows,  and  hence  their 
bulky  bodies,  and  large  and  spreading  horns. 
Nothing  more  natural  than  that  a  deer  should 
appear  with  a  tree  growing  out  of  his  head. 

Feb.  16,  1854.     By  this  time  in  the  winter  I 


WINTER.  397 

do  not  look  for  those  clear  sparkling  mornings 
and  delicate  leaf  frosts  which  seem  to  belong  to 
the  earlier  part  of  the  winter,  as  if  the  air  were 
now  somewhat  tarnished  and  debauched,  had 
lost  its  virgin  purity. 

Every  judgment  and  action  of  a  man  qualifies 
every  other,  i.  e.,  corrects  our  estimation  of  every 
other,  as,  for  instance,  a  man's  idea  of  immor 
tality  who  is  a  member  of  a  church,  or  his  praise 
of  you  coupled  with  his  praise  of  those  whom 
you  do  not  esteem.  For,  in  this  sense,  a  man  is 
awfully  consistent  above  his  own  consciousness. 
All  a  man's  strength  and  all  his  weakness  go  to 
make  up  the  authority  of  any  particular  opinion 
which  he  may  utter.  ...  If  he  is  your  friend, 
you  may  have  to  consider  that  he  loves  you,  but 
perchance  he  also  loves  gingerbread.  .  .  . 

Columella,  after  saying  that  many  authors 
had  believed  that  the  climate,  qualitatem  coeli 
statumque,  was  changed  by  lapse  of  time,  longo 
cevi  situ,  refers  to  Hipparchus  as  having  given 
out  that  the  time  would  be  when  the  poles  of  the 
earth  would  be  moved  from  their  places,  tempus 
fore  quo  cardines  mundi  loco  moverentur ;  and 
as  confirmatory  of  this,  he,  Columella,  goes  on  to 
say  that  the  vine  and  olive  flourish  now  in  some 
places  where  formerly  they  failed.  He  gives  the 
names  of  about  fifty  authors  who  had  treated 
de  rusticis  rebus  before  him. 


398  WINTER. 

Feb.  16, 1857.  ...  I  perceive  that  some  com 
monly  talented  persons  are  enveloped  and  con 
fined  by  a  certain  crust  of  manners,  which, 
though  it  may  sometimes  be  a  fair  and  trans 
parent  enamel,  yet  only  repels  and  saddens  the 
beholder,  since  by  its  rigidity  it  seems  to  re 
press  all  further  expansion.  They  are  viewed 
as  at  a  distance,  like  an  insect  under  a  tumbler. 
They  have,  as  it  were,  prematurely  hardened 
both  seed  and  shell,  and  this  has  severely  taxed, 
if  not  put  a  period  to,  the  life  of  the  plant.  This 
is  to  stand  upon  your  dignity.  .  .  .  Such  per 
sons  are  after  all  but  hardened  sinners  in  a  mild 
sense.  The  pearl  is  a  hardened  sinner.  Man 
ners  get  to  be  human  parchment,  in  which  sensi 
ble  books  are  often  bound  and  honorable  titles 
engrossed,  though  they  may  be  very  stiff  and  dry. 

Feb.  16, 1859.  From  the  entrance  of  the  mill 
road,  I  look  back  through  the  sunlight,  this  soft 
afternoon,  to  some  white  pine  tops  near  Jenny 
Dugan's.  Their  flattish  boughs  rest  stratum 
above  stratum  like  a  cloud,  a  green  mackerel 
sky,  hardly  reminding  me  of  the  concealed  earth 
so  far  beneath.  They  are  like  a  flaky  crust  of 
the  earth,  a  more  ethereal,  terebinthine,  ever 
green  earth.  It  occurs  to  me  that  my  eyes  rest 
on  them  with  the  same  pleasure  as  do  those  of 
the  henhawk  which  has  been  nestled  in  them, 
eyes  nibble  the  piny  sierra  which  makes 


WINTER.  399 

the  horizon's  edge  as  a  hungry  man  nibbles  a 
cracker.  The  henhawk  and  the  pine  are  friends. 
The  same  thing  which  keeps  the  henhawk  in  the 
woods,  away  from  cities,  keeps  me  here.  That 
bird  settles  with  confidence  on  a  white  pine  top, 
and  not  upon  your  weather-cock.  That  bird 
will  not  be  poultry  of  yours,  lays  no  eggs  for 
you,  forever  hides  its  nest.  Though  willed  or 
wild,  it  is  not  willful  in  its  wildness.  The  un- 
sympathizing  man  regards  the  wildness  of  some 
animals,  their  strangeness  to  him,  as  a  sin,  as  if 
all  their  virtue  consisted  in  their  tamableness. 
He  has  always  a  charge  in  his  gun  ready  for 
their  extermination.  What  we  call  wildness  is 
a  civilization  other  than  our  own.  The  hen- 
hawk  shuns  the  farmer,  but  it  seeks  the  friendly 
shelter  and  support  of  the  pine.  It  will  not 
consent  to  walk  in  the  barnyard,  but  it  loves  to 
soar  above  the  clouds.  It  has  its  own  way  and 
is  beautiful  when  we  would  fain  subject  it  to  our 
will.  So  any  surpassing  work  of  art  is  strange 
and  wild  to  the  mass  of  men,  as  is  genius  itself. 
No  hawk  that  soars  and  steals  our  poultry  is 
wilder  than  genius,  and  none  is  more  persecuted 
or  above  persecution.  It  can  never  be  poet 
laureate,  to  say,  "  Pretty  Poll,"  and  "  Polly  want 
a  cracker." 

Feb.  17,  1841.     Our  work  should  be  fitted  to 
and  lead  on  the  time,  as  bud,  flower,  and  fruit 


400  WINTER. 

lead  the  circle  of  the  seasons.  —  The  mechanic 
works  no  longer  than  his  labor  will  pay  for 
lights,  fuel,  and  shop  rent.  Would  it  not  be 
well  for  us  to  consider  if  our  deed  will  warrant 
the  expense  of  nature  ?  Will  it  maintain  the 
sun's  light  ?  —  Our  actions  do  not  use  time  in 
dependently,  as  the  bud  does.  They  should  con 
stitute  its  lapse.  It  is  their  room.  But  they 
shuffle  after  and  serve  the  hour. 

Feb.  17,  1852.  Perhaps  the  peculiar  attrac 
tiveness  of  those  western  vistas  was  partly  ow 
ing  to  the  shortness  of  the  days,  when  we  natu 
rally  look  to  the  heavens  and  make  the  most  of 
the  little  light,  when  we  live  an  arctic  life,  when 
the  woodchopper's  axe  reminds  us  of  twilight  at 
three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  when  the  morning 
and  the  evening  literally  make  the  whole  day, 
when  we  travel  as  it  were  through  the  portals 
of  the  night,  and  the  way  is  narrow  as  well  as 
,  blocked  with  snow,  when,  too,  the  sun  has  the 
least  opportunity  to  fill  the  air  with  vapor.  .  .  . 

If  you  would  read  books  on  botany,  go  to  the 
fathers  of  the  science.  Read  Linnaaus  at  once, 
and  come  down  from  him  as  far  as  you  please. 
I  lost  much  time  reading  the  florists.  It  is 
remarkable  how  little  the  mass  of  those  interested 
in  botany  are  acquainted  with  Linnaeus.  I 
doubt  if  his  "  Philosophia  Botanica,"  which  Rous 
seau,  Sprengel,  and  others  praised  so  highly,  has 


WINTER.  401 

ever  been  translated  into  English.  It  is  simpler, 
more  easy  to  understand,  than  any  of  the  hundred 
manuals  to  which  it  has  given  birth.  A  few 
pages  of  cuts  representing  the  different  parts  of 
plants,  with  their  botanical  names  attached,  are 
worth  whole  volumes  of  explanation.  Accord 
ing  to  the  classification  of  LinnaBus,  I  come 
under  the  head  of  Miscellaneous  Botanophilists. 
"  Botanophili  sunt  qui  varia  de  vegetabilibus 
tradiderunt,  licet  ea  non  proprie  ad  scientiam 
Botanicam  spectant," 

Feb.  17,  1854.  p.  M.  To  Gowing's  Swamp. 
.  .  .  The  mice  tracks  are  very  amusing.  It  is 
surprising  how  numerous  they  are,  and  yet  I 
rarely  see  a  mouse.  They  must  be  nocturnal  in 
their  habits.  Any  tussocky  ground  is  scored 
with  them.  I  see,  too,  where  they  have  run 
over  the  ice  on  the  swamp  (there  is  a  mere 
sugaring  of  snow  on  it),  ever  trying  to  make 
an  entrance,  to  get  beneath  it.  You  see  deep 
and  distinct  channels  in  the  snow  in  some  places, 
as  if  a  whole  colony  had  long  traveled  to 
and  fro  in  them,  a  highway,  a  well-known  trail, 
but  suddenly  they  will  come  to  an  end.  And 
yet  they  have  not  dived  beneath  the  surface,  for 
you  see  where  the  single  traveler  who  did  it  all 
has  nimbly  hopped  along,  as  if  suddenly  scared, 
making  but  a  slight  impression,  squirrel-like,  in 
the  snow.  The  squirrel  also,  though  rarely,  will 


402  WINTER. 

make  a  channel  for  a  short  distance.  .  • .  .  I  sus 
pect  that  the  mice  sometimes  build  their  nests  in 
bushes  from  the  foundation,  for  .  .  .  where  I 
found  two  mice  nests  last  fall,  I  find  one  begun 
with  a  very  few  twigs  and  some  moss,  close  by 
where  the  others  were,  at  the  same  height,  and 
also  on  Prinos  bushes,  plainly  the  work  of  mice 
wholly. 

Feb.  18,  1838.  ...  I  had  not  been  out  long 
to-day  when  it  seemed  that  a  new  spring  was 
already  born ;  not  quite  weaned,  it  is  true,  but 
verily  entered  upon  existence.  Nature  struck  up 
"  the  same  old  song  in  the  grass,"  despite  eight 
een  inches  of  snow.  .  .  . 

Feb.  18,  1840.  All  romance  is  grounded  on 
friendship.  What  is  this  rural,  this  pastoral, 
this  poetic  life  but  its  invention  ?  Does  not  the 
moon  shine  for  Endymion?  Smooth  pastures 
and  mild  airs  are  for  some  Coridon  and  Phyllis. 
Paradise  belongs  to  Adam  and  Eve.  Plato's 
Republic  is  governed  by  Platonic  love. 

Feb.  18,  1841.  .  .  .  My  recent  growth  does 
not  appear  in  any  visible  new  talent ;  but  its 
deed  will  enter  into  my  gaze  when  I  look  into 
the  sky  or  vacancy.  It  will  help  me  to  consider 
ferns  and  everlasting. 

Man  is  like  a  tree  which  is  limited  to  no  age, 
but  grows  as  long  as  it  has  its  root  in  the 
ground.  We  have  only  to  live  in  the  alburnum, 
and  not  in  the  old  wood. 


WINTER.  403 

A  man  is  the  hydrostatic  paradox,  the  coun 
terpoise  of  the  system.  You  have  studied  flowers 
and  birds  cheaply  enough,  but  you  must  lay  your 
self  out  to  buy  him. 

Feb.  18,  1842.  ...  I  have  a  commonplace 
book  for  facts,  and  another  for  poetry,  but  I  find 
it  difficult  always  to  preserve  the  vague  distinc 
tion  which  I  had  in  my  mind,  for  the  most  in 
teresting  and  beautiful  facts  are  so  much  the 
more  poetry,  and  that  is  their  success.  They  are 
translated  from  earth  to  heaven.  I  see  that  if 
my  facts  were  sufficiently  vital  and  significant, 
perhaps  transmuted  more  into  the  substance  of 
the  human  mind,  I  should  need  but  one  book  of 
poetry  to  contain  them  all. 

It  is  impossible  for  the  same  person  to  see 
things  from  the  poet's  point  of  view  and  that  of 
the  man  of  science.  The  poet's  second  love  may 
be  science  (not  his  first),  when  use  has  worn  off 
the  bloom.  I  realize  that  men  may  be  born  to  a 
condition  of  mind  at  which  others  arrive  in  mid 
dle  age  by  the  decay  of  their  poetic  faculties. 

Feb.  18,  1854.  ...  It  is  a  little  affecting  to 
walk  over  the  hills  now,  looking  at  the  reindeer 
lichens  here  and  there  amid  the  snow,  and  re 
member  that  erelong  we  shall  find  violets  also  in 
their  midst.  What  an  odds  the  season  makes ! 
The  birds  know  it ;  whether  a  rose-tinted  water 
lily  is  sailing  amid  the  pads,  or  neighbor  Hob- 


404  WINTER. 

son  is  getting  out  his  ice  with  a  cross-cut  saw, 
while  his  oxen  are  eating  their  stalks.  I  noticed 
that  the  ice  which  Garrison  cut  the  other  day  con 
tained  the  lily  pads  and  stems  within  it.  How 
different  their  environment  now  from  when  the 
queenly  flower,  floating  on  the  trembling  surface, 
exhaled  its  perfume  amid  a  cloud  of  insects !  .  .  . 

What  a  contrast  between  the  upper  and  un 
der  side  of  many  leaves,  the  indurated  and  col 
ored  upper  side,  and  the  tender,  more  or  less 
colorless  under  side,  male  and  female,  even 
when  they  are  almost  equally  exposed.  The  un 
der  side  is  commonly  white,  however,  as  turned 
away  from  the  light  toward  the  earth.  Many  in 
which  the  contrast  is  finest  are  narrow,  revolute 
leave*s,  like  the  delicate  and  beautiful  androm- 
eda  polifolia,  the  ledum,  kalmia  glauca.  .  .  . 
The  handsome  lanceolate  leaves  of  the  androm- 
eda  polifolia,  dark,  but  pure  and  uniform  dull 
red  above,  strongly  revolute,  and  of  a  delicate 
bluish-white  beneath,  deserve  to  be  copied  on 
works  of  art. 

Feb.  18,  1857.  ...  p.  M.  The  frost  out  of 
the  ground  and  the  ways  settled  in  many  places. 
...  I  am  excited  by  this  wonderful  air,  and  go 
listening  for  the  note  of  the  bluebird  or  other 
comer.  The  very  grain  of  the  air  seems  to  have 
undergone  a  change,  and  is  ready  to  split  into 
the  form  of  the  bluebird's  warble.  Methinks  if 


WINTER.  405 

it  were  visible,  or  I  could  cast  up  some  fine  dust 
which  would  betray  it,  it  would  take  a  corre 
sponding  shape.  The  bluebird  does  not  come 
till  the  air  consents,  and  his  wedge  will  enter 
easily.  .  .  . 

What  a  poem  is  this  of  spring,  so  often  re 
peated  !  I  am  thrilled  when  I  hear  it  spoken  of 
as  the  Spring  of  such  a  year,  that  Fytte  of  the 
glorious  epic. 

Fel.  18,  1860.  ...  I  think  the  most  impor 
tant  requisite  in  describing  an  animal  is  to  be 
sure  that  you  give  its  character  and  spirit,  for 
in  that  you  have,  without  error,  the  sum  and  ef 
fect  of  all  its  parts,  known  and  unknown.  You 
must  tell  what  it  is  to  man.  Surely  the  most 
important  part  of  an  animal  is  its  anima,  its 
vital  spirit,  on  which  is  based  its  character,  and 
all  the  particulars  by  which  it  most  concerns  us. 
Yet  most  scientific  books  which  treat  of  animals 
leave  this  out  altogether,  and  what  they  describe 
are,  as  it  were,  phenomena  of  dead  matter. 
What  is  most  interesting  in  a  dog,  for  instance, 
is  his  attachment  to  his  master,  his  intelligence, 
courage,  and  the  like,  and  not  his  anatomical 
structure,  and  even  many  habits  which  affect  us 
less.  If  you  have  undertaken  to  write  the  biog 
raphy  of  an  animal,  you  must  present  to  us  the 
living  creature,  i.  e.,  a  result  which  no  man  can 
understand.  He  can  only,  in  his  degree,  report 


406  WINTER. 

the  impression  made  by  it  on  him.  Science,  in 
many  departments  of  Natural  History,  does  not 
pretend  to  go  beyond  the  shell,  i.  e.,  it  does  not 
get  to'  animated  nature  at  all.  A  history  of 
animated  nature  must  itself  be  animated.  The 
ancients,  one  would  say,  with  their  Gorgons, 
Sphinxes,  Satyrs,  Mantichora,  etc.,  could  imag 
ine  more  than  existed,  while  the  moderns  can 
not  imagine  so  much  as  exists. 

We  are  as  often  injured  as  benefited  by  our 
systems,  for,  in  fact,  no  human  system  is  a  tiue 
one.  A  name  is  at  most  a  convenience,  and 
carries  no  information  with  it.  As  soon  as  I 
begin  to  be  aware  of  the  life  of  any  creature,  I 
forget  its  name.  When  we  have  learned  to  dis 
tinguish  creatures,  the  sooner  we  forget  their 
names  the  better,  so  far  as  any  true  apprecia 
tion  of  them  is  concerned.  I  think,  therefore, 
that  the  best  and  most  harmless  names  are  those 
which  are  an  imitation  of  the  voice  or  note  of  an 
animal,  as  they  are  the  most  poetic  ones.  But 
the  name  adheres  only  to  the  accepted  and  con 
ventional  bird  or  quadruped,  never  an  instant  to 
the  real  one.  There  is  always  something  ridicu 
lous  in  the  name  of  a  great  man,  as  if  he  were 
named  John  Smith.  The  name  is  convenient  in 
communicating  with  others,  but  it  is  not  to  be 
remembered  when  I  communicate  with  myself. 

If  you  look  over  a  list  of  medicinal  recipes  in 


WINTER.  407 

vogne  in  the  last  century,  how  foolish  and  use 
less  they  are  seen  to  be,  and  yet  we  use  equally 
absurd  ones  with  faith  to-day. 

Feb.  19,  1841.  A  truly  good  book  .  .  . 
teaches  me  better  than  to  read  it.  I  must  soon 
lay  it  down,  and  commence  living  on  its  hint. 
I  do  not  see  how  any  can  be  written  more,  but 
this  is  the  last  effusion  of  genius.  ...  It  is 
slipping  out  of  my  fingers  while  I  read.  It 
creates  no  atmosphere  in  which  it  may  be  pe 
rused,  but  one  in  which  its  teachings  may  be 
practiced.  It  confers  on  me  such  wealth  that  I 
lay  it  down  with  the  least  regret.  What  I  began 
by  reading,  I  must  finish  by  acting.  So  I  can 
not  stay  to  hear  a  good  sermon,  and  applaud 
at  the  conclusion,  but  shall  be  half-way  to  Ther- 
mopylaB  before  that. 

We  linger  in  manhood  to  tell  the  dreams  of 
our  childhood,  and  they  are  half  forgotten  ere 
we  acquire  the  faculty  of  expressing' them. 

It  is  the  unexplored  grandeur  of  the  storm 
which  keeps  up  the  spirits  of  the  traveler. 
When  I  contemplate  a  hard  and  bare  life  in  the 
woods,  I  find  my  last  consolation  in  its  untri vial- 
ness.  Shipwreck  is  less  distressing  because  the 
breakers  do  not  trifle  with  us.  We  are  resigned 
as  long  as  we  recognize  the  sober  and  solemn 
mystery  of  nature.  The  dripping  mariner  finds 
consolation  and  sympathy  in  the  infinite  sublim- 


408  WINTER. 

ity  o£  the  storm.  It  is  a  moral  force  as  well 
as  he.  With  courage  he  can  lay  down  his  life 
on  the  strand,  for  it  never  turned  a  deaf  ear  to 
him,  nor  has  he  ever  exhausted  its  sympathy. 

In  the  love  of  narrow  souls  I  make  many 
short  voyages,  but  in  vain.  I  find  no  sea  room 
But  in  great  souls,  I  sail  before  the  wind  without 
a  watch,  and  never  reach  the  shore. 

Feb.  19,  1852.  The  sky  appears  broader 
now  than  it  did.  The  day  has  opened  its  eye 
lids  wider.  The  lengthening  of  the  days, 
commenced  a  good  while  ago,  is  a  kind  of  fore 
runner  of  the  spring.  Of  course  it  is  then 
that  the  ameliorating  cause  begins  to  work. 

To  White  Pond.  .  .  .  The  strains  from  my 
muse  are  as  rare  nowadays  or  of  late  years  as 
the  notes  of  birds  in  the  winter,  the  faintest 
occasional  tinkling  sound,  and  mostly  of  the 
woodpecker  kind,  or  the  harsh  jay,  or  the  crow. 
It  never  melts  into  a  song,  only  the  day-day-day 
of  an  inquisitive  titmouse. 

Everywhere  snow,  gathered  into  sloping  drifts 
about  the  walls  and  fences,  and  beneath  the 
snow  the  frozen  ground,  and  men  are  com 
pelled  to  deposit  the  summer's  provision  in 
burrows  in  the  earth,  like  the  ground  squirrel. 
Many  creatures,  daunted  by  the  prospect,  mi 
grated  in  the  fall,  but  man  remains,  and  walks 
over  the  frozen  snow  crust,  and  over  the  stiff- 


WINTER.  409 

ened  rivers  and  ponds,  and  draws  now  upon  his 
summer  stores.  Life  is  reduced  to  its  lowest 
terms.  There  is  no  home  for  you  now  in  this 
freezing  wind,  but  in  that  shelter  which  you  pre 
pared  in  the  summer.  You  steer  straight  across 
the  fields  to  that  in  season.  I  can  with  difficulty 
tell  when  I  am  over  the  river.  There  is  a  simi 
lar  crust  over  my  heart.  Where  I  rambled  in 
the  summer,  and  gathered  flowers,  and  rested  on 
the  grass  by  the  brook  side  in  the  shade,  now 
no  grass,  nor  flowers,  nor  brook,  nor  shade,  but 
cold  unvaried  snow,  stretching  mile  after  mile, 
and  no  place  to  sit.  Look  at  White  Pond,  that 
crystal  drop  that  was,  in  which  the  umbrageous 
shore  was  reflected,  and  schools  of  fabulous 
perch  and  shiners  rose  to  the  surface,  and  where 
with  difficulty  you  made  your  way  along  the 
pebbly  shore  in  a  summer  afternoon,  to  the 
bathing  place.  Now  you  stalk  rapidly  across 
where  it  was,  muffled  in  your  cloak,  over  a  more 
level  snow  field  than  usual,  furrowed  by  the 
wind ;  its  finny  inhabitants  and  its  pebbly  shore 
all  hidden  and  forgotten,  and  you  would  shudder 
at  the  thought  of  wetting  your  feet. 

A  fine  display  of  the  northern  lights  aften  ten 
P.  M.,  flashing  up  from  all  parts  of  the  horizon 
to  the  zenith,  where  there  was  a  kind  of  core 
formed,  stretching  S.S.E.  N.N.W.,  surrounded 
by  what  looked  like  a  permanent  white  cloud, 


410  WINTER. 

which,  however,  was  very  variable  in  form.  The 
light  flashes  or  trembles  upward,  as  if  it  were 
the  light  of  the  sun  reflected  from  a  frozen  mist 
in  the  upper  atmosphere. 

Feb.  19,  1854.  ...  To  Fair  Haven  by  river, 
back  by  railroad.  .  .  .  The  large  moths  appar 
ently  love  the  neighborhood  of  water,  and  are 
wont  to  suspend  their  cocoons  over  the  edge  of 
the  meadow  and  river,  places  more  or  less  inacces 
sible  to  men,  at  least.  I  saw  a  button-bush  with 
what,  at  first  sight,  looked  like  the  open  pods 
of  the  locust  or  of  the  water  asclepias,  attached. 
They  were  the  light,  ash-colored  cocoons  of  the 
Attacus  Promethea,  with  the  completely  with 
ered  and  faded  leaves  wrapped  around  them, 
carefully  and  admirably  secured  to  the  twigs  by 
fine  silk  wound  round  the  leaf  stalk  and  the  twig. 
They  add  nothing  to  the  strength  of  the  co 
coon,  being  deciduous,  but  aid  in  deception. 
They  are  taken  at  a  little  distance  for  a  few 
curled  and  withered  leaves  left  on.  Though  the 
particular  twigs  on  which  you  find  some  "co 
coons  may  never,  or  very  rarely,  retain  any 
leaves,  there  are  enough  leaves  left  on  other 
shrubs  and  trees  to  warrant  the  adoption  of  this 
disguise.  Yet  it  is  startling  to  think  that  the 
inference  has  in  this  case  been  drawn  by  some 
mind,  that  as  most  other  plants  retain  some 
leaves,  the  walker  will  suspect  these  also  to. 


WINTER.  411 

Each  and  all  such  disguises  and  other  resources 
remind  us  that  not  merely  some  poor  worm's 
instinct,  as  we  call  it,  but  the  mind  of  the  uni 
verse  rather,  which  we  share,  has  been  intended 
upon  each  particular  object.  All  the  wit  in  the 
world  was  brought  to  bear  on  each  case  to  secure 
its  end.  It  was  long  ago  in  a  full  senate  of  all 
intellects  determined  how  cocoons  had  best  be 
suspended.  Kindred  mind  with  mine,  that  ap 
proves  and  admires,  decided  it  so.  ... 

Much  study,  a  weariness  of  the  flesh !  Ah, 
but  did  they  not  intend  that  we  should  read  and 
ponder,  who  covered  the  whole  earth  with  alpha 
bets,  primers,  or  Bibles,  coarse  or  fine  print? 
The  very  debris  of  the  cliffs  .  .  .  are  covered 
with  geographic  lichens.  No  surface  is  per 
mitted  to  be  bare  long.  .  .  .  Was  not  he  who 
creates  lichens  the  abettor  of  Cadmus  when 
he  invented  letters  ?  Types  almost  arrange 
themselves  into  words  and  sentences,  as  dust 
arranges  itself  under  the  magnet.  Print  !  it  is 
a  close-hugging  lichen  that  forms  on  a  favorable 
surface,  which  paper  offers.  The  linen  gets 
itself  wrought  into  paper  that  the  song  of  the 
shirt  may  be  printed  oil  it.  Who  placed  us 
with  eyes  between  a  microscopic  and  a  telescopic 
world  ? 

Feb.  19,  1855.  Many  will  complain  of  my 
lectures  that  they  are  transcendental,  can't  under- 


412  WINTER. 

stand  them.  "  Would  you  have  us  return  to 
the  savage  state  ? "  etc.,  etc.,  a  criticism  true 
enough,  it  may  be,  from  their  point  of  view. 
But  the  fact  is,  the  earnest  lecturer  can  speak 
only  to  his  like,  and  adapting  himself  to  his 
audience  is  a  mere  compliment  which  he  pays 
them.  If  you  wish  to  know  how  I  think,  you 
must  endeavor  to  put  yourself  in  my  place.  If 
you  wish  me  to  speak  as  if  I  were  you,  that  is 
another  affair. 

Feb.  19,  1857.  A  man  cannot  be  said  to  suc 
ceed  in  this  life  who  does  not  satisfy  one  friend. 

Feb.  19,  1858.  The  traveler  is  defended  and 
calloused.  He  deals  with  surfaces,  has  a  great 
coat  on  ;  but  he  who  stays  at  home  and  writes 
about  homely  things  gives  us  naked  and  tender 
thoughts  and  sentiments. 

Feb.  20,  1840.  The  coward's  hope  is  suspi 
cion  ;  the  hero's  doubt,  a  sort  of  hope.  The 
gods  neither  hope  nor  doubt. 

Feb.  20,  1841.  When  I  am  going  out  for  an 
evening,  I  arrange  the  fire  in  my  stove  so  that  I 
do  not  fail  to  find  a  good  one  when  I  return, 
though  it  would  have  engaged  my  frequent  at 
tention,  present ;  so  that  when  I  know  I  am  to 
be  at  home,  I  sometimes  make  believe  that  I 
may  go  out  to  save  trouble.  And  this  is  the  art 
of  living,  too,  to  leave  our  life  in  a  condition  to 
go  alone,  and  not  to  require  a  constant  supervis- 


WINTER.  413 

ion.  We  will  then  sit  down  serenely  to  live,  as 
by  the  side  of  a  stove. 

When  I  sit  in  earnest,  nothing  must  stand. 
All  must  be  sedentary  with  me. 

I  hear  the  faint  sound  of  a  viol  and  voices 
from  the  neighboring  cottage,  and  think  to 
myself,  I  will  believe  the  muse  only  forever- 
more.  It  assures  me  that  no  gleam  which  comes 
over  the  serene  soul  is  deceptive.  It  warns  me 
of  a  reality  and  substance  of  which  the  best 
that  I  see  is  but  the  phantom  and  shadow.  O 
Music,  thou  tellest  me  of  things  of  which  mem 
ory  takes  no  heed;  thy  strains  are  whispered 
aside  from  memory's  ear.  .  .  .  Thou  openest 
all  my  senses  to  catch  the  least  hint,  and  givest 
me  no  thought.  It  would  be  good  to  sit  at  my 
door  of  summer  evenings  forever,  and  hear  thy 
strains.  Thou  makest  me  to  toy  with  speech, 
or  walk  content  without  it.  ...  I  am  pleased  to 
think  how  ignorant  and  shiftless  the  wisest  are. 

My  imperfect  sympathies  with  my  friend  are 
a  cheerful,  glimmering  light  in  the  valley. 

Feb.  20,  1842.  I  never  yet  saw  two  men  suf 
ficiently  great  to  meet  as  two.  In  proportion 
as  they  are  great,  the  differences  are  fatal,  be 
cause  they  are  felt  not  to  be  partial,  but  total. 
Frankness  to  him  who  is  unlike  me  will  lead  to 
the  utter  denial  of  him.  .  .  .  When  two  ap 
proach  to  meet,  they  incur  no  petty  dangers ; 


414  WINTER. 

they  run  terrible  risks.  Between  the  sincere 
there  will  be  no  civilities.  No  greatness  seems 
prepared  for  the  little  decorums ;  even  savage 
unmannerliness  it  meets  from  equal  greatness. 

My  path  hitherto  has  been  like  a  road  through 
a  diversified  country,  now  climbing  high  moun 
tains,  then  descending  into  the  lowest  vales. 
From  the  summits  I  saw  the  heavens,  from  the 
vales  I  looked  up  at  the  heights  again.  In  pros 
perity  I  remember  God,  or  memory  is  one  with 
consciousness;  in  adversity  I  remember  my  own 
elevation,  and  only  hope  to  see  God  again.  .  .  .  • 

The  death  of  friends  should  inspire  us  as 
much  as  their  lives.  If  they  are  great  and  rich 
enough,  they  will  leave  consolation  to  the  mourn 
ers  before  the  expenses  of  their  funerals.  It 
will  not  be  hard  to  part  with  worth,  because  it 
is  worthy.  How  can  any  good  depart  ?  It  does 
not  go  and  come,  but  we. 

Feb.  20,  1856.  P.  M.  Up  Assabet.  See  a 
broad  and  distinct  otter  trail  made  last  night  or 
yesterday.  It  came  out  to  the  river  through  the 
low  woods  N.  of  Pinxter  swamp,  making  a  very 
conspicuous  trail  from  seven  to  nine  or  ten  inches 
wide  and  three  or  four  deep,  with  sometimes 
singularly  upright  sides,  as  if  a  square  timber 
had  been  drawn  along,  but  commonly  rounded. 
It  made  some  short  turns  and  zigzags,  passed 
under  limbs  which  were  only  five  inches  above 


WINTER.  415 

the  .snow,  not  over  them,  had  apparently  slid 
down  all  banks  and  declivities,  making  a  uni 
form,  broad,  hollow  trail  there,  without  any 
marks  of  its  feet.  On  reaching  the  river,  it  had 
come  along  under  the  bank,  from  time  to  time 
looking  into  the  crevices,  where  it  might  get 
under  the  ice,  sometimes  ascending  the  bank  and 
sliding  back.  On  level  ground  its  trail  had  this 

appearance 

.  .  .  tracks  of  feet  twenty  to  twenty-four  inches 
apart,  but  sometimes  there  was  no  track  of  the 
feet  for  twenty-five  feet,  frequently  for  six.  In 
the  last  case  there  was  a  swelling  in  the  outline 
as  above.  ...  It  entered  a  hole  under  the  ice 
at  Assabet  spring,  from  which  it  has  not  issued. 

Feb.  20,  1857.  What  is  the  relation  between 
a  bird  and  the  ear  that  appreciates  its  melody, 
to  whom,  perchance,  it  is  more  charming  and  sig 
nificant  than  to  any  one  else  ?  Certainly  they 
are  intimately  related,  and  the  one  was  made  for 
the  other.  It  is  a  natural  fact.  If  I  were  to 
discover  that  a  certain  kind  of  stone  by  the  pond 
shore  was  affected,  say  partially  disintegrated, 
by  a  particular  natural  sound,  as  of  a  bird  or 
insect,  I  see  that  one  could  not  be  completely 
described  without  describing  the  other.  I  am 
that  stone  by  the  pond  side. 

What  is  hope,  what  is  expectation,  but  a  seed- 


416  WINTER. 

time  whose  harvest  cannot  fail,  an  irresistible,  ex 
pedition  of  the  mind,  at  length  to  be  victorious  ? 

Feb.  20,  1859.  Have  just  read  k<  Counter 
parts,  or  the  Cross  of  Love,"  by  the  author  of 
"  Charles  Auchester."  It  is  very  interesting,  its 
illustration  of  Love  and  Friendship,  as  showing 
how  much  we  can  know  of  each  other  through 
sympathy  merely,  without  any  of  the  ordinary 
information.  You  know  about  a  person  who 
deeply  interests  you  more  than  you  can  be  told. 
A  look,  a  gesture,  an  act,  which  to  everybody 
else  is  insignificant,  tells  you  more  about  that 
one  than  words  can.  ...  If  he  wished  to  con 
ceal  something  from  you,  it  would  be  apparent. 
It  is  as  if  a  bird  told  you.  .  .  .  Sometimes  from 
the  altered  manner  of  a  friend  which  no  cloak 
can  possibly  conceal,  we  know  that  something 
has  happened,  and  what  it  was,  all  the  essential 
particulars,  though  it  would  be  a  long  story  to 
tell,  though  it  may  involve  the  agency  of  four 
or  five  persons,  who  never  breathed  it  to  you, 
yet  you  are  sure  as  if  you  detected  all  their 
tracks  in  the  wood.  You  are  the  more  sure,  be 
cause,  in  the  case  of  love,  effects  follow  their 
causes  more  inevitably  than  usual,  this  being  a 
controlling  power. 

How  much  the  writer  lives  and  endures  in 
coining  before  the  public  so  often  !  A  few  years 
or  books  are  with  him  equal  to  a  long  life  of  ex- 


WINTER.  417 

perience,  suffering,  etc.  It  is  well  if  he  does 
not  become  hardened.  He  learns  how  to  bear 
contempt,  and  to  despise  himself.  He  makes, 
as  it  were,  a  post-mortem  examination  of  him 
self  before  he  is  dead.  Such  is  art. 

Feb.  21,  1842.  ...  I  must  confess  there  is 
nothing  so  strange  to  me  as  my  own  body.  I 
love  any  other  piece  of  nature,  almost,  better. 

I  was  always  conscious  of  sounds  in  nature 
which  my  ears  could  not  hear,  that  I  caught  but 
a  prelude  to  a  strain.  She  always  retreats  as 
I  advance.  Away  behind  and  behind  is  she 
and  her  meaning.  Will  not  this  faith  and  ex 
pectation  make  itself  ears  at  length  ?  I  never 
saw  to  the  end,  nor  heard  to  the  end,  but  the 
best  part  was  unseen  and  unheard. 

I  am  like  a  feather  floating  in  the  atmosphere. 
On  every  side  is  depth  unfathomable. 

I  have  lived  ill  [of  late]  for  the  most  part, 
because  too  near  myself.  I  have  tripped  myself 
up,  so  that  there  was  no  progress  for  my  own 
narrowness.  I  cannot  walk  conveniently  and 
pleasantly  but  when  I  hold  myself  far  off  in 
the  horizon,  but  when  the  soul  dilutes  the  body 
and  makes  it  passable.  My  soul  and  body  have 
tottered  along  together, .  .  .  tripping  and  hinder 
ing  one  another,  like  unpracticed  Siamese  twins. 
They  two  should  walk  as  one  that  no  obstacle 
may  be  nearer  than  the  firmament. 


418  WINTER. 

There  must  be  some  narrowness  in  the  soul 
that  compels  one  to  have  secrets. 

Feb.  21,  1855.  ...  A  clear  air,  with  a  north 
westerly  March-like  wind,  as  yesterday.  What 
is  the  peculiarity  in  the  air  that  both  the  in 
valid  in  his  chamber  and  the  traveler  on  the 
highway  say,  "These  are  perfect  March  days"? 
The  wind  is  rapidly  drying  up  the  earth,  and 
elevated  sands  already  begin  to  look  whitish. 
How  much  light  there  is  in  the  sky  and  on  the 
surface  of  the  russet  earth !  It  is  reflected  in 
a  flood  from  all  cleansed  surfaces  which  rain  and 
snow  have  washed,  from  the  railroad  rails,  the 
mica  on  the  rocks  and  the  silvery  latebrae  of  in 
sects  there,  and  I  never  saw  the  white  houses 
of  the  village  more  brightly  white.  Now  look 
for  an  early  crop  of  arrowheads,  for  they  will 
shine.  When  I  have  entered  the  wooded  hol 
low  on  the  east  of  the  Deep  Cut,  it  is  novel  and 
pleasant  to  hear  the  sound  of  the  dry  leaves  and 
twigs,  which  have  so  long  been  damp  and  silent, 
crackling  again  under  my  feet,  though  there  is 
still  considerable  snow  along  wall-sides,  etc.,  and 
to  see  the  holes  and  galleries  recently  made  by 
the  mice  (?)  in  the  fine  withered  grass  of  such 
places.  I  see  the  peculiar  softened  blue  sky  of 
spring  over  the  tops  of  the  pines,  and  when  I 
am  sheltered  from  the  wind  I  feel  the  warmer 
sun  of  the  season  reflected  from  the  withered 


WINTER.  419 

grass  and  twigs  on  the  side  of  this  elevated  hol 
low.  .  .  .  When  the  leaves  on  the  forest  floor 
are  dried  and  begin  to  rustle  under  such  a  sun 
and  wind  as  these,  the  news  is  told  to  how  many 
myriads  of  grubs  that  underlie  them !  When 
I  perceive  this  dryness  under  my  feet,  I  feel  as 
if  I  had  got  a  new  sense,  or  rather  I  realize 
what  was  incredible  to  me  before,  that  there  is  a 
new  life  in  nature  beginning  to  awake.  ...  It 
is  whispered  through  all  the  aisles  of  the  forest 
that  another  spring  is  approaching.  The  wood 
mouse  listens  at  the  mouth  of  his  burrow,  and 
the  chickadee  passes  the  news  along.  We  now 
notice  the  snow  on  the  mountains,  because  on 
the  remote  rim  of  the  horizon  its  whiteness  con 
trasts  with  the  russet  and  darker  hues  of  our 
bare  fields.  I  looked  at  the  Peterboro  mountains, 
with  my  glass,  from  Fair  Haven  hill.  I  think 
there  can  be  no  more  arctic  scene  than  these 
mountains,  on  the  edge  of  the  horizon,  completely 
crusted  over  with  snow,  the  sun  shining  on  them, 
seen  through  a  telescope  over  bare  russet  fields 
and  dark  forests,  with  perhaps  a  house  on  some 
bare  ridge  seen  against  them.  They  look  like 
great  loaves  incrusted  with  pure  white  sugar,  and 
I  think  this  must  have  been  the  origin  of  the 
name  "  sugar-loaf  "  sometimes  given  to  moun 
tains,  and  not  their  form.  We  look  thus  from 
russet  fields  into  a  landscape  still  sleeping  under 


420  WINTER. 

the  mantle  of  winter.  The  snow  on  the  moun 
tains  has,  in  this  case,  a  singular  smooth  and 
crusty  appearance,  and  by  contrast  you  see  even 
single  evergreens  rising  here  and  there  above  it ; 
and  where  a  promontory  casts  a  shadow  along 
the  mountain  side,  I  saw  what  looked  like  a  large 
lake  of  misty,  bluish  water  on  the  side  of  the 
farther  Peterboro  mountain,  its  edges  or  shore 
very  distinctly  defined.  This  I  concluded  was 
the  shadow  of  another  part  of  the  mountain, 
and  it  suggested  that  in  like  manner  what  on 
the  surface  of  the  moon  is  taken  for  water  may 
be  shadows. 

Feb.  21,  1860.  ...  It  was  their  admiration 
of  nature  that  made  the  ancients  attribute  those 
magnanimous  qualities,  which  are  surely  to  be 
found  in  man,  to  the  lion,  as  her  masterpiece. 
It  is  only  by  a  readiness  or  preparedness  to  see 
more  than  appears  in  a  creature  that  we  can 
appreciate  what  is  manifest. 

Feb.  21,  1861.  .  .  .  This  plucking  and  strip 
ping  of  a  pine  cone  is  a  business  which  he  [the 
squirrel]  and  his  family  understand  perfectly. 
.  .  .  He  does  not  prick  his  fingers,  nor  pitch  his 
whiskers,  nor  gnaw  the  solid  cone  any  more 
than  he  needs  to.  Having  sheared  off  the  twigs 
and  needles  that  may  be  in  his  way  (for,  like  a 
skillful  wood-chopper,  he  first  secures  room  and 
verge  enough),  he  neatly  cuts  off  the  stout  stem 


WINTER.  421 

of  the  cone  with  a  few  strokes  of  his  chisels, 
and  it  is  his.  To  be  sure,  he  may  let  it  fall  to 
the  ground,  and  look  down  at  it  for  a  moment 
curiously,  as  if  it  were  not  his.  But  he  is  tak 
ing  note  where  it  lies,  that  he  may  add  it  to  his 
heap  of  a  hundred  more  like  it,  and  it  is  only  so 
much  the  more  his  for  his  seeming  carelessness. 
And  when  he  comes  to  open  it,  observe  how  he 
proceeds.  He  holds  it  in  his  hands  a  solid  em 
bossed  cone,  so  hard  it  almost  rings  at  the  touch 
of  his  teeth.  He  pauses  for  a  moment,  perhaps, 
but  it  is  not  because  he  does  not  know  how  to 
begin.  He  only  listens  to  hear  what  is  in  the 
wind.  He  knows  better  than  to  cut  off  the  top, 
and  work  his  way  downward  against  a  cheval-d&> 
frise  of  advanced  scales  and  prickles,  or  to  gnaw 
into  the  side  for  three  quarters  of  an  inch  in  the 
face  of  many  armed  shields.  He  whirls  it  bot 
tom  upward  in  a  twinkling,  where  the  scales  are 
smallest  and  the  prickles  slight  or  none,  and  the 
short  stem  is  cut  so  close  as  not  to  be  in  his  way, 
and  there  he  proceeds  to  cut  through  the  thin 
and  tender  bases  of  the  scales,  and  each  stroke 
tells,  laying  bare  at  once  a  couple  of  seeds. 
Thus  he  strips  it  as  easily  as  if  its  scales  were 
chaff,  and  so  rapidly,  twirling  it  as  he  advances, 
that  you  cannot  tell  how  he  does  it  till  you  drive 
him  off,  and  inspect  his  unfinished  work.  If 
there  ever  was  an  age  of  the  world  when  the 


422  WINTER. 

squirrels  opened  their  cones  at  the  wrong  end,  it 
was  not  the  golden  age,  at  any  rate. 

Feb.  22,  1841.  .  .  .  Friends  will  be  much 
apart.  They  will  respect  more  each  other's 
privacy  than  their  communion,  for  therein  is  the 
fulfillment  of  our  high  aims  and  the  conclusion 
of  our  arguments.  That  we  know  and  would 
associate  with,  not  only  has  high  intents,  but  goes 
on  high  errands,  and  has  much  private  business. 
The  hours  my  friend  devotes  to  me  were  snatched 
from  a  higher  society.  He  is  hardly  a  gift  level 
to  me,  but  I  have*  to  reach  up  to  take  it.  ... 

We  have  to  go  into  retirement  religiously, 
and  enhance  our  meeting  by  rarity  and  a  degree 
of  unfamiliarity.  Would  you  know  why  I  see 
thee  so  seldom,  my  friend  ?  In  solitude  I  have 
been  making  up  a  packet  for  thee. 

Some  actions  which  grow  out  of  common  but 
natural  relations  affect  me  strangely,  as  some 
times  the  behavior  of  a  mother  to  her  children. 
So  quiet  and  noiseless  an  action  often  moves  me 
more  than  many  sounding  exploits. 

Feb.  22,  1852.  .  .  .  Every  man  will  take 
such  views  as  he  can  afford  to  take.  Views 
one  would  think  were  the  most  expensive  guests 
to  entertain.  I  perceive  that  the  reason  my 
neighbor  cannot  entertain  certain  views  is  the 
narrow  limits  within  which  he  is  obliged  to  live 
on  account  of  the  smallness  of  his  means.  His 


WINTER.  423 

instinct  tells  him  that  it  will  not  do  to  relax  his 
hold  here,  and  take  hold  where  he  cannot  keep 
hold. 

Feb.  22,  1855.  .  .  .  J.  Farmer  showed  me 
an  ermine  weasel  he  caught  in  a  trap  three  or 
four  weeks  ago.  They  are  not  very  uncommon 
about  his  barns.  All  white  but  the  tip  of  the 
tail.  Two  conspicuous  canine  teeth  in  each  jaw. 
In  summer  they  are  distinguished  from  the  red 
weasel,  which  is  a  little  smaller,  by  the  length  of 
their  tails  particularly,  six  or  more  inches,  while 
the  red  one's  is  not  more  than  two  inches  long. 
.  .  .  He  had  seen  a  partridge  drum  standing  on 
a  wall ;  said  it  stood  very  upright,  and  produced 
the  sound  by  striking  its  wings  together  behind 
its  back,  as  a  cock  often  does,  but  did  not  strike 
the  wall  nor  its  body.  This  he  is  sure  of,  and 
declares  that  he  is  mistaken  who  affirms  the  con 
trary,  though  it  were  Audubon  himself.  Wil 
son  says  he  "  begins  to  strike  with  his  stiffened 
wings,"  while  standing  on  a  log,  but  does  not 
say  what  he  strikes,  though  one  would  infer  it 
was  either  the  log  or  his  body.  Peabody  says  he 
beats  his  body  with  his  wings. 

Feb.  22,  1856.  .  .  .  Now  first,  the  snow 
melting  and  the  ice  beginning  to  soften,  I  see 
those  slender,  grayish-winged  insects  creeping 
with  closed  wings  over  the  snow-clad  ice.  Have 
seen  none  before  this  winter.  They  are  on  all 


424  WINTER. 

parts  of  the  river,  of  all  sizes,  from  one  third 
of  an  inch  to  an  inch  long ;  are  to  be  seen  every 
warm  day  afterward. 

Feb.  23,  1841.  .  .  .  There  is  a  subtle  elixir 
in  society  which  makes  it  a  fountain  of  health 
to  the  sick.  We  want  no  consolation  which  is 
not  the  overflow  of  our  friend's  health.  "We 
will  have  no  condolence,  who  are  not  dolent  our 
selves.  We  would  have  our  friend  come  and 
respire  healthily  before  us  with  the  fragrance 
of  many  meadows  and  heaths  in  his  breath,  and 
we  will  inhabit  his  body  while  our  own  recruits. 
—  Nothing  is  so  good  medicine  in  sickness  as  to 
witness  some  nobleness  in  another  which  will 
advertise  us  of  health.  In  sickness  it  is  our 
faith  that  ails,  and  noble  deeds  reassure  us. 

That  anybody  has  thought  of  you  on  some 
indifferent  occasion  frequently  implies  more 
good  will  than  you  had  reason  to  expect.  You 
have  henceforth  a  stronger  motive  for  conduct. 
We  do  not  know  how  many  amiable  thoughts 
are  current. 

Feb.  23,  1842.  .  .  .  True  politeness  is  only 
hope  and  trust  in  men.  It  never  addresses  a 
fallen  or  falling  man,  but  salutes  a  rising  gener 
ation.  It  does  not  flatter,  but  only  congratu 
lates. 

Feb.  23,  1853 I  think  myself  in  a  wilder 

country,  and  a  little  nearer  to  primitive  times, 


WINTER.  425 

when  I  read  in  old  books  which  spell  the  word 
savages  with  an  I  (salvages),  like  John  Smith's 
"  General  Historic  of  Virginia,"  etc.,  reminding 
me  of  the  derivation  of  the  word  from  sylva^ 
some  of  the  wild  wood  and  its  bristling  branches 
still  left  in  their  language.  The  savages  they 
describe  are  really  salvages,  men  of  the  woods. 

Feb.  23,  1854.  A.  M.  The  snow  drives  hori 
zontally  from  the  north  or  northwesterly  in  long 
waving  lines  like  the  outline  of  a  swell  or 
billow. 

p.  M.  Saw  some  of  those  architectural  drifts 
forming.  The  fine  snow  came  driving  along 
over  the  field  like  steam  curling  from  a  roof. 
As  the  current  rises  to  go  over  the  wall,  it  pro 
duces  a  lull  in  the  angle  made  by  the  wall  and 
the  ground,  and  accordingly  just  enough  snow  is 
deposited  there  to  fill  the  triangular  calm,  but 
the  greater  part  passes  over,  and  is  deposited  in 
the  larger  calm.  A  portion  of  the  wind  also 
apparently  passes  through  the  chinks  of  the 
wall,  and  curves  upward  against  the  main  drift, 
appearing  to  carve  it,  and  perforate  it  in  various 
fashions,  holding  many  snowy  particles  in  sus 
pension,  in  vertical  eddies.  I  am  not  sure  to 
what  extent  the  drift  is  carved  and  perforated, 
and  how  far  the  snow  is  originally  deposited  in 
these  forms. 

Feb.  23,  1855.  .  .  .  Mr.  L.  says  that  he  and 


, 


426  WINTER. 

his  son  George  fired  at  white  swans  in  Texas 
on  the  water,  and  though  George  shot  two  with 
ball,  and  killed  them,  the  others  in  each  case 
gathered  about  them,  and  crowded  them  off  out 
of  their  reach. 

Feb.  23,  1856.  ...  I  read  in  the  papers 
that  the  ocean  is  frozen,  or  has  been  lately,  on 
the  back  side  of  Cape  Cod,  at  the  Highland 
Light,  one  mile  out  from  the  shore  (not  to 
bear  or  walk  on  probably),  a  phenomenon 
which,  it  is  said,  the  oldest  have  not  witnessed 
before. 

Feb.  23,  1857.  P.  M.  See  two  yellow-spotted 
tortoises  in  the  ditch  S.  of  Trillium  wood.  You 
saunter  expectant  in  the  mild  air  along  the  soft 
edge  of  a  ditch  filled  with  melted  snow,  and 
paved  with  leaves  in  some  sheltered  place,  yet 
perhaps  with  some  ice  at  one  end  still,  and  are 
thrilled  to  see  stirring  mid  the  leaves  at  the 
bottom,  sluggishly  burying  themselves  from 
your  sight  again,  these  brilliantly  spotted  crea 
tures.  There  are  commonly  two,  at  least.  The 
tortoise  is  stirring  in  the  ditches  again.  In 
your  latest  spring,  they  still  look  incredibly 
strange  when  first  seen,  and  not  like  cohabitants 
and  contemporaries  of  yours. 

I  say  in  my  thought  to  my  neighbor  who  was 
once  my  friend,  It  is  of  no  use  to  speak  the 
truth  to  you.  You  will  not  hear  it.  What  then 
shall  I  say  to  you  ? 


WINTER.  427 

At  the  instant  that  I  seem  to  be  saying  fare 
well  forever  to  one  who  has  been  my  friend,  I 
find  myself  unexpectedly  near  to  him,  and  it  is 
our  very  nearness  and  dearness  to  each  other 
that  gives  depth  and  significance  to  that  "  for 
ever."  Thus  I  am  a  helpless  prisoner,  and  these 
chains  I  have  no  skill  to  break.  While  I  think 
I  have  broken  one  link,  I  have  been  forging 
another.  —  I  have  not  yet  known  a  Friendship 
to  cease,  I  think.  I  fear  I  have  experienced  its 
decaying.  Morning,  noon,  and  night,  I  suffer 
a  physical  pain,  an  aching  of  the  breast  which 
unfits  me  for  my  tasks.  It  is  perhaps  most 
intense  at  evening.  With  respect  to  Friendship 
I  feel  like  a  wreck  that  is  driving  before  the 
gale,  with  a  crew  suffering  from  hunger  and 
thirst,  not  knowing  what  shore,  if  any,  they 
may  reach,  so  long  have  I  breasted  the  conflict 
ing  waves  of  this  sentinent,  my  seams  open  and 
my  timbers  laid  bare.  I  float  on  Friendship's 
sea  simply  because  my  specific  gravity  is  less 
than  its,  but  no  longer  that  stanch  and  graceful 
vessel  that  careened  so  buoyantly  over  it.  My 
planks  and  timbers  are  scattered.  At  most  I 
hope  to  make  a  sort  of  raft  of  Friendship  on 
which  with  a  few  of  our  treasures  we  may  float 
to  some  land.  —  That  aching  of  the  breast,  the 
grandest  pain  that  man  endures,  which  no  ether 
can  assuage ! 


428  WINTER. 

You  cheat  me,  you  keep  me  at  a  distance  with 
your  manners.  I  know  of  no  other  dishonesty, 
no  other  devil.  Why  this  doubleness,  these 
compliments?  They  are  the  worst  of  lies.  A 
lie  is  not  worse  between  traders  than  a  compli 
ment  between  friends.  I  would  not,  I  cannot 
speak.  I  will  let  you  feel  my  thought,  my  feel 
ing.  —  Friends !  They  are  united  for  goocf,  for 
evil.  They  can  delight  each  other  as  none  other 
can.  Lying  on  lower  levels  is  but  a  trivial 
offense  compared  with  civility  and  compliments 
on  the  level  of  Friendship. 

I  visit  my  friend  for  joy,  not  for  disturbance. 
If  my  coming  hinders  him  in  the  least  conceiva 
ble  degree,  I  will  exert  myself  to  the  utmost  to 
stay  away.  I  will  get  the  Titans  to  help  me  stand 
aloof,  will  labor  night  and  day  to  construct  a 
rampart  between  us.  If  my  coming  casts  but 
the  shadow  of  a  shadow  before  it,  I  will  retreat 
swifter  than  the  wind,  and  more  untrackable.  I 
will  be  gone  irrevocably,  if  possible,  before  he 
fears  that  I  am  coming. 

If  the  teeth  ache,  they  can  be  pulled.  If  the 
heart  aches,  what  then  ?  Shall  we  pluck  it  out  ? 

Must  friends  then  expect  the  fate  of  those 
oriental  twins,  that  one  shall  at  last  bear  about 
the  corpse  of  the  other,  by  that  same  ligature 
that  bound  him  to  a  living  companion  ? 

Look  before  you  leap.     Let  the  isthmus  be 


WINTER.  429 

cut  through,  unless  sea  meets  sea  at  exactly 
the  same  level,  unless  a  perfect  understanding 
and  equilibrium  has  been  established  from  the 
beginning  around  Cape  Horn  and  that  unnamed 
northern  cape,  what  a  tumult !  It  is  Atlantic 
and  Atlantic,  or  Atlantic  and  Pacific. 

I  have  seen  signs  of  the  spring.  I  have  seen 
a  frog  swiftly  sinking  in  a  pool,  or  where  he 
dimpled  the  surface  as  he  leapt  in,  I  have  seen 
the  brilliant  spotted  tortoise  stirring  at  the  bot 
tom  of  ditches,  I  have  seen  the  clear  sap  trick 
ling  from  the  red  maple. 

Feb.  23,  1859.  [Worcester.]  p.  M.  Walk 
to  Quinsigamond  Pond,  where  was  very  good 
skating  yesterday,  but  this  very  pleasant  and 
warm  day  it  is  suddenly  quite  too  soft.  I  was 

just  saying  to  B that  I  should  look  for  hard 

ice  in  the  shade  or  on  the  N.  side  of  some  hill 
close  to  the  shore,  though  skating  was  out  of  the 
question  elsewhere,  when  looking  up  I  saw  a  gen 
tleman  and  lady  very  gracefully  gyrating,  and, 
as  it  were,  courtesying  to  each  other,  in  a  small 
bay  under  such  a  hill  on  the  opposite  shore  of 
the  pond.  Intervening  bushes  and  shore  con 
cealed  the  ice,  so  that  their  swift  and  graceful 
motions,  their  bodies  inclined  at  various  angles, 
as  they  gyrated  forward  and  backward  about  a 
small  space,  looking  as  if  they  would  hit  each 
other,  reminded  me  of  the  circling  of  two 


430  WINTER. 

winged  insects  in  the  air,  or  hawks  receding  and 
approaching. 

I  first  hear  and  then  see  eight  or  ten  bluebirds 
going  over. 

Feb.  23,  1860.  3  p.  M.  Thermometer  58° 
and  snow  almost  gone,  river  rising.  We  have 
not  had  so  warm  a  day  since  the  beginning  of 
December,  which  was  unusually  warm.  I  walk 
over  the  moist  Nawshawtuck  hillside,  and  see  the 
green  radical  leaves  of  the  buttercup,  shepherd's 
purse,  sorrel,  chickweed,  cerastium,  etc.,  revealed. 

A  fact  must  be  the  vehicle  of  some  humanity 
in  order  to  interest  us.  Otherwise  it  is  like 
giving  a  man  a  stone  when  he  asks  for  bread. 
Ultimately  the  moral  is  all  in  all,  and  we  do  not 
mind  it  if  inferior  truth  is  sacrificed  to  superior, 
as  when  the  annalist  fables,  and  makes  animals 
speak  and  act  like  men.  It  must  be  warm, 
moist,  incarnated,  have  been  breathed  on  at  least. 
A  man  has  not  seen  a  thing  who  has  not  felt  it. 


INDEX. 


ABORIGINES,  144^ 

Account  book,  266-269. 

Acquaintances,  318. 

Activity,  282. 

Acton,  198. 

Adams,  John  Quincy,  88. 

Adversity,  414. 

Advice,  43,  367. 

^Eachylus,  279. 

Air,  404,  418. 

Alcott,  196. 

Alderberry,  152. 

Alders,  87,  89,  94,  97,  152,  153,  155, 

177,  370,  371. 
Alley,  John  B.,  174. 
Ambition,  310. 
Amherst,  12,  161. 
Ancients,  406,  420. 
Andromeda,  125,  152,  153,  189.  190, 

252,  307,  308,  339,  404. 
Andromeda  ponds,  15,  57. 
Animals,  136,  405. 
Ants,  221. 
Aphorisms,  137,  144,  183,  193,  254, 

256,  396. 
Apple-tree,  343. 
Arabians,  222. 
Arctic  animals,  49. 
Arctic  voyagers,  66. 
Aristotle,  35,  122. 
Arrowheads,  132,  380,  418. 
Arthur,  37,  213. 
Ashes,  100. 
Aspirations,  310. 
Assabet,  177,  414. 
Assabet  spring,  415. 
Asters,  30. 
Astrology,  216. 
Astronomy,  217. 
Atlantis,  168,  203. 
Atmosphere,  146,  175,  359,  360. 
Attacus  Promethea,  410. 
Audience,  the,  310. 
Auditors,  339. 


Authors,  42. 
Azalea,  152. 

Bacon,  264. 

Baffin's  Bay,  94. 

Bailey,  188. 

Baker  farm,  3,  176. 

Balm  of  Gilead,  363. 

Barberry,  5,  97. 

Barber's  Historical  Collections,  328. 

Barnsdale  wood,  9. 

Barrett,  N.,  5. 

Barry,  187. 

Bartlett's  Cliff,  27 

Baskets,  118,  143. 

Bear,  158,  360,  361. 

Beauty,  82,  105,  213. 

Beehives,  337. 

Bees,  363. 

Beliefs,  304,  305,  338. 

Ball,  25,  219,  338. 

Beomyces  rosaceus,  133,  207. 

Berries,  29,  70,  71,  85,  86,  97,  125, 

143,  153. 

Bidens  Brook,  374. 
Billerica,  325. 
Bingham's  Purchase,  93. 
Birches,  86,   9G,  97,   111,  112,  113, 

201,  252,  258,  373. 
Birches,  black,  112,  258. 
Birches,  canoe,  112. 
Birches,  white,  113,  373. 
Birches,  yellow,  111,  112,  113. 
Birds,  50,  97,  132,  197,  276,  317,  327, 

331,  391,  408. 
Birds'  nests,  171,  203. 
Bittern  Cliff,  311. 
Blueberry,  68,  69,  152,  153,  252. 
Blueberry  bushes,  16. 
Bluebirds,  53,  54,  404,  430. 
Bluejays,  73. 

Blueness,  179,  215,  298,  348. 
Bluet,  70. 
Body,  202,  331,  332,  379,  417. 


432 


INDEX. 


Bombay,  184. 

Bonnets,  23,  24. 

Books,  318,  323,  407. 

Booming  of  pond,  88. 

Boston,  21,  70,  161,  178,  394. 

Boston  Common,  199. 

Boston  Harbor,  210,  234. 

Botany,  222,  342,  400. 

Boxboro',  108,  109. 

Boys  skating,  325,  327. 

Bretagne,  37. 

Bridges,  320. 

Brilliants,  188,  189. 

Brister's  Hill,  27,  30,  70. 

Brister's  Spring,  275. 

Britton's  Camp,  1G9. 

Brooks,  112,  1G3,  249. 

Brown,  Simon,  3G1,  368,  369. 

Brown's  scrub  oak  lot,  136. 

Buds,  251,  300,  301,  363. 

Buffoonery,  238. 

Buffum,  Jonathan,  174,  178,  179. 

Building,  176. 

Bunker  Hill,  70. 

Burton,  365. 

Buzzing  sound,  169,  170. 

C.,  W.  E.,  53. 

"  Cabinet  Council,"  the,  146. 

Cake,  143,  144. 

Cambridge,  161,  394. 

Canada,  99,  118. 

Canada  lynx,  394. 

Canal,  22. 

Cape  Cod,  103,  426. 

Capital,  196. 

Carlisle,  167. 

Cars,  321. 

Cartridge-box,  110. 

Cassandra  ponds,  188. 

Caterpillar,  142,  177,  246,  247,  375, 

392. 
Catkins,  94,  97,  133,  155,  252,  256, 

364,  370,  392. 

Cato,  175,  176,  194,  195,  370. 
Cat-owl,  41. 
Cat-tails,  248. 
Cattle,  53. 
Causeways,  326. 
Cawing  of  crows,  164,  296,  297. 
C  banning,  285. 
Character,  72. 
Chaucer,  96. 
Chemistry,  236. 
Chestnut  burs,  7 
Chickadees,  50,  122,  167,  178,  201, 

295,  373,  391,  392,  419. 
duckweed,  193,  311,  341. 
Church  bells,  8. 
Cinnamon  stone,  102. 


Civilization,  367,  368. 

Clamshell  Hill,  124,  132. 

Clamshells,  34. 

Clematis  Brook,  311,  312. 

Cliff  Hill,  311. 

Cliffs,  96,  98,  99,  146,  168,  320. 

Climate,  42. 

Clouds,  18.  38,   127,  128,   130,  137, 

148,  168,  193,  203,  204,  206,  258, 

278,  320. 

Clover,  85,  132,  251. 
Club,  135,  160. 
Cock-crowing,  28,  41,   53,   78,   129, 

143,  164,  228,  230,   234,  263,  297, 


Cockle  shells,  370. 

Cocoons,  14,  171,  177,  178,  410. 

Cold,  13,  59,  133,  134,  151,  161,  226, 

233,  234,  248,  285,  293,  343,  344, 

356. 

Cold  Friday,  226,  344. 
Coleridge,  238. 
College  teaching,  81. 
Colors,  381,  386. 
Colors  on  snow  and  ice,  155,  156, 

377,  383,  384,  387. 
Columella,  175,  176,  397. 
Commonplace  books,  403. 
Companions,  49,  77,  135,  160. 
Composition,  387. 
Conantum,  63,  250. 
Conantum  End,  10. 
Concord,  12,  25,  28,  29,  93,  102,  134, 

146,  161,  326. 
Concord  River,  124,  188. 
Conscience,  254,  279. 
Consciousness,  379. 
Consistency,  397. 
Constellations,  215. 
Conversation,  77,  127. 
Corn,  143. 
Cornel,  312. 
Corner  road,  220,  311. 
"  Counterparts,"  416. 
Cow-bell,  337. 
Cows,  150,  336. 

Cracking  of  ground,  12,  156,  344. 
Creaking  of  wagon,  220,  343. 
Creeper,  391. 
Cress,  6,  311. 
Crickets,  53,  352. 
Cromwell,  116. 
Crowfoot,  147,  148. 
Crows,  40,  48,  89,  161,  164,  228,  296, 

297. 

Crystallizations,  8,  344,  374. 
Crystals,  2,  91,  92, 119, 137, 166,  213, 

287,  321,  375,  383. 
Cymri,  37. 


INDEX. 


433 


Daguerreotype,  309,  310. 

Dandelion,  251. 

Days,  lengthening  of,  408. 

Days,  shortness  of,  400. 

Dead,  the,  13. 

Death,  14,  51,  202,  331,  333,  414. 

Debtor  and  creditor,  252. 

Decay,  269. 

Deep  Cut,  215,  231,  232,  248,  418. 

Deer,  220,  396. 

Demigod,  52. 

Dennis's  Swamp,  124. 

Derby's  Bridge,  226. 

Devil,  351. 

Dew-drops,  119,  126. 

Diogenes,  185. 

Diplomacy,  66. 

Disappointments,  204,  342. 

Discipline,  91. 

Ditch  Pond,  235. 

Diver,  28. 

Dob-chick,  28. 

Dog,  236,  248,  316,  405. 

Dog-barking,  40,  41,  42. 

Dogwood,  5,  124,  153,  252. 

Dormancy,  65,  376. 

Dreams,  136,  253,  254,  407. 

Dress,  24,  343. 

Drizzle,  84. 

Duck,  30,  132,  276,  389,  390. 

Dugan,  Jenny,  32,  398. 

Duty,  378. 

E.,  R.  W.,  119,  210. 

Early  New  England  writers,  148. 

Early  rising,  233. 

Earth,  the,  3,  73,  143. 

Earth,  perfume  from,  138. 

Earth  voice,  103. 

Echo,  50,  368,  369. 

Elms,  54,  98,  112,  198,  200,  241,  242. 

Emberiza  nivalis,  54. 

Emergencies,  340. 

Emerson,  163,  214,  327. 

Emerson,  Miss,  141,  261. 

England,  116. 

Englishman,  i08. 

Ermine  weasel,  423. 

Erskine,  17. 

Esox  fasciatus,  212. 

Esquimaux,  11,  49,  211. 

Estrangement,  76,  223,  354,  355,  356. 

Etiquette,  335. 

Experience,  147,  153,  162. 

Expression,  257. 

Eyes,  163. 

Fables,  35,  235. 

Fact,  430. 

Facts,  precedence  in,  238. 


Failures,  363. 

Fair  Haven,  83,  117,  188,  250,  312, 

410. 
Fair  Haven  Hill,  38,  63,  83, 231,  321, 

356. 

Fair  Haven  Island,  16,  389. 
Fair  Haven  Pond,  3,  20,  22,  33,  39, 
80,  140,  229,  288, 293,  314,  322, 359, 
363,  375,  383,  389. 
'aith,  298,  299. 
Talco  lineatus,  165. 
Fame,  310. 
Farmer,  J.,  423. 
Farmer,  Mr.,  164,  165,  174. 
Farmers,  32,  56,  150,  200,  323,  336, 

388,  389. 
Fences,  10. 
Ferns,  125,  275. 
Fields,  266. 
Finches,  48,  89. 
Fire,  5,  99,  324,  325,  412. 
Firs,  30,  86. 

Fisherman,  7,  48,  91,  359. 
Fishes,  7,  59,  123,  388. 
Fish-hawk,  65. 
Fitchburg,  330. 
Flame,  99. 
Flattery,  357. 

Flint's  Pond,  6,  7,  14,  20,  39,  163. 
Floating  islands,  309. 
Flowers,  290,  343. 
Forest,  8. 
Forest  Hall,  75. 
Forest  voices,  103. 
Fox  [Charles  James],  17,  116. 
Foxes,  16,  42,  48,  94,  104,  220,  235, 
287,  288,  289,  293,  315,  316,  364, 
365. 

Fox-hound,  207. 
Freezing,  13,  61. 

Friends,  1,  2,  12, 14,  75,76,  205,  215, 

223,  225,  278,  280,  290,  298,  299, 

303,  305,  310,  342,  347,  393,  412, 

422,  426,  428. 

Friendship,  1,  253,  346, 354,  355, 356, 

358,  393,  402,  416,  427,  428, 
Fringilla  hyemalis,  6,  48. 
Frost,  151,  343. 
Frost-work,  198,  199. 
Funeral  customs,  184. 
Fungi,  113,  262,  286. 
Future,  the,  140. 

Game,  91. 

Gardiner,  Captain,  46,  48. 

Gaylussacia,  68. 

"  General    Historic    of    Virginia," 

425. 
Genius,  43,  197,  255,  264,  378,  379, 

399. 


484 


INDEX. 


Georgic,  61,  62. 

Ghosts,  8. 

Gladness,  107. 

Glaze.  15,  29,  198,  199, 

Gods,  228. 

Golden  Age,  61,  62. 

Goldfinches,  6. 

Good,  the,  392,  393. 

Goodwill,  424. 

Gowing's  Swamp,  307,  401. 

Grammar,  104. 

Grasses,  31,  84,  87. 

Grasshoppers,  246. 

Great  Fields,  153. 

Great  Meadows,  185,  286,  300, 

Grebe,  28. 

Greece,  106,  146, 186. 

Greeks,  41,  146,  168.  278,  279. 

Greeley,  Horace,  298. 

Green  Island,  118. 

Greenland,  69. 

Greenness,  32,  212. 

Grief,  193, 

Grisly  bear,  SCO,  361. 

Groves,  195,  196. 

Growth,  402. 

Guitar,  172. 

Gulf  Stream,  29, 

Gutenberg,  183, 

Hangbirds,  54. 
Hannibal,  204. 
Happiness,  114,  123r  159,  190,  204, 

212. 

Haste,  45. 
Hats,  23,  24. 

Hawks,  65,  164,  165,  174,  295,  390. 
Haycocks,  175. 
Hayden,  347. 
Head,  Sir  Francis,  340. 
Health,  44,  57,  389. 
Heath,  70. 
Heaven,  256. 
Help,  366,  367. 
Hemlocks,  8,  30,  167. 
Hen-hawk.  65,  165,  396,  399. 
Hens,  143,  164,  180,  193.  337. 
Heywood's  Meadow,  248. 
Hickory,  251. 
Highland  Light,  426. 
Hill,  Mr.,  119. 
Hill,  the,  165,  270. 
Hills,  70,  140,  141. 
Hip^  97. 

"  History  of  Animals,"  36. 
Holden  wood,  377. 
Holly,  29. 
Holt,  104. 
Holt  Bend,  61. 
Homer,  139,  276. 


Homesickness,  37. 
Hope,  412,  415. 
Hubbard's  Bath,  201, 
Hubbard's  Bridge,  59, 
Hubbard's  Field,  85. 
Hubbard's  Meadow,  37T. 
Hubbard's  Swamp,  111. 
Hubbub,  123. 
Huckleberries,  48. 
Huckleberry,  36,  68,  70. 
Huckleberry  cake,  143,  144, 
Huckleberry  pastures,  70. 
Hume,  99. 
Humor,  3. 
Hunt  farm,  5. 
Hunt  pasture,  111. 
Hunters,  27,  90,  226. 
Hunt's  Island,  124. 
Hymn,  228. 

Ice,  22,  30,  32,  50,  60,  84,  85,  91,  96, 
97,  98,  114,  188,  212,  234,  247,  252, 
258,  301,  306,  307,  311,  314,  366, 
371,  376,  383,  392,  401. 

Ice-cracks,  50,  306. 

Ice-flakes,  379,  380. 

Icicles,  13. 

Imagination,  19,  385, 

India  rubber,  40. 

Indian  heaven,  132. 

Indians,  48,  66,  91,  109,  118,  143, 
224,  235,  275,  332,  333,  380. 

Industry,  230. 

Infidel,  173,  338. 

Influence,  378. 

Innocence,  52,  272. 

Insanity,  57. 

Insects,  247,  271,  286,  312,  425. 

Instinct,  411. 

Integrity,  281,  378. 

Invitation,  224,  225,  305. 

January,  313. 

January  thaw,  132,  138. 

Jays,  73,  312,  373. 

Jesuits,  224. 

Johnswort,  62,  147,  251,  311,  346. 

Jones,  Ephraim,  267. 

Jonson,  357. 

Josselyn,  148,  202,  352. 

Journal,  32,  115,  167,  240,  264,  265, 

281,  350. 
Journey,  265. 
Juniper,  251. 

Kalmia  glauca,  308,  339,  404. 
Kirkham,  104. 
Kitten,  11,394,  395. 
Knavery,  372. 
Knowledge,  127. 


INDEX. 


435 


108, 


284, 


180, 


Labor,  division  of,  36. 
Lake  school,  227. 
Lakin,  Jake,  104. 
Lanrlor  quoted.  305,  306. 
Landscape,  86,  87,  97,  99,  100, 

109,  322,  348. 
Language,  334. 
Larks,  12,  29,  48. 
Lamed  Brook,  307. 
Laws,  303,  304. 
Leaves,  404,  430. 
Lecture,  7G,  174,  208,  209,  214, 

285,  411. 
Lecturer,  158. 
Ledum  latifolium,  339,  406. 
Lee  place,  100. 
Lee's  Bridge,  33. 
Lee's  Cliff,  22,  201,  302,  324. 
Leisure,  45,  157. 
Le  Jeune  quoted,  88,  89. 
Lepraria  chloriiia,  180. 
Letter  writing,  50. 
Libraries,  318,  319. 
Lichens,   31,   32,   74,   75,  133, 

207,  258,  270,  311,  348,  349, 

411. 
Life,  9,  12,  18,  32,  42,  44,  45,  51 

89,  90,  91,  132,  140,  1G2,  163, 

173,  181,  218,  231,  255,  263, 

353,  358,  385,  409. 
Life  everlasting,  346. 
Light,  384,  418. 
Lily  roots,  34. 
Limits,  330,  331. 
Linaria,  364. 
Linnseus,  352,  400,  401. 
Lion,  420. 
Little  John,  8. 
Little  Nahant,  179. 
Lives,  147. 
Living,  157,  412. 
Loafer,  45. 
Long  Wharf,  21. 
Love,  201,  232,  290. 
Love-cracked,  187. 
Lover,  347.  ^ 

Lumber,  65. 
Lu  ral  lu  ral  lu,  342. 
Lycopus,  15,  16. 
Lynn,  174. 


Mackenzie's  River,  94. 

Magazines,  42. 

Maine,  143. 

Maine  woods,  93. 

Man,  106, 107, 122, 135, 160, 173, 183, 

212,  262,  335. 
Manners,  398,  426. 
Maples,  87,  177,  250,  306,  371. 
Marsh,  248. 


Mather,  Cotton,  letter  of,  328,  329. 

"  Maxims  of  State,"  146. 

McKean,  186,  187. 

Meadow,  390. 

Meadow  mouse,  39,  314,  316. 

Meadow  walk,  372. 

Medicinal  recipes,  406. 

Meeting,  413. 

Men,  110,  135,   159,   160,   183,  213, 

228,  237,  281,  335,  403. 
Mice,  182. 

Migratory  instinct,  247. 
Miles,  Martial,  126,  29G. 
Mill  Brook,  6,  163. 
Mill  dam,  55. 
Milton,  145,  279. 
Ministerial  Swamp,  131. 
Minott,  104,  220,  228,  276,  277,  278, 

338. 

Miiiott's  Meadow,  163. 
Minstrelsy,  heroes  of,  37. 
Mirage,  359,  360. 
Mist,  73,  137. 
Mocking  bird,  231. 
Moles,  47,  48. 
Moment,  the,  255. 
Money,  343. 
Montaigne,  265. 
Moods,  9,  82,  83, 
Moonlight,  203,  215,  320,  322. 
Moose,  285. 
Morality,  138,  139. 
Morning,  128,  137,  258,  259. 
Mosses,  75,  231. 
Moths,  410. 
Motions  in  Nature,  52. 
Mountains,  14,  40. 
Mount  Washington,  69,  110. 
Mouse,  152,  183,  316,  419. 
Music,  41,  139,  140,   172,   173,   181, 

232,  335,  340,  353,  413. 
Musketaquid,  64,  65,  199,  227. 
Musketicook,  326. 
Muskrats,  33,  35,  67,  132,  225,  226, 

228,  229,  296,  302,  306,  341,  374. 
Myself,  316,  317,  347,  363. 
Mythologies,  41,  396. 

Naevia,  36. 

Names,  406. 

Nantucket,  29,  46,  47. 

Nashua,  12. 

Natural  history,  406. 

Natural  objects,  109. 

Nature,  6,  15,  18,  71,  72,  105,  106, 

109,  110,  126,  135,  137,   147,  231, 

236,  257,  309,  317. 
Naushon,  29. 
Nawshawtuok,  128,  430. 
Neighbor,  95,  154. 


436 


INDEX. 


New  Bedford,  28,  29. 

New  England,  32,  33,  109,  132. 

"  New  England's  Prospect,"  149. 

New  Hampshire,  71,  110. 

New  Testament,  1,  297,  298. 

News,  55,  56. 

Night,  83,  215,  217,  218. 

Nobscot,  306,  307. 

North  Branch,  326. 

Northern  Lights,  409. 

November,  294. 

Nuthatch,  121,  390. 

Nut  Meadow,  295,  348. 

Nut  Meadow  Brook,  243,  296. 

Nutting's  Pond,  325. 

Oak  leaves,  23,  102,  206,  321. 

Oak  lot,  136. 

Oak  woods,  117. 

Oaks,  5,  80,  87,  96,  98,  102,  103,  108, 

110,  112,  218,  219,  250,  252,  300. 
Observers,  269,  270. 
Ocean,  freezing  of,  421. 
Officials,  107. 
Osiers,  395. 

Otter,  22,  79,  90,  337,  414. 
Owls,  23,  41,  126,  131,  219,  295,  320, 

321,322. 
Oxen,  25, 176,  194,  195,  396. 

Pacing,  100, 101. 

Pain,  202. 

Paint,  257. 

Pansy,  254. 

Pantry,  258,  307. 

Pantry  Brook,  373. 

Pantry  Meadow,  324. 

Parasites,  282. 

Parmelia,  306. 

Parsees,  184. 

Partialness,  46. 

Partridges,  3,  48,  60,  80,  152,  261, 

301,  302,  316,  371,  381,  382,  423. 
Peat,  309. 

Pelham  Pond,  197,  301,  325. 
Pennyroyal,  31. 
Persian,  197. 
Perth  Amboy,  40. 
Peterboro'  Hills,  104,  419,  420. 
Pfeiffer,  Madame,  184. 
Pheasants,  29. 
Philistines,  114. 
Philosopher,  185,  186. 
Philosophia  Botanica,  400. 
Piano,  239. 

Pickerel,  25,  50,  59,  212,  312. 
Picture,  a,  291,  292. 
Pigeons,  313. 
Pigweed,  364,  382. 
Pine  cones,  77,  251,  324,  420. 


Pine  needles,  30,  335. 

Pine  roots,  10. 

Pine  stump,  336. 

Pine  woods,  25,  30,  32. 

Pines,  63,  64,  77,  80,  86,  87,  97,  197, 

206,  218,  311. 
Pines,  Norway,  46,  47. 
Pines,  pitch,  23,  26,  27,  46,  47,  49, 

88,  98,  99,  261,  299,  300,  336. 
Pines,  white,  10,  44,  94.  97,  98,  167, 

250,  296,  336,  398,  399. 
Pioneer  work,  82. 
Plantain,  193. 
Pleasant  Meadow,  315. 
Plutarch,  265. 
Pockets,  41. 
Poetic  frenzy,  349. 
Poetry,  263,  403. 
Poets,  179,  217. 
Poke,  358. 
Politeness,  424. 
Ponds,  13,  25,  43,  88,  250. 
Pontederia,  34. 
Poplar,  94. 
Popped  corn,  105. 
Post-office,  55,  56. 
Potter's  Meadow,  30. 
Poverty,209,  353,  354. 
Powder  mill,  129,  130,  131. 
Pratt's,  112. 
Precocity,  380,  381. 
Present,  the,  316. 
Presentiments,  340. 
Primrose,  311. 
Prince,  178. 
Prinos,  85,  113,  125. 
Print,  411. 
Privacy,  422. 
Profanity,  292. 
Property,  196. 
Prose,  203. 
Prosperity,  253,  414. 

Quails,  347,  348. 
Questioning,  224. 
Quh»igamond  Pond,  118,  429. 
Quinsigamond  Village,  118. 

Rabbits,  134, 152,  313,  327,  381. 

Raccoons,  48. 

Railroad  shanties,  367. 

Rain,  270,  271,  394. 

Rainbow,  128. 

Raleigh,  110,  116,  145. 

Reading,  222. 

Record  on  snow,  39,  89,  100. 

Red  Bridge,  5. 

Red-house  crossing,  101. 

Reed-mace,  248. 

Relations,  4,  76,  95,  162, 183,  218. 


INDEX. 


437 


Religion,  333. 

Reminiscences,  213. 

Repentance,  164. 

Repetition,  309. 

Resemblance,  332. 

Resistance,  273. 

Respiration,  72. 

Restraints,  169. 

Retirement,  422. 

Rhode  Island,  170. 

Rhymes,  310. 

Rice,  Israel,  58. 

Rig  Veda,  228,  240,  241. 

Ringdove,  40. 

Riorden,  Johnny,  5,  273,  274,  352. 

Ripley,  Mrs.,  180. 

Rivals,  187,  188. 

River,  the,  7,  60,  80,  132,  148,  188, 

203,  209,  210,  234,  243,  250,  252, 

258,  276,  293. 
Rivera,  144,  177. 
Robin  Hood,  9. 
Robins,  8,  29,  48,  54. 
Rock,  83,  84. 
Romance,  402. 
Rough  and  smooth,  136, 137. 
Routine,  230,  263. 
Rudeness,  191,  192. 
Rumor,  84. 
Russell,  180. 

Sabbath  bell,  25. 
Salix  alba,  199. 
Sallows,  312. 
Salutations,  273. 
Salvages,  425. 
Sand  foliage,  73. 
Sanity,  58. 
Sanskrit,  241. 
Saskatchewan,  120. 
Sassafras,  360. 
Saugus,  174. 
Savages,  11,  66,  67,  90. 
Sawing,  187. 
Saw-mill  Brook,  53,  234. 
Sawyers,  63,  64. 
Saxifrage,  132. 
Saxon  race.  179. 
Saxonville,  326. 
Scenery,  189,  322. 
Schoolcraft,  170. 
Science,  19,  216,  403,  406. 
Sea-room,  408. 
Sea-serpent,  178. 
Seasons,  13,  123,  237,  256. 
Secrets,  418. 
Sedge,  188,  229,  314. 
Seed  vessels,  190. 
Seeds,  185,  189,  327, 
Self-reliance,  280. 


Shadows,    102,   197,   198,  218,   219, 

250,  320,  420. 

Shakespeare,  116,  145,  264,  279. 
Shelter,  229. 
Shepherd's  purse,  132. 
Sherwood,  9. 
Shore  lark,  48. 
Shrikes,  13,  57,  67,  326. 
Shrub  oaks,  27,  141. 
Siasconset,  46. 
Sickness,  202,  388,  414. 
Silence,  111,  217,  218,  358. 
Sin,  25,  111. 
Sincerity,  237,  317,  346. 
Sins,  144,  145. 

Six.mysteries  of  the  number,  120, 121. 
Skating,  20,  58,  176,  301,  303,  324, 

325,  327,  373,  380,  429. 
Sketch,  361,  362. 
Skunk-cabbage,  132,  275,  380. 
Sky,  39,  73,  83,  96,   100,   127,   128, 

133,  157,  192,  193,  201,  206,   215, 

216,  225,  257,  311,  384,  418. 
Smoke,  100,  153,  154,  343. 
Snow,   26,  27,  44,   54,  79,  101,  116, 

140,  149,   166,  168,  181,  188,  207, 

209,   260,  261,  300,  321,  323,  327, 

328,  330,  408. 

Snow,  a  betrayer,  38,  79,  89,  100. 
Snow-birds,  13,  48,  59,  361. 
Snow-bow,  127. 

Snow-bunting,  55,  59,  89,  220,  307. 
Snow-cave,  210,  211. 
Snow-drifts,  21,  39.  54,  88,  89,  101, 

117,  146,  152,  153,  261,  425. 
Snow-flakes,  62,  119,  120,  125,  137, 

149,  166. 
Snow-fleas,  117,  179,  237,  297,  312, 

369. 

Snow-shoes,  91. 
Snow-stars,  120,  121. 
Snow-storms,  39,  54,  119,  120,  151, 

225. 
Society,  133,  136,  160,  205,  272,  353, 

357,  424. 
Socrates,  185. 

Solitude,  49,  134,  152,  259,  354. 
Song  sparrow,  181,  271,  276,  314. 
Sorrel,  85,  251. 
Soul,  the,  247. 
"  Soul's  Errand,"  the,  146. 
Sounds,  41,  44,  51,  78,  102,  129,  141, 

143,  147,  164,  296,  322,  356,  385, 

417. 

Southwest,  132. 
Spanish  Brook,  250. 
Sparrows,  48,  181,  271,  276,  300. 
Spawning  of  fishes,  123. 
Speech,  115. 
Sphagnum,  152,  249,  307 


438 


INDEX. 


Spice  Islands,  16. 

Spicula,  85,  8G,  87. 

Spiders,  247. 

Spitzbergen,  55,  56,  87. 

Spleenwort,  311. 

Spring,  312,  402,  405,  419,  429. 

Spruce,  97. 

Squash,  262. 

Squirrels,  7,  31,  65,  79,  251,  402,  420, 

421. 

Stars,  40,  83,  216,  238,  323. 
Steam,  321. 

Stellaria  media,  311,  341. 
Still  life,  183. 
Storm,  407,  408. 
Stow,  Beck,  300. 
Stow's  wood  lot,  97,  102,  390. 
Strangers,  111. 
Strawberry,  311. 
Strix  Acadica,  126. 
Strix  Asio,  36. 
Stubble,  98,  114. 
Stupidity,  387. 
Sudbury,  301,  305,  379,  380. 
Suicide,  42,  181. 
Summer,  163. 
Summer  life,  51. 

Summer,  memories  of,  57,  62,  163. 
Sun,  217,  346. 
Sunbeams,  44. 
Sunday,  71. 

Sunlight,  114,  249,  250. 
Sunrise,  52. 
Sunsets,  18,  23,  38,  40,  100,  127,  128, 

156,  378. 

Superstitions,  184. 
Surveying,  113,  234,  368,  369. 
Swallows,  241. 
Swamp  pink,  252. 
Swamp  walk,  152. 
Swamps,  5,  10,  111,  112,   124,   131, 

152,  308,  309,  339. 
Swampscott,  178. 
Swans,  426. 
Swedish  inn,  212. 
Symbols,  340,  382. 
Sympathy,  50, 202,  310,  378,  413,  416. 
Systems,  406. 

Tail's  Island,  306. 

Tansy,  85. 

Tavbel  Spring,  226. 

Tarbell's  Meadow,  370. 

Tea,  339. 

Telegraph  harp,  105,  1462,  19,  231, 

240,  248,  283,  390. 
Telegraph  wire,  97,  146. 
Telescope,  163,  217. 
Texas,  426. 
Thaw,  132,  156,  300,  301. 


Thistle,  251. 

Thorer,  393.  394. 

Thoughts,  223,  224,  256,  301,  341. 

Thoughts  and  dreams,  9. 

Tickets,  222. 

Time,  147,  190,  191,  341. 

Titmice,  132,  391. 

Tortoises,  421,  426. 

Townships,  108,  109. 

Tracks,  207,  293,  313,  322,  401. 

Tragedies,  341. 

Trail,  90,  287,  414,  415. 

Translators,  241. 

Travel,  157,  158,  161,  162,  163,  292, 

365. 

Traveler,  412. 
Treatise,  66,  67. 
Tree-sparrow,  27,  46,  89,  137,  152, 

189,  190,  364. 
Trees,  44,  46,  86,  87,  94,  96,  97,  116, 

198,  199,  250,  255,  287. 
Trench,  187,  266. 
Trillium  Wood,  149. 
Trumpet  weed,  85. 
Truth,  72,  83,  254,  378,  379. 
Truths,  52,  81,  336. 
Tucker  man,  351. 
Turnpike  Bridge,  6. 
Tuttle's  road,  274. 
Types,  183. 
Typha  latifolia,  248. 

Uncle  Charles,  88. 
Unconsciousness,  264. 
Understanding,  389. 
Unlikeness,  205. 

Vaccinium  Canadense,  69. 

Vapor,  26,  51,  60,  129,  137,  164,  193. 

Varro,  175,  203,  233,  285,  323,  336, 

337,  370. 
Veronica,  251. 
Verses,  62,  156. 
Views,  422. 
Village,  242. 
Village  street,  54. 
Vireo,  54,  171. 
Virgil,  61,  393. 
Virtue,  52,  72,  76,  145. 
Vision,  confined,  15. 
Visiting,  390,  428. 
Voice,  the,  335. 

Wachusett,  40. 

"  Walden"  [the  Book],  119. 

Walden,  5,  14,  29,  48,  49,  91,  133, 

142,  146,  154,  183,  197,  274,  291, 

366. 
Walden  Pond,  14,  23,  28,  39,  40,  49, 

79,  133,  197,  295. 


INDEX. 


439 


Walden  Woods,  92,  179,  200. 

Walking,  163,  209,  259,  366,  384. 

Walks,  15,  22,  86,  133,  154,  274. 

Walnuts,  87. 

Walrus,  etc.,  49. 

Warmth  and  coldness,  2,  3. 

Warren  Miles's  mill,  57. 

Warren's  Wood,  96. 

Washington,  17. 

Wasp,  247. 

Water,  53,  75,  225,  376. 

Water  asclepias,  203. 

Water-bugs,  235,  243,  244,  245,  246, 

296. 

Water-horehound,  16. 
Water  lily,  403,  404. 
Water  rights,  188. 
Wayland,  301,305,  325,  326. 
We  receive  what  concerns  us,  122. 
Wealth,  95,  208,  253,  283. 
Weasel,  174. 
Weather,  7,  53,  142,  257. 
Webster,  88, 104. 
Weeds,  27,  30,  31,  85. 
Weight,  310. 
Well  Meadow    field,   16,   133,   136, 

160,  182,  183. 
Weston's  field,  14. 
Wharves,  21. 

Wheeler,  Bill,  184. 185,  186,  187. 
White  Pond,  296,  408,  409. 
Whooping  of  ponds,  20. 
Whortleberry  family,  68. 
Whortleberries,  68,  143. 
Wigwam,  118. 
Wild  geese,  247,  277,  278. 
Wilderness,  93,  94. 
Wildness,  399. 
Will,  266. 


Willow,  86,  87,  133,  177,   200,  252, 

256,  364,  370,  392. 
Wilson,  55. 
Winter,  117,  128,  137,  151,  153,  154, 

243,  256,  294,  295,  397. 
Winter  afternoons,  141,  157. 
Winter  berries,  97.' 
Winter  morning,  128,  137. 
Winter  night  thoughts,  62. 
Winter  walk,  409. 
Withdrawal,  169. 
Wolf,  285. 
Wolf-traps,  174. 
Woman,  a,  76,  111. 
Womanhood,  76. 
Wood,  William,  148,  149. 
Wood-chopper,  26,  28,  63,  274,  275, 

291. 

Woodland,  109. 

Woodland  walks,  133,  134,  135,  159. 
Woodlots,  92,  93,  200. 
Woodpaths,  96. 

Wood-peckers,  27, 141, 312,  361,  391. 
Wood-thrush,  78. 
Woods,  9,  15,  18,  44,  206,  207,  218, 

222,  250. 

Worcester,  118,  429. 
Words,  257,  263. 
Words  and  relations,  4,  76. 
Work,  231,  399,  400. 
Work  in  Heaven,  159. 
Writer,    the,    12,   19,  20,   175,   239, 

254,  282,  333,  363,  416. 

Yellow  birch  swamps,  111. 
Youth,  194,  350. 
Youth  and  Age,  257. 

Zeno,  345. 


Jbtantiara  an&  popular  Hibratrp 

SELECTED  FROM  THE  CATALOGUE  OF 

HOUGHTON,  MIFFLIN  AND  COMPANY. 

A  Club  of  One.    An  Anonymous  Volume,  $1.25. 

Brooks  Adams.  The  Emancipation  of  Massachusetts,  crovm 
8vo,  $1.50. 

John  Adams  and  Abigail  Adams.  Familiar  Letters  of, 
during  the  Revolution,  I2mo,  $2.00. 

Oscar  Fay  Adams.  Handbook  of  English  Authors,  i6mo, 
75  cents  ;  Handbook  of  American  Authors,  i6mo,  75  cents. 

Louis  Agassiz.  Methods  of  Study  in  Natural  History,  Illus 
trated,  i2mo,  $1.50;  Geological  Sketches,  Series  I.  and  II., 
I2mo,  each,  $1.50;  A  Journey  in  Brazil,  Illustrated,  I2mo, 
$2.50;  Life  and  Letters,  edited  by  his  wife,  2  vols.  I2mo, 
$4.00;  Life  and  Works,  6  vols.  $10.00. 

Anne  A.  Agge  and  Mary  M.  Brooks.  Marblehead 
Sketches.  4to,  $3.00. 

Elizabeth  Akers.  The  Silver  Bridge  and  other  Poems,  i6mo, 
$1.25. 

Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich.  Story  of  a  Bad  Boy,  Illustrated, 
I2mo,  $1.50;  Marjorie  Daw  and  Other  People,  I2mo,  $1.50; 
Prudence  Palfrey,  I2mo,  $1.50;  The  Queen  of  Sheba,  I2mo, 
$1.50;  The  Stillwater  Tragedy,  I2mo,  $1.50;  Poems,  House 
hold  Edition,  Illustrated,  I2mo,  $1.75;  full  gilt,  $2.25;  The 
above  six  vols.  I2mo,  uniform,  $9.00;  From  Ponkapog  to 
Pesth,  i6mo,  $1.25  ;  Poems,  Complete,  Illustrated,  8vo,  $3.50  ; 
Mercedes,  and  Later  Lyrics,  cr.  8vo,  $1.25. 

Rev.  A.  V.  G.  Allen.     Continuity  of  Christian  Thought,  I2mo, 

$2.00. 

American  Commonwealths.     Per  volume,  i6mo,  $1.25. 
Virginia.     By  John  Esten  Cooke. 
Oregon.     By  William  Barrows. 
Maryland.     By  Wm.  Hand  Browne. 
Kentucky.     By  N.  S.  Shaler. 
Michigan.    By  Hon.  T.  M.  Cooley. 


2  Houghton,  Mifflin  and  Company's 

Kansas.     By  Leverett  W.  Spring. 

California.     By  Josiah  Royce. 

New  York.     By  Ellis  H.  Roberts.    2  vols. 

Connecticut.     By  Alexander  Johnston. 
(In  Preparation.} 

Tennessee.     By  James  Phelan. 

Pennsylvania.     By  Hon.  Wayne  MacVeagh. 

Missouri.     By  Lucien  Carr. 

Ohio.     By  Rufus  King. 

New  Jersey.     By  Austin  Scott. 

American  Men  of  Letters.     Per  vol.,  with  Portrait,  i6mo, 
$1.25. 

Washington  Irving.     By  Charles  Dudley  Warner. 

Noah  Webster.     By  Horace  E.  Scudder. 

Henry  D.  Thoreau.     By  Frank  B.  Sanborn. 

George  Ripley.     By  O.  B.  Frothingham. 

J.  Fenimore  Cooper.     By  Prof.  T.  R.  Lounsbury. 

Margaret  Fuller  Ossoli.     By  T.  W.  Higginson. 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson.     By  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes. 

Edgar  Allan  Poe.     By  George  E.  Woodberry. 

Nathaniel  Parker  Willis.     By  H.  A.  Beers. 
(In  Preparation.} 

Benjamin  Franklin.     By  John  Bach  McMaster. 

Nathaniel  Hawthorne.     By  James  Russell  Lowell. 

William  Cullen  Bryant.     By  John  Bigelow. 

Bayard  Taylor.     By  J.  R.  G.  Hassard. 

William  Gilmore  Simms.     By  George  W.  Cable. 
American  Statesmen.     Per  vol.,  i6mo,  $1.25. 

John  Quincy  Adams.     By  John  T.  Morse,  Jr. 

Alexander  Hamilton.     By  Henry  Cabot  Lodge. 

John  C.  Calhoun.     By  Dr.  H.  von  Hoist. 

Andrew  Jackson.     By  Prof.  W.  G.  Sumner. 

John  Randolph.     By  Henry  Adams. 

James  Monroe.     By  Pres.  D.  C.  Gilman. 

Thomas  Jefferson.     By  John  T.  Morse,  Jr. 

Daniel  Webster.     By  Henry  Cabot  Lodge. 

Albert  Gallatin.     By  John  Austin  Stevens. 

James  Madison.    By  Sydney  Howard  Gay. 

John  Adams.     By  John  T.  Morse,  Jr. 


Standard  and  Popular  Library  Books.  3 

John  Marshall.     By  Allan  B.  Magruder. 
Samuel  Adams.     By  J.  K.  Hosmer. 
Thomas  H.  Benton.     By  Theoc  ore  Roosevelt. 
Henry  Clay.     By  Hon.  Carl  Schurz.     2  vols. 

(In  Preparation.] 

Martin  Van  Buren.     By  Edward  M.  Shepard. 
George  Washington.     By  Henry  Cabot  Lodge.     2  vols. 
Patrick  Henry.     By  Moses  Coit  Tyler. 
Martha  Babcock  Amory.    Life  of  Copley,  8vo,  $3.00. 
Hans  Christian  Andersen.    Complete  Works,  10  vols.  i2mo, 

each  $1.00.     New  Edition,  10  vols.  I2mo,  $10.00. 
Francis,  Lord  Bacon.     Works,  15  vols.  cr.  8vo,  $33.75  ;  Pop 
ular  Edition,  with  Portraits,  2  vols.  cr.  8vo,  $5.00 ;  Promus  of 
Formularies  and  Elegancies,  8vo,  $5.00;   Life  and  Times  of 
Bacon,  2  vols.  cr.  8vo,  $5.00. 

L.  H.  Bailey,  Jr.    Talks  Afield,  Illustrated,  i6mo,  $1.00. 
M.  M.  Ballou.     Due  West,  cr.  8vo,  $1.50  ;  Due  South,  $1.50. 
Henry  A.  Beers.    The  Thankless  Muse.  Poems.    i6mo,  $1.25. 
E.  D.  R.  Biaiiciardi.    At  Home  in  Italy,  i6mo,  $1.25. 
William  Henry  Bishop.     The  House  of  a  Merchant  Prince, 
a  Novel,  I2mo,  $1.50;  Detmold,  a  Novel,  i8mo,  $1.25  ;  Choy 
Susan  and  other  Stories,  i6mo,  $1.25 ;  The  Golden  Justice, 
i6mo,  $1.25. 

Bjornstjerne   Bjornson.     Complete  Works.     New  Edition, 
3   vols.    I2mo,    the   set,    $4.50;    Synnove    Solbakken,    Bridal 
March,  Captain  Mansana,  Magnhild,  i6mo,  each  $1.00. 
Anne  C.  Lynch  Botta.     Handbook  of  Universal  Literature, 

New  Edition,  I2mo,  $2.00. 
British  Poets.    Riverside  Edition,  cr.  8vo,  each  $1.50;  the 

set,  68  vols.  $100.00. 

John  Brown,  A.  B.    John  Bunyan.     Illustrated.     8vo,  $4.50. 
John  Brown,  M.  D.     Spare  Hours,  3  vols.  i6mo,  each  $1.50. 
Robert  Browning.     Poems  and  Dramas,  etc.,  15  vols.  i6mo, 
$22.00;  Works,  8  vols.  cr.  8vo,  $13.00;  Ferishtah's  Fancies, 
cr.  8vo,  $1.00;   Jocoseria,  i6mo,  $1.00;   cr.  8vo,  $1.00;    Par- 
leyings  with  Certain  People  of  Importance  in  their  Day,  i6mo 
or   cr.  8vo,   $1.25.     WTorks,   New   Edition,   6   vols.   cr.   8vo. 
$10.00. 
William  Cullen  Bryant.     Translation  of  Homer,  The  Iliad 


4.  Houghton,  Mifflin  and  Company's 

cr.  8vo,  $2.50;  2  vols.  royal  8vo,  $9.00;  cr.  8vo,  $4.00.  The 
Odyssey,  cr.  8vo,  $2.50 ;  2  ^ols.  royal  8vo,  $9.00 ;  cr.  8vo,  $4.00. 

Sara  C.  Bull.  Life  of  Cie  Bull.  Popular  Edition.  I2mo, 
$1-50. 

John  Burroughs.     Works,  7  vols.  i6mo,  each  $1.50. 

Thomas  Carlyle.  Essays,  with  Portrait  and  Index,  4  vols, 
I2mo,  $7.50;  Popular  Edition,  2  vols.  I2ino,  $3.50. 

Alice  and  Phcebe  Gary.  Poems,  Household  Edition,  Illus= 
trated,  I2mo,  $1.75  ;  cr.  8vo,  full  gilt,  $2.25  ;  Library  Edition, 
including  Memorial  by  Mary  Clemmer,  Portraits  and  24  Illus 
trations,  8vo,  $3.50. 

Wm.  Ellery  Channing.  Selections  from  His  Note-Books, 
$1.00. 

Francis  J.  Child  (Editor^.  English  and  Scottish  Popular 
Ballads.  Eight  Parts.  (Parts  I.-IV.  now  ready).  4to,  each 
$5.00.  Poems  of  Religious  Sorrow,  Comfort,  Counsel,  and 
Aspiration.  i6mo,  $1.25. 

Lydia  Maria  Child.  Looking  Toward  Sunset,  I2mo,  $2.50; 
Letters,  with  Biography  by  Whittier,  i6mo,  $1.50. 

James  Freeman  Clarke.  Ten  Great  Religions,  Parts  I.  and 
II.,  I2mo,  each  $2.00 ;  Common  Sense  in  Religion,  I2mo,  $2.00 ; 
Memorial  and  Biographical  Sketches,  I2mo,  $2.00. 

John  Esten  Cooke.     My  Lady  Pokahontas,  i6mo,  $1.25. 

James  Fenimore  Cooper.  Works,  new  Household  Edition, 
Illustrated,  32  vols.  i6mo,  each  $1.00;  the  set,  $32.00;  Fire 
side  Edition^  Illustrated,  16  vols.  I2mo,  $20.00. 

Susan  Fenimore  Cooper.     Rural  Hours.     i6mo,  $1.25. 

Charles  Egbert  Craddock.  In  the  Tennessee  Mountains, 
i6mo,  $1.25;  Down  the  Ravine,  Illustrated,  $1.00;  The 
Prophet  of  the  Great  Smoky  Mountains,  i6mo,  $1.25 ;  In  The 
Clouds,  i6mo,  $1.25. 

C.  P.  Cranch.  Ariel  and  Caliban.  i6mo,  $1.25 ;  The  ^Eneid 
of  Virgil.  Translated  by  Cranch.  8vo,  $2.50. 

T,  F.  Crane.     Italian  Popular  Tales,  8vo,  $2.50. 

F.  Marion  Crawford.  To  Leeward,  i6mo,  $1.25  ;  A  Roman 
Singer,  i6mo,  $1.25  ;  An  American  Politician,  i6mo,  $1.25. 

M.  Creighton.  The  Papacy  during  the  Reformation,  4  vols. 
8vo,  $17.50. 

Richard  H.  Dana.  To  Cuba  and  Back,  i6mo,  $1-25;  Tw* 
Years  Before  the  Mast,  i2mo,  $1.00. 


Standard  and  Popular  Library  Books.  5 

G.  W.  and  Emma  De  Long.  Voyage  of  the  Jeannette.  2 
vols.  8vo,  $7.50 ;  New  One-Volume  Edition,  8vo,  $4.50. 

Thomas  De  Quincey.  Works,  12  vols.  i2mo,  each  $1.50; 
the  set,  $18.00. 

Madame  De  Stael.    Germany,  I2mo,  £2.50. 

Charles  Dickens.  Works,  Illustrated  Library  Edition,  with 
Dickens  Dictionary,  30  vols.  I2mo,  each  $1.50 ;  the  set,  $45.00. 

J.  Lewis  Diman.  The  Theistic  Argument,  etc.,  cr.  8vo,  $2.00 ; 
Orations  and  Essays,  cr.  8vo,  $2.50. 

Theodore  A.  Do,dge.  Patroclus  and  Penelope,  Illustrated, 
8vo,  $3.00.  The  Same.  Outline  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo,  $1.25. 

E.  P.  Dole.    Talks  about  Law.     Cr.  8vo,  $2.00;  sheep,  #2.50. 

Eight  Studies  of  the  Lord's  Day.     I2mo,  $1.50. 

George  Eliot.    The  Spanish  Gypsy,  a  Poem,  i6mo,  $1.00. 

Ralph  Waldo  Emerson.  Works,  Riverside  Edition,  1 1  vols. 
each  $1.75;  the  set,  $19.25;  "Little  Classic"  Edition,  n  vols. 
i8mo,  each,  $1.50;  Parnassus,  Household  Edition,  I2mo,  $1.75; 
Library  Edition,  8vo,  $4.00  ;  Poems,  Hottsehold  Edition,  Por 
trait,  I2mo,  $1.75  ;  Memoir,  by  J.  Elliot  Cabot,  2  vols.  $3.50. 

English  Dramatists.  Vols.  1-3,  Marlowe's  Works  ;  Vols. 
4-1 1,  Middleton's  Works;  Vols.  12-14,  Marston's  Works; 
each  vol.  $3.00 ;  Large-Paper  Edition,  each  vol.  $4.00. 

Edgar  Fawcett.  A  Hopeless  Case,  i8mo,  $1.25  ;  A  Gentle 
man  of  Leisure,  i8mo,  $1.00;  An  Ambitious  Woman,  I2mo, 
$1.50. 

Feiielon.    Adventures  of  Telemachus,  I2mo,  $2.25. 

James  T.  Fields.  Yesterdays  with  Authors,  i2mo,  $2.00;  8vo, 
Illustrated,  $3.00  ;  Underbrush,  i8mo,  $1.25  ;  Ballads  and  other 
Versos,  ibmo,  $1.00;  The  Family  Library  of  British  Poetry, 
royal  8vo,  $5.00 ;  Memoirs  and  Correspondence,  cr.  8vo,  $2.00. 

John  Fiske.  Myths  and  Mythmakers,  I2mo,  $2.00;  Outlines 
of  Cosmic  Philosophy,  2  vols.  8vo,  $6.00 ;  The  Unseen  World, 
and  other  Essays,  I2mo,  $2.00 ;  Excursions  of  an  Evolutionist, 
I2mo,  $2.00;  The  Destiny  of  Man,  i6mo,  $1.00;  The  Idea  of 
God,  i6mo,  $1.00;  Darwinism,  and  Other  Essays,  New  Edi 
tion,  enlarged,  I2mo,  $2.00. 

Edward  Fitzgerald.     Works.     2  vols.  8vo,  $10.00. 

O.  B.  Frothingham.    Life  of  W.  H.  Channing.   Cr.  8vo,  $2.00. 

William  H.  Furness,    Verses,  i6mo,  vellum,  $1.25. 


6  Houghton,  Mifflin  and  Company** 

Gentleman's  Magazine  Library.  14  vols.  8vo,  each  $2,50; 
Roxburgh,  $3.50;  Large-Paper  Edition,  $6.00.  I.  Manners  and 
Customs.  II.  Dialect,  Proverbs,  and  Word-Lore.  III.  Pop 
ular  Superstitions  and  Traditions.  IV.  English  Traditions 
and  Foreign  Customs.  V.,  VI.  Archaeology.  VII.  Romano- 
British  Remains  :  Part  I.  <  Last  two  styles  sold  only  in  sets.) 

John   F.  Genung.     Tennyson's  In  Memoriam,  cr.  8vo,  $1.25. 

Johann  Wolfgang  von  Goethe.  Faust,  Part  First,  Trans- 
lated  by  C.  T.  Brooks,  i6mo,  $1.25  ;  Faust,  Translated  by  Bay 
ard  Taylor,  cr.  8vo,  $2.50;  2  vols.  royal  8vo,  $9.00;  2  vols.  I2mo, 
$4.00-;  Correspondence  with  a  Child,  I2mo,  $1.50;  Wilhelm 
Meister,  Translated  by  Carlyle,  2  vols.  I2mo,  $3.00.  Life,  by 
Lewes,  together  with  the  above  five  I2mo  vols.,  the  set,  $9.00. 

Oliver  Goldsmith.    The  Vicar  of  Wakefield,  32mo,  $1.00. 

Charles  George  Gordon.     Diaries  and  Letters,  8vo,  #2.00. 

George  H.  Gordon.  Brook  Farm  to  Cedar  Mountain,  1861-2. 
8vo,  $3.00.  Campaign  of  Army  of  Virginia,  1862.  8vo,  $4.00. 
A  War  Diary,  1863-5.  8vo,  $3.00. 

George  Zabriskie  Gray.  The  Children's  Crusade,  i2mo, 
$1.50;  Husband  and  Wife,  i6mo,  $1.00. 

F.  W.  Gunsaulus.   The  Transfiguration  of  Christ.    i6mo,  $1.25. 

Anna  Davis  Hallowell.    James  and  Lucretia  Mott,  $2.00. 

R.  P.  Hallowell.  Quaker  Invasion  of  Massachusetts,  revised, 
$1.25.  The  Pioneer  Quakers,  i6mo,  $1.00. 

Arthur  Sherburne  Hardy.  But  Yet  a  Woman,  i6mo,  $1.25  ; 
The  Wind  of  Destiny,  i6mo,  $1.25. 

Bret  Harte.  Works,  6  vols.  cr.  8vo,  each  $2.00 ;  Poems, 
HouseJiold  Edition,  Illustrated,  I2mo,  $1.75  ;  ci  8vo,  full  gilt, 
$2.25  ;  Red-Line  Edition,  small  4to,  $2.50  ;  Cabinet  Edition, 
$1.00;  In  the  Carquinez  Woods,  i8mo,  $1.00;  Flip,  and  Found 
at  Blazing  Star,  i8mo,  $1.00;  On  the  Frontier,  i8mo,  $1.00; 
By  Shore  and  Sedge,  i8mo,  $1.00;  Maruja,  i8mo,  $1.00; 
Snow-Bound  at  Eagle's,  iSmo,  $1.00;  The  Queen  of  the  Pirate 
Isle,  Illustrated,  small  4to,  $1.50;  A  Millionaire,  etc.,  i8mo, 
$"1.00 ;  The  Crusade  of  the  Excelsior,  i6mo,  $1.25. 

Nathaniel  Hawthorne.  Works,  "Little  Classic"  Edition, 
Illustrated,  25  vols.  i8mo,  each  $1.00;  the  set  $25.00;  New 
Riverside  Edition,  Introductions  by  G.  P.  Lathrop,  n  Etch 
ings  and  Portrait,  12  vols.  cr.  8vo,  each  $2.00;  Wayside  Edi 
tion,  with  Introductions,  Etchings,  etc.,  24  vols.  I2mo,  $36.00; 


Standard  and  Popular  Library  Books.  7 

Fireside  Edition,  6  vols.  I2mo,  $10.00 ;   The   Scarlet  Letter, 
I2mo,  $1.00. 

John  Hay.  Pike  County  Ballads,  i2mo,  $1.50;  Castilian 
Days,  i6mo,  $2.00. 

Caroline  Hazard.     Memoir  of  J.  L.  Diman     Cr.  8vo,  $2.00. 

Franklin  H.  Head.  Shakespeare's  Insomnia.  i6mo,  parch 
ment  paper,  75  cents. 

The  Heart  of  the  Weed.  Anonymous  Poems.  i6mo,  parch 
ment  paper,  $1.00. 

S.  E.  Herrick.    Some  Heretics  of  Yesterday.    Cr.  8vo,  $1.50. 

George  S.  Hillard.     Six  Months  in  Italy.     I2mo,  $2.00. 

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes.  Poems,  Household  Edition,  Illus 
trated,  I2mo,  $i  75  ;  cr.  8vo,  full  gilt,  $2.25  ;  Illustrated  Library 
Edition,  8vo,  $3.50;  Handy- Volume  Edition,  2  vols.  321110, 
$2.50;  The  Autocrat  of  the  Breakfast-Table,  cr.  8vo,  $2.00; 
Handy- Volume  Edition,  32mo,  $1.25;  The  Professor  at  the 
Breakfast-Table,  cr.  8vo,  $2.00;  The  Poet  at  the  Breakfast* 
Table,  cr.  8vo,  $2.00 ;  Elsie  Venner,  cr.  8vo,  $2.00 ;  The  Guar 
dian  Angel,  cr.  8vo,  $2.00;  Medical  Essays,  cr.  8vo,  $2.00; 
Pages  from  an  Old  Volume  of  Life,  cr.  8vo,  $2.00 ;  John  Lo- 
throp  Motley,  A  Memoir,  i6mo,  $1.50;  Illustrated  Poems, 
8vo,  $4.00 ;  A  Mortal  Antipathy,  cr.  8vo,  $1.50  ;  The  Last 
Leaf,  Illustrated,  4to,  $10.00. 

Nathaniel  Holmes.  The  Authorship  of  Shakespeare.  New 
Edition.  2  vols.  $4.00. 

Blanche  Willis  Howard.  One  Summer,  Illustrated,  i2mo, 
$1.25  ;  One  Year  Abroad,  i8mo,  $1.25. 

William  D.  Howells.  Venetian  Life,  I2mo,  $1.50;  Italian 
Journeys,  I2mo,  $1.50;  Their  Wedding  Journey,  Illustrated, 
I2mo,  $1.50;  i8mo,  $1.25;  Suburban  Sketches,  Illustrated, 
I2mo,  $1.50;  A  Chance  Acquaintance,  Illustrated,  I2mo, 
$1.50;  i8mo,  $1.25;  A  Foregone  Conclusion,  I2mo,  $1.50; 
The  Lady  of  the  Aroostook,  I2mo,  $1.50;  The  Undiscovered 
Country,  I2mo,  $1.50. 

Thomas  Hughes.  Tom  Brown's  School-Days  at  Rugby, 
i6mo,  $1.00  ;  Tom  Brown  at  Oxford,  i6mo,  $1.25  ;  The  Man 
liness  of  Christ,  i6mo,  $1.00;  paper,  25  cents. 

William  Morris  Hunt    Talks  on  Art,  2  Series,  each  $1.00. 


8  Houghton,  Mifflin  and  Company's 

Henry  James.  A  Passionate  Pilgrim  and  other  Tales,  i2mo, 
$2.00;  Transatlantic  Sketches,  I2mo,  $2.00;  Roderick  Hud 
son,  I2mo,  $2.00;  The  American,  121110,  $2.00;  Watch  and 
Ward,  i8mo,  $1.25;  The  Europeans,  I2mo,  $1.50;  Confidence, 
I2mo,  $1.50;  The  Portrait  of  a  Lady,  I2mo,  $2.00. 

Anna  Jameson.  Writings  upon  Art  Subjects.  New  Edition, 
10  vols.  i6mo,  the  set,  $12.50. 

Sarah  Orne  Jewett.  Deephaven,  i8mo,  $1.25  ;  Old  Friends 
and  New,  i8mo,  $1.25  ;  Country  By- Ways,  i8mo,  $1.25  ;  Play 
Days,  Stories  for  Children,  square  i6mo,  $1.50;  The  Mate  of 
the  Daylight,  i8mo,  $1.25  ;  A  Country  Doctor,  i6mo,  $1.25  ; 
A  Marsh  Island,  i6mo,  $1.25  ;  A  White  Heron,  i8mo,  $1.25. 

Rossiter  Johnson.    Little  Classics,  18  vols.  i8mo,  each  $1.00 ; 

the  set,  $18.00. 
Samuel    Johnson.      Oriental   Religions:    India,  8vo,  $5.00; 

China,  8vo,  $5.00 ;  Persia,  8vo,  $5.00 ;  Lectures,  Essays,  and 

Sermons,  cr.  8vo,  $1.75. 

Charles  C.  Jones,  Jr.     History  of  Georgia,  2  vols.  8vo,  $10.00. 
Malcolm  Kerr.    The  Far  Interior.     2  vols.  8vo,  $9.00. 
Omar  Khayyam.     Rubaiyat,  Red-Line  Edition,  square  i6mo., 

$1.00  ;  the  same,  with  56  Illustrations  by  Vedder,  folio,  $25.00 ; 

The  Same,  Phototype  Edition,  4to,  $12.50. 
T.   Starr    King.    Christianity  and   Humanity,   with   Portrait, 

I2mo,  $1.50  ;  Substance  and  Show,  i6mo,  $2.00. 
Charles  and  Mary  Lamb.    Tales  from  Shakespeare.    Han 
dy-  Volume  Edition.     32mo,  $1.00. 

Henry  Lansdell.    Russian  Central  Asia.    2  vols.  $10.00. 
Lucy  Larcom.    Poems,  i6mo,  $1.25  ;  An  Idyl  of  Work,  i6mo, 

$1.25;   Wild  Roses  of  Cape  Ann  and  other  Poems,   i6mo, 

$1.25;  Breathings  of  the  Better  Life,  i8mo,  $1.25;  Poems, 

Household  Edition,  Illustrated,    I2mo,  $1.75;  full  gilt,  $2.25 ; 

Beckonings  for  Every  Day,  i6mo,  $1.00. 
George  Parsons  Lathrop.    A  Study  of  Hawthorne   t8mo, 

$1.25. 

Henry  C.  Lea.    Sacerdotal  Celibacy,  8vo,  $4.50. 
Sophia  and  Harriet  Lee.    Canterbury  Tales.     New  Edition. 

3  vols.  I2tno,  $3.75. 
Charles  G.  Leland.    The  Gypsies,  cr.  8vo,  $2.00 ;  Algonquin 

Legends  of  New  England,  cr.  8vo,  $2.00. 


Standard  and  Popular  Library  Books.  9 

George  Henry  Lewes.  The  Story  of  Goethe's  Life,  Portrait, 
I2mo,  $1.50;  Problems  of  Life  and  Mind,  5  vols.  8vo,  $14.00. 

A.  Parlett  Lloyd.  The  Law  of  Divorce,  cloth,  $2.00 ;  sheep, 
#2.50. 

J.  G.  Lockhart.    Life  of  Sir  W.  Scott,  3  vols.  I2mo,  14.50. 

Henry  Cabot  Lodge.    Studies  in  History,  cr.  8vo,  $1.50. 

Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow.  Complete  Poetical  and 
Prose  Works,  Riverside  Edition,  n  vols.  cr.  8vo,  $16.50;  Po 
etical  Works,  Riverside  Edition,  6  vols.  cr.  8vo,  $9.00 ;  Cant- 
bridge' Edition,  4  vols.  I2mo,  $7.00  ;  Poems,  Octavo  Edition^ 
Portrait  and  300  Illustrations,  $7.50  ;  Household  Edition,  Illus 
trated,  I2mo,  #1.75;  cr.  8vo,  full  gilt,  $2.25;  Red-Line  Edition, 
Portrait  and  12  Illustrations,  small  410,  $2.50;  Cabinet  Edition^ 
$1.00 ;  Library  Edition,  Portrait  and  32  Illustrations,  8vo,  $3.50 ; 
Christus,  Hotisehold  Edition,  $1.75;  cr.  8vo,  full  gilt,  $2.25; 
Cabinet  Edition,  $1.00 ;  Prose  Works,  Riverside  Edition,  2 
vols.  cr.  8vo,  $3.00;  Hyperion,  i6mo,  $1.50;  Kavanagh,  i6mo, 
$1.50;  Outre-Mer,  i6mo,  $1.50;  In  the  Harbor,  i6mo,  $1.00; 
Michael  Angelo  :  a  Drama,  Illustrated,  folio,  $5.00  ;  Twenty 
Poems,  Illustrated,  small  4to,  $2.50 ;  Translation  of  the  Divina 
Commedia  of  Dante,  Riverside  Edition,  3  vols.  cr.  8vo,  $4.50  j 
i  vol.  cr.  8vo,  $2.50;  3  vols.  royal  8vo,  $13.50;  cr.  8vo,  $4.50; 
Poets  and  Poetry  of  Europe,  royal  8vo,  $5.00 ;  Poems  of 
Places,  31  vols.  each  $1.00;  the  set,  $25.00. 

James  Russell  Lowell.  Poems,  Red-Line  Edition,  Portrait, 
Illustrated,  small  4to,  $2.50  ;  Hoitsehold  Edition,  Illustrated, 
I2mo,  $1.75  ;  cr.  8vo,  full  gilt,  $2.25  ;  Library  Edition,  Portrait 
and  32  Illustrations,  8vo,  $3.50  ;  Cabinet  Edition,  $1.00;  Fire 
side  Travels,  I2mo,  $1.50  ;  Among  my  Books,  Series  I.  and  II. 
I2mo,  each  $2.00;  My  Study  Windows>  I2tno,  $2.00;  Democ 
racy  and  other  Addresses,  i6mo,  $1.25;  Uncollected  Poems. 

Thomas  Babingtou  Macaulay.  Works,  '.5  vols.  12010, 
$20.00. 

Mrs.  Madison.  Memoirs  and  Letters  of  Dolly  Madison, 
i6mo,  $1.25. 

Harriet  Martiiieau.  Autobiography,  New  Edition,  2  vols. 
I2mo,  $4.00;  Household  Education,  i8mo,  $1.25. 

H.  B.  McClellan.  The  Life  and  Campaigns  of  Maj.-Gen. 
J.  E.  B.  Stuart.  With  Portrait  and  Maps,  8vo,  $3.00. 

G.  W.  Melville.  In  the  Lena  Delta,  Maps  and  Illustrations, 
8vo,  $2.50. 


io  Houghton,  Mifflin  and  Company's 

T.  C.  Mendenhall.    A  Century  of  Electricity.     i6mo,  $1.25. 

Owen  Meredith.  Poems,  Household  Edition,  Illustrated, 
I2mo,  $1-75;  cr.  8vo,  full  gilt,  $2.25;  Library  Edition,  Por 
trait  and  32  Illustrations,  8vo,  $3.50;  Lucile,  Red- Line  Edi 
tion,  8  Illustrations,  small  4to,  $2.50 ;  Cabinet  Edition,  8  Illus 
trations,  $1.00. 

Olive  Thorne  Miller.    Bird-Ways,  i6mo,  $1.25. 

John  Milton.  Paradise  Lost.  Handy-  Volume  Edition.  32mor 
$1.00.  Riverside  Classic  Edition,  i6mo,  Illustrated,  $1.00. 

S.  Weir  Mitchell.  In  War  Time,  i6mo,  $1.25;  Roland 
Blake,  i6mo,  $1.25. 

J.  W.  Mollett  Illustrated  Dictionary  of  Words  used  in  Art 
and  Archaeology,  small  4to,  $5.00. 

Montaigne.    Complete  Works,  Portrait,  4  vols.     i2mo,  $7.50. 

William  Mountford.    Euthanasy,  i2mo,  $2.00. 

T.  Mozley.  Reminiscences  of  Oriel  College,  etc.,  2  vols.  i6mo, 
$3.00. 

Elisha  Mulford.  The  Nation,  8vo,  $2.50;  The  Republic  of 
God,  8vo,  $2.00. 

T.  T.  Munger.  On  the  Threshold,  i6mo,  $1.00 ;  The  Freedom 
of  Faith,  i6mo,  $1.50 ;  Lamps  and  Paths,  i6mo,  $1.00 ;  The 
Appeal  to  Life,  i6mo,  $1.50. 

J.  A.  W.  Neander.  History  of  the  Christian  Religion  and 
Church,  with  Index  volume,  6  vols.  8vo,  $20.00  ;  Index,  $3.00. 

Joseph  Neilson.    Memories  of  Rufus  Choate,  8vo,  $5.00. 

Charles  Eliot  Norton.  Notes  of  Travel  in  Italy,  i6mo,  $1.25 ; 
Translation  of  Dante's  New  Life,  royal  8vo,  $3.00. 

Wm.  D.  O'Connor.    Hamlet's  Note-Book,  i6mo,  $1.00. 

G.  H.  Palmer.    Trans,  of  Homer's  Odyssey,  1-12,  8vo,  $2.50. 

Leighton  Parks.     His  Star  in  the  East.     Cr.  8vo,  $1.50. 

James  Parton.  Life  of  Benjamin  Franklin,  2  vols.  Svo,  $5.00 ; 
Life  of  Thomas  Jefferson,  Svo,  $2.50;  Life  of  Aaron  Burr, 
2  vols.  Svo,  $5.00;  Life  of  Andrew  Jackson,  3  vols.  Svo,  $7.50 ; 
Life  of  Horace  Greeley,  Svo,  $2.50 ;  General  Butler  in  New 
Orleans,  Svo,  $2.50;  Humorous  Poetry  of  the  English  Lan 
guage,  I2mo,  $1.75;  full  gilt,  $2.25;  Famous  Americans  of 
Recent  Times,  Svo,  $2.50  ;  Life  of  Voltaire,  2  vols.  Svo,  $6.00  \ 
The  French  Parnassus,  I2mo,  $1.75;  crown  Svo,  $3.50;  Cap 
tains  of  Industry,  i6mo,  $1.25. 


Standard  and  Popular  Library  Books.          n 

Blaise  Pascal.    Thoughts,  i2mo,  $2.25;  Letters,  I2mo,  $7.25. 

Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps.  The  Gates  Ajar,  i6mo,  $1.50; 
Beyond  the  Gates,  i6mo,  $1.25;  Men,  Women,  and  Ghosts, 
l6mo,  $1.50;  Hedged  In,  i6mo,  $1.50;  The  Silent  Partner, 
l6mo,  $1.50;  The  Story  of  Avis,  i6mo,  $1.50  ;  Sealed  Orders, 
and  other  Stories,  i6mo,  $1.50;  Friends:  A  Duet,  i6mo, 
$1.25  ;  Doctor  Zay,  i6mo,  $1.25  ;  Songs  of  the  Silent  World, 
l6mo,  gilt  top,  $i  .25  ;  An  Old  Maid's  Paradise,  i6mo,  paper,  50 
cents ;  Burglars  in  Paradise,  i6mo,  paper,  50  cents  ;  Madonna 
of  the  Tubs,  cr.  8vo,  Illustrated,  $1.50. 

Phillips  Exeter  Lectures :  Delivered  before  the  Students  of 
Phillips  Exeter  Academy,  1885-6.  By  E.  E.  HALE,  PHILLIPS 
BROOKS,  Presidents  McCosH,  PORTER,  and  others.  i2mo, 
$1.50. 

Mrs.  S.  M.  B.  Piatt.     Selected  Poems,  i6mo,  $1.50. 

Carl  Ploetz.    Epitome  of  Universal  History,  i2mo,  $3.00. 

Antonin  Lefevre  Pontalis.  The  Life  of  John  DeWitt, 
Grand  Pensionary  of  Holland,  2  vols.  8vo,  $9.00. 

Margaret  J.  Preston.     Colonial  Ballads,  i6mo,  $1.25. 

Adelaide  A.  Procter.  Poems,  Cabinet  Edition,  $1.00;  Red- 
Line  Edition,  small  /j.to,  $2.50. 

Progressive  Orthodoxy.     i6mo,  $1.00. 

Sampson  Reed.    Growth  of  the  Mind,  i6mo,  $1.00. 

C.  F.  Richardson.   Primer  of  American  Literature,  i8mo,  $  .30. 

Riverside  Aldine  Series.  Each  volume,  i6mo,  $1.00.  First 
edition,  $1.50.  i.  Marjorie  Daw,  etc.,  by  T.  B.  ALDRICH; 
2.  My  Summer  in  a  Garden,  by  C.  D.  WARNER  ;  3.  Fireside 
Travels,  by  J.  R.  LOWELL;  4.  The  Luck  of  Roaring  Camp,  etc., 
by  BRET  HARTE  ;  5,  6.  Venetian  Life,  2  vols.,  by  W.  D.  HOW- 
ELLS  ;  7.  Wake  Robin,  by  JOHN  BURROUGHS  ;  8, 9.  The  Biglow 
Papers,  2  vols.,  by  J.  R.  LOWELL  ;  10.  Backlog  Studies,  by  C. 
D.  WARNER. 

Henry  Crabb  Robinson.  Diary,  Reminiscences,  etc.  cr.  8vo, 
$2.50. 

John  C.  Ropes.  The  First  Napoleon,  with  Maps,  cr.  8vo,$2.oo. 

Josiah  Royce.    Religious  Aspect  of  Philosophy,  i2mo,  $2.00. 

Edgar  Evertson  Saltus.  Balzac,  cr.  8vo,  $1.25  ;  The  Phi 
losophy  of  Disenchantment,  cr.  8vo,  $1.25. 

John  Godfrey  Saxe.    Poems,  Red-Line  Edition,  Illustrated, 


12  Houghton,  Mifflin  and  Company's 

small  4to,  $2.50;  Cabinet  Edition,  $1.00;  Household  Edition* 
Illustrated,  i2mo,  $1.75  ;  full  gilt,  cr.  8vo,  $2.25. 

Sir  "Walter  Scott.  Waverley  Novels,  Illustrated  Library 
Edition,  25  vols.  I2mo,  each  $1.00  ;  the  set,  $25.00 ;  Tales  of  a 
Grandfather,  3  vols.  I2mo,  $4.50  ;  Poems,  Red-Line  Edition 
Illustrated,  small  4to,  $2.50  ;  Cabinet  Edition,  $1.00. 

W.  H.  Seward.  Works,  5  vols.  8vo,  $15.00;  Diplomatic  His 
tory  of  the  War,  8vo,  $3.00. 

John  Campbell  Shairp.  Culture  and  Religion,  i6mo,  $1.25  j 
Poetic  Interpretation  of  Nature,  i6mo,  $1.25 ;  Studies  in  Po 
etry  and  Philosophy,  i6mo,  $1.50;  Aspects  of  Poetry,  i6mo, 
$1.50. 

William  Shakespeare.  Works,  edited  by  R.  G.  White,  Riv 
erside  Edition,  3  vols.  cr.  8vo,  $7.50  ;  The  Same,  6  vols.,  cr. 
8vo,  uncut,  $10.00 ;  The  Blackfriars  Shakespeare,  per  vol. 
$2.50,  net.  (In  Press.} 

A.  P.  Sinnett.  Esoteric  Buddhism,  i6mo,  $1.25;  The  Occult 
World,  i6mo,  $1.25. 

M.  C.  D.  Silsbee.    A  Half  Century  in  Salem.     i6mo,  $1.00. 

Dr.  William  Smith.  Bible  Dictionary,  American  Edition,  4 
vols.  8vo,  $20.00. 

Edmund  Clarence  Stedman.  Poems,  Farringford  Edition, 
Portrait,  i6mo,  $2.00;  Household  Edition,  Illustrated,  I2tno, 
$1.75;  full  gilt,  cr.  8vo,  $2.25  ;  Victorian  Poets,  I2mo,  $2.00; 
Poets  of  America,  I2mo,  $2.25.  The  set,  3  vols.,  uniform, 
I2mo,  $6.00 ;  Edgar  Allan  Poe,  an  Essay,  vellum,  i8mo,  $1.00. 

W.  W.  Story.  Poems,  2  vols.  i6mo,  $2.50;  Fiammetta:  A 
Novel,  i6mo,  $1.25.  Roba  di  Roma,  2  vols.  i6mo,  $2.50. 

Harriet  Beecher  Stowe.  Novels  and  Stones,  lovols.  I2mo, 
uniform,  each  $1.50;  A  Dog's  Mission,  Littie  Pussy  Willow, 
Queer  Little  People,  Illustrated,  small  4to,  each  $1.25  ;  Uncle 
Tom's  Cabin,  100  Illustrations,  8vo,  $3.00 ;  Library  Edition, 
Illustrated,  I2mo,  $2.00  ;  Popular  Edition,  I2mo,  $1.00. 

Jonathan  Swift.  Works,  Edition  de  Luxe,  19  vols.  8vo,  the 
set,  $76.00. 

T.  P.  Taswell-Langmead.  English  Constitutional  History. 
New  Edition,  revised,  8vo,  $7.50. 

Bayard  Taylor.  Poetical  Works,  Household  Edition,  i2mo, 
#1.75;  cr.  8vo.  full  gilt,  $2.25;  Melodies  of  Verse,  i8mo,  vel- 


Standard  and  Popular  Library  Books.  13 

lum,  $1.00;  Life  and  Letters,  2  vols.  I2mo,  $4.00;  Dramatic  Po 
ems,  I2mo,  $2.25;  Household  Edition,  I2mo,  $1.75;  Life  and 
Poetical  Works,  6  vols.  uniform.  Including  Life,  2  vols. ;  Faust, 
2  vols. ;  Poems,  I  vol.  ;  Dramatic  Poems,  I  vol.  The  set,  cr. 
8vo,  $12.00. 

Alfred  Tennyson.  Poems,  Household  Edition,  Portrait  and 
Illustrations,  I2mo,  $1.75;  full  gilt,  cr.  8vo,  $2.25;  Illus 
trated  Crown  Edition,  2  vols.  8vo,  $5.00  ;  Library  Edition^ 
Portrait  and  60  Illustrations,  8vo,  $3.50;  Red-Line  Edition, 
Portrait  and  Illustrations,  small  4to,  $2.50 ;  Cabinet  Edition, 
$1.00;  Complete  Works,  Riverside  Edition,  6  vols.  cr.  8vo, 
$6.00. 

Celia  Thaxter.  Among  the  Isles  of  Shoals,  i8mo,  $1.25  ; 
Poems,  small  4to,  $1.50 ;  Drift- Weed,  i8mo,  $1.50 ;  Poems 
for  Children,  Illustrated,  small  4to,  $1.50  ;  Cruise  of  the  Mys 
tery,  Poems,  i6mo,  $1.00. 

Edith  M.  Thomas.  A  New  Year's  Masque  and  other  Poems, 
i6mo,  $1.50;  The  Round  Year,  i6mo,  $1.25. 

Joseph  P.  Thompson.  American  Comments  on  European 
Questions,  8vo,  $3.00. 

Henry  D.  Thoreau.  Works,  9  vols.  I2mo,  each  $1.50;  the 
set,  $13.50. 

George  Ticknor.  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  3  vols.  8vo, 
$10.00;  Life,  Letters,  and  Journals,  Portraits,  2  vols.  I2mo, 
$4.00. 

Bradford  Torrey.    Birds  in  the  Bush,  i6mo,  $1.25. 

Sophus  Tromholt.  Under  the  Rays  of  the  Aurora  Borealis, 
Illustrated,  2  vols.  $7.50. 

Mrs.  Schuyler  Van  Rensselaer.  H.  H.  Richardson  and 
his  Works. 

Jones  Very.     Essays  and  Poems,  cr.  8vo,  $2.00. 

Annie  Wall.    Story  of  Sordello,  told  in  Prose,  i6mo,  $1.00. 

Charles  Dudley  "Warner.  My  Summer  in  a  Garden,  River 
side  Aldine  Edition,  i6mo,  $1.00 ;  Illustrated  Edition,  square 
i6mo,  $1.50;  Saunterings,  i8mo,  $1.25;  Backlog  Studies, 
Illustrated,  square  i6mo,  $1.50;  Riverside  Aldine  Edition, 
i6mo,  $1.00 ;  Baddeck,  and  that  Sort  of  Thing,  i8mo,  $1.00; 
My  Winter  on  the  Nile,  cr.  8vo,  $2.00 ;  In  the  Levant,  cr.  Svo, 
$2.00;  Being  a  Boy,  Illustrated,  square  i6mo,  $1.50;  In  the 


14          Standard  and  Popular  Library  Books. 

Wilderness,  i8mo,  75  cents ;  A  Roundabout  Journey,  I2tno, 
$1.50. 

William  F.  Warren,  LL.  D.    Paradise  Found,  cr.  8vo,  $2.00. 

William  A.  Wheeler.  Dictionary  of  Noted  Names  of  Fic 
tion,  12010,  $2.00. 

Edwin  P.  Whipple.    Essays,  6  vols.  cr.  8vo,  each  $1.50. 

Richard  Grant  White.  Every-Day  English,  i2mo,  $2.00; 
Words  and  their  Uses,  I2mo,  $2.00;  England  Without  and 
Within,  i2mo,  $2.00;  The  Fate  of  Mansfield  Humphreys, 
i6mo,  $1.25  ;  Studies  in  Shakespeare,  I2mo,  $1.75. 

Mrs.  A.  D.  T.  Whitney.  Stories,  12  vols.  i2mo,  each  $1.50; 
Mother  Goose  for  Grown  Folks,  I2tno,  $1.50;  Pansies,  i6mo, 
$1.25;  Daffodils,  i6mo,  $1.25;  Just  How,  i6mo,  $1.00;  Bon- 
nyborough,  i2mo,  $1.50;  Holy  Tides,  i6mo,  75  cents;  Home 
spun  Yarns,  I2mo,  $1.50. 

John  G-reenleaf  Whittier.  Poems,  Household  Edition,  Illus 
trated,  I2mo,  $1.75  ;  full  gilt,  cr.  8vo,  $2.25  ;  Cambridge  Edi 
tion,  Portrait,  3  vols.  I2mo,  $5.25  ;  Red-Line  Edition,  Por 
trait,  Illustrated,  small  4to,  $2.50;  Cabinet  Edition,  $1.00; 
Library  Edition,  Portrait,  32  Illustrations,  8vo,  $3.50 ;  Prose 
Works,  Cambridge  Edition,  2  vols.  I2mo,  $3.50;  The  Bay  of 
Seven  Islands,  Portrait,  i6mo,  $1.00 ;  John  Woolman's  Jour 
nal,  Introduction  by  Whittier,  $1.50;  Child  Life  in  Poetry, 
selected  by  Whittier,  Illustrated,  I2mo,  $2.00;  Child  Life  in 
Prose,  I2tno,  $2.00;  Songs  of  Three  Centuries,  selected  by 
Whittier:  Household  Edition,  Illustrated,  I2tno,  $1.75;  full 
gilt,  cr.  8vo,  $2.25 ;  Library  Edition,  32  Illustrations,  8vo, 
$3.50 ;  Text  and  Verse,  i8mo,  75  cents  ;  Poems  of  Nature,  410, 
Illustrated,  $6.00 ;  St.  Gregory's  Guest,  etc.,  i6mo,  vellum, 
$1.00. 

Woodrow  Wilson.  Congressional  Government,  i6mo,  $1.25. 

J.  A.  Wilstach.  Translation  of  Virgil's  Works,  2  vols.  cr.  8vo, 
$5.00. 

Justin  Winsor.  Reader's  Handbook  of  American  Revolu 
tion,  i6mo,  $1.25. 

W.  B.  Wright.  Ancient  Cities  from  the  Dawn  to  the  Day 
light,  i6mo,  $1.25. 


\j 


14  DAY  USE 

RETURN  TO  DESK  FROM  WHICH  BORROWED 

LOAN  DEPT. 

This  book  is  due  on  the  last  date  stamped  below,  or 

on  the  date  to  which  renewed. 
Renewed  books.4ire  subject  to  immediate  recall. 

A?   ' 


General  Library 

University  of  California 

Berkeley 


LD  21A-50W-8,  61 
(Cl795slO)476B